The Seats and Causes of Diseases Investigated by Anatomy, Vol. III
Giovanni Battista Morgagni, trans. Benjamin Alexander (1769)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Alexander's 1769 translation of Morgagni's 'De sedibus', vol. III — completing the set, with the general index ('The End'). This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE

SEATS and C  A  U  S  E  S "^C

"^  MfXs3

DISEASES

INVESTIGATED BY ANATOMYi

IN FIVE BOOKS,

CONTAINING

A  Great  Variety  of  D I SS  E  C  T  I O  N  S,  with  Remarks.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED  •

Very  Accurate and Copious INDEXES of the
Principal  Things  and  Names  therein  contained.

^ Translated  from  the  Latin  of

JOHN BAPTIST MORGAGNI,

Chief  Profeflbr  of  Anatomy,  and  Prefident  of  the  Univerfity  at  Padua,

By BENJAMIN ALEXANDER, M.  D.

INTHREE VOLUMES.
VOL. IIL


m.


LONDON,

Printed for A. MiXLAR; and T.  Cad'ell, his SuccelTor, in  the Strand;
afld  Johnson and Payne, in  Pater-nofter  Row-.
MDCCLXIX.  '


T  0

Dr. H U N T E R


SIR,

'T~^HE  particular  nature  of  the  work  before  us  gives  a
JL  propriety  to  this  addrefs.  A  performance  which
jftands  upon  the  bails  of  anatomical  fcience  cannot  feek  the
fanction  of  a  more  refpedlable  name  than  that  of  Dr.  Hun-
ter. Great  as  the  author  allowedly  is,  and  great  as  I  have-
frequently  known  you  confels  him,  it  cannot  but  give  ad-
ditional weight  to  his  work,  and  fhill  more  to  my  tranfla-
tion,  that  it  is  patroniz'd  by  you.

To  you  belongs  the  honour,  in  this  country  at  leaf!:,  to*
have  ftripped.  anatomical  fcience  of  its  my  fiery  and  dif-
guife.  — You  have  divefted  it  of  that  pompous  jargon  and
farrago  of  learning,  with  which  it  had  been  drefs'd  up
in  the  fchools,  and  have  render'd  its  leflbns,  eafy,  perfoi-
cuous,  and  ^familiar.  The  fcience  has,  by  your  means,
become  more  univerfally  diffus'd,  and  more  clearly  under-
ftood.  And  perhaps  there  is  no  city  in  the  world,  where
the  attentive  praditioners  of  the  feveral  branches  of  medi-
cine, adlwith  greater  certainty  to  themfelves,  and  fafety  to-
their  patients,  than  in  this  metropolis.

For  myfelf,  I  muft  confefs  that  it  is  to  you,  chiefly,  I
owe  that  little  lliare  of  anatomical  fcience,  of  which  I  am
poffefs'd." — From  thence  arifes  every  degree  of  certainty
that  I  find  in  determining  the  feats,  and  in  great  meafure
the  caufes,  of  difeafes.  And  though  I  do  not  affe6t  to  def-
pife,  but  even  greatly  efteem,  the  fcience  of  chemiftry„
and  other  branches  of  natural  knowledge,  auxiliary  to  me-
dicine, I  cannot,  however,  but  give  the  firfb place  to  ana-
tomy, as  being  the  very  bafis, the  ground  work,  and  in-

^  deed,,


DEDICATION.

deed,  if  I  may  be  allow'd  to  fpeak  thus,  the  grand  liimi=
nary,  of  Phyfic.

What  is  it  we  do  not  owe  to  you  in  anatomy  ?  You
have  not  only  rendered  that  which  was  already  known,
clearly  attainable  by  the  induftrious  and  attentive  mind,
but  have  made  many  happy  difcoveries,  which  lead  on  to
the  mofl  pleadng  and  important  confequences.  And
though  the  public  has  feen  many  inftances  of  this  improve-
ment already,  we  do  not  doubt  but  we  fhall  ftill  be  wit-
nefles  to  others.  That  unwearied  affiduity  with  which
you  purfue  your  inquiries,  in  fpite  of  the  moft  lucrative
avocations,  cannot  but  produce  the  moft  ufeful  effedis.

To  this  affiduity  the  community  ftands  greatly  indebt-
ed. And  this  the  Community  will  in  general  allow,  how-
ever the  jealous  few  may  retradt.  It  is  a  circumftance  fre-
quently attendant  on  great  characters,  to  be  envy'd  and  de-
tradled  from  while  living:  And  nothing  but  death  itfelf
can  pay  the  juft  reverence  to  fuch  reputation.

You  will  however  permit  me  to  hope.  Sir,  that  it  will
be  long,  very  long,  before  full  and  ample  juftice  be  done
to  your  charader.  And  this  you  will  the  more  readily  be-
lieve, when  I  afliire  you  that,  in  fuch  a  defire,  I  am  far
from  being  deftitute  of  the  moft  felfifh  regards.  For  I  can-
not but  hope,  from  the  many  inftances  of  favour  and  par-
tiality I  have  met  with  from  Dr.  Hunter,  that  I  fhall,  du-
ring the  courfe  of  our  reftdence  here,  be  indulg'd.  with  the
iionour  of  fubfcribing  myfelf


his  very  refpedful  friend,

and  greatly  obliged  humble  fervant,

April  7th,  1768,

BENJ.  ALEXANDER.


O  F T  li  E

THIRD VOLUME.

BOOK IV. Of  Chinirgical  and'Univerfal  Disorders.

Letter
XLIX.  Of  Fevers.

L.  Of  'Tumours.  ,

LI.  Of  Womids  and  Blows  on  the  Head.

LII.  Of  the  fame.  ~  .

LIII.  Of  Wounds  and  Blows  of  the  Neck,  Breaft,  and  Back.

LIV.  Of  Wourids  and  Blows  on  the  Belly,  Loins,  and  Limhs.

Lv.  Of  Ulcers^and Sphacelus.

LVI.  Of  FraSlures  and  Luxations  of  the  Bones ;  and  of  other  Diforders  injuri-
ous to  Motion.

LVII.  Of  the  Arthritis  or  Gout,  and  other  Pains  of  the  Limbs.

LVIII.  Of  the  Lues  Venerea.

LIX.  Of  Diforders  brought  on  by  Po'ifon,

B  O  O  K  V. Of  fuch  Things  as  may  be  added  to  the
former  Books.

Letter

LX.  Of  the  Apoplexy.

LXI.  Of  Deliria  which  happen  ivithout  a  Fever.
Vol.  III.  a  LXIL


CONTENTS.

Letter

LXII.  Of  the  Epilepfy;  of  Convulfwn ;  ftnd  Paralyfts.

LXIII.  Of  Blindnefs^  Jphonia,  and  Avgina.
LXIV,  Of  many  Difordcrs  of  the 'Thorax.
LXV.  Of  mofl  Diforders  of  the  Belly.
LXVI,  Of  Diforders  of  the  Urinary  Bladder  in  particular.

LXVII.  Of  Difordirs  of  the  Genital  Parts  in  both  Sexes-,  but  particularly  of  thofs

of  the  Female  Sex.

LXVIIL  Of  Fevers;  and  of  Tumours.

LXIX.  Of  Blows  and  Wounds  of  the  Head,  and  Thorax ;  of  Diforders  of  the

Joints;  and  of  the  Lues  Fenerea.

LXX.  Of  fame  Things  which  were  promised  in  the  latter  Pari  of  the  66th  Let-^
ter ;  and  at  the  f ami  time  of  fame  Diforders  of  the  Belly  and  Thorax,.


THE


A  T  S  and CAUSES


O  F


DISEASES


INVESTIGATED BY ANATOMY.


B O O K the FOURTH,


Wherelti  the  Diforders  relative  to  Surgery,  or  thofe  which
afFeft  the  whole  Body,  are  treated  of.


VW..III.  B


LETTER  the FORTY- NINTH

Treats  of Fevers.


L T HO  UGH  you  not  long  ago  receiv'd  a  very  long  letter
from  me,  you  may  now,  perhaps,  expefl  a  longer,  as  the  fubjedl
of  this  is  fevers  ;  difeafes  which  are  of  all  the  moft  frequent,  the
moft  various  and  manifold.  And,  indeed,  you  fee  that  the  firft  fedtion  of  the
fourth  book,  which  is  afTign'd  to  them  in  the  Sepulchretum,  is  one  of  the
moft  prolix.  Yet  this  letter,  though  it  may  not  be  the  fliorteft,  will,  at  leaft,
not  be  one  of  the  longeft.  For  why  (hould  I  here,  in  imitation  of  that  fedion,
repeat  what  I  have  already  fufficiently  faid,  or  anticipate  what  I  fhall  here-
after fay,  with  greater  propriety,  when  treating  of  a  great  number  of  dif-
orders,  each  of  which  has  its  proper  fever,  if  I  may  fo  fpeak,  naturally  join'd
with  it  ?  And  in  that  fedion  there  are  a  great  number  of  obfervations  which
Bonetus  himfelf  confelTes  are  propos'd  in  other  places,  whereto  he  refers  j
and  out  of  thofe  ofjvhich  he  makes  no  confeffion,  I  think  I  have  found  others
befides,  in  regard  to  which  he  might  have  made  the  fame  confeflion.

And,  indeed,  I  have  more  than  once  obfcrv'd  hiftories  to  be  put  down
twice  over  in  that  fame  fedion  ;  which,  however,  I  do  not  particularly  refer
you  to,  becaufe  I  imagine  that  you  yourfelf,  if  you  read  it  more  accurately,
and  with  more  attention,  than  I,  will  remark  a  ftill  greater  number;  and  at
the  fame  time  be  furpriz'd  at  fome  in  which  you  read  of  incredible  things  ;
as,  for  inftance,  that  in  a  peftilential  hemitritaeos  (a),  a  vaft  qiiandty  of  bugs
or  flies  was  found  betwixt  the  meninges  of  the  brain-,  that  in  certain  peili-
Itnces  {b),  "  vipers  and  lizards  "  had  been  generated  in  human  bodies,  in  feveral
parts,  which,  after  the  moft  excruciating  pains,  kill'd  "  a  thoufand  men
"  every  day  •,"  or  {c)  that  "  the  livers  both  of  men  and  horfes  were  found  to  be
"  full  of  toads."

It  is  my  determination,  however,  to  copy  in  this  place  fome  obferva-
tions in  particular,  which  ftill  remaih  uncopied  among  the  papers  of  Val-
falva  i  in  moft  of  which  you  will  rather  be  furpriz'd  at  this  circumftance,
that  after  violent  fevers,  or  thofe  that  kill  unexpeftedly  foon,  fcarcely  any
fhing,  and  fometimes  nothing  at  all,  is  found,  which  might  bear  any  cor-

{a)  Obf.  57.  §  II.  {(,)  Obf.  62.  §  8,  St  tj.  {-c)  Ibid.  §  10.

B  2  efpondencc


4 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

refpohdence  to,  or' competition  with,  their  violence  or  impetus  ^  fo  far  is  the
caule  by  which  fevers  become  fatal  not  uncommonly  latent.

2.  A  man,  about  thirty  years  of  age,  was  feiz'd  with  a  flow  fever,  which
was  attended  with  no  fymptom  worthy  of  remark,  except  that  his  appetite
was  entirely  loft.  The  pulfe  and  ftrength  of  the  patient  fall'd  every  day  ;
and  at  length  he  died  fuddenly.

The  body  being  diffefted  by  Valfalva,  all  the  vifcera  were  found  to  be  in
a  found  ftate,  except  the  following.  The  gall-bladder  contain'd  a  bile  which
was  ting'd  of  a  brown  colour;  and  in  this  bile  was  a  cakulus  of  the  bignefs
of  a  dens  molaris,  of  a  pallid  colour,  and  eafiiy  friable.  Internally  it  was
hollow,  and  had  many  other  calculi  included  in  it,  and  thofe  of  a  black  co-
lour. The  lungs  were  diftinguifh'd  with  black  fpots.  In  the  pericardium
was  little  or  no  lerum.  The  blood  in  this  body  was  very  grumous,  and  in
the  ventricles  of  the  heart  was  coagulated.

3.  Whether  you  fuppofe  this  to  have  been  a  flow  or  a  malignant  fever^
certainly  the  preternatural  appearances  that  were  found  by  difleiflion,  fre-
quently occur  in  others  alfo,  who  are  not  carried  off  by  a  difeafe  of  this  kind,
and  particularly  not  by  a  death  of  this  kind.  It  does  not  fo  frequently  hap-
pen, that  thofe  appearances  are  feen  in  the  heart  itfelf,  which  Valfalva  faw  in
a  boy  v;hom  I  fuppofe  a  hectic  fever  carried  off;  although  there  are  fome
things  in  regard  to  which  you  would  wifh  to  know  whether  they  exifted  in
the  living  body,  or  not,  and  perhaps  even  in  the  body  after  death.

4.  A  certain  boy  died  emaciated.  The  heart  wasftrongly  conneded  with
the  pericardium  ;  which  being  feparated  therefrom  together  with  the  fat,
through  all  th^  external  furface  of  the  mufcles  of  the  heart,  certain  whitifli
bodies  were  feen  lying  at  a  diftance  from  each  other.  Moft  of  thefe  re-
fembl'd  fmall  grains  of  millet-feed  in  their  figure,  magnitude,  and  colour;
but  fome  were  a  little  larger,  and  of  an  irregular  figure.  On  the  furface  of
the  diaphragm  the  lymph^dufts  appear'd  pretty  evidently.

5.  But  now  let  us  go  on  to  fome  things  that  relate  to^  another  kind  of  fever,
which  the  fame  perfon  obferv'd  in  three  women.

6.  A  woman,  about  thirty  years  of  age,  of  a  bilious  temperament,  who  al-
ready had  labour'd  under  a  double  tertian  fever  for  a  long  time,  recciv'd  a  blow
upon  the  abdomen  with  a  ftick.  Being  receiv'd  into  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de
"Vita,  fhe  complain'd  only  of  a  pain  in  her  abdomen.  But  on  the  third  day
after  receiving  the  blow,  fiie  began  to  be  delirious.  Her  pulfe  was  fmall  and
quick.  She  threw  up  from  her  ftomach,  more  than  once,  a  humour  like  water
wherein  frefli  meat  has  been  wafh'd.  At  length,  the  difeafe  increafmg  every
day,  Ihe  died.

The  mufcles  of  the  belly  were  found  to  be  contus'd  ;  yet  in  fuch  a  manner,
that  no  mark  of  contufion  appear'd  either  externally,  or  within  the  abdomen.
The  liver  was  whitifh,  and  inclin'd  to  hardnefs  in  fome  degree  :  the  gall-
bladder, which  was  of  a  remarkable  magnitude,  contain'd  about  three  ounces
of  bile,  of  a  black  colour ;  fome  portion  of  which  fluid  v,'as  alfo  found  in
the  ftomiJch.  The  other  parts  of  the  belly  were  in  a  natural  ftate.  In  the
thorax,  the  lungs,  on  that  furface  which  was  turn'd  to  the  vertebrs,  were
affedted  with  a  confiderable  phlogofis,  but  in  other  refpedls  found.  The  right
ventricle  of  the  heart  contain'd  a  fmall  polypous  concretion.

■  7.  Whofoever


Letter  XLIX. Articles  7,  8,  9,  ro.-  jr

7.  Whofdever  had  confider'd  only  the  blow  upon  the  abdomen,  and  the
complaints  made  by  the  woman  of  pain  in  this  part,  would  have  attributed
the  iymptoms  that  follow'd  to  fome  vifcus  of  the  belly  having  been  injur'd
thereby.  But  the  diffeftion  fhow'd,  that  whatever  diforder  there  was  in  the
liver  related,  rather,  to  that  long-continii'd  fever  ;  or,  at  leaft,  in  the  opinion
of  Valialva,  who  prefix'd  this  title  to  the  obfervation,  De  Tcriiana  Buplici,
whether  he  fuppos'd  the  whole  of  this  morbid  appearance  to  have  related  to
the  caufes  of  that  diforder,  or  to  the  effefts  of  it.  What  had  been  added
thereto  on  occafion  of  the  blow,  in  a  woman  of  a  bilious  temperament,  the
inipe£lion  of  the  brain,  perhaps,  might,  as  the  delirium  feems  to  hint,  have
fhown.  For  as  to  the  confiderable  phlogofis  of  the  lungs,  who  can,  for  a
certainty,  affirm  that,  as  it  occupied  the  pofterior  parts,  it  was  not  owing-
rather  to  the  fupine  pofture  of  the  body  ;  as  1  have  admonifli'd  on  a  former
ocraflon  (i),  and  as  we  fee  frequently  happen  ?  And  this  I  would  have  you
fuppofe  to  be  faid  in  regard  to  the  following  hiftory  aifo.

8.  A  virgin,  of  two-and-twenty  years  of  age,  having  labour'd,many  days
under  a  double  tertian,  and  being  afterwards  feiz'd  with  an  ardent  fever,
and  troubi'd  with  a  pain  of  the  head  and  the  whole  body,  was  carried  off
thereby.

In  the  belly,  at  the  extremity  of  the  inteftinum  ileum,  in  the  part  where
it  is  connected  to  the  mefentery,  were  prominent  many  little  bodies,  which
in  [heir  magnitude,  form,  and  colour,  refembl'd  the  granules  of  gun-powder.
In  the  uterus  many  round  bodies,  like  glands,  were  protuberant ;  on  the
rupture  of  which  a  vifcid  humour  was  dilcharg'd.  Except  thele  things,  all
the  parts  of  the  belly  were  in  a  natural  ftate.  But  in  the  thorax,  the  lungs,.
where  they  were  turn'd  towards  the  back,  were  (lightly  inflam'd  ;  arid  in  the
right  ventricle  of  the  heart  was  a  polypous  concretion.

9.  Whether  thefe  rOund  bodies  were  protuberant  on  the  external  or  the
oppofite  furface  of  the  uterus ;  and,  in  like  manner,  whether  thofe  black  little
bodies,  or  rather  points,  pofiefs'd  this  or  that  furface  of  the  inteftine  ;  it  does
not  fufficiently  appear  from  what  caufe  the  tertian  in  the  firft  place,  and  after
that  the  ardent  fever,  had  its  rife.  It  does  not,  I  fay,  fufficiently  appear:
not  that  it  efcapes  me  in  what  manner  very  learned  men  have  accounted  for
recurrent  fevers,  from  a  vifcid  humour  being  dlfcharg'd  out  of  more  than  one
lijrking  place,  within  a  certain  time ;  or  that  thofe  black  points  might  be  very
fmall  inflammations,  already  degenerating  into  a  gangrene  :  but  becaufe  I
know  that  both  of  thefe  difeafes  have  been  in  many,  who  had  not  been  afflifted
with  fevers  of  this  kind,  but  v/ith  quite  different  diforders,  which  I  look  for
in  this  hillory  in  vain,  where  the  feat  of  thofe  diforders  is  pointed  out.

10.  A  woman,  of  five-and-twenty  years  of  age,  and  of  the  fame  tempe-
rament as  the  former  (f),  had  come  into  the  fame  hofpital  at  the  time  when
Ihe  began  to  be  affected  with  a  difficulty  of  breathing.  With  this  difficulty
v.'ere  join'd  a  pain  in  the  left  part  of  the  thorax,  a  certain  found  of  matter
within  this  cavity  at  the  time  of  refpiration,  and  a  pulfe  which  was  foft  in-
deed, 'but  very  frequent.  On  the  fifth  day  the  jaundice  came  on,  which,
after  having  continu'd  quite  to  the  eighth  day,  vanifh'd. Then,  by  reafon

(a')- Epill.  4.  n.  13.  \e)  N.  6.

of


6 Book  IV.  Of  Cliirurgical  and  Univerfal  Difordei-s.

of  the  obftinacy  of  the  fever,  vensefedtion,  which  had  been  made  ufe  of  on
the  firft  days,  was  again  repeated.  At  length,  death  fuddenly  came  on ;  for
tlje  fever  was  not  of  luch  a  kind  as  to  threaten  death  at  that  time.

The  beliy  being  open'd,  every  4nng  appear'd  to  be  found  ;  except  that
half  a  pint  of  water  was  found  in  the  whole  of  that  cavity  :  which  circum-
ftance  had  frequently,  however,  been  found  in  other  bodies  alfo.  In  the
tliorax,  the  right  lobe  of  the  lungs,  which  adher'd  to  the  ribs  on  its  fuperior
part,  was  inflam'd  on  its  inferior  part;  and  from  tlie  fubftance  of  it,  when
cut  into,  a  little  ferum  was  difcharg'd.  Yet  the  left  lobe  was  not  only  free
from  the  ribs  on  all  fides,  but  was  likewife  found  to  be  in  a  found  ftate,
From  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  a  polypous  concretion,  which  had  its
bafis  in  the  fafciculated  texture  of  that  cavity,  was  produc'd  into  the  vena
cavn,  being  every-where  of  a  firm  compages,  and  of  a  colour  in  one  part
pallid,  and  in  another  iomewhat  red.

11.  If  Valfalva  himfelf  had  not  entitl'd  this  obfervation  De  Febre  Ardente,
I  ftiould  have  clafs'd  it  rather  with  the  peripneu monies ;  although,  even  on
this  fuppofition,  we  fhould  not  very  well  underftand  how  it  happen'd,  that
the  patient  died  fuddenly.  Nor  yet  does  it  appear  why,  although  the  pain
was  on  the  left  fide,  the  inflammation  was  on  the  right;  unlefs,  perhaps,
where  the  one  or  the  other  is  mention'd,  one  fide  was  put  down  for  the  other,
by  a  flip  of  the  pen,  as  frequently  happens.  This,  however,  is  certain  from
the  aphorifm  of  Hippocrates  (/),  that,  in  refpedt  to  this  difeafe,  but  an  ill
omen  is  to  be  drawn  from  a  jaundice  being  added  to  the  fever  before  the
feventh  day.  But  if  you  fufpeft  that  any  thing  malignant  had  lain  hid  in
any  of  the  fevers  hitherto  propos'd ;  you  will  ftill  more  fulpefl:  it  in  that,
which  Valfalva  has  left  us  the  defcription  of  in  the  following  manner.

12.  A  man,  of  forty  years  of  age,  lay  ill  in  the  fame  hofpital,  by  reafon
of  a  wound  in  the  tibia  with  a  blunt  inftrument.  And  when  his  wound  be-
gan to  be  in  a  very  good  fl:ate,  and  he  himfelf  was  quite  free  from  fever;
he  was  fuddenly  feiz'd  with  an  acute  fever.  And  this  growing  more  and
more  violent,  he  was  taken  oflF  thereby.  In  the  carcafe  was  no  morbid  ap-
pearance, except  that  the  blood  kept  nearly  its  natural  fluidity.

i^.  What  is  more  natural  in  this  cafe,  than  to  think  as  Riverius(^)  did
jn  a  certain  cafe  of  his?  I  mean  in  the  cafe  of  a  boy,  who  had  been  taken
off  by  a  very  acute  fever,  attended  with  fymptoms  which  brought  on  a  great
fuipicion  of  inflammation  in  the  vifcera ;  whereas,  by  difledion,  he  found
"  all  the  vifcera"  (for  fo  Riverius  has  written,  and  nor,  as,  through  the  great
carelefljicfs  of  the  printers,  it  is  copied  into  the  Sepulchretum  (>&),  "  all
"  the  fymptoms")  in  a  very  good  "  flate ;"  and,  not  meeting  with  any  ap-
parent caufe  of  fo  many  fymptoms,  accounted  for  the  difeafe  from  fome  la-
tent malignity.

And  this  you  will  perhaps  do  the  more  readily,  becaufe  here,  at  lead,  the
fluxile  ftate  of  the  blood  was  apparent.  For  fome  of  the  moft  eminent  phy-
ficians  have  taught  us,  that  a  great  number  of  malignant  fevers  are  join'd
with  a  diflblution  of  the  bk)od. And  thefe  we  have  alfo  follow'd,  in  ex-

W  '5.  ex  Sea.  4. (^J  Cent.  2.  Obf.  83, {h)  in  Additam.  adhaiic  Seft.  Obf.  10.

plaining


Letter  XLIX. Articles  14,  15, 16, 17.  7

plaining  other  obfervations  of  Valfalva  (i),  yet  with  this  reftriftion,  that  as
malignant  fevers  do  not  all  difcover  themfelves  in  one  and  the  fame  way,
we  do  not  think  they  ought  to  be  deferted,  who  have  afBrm'd,  on  the  other
hand,  that  many  of  them  are  alfo  join'd  with  a  concretion  of  the  blood.
For  the  opinion  is  favour'd  not  only  by  others,  but  by  this  obfervation  in
particular  that  1  am  about  to  fubjoin,  which  is  the  laft  1  fhall  give  you  from-
the  papers  of  Valfalva,  and  is  infcrib'd  with  this  title  by  himfelf,  "^  Of  a  ma-
*'  lignant  fever  and  obftinate  coftivenefs."

14.  A  nobleman,  about  forty  years  of  age,  who,  even  when  in  health,
was  fubjeft  to  fuch  a  coftive  ftate  of  bowels,  that  he  could  never  go  to  ftool
without  the  ufe  of  purging  medicines,  having  remov'd  his  habitation  from-
his  native  country,  where  he  liv'd  in  a  thin  air,  to  one  that  was  more  thick  ^
after  a  fhort  time  was  feiz'd  with  a  fever,  which  was  attended  with  no  other
fymptom  but  this,  that  the  patient  complain'd  of  continual  anxiety  of  mind,  .
and  of  watchings.  But  a  pain  of  the  head  having  come  on  in  the  courfe  of
the  fourteenth  day,  and  the  pulle  now  and  then  appearing,  and  foon  after
being  fo  contradted,  that  frequently  it  could  not  be  perceiv'd  by  the  phyfi-
cian ;  he  made  an  exchange  of  life  for  death  on  the  fame  day.

The  fundus  of  the  ftomach  was  ting'd  of  a  black  colour.  The  inteftines,,
and  efpecially  the  large  ones,  were  contradted.  The  other  vifcera  of  the
belly  were  found.. The  blood  was  very  much  coagulated'.

15.  I  will  now  join  to  thefe  difledions,  fome  inftances  either  of  obferva-
tions or  animadverfions  of  my  own,  or  my  friends,  that  relate  to  the  kinds
of  fever  tak^n  notice  of  already,  and  to  others.  And  I  faid  fome  inftancesj-
for  as,  in  obfervance  of  the  above  order,  we  begin  with  flow  and  hedtic  fe^
■vers ;  you  have  already  had  others  in  the  letters  before  fent  to  you,  either
when  I  took  notice  of  an  abfcefs  of  the  thorax  purpofely,  or  even  fometimes
•when  I  took  notice  of  an  abfcefs  of  the  belly  (k)  in  a  tranfitory  manner.  I
will  add  one  example  or  two  here,  even  without  a  manifeft  abfcefs.

16.  A  man  who  was  greatly  emaciated,  and  therefore  thought  by  fome  to
have  a  phthifis,  though  it  fcem'd  otherwife  to  us,  at  length  came  into  this
hofpital,  where  he  made  his  exit  from  this  life,  after  the  beginning  of  March,
in  the  year  1 747.

The  thorax,  the  belly,  and  the  head,  being  diflected,  the  lungs  were  found
to  be  found,  and  the  other  vifcera  without  any  taint,  except  that  the  dura
mater  was  very  thick,  and  the  brain  very  lax.  And  I  moreover  obferv'd,
when  I  was  going  about  to  demonftrate  fome  things  in  relation  to  the  pofte*
rior  part  of  the  fpinal  marrow,  to  the  ftudents ;  that  this  membrane,  the
dura  mater,  could  not  be  dra,wn  off  fo  eafiiy  as  at  other  times ;  and  1  was
even  under  a  neceffity  of  proceeding  gradually,  in  order  to  feparate  it  from
the  neighbouring  tunica  arachnoides,  without  laceration.  However,  thefkin
was  very  hard  in  this  body,  as  it  generally  is  in  tabid  bodies.

17.  This  hardnefs  of  the  fkin,  whether  you  try  it  with  a  knife,  cr  with
needles,  is  very  evident;  and  not  only  in  phchilical  perfons  on  whom  many
have  cxperienc'd  it,  but  in  others  likewife  who  have  been  greatly  emaciated,
cither  becaufe  no  fat  remains  in  the  fuhjedled  membrana  adipofa,  by  the

(/')  Epift.  4.  n.  9.  &  E^oift.  7.  n.  2.  (i)  ut  Epift,  4,6.  n.  27.

unflu-


•g Book  IV .  O f  ChirurgicaV  and  Uniyerfal  Diforders .

unduoufnefs  of  which  that  might  be  prefcrv'd  loft,  or  becaufe  the  flefli  is
coUaps'd,  not  only  for  want  of  fat  in  the  interftices  of  the  mufeles,  but  alfo
fo;-  want'of  humours,  which  were,  in  grea-t  mearure,  deficient  in  their  veffels
in  ieveral  places,  fo  that  the  {l<in  being  no  longer  diftended,  is  contracted
into  itfclf,  and  becomes  thicker;  by  reaibn  of  which  contradlion,  and  of  the
niaffi  that' are  prodiic'd  thereby,  and  theie  not  only  very  large  but  very  fmall,
the  Vmoothnefs  of  it  is  loft  ;  for  thus  I  interpret  Morton  (/),  wtio^  fpeaks  of
this  fubicifl. On  the  other  hand,  the  flcin,  when  diftended  by  the  fat  beneath
it is  not  only  fliining  and  fniooth,  as  every  one  fees,  but  is  prefcrv'd  very
fo'ft.  as  even  the  confedlioners  and  makers  of  faufages  know, by  cutting  the
iWn  of  hoys  flefii  into  very  fmall  pans  ;  fince  they  ufe  the  lefs  labour  in  pro-
portion as  the  creature  was  fatter,  and  the  greater  in  proportion  to  its  being
lefs  ib. But  let  us  go  on  to  the  other  diffeclion,  in  which,  indeed,  evident
•iniuries  of  the  vifcera,  both  in  the  thorax  and  abdomen,  appear'd,  but  with-
out any  abfcefs.

18.  The  body  of  an  old  man,  who  had  been  fo  emaciated  as  to  be  faid
to  have  been  wafted  away  by  a  marafmus,  which  was  the  effed  of  old  age,
was  brought  into  the  college,  that  1  might  therewith,  at  leaft,  make  a
becrinninsTof  anatomical  demonftrations,  before  the  end  of  January,  in  the
year  174I.  ,

In  the  belly  the  mefenteric  glands  were  not  fo  minute  as  they  gene-
fally  are  at  that  ag£  -,  and  not  only  this,  but  about  the  iliac  vefiels,  from
the  origin  thereof  quite  to  the  thigh,  were  a  great  number  of  glands,  and
thofe  very  larg€ ;  fo  that  thefe  veffels  were  cover'd  over  with  a  kind  of
continu'd  chain  of  them,  as  it  were,  fome  of  which  were  equal  in  length  to
two  or  three  inches,  being  large  even  in  refpett  to  thicknefs  -,  fo  as  to  make
it  not  furprizing,  that  thefe  arteries  Ihould  feem  to  have  their  parietes  fome-
what  infiefted,  and  in  a  manner  varicofe,  in  confequence  of  being  attended
by  fuch  glands  as  thefe,  and  prefs'd  upon  by  them  :  yet  thefe  glands,  when
cut  into,  did  not  feem  to  deviate  from  the  found  conftitution  of  lymphatic
glands.

But  the  fpleen,  although  rather  fmall  in  other  of  its  dimenfions,  vi?as  thicker
than  is  natural,  particularly  in  the  tniddle;  and  befides  that  the  membranous
connexions,  by  which  it  is  join'd  to  the  diaphragm,  were  themfelves  alfo
becoine  thicker  than  ufual,  it  had  its  coat  not  only  thick  likewife,  in  the
very  middle  of  its  convex  furface,  but  hard  alfo  for  a  fpace  as  large  as  a
circle,  the  diameter  of  which  was  fcarcely  Ihorter  than  tvyfo  inches,  would
occupy  ;  and  indeed  in  ibme  part  of  that  fpace  it  was  already  bony,  and  to
this  coat  was  annex'd  internally,  a  kind  of  trunk  of  a  vefTel  as  it  were,  which
was  itfelf  hard  alfo,  and  went  into  the  fubftance  of  the  fpleen.  This  J  alfo
remark'd  in  regard  to  the  fpleen :  the  artery  which  went  to  it  v/as  fomewhac
narrrower  than  is  natural,  from  its  origin  at  the  coeliac  to  the  extent  of  fome
inches,  till,,  at  the  place  where  it  began  to  wreath  itfelf  into  many  flexures,
as  it  generally  does,  it  became  wider.

The  bladder,  which  was  fo  diftended  with  urine  as  to  raife  itfelf  up  above
tJie  pubes,  had  its  coats  in  a  thicken'd  ftate;  and  being  comprefs'd  by  the

(/■)  Fhihifiolo^.  1.  3.  c.  13.

hand


Letter  XLIX.  -  Article  19.  '9

hand,  did  not  eafily  difcharge  the  urine  ;  nor  could  all  that  fluid  be  prefs'd
out:  perhaps  by  reafon  of  the  proftate  gland  beirrg  enlarg'd,  and  every  where
protuberating  in  the  cavity  of  the  bladder,  about  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  -,
for  what  appearances  I  found  in  this  gland,  I  have  already  told  you  in  the
forty -fourth  letter  (»z).

l.he  thorax  and  the  pericardium  being  open'd,  we  found  the  heart  to  be
deftitute  of  ail  fat,  of  an  afli-colour  in  its  furface,  and  not  fmooth.  The
great  artery  had  very  hard  valves :  and  this  tube  itfelf,  at  a  fmall  diftance
above  thefe  valves,  was  rigid  with  fcales,  that  lay  under  the  internal  coat,
and  were  entirely  bony :  but  the  beginnings  of  thefe  only,  or  white  fpots,
appear'd  in  that  part  of  the  trunk  which  is  in  the  belly,  and  in  the  iliac
branches  thereof.

Nor  ought  a  kind  of  fingular  diforder  of  the  carotid  arteries  to  be  con-
ceal'd :  for  thefe  had  no  fooner  afcended  to  one  half  their  length,  but  they
there  diftorted  themfclves  like  a  cochlea-,  and  immediately  return'd  to  their
original  itrairnefs  of  diredtion  •,  and  fo  obflinate  was  this  flexure,  that,  if
you  extended  out  the  arteries  in  a  fl;rait  line,  they  foon  after  reftor'd  them-
ielves  to  the  fame  ftate  of  contorfion,  upon  the  removal  of  the  hand.

19.  Having  feen  thefe  feveral  peculiarities,  I  was  greatly  chagrin'd  to  find
that  it  was  impoflible  to  learn  any  more  circumftances  in  regard  to  this  old
man  while  living,  (he  having  been  an  unknown  pauper)  than  that  he  had  evi-
dently died  in  confequence  of  being  confum'd  by  a  great  lofs  of  flefli.  And
whether  many  of  the  appearances  found  in  the  body  afrer  death,  were  the
effefts  or  the  caufe,  or  rather  both  caufes  and  efi^efts,  of  this  wafl:ing,  you
yourfelf  will  judge.  Certainly  in  turning  over  this  fedlion  of  the  Sepulchre-
turn  (k)  you  will  find,  that,  in  a  heftic  body  (o),  other  glands  of  the  lym-
phatic kind  were  encreas'd;  and  that  in  others  (p),  the  heart  was  not  with-
out fome  diforder,  as  in  that  boy  even  of  whom  we  fpoke  above  (q)  from
Valfalva  -,  not  to  iay  in  another  (r),  from  the  fedion  already  referr'd  to,  who,
having  been  brought  into  a  marafmus,  had  the  heart,  like  our  old  man,
"  ftripp'd  of  all  its  fat,"  and  unequal  with  rugje.

I  omit  other  circumftances  from  whence  it  might  likewife  be  underftood,
that  the  blood,  and  the  humours  fecreted  from  thence,  could  not,  in  this
cafe,  be  impell'd  in  the  manner  that  was  requifite,  fo  that  a  proper  quantity
of  the  one  and  of  the  others  might  be  daily  fupplied,  and  thruft  forwards
into  all  the  fmall  vefl^els  ;  for  if  in  the  greater  part  of  thefe,  the  blood  and
humours  are  deficient,  the  whole  body  muft  of  courfe  be  collaps'd  into  it-
felf; and  on  this  collaps'd  ftate,  if  we  except  the  bones  and  the  cartilages,
the  whole  affair  of  great  leannefs  depends.  For  all  the  folid  parts  of  muf-
cles  or  membranes  bear  a  far  lefs  proportion  to  the  blood  and  humours,  with
•which  their  veflTels  and  cells  are  extended,  than  the  common  people  ima-
gine ;  fo  that  it  would  be  almoft  incredible  to  how  little  k  fubflance  the  body
is  reduc'd,  when  the  fluids  are  diflipated  and  fly  off,  if  the  moft  learned  men
had  not  demonftrated  it  by  the  colledion  of  many  experiments. Yec  among

{m)  n.  zo.  (p)  Obf.  12.

(«)  libri  IV.  Seft.  i.  (?) n.  4.

{o)  Obf.  16.  §  2.  (r) Obf.  56,  5  .7.

Vol.  in.  C  thefe


I  o Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diibrders.

thefe  experiments  I  fliould  think  it  was  lefs  natural  to  recount-  that  which
was  made  by  Lancifi  (j),  with  another  view,  I  mean  by  a  long  continu'd
maceration  of  the  human  heart.  For  with  the  water,  when  often  renew'd,
many  Ihreds  of  membranes  and  fibrilicC,  which  the  water  has  gradually  dif-
join'd,  are  thrown  away.

However,  there  is  no  more  general  caufe  of  the  body  being  made  defticute
of  blood  and  humours,  and  growing  lean,  than  the  tranfit  of  the  chyle  thro'
the  mefentery  being  made  more  difficult,  whether  this  difficulty  be  in  the
ultimate  glands  of  the  mefentery,  or  in  the  firft,  or  promifcuoufly  in  many
of  them,  at  the  fame  time.  An  example  of  the  former  difficulty  you  will
have  from  Cowper(/),  who,  in  a  young  heifer  that  was  very  lean  in  her
whole  body,  found  two  of  thofe  glands  which  comprcfs'd  the  receptaculum
chyii  by  their  tumour.  And  an  example  of  the  fecond  difficulty  will  be
given  by  the  celebrated  Fantonus  (?<;),  who,  in  a  man  that  had  been  confin'd
for  many  months  by  a  flow  fever,  found  chyle  only  in  the  vafa  la£lea  primi
generis,  being  retarded,  for  inftance,  by  the  obftruftion  of  the  glands,  to-
which  thofe  veflels  were  carried.  And  many  obfervations  of  the  third  diffi-
culty wi'l  occur,  which  you  may  add,  together  with  thofe  two,  to  the  Sepul-
chretum.

For  even  not  a  few  are  to  be  found,  merely  in  the  volumes  of  the  Casfa-
rean  Academy,  that  have  been  publifh'd  fince  the  laft  edition  of  the  Sepul-
chretum ;  that  is  to  fay,  "  of  the  mefenteric  glands  being  totally  obftrufted.
"  and  fwell'd  {x) ;  of  all  the  glands  of  the  mefentery  being  ftuff'd  up,  toge-
"  ther  with  the  pancreas  (j)  j  of  the  mefentery  being  fill'd  with  tumid
"  glands  (2) ;  of  the  mefentery  being  every  where  crowded  with  fcirrhous
"  glands  {a)  -,  of  the  chylous  veflels  being  here  and  there  obftrufted  {b)  ;'*
and  thefe  obfervations  were  made  upon  bodies  that  had  been  affected  with
"  an  atrophy  ;  a  heftic  fever  5  on  one  that  was  wholly  emaciated  j  on  one  re-
"  duc'd  to  extreme  leannefs,  which  follow'd  a  flow  heftic  fever."  And  in-
deed, v/hen  you  twice  read,  that  in  an  atrophy  the  mefentery  was  fill'd  [c),
and  rcnder'd  unfightly  (t/),  "  with  innumerable  fteatomatous  tumours;"  you
will  fcarcely  doubt,  in  both  cafes,  but  the  glands  had  been  chang'd  into
thofe  tumours  from  the  ftagnating  chyle;  not  to  fay  any  thing  of  the  mefen-
tery being  found  fill'd,  after  "  a  flow  fever,  with  little  abfcell'es  and  ulcers,.
"  and  that  univerfally  {e)."  But  if  you  choofe  to  think  differently;  even
with  my  confent,  and  not  fuppofe  the  feat  of  thofe  tumours  or  abfceffes  to-
have  been  in  thefe  glands ;  yet  in  fo  great  a  number  of  both  of  them  it  could
not  but  happen,  that  many  of  the  glands,  and  a  great  number  of  the  veflels
that  tranfport  the  chyle,  muft  have  been  comprefs'd,  and  the  tranfit  of  this
fluid,  in  great  meafure,  prohibited  5  as  in  the  obfervation  alfo  of  the  cele-
brated Phil.  Conr.  Fabricius  (/),  a  tumour  "  equal  in magnitude  to  fome

{s)  D?  Mot.  Cord.  Propof.  5.3.  (a)  Eorund.  Tom.  a..  Obf  146.
(0  Vid.  Aa.  Erud.Lipf.  A.  1699.  M.Febi. \b)  Eorund.  Tom.  8.  Obf.  125.

ad  Tab.  CowparL  34.  (r)  Cent.  6.  Obf.  16.

(ti)  Anat.  corp.  hum.  Diff.  5.  (3')  Dec.  3.  A.  9.  &  10.  Obf.  214.

\x)  Dec.  3.  A.  9.  &  10.  Obf.  zj8.  (e)  Dec.  ead.  A.  3.  Obf.  139.

(y)  Cent.  ?.  cSc  4.  Obf.  iig.  (f)  Progr.  quo  Obierv. in 3.  cadavefib.

(2;)  Aa.  Tom.  I.  Obf.. 59.  yerf.  fin,

?'  Sfts,


Letter  XUX. Article  20.  11

"  fifts,  and  fcirrhous,"  could  not  exifl:  "  in  the  center  of  the  mefentery  "
of  an  infant,  who  died  of  an  atrophy,  without  prefllng  upon  the  vafa  chyli'
fera  ultiini  generis.  And  indeed  that  very  experienc'd  anatomift  {g)  has,  ia
another  place,  the  diffedlion  of  a  woman,  who  died  of  a  "  flow  wafting  of
*'  flefh,"  all  of  whofe  vifcera  fliow'd  no  unufual  appearance,  except  that
"'  the  glands  of  the  mefentery  had  entirely  difappear'd."  But  he  has  imme-
diately fubjoin'd,  that  in  bodies  of  this  kind,  "  unlefs  they  are  carried  off
''  by  a  very  advanc'd  old  age,"  (from  which  this  woman  was  far  diftant)
"  thefe  glands,  if  not  altogether  fcirrhous,  are  neverthelefs,  for  the  moft
"  part,  found  to  be  remarkably  tumid."  And  when  they  are  entirely  loft,
is  not  the  paflTage  of  the  chyle  retarded  by  this  means  alfoi  which  paffage,
if  they  adminifter  thereto  by  no  other  means,  they  are  ufeful  in  promo-
ting, by  diluting  with  the  addition  of  the  lymph  at  leafc  ?  And  as,  when
thei'e  glands  are  diminifli'd,  this  lymph  is  diminifli'd  alfo,  may  we  not,  in
fome  meafure,  afcribe  the  emaciated  ftate  of  mofl:  old  men  to  this  caufe  alfo,
among  others  ?  However  this  may  be,  as  it  is  certain  that  thefe  glands  do,
for  the  moft  part,  decreafe  in  old  men  ;  if  in  the  old  man,  whofe  hiftory  I
have  given  you,  they  were  not  fo  fmall  as  they  generally  are  ;  it  is  very  proba-
ble that  this  had  happen'd  on  account  of  their  obftrudlion  ;  and  that  for  this
reafon,  the  pafiage  of  the  chyle  being  become  difficult,  the  body  had  funk
away  in  a  marafmus.

20.  There  is  on  the  other  hand,  to  go  on  to  another  kind  of  fevers,  when
we  wilh  the  bodies  of  thofe  who  labour  under  fevers  to  be,  in  fome  meafure,
collaps'd  ;  that  is  to  fay,  by  the  quantity  or  turgefcency  of  the  vitiated  hu-
mours being  diminiftied.  And  this,  I  remember,  was  defir'd  by  the  phyfi-
cians  who  were  my  preceptors,  in  the  cafe  of  a  virgin  at  Bologna,  in
particular ;  as  well  as  at  other  times ;  and  that  not  rarely  neither,  by
all  who  do  not  negledt  the  aphorifms  of  Hippocrates  (h).  For  this  virgin
having  fall'n  into  iweats  during  an  acute  fever,  the  acutenefs  of  the  fever,
indeed,  foon  went  off,  but  not  the  fever  ;  of  which  ffie  did  not  get  entirely
rid  for  more  than  a  hundred  days  afterwards.  However,  as  the  fever  did
not  go  off  in  fo  long  a  time,  fo  the  face  of  the  patient  did  not  fall  much,  but
continu'd  full,  and  never  pallid.  Therefore,  when  the  fever  feem'd  to  be,  at
length,  gone,  and  the  virgin  had  got  up  from  her  bed,  behold  the  fever
again  difcover'd  itfelf,  as  they  had  expefted  ;  and  that  not  flight,  nor  of  few
days  continuance  ;  till  it  at  lafc  went  off,  together  v/ith  that  fuUnefs  of  body,
lb  as  to  return  no  more.  -  -

1  would  not,  however,  from  the  narration  of  this  cafe  ;  wherein  that
fweat  may  feem  to  have  been  of  lefs  advantage  in  taking  off  the  acutenefs  of
the  fever,  than  injurious  in  producing  the  fever  for  fo  long  a  time  ;  I  would
nor,  I  fay,  have  you  believe  that  I  am  in  the  number  of  thofe  who  are  even
more  averfe  to  fweats,  in  increas'd  fevers,  than,  a  little  before  the  time  we
are  fpeaking  of,  thofe  phyficians  were  to  ftools,  who  had  frequently  obferv'd
patients  of  this  kind  to  have  been  carried  off  in  a  miferable  manner,  from
having,  taken  purging  medicines.  Without  doubt  nothing  is  more  natural
for  men,  than  to  avoid  one  extreme  error,  and  fun  immediately  into  anothei-.

(g)  Properaptic.  ad  DiiTat,  J.  B.  Hoffm.  {h)  Vid.  38,  ,Aph,  Sea.  2.

C  2  Difl'erent


I  2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

Different  regions,  different  feafons  of  the  year,  different  ages,  different  de-
grees of  ftrength,  different  conditions  of  bodies,  difeafes,  and  caufes,  require
different  treatments.  But  fcarcely  any  bear  violent  medicines  without  danr
^er  ;  and  much  lefs  if  the  matter  is  crude  ;  or,  if  concoded,  it  is  not  drawn
to  that  part  "  where  nature  mod  incHnes,"  to  ufe  the  words  of  Hippo-
crates {i),  "  through  the  paffages  that  colleil  it  together."

Yet  nature  does  not  incline  to  the  fame  place  always,  nor  in  all  cafes ;  but
to  different  places  at  different  times  ;  as,  for  inftance,  to  the  kidnies,  to  the
inteftines,  to  the  Ikin.  And  that  nature  does  verge  to  the  fl-cin,  and  cures
the  moll  violent  diforders  by  fweats  frequently  -,  and  among  thefe  fevers,  al-
though that  moft  ancient  mafter  (k)  had  not  cxprefsly  taught  it,  I  neverthe-
Jefs  believ'd  that  no  phyficians  could  be  ignorant.  However,  the  flying
from  one  extreme  carries  even  fome  of  the  moft  learned  men  fo  far,  as  to
affert,  that  they  cannot  find  examples  of  critical  fweats',  even  in  Hippocrates
himfelf,  in  whom  Malpighi  (/)  had  pointed  out  i'o  many  unfuccefsful  exam-
ples of  ftools.  But  thefe  gentlemen  have  been  fufRciently  anfwered  by  the
celebrated  Haller  {m).

And  others,  though  they  do  not  affert  the  fame  thing,  neverthelefs  make
fuch  objeftions  to  thofe  who  endeavour  to  excite  fweats,  as  may  make  the
phyficlan  fearful,  who  ftudies  opportunely  and  cautioufly,  that  is  mildly,  to
afliil  nature  j  which  is  a  little  fluggifh  indeed,  but  evidently  inclining  to  the
fkin :  as  if,  truly,  almoft  the  fame  objections  might  not,  withjuftice,  be
made  againft  purging,  which  they  fo  much  recommend.  Others  are,  more-
over, made  averfe  to  fweating  remedies,  by  this  confideration,  that  the  firft
ufe  of  fudorifics  began,  as  they  themfelves  fay,  among  the  Arabians.  So
the  moft  advantageous  ufe  of  the  Peruvian  bark  firft  began  among  the  Ame-
ricans:  nor  are  all  the  inventions  of  the  Arabian  phyficians  to  be  difcom-
mended.  And  certainly  they  were  not  Arabian  phyficians,  from  whom  PHny,
in  fo  many  places  of  his  natural  hiftory,  has  taken  the  account  of  roots,  feeds,
herbs,  or  other  things,  which  were  ufeful  in  exciting  fweats.

Nor  was  Andromachus  an  Arabian  :  yet  from  him  Galen  (n)  has  defcrib'd
an  antidote,  which  was  even  given  to  perfons  who  had  fevers,  "  and  power-
"  fully  excited  fweat :"  nor  did  Oribafius  (o),  nor  Aetius  (p),  nor  Paulus  (^),
come  from  an  Arabian,  but  from  a  Grecian  fchool ;  yet  not  one  of  them  has
omitted  to  take  notice  of  medicines,  by  the  taking  of  which  internally,
fweats  may  be  excited  :  and,  indeed,  the  two  laft  have  written  a  chapter  ex-
prefsly  upon  fudorific  remedies.  Yet  I  do  not  fay  thefe  things,  becaufe  I  think
that  they  are  not  equally  knov/n  to  the  fame  learned  men  as  to  me  ;  but  in
order  to  ftiow  you,  that,  by  reafon  of  a  too  great  forwardnefs  to  difapprove
fome  certain  remedies,  it  now  and  then  happens,  that  we  feem  to  be  quite
forgetful  of  thofe  things  whereof  we  are  very  well  inform'd.

(y)  Sea.  I.  Aph.  21. {k)  Sea.  4.  Aph,  36.  _  (o)  Medic.  Collefl.  1.  8.  c.  17. &  de  VIrt.

(/) Refp.  ad  Lipar.  Simpl.  ubi  de  Calamintha.

(«)  in  Boerh.  PrsEleft.  ad  Inftit.  §.  425.  ( fij  Medic,  tetrabib.  1.  i.  Serni.  i.  ubi  de

not.  p.  ead.  &  Serrti.  3.  c.  48.  &  157.

(«)  De  Compof.  msdicam.  fee  loca  1.  S,  (2)  De  Re  iVied.  1.  i,  c.  48.
t,  7.

21. It


Letter  XLIX. Article 21.  13

21.  It  is,  therefore,  the  bufinefs  of  a  prudent  phyfician,  in  epidemical
conftitutions  of  fevers,  to  adhere  obftinately  to  no  prejudg'd  opinion  ;  but  to
obferve  attentively,  of  himfelf,  where  nature  incHnes  ;  and  not  to  conclude
from  one  obfervation,  or  accidental  cure,  w-hat  ought  to  be  done  in  other
cafes.  1  have  feen  a  woman  labouring  under  a  continual  fever,  who,  after
blood  being  taken  from  her  arm,  in  which  I  remember  there  was  but  little
ferum,  was  immediately  feiz'd  with  a  much  more  violent  fever,  like  an  ac-
ceffion,  or  paroxyfm  ;  which  had  hitherto  been  unufual.  And,  indeed,  this
was  the  true  acceffion  of  an  intermittent,  which  was  fucceeded  by  another
on  the  following  day ;  and  within  four  days  the  woman  was  freed  from  her
fever.  This  acceffion,  therefore,  which  had  at  firft  feem'd  dangerous,
and  inimediately  fucceeded,  in  fo  violent  a  manner,  to  the  lofs  of  blo'od,
prov'd  to  be  falubrious  :  for  the  fever,  from  a  continual  one,  became  an  in-
termittent ;  which  went  away  of  itfclf  eafily  and  foon.  But  that  change  was
fortuitous,  and  would  even  have  come  on  without  any  Ijfs  of  blood,  There
is  no  occafion  to  add  other  examples,  that  are  frequently  met  with  in  the
pradlice  of  phyfic,  in  order  to  (hew  you  the  intention  of  what  I  alTerc.

However,  not  only  in  the  event  of  fevers,  but  alfo  in  the  prognoftic  indi-
cations of  the  event,  thole  which  accidentally  indicate,  ought  to  be  diftin-
guifh'd  from  thofe  that  do  not  accidentally  indicate.  Among  the  latter,  the
common  people  gladly  place  even  pufcules  and  little  ulcers,  which  happen
about  the  lips  ;  and,  perhaps,  not  without  reafon.  For  Albertini  alfo  (r)
confefs'd  th.ic  thcfe  were  the  marks,  or  tokens,  of  crifes,  "  whigh  follow
"  after  ;"  and  I  have,  more  than  once,  obferv'd  that  the  event  anfwer'd  aur
expetlation  :  although,  at  the  fame  time,  I  remember  that,  in  a  very  bad
continual  fever,  our  hopes  were  difappointed ;  notwithftanding  they  appear'd
of  themfelves,  not  "  after  a  fright,"  and  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  difeafe,
and  "  urine  was  at  the  fame  time  difcharg'd  with  fome  little  heat :"  and  why
1  have  m^ade  theie, remarks  you  will  eafily  know,  if  you  infpedt  fome  certain
places  of  the  Comtnercium  Litter arium  (j),  which  relate -to  thefe  little  ulcers  or
puftules  of  the  lips.  Yet  in  regard  to  this  fign,  I  have  not  fo  many  oblerva-
tions  as  I  would  wilh.

But  another  fign,  v/hich  I  had  begun  to  obferve  by  chance,  as  frequently
is  the  caie,  has  very  rarely  happen'd  to  fail,  in  a  very  great  number  of  ob-
.fervations :  1  mean  a  fign  taken  from  the  infpedlion  of  the  urine.  For  I  con-
tinu'd  the  more  attentively,  and  frequently,  to  attend  to  it,  from  the  time  I
lit  on  tv/o  paffages  of  eminent  phyficians  ;  which  you  will  fee  transferr'd  into
this  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (/},  although  for  fome  other  reafon  ;  I
mean  of  Joubertus  and  Gradius  :  Joubertus,  I  fay,  for  the  words  v^hich  are
copied  there,  as  if  from  Schneider,  are  not  the  words  of  that  author,  but  of
Joubertus,  who  is  exprefsly  quoted  by  him  in  his  treatife  on  the  gout,  in  the
firft  book  and  fixth  chapter;  in  which  manner  Schneider  ought  to  have  been
quoted  ;  and  not  "  in  the  chapter  on  the  gout :"  and  in  another  place,  at
leaft,  of  the  Sepulchretum  (;0)  where  I  have  obferv'd  that  the  greateft  part

(r)  in  Opufc. de Cort. Peruv. Tom. i.  (/) Obf.  40.  &  Schol.

Comment,  de  Bonon,  Sc.  Infcit.  (»)  ].  3.  beft.  25.  in  Schol.  ad  Obf.  14.

(i)A.  i745.Hebd.3i,&A.  1739.  Hebd.  2,8.

©f


I  4 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

of  a  certain  fcholium  is  taken  from  Schenck  (.r),  thofe  words  are  attributed  to
Joubertus.  Tiiis  author,  then,  has  aflerted,  "  that  in  many  patients  who
"  have  fevers,  (and  efpecially  when  the  diforder  has  been  brought  to  a  crifis)
"  fmall  fandy  particles  are  copioully  difcharg'd  with  the  urine-,  without  any
"  nephritis  being  prefent,  or  having  preceded,"  And  Gradius  had  formerly
taught,  that  land  "  appears  in  the  decline  of  fevers,  and  after  long  fevers  ;"
■but  that  they  are  eafily  diftinguifh'd  from  thofe  which  prove  the  exiftence  of
.calculi ;  "  becaufe  if  they  are  comprefs'd  and  rubb'd  betwixt  the  fingers,
"  they  are  readily  diflblv'd."

Moreover,  1  have  not  only  in  fevers,  whether  they  were  vernal  or  au-
tumnal, in  fummeror  in  winter";  whether  intermittent  or  continual ;  whether
iaenign  or  malignant,  or  join'd  with  petechife,  or -of  a  middle  nature  betwixt
them  ;  or  fometimes  very  flight,  long  or  fhort ;  v/hcther  in  children  or  young
men  -,  whether  in  men  or  women,  and  thefe  Ibme  of  them  pregnant  -,  or,
finally,  whether  in  thofe  that  have  their  origin  from  more  frequent,  or  more
fingular  caufes ;  as  for  inftance,  from  a  corrofive  poifon  being  accidentally,
or  purpofely,  taken  •,  I  have  not  only,  I  fay,  in  fevers,  but  alfo  in  fome  other
diforders  disjoin'd  from  fevers,  and  particularly  in  fevere  pains  of  the  head,
and  fome  apopledic  affcdlions,  fometimes  even  in  thofe  of  old  perfons,  ob-
ferv'd,  that  as  often  as  thefe  fandy  particles  appear'd,  the  fever' was  in  fa£t
either  at  an  end,  or  very  near  to  an  end  :  but  not  unfrequently  when  it  had
not  as  yet  begun  to  decline,  or  if  it  had  begun,  when  it  did  not  go  on  fo
evidently  to  decline  as  not  to  leave  the  event  ftili  more  doubtful  than  I
would  wifli.

And  as  in  the  end  of  the  difeafe,  or  in  the  decline,  that  is  already  cer-
tain, and  becoming  more  confiderable  every  day,  they  have  confirm'd  the
victory  of  nature;  fo  before  the  beginning  of  the  decline,  or  in  a  de-
cline, which  is  ftill  doubtful,  they  have,  for  the  moft  part,  portended  the
fame  vi£tory  :  for  either  the  difeafe  has  happily  gone  off  altogether,  or  if  a
relapfe  has  foUow'd,  it  has  been  fo  much  the  flighter  and  fhorter.  Once
only,  -as  I  have  already  told  you  (j),  to  a  dropfy,  which  had  follow'd  a
fever,  and  gone  off,  other  violent  and  not  very  fliort  diforders,  but  thofe
alfo  of  fuch  a  kind  that  the  patient  recover'd  from  them,  fucceeded.  But
once,  in  all,  the  death  of  a  patient  was  the  confequence  of  an  autumnal  ma-
lignant fever;  which  patient  I  never  faw  cither  before  or  after  that  one  day  ;
fo  that  whether  he  was  taken  off  by  the  fever,  or  by  fome  error  committed
afterwards  by  himfelf,  thole  who  were  about  him,  or  by  the  phyfician,  I  do
not  certainly  know  ;  nor  yet  whether  thofe  fandy  particles  had  been  obferv'd
during  the  whole  time  of  the  difeafe,  or  had  appear'd  on  that  day  for  the  firft
time.

Nor  do  I  fpeak  of  thofe  which  appear  always,  but  of  thofe  which  begin  to
diicover  thenifelves  only  when  the  vigour  of  the  diieafe  is  approaching  near
to  a  decline,  or  when  the  decline  is  already  begun,  and  "  adhere  to  th«
"  furface  of  the  urinal,"  as  Gradius  fays  (z) ;  net  "  of  the  urine,"  as  you
will  read  it  falfely  copied  in  the  Sepulchretum  {ci)  ;  where  not  even  the  book

(x)  Obf.  Medic.  1.  3,  ubi  de  Ren.  Symp- (x)  Prax.  in  Non.  Almanfor.  tr.  3.  c.  14.
Obf  5.  («)  in  Schol.  cit.

(yj  Epill.  8.  n.  10.


Letter  XLIX. Article  22.  1 5-

in  which  he  has  faid  thefe  things  is  pointed  out.  That  is  to  fay,  looking  at
the  urine  in  a  very  clear  light,  you  will  obferve  thin  Tandy  particles  adhering
to  the  fides  of  the  glafs  chamber-pot,  and  fometimes  fwimming  on  the  fur-
face  at  tiie  fame  time,  reddifh  for  the  moft  part,  whitifh  very  feldom  ;  fuch
as  I  remember  to  have  feen  in  a  certain  young  man,  when  a  fever  that
was  malignant,  and  attended  with  petechise,  began  to  decline.

22.  What  1  have  mention'd  of  this  young  man,  brings  back  to  my  mind,
that  the  blood,  which  in  his  diforder  was  taken  away  at  four  different  times,
at  one  time  by  the  lancet,  and  at  another  by  cupping-glaiTes ;  befides
that  it  was  more  fluid  than  it  ought  to  be,  or  had  its  crafTamentum  very
foft;  had,  at  the  three  laft  times  of  being  taken  away,  the  coagulum  fur-
rounded  with  a  fcrum,  which  was  of  a  white  colour,  as  if  from  chyle  being
mix'd  with  it.  Which  1  fhould  not  have  taken  notice  of,  if  I  had  feen  it
in  a  perlon  who  was  well-nourilh'd  ;  as  I  have  at  other  times,  and  at  a  certain
hour  after  taking  food.

But  in  the  following  month,  the  blood  which  was  taken  away  from  another
young  man  alfo,  on  the  third,  and  again  on  the  fifth,  day  of  the  difeafe,
fhow'd  at  both  times  a  whitifh  ferum,  in  fmall  quantity  indeed,  and  even  in
all  only  a  few  drops  on  the  third  day ;  while  the  crafTamentum  was  hard,
and  cover'd  over  with  a  cruft  of  a  moderate  thicknefs:  whereas  on  the  fifth
day,  the  coagulum  was  fofter  than  it  ought  to  be,  and  cover'd  over  with  a
cruft  not  lefs  thick  than  itfelf ;  not  being  hard  however,  but  fo  tenacious,
and  refifting  divifion,  that  you  could  fcarcely  cut  it  with  a  knife.  Yet  this
fecond  young  man  labour'd  under  a  fever,  which  rather  inclin'd  to  malignity,
than  was  really  malignant  ;  being  not  only  much  fhorter  than  that  former,,
but  more  flight,  and  without  danger.  However,  in  thofe  malignant  fevers
wherein  thele  fandy  particles  appear'd,  I  neither  faw  a  whitifli  ferum  nor  a
very  foft  crafl"amentum  ;  but  even  this  laft  fometimes  more  hard  than  it  na-
turally is  ;  and  I  e^n  faw  it  very  hard  in'one  pcrfon,  in  whom  it  us'd  to  be
very  foft  at  other  times.

I  remember  befides,  that  when  two  phyficians  of  this  college,  of  whom
I  was  one,  were  confulted  by  order  of  the  fupreme  magiftrate  of  Venice,
upon  peftilential  fevers  that  rag'd  in  that  part  of  the  territories  of  Padua
•which  is  about  Montaneana,  (lorfo  fome  call  it  now,  though  Peter  Bembo(^)
call'd  it  Mont^nianum)  we  were  inform'd,  that  althouah  in  the  beginning  the
blood  of  the  patients  was,  for  the  moft  part,  diflTolv'd  in  too  great  a  degree,
and  at  that  time  appear'd  to  be  too  much  coagulated  ;  yet,  in  both  times  of
that  conftitucion,  the  petechiae  had  difcover'd  themfelves  ;.  and  even  at  this
time,  if  any  peribns  happen'd  to  have  the  blood  diflTolv'd,  thefe  had  the  pc-
techise  produc'd  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  others  :  fo  that  it  was  natural  to-
conceive  of  this  malignant  power,  (which  the  communication  of  the  diforder
by  contagion  fhow'd  to  confift  in  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  fubtle  matter)  fince
it  operated  in  one  and  the  fame  conftitution  of  air  at  the  fame  place  and  time,
as  being  in  tacl  one  and  the  fame  ;  but  rhat  the  blood  being  in  a  difi^erent
difpofition  or  ftate  in  different  perfons,  appear'd  to  be  differently  vitiated  in;
different  perfons.

{i]  Rerum  Venetar.  Hiftor.  1.  9.  &  1.  ig,

4,  . And;


X  6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Dlforders.

And  as  the  evident  vitiated  ftate  of  the  blood  was  different  in  different
perlons,  or  brought  on  feme  fymptoms  differently  in  different  perfons;  lb  it
plainly  appear'd,  that  either  different  remedies,  or  a  different  ufe  of  the  fame
remedies,  were  requir'd  in  different  cafes  -,  yet  that  there  were  both  fome
fymptoms,  and  fome  rem.edies,  which  were  common  to  all,  although  the
former  were  much  more  knowp  than  the  latter :  for  who  would  believe  that
he  could,  in  any  meafure,  conjefture  the  peculiar  nature  of  that  malignant
power,  or  energy,  by  which  every  one  was  infected,  except  from  thofe  things
that  were  obferv'd  to  be  commonly  advantageous  or  hurtful  to  all  ?  And
even  if  thefe  fevers  were  not  altogether  peililential,  could  any  one  think  here,
with  a  celebrated  writer  in  the  medical  fciende,  that  the  ftrengthof  the  patients
was  not  cverwhelm'd  by  the  malignant  influence,  but  by  the  quantity  of
blood,  fince  fuch  caufes  had  preceded  as  tend  to  diminilh  rather  than  increafe
it ;  and  experiments,  which  had  been  more  than  fufHciently  repeated,  Ihow'd
blood-letting  to  be  pernicious.

23.  It  is,  therefore,  natural  to  fuppofe,  that  with  the  malignant  power  is
Join'd  a  folution  or  coagulation  of  the  blood  ;  but  that  the  malignity  does
not  confift  in  either  of  thefe  qualities,  efpecially  as  we  fee  one  or  the  other  of
them  in  fo  many  dilbrdcrs  which  are  not  malignant.  However,  where  either
the  one  or  the  other  is  very  confid'erable,  and  has  fymptoms  join'd  to  it  by
which  the  malignity  is  fhown  •,  as,  in  particular,  a  fpeedy  and  very  great
proftration  of  ftrength  and  vital  power,  which  can  neither  be  attributed  to
evident  foregoing  caufes,  nor  to  an  exceffive  quantity  of  overwhelming  bleod  ;
this  quality  alfo,  as  one  that  is  very  frequen-ly  join'd  with  malignity,  and
adds  violent  fymptoms  likewife  thereto,  will,  in  Ibme  meafure,  be  a  proof
of  this  malignity,  as  you  will  find  in  many  obfervations,  and  even  in  that
v/hich  I  Ihali  fubjoin  from  our  Mediavia.

24.  A  wom.an,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  being  very  evidently  feiz'd  with  a
malignant  fever,  was  brought  into  the  hofpital.  Her  pulfe  on  the  fix  firft  days
■was  very  fmall  and  obfcure,  though  it  feem'd  afterwards  to  be  a  little  more
lively.  But  a  very  great  ftreightnefs  in  refpiration,  and  a  palpitation  of  the
heart,  coming  on,  the  woman  was  carried  off  thereby  within  the  fpace  of
two  days.

The  thorax,  therefore,  only  being  open'd,  the  blood  was  found  to  be  half-
concreted  in  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart ;  and  in  the  right,  it  was  not  only
fo  colleded  together  as  to  diftend  that  cavity,  but  the  whole  of  it  was  fo
crowded  together  into  a  polypous  concretion,  that  although  this  feem'd  to  be
fielhy,  when  you  look'd  at  it,  it  neverthelefs  refitted  the  knife  when  you  at-
tempted to  cut  it,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  moft  tenacious  and  vifcid  cruft
that  gathers  upon  the  blood  of  pleuritic  patients.

25.  If  you  happen  to  aflc  me  whether  acids,  as  the  fame  perfons  imagine,
bring  on  the  caufe  of  concretion,  or,  as  is  more  cotnmonly  faid,  of  coagu^
lation,  in  the  blood  ;  or  whether,  although  fome  acids  bring  it  on,  all  of
them  are  capable  of  bringing  it  on,  as  it  feems  to  others  they  are  not,  or  of
continuing  to  produce  it ;  1  (hall  fay,  that  there  may  be  other  caufes  befides
acids  from  whence  the  blood  may  coagulate,  and  fhall,  at  the  fame  time,  add
fome  of  my  obfervations,  which  were  made  with  attention,  and  clofe  in-
fpedlion,  upon  the  blood  that  had  been  taken  from  patients  by  venasfeftion.

And,
7


Letter  XLIX. Article  26.  ay

And,  firft,  although  I  have  lit,  more  than  once,  upon  blood  which  exhal'd
a  kind  of  naufcous  and  acid  odour,  and,  if  I  may  fo  fpeak,  a  kind  of  vague
acid,  or  ficidttm  fyhejire ;  it  never  happen'd,  though  I  have  been  oblig'd  to
let  blood  in  many  malignant  diforders,  that  I  found  any  thing  of  an  acid
odour  in  that  blood.  But  I  found  it  in  a  woman  who  was  affefted  with  a
continual  llimmer-fever,  and  in  a  man  in  like  manner,  and  in  a  boy  of  fix
years  old,  who  were  troubled  with  vernal  intermittent  tertians,  of  a  mild
nature  like  the  former,  in  different  years,  in  all  of  whom,  for  fome  reafon
or  other,  it  was  neceffary  toopen  a  vein. -

In  the  boy,  indeed,  the  craflamentum  was  hard,  and  had  very  little  ferifm  :
it  was  moderately  firm  in  that  woman  and  in  the  man  ;  and  in  the  latter  with
rather  a  little  feium,  and  that  of  a  yellovvifn  colour.  In  which  man  it  hap-
pen'd, that,  though  1  had  obferv'd  this  odour  on  the  fourth  hour  after  blood-
kcting,  feven  hours  after  that  I  could  fcarcely  perceive  it ;  which  was  a  pretty
clear  proof,  that  the  caufe  of  this  confifted  in  particles  which  were  more
eafily  dilTipable  than  in  the  blood  of  the  others,  in  which  I  perceiv'd  it  after
ten  or  twelve  hours  in  a  ftrong  and  vigorous  ftate.  And  not  only  in  thofe
of  whom  I  have  fpoken  :  for  even  where  there  was  no  fever,  as  in  a  fevere
and  recurrent  pain  of  the  head,  and  in  a  fcabies  in  like  manner,  there  was
the  iame  odour  of  the  blood,  which  abounded  with  a  great  quantity  of  ferum
around  the  craflamentum,  that  was  cover'd  with  a  thin  and  tenacious  crufb.
In  him,  however,  who  had  "the  pain  in  his  head,  the  craflamentum  was  not
fo  thick  and  black  as  in  the  fcabious  man ;  although  both  of  them  were
fcabious.  But  lefl:  you  imagine  that  in  all  thofe  who  are  troubl'd  with  a
fcabies  the  blood  emits  an  acid  odour,  I  can  afllire  you  that  it  did  not  in
others,  and  particularly  not  in  a  nobleman  of  the  firflrrank,  in  whom  a  fcaly
diforder,  that  had  eroded  the  flcin,  was  unadvifedly  repell'd  at  that  time,
from  which  he  fufFer'd  much,  his  blood  having  a  very  tender  and  diffluent
craflamentum  beneath  a  very  tough  and  thick  crufl.  And,  indeed,  in  the
cafe  of  that  fame  fcabious  patient  whom  I  mention'd  in  the  fecond  place,  al-
though he  had  blood  taken  away  four  times  within  five  months,  no  acid  odour
proceeded  therefrom  more  than  once.

But  let  us  now  fay  no  more  of  a  diforder  of  the  blood  of  this  kind,  which
is,  as  you  fee,  not  very  rare,  in  order  to  confider  one  much  more  rare,  which
was  perceiv'd  at  Padua  ten  years  ago,  and  not  by  the  faculty  of  fmelling,  but
of  feeling.

26.  Catherine  B.  the  honell  wife  of  her  honeft  hufband  Jofeph,  being  a
woman  of  a  middle  ftature,  and  of  a  fanguineous  temperament,  fo  that  her
menftrua  had  begun  when  the  was  in  her  thirteenth  year,  and  not  in  a  fmall
quantity,  and  continued  to  flow  in  the  fame  or  in  a  larger  quantity  every
month  after,  even  when  fhe  gave  fuck,  and  generated  a  great  quantity  of
milk  after  her  firft  and  fecond  time  of  child-bearing  ;  for  fiie  brought  forth
twice  ;  and  notwithftar.ding  fne  labour'd  under  an  inflammatory  fever  every
year  afterwards,  both  in  fpring  and  autumn,  and  that  for  twelve  years  to-
gether ;  although  fhe  often  loft  blood  on  account  of  this  fever  ;  and  even
though  the  firfl  of  thefe  fevers  was  fucceeded  by  fo  great  a  hsmcrrhage  from
the  uterus,  that  being  carried  on  beyond  the  eleventh  day,  it  brought  on  a
great  weaknefs  of  the  pulfe,  that  was  alfo  follow'd  by  a  jaundice,  which  was

Vol.  III.  • D  at


1  8 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

at  length  carried  off  after  tv/o  months  by  a  great  difcharge  of  urine :  this
woma'n,  then  ;  whofe  habit  of  body  and  general  difeafes  I  have  mention'd
thus  far,  and  am  about  to  nnention  thofe  that  foUow'd,  for  the  reafons  which
I  (hall  hint  at  when  1  have  finifh'd  the  narration  ;  being  in  her  nine-and-
twentieth  year,  receiv'd  the  fudden  and  unexpefted  news  of  a  fatal  accident
having  happen'd  to  her  moil:  dear  brother ;  and  though  flie  was  in  other
refpedts  of  a  fierce  and  intrepid  mind,  fhe  immediately  fwoon'd  away.

On  coming  to  herfelf  again,  flie  perceiv'd  that  her  menftrua,  which  fiie
happen'd  to  have  at  that  time,  had  been  check'd  ;  but  on  the  next  day  fhe
faw  them  again,  not  having  the  fame  appearance  as  before  however,  but
beino-  lil<e  water  in  which  frefh  meat  has  been  wadi'd  :  and  difcharges  of
this  'kind  return'd  at  Hated  times  afterwards,  through  the  courfe  of  fome
months.  For  this  reafon  blood  was  taken  away  more  than  once,  and  foon
after  often,  in  a  very  violent  fever  that  came  on,  and  was  at  length  carried
off  by  a  fweat.  However,  after  thefe  things  the  menftrua  return'd  to  their
former  nature  ;  nor  was  a  double  tertian  continual  fever,  which  return'd
every  year  in  the  fpring  time,  and  that  for  the  fpace  often  years  fucceffively,
any  obltrudtion  thereto,  notwithftanding  this  fever  was  not  carried  off  but
by  repeated  blood-letting,  and  the  exhibition  of  the  Peruvian  bark.

After  thefe  ten  years,  fhe  was  attack'd  in  the  fummer  with  fevers  almofb
cf  the  fame  kind  ;  but  with  thefe  fhe  was  afHifted  more  feverely  and  more
danoeroufly,  becaufe  they  had  violent  pains  of  the  whole  belly  jcin'd  to  them,
and  a  uterine  haemorrhage,  which  was,  for  the  moft  part,  more  increas'd
when  the  pains  were  grown  a  little  milder.  Every  method  was  made  ufe  of
to  counteraft  thefe  fymptoms,  and,  among  others,  blood-letting  was  fix  times
repeated  ;  and  the  ferum  of  the  blood  was  of  a  faffron  colour,  the  craffa-
mentum  hard,  and  cover'd  over  with  a  polypous  cruff.  But  although  both
the  fever  and  thofe  fymptoms  were  fometimes  diminifh'd,  and  fometimes,  to
all  appearance,  remov'd ;  yet  an  end  was  not  put  to  them  all,  but  by  the
h^fmcrrhagia  uleri  itfelf,  which  return'd  in  a  greater  quantity  than  ever  on
the  forty-fifth  day  after  the  fevers  had  begun.  Neverthelefs,  the  patient  foon
grew  well,  and  grew  well  in  fuch  a  manner,  that,  after  the  completion  of
five -and  thirty  days  from  the  laft  hemorrhage,  the  menfes  returning  in  a  mo-
derate and  natural  degree,  and  always  continuing  to  flow  at  the  proper  time,
fhe  pafs'd  twenty  months  in  extremely  good  health.  But  after  that,  in  the
fummer  of  the  year  1749,  flie  had  frequently,  by  reafon  of  a  great  thirfi:,
drunk  a  confiderable  quantity  of  water,  without  any  uneafinefs  of  the  ifomach,
which  fhe  could  by  no  means  bear  in  former  years,  even  when  fhe  had  a,
fever;  and  in  the  autumn  that  follow'd,  by  reafon  of  external  caufes  which
were  very  evident,  and  affcded  the  body  with  fatigues,  and  the  mind  wiih
anxiety,  had  been  troubl'd  with  a  naufea  of  the  ftomach,  watchings,  pain  of
the  head,  and  laffitude  ;  this  fymptom  was  added  in  the  fuccceding  winter,
that  though  her  thorax  and  head  were  very  hot,  the  belly  and  the  lower  limbs
were  cold,  nor  could  be  fufficiently  defended  from  the  cold  by  clothes,  or
any  other  prefervative  whatever ;  and,  in  like  manner,  that  fhe  was  feiz'd
with  a  horror,  which  crept  over  her  back  after  dinner,  and  ftill  more  in  the
night-tim':-,  when  fhe  turn'd  herfelf  from  one  fide  to  the  other:  and,  ina<.ed,^
if  fhe  got  any  fleep,  fhe  was  awak'd  by  cremors  and  fudden  terrors ;  akhougk

fome
8


Letter  XLIX. Article  26.  i^

fome  diurnal  terrors  were  not  wanting,  which,  certainly,  were  the  confe-
quences  of  a  falfe  imagination,  through  the  effedl  of  which  flie  every-now-
and-then  fell  into  a  fwoon.

From  hence  all  the  fymptoms  laft  fpoken  of  were  increas'd  every  day,  a
fenfe  of  internal  oppreflion  was  troublefome  to  her,  and  her  head  in  parti- _
cular  became  fo  heavy  and  fubjeft  to  a  vertigo,  that  the  woman  had  need
of  a  fupport  in  order  to  prevent  her  from  falling.  She  was  then  in  her
three-and  fortieth  year,  when  fhe  fent  for  her  phyfician,  who  was  our  Me-
diavia,  and  had  been  now  for  four  years  ;  and  to  hjm,  on  the  feventh  of
May,  in  the  year  175c,  related  all  thefe  things ;  and  this,  moreover,  which
in  a  woman  cf  that  kind  is  worthy  of  peculiar  remark  :  that  her  menftrua,
which,  as  we  learn  from  what  has  been  faid  above,  had  always  been  in  a
great  quantity,  and  which  in  the  laft  fummer  had  not  been  diminilh'd,  al-
though they  flow'd  twice  in  each  month,  and  us'd  to  be  pretty  hot,  and  even
extremely  hot,  had  now  not  only  begun  to  be  diminifh'd  in  their  quantity,
from  the  time  flie  had  been  thus  afFedted,  but  had  begun  to  be  dil'charg'd  in
a  cold  ftate,  and,  laft  of  all,  had  even  come  away  quite  cold.

Upon  hearing  this  account,  the  inceftines,  which  in  this  patient  had
always  been  fubjeft  to  coftivenefs,  being  immediately  open'd  in  a  mild
manner,  blood-letting  was  order'd  ;  but  the  blood  running  down  the  arm
flowly,  and  not  coming  forth  with  an  impetus,  a  circumftance  which  gave
rife  to  this  my  prolix  narration,  was  obferv'd  by  the  patient,  and  at  the  fame
time  by  the  furgeon,  who  was  a  man  of  approv'd  credit  and  veracity,  Daniel
Fafolati,  to  the  great  aftonilbment  of  them  both  ;  I  mean,  that  the  blood,
the  violent  heat  of  which  not  only  the  patient  herfelf  at  other  times,  but  the
furgeons,  when  holding  in  their  hands  the  glafs-veflel  in  which  the  blood  was
receiv'd,  had  been"  furpriz'd  at,  came  forth  now  in  fuch  a  ftate  of  coldnefs,
that  the  patient  complain'd  of  ice  (for  that  was  her  exprefllon)  flowing  down
upon  the  bending  ©f  her  elbow  ;  and  the  hand  of  the  furgeon  was  afFedted
with  the  coldnefs.  The  ferum  of  this  blood  was  in  Imall  quantity,  and  of
a  yellow  colour ;  the  craflamentum  black  and  vifcid.  And  that  which  in
the  evening  was  taken  from  the  foot,  had  the  fame  kind  of,  coldnefs,  and
almoft  the  fame  nature.

As  there  was  fcarcely  any  advantage  gain'd  by  this  treatment,  and  by
fome  medicines  which  are  call'd  cardiacs  ;  the  phyfician  did  not  hefitate,  and
particularly  in  a  wom.an  of  this  kind,  in  order  that  the  blood  might  be  rous'd
to  a  more  brifk  motion,  to  take  fome  from  the  arm  and  from  the  foot  at
the  fame  time,  on  the  following  day.  And  the  fuccefs  correfponded  to  his
wifties.  For  not  only  the  blood  was  difcharg'd  in  a  lefs  cold  ftate,  but  while
it  was  difcharg'd  the  woman  faid  that  the  fenfe  of  oppreflion  was  taken  av/ay  ;
and  a  little  fever  coming  on  in  the  evening,  in  the  night  the  inferior  parts,
which  had  always  been  cold  and  ftiff  in  the  preceding  months,  grew  a  little
warm  ?  and  in  the  morriing  the  fever  remitted,  and  foon  after  leh  the  patient
entirely.  After  this  fne  continu'd  well  ten  days  :  the  lower  limbs  being
warm,  and  the  pulfe,  which  had  been  before  hard,  fmall,  a:id  low,  and  gave
no  refinance  to  the  comprefilon  of  the  finger,  being  now  chang'd  for  the
better,  in  confcquence  of  the  oppreffion  being  remov'd  ;  and  the  urine  itfelf,

D  2  which


.2  0 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

which  had  been  before  difcharg'd,  not  only  in  a  large  quantity,  but  in  a  crude
and  limpid  ftate,  returning  now  almoft  to  its  natural  quantity  and  colour.

2  7.  Now  take  the  remainder  of  the  narration  ;  for  1  do  not  think  it  fuf-
ficient  to  have  related  what  had  preceded  and  accompanied  an  affedion  of
the  blood  of  that  kind,  except  all  things  be  taken  notice  of,  or,  at  leaft,
down  to  a  certain  time.  At  the  end  of  tht  tenth  day,  then,  that  part  of  the
metatarfus  of  the  left  foot  which  anfwers  to  the  great  toe,  was  attack'd  with  a
pain  that  was  of  very  lliort  continuance  indeed  ;  fo  that,  as  it  attack'd  her
once  on  the  firft  day^  and  thirteen  times  on  the  following  day,  it  recurr'd
five  times  within  half  an  hour,  and  went  off  in  fuch  a  manner,  that,  a  little
after,  on  the  very  fame  day,  the  woman  could  go  from  home  almoft  without
any  inconvenience  ;  except  that,  as  fne  was  returning,  Ihe  fell  down  fuddenly,
without  any  external  caufe,  on  the  right  fide,  and  did  not  rife  up  without
being  affifled  by  the  hands  of  other  perfons.

Sl°e,  neverthelefs,  return'd  home  ;  and  there  the  pain  attack'd  her,  firft,  in
a  flight  manner ;  but  on  the  day  following  was  fo  acute,  together  with  a  great
fever,  and  fo  continual,  as  to  trouble  her  the  whole  of  that  day,  and  not  to
go  off  without  the  adminiftration  of  opium.  On  the  next  day  fhe  was  free
both  from  pain  and  fever,  fo  as  to  rile  up  from  her  bed  in  a  good  ftate  of
health.  But  on  the  fucceeding  day,  flie  was  feiz'd  with  a  violent  convulfion
of  the  cheft  and  of  the  thorax.  After  that,  fhe  was  affiifted  with  a  fever
and  pain,  to  which  a  very  violent  convulfion  was  added;  thefe  fymptoms
o-rowing  milder  fometimes,  even  to  the  fpace  of  three  days ;  but,  at  other
times,  perfevering,  or  growing  ftronger,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  it  was  fcarcely
in  h?r  power  to  draw  her  breath,  and,  finally,  that  her  head  was  opprefs'd
by  a  deep  fleep.

From  the  time  of  that  firft  convulfion  the  difeafe  was  contended  with,  for
eleven  days,  at  one  time,  by  giving  the  frefti-drawn  oil  of  fweet  almonds ;  at
other  times  by  antifpafmodic  powders,  of  the  fame  kind  as  thofe  that  have
their  name  from  the  marquis ;  fometimes  by  cinnabar  ;  fometimes  by  opium,
which  in  the  middle  courfe  of  the  diforder  was  left  off',  as  it  had  been  found
to  be  of  no  effe6t  when  given  to  the  quantity  of  two  grains ;  and  often  by
vensefeftion,  that  is  to  fay,  once  in  the  arm,  twice  in  the  hand,  three  times
in  the, foot ;  the  laft  blood  that  was  taken  from  thence  having  almoft  taken
av/ay  both  that  fleep  and  convulfion,  leaving  the  fever  behind  :  and  this  fever
dlfcover'd  itfelf  every  morning  by  a  thirft,  and  was  attended  with  a  pain  of
the  head  and  ftomach,  till  it  rcach'd  to  its  achine ;  thefe  fymptoms  afterwards
ceafing,  and  the  fever  itfelf  remitting  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  in  the  evening
fcarcely  any  was  left,  and  the  patient  flept  well  in  the  night.  And  after  this
fever  had  continu'd  fome  days  in  the  fame  manner,  it  was  quite  remov'd  by
the  Peruvian  bark,  taken  to  the  quantity  of  an  ounce,  divided  into  feveral
dofes.  Three  years  were  pafs'd  over  from  this  time  without  any  inconvenience
that  was  worthy  of  remark.  But  afterwards,  the  parns,  fevers,  conv-jlfions,
and  other  fymptoms  of  that  kind,  return'd,  though  alv/ays  flighter  than  the
former,  and  more  eafily  giving  way  to  large  blood-lettings.

And  to  thefe  things,  which  had  now  been  committed  to  writing  a  long  time
before,  I  thought  proper  to  add  the  following,  which  I  receiv'd  by  ftrift

enquiries.


Letter  XLIX. Article  28.  21

enquiries  from  the  fame  woman,  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  1760J
when  thefe  letters  were  copied  :  That,  in  the  year  1758,  which  was  the  fifty-
•firft  of  her  age,  fhe  at  length  began  to  be  without  her  menfes,  which  to  that
time  had  coniinu'd  to  flow,  not  only  very  plentifully,  but  of  a  bright-red
colour :  neverthelefs,  that  fhe  had  been  very  well,  and  was  ftill  fo,  except
that  fl:e  had  an  almoft  continual  fenfation  of  ice,  as  it  were,  in  her  belly  ;
and  as  this  afcended  from  thence  to  the  cheft,  it  brought  on  fuch  a  dilKculty
of  refpiration,  that  fhe  was  immediately  oblig'd  to  lole  blood,  and  that  to  a
confiderable  quantity.  Nor  is  ftrength  wanting  to  bear  this,  as  the  woman
ilill  preferves  both  a  good  habit  of  body,  and  a  good  colour  of  countenance.

28.  You  have  here  the  v/hole  hiftory  of  an  affeflion  of  the  blood,  which
is  not  lefs  to  be  wonder'd  at  than  v/hat  you  read  in  Lower  (c),  of  this  fluid
being  almoft  wholly  effus'd  by  a  very  great  hemorrhage,  and  at  the  fame
time  reftor'd  by  taking  plentifully  of  broths  now  and  then,  and  at  .length
being  difcharg'd  in  a  flate  more  fimilar  to  broth  than  to  blood  j  the  man  not
only  living,  but  perfeftly  recovering :  you  have,  I  fay,  the  whole  hiftory,
from  the  medical  journal  of  our  Mediavia,  given  in  a  prolix  manner  indeed
by  me,  bur,  as  I  apprehend,  not  without  Ibme  utility ;  fince  in  proportion
as  things  of  this  kind  are  more  difficult  to  be  explain'd,  we  ought  to  en-
•deavour  fo  much  the  mere  that  no  part  of  the  hiftory  be  unfupplied  to  thofe
who  may  undertake  to  explain  it,  contrary  to  what-  is  generally  the  cafe  in
other  obfervations  of  this  kind  that  1  have  hitherto  lit  on.
'  For,  to  omit  what  ourSpigelius(i;/)  hasfaid  "of  thick  and  cold  blood,"  which
he  faw  coming  forth  from  a  vein  that  was  open'd  in  perfons  who  had  drunk
cold  water  after  being  very  hot,  and  not  without  difficulty,  as  he  feems  to
fuppofe  it  to  have  been  made  more  denfe  and  thick,  within  the  adjacent  great
artery,  from  the  cold  of  the  cefophagus,  rather  than  to  have  been  aftually
cold ;  certainly  the  obfervation  which  was  formerly  propos'd  in  Riverius  (^ ),.
of  a  woman  very  liable  to  anger,  who  died  within  the  fifth  day  after  blood-
letting, we  are  fo  far  from  knowing  what  caufes  had  preceded,  or  what
fymptoms  accompanied  that  continual  fever  under  which  fhe  then  labour'd,
that  Thomas  Bartholin  (/)  was  oblig'd  to  conjefiiure  by  a  kind  of  divination,
if  1  may  be  allow'd  fo  to  fpeak,  that  a  perpetual  horror  had  accompanied
this  fever.

As  to  Peter  Borelli  (g),  he  thought  it  fufficient  to  fay,  tlrat  a  commander
of  horfe,  "  when  he  had  a  vein  open'd  in  a  difeafe,  had  difcharg'd  his  blood
"  in  a  cold  ftate  :"  fo  that  we  are  not  even  told  under  what  difeafe  he  la-
bour'd, or  who  had  been  witnefs  to  the  circumftance.  And  he  likewife  adds
fuch  an  explication  of  the  phenomenon,  that  makes  it  feem  furprizing,  not
that  the  fame  circumftance  had  already  happen'd  fometimes,  but,  rather,  that
it  does  not  happen  always,  or  much  more  frequently  at  leaft.  Finally,
Gabriel  Clauderus  (b),  producing  another  explication,  according  to  which
this  circumftance  ought  to  happen  alv/ays  or  generally,  in  the  moft  violent
apoplexies,  fays  that  he  had  obferv'd  the  fame  thing  as  Riverius  ;  that  is,  he
had  obferv'd,  in  two  matrons  who  were  feiz'd  v/ith  a  violent  apopleftic  pa.-

(0  Traa.  de  Corde,  r.  2.'  f/J  Cent.  4.  Epift.  Med.  47.

(//)  De  hi  m.  corp.  fabr.  1.  6.  c.  2.  (y) Cent.  2.  Med.  Phyf.  Obf.  51.

{i)  Obfc.  commuiiic.  46.  (/i)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  2..  A.  4.  Obf.  138.

roxyfm,


£Z Book  IV.  Of  Chimrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

roxyfm,  the  bloqd,  which  fiow'd  from  a  vein  that  was  open'd,  to  be  cold,  he
having  felt  it  fo  in  his  hand  immediately  upon  its  being  difcharg'd  ;  yet  that
rhe  had  reftor'd  both  of  them  to  health,  by  applying,  externally  and  internally,
medicines  that  were  loaded  with  volatile  particles.

But  from  the  vein  of  our  woman  the  blood  did  not  leap  forth,  but  flow'd
<lown  nowly;  fo  that  Clauderus  might  have  accommodated  his,;explication,
fuch  as  it  is,  with  fomewhat  more  cafe  to  this  woman.  The  fame  author
fubjoins  (i)  obfervations  of  the  blood  dropping  from  the  noftriis  in  a  cold
ftate,  and  of  the  urine  being  difcharg'd  in  the  fame  ftate  of  coldnefs.  But
if  it  had  happen'd  that  he  had  written  later,  he  might  have  added  others,
not  only  of  the  urine  being  difcharg'd  in  a  frigid  (late ;  as,  for  inftance,  by
a  foldier  {k),  and  by  a  boy  (/),  both  of  whom  were  opprefs'd  with  a  ma-
lignant fever,  the  latter,  moreover,  being  univerfally  cold  ;  and  alfo  of  a
fcetus  being  difcharg'd  in  a  cold  ftate,  not  only  when  already  dead,  and  from
a  mother  who  was  already  cold,  and  who  died  foon  after,  that  is,  within  an
hour  (»2)  ;'but  alfo  of  a  living  foetus  (n),  and  from  a  mother  wholiv'd,  having
*'  the  mofl:  intenfe  coldnefs"  in  its  whole  little  body,  and  "  a  rigidity  which
*'  was  quite  unufual,  and  almofl:  like  that  of  wood  ;"  fo  that  from  its  birth
to  the  end  of  three  days,  during  which  time  it  liv'd,  if  it  had  not  breath'd
in  the  llighteft  degree  imaginable,  it  would  have  been  confider'd  by  every
one  as  a  fetus  quite  dead.

Nor  would  Clauderus  have  on:iitted  the  example  of  that  illuftrious  wo-
man ((?),  in  whom,  "  for  fome  days  before  death,  the  expiration  had  always
"  been  extremely  cold  •,"  and  after  flie  was  dead,  though  both  lobes  of  the
Jungs  had  "  fcirrhi  and  vomica  in  great  plenty,"  the  left  was  found  to  be
^<  exceffively  cold  to  the  touch,  and  like  ice  ;  yet  fuch  a  coldnefs  as  this
"  was  not  obferv'd  in  the  other  lobe  of  the  lungs,  nor  in  any  other  part  of
"  the  body."  BiK  we  will  fet  afide  the  confideration  of  thofe  that  were
dead,  or  near  to  death,  and  will  compare  with  our  woman,  who  was  herfelf
preferv'd,  thofe  only  that  it  was  in  the  power  of  Clauderus  to  fave,  notwith-
ftanding  cold  blood  diftill'd  from  the  noftriis,  or  cold  urine  was  difcharg'd.
And  there  is  no  doubt  but  in  our  patient  the  menfes  had  been  difcharg'd  in
a  cold  ftate  •,  although  there  is  a  cotifiderable  difi'erence  betwixt  the  blood
which  flows  immediately  from  an  open'd  vein,  and  that  which  falls  out  by
drops  into  the  cavities  of  the  noftriis,  or  uterus,  and  vagina  ;  and  at  length
betwixt  the  blood  immediately  flowing  from  a  vein,  and  a  fluid  which,  after
being  fecreted  from  the  blood,  flows  down  through  a  very  long  paflage  :  fo
that  it  is  fomewhat  lefs  difficult  to  underfland  h-ow  thefe  difcTiarges  could
come  away  in  a  cold  ftate,  than  how  the  blood  could  be  cold  in  a  vein.

If  the  upper  parts  of  the  body  had  been  cold  in  our  patient,  at  that  time,
alfo,  as  well  as  the  lower ;  it  would,  perhaps,  have  come  into  the  mind  of
fome  perfon  to  reply,  that,  as  the 'remaining  part  of  the  blood  which  flow'd
through  the  internal  parts  of  the  vifcera  was,  by  this  means,  fufficiently  warm
and  proper  for  the  preiervation  of  life,  that  only  which  was  carried  through
the  external  veins,  and  lay  immediately  under  the  fkin,  could  be  cool'd  by

(/)  Ibid.  Obf.  139,  &  140.  («)  Eph.N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  5,  &6.  Obf.  So.

l^)  Earund.  Dec.  3.  A.  9.  &  10.  Obf.  206. («j Earund Cent.  9 Obf.  30.

(/)  Ait  N.  C.  Tom.  i.  Obf.  34. "  {0]  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  1743.  Heb.  zi.  n.  4.

the


Letter  XLIX. Articles  29, 30.  2.3

the  coldnefs  of  the  Ikin.  But  there  is  no  room  here  for  this  explication,
whatever  its  confiftency  may  be  in  other  refpefts.  For  not  only  the  upper
parts  were  hot,  but  the  woman  would  not  have  complain'd  of  the  coldnels
of  the  blood  which  flow'd  down,  unlefs  the  fkin  had  been  lefs  cold.

You  then,  as  you  are  an  ingenious  enquirer,  will  confider  by  what  means
it  can  happen,  not  only  that  the  blood  may  fometimes  be  fuch  as  it  is  in  fiflies,
but  colder  in  living  men,  and  men  who  are  likely  to  live.  But  I,  for  whom
it  is  fufficient  to  have  given  you  the  hiftory,  with  very  great  fidelity,  and  to
have  compar'd  it  with  others,  muft  go  on  to  other  things,  which,  although
they  are  not  of  fo  furprizing  a  nature,  this  hiftory  has,  neverthelefs,  brought
back  to  my  remembrance.

29.  "When  1  refided  at  Bologna,  a  certain  honeft  man  was  every  day  feiz'd
with  a  coldnefs,  which,  although  no  heat  foUow'd  it,  one  out  of  two  phyfi-
cians  confider'd  as  a  fever ;  and  the  other,  becaufe  the  patient  fell  down  when-
feiz'd  with  that  coldnefs,  chofe  rather  to  confider  in  the  light  of  a  vertiginous,
diibrder.  He  was  cur'd  by  the  ufe  of  the  carduus  benedidus,  and  the  fpi-
ritus  falis  ammoniaci.

I  al»3  remember  that  a  woman,  who  was  fifty  years  of  age,  and  was  taken,
into  that  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Morte,  was  feiz'd  every  night  at  a  certain,
hour,  with  a  coldnefs  and  trembling,  which  continu'd  till  the  morning,  be-
ing attended  v/ith  a  pulfe  which  was  fomewhat  more  obfcure  than  ufual,  but
not  more  frequent,  nor  with  any  other  inconvenience,  nor  yet  follow'd  by  a-
febrile  heat.  And  indeed  her  feet  were  continually  cold,  and  often  at  other>
though  uncertain,  hours,  fhe  was  likewife  feiz'd  with  a  fhort  coldnefs,  trem-
bling, and  obfcurity  of  pulfe.  The  difeafe  having  been  in  this  ftate  already,
for  twenty  days;  by  giving  the  Peruvian  bark  thole  erratic  rigors  firft  of  all
difappear'd,  and  the  periodical  remitted  :  at  length  the  latter  ceas'd  to  return
alfo,  and  left  the  Vvfoman  quite  free  from  difeafe.

But  thefe  fympt^ms  feem'd  to  me  in  fa6l  to  belong  to  a  fever  fui  generis.
Other  tremors,  however,  which  were  very  fimilar  to  febrile  tremors,  but  not
join'd  with  coldnefs,  and  ftill  lefs  fucceeded  by  any  heat,  and  which  I  know
to  have  attack'd  a  nobleman,  a  fellow-citizen  of  mine,  every  other  night,  I
have  referr'd  to  another  place,  and  law  them  remov'd,  by  a  confidcrable
quantity  of  urine  being  difcharg'd  fpontaneoufly,  and  by  a  confiderablc  dif-
charge  from  the  inteftines,  by  the  help  of  a  mild  medicine,  without  the  ufe
of  this  bark:  although  that  fome  periodical  affeAions,  if  they  are  febrile,  are
often  diffipated  without  this  remedy,  nobody  is  ignorant-,  and  if  they  are  not
febrile,  are  fometimes  overcome  thereby,  as  has  been  remark'd  by  many.

30.  But  that  by  the  ufe  of  this  bark  (if  you  except  fome  coriftitutions
wherein  it  has  feem'd  not  to  anfwer  fo  well)  periodical  fevers  are  put  to  flight
with  much  greater  certainty,  if  it  be  taken  in  the  quantity,  and  at  the  time,,
that  is  proper,  v^hether  they  intermit,  or  are  already,  from  intermittents,
become  continual,  and  whether  they  are  mild,  or  malignant  and  pernicious,
I  fuppofe  is  now  well  known,  almoft  among  all  perlons;  fince  even  fome
of  the  phyficians  ofthis  country,  whom  formerly  tear,  and  I  know  not  what
kind  of  averfion  to  the  bark,  deterr'd  from  the  ufe  of  it,  might  have  been
brought  into  a  better  opinion  thereof,  by  the  many  happy  and  fpeedy  cures

whick


2  4 Book  IV.  Of  CliiruTgkal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

whkh  they  have  feen  perform'd  even  by  me,  with  the  affiftance  thereof,  many'
years  ago ;  and  thofe  alfo  upon  perfons  of  rank  and  figure.

But  the  notice  of  the  proper  time,  in  which  this  remedy  ought  to  be  ex-
hibited, may  fometimes  efcape  the  phyfxcians,  not  fo  much  from  their  care-
leflhefs  in  forefeeing  the  danger  at  hand,  as  by  chance ;  in  the  fame  manner
that  it  happen'd  in  his  eminence  the  cardinal  Giovanni  Francefco  Barbadici,
twhom  the  moft  pernicious  febrile  paroxyfm  almoft  carried  off,  before  it
could  be  known  that  he  was  attack'd  with  a  periodical  fever.

The  cafe  is,  of  itfelf,  certainly  v/orthy  of  obfervation,  and  not  only  becaufe
it  happen'd  in  a  man  of  eminence,  whofe  laft  dilbrder  I  have  already  defcrib'd
to  you(p).  For  having  fnut  himfeif  into  his  chamber  immediately  after  din-
ner, and  not  open'd  the  door  at  the  ufual  hour;  the  fervants  at  firft  fufpeft-
ing  nothing,  except  that  he'  was  detain'd,  longer  than  ufual,  by  his  holy
.prayers  and  meditations,  or  by  reading,  were  quite  unalarm'd  •,  but  after-  ■
wards,  v/hen  it  began  to  grow  late,  they  fufpefting  fome  diforder,  at  firft
knock'd  at  the  door  gently,  and  after  that,  as  nobody  anfwer'd,  more  ftrong-
ly,  but  all  to  no  purpole,  though  they  call'd  out  to  him  at  the  fame  time  ;
at  length,  getting  in  at  the  window,  they  found  their  mafter  lying  fpee'chlefs,
without  fenfe,  and  without  motion.  A  phyfician  being  immediately  call'd,
he  found,  befides  thefe  diforders,  which  however  remitted  more  and  more,
convulfive  (fartings  of  the  tendons,  and  a  fever.  And  this  fever  alone  con-
tinu'd,  all  the  others  having  gene  off  of  themfeives,  within  lefs  than  an
hour.

The  following  day,  in  the morning,  Vallifneri  and  I  were  call'd  to  the
patient. We  enquir'd  of  what  nature,  and  from  what  caufe,  that  very  fud-
den,  and  very  violent,  diforder  of  yefterday  had  been;  which  a  fever,  as  ic
feem'd,  had -carried  off. The  phyfician  told  us,  that  not  many  days  ago,
an  eryfijbelas  had  appear'd  in  the  patient's  face. But  that,  probably,  from
the  inclemencies  of  the  air;  for  it  was  then  the  autumn  of  the  year  1729,
and  the  patient  being  more  folicitous  about  his  epifcopal  duties,  than  about
his  own  health,  would  never  confine  himfelf  to  bed,  nor  keep  himfelf  within
his  chamber ;  it  had  been  repell'd  inwardly,  and had  fuddenly  difappear'd.
That  he  had  feen  only  the  termination  of  yefterday's  diforder : and  as  to  the
manner  of  its  attack,  this  even  the  patient  himfelf  did  not  know,  as  he  had
neither  been  fenfible  what  had  then  happen'd  to  him,  in  thofe  many  hours,
nor  remember'd  any  thing  now,  except  that  feeling  himfelf  cold,  as  if  from
the  feafon, he  had  gone  to  bed. The  fame  things  were  confirm'd  by  the  pa-
tient, whom  we  found,  as  ufual,  in  a  chearful  and  attentive  ftate  of  mind,
his  fever  now  growing  flighter  and  flighter,  and  there  not being  the  leaft
trace  of  the  fymptoms he  had undergone  the  day  before. Although  we
doubted,  for  more  reafons  than  one,  to  what  diforder  we  fiiould,  with  pro-
priety, refer  thefe  fymptoms  ;  yet  that  fomething  monftrous was  cherilh'd
within,  not  only  the  aphorifm  of  Hippocrates  (^),  but  reafon  itfelf  alio,  did
not  fuffcr  us  to  doubt.

In  compliance  with  the  one  and  the  other,  therefore,  until  fome  more  clear

/>;  Epift,  13.  n.  3.  (^)  25.  Sea,  6.

lisrht


Letter  :XLIX. Article  30.  25-

light  ihould  he  thrown  on  the  cafe,  -we  readily. granted,  «nd,aflented  to,  tfec
firft  phyfician's  opinion,  who  was  a  man  of  eminence,  and  beyond  a  doubt
cxperienc'd ;  I  mean,  that  the  matter  of  the  eryfipelas  ought  co  be  again,
thrown  outwards,  in  order  to  prevent  its  bringing.on  the  fame  danger  afrefh,
which  it  feem'd  to  have  brought  on  before;  and  this  the  phylician  had  al-
ready attempted,  by  giving  fuch  things  as  might  propel  the  rrtatter  to  the
fliin,  without  exciting  any  tumult  in  the  conftitution,  and  had  made  nature
obedient  to  him  fo  far,  that  a  nofturnal  fwear,  and  fome  raoifturs  of  the  fkin,
at  prefent,  were  the  conlequences.  And,  indeed,  in  the  whole  of  that  day,
there  was  nothing  new  that  we  could  obferve.  But  on  the  fucceeding  night,
behold  a  febrile  paroxyfm  came  on,  which  however,  except  fome  convulfive
ftartings  of  the  tendons,  Ihow'd  nothing  violent  till  noon.  At  which  tiniej
at  length,  either  the  fame,  or  rather  another  acceffion,  produc'd  fuch  a  nuni-
ber  of  dreadful  fymptoms,  that  we  were  all  fent  for  immediately.  We  found
the  patient  incapable  of  fpeaking,  and  totally  infenfible,  having  a  ftertor,
^nd  a  very  difficult  refpiration,  and  being  altogether  like  an  apopleclic  per-
Ibn,  except  that  he  was  continually  agitated  by  a  fubfultus  tendinum,  and  had
a  very  obfcure  pulfe,  which  gave  no  refiflanee  to  the  finger,  when  prefs'd
upon  it.

Then,  indeed,  it  was  evident  with  what  difeafe  he  had  been  feiz'd  three
days  before,  and  that  this  was  another  acceffion  of  a  molt  dangerous. tertian
fever,  which,  as  it  anfwer'd  to  that  firft  paroxyfm  in  the  hour  of  its  return-,
correfponded  alfo  therewith  in  its  violence,  and  in  the  number  of  its  fymp-
toms, or,  indeed,  rather  butftripp'd  it.  Nor  was  there  any  hope  of  retard-
ing the  threatening  danger,  by  what  we  could  then  apply  only  to.  the  external
parts,  as  all  the  terrible  fymptoms  which  we  juft  now  raention'd,  grew
ftronger. and  .ftronger,  before  our  ^es,  and  under  our  hands ;  fo  that,  of
all  thofe  who  faw  the  patient,  and  a  great  number  of  perfons  did  fee  him,
there  was  not  onejvho  did  not  look  upon  it  as  certain,  and  pronounce  ic
through  the  whole  city,  which  was  ftruck  with  the  unexpeiSed  .diforderof
their  excellent  paftor,  that  he  would  very  foon  die.

And  although  I  was  very  much  under  the  fame  apprehenfion ;  I,  never-
thelefs,  faid  that  fome  little  hope  remain'd,  if  this  acceffion,  like  the  former-,
ihould  remit,  if  not  at  the  fame  hour,  by  reafon  of  its  greater  violence,  at
leaft  an  hour  or  two  later.  I  therefore  enquir'd  of  my  fellow -phyficians,
who  departed  about  evening,  as  from  a  perfon  that  they  totally  defpair'd  of,
whether,  if  the  diforder  Ihould  remit,  they  could  fuppofe  there  was  any  ob-
jefbion  to  my  giving  the  Peruvian  bark;  to  which  they  anfwer'd  that  they
ihould  readily  aflent,  provided  no  blood  fhould,  in  the  mean  while,  have  be-
gun to  adhere  obftinately,  either  in  the  brain,  or  the  lungs.

Within  the  firft  hours  of  the  night  I  perceiv'd  that  the  pulfe,  by  degrees,
became  not  quite  fo  bad ;  and  that  fome  fweat  appear'd  :  after  that  I  found
the  patient  come  to  himfelf  by  very  flow  degrees  ;  and  within  that  night,  on
;which  I  would  not  return  home,  all  the  dangerous  fymptoms  totally  va-
nifti'd  :  fo  that,  early  in  the  morning,  the  power  of  fwallowing  being  re-
ftor'd,  and  the  fever  being  brought  to  a  proper  remiffion,  there  was  now
room  for  a  remedy.  And  this  I  had  previoufly  order'd  to  be  prepar'd,  as  I
always  do  in  very  violent  cafes  of  that  kind,  agreeably  to  the  pradice  of  the

Vol.  Ill,  E  moft


2  6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

moft  eminent  phyficians,  from  the  fame  bark ;  yet  not  fuch  as  the  appear-
ance of,  only,  recommended  to  the  fenfes  by  a  mark  that  is  fometimes  fal-
lacious •,  but  fuch  as  it  was  certain  intermittent  fevers  had  been  put  to  flight
by  the  ufe  of-,  and  I  gave  half  an  ounce  of  it  in  the  firft  draught :  the  re-
n.ainder,  which  was  three  times  the  quantity,  I  diRributed  into  much  lefs
parts  -,  to  be  taken  at  proper  intervals.  And  by  this  means  I  obtain'd  my
purpofe  of  preventing  the  return  of  the  paroxyfm  ;  which  would,  without
doubr,  have  carried  oft  the  patient  ;  who  was  almoft  killed  by  the
fecond.

But  even  the  fecond  would  never  have  come  on,  if  it  had  come  into  my
mind  to  do  the  fame  thing  in  the  remiflion  of  the  firft.  This,  however,  did
not  come  into  my  mind  ;  as  we  confider'd  only  the  eryfipetalous  matter  being  -
thrown  inwards,  as  it  certainly  was;  and  not  the  fever :  for  who  could  have
guefs'd  that  this  fever  had  not  foUow'd  thofe  very  violent  diforders,  as  ge-
nerally happens  ■,  but  had  preceded,  and  brought  them  on,  and  was  peri-
odical }  as  no  one  had  feen  the  beginning  of  it  •,  nor  any  fever  of  this  kind
had  been  obferv'd  at  Padua  at  that  time  ;  although  in  thofe  days,  as  we  af-
terwards learn'd,  the  fame  fever  had  been  obferv'd  in  a  city  not  very  diftant,
and  had  carried  off  an  illuftrious  patient,  in  whom  the  ufe  of  the  bark  had
been  deferr'd  for  a  fit  or  two.  Wherefore  you,  for  whofe  fake  I  have  given
this  long  narration,  if  a  cafe  of  that  kind  happen  to  you  at  any  time,  the  be-
oinning  of  which  is  unknown,  although  the  caufe  may  feem  to  be  manifeft  j
will  by  no  means  fuffer  yourfelf  to  omit  enquiries  into  the  nature  of  the
fevers  which  prevail  at  that  time  ;  for  it  will  not  always  happen  to  you,  as  it
did  to  us,  that  it  will  be  in  your  power  to  cure  the  patient,  in  whom  you
have  let  flip  the  remifTion  of  fo  dangerous  a  paroxyfm.

31.  Nor  would  I  have  you  fuppofe  t-h>at  the  patient,  if  he  be  not  an  old
man,  will  be  free  from  a  fever  of  this  kind,  becaufe  learned  men  have  now
thought  proper  to  call  it  "  the  foporific  intermittent  fever  of  old  men."  For
although  it  happens  more  frequently  in  that  age,  and  the  cardinal,  of  whom
we  have  been  juft  now  fpeaking,  v/as  more  than  feventy  years  of  age  ;  as  alfo
the  noble  count  M.  Antonio  Trento,  whom  I  had  cur'd  by  the  fame  remedy,
when  in  the  fame  flate  of  danger  from  a  like  fever  five  years  before-,  and
that  without  either  of  them,  which  is  not  fo  common,  relapfing  into  the
fever :  yet  Morton  (r)  has  alfo  defcrib'd  the  cafe  of  a  boy  of  ten  years  of
age  s  and  Torti  {s)  of  a  girl  of  a  tender  age ;  not  to  mention  another  who
was  not  pcrfeftly  grown  up  to  womanhood,  and  who  labour'd  under  fevers
which  he  call'd  "  lethargic."

I  like  wife  would  not  have  you  be  without  fear  of  a  foporific  diforder  confmg
6n  in  the  future  paroxyfms,  or  future  parts  of  the  paroxyfm,  becaufe  patients
have  pafs'd  through  the  firft  paroxyfms,.  or  the  firft  part  of  any  paroxyfm,
without  that  profound  fleep.  For  although  it  frequently  comes  on  before,
and  indeed  long  before,  yet  it  now  and  then  comes  on  at  length  in  the
fcventh  paroxyfm  :  and  although  it  is  in  the  fi.rft  attack  of  the  paroxyfm

(;r)  Pyretolog,  Exerc.  i.  c.  9.  Hift.  2j.  (j)  Therapeut.  Special,  ad  febr,  period,  per-

nic  1,. 4.  c.  3.  Hift.  9.  &  I.

thafi.


Letter  XLIX. Article  31.  .  27

that  it  generally  comes  00,  as  Sydenham  alfo  (/)  fliows  ;  and  that  time,  ac-
cording to  the  diffedtiohs  made  by  Harvey  {u)  of  thofe  who  died  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  fit,  is  very  convenient  for  the  obftruftion  of  the  blood  :  there
are  not  wanting,  neverthelefs,  examples  of  a  deep  fleep  coming  on,  not  only
at  other  times  of  the  paroxyfm,  which  is  not  uncommon  ;  but  v^hat  is  very
rare,  when  the  fever  is  declining  ;  one  of  which  kind  you  will  fee  taken  no-
tice of  in  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (.v).

Here  you  will,  perhaps,  wifli  for  fome  marks,  whereby  to  jvidge,  while
the  fever  does  not  feem  to  differ  from  the  mild  kind,  that  this  dangerous
fymptom  is  about  to  come  on.  And  the  fame  thing  has  Been  wifli'd  by
others,  no  lefs  than  to  know,  whether  any  one  had  obferv'd  fevers  of  this
kind  before  the  year  173 1.  And  they  might  eafily  have  both  their  wiflies
fully  completed,  by  the  reading  even  of  one  author  whom  I  have  quoted ;
I  mean  Torti,  For  as  he  had  transferr'd  what  was  written  before  the  end
of  the  fixteenth  century  by  Ludovicus  Mercatus ;  and  again  before  the  end
of  the  feventeenth  century  by  Richard  Morton,  upon  dangerous  intermittent
fevers,  into  his  celebrated  Therapeutice  (j),  not  without  the  addition  of
fcholia  ;  he  has  handled  the  fubjeft  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to-  inform  every
one  who  reads  his  works,  that  Hippocrates,  and  many  of  the  ancients,  were
not  ignorant  of  intermittent  fevers  being  fometimes  made  malignant  and  de-
ftru6tive  (z) ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  from  what  figns  Mercatus  has,  in
general,  taught  us  to  underftand  that  thefe  will  be  of  a  dangerous  kjnd  (a)  j
but  particularly  to  fear  in  thofe  whereof  we  fpeak  •,  left,  "  in  the  third  or
"  fourth  acceffion,  a  deep  fleep,  or  fome  other  of  the  foporific  affedtionS,
"  become  perfedly  eflential  to  the  fever  ^i>)"

Nor,  indeed,  ought  thofe  figns  to  be  pafs'd  by  which  Torti  has  propOs'd,
both  in  general  and" particular,  from  his  own  obfervation  (f)  •,  and  has  cpn-
firm'd  by  the  produftion  of  hiftories,  in  their  proper  places,  which  relate  not
only  to  other  kinds  (J),  but  alfo  to  this  we  treat  of  now  (^).

To  thefe  you  will  join  the  figns  that  are  added  by  another  illuftrious  phy-
fician  in  relation  to  this  very  kind(/).  And  you  will  fee  in  Torti  (^i  this
mark,  among  others,  of  a  fleep  being  about  to  come  on  foon,  that  the  patient
fometimes  ftammers,  and  mutilates  or  clips  his  words,  or  fpeaks  one  for  ano-
ther, "  juft  as  if  he  was  troubl'd  with  a  flight  apoplexy  degenerating  into  a
"  palfy  of  the  tongue."  There  is,  alfo,  in  the  fame  author,  the  hiftory  of
an  old  woman  (^),  in  whom,  as  it  had  happen'd,  in  an  exacerbation  of  a
fever,  not  only  that  (lie  could  not  fpeak  her  words  properly,  but  that  an  evi-
dent kind  of  diilortion  of  the  mouth  had  come  on  ;  in  the  following  exacer-
bation a  deep  fleep,  moreover,  was  added  ;  and  in  the  next  to  that  an  apo-
plexy, which  pafs'd  over  into  a  paralyfis  of  the  whole  right  fide. And,  that

(.')  Epift.  Rerponf.  de  Moib.  Epidem.  (c)  L.  ?•  c.  i.

(.';)  Exercit.  i.  de  Id.iU  cord.  &  fangu.  c.  16. (J)  L.  4.  c.  i.  &  2.

{x) A.  174.0.  Hebd.  13.  n.  2.  f^J  Ibid.  c.  3.

CyJ  L.  2,  C/J  Vid.  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  1^33.  Hebds

(z)  Ihid.  c.  4.  Schol.  I.  &  c.  8.  Schol.  1. 52.

(a)  Ibid.  c.  2.  ante  Schol.  3.  ^gj  L 3.  e.  i,

(/')  Ibid.  c.  3.  ante  Schol.  3.  (i&)  L,  4.  c.  4.

E  2  you


2  8 BookrV.  OfiGhirurgicatsnd^XJniverfalDiforders.

you- may  knowthefe  ta  have  been  from  a  fever,  they  were  tak«n  off  by  the
xiih  of"  the  Peruvian  bark.

"£ou  rrot  only  perceive  what  fymptoms  have  fometimes  foretold  fleep,  and
after  this  an  apoplexy;  but  you,  at  the  fame  time,  perceive,  that  this  deep
is  rather:  of  the  apopleftic,  than  of  the  lethargic  kind,  efpecially  when  join'd
with  that  ftertor  which  is  wont  to  be  joinM  with  the  moft  violent  apoplexy.
And  in  confideration  of  theic  things,  Sydenham  {i),  and  others,  have  aflert-
ed  an  attack  of  this  kind,  to  be  "  altogether  like  a  true  apoplexy ;"  and
Torti  himfelf  (^),  that  it  at  length  becomes  fatal,  "  lilce  a  ftrong  apoplexy,"
if  not  put  a  ftbp  to  by  the  bark ;  and  Morton  (/)  fays,  that  a  boy,  whom  we
have  taken  notice'  of  above,  was  found  twice  by  him  "■  affefted  with  a  ftertor
*'  and  other  fymptoms  of  a  true  apoplexy  :"  and  he  has  related,  that  an  old
rrtani  an  uncle  of  his  {m),  who  had  been  already,  for  many  years,  dull  and
fleepy,  was  feiz'd  with  an  "  apoplexy  "  of  the  fame  kind  -,  fo  that  the  attack
remitting,  he  fav'd  both  of  them  by  giving  the  bark  in  large  dofes.

But  the  calling  to  mind  this  dull,  fleepy,  and  moreover,  fat  old  marr,
join'd  with  other  hiftories,  and  particularly  with  that  which  is  defcrib'd  in
the  Commercium  Litterarium  («),  by  a  diligent,  certainly,  and  llcilful  ob^
ferver ;  J  mean,  of  an  old  womani  who,  having  been  afBifted  a  long  time
before  witli'a-ftupor,  and  debihty  of  one  arm,  and  loon  after  with  a  heavi^
nefs  of  her  head,  a  frequent  vertigo,  and  a  great  laflitude  of  her  legs,  was
ieiz'd  with  a  very  profound  fleep,  in  the  paroxyfms  of  an  intermittent  fever ;
thefe  examples^  I  fay,  ought  to  make  you  folicitous  left,  in  intermitting  fe-
vers, which  trouble  patients  that  are  fubjedt  to  thefe,  or  any  other  fimilar  diJt
orders  of  the  head  or  nerves,  they  Ihould  happen  to  be  feiz'd  with  that  ter-
rible fleep,  or  even  with  an  apoplexy,  without  that  fleep  having  preceded.

For  as  examples  are  at  hand,  from  the  obfervator  whom  I  have  commend-
ed (o),  "  of  an  incurable  apoplexy,"  and  "  of  an  apoplexy  fuddenly  fatal,'*
which  follow'd  this  fleep;  fo  alfo  we  have  others,  wherein,  "without  any
"'  foporific  affefbion  having  preceded,"  an  apoplexy  has  fnatch'd  away  thole
who  were  attack'd  with  intermittent  fevers.  Wherefore,  when  a  patient  fliall
be  fubjeft  to  thofe  diforders  of  which  we  were  fpeaking;  take  care  that  you
give  him,  in  particular,  the  bark,  as  you  would  another,  and  in  time ;  and
take  care  likewife,  that  it  may  be  retain'd  by  him  for  a  proper  time  ;  for  he
whom  I  have  fpoken  of,  as  being  fuddenly  kill'd  by  an  apoplexy,  could  by
no  means  retain  it.  And  this  I  was  the  more  anxious  about  in  Count  Trento,
who  was  affedled  with  a  kind  of  apopleftic  fleep,  as  has  been  faid,  and,  at
the  fame  time,  with  a  flippery  ftate  of  the  bowels,  becaufe  I  knew  very  well
that  his  own  brother  had  been  carried  oft',  in  tormer  years,  by  a  fudden  apo-
,  plexy.  But  in  the  remiffion  of  the  paroxyfm,  I  endeavour'd  that  the  bark
fhould  be  retain'd,  by  mixing  with  it  fuch  things  as  ftrengthen  the  ftomach
and  bowels ;  for  I  was  afraid  to  make  ufe  even  of  the  leaft  opium.  And  in
this  manner  it  pleas'd  heaven  to  profper  my  wifties.

32.  I  do  not  think  you  will  be  difpleas'd,  and  I  know  for  a  certainty  you

(0  Epift.  Cit.  _ (J)  1.  3.  c.  r.  (»)  A.  1738.  Hebd.  33.

(/)  Hilh  25.  cit.  (0)  Commerc,  Litter.  A.  1731.  Specim.  24.

(w)  Hift.  z6.  B.  3.  Ss  A.  1734.  Hebd.  13.  poft  n.  2.

•will


-Letter  XIIIX: Atticle  33*  2  9

will  not  be- furpriz'd,  that  inftead' of' anatomical  obfervation&  on  tliafe  who
died  of  thefe  fevers^  I;  have  produc'd  obfervations  made  upon  living  bodieSi
For  youknow,  not  only  that  in  the  ie£tion  which  treats  of  fevers  in  the  Se-
pulchretum,  fome  hiftories  of  this  other  kind  are  produc'd  (/>),  but  that  it
is  my  cuftom  particularly  to  avoid  dangerous  diffeftions.  For  which  reafon,
I  fuppofe,  you  will  be  in  lefs  expedtation  of  diffeftions  perform'd  on  thofe
bodies  which  were  carried  off  by  malignant  fevers  attended  with  the  fmall-
pox,  when  you  know  that  I  have  not,  as  yet,  been  feiz'd  with  the  fmall-pox.
For,  I  have  not  fo  much  courage  as  Theodore  Zwinger,  who,  as  you  will
even  read  in  the  Sepulchretum  (*),  had  never  labour'd  under  that  difeafe,
and  yet  differed  a  boy  who  died  of  it.

Bud  you  will,  perhaps,  fay,  that  the  bodies  even  of  thofe  who  die  of  the
plague  itfelfi  when  difledted,  and  efpecially  when  cold,  have  been  denied  to
be  hurtful  even  by  very  learned  men.  It  is  true,  I  have  read  thefe  aAJthors  ;
yet  1  have  alfo  obferv'd  what  Thomas  Bartholin  {q),  and  Ifbrandus  Diemer-
broeck  (r),  who  had  read  the  fame,  have  thought  of  it.  For  the  firft  fays,
*'  I  would  not  truft  too  much  to  their  reafonings  ;"  and  the  other,  that  a
dead  body,  when  it  is,  in  fa£i:,  quite  cold,  is  "  much  lefs  contagious  than  a
"  living  and  morbid  body ;"  but  that  it  was  contagious  he  did  not  deny ;
nay,  even  fiiow'd  by  his  own  example  what  he  thought  of  it,  whenj,  although
there  was  a  perfon  who  promis'd  to  Ihow  him  (j)  carbuncles  in  the  ftomach
of  a  body  of  that  kind,  he  faid,  "  That  he  did  not  care  to  difturb  a  wafps-
•*  neft,  and,  by  opening  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  expofe  himfdf  to  the
"  danger  of  contagion  ;  and  that  he  had  rather  believe  it;,than  fee  it :"  and
again  (7),  when  he  had  related  that  it  was  demonftrated  by  the  furgeons  in
his  prefence,  that  the  exanthemata  were  continu'd  very  deep  through  the
mufcles  of  the  limbs,  he  fays,  "  Whether  the  vifcera  are  affedltd;  in  the
"  fame  manner,  I  have  not  ocular  experience  ;  for  this  reafon,  becaufe,  al-
*'  though  I  makej)ut  light  of  the  contagion  which  arifes  from  the  diffeftion
"  of  the  mufcles,  I,  neverthelefs,  believe  that  the  contagion  which  arifes
"  from  the  opening  of  the  abdominal  and  thoracic  cavities,  may  rufh  fu-
"  rioufly  upon  the  by-ftanders."

Do  not  be  furpriz'd,  then,  that  I  chufe  rather  to  be  in  the  number  of  the
many,  than  in  the  number  of  "  the  yery  few,"  as  he  fays  (a),  "  who  give
"  credit  to  thofe  that  aflert  the  carcafes  of  fuch  as  had  been  afflifted  with
"  peftilential  diforders,  not  to  be  contagious."  And  if  they  had  not  been.
very  few  who  gave  credit  to  them,  do  you  think  that,  after  fo  many  pefti-
leJ^k,  there  would  have  been  fo  few  obfervations  from  bodies  that  had  died
th^^f,  as  are  transferr'd  into  this  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum  ?  For  they
are  very  few  indeed,  if  you  take  away  thofe  that  are  put  down  from  hear-fay,,
thofe  which  affert  incredible  things,  and  thofe  that  are  repeated  ;  as,  for  in-
ftance,  that  which,  after  being  fet  down  under  the  third  article  of  the  fixty-
fecond  obfervation,  is  alfo  put  down  again  under  the  feventh  article. And

(P)  Append,  ad  Obf.  lo,  &  29.  (r) De  Peffe  1.  2.  e.  3,  gdnot.  12^

(*)  In  Additam.  adhanc  Seft.  Obf.  19,  cum  (-i)  Ibid.  1.  4.  Hift.  ij.

Schol.  (0 Hift.  32.

(^)  CcnTil.de  Anat:.Pra£t  n.  3.  {»)  Hift,  ^;it.  15,


3  0 Book  IV.  Of  Chirilrgical  and  Unlverfal  Dlforders.

left  you  fnould  fufpetT;  that  anatomifts  have  been  deterr'd  from  thefe  diflcdions
by  a  vain  fear,  rather  than  by  any  juft  reafons  ;  pray  read  the  arguments
which  are  at  the  fame  time  contrafted  with  the  contrary  ones,  in  the  fame
authors,  Bartholin  (x)  and  Diemerbroeck  (jy).

Yet,  if  after  reading  them  you  are  flill  of  opinion  that  there  is  no  danger
to  fear;  attend  to  what  happen'd  in  this  our  theatre  to  thofe  who  diffcifled
the  bodies  of  perfons  who  died  of  a  malignant  fever  only,  and  not  of  a
peftilential  one,  A  profe^or,  who  was  young,  ftrong,  and  healthy,  Stegag-
noni  by  name,  had  fo  far  diflefted  a  man  who  died  of  a  petechial  fevef,  as
it  is  cail'd,  as  to  prepare  the  mufcles  of  the  back,  (trufting,  perhaps,  to  Die-
merbroeck, who  made  light  of  this)  when  he  was  feiz'd  with  the  fame  fever,
and  taken  from  among  the  living.  But  this  body  might,  perhaps,  not  be
quite  cold  :  that  of  an  old  woman,  however,  the  belly  of  which  was  open'd
by  the  celebrated  Vulpius,  in  the  year  171 7,  and  in  the  month  of  January,
was  certainly  cold  both  internally  and  externally  ;  for  I  flood  by  him,  in
order  to  demonftrate  the  fituation  of  each  vifcus  to  the  auditors ;  and  although
no  ill  fmell,  more  than  ufual,  appear'd,  nor  any  mark  of  dilbrder  befides  an
entangl'd  ilate  of  the  inteftines,  yet  I  immediately  felt  a  kind  of  unufual
languor,  juft  as  if  I  were  about  to  fall  into  a  fwoon  :  and  foon  after,  when
the  demonftration  was  finifh'd,  we  had  fcarcely  return'd  home,  but  we  were
both  of  us  feiz'd,  one  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  other,  and  at  the  fame  time,
with  a  febrile  horror  and  coldnefs,  and  after  that  with  a  febrile  heat :  and
from  that  time,  notwithftanding  the  force  of  the  fever  was  broken,  I  began
to  have  but  indifferent  health  for  fome  years,  in  the  manner  I  have  faid  in
the  dedication  of  the  fourth  of  the  Adverfaria.  Nor  is  this  to  be  wonder'd
at:  for  although  that  woman  had  been  brought  into  the  hofpital  as  an  apo-
pledic  patient,  and  really  was  fo;  yet  that  apoplexy  had  come  on  lately,
during  the  courfe  of  a  malignant  fever  under  which  flie  labour'd  at  home,
as  was  found  upon  enquiry  afterwards.

You  fee,  then,  that  in  order  to  avoid  the  danger,  it  is  not  fufBcient  to  be
cautious  of  diffefting  a  body  before  it  is  cold  :  for  they  who  have  recom-
mended this  caution  do  not  feem  to  have  obferv'd,  that  a  body  may  be  cold
externally,  but  retain  its  heat  internally  ;  which,  as  you  will  perceive  from
my  letters  to  you,  happens  very  often  ;  and  fometimes,  even  at  the  thirtieth
hour  after  death  (2),  heat  remains  in  the  internal  parts  of  the  belly.  Muft
v/e  wait  longer  then  ?  A  putrefying  body,  they  fay,  becomes  "  much  more
"  contagious  than  a  living  m.orbid  body."  Nor  would  I  have  you  objeft  to
me,  that  there  have  been,  and  ftiil  are  thofe,  who,  without  having  rega^kn
any  of  thefe  cautions,  have  differed  fuch  bodies  with  impunity.  Fonffe
nature  and  force  of  all  malignant  fevers  is  not  the  fame,  nor  the  difpofition
cf  all  difTeders  the  fame ;  and  as  no  one  can,  for  a  certainty,  know  the  na-
turc  of  either,  v.  ho  can  deny  but  the  advice  of  the  more  timid  is  fafer  than
that  of  the  more  bold  ?

33.  However,  to  return  to  myfelf,  and  to  the  fmall-pox :  when  I  was  a
very  young  man,  and  this  diforder  happen'd  to  be  very  general,  (and  fo
mild  as  fcarcely  to  have  taken  any  off  to  that  very  day)  being  carried  away

(x)  N.  3.  cit,  CjJ  Adnot.  12.  cit.  {z)  Epift.  3.  n.  2.

with


Letter  XLIX. Article 21.  31

with  a  defire  of  learning,  I  made  no  helitation  to  attend  an  excellent  phy-
fician  in  the  hofpital ;  and  was  not  afraid  even  to  feel  the  pulfes  of  thofe
who  lay  ill  of  the  fmallpox,  much  lefs  to  take  notice  of  otlier  circumftances,
and  enquire  into  ftiU  lighter  matters;  as,  for  inftance,  by  what  coUyrium
the  fkin  upon  the  eye- lids,  though  in  other  parts  almoft  univerfally  rough
and  deform'd  with  puftuies,  was,  neverthelefs,  kept  fmooth,  clear,  and  beau-
tiful ;  and  1  found  that  this  collyrium  was  made  of  plantain  water,  in  which
a  little  of  the  faccharum  fsturni,  as  it  is  call'd,  was  diffolv'd.  And  while  I
was  obferving  thefe  things,  it  accidentally  happen'd  that  one  or  two  of  thefe
patients  were  carried  off  by  death,  though  the  phylician  very  diligently  did
all  in  his  power  to  prevent  it.

Admoniili'd  by  this  inftance,  I  determin'd  never  to  attend  patients  of  thac
kind  afterwards,  though  fent  for  even  to  princes  and  men  of  the  firft  rank.
Nor  do  I  think,  though  I  have  reacli'd  to  this  age,  that  I  ought,  by  any  means,
knowingly  to  bring  myfelf  into  danger  ;  fince  I  have  known  it  happen,  even
to  perfons  of  eighty  years  of  age,  to  be  infefted  with  the  variolous  con-
tagion in  the  fame  manner  as  children,  and  to  perifh  from  thence  much  more
eafily  than  children,  notwithftanding  they  had  then  believ'd  themfelves  to  be
free  from  it ;  although  in  a  very  fevere  conftitution  of  this  kind  at  Forli,  in
the  year  1749,  an  old  woman,  who  was  advanc'd  beyond  the  age  mention'd
juft  now,  and  afflided  with  that  difeafe,  efcap'd  with  her  life,  which  was
certainly  a  rare  inftance  of  efcape.

However,  what  it  was  not  proper  for  me  to  do ;  I  mean,  to  dilTeft  the
bodies  of  perfons  who  died  of  that  difeafe  ;  has  been  done  fo  many  times,
and  by  fo  many  anatomifts,  that  I  cannot  help  being  fjrpriz'd,  men,  in  other
refpefts  very  learned,  fliould  feem  to  be  ignorant,  that  they  would  be  wide
of  the  truth,  either  who  fhould  contend  that  the  variolous  puftuies  never
came  in  any  other  part  but  the  fkin,  and  particularly  not  in  the  inteftines  ;  or
who  Ihould  contend- that  they  were  always  form'd  in  other  parts.

You  will  naturally  fuppofe,  that  the  firft  clafs  of  thefe- gentlemen  had  hap-
pen'd to  light  on  fuch  obiervations  as  that  propos'd  by  Peyerus  the  fon  («)  •,
and  that  the  other  lit  on  fuch  as  happen'd  to  agree  with  tliofe  which  the  cele-
brated Gunzius  (J)  )  takes  notice  of,  as  being  made  by  himfelf ;  but  that  both,
quite  forgetful  of  all  others,  had  concluded  that  every  obfervation  was  fimilar
to  their  own  ;  whereas  many  which  are  even  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum
vjere  extant,  fom_e  of  which  very  evidently  agree  with  the  former,  and  the
others  with  the  latter.

Befides,  there  are  fome,  which  you  may  colleft  from  the  diflertation  of
the  celebrated  Phil.  Conr.  Fabricius  (c),  to  be  added  to  both  of  them.  And,
moreover,  as  another  dilTertation  (i),  which  was  deliver'd  under  the  aufpices  of
BuiTerius  the  prefidenr,  v/ill  give  you  an  obfervation  made  on  a  certain  prince,
which  agrees  with  the  firft  of  tlie  above  ;  fo  the  volumes  of  the  CEefarean
Acidemy  [e)  will  furnifti  you  with  many  that  agree  vvith  the  latter.

(.■?)  Obr.  Anat.  2.  (d)  Sift.  Hill,  morbi, &  cadaver,  vario!.

{h)  In  Hippocr.  ds  Humorib.  not.  21.  c.  ].

(Vj  Exhib.  Obf.  circa Conllit.  Epid.  A.  1750. [e)  Eph.  Dec.  3.  A.  7,  &  8. Obr.97.a m

Eot  i;  ad  §  19.  Schol.  &  Cent.  g.  Obi".  52.

'And


'i'z Book  IV.  Of  Ghimrgical  and  Univeffal  Diforders.

And,  indeed,  other  hiftorres  are  not  wanting,  which  defcribe  puftuTes  m
various  parts  befides  thefkin,  and  yet  not  in  the  inteftines  or  other  vilcera.
Of  which  kind  are  thole  that  you  read  'mxh&A5ia  Hafnienjia{f),  in  the
Ephemerides  of  the  Csfarean  Academy X|"),  in  the  pathological  works  of
the  moft  excellent  Halier  (i-)  ;  and  this,  alfo,  which  1  fubjoin  nearly  in  the
fame  words  wherein  I  formerly  heard  it  from  Jacob  Sandri,  who  was  one  of
my  preceptors  at  the  time  when  I  refided  at  Bologna,  and  a  man  of  great
learning.

34.  A  boy,  of  a  noble  family,  who  had  but  few  puftules  of  the  fmall-
■pox  externally,  and  had  no  figns  of  others  having  befet  the  vifcera,  died  like
a  fuffocated  perfon.

The  body  being  open'd  by  Sandri  himfelf,  fliow'd  all  the  vifcera  in  a  very
found  ftate.  But  upon  one  of  the  mufcles  of  the  larynx  a  variolous  puftule
had  been  form'd,  and  about  it  the  black  colour  of  a  gangrene  now  ap-
pear'd.

35.  Moreover,  that  an  internal  gangrene  is  frequently  join'd  with  other
malignant  fevers  alfo ;  and  even,  if  they  are  mortal,  that  inflammations  of
the  vifcera  then  degenerate  into  gangrenes ;  will  appear  from  obfervations
that  you  will  read  in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum.  To  which  you
may  alfo  join  thefe  :  Our  Sanftorius  (/)  fays,  "  Some  others  have  thought
"  that  a  malignant  fever  arifes  from  a  gangrene  in  the  liver,  or  any  other
"  vifcus ;  which  I  have  obferv'd  in  bodies  more  than  once."  Dominic  Gag-
iiardi  (1^)  affirm'd,  that  in  the  dilTedtions  of  thofe  who  perifh'd  from  a  ma-
lignant fever,  in  whom  the  ulcers  which  had  been  open'd  by  corroding  me-
dicines call'd  veficatories,  already  began  themfelves  to  be  afFeded  with  a  gan-
grene, "  internal  gangrenes  were  frequently  feen."  And  Jofeph  Lanzoni  (/),
in  defcribing  an  epidemical  difeafe  that  rag'd  at  Ferrara  in  the  year  1729,
took  notice,  among  other  things,  of  "  feme  livid  fpots  in  the  coats  of  the
"  inteftines,"  which  appear'd  upon  opening  the  bodies  of  feveral  perfons
who  had  been  carried  off  by  this  difeafe.  And  you  yourfelf  may  add  other
examples  which  will  not  be  wanting.

36.  Now,  before  I  make  an  end  of  writing,  I  will  venture  to  fay  I  do  not
fuppofe  you  will  be  furpriz'd  ;  particularly  as  you  were  inform'd  in  the  be-
ginning, that  I  am  not  willing  to  repeat  any  thing  which  I  have  already
written  to  you-,  I  fay,  I  do  not  fuppofe  you  will  be  furpriz'd  that  J  have
made  no  mention  of  feme  certain  fevers  in  this  place.

For  you  know  that  I  have  treated  of  the  greater  part  of  them,  in  treating
of  other  diforders.  Some  however,  as,  for  inftance,  quintans,  and  thofe  that
have  longer  intervals,  I  confefs  I  have  never  nam'd ;  nor,  indeed,  have  I
feen  any  of  them,  except  one  which  recurr'd  exadtly  every  week,  in  a  noble-
man, when  I  formerly  liv'd  at  Bologna:  nor  can  1  fay  any  thing  of  them,
except  that,  although  they  generally  fucceed  quartans,  they  are  not,  never-
thelefs,  as  has  been  done  fometimes,  to  be  confider'd  as  quartans  that  have
their  intervals  render'd  longer,  unlefs  we  would  ftill  confider  quartans,  in  like


(f)  Tom.  I.  P.  I.  Obf.  109.
{g]  Dec.  3.  A.  7,  &  8.  Obf.  47.
{h)  Obf.  44,  in  fine.


(/)  Comment,  in  I.  Fen.  I.  1.  Avic.  Qu.  S6.
(1^)  Dell'Infermo  inflruito  P.  2.  Vegl.  30.
(/)  A&.  N.  C.  Tom.  2.  Obf.  209.

manner.


Letter  XLIX. Article  37.  33

manner,  when  they  fiicceed  tertians,  as  tertians,  whofe  returns  are  become
flower  than  before;  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  all  phyficians  from  the  mod
early  times.

And  this  has  beenvery  clearly  obierv'd  by  my  ingenious  friend  Zeviani  {m),
where  he  delcribes  the  change  of  a  quartan  into  a  quintan,  of  a  quintan  into  a
tertian,  and  foon  after,  of  a  tertian  into  a  quartan,  and,  finally,  of  a  quartan
into  afextan;  and  this  conftant  in  a  young  girl  that  he  had  feen  :  of  which
latl  fpecies  of  fever  examples  are  extremely j-are,  as  I  do  not  remember,  ever
to  have  read  more  than  two  befides  this  ;  the  one  of  Gentilis  (h),  and  the
other  of  Lanzonus  (0).  But  what  appearances  have  been  found  in  thofe  who
died  after  fevers  of  this  kind,  I  am  quite  uninform'd.  Yet  v^hen  they  are  of
long  continuance,  or  fucceed  fevers  of  long  continuance,  it  is  probable  that
they  leave  behind  them  almoft  the  fame  appearances  as  thei'e  generally  do.
And  thefe  fevers  frequently  produce  diibrders  of  the  mefentery,  or  the  fpleen,-
or  fome  other  neighbouring  vifcus,  and  particularly  of  the  liver.  And  you
have  an  example  in  the  celebrated  Fantonus  {p)  of  all  thefe  appearances  being
found  at  the  fame  time.

In  regard  to  the  fpleen,  I  have  already  fufficiently  fhown  this,  in  more
places  than  one,  but  particularly  in  the  thirty-fixth  letter  (j),  which  you  will.
Hnd  to  agree  with  the  obfervations  transferr'd  into  this  feftion  of  the  Sepul-/
chretum,  where  the  queftion  is  of'^quartans  fr),  and  of  long  erratic  fevers  (.;).  ■
You  will  alio  find  examples  relating  to  the  liver  in  the  fame  place.  "With
which  you  will  join  what  is  faid,  in  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (/),  of  the
fubftance  of  the  liver  "  cherifhing  the  fomes  of  quartans  in  preference  to
"  other  parts  ;"  and  that,  for  this  reafbn,  "  in  many  of  thofe  who  die  of
"  quartans,  it  is  at  one  tirfle  found  to  be  injur'd,  at  another  time  dried  up,
and  lometimes  inflated.

37.  And  thus  far  I  had  to  add  to  the  hiftories  of  Valfalva  upon  moft  kinds
of  fevers,  from  my  awn  obfervation,  thofe  that  I  have  read,  or  fuch  as  have
been  communicated  to  me  by  others.  And  thefe  I  would"  have  you  receive,
as  ufual,  in  good  part. Farewel.


{m)  Nuovo  Fonte  di  Pronoftici  P.  i.  {p)  De  Obf.  Med.  &  Anat.  Epift.  8.  n.  lo.

(k)  Apud  Schenck.  Obf.  Med.  1.  6. ubi  de  (q)  N.  i8.

raris  febr.  typisObf.  2.  (r)  Sub  Obf.  30. (s)  Sub  Obf.  32,

(0)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  8.  Obf.  10.  (?) A.  1739.  Hebd.  50.


Vol.  III.  F  LETTER


34 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.


LETTER the FIFTIETH

Treats  of Tumours.


I,  rr^HOSE  difeafes  which  moft  authors  would  certainly  have  plac'd  im-
Jl  mediately  after  fevers,  the  gout,  the  lues  venerea,  and  others  of
that  kind,  Bonetus  chofe  to  defer  the  confideration  of;  and  betwixt  thefe  and
fevers  to  place  tumours,  wounds,  ulcers,  and  others  that  relate  to  furgery.
And  as  you  know  very  well,  how  much  this  profeffion  was  lov'd  and  culti-
vated by  Valfalva,  you  perhaps  expeft  a  great  number  of  obfervations ;  if
not  from  me,  whom  you  know  not  to  be  form'd,  by  nature,  for  the  cutting
of  living  bodies,  as  I  am  for  that  of  dead  bodies,  yet  at  lead  from  him.
And  you  will  find,  from  the  next  letter,  which  will  be  upon  the  fubjed  of
■wounds,  that  your  opinion  has  not  fail'd  you.  Nor  indeed  had  he  a  tew  ob-
fervations upon  tumours.

But  fome  he  did  not  commit  to  paper ;  and  others,  though  he  did  write
them  down,  either  he  has  himfelf  publilh'd,  or  I  have  defcrib'd  in  former
letters.  All  of  which  I  will  only  refer  to  here,  that  you  may  read  them  ovep
again  if  you  pleafe ;  as  I  will  repeat  nothing,  whether  it  be  his  or  mine.
For  although  I  ftiall  here  follow  the  order  of  the  Sepulchretum  alio,  fuch  as
it  is,  according  to  my  general  cuftom ;  yet  I  fliall  not  follow  the  repetitions^
Some  of  which  are  not  only,  ,like  many  others,  not  repetitions  of  thofe  ob-
fervations that  are  openly  declar'd  to  have  been  given  in  other  feftions ;  but
of  thofe  that  are  put  down  again  in  this  fame  fedtion ;  as  v^hen,  among  thofe
that  you  read  in  the  Additaraenta,  even  the  very  firft,  with  part  of  the  fub-
join'd  fcholium,  had  been  already  given  above,  in  the  fixth  obfervation  (a),,
by  Bonetus,  who  did  not  himfelf  conceal  the  place  from  whence  he  had
taken  it;  or  when  it.happenM  to  the  fame  author,  which  ii  almoft  incredi-
ble, that,  in  one  and  the  fame  page  {I?),  he  produc'd  one  and  the  fame  hif-
tory,  from  Garnerus,  twice  over.

2.  In  regard,  therefore,  to  bloody  tumours,  either  thofe  which  are  com-
monly fo  call'd,  or  thofe,  in  particular,  that  communicate  with  fome  trunk
of  a  vein,  (which  are  the  fame,  in  my  opinion,  that  were  afterwards  nam'd
"  fpurious  varices,"  by  Boerhaave  (,f)  )  what  Valfalva  law  of  them,  and
what  he  thought,  you  read  in  the  thirteenth  of  my  anatomical  epiftles  (d)  ;
and  Hill  more  in  his  treatife  of  the  human  ear  (e) ;  and  in  both  places,  in  like

(a)  §.  7.  (f)  Praska.  ad  Inftit.  §711.

(^Obf.  7.  §  I.  &  3.  (^)  n.  4.  (f)  c- 4- n- 8.

manner


Letter  L. Articles  3,  4, j".  33

manner  (/),  thofe  things  that  relate  to  fteotamata  of  the  eye-lids.  And  I
could  wifh  he  had  given  his  opinion  in  as  exprefs  a  manner,  as  to  the  nature
of  a  certain  tun:iolir,  of  which  he  has  left  us  the  following  defcription.

3.  A  woman,  of  fifty  years  ofage,  had  labour'd,  for  three  months,  under
a  hard  tumour,  in  the  right  part  of  the  neck,  being  oblong  in  its  figure,
equal  to  the  fize  of  a  turkey's  egg,  and  having  its  bafis  in  the  carotid  anery
of  the  fame  fide,  from  whence  going  upwards,  quite  to  the  divifion  of  that
artery,  it  terminated  there.  At  length,  about  twenty  days  before  her  death,
it  began  to  be  very  frequently  troublefome,  efpecially  in  that  region  of  the
larynx ;  fo  that  (he  was  oblig'd  to  breathe  with  a  peculiar  kind  of  ftertor,
accompanied  with  a  fenfe  of  heat  in  the  throat.  The  woman  was  therefore
carried  off.

I  will  not  here,  as  I  did  in  the  cafe  of  another  tumour,  in  the  left  part  of
the  neck,  which  Valfalva  defcrib'd  as  being  hard  likewife,  and  without  mak-
ing mention  of  any  pulfation  (^),  give  you  my  conjedure  upon  the  nature
of  it :  you  yourfelf  will  judge  of  it  as  you  pieafe.  And  I  will  go  on  to  give
you  more  certain  remarks.

4.  A  virgin,  of  a  lively  difpoficion,  who,  by  reafon  of  her  age,  being  now
advanc'd  to  about  fifty,  had  been  fome  years  without  her  menftrual  purga-
tions, had  a  cancerous  tumour  in  her  right  fide,  near  to  the  axilla.  This
tumour,  by  degrees,  increas'd  greatly  in  breadth  and  length,  though  but
little  in  thicknefs,  and,  at  length,  reach'd  to  the  arm-pit.  The  neighbouring
limb  was  univerfally  affedted  with  an  oedematous  tumour.  To  this  was  added
a  cough,  a  fpitting  of  catarrhous  matter,  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  a  great
thirft,  and  finally  death.

The  tumour,  as  far  as  could  be  perceiv'd  by  the  fenfes,  .had  not  hurt  the
parts,  whereon  it  was  feated,  to  any  confiderable  depth.  In  cutting  into  the
neighbouring  limb,  a  great  quantity  of  ferum  flow'd  out,  all  of  which  had
ftagnated  in  the  cell*-of  the  adipofe  membrane.  And  the  whole  cavity  of
the  thorax,  on  the  fame  fide,  was  fiU'd  with  ferum  of  that  kind,  having
jnany  concretions  of  the  fame  colour  fwimming  in  it,  of  a  middle  nature
betwixt  membranous  and  gelatinous  fubftance,  many  of  which  likewife  ad-
her'd  to  the  pleura.  The  lungs  were  fo  contrafted,  that  at  firft  fight  they
almoft  feem'd  to  be  wanting  as  it  were. The  heart  was  very  fmall.

However,  in  regard  to  the  belly,  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach  was  very
much  extended;  the  fpleen  was  very  fmall;  the  liver  inclin'dfrom  its  natural
xolour  to  that  of  a  brown  ;  the  gall-bladder  was  fmall  and  empty.  Theova-
ria  were  white ;  and  although  they  preferv'd  their  natural  figure  and  bulk,
they  had  neverthelefs  grown  very  hard.

5.  You  will  read  an  obfervation  of  Rondeletius  (that  is  transferr'd  into
the  Sepulchretum,  not  in  this  place,  wherein  it  is  not  fo  much  as  mention'd,
but  in  the  fecond  book  (b)  )  v.'hich  is  fimilar  to  that  in  queftion.  For  in  both
of  them  were  an  external  cancerous  tumour,  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  and
a  great  quantity  of  ferum  in  the  thorax  :  yet  that  this  ferum  was  colle<5led,
in  that  obfervation,  during  the  decreafe  of  the  tumour ;  and  in  this,  during

(/)  Ibid,  &  noftrae  illius  Epiftolae,  n.  2. (^)  Epift.  17.  n.  19.  &  20. {b)  Seft.  i.  Obf.  72.

F  2  the


36 Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  increare,  isfhown  by  the  time  in  which  the  difficulty  of  breaching  came
on.  And  this  diBerence  will  make  you  explain  the  circumftance  Ibmcwhac
differently  in  that  obiervation,  from  what  you  would  in  this.  And  as  what
relates  to  the  ferous  tumour  of  the  arm  is  peculiar  to  this,  fo  the  cauic  of
this  tumour  was  peculiar  alfo  ;  I  mean,  the  comprcffion  of  the  axillary  vein,
from  the  cancer  raifing  itfelf  up  thither.

6.  But  now  let  us  come  to  other  tumours  of  the  upper  or  lower  limbs,  of
a  different  kind,  that  have  been  oblerv'd  by  Valialva,  beginning  with  thole
that  have  fucceedcd  venasfedion,  when  ill-perform'd.  But  1  omit  that
which  he  faw  in  a  noble  matron  from  the  pundure  of  a  nerve  or  tendon,  in
blood- letting,  her  hand  being  greatly  fwell'd  with  the  very  fevere  pain,  and,
when  that  pain  was  appeas'd,  continually  trembling:  which  tremor  continued
not  only  after  the  fwelling  of  the  hand  was  abated,  but  even  quite  to  the
day  in  which  he  wrote  this,  that  is  to  fay,  for  five  years  together,  no  remedy
being  of  any  fervice.

I,  in  like  manner,  omit  that  which  happen'd  to  a  young  man,  by  an  un-
fkilful  furgeon's  having  pierc'd  through  the  vein,  in  the  bending  of  the
elbow,  the  blood  being  internally  effus'd  in  confequence  thereof;  from  whence
afterwards  arofe  an  abfcefs  of  long  and  difficult  cure.

I  will  rather  defcribe  to  you,  with  the  more  accuracy,  the  hiftory  of  a
tumour  cur'd  by  the  hand  of  Valfalva,  becaufe  it  is  a  thing  of  greater  mo-
ment, nor  unworthy  to  be  compar'd  by  you  with  the  obfervations  which  re-
late what  has  been  feen,  done,  or  remark'd,  in  that  part  by  others ;  as,  for
inftance,  by  Rockius  (/),  by  Petit  the  furgeon  (;»),  by  Teychmeyerus  (k),
and  by'thofe  whom  I  read  while  I  was  revifing  this  letter,  that  celebrated
phyfician  Trew  (0),  and  that  induftrious  furgeon  Guattanus  {p),  but  efpeci-
ally  by  the  celebrated  author  of  the  diflertation  to  be  quoted  below  {q).

This  obfervation,  therefore,  of  Valfalva,  although  it  may  feem  lame  and
imperfeft  in  fome  things,  as  defcrib'd  in  a  loofe  manner  by  a  man  who  wrote
for  himfclf  only ;  has,  nevcrthelefs,  fome  things  that  deferve  peculiar  atten-
tion, as  one  in  particular  does  -,  I  mean,  that  a  cure  of  this  kind  was  per-
.form'd  by  Valfalva,  before  he  had  feen  it  perform'd  by  others;  and  that,  as
he  was  fo  fkilful  and  induftrious,  he  would  have  added  other  things  at  diffe-
rent times,  if  he  had  liv'd  longer,  and  other  opportunities  of  performing  the
fame  operation  had  occurr'd  to  him.

7.  A  furgeon,  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  lofing  blood  from  the  arm,
on  account  of  a  ddbrder  of  the  thorax,  had  his  artery  wounded.  The  per-
fon  who  bled  him,  fuppofing  that  he  had  open'd  the  vein,  tied  the  wound  up
in  the  fame  manner  as  if  nothing  but  a  vein  had  been  cut  into.  After  fome
days,  a  tumour  was  obferv'd  in  the  elbow;  which,  within  twenty  days,  or
fomewhat  more,  encreas'd  to  the  bignefs  of  an  apple.  This  a  certain  fur-
geon, fuppofing  it  to  contain  pus,  cut  into:  and  from  the  wound  the  blood
began  to' flow,  but  without  any  impetus,  in  confequence  of  the  coagula  of
blood  plugging  it  up,  and  entirely  preventing  the  difcharge.

(/) Comm.  Litt.  A.  1734.  Hebd.  36 n.  2.  («)  Diflert.  de  ftupendo  Ancu'yfm.  &  cat.

(m)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  dcs  Sc.  A.  1,735. {0)  Aa.  N.  C.  Tom.  8.  Obf.izd.
&  3736. -  (/)  Hift.  2.  Ancuryfm.Hift.  I. (y)  n.  g.

Biit


Letter  L. Article  8.  '37

But  three  days. after,  the  blood,  having  made  a  way  for  itfelf,  burft  forth  :
and  tliat  not  only  on  this  day,  but  on  the  two  following  days  alio  ;  once  only
every  d?.y  indeed,  yet  in  fiich  a  quantity  as  could  not  be  reftrain'd  by  any
allringent  remedies;  and  brought  the  pacient  into  a  kind  of  iwooning  ttare.
jn  the  mean  while,  both  the  hand,  and  the  elbow,  and  the-  neighbouring
fnoulder,  almoft  quite  to  the  middle,  became  fv.-el I'd :  and  an  infiammation
had  ah-eady  arifen  near  to  the  incis'd  tumour.  In  fucfi  an  extremity  phyfici-
ans  were  call'd,  and  thofe  ilich  as  were  well  fkill'd  in  furgery  alio  ;  among
v;hom  was  Vailalva  ;  who,  after  having  weigh'd  the  cafe  accurately,  began
the  cure  in  the  fcjllowing  manner  :

In  the  firft  place,  he  bound  the  upper  arm  with  the  bandage  which  they
novj  call  the  torcular,  or  tourniquet,  in  fuch  a  manner  that  it  might  be
fpeedily  and  eafily  relax'd  upon  occafion.  He  then  carried  up  the  incifion,
which  had  been  made  by  the  furgeon,  as  1  have  faid,  upon  the  tumour,  to-
v/ards  the  fuperior  parts,  and  in  the  ufual  courfe  of  the  artery.  Thus  the
whole  cavity  of  the  tumour  being  laid  open,  which  would  almoft  have  con-
l|ain'd  a  man's  fift,  he  drew  out  the  blood,  both  fluid  and  coagulated,  where-
with it  was  fill'd  ;  and  wafh'd  the  place  very  well  with  fponges  moiften'd
with  warm  wine.  And  this  being  done,  he  order'd  the  bandage  to  be  re-
lax'd a  little  ;  until  the  blood,  flowing  out,  fliould  fiiow  the  fituation  of  the
.  wounded  artery.  This  was  in  the  fundus  of  the  cavity  ;  fo  that  it  was  very
inconvenient  to  tie  up  the  artery,  by  reafon  of  the  depth  But  having,  at
length,  tied  it  immediately  above  the  wound,  the  blood  no  more  fprang
forth,  even  when  the  bandage  was  relax'd.

However,  all  the  part  of  that  limb,  which  was  below  this  ligature  made
upon  the  artery,  inftantly  loft  its  power  of  feeling  and  motion  ;  and  a  few
hours  after  became  quite  cold  :  nor  was  a  pulfe  any  longer  perceiv'd.  Yet
this  pulfe  began  to  be  perceiv'd  again  about  the  third  day,  from  the  time  of
making  the  ligat_ure,  though  in  a  very  i'mall  degree  :  but  about  the  fifth  it
had  return'd  almoft  to  its  natural  impetus.  In  the  latter  part  of  this  day
blood  was  obferv'd  in  the  bed  -,  and,  for  that  reafon,  the  bandages  about  the
wound  were  feen  to  be  wet.  But  when  thefe  were  cautioufly  remov'd,  and
the  wound  exarnin'd,  no  blood  was  difcharg'd  ;  nor  was  there  any  fign  from
whence  it  had  been  difcharg'd.  From  this  laft  eruption  of  blood  the  pulfe
was  again  entirely  loft;  juft  as  if  a  new  ligature  had  been  thrown  around  the
artery.  But  the  limb,  neverthelefs,  recover'd  its  natural  heat,  gradually,  a
few  days  after,  and  its  motion  alfo,  though  this  laft  more  flovvly  ;  for  a  weak-
nefs  remain'd  eight  or  nine  months,  and  a  kind  of  wafting,  a  brown  colour
of  the  nails,  and  a  great  pronenefs  to  be  hurt  by  cold.  After  this  period  of
time  however,  which  I  have  mention'd,  all  thefe  lymptoms  went  off;  and
the  pulfe  return'd,  though  in  a  languid  ftate.

8.  'This  hiflory  having  been  requefted  of  me,  by  that  celebrated  man  Peter
Paul  Molinelli,  I  immediately,  and  very  readily,  fent  it  him  ;  not  only  that
I  might  oblige  a  man  who  excell'd  in  the  medical  and  chirurgicjd  art,  and
delerv'd  very  well  of  me,  but  alio  that  the  hiftory,  which  1  fent  to  him  in  an
imperfeft  ftate,  he  might,  as  having  known  the  furgeon  when  living,  and
diffefted  his  bjdy  after  death,  make  complete  for  me,  as  far  as  this  was
poirible-

And


38 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

And  this  you  will  find  to  be  extremely  well  done  by  him,  if  you  read  his
differtation,  which  is  entitled,  "  Of  an  aneurifm  from  tiie  artery  of  the  arm
"  being  wounded  in  letting  blood."  The  chief  things  which  he  has  added
are  the  following  :  that  Vallalva  had  applied  not  one  ligature  only  round  the
artery,  but  many  ;  being  compell'd  thereto  by  the  difficulty  of  flopping  the  ,
blood  :  that  the  man  had  afterwards  liv'd  in  pretty  good  health  ;  and  did
not  die  till  about  thirty  years  after  this  operation  ;  when  he  was  taken  off  by
a  confumption  and  afcites :  and  that  he  had  been  wont  to  make  ufe  of  tiiat
arm  which  had  been  injur'd,  juft  as  he  did  the  other,  fince  you  could  now
perceive  no  difference  by  comparing  the  two  arms  together,  not  lb  much
as  in  the  pulfe.

This  is  the  more  to  be  wonder'd  at  becaufe,  in  the  difTedlion  of  the  bo'J.y
after  death,  although  the  brachial  artery  was  entirely  deficient,  to  the  extent
of  two  inches,  in  that  part  where  the  aneurifm  had  been  ;  that  is  to  fay,  in
confequence  of  having  been  deftroy'd  formerly  by  difeafe,  by  the  knife,  and
by  abfcefs,  or  floughs ;  there  could  be  found  no  artery  but  one  which  could
keep  up  the  communication  inftead  of  it,  betwixt  its  luperior  trunk,  and  tjj^
radial  and  ulnar  arteries  ;  and  this  was  not  only  furprizingly  tortuous,  'but  lb
flender,  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  conceive  how  the  radial  artery,  as  fb
little  blood  fiow'd  into  it,  and  this  blood  was  carried  through  fo  many
flexures,  could  pulfate  equally  with  the  artery  in  the  other  rum  ;  and,  again,
how  it  was  that  both  arms  were  equally  well  nourifh'd,  and  robuft;  or,  at
ieaft,  equally  fit  for  every  kind  of  ailion.

Indeed  that  part  of  the  nerve  which  lay  in  the  fame  traft,  wherein!  have
faid  the  brachial  artery  was  wanting,  was  found  to  be  enlarg'd  into  the  form
of  a  very  confiderable  ganglion.  But  although  you  fliould  imagine  that  the
ftrength  of  the  nerve  might  be  encreas'd  by  this  means  ;  you,  neverthelefs,
could  not  conceive  of  the  proper  flrength  of  the  mufcles,  the  nutrition  of
the  parts,  and,  particularly,  the  pulfation  of  the  arteries,  without  a  proper
quantity  of  blood  flowing  in,  and  that  with  a  proper  impetus.  And  cer-
tainly, when  a  principal  trunk  of  an  artery  is  fhut  up,  the  moft  learned  men,
and  among  thefe  Haller  (r),  did  not  doubt,  "  from  phyfics,  and  hydraulics,
"  but  the  lateral  branches,  although  fmsll,  may  afterwards  be  diflended,  if
"  they  are  aded  upon  by  a  fiuid  alone  :"  and,  indeed,  the  fame  Haller  (.;)
affirm'd  it  "  to  be  commonly  known,  and  to  have  been  feen  by  him,  that
"  upon  cutting  the  radial  artery  away,  the  ulnar  had  been  fo  dilated,  that  all
*'  the  branches  which  are  fupplied  by  the  radial,  receiv'd  their  blood  from
"  thence."

Wherefore  it  is  the  more  to  be  wifh'd  that  the  enquiry  may  be  repeated,
in  the  bodies  of  thofe  in  whom  the  brachial  artery  itfelf  has  been  tied  up
vArAt  living,  for  the  fake  of  curing  an  aneurifm  in  the  fiexure  of  the  elbow,
by  every  anatomift  who  has  opportunity  to  make  it ;  and  particularly  by  the
lame  very  excellent  Molinelli :  ib  that,  as  he  has  defcrib'd  with  fo  much  accu-
racy whan  he  found  in  this  firft  cafe,  he  might  be  able  to  inform  us,  even
by  the  help  of  injection,  whether  the  fame,  or  different  appearances,  occur
in bodies  of  this  kind. For  although  the  trunk  of  that  artery  is  feldom

('•)  Differ:,  de  Arteria  Brachii  not.  ad  §.  45. {1)  in  Boerh.  Prsled.  ad  Inftit.  §.  692.  not.  e.

double,


Letter  L. Article  51.  ' 3  9"

double,  yet  that  the  branches  going  from  thence,  both  into  the  ulnar  and  the
radial  artery,  which  the  celebrated  WinQow  (/)  calls  collateral  branches,  do
not  appear  in  the  fame  manner  in  all  bodies  -,  but  that  there  are  many  in  moft
bodies,  fufficiently  appears,  even  from  the  delcriptions  of  this  author,  and
the  illuftrious  Haller(K),  when  compar'd  one  with  another.  It  is,  therefore,
probable  it  will  at  one  time  happen,  that  more  than  one  of  the  collateral
branches  offer  themfelves  to  the  eyes  in  a  dilated  ftate  ;  and  at  another  time,
one  only  :  although,  even  upon  this  hypothefis,  it  could  not  be  fufBciently
underftood,  how  what  Valfalva  had  obferv'd,  about  the  fifth  day  after  tying
up  the  artery,  could  happen  ;  for  if  the  dilatation  of  thofe  branches  muft  be
brought  on  by  degrees,  how  had  the  pulfe  fo  foon  return'd  to  its  natural


impetus


But  in  regard  to  the  nerves  -,  although  the  communications  of  the  brachial
one  with  another,  and  the  frequent  diftribution  of  more  than  one  branch
therefrom  into  one  mufcle,  may,  perhaps,  tend  to  make  us  not  quite  fo  foli-
eitous  about  making  the  fame  enquiry  in  refpeft  to  them,  as  we  did  in  refpe<5t
to  the  arteries ;  without  doubt  that  change  which  the  celebrated  enquirer  has
obferv'd,  that  change,  1  fay,  of  the  nerve,  which  feems  to  have  been  tied  up
together  with  the  artery  into  a  very  large  ganglion,  deferves  to  be  confirm'd
by  many  obfervations  upon  bodies  of  that  kind  ;  or  even  by  experiments
on  brute  animals,  made  with  accuracy  and  attention  :  and  it  ought  alfo  to  be
enquir'd,  whether  this  enlargement  be  owing  to  the  very  manifeft  dilatation
of  the  arterial  branch  flowing  into  it,  or  rather,  if  this  does  not  always  occur,
to  the  ligature  made  upon  the  nerve.

And  I  now  fee  that  this  wilh  has  been  fufficiently  completed  fince  my
writing  this  letter  (x),  as  far  as  relates  to  brute  animals,  by  experiments
which,  as  I  judge  then*  to  be  worthy  of  more  than  common  praife  in  them-
felves, fo,  if  1  am  to  confider  them  as  repetitions  of  the  experiments  of  Val-
falva, ,1  hope  to  hzyie  a  more  convenient  place  of  confidering  and  faying  what
I  wifh  for  even  in  them.  For  at  prefent  it  will  be  much  more  ufeful  to  you
to  confider  with  diligence  and  attention,  the  obfervations  and  remarks  which
the  celebrated  Molinelli  has  made,  in  that  clear  and  fruitful  differtation,  on
performing  the  cure  of  the  aneurifm  in  the  flexure  of  the  elbow  ;  not  only  by
tying  up  the  nerve  with  the  artery  more  expeditioufly,  but  alfo  by  throwing
ligatures  more  fafcly  round  the  aneurifmal  fac  ;  and  join  them  with  thofe
cures  which  he  may  perform  hereafter.  However,  although  he  has  com-
pleted the  above  obfervation  of  Valfalva  for  us,  1  do  not  very  well  know
whom  I  can  now  find  to  make  the  following  complete.

9.  A  certain  man  had  labour'd  under  an  aneurifm  in  the  k'ft  ham  about
ten  years,  which  gave  him  great  pa'n,  and  was  equal  nearly  to  three  inches
and  a  hnlf,  of  the  meafure  of  Bologna.,  in  its  diameter.  Tliis  being  cur'd
by  Valfalva,  the  patient  was  at  lall carried off  by  another  aneurifm  in  the

(r)  Expof.  Anat.  tr.  des  Arter.  n.  140.  &  (.v)  De  Bonon.  Sc.  Inft.  Tom.  3.  in  Opufc
est.  &  Quaeft.  Prsefide  Hazon Parif. propof. 5.

(a)  Diifert.  cit. §.. 17. 1.9.  &  feqq.  &  z8. Febr.  1750.  n.  4.
■;6. 4;. Adde  nunc  Fafcic. loon. Anat.  6.
&  Guattani  Hiil.  cit.  Fig,  1.

right


Ao Book  VI. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Difordci-s,

riohc  ham. And  when  his  body  was  open'd,  a  third  aneurilm  was  found  to
hcTve  been  form'd  at  the  ciir.vatLire  of  the  great  artery.

lo.  As  Laurence  Hcivrer,  who  is  a  very  learned  fiirgeon  and  phyfician,
if  any  man  is,  in  that  diii'crtation  whicli  is  enrid'd  "  Of  the  ilrufture  of  the
"  knees,  and  their  diffaks  (r),"  l^as  admonillu'd  us,  that  "  very  few  "  aneu-*
rifms  had  been  remark'd  in  the  ham  ;  and,  indeed,  befides  thofe  that  he
himfelf  mencions,  1  fcarcely  remember  to  have  read  of  more  than  two,  the
firll  of  which  v;as  formerly  pointed  out  in  one  word  by  Severinus  (z)  ;  and.
as  to  the  other,  Matanus  [a]  has  very  lately  told  us  how  great  a  quantity  of
blood  it  contain'd  •,  I,  therefore,  was  not  willing  to  omit  this  obfervation  of
Valfalva,  although  obfcure  (if  you  confider  thofe  things  that  I  (hall  fay  pre-
fently)  and  imperfeft  ;  as,  bcfides  other  things,  it  (hows,  at  leaft,  how  liable'
fome  bodies  are  to  aneurifms.

But  althouoh  the  very  experienc'd  Heifter  thinks  the  fame  method  of  cure
•which  is  made  ufe  of  in  the  aneiirifm  of  the  elbow,  to  be  "  not  impratli-
cable  "  in  the  ham  alio  {b),  on  account  of  the  fame  hope  (which  ycu  will
now  fee  confirm'd  by  the  very  excellent  Haller  (c)  )  of  the  branches  of  the
artery  communicating  laterally,  and  indeed  profefles  that  he  would  under-
take the  operation  whenever  the  cafe  may  offer  ;  yet,  as  I  never  found  any
thing  more  in  refpe£l  thereto  to  have  been  added  by  Valfalva,  than  what  I
have  written  in  the  hiftory,  I  did  not  take  upon  me  to  determine  by  what-
method  he  had  made  the  cure.

There  were,  indeed,  among  the  papers  of  Valfalva,  two  figures,  fKilfully
anid  elegantly  drawn  ;  one  of  which  reprefents  the  popliteal  artery  on  the
furface  that  is  turn'd  towards  the  externa!  parts  ;  the  other  reprefents  it  on  the
oppofite  fide,  dilating  itfelf,  from  the  external  furface,  into  an  oblong  fac,
which  is  narrower  in  proportion  as  it  afcends  the  more,  and  not  without  three
orifices  of  arterial  branches  communicating  with  the  narrower  part  of  the
fac  :  fo  that  unleis  this  part  was  tied  up  with  a  ligature,  according  to  the
cuftom  of  the  celebrated  Molinelli,  it  would  have  requir'd  a  very  long  and
trdious  manual  operation  ;  and  yet  the  fac  is  reprefented  as  entirely  whole  on
the  external  fide.  For  which  reafon,  and  the  man's  dying  of  an  aneurifm
that  had  been  form'd  in  the  other  ham,  I  almoft  conjedur'd  that  the  latter,
rather  than  the  former,  had  been  drawn  in  thefe  figures,  as  Valfalva  had
taken  it  out  from  the  dead  body.

Neverthelefs,  it  did  not  appear  clear  by  what  method  he  had  cur'd  that
other,  till,  turning  over  the  obfervations  of  the  celebrated  Benevoli,  I  hap-
pen'd  to  ligiit  on  a  paflage,  where  (if),  fpeaking  in  commiendation  of  the
method  already  taken  notice  of  to  you  on  a  former  occafion  {e),  in  which
Vallalva  us'd  to  cure  aneurifms  by  letting  blood  frequently,  and  afterwards
ufing  a  very  fpare  diet;  he  afferts  that  he  had  feen,  in  the  ftudy  of  Valfalva,
an  example  of  one  thus  cur'd  "  in  the  popliteal  artery,"  from  a  man  who
had  been  carried  off  by  fome  other  difeafe  after  the  completion  of  this  cure.

Cy)  N.  83.  {b)  Dlffert.  indicata,  n.  76,  77.

(%)  De  recond,  AbfceiT.  nat.  ].  4.  c.  7.  prope  (c)  Fafcic.  Icon.  Anat.  5.  ad  Tab.  4.

finem  ad  n.  2.  (d)  Oflerv.  11.

{a)  De  Aneur/fmstic.  prscord.  Morbis  Ani-  {e)  Epift,  17.  n.  30.
piadv.  not.  a  ad  §  71.

For


Letter  L. Articles  ii,  12.  41

For  having  read  thefe  words,  and  taken  thofe  figures  into  my  hands,  when
I  obferv'd  that  the  fac  was  certainly  reprefented  of  a  diameter  far  lefs  than
that  which  is  propos'd  above  (/)  -,  I  began  to  think,  that  the  very  great  con-
tradion  of  the  fac  was  to  be  afcrib'd  to  this  kind  of  cure  :  which,  although
Valfalva  had  made  ufe  of  it  againft  internal,  and  thofe  incipient,  aneurifms,
he  would,  perhaps,  have  been  willing  to  apply  againft  this  alfo,  adding  a
compreffing  bandage,  and  other  external  afiiftances.  But  as  I  fee  fome  things
which  do  not  fufficiently  agree  v/ith  this  conjedture,  I  therefore  leave  it  en-
tirely to  your  determination :  I  pronounce  nothing  myfelf,  and  return  now
to  more  certain  things,

1 1.  A  man,  of  forty  years  of  age,  had  a  fmall  but  pulfating  tumour  which
arofe  gradually  about  the  right  groin.  Through  the  fpace  of  three  years  it
encreas'd  every  day,  and  became  large.  About  the  third  month  before  his
death,  it  began  to  trouble  him  with  pains,  and  to  bring  on  a  large  and  equal
cedematous  iV/elling  through  the  whole  of  that  lower  limb.  In  the  laft
month  the  pains  became  very  violent,  and  not  at  the  tumour  only,  but  fome-
times  alfo  below  the  internal  anckle  :  in  which  one  place,  and  only  when  the
pains  were  troublefome,  the  foot  had  feeling,  being  at  other  times  depriv'd
of  all  power  of  feeling  and  motion.  There  was  never  any  refpite  from  ex-
cruciating pain  through  the  whole  of  this  month,  and  no  deep  ;  till  at  length*
the  patient's  ftrength  being  worn  out,  he  lay  half-afleep  for  fome  days,  and
in  this  manner  died.

This  aneurifm  had  an  immenfe  cavity  -,  for  it  reach'd  from  the  anterior
fl<in  of  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh  to  the  thickeft  of  all  the  nerves,  the  cruralis
;pofticus.  And,  indeed,  the  crural  artery,  from  the  dilatation  of  which  the
tumour  had  begun,  was  found  to  be  moderately  dilated  ;  but  being  in  fome
places  torn  afunder,  or  eroded,  it  had  thrown  out  the  blood  through  thefe
apertures  in  fuch  a  quantity,  and  with  fuch  an  impetus,  that  the  mufcles
partly  being  corrodeii,  and  partly  giving  way,  it  had  produc'd  a  very  large
cavity,  as  I  have  already  faid,  and  had  eroded  that  very  nerve  which  I  men-
tion'd  juft  now,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  only  a  few  fibres  of  it  remain'd,  by
which  the  upper  part  was  join'd  with  the  lower.  All  that  cavity  was  full  of
coagulated  blood  and  polypous  concretions,  as  they  feem'd  to  be.

12.  The  difiedion  very  clearly  ftiows  the  caufe  of  all  the  fymptoms  that
the  man  fuffer'd.  For  after  that  the  aneurifm  had  degenerated  from  a  true
to  a  fpuriousone,  in  the  manner  that  the  word  "  fpurious"  is  generally  under-
ftood  ;  that  is,  after  the  coats  of  the  dilated  artery,  being  ruptur'd  or  eroded,
began  to  pour  out  the  blood  into  the  neighbouring  parts  -,  the  remainder  of
this  fluid  could  not  now  be  lent,  either  with  thatforceor  in  that  quantity,  into
the  parts  below,  which  are  requir'd  to  preferve  its  fpeedy  return  through  the
veins  :  hence  the  cedematous  fwelling  of  the  limb.  And  the  extravafared
blood,  while  by  tearing  the  mufcles  one  from  another,  it  at  the  tame  time  la-
cerated the  little  nerves  with  the  interpos'd  membranes,  or  at  leaft  caus'd  a
diftraftion  therein,  created  pains  •,  but  fuch  as  were  more  eafily  to  be  borne
than  when  it,  at  length,  reach'd  to  that  very  thick  nerve,  and  bein^  now
made  more  acrid  by  ftagnation,  began  to  erode  it.

(fj  N.  9.

-  Vol.  m.  _  G  At


42 Book  IV.  Of  Chiinirgical  and  XJniverfal  Diforders.

At  lenath,  when  the  nerve  was  fo  far  eroded  as  to  that  part  from  whence
almoft  alfthe  branches  proceed  that  bring  the  power  of  feeling  and  moving
to  the  foot ;  both  of  thefe  powers  were  loft  therein,  if  you  except  that  place
which  is  near  the  internal  anckle  :  for  to  this  place  belongs  a  branch  that  does
not  proceed  from  this  pofterior,  but  from  the  anterior  crural  nerve,  and  ge-
Tierally  accompanies  the  vena  laphena.  There  is  no  need  to  explain  in  what
manner  the  other  fymptoms  were  the  conlequences  of  continual  pains.

It  is  better  to  obferve,  from  the  fucceflion  of  thefe,  and  even  of  death
itfelf,  that  where  aneuril'ms,  even  when  external,  are  feated  very  near  to  the
nerves,  or  to  other  parts  of  a  quick  and  lively  feniation,  nocwithttanding  they
do  not  immediately  become  deftrufhive  by  being  ruptur'd  and  pouring  out
their  blood,  they  may,  neverthelels,  carry  off  the  patients  by  very  fevere  and
excruciating  pains.  And  this  will  be  confirm'd  to  you,  befides  the  hiftory
which  I  lately  faw  publifh'd  by  buattanus  (g),  and  which  may  be  compar'd
with  this  of  Valfalva,  by  fome  obfervations  of  Marcus  Aurelius  Severinus  (;??)
on  a  Grecian  man,  and  on  a  fhoemaker.

But  akhoucrh  you  will  very  readily  read  the  defcription  of  the  aneurifm  in
Anfelmus  Pao-anus,  which  Severinus  has  taken  notice  of  with  the  others,  as
it  is  very  fimilar  to  that  juft  now  propos'd  from  Valfalva  in  its  fituation,  mag-
nitude, and  moft  other  of  its  circumftances ;  yet  when  you  confider  the  in-
credible, I  had  almoft  faid,  cure  af  the  fame,  you  will  be  very  much  fur-
priz'd  that,  among  the  problems  explain'd  by  Severinus,  this  principal  one
was  not  very  clearly  and  accurately  difcufs'd  ;  I  mjcan,  how  the  crural  artery,
"  when  putrefied,  diffolv'd,  and  broken  down,"  near  to  the  groin,  could,  by
the  force  of  fire  applied  thereto,  again  recover  its  parietes  -,  lb  that  the  limb
not  only  continu'd  to  live,  but  the  man  could  even  wallc  upright  upon  it,
only  with  the  fmall  fupport  of  a  low  and  flender  cane.

13.  In  regard  to  other  tumours  which  relate  to  this  letter,  Valfalva  has
left  us  nothing  in  writing  befides  what  has  been  faid  above  •,  unlefs  we  fhould
chufe  to  refer  to  this  cials  thofe  very  few  words  which  he  has  curforily  thrown
into  his  mtdical  refponfes.  In  one  of  them,  which  is  of  the  hjemorrhoids,
he  fays  that  fome  condylomata,  dcfcrib'd  with  thefe,  niay  be  blind  piles,  as
thofe  which,  being  often  cover'd  over  with  a  coat  of  fat,  do  not  fcem  to  be
vefiels  dilated,  as  they  really  are,  but  excrelcences  of  another  nature.

And  in  another  refponfe  given  upon  an  old  tumour  in  the  knee,  which  was
taken  for  an  exoftofis,  it  is  natural  to  fuppofe,  fays  he,  as  the  tumour  began
to  appear  immediately  after  the  retropuliion  of  a  fcabies,  in  which  there  was
fome  fufpicion  of  a  latent  venereal  virus,  that  the  particles  which,  by  previoufly
vitiating  the  blood,  had  produc'd  a  fcabies,  being  obftrudled  in  that  part,
had  given  origin  to  the  tumour,  eiiher  by  lacerating  the  fibres  of  the  bony
fubftance,  juft  as  when  the  fibres  of  oaks  being  pierc'd  through  by  infefts,
galls,  or  oak-apples,  rife  upon  them  •,  or  by  ftagnating  with  the  humours
flowing  through  the  joints,  which  is  a  thing  that  very  eafily  happens,  by  reafon
ef  the  narrownefs  of  the  veflels  in  places  of  that  kind  ;  for  being  thus  ce-
mented with  the  ligaments  and  tendons,  they  have  increas'd  the  thiclcnefs  and

ig)  Hill.  2.  Aneuryfm.  Hift.  2.  (h)  De  recond.  Abfceff.  nat.  1.  4.  c.  7.

ths-


Letter  L. Articles  14,  is,  16.  43

ihe  hardnefs  of  both  :  wherefore,  if  they  are  comprefs'd  with  the  hand,  they
entirely  bear  the  fimilitude  of  bone  ;  although  to  thofe  who  enquire  by  dif^
fedtion,  which  fometimes,  fays  he,  I  have  had  opportunity  to  do,  they  re-
femble  the  internal  fubftance  of  the  root  of  the  reed,  if  I  may  be  allow'd  to
ufe  a  kind  of  grofs  comparifon,

14.  Thefe  things,  then,  have  been  left  in  writing  by  Valfalva.  And  fome
other  things  which  were  done  andobferv'd  by  him,  he  related  to  me;  or  ob-
ferv'd  and  did  even  when  I  was  prefent :  and  thefe  I  will  now  communicate
to  you.  The  firft  of  which  you  may,  in  fome  meafure,  compare  with  that
obfervation  of  our  Fabricius,  which  1  formerly  referr'd  to  in  the  fecond  of
the  Adverfaria  (i),  or  with  another  of  that  illuftrious  man  Heifter  (k) ;  or
rather,  if  you  chufe  to  refer  both  of  thefe  to  the  clafs  of  ganglia,  you  may
compare  it,  in  fome  meafure,  as  I  have  faid,  with  that  which  the  very  illuftrious
archiater  Van  Swieten  (/)  has  taken  notice  of.

15.  A  virgin,  as  was  related  to  me  by  Valfalva,  had  a  very  fmall  protu-
berance of  the  anckle,  which,  for  more  than  fixteen  years  after,  created  fuch'
violent  pains,  that  if  (he  had  not  been  prevented  by  her  domeftics,  fhe  would'
have  cut  off  her  foot.

Making  an  incifion,  therefore,  in  that  part,  according  to  the  longitudinal
direftion  of  the  leg,  under  the  common  integuments  a  gland,  of  a  fmall  fize,
was  found  by  him,  of  an  oval  figure,  but  deprefs'd,  and,  as  to  its  colour  and
nature,  feemingly  in  a  middle  ftate  betwixt  the  conglobate  and  conglomerate
kinds. This  gland  being  taken  away,  the  pain  no  more  return'd.

1 6.  A  ruftic  woman,  whom  by  looking  at  you  would  have  fuppos'd  to  be  dy-
ing of  old-age,  weak,  wrinkled,  dry,  and  even  brought  down  to  the  moft  ema-
ciated ftate,  lay  ill  in  the  hofpital  for  Incurables,  at  Bologna^  The  caufe  of
all  her  misfortunes  was  her  right  breaft,  which  had  grown  out  into  a  tumour,
of  a  form  and  fize  that  refembled  the  human  brain.  This  tumour,  being,
every-where  and  altogether  ulcerated,  fliow'd  in  feveral  places,  amidft  its  red'
and  bloody  fubftance,  many  glands,  as  it  were,  equal  in  fize  to  the  largeft
grapes,  but  white  in  their  colour,  oblong,  and  fmooth.  As  there  was  no
room  to  attempt  any  other  method  of  cure,  on  account  of  the  woman's  decay
of  ftrength  in  particular ;  it  came  into  Valfalva's  mind  to  conftringe  the  bafis
of  the  tumour,  which  was  large  indeed,  but  lefs  fo  than  the  other  pare,  as
far  as  the  woman  could  bear  it,  by  making  a  bandage  thereon.

By  this  continual  conftridtion  being  increas'd  every  day,  it  naturally  fol-
low'd  that  the  edges  of  the  tumour  were  depriv'd  of  their  nouriftiment,  and
became  dead  all  about ;  fo  that  they  could  be  cut  away  all  round  with  the
fciflars  without  pain  or  effufion  of  blood  -,  and  the  circumference  of  the
bafis  was  more  and  more  diminifh'd.  This  method  being  continu'd  for  a
confiderable  time,  that  very  large  tumour  was  reduc'd  to  a  very  frnall  bulk,
and  at  length  fafcly  amputated.  "Wherefore  a  cicatrix  being  brought  on,
the  woman,  in  the  mean  while,  departed  much  recover'd  in  her  health.

And  left  you  Ihould  doubt  whether  (lie  v/as  perfedlly  cur'd  in  that  part,
it  not  only  happen'd  to  me  to  fee  the  other  circumftance^  whicli  I  have  related


7)  Animaid.  24.  {i)  Differt.  de  Tumorib.  Cyllic,  fingiilaiib.  n.  36.

(/)  Comment,  in  Bueih.  Aph,  §  10S4..


to


44 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Uaiverfal  Diforders.

to  you,  but  a  year  or  two  after  I  even  faw  what  I  am  going  to  relate  to  you
now.  For  one  day,  when  I  happen'd  to  be  in  the  hofpical  together  with  Val-
falva,  behold  a  certain  woman  came  to  us,  who  faluted  him  and  me  alfo,  as
very  well  known  to  her,  being  of  a  very  good  habit  of  body,  of  a  good
colour,  and,  to  appearance,  of  fuch  an  age,  that  fhe  might  Teem  to  be  the
daughter,  or  rather  the  grand-daughter,  of  the  other,  whom  I  defcrib'd  to
you  juft  now.  Yet  Ihe  was  the  very  fame  I  have  fpoken  of,  and  fhe  won-
der'd  fhe  was  not  known  by  us  -,  You  will  know  very  well,  fays  fhe,  who  I
am,  when  I  fhall  have  told  you  the  reafon  of  my  coming  here  :  and  no  iboner
had  fhe  faid  this,  but  fhe  open'd  her  bofom,  v/hich  was  without  any  bread
on  one  fide  ;  but  found  both  on  the  right  and  the  left  fide  alfo  :  except  that  a
fmall  fwelling  began  to  be  perceiv'd  under  the  fkin  of  the  breaft.

In  this  manner,  faid  fhe,  the  former  tumour  began  :  I  therefore  came
hither  that  this  new  tumour  may  be  cut  out,  before  it  encreafes  to  any  confi-
derable  fize.  And  this  was  done  a  few  days  after  by  Valfalva  ;  who  was
afraid,  neverthelefs,  that  frefh  and  frefh  tumours  would  ftill  arife ;  and  that
even  when  this  breaft  was  taken  away  at  length,  the  fame  would  be  form'd
in  fome  other  place,  and  particularly  in  the  uterus.  And  that  he  was  not
^fraid  of  this  without  reafon,  is  fhown  by  too  frequent  obfervation  :  and  in-
deed the  very  learned  differtation  of  that  ilkiflrious  man  Triller  (m),  will
Ihow  you  that  he  had  reafon  to  fear  even  worfe  confequences :  after  reading
of  which,  and  confidering  what  more  fevere  difeafes  follow  the  extirpation
of  a  cancer,  for  the  moll  part,  you  may  judge  whether  fo  great  a  feverity  of
evils  is  compenfated  by  the  truce  that  may  have  been  gain'd  for  a  year  or
two :  although  the  patient,  fo  that  fhe  be  but  deliver'd  from  the  prefent  pains,
which  would  foon  prove  fatal,  either  does  not  fuppofe  that  others  more  vio-
knt  will  come  on  foon  after,  and  kill  her  in  a  more  cruel  manner ;  or  if
ftie  does  believe  it,  does  not,  however,  pay  fo  much  regard  to  them,  as.
what  is  to  happen  after  fome  time.

17.  I  alfo  law  a  tumour  of  a  far  different  kind  cut  out  by  Valfalva.  Which,,
however,  as  I  myfelf  diffefted  it  after  being  cut  out,  with  his  confent,  I
fhall  defcribe  below  in  its  proper  place.  For  now  I  muft  go  on  to  my  own
diffeclions.  And  firfl,  not  to  repeat  here  what  I  have  written  elfewhere,  you
have  in  the  fame  treatife,  and  the  fame  epiflle,  which  are  taken  notice  of
above  (;?),  what  I  myfelf  have  obferv'd  of  thofe  fpurious  varices,  and  of  the
fteatomata  of  the  eye-lids,  when  I  pointed  out  what  Valfalva  has  faid  of  both
thefe  kinds  of  tumours.  And  in  regard  to  fteatomata,  and  other  encyfted
tumours,  many  things  that  deferve  to  be  read  are  extant  in  that  epiftle  of
Boerhaave,  which  is  entitled,  "  Of  the  ftructure  of  glands  i"  and,  in  like
manner,  in  the  prasleflions  upon  his  inftitutions  (0).

And  although  the  fame  author,  as  it  feems,  gives  an  inftance  of  a  tumour
containing  an  aqueous  humour,  not  in  juft  the  fame  manner  in  both  places ;.
being,  as  I  fuppofe,  a  little  forgetful ;  yet  it  fufhciently  appears,  which  is-
the  principal  thing,  that  he  had  feen  a  tumour  of  this  kind  : .  and  this  obferr-

(m)  De  nociva  Cancrl  inveter.  Extirpatione {uj  n.  2.
Hift.  pj-sfertim  3. &.  Qbferv.  addit.  §. 17. {0)  ad§.  7i!i

v-ation;


Letter  L. Articles  i  8, i  p.  ^^

ration  may  be  confirtn'd  by  many  examples  added  from  the  celebrated
Heifter  (p).  And  to  the  fame  clafs  belongs,  in  part,  the  defcription  of
certain  tumours  in  the  head  of  an  infant ;  which  is  transferr'd  from  Blafius
into  this  fedtion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (q)  -,  although  the  water  was  divided
into  many  hydatids.  That  which  I  oblerv'd  in  the  following  manner  was
more  free,  though  it  feem'd  at  firft  to  be  otherwife.

1 8.  One  of  the  bodies,  the  head  and  neck  of  which  I  made  ufe  of  in  my
public  anatomical  demonftrations  of  the  year  1750,  had  a  fmall  tumour  at  the
left  fide  of  the  os  hyoides.

The  tumour  bei-ng  laid  quite  bare  by  difledtion,  and  being  {ct  at  liberty
from  the  left  horn  of  the  os  hyoides,  to  which  it  was  externally  connefted,
reprefented  a  congeries  of  hydatids,  not  larger  than  the  laft  joint  of  the  little
finger.  But  having  flightly  prick'd  the  edge  of  it,  the  fomewhat  turbid
water,  which  it  contain'd,  all  immediately  flovv'd  down,  with  even  the  flighted
preflure.

19.  This,  probably,  might  have  been  the  beginning  of  a  large  tumour,
if  the  man  h"ad  liv'd  much  longer  :  although  I  think  that  tumours  like  thefe  are
to  be  plac'd  in  the  number  of  thofe  which,  while  they  are  as  yet  incipient,  are
diffolv'd  without  great  difficulty  :  and  I  believe  that  one,  which  I  faw  form'd
on  the  external  part  of  the  wrift  in  my  wife,  to  have  been  probably  of  this
kind ;  being  of  the  fhape,  hardnefs,  and  magnitude  of  a  filbert.  For  though
fhe  had  been  troubled  with  it  for  many  weeks,  behold  one  morning  when  fhe
rofe  out  of  bed,  fhe  found  it  to  have  been  fuddenly  and  entirely  vanifh'd
during  the  night.  The  truth  of  which  I  was  immediately  witnefs  to.  But
not  many  days  after,  the  fame  tumour  return'd ;  and  after  a  much  fhorter
time  than  before,  again  vanifl^'d  away  fuddenly,  never  to  return  more  ;  and
what  had  not  happen'd  before,  left  the  fkin  in  that  part  diftinguifli'd  by  fome
red  puftules  as  it  were ;  which  went  away  .of  themfelves  likewife  foon
after.  --

It  was  the  fummer-time,  and  fhe  had  made  ufe  of  refolvent  cerates  and
prelTure ;  having  happen'd  to  hear  from  me  that  Valfalva  afcribed  fo  great
effefts  to  this  latter,  as  to  order  an  encyfled  tumour,  which  hehimfelf  had
on  one  of  his  fcapulas,  to  be  comprefs'd  even  with  the  feet,  in  order  to  re-
tard its  encreafe.  But  ihe  had  us'd  moderate  prefTure  only,  as  I  perfuaded
her,  and  that  merely  on  the  firft  days ;  and  the  cerates  not  for  a  long  time,
or  at  leaft  not  conflantly  ;  as  they  feem'd  to  be  of  no  advantage.  Nor  in-
deed, if  you  fhould  rather  choofe  to  confider  it  as  a  ganglion,  fhall  I  greatly
obje6l  to  your  opinion  ;  for  it  was  recent;  fo  that  there  was  no  neceffity  to
fuppofe  it  contain'd  in  very  thick  invokicra  ;  or  to  fuppofe  that  it  included  a
humour,  which  a  long-continu'd  abforption  of  the  thinner  particles  had  left
more  glutinous  and  lefs  diffipable.

You  perceive  I  do  not  think  in  any  different  manner,  of  the  matter  of
ganghons,,  from  what  their  frequent  difieftions  have  fhown.  Some  of  which
you  will  read  in  the  celebrated  Heifter  (r)  ;  and  others  you  will  add  from  the

[p)  Differt.  fupra  ad  n.  14,  cic.  (r)  Inllit.  Chir.  P.  2.  S.  6.  c,  171.  n.  z.

(j)  Obf.  I.J.  5.

4,  ^  obfervatiOBs


46 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

obfervation  of  thofe  excellent  men  WeilTius  (j)  and  EUerus  (/).  However,
our  country  furgeons,  as  you  very  well  know,  call  encyfted  tumours  natte ;
comprifing  in  this  one  word,  not  only  thofe  three  common  kinds,  but  others ;
almoft  all  of  them,  if  you  except  the  more  learned,  being  entirely  ignorant
how  different  a  matter  from  thofe  they  fometimes  contain  ;  and  not  fo  much
as  fufpefting,  that  where  there  is  a  hardnefs,  there  water  may  be  -,  both
of  which  have  been  obferv'd  by  Boerhaave  (a),  and  by  Heifter  (««),  in
theirs.

But  there  are,  alfo,  other  peculiar  kinds  of  tumours  -,  as,  for  example's
fake,  that  which  Jo.  Paulus  Kellius  (.v)  exhibited,  when  Saizmannus  was
prefident,  confifting  nearly  of  membranes  alone  -,  which  lying  one  upon  ano-
ther, in  the  manner  of  lamellse,  had  produc'd  a  t-umour  in  the  neck,  that
was  equal  to  the  weight  of  five  pounds ;  an  inftance  that  had  fcarcely  ever
occurr'd  to  any  one  before ;  or  that  which  after  others,  and  particularly
after  Severinus  (jy),  is  defcrib'd  by  the  very  experienc'd  Benevoli  (2),  con-
taining a  fubftance  fimilar  to  fomething  polypous.  In  reading  of  whofe
obfervation,  I  call'd  to  mind  another,  which  our  Mediavia  communicated
to  me  on  the  very  day  he  made  it,  that  is,  in  the  month  of  June,  in  the
year  ij^^.

ao.  A  monk  had  a  tumour  form'd  upon  the  region  of  one  rotula,  or
knee-pan,  which  was  equal  to  a  man's  fift  in  its  fize,  hard,  moveable,  and
free  from  pain  ;  they  call'd  it  Jiatta.

The  common  integuments  being  cut  into,  and  eafily  drawn  afunder  ;  for
there  were  no  very  clofe  conneftions  that  prevented  it,  and  the  blood-veffels,
though  very  thick  indeed,  were  very  fmall ;  the  tumour  was  feparated  from
the  tendons  that  cover  the  knee-pan,  with  as  much  eafe  as  one  mufcle  is  ge-
nerally feparated  from  another.  Wherefore,  the  coat  being  uninjur'd,  the
tumour  was  taken  away ;  and  when  cut  into,  fhow'd  this  coat  to  be  pretty
thick ;  fo  that  it  might  be  divided  into  three  laminse,  the  middle  of  which
was  the  thickeft.

And  whatever  folid  matter  there  was  contain'd  within  the  coat,  was,  to
appearance,  of  a  polypous  fubftance ;  and  that  form'd  into  a  kind  of  can-
celli,  fo  as  to  refemble,  in  fome  meafure,  the  fpongy  ftrufture  which  we  fee
•within  the  heads  of  the  bones.  All  thefe  cancelli  were  full  of  a  dilute
blood.

21.  Tumours  of  this  kind  might,  perhaps,  have  been  plac'd  among  thofe
which  Celfus  {a)  fays,  contain  "  fome  what  like  a  heavy  and  bloody  flefh,"
if  he  had  not  clafs'd  them  among  the  loft  and  yielding  tumours.  Boer-
haave (/J),  who  does  not  eafily  fuppofe  that  farcomata  are  propagated
from,  and  made  up  of,  true  flelhy  fibres,  but  of  the  adipofe  membrane  ;  the
fat  of  which,  by  reafon  of  the  fmall  vefil^ls  being  diftended  with  blood,  re-
femblcs  red  flefh;  alfo  afferts  that  tumours  thus  form'd  are  included  in  a
thin  pellicle ;  and  can,  for  that  reafon,  be  taken  away  in  an  entire  Hate.

(j)  Vid.  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  1745.  Hebd.  (ar)  Difput.  deTumore  tunlcatomenibranac.
•24- "•  ••  §.  I.  &  7.

U)  Vid. Aa.  Erud. Lipf.  A. 1750. M. (y)  '•  4-  ^^pra  ad  n.  10.  cit.  c.  2.  Sc  3.'
Oftobr.  _  .  (-)  Ofiervaz. 16.

t«)  ('"')  Vid.  fupra  ad  n.  17.  (a)  De  Medic.  1.  7.  c.  6.

{b]  Prasleft.  §.  fupra  ad  n.  17.  cit.

And


Letter  L. Article  22.  47

And,  indeed,  I  formerly  faid  in  the  Adverfaria  (c),  that  I  had  feen  fat
fometimes  in  the  facculi  of  this  membrane,  fo  ting'd  with  blood,  that  thefe
facculi  themfelves  refembl'd  flelh.  But  whether  the  cafe  was  thus  or  not,  or
rather  whether  the  rednefs  was  in  the  very  thick  and  diftended  veflels,  which
creep  through  the  very  frequent  and  very  thin  little  membranes,  that  are  in-
terpos'd  to  the  fat,  and  feen  through  it;  it  certainly  did  not  happen  to  me,
at  that  time,  to  fee  thofe  parts  of  the  adipofe  membrane  conglobated  into  a
tumour,  and  furroundcd  with  a  peculiar  coat.  And  though  1  would  not  deny
but  this  might  have  happen'd  to  others ;  yet  I  believe  that,  on  the  other
hand,  all  will  not  deny  but  thefe  flelhy  excrefcences  may  eafily  arifefrom  the
fleftiy  fibres  themfelves,  where  any  part  of  them  is  lacerated  or  eroded.

But  thefe  excrefcences  do  not  relate  to  encyfted  tumours,  nor  yet  the  ex-
crefcences of  the  adipofe  membrane.  Yet  as  fome  very  learned  men  may
feem  to  have  confounded  thefe  latter  with  fteacomata,  and  others  may  feem
to  have  diftinguilh'd  them  from  thefe  indeed,  and  neverthelefs  to  have  plac'd
them  among  encyfted  tumours  •,  I  will  here  fully  explain  to  you  what  I  un-
derftand  by  the  term  of  excrefcence  of  the  adipofe  membrane,  and  what
ftrufbure  thereof  I  have  obferv'd.

22.  John  Philip  JagrafTias,  where  he  treats  of  the  natta{d),  which,  he
fays,  he  had  feen  only  in  the  fcapujs,  having  found  fat  contained  therein,
though  fometimes  flefli  alfo,  does  not  doubt  but  it  is  to  be  reduc'd  to  the
clafs  of  fteatomata.  And  our  Fabricius  ab  Aquapendente  (f)  aflerts,  that
the  fteatoma,  when  it  is  not  in  the  head,  but  in  other  parts,  "  Teems  to  con-
"  tain  a  matter  rather  fimilar  to  other  fat  than  to  fuet."  Which  remark
clearly  fhows,  that  our  anceftors,  ahhough  a  febaceous  matter  was  not
found  by  them  in  tumours,  but  far,  did  not,  for  this_  reafon,  fuppofe  that
a  new  clafs  of  tumours  was  to  be  conftituted,  as  in  our  memory  Lit-
tre  (/),  who  thought  proper  that  a  tumour  of  this  kind  Ihould  be  fepa-
rated  from  a  fteatoipa,  and  call'd  a  lipoma,  fuch  as  he  faw  on  the  fcapula  of
a  man,  full  of  foft  fat,  not  febaceous  matter.  Yet  Ruyfch  {g),  when  he
afterwards  defcrib'd  a  tumour  of  that  kind  in  a  few  words,  continu'd  to  call
it  a  fteatoma.

But  Palfin  {h),  taking  notice  of  two  tumours  of  the  fame  kind,  which  had
grown  out  to  a  prodigious  fize  in  the  back  of  two  women,  makes  ufe  of  nei-
ther term  •,  and  what  all  thole  whom  I  have  nam'd  have  either  exprefsly  done^
or  at  leaft  in  fuch  a  manner,  that,  upon  well- weighing  all  things,  we  may
Gonjefture  the  fame  thing,  omits  himfelf  to  tell  us,  whether  thefe  tumours
of  thofe  women  were  comprehended  in  a  peculiar  cyft  likewife.

Nor,  indeed,  does  he,  or  the  others,  declare  with  fufficient  plainnefs,  what
fat  was  found  in  thofe  tumours,  whether  it  was  comprehended  in  many  cells,
as  in  the  adipofe  membrane,  or  whether  it  fill'd  up  the  whole  cavity,  with-
out any  fmall  m.embranes  being  interpos'd ;  fo  that  thofe  who  read  the  ac-
count may  be  fufpicious  that  ic  was, if  not  "  liquefied  oil,"  with-  which

(c)  II.  Animad. 6.  (f)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R,  des  Sc.  A.  1709*

\d)  in  fine  Tract,  de  Tumor,  p.  n.  Obf.  Anar.  3.

(s)  in  fine  Append.  1.  i.  Chirurg.  {£]  Epift.  ad  Boerh.

(h)  Anat.  du  corpf.  hum.  tr.  2.  ch.  1,

Boer?-


48 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

Boerhaave  (?)  aflerts,  that  he,  in  conjunftion  with  Ruylch,  had  feen  a  tu-
mour (of  eight  pounds  in  weight,  taken  from  the  back  of  a  porter)  fill'd  i
yet,  at  leaft,  t"hat  it  was  a  "  fubftance"  which  "  was  nothing  but  oil,"  as
he  had  faid  a  little  above,  when  taking  notice  of  another  tumour,  or  elie
the  fame,  as  it  weigh'd  juft  the  fame  number  of  pounds,  and  was  feen  by
Ruyfch.

It  is  not  certain  therefore,  notwithftanding  fome  of  them  might  be,  that
all  the  tumours  I  have  ipoken  of  were  excrefcences  of  the  adipofe  membrane
icfelf,  as  that  in  faft  was,  which  is  defcrib'd  about  the  fcapula  of  a  woman,
by  Blefius  (k),  and  call'd  excrefcentia  adipofa  by  him  :  which  I  omitted  among
thofe  taken  notice  of  above,  not  becaufe  it  was  diffimilar  in  the  fubftance
which  it  contain'd;  for  this  refembl'd  nothing  but  a  yellowifli  fat  j  but  be-
caufe the  fame  fubftance  was  not  foft,  but  endow'd,  in  fome  meafure,  with
a  cartilaginous  hardnefs.

1,  however,  formerly  fent  an  obfervation  to  Schrockius,  of  a  large  adipofe
tumour,  which  itfelf  alfo  poftefs'd  the  region  of  the  fcapula  •,  and  that  was
in  a  woman  too,  as  nioft  of  the  others  that  I  have  fpoken  of  likewife  were.
If  you  read  this,  for  it  is  publifti'd  by  Schrockius  (/),  and  for  that  reafon
will  not  be  repeated  here,  and  join  with  it  another,  which  1  ftiall  immediately
fubjoin,  you  will  eafily  perceive  how  far  my  obfervations  and  opinions  differ
from  thofe  of  others.

23.  A  man,  without  any  previous  caufe  that  he  knew  of,  had  a  fmall  tu-
mour appear  in  the  common  integuments  of  one  buttock.  This  tumour  en-
creafing  by  degrees,  at  length  reach'd  to  fuch  a  fize,  as  to  equal  the  magni-
tude of  a  child's  head,  if  not  to  exceed  it.  It  was  of  a  globular  form,  and
being  connedted  to  the  buttock  by  a  ftiort  peduncle,  not  thicker  than  two
thumbs,  hung  downwards.  There  was  the  fame  colour  both  in  the  pedun-
cle and  the  tumour,  as  in  the  other  parts  of  the  fkin.  There  v/as  no  pain
if  you  handled  them,  no  hardnefs,  no  fludtuation,  no  pulfation.  But~  the
bulk  was  inconvenient  to  him  when  fitting,  and  the  weight  (although  it  was
Juftain'd  with  a  broad  and  proper  bandage,  left  the  tumour  ftiould  increafe
by  diftradlion,  as  it  was  very  poffible  for  it  to  do)  was  uneafy  to  him  when
ftanding  or  walking ;  and,  at  length,  a  fever,  and  a  fenfe  of  violent  heat,
which  two  fymptoms  fometimes  follov/d  a  very  long  or  very  quick  walking,
laid  the  man  under  a  neceffity  of  confulting  Valfalva.

Valfalva  having  confider'd  the  whole  of  the  cafe,  and  not  doubting  but
the  tumour  ftiould  be  taken  off",  perform'd  the  operation  a  few  days  after,  in
my  prefence,  and  in  the  following  manner.  After  having  tied  up  the  pe-
duncle by  a  ligature,  near  to  the  globe  of  the  tumour,  and  not  having,  even
by  this  means,  perceiv'd  any  pulfation  above  the  ligature,  which  ftiow'd  the
exiftence  of  any  pretty  confiderable  artery  in  that  part,  he  cut  the  pedun-
cle acrofs,  above  the  ligature.  Nor  did  any  more  blood  come  forth  upon
the  incifion,  than  he  had  expected  ;  but  one  fmall  artery  ftiowing  itfelf,  and
that  fo  very  fmall  as  to  be  ftopp'd  by  compreffion  alone,  and  but  one  vein
vof  any  importance,  which  however was  but  fmall,  running  at  the  fide  of

(0  Praeka,  ad  §  cit.  fupra  ad  b,  17.  (/)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  5.  Obf.  17.

{k)  Part.  I.  Obf.  Med.  rar.  3.

the


Letter  L, Article  ^4-,  4^

the  peduncle  under  the  fl<in,  and  being  manifeft  before  diffedioh.  And  the
wound  being  in  a  man  of  a  good  habit  of  body,  and  at  a  good  feafon  of
the  year;  for  it  was  the  fpring  of  the  year  1704;  which  much  forwarded
the  advantage  of  remedies,  was  very  foon  heal'd  up.

As  the  tumour  had  been  taken  out  by  Valfalva  while  I  was  looking  on,  fo
it  was  cut  into  and  examin'd  by  me  on  the  fame  day^  while  he  look'd  on.
In  the  very  place  of  excifion,  before  I  began  to  diffe£t  it,  there  appear'd
four  or  five  cylindrical  bodies,  as  it  were,  of  the  thicknefs  of  a  little  finger,
of  which  the  peduncle  confided.  Purfuing  the  courfe  of  thefe  bodies  then,
I  faw  that  the  tumour  was  nothing  elfe  but  the  produftion  thereof  For  be-
ing become  very  thick,  unequal,  and  tortuous,  and  being  divided,  each
into  many,  they  made  up  the  whole  of  that  bulk.  Nor  was  there  any  need
of  the  knife  to  disjoin  them  ;  for  they  were  better  disjoin'd  by  the  fingers,
and  more  eafily,  that  is,  by  pufhing  them  on  gradually.

The  ftrudure  and  nature  of  thefe  bodies  was  the  fame  in  the  peduncle,
and  every  where  elfe ;  that  is  to  fay,  their  nature  and  ftrufture  was  the  fame
with  that  of  the  adipofe  membrane  ;  fo  as  to  differ  from  it  in  no  point,  whe-
ther you  confider'd  the  furrounding- and  interpos'd  little  membranes,  or  the
fat  they  contain'd,  which  was  fofc  and  greafy  to  the  fingers,  and  inclining
from  a  white  colour  to  a  yellow,  of  which  kind  the  fat  in  the  moft  healthy
bodies  is.  No  fanguiferous  veflels  appear'd  to  the  eye,  except  at  the  upper
part ;  and  thefe  were  fmall,  as  I  had  before  perceiv'd  to  be  the  cafe,  from
what  I  remark'd  during  the  excifion.  However,  the  whole  tumour  was  fur-
rounded  with  a  pretty  thick  fkin,  fo  that  you  might  divide  it  into  two  lamina
with  the  fcalpel.

24.  I  do  not  doubt  but  from  this  obfervation,  and  the  obfervation  I  fent
to  Schrockius,  which  agrees  with  this  in  every  circumftance,  you  will  clearly
perceive,  that  thefe  iwo  tumours,  diffefted  by  me,  were  nothing  but  ex-
crefcences  of  the  adipofe  membrane  itfelf,  that  lies  under  the  fkin  •,  as  they
were  not  made  up  of  fat  more  or  lefs  liquid,  and  every  where  comprehended
in  a  peculiar  cyft,  but  made  Up  of  fat  which  was  included  in  the  membra-
nous cells,  not  only  endow'd  with  the  fame  ftrufture  and  nature  wherewith
they  evidently  are  endow'd  in  that  membrane,  but,  as  jhe  tranfverfe  feflion
both  of  the  peduncle  and  bafis  fhow'd,  evidently  continu'd  into  that  mem-
brane.

Nor  is  the  internal  of  thofe  two  laminas,  into  v»fhich  I  have  faid  that  the
fkin  might  be  divided^  to  be  confider'd  as  a  peculiar  cyft  ;  not  only  becaufe
1  know  that  it  was  not  allowable  to  do  fo  in  that  other  obfervation,  but  alfo
in  particular,  becaufe  in  either  one  or  the  other,  if  there  had  been  a  cyfi:
which  every  where  embrac'd  the  tumour,  certainly  that  portion  of  the  cyft
which  comprehended  the  upper  part,  would  have  been  left  within  in  its  pro-
per fituation,  as  it  was  not  cut  out  together  with  the  tumour :  and  that  it
was  not  left  within  is  to  be  argu'd  from  hence,  that  the  wounds  of  both  pa-
tients were  eafily  heal'd,  and -without  the  afiiftance  of  fuch  things  as  dcftroy
a  portion  of  the  follicle  left  behind,  by  corroding  or  putrefying  it-,  whereas
if  this  be  not  confum'd,  the  wound  is  not  brought  to  a  firm  cicatrix,  and  the
tumour  returns  afcerv/ards  :  neither  of  which  circumftances  h?.ppen'd  to  thefe
patients.

Vol.  III.  '  FI  To


50 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

To  this  very  kind  of  tumour,  I  fliould  fuppofe,  belong'd  that  which.  T
have  already  (in)  mention'd  to  you,  as  being  taken  for  an  omphalo-epiplocele,
by  phyficians  of  eminence;  whereas  in  the  body,  after  death,  no  hernia  was
found  there,  but  only  a  prominence  from  a  quantity  of  fat  which  the  cells,
indeed,  of  thejubjefted  membrana  adipofa  contain'd,  but  no  peculiar  cyft.
And  that  to  this  clafs  belong  that  globe  of  found  fat,  which  I  formerly  fpoke
of  to  you  in  another  letter  (?/),  as  lying  under  the  flcin  of  the  abdomen  ia
like  manner,  but  fomewhat  higher  than  the  other ;  that  is  to  fay,  about  the
enfiform  cartilage  of  an  old  woman  -,  I,  for  a  certainty,  know,  inafmuch  as
I  diflcdled  it  mylelf,  and  clearly  faw  that  it  appear'd  in  the  manner  I  here
require  ;  as  I  do  alio  of  that  which  I  fhall  defcribe  hereafter  (o),  as  having
been  accurately  examin'd  by  me  in  the  thigh  of  another  woman.

And  that  of  the  two  propos'd  by  Littre,  the  one  which  he  himfelf  alfo
found  in  the  thigh  of  a  decrepit  woman  (;>)  was  fimilar  to  thefe,  I  fliould
more  readily  believe,  than  of  that,  taken  notice  of  above  {q),  upon  the  fca-
pula  of  a  man  ;  as  in  this  he  not  only  has  made  no  mention  of  cells,  but
has  even  exprefsly  fuppos'd  a  cyft  wherewith  it  was  furrounded  -,  whereas  in
that  tumour  of  the  woman  he  makes  mention  of  cells  indeed,  but  by  no
means  of  a  cyftj  and  even  when  there  is  a  neceffity  of  coming  to  the  ampu-
tation of  a  tumour  which  does  not  yield  to  thofe  things  that  he  recommends
to  be  applied  externally,  in  the  beginning,  he  would  have  nothing  of  the
tumour  left  behind,  left,  as  he  fays,  it  ftiould  happen  to  fpring  forth  again
from  fome  cell  that  was  already  relax'd,  and  not  from  the  remains  of  the
cyft,  which,  if  he  had  then  feen  it  to  exLft  in  any  part,  he  would  not  there
have  omitted.

A  tumour  made  up  of  fat  Littre  fuppos'd  to  be  very  rare,  and  perhaps
not  feen  before.  Yet  Elftiolzius  (r)  had,  thirty-eight  years  before,  publifli'd
the  diffedion  of  a  tumour,  under  the  name  of  a  fteatoma,  which  having  been
form'd  in  a  foldier,  almoft  betwixt  his  thighs,  contain'd  fat,  "  in  very  thin
"  little  membranes,  difpers'd  through  the  whole  mafs  of  the  tumour,  and
"  diftinguifti'd  into  cells  as  it  were."  And  this  tumour  I  could  fcarcely  fup-
pofe to  differ  from  thofe  that  I  differed,  even  confidering  the  reprefentation
of  it  when  differed,  if  a  furrounding  follicle  had  not  been  fpoken  of,  and
that  almoft  equal  to  a  goofe-quill  in  thicknefs.

There  are  others  alfo,  of  which  mention  is  made  by  Alexander  Camera-
rius  (.?),  as  containing  fat,  or  a  matter  fimilar  to  fat ;  but  with  this  other,  and
ftill  other  fubftances,  and  amongft  thefe  fome  having  glands  lying  betwixt,
or  as  not  exifting  in  the  membrana  adipofa  ;  fo  that  I  cannot  conQder  them
as  true  excrefcences  of  this  membrane;  as  I,  in  like  manner,  cannot  thofe
that  are  defcrib'd  in  the  Commercium  Litterarium  {t),  as  made  up  "  of  fat
"  like  the  udder  of  a  beaft,  or  the  breaft  of  a  woman,  being  contain'd  in
"  its  proper  cells,  tenacious,  hard,  and  thick,  and  having  very  large  velTcIs

(«)  Epift.  43.  n.  10.  (p)  Hift.  de  I'Acad. R.  des  Sc.  A.  1704.

(«)  Epill.  19.  n.  18.  Obf.  Anat.  i.

(0)  Epift.  68.  n.  6, Adde  etiam alterum l,q)  N.  22. (>-)  Hift.  Steatomat.  refeifl.
ibid.  n.  8.  (j) Hift.  Pedis  tumid.

(/)  A.  1 741.  Hebd.  i.  n.  4.

•'  carrying


Letter  L. Article  2J'.''  jt

■*•  carrying  red  blood  interfpers'd  with  it :"  although  I  do  not  deny  but  thefe
might  have  been  fo  in  the  beginning,  as  well  as  thofe  del'crib'd  by  me.  Be
this  as  it  will,  however,  I  take  upon  me  to  perfuade  you  to  join  thefe  to
this  fedion  of  the  Sepulchrctum,  as  you  may  do  it  with  juftice.

And  I  think  juft  in  the  fame  manner  of  two  tumours  in  particular,  one  of
which  was  defcrib'd  by  Jo.  George  Hoyer  (a),  and  the  other  by  Elias  Came-
rarius  (x)  ;  the  former  in  a  woman  of  an  advanc'd  age,  about  the  region  of
the  left  fcapula  ;  the  latter  upon  the  knee  of  a  man,  and  above  it.  The  im-
proper methods  of  apphcation  that  had  been  made  ufe  of  by  mountebanks,
might  change  many  things  in  both  tumours,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  fubftances
interpos'd  to  their  more  deep  and  retir'd  fituation,  or  to  the  confidence  of
the  fat ;  and  thofe  appearances  that  are  call'd  glandular  conglomerations,  but
are  faid  to  confift  of  a  matter  fimilar  to  the  adipofe  fubflance,  and  thofe  parts
that  are  faid  to  be  many  alveoli,  as  it  were,  or  fmall  cavities,  from  which  the
fofter  fat  was  prefs'd  out,  might  formerly  have  been  the  cells  of  this  fat.

But  thefe  things  amount  to  no  more  than  conjefture  :  this  is  certain,  that
if  I  had  found  a  tumour  of  that  kind  whereof  you  have  a  very  fmall  one  de-
fcrib'd in  the  forty- fourth  letter  ( j)  under  the  fldn  itfelf,  as  I  did  in  the  me-
fentery,  I  fhould  never  have  j^clafs'd  it  among  the  true  excrefcences  of  the
adipofe  membrane  ;  for  it  contain'd  fat  which  was  not  feparated  by  the  la-
roins  of  the  cells,  and  v/as  every-where  comprehended  in  one  fpherical
follicle.

25.  But  whatever  caufe  may  relax  the  fldn  in  a  certain  place,  fo  as  to
make  it  give  lefs  refiftance  to  the  weight  or  bulk  of  the  many  fat  cells,  which
increafe  more  and  more  in  the  part  where  there  is  the  leaft  refiftance,  efpe-
cially  if  compreffion,  .or  any  obftruftion  be  added  ;  either  of  the  fmall  veins
that  carry  back  the  fat  from  thofe  cells,  or  even  of  the  foramina  by  which  it
is  tranfmitted  into  the  neighbouring  cells,  affords  us  an  eafy  method  of  ac-
counting for  the  origin  of  thefe  excrefcences  whereof  we  fpeak,  and  their
vaft  increafe  alfo  j  the  very  weight  of  the  fat,  for  inftance,  relaxing  every
day  more  and  more  both  the  cells  and  the  fldn  :  for  which  reafon  ftill  other
and  other  cells,  upon  the  removal  of  the  farmer  refiftance,  expand  themfelves,
and  are  enlarg'd  in  a  furprizing  manner.

How  much  the  removal  of  refiftance  contributes  to  the  enlargement  even
of  fat  tuinours,  thofe  two  in  particular  which  I  fpoke  of  juft  now  (2),  as
defcrib'd  by  thofe  celebrated  men  Jo.  George  Hoyer  and  Elias  Camerarius,
fhow.  For  the  fkin  being  eroded,  or  incis'd,  by  mountebanks,  and  almoft
all  their  adipofe  fubftance,  or  at  leaft  a  very  confiderable  part  of  it,  being
taken  away,  thefe  tumours  began  to  be  enlarg'd  in  a  furprifing  manner,  and
had  a  very  fpeedy  increafe  in  their  fubftances  of  this  kind  ;  as  you  will  learn
from  the  hiftories  of  both.

However,  although  in  fpeaking  of  the  membrana  adipofa  itfelf,  I  have
mendon'd  nothing  of  it  in  this  place,  but  its  cells ;  I  did  not,  for  that  reafon,
mean  to  determine  any  thing  in  relation  to  its  ftrufture.  For  whether  you
ihould  chufe  to  call  any  of  the  larger  parts  of  that  membrane  facculi,  or  lobes,

(a)  Eph.N.  C.Dec.  3.A.7,&  S.Obf.  183, O^  N.  3.
(a-)  Dec.  ead.  A.  5,  &  6.  Obf.  41.  (z)  N.  24.

H  2  - and


5.2. Book  IV.  Of  Chirargical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

and  the  leffer  parts  lobules,  apd,  in  fine,  very  fmall  cells,  or  kernel-like  bodies  p.
or  whether  you  chufc  to  comprehend  all  thefe  under  one  term  of  cells,  or  to-
call  them  membranous  revoluHons  and  complications.,  or  even  membranous  la-
min32  varioudy  inclin'd  to  each  other ;  it  will  equally  tend  to  give  you  a  juft
conception  of  the  matter  :  and  you  will  find  authors,  who  are  by  no  means
contemptible,  fpeaking  of  each  of  thefe  modes  of  ftruflure.  For  the  fourth  is
from  an  illuftrious  anatomift  among  the  more  modern  •,  the  third  from  our
Sanftorius  {a),  who  by  this  means  led  the  way,  as  it  were,  to  thofe  modes^
v.'hich  we  have  from  the  others  ;  the  fecond  was  made  ufe  of  by  Gliflbn  {b)y.
though  he  had  not  as  yet,  in  my  opinion,  feen  that  of  Malpighi,  when  he
wrote,  nor  yet  Malpighi  that  of  Gliflbn,  as  I  believe  Malpighi  publifh'd
his  {c)  before  the  other ;  and  his  was  almoft  the  fame  as  that  which  was  pointed
out  in  the  firft  place  by  me.

And  that,  if  you  pleafe,  you  may  follow  :  for  what  forbids  us  to  divide
the  larger  parts  into  fmaller,  and  thefe  into  very  fmall  ?  efpecially  as  Mal-
pighi has,  if  I  remember  rightly,  no-where  exprefsly  denied,  that  thefe  parts-
have  communication  v/ith  each  other,  and  with  the  reft ;  nor  has  taught  that
the  membranous  "  facculi,  or  lobuli,"  have  an  oval  figure,  but  "  almoft
"  oval  i"  and  even  "  that  they  are  differently  figur'd,  and  are  like  the  fmalL
"  lobes  of  which  the  lungs  are  alfo  compos'd :"  and  of  how  different  forms
thefe  "lobules  are,  appears  from  the  figures  that  he  join'd  to  his  epiftles  of  the
lungs.  And  he  had,  moreover,  written  this  before,  "  that  in  a  facculus  were
"  contain'd  very  fmall  lobules  of  a  very  different  figure,  fill'd  with  fat."

However,  to  return  to  excrefcences  of  that  kind  which  I  have  fpoken  of  j
that  fome  excrefcences,  very  fimilar  to  them,  exift  not  only  in  the  adipofe
membrane,  but  alfo  in  other  internal  membranes,  and  particularly  in  the
omentum,  is  fhown  by  an  obfervation  which  is  transferr'd  into  the  Bibliotheca
Anatoniica{d),  of  innumerable  procefies,  an  inch  in  thicknefs,  and  four  or
five  inches  in  length,  that  hung  from  the  adipofe  parts  of  the  omentum,,
being  alfo  turgid  with  the  fame  kind  of  half-concreted  oleofe  fluid  that  the
other  adipofe  membranes  are.  But  omitting  thefe  more  internal  tumours,
let  us  go  on  to  fpeak  of  thofe  which  fall  under  the  notice  of  the  hands  and
eyes,  as  the  intention  of  this  letter  requires.

26.  But  although,  for  the  fake  of  fome  order,  I  fhall  fpeak  of  thofe  tu-
mours that  remain  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  follow  their  fituation,  rather  than
their  nature  ;  that  is,  to  begin  with  thofe  which  occur  in  the  head  and  the
neck,  and  after  that  to  defcend  to  the  inferior  parts  ;  I  would  not,  however,,
have  you  expedt  that  I  here  take  notice  of  the  venereal  "  gummata,"  which
difcover  themfelves  there,  and  in  other  parts ;  as  I  fhall,  with  more  pro-
priety, referve  the  confideration  of  them  till  we  come  to  confider  the  venereal
lues(^);  and  much  lefs  that  I  here  repeat  what  I  have  already  written  (/)
on  the  hydrocephalus,  or  on  the  polypi  of  the  noftrils  (^^.

As  to  tumours  of  the  tongue,  I  have,  indeed,  feen  many  of  them  ;  but

{a)  Comment,  in  I.  Fen  Avic.  Quaft.  55.  [d)  Tom.  i.  P.  i.  in  Adnot.  ad  cit.  Malp.

(^)  Tradl.  de  Partib.  Continent,  c.  11,  &  Exercit.
15.  (e)  Epift.  58.  (f)  EpiH.  12.

(f)  Exercit.  de  Omento,  Pingued.  &  cxt.  (g)  Epift.  14.

never


Letter  L. Article  -2  6\  S3

never  have  had  opportunity  of  examining  any  by  difieiftion.  Yet^mong
thofe  1  have  feen,  I  am  not  witling  to  omit,  in  this  place,  fome  very  fmall  tu-
bercles, like  warts,  on  the  upper  lurface  of  it,  very  near  to  the  bafis,  which
were  formerly  fhown  to  me  by  a  furgeon,  in  a  woman  of  Padua,  in  order  to
take  my  advice  in  regard  to  the  proper  method  of  extirpating  them.  I  was
not  ignorant  that  Marcellus  Donatus  {h)  had  mention'd  verrucs,  or  warts,
of  the  tongue,  as  a  very  rare  cafe,  and  what  had  been  feen  by  him  but
twice  in  the  whole  courfe  of  his  life.  For  which  reafon,  I  was  the  more
attentive  to  examine  them,  while  the  woman  thruft  forth  her  tongue,  and
the  furgeon  deprefs'd  it.  And,  indeed,  nothing  could  be  more  like  warts
in  appearance  ;  but,  in  faft,  thofe  tubercles  were  nothing  more  than  the  lalt
andlargeft  of  all  the  pa|3illfe,  as  the  fituation  and  pofuion  of  them  imme-
diately ihow'd  ;  being  difeas'd  only  in  this  one  refped,  that,  as  this  part  of
the  tongue  was  affedted  with  a  phlogofis,  tliey  were  alio  become  fomewha^
thicker  and  higher  than  ufual,  and  protuberated.

.  I  defir'd,  therefore,  both  the  woman  and  the  furgeon  to  be  of  good  courage,-
and  gave  him  no  other  advice  in  regard  to  thefe  tubercles,  when  I  conferr'd
with  him,  but  that  he  ftiould  frequent  anatomical  demonftrations -,  by  the-
negletl  of  which  it  happens  more  frequently  than  you  imagine,  that  the  ap-
pearances which  are  natural  are  confider'd  as  morbid  ;  juft  as  when  thofe  fo-
ramina that  naturally  open  in  the  neighbouring  tonffls  are  taken  for  ulcers.

The  tonfils,  however,  I  have  more  than  once  difiedled  in  dead  bodies,  either
when  tumid  from  a  prefent  inflammation,  or  from  one  that  had  preceded.

But  I  never  was  willing  to  perfuade  any  one  to  have  them  taken  away  with'
the  knife,  v/hen  they  were  become  hard,  and  growing  out  into  fcirrhous  tu-
mours ;  not  becaufe  I  was  ignorant  that  they  might  be  taken  our,  but  becaufe^
Ixould  not  be  fure  that  other  furgeons  would  make  ufe  of  "the  fame  dexterity
and  felicity,  in  this  operation,  as.  fome  very  experienc'd  furgeons  have  done,,
and  in  particular  B&Bevoli  (i) ;  efpecially  as  I  am  very  well  inform'd  in  how
much  danger  fome  of  thole  who  have  undergone  the  operation  of  extirpating-
the  tonfils  have  been,  on  account  of  a  very  great  effufion  of  blood,  which;
has  not  been  flopp'd,  at  length,  but  with  difficulty.

And  I  was  very  glad  when  I  heard  that  very  prudent  and  learned  phyficiarii
Francefco  Serao  fay,  in  a  conference  with me,  that  he  us'd  to  behave  in
nearly  the  fame- manner  ;  that  is,  to  propofe,  on  the  one  hand,  the  fuccefsful
inftances  of  their  extirpation,  many  of  which  he  had  feen  -,  and,  on  the  other
hand,  the  examples  wherein  there  had  been  great  fear  and  danger,  which  he
likewife  was  not  ignorant  of:  and  then  leave  to  the  difcretion  of  thofe  whc
confulted  him  what  they  would  do,  without  interpofing  any  judgment  or'
perfuafion  of  his  own.

Yet  thofe  furgeons  better  deferve to be  forgiven,  who,  when  they  fee-
that  paflTage  which  is  neceffary  for  fpeaking,  fwallowing,  and  breathing,  al-
ready become  very  narrow,  by  reafon  of  a  fcirrhous  tumour  of  both  the  tonfils, ,
and  all  other  remedies  of  no  tfJedt,  fearing  that  it  will  be  every  day  more  -
narrow,  are  bold  enough  to  precipitate  the  patient  into  a  prefent  danger,  in  ■

(4)  De  Medic,  Hift,Mirab,  J.  3,  c.  5.  {i)  Oflervaz.  i3.

orders-


54 Book  IV,  Of  Chirurgical  and  Uriivet-fal  Diforders.

order  to  avoid  a  future  one;  better  deferve,  I  fay,  to  be  forgiven,  than  they
who  undertake  to  extirpate  a  wan,  or  any  other  harmlefs  tubercle  of  that
kind,  from  the  face,  efpecially  if  it  be  congenial  and  livid  ;  not  attending  to
what  Arantius  {k)  has  admonilh'd  us  of,  that  if  the  cafe  fucceed  well,  very
fmall  reputation  is  acquir'd  thereby,  as  from  a  cafe  of  very  fmall  importance  ;
but  that  great  infamy  and  reproach  are  the  confequences,  if,  which  frequently
and  eafiiy  happen^!,  the  moft  violent  diforders  are  excited  even  from  a  flight
irritation  of  the  face  :  I  fay,  of  the  face  ;  inafmuch  as  I  faw  a  cafe  which
happen'd,  not  from  the  extirpation  of  a  tubercle  of  this  kind  from  the  fldn
of  the  nofe  or  lips,  but  from  the  flvin  of  the  cheek,  and  that  to  the  great
difgrace  of  the  furgeon.  At  firft,  indeed,  there  was  only  a  flight  ulcer;  but
this  could  not  be  brought  to  a  cicatrix,  though  in  a  prieft  who  was  in  other
refpeds  in  very  good  health  ;  and  this  at  length  degenerated  into  a  large
cancerous  and  incurable  ulcer,  in  which  ftate  I  faw  it ;  fo  that  the  whole
cheek  was  entirely  confum'd,  and  the  patient  kill'd  by  the  mofl:  fevere  and
excruciating  pains.  Yet  the  furgeon  had  taken  off  this  tubercle  by  the  knife  :
and  this  I  fay,  that  you  may  be  Icfs  furpriz'd  to  read  of  a  much  larger  can-
cerous ulcer  having  been  the  confequence,  when  aHother  furgeon  had  under-
taken to  remove  a  wart  of  the  face  (/)  by  "  cauftic"  remedies.

27.  But  as  to  what  I  faw,  by  difl"efl:ion,  in  a  recent  and  large  tumour
that  occupied  the  cheek,  and  the  parts  that  are  below  the  chin  and  the
ear  {m)  ;  or  in  another  lefs  recent,  that  had  been  form'd  behind  the  ear  {n) ;
or  what  kind  of  matter  I  found  in  the  parotid  gland  ;  and  into  what  a  hard-
nefs  it  degenerated  by  ftagnation  ;  has  been  fufBciently  faid  on  a  former  oc-
cafion  (0).  But  what  makes  that  tumour  in  the  fame  gland,  which  we  call
the  parolis,  and  which  every  one  knov/s  to  happen  often  in  the  height  of  an
acute  difeafe,  while  the  event  of  it  is  yet  doubtful ;  though  fometimes  it  hap-
pens even  in  thofe  who  are  upon  the  recovery,  and  fuch  as  are  taken  up  from
the  bed,  and  that  with  fuccefs ;  as  it  never  yet  happen'd  to  me  to  diflTeft  it,  I
cannot  certainly  fay  :  yet  you  will,  perhaps,  conjedure,  that  it  may  fome-
times be  brought  on  from  a  fluid,  which  rather  diftends  the  common  integu-
ments of  the  gland,  than  the  gland  itfelf;  and  conjefture  it  in  confequence
of  what  I  have  taken  notice  of,  as  having  been  feen  by  me,  when  defcribing
that  tumour  which  was  mention'd  in  the  firft  place,  efpecially  where  the
gland,  after  the  fuppuration  and  cure  of  the  tumour,  performs  its  office  pro-
perly as  before.

And  that  the  gland  itfelf  grows  gradually  tumid  fometimes,  without  aiiy
preceding  fever,  and  becomes  hard,  juft  as  the  other  glands  that  lie  lower  in
the  neck  do,  when  they  grow  large  and  ftrumous,  is  too  well  known  to  all
phyficians  and  furgeons  ;  to  whoxn  they  generally  create  a  good  deal  of  trou-
ble. Yet  fometimes  they  are  refolv'd  much  more  eafiiy  than  could  be  ex-
pe6led.  Thus  in  a  Venetian  girl  of  feven  years  of  age,  I  remember  that  it
had  become  very  hard,  and  extremely  tumid,  and  could  not  be  touch'd  with-
out pain  ;  yet  that  the  whole  of  the  matter  which  had  ftagnated  there,  was


{i)  De  Tumorib.  p.  n.  c.  23.  &  31.  («J  Ep.  14.  n.  3.

(/)  Eph.  N.  e.  Cent.  5.  Obf.  35.  (»)  Ep.  11.  n.  15.

(ot)  Epill,  4.  n.  24.


entirely.


Letter  L» Article  28,  55

entirel}',  though  flowl^,  difciifs'd  ;  and  that  the  gland  return'd  to  its  natural
proportion,  merely  by  the  help  of  anointing  it  with  the  Oleujn  Philo-
fopboriim.

But  in  regard  to  ftrumas,  I  have  heard  our  Vallifneri  more  than  once
afTert,  that  when  a  poor  woman  had  brought  to  him  her  child,  who  was  a
very  young  girl,  andftrumous;  he,  in  conlequence  of  her  poverty,  had  pre-
fcrib'd  nothing  to  be  taken  but  a  fmali  v/ine,  in  which  the  infefts  call'd  yorrj
were  macerated  ;  and  the  woman  had  even  always  put  more  of  them  into  the
wine  than  he  order'd,  and  by  that  means  excited  a  great  flow  of  urine  ;
and  that  fhe  return'd  with  her  daughter  a  month  after,  who  was  perfedly
cur'd,  to  his  very  great  i\irprize.

Thefe  remedies,  however,  I  do  not  make  mention  of  as  being  unknown  ;
but  rather  becaufe  they  are  fo  very  well  known,  and,  for  that  reafon,  de-
fpis'd  by  fome  \  whereas  they  neverthelefs  may  fometimes,  and  particularly
in  a  tender  age,  when  the  difeafe  is  not  very  inveterate,  be  of  greater  ufe  to
the  patient  than  we  could  hope  or  expeft.

2S.  Perhaps  you  will  here  enquire,  whether  fome  things  faid  by  Riolanus
upon  ftrumsE,  in  the  fecond  book  and  fifteenth  chapter  of  his  Anthropogra-
phia,  are  faid  with  propriety  and  juftice.  And  thefe  are  faid  with  juftice  and
propriety  :  "  Nor  is  it  without  reafon  that  Julius  Pollux,  in  his  Onomafticon,
"  has  obferv'd  that  ftrumse  are  form'd  about  the  mefentery.  On  this  fubjeiSh
"  fee  Philip  Ingraffias,  in  his  book  of  tumours,  page  two  hundred  and
"  ninety-nin?."  But  thefe  things,  which  immediately  precede,  are  not  faid
with  juftice;  "  Nor  do  ftrumas  ever  break  out  externally,  unlefs  the  mefeni-
"  tery  has  been  ftrumous.  And,  for  this  reafon,  Guido  de  Cauliaco  very
"  properly  derives  the  fource  of  ftrumas  from  the  mefentery."

For  Guido  {p),  and  he  who  is  quoted  by  him,  Arnoldus,  fays  this ;  that
from  external  ftrumas,  if  many  in  number,  the  exiftence  of  the  internal  is
proved.  Nor  is  w-hat  Riolanus  fays  univerfally  true  ;  1  mean,  that  the  ftruma
never  appears  outwardly,  unlefs  there  are  others  in  the  mefentery  :  and  that  is
defervedly  difapprov'd  by  Thomas  Bartholin  {q).  Againft  whom  Riolanus
is  not  well  defended  in  this  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (r),  as  if  he  had  faid
no  more  than  what  is  faid  by  Guido ;  that  is,  if  the  external  ftrumse  are
"  in  great  number."  For  Riolanus  has  added  this  in  his  Encheiridion  (j),
and  even  has  more  contrafted,  in  that  work,  what  he  had  before  faid  in  his
Anthropographia,  by  faying,  that  ftrumas  "  rarely  appear  externally  in  great
"  numbers,  unlefs  they  have  their  roots  feated  in  the  mefentery."  Bartholin,
however,  did  not  refer  to  the  Encheiridion,  but  to  the  Anthropographia  ;  -as
others  have  alio  done  ;  and  among  thefe  Schelhammer  (/)  ;  and  before  him
Scultetus.  Who,  as  you  fee  from  the  Sepulchretum  itfelf  (k),  attributed-
this  univerfal  opinion  to  Riolanus  j  and  added,  "  which  even  Guido  and
"  Ingraffias  bear  teftimony  to."

(/■)  Chirurg.tr.  z.  do£lr.^  I.  c.  4,,  (/)  De  hum.- corp.  Turaoiib.  _^S. 2.  P.  J^

(?) Anat.  quart,  renov.  1.  i.  c.  12.  n.  78.


(r) Obf.  6.  Scho!.  ad  5.  4.  (.v)  Obf.  cit.  § 9.

{..)  1.  z.  c.  18.


What


56 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

What  the  firft  of  thefe  authors  has  afferted,  I  have  dlready  told  you  ;  and
Ingraffias  is  not  even  faid  to  have  afferted  this  by  Riolanus  -,  but  it  is  quoted
as  relatincr  the  opinion  of  Pollux,  (which  is  quite  different)  and  confirming
it-,  that  Ts  to  fay,  "  that  ftrumas  are  alio  form'd  about  the  mefentery ;"
which  Schelhammer  and  Scultetus  would  have  known,  as  Riolanus  admo-
nifhes,  by  infpefting  the  book  of  Ingraffias,  and  he  who  added  the  fcholium
of  this  oblervation  in  the  Sepulchretum  ;  in  whom,  in  other  refpeds,  there
is  no  reafon  why  we  (hould  require  this  diligence,  fince  neither  the  paf-
faee  of  Scultetus  is  accurately  copied,  nor  is  the  chapter  of  Riolanus  rightly-
put  down  ;  but  the  fifth  inftead  of  the  fifteenth ;  and  the  thirty-ninth  obfer-
vation  of  Scultetus  inttead  of  the  thirty-firfl.

Some  years  ago  I  faw  a  noble  youth  that  might  have  been  compar'd  with
him  defcrib'd  in  the  Sepulchretum  hj  Platerus  (x),  by  reafon  of  the  number
of  his  external  ftrumas,  and  the  various,  but  always  ufelefs,  methods  of  cure,
that  had  been  made  ufe  of;  who  in  the  firft  year,  however,  had  no  mark  of
the  mefentery  being  affefted  in  the  fame  manner.  But  neither  Platerus  ex*
amin'd  the  belly  of  his  patient,  though  he  had  It  in  his  power  ;  nor  I  of  mine,
as  he  at  length  died  at  Ibme  diftance  from  hence.

Yet  this  which  1  Ihall  immediately  fubjoin,  and  which  is  fufficient  againft
-what  is  pronounc'd  by  Riolanus  in  his  Anthropographia,  I  remember  to  have
feen  in  another  body.

29.  A  young  man  had  died  in  this  hofpital,  about  the  beginning  of  No-
vember, in  the  year  1715,  from  theeffefts  of  ftrumous  tumours,  which  befet
his  neck.

Being  led,  by  the  defire  of  anatomical  refearches,  to  difTeft  fome  other
parts,  and  among  them  the  mefentery,  I  not  only  found  no  ftruma  in  them,
but  even  no  indurated  glands :  and  although  they  feem'd  to  be  a  little  larger
than  they  generally  are,  I  fuppos'd  this  to  be  owing  rather  to  the  age  (j)  of
the  patient,  for  he  was  very  young,  than  to  difeafe.

30.  That  tumours  of  the  thyroid  gland  ought  to  be  entirely  referr'd  to  the
clafs  of  ftrumas  of  the  neck,  and -that  they  are  improperly  call'd  broncho-
celes,  is  affirm'd  by  John  Freind  (2)  -,  who  acknowledges  many  kinds  of
thefe,  but  all  on  the  outfide  of  that  gland  ;  and  amongft  them  One  that  is
fimilar  to  an  aneurifm^  to  which,  therefore,  the  fcalpel  ought  not  to  be  ap^'
plied.  But  John  Riolanus  (a),  before  Schelhammer  {i>),  who  thought  him-
lelf  to  be  the  firft  that  had  obferv'd  this,  claffes  among  bronchoceles,  which
he  fuppofes  to  differ  "  widely  from  ftrumas,"  the  thyroid  gland,  "  in  a  more
"  extended  ftate,  which  produces  a  farcoma ;"  nor  does  he  mention  any  one
among  them  that  is  fimilar  to  an  aneurifm.

For  i  would  have  you  take  care  how  you  fuppofe  that  the  example  which  is
immediately  fubjoin'd  to  this  pafTage  of  Riolanus,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (c),  of
a  bronchocele  of  that  kind,  which  was  very  fimilar  to  an  aneurifm,  unlefs  it
was  rather  a  real  aneurifm,  belongs  to  the  fame  author ;  that  is,  to  Riolanus^
or  perhaps  to  Parey ;  both  of  whofe  words  and  obfervations  had been  juft

(.r) Obf.  ead.  §.  3.  (/?)  Encheir.  Anat.  I.  4.  c.  7.

CjJ  Vid.  Haller.  adBoerh.  Prsleft.  §.  iz8,  (<5)  1.  cit.  S.  &  P.  ead.  n.  8j.

n- 1.  2.  (f)  SeiSt.  hac  2.  Obf.  5,  §,  2.
(z)  Hift.  Medic,  ubi  de  Albucafi.

6  before


Letter  L. Articles  3i>32,  33>34'  57

before  quoted.  But  if  you  aflc  to  whom  then  that  example,  and  the  two
which  follow  next  (i),  belong,  read  Severinus  {e) ;  and  you  will  find  that
thofe  three  inftances  are  defcrib'd  from  him,  though  with  great  negligence  ;
and  that  he  has  exprefsly  plac'd  the  laft  in  the  clafs  of  aneurifms  themfelves.

To  me,  however,  it  has  always  happen'd,  that,  among  the  great  number
of  fwell'd  necks,  fuppos'd  to  be  affefted  with  a  bronchocele,  which  I  have
difleded,  I  always  found  the  diforder  in  the  thyroid  gland  ;  even  when  there
was  a  cavity  fimilar  to  that  of  an  aneurifm  ;  or  one,  at  leaft,  which  was  full  of
blood.  But  as  thefe  obfervations  of  mine,  of  the  various  and  manifold
diforder  in  that  gland,  when  tumid,  are  already  extant  in  the  ninth  of  the
EpiJioU  Anatomica  (/),  there  is  no  occafion  to  repeat  them  here.  More-
over, you  have  others  in  other  letters  which  I  have  fent  to  you  {g) ;  and  I
Iliall  add  fome  here  ;  from  which  you  may  more  and  more  underftand,  how
various  the  diforders  of  that  gland  are  ;  or,  at  leaft,  of  what  nature  the  be-
ginnings of  this  diforder  are.

31.  A  woman,  whofe  body  was  diflTedted  in  this  college,  in  the  year  1741,
the  remainder  of  whofe  hiftory  1  fhall  fend  to  you  when  I  treat  of  the  gout  {h)^
had  the  thyroid  gland  much  thicker  than  it  naturally  is,  roundifh  in  its
figure,  and  univerfally  conglobated  into  icfelf.  In  cutting  into  it  I  found  it
to  be  hard,  and  even  fcirrhous ;  a  white  fubftance  being  here  and  there  in-
terpos'd  betwixt  a  fubftance  which  was  of  a  flefhy  colour,  degenerating  into
brown.

32.  As  I  was  diflefting  the  head  and  neck  of  another  woman,  in  the  fame
place,  and  the  fame  year,  I  obferv'd  the  gland  we  are  fpeaking  of  to  be
fomewhat  hard  at  the  lower  part  of  the  left  lobe;  cutting  both  lobes  afunder,
therefore,  longitudinally,  I  faw  many  and  pretty  large  portions  of  a  white
fubftance  intermix'd  with  both,  and  particularly  the  right ;  and  in  the  other,
in  which  I  have  faid  there  was  a  part  fomewhat  hard,  I  faw  a  cyft  included,
made  up  of  a  thick  and  white  coat,  wherein  a  yellow  humour,  fomewhat
denfe  in  its  confiftence,  was  contain'd.

33.  A  man,  whofe  head  and  neck  were  difleded  there  about  the  fame
time,  had  one  lobe  of  the  thyroid  gland  larger  than  the  other,  and  confi-
derably  higher.  When  I  examin'd  with  great  attention  the  upper  part  of  that
lobe,  which  was  very  hard ;  I  obferv'd  a  membranous  bladder,  of  the  form
of  a  very  round  globe,  to-be  half-buried  in  it :  and  this  bladder  being  per-
forated, a  humour  of  a  vifcid  nature  and  a  yellow  colour,  fo  as  to  referable
bile,  was  difcharg'd.

34.  The  larynx  of  a  woman  was  prepar'd  for  demonftration  in  the  fame
place,  in  the  year  1744.  The  fame  gland  being  taken  out,  and  being  larger
and  more  turgid  than  it  generally  i?,  lliow'd  certain  globules,  which  were  in
one  part  of  them  protuberant,  and  in  the  other  part  buried  within  the  glan-
dular fubftance,  being  all  of  a  round  form,  but  of  different  magnitudes
from  each  other.  The  largeft  was  equal  to  the  fize  of  a  grape:  the  others
were  much  lefs. When  the  coat  of  thefe  globules  was  pundur'd,  a  fluid,  like

/'«';§  3,  &  4.  ■  cgj  Epift.  16.  n.  38.  Epift.  23,  n.  4.  ^Ift.

<^)  De  recond.  Abfceff.  nat.  1,  4.  c.  6,.&  7. 26.  n.  21.  &  Epift.  -ia..  n.  i.e.
a  J  N.  38.  &  ieq.  (/,)  Epift.  .57,  n.  2;


Voi.  III.  I


water.


5  8 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

water,  and  without  any  colour,  came  forth.  But  the  largefl:  was  of  a  far
difi^erent  kind  ;  for  it  was  made  up  of  a  firm  fubftance,  as  I  perceiv'd  hy
diffeiStion,  not  much  unlike  that  of  which  the  conglobated  glands  confift,
but  of  a  reddifh  colour,  degenerating  into  a  dirty  white,  except  where  it  was
here  and  there  diftinguifli'd  with  fmall  fpots  of  black  blood,  as  it  were,  and
in  fome  places  with  very  fmall  cavities  that  contain'd  nothing.

55.  Another  woman,  who  was  diffefted  a  little  after  that,  but  in  the  hof-
pitai,  had  in  the  thyroid  gland,  at  the  bafis  of  the  right  lobe,  a  fmall  white
body  of  the  bignefs  of  a  vetch,  and  in  fome  meafure  of  the  form,  being  a
little  prominent  on  the  outfide  of  the  gland  :  and  in  cutting  into  this  body,
I  found  it  rather  to  be  bony  than  cartilaginous.

36.  A  young  man  having  died  of  an  alcites,  his  head  and  neck,  as  na
better  could  be  then  procur'd,  were  brought  into  the  theatre,  in  order  to
finilli  the  public  anatomical  demonftrations  of  the  year  1747.  ^"  which,
thou'-^h  the  other  parts  were  in  a  pretty  natural  ftate,  the  gland  that  I  have  fo
often  fpoken  of  was  thicker  than  it  generally  is,  and,  at  the  lower  part  of
one  of  its  lobes,  even  harder.  In  this  place,  when  diffedled,  I  faw  that  it
confided  of  round  veficles,  as  it  were,  full  of  mucus.  The  remaining  fub-
ftance, if  you  examin'd  it  externally,  reprefented  the  gland  as  divided  into
pretty  large  lobes  -,  if  internally,  into  very  fmall  lobes,  but  more  than  ufu-
ally  diftinft.

37.  From  thefe  obfervations  you  perceive,  that  the  tumours  of  the  thyroid
gland,  or  the  beginnings  of  thefe  tumours,  happen  more  frequently  to  the
female  fex,  than  to  ours.  And  this  I  have  alfo  hinted  at  in  the  EpiJloU
Anatomica  (i) ;  and  you  will  conjedure  it  from  the  examples  of  a  bronchocele
which  are  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulcretum,  firft,  if  you  compare  them  alto-
o-ether ;  for  you  will  not  only  find  them  in  this  fedlion  of  the  Sepulchretumj,
but  alfo  in  the  eighth  fedtion  of  the  third  book  (k),  and  in  the  fecond  fedlioa
of  the  fecond  book  (/),  which  I  wonder  that  Bonetus  fliould  have  forgot  to
mention  here,  according  to  his  cuftom  •,  and  in  the  fecond  place,  if  you  fet
afide  thofe  things  that  rather  relate  to  true  aneurifms,  which  you  will  very
eafily  find  out  by  comparing  them  with  the  books  from  whence  they  are
taken.

But  I  fuppofe  it  will  be  of  no  confequence  to  com,pare  one  of  thofe  that
are  propos'd  in  the  fecond  book,  from  Moinichenius,  for  inftance  j  for  in^
this  cafe  I  fliould  put  you  in  mind  that,  inftead  of  Epid.  yy,  as  it  is  publilh'd
in  the  Sepukhretum,  you  (hould  read  Epji.  87  ;  for  Moinichenius  wrote  that
to  Bartholin  at  the  end  of  this  letter  (w).  And  there  would  be  no  need  of
conje(5ture,  if  they  who  have  told  us  what  they  found  in  the  bronchocele,.
had  not  omitted  to  take  notice  in  what  ftate  they  found  the  thyroid  gland  ::
to  which,  however,  I  fuppofe  them  moft  frequently  to  have  belong'd  ;  and
this  not  only  from  fome  of  the  author's  words,  but  ftill  more  /rom  all  the
obfervations  I  have  made  quite  to  the  prefent  time.

But  I  would,  likewife,.  have  you  examine  thofe  that  have  been  publifli'd

(7)  Epift,  9.  n.  40.  V)  Obf.  9.'§  I,  &  4.

(k)  Obf.  31 .  in  fine»  if")  Vid.  in  Bartholin!  Cent.  2.  Epift.  Medic».

6  ^y-


Letter  L. Article  37.  59

by  men  of  eminence  fince  the  fecond  edition  of  the  Sepulchretum,  tieiiricus
Albertus  Nicolai  («),  Philip  Conrade  Fabricins  (<?),  the  French  phyfician
Lalouette  ( p),  Janus  Plancus  (^),  Albertus  Halier  (r),  and  others;  and
among  thefe,  as  I  learn  from  Boeclerus  (5),  Lauthius,  That  different  perfons
have  feen  different  diforders  in  the  thyroid  gland,  you  will  find  by  reading
their  obfervations  ;  but  that  moft  of  them  met  with  hard  bodies  of  a  carti-
laginous, bony,  or  ftony  nature,  and  ibmetimes  even  found  the  gland  itfelf
become  bony,  or  of  a  ftony  nature.

Do  not,  however,  imagine,  becaufe  there  is  more  than  one  of  them,  as
well  as  myfelf,  who  have  Ibmetimes  obierv'd  thefe  or  otiier  diforders  in  one
lobe  of  the  gland  only,  the  other  being  quite  found  -,  do  not,  J  fay,  imagine
that  this  gland  is  not  folitary,  but  confifts  really  of  two  ;  unlefs  you  chufe
to  fufpeft  the  fame  of  the  ipleen  or  the  liver,  when  one  parr  of  them  is
feiz'd  with  a  difeafe,  though  the  other  is  found.  And  ftill  more  beware,
v/here  you  read  fome  difquifitions  upon  the  thyroid  gland,  left  you  are  eafily
allur'd  by  the  promifes  which  you  find  in  the  beginning.  But  previouQy
read,  with  attention,  whatever  is  written  of  this  gland,  not  only  in  the  ninth
of  the  Epiftola  Anatomide-  (i),  but  alfo  in  thofe  paffages  that  the  fame  epiftle
refers  to  of  the  firft,  fourth,  and  fixth  Adverfaria  ;  and  then,  at  length,  read
over  thofe  difquifitions  alfo.

You  will,  indeed,  commend,  in  concert  with  me,  the  defign  of  the  author,
and  his  endeavour  to  promote  and  illuftrate  that  fufpicion  ot  mine,  of  many
but  very  flender  tubuli  going  from  the  thyroid  gland,  and  terminating  in  the
larynx.  But  you  will  wifh,  at  the  fime  time,  that  he  had  conjedtur'd  thefe
to  be  far  different  from  lymphsedudts,  bearing  in  mind  the  office  and  ftrufture
thereof:  and,  in  other  things,  that  what  is  mine  he  would  attribute  to  mej
that  what  is  not  mine  he  would  not  attribute  to  me ;  as,  for  example's  fake,
where  1  am  faid  to  have  prohibited  the  immiffion  of  air,  or  to  have  rejedied
the  comprefTion  of -this  gland,  in  order  to  enquire  into  the  tubuli  thereof.

Is  not  it  fufficient  to  have  infpefted,  though  never  fo  flightly,  a  page  or
two  of  that  epiftle  (u),  in  order  to  fliow  whether  I  prohibited  immiffion
of  air  ?  Did  I  rejeft  the  comprefTion  of  the  gland  ?  I  admonifh'd  that  this
was  to  be  done  with  caution  and  gentlenefs :  which  was  very  well  underftobd
by  that  experienc'd  man  Boeder  («•),  when,  diffenting  from  the  author  of  the
Difquifitions,  he  has  faid  that  he  was  on  my  fide  of  the  queftion ;  for,  fays
he,  "  we  could  not  elevate  the  reft  of  the  veficles,  (and  even  then  not  all
"  of  them)  except  by  ftrongly  inflating  one  -,  lb  that  we  fuppofe  the  air  to
*'  have  made  a  way  from  hence  into  the  eellular  membrane,  by  rupturing  the
"  velTels,  and  by  this  means  to  have  fw^U'd  the  whole  gland."

And  how  many  times  I  have  made  ufe  of  the  compreffion  of  this  gland,
I  have  not  only  not  fpar'd  to  declare,  but  have,  moreover,  exprefsly  refuted

(a)  Dec.  Obf.  Illuftr.  Anat.  Obf.  4.  {r)  Opufc.  Fathol.  Obf.  6.

(o)  Idea  Anat.  Praft.  Sed.  4.  (j)  Diflerc.  de  Thyroid<B^, Thymi &  cart,

(p)  Memoir,  de  Math.  &  de  Phyf.  prefentes  Fundlionibus,  not.  9.  ad  §  18.
a  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  Tom.  i.  pag.  168,  569.  (/)  N.  30.  &  feqq.  ufque  ad  41.

(q)  Epift.  de  Monftris  Sc  est.  cum  Tab.  3. (a)  N.  36,  &  37.
Fig.  I,  &  2.  {x)  DifTert,  cit.  not.  fad  §  8.

I  2  the


<5o Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  reafoning  of  thofe  who  would  attempt  to  prove  it  ufelefs.  How  then  is
the  cafe  ?  Is  it  poffible  that  the  reafon  which  another  advances,  and  which
1  loon  after  rejeft,  has  been  taken  for  mine  by  him  who  read  it  in  a  very
curfory  manner  ?  Something  of  this  kind,  certainly,  feems  to  have  drawn
into  an  error  another  certain  perfon,  who,  in  a  kind  of  anatomical  problem,
not,  perhaps,  obferving  how  that  is  to  be  underftood,  in  difputations,  which
is  fet  apart  for  the  fake  of  gratificaticn,  as  it  were,  by  way  of  hypothefis,  and
in  the  mean  while  is  left  as  doubtful  and  undetermin'd  ;  and  thinking  that  I
contefted  againft  Cowper  in  that  pafTage,  in  which  I  continu'd  to  defend  this
very  Cowper,  did  not  hefitate  to  defend  him  againft  me  ;  and  not  only  this,
but,  like  an  exulting  vidlor,  took  upon  him  to  fubjoin  the  following  words :
"  Lee  Morgagni  now  fay  what,  £5?  ca^t."  Upon  reading  which  words,  a
friend  of  mine  replied.  And  what  fhoukl  Morgagni  fay  but  what  I  formerly
heard  him  fay,  when  fome  young  men,  who  had  very  often  found  in  the
books  of  learned  authors,  that  Morgagni  had  obferv'd  fome  certain  things
"  after  "  Berengarius,  Falloppius,  Arantius,  and  other  anatomifts,  but  were
ignorant  that  thefe  authors  were  exprefsly  referr'd  to  by  Morgagni  in  thofe
obfervations,  fo  as  to  confefs  by  whom  he  had  profited,  and  yet  to  fhovv
•what  he  had  added  to  their  difcoveries ;  when,  therefore,  thefe  young  men
■were  furpriz'd,  that  the  pafTages  of  lb  many  authors  which  1  have  quoted
had  efcap'd  his  eyes  or  memory  ;  his  reply  was,  I  would  not  have  you  be
too  hafty  in  judging.

But  of  myfelt  T  have  fpoken  more  than  enough,  and  enough  of  tumours
of  the  thyroid  gland,  when  I  have  added  this,  that  they  who  have  remark'd...
a  change  of  the  voice  from  thence,  may  have  different  methods  of  accounting
for  this  change,  either  from  the  influx  of  fluid  into  the  larynx  being  obftrufted
or  chang'd,  or  from  the  diftraftion  or  comprefllon  of  the  adjacent  mufcles  of
the  larynx,  or  from  the  weight  that  lies  on  this  tube,  and  the  bulk  that
forces  againft  it :  which  I  have  very  briefly  hinted  at  in  that  ninth  letter  (j).

Yet  far  more  violent  fymptoms  may  happen  from  the  preflTure  being  too  ■■
much  increas'd,  whether  this  fall  upon  the  jugular  veins,  from  whence  thb
illuftrious  Haller  (2)  law  a  foporific  diforder  and  an  apoplexy,  orprincipally
confine  the  afpera  arteria,  which  the  fame  author  has  obferv'd,  fo that  the
breath  could  not  be  drawn  without  difficulty  :  and,  indeed,  fometimes  it  could  ■
not  be  drawn  at  all  ;  as  others  have  obferv'd,  and  Kerckringius  (<?)  in  pre-
ference to  the  reft,  who,  mov'd  by  the  fuffocation  of  a-  miferable  womary, ,
blam'd  the  phyficians  for  having  omitted  to  endeavour,  by  a  diminution  and
diverfion  of  the  humours,  to  prevent  the  tumour  from  increafing  fo  faft,  at
leaft,  and  prefTing  the  afpera  arteria  againft  the  vertebrae  of  the  neck  by  its
precipitate  increafe.

38.  But  now,  as  I  have  already  written  to  you  of  tumours  of  the  jugular
glands  (^),  and  of  thofe  aneurifms  in  the  neck  which  are  real  (r) ;  come,  lee
us  go  on  to  the  cheft.

In-refpefl:  to  tumours  of  the  breaft  of  women,  our  Fabricius  de  Aqua-

(y)  N.  40.  {z)  Obf.  cit.  6.  {b)  Epift.  22.  n.  19..&  Epift.  29.  n.  12..

(a)  Obf.  ex  Sepulchr.  fupra  cit.  9..§  I.  (f)  Epift.  26.  n.  21.

pendente-


Letter  L. Article  38.  61

pendente  (d)  denies,  that  he  had  ever  feen  thofe  which  came  on  at  the  time
of  the  milk's  conning,  not  perfecftly  cur'd.  Yet  the  patients  frequently  fuffer
various  and  very  troublefome  inconveniences,  before  the  abfcefles,  into  which
they  degenerate,  are  perfeftly  heal'd.  For  which  reafon  it  were  the  more
to  be  wifli'd,  that  there  were  remedies  at  hand,  by  which  women,  after  de-
livery, who  abound  with  milk,  but,  for  certain  reafons,  cannot  give  fuck,
could  fafely  drive  away  their  milk,  before  it  could  be  turn'd  into  abfcefles.

There  was  a  phyfician  at  Bologna  who  aflerted,  that  this  might  be  done
by  fufpending  a  little  dried  fifh,  which  they  call  the  hippocampus,  or  fea-
horfcy  betwixt  the  fcapulse,  efpecially,  as  he  himfelf  faid,  when  taken  at  a
certain  time ;  wherefore,  as  he  had  two,  he  faid  that  the  one  was  more  effi-
cacious than  the  other,  and  willingly  lent  the  moft  ufeful  of  the  two  to  thofe
who  aflc'd  it  of  him.

Among  thefe  was  an  ingenious  young  man,  who  applied  to  the  ftudy  of
medicine  there  with  me,  before  the  beginning  of  this  century,  and  had  already
begun  to  praflife  it  there  :'  and  this  gentleman,  having  tried  the  effedt  of  that
fifh  upon  two  women,  aflcrted  that  it  had  anfwer'd  in  both  of  them.  But
hearing  nothing  of  this  experiment  for  thirty  years  after  and  more  ;  I,  an
length,  found  it  fpoken  of  in  the  pofthumous  works  of  our  Vallifneri  (f),
who  fays,  that  he  had  made  the  fame  experiment  often,  and  that  it  had  fuc-
ceeded  in  the  fame  manner:  but  in  the  contrary  manner,  if  the  woman  who
defir'd  to  encreafe  the  quantity  of  her  milk,  hung  it  on  the  oppofite  fide,
that  is  betwixt  her  brearts ;  which,  though  in  like  manner  affirm'd  by  that
phyfician  of  Bologna,  the  fellow-ftudent  of  mine,  whom  I  have  mention'd,
had  no  opportunity  of  trying.

I  am  very  forry  that  I  nother  made  the  enquiry  formerly,  nor  Vallifneri
has  remark'd,  whether  the  milk  which  was  driven  away  in  this  manner,  had^
been,  in  any  point,  detrimental  to  the  women  ;  for  it  might  not  be  injurious
at  all,  if  it  was  drij;en  away  gently  and  gradually  :  and  by  this  way  of  afting,
the  celebrated  Degnerus  (/)  has  very  frequently  feen  that  quickfilver  in-
cluded in  a  goofe-quil),  and  worn,  in  the  fame  manner,  betwixt  the  breads,
difcufles  the  milk  "  without  any  injury  ;"  and  has  not  only  been  well-inform'd,
that  even  among  the  women  in  Holland,  this  is  "  a  fafe,  familiar,  and  ap-
*'  prov'd  "  remedy.  However,  it  is  certain,  that  though  at  the  time  I  am
-  fpeaking  of,  this  fecond  remedy  was  unknown  to  the  Italians,  the  chief  phy-
ficians  at  Bologna  did  not  ufe  the  firft,  either  becaufe  they  did  not  believe  its
efficacy,  or  fufpefted  that  it  might  be  hurtful.

I  therefore  remember  that  Albertini  reliev'd  the  complaint  of  two  noble
matrons,  when  their  breafts  were  fo  turgid  with  milk,  that  they  could  nei-
ther Ileep  nor  move  their  arms  without  pain,  merely  by  diverting  the  milky
fluid  to  the  inteftines ;  and  that  by  a  clyfter,  which  confided  of  nothing  elfe
but  broth,  with  fome  butter  diflTolv'd  in  it,  and  the  ulual  quantity  of  fugar.
And  this  I  take  notice  of  becaufe  bcth  of  them  began  to  be  fo  reliev'd,  and
with  fuch  furprizing  felicity,  at  the  very  time  of  going,  to  ftool,  that  their

CilJ Da.  Cliirurg. Operat. ubi  de  Chir.  (s)  Opere  Tom. 3.  P.  4. Saggio  Alfab.

Thorac.  d'lftor.  Med.  alia  voce  Ippocampo.

(■/J  Ait.  N.  C.  Tom.  J.  Obf.  149..

breafls^


6  2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

breafts  afterwards  decreafing  in  their  fize,  neither  of  them  had  occafion  for
any  other  remedy.  And  indeed  Albertini  affirm'd  to  me  in  a  folemn  man-
ner, that  by  one  of  them  was  difcharg'd  a  matter  which  he  himfelf  faw,  and
which  was  perfcdly  fimilar  to  milk;  lb  that  this  cafe  brought  into  m.y  mind
that  of  the  woman  in  whom,  after  weaning  her  child,  the  tumour  of  the
breaft  decreas'd,  as  foon  as  ever  the  milk  began  to  difcharg'd  into  the  mouth,
inltead  of  faliva :  which  obiervation,  and  the  explication  of  it,  that  may  be
accommodated  to  this  of  Albertini,  you  will  read  in  Nuck's  Sialographia{g).
But  in  what  manner,  in  a  certain  epidemical  conftitution  of  lying-in  women
at  Paris,  of  which  the  celebrated  Malovin  {h)  has  written,  as  on  the  third
and  fourth  day  after  delivery,  the  breafts  not  only  were  not  fwell'd,  but  were
flaccid  ;  how  I  fay,  after  death,  which  happen'd  betwixt  the  fifth  and  the
feventh  day,  the  milk  could  be  found  coagulated,  and  adhering  to  the  ex-
ternal fuperficies  of  the  inteftines ;  although  they  feem'd  to  have  been  in-
flam'd,  and  much  affedled  with  pain,  and  the  difeafe  had  taken  its  origin
from  a  diarrhea,  and  from  the  continuance  of  it ;  is  not  eafily  to  be  explain'd  ;
vinlefs,  perhaps,  from  that  milky  ferum  (which  probably  being  redundant
in  the  blood,  was  found  in  other  places  in  fome  bodies,  but  in  the  cavity  of
the  belly  of  all  which  were  then  dificdled)  the  thicker  and  more  vifcid  parts
had  fubfided,  and  had  adher'd  to  the  fubjefted  inteftines.

39.  But  as  to  tumours  of  the  breafts,  which  do  not  arife  at  the  time  of
the  milk  (although  Hildanus  produces  examples  even  of  thefe  (/),  and  I  have
feen  one,  which  were  form'd  at  that  time,  and  degenerated  into  a  cancer)
nocwithftanding  our  Fabricius  f^)  afferts,  "  that  he  had  feldom  feen  any
"  which  did  not  emulate  the  nature  of  a  cancer ;"  yet,  to  omit  others,  and
infpedl  Ludovicus  Mercatus  (/)  alone ;  you  will  be  abundantly  convinc'd,
how  many  different  fpecies  of  tumours  occur  in  the  breafts,  which  do  not
emulate  the  nature  of  a  cancer.

But  there  are  even  others  befides  what  he  defcribes  ;  as,  for  inftance,  that
which  was  obferv'd  by  me  in  a  Venetian  virgin,  who  was  forty  years  of  age.
This  woman,  at  a  time  when  the  menftrua  began  to  flow  fome  days  later
than  ufual,  frequently  us'd  to  have  a  tumour  bigger  than  a  pigeon's  egg,
(not  unequal,  nor  changing  the  colour  of  the  fkin,  but  very  hard,  and  cre-
ating pain  in  the  motions  of  the  neighbouring  arm)  arife  in  one  of  her  breafts,
which  was  the  left ;  fo  that  if  it  had  occupied  the  whole  of  the  breaft,  it
would  have  feem'd  to  be  fcarcely  at  all  different  from  one  of  thofe,  which
are  defcrib'd  in  the  firft  place  by  Mercatus.  Yet  it  was  not  altogether  fimi-
lar to  that  which  they  call  glandular,  as  it  was  not  only  not  cut  into  little
exiuberances ;  but  foon  after,  when  the  menftrua  appear'd,  it  was  immedi-
ately reduc'd,  without  the  application  of  any  remedy,  and  without  leaving
any  traces  of  it  behind.

40.  There  are  tum.ours  alfo  which  arife  within  the  breafts,  and  which,
when  the  menftrual  flux  is  at  hand,  are  wont  to  be  fubjedl  to  troublefome
■tenfions. Thefe  being  hard,  and  diftinguifh'd  into  certain  knots,  as  it  were,

i.g)  c.  2.  {k)  loco  fnpra  ad  n.  38.  indicato.

\h)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A,  1746.  (/)  De  Mulier.  AfFeft.  I.  i.  c.  17.

(0  Cent.  i.  Obf.  78.

or


Letter  L. Articles  41,  42,  43,  6%

or  fometimes  occupying  the  whole  gland  of  the  breaft,  not  only  continue,
but,  pains  afterwards  coming  on,  feem  already  to  degenerate  from  a  fcirrhous.
nature  into  that  of  a  cancer.  Read  thofe  defcrib'd  by  the  moft  excellent
Trew  (z»),  and  you  will  learn  how  he  extirpated  them  radically,  but  without
the  knife,  within  the  period  of  the  revolving  year,  lb  that  not  even  the  leaft
traces  remain'd  behind.  But  there  are  other  tumours  fometimes,  which,  not
only  by  adhering  for  a  long  time,  and  even  for  a  very  long  time,  but  alfo
by  other  marks,  emulate  the  nature  of  a  cancer,  and  yet  are  not  cancers.
To  tumours  of  this  kind  the  following  hiftory  particularly  relates.

41.  There  was  at  Padua  a  nun  who  had  begun,  thirty  years  before,  firfl:
to  labour  under  tubercles  within  one  of  her  breads,  which  lay  at  a  dillance
from  each  other.  Thefe  tubercles,  at  length,  feem'd  to  be  join'd  together
into  one  tumour,  in  the  inferior  part  of  the  breaft;  and  had  fuch  an  inequa-
lity of  furface,  and  excited  fuch  pains,  that  made  it  be  univerfally  confi-
der'd  as  a  cancer.  Laft  of  all,  the  pains  being  greatly  encreas'd,  the  tumour
open'd  of  itfelf.  Then  from  the  manner  of  its  opening  itfelf,  from  the  na-
ture of  the  matter  difcharg'd,  and  from  the  other  appearances,  an  inge-
nious and  Ikilful  furgeon  judg'd  it  not  to  be  a  cancer,  and  undertook  to
cure  it.

However,  the  cure  never  proceeded  according  to  his  wifli,  or  expeftation,,
till  about  the  end  of  the  year  1739  '  when  he  extradled  from  the  tumour  a
tuberous  body,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  walnut,  which  he  brought  to  me.  This
body  confifted  of  many  little  pieces  of  bone,  fome  larger,  fome  fmaller,  dif-
pos'd  in  no  certain  or  regular  order,  as  I  have  feen  them  in  the  cafes  of
frafture.  Betwixt  the  pieces  was  interpos'd  a  fubftance  almoft  fimilar  to  a
ligament.  This  fubftance,  when  dried,  grew  black  :  but  the  bony  fragments
■  ihow'd  their  whitenefs.  The  breaft  was  therefore  heal'd- up :  and  although.
the  exulceration  return'd,  the  virgin  did  not  die  thereof,  but  of  quite  another
difeafe,  and  at  the  end  of  three  years  after  the  extraftion  of  that  bony:
body.

42.  I  fuppos'd  this  body  to  hai^e  had  its  origin  from  the  coats  of  the
veffels  which  are  given  to  the  breaft  for  the  fake  of  the  milk,  or  of  the
blood,  or  from  other  membranes  that  had  become  bony.  And  from  thence,,
probably,  another  (which  I  found,  when  a  young  man,  in  the  fame  bitch  in
both  of  whofe  kidneys,  as  is  already  written  to  you  {n),  I  faw  calculi)  had
likewife  its  origin.  Nor  will  it  be  foreign  to  our  purpofe  to  produce,  on;
this  occafion,  obfervations  made  upon  brute  animals ;  fince  into  this  very
fecond  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (0)  is  transferr'd  an  account  of  tumours,^
which  were  found  in  a  calf  and  a  dog.

43.  A  bitch  had  one  of  her  dugs,  among  the  reft,  more  tumid  than  it
ought  to  be.  This  bitch  being  kill'd,  I  diftedled  her  through  curiofity ;  and
under  the  very  teat  I  found  a  fmall  roundifh  body,  unequal  in  its  figure^
made  up  of  many  little  bodies,  and  of  more  than  a  cartilaginous  hardnefs^

(m]  Commerc.  Litten  A.  3742.  Hebd.  52. (»)  Epift.  42.  n.  17.
^-  2'  (e)  1.  4,  Obr,  4,  §.  3 ,  &  in  Additam.  Obf.  1 2;


64 Book  IV.  Of  Cliirurgical  and  Unlverfal  Diforders.

But  a  matter  of  a  yellow  colour,  degenerating  into  lividnefs,  with  which
two  tubercles,  of  the  foim  and  magnitude  of  a  pretty  large  lentil,  that  pro-
tuberated  into  the  cavity  of  the  Itomach,  v/ere  full,  eafily  yielded  to  the
prefllire  of  the  fingers.  The  cyfts  of  thtfe  tubercles  were  betwixt  the  flefhy
and  internal  coat.  And  under  the  external  membrane  of  the  lungs  I  ob-
ferv'd,  in  a  eertain  place,  fome  granules,  as  it  were,  of  a  kind  of  tartareous,
matter ;  which  lay  at  a  diftance  from  each  other,  in  feveral  parts.  And
why  thefe  things  ought  not  to  be  omitted  here,  I  {hall  immediately  fay.

44.  For  as,  in  the  fame  bitch,  I  found  calculi  in  both  kidnies  •,  befides  a
very  confiderable  dilorder  in  one  of  them,  which  I  juft  now  put  you  in  mind
of;  I  did  not  think  it  proper  to  conceal  the  matter  in  the  lungs,  which  was
already  of  a  tartareous  nature  •,  and  that  in  the  ftomach  likewile,  which  would
perhaps  have  been  of  the  fame  kind  :  fo  that  if  you  fhould  be  difpofed  to
fufpedi,  that  the  body  which  lay  under  the  teat  was  of  the  fame  matter,  in
confequence  of  its  abounding  fo  much  in  the  body,  rather  than  of  a  bony
nature,  you  are  at  liberty  for  me  to  fufpeft  it :  ahhough  neither  in  the  bitch,
nor  in  that  nun  {p),  did  it  feem  to  me  to  be  tartareous  ;  and  there  is  extant
in  the  Sepulchretum  (j),  an  example  of  another  nun,  in  whom  the  breafts,
as  far  as  appear'd  from  one  of  them,  were  found  to  be  "  univerfally  bony,'*
the  fkin  only  excepted.

Yet,  as  it  is  controverted  even  in  refpeft  to  the  arteries  themfelves,  as  I  have
taken  notice  to  you  in  former  letters  {r),  whether  that  which  feems  to  be
bony,  be  really  bony,  or  only  tartareous ;  and  as,  in  the  cafes  in  queftion,
fuch  examinations  were  not  made  as  are  fufficient  to  (how  clearly  of  what
nature  the  concretions  in  thofe  tumours  were ;  I  will  fo  much  the  more  readily
leave  it  undetermin'd  ;  becaufe  tartareous,  or  ftony  concretions,  or,  as  Cel-
fus  {s)  fays,  "  certain  bodies  fimilar  to  ftones,"  are  fometim.es  found  in  other
tumours  ;  as  he  himfelf  teaches  us,  and  as  the  Sepulchretum  in  this  fe6lion
ihows  (/) ;  but  particularly  in  tumours  of  the  breafts  :  fo  that  in  a  widow,  of
■whom  the  celebrated  Baffius  («)  gives  the  hiftory,  the  bodies  contain'd  in
thefe  parts,  "  by  their  mutual  attrition  and  collifion  againft  each  other,  gave
forth  a  '■'■  found  like  little  ftones ;"  and  I  myfelf  have  feen  in  a  man,  a  mat-
ter fimilar  to  indurated  lime.

For  the  breafts  of  males  fometimes  grow  out  into  tumours  alfo,  as  well  as
thofe  of  women  %  one  of  which  I  have  read  the  defcription  of  by  Bidloo  (x) ;
and  Heifter  (jy),  who  quotes  Bidloo,  afferts  that  he  alfo  had  made  a  fimilar
obfervation  •,  and  the  celebrated  Jo.  Mart.  Wolffius  (z)  has  added  another ;
and  I  oncefaw  the  beginning  of  this  diforder  in  a  goldfmith,  to  whom  nothing
was  of  lb  much  fervice  as  keeping  the  arm  on  that  fide  quiet  for  a  long  time
together,  in  the  manner  prefcrib'd  by  me :  and  I  again  law  it  in  a  perfed
.ftate,  but  containing  the  fame  kind  of  matter  which  I  Ipokeof  juft  now:  and
■in  this  manner  did  the  cafe  appear.


s


(;■)  fupra,  n.  41.  («)  Dec.  2.  Obf.  6.

[q)  1.  3.  S.  21.  in  Additam.  Obf.  61.  (x)  Dec.  2.  Exercit.  Anat  Chir.  5.

{r)  Epift.  27.  n.  zo.  &  feqq.  (j)  Jnflit.  Chir.  P.  i.  1.  4.  c.  17.  n.  3.

.-{.')  De  Medic.  1.  7.  c.  6.  {«.)  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  174.Z.  Hebd.  44.

,(0  Obf.  15.  §.  4.  &  Obf.  17.  §.  I.  n.,2.

4  AS- A


Letter  L. Articles  45*,  4<5.  6s

45.  A  noble  and  learned  man,  the  fon  of  that  matron  whofe  difeafes  and
difleftion  I  defcrib'd  to  you,  when  I  treated  of  vomiting  (a),  being  in  his
thirty-firft  year,  had  a  very  fmall  gland,  as  it  were,  begin  to  be  prominent
in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  breaft.  This  gland,  increafing  gradually,
within  about  a  year  grew  out  into  a  tumour  of  the  bignefs  of  a  fift,  and
very  hard,  but  wanting  all  the  peculiar  marks  of  a  deprav'd  nature.

This  tumour,  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  174?.,  and  in  the  fourteenth
month  from  the  time  of  its  beginning,  fpontaneoufly  open'd  itfelf ;  and
fhow'd  within  the  cortex,  or  fhell,  that  was  made  up  of  the  integuments,
and  flefhy  fibres,  nothing  but  a  matter  which,  in  Tome  places,  refembled
a  hard  calcareous  concretion,  and  in  others,  a  fofter  concretion  of  the
fame  kind.

46.  I  then  even  faw  and  touch'd  this  matter,  as  it  lay  within  the  gaping
tumour,  being  call'd  into  confultacion  upon  the  cafe,  together  with  Ibme
other  profeflbrs  of  the  college.

As  his  father  and  grand-father  had  been  greatly  fubjeft  to  the  gout,  but
this  patient  never,  except  that  fometimes  he  had  juft  obferv'd  a  Qight  and
fliort  pain  in  the  great  toe  of  one  foot ;  it  feem'd  reafonable  to  all  of  us  to
fuppole,  that  the  tartareous  matter,  which  in  them  had  fall'n  upon  the  mu-
cilaginous glands  of  the  joints,  had,  in  this  gentleman,  fall'n  upon  the
mammary  glands  •,  perhaps  becaufe  the  other  parts,  being  very  firm,  had
given  too  great  refiftance  ;  and  this  the  more  eafily,  as  I  obferv'd  the  fter-
num,  when  it  had  fcarcely  meafur'd  a  third  of  its  length  from  the  upper  part,
to  fubfide  fuddenly,  and  in  a  great  degree  -,  for  which  reafon  I  conjeftur'd
that,  in  confequence  of  the  mammary  veflels  being  infledted  in  an  angle  here,
at  the  fides  of  the  fternum,  the  motion  of  the  blood  through  the  breafts  was
become  very  flow.

But  this  opinion,  in  regard  to  the  gouty  matter  of  that  tumour  (which
was  fo  much  the  ifiore  probable,  becaufe  Preufljus  (i^)  had  feen  a  gouty
matter  "  in  the  form  of  a  calx,"  which  could  no  longer  be  depofited  in  the
extreme  joints  of  the  limbs,  come  out  through  an  ulcer  of  the  breaft)  made
moft  of  us  very  cautious  in  giving  our  opinion  -,  as  we  fear'd,  for  inftance,  left
■when  the  tumour  was  cut  out,  and  the  feat  of  it  heal'd  up,  the  matter  fliould
perhaps  turn  itfelf  to  other  and  more  noble  parts ;  fince  the  obfervation  of
Albertini  (c)  had  alfo  lately  fliown,  how  many  tumults  had  been  excited  in
the  conftitution,  and  efpecially  in  the  belly,  by  the  repulfion  of  the  gouty
Blatter  from  the  lower  limbs  ;  which  were  ftrengthen'd  by  anointing  them
with  the  Okum  Petrolei,  till  it  was,  at  length,  difcharg'd  by  the  way  of  the
inteftines,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  it  was  furprizing  "  what,  and  how  many,
"  concretions,  made  up  of  lime,  or  of  gypfum  lately  cemented,  and  nearly
"  fimilar  to  the  matter  from  whence  the  gout  is  produc'd,"  were  difcharg'd
that  way.

Since,  therefore,  for  thefe  I'eafons,  the  advice  of  thofe  who  were  for  wait-
ing did  not  at  firft  difpleale,  and  the  matter  was  gradually  taken  away  from
the  tumour  j  behold  a  new  fever  came  on;  and to  that  matter  which  re-

{a)  Epift.  30.  n.  7.  (f)  Comment.  deBonon.  Sc.  Acad.  Tom.  i.

{b)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  3.  Obf.  17.  in  Opufc.  ubi  de  Cortice  Peruv.

Vol.  hi.  K  main'd.


66 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Dlforders.

main'd,  a  new  matter  of  the  fame  kind  was,  in  fa£V,  added.  After  this,  how-
ever, the  patient  being  quite  wearied  out  with  waiting,  committed  himfelf  to
the  care  of  a  refolute  furgeon  ;  by  whom,  as  the  patient  himfelf  earneftly
defir'd,  the  tumour  being  entirely  cut  out,  and  the  wound  brought  to  a  ci-
catrix without  any  difficulty,  he  fo  far  recover'd  as  to  be  feiz'd  with  no  dif-
order  afterwards  that  I  know  of:  fo  fuccefsful,  fometimes,  in  medicine  is
an  unreafonable  boldncls.

47.  To  what  kind  of  tumours  thofe  parts  of  the  breads  which  were  harder
than  natural,  and  which,  though  a  brown,  green,  and  black  humour  was
exprefs'd,  I  found  to  be  pretty  found  to  appearance,  in  that  difleftion  which
was  dcfcrib'd  to  you  in  the  twenty-firft  letter,  under  number  forty  feven ;  I
fay,  to  what  kind  of  tumours  theie  belong'd,  or  rarher  would  have  belong'd,
if  the  woman  had  liv'd  for  a  confiderable  time  longer,  I  cannot  eafily "de-
termine,

For  although  you  might  then  refer  thofe  tumours  only  to  that  humour  which
diftended  the  laftiferous  veffels,  yet  who  can  for  a  certainty  affirm,  that  a  hu-
mour fo  very  preternatural  and  deprav'd  would  not  have  produc'd  fome  tu-
mours of  a  very  bad  nature,  by  its  long  confinement  there  ?  Indeed,  I  have
read  of  women  that  were  feen  by  Riverius  ((^"),  and  by  Lanzonus  (d'),  from
whole  breads  a  green  milk  was  difcharg'd ;  and  two  are  fpoken  of  in  the
Ephancrides  Nature  Curufcrum  (/),  and  in  the  Cotmurcium  Lttteranum{g),
one  of  which  had  black  and  very  acid  milk  ;  and  the  other,  as  often  as  flae
pleas'd,  couid  prefs  cut  of  both  breafts  "  a  kind  of  very  thick  fluid,  of  a
"  colour  extremely  black;"  and  this  being  receiv'd  upon  linnen  rags,  within
twenty-four  hours  "  becatiie  green  like  verdigreafe,  and  at  the  fanie  time
"  feemingly  put  on  a  corrofive  nature."

But  although  I  fee  that  moft  of  thefe  women  were  not  at  a^l  healthy,  yet
I  do  not  know  what  was  the  end  of  any  one  of  them  ;  and  whether  the  breafts
in  particular,  if  either  the  milk  did  not  flow  out,  or  what  remain'd  of  this
kind  of  humour  was  not  prefs'd  out,  were  feiz'd  with  any  pain,  or,  finally,
with  any  tumour  of  a  malignant  nature.

You  perceive  that  at  prefent  I  fpeak  of  the  cancer,  a  tumour  which  is  fo
often  form'd,  and  efpecially  in  the  breafts,  and  which  is  a  cafe  the  malignity
whereof  is  as  evident  as  the  cure  is  difficult :  fo  that  Johannes  Bapt.  Cor-
tefius  (*),  when  he  wanted  to  fliow  "  how  far  it  does  not  always  follow,  that
"  a  difeafe  which  is  known  may  be  immediately  cur'd  ;"  and  this  "  chiefly  on
"  account  of  its  malignity  ;"  has,  with  great  propriety,  made  ufe  of  the
cancer  in  particular,  as  an  example,  "  which,  although  it  be  known  by  all,
"  is,  neverthelefs,  feldom  cur'd  by  any."

Indeed,  it  does  but  rarely  happen  that  the  cure  is  in  every  refpe£t  happy.
And  I  have  very  often  feen  thofe  confequences  which  Celfus  {h)  has  foretold  ;
that  whether  it  be  cut  out  by  the  moft  experienc'd  and  fkilful  furgeons,  "  it
."  has,  neverthelefs,  return'd  after  the  wound  was  cicatriz'd,"  in  the  fame  or
fome  other  place  ;  or  any  other  perfcns "  have  made  ufe  of  cauftic  applir

(<^)  Cent.  2.  Obf.  Medic.  100.  {g)  A.  1734.  Hebd.  i.  n.  I.

(f)  Aniraadverf.  var.  ad  Medic.  &csEt."i25.  (*)  Mifcell.  Medic.  Epift.  6,

(/)  Dec.  2.  A.  4  Append,  n.  5.  XLIU.  {h)  De  Medic.  L.  5.  c.  28.

. *'  cations '*


Letter  L. Article  48.  67

«  cations,"  and  put  the  poor  women  to  the  moft  fevere  torture  for  a  long  time
cogether,  tbac  the  event  of  thefe  cafes  has  been  vvorfe,  or,  at  leaft,  not
better.

For  there  was,  even  amongfl:  us,  before  the  volume  of  the  Memoirs  of  the
Royal  Society  at  Paris,  for  the  year  1739,  came  out,  a  perfon  who,  by  the.
application  of  a  cauftic  herb,  was  faid  to  deikoy  cancers  radically.  But
whether  this  was  thtdentellcria  of  Rondeletius,  as  we  conje£tur'd  from  fome '
marks  •,  for  the  perfon  himfelf  conceal'd  it  as  much  as  he  poffibly  could  ;  or
whether  it  was  any  other,  the  man  at  firft  got  himfelf  a  great  reputation,  as
is  frequently  the  cafe ;  but  the  fuccefs  of  his  cures  not  correfponding  to  his
fame, he  was  foon  after  deferted.

Whether  it  has  coniinu'd  to  anfwer  among  the  inhabitants  of  Montpelier,
I  am  ignorant :  among  us,  at  leaft,  phyficians  and  furgeons  are  more  con -
firm'd  in  their  opinion  of  preferring  excifion  by  the  knife,  when  they  are  at
length  overcome  by  the  entreaties  of  the  patients  (who  do  not  at  all  con-
fider  thofe  things  that  have  been  laid  above  {i)  )  and  compell'd  to  undertake
the  cure  ;  fince,  if  this  method  be  not  attended  with  a  lefs  fevere  pain,  that
pain  is  at  leaft  fnortcr  in  its  continuance  :  lb  that  by  this  means  the  prolonging
of  life,  at  leaft,  if  not  life  itfclf,  cofts  the  patients  lefs,  although  the  cancer
fhculd  return  afterwards  ;  and  they  are  free,  in  the  mean  while,  from  the
continual  and  excruciating  tortures  of  a  very  filthy  difeafe.

But  1  forbear  to  fay  at  prefent,  how  many,  and  what  circumftances  are  re-
quir'd  in  patients,  in  order  to  give  us  reafonable  hopes  that  their  life  may  be
prolong'd.  Some  of  thefe  requifites,  and,  in  like  manner,  many  circum-
ftances diametrically  oppofite  thereto,  you  will  colleft  from  an  obfervation
which  I  fnall  give  you  here  in  particular,  though  1  might  have  given  it  on
other  occafions.  For  from  the  fame  obfervation  you  will  fee  what  was  the
ftrudture  of  a  fcirrhus  degenerating  into  a  cancer;  and  will,  at  the  fame  time,
fee  it  confirm'd,  "  that  a  contulion,  which  would  be  of  no  importance  in
"the  fkin,"  may,  to  ufe  the  words  of  Bcerhaave  (^),  "  produce  the  worft  of
"  fcirrhi  in  a  conglomerated  gland  ;"  and,  in  like  manner,  "  that  a  cancer  is
"  with  great  difficulty  cur'd  in  a  melancholic  woman."

For  there  are,  even  among  us,  fome  women  of  this  temperament ;  but  they
are  not  all  fo  :  nor  can  I  conceive  who  could  impofe  upon  that  great  man  in
fuch  a  manner  as  to  alTert  (/),  "  that  the  Italians,  to  the  eighteenth  year  of
"  their  lives,  were  lively  and  playful ;  but  that  after  the  thirtieth  year  they
"  all  became  fad,  morofe,  melancholy,  and  afflicted  with  the  piles."  How-
ever, this  obfervation  was  communicated  to  me,  fome  years  ago,  by  that
learned  and  refpectable  man  Jo.  Bapt,  Charburi,  formerly  my  much-efteem'd
auditor,  but  now  firft  regius  profeflbr  of  the  pradice  of  medicine  at  Turi.T.

48.  A  ruftic  wornan,  about  fifty  years  of  age,  happen'd  to  have  a  blow
upon  her  left  breaft  :  and  therein,  after  near  a  month,  a  tumour  difcover'd
itielf,  which  they  in  vain  hop'd  to  have  diflolv'd  by  fomentations,  or  pre-
vented from  growing  larger  by  the  comprefiion  of  a  hollow  plate  of  lead.
For  it  increas'd  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  within  the  fevfnth  month  after  receiving

(0  N.  16.  [k)  Prsclea.  in  Inllit.  §  903.  (/)  Ibid,  ad  §  S97.

K  2  the


^8 Book  IV.  0£  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  blow,  from  the  upp?r,  and  at  the  fame  time  from  the  external  part  of
the  breaft,  where  it  was  much  thicker,  harder,  and  of  a  more  irregular  figure,
it  nov/  defcended  below  the  areola  :  the  nipple  of  which  lay  hid,  ahnoft  uni-
verfally,  among  ibme  tranfverfe  rug^.

Under  the  neighbouring  axilla,  odier  rugae,  fimilar  to  thefe,  were  obferv'd  :
there  was  a  pain  at  the  axilla,  when  the  Ihoulder  was  lifted  up  ;  and  the
whole  of  that  limb  was  afiefted  with  an  oedemacous  tumour.  Which  cir-
cumftances,  and,  befides  thtfe,  the  aduft  and  melancholic  temperature  of  the
woman,  were  immediately  repugnant  to  the  opinion  of  thofe  who  propos'd
the  excifion  of  the  tumour.  On  the  contrary,  the  robuft  body  of  the  woman,
and  her  intrepid  mind,  which  was  prepar'd  to  undergo  the  operation,  were
favourable  to  their  propofal ;  which  was,  moreover,  urg'd  by  other  things,
but  in  particular  by  this,  that  the  pungent  pains,  which  increas'd  upon  the
patient  in  proportion  as  the  tumour  had  increas'd,  were  nosv  become  ex-
tremely more  violent,  and  were  attended  with  almoft  continual  watchings.

The  excifioft  of  the  tumour  was,  therefore,  undertaken ;  and  what  ap-
pearances this  had  internally,  will  be  faid  below.  The  operation  feem'd  to
have  been  perform'd  fuccefsfully,  and  according  to  the  opinion  of  thofe  who
propos'd  it,  till  the  feventh  day,  at  which  time  the  wound  was  always  of  a
lively  colour,  and  foft.  But  after  this  time  it  was  feiz'd  with  an  inflammation
and  corruption,  which  not  only  confum'd  all  the  cellular  part  of  the  bread
that  remain'd,  but  that  part  of  the  pedoral  mufcle,  alfo,  which  lay  beneath
the  breaft,  and  that  part  both  of  the  external  and  internal  intercoftals  which
was  oppofite  thereto  ;  fo  that  the  pleura  appear'd  to  be  naked,  betwixt  the
ribs,  in  that  part,  to  the  extent  of  about  five  inches,  that  is,  from  the  fter-
num  tranfverfely.

However,  the  ulcer  was  at  length  cleans'd,  and  for  five  days  was  foft ;  at
■which  time  there  was  a  laudable  pus  ;  and  the  pulfe  was  not  quick,  except'in
the  evening,  and  this  only  for  a  few  hours ;  all  the  other  circumftances  being
nearly  in  their  natural  ftare,  if  you  except  an  obftinate  coftivenefs  of  the
belly,  which  was  now-and-then  obviated  by  clyfters.

But  after  thofe  days,  every  thing  chang'd  for  the  worfe.  The  ulcer,  m
which  was  feen  the  cartilage  of  the  fourth  rib,  of  a  black  colour,  and  in  a
manner  disjoin'd  from  the  fternum,  grew  dry,  and  difcharg'd  a  fmall  quantity
of  an  ichorous  pus,  which  had  a  very  difagreeable  fmell :  and  the  oedematous
tumour  of  the  neighbouring  limb,  which  had  loft  its  motion,  and  almoft  its
fenfation  likewife,  on  the  firft  days  after  the  excifion,  except  that  both  of
them  continu'd  in  the  hand  neverthclefs,  was  increas'd  :  the  lower  limbs
v;ere  alfo  fwell'd  in  the  fame  manner  :  and,  at  the  fame  time,  the  frequency
of  the  pulfe,  the  thirft,  and  the  watchings,  were  increas'd.  To  thefe  fymp-
toms  were  added  a  diarrhoea,  a  lofs  of  appetite  for  food,  a  decay  of  ftrength,
a  perpetual  lleepinefs,  a  difficult  and  frequent  refpiration.  And,  finally,  the
lalt-mention'd  fymptoms  were  fucceeded  by  four  long  febrile  paroxyfms,
which  were  violent,  and  join'd  with  a  rigor  -,  one  following  the  other  at  the
interval  of  about  ten  hours :  and  by  theie  the  woman  was  carried  off.

The  body  was  every-where  flaccid  and  lax  ^  yet  the  lower  limbs,  even
when  the  integuments  were  cut  into,  had  no  remains  of  the  oedematous
tumour,

J  The


Letter  L. Article  49.  69

The  belly  had  all  the  vifcera  of  its  cavity  in  a  tolerably  found  and  natural
flate,  if  you  except  the  fpleen  being  a  little  larger  than  is  natural,  blacker,
and  more  lax  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  uterus  being  very  hard,-  and
giving  refiftance  to  the  knife.

Both  the  cavities  of  the  thorax  were  almoft  full  of  water,  but  particularly
the  left  :  and  therein  the  lungs,  on  the  fide  which  correfponded  to  the  ulcer,
were  dry,  and  almoft  fcirrhous,  adhering  clofcly  to  the  pleura  in  that  part,
which  adher'd  much  more  clofely  to  the  ribs,  and  was  become  callous,  as  it
were,  in^that  place  where  it  had  been  expos'd  to  the  external  air.  Then
examining  the  heart,  the  cavities  on  the  right  fide  of  which  contain'd  fome-
thing  polypous,  we  return'd  to  the  external  parts  :  and  all  the  axillary  glands
on  the  left  fide  were  found,  not  only  to  be  fomewhat  thicken'd,  but  alfo  to  be
chang'd  into  a  heap  of  fcirrhous  tubercles,  of  a  very  great  firmnefs,  and  a
livid  colour ;  and  this  was  contain'd  in  the  neighbouring  cellular  membrane,
which  was  itfelf,  alfo,  converted  into  a  hard  fteatoma.

And  from  thefe  tumours,  whereby  the  neighbouring  veffels  and  nerves
were  comprefs'd,  was  underftood  the  caufe  both  of  the  imperfedt  paralyfis
and  the  obftinate  oedema  under  which  that  limb  had  labour'd,  and  alfo  of
the  pain  at  the  axilla  when  the  Ihoulder  was  lifted  up  ;  and,  finally,  of  the
imminent  danger  left  another  tumour,  of  a  very  bad  nature,  fhould  grow  out
under  the  axilla  after  the  former  had  been  amputated  from  the  breaft.

This  tumour,  being  examin'd  immediately  after  the  excifion,  and  after  the
fat  which  adher'd  to  it  was  taken  away,  was  found  to  be  of  a  figure  ap-
proaching to  an  oval,  the  larger  axis  of  which  was  equal  to  about  an  inch
and  a  half.  With  this  tumour  were  continu'd  three  or  four  others,  of  dif-
ferent magnitudes,  but  all  fmall.  At  the  center  of  thefe  and  of  the  former,
•blood  which  was  putrid,  and  of  a  pale  colour,  was  found :  and  this
blood  was  furrounded  by  a  matter  of  a  middle  nature  betwixt  puriforni  and
febaceous.  ^

49.  Some  things  which  were  obferv'd  with  accuracy  and  fkiil,  during  the
refpiration  of  the  woman,  in  the  pleura,  in  the  ribs,  and  part  of  the  inter-
coftal  mufcles,  when  thefe  lay  expos'd,  I  have  pafs'd  by,  not  becaufe  thefe
circumftances  were  lefs  worthy  of  notice,  but  becaufe  they  do  not  imme-
diately relate  to  the  intention  of  this  letter.  But  that  hiftory  which  is  de-
fcrib'd  by  Gahrliepius  (?»),  is  one  of  the  firft  that  relates  to  the  fubjeft  of
this  letter,  as  it  has  many  circumftances  which  may  be  compar'd  with  that  I
juft  now  gave  you,  and  this,  moreover,  which  was  found  in  the  difTeftion  of
the  body  ;  I  mean,  that  the  cancer  which  had  been  cut  out  from  one  breaft,
"  had  propagated  its  virus  from  thence  to  the  other  breaft,  alfo,  in  a  tranf-
"  verfe  direction,  over  the  bone  of  the  fternum ;"  and  this  in  a  latent
manner,  fo  that  nobody  fufpefted  it  during  the  life  of  the  woman.

But  now,  as  we  are  haftening  on  to  the  remaining  tumours  both  of  the
thorax  and  the  belly,  that  which  I  faw  in  the  clavicle,  i  think,  may  with  more
propriety  be  deferr'd  till  I  treat  of  exoftofes  below  (;z).  And  as  to  thofe
which  relate  to  aneurifms  of  the  great  artery,  that  raife  up  the  parietes  of

(aij  Eph.  N.C.  Dec.  3.  A.  5,  &  6.  Obf.  163.  (*;  Vid.  n.  58.  ,

the


7  o Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Unlverfal  Diforders.

the  thorax  or  abdomen,  as  they  have  been  already  fufficiently  fpoken  of  (<?)
by  me,  when  I  treated  of  the  internal  difeafes  whereto  they  belong,  I  am  not
at  leifure  here  to  repeat  them,  in  imitation  of  the  Sepulchretum.

And  indeed,  if  by  chance,  as  in  the  living  cook  I  diftinguifli'd  an  aneu-
rifm  of  an  intercoftal  arsery,  from  the  pulfation  being  very  much  produc'd
in  the  longitudinal  diredion  of  the  artery,  and  the  tranfverfe  diredion  of  the
body,  but  never  equalling  the  whole  interval,  which  was  betwixt  the  two
ribs  in  its  latitude ;  fo  1  had  alfo  feen  that  interval  rais'd  up  into  a  tumour  at
length,  as  Lancifi  faw  it(p)  -,  and  in  the  body  after  death,  as  happen'd  three
or  four  times  to  Ruyfch  (q),  had  found  fo  fmall  an  artery  expanded  fo  the
fize  of  a  hen's  egg ;  I  do  not  know  whether  I  fliould  not  have  plac'd  ic
among  the  tumours  of  tlie  thoracic  cavity,  rather  than  among  thefe  I  am
fpeaking  of  now ;  though  it  would  have  been  more  allowable  to  have  done
the  latter,  than,  as  in  the  Sepulchretum,  to  refer  to  this  clafs,  tumours  of
the  vifcera  themfelves,  whereby  the  abdomen  is  forc'd  outwards :  of  which
tumours  (r),  and  of  the  hernis  of  the  abdomen  itfelf  (j),  and  of  the  hydro-
rachitis  aifo(/),  I  have  written  to  you  in  other  letters.

There  are,  however,  now  and  then,  certain  tumours  of  the  abdomen,
which,  although  they  really  belong  to  the  abdomen  itfelf  alone,  feem  to  be-
long to  the  vifcera.  One  of  that  kind  I  faw  in  a  pious  and  learned  prieft,
prominent  in  the  manner  of  a  large  hemifphere.  This  tumour  being  open'd,
and  having  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity  of  matter,  of  a  very  filthy  odour,
was  obferv'd  by  the  furgeon,  upon  introducing  his  probe,  to  penetrate  as  far
inwardly,  as  it  had  protuberated  outwardly  ;  fo  that  it  was  generally  fuppos'd,
without  any  doubt,  to  belong  to  fome  one  of  the  vifcera.  There  was  nor,
however,  any  difcharge  of  matter  which  confirm'd  this  opinion,  nor  were
there  any  marks  of  a  vifcus  being  injur'd ;  and  finally,  the  perfe6t  cure  of
the  patient,  who  liv'd  in  a  very  good  ftate  of  health  many  years  afterwards,
clearly  Ihow'd,  that  what  had  been  colledted  together  in  this  very  large  tu-
mour, had,  in  faft,  forc'd  inwards,  in  an  incurvated  manner,  the  mufcular
parietes  of  the  abdomen,  and  the  peritonseum,  far  into  the  cavity  of  the
abdomen  •,  but  had  not  perforated  them,  nor  yet  brought  about  a  communi-
cation betwixt  the  cavity  of  the  tumour  and  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  and
much  lefs  a  communication  betwixt  the  cavity  of  the  tumour  and  any  of  the
vifcera.

50,  Tumours  of  the  teftes,  and  the  involucra,  wherewith  they  are  fur-
rounded,  of  which  I  can  write  fomewhat  more,  you  remember  have  been
treated  of  by  me  in  a  former  letter  (u).

But  as  to  thofe  that  relate  to  the  penis,  anus,  and  the  genital  parts  of  wo-
men, although  I  have  feen  many  of  them,  yet  as  1  never  had  any  opportu-
nity of  diflefting  them,  there  is  fcarcely  any  thing  for  me  to  hint  at.  I  was
prefent  when  Valfalva  amputated  a  cancerous  tumour  into  which  the  glans,
and  a  very  large  part  of  the  penis  adjoining,  had  grown  out. The  two  cir-

(0)  Epift.  26.  n.  19.  &  Epift.  40.  n.  26.  (j)  Thef.  Anat.  g.  n.  5.

(p)  De  Aneuryfm.  1.  2.  c.  2.  Pxopof.  28.  cu-  (r)  Epift.  36.  &  39,

j.is,  &  prKcedentis  titulo  ne  fallaris, faciet  (j)  Epift.  34.

i'ropcf.  25.  (/)  Epift. 13.  (»)  43.

cumftances


Letter  L. Article  50.  71

cumftances  which  he  was  afraid  might  happen,  did  neither  of  them  happen.
One  waSj  left  the  very  fmall  part  of  the  penis  which  was  to  remain  behind,
fhoLild  happea  to.be  immediately  drawn  inwards.  And  the  other  was,  left,
though  the  penis  Ihould  remain  in  its  ufual  fituation,  the  arteries  Ihould  be
drawn  inwards  neverthelefs.  And  as  he  intended,  which  he  really  did,  to
tie  thefe  up  by  paffing  a  needle  and  thread  round  them ;  this  operation
would  have  become  extremely  difficult  by  either  of  thefe  circumftances  hap-
pening.

Againft  the  firft-mention'd  accident  he  had  before  provided  :  and  if  the
fecond  had  happen'd,  he  then  would  have  been  oblig'd  to  do  what  he  was
very  unwilling  to  do.  For  he  always  ftudied  to  diminifh,  as  much  as  was
in  his  power,  the  painful  tortures  of  thofe  whom  he  cur'd  by  the  knife.
For  which  reafon  he  was  not  willing  to  mak?  ufe  of  fire  in  this  cafe,  as  Scul-
tetus  did  {x),  or  leave  any  of  the  difeas'dpart  behind,  as  the  fame  author  did;
nor  yet  apply  a  tight  ligature  round  the  penis,  and  above  the  difeas'd  part,
in  fuch  a  manner,  that  whatever  was  below  the  ligature  might  die  in  a  Ihorc
time :  for  how  much  pain  is  brought  on  in  this  cafe,  by  fuch  a  conftriftion,
the  thirtieth  obfervation  of  Ruyfch  (y)  fufficiently  fhows.

Yet  I  would  not  have  you  believe,  for  this  reafon,  that  other  very  expe-
rienc'd  furgeons,  among  whom  are  Heifter  (z)  and  Benevoli  (a),  have  pre-
ferr'd  this  method  of  conftritlion  without  very  good  reafons.  For  although
Valfalva  perfeftly  cur'd  this  patient  of  his  -,  yet  there  was  fome  danger  on
one  of  the  firft  nights,  by  reafon  of  the  blood's  beginning  to  open  itfelf  a
paflfage,  if  an  attendant  who,  according  to  Valfalva's  order,  lay  juft  at  hand,
.had  not  very  fpeedily  prevented  it  in  the  manner  that  had  been  previoufly
fliown  him. This  patient  was  of  an  advanc'd  age.

Another  patient  was  of  an  advanc'd  age  alfo,  from  whofe  anus  an  excref-
cence,  of  a  very  bad  kind,  and  fimllar  to  a  kidney,  both  in  fizc  and  (hape,
hung  down  by  two'^eprefs'd  peduncles.  This  excrefcence  being  taken  off
by  another  fenior  furgeon,  when  I  was  a  young  man,  and  look'd  on,  by  draw-
ing it  down,  and  cutting  the  peduncles  acrofs  ;  and  the  lower  part  of  the  in-
teftine,  from  whence  they  had  grown  out,  having  immediately  drawn  itfelf
upwards,  and  conceal'd  itftlf  both  from  his  hands  arid  eyes ;  I  at  firft  faw
that  the  man  was  confus'd,  as  he  had  expefted  no  fuch  thing,  although  none
had  had  greater  experience  than  he,  and  he  was  really  eminent  in  his  art ;
yet  foon  after,  as  no  great  quantity  of  blood  was  difcharg'd,  his  courage  be-
ing reviv'd,  he  inferted  a  middle-fiz'd  tent,  daub'd  over  with  the  white  of  aa
egg,  and  fprinkl'd  with  powders  that  have  a  ftrong  aftringent  virtue,  and  de-
parted from  the  patient.

But  fcarcely  had  a  quarter  of  an  hour  pafs'd,  before  blood  began  to  be
.  difcharg'd  in  a  confiderable  quantity  ;  and  what  ftiow'd  that  it  had  been  dif-
charg'd into  the  cavity  of  the  inteftines,  in  a  much  greater  quantity,  the  pa-
tient began  to  beg  that  the  tent  might  be  taken  away,  becaufe  he  could  no
longer  rcfift  the  vehement  defire  he  had  of  going  to  ftool ;  and  his  pulfe  had
funk  in  a  very  great  degree. The  furgeon  being  calt'd  again  took  away  the

(x)  Obf.  Chir.  60.  (z)  Inftit.  Chirurg.  P.  2,  S.  5.  c.  132^

(jj  Cent,  Obf.  Anat.  Chirurg.  {a)  Offerv.  27.

4  tent,.


^  4 Book  IV. Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

tent,  and  this  was  foUow'd  by  very  large  pieces  of  coagulated  blood.  Then
the  furgeon,  introducing  his  finger,  comprefs'd  the  wound  thereby,  for  a
confiderable  time  ;  nor  did  he  remove  ir,  till  a  tent  was  prepar'd  to  be  in-
ferted,  daub'd  and  fprinkl'd  over  with  the  fame  medicines  as  the  former,  but
much  thicker,  which  ought  to  fi&ve  been  attended  to  at  firft :  and  by  this
means  the  blood  was  at  length,  with  much  difficulty,  check'd.

Yet  thefe  things  I  have  taken  notice  of  for  no  other  reafon,  but  that  you
might  underftand  what  was  the  opinion  of  Valfalva,  in  regard  to  the  method
of  amputating  the  penis,  at  that  time  fo  much  controverted  -,  and,  in  like
manner,  that  every  thing  which  may  happen  during  an  operation,  is  to  be
well  conflder'd  and  provided  for,  even  by  the  oldeft  and  mod  experienc'd
furo-eons.  However,  in  regard  to  the  firft  method  of  cure,  I  would  have
yoi°read  Benivenius  (Z-)  among  the  ancient  authors  :  and  as  to  the  fecond,
Heifter  among  the  more  modern  authors  (c) ;  for  you  will  fiind  in  both  an
example  of  a  fuccefsful  cure.

In  regard  to  condylomata  of  the  vagina  in  women,  there  may  not  only
be  many  caufes  thereof,  but  I  fufpeft  that  one  of  them  is  Ibmetimes  fuch  a
caufe  as  exifts  from  the  original  formation  ;  and  of  what  kind  this  is  will  ap-
pear from  the  following  obiervation.

51.  A  young  virgin,  of  fifteen  years  of  age,  having  been,  for  a  long  time,
in  a  cachedic  habit  of  body,  was  as  length  feiz'd  with  a  very  violent  dilbr-
der,  and  pafs'd  the  latter  days  of  this  diforder,  and  of  her  life,  in  the  hofpi-
tal  at  Padua,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as,  to  all  appearance,  to  die  of  an  inflam-
mation of  the  lungs,  which  happen'd  about  the  end  of  the  year  lyso.^

When  the  thorax  was  open'd,  a  dropfy  of  that  cavity  appear'd ;  and  in  the
lungs  was  fcarcely  any  appearance  that  argu'd  a  flight  inflammation  thereof.

The  genitals  were  the  principal  parts  which  were  taken  away  from  the
belly.  And  though  in  demonftrating  the  ftrufture  of  thefe  parts,  I  found
it,  in  almoft  all  of  them,  to  be  nearly  natural ;  yet  thefe  few  things,  which
were  preternatural,  I  did  obferve.  At  the  foliated  extremity  of  one  of  the
Falloppian  Tubes  was  an  hydatid.  From  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  a  fmall
reddifli  body  was  prominent;  and  this,  when  cut  into  longitudinally,  I  per-
ceiv'd  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  the  internal  coat  of  that  meatus,  which  being
univerfally  black  above,  from  the  fubjefled  vefl:els  being  diftended  with  blood,
had  inverted  itfelf  outwards  at  the  lower  parr,  and  become  protuberant :
and  this  I  remember  alio  to  have  feen  in  another  woman,  of  whom  I  fhall
write  (J),  when  I  treat  of  lamenefs ;  and  I  remember  to  have  taken  notice  of
both,  when  on  the  fubjeft  of  difficulty  of  urine  (f),  and  to  have  enquir'd  into
the  caufe  of  that  little  diforder.

The  vagina  being  open'd  at  length,  and  being  found  to  be  fmear'd  over
with  a  whitifli  and  thickifli  humour,  I  met  with  that  appearance  which  gave
occafion  to  my  writing  this  obiervation  in  the  prefent  place.  That  is  to  fay,
near  to  one  fide  of  this  cavity,  at  a  finger's  breadth  above  the  hymen,  the
anterior  and  pofterior  furface  of  the  vagina  were  tied  to  each  other  by  a  kind
of  fhort  band,  of  a  moderate  breadth  and  thicknefs,  made  up  exaftly  of  the

(i)  De  abdir.  morb.  &  fanat.  cauf.  c,  68.  («')  Epift.  56.  n.  21.

{<)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  8.  Obf,  67.  (f)  Epilh  4.2.  n.  42.

fame


Letter  L. Articles  ^2,  53.  73

fame  fubftance  as  the  vagina  itfelf,  and  furnifh'd,  in  the  fame  manner,  with
a  rugous  furface  ;  fo  that  it  was  manifeft  this  connection  had  exifted  from  the
firft  formation,  efpecially  as  no  trace  of  foregoing  erofion  appear'd,  either
above  or  below.  Before  I  cut  this  band  afunder,  the  vagina  was  very  nar-
row on  that  fide  ;  but  when  it  was  divided,  this  cavity  immediately  extended
itfelf  into  a  proper  breadth.

52.  But  if  this  virgin  had  been  married,  you  naturally  conceive  that  this
band  muft  have  been  ruptur'd,  either  by  the  embraces  of  the  hufband,  or
by  the  birch  of  the  foetus,  and  might  afterwards  have  grown  out  into  a  con-
dyloma, by  being  nourifh'd  in  this  very  moill  place.  When  I  differed  this
body,  at  leaft,  it  brought  to  my  mind  the  cafe  of  a  young  married  woman,
from  the  orifice  of  whole  vagina  I  faw  two  condylomata  hang  down,  after
a  very  difficult  birth,  fimilar  to  this  band  if  it  had  been  ruptur'd  in  the
middle,  and  had  grown  out  a  little  after  the  rupture  ;  and  fimilar  even  in  this
circumftance,  that  they  did  not  arife  at  a  larger  interval  above  that  orifice
than  this  band  did.

5^.  Tumours  of  the  limbs  ftill  remain  to  be  fpoken  of.  But  as  almoft
all  thefe  are  nearly  common  to  both  the  upper  and  lower  limbs,  I  choofe
chiefly  to  infifl:  upon  thofe  which  are  feated  upon  the  lower  limbs,  fome  of
a  very  large,  and  fome  of  a  moderate  fize.  That  was  of  a  large  fize  which
diftended  the  thigh  of  a  nobleman  to  fuch  a  degree,  and  in  the  manner  of
an  abfcefs,  that  Valfalva,  who  was  call'd  to  undertake  the  cure,  was  afraid
to  open  it,  in  which  caution  he  was  very  happy  ;  for  in  a  few  days  the  whole
of  it  vanifh'd  away  fpontaneoully,  and  the  patient  recover'd  fo  perfectly,  as
to  live  many  years  afterwards,  in  a  very  good  ftate  of  health  ;  and  afiirm'd
the  fame  frequently  to  the  phyficians  and  furgeons,  from  whom  I  had  this
relation,  and  even  affirm'd  it  himfelf  to  me,  who  was  one  X)f  his  intimate
friends  ;  all  of  us  being  furpriz'd  whither  fo  great  a  quantity  of  matter,  which
evidently  fluftuated  ugjder  their  hands,  had  been  carried,  and  that  without
any  injury.

But  it  was  fuppos'd,  that  Valfalva  had  been  deterr'd  from  opening  a  tu-
mour of  that  kind,  in  the  firft  place,  by  this  confideration,  left  it  fhould  be
as  difficult  to  heal  it  up  as  it  was  eafy  to  open  it ;  and  in  the  fecond  place,
left,  by  reafon  of  the  immoderate  difcharge  of  matter,  the  patient  ftiould
fink,  either  during  the  fpace  of  a  very  long  cure,  or  at  the  very  firft  time  of
incifion  ;  as  if  it  had  not  been  in  his  power,  at  that  time,  only  to  take  away
as  much  as  the  ftrength  of  the  patient  could  bear.

And  upon  my  replying  in  this  manner,  I  remember  that  it  was  aflc'd  of
me,  as  happens  in  private  conferences,  what  was  the  reafon  that,  if  a  fur-
geon  fufi'ers  the  whole  contents  of  a  very  large  tumour  to  be  immediately
difcharg'd,  the  patients  frequently  fall  into  a  fwoon  :  and  1  remember  to  have
anfwer'd,  that  fome  perfons  chofe  to  attribute  this  to  the  blood  fuddenly  rulh-
ing  into  the  veflels  of  that  part,  in  a  very  great  quantity,  in  confequence  of
their  relaxation,  by  the  weight  of  the  incumbent  matter  being  taken  off;  fo
that  the  quantity  which  returns  to  the  heart  is  much  lefs  than  it  ought  to  be.
And  in  this  manner  did  I  anfwer  what  appear'd  to  others  rather  than  to  my-
felf;  firft,  becaufe  in  all  tumours,  there  are  not  large  vefiels  to  be  com-
prefs'd ;  and,  in  the  fecond  place,  becaufe  thofe  nei*ghbouring  veffels  which
Vol.  III.  L  the


7  4 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  uterus  compreffes  when  diftended  with  a  nine  months  foetus,  are  cer-
tainly large,  and  that  comprefiion,  in  a  very  happy  and  quick  birth,  is  taken
away  in  a  point  of  time,  and  yet  faintings  do  not  for  this  reafon  come  on  -,
fo  that  we  are  under  a  neccffity  of  feeking  out  another  way  or  accounting
for  it,  or  at  leall  it  feems  that  fome  other  anfwer  ought  to  be  added  to  the
former.

But  there  are  other  tumours  of  the  limbs,  even  ftill  larger  than  that  I  have
fpoken  of:  which  you  may  in  vain  defire  to  open  -,  for  what  they  contain  is
in  great  part  not  fluid,  nor  can  be  turn'd  into  pus ;  and,  indeed,  frequently
the  ftrufture  of  the  mufclcs  that  are  interpos'd  is  vitiated,  and  chang'd  to  *
furprizing  degree.  You  will  fee  fome  defcrib'd  in  a  diflfertation  (/)  of  Jo.
Henfelerus,  wherein  many  examples  of  tumours  of  the  iame  kind  are  pointed
out  ;  fome  of  which  are  not  fo  recent  but  they  might  have  been  added  to  the
Sepulchretum,  and  be  join'd  to  that  of  Wcdclius  (^),  which  is  omitted  in
this  diffcrtation.

You  will  alfo  read  of  many  in  a  diflertation  that  had  before  come  out,  of
Alexander  Camerarius  (i?),  and  fome  in  a  volume  of  the  Diarhim  Italorum
Litteratorum  {i),  which  had  been  publifh'd  before  either  of  the  other;  for,
even  amongft  us,  thefe  examples  are  not  very  rare,  but  pretty  frequent,  and
furprizing  in  their  nature.  I  myfelf  have  alfo  feen  another  in  this  place,
which  was  large,  although  not  to  be  compar'd,  by  any  means,  with  the  pre-
ceding, wherewith  the  leg  of  a  nobleman  was  exceedingly  diftended.  And
this  I  pronounc'd  it  to  no  purpofe  to  open,  for  the  reafons  jutt  now  given  :
nor  was  I  deceiv'd  in  the  event,  as  the  patient  would  neverthelefs  have  the
tumour  open'd  afterwards.

However,  I  cannot  be  induc'd  to  believe  that  the  arm  of  a  man,  whereof
Sancaflanus  wrote  to  Vallifneri  {k),  was  turgid  with  a  tumour  of  this,  or  of
a  fimilar  kind ;  for  the  primary  furgeon  having  made  an  incifion  into  it,  fo
great  a  quantity  of  blood  burft  forth  therefrom,  that  the  operator  was  ftruck
with  aftoniflimenr,  and  fuppos'd  the  man  to  be  about  to  die  inftantly :  but
the  flux  of  blood  ceafing,  a  ferum  was  difcharg'd  for  many  weeks,  from  the
effedt  of  which  difcharge  the  arm  was  reduc'd  to  its  proper  bulk  ;  and  the
man  was  troubl'd  with  no  inconvenience  of  the  limbs  as  long  as  he  liv'd,
though  he  liv'd  many  years.

This  cafe  rather  brings  to  my  mind  that  which  you  read  in  Xenophon  (/)
and  Plutarch  {m),  of  Agefilaus,  king  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  that,  as  he  was
afcending,  "  blood,  though  from  the  rupture  of  what  vein  is  uncertain,  flow'd
"  down  from  his  body  into  the  found  leg,"  for  he  was  lame  of  the  other;
"  and  when  the  parts  about  the  calf,  and  the  fkin,  were  exceedingly  fwell'd,
"  and  intolerable  pains  came  on,  a  certain  Syracufan  phyfician  open'd  a  vein
"  in  the  leg  near  to  the  ankle  ;  and  when  the  blood  had  once  begun,  it  con-
"  tinu'd  to  flow  night  and  day,  and,  in  ipice  of  all  their  endeavours,  they.
"  could  not  retrain  this  haemorrhage,  till  Agefilaus  at  length  fainted  away,

(f)  Hift.-brachi:  pjstumidi  §  14,  [k]  Opere  Tom.  1.  P.  6.

(g)  Sedl.  hac  z.  Obf.  17.  §  3.  (/)  Rer.  Grsecar.  1.  5.  verfus  fin.
\h)  Hift.  pedis  tumidi. ■  (m)  in  Vita  Agefilai.

{i)  Tom.  29.  art.  4, '

*'  and


Letter  L. Article  54 .  7jr

'<  and  then  the  blood  ceas-'d  to  flow  •/'  fuch'a  ftate  of  health  being  the  con-
fequence  of  it,  as  confin'd  the  king  to  his  bed  the  remaining  part  of  the
fummer  and  the  whole  of  the  winter.  Which  cafe,  though  in  other  refpefts
worthy  of  attention,  I  do  not  remember  whether  any  learned  phyfician  has
confider'd.

It  is  likewife  uncertain  from  what  veflel  the  blood  flow'd,  in  order  to  make
up  two  large  tumours  mention'd  by  Marcus  Aurelius  Severinus('z),  and  the
famous  Albertus  Haller  {0).  The  one,  indeed,  had  diftended  "  the  arm  quite
■"  to  the  upper  part  of  the  fhoulder,  and  to  the  anterior  part  of'  the  thorax
"  which  lies  about  the  arm-pits,"  into  fuch  an  immenfe  bulk  as  the  figure
which  is  added,  and  the  pain  whereof  the  man  died,  mutually  demonftrate.
But  the  other,  having  arifen  "  fuddenly  after  a  very  great  pain,  yielding  to
*'  the  touch  of  the  hand,  and  vanifhing  away  when  comprefs'd,"  extended
itfelf  from  the  fcapula  almoft  to  the  tenth  rib.  As  to  the  firft,  however,  we
could  not  fo  much  as  fuiped  what  it  contain'd,  if  he  had  not  propos'd  it
among  the  number  of  fanguiferous  abfcelTes,  or  "  aneurifms  ;"  as  Severinus
fays  nothing  befides  thofe  words,  and  does  not  feem  to  have  differed  it.  But
the  other  we  know  to  have  been  fill'd  with  blood,  as  the  man  was  kill'd  by
the  difcharge  thereof,  not  many  hours  after  the  incifion  ;  and  a  great  quan-
tity was  found  in  the  tumour,  afterwards,  when  it  was  diflefted.

However,  if  it  could  have  been  added,  in  refpedt  to  both  of  the  tumours,
that  they  had  pulfated  in  the  beginning  at  leaft ;  as  in  regard  to  another  which
contain'd  blood,  and  "  cover'd  the  knee  univerfally,"  and  which  was  fliown
to  Preufius  {p)  at  length,  after  an  interval  of  fome  years,  this  author  has
(lightly  himted  ;  there  would  have  been  lefs  room  for  doubt  left  to  thofe  who
might  have  read  the  remarks  upon  bloody  tumours  communicating  with  the
ruptur'd  trunk  of  fome  vein,  which,  as  is  taken  notice  of  above(j),  are  inferted
in  Valfalva's  treatife  of  the  human  ear,  and  in  the  thirteenth  of  my  EpiJloU
Anatomica.

54.  On  the  contrary,  there  are  tumours  which  we  have  heard  are  eafily
cur'd,  though  in  a  manner  not  readily  to  be  explain'd ;  and  this  is  the  reafon
why  I  do  not  think  they  ought  to  be  pafs'd  by.  A  phyfician  of  Verona,  a
man  of  eminence  and  reputation,  related  to  me,  and  to  fome  learned  friends,
who  happen'd  to  be  with  me  at  Venice  in  the  year  1707,  the  following  hiftory.
When  he  was  in  the  place  of  his  nativity,  and  that  very  lately,  a  horfe  of
great  value  had  both  his  hinder  legs  fwell'd  to  a  very  great  degree,  at  the
knee-joint,  with  a  watry  tumour  -,  but  a  watry  tumour  which  was  hard,  and
attended  with  pain  :  and  when  no  other  remedies  were  of  any  advantage,
that  there  was  a  horfeleach  who  promis'd  to  cure  the  difeafe  in  this  manner ;
that  is,  he  would  open  the  flcin  a  little  above  the  tumour,  and  having  laid
bare  a  vein  of  a  confiderable  fize,  which  is  there,  he  would  tie  it  up  ftrongly
with  two  ligatures,  and  would  cut  it  afunder  betwixt  thefe  two.

This  method  was,  at  firft,  cried  out  againft  by  every  one,  and  efpecially  by
thofe  to  whom  the  circulation  of  the  blood  was  known,  as  one  which  was  fo

(»)  De  recond.  Abfceff.  nat.  1.  4.  in  fine (;))  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  3.  Obf.  ig,
Schol.  ad  c.  7,  (^)  N.  z.

(«)  Opufc.  Pathol.  Obf.  32.  Hift.  2.

L  2  far


7  () Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

far  from  being  likely  to  be  of  utility,  that  it  mufl:  even  be  greatly  hurtful.
However,  as  he  mention'd  that  feveri  or  eight  horfes  had  been  cur'd  by  him
in  this  manner,  and  two  of  them  in  the  lame  city  ;  and  as  it  appear'd,  upon
immediately  making  inquiry  into  the  circumftance,  that  what  he  faid  was
true  ;  he  was  allow'd  to  perform  the  operation,  which  was  done  in  the  manner
I  have  defcrib'd,  and  in  the  prefence  of  the  perlbn  who  related  the  affair  to
me.  The  tumours  then  decreas'd  continually,  even  on  the  firfl:  days  after
the  operation,  till  at  length,  within  about  twenty  days,  they  quite  vanifh'd
away.

And  as  I  happen'd  to  be  making  the  fame  relation  to  fome  others,  among
whom  was  that  very  ingenious  man  Dominic  Gulielmini,  he  chofe  rather  to
fuppofe  it  probable  that  fome  nerve  was  tied  up  together  with  the  vein,  whicli
nerve  went  to  the  difeas'd  part ;  and  that  this  nerve,  therefore,  being  cut
afunder  together  with  the  vein,  the  pain  was  by  that  means  taken  away  ;  as
It  might  be  fuppos'd  not  to  have  its  origin  from  the  tumour,  but  rather  to
have  given  rife  thereto:  wherefore  the  force  of  the  ftimukis,  which,  as  it  had
produc'd,  might  in  the  fame  manner  continue  the  tumour,  being  taken  away,
the  tumour  was  without  difficulty  carried  off.  Be  this  as  it  will,  I  was  de-
termin'd  not  to  conceal  this  cure  from  you  ;  for  it  never  has  doae  any  harm
to  phyficians  to  know  what  fucceeds  with  farriers ;  and  perhaps  many  things
have  been  tried  and  done  by  thefe  men,  as  it  is  allowable  to  make  expe-
riments upon  brute  animals,  before  they  were  transferr'd  to  men.

You  fee,  for  inftance,  that  Petriis  Crefcentius,  who,  when  he  wrote  upon
agriculture,  four  hundred  years  ago,  interfpers'd  fome  things  relating  to  the
chirurgical  part  of  farriery,  has  taught  us  to  take  blood  from  a  difeas'd  ox
by  incifing  the  veins  under  the  tongue  (r)  ;  or  how  to  receive  what  was  to
be  given  by  way  of  clyfter  in  a  kind  of  bag,  the  orifice  of  which  is  furnifh'd
■with  a  tube,  and  to  injed  it  into  the  belly  of  a  horfe  {s) ;  or  in  what  manner,
if  blood  happen  to  burft  forth  from  any  vein  in  cutting  out  a  tumid  gland
from  a  horfe,  this  is  to  be  immediately  ftopp'd  (t),  by.laying  hold  of  the  vein,
and  tying  it  up  tight  with  a  filk  thread.  Do  you  fuppofe  that  he  did  not
take  thole  things  from  more  ancient  authors  ?  and  thefe  from  autliors  iiiU
more  ancient  ?  lb  that  before  Celfus  («)  and  Galen  (x)  taught  how  to  reftrain
the  flux  of  blood,  in  parts  that  are  wounded,  by  throwing  a  ligature  round
the  wounded  artery  or  vein,  this  method  had,  perhaps,  been  made  ufe  of  by
them  while  they  were  extirpating  fome  gland,  or  while  they  were  endeavouring
to  cure  horfes  that  were  wounded  in  battle.

But  whether  this  method  of  flopping  the  blood  has  been  transferr'd  from
other  animals  to  man,  or  was  firil  tried  on  him  ;  I  cannot  help  wondering
that,  as  it  has  been  defcrib'd  in  different  places,  in  the  books  of  furgeons,
iro.m  the  times  of  Galen  ;  and  Benivenius  had  made  ufe  of  it,  among  others,
in  that  cure  of  the  amputated  penis  which  was  referr'd  to  above  (jy),  "  by
"  laying  hold  of  each  of  its  veins  which  pour'd  out  blood,"  that  is  to  fay,
the  arteries,  "  and  by  tying  them  fo  as  to  bring  on  a  coalition  of  their  pre.^

(r)  L.  9.  c.  S^i.  (a)  De  Medic.  1.  i,.  c.  z6.  S,  21.

{s)  Ibid.  c.  18.  (x)  Meth.  Med.  1.  4.  c.  3.

(/}  Ibid.  c.  i6.  CjJ  N.  50..

I  "^  eluded'


Letter  L. Article  5- 5 .  77

««  eluded  orifices;"  I  fay,  I  cannot  help  wondering  that  there  was  nobody
before  Parey  (2),  who  thought  of  transferring  this  to  thofe  wounds  which
are  made  in  the  amputations  of  the  limbs.

But  left  you  (hould  happen  to  believe,  that  they  were  afraid  of  the  thick-
nefs  of  the  arteries  that  are  the  principal  in  the  limbs,  which  bears  no  com-
parifon  with  the  flendernefs  of  the  branches  that  Galen  order'd  to  be  tied ;
at  lead,  that  is  the  principal  trunk  in  the  arm  which  unfliilful  men  often
wound  when  they  think  they  open  only  a  vein,  from  whence  afterwards,  un-
lefs  great  diligence  be  made  ufe  of  to  refifh  the  beginning,  an  aneurifm  arifea.
And  yet  that  this  principal  trunk  was  itfclf  alfo  wont  to  be  tied  up  with  li-
gatures, in  the  chirurgical  cure  of  this  aneurifm,  they  could  not  be  ignorant,
not  only  from  the  writings  of  Aetius  {a},,  Paulus  {i>),  and  Albucafis  (c),  but
even  from  thofe  of  much  later  authors,  as  Guido  de  Cauliaco  {d),  and
others.

However,  I  am  reminded  by  the  mention  of  an  aneurifm  in  the  arm,
which  was  merely  accidental,  rather  to  fubjoin  an  obfervation  of  an  aneurifm
which  was  form'd  in  the  ham  ;  not  only  that  I  may  not  recede  too  far  from
tumours  of  the  lower  limbs,  on  which  1  had  determin'd  chiefly  to  infift  ;  but
alfo  on  account  of  thole  things  which  have  been  laid  above  (e)  of  aneurifms
in  the  ham  ;  a  very  clear  example  whereof,  defcrib'd  by  Hornius  (/),  I  have
in  vain  enquir'd  after  in  the  iiepulchretum.

SS.  A  builder,  or  malbn,  had  a  very  fmall  tumour  begin  to  appear  and
pulfate  in  his  ham.  And  this,  being  negleded,  grew  to  the  bignefs  of  aa
apple.  Then  many  things  being  prefcrib'd  by  the  phyficians  and  iurgeons,
they  were  partly  of  no  ufe,  and  partly  feem'd  rather  to  be  injurious,  and.
particularly  compreffion.  Whertfore,  it  had  fo  increas'd  within  a  very  few
months,  as  to  equal  a  fmall  melon  •,  and  gave  the  patient  the  moft  excru-
ciating pains.  To  thefe  was  added  an  cedematous  tumour  of  the  whole  leg
and  foot,  and  a  tumour  of  the  knee  itfelf  in  particular.  Finally,  a  gangrene,,
and  foon  after  a  fphacelus,  came  on.  And  a  rupture  being  the  confequence
of  this,  as  had  been  predidbed,  a  great  profufion  of  blood  was  brought  on,,
whereby  life  was  immediately  taken  away  ;  and  this  happen'd  about  the  end
of  March,  in  the  year  1740,  at  which  time  I  was  demonftrating  fome  things.
relative  to  the  anatomy  of  the  brain,  to  the  pupils  in  the  hofpital.

In  diJHefting  the  brain  of  this  man,  at  that  time,  likewife,  befides  other
circumftances  which  do  not  relate  to  the  prefent  fubjeft,  I  obferv'd  that,  not-
withftanding  he  had  feem'd  to  die  from  a  great  lofs  of  blood,  bloody  points,.
neverthelefs,  appear'd  in  the  fedions  of  the  medullary  fubftance,  which  even,
became  much  larger  when  I  comprefs'd  them  laterally:  and  1  alfo  obferv'd
what  feem'd  to  deferve  our  attention  and  admiration  ;  I  mean,  that  when  I
cut  the  corpora  ftriata  into  fmall  pieces,  as  I  generally  do,  although  the  fcalpeL
v/as  direded  to  whatever  part  I  pleas'd,  and  inclin'd  in  every  diredion  during.,
the  divifion  of  the  whole  of  thefe  bodies,  Lno-v/here,  however,  law  any  medul-


{z)  L.  II.  c.  24J.

(a)  Tetrab.  4.  Serm.  4.  c.  40.
ti)  De  Re  Med.  1.  6.  c.  37.
^f)  Chirurg.  P.  2.  s,  49,


{J) Chirurg.  Tr.  2.  D.  2.  c.  4.

(e) N.  10,

ffj:  Epiil.  deAneuryfra.  ad  Donztl],


L^'-}^'


7  8 Book  IV.  0£  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

lary  ftrise,  as  I  have  done  always  at  other  times  -,  but  that,  in  place  of  them,  a
kind  of  continu'd  medullary  band,  as  it  were,  fhow'd  irfelf,  which  was  inter-
cepted on  each  fide,  according  to  the  longitudinal  diredion  of  thofe  bodies,  by
the  cortical  fubftance  :  and  yet  it  did  not  appear  that  the  man  had  fuffer'd  any
thing  unufual  in  regard  to  the  ufe  of  his  brain  or  nerves  :  and  this  I  would
have  thofe  gentlemen  confider,  who  are  pleas'd  with  certain  offices  of  thefe
ftriated  bodies  which  were  formerly  affign'd  to  them.

But  let  us  at  prefentomit  thefe  things,  and  go  on  to  the  difieilion  of  the
ham,  which  was  perform'd  by  our  Mediavia.  It  is  true,  a  fphacelus  had  af-
fefted  all  thefe  parts ;  and  yet  not  in  I'uch  a  manner,  but  that  all  the  circum-
ftances  which  I  (hall  mention  appear'd  very  clear.  The  crural  artery  began
to  be  dilated  immediately  upon  its  paffing  from  the  internal  fide  of  the  thigh
to  the  pofterior  part.  Then,  for  the  extent  of  fome  inches,  you  might  have
look'd  for  the  trunk  of  the  artery  in  vain  ;  but  the  branches,  into  which  ic
divides  itfelf,  at  length  appear'd  in  the  calf  of  the  leg.  Yet  in  the  whole
of  this  traft  was  there  nothing  but  a  very  large  cavity  fiU'd  with  ill-con-
dition'd  blood  ;  all  the  parts  being  eroded,  and  even  the  nerve  and  vein
which  are  aflbciated  with  the  artery,  betwixt  the  lower  proceffes  of  the  os
femoris  that  are  prominent  on  the  back  part,  being  fo  far  confum'd,  that
fcarcely  any  thing  remain'd  befide  the  coats  of  the  vein  which  adher'd  to  the
bones.  But  the  bones  themfelves  were  alfo  in  part  eroded  ;  that  is  to  fay,
the  pofterior  furface  of  thofe  procefles  I  have  mention'd,  and  the  upper  part
of  the  fibula.

56.  But  now  let  us  go  on  from  the  tumour  of  the  veflels  to  the  tumour
of  the  bones,  that  is,  to  the  exoftofis ;  and  without  being,  in  this  letter,  at
all  folicitous  with  Schelhammer  (g),  whether  the  exoftofis,  the  farcoma,  the
polypus,  and  other  diforders  of  this  kind,  are  with  juftice  clafs'd  among  tu-
mours ;  nor  yet  with  Bidloo  {h),  whether  in  a  man  who  is  not  "  healthy  in
'"  the  other  parts  of  his  body,"  a  tumour  of  the  bone  may  not  be  call'd  an
€xoftofis  •,  efpecially  as  Gorrasus  {i),  who  is  very  accurate  in  determining  the
proper  fignifications  of  medical  words,  cxprefsly  fays  that  a  polypus  "  is  a
"  tumour,"  and  that  exoftofes  "  are  tumours  frequent  even  to  thofe  who
"  labour  under  the  lues  venerea."

However,  although  I  ftiall  not  controvert  the  point  with  any  one,  and
{hould  chufe  rather  to  comprehend  under  the  name  of  exoftofis,  as  if  under
a  certain  clafs  or  fpecies,  any  tumours  of  the  bones  which  are  preternatural  ;
yet  I  cannot  approve  of  thofe  who,  in  enumerating  the  examples  of  exoftofes,
produce,  among  thefe,  fuch  as  it  is  not  certain  do  belong  to  the  tumours
of  the  bones ;  or,  if  this  be  certain,  do  not  diftinguifli  the  exoftofes  into
different  fpecies,  as  it  were,  with  the  addition  or  junction  of  a  peculiar
name.

It  is  not  certain  and  clear,  that  the  monftrous  arm,  defcrib'd  in  the  fixty-
ninth  obfervation  of  the  fourth  century  of  Hildanus,  does  belong  to  the
.clafs  of  bony  tumours  -,  fo  that  he  himfelf  (/^)  rather  thought  it  ought  to  be

(£)  De  hum.  corp.  Tumor.  S.  i.  n.  3.  (/)  Defin.  Medic,  in  wo^iIots;)  &  in  E'|o'r«<"5.

(4-)  Pec.  2.  Exercit.  Anat.  Chir.  9.  (i)  Hift.  ibid.  cit.  §  4.

reckon'd


Letter  L. Article  57.  79

feckon'd  among  thofe  tumours  which  I  have  taken  notice  of  above  (/),  with
Henfelerus.  Yet  although  Tulpius  (ot)  had  quoted,  in  the  latter  part  of
one  of  his  obfervations,  that  which  I  have  faid  is  extant  in  Hiidanus,  and
had  therein  defcrib'd  the  os  humeri  as  being  in  a  very  bad  ftate,  without  fay-
ing, however,  that  it  was  found  to  be  increas'd  in  bulk;  Stalpart  (w),  in
treating  of  exoftofes,  not  only  takes  notice  of  that  example  of  Hiidanus,  but
even  affirms  that  Tulpius  had  there  defcrib'd  "  an  os  humeri"  which  "  was
*'  much  encreas'd  in  its  bulk  :"  and  this  circumftance  Tulpius  feems  to  hint,
as  if  he  judg'd  from  the  external  appearances,  in  the  beginning  of  a  hiftory,
which  is  likewife  related  in  the  Sepulchretum  (0),  though  not  without  fome
typographical  error  j  but  when  he  comes  to  the  difieftion  he  -by  no  means
confirms  it.

After  thefe,  you  will  fee  that  both  of  the  examples  are,  without  any  fcruple,
related  among  the  number  of  exoftofes,  by  fome  authors,  juft  as  another
from  M.  Aurelius  Severinus  (p)  has  alio  been,  fince  Mery  (q)  quoted  it,  as
fimilar  to  the  exoltoles  of  the  fingers  dcicrib'd  by  him.  But  M.  Aurelius,
though  he  has  really  defcrib'd  and  delineated  a  hand  which  was  not  unlike
thefe  of  Mery  externally,  has,  however,  exprefsly  faid,  "  that  the  matter
'•  which  vvas  found  under  the  difcas'd  part,  when  cut  into,"  was  not  bony  ac
leaft  ;  but  "  that  it  appcar'd  like  the  fubftance  of  the  bulbous  root  of  fow-
"  bread  boil'd  ;  and  thac  it  was  friaole  moreover,  and  yielded  to  the  flighteft-
"  touch :"  fo  that  we  could  pardon,  with  a  better  grace,  him  who  re-
counted among  exoftofes.  a  hand  which,  to  external  appearance,  was  not
very  much  unlike  one,  and  which  was  examin'd  by  Ruyfch  (r),  in  the  be-
ginning of  this  century;  tor  although  it  was  not  poffible  £0  fee  through  the
part,  and  diftinguilli  whether  the  tuberofities,  into  which  it  had  grown  out,,
took  their  origin  from  the  bone  itfelF,  yet  he  found  that  bfie  of  them  was
compounded  of  innumerable  Icflfer  tumours,  as  it  were,  "  partly  cartilagi-
"  nous,  and  partly-olleous."

gy.  But  it  is  hot  even  fufficient  to  comprehend  under  one  name  of  exoflo--
fjs,  except  in  a  general  way,  thofe  tumours  which  it  is  certain  are  real  tu-
mours of  fome  bone,  as  they  greatly  differ  from  each  other.  For  there  are
fome,  in  which  there  feems  to  be  nothing  contrary  to  the  general  tenor  of'
nature,  befides  a  fwelling  or  excrefcence  of  the  bone  ;  fuch  as  Mery  (j)  has
faid  that  the  common  exoftofes  are,  and  fuch  as  Bidloo  (r)  has  fuppos'd  to  be
the  only  ones  that  deferve  the  name  of  exoftotis  ;  requiring  the  bones  to  be
perfeftly  found,  not  only  above  and  below  the  tumour,  but  alfo  that  they
Ihould  be  properly  cover'd  with  the  periofteum,  and  not  fiiow  the  leaft  traces
of  any  inflammation  internally  or  outwardly,  nor  yet  of  acrimony,  putrefac-
tion, or  corruption,  in  the  leaft  degree :  and  this  opinion  has  had  more  than-
one  follower;  and  among. thefe  the  dilciple'of  the  celebrated Kulmus,  in  that

(/)  n.  53.  , (fij  Tie  recond.  Abfceff.  nat.  1.  4.  c. i.

(ffjj  Obf.  Med.  1.  4.  c.  13.  (y)  Mem.  de  I'  Acad.  R.des  Sc.  A.  1720.

(//)  in Schol. ad Obf. Med.  Anat. 94.  (r)  Epift.  Anat.  14.

Sent.  I.  (j)  M,;,n.  de  T  Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1706*

{«)  Seel,  hac  Obf.  15.  §.  3.  {t)  Exercit.  cit.  fupra  adn.  56.

differtation


So Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders,

diflertarion  (k)  which  was  publifh'd  in  the  year  1732,  while  he  himfelf  was
prefident,  entitled,  De  Excftoft  Skatomatode  ClavicuU. ■

Yet  many  others,  both  before  and  after  them,  call'd  tumours  of  the  bones,
wherewith  a  caries  was  likewile  join'd,  exoftofes.  But  in  both  kinds  we
•meet  with  divilions  again.  For  the  tumour  of  a  bone  which  is  not  carious,
is  either  made  up  of  a  denfe  and  folid  fubftance,  fuch  as  Bidloo  {x)  has  in
the  greateft  part  reprefented,  or  of  a  fubftance  "  wholly  "  cellular,  or  ipongy  ;
as  Ruyfch  ( y)  law  m  a  thigh  bone,  which  is  naturally  very  hard,  and  which
was  encreas'd  an  inch  in  its  thicknefs  ;  or,  finally,  as  the  fame  author  deli-
neated (z)  in  the  os  tibi^,  of  a  fubftance  externally  very  thick,  hard,  and
compaft  ;  yet  internally  cavernous.

But  tumours  of  a  carious  bone  are  either  the  confequence  of  a  caries,  the
•caufe  of  which  was  external  injury,  as  in  the  lower  jaw  of  a  girl  who  had  fall'n
from  a  high  place,  and  who  is  defcrib'd  in  the  Hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy
of  Sciences  at  Paris  (;;),  or,  as  is  more  frequently  the  cafe,  of  an  internal
diforder  of  the  humours ;  whether  this  be  from  a  lues  venerea,  as  Stal-
part  {b)  oblerv'd  in  the  os  tibia;,  and  even  as  the  figure  fhows  in  the  os  femo-
ris  ;  or  from  feme  other  caufe,  as  Bogdanus  (f)  found  in  the  whole  os  tibi^,
referring  the  caufe  to  that  difeale  which  the  Arabians  call'd  the  Ventofttas
Spina :  and,  indeed,  that  the  bones  do  become  tumid  from  this  difeafe,
•is  very  well  known  ;  and  not  only  in  the  limbs,  but  in  other  parts  alio  ;  as
Sevcrinus  has  oblerv'd  (d),  and  the  celebrated  Kaltfchmiedius  {e)  has  lately
confirm'd,  by  a  fingular  example  in  the  lower  jaw.

Yet  how  much  thefe  tumours  differ  from  each  other,  where  we  confider
either  the  various  magnitude  of  the  cells  which  they  comprehend,  or  the  various
matters  which  are  contain'd  in  thefe  cells,  may  not  only  appear  from  other
obfervations,  but  particularly  from  thofe  that  we  read  in  the  Hiftory  of  the
Academy  juft  now  quoted  (/),  and  in  their  Memoirs  (g) ;  as  that  of  Farcy  in
the  upper  part  of  the  thigh,  that  of  Mery  in  the  inferior  procefles  of  the
thigh-bone,  and  of  the  fame  author  in  the  fingers.

However,  even  when  the  exoftofes  contain  nothing  that  is  foreign  to  the  na-
ture of  bones,  and  for  that  reaibn  nothing  which  is  apt  to  produce  caries,  pains,
and  ulcers  -,  the  protuberances  themfelves,  neverthelefs,  efpecially  thofe  that
are  large  and  fituated  in  the  joints,  by  greatly  diflending  the  tendons  that  lie
thereon,  are  exceedingly  injurious  to  the  motions  of  the  parts  in  which  thefe
tendons  terminate  :  in  the  two  obfervations,  therefore,  of  IVIery,  which  were
laft  of  all  referr'd  to,  they  could  by  no  means  be  mov'd  :  but  it  is  fingular
in  that  which  Richius  (h)  fent  to  Paris,  that  a  fenfible  motion  of  flexion  re-
main'd  in  the  leg,  when  the  lower  part  of  the  os  femoris  was  greatly  en-
larg'd.

[^)  §.  13.  &  24.  (0  Obf.  Anat.  Chirurg.  12.

(x) Exerc.  cic.  Tab.  2.  Fig.  3.  (i)  Ve  recond.  Able.  nat.  I.  5,  c.  16.

(y)  Thef.  Anat.  Max.  in  fine  ad  lift.  H.  (e)  Progr.  de  raro  Spina:  Vent.  cafu.

\z)  Thef.  Anat.  10.  Tab.  2.  Fig.  10.  (f)  A.  1737.  Obf.  Anat.  i.

{a) A.  1727.  Obf.  Anat.  6.  (g) A.  \-j^G.  &  I7'20.

\h)  Cen,t.  Poller.  P,  1.  Obf,  44,  &Tab.  14,  {/.-)  Hilr.  de  1'  Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1739.
Fig.  I.  &  2. ■' Obf,  Anat.  4.

But


Letter  L. Article  5' 8.  81

But  that  which  the  very  great  anatomift  Euftachius  (i)  has  given  us  in  the
hiftory  of  a  Roman  macron,  is  much  more  furprifing.  In  her  cafe,  the  in-
ferior procefles  of  the  femur  "  were  grown  out  into  fuch  a  tumour  as  to  far
"  exceed  the  fize  even  of  the  Jargeft  human  head  ;"  as  diflfedion,  at  length,
in  the  dead  body  demonftrated  to  the  other  phyllcians,  who  did  not  give
credit  to  the  nature  of  this  tumour;  yet  the  woman"  mov'd  very  freely  and
"  eafily  to  all  fides  •,"  which  circumftance  being  obferv'd  by  Euftachius,  and
this  at  the  fame  time,  that  thofe  procefles,  or  heads,  "  although  they  were
"  become  fo  tumid  and  turgid,  retain'd  their  natural  figure  neverthel&fs,"
had  brought  him  to  attain  to  a  true  knowledge  of  the  cafe  while  the  woman
was  ftill  living.

Mery,  therefore,  in  the  cafe  of  that  large  exoftofis  which  I  have  jufl:  now
taken  notice  of,  as  defcrib'd  by  him  in  the  fame  procefles,  has,  with  great
propriety,  accounted  for  the  impoflibility  of  flexion  in  the  leg,  not  only  from
the  tendons  being  vehemendy  diftended,  but  alfo  from  the  figure  of  thefe
proceflTes  being  fo  chang'd,  that  the  lower  furface  of  them  was,  from  a  con-
vexity, become  plane  and  flat,  and  even  rather  excavated.

58.  From  thefe  you  will  colled  other  diftindlions  of  exoftofes  in  their
figure,  and  not  only  in  their  fituation  ;  which,  both  formerly  and  in  our  times,
you  find  to  }iave  been  obferv'd  even  in  the  extremities  of  oblong  bones,  al-
though it  is  faid  to  occur  more  frequently  in  the  trunk  of  them,  which  they
call  the  diaphyfis ;  and  that  cannot  be  denied.  But  this  diforder  attacks
other  bones,  alfo,  befides  thofe  of  the  limbs :  though  it  is  not  agreeable  to
our  purpofe  here  to  take  notice  of  all  the  examples  of  this  kind.  I  have
flightly  touch'd  upon  fome  from  the  books  that  are  now  in  my  hands,  from
whence  you  will  eafily  imagine  how  many  might  be  added  to  this  fedion  of
the  Sepulchretum,  in  which  not  only  recent  examples,  but  even  fome  ancient
ones,  are  wanting.

If  you  enquire  after  cithers,  you  will  find  them  in  feveral  places,  but  par-
ticularly in  that  diflertation  which  I  referr'd  to  above  {k).  The  author  of
which,  moreover,  gives  you  a  peculiar  obfervation  of  an  exofl:ofis  of  the  cla-
vicle ;  in  which  bone  he  confefles  he  does  not  remember  whether  it  had  been
feen  before  by  others,  efpecially  of  fo  confiderable  a  fize.  I  faw,  four  years
after  the  publication  of  that  diflertation,  an  exofl:ofis  protuberating  from  the
left  clavicle  in  like  manner,  (which  had  alfo  formerly  receiv'd  a  blow)  and
that  in  the  form  of  a  very  large  fpheroid,  in  a  young  man,  by  defcent  an  Ita-
lian, who  had  come  hither  from  Vienna,  to  fee  if  he  could  find  any  one  here,
who,  after  fo  many  methods  having  been  tried  by  various  perfons,  and  all  to
no  efi-ed,  would  undertake  to  cure  him.

This  tumour  might  eafily  have  impos'd  upon  me  alfo,  as  it  had  done  upon
others,  by  reafon  of  the  teguments  wherewith  it  was  cover'd.  But  the  bony  >
hardnefs  which  lay  beneath,  and  its  very  firm  connedion  and  continuation
with  the  clavicle,  caus'd  that  difl^ertation  to  come  into  my  mind  ;  and  1  pro-
nounc'd  that  no  cure  of  it  could  be  made  without  the  application  of  a  law  :
which,  to  fay  nothing  of  the  danger,  neither  the  decay'd  fi;rength  of  his  flender

(?)  De  Multitudine,  c.  8.  {k)  N,  57 Vid.  ejus  c.  2.

Vol.  III.  M  and


§2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

and  delicate  little  body  would  bear,  nor  the  deprav'd  ftate  of  his  fluids,  which
was  even  original  in  him,  would  permit :  all  which  fuppofitions  I  confirm'd
by  letters  to  the  chevalier  Nicolaus  Garellius,  defervedly  chief  of  the  impe-
rial archiaters,  who  had  in  particular  advis'd  the  mother  of  the  patient,  from
his  peculiar  partiality  to  me,  that  (he  would  fuffer  nothing  to  be  done  but  by
my  advice ;  and,  at  the  lame  time,  referr'd  him  to  the  diflertation  I  have
quoted,  which  he  had  never  yet  feen.

Nothing,  therefore,  was  done  •,  he  himfelf  alfo,  as  he  wrote  back  to  me,
approving  my  advice,  and  affirming  that  the  tumour,  when  fhown  to  him
in  the  beginning,  and  before  any  congeilion  of  ftagnating  humours  was  made,
was  really  bony,  and  had  its  origin  from  the  clavicle  itfelf.  Of  what  ftrufture,
therefore,  this  exoftofis  was,  and  what  it  contain'd,  1  did  not  fee.  But  I  did
fee  in  another,  which  v;as  prominent  from  the  thigh  of  a  man.  Yet  before
I  fpeak  of  this,  I  will  anfwer  a  kind  of  tacit  interrogation  of  yours.  For
you  will  defire  to  know  how  it  can  happen,  that  the  moft  rigid  and  hardeft
laminEG  of  bones  may  be  fo  extended  as  to  form  exoftofes.

p,<).  In  the  firft  place,  then,  call  to  mind  thofe  things  which  have  been
quoted  above  (/)  from  a  certain  refponfe  of  Valfalva,  that  there  are  fome
exoilofes,  as  they  feem  at  firft  to  be,  which  are,  in  faft,  nothing  eife  but  li-
gaments and  tendons,  the  thicknefs  and  hardnefs  of  which  being  increas'd
by  the  ftagnant  matter,  refemble  a  tumour  of  the  bone  whereupon  they  lie.
Exoftofes  of  this  kind  occur  after  a  blow,  a  luxation,  and  other  injuries  of
that  kind,  externally  applied  ;  and  one,  in  particular,  occurr'd  in  a  noble
abbot,  a  colleague  of  mine,  who,  after  having  his  foot  luxated,  and  re-
plac'd,  had  fo  confiderable  a  hardnefs  in  a  certain  place,  on  the  upper  and
back-part  of  the  foot,  that  the  bone  might  have  feem'd  to  moft  perfons  to  be
prominent  beyond  its  fituation  ;  yet,  by  the  ufe  of  cerates  containing  gum  am-
moniacum,  by  time,  and  walking,  it  was  at  length  entirely  taken  away.

Nor,  probably,  were  thofe  exoftofes  of  a  different  kind  which  Severinus  {m)
fays  he  himfelf  had  been  troubl'd  with  at  the  lower  part  of  each  elbow,  and
which  perpetually  incommoded  him  when  he  lean'd  upon  them,  till  fome
years  after  they  were  difcufs'd  without  any  remedy.  Thefe,  he  fays,  "  are
"  wont  to  be  call'd  foprcjjb  "  by  farriers,  as  if  "  accelTions  of  bony  matter
"  made  upon  the  bones :"  and  it  is  furprizing  that  Stalpart  (;y),  in  copying
this  paflage  from  a  namelefs  author,  after  fome  other  things,  which  follow
foon  after  in  the  fame  Severinus,  fhould  underftand  this  Italian  word  foprojfo
in  fo  wrong  afenfe,  as  to  fay  that  it  fignified  "  an  ulceration  of  the  bones."

But  to  come  from  falfe  exoftofes  to  the  true,  and  from  ligaments  and  ten-
dons to  the  periofteum,  which  adheres  very  clofely  to  the  bones ;  Boer-
haavc  (o)  propofes  a  double  kind  of  exoftofis :  the  firft,  wherein  the  periofteum
alone  is  obftru61:ed,  and  after  that  fwells  by  various  degrees  till  it  attains  to
the  hardnefs  of  bone ;  the  fecond,  where  the  lamellse  of  the  bones  recede  in
fuch  a  manner  from  their  ufual  contadl,  that  he  faw  the  bones  of  the  cranium
four  times  thicker  than  they  naturally  are,  and  altogether  fungous,  fo  as  to
refemble  a  pumice-ftone.

(/)  N.  13. (m)  De  recond.  Abfc,  nat.  1.  4.  c.  9.  §  4. («)  Schol,  ad  Obf.  cit.  fupra,  n.  57.
(0)  Prsleft.  ad  Inftit.  §711.

6  '  The


Letter  L. Article  59,  83

The  former  of  thefe  modes,  then,  you  may  make  ufe  of  in  order  to  ex-
plain thofe  exoftofes  which,  being  protuberant  on  the  external  furface  of  the
bones,  confift  of  a  compadt  bony  lubftance,  as  in  thofe  examples  that  I  have
quoted  from  Bidloo  and  Ruyfch(/)) ;  but  you  will  much  more  readily  explain
them  in  this  manner,  after  you  have  read  the  explications  of  the  celebrated
Duhamel  (q),  which  are  not  only  not  different,  but  even  confirm'd  by  his
own  experiments,  while  he  infpeded  exoftofes  of  this  kind  excited  by  himfelf
in  living  animals,  in  their  various  degrees  of  induration,  and  attended  to  it
from  whence  they  proceeded.  And,  indeed,  although  he  confelTes  that  he
could  never  yet  excite  exoftofes  of  another  kind,  that  is,  fpongy  exoftofes  ;
yet  he  hints  at  a  mode  wherein  we  may  conceive  that  thefe,  alfo,  are  made
up  of  the  periofteum  -,  and  in  fine  concludes,  that  whatever  wounds,  irritates,
inflames,  or  makes  the  periofteum  tumid ;  which  kind  of  injuries,  it  is  certain,
have  very  often  happen'd  before  the  produftion  of  exoftofes ;  may  without
doubt  give  origin  thereto  :  and  this  opinion  of  that  very  experienc'd  man
will  have  fomewhat  more  weight  with  you,  when  you  read  over  the  memoirs
which  he  previoufty  wrote,  wherein  he  deduces  the  produftion  and  reparation
of  the  bones  from  the  periofteum.

Yet  as  there  are  not  wanting  fome  who  oppofe  contradiftory  experiments,
and  as  he  himfelf,  like  a  prudent  and  cautious  obferver,  denies  that  he  contends
for  the  opinion  of  all  exoftofes  proceeding  from  fome  diforder  of  the  pe-
riofteum ;  if  you  fuppofe  thofe  are  to  be  excepted,  in  which,  according  to
the  fecond  mode  mention'd  by  Boerhaave,  the  laminse  of  the  bone  itfelf  have
receded  from  each  other ;  you  will  not  eafily  underftand  by  what  means  they
could,  when  they  are  very  hard  and  very  rigid,  be  mov'd  and  forc'd. outwardly,
be  curv'd,  expanded,  and  increafe  ;  unlefs  you  fuppofe  them-  to  be  again
madefoft,  and  to  have  return'd  to  the  former  nature  of  a  cartilage,  as  ic
were.

Many  examples  of  tHTs  change  are,  certainly,  extant  in  the  books  of  phy-
ficians,  fome  of  which  you  will  fee  pointed  out  by  the  very  learned  Haller  (r)  j
and  not  to  go  far  from  the  obfervations  taken  notice  of  above,  Tulpius,
alfo  (j-),  faw  bones  "  fo  tender,  flaccid,  and  foft,  that  they  could  be  cut  very
*'  eafily  with  a  knife,  like  wax ;"  and  Richius  (;)  found  them  fo  foften'd,
that  he  took  the  exoftofis  for  a  certain  fpecies  of  the  fpina  ventofa  fcorbutica.
To  thefe  add  thofe  that  have  been  found,  more  than  once,  by  the  celebrated
Heifter  (a),  and  not  in  children  only,  but  in  men  alfo,  fo  foft  as  to  be  very
eafily  cut  with  the  knife,  when  they  were  affedted  with  z.  fpina  ventofa:  where-
fore, as  he  fuppofes  that  from  deprav'd  humours  of  the  venereal,  fcorbutic,
variolous,  and  even  ricketty  kind  (for  it  is  certain  that  ricketty  children
are  alfo  fubjed  to  tumours  at  the  extremities  of  the  bones)  eftus'd  by  the
eroded  fanguiferous  veflels  into  the  cavities  and  cells  of  the  bones,  and  vi-
tiating the  medullary  oil;  as  he  fuppofes,  I  fay,  that  the  bony  lamellce  are

(p)  Supra,  n.  57.  (j)  C.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  ;6.

(f)  Mem, de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1743. (/) Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  57.
Mem.  6.  fur  les  Os,  Obf.  31.  &  feqq.  (a)  Inftit.  Chir.  P.  i.  1.  5.  c.  9. not.  a  ad

(r)  Not.  h  ad  Prxleft.  Boerh.  in  Inftit, §  n.  5,  &  Diff,  de  Ofl'.  Tumor,  n,  28.  &  feqq.
401.

M  2  foften'd


84 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

fofcen'd  by  humours  of  this  kind,  fo  he  thinks  that,  when  foften'd,  they  arc
by  degrees  urg'd  outwards,  from  the  congeftion  and  prefliire  of  thefe  fluids,
and  expanded  in  their  compafs.

And  1  fcarcely  doubt  but  you  will  follow  this,  or  fome  other  fimilar  expli-
cation, in  thofe  tumours,  in  particular,  which  are  as  yet  comprehended  by
fofc  bony  lamellsc  ;  though  you  might  rather  hefitate  in  regard  to  thoie  in
which,  though  thefe  lamellse  were  perceiv'd  to  be  every- where  rigid  and  hard,
the  bulk,  neverthelefs,  ftill  continu'd  to  be  increas'd,  and  even  gain'd  a  very
great  increafe  in  the  latter  years  of  its  exiftence  ;  fuppofe,  for  inftance,  an
increafe  equal  tu  that  of  the  fingers  fpoken  of  by  Mery  (.v),  and  of  the  cla-
vicle in  that  differtation  quoted  above  (y) :  although  in  thefe  two  examples
fome  room  is  left  for  the  explication  ;  in  the  latter,  by  reafon  of  the  carti-
laginous parts  being  here  and  there  interpos'd  to  the  bony  in  the  circum-
ference of  the  tumour ;  and  in  the  firft,  by  reafon  of  the  fame  circumference
being  interrupted  wi[h  carious  ulcers  in  many  parts.

But  fo  far  on  this  fubjed ;  for  we  have  even  faid  more  than  is  neceflary  to
ftiow  you  of  what  kind,  and  from  what  caufe,  this  exoftofis  was  which  was
feen  by  me  in  that  perfon  of  whom  I  fliall  immediately  fpeak,  and  examin'd
by  dillecflion  after  the  death  of  the  patient.

60.  The  body  of  a  man,  of  thirty  years  of  age,  of  whom  we  could  learn
nothing  more  than  that  he  was  taken  off  by  an  apoplexy,  was  brought  into
the  college,  when  I  was  teaching  anatomy  there,  in  the  month  of  January,
in  the  year  1732,  and  his  limbs  made  ufe  of  for  the  public  demonftrations  ;
by  which  I  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  a  protuberance  on  the  left  os
femoris,  of  the  form  of  a  fpheroid,  and  of  the  bignefs  of  a  middle- fiz'd
apple.  This  tumour  was  prominent  at  a  little  diftance  above  the  inferior
heads,  or  procefTes,  of  that  bone,  and  on  the  pofterior  furface.

The  bone  being  cut  with  the  faw  in  a  longitudinal  direftion,  on  ex-
amination I  found  it  to  confift  of  bony  cells,  which  abounded  with  a  medul-
lary oil,  of  a  liquid  confiftence,  and  of  a  yellow  colour ;  the  cavity  of  the
bone,  which  correfponded  to  that  protuberance,  being  filled  with  a  very  large
quantity  of  the  fame  kind  of  oil.  And  the  yellownefs  and  liquid  ftate  of
this  oil,  in  both  places,  became  worthy  of  remark,  on  account  of  the  mar-
row in  the  farther  cavity  of  the  bone  being  fomewhat  red  and  concreted ;
and  the  occafion  of  this  obfervation  was  encreas'd  by  the  great  coldnefs  of
the  feafon,  with  which,  though  other  fluids  were  frozen  to  ice,  a  part  of
that  oil,  neverthelefs,  had  _not  in  the  leaft  become  concreted.

61.  Whether  that  change  of  the  medullary  oil  in  an  exoftofis,  and  about
an  exoflofis,  was  the  confequence  of  this  tumour,  or  preceded  ir,  I  leave  to
you  to  determine.  For  I  think  I  have  faid  more  than  enough  of  bony  tu-
mours, at  leaft  as  far  as  relates  to  the  prefent  purpofe,  and  I  perceive  that
this  letter  is  already  grown  out  beyond  the  bounds  of  my  firfl  intentions.
And  yet  I  have  not  touch'd  upon  all  the  tumours,  even  of  thofe  which  hap-
pen chiefly  in  the  lower  limbs,  tho'  I,  lafl  of  all,  infifted  principally  on  thofe  ;
and  of  this  kind,  among  others,  are  varices,  cedemas,  and  clavi  or  corns  of
the  feet.

(x)  Cit.  fupra.  n.  56.  fj'J  Cit,  fupra,  n,  57.

But


Letter  L. Article  60.  85

But  in  regard  to  varices,  I  had  fcarcely  any  thing  that  was  worthy  of  re-
mark, unlefs  I  fhould  perhaps  have  chofen  to  refer  you  to  Bidloo  (z),  to  be
inform'd  of  the  immenfe  fize  of  fome  varices ;  in  order  to  underftand  which,
when  already  form'd,  it  is  neceflary  to  fuppofe  a  laxity  of  the  coats  of  the
veins,  or  a  lofs  of  tone,  in  confequence  of  too  violent  exercifes,  too  long-
continu'd  exertions  in  {landing,  or  carrying  heavy  burdens  ;  and  conftriftions
or  compreffions  that  prevent  the  free  motion  of  the  blood,  with  other  things
of  a  fimilar  kind.

And  who  can  allow  that  a  laxity  of  the  valves  has  no  efFeft,  in  compleat-
ing  that  dilatation  which  is  begun  to  be  form'd  ?  I  fhould  even  fuppofe,
that  to  the  commonly-known  office  of  the  valves,  which  relates  very  much  to
the  prefent  cafe,  another  might  be  added,  as  having  the  fame  relation  ;  I
mean,  that  like  bands  or  ligaments  they  may  ftrengthen  the  vein,  as  far  as
it  is  pofTible,  by  pafling  from  one  paries  to  the  other-,  fo  as  to  make  it  lefs  to
be  wonder'd  at  that  the  dilatation  is  increas'd,  when  they  are  relax'd  or  la-
cerated.

And  as  to  oedematous  tumours,  I  have  fpoken  of  them  fufficiently  when
writing  of  the  chronic  and  hydropical  affedtions  of  the  vifcera :  and  indeed
it  is  from  the  previous  hiflories  of  thefe  affedlions,  that  almoft  all  the  exam-
ples of  oedemas  are  taken  in  the  Sepulchre'tum,  in  order  to  be  repeated  here.

Nor  fhould  I  have  any  thing  to  add  in  regard  to  clavi,  if  you  had  not
lately  afk'd  me  my  opinion  of  that  incurable  clavus,  from  the  irkfomenefs  of
which  it  is  faid,  by  the  younger  Pliny  [a),  that  Silius  Italicus,  a  confular
man,  and  at  the  fame  time  no  contemptible  poet,  would  have  put  an  end
to  his  own  life  by  hunger.  "  The  caufe  of  death,"  fays  he,  "  was  his  ill
"  health. He  was  affedted  with  an  incurable  clavus."

If  he  had  faid  more  than  thefe  words,  you  would  not,  I  fuppofe,  have  then
afli'd  me  what  this  clavus  was,  or  where  it  was.  You  therefore  would  have
me  divine.  For  yOu  cannot  be  ignorant,  when  you  read  Celfus  {b)  and
Aetius  (f),  that  clavi  may  arife  not  only  in  the  feet,  but  in  the  eyes  alfo,  not
to  mention  other  places ;  and  of  thofe  which  have  their  origin  in  the  eyes,
that  the  diforder  call'd  clavus  by  Aetius,  is  different  from  that  to  which  Cel-
fus gives  the  fame  name ;  for  the  former  means  the  tunica  uvea  prolaps'd,  in
a  confiderable  part  of  it,  on  theoutfide  of  the  eye,  and  already  become  hard,
in  the  fame  manner  as  PauJus  {d)  and  Adluarius  [e)  underftand  the  terms ;
but  Celfus  means  callous  tubercles  in  the  white  of  the  eye:  and  he  fays  alfo
that  clavi,  which  exift  elfewhere,  arife  not  only  from  concufions,  but  fome-
times  from  other  caufes  alfo.

Yet  as  you  know  that  all  thefe  tumours,  whether  form'd  in  the  feet  or  in
the  eyes,  or  in  any  other  parr,  have  been  call'd  clavi  from  the  fimilarity  of
their  figure  ;  you  plainly  fee  how  many  cafes,  that  are  various  in  their  nature,
ficuation,  and  caufes,  are  comprehended  under  this  term  alone,  and  how
eafily  clavi  may  be  incurable  -,  and  not  only  in  proportion  to  thefe  varieties,

{x)  Dec.  I.  Exercu.  Anat.  Chir.  6.  (r)  Medic.  Tetrabibl.  z.  S.  3.  c.  34.

{a)  1.  3.  Epift.  7,  (a)  DeReMed.  1.  3.  c-.  22.  ubi  de  prolapf..

{/y)  De  Medic.  1.  5.  c.  28.  S.  14.  &  1.  7.  c.  ocul.
7.  S.  iz.  {e)  Medic.  1,  2.  c,  37.

bUit


8  6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

bot  a]fo  in  proportion  to  the  feverity  in  the  method  of  curing  them  (/),  be
iometimes  the  occafion  of  great  irkfomenefs  and  pain,  not  to  fay  always  •,  par-
ticularly in  a  man  fuch  as  Silius  Italicus,  who,  as  the  fame  author  Pliny  (g)
has  told  us,  "  had  pafs'd  through  his  feventy-fifth  year,  and  was  of  a  deli-
"  cate  habit  of  body."

But  though  this  is  the  ftate  of  the  queftion,  as  there  is  neverthelefs  fo  great
a  latitude  in  underftanding  the  cafe,  and  confequently  a  great  difficulty  in  af-
certaining  the  truth,  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  in  my  power  greatly  to  refilt
the  opinion  of  any  one,  who  may  think  differently  from  me;  yet  perhaps
this  will  not  prevent  you  fr^m  thinking  that  I  come  pretty  near  to  probabi-
lity, if  I  lay  that  no  other  clavus  was  here  meant  by  Pliny,  than  a  clavus  of
the  feet.  For  thofe  that  are  form'd  in  the  eyes  are  more  rare  ;  and  the
others  "  fometimes  indeed  have  their  origin  in  other  parts,  but  chiefly  in
"  the  feet,"  as  Celfus  (h),  and  thofe  Grecians  (/),  and  even  the  fafl  itfelf,
confirm  •,  lb  that  he  who  fpeaks  of  a  clavus,  without  making  mention  of  its
particular  fituation,  and  particularly  if  he  is  not  a  phyfician,  feems  to  fig-
nify  a  clavus  of  the  feet,  rather  than  of  any  other  part :  although,  indeed,
one  who  is  not  a  phyfician  would  certainly  fcarcely  omit  that  particular  men-
tion, or  Ibme  other  adjund,  if  he  meant,  by  the  term  clavus,  to  point  out
any  other  diforder,  but  that  of  which  this  word  moft  generally  conveys  the
idea  •,  of  which  rare  kind,  clavi  of  the  eyes,  or  a  certain  fpecies  of  furunculi,
are ;  yet  you  read  in  IngrafTias  {k),  "  that  fome  us'd  to  call  this  fpecies  cla-
"  vus  or  fpina -,"  and  certain  clavi  of  the  feet  themfelves,  when  explain'd
in  the  manner  they  are  by  the  author  of  the  Finitiones  Medico  (I),  which  are
afcrib'd  to  Galen,  are  rare  alfo;  for  in  this  work  we  read  that,  "  a  clavus  is
«'  an  orbicular  ulcer  in  the  fole  of  the  foot,  which  has  contrafted  a  callus."

And  if  this  definition  had  come  into  the  mind  of  that  learned  phyfician
Lochner  (m),  when  he  defcrib'd  a  fpecies  of  a  very  malignant  kind  of  clavus,
as  having  been  feen  by  him,  not  without  death  being  the  confequence;  he
would,  in  my  opinion,  more  readily  have  made  mention  of  it,  than  of  the
difeafe  call'd  by  the  ancients  gemurja,  inafmuch  as  it  is  a  difeafe  which,  if  it
were  in  fa£t  any  fpecies  of  the  clavus,  has  not  its  feat,  however,  in  the  fole
of  the  foot,  but,  as  Feftus  fays  (k),  "  arifes  under  the  little  toe,  and  even
betwixt  the  toes,"  as  the  elder  Pliny  had  faid,  who  is  likewife  quoted  by
Lochner,  in  the  twenty-fixth  book  indeed,  but  in  the  firft  chapter,  when
fpeaking  of  the  germrfa,  as  of  a  diforder  which  was  "  foon  put  a  flop  to  in
"  Italy,"  and  that  long  ago,  fo  as  for  "  even  the  name  of  it  to  be  oblite-
"  rated."

All  which  things  T  was  willing  to  take  notice  of  for  example's  fake ;  not
that  I  believe  there  to  have  been  fo  many  fignifications  of  the  word  clavus
among  phyficians,  and  ftill  lefs  ainong  others,  in  the  age  of  the  younger  Pliny;
though  there  certainly  was,  among  all,  that  fenfe  in  which  I,  for  this  reafon,

C/J  Vid.  exempla  plura  apud  mox  citandum  {i)  De  Tumor,  p.  n.  ubi  de  Furuncul.

Lochnerum,  &  in  Epiftola  indicanda.  (/)  jam  propius  finem.

CgJ  Epift.  cit.  {«)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  i.  &  2.  Obf.  192.

(i)  Se£l.  14.  cit.  (»)  De  Verbor.  Signific.  1.  7.

(0  Aet.  Tetrab.  4.  Serm,  2.  c.  82.  &  Paul.
1.  3.  cit,  c.  80.

fuppofc


Letter  LI. Articles  i,  2.  87

fuppofe  him  to  have  made  nfe  of  it  alfo.  And  from  hence,  and  from  the
word  nalus,  which  he  has  made  ufe  of,  not  fo  proper  to  all  difeafes  as  to  the
difeafes  of  this  kind,  you  will,  at  the  fame  time,  underftand,  why  I  did  not
fall  into  the  opinion,  as  I  am  wont  to  do  at  other  times,  of  another  very  learned
phyfician,  who  in  a  particular  letter,  publifh'd  fome  years  ago,  upon  the  cla-
vus  of  Silius,  fuppofes  it  to  have  been  that  pain  of  the  head  ;  which,  how-
ever, he,  in  confequence  of  his  very  commendable  ingenuoufnefs,  confeffes  he
could  never  find  to  have  been  call'd  by  the  name  of  clavus,  before  Valefeus
de  Taranta,  that  is,  before  the  fourteenth  century. Farewel.


LETTER the FIFTY-FIRST

Treats  of  Wounds  and  Blows  of  the  Head.


I  HERE  are,  in  the  papers  of  Valfalva,  fo  many  obfervations  which
_^  relate  to  wounds  and  blows,  that,  if  I  meant  to  comprize  ail  of
them  in  one  letter,  I  fhould  feem  to  fend  you  a  book  inftead  of  a  letter.
Being,  therefore,  under  a  neceffity  of  dividing  them  according  to  their  various
fituations,  I  now  fend  you  thofe  that  relate  to  the  head,  and  fhall  fend  the
others  hereafter.  And  beginning  with  thofe  wherein  the  cranium  was  either
not  at  all  hurt,  or  only  (lightly,  1  fhall  go  on  to  thofe  wherein  it  was  found  to
be  either  quite  fiffur'd,  or  fraitur'd.

2.  A  young  man,  of  fixteen  years  of  age,  was  ilruck  with  a  ftone  which
was  thrown,  in  the  left  part  of  the  finciput,  near  to  the  lambdoidal  future,  at
the  diftance  of  about  two  inches  from  the  fagittal.  No  fymptom  that  was
worthy  of  remark  was  the  confequence ;  except  the  lips  of  the  wound  be-
ginning to  fwell,  and  that  fome  days  only  before  the  eleventh  day.  On
which  day  a  fever  djfcover'd  itfelf,  with  a  coldnefs  and  a  vomiting,  but  with-
out any  pain  of  the  head.  After  this  follow'd  convulfive  motions,  fpeechiefs-
nefs,  deafnefs,  and  blindnefs  j  and,  finally,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth
day,  death  itfelf.

The  cranium  was  unhurt,  and  yet  the  dura  mater,  in  that  part  which  lay
under  the  wound,  for  almoft  as  large  a  fpace  as  the  wound  was  continu'd,
was  found  to  be  thicken'd,  and  very  lax,  of  an  unequal  furface,  and  of  a  colour
verging  to  a  yellowifh  hue  -,  and  betwixt  this  membrane  and  the  pia  mater,  a.
concofted  pus  was  found  to  flagnate  betwixt  the  falciform  procefs,  and  the
upper  part  of  the  cerebrum  which  lay  near  thereto,  quite  to  the  anterior  parts.
In  the  whole  of  the  cerebrum  itfelf,  however,  was  found  no  injury  which  fell
under  die  notice  of  the  fenfes.

3.  A  man.


S  S Book  IV.  ■  Of  Chirurgical  and  TJniverfal  Difordcrs.

3.  A  man,  who  was  near  fixty  years  of  age,  receiv'd  a  blow  v/ith  a  ftick,
a  little  above  the  extreme  part  of  the  forehead,  and  the  left  temple  ;  no
morbid  fymptom  appearing  then,  or  in  the  following  days  *,  fo  that  he  came
by  himfelf  every  day  to  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Morte,  at  Bologna  •,
where  the  ullial  remedies  were  applied  to  his  wound,  which  was  fuppos'd  to
be  no  more  than  cutaneous,  and  of  no  importance.

.  And,  indeed,  during  four  or  five  of  thefe  days,  he  continu'd  in  the
market  felling  chefnuts,  according  to  his  ufuai  cuftom,  in  a  very  cold  feafon.
But  about  the  fixth  day  his  wound  became  worfe,  and  a  fever,  attended  with
a  coldnefs  and  rigor,  came  on  :  and  this  returning  every  day  in  the  fahne
m.anner,  without  any  other  fymptom  being  added,  than  a  flight  gangrene  of
the  wounded  part,  the  man  was  gradually  carried  off  thereby.

The  carcafe  was  confradted,  as  it  feem'd,  from  the  coldnefs  of  the  feafon.
A  little  fanies  had  defcended  from  the  wound  betwixt  the  extreme  margin  of
the  temporal  mufcle  and  the  bone.  And  the  gangrene,  by  its  erofion,  had
dilated  the  wound  to  the  fize  of  that  piece  of  money  which  is  called  a  Roman
crown  :  and  there  the  naked  bone  came  into  fight.

On  cutting  out  the  upper  part  of  the  cranium,  no  fign  of  injury  could  be
obferv'd  in  that  bone,  even  upon  the  moft  fl:ridl  examination.  Yet  the  me-
ninges were  found  to  be  fanious,  and  fomewhat  thicken'd,  in  the  whole  of
that  fpace  wherein  the  bone  had  been  laid  bare.  The  cerebrum,  which  lay
beneath  thefe  thicken'd  parts  of  the  meninges,  had  contradled  a  very  evident,
though  a  very  flight  injury.  For  externally,  the  fubftance  thereof  was  cor-
rupted to  the  fize  of  a  fmall  vetch  ;  and  in  the  middle  it  feem'd  to  be  periorated
with  a  very  fmall  foramen.  But  this  foramen,  together  with  the  corruption,
did  not  dcfcend  lower  than  to  a  very  fmall  depth.

4.  Before  I  here  add  other  hiftories  of  the  fame  kind,  you  will  certainly
make  fome  enquiries  -,  and  this  in  the  firll  place,  how  it  could  be  that,  though
the  bone  was  unhurt,  the  meninges  which  lie  beneath  were  neverthelefs  both
purulent  and  fanious ;  and  how  the  brain  itfelf  was  found  to  be  not  without
fome  injury  in  this  man  ?  Berengarius,  indeed,  as  you  have  it  even  in  that
fecond  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (ij),  fufpefted  it  might  happen  that  the
fanies  fiiould  pafs  through  the  pores  of  the  cranium,  from  the  external
wound,  efpecially  if  it  had  not  a  free  exit  from  the  wound  :  and  that  this  may
happen  in  fome  certain  places  is  not  to  be  denied  ;  as,  for  inftance,  where  the
fanguiferous  veflels  are  pierc'd  through,  or  where  the  futures  are  very  lax.
Yet,  for  the  moft  part,  it  is  better  to  fuppofe,  with  him,  what  I  fhall  fpeak
in  the  words  of  Celfus  {b),  "  that  although  the  bone  remain'd  entire,  fome
*'  vein,  being  ruptur'd  internally,  in  the  membrane  of  the  cerebrum,  from
"  the  blow,  difcharges  a  little  blood :"  and  that  this  vein  is  ruptur'd  from  a
violent  concufTion  of  the  cranium.

In  the  fame  manner  you  v/ill  explain  many-obfervations,  fimilar  to  thofe  I
have  produc'd  ;  as,  in  particular,  that  of  Mauchartus  (f),  wherein,  till  fo
far  as  the  tenth  day,  there  appear'd  no  bad  fign  ;  and  yet  how  much  mif-
chief  was  conceal'd  under  the  cranium,  which  was  every  where  unhurt,  the

{a)  I.  4.  in  Schol.  ad  Obf.  i.  U)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  9.  Obf.  40.

U)  De  Medic.  1.  8.  c.  4.

diffedion


Letter  LI. Article  4.  89

difleiSlion  of  the  padent,  who  died  fuddenly  before  the  fourteenth  day,  fuf-
ficiently  (how'd.  And  by  what  means  it  may  happen  that,  in  a  concuiTion
of  the  flcull,  the  veflels  within  its  cavity  fliall  be  ruptnr'd,  has  been  fliown
at  large  by  Peter  Simon  Rohault  (i).  But  if  the  concuffion  fhould  have-
been  very  fmall,  and  within  the  cranium,  which  is  not  at  all  injur'd,  the  in-
ternal parts  be  found  to  have  been  hurt  ;  fee  in  what  manner  Bohn  (e)  con-
jeftur'd  that  this  might  happen  in  his  obfervation,  and  that  of  others  ;  from.
Xvhofe  writings  (/)  you  will  pick  out  feveral  that  you  may  add  to  this  feftion
of  the  Sepulchretum.

But  to  return  to  thofe  obfervations  which  I  have  given  you  from  Valfalva  ;
you  will  aflc  me,  in  the  next  place,  why  the  blood,  which  was  extravafated
within  the  fliull,  did  not  begin  to  give  tokens  of  its  effufion  immediately,
inftead  of  beginning  fo  many  days  after?  Without  doubt,  becaufe  very
fmall  drops,  diftiUing  from  a  fmall  veffel  flowly  and  by  degrees,  could  not
arrive  to  fuch  a  quantity  as  to  be  injurious  till  after  fome  days  had  pafs'd,
and  at  the  fame  time  could  not  arrive  to  fuch  a  ftate  of  corruption  as  to
vitiate  the  meninges  and  brain.

Yet  both  of  thefe  circumftances  were  brought  about  the  fooner  in  him  who,
continually  expofing  himielf  to  the  very  cold  air,  gave  occafion,  by  the  con-
tradlion  of  the  external  veffels,  for  a  greater  quantity  of  blood  being  carried
through  the  internal  parts ;  and  that  in  a  lefs  falubrious  ftate,  by  reafon  of
infenfible  perfpiration  being  retain'd.  The  contrary  external  caufe  may  alfo
produce  the  fame  effedts,  by  exciting  and  heating  the  blood  ;  as  in  the  fon
of  Theodorus  (who  died  of  a  wound  in  the  head,  which  was  to  appearance
flight)  Vallefius  (g)  conjefliur'd,  and  with  very  good  reafon,  fince,  after  having
been  expos'd  to  the  fun  "  on  the  ninth  day,  the  firft  fever  came  upon  him
*'  on  the  tenth,"  ~

But  if  you  afk  me  why,  of  the  two  firfl:  whofe  hiftories  I  have  written,
he  whom  the  fever  feiz'd  the  fooneft  was  carried  off  by  no  diforder  befides
this ;  but  he  who  was  feiz'd  with  a  fever  later,  was  carried  off  by  fo  many
other  very  violent  diforders  in  conjundion  with  it-,  many  reafons  may  be
given  for  this  difference :  firft,  the  delay  itfeif,  whereby  both  the  quantity
and  the  depravity  of  the  extravafated  matter,  although  latent  in  the  con-
cofted  pus,  was,  without  doubt,  increas'd  :  in  the  lecond  place,  the  dif-
ferent difpofition  of  the  humours  and  parts  in  different  bodies  and  different
ages  :  and,  finally,  the  different  kind  of  violence  applied  by  the  throwing
of  a  flone,  and  by  the  blow  of  a  ftick.

Thus,  in  the  fifth  book  of  the  Epidemics  (h),  you  fee  that  "  he  who  was
"  ftruckon  the  head  with  a  ftone  by  the  Macedonian,  was  entirely  depriv'd
"  of  hisTpeech,  heard  nothing  at  all,  and  was  agitated,"  that  is,  "  in  a  con-
"  vulfive  manner,"  as  the  fame  Vallefius  (i)  rightly  interprets  it ;  which  arc
almoft  the  fame  fymptoms  that  were  fuffer'd  by  our  young  man,  though
later,  that  is  to  fay,  on  the  eleventh  day,  and  not,  like  the  other,  on  the  third  :

fifj  Traite  des  Playes  de  tete  ch.  4.  &  10.  (i)  N.  24.  apud  Marinell.

(e)  Differt.  de  Trepanat.  difficult.  {/')  Comm.  ad  earn  hiftdriam,  qus  ipfi  eft
ffj  Etiara  de  Renunc.  Vulner. n.  56.

(f)  Comm.  in  1.  7. Epid.  gd  29.  k  in  I.  5.
ad  97.

Vol.  III.  N  neither


9  o Book  IV. Of  Cblrurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

neither  did  this  young  man,  like  him,  fall  down  from  the  blow,  nor  had  he
his  fkuU  fiffiir'd,  and  that  "  above  the  right  temple;"  as  the  fame  hillory,
which  is  repeated  fomewhat  more  at  large  in  the  feventh  book,  teaches  {k}  j
though  Vallefuis,  who  had  remark'd  fo  many  other  things,  does  not  obferve
this,  and  enquires,  therefore,  "  in  what  part  of  the  head  this  man  had  re-
*'  ceiv'd  the  blow."  And  from  this  hiftory  you  will  perceive,  that  the  va-
rious force  of  the  ftriking  body,  and  the  part  of  the  head  befides  which  is
ftricken,  ought  to  be  attended  to  in  the  diftinftions  of  wounds  of  this  kind.
But  now  let  us  add  other  obfervations.

5.  A  young  man,  of  about  thirty  years  of  age,  had  two  wounds  infliifled
by  cutting  inftruments ;  the  one  on  the  left  part  of  his  forehead,  the  other
oppofite  thereto,  as  it  were,  in  the  occiput.  He  had  a  vain  irritation  to
vomit. He  died  about  the  twenty-fifth  day.

In  difiefting  the  head,  nothing  was  found,  either  internally  or  externally,
that  was  worthy  of  remark,  as  tar  as  related  to  the  wound  of  the  occiput.
But  that  of  the  forehead  firft  (how'd  a  fanies  about  ir,  betwixt  the  fl<in  and
the  cranium,  which  in  that  part  had  eroded  the  pericranium  and  the  internal
furface  of  the  fkin  itfelf,  like  a  herpes  exedens,  and  had  in  Ibme  meafure  fe-
parated  the  anterior,  and  at  the  fame  time  fuperior,  part  of  the  temporal
mufcle.  But  internally,  although  the  os  frontis  fhow'd  no  more  marks  of
injury  than  the  os  occipitis  did,  yet  betwixt  the  bone  and  the  dura  mater
there  was  a  fanies  to  the  quanty  of  two  drachms,  which  had  eroded  that  mem-
brane. And,  indeed,  on  the  right  fide,  under  the  upper  part  of  the  cranium,
fn  the  interftices  of  the  blood-veflels  of  the  fame  membrane,  was  found  a
matter  fimilar  to  fanies,  but  thicker.  The  other  parts  within  the  cranium
were  in  a  natural  ftate.

6.  An  old  man,  of  fixty  years  of  age,  who  was  very  fubjedl  to  epilepfies,
being  feiz'd  with  a  paroxyfm,  and  falling  upon  the  ground,  receiv'd  a  blov/
upon  the  left  part  of  the  thorax,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  on  the  left  fide  of
the  head,  above  the  temporal  mufcle.  That  part  of  the  thorax  was  in  much
pain  :  his  refpiration  was  difficult,  and,  in  the  beginning,  blood  was  thrown
out  at  the  mouth  by  the  ftrainings  to  vomit.  His  head  was  weak,  dull,  and
heavy  ;  fo  that  when  afk'd  a  queftion,  he  fcarcely  gave  any  anfwer.

His  thorax  being  open'd  after  death,  the  left  cavity  of  it  was  found  -,  but
in  the  right  cavity  was  found  ferum,  to  about  the  quantity  of  a  pint  -,  and
the  lungs  on  this  fide  adher'd  to  the  pleura  in  their  upper  part,  and  were
univerially  indurated,  as  they  generally  are  in  a  peripneumony.  The  ven-
tricles of  the  heart  contain'd  polypous  concretions ;  that  in  the  right  being
very  large.

In  the  head,  the  left  temporal  mufcle  was  a  little  bruis'd  :  and  when  the
head  was  open'd,  a  portion  of  coagulated  blood  was  found  betwixt  the  left
os  petrofum  and  the  dura  mater ;  which  bone  adher'd  fo  clofely  to  the  dura
mater,  that  it  could  not  be  feparated  but  by  force.  However,  the  pia  mater
fhow'd  a  little  gelatinous  concretion  of  ferum  at  the  fides  of  the  veflels  -,  and
the  ventricles  contain'd  a  little  extravafated  ferum  :  the  remaining  part  of
the  cerebrum  was  found.

(^)  N.  I  a.

7.  A  man.


Letter  LI. Articles  7, 8.  91

7.  A  man,  of  forty  years  of  age,  falling  from  a  high  place,  bruis'd  his
Idc  eye  :  and  the  fkin  above  the  eye-brow  was,  probably,  torn  by  a  Iharp
ftone.  In  the  beginning  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  fever;  which  remitted  a  l.tUe
afterwards.  But  about  the  twelfth  day,  after  the  commiffion  of  an  error  m
the  prefcrib'd  method  of  living,  a  more  violent  fever  came  on  -,  to  which,
about  the  fourteenth  day,  a  convulfion  of  the  whole  left  fide  of  the  face  was
added,  together  with  a  cruel  pain  in  the  very  ball  of  the  eye.  And  at  length
the  patient  died  about  the  twentieth  day.

When  the  head  was  examin'd,  thefe  appearances  were  found.  Under  the
fkin  that  was  lacerated  above  the  eye-brow,  was  that  nerve  which,  coming
forth  from  the  orbit,  is  reflected  upwards  on  the  forehead ;  fo  that  being  ei-
ther contus'd,  or  in  any  other  manner  injur'd,  it  might  eafily  excite  convul-
fion. And  the  ball  of  the  eye  being  fomewhat  putrid  on  the  external  part,  had
brought  on  a  flight  erofion  in  the  bone  which  is  interpos'd  betwixt  the  or-
bit and  the  brain,  yet  not  to  fuch  a  degree  as  to  affedt  the  brain,  which  was
found  in  this  place.  Towards  the  left  part  of  the  occiput,  however,  a  fmall
portion  of  the  brain  inclin'd  from  its  native  colour  to  that  of  a  browniOi  co-
lour. And  the  dura  mater,  which  correfponded  with  this  portion,  was  fome-
what moift  externally  with  a  fanies.

8.  Although,  in  falling  from  high  places,  it  frequently  happens,  thatbefides
the  part  which  is  manifeftly  contus'd,  feme  other  is  alfo  contus'd  lefs-evi-
dently,  and  it  is,  for  this  reafon,  lefs  furprizing,  that  upon  dalhing  the  os
frontis  againft  a  hard  body,  fome  injury  and  a  fanies  fliould  be  found  inter-
nally at  the  occiput ;  yet  in  the  young  man  alfo  (/),  who  was  wounded  on
the  left  fide,  as  a  matter  fimilar  to  fanies  was  found  on  the  right  fide  -,  and
as,  in  the  old  man  {m),  not  that  part  of  the  thorax  which  was  ftruck  againft
the  ground,  but  the  oppofite,  fliow'd  an  internal  diforder  ;  I  (hall  add  fome-
thing  upon  thefe  fubjefts  below  («),  as  I  alio  fhall  of  convulfions,  in  confe^
quence  of  injuries  of-*he  nerve  which  is  reflecSted  under  the  eye-brow.

Yet  I  do  not  attribute  the  convulfions  and  death  of  this 'man  to  that  nerve
only,  but  alio  to  the  fanies,  wherevi^ith  the  dura  mater  was  moift;  as  I  do
the  difeafe  and  death  of  the  old  man,  partly  to  the  peripneumonic  ftate  of
the  lungs,  and  partly  to  the  blood  which  was  coagulated  betwixt  the  bafis
of  the  cranium  and  that  membrane,  and  which  adher'd  thereto,  no  lefs  than
it  adher'd  in  that  man  who,  being  kill'd  within  the  fpace  of  four  days,  by  a
fall  from  a  confiderable  height,  is  fpoken  of  in  the  commentaries  of  the  Im-
perial Academy  of  Sciences  at  Peterfburg  {o).

However,  the  marks  of  injury  which  were  found  within  the  cranium  in
thefe  three  obfervations,  without  the  cranium  itfelf  being  injur'd,  may  be
explain'd,  you  perceive,  in  the  fame  manner,  that  the  former  two,  which  you
have  read  before  them,  were  explain'd  {p).  Nor  will  you  fuppofe,  I  believe,
that  the  five  which  I  fliall  immediately  fubjoin,  ought  to  be  differently  ex-
plain'd ;  the  cranium  in  them,  indeed,  being  injur'd  externally,  but  internally
quite  found.

5.  An  old  man,  about  feventy  years  of  age,  falling  from  a  confiderable

{I)  n.  5.  (m^  n.  6.  (")  Tom.  7.

{aj  n.  41.  &  n,  16.  ,  (/>)  n.  4.

N  2  height


92 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

height  upon  the  ground,  receiv'd  a  blow  on  the  pofterior  and  right  fide  of
the  finciput.  After  his  fall  he  lay  half-ftupid :  and  although  his  ftupor  was
difcufs'd  foon  after,  and  he  walk'd  by  himfelf  into  the  hofpical,  he  neverthe-
lefs  denied  that  he  knew  any  thing  of  his  fall,  or  had  any  remembrance  of"
the  affair. The  wound  was  attended  with  no  fymptoms  during  the  firft  days.

Yet  fcarcely  was  the  feventh  day  pafs'd  over,  but  it  was  feiz'd  with  a  gan-
grene :  and  to  the  gangrene  a  fever  was  join'd.  However,  the  gangrene  be-
ing remov'd  in  the  fpace  of  a  few  days,  the  fever  was  remov'd  likewife.
After  this  the  patient  complain'd  of  a  pain  that  opprefs'd  the  pofterior  part
of  the  head,  which,  however,  was  not  violent.  But  about  the  twentieth  day
he  was  feiz'd  with  a  fever,  a  rigor,  and  a  vomiting.  And  this  fever  return-
ing afterwards,  without  the  vomiting,  fometimes  twice,  and  fometimes  three
times,  every  day,  all  the  vital  adtions  gradually  decay'd,  and  the  patient  was
carried  off  about  the  thirtieth  day.

The  OS  fincipitis,  on  the  right  fide,  near  to  the  fagittal  and  lambdoidal
futures,  had  its  exterior  lamina  fomewhat  injur'd  and  brolcen  ;  but  internally
it  was  perfectly  found.  Betwixt  the  two  meninges,  and  in  the  ventricles  of
the  brain,  was  ferum  ;  the  whole  of  which  weigh'd  nearly  four  ounces.  The
cerebrum  was  foft  and  flaccid  ;  and  was  contain'd  in  a  pretty  lax  fpace  within
the  cranium.

lo.  In  this  patient,  four  of  thofe  circumftances  feem'd  to  be  united,  which,
■when  join'd  together,  may  juftly  give  us  reafon  to  believe  that  there  has
been  a  very  conliderable  concuffion  of  the  brain :  the  fall  from  a  high  place,
the  ftupor  immediately  following  the  fall,  together  with  the  total  lorgetful-
nefs  of  the  fall  itfelf,  the  cranium  not  being  broken,  and  the  interval  betwixt
this  and  the  brain  being  encreas'd.

LudovicusDuretus  (j),  upon  that  paiizge  of  the  Coac^e  Pr^notiones :  "  They
"  who  have  a  concufllon  of  tlie  brain,  and  have  felt  pain  therein  after  being
"  flruck,  or  having  fall'n,  are  immediately  bereft  of  their  fpeech,  do  not
"  fee  nor  hear,  and  for  the  moft  part  die,"  fufficiently  fhows  how  much
more  liable  to  concuffion  the  brain  is,  "  if  it  happen  to  have  loft  that  fulnefs
"  or  plumpnefs  that  took  up  the  whole  cavity  of  the  cranium."  And  as
Falloppius  (r)  (in  the  fame  manner  as  Fernelius  (j)  in  the  full  moons)  ac-
knowledges this  fullnefs,  "  when  the  moon  fhines  through  the  whole  night ;"
fo  he  affirm'd  it  to  be  true,  that,  "  when  there  is  no  full  moon,  the  fkull  is
*«  not  quite  fill'd  up  by  the  brain,  but  there  is  fome  fpace,  and  that  the  vef-
"  fcls,  by  which  the  parts  are  connefted,  are  a  little  diftrafted ;"  and  thai
he  himfelf  "  had  obferv'd  it  in  diiTedions."

But  whether  this  has  (by  the  anatomifts  after  him,  as  Piccolhominus,  whom
I  before  fpoke  to  you  of  (^),  when  I  happen'd  to  be  upon  the  iame  fubjeft)
not  only  been  affirm'd  in  words,  hot  confirm'd  by  accurate  obfervations  alio,
1  do  not  call  to-  mind  ;  although  this  confirmation  might  very  well  agree
\vi^  the  opinion  of  thofe  who  did  not  doubt  but,  according  to  the  various
phafes  of  the  moon,  the  force  of  difeafcs  was  various,  particularly  of  difeafes
afR;6ling  the  head,  and  that  the  danger  from  wounds  of  this  kind  is  different.

{g) Interpret.  I.  3.  tr.  z.  c.  2.  (.')  Pathol.  I.  7.  c.  8.

(r)  Traft.  de  Vulner.  c.  iz.  (/)  Epift.  4.  n.  32.

Ycc


Letter  LI. Article  lo.  5>3

Yet  1  remember  to  have  read  in  fome  authors,  and  particularly  in  John
Salzmann  (/<;)>  that  in  feveral  fubjefls,  betwixt  the  anterior  lobes  of  the  cere-
brum and  the  cranium,  "  a  fpace,  ahnoft  equal  to  the  thicknefs  of  an  inch,
*'  is  fometimes  feen  •,"  and  even  it  has  not  appear'd  to  me  that  tJie  cranium-
has  been  equally  fill'd  with  the  brain,  at  leaft  not  in  all,  as  I  have  hinted  in
the  Adverfaria  (.v) :  although  whether  this  variety  anfwer'd  to  the  various
phafes  of  the  moon,  is  neither  faid  by  them,  nor  has  ever,  to  confefs  the
truth,  been  attended  to  by  me.

It  does  not,  indeed,  efcape  me,  as  GlilTon  (jy)  formerly  aflerted,  "  that  in
"  living  animals  there  are  only  potential  and  not  aftual  cavities,"  betwixt
the  vifcera  of  the  belly  ;  "  and  that  all  the  parts  thereof  are  contiguous,  by
"  the  force  of  the  equable  comprefllon  of  the  abdominal  mufcles-,"  and,  at
the  prefent  day,  that  no  interval  is  acknowledg'd  by  many  of  the  moft  ex-
cellent men,  betwixt  any  of  the  parts  of  a  living  body  whatever.  However,
as  the  cranium  is  unchangeable  in  its  figure,  and  the  brain  may  be  more  or
lefs  turgid,  either  from  the  phafes  of  the  moon,  as  is  aflerted  by  the  very
learned  Mead  (2),  or  from  any  caufe  whatever,  which  may  encreafe  or  ex-
pand the  blood  ;  I  do  not  well  fee  how  we  can  deny,  but  the  brain  may
fometimes  be  more  or  lefs  diftant  from  the  fcuU,  even  in  the  living  body.
And  to  this  may  be  added,  the  contraction  and  denfity  of  the  brain  ;  which,,
from  what  caufe  foever  it  may  arife,  (for  the  ancients,  and  among  thefe  Lie-
bautius  (a),  fuppos'd  it  to  happen  from  old  age  itfclf)  muft  of  courfe  dimi-
nifli  the  bulk  of  the  brain,  and  confequently  make  it  retrafl  from  the  en-
clofing  cranium.

At  leaft  Littre  (^)  not  only  found  the  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum  in  the-
ftate  1  have  niention'd,  but  alfo  found  it  at  a  confiderable  diftance  from  the
cranium,  in  a  robuft  youth,  who  had  run,  in  the  moft  violent  manner  ima-
ginable, with  his  head  againft  the  wall,  fo  as  to  kill  himfelf  in  the  fmalleft
moment  of  time,  _And  although  he  confiders  this  ftate  of  the  brain  as  the
elFedt  of  the  concuffion  ;  there  will  be  fome,  perhaps,  who,  with  Duretus,
would  rather  chufe  to  confider  it  as  the  caufe  of  the  concuffion  being  more
violent ;  and  ftill  a  greater  number,  who  will  confider  the  fcull's  not  being
broken,  and  giving  way,  and  the  dafliing  of  it  againft  a  hard  and  immoveable
body,  as  the  caufes  of  this  concuffion  being  fo  violent.

For  you  know  much  is  attributed  to  both  thefe  caufes  of  concuffion  by  the
more  modern  furgeons  -,  to  the  fecond  for  this  reafon,  that  "-  the  brain  being.
*'  ftiaken  againft  a  hard  body,  and  driven  back  again  thereby,  fufitrs  two
"  motions,  diametrically  oppofite,  in  one  moment  of  time;"  and  to  the  firft,
becaufe  "  if  the  cranium  is  not  broken,  the  whole  impetus  of  the  percuffion
"  is  direfted  to  the  brain,"  rn  confequence  of  its  being  "  intercepted  "  by
no  large  fradture,  or  by  "  a  bone  which  is  broken  into  many  pieces."

Why  then,  you  will  fay,  fince  in  the  old  man  you  have  juft  now  defcrib'd
from  Valfalva,  thefe  two  caufes  were  not  wanting,  (for  he  had  dalh'd  hiS'

(ft)  DJffert.  de  mira  cranii  Fradl.  §.  17.  (z)  De  imper.  Sol.  ac  Lun.

(.v)  VI.  Aniinad.  84.  (a)  Schol.  ad  Holler.  Coram,  in  Hippocr,

C/j  Tt&&.,  de  Farcib. Conjinent. c. 16. Aph.  58.  S.  7.
B.  21.  {!•) Hift.  de  r  Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1705.

Obi".  Anat,  iz.

head-


94 Book  IV.  Of  Chlrurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

head  againft  the  ground,  and  had  not  his  cranium  fradur'd)  and  though  there
feem'd  to  be  lb  many  other  circumftances  from  whence  a  great  concuITion  of
the  brain  might  be  conjedur'd,  did  he  not  die  before  the  thirtieth  day,  nor
futfer  fo  confiderable  dilorders,  nor  yet  fhow  any  blood,  or  pus,  to  have  been
extravafated  within  the  cranium  ?  I  fuppofe  becaufe  he,  probably,  did  not
fall  from  a  very  high  place,  though  from  a  place  of  feme  height ;  nor  yet
upon  ftones ;  and  becaufe  part  of  the  violence  of  the  blow  was  intercepted  by
the  external  lamina  of  the  cranium  giving  way,  and  being  broken  in  pieces.
And  the  flight  and  fhort  ftupor,  and  the  lofs  of  memory,  which  then  hap-
pen'd,  as  they  happen'd  without  the  other  diforders  that  are  enumerated  by
Hippocrates,  fhow'd  the  concuffion  of  the  brain  to  have  been  lefs.

For  our  Peter  de  Marchettis,  as  you  have  it  there  (c)  in  the  Sepulchretum
alfo,  faw  "  fome  perfons  who  had  only  this  fymptom  appear  after  a  fall,  or  a
"  blow  upon  the  head,  (that  is  to  fay,  an  alienation  of  mind,  with  a  priva-
*'  tion  of  fenfe  and  motion  -,"  which  are  certainly  more  violent  fymptoms  than
thofe  that  immediately  follow'd  the  fall  of  our  old  man)  faw  thofe  perfons,  I
fay,  "  quite  free  from  difeafe  on  the  following  day."

Since,  therefore,  this  concuffion  was  more  flight,  and  fo  much  the  more
flight,  if  the  brain  happen'd  to  be  at  that  time  foft  and  flaccid,  or  approach-
ing nearly  to  this  fl:ate,  it  is  not  to  be  wonder'd  at  that  the  larger  blood-
veflels  were  none  of  them  ruptur'd ;  but  only  fuch  very  fmall  ones  as  would
naturally  difcharge,  by  a  very  flow  diftillation,  thofe  four  ounces  of  ferum,
which,  by  gradually  injuring  the  vital  actions,  at  length  totally  deftroy'cl
the  man.

But  if  you  fhould  choofe  rather  to  fuppofe  that  fluid  to  have  proceeded
gradually  from  the  fmall  vefi"els,  not  of  the  blood,  but  of  the  lymph,  which
were  ruptur'd,  fuppofing  that,  by  this  means,  both  the  rupture  of  thefe  vef-
fels,  and  the  long  itagnation  of  that  extravafated  matter,  without  any  evident
corruption,  may  be  better  conceiv'd  of;  you  will  have  fome  authors,  in  con-
jundlion  with  whom  you  will  think,  and  among  thefe  Rohault  (J),  and
before  him  Bohn,  who  has  even  produc'd  the  diflfeflions  from  whence  he
made  this  conjefture  (f)  •,  and  has  affirm'd,  in  a  fucceeding  work  (/),  what
he  at  firfl:  had  left  undetermin'd,  that  he  had  feen  the  lymphedufts  "  about
*'  the  convolutions  of  the  brain,  in  particular,  very  turgid  "  in  a  cer-
tain boy.

However,  that  fome  vefTel  is  broken  in  the  concufllonof  the  brain,  appears
from  very  frequent  obfervations  •,  to  which  you  may  add  that  publifti'd  by
Chriftian  Vater  (g) :  yet  that  this  is  perpetual  in  a  fatal  concuffion,  as  if  the
extravafated  humours  always  were  the  caufes  of  death,  and  the  concuffion  of
the  brain  never  was  of  itfelt  fatal,  it  does  not  feem  poffible  for  thofe  to  afi'ert,
to  whom  the  hifl:ory  I  have  quoted  from  Littre,  and  another,  in  like  manner,
of  the  celebrated  Fl^velius  (h),  are  knowir.  For  in  neither  of  thefe  was  any
thing  found  to  be  extravafated  after  the  moft  violent  blow  upon  the  head.

(<r)  Schol.  adObr.  12.  (g) Eph.  N. C.  Dec. 3. A. 9. & 10.

{il)  Tr.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  4.  c.  11.  Obi'.  165.

{e)  De  Renunc,  Viiln.  Seft.  2.  c.  I- {/■>)  Coramerc.  Litter.  A.  1741.  Hebd.  14.

{/)  De  Trepan.  ditJic.  in  fin..

I  Nor


Letter  LI. Article  1 1.  95

Nor  will  any  one  have  the  better  fide  of  the  queftion,  in  afierting  that  an
extravafation  was  not  made  for  this  reafon,  that  immediately  after  the  con-
cuffion  the  motion  of  the  fluids  ceas'd,  together  with  life.  For  befides  that
it  appears,  from  the  fecond  hiftory,  that  the  man  had  liv'd  about  twelve
hours  after  the  blow  was  receiv'd  ;  it  is  certain  that  neither  of  them  was
kill'd  by  an  extravafation  where  there  was  none  at  all.  Death,  therefore,  was
brought  on  by  the  concufTion  alone.  Wherefore  there  is  even  room  ta
doubt  often,  when  an  extravafation  is  join'd  with  ir,  whether  the  one,
or  the  other,  of  the  two,  had  the  greater  efficacy  in  producing  the  ca-
taftrophe.

But  in  order  to  conceive  in  what  manner  the  particles  of  the  cranium  are
Ihaken,  at  the  time  of  a  violent  percuJTion,  and  when  (haken  give  a  ftilt
greater  concuffion  to  the  brain  than  they  fuffer  themfelves,  and  how  the  con-
cuflion  of  the  brain  renders  it  unfit  for  its  neceffary  funftions,  by  injuring  its-
proper,  not  more  invifible  than  tender,  internal  ftrufture,  by  ftretching  the
fibres  thereof,  by  relaxing,  by  diftorting,  by  compreffing,  by  entangling,
by  lacerating,  or  by  vitiating  them,  in  any  other  way  whatever;  I  fay,  in
order  to  conceive  how  thefe  changes  happen,  you  may  read  the  conjeftures
of  Bohn  {i).  After  having  read  which,  you  will,  perhaps,  think  it  quite
fuperfluous  to  enquire,  whether  any  injury  of  the  fame  kind  be  brought
upon  the  fmall  trunks  of  the  nerves  alfo,  where  they  already  go  out  from  the
medulla  oblongata,  by  the  great  concufllon  of  the  brain  ;  and  whether,  if  it
be  brought  on,  this  injury,  of  itfelf  alone,  is  capable  of  bringing  on  all
thofe  violent  diforders  which  then  follow.

But  now,  laying  afide  thefe  difquifitions,  let  us  go  on  to  propofe  more
violent  efFefts  of  wounds  in  the  head,  than  appear'd  in  the  old  man  de-
fcrib'd  ;  whether  we  confider  them  as  following  in  the  living  body,  or  found
in  the  body  after  death.

II.  A  woman,  of  more  than  forty  years  of  age,  failing  from  a  high
ladder,  hurt  the  left  part  of  her  finciput,  a  little  above  the  os  temporis.
She  lay  as  in  a  manner  dead  after  her  fall :  yet  a  little  after  this  (he  feem'd  ta
be  in  health  as  before ;  nor  did  there  appear  to  be  any  wound,  except  of  the
fkin.  And  although,  about  the  fourteenth  day,  the  fkin  was  feiz'd  with  a
gangrene  in  the  wounded  part,  which  gangrene  a  fever  accompanied,  yet
within  a  few  days  the  gangrene  was  firft  overcome,  and  after  that  the  fever.
But  before  the  thirtieth  day,  the  fever  came  on  again  with  a  coldnefs :  and  to
this  was  added,  about  the  tWrty  fourth  day,  an  apoplectic  aftefcion,  with  a
lofs  of  fpeech,  and  a  privation  of  motion  in  the  whole  right  fide  of  the  body,,
though  the  fenfe  remain'd  at  the  fame  time.  However,  fne  fhow'd  by  nods-
and  figns  that  fhe  underftood  what  was  faid  :  and  a  kind  of  epileptic  convul-
fions,  as  it  wtre,  which  fometimes  afi^edt^d  the  whole  body,  agitated  that
part  no  lefs  than  they  did  the  left  fide.  At  length  fhe  died  about  the
fortieth  day.  ■

The  external  lamina  of  the  cranium  was  open'd  into  the  form  of  a  femi-
circle,  in  the  part  where  the  head  had  been  in]ur'd;  but  the  interiors  of  the
bone  were  found. Yet  the  part  of  the  pia  mater  which  lay  under  that  place

(i)  C.  I.  cLt.


o6 Book  IV.  Of  Clnrurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

was  f.-.nioiis-,  and  the  brain,  in  the  fame  place,  was  ting'd  of  a  brownifh  and
palld  colour.  But  the  ventricles  thereof  were  found,  as  the  whole  right  fide
was  aUb.

17..  A  virgin  of  fiveand-tvventy  years  of  age,  having  fall'n  upon  the
ground,  was  wounded  with  a  very  Iharp  ftone  in  the  left  part  of  her  forehead,
iieino-  recciv'd  into  the  hofpital,  Hie  was  troubl'd  with  a  continual  fever,
which  increas'd  every  day.  The  wound  began  to  be  feiz'd  with  a  gangrene,
which  in  that  fealbn,  (for  it  was  the  month  of  June,  1689)  came  upon  all
wounds.  Some  time  after,  the  patient  became  idiotic,  as  it  were ;  (he  heard
but  little  ;  Jhe  fpoke  not  at  all ;  (he  fix'd  her  eyes  ftedfaftly  on  thofe  about
her.  At  length,  a  tremor  of  the  whole  body  came  on,  during  which  (lie
died  ;  and  this  was  about  the  beginning  of  the  twenty-eighth  day.

The  bone  that  lay  beneath  the  wound  was  hollow'd  out  with  a  fmall  dent,
and  a  foramen,  as  it  were,  externally-,  about  which  were  feen  three  chinks.
But  neither  theie  chinks,  nor  the  foramen,  reach'd  to  the  internal  parts.
Yet  the  meninges,  in  that  part  which  anfwer'd  to  the  wound,  were  both  of
them  eroded  ;  and  from  hence  a  ferous  coUuvies  was  difcharg'd,  which,  being
difFus'd  through  the  whole  fubftance  of  the  brain,  had  infedted  it  with  a  dif-
agreeable  odour,  and  ting'd  it  of  a  blackifh  colour.

13.  If  it  had  happen'd  to  be  the  fame  feafon  wherein  a  gangrene  came
on  in  the  wound  of  the  head  of  the  woman,  and  of  the  old  man  laft  fpoken
of,  and  of  the  man  of  whom  we  fpoke  almoft  in  the  beginning  (/^),  that  it
was  in  the  cafe  of  this  virgin  ;  we  might,  perhaps,  refer  hither  a  pafiTage
from  the  fourth  book  of  the  Epidemics  (/) :  "  In  Aenum,  whofoever  was
"  wounded  in  the  head,  the  wound  had  a  horrid  afpedt,  was  malignant  and
"  fuppurated  :"  and,  certainly,  that  obiervation  of  Pigrseus,  which  you  have
there  in  the  Sepulchretum  (;«),  and  which  mentions  a  certain  year  "  wherein
"  a  gangrene  came  upon  almoft  all  wounds,"  may  be  fuppos'd  to  relate  to
the  prefent  cafe.  At  leatl,  fome  preceding  deprav'd  ftate  of  aliments,  or
prefent  conftitutions  of  air,  although  fometimes  hid  from  the  fenfes,  add,  in
general,  a  deprav'd  ftate  of  fome  other  particular  diforder  to  difeafes  hap-
pening at  that  time  ;  as  has  often  been  obferv'd  by  phyficians  ;  and  particularly
a  gangrene,  in  general,  to  all  wounds,  as  happen'd  fome  years  ago  at  Paris  (n),
and  even  in  the  very  city  which  we  are  at  prefent  fpeaking  of,  1  mean  that
of  Bologna  (0).

14.  A  young  man,  of  eighteen  years  of  age,  llender,  and  of  a  blackifli
colour,  having  receiv'd  a  blow  by  a  (lone  that  was  thrown  againft  one  of  the
offa  fincipitis,  where  the  temporal  mufcle  arifes  from  it,  pafs'd  two  days  with-
out any  fymptom  worthy  of  remark,  if  you  except  a  fever.  But  on  the
fixth  day  after  that,  as  be  lay  in  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Vita,  the  wound
became  livid,  and  the  difcharge  which  came  from  it  was  exceedingly  foetid ;
befides  which  he  had  an  acute  fever.  To  thefe  fymptoms  was  added,  near
the  eighth  day,  a  fopcrific  diforder ;  fo  that  when fpoken  to,  he  made  no

{k)  N.  %.  (0)  Vid.  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  1738.  Hebd.

IJ)  N.  26.  Apud  Marinell.  42.  n.  i.  fed  &  aliis  poftea  annis  idem  accidit

(m)  In  Schol.  ad  §  6.  Obf.  6.  ibidem.

(/;)  Maloviii  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des Sc.
A.  );4.8j  &  174-'-

anfwer.


Letter  LI. Articles  15, 16.  i)j

anfwer.  Sometimes  he  fent  forth  a  kind  of  fufpirious  voice.  His  whole
face  became  tumid  and  yellow.  With  all  thefe  fymptoms  he  went  on  to  the
eleventh  day  ;  on  which,  with  a  very  great  expiration,  he  died.

The  whole  body  feem'd  to  be  that  of  an  icSteric  perfon.  From  the  wound
a  purulent  matter  had  made  itfelf  many  pafTages  betwixt  the  cranium  and
the  cutis  ;  which  it  had  alio  eroded.  And  the  bone  had  contrafted  fome
roughnefs  on  the  furface,  from  the  ftroke  of  the  ftonc  ;  but  fhow'd  no  injury
on  the  internal  furface,  which  fell  under  the  notice  of  the  fenfes.  However,
betwixt  the  bone  and  the  dura  mater,  in  the  interftices  of  the  vefTels  of  this
membrane,  was  obferv'd  a  cineritious  matter,  not  much  unlike  a  condens'd
pus,  in  that  part  only  which  lay  under  the  blow  :  and  in  the  fame  part  only
the  cerebrum  had  contrafted  a  livid  colour,  to  the  depth  of  two  inches.

All  the  other  parts  within  the  cranium  were  found.  All  the  parts  in  the
thorax  were  found  alfo.  But  the  blood  was  extremely  fluid,  except  that,  in
the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  was  the  beginning  of  a  polypous  concretion.

15.  Another  young  man,  of  the  fame  age,  of  a  fanguineous  temperamenr,
and  of  a  fattifli  habit  of  body,  was  wounded,  on  the  firlt  of  November,  in  the
year  1688,  in  the  upper  part  of  his  forehead  to  the  left  fide ;  on  which  he  im-
mediately fell  down,  being  fomewhat  confus'd  in  his  head.  Being  brought
from  the  place  of  his  fall  into  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Morte,  he  feem'd
to  hope  that  he  might  have  a  fuccefsful  cure,  as  he  pcrform'd  all  the  natural
functions  of  life,  and  was  without  any  fever.  But  behold,  on  the  eleventh
■day,  he  was  attack'd  wiih  a  fever;  which  becoming  more  violent  on  the  day
following,  gave  occafion  to  open  a  vein  once  more.  The  wound,  inftead  of
conco6led  pus,  difcharg'd  a  ferous  and  bloody  humour:  the  part  of  the
■forehead  which  lay  under  the  wound  became  fwol'n  :  and  pains  of  the  head,
'limbs,  and  back,  were' added;  which,  about  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  day,
degenerated  into  fpafmodic  afFedions.  And  at  tl:ie  fame  time,  as  he  began
to  be  delirious  to  fuch-a  degree,  on  the  beginning  of  that  day,  as  to  make  it
neceflary-  to  confine  him  down  in  bed,  he  ceas'd  to  live  any  more.

The  common  integuments  about  the  wound  being  cut  afunder,  a  great
quantity  of  fanious  matter  was  found  to  lie  therein,  and  extend  itfelf  quite
to  the  eye,  where  the  forehead  was  fwell'd.  But  the  bone  had  been  injur'd
by  the  wounding  inftrument,  only  fuperficially.  Thefe  were  the  appearances
•externally.  And  within  the  cranium,  betwixt  the  dura  and  pia  mater,  in  the
part  where  they  correfponded  to  the  wound,  a  quantity  of  fanious  matter  was
found  ;  notwithftanding,  we  could  difcover  no  mark  of  injury  in  thofe  mem-
branes, and  none  in  the  whole  brain  ;  except  that  the  fanguiferous  veiTels,  which
lay  hid  under  the  pus,  were  turgid  with  very  black  and  coagulated  blood,  fo
■as  almoft  to  referable  varices.  The  vifcera  of  the  thorax,  which  are  fome-
times  found  to  be  affedted  in  diforders  of  this  kind,  were  unhurt :  and  only
a  polypous  concretion  was  found  in  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart.

16.  From  what  is  faid  in  the  latter  part  of  this  hiftory,  you  fee  why  it  was
remark'd,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  preceding  hiftory,  that  every  thing  in  the
thorax  was  found.  But  what  marks  of  injury  Valfalva  has  fometimes  feen
in  the  thorax  of  thofe  who  have  died  of  wounds  in  the  head,  the  four  next
obfervations  will  fhew.  The  firft  will,  at  the  fame  time,  confirm  fome  of
Vol.  III.  O "  thofe


9  8 Book  IV.  Of  Chiriirgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

thofe  things  which  I  have  already  faid  {p)  in  regard  to  the  injuries  of  the
nerve  which  is  reflciSted  under  the  eye-brow.  For,  according  to  the  different
force  and  ftate  of  thefe  injuries,  fometimes  flight  convuliions,  which  fpread
no  farther  than  the  eye,  arife  ;  but  fometimes  very  violent  and  far-diffus'd
ones.  To  thefe  flight  convulfions  relates,  perhaps,  in  fonne  meafurc,  that
paflage  of  the  Coac^e  Prienotioiies  {q)  which  I  have  mention'd  in  a  former
work  :  "  The  fight  is  obfcur'd  in  wo'unds  made  upon  the  eye- brow,  and
"  a  little  higher :"  and  to  the  very  violent  ones,  in  my  opinion,  the  words
of  Lancif],  which  I  have  likewife  quoted  heretofore  (r),  refer,  "  that  wounds
"  which  happen  in  thefe  parts  are  very  dangerous :"  and  to  the  fame,  I  ihould
believe,  related,  in  fome  meafure  at  leaft,  the  convuUion  of  the  face  in  the
man  whofe  wound  was  defcrib'd  above  {s)  at  the  eye-brow  -,  as  well  as  thofe
much  more  widely-diffus'd  and  very  violent  convulfions,which  immediately  fol-
low'd  the  wound  that  was  inflifted  on  the  part  I  Ihall  fpeak  of  imtnediately.

17.  A  young  man,  of  fix-and-twenty  years  of  age,  had  a  ftone  thrown  ac
him  by  an  enemy,  and  was  wounded  on  the  right  fide  of  the  left  eye-brow.
He  fell  down  immediately,  indeed  ;  but  foon  rofe  up  again,  and  purfu'd  his
enemy  with  alacrity.  He  afterwards  came  to  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de
Vita  with  the  fame  vigour  of  mind  :  where,  after  the  proper  remedies  were
applied  to  the  wound,  it  was  neceflfary,  in  a  manner,  to  compel  him  to  re-
main -,  fo  light  did  he  let  by  a  wound  of  this  kind.  On  that  very  day,  the
paroxyfm  of  a  quartan  intermittent  fever,  wherewith  he  was  then  troubl'd,
happen'd  to  be  expefted,  and  really  came  ;  but  it  became  a  continual  fever,
■with  a  large  and  vehement  pulie,  and  a  confiderable  pain  of  the  head.

About  the  feventh  day  a  delirium  was  added  to  the  fever,  together  with
fome  convulfive  motions.  Near  the  eleventh,  one  or  two  febrile  acceflions
came  on,  with  a  peculiar  rigor.  At  length,  the  delirium  ceas'd,  and  the  man
lay  in  a  foporofe  ftate,  except  that  he  was  fliaken  by  convulfive  motions.
And,  indeed,  thofe  who  were  about  him  faid,  that  they  had,  many  times  in
the  night,  obferv'd  him  to  have  rais'd  himfclf  up  from  the  bed  by  an  aimoll
incredible  exertion,  lifting  up  his  head,  and  clinching  both  his  hands  :  at
the  ceafmg  of  which  motions  he  lay  like  a  perfon  dead.  Yet  Ifis  right  hand
was  for  two  days  before  his  death  paralytic,  as  far  as  related  to  the  motion  ;
for  as  to  the  lenfacion,  it  was  not  quite  deftimte  of  that;  but  after  eight
hours,  the  right  foot  be^an  to  be  mov'd  more  weakly  likewife.  And  his
refpiration  having  already  become  laborious  before  this  time,  he  at  length
died  in  the  conclufion  of  the  fourteenth  day.

By  examining  the  wound  externally,  a  little  abfcefs  was  obferv'd  at  the
fide  of  it;  and  part  of  the  fanies  of  this  abfcefs  had  crept,  betwixt  the
mufcles  and  the  fl<in,  towards  the  ear.  Bur  the  bone  beneath  the  wound  was
fiffur'd,  and  the  dura  mater  that  anfwer'd  to  it  was  flightly  injur'd  :  the  in-
terior part  of  the  cranium  on  the  fame  fide,  that  is,  on  the  left,  was  fill'd
with  pus,  which  was  fhut  up  betwixt  the  dura  and  pia  mater.  And  this  pus
the  fubllance  of  the  brain  that  lay  beneath,  feem'd  to  have  imbib'd ;  for  it

(p)  Epift.  Anat  18.  n.  7.  (r)  Epift.  Anat.  i8.  n.  7.  in  fin,

(i)  ^-  3-  apiid  Marinell,  (j)  N.  7.


Letter  LT. Articles  i  8,  19.  99

was  of  the  fame  colour;  but  on  the  furface  only. Every  thing  elfe  was
found  -,  except  that  a  little  ferum  was  found  at  the  bafis  of  the  cerebrum.

The  thorax  being  open'd,  in  the  lungs  were  found,  here  and  there,  various
tubercles,  of  a  confiderable  hardnefs :  fome  of  which,  when  cue  into,  dif-
charg'd  a  pure  fanies ;  the  others,  being  not  yet  fuppurated,  relennbl'd  the
firmnefs  of  a  glandular  body.

18.  A  boy,  about  thirteen  years  of  age,  was  wounded  by  the  throwing  of
a  ftone  in  the  right  part  of  the  finciput,  above  the  temporal  mufcle.  He
immediately  fell  down,  with  fome  obfcuration  of  the  internal  fenfes,  and  vo-
mited. He  was  carried  into  the  fame  hofpital,  but  was  not  feiz'd  with  any
fever  till  the  fourteenth  day.  This  coming  on,  a  great  quantity  of  fanies
was  difcharg'd  by  the  wound  ;  and  a  little  purulent  matter  from  the  mouth,
by  fpitting.  About  the  twentieth  day  a  delirium  came  on  ;  and  about  the
twenty-fifth  he  died.

In  Separating  the  fidn  from  the  cranium,  about  that  and  the  pericranium
fmall  abfceffes  were  obferv'd  :  but  thefe  had  no  communication  witli  the
wound,  which  fell  under  the  notice  of  the  fenfes.  Under  the  wound,  hovv'-
ever,  the  bone  was  broken  and  deprefs'd,  and  adher'd  clofely  to  the  dura
mater,  in  which  it  alfo  had  fix'd  fome  of  its  acuminated  particles.  Yet  no
laceration  of  this  membrane  difcover'd  itfelf  to  the  fenfes  ;  nor  yet  any  in-
jury of  the  brain,  if  you  except  one  or  two  ounces  of  ferum,  which  ran
out  by  the  infundibulum,  while  the  brain  was  taken  out.  The  thorax  being
epen'd,  the  lungs  were  found  to  be  very  red,  and  in  them  were  found  fmall
abfcelTes  full  of  pus.

19.  A  young  man,  being  ftruck  by  a  ftone  on  the  left  fide  of  the  finciput
fell  down  in  confequence  thereof:  yet  he  came  by  himfelf  into  the  hofpital  of
St.  Mary  de  Morte.  "There  were  no  fymptoms  of  difeafe.  About  twenty
days  alter,  when  the  patient  had  indulg'd  himfelf  in  eating,  a  dreadful  fever
came  on  -,  which,  by-returning  many  times,  afflifled  the  patient  very  much.
And  although  he  was  freed  from  this  fever,  yet  a  cicatrix  could  never  be
brought  on  the  bone,  which  was  laid  bare  in  the  wound,  as  long  as  he  liv'd.
After  thefe  fevers,  the  patient  was  attack'd  with  a  cough  ;  which,  for  a  long
time,  was  dry,  till  two  or  three  days  before  death  he  threw  up  a  purulent
matter  by  fpitting.  In  the  mean  while,  a  gangrene  had  feiz'd  upon  the  but-
tocks by  long  lying  ^^  and  befides,  on  that  night  which  preceded  his  death,
a  large  abfcels  was  obferv'd  in  the  back  ;  and  this,  being  fpontaneoufly  rup-
tur'd,  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity  of  pus.  Wherefore,  no  fooner  had  he
pafs'd  over  the  fecond  month  but  he  died,  without  any  injury  of  the  intel-
leflual  powers.

The  body,  from  a  long  difeafe  of  this  kind,  and  from  delay,  becaufe  we
were  not  permitted  to  diffefl  it  till  fome  days  after  death,  was  very  putrid
and  ofFenfive ;  yet  was  differed  with  accuracy.  The  integuments  of  the  head
being  remov'd,  at  the  upper  fide  of  the  wound  was  feen  a  disjundion  of  the
fagittal  future  :  but  the  os  fincipitis,  in  that  part  of  it  which  had  been  always
iincover'd,  was  without  any  injury;  yet  in  other  parts  it  was-here  and  there
eroded  with  a  caries,  but  efpecially  near  the  fquamofe  future,  where  the  ca-
ries had  perforated  the  whole  thicknefs  thereof.  The  dura  mater,  however,
which  lay  under  that  bone  was  unafFeded,  except  that  it  inclin'd  to  a  fome-

O  2  what


I  o  o Book  IV.  Of  Ghirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

what  livid  colour,  and  (hovv'd  feveral  bony  particles  adhering  to  if,  and  oir
the  internal  iiJrface,  under  the  very  place  of  the  wound,  it  had  an  abfcefs>
annex'd  to  it,  lying  in  the  excavated  fubftance  of  the  brain,  which  was  fmall
however,  fo  as  fcarccly  to  be  able  to  contain  a  little  filbert ;  and  from  this„,
while  that  membrane  was  puU'd  away  from  the  brain,  a  thick  and  green,
pus  was  difcharg'd.  In  the  difleftion  of  the  brain  a  ferum,  but  in  fmall.
quantity, was  obferv'd  in  the  bafis  of  the  cranium.

The  thorax  being  open'd,  the  lungs  were  found  to  be  hollow'd  out  with*
many  and  various  Imall  abfcelTes;  Ibme  of  which,  inclining  from  the  nature
of  a  tubercle  to  the  condition  of  an  abfcefs,  contain'd  a  fanies  not  as  yet  per-
fefl,  but  fuch  as  had  only  begun  to  be  maturated  into  a  fluid  and  faiiiouS'
matter.  The  pericardium  contain'd  a  great  quantity  of  water,,  theheart.no
polypous  concretion.

At  length  we  thought  proper  to  enquire  whether  any  pafTage  lay  open  tcb
the  cavity  of  that  large  abfcefs  in  the  back,  through  the  interftices  of  the
mufcles,  whereby  matter  might  have  flow'd  thither  from  the  head.  How-
ever, no  appearance  of  this  kind  was  met  with  ;  as  the  parts  which  lay  be-
tween, and  efpecially  the  external  ones,  were  found.  But  the  mufcles  in  this,
body  were  here  and  there  pale,  and  thofe  that  are  call'd  abdominal  were  livid.,

20.  A  man,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  v/as  ftruck  with  a  ilick  on  the  left  part
of  the  finciput,  no  morbid  fymptom  being  the  confequence  of  the  wound.
He  came  by  himfelf  to  the  hofpital ;  where,  by  experienc'd  furgeons,  there
was  judg'd  to  be  no  injury,  but  an  external  one;  and  the  cure  fucceeded
happily  till  the  fourteenth  day,  without  the  appearance  of  one  bad  fymptom.
But  on  that  very  day  a  fever  attack'd  him,  with  a  rigor,  and  a  pain  in  the
belly.  On  the  following  days,  in  like  manner,  a  difficulty  of  refpiration-
came  on,  with  a  fenfe  of  weight,  a  cough,  and  a  purulent  fpitting.  And  at
length  he  died,  about  the  twenty-fecond  day.

As  nothing  morbid,  befides  that  injury  which  appear'd  externally,  could
be  found  in  the  head;  that  is,  neither  in  the  cranium  nor  the  brain,  except
that  a  little  ferum  flow'd  out  during  the  difledtion  of  the  latter ;  the  thora^j
was  open'd.  Both  of  the  cavities  of  which  were  full  of  pus  ;  and  the  lungs,
although  loofe  from  the  ribs,  were  found  to  be  diftinguifh'd  with  many  tu?
bercles,  ibme  of  which,  being  already  fuppurated,  emitted  a  fanies  upon.in-r
cifion.

In  the  pericardium  was  but  a  fmall  quantity  of  water.  In  both,  the  ventricles-
of  the  heart  were  polypous  concretions,  that  in  the  right  being  very  largCj..
that  in  the  left  but  fmall.  The  belly  at  length  being  open'd,  in  the  right
part  of  the  liver  frequent  tubercles  were  feen  ;  and  amonglt  thefe,  fome  which'
had  already  come  to  fuppuration.

2L.  You  fee  that  Valfalva  is  induc'd,  by  his  own  obfervations,  to  fay  (/),.
that  the  vifcera  of  the  thorax  are  fometimes  afi^edted  in  wounds  of  the  head  :;
akhoucrh  he  might  have  bee,n  induc'd  even  by  others.  For  Nicolaus  Mafia  (z^)
iiad  already  feen,  in  the  year  1553,  ViftorTrincavella,  with  otlier  very  learned
men,  being  prefent,  fuch  things  as  I  do  not  remember  to  be  extant,  and  not
.only  here  in  the  Sepulchretum,  but  even  not  in  any  authors  who  have  treated

(/)  Supra,  n.  15.  in, fin.-  («)  lib.  Introd.  Anat.  c,  28,

of;


Letter  LI. Article  22;.  lol

of  fubi<?i5ts  of  this  kind ;  for  which  reafon  I  will  mention  them  to  you  here.
ia  a  brief  mannen

A  certain  man  having  receiv'd  a  wound  upon  the  right  fide  of  his  head,,
near  to  the  fagittal  future,  together  with  a  wound  of  the  meninges,  he
died  delirious  and  paralytic ;  which  paralyfis,  for  the  mofb  parr,  fays  he,  is
wont  to  happen  on  that  fide  of  the  body  which  is  oppofite  to  the  wound.
In  the  head  were  found  two  impofthumes,  the  pus  of  which  was  laudable  -,:
one  in  the  fubftance  of  the  brain,  near  to  the  wound  •,  the  other  in  the  pofte-
rior  part  of  the  cerebelluoi.  And  in  the  thorax  was  a  great  quantity  of  fa-
mes, and  that  of  an  ill  condition'd  kind,  found  within  an  ulcer  of  the  left,
lobe  of  the  lungs,  the  cavity  of  which  was  larger  than  half  the  fliell  of  ?l
hen's  egg.  There  was  alfo  a  manifeft  fanies  on  the  external  furface  of  the
left  auricle  of  the  heart,  the  whole  of  which  was  ulcerated.  But  even  in  the
right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  in  the  carnea  columna,  was  a  remarkable
impofthume,  which  afcended  quite  up  to  one  of  the  valves;  this  valve  alfo
being  affeded  with  a  confiderable  tumour  of  the  apaftematous  kind.

And  that  you.  may  not  fuppofe  thefe  apoftems  to  have  exifted  in  the  tho-
rax, before  the  wound  ;  Maila  afferts,  that  he  knew  the  man,  and  that  he
had  not  ever  complain'd  of  any  pain,  nor  was  troubl'd  with  any  cough,  even
after  he  lay  ill  of  the  wound,  Qc.

To  this  ought  to  be  added  the  obfervations  of  our  M'archetti  {x).  And  as
thefe  are  much  more  known,  and  even  related  in  the  Sepulchretum  (jy),  youi
may  there  fee  how  often  he  found  the  lungs  and  the  pleura  eroded  in  wounds
of  the  head,  and  half  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  fiU'd  with  pus  ;  and  how  he
argues  againft  thofe  who  do  not  ded.uce  this  from  the  wound  of  the  head.
For  he  himfelf  did  not  doubt,  by  reafon  of  previous  pains  in  the  neck,  ef--
pecially  in  the  hinderand  lateral  part,,  but. a  purulent  matter- defcended  from
tiie  wound  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax.  Yet  this  pafiage,  as  you  have
feen  by  the  obfervacion  of  Valfalva  on  the  young  man  (z),  could  not  be  con-
firm'd,  even  in  regard  to  the  abfcefs  of  the  back.

a2.  You  have  others  then,  befides  Yalfalva,  who,  in  cafes  of  wounds  in
the.  head,  have  fometimes  found  pus  within  the  thorax.  There  are  even
fome  who  have  found  pus  in  the  belly,  as  the  fame  Marchetti  (a),  who  has,
even  found  a  taint  of  the  fpleen  and  purulent  puftules  •,  as  there  are  others,.,
which  I  fee  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  (^),  who  fay,  that  abfcefles
liave  been  tranOated  into  the  flomach  alfo,  the  intellines,  and  mefentery.
Yet  not  only  the  fame  obfervers,  and  Marchetti  and  Bohn  {c),  who  likewife
mentions  the  pleura,  the  lungs,  and  the  fpleen  promifcuoufly,  do  not  omic
the  liver ;  but  moft  others  mention  this,  as  the  only  vifcus  into  which  pus,
can  be  carried  from  the  head  when  wounded.

And  that  you  will  learn  from  all  the  hiftories  and  fcholia  which  are  propos'd
under  the  fixteenth  obfervation  in  the  Sepulchretum.  Nor  will  you  be  puz--
zled  by  the  careleffnefs  of  the  printers  (4),,  who  write  afoftema  in  capite,  or.

{x)  Obf.  Med.  Chir.  15.  {b)  Obf.  5.  §  4.

(y)  Schol.  ad  §  z.  Obf.  16.  (0  De  Renunc.  Vuln,.S.  1..

{;;)  fupra, n.  19.  (<^) §  I.  &  3,

(^)  Schol.  cit.


16  2 Book  IV.  Of  Giirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

fulneribiis  bepa/is,  inllead  of  apofiema  in  kepate,  and  ^ulneribtts  capitis.  But
it  would,  perhaps,  rather  hurt  your  undcrttanding  to  believe,  that  Balloniua
had  propos'd,  as  a  thing  well-afcertain'd  to  himfelf,  what  he  has  faid  of  an
abicefs  obfcrv'd  in  the  concave  part  of  the  liver;  fince,  upon  infpedling  that
aependix  to  his  little  book  on  convulfions,  from  whence  this  palTage  is  taken,
you  do  not  find  what  we  have  in  the  Sepulchretum(^)  -,  "  And  this  I  know
"  to  have  been  obferv'd  by  mcft  furgeons ;"  but  the  following  words:  "  Whe-
"  ther  this  does  really  happen  I  am  ignorant;  yet  1  have  heard  that  it  has
"  been  obferv'd  by  the  greater  part  of  furgeons.  But  if  it  does  happen,  by
*'  what  means  it  can  come  to  pafs,  and  whether  it  is  probable  that  it  can
"  happen,  will  moreover  be  worthy  of  enquiry."

You  will  be  cautious  then  of  placing  Ballonius  among  the  obfervers  of
this  abfcefs,  who  ought,  in  fa6t,  to  be  plac'd  among  the  explainers  of  it ;
as,  on  the  other  hand,  a  certain  perfon  ought  not  to  have  number'd  amoncr
the  explainers,  thofe  who  were  only  witneffes  of  theobfervation  ;  but  among
the  obfervers.  And  you  will  be  ftill  more  cautious,  if  you  happen  to  be  de-
firous  of  explaining  the  affair,  of  fuppofing  any  thing  that  does  not  agree
•with  the  oblervations,  as  if,  in  moft  of  them,  or  almofl.  always,  or  always,
as  Barbette  (/)  does  not  fcruple  to  fuppofe,  pus  were  tranflated  from  the  head
into  "  the  liver  alone."  For  you  have  read  by  whom  it  has  been  feen  tranf-
lated even  into  the  heart,  the  lungs,  and  the  fpleen  :  and,  in  regard  to  this
laft-mention'd  vifcus,  I  wonder  it  fliould  be  afferted  by  him,  I  do  not  mean
in  thefe  cafes,  but  in  general,  "  that  it  is  very  rarely  found  in  a  preternatural
'♦  ftate,  in  the  difledtions  of  bodies."

But  we  are  often  compell'd  to  thefe  things,  by  a  greater  folicitude  in  ex-
plaining, than  in  obferving,  certain  circumftances.  For  which  reafon,  among
thofe  who  have  written  of  thefe  things  afterwards,  the  celebrated  Molinelli
is  the  more  to  be  commended  (g),  becaufe  he  has  very  properly  judg'd  that
the  matter  ought  firft  to  be  accurately  obferv'd  by  him,  rather  than  explain'd  :
and  he  faw  pus  fometimes  tranflated  into  other  parts,  but  not  into  the  liver;
and  in  many  not  tranflated  into  the  liver,  nor  into  the  other  parts  ;  yet  in
others  into  the  liver  certainly,  but  jufl:  in  the  fame  manner  from  other  wound-
ed and  ulcerated  parts,  as  from  the  head.  And  to  convince  you  that  it  is
not  fo  frequently  carried  into  the  liver,  take  this  remark  with  you,  that  it
never  happen'd  to  me,  as  far  as  I  can  remember,  to  fee  it :  to  Valfalva,  in
fuch  a  number  of  difleclions,  not  more  than  once  ;  and  that  when  it  was,  at
the  fame  time,  tranflated  into  the  lungs  alfo,  and  into  the  cavities  of  the  tho-
rax itfelf,  in  great  quantity.

Yet  it  may  happen  that  he  did  not  fee  it  fometimes,  becaufe  he  did  not
enquire  after  it;  and  particularly  in  that  young  man  {h)  whofe  face  became
yellow  before  death,  and  whofe  whole  body  feem'd  to  be  ifterical  after  death  ;
for  you  have,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (z),  an  example  of  a  jaundice  with  hard-
nefs  and  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  and  with  the  putrefaction  of  this
vifcus,  in  confequence  of  a  wound  in  the  head. But  by  reafon  of  that  yel-


(«)  §  4.  (f)  Schol.  ad  §  6,  {h)  fupra,  n.  14.

[g)  Comment,  de  Bonon.  Sc.Inft.  T,  z.  ?, (0  Obf.  16.  §  5.
I,  incer  Medics.


lownefs


Letter  IJ. Article  2  3.  103

lownefs  which  Valfalva  obferv'd,  it  is  not  eafy  to  believe  that  he  did  not  en-
quire in  what  (late  the  liver  was  :  and  although,  in  thofe  efpecially  in  who.-n
there  are  thele  and  other  marks  of  the  liver  being  injur'd,  and  the  wound  of
the  head  becomes  dry,  or  fuddenly  and  unexpectedly  difcharges  lefs  pus,  it
may  be  fufpefted  by  many  confirming  obfervations,  which  1  have  read,  that
the  pus  is  tranflated  into  the  liver  ;  yet  the  cafe  is  not  to  be  predided  for  a
certainty:  for  there  may  be  fometimes  a  fallacy  in  the  fymptoms,  whether
many,  or  even  all  of  them,  occur.

23.  If  you  read  the  obfervation  of  Molinelli  {k)  on  a  man  in  whom,  as
foon  as  the  fanies  had  ceas'd  to  flow  from  the  wound  of  the  head,  the  abdo-
men began  to  fwell,  and  be  tenfe  ;  and  yet  there  was  no  dilbrder  in  the  liver,
but  a  kind  of  fmall  ulcers  deform'd  the  furface  of  the  inteftines,  with  a  great
quantity  of  fanies,  and  a  great  number  of  tubercles  lying  at  a  diftance  from
each  other,  here  and  there  ;  you  will  eafily  conceive,  that  if  thefe  diforders  had
befet  the  part  of  the  inteftine  colon  in  particular,  which  lies  immediately
under,  and  contiguous  to,  the  liver,  it  muft  have  happen'd  that  many  figns
of  pus  being  tranflated  into  the  liver,  though  fallacious,  would  have  been
join'd  together.  And  indeed  it  may  fon^etimes  happen,  that  all  of  them
come  together,  and,  neverthelefs,  that  he  may  be  deceiv'd,  who  Ihall  predidt
that  pus  will  be  found  in  the  liver.  Read  over  again  the  obfervations  of  Val-
falva which  I  lafl:  of  all  defcrib'd  to  you.  You  will,  for  the  moft  part,  fincj.
that  the  tubercles,  either  in  the  lungs,  or  in  the  liver  itfelf,  were  not  alt
fuppurated  ;  and  indeed  that  many  of  them,  at  times  (/),  as  yet  refembled
the  firmnefs  of  a  glandular  body.

"What  if,  when  the  patient  was  dying,  there  were  not  as  yet  any  that  began
to  contain  pus  ?  And  it  feems  according  to  thofe  obfervations  wherevs'ith,  in
my  opinion,  the  obfervation  of  Molinelli  may  be  join'd,  that  the  pus  carried
,from  other  parts  into  the  vifcera,  is  not  always  depofited  in  the  form  of  a  pus^
but  frequently  at  leaii,  that  many  of  its  particles,  being  mix'd  with  the  bloody
and  entirely  disjoin'd  from  each  other,  ftick  in  fome  narrow  paffages,  perhaps
of  the  lymphatic  glands,  and  by  obftrudling  or  irritating  them,  as  happens  in
the  production  of  venereal  bubos,  and  by  retaining  the  humours  therein,
iiiftend  them,  and  give  origin  to  the  generation  of  a  much  more  copious  pus
than  what  is  carried  thither ;  which  generation  is  fhown  by  thofe  rigors  and
horrors  (;»).  And  by  this  means  we  may  alfo  conceive  how  it  is,  that  much
more  pus  is  frequently  found  in  the  vifcera,  and  cavities  of  the  bodies,  than
a  fmall  wound  could  have  produc'd.

But  in  what  manner  not  only  a  few,  but  even  fometimes  a  great  number  of
purulent  particles,  pafs  to  other  parts  from  wounds  of  the  head  ;  and  not
from  thefe  only,  but  alfo  from  the  wounds  of  other  parts,  or  their  abfcefles
and  ulcers ;  as  when  from  the  lungs  of  pleuritic  patients,  and  even  from
fuppurated  limbs,  it  is  often  fo  evidently  carried  to  the  paflTages  of  the  in-
teftines, or  kidneys,  that  the  foeces  and  urine  are  purulent,  as  long  as  no
pus  flows  from  the  limbs ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  thofe  excrements  are
pure  as  long  as  the  limbs  difcharge  a  pus,  and  fanies,  which  was  the  obfer-

(^•)  loco  paulo  ante  indkato.  {m)  fupran.  17.  19.  zo.

(/)  n.  17.

va£io  a


104 Book  IV.  01:  Chirurgtcal  9.nd  Univeffal  Diforders,

vation  of  Parey  (n) ;  is  fufficiently  explain'd  by  the  circulation  of  the
blood  (*)  ;  which  alio  illuftrates  another  obiervation.of  the  lan>e  author  (o),
and,  to  omit  thofe  of  others,  one  very  excellent  obfervation  which  is  added
lately  by  the  very  experienc'd  Benevoli  (p).  Yet  there  is  not  room  for  thcfe
explications,  if  at  any  time  the  wound  is  dried  up,  in  confequence  of  the
powers  of  nature  decaying  :  which  I  here  take  notice  of,  that  you  may  alfo
beware  of  the  fallacy  of  this  fign,  which  is  propos'd  among  thofe  above.

24.  The  four  obfervations  of  Valfalva  that  I  have  lali  produc'd,  if  you
except  one,  which,  like  the  others  before  produc'd,  mentions  no  injury  of
the  cranium  that  relates  to  the  internal  parts  ;  all  of  them  (how  it  to  have
been  either  loofen'd,  or  deprefs'd,  fiffur'd,  fradlur'd,  or  eroded.  Let  us  go
on,  therefore,  to  defcribe  other  obfervations  which  relate  to  each  of  thofe
kinds  of  injuries.

25.  A  woman,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  being  bufy  i^n  wafhing  linen  on  the
bank  of  a  river,  was  flruck,  by  another  woman,  on  the  right  and  pofterior
part  of  the  head  with  a  flick,  in  confequence  of  which  blow  fhe  fell  into  the
water.  -Being  immediately  taken  out,  (he  lay  in  fome  meafure  ftupid.  But
the  ftupor  being  difcufs'd,  and  no  other  fymptom  appearing,  and^the  hope
of  her  fafe  recovery  being  confirm'd  more  and  more  every  day  •,  behold,
about  the  fourteenth  day  fhe  was  attack'd  with  a  fever,  which  began  with  a
rigor ;  of  which  fever  fhe  died  about  the  twenty-fecond  day.

The  integuments  of  the  cranium  being  taken  off,  it  was  obferv'd  that
tehind  the  right  ear,  which  had  been  flruck,  the  indentations  of  the  lamb-
doidal  future  were  feparated  from  each  other  ;  and  that  from  their  interfaces  a
little  ferous  humour  was,  by  a  flight  prelTure,  difcharg'd.  And  within  the
cranium,  at  the  fame  place,  a  little  blood  was  flagnant.  However,  the  brain
was  entirely  found.

26.  A  young  man,  who  was  ftruck  with  a  ftick  upon  the  fagittal  future,
near  to  the  coronal,  pafs'd  over  fix  or  feven  days  without  any  bad  fymptom  ;
lb  that  he  did  not  lie  in  bed,  but  walk'd  about  the  hofpital.  However,  about
the  tenth  day  the  wound  was  very  foetid  :  and  one  or  two  days  after  that  the
edges  of  the  wound  fwell'd  ;  and  a  certain  heat  v/as  perceiv'd  at  the  throat.
After  this  a  fever  attack'd  him,  with  a  rigor  :  he  was  alio  attack'd  with  c-on-
vuKive  motions  :  and  he  at  length  died  on  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  day.

The  craniiim,  when  examin'd  externally  and  internally,  did  not  fhow  the
leaft  injury,  except  that  the  future,  where  it  had  lain  under  the  wound,
had  a  tortuous  little  line  running  betwixt  its  indentations,  which  appear'd
very  evident  by  a  brownifh  colour.  And  at  the  very  fide  of  the  future,
feme  portion  of  the  dura  mater  adher'd  to  the  cranium,  in  a  peculiar  kind  of
manner  :  this,  however,  being  eafily  feparated,  fhow'd  a  very  flight  ap-
pearance of  fanies  adhering  to  it  on  the  furface.  But  the  pia  mater,  which
lay  beneath,  was  pale.  Befides  thefe  appearances,  nothing  was  obferv'd ;  for
the  other  parts,  as  well  as  the  whole  brain,  were  in  a  natural  ftate.

27.  A  man,  of  more  than  thirty  years  of  age,  receiving  a  blow  with  a
bltint  inftrument  on  the  upper  part  of  the  lambdoidal  future  on  the  left  fide,

,(«) Oper.  1.  16.  c 49.  (0)  1.  10 c.  12.

i(*) Vid.  etiam  Epift.  25,  n.  zo.  (/)  Oflerv.  zz.

■when


Letter  LI. Article  28.  105

when  returning  to  Bologna  from  the  country,  where  he  had  been,  fell  down,
indeed,  but  immediately  rofe  up  ;  and  inftantly  purfuing  his  journey,  which
was  in  extent  three  miles,  betook  himfelf  into  the  hofpital.  While  he  lay
there,  it  was  obferv'd  that  the  wound  was  not  of  a  very  laudable  colour,  and
that  fome  days  after  an  abfcefs  was  produc'd  at  the  fide  of  it :  and  this  ablcefs
being  afterwards  open'd  by  art,  and  in  a  fhort  time  cleans'd,  the  cure  of  the
wound  feem'd  to  proceed  in  a  much  better  way.

But  many  errors  in  diet  being  committed,  and  fome  febrile  accelTions  having
already  preceded,  about  the  eleventh  day  a  very  violent  epileptic  convulfion
attack'd  him:  and  when  this  remitted  the  patient  did  not  fpeak:  although
he  fignified  that  he  underftood  what  others  faid.  After  this,  convulfive
motions  were  obferv'd  in  the  left  fide  of  the  body  ;  but  in  the  right  a  para-
lyfis ;  his  face  fometimes  reprefenting  the  rifus  fardonicus  as  it  were.  In  the
mean  while  the  pulfe  was  natural :  but  this  afterwards  becoming  quick,
turgid,  and  impetuous,  death  foUow'd  in  a  few  days ;  that  is,  on  the  nine-
teenth day.

Drawing  down  the  fkin  from  the  head,  under  it  on  the  left  fide,  and  in
many  places,  although  in  fuch  as  were  far  diftant  from  the  wound,  was
found  a  ftagnating  pus,  wherewith  the  os  temporis  was  eroded  on  the  furface.
Moreover  the  lambdoidal  future,  where  it  lay  under  the  wound,  had  its
indentations  diftind  from  each  other.  And  the  dura  mater  Ihow'd  a  kind  of
cineritious  colour,  which  it  had  contrafted  from  pus  that  was  collefted  be-
twixt itfelf  and  the  pia  mater.  Part  of  that  pus  adher'd  to  the  pia  mater,  in
the  form  of  a  thick  gluten  as  it  were  ;  the  remaining  part  was  fluid,  and
fcarcely  equall'd  half  an  ounce.  The  fubllance  of  the  cerebrum,  which  lay
under  this  portion  of  the  pia  mater,  to  the  extent  of  about  two  inches  both
in  length  and  breadth,  and  of  one  in  depth,  inclin'd  to  a  fomewhat  livid  co-
lour. However,  the  remaining  parts  of  the  whole  cerebrum  were  found  ;
if  you  except  the  exiftence  of  a  little  ferum,  which  was-  found  not  only  in
the  ventricles,  but  alfo  at  the  beginning  of  the  fpinal  marrow.

2§.  An  old  man,  of  fixty  years  of  age,  falling  down  from  fome  height,
receiv'd  a  blow  upon  his  head,  under  the  angle  of  the  lambdoidal  future.
At  firft  he  lay  half-dead.  But  coming  to  himfelf  afterwards,  he  complain'd
of  a  pain  in  the  injur'd  part:  and  this  continuing  he  did  not,  however,  con-
fine himfelf  to  bed,  till  the  fourth  or  fifth  day,  when  he  came  into  the  hof-
pital of  St.  Mary  de  Vita.  There  he  not  only  could  not  bear  the  conta£t  of
the  probe  in  examining  the  wound,  but  not  even  that  of  the  line  or  tow
v/ith  which  it  was  wip'd,  without  a  great  deal  of  pain.  About  the  feventh
day  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  paralyfis  of  the  left  arm  ;  to  which,  upon  opening  a
vein,  motion  was  reftor'd  -,  but  not  in  a  perfeft  degree.  This  patient  liv'd
quite  to  the  twenty- third  day,  on  which  he  died  in  a  foporofe  ftate.

While  the  IkuU  was  faw'd  open  about  the  right  temple,  pus  flow'd  out
from  its  cavity  :  and  this  pus  had  been  alfo  feen  in  the  place  of  the  wound,
while  the  head  was  examin'd  before  cutting  into  it.  But  in  this  place  no
injury  of  the  cranium  was  found,  except  a  disjun£lion  of  the  lambdoidal
future.  In  that  part  the  cerebrum  had  an  ulcer  on  the  right  fide,  to  the
depth  of  two  inches,  which  had  certainly  been  hoUow'd  out  in  this  manner
by  the  fanies.  But  in  the  neareft  part  of  the  left  fide  it  was  of  a  palifh
Vol.  III.  P  colour.


io6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgieal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

colour.  Betwixt  the  dura  and  pia  mater,  where  they  cover'd  the  whole  an-
terior lobe  on  the  right  fide,  was  contain'd  a  moderate  quantity  of  pus,  with
the  colour  of  which  the  meninges  had  been  ting'd.  In  the  ventricles  of  the
brain,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  vertebral  tube,  a  fmall  portion  of  limpid
lerum  ftagnated.

29.  The  fudden  disjunflion  of  the  futures,  if  you  attend  to  the  caufe  of
it,  cannot  happen  without  fome  confiderable  concuffion  of  the  brain  ;  and
if  you  attend  to  the  effed,  not  without  a  violent  diflraftion  of  the  dura  mater,
which  adheres  more  clofely  in  that  part  than  in  others,  and  a  laceration  of
the  conneifting  fmall  fibres  and  veffels.  To  this  may  be  added,  that  the
paflage  for  the  pus  from  the  wound  into  the  cavity  of  the  cranium,  is  by
this  means  with  lefs  difficulty  obtain'd.  It  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  wonder'd
at,  ihar,  in  thefe  four  obfervations  of  Valfalva,  and  in  another,  in  like
manner,  which  had  been  defcrib'd  above  (j),  the  patients  died,  fooner  or  later,
where  there  was  a  disjundion  of  the  futures ;  being  affeded  with  more  fiighc
or  more  violent  diforders,  both  according  to  the  various  difpofition  of  each,
and  according  to  the  condition  of  other  circumftances,  all  of  which  cannot
be  is;no\vn.

But  as  to  a  paralyfis  occupying  the  fide  oppofite  to  the  wound  or  the  in-
jury ;  as  this  has  been  alfo  oblerv'd  in  other  patients,  of  whom  I  fhall  write
below,  as  well  as  in  the  two  laft,  I  fhall  hint  a  few  things  in  regard  thereto
hereafter  (r).  Now  let  us  come  from  the  laxated  cranium  to  the  deprefs'd
cranium.

30.  A  certain  herb-man  was  ftruck  in  the  forehead,  near  to  the  coronal
future,  and  a  little  to  the  left  fide,  with  an  inftrument  which  was  more  apt
to  bruife  than  to  cut.  After  the  blow,  he  felt  the  beginning  of  a  flight
fwooning.  Having  come  into  the  hofpital  juft  now  mention'd,  till  the  ele-
venth day  there  not  only  was  no  fymptom  of  ill  fuccefs  in  the  cure,  but
every  thing  feem'd  to  portend  a  happy  event.  However,  on  that  very  day
the  man  was  feiz'd  with  a  vehement  fever,  which  began  with  a  rigor,  and  a
vomiting  of  a  great  quantity  of  bile,  which  return'd  again  in  the  evening..

This  fever  recurr'd  every  day  in  the  fame  manner,  till,  on  the  fourteenth
day  from  the  blow,  which  was  the  fourth  before  the  next  full  moon,  the
wind  blowing  pretty  nearly  from  the  fouth,  he  firfl;  became  dull,  yet  fo  as  to
anfwer  readily  any  one  who  afk'd  him  a  quefcion :  but  after  a  few  hours,
while  he  was  turning  himielf  from  the  right  to  the  left  fide,  he  was  depriv'd.
both  of  his  internal  and  external  fenfes  entirely,  and  was  opprefs'd  with  a
difficult  refpiration  ;  which,  although  it  afterwards  was  brought  back  almoft
to  a  natural  fiate,  yet  return'd  again  in  a  laborious  way  :  and  in  this  manner
he  died  on  the  fame  day  that  I  have  mention'd.

The  OS  frontis  was  llightly  deprefs'd  in  that  place  which  was  pointed  out ;
and  an  unequal  and  fharp  fcale,  feparated  from  it  internally,  which  inclin'd
to  the  right  fide,  had  injur'd  the  dura  mater  on  that  fide  -,  fo  that  betwixt
this  membrane  and  the  pia  mater  pus  flagnated,  which  had  overflow'd  from
the  vertex  of  the  head  almoft  to  the  bafis  of  the  cerebrum,  and  the  termi-
nations of  the  cerebellum  on  the  fame  right  fide. And  the  dijra  mater,  which

(:?)  N.  19,  (r)  N.  46.  &  feqq,

6  lay


Letter  LI. Articles  3I5  3-j  3  3?  34«  io7

lay  under  the  pus,  being  fomewhat  thicken'd,  was  eafily  feparated  from  the
cerebrum  ;  which  in  that  place  inclin'd  to  a  cineritious  colour,  not  unlike
the  pus  whereof  I  have  fpoken.  Moreover,  the  cerebrum  was  very  much
confin'd  within  the  cranium.

31.  In  regard  to  the  brain  being  very  much  confin'd  within  the  cranium,
and  the  caufes  thereof,  among  which  we  have  feen  that  fome  place  the  full-
moon,  and  to  which  the  ftate  of  air,  during  the  blowing  of  foutherly  winds,
as  a  caufe  of  expanfion  and  rarefadion  in  the  blood,  muft  be  added ;  botlt
of  which  Valfalva  has  taken  notice  of  in  this  hiftory,  you  know,  that  I  have
written  of  them  above  (s).  But  as  to  the  apoplexy  feizing  upon  this  man,  while
he  turn'd  himfelf  from  the  right  to  the  left  fide,  as  it  has  done  fo  many  others,
according  to  what  has  been  hinted  in  the  EpiftoU  Anatomica  {() ;  the  caufe  of
it,  in  this  cafe,  might  be,  that  the  quantity  of  pus  which  was  on  the  right  fide
by  this  means  comprefs'd  the  cerebrum,  which  was  wholly  fubjefted  thereto,
in  fo  much  a  more  dangerous  nnanner,  in  proportion  as  ic  was  now  the  more
comprefs'd  by  reafon  of  the  more  confin'd  (pace  within  the  cranium.

32.  A  man,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  being  wounded  with  a  cutting  in-
ftrument  on  the  finciput,  immediately  vomited. Being  receiv'd  into  the  fame

•  hofpital,  the  bone  was  found  to  be  fo  deprefs'd  under  the  wound,  that  it
could  not  be  drawn  back  by  any  art  whatever.  In  the  beginning  there  was
no  pain  in  the  wound  ;  but  after  fome  days  it  was  afre£ted  with  the  fenfe  of
a  creeping  motion.  And  to  this  convulfive  motions  of  the  whole  i^ody  being
added,  on  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  day  life  was  exchang'd  tor  death.

That  portion  of  the  bone  which  had  receded  from  the  other  by  the  force
of  the  percuffion,  adher'd  ftrongly  to  the  dura  mater,  which  was  there  flightly
inflam'd.  Betwixt  this. and  the  pia  mater  was  a  fluid  fimilar  to  ferum,  both  in
confidence  and  colour.

33.  A  woman,  whojA'as  about  the  fame  age,  was  wounded  with  a  blunt
inftrument  above  the  left  eye-brow.  After  the  blov.',  (he  voraited  and  became
ftupid.  Yet  the  ftupor  was,  after  fome  time,  diffipated  ;  and  the  cafe  feem'd
to  the  furgeon  to  be  going  on  very  well,  till,  the  tenth  day  being  elaps'd,  £he
was  feiz'd  with  a  pain  of  the  left  ear,  together  with  a  horror  and  a  coldnefs,
which  was  fucceeded  by  a  heat.  At  length,  convuifions  of  the  whole  body
coming  on,  fhe  died  within  a  few  days.

The  bone  which  lay  under  the  part  where  the  blow  was  receiv'd,  had
wounded  the  brain  by  an  acuminated  lamina  ;  and  the  brain  was,  for  that
reafon,  fanious  in  this  part,  and  corrupted.  But  although  the  diforder  had
defcended  very  deeply,  it  did  not,  however,  reach  to  the  ventricles.  Part  of
the  fanies  had  flow'd  down  to  the  bafis  of  the  cerebrum,  about  fome  of  the
pairs  of  the  nerves.

34.  A  woman,  of  thirty  years  of  age,  had  been  flruck  upon  the  head  with
many  ftones  •,  a  languor  and  vomiting  being  the  immediate  confequences
thereof",  which  continu'd  for  many  days.  Yet  the  wound  did  not  feem  to
promile  an  unhappy  event.  But  about  the  tenth  day,  a  fever  coming  on,
with  a  coldnefs,  it  became  dry  and  pallid. To  thefe  changes  was  added  a

(0  N.  10.  (/)  XIII.  n.  24.

P  2  '  delirium,


I  o  S Book  IV.  Of  Ghlrurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

delirium,  wliich  degenerated  gradually  into  a  foporofe  affeftion.  And  hf
this  the  patient  was  at  length  carried  off  about  the  twentieth  day.

In  the  right  fide  of  the  cranium  was  found  a  fifTure  of  four  inches  in  length ;
yet  that  portion  of  the  cerebrum  which  lay  under  the  fiflure,  was  affefted  with
no  injury.  But  on  the  left  fide,  where  there  appear'd  to  be  a  very  confiderable
contufion  externally,  the  cranium  was  not  only  cleft  by  a  fiflure,  which  was
drawn  in  the  form  of  a  circle,  and  had  a  diameter  equal  to  half  an  inch  of
the  meafure  of  Bologna  •,  but  it  was  alfo,  in  fome  meafure,  deprefs'd  in  that
part :  and,  indeed,  from  that  deprefs'd  portion  an  acuminated  lamina  had
receded  internally,  and  had  wounded  the  dura  mater.  To  this  membrane,
therefore,  a  purulent  matter  adher'd  in  that  part ;  and  the  cerebrum,  which
lay  beneath,  was  morbid  to  the  extent  of  three  inches  both  in  length  and
breadth,  and  to  the  extent  of  two  in  depth;  fo  that  the  injury  did  not  reach
"to  the  ventricles.

^§.  A  man,  of  a  middle  age,  being  ftruck  in  the  right  part  of  the  finciput
with  a  blunt  inltrument,  but  affefted  with  no  fymptom  whatever  in  confe-
quence  thereof,  came  of  himfelf  on  foot  to  the  afore- mention'd  hofpital,
and  went  to  bed  there.  After  two  hours  he  began  to  ftammer ;  and,  a  few
hours  after  that,  was  feiz'd  with  a  paralyfis  in  the  whole  left  fide  of  his
body.

He,  neverthelefs,  open'd  his  left  eye  perfe6lly,  when  he  anfwer'd,  in  a
ftammering  manner,  to  the  queftions  which  were  aflc'd  him  :  the  right  he
kept  half  {hut.  But  he  could  not  even  move  the  right  part  of  his  body,
without  great  pains  and  endeavours.  Two  or  three  days  after  receiving  the
wound,  he  was  delirious.  At  length,  becoming  lethargic,  he  died  on  the
fifth  day.

The  head  of  this  man  Valfalva,  indeed,  could  not  himfelf  difledl,  being
taken  up  with  m^ore  important  bufinefs.  Yet  he  did  not  omit  to  mark  down
what  was  related  by  his  friends,  Peter  Molinelli  and  John  Anthony  Guicciar-
dini,  who  had  difiefled  it.  The  cranium  was  broken  in  fuch  a  manner,  that
two  large  fragments  of  it,  being  depreis'd,  had,  by  making  an  angle  in-
wards, as  it  were,  made  a  confiderable  wound  in  the  meninges  and  the  brain
itfelf,  and  had  penetrated  into  the  fubftance  thereof,  to  the  breadth  of  two
inches.  There  was  in  that  wound  of  the  cerebrum  a  coagulated  blood  ;  and
the  vefTels,  alfo,  were  turgid  with  blood  to  a  confiderable  degree.  While
the  brain  was  taken  out  of  the  cranium,  fome  portion  of  ferum  was  dif-
charg'd.

36.  As  to  my  heaping  together  fo  many  obfervations  here,  I  do  not  do  it
fo  much  for  the  fake  of  brevity  ;  for  many  things  remain  to  be  added  ;  as
to  prevent  the  fame  animadverfions  from  being  frequently  repeated.  For
thofe  things  that  feem  to  be  worthy  of  peculiar  attention,  in  any  one  of  them,
I  will  take  notice  of  below  in  their  proper  places.  In  the  mean  while,  how-
ever, let  us  not  ftand  ftill:  but,  as  we  have  done  in  the  examples  of  the
cranium  being  deprefs'd,  let  us,  moreover,  fubjoin  other  obferv^ations  of  its
being  broken  or  fiffur'd,

37.  A  woman,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  fell  headlong  from  a  ladder  upon
the  ground.  A  wound  appear'd  above  the  left  eye  :  her  face  was  tumid  and
pale  J  her  temples  were  livid  :  blood  was  difcharg'd  from  her  mouth. The

woman


Letter  LI. Articles  38, 39.  109

woman  underftood  nothing,  felt  nothing,  mov'd  nothing  except  her  right
hand,  and  that  only  a  little  while,  flightly,  and  feebly.  She  died  fifteen
hours  after  her  fall

The  external  integuments  of  the  finciput  were  red.  In  the  bone  which
compos'd  the  fuperior  part  of  the  orbit  of  the  left  eye,  were  many  frafbures.
On  the  right  fide,  the  artery  which  pafTes  through  the  dura  mater,  being
lacerated,  had  pour'd  out  its  blood  ;  about  two  ounces  of  which  were  feen
to  be  coagulated  betwixt  that  membrane  and  the  os  petrofum.  This  blood,
thus  concreted,  had  injur'd  that  part  of  the  cerebrum  which  correfponded
to  it,  fo  as  to  make  it  appear  as  if  ic  were  eroded.

38.  An  old  man,  of  fixty  years  of  age,  being  attack'd  by  a  he-goar,
fell  down  on  the  ground,  and  hurt  the  left  part  of  his  head.  He  could
fcarcely  fpeak  :  he  vomited  :  he  threw  out  blood  from  his  mouth  :  he  gave
no  fign  of  any  internal  fenfes :  his  hands  were  agitated  by  convulfive  motions  :.
his  face  was  red  :  he  therefore  died  after  two  days.

The  injury  of  his  head,  which  was  about  the  upper  margin  of  the  tem-
poral mufcle  on  the  left  fide,  feem'd  to  be  flight  externally.  But  when  the
fl<in  was  taken  off,  that  mufcle  was  found  to  be  univerlally  fuffus'd  with
blood  :  and  when  the  cranium  was  open'd,  a  confiderable  quantity  of  gru-
mous  blood  was  found  to  adhere  fo  tenacioufly  to  the  dura  mater,  where  it
correfponded  to  the  fame  mufcle,  that  it  feem'd  to  be  one  fubftance  there-
with. And  in  the  fame  place  there  was  a  fra£lure  of  the  fkull,.  with  a  rup-
ture of  the  internal  vefTels.

However,  as  to  the  fame  membrane,  where  it  correfponded  to  the  right
temporal  mufcle  alfo,  a  ftill"  larger  quantity  of  the  fame  kind  of  blood  ad-
her'd,  and  could  not  have  come  thither  by  any  means  from  the  left  fide  j.
and  as  no  frafture  of  the  cranium  was,  by  any  means,  difcover'd  on  the
right  fide  ;  Valfalva  was  very  much  fufpended  in  his  mind  thereon.  For  al-
though, when  he  was  afterwards  about  to  examine'  the  bony  fabric  of  the
internal  ear,  a  fubjeft  on  which  he  was  then  wholly  employ'd,  and  had
driven  a  chifTel  againfl  that  right  part  of  the  cranium  with  a  mailet,  a  fiffure
came  into  his  view;  yet  he  was  in  doubt  whether  this  was  to  be  afcrib'd  to
the  mallet,  or  to  the  blow  receiv'd  in  falling.  As  to  what  remains,  the  whole
brain  was  in  a  natural  Hate,  if  you  except  a  little  ferum  which  was  in  the
ventricles,

39,  A  man,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  was  flruck  with  a  flone  ahnofl:  in  the
middle  of  the  left  eye-lid,  where  the  nerve  goes  out  from  the  orbit.  Many
hours  being  elaps'd  after  the  fall,  he  was  carried  into  the  hofpital  I  have  fo
often  mention'd,  where  it  was  necefTary  to  tie  him  down  in  bed,  on  account
of  the  very  great  convulfive  motions  whereby  his  whole  body  was  agitated.
His  eyes  were  fhut :  the  aftions  of  his  mind  were  at  refb.  At  length,  when
the  thirty  fixth  hour  from  the  time  of  receiving  the  blow  was  completed,  the
convulfive  motions  having  ceas'd  for  the  laft  hour,  he  died.

Many  portions  of  the  cranium,  above  the  orbit,  were  broken  ;  and  one
©f  them  that  was  acute  prickM  the  dura  mater,  which  for  this  reaibn  was
inflam'd  in  that  part.  And,  indeed,  a  fiflure  was  alfo  found  on  the  oppofiie,
that  is,  on  the  right  fide,  in  that  very  part  which  correlpoaded  to  the  fractur'd
bone  on  the  left  fide. In  the  biiain  was  found  ^a  ferum  in  Ibnie  meafure

ianious*


1  I  o Book  IV.  Of  Clilrurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

flmious.  However,  as  the  head  of  this  man  had  been  wounded  before  alfo,
you  might  fee,  in  that  part  from  whence  a  fragment  of  the  cranium  had  been
taken  av/ay,  a  kind  of  thick  membrane,  which  fupplied  the  place  of  a  bone.
To  this  membrane  the  dura  mater  ftrongly  adiier'd.

40.  Befides  this  laft  circumftance,  which  you  will  fee  agrees  extremely  well
with  what  was  obferv'd  formerly  by  Berengarius  («)  -,  and  befides  that  which
relates  to  the  nerve  refleded  under  the  eye- brow,  the  very  injury  of  which
is  alfo  fucceeded  by  violent  convulfions,  as  has  been  fliown  above  (.v)  -,  this
obfervation  contains  two  other  circumftances,  whereon  we  may  infift  a  little.
One  of  thefe.  however,  I  fhall  more  conveniently  touch  upon  below  (jy).
And  the  other  relates  to  that  celebrated  controverfy  in  regard  to  the  counter-
iiffure.  Which  moft  perfons  were  formerly  induc'd  not  to  acknowledge,  by
a  reafon  that  was  weak,  neverthelefs,  in  confequence  of  its  depending  upon
that  utility  of  the  futures  of  the  cranium,  which  they,  following  Galen  (2),
afcrib'd  thereto,  as  if  they  were  created  to  flop  the  progrefs  of  a  fradture';
whereas  fifflues  may  be  known  to  every  one,  as  well  as  to  us  (a),  which  are
produc'd  from  one  bone  of  the  fliuU  into  another,  and  even  frequently  into
more  than  one.

Another  difficulty  likewife  offer'd  itielf  in  regard  to  this  queftion  ;  I  mean,
to  confefs  the  truth,  that  the  cafe  cannot  be  fo  plainly  and  clearly  explain'd
by  any  reafonings  or  fimilitudes  whatever,  as  to  make  every  one  acquiefce
therein.  However,  although  the  explications,  which  are  now  read  in  the
diflcrtation  of  Georgius  Wolfg.  Wedelius,  de  Contrqfijfura  {b),  were  not  as
yet  brought  to  light ;  it  was  not  juft  to  deny  any  thing  for  this  reafon,  that
the  caufe  of  it  is  not  underftood.  Finally,  the  opinion  of  moft  perfons
was  moreover  with-held  by  this  argument,  that  very  eminent  anatomifts  and
furgeons,  out  of  whom  it  is  fufficient  to  mention  Jacobus  Berengarius  (r),
Gabriel  Falioppius((i),  John  Baptlft  Carcanus(^),  IforandusDiemerbroeckf/),
in  fo  many  cales  of  fraftur'd  fkulls,  and  in  fo  many  infpeftions  of  them  after
(which  I  mean  to  fay  of  Carcanus  in  particular,  although  I  fee  none  of  his
obfervations  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum)  had  never  found  the  bone
fifTur'd  in  the  part  oppofice  to  the  blow.

From  hence,  indeed,  we  might  have  argu'd  the  rarenefs  of  the  counter-
fiflure;  but  could  not  have  denied  its  exiftence,  if,  at  the  fame  time,  it  were
only  certain  that  it  had  been  aftually  fometimes  found  by  others.  And  that
it  has  been  found,  not  only  many  not  recent,  but  even  many  recent,  obfer-
vations are  extant  to  confirm :  and  as  you  have  fome  of  thefe  here  in  the
Sepulchretum,  not  under  number  five,  as  is  erroneoufly  faid  by  the  printers,
but  under  number  eleven  {g),  and  others  in  the  differtation  of  Stofchius  de
Refonitu  (/•»)  ;  I  (hall  not  take  notice  of  them  here.

Yet  I  will  put  you  in  mind  of  this,  which  Paulus(/)  formerly  hinted,  that

(«)  Traft.  de  Frafl.  Calvar.  in  Document. (0  Traft.  cit.  c.  i.  &  2.
prope  fin.  \d)  De  Vuln.  c. 12.  &  Expof.  in  Gal.  de

{x)  n.  16.  _  Ofl:  c.  13.

Cy)  n.  4?.  in  fin.  {e)  De  Vuln.  capit.  Serm.  2.  Left.  6.

(z)  De  Uf.  part.  ].  g.  c.  17.  (f)  Anat.  1.  9.  c.  4.

(«)  Epift.  52.  n.  35.36.  r^;  §  2.  5.  7.  8.  9.  (^)  c.  4.

[b)  Sea.  I.  membr.  3.  (?)  De  Re  Med.  1.  6.  c.  90,

the


Letter  LI. Article  41.  11  i

the  head  being  ftricken  in  more  than  one  part,  "  as  happens  in  falling,  the
"  fifllire  of  the  fcuU,  which  is  brought  on  without  a  folution  of  continuity  in
"  the  fkin,  but  appears  afterwards,  in  confequence  of  an  abfceis  being  form'd
"-  around  it,  and  the  (kin  being  cut  through,  was  fuppos'd  to  be  made  in  the
"  part  oppofite  to  that  on  which  the  blow  was  receiv'd ;"  I  will,  I  fay,  put  you
in  mind  of  this,  as  it  is  neceffary  that  it  Ihould  be  cautioiifly  and  prudently
attended  to  in  the  examination  of  every  obfervation.  For  which  reafon  Fal-
loppius  (k),  although  in  one  perfon  he  faw  the  bone  fraftur'd  on  the  fide  op-
pofite to  that  which  had  been  ftruck  by  the  kick  of  a  horfe,  as  there  was  a
fufpicion  that  this  fraflure  had  been  produc'd  by  being  dafh'd  againft  the
ground,  neverthelefs  thought  he  could  not  aflert  that  he  had  feen  a  counter-
fifTure.

.  And  Berengarius,  Carcanus,  and  Diemerbroeck,  have  judg'd  nearly  in  the
fame  manner  of  this  counter-fifTure,  when  defcrib'd  by  others :  and  very  often,
at  leaft,  the  patient  cannot  fpeak,  or  remember  how  many  blows  he  receiv'dy
or  in  what  places,  or  on  what  part  of  the  head  he  fell.  This  muft  be  at-
tended to  befides,  whether  the  filTure  which  is  defcrib'd  in  the  oppofite  part
be  there  only,  or  whether  it  be  proddc'd  thither,  beginning  from  the  part
which  was  evidently  ftruck,  or  from  fome  other  very  near  to  it.

When  thus  continu'd,  it  is  not  properly  the  counter-fifTure,  of  which  the
queftion  is  at  prefent ;  for  they  fuppofe,  with  Celfus  (/),  "  that  the  gaping  of
"  the  bone  is  not  found  on  that  part  where  the  fliin  is  cut  afunder ;"  but  that
the  bone  is  "  fiflTur'd  on  the  other  fide."  If  you,  the-refore,  obferve  thefe
things,  you  will  perhaps  find  much  fewer  examples  than  fome  may  imagine,
in  which  you  will  think  it  reafonable  to  allow  of  a  counter-fifTure.

41.  Nor  indeed  is  it  properly  a  counter-fi figure,  if  it  at  any  time  appear,:
that  one  and  the  fame  of  the  bones  of  the  cranium  had  receiv'd  a  blow  in
one  place  only ;  and  yet  that  it  has  a  fifllire,  not  in  that  place,  but  in  fome
other:  for  that  this  fiiay  adtually  happen,  v/as  not  denied,  by  Carcanus  (»?),
and  his  preceptor  Falloppius(«).  And,  indeed,  the  latter  of  thefe  authors
has  (hown  (o),  that  in  this  manner  the  words  of  Hippocrates  (p)  may  be  un-
derftood,  in  which  others  have  believ'd  that  the  counter-fifTure,  properly-
taken,  was  evidently  fpoken  of;  that  is  to  fay,  that  the  bone  is  fometimes
broken  in  a  part  of  the  head  diflant  from  that  where  the  wound  is;  for  if
he  had  intended  to  fpeak  of  the  oppofite  fide  only,  there  was  certainly  no
reafon  why  he  fhould  confider  it  as  a  great  calamity  (which  he  immediately
fubjoins)  that  the  phyfician  is  then  ignorant  in  what  pare  of  the  head  the
fradture  has  taken  place;  as,  by  the  general  figns  of  a  fracture  then  exifting,
it  would  be  certain  that  it  was  in  the  oppofite  Tide.

But  I  do  not  fee  why  he  would  not  have  {q)  Celfus  interpreted  in  the  fame
manner,  and  by  a  fimilar  kind  of  reafoning.  For  Celfus  (r),  where  the
marks  of  a  fraftur'd  fcuU  are  found,  and  thefe  he  does  exprefsly  fuppofe  to
be  found,  but  the  fifTure  does  not  appear  under  the  wound,  would  not  have

(4)  c.  13.  cit.  (0)  Comm.  in  Hippocr.  de  Vuln.  Cap.  c.  14.

(/)  De  Medic.  1.  8.  c.  4.  (/.)  De  Cap.  Vuln.  n.  so,  apud  Marinell.

(m)  Left.  6.  cit.  (//)  c.  12.  cit.

(»J)  c.  I  a.  ciu  ('}  c,  4.  cit.

, enquir'd


1  1  2 Book  IV.  Of  Chimrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

eiKjuir'd  after  other  figns  of  the  part  wherein  the  cranium  is  fraftur'd,  if  he
had  meant  only  the  oppofite  part;  fince  he  hasfaid, ,"  And  it  does  even  not
"  uncommonly  happen,  that  the  blow  has  been  receiv'd  in  one  part,  and
"  the  bone  has  been  filfur'd  in  another."

Be  cautious,  therefore,  how,  rather  than  give  credit  to  Carcaniis  (s),  you
here  give  credit  to  John  Baptift  Cortefuis  (/),  who  readily  affirms,  "  that  the
"  more  elegant  Latins,  by  the  alitra  pars  of  any  thing,  always  underftood  the
"  oppofite  part."  For  if  this  author  had  attended,  but  a  little  while,  to  the
words  of  Celllis,  juft  now  copied  by  me,  he  would  not  even  have  written,  a
little  before,  that  Celfus,  in  this  paflage,  "  had  fpoken  according  to  the
"  opinion  of  the  vulgar,"'  and  not  according  to  his  own.

But  much  lefs  are  we  to  reckon  among  the  inftances  of  a  counter-fiflure,
as  has  been  done  by  Ibme,  ihofe  in  which  there  has  happen'd  to  be  either  extra-
valated  blood,  or  lanies,  or  any  other  mark  of  difeafe  whatever,  found  within
that  part  of  the  cranium  which  is  oppofite  to  the  blow,  at  the  fame  time  that
the  bone  was  there  uninjur'd.  Since,  akho'  Berengarius  (a),  Falloppius  (;<:),
and  others,  aflTert,  that  they  have  found  thefe  appearances  in  many,  yet  they,
at  the  fame  time,  deny  that  they  had  feen  a  counter-fiflijre.  For  this  is  never
underftood  by  them,  and  the  more  ancient  authors,  unlefs  the  bone  be  frac-
tur'd :  and  in  what  manner  the  veflels  may  be  ruptur'd,  in  the  oppofite  part,
under  the  uninjur'd  bone,  not  only  they  have  explain'd  in  their  own  way,  but
may  be  conjedur'd  from  the  dilTertation  of  Wedelius  (y),  which  I  have  al-
ready commended.

Wherefore,  if  you  even  fuppofe  that  no  part  of  the  fcull,  befides  what
evidently  appear'd  to  have  been  ftruck,  was  ftruck  in  that  young  man  (z),
and  in  that  man  (a),  in  whom,  in  the  fame  manner  as  I  fhall  fay  in  the  next
obfervation,  I  have  faid  above,  that  a  fanies  and  marks  of  injury  appear'd
to  Valfalva  in  the  oppofite  part ;  you  will  have  from  whence  to  explain  the
affair,  as  in  a  woman  in  like  manner  {b) ;  although  in  her  it  is  more  natural
to  fuppofe  many  blows  -,  and  in  the  old  man  (c),  in  regard  to  whom  I  laft
of  all  wrote  that  blood  was  extravafated  in  the  oppofite  fide.  And  from
thofe  things  which  I  have  taken  into  confideration,  in  relation  to  the  word
counter-fifiure  properly,  or  lefs  properly,  taken,  you  would,  without  doubt,
choole  rather  to  afcribe  the  fifiure  obferv'd  in  the  oppofite  bone,  in  the  fame
old  man,  to  the  anatomical  mallet,  but  that  which  was  feen  in  him  (d)  whom
we  imnrrediately  defcrib'd  afterwards,  to  the  one  hoftile  blow,  inafmuch  as  it
was  not,  like  the  former,  found  in  a  different  and  not  contiguous  bone,  but
in  one  and  the  fame.

42.  A  man,  of  thirty  years  of  age,  who  was  very  delirious  from  an  acute
fever,  threw  himfelf  down  from  a  window  upon  the  ground,  and  wounded
the  left  fide  of  his  head,  above  the  temporal  mufcle.  He  could  not  fpeak  :
his  face  was  red  :  the  whole  left  fide  of  his  body  lay  immoveable ;  except  that
an  hour  or  two  after  the  fall,  while  the  wound  was  handled,  the  foot  con-

{s)  Left.  6.  cit.  (2;)  n.  5.

(f)  Traft.  de  Vuln.  Cap.  P.  2.  {«)  n.  7.

(a)  c.  I.  cit.  {By  n.  37.

(At)  c.  12.  13.  14.  cit.  (f)  n.  3§.

OJ  Se£l.  I.  Membr.  3.  &  4,  (^J  n.  39.

traded


Letter  LI. Articles  43,  44,  ^S'  113

trailed  itfelf  fliglnly,  and  was  afterwards  extended. And  in this  manner
he  liv'd  till  the  third  day,  when  he  died.

Under  the  left  temporal  mufcle  was  a  fiffure  of  the  ficull  ;  to  which,  how-
ever, no  internal  injury  that  fell  under  the  notice  of  the  fenfes  correfponded.
But  in  the  part  oppofite  to  this,  betwixt  the  dura  and  pia  mater,  was  blood
extravafated  to  the  quantity  of  about  two  ounces  ;  fo  that  the  hemiplexia  of
the  left  fide  was  brought  on  by  this  extravafation,  and  not  by  the  wound
or  fracture  on  the  fame  fide.  However,  the  whole  cerebrum  was  found,  ex-
cept that  all  the  veffels  which  crept  through  the  pia  mater,  were  very  turgid
with  blood,  and  the  neighbouring  parts  in  fome  meafure  inflam'd  :  but  thefe
appearances,  probably,  related  more  to  the  delirium  than  to  the  blow.

43.  You  fee  how  eafily  any  one  might  be  deceiv'd,  who,  confidering  only
the  fituation  of  the  wound,  fliould  take  upon  him  to  judge  of  the  feat  of  the
caufe  by  which  the  hemiplexy  was  produc'd.  For  that  this  ought  not  to  be
done  will,  in  like  manner,  appear  from  an  obfervation  of  mine  fimilar  to
this,  which  you  read  in  the  Epilfol^  Anatomise  {e).

But  to  the  feat  of  the  caufe  of  a  hemiplegia  of  this  kind,  which  was  en-
quired after  by  difleftion,  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  befides  others  which  are
defcrib'd  above,  that  hiftory  alfo  belongs  which  I  fhall  immediately  deicribe  :
for  the  other  circumftances  that  occur  in  the  hiftory  laft  defcrib'd,  either  in
regard  to  the  blood  being  found  in  the  part  oppofite  to  the  wound,  or  in
regard  to  the  veflels  being  very  turgid  with  blood  in  a  delirium,  you  re-
iiiember  I  have  fpoken  of  juft  now  in  part,  and  in  part  on  a  former  oc-
cafion  (/).

~  44.  A  young  man,  of  twenty  years  of  age,  being  flruck  by  a  fliarp  in-
ftrument,  had  the  left  temporal  mufcle  cut  in  a  tranfverfe  direction.  After
the  blow  he  proceeded  on  his  way  for  a  little  time,  but  at  length  fell  dov/n,
and  loft  the  power  of  fpeech.  However,  to  thofe  who  adi'd  him  queftions
he  anfvver'd  by  nods,-though  (lowly.  Being  brought  into  the  fame  hofpital
which  I  have  fo  often  mention'd,  after  fome  days  had  pafs'd  he  fpoke  a  little,
though  dclirioufly.  In  the  mean  while,  he  mov'd  his  right  hand  no  more:
yet  if  this  were  prick'd,  the  patient  Ihow'd  that  it  felt  pain.  About  the
fourteenth  day  he  died.

The  cranium  being  open'd,  it  was  found  that  the  wound,  which  had  not
only  cut  the  temporal  mufcle,  but  the  bone,  had  penetrated  deeply  into  the
brain  ;  and  that  a  ferous  colluvies,  which  was  found  there,  had,  moreover,
eroded  the  brain  :  fo  that  the  erofion  penetrated  quite  into  the  left  ventricle.
And  as  a  ferum  not  unlike  this  Vv^as  difcharg'd  about  the  fella  equina,  Vv'hile
the  brain  was  taken  our,  it  was  probable  that  it  had  flow'd  down  thither,
from  the  fame  ventricle,  through  the  infundibulum.

45.  A  young  man,  about  two-and-twenty  years  of  age,  receiv'd  a  very
great  blow  with  a  cutting  inftrument,  by  which  he  was  wounded  at  the
upper  part  of  the  left  temporal  mufcle.  He  immediately  fell  down,  and
loft  his  fpeech  ;  fo  that  he  fcarcely  feem'd  to  be  alive.  After  which,  the
power  of  fpeaking,  and  all  the  other  faculties,  were  reftor'd.

{e)  XIU.  n.  16.  Cf)  Epift.  7. ,

Vol.  IIT.  (^  But


J  r  4 Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

But  about  the  fourth  day  his  aphonia  retiirn'd ;  although,  after  that,  he
fbmetimes  brought  out  a  few  words,  yet  feldom  only  :  and  with  the  aphonia.
were  join'd  convulfive  motions  •,  but  thefe  in  the  left  part  of  the  body  alone
fometimes,  and  flight;  yet  in  the  whole  right  ;fide  of  the  body,  they  were
continual,  and  fo  violent,  that  the  body  feem'd  fometimes  to  be  curv'd  to
this  fide.  During  the  torture  of  thefe  fymptoms,  neverthelefs,  the  patient
fhow'd,  by  nods,  that  he  underftood  what  was  faid.  However,  as  the  fever
increas'd  every  day,  and  the  convulfive  motions,  at  length,  grew  weaker
from  a  decay  of  bodily  ftrength,  having  even  quite  ceas'd  fome  hours  before-
death,  he  died  about  the  thirteenth  day.

The  wound  had  not  only  penetrated  through  the  temporal  mufcle,  but  had
defcended,  through  the  bone  that  lay  beneath,  deep  into  the  fubfbance  of
the  brain.  The  dura  mater  was  become  much  indurated  about  the  wound.
About  the  fame,  and  within  it,  a  fanious  humour  was  found  ;  from  the  pun-
gent nature  of  which,  perhaps,  the  convulfions  had  been  excited :  at  leaft,.
though  the  wound  feem'd  to  have  reach'd  fo  far  as  to  be  only  an  inch  diftanc
from  the  left  ventricle,  yet  it  did  not  appear  that  the  inftrument  had  pene-
trated fo  far,  but  that  the  excavation  had  been  made  deeper  by  the  eroding
juices  which  were  generated  in  the  wound.  In  the  ventricles  of  the  brain
a  little  ferum  ftagnated.

However,  that  in  this  young  man,  the  left  part  of  the  brain  being  injur'd,
the  convulfions  were  moft  violent  in  the  right  fide  of  the  body,  Valfalva
thought  was  to  be  referr'd  to  the  fame  caufe  as  the  paralyfis,  which  he  had:
before  always  obfcrv'd  in  the  fide  of  the  body  oppofite  to  the  injury  of  the
brain.

46.  Among  thofe  obfervations  that  have  been  hitherto  defcrib'd  from  him,
you  have  one  {g)  wherein,  although  there  was  a  paralyfis  of  that  part  of  the
body  which  was  oppofite  to  the  injury  of  the  brain,  yet  certain  epileptic  con-
vulfions, as  it  were,  fometimes  agitated  this  paralytic  fide,  no  lefs  than  that
which  was  not  paralytic.  But  you  have  another  (i))  alfo,  wherein,  although
the  oppofite  fide  was  in  like  manner  paralytic,  convulfive  motions  were  ob-
ferv'd  m  that  fide  which  was  not  paralytic-
Yet  you  have  not  one  in  v/hich  the  circumftances-  occurr'd-  in  a-  contrary-
manner  to  what  they  did  in  that  other  obfervation  :  and  this,  certainly,.,
agrees  perfrftly  with  that  "  univerfal  theorem"  of  Salicetus,  which  I  have-
mention'd  in  the  t\i\xi^QX\\}n.  oi  xhz  Epijlola  Anaioniicie{i^  :  \A\tx?.,  however,.
1  have  not  even  conceal'd  the  dogmata  of  thofe(i),  who  have  not  only  afi^erted:
that  a  paralyfis,  or  convulfion,  happens  promifcuoufly  in  one  or  the  other  fide,,
but  alfo  that,  for  the  moft  part,  the  fide  which  correfponds  to  the  wound  is
ieiz'd  with  a  palfy,  and  the  oppofite  v/ith  a  convulfion.  With  whom  Bal-
lonius  fo  far  agreed,,  that,  in  his  little  book  upon  convulfions,  he  took  upon
him  to  explain  this  quellion  in  particular,,  which  he  alfo  has  propos'd  in  the-
very  beginning  of  his  book,  "  Why  thofe  who  are  wounded  in  the  right
'■  fide  have  a  convulfion  brought  on  in  the  found  part,"  that  is,  in  the  pare,
oppofite  to  the  wound.

(g)  N.  lu  (i)  N.  27.  (/)  N,  14,  {k)  N.  15.

To'


letter  LL Article  47,  ir/

To  this  fjppofition  they  were  impell'd  by  the  dogmata  of  the  ancients,
particularly  of  Hippocrates;  who  repeats  the  fame  thing  in  fo  many  places,
that  Marcellus  Donatus  (/),  when  he  referr'd  to  them  in  particular,  being
overwhelm'd,  as  I  fuppofe,  with  the  number  of  them,  forgot  that  which
was  quoted  by  me  in  the  epiftle  I  have  mention'd  {',n)  -,  in  which,  however,
that  very  ancient  preceptor(«)  has  exprefsly  taught,  that  thofe  who  are  wounded
in  the  head  "  become  difabl'd  in  the  left  fide,  if  the  wound  is  in  the  right}
"  but  if  the  wound  is  in  the  left  fide,  in  the  right  :"  than  which  nothing
can  be  more  clearly  faid  ;  although  Donatus  aflerts,  "  that  Hippocrates  has
"  no-where,  as  far  as  he  remembers,  fpoken  of  a  paralyfis  of  the  oppofite
"  part."

But  as  to  thofe  more  ancient  authors,  and  many  of  their  followers,  ima-
gining that  not  the  latter,  but  the  former,  happens  the  molt  generally  ;  I
fhould  fuppofe  it  to  have  arifen  in  great  meafure  from  hence,  that  as  they
did  not  difleft  the  heads  of  thofe  who  died,  they  argu'd,  from  the  leat  of
the  wound,  which  they  faw  in  the  head,  the  feat  of  the  injury  alio  that  was
brought  on  in  the  brain  :  or,  if  they  fometimes  faw  this  injury  to  lie  under  the
■wound,  by  reafon  of  the  cranium  being  perforated  by  the  blow  itfelf,  or  by
their  inftruments,  during  the  courfe  of  the  cure-,  they,  at  lead,  did  not  at;
all  fufpedl  that  the  greater  and  principal  wound  might  be  in  the  oppofue  part
of  the  brain  ;  contrary  to  what  anatomy  has  taught  us  that  we  are  to  fuppofe,
as  has  been  demonftrated  above  {o).

47.  However,  I  do  not  fay  this  becaufe  I  am  ignorant  that  the  fide  of  the
body  which  is  oppofite  to  the  fide  of  the  brain  that  aftually  labours  under
the  principal  injury,  is  frequently  feiz'd  with  a  convulfion.  For  I  very  well
remember  what  was  rela,ted  to  the  Royal  Academy  ef  Sciences  at  Paris  {p)
by  Poupart,  from  his  own  anatomical  infpedlion ;  and,  in  like  manner,  from
that  of  Chirac:  nor  am  I  ignoranj:  of  another  certain- obfervation,  as  it  is
one  which  is  transfer'r'd^into  this  fed:ion  of  the  Sepulchretum  {q).  But  I  fay
it  for  this  reafon,  that  you  may  perceive  what  kind  of  obfervations  I  would
alfo  have  to  be  attended  to  here,  before  it  be  determin'd  by  us  what  happens
for  the  moft  parr.

For  they  are  not  to  be  reckon'd  up,  but  to  be  confider'd,  and  not  to  be
admitted,  unlefsthediffeiflion  of  the  head  was  perform'd.  And  this  was  per-
form'd  in  that  obfervation  of  MafTa  which  is  ir.ention'd  above  (r)  -,  juft  as  in
-a  great  number  which  are  either  defcrib'd  from  Valfalva,  or  read  in  the  Se-
pulchretum ;  as  that  of  Diemerbroeck  (j),  Dodonasus  (/),  Horftius  (a),  and
Reifelius  {x) ;  in  all  of  which  you  fee,  that  the  fide  of  the  body  which  was
^oppofite  to  the  injury  of  the  brain,  is  defcrib'd  as  having  been  affedted  with  "
a  paralyfis,  and  not  with  a  convulfion.  And,  indeed,  you  fee  that  thofe  in
which  a  convulfion  of  one  fide,  and  a  refolution  of  the  other,  are  obferv'd,

(/)  De  Hift.  Med.  Mir.  1.  5.  c.  4.  (r)  N.  21.

(m)  N.  14.  {s)  Obf.  3.  §  z.

(»)  Epid.  1.  7.  n.  19.  apud  Marinell.  (?)  Obf.  4.  §  10.

(0)  N.  43.  (a)  Obf.  8.  §  9.

CpJ  Hift.  A.  1700.  Obf.  Anat.  19.  {x)  In  Addit.  ad  hanc  3  Seft.  Obf.  24.


iq) Obf.  7.  4  2.


Xi^2  fllOW


1 1 6 Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univeffal  Difbrders.

fhow  this  latter  to  have  been  in  the  oppofite  fide,  and  the  former  in  that
which  was  the  fubjedl  of  the  wound  :  of  which  obfervations  one  is  of  bal-
.n'iuthus(_y),  who,  moreover,  affirms  that  it  generally  happen'd  thus  ;  and  the
ether  of  Ballonius  h';mfe]f(s):  although,  to  fpeakof  no  otheriaults,  it  is  not  faid
in  the  Sepulchretiiin,  by  the  carelelfnefs  of  the  printers,  what  limbs  were
paralytic.  And  to  this  careleffnefs  I  wilh  1  could  refer  a  blunder  diametrically
oppofite  to  this  :  as  when  the  obf^rvation  of^Fontanus  is  repeated  [a)  -,  or
when  another,  in  like  manner,  of  Barthol;:!  {_b)  is  repeated,  which  would
relate  to  the  queftion  in  hand,  if  it  had  been  remark'd  in  which  fide  the
limbs  (for  both  fides  are  mention''d)  were  firft  or  moft  affedted  with  palfy.

48.  Yet  even  of  thofe  who  feem  to  have  attended  to  nothing  but  the  ex-
ternal feat  of  the  wound,  there  were  not  wanting  learned  men  who  receded
more  or  lefs,  even  before  thefe  times,  from  that  dogma  of  Hippocrates,,
which  is  {o  frequently  inculcated.  Thus  Donatus  (f)  has  alfo  taught  that
the  contrary  happens.  Thus  Csefalpinus  (J),  from  a  review  of  thofe  paf-
fages  of  Hippocrates,  fays,  "  Yet  in  thefe  days  we  frequently  fee  not  only
"  a  convulfion,  but  alfo  a  paralyfis,  arife  in  the  fame  manner;"  that  is,  in
the  part  oppofite  to  the  wound.  So  Martianus  (f),  after  fpeaking  of  convul-
fion in  that  part,  goes  on  to  fpeak  of  refolution,  and  afTerts  as  follows  :.
"  Experience,  indeed,  has  ihown  us,  that  the  refolution  always  happens  on
"■  the  oppofite  fide."

And,  indeed,  before  thofe,  Carcanus  (/)  had  exprefsly  faid  thefe  things  u
'■'  Not  the  part  correfponding  to  the  wound,  but  the  oppofite,  is  always  af-
"  fe6ted  with  a  palfy;  as  Hippocrates  has  very  juftly  faid,  and  as  experience
"  has  taught  us.  It  is  true,  that  Hippocrates  has  faid  the  oppofite  fide  is
"  alFefted  with  a  convulfion,  and  not  with  a  paralyfis ;  but  I  fay,  that  it  is
"  rather  afFeded  with  a  paralyfis :"  and  this  affertion  of  Carcanus  is  not  only
Gonfirm'd  by  many  others,  but  by  that  remarkable  obfervation  of  the  cele-
brated Daniel  Hoffman  {g) ;  who  obferv'd,  in  a  boy  that  had  fuffer'd  "  a.
"  concuITion  of  the  brain,  on  the  left  fide,  with  a  confiderable  lofs  of  fub-
"  ftance,"  a  very  violent  convulfive  agitation  of  the  left  foot,  and  a  para-
"  lyfis  of  the  right  fide,  which  had  made  it  altogether  immoveable.  And
they,  indeed,  determin'd  the  feat  of  the  caufe  of  both  affeftions  to  be  in
the  fame  fide  of  the  brain,  which  is  oppofite  to  the  convuls'd  or  paralytic  fide
of  the  body  ;  but  have  determin'd  the  caufe  of  one  of  the  affedions  to  be
different ;  as,  for  infl:ance,  an  irritation,  or  an  inflammation,  if  it  be  a  con-
vulfion ;  but  a  compreffion,  or  a  rupture,  if  a  paralyfis.

In  this  manner,  alfo,  or  a  fimilar  manner,  is  to  be  underftood  what  Val-
-falva  has  luppos'd  in  regard  to  the  young  man  in  queftion  {h),  that  convul-
fions  are,  in  general,  to  be  referr'd  to  the  fame  caufe  that  refolutions  or  pa-
ralyfes  are  in  others.  But  why  the  effects  of  this  or  that  caufe  difcover  them-
felves  in  the  oppofite  part  of  the  body,  you  will  not  eafily  underftand,  unlefs

(y)  Sea.  ead.  Obf.  3.  ij.  («")  L.  2.  Qua;[l.  Medic.  10.

(k)  Obf.  17.  §  !.  (f) Annot.  ad Hippocr. Epid.  ].  7. S.  i,

{a) Obf.  5.  §'7,  &  8.  verf.  377.

[h)  Obf.  4.  §  6,  &  7.  conferend,  cum  1.  i. (/)  De  Vuln.  Capit.  Serm.  3.  left.  5.

S.  15.  Ob.r.  27.  §  2.  \g)  Dtffert.  de  hac  rariffima  fanatione.

(<)  C,  4.  cit.  {h)  N.  4S-

you


Letter  LI. Article  47.  ■  i  i -j

you  fuppofc  fome  decufTation,  And  this  they  fuppos'd,  and  long  before  them
others  ;  in  regard  to  which  controverfy  I  have  already  fufficicntly  fhown  (/)
what  fcems  to  me  the  mofl:  probable.

Nor,  although  fome  do  not  ib  well  approve  of  that  decufiation,  which  they
themfelves  fay  was  formerly  approv'd  of  by  Hippocrates,  and  do  not  think
that  the  origin  and  the  effefl:  of  the-  fpinal  nerves  ought  to  be  tleriv'd  from
the  medulla  oblongata,  or  higher  ;  can  I  agree  with  them,  unltfs  they  firft
flaow  how  a  paralyfis  of  the  whole  body  is  the  conlequence  of  a  confiderable
injury  of  the  brain  only;  or  how  we  can  give  a  fatisfaftory  anfwer  to  the
quefton  propos'd  by  any  other  fuppofition,  whether  a  convulfion  or  a  refo-
lution  happen  in  the  oppofite  fide.

Moreover,  of  thofe  who,  with  us,  fuppofe  the  refolution,  for  the  mod
part,  to  happen  in  the  oppofite  fide,  there  are  who  fay  that  a  convulfion
happens  in  the  other  fide;  becaufe  the  mufcles  on  one  fide  being  refolv'd,
thofe  on  the  oppofite  fide  prevail  over  them,  and  contrafting  themfelves,
draw  the  lower  jaw,  or  the  trunk  of  the  body,  or  curve  it,  to  that  fide  on
■which  the  contrafling  mufcles  are.

■  But  to  omit  enquiring  whether  this  contradion  could  properly  be  taken
for  a  convulfion,  or  if  it  could,  what  it  relates  to  thofe  convulfive  motions
of  which  we  here  principally  treat  ;  at  leaft,  I  will  make  the  fame  enquiry
which  Csfalplnus  {k)  made,  from  thofe  who  were  nearly  of  the  fame  opinion
even  formerly  :  "  What  injury  of  the  oppofite  mufcles  can  be  fuppos'd,  if
"  the  whole  arm  is  convuls'd,  or  a  leg,  from  a  wound  of  the  head  in  the
*'  oppofite  part,"  or  in  the  correfponding  parts  ?  For  the  mufcles  of  one
arm,  or  leg,  are  not  antagonifts  to  thofe  of  the  oppofite  arm  or  leg ;  and  in
the  limbs  it  is  that  thofe  convulfions  whereof  we  fpeak  at  prefent  occur.

This  was  alfo  obferv'd  by  Thomas  Bartholin  (/),  in  a  boy  in  whom,  from
a  wound  of  the  right  temple,  not  only  the  noftrils  and  mouth  were  convuls'd
on  the  left  fide,  bufalfo  the  arm.  For  he  has  written  thofe  things,  fuch  as
they  are,  that  are  contain'd  in  the  htter  end  of  the  fcholium  affix'd  to  the
fecond  article  of  the  eighth  obfervation  in  this  feftion  of  theSepulchretum  ;
although  it  does  not  there  appear  from  what  author  they  are  taken.  And,
certainly,  if  I  may  be  allow'd  to  ad-d  this,  in  order  to  explain  paralyfes  which
happen  in  the  oppofite  fide,  we  are  oblig'd  to  have  recourfe  to  the  decufiation
of  the  nervous  origins,  ftill  higher  than  from  the  medulla  oblongata;  as  has
been  already  fhown  {m)  from  the  refolution  of  the  oppofite  tunica  retina  :
and  this  we  might  now  confirm  from  the  obfervation  of  Peyronius  («),  of  the
fight  being  lofl:  in  the  eye  of  one  fide,  or  reftor'd,  as  often  as  either  pus  was
retain'd  in  the  oppofite  part  of  the  cerebrum,  where  there  was  a  deficiency
of  the  fubftance  of  this  part,  whereby  the  corpus  callofum  beneath  was
prefs'd  upon  ;  or  was  taken  out  from  thence,  whereby  the  preflTure  was  re-
mov'd  :  and,  in  like  manner,  from  another  of  the  celebrated  Fetzius  (<?),
who,  when  the  left  hemifphere  of  the  cerebrum was  wounded in  fuch  a

(?)  Epift Anat.  13.  n.  17.  ufq.  ad  Z3.  («)  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  1731.  Htbd.  30,

{k)  Quseft.  cit,  10.  prope  fin.

(/)  Cent.  5.  Hift..  Anat.,  2.  (0)  &  A.  1730.  Hebd,  34..  n.  2.

(jn)  Epill.  indie,  n. 1%,  iq,  zi.


1  I  8 Book  IV.  Gf  Cblrarglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

inanner,  that  a  great  part  of  its  fubftance  was  torn  away  and  loft,  not  only
obferv'd  both  limbs,  on  the  right  fide,  to  be  depriv'd  of  the  power  of  mo-
tion, but  alio  obferv'd  the  fight  to  be  obfcur'd  on  the  fame  right  fide,,  and
fcarcely  any  power  of  hearing  to  remain.  Since  then  we  are  under  a  necef-
ficv  of  allowing  this  dccuflation,  in  order  to  explain  a  paralyfis  in  the  oppo-
fit'e  fide,  why  fhould  we  not  acknowledge  it  in  order  to  explain  a  con-
vulfion  ?

However,  Valfalva  giv^s  us  the  reafon  why,  in  the  young  man  of  whom
Ave  fpoke  kit,  thofe  very  violent,  conftant,  and  long-continu'd,  convuHive
motions  ceas'd  fome  hours  before  death  ;  when  he  fays,  that  they  went  off
from  a  defedt  of  bodily  ftrength.  So  alfo  thofe  extremely  violent  conviil-
lions,-  which  are  defcrib'd  above  in  a  certain  man  {p),  had  ceas'd  to  be  trou-
blefome  in  the  laft  hour  of  life.  And  there  feems  to  have  been  the  fame
caufe  why,  in  another  man  (j),  and,  in  like  manner,  in  a  woman  (r),  the
deliritmi  at  length  degenerated  into  a  fatal  lethargy.  But  now  let  me  give
you  other  obfervations  of  the  fcuU  being  fifiTur'd.

49.  A  young  man  of  twenty  years  of  age,  was  wounded  with  a  cutting
inftrument,  in  the  left  part  of  the  occiput.  No  fymptom  was  obferv'd  after
the  blow  ;  and  in  the  beginning  the  cure  promis'd  fuccefs.  Yet  in  the  pro-
grefs  of  a:  few  days  the  parts  about  the  wo\ind  fwell'd  very  confidcrably.  On.
the  twelfth  day  a  fever  came  on,  with  a  rigor  and  a  delirium;  and  on  the
fourteenth  day  the  patient  was  carried  off.

While  the  body  was  taken  away  from  the  bed  after  death,  a  confiderabler
^quantity  of  blood  flow'd  out  from  the  wound.  And  as  foon  as  the  diffeition
was  begun,  the  whole  part  of  the  head  which  had  fwell'd,  was  found  to  be
turgid  with  blood.  And  although  the  inftrument,  wherewith  the  wound  was:
inflicted,  had  left  only  a  flight  incifion  on  the  external  furface  of  the  bone^
yet  at  the  fide  of  this  incifion  was  a  fiffure  -,  and  the  dura  mater  which  Gor-
refponded  thereto  had  a  purulent  matter  flrongly  adhering  to  it :  at  the  fame
time  that  the  part  of  the  cerebrum,  which  lay  beneath,  had  chang'd  its  natu-
ral colour  into  black,  in  fome  meafure.  Befides  this,  there  was  nothing  worthy
of  obfervation  in  the  whole  remaining  part  of  the  cerebrum,

50.  A  man  about  thirty  years  of  age,  fell  from  a  high  place  upon  the
ground.  He  loft  his  fpeech,  and  all  his  internal  fenfes.  He  vomited  at  firft,
after  which  only  an  endeavour  to  vomit  remain'd  :  convulfive  motions  came
on  :  his  face  was  red :  his  pulfe  was  turgid  :  blood  burft  forth  from  his
noftrils  and  his  left  ear :  he  breath'd  with  difficulty :  and  within  twenty-four
hours  after  his  fall  he  quitted  this  ftate  of  exiftence.

On  the  left  fide  of  his  head  the  temporal  mufcle  was  contus'd,  and
the  branches  of  the  temporal  artery  were  lacerated.  When  that  mufcle
was  taken  away,  about  two  inches  above  the  ear,  was  found  a  fiffure  of  the
cranium,  in  the  form  of  an  arch  :  and  near  to  this  fiffure  was  coagulated
blood,  to  the  quantity  of  two  ounces,  betwixt  the  cranium  and  the  dura
mater  ;  which  membrane  was  neverthelefs  found,  as  the  other  parts  of  the
farain  were  alfo.

(/)  »!'  39'  (f)  "•  35-  ('•)  "•  34-


Letter  LI. Articles  jr,  f2..  sip

In  the  belly,  the  ftomach  was  turgid  with  air;  as  the  lungs  were  alfo  in
the  thorax,  and  efpecially  the  right  lobe  :  both  of  them  being  red,  and
not  at  all  adhering  to  the  parietes.  The  pericardium  contain'd  little  or
no  ferum  :  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  contain'd  a  little  frothy  and  fluid
blood,

51.  Another  man,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  being  ftruck  by  a  horfe,  which-
had  run  loofe  without  his  bridle,  was  thrown  on  the  ground  with  fuch  a  force,
that  when  the  hinder  part  of  his  head  was  dafh'd  againft  a  ftone,  the  crack
of  a  broken  bone  was  plainly  heard.  At  firft  he  lay  half  dead  :  a  little  after
he  endeavour'd  to  fpeak,  but  his  words  could  fcarcely  be  underftood.  From
his  right  ear,  from  his  noftrils,  and  from  his  mouth,  was  blood  difcharg'd;
and  by  the  fuUnefs  and  rednefs  of  his  face,  he  feem'd  to  be  almoft  fuffbcated.
He  was  alfo  attack'd  with  a  vomiting  ;  which  foon  after  return'd  with  fuch  a
violence,  chat  he  was  fuppos'd  to  be  giving  up  the  ghoft.  About  half  an
hour  after  the  fall,  he  no  longer  Ihow'd  any  fign  of  fenfe,  nor  yet  of  motion  j
except  that  once  or  twice  he  fhook  his  head,  and  that  he  ftill  had  the  natural
motion  of  refpiration.  His  face  was  fometimes  livid,  but  for  the  moft  part
pale.  Finally,  when  twelve  hours  were  elaps'd,  he  began  to  breathe  (lowly  -,
fo  that  to  have  argu'd  from  what  generally  happens  to  others,  it  might  her
fuppos'd  that  he  was  about  to  die  in  a  few  moments  of  time.  Yet  he  drew
his  breath  in  this  manner  for  two  hours,  and  died  on  the  fourteenth  hour
after  receiving  the  blow  on  his  head.

The  middle  of  the  os  occipitis,  but  a  little  more  to  the  right  fide,  was
deft  afunder  into  a  very  large  and  wide  fiflure  ;  which  being  produc'd,  thro'
its  bafis,  to  the  foramen  magnum,  and  cutting  this  obliquely,,  reach'd  quite
to  the  petrous  procefs.  And  a  great  quantity  of  extravafated  blood  was
found  under  the  bafis  of  the  cerebrum,  and  in  the  anterior  part  of  it  alfo^
betwixt  the  dura  and  pia  mater.

52.  By  what  means  it  could  happen  in  this  man,  that,  although  the  occi-
put was  fiffur'd,  a  quantity  of  blood  was,  neverthelefs,  found  to  be  extra-
vafated in  the  anterior  part  of  the  head,  likewife,  betwixt  the  meninges,  you
will  very  well,  conceive  from  v^hat  I  have  faid  above  {s) :  although,  as  there
was  a  great  quantity  of  blood  under  the  bafis  of  the  cerebrum,  a  part  o£
that  might,  perhaps,  have  been  carried  forwards  aljb,  betwixt  the  me*
ninges.

But  if  this  was  not  the  cafe,  veffels,  and  thefe  very  confiderable  ones  too,
are  not  wanting,  which  paffing  from  one  of  thefe  membranes  to  the  other,
may  be  very  eafily  broken  in  great  concuffions  of  this  kind  -,  efpecially  if  they
are  very  much  difiended.  And  at  the  fame  time,  others  may  be  broken,  on'
the  outfide  of  the  cavity  of  the  cranium,  from  whence  blood  may  flow  out-
by  the  ears,  the  noftrils,  and  the  mouth.  And  thefe  circumftances  may  the
more  eafily  happen,  if  the  filTure  reaches  to  the  petrous  procefs,  as-  it  did  in,
this  man;  or  if  the  blood,  as  in  the  former,  be  extravafated  near  the  new
foramina  of  the  tympanum,  betwixt  the  cranium  and  the  dura  mater.  For
that  there  is  a  palTage,  by  thefe  foramina,  into  the  cavity  of  the  tympanum,
and  from  this  cavity,  through  the  euftachian  tube,  into  the.  noftrils,  andi

'7-  fauces,.


I  20 Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univcrfal  Diforders.

fauces,  there  is  no  necelTity  for  me  to  demonftrate  here,  as  I  have  already
•written  fufficiently  on  this  fiibjed  in  a  former  work,  and  even  of  the  difcharge
of  blood  from  the  cranium  by  thefe  paiTages  (/).

53.  A  certain  man,  being  wounded  with  a  cutting  inftrument  in  the  ante-
rior, and,  in  like  manner,  in  the  pofterior,  and  left  part  of  the  head,  an-d
being  receiv'd  into  the  hofpital  fo  often  mention'd,  began,  on  the  fourth  day
after  his  wounds,  to  complain  of  very  fevere  pains  therein  •,  which,  within
a  few  days,  had  even  fpread  over  the  whole  body.  On  the  fixteenth  day  he
was  depriv'd  of  the  power  of  fpeech  ;  and  then,  having  loft  the  uie  of  all  his
internal  lenfes,  he  at  length  died  on  the  twenty-fifth  day.

The  wound,  which  was  receiv'd  anteriorly,  had  reach'd  quite  to  the  begin-
ning of  the  medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain.  And  the  pofterior  wound  had
pafs'd  above  the  tranfverfe  procefs  of  the  dura  mater,  and  had  penetrated
into  the  cerebrum,  quite  to  the  cavity  of  the  left  ventricle.  In  that  ventricle
was  contain'd  a  confiderable  quantity  of  ferum,  which,  when  laid  upon  the
tongue,  left  a  biting  tafte  for  a  long  time  together  ;  fo  that,  from  the  acri-
mony thereof,  it  might  feem  reafonable  to  account  for  the  irritation  of  the
genus  nervofum  ;  and  from  this  irritation,  perhaps,  thofe  univerfal  pains  of
the  body.

54..  A  hufoand-man,  about  forty  years  of  age,  was  v/ounded  by  another
hufband-man,  almoft  at  the  right  fide  of  the  lagittal  future,  with  a  bill,
the  beak  of  this  inftrument  being  driven  in  fo  deep  as  to  reach  within  the
cerebrum.  His  whole  body  was  feiz'd  with  a  trembling  immediately  upon
the  blow  :  his  intelleftual  adions  began  to  be  retarded  :  and  in  all  the  parts
of  the  left  fide  the  power  of  motion  began  to  be  diminifli'd,  till  about  the
fourth  day  it  was  entirely  loft:  the  fenfe  of  feeling  ftill  remaining.  His  face
was  very  red  ;  his  internal  fenfes  were  obfcur'd  ;  his  refpiration  becatr.e  deep,
and  his  pulfe  weak.  Finally,  a  reddifti  matter  being  thrown  up  from  the
mouth,  he  died  on  the  feventh  day.

The  upper  part  of  the  cranium  being  cut  off  (which  was  not  only  perfo-
rated v^ith  the  wound,  but  had  alfo  a  bony  fcale  rais'd  up  from  its  ufual  fitu-
ation)  while  the  dura  mater  was  cut  into,  about  the  beginning  of  the  me-
dulla fpinalis,  in  order  to  extrad  the  brain,  a  confiderable  quantity  of  blood
flow'd  out.  However,  the  wound,  perforating  the  longitudinal  finus,  reach'd
from  thence  quite  into  the  left  ventricle -,  in  v/hich  fome  ferum,  with  a
p-rumous  blood,  was  conceal'd :  and  in  the  bafis  of  the  fame  ventricle  was
feen  a  fordid  ulcer.  In  the  thorax,  the  left  lobe  of  the  lungs  was  very  turgid
from  ftagnating  blood.

c,^.  It  is  natural  to  fuppofe  it  had  happen'd  to  Valfalva,  at  the  time  of
writing,-  as  frequently  is  the  cafe,  that  inftead  of  the  right  ventricle,  which
lay  under  the  wound,  he  fet  dovvn  the  left ;  by  reafon  of  no  animadverfion
being  added  or  interpos'd.  For  he  who -was  wont  to  find  the  injury  of  the
brain,  in  that  fide  which  vjas  oppnfice  to  the  paralytic  fide  of  the  body  ;  as
from  the  many  obiervations  which  are  defcrib'd  above  (a),  and  from  what  he
has  exprefsly  added  under  number  forty-five,  very  evidently  appears  ;  if  he

(/)  Epifl.  Anat,  6.  n.  6.  &  feqq.  [u]  n.  it.  17.  27.  28.  35.  4.2.  44..

had


Letter  LI. Articles  s^,  si, S^-  i^i

liad  now  feen  the  contrary  in  this  hufband-man,  would  certainly  not  have
omitted  to  make  feme  remark  on  fo  nnufual  an  appearance.

Yet  this  I  do  not  fay  becaufe  I  think  it  impofiible  for  that  wound  to  be
turn'd  afide,  by  a  flight  obliquity,  from  the  right  ventricle  into  the  left,
efpecially  as  it  lies  fo  near  -,  or  becaufe  I  myfelf  never  difiefted  bodies  which
had  the'injury  in  the  hemifphere  of  the  brain  that  correfponded  to  the  para-
lytic fide  of  the  body.  For  in  the  thirteenth  of  the  Epiftolse  Anatomic^e  (x),
I  have  not  only  pointed  out  fome  obfervations  of  this  kind,  made  by  others,
but  have  even  propos'd  my  own ;  although  I  have  not  conceal'd  (y)  what
may  ftill  be  wiih'd  for  in  fome  of  them,  and  in  what  manner  we  may  explain
both  mine  and  the  others,  without  overturning  the  dogma  of  Valfalva.  And
from  thence  you  will,  perhaps,  be  able  to  collect  fome  things,  in  order  to  ex-
plain this  obfervation  alfo;  not  to  fay  if  any  thing  that  is  advanc'd  in  the  ob-
fervation  under  number  thirty-five,  in  regard  to  the  eye-lids,  feeitis  not  very
well  to  correfpond  thereto.

§6.  I  will  now  put  the  finifhing  flroke  to  this  letter,  by  the  hifto-
ries  of  two  wounds,  which  were  both  of  them  inflifted  by  a  (harp-pointed
inftrument  •,  but  are  fuch  as  deferve  the  more  attention,  by  reafon  of  the
ftroke  appearing  fo  flight  in  both  of  them,  and  by  reafon  of  their  feeming
to  belong  to  the  face  rather  than  to  the  brain.

gy.  A  man  of  thirty  years  of  age,  of  a  bilious  temperament,  being  ftfuck,
with  a  fliarp-pointed  inilrument,  about  the  right  eye,  pafs'd  over  the  fpace
of  three  days  without  any  fenfible  injury  of  the  animal  adtions.  On  the  fourth
day  he-caine  of  himfelf  into  the  holpital  fo  frequently  mention'd :  and  on
the  fame  day  he  died ;  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the  phyficians ;  becaufe
there  appear'd  to  be  no  where  any  moftal  wound,  but  only  a  fimple  contu-
fion  on  that  eye.

The  flcull  being  open'd,  and  a  fmall  quantity  of  purulent  matter  being
found  betwixt  theosTrontis  and  dura  mater,  and  the  place,  being  fought  for
from  whence  this  matter  had  come,  the  bone  was  found,  by  means  of  the
probe,  to  be  perforated,  oppofite  to  the  right  eye.  Therefore  the  external
and  internal  paffage  of  the  whole  wound  was  diligently  fought  after,  and  evi-
dently found.  That  is  to  fay,  the  inftrument  had  pafs'd  betwixt  the  eye  and
the  orbit,  without  injuring  the  eye,  to  the  bony  arch  of  the  orbit;  and  after
pertorating  this  arch,  had  penetrated  into  the  fubftance  of  the  brain,  fo  that
the  termination  of  the  wound  was  diftant  only  by  the  breadth  of  a  finger,
from  the  parietes  of  the  left  ventricle.

However,  although  it  was  winter,  and  the  body  v\'as  diflecled  foon  after
death,  there  was  fuch  a  flaCcidity  of  the  vifcera  and  vefiels,  that  they  did  not
bear  even  to  be  touch'd  without  having  their  texture  injur'd  ;  and,  at  the
fame  time,  fuch  a  putrid  fmell  in  the  whole  body,  that  Valfalva  affirms  he
had  never  met  with  the  like  till  that  time ;  and  afcribes  the  whole  of  it  to  the
deprav'd  difpofition  of  fluids,  which  muft  have  preceded  the  wound.

58.  Of  all  the  obfervations  that  I  remember  to  have  read,  of  the  brain
being  injur'd  through  a  wound  of  the  orbit,  fcarcely  any  feems  more  fur-
prizing  than  this,  when  I  confider  what  pafs'd  betwixt  the  wound  and the

{x)  n.  25.  CyJ  Ibid.  &  n.  ?6.

Vol.  III.  R  death


122 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

death  of  the  man.  For  although  others,  of  whom  Horftius  (x),  Ballo-
nius  (a),  Fantonus,  the  father  [b],  and  Jo,  Phil.  Burggraflius  (c),  have  writ-
ten, did  not  die  till  the  ninth,  the  eleventh,  the  fourteenth,  or  the  twcnty-
firft  day  ;  and  others,  of  whom  Peter  BorcUi  {d),  and  Schmidius  («),  have
fpoken,  fufpecfling  no  danger,  or  making  merry  with  their  companions  on
that  day,  walk'd  the  length  of  two  leagues,  or  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile  ;  yet  the
latter  were  either  found  dead  on  the  day  following,  or  fell  down  dead  foon
after  ;  but  the  others,  being  either  troubled  firfh  with  a  pain  of  the  head,  and
after  that  with  more  violent  fymptoms,  or  being  aiHided  with  thefe  fymptoms
immediately  after  the  accident,  dragg'd  through  all  that  number  of  days
under  the  painfulnefs  thereof.

With  neither  of  thele  have  I  clafs'd  ibme  others  ;  as  him  whom  Sennertus
has  defcrib'd  (/),  that  immediately  became  apopleftic,  and  died  about  the
ninth  hour  from  thence  ;  becaufe  that  fharp  fword  feems  to  have  entered  the
cavity  of  the  cranium,  through  the  foramen  ?iervi  cptici ;  or,  if  you  pleafe,
through  the  other  neighbouring  foramen,  which  is  call'd  lacerum  :  and  that
this  might  happen  in  the  obfervation  of  Diemerbroeck  {g),  which  I  have
look'd  for  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  in  vain,  you  will  not  deny  -,  the  patient
being  depriv'd  "  of  none  of  the  animal  aftions  "  till  the  tenth  day,  and
being  then  carried  off,  in  the  fpace  of  two  days,  by  a  "  very  violent  fever  "
•which  fuperven'd.

But  the  muflcet  ball,  which  was  "  driven  through  the  orbit  of  the  right
"  eye,  in  fuch  a  manner  that  it  emerg'd  from  the  left  part  of  the  occiput ;"  as
the  celebrated  Helwich  {h)  has  defcrib'd  -,  does  not  feem  to  have  been  able
to  pafs  through  without  a  frafture  of  the  orbit  ;  fo  that  if  you  would  refer
this  cafe  to  the  clafs  of  thofe  that  I  have  taken  notice  of  in  the  fecond  place,
you  are  at  liberty  to  do  fo  for  me,  efpecially  as  the  woman  fell  down  dead
from  the  wound.

Yet  I  do  not  knov/  to  which  clafs  thofe  belong,  that  have  been  faid  to  be
kill'd  from  a  wound  of  the  orbit,  by  Bohn  (z),  by  Ruyfch  {k),  Jacotius  (/),  and
even  Dodonseus  (wz),  whofe  name  being  overlook'd,  while  this  obiervation
was  copied  into  the  Sepulchretum  from  Schenck  («),  is  improperly  taken
from  the  preceding.  And  I  am  ignorant,  becaufe  it  is  by  no  means  certain,
from  the  narration  of  thofe  authors,  as  it  is  from  others,  and  particularly
from  Vallalva,  how  many  days  the  wounded  pafa'd  without  the  appearance  of
any  bad  fymptum  •,  as,  for  inftance,  a  deep,  which  Dodon^us  mentions
indeed,  but  does  not  fay  on  what  day  it  began  :  Bohn  has  only  this,  that
the  patient  died  on  the  third  day  after  the  blow  :  and  Ruyfch  fays  nothing
elfe,  but  that,  in  a  fhort  time  after  the  wound  was  receiv'd,  which,  to  thofe
who  had  the  care  of  it,  feem'd  of  very  fmall  moment,  death  had  come  on.  And

(z)  Serulchr.  ],  I.  S.  3.  Obf.  38.  [h)  Eph. N. C.  Dec. 3. A. 9. & 10.

{a)  Ibid.  1.  4.  S.  hac  3.  Obf.  17.  §.  1.  Obf.  120.

{h)  Sea.  ead.  Obf.  5.  §.  10.  (/) De  Renunc.  Vuln.  Seft.  2.  c.  I.

(f) Aa.  N.  C.Tom.  6.  Obf.  130.  [k]  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  54.

\-i)  Sepulchr.  Obf.  etc.  17.  §.  2.  (/) Sepulchr.  Obf.  cic.  17,  §.  5.

(<■)  Ibid,  in  Addit.  ad  banc  Seft.  Obf,  9.  («;  Medic  Obf.  c.  3.

(f)  Obf.  cit.  17.  §.  4.  {>i}  Obf.  Medic.  1.  1.  ubi  de  VuIji.  Cerebri.


(^)  Anat.  1.  3,  c.  10.


this


Letter  LI. Article  58.  123

this  author,  although  other  obfervations  of  the  fame  kind  were  ah-eady  extant,
as  you  might  perceive,  thought  this  of  his  fo  extraordinary,  that  he  reckon'd
in  the  number  of  thole  things,  which  Bidloo  fuppos'd  could  never  happen,
«'  a  fatal  wound  of  the  orbit  (0)."

Yet  this  obfervation  ought  not  to  have  been  omitted  among  the  others
which  arcadded  to  the  Sepulchretum  ;  nor  yet  what  Ruyfch  has  added  to  it ;
I  mean,  that  the  fuperior  part  of  the  orbit  is  fo  thin  and  fragile,  as,  in  many
places,  not  to  exceed  the  thicknefs  of  writing-paper,  and  to  admit  of  a
fiaifture  from  the  finger  alone  :  and,  therefore,  that  wounds  inflifted  on  the
orbits  are  not  to  be  made  (light  of,  (as  happen'd  in  many  of  them  which  I
have  taken  notice  of)  efpecially  if  they  are  inflicted  with  a  fword,  or  fome
inftrument  of  a  fimilar  nature,  or  with  a  piece  of  wood  that  is  not  blunt-
pointed,  or  if  the  wounded  perfons  are  feiz'd  v^'ith  a  fleepinefs,  a  naufea,  a
fever,  a  vertigo,  or  a  convulfion  ;  to  which  you  may  add,  from  the  hiftories
I  have  pointed  out,  a  confiderable  pain  of  the  head,  a  numbnefs  of  the
limbs,  a  palfy,  a  delirium,  or  any  other  fymptom  of  that  kind.

And  as  this  attention  is  fometimes  of  ufe  towards  the  cure,  for  inftance,
by  leading  us  to  apply  the  trepan  to  the  os  frontis  in  proper  time,  v;hich
another  obfervation  of  Bcrelli  fliews  (p),  fo  it  is,  for  the  moll:  part  at  leaft,
ufeful  in  making  a  prognofis.  I  have  laid  for  the  molt  part  :  fince  although
the  others  died,  yet  this  patient  of  Borelli's  efcaped,  and  the  celebrated  Fan-
tonus,  in  the  fcholium  to  his  father's  obfervation  (j),  which  does  not  indeed
particularly  make  mention  of  a  wound  of  the  corpus  ftriatum,  but  appears
to  be  the  fame  that  is  refer'd  to  above  from  the  Sepulchretum  (r)  :  fays,
that  he  knew  a  foldier,  who,  being  wounded  with  a  very  lliarp  fword,  at
the  internal  angle  of  -the  orbit,  and  having  fallen  into  a  hemiplegia  and
weaknefs  of  the  eye,  drag'd  on  his  life  for  many  years  in  this  ftate  of  health.

To  this,  I  fuppofe,.  you  will  add  that  hunter,  of  whom  Elias  Camerarius
(j)  fpcaks,  who  being  wounded,  with  a  {harp  inftrument,  in  the  fame  angle,
and  in  the  confines  of  the  upper  eye-lid,  had  a  paralyfis  of  the  whole  oppo-
fite  fide  fucceed  to  that  wound,  an  amaurofis  of  the  neighbouring  eye,
and  a  confiderable  diminution  of  memory  -,  the  paralyfis,  neverchelefs,  being
by  degrees  very  much  alleviated  afterwards,  and  he  continuing  to  live,  lo
that  four  months  had  already  pafs'd  fince  the  infliction  of  the  wound,  when
the  obfervation  was  written,  and  almoft  nine,  as  it  feems,  when  it  was  fent
to  Augfburg.

Another  young  man,  who  is  defcrib'd  by  Nebelius  (/),  was  happier  than
he  ;  for  being  wounded  thorough  the  left  orbit,  and  immediately  feiz'd  with
a  paralyfis  of  the  fame  fide,  and  convulfive  motions  on  the  oppofice  fide,
with  an  aphonia,  and  foon  after  with  a  delirium  and  lofs  of  memory,  had,
after  the  third  week,  a  little  fanies  difcharg'd  from  the  right  ear,  after  a  great
pain  of  that  part  having  preceded;  which  difcharge  continu'd  fome  days,
and  about  fix  weeks  after  receiving  the  wound,  he  recover'd  his  health  en-
tirely. But  left  you  fhould  happen  to  be  furpriz'd  that  the  hemiplegia  had
feiz'd  on  the  fide  which  lay  under  the  wound,  and  that  convulfions  feiz'd  on

{c)  Refp.  ad  Bibl.  Vindk.  (r)  §.  lo.  Obf.  5.

(fij  in  Schol.  ad  cit.  §  2.  Obf.  17.  {i)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  3.  Obf.  55.

(j)  35.  (/)  Earund.  Cent.  6.  Obf.  54.

R  2  the


I  24 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  oppofite  fide,  contrary  to  what  more  generally  happens,  as  I  have  faid
above  (a)  -,  it  is  neceflary  you  fhould  be  inform'd,  that  the  vi'ound  had  been
inflidled  with  a  fharp  fword,  which  "  had  gone  through  the  lower  eye-lid,
"  under  the  external  canrhiis  of  the  left  eye,  and  had  proceeded  upwards
"  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  point  of  the  fword  penetrated  obliquely  under
"  the  bulb  of  that  eye,  through  its  bony  orbit,  towards  the  anterior  bafis
"  of  the  brain."

Add  therefore  with  me,  what  this  oblique  palTage  of  the  fword,  and  the
great  pain  of  the  right  ear,  and  the  falutary  defluxion  of  fanies  through  the
fame  ear,  fufiiciently  ihow  ;  I  mean,  that  the  fword  penetrated  through  the
anterior  bafis  "  of  the  right  hemifphere"  of  the  brain.  By  this  means  you
will  readily  perceive  that  the  left  fide  of  the  body,  and  not  the  right,  was
oppofite  to  the  injury  of  the  brain.  And  you  naturally  conceive  of  yourfelf,
that  not  only  wounds  infli£ted  on  the  orbits,  but  even  below  the  orbits,  as
the  hiftory  of  Egermeierus  (x)  had  Ihown,  and  this  other  of  our  Valfalva's
confirm.s,  relate  fometimes  to  the  brain.

59.  A  young  man,  of  twenty  years  of  age,  was  wounded  with  the  point  of
a  fharp  fword,  about  the  lower  margin  of  the  orbit  of  the  left  eye.  On  be-
ing v;ounded  he  fell  dov/n  :  all  the  fundions  of  the  internal  fenfes  ceas'd  :  he
became  fpeechlefs.  If  you  except  certain  convulfive  motions,  he  fcarcely
gave  any  fign  of  motion  ;  neverthelcfs  he  fliow'd  fome  fenfe  of  pain,  when
the  probe  was  introduc'd  into  the  wound.  The  motion  of  refpiration  was
encreas'd  every  hour.  At  length  the  pulfe  failing,  he  died  about  ten  hours
after  receiving  the  wound.

The  brain  being  taken  out  from  the  cranium,  and  the  probe  being  intro-
duc'd into  the  external  orifice  of  the  wound,  it  was  found  that  the  fword  had
penetrated  into  the  cavity  of  the  cranium,  almofh  by  the  fide  cf  the  os  fpon-
giofum  fuperius  •,  which  was  confirm'd  by  the  bony/ragments  in  that  cavity,
and  by  the  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum  being  wounded  in  that  part.  But
how  far  the  wound  proceeded  in  the  cerebrum,  it  was  in  vain  to  enquire  with
the  probe,  as,  by  reafon  of  the  foftnefs  of  the  fubfl;ance  of  the  brain,  it
might  as  eafily  make  new  paflages,  as  fhow  one  that  was  already  made-
Taking  av;ay  the  dura  mater  therefore,  and  obferving  the  pia,  which,  in  the
finciput,  was  turgid  with  blood,  like  an  inflam'd  part ;  and  the  lateral  ven-
tricles being  then  open'd,  in  both  of  them  was  feen  coagulated  blood,  which
had  flow'd  out  from  the  veflcls  that  had,  without  doubt,  been  ruptur'd  by
the  wound  itfelf.  And  from  thefe  ventricles  it  feem'd  to  have  overflow'd  into
the  fourth  ;  for  in  this  cavity  alfo  a  blood  of  this  kind  occurr'd.

60,  Thus  1  have  given  you  the  obfervations  of  Valfalva,  which  are  greatly
to  be  commended,  even  on  this  very  account,  that,  in  all  of  them  in  gene-
xal,  the  days  and  the  hours  are  mark'd  down,  on  which  the  patients  were
attack'd  with  the  particular  fymptoms,  or  with  death  :  circumftances  which,
although,  very  ufeful  and  neceflfary  to  be  known  by  phyficians  and  furgeons,
are  neverthelcfs  wanting  in  moft  obfervations  of  the  kind.  As  to  my  obferva-
tions they  bear  no  proportion  to  his  in  number.  However,  as  this  letter  is
already  fufficiently  prolix,  I  lliall  refer  you  to  the  next'for  them. Farewel.

(a)  B.  47.  {x)  Senukhr.  SeiEl,  hac  3.  Obf,  3.  §  13.

LETTER


Letter  LII. Articles  r, 2.  iir


LETTER the FIFTY-SECONI

Finilhes  the  Difcourfe  on  Wounds  and  Blows  of  the  Head„


N  giving  you  the  remaining  hiftories,  which  relate  to  the  wounds  and
_  blows  of  the  head,  in  this  letter,  I  fliall  preferve  the  fame  order  as  in'
the  former,  and  begin  with  thofe  wherein  either  the  injury  of  the  cranium
was  very  inconfiderable,  or  there  was  none  at  all.  For  although  Celfus  {a)
feys,  "  it  rarely  happens  for  the  whole  bony  compages  of  the  cranium  to  re-
»'  main  entire,  and  for  fome  vein  in  the  membrane  of  the  brain  to  be  ruptur'd
"  internally  from  the  blow  ;"  yet  the  frequent  diffeftion  of  bodies  has  fince
fhown  us,  that  fomething  of  this  kind,  or  even  a  more  violent  injury,  very
frequently  happens  without  any  injury  of  the  bone.  And  this  1  have  no;:
only  heard  Valfalva  aflert,  from  the  teftimony  of  his-  own  diffecStioos,  but
you  yourfelf  might  alfo  have  learn'd  from  thofe  that  are  defcrib'd  among  the
firft  of  the  preceding  letter.  To  which  you  may  add,  befides  fo  many  others
that  you  will  find  in  turning  over  the  Sepulchretum,  thefealfo  that  I  fhall
hnmediately  fubjoin.

2.  A  woman,  of^fry  years  of  age,  and  the  mother  of  many  children;
being  fomewhat  fatter  than  country-women  (in  the  number  of  whom  fhe
was)  for  the  molt  part  are,  fell  into  a  ditch,  and  dafh'd  one  fide  of  the  fin-
ciput  againft  a  very  hard  piece  of  ice;  for  it  was  the  middle  of  the  month
of  December,  in  the  year  1725.  The  bone  which  receiv'd  the  blow  was
laid  bare  by  this  ftroke,  for  two  or  three  inches.  On  account  of  this  wound
fhe  came  into  the  hofpital  here :  in  which,  without  any  paralyfis,  without
any  convulfion,  without  any  very  violent  fymptom  preceding  ;  for  flie  had
but  juft  felt  a  flight  inclination  to  vomit;  without  being  weaken'd  in  her
mufcular  ftrength,  or  that  of  her  pulfe,  the  wound  fuddenly  grew  dry  and
livid,  and  the  day  after,  which  was  the  eleventh  from  her  fall,  Ihe  died.

Her  body,  though  the  feafon  was  extremely  cold,  and  though  I  diflefted  if
not  more  than  twecty-four  hours  after  death,  fmelt  fo  ftrong,  that  I  was  ob-
lig'd  to  finifh  the  difledion  within  the  courfe  of  one  day.  Yet  I  remark'd
many  things  that  related  both  to  a  natural  and  to  a  dil'eas'd  ftate.  I  (hall,
however,  only  give  you  the  narration  of  the  latter.  In  the  belly  the  omen-
tum was  contrafted,  and  the  ftomach  was  inclin'd  obliquely  too  much  to
the  right  fide. That  part  of  the  inteftine  colon,  which  lies  under  the  fto-

(<!}.  De  Medx.  1.  8.  c.  4.


I  2  6 Book  IV.  Of  Ch-irurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

mach,  did  not  proceed  tranfverfly,  but  was  curv'd  downwards  •,  and  the  fame
inteliine  was  very  much  dilated,  from  the  beginning  quite  to  this  curvature,
and  livid.  The  ipleen  was  longer  than  k  naturally  is.  The  teftes  were  not
only  white,  hard,  and  unequal,  but  in  one  of  them  lay  hid,  in  the  centre,  a
little  body  of  a  white  colour,  roundidi,  almoll  hollow,  and  cartilaginous.
Both  the  tubes  were  utterly  impervious  at  two  fingers  breadths  below  the  larger
orifice.  The  vagina  was  internally  of  a  black  colour,  and  at  the  lower  and
almoft  anterior  part  appear'd  to  be  eroded,  as  if  from  an  acrid  humour  ;  an
erofion  of  which  kind  was  alfo  obierv'd  in  one  fide  of  the  cervix  uteri.

In  the  thorax  the  lungs  were  black  on  the  back-part.  The  heart  was  lax,
and  in  its  ventricles  were  many  polypous  concretions.  The  veflels  were  fiU'd
with  a  great  quantity  of  blood,  as  they  were  in  other  parts  of  the  body  like-
wife.

Finally,  in  the  head  the  os  fincipitis  was  internally  and  externally  livid,
where  it  had  been  dafh'd  againft  the  ice;  yet  had  not  the  leaft  fifllire.  The
meninges,  under  which  not  pus  or  blood  was  extravafated,  but  watc-r,  were
themfelves  alfo  livid  and  greenilli,  in  the  part  where  they  correfponded  to  the
livid  bone-.  So  in  that  place  only  the  cerebrum  alfo  was  affedted  with  a  li-
vidnefs,  which  did  not  however  defcend  deeper  than  to  the  extent  of  two
inches.  The  putrid  odour  which  exhal'd  from  thefe  parts  was  much  more
violent  than  that  of  the  others,  though  thofe  were  exceedingly  offenfive,  as
I  have  already  faid,

3.  The  head  of  a  man  who  had,  in  like  manner,  fall'n  from  a  high  place,
was  brought  to  me  in  the  year  1722.  Though  the  fcuUwas  neither  fraftur'd
nor  fifllir'd,  yet  was  there  almoit  the  fame  ftate  of  the  meninges,  and  of  the
brain  itfelf  alfo.

4.  A  poor  woman,  of  a  habit  of  body  inclining  to  fatnefs,  having  become
mad  through  grief  for  having  loft  her  hufband,  fhe  herfelf  being  at  that
time  very  young,  wander'd  through  the  city  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  hurt  no-
body, but  to  be  herfelf  troubled  with  the  reproaches  and  injurious  treatment
of  the  rabble.  Wherefore,  befides  that  fhe  v^as  faid  to  have  brought  forth
a  child  fome  months  before,  flie  was  at  laft  ftruck  on  the  head  by  a  profli-
o-ate  young  fellow,  with  an  iron  pin  or  bolt,  fo  that  fhe  died  about  the  tenth
or  eleventh  day  after  the  blow,  not  without  fymptoms  of  a  concuffion  in  the
brain.

The  body  being  brought  into  the  college  the  following  day,  that  I  might
therefrom  linifli  the  anatomical  demonftrations  of  the  year  1728,  before  the
end  of  February,  it  was  fcarcely  poffible  to  make  ufe  of  it.  For  although
it  feem'd  to  be  a  very  proper  fubjeft,  when  I  order'd  the  inteftines  to  be
taken  out;  yet  on  the  follov/ing  day  the  greater  part  of  .the  abdominal  vif-
cera  were  ah'eady  green,  I  neverthelefs  obferv'd  the  following  things.  The
who'e  fundus  uteri  was  very  thick :  the  teftes  were  very  much  enlarg'd,  and
rounder  than  ufual  in  their  figures  :  and  the  orifice  of  the  tube  was  perfeflly
o-rown  into  one  lublfance  with  the  teftis  on  one  fide.  But  the  teftes  them-
felves, when  difiedtcd,  fhow'd  nothing  peculiar  in  their  appearance,  except
that  they  tontain'd  a  little  more  fluid  than  ufual.

In  both  the  caviies  of  the  thorax  was  water  contain'd.  The  pofterior
furface  of  the  heart  had  already  begun  to  be  green.

But


Letter  LIL Articles  i",  (5.  127

But  the  head  was  in  a  more  diftemper'ci  ftate  than  any  of  the  other  parts>
as  was  naturally  to  be  expeded.  For  although  the  cranium  was  found,  yet
pus  was  contain'd  betv/ixc  that  and  the  dura  mater,  and  this  membrane  was
moreover  affeded  with  a  kind  of  fphacelus.

5.  That  the  bodies  of  wounded  perlbns  very  often  become  foetid,  green,
and  putrid,  loon  after  death,  is  not  to  be  wonder'd  at,  when  the  part  which
was  wounded  already  began  to  abound  v/ith  pus  and  fanies,  and  ftill  more
when  it  was  feiz'd  with  a  gangrene,  as  was  the  cafe  here.  For  the  dtprav'd
and  corrupted  particles  enter  the  blood  through  the  ruptur'd  venous  or  lym-
phatic vefiels,  and,  with  this  fluid,  are  carried  through  the  whole  body.
And  that  this  takes  place  in  wounds  of  the  head  alfo,  1  iiave  fecn  more  than
once,  efpecially  in  an  old  woman,  whom  I  have  taken  notice  of  when  I  was
writing  to  you  on  the  fubjeft  of  barrennefs  {b).  For  in  that  feafon  which  was
fo  very  cold,  when  the  vifcera  of  the  belly  were  taken  out,  the  feptum  tranf-
verfum  itfelf  was  loon  after  of  a  green  colour.

But  thefe  things  happen  more  readily  in  the  carcafes  of  thofe  who,  either
in  other  parts,  as  in  the  aorta  of  that  old  woman,  or  in  the  humours  them-
felves  only,  were  difpos'd  to  putrefaction  before  the  wound  was  receiv'd.
And  in  the  number  of  thefe,  befides  a  man  who  was  wounded  in  the  orbit
of  the  eye,  of  whom  I  wrote  in  the  preceding  letter  (f),  you  will  recount
that  country-woman,  whofe  difleftion  Irelated  to  you  juft  no\v{d)  ;  for  an  in-
jury of  that  kind  in  the  head  did  not  fufficientiy  account  for  fo  great  a  ftate
of  putrefaction  :  although  why  this  may  fometimes  feem  to  be,  in  part,  lefs
than  it  was  before,  may  not  only  be  gather'd  from  what  has  been  juft  now
faid,  but  will  be  more  clearly  pointed  out  below  [e).

6.  A  woman  of  the  fame  age,  but  many  years  before,  that  is  in  the  year
1706,  had  two  wounds  inflifted  upon  her  head  with  a  (hort.and  cutting  in-
ftrument,  which  however  was  not  very  heavy  %  with  one  of  thefe  wounds
that  part  of  the  right  temporal  mufcle  was  injur'd,  which  lies  behind  the  an-
gular apophyfis  of  the  zygomatic  bone,  to  ufe  the  words  of  the  celebrated
Window ;  the  other  was  fome what  lower.  Yet  both  the  wounds  were  brought
almoft  to  a  cicatrix,  when  the  woman,  expofing  herfelf  to  the  injuries  of  the
cold  air,  and  agitating  the  temporal  mufcle  by  the  maftication  of  hard  food,
fwell'd  very  much,  foon  after,  in  her  whole  face,  and  was  fliaken  with  rigors,
and  convuifive  motions  in  her  head  :  fhe  was  now  and  then  alfp  feiz'd  with
a  flight  delirium,  till  having  a  ftertor  come  upon  her,  fhe  died  in  the  hofpital
of  St.  Mary  de  Morte  at  Bologna.

As  I  differed  not  only  her  head  on  the  following  day,  which  was  the  twenty-
fixth  of  March  ;  but  the  other  part  of  this  woman  alfo,  1  firft  obferv'd  the
following  appearances  in  the  genitals,  thit  were  preternatural.  In  one  of  the
teftes  was  a  fmall  cyft  of  a  yellow  colour,  inclining  to  green,  v/herein  was  a
globule,  as  if  of  concreted  blood,  v»?hich  had  I  know  not  v/hat  of  a  bright
red  appearance  in  the  center.  The  uterus  had  its  parietes  much  thicken'd,
the  internal  coat  being  lax,  under  which  were  feen  through  its  fubftance,  in
iome  places,  bloody  drops,  perhaps  becaufe  the  menftrual  flux  had  been
coming  on  :  or,  probably,  rather  becaufe  the  uterus  was  difeas'd. For  a

(/)  Eplll  46,  n.  26,  (f)  n.  57.  (dj  n.  2.  (ej  n.  9.

8  white


iiB Book  IV, Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

white  and  pretty  fluid  matter  occur'd  betwixt  the  valves  of  the  cervix,  as  i^
the  woman  had  labour'd  under  a  uterine  floor :  and,  indeed,  the  ofcidum  uteri
was  more  lax  than  the  fubjeded  vagina  and  its  orifice  requir'd,  and,  at  the
lame  time,  i'omewhat  injur'd  on  its  iurface,  as  if  from  acrid  matter.

The  ikull  being  open'd,  we  found  the  dura  mater  to  be  thiclcen'd  and  red
here  and  there,  as  if  from  drops  of  blood,  which,  however,  you  could  not
wipe  ofi^;  and  this  in  more  than  one  place,  where  it  is  fubjedted  to  the  bafis
of  the  cerebrum  ;  as,  for  inftance,  at  the  fides  of  the  fella  turcica,  and  under
the  glandula  pituitaria  itfelf,  but  no  where  more  than  under  the  right  anterior
lobe  of  t!ie  cerebrum.  Under  which,  and  at  the  external  fide  of  the  fame
.lobe  alfo,  betwixt  both  the  meninges,  was  a  pus  of  a  yellowiih  colour  in-
clining to  cineritious.  Yet  the  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum,  and  the  other
parts  that  were  within  the  cranium,  were  unhurt;  although  the  fanguiferous
veffels,  which  run  through  the  pia  mater,  appear'd  to  be  ibmewhat  more
turgid  than  ufual ;  and  under  this  membrane  was  a  fmall  quantity  of  water,
as  there  was  a  fmall  quantity  alfo,  and  of  a  reddifli  colour,  in  the  lateral
ventricles  of  the  brain,  and  a  polypous  concretion  in  the  fuperior  ftnus  of
the  falx.

As  we  diligently  enquir'd  after  the  paflfage  by  which  pus  could  enter  the
cranium  from  the  wound,  we  found  that  all  the  bones  which  compos'd  this
cavity  were  quite  free  from  injury  on  their  internal  furface.  And  then  we
pafs'd  on  to  examine  the  external  parts.  Under  the  upper  wound  ;  for  the
inferior,  being  lefs  deep,  had  a  different  direftion  ;  there  was  a  cavity  about
which,  and  in  which,  pus  fl:agnated  :  and  through  this  cavity  a  certain  furgeon
faid  that  he  introduc'd  a  probe  into  the  cavity  of  the  cranium,  while  the
woman  was  living.  And,  indeed,  there  was  a-pafl'age  through  the  bone,  per-
forated by  the  wound,  for  the  pus  to  be  carried  from  this  cavity,  not  into
the  cranium  however,  but  into  the  orbit  of  the  eye:  and  by  this  flight  dif-
ference the  fijrgeon  had  been  deceiv'd.  But  by  what  pafllige  it  was  carried
from  the  orbit,  where  pus  was  alfo  found,  into  the  cranium,  there  was  not
the  leaft  teftimony  to  evince  ;  whether  we  infpe6led  the  natural  foramina,  or
e5<amin'd  into  thofe  which  had  happen'd  to  be  open'd  by  the  force  of  difeafe  ;
cipecially  as  the  dura  mater  was  feen  to  be  no-where  eroded.  And  that  ani-
madverfion  had  this  ufe  alfo  ;  1  mean,  to  prevent  us  from  fuppoflng  that  pus
had  pais'd  through  a  certain  very  fmall  chink  which,  we,  at  length,  thought
we  difcover'd,  after  raifing  up  the  arch  of  the  orbit,  by  driving  the  chiflfel
thereinto.

7.  However,  in  refearches  of  this  kind,  whether  they  are  made  in  the
living  or  in  the  dead  body,  as  it  is  necefl^ary  to  take  care  in  the  former,
left,  where  two  natural  cavities  are  disjoin'd  by  a  thin  feptum,  we  too  hafi:ily
fuppofe,  that  the  probe  which  reaches  into  one  has  enter'd  into  the  other ;
fo  it  is  proper,  in  the  latter,  to  abftain  from  the  ufe  of  the  mallet  and  chiflel,
lefl:,  if  any  chink  fhould  happen  to  appear,  there  may  be  a  doubt  whether
it  fliould  be  afcrib'd  to  our  violence,  or  to  the  blow  that  had  been  receiv'd  :
as  there  certainly  was  no  fifllu'e,  from  either  caufe,  in  him  whom  I  difleded
a  few  days  after  in  the  fame  place.

8.  There  was  an  old  man  of  a  lufty  habit  of  body,  and  of  a  yellow  colour
of  fliin,  who  had  been  before  under  medical  courfes,  as  an  afthmatic  patient.

6  This


Letter  LIL Article  8.  i2<).

Tills  man  having  fall'n  from  on  high,  and  dafh'd  the  right  fide  of  his  head
ao-ainft  a  ftone  ;  the  cure  of  the  wound  which  he  had  got  by  the  fall,  feem'd
to  go  on  very  well,  when,  about  the  eleventh  day,  a  difficulty  of  breathing
came  on,  with  a  ftertor.  He  had  no  pain  in  the  thorax.  But  rather  com-
plain'd  continually  of  a  kind  of  troublefome  fenfation  below  the  right  hypo-
chondrium.  And  applying  our  hands  to  this  place,  we  perceiv'd  a  bubble,
as  it  were,  like  one  of  thofe  which  the  rain  excites  on  the  furface  of  water ;
and  this  rais'd  itfelf  up  and  fubfided  alternately  and  inftantly,  foon  after  re-
turning and  going  away,  and  always  keeping  the  fame  fituation.

In  the  mean  while,  the  head  feem'd  to  be  very  well ;  but  the  man  could
not  fleep,  and  convulfive  ftartings  of  the  tendons  occurr'd  at  the  wrifts  to
thofe  who  felt  the  pulfe.  And  this,  which  had  always  been  frequent,  was
now  alio  become  fmall.  Wherefore,  within  a  day  or  two  after  the  difficulty
of  refpiration  came  on,  death  freed  the  patient  from  his  diforders.

The  abdomen  of  the  carcafe  was  diftended  :  and  when  this  cavity  was
open'd,  the  ftomach  and  the  inteflines  appear'd  to  be  diftended  with  air,  the,
fmall  inteftines  being  infiam'd  in  a  certain  place,  and  not  v.'ithout  fome  foetor.
The  liver  was  fomewhat  hard,  I'he  fpleen  was  fo  lax,  that  it  could  be  torn
to  pieces  very  eafily  by  the  fingers.  The  hernia,  and  the  lacerated  flap,  as
it  were,  which  hung  from  the  ring  of  the  pylorus,  in  confequence  of  their
being  fufficiently  defcrib'd  already  (/),  and  the  eleven  ribs  on  each  fide  alfo,.
which  I  have  taken  notice  of  in  the  Adverfaria  (^),  1  pafs  by  here,  as  it  is,
fufficient  to  hint  that  this  is  the  man  in  whom  thefe  appearances  were  found.,
And  as  to  the  lower  part  of  one  of  the  lobes  of  the  thyroid  gland  containing
a  pretty  large  globular  body,  and  two  others,  in  like  manner,  that  were  full
cf  a  ropy  humour;  I  pafs  over  thefe  circumftances  for  this  reafon,  becaufe
I  have  often  taken  notice  of  things  of  that  kind  in  other  bodies.

It  will  not  be  improper  to  add  what  appear'd  in  the  thorax.  The  anterior
furface  of  the  lungs  was  connected  by  membranes  to  the  cheft.  The  lungs
themfelves  were  no-where  hard ;  yet,  although  neither  the  legs  nor  the  feet
had  been  fwell'd,  both  lobes  were  furrounded  with  a  great  quantity  of  water ;
the  left  with  that  which  was  of  a  red  colour,  and  rather  fmall  in  quantity  ;  and;
the  right  with  fomewhat  more,  and  that  which  was  of  a  green  and  yellowifh
colour.  On  the  right  fide,  alfo,  the  pleura  was  putrid  ;  fo  that  it  was  not  only
very  eafy  to  feparate  it,  but  pieces  thereof  had  been  fpontaneoufly  feparated,
and  fwarn  in  that  water ;  and  adhering  to  the  membrane  of  the  lungs,  which
was  itfelf  found,  belied  the  appearance  of  pus.  The  pericardium  contain'd
a  reddilh  v/ater-,  and  the  heart  a  frothy  blood :  the  great  artery,  at  its  origin
from  the  heart,  had  within  it  a  polypous  concretion.

The  bone  of  the  wounded  fmcipuc  lay  open  to  the  extent  of  half  an  inch,
being  of  a  livid  colour,  and  comprehended  in  a  kind  of  circular  little  furrow,
as  if  the  exterior  lamina  of  the  cranium  had  fubfided.  And  the  internal
furface  correfponding  to  it  was  of  the  fame  colour  indeed,  but  comprehended
in  no  Lttle  furrow.  Nor,  indeed,  had  the  fiiuM  any  other  diforder  befides,
-cither  there,  or  in  any  other  part. But  the  dura  mater,  which  lay  under

CfJ  Epift.  ^3.  n.  35,  &  Eplft.  29.  n.  17.  (j)  II,  Animad. 32.  in  iin.

Vol,,  hi.  S  ■ that


I  3  o Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

that  one  place,  was  moid  with  a  thickifh  ichor  on  its  fuperior  furface  ;  and
had  adhering  to  its  inferior  furface,  yet  in  fuch  a  manner  that  it  could  be
taken  away  without  any  difficulty,  a  piece  of  another  dura  mater,  as  it
were,  which,  when  attentively  examin'd,  was  found  to  be  very  fimilar  to
thofe  fpurious  membranes  wherewith  the  lungs  and  the  pleura  are  frequently
cover'd  over,  in  inflammations  of  the  thorax.  Under  this  piece  adher'd  to
the  pia  tnater  a  kind  of  pretty  large  drop  of  thick  and  whitifh  ichor.  A.nd
betwixt  this  membrane  and  the  brain,  not  there  only,  but  in  feveral  places,
a  fnull  quantity  of  water  was  interpos'd.  And  this  water  was  not  wanting
in  the  lateral  ventricles,  in  which  cavities  it  was  of  a  reddifh  colour.  How-
ever, all  the  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum  was  everywhere  found:  the  cere-
bellum was  very  foft.  And,  finally,  all  the  mufcles  of  the  body  were
flaccid.

9.  As  to  the  fenfation  of  bubbles,  as  it  were,  rifing  up  and  fubfiding,
•which  was  troublefome,  indeed,  but  eafily  to  be  referr'd  to  flatulent  habits,
in  which  one  certain  part  of  the  intefl;ines  is  rais'd  up,  and  not  any  others
if  you,  in  concert  with  me,  omit  this  fymptom,  and  confider  the  others,
you  will,  without  doubt,  add  this  obfervation  alfo  to  the  four  which  are  al-
ready defcrib'd,  and  to  many  others  given,  from  Valfalva,  in  the  preceding
letter ;  from  which  it  is  underftood,  that,  although  the  bone  is  not  perfo-
rated by  any  fiflln-e,  fome  part  may  be  injur'd  within  the  cranium  by  the
force  of  the  percuQion  :  and  of  this  injury  death  may  be  the  confequence.

For  as  to  the  preternatural  appearances  which  were  found  in  the  thorax  of
this  old  man,  perhaps,  they  alfo  add  their  origin  or  increafe  from  thofe  that
were  within  the  fl^ull ;  fome  part  of  the  deprav'd  ichor  being  carried  from
thence  into  the  thorax,  eipecially  as  the  man  was  fubjeft  to  an  afthma.  And-
I  even  remember,  that  a  woman  who  died  of  a  blow  on  the  forehead,  had,
contrary  to  cxpeftation,  a  dirty-colour'd  water  in  both  cavities  of  the  thorax  :
the  hiflrory  of  which  woman  I  fliall  fend  to  you  hereafter,  among  thofe  that
relate  to  the  fubjedl  of  lamenefs  (h).

This  iufpicion  has  a  colour  given  to  it  by  the  circumftance  which  I  have
remark'd  in  the  obfervation  of  Valfalva,  and  others,  about  the  tranllation  of
deprav'd  matter  from  an  injur'd  cranium  into  the  thorax,  which  is  by  no
means  rare  (z).  And  although  we  know  that  where  the  queftion  is  of  the
meninges  and  brain,  we  are  v/ont  to  attend  no  lefs  to  the  acrimony,  than  to
the  quantity,  of  the  injurious  humour ;  yet  it  is  not  quite  incongruous  to
fuiped,  or  at  leall  fometimes,  that  where  a  very  little  quantity  of  this  is  found
within  the  fkull  of  dead  bodies,  it  is  the  remainder  of  a  fomewhat  larger
quantity,  which,  after  having  injur'd  thofe  parts,  even  more  than  is  apparent,
has  been  prefently  carried  through  the  veffels  into  other  parts,  or  difpers'd
through  the  whole  body  ;  from  whence  we  have  alfo  accounted  for,  in  part,
the  figns  of  univerfal  putrefafbion,  and  the  very  putrid  odour  in  particular  (k).
And  how  little  mortal  ichor,  or  diforder  brought  on  by  it,  frequently  remains
within  the  cranium,  or,  at  leaft,  is  found  within  the  cranium,  befides  many
hiilories  of  Valfalva  (/),  and  the  two  firfl:  of  ours,  and  this  laft,  thefe  others,
which  our  very  diligent  Mediavia  communicated  to  me,  v/ill  fliow  you.

(/j)  Epift.  56.  n.  26.  (^)  Supra,  n  5.

(0  Epift,  pixced.  51.  n.  17.  &  fcqq.  [l)  Epift.  prsced.

10.  An


Letter  LII. Articles  i  g, 1 1 ,  131

10.  An  old  man  was  fcruck  with  a  ftone  on  one  fide  of  the  finciput,  when
he  was  drunk,  and  had  a  wound  inflifted  thereby  :  yet  he  neither  fell  down,
nor  vomited,  in  confeqiience  thereof.  The  wound  being  dilated,  fome  days
after,  by  the  furgeon,  the  bone  beneath  was  found  to  be  fomewhat  livid,  not
very  far  from  the  angle  which  is  intercepted  by  the  fagittal  and  lambdoid  fu-
tures ;  for  which  realbn  it  was  fcrap'd  with  an  inftrument  proper  for  that
purpofe.  Nor  was  the  phyfician  wanting  in  making  ufe  of  every  thing  which
it  is  cuftomary  in  thefe  cafes  to  make  ufe  of.  But  the  wound  was  almoftdry,
and  not  of  a  good  colour :  a  fever  attended  it  :  the  pulfe  was  weak  :
the  patient  rofe  up  out  of  bed  in  the  night,  complaining  of  the  violence  of
the  heat;  and,  indeed,  it  was  the  month  of  June,  in  the  year  1739  ;  but
this  feem'd  to  be  done  with  fome  degree  of  delirium.

At  length,  the  fever  went  away  ;  the  pulfe  became  better ;  and  now  the
patient  declar'd  that  he  could  bear  to  abltain  from  food  no  longer.  How-
ever, he  was  guilty  of  no  irregularity,  although  the  fever  return'd  after  fome
days,  with  a  fenfe  of  heavinefs  in  the  head,  with  a  kind  of  torpor  of  the
fenfes,  a  flight  delirium,  and  a  rednefs  of  the  face  and  eyes.  The  phyfician,
therefore,  endeavour'd  once  more  to  alleviate  the  fymptoms,  but  to  no  pur-
pofe ;  and  in  a  ftiort  time  after,  the  old  man  died  ;  that  isj  about  the
twentieth  day  after  receiving  the  blow.

The  cranium  was  very  thick  •,  and  the  dura  mater  thick  in  proportion.
In  the  former  was  no-where  any  mark  of  diforder ;  becaufe,  even  in  that
part  where  it  had  been  fcrap'd,  it  was  of  a  natural  colour  both  internally  and
externally.  The  dura  mater  was  likewife  found.  But  not  fo  the  pia  mater,
to  the  external  furface  of  which,  where  it  correfponded  with  the  place  of
percufiion,  a  little  mucus  adher'd  ;  which  was  of  a  yellow  colour  inclining  to
green,  and  of  a  very  filthy  odour.  That  part  of  the  cerebrum  which  lay
beneath  this  mucus,  began  to  become  blackifli,  for-as  large  a  fpace  as  two
fingers  breadths  woufd  cover,  in  every  direftion  ;  yet  not_to  a  greater  depth
than  that  of  the  cortical  fubftance  of  the  brain.  However,  the  other  parts
were  in  a  found  and  proper  flate,  except  that  a  confiderable  quantity  of  red-
difli  ferum  was  found  in  the  lateral  ventricles,  but  more  in  that  which  lay
under  the  wound.  In  both  of  thefe  cavities  the  plexus  choroides  were  of  a
pale  colour.

11.  A  woman,  who  had  been  for  a  long  time  fubjedt  to  an  epileptic
diforder,  receiv'd  a  blow  upon  her  head.  In  the  beginning  there  was  no
fymptom  worth  attention  ;  fo  that,  if  fhe  were  aflc'd  about  hercomplaints,
fhe  anfwer'd  that  they  were  all  very  flight,  or  none  at  all.  But  at  the  end
of  fome  days,  the  fymptoms  began  to  Ihow  themfelves,  and  to  increafe  ;  the
fever  was  augmented  ;  and  a  certain  ftate  of  inaftivity,  which  was  very  much
like  a  conftant  fleep,  came  on,  though  without  fleep  •,  for  if  you  attended
to  it,  you  heard  her  murmuring  with  a  low  and  fmall  voice.  And  in  this
manner,  neither  the  firft  remedies,  nor  the  latter,  being  of  any  advantage,
flie  died.

The  flcull  not  only  fliow'd  no  fifl\ire,  but  had  fcarcely  any  change  of  co-
lour, in  the  part  where  the  blow  had  been  receiv'd.  Only  under  that  place
was  a  purulent  mucus,  as  we  have  faid  in  the  old  man,  though  in  a  rather
larger  quantity, Befides,  from  the  internal  furface  of  the  cranium,  where

S  2  it


132 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

k  hung  over  the  falciform  finus,  flood  forth  a  bony  prominence,  which  was
fmall  indeed,  and  fhort  -,  but  of  fiich  a  kind,  that  if  you  drew  your  finger  .
over  from  the  pofterior  part  forwards,  your  finger  was  prick'd  thereby. But
this  probably  related  to  the  epilepfy  -,  to  the  blow  it  certainly  did  not  re-
late.

12.  And  Mediavia  related  that,  in  the  fame  year  1739,  it  had  happen'd,
almoft  in  the  fame  manner,  to  fome  as  to  the  old  man,  to  others  as  to  the
woman,  from  blows  of  the  head  •,  and  he  had  oblcrv'd,  if  at  any  time  the
violent  fymptoms  of  diforder  which  had  been  in  the  beginning,  v/ere  almoft
obliterated,  and  after  that  the  fever,  from  a  flight  one,  fuddenly  became
violent,  beginning  with  a  coldnefs  and  perturbation  of  mind ;  if  this  came
on  in  the  eleventh  day,  that  death  foliow'd  on  the  fourteenth  ;  but  if  tl-.e
exacerbation  of  fever  came  on  in  the  fourteenth  day,  that  death  came  on  in
the  feventeenth.

In  reading  thefe  obfervations,  and  ftill  more  in  reading  the  great  number
left  us  by  Valfalva  (m),  I  do  not  doubt  but  you  are,  and  have  been,  much
furpriz'd  that  no  mention  is  made  of  the  cranium  being  perforated  by  the
trepan  ;  efpecially  in  thofe  cities  wherein  very  eminent  profefibrs  of  the  chf-
•rurgical  art  have  flourifli'd,  who  were  accuftom'd  formerly,  as  we  learn  even
from  their  writings,  to  afford  this  affiftance  with  the  greateft  readinefs  to  thofe
who  were  v/ounded  in  the  head.

Yet  you  will  ceafe  to  wonder,  when  you  confider  the  different  fortune  of
fo  many  remedies  in  different  ages,  and  not  only  in  different  nations  and
climates,  but  in  the  fame  ;  and  efpecially  thofe  remedies  which  are  of  a  cruel
nature,  and  at  the  fame  time  of  an  uncertain  event,  as  this  is.  The  furgeons
d'id  not  want  readinefs,  dexterity,  or  courage :  but  courage  was  rather
wanting  to  the  patients,  or  their  relations,  or  others  who  were  concern'd  ;  as
they  confider'd,  on  one  hand,  an  operation  which  was  cruel  in  its  appearance,
and,  on  the  other,  the  event,  which  was  often  fo  unhappy,  that  to  the  com-
mon-people, and  perfons  ignorant  of  the  medical  art,  thofe  patients  who  died
might  feem  to  have  been  kill'd  by  the  method  which  was  us'd  in  order  to
fave  them  :  which  confideration,  I  fuppofe,  led  them  to  with-hold  their  con-
fent  from  the  operation.  And  lb  many,  fo  various,  and  fo  difficult  to  con-
jefture,  are  the  caufes  for  which  the  perforation  of  the  cranium,  although
lldlfully  and  innocently  perform'd,  may,  neverthelefs,  become  ufelefs ;  that^it
might  eafily  happen,  among  many  who  were  trepann'd  in  thofe  years,  that
very  few  only  efcap'd.

Nor  would  I  have  you  wonder,  that  I  faid  it  might  fo  happen,  fince
Tronus  teftifies,  in  the  work  of  Bohn  («),  that  in  the  hofpital  of  a  large
city  in  Italy,  all  who  V7ere  wounded  in  the  head,  and  underwent  the  opera-
tion of  trepanning,  aflually  "  perifhed,"  not  one  excepted.  And  what  will
you  fay  to  this  ?  that  in  a  hofpital,  in  a  foreign  nation,  which  is  much  larg-
er, not  before  the  end  of  the  fixteenth  century,  but  in  this  our  age,  not
under  any  rafh  operator,  but  under  the  moft  experienced  furgeons,  the
fame»  or  almoft  the  fame  thing  happens,  as  has  been  committed  to  writing  ;

{ip!j.  Epift.  51*  (»)  Diflert.  de  Trepanat.  Difficult.,

and


Letter  LII. Article  1 2'.  133

and  in  neither  place  can  we  lay  all  the  blame  upon  the  air,  although  infeft-
ed  with  unwholefome  effluvia  of  a  great  number  of  fick  perlons ;  fince  it  is
certain,  that,  in  both  of  them,  wounds  of  the  head,  even  when  confiderable,
have  been  cur'd  by  being  treated  in  a  different  method, and  are  ftill  cur'd.

Take  care  how  you  luppofe,  that  I  here  wifh  for  greater  diligence,  or
fl<ill,  in  thefe  very  celebrated  men.  There  are  caufes  enough  for  us  to  ac-
cufe,  as  I  had  begun  to  fay.  Thus  fuppofe,  for  inftance,  that  blood  is
fometimes  extravafated  within  the  ventricles  of  the  brain,  or  under  the  baQs
of  it ;  at  other  times  it  may  be  extravafated  externally  indeed,  and  at  the
upper-part,  but  under  the  dura  mater ;  or  if  above  this,  yet  in  a  place  di-
redly  oppofite  to  which  the  furgeon  dare  not  trepan  ;  for  inftance,  under  the
mufcles  of  the  temples,  or  oppofite  to  the  pituitary  finulTes  of  the  fore-
heads

Nor  will  you  interrupt  me  by  replying,  that  the  cranium  may  fometimes
-be  perforated,  even  oppofite  to  the  feat  ^^of  theie  finuffes,  and  under  thofe
mufcles ;  and  the  dura  mater  be  cut  into  above  that  blood.  For  I  know,
that  the  frontal  finuffes  are  wanting  in  fome  perfons,  which  I  think  I  have
fometimes  obferv'd,  where  the  lower  part  of  the  forehead  was  not  at  all
prominent  about  the  eye- brows,  but  flat.  Nor  does  it  efcape  me,  that,  in
order  to  drav/  out  the  matter  which  is  confin'd  under  that  membrane,  the
incifion  thereof  has  been  propos'd  by  the  mod  excellent  furgeons  -,  among
whom  our  country-men,  Gabriel  Falloppius  (<?),  Csfar  Magatus  (p),  Peter
de  Marchettis  (q),  were  not  the  laft  ;  nor  that  the  temporal  mufcle  has  been
"  cut  many  times  with  fuccefs,"  by  the  fame  Magatus  (r) ;  nor  that,  before
Magatus,  five  fuccefsful  inftances  of  the  fame  mufcle  being  cut.  were,  in
like  manner,  publifh'd  by  Carcanus  (s)  ;  no  convulfion  being  the  confe-
quence,  even  when  tlie  whole  of  it  was  cut  through  tranfverfly  :  and  I  my-
lelf  faw  here,  in  the  year  1734,  a  young  man,  who,  having  had  a  dagger
forc'd  through  thatTnufcle,  from  the  upper  and  anterior  part  of  it,  quite
into  the  concha  of  the  external  ear,  behind  the  tragus,  was  troubled  with  a-
great  hjemorrhage  indeed,  but  with  no  fever,  much  lefs  with  any  convul-
fion, and  recover'd  very  happily.

1  know  then,  that  thefe  things  were  propos'd,  or  done,  by  the  Italians,
others  being  even  at  that  time  afraid  of  them.  But,  at  the  fame  time,  I
know,  that  thefe  things  were  done  in  confequence  of  the  moil  extreme  ne-
cefTity,  and  not  without  very  great  danger,  which  they  themfelves  do  nof
dilTemble,  and  particularly  of  convulfions,  which  not  Hippocrates  (/)  only,
but  even  Marchetti  {u)  himfelf,  faw  to  be  the  confequence  thereof;  fo  that,
for  this  very  realbn,  he  would  not  recommend  the  cutting. of  this  mufcle.;
not  to  fay  that  he  has  exprefly  faid,  it  ought  "  never"  to  be  undertaken.

Whether,  therefore,  the  furgeons,  at  that,  tim.e  in  which  the  perforation
of  the  cranium  began  to  be  not  well  fpoken  of  in  fome  cities,  perform'd
this  operation  in  any  very  fafe  place, and  as  far  as  they  fuppos'd  it  to  be

(0)  Comm.  in  Hipp,  de  Vuln.  Cap.  c.  43. (j)  De  Vuln.  Cap.  Serm.  1.  Left.  8.

(;>)  De  rara  Medic.  Vuln.  1.  2.  c.  3!.  (/)  in  Coac.  juxta  Dareti  interpret,  i.  3.  tr.


(f)  Syllog.  Obf. Med.  Chir.  14.  2.  c.  i.  n  1.

(>:)  I,  2.  cit.  c.  27.  («)  Syllog.  cit,  in  addit.  ad  Obf.  1;.


proper^


I  34 Book  IV.  Of  Cliirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

proper,  not  daring  to  imitate  the  above-tnention'd  authors  in  the  other
proceedings,  and  the  patients  neverthelefs  perifti'd ;  or  whether  they  did
dare  to  imitate  theni;  and  convulfions,  fuppofe,  or  other  evils  following  the
imitation,  the  patients  perifli'd  in  fo  much  a  more  miferable  manner  (for
our  enquiry  is,  not  what  neceflarily  happen'd,  but  what  might  happen,  in
order  to  make  a  remedy  of  this  kind  become  deferted)  ;  you  fee  into  what
fear  the  people  might  have  been  thrown,  and  how  naturally  their  opinion
might,  from  either  of  the  events,  become  averfe  to  the  praftice.

13.  But  befides  thofe  reafons  that  have  been  mention'd,  it  might  hap-
pen for  many  others,  that  the  perforation  of  the  cranium,  at  that  time,
might  be  perform'd  without  any  utility,  and  even  not  without  manifeft  de-
triment ;  which  is  a  circumftance  that  would  render  the  minds  of  the  people
Hill  more  averfe  to  the  remedy  in  queftion  :  as,  for  inftance,  if  a  furgeon,
who  happen'd  to  be  ignorant  how  often  dents  or  cavities  are  imprefs'd
upon  the  internal  furface  of  the  cranium,  which  cavities  I  have  already
fpoken  of  to  you  (x),  and  which  fometimes  receive  fo  very  deeply  the  tu-
bercles, as  they  formerly  call'd  them,  of  the  dura  mater,  that  you  will
have  only  one,  and  that  a  very  thin  external  lamina  of  the  bone,  remaining,
efpecially  in  the  ofTa  fincipitis,  and  fometimes  in  the  os  frontis ;  through  the
ignorance  of  which  circumftances,  I  fear,  left  fome  obfervers  have  co'nfider'd
them  as  diforders  of  the  cranium,  and  dura  mater ;  if  he  then,  I  fay,  had
by  chance  borne  down  the  trepan  againft  any  one  of  thefe  cavities,  for  they
have  no  certain  fituations,  he  would,  without  doubt,  firft  have  injur'd  the
dura  mater,  and  the  parts  whereby  it  is  rais'd  up,  before  he  could  have  fup-
pos'd  the  whole  of  the  firft  lamina  to  have  been  pierc'd  through  by  him :
or  if  another,  having  laid  bare  the  fame  membrane  by  the  trepan,  and  fup-
pofing  pus  to  be  confin'd  under  it,  (for  there  fometimes  is  pus,  as  we  learn
from  many  obfervations,  and  among  thefe,  from  two  that  are  publifli'd  by
Murray  (^),  and  confirm'd  by  anatomy)  had  cut  into  it;  but  being  deceiv'd
by  the  figns  (amongft  which,  whether  "  the  moft  certain  of  all  can  be  the
"  celTation  of  the  pulfatile  motion,  imprefs'd  thereon  by  the  arteries  of
"  the  cerebrum,"  others  muft  determine),  had  carried  the  point  of  the  in-
ftrument  not  againft  the  pus,  which  did  not  exift  at  all,  but  againft  the  pia
mater  and  the  brain  5  or  if  not  deceiv'd,  had  wounded  the  branches  of  the
artery  that  creep  through  the  dura  mater.

I  omit  to  enumerate  other  errors,  many  of  which  might  happen  in  an
operation  that  is  not  very  eafy  and  clear,  and  that  to  the  great  detriment  of
the  patients :  and  I  return  to  the  remaining  caufes  which  might  render  this
operation  ufelefs.

To  ta!<e  notice  of  fome  of  thefe  only  •,  at  leaft  though  the  blood  was  ex-
travafated  betwixt  the  dura  mater  and  the  cranium,  and  in  thofe  places  even
which  nothing  forbids  us  to  perforate ;  yet  if,  being  coagulated,  it  had  adher'd
lo  clofely  and  tenaciouQy  to  that  membrane,  as  not  to  be  feparated  therefrom
without  violence,  as  it  has  happen'd  to  many  others,  and  to  Valfalva  himfelf,
more  than  once,  to  find  it ;  for  we  particularly  refer  to  nothing,  as  you  may
even  have  obferv'd  above,  but  you  have  examples  of  almoft  every  circum-

{;<)  Epift.  8,  n.  3.  (yj  Quaeft.  Parsf.  A,  1736,  propofita  n.  5.

fiance,


■^  Letter  LIT, Article  i$.  j  55

fiance  in  the  preceding  or  in  the  prefent  letter ;  of  what  advantage  would  it
have  been  to  perforate  the  cranium  ?

You  will  perhaps  fay  :  But  if  it  had  adher'd  in  this  manner,  even  before
death,  a  fkilful  furgeon  would  have  been  able  to  apply  fuch  things  as  might
diflblve,  and  fet  it  loofe.  Let  us  fuppofe  it.  Yet  what  if  fome  part  of  the
coagulated  blood  lay  in  fuch  a  place  as  the  infus'd  fluid  could  have  no  accefs
to ;  for  you  are  not  ignorant  that  this  membrane  adheres  very  clofely  to  the
cranium ;  and  that  it  follows  from  hence,  that  one  place,  wherein  it  is  fepa-
*ated  from  the  cranium,  cannot  communicate  with  another,  though  very  near,
in  which  it  is  likewife  feparated,  or  at  leaft  fo  expeditioufly,  as  would  be  ne-
celTary  for  it  both  to  enter  and  to  be  difcharg'd.

Nor  am  I  ignorant  by  what  instruments  furgeons  can  feparate  fome  neigh-
bouring part  of  the  dura  mater  from  the  fcull  -^^  and  that  the  patient,  by
holding  his  breath  at  intervals,  may  urge  the  cohering  matter,  and  procure
it  a  more  eafy  difcharge  from  its  receffes.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  alfo  fee  the  danger,  left,  by  tearing  away  the
dura  mater,  the  furgeon  fliould  hurt  this  membrane ;  or  left  fome  veflel  of
thefe  pretty  large  ones  which  I  have  before  mention'd,  Ihould  be  injur'd
thereby ;  as  you  know  very  well  that  they  are  prominent  through  the  exter-
nal furface  of  this  membrane,  and  are  receiv'd  within  thofe  ramifying  fur-
rows of  the  fcuU:  and  indeed  J  am  not  without  fear  of  thofe  exertions  in
the  patient,  if  he  can  really  hear,  and  do  what  is  commanded  him,,  and  does>
not  lie  in  an  apopledtic  ftate,  without  fenfe  or  motion.

For  when  refpiration  is  reftrain'd,  and  men  exert  themfelves  in  this  ftate,
it  is  evident  that  a  greater  quantity  of  blood  is  retain'd  in  the  head,  even
by  obferving  their  faces,  which  are  at  that  time  tumid  and  red;  either  be-
caufe  the  return  of  the  blood  is  then  lels  eafy  on  all  fides,  in  confequence  of
the  lungs  being  at  reft,  or  even  for  that  reafon  which  Santorini  (z)  fuppos'd,
or  for  fome  other  caufe  of  that  kind  peculiar  to  the  head.  Wherefore  the
vefTels  of  the  brain  being  turgid,  the  pia  mater  is  every  where  forc'd  againft
the  dura  ;  and  if  there  happens  to  be  any  fluid  betwixt  this  and  the  cranium,
that  is  fqueez'd  out  through  the  foramen  which  is  open'd  in  the  cranium,,
where  there  is  the  leaft  refiftance,  if  the  progrefs  of  it  this  way  be  not  wholly
obftrufted.  But  even  the  diftenfion  of  the  veflels,  in  general,  may  give
rife  to  a  frefh  eruption  of  blood  through  the  injur'd  veffels ;  and  the  too
violent  and  too  frequently-repeated  compreffion  of  the  dura  mater,  may  occa-
fion  an  inflammation  therein.  And  you  fee  that  neither  of  thefe  circum-
ftances  can  contribute  much  to  the  recovery  of  the  patient.

Belides,  there  is  fometimes  blood  in  a  fluxile  ftate,  fo  that  it  might  efcape
at  this  foramen  ;  but  it  is  in  fuch  a  quantity,  that  before  it  can  be  taken  out,
it  muft  have  prefs'd  upon  the  brain,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  kill  the  patient  j
an  example  almoft  fimilar  to  which  you  have  in.  one  of  our  EprJicU  Anato-
mic£{a).  Add  to  this,^  that  it  might  already  have  brought,  by  its  corruption^
a  fatal  diforder  upon  the  meninges.

Moreover,  fuppofe  every  thing  that  I  have  faid  of  blood  to  be  faid  of  pu&
slfo,  or,  if  yoiv  pleafe,  of  fanies  and  ichor.

(z)  Obf.  Anat,  c  3.  in  fin,  («)  XIII.  n.  16.

Andi


x-6 Book  IV.  Of.  Chir'urgical  atid  Univei'fal  Diforders.

::And  what  if  there  be  none  of  thefe  circiim [lances,  bin  the  concuffion  ©f
the  cerebrum  is  fo  great  as  to  have  ccnfiderably  deftroy'd  its  internal  ftriiG-
tore  ?  Read  over  again,  I  beg  of  yon,  the  oblervation  taken  from  the  man
who  died  of  a  violent  blow  on  his  head,  which  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  in
the  eighth  letter  (Z^,  and  compare  it  with  that  of  the  criminal  which  1  then
took  notice  of  from  Littre(c),  and  to  v/hich,  when  fpoken  of  in  the  pre-
ceding letter  (d),  we  added  another  of  Hsnelios.  In  none  of  thofe  three  was
blood  extravafated  -,  yet  the  two  firft  died  immediately  after  the  blow  receiv'd,
and  the  third  within  twelve  hours.  Suppofe  that  any  one  of  them,  in  con-
fequence  of  the  concufficn  being  fomewhat  lefs,  could  have  liv'd  fome  little,
time,  and  that  the  cranium  had  been  perforated,  as  if  the  brain  were  com-
prefs'd  from  an  internal  extravafation  of  blood ;  could  the  blood  have  been
difcharg'd  which  never  was  extravafated  ?

And  to  this  fuppofition  relate  thofe  words  of  Ballonius  (e) :  "  Sometimes
"  the  brain  fuffers  an  internal  concuffion  when  the  cranium  is  unhurt,  and
"  the  flefn  only  flightly  contus'd  :"  and  a  little  lower,  "  It  has  been  obferv'd,
"  by  experience,  that  innumerable  perfons  have  died  of  diforders  of  the
"  brain,  after  convulfions  and  concuffions  ;  in  the  brain  of  whom  nothing
"  could  be  found,  by  means  of  diifedion,  that  might  feem  to  have  been
<'  the  caufe  of  lb  terrible  fymptoms.  And  this  has  deceiv'd  moft  perfons,
«'  who  have  fuppos'd  that  they  could  find  fomething  v.?orthy  of  attention  in
«'  the  brain  of  thofe  who  died,  after  having  labour'd  under  thefe  diforders.
"  So  occult  frequently  is  the  caufe  of  convulfion."  There  is,  on  the  other
hand,  when  there  is  a  great  and  confpicuous  injury  in  the  brain,  or  a  great
quantity  of  blood  extravafated  within  the  cranium  :  and  yet  when  this  is  per-
forated, none  can  be  drawn  out  from  the  brain,  or  the  blood  is  difcharg'd  to
no  purpofe.

See  an  inftance  of  the  firft  cafe,  in  the  obfervation  of  Elias  Camerarius  (/;,
who  relates  that  the  cranium  was  perforated  in  vain  for  this  reafon,  that  a
fuppuration,  v/hich  had  foUow'd  the  blow  of  the  head,  lay  hid  within  the
brain,  v;hich  was  every  where  found  and  entire  externally.  And  examples  of
the  fecond  cafe  you  may  draw  from  the  obfervations  of  thofe  who  have  found
the  fanguiferous  veflels,  and  the  arteries  in  particular,  ruptur'd  within  the
fcull  after  concufiion.  It  is  fufEcient  for  you  to  turn  to  Bohn  (g),  who  faw
it  three  times.  Suppofe  that  the  arteries  either  were  not  in  the  number  of
the  laroeft,  or  were  not  altogether  ruptur'd  ;  for  in  this  cafe  there  would  not
be  time  to  apply  the  trepan.  Yet  of  what  effe6t  would  it  be  to  perforate
the  cranium,  in  order  to  draw  out  the  extravafated  blood,  if  ftill  frefh  and
frefii  extravafations  were  made,  and  added  to  the  firft:,  by  the  arteries,  though
of  the  fmaller  fize,  which  were  not  altogether  ruptur'd  ?  I  omit  other  caufes,
even  thofe  v/hich  are  not  to  be  imputed  fo  much  to  the  careleflhefs  and  er-
rors of  the  furgeons,  as  of  the  patients  and  thofe  who  are  about  them,  which
■are  not  always  known  to  the  common  people  -,  and  I  go  on  to  that  frooi
which  I  fuppofe  it  has  inore  frequently  happen'd,  than  from  others,  that  th.e
^perforation  of  the  cranium. might,  to  the  populace,  feem  of  no  efiecl.

{i]  n.  15.  (0  n.  18.  CfJ  Aa.  N.  C.  Tom.  2.  Obf.  149.

(aj  n.  10.  («)  1.  de  Convulfione.  {g)  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  S.  2.  c.  i.

.4  14.  Fo^


Letter  LII. Articles  14, ij',  137

14.  For  although  there  are  figns  from  which  we  may  fufpecl  that  blood
is  efFus'd  within  the  fcull ;  who  can,  for  a  certainty,  fay,  whether  there  is  re-
ally fuch  an  extravafation ;  and  if  he  knew  this,  how  could  he  know  in  what
part  the  extravafation  was  made,  and  confequently  where  the  bone  ought  to
be  pierc'd  through  ?  It  very  often  happens  that  nobody  is  prefent  when  a
man  falls  from  a  confiderable  height,  or  when  he  is  ftruck  by  an  enemy  ;
and  he  himfelf  frequently  cannot  fpeak :  and  Ibmetimes  many  places  appear
to  have  been  flruck,  and  fometimes  none  ;  and  in  thofe  many  places,  when
cxamin'd  by  the  eyes  and  the  hands,  even  after  applying  emollient  plaifters
and  refolvent  facculi,  fome  rednefs,  tumour,  or  foftnefs,  can  but  juft  be  per-
ceiv'd.  And  indeed  Rouhauk  {h)  has  feen  that  a  fpontaneous  tumour  fome-
times appears  in  the  part  of  the  head  which  had  not  been  flruck  ;  and  has
even  fhown  in  what  manner  it  might  happen.

Nor  are  the  other  figns,  which  have  been  propos'd  by  the  ancient  or  the
modern  phylicians,  of  fufficient  avail ;  as,  for  inftance,  if  the  patient  who
can  neither  fpeak  nor  underftand,  apply  his  hand  now  and  then  to  a  certain
part  of  his  head  ;  or  the  phyficians,  by  chance,  obferving  one  fide  of  the
body  to  be  paralytic,  conjedture  the  injury  to  have  been  in  the  oppofite  fide
of  the  head.  For  befides  one  place,  which  perhaps  gives  greater  pain  ex-
ternally, there  may  be  other  places,  under  which  the  greater  internal  difor-
der  may  really  lie  hid  5  nor  is  it  neceffary  that  fome  paralyfis  (hould  be  al-
ways the  confequence  of  this ;  or  if  it  is  the  confequence,  we  do  not,  of  courfe,
know  the  part  of  the  fide  which  is  principally  difeas'd,  becaufe  we  know  the
afFedted  fide.

Yet  this  it  would  be  neceffary  to  know,  in  order  to  make  the  foramen,
which  is  to  be  open'd,  correfpond  to  the  difeas'd  part  •,  and  to  convince  every
one  that  this  opening  was  not  made  in  vain.  But  how  deceitful  our  conjec-
tures on  this  fubjedt  frequently  are,  appears  even  from  hence,  that  although
the  very  part  which  was  ftruck  be  pointed  out  by  the  patient,  and  eve/i  evi-
dently fhow  itfelf  by  an  ecchymofis  and  tumour ;  yet  cafes  frequently  hap-
pen, wherein  one  part  is  contus'd,  and  yet  another  has  the  extravafation
made  in  it.  And  this  you  will  underftand,  not  only  from  fome  of  the  obfer-
vations  defcrib'd  in  the  former  letter,  and  others ;  but  in  particular  from
this  which  I  fhall  immediately  fubjoin,  and  which,  being  communicated  to
me  by  our  Mediavia,  deferves  the  more  to  be  tranfcrib'd  here,  becaufe,  in
the  cafe  of  which  it  gives  the  hiftory,  the  cranium  was  perforated.

15.  A  robuft  country-lad,  having  fall'n  from  a  high  place,  had  hurt  his
head.  Not  the  leaft  bad  fymptom  was  obferv'd  to  be  the  confequence,  either
then,  or  foon  after,  on  the  following  days.  He  therefore  continu'd,  for
the  fpace  of  three  days,  to  live  as  ufual,  and  to  follow  the  bufineffes  of  life
in  the  country,  according  to  cuftom.  After  this,  an  evident  tumour  ap-
pear'd  in  the  place  which  had  been  hurt ;  which  was  about  the  part  of  one
of  the  bones  of  the  finciput,  that  is  neareft  to  the  lambdoid  future ;  and  a
fever  being  added  thereto,  he  was  compell'd  to  come  into  the  hofpital.
Being  plied  by  the  phyfician  and  furgeon  with  every  remedy  their  art  could

{h)  Trattc  des  playes  de  tete  ch,  lo.

Vol.  IIL  T  fi^pply>


I  38 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcai  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

fupply,  he  now  feem'd  to  be  almoft  recover'd  ;  efpecially  as,  through  the
whole  of  that -time,  no  peculiar  fymptom  of  a  latent  diforder  had  difcover'd
itfelf.  About  the  feventeenth  day  from  his  fall,  when  he  could  bear  hunger
on  longer,  he  was  prefumptuous  enough  to  eat  very  plentifully.  Prefently  the
fever  return'd  in  a  more  violent  manner,  with  a  pain  which  opprefs'd  the
whole  head,  and  a  vomiting.  Yet  even  then  did  lie  not  confefs  his  irregu-
larity, which  he  had  been  guilty  of  privily  to  every  body.

When  other  remedies  had  been  tried  in  vain,  mention  was  made  of  one
which  every  body  here  refufes,  but  he  himfelf  did  not  at  all  fear.  In  the
place,  therefore,  where  it  was  certain  that  the  head  had  receiv'd  a  blow,
the  bone,  which  (how'd  no  diforder  at  all,  was  perforated  by  a  bold  and
eminent  furgeon,  with  fuch  diligence  and  art,  that  the  perforation  could  do
no  harm,  if  it  were  of  no  advantage.  Nothing  was  difcharg'd  then,  or  af-
terwards. The  dura  mater  appear'd  to  be  very  found,  and  was  preferv'd  fo.
And  in  the  mean  while  the  patient  feem'd  to  be  a  little  better:  nor  did  he
any  longer  conceal  the  previous  irregularity  of  his  condud ;  when,  of  a  fud-
den,  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  pleurify,  at  the  lower  and  left  part  of  the  thorax  ;
and  no  remedies  being  of  fervice  to  him,  he  died  within  a  few  days,  although
he  had  even  thrown  up  a  kind  of  matter  from  his  lungs,  which  was  fome-
what  tinftur'd  with  blood,  but  not  a  great  quantity  ;  and  no  fymptom  of  the
head  being  afFeded  had  come  on,  befides  thofe  which  I  have  already  men-
tion'd.

The  carcafe,  from  the  mouth  of  which  a  filthy  matter  was  difcharg'd,  was
livid  below  the  throat,  on  the  left  fide  only,  and  that  to  a  fmall  extent
merely;  but  was  fo  exceedingly  putrid  and  ill  fmelling,  that  even  in  this
very  cold  fealon,  for  it  was  the  beginning  of  January,  in  the  year  1742,  in
could  not  be  borne.  No  part  therefore,  except  the  cranium,  which  was
very  thick,  v\as  open'd.  Yet  in  the  cranium  was  found  not  the  leaft  mark
of  difeafe;  nor  yet  in  any  of  its  contents,  if  you  except  a  very  little  yellow
kind  of  jelly,  which  was  found  to  be  extended,  in  every  direftion,  under
the  dura  mater,  for  the  fpace  of  three  or  four  inches  -,  not  under  the  contus'd
part  of  the  head,  where  the  trepan  had  been  applied,  but  more  to  the  fore-
part.

i6.  If  you  compare  this  hiftory  with  thofe  animadverfions  wliich  I  made
above  (z),  you  will  readily  fufpedt  the  caufe  from  whence  a  pleurify  had
arifen  in  this  young  man  -,  and  that  the  very  fmall  quantity  of  matter  which
was  found  under  the  dura  mater,  was  the  remains  of  fome  which  had  exilted
there  in  much  larger  quantity,  the  other  part  of  it  having  been  tran Dated
into  the  thorax  in  particular,  and  into  the  whole  body  in  general ;  as  the
univerfal  ftate  of  putrefaction  (how'd.  And  if  this  was  the  juft  idea  of  the
cafe,  it  were  to  be  wifh'd,  that  before  the  matter  could  have  been  carried  to
thefe  parts,  it  might  have  been  extraifted  by  a  perforation  of  the  cranium.

Yet  who  could  poffibly  know  that  it  was  neceffary  to  perforate  the  crani-
um, not  under  the  contus'd  part,  but  more  anteriorly,  where  there  was  no
peculiar  mark  of  matter  being  colleded  ?  But  even  fuppofe  this  could  have
been  divin'd  ;  tell  me,  I  beg  of  you,  at  what  time  the  cranium  fnould  have

(<)  n,  9.  &  10.

been


Letter  LII. Article  17.  139

been  perforated  ?  Should  it  have  been  done  before  the  feventeenth  day  ?  Yec
there  was  no  fign  of  any  fltiid  being  extravafated.  Should  it  have  been  done
as  foon  as  any  bad  fymptoms  appear'd  ?  Although  the  nnoft  experienc'd  fur-
geon  Carcanus  {k)  has  exprefly  inculcated,  "  that  when  the  bad  fymptoms
"  appear,"  not  in  the  firll  days,  but  "  in  procefs  of  time,"  when  "  they
"  are  wont  to  proceed  from  a  corruption  which  is  already  made,  or  which
"  is  beginning  to  come  on,  we  can  very  feldom  have  any  hope  of  an  infirni
"  conftitution ;  nay,  that  the  fate  of  it  is  almoft  always  determin'd  ;"  yet
they  would  not  be  backward  to  make  ufe  of  this  doubtful  remedy,  in  the
cafe  of  a  patient,  who,  by  way  of  a  rare  inftance  in  this  country,  chofe  to
undergo  it ;  fince  Carcanus  himfelf  did  not  deny,  that  a  perfon  might  be
fav'd  ;  and  even  did  not  conceal  the  teftimony  of  Falloppius,  who  affirms,
that  one  man  was  preferv'd  by  him,  in  confequence  of  the  cranium  being
perforated,  about  the  thirtieth  or  fortieth  day,  and  the  fanies  being  dil-
charg'd  therefrom  ;  though  Carcanus  was  not  very  forward  to  give  credit  to
it,  and  would,  certainly,  with  more  difficulty  have  given  his  credit,  if  other
rare,  but  not  lefs  certain,  obfervations  of  this  kind  had  been  publifli'd  •,  and
in  particular,  of  Scultetus  (/),  who,  "  after  the  twenty-eighth  vi'eek  from
"  the  injury's  being  receiv'd,"  affirm'd,  that  he  had  done  the  fame  thing  as
Falloppius,  naming  the  man,  and  pointing  out  the  time  and  place  wherein
the  cafe  happen'd.  In  this  young  man,  therefore,  all  that  could  be  done,
was  done.  But  that  caufe,  on  account  of  which  1  have  propos'd  this  hifto-
ry,  prevented  a  happy  fuccefs  attending  the  endeavours  that  were  made
life  of.

1 7.  And  I  wifli  this  were  the  only  hiftory  of  the  kind,  and  that  others,
verylimilar  to  this,  were  not  extant  among  different  authors,  which  moreover,
together  with  many  others,  that,  for  feveral  reafons,  likewife  fhow  the  ufe
of  the  trepan  to  be  of^no  advantage,  and  that,  very  frequently,  have  induc'd
eminent  phyficians,  both  ancient  and  modern,  to  affert  jiot  only  that  this
operation  was  "often  of  no  effeft,"  but  even  that  it  was  very  frequently
of  no  advantage.

The  minds  of  praftitioners,  however,  and  of  the  people  in  general,  have
been  much  more  terrified  by  thofe  who  formerly,  and  even  in  our  times,  have
afferted,  that  there  was  "  a  confiderable  danger"  therefrom;  or  that  "  the
"  danger  v/as  more  certain  ;"  and  that  trepanning  "  could  not  be  made  ufe
"  of  without  very  great  danger."  Will  you  then  aflc,  whether  it  could  be
dangerous,  when  made  ufe  of  by  an  excellent  furgeon  ?  Without  doubt,  it
is  to  be  fuppos'd,  that  the  phyficians  who  were  lent  for  to  Ptolemy,  that
king  of  Egypt  who  was  "  violently  wounded  on  the  head,"  and  of  whom
mention  is  made  in  the  epitome  (?»)  of  Titus  Livy,  were  not  v/anting  in
eminence  or  fkiil.  Yet  the  king  "  expir'd  in  the  midft  of  the  operation,
"  while  the  phyficians  endeavour'd  to  pierce  through  the  bones."

And  who  does  not  know  how  excellent  a  phyfician  and -furgeon  Fallop-
pius was  ?  yet  he,  with  fuch  a  fimple  confeffion  of  his  error  as  is  worthy
of  the  greateft  men,  on  account  of  a  certain  circumllance  obferv'd  by  him,

{h)  De  Vuln.  Cap.  Sertn.  3.  Left.  5.  (/)  Obf.  13,  («)  1.  52,

T  2  .  very


I  40 Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

very  late,  in  perforating  the  cranium,  has  faid  the  following  things  («) :
"  Obferve,  1  befeech  you  ;  I  have  been  the  occafion  of  death,  in  fonne  mea-
"  fure,  to  a  hundred  men,  being  ignorant  of  this  caufe."  And  thefe  feve-
ral  things  that  I  have  mention'd,  neither  could  then,  nor  can  now,  be  con-
ceal'd  :  as  tTiey  have  been  laid  in  fo  many  books  of  lb  many  writers,  of
different  ages  and  countries.

There  is  no  occafion,  therefore,  to  wonder  that  the  people  of  this  coun-
try began  to  refufe  the  adiftance  of  this  remedy,  being  deterr'd  from  it  by
experiments  of  its  being  ufelefs  in  particular,  or  injurious  •,  and  this  not
only  in  one  or  two  cities,  but  in  moft  of  the  cities  of  Italy  ;  and,  befides
our  countrymen,  by  others  alfo,  amongft  whom  Wepfer  {o)  hints,  that  his
countrymen  were,  at  a  time  when  the  ufe  of  the  trepan  even  flourilh'd
among  us :  his  words  are,  "  The  Italians,  and  other  inhabitants  of  the  more
"  warm  regions,  would  have  determin'd  to  make  ufe  of  the  trepan  imme-
"  diactly  •,  and  the  very  experienc'd  D.  D.  Burgouverus  would  have  done
"  the  fame  thing,  if  the  patient,  and  thofe  who  were  about  him,  had  not
"  entertain'd  a  dreadful  idea  of  a  remedy  which  they  were  unus'd  to  in
"  thefe  places,  and  which  is  terrible  to  moft  perfons,  even  by  its  nam«
"  alone ;  and  had  not,  in  confequence  thereof,  refifted  his  endeavours."

And  can  you  fuppofe,  that  courage  was  given  to  thofe  perfons,  who  re-
fus'd  to  fuffer  this  operation  by  the  declaration  of  John  Bohn,  an  eminent
profeffor  at  Leipfic,  in  the  dilTertation  which  he  publiQi'd,  de  Trepanationis-
Diff.cultatjbus  ?  For  before  he  particularly  explains  thefe  difficulties,  he  does
not  hefitate  to  affirm,  "  that  this  operation,  certainly,  is  attended  with
"  much  danger  -,  and  that  it  is  often  found  of  no  effeft,  or  improper."  As  I
have  taken  notice  of  the  greateft  part  of  thefe  difficulties  fufficiently  above;
I  fliall  rather  add  fomething  of  that  one,  which  was  taken  from  the  laft-pro-
duc'd  obfervation  ;  I  mean,  of  that  difficulty  which  very  frequently  occurs,
in  determining  the  tin>e  that  is  proper  for  applying  the  trepan.  And  this  I
have  it  in  my  power  to  confirm,  by  another  example  which  was  feen  by  me
in  this  city.

There  was  a  young  woman,  of  no  mean  parentage,  flender  in  her  make,
and  of  a  weak  conftitution,  but  healthy,  fo  as  never  to  have  had  any  difor-
der,  but  very  fevere  convulfions ;  which  (he  .had  been  afflided  with  fome
years  before,  in  the  whole  of  her  body,  though  not  more  than  once.  Being,
therefore,  in  good  health,  and  fitting  upon  a  very  low  feat,  it  accidentally
happen'd,  that  being  furpriz'd  with  an  unfor^feen  thing,  and  a  noife,  fhe  drew
her  head  back  haftily,  as  is  frequently  the  cafe,  and  ftruck  one  fide  of  the
occiput,  with  violence,  againft  a  marble  fiab,  which  was  prominent,  behind
her,  from  the  wall.  It  was  the  lafl:  day  but  one  of  March,  in  the  year  1739';
nor  did  fiie  feel  any  inconvenience  then,  nor  for  fome  days.  After  that,
there  was  a  little  pain  in  the  place  which  had  receiv'd  the  blow,  and  to  this
■fucceeded,  in  the  fide  of  the  neck  below  that  parr,  -a  kind  of  rigidnefs  of
the  mufcles  that  lie  there,  attended  with  confiderable  pain.  Yet  all  thefe
fymptoms  were  fo  flight, that  the  patient  did  all  the  fame  kinds  of  bufinefs

{11)  Ccrament,  fupra  ad  n.  12,  cit.  c.  17. (0)  Hiftoriar.  Apopl.  AuSar.  in  Schol.  ad-Hift.  6.

fhe


Letter  LII. Article  17.  141

file  had  been  iis'd  to  do  before,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Who  then
would,  at  this  time,  have  prefum'd  to  order  the  cranium  to  be  trepan'd  ?  or
if  any  could  have  been  fo  prefumptuous  ;  do  you  think,  that  others  would
have  permitted  it,  or  that  a  delicate  woman  would  have  fuffer'd  it  ?  Now
take  the  remainder  of  the  hiftory.

The  woman  having  gone  on,  quite  to  the  month  of  Auguft,  in  the  man-
ner I  hare  told  you,  that  is,  having  felt  no  other  inconvenience,  befides
what  has  been  taken  notice  of,  I  was  fent  for  to  her  on  the  fixteenth  day  of
the  fame  month  ;  having  had,  from  her  phyfician,  the  relation  which  I
have  given  you :  he  farther  added,  that  for  fome  days  paft,  the  patient  was
feverilh,  and  that  to  a  confiderable  degree  ;  that  her  pulfe  was  hard ;  that
thofe  mufcles  of  the  neck  were  fomewhat  fwell'd,  rigid,  and  affciSed  with
pain ;  that  there  was  a  pain  alfo  which  defcended  in  the  courfe  of  the  fpine,
and  that  it  was  with  difficulty  the  lower  jaw  could  be  drawn  down  from  the
upper  :  that  the  patient  herfclf  was  almoft  ftupid,  and  anfwered  flovvly ;  and
indeed,  that  fhe  was  fometimes  a  little  delirious :  that  flie  did  not  fee  very-
well  ;  and  that  her  eyes  feem'd  to  be  convuls'd  as  it  were :  but  that  thefe
laft  fymptoms  were  then  gone  ofFj  yet  that  the  others  had  now  remain'd  for
feveral  days.

He  moreover  told  me,  that  the  pain  had,  within  thefe  few  days,  return'd
to  the  place  which  was  formerly  ftruck;  although,  to  the  judgment  of  the
touch,  and  of  the  fight,  no  diforder  appear'd  in  the  part.  On  feeing  the
patient,  foon  after,  I  perceiv'd  that  what  he  had  related  was  but  too  true,
and  that  there  was  now  no  room  for  remedies.  Having,  therefore,  pro-
pos'd  fome  things  of  little  importance,  on  which  no  calumny  could  fall,
merely  to  comply  with  cuftom  ;  I  call'd  afide  one  of  the  elder  of  her  rela-
tions, and  told  him  how  much  I  apprehended  from  the  patient's  cafe :  after
which  I  took  my  lea>'e,  thinking  it  unneceflary  to  return  any  more.  Andy
in  fa£t,  two  or  three  hours  after  I  was  gone,  her  fpeech  left  her :  and  within
two  or  three  days  Ihe  died.

If  we  had  been  permitted  to  examine  the  internal  parts  of  the  fcull,  I  do
not  doubt,  but  as  our  Marchetti  if)  fcund  pus  upon  the  membranes  and
brain,  in  a  man,  who,  having  been  (lightly  wounded  in  the  head,  fo  that-
not  even  the  bone  was  laid  bare,  was,  after  three  months,  feiz'd  with  a  fe-
ver, and  after  that  with  a  pain  which  return'd  into  the  wounded  parr,,
where  was  no  appearance  of  difeafe,  and  in  this  manner  died  ;  I  do  not
doubt,  I  fay,  but  I  Ihould  have  found  it  fo  much  the  more  in  this  woman,
as  Ihe  had  not,  like  that  man,  been  without  any  fymptom  of  a  wound  in  the
head,  either  in  the  fever,  or  before  it;  but  had  been  already  troubled  with
feveral  fymptoms,  for  four  months  and  more  before  the  fever,  and- with  as
many  after  the  time  of  being  attack'd  with  the  fever.

Thus  you  very  plainly  perceive,,  that  cafes  may  happen,  wherein  either
no  fymptoms  of  blood  being  extravafated  in  the  cranium,  offer  themfelves
fn  the  beginning,  or  they  are  very  flight ;.  but  after  a  long  interval,  f6  ma-
ny and fo  violent fymptoms crowd upon  and attack  the  patient, that

(pX  in  additis  ad  Obf.  15,

neither


1  42 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

neither  in  the  firft  part  of  the  difeafe,  which  is  convenient  for  trepanning,
the  patient  can  be  llruclc  with  fuch  a  fear  as  to  malce  him  admit  of  that
operation;  nor  in  the  latter  part  can  the  phyficians  hope  to  be  of  any  ufe
to  the  patient  thereby  ;  as  you  cannot  fuppofe,  after  fo  long  a  fpace  of  time,
and  after  the  exiltence  of  fo  many  dertrtiftive  fymptoms,  that  a  corruption
of  the  parts  was  not  brought  on,  though  it  was  abfent,  almoft  beyond  be-
lief, in  that  very  rare  obfcrvation  of  Scultetus  {q).

18.  But  what,  you  v^ill  fay,  can  malce  patients  of  this  kind,  or  their  re-
lations, and  others  who  are  concern'd  for  them,  fo  averfe  to  this  remedy,  even
at  a  time'when  violent  fymptoms  are  immediately  prefent  ?  Read  over  again
all  that  has  been  faid  above  (r)  of  the  caufes  for  which  it  is  to  be  fuppos'd
that  this  remedy  has  been  deferred  in  fome  cities,  and  to  thofe  alfo  add  that
which  is  gather'd  from  the  following  hilfory  of  Mediavia.

19.  A  boy,  of  fourteen  years  of  age,  was  flruck  on  one  fide  of  the  fin-
ciput  with  a  pole,  about  tlie  middle  of  Auguft,  in  the  year  1739.  At  the
fame  time  an  old  man  had  been  ftruck  on  the  head  alfo.  Both  of  them  had
fall'n  down  after  the  blow  ;  both  had  vomited  ;  and  foon  after  been  feiz'd
with  a  fever.  Both  of  them  were  receiv'd  into  the  fame  hofpital;  and  both
of  them  attended  to  with  equal  diligence  by  the  phyfician  and  furgeon.
Thus  far  the  cafes  were  in  every  refpedl  limilar.  But  now  I  will  tell  you  the
dilTimilar  fate,  of  the  boy  firft,  and  then  of  the  old  man.  The  fever  having
left  the  boy  about  the  fourth  day,  attack'd  him  again  on  the  eleventh,  being
always  attended  with  a  torpor,  fometimes  with  a  delirium,  or  convulfions,
or  an  eruption  of  blood  from  the  noftrils ;  though  a  fufficient  quantity  of
this  fluid  had  already  been  taken  away  in  the  beginning.  No  remedies,  there-
fore, being  of  any  advantage,  he  died  within  a  very  few  days.

The  cranium,  when  infpeded  by  means  of  a  bright  and  oppofite  light,
was  found  not  only  not  to  be  filTur'd,  but  fcarcely  to  fliow  any  difference,
■when  the  part  which  had  been  ftruck  v/as  compar'd  with  the  other  part.  Bu£
betwixt  the  part  which  had  been  ftrucli  and  the  dura  mater,  fomething  fimilar
to  mucus  occurr'd,  and  under  this  mucus  the  dura  mater  was  alter'd  from
its  natural  colour.  But  betwixt  this  membrane  and  the  pia  mater,  where  it
invefted  almoft  the  whole  upper  furface  of  that  hemifphere,  was  a  great
quantity  of  pus  of  a  yellow  and  green  colour,  and  very  foetid  in  its  fmell :
and  all  that  part  of  this  membrane  vv'hich  had  been  cover'd  with  pus,  was  in-
creas'd  beyond  its  natural  thicknefs  in  a  triple  or  quadruple  proportion  ;  its
furface  being  in  a  manner  granulated.  Befides  this  nothing  was  obferv'd,  not
even  in  the  ventricles,  no  water  being  found  therein.  Thus  far  of  the  boy.
But  as  to  the  old  man,  he  efcap'd  quite  fafe  and  found.

?.o.  Now,  if  you  tell  tht  common  people,  that  this  boy  might  certainly
have  efcap'd,  if  the  bone  had  been  perforated,  and  the  blood  which  was  ex-
travafated  beneath  had  been  extrafted-,  without  doubt,  the  people  would  im-
mediately reply.  But  the  old  man,  who  had  likewife  been  feiz'd  with  the  fame
fymptoms  in  the  beginning,  recover'd  totally  without  that  remedy.  It  is
true,  you  would  not  want  wherewith  to  rejoin  to  thole  who  fhould  argue  in

{q)  Cit.  fupra  in  fin,  n.  16.  (')  N.  iz,  &  feq.

this


Letter  LII. Article  20.  143

this  manner.  But  what  are  thefe  reafonings  to  the  people,  who  are  always
taking  new  arguments  from  all  the  cures  which  have  happily  fucceeded  with-
out the  ufe  of  the  trepan  in  wounds  of  the  head,  to  make  themfelves  ftill
more  averfe  to  it  ?  And  this  does  not,  1  fuppofe,  happen  among  us  only,
but  in  other  places  likewife  ;  for  in  others,  examples  of  cures  of  this  kind,
alfo,  frequently  occur.  What  the  fymptoms  are  whicbfhow  violent  injuries
to  exift  within  the  cranium,  and  fuch  as  would  feem  to  require  trepanning,
you  will  learn  from  feveral  books,  and  in  particular  from  thole  which  belong
to  the  Commercium  Litterariurn  (5).

Where  you  may  look  for  other  examples,  appears  not  only  from  the  ASia
Eruditoritm  Lipfienfia  (/),  but  from  the  differtation  of  Jo.  Andr.  Conradus  {u\
and  others,  whom,  for  the  fake  of  brevity,  I  purpofely  omit;  as  I  alfo  do
the  obfervation  of  Grimmius  (.v),  and  two  of  Burgouverus  (j),  one  of  which
is  that  wherein  he  himfelf  would  have  perforated  the  cranium,  if  the  perfons
about  the  patient  had  not  been  againd  it  -,  as  that  furgeon  alfo  would  of
whom  Rouhault  (z)  makes  mention,  if  Mery  had  not  diffented.  Yet  all  the
patients  that  I  have  referr'd  to  were  perfeftly  cur'd  without  the  affiftance  of
the  trepan,  and  fome  of  them  even  very  foon.

But  that  you  may  the  more  clearly  perceive  with  how  much  propriety  I
have  faid  it  happens,  in  cafes  of  this  kind,  that  perfons  are  more  and  more
averfe  to  perforations  by  the  trepan,  I  will  tell  you  what  happen'd  here  in
the  yffar  1729.  The  coachman  of  a  noble  matron  not  being  able  to  keep
his  horfes  in  with  the  reins,  fhe  threw  herfelf  out  of  the  chariot,  as  it
mov'd  along  with  great  velocity,  and  had  the  fame  thing  happen  to  her
that  happens  to  others,  in  general,  in  the  fame  cafe  ;  that  is,  fl^e  fell  head-
long on  the  ground,  which  was,  from  the  nature  of  the  place,  and  the
fevere  ftafon  of  the  year,  cover'd  with  ftones  and  very  hard  ice,  bhe,  there-
fore, hurt  her  head  lb.  grievoufly,  that  fhe  was  carried  home  for  dead.

The  phyflcians,  having  done  all  that  ought  to  be  done-,  and  is  cuftomary
to  be  done,  with  the  utmoll  diligence,  hop'd  what  Marchetti,  as  h'as  been
faid  in  the  former  letter  alfo  (a),  had  feen  in  fome  perfons  after  a  fall,  or  an
injury  on  the  head  from  a  blow,  "  that  lofing  their  internal  fenfes,  and
"  being  depriv'd  of  feeling  and  motion,"  yet  not  being  feiz'd  with  the  other
fymptoms  that  are  taken  notice  of  by  Hippocrates,  they  fhould,  in  the  fame
manner,  fee  the  woman  "  entirely  freed  from  her  diforder  on  the  following
"  day."  But  as  in  this  hope  they  were  difappointed,  I  was  call'd  to  the
patient.

From  the  appearance  of  her  head  we  could  not  argue  in  what  parr,  parti-
cularly, it  had  been  ftruck  •,  nor  could  her  fenfatio'n,  or  voice,  of  which  fhe
was  entirely  bereft,  make  this  known  to  us.  I,  therefore,  gave  it  as  my
opinion,  that,  when  the  other  things  were  done  which  contributed to  re-

(j)  Vid.  A.  1739. Hebd.  52.  n,  i. &  A. [u)  De  Vuln.  Front,  ini^ift.  in  Refolut,  ad
1741.  H.  16.  n.  3. &  A.  1743.  H.  35. n.  2. n.  2.
H.  47,  n.  I.  ad  194.  &  193.  &  714.  (.v)  Eph.N.  C.Dec.  3.  A.  9,  &  10.  Obf.  87,

(?)  A.  1693.  M,  Nov.  in relat.  novs  Edit.  (y)  6,  &  7.  in  Auflav.  fupra  ad  n.  17  cir.

Barbett.  (4  Tr.  fupra  ad  n.  \a..  cit.  c.  7.

{a)  N.  10,

6  vullioni


144 Book  IV.  Of  Chimrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

vulfion  and  reabforption,  if  it  ftiould  happen  that  any  blood  was  extravafated
within  the  {kuU,  to  the  whole  of  the  head  (liould  be  immediately  applied  fuch
things  as,  by  moderately  attenuating  and  corroborating,  might  affift  that
abforption  :  that  Cornelius  Celfus  {b)  had  afcrib'd  a  great  deal  to  external
remedies,  even  where  the  cranium  was  manifeftly  fifllir'd  :  that  what  Galen
had  done  afterwards,  and  many  others  formerly,  may  be  underftood  from
Magatus  {c),  who  had  alfo  himfelf  begun  the  cure  in  this  manner.

What  the  authors  more  modern  than  Magatus  thought,  I  had  learn'd
even  from  the  reading  of  my  anatomifts  with  whom  I  was  fo  frequently
converllng  ;  and  particularly  of  Bartholin  (^),  Wepfer  (f),  and  Ruyfch  (/).
That  we,  indeed,  were  in  Italy,  a  region  much  warmer  than  theirs  ;  but
that  Magatus,  to  omit  others,  was  in  this  region  alfo  :  and  that,  at  this
time  of  the  year,  the  cold  was  often  more  intenfe  than  in  other  times  of  the
year  among  them ;  and  that,  therefore,  our  matron,  like  the  woman  fpoken
of  by  Ruyfch,  was  hurt  from  this  caufe,  that  "  fhe  had  fall'n  from  the
"  chariot  upon  the  ground  when  harden'd  with  the  frofl."  That,  therefore,
I  would  make  ufe  of  the  fame  fomentation  which  he  had  frequently  made
ufe  of  with  fuccefs,  and  not  contrary  to  the  cautious  admonitions  of  Ma-
gatus, but  having  in  it  fome  of  the  ingredients  that  he  had  recommended.

The  phyficians  came  into  this  opinion  :  nor  had  they  reafon  to  repent  itj
as,  by  the  continu'd  ufe  of  this  remedy,  the  patient  firft  became  a  little
better,  and  then  came  quite  to  herfelf  •,  and,  finally,  fo  far  recover'd,  with-
out any  remaining  inconvenience,  that  fhe  liv'd  more  than  twenty  years  in  a
good  flate  of  health,  till  fhe  was  at  laft  carried  off  by  mere  old  age.

But  this  inftance  of  fuccefs  made  men  ftill  more  averfe  to  the  perforation
of  the  cranium,  and  caus'd  the  fomentation  I  have  fpoken  of  to  be  recom-
mended from  that  very  time  both  by  the  phyficians  and  furgeons;  but  to  be
particularly  defir'd  by  the  patients  and  their  relations,  and  to  be  in  very
frequent  ufe  here  ;  and  this  to  fuch  a  great  degree,  that  I  was  fometimes
afraid,  left,  being  improperly  made  ufe  of,  it  fhould  be  as  injurious  to  fome
perfons  as  it  had  been  profitable  to  others.  For  I  have  feen  it  applied  in
the  hottefl  feafons  that  we  have  in  this  country,  as  it  was  in  that  calc  which
the  prefent  recals  to  my  mind,  and  which  I  will  mention  to  you  in  a  few
words,  though  not  on  account  of  this  animadverfion  only,  but  on  account
of  fome  others  alfo.

2  1.  A  noble  count,  happening  to  fit  on  a  pretty  high  bench,  which  gave
way  under  him,  fell  backwards,  and  dafli'd  the  hinder  part  of  his  head
againft  the  wall,  with  fo  much  the  more  violence  as  it  was  bald,  and  he  him-
felf of  a  tall  flature.  He  perceiv'd  no  diforder  at  that  time,  except  that  a
great  number  of  fparks  feem'd  to  be  flying  about  before  his  eyes.  But  af-
terwards he  had  a  very  troublefome  pain  about  the  forehead  and  the  eyes,
watchings,  fever,  and  a  flux  of  the  inteflines.  The  fever  went  off.  Soon
after  it  return'd  with  the  fame  fymptoms.  I  was  call'd  into  confultation.
Som.e  of  the  phyficians  were  particularly  diipleas'd  with  the  inteflinal  flux.

{b)  Pe  Medic.  1.  8.  c.  4.  {e)  Exerc.  de  loco  afF.  in  Apopl.  Sc  in  Auc-

(i-)  L.  2.  fupra  ad  n.  12.  cif.  c.  38.  i.\,  49. tar.  Schol,  ad  Hift.  6.

\d)  Cent.  z.  Hift.  Anat.  41.  '  (/)  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  60.

8  For


Letter  LII. Articles  21.  145'

For  they  had  read  this  in  Marchetti  (g) :  "  Befides  the  figns  propos'd  by  Hip-
"  pocrates,  it  is  to  be  obferv'd,  thar  a  flux  of  the  belly  coming  on  in  wounds
"  of  the  head,  notwithftanding  the  abfence  of  other  i')  mptonas,  is  a  fign  of

"  the  brain's  being  injur'd  ; and  that  almoft  all  thefe  perfons  die,  on

"  account  of  the  brain  being  injur'd  in  the  internal  part,  where  it  is  ftretch'd
'.'  out  into  the  medulla  fpinalis,  and  where  is  the  origin  of  the  nerves,"  and
among  the  others  of  thofe  that  go  to  the  ftomach.  1,  however,  having  en-
quir'd  into  all  things  accurately  ;  and,  as  it  was  the  month  of  July,  in  the
year  1739,  having  found  that  a  greater  quantity  of  water  might  eafily  have
been  taken  than  the  ftomach  of  an  old  man  would  bear  ;  for  water  had  been
prefcrib'd  as  his  common  drink;  fpoke  to  the  following  effe6t :

I  will  omit  to  difcufs  this  queftion  here,  whether  Marchetti,  when  he  faid
that  the  other  fymptoms  were  abfent,  meant  alfo  to  except  thofe  which  he
fays  were  propos'd  by  Hippocrates,  and  which  certainly  are  abfent  in  this
cafe.  J  will  only  fay  this,  if  the  patient  had  fall'n  down  at  a  time  when  his
ftomach  was  fiU'd  with  meat  and  drink,  efpecially  fuch  as  did  not  agree  with
him,  and  had  immediately  thrown  them  up  ;  certainly,  there  would  be  no
occafion  to  be  terrified  by  this  vomiting.  Now,  then,  as  there  feems  to  be
another  reafon  why  the  belly  fliould  be  relax'd,  we  need  not  be  under  any
great  fear  about  this.  L.et  a  fomewhac  fmaller  quantity  of  water  be  drunk,
and  let  it  be  a  little  medicated,  fo  as  to  prevent  it  from  relaxing  the  ftomach.
And  as  to  the  fomentation,  (fori  had  heard  that  this  was  made  ufe  of)  I  make
no  doubt  but  it  may  be  properly  applied  by  you,  provided  it  be  fomewhat
more  dilute  than  ufual,  and  us'd  more  moderately ;  nor  applied  by  means  of
flannels,  nor  on  a  great  number  of  cloths.  And  it  was  not  long  after  this
that  all  the  fymptoms  went  off,  and  the  patient  recover'd  ;  being  ftill  alive
at  the  time  of  writing  this  letter,  and  in  good  health,  though  fourfcore  and-
fix  years  of  age.

But  before  I  ceafe  to'fpeak  of  this  fomentation,  I  v/ould.have  you  to  ob-
ferve,  that  almoft  ali  thole  perfons  that  1  faid  {h)  had  been  fav'd  without  the
trepan,  which  otherwife  feem'd  neceffary,  and  others  of  the  fame  kind,  have
been  fav'd  by  means  of  this  fomentation  ;  or,  at  leaft,  by  fomething  very
limilar  to  it-,  as,  for  inftance,  thofe  vi'hom  Slevogtius  (?)  refers  to  in  thele
words:  "  By  fuch  remedies  the  moft  violent  injuries  of  the  head,  that  for-
"  merly  had  occafion  for  cuttings,  burnings,  Icalpings,  trepannings,  and
"  other  dreadful  operations,  are  every  day  cur'd  by  our  furgeons  :"  and
fometimes  by  thefe  remedies  "  alone  ;"  fo  that  by  a  French  furgeon  nam'd
Pincon  (k),  a  ruftic  was  cur'd  "  who  lay  fpeechlefs  ten  days,  and  was  con-
"  fider'd  as  defperate  ;"  a  young  man  by  Grimmius  (/),  who  had  been  feiz'd
"  with  a  delirum,  a  vomiting,  a  fever,  &c."  a  boy  by  Trew  (w),  who  was
"  depriv'd  of  ail  his  fenfes,  paralytic"  in  the  fide  oppofite  to  the  blow,  and
in  the  other  "  perpetually  agitated  with  convulfive  motions."

Yet  frequently  other  remedies  are  join'd to  it ;  and  among  thefe,  when

(g)  In  adJit.  ad  Obf.  i^.  (.4)  Vid.  Dan.  Hoffman.  Difleit.  de  ianac.

(h) N.  20,  cerebri  quaiT.

{:)  Diiiert.  de  Carie  Cran.  §  20.  (/) Obf.  87.  fupra.  ad.  n.  20.  cit

(m)  Coiiimerc.  Litter.  A.  1741.  ibid.  cit.


Vol.  IU.  U


It


1  46 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Unlvcrfa-l  Difordcrs.

it  was  allowable,  venasfeftions,  that  "  the  veins  may  be  render'd  ihungry^
"  as  it  were,  by  having  Ibme  quantity  of  their  blood  taken  away,"  as  Wep-
fer  (ft)  Ipeaks,  "  and  may  more  greedily  drink  up  the  extravafated  blood  ;"
which  that  remedy  1  have  fpoken  of,  externally  applied,  and  certainly  pene-
trating by  its  efficacy  where  trepanning  cannot  reach  and  bring  it  out,  fwhat-
ever  i'ts  efficacy  or  mode  of  afting  may  be)  "  fo  difpofes,  as  to  make  it  fit
«  to  enter  the  blood-veffcls  again."  For  thus  he  explains  both  his  own  ob-
fervations,  and  thofe  of  others ;  as  he  even  fays  above  (o),  "  that  he  re-  .
"  members  the  difllpation  "  of  extravafated  blood  "  to  have  been  brought
"  about  very  frequently  in  his  country,  with  great  fuccefs,  by  proper  fomen-
"  tations ;  without  the  ufe  of  the  trepan,  and  without  any  detriment  to  the
"  patient."

As  to  this  reabforpiion,  however,  I  have  written  to  you  formerly  (p)  what
has  been  obferv'd  in  the  brain  after  apoplexies  that  had  formerly  preceded,
and  even  after  an  old  wound  of  the  head,  without  a  perforation  of  the  cra-
nium, and  have  faid  whence  I  fuppofe  this  reabforption  to  happen  ;  for  whicli
reafon  I  fliall  add  no  more.  Nor  (hall  I  fay  any  thing  of  another  ufe  of  tre-
pannino-  •,  I  mean,  that  the  bones  of  the  fkuU,  when  deprefs'd,  may  be  rais'd
up,  the  ffiarp  fragments  extrafted,  and  the  prominent  needle-like  points  of
the  internal  lamina  which  has  happen'd  to  be  fiffur'd  :  for  how  long,  and  in
how  great  a  degree,  thefe  may  be  injurious,  the  excellent  obfervation  of
Platner(ff),  among  others,  fliows  by  difleftion :  I  fhall  not,  I  fay,  add  any-
thin'?  on  this  fubjcdt,  left,  if  1  Ihould  fay  that  fome  objedion  may  be  alfo
made  even  to  this  remedy  fometimes,  which,  certainly,  other  remedies,  and
nature  itfelf,  are  lefs  able  to  fupply  the  place  of;  1  ffiould  feem  to  give  more
credit  to  vulo-ar  prejudices,  than  to  the  diftates  of  reafon  and  of  prudent
praftitioners.

22.  For  now,  as  !  have  fpoken  above  merely  of  perforating  the  cranium,
not  only  as  much  as  is  neceffary  to  make  the  difcourfe  that  I  had  begun
complete  ;  but  alfo  (which  I  would  not  wifh)  to  create  a  falfe  and  unjuft
fulpicion  that  I  am  on  the  fide  of  the  people  in  this  queftion,  and  have  an
immoderate  averfion  to  this  kind  of  remedy,  which,  when  cautioufly  and
properly  applied,  I  readily  confefs  to  be  very  ufeful  and  even  neceffary  :  let
us  return  to  diffeftions.  And  as  two  of  our  Mediavia's  remain,  I  will  give
you  them  before  my  own.  The  iirft  belongs  to  thofe  that  have  been  already
propos'd  ;  I  mean  thofe  in  which,  if  there  was  any  diforder  of  the  cranium,,
it  did  not  reach  to  the  internal  parts.  And  the  fecond,  to  thofe  in  which  the
diforder  did  reach  thereto.

23.  A  certain  man,  falling  upon  his  face,  dafh'd  his  forehead  againft  the
o-round  on  the  right  fide,  about  the  middle  of  the  bone.  No  vomiting,
nor  any  other  fymptom,  happen'd  immediately  after  the  fall,  except  fome
flieht  diforder  of  the  ftomach.  But  foon  after,  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  confi-
de7able  fever,  and  a  fleepinefs.  About  the  fourth  day,  both  of  ihefe  fymp-
toms  went  off:  and  he  was  well.  He  remain'd  in  the  hofpital,  however,  for
the  cure  of  his  wound,  which  was  of  a  good  colour,  together  with  the  bone

{/,)  Schol.  fiipra  ad  n.  17.  cit.  (/-)  Eplft.  z.  n.  16.

{o)  Exercft.  fupra  ad  n.  lo.  cit.  (q) InlUtut.  Chirurg.  §  53a.  not.  d.

that


Letter  LII. Article  24.  147

•that  was  laid  bare.  About  the  feventeenth  day  a  violent  fever  came  on  again,
and  a  heavy  deep.  The  colour  of  the  wound  and  of  the  bone  became
brown.  The  bone  was  fcrap'd,  and  appear'd  to  be  white  beneath.  Yet  the
man  died  with  the  fame,  and  no  other  fymptoms,  about  the  twentieth  day,
which  was  the  twelfth  of  April,  in  the  year  1740.

Upon  opening  the  fcuU,  a  fiffure  was  indeed  obferv'd  therein,  which  pafs'd
tranfverQy  a  little  above  the  eye-brow,  that  lay  under  the  wound.  But  this
did  not  reach  to  the  internal  parts.  However,  where  the  bone  had  receiv'd
the  blow,  there,  betwixt  itfelf  and  the  dura  mater,  lay  a  little  of  a  kind  of
jelly  as  it  were.  And  the  correfponding  hemifphere  of  the  cerebrum  was  of
a  black  colour,  inclining  to  green ;  nor  yet  in  that  place  only,  but  every
where;  and  had  a  very  putrid  fmell.  This  colour  defcended  quite  to  the  la-
teral ventricle  itfelf,  infedting  all  the  parietes  thereof,  the  bafis  excepted.
Moreover,  the  anterior  part  of  that  ventricle  was  not  lacerated ;  but  dilated
to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  contain  a  quantity  of  coagulated  blood,  equal  to  the
fize  of  a  man's  fift.  The  remaining  part  of  the  ventricle  contain'd  a  bloody
ferum,  as  the  left  did  alfo.

24.  The  blood  which  was  found  within  the  ventricle,  was  certainly  effus'd
from  fome  ruptur'd  vefTel,  either  of  the  plexus  choroides,  or  of  tliofe  that
pafs  through  the  furface  of  the  parietes  of  the  ventricle.  But  fliall  v/e  fup-
pofe  that  vefTel  to  have  been  flightly  ruptur'd,  at  the  time  when  the  head  re-
ceiv'd the  blow,  and  that  the  blood  had  begun  to  be  diftiU'd  Qowly,  and  by
degrees,  from  that  time  ?  or  fhail  we  only  fuppofe  it  to  have  been  weaken'd
then  ;  and,  finally,  that  a  gangrene  of  that  hemifpliere  coming  on,  it  was
ruptur'd,  and  pour'd  out  its  blood  haftily  ?  If  you  ftiould  choofe  to  fuppofe
the  latter,  you  will,  in  my  opinion,  lefs  eafily  explain  why  the  man  did  not
then  die  much  fooner,  and  with  other  fymptoms,  almoft  like  an  apopledic
perfon;  and  how,  without  any  laceration  of  the  fubftance,  the  ventricle  was
lb  dilated  ;  fo  that  it  irmoft  probable  the  blood  was  difcharg'd  gradually  and
flowly,  till  it  increas'd  to  fo  great  a  quantity  ;  and  that  the  ventricle  gave
way  gradually  in  proportion.

Nor  let  it  be  any  objection  with  you  to  this  hypothefis,  that  the  man
feem'd  to  be  very  well  from  the  fourth  day  to  the  feventeenth,  without  a
fever,  or  any  fymptom  whatever.  For  it  is  not  only  to  be  fuppos'd,  that  to
a  gangrene  ib  widely  diffus'd,  a  deprav'd  difpofitio.i  in  the  brain  muft  have
preceded ;  but  even  in  the  moft  confiderable  difeafcs  of  this  organ,  it  does
jiot  very  rarely  happen,  that  either  fome  flight  fymptoms  thereof,  or  none
at  all,  are  obferv'd,  even  for  a  much  longer  fpace  of  time.

Call  to  mind,  I  beg  of  you,  thofe  things  that  are  produc'd  above  (r),
from  our  obfervation,  or  at  leafl  from  the  obfervation  of  Marchetti.  Read,
not  fo  much  the  ninth  obfervation  of  Fantonus  the  father,  as  the  fcholium
of  his  celebrated  fon  to  the  twenty-fifth.  And  to  omit  that  of  Avignon  {s),
which  is  an  extremely  rare  obfervation,  as  therein,  though  fo  great  an  injury
of  the  cranium,  the  meninges,  and  the  brain,  had  taken  place  -,  as  the  courfe
of  the  cure  demonflrated  ;  yet  no  fymptom  exiiled,  from  the  beginning  to

(/)  n.  17.  (j)  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  1731.  Specim.  z\.

U  2  the


I  4S Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  perfeft  completion  of  the  cure,  that  is,  to  the  fcventy  rnd  fixth  day  >
there  is  a  hiftory  in  Bohn  't),  from  Lamzwcrdius,  of  fymptorns  not  llicceed-
ing  to  two  fiiTures  of  the  finciput,  till  the  thirty  fixtli  day:  and  there  are
others  from  Monranus  in  Rouhraiit  (?./),  wherein  the  lymptoms  did  not  come
on  till  the  fevenieenth,  twentieth,  or  twenty  firft  day,  when  they  generally
prov'd  mortal ;  and  this  happen'd  at  >*,  ntwerp,  for  the  fpace  of  a  whole  year,
to  the  greater  part  of  thofe  who  had,  in  this  period,  receiv'd  blows  iipoa
the  head.

Read  thofe  obfervations,  moreover,  which  Poupart,  and  particularly  Va-
cher,  have  communicated  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (.v).
From  thefe,  and  from  others  that  I  dcfignedly  pafs  over,  you  will  ceafe  to
v.'onder  if  at  any  time,  as  in  one  juf^  now  propos'd  by  us,  lb  in  fome  others
that  are  given  either  in  this  or  the  former  letter,  you  fliall  fee  that  conflder-
•able  diforders  lay  hid  in  the  brain  fome  days,  without  any  bad  fymptorns,
and  in  particular  without  any  fever.  1  here  are  a  great  number  of  things  in
this  organ,  not  only  in  a  natural  ftate,  but  in  a  preternatural  flate,  of  which
we  know  not  how  to  conceive.

And  that  our  anceflors  alfo  were  properly  and  juftly  furpriz'd  thereat,  you
■will  underftand  even  from  what  is  added  to  the  obiervation  of  Salmuthus,
in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (7)  -,  which  obfervation  relates  to  tlie  pre-
fent  fubjeft  in  almoft  every  view:  this  addition  is  taken  from  Berengarius,
or,  if  you  pleafe,  from  Carpenfis,  as  they  more  frequently  call  him  from  his
country:  and  this  is  a  circumftance,  the  want  of  attention  to  which  has  de-
ceiv'd  a  very  modern,  and,  in  other  refpefts,  not  unlearned  furgeon,  who,
having  faid  that  Berengarius  had  fometimes  perforated  the  cranium  upon  the
very  futures  with  fuccefs;  immediately  fays,  that  Carpenfis  had  done  the
fame,  as  if  Cai-penfis  had  been  quite  another  perfon.

But  from  a  lingering  death,  after  a  blow  of  this  kind,  let  us  come  to  a
very  fpeedy  one,  as  in  the  fecond  obiervation  that  I  have  prcmis'd  you.

25.  A  country-woman  falling  headlong  down  flairs,  hurt  her  head  in  io
great  a  degree,  that  having  loft  the  power  of  fpeech,  and  of  motion,  but
efpecially  in  her  lower  limbs,  and  difcharging  blood  from  her  noftrils,  and
one  of  her  ears,  fhe  died  within  an  hour.

The  bafis  of  the  cranium,  which  contain'd  a  large  quantity  of  extrava-
fated  blood,  was  broken  tranfverfly,  the  frafture  paffing  from  one  fide  to
the  other,  before  the  ofTa  petrofa,  through  the  pofterior  parts  of  the  fphenoi-
dal  fmuiTes  ;  the  bony  part  of  the  meatus  auditorius  being  alfo  ruptur'd,  to-
gether with  the  m.embrana  tympani  in  that  ear  which  had  difcharg'd  blood.
The  lateral  finuffes  of  the  dura  mater  were  alfo  ruptur'd:  and,  befides  the
other  injuries,  the  cerebellum  itfelf  was  fomewhat  injur'd.

26.  If  befides  this  injury  of  the  cerebellum,  whatever  it  was,  there  had
not  been  ether  very  violent  ones,  fuch  as  a  very  great  concuffion  of  the  cere^-
brum,  and  a  very  great  compreffion  both  of  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,  in
proportion  to  the  quantity  of  blcod  extravafated  within the  cranium,  and

(/)  De  Renunc.  Vulner.  Seft.  i.  {x)  Hift.  de  I'A.  1700. Obf.  Anat.  19.  &

(u)  Tr.  fiipra  ad  n.  14.  cit.  c.  11.  <3e  I'A.  1743.  Obf.  Anat.  12.

(yj §  8.  Obf.  10.

parti-


Letter -Lll. Article  16.  149

particularly  from  the  riipture  of  the  lateral  finLiffes ;  do  you  think  death
would  have  come  on  fo  foon  ?  1  confefs  I  fiiould  not  readily  believe  it ;  not-
uithftanding  I  know  that  cunfiderable  and  fudden  injuries  of  the  cerebellum
are,  for  the  moft  part,  wont  to  be  more  fpeedily  and  fuddenly  deftruclive,
than  equal  injuries  of  the  cerebrum  ;  at  leaft  in  the  more  perfeft,  as  they
call  them,  and  adult  animals,  and  thofe  that  approach  the  neareft  to  the
ftrudlure  of  man.

In  t4iis  controverfy  therefore,  which  I  have  fall'n  upon  by  chance,  and  of
which  I  remember  that  you  have  formerly  afli'd  my  opinion,  do  not,  in
concert  with  men  in  other  refpcfls  very  learned,  take  notice  not  only  of  in-
feds,  but  nor  even  of  birds,  or  fcetufles,  or  nev;ly-born  animals  of  any
kind.  For  Ariftotle  (2)  himfelf  has  even  obferv'd  formerly,  "  that  this  evi-
♦'  dently  happens  in  infefts,  as  in  wafps  and  bees ;"  that  is  to  fay,  when  the
part  "  which  is  cali'd  the  head  is  taken  off,  they  ftill  live."  And  it  is  fo
long  fmce  as  when  I  was  a  very  young  man,  that  Vall'alva  affirm'd  to  me  he
had  irritdted,  to  a  very  great  degree,  the  cerebellum  of  birds,  and  yet  than
they  had  not  died  immediately.

And,  indeed,  I  myfelf  can  relate  what  I  faw  of  this  kind  in  two  cats,
which  were  two  days  old,  when  I  open'd  the  heads  of  them  while  living,  and
in  the  fummer  time.  For  one  hemilphere  of  the  brain  being  laid  open  in
each  of  them,  and  the  ufe  of  the  pia  mater,  in  confining  the  brain,  being
obferv'd;  for  where  it  had  happen'd  that  a  fmall  part  of  this  membrane
was  lacerated,  there  a  fmall  part  of  the  brain  extruded  itfelf,  and  became
prominent;  I  took  away  the  whole  of  that  hemilphere  piece-meal :  and  yet
the  power  of  feeling  and  moving  did  not  feem  to  be  loft,  or  even  in  the  leaft
dimini(l:i'd,  in  the  correfponding  and  oppofite  limbs.  Nor  indeed  were  thefe
faculties  loft  when  I  had  foon  after  wounded  the  cerebellumof  the  other  car.

But  they  were  immediately  loft  upon  cutting  deeply  into,  and  tearing  afun-
der,  the  cerebellunrof  the  other,  and  the  beginning  of  the  fpinal  marrow  ;
they  were  loft,  I  fay,  in  the  limbs,  and  the  whole  body,  as  much  of  it  as
then  prefented  itfelf  to  my  eyes ;  if,  however,  you  except  the  heart,  and  its
auricles ;  for  the  motions  of  thefe  cavities,  and  of  that  vifcus,  ftill  continu'd
lively  and  vigorous :  and  even  when,  fome  little  time  after,  I  cut  off  the
head  from  the  trunk,  this  motion  neverthelel's  continu'd  the  fame,  as  if  I
had  not  cut  it  off.  Cutting  off  the  great  veffels  therefore,  foon  after  that,  I
took  away,  together  with  them,  the  heart ;  which  then  finally  foon  grew
quiet :  although  not  long  after  this  I  perceiv'd,  by  compreffing  it  betwixt
the  fingers,  that  it  was  atling  even  then  by  a  powerful  exertion.

I  know  therefore  that  they  fay  truly,  who  have  afferted,  that  cats  hold  out
the  longeft  of  almoft  any  animals,  in  anatomical  experiments.  Yet  I  under-
ftand,  at  the  fame  time,  that  if  we  attend  to  thofi;  things  which  we  obferve
in  this  kind  of  animals,  efpecially  when  newly- born,  and  ftill  more  to  what
is  obferv'd  in  infedls,  birds,  and  human  fcetufies  themielves  ;  as,  for  inftance,
thofe  that  are  fometimes  born  not  only  without  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,
but  alio  without  the  medulla  oblongata  and  ipinalis  ;  I  fay,  if  we  attend  to
thefe  things,  it  will,  I  fee,  of  courfe  happen,  that  many  confcquences  feem

(k)  De  Juvent.  &  Seneft.  c.  i.

to


I  50 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

to  arife  therefrom,  which  argue  againft  the  uies  of  both  thefe  medullaj  and
cerebrum  ;  not  to  fay  againft'  the  ufes  of  the  cerebellum  itfelf.

I  likewife  would  not  have  you  here  attribute  too  much  to  certain  difor-
ders of  the  cerebellum,  which  are  generated  in  a  longer  or  lliorter  fpace  of
time,  but  certainly  not  fuddenly.  Of  the  former  kind  are  thefe :  from  iVIau-
chart(«),  and  from  Littrer-J'),  of  the  cerebellum  being  indurated  in  two  hy-
drocephalus children,  or  fcirrhous  ;  yet  in  fuch  a  degree  only  that  in  the
latter,  two,  although  very  fmall,  places  remain'd,  wherein  the  cerebellum
was  in  a  natural  ftate :  and  in  the  former,  one  of  the  lobes  was  lefs  enlarg'd,
as  well  as  lefs  indurated:  from  Briffeus  (c)  alfo,  a  hard  tumour,  but  one
that  had  form'd  itfelf  in  the  middle  of  the  cerebellum :  from  the  celebrated
Lieutaud(i),  a  bone  of  no  fmall  fize  within  one  of  its  lobes :  from  Peyron(^),
the  whole  cerebellum  converted  into  a  membrane,  which  involv'd  in  it  a
body  of  the  bignefs  of  a  hen's  egg,  made  up  of  many  and  hard  glands ;  into
which  body  fome  will  perhaps  fufpeft  that  the  cerebellum  had  been  chang'd  ;
as  feems  to  have  happen'd  formerly  in  regard  to  the  cerebrum  ;  rather  than
into  that  membrane  :  and  to  have  been  conceal'd  under  that  appearance,  juft
as  they  would  of  fome  parts  of  the  cerebellum  itfelf,  in  which  Harderus  (/)
found  three  fmall  globules ;  for  the  largeft  was  in  the  beginning  of  the  me-
dulla fpinalis :  or  of  Wurffbainius  (g),  who  found  feveral  fmall  glandular
bodies  in  the  cerebellum,  which  was  yellow  and  foetid  indeed,  but  not  pu-
trefied ;  or  of  Flafcus  in  Lancifi  (h)  (for  Lancifi  did  not  fee  it)  who  found
a  body  made  up  of  many  globules.

Nor  indeed  did  that  fcirrhus  belong  to  the  whole  of  the  cerebellum  ;  as
fome  feem  to  hint,  and  as  others  exprefsly  affirm  -,  which  the  celebrated
Haller  found  in  a  beggar- girl,  as  this  gentleman  aflerts  (z)  that  it  had  occu-
pied "  the  middle  part  of  the  cerebellum,"  that  is,  "  the  left  lobe ;"  fo  that
it  certainly  did  not  equal  that  which  I  found  in  the  cerebellum  of  a  man  in
the  beginning  of  the  year  1754,  as  this,  though  lefs  hard,  and  lefs  compafl,
befides  occupying  the  fame  lobe  almoft  wholly,  occupied  the  middle  pare
alfo,  and  the  neareft  portion  of  the  right  lobe,  as  you  will  learn  from  the  hif-
tory  which  I  fhall  fend  you  on  a  future  occafion  (k).

And  to  the  fecond  kind  of  diforders  in  the  cerebellum  belong,  if  you  rea-
dily fet  afide  the  obfervation  which  Peyron  (/)  has  alfo  produc'd  among  fome
of  thofe  above,  as  others  likewife  have  done  fince,  from  Fantonus  the  fa-
ther, fince  the  very  eminent  fon  (?»)  thinks,  that  inftead  of  the  cerebellum
beinw  "  corrupted,"  we  are  to  underftand  only,  that  it  was  foft,  and  not  of
the  natural  colour;  to  this  fecond  clafs,  I  fay,  belongs,  firft,  that  obfervation
v/hich  is  made  by  Maffa  («),  of  an  abfcefs  in  the  cerebellum,  after  a  wound
of  the  finciput  "  being  fuppurated  with  a  laudable  pus :"  and  in  the  next

{a)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  4.  Obf.  59.  (g)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  2.  A.  9.  Obf.  237.

li)  Hift.  de  r  Acad. R.  des  Sc.  A.  1705.  [b)  Di  nox.  Palud.  Effl.  1.  2.  Epid.  2.  c.  6.

Obf.  Anar.  13.  (0  Opufc.  Pathol.  Obf.  i.

(f)  apudPlamer.  Inft  Cliir,  adnot.  ad  §  548.  (i)  Epift.  6z.  n.  15.

{d)  Hift. de  I'Acad. R.  des  Sc.  A.  1737.  (/)  loco  indicate.  _

Obf.  Anat.  8.  ("0  Schol.  in  Edit.  ult.  ad  earn  Obf.  quje


(e)  Mem.  de  la  meme  Acad.  A.  1741.  9-  eft.

C/J  Apiar.  Obf.  5S.  {")  I-  Introd.  Anat.  c.  28.


place,


Letter  LIT. Article  26.  r  j  r

place,  one  vfritten  to  me  by  a  friend  in  the  year  17,? 5,-  of  the  right  lobe  of
the  cerebellum  being  penetrated,  univerfally,  by  a  green  and  fostid  fanies,
after  having  affeded  the  neighbouring  temple-bone  here  and  there  with  a
caries,  and  corroded  the  dura  mater  :  and  again  one  of  mine,  which,  if  you
eonfider  the  caufe,  is  not  unlike  this,  and  which  I  have  fent  to  you  forr
merly  (0) ;  but  unlike  in  this  circumftance,  that  the  fanies  had  vitiated  the
fame  lobe  of  the  cerebellum  fuperficially,  and  that  only  in  fome  meafure :
and,  finally,  a  fourth  of  the  celebrated  Plancus  (p),  of  an  abfcefs  which  oc-
cupied two  third  parts  of  that  lobe.

Nobody,  certainly,  has  ever  been  carried  off  immediately  and  by  a  fudden
death,  in  confequence  of  one  or  the  other  kind  of  difeafe,  when  he  feem'd
to  be  in  health  ;  nor  has  the  diforder  even  been  form'd  fuddenly :  and  to
thofe  diforders  that  are  generated  by  degrees,  the  nature  of  the  body  ac-
euftoms  itfelf  in  fome  meafure,  and  fupplies,  from  fome  other  part,  as  far
as  lies  in  its  power,  vi^hat  is  wanting  in  the  difeas'd  part.

An  example  of  this  kind  I  will  produce  in  the  nerves  themfelves.  For
what  do  you  fuppofe  could  be  the  reafon  that  a  dog,  whofe  recurrent  nerve,
both  on  the  left  and  right  fide,  was  cut  by  the  celebrated  Emmet  (q),  re-
cover'd  in  fome  meafure,  the  following  day,  the  voice  that  he  had  loft  imme-
diately on  the  incifion,  and  continu'd  to  recover  it  more  and  more  every
day  ?

The  third  recurrent  nerve,  you  will  fay,  as  it  lies  behind  the  afpera  ar-
teria,  could  not  be  divided.  But  this  unufual  nerve  had  certainly  exifted
the  day  before  ;  and  other  fmall  branches,  1  fuppofe,  had  exifted,  that  arofe
from  the  par  vagum,  above  the  feftion  of  thefe  nerves,  when  perform'd  by  Val-
falva(*),  or  from  fome  other  nerves  that  went  to  the  larynx,  in  a  whelp,
which,  though  Ihe  ftrove  before  in  vain,  could  at  length  bark  on  the  ninth
day.  ^

That  is  to  fay,  either  I  am  deceiv'd,  or  the  fpirits,  which  could  no  longer
pafs  through  thofe  larger  nerves  that  were  cut  afunder,  had,  by  this  time,,
fufficiently  dilated,  for  themfelves,  the  paffages  through  the  lefler  nerves,
which  were  before  not  fufficiently  open,  and  which  communicate,  higher
up,  with  thofe  larger  ones,  either  on  the  outfide  or  the  infide  of  the  brain,
and  go  to  the  fame  place.  I  fay  fufficiently  dilated ;  for  in  men  that  are  af-
fedted  with  increafing  diforders  of  the  cerebellum,,  to  whom  you  will
transfer  thefe  remarks,  it  is  fcarcely  probable,  that,  after  thefe  diforders
have  wholly  occupied  the  cerebellum,  the  motion  of  the  heart  and  the  lungs
fhould  have  been  lb  vigorous  and  ftrong  as  before  r  nay,  indeed  it  is  affert-
ed  by  fome  of  them,  as  in  the  boy  fpoken  of  by  Littre,  that  the  refpiration
was  weak,  and  that  the  pulfe  was  very  fnall  :  and,  in  the  obfervation  which
I  have  faid  was  written  to  me,  a  languor  was  taken  notice  of:  and  in  that
alio  which  I  have  fent  to  you,  it  appears,  that  the  ftrength  of  the  pulfe  had
been  quite  funk  and  diminifh'd.

It  would  be  much  more  difficult  to  fatisfy  the  objeftion  which  I  remem-
ber to  have  read  in  the  work  of  fome  grave  author ;  for  who  he  was  I  can-

(0)  Epift.  14.  n.  3.  (y)  Tentam.  de  Cur.  Morb.  Cephal.  n.  30.

(/)  in  Append,  ad  Epift^  de  Monftr,  (*)  Epift,  Anat.  13.  n.  37,

not


1S2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and Univerfal  Diforders.

not  remember  ;  1  ttiean,  that  in  a  thief,  whofe  memory  was  very  weak,  no
trace  of  the  cerebellum  was  found  by  Beniveniiis  ;  if  Benivenius  (r)  had
not  written  the  following  words  only,  "  that  the  pofterior  part  of  the  head,
"  where  the  feat  of  the  memory  is,  was  fo  Ihort  in  this  thief,  as  to  con-
"  tain  a  very  fmall  portion  of  brain  ;"  fo  that  if  any  one,  by  reafon  of  that
ancient  credulity  of  the  feat  of  the  memory,  fliould  be  willing  to  under-
ftand  this  of  the  cerebellum,  rather  than  of  the  cerebrum  ;  he,  neverthelefs,
does  not  acknowledge,  that  the  cerebellum  was  entirely  wanting.

This  then  being  the  Rate  of  the  queftion  -,  let  us  fet  thefe  things  afide,
and  returning  to  that  point  from  whence  the  controverly  took  its  rife,  and
by  which  it  may  be  more  eafily  decided;  let  us  compare  confiderable  and
fudden  injuries  of  the  cerebellum,  with  confiderable  injuries  of  the  cere-
brum, and  even,  if  you  will,  with  very  violent  and  fudden  injuries,  fuch  as
happen  from  wounds.

27.  That  there  are  fome  wounds  of  the  cerebrum  which  bring  on  a  very
fpeedy  death,  we  are  fo  far  from  having  it  in  our  power  to  deny,  that  it  is
rather  to  be  wonder'd  at,  that  two  obfervations,  and  no  more,  fhould  be
pointed  out,  to  this  effect,  by  fome  very  learned  men,  in  neither  of  which
death  immediately  follow'd  ;  whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  no  body  can  be
ignorant,  irom  the  experiments  of  many  of  the  moft  excellent  authors,  that
wounds  inflided  on  the  cerebellum  are  wont,  for  the  moft  part,  to  take
life  away,  either  immediately,  or  in  a  very  little  time.  For  that  they  do
not  always  kill  with  the  fame  celerity,  I  have  readily  confefs'd.  But  1  en-
quire how  many  times,  at  length,  and  how  flowly  this  has  happen'd.  Fran-
cifcus  Antonius  Cattus,  profcTlbr  of  anatomy  amongft  the  Neapolitans,  has
faid,  in  a  little  work  (i),  which  was  printed  at  Naples  in  the  year  1557,
"  that  he  can  eafily  prove  by.  experiment,"  a  circumftance  which  he  does
not  feem  to  have  piov'd  without  a  wound  of  the  cerebellum.  His  words
are,  "  though  all  the  other  parts  of  the  brain  are  wounded,  death  is  not  a
"  natural  confequence  thereof-,  yet  when  the  pofterior  ventricle  is  wounded,
"  1  have  feen  that  the  animal  immediately  falls  down  and  dies."

But  if,  befides  the  cerebellum,  which;  although  it  does  not  every  where
comprehend  this  fourth  ventricle,  as  if  proper  to  itfelf,  as  the  cerebrum  does
its  ventricles  ;  neverthelefs  compleats  it,  and  immediately  covers  it  ;  you
fhould  choofe  to  fufpedl,  that  with  it  he  had  alfo  wounded  the  medulla  ob-
longata, with  lies  beneath  ;  experiments  would  not  be  wantirg  {(),  from
whence  you  might  undcrftand,  that  fudden  death  does  not  necelTarily,  and
of  courfe,  follow  on  account  of  this  wound  in  particular.

It  were  to  be  wifli'd,  that  Coiterus,  in  thpfe  anatomical  obfervations,
which  he  publifii'd  fixteen  years  after  Cattus,  had  touch'd  upon  fomething
in  relation  to  the  cerebellum  ;  fince  he  alio,  as  to  what  relates  to  the  cere-
brum of  lambs,  kids,  and  living  dogs,  outftrips  the  more  modern  authors,
by  makins  the  following  affcrtions  :  "  And  what  is  a  circumftance,  that  de-
"  fervcs  the  higheft  admiration  ; I have  laid  open the brains  of  living

(0  De.abdit.  ncnnull.  ac  miraiid.  moibor.  (/) Vid.  apud  Teubeler Eiflcrt.  de  Vulne-

&c.  cauji.-,  c.  89.  lib.  cerebi  noii reir.pcr  leihalib.  §.  43.  &.  Uq.

[.')  l.'a^og.  Anat.  c.  15 ii.  Cn.

"  brutes.


Letter  LII. Article  27.  153

"  brutes;  I  have  wounded  them,  and  without  touching  the  nerves,  or  their
"  origins,  and  without  wounding  the  ventricles  that  lie  in  the  middle,  I
«'  have  taken  them  out,  but  have  not  found  any  fign  of  the  voice,  refpira-
♦'  tion,  or  fenfe  being  injur'd  in  thefe  animals.  Birds  live  fome  time  with-
"  out  the  cerebrum,  as  any  one  may  experience  in  hens,  or  pullets,  if  he
"  cuts  off  the  upper  part  of  the  beak  with  half  of  the  head,  and  takes  out
"  the  greater  part  of  the  brain."

But  in  the  preceding,  and  the  prefent  century,  curious  and  enquiring
men  have  not  omitted  even  to  take  out  the  cerebellum  of  birds.  Thus
the  celebrated  Zimmermann  (h),  having  drawn  out  the  cerebrum  and  cere-
bellum of  a  pigeon,  the  creature  died  fuddenly  and  entirely  :  and  that  you
may  not  be  at  a  Ids  to  determ.ine  from  whence  this  chiefly  happen'd  ;  he
took  away  the  cerebrum  from  another  pigeon,  which,  neverthelefs,  liv'd
fome  time  v  yer,  when  the  cerebellum  was  taken  out,  "  it  perifh'd  fud-
"  dcnly."

But  not  to  recede,  however,  from  the  more  perfedb  animals,  as  has  been
propos'd  above;  when  I  firft  fent  this  letter  to  you,  one  dog  of  Chirac  was
made  mention  of  in  this  controverfy  ;  which,  amongll  a  great  number  that
died  immediately,  or  not  long  after,  had  furviv'd  twenty  four  hours  after
making  the  experiment.  But  I  now  fee  that  in  the  diflertation  publilh'd  by
the  celebrated  Zinnius,  in  which  he  has  alfo  given  the  experiment  made  by
himfelf  on  the  cerebellum  (a-),  a  dog  is  taken  notice  of,  which  liv'd  as  many
hours  after  the  perforation  of  that  vifcus ;  and  even  another  is  mention'd,
from  which  Petit  had  cut  away  a  part  of  the  left  lobe  of  the  cerebellum  ;  and
yet  this  animal  liv'd  fix  days.

However,  it  is  certain  that  thefe  are  very  rare  examples,  and  only  a  few
in  all,  if  they  be  compar'd  with  the  great  number  of  other  inftances,  of  dogs
that  we  know  to  have  died  immediately  upon  the  experiment ;  or  thole  which
he  himfelf  confefies,  Trom  his  own  obfervations,  and  from,  the  feleft  obfer-
vations  of  others,  have  but  juft  dragg'd  on  their  lives  "  after  the  fourth  or
"  fifth  minute  ;"  or  "  almoft  for  an  hour,"  as  two  or  three  did  ;  or  "  for
"  three  hours,"  as  one  did ;  or  at  moft  "  for  twelve  hours,"  as  another
dog  did.

And  if  we  enquire  after  inftances  of  very  violent  wounds  of  the  cerebel-
lum, in  the  human  fpecies,  which  have  not  been  very  fpeedily  fatal,  1  be-
lieve there  will  be  fcarcely  more  than  two  ;  one  of  thefe  is  quoted  by  Pey-
ron  (y  )  from  Petit,  of  a  foldier  who  liv'd  three-and-forty  hours.  The  other
you  will  read  in  the  Sepulchretum  (2),  from  Binningerus,  of  a  Dutchman,
who,  unlefs  fome  error  has  crept  into  the  imprefiion  of  the  numbers,  feems
to  have  liv'd  more  than  four  days  after  the  wound.

As  to  another  example,  of  a  fervant-man  from  Borelli  (a),  I  do  not
think  it  can  be  added  hereto ;  for  I  do  not  fee,  how  the  fword  could  pafs
through  the  orbit,  and  reach  to  the  cerebellum,  without  wounding  that  part
of  the  cerebrum  which  lies  between  ;  and  I  think,  certainly,  that  we  ought

(«)  Differt.  de  Irritabil.  §.  27.  Exp.  7.  &  8. (z)  Seft.  hac  Obf.  8.  §.  8.
Ix)  in  Schol.  ad  earn  Difleft.  partem  §.  i. («)  Cent.  z.  Obf.  19.
CjiJ  Mem.  fupra  ad  n.  z6.  cit.

Vol.  III.  X  to


I  J' 4 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Dlfordcrs.

to  read  cerebrum  there,  inftead  of  cerebellum ;  yet  this  fervant-mant
wherefoever  the  wound  did  penetrate,  was  found  dead  the  next  morning.
And  why  I  think  that  other  examples,  which  I  have  equally  attended  to,
ought  not  to  be  recounted  among  the  more  confiderable  wounds  of  the  ce-
rebellum, I  will  Ihow  prefently  when  I  take  notice  of  them.

But  the  left  lobe  of  the  cerebellum  had  certainly  been  pafs'd  through
by  a  leaden  bullet  in  that  foldier  :  and  in  the  Dutchman,  "  the  beginning
"  of  the  left  lobe  of  the  cerebellum  appear'd  black  and  corrupted ;  and
"  from  the  internal  parts  of  its  fubftance,  a  little  piece  of  the  bone  of
*'  the  cranium,  of  a  conic  figure,  and  acute  at  its  point,  was  by  accident
"  extrafted  j"  and  on  the  fame  left  fide  the  limbs  ,had  been  paralytic :  and
this  I  mention,  though  in  a  tranfitory  manner,  becaufe  in  the  obfervation  of
Plancus,  alfo  referr'd  to  above  {b),  a  hemiplegia  feiz'd  not  upon  the  oppofite
limbs,  but  thofe  which  lay  under  the  jnjur'd  lobe  of  the  cerebellum  ;  fo  that
a  doubt  which  has  fometimes  arifen  equally  to  Caefalpinus  {c)  and  myfelf  (ti),
may  feem  to  be  removable,  if  it  conftantly  appear,  by  many  other  obferva-
tions  fimilar  to  ihefc,  that  the  feat  of  the  caufe  producing  an  hemiplegia,  is
•wont,  for  the  moft  part,  to  be  found  differently  in  the  cerebellum  from  what
it  is  in  the  cerebrum.

And  when  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  are  difeas'd  both  together,  any
one  might  fuppofe,  that  the  difeafe  of  the  former  was  lefs  capable  of  pro-
ducing a  par<ilyfis  in  the  oppofite  fide,  than  the  latter  in  the  fubjefted  fide;
if  the  fame  thing  were  obferv'd  in  others  alio  that  is  obferv'd  by  Foreftus  (e)
in  a  lethargic  boy,  who  had  the  whole  right  fide  of  his  body  quite  paralytic,,
fenfe  and  motion  being  entirely  lofl:  •,  for  not  within  the  left  part  of  the  cra-
nium, but  within  the  right,  an  abfcefs  was  found  ;  not  in  the  cerebrum  only,,
but  alfo  in  the  cerebellum.

But  to  return  to  the  point  in  queftion  :  although  there  are  fo  few  inftances
of  life  being  protradled  even  for  a  fiiort  time  after  a  confiderable  wound  has
been  inflifted  on  the  human  cerebellum  ;  yet  what  learned  and  experienc'd
furgeon,  on  the  other  hand,  is  there,  who,  though  he  may  not  have  feen  in-
numerable examples,  has  not  himfelf  feen  fome  even  confiderable  wounds  of
the  cerebrum  wherewith  life  has  been  long  protrafted  ?

And  fince  it  does  not  feem  poffible  that  there  fhould  be  any  doubt  on  this
head,  and  as  all  muft  confefs  that  death  is  generally  brought  on  more  fpeedily
by  wounds  of  the  one  than  of  the  other ;  let  us  now  fee  whether  more  cer-
tainly. All  thofe  perfons  certainly  died  in  whom  I  have  taken  notice  of  tbs
cerebellum  being  injur'd,  not  to  fay  wounded.  But  to  infift  chiefly  upon
wounds  :  how  many  of  thofe  are,  at  length,  faid  to  have  efcap'd,  in  whom,
the  cerebellum  was  not  (lightly  but  deeply  wounded  ?

.  You  certainly  fee  that  the  perfon,  of  whom  it  was  related  to  Platner  (/),
that  he  had  been  "  cur'd  after  a  confiderable  part  of  the  occiput,  together
"  with  a  remarkable  portion  of  the  cortex  cerebelli,  had  been  taken  away
"  by  a  fword,"  does  not  relate  to  this  queftion. Nor  will  you  fee  that  the


(b)  N.  26.  (f)  L.  10.  Obf.  Medic.  11.

\c)  L.  2.  Oojeft.  Med.  10.  in  fin.  (/J  Adnot.  fupra  ad  n.  26.  cit.

(aj  Epill.  Anat.  13 n,  23.


Abifiiniati:


Letter  LII. Article  27.  1  s"'S

Abiffinian  cur'd  by  our  Veflingius  (g)  related  thereto  any  more.  For  although
fome  authors,  as  I  have  lately  obferv'd,  fpeak  of  him  as  a  man  "  who,  being
"  already  far  advanc'd  in  age,  had  a  wound  infli6l"ed  on  his  cerebellum  to  the
•'  breadth  of  two  inches ;"  yet,  if  you  read  Veflingius  attentively,  you  will
eafily  perceive  (I  omit  that  he  was  more  than  fifty  years  of  age,  "  but  dill  a
«  vigorous  man")  "  that  a  broad  wound  had  been  inflifted  "  on  his  occiput
indeed ;  and  that  this  wound,  "  penetrating  through  both  the  meninges,  had
"  flightly  touch'd  upon  the  cerebellum  to  the  breadth  of  two  inches  •,"  that
is,  had  graz'd  its  furface  :  for  in  this  manner  Nonius  Marcellus  (h)  explains
thatpaffage  of  Virgil  in  the  eighth  book,  of  the  ^neid  {i),  ftringentem  ripas  ;
and  therefore 7?n»g-o,  being  the  word  here  us'd  by  Veflingius,  muft  fignify
to  wound  flightly ;  as  Servius  fays,  in  regard  to  another  paflTage  of  Virgil
vfhtre  Jh-inxii  is  made  ufe  of  (^),  that  "  it  gives  the  idea  of  a  flight  wound."

Nor  will  you  here  fail  to  recolle£t  that  Veflingius  has  been  taken  notice  of
by  Riolanus  (/),  as  writing  "  in  a  very  elegant  and  clafllcal  ftile,  yet  fome-
*'  times  obfcurely,  becaufe  he  has  not  made  ufe  of  the  words  and  terms  which
*'  are  common  among  phyficians."

But  if  they  had  alfo  taken  notice  of  another  wound,  whereby  our  Fal-
loppius  (m)  has  faid,  "  that  firft  a  quantity  of  the  cerebellum,  not  thicker
*'  than  a  vetch,  had  been  taken  away  ;  and,  in  the  fecond  place,  that  when
"  he  had  extrafted  the  fmall  bony  pieces  from  the  fubftance  of  the  fame,
*«  another  ftill  thicker  part  than  the  former  had  come  away  ;"  it  would  have
been  very  natural  to  anfwer  to  thofe  who  reckon'd  this  wound,  moreover,  in
the  number  of  the  former,  that  not  only  the  man  was  not  perfeflly  cur'd,
when  thefe  things  were  written,  but  that  he  was  no  more  than  "  almoft
"  recovered ;"  and  this  alfo  in  particular,  that  if  the  wound  had  been
deep,  and  if  thofe  bony  fragments  had  been  extrafted  "  from  the  internal
*«  parts  of  the  fubftance  "  of  the  cerebellum  ;  as  in  the  Dutchman  of  whom
I  fpoke  juft  now,  the"  author,  after  writing  of  that  wound  which  he  now
thought  almoft  heal'd,  and  of  others  of  the  cerebrum  which  were  perfettly
heal'd,  would  not  have  immediately  concluded  his  difcourfe  in  this  manner  :
"  Wherefore,  not  all  wounds  of  the  cerebrum,  but  deep  wounds  only,  are
"  mortal."

And  this  being  the  juft  ftate  of  the  queftidn,  you  will  fuppofe  that  John
Bohn  («)  has  done  properly,  who,  as  he  had  feen  many  wounds,  and  had  read
a  great  deal,  if  any  other  man  had,  upon  this  fubjed,  aflerted  as  follows :
"^^  If  we  confult  experience,  we  fhall,  perhaps,  be  fcarcely  able  to  obferve  one
*'  wha  has  efcap'd  after  a  laceration  of  the  cerebellum  -,  though  many  in-
*^  fiances  are  to  be  met  with  here  and  there,  wherein  it  is  faid  that  very  large
"  wounds  of  the  cerebrum  have  been  heal'd."

Obfervations  of  this  kind  of  cure  he  himfelf  points  out  (o)  in  great  number,
and  Donatus  (j>)  alfo,  and  Schenck  (j),  had  gather'd  together  ;  among  which

CgJ  Obferv.  Anat.  &  Epift.  Medic.  13.  (m)  De  Vulnerib.  c.  6.

{i>)  De  Propriet.  Serm.  fub  litt.  S.  (c)  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  S.  2.  c.  i.

{>)  Verf.  63.  (0)  S.  I.

[i)  JEr\e\d.  !.  10.  verf.  478.  ( fij  De  Medic.  Hift.  Mirab.  1.  5.  c.  4.

(/)  In  ipfo  initio  animadverf.  in  Synt.  Ve-  (y)  Obf.  Medic.  1.  i.  ubi  de  Cerebri  VuIHo
fling.

X  2  are


T  5  6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Umverfal  Diford'ers.

are  even  fome  of  wounds  penetrating  quite  into  the  ventricles  of  the  brain?
Aiigenius  (r),  and  even  Galen  himfelf  (5),  teftifying  that  they  had  feen  them  :
fo  that  I  cannot  help  wondering  that,  in  a  certain  fcholivim  of  the  Sepul-
chretum  (/),  it  is  remark'd  as  "  probable,  that  fome  wonderful  wounds  of
"  the  head,  with  an  evident  injury  of  the  brain,  fome  fmall  parts  of  which
"  have  even  been  taken  away  without  deftroying  Hfe,  were  not  mortal,  be-
"  caufe  they  were  found  to  have  affeded  the  furface  only,  the  medullary  fub-
"  rtance  being  unhurt ;  for  where  this  fubltance  is  touch'd,  death  mufl;  be
"  the  confequence."

For  if  thofe  obfervations  had  been  read,  it  would  have  been  known,  from
many  of  them,  not  only  whether  the  injury  had  reach'd  to  the  medullary  fub-
ilance,  but  alfo  whether  a  portion  of  the  cortical  fubllance  only  was  taken
away,  as  in  that  wound  of  the  cerebellum  in  Platner.  But  you  may,  befides
thofe,  read  fome  others  that  are  really  wonderful  in  Martianus  («),  from  whom
nobody,  that  I  remember,  has  yet  quoted  them  ;  and  others,  in  like  manner,
in  Wepfer  (x)  and  Saltzmann(_)')  •,  to  omit  others  at  prefent :  the  latter  of  which
authors,  however,  like  Bohn,  after  having  recounted  many  cures  of  large
wounds  of  the  cerebrum,  has  exprefsly  excepted  wounds  of  the  cerebellum(z),
"  as  what  experience  proves  to  be  always  and  abfolutely  fatal ;"  and  Wepfer
finilhcs  his  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  after  having  mention'd  a  leaden  bullet's
having  pafs'd  through  the  cerebrum  in  one  perfon,  and  in  another  through
the  cerebellum  and  cerebrum,  he  declares  the  firft  to,  liave  died  "  foon  after,"
but  the  latter  "  inftantly."

How  much  more  fpeedily  and  more  certainly,  then,  wounds  of  the  cere-
bellum are  generally  mortal,  than  thofe  of  the  cerebrum,  has  been  fufB-
ciently  confirm'd  by  us.  Now  let  us  go  on  to  our  obfervations  of  the  cra-
nium being  fiflur'd  or  fraftur'd.

28.  A  virgin,  of  feventeen  years  of  age,  of  a  pallid  colour,  happen'd  to
be  talking  with  a  lover  of  hers,  with  whom  her  father  had  forbiddeh  her  to
talk,  when  on  a  fudden  her  father  furpriz'd  them  together.  As  he  was  a
fierce  and  favage  kjnd  of  man,  and  not  quite  fober,  he  fnatch'd  up  a  thick
club,  wherewith  he  ftruck  the  arm,  but  particularly  the  head,  of  his  daughter,
with  fuch  violence  that  the  club  was  broken.

In  this  wounded  condition  the  poor  girl  was  carried,  four  hours  after,  into
the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Morte,  at  Bologna.  She  made  no  anfwer  to  any
queftion  that  was  afk'd  her  ;  and  her  pulfe  was  fo  low,  that  they  did  not  dare;
to  take  away  blood.  In  the  arm  was  one  flight  wound  ;  but  in  the  head  were
many  and  confiderable  wounds;  and,  amongft  thefe,  one  in  particular  that
was  extremely  large,  and  feem'd  to  give  her  the  moft  pain,  lay  behind  the
left  ear,  from  which  a  perfeft  fanies  afterwards  flow'd  out :  and  with  this,
the  wounds  were  a  little  moift.

"Within  about  four  days  the  patient  began  to  make  anfwers  to  the  queftions.
which  were  afk'd  her,  but  very  little,  for  the  moft  part ;  as,  for  inftance,

(r)  L.  9.  Epift.  2.  quffi  effe  deberet  3.  (x)  Exerc.  de  loco  afF.  in  Apopl.

(j)  De  Uf.  Part.  1.  8.  c.  10.  CjJ  Differt.  de  mira  Cran.  Frad. §  10.  &

(/) Ad  §  8,  Obf.  5.  hujus  Seft.  feqq-

{u] Annot.  ad  Hippocr, Epid. 1.  7.  S.  I.  (2) §12.^

verf.  377  prope  fin,

either


Letter  LII. Articles  28,  29.  15-/

either  to  affirm  or  deny.  In  the  mean  while,  the  pulfe  became  vehement
and  frequent ;  and  the  fever  was  obferv'd  to  incrtafc  every  day  in  the  evening.
Then  the  menftrual  purgation  came  on  in  its  proper  time,  nor  ceas'd  to  flow
till  the  time  of  her  death;  which  follow'd  a  few  days  after,  in  a  gradual  and
placid  manner,  after  the  fever  had  come  on  once  only,  and  that  three  days
before  death,  with  a  fhort  and  flight  coldneis.

The  body  of  this  virgin  was  very  ufeful  to  me  In  the  year  1 704,  together
with  other  bodies,  when  I  was  very  bufy  in  examining  the  genital  parts  both
of  virgins  and  women  ;  in  order  to  inveltigate  thofc  things  that  I  have  fpoken
of  in  the  firft  Adverfaria  in  regard  to  the  hymen,  the  valves  of  the  cervix
uteri,  the  fources  of  the  menftrual  blood,  and  other  circumftances  of  that
kind.  Though  the  menftrual  blood  did  not  ceai'e  to  flow  quite  to  the  time
of  death,  as  1  have  faid  ;  yet,  as  it  flow'd  much  more  flowly  in  the  latter
part  of  her  life,  it  had  coagulated  into  the  form  of  a  thick  cylinder,  within
the  vagina  and  the  cervix  uteri;  juft  as  the  blood  which  is  receiv'd  into  a
glafs-veffel  from  a  vein  is  wont  to  do  ;  and  feem'd  to  have  dilated  the  of-
culum  uteri  and  cervix  :  unlefs  you  chufe  to  attribute  this  to  the  natural
laxity  of  the  parts  at  fuch  a  time.  Nor  was  the  whitifh  part  entirely  wanting
in  that  fanguineous  concretion.

But  it  is  more  worth  while  to  remark,  in  a  few  words,  what  I  obferv'd  par-
ticular in  the  fundus  uteri  and  the  teftes.  The  anterior  furface  of  this  fundus
v/as  unequal  with  three  or  four  little  furrows,  drawn  in  a  longitudinal  di-
redlion.  And  the  membrane  which  invefts  the  teftes  Ihow'd  fome  fmall  ci-
catrices, as  it  were;  amongft  which,  in  one  of  the  teftes,  appear'd  fomething
fimilar  to  a  little  ulcer,  being  unequal  in  its  furface,  and  of  a  yellow  colour
inclining  to  blacknefs.  Through  a  foramen  which  was  manifeft  therein,  a  thin
probe  was  pafs'd  down  by  me  into  a  cell  that  was  not  very  fmall,  but  empty.
And  the  veficles,  which  in  thefe  teftes  were  not  w(anting,  but  were  full  of
ferum,  being  cut  into- after  boiling,  ihow'd  not  the  leaft  of  a  coagulated
humour ;  and  only  contain'd,  within  a  thickifti  coat,  a  firms  that  was  per-
feftly  empty. All  thefe  things,  however,  were  feen  laft  in  order.

But  as  to  the  head,  which  had  been  already  diflTeded,  all  the  wounds  ap-
pear'd of  a  cineritious  and  ill-looking  colour  j  and  while  the  integuments  were
taken  off  from  it,  many  difagreeable  colours  appear'd ;  and  among  thefe  a  black
colour.  The  cranium,  when  laid  bare,  ftiow'd  the  lambdoidal  future  to  be
fomewhat  open'd  ;  and  at  that  place  behind  the  ear,  in  which  I  have  faid  that
the  wound  was  the  moft  confider^ble,  a  large  part  of  the  bone  was  broken  •,
and  fo  disjoin'd  from  the  other  parts,  that  it  eafily  follow'd  the  hand  which
drew  it  away.

The  fkull  being  cut  through  round  about,  and  examin'd  both  internally
and  externally,  fhow'd  two  fifllires,  that  penetrated  through  both  tables  ;  the
longeft  of  which  fiflures  began  from  that  place  where  the  large  fradlure  was.
And  the  inferior  part  of  the  left  hemifphere  of  the  cerebrum,  which  anfwer'd
to  this  place,  was  corrupted  to  as  great  an  extent  as  a  fmall  apple  would  have
occupied.  The  other  parts  we  found  to  be  found,  if  you  except  the  dura
mater  only,  which  had  a  kind  of  flight  ecchymofis  where  it  lay  under  that
longeft  fifllire.

29.  Befides  this,  ^d  perhaps  others,  T  alfo  made,  in  the  fame  hofpital,

tliat


158 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

that  difledion  belonging  to  this  clafs,  which  is  already  fufficiendy  defcrib'd
in  the  Epiftola  Anaiomica  {a).  From  which,  befides  other  things  tliat  I  have
hinted  at,  in  this  and  the  former  letter,  you  will  fee  this  circumftance  con-
firm'd  in  particular ;  that  blood  is  fometimes  effus'd,  not  where  the  fcuU  has
receiv'd  a  blow,  and  been  fifflir'd,  but  within  the  part  oppofite  thereto.

Now  let  us  go  on  to  Ibme  diffedtions  perform'd  at  Padua,  beginning  with
that  in  which,  like  the  former,  we  faw  the  fcuU  to  be  fiffur'd  by  the  blow
of  a  ftick.

30.  A  certain  man,  who  was  a  native  of  Genoa,  blind  of  one  eye,  and
liv'd  by  begging,  being  drunk,  and  quarrelling  with  other  drunken  beggars,
receiv'd  two  blows  by  their  fticks ;  one  on  his  hand,  which  was  flight,  and
another  violent  one  at  the  left  temple;  fo  that  blood  came  out  of  the  left
ear.  Yet  foon  after,  the  quarrel  being  made  up,  he  fat  down  at  the  fire  with
them  in  the  fame  place  ;  and  again  fill'd  himfelf  with  a  great  quantity  of  wine,
by  way  of  pledge  of  friendfliip  being  renew'd :  and  not  long  after,  on  the  very
fame  night,  he  died.

The  body  was  warm  even  on  the  day  following,  although  it  was  in  the
latter  end  of  January,  in  the  year  1746,  when  it  was  brought  into  the  col-
lege before  night.  And  as  I  was  teaching  anatomy  at  that  time,  it  was  dif-
fered on  the  following  days  ;  for  it  was  a  proper  body  for  the  purpofes  of
demonftration  -,  although  there  was  an  ulcer  at  the  lower  part  of  the  left  ti-
bia, and  the  fcrotum  was  tumid,  as  if  from  an  ecchymofis  ;  being,  at  the
fame  time,  of  a  red  and  violet  colour,  and  the  belly  in  particular  diftended.

For  when  the  abdomen  was  open'd,  it  was  found  that  the  tumour  was
from  the  ftomach,  which  had  been  fo  diftended  with  wine  and  air,  that  I  ne-
ver remember  to  have  feen  it  more  fo  -,  whereas  the  inteftines,  and  efpecially
the  fmall  ones,  were  almoft  empty  ;  fo  that  fome  perfons  hop'd  in  vain,  as
in  a  man  who  died  foon  after  having  drunk  fo  much  wine,  that  they  fhould
fee  fome  chyliferous  veflels  in  the  inteftine  and  mefentery  ;  although  in  the
beginning,  while  the  ftomach,  which  was  even  then  full,  was  rais'd  up  with
the  hand  towards  the  left  fide,  we  moft  of  us  were  impos'd  upon  by  the  ap-
pearance of  a  chyl  ferous  veffel,  that  ran  parallel  to  the  gaftro-epiploic  veflels,
on  the  external  furface  of  the  ftomach  ;  yet  it  was  immediately  perceiv'd,
that  this  v/as  either  a  nerve,  or  fomething  elfe  of  that  kind,  as  it  had  no  ap-
pearance of  valves,  and  when  diflTefted  and  comprefs'd,  gave  out  not  the  leaft
moifture.

The  abdomen,  the  mefentery,  and  the  omentum,  which  we  found  to  be
drawn  upwards,  were  fill'd  with  a  yellow  fat.  The  fpleen  was  one  of  the
largeft  I  have  feen,  in  every  dimenfion  ;  but  efpecially  in  its  breadth  and
length  :  and  in  its  longitudinal  diredlion  it  was  wrapp'd  up  into  icfelf  on  its
flat  furface.  Internally  it  was  of  a  dilute  and  pale  red  •,  but  no  where  hard.
Nor  was  the  liver  hard :  large  indeed  it  was,  but  within  natural  bounds  :
and  the  gall-bladder  was  full  of  yellow  bile.  The  urinary  bladder  alfo  was
full  of  urine  ;  fo  as  to  be  prominent  above  the  ofl"a  pubis  by  three  inches.

The  urethra  was  without  our  canaliculi,  at  leaft  as  far  as  appear'd  to  the
tyes  •,  though  perhaps  from  a  foregoing  difeafe. For  the  glans  could  not  be

[a)  Xin.  n.  16.

difen-


Letter  Lir. Article  30.  tS9

difengag'd  from  the  prepuce,  in  the  whole  of  it,  without  difleftion.  Nor
was  the  part  which  could  be  difengag'd,  that  wherein  the  extremity  of  the
urethra  opens.  Within  the  fcrotum  was  no  diforder.  Nor  within  the  tho-
rax :  nor  any  thing  worthy  of  remark  therein ;  except  that,  in  the  cavities  of
the  heart,  and  great  veffels,  the  blood  was  free  from  all  polypous  concretion,
as  it  alfo  was  in  all  the  remaining  \«efrels  of  this  body.

But  the  head  ofFer'd  many  things  worthy  of  remark.  The  mufcles  of  the
face,  the  membranes  which  lay  betwixt  them,  and  the  parotid  glands,  were
ting'd  with  a  kind  of  bright  red  colour  degenerating  into  brown.  Thefe
glands  were  large;  and  perhaps  from  the  fame  caufe,  that  is,  from  the
blood  having  ftagnated  there :  for  the  thyroid  gland  alfo,  and  particularly
the  internal  maxillary,  were  enlarg'd  :  could  this  have  happen'd  becaufe  in
gluttons  of  this  kind,  they  grow  large  in  confequence  of  being  more  fre-
quently and  more  violently  agitated  ?  The  left  temporal  mufcle,  1  mean  that
which  had  receiv'd  the  blow,  was  black  in  the  whole  of  it,  except  in  that
part  which  is  neareft  to  the  forehead,  from  the  ftagnating  blood  that  was
effus'd  betwixt  the  fibres  of  the  mufcle  in  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  be  difcharg'd
to  the  quantity  of  fome  fpoonfuls  during  the  difledlion.

The  cranium  being  law'd  open ;  in  which,  inftead  of  the  frontal  pituitary
finuflTes,  the  fubftance  of  the  bone  was  found  to  be  fpongy  -,  betwixt  that  and
the  dura  mater,  where  it  lay  beneath  the  part  which  had  recejv'd  the  blow,
we  found  blood  half-coagulated,  to  the  quantity  of  two  or  three  ounces ;  ex-
tending from  the  pofterior  part  forwards,  to  the  fpace  of  four  or  five  inchesy
and  from  the  bafis  of  the  cranium  upwards,  almoft  as  much.  From  the
compreflion  of  this  blood,  the  dura  mater,  and  the  brain,  had  very  evidently
fubfided  for  as  great  a  fpace  as  I  have  faid  was  occupied  thereby.

Moreover,  the  fanguiferous  veflels  in  that  membrane,  and  ftill  more  thofe
in  the  pia  mater,  were  fo  diftended,  that  even  the  fmalleft  ramifications  were
every  where  beautifully  red,  yet  mod  on  the  right  fide  -,  perhaps  becaufe  the
man,  when  dying,  had  lain  on  that  fide  in  confequence  of  its  being  lefs  af-
feded  with  pain.  Or  perhaps,  as  to  what  relates  to  the  dura  mater,  becaufe
the  vefTels  of  this  membrane  could  not  be  equally  full  on  the  left  fide,  as
they  were  on  the  right,  by  reafon  of  fo  much  blood  having  been  effus'd :  al-
though, even  at  the  bafis  of  the  right  hemifphere  of  the  cerebrum,  betwixt
that  and  the  pia  mater,  we  obferv'd  blood  to  be  extravafated  to  fome  extent ;.
but  in  fo  fmall  a  quantity,  that  it  feem'd  rather  to  be  a  livid  appearance,  as
if  from  contufion,  than  a  real  estravafation.

That  there  was  a  like  plenitude  of  the  vefl'els,  in  proportion,  in  the  me-
dullary fubftance  of  th.e  cerebrum,  and  not  only  there,  but  in  the  lubftance
of  the  cerebellum  alfo,  we  percfiv'd  by  the  pretty  large  bloody  points,  that
were  feen  here  and  there  throughout  each  of  thefe  fubflances;  and  throughout
the  parietes  of  the  lateral  ventricles  we  faw  the  veffels  themfelves  to  be  di-
ftended :  although  the  choroid  plexufies  were  pale,  in  confequence  of  a  lit-
tle and  fomewhat  turbid  water  which  was  contain'd  in  thofe  ventricles.

Having  feen  thefe  things  in  the  manner  defcrib'd,  we  turn'd  our  eyes  to

the  cranium,  which  was  cutout;  and,  in  the  left  temple-bone,  we  obferv'd

almoft  a  capillary  fifTure,  but  fuch  a  ope  as  penetrated  from  the  external  to

the  internal  parts. This  fifiure  began  at  the  breadth  of  a  little  finger,  above

1  that


loo Book  iV.  Of  Chirui'gical  and  UniveVfal  Diforders.

that  place  where  the  fcuU  had  been  cut  into,  as  it  ufually  is.  It  was  conti-
nu'd  to  the  bafis  of  the  cranium,  and  extended  itfelf  quite  to  the  common
fuperior  terminations  of  tbe  internal  meatus  auditorius  and  tympanum  ;  for
which  reafon  the  membrane  that  disjoin'd  the  one  from  the  other,  was  broken
through ;  the  latter  cavity  being  full  of  blood,  and  the  former  of  a  bloody
appearance.

Having  thus  found,  out  the  caufes  which  had  ruptur'd  the  internal  and  ex-
ternal vefftls,  and  confequently  the  caufes  of  blood  being  effus'd  within  the
cranium,  and  difcharg'd  from  the  ear  ;  it  remain'd  in  a  man  who,  as  I  have
faid,  was  blind  (if  one  eye,  to  examine  this  eye.  It  was  the  right  eye.  The
tunica  adnata  of  which  was  diftinguifli'd  v/ith  a  great  number  of  veflels,  go-
ing to  the  circumference  of  the  cornea,  and  particularly  in  one  part.

The  cornea  was  not  only  opaque,  but  alfo  much  lefs  than  it  ought  to  be,
and  not  of  its  ufual  figure.  The  eye  being  then  taken  out  of  the  orbit,  the
globe  itfelf  appear'd  to  be  confiderably  lefs  than  is  natural :  and  indeed  did
not  ftridtly  refemble  a  fphere,  but  rather  one  of  thofe  bodies,  which,
amongft  us,  we  call  lottoni  or  buttcns;  I  mean,  thofe  that  we  make  ufe  of
to  keep  oin- clothes  together;  being  deprefs'd  on  one  furface,  and  on  the
other,  protuberating  in  the  manner  of  a  low  cone.  Yet,  as  of  thefe  furfaces
the  former  was  here  anterior,  and  the  latter  pofterior,  the  diameter  of  the
anterior  furface  was  much  longer  than  the  axis,  or  a  right  line  drawn  from
the  middle  of  this  furface  to  the  middle  of  the  pofterior  furface.

And  having  divided  this  eye,  which  was  hard,  into  two  parts  in  the  di-
redion  of  that  line,  arid  nothing  having  been  difcharg'd  but  a  humour,  which,
if  it  had  not  been  of  a  blackifh  colour,  you  would  have  call'd  aqueous,  I
in  vain  fought  for  the  remains  of  the  chryftalline  or  vitreous  humour ;  for
not  the  leaiV  trace  of  them  remain'd.  But  under  the  contracted  tunica  fcle-
rotica  was,  the  choroides,  betwixt  the  hvov-in  colour  of  which,  a  bloody  one,
as  there  generally  is,  pretty  evidently  appear'd  here  and  there  ;  and  the  uvea
alfo  was  annex'd  to  the  choroides,  but  not  found  and  entire  like  the  choroides ;
fo  that  we  could  not  diftinguifh  the  iris  and  the  corpus  ciliare.

Under  the  choroides  univerfally,  inftead  of  the  retina  was  a  thin  bony  la-
mella, which;  proceeding  from  the  infertion  of  the  optic  nerve,  being  every
•where  entire,  preferving  that  figure  of  the  eye  which  I  have  defcrib'd,  and
comprehending  the  aqueous  humour  whereof  I  fpoke ;  extended  itfelf  quite
to  the  circumference  of  the  cornea,  where  it  adher'd  to  the  uvea  more  clofely
than  in  any  other  part,  as  I  again  obferv'd,  even  after  having  macerated  the
diffedted  eye  fix  days  in  water.  The  pieces  of  this  lamella,  which  was  really
bony,  I  ftill  preferve  carefully  by  me ;  fome  of  which,  being  pretty  large,-
may,  by  their  figure,  and  the  adhering  portions  of  the  uvea  and  choroides,
gain  credit  to  a  circumftance  fo  extremely  rare ;  if  not  hitherto  unfeen  by
any  one  •,  with  thofe  who  were  not  prefent  at  that  time.

Thofe  who  were  then  prefent,  however,  both  dodlors  in  medicine,  and
ftudents,  having  fufficiently  examin'd  thefe  things,  and  it  having  appear'd,
even  from  infpeftion,  that  the  blindnefs  had  been  of  long  ftanding ;  what-
ever the  caufe  of  it  might  be,  which  could  neither  have  been  enquir'd  from
the  man  himfelf,  nor  yet  from  others,  as  they  were  ignorant  of  the  life  of  a
beggar,  who  had  been  bqjrn  in  another  country,  and  had  fpent  the  greater

2  girt


Letter  LII. Article  31.  161

part  of  his  life  there;  it  did  not  feem  proper  to  omit  enquiring  into  the  ftate
of  the  optic  nerve  of  that  eye,  and  comparing  it  with  the  other  which  wcnc
to  the  left,  that  is  the  found  eye.-

The  difference  then,  betwixt  one  and  the  other  nerve,  was  immediately
evident  to  all,  even  without  diflfeftion.  For  the  left  was  in  the  ftate  that  the
moft  found  optic  nerve  generally  is.  But  the  other  was  more  deprefs'd,  thin,
and  of  a  faint  flefh-colour ;  and  in  this  ftate  it  appear'd  from  that  place
where  it  had  been  join'd  with  the  other,  within  the  cranium,  quite  to  its  in-
fertion  into  the  eye.  And  indeed  in  the  whole  of  this  tra£t,  in  which  it  was
invefted  with  the  dura  mater,  when  it  was  cut  tranfverfly,  it  feem'd  to  be  the
feftion  of  fome  artery  or  other,  rather  than  of  a  nerve ;  in  confequence  of
the  dura  mater  being  contrafted  into  itfelf,  and  become  thicken'd  :  and  of
the  tubulus  form'd  thereby,  having  its  cavity  fiU'd  with  a  mucous  fubftance,
of  the  very  fame  colour  that  I  juft  now  defcrib'd.

But  what  appearance  it  had  in  the  point  of  conjunfbion,  we  could  not  en-
quire ;  as  that  part  had  been  accidentally  injur'd  before,  in  the  difledtion  of  the
cerebrum.  From  that  place,  however,  inwards,  to  the  extent  of  two  inches,
not  the  leaft  difference  could  be  obferv'd,  by  any  one,  betwixt  the  right  and
left  nerve  ;  for  neither  of  them,  like  the  right  below,  was  fofter  than  ufual,
of  a  mucous  nature  in  its  fubftance,  reddifli  in  its  colour,  or  extenuated ;
but  both  of  them  ftiow'd  an  equal  firmnefs,  thicknefs,  and  whitenefs.

31.  Although  this  hiftory  was  pretty  long,  yet  it  will  be  fufficient  to  tack
a  fhort  annotation  thereto.  I  would  have  you,  therefore,  compare  what  I
have  faid  of  the  optic  nerve  of  this  blind  eye,  with  thofe  remarks  that  you
have  in  the  thirteenth  letter  {l>) :  and  you  will  perceive  that  all  my  obferva-
tions  of  thefe  things  agree  very  well  with  each  other  ;  biit  that  this  laft,  as
far  as  it  relates  to  the  eye  itfelf,  contains  fomething  more  remarkable  and
rare,  than  the  others;  I  mean,  the  change  of  the  tunica  retina,  in  every  pare
of  it,  from  a  very  foft^nd  nervous  fubftance,  into  a  hard  and  bony  plate.

For  how  rare  an  appearance  this  is,  you  may  imagine  from  hence,  that
the  very  learned  anatomift  Haller  (c)  having  fince  lit  on  a  circumftance  fimi-
lar  to  this  of  ours,  fays,  "  I  have  read  of  fome  little  ftony  particles  being
"  found  in  the  chryftalline  humour ;  but  whether  a  diforder  of  this  kind  in
"  the  retina  has  ever  been  feen,  I  do  not  know."  The  changes  in  the  other
parts  of  the  eye  itfelf,  into  a  bony  or  a  ftony  nature,  are  alfo  rare;  though
not  fo  rare  as  the  former.  For  do  not  too  readily  believe  that  fo  many  have
been  feen  as  are  recounted  in  a  certain  colleflion ;  unlefs  you  firft  find  them
in  books,  which  are,  in  my  opinion,  too  haftily  pointed  out  therein.
■  To  me,  at  leaft,  it  happen'd,  contrary  to  my  expectation,  when  I  examin'd
four  or  five  of  thofe  which  are  in  my  hands,  that  I  found  nothing,  or  at  leaft
nothing  to  the  purpofe,  in  the  places  which  are  pointed  out  ;  except  one,
which  however  was  improperly  referr'd  to :  and  this  you  will  obferve
moreover  to  belong  to  the  tunica  fclerotica,  which  was  not  "  found  bony"
indeed,  as  is  there  faid,  but  was  found  to  have  a  bony  fcale  inherent
in  it ;  as  you  will  fee  if  you  infpedt  Blafius,  not  in  book  the  fixth,  chapter

(^)  n.  7.  &  feqq,  (r)  Opufc.  Pathol.  Obf.  53.

Voi.  III.  Y  the


1  6z Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Uaiverfal  Diibrders.

the  eighth  •,  but  in  part  the  fixth,  medical  obfervacion  the  eighth  ;  whereas,
in  the  eighth  table,  figure  the  thirteenth,  Gunzius  {d)  has  laid  what  kind
of  bony  lamella  he  had  afterwards  feen  "  betwixt  the  laminas  of  the  cho-
"  rhoides."

But  the  celebrated  Morand  {e)  had  produc'd  an  example  long  before  ;
fo  that  it  ought  not  to  have  been  omitted  in  that  colledtion,  efpecially  as  it
was  rare,  and,  as  he  himfelf  fays,  "  perhaps  the  only  example"  of  an  offifi-
cation  within  the  globe  of  the  eye.  For,  hefides  the  chryfl-alline  humour,
which  was  of  the  confiftence  of  a  very  hard  ftone,  he  found  a  pretty  thick
little  bone  betwixt  the  choroides  and  the  tunica  retina,  convex  pofteriorly,
and  anteriorly  concave.  Finally,  not  to  add  any  thing  more  of  indura-
tions of  this  kind  in  the  parts  of  the  eye  ;  you  will  remember  what  kind
of  a  fmall  bone  we  found,  in  the  place  of  the  chryftalline  humour,  in  a
woman  of  whom  I  have  written  to  you  before  (/).

The  other  circumftances  in  the  hiftory  laft  propos'd,  which  relate  to  the
blow  on  the  head,  you  fee  it  is  needlefs  to  explain  again  in  this  place  -,  after
what  we  have  fo  often  hinted  in  this  and  the  former  letter.  But  as  to  the
difcharge  of  blood  from  the  ear,  by  what  way,  and  in  what  manner,  it  hap-
pen'd  in  this  man  -,  you  will,  of  yourfelf,  fufficiently  remember,  even  with-
out my  giving  any  hint,  that  the  fame  thing  had  happen'd  in  others  like-
wife  :  that  is  to  fay,  in  thofe  whom  this  letter  (^),  and  the  thirteenth,  in  like
manner  (h),  make  mention  of.

32.  A  porter,  who  was  not  yet  forty  years  of  age,  and  of  an  excellent
habit  of  body,  being  drunk,  fell  down  as  be  was  walking,  and  hurt  his  fore-
head very  much  •,  from  whence  a  confiderable  lividnefs  appear'd  in  that  part.
He  alfo  vomited  at  the  time  of  falling,  but  no  fymptom  appear'd  after-
wards, befide  one,  which  was  a  very  confiderable  fymptom  ;  I  mean,  that
he  lay  torpid,  without  taking  any  thing,  and  without  fpeaking,  except  that
■when  the  furgeons  gave  him  pain  by  their  apphcations,  he  then  complain'd
vehemently,  and  fent  forth  a  great  cry.  In  this  ftate,  being  brought  into
the  hofpitai,  he  died  within  the  fourth  day  after  the  fall,  at  the  time  when
I  was  giving  anatomical  demonftrations  to  the  ftudents  there ;  that  is,  about
the  beginning  of  December  in  the  year  1741.

The  OS  frontis,  in  the  part  where  it  had  receiv'd  the  violence,  I  faw  to  be
cleft  afunder  with  a  very  long  fiffure,  both  externally  and  internally  •,  under
which  fiffure  was  grumous  blood  within  the  cranium,  but  not  a  great  quan-
tity ;  nor  did  I  find  any  other  appearance,  befides  this,  which  related  to  the
blow.  For  as  to  the  little  bone  which  I  found  not  very  far  from  the  fiffure,,
betwixt  the  dura  and  pia  mater  of  this  man  ;  that  this  had  been  form'd
there  long  before  that  time,  you  will  underftand  from  the  defcription  there-
of, which  I  have  inferted  in  the  twenty-fifth  letter  to  you  {i)  j.  and  that  it
€0uld  by  no  means  be  confider'd  as  a  fcale,.  which,  having  been  fhaken
from  the  internal  furface  of  the  bone,  by  the  violence  of  the  blow, had  in-

fj)  Progr.  de  Ozana  Maxill.  prope  fin.  (g)  n.  25.

(ej  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  cies  Sc.  A.  J730. (*)  n.  16.
(fj  Epift.  13.  n.  ic.  (')  n.  8.  initio,.

S-  Cuuated


Letter  Lll. Article  33,  34.  163

finuated  itfelf  within  the  meninges,  as  it  had  happen'd  in  that  mafon,  wholb
diffedion  you  have  in  the  celebrated  Fantonus  (/c).

:^3.  In  the  lame  hofpital  of  Padua,  I  demonftrated  to  my  very  numerous
auditors,  among  whom  was  remarkable  for  his  ingenuity,  his  lludy,  and
his  diligence,  that  eminent  man  Jacobus  de  Scopulo;  he,  v*ho  a  few  years
after  was  transferr'd  into  the  number  of  the  public  profeifors,  and  who  is  a
very  prudent,  experienc'd,  and  eloquent  phyfician,  if  any  other  is  ;  I  fay,  I
there  demonftrated  what  parts  had  been  fraclur'd,  by  falling  from  on  high,
in  a  certain  man,  about  the  beginning  of  April  in  the  year  1740,  and  in  a
young  man,  in  like  manner,  before  the  end  of  November,  in  the  year
1742.  And  although  thefe  hiftories  relate  to  the  thorax  alio,  yet  becaufe
the  head  had  been  very  much  hurt,  I  (hall  fubjoin  theni  here.

34.  A  man  who  was  employ'd  in  pruning  a  high  vine,  fell  headlong
upon  the  ground,  which  was  fpread  over  with  ftones.  He  immediately  loft
the  power  of  fpeech.  Some  cordial  liquor  having  been  pour'd  into  his
mouth,  as  he  lay  half-dead,  he  vomited  :  and  although  his  pulfe,  which  had
been  contradted,  difcover'd  itfelf  again  ;  yet  all  the  other  circumftances
growing  worfe,  and  the  excrements  both  of  the  inteftines  and  bladder  being
fpontaneoufly  difcharg'd,  death  follow'd  within  four  hours  after  the  fall.

The  body,  from  the  mouth  and  noftrils  of  which  blood  was  difcharg'd,
was  quite  rigid  ;  even  at  the  thirtieth  hour  after  death  :  and  not  flexible
without  the  greateft  violence.  The  finciput  was  black  from  contufion,  in
more  than  one  place  •,  but  moft  of  all  in  that  part  where  the  common  boun-
daries of  this  region  and  the  forehead  are.  And  indeed  we  prefently  found
the  OS  frontis  to  be  fiffur'd,  almoft  through  the  middle  of  it ;  the  fifTure  reach-
ing from  the  external  to  the  internal  furface,  and  defcending,  in  a  direft
line,  from  the  finciput :  after  which  going  through  the  arch  of  the  orbit-
of  the  right  eye,  not  far  from  the  os  ethmoides,  and  having  pervaded  the
whole  OS  frontis  in  that  manner,  it  at  length  pafs'd  over  into  that  part  of
the  OS  fphenoides,  through  which  the  optic  nerve  goes  into- the  orbit :  and
as  you  perceive,  from  this  progrefs  of  the  fifllire,  that  it  could  not  but  go
through  the  pituitary  finus  -,  you  likewife  perceive  how  the  blood  could  be
difcharg'd  from  the  noftrils,  as  has  been  faid,  and  from  the  mouth  a!fo,  by
communication  thereof  with  the  fauces.

Under  the  dura  mater  anteriorly,  we  found  a  fluid  blood,  though  not  in
great  quantity ;  and  we  alio  found  a  fmall  quantity  of  the  fame  kind  of
blood,  and  indeed,  to  appearance,  mix'd  with  water  in  fome  meafure,  in
both  the  lateral  ventricles  :  and  as  this  was  fluid,  it  was  lefs  to  be  wonder'd.
at,  that  it  was  found  in  the  third,  and  even  in  the  paflTage  to  the  fourth  ven-
tricle ;  as  it  might  eafily  flow  thither,  efpecially  while  the  body  was
mov'd.

The  thorax  being  laid  open,  and  the  lungs  ;  which  (if  you  except  the  up-
per part  of  the  left  lobe,  that  was  conneded,  by  a  very  thin  membranous
little  band,  with  the  pleura)  were  every  where  free  and  unconnedted  ;  being
fott,  and  found  to  be  collaps'd  into  themfelves,  and  altogether  found  ;  al-

(-J)  De  Obferv.  Med.  &  Anat.  Epift.  I.

Y  2  though


I  64 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

though  where  they  were  tiirn'd  towards  the  back,  they  were  of  a  red  colour,
as  if  from  inflammation,  as  it  was  to  be  expeded  in  a  man  who  had  died  in  a
fupine  pofture  ;  when  they  were  lifted  up  with  the  hands,  we  faw  that  as  much
fluid  blood  was  etfus'd  into  both  cavities  of  the  thorax,  though  in  fome-
what  larger  quantity  into  the  right  than  thie  left,  as  exceeded  fix  pints.

In  the  pericardium  was  limpid  ferum  in  very  fmall  quantity.  We  found
the  trunks  of  the  pulmonary  artery  and  the  aorta,  and  even  the  heart  itfelf,
to  be  almoft  univerfally  cover'd  with  far  -,  although  the  man  himfelf  was  not
fat :  in  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  was  but  little  of  a  black,  and  in  fome
meafure  grumous,  blood  -,  except  that  at  the  venous  orifice  of  the  right  ven-
tricle there  was  a  fmall  polypous  concretion.  And  from  hence  even  the
lludents  could  perceive,  that  what  I  had  fo  often  admonifli'd  againft  the
vulo-ar  error  in  regard  to  the  origin  of  thele  concretions,  was  true  ;  as  it  was
certain  that  in  a  man  who  had  been  in  very  good  health,  a  hydrocele  ex-
cepted, this  coalition  could  not  have  been  form'd  by  the  ftagnation  of  the
thicker  and  more  viicid  particles  of  the  blood  among  the  fibriiJEe  of  the  val-
vuIee  tricufpides,  till  after  death,  or  a  little  before.

1  hefe  vifcera  being  then  taken  away,  and  the  blood  I  have  fpoken  of  being
exhaufted,  we  endeavour'd  to  find  out  from  what  veflels  it  was  that  this  fluid-
had  been  effus'd  into  the  thorax,  and  perceiv'd  that  it  was  from  the  inter-
coftals ;  fome  of  the  upper  ribs,  on  both  fides,  being  broken  not  far  from
the  fpine,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  their  unequal  extremities  had  pierc'd  through
the  pleura,  and  were  fomewhat  prominent  within  the  thorax.  And  there  was
at  and  about  thofe  parts  a  large  blacknefs,  as  if  from  contufion,  by  reafon  of
the  blood  ftagnating  under  the  pleura.

When  the  carcafe  was  turn'd  upon  its  belly,  and  the  mufcles  of  the  back
remov'd,  I  not  only  found  blood,  which  had  ftagnated  under  thefe  mufcles
equally,  and  even  in  fomewhat  larger  quantity,  about  the  fame  ribs,  but  I
alfo  {how'd  a  circumftance  which,  in  one  who  by  falling  down  had  broken
the  OS  frontis,  was  not  very  eafily  to  be  tinderftood  ;  that  is  to  fay,  befides
the  ribs,  fix  of  the  upper  vertebrre  were  fo  broken,  that  confiderable  pi'eces
of  them  were  wholly  divided  from  their  bodies.  But  what  1  conjedture  upon
this  affair  you  will  fee  below  (/).  Now,  then,  you  fee,  from  the  very  great
injury  done  to  the  vertebra,  and  confequently  from  the  injury  of  the  included
fpinal  marrow,  why  the  excrements  could  not  be  retain'd.

In  the  belly  was  no  extravafated  fluid  \  nor  did  v/e  find  any  thing  of  a
preternatural  appearance,  if  you  except  fome  little  part  of  the  liver  being
blackilh,  and  a  double  hydrocele  in  the  fcrotum  alfo  :  but  as  I  have  already
fent  you  {in)  a  defcription  of  this  hydrocele,  there  is  no  OGcafion  to  repeat  it
here. And  this  is  the  hiftory  of  the  man.

35.  As  to  the  young  man  ;  he  was  about  four- and  twenty  years  of  age,
of  a  fat  habit  of  body,  and  by  tmde  a  v/ool-comber.  I'his  young  man,  like
the  former,  having  fall'n  from  a  high  place,  died  vi/.ithin  four  hours  from  the
fall.  Yet  this  patient  could  fpeak  a  little  to  thofe  who  firft  ran  to  him  on
his  falling,  and  aflc'd  him  queftions  :  after  that  he  immediately  ceas'd  to
fpeak.

(/)  N.  36.  («)  Epift.  43.  n.  25,

The


Letter  LII. Article  3(5.  i  6  s:

The  limbs  of  the  carcafe  were  rigid  at  the  end  of  two  days  after  death  ;
but  after  the  third  they  became  flexile.  The  finciput,  on  the  left  fiJe,  to-
gether with  a  part  of  the  temporal  miifcle,  had  a  livid  appearance,  as  if  from
contufion.  While  the  cranium  was  cut  open,  a  confidcrable  quantity  of
blood  flow'd  out.  And  yet  we  loon  after  favv,  that  as  much  of  the  fame  tiiiid
remain'd  betwixt  the  cranium  and  the  dura  mater,  as  might  be  equal  to  the
weight  of  three  or  four  ounces.  This  blood  was  black,  and  form'd  into
coagula ;  but  in  no  other  place  than  in  the  lett  fide,  below  the  os  fincipitis,  and
at  the  bafis  of  the  cranium.  1  herefore,  although  a  confiderable  quantity  of
ferum  was  found  in  the  lateral  ventricles,  I  fav/  fome  of  it  to  be  turbid  indeed,
but  not  at  all  bloody.  Nor  were  the  plexus  choroides  very  red  :  yet  the
veffels  in  the  meninges  were  very  turgid.  Having  obferv'd  thefe  things  -,
nor  was  there  any  thing  elfe  preternatural  within  the  cranium  ;  upon  in-
fpefting  the  cranium  itfelf,  and  tracing  on  the  filTure,  which  I  had  feen  be-
ginning in  the  left  os  fincipitis,  I  perceiv'd  it  to  go  through  the  fubjefted  os
temporum  quite  to  the  petrous  procefs  :  and  tronn  thence  we  perceiv'd  the
fame,  or  if  another,  join'd  with  the  former,  to  be  carried  through  that  part  of
the  os  fphenoides  which  lies  betwixt  the  os  temporum  and  os  frontis ;  being
produc'd  from  hence,  where  the  percuffion  had  been  given,  into  that  laft  re-
gion of  the  OS  frontis  which  makes  the  extreme  part  of  the  arch  of  the  orbit
of  the  eye.  And  this  very  long  filTure  was  carried  through  the  whole  thick-
nefs  of  the  bones ;  fo  that,  if  with  one  hand  you  laid  hold  of  the  anterior
part,  and  with  the  other  the  pofterior  part,  of  thofe  bones  that  1  have  men-
tion'd,  and  drew  them  afunder,  you  would  evidently  perceive  that  they  gave
way,  and  were  moveable.

The  bony  parietes  of  the  thorax  alfo  were  not  free  from  fradtures.  For,
befides  that  the  left  clavicle  was  broken,  we  obferv'd  a  lividnefs  in  the  back,
which  lay  near  to  the  fpine,  on  the  left  fide  in  like  manner,  taking  up  in  fome
places  a  more  narrow,  and  in  other  places  a  more  extenfive,  trad :  and  upon
opening  the  cheft,  and  exhaufting  the  blood,  which  was  foun^  to  be  extravafated
to  the  quantity  of  two  or  three  ounces  in  the  cavity  of  the  fame  left  fide,  we
faw  a  large  ecchymofis  under  the  pleura;  and  in  this  tumour  one,  at  leaft,
of  the  ribs  which  are  about  the  middle  of  the  length  of  the  thorax,  fo  evi-
dently broken,  in  the  part  where  they  begin  to  be  curv'd  pofteriorly,  that
the  adhering  intercoftal  veffels,  together  with  the  pleura,  could  not  but  be
lacerated,  and  pour  out  their  blood,  both  internally  and.  externally.  How-
ever, the  lungSj,  which  we  feldom  fee  in  wool-combers,  were  entirely  free
from  the  pleura  ;  except  that  the  upper  and  anterior  part  of  the  right  lobe,
only,  was  connefted  therewith  by  a  fmall  membrane.  In  the  pericardium
was  no  great  quantity  of  ferum  :  in  the  heart  no  polypous  concretions  were
obferv'd-

The  abdomen  being  open'd,  nothing  was  found  to  be  in  a  difeas'd  ftate
but  the  ureters,  which  were  not  only  preternaturally  widen'd  in  other  parts,
but  even  at  their  very  entrance  Into  the  bladder  ;  fo  that  it  was  lefs  fur-
prizing  that  the  bladder,  which  we  had  taken  care  to  fill  with  air,  ftoukl
Ibow  an  almoft  equal  diftention  in  the  upper  and  in  the  lower  part.

^6.  For  frequently,  as  has  been  already  flaown(«),  a  diftended  ftate  of  the

{«)  Epift.  42.  n.  23.

ureters


i  (iG Book  IV.  Of  ChuTirgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

ureters  is  the  confequence  of  a  great  quantity  of  urine  being  long  confin'd
in  the  bladder ;  from  whence  it  eafily  happens  that  this  receptacle  is  rclax'd,
and  that  the  figure  of  it  is  altered  in  conlequence  of  this  relaxation.

But  to  return  to  the  bones  which  were  fradur'd  in  this  young  rnan  :  as  all
the  fraflures  appear'd  to  be  on  the  left  fide,  it  is  very  eafily  conceiv'd,  in
refpeft  to  this  patient,  though  with  difficulty  in  the  man  (o),  how  the  bones
of  the  head  and  thorax  were  broken  at  the  iame  time  •,  as  the  body  of  this
young  man  fell  on  its  left  fide  -,  whereas  we  muft  fuppofe  that  the  man  had
met  with  fome  hard  body  in  falling,  whereby  his  head  being  fradlur'd  in  the
anterior  part,  and  the  diredion  of  his  body  being  chang'd,  he  might  at  lengcli
dafli  his  back  againft  the  ground.

However,  among  other  fiffures  of  the  cranium,  this  laft,  in  particular,  was
found  to  be  of  fuch  a  length,  and  in  fuch  a  fituaiion,  that  you  may  compare
it  with  thofe  which  are  defcrib'd  by  Ruyfch  (jp),  by  Poupart(^),  by  Mauchar-
tus  (r),  by  Schreiberus  (j),  and  by  others -,  fo  that  it  always  appears,  more
and  more,  that  the  futures  and  commilTures  of  the  fkull  were  not  made  par-
ticularly for  the  purpofe  of  reftraining  the  progrefs  of  fiffures,  and  preventing
them  from  being  produc'd  into  more  than  one  bone.

And  this  I  remember  was  firft  obferv'd  by  me  at  Bologna,  in  the  year  1702,
in  a  body  publicly  differed  -,  the  cranium  of  which  had,  in  confequence  of
a  blow  upon  one  fide,  afiffure  parallel  to  the  coronal  future,  but  much  larger
than  that  -,  as  it  ran  behind  it  through  almoll  the  whole  cranium,  except  the
bafis,  and  pervaded  both  the  tables.  And  this  obfervation,  if  1  had  then
written  down  the  other  circumftances,  1  certainly  fhould  not  have  omitted
among  thofe  above.

37,  Before  we  ceafe  to  fpeak  of  blows  of  the  fkull,  I  muft  not  omit  to
fay,  that,  when  both  of  its  tables  are  altogether  unhurt,  and  theveffels  of  the
meninges  below  are  unhurt  alio,  it  fometimes  happens,  that  the  fmall  vcffels
which  CTO  to  the  medulla,  betwixt  thofe  tables,  are  broken,  and  pour  out
their  blood  •,  which,  in  procefs  of  time,  being  corrupted,  and  become  more
acrid  ;  for  this  reafon,  that  the  "  medullary  juice,"  as  is  obferv'd  by  the
celebrated  Nicolaua  Rofen  (/),  is  mix'd  with  it,  and  at  that  time,  "  by  its
"  ftagnation  and  heat,  degenerates  into  the  worft  kind  of  rancidity-,"  afFefts
the  internal  table  with  a  caries  :  and  while  the  man  has  now  forgotten  the
blow,  and  fears  nothing  of  this  kind,  flows  internally,  vitiates  the  meninges,
and  brings  on  death.

More  than  one  example  of  this  kind  is  known  to  me  and  to  others,  ard
was  known  to  the  authors  quoted  by  Bohn  {u)  \  as,  for  inllance,  to  Jo.  Peter
Pafferius,  and  to  him,  in  particular,  from  whofe  commentaries  on  Hippo-
crates I)e  Capitis  Vuhmibus  1  wonder  that  no  diffcdion  of  the  head  is  tranf-
ferr'd  into  this  part  of  the  Sepulchretum  ;  I  mean  Peter  Paaw.  And  it  even
Jometimes  happens  that  both  the  tables  are  dcftroy'd  from  that  caule ;  as  was,

(c)  N.  34.  (■>)  Nov.  Comnn.  Imp.  Acad.  Sc.  Petropol.

(j,)  Obi.  Anar.  Chir.  47.  Tom.  3.  in  Phyfi.  Obf.  3.

{q)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1700. (r)  DiiTert.  de  Offib. Calvar. P.  i. § j.

Obi.  Anat.  19.  rot./.

(/■)  Eph.  M.  C.  Cent.  5.  Obf.  32.  &  Cent. [u)  DiJTert.  de  Trepanat.  Difficult, propc

Q.  Obf.  39.  in  iiutore.  finem.


Letter  LII. Article  38.  167

in  particular,  feen  by  the  chevalier  whom  1  have  already  Ipoken  of,  Pius  Ni-
colaus  Garellius,  one  of  the  phyficians  to  the  Imperial  court.  The  cafe  is,
at  leaft,  worthy  of  your  attention,  when  couch'd  in  a  few  words ;  for  which
reafon,  J  will  in  fome  meafure  contraft  it,  from  the  account  he  fent  to  me
by  letter,  and  give  it  you  here.

38.  A  woman,  falling  backwards  upon  ftone  flairs,  receiv'd  a  violent  blow
upon  the  hinder  part  of  her  head  ;  but,  befides  a  (hort  and  flight  ftupor,
which  did  not  prevent  her  from  returning  home  foon  after  by  herielf,  and  a
fmall  blacknefs  in  the  contus'd  part,  which  foon  difappear'd,  (he  feem'd  to
fufFer  no  inconvenience  from  her  fall  at  that  time.  At  length,  after  fome
months,  a  tumour,  not  bigger  than  a  filbert,  appear'd  in  the  part  of  her
head  which  had  receiv'd  the  blow  :  but  this  tumour,  as  it  gave  her  no  pain,
was  neglefted  by  the  v/oman,  and  grew  larger  by  degrees,  till,  at  the  expi-
ration of  the  third  year,  Dr  thereabout,  it  became  very  large  :  at  which  time
it  was  miftaken,  by  certain  furgeons,  for  an  encyfted  fubcutaneous  tumour,
as  it  had  neither  chang'd  the  colour  of  the  fxiin,  nor  gave  any  pain  when  ic
was  prefs'd  ;  and  would  have  been  cut  out  by  them  as  fuch,  if  the  woman
had  not  refus'd  to  fufier  the  operation.

A  little  after,  the  patient  began  to  have  excruciating  pains,  which,  be-
ginning from  the  feat  of  the  tumour,  were  fo  extended  through  almofl  the
whole  cranium,  that  to  herfelf  it  feem'd  to  be  bound  hard  with  cords.
Thefe  pains,  indeed,  were  not  continual,  nor  always  equally  violent ;  yec
fometimes  to  fuch  a  degree  as  to  bring  on  a  flight  delirium  :  and  the  lono-er
they  continu'd,  the  more  frequent  and  violent  they  became.  In  this  manner
flie  went  on  to  the  fixth  year.  And  no  fooner  was  this  year  elaps'd,  but
behold  !  an  apoplexy  fuddenly  came  on,  and  within  a  few  hours  kill'd  the
woman :  this  happen'd  at  Vienna  in  the  year  1735.

The  tumour  being  open'd,  the  cavity  of  it  was  found  almofl:  full  of  black
blood ;  and  not  only  concreted,  but  fo  denfe,  that  being  laid  hold  of  with
the  fingers,  the  whole  of  it  immediately  follow'd  ;  fome  portion  of  fluid  blood
being  difcharg'd  at  laft.  This  difeafe,  when  the  integuments  were  taken  ofi^,
was  found  to  begin  from  the  part  which  had  been  formerly  ftruck  ;  that  is,
from  the  upper  part  of  the  os  occipitis  at  the  left  fide,  and  to  be  continu'd
through  the  os  fincipitis  of  the  fame  fide,  fo  far  as  to  be  no  more  than  three
inches  difl:ant  from  the  coronal  future.

It  occupied,  moreover,  a  part  of  the  right  finciput ;  fo  that  the  whole  of
the  caries  extended  itielf  fix  inches  in  breadth,  and  more  than  feven  in  length.
Where  the  bones  were  not  entirely  pierc'd  through,  the  fubftance  of  the  bone
appear'd  reticular ;  and  from  the  external  furface  of  this  reticular  fubftance
bony  lamelljE  were  rais'd  up  here  and  there,-  mofl:  of  them  beino-  thin  like
paper,  but  all  of  them  very  hard  and  acute :  and  hereby  was  form'd  a
beautiful  appearance,  as  they  refembl'd  a  kind  of  foliated  fungufles,  of  dif-
ferent fizes, which  had  arifen  by  a  kind  of  bony  vegetation.

The  dura  mater  was  become  very  thick  in  the  whole  of  that  fpace  where  it
lay  beneath  the  difeas'd  cranium,  and  adher'd  much  more  clofely  than  ufual
to  the  part  of  it  which  had  formerly  receiv'd  the  blow.  The  vefl^els  that
crept  through  this  membrane  preferv'd  their  natural  bounds  on  the  rit^ht  fide,
but  on  the  kft  were  very  turgid,  and  much  dilated  ;  and  the  traces  of  them


I  68 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and.UniverfalDiforders.

were  feen  to  be  much  larger  and  deeper  (in  the  found  part  of  the  (Icull  which
remain'd)  on  the  fame  fide,  than  on  the  right  fide.  As  to  what  remains,  the
veflels  of  the  plexus  choroides  were  alfo  much  diftended  with  blood  :  and
fome  portion  of  ferum  was  found  to  be  eft'us'd  ^under  the  bafis  of  the
cerebrum.

39.  However,  Garellius  was  of  opinion,  that  the  fmall  arteries,  not  only
betwixt  the  tables  of  the  cranium,  but  alfo  betwixt  other  bones,  are,  by  the
injury  and  compreffion  occafion'd  from  blows,  dilated  and  diftended  into
aneurifms  :  and  that  thefe  aneurifms  produce  a  caries  even  before  they  are
ruptur'd,  as  other  aneurifms  which  lie  near  to  bones  do  ;  or  that  they  produce
this  caries  fometimes  after  they  are  ruptur'd.  And  he  had  been  brought  into
this  opinion  by  obferving  three  thigh-bones,  which  he  preferv'd  together  with
the  cranium  defcrib'd.  One  of  which  thigh-bones  fhow'd  a  tumour  that
it  had  been  dilated  into,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  man's  lift,  corroded  and  perfo-
rated with  a  caries  in  feveral  places,  and  fending  forth  three  bony  productions,
rhe  largeft  of  which  was  equal  to  a  finger  in  length  and  thicknefs  -,  and  it
fhow'd,  at  the  fame  time,  the  foramen  through  which  the  artery  enter'd  the
bone,  and  which  is  very  narrow  in  other  bones,  to  be  fo  much  enlarg'd  in
that  as  very  eafily  to  admit  the  little  finger.

The  two  other"  bones,  befides  the  fradure  which  had  formerly  preceded,
and  was  confolidated,  had  a  tumour  affeded  with  a  caries,  and  the  foramen,
which  was  hoUow'd  out  in  the  bone  for  the  artery,  in  like  manner  dilated.
He,  therefore,  thought  that  this  fpecies  of  difeafe  was  not  yet  illuftrated  and
explain'd  as  much  as  it  deferv'd.

Thus  far  from  his  letters  to  me.  But  you  may  compare,  in  fome  meafure,
the  tumour  which  he  faw  in  that  woman  ;  on  account  of  its  fituation,  its  very
lontr-continu'd  and  violent  pains,  by  reafon  of  the  included  blood,  and  the
part  of  the  cranium  beneath  being  rough  with  fliarp  bony  prominences  ;  with
that  which  is  made  mention  of  from  the  Englifh  Philofophical  Tranfadions,
in  that  diflertation  (x)  which  I  have  already  commended,  and  which  was  pub-
lilh'd  under  the  aufpices  of  the  celebrated  Kulmus  in  the  year  1732.

In  rco-ard,  however,  to  the  external  caufe,  and  the  flow  beginning  of  the
tumour  after  the  blow  -,  and  in  regard  to  no  pain  being  felt  for  a  long  time,
but  afterwards  a  very  fevere  one,  though  not  continual ;  and  in  regard  to
the  caries  of  the  cranium,  and  the  confiderable  hiatus  ;  you  may,  in  great
part,  compare  it  with  that  which  we  find  taken  notice  of,  in  another  woman,
by  Jo.  Sakzmann  (y).

40.  As  thofe  wounds  which  are  inflicted  on  the  face  belong  alfo  to  the  head,
%vhen  taken  in  a  general  fenfe  -,  I  thought  it  would  be  proper  to  add  fomething
in  this  place  upon  wounds  of  the  eyes,  nofe,  lips,  and  orbits.  And  of  thofe
which  are  not  fo  much  wounds  of  the  eyes,  as  of  the  orbits  and  of  the  cere-
brum, we  have  treated  in  the  preceeding  letter.

To  which  you  may  alfo  add  thofe  that,  after  paffing  through  the  whole
cavity  of  the  orbit,  have  fometimes  in  men  gone  through  the  foramina  and
ultimate  parietes  of  this  cavity  to  the  brain,  and  always  in  thofe  flieep  which

(;<:)  De  Exoft.  Steat.  Clanc.  c.  2.  §  22.  CyJ  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  2.  Obf.  100.

Wepfer


Letter  LII. Article  40.  169

Wcpfer  (z)  faw,  at  Rome,  to  be  univerfally  depriv'd  of  all  fenfe  and  motion  as
foon  as  ever  the  butcher  had  pliing'd  his  knife,  quite  up  to  the  handle,
rnto  one  of  their  eyes :  which  Wepfer  "  fuppos'd,  without  doubt,  to  have
"  happen'd  in  confequence  of  the  cai'otid  arteries  being  cut  through  near  to
"  the  infundibulum,  all  the  ventricles  remaining  found  :"  although,  if  he
had  differed  the  heads  of  the  creatures  flain  in  this  manner,  as  it  was  natural
to  do,  he  would,  perhaps,  have  found  one  of  the  ventricles  wounded  in  fome
of  them.

■  And  as  to  v/ounds  of  the  eye  itfelf  by  which  the  humours  are  difcharg'd,
if  the  aqueous  only  be  eftus'd  indeed,  and  no  part  is  prick'd  or  incis'd  but
the  cornea  tunica ;  Ariftotle  {a),  Celfus  (^),  and  Pliny  (c),  had  declar'd  that
there  was  reafon  to  hope  for  a  happy  cure,  from  the  examples  of  fwaljows,  of
pigeons,  of  doves,  of  green  lizards,  and  of  weazels  likewife,  before  the  fol-
lowers of  Galen  confirmed  it  in  men,  and  in  other  animals  alfo,  after  the  ob-
fervation  of  Galen  (d)  on a  boy.

But  when  the  vitreous  humour,  and  ftill  more  when  the  chryftalline,  is  ef-
fus'd,  can  the  eye  fee  properly  as  before  ?  This  is  what  thofe  believe  with
difficulty  who,  extrafting  thefe  humours  through  the  cornea,  have  obferv'd
that  the  iris  and  corpus  ciliare  are  injur'd  ;  though  the  entire  ftate  of  both
thefe  parts  is  neceflary  to  make  vilion  perfeft  :  not  to  fay  any  thing  of  the
retina,  without  which  we  cannot  fee  at  all,  and  which,  when  the  vitreous  hu-
mour is  taken  away,  collapfes  into  itfelf,  or  at  leaft  is  corrugated.

Yet  fuppofe  that  the  aqueous  humour,  being  again  coUefted  in  its  proper
fituation,  is  alfo  coUeded  in  fome  of  the  remaining  cells  of  the  vitreous
humour,  and  that  thereby  thefe  cells,  and  any  thing  that  was  comprefs'd
within  them,  are  diftended,  and  the  retina  confequently  unfolded  to  its  full
extent ;  will  the  chryftalline  humour,  which  had  fall'n  out  by  a  wound  im-
properly made,  together  with  the  vitreous,  be  generated  afrelh  ?  this  hu-
mour, the  want  of  wKTch  is  never  fupplied  after  being  deprefs'd  by  a  fkilful
furgeon,  and  which  is  fo  extremely  neceflary  to  vifion,  as  they  who  have
had  it  deprefs'd  very  well  know  ?

And,  indeed,  it  appears  from  that  fcholium  of  Elfenerus  (e),  that  thofe
who  made  no  doubt  of  the  vitreous  humour  being  reftor'd,  unanimoufly
defpair'd  of  the  reftitution  of  the  chryftalline  :  yet  in  this  fcholium  he  takes
notice  of  one  who  was  fuppos'd  to  have  reftor'd  all  the  humours  of  the  eye,
after  being  prefs'd  out,  and  vifion  itfelf  to  its  perfedt  and  natural  ftate  ;  and
produces  a  certain  teftimony  of  Thomas  Bartholin,  of  the  fame  experiment  •
of  Burrhus  •,  which  he  would  not  have  produc'd  if  he  could  then  have  read
what  the  fame  author  Bartholin  (/)  faid  a  few  years  afterwards  -,  not  in  private
letters,  or  in  a  brief  manner,  but  in  a  public  writing  and  at  large ;  of  the
fuccefs  of  one  experiment  of  this  kind,  and  no  more,  which  he  had  feen ;
and  that  a  doubtful  and  imperfedt  fuccefs.

I Nor,  indeed,  has  the  furgeon  Scriverius  (g) ;  he  who,  in  writing  to  Bar-
tholin of  the  humours  of  the  eye  being  prefs'd  out  by  Burrhus,  and  by  him-

(a)  Exerc.  de  loc.  aff.  in  Apopl.  (d)  De  Sympt.  Cauf.  I.  j.  c.  2.

la)  Hift.  Animal.  1.  6.  c.  5.  («)  Ad  Obf.  12.  Dec.  i.  A.  i.  Epb.  N.  C.

(4)  De  Medic.  1.  6.  c.  6.  n.  39.  (/)  Aft.  Med.  Hafn. A.  167a.  Obf.  132,

(r)  Nat.  Hift.  1.  29.  c.  ult.  (^)  Ibid  Obf.  133.

Vol.  III.  Z  felf


170 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

feif  alfo,  in  a  goofe,  and  reftor'd,  denied  "  that  it  was  doubtful  to  him
"  whether  the  iame  thing  happen'd  in  all  other  flying  creatures  ;"  affirm'd
that  fight  was  perfeiflly  reftor'd,  but  "  in  part,  and  not  with  equal  fuccefs,"
either  in  the  goofe,  or  in  the  cock  and  the  hen  on  which  he  made  the  expe-
riment.

Yet,  in  the  laft-mention'd  creature,  he  fays  that  the  chryftalline  humour
had  been  regenerated  within  eight  weeiis ;  but  that  it  hid  not  then  come
to  its  proper  fize  :  and  notwithltanding  he  adds,  "  If  the  creature  had  been
"  ftill  preferv'd  for  fome  weeks  longer,  there  is  no  doubt  but  it  might  have
been  perfcftly  reftor'd,"  yet  he  leaves  the  readers  in  doubt  •,  as  he  did  not
afterwards  repeat  the  experiment,  which  was  of  fo  eafy  a  kind,  in  order  to
continue  it  for  a  longer  time.

And  even  Zambeccarius  [h),  having  formerly  affirm'd,  that  as  the  rege-
neration of  the  aqueous  humour  is  (which  he  confefles)  the  mere  work  of
nature,  fo  "  the  regeneration  and  reftitution  of  the  vitreous  and  chryftalline
*'  humour  "  is  the  work  of  the  fame  nature  alfo  ;  "  but  what  happen'd  from
"  a  regeneration  of  this  kind  he  would  tell  us  at  another  time;"  never  pub-
lifh'd  any  thing  afterwards  upon  this  fubjeft,  that  I  knov/  of,  although  he
liv'd  for  a  very  long  time.

And  I  even  know  that  he  anfwer'd  the  enquiries  of  Sancaflanus,  who  wrote
to  him  on  that  fubjedt  in  the  year  1724,  by  faying  that,  fince  the  time  he
had  written  thefe  things,  he  had  not  found  opportunity  to  make  the  expe-
riment :  yet  he  believ'd  that  thefe  two  humours  may  be  generated  afrefh,
but  more  flowly  than  the  aqueous  :  and  he  believ'd  this,  not  only  becaufe
it  was  certain  from  Benevoli,  that  where  the  chryftalline  humour  had  been
deprefs'd  with  a  needle,  on  account  of  its  opacity,  in  them  the  vitreous  hu-
mour came  forwards  to  fupply  its  place  -,  but  alfo  becaufe  thefe  two  humours
are  nourilh'd,  and  nutrition  is  generation ;  wherefore,  as  they  were  nourifti'd,
fo  they  may  again  be  generated.  And  this  I  have  quoted,  that  you  may
perceive  what  might  have  been  expedted  from  hitn.

Finally,  Theodorus  Kerckringius  (z)  having  exprefsly  affirm'd,  that  he
*'  would  make  an  incifion  into  the  eye  of  any  animal  whatever  that  fhould
"  be  offer'd  to  him,  prefs  out  all  the  humours,  and  even  give  them
'*  to  the  fpeftators  to  be  taken  away,  and  in  a  little  time  reftore  the  fight
"  entirely  :  and  that  this  he  had  done  fometimes  fo  far,  for  the  fake  of  ex-
"  periment,  that  in  one  and  the  fame  dog  he  cut  into  one  and  the  fame  eye
**  three  times,  and  three  times  made  a  cure  of  it :"  I  afk  of  you,  if,  when
all  the  humours  were  really  prefs'd  out,  the  fight  was  really  entirely  reftor'd  ;
I  afk,  I  fay,  of  you,  what  you  fuppofe  the  reafon  to  be,  why,  although  other
tranfaftions  of  that  induftrious  anatomift  are  ftill  taken  notice  of,  this  one
very  great  thing  alone  has  been  fo  buried  in  filence  for  a  long  time  paft,  that
the  memory  of  it  has  been  in  a  meafure  loft,  and  no  mention  made  of  it
now,  even  by  the  moft  learned  men,  in  recounting  the  experiments  of  others
that  relate  to  this  fubjed  ?

41.  But  to  wounds  of  the  nofe  belong  fome  of  thofe  furprizing  cafes
•which  are  fuppos'd  to  have  related  to  the  brain  ^  as  that  which  it  is  faid  in
Wepfer  (^),  was  inflided  upon  a  Polilh  knight,  by  an  arrow  being  driven

(J})  Experim.  circa  diverfa  e  v'w.  ejseft.  Vifcera.  (?)  Spicileg.  Anat.  Obf.  100.

{k)  Exercit.  fupra  ad  n.  40.  cit.

2  from


Letter  LII. Article  41.  171

from  one  fide  of  the  head  to  the  other  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  ftand  out
equally  on  both  fides.  For  as  it  was  forc'd  in  "  below  the  temple  bones,
"  towards  the  prominence  of  the  ofla  jugalia  on  each  fide;"  and  as  the
knight,  "  befides  the  fymptomatic  fever,  had  fcarcely  any  more  violent
"  fymptoms,  than  what  generally  attend  wounded  patients  of  every  kind  ;"
to  me,  I  confefs,  the  arrow  feems  to  have  pafs'd  not  only  below  the  bafis  of
the  cranium,  but  through  the  cavities  of  the  maxillary  finulTes,  and  of  the
nofe.

And  I  fuppofe  that  wound  alfo,  which  Freind(/)  gives  the  account  of
from  Procopius,  to  have  related  to  the  finufiTes  which  belong  to  the  cavity
of  the  nofe,  in  like  manner ;  though  to  different  finuflfes  from  the  former.
For  "  the  iron  point  of  the  arrow,  entering  above  the  right  eye,  near  to  the
"  nafal  bone,  however  large  and  long  it  was,  funk  in  fo  deep  as  to  be  quite
*'  out  of  fight,"  and  continu'd  there  many  years  without  creating  any  pain
or  uneafinefs ;  I  fuppofe  of  fuch  a  kind  as  fbow'd  the  arrow's  point  to  have
been  fituated  in  a  more  noble  part.

For  the  frontal  finus  excepted,  and  the  neighbouring  ethmoidseal  and  fphe-
noidsal  finuffes,  it  might  have  room  enough,  efpecially  in  a  large  head,
where  it  could  lie  hid,  without  any  injury  to  the  more  noble  parts  -,  although
it  equall'd  the  little  finger  in  length,  and  indeed  almoft  in  thicknefs.  So
alfo  when  Hildanus  (m)  very  properly  explain'd  how  it  happen'd,  that  a
wound  beginning  under  the  eye,  and  ending  in  the  oppofite  and  upper  re-
gion of  the  neck  was  not  mortal ;  and  fuppos'd  the  firft  part  of  the  pafl^age
of  the  wounding  inftrument,  to  have  been  through  the  maxillary  finus ;  this
wound  in  like  manner,  in  that  refpeft  at  leaft,  belong'd  to  the  nofe.

And  I  even  faw  a  wound  of  this  kind  at  Bologna,  which  was  of  itfelf
large,  but  to  appearance  extremely  large  :  as  therein  were  concern'd  not  only
both  thefe  finufiTes,  the  external  nofe,  and  the  bones  which  lay  beneath,  but
it  had  even  laid  open-their  cavities,  and  fmear'd  them  over  with  blood ;  fo
that  the  natural  deepnefs  of  thefe  cavities,  being  added  to  the  great  opening
of  the  wound  thus  inflicSled,  offer'd  a  horrible  fpeftacle  to  the  eye.

For  an  iron  tube,  which  in  our  language  we  call  archibufo  (a  little  muf-
quet  or  hand-gun)  having  burft  into  pieces,  in  confequence  of  being  over-
charg'd  with  powder,  it  took  away  from  the  face  of  a  boy  his  nofe,  and
fo  much  of  both  the  maxillary  bones,  that  both  the  maxillary  finuffes,  toge-  .
ther  with  the  cavities  of  the  nofe,  were  laid  open  -,  which  appear'd  lb  m.uch
the  larger  alfo,  for  this  reafon,  that  part  of  both  thofe  bones,  which  are  in-
terpos'd  betwixt  the  nofe  and  the  mouth,  was  partly  confum'd  anteriorly,
and  hung  down  partly,  in  confequence  of  being  broken ;  fo  that  it  was  ne-
ceffary  to  put  a  tube  of  lead  betwixt  them  and  the  lower  jaw,  by  which  the
boy  might  breathe  and  be  nourilh'd,  till  the  broken  part  became  whole,  and
the  feveral  dreffings  could  be  wholly  remov'd  from  the  cavities  of  the  nole.

This  boy  was  preferv'd  by  the  diligence  of  Paul  Piella,  a  very  experienc'd
phyfician  and  furgeon  :  whom  I  faw  to  be  at  firft  ftruck  with  horror,  as  well
as  the  others  who  ftood  around  him,  and  to  turn  away  from  fo  unufual
and  miferable  a  fpedacle, when  his  bloody  face  was  uncover'd  on  being

(/)  Hift.  Medic,  ad  A.  560.  («)  Cent.  4.  Obf,  Chir.  2.

Z  2  brought


I  7  2. Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

brought  into  the  hofpital,  immediately  after  receiving  the  wound  ;  fo  large
and  lo  deep  did  it  appear  at  firft  fight ;  though  foon  after,  by  examining  it
more  attentively,  and  by  comparing  it  with  the  natural  ftrudture  and  difpo-
fition  of  the  parts,  as  known  from  anatomy,  we  perceiv'd  it  to  be  very  con-
fiderable  indeed,  and  large,  but  to  be  much  lefs  deep  in  reality,  than  it  was
in  appearance.

42.  And  I  remember  this  of  a  wounded  lip.  Another  boy  of  almoft  the
fame  age  ;  that  is  to  fay,  of  twelve  years  of  age,  but  of  a  moft  noble  fami-
ly ;  having  fall'n  on  his  face  in  running,  and  broken  one  of  his  upper  dentes
inciforii  tranfverfly  againft  the  marble  pavement,  his  upper  lip  was  cut  through
by  that  part  of  the  tooth  which  had  been  broken  off.  And  now,  by  the  at-
tention and  care  of  the  furgeons,  that  part  of  the  lip  which  lay  about  the
wound  had  decreas'd  in  its  fwelling,  and  become  fofter :  yet  neither  orifice
of  the  wound  inclin'd  to  agglutination  •,  nay,  a  very  flaccid  and  moifl  flefh,
which  lay  in  the  wound,  was  an  abfolute  bar  to  fuch  a  difpofition.

We  fufpefted  that  fomething  extraneous  was  lodg'd  within  :  but  what  re-
ally did  lodge  therein  never  enter'd  into  any  one's  thoughts,  fince  not  only  the
patient,  but  all  the  domeflics,  had  believ'd,  themfelves,  for  a  certainty,  and
had  affirm'd  it  to  me  and  to  the  furgeons,  from  the  very  beginning  of  our
attendance,  that  the  part  of  the  tooth  which  had  been  broken  off,  as  it  had
made  the  external  orifice  of  the  wound,  had  alfo  fall'n  out  at  that  orifice.

Yet  that  very  pirt  of  the  tooth  was,  in  faft,  buried  within  the  wound :
and  this  being  eafily  extrafted,  the  wound  was  in  a  little  time,  and  without
any  difficulty,  brought  to  a  cicatrix.  And  from  hence  you  will  learn,  that,
in  examinations  of  this  kind,  we  muft  not  pay  a  regard  to  the  narration  of
any  one,  (even  when  the  moft  probable)  unlefs  of  thofe  who  affert  that  they
clearly  faw  the  circumftance  with  their  own  eyes.

43.  And  I  could  wifh,  that  as  this  boy  afterwards  grew  to  be  a  young
man,  and  now  flouriilies  among  the  nobles  of  his  famous  city  ;  fo  another
alfo,  born-  in  a  place  not  inferior,  bad  not,  after  having  recover'd  from  his
wound  alfo,  been  fnatch'd  from  a  very  noble  family,  by  a  much  more
grievous  kind  of  diforder.  This  boy  was  three  years  old,  when,  being  at
play,  he  fell  down,  and  dadiing  his  chin  againft  a  marble  ftep,  fo  comprefs'd
his  tongue  (which  happen'd  at  that  time  to  be  thruft  out)  betwixt  his  teeth,
as  to  cut  it ;  and  with  an  oblique  wound,  at  leaft  an  inch  in  length  :  nor  at  a
much  lefs  diftance  from  the  lower  point  of  the  apex,  divided  that  anterior
part  of  the  tongue  from  the  other  entirely,  for  as  large  a  traft  as  from  the
edge  laterally  to  the  middle  line.

The  parents  of  the  child,  and  all  the  relations,  were  very  much  affefted
with  the  misfortune,  and  enquir'd  of  me  by  letter ;  but  particularly  a  great-
uncle  of  the  child,  who  was  a  man  eminent  for  his  learning;  not  by  what
kind  of  remedy  he  could  now  be  cur'd ;  for  by  reafon  of  his  age  he  was  ob-
ftinately  repugnant  to  all  kinds  of  remedies,  and  (hut  his  teeth  againft  every
thing ;  and  to  compel  him,  by  violence,  to  fubmit  to  any  method  of  cure
v/as  improper,  by  reafon  of  the  fever,  and  the  tumour  of  the  tongue,  both
of  which  had  come  on :  but  this  one  thing  they  enquir'd,  which  was  the
only  one  that  remain'd  for  their  comfort,  whether  there  was  any  hope  that,
if  he  were  left  to  the  care  of  nature  alone,  he  might  fpeak  properly  and  ex-
peditioufly.

I  imme-


Letter  LIIl. Article  i .  173

I  immediately  wrote  back  that  they  need  not  defpair ;  and  prodiic'd  many
examples  to  that  efFedl :  efpecially  a  cafe  very  fimilar  thereto,  which  is  extant
in  Hiidanus  («).  The  event  alfo,  by  the  bleffing  of  God,  was  very  fimilar  r
fo  that  I  heard,  when  I  happen'd  to  be  at  Venice  in  the  following  year,  that
"  the  fpeech"  of  the  child,  to  ufe  the  very  words  of  Hiidanus,  "  was  not
'•  at  all  deprav'd  ;"  nor  was  it  injur'd  through  the  whole  of  his  life-time,
which  was  but  fhortj  for  he  was  foon  after  carried  off  by  a  malignant  kind
of  fm  all-pox.

And  what  you  will  think  ftill  more  furprizing,  although  he  fpoke  properly
and  expeditiouQy,  yet  thofe  parts  of  the  tongue  which  had  been  disjoin'^d  by
the  wound,  were  not  coalefc'd  to  each  other,  but  each  of  them  had  its  own
proper  cicatrix :  for  which  reafon  that  anterior  part  was  feen,  even  at  this^
time,  jufl  as  immediately  after  the  wound,  to  be  disjoin'd  from  the  other,,
and  pendulous. Thus  far  of  wounds  of  the  head. Farewel.


LETTER the FIFTY-THIRD

Treats  of  Wounds  and  Blows  of  the  Neck,  Breaft,  and  BacK:.


1.  A  LTHOUGH  in  this  third  kd\oin{a),  in  which  alone  the  author  of
_£\_  the  Sepukhfetum  would  have  blows  and  wounds  of  all  the  parts-
comprehended,  fome  things  are  now  and  then  repeated;  as^  forinftance,  the
firft  article  of  the  twentieth  obfervation,  in  the  firft  article  of  the  twenty-
fecond ;  and  the  fourth  article  of  the  twenty-firft,  in  the  eightli  article  of
the  fame,  and  in-  the  fifth  article  betwixt  the  feventh  and  eighth  ;  and  what
is  in  the  fcholium  to  article  the  firft  of  the  twenty-fourth  obfervation,  in  the
fcholium  to  article  the  fturth  of  the  fame  obfervation  ;  and  although  yoU'
will  now  and  then  think  the  difpofition  and  order  of  the  matters  is  fome-
what  deficient ;  yet  there  is  much  more  irregularity  in  the  additamenta-
which  are  join'd  to.  this  fection.  For  befides  that  the  twenty-fixth  obferva-
tion, which  has  no  relation  to  blows  or  wounds,  is  thruft  in  herfj.  and  takes  up,,
together  with  its  fcholia,  ten  large  pages ;  and  befides  that  under  article  the
firft  of  the  tenth  obfervation,  and  in  obfervations  the  twentieth  and  twenty-
firft,  the  fame  hiftories  of  Parey  and  Bartholin  are  again  produc'd,  which  had-
been  already  given  above  in  this  very  fedtion,  under  obfervation  the  tv^enty-
third,  article  the  feventeenth,  and  fourth,  and  under  obfervation  the  twenty-
fixth,  article  the  eighth ;  befides  thefe  things,  I  fay,  without  any  the  leaft;

(«) Cent.  1.  Obf.  Chir.  28.  (a).  1.  4.

regard'


174 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

regard  being  had  to  order,  they  pafs  over  from  a  wound  of  the  breafl:  to  a
wound  of  the  tibia  ;  and  among  the  wounds  of  the  breaft,  both  wounds  of
the  head  and  belly  are  indifcriminately  interpos'd.

1.  however,  am  determin'd  not  to  repeat  any  thing  in  thefe  letters,  and
to  preferve  order  and  regulahty.  "Wherefore,  as  I  wrote  laft  of  wounds,
and  blows  of  the  head,  1  fhall  now  treat  of  the  wounds  of  the  neighbour-
ing parts,  neck,  breaft,  and  back.  And  becaufe  the  obfervations  made  by
Valfalva,  and  by  me,  are  not  fo  numerous  as  to  exceed  the  bounds  of  one
letter ;  I  will,  according  to  my  cullom,  propofe  both  of  them  in  the  pre-
fent,  and  begin  with  his  obfervations.

2.  A  woman,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  being  wounded,  with  a  cutting  in-
ftrument,  in  the  neck,  fell  down  ;  and  could  no  longer  move  her  hands  or
feet.  After  fome  days,  fhe  mov'd  her  hands  again,  but  not  with  their  for-
mer vigour.  A  flight  delirium  came  on  ;  and,  finally,  before  the  feventh
day  fhe  died.

As  the  body  was  buried  privately,  the  opinion,  of  the  fpinal  marrow  being
injur'd,  could  not  be  confirm'd  by  difTedtion.  Yet  this  feem'd  fo  probable
from  the  paralyfis  of  the  limbs,  from  the  feat  of  the  wound,  and  from  the
fmall  fragments  of  bone  which  had  come  out  therefrom,  that  I  did  not
think  this  obfervation  ought  to  be  entirely  omitted  here.

3.  A  man,  of  five-and-thirty  years  of  age,  of  a  bilious  temperament,
being,  in  the  month  of  November,  in  the  year  1688,  wounded,  with  a  knife,
at  the  middle  of  the  fternum,  betwixt  the  fifth  and  fixth  rib,  was  imme-
diately feiz'd  with  a  great  lofs  of  ftrength  ;  fo  that,  as  the  pulfe  could  fcarce-
ly  be  perceiv'd,  the  phyficians  thought  he  would  die  in  a  very  (hort  time.
Yet,  after  three  hours  had  pals'd,  his  ftrength  began  to  return  by  degrees :
he  was  therefore  brought  into  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Vita.  On  the  fol-
lowing day  he  was  troubled  with  a  terrible  cough,  and  with  a  diarrhea  al-
fo.  But  the  latter  was  very  urgent,  although  fcarcely  any  thing  befides  a
little  vilcid  matter,  was  difcharg'd  thereby :  and  on  the  fixth  day  it
ceas'd.

Yet  the  cough  was  fo  encreas'd  every  day,  that  it  could  fcarcely  be  borne.
From  the  firft  days  alfo,  there  was  a  fcnfe  of  a  very  great  weight  in  the
belly,  which,  in  the  progrefs  of  the  diforder,  extended  itfelf  through  the
whole  abdomen  :  there  was  none,  however,  in  the  thorax.  On  the  firft  days,
alfo,  the  pulfe  was  fomething  turgid,  and  moderately  quick  ;  which  quick-
nefs  it  even  preferv'd  afterwards :  but  growing  fmaller  and  fmaller  every  day,
it  at  length  fail'd  gradually  on  the  eighth  day,  together  with  life.

In  the  body,  at  the  firft  incifion  on  the  right  fide  of  the  fternum,  the
blood,  wherewith  that  cavity  of  the  thorax  was  fill'd,  rufli'd  forth  with  great
impetus.  And  when  the  fternum  was  taken  away,  and  the  blood  exhaufted
with  fponges,  frefh  blood  again  flow'd  through  the  diaphragm,  which  was
wounded,  from  the  belly,  into  the  fame  cavity  of  the  thorax.

For  this  reafon,  it  was  neceffary  to  open  the  belly  alfo  immediately,  and
to  exhauft  the  blood,  which  was  extravafated  into  that  cavity :  the  concreted
fibres  of  which  blood,  being  difpos'd  throughout  the  external  coat  of  the
inteftines,  in  the  form  of  a  net,  adher'd  to  this  coat  in  fuch  a  manner,  that
they  could  be  feparated  by  the  knife  only. Wherefore,  when  all  the  blood

was


Letter  LIII. Article  4.  175

was  remov'd,  and  the  vifcera  brought  into  view,  we  rcturn'd  to  examine
the  wound.  The  mediaftinum,  which  was  the  firft  part  that  correfponded
to  the  wound,  was  wounded  :  after  that  the  pericardium  :  and,  finally,  the
paries  of  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  fo  that  the  fifllire  of  the  wound
open'd  within  that  ventricle  ;  and  when  the  ventricle  was  comprefs'd,  a  little
blood  was  difcharg'd  from  it  through  the  fifllire.  But  the  next  to  the
wound  of  the  mediaftinum  was  the  wound  of  the  diaphragm  ;  through
which  blood,  as  has  been  faid  above,  flow'd  out  of  one  cavity  into  the
other.

4.  Since  the  time  in  which  Galen  {b)  faid,  that  if  a  wound  penetrates  to
the  ventricle  of  the  heart,  "  the  man  muft  immcdiatly  die  -,"  and  if  it  did
not  penetrate,  "  that  fome  might  not  only  live  through  the  day,  on  which
"  they  were  wounded,  but  alfo  through  the  following  night  •"  difleftions  of
dead  bodies  have  fhewn,  that  the  contrary  frequently  happens  :  many  of
•which,  indeed,  you  have  in  the  Sepulchretum,  but  not  all.  For  there  are
fome  extant  which  may  be  added,  and  not  only  from  books  that  have  been
publifla'd  fmce ;  as,  for  inftance,  thofe  that  are  produc'd  in  more  than  one
volume  of  the  Royal  Acadamy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (c) ;  but  alfo  much  more
ancient  ones,  as  that  Which  was  made  by  our  Falloppius  {d) :  from  whence
it  appears,  that  whether  a  wound,  as  in  this  obfervation  of  Falloppius,  does,
not  penetrate  through  the  parietes  of  the  yentricle,  or,  as  in  the  former,
reaciies  quite  into  that  cavity,  life  may  be  fometimes  prolong'd  to  a  greater
length  of  time  than  the  more  ancient  authors  fuppos'd.

The  obfervation  of  Valfalva,  when  compar'd  with  the  others,  is  not  in
the  number  of  thofe,  wherein  life  was  dragg'd  on  to  the  greateft  length  of
time  ;  nor  yet  in  the  number  of  thofe,  wherein  it  cbntinu'd  the  fhorteft
time.  But  it  contains,  in  refpedl  to  the  wound  of  the  diaphragm,  where-
with the  other  was  complicated,  fome  things  worthy  of  remark. ;  from  whence
phyficians  may  draw  fome  advantage  in  forming  a  diagnofis.

For  when  there  are  figns  of  the  heart  being  wounded,"  and  of  the  blood
being  pour'd  out  therefrom,  if  there  be  no  fenfe  of  weight  in  the  thorax,
and  there  not  only  is  fuch  a  fenfation  in  the  belly,  but  it  is  increas'd  every
day,  there  will  be  room  for  a  conjecture  of  the  diaphragm  being  fo  wound-
ed, as  to  tranfmit  blood  from  the  thorax  into  the  belly ;  efpecially,  where
fopie  one  of  the  fymptoms  which  confirm  this  feptum  to  be  Vv'ounded,  is
not  wanting  :  of  which  kind  was  that  very  troublefome  cough  in  the  patient
in  queftion,  that  was  fo  violent  as  fcarcely  to  be  borne.  Which  fymptom,
although  omitted  by  fome,  is  at  leaft  not  pafs'd  over  by-  that  excellent  fur-
geon  Falloppius  {e).

Do  not,  however,  be  furpris'd,  that  it  is  not  taken  notice  of  in  the  next
obfervation.  For  all  the  fymptoms  of  any  diforder  do  not  always  occur ;.
on  which  account,  that  will  have  other  things,  which  we  do  not  read  of  in
this  obfervation.  Befides,  obfervers  frequently  make  remarks  only  upon  the
principal  fymptoms.

{I,)  De  Loc.  afF.  1.  ;.  c.  z.  (d)  Traft.  de  Vulnerib,  c.  z8-.

(<r)  Hift.  A.  1735.  Obf,  Anat.  9.  &  A.  1744. {e)  eod.  c.  z8.
ObC  Anat.  9.  &c.  ' .

Finally,


1 7  6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

Finally,  in  proportion  to  the  various  (late,  or  fituation,  of  the  wound  in
the  fame  part,  different  fymptoms  will  offer  themfelves  at  different  times.
And  although  in  this,  and  the  following  obfervation,  we  may,  in  fome
meafure,  conje6lure  what  was  the  feat  of  the  wound,  from  the  other  circum-
ftances  that  are  added  ;  yet  it  were  to  be  wifli'd,  that  in  defcribing  this  feat,
and  even  the  whole  paffage  of  the  wound,  nothing  had  been  pafs'd  over  by
Valfalva,  which  could  be  wifli'd  for  by  any  one  :  and  even  that,  in  the  be-
ginning of  this  firft  hiftory,  he  had  exprefsly  faid  what  he  feems  to  have  in-
tended -,  I  mean,  that  the  knife  was  fo  drawn  in  betv/ixt  the  fifth  and  fixth
rib,  as  to  afcend  towards  the  middle  of  the  fbernum.

5.  An  old  man,  of  feventy  years  of  age,  who  had  been  blind  about  twen-
ty years,  fell  down,  and  dafh'd  the  left  fide  of  his  cheft  againft  a  flint  with
fuch  violence  as  to  break  his  ribs.  He  was  receiv'd  into  the  fame  hofpital.
His  pulfe  was  hard  ;  he  had  an  opprefllve  and  pricking  pain  in  the  wound-
ed part ;  his  refpiration  was  very  difficult.  And  although  this  difficulty  be-
gan to  remit  a  little  about  the  fourth  day  ;  yet,  on  the  beginning  of  the
fixth  day,  it  again  became  more  violent  •,  and  with  it  a  delirium  came  on.
All  thofe  fymptoms  continuing,  the  patient  died  about  the  ninth  day.

The  left  cavity  of  the  thorax  was  full  of  extravafated  blood  :  and  the  true
ribs,  of  the  fame  fide,  except  the  uppermofl:,  were  all  broken  in  fuch  a
manner,  that  the  feventh  had  wounded  the  diaphragm  by  its  rough  and  un-
equal fradlure ;  and  this  mufcle  was  univerfally  inflam'd  round  about  the
wound.

As  to  the  blindnefs  -,  in  what  manner  Valfalva  found  both  the  chryftalline
humours  to  be  affedted,  I  have  written  in  the  eighteenth  of  the  Epiftolse  Ana-
tomies (/).

6.  Here  you  have  another  example  of  the  diaphragm  being  wounded,
and  of  blood  being  effus'd  internally.  But  there  is  no  mention  made  of  a
cough,  or  of  a  weight  in  the  belly  ;  only  of  an  oppreffive  and  pricking  pain
in  the  thorax,  of  a  very  difficult  refpiration,  and  a  delirium.  Suppofe  the
wound,  in  this  cafe,  not  to  have  been  in  the  tendinous  part  of  the  dia-
phragm, but,  as  is  mofl:  probable,  in  the  flefliy ;  and  that  it  did  not  open
into  the  belly,  fo  as  to  be  capable  of  tranfmitting  thither  the  blood  effus'd
from  the  intercofl:al  veffels,  which  were  broken  afunder,  together  with  the
ribs,  but  to  have  confifl:ed  in  the  upper  fiefliy  fafciculi  being  prick'd  and
lacerated,  every  now  and  then,  by  the  rough  points  of  the  broken  rib,  and
for  that  reafon  to  have  been  inflam'd  -,  and  you  will  readily  conceive  from
whence  all  the  differences  betwixt  this  and  the  former  obfervations  arofe.

And  although,  in  the  fix  broken  ribs  on  the  left  fide,  and  in  the  blood
which  fill'd  that  cavity  of  the  thorax,  there  are  fufficient  caufes  of  a  difficult
refpiration  •,  yet  if  you  obferve  that  this  refpiration  became  more  difficult
when  a  delirium  was  added  to  it;  that  is,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the
ancient  matters,  when  to  a  wound  of  the  diaphragm  an  inflammation  was  add-
ed -,  you  will  enumerate  among  thofe  caufes,  and  on  this  account,  an  inju-
ry of  the  diaphragm  alfo.

r/J  n.  29.

For


Letter  LIII. Article  7.  177

For  we  are  not  to  fuppofe,  that  they  were  always  tieceiv'd,  when  they
allovv'd  of  a  paraphrenitis  in  the  inflammation  of  this  part  •,  although  I  have
Ihown  you  formerly  (g),  that  thefe  two  diforders  are  not  necelTarily  join'd
together.  Nor  does  the  rifus  fardonicus  always  arife  from  a  wound  of  the
diaphragm  :  which  is  not  only  demonftrated  by  other  obfervations,  but  by
thetwojuft  now  propos'd.  And  yet  that  this  was  not  falfly  afferted  in
Ariftotle  (h),  may  be  underftood  from  Hippocrates  (z),  from  whom  Valle-
fius  fuppos'd  him  to  have  taken  it  {k).  And  this  is  confirm'd  by  Pliny  (/),
from  "  the  fhows  of  the  gladiators,"  which  were  very  frequent  at  Rome.
In  looking  over  a  pafTage  of  which  author  at  any  time,  I  have  not  been
fo  much  furpriz'd,.  that,  following  Celfus  («?),  he  has  afferted  the  diaphragm
to  be  a  membrane,  which  "  has  no  flefh,  but  a  flender  nervous  fubftance ,"
as  that  a  note  has  been  haftily  added  by  Dalechampius,  and,  as  1  fuppofe,
not  read  over  again,  wherein  he  fays :  "  Anatomy  fhows  this  to  be  falfe  j
"  the  circumference  of  the  feptum,  indeed,  is  nervous  and  membranous,
"  yet  the  middle  part  of  it  is  flefliy."

But  I  return  to  my  fubje6t.  Whether  you  confider  that  fimilitude  of
laughing  in  the  convulfive  concuffions  of  the  diaphragm,  as  Hippocrates
feems  to  have  done,  who  call'd  this  laugh  tumultuous ;  or  even  in  the  face,
as  mofl;  perfons  generally  do ;  and  amongft  thefe  Bartholin  (b),  who  confirms
the  thing  by  an  example  which  he  refers  to  in  his  Saxon,  and  explains  it
by  the  phrenic  nerves,  with  lefs  perfpicuity  than  that  very  exaft  anatomifl:
Meckel  {0)  has  done  lately  ■,  the  fmall  branches  of  the  cervical,  from  v?hence
they  arife,  being  produc'd  through  the  face  ;  whether  you  confider  it,  there-
fore, in  one  or  the  other  way,  or  in  both  of  them,  as  this  laughter  is  not  a
mere  fuppofition ;  becaufe  it  does  not  occur  in  all  wounds  of  the  diaphragm  ^
fo  neither  is  the  delirium  a  mere  figment,  though  it  does  not  attend  all  in-
flammations of  the  diaphragm.

Yet,  if  you  chufe  te  have  no  regard  to  ancient  obfervation,  you,  never-
thelefs,  cannot  deny  that  the  diaphragm,  which  is  the  principal  inftrument
we  ufe  in  refpiration,  when  it  is  not  only  v/ounded,  but  inflam'd  alfo,  and
depriv'd  in  part  of  its  fupport,  by  reafon  of  the  fra6lure  of  the  feventh  rib,
is  chiefly  to  be  reckon'd  among  the  caufes  of  that  very  difficult  refpiration.

7.  A  man,  about  forty  years  of  age,  who  had  labour'd  a  long  time  under
a  lues  venerea,  with  very  violent  pains  in  his  joints,  and  a  difficulty  of
isreathing,  particularly  when  afcending  any  height,  having  fall'n  upon  the
■ground  from  a  very  high  place  ;  that  is  to  fay,  a  place  to  which  he  had
afcended  by  a  ladder  of  forty  rounds ;  at  firft,  indeed,  cried  out  for  af-
iiftance,  but  foon  after  could  fpeak  no  more,  and  was  carried  off  by  a  fud-
den  death.

In  the  belly,  and  the  head,  was  nothing  worthy  of  remark,  or  prefer-^
iiatural. But  when  the  thorax  was  open'd,  all  the  cavity  of  the  pericardium

{g)  Epift.  7.  n.  T4.  (,<«)  De  Medic  1.  4..  c.  i.

{h)  De  Part.  Animal.  1. 3.  c.  10.  («J  Anat.  quart,  renov.  1.  2.  c.  3.

{f)  Epid.  1.  5.  n.  34.  apud  Marinell.  (0)  Hill:,  de  VAzidi.  R.  des  Sc.  de  Berlin,

(^)  Comment,  in  hunc  locum  n.  ipfi  94.  A.  1752.

(/)  Nat.Hift.  1.  I  I.e.  37,

yoL.  III.  A  a  v,as


178 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

was  found  to  be  full  of  concreted  blood  ;  which  feem'd  to  have  burft  forth
from  the  great  artery  near  to  the  heart.  For  the  probe  being  pafs'd  thither
from  without,  was  feen  to  come  within  the  cavity  thereof.

8.  Valfalva  himfelf  knew  a  vein  to  have  been  ruptur'd  in  the  belly  by  a
fall  from  on  high,  as  I  Ihall  write  to  you  hereafter  [p).  "Why  then,  in  this  .
man,  if  a  veffel  muft  have  been  ruptur'd  in  the  thorax  from  a  fimilar  caufe,
did  not  this  rupture  happen  rather  to  a  vein  than  to  a  veffel  furnifh'd  with  very
thick  coats,  fuch  as  the  trunk  of  the  great  artery  is,  efpecially  near  the  heart  ?
Let  us  fuppofe  that  the  man  had  been,  from  the  lues  venerea,  fubjeft  to  a
difficulty  of  breathing,  and  that  the  great  artery  was  not  found  to  be  rup-
tur'd, but  pierc'd  through,  as  it  feems  to  have  been,  with  a  fmall,  and
perhaps  oblique  foramen,

Thus  you,  who  bear  in  mind  what  I  have  faid  (when  treating  of  fudden
death  from  the  difeafe  of  the  blood-veffels  (q)  )  of  the  diforders  of  that  ar-
tery perforating  the  coats  by  degrees,  and  opening  a  difcharge  for  the  blood,
even  within  the  pericardium  ;  thus  you,  I  fay,  will  eafily  imagine  what  might
have  preceded  in  this  man,  from  whence  the  trunk  of  the  artery,  being  in-
jur'd  in  that  part,  not  only  brought  on  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  by  not  fuf-
ficiently  propelling  the  blood  ;  but,  finally,  by  pouring  out  the  blood,  in  con-
fequence  of  a  fall  of  this  kind  having  broken  through  any  barrier  that  might
flill  remain  in  the  external  coat,  brought  6n  a  fudden  death.  And  this  in-
jury would  have  been  obferv'd  without  difficulty,  in  my  opinion,  if  Valfalva
had  infpeded  the  internal  furface  of  the  artery.

But  be  this  as  it  will,  it  is  certain  that  the  diforder  which  he  found  in  the
heart  of  that  old  man  whofe  hiftory  I  fhall  immediately  defcribe  to  you,  had
exifted  for  a  lojig  time  before  ;  as  is  evident  from  the  nature  of  the  diforder
itfelf.

9.  An  old  man,  of  feventy  years  of  age,  fell  from  a  high  place,  and
dalh'd  the  right  fide  of  his  thorax  againll:  the  ground.  Being  brought  into
the  fame  hofpital  which  I  have  mention'd  above,  he  was  feiz'd  with  lb  great
a  difficulty  of  refpiration,  and  fo  acute  a  fever,  that  he  died  on  the  feventh
day.

In  the  richt  cavity  of  the  thorax,  the  lungs  had  grown  fomewhat  hard  ;  the
lobe  being  univerfally  affe6ted  with  a  great  inflammation  ;  efpecially  at  the
upper  part,  where  it  alfo  adher'd  clolely  to  the  pleura,  and  contain'd  an
abfccfs.  The  left  lobe  of  the  lungs  was  likewife  of  a  red  colour,  but  more
on  the  back-part,  fo  as  to  feem  fomewhat  infiam'd  ;  and  had  black  fpots,  lying
at  a  diftance  from  each  other,  through  its  fubftance.  The  pericardium  con-
tain'd a  crreat  quantity  of  water,  and  lb  large  a  heart  as  almoft  to  equal  that
of  an  ox  in  its  fize.  In  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  were  polypous  concretions
of  a  white  colour,  and  pretty  foft,  one  in  each;  but  that  which  was  in  the
right  ventricle  was  the  largeft.

10.  I  do  not  doubt  but,  if  it  had  been  enquir'd  to  what  difagreeable
fymptoms  this  old  man  had  been  fubjedt  before  his  fall,  there  would  have
been  fome  found  which  might  have  been  afcrib'd  to  that  very  increas'd  fize

(/)  Epift.  54.  D.  18.  (?)  EpiiL  26.

8  of


Letter  LIII. Articles  ii,  12,  13,  14.  179

of  the  heart.  And  although  there  was  fufficient  caufe,  in  the  violent  injury
from  the  fall,  why  the  right  lobe  of  the  lungs  fhould  contraft  an  inflam-
mation and  an  abfcefs  from  the  degeneracy  thereof  in;o  fuppuration  ;  yet  it
is  not  altogether  improbable,  that  this  inflammation  was  the  fooner  contradled,
becaufe  the  lungs  had  been  before  comprefs'd  by  a  heart  of  that  kind,  and
relax'd  by  realbn  of  the  lefs  quick  pafl'age  of  the  blood  through  the  heart,
and  confequently  through  themfelves  alio  ;  and  were  difpos'd,  upon  the  ac-
ceffion  of  any  new  caufe  whatever,  to  retain  this  blood,  ar:d  lefs  fie  to  prevent
the  effefts  that  follow'd  therefrom.

11.  Now,  as  we  have  given  you  hiftories  of  blows  and  wounds  which
relate  to  the  neck,  the  breaft,  and  the  Odes,  from  the  papers  of  Valfalva ;
let  us  fubjoin  four  obfervations  of  his  which  relate  to  wounds  of  the  back.

12.  A  man,  about  fiveand-forty  years  of  age,  was  wounded  with  a  fliarp-
pointed  inftrument  in  the  back,  about  the  fifth  and  fixth  rib,  at  the  diftance
of  two  inches  from  the  fpine.  On  the  firft  days  only  a  fmall  quantity  of
blood  diflill'd  from  the  wound-,  but  afterwards,  about  four  or  five  ounces
were  difcharg'd  every  day.  This  hemorrhage  being  reftrain'd  about  the  tenth
day,  by  means  of  various  remedies,  the  wound  Iwell'd,  and  began  to  dif-
charge  a  great  quantity  of  fanies  ;  the  quantity  of  which  was  increas'd  every
day.  The  fanies  was  vifcid  and  tenacious,  fo  as  to  fufler  itfelf  to  be  drawn
out  into  a  long  extent.  This  excretion  continu'd  a  longtime,  and  was  join'd
with  a  flow  fcver  ;  fo  that  the  patient  fank  gradually,  and  death  came  on  at
the  forty-fecond  day  from  the  infliftion  of  the  wound.

On  difl"e(5ling  the  body,  it  was  found  that  neither  the  wound  nor  the  fanies
had  penetrated  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  :  and  although  the  fanies  had
form'd,  to  itfelf,  many  finuflTes  and  winding  communications ;  yet  that  all
the  mifchief  had  been  confin'd  to  the  external  parts.

13.  How  much  better  it  is  to  moderate  and  check  gently,  than  reftrain,  not
only  other  hEemorrhages',  but  thofe  of  wounds  alfo,  is  confirm'd  to  you  by
this  hiftory.  And  you  will  be  able  to  gather  fome  ufeful  admonition  from
the  following.

14.  A  hulbandman,  about  thirty  years  of  age,  of  a  bilious  temperament,
being  wounded  with  a  cutting  inflrrument  in  the  left  fcapula,  and  quite  to
the  fecond  rib,  fo  as  to  make  a  large  wound,  was  receiv'd  into  the  fame
hofpital  that  has  been  mention'd  above.  Being  there  under  the  care  of  Paul
Piella,  a  very  excellent  phyfician  and  furgeon,  he  was  fciz'd  with  a  fpitting
of  blood,  a  cough,  a  difficult  refpiration,  had  a  weak  and  frequent  puife,
being  often  attended  with  fwoonings;  and  as  all  thefe  fymptoms  grew  ftronger
and  ftronger  upon  him,  it  feem'd  that  he  was  very  likely  to  die  about  the
ninth,  day.

But  this  day  being  pafs'd  over,  and  the  fymptoms  remitting  in  fome  degree,
the  wound  itfelf  alio  inclin'd  to  be  in  a  better  fl:ate  ;  when,  near  the  fcven-
teenth  day,  the  wound  fwell'd  on  a  fudden,  although  without  inflammation,
and  a  fever  came  on  in  a  violent  degree,  with  a  languid  pulfe,  and  a  rigor
difFus'd  through  the  whole  body,  a  fenfe  of  weight  in  the  thorax,  a  labo-
rious refpiration,  and  purulent  urine  •,  and  death  at  length  fucceeded  twenty-
fix  days  after  the  patient  bad  receiv'd  the  wound.

The  diflTedion  of  the  thorax  was  perform'd  in  conjunftion  with  Peter  Mo-

A  a  2  linelli.


rSo Book  IV.  Of  Chirargkal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

linelli,  and  Franccfco  Guiccardini,  aniftant-phyfician  of  this  hoipital.  The
knife,  in -cutting  out  the  fternum,  having  neceflarily  penetrated  into  the
right  cavity  of  the  thorax,  a  great  quantity  of  fluid  rufii'd  out,  not  very
much  unlike  the  ferum  of  milk  ;  and  in  this  fluid  the  lungs  fwam.  This
fluid  being  exhauftcd,  a  fmuous  cavity  was  found  in  this  lobe,  full  of  pu-
rulent matter,  and  communicating  with  that  cavity  of  the  thorax  by  a  large
aperture.

But  the  other,  that  is,  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax,  which,  as  has  been
already  hinted,  correfponded  to  the  wound,  contain'd  no  purulent  matter,
and  had  its  lungs  entirely  uninjur'd  and  found.  That  part  of  the  pleura,
indeed,  which  was  neareft  to  the  wound,  was  of  a  livid  hue  -,  but  had  not
the  leafl;  foramen  :  nor  was  the  wound,  though  examin'd  to  the  bottom,  and
with  the  utmoft  care,  found  to  have  reach'd  beyond  that  fecond  rib  in  its
direftion  inwards.

15.  The  fymptoms  which,  while  you  were  reading  the  hiftory  of  the
difeafe,  you  would  fuppofe  to  have  been  from  the  wound  penetrating  into
the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  you  perceive,  by  reading  the  difl^edtion,  were  from
the  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  their  fuppuration,  and  an  empyema  which
had  follow'd  this  fuppuration.  Wherefore,  as  in  other  patients,  fo  in  wounded
patients  alfo,  all  the  fymptoms  are  not  always  to  be  imputed  to  the  firfl:  and
evident  difeafe ;  but  we  are  to  fuppofe  that  another  may  be  join'd  thereto,
which  does  not  depend  thereon  :  and  even  when  the  fymptoms  feem  to  be
from  the  firft  difeafe,  we  mult  fufpeiSl,  and  enquire  with  diligence,  whether
they  may  not  rather  be  from  fome  other  diforder  join'd  to  the  original  one,
as,  in  this  cafe,  from  the  marks  of  inflammation,  which,  perhaps,  did  exift
in  fome  degree-,  and  thefe  not  fuch  as  related  to  the  left  lobe  of  the  lungs,
which  was  the  fide  whereon  the  wound  had  been  receiv'd,  but  to  the  right
lobe.

16.  A  young  man,  of  twenty  years  of  age,  was  wounded  with  a  knife  al-
moft  in  the  middle  of  the  back  ;  yet  with  this  circumftance,  that  the  wound,
inclining  fomewhat  to  the  left  fide,  tended  towards  the  beginning  of  the  fixtb
and  feventh  rib.  Not  long  after  the  wound  was  inflifted,  a  fever  came  on  i
and  to  this  was  added,  after  fome  days,  a  flight  difficulty  of  breathings  a
flight,  alfo,  and  dry  cough ;  but  a  great  pain  about  the  ftomach,  and  a  con-
fiderable  tumour  of  the  whole  abdomen.  At  length,  the  refpiration  growing
more  difficult,  the  patient  died  near  the  fixteenth  day,  the  whole  body  having
an  ifteric  appearance.

When  the  belly  was  open'd,  the  inteftines  were  feen  to  be  turgid  with  air  j
but  the  liver  was  in  a  natural  ftate.

On  opening  the  thorax,  a  little  fcrum  was  found  in  the  lower  part  of  both
its  cavities.  And  as  the  left  Jobe  of  the  lungs  adher'd  llrongly  to  the  pleura^
the  membranous  produdlions,  whereby  they  were  tied  with  the  upper  and  an-
terior part  of  this  membrane,  feem'd  to  be  moift,  as  it  were,  with  fanies  •
and  that  feem'd,  in  like  manner,  to  be  a  peculiar  adhefion,  where  the  fame
lobe  of  the  lungs  was  join'd  lo  the  pleura,  in  the  part  correfponding  to  the
wound,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  it  could  not  be  feparated  without  lace-
ration.

But  the  wound,  although  it  reached  quite  to  the  pleura  itfelf,  after  having,

pafs'd


Letter  LIII. Articles  17,18.  181

pafs'd  betwixt  the  mufcles  that  lie  near  the  fpine,  did  nor,  however,  appear
to  have  perforated  this  membrane.  As  to  the  lungs,  they  abounded  with
tubercles  in  many  places,  fome  of  which  were  larger,  and  fome  fmaller  :  and
many  of  them  were  already  fiippurated,  and  when  cut  into  difcharg'd  a  fanies ;
but  others  ftillpreferv'd  the  fimilitude  of  a  found  and  uninjur'd  gland.  In
the  pericardium  was  a  little  ferum.  In  each  of  the  ventricles  of  the  heart
was  a  polypous  concretion,  which  were  bo:h  of  them  produc'd  from  thence
into  the  auricles  and  annex'd  veins  ;  that  in  the  right  being  pretty  large,  and
that  in  the  left  but  fmail.

17.  This  young  man,  alfo  ;  if  fome  internal  convulfion,  to  which  the  pain
about  the  ftomach,  the  diftenfion  of  the  inteftines  from  retain'd  air,  and  the
ideric  colour  of  the  whole  body  may  be  imputed,  had  not  happen'd  to  be
added  to  the  other  bad  fymptoms,  and  to  have  brought  on  a  more  fpeedy
death  ;  would,  certainly,  have  expectorated  blood  and  pus,  upon  the  rupture
of  thefe  tubercles  in  the  lungs  :  and  it  would  have  been  thought,  that  this
expeftoration  muft  be  owing  to  the  wound  penetrating  into  the  cavity  of  the
thorax.  But  whether  pus,  taken  up  from  the  deep  wound  into  the  fangui-
ferous  veiTels,  (as  I  have  faid,  lately  (r),  happen'd  from  wounds  of  the  ce-
rebrum) and  carried  into  the  Kings,  excited  thofe  tubercles  ;  or  whether  they
had  begun  to  exift  of  themfclves  before  the  wound  was  infiidted  ;  I  leave
entirely  undetermin'd.

18.  Another  young  man  receiv'd  a  wound  in  the  left  part  of  his  back  •,
which  paffing  downwards  obliquely,  and  to  the  right  fide,  and  grazing  upon
the  vertebrse,  at  length  enter'd  the  right  cavity  of  the  thorax  betwixt  the
fixth  and  feventh  rib.  For  fome  days  after  receiving  the  wound,  the  patient
luffer'd  a  flight  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  a  kind  of  pain,  which  Gor-
refponded  thereto,  in' the  anterior  part  of  the  body  :  he  felt  a  pain,  likewife,
when  he  turn'd  himfelf  from  one  fide  to  the  other.  He  was  alfo  troubled
with  a  kind  of  itchitrg,  fometimes  in  one  place,  andfometimes  in  another.
To  thefe  fymptoma  was  added,  on  the  fifth  day,  a  cough,  with  a  fpitting
of  blood  ;  and  after  that  a  kind  of  ftupor  in  the  lower  limbs.  This  ftupor
was  fucceeded  by  a  paralyfis,  from  the  middle  of  the  body  quite  to  the  ex-
tremities of  the  feet ;  fo  that  the  power  of  moving  and  feeling  remain'd  only
in  the  thorax  and  the  parts  above.  He  was  at  the  fame  time  attack'd  with  a
tumour  and  tenfion  of  the  abdomen,  and  a  fupprefllon  both  of  the  urine  and
the  inteftinal  fasces.  After  the  coming  on  of  this  palfy,  the  patient  feem'd  to
himfelf  to  be  fomething  better.  Yet  he  was  fometimes  feiz'd  with  fwoonings-,
in  one  of  which  he  died  on  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  day.

While  the  body  was  mov'd,  a  great  quantity  of  blood  burft  forth  from
the  wound  :  which  enter'd  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  on  the  right  fide,  betwixt
the  two  ribs  that  I  have  mention'd,  near  to  the  vertebrse;  fo  as  to  make  it
fcem  natural  to  fiippofe,  that  this  great  quantity  of  blood  muft  have  proceeded
from  a  laceration  of  the  intercoftal  vcffels.  The  right  lobe  of  the  lungs
fhow'd  no  peculiar  mark  of  injury  in  the  part  which  correfponded  to  the
wound  J  or,  at  leaft,  none  that  came  under  the  cognizance  of  the  fenfes,  cx-

(r)  Epift,  51.  n.  21.  &  feqq.

cept


I  83 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

cept  that  the  external  coat  was  eroded  in  feme  places:  yet  the  whole  of  this
lobe  was  of  a  red  colour,  and  tumid.  The  pericardium  was  full  of  fcrum.
From  the  heart,  when  cut  into,  a  frothy  and  fluid  blood  burft  out  ;  and  in
the  right  ventricle  thereof  was  found  a  polypous  c  ncretion

When  the  belly  was  open'd,  all  the  mtellines  were  turgid  with  air;  and
in  them  was  a  certain  fluid  ting'd  with  a  black  colour.  The  bladder  was
fill'd  with  urine.  In  the  cavity  of  the  belly  were  fome  pints  of  ftagnant
ferum.

19.  As  Valfalva  has,  with  propriety,  accounted  for  that  efl^ufion  of  blood,
from  the  intercoftal  veflTels  being  lacerated,  or  eroded  ;  foyou,  peihaps,  would
not  err,  if  you  were  to  afcribe  the  paralyfis  to  a  pricking  or  irritation  of  their
attendant  nerve  from  acrid  fanies.  For  from  the  lormer  a  convulfion  would
arife,  and  from  the  latter  a  conrtridlion  :  and  from  hencr,  as  1  have  already
explain'd  (j),  lb  much  more  confiderable  a  refolucion  might  happen,  as  every
coftal  nerve  is  conncdted  to  that  very  long  nerve  which  they  call  the  inter-
coftal. And  you  have  a  proof  of  the  coftal  nerve  being  punftur'd,  from
that  correfponding  pain  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  body,  to  which  this  nerve
goes.  However,  notwithftanding  upon  thefe  fuppofitions  it  is  not  difficult
to  explain  this  hiftory;  yet,  if  any  better  tnode  of  explication  occurs  to
your  mind,  I  (hall  with  chearfulnefs  affent  thereto.

20.  Thus  far  go  the  obfervations  of  VaUalva  ;  now  take  mine  :  which  I
fliall  adjoin  in  the  fame  order ;  although  in  regard  to  the  two  which  relate
to  wounds  of  the  neck,  as  one  has  been  already  fent  to  you  in  a  former  let-
ter (/),  there  is  no  reafon  to  repeat  it  again  here;  and  the  other  is  extremely
fhort.

2i.  A  man  had  his  neck  pierc'd  through,  in  the  inferior  and  anterior
part,  in  fuch  a  manner  that  the  foramen  which  had  been  made  by  the  en-
trance of  the  fword,  was  fcarcely  more  than  an  inch  diftant  from  the  fora-
men which  the  fword  had  made  on  coming  out.  This  man  died  very  foon,
like  a  fuffocated  perfon.

The  body,  although  I  diflTefled  it  at  Venice,  with  a  view  to  demonftrate
to  my  entreating  friends,  many  and  various  things  which  relate  to  the  na-
tural ftrufture  of  the  parts  ;  yet  at  the  fame  time  confirm'd  this  fuppofition,
that  the  man  had  died  of  fuffocation.  For  one  ring  of  the  afpera  arteria,
having  been  divided  from  the  other,  had  laid  open  a  paflage  for  the  blood
to  be  dillharg'd,  from  the  incis'd  veffels,  into  this  tube,  and  confequently
into  the  lungs.

22.  I  remember  that  two  enquiries  were  particularly  made  of  me  in  re-
gard to  det-p  wounds  of  the  neck.  Firft,  if  any  trunk  or  branch  of  the  fan-
guiferous  veflels,  which  is  too  large  to  be  fufficiently  conftring'd  by  in~tro-
ducing  arm'd  doffils,  or  the  like,  be  wounded,  by  what  method  can  fur-
gcons  rcftrain  the  flux  of  blood  ?  1  anfwer'd,  that  it  might  be  reftrain'd  by
many  methods,  if  the  queftion  was  of  preferving  the  patient  for  fome  time
only  ;  but  if  the  queftion  was  of  preferving  him  for  a  very  long  time,  by
fcarcely  any. For  by generating  a  cruft  upon the  internal  jugular  vein

[))  Epift. II.  n.  18.  20.  (/)  Epiil.  44.  n.  7.

itfelf.


Letter  LIII. Article  22.  183

jtfelf,  by  means  of  a  red-hot  iron,  this  reftraint  was  brought  about,  till  the
cruft  fell  off;  as  you  have  it  in  Bohn  (a)  :  from  whom  not  only  this,  but
many  other  obfervations,  which  relate  peculiarly  to  the  bodies  of  thok  who
died  of  wounds,  might  be  added  to  the  Sepulchretum.

And  the  experiments  which  I  have  related  to  you  in  the  nineteenth  letter;
and  which  fhow,  that  if  the  carotid  arteries,  or  internal  jugular  veins,  are
tied  up  with  a  ligature,  what  they  formerly  fear'd  did  not  foon  happen  ;
may  encourage  the  furgeon  to  tie  up  one,  or  the  other,  of  thefe  veffels  in
one  fide,  that  the  flux  of  blood  may  be  reltrain'd  for  fome  time.  But  it  is
evident,  that  the  vefTels  cannot  be  conftri(5ted,  and  ftopp'd  up,  for  a  very
long  time,  by  other  methods,  any  more  than  by  thole  which  bring  on  a
cruit ;  nor  can  we,  with  any  good  grounds,  hope,  that  after  the  ligature's
being  applied,  thole  bad  fymptoms  will  not  fooner  or  later  come  on  ;  which,
at  length,  of  themfelves  bring  on  death  :  although,  in  applying  thefe  liga-
tures, no  error  or  omiffion  whatever  was  made  by  the  furgeon.

For  as  both  thefe  trunks  of  veflels  are  wrapp'd  up  within  a  kind  of  mem-
branous, or,  ifyoupleafe,  rather  within  a  kind  of  cellular  fheath,  together
with  the  nerves  from  the  parvagum,  and  intercoftals ;  it  is  very  difficult,  in
a  deep  place,  and  one  that  is  cover'd  by  the  flowing  blood,  to  tie  up  either
of  them  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  one,  or  other,  or  both,  of  thofe  nerves  may
not  be  tied  up  at  the  fame  time,  or  may  not  be  hurt  by  pafling  the  needle
beneath  the  vefiels.

Nor ;  if  the  artery  is  to  be  tied  up  ;  is  it  fufficient  to  conftringe  the  arte-
ry, by  putting  a  ligature  below  the  wound,  as  thofe  experiments  which  I
juft  now  took  notice  of  fhow ;  but  there  is  a  neceflity  for  applying  another
above  the  wound.  Nor  can  the  compreflion  which  is  rnade  ufe  of  in  the
limbs,  by  means  of  a  bandage  call'd  torcu'ar,  or  tourniquet,  take  place  in
the  neck  ;  either  to  diminifh  the  impetus  of  the  blood  into  the  conftrided
artery,  or  to  intercept  the  flux  while  the  furgeon  is  afting  his  part.  For
we  are  not  only  forbid  to  apply  this  compreflion  to  the  neck  by  the  afpera
arttria,  but  alfo  by  the  other  veflels,  which  mufl:  not,  by  any  means,  be
comprefs'd.

And  although  you  fliould  think  of  any  thing  to  interpofe  betwixt  that
bandage  and  other  certain  parts  of  the  neck,  and  particularly  the  part  which
is  to  be  comprefs'd,  fo  that  their  prominence  may  prevent  the  bandage  from
touching  thofe  pares  which  are  not  to  be  comprefs'd  ;  yet  how  can  that
which  is  mod  to  be  prefs'd  upon,  be  comprefs'd  fo  as  to  prevent  the  vein
alfo,  and  nerves ;  which  we  have  faid  are  carried  together  with  the  artery  that
is  to  be  comprefs'd  ;  from  being  comprei's'd  therewith.

From  thefe  things,  therefore,  you  perceive  the  very  great  difficulty  of  the
affair.  And  from  what  has  been  faid  above,  you  fufficiently  perceive,  if  it
is  difficult  to  tie  up  a  trunk  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  not  to  .injure  any  part
that  lies  near  it,  wh  le  the  bufinefs  is  to  be  tranfafted  in  a  deep  place,  which
is,  at~the  fame  time,  overflowing  with  blood  ;  you  fufficiently,  I  fay,  per-
ceive, how  much  more  difficult  it  is to  tie  up  any  neighbouring  branch,

(a)  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  S.  2.  c.  2^

without


I  84 BookiV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Difordei's.

without  that  danger;  as,  to  the  other  difficukies>  the  (Icndernefs  of  the  vef-
lel  is  added  :  which,  if  it  does  nothing  elfe,  at  leaft  greatly  diminifhes  the
power  of  diftingoirtiing  which  of  the  many  neighbouring  branches  is  wound-
ed, or  in  what  part  it  is  wounded.

And  although  this  feems  to  be  the  natural  fcate  of  the  circumftances  ;  yet
as  I  am  not  ignorant  that  thofe  methods  may  fometimes  fucceed,  which  we
fcarcely  dare  hope  will  fucceed  ;  I,  for  this  reafon,  contrafted  my  anfwer,
lb  as  to  fay,  that  this  end  could  be  fcarcely  brought  about  "  by  any  means."
Nor  had  I  any  reafon  to  be  forty  I  had  anfwer'd  thus,  when,  fome  time  af-
ter, I  lit  on  the  cure  of  a  wound  inflided  in  the  internal  jugular  vein,  as
related  by  the  celebrated  Schiitingius  (xj;  whole  fuccefs  I  wifh  all  could
attain  to,  as  eafily  as  they  can  imitate  his  hope.

23.  But  theie  things  pafs'd  in  private  conferences.  Another  enquiry  was
made  of  me,  by  letters,  in  the  year  1735.  A  young  man,  of  twenty-four
years  of  age,  and  of  a  good  habit  of  body,  receiv'd  a  wound  from  a  qua-
drangular and  Iharp  dagger,  which  pafs'd  obliquely  downwards,  from  the
left  fide  of  the  neck,  at  three  fingers  breadths  below  the  external  ear,  to-
wards the  beginning  of  the  fpinal  marrow.  Although  fcarcely  any  blood
was  difcharg'd  from  the  wound,  yet  the  young  man  immediately  fell  down  ;
being,  in  fuch  a  manner,  depriv'd  of  the  power  of  motion  and  feeling  in
all  the  parts  which  are  below  the' head,  that  it  was  necelTary  to  carry  him
home,  and  put  him  to  bed  :  and  there,  having,  among  the  few  words  which
he  fpoke  with  a  great  difficulty  of  refpiration,  laid,  that  he  was  cold,  a
warming-pan  was  immediately  applied,  with  great  indifcretion,  to  his  thighs,
his  legs,  and  his  feet,  whereby  he  was  very  much  burnt;  though  he  him-
felf  did  not  at  all  feel  thefe  burnings,  which  at  length  degenerated  into  foul
ulcers.  At  firft  he  neither  difcharg'd  urine  nor  ftool ;  but  after  fome  days,
he  difcharg'd  his  urine,  not  only  in  an  involuntary  manner,  but  even  with-
out his  knowledge.

As  he  was  diligently  attended  by  a  phyfician  and  furgeon;  after  the  com-
pletion of  the  feventeenth  day,  the  left  fide  of  his  body  firft  began  to  feel  a
little  :  and  on  the  twentieth  day,  the  fingers  of  the  upper  limb,  and  the
toes  of  the  lower  limb,  on  the  left  fide,  both  began  to  be  mov'd  in  fome
meafure  :  and  betwixt  that  and  the  thirtieth  day,  both  the  powers  were,  by
degrees,  more  and  more  encreas'd  in  the  left  fide.  As  to  the  right  fide,
however,  which  was  the  fide  oppofite  to  the  wound,  fenfation  did  not  begin
to  return  there  till  the  thirty-fecond  day  ;  and  foon  after  that,  motion  re-
turn'd  alfo,  and  went  on  to  encreafe,  by  degrees,  in  the  fame  manner.

And  although,  on  the  fortieth  day,  the  whole  body  had  pretty  well  re-
cover'd  its  fenfe  and  motion  ;  1  fay,  pretty  well,  for  he  could  not  yet  fl:and,
and  much  lefs  walk ;  and  even  although,  on  the  twenty-fixth  of  May  ;
whereas  the  wound  had  been  infli6ted  on  the  fecond  of  February ;  the
young  man  went  out  of  his  chamber,  and  with  both  his  legs  extenuated,
and  in  a  manner  wither'd,  walk'd  flowly  and  gradually,  juft  like  a  child
who  was  learning  to  walk  ;  yet  even  then,  he  us'd  the  right  fide  of  his  body

/^)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  8.  Obf.  29.
I

with


Letter  LIII. Article  24, 25, 16.  i  8  j-

with  a  more  infirm  motion  than  the  left ;  and  the  latter  had  its  fenfatioh  alfo
the  moft  perfect.

The  c'uile  of  this  difference  then  being  afk'd  of  me  ;  I  hinted,  that  we
mull  fuppofe  it  to  confift  in  thofe  medullary  fibres,  which,  pafTing  betwixt
the  right  and  left  fide  of  the  beginning  of  the  fpinal  marrow  itfelf  (_}> ),  may
fometimes  wholly,  and,  at  other  times,  in  great  part,  transfer  the  efi"e6t  of
the  injury  which  had  been  done  to  this  fide,  to  the  oppofite.  And  although
this  explication  has  nothing  peculiar  in  it;  as  it  depends  upon  the  explica-
tions of  others,  of  a  hemiplegia  brought  on  by  an  injury  of  the  brain  in  the
oppofite  hemifphere  ;  yet,  as  this  hiftory  fhows,  how  much  lower  ftill  the
feat  of  an  injury,  which  produces  the  fame  effeft,  may  be ;  it  fcem'd  to
me  to  be  no  defpifable  obfervation,  and  therefore  worthy  to  be  propos'd
to  you,  among  other  wounds  of  the  neck.  But  now  let  us  go  on  to  the
wounds  of  the  thorax  itfelf.

24.  A  man  had  been  wounded  in  one  of  his  clavicles  almoft:  a  month  be-
fore, and  the  cure  of  the  wound  indeed  feem'd  to  go  on  very  well ;  when,
at  length,  he  began  to  be  feiz'd  with  a  ftupor  of  the  fenfes,  and  with  rigors  •,
to  which  there  was  by  no  means  a  correfponding  heat.  As  he  died  with
thefe  fymptoms,  his  body  was  brought  into  the  college,  that  I  might  begin
to  teach  anatomy  from  thence  ;  it  being  now  near  the  end  of  January,  in
the  year  1732  ;  till  I  fhould  be  furnifti'd  with  a  more  proper  fubjeft.

The  wound  did  not  reach  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax.  But  as  I  law
that  the  fide  oppofite  to  the  wound  was  green  externally  within  two  days
after  death,  and  no  caufe  of  this  greennefs  appear'd  within  the  thorax  ;  i
thought  it  was  proper  to  look  for  it  in  the  parietes :  and  pus  was  found  be-
twixt the  mufcles  of  the  fides  and  of  the  back.  But  there  were  abfcefl^eS
alfo  in  other  places ;  as,"  for  infl:ance,  about  the  pyramidal  mufcles  of  tlie
abdomen.

Yet  was  there  no  pus  within  the  belly;  only  fome  part  of  the  omentum,
and  inteftines,  were  of  a  green  colour.  The  liver  indeed,"  the  fpleen,  the
ilomach,  and  the  bladder,  were  larger  than  their  natural  ftate  requires.
But  there  was  no  other  appearance  of  difeafe  befides  this,  either  in  thefe,  or
in  the  other  vifcera.  Thofe  parts  where  the  pus  had  infinuated  itfelf  be-
twixt the  mufcles,  were  the  only  parts  that  appear'd  to  be  adtually  vi-
tiated.

25.  From  this  hiftory  it  alfo  fufEciently  appears,  that  pus  may  be  receiv'd
into  the  fanguiferous  veffels,  and  transferr'd  to  another  part.  For  if  it  were
not  carried  by  means  of  the  fanguiferous  vefl^els,  how  fhould  it,  ofitfdf,
have  come  betwixt  the  mufcles,  and  not  thofe  that  lie  near  to  the  cavicle,
but  thofe  that  are  oppofite,  or  at  a  great  diftance  ?  Now  give  me  leave  to
relate  to  you  an  obfervation  of  much  greater  moment,  that  is,  an  obferva-
tion of  the  heart  being  wounded.

26.  A  poor  man,  a  native  of  Milan,  of  forty  years  of  age,  being  of  a
pretty  mufcular  habit  of  body,  and  healthy  ;  except  that  his  limbs  were  here

(j)  Epift.  Anat.  13.  n.  20.

Vol.  III.  B  b  and


I  8  6 Book  IV.  Of  Chimrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

and  there  cover'd  with  a  filthy  fcabies -,  after  having  din'd,  and  drunk  plen-
tifully, fell  into  a  quarrel  with  another  man  of  his  own  fort,  and  receiv'd  a
wound  with  a  knife,  at  the  diftance  of  two  fingers  breadths  below  the  left
pap.  As  but  little  blood  was  then  or  afterwards  difcharg'd,  he  walk'd,  of
himfelf,  to  about  the  length  of  feventy  paces ;  after  this  he  fat  down,  and
throwinor  up  from  his  ftomach  what  he  had  taken  at  dinner-time,  he  died
there  within  half  an  hour ;  or  at  leafl  not  much  after  that  time  :  and  this
was  about  the  fifteenth  of  March,  in  the  year  1725.

The  body  being  brought  into  the  theatre  of  the  college,  in  order  that  the
anatomical  demonftrations,  which  the  celebrated  John  Baptift  Vulpius  ex-
ercis'd,  at  that  time,  in  the  fecond  place,  might  be  finifli'd  therefrom  ;  it
was  examin'd  v/ith  the  greateft  diligence  by  both  of  us.  And  many  things
were  obferv'd,  indeed,  which  do  not  relate  to  this  place  ;  fince  here,  in  ge-
i>eral,  we  only  relate  fuch  things  as  appear'd  to  be  more  preternatural.  And
that  I  may  juft  touch  upon  thefe  things,  before  I  write  of  the  wound,  they
were  briefly  as  follows  :

In  the  belly,  the  fpleen,  which  was,  in  other  refpefts,  found,  was  fome-
■what  larger  in  every  dimenfion,  than  might  feem  to  agree  with  the  flature  of
a  man  who  was  fquare-built,  and  of  a  proper  fize  ;  and  even  larger  than
feem'd  to  agree  with  the  fize  of  the  liver.  But,  .that  there  was  little  bile
in  the  gall  bladder,  I  did  not  at  all  wonder;  as  I  knew,  that  both  a  vomit-
incr,  and  a  copious  dinner,  whereby  it  had  been  prefs'd  out,  had  preceded  :
and  indeed,  at  the  mouth  of  the  biliary  duft,  and  in  that  neighbourhood,
the  inteftine  duodenum  was  feen  to  be  moift  with  yellow  bile.

As  to  what  relates  to  the  head,  the  fanguiferous  veflels  were  turgid,  and
without  doubt,  from  the  great  number  of  air-bubbles  wherewith  they  were
diftended  ;  many  of  which  bubbles  we  faw,  here  and  there,  in  the  veflels  of
the  brain,  and  under  the  pia  mater:  being  probably  extricated  from  the
blood,  by  reafon  of  the  warmth  of  the  feafon  ;  efpecially  as  the  body  had
lain  fome  time  after  death.  For  we  did  not  come  to  the  examination  of  the
internal  parts  of  the  cranium,  till  the  thirteenth  day  :  at  which  time,  taking
out  the  brain,  we  obferv'd  that  the  cavity  of  the  cranium  was  much  larger
towards  the  right  fide,  than  towards  the  left,  in  the  occiput.

But  the  thorax,  and  the  wound,  which  we  examin'd  on  the  firll  days^
■were  in  the  ftate  I  am  about  to  defcribe.  The  left  cavity  of  the  thorax  had
a  great  quandty  of  blood  extravafated  in  •,  it  and  the  pericardium  alfoj.
which  was  fluid  however ;  and  fuch  as  was  feen  in  other  parts  of  this  body,
wherein  it  was,  in  general,  more  diflblv'd,  and  more  watery,  thanufualj
perhaps  from  the  quantity  of  fluid  which  had  been  drunk,  and  which  is
foon  carried  through  the  chyliferous  into  the  fanguiferous  veflJels.  Yet  the
narrownefs  and  obliquity  of  the  wound  were  the  obfliacles,  in  my  opinion,,
to  this  blood's  being  difcharg'd  at  the  external  orifice.

By  following  the  paflage  of  the  knife  from  this  orifice,  we  found,  that  it
had  pafs'd  from  that  place  which  I  have  mention'd,  betwixt  rib  and  rib,
obliquely  upwards,  and  to  the  right  fide,  to  the  mediaftinum,  the  pericar-
dium, and  the  anterior  fide  of  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart ;  which  was  to
be  pierc'd  through,  nearly  about  the  middle  of  the  length  of  the  fame  fide.
There  was  a  wound  on  the  external  furface  of  the  heart,  of  narrow  dimen-
4  fion.


Letter  LIII. Article  27.  187

fion  indeed,  but  not  lefs  long  than  the  point  of  the  little  finger's  extremity
is  broad  ;  fo  that,  when  I  open'd  the  ventricle,  I  was  at  firft  furpriz'd,  that
the  termination  of  the  wound  did  not  appear  on  the  internal  furface ;  till  ima-
gining, what  was  really  the  cafe,  that  the  foramen  was  cover'd  over  by  the
network  of  chicle  flefhy  fibres,  and  fafciculi,  which  lay  oppofite  to  the
wound  -,  I  took  thofe  fibres  and  fafciculi  away  with  great  accuracy,  as  has
been  faid  in  the  fifteenth  of  the  Epiftolas  Anatomicce  (2)  :  and  it  was  mani-
feft  to  all,  that  the  wound  had  reach'd  into  the  cavity  of  the  ventricle,  after
piercing  through  the  whole  thicknefs  of  the  flefhy  paries,  and  the  internal
membrane.

In  the  lungs,  we  not  only  found  the  anterior  furface  itfelf  of  a  black  co-
lour, and  variegated  ;  but  we  alfo  found  a  part  of  the  food  which  had  been
taken  into  the  ftomach,  and  which  the  larynx  had  intercepted,  while  it  was
thrown  up  by  vomiting,  in  confequence  of  the  proper  offices  and  functions
of  the  parts  which  are  about  the  fauces  having  been  difturb'd,  in  that
tumultuous  agitation  of  the  whole  body,  and  during  the  deficiency  of  the
vital  power :  fo  that,  befides  what  was  in  the  bronchia,  no  inconliderable
portion  of  thefe  ingefta  had  ftagnated  in  the  trunk  of  the  afpera  arteria.
And  we  made  no  doubt,  but  the  man's  death  had  been  more  fudden  on  this
account :  and  certainly  the  face,  even  for  fome  days  after  death,  was  tur-
gid ;  by  reafon  of  the  vefl^ls  being  fo  diftended  with  blood,  as  to  have  the
appearance  which they  are  found  to  have  in  a  fuffbcated  perfon.

27.  Thofe  wounds  of  the  heart  which  reach  to  the  left  ventricle,  occur
more  feldom  than  thofe  that  penetrate  to  the  right  ventricle.  For  the  heart
is  lb  fituated,  that  a  much  lefs  part  of  the  former  than  of -the  latter  ventri-^
cle,  lies  open  to  wounds,  moft  of  which  are  inflicted  in  a  diredt  oppofition
to  the  heart.  And  this  I  confider  as  the  effe£t  of  that  fame  providence,
whereby  the  larger  trunks  of  the  fanguiferous  veflTels  are,  wherever  it  was
poffible,  either  feated  very  deeply,  or  drawn  back  to  a  feat  lefs  liable  to  in-
juries. Thus  the  crural  arteries  pafs,  in  'great  part,  through  the  thighs  in-
ternally, and  through  the  ham  :  thus  the  brachials  are  carried  through  that
fide  of  the  humerus  which  is  turn'd  towards  the  thorax  ;  and  not  on  the  ex-
ternal part.

And  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  is  certainly  that,  by  the  force  of  which,
blood  is  impell'd  into  the  brain,  and  to  all  the  body  ;  fo  that  if  this  force  be
very  much  weaken'd,  and  the  office  of  the  ventricle  be  very  much  impeded,
deaih  mull  of  necefilty  be  the  confequence:  and  this  Galen  (i^),  with  juftice,
pronounc'd  would  happen,  "  particularly  if  the  belly  of  the  left  part  of  the
"  heart  fliould  be  wounded."

Now  if  you  run  over  in  your  memory,  the  great  number  of  wounds  of
the  heart  that  you  read  in  this  third  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (^),  you
will  be  lefs  furpriz'd,  that  thofe  are  by  far  the  moft  in  number  which  relate
to  the  right  ventricle  •,  to  which  thofe  two  alfo  relate,  that  I  have  pointed  out

(z.)  n.  61.  {i]  Obf.  fub  n.  23.  &  in  Addit.  Obf.  3.

(a)  De  Loc.  afF.  I,  5.  2.

B  b  2  above


1 88 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

above  (c),  from  the  Hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris:
and  out  of  the  very  few  which  have  come  within  the  left  ventricle,  you  will
fee  that  there  are  none,  after  which  the  man  dragg'd  on  his  life,  I  do  not
fay  to  the  twenty- third  day,  or  to  the  fixteenth,  or  to  the  ninth,  or  to  the
leventh,  but  to  the  fourth,  or  to  the  fifth  ;  though  you  will  fee  that  life  was
carried  on  to  thofe  periods,  more  than  once,  after  a  wound  penetrating  the
right  ventricle.

You  will  find  that  both  he  of  whom  Dlemerbroeck  (J),  and  he  of  whom
Tim^us  ((?),  gives  the  hiftory,  died  immediately  upon  the  perforation  of  the
left  ventricle.  It  is  true,  he  liv'd  an  hour  whom  Lucius  (/)  fpeaks  of;  and
even  four  or  five  hours  another,  whofe  cafe  is  related  by  DoIjeus  (g),  though
i  believe  no  mention  of  it  is  made  in  the  Sepulchretum ;  yet  in  both  thefe
patients  both  the  ventricles  were  pierc'd  through.

But  what  is  an  hour,  or  what  are  a  few  hours,  to  fuch  a  number  of  days
as  I  have  mention'd  ?  to  fixteen  for  inftance,  nay  even  to  three-and  twenty -,
for  to  this  period  it  is  certain  that  Fantonus  the  father  faw  life  extended  in
a  cafe  of  this  kind.  And  if  by  reafon  of  fome  typographical  error,  you
fliould  doubt  whether  that  obfervation  of  his,  which  we  read  in  this  feftion  (h),
relates  to  the  right  ventricle  ;  you  will  have  all  your  fcruples  remov'd,  if  you
read  the  fame  over  again,  as  it  has  been  fince  publifh'd,  more  than  once,  by
his  celebrated  fon  (i).

There  is,  indeed,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  Sepulchretum,  another  obferva-
tion of  the  father's  (k),  on  a  man  who  "  had  liv'd  feventeen  days  ;"  whereas
"  the  feptum  of  the  heart  was  wounded  in  the  bafis,  the  wound  (lightly  pe-
"  netrating  the  left  ventricle,  and  terminating  in  the  right ;"  or,  as  the  fon
afcerwards  publilh'd  it  (/),  "  the  wound  flightly  touching  upon,"  or,  "  flightly
"  injuring,  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  penetrating  into  the  right;'*
fo  as  to  make  you  naturally  conjefture,  that  the  feptum  being  obliquely
pierc'd  through,  "  by  a  thin  and  very  (harp  fword,"  the  left  ventricle  was
flightly  graz'd  upon  in  the  paflage,  but  that  the  right  was  open'd  ;  though
"  by  a  fmall  foramen,"  juft  as  in  that  other  obfervation  of  which  I  firft
ipoke.

But  left  you  Ihould  be  in  doubt  about  a  hiftory  which  is  transferr'd  into
this  feftion  (m)  from  Henricus  ab  Heer,  fuppofing  that,  becaufe  "  he  found
"  the  bafis  of  the  heart,  and  the  apex  thereof,  pierc'd  by  two  mufquet-
"  balls,  with  a  very  great  laceration,"  the  wound,  had  reach'd  into  the  left
ventricle ;  read  the  whole  of  it,  and  you  will  find  that  the  wound  pene-
trated into  neither  of  the  ventricles  :  for  otherwife  he  could  not  have  fatif-
fied  thefe  perfons,  who  wonder'd  how  the  life  of  the  patient  could  have  been
produc'd  to  the  end  of  the  feventh  day,  by  citing,  as  he  fays  he  then  did,
the  opinion  of  the  ancients,  that,  "  when  the  fubftance  of  the  heart  only  is
"  injur'd,  if  the  wound  does  not  penetrate  to  the  ventricles,  the  patient  may

(<:)  n.  4.  (h)  Obf.  cit.  23.  §  12.

{aj  Obf.  23.  cit.  §  2.  (0  Patern.  Obf.  33.

(f)  Ibid.  §  18.  C^)  Obf.  17.

f/J  Ibid.  ^  16.  (1)  Obf.  17.

(£)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  2.  A.  2.  Obf.  188.  («;  Obf.  cit.  23.  §  30.

"  furvivc


Letter  LIII. Article  27.  189

"  furvive  for  fome  days,  till  he  is  fnatch'd  away  by  a  fupervening  phleg-
«  mon."

Nor  does  it  efcape  me  that,  befides  the  various  fituation,  the  ftrait  di-
reftion  alfo,  or  obliquity,  the  (hortnefs  or  length,  but  particularly  the  large-
nefs  or  narrownefs,  of  the  wound,  has  a  great  effeft  in  accelerating  death,
or  retarding  it ;  in  proportion  as  the  heart  is  more  or  kfs  hurt,  or  more  or
lefs  blood  is  difcharg'd  from  one  or  other  of  the  ventricles.  For  which  rea-
fon  I  fuppofe  that  this  man,  whom  I  diffefled,  might  have  dragg'd  on  his
life  for  fome  time  longer,  if  fufFocation  had  not  been  added  to  the  wound
(for  regard  muft  be  had  to  the  circumftances  that  are  join'd  with  the  wound
of  the  heart  in  thofe  who  die  very  foon,  as,  for  inftance,  in  a  certain  obfer-
vation  of  Maucharcus(;2) )  yet  not  fo  long  as  he  that  I  have  defcrib'd  above  (ij)
from  Valfalva,  who  liv'd  quite  to  the  eighteenth  day,  after  a  penetratino-
wound  of  the  right  ventricle.

And  it  feems  that  this  difference  may  be  gather'd  from  comparing,  one
with  another,  the  great  number  of  obfervations,  which  I  have  referr'd  to,  of
one  or  the  other  ventricle  being  wounded ;  unlefs  there  be  fome  one  of  thole
obftacles  that  I  mention'd  juft  now,  or  even  others  :  as  in  this  man  whom
I  difleded,  the  reticulated  fibres  and  fafciculi  lying  one  upon  another,  and
fo  covering  the  wound  ;  as  in  him  whom  Bartholin  (p)  examin'd,  "  the  lips
*'  of  the  wound  collapfing ;"  as  in  him  of  whom  Billyius  (q)  fpeaks,  "  a  coa-
"  gulum  of  concreted  blood  flopping  up  the  wound  of  the  heart :"  or  if
there  is  no  obflacle,  even  the  very  weaknefs  of  the  heart  in  contracting  itfelf,
and  confequendy  in  throwing  out  the  blood  at  the  wound ;  which,  in  the
hiftories  of  Fantonus  that  have  been  mention'd,  the  frequent  fwoonings,  and
the  quantity  of  blood  difcharg'd,  feem  to  Ihow.

And  for  thefe  reafons  it  was,  perhaps,  that  the  young  man,  whole  n'o-hi;
ventricle  of  the  heart  had  been  wounded  with  a  knife ;  the  wound  beino-  equal
to  fix  lines  of  Parisj-^nd  inflided  horizontally,  at  the  diftance  of  three  inches
from  the  apex,  reaching  from  the  external  paries  to  the  oppofite  fide;  did
not  die  before  the  fixth  day.  There  had  been  a  great  profufibn  of  blood,  a
very  confiderable  fyncope  (befides  very  flight  fwoonings),  and  that  more  than
once ;  and  on  the  three  lafl  days  fcarcely  any  pulfe ;  though  on  the  fecond
and  third  there  had  been  a  violent  fever,  with  a  ftrong  and  full  pulfe :  which
circumftances,  together  with  others  that  were  remark'd  with  more  accuracy
than  I  remember  to  have  read  in  moll  of  the  obfervations  of  the  wounded
heart,  you  may  fee  defcrib'd,  briefly  indeed,  but  with  great  perfpicuity,  by
Stephen  Gafpareni  (r),  formerly  my  auditor,  but  now  an  eminent  phyficiaa
and  furgeon  at  Feltri.

When  I  had  revis'd  thus  far  what  I  have  hitherto  l^aid,  that  excellent  trea-
tife  of  the  heart,  by  the  illuftrious  Archiater  Senac,  was  brought  to  me  :  and
in  reading  over  that  chapter  (j)  which  is  entitled,  "  Of  wounds  of  the  heart,"
1  faw  that  it  contain'd  whatever  could  be  wifh'd  for,  as  far  as  relates  to  rhe
theorjf,  to  the  ufeful  comparifon  of  obfervations  one  with  another,  and  to

(«)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  i.  Obf.  18.  (j)  in  Addit.  ad  banc  Sedl.  Obf.  3.  in  Scliol

(0)  n.  3.  (r)  Offerv.  Med.  Ghii.  9.

(pj  Sea,  hac  Obf.  cit.  23.  §  15.  {s)  1.  4.  ch.  6.


I  c)o Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Difordcrs.

the  cure  itfelf,  as  far  as  any  curative  methods  can  be  attempted.  For  which
reafon  1  make  no  Icruple  to  perfuade  you  to  perufe  the  whole  of  it,  more
than  once.

You  will,  at  the  fame  time,  light  on  obfervations,  fome  of  which  I  'was
■without,  and  chiefly  thofe  of  his  own  that  he  gives ;  and  among  thefe,  par-
ticularly, thofe  which  are  of  fuch  a  nature,  as  to  confirm  the  opinion  that
wounds  may  penetrate  into  the  ventricles,^  and  yet  no  great  efFufion  of  blood
be  brought  on  ;  either  becaufe  he  found  a  deep  wound  ftopp'd  up  with
a  coagulum  of  blood,  or  becauie  the  fibres,  being  irritated  by  the  wound
itfelf,  contrafl  themfelves  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  prevent  the  difcharge  of
the  blood  -,  or  in  confequence  of  the  wound  being  oblique  :  and  he  produces
a  fingular  inftance  of  great  obliquity  -,  for  he  law  a  wound,  in  which  the
fword  had  been  pafs'd  through  the  fubftance  of  the  heart,  from  the  apex  to
the  bafis.

And  although  he  admonifhes  that  this  kind  of  obftacle  can  happen  lefs
eafily  in  wounds  of  the  right  ventricle,  by  reafon  of  the  thinnefs  of  the  pa-
rietes ;  he,  neverthelefs,  does  not  deny  that  the  eft'ufion  of  blood,  from  this
ventricle  alfo,  is  fometimes  not  very  great.  But  if  the  heemorrhage,  from
either  of  the  ventricles,  be  not  fo  large  as,  of  itfelf,  to  be  fpeedily  fatal ;
yet  he  (hows  that  from  the  inflammation  which  comes  on  afterwards,  and
unlefs  this  be  difcufs'd,  from  the  confiderable  fuppuration,  there  is  great
danger  at  hand.  Thefe  things,  however,  I  had  rather  you  would  fee  of
yourfelf,  than  learn  from  my  recital.  i^

28.  And  from  a  wound  alfo  of  a  large  fanguiferou^veflel ;  one  of  thofe  in
particular  that  are  contain'd  in  the  thorax,  efpecially  an  arterial  tube  -,  that  a
great  quantity  of  blood  is  pour'd  out,  and  the  rjian  carried  off;  if  it  were
not  both  evident  by  reafonings,  and  confirm'd  by  the  frequent  difl"e61:ions  of
-wounded  perfons,  an  obfervation  of  Jo.  Andreas  Ufenbezius  (/),  which  you
will  add  to  the  Sepulchretum,  might  fliowi-  And  then,  indeed,  it  is  certainly
in  the  power  of  the  anatomifts,  to  demonurate  from  whence  the  blood  was
difcharg'd.

Whereas,  on  the  contrary,  if  a  flender  veffel  be  injur'd,  the  blood,  flow-
ing out  flowly,  may,  by  its  quantity  being  continually,  though  gradually,  in-
creas'd,  deftroy  the  man  ;  but  it  is  fometimes  with  difficulty  that  it  is  found,
from  whence  the  blood  has  been  difcharg'd :  and  indeed  this  queftion,  in  fome
cafes,  cannot  be  determin'd  at  all,  unlefs  time  be  given  for  making  the  en-
quiry by  the  help  of  injedlion ;  as  in  a  man,  in  whom  one  of  the  cavities  of
the  thorax  was  feen  to  be  fiU'd  with  a  great  quantity  of  blood,  from  a  wound.
But  from  whence  this  blood  had  fiow'd  was  fo  obfcure,  that  it  could  not  be
found  out,  even  by  our  Mediavia,  a  man  whofe  accuracy  was  well  known  to
me.  As  it  is  a  hiflory  by  no  means  defpicable  in  other  refpeds,  I  will  im-
mediately communicate  it  to  you,  in  the  fame  manner  as  he  himfelf  com-
municated it  to  me,  on  the  very  day  of  the  difledion,  which  was  the  firft  of
May  1742.

29.  There  was  a  French  cook  here,  who,  happening  to  quarrel  with  ano-
ther man,  was  wounded,  by  his  drawn  fword,  with  a  blow  which  pafs'd  ob-

(/)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  7.  Obf.  58.

liquely


Letter  LIII. Article  30.  ipi

liquely  from  the  right  fide  to  the  left.  The  wound  indeed  was  manifefl:  about
the  right  fide  of  the  fternum,  almoft  in  the  middle  of  it :  but  whether  it
penetrated  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  could  not  be  diftinguifh'd  by  the
probe,  nor  by  any  other  means.  The  cough  and  the  fpitting,  which  was  now
and  then  ting'd  with  blood  in  feveral  places,  could  fignify  nothing  certain  in
a  man  who  had  been,  for  a  long  time,  fubjeft  to  a  cough  ;  and  to  cineritioua
and  bloody  expeftorations,  with  a  difficulty  of  breathing.

Yet  this  difficulty  of  breathing  was  now  become  much  greater,  and  had  a
fever  join'd  to  it,  with  a  great  frequency  of  pulfe,  a  hardnefs,  and  a  vio-
lence of  ftroke  ;  but  without  any  intermiflion,  or  inequality.  And  on  the
laft  day  of  his  life  alfo,  which  was  the  fourth  from  the  inflidion  of  the  wounds
although  the  pulfe  was  become  extremely  bad  ;  yet  the  patient  lay  fupine,
or  on  either  fide,  juft  as  he  chofe ;  and  even  fat  up  in  bed  to  write  a  letter :
nor  ever  complain'd  of  an  anxiety  of  the  heart,  or  of  any  pain  whatever.

In  examining  into  the  ftate  of  the  wound  after  death,  the  cartilage  of  one
of  thofe  ribs  that  are  join'd  with  the  fternum,  was  found  to  be  cut  into,,
quite  to  the  middle  of  its  height ;  but  the  remaining  paflfage  of  the  fword.
could  not  be  clearly  found  out.  For  this  was  the  ftate  of  the  thoracic  cavi-
ties. The  right  cavity  contain'd  nothing  but  the  lungs  themfelves,  which
were  every  where  conne£ted  to  the  pleura,  flaccid,  of  a  blackifh  colour,
and  in  a  very  bad  ftate ;  but  without  any  hardnefs.  The  left  cavity,  how-
ever, was  very  full  of  fluid  blood  ;  and  in  this  blood  the  lungs  floated,  being:
every  where  unconnected  and  found.

The  internal  furface  of  the  fternum  had  a  kind  of  blacknefs  in  the  left
fide  indeed,  but  not  the  leaft  trace  of  incifion  ;  nor  could  any  traces  thereof
be  found  in  any  vefl'el,  nor  in  the  lungs.  The  pericardium,  which  was  be-
come pretty  thick  on  the  right  fide,  feem'd  to  have  adher'd  to  the  heart  in;
fome  part  of  it ;  and  contain'd  a  fmall  quantity  of  yellow  and  mucous  pus.
The  external  furface -ef  the  heart  was  unequal,  and  in  fome  meafure  cor-
roded. In  the  ventricles  was  no  blood :  yet  there  were  -polypous  concre-
tions.

But  the  fubftance  of  the  heart  was  fo  lax,  and  flaccid,  that  although  about
the  bafis  of  the  right  ventricle,  where  fome  very  fmall  part  of  that  mucous
pus  adher'd  externally,  it  feem'd  to  have  a  foramen,  and  very  readily  admit-
ted a  probe  -,  yet  it  was  doubtful  whether  there  was  a  foramen  before,  or  whe-
ther the  probe  had  not  made  this  foramen  for  itfelf,  by  reafon  of  the  great
laxity  of  the  mufcular  fubftance.  Thus,  as  the  difeafe  of  the  thorax,  which
had  been  of  long  ftanding,  had  held  the  phyficians  in  fufpence  while  the  man-
was  living  •,  fo  they  alfo  held  the  anatomifts  fufpended  in  their  opinion,  after-
death.

30.  That  the  fword  had  penetrated  into  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax,  and
wounded  fome  fanguiferous  velTcl,  appears  from  the  quantity  of  blood  which
was  extravafated  thereinto,  although  it  is  uncertain  what  vefl^el  this  was.
But  as  it  is  very  difficult  to  underftand,  from  the  ftate  of  both  thefe  cavities,
and  of  the  heart  and  pericardium,  how  thofe  fymptoms  could  be  prefent  or
abfent,  which  it  is  very  certain,  from  the  hiftory,  were  prefent  or  abfent ;
■we  ought  the  more  ftudioufly  to  retain  this  obfervation  in  our  memory,  that
thofe  things  foraetimes  happen  which  are  lefs  ufual ;  not  being  ignorant  that

we


I  92 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

we  afcribe  a  great  deal,  for  the  mod  part,  to  the  prefence  or  abfence  of  th
fymptoms  ;  but  not  all  the  circumftances  always.

3i.  Thus  far  of  wounds  of  the  thorax  :  in  regard  to  >»hich  you  will  read
a  hiftory  of  Jo.  Adrian  Slevogtius  («)?  that  deferves  notice,  on  account  of
the  flight  fymptoms  of  their  moft  confiderable  effeCls.  And  as  1  am  now
about  to  add  fome  obfervations  of  blows,  and  compreflions,  which  happen
without  a  wound,  we  will  begin  with  that  which  was  formerly  communicated
to  me  by  Ignatio  Pedratti,  a  phyfician  at  Cremona,  whom  I  have  formerly
fpoken  of  to  you  («).  You  may  compare  it  with  another  which  is  propos'd
by  the  fame  Slevogtius  (jy).

32.  A  man  fell  from  his  horfe.  The  horfe  flruck  his  bread  with  one  of
his  feet,  as  he  lay.  No  external  mark  of  injury  appear'd  therefrom  :  but  he
had  fo  great  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  that  neither  by  blood-lettings,  nor  by
the  application  of  proper  remedies  externally  and  internally,  could  the  phy-
ficians  prevent  death  from  coming  on  within  the  fifteenth  day  after  the  blow.
No  Tib  was  found  to  be  broken  in  the  difledtion  :  but  betwixt  the  ribs  and
the  pleura  was  a  tumour  of  a  confiderable  fize,  made  up  of  congefled
blood,  as  it  were  :  and  there  was  a  difeafe  in  the  lungs  which  correfponded
thereto.

33.  A  country-lad,  of  ten  years  of  age,  lying  upon  the  ground,  had  the
wheels  of  a  cart  run  over  his  thorax  :  though  in  what  pofture  he  lay  could
not  be  Icarn'd.  This  was  known,  that  he  expir'd  within  an  hour :  and  this
happen'd  at  Bologna,  in  the  autumn  of  the  year  1706.

As  I  examined  the  natural  ftate  of  fome  of  the  parts,  for  the  fake  of  ana-
tomical improvement,  I  found  blood  extravafated  in  the  thorax,  and  fome
ribs  deprefs'd  and  broken  on  the  left  fide  •,  and,  on  the  right  fide,  I  found
the  inferior  lobe  of  the  lungs  torn  away  from  the  back  ;  that  is  to  fay,  open'd
with  a  large  and  deep  hiatus,  in  a  longitudinal  direftion.  In  the  heart  was
fcarcely  any  blood,  and  no  polypous  concretion.

34.  After  what  has  been  faid,  in  the  preceding  letters,  of  great  injuries
being  found  within  the  head  from  the  efixft  of  blows,  at  the  fame  time  that
the  head  has  been  externally  found  ;  and  thefe  fometimes  in  the  part  oppofne
to  the  blows  -,  I  fuppofe  you  do  not  greatly  expedl  that  I  fhould  explain  thefe
two  obfervations.  To  the  fecond,  however,  you  fee  that  a  caufe  was  added,
by  a  fudden  comprenion  ftreight'ning  a  vifcus  full  of  blood  and  air,  and
forcing  it  againft  the  oppofite  ribs.  But  to  the  firft  you  will  fee  that  thofe
things  relate,  which  will  be  faid  on  a  future  occafion  (2),  of  the  internal
parts  of  the  belly  being  ruptur'd,  while  the  abdomen  was  found.

I  rather  chufe  to  take  notice,  at  prefent,  of  fome  other  hiftories  which
may  be  added  to  the  Sepulchretum  ;  and  which  relate  to  blows  and  com-
preflions of  the  thorax,  whereof  we  treat.  To  fay  nothing,  therefore,  of
the  fufpicicn  of  Gahrliepius  {a),  of  bones  being  generated  betwixt  the  pleura
and  the  coat  of  the  lungs,  at  the  junfture  of  the  ribs ;  as  if  the  firft  caufe  of

(«)  Differt.  infer.  VomicJe  Pulmon.  &  cast. (z)  Epift.  54.  n.  14.  &  feqq.
'Exempla,  §  6i.  '  [a)  Eph.  N.  C,  Dec.  3.  A.  9,  &  10.  Obf.

(a)  Epilh  21.  n.  43.  43.

(yj  Di&rt,  modo  cit.  §  21.

them


Letter  LIII. Article  34.  193

them  had  been  a  preceding  very  violent  dafhing  of  the  breafl:  againft  the
around  ;  read,  in  Bohn  {b),  of  that  old  man  being  fo  violently  daOi'd  againft
a  bench,  that,  five  ribs  being  broken  "  tranfverfly,"  he  died  within  a  week
in  a  ftate  of  fuffocation.

The  fame  author  (c)  alfo  diflfefted  another  man,  who  died  much  fooner ;  be-
caufe,  befides  that  many  more  ribs  were  broken,  and  fome  laxated,  blood,
which  had  been  extravafated  within  the  thorax  from  the  ruptur'd  intercoftal
veflfels,  and  from  one  of  the  internal  mammary  arteries,  had  accelerated  the
fuffocation.  And  this  man  had  been  run  over  by  the  wheels  of  a  loaded
carriage.

That  man  was  carried  off  by  fuffocation  likewife,  but  unexpectedly,  and
on  the  eleventh  day  of  the  difeafe,  who  had  been  trampled  upon  by  the
horfes  as  he  lay  proftrate  on  the  ground,  and  whofe  back  had  been  comprefs'd
by  the  wheel  of  a  loaded  waggon  paffing  over  it.  In  this  body,  befides  other
things,  Theodorus  Zuingerus  (a')  faw  three  ribs  broken,  and  the  cartilages
of  fome  of  them  quite  torn  away.  And  Mery  (<?)  found  two  ribs  broken  in
an  old  man  whofe  bread  had  been  comprefs'd  by  the  wheels  of  a  paffing
chariot ;  the  emphyl'ematous  tumour  firft  beginning  at  the  feat  of  the
frafture,  and,  with  a  difficulty  of  refpiration,  afterwards  increafing  through
almoft  the  whole  circumference  of  the  body,  till  death  came  on  in  the  fourth
day  ;  fo  as  to  make  us  not  wonder  that  the  hufbandman  (/),  upon  whofe  fide
the  whole  bulk  of  a  plough  had  been  dafh'd  in  fuch  a  manner,  by  a  horfe
who  ran  away  with  it,  as  to  break  a  rib,  upon  which  an  emphyfema  came  on,
fliould,  as  often  as  ever  he  drew  in  the  air,  have  "  a  tumour,  of  the  bignefs
"  of  a  hen's  egg,  protuberating  in  the  region  of  the  broken  rib ;"  which  tu-
mour receded  loon  after  in  exfpiration.  But  this  patient,  as  he  was  a  young
man,  of  a  robuft  conffitution,  and  treated  in  a  different  manner  from  the
old  man,  recover'd.

I  had  almoft  omitted- a  more  furprifing  hiftory,  and  on^  which  relates  pretty
much  to  thofe  things  that  have  been  faid  above  of  wounds  of  the  heart.
This  hiftory  is  Chriftian  Vater's  {g)  ;  who  having  found  the  upper  ribs  of  a
woman  that  had  been  violently  ftruck  upon  the  breaft  by  a  palling  carriage,
and  kill'd  thereby  on  that  very  day ;  having  found  the  upper  ribs,  I  fay,  near
to  the  fternum,  together  with  the  clavicle,  broken  on  the  left  fide,  although
they  were  lefs  bent  inwards,  and  had  injur'd  the  pericardium  much  lefs ;  within
this  cavity  (the  parietes  of  which  were  found,  and  diftended  with  extrava-
fated blood)  neverthelefs,  found  the  right  ventricle  of  the-heart,  not  far  fro.m
the  apex, "  ruptur'd  to  almod:  the  length  of  an  inch."

And  this  obfervation  you  will  join  with  that  which  is  ttansferr'd,  from  the
royal  furgeon.Boirellus,  into  the  Sepulchretum  f/^) ;  I  mean,  of  a  man  who
died  three  or  four  hours  after  a  leaden  bullet,  difcharg'd  from  a  mufquet,
had  enter'd  his  breaft  :  for  although  the  bullet  had  ftopp'd  ftiort  on  this  fide

{b)  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  Sefl.  i.  (f)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom ^  Obf.  51.

(<r)  Ibid.  (ff)  Dec.  3.  cit.  A.  9,  &  10.  Obf.  104.

(d)  Dec.  modo  cit.  3.  A.  5,  &  6.  Obf.  277. {h)  In  Addit.  ad  Seft.  hanc  3.  Obf.  i.

(e)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.R.  des  Sc.  A.  17 13.
Obf.  4.

Vol.  III. ■  C  c  - the


I  94 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  pericardium,  yet  within  this  cavity,  the  parietes  whereof  were  entirely
vinhurt,  but  diftended  with  blood,  was  found  a  wound  of  the  heart  •,  and  in
the  inferior  part  of  the  right  ventricle,  in  like  manner.  In  regard  to  which
two  hiftories,  I  Uippofe,  you  will  not  be  much  furpriz'd,  that  the  wound  or
rupture  of  that  ventricle  brought  on  fo  fudden  a  death,  if  you  obferve  that
the  blood  could  by  no  means  get  out  from  the  pericardium,  which  was  un-
hurt, as  it  did  in  other  v/ounds  of  the  heart  -,  and  that  being,  for  this  reafon,
collefted  and  crowded  together,  it  had  produc'd  the  fame  effedl  that,  as  has
been  already  Ihown  (/),  a  fluid  effus'd  into  the  cavity  of  the  found  pericardium,
from  an  internal  caufe,  can  produce.

But  as  to  the  heart  being  ruptur'd,  without  a  rupture  of  the  pericardium,
Boirellus  had  promis'd  that  he  would  point  out  the  caufe  of  it  when  he  pub-
lilh'd  his  obfervation  {k).  And  what  Vaterus  thought  of  this  matter,  you
will  fee  in  the  latter  part  of  his  obfervation.  To  me,  however,  though  I  do
not  difapprove  the  thoughts  or  inventions  of  others,  it  feems,  that  where  the
queftion  is  of  the  heart,  or  the  arteries,  being  ruptur'd  by  a  blow  receiv'd
on  the  body,  without  the  parts  themfelves  being  touch'd  by  it ;  that  ought
to  be  added  which  Lancifi  (/)  did  not  doubt  was  to  be  attended  to  in  the  ar-
teries, when  weaken'd  from  a  fimilar  ftroke  :  I  mean,  whether  the  percuffion
had  happen'd  in  that  point  of  time  wherein  they  were  dilated  :  for  at  that
time,  as  they  do  not  recede  from  the  ftroke,  but  even  meet  and  give  refiftance
to  it,  they  themfelves  increafe  the  caufe  of  the  injury.

And  in  proportion  as  the  paries  of  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  which
is  of  itfelf  thin,  is  thinner  when  dilated,  it  will  be  the  more  liable  to  receive
an  injury  from  the  percuflion.  And  if  you  add,  that  there  is  a  greater  quan-
tity of  blood  in  fome'  bodies,  you  will  the  more  clearly  conceive  of  that
paries  being  both  dilated  and  extenuated,  fo  as  to  be  ruptur'd  without  grea;t
difficulty  by  the  force  of  a  fudden  and  very  violent  percuffion.

Yet  I  do  not  think  that  animadverfion  of  Lancifi  is,  of  itfelf,  fufficient  to
make  us  underftand  in  what  manner  that  could  happen  which  Jacob  Cicognini,
formerly  counfellor  and  phyfician  at  the  court  of  Turin,  and  after  that,  as
long  as  he  liv'd,  my  moft  worthy  collegue  in  this  univerfity,  afferted  to
Valfalva  and  me  that  he  had  been  witnefs  to.

35.  An  old  man,  being  bufy  in  cutting  wood  in  the  foreft  of  another  perfon,
was  caught  by  the  mafter  of  the  foreft  in  the  middle  of  his  theft.  The
mafter  firft  blam'd  him,  which  was  anfwer'd  from  the  old  man  by  curfes  and
threats ;  and,  at  length,  as  the  old  man  was  running  away,  the  mafter  ftruck
him  on  the  ioack,  once  only,  with  a  club.  The  man  fell  down  dead  from
the  blow,  after  going  two  or  three  paces.

The  great  artery  was  found  to  be  ruptur'd  tranfverely,  and  cleft  afunder  j
notwiftanding  the  vertebrae  and  ribs  were  found  and  unhurt.

36.  What  I  faid  above  (?»)  of  the  fame  artery,  when,  after  a  fall  from  a
very  high  place,  it  was  found  by  Valfalva  in  a  perforated  ftate  within  the
pericardium,  I  muft  fay  here  fo  much  the  more,  where  the  artery  is  found  to

(i)  Epift.  26.  n.  18.  (0  l^e  Aneur.  1,  2.  c.  2.  Propof.  21.  cum

{i)  Zodiac.  Med.  Gall.  A.  z.  M.  Jul.  Obf. Schol.
20.  {m)  N.8.

8  be


Letter  LIII. Article  37.  19^"

be  ruptur'd  tranfverfely.  The  old  man  was  ftruck  with  a  (lick ;  and  how
often,  and  how  much,  we  have  feen  this  artery  to  be  eroded  internally  in  old
men,  our  letters  to  you  fufficiently  Ibow.  If  it  happen  that  this  vefTcl  was
very  near  to  rupture  of  itfelf,  when  it  receiv'd  a  concuffion  from  a  violent
blow  upon  the  vertebrfe,  to  which  it  adher'd  ;  it  will  not  feem  very  foreign  to
probability  to  fuppofe  that  it  might  be  broken  through :  efpecially  as  by
reafon  of  the  various  paffions  and  feelings  of  the  old  man,  who  was  caught
in  the  theft,  enrag'd,  and  put  to  flight,  the  artery  would  be  ftreighten'd  at
the  fame  time,  in  feveral  places,  by  irregular  contraftions  ;  and  the  adtion  of
threatening  and  curfing,  and  the  efforts  of  running,  would  more  fpeedily  urge
on  the  blood,  and  urge  it  more  vehemently  into  this  artery  :  to  omit  that,  by-
two  blows  of  this  kind,  (which,  however,  were  receiv'd  on  the  hypochondria)
Samuel  Graffius,  as  you  will  even  read  in  the  Sepulchretum  (n),  had,  befides
the  fpleen  and  the  vena  cava,  feen  the  great  artery  alfo  torn  afunder  in  a  young
man.

And  in  the  porter  of  whom  I  fliall  fpeak  prefently,  the  caufes  both  of  the
fudden  death,  and  of  thofe  parts  that  were  found  to  be  broken  in  the  dead
body,  were,  of  themfelves,  very  evident  to  all,  and  did  not  relate  to  the
thorax  only,  but  to  the  head  alfo  ;  as  was  the  cafe  in  a  man,  and  a  young
rnan,  whom  I  have  defcrib'd  in  the  preceding  letter  {0) :  fo  that  I  fcarcely
deferr'd  this  obfervation  to  the  prefent  opportunity,  on  any  other  account,
but  to  prevent  my  being  too  prolix  in  that  letter;  for  it  might  with  great
propriety  have  been  propos'd  there.

37.  A  porter,  of  a  pretty  fat  and  mufcular  habit,  being  in  very  good  health,
and  bufy  about  fomething  or  other  on  a  very  high  roof,  fell  down  from  thence,
headlong,  upon  a  road  pav'd  with  hard  ftones,  and  died  immediately.  This
happen'd  in  the  month-of  January,  in  the  year  1725,  when  the  time  was  at
hand  in  which  anatomical  demonftrations  are  annually  given  in  this  theatre.

His  carcafe  was,  therefore,  given  to  the  college,  and  was  the  more  ac-
curately diffedted  by  me,  as  it  was  more  fit  for  this  purpofe  than  moft
bodies  are.  But  I  Ihall  now  take  notice  of  the  preternatural  appearances
only,  as  I  preferve  the  natural  appearances,  except  a  few,  to  another  time  ;
yet  I  fhall  not  mention  all  that  were  preternatural,  as  I  have  hinted  at  fome
of  thefe  things  when  writing  to  you  on  other  occafions,  as  will  be  faid  below
in  the  proper  places.

When  the  belly  was  open'd,  we  found  fome  tradt  of  the  fmall  inteftines  to
be  univerfally  livid  ;  and  as  two-and-twenty  hours  were  not  yet  elaps'd  fince
death,  we  diftinguilh'd  the  chyliferous  veffels  of  that  part  of  thofe  inteftines
which  was  neareft  to  the  ftomach,  that  was  diftended  with  food;  and  for  this
reafon  we  obferv'd  but  a  fmall  quantity  of  bile  in  the  gall-bladder.  But  in
whom  prominences  were  feated  upon  the  ring  of  the  pylorus,  has  been  faid
in  the  twenty-ninth  letter  (^) :  as  it  has  been  hinted  [in  the  forty-third  (q)
what  was  the  ftate  of  the  urethra.

The  trunk  of  the  great  artery,  in  all  that  part  which  belongs  to  the  belly,

(»)  In  Addit.  ad  hanc  SeO.  Obf.  31.  fpj  N.  17.

(.)  N.  34,  &  35.  (?)  N.  9.

C  c  2  fliow'd


i()6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

fliow'd  here  and  there,  internally,  beginnings  of  future  bone:  and  when  look'd
upon  both  internally  and  externally,  inftead  of  one  cosliac  artery,  had  three
arifing  from  itfelf ;  one  of  which  was  very  fmall,  two  confiderably  large,  but
all  very  near  to  each  other.  The  thorax  had  feventeen  of  its  ribs  broken.
The  left  lobe  of  the  lungs  coher'd  witli  the  pleura.  The  fuperior  vena  cava,
in  the  very  extrennity  of  it,  appear'd  to  be  in  a  manner  eroded,  as  it  were,
on  the  internal  furface  ;  and  the  great  artery,  on  iis  internal  furface  aifo,  not
far  from  the  heart,  was  reticulated,  for  a  confiderable  trad,  with  thick  and
white  fibres :  befides,  at  the  curvature  it  had  become  indurated  into  a  bony
fcale  ;  and  this  difeafe  was  internal  likewife.

Finally,  the  cranium,  at  the  occiput,  and  the  pollerior  parts  of  thefinciput,
was  broken  afunder  into  fragments.

38.  If  1  had  chofen  to  attend  to  the  principal  caufe  of  fudden  death,  this
hiftory  ought  to  have  been  propos'd  in  the  preceding  letter ;  for  you  fee  from
the  comminution  of  the  cranium  into  fragments,  and  thofe  at  the  occiput,
how  great  the  concuffion,  not  only  of  the  cerebrum,  muft  have  been,  but
alfo  of  the  cerebellum.  Yet  I  chofe  to  defer  it  to  the  prefent  letter,  noc
only  for  the  reafon  I  mention'd  before,  but  alfo  on  account  of  the  great
number  of  ribs  which  were  fradlur'd.

From  that  letter  you  have  examples  wherein  we  favv  the  ribs  alfo,  though
much  fewer  in  number,  and  indeed  forae  of  the  vercebrse  dorfi,  to  be  broken.
Therefore,  we  not  only  pafs  by  thofe  things  here,  but  that  wound  of  the
wool-comber  likewife,  which  is  already  defcrib'd  to  you  (r),  and  which  was
inflicted  on  the  fcapula,  adding  this  one  thing  from  anatomy  ;  I  mean,  that
we  ought  to  take  care,  in  wounds  of  that  part,  left  the  upper  limb  of  the
fame  fide  be  agitated  :  for  the  motion  of  this  limb  prevents  thofe  wounds
from  being  eafily  brought  to  a  cicatrix.

39.  Before  we  treat,  in  the  next  letter,  of  wounds  that  relate  to  the  belly,
we  muft  not  omit  here  a  wound  which  related  to  the  belly  and  to  the  thorax
at  the  fame  time  ;  efpecially  as  it  began  in  the  thorax,  which  is  the  part  we
are  now  fpeaking  of,  and  terminated  in  the  fame,

40.  A  taylor,  of  twenty  years  of  age,  was  wounded  by  a  foreigner,  for
a  reafon  of  very  little  confequence,  by  a  double-edg'd  and  pretty  broad  knife,
in  the  lower  part  of  his  right  fide.  This  happen'd  on  the  24th  of  March,
in  the  year  1742;  that  is,  on  the  very  day  when  the  refurre£lion  of  our
Saviour  was  celebrated ;  a  circumftance  that  made  the  fafb  more  heinous.

He  did  not  fall  down  after  receiving  the  wound.  But  being  immediately
brought  into  the  hofpital,  which  was  at  fome  diftance  from  thence,  he  vo-
mited in  the  way,  and  difcharg'd  the  excrements  both  of  the  inteftines  and
bladder.  When  he  came  thither,  he  was  cold  all  over  his  body  -,  he  had  no
ftrength,  and  no  pulfe ;  or,  at  leaft,  his  pulfe  was  very  obfcure  -,  and  he
fcarcely  could  mutter  over  a  few  pious  words.  As  the  blood  was  difcharg'd
in  very  fmall  quantity,  the  wound  was  for  that  reafon  dilated  -,  but  he  fhow'd
not  the  leaft  fign  of  feeling.  Therefore,  after  an  hour,  or  a  little  more,
from  the  infliftion  of  the  wo-und,  he  died  without  any  difRculty  of  breathing, ,
or  any  difcharge  of  blood  from  the  mouth.

(r)  Epift.  16.  n.  28.-

Two  ■


Letter  LIIT. Article  40.  197

Two  days  after  the  death  of  this  patient,  we  began  to  difle£t  the  body,
accurately,  in  the  fame  place,  and  continu'd  the  difiedion  the  fix  following
days ;  as  it  was  very  proper  for  our  purpofe  by  reafon  of  the  fize  and  habit,
which  you  could  neither  call  fat  nor  lean.  I  fhall  take  notice  here  only  of
what  relates  to  the  wound,  and  any  thing  elfe  which  occurr'd  unexpefledly.

The  abdomen,  which  was  neither  tumid  nor  tenfe,  and  contain'd,  never-
thelefs,  fuch  a  quantity  of  blood  as  I  fhall  mention,  being  cut  into,  and  laid
open,  the  furface  of  all  the  vifcera  appear'd  to  be  flightly  bloody.  In  ob-
ferving  the  fituation  of  thefe  vifcera,  and  among  the  others  of  the  omentum,
we  found  that,  as  it  defcended  from  the  right  fide  obliquely  to  the  middle  of
the  belly,  it  was  drawn  up  on  the  left  fide,  and  roU'd  together,  fo  as  to  cover
the  ftomach ;  and  then  we  immediately  went  on  to  the  examination  of  the
wound.

The  knife  had  enter'd  the  lower  fide  of  the  right  cavity  of  the  thorax,
betwixt  the  ninth  and  tenth  rib  ;  and  after  having  pierc'^d  through  the  fiefhy
part  of  the  diaphragm,  near  to  thofe  ribs,  had  pafs'd  through  the  nearefl:  fide
of  the  liver,  having  enter'd  it  on  the  convex  furface,  at  fome  diftance  from
the  lower  edge,  by  a  fiflfure  about  two  inches  in  length  ;  but  having  come  out
on  the  concave  furface  at  a  fiffure  fomewhat  lefs :  fo  that  the  whole  paflTage
of  the  knife  through  the  liver  was  not  longer,  in  general,  than  two  inches.

After  it  had  come  out  from  the  liver,  it  was  forc'd  through  the  right
kidney,  at  fome  diftance  from  the  upper  part,  pafTing  obliquely,  in  like
manner,  from  the  anterior  to  the  pofterior  furface,  as  in  the  liver ;  by  a  fiflTure
which  was  almoft  one-half  lefs  in  length  than  that  in  the  liver.  Finally,  it
had  again  pervaded  the  diaphragm,  and  had  gone  quite  to  the  lower  part  of
the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  through  the  flefhy  part  of  this  mufcle  that  lies  be-
hind the  kidney  :  and,  after  having  injur'd  the  trunk  of  the  intercoftal  nerve,
at  the  fide  of  the  twelfth  vertebra  dorfi,  and  a  certain  branch  of  the  vena
fine  pari ;  and  after  having  gone  through  fuch  a  number  of  other  parts  ;  ic
laft  of  all  wounded  the  neighbouring  mufcles  which  pafs  by  the  fide  of  the
fpine :  and  thefe  to  the  depth  of  an  inch,  or  rather  more,  notwithftanding  fo
many  parts  had  been  already  pierc'd  through  at  one  ftroke.  Therefore,  altho'
neither  in  the  intercoftal  mufcles,  nor  in  the  diaphragm,  nor  in  the  liver,
nor  the  kidney,  nor  in  the  fide  of  the  fpine,  nor  in  thofe  mufcles  which  I
laft  of  all  mention'd,  it  had  wounded  any  veflel  of  a  confiderable  fize  ;  yet
it  had  cut  into  fo  many  fmaller  vefl^els,  that  within  the  fliort  time  for  which
life  continu'd,  no  lefs  a  quantity  of  blood  feem'd  to  have  been  effus'd,  than:
if  the  emulgent  veflels,  or  the  vena  portarum,  or  ratlier  the  trunk  of  the
vena  cava  itfelf,  all  of  which  we  found  to  be  unhurt,  had  been  wounded.

For,  upon  lifting  up  the  inteftines  with  the  hands,  a  quantity  of  black
blood  was  feen  under  them,  and  ftill  more  in  the  cavity  of  the  pelvis ;  fo
that  moft  of  the  perfons  who  were  prefent  at  the  diflTedion,  feem'd  to  think,
that  there  were  twenty  pounds  at  leaft  :  although,  as  it  was  fo  fluid  that  very
few  coagula  could  be  obferv'd  therein,  and  as  nothing  of  a  polypous  ap-
pearance was  feen  in  the  difleftion  of  the  whole  body,  either  in  the  vefTels,
or  in  the  heart  itfelf,  it  is  probable  that  it  had  alfo  continu'd  to  flow  from
the  incis'd  vefTels  after  death,  and  that  it  had  increas'd  the  quantity  of  that
which  had  been  extravafaced  before  death.  This,  at  leaft,  is  certain,  that, .
4r  at;


198 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

at  the  end  of  the  fourth  day  after  the  death  of  the  man,  we  faw,  even  then,
blood  difcharg'd  from  the  very  extremity  of  the  wound  which  we  have  de-
fcrib'd,  at  the  fide  of  the  fpine.

But  whether  part  of  the  blood  defcended  from  thence,  through  the  tranf-
fix'd  diaphragm,  into  the  belly  -,  or  whether,  on  the  other  hand,  it  afcended
into  the  thorax  of  the  fupine  carcafe  from  the  belly  ;  is  not  eafy  to  determine.
This,  however,  is  certain,  that  before  the  thorax  was  open'd  ;  when,  after
removing  the  vifcera  of  the  belly,  and  exhaufting  the  blood,  we  examin'd
the  diaphragm  ;  blood  ifTu'd  forth  from  the  laft  wound  of  this  part  -,  and,
by  prefling  the  hand  upon  that  part  of  the  diaphragm,  fomething  was  per-
ceiv'd  to  flu6tuate  above  this  place  :  and  a  kind  of  croaking  and  found  was
beard,  fimilar  to  that  which  arifes  from  flatus  included  in  the  inteflines.  And,
finally,  when  the  thorax  was  open'd,  fome  quantity  of  blood  was  found  in
the  cavity  on  that  fide  -,  and  the  lobe  of  the  lungs  therein  was  drawn  up-
wards to  a  confiderable  degree.

For  this  lobe  was  every-where  unconne6ted  to  the  pleura ;  whereas  the  left
lobe  was  connefted  thereto  anteriorly,  and  at  the  fide,  but  particularly  on
the  back-part.  Befides  thefe  things,  there  was  nothing  either  in  the  thorax,
or  in  the  belly,  that  deferves  to  be  taken  notice  of  here.  For  it  was  to  no
purpofe  that  we  look'd  whether  there  was  any  thing  bloody  contain'd  in  the
bladder,  by  reafon  of  the  wounded  kidney  -,  as  the  fmail  quantity  of  urine
that  was  contain'd  therein,  was  without  any  mixture  of  blood.  But  as  to
what  we  obferv'd  in  the  tunica  albuginea  of  one  of  the  teftes,  this  has  been
already  faid  on  a  former  occafion  (s).

Of  the  appearances,  however,  that  I  faw  in  the  diflfedtion  of  the  head,,
thefe  things  ought  not  to  be  pafs'd  over ;  I  mean,  that  the  right  vertebral
artery,  at  lead  within  the  cranium,  was  four  times  as  wide  as  the  left:  and
that  within  the  dura  mater,  not  only  externally,  but  where  it  inverts  the
lateral  ventricles  of  the  brain  alfo,  the  vefTels  were  not  diftended  with  a
fmaller  quantity  of  blood,  than  if  the  man  had  died  of  a  phrenzy.  So,
alfo,  in  thofe  ventricles,  each  of  which  contain'd  about  a  fpoonful  of  clear
water,  the  plexus  choroides  were  of  a  blackifti  colour  inclining  to  red.

So  in  whatever  part  the  medullary  fubftance  was  cut  into,  fmall  bloody
drops  diftill'd  here  and  there  ;  and  if  you  wip'd  thefe  away,  and  comprefs'd
the  cerebrum,  other  larger  drops  immediately  burfl:  forth:  and  we  thought
it  altogether  furprifing,  what  fhould  prevent  the  return  of  the  blood  from  the
cranium,  unlefs  we  fuppos'd  fome  convulfive  contradlions  to  have  been  excited ;
in  confequence  of  the  injury  done  to  the  trunk  of  the  intercoflal  nerve ;  which
retain'd  the  blood  there,  in  fpite  of  the  great  extravafation  thereof  into  the
belly.  And  to  thefe  contraftions  you  may  alfo  attribute  the  vomiting  ;  al-
though you,  perjiaps,  have  fufficient  caufes  in  the  wounds  of  the  kidney
and  diaphragm,  from  whence  to  account  for  the  exiftence  of  this  fymp-
tom.

41.  But  however  thefe  things  might  be;  this  you  will,  in  particular,  ga-
ther from  the  obfervation  in  quedion, (and  from  others fimilar  thereto)

(i)  Epift43.  n.  30.

that


Letter  LIIL Article  ,41.  199

that  if  any  furgeons  happen  to  be  not  very  well  fkill'd  in  anatomy,  they
may  fall  into  very  grievous  miftakes,  by  fuppofing  that  wounds  which  enter
betwixt  the  ribs,  belong  only  to  the  thorax.  That  is  to  fay,-  they  are  led
afide  by  not  being  well  acquainted  with  the  arch'd  fituation  of  the  dia-
phragm ;  and  never  obferving  that  the  upper  part  of  the  belly  is,  therefore,
contain'd  betwixt  the  ribs,  they  do  not,  in  the  leaft,  fufped,  that  the  vifcera
of  this  cavity  may,  at  the  fame  time,  be  injur'd  by  thofe  wounds.

This  danger  is  lo  much  the  more  increas'd,  if  there  be  any  caufe  in  the
belly,  which  drives  the  diaphragm  up  higher  than  ufual  :  whether  this  be,
as  1  have  taken  notice  of  in  a  fat  woman  (/),  a  quantity  of  pinguedinous
matter,  or  of  flatus,  or  of  water,  or  even  the  bulk  of  the  diftended  uterus,
or  of  any  other  vifcus  ;  as,  for  inftance,  of  the  liver  ;  whereby,  even  in  a
natural  ftate,  as  T  have  already  admonifh'd  (it),  the  right  fide  of  the  dia-
phragm is  frequently  rais'd  up.  And  the  danger  is  ftiU  greater,  if  the
wound  is  inflidled  upon  a  perfon  when  in  a  recumbent  pofture,  inftead  of
{landing  upright.

Nor  do  wounds  of  this  kind  occur  fo  rarely,  but  I  can  remember  four  in-
ftances  at  leaft;  which  you  may  add  to  the  Sepulchretum  ;  befides  one  of
GlilTon's  {x),  that  certainly  fhould  have  been  inferted  there,  by  thofe  who
compil'd  and  made  additions  to  the  Sepulchretum.  The  firft  is  that  of
Mauchart(j),  which  is  fimilar  to  the  one  produc'd  above,  from  Valfalva
(2),  in  this  circumftance,  that  as  much  blood  as  was  exhaufted  from  the
thorax,  fo  much  immediately  fiow'd  in  thither,  by  the  wound  of  the  diaphragm,
from  the  belly.

The  fecond  is  that  of  Goetzius  {a).  The  third,  of  the  celebrated  Heifter
{b).  And  the  fourth  is  that  of  Cramerus  (c).  And  in  all  thefe  cafes,  in
fadt,  the  wound  defcended  from  the  thorax,  which  it  had  firft  enter'd,
through  the  diaphragm  into  the  belly,  and  had  perforated  the  liver.  More-
over, on  account  ot  th5,fame  confirmation,  and  pofition,-  of  the  diaphragm,
which  I  have  mention'd,  and  its  declivity  towards  the  pofterior  parts  -,  ic
alfo  happens,^  that  if  the  wounds,  inflidled  upon  the  upper  part  of  the  ab-
domen, are  continued  to  any  confiderablc  extent,  not  only  the  vifcera  of
the  belly,  but  thofe  of  the  thorax  alfo,  will  be  wounded  together  with  the
diaphragm.

However,  you  fee  that  wounds  of  this  kind  muft  be  referr'd  by  us  to  the
next  letter ;  as  we  here  attend  to  the  part  from  whence  they  begin.  You
may  therefore  expeft  this  letter  ihortly  ;  and,  in  the  mean  while,  fare-
wel.

(/)  Epift.  27,  n.  2.  (a)  Aa.  N.  C.  Tom.  2.  Obf.  181.

(«)  Epift.  Anat.  i.  n.  13.  (h)  Differt. de  Medicinas  Udlit.  in  Jurif-

(:«■) Anat.  Hep.  c.  9.  in  fin.  prudent,  n.  61.  &  feqq.

(y)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  1.  Obf.  19.  [c)  Commerc.  Litter.  A. 1741. Hebd.  27.

C?)  "•  1- • .  n.  I.  ad  cap.  2.


LETTER


2  00 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

LETTER the FIFTY-FOURTH

Treats  of  Wounds  and  Blows  of  the  Belly,  Loins,  and  Arms.


I.  T  TAVING  treated  of  wounds  of  the  cheft  and  back,  it  comes  next  in
_(~J_  order  to  treat  of  thofe  that  relate  to  the  belly  and  the  loins  ;  and,
that  no  others  may  remain,  we  will  add  thofe  alfo  that  belong  both  to  the
fuperior  and  inferior  limbs.  Firft,  then,  take  thefe  obfervations  from  Val-
falva.

2.  A  young  man,  of  two-and-twenty  years  of  age,  was  run  at  by  a  cow,
and  was  wounded  with  her  horn  about  one  of  his  groins.  He  had  a  fever ;
and  by  degrees  his  face,  and  the  remaining  part  of  his  body,  began  to
fwell :  yet  the  tumour  could  not  be  clafs'd  with  thofe  of  the  truly  oederaatous
kind.  Nothing  occurr'd  befides  this,  that  was  worth  notice,  till  the  feven-
teenth  day.  And  then  a  difficulty  of  breathing  came  on,  with  a  kind  of
pain,  and  impediment  at  the  fauces  ;  which,  to  the  patient  himfelf,  feem'd
to  be  like  a  bolus :  and  he  affirm'd,  that  if  he  could  get  rid  of  this,  he  fhould
be  quite  well  in  every  other  refpeft.  Yet  fometimes,  tremors  of  the  whole
body  were  obferv'd  by  thofe  who  fat  by  him  ;  and  the  tumour  thereof,  in  the
mean  while,  continu'd  and  encreas'd.  At  length,  about  the  twenty-fecond
day  from  receiving  the  wound,  death  came  on.

The  wound  being  accurately  examin'd  in  the  dead  body,  began  near  the
paffage  of  the  fpermatic  veflels  through  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  and
was  continu'd  betwixt  the  mufculus  redtus,  and  the  tendons  of  the  obliqui,
where  a  quantity  of  coagulated  blood  was  found.  But  it  did  not  reach  in-
to the  cavity  of  the  belly.  In  this  cavity  the  inteftines  were  much  diftend-
ed  with  air,  and  there  was  a  great  quantity  of  ftagnant  ferum.

In  the  thorax  alfo  was  a  ftagnating  ferum.  However,  the  vifcera  both  of
the  thorax  and  belly  were  very  found.  And  indeed,  the  mufcles,  in  feveral
places,  preferv'd  their  natural  folidity.

If  the  tumour,  wherewith  the  body  of  this  young  man  was  diftended,  had
any  circumftance  attending  it,  which  might  make  it  referable  to  the  clafs
of  emphyfematous  tumours  ;  it  might  be  conceiv'd,  from  hence,  that  an
emphylema  does  not  arife  only  from  thofe  wounds  that  penetrate  into  the
cavity  of  the  thorax,  or  afpera  arteria.  So  even  Bartholin,  as  you  have  it
in  this  third  fedlion  of  the  Sepulchretum  («),  when  an  emphyfema  had  oc-

(a) Obf.  20.

cupied


Letter  LIV. Articles  4,  5,  6.  201

cupied  not  only the  face  but  the  whole  body; could  not,  neverthelefs,  find
a  deep  wound,  and  ftill  lefs  one  that  injur'd  any  internal  part.

But  as  to  that  pain  and  impediment  about  the  fauces,  you  remember  that
I  have  already  made  mention  of  it  {b),  not  only  from  Valfalva,  but  alfo
from  the  obfervations  of  Wepfer :  to  which  you  may  add  others  of  Eber-
hardus  Gockelius  (<:),  of  Elias  Camerarius  {d),  and  of  Maurice  Reverhorft  (1?).
If  you  examine  all  thefe  obfervations,  you  will  fee  that  this  impediment  has
particularly  arifen  from  wounds :  and,  indeed,  that  it  has  often  been  the
forerunner  of  convulfions  of  thofe  parts,  near  to  which  this  young  man  had
bec;n  wounded  ;  and  thefe  convulfions  you  fee  did  come  on,  in  this  cafe  alfo,
under  the  appearance  of  tremors.  And  to  the  fame  caule  was,  perhaps,  owing,
not  only  the  diftention  of  the  inteftines,  but  alfo  the  efFufion  of  ferum  into
the  belly  and  thorax,  by  giving  a  check  to  the  motion  of  the  blood  and
lymph,  in  their  progrefs.

4.  A  man,  of  forty  years  of  age,  was  wounded  by  leaden  fhot,  from  a
piftol,  at  the  margin  of  the  right  os  ilium.  At  firft  no  fymptoms  appear'd.
But  fome  days  after  a  fever  came  on,  with  a  very  great  rigor,  and  recurr'd
every  four-and-twenty  hours  :  till  about  the  fourteenth  day,  when  he  had  been
fliort  of  breath  for  the  fpace  of  three  days,  the  patient  died  ;  not  without
fome  fufpicion  of  the  inteftines  being  wounded,  for  this  reafon,  that  a  matter
had  been  difcharg'd  from  the  wound  almoftfimilar  to  inteftinal  excrements.

Yet  the  wound  had  not  penetrated  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  and  the
vifcera  of  this  cavity  were  all  uninjur'd.  The  wound  itfelf  abounded  with
leaden  {hot,  which  had  broken  the  margin  of  the  bone,  that  I  have  men-
tion'd,  into  fmall  pieces.

5.  Although  Valfalva  has  added  to  this  obfervation,  that  he  had  feen  ano-
ther man,  who  died  fro'm  a  fimllar  wound  in  the  fame  part,  without  any
other  injury  v^hich  deferv'd  attention ;  and  although  you  are  not  ignorant,
what  mufcles  have  theip-tendons  arifing  therefrom,  or  terminating  therein  ;
yet  you  will  be  prevented  from  fuppofing  this  confequence  perpetual,  by  the
obfervation  of  Meekrenius,  which  you  even  read  in  this  leftion  of  the  Se-
pulchretum  (f).  For  "  the  fpine,  or  appendix,  of  the  os  ilium,  being
"  broken  into  feveral  parts,  by  a  bulkt,"  the  man  not  only  liv'd  for  "  twelve
"  weeks,"  as  you  have  it  in  the  Sepulchretum,  "  but  for  fourteen  weeks ;"
and  would  not,  to  all  appearance,  have  died  even  then,  if  the  bullet  had
not  injur'd  other  parts,  and  a  fudden  and  violent  paffion  of  the  mind  had
not,  laft  of  all,  come  on.

6.  A  young  man,  of  three  and-twenty  years  of  age,  was  wounded  at  the
diftance  of  four  fingers  breadths  below  the  navel.  A  vomiting  follow'd  the
wound.  From  the  wound  came  out  a  portion  of  the  omentum,  which,  within
a  few  days,  was  fo  chang'd  in  its  colour  and  appearance,  as  to  refemble  a
firm  and  compact  flefli.  In  a  fliort  time  after  the  infiidion  of  the  wound,  a
diarrhoea  came  on.  In  the  mean  while,  the  abdomen  preferv'd  its  natural
ftate,  if  you  except  the  upper  part  that  correfponded  to  the  ftomach,  which

{h)  Epift.  15.  n.  g.  (d)  Ibid.  Obf.  4r.

(f)  Eph.  N. C.  Dec.  5. A. 5.  Obf.  37. (f)  Epi.1.  inter  Problem.  Ruyfch.  14.
&  38-  •  (fj  in  Additam,  Obf.  4,  cum  SchoL

Vol,  IIL  D  d  became


2  o  2 Book  IV.  of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

became  (lightly  tumid.  To  thefe  fymptoms  were  at  length  join'd,  a  diffi-
culty of  breathing,  and  a  very  frequent  cough ;  together  with  an  expedtora-
tion  of  purulent  matter,  and  a  very  troublelome  pain  in  the  right  fide  of  the
thorax.  And,  after  being  tormented  with  thefe  fymptoms,  the  patient  at
length  died.

The  belly,  being  open'd,  Ihow'd  no  mark  of  injury  at  fiift  fight.  But  by
enquiring  farther  a  purulent  matter  was  foon  after  found,  which  ftagnated
on  the  right  fide,  betwixt  the  membranes  of  the  mefentery,  and  peritonEcum,
juft  as  if  it  had  been  contain'd  in  a  follicle.  This  matter  extended  itfelf
from  the  lower  part  of  the  belly,  under  the  liver,  quite  to  the  diaphragm.

The  correfponding  cavity  of  the  thorax  alio,  not  only  contain'd  fome  of
the  fame  kind  of  pus,  but  was  fo  fiU'd  therewith,  that  no  fooner  was  the
knife  forc'd  into  that  cavity,  in  order  to  cut  out  the  fternum,  but  the  pus
rulh'd  forth  with  an  impetus.  In  this  pus  lay  the  lungs,  in  a  contrafted  ftate,
and  inclining  to  a  black  colour.  But  about  the  right  appendix  of  the  dia-
phragm, was  a  pretty  thick  fanies  ;  fo  that,  at  this  part,  the  pus  feem'd
to  have  pafs'd  from  the  belly  into  the  thorax,  as  if  through  a  ftrainer  -,  as
fo  o-reat  a  quantity  of  it  ftagnated  about  this  region,  both  above  and  below:
but  no  evident  pafTage  could  be  obferv'd.

The  fame  quantity  of  extravafated  matter,  join'd  with  a  very  filthy  odour,
not  only  prevented  us  from  enquiring  very  diligently  into  this  circumftance,  but
alfo  from  enquiring  whence  fo  great  a  quantity  of  pus  had  proceeded  ;  whe-
ther from  a  laceration  of  fome  of  the  mefenteric  glands,  and  chyliferous
vefTels,  fince  no  mark  of  injury  could  be  found  in  the  inteftines,  or  elfe-
where.

7.  As  he  who  had  feen  the  young  man  when  living,  and  diffecled  him  after
death,  I  mean  Valfalva,  fuppofes  that  the  wound  had  reach'd  to  the  mefen-
tery, in  confequence  of  the  inteftines,  by  their  lubricity,  eluding  the  point
of  the  inftiument;  as  muft  have  happen'd,  in  thole  who  have  been  run  thro'
with  a  fword,  and  cur'd  in  a  fhort  tmie,  with  great  fuccefs,  one  of  whom  I
have  even  ken  in  this  hofpital ;  nothing  forbids  us  to  conceive  from  whence
the  p^s  tirft  began  to  be  difcharg'd.

But  by  what  way  it  pafs'd  from  the  belly  into  the  thorax,  is  uncertain.  For
even  in  a  man  who  lies  in  a  fupine  ftate,  and  not  to  fay  in  one  who  has  a
great  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  lies  fupine  for  this  reafon  ;  as  the  thorax
muft  be  fometimes,  at  leaft,  higher  than  the  belly ;  it  is  difhcult  to  conceive,
that  pus  can  be  carried  from  the  pofterior  part  of  the  belly,  into  the  thorax,
in  luch  a  manner  as  to  be  coUefted  there  in  fo  much  more  large  a  quantity,
than  in  the  belly.

Nor  is  it  more  eafy  to  conceive  of  it,  if  you  fhould  conje£lure  that  it
might  be  receiv'd  into  the  circulation,  and  afterwards  carried  into  the  tho-
rax :  for  why  ihould  it  be  carried  into  the  correfponding  fide  of  the  thorax;
and  into  that  part  which  was  neareft  to  the  part  that  it  occupied  in  the  belly  j,
rather  than  into  the  other  fide,  or  into  both,  or  into  any  other  part  of  the
body  ?  Some  things  therefore  muft  be  fuppos'd  at  a  venture.  But  by  this-
very  circumftance  it  appears  plainly,  that  the  cafe  is,  as  I  have  faid,  uncertain.

But  in  regard  to  the  very  great  quantity  of  pus,  you  may  either  account
for  it  irom  the  iatne  caufe  as  Valfalva,  and  from  a  great  quantity  of  fat  in

the


Letter  LIV. Articles  8, 9,  203

the  mefentery  ;  or  you  may  fuppofe  that  by  pus  itfelf,  the  more  pus  is  form'd,
in  proportion  as  it  is  more  acrid,  as  was  fhown  by  that  very  frequent  cough,
and  in  proportion  as  it  affedls,  or  irritates,  for  a  very  long  time,  the  parts
within  which  it  is  contain'd,  as  it  feems  in  this  cafe  to  have  done.

8.  A  certain  man  receiv'd  a  wound  a  little  after  fupper,  a  fliarp  inftrument
being  forc'd  through  the  epigaftrium,  a  little  to  the  left  fide,  oppofite  to
-that  rib,  which  h  the  third,  if  you  reckon  from  the  inferior  parts.  He  im-
mediately vomited  ;  but  what  he  brought  up  was  quite  free  from  blood  :  he
difcharg'd  a  confiderable  quantity  of  blood  from  the  wound.  Both  of  thefe
fymptoms  return'd  on  the  fame  night.  In  the  morning  the  wound  was  in
very  violent  pain ;  fo  that  he  could  not  bear  the  leaft  contorfion  of  body,
without  complaining.  The  day  after,  at  the  break  of  day,  he  got  up  out
of  bed,  and  what  he  had  in  vain  attempted  before,  had  an  eafy  and  natural
ftool.  But  when  he  went  to  bsd  again,  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  kind  of  fudden
fwooning,  and  ceas'd  to  live ;  it  being  now  fix-and-thirty  hours  after  receiv-
ing the  wound.

In  cutting  into  the  abdomen,  the  mufcles  about  the  wound  were  found  to
be  every  where  embrew'd  in  blood,  as  it  were,  for  a  confiderable  fpace ;  and
the  cavity  of  the  belly,  although  the  abdomen,  when  handled,  had  not  been
in  the  lead  tenfe,  was  fiU'd  with  extravafated  blood.  Under  the  wound  lay
the  omentum,  and  the  inteftinum  colon,  where  it  is  connefted  with, the  tlo-
mach.  The  omentum  had  a  Qight  injury  :  the  inteftine  had  none  at  all.
But  the  ftomach  was  perforated  with  a  wound  in  the  middle:  and  this  wound
was  equal  in  breadth  to  the  breadth  of  a  filbert.  But,  although  it  was  en-
quir'd  with  great  accuracy,  whether  any  other  part  was  hurt  befides  thefe,
or  whether  aciy  pretty  large  veffel  was  incis'd  ;  nothing  was'  found  to  be  in-
jur'd,  befides  the  parts  I"  have  mention'd.

9.  Why,  although  a  great  quantity  of  blood  had  flow'd  down  into  the  ca-
vity of  the  belly ;  yet  ao  blood  appear'd,  either  by  vomiting  or  ftool,  any
more  than  if  the  fl:omach  had  not  been  perforated  by  the  wound,  you  will
learn  from  the  fcholium  which  is  fubjoin'd  to  an  obfervation  pretty  fimilar
to  this,  that  is  the  twenty-feventh  (g),  in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  ;
and  you  will,  moreover,  learn  other  caufes  from  the  cafe  of  Gliffon  (h),  which
is  very  improperly  omitted  in  the  fame  place.  But  to  that  large  effufion  of
blood  into  the  belly,  the  fudden  death  is  chiefly  to  be  afcrib'd ;  efpecially  as
it  follow'd  a  fwooning.

However,  that  thofe  perfons  die  within  a  fhort  time,  for  the  moft  part,
who  have  no  part  of  the  ftomach  wounded  befide  the  fundus ;  perhaps  even
without  this  effufion  of  blood  ;  is  not  only  to  be  argu'd  from  the  nerves,
wherewith  the  fundus  is  furnifh'd,  in  a  great  number,  and  from  more  than
one  origin,  but  is  alio  clearly  confirm'd  by  obfervations  ;  that  which  Vv'as  jufl
now  taken  notice  of  from  the  Sepulchretum,  being  even  fet  afide,  on  account
of  the  wound  of  the  thorax,  which  was  adjoin'd  to  k;  as,  for  inflance,  by
the  next  to  it(/),  and  by  others  which,  befides  thefe,  are  given  by  Bohn  {k),
and  might  be  added  to  the  Sepulchretum.

rg)  §  I.  0  §  "•

{h)  Anat.  Hepat.  c.  9.  in  fin.  (/f)  Dc  Renanc.  Vuln,  S.  2.  c.  4.

D  d  2  And


2  04 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univcrfal  Diforders,

And  although  this  author,  as  well  as  the  fon  of  Etmuller  alfo  (/),  recounts
the  caufes,  from  which  wounds  inflifled  on  the  ftomach  are  not  mortal  fome-
times  ;  yet  neither  of  them  is  filent  in  refpecl  to  the  contrary  caufes :  that  is
to  fay,  thofe  from  whence  death,  for  the  moft  part,  or  frequently  a  great
difficulty  of  fucceeding  in  the  cure,  is  the  confequence.

Turn  to  three  examples,  that  you  have,  of  the  liomach  being  wounded,  two
of  which  are  pointed  out,  from  Cowper,  in  the  A^a  Erudltcrum  Liffienf,o.  (;»),
and  the  third  you  have  in  the  Commercium  Litterarium  Noi'imbergenfe  [n).  But  as
to  the  great  quantity  of  blood  being  effus'd  beneath,  and  yet  the  abdomen  not
being  tenfe,  you  will  remember  that  this  has  been  obfcrv'd  by  me  alfo,  in
the  cafe  of  the  taylor(c).

10.  A  young  man,  of  twenty-five  years  of  age,  receiv'd  two  wounds  with
a  fword  ;  the  one  about  four  lingers  breadth  below  the  xiphoid  cartilage,  but
on  the  left  fide,  that  is  to  fay,  about  the  fourth  and  fifth  rib,  reckoning  from
the  lower  part  upwards ;  the  other  a  little  below  the  hypochondrium,  and  on
the  left  fide,  in  like  manner.  At  both  wounds  the  omentum  came  forth.
The  wounded  young  man  firft  went  home  :  but  being  fcarcely  able  to  ftand,
when  he  came  there,  by  reafon  of  faintnefs ;  he  was  carried  from  thence  into
the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Morte,  There,  if  he  attempted  to  lie  down,  he
felt  that  a  fuffocation  was  coming  on,  for  which  reafon  he  was  oblig'd  to
breathe  with  his  neck  ereft.  In  the  mean  while  he  vomited.  Pie  took  no-
thing. At  the  thirteenth  hour  after  receiving  the  wounds  he  died.

The  belly  and  thorax  being  open'd,  in  both  of  them  was  found  extravafated
blood,  but  not  in  great  quantity.  The  inferior  wound  had  alfo,  in  faft,  pe-
netrated into  the  very  cavity  of  the  belly,  but  had  touch'd  none  of  the  vif-
cera.  The  fuptrior  wound,  however,  had  hurt  the  vifcera,  both  of  the
thorax  and  belly.  For  the  left  lobe  of  the  lungs  was  a  little  incis'd  at  its
lower  and  extreme  part :  but  previouQy  to  this  the  fword  had  pafs'd  through
the  diaphragm,  leaving  a  broad  wound :  and  the  upper  part  of  the  ftomach
was  wounded  on  both  fides ;  whereby  not  only  the  cavity  of  this  vifcus  was
fill'd  with  blood,  but  a  paffage  had  even  been  open'd  for  the  ftomach  itfelf,
through  the  diaphragm  ,  fo  that  it  had  pafs'd  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,
together  with  a  portion  of  the  omentum.

1 1,  Of  wounds  of  the  flomach  we  have  written  juft  now  ;  and  of  wounds
of  the  diaphragm  we  treated  in  the  preceding  letter  {p).  And  although  we
have  feen  a  wound  of  the  diaphragm,  join'd  with  wounds  either  of  the  heart  (j),
or  of  the  liver  and  kidney  (r),  in  that  letter,  we  have  not  as  yet,  however,
feen  it  join'd  with  a  wound  of  the  ftomach,  as  in  this  cafe.  Indeed,  the  be-
ginning of  thofe  wounds  was  in  the  parieies  of  the  thorax  ;  but  the  begirr-
ning  of  this  in  the  btUy  :  and  the  pofition  of  the  diaphragm,  which  was
made  menrion  of  in  that  letter  (j),  was  the  reafon  that  the  wound,  proceed-
ing from  this  beginning,  communicated  its  injury  to  a  vifcus  of  the  tho-
rax alfo  ;  as  beginning  from  the  thorax  likewife,  it  communicated  its  injury
to  the  vifcera  of  the  belly.

(/)  In  Programm.  cit.  ad  n.  32.  Ep'.ft.  36.  (0)  Epift.  jj.  n.  40.

[m)  A.  1699.  M.  Febr.  in  Relat,  ejus  Anat.  (/>)  n.  4.  &  6.

2d  Tab.  35.  (y)  n.  3.  [r)  n.  43,

t»J  A,  1736.  H«bd.  i6.  n.  4.  (j)  n.  4.1.

But


Letter  LIV. Article  ii.  205"

But  as  the  obfervadon  in  queftion  has  this  peculiarity  in  it,  that  the  wound-
ed ftomach  alcended  through  the  wound  of  the  diaphragm  ;  it  is  proper  that
we  fpeak  a  few  words  upon  this  cafe,  which,  though  not  very  rare,  is,  how-
ever, not  very  frequent,  as  you  welH^now.

The  diaphragm  confrlling  of  a  nervous,  that  is  a  tendinous  part,  and  of  a
flefiiy  part,  which  furrounds  the  other  •,  and  being  naturally  perforated  by
more  than  one  foramen  -,  is  fo  interpos'd  to  the  thorax  and  belly,  that  it  lifts
itfelf  up,  like  an  arch,  into  the  cavity  of  the  former,  and  no  where  -with
more  declivity  than  at  die  pofterior  part ;  and  this  moft  of  all  in  man  :  for
which  reafon  Pechlinus  (/)  has  admonifn'd  us,  that  in  a  wound  which  is  in-
flifted  upon  the  parietes  of  the  thorax,  at  a  confiderable  diftance  from  the
pofterior  part ;  the  difcharge  of  extravafated  blood,  or  pus,  is  not  only  to  be
affilted  by  the  infledtion  of  the  body  to  the  wound,  but  by  infpiration  alfo  ;
that  is  to  fay,  that  the  more  the  diaphragm,  which  is  then  contradted,  ap-
proaches to  the  figure  of  a  plane,  the  lefs  declivity  there  is  to  be  overcome
by  the  humours,  which  have  flow'd  down  into  that  more  declining  and  deeper
pofterior  part  of  the  thorax.

And  akhouoh  the  wounds  of  this  very  feptum  arefaid,  by  Hippocrates  (a),
to  be  "  mortal;"  yet  from  the  words  which  Hippocrates  has  made  ufe  of^
Galen  (x)  has  admonifti'd  us,  that  thofe  are  to  be  underftood  which  are  large
and  deep,  not  thofe  that  are  fmall  and  fuperficially  inflidled  ;  not  even  if
they  "  are  in  the  nervous  part  of  the  feptum  :"  for  in  this  very  part,  he  has
not  faid  that  thefe  flight,  but  that  thofe  large  and  deep  wounds,  "  do  not
"  coalefce."  And  it  it  certain  that  you  will  fee  many  examples  produc'd,
of  wounds  in  the  fleftiy  part  being  cur'd  :  to  which  you  may,  moreover,  add
three  even  from  Bofcus  (y)  alone.

But  it  is  much  more-difficult  to  find  equal  examples  of  wounds  in  the  ner-
vous part.  Yet,  in  the  hiftory  remark'd  by  the  father-in-law  of  Sennertus^
the  diaphragm  being  pierc'd  through  in  the  nervous  pa,rt,  you  will,  at  leaft,
read  this,  that  after  a  curative  application  of  two  months,  the  patient  "  had
"  feem'd  to  himfelf  to  be  pretty  well,"  for  five  months  ;  if  you  examine
Sennertus  himfelf  (2),  inftead  of  the  Sepulchretum  (a),  wherein  the  fame
hiftory  is  lamely  copied  in  many  particulars.  However,  wounds  even  of  the
flelhy  parr,  not  to  fay  of  the  tendinous  part,  in  the  feptum  tranfverfum,  are,,
for  the  moft:  part,  mortal,  and  that  within  a  little  fpace  of  time.

Yet  whenever  the  ftomach  is  carried  up  through  the  diaphragm  into  the
thorax,  as  it  even  happen'd  in  the  cafe  of  Sennertus ;  it  does  not  always
happen  through  a  paffage  open'd  by  a  wounding  inftrument.  For  to  omit
mentioning  the  fheep  in  which  Peyerus  (l?)  fpund  a  tranfverfe  opening  in  the
upper  and  fleftiy  part  of  the  diaphragm,  bigger  than  the  palm  of  a  man's
hand  ;  this  mufcle  having  been  broken  through  by  the  very  great  diftenfion
of  the  ftomachs,  and  one  of  them  having  been-  forc'd  up,  out  of  the  belly'
within  the  thorax  j.  there  certainly  are  places  in  the  diaphragm,  through  which,..


(t)  Hift.  Vuln.  Thorac.  art.  ii.
(a)  Seft 6.  Apb.  18.
(.1) Comment,  in  cit.  Aph.
(y)  De  Facult.,  Anat,  Left.  4.


(k)  Medic.  Praft.  1.  2.  P.  z.  c.  ir,

[a)  I.  3.  S.  8.  Obf.  27.  §  I.

{il  Eph..N.  C.  Dec.  2,  A.  4.  Obf.  loo.


ujea


2o6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

upon  the  drawing  afonderof  the  flefliy  fibres,  and  upon  the  giving  way  of  the
membranes,  the  ftomach,  or  fome  part  of  the  intellinal  tube,  or  any  other
vifcus,  may  pafs  over  from  the  belly  into  the  thorax.  ■;

Thus  (befide  the  paffage  of  the  cefophagus  of  which  I  fhall  fpeak  after-
wards) I  fee  it  is  related  by  Plainer  (r),  that  fome  part  of  the  colon,  but  a
Hill -larger  part  of  the  omentum,  and  pancreas,  was  carried  up  through  that
pafTage  which  tranfmits  one  of  the  intercoftal  nerves  ;  and  this  happen'd  after
very  violent  pains  of  the  inteftines.

Thus  alfo,  anteriorly,  betwixt  the  fibres  that  come  from  the  xiphoid  car-
tilage and  the  neighbouring  fibres,  there  generally  is  an  interval  through
which  fomething  fimilar  may  happen  :  and  I  even  fiifpcded  this  to  have
happen'd  in  a  hufbandman,  in  whom  I  heard  that  Leprotti  faw,  at  Rome,
part  of  the  inteftine  colon  carried  up,  through  the  middle  and  anterior  part
of  the  diaphragm,  in  fo  great  a  quantity  as  to  equal  a  Ipan,  when  extended.

But  as  I  afterwards  heard,  from  thofe  who  had  differed  the  body,  that
neither  this  inteftine,  nor  the  foramen,  the  diameter  of  which  was  two  thumbs
breadths,  and  through  which  this  part  went  out  and  came  in,  fliow'd  any  fign
of  foregoing  violence  or  diforder,  and  that  the  man  died  in  decrepit  age,
from  a  manifeft  injury  within  the  fkuU;  I  chofe  rather  to  fuppofe  that  it  had
been  thus  from  the  original  formation  •,  in  the  fame  manner  as  Chauvet  (i)
fuppos'd  it  to  have  been  in  the  cafe  of  the  military  officer,  in  the  left  cavity
of  whofe  thorax,  befides  the  ftomach  and  one  half  of  the  Ipleen,  was  a  part
of  the  inteftine  likewife  that  has  been  mention'd;  which,  however,  did  not
return  by  the  fame  foramen  that  it  enter'd,  but  by  another :  and  the  carti-
laginous borders  of  thefe  foramina  adher'd  clofely  to  the  vifcera,  which  pafs'd
through  by  themfelves.

You  will  alfo  fee,  that  Riverius  {$),  Bartholin  (/),  and  Clauderus  (^),  had
the  fame  opinion  in  regard  to  two  others,  if  you  read  the  whole  paffage  of
Bartholin  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  ;  for  the  beginning  of  it  is  omitted
in  the  Sepulchretum.  He  and  Clauderus  fpeak  of  one  and  the  fame  perfon  :
but  the  latter  mentions  many  things  of  him  when  living  ;  the  former  fpeaks
of  the  body  after  death.  The  fum  of  the  obfervation  is,  that  the  ftomach,
the  omentum,  a  little  part  of  the  pancreas,  and  a  pretty  large  part  of  the
inteftinum  colon,  had  lain  hid,in  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax  :  and  this  part
of  the  colon,  together  with  the  duodenum,  came  out  at  the  fame  foramen  by
•which  it  enter'd  j  this  foramen  being  large  in  its  fize,  and  circumfcrib'd  by
a  nervous  circle,  which  was  open'd  in  a  peculiar  manner  in  the  fubjedled  dia-
phragm, that  was  wholly  f^efhy.

The  other  young  man,  defcrib'd  by  Riverius,  had  only  the  ftomach  in  the
thorax,  but  this  on  the  right  fide  -,  which  part  of  the  thorax,  as  it  was  with-
out any  lungs,  fhow'd  this  to  have  been  the  ftate  of  the  parts  from  the  very
birth.  By  what  paffage  the  inteftine  duodenum  came  out  through  the  feptum
tranfverfum,  Riverius  has  been  filent.  Thefe  things,  however,  he  has  made
known,  that  the  young  man,  during  the  whole  courfe  of  his  life,  had  not

(f)  Difp.  de  Hydrocel.  not,  (p  ad  §  2.  {e)  Sepulchr.  Obf.  27.  cit.  §  2.  cum  Schol.

<i)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1729, (/)  Ibid.  §  3.
Obf.  Anat.  2.  (g)  Obf.  12.  in  Addit.  ad  e.^nd.  Sed.

A.  been


Letter  LIV. Article  12.  207

been  "  very  much  "  opprefs'd  with  a  difficulty  of  breathing ;  for  fo  it  ought
to  have  been  faid  in  the  Sepulchretum  alfo ;  and  that  the  moft  violent
ftrainings  to  vomit,  from  the  taking  of  antimony^  were  entirely  without  ef-
feft ;  the  ftomach  being,  as  Riverius  fuppos'd,  prevented  from  difcharging
itfelf  by  the  ribs  that  were  around  it.

As  to  the  young  man  of  whom  Clauderus  and  Bartholin  fpeak,  he  had
always  enjoy'd  a  free  and  Cafy  refpiration  ;  if  you  except  a  fudden  and  fpeedily
evanefcent  afthma:  and  this  young  man  died  in  the  midllof  almoft  infinite
vomitings ;  although  the  ftomach,  being  connected  by  fome  very  ftrong  ban-
dages to  the  diaphragm,  and  that  neighbourhood  where  it  was  join'd  with
the  gula,  reach'd,  with  the  other  part  of  it  that  was  turn'd  upwards,  almoft
to  the  clavicles ;  occupying  nearly  the  whole  cavity  of  the  thorax  wherein  it
was  included.

What  fymptoms  an  infant  of  two  months  old  was  troubl'd  with,  who  was
in  an  ill  ftate  of  health  from  the  very  birth,  and  in  whom,  after  death,  Ca-
rolus  Hukius  found  almoft  all  the  inteftines,  together  with  the  mefentery,
carried  up  into  the  thorax,  through  a  foramen  form'd  by  nature  in  the  dia-
phragm, on  the  left  fide  of  the  foramen  of  the  gula,  you  will  learn  from
the  Asia  Eruditorum  Lipjienjta  (h').

And  I  fhould  alfo  fuppofe  that  the  fiffure  of  the  diaphragm,  through
which  the  celebrated  Stehelinus  (i)  faw  the  ftomach,  the  fpleen,  a  part  of
the  liver,  of  the  inteftine  duodenum,  and  omentum,  carried  up  into  the
left  cavity  of  the  thorax,  in  a  foetus,  was  from  nature  herfelf ;  I  fhould  fup-
pofe fo,  I  fay,  as  the  left  lobe  of  the  lungs  confifted  only  of  one  lobule,  and
was  three  times  lefs  than  the  right  lobe.

I  purpofely  omit  what  vifcera  of  the  belly  have  been  feen  in  the  thorax  of
other  foetulTes,  which  'were  quite  monfters  in  their  formation  ;  as  in  one  of
a  low,  and  in  two  human  fcetuffes,  by  a  certain  anonymous  author(/^),  by
Lemery  (/),  by  Verneyus  (jn)  ;  and  that  all,  in  generai,  faw  the  diaphragm
perforated.  P'or  the  intention  of  my  difcourfe  requires,  that  I  fhould  return
to  thofe  bodies  in  which  not  the  firft  conformation,  but  the  eftedts  of  difeafe,
and  particularly  wounds,  have  forc'd  the  ftomach,  or  any  other  vifcus,  into
the  thorax.

12.  The  obfervation  of  Littre  («)  fliows  that  there  were,  befides  a  difficult
refpiration,  frequent  but  inefFedual  ftrainings  to  vomit,  in  a  dog  whofe  fto-
mach had  gone  out  into  the  thorax  by  the  fame  foramen  through  which  the
gula  enters.  And  two  circumftances  (how'd  this  not  to  have  been  fo  naturally ;
the  firft,  the  length  of  the  gula  itfelf,  which  has  not  been  obferv'd  by  others,
I  mean,  in  fo  great  a  degree  ;  for  when  he  foon  after  replac'd  the  ftomach  in
its  natural  fituation,  the  gula  gave  no  reiiftance  at  all  thereto  :  the  fecond,
a  large  fiffure,  into  which  that  foramen  of  the  diaphragm  had  been  enlarg'd
whereby  the  fame  gula  is  wont  to  pafs, but  the  inteftine  duodenum  then

(h)  A.  1702.  M.  Decembr.  {m}  Comment. Acad. Sc. Imp»  Petropol.

(>)  Tentam  Medic,  th.  3.  Tom.  3.

(/f)  Zodiac.  Medic,  Gall.  A.  4.  M.  Febr.  («i  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1706.

Obf.  14.  Obf.  Anat.  10. '
(/)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R,  des  Sc.  A.  1724,

pafs'd


2o8 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders,

pafs'd  through  ;  which  fiflure  had  already  contracled  a  cicatrix  a  long  time
before.

Littre  fuppos'd  the  diaphragm  to  have  been  thus  fiflfur'd,  either  from  fome
very  violent  convulfion  of  the  CEfophagus,  drawing  the  ftomach  upwards,  or
from  a  contraftion  of  the  diaphragm,  and  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  at  the
lame  time  •,  which  contradion  the  ftomach,  at  that  time,  perhaps,  fill'd  with
folid  aliments, as  is  often  the  cafe  in  a  dog,  had  affifted.

And  I  thought  it  proper  not  only  to  tal<e  notice  to  you  here  of  many  things
from  the  authors  above-mention'd,  but  particularly  of  thcfe  things  from  Littre,
that,  by  comparing  them  together,  you  may  the  more  eafily  underlland,  whether
different  inlbuments  of  vomiting  have  been  wont  to  be  propos'd  by  different
perfons  with  propriety,  or  not ;  either  when  the  ftomach  is  in  the  thorax,  and
has  been  plac'd  there  in  the  original  formation,  or  has  been  driven  up  thither
by  the  force  of  difeafe  :  or,  finally,  to  omit  other  things  in  this  place  which
are  to  be  touch'd  upon  hereafter,  that  you  may  conceive  by  what  caufes  it  is
driven  thither.

For  as  to  its  feeming  to  a  very  great  man,  in  this  our  age,  that  the  force
■wherewith  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen  urge  the  vifcera  of  the  belly  upv.'ards
in  expiration,  may  be  eftimated  from  hence,  that  they  dilate  a  very  fmall
wound  inflifted  on  the  feptum  tranfverfum,  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  let  the
ftomach  pafs  up  into  the  thorax  this  way ;  you  doubtlefs  perceive  that,  pro-
bably forgetting  the  explication  of  Littre,  he  afcrib'd  to  thefe  mufcles  alone
the  whole  of  that  effeft,  which  he  ought,  unlefs  I  am  deceiv'd,  to  have  af-
crib'd in  part  to  thofe  mufcles,  and  in  part  to  that  feptum  being  drawn  down-
wards with  great  force  ;  efpecially  while,  by  means  of  a  convulfion,  or  any
endeavour  in  reftraining  refpiration,  it  afts  in  concert  with  them.

However,  if  a  wound  happen  to  be  inflided  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  enlarge
the  foramen  through  which  the  oefophagus  paffes,  it  is  evident  that  lefs
power  is  fufficient  to  produce  the  fame  effedl.  And  in  this  manner  the  wound
had  happen'd  in  a  foldier,  in  whom  Glandorpius  (o)  found  that  the  left  part
of  the  ftomach  had  afcended  through  the  fame  oefophageal  paffage,  together
with  a  portion  of  the  duodenum,  and  inteftinum  colon  :  and  this  foldier  had
been  carried  off  by  pain,  and  heemorrhage,  a  very  great  fyncope,  with  an
interception  of  refpiration,  and  a  fingultus.

And  it  may  even  happen,  that  there  is  fometimes  need  of  lefs  force ;  that
is  to  fay,  in  a  man  in  whom  this  oefophageal  paffage  is  of  itfelf  pretty  wide,
as  I  have  told  you  that  it  was  feen  by  me  in  a  certain  Ihoemaker  (/>).  There
is,  on  the  other  hand,  when  a  force  is  requir'd  either  for  a  long  time,  and  re-
peatedly, or  in  a  very  powerful  degree  ;  whether  this  fame  paffage,  or  any
other  that  is  not  fufficiently  open'd  by  a  wound,  is  to  be  overcome.  It  was
repeated  for  eight  days,  in  the  cafe  of  that  man  in  whom  Henricus  ab
Heer  (q)  law  that  the  fmall  inteftines  had  crept  into  the  thorax  by  a  "  very
"  narrow  "  wound  of  the  diaphragm  •,  as  this  patient  did  not  feel  the  fymp-
toms  that  fhow'd  fuch  a  ftate  of  the  parts  till  the  ninth  day :  and  they  became
fatal  within  four-and-twenty  hours.

(fl)  Sepulchr.  S.  hac  3.  Obf.  21.  §  9.  (?)  Sep.  Obf.  cit.  §  3.

lj>)  Epilt.  37.  n,  30.

And


Letter  LIV. Article  12.  209

And  this  force  was,  perhaps,  repeated  for  five  months  together,  in  that
ftudent  of  whom  we  made  mention  above  (r)  from  Sennertus ;  for,  at  the
completion  of  thefe  months,  he  at  length  began  to  be  in  an  unhealthy  ftate  :
and  fome  days  from  thence,  after  frequently-repeated  vomitings,  and  the
moll  fatal  fymptoms,  he  died  :  lb  that,  although  there  is  fome  proof  of  not
a  fmall  part' of  the  ftomach  having  enter'd  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax  feveral
months  before,  when  the  wound  was  inflided,  and  having  forc'd  the  heart
into  the  right  fide,  where  it  was  found  ;  for  the  patient  himfelf  "  defir'd  them
"  to  take  notice  of  the  pulfation  being  there,  after  the  wound  was  receiv'd  -,"
yet  there  is  fome  room  to  believe  "  that  the  whole  of  the  ftomach,"  the
omentum,  and  the  whole  pancreas,  had  not  afcended  thither  till  the
latter  part  of  his  life.

And  there  is  ftill  more  room  to  believe  this  in  that  military  officer,  in  whom,
if  you  look  into  the  Sepulchretum  (s),  you  would  fuppofe  that  Henricus  ab
Heer,  who  was  fpoken  of  juft  before,  but  if  you  read  Parey  (/),  you  would
know  that  Guillemseus,  had  found  a  great  part  of  the  inteftine  colon  driven
up  into  the  thorax,  through  a  wound  fcarcely  able  to  admit  a  little  finger,
which  pafs'd  through  the  flefh  of  the  diaphragm.  For  although  a  pain  of
the  inteftines  us'd  to  attack  him  about  the  evening,  yet  it  was  not  till  the
eighth  month  after  receiving  the  wound,  that  it  increas'd  to  fo  fevere  a  de-
gree as  to  make  every  remedy  ineffeftual,  and  to  carry  off  the  patient.

And  if  it  is  not  the  fame  cafe,  which  you  will  fee  transfer'd  into  the  Se-
pulchretum («),  from  Ballonius  •,  as  that  pain  is  not  faid  to  have  begun  till
a  year  after  -,  there  feems  to  have  been  occafion  for  a  much  more  long-con-
tinued impulfe,  in  order  to  carry  that  larger  part  of  the  colon  through  the
diaphragm  ;  after  the  lefl"er  portion  had  "  gradually"  enter'd,  as  Ballonius
himfelf  thought.  And  certainly  that  celebrated  man  Fantonus,  in  the  fcho-
lium  to  his  father's  twenty-third  obfervation  •,  of  a  young-man,  who  had
been  wounded  a  year  b^ore  -,  does  not  think  that  the  ftomach,  which  had
pafs'd  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  by  being  thruft  through  the  diaphragm  j
that  was  torn  afunder  where  the  cefophagus  is  tranfmitted  through  it ;  came
thither  before  it  had  been  contrafted  by  pains,  and  vomitings,  which  took
place  from  the  time  of  inflifting  the  wound  :  and  that  being  forc'd,  thereby,
againrt  the  diaphr^igm,  it  was,  at  length,  able  to  tear  it  afunder  ;  and,  by
this  means,  open  a  fufficient  paflage  for  itfelf.

And  he  wifhes  that  which  I  alfo  have  wifh'd  for,  every  now  and  then,  in
many  obfervations  of  this  kind,  not  even  altogether  excepting  that  of  Val-
falva  ;  I  mean  that  fome  things  had  been  farther  remark'd,  in  regard  to  the
conditions  of  the  tranfmitted  vifcus,  or  the  tranfmitting  feptum  ;  and
amongft  thefe  we  place  both  the  fituation  of  the  vifcus,  and  of  the  wound,
as  in  the  hiftory  of  Cloffieus  (x)  ;  which  (hows,  indeed,  that  the  upper  part
of  the  inteftine  colon,  which  was  neareft  to  the  ftomach,  lay  above  the  dia-
phragm, to  the  length  of  a  fpan  : but  in  what  part  this  mufcle  was  perfo-

{>■)  N.  II.  («)  L.  3.  S.  14.  Obf.  8.  §  8.

. [s)  Obf.  cit.  §  4.  Ix)  Sepukhr.  cit.  Obf.  8.  §  lo,

(t)  Oper.  1.  9.  c.  30.

Vol.  III.  ,E  e  rated.


2 1  o Book  IV.  Of  Cnirurgica!  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

rated,  and  in  which  cavity  of  the  thorax  the  inteftine  was  receiv'd,  we  are
ROt  at  all  inform'd.

Yet  as  he  afferts,  that  the  man  felt  no  injury  "  in  the  natural  or  vital  fa-
"  cukies,"  for  the  whole  fpace  of  two  years  after  receiving  his  wound,  till
being  leiz'd  with  a  colic  paflion,  he  was  carried  off  from  among  the  living;
it  would  have  been  natural  to  fuppofe,  that  the  inteftines,  which  were  found
to  be  "  inflated,  as  if  by  means  of  bellows ;"  making  an  impetus  upon  the
wound,  had  then,  at  length,  laid  open  a  paffage  for  that  portion  of  the  co-
lon ;  or,  at  leail,  for  the  greater  part  of  it ;  if,  by  faying,  that  I  know  not
what  "  had  been  found  to  be  confolidated,"  he  had  not  left  us  doubtful
whether  he  fpeaks  of  the  colon  being  fomewhat  wounded,  or  of  the  dia-
phragm.

But  of  the  long-repeated  force  enough  ;  now  let  us  add  examples  of  the
force  being  very  powerful.

13.  Iris  certain,  that  in  the  firft  of  all  the  obfervations,  of  the  ftomach
being  forc'd  up  within  the  thorax,  which  was  made  by  Parey  (jy )  upon  a  ftone
mafon,  the  power,  whereby  it  was  impell'd,  was  very  great.  For  through
the  wound  of  the  tendinous  part  of  the  diaphragm,  which  was  fcarcely  equal
to  a  inch  in  breath,  was  it  found  to  be  driven,  three  days  after  the  wound
had  been  inflidted.  And  Bartholin  (2),  found  not  only  the  ftomach  there,
but  alfo  a  part  of  the  other  vifcera,  and  particularly  of  the  fpleen,  in  an  ob-
fervation  which  is,  in  moft  circumftances,  fimilar  to  that  we  have  given  you
from  Valfalva.

For,  in  both  of  them,  the  ftomach,  and  lungs,  were  wounded,  together
with  the  diaphragm,  and  death  happen'd  on  the  third  day  :  fo  that,  confj-
dering  the  time,  the  power  appears  to  have  been,  without  doubt,  very  great-,
although  we  are  in  neither  of  them  inform'd,  what  part  of  the  diaphragm
was  wounded  ;  nor  in  that  of  Bartholin  whether  the  wound  was  narrow  or
wide  ;  nor,  of  confequence,  how  great  a  refiftance  there  was,  in  the  dia-
phragm, to  be  overcome  by  the  impelling  vifcera.

But  in  the  cafe  of  Schoberus  {a)  we  are  not  wanting  in  thefe  particulars,
which  cafe  was  [fo  much  the  more  violent,  as,  without  any  wound,  a  very
vehement  cardialgia  came  on,  in  the  morning,  at  break  of  day  ;  attended
with  very  frequent  vomitings,  of  an  incredible  quantity  of  blackilh  matter,
and  with  ftrainings  to  vomit ,  fo  that  the  young  man  died  on  the  following
nic^ht :  and  within  his  thorax  was  found,  together  with  the  omentum,  and
inteftine  duodenum,  with  the  jejunum,  and  a  part  of  the  ileum,  the  ftomach
fo  diftended  with  that  matter,  and  with  flatu.s,  as  to  comprefs,  into  a  very-
narrow  compafs,  the  heart  and  the  lungs  •,  having  been  admitted  into  that
cavity,  by  the  fame  foramen  through  which  the  gula  is  brought  down,  this
foramen  "  being  greatly  dilated  and  deprived  of  its  tone."

And  if  you  remember  thofe  things  that  I  have  hinted  at  above  (^),  with
Liitre,  and  Fantonus,  you  will  not  doubt  but  this  may  happen.  For  when
the  motion  of  the  fibres  of  the  cefophagus, the  ftomach, and  inteftines,  is

(y)  Sep.  1.  4.  S.  hac  3.  Obf.  21.  §7.  {a)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  3,  &  4.  Append,  n.

(k)  Ibid.  Obf.  20,  §  2.  112.  c.  iv

(^J  n.-i2t

iavertedy


Letter  LIV. Article  13.  211

inverted,  by  evident  convulfions  of  the  fibres ;  it  is  natural  to  conceive,  that,
the  ftomach  ;  being  carried  upwards  by  the  cefophagus,  and  at  the  fame  time
(c)  the  matter  being  prefs'd  downwards,  out  of  the  afcending  ftomach,  by
the  flefliy  fafciculi  of  the  diaphragm,  which  are  not  yet  very  muchweaken'd,
and  which  intercept  that  foramen ;  is  carried  up  in  an  empty  ftate,  and  thofe
inteftines  in  the  fame  manner  :  till  the  force  of  the  inverted  motion  being
continued,  and  encreas'd,  the  matter  is  driven  ftill  upwards,  and  upwards,
from  the  lower  parts,  fo  as  to  overcome  the  refiftance  of  thefe  fafciculi,  and
diftend  the  ftomach.

And  now  you  have  almoft  all  the  examples,  of  the  vifcera  being  carried  up
through  the  feptum  tranfverfum  into  the  thorax,  which  were  in  my  hands  at
this  time  of  writing ;  fo  that  you  may  compare  them  with  the  obfervation
propos'd  by  Valfalva :  I  fay,  almoft  all.  For  as  to  that  whch  I  might  have
quoted  from  Valentinus  (d),  of  the  omentum  having  fallen  through  a  fora-
men, formerly  made  in  the  diaphragm  of  a  dog,  into  the  thorax  ;  it  is  not
only  a  very  inconfiderable  cafe,  but  without  any  mention  of  the  fituation  of
that  foramen,  or  of  the  fymptoms.

That  obfervation  of  Beckerus  is  of  more  importance,  indeed,  and  men-
tions the  fymptoms  -,  but  is  quite  filent  as  to  the  feat  of  the  foramen,  as
far  as  I  can  gather  from  the  ^^a  Eruditorum  Lipjienjia  {e).  This  obfervation
is  from  a  child  of  four  years  of  age,  whofe  ftomach,  fpleen,  and  liver,  were
in  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax,  for  two  years  together,  as  1  fuppofe  ;  for  it
had  pafs'd  the  firft  two  years  of  its  life  in  tolerably  good  health.  Nor  does
the  obfervation  of  Carolus  Pifo,  De  Morbis  a  Sero,  "  fection  the  fecond,  part
*'  the  fecond,  and  chapter  the  feventh,"  of  a  very  great  tumour  of  one  of
the  kidnies,  relate  to  this  fubjedt,  as  fome  feem  to  believe.  For  if  it  is  that,-
as  I  fuppofe,  which  is  extant  in  that  feventh  chapter  of  Pifo,  which  is  quoted,
and  under  number  forty-fix  ;  he  indeed  defcribes  the  feptum  tranfverfum  as
having  been  driven  upwards  by  the  tumour  of  the  kidney  ;  but  not  as  hav-
ing been  perforated.

Yet  this  mufcle  was  perforated,  by  the  erofion  of  a  large  cancerous  tu-
mour of  the  pancreas,  which  had  thruft  part  of  itfelf  into  the  left  cavity  of
the  thorax,  in  the  obfervation  of  Hertodus,  which  is  transferr'd  into  the  Se*
pulchretum  in  another  place  (/).  But  to  lay  afide  my  fufpicion,  which  I
have  made  known  to  you,  in  regard  to  that  obfervation,  on  a  former  occa-
fion  (g) ;  you  have,  therein,  more  than  fufficient  of  different  caufes,  where-
by to  explain  whatever  had  preceded,  and  the  fudden  death  itfelf.

At  length,  when  I  revis'd  this  letter,  I  happen'd  to  light  on  that  difler-
tation,  which  is  the  fixty-ninth  among  thofe  chirurgical  ones  coUefted  by  the
very  excellent  Haller ;  and  as  I  took  notice  that  fome  of  the  examples,  I
have  mention'd  here,  were  wanting  therein,  fo  I  obferv'd,  that  there  were
fome,  which,  either  on  account  of  my  being  without  the  books,  or  by  rea-
jon  of  the  language  in  which  they  are  written,  I  could  not  have  infpefted.
You  will,  thereiore,  read  them  in  that  diflertation, and  particularly  the  cafe

(c)  c.  2.  §  18.  c/J  1  3-  S.  22.  Obf.  40,

faj  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  2.  Obf. 124. (g)  Epift.  40.  n.  27.
(0  A.' 1706.  M.  April.

E  e  2


2 1  2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

of  that  girl  of  Strafburg  {h),  whofe  fymptoms  and  wound  are  defcrib'd  r  for
by  this  wound  fhe  was  principally  carried  off  in  a  few  hours  -,  it  being  in  the
tendinous  part  of  the  diaphragm,  and  a  portion  of  the  fpleen  and  Ilomach
having  enter'd  the  thorax,  and  forc'd  the  heart  to  the  right  fide.

Moreover,  I  knew  that  four  other  examples,  to  appearance,  are  read  in
Blancard  (/).  But  if  you  compare  them  with  thoie  that  are  produc'd  above
by  me,  you  will  lee  plainly  that  they  are,  in  fadt,  the  fame  with  as  many  of
them  ;  although  they  are  chang'd  by  a  transformation  which  we  cannot  very
eafily  bear :  as,  for  inftance,  that  ftudent  fpoken  of  by  Sennertus,  into  a  certain
native  of  Revel  {k) ;  the  fon  of  D.  Rat,  in  Riverius,  into  a  foldier  {I)  ;  the
ftone-mafon,  in  Parey,  into  the  fervant  of  a  certain  fmith  (;»)  •,  and  the  mili-
tary officer,  fpoken  of  by  the  fame  author,  into  the  fervant  of  a  certain
captain  («).

And  as  thefe  two  laft  changes  are  plac'd  by  Blancard  in  the  very  beginning
of  his  book,  it  is  not  to  be  wonder'd  at,  that  they  have  impos'd  upon  many
candid  and  fincere  men,  who  judge  of  others  by  themfelves ;  and,  therefore,
fuppofe  them  to  be  honeft  before  they  find  them  otherwife,  and  fufpeft  no
fuch  fraud:  and,  amongft  thefe,  it  is  not  furprizing  that  he  Ihould  have  im-
pos'd upon  Bohn  (o)  -,  fo  that,  together  with  the  two  obfervations  juft  now
referr'd  to  in  Parey,  he  has  quoted  the  firft  and  fecond  of  Blancard,  as  if  not
made  6ut  of  them.

But  from  wounds  of  the  abdomen  let  us  go  on  to  other  examples  of  com-
preffions,  or  concuflions,  of  this  part,  which  we  may  copy  from  the  papers
of  Valfalva.

14.  A  man,  of  five-and-thirty  years  of  age,  was  kick'd  on  the  abdomen
by  a  horfe  ;  from  whence  being  feiz'd  with  cruel  pains  and  vomiting,  he
•was  receiv'd  into  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Vita.  And  there,  his  pains
continuing,  with  a  fenfe  of  great  weight  in  the  lower  part  of  the  belly,  and
with  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  he  died.

The  carcafe,  being  diflefted  by  Valfalva  and  Peter  Molinelli,  although  Ic
fhew'd  no  contufion  in  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen  which  corrcfponded  to
the  place  of  the  injury  ;  yet,  when  the  belly  was  open'd,  exhibited  a  very
large  quantity  of  extravafated  blood,  which  had  already  begun  to  be  cor-
rupted. The  fanguiferous  veflels  which  pafs  through  the  omentum  were
ruptur'd  ;  and  the  inteftine  ileum,  which  lay  beneath  the  omentutH,  was
quite  cut  afunder,  almoft  tranfverfely.

In  the  thorax,  the  lungs  were  affefted  with  a  very  great  inflammation  :  and
there  was  a  confiderable  polypous  concretion  in  the  right  veacricle  of  the
heart.

15.  That  the  parts  which  are  confin'd  m  the  abdomen  fliould  be  ruptur'd,
without  the  abdomen  itfelf,  which  firft  meets  the  blow,  being  at  all  injur'd,.
is  by  no  means  new  or  unufual. Thus  Tulpius  ijp)  twice,  thus  Fontanus  (j),,

{h)  §4.  («)  Ibid.  Obf.  I.

(i)  Anat.  Praft.  Ration.  (»)  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  S.  2.  c.  4.

{k)  Cent.  2.  Obf.  9.  {/>)  Sepukhr.  S.  hac  3.  Qbf.  29 §9.  veL

(/)  Cent.  I.  Obf.  70.  potius  8.

iml  Ibid.  Obf.  2.  (2)  Ibid.  §  11.

thus


Letter  LIV. Article  is-  215

thus  Graflius(r),  thus  Raygerus  (j),  faw  the  fpleeii  ruptur'd ;  the  three  firlt
from  3  blow  of  a  ftick,  the  laft  from  a  fall :  to  which  hiftories,  that  are
propos'cl  in  the  Sepulchretum,  you  may  add  others  alfo  ;  as  that  which  is
extant  in  the  Commentaries  of  the  Imperial  Academy  at  Peterfourg  (/),  and
that  you  meet  with  in  the  celebrated  Heiller  (n).  For  both  of  them  fhow
the  fame  vifcus  to  have  been  ruptur'd,  and  the  fame  very  great  efFufion
of  blood  from  thence  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly ;  the  former  from  the  blow
of  a  man's  fifl-,  the  latter  from  the  kick  of  a  horfe.  And  that  the  fame
thing  had  happen'd  in  two  others,  by  a  fimilar  kick  of  a  horfe,  you  will  learn
from  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (x).  And  Bohn  (y)  had  reported  the  fame
thing  to  have  been  found  in  as  many  others,  but  fron  the  blow  of  a
ftick.

Nor  are  other  examples  of  the  fame  kind  wanting  from  blows  of  any  kind,
and  among  thefe  from  a  fall,  which  have  been  remark'd  by  Peter  Albrech-
tus  (z),  Gotth.  Budasus  («),  Lucas  Schrockius  (i"),  Hieronymus  Laubius  (f),
and  Johannes  Storchius  (^).  And  if  you  defire  others,  befides  thefe,  you
will  read  two  in  Hoffman  (e)  ;  and  where  you  may  look  for  two  more,  the
Commercium  Litterarium  vi'iW  fhow  you  (/);  and  where  you  may,  moreover,
find  flill  others,  you  will  learn  from  Platner  (g)  :  and  you  wjll  perceive  that
it  is  not  without  reafon  the  lafh-mention'd  author  has  laid,  that  by  a  violent
compreflion  of  the  abdomen,  the  included  "  vifcera  are  ruptur'd  and  lacerated,
"  in  fuch  a  manner  that,  all  the  blood  being  effus'd,  death  is  foon  the  con-
"  fequence.  And  it  is  found  by  experience,  that  this  happens  more  fre-
"  quently  in  the  fpleen  than  in  any  other  vifcus,"

Nor  is  this  to  be  wonder'd  at,  if  you  attend  to  the  foft  ftrufture  thereof,
and  the  thinnefs  of  the  coat  wherewith  it  is  invefled.  But  if  it  become  fofter
by  the  force  of  difeafe,-  and,  by  a  quantity  of  flowly-circulated  blood,  is  ex-
tended below  the  fortification  of  the  ribs,  it  is  fo  much  the  more  eafily  rup-
tur'd ;  aud  pours  out-jn  lefs  time  the  greater  quantity  of  blood:  and  confe-
quently  brings  on  a  more  fpeedy  death.  And  it  even  appears  that  this-
vifcus,  being  become  tumid,  and  almoft  "  pultaceous,"  in  a  certain  count  (^),,
was  of  itfelf  ruptur'd,  and  became  the  caufe  of  fudden  death.

But  in  the  kidnies,  in  proportion  as  the  ftrudlure  is  more  compact,  fo  much
more  reafon  is  there  for  being  furpriz'd,  when  we  read,  in  the  obfervation.
quoted  from  Laubius,  that,  by  reafon  of  an  external  compreffion  by  a  fall
from  on  high,  not  only  "  the  fpleen  was  contus'd  quite  to  rupture,"  but  alfa
that  "  a  foramen,  capable  of  admitting  two  fingers,"  was  found  "  on  the
"  back  of  the  left  kidney  ;"  or  in  Mauchart  (z),  that  "  a  very  violent  and

{r)  Tbid.  in  Addit.  Obf.  31.  (i)  In  Schol.  ad  eand.  Obf.

{,)  Ibid.  Obf.  30.  (c)  Aa-.  N.  C.  Tom.  z.  Obf.  21.

(;)  Tom.  1.  in  Obf.  Anat.  fJJ  Commerc. Litter.  A.  1731.  Specira.  36.

(a)  Inftit.  Chir.  P.  1. 1.  i. c.  15. not.  ad n.  2.

n.  6.  OJ  Medic.  Rat.  Tom.  3.  S.  i.  c.  7.  §  34..

(x)  A.  1736.  Hebd.  16.  n.  4.  &  A.  1740. fW  -A-  1738,  Hebd.  32.  n.  1.  ad  Part.  4,

Hebd.  21.  n.  I.  &  5. "

CyJ  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  S.  2.  c.  4.  (g)  Inft.  Chir.  §  717.  not  a.

(z)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  9.  Obf.  6.  (*)  Att.  N.  C.  Tom.  5.  Obf.  125.

{a)  Earund.  Genu  i.  &  2,  Obf.  108..  {i)  Differt.  de  Mj^driafi,  §  32.

*'  forcible


2 1  4 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

"  forcible  impulfion  of  a  round,  and  not  fharp,  ftick,  againft  the  abdomen,
"  without  any  folution  of  continuity,"  was  the  caufe,  "  neverthelefs,  of  the
"  middle  of  the  kidney,  which  was  fituated  oppofite  to  the  part  that  re-
"  ceiv'd  the  violence,  being  burft,  and  proving  fatal."

And  now  that  I  have  happen'd  to  fpeak  of  the  vifcera  which  ferve  for  the
fecretion  of  urine ;  read,  I  beg  of  you,  the  obfervation  of  Theodore  Zuin-
ger  (k),  which  gives  you,  with  a  great  degree  of  accuracy,  the  fymptoms  and
the  diffeftion  of  a  young  man  ;  who,  having  chanc'd  to  run  violently,  in  the
nio^ht,  with  his  hypogaftrium  againft  the  prominent  branch  of  a  tree,  had  not,
indeed,  the  leaft  mark  of  external  injury  therefrom,  but  unhappily  got  a
rupture  of  his  bladder,  which  was  at  that  time  full  of  urine.

However,  not  entirely  to  omit  what  happens  to  the  other  vifcera ;  Heifter,
whom  I  have  fpoken  of  above,  has  produc'd  two  obfervations  (/),  befides
that  I  pointed  out  before  :  the  one  of  the  vifcera  of  the  belly,  which  were
found  to  be  greatly  contus'd  and  lacerated  by  very  violent  blows  of  a  ftick,
though  the  ftick  was  but  {lender ;  the  other,  in  which  he  found  the  middle
part  of  the  liver  perfeftly  ruptur'd  by  the  force  that  had  been  applied  from
without ;  though,  externally,  not  the  leaft  mark  of  injury  was  feen.

Platner  (m)  will  alfo  give  you  an  example  of  the  liver  being  ruptur'd,  and
another  you  may  take  from  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (n)  •,  from  whence  {o)
you  will,  moreover,  have  a  third,  of  a  man  being  violently  ftruck  by  a  horfe
in  the  region  of  the  liver :  fo  that  the  lower  ribs  were  broken,  and  the  gibbous
part  of  that  vifcus  was  cleft,  with  a  great  number  of  fiffures,  not  very  deeply
however,  as  I  fuppoie  •,  fince  the  belly  was  not  fill'd  with  blood,  but  with  a
crreat  deal  of  bloody  lymph  :  and  the  patient  did  not  die  before  the  fourth
day  :  lb  that  it  recals  to  my  mind  that  hiftory  of  Hippocrates  (/>) ;  "  A  boy,
"  who  receiv'd  a  kick  from  a  mule  on  his  belly  and  liver,  died  on  the  fourth
"  day ;"  although  this  boy,  as  you  fee,  was  alfo  ftruck  on  the  ftomach,  and
had  very  different  fymptoms :  all  of  which  being  attended  to  by  that  grave
interpreter  Vallefius  (j),  he  judg'd  that  the  boy  died  from  the  very  acute  in-
flammation of  thofe  vifcera,  and  not  from  the  rupture,  or  the  effufion  of
blood.

And,  certainly,  if  there  had  been  a  great  effufion  of  blood,  both  reafon,
and  the  obfervation  of  Lanzonus  (r),  ftiow  us  that  death  muft  have  come  on
very  fpeedily.  For  he  who  was  ftruck  with  a  fill,  violently,  upon  the  liver,
and  had  in  his  belly  "  an  extravafation  of  blood,  and  a  rupture  of  the  veflTels
"  in  the  liver,  fell  down  upon  the  ground  foon  after  receiving  the  blow,  and
"  expir'd  in  a  miferable  manner."

To  this  fubject,  alfo,  would  relate  the  hiftory  of  a  boy  of  feven  years  of
age  {s),  who  had  been  trampl'd  upon  •,  as  he  lay  upon  the  ground  with  his
face  upwards ;  in  fuch  a  manner,  by  horfes  which  drew  a  chariot,  that  blood
was  extravafated  from  the  liver,  which  was  ruptur'd  and  lacerated  on  the

(7)  EpK.  N.  C.  Cent.  7.-0bf.  30.  (^)  Epid.  I.  5.  n.  17.

((')  Not cit.  [1)  Comment,  in  banc  hift.  qus  ipfi  38.

Im)  Not.  cit.  ('■)  Aa.  N!  C.  Tom.  2.  Obf.  6.

?»)  A.  1738.  Hebd.  32.  n.  i.  ad  Part.  5.  (/)  Commerc.  Litter. A. 1740. Hib.  52.

'{o)  A.  J734.  Hebd.  35.  n.  3.  n.  3.

ris!  t


Letter  LIV. Article  i  jr.  2i\j!

Ti'^ht  fide,  into  the  whole  cavity  of  the  belly,  though  this  was  externally  un-
hurt; if  other  caufes  of  the  death  which  immediately  follow'd,  had  not
been  found,  at  the  fame  time,  both  in  the  thorax  and  in  the  neck.

But  to  come  nearer,  finally,  to  the  obfervation  of  Valfalva,  which  has  de-
fcrib'd  the  fanguiferous  vefTels  of  the  omentum,  and  the  inteftine  ileum,  as
being  ruptur'd  ;  the  fame  veflels,  in  a  woman  who  was  ftruck  by  a  foldier,
and  who  died  fuddenly  after  the  whole  belly  was  fiU'd  with  extravafated  blood  ;
the  fame  veflels,  I  fay,  were  fliown  to  be  ruptur'd,  in  this  woman,  by  the
fmall  coagula  and  grumous  concretions  of  blood  v/hich  were  included  within
the  duplicature  of  the  omentum  ;  as  you  will  read  in  the  Peterfburg  Com-
mentaries juft  now  referr'd  to  (t) ;  where  it  is  indeed  faid,  "  that,  in  this
"  very  extraordinary  cafe  of  injury,  this  perhaps  fiiould  be  taken  into  con-
"  fideration,  that,  contrary  to  the  cuftom  of  nature,  the  omentum  had  grown
"  into  one  fubftance  with  the  fundus  uteri :"  yet  the  obfervation  of  Valfalva
ftiows  this  to  have  been  by  no  means  neceflTary.

But  as  to  what  relates  to  the  inteftine  which  was  ruptur'd  by  the  kick  of
a  horfe,  you  may  compare  with  this  obfervation  that  of  Kramerus  («)  on  a
carman  who  died  from  the  fame  caufe,  but  not  at  the  fame  time,  nor  from
the  fame  internal  injury  alone  ;  unlefs  you  fhould  fufpeft  that  the  rupture  of
the  inteftine  ileum  is  rather  to  be  attributed  to  a  gangrene  of  the  inteftines ;
as  that  hiatus,  which  was  obferv'd  in  a  young  man  who  died  not  many  days
after  his  mafter  had  ftruck  him  violently  upon  his  belly  with  a  flick,  ought,
without  doubt,  agreeably  to  the  opinion  of  Helwick  («■),  to  be  afcrib'd  to
the  fphacelus  wherewith  the  colon  and  ileum  had  been  affe£led.

Yet  even  without  thefe,  you  have  in  the  Sepulchretum  (j'),  not  only  the
inteftine  jejunum  ruptur'd,  from  very  violent  tramplings  of  the  feet  upoq.
the  loins  and  back  of  a  man,  when  proftrate  ;  but  you  have  alfo  the  ileum
and  the  colon  perforated,  in  more  than  one  place,  from  a  very  violent  dafhing
of  the  abdomen  againftj;he  trunk  of  a  tree,  in  another  (2) ;  although  the  ab-
domen was  found  in  both  of  them.

Do  not,  however,  be  furpriz'd  that,  although  the  abdomen  of  a  woman,,
who  has  been  defcrib'd  to  you  in  a  former  letter  (a),  was  ftruck  with  a  ftick,
and  the  moft  violent  fymptoms  were  the  confequences  of  the  blow,  ftie  ne-
verthelefs  complain'd  of'apain  in  this  part  only;  and  that  nothing  was  found
to  be  injur'd  within  the  abdomen,  and  ftill  lefs  any  thing  ruptur'd.  For  all
blows  are  not  inflided  with  the  fame  degree  of  force  ;  nor  are  the  inteftines
equally  liable  to  rupture  in  all  perfons  :  either  from  their  natural  propenfity ;.
as  Ariftotle  has  aflTerted  (^),  that  ftags  "  have  their  inteftine  fo  thin  and  weak,
"  that  although  you  ftrike  the  abdomen  but  flightly,  it  may  be  ruptur'd,
*'  without  any  rupture  of  the  fkin  ;"  or  from  repletion.

And,  certainly,  in  both  of  thofe  whofe  hiftories  I  have  juft  now  pointed
out  from  the  Sepulchretum,  the  inteftines  were  then  extremely  fiU'd,  and

(/)  Tom.  cit,  ibid.  (j- )  In  Addit.  ad  -banc  S.  Obf.  25,

(a)  Commerc. cit.  A.1740.  Hebd.  26.  n.  2.  (z)  L.  3.  S.  I4.  Obf.  47,

(x)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  j,  A.  9.  &  10.  Obf.  (a)  Epift.  49.  n.  6.

I'iO-*  (^)  Hill.  Animal.  1.  6.  c.  29.  in  fin.

diftended.


1 1  6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univcrfal  Diforders.

diftended  beyond  their  ufual  degree,  by  too  great  a  quantity  of  fluid  ;  as  you
will  learn  from  the  reading  of  the  obrervations,  and  from  the  fcholium,  more-
over, which  is  added  to  the  firft.  You,  therefore,  if  at  any  time  you  know-
that,  befides  the  violence  of  the  blows  upon  the  abdomen,  there  was  at  that
time  a  diftenfion  of  the  inteftines,  from  any  caufe  whatfoever ;  and  very  con-
fiderable  and  peculiar  fymptoms  come  on ;  will  fufpeft  what  might  happen
inwardly,  although  you  fee  no  mark  of  injury  in  the  fkin :  and  if  you  are
able  to  do  nothing  elfe,  you  will  at  leaft  declare  you  fufpicion  to  thofe  whom
it  may  concern,  and  that  cautioudy  and  with  difcretion.

And,  indeed,  if  there  has  not  been  that  diftenfion,  and  thofe  fymptoms
do  not  immediately  come  on  ;  do  not  then  be  without  all  fear,  left  fome  latent
evil  gradually  increafe,  and  the  fymptoms  thereof  break  out  univerfally  and
unexpedtedly.  Plancus  has,  with  great  propriety,  faid  to  M.  Tullus  (c)  :
"  I  cannot  help  being  in  dread,  if  there  be  any  thing  of  a  wound  under  the
"  fkin,  which  may  do  much  mifchief  before  it  can  be  known  and  cur'd."
Read  the  obfervation  of  Lofpichlerus  (ij,  and  you  will  perceive  that  what
1  fay  is  true.  For  you  will  fee  what  kind  of  fatal  diforder  at  length  arofe
about  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach,  in  a  man  who,  many  years  before,  had
fallen  down  with  his  horfe  ;  and  who,  though  he  felt  a  violent  "  comprefTion
*'  of  the  faddle  upon  his  flomach,"  had,  neverthelefs,  totally  neglefled  it.

And  Platner  {e)  has,  with  great  propriety,  admonifli'd  us,  that  fcirrhi  fre-
quently arifefrom  blows  on  the  other  vifcera  alfo  -,  diforders  which,  as  you
very  well  know,  begin  flowly  and  increafe  gradually :  although  it  fometimes
happens,  from  the  very  beginning,  that  marks  of  the  injury  receiv'd  dif-
cover  themfelves,  and  do  not  fail  to  continue  quite  to  the  end,  although  in
a  mild  degree;  as  happen'd  to  the  young  man,  whom  the  illuftrious  Hal-
ler  (/)  defcrib'd,  that  was  "  kick'd  upon  the  abdomen  "  by  his  drunken
companions.

i6.  A  boy,  of  nine  years  of  age,  having  fallen  under  a  carriage,  had  the
wheel  run  over  his  belly,  and  died  in  this  manner.  The  pain  of  his  belly,
indeed,  was  not  great;  yet  the  pulfe  was  but  juft  perceiv'd:  the  extremities
were  very  cold  :  the  patient  fcarcely  ever  lay  ftill,  but  turn'd  himfelf  slter-
nately  from  one  fide  to  the  other,  wiih  great  anxiety-  Finally,  an  hour  or
two  after  the  preflTure  of  the  wheel  had  been  fufrer'd,  convulfiv'e  motions
came  on ;  and  he  died  within  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

The  abdomen,  which  was  very  tenfe,  being  cut  into,  a  quantity  of  fluid
blood  was  found  to  be  extravafated  into  the  belly  ;  and  the  inteftines  were
feen  to  be  turgid  with  air.  The  right  part  of  the  liver,  where  it  is  turn'd
towards  the  ribs,  was  deeply  lacerated,  to  the  extent  of  three  inches  of  Bo-
logna.

In  the  thorax,  the  lungs  were  found  to  be  everywhere  unconneded  on
ail  fides,  and  found  ;  except  that,  on  the  back-part,  they  were  flightly  in-
fiam'd.  '  The  ventricles  of  the  heart  contain'd  a  fluid  and  frothy  blood.

M  Inter  Epift.  ad  Familiar.  1.6.  Epift.  i8. (f)  Inftit.  cit.  §  718.

\d)  Eph.  N,  C.  Cent,  i,  &  2,  Obf.  151.  (fj  Opufc.  Pathol.  Obf.  25.

17.  In


Letter  LIV. Article  17.  217

17.  In  turning  over  the  Sepulchretum,  you  will  find  two  obfervarions,
one  of  which  relates  to  the  wheels  of  an  empty  waggon  (g),  and  the  other
to  thofe  of  a  well-loaded  chariot  (h),  having  pafs'd  over  the  belly.  Andj
indeed,  the  different  weight  of  the  compreffing  body  ought  to  be  attended
to ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  the  various  refinance  of  the  man  that  is  prefs'd
upon  ;  whether  you  confider  his  age,  or  the  part  of  his  belly  which  is  com-
prefs'd  :  and  the  firft  of  thofe  who  are  there  defcrib'd,  was  about  thirty
years  of  age  ;  the  other  fomewhat  more.

The  hypogaftrium  of  the  firft  had  been  comprefs'd  a  little  above  the  pubes ;
and  the  hypochondrium  of  the  other.  In  the  former,  who  died  within  fix-
anri-thirty  hours ;  and  not  without  convulfive  motions;  under  the  Hdn  of  the
-abdomen,  and  the  other  integuments  thereof,  which  were  found,  theinteftine
ileum  was  found  to  be  perforated  :  a  circumftance  that  had  happen'd  the
more  eafily,  becaufe  it  was  diftended  in  confequence  of  drunkennefs.  In
the  other,  however,  v^ho  dragg'd  on  his  life  for  a  confiderable  time,  they
found  the  liver  to  be  in  an  entire  ftate,  under  the  fpurious  ribs,  which  were
alfo  entire  ;  and  none  of  thofe  parts  that  are  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly,
was  rupiur'd  :  but  only  a  large  abfcefs  was  found  betwixt  the  mufcles  of  the
abdomen  and  the  peritonsum.

But  he  was  a  boy  of  nine  years  of  age,  in  v?hom  Valfalva  found  the  liver
lacerated ;  and  thole  three  were  boys  alfo,  in  fpeaking  of  whom  above  (/),
from  the  celebrated  Heifter,  1  have  faid  that  fome  vifcus,  and  in  the  third
the  liver  itielf,  was  entirely  ruptur'd  in  the  middle,  from  the  violence  applied
to  the  abdomen  externally  ;  although  the  fkin  idelf  was  found,

And  it  was  ftill  a  boy,  who,  falling  down  drunk  from  the  fhafts  of  a
waggon,  was  violently  prefs'd  upon  by  the  axle-tree  and  hind-wheel  of  the
carriage;  fo  that  he  died  "ten  hours  after:  and  had,  befides,  contufions  of
the  inceftines,  here  and  there,  with  livid  appearances  ;  the  pylorus,  the  liver,
the  vena  portarum,  and-^the  right  kidney,  entirely  ruptur'd,  through  the
middle,  to  the  great  furprize  ot  Preudius  {k)  ;  who  wonder'd  how  it  could
have  happen'd,  that  hefhould  livefo  many  hours  after  having  undergone  fuch
a  number  of  injuries,  and  having  had  fo  large  an  extravafation  of  blood,
vv'ith  which  he  lound  thr  belly  to  be  full  :  and  he  alfo  wonder'd  that  the  fkin
was  no-where  ruptur'd,  not  even  in  the  abdomen  ;  unlefs  we  (liould,  p':'rhaps,
fay  that  it  was  in  confequence  of  this  being  foft,  and  eafily  extended,  by
reafon  of  the  foft  vifcera  being  fubjedted  to  it,  which  would  fuffer  the  fkin
to  yield,  and  remain  unhurt ;  and  that  thole  vifcera  were  necefifarily  fiflur'd,
becaufe  they  could  not  give  way,  but  were  forc'd  and  driven  againft  the
pofterior  parietes  of  the  belly,  where  it  is  in  great  meafure  bony  ;  and  thefe
parietes  with  great  violence  againft  the  very  hard  ground,  that  lay  under
them.

And,  indeed,  the  fame  thing  feems  to  happen  to  the  natural  integuments
of  the  body,  fometimes,  that  happens  to  the  clothes  we  v/ear,  which  are
frequently  unhurt  by  a  blow,  when  the  body  is  wounded  beneath. Thus  I

('gj  Additam.  ad hanc S. Obf.  27, cum (;)  N.  ij.
Schol.  {i)  EpK.  N, C.  Dec.  3,  A.  .5,  &  6,  Obf.

(*)  L,  3.  S.  17.  Obf.  29,  228.

Vol.  hi.  F  f  have


2 1  8 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

have  heard,  from  a  colleague  qF  undoubted  credit,  that  the  abdomen  of  a
pregnant  woman,  which  had  been  gor'd  by  the  horn  of  an  ox,  was  ruptur'd
in  fuch  a  manner,  notwithftanding  her  clothes  were  neither  perforated  nor
torn,  that  the  uterus  could  be  {een  ;  and  that  a  hernia  remain'd  there  afrer
the  cure,  which  was  accurately  attended  to  by  hinilelf  And  I  myfelf  faw
a  wound,  in  another  colleague  of  mine,  who,  while  he  liv'd,  was  the  very
worthy  abbe  of  this  celebrated  monaftery  of  St.  Juftin,  upon  rhe  pofterior
part  of  the  left  fincipital  bone,  which  had  been  lately  brought  to  a  cicatrix,
and  which  had  been  inflifted  fifteen  days  before,  accidentally,  by  the  tall  of
an  angular  ftone,  of  two  pounds  weight,  that  had  neither  cut  his  cap,  nor
his  cowl,  nor  his  under  thin  linen-cap,  wherewith  his  head  was  cover'd,  nor
made  any  perforation  in  them  ;  but  had  wounded  the  natural  integuments
of  his  head,  that  lay  beneath,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  a  great  quantity  of  blood
was  immediately  dilcharg'd.

And  thefe  things  are  faid  of  blows  or  comprefilons  of  the  belly,  But
whether  to  one  or  the  other  of  thefe  caufes,  or  to  both  of  them,  or  even  to
a  very  violent  concuflion,  is  to  be  attributed  what  you  will  fee  related  m  the
next  hiftory,  you  yourfelf  will  judge.  It  was  not  only  related  to  me  by
Valfalva,  but  left  in  his  papers  alfo.

18.  A  builder,  about  fix-and- thirty  years  of  age,  falling  from  a  high
building  into  the  dirt,  remain'd  in  a  ftate  of  ftupor.  No  external  injury
appear'd.  The  abdomen  fwell'd  a  little  after,  and  became  tenfe.  The  pulfe
was  lb  fmall  as  fcarcely  to  be  perceivable. He  died  within  twelve  hours.

On  opening  the  belly,  the  caufe  of  this  part  becoming  tumid  was  found
to  be  extravalated  blood.  In  fome  of  the  membranes  of  that  cavity,  a  black-
nefs  from  contufion  appear'd.  Yet  from  the  rupture  of  what  vefTel  the  blood
had  been  difcharg'd,  it  was  difficult  to  find  out.  It  might,  however,  be  fup-
pos'd  to  have  proceeded  from  a  branch  of  the  vena  cava,  becaufe  this  vein
was  entirely  depleted.

19.  And,  indeed,  in  anot'her  man,  who  had  fallen  from  on  high,  Jacobus
Sylvius  faw,  formerly,  a  great  quantity  of  blood  pour'd  out  from  the  ruptur'd
vena  cava  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  ;  as  you  alfo  have  it  in  the  Sepul-
chretum  (/).  And  what  was  found  by  Valfalva  in  the  belly  of  a  virgin,
who  had  fallen  from  a  conliderable  height,  I  have  already  told  you  (»?).  Now
let  us  fee  what  defcriptions  he  has  kft  relative  to  blows  upon  the  loins,  and
that  neighbourhood.

20.  A  man,  very  near  forty  years  of  age,  was  vi^ounded  with  two  mufquet-
balls,  in  this  manner  :  The  balls  cnter'd  at  the  right  fide  of  the  fecond  and
third  vertebras  lumborum,  opening  only  one  foramen  for  themfelves  ;  and
they  went  out  at  a  double  foramen,  the  one  being  pretty  large,  the  other  but
iTnall,  from  the  middle  of  the  abdomen,  about  two  fingers  breadths  above
the  navel.  1  he  wounded  man  went  to  a  place  which  was  not  far  diftant,
■where  remedies  were  applied  by  a  furgeon.  He,  from  that  time,  complain'd
of  violent  pain  :  he  was  oblig'd  to  breathe  with  his  neck  erefl,  and  not  with-
Qut  confiderable  difficulty  and  Ihortnefs  :  he  more  than  once  vomited  :  his..

(/)  Sea.  hac  3.  Obf.  28,  §  6.  («)  Epift,  40.  n.  9.

urine


Letter  LIV. Articles  21, 22.  '  21^

uilne  he  endeavour'd  to  difcharge,  But  in  vain  :  his  pulfe  became  gradually
Imall  and  weak  :  at  length,  continuing  to  fpeak,  and  having  his  fenfes  in  a
very  perfcdl  ftate,  and  having  taken  in  the  air  fometimes  with  a  gaping  mouth,
which  is  the  certain  forerunner  of  death,  he  died  on  the  ninth  hour  after  re-
ceiving the  wound.

The  whole  back  of  the  carcafe  began  to  be  livid  fome  hours  after  death.
The  day  following,  in  the  morning,  not  only  the  lividnefs  had  increas'd,  but,
moreover,  the  whole  head  was  become  disiigur'd,  and  the  right  eye  had  fwollen
to  a  very  great  degree.  The  lips  of  the  wound  inclin'd  to  putrefaction  on
both  fides.

In  the  belly  an  extravafated  blood  was  ftagnant.  The  inteftinum  ileum
was  perfeftly  lacerated  in  three  places ;  and  the  colon,  in  that  part  which  is
conncfted  to  the  ftomach,  was  wounded  in  one  half  of  its  breadth :  and  all
the  inteftines  were  red.

As  the  wound  enter'd  the  cayity  of  the  belly  a  little  below  the  right  emul-
gent  vein,  near  to  the  feat  of  the  ureter,  it  was  doubted  whether  this  part
was  not  lacerated.  But  as  the  intolerable  ftench  of  the  carcafe  oblig'd  us  to
haften  to  a  conclufion,  the  matter  could  not  be  fufficiently  examin'd.  It
was  alfo  doubted,  whether  the  mufquet -bails  had  not  been  infedled  with
poiion.

21.  You  might  here,  among  other  things,  enquire  how  it  could  happen,
that,  as  there  were  only  two  balls,  they  had  Ijcerated  the  intelline  ileum  in
three  places  .?  if  you  did  not  take  notice,  that  the  convolutions  of  this  in-
reftine  are  of  fuch  a  nature,  that,  one  part  of  it  being  plac'd  before  the  other,
the  inteftine  was  twice  met  with  in  the  pafiage  which  one  of  the  balls  had
taken.

22.  A  man,  of  forty -years  of  age,  was  wounded,  by  the  difcharge  of
unequal  fragments  of  lead  from  a  mufquet,  in  fuch  a  manner,  and  in  fuch
a  fituation  of  body,  that  in  the  left  buttock,  where  thefe  fragments  had  en-
ter'd, were  three  foramina  -,  and  in  the  lumbar  region,  where  they  had  pafs'd
out,  near  the  lower  rib,  were  feen  two  foramina.  About  the  fifth  day  came
on  a  fuppreffion  of  urine  -,  and  the  patient  complain'd,  more  than  once,  of  a
fpafmodic  pain  at  the  upper  margin  of  the  os  ileum,  to  fuch  a  degree  that
the  whole  body  was  fuddenly  Ihaken  :  and  the  part  could  fcarcely  luffer  the
touch  of  thefurgeon's  hand  externally,  by  real'on  of  the  violence  of  the  pain.
The  fain  was  increas'd  every  day;  and  the  convulfion.  in  confequence,  be-
came more  violent  and  continual ;  ei'pecially  about  the  throat  and  the  mouth.
Yet  he  rerain'd  his  fenfes,  neverthelefs.  At  length,  he  died  on  the  thirteenth
day.

The  wound  being  examin'd  by  difleftion,  it  was  very  evident  that  no
leaden  fragment  had  penetrated  to  the  internal  parts.  Yet  one  of  them  had
pafs'd  a  different  way  from  the  others,  and  had  broken  into  pieces  the  upper
margin  of  the  cs  ilium,  vv'here  the  tendons  of  the  mufcles  are  connected.
However,  there  was  no  mark  of  injury  in  the  belly,  if  you  except  a  kind
of  blacknefs  of  the  inteftines,  and  ftill  more  of  the  omentum,  as  if  from
contufion.

But  the  cerebrum,  was  perfedly  found  ;  fo  as  not  to  Ihew  the.  leaft  traces  of
any  ferum.

F  f  2 •  23.  This


2  20 Book  IV.  of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

23.  This,  I  iuppofe,  was  that  other  man  whom  I  have  obferv'd  above  («)
to  have  been  feen  by  Valfalva,  and  to  have  died  from  a  comminution  of  the
margin  of  the  os  ilium,  when  I  had  defcrib'd  one  that  was  carried  off  by
a  wound  of  the  fame  kind ;  but  by  little  pieces  of  lead,  which  were  not  dif-
charg'd  on  the  pofterior  part  in  this  manner.  And  near  to  that,  which  I
juft  now  copied,  comes  the  obfervation  of  Harderus,  with  which  I  could  willi
to  have  a  diffedtion  join'd.

It  h  extant  in  the  Sepulchretum  (<?),  and  fpeaks  of  a  man  being  wounded
with  a  mufquet-ball  ''  behind  the  nates  ;"  the  ball  proceeding  towards  the
fuperior  parts,  betwixt  the  mofcles  and  tendons  whicfi  belong  to  the  back  :
and  you  will  fee,  that,  from  this  wound,  at  length,  a  ftrangury  firft  arofe,  and
foon  after  a  convulfion  about  the  throat  and  mouth  ;  which,  being  at  length
propjgated  to  the  limbs,  and  afterwards  to  the  whole  body,  foon  carried  off
the  patient.

24.  After  wounds  follow  blows  receiv'd  upon  the  loins,  and  the  fpine  that
lies  betwixt  them.  In  regard  to  which  blows  take  the  two  following  ob-
fervations  of  Valfalva.

25.  A  man,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  happening  to  be  walking  in  a  very
ftooping  pofture,  v/as  llruck,  by  a  piece  of  wood  that  fell  from  a  confiderable
height,  in  a  very  violent  manner,  on  the  three  inferior  vertebrse  of  the  loins.
He  fell  down  half-dead;  and,  being  brought  into  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary
de  Vita,  died  four  hours  after  receiving  the  blow.

The  loins,  and,  in  particular,  the  common  origins  of  the  mufcles  cali'd'
kngijjimi  dcrji,  und  facro-iumbi,  were  found  to  be  fluff 'd  up  with  coagulated'
blood,  from  the  contufion.  Within  the  vertebra,  where  the  blow  had  been
applied,  was  a  fmall  quantity  of  grumous  blood;  yet  the  included  marrow
was  not  at  all  injur'd,  to  appearance.  The  vifcera  were  likewife  unhurt.  In
the  arteries  alone  ;  which  in  dead  bodies  are,  for  the  moft  part,  wont  to  con-
tain little  blood,  fo  great  a  quantity  of  this  fluid  was  found,  and  in  a  coa-
gulated ftate,  that  they  were  entirely  fill'd  th;  rewith  ;  efpecially  about  the
prscordia,  where  it  had  coagulated  in  a  much  greater  degree.

26.  Another  man,  of  fix-and-forty  years  of  age,  was  ftruck  on  the  back
by  a  piece  of  falling  wood.  From  thence  the  power  of  moving  was  entirely
loft  in  the  legs ;  though  the  power  of  feeling  remain'd.  The  inteftinal  ex-
crements were  diicharg'd  involuntarily ;  the  urine,  by  the  help  of  the  catheter
alone  ;  and  this  fluid,  about  the  end  of  the  difeafe,  loft  its  natural  colour,
and  refembl'd  water  in  which  frefti  meat  had  been  wafh'd.  In  the  part  of
the  loins  which  had  been  ftruck,  was  fcarcely  anj^  pain  perceiv'd.  But  in
this  manner  he  gradually  funk,  and  was  carried  off^  on  the  fourteenth
day.

The  limbs  of  the  carcafe  were  lax  externally,  and  eafily  moveable.  The
belly  being  open'd,  the  inteftines  were  found  to  be  ting'd,  in  many  places-,
■with  a  confiderable  blacknefs ;  where  they  were  turn'd  towards  the  parts  that
had  been  hurt.  For  the  fame  blacknefs  likewife  was  extended  through  the
whole  iliac  and  lumbar  region  ;  fo  that  the  blood  appear'd,  in  fome  meafure,

(a)  N.  5.  {o)  In  Addijam.  ad  S.  hanc  3.  Obf.  32.

to


Letter  LIV. Article  27.^  22 1

to  be  coagulated  in  the  interftices  of  thofe  parts.  The  fpleen  was  alfo  livid,
to  a  very  extraordinary  degree,  in  one  half  of  it.  Finally,  the  lumbar  ver-
tebra, as  the  fymptoms  of  the  difeafe  had  previoufly  Ihown,  was  found  to
be  broken  ;  fome  bony  fragment  being  confpicuous  from  thence.

In  the  thorax,  the  lungs  were  diftinguifh'd  with  certain  black  fpots  ;  yet:
on  the  back  part :  and  both  lobes,  but  efpecially  the  left,  and  in  the  inferior
part,  were  fomewhat  inflam'd.  Both  ventricles  of  the  heart  contain'd  a  po-
lypous concretion  ;  but  the  right  the  largeft :  for  this  enrer'd  into  the  pul-
monary artery. However  the  blood  was  fluid  in  almoft  every  part.

27.  If  you  compare  thefe  two  hifliories  one  with  another,  you  will,  with-
out doubt,  be  furpriz'd  that  he,  whofe  vertebrse  are  not  faid  to  have  been
broken,  fhould  have  died  within  four  hours ;  and  that  the  other,  who  is  faid
to  have  one  of  his  vertebrjE,  at  leaft,  broken,  fhould  not  die  till  the  four-
teenth day.  Was  it  becaufe  this  vertebra  was  not  only  one,  but  perhaps
the  lowefl  of  all ;  and  becaufe  the  others  were  three  in  number.''  But  thofe
three  alfo  were  the  lower  vertebrse:  and  you  know  that  the  body  of  the  me-
dulla fpinalis  itfelf  does  not  reach  down  to  the  third  vertebra  lumborum  :
and  it  does  not  fetm  that  fo  great  a  difference  can  be  accounted  for,  from^
fomewhat  more,  in  number,  of  the  nerves  which  compofe  the  cauda  equina,-
as  it  is  cali'd,  receiving  a  concuflion ;  as  none  of  thefe,  certainly,  go  to  the-
parts  above.

And  1  lliall  fav  the  fame,  if  you  fhould  choofe  to  afcribe  that  difference
to  this  circumflance-,  that  within  thofe  three  vertebrae  there  was  fome  extra-
vafated  blood,  no  mention  of  which  is  made  within  this  one.  I  confels,  in-
deed, that  the  different  confequences  which  attend  an  injury  of  the  verte-
brae, or  of  the  fpinal  marrow  irlelf,  at  different  times^  do  not,  frequently,,
feem  to  be  capable  of  being  eafily  explain'd.

I  omit  thofe  obfervations,  that  you  have  in  the  Sepulchretum,  of  Rum-
krus  (^),  and  Fonfeanus(^),  on  a  fall  from  a  high  place.  For,  although  the.
former  defcribes  fimilar  fymptoms  with,  and  even  more  confiderable  than^
the  fecond  obfervation  of  Vallalva,  and  death  on  the  feventh  day  ;  yet  it  does
not  appear  what,  and  how  many,  vertebra  were  injur'd  ;  and  to  how  great,
a  degree  they  were  injur'd  :  and  the  obfervation  of  Fontanus,  as  At  tells  us
of  five  vertebrse  dorfi  being  luxated,  and  does  not  only  not  take  notice  of
lymptoms  of  this  kind,  but  fhows  that  the  life  of  the  patient  was  prolon^'d'
to  a  very  confiderable  time  ;  is  liable  to  the  doubts  of  thofe  who  do  not  ac-r
knowledge  luxations  of  the  vertebra,  as  I  fhall  fhow  hereafter  (r).  Read
over  again,  therefore,  the  hiftory  of  Meekrenius  in  the  fame  place  (j)  ;  ia
which  the  mufquet- bullet,  pafTmg  betwixt  two  vertebrs  of  the  loins,  broke
thefe  vertebrae,  and  comprefs'd  the  fpinal  marrow;  yet  did  not  bring  on
thofe  fymptoms  that  I  have  mention'd,  nor  death  till  after  twelve  weeks:
nay,  as  you  have  it  in  the  author's  own  words,  not  even  till  after  the  four-
teenth week.

And  left  you  fhould  fay,  with  Hornius  (/.),  that  the  bullet  had  ftopp'd  at  ths.-

(p)  Sfft.  hac  3.  Obf.  29.  §  7.  (j)  in  Additam.  Obf.  4.  cum  Schol..

(5)  Ibid.  Obf.  28.  §  1.  (()  in  Schol.  modo  cit,

(r)  Epift,  36.  n.  3^5.;

external.


«  2  2 Book  IV.  "Of  Chirurgical  and  Univcrral  Difordcrs.

external  integument  of  the  fpinal  marrow,  fo  that  it  could  not  comprefs  ic;
add  to  this  the  obiervation  of  Bohn  (a),  who  not  only  faw  the  fpine,  in  the
loins,  perforated  with  a  bulletin  a  military  officer,  but  alfo  "the  left  half
"  of  the  funis  medullaris  perforated  at  the  fame  time  ;  yet  in  fuch  a  man-
'^  ner,  that  not  even  the  right  half  remain'd  quite  untouch'd  :"  violent
fymptoms  being  the  confequence  thereof,  and  life,  neverthelefs,  being  car-
ried on  to  the  eighth  or  ninth  day.

But  left  you  fliould  fay,  after  all  this,  that  the  bullet  which  enter'd  be-
tv/ixt  the  fecond  and  third  lumbar  vertebrre  (and  much  lefs  that  which  en-
ter'd between  the  third  and  fourth,  as  in  the  hiftory  of  Meekrenius)  could
not  have  wounded  the  body  of  the  medulla  itfelf,  but  only  the  cauda  equina ;
fet  both  thefe  hiftories  afide ;  and' rather  read  the  obfervation  of  Platerus,
which  is  extant  in  another  part  of  the  Sepulchretum  (.v).

In  this  obfervation  we  have  the  cafe  of  a  virgin,  in  whom  a  leaden  bullet,
difcharg'd  from  a  mufquet,  having  ruptur'd  the  fpinal  marrow,  within  the
eighth  or  ninth  vertebra  dorfi,  had  immediately  taken  away,  from  the  mid-
dle of  the  body  downwards,  the  power  of  moving  and  feeling  ;  and  life  was,
neverthelefs,  prolong'd  to  the  twentieth  day.  Nay,  confidcr  duly  what  Cu-
villiers  relates,  in  the  Hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  (y),  of  a
foldier,  in  whom  the  point  of  a  Iword,  to  the  length  of  two  inches,  had
pafs'd  through  the  twelfth  vertebra  of  the  back,  and  the  included  body  of
rhe  marrow  ;  and  not  only  pafs'd  through,  but  adher'd  there  always,  and  ex-
cited the  moft  fevere  pains  indeed,  but  brought  on  no  paralyfis,  as  long  as
the  patient  liv'd :  and  he  liv'd  fome  months.

Now  compare  with  thefe  obfervations,  that  which  you  have  in  the  Sepul-
chretum  (z),  of  Marcellus  Lucius.  You  will  read  of  a  man's  dying  within
about  thirty  hours,  in  whom  a  mufquet-ball,  having  enter'd  on  the  right
fide,  four  inches  below  the  region  of  the  kidneys,  pafs'd  through  the  middle
of  the  fpinal  marrow,  and  came  out  at  the  left  fide.  Certainly  this  bullet
had  not  pafs'd  through  the  body  of  the  marrow,  but  the  cauda  equina.

How  could  it  happen,  then,  that  death  was  fo  much  the  fooner  brought
on,  than  in  thofe,  in  whom  the  body  of  the  marrow  itfelf  had  been  pafs'd
through  ;  and  yet,  at  the  fame  time,  fo  much  later  than  in  that  firft  man  of
Valfalva's,  in  whom  this  very  cauda  equina  had  not  only  not  been  pafs'd
through,  but  feern'd  to  be  quite  free  from  injury  .''  Without  doubt  it  is
difficult,  as  I  have  faid,  to  explain  thefe  differences.

Yet  if  there  be  any  room  for  conjeftures,  which,  perhaps,  are  not  entirely
to  be  difapprov'd  ;  there  may  feem  to  have  been  two  caufes,  why  this  man
of  Valfalva's  was  fnatch'd  away  by  fo  fudden  a  death.  For  as  he  walk'd
in  a  prone  pofture,  when  the  piece  of  wood,  falling  down  from  on  high,
(truck  thofe  three  vertebrae  i  I  fhould  fuppofe  that  they  receiv'd  the  more
violent  concuffion,  in  confequence  of  the  ftroke  being  receiv'd  lefs  obliquely;
the  fanguiferous  veflels  being,  by  that  means,- ruptur'd,  and  difcharging  mare
blood  than  perhaps  appear'd  in  that  part,  as  in  a  falling  and  fupine  man,  it
might  have  flow'd  into  other  vertebrcE, about  the  body  of  the  medulla :

(a)  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  S.  i.  prope  fin.  CyJ  ad  A.  1743.  in  Obf.  Anat.  11.

{x)  1.  I.  S.  15.  Obf.  26.  (z)  Sea.  hac  3.  Obf.  26.  §  z.

nearly


Letter  LIV. Articles  28, 29, 30, 31, 32. 223'

nearly  in  the  fame  manner  as  is  fuppos'd  to  have  happen'd,  by  du  Verney  (a),
in  certain  kinds  of  apoplexies,  as  it  were,  after  he  had,  in  one  of  them,  feen
blood  flow  down,  not  from  the  cranium,  but  from  the  tube  of  the  vertebrae.

For  that  part  being  comprefs'd,  "  from  v/hence  the  great  number  of  nerves,.
"  which  give  origin  to  the  branches  of  the  intercoftal  nerve,  arife,"  he  thought
"  that  the  motion  of  the  internal  parts  ceas'd."  And  I  fhould  fuppofe  that
it  ceas'd  fo  much  the  more  eafily^^  in  our  cafe,  in  proportion  as  the  blood
(which  is  another  caufe  of  my  conjefture)  refilled,  by  its  thicknefs,  the  in^
fiuence  of  the  organs  which  propell'd  it;  or  by  that  lefs  than  proper  fluidity,
from  which  it  was  found  to  be  fo  concreted  in  the  arteries,  and  ftill  more  a-
bout  the  prscordia.

28.  To  the  blows  of  the  limbs,  at  length,  belongs  the  following  obferva-
tion  of  Valfalva :  which  not  only  fiiows  how  much  regard  ought  to  be  paid
to  injuries  of  the  extremities,  but,  at  the  fame  time,  confirms  this  opinion,
that,  from  a  convulfion  of  the  jaws,  in  cafes  of  wounds,  fatal  convulfions  of
the  whole  body  are  (hown  to-be  at  hand.

29.  A  man,  of  five-and-thirty  years  of  age,  was  ftruck,  with  a  very  large
ftone,  upon  the  extremity  of  his  left  foot.  The  contus'd  part  had  no  pain
in  it,  unlefs  in  confequence  of  being  touch'd.  But  from  the  middle,  in  par-
ticular, of  the  great  toe,  where  the  violent  pain  was  excited  by  touching,
it  emitted  no  purulent  matter,  nor  did  by  any  means  feparate  the  lacerated
fibres  of  the  tendons.  The  man  was  in  every  refpeft  well,  and  confefs'd  it,
and  went  about  his  ufual  employments  with  alacrity.  On  the  fixth  day,
however,  he  was  fuddenly  feiz'd  with  tenfion  and  pains,  and  with  a  dreadful
convulfion  about  the  fauces.  After  this  foUow'd  a  very  great  convulfive.
motion  in  the  whole. body:  and  that  was  follow'd  by  death  on  the  eighth
day.

In  diflefting  the  head,  nothing  preternatural  was  found,  if  you  except  a
little  ferous  matter  ilagnating  in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain.

30.  Now  let  us  fubjoin  fome  obfervations  of  our  own,  of  vi^ounds,  or  of
blows,  in  the  fame  parts  that  are  hitherto  fpoken  of;  preferving  the  fame
order  as  before.

31.  A  man  being  afBifted  with  vomitings,  and  having  a  low  and  weak,
pulfe,  in  confequence  of  a  wound  being  inflidled  upon  the  hypogaftrium,  at.
the  right  fide  of  the  linea  alba,  together  with  fome  convulfive  motions,  but
no  fwooning;  he  died  within  the  third  day,  in  this  hofpital,  before  the  latter
end  of  November,  in  the  year  1742.

The  abdomen,  which  v/as  not  tumid,  being  laid  open,  we  found  a  quan-
tity of  extravafated  blood  in  a  coagulated  ftate  :  and  the  inteftine  ileum  was.
pierc'd  through,  where  it  correfponded  to  the  wound.

32.  Although  the  prudent  and  cautious  phyfician,  in  forming  a  judgment
of  the  fatality  of  wounds  inflifted  even  upon  the  fmall  inteftines,  ought  not
to  neglefl;  thofe  things  which  Abraham  Vater(i')  has  learnedly  and  prudently
•written  upon  this  fubject ;  yet  we,  for  the  moft  part,  experienc'd  that  to  be-
too  true,  which,  after  Hippocrates  (;:),  has  been  faid  by Celfus  (^)i  "that

(a)  apud  du  Hamel  Hill,  R.  Sc.  Acad.  I.  3. (c)  S.  6.  Aph.  18.
S.  J.  c.  2.  n.  I.  («>)  De  Medic,  1.  5.  c,  26.  S.  7„ "

(^)  Difp.  infer.  Yuln.  in  Inteft.  Lethalitasi

4.  ««  }ig-


£24 Book  IV.  Of  Ghirurgical  and 'Jniverfal  Diforders.

"  he  cannot  be  fav'd,  in  whom  the  jejunum,  or  any  fmall  inteftine,  has  been
"  wounded."  To  which  our  Fabricius  ab  Aquapendente  {e),  has  added  the
following  things  :  "  I  have  obferv'd  perfons,  thus  wounded,  to  have  a  very
"  Imall,  and  very  frequent  pulfe,  and  to  die  on  the  firft  or  fecond  day  •,
"  from  whence,  if  you  fee  Itich  pulfes,  always  have  a  fufpicion  of  the  fmall
"  inteftines  being  wounded."

As  far  as  it  has  happen'd  to  me  to  obferve,  in  a  certain  man,  in  whom  a
wound,  inflifted  upon  the  umbilical  region,  fhow'd  the  inteftine  jejunum  to
have  been  wounded  in  its  fituation  ;  Fabricius  has  fpoken  with  propriety  of
the  pulies,  and  juftly,  alfo,  of  the  day  on  which  death  comes  on  :  although,
as  I  was  not  allow'd  to  diffcft  the  body,  I  could  not,  for  a  certainty,  deter-
mine, whether  this  was  to  be  aicrib'd  to  the  wound  of  that  inteftine  alone,  or
to  the  wound  of  the  mefentery,  and  the  vefTels  alfo  ;  from  whence  blood  had
been  difcharg'd.

Wichout  doubt  we  muft  be  led  by  our  difteflions.  And  as  thefe  (how
us,  for  a  certainty,  what  inteftines  were  wounded,  fo  they  make  us  con-
ceive, that  the  term  of  life  is  different  in  different  perfons,  and  that  very  fre-
quently, from  thiscaufe;  that  is  to  fay,  according  to  the  various  difpofi-
tion  of  bodies,  and  the  different  fymptoms  which  are  join'd  to  thefe  difeafes.
If,  in  this  third  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  you  read  the  twenty-fifth  obfer-
vation,  which  contains  moft  of  the  examples  that  relate  hereto ;  you  will  fee,
that  wounds  of  the  inteftinum  ileum  have  brought  on  death,  fometimes
within  two -and  twenty  days  (/),  fometimes  within  three  days  (g),  and  at
other  times  within  four  (h) :  but  that  wounds  of  the  colon  became  fatal
within  as  many  days  (f )  •,  at  one  time,  and  at  another  within  as  many  fiours
(k) :  and  even  that,  in  a  certain  perfon,  the  inteftines,  both  large  and  fmall,
being  pierc'd  with  many  wounds,  thefe  wounds  had  become  fatal  on  the  fifch
day  (/).

Add  to  thefe  from  Hoyerus  (?«)  •,  that  a  wound  of  the  inteftine  duodenum
became  fatal  on  the  fourth  day  ;  from  Bohn  (n),  that  a  wound  of  the  j-ju-
num  was  foUow'd  by  death  a  few  hours  after-,  from  the  fave  author  (c),
from  Uzenbezius  (^),  and  from  Haller  (q),  that  a  wound  of  the  ileum  was
fatal  on  the  eighth  day,  the  fourth  day,  and  the  firft.  To  me,  however,  it
had  happen'd  long  betore,  not  to  obferve  a  different  time  of  death  from  that
in  the  man  in  queftion,  in  conlequence  of  a  wound  in  the  fame  inteftine,  as
you  will  learn  from  the  following  hiftory.

33.  Another  man  died  convuls'd,  in  the  fame  hofpital,  on  the  day  after
his  having  receiv'd  a  wound,  with  a  knife,  about  the  lower  part  of  the  right
epicolic  region,  a  little  before  the  end  of  December,  in  the  year  iyz6.

'  As  I  examin'd,  with  great  accuracy,  fome  parts  of  this  body,  :nd  parti-
cularly the  kidnies,  one" of  which  was  furnifti'd  with  two  ureters,  that  ran
diftinftly  from  each  other,  and  were  divided,  even  at  their  termination^  with-

(e)  Pentateuch.  1.  2,  c.  34.  in  fin.  (0  §  '2-

(/)  §  9.  -  (az)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  3.  Obf.  18.

(p)  §  ic.  (»)  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  S.  z.  c.  4.

(A)  §  14.  (0)  Ibid.

(,)  ^13,  CfJ  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  7.  Obf.  60.

(^)  ^  6.  (f)  Difp.  Anat.  colleftar.  Tom.  7.  in  fin.


Letter  LIV. Articles 34j 3j:.  225*

in  the  bladder;  I  did  not  negleft  to  obferve  thofe  things  which  related, to
the  wound.  The  mefentery  was  pierc'd  through,  not  far  from  the  termi-
nation of  the  inteftinum  ileum,  but  without  having  any  veflcl  injur'd,  in
fuch  a  manner  as  to  be  capable  of  pouring  out  a  great  quantity  of  blood  :
nor  indeed  was  there  any  effufion  which  d<.'ferv'd  attention.  And  even  that
inteltine  was  wounded.

34,  This  wound  of  the  inteftine  prevented  me  from  being  fo  capable  of
confirming  the  obfervations  of  Frederic  Ruyfch  ^  though,  in  this  man,  there
was  no  effufion  of  blood  to  render  nrie  doubtful.  This  author  having  ad-
monilh'd  us,  in  his  Thefauri  anatomici  (r),  "  that  throughout  the  mefentery.
"  are  a  pretty  confiderable  number  of  vifible  nerves,  the  injuries  of  which
*'  produce  very  violent  fymptoms,  and  very  great  pains  ;"  afTerted,  in  his
Adverjaria  (j),  that  he  had  often  feen  men  die  within  two  or  three  days,  af-
ter continual  and  intolerable  pains  of  the  belly  ;  in  none  of  whom  he  could
find  any  part  of  moment  injur'd  by  the  wound,  befides  the  mefentery  itfelf^
after  the  moft  accurate  examination  was  made  :  notwithllanding  the  authors,
who  had  written  upon  thefe  things  to  that  time,  had  not  pronounc'd  the
wounds  of  the  mefentery  to  be  fatal.  Somewhat  nearer  to  the  obfervations
of  Ruyfch,  comes  that  which  was  related  to  me  by  a  furgeon  of  undoubted
veracity,  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  1724,  in  the  following  manner  5
and  that  a  few  days  after  it  had  been  made  by  himfelf.

35.  A  foreigner  who  had  refided  here  for  a  long  time,  and  was  there-
fore known  to  every  one,  receiv'd  a  wound  with  a  fharp,  thin,  and  two-
edg'd  fword,  which  penetrated  the  abdomen  obliquely,  on  the  left  fide,  under
the  ribs  themfelves.  The  narrownefs  and  obliquity  of  the  wound  were  fuch»
that  not  only  nothing  could  come  out  of  the  wound  ;  but  they  would  not
even  fuffer  the  probe,  by  any  diligence  of  his  furgeon,  or  by  the  diligence
of  Maflieri  himfelf,  to.be  introduc'd  into  the  cavity  of.  the  belly  :  and  yet
that  the  wound  had  reach'd  into'  this  cavity,  was  plain  from  the  following
fymptoms.

From  the  time  of  receiving  the  wound,  quite  to  the  fifth  dayv  on  whicfi
the  pulfe  fail'd,  and  the  patient  died  ;  he  threw  up  the  ingefta  and  bile,
continually,  by  vomiting  •,  if  you  except  an  interval  of  five  hours,  which
happen'd  no  more  than  once.  He  was  tortur'd  Vi^ith  pains  of  the  belly.  The
inteftines  never  difcharg'd  any  thing,  unlefs  ftimulated  by  glyfters.  And  al-
though blood  had  been  taken  away  at  three  feveral  times,  and  although
none  of  this  fluid  ever  appear'd  in  what  was  difcharg'd  after  glyfters,  or  by
vomiting  •,  yet,  laft  of  all,  blood  iffued  from  the  mouth  before  death,  and
at  the  fame  tittie  from  the  noftrils.

On  opening  the  abdomen,  under  the  inteftines,  which  were  turgid  with
air,  a  fmall  quantity  of  blood  was  feen  to  be  extravafated  ;  and  that  in  the
lower  part  of  the  :belly.  And  the  wound  had  reach'd  to  the  inteftine  colon,
about  four  inches  below  the  fpleen  ;  but  had  injur'd  it  only  fuperficially  ;
and  from  thepce,  withj?ut  injuring  any  other  inteftine,  it  had  reach'd  to  the
mefentery  :  which,  for  this  reafon,  was  not  only  found  to  be  wounded,  but
tumid.  ' •

(r)  I.  Repof.  3.  n.  13.  not.  i.  (j)  Dec,  z,  c.  4.

Vol.  III.  G  g  Z^'  Although,


2  26 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univei'fal  Difoiders.

36.  Although,  befides  the  mefentery,  the  external  furfaceof  the  inteftine
was  here  wounded  alio ;  yet  you  will  cafily  perceive,  that  this  was  much
more  fimilar  to  the  obfervations  of  Ruyfch,  except  that  life  was  fomewhae
more  prolong'd,  when  yoii  obferve  with  Boerhaave(/),  "  that  the  external  fur-
face  of  the  inteftines  is,  in  fadl:,  nothing  but  the  mefentery  itfclf"

However,  when  death  happens  from  a  wound  in  the  mefentery,  and  you
cannot  account  for  this  circumftance  from  the  incifion  of  any  of  its  pretty
large  veficls,  as  in  the  citizen  whom  Bohn  («)  diffefted  ;  you  may  afcribe
it,  with  Ruyfch,  to  the  pundure  of  thefe  nerves,  but  of  ihofe  that  are  pret-
ty large  :  for  if  the  pundlure  of  the  very  fmall'  ones  were  fatal  likewife  j-
therc  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  no  inftance  of  a  fuccefsful  cure  of  a  wound
that  pierc'd  through  the  belly  :  or,  at  leaft,  none  that  was  foon  brought
about,  and  unattended  with  the  moft  violent  fymptoms ;  yet  this  has  beea
faid  by  us,  as  I  have  faid  above  (.v)  ;  and  others  alfo  have  feen  it :  among
■whom  is  Waldfchmied  (jy).

But  our  cafe  was  a  wound  with  a  fword  :  Mauchartus  (3),  however,  hav-
ing feen  the  belly  pierc'd  through  by  a  leaden  bullet ;  in  confequence  of
which,  the  wounded  man  died  nearly  within  the  fpace  of  five  hours  ;  en-
quir'd  into  the  caufe  of  fo  fpeedy  a  death,  and  found,  that  the  bullet,  after
having  gone  through  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach,  "  had  pafs'd,  from  thence,
"  through  the  mefentery,  betwixt  the  colon  and  ileum,  without  injuring
"  either  of  them,  or  without  rupturing  the  mefenteric  vtlTels :"  and  he  ob-
ferv'd,  that  it  was  "  very  little  of  the  contents  of  the  ftomach,  which  had
'  "  gone  down  into  the  abdomen ;  and  that  there  were,  in  no  part  whatever,
"  marks  even  of  an  incipient  gangrene,  or  any  fatal  haemorrhage;"  fothat
he  might  have  attributed  this  lo  fpeedy  death,  to  the  larger  nerves  of  the
mefentery  being  lacerated,  if  he  had  not  been  inform'd,  "  that  no  convul-
"  fions  had  come  on,  previoufly  to  death  ;  but  that  the  vomitings  had  been
"  frequent."  Although  the  internal  convulfions  of  the  vifcera,  perhaps,
efcap'd  the  notice  of  the  by-ftanders.

Certainly,  although  you  have  feen  it  confirm'd,  by  obfervations  produc'd
above  (a),  by  me,  and  particularly  by  obfervations  referr'd  to,  in  other
authors,  that  wounds  infliffed  on  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach,  are  fatal  within
a  fhort  time,  for  the  moft  part ;  yet,  that  this  had  kill'd,  within  fo  very
fmall  a  fpace,  a  man  who  was  fo  healthy  and  robuft,  neither  Mauchartus
appears  to  have  believ'd,  nor  do  I  imagine  others  will  readily  believe.  But
let  us  return  to  what  I  myfelf  have  feen.

37.  A  miller's  fervant,  of  one-and-twenty  years  of  age,  healthy,  robuft,
and  of  a  very  good  habit  of  body,  had  the  fame  thing  happen  to  him,
which  happens  frequently  to  young  men  that  are  audacious,  and  full  of
threats,  of  which  kind  he  was ;  "1  mean,  that  he  receiv'd  a  wound  which
prov'd  fatal.  This  was  inflifted  upon  the  left  epicolic  region,  with  a
butcher's  knife  :  as  it  was  then  the  firft  v/atch  of  the  night,  he  return'd  home
by  himfelf. In  the  morning,  being  brought  into  the  hofpital,  he  was  taken

(/)  Pr:elea.  ad  Inftit.  §  816.  fyj  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  9.  Obf.  70.

(u)  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  S.  2.  C.  4.  {z)  Earund.  Cent,  5.  Obf.  33.

(^)  n.  7.  {a)  n.  9.

under


Letter  LIV. Article  37.  227

under  the  care  of  a  phyfician  and  furgeon.  On  that  day  the  fever  v/as  incon-
fiderable.  But  on  the  following  night  he  vomited,  and  always  trembled
with  convulfive  ftartings.  And  continuing  to  tremble  and  flart  in  this  man-
ner, he  died  on  the  following  day,  in  the  morning  ;  about  the  fortieth  hour,
after  receiving  the  wound.

The  body  was  made  ufe  of  on  the  next  day,  which  was  the  twenty-firfl:,
of  January,  in  the  year  1738,  and  on  many  of  the  following  days,  to  carry
on  the  anatomical  demonftrations,  which  we  had  begun  to  give  in  the  col-
lege.

The  tranfverfe  and  oblique  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  v/ere  perforateJ,  in
that  region  which  I  have  mark'd  out,  with  a  wound  that  would  admit  al-
moft  two  fingers :  and  betwixt  them  the  air  had  enter'd,  fo  that  a  beginning
emphyfema  was  already,  in  a  manner,  brought  on.  This  air  had  got  out
of  the  colon;  which  was  wounded,  as  I  (hall  fay  juft  now,  into  the  cavity
of  the  belly,  and  had  diftended  it.  Nor  had  the  air  alone  come  forth  from
that  inteftine,  but  the  excrements  alfo  :  fo  that,  although  a  fluid  was  extra-
vafated  in  the  belly,  to  the  quantity  of  two  pounds ;  the  greateft  part  of  k
was  made  up  of  excrementitious  matter,  and  very  little  of  it  of  blood  ;  no
confiderable  veffel  having  been  injur'd.

For  the  knife,  having  pierc'd  through  the  abdomen,  as  I  have  faid,  had
pafs'd  on  obliquely  upwards,  and  inwards :  and  firft,  indeed,  had  incis'd  the
correfponding  pare  of  that  inteftine,  which  I  have  mention'd,  in  fuch  a  man-
ner, that  the  anterior  and  polterior  furface  of  it,  and  that  which  is  turn'd
towards  the  vertebrje  laterally,  being  cut  afunder,  gave  a  pafTage  for  the  air
and  excrements  to  be  difcharg'd  into  the  belly.

After  that,  the  knife  had,  without  hurting  the  kidney,  or  the  appendix
of  the  diaphragm,  pafs'd  through  the  mufculus  quadratus  lumborum,  and  had
penetrated,  beyond  this,  into  the  common  beginning  of  the  facrolumbus  and
longiffimus  dorfi,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  of  the  tendons,  which  afcend  ob-
liquely from  this  beginning,  to  the  tranfverfe  procefll'S  of  the  lumbar  verbe-
brs,  one  only  was  incis'd  ;  and  that  not  entirely ;  but  what  you  know  to
be  much  worfe,  was  cut  into  only  in  part.  From  hence,  therefore,  per-
haps moft  perfons  would  have  deduc'd  the  principal  caufe  of  the  man's
being  carried  off  by  convulfive  ftartings  -,  efpecially,  as  the  v/ounded  in-
teftine was  not  red,  or  livid,  in  that  very  part  where  it  v/as  wounded.

The  fundus  of  the  ftomach,  when  infpefted  on  the  internal  furface,  Ihow'd
the  fmall  velTels  to  be  diftended  with  blood  here  and  there,  for  fome  fpace.
However,  the  liver  was  large,  and  very  long  tranfverfly  ;  fo  as  to  be  extend-
ed almoft  into  the  whole  hypochondrium  on  the  left  fide.  The  fpleen  was
alfo  pretty  long,  and  bigger  than  it  naturally  is ;  and  the  artery  thereof,
was  not  only  very  fn>all,  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  that  vifcus  in
particular,  but  very  little  tortuous  alfo.  Fori  was  lefs  furpris'd  at  the  thin-
nefs,  as  I  obferv'd  the  trunk  of  the  great  artery  to  be,  in  that  part,  as  well
as  in  the  thorax,  very  narrow ;  and  not  only  in  proportion  to  the  body,  but
alfo  in  proportion  to  the  vena  cava  itfelf;  the  foramen  of  which,  in  the  fep~
rum  tranfverfum,  was  the  largeft  of  ail  that  I  ever  remember  to  have
feen.

Upon  opening  the  thorax,  I  found  the  lungs  every  where  free  and  un-
G  g  2  conncifted  -,


2  28 Bcx)k  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Difordcrs.

connefted-,  v/hich,  you  know,  happens  but  rarely  in  adult  perfons  :  but  they
were  furnifh'd  with  bronchial  glands,  of  a  larger  fize  than  ufual,  fo  that  one
•was  almofl  equal  in  magnitude  to  a  Imall  nut,  when  comprefs'd.  In  the  pe-
ricardium was  a  yellowifli  water,  and  that  not  in  very  fmall  quantity.  The
heart  was  rather  large,  and  therein  was  blood,  which,  like  the  blood  in  other
parts,  was  black  ;  but  there  it  v/as,  alfo,  in  fome  meafure  grumous.  The
great  artery,  beyond  the  curvature,  ftiew'd  fome  kind  of  furrows,  as  it  were,
drawn  on  the  internal  furface,  and  in  a  longitudinal  diredion.

The  other  circumftances  that  I  have  obferv'd  in  this  body,  do  not  relate
to  the  prefent  fubjedt.

38.  Although  you  have  had  a  great  number  of  obfervations,  in  this  letter,
in  reoard  to  wounds  of  the  ftomach,  the  inteftines,  and  mod  of  the  other
vifcera  which  are  in  the  belly,  froni  Valfalva,  from  me,  and  from  other  ob-
fervators  ;  yet  1  will  refer  to  dthers,  in  feveral  authors,  which  you  may,  if
you  pleafe,  infert  into  the  Sepulchretum.

To  wounds  of  the  larger  inteftines,  that  is,  of  the  colon  and  the  redtum,
relate  the  obfervations  of  Harderus  (/>),  and  Bautzmannus  (i).  In  the  latter
is,  at  the  fame  time,  what  relates  to  the  diaphragm  being  wounded  ;  and  in
the  former,  what  relates  to  the  receptaculum  chyli ;  if  1  rightly  underftand
it ;  but,  at  leaft,  what  relates  to  the  kidney  being  wounded  at  the  fame  time :
mention  of  a  wound  in  which  part  is  alfo  made  in  the  preceding  letter  (i^).
Now  we  (hall  add  the  obfervation  of  Laubius  {e),  which  is  fo  much  the  more
worthy  of  attention,  becaufe  the  knife  had  reach'd  through  the  middle  of  the
fpleen  quite  to  the  left  kidney.  And  there  will  be  another  of  the  fpleen
from  Bernerus  (/).

Moreover,  befides  thofe  examples  which  are  pointed  out  in  the  latter  end  of
the  preceding  letter  (^J,  as  relating  to  wounds  of  the  liver,  Bohn  (/;;)  will
give  you  others,  which  have  ftill  more  reference  to  the  fubjeft  of  this  letter.
And  in  none  of  the  vifcera  of  the  belly  are  deep  wounds  miOre  certainly,  and
more  fpeedily  fatal,  thin  in  this  vifcus  ;  not  only  by  reafon  of  the  multiplicity
of  its  veflels,  but  alfo  by  reafon  of  its  greater  thicknefs,  the  nearer  it  ap-
proaches to  the  diaphragm.

Wherefore  Homer  (i)  has,  with  great  propriety,  faid  of  Eurypilus  throwing
his- lance  :  Ver'vafit  hepar  fubier  fracordia  :  Jiatim  autem  genua  folvit :  and  in.
another  place  (k)  of  Patroclus :  Perctijfit  ubi  mentes  fingunt  circa  prudens  cor ;
cecidit  autem :  in  which  paffage,  by  reafon  of  the  word  fingunt,  there  is  fome
refemblance  to  a  commentary  which  we  have  in  the  book  De  Morbo  Sacro  (/).

And  left  you  (hould  here  think  that  I  digrefs  to  the  poet,  contrary  to  the
cuftom  of  the  ancients  •,  fee  what  Galen  («j  has  obferv'd  in  regard  to  that
paffage  of  Homer  {m),  which  relates  to  Ulyffes  and  the  Cyclops,  Ubi  mentes-;
hepar  habent.  "  So  fpeedy  and  violent  a  death,"  fays  he,  "  follows  the-
*^'  wound  or  the  laceration  of  this  vein,"  that  is  to  fay,  the  cava,  where  it

{b)  Eph  N.  C.  Dec.  J.  A.  g,  &  10.  Obf.6z.  {h)  C.  4.  fupra  ad  n.  36.  cit.

(c),  ]bid.  Obf.  234.  [2)  Iliad.  1.  n.

(dj  N.  40.  (/f)  Iliad.  1.  16.

(f)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  10.  Obf.  8.  (/)  N.  l8.

Cf)  ha.  N.  C.  Tom.  a.  Obf.  69,  (»:)  Odyfl".  1.  9.

Cg)  N.  41..  ",  (»)  De  Ufu  Part.  1.  4.  c,  14. ,

connedlrs


Letter  LIV. Article  3  S.  22  9

conne£bs  the  liver,  into  the  fubftance  of  which  it  is  fix'd,  to  the  diaphragm,
"  that  when  the  poet  fays,  the  very  wife  and  prudent  LJlyffes  lay  in  wait  for
"  the  huge  Cyclops,  and  contnv'd  how  to  tai<.e  away  his  life,  he  determin'd
"  not  to  force  his  fword  into  any  other  part  of  the  b'ody,  but  that  where  the
"  liver  is  contain'd  in  the  diaphragm.:  fo  confident  was  he,  in  refpeCl  to
"  this  place,  that  if  it  was  affefted  with  a  wound,  it  would  not  fufFerhim  to
"  live  even  a  moment  of  time."

But  Riolanus(o)  alfo  commends  Galen,  for  producing  this  teftimony  of
Homer  :  although,  through  forgetfulnefs,  he  afferts  that  UiyfTes  really'  did
what  both  of  them  fay  he  intended  to  do.

And  whether  from  a  wound  of  the  gall-bladder,  an  equally  fpeedy  and
fudden  death  is  to  be  expefted,  has  been  fufficiendy  fliewn  by  me  in  the
fecond  of  the  EpifioU  Anatomica  {p)  ;  as  I  have  confider'd  all  the  examples,
which  had  been  produc'd  quite  to  that  time,  of  rupture  in  this  parr,  and  not
only  from  a  wound,  but  from  any  caufe  whatfoever.  I  remember  to  have
read  only  one  or  two  that  have  been  added  fince  that  time  ;  one  of  which
you  may  examine  in  the  works  of  the  very  illuftrious  Van  Swieten  {q).

You  will  fee,  indeed,  what  fymptoms,  which  were  very  confiderable,  fuc-
ceeded  to  the  wound  of  the  veficle,  and  the  efFufion  of  the  bile  into  the  cavity
of  the  belly,  both  immediately  and  after  fome  days ;  but  you  will,  at  the
fame  time,  fee  that  death  did  not  come  on  before  the  beginning  of  the  fe-
venth  day.  Yet  this  did  not  happen  by  any  means  in  the  other  example,
which  the  celebrated  Tacconus  (r)  has  produc'd  ;  but  the  woman,  in  whom
was  an  abfcefs  of  the  liver,  which  was  grown  into  one  fubftance  with  the  pe-
ritonjEum,  and  had  ruptur'd  the  cyft,  recover'd  perfeftly.

And,  indeed,  1  lee  that  Kaltfchmidt  (/)  agrees  with  Bohn  {$)  in  this  opinion,,
that  life  may  be  extended  for  fome  length  of  time  without  the  cyftic  bile  %.
nay,  he  even  thinks  that  this  bile,  when  etfus'd  within  the  abdom^en,  does  not,,
of  itfelf, bring  on  any  immediate  danger.

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  not  the  leaft  room  for  doubt,  but,  if  the  other
bladder,  that  is,  the  urinary  refervoir,  be  fo  wounded  as  to  difcharge  its  con-
tents within  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  that  the  moft  violent  and  fatal  injuries
are  the  confequence  thereof;  as  is  likewife  the  cafe,  when  the  ureters  are
wounded.  For  the  urine  does  not  always  entirely  come  out  by  the  external
wound,  where  the  bladder  is  open'd,  till  it  begins  to  be  excreted  by  the
urethra  (which  it  could  not  be  at  all  in  the  beginning)  ;  as  happen'd  in  the
cafes  obferv'd  by  Ruyfch  {ti),  by  Bohn  {x),  and  by  Martinus  (jy).

Sometimes,  indeed,  the  wound  is  not  inflifted  in  an  oppofite  dire£tion,.
but  on  the  back-part  of  the  bladder  •,  as  in  the  third  hiftory  which  is  produc'd
by  Bohn  (z),  in  which  the  fide  of  the  bladder  was  perforated  ;  and,  in  like
manner,  as  in  that  fervant-maid,  of  whom  Alexander  Camerarius  (<?)  fpeaks^

(o)  Anthropogr.  I.  I.e.  2.  (a)  Cent.  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  7;.

(/)  N.  96.  . \x)  C.  4.  cit.

(y) Coram,  in  Boerb.  Aph.  §  31Z.  (yj  Coir.nierc. Litt. A. 1731. Spec. 41.

(r)  De  raris  quibufd.  Hepat.  &c,  Obferv.  n.  3.

(/)  C.  4.  cit.  (s)  C,  4.  cit.

(/)  Diflert.  de  Vuln.  Hepat.  §  48.  (a)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  i.  Obf.  160.  yerL  fin,.

7 .

in


i^o Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

'n  whom  ci  leaden  bullet had  pafs'd  throvigh the  middle  fubftance  of  the
uterLi?,  and  from  thence  alfo  through  the  middle  of  the  bladder.

We,  therefore,  come  at  length  to  the  uterus,  other  examples  of  which
being  wounded  you  will  meet  with,  befides  this  inftance ;  particularly  in
gravid  women,  in  whom,  in  proportion  as  it  lies  more  eaQly  open  co  wounds,
lo  the  wounds  are  attended  with  more  danger.  There  is,  among  the  chirur-
gical difputations  collcdted  by  Haller,  one  in  particular,  J  mean  the  hundred-
and-thirty-firll,  in  which  {!/)  you  will  find  fome  oblervations  relating  to  this
fubjedl.

But  whatever  vifcus  is  wounded,  although  each  has  its  peculiar  marlcs  to
judge  by,  and  in  particular  that  which  anatomy  fupplies  us  with  ;  I  mean,
the  knowledge  of  its  proper  feat;  we  mull,  neverthclefs,  be  cautious,  left
we  are  at  any  time  deceiv'd  by  this  very  circumftance,  being  unmindful  of
the  varieties  which  frequently  occur ;  as  in  cafe  of  the  uterus  being  inclin'd
to  one  fide;  or  in  cafe  of  the  inteftine  colon,  in  particular,  being  inflefted
from  that  tranfverfe  fituation,  which  it  is  wont  to  have  in  the  upper  part  of
the  belly,  more  or  lefs  downwards :  or  in  the  liver,  of  which,  it  I  have  not
told  you  in  thefe  letters  what  I  have  feen  differently  in  different  perfons,  yet
I  have  in  the  firft  of  the  EpiJloU  Anatomic^  {c) ;  as  alio  in  the  fecond  of  the
Adverfaria  (^),  where  I  have  not  conceal'd  what  it  behoves  us  likewife  to
fufpedl,  in  fome  perfons,  in  regard  to  the  ftomach.

But  fuppofe  that  the  feveral  vifcera  fliould  always  keep  the  fame  fituations ;
as  the  diaphragm  is  higher  at  the  time  of  exfpiration,  and  lower  at  the  time
of  infpiration,  does  not  the  liver,  in  particular,  and  the  ftomach,  follow  the
fituation  of  the  diaphragm,  and  therefore  defcend  more  when  we  infpire
very  ftrongly  ?  "When  we  ftand  upright,  when,  from  faffing,  the  vifcera
■which  fupport  the  liver  are  empty,  the  fulchrum  of  the  diaphragm  is  alfo
wanting,  which  refifts  its  defcent ;  as  I  have  faid  to  you  already  in  a  former
letter  [e].,  in  refpeft  to  the  opinion  of  more  than  one,  both  of  the  ancient
and  modern  authors :  to  whom  you  may  moreover  add  thofe  celebrated  men
Window  (/),  and  Van  Swieten  [g),  who  do  not  doubt  but  this  is  confirm'd
by  the  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Garengeot  on  the  liver  of  a  man,  which
was  wounded  while  in  this  ftate.

All  thefe  things,  therefore,  and  others  of  the  like  kind,  it  is  neceffary  to
attend  to  :  and  if  there  be  any  doubt  remaining  after  that ;  with  the  know-
ledge of  the  more  general  fituation,  joirt  other  tokens  taken  from  the  adlon
and  the  office  of  each  vifcus,  and  from  the  nature  of  thofe  fluids  which  they
contain.

In  the  fame  manner,  the  blood- veffels  difcover  themfelves,  when  wounded,
by  their  blood  being  in  great  quantity,  if  they  are  large,  and  there  is  no  ob-
ftacle  to  its  profufion  from  the  cavity  of  the  belly ;  and  by  its  being  in  very
great  quantity,  if  the  veffel  is  very  large  ;  as,  for  inftance,  if  the  aorta  or
vena  cava  be  wounded :  although,  in  fuch  a  cafe,  life  ceafes  before  we  can
have  time  to  diftinguifh.

(i)  C.  1.  §  15.  {/)  Expof.  Anat.  tr.  du  bas  Ventr.  n.  267.

\c)  N.  2.  II.  &  feqcj.  &  feq.

{d)  Animad.  2.  {g)  Comm.  in  §  cit.

\e)  26.  n.  25.

I  You


Letter  LIV. Article  39.  231

You  have  an  obfervation  from  Helwich  {h),  of  a  confiderably  large  artery,
that  is,  of  the  fplenic,  being  wounded ;  and  of  the  aorta  being  perforated
(without  the  inteftines,  which  lie  before  it,  being  injur'd)  at  the  very  divifion
into  the  iliacs,  from  Dillenius  {i).  And  you  may  read  examples  of  the  vena
cava  being  wounded,  in  the  Sepulchrctum,  from  Hildanus  {k),  and  Paaw(/; :
and  thereto  you  may  add  an  example,  from  Bohn  (»;),  of  the  internal  iliac
vein  ■,  from  which  you  yourfelf  v/ill  perceive  what  may  often  be  an  ob-
ftrudion,  for  fome  fpace  of  time,  to  the  blood  which  is  about  to  flow,  not
only  from  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  as  I  faid  a  little  above,  but  even  from  the
vein  icfelf  which  is  wounded.  To  return,  however,  to  my  obfervations  which
relate  to  wounds  of  the  belly  :  as  the  laft  of  them  was  that  which  I  took
from  a  young  man  that  was  fervant  to  a  miller ;  now  take  lome  which  relate
to  blows  and  compreflions  of  the  fame  part.

39.  Another  miller,  but  this  an  old  man,  falling  down  upon  a  ftone,  hurc
the  very  fide  of  the  right  epicolic  region.  For  which  reafon,  and  becaufe  he
then,  by  means  of  coughing,  expedlorated  blood,  though  in  a  fmall  quantity,
he  came  into  the  hofpital.  More  than  fifteen  days  being  elaps'd,  and  he  in
the  mean  while  making  fcarcely  any  complaint,  and  flaying  there  only  on
account  of  his  poverty  and  feeblenefs,  as  it  were,  faid,  upon  being  afk'd,
that  he  was  coftive  in  his  bowels.

He  had,  at  firft,  folutive  clyfters  adminlfter'd  to  him,  which,  however,  re-
turn'd  without  any  effc6t.  After  this,  he  faid  that  he  had  pains  in  his  belly-,
and  that  his  abdomen  had  lately  become  turgid  and  tenfe,  like  that  of  a
tympanitic  perfon  :  in  the  morning,  therefore,  an  ounce  of  that  medicine
which  is  cali'd  diatartarum,  was  given  him.  This,  however,  had  no  effed  ;••
except  that,  on  the  following  night,  the  old  man  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity
of  blood  into  his  bed,  without  knwing  what  he  had  difcharg'd  :  and,  at  the
fame  time,  he  threw  up  from  his  ftomach  what  he  had  taken  in  by  way  of
fupper.  tioon  after  this,  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  dehquium,  and  foon  after  that
vyith  death,  which  happen'd  on  the  fame  night ;  that  is,  a  little  before  the
end  of  November,  in  the  year  1743.

The  abdomen  was  not  only  tumid,  at  about  the  fpace  of  three  days  from
the  time  of  death,  but  even  at  the  thirtieth  hour  from  thence  ;  and  ic  was
already  externally  green,  moreover.  Upon  the  opening  of  this  cavity,  much,
water  was  found  within  ;  although  in  the  feet  there  was  not  the  leafl:  beginning
of  an  oedematous  tumour.  This  water  being  exhaufted,  the  remaining  parts
were  left  in  that  ftate  for  fome  hours,  by  reafon  of  the  very  filthy  odour  the^f
exhal'd.  And  when  thefe  hours  were  elaps'd,  the  internal  furface  of  the  pe.
ritonseum,  alfo,  was  become  green.

Then  re-examining,  with  more  diligence,  thofe  things  that  had  before  oc-
cur'd  to  the  eyes,  I  faw  the  omentum  to  be  univerfally  drawn  up  to  the
ftomach  ;  this  laft-mention'd  vifcus  not  being  at  all  diftended  :  yet  the  fmall
inteftines  were  very  much  diftended,  particularly  the  ileum,  and  that  in  the
laft  turns  thereof;  to  appearance,  from  the  air  which  was  includedtherein.

. [',)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3. A.  9,  &  10.  Obf. (k)  Seft.  hac  3.  Obf.  25.  §  18,

S:.;o.  Tub  A.  1698.  -  '  (/)  Ibid.  §  19.

(0  Dec.  ead.  A.  7,  &  8,  Obf.  166,  {m)  De  Renunc.  Vu!n.  Seft.  s.

*  .  The  ■


2  3  - Book  IV, Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

The  extremity  of  the  fame  ileum,  and  the  beginning  of  the  colon,  were  of
a  bright  red  colour,  inclining  to  brown :  whereas  the  neighbouring  caecum,
the  appendicula  vermiformis,  and  the  remaining  part  of  the  colon,  were  of
a  natural  colour  -,  and  the  whole  left  part  of  this  inteftine,  and  the  retlum,
were  very  much  contra6led.

Yet  that  portion  of  the  abdominal  mufcles,  which  had  been  in  proximity
with  the  beginning  of  the  colon,  appear'd  to  be  black  and'  livid  on  the  in-
ternal furface,  as  if  from  contufion.  But  neither  this,  nor  that  part  of  the
inteftines,  which  I  faid  was  of  a  preternatural  colour,  had  any  thing  hard  or
tumid  in  them.  V/e  could  not  examine  the  interna!  furface  of  the  inteitines,
by  reafon  of  the  very  difagreeable  and  almoll  intokrable  odour.  The  liver
was  pallid  :  the  fpleen  was  larger  than  it  naturally  is  :  the  glands  of  the  me-
fentery  were  not  lb  fmall  as  to  make  it  necelTary  to  open  the  fat  in  order  to
bring  them  into  fight.

In  both  the  cavities  of  the  thorax  was  no  very  fmall  quantity  of  reddifh
water  :  in  the  pericardium  was  more  than  ufual ;  but  it  was  not  in  fo  great
a  quantity  as  the  former,  nor  of  fo  red  a  colour.  The  left  lobe  of  the  lungs
was,  in  iome  part  of  it,  connefted  with  the  pleura ;  yet  both  this  lobe  and
the  right  were  found.

Upon  opening  the  cranium,  and  removing  the  dura  mater;  under  the  pia
mater,  in  fome  places,  were  obferv'd  a  few  air-bubbles,  and  that  appearance
of  a  kind  of  jelly  alfo.  The  vefTels  which  creep  through  this  membrane
were  moft  of  them  diftended  with  blood ;  but  ftill  more  thofe  which  run  on
the  fides  of  the  feptum  lucidum :  and,  indeed,  from  the  fubftance  of  the
medullary  part  of  the  cerebrum,  drops  of  blood  were  prominent,  as  we  cut
into  it.  And  thefe  appearances  I  attended  to  fo  much  the  more,  as  I  had
obferv'd  a  fmaller  quantity  of  blood  than  ufual,  in  the  larger  veffels  of  the
belly  and  thorax.  There  was  no  water  in  the  ventricles  of  the  cerebrum,  and
the  fubftance  thereof  was  itfelf  fufBciently  firm  :  but  I  found  the  cerebellum
to  be  very  lax,  and  the  pineal  gland  ftill  more  fo  -,  though  thefe  parts,  and
others,  vv^hich  it  is  not  neceflary  to  mention -here,  I  did  not  difled;  later  than
on  the  fourth  day  after  death.

40.  This  man,  indeed,  died  very  late  from  a  blow  of  the  abdomen  :  but
another,  in  this  city,  very  foon ;  and,  as  I  fuppofe,  about  the  year  1670,
when  Jacob  Sandri,  whom  I  have  already  mention'd  to  you,  as  one  of  my
preceptors  at  Bologna,  was  here  upon  his  ftudies.  What  he  related  to  me,  I
ihall  give  you  in  juft  as  many  words.

41.  A  certain  mart  being  ftruck  on  the  navel,  by  the  kick  of  a  horfe,  fell
down  dead  immediately,  like  an  apopjeftic  perfon.  When  he  was  differed,
there  was  no  other  preternatural  appearance  but  a  lividnefs,  and  blacknefs,  of
the  inteftines  corrcfponding  to  the  part  which  had  been  ft'ruck.

42.  Upon  hearing  this  relation,  when  I  was  a  young  man,  the  obfervation
of  Hildanus(«)  came  into  my  mind,  of  a  young  mamtalling  down  foon  after
having  the  umbilical  ligament  of  the  liver  cut  through,  and  dying  very  foon.
Bur  afterwards  •,  when  I  obferv'd  that  neither  reafon,  nor  the  greater  part  of
authors,  afcrib'd  great  eftefts  to  the  injuries  of  this  ligament;  I  let  afide  that

(»j  Cent.  I.  Obf.  53.

thought.


Letter  LIV. Articles  43,  44.  235

thoucrht,  and  happen'd  to  light  on  another,  to  which  the  obfervations  of
Bohn^(<7),  and  others  whom  he  quotes,  and  fome  of  Benivenius  {p)  btfides,
feem'd  to  lead  me :  I  mean  of  blows  on  the  abdomen,  caufing  a  fudden  pro-
ftration  of  ftrength  in  thole  who  receiv'd  them,  and  even  fuddenly  killing ;
by  reafon,  as  he  fLippofc;s,  of  the  very  violent  concuffion  and  convulfion  of
the  diaphragm,  from  whence  fiifrocation  and  afphuxia  may  be  brought  on.

However,  as  the  blows,  of  which  he  fpeaks,  do  not  relate  to  the  navel,
but  to  the  epigaftrium  ;  for  this  very  reafon,  and  fome  others,  1  myfelf  with-
hold my  affent: but  you  are  at  liberty  to  think  as  you  pleafe,

43.  To  violent  compreffions  of  the  abdomen  would  relate,  in  preference
to  others,  that  which  the  carman  fuffer'd  from  the  wheel  of  a  cart  being
driven  over  his  belly ;  from  whence  the  moft  confiderable  inconveniences,
and  thelargeft  aneiirifm  of  the  great  artery,  that  I  have  ever  feen,  proceeded  j
if  I  had  not  defcrib'd  this  hiftory  to  you  already  in  the  fortieth  letter  (j).

But  in  regard  to  wounds,  and  blows  of  the  loins ;  whereto  belong  the  ob-
fervations of  thofe  celebrated  men,  Verdriefius  (r),  and  Quelmaltz  {s)  -,  as  at
prefent  I  have  none  of  my  own  at  hand ;  and  as  I  have  more  than  one  of
thofe  that  relate  to  wounds,  or  compreffions,  of  the  limbs ;  I  will  pals  over
to  thefe.

44.  A  ruftic  man,  who  had  a  pretty  good  habit  of  body,  being  at  vvork
about  wood,  fix'd  feveral  fplinters  of  it  very  deep  into  the  palm  of  his  rigtic
hand  ;  the  wound  correfponding,  pretty  nearly,  to  that  interftice  which  is
betwixt  the  bones  of  the  metacarpus,  that  lie  under  the  fore-finger  and  the
middle-finger  :.  nor  did  he  fliow  the  wound  to  any  furgeon,  or  phyfician,  till
after  he  was  feiz'd  with  convulfive  motions  of  that  whole  limb.

Therefore,  on  the  eighth  day,  from  the  time  of  receiving  the  wound,  he
was  at  length  brought  into  this  hofpital.  Blood  was  then  firft  taken  from  his
left  arm;  frefh  drawn  oil  of  almonds  was  given  him;  oil  of  turpentine  was
applied  to  the  wound.^  the  right  limb,  and  the  fpine,  were  anointed  with  luch
liniments  as  are  ufeful  againft  convulfions  ;  and  fome  fplinters  of  wood  were
extraded  from  the  wound ;  but  all  was  in  vain  :  and  that  not  only  for  the
reafon  which  I  fliall  give  you  juft  now,  but  aifo  becaufe  the  effedts  of  a  dif-
order,  which  was  entirely  neglefted  for  fo  long  a  time,  had  become  very
deeply  rooted  in  the  habit;  and  the  whole  limb  was  manifeftly  drawn  up-
wards, by  very  frequent  convulfive  motions.

Wherefore,  v/ithin  forty  hours,  from  the  time  of  his  being  brought  thi-
ther, he  died  :  and  this  was  at  a  time  when  I  v/as  demonftrating  the  ftrufture
of  the  human  body  to  the  pupils  there,  on  other  bodies ;  for  it  was  now  near
the  end  of  November,  in  the  year  1742  ;  I  therefore  made  ufe  of  this  alfo.
But  at  prefent  I  will,  according  to  my  cuftom,  pafs  over  other  things ;  and
will  take  notice  only  of  thofe  that  relate  to  the  wound,  or  to  appearances  not
quite  natural.

The  hand  and  the  arm  were  not  very  tumid.  The  wound  had  a  narrow
orifice ;  and  the  fhape  of  it  was  nearly  circular :  and  fo  deep  was  it,  that  it

(0)  De  Renunc.  Vuln.  S.  i.  &  S.  z.  c.  3.  (y)  n.  26.

(/>)  De  abdit.  &  c.  morbor.  caufis,  c.  no. \r)  AQ..  N.  C.  Tom.  i.  Obf.  86.
in  fin.  (j)  Differc.  de  Pingued.  §  17.  in  fin.

Vol,.  III.  H  h  came


2  3  4 ^<^o^  ^^-  ^^  Chimrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

came  through  that  interftice  of  the  bones,  which  I  have  fpoken  of,  almoft
to  the  back  of  the  hand  :  the  tendinous  expanfion  of  the  pulmaris,  the  ad-
ducens  mufcle  of  the  thumb,  which  lies  beneath  it,  and  the  interolTei,  not
to  -fay  the  lumbricalis,  being  perforated  •,  the  tendons  of  the  mufcles  that
bend  the  fecond  and  third  joints  of  thofe  fingers,  as  well  as  the  nerve  which
ran,  as  I  faw,  on  the  fide  of  the  wound,  being  moreover  certainly  injur'd,
as  you  will.underftand  from  thofe  things  which  will  be  immediately  faid.

For  while  we  examin'd  the  wound  thoroughly  in  the  dead  body ;  with  fuch
freedom  as  it  was  impoffible  for  the  furgeon  to  make  ufe  of  in  the  living
body  -,  we  found  a  fragment  of  the  wood,  of  the  form  of  a  parallelopiped  ;
(lender  in  its  fl-iape,  but  longer  than  the  point  of  the  little  finger,  in  its  tranf-
verfe  direction,  though  not  fo  broad  by  one  half;  fo  deeply  buried,  and  fo
wedg'd  and  fix'd  in,  that  it  could  not  be  got  out  without  difficulty,  nor
without  doing  violence  to  the  tendons  of  thofe  flexor  mufcles  which  I  have
mention'd.

You  fee  plainly  then,  that  thefe  tendons  were  much  afFeded  by  the  en-
trance of  that  fragment;  and  that,  after  it  had  enter'd,  by  confining  the  pus,
which  was  difcharg'd  from  the  wound  in  but  fmall  quantity,  and  almoft  like
ichor,  it  had  render'd  it  more  acrid  from  ilagnation,  and,  for  that  reafon,
more  fit  to  vellicate  thofe  tendons,  or  at  leaft  that  nerve,  while  it  was  flowly
and  gradually  diftill'd.

The  veins,  both  internally  and  externally,  were,  in  feveral  places,  diftended
with  black  and  fluid  blood  :  and  this  it  was  eafy  to  obferve,  as  we  diflieded
the  thorax,  the  neck,  and  the  head ;  and  from  thence  it  was  very  eafy  to
know,  that  the  cephalic  vein  was  wanting  in  the  left  arm,  not  only  below  but
above  the  elbow,  except  that,  above,  a  very  flight  and  flender  refemblance  of
it  was  found,  at  length,  with  fome  difficulty,  and  by  means  of  a  very  accu-
rate and  attentive  difliedlion.

The  head  being  cut  off  from  the  vertebrse,  no  water  flow'd  out  from  the
tube  thereof :  and  ^.one  of  this  fluid,  in  like  manner,  was  in  the  ventricles  of
the  cerebrum  ;  in  v»hich  the  plexus  choroides  were,  as  I  faw,  of  a  brown  co-
lour mix'd  with  a  great  rednefs  :  and  I  faw  a  great  number  of  fanguiferous
veflels  here  and  there,  during  the  diflTeftion  of  the  meduUary  part  of  the  ce-
rebrum, which  had  the  fame  appearance.  But  the  cerebrum,  and  the  cere-
bellum, the  medulla  and  the  nerves,  were  of  a  proper  firmnefs.

45,  While  1  was  defcribing  to  you  thefe  very  violent  and  fatal  convuTfions,.
which  fucceeded  to  a  deep  wound  of  the  hand,  they  brought  to  my  mind
thofe  that  came  on  after  a  very  flight  wound  of  the  forefinger ;  which  of
themfelves,  indeed,  were  not  fo  violent,  but  feem'd  more  conliderable  than
they  really  were,  not  only  on  account  of  thofe  fymptoms  which  they  had
join'd  with  them,  but  by  reafon  of  the  little  animal  that  gave  the  wound,
from  whofe  bite  nothing  of  this  kind  was  expefted.

A  noble  virgin  of  Verona,  of  fixteen  years  of  age,  having,  like  Leftjia,
that  fellow-citizen  of  hers  in  Catullus  (*),  a  fparrow  which  ffie  fed,  and  with
which  fhe  play'd  ;  endeavouring  one  day  to  take  it  from  her  right  flioulder
(on  which  it  had  happen'd  to  hop)  with  her  left  hand,  the  mifchievous  little

(*)  Carm.  2.  &  3.

^  animal


Letter  LIV. Article  45.  23^

animal  bit  her  fore-finger  with  a  very  violent  ftroke  of  its  beak,  and  wounded
it,  on  the  external  part,  in  the  very  joining  of  the  firft  and  iecond  internode.
It  was  plain,  from  the  appearance  of  the  finger,  that  fome  nervous  part  was
wounded,  befides  the  common  integuments ;  for  it  was  immediately  bent,
and  could  be  no  more  extended,  or  mov'd  :  and  for  that  reafon  it  became
lefs  movable  foon  after,  when  pus  was  form'd  in  the  wound,  the  pain  being
encreas'd,  and  the  hand  alfo  becoming  contradled  and  fwollen.

To  thefe  fymptoms  v/as  added  a  fever  of  fome  days.  Which  fever,  how-
ever, as  well  as  all  the  fymptoms  I  have  mention'd,  together  with  the  fwell-
ing  of  the  hand  and  finger,  were  remov'd,  to  all  appearance,  by  a  fpe'edy
and  happy  cure.  But  fcarcely  had  they  brought  about  this  cure,  when,  lo !
on  the  fourteenth  day  from  the  time  of  her  finger  being  wounded,  a  fudden
tremor,  which  began  firft  in  her  feet,  and  foon  after  in  her  hands,  and  was
from  thence  propagated  through  the  whole  of  her  body,  feiz'd  upon  the  vir-
gin, and  brought  with  it  a  dangerous  and  long  fyncope :  on  the  going  off  of
which  her  tremors  did  not  for  that  reafon  go  off;  but  being  join'd  with  a
groaning,  and  fometimes  with  a  kind  of  howling,  continu'd  many  hours :
till  at  leijgth  opening  her  eyes,  and  relaxing  the  lower  jaw,  which  was  forc'd
ciofely  againft  the  upper,  fhe  recurn'd  to  her  fenfes,  being  quite  ignorant  of
all  that  had  pafs'd.

But  after  a  very  fliort  interval,  all  thefe  fymptoms  return'd  again  in  the
fame  order,  more  flightly  indeed,  and  for  a  ihorter  time  ;  but  were  fo  fre*
quently  troubling  her,  that  every  day  fixteen  or  twenty  attacks  were  reckon'd
up.  And  now  this  had  been  the  ftate  of  the  cafe  for  fix  days,  when  I  was
confulted,  by  letters  relating  thefe  fafts ;  which  letters  bore  date  the  laft  day
of  Auguft,  in  the  year  1743.  I  was  not  very  well  pleas'd,  upon  calling  to
mind  the  aphorifms  of  Hippocrates  (/),  that  the  fever  had,  in  this  cafe,  been
put  to  flight  by  the  Peruvian  bark  ;  and  that  the  wound  had  been  fo  foon
brought  to  a  cicatrix  r'as  I  remember'd  that  it  was  the  opinion  of  Celfus  (a),
according  to  the  reading  which,  as  I  have  fhewn  in  a  forrner  work,  ought
to  be  retain'd  (x),  "  that  almoft  every  bite  has  fome  virus ;"  and  that  Mat-
thias Tilingius  (y),  Jo.  Georg.  Sommerus  (z),  and,  before  thefe,  John
Schenck  (a),  had  been  of  the  fame  opinion,  on  account  of  the  very  violent
fymptoms  which  fucceeded  the  bite  of  a  goofe,  and  of  a  cock  likewife  :  the
latter  of  thefe  authors  from  the  obfervations  of  Baccius,  the  former  from
their  own.

However,  as  we  obferv'd  that  all  thefe  bites  had  been  applied  to  the  hands
or  to  the  fingers,  (as  in  the  cafe  in  queftion)  parts  which,  either  becaufe  they
are  furnifli'd  with  fo  many  tendons,  or  from  any  other  more  juft  caufe,  are
certainly  often  liable  to  confiderable  and  violent  diforders,  even  without  any
virulent  infeftion,  when  lacerated  and  contus'd  -,  I  gave  fuch  an  anfwer  to
the  letter,  as,  whether  the  paroxyfms  had  taken  their  origin  from  the  too
hafty  occlufion  of  the  wound,  or,  on  occafion  of  the  wound  itfcif,  had  had

(/)  S.  II.  26.  &  IV.  57.  OJ  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  2.  A.  2.  Obf.  75.

(a)  De  Medic.  1.  5.  c.  27.  (z)  Dec.  ead.  A.  lo.  Obf.  82.  -

[x)  In  Celf.  Epift.  1.  («)  Obf.  Medic.  1.  7.  S.  i.  OK.  13.  in  fin.

H  h  2  the


2  3  6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  fame  oric^in  as  in  hyfterical  perfons  (for  the  virgin  was  of  a  finnguineovts
temperament,  inclining  to  melancholy,  and  full  of  juices,  2nd  yet  did  not
difcharoe  a  fufficient  quaniity  of  blood  every  month  from  the  uterus,  in  pro-
portion to  the  quantity  of  her  humours)  ;  I  fay,  I  gave  fuch  an  anfwer  as
recommended  wha.t  feem'd  to  me  the  moft  proper  methods  to  be  taken.
But  whether  by  the  hdp  of  thefe  methods,  or  by  the  ftrena,th  of  nature,  and
increafint^-  j.ae,,  all  thefe  fymptoms  were  carried  off;  it  is  ac  lead  certain,  that
1  heard- no  more  complaint  of  thefe  diforders  afterwards.

46.  A  woool-comber  quarrell'd  with  another  wool  comber,  who  was,  I
believe,  his  uncle,  either  by  the  father's  or  the  mother's  fide  ;  but  certainly
a  relation.  Both  of  them  were  heated  with  wine,  which  they  had  drank
in  great  plenty,  as  moft  of  the  common-people  are  wont  to  do  here  on  the
eleventh  of  November;  for  that  was  the  day,  in  the  year  1745.  Jn  the
ni<jht-time,  at  length,  they  went  from  words  to  blows.  The  firft  happen  d  to
fall  dov.'n,  being  lame  of  his  right  fide.  The  other  wounded  his  thigh,  as
he  lay,  with  a  knife,  and  even  pierc'd  it  through.  For  the  po.nt  of  the
knife  enterino-  a  little  above  the  knee,  on  the  anterior  and  internal  fide,  had
come  out  ao-ain  on  the  pofterior  and  extern.il  fide.  A  great  etiufion  of  blood
was  inftantly  made  from  the  wound  at  both  orifices  ;  and  this  hemorrhage,
as  it  was  an'unfeafonable  time  of  night,  not  only  could  not  be  refcrain'd  by
thofe  who  were  about  him,  but  could  not  even  be  prevented  from  carrying
gfF  the  m.an,  when  brought  into  the  hofpital,  within  fix  or  feven  hours.

The  body  being  lean,  but  within  the  bounds  of  health,  was  proper  for
the  profecution  of  our  anatomical  ftudies :  and  the  time  of  the  year  was  not
unfuitable.  Wherefore,  on  the  twelfth  and  on  the  following  days,  we  dif-
fefted  it  with  accuracy.  But  fome  things  that  I  obferv'd  I  have  referr'd  to
other  writings ;  and  the  caufe  of  the  lamenefs  itfelf,  which  I  plainly  faw,  to
another  letter  (^).

We  will  now  add  what  remains.  And,  firft,  upon  opening  the  wound
carefully,  the  caufe  of  fo  great  an  efFufion  of  blood  came  into  fight.  For
we  found  that  the  crural  artery,  where  it  goes  to  the  ham,  and  the  attendant:
vein,  were,  in  great  meafure,  cut  tranfverfely.

In  the  belly,  moreover,  the  omentum,  which  was  moderately  fat,  was
drawn  up  to  the  ftomach,  both  on  the  left  and  right  fide.  The  fi:omach
was  full  of  wine ;  yet  no  chyliferous  veflfel  was  found  creeping  any-where
throuc^h  the  mefentery  or  inteftines.  The  fmall  inteftines,  except  the  duo-
denum alone,  were  of  a  brown  colour  inclining  to  cineritious :  that  part  of
the  colon  which  pafTes  tranfverfly,  in  the  whole  of  it,  and  a  portion  of  the
parts  that  lay  neareft  to  it  on  both  fides,  were  contradled  almofl:  to  the  fize
of  a  man's  thumb.

The  o-all-bladder  was  alfo  contrafted-,  and  this  appear'd,  not  only  from
the  fmalt  quantity  of  bile  which  was  in  it,  but  alfo  from  the  cavity  which
was  hollow'd  out  in  the  liver  to  receive  it :  for  though  this  fhould  have  cor-
refponded  to  the  veficle  in  latitude,  it  was  much  wider  than  the  veficle.  The
kidnies  were  pretty  large ;  the  fpleen  was  fmall,  and  of  an  unufual  kind  of

(^1  Epift.  56.  n.  14..

figure^


Letter  LIV. Articles  47,  48,  45*.  237

figure,  yet  not  lels  found  than  the  kidnies  -,  except  that,  while  I  cut  into  it,
it  feem'd  to  n:ie  to  be  Ibmewhat  more  firm  than  it  ought  to  be.

In  the  thorax,  the  lungs,  which  were  in  other  refpects  found,  had  fo  col-
laps'd  into  themfelves,  that  I  fcarcely  remember  to  have  feen  any  that  were
lefs  extenfive  in  their  bulk  :  but  the  right  lobe  was  moft  collaps'd,  as  it  was
connedled  only,  at  its  upper  part,  by  a  lax,  and  not  very  broad,  membrane,
to  the  pleura  -,  whereas  the  fide  of  the  left  lobe  was,  in  great  meafure,  very
clofely  ccnnetted  to  the  pleura.  That  they  had  thus  collaps'd,  and  yet  were,
if  you  except  the  pofterior  furface,  as  in  propriety  we  ought,  of  a  cineritious
colour  inclining  to  white,  was  owing  to  the  very  fmall  quantity  of  blood
which  we  obferv'd  to  remain  in  the  larger  veflt-ls,  both  of  the  belly  and
thorax  ;  for  the  muicles  were,  in  other  refpefts,  of  a  very  beautiful  colour.
And  even  the  heart  was  quite  depnv'd  of  blood  ;  lb  that  in  the  right  auricle
was  nothing  more  than  a  very  fmall  coagulum.  This  inclin'd  to  the  nature
of  a  polypous  concretion  ;  whereas  all  the  blood  which  was  contain'd  in  the
feveral  other  parts  of  the  body,  was  fluid.

47.  If  a  fkilliul  furgeon  could  have  been  at  hand  immediately  upon  the
inflidion  of  the  wound,  by  applying  the  tourniquet,  and  conftringing  the
femur,  above  the  wound,  he  would,  at  leaft,  have  preferv'd  the  patient  fa
long,  as  to  give  time  to  confider  of  amputating  the  limb.  For  the  tranfverfe
incifion  both  of  the  artery  and  of  the  vein,  in  great  meafure,  would  have
render'd  ineffeftual  the  other  methods  of  cure,  which  are  not  only  prudently
propos'd  by  the  celebrated  Heifter  (c),  but  alfo  have  been  fuccefsfully  put-
in  praftice,  when  this  artery  was  wounded  almoft  in  the  fame  place,  thougb
in  a  longitudinal  direftion.

Nor  could  an  incifion  of  this  kind,  join'd  with  fo  great  a  fluidity  of  blood,
afford  us  even  the  miferable  hope  that  the  grumous  blood  (as  you  will  find,,
from  the  Sepulchretum  {d),  that  Bartholin  had  feen  in  a  cafe  of  this  kind)
Ihould  ftop  up  the  wo«nd  for  fome  days  by  its  coagulum.

However,  in  regard  to  the  cure  of  wounds  of  the  velTels,  in  whichfoevcr
limb  they  may  happen  ;  when  they  admit  of  other  cures,  or  when  they  admit
only  of  amputation ;  read  the  many  obfervations  produc'd  by  John  Bohn,  in
his  book  De  Renunciatione  Vulnerum  Lethalium  [e)  :  and  you  will  not  wonder
that  this  very  great  man  is  fo  often  commended  by  me  in  thefe  letters,  when
you  obferve  either  the  number  of  the  examples  that  he  has  given,  or  the  per-
petual filence  that  there  is  in  the  Sepulchretum  in  retpeft  thereto  j  or,  finally^
when  you  know  what  1  owe  to  his  memory,  who,  befides  other  adls  of
friendship,  when  he  was  an  old  man,  fent  this  book  to  me  with  great  kind-
pels,  together  with  his  other  books,  at  the  time  I  was  but  a  young  man.

48.  To  violent  comprefiions  of  the  lower  limb  feems  to  relate  the  cafe  of
a  certain  young  man,  who  died  in  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Morte,  and
was  diflTeded  when  I  happen'd  to-  be  at  Bologna,  in  the  beginning  of  the-
month  of  June,  in  the  year  1709.

49.  A  young  man,  of  two-and-twenty  years  of  age,  having  the  wheel  of
a  cart  pais  over  almoft  the  lower  part  of  the  left  heel,  feem'd.  to  have  rgceiv'd

(c)  Diflert.  de  Arter.  Crural.  Vulner.  n.  6. ^JJ  Seft.  hac  3.  Obf.26.  |  S.

it  leqq^,  fej Seft.  1.


238 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgicfil  and  Univerfal  Difor-ders.

no  oclicr  difadvantage  from  ic  but  this,  that  the  common 'integuments  were
torn  away.  While  the  cure  of  an  injury  which  appear'd  flight  went  on  very
well,  behold  !  after  fome  days,  the  neck  and  the  back  become  rigid  ;  fo  that,
as  if  he  had  been  feiz'd  with  a  kind  of  tetanos,  he  could  move  his  limbs
indeed,  but  could  not  move  either  his  neck  or  his  back.  To  this  was  added,
that,  at  intervals,  he  was  fliaken  by  the  moft  violent  tremors  of  the  whole
body.  And  all  thefe  fymptoms  going  on,  in  this  manner,  for  twenty  days
or  more,  his  fenfes  being  always  perfedt,  he  having  thrown  up  a  round  worm
by  vomiting,  and  the  ftertor  being  much  increas'd,  he  died.

The  foot  being  examin'd  about  the  evening  of  that  very  day  on  which  he
died,  the  heel  was  found  to  be  almoft  heal'd.

The  abdomen,  which  was  turgid,  being  open'd,  a  fmall  quantity  of  water
was  feen  to  be  extravafated  therein  ;  all  the  intellines,  and  the  flomach  itfelf,
being  found,  but  diftended  with  air,  to  a  very  great  degree.  Within  the
colon,  near  to  the  appendicula  vermiformis,  was  a  round  worm  dead.

The  thorax  alfo  had  a  fmall  quantity  cf  water  effus'd  in  its  left  cavity  :
the  lungs  of  that  fide  were  hard  pofteriorly,  and  of  a  fubftance  like  that
of  the  liver.  There  were  polypous  concretions  in  the  large  veflTels,  and  in
the  ventricles  of  the  heart ;  in  the  right  of  which  cavities  there  was  blood
alfo,  together  with  airy  bubbles.

Upon  opening  the  cranium,  in  the  right  lateral  finus  of  the  dura  mater
was  coagulated  blood  ;  in  the  other  was  leen  a  fluid  blood,  not  without  fome
pretty  large  bubbles.  I'here  were  many  bubbles  alfo  under  the  pia  mater,
cfpecially  about  the  left  anterior  lobe  of  the  cerebrum.  Under  the  fame
membrane  was  water  befides  ;  the  taflie  of  which  water  feem'd,  to  one  who
was  willing  to  tafl:e  of  it,  to  be  nothing  at  all,  or  at  leafl:  nothing  more  than
a  flight  faltnefs.  In  the  ventricles  of  the  brain  was  a  pretty  large  quantity
of  water.  And  no  fmall  quantity  was  difcharg'd  from  the  tube  of  the  ver-
tebra, efpecially  when  I  order'd  the  loins  and  the  os  factum  to  be  rais'd  up.
The  cerebellum  was  lax^  the  cerebrum  was  firm  ;  and  the  fanguiferous  veflels,
that  crept  through  the  ventricles  of  the  cerebrum,  and  the  plexus  choroides,
were  not  at  all  of  a  white  colour.

50.  What  Vallefius(/)  thought  of  that  young  man  of  Hippocrates,  who
had  run  through  a  rough  way,  and  who  had,  from  thence,  "  a  pain  in  his
"  heel,  efpecially  at  the  lower  part ;"  which  part,  and  the  neighbouring
parts  about  it,  becoming  black,  "  he  liv'd  in  all  but  twenry  days  after
"  having  run  thus;"  and  what,  in  like  manner,  Augenius  (^)  thought,  when
he  was  fpeaking  of  many  perfons  who  had  perifli'd  from  flight  wounds,  and
particularly  of  M.  Sobrirantius,  "  who,  contrary  to  the  expeftation  of  all,
"  died  on  the  fourteenth  day  after  a  very  fmall  wound  was  inflifted  on  his
"  heel  •,"  I  mean,  that  from  flight  external  caufes  of  this  kind  arifes  no
more  than  the  occafion  of  the  difeafe;  bur  from  the  bad  habit  of  body,  and
from  the  malignity  of  the  juices,  arife  the  violent  fymptoms,  and  even  death
itfelf;  will  certainly  feem  to  you  reafonable  to  be  determin'd  in  this  cafe:
and  this  fo  much  the  more,  as  the  worms,  and  the  very  quick  extrication  of

^/J  Comment,  in  1.  5.  Epidem.  n.  47.  (^)  Tom.  i.  1.  9.  Epift.  Medic.  2.  ve]  potius  3.

the


Letter  LV. Article  i .  139

the  air-biibbles  from  the  blood  and  humours,  may  be  confider'd  as  marks  of
the  deprav'd  difpcfuion  of  thofe  humours,  or,  as  the  aacients  fpoke  of  it>
the  putrefaftion  thereof.

Indeed,  I  do  noc  defpife  tokens  of  this  kind  taken  from  Hippocrates  him-
felf(i'),  where  he  has  iaid,  "  that  men  die  from  wounds  of  every  kind,  and
"  fuch  as  are  in  no  refpecl  confiderable  ;  nor  need  we  be  furpriz'd  at  this  -  -  -,

"  when  we  confider  that the  bodies  of  men  differ  fo  much  from  each

"  other."  And,  befides,  you  know  that  I  am  not  ignorant  of  this  faying  of
Valerius,  as  I  have  fpoken  of  it  to  you  on  a  former  occafion  (i) :  "  the  end
*'  of  our  life  being  expos'd  to  various  and  occult  caufes,  they  fometimes,
"  undefervedly,  bear  the  reproach  of  being  fatal ;  whereas  they  happen  rather
*'  at  the  time  of  our  death,  than  are  themfelves  the  caufes  of  it."  Finally,
•in  this  very  letter  {k),  when  I  related  the  cafe  of  that  virgin  of  Verona,  which
was  foliow'd  by  violent  fymptoms,  you  might  fee  how  much  I  afcribe  to
tokens  of  this  kind.

Ye!  if  any  happen,  either  in  this  cafe  or  that,  to  confider  both  the  nature
of  the  part,  which  was  wounded  by  the  external  injury,  and  the  kind  of
fymptoms  which  have  come  on  -,  that  is  to  fay,  convulfions,  from  whence
moft  of  the  circumftances  of  difeafe,  that  happen'd  not  only  in  that  virgin,
but  in  this  young  man,  might  arife ;  for  the  vefTels  being  conftrifted  here
and  there,  and  the  motion  of  the  lymph  and  the  blood  being  retarded  for
a  long  time,  not  only  a  fyncope,  but  extravafations  of  water,  and  inflarn-
mation  of  the  lungs,  are  eafily  brought  on  ;  if  any  one,  1  fay,  in  confide-
ration  of  thefe  things,  fhould  chufe  rather  to  afcribe  fomewhat  more  than
the  occafion  of  thefe  morbid  affedtions  to  the  caufe  which  is  accidentally  ap-
plied from  without,  I  Ihall  not  conteft  it  with  him  very  obftinately.  Fare-
wel.


LETTER the FIFTY -FIFTH

Treats of Ulcers and Sphacelus,


S  the  beginning  of  the  fedtion  which  is  thus  entitled,  and  is  the
fourth  in  this  fourth  book  of  the  Sepulchretum,  begins  with  the
conlideration  of  Achores  and  'Tinea ;  it  does  not  fufficiently  appear,  why  thofe
obfervations,  alfo,  of  Lepra,  Pfora,  and  of  Tinea  itfelf,  fome  of  v;hich  you.
will  at  length  find  in  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  fedtion,  and- one  near

{h)  Prsdidl.  1.  z,  n.  19,  &  20.  apud  Msrinell.  (/)  Epift^  26.  n.  \i^ ' {k)  N.  45.,

2

die


240 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  end  of  the  twelfth  {a),  are  not  comprehended  therein.  And  the  reafon,
certainly,  was  not  left  this  fourth  feftion  thould  be  more  prolix  than  it  ought
to  be  ;  for  thole  obfervations  which  are  referr'd  to  other  places,  are  few,  and
this  feftion  is  fhort ;  efpecially  if  you  take  away  the  fcholia,  and  out  of
thirteen  obfervations,  which  are  propos'd  under  number  ten,  you  obferve
that  ten  have  already  been  produc'd  in  other  places,  and  that  one  out  of  this
very  fame  number  has  been  fet  down  twice  over  htxe.{b).  Which  circum-
ftances  1  was  willing  to  take  notice  of,  left  you  Ihould  be  furpriz'd,  that  I,
who  am  determin'd  to  make  no  repetitions,  ftiould  have  fcarcely  any  to  relate
in  the  preient  letter.

2.  For  that  I  alio  may  begin  with  achors  and  fcabies  :  if  you  fhould  defire
t,o  know  what  appearances  were  found  by  Valfalva,  or  by  me,  in  bodies  that
had  been  infefted  with  thefe  diforders ;  you  will  readily  find  them  in  the
tenth  {c),  the  fixteench  {d\  the  thirty-eighth  {e),  and  the  forty-firft  letters  (/),
and  in  others.  In  reading  of  which  over  again,  I  would  have  you  obferve,
tliat,  in  confequence  of  thefe  little  ulcers  being  dried  up,  either  of  themfelves,
or  by  any  kind  of  unflions  whatever,  an  infant  perifh'd  by  convulfions;  a
virgin,  by  a  dropfy  of  the  thorax  and  pericardium  •,  a  woman,  by  an  acute
fever  and  tympanites  •,  and  a  young  man,  by  a  fuppreflion  of  urine  :  and  that
the  caufes  of  death  had  arifen  from  the  occlufion  of  the  little  ulcers ;  for,  as
when  open  and  difcharging  they  kept  off"  dileafes,  or,  as  was  manifeft  in  the
infant  and  the  woman,  even  remov'd  them  ;  fo  when  dried  up,  they  retain'd
in  the  blood  thofe  ftimulating  particles,  and  noxious  humours,  which  were
before  eliminated  and  difcharg'd  thereby;  and  which  were  loon  afterwards
cffus'd,  in  almoft  all  of  them,  either  betwixt  the  meninges,  or  into  the  belly,
or  into  the  thorax,  which  I  found  to  be  full  of  a  blueifh  water  in  the  virgin
whom  I  have  mention'd.

In  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  letter  (^),  you  will  alfo  light  on  the
hiftory  of  a  ftioemaker,  whofe  body  was  cover'd  over  with  a  very  fmall
fcabies.  And  there  confider  over  again  with  yourfelf,  1  beg  of  you,  that  if
any  one  fhould  have  attempted  to  drive  this  away  by  an  undiion,  how  much
more  he  muft  have  increas'd  the  difeafes  of  the  relax'd  and  extenuated  paries
of  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  of  the  great  artery  annex'd  thereto;
which  was,  internally,  a(h-colour'd  and  unequal :  and  that  by  confining  thofe
erofive  particles.  This  you  will  believe  the  more  readily,  if  you  now
call  to  mind  what  happen'd  to  Trombelli  {b)  from  having  a  herpes  repell'd.
'  Moreover,  you  will  fee,  that  with  thefe  obfervations  of  Valfalva,  and
with  mine,  agree  what  are  advanc'd  in  the  beginning  of  this  fourth
fedlion  of  the  Sepulchretum  :  in  one  obfervation,  for  mflance  (z),  on  a  prince
of  two  years  old,  in  whom  the  achores  having  entirely  vanifti'd,  a  bloody
water,  and  in  confiderable  quantity  forio  fmall  a  body,  was  found  under  the
cranium ;  and  in  another  (k),  taken  from  a  woman,  who  having  been  cur'd
of  tlie  tinea  by  lotions,  had  one  hemifphere  of  her  brain  putrid,  and  fill'd

(^)  In  Additam.  OLf.  6.  (f)  N.  4.

{h]  §  6.  &  8.  ' {g)  '^'  2-

(<-)  N.  9.  {h)  Epift.  26.  n.  39.

(V)  N.  34..  (')  Obf.  I.  §  I.

{e)  N.  Zi.  (A')  Ibid.  §  2.

with


Letter  LV. Article  3.  241

with  a  citronrColQwrM  ichor.  To  which  ifyoq  would  have  others  to  addj
they  will  not  be  found  \yanting  j  and  in  particular  two,  the  one  from  Schul-
zius  (/),  Ibowing,  what,  and  how  tnany  diforders  of  the  vifcera  fucceedcd
a  very  confiderable  humid,  and  long-continued  fcabies,  when  repell'd  by  an
external  remedy;  and  the  other  from  Lanzonus  (m)  ;  whichjihows,  that  dif-
eafes  were  found  in  the  brain,  the  diaphragm,  and  the  liver,  when  an  acrid
tinea,  and  a  foul  fcabies,  had  been  remov'd  by  undlion.

3.  But  even  without  the  difleclion  of  dead  bodies,  what  phyfician  is  there
who  has  not  feen  internal,  or  external,  diforders,  often  arife  from  the  retro-
pulfion  of  a  fcabies,  or  of  achores?  you  remember  that  Valfalva  was  con-
fulted  in  regard  to  a  tumour  (»),  which,  whether  it  was  a  real  exoftofis  of
the  knee,  or  only  bore  the  appearance  of  it,  had  certainly  fucceeded  to  the
caufe  whereof  J  am  fpeaking.  And  what  external  or  internal  diforders  Ger-
be?iu§  (0)  faw  from  the  fame  caufe,  and  among  thefe  diforders  malignant  fe-
vers ;  which  Lanzonus  (p)  obferv'd  qnore  than  once,  and  thofe  of  a  fatal
confequence  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  that  Dethardingius  obferv'd  an  afthma
(^),  and  Cummius  (r),  who  is  referr'd  to  by  him,  an  apoplexy  ;  you  will
learn  from  infpefting  their  obfervations.

It  would  be  very  eafy  to  add  a  great  number  of  others,  either  if  there  were
occafion,  or  if  1  were  not  about  to  take  notice  of  them  below  (s).  Where-
fore, though  I  could  alfo  produce  a  great  number  of  my  own  obfervations
in  this  place,  I  will  give  you  no  more  than  two,  and  thofe  made  both  in
one  month  ;  I  mean  in  February,  of  the  year  1710,  on  two  noble  fellow-ci-
tizens of  mine.

In  one  of  thefe  gentlemen,  little  ulcers  of  the  head,  juft  like  thofe  that  we
call  achores  in  infants,  had  been  dried  up  by  the  injuries  of  the  nofturnal
air ;  when,  fcarcely  eight  days  having  pafs'd  from  that  time,  he  was  feiz'd
with  a  malignant  fever,  attended  with  vomitings,  and  finally  with  a  fingul-
tus :  in  which  fever ;  although  the  pulfe  was  very  weak,  and  other  bad  fymp-
toms  were  not  wanting,  befides  thofe  that  I  have  mention'd  ;  he,  neverthe-
lefs,  always  feem'd  to  himfelf  to  be  in  good  health  :  for  this  reafon,  his  phy-
fician, who  was  a  man  of  age  and  experience,  was  not  call'd  in  till  late  ;
when,  notwithftanding  he  did  whatever  lay  in  his  power,  and  notwithftand-
ing  I  alfo  was  call'd  in  on  the  laft  days,  and  both  of  us  did  whatever  we
thought  moft  proper,  he.perifh'd  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  difeafe.

The  other  labouring  under  a  very  fimilar  diforder;  if  you  confider'd  the
erofion  of  the  fkin,  and  the  crufls  with  which  the  arms  were  firft  affeded,
foon  after  the  legs  alfo,  and  finally  fome  other  parts  ;  and  having,  by  the
advice  of  I  know  not  whom,  made  ufe  of  a  fhirt  medicated  with  the  fumes
of  fulphur,  got  rid  of  a'.moft  all  the  diforder  of  his  flcin  indeed,  but  was,  at
the  fame  time,  feiz'd  with  rheumatic  pains  of  the  whole  body,  join'd  with  i

{i)  Aa.  N.  C.  Tom.  1.  Obf.  231.  (p)  Ejufd.  Dec.  A.  9.  &  10.  Obf.  cit.  113.

(m)  Eph.  eorund.  Dec.  3.  A.  9.  &  ic.  Obf. &  Obf.  i6.
113.  if)  Append,  ad  Dec.  3. A. 5.  &  6.  n.  8.

C>7j  Epift.  50.  n. 13.  in  Obf.  Parallel,  ad  Obf.  58.

(0)  Eph.  cit.  Dec.  3.  A.  2.  Obf.  167.  (r)  Dec.  i.  A.  i.  Obf  58.

W  «•  7-

. Vol.  III.  li  fever  j


2  42- Book  IV.  Of  Chirtirgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

fever ;  which  not  only  prevented  him  from  deeping  in  the  night,  but  alfo,
in  the  day  time,  render'd  him  incapable  of  turning  himfelf  from  one  fide  to
another  :  and  indeed  began  to  affedt  even  the  tongue  itfelf,  and  the  cefo'
phagus.

1  endeavour'd  to  obviate  thefe  fymptoms  fpeadily  and  diligently.  But  if
nature'had  not  afiifted  us,  by  expelling  the  repell'd  matter,  partly  to  the
Ikin,  and  partly  to  the  inteftines,  where  it  tended  fpontaneoufly,  we  fliould
certainly  never  have  leen  thefe  pains  critically  Iblv'd  within  a  month  -,  nor
the  fkin  perfeftly  heal'd  within  the  next  fpring  :  nor  would  the  patient  have
got  fafely  over  this  difeale,  fo  as  to  live  to  an  extreme  old  age.

Indeed  there  is  no  phyfician  whatever,  to  whom  cafes  of  this  kind,  as  I
faid,  have  not  occurr'd  ;  even  from  the  very  time  in  which  Hippocrates,  firft
of  all  (t),  took  notice  of  that  Athenian,  who,  being  affefted  with  a  very  vio-
lent prurigo  of  the  whole  body,  and  having  fuch  a  thicknefs,  and  appear-
ance of  fkin,  as  relembled  a  leprofy,  made  ufe  of  the  warm  baths  that  are
in  Melos,  and  "  was  freed  from  the  itching,  and  thicknefs  of  fkin,  indeed,
"  but  became  dropfical  and  died."  Martianus  («)  fuppos'd,  that  the  waters
of  thefe  baths  were  fulphureous :  Pliny  certainly  has  faid  (a:),  that  "  in
"  the  ifland  of  Melos  was  very  excellent  fulphur :"  and  Diolcorides  aflerted,
that  it  was  "  generated  there  in  great  quantity."

4.  Thefe  things,  and  thofe  in  particular  that  I  have  taken  notice  of,  in
regard  to  difeafes  that  follow  the  repulfion  of  a  fcabies  by  undion,  will,
■without  doubt,  induce  you  to  enquire  of  me,  what  I  therefore  think  of
thofe  very  minute  animalculte  ;  which,  as  very  induftrious  men  have  obferv'd
them  in  our  age,  and  have  aflerted  to  be  the  only  caufe  of  a  fcabies,  they
have  alfo  aflerted,  might  be  eafily  exterminated,  by  fulphureous,  and  other
remedies,  which  kill  thefe  animalculas,  externally  applied ;  and  this  at  any
time  of  the  year  whatever,  and  without  attending  to  any  internal  methods  of
cure  whaever;  for  that  the  caufe  being,  by  thefe  means,  remov'd,  the  fca-
bies very  foon,  and  very  fafely,  vanifli'd ;  without  any  inconvenience,  not  to
fay  any  difeafe,  being  the  confequence.

1  however,  to  deal  ingenuoufly  with  you  as  ufual-,  will  firft  admonifh  you,
net  to  afcribe  more  to  learned  men  than  they  claim  to  themfelves.  For  as  to
the  difcovery  itfelf,  nothing  is  more  eafy  than  to  (how,  that  thefe  animalcu-
les had  been  already  known,  even  to  much  more  ancient  authors  than  they
acknowledge.  I  do  not  fay  to  thofe  writers,  who  I  fee  are  objefted  by  fome
one  from  Daniel  Sennertus  (z),  where  he  fpeaks  of  worms  of  the  back  ;  and
ftill  lefs  to  thofe,  who  have  formerly  taken  notice  of  the  vena  Medinenfis,  as
it  is  call'd,  after  VeKchius  {a),  which  is  alfo  confirm'd  by  Wepfer,  as  you
will  perceive  from  the  preceding  third  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  {b).  But
I  fay,  10  thofe  who  have  fpoken  of  far  lefs,  and  certainly  fhorter,  animalcu-
les, in  the  fame  kind  of  words  as  Abinzoar  in  Joannes  Langius  (r).

(<)  Epid.  1.  ;.  rt.  4.  spud.  Marinell.  (a)  Medic.  Prafl.  1.  2.  P.  2.  c.  24.

(a)  Annot.  ad  hunc  Hippocr.  locuin.  (a)  Exercit.  de  Vena  Medin.

(.r) Nat.  Hilt.  1.  35.  c.  15.  {by  ad  Obf.  26.  Schcl.  n.  V.

{})  De  Medic.  Mat.  1.  5.  c,  83.  (<r)  1.  2.  Epilt.  Medic.  43.

For


Letter  LV. Article  j*.  243

For  there  are,  fays  Abinzoar,  '■^  fyrones,  or  pedecelli,  calPd  by  the  Ari--
«'  bians,  ajjoabat,  which  creep  under  the  fkin,  both  in  the  hands  and  the.
"  leers :  they  alfo  excite  puftules,  full  of  water,  under  the  fkin,  where  they
"  lie  hid :  which  puftules  being  cut  into,  the  animalcules  creep  out;  but
"  are  fo  imall,  as  fcarcely  to  be  found  out  by  the  fighc,  though  very  quicic
"  and  piercing,"

That  the  form  thereof,  was  alfo  not  unknown  to  others  before,  by  the
affiftance  of  the  microfcope,  is  not  only  (hown  by  the  obfervations  of  Borel-
li,  that  are  taken  notice  of  by  Vellchius  (i) ;  according  to  which  ih^fyrones
"  refembled  tortoifes  in  their  forms ;"  but  is  particularly  confirm'd  by  that
obfervation,  of  Etmuller,  upon  the  fyrones,  which  being  publifli'd  in  the
firft  volume  {e)  of  the  A£ia  Erudilorum  Ltpji^e,  befides  that  it  mentions  others
who  had  feen  them  before,  gives  an  idea  of  the  animalcules  themfelves,  both
by  figure  and  defcription ;  in  fuch  a  manner,  indeed,  that  the  defcription,
and  the  figure,  might  both  of  them  be  render'd  more  perfefl  a  few  years
after,  but  could  not  be  produc'd-in  public  as  quite  new  difcoveries.

Many  things  alfo,  which  relate  to  the  origin  of  the  fcabies,  the  multipli-
cation, and  the  eafy  communication  thereof  by  con  tad  ;  and  not  only  this,
but  the  eafy  cure  of  it  by  certain  remedies  externally  applied ;  and  to  other
circumftances  of  this  kind,  might  be  illuftrated  by  clear  explications.  But
while  that  external  cure  is  recommended,  without  paying  any  regard  to  the
internal,  the  fame  thing  feems  to  have  happen'd  to  thefe  learned  men,  that
happen'd  to  Van  Helmont  (/),  who  likewife  recommended  the  fofmer,  and
difapprov'd  of  the  latter.

For  although  Van  Helmont  acknowledg'd,  befides  the  fcabies  from  con-
ta6b,  that  alfo  which  arofe  fpontaneoufiy  {g)  ;  yet,  as  he  determin'd  to  each
the  fame  nature,  fo  he  alfo  fix'd  the  feat  of  their  fcmen,  or  ferment,  in  the
Ikin  only.  In  which  alone,  thefe  authors  fo  much  the  more  readily  deter-
mine, that  all  the  diforder  adheres,  as  in  this  part  only,  thofe- animals  form
their  nidufles :  and  they  aflert,  that  if  there  were  none  of  thefe  animals  in
the  world,  there  would  alfo  be  no  fcabies ;  as  this  diforder  never  feizes  upon
any  one,  unlefs  he  has  got  thefe  animalcules  from  fome  other  place.  Let  us
fee  then,  what  the  authors  of  fuch  kind  of  dogmata  will  be  led  to  teach
from  each  of  them  ;  and  what  dodtrines  that  are  partly  true,  and  ufeful,  in
regard  to  the  cure,  and  partly  lefs  true,  and  lefs  fafe,  in  that  refpeft,  will
Fclult  therefrom.

-  5.  That  very  prudent,  and  at  the  fame  time,  very  learned,  phyfician,
Ballonius  {h),  having  lit  upon  the  opinions  of  fome  perform,  in  regard  to  dif-
orders  of  the  (kin,  that  agree  with  thofe  I  fpoke  of  juft  now  ;  in  dependence
upon  reafon,  experience,  and  the  dodrine  of  Hippocrates ;  fuppos'd  that
there  are  three  kinds  of  diforders  of  the  fkin,  which  are  cautioufly  to  be  dif-
tinguifh'd  from  each  other  : that  fome  are  diforders  of  the  Ikin  itfelf  as  it.

{dj  Exercit.  cit.  c.  7.  {g)  Ibid  n.  11.

(0  A.  1682.  M.  Septembr,  {h)  Epid.  &  Ephem,  1.  i.  Conftit.  Hyem.

(fj  Traft.  45.  infcripto  Scabies  &  est.  A.  1574.

I »  2  were  -,


2  44 Book  IV.  Of  Chimrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

were  ;  fome  abfceffes  of  the  internal  parts  j  and  others,  of  a  middle  nature,
bttwixt  both.

Nor  has  he  omitted  the  figns  by  wfeich  we  may  diftinguifh  the  one  from
the  other :  nor  has  he  doubted  but,  where  there  are  diforders  of  the  fkin  on-
ly, "  we  muft  then  apply  ourftlves  to  the  cure  of  that  external  diforder
"  only,  without  teazing  the  internal  parts  by  purgative  medicines."

And  indeed  he  has  Ihown,  that  thofe  "  broad  puftulcs"  of  Simon  j  of
whom  Hippocrates  (/)  has  faid,  "  that  he  found  relief  when  they  were  an-
"  nointed  by  the  fire,  or  walh'd  with  warm  water ;"  but  that  vomiting  was
of  no  advantage  ;  were  certainly  of  the  fame  nature.  And  that  in  particular
relates  to  the  point  in  queflion,  which  you  will  read  remark'd  upon  thofe
words  of  Ballonius  (k) :  "  when  any  one  lies  with  a  perfon  affefted  with  a
"  fcabies,  and  the  fkin  is  infefled,  this  diforder  is  really  cutaneous,  and  the
"  cure  ought  to  be  quite  fuperficial."

You  fee  then,  what  there  is  true,  or  ufeful,  in  that  external  cure  alone,
the  internal  being  entirely  omitted,  when  any  perfon,  that  is  quite  in  good
health,  has  juft  before  contraded  a  fcabies  from  the  contad  of  a  fcabious
perfon,  or  from  the  contad  of  his  linen,  or  clothes  :  but  you  fee,  at  the
fame  time,  what  there  would  be  lefs  true,  and  lefs  ufeful,  in  that  fame
dodrine  of  cure,  if  the  fcabies  were  not  a  diforder  of  the  flcin  alone,  but
either  an  abfcefs  entirely,  or  an  abfcefs  join'd  together  with  a  diforder  of  the
IkJn.

Nor  can  we  eallly  affent,  when  it  is  faid,  that  a  fcabies  never  arifes  but
from  the  contad  of  a  fcabious  perfon,  or  from  his  animalculse.  Does  it  ne-
ver rife  from  naflinefs  ?  never  from  improper  eating  and  drinking?  It  cer-
tainly feems  otherwife  to  moft  phyficians ;  and  amongfl:  thefe  to  Sennertus,
whom  I  have  commended  in  the  fecond  epiftle  upon  Samonicus,  and  who
•wrote  the  following  lines  to  Samonicus  (/)  -,  if  he  really  did  write  them,  as
I  have  there  endeavour'd  to  fhow,  and  explain  :

Illotus  fudor,  vel  copia  inutilis  efcje,
Saspe  gravi  fcabie  correptos  afperat  artus.

Does  it  not  fometimes  arife  from  violent  and  long-continued  diforders  like
a  crifis  ?  and,  to  omit  other  caufes,  does  it  not  fometimes  arife  from  hand-
Rng  the  wool  of  difeas'd  fheep  ?  certainly,  what  happen'd  formerly  at  Venice,
and  in  the  country  thereabout,  Virgil  related  (;«),  when  fpeaking  ©f  fleeces
of  this  kind,

->~^ invifos  fi  quis  tentarat  amidus  •,

Ardentes  papulse,  atque  immundus  olentia  fudor
Membra  fequebatur.
But  this  was  not  properly  a  fcabies. 1  grant  it. Yet  it  was  a  cutaneous
infedion. And  why  cannot  a  more  flight  infedion  be  communicated  in  the
fame  way, as  this  more  violent  one  i Indeed  the  celebrated  Werlhof  (»),

li)  Rpid.  1.  6.  S.  z,  H  Georg.  1.  3.  in  fin.

»^j  n,  ,0.  (n)  Difquif.  de  Variol.  c.  4.  adnot.  54.  in

Xl)  De  Medic,  Pisecept.  c.  6.  fin.

being


Letter  LV. Articled.  245-

being  indiic'd  thereto,  .by  various  obfervations,  aflerts,  he  fhould  readily  be-
lieve, "  that  the  true  human  fcabies  arifes,  firft  of  all,  from  the  wool  of
«  flieep,  to  which  a  diforder,  not  unlike  this,  is  every  wheris  frequent,
"  through  improper  pafture  ■"  for  as  we  almoft  all  of  us  ufe  woolen  cloaths,
and  wear  them  for  a  long  time  together,  "  there  are  perhaps  few  in  which
"  fomething  from  unclean  flieep,  or  thofe  that  are  imperfeftly  cur'd,  is  not
"  mix'd  :  and  perhaps  it  is  for  this  reafon  chiefly,  that  the  workmen,  who
"  are  employ'd  in  the  manufadture  of  woolen  cloth,  are  fo  much  troubled
"  with  thefe  diforders."

And  Etmuller,  the  fon,  had  publifli'd,  at  Leipuc,  in  the  year  1731,  a
Programnia  de  fcabie  ejttfque  ortu  ab  impura  lana  (e),  in  which,  I  fuppofe,  he
had  faid  the  fame  things  that  he  fent  to  the  Cafarean  Academy  Natura  Curiof.
(p),  to  be  publifh'd  in  the  fame  year,  and  upon  the  fame  fubjeft  ;  afcribing
the  puftular  fcabies  of  a  certain  girl,  to  the  wool  wherewith  flie  cover'd
herfelf,  by  night,  inftead  of  bed-clothes ;  a  part  of  which  wool,  had  been
fhorn  from  flieep  that  were  infefted  with  a  fcabies.

In  this  paper  he  alfo  quotes  Cofchwizius,  who  had  faid,  that  taylors  are
more  frequently  infefted  with  this  diforder  than  others,  by  their  conftant
handling  of  woolen  clothes.  Nor  does  he  conceal  the  words  of  Elianus ;
"  that  whofoever  fhall  comb  the  wool  of  a  flieep  torn  by  wolves,  and  make
"  a  garment  of  it,  will  excite  a  fcabies  on  the  fkin  of  the  wearer:"  either
becaufe  a  flieep  of  that  kind,  which  is  weak,  from  a  very  violent  fcabies,  is
unable  to  follow  the  reft  -,  or  becaufe,  being  driven  away  by  the  others,  left
they  fliould  be  infeded  thereby ;  it,  by  this  means,  eafily  falls  a  prey  to
wolves.

Nor  are  the  conjeiftures  of  thefe  celebrated  men  to  be  flighted  ;  becaufe,
in  this  city,  where  fo  many  men  apply  themfelves  to  the  woolen  manufaftu-
ry,  it  is  very  rare  that  any  one,  even  of  thefe  perfons,  is  found  to  have  a
fcabies.  For  there  are  different  paftures  in  different"  countries  5  different
waters,  and  perhaps  different  methods  in  felefting  and  cleanfing  the  wool :
and  now  certainly,  if  in  Venice  any  confiderable  infection  feizes  upon  the
fl<in  of  flieep,  their  wool  is  not  only  rejedted ;  but,  left  any  one  fliould  im-
pofe  it  upon  us,  it  was  our  advice  to  the  fupreme  magiftrate  of  Venice,  that
prefides  over  the  public  fafety,  when,  in  the  year  1724,  I  anfwer'd  upori
this  queftion,  in  the  name  of  the  phyflcians  of  this  celebrated  college  ;  10  co-
ver, as  Virgil  fays  {q),  "  their  carcafes,  together  with  their  wool,  in  the
"  ground,  and  to  hide  them  in  pits,  and  holes  of  the  earth."

6.  But  what  will  you  fay,  if  the  very  fcabies  of  flieep  were  owing  to  ani-
malcute,  which  are  transferr'd  by  means  of  the  wool  to  men  ?  i  do  not
choofe  to  enquire  whether,  after  fo  many  cleanfings  of  the  wool,  which  are
added  even  by  thofe  who  dye  the  cloths,  thefe  animals  can  poflibly
live  ;  notwithftanding  the  human  animalcute  are  certainly  deftroy'd,  when
the linen  is made clean by  waflier-women. I  rather choofe, on- th*

(0)  apud  Haller.  in  Acce/T.  ad  P.  9.  M«th. CfJ  Aa.  Tom.  3.  Obf,  50,
Stud. Med.  Boerth  ;  imo  nunc  ab eod.  exhi- (ij/)  loc.  ei*.
bit.  inter  Difput.  ad  Morbor.  Hift. fub.  n.
CXCIII.

'  .  '  Other


24^ Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univeifal  Diforders.

other  hand,  to  afk  yon  to  aniwer  hhefe  things, which  follow  from  fome  ob-
krvations  of  Hoffmann  (r),  and  Junckerus  (j).

The  former  of  thole  authors  writes,  that  a  fcabies  had  arifen  from  an  un-
feafonable  iife  of  acidulated  vvaters.  The  other  tells  us,  "  that  the  juice  of
"  the  birch  tree,  drunk  in  a  pretty  large  quantity  ;"  and,  in  like  manner,
"  that  the  hot  baths  of  Walckenfteir.  •,  and  thefe  particularly  in  robuft  and
"  healthy  bodies ;  are  wont  to  bring  on  a  fcabies."  1  now,  therefore,  a(k  of
you,  whether  you  think  that  in  thefe  baths,  in  that  juice,  and  in  thofe  aci-
dulated waters,  were  to  be  found  thefe  animalcules,  of  which  we  are  fpeak-
ing  ;  fo  as  to  adhere  to  the  flcin  while  bathing,  and  to  get  out  upon  the  fkin,
after  having  been  taken  into  the  internal  parts  of  the  body  ?

And  the  former  of  thefe  authors  fays  again  (/),  "  it  is  neceflary  to  ob-
"  ferve,  that  the  fcabies,  which  is  communicated  by  contagion,  is  always
"  more  eafy  to  be  cur'd,  than  that  which  has  taken  its  origin  from  the  in-
"  bred  depravity  of  the  blood,  and  humours :"  that  is  to  lay,  without  any
fufpicion  of  contagion.  He  alfo  mentions,  as  a  proof  thereof  («),  the  obfer-
vation  of  Lanzonus  (x),  (who  was,  while  he  liv'd,  my  friend),  of  a  fcabies
in  a  foldier,  which  encreas'd  to  fuch  a  degree,  on  the  three  or  four  firft  days
of  the  new  moon,  that  he  was  oblig'd  to  pafs  thofe  days  in  bed,  every
month,  as  long  as  the  fcabies  continued  ;  and  it  did  continue  for  feventeen
months.

And  obfervations,  in  part  fimilar  to  this,  that  have  been  formerly  re-
mark'd  by  me,  1  could  produce,  and  add  to  thofe,  not  only  that  I  have,
more  than  once,  feen  it  happen  in  fcabious  perfons,  that  while  the  fever  was
at  its  height,  the  itching  ceas'd,  and  return'd  at  the  decline  of  the  fever ;  but
that  I  know  it,  for  a  certainty,  to  have  happen'd  to  a  nun,  that  as  often  as
ever  (he  was  let  blood  -,  and  it  was  often  neceflary  for  her  to  lofe  blood  ;
her  fcabies,  which  had  already  grown  very  flight,  always  encreas'd  to  a  fur-
prifmg  degree.  All  thefe  phenomena  therefore,  and  others,  which  I  pur-
poi'ely  pafs  over,  being  coniider'd,  1  afk  of  you,  to  tell  me  candidly,  whether
they  feem  to  you  to  be  more  eafily  explicable  by  fuppofing  the  fcabies  to
arife  from  animalcules, than  to  take  its  origin  from  the  blood  .''

Finally,  I  would  alfo  wilh  to  know,  if,  in  any  perfon,  an  external  caufe
bring  on  a  very  troublefome  itching  in  the  fkin  •,  as,  for  inflance,  the  bites
of  gnats,  or  injuries  from  any  other  little  animals  of  that  kind ;  and  this  per-
fon, indulging  the  itching,  fcratches  the  fkin  again  and  again,  fo  that  little
ulcers  arife,  and  refemble  a  fcabies ;  I  would  wi(h  to  know,  1  fay,  why  the
fame  perfon,  or  others,  may  not  have  an  itching  brought  on  from  an  inter-
'  nal  caufe,  which  compels  him  to  fcratch,  and  to  lacerate  the  fkin,  juft  as
when  it  is  vellicated  by  thofe  animalculse  .''

7.  But  left  you  (hould  happen  to  fuppofe,  that  I  am  more  averfe  to  this
hypothefis  of  animalculs,  than  truth  and  juftice  can  warrant ;  1  will  firft
confels, not  only  that  the  origin  of  a  fcabies  is  often  to  be  acknowledg'd

(r)  Medic.  Rat.  T.  4.  P.  5.  c.  5. Obf,  3.  («) Ibid.  §  zi.

(j)  Confp.  Medic.  Theor.  Praft,  Tab.  90.  {x)  Eph,  N.  C,  Dec.  3.  A.  9.  &  10.  OW.

jn  Cautel.  n.  19.  aoj.
(?)  c.  cit,  '^hef.  Pathol.  §  24.

from


Letter  LV. Article  7.  247

from  thefe  animalcules  j  but  alfo,  that  they  do  fometimes  really  exift,  where
you  would  not  be  very  ready  to  fuppofe  their  exiftence  :  ib  eafily  may  they
lie  hid,  by  reafon  of  their  very  minute  fjzes,  when  they  are  transferr'd  from
one  body  to  another.

Thus  I  remeraber  that,  when  I  attended  an  illuftrious  matron,  in  the  place
of  my  nativity,  and  (he  was,  at  length,  recovering  from  a  long,  various,  and
very  difficult  diforder,  a  fcabies  feem'd  to  be  added  to  the  other  crifes  which
had  preceded  ;  and  this,  coming  on  fuddcnly,  foon  occupied  almoft  the  whole
fkin,  but  particularly  the  palms  of  the  hands,  fo  that  Ihe  could  not  fleep
by  reafon  of  the  very  troublefome  itching.

As  1  faw  very  fmall  veficles  In  thefe  parts,  which  were  full  of  water,  fuch
as  thofe  generally  aie  wherem  thefe  animalcules  harbour ;  I  order'd  the  maid-
fervants  to  open  one  or  two  of  them  with  a  fmall  needle,  in  a  very  clear  light-,
and  if  they  could  takeout  any  thing,  after  prefling  out  the  water,  to  Ihew
it  to  me,  as  I  intended  to  examine  it  by  looking  through  very  good  glaffes
which  happen'd  to  be  at  hand.  You  afk  me  the  event  of  my  refearches.
There  was  no  need  to  examine  for  a  long  time.  The  animalcule  was  alive  j
and  of  that  very  form  which  the  more  modern  authors  had  delineated,

I  then  took  away  another,  and  ftill  another :  they  were  all  alive,  and  of
the  fame  form.  As  none  of  the  women  who  waited  upon  this  lady  were,  in
the  leaft,  affedted  with  a  fcabies ;  any  phyfician  who  had  liv'd  before  Redi
and  Malpighi,  would  not  have  doubted  but  thefe  animalcules  had  taken
their  origin  from  putrefadtion  :  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  not  at  all  doubtful
with  me,  but  fome  one  of  the  maid-lervants  had,  without  her  own  knowledge,
brought  one  home  to  her  miftrefs  adhering  to  her  clothes.-,  and  that  this  had
brought  forth  others ;  and  thefe  ftill  others,  in  a  fhorc  time  ;  in  confequence
of  their  being  extremely  fruitful.

Nor  do  1  confefs  this  only.  But  if  you  would  chufe  to  fuppofe,  that  the.
fame  thing  which  hap^pen'd  to  this  matron,  happens  to  all  _thole  that  are  af-
fecSed  with  a  fcabies,  and  that  this  one  caufe  is  always  the  efficient  caule
when  a  fcabies  is  produc'd  ;  I  myfelf,  indeed,  will  not  readily  believe  it,  but
will  fuller  it  to  be  believ'd  by  you  a  little  while,  till  J,  neverthelefs,  fhew
tliat  it  is  by  no  means  fafe  to  cure  a  fcabies,  which  has  arifen  even  in  this
manner,  by  an  external  cure  only,  and  negledl  the  internal  :  unlefs,  perhaps,
in  a  body,  as  is  laid  above,  which  was  before  in  good  health,  and  very  lately
iofedled  by  the  contagion.

For  what,  I  befeech  you,  is  a  fcabies,  from  what  caufe  foever  it  may  have
arilen,  but  imall  ulcers,  which,  if  they_were  join'd  in  one,  v/ould  very  often
be  equal  to  the  largeft  ulcer.''  And  what  phyfician  fuffers  an  ulcer,  I  do
not  fay  a  very  large  one,  but  even  a  fmall  one  ;  whether  fpontaneoutly  form'd,
or  by  the  application  of  a  cautery,  or  any  other  external  caufe  ;  to  be  fhut
up  after  it  has  remain'd  open  for  a  long  time,  without  5rtt  applying  a  cu-
rative regimen  to  the  conliitution  ?

Yet  why  this  ?  Why,  becaufc  by  thefe  emiffaries  the  body  had  been  long
us'd  to  throw  out  any  thing  of  a  deprav'd,  or  at  leail  of  a  redundant  humour,
v;hich  it  had  within  it.  And  why  Iliould  we  not  attend  to  the  fame  thing,
in  the  fmall  ulcers  of  a  fcabies  of  long  ftanding  ?  for  as  all  of  thefe  are
nearly  the  fame  thing  with  a  very  large  ulcer,  ic  is  the  lefs  fafe  to  cure  them^

withoui


248 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univcrfal  Diforders.

without  internal  remedies,  in  proportion  as  they  difcharg'd  the  more  dc-
prav'd  humour  from  without  the  body  ;  and  in  proportion  as  they  fent  back
into  the  body  the  more  of  the  lame  kind  of  humour,  fiill  more  deprav'd  in
thefe  little  ulcers  themfclves,  both  by  ftagnation,  and  by  the  external  air.

For  that  excellent  archiater  Senac  ( j)  ihews,  with  his  ufual  perfpicuity,
that  pus  flowing  back  from  external  ulcers  into  the  blood,  may  not  only  be
injurious,  in  an  equal  degree  with  that  which  is  carried  into  the  circulation
from  internal  ulcers ;  but  may  be  even  ftill  more  deftruftive  to  the  vital
organs,  by  realbn  that  this  has  a  communication  with  the  external  air,  which
<he  other  has  not.  Yet  I  fhould  never  fuppofe  it  to  h.ve  been  more  injurious
to  the  vital  organs,  than  when  it  was  the  caufe  of  the  internal  furface  of  the
pericardium,  and  the  external  furface  of  the  hearc,  and  of  almoft  all  the
parts  which  are  contain'd  in  the  heart,  being  rendered  fcabious,  in  a  boy  who
had  an  external  fcabies ;  I  fay,  really  fcabious ;  for  the  accurate  author  of
this  very  rare  obfervation,  Buddeus  (2),  found,  by  the  judgment  of  his
eyes,  both  when  naked  and  furnifli'd  with  glafies,  that  the  puftules,  which
were  in  thefe  parts,  were  perfeftly  the  fame  with  thofe  on  the  fkin  :  and  this
not  only  appear'd  evident  to  him,  but  to  all  that  were  then  prefent.

Yet  the  external  furface  of  the  body  was  cover'd  over  with  a  fcabies  uni-
verfally  •,  what  if  it  had  been  repell'd  ?  You  fee,  then,  of  how  much  im-
portance it  is  not  to  drive  back  a  diforder  of  this  kind  :  and  that  they  do  not
talk  altogether  idly,  who  deny  that  a  fcabies  is  always  a  difeafe  of  the  (kin
alone,  and  confequently  that  remedies  are  to  be  applied  to  the  fkin  alone ;
neglefting  the  cure  of  the  remaining  part  of  the  body  :  and  not  only,  if  this
be  neglected  ;  but  attempted  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  difturb  the  motibn  of
nature,  when  verging  to  the  fkin ;  fometimes  death,  and  at  other  times  va-
rious diforders,  are  the  confequences.

Read,  in  the  fixth  volume  of  the  A^a  Natura  Cur.  the  fixteenth  obfer-
vation, which  is  that  of  the  celebrated  Carlius.  And  fuppofe  thefe  things
to  be  faid,  by  me,  to  (hew  you  how  much  prudence  is  requir'd  in  phyficians,
who  take  upon  them  to  cure  fcabious  perfons ;  and  how  much  it  behoves
them  to  apply  themfelves  in  order,  and  with  propriety,  to  the  cure  of  the
feveral  diforders,  either  of  the  primas  vis,  or  of  the  obllruded  vifcera  ;  whe-
ther thefe  diforders  arife  from  the  quantity  of  humours,  or  from  any  other
depravity  whatever.  And  among  thefe  laft-mention'd  diforders,  we  muft
never  forget  that  which,  as  long  as  it  fubfifts,  requires  a  fcabies  by  way  of  a
kind  of  chronic  crifis.

You  will  find  examples  of  this  kind  from  the  obfervation  of  the  celebrated
Carhus  (<z),  whom  1  have  commended  :  both  in  a  man  who  ;  having  driven
away  from  the  nape  of  the  neck,  by  means  of  a  certain  liniment,  a  fcabious
cfflorcfcence,  which  often  recurr'd  ;  fell  into  epileptic  convulfions,  which
v/cre  remov'd  by  the  return  of  that  efRorefcence  :  and  in  another  man,  and
in  a  certain  woman  alfo,  in  whom  an  efflorefcence  of  this  kind  (v/hich  had
for  a  long  time  afFefted  the  hands)  being  dried  up,  he  foretold  that  a  fever

(yj  Traiie  du  Coeur,  1.  4.  ch.  3.  n.  6.  (z)  Commerc.  Litterar.  A.  1745,  Hebd.42.

n.  I.  (<»)  In  fine.


Letter  LV. Article  8.  ^j^p

was  at  hand ;  and  foretold  the  termination  of  the  fever,  when  the  elflorefcence
retiirn'd.

And  yet  it  occupied  only  a  fmall  part  of  the  body,  and  had,  in  neither
of  thefe  two,  beenrepell'd  by  any  excernal  remedy.  What  then  ?  where
the  fcabies  occupies  the  whole  circumference  of  the  body,  and  not  only  va-.
niflies  of  itfelf,  as  in  a  perfon  of  whom  Lanzonus  fpeaks  {l>),  who  had  been
always  fcabious  from  his  birth  -,  but  is  even  driven  back  by  a  fulphurared
ointment,  or  any  thing  elfe  of  that  kind,  as  in  him  of  whom  Apinus  (c)
gives  the  relation  ;  end  in  thofe  young  men  fpoken  of  by  Jo.  Sebaft.  Al-
brechtus  (i)  ?  is  it  to  be  wonder'd  at,  if  a  malignant  fever,  or  other  con-
fiderable  diforders,  and  particularly  an  afthma,  come  on,  which  cannot  be
fubdu'd,  but  by  the  return  of  the  fcabies,  either  fpontaneoufly  produc'd,  or
by  the  help  of  proper  remedies  ?

Thus  the  caufe  of  the  diiorders  is.  ftiewn  by  the  very  cure  :  that  is,  it  is
fhewn  to  have  confifted  in  that  deprav'd  maiter,  which,  as  it  is  injurious
when  retain'd  internally,  fo  when  it  is  again  difcharg'd  from  the  blood,  frees
us  from  the  diiorder.  To  this  queftion  belong  the  obfervaticns  of  our  Ram-
mazzini  (e),  made  upon  many  perfons,  who,  having  repell'd  a  fcabies  by
undtions,  were  afterwards  feiz'd  with  a  fever,  during  which  they  difcharg'd
black  and  fuliginous  urine  ;  yet  the  fame  perfons,  after  the  fcabies  had  been,
by  the  help  of  remedies,  brought  back  to  the  fkin,  excreted  urine  like  that
of  perfons  in  health  :  and  when  this  diforder  was  again  repell'd,  or  broke
out  again,  they  fhew'd  this  reciprocal  change  in  the  urine.

f  oi-  which  real'on,  that  very  cautious  phyfician,  particularly  following  the
examples  of  Hippocrates,  and  the  opinion  of  Ballonius,  which  I  have  pro-
duc'd above,  conceiv'd  that  the  fcabies  is  not  always  a  difeaie  of  the  ficira
alone,  and  confcquently -thought  (/),  that  "  to  drive  it  away  by  topical  re-
"  medics  alone,"  always,  and  without  diftindlion,  "  was  an  attempt  full  of
"  danger."  To  Rammazzini  add  another  very  experienc'd  phyfician  ;  I
mean  Hoffman  (^)  -,  who  "  places  external  remedies  as  the  laft  in  order,"  in
a  difeafe  of  this  kind;  and  would  previoufly  "  correft,  by  means  of  proper-
"  internal  remedies,  the  vifcid,  acrid,  and  corrupted  mafs  of  blood  and
"  humours."  For  he  was  wont  to  find  the  blood,  when  taken  away  in
difeafes  of  this  kind,  "  fo  vifcid  and  condens'd  into  a  coagulum,  as  it  were,
"  that  it  was  difficult  to  divide  it."

8.  But  you  will  fay,  that  the  urine  is  not  always  black  in  cafe  of  a  repell'd
fcabies  :  nor  do  we  fee  this  kind  of  blood  always  in  fcabious  perfons ;  and
you  even  o^jeft  to  me  my  own  obfervations,  that  I  have  written  to  you  here-
tofore {h) :  as  if,  in  h£t,  I  had  obferv'd  the  blood  to  be  in  a  very  good
ftate,  in  perfons  affetted  with  a  fcabies  ;  and  not  to  be  differently  affected
in  other  perfons  ;  or,  as  if,  though  there  are  various  kinds  of  fcabies,  there
could  not  be  various  diforders  of  the  blood,  or  various  degrees  of  diforder ;

(i)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  3.  Obf.  31.  _(e)  Conflk.  Epid.  Urb.  A.  169!.  n.  32.

{t)  Dec.  ead.  A.  5,  &  6.  Obf.  117.  (/) Ibid.  n.  28.

(tf)  Commsrc.  Litter. A.  1742.  Hebd.  5. CgJ  0,5.  fupra  ad  n.  6.  cit.  in  raeth.  med.

r.  I.  M,  Mart. &  A.  1743.  Hebd.  14. n.  i.  §  15.  &  in  tiief.  patholog.  §  ig.
M.  Febr.  {h)  Epift.  49,  n.  23,

Vox,.  III.  K  k  .  or


2.  so Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  TJnivevfal  Diforders.

or,  what  I  would  wiih  you  principally  to  attend  to,  as  if  I  had  undertaken
to  prove  any  thing  elfe  to  you  than  this,  that  it  is  by  no  means  fafe  to  ncgledl
methods  of  internal  cure,  and  to  drive  away  a  fcabies  which  is  not  recent  by
external  remedies  alone.

And  certainly,  as  in  many  perfons  affected  with  a  fcabies,  the  whole  of  the
diforder  is  not  in  the  flcin,  as  the  obfervations,  made  by  me  and  by  others,
teftify ;  how  could  it  be  fafe  to  apply  a  cure  to  the  fl-^in  promifcuoufly,  in
all  perfons,  and  negleft  the  internal  parts  ?  a  purgation  of  which,  if  not  in
all  perfons,  at  leaft  in  thofe  whofe  natural  emundories  are  not  equally  open,
was  made  in  part  by  the  ulcerated  ttdn,  or  at  leaft  might  have  been  made.

What  can  be  faid  to  thefe  things  ?  Why  this  I  fuppofe,  that  phyficians
are  not  wanting,  who  teftify,  on  the  other  hand,  that  what  we  deny  to  be
fafe,  had  always  fucceeded  well  with  them,  promifcuoufly,  in  any  fcabious
patient  whatever;  and  without  any  detriment  being  the  confequence  thereof.
But  as  we  do  not  call  their  obfervations  in  queftion  •,  fo  we  think  it  but  juS;
that  they,  in  return,  fliould  not  call  into  queftion  our  obfervations,  and  thofe
of  the  great  number  of  other  phyficians  that  I  have  referr'd  to  above  (z).

To  which  you  will  add  other  obfervations  of  Hoffman  {k),  and  of  other
phyficians,  who  are  quoted  by  him  (/).  By  thefe,  and  others,  that  1  defignedly
pafs  over,  it  is  made  evident,  how  many  and  how  violent  diforders  have  been
the  confequence  of  a  fcabies  being  thus  repell'd :  and  of  courfe,  it  is  certain
what  it  is  moft  fafe  to  determine,  in  regard  to  that  method  of  cure  which
has,  at  one  time,  one  event,  and  at  another  time,  another.
•  g.  But  as  fulphur  is  made  ufe  of,  among  other  things,  againft  a  fcabies,
we  will  add  fome  things,  in  particular,  in  refpeft  to  this  remedy.  This  re-
medy is  applied  externally  in  unguents,  lotions,  and  even  in  the  clothes  we"
wear ;  either  by  the  fumes  thereof,  as  I  have  faid  above  (m'),  being  applied
thereto,  or  rather  by  medicating  them  with  a  decodion  thereof,  and  after-
wards drying  them  in  the  fun,  or  at  the  fire,  which  Willis  (n)  recommends
as  the  more  eafy,  and  much  more  elegant  method  ;  although  I  am  in  doubt,
whether  it  is  quite  "  without  any  difagreeable  fmell,"  as  he  aflerts.

But,  internally,  it  is  us'd  in  one  way  by  the  phyficians,  and  in  another
v/ay  by  the  common-people.

And  as,  in  regard  to  the  external  ufe,  which  is  at  one  time  to  be  com-
mended, and  at  another  difapprov'd,  we  have  already  fpoken  fufficiently;
now  hear  the  manner  in  which  the  common-people  make  ufe  of  fulphur
againft  the  fcabies,  and  what  inconveniencies  and  injuries  fometimes  happen
therefrom.  They  take  fulphur  beaten  into  a  powder,  throw  it  into  any  wine
but  red  wine,  and  drink  it  together  with  the  wine.

And  I  knev/  a  young  woman,  v/ho,  having  taken  fome  in  this  manner,
foon  after  felt  fo  great  a  difturbani.e  in  her  head,  that  fhe  feem'd  then  to  her-
felf  to  be  almoft  mad;  I  fuppofe,  in  confequence  of  the  irritation  of  the
ftomach  being  immediately  propagated  to  the  brain,  in  the  fame  manner  that
Boerhaave  (o)  did  not  doubt  but  opium  a£ted,  even  while  it  is  as  yet  in  the-


(0  N.  2.  3.  7.  (»)  N  3.

(A)  §  15.  iupra  ad  n.  7.  cit.  («).  Pharmac.  Rat.  S.  3.  c.  6.

(/)  in  mef.  pathol.  ibid.  cit.,§  18.  (0)  Pisled.  ad  Inftit.  §  857.


ftomach.


Letter  LV. Article  i  o.  251

ft-omach,  and  did  not  need  that  long  paflage  through  the  chyllferous  du6ls  -,
for  having  open'd  a  dog,  that  was  now  almoft  in  convulfions  from  the  effefts  of
opium,  which  he  had  Iwallow'd,  he  had  found  the  opium  ftill  in  the  ftomach.
Be  this  as  it  will ;  that  fulphur  afts  on  the  ftomach  itfelf,  you  will  learn  or
fufpedt  from  one  of  the  obfervations  which  I  (hall  immediately  add  here,  if
not  from  both  of  them.

JO.  A  woman,  of  forty  years  of  age,  who  was  addifted  to  the.ufe  of  wine
and  tobacco,  more  than  became  a  woman,  and  had  been  married,  to  a' por-
ter that  was  a  robuft  man,  but  had  never  borne  children,  having  drunk  ful-
phur in  wine,  more  than  once,  in  order  to  drive  away  a  fcabies,  which,  fiie
had  contracted,  and  laft  of  all  in  a  much  larger  quantity ;  began,  foon  after,
to  be  very  much  diforder'd,  vomited  feveral  times,  and  came  thereupon  to
the  hofpital :  being  already  troubled  with  a  fever,  her  pulfe  being  hard  and
contrafted,  and  fhe  complaining  of  a  great  ftreightnefs  in  breathing.

For  this  reafon  fre(h-drawn  oil  of  almonds  was  given,  and  blood  was  taken
away.  The  day  after,  her  refpiration  being  ftill  more  confin'd,  blood  was
again  taken  away  :  and  it  was  like  that  of  the  day  before,  of  a  firm  and  denfe
craflTamentum,  but  cover'd  over  with  no  cruft.  When  the-^aufe  of  the  dif-
eafe  was  heard,  two  glaflfes  of  milk  were  alfo  given.  But  the  difficulty  of
breathing  being  encreas'd,  the  patient  being  troubled  with  evident  convulfions
of  the  limbs,  and  the  pulfe  growing  more  languid,  fhe  died,  fo  as  to  put  an
end  to  her  difordei"  within  about  four  days,  after  the  beginning  thereof.

The  difl^edtion  of  the  body  was  perform'd,  not  only  with  a  view  to  find  out
the  caufe  of  the  diforder,  but  alfo  to  inftrud  the  ftudents  in  anatomy ;  for  it
was  almoft  the  latter  end  of  November,  in  the  year  1744:  and  the  dilTedtion
was  perform'd  in  the  hofpital,  thirty  hours  after  the  time  of  the  patient's
death.

The  body  had  a  good  appearance ;  except  that  the  fkin  was  here  and  there
deform'd  with  a  fmalWcabies.  The  abdomen,  however,  was  tumid :  and
this  not  from  too  much  fat;  for  as  the  fat  was  very  well-ccmdition'd,  fo  it
was  in  a  very  proper  quantity  :  nor  yet  was  this  tumid  ftate  of  the  abdomen
owing  to  the  extravafation  of  a  great  quantity  of  water  into  the  belly ;  for
although  a  confiderable  quantity  of  this  fluid  was  there,  it  neverthelefs  did
not  appear  to  be  out  of  the  pelvis.

But  the  ftomach,  the  fmall  inteftines,  and  the  colon,  for  a  confiderable
extent ;  for  in  other  places  it  either  preferv'd  its  natural  latitude,  or  was  very
much  contracted,  which  we  obferv'd  more  on  the  left  fide,  near  to  the  fto-
mach ;  being,  themfelves,  diftended  with  air,  had  diftended  the  abdomen.
The  omentum  cover'd  no  inteftines,  by  reafon  of  its  being  forc'd,  or  drawn
upwards  ;  for  this  part,  and  that  upper  part  of  the  mefocolon,  which  fup-
ports  the  tranfverfe  arch  of  the  colon,  were  rigid,  and  diftinguifh'd,  here  and
there,  with  red  fpocs -,  but  particularly  on  the  back  part.

On  the  external  furface  of  the  ftomach,  the  blood-vefl"els  were  pretty  tur-
gid. And  the  internal  furface,  where  the  fundus  came  very  near  to  the  an-
trum pylori,  ftiow'd  an  area  of  a  circular  form^  the  diame^ter  of  which  v/as
about  four  fingers  breadths.  This  area  was  diftinguifh'd,  from  the  remain-'
ing  furface  of  the  ftomach,  by  thefe  circuftances,  that  it  was  lefs  fmooth,  and
iefs  fhining,  confiderably  more  white,  and  furnifli'd with  vefl^els  that  were

K  k  2  black,


2S'-2 Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Dlforders.

black,  as  if  from  injeftion  V  whereas,  in  other  places,  a  fmoothnefs,  a  bright-
jiefs  a  lefs  white  colour,  were  every  where  feen  ;  but  fcarcely  any  velVcls  ;
not  to  lay  that  they  were  not  render'd  confpicuous  in  the  fame  manner,  or  of
a  black  colour:  fo  that  it  was  evident  to  every  one,  that,  as  far  as  this  whole
area  extended  itfelf,  fo  much  of  the  internal  lamella  of  the  ftomach  had
been  eroded.

Nor  befides  this,  not  even  in  the  neighbouring  cefophagus,  or  inteftines,
could  1  obferve  any  thing  which  fignined  erofion,  or  inflammation.  As  this
ftomach  was  bigger  than  the  ftomach  naturally  is,  fo  it  was  without  any
rvcr±,  and  had  us  parietes  very  thin  :  and  fcarcely  did  it  retain  any  traces  of
the  rino  of  the  pylorus.  The  latter  of  which  appearances,  if  not  the  cfFeft
of  origfnal  formation,  or  from  fome  other  more  ancient  caufe,  might,  toge-
ther with  the  others,  be  owing  to  the  frequent  diftentions  of  this  vifcus,  in
a  drunken  woman  -,  and  particularly  to  its  late  diftencion,  from  included  air.
The  other  circumftances  ot  difeafe  that  I  obferv'd  in  the  belly,  are  briefly
thefe.  The  o-all- bladder  was  confiderably  fhrunk,  and  contain'd  but  little
bile. The  ktdnies  were  lax. The  great  artery  was  very  narrow.

I  then  infpefted  and  difleited  the  genital  parts  with  accuracy,  as  the  v/on^n
had  been  barren.  The  teftes  v/ere  fmall  and  contrafted,  even  more  than  they
are  wont  to  be  at  that  age.  From  the  left  was  univerfally  prominent  an  hy-
datid of  the  bignefs  of  a  fmall  grape.  The  uterus  was  inclin'd  to  the  right
fide,  and  had  its  fundus  rather  Imall  :  for  which  reaibn  the  thicknefs  of  the
cervix,,  that  was  greater  than  it  ought  to  be,  and  efpecially  at  the  lower  part,
was  more  worthy  of  remark  ;  as  that  of  the  corona  itlelf,  with  which  the
ofculum  uteri  is  circumlcnb'd,  was  alfo":  tor  the  ofculum  was  here  fmal?,  as
it  is  in  virgins,  and  of  a  circular  form.

From  this  orifice  diftill'd  a  humour  like  milk  in  its  colour,  and  not  more
fluid  than  this,  nor  of  a  bad  fmell ;  yet  in  a  quantity  which  was  very  confi-
denhle  :  fo  that  the  woman  feem'd  to  have  labour'd  under  a  uterine  fiuor.
And  that  the  fource  of  this  difcharge  was  higher  up  than  the  lower  part  of
the  cervix,  was  fhewn  by  the  difiedion  cf  this  part.  For  there  the  veficles
of  the  cervix  contain'd  a  mucus,  which  feem'd  to  be  more  fluid,  and  yet
rot  milky.  Above  there  appear'd  none  even  upon  diffeftion.  About  the
middle  of  the  length  of  the  cervix,  I  found,  in  two  places,  by  cutting
deeply  within  the  thicknefs  of  the  parietes,  an  empty  roundifii  cellule,  ca-
pable of  containing  a  fmall  pea,  and  without  any  figns  of  erofion,  either
there  or  in  any  other  place.

Ur  on  opening  the  thorax,  I  found,  very  evidenily,  what  I  had  before
fufpefted,  from  the  vertebrse  of  the  loins  beginning  to  he  bent  flightly  to
the  left  fide,  that  the  woman  was  gibbous  ;  for  the  vertebrse  of  the  thorax
were  much  more  tienl  to  the  right  fide.  But  if  the  cafe  had  been  different,
or  if  the  uterus,  which  I  faid  was  inclin'd  to  the  right  fide-,  had  been,  like
the  vertebras  of  the  loins,  inclin'd  to  the  left  fide  ;  I  (hould  have  added  this
woman  to  the  others  whom  I  have  already  ipoken  to  you  of  (/>),  when  writing
of  the  inclination  of  the  uterus. But  the  inclination  of.  the  fpine,  at  the

(/)  Epift.  48,  n.  33.

lower


Letter  LV. Article  ii.  253

lower  part,  was  here  very  flight  -,  and  fuch  as  the  ofla  innominata  would  not
eafily  tollow,  as  they  did  in  thofe  fiibjefts.

However,  I  found  no  water  extravafated  in  the  thorax,  or  pericardium,
as  I  did  in  the  belly.  The  lungs,  anteriorly  and  laterally,  'were  connedted
very  cloiely  wil:h  tlie  pleura  :  they  were  tumid  befides,  and  efpecially  the
left  lobe,  but  only  from  the  air,  and  a  fluid  that  was  mix'd  therewith  ;  for
they  were  in  no  part  hard,  or  more  red  than  was  natural.  The  ventricles  of
the  heart  contain'd  a  coagulated  blood  :  and  that  blood  was  black,  as  it  was
in  other  places  alio.

Upon  opening  the  cranium,  all  the  parts  which  were  within  it,  feem'd  tg
be  confiderably  more  lax  than  they  ought'  to  have  been,  on  the  eighth  day
after  death ;  for  fo  many  days  had  the  accurate  difledion  of  the  other  parts
taken  up.  The  veffels  that  go  through  the  dura  mater  were  turgid  with
blood  •,  and  in  the  plexus  choro'ides  I  obferv'd  veficles  full  of  water,  in  great
number,  and  not  very  fmall.  Finally,  all  the  parts  that  were  within  the
cranium  being  taken  away,  thofe  furfaces  of  both  the  petrous  procelTes,  which
look  one  upon  another,  and  the  neighbourhood  thereof,  were  feen  to  be  nop
fmooch,  but  unequal.

II.  A  porter,  the  hufoand  of  the  woman  I  juft  now  fpoke  of,  of  a  tall
ftature,  and,  although  of  a  fomewhat  pallid  face,  and  3  habit  of  body  in-
clining to  leannefs,  robuft  neverthelefs  ;  being  almoft  of  the  fame  age  with
herfelf,  and  equally  given  to  drinking,  was  affeded  with  the  fame  fcabies,
and  made  ufe  of  the  fame  remedy  as  fhe :  but  I  believe  not  in  the  fame
quantity.  After  her  death  he  continu'd  in  pretty  good  health,  to  all  ap-
pearance, for  almoft  fix  months  ;  at  the  end  of  which  he  was  fei^'d  with  3
fever  that  feem'd  to  be  flight,  but  wks,  in  effeft,  fo  fatal,  that  he  lay  in  the
hofpital  but  two  days  before  he  die(i  :  and  this  was  about  the  middle  of
May.

On  the  frrft  day,  ttfe  pulfe  and  _^the  other  fymptoms'  were  not  very  bad;
if  they  had  not  been  render'd  fufpefted  by  a  kind  of  anxiety  and  inquietude.
On  that  day,  as  is  generally  pradis'd  with  moft  others  in  the  beginning,  a
medicine  was  given  to  cieanie  the  fton:iach  and  bowels,  v/ith  gentlenefs.  On
the  day  following,  all  thole  evils,  which  1  fliall  relate  to  you,  .came  on  j
fo  that  remembering  how  his  wife  was,  they  gave  him  milk.  For  he  vo-
mited :  he  was  troubled  v/ith  the  fame  ftreightnefs  of  refpiration  that  his
y/ife  was  formerly  :  he  was  convuls'd  in  his  whole  body  :  he  was,  moreover,
violently  delirious  :  and  in  his  delirium  cried  out  that  his  belly  was  on  fire.
And  in  this  manner  his  life  was  finifh'd,  before  the  third  day  after  his  coming
into  the  hofpital.

On  account  of  this  fhortnefs  of  the  difeafe,  it  happen'd  that  the  body  was-
diffeded  before  I  knew  of  the  man's  being  fick  ;  which  was  a  circumftance
ihac  was  very  far  from  being  pleafing  to  me.  Yet  the  body  was  difTefted-
by  a  very  attentive  and  intelligent  pupil  of  mine,  who  is  now  defervedly  an
eminent  phyfician  at  Feltri  ;  1  mean,  Anthony  Guilermi :  and  from  hi.m  I
receiv'd  the  following  account.

The  belly  being  open'd,  in  the  omentum,  and  the  pinguedinous  appen.

diculas  of  the  intefline  colon,  and  particularly  in  thofe  that  were near  the

fyleen,  as  alio  in  the  adipole  membrane,  as  it  is  cali'd,  of  the  left  kidney,

4.  the


2^4 ^ook  IV.  Of  Chimrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  fat,  which  was  not  in  great  quantities,  was  of  a  brown  colour  and  fomc-
what  livid.  And  as  to  the  colon  itfelf,  it  was  three  times  more  wide  than
ufual.  The  ftomach  was  contrafted,  of  a  brown  colour  externally,  and  in-
ternally inflam'd,  without  any  erofion,  to  the  breadth  of  the  palm  of  a  man's
hand,  where  it  was  turn'd  towards  the  fpleen.  The  lower  edge  of  the  liver
was  livid,  and  of  a  blackilh  colour  -,  yet  not  to  a  very  great  depth.

Upon  opening  the  thorax,  the  lungs  and  the  heart,  as  well  as  the  dia-
phragm, which  was  examin'd  on  both  furfaces,  were  found  to  be  in  a  natural
Itate.  In  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  were  fmall  polypous  concretions.  The
head  was  not  diflefted.

12.  1  enquir'd  whether  the  fkin  had  retain'd  any  thing  of  the  fcabies,  and,
in  like  manner,  whether  the  man,  after  drinking  the  wine  and  fulphur  with
his  wife,  had  taken  any  more.  To  both  of  which  enquiries  I  was  anfwer'd
in  the  negative.  This,  however,  was  added,  that  the  wine  which  both  of
them  had  made  ufe  of,  was  kept  in  a  brazen  veiTel.  On  hearing  of  which,
as  I  did  not  doubt  but  this  very  pernicious  diforder  was  an  inflammatory
fever,  fo  I  faw  that  it  might  be  doubted  whether  the  fcabies,  which,  indeed,
had  been  repell'd,  without  any  proper  method  of  internal  cure,  had  left  fuch
particles  in  the  blood,  as  were,  in  fome  meafure,  the  caufe  of  this  very  great
injury  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  as  the  ftomach  was  the  feat  of  this  inflammation,
whether  this  did  not  happen  the  more  eafily,  becaufe  it  had  been  already
fomewhat  weaken'd  by  the  drinking  of  that  wine.  At  lead,  you  have  read
what  injury  the  ftomach  of  his  wife  receiv'd  therefrom  -,  whether  this  arofe,
in  part,  from  the  noxious  quality  of  the  brafs  vefliel  wherein  it  had  been  kept,
or  only  from  the  fulphur  that  had  been  mix'd  with  it.

For  how  injurious  fulphur  may  be,  the  ancient  phyficians  had  formerly
known,  from  whom  Pliny  {q),  took  this  dogma,  that  afles  milk  was  ufeful
"  againft  gypfum,  cerufle,  fulphur,  and  quick-filver ;"  notwithftanding
Dalechampius  (r),  is  ncedlefsly  afraid,  left,  though  they  had  perhaps  writ-
ten ^pt/'or,  that  is  the  folanum  manicon^  Pliny  had  read  improperly  ^j/o^  that
is  fulphur  •,  for  it  is  not  probable,  that  among  thofe  things  which  Pliny  fpeaks
of,  as  belonging  to  the  mineral  kingdom,  as  it  is  call'd,  a  vegetable  fhould
have  been  interpos'd  in  that  paflage  which  Pliny  has  copied  :  nor  is  the
difference  of  the  writing  fo  inconfiderable,  as  eafily  to  deceive  the  eyes  of  a
perfon  who  copied  the  paffage.

But  even  Galen  has  plac'd  fulphur  among  thofe  things  {s)  that  "  create
"  ulcers  in  the  parts  to  which  they  long  adhere  :"  and  Haly  Abbas,  whom
Ardoynus(/^)  commends  and  follows,  has  faid,  that  a  man  who  drank  fulphur
"  had  a  cutting,  burning,  excruciating  pain  in  his  ftomach,  and  ulcers  in  the
"  in^eftines."  Yet  I  would  not  have  you  believe,  that  I  attribute  this  de-
ftruilive  power  to  every  kind,  to  every  preparation,  to  every  mixture,  and
to  every  dofe  of  fulphur:  for  1  am  by  no  means  ignorant  that  fulphur  has
been  commonly  given  againft  the  fcabies,  not  only  by  the  modern  phyficians,
t)ut  fometimes  alio  by  the  ancient  phyficians.


(y)  Nat.  Hift.  1.  28.  c.  9.  W  De  compof.  medic  1.  6.  c.  2.

l')  In  Adnot.  ad  eum  locum.  (')  De  Venen.  1.  2.  c.  15.


Bat


Letter  LV. Article  1 2. _  255

But  it  is  certain  that  the  woman,  of  whom  we  fpeak,  had  taken  it  in  wine
which  had  been  preferv'd  in  a  brazen  vefTel,  and  in  too  great  a  quantity  :
but  whether  (he  toolv  it  in  a  pure,  or  arr  impure  ftate,  is  by  no  means
certain.

I  would  have  you  examine  thofe  authors  who  have  admonifh'd  us  what  may
be  mix'd  with  it  in  the  very  mines  from  whence  it  is  dug  ;  or,  at  leaft,  what
Waltherus  {u)  has  briefly  hinted,  when  he  fays,  that  "  we  muft  examine
"  whether  the  mines,  which  fupply  the  fu'phur  vivum,  do  not  produce,  to-
"  gether  with  the  fulphur,  minerals  that  are  in  other  refpefts  hurtful  :  and
"  that  we  ought  to  be  particularly  afraid  of  arfenic  being  join'd  with  many
"  fpecies  of  fulphur  :  for  thus  he  had  known,  that,  from  a  fcruple  of  crude
"  fulphur  being  taken  into  the  ftomach,  a  vomiting,  tormina,  and  tenefmus
"  had  been  excited  :  and,  indeed,  although  the  fulphur  had  been  frequently
"  boil'd  in  water,  and  diffolv'd  over- a  gentle  fire  •,  yet,  in  many  perfons,  ftools
"  had  not  fo  much  been  the  confequence  of  taking  it,  as  tormina."

And  as  to  that  with  which  arfenic  is  join'd,  this  certainly  ought  not  to  be
applied  externally  to  the  ulcers  of  fcabious  perfons,  as  appears  from  the
effefts  of  cobalt ;  which  as  the  celebrated  Jo.  Adr.  Sproegelius  (x)  juftly
affirms  "  to  be  of  the  fame  nature  with  arfenic,"  fo  he  relates  that  this
metal,  being  fprinkl'd  upon  the  head  of  a  fcabious  girl,  had  brought  on  a
very  miferable  death  within  a  few  hours  -,  and  that  the  fame  thing  had  hap-
pen'd,  not  only  to  a  fcabious  dog,  from  cobalt,  but  to  three  others,  in  which
he  had  made  a  flight  incifion  of  the  flcin,  and  applied  arfenic  by  fprinkling :
and  he  adds,  that  even  greater  m.arks  of  difeafe  were  found  by  difleftion,
than  if  he  had  given  them  fo  much  arfenic  by  way  of  the  mouth.

However,  to  the  cafe  of  that  girl  you  will  add  a  fimilar  one  in  another
girl,  who  was  affeded  with  a  pkthrriajls,  or  loufinefs,  of  the  head,  as  related
by  Harderus  {y)  ;  and  to  the  experiments,  thofe  examples  which  Ftmuller
the  fon  (2)  has  produc'd  from  Fabricius  Hildanus,  Janus  Antonius  Sara-
cenus,  Amatus  Lufitanus,  and  others  ;  that  is  to  fay,  of  death,  or  of  the
moft  violent  fyoiptoms,  being  brought  on  from  the  application  of  an  oint-
ment, wherewith  arfenic  was  join'd,  to  ulcers ;  and  even  to  the  fcabies
itfelf

And  to  this  fubjeft,  alfo,  probably  belongs  that  more  ancient  obfervation
of  Baccius  (a),  of  arfenic  being  fprinkl'd  upon  a  phagedenic  bubo  ;  to  which
infperfion  death  fucceeded,  after  three  days,  by  fuch  violent  vomitings  of  an
seruginous  humour,  that  a  fufpicion  arofe  of  fu'olimated  mercury  having  been
privately  given.

But  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  late  obfervations  of  that  very  experienc'd
furgeon  Goulard  {b),  being  relative  to  this  queftion,  as  they  agree  with
others  which  he  refers  to  from  IVLorand  ;  obfervations,  for  inftance,  of  acrid
and  eroding  medicines  being  applied  to  the  fungous flefli  of  ulcers,  and

(a)  Progr.de  Sulph.  &  Mart.  (k)  Eph.  N.  C. Cent.  3, &  4. Obf,  127.

{x)  Experim.  circa  varia  venena,  &c.  §  a8.  in  Schol.
&  Exp.  36. ^  (a)  De  Venenisj  &c.  ubi  de  Venen.  quae  ex-

(yj  Scpulch.  in  Additam.  ad  Sect.  11.  1.  triniecu:,  S:c.  ,

hujui  4  Obf.  13,  Hill.  13,  {h)  Memoire  fur  les  Maladies  de  I'Uretre.

8-  havins:


25^ Book  IV.  Of  ChirurgicalandUniverfalDiforders.

having  their  frirall  particles  taken  into  the  blood,  in  fiich  a  manner,  that  the
patient  died  with  all  the  fymptoms  of  poiibn -,  though  in  the  mean  while
no-body  fufpeCts  the  true  caufe  of  his  death.  And  if  you  confider  all  thefe
things  maturely,  ycu  will  alio  gather  from  thence,  how  eafily  the  particles
of  erofive  matter,  that  is  proper  to  fcabious  perfons,  may  be  carried  from
their  little  ulcers  into  the  circulating  fluid.

But,  before  1  make  an  end  of  writing  upon  the  fubjeft  of  the  fcabies,  you
will,  perhaps,  afk,  why  I  never  made  mention  of  the  febaceous  glands  of
the  fliin,  and  of  the  matter  fecreted  therefrom  ?  When  the  queifion  was
of  Sirones{c),  I  thought  it  fuperfluous  to  put  you  in  mind,  that  a  certairi
appearance  of  worms  muft  not  be  confounded  therev/ith,  as  was  formerly
done  •,  fince  in  this  prefent  ftate  of  anatomical  knowledge,  to  the  increafe  of
which  I  have  labour'd  vyith  all  my  little  abilities,  1  fee  that  it  is  aflerted,
even  by  tyros  in  medical  knowledge,  "  that  the  worms  which  infeft  the  Ikin
"  of  children,  are  nothing  more  than  a  deceitful  appearance  ;  and  are,  iri
"  fa6l,  filaments  prefs'd  out  from  the  febaceous  follicles  of  the  fldn,  as  is
"  fuiiiciently  and  clearly  determin'd."

And,  indeed,  I  have  heard  that,  as  there  is  an  endemic  dilbrder  in  Fin-
land, which  they  call  E?-eft,  and  which  makes  great  havock  among  children,
confifting  in  very  fmall  tubercles  of  the  whole  fkin,  that  are  extenuated  into
a  kind  of  worms ;  I  have  now  heard,  I  fay,  that  this  diforder  is  accounted
for,  by  learned  men,  from  an  obftruftion  of  the  febaceous  glands  of  the
fldn  :  perhaps,  becaufe  the  matter,  fecreted  by  thefe  glands,  being  in  a  very-
thick  and  tenacious  ftate^,  is,  for  that  reafon,  while  it  comes  out  in  a  very
flow  manner,  form'd  into  filaments,  which  not  only  retard  the  difcharge  of
the  matter  that  ought  to  be  excreted  in  fuccelTion ;  but  alio  prevent  the
very  neceffary  difcharge  of  infenfible  perfpiracion,  by  compelling  the  matter,
that  lies  obftruded  in  thefe  follicles,  to  prefs  upon  the  neighbouring  fangui-
ferous  veflels  all  round.

You  fee  then,  why,  in  fpeaking  of  the  Jiroues,  I  thought  it  unnecefTary  to
take  any  farther  notice  of  the  lebaccous  matter  :  perhaps  this  might  have
been  done  with  more  propriety  in  other  places.  For  as  the  fecretion  of  this
oleoie  matter  feems  to  be  intended  not  only  for  other  ufes,  but  particularly
to  keep  the  fl<in  foft  and  flexible,  and  to  defend  it  againif  the  effeffl  of  eroding
bodies-,  it  follows,  that  where  this  fecretion  is  either  prevented,  or  de-
prav'd,  th-ofe  diforders  muft  eafliy  arife  which  are  obferv'd  in  cutaneous  in-
teftions.

Thus  in  the  elephantiafis,  as  fome  underffand  this  v/ord,  the  flcin  becomes
rio-id  and  inflexible  :  although  this  happens  fbmetimes  even  without  an  ele-
phantiafis, as  it  did  formerly  in  a  woman  whom  Jo  Fred.  Hclvetius,  as
you  have  it  in  Stalpart  (<i),  cur'd  within  the  fpace  of  three  weeks  ;  and  in
another  defcrib'd  by  Diemerbroeck  (^) ;  for  another  I  fuppofe  it  to  be,  when
I  compare  the  detcriptions  together  :  and,  finally,  in  that  Neapolitan  woman
whofe  diieaie  and  cure  are  defcrib'd,  as  you  know,  by  Charles  Curti  (/),

(f)  N.  4.  ('')  Anat.  1.  8.  c.  I.

{dj  Cent.  Poll.  P.  I.  Obf.  43.  f/J  DifcufT.  d'un  raro  niorbo  cutaneo.

As


Letter  LV. Article  12,  23-7

As  to  what  relates  to  erofion,  however,  it  is  natural  to  fappofe  that  this
happens  much  more  eafily  in  thoie  in  whom  the  fcabies  does  not  come  by-
contagion-,  but  arifes  from  the  eroding  corpufcles,  which  are  lb  redundant
in  the  blood,  that  even  by  infedting  the  I'ebaceous  matter,  they  not  only  render
it  unfit  to  defend  the  fkin,  by  its  unftion,  froni  the  irritating  falts  of  the
fweat ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  render  it  very  fit  to  irritate  and  erode.

Why  then,  you  will  fay,  have  you  not  hinted  at  thefe  things  above?
Why,  in  fad,  1  did  not  touch  upon  this  fubjeft,  left  I  fhould  either  feem  to
fet  more  lightly  by  fome  celebrated  men  than  I  ought,  or  fliould  feem  to
challenc^e  them  ;  if  I  either  entirely  neglefted,  or  undertook  to  difcufs,  thofe
things  which  they  advanc'd  fome  years  before,  of  the  febaceous  glands,  and
of  the  matter  fecreted  therefrom.

For  fuch  a  difcuffion,  moreover,  this  is  not  a  convenient  place ;  as  it
would  give  occafion  to  a  long  difcourfe,  that  would  be  difagreeable  to  you ;
and  ftill  more  to  myfclf,  by  realbn  of  the  repetition  of  thofe  things  which  I
have  faid  fufficiently  at  large  above  :  and  that  would  be  frequently  neceffary.
Both  of  which  circumftances  you  will  naturally  conjeAure,  from  the  few  things
that  I  (hall  briefly  point  out.  There  are  febaceous  glands,  fay  they,  "  in
"  the  trachea,  in  the  alimentary  canal,  &c."  But  do  you  read  the  thirteenth
animadverfion  of  the  fourth  of  the  Adverfaria.

They  could  "  never  find  "  febaceous  glands  fcatter'd  up  and  down,  in
the  llcin.  Do  you,  however,  examine  numbers  three  and  four,  in  the  third
of  the  EpiftoliS  Anatomies.

Yet  they  have  feen  "  on  the  (Icin  of  the  face,  the  breaft,  and  the  arms,
"  of  fome  men,  fmall  black  points  ;"  and  not  only  thefe  little  points,  but
have  feen  "  an  unftuous  matter,  refembling  a  round  worm,  pieis'd  out
"  therefrom  :"  and  they  therefore  fay,  that  there  are,  "  in  the  fliin,  certain
"  very  fmall  cavities,  which  are  found  to  be  larger  than  their  orifice  ;"  but
they  contend,  that  thefC things  which  they  have  feen  "•  are  not  prefent  in  a
found  ftate."

You  muft,  therefore,  look  again  to  thole  pafl^ages  which  I  have  pointed  out
in  my  writings,  and  others  :  or,  rather,  you  muft  examine  the  ate  nafi  in
moft  men,  and  in  thofe  that  are  found  and  healthy  too.  What  then  do  they
fay  thefe  cavities  are  ?  A  /heath,  which  before  embrac'd  the  root  of  a  hair
that  is  now  deflroy'd.  And  here  it  becomes  neceffary  for  you  to  read  number
twelve  of  the  firft  of  the  Adverfaria  (g),  and  the  thirty-third  animadver-
fion {h)  of  the  fourth  of  the  Adverfaria ;  for  in  the  former  paffage,  I  firft
hinted  a  doubt  againft  the  febaceous  glands,  from  the  receptacles  of  the
hairs  ;  and,  in  both  places,  I  have  not  fpar'd  to  mention  fome  things  that  are
contrary  thereto,  or  at  leaft  that  limit  its  extent :  to  which  you  may  now
add,  that  thofe  cavities  would  not  have  been  the  largeft  in  the  als  nafi  ;  that
is  to  fay,  where  the  hairs  were  the  fmalleft.

And  that  vagina,  or  Jheath,  is  fix'd  in  the  far,  under  the  flcin  •,  for  they
think  "  that  the  opinion  of  Columbus  is  fupported  upon  truth,  to  wit,  that
"  all  the  hairs  fix  their  roots  in  the  fat." But  neither  has  Columbus  faid

(a)  Verfus  finem.  [h)  In  fi-ne.

Vol.  Ill,  L  I  all.


258 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

dl,  nor  have  I  faid  all,  when  1  firft  alfo  produc'd  his  opinion ;  as  you  will
learn  from  the  fifth  animadverfion  of  the  fecond  of  the  Jdverfaria.

For  I  not  only  knew  that  there  are  hairs,  whereby  we  cannot  fhew  that
the  whole  thicknefs  of  the  fkin  is  pervaded  •,  but  I  even  faw  that  Columbus
himfelf,  among  the  others  which  are  fix'd  in  the  fat,  had  exprefsly  excepted
thofe  which  are  in  the  fcrotum  :  and  that  to  thefe,  others  ought  to  be  added  ;
as,  for  inllance,  thofe  that  arife  from  the  neighbouring  integuments  of  the
penis,  and  thofe  very  flender  ones  that  arife  from  the  pinna  of  the  external
ear,  and  from  the  caruncula  lachrymalis.

Do  not,  however,  imagine,  that  thofe  fheaths  of  the  hairs,  which  are  fub-
ftituted  in  the  place  of  the  febaceous  glands,  are  fix'd  down  in  the  fat  for
this  reafon,  that  they  may  take  up  an  oleofe  matter  from  thence.  From
thefe  fheaths,  indeed,  a  matter  is  faid  to  be  difcharg'd  which  is  call'd  feba-
ceous •,  but  at  the  fame  time  it  is  faid  not  to  be  oleaginous,  becaufe  linen-
rags,  or  lint,  "  plentifully  moiften'd  "  with  this  matter,  "  refift  the  flames
"  for  a  very  long  time  ;"  as  if,  truly,  we  denied  that  nothing  befides  this,
either  of  the  matter  of  fwcat,  or  infenfible  perfpiration,  adher'd  to  the  linen  ;
or,  as  if  we  had  denied  that  this  was  any  thing  but  pure  oil :  neither  of  which
could  ever  come  into  my  mind,  as  I  every  day  fee  with  how  much  eafe  the
fordes  of  the  fkin  are  wafh'd  off  with  water.

We,  therefore,  believe  it  to  be  fufficiently  "  of  a  faponaceous  nature,"
not  only  by  means  of  fomewhat  being  mix'd  therewith  externally,  but  alfo
internally  ;  and  yet  not  "  as  all  the  humours  of  our  body  are,"  but  in  a
peculiar  kind  of  manner  :  and  from  hence  it  happens,  that  if  it  be  examin'd
with  the  eye,  and  with  the  hand,  immediately  upon  its  being  fecreted  from
a  found  body,  and  the  effcfts  of  it  confider'd,  it  is  clearly  perceiv'd  how
much  it  differs  from  the  other  humours.

And  I  would  alfo  have  you  transfer  thefe  things  to  that  febaceous  matter
which  is  feparated,  about  the  eyes,  from  the  glands  of  the  tarfi,  and  the  neigh-
bouring caruncle;  for  this  is  alfo  mix'd  with  the  lachrymal  humour,  that  is
conftantly  fecreted.  In  which  glands,  and  caruncle,  and  in  the  neighbour-
hood thereof,  what  my  labour  formerly  did,  I  might  fay  to  fome  others,  who
have  Ihewn,  in  defcribing  them  two-and-twenty  years  ago,  either  that  they
are  ignorant  of  the  hiftory  of  anatomy,  or,  if  they  know  it,  that  they  too
openly  dilTemble.  But  I  do  not  think  this  worth  fo  much  notice  :  and  I  al-
ready feem,  to  you,  to  have  forgotten  that  this,  as  I  faid  above,  is  not  the
proper  place  for  dlfcuffions  of  fuch  a  nature.

13.  Let  us  go  on,  therefore,  from  the  fcabies,  that  is,  from  the  fmaller
ulcers,  to  the  larger.  I  never  remember  to  have  feen  a  larger  than  in  a
ruftic  man,  who,  when  fhut  up  in  a  ftove,  fuffer'd,  at  firft,  from  the  unn.il-
fulnefs  of  a  furgeon  in  applying  too  much  heat ;  and,  after  that,  by  his  ob-
ftinacy  in  neglcdling  the  complaints  of  the  poor  man,  who  cried  out  that  he
was  burnt :  for  he  did  not  take  him  out  before  he  was  half  burnt  in  the
whole  outfide  of  his  body.

Wherefore,  ahhough  the  fkin  only  was  externally  ulcerated  j  yet  the  very
fize  of  the  ulcer  brought  the  man  to  the  end  of  his  life,  by  the  moft  con-
tinual and  incredible  tortures  :  and  that  within  the  fpace  of  tv.o  or  three
days,  in  the  hofpital  of  incurables  at  Bologna;  where  they  had  ca>ried  him

foon


Letter  LV. Article  14,  -^^5  9

foon  after  the  accident.  A  cafe  not  far  unlike  this,  you  will  read  the  de-
fcription  of  by  Ledelius  (i) ;  but  a  juvenile  age,  a  very  fpeedy  cure,  and  not
an  equal  ulceration  in  all  parts  of  the  flcin,  as  appears  from  the  difference
of  the  pains,  fuffer'd  a  more  happy  event  to  the  difeafe.

Mention  is  made  of  old  ulcers,  in  the  obfervations  I  have  fent  to  you,
even  more  frequently  than  of  the  fcabies.  And  two  of  thefe  (k),  particularly,
confirm  what  1  faid  of  the  purgation  which  is  made  by  the  fcabies  (/).  For
when  an  ulcer,  and  a  fcabies,  afflicted  one  perfon  at  the  fame  time,  the  former
began  to  be  much  more  troublefome,  and  painful,  upon  the  vanifliing  of  the
latter;  though  the  fcabies  was  not  moift,  but  dry.  And,  on  tiie  other  hand,
upon  the  clofing  up  of  ulcers,  which  appear'd  from  cicatrices  on  the  tlb'ise,
ill-condition'd  puftules  had  occupied  almoft  the  whole  fkin.

As  to  what  has  been  faid  of  the  fcabies,  that  it  muft  not  be  driven  away
by  external  remedies  merely,  unlefs  when  it  is  recent  and  contraded  fay  con-
tagion ;  becaufe,  otherwife,  the  difchargeof  noxious  humours,  which  us'd  to
be  thrown  out  thereby,  would  be  by  this  means  prevented,  as  well  as  the
abforption  of  thofe  humours  which  us'd  to  be  carried  inwards  therefrom  ;  the
fame  may  be,  with  juftice,  faid  of  other  ulcers  alfo,  as  appears  from  the  re-
mainder of  our  obfervations.  For  ulcers  of  long  Handing,  whether  fponta-
neoufly  or  artificially  growing  dry,  or  ftiut  up,  have  had  the  moft  violent
diforders  follow  them  •,  particularly  diforders  of  the  brain,  and  fometimes  of
the  heart :  and  even  then,  and  when  ulcers,  although  not  yet  (hut  up,  had
been  long  troublefome,  you  may  obferve  almoil  always,  that  there  was  ferum
within  the  cranium,  fometimes  alfo  within  the  vertebrse,  or  within  the  thorax
and  belly.

And,  rather  than  repeat  thefe  obfervations  here,  I  chufe  to  refer  you  to
the  letters,  in  which  you  may  read  moft  of  them  over  again  ;  that  is  to  fay,
the  fourth  (?»),  the  Hhhjji),  the  twelfth  (<?),  the  twenty  fifth  (/>),  the  twent}--
feventh  (q),  the  forty-feventh  (r),  and  the  fifty-fecond  (s).

14,  But  befides  thefe  that  belong  to  the  tibis,  we  have  often  defcrib'd,  in
our  obfervations,  other  ulcers  alfo  ;  as,  for  inftance,  at  one  time,  in  the  obfer-
vations that  relate  to  the  finuflfes  of  abfceffes,  and  to  the  fubjedted  caries ;
and,  at  another  time,  in  thofe  that  relate  to  ulcerated  tumours  and  gangrene.
However,  I  have  not  leifure  here  to  point  out  all  the  places  of  thefe  obfer-
vations in  particular.  I  chufe  rather  to  fubjoin  fome,  which  are  referr'd  to
the  two  above-mention'd  heads,  omitting  the  others  which  I  fee  are,  with
lefs  propriety,  referr'd  to  this  fubjedt ;  as,  for  inftance,  when  in  this  feftion
of  the  Sepulchretum  (t),  among  the  ulcers,  is  produc'd  the  cafe  of  a  fcecus
of  feven  months,  that  was  without  a  brain  :  which  cafe  you  may  compare
with  thofe  that  I  have  taken  notice  of,  as  being  thus  born,  from  the  obfer-
vations of  ourfelves  and  of  others  ;  and,  as  I  think,  in  a  place  that  is  much
more  proper  {^u)  for  fuch  obfervations.

(/)  Eph.N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  5,&  6.  Obf.  51.  Cp)N.i2.

(i)  Epift.  2:.  n.  30.  &  Epilt.  4.  n.  35.  (j)  N.  8.

(/)  Supra,  n.  8.  (r)  N.  4.  33. (j)  N.  30.

(ot)  N.7.  13.  30.  (/)  Obf.  1.  §  3.

(«)  N. 15.  (a)  Epift.  12. n.  5. & feqq. & Epift.  48.

(o)  N.  2.  n.  48.  &  feqq.

L  1  2  In


26  o Book  IV.  Of  Cliirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

In  the  firft  place,  therefore,  as  to  what  relates  to  the  former  of  thefe  two
heads,  1  mean  to  the  fmuffcs  of  abfcefles,  one  of  my  cures  of  this  kind  par-
ticularly comes  into  my  mind ;  and  this  1  (hall  fo  much  the  more  willingly
relate  here,  as  it  was  pcrform'd  by  means  of  that  remedy,  the  peculiar  effi-
cacy of  which  againft  even  minute  ulcers  ;  that  is,  againil  the  fcabies  fpokcn
of  above ;  I  fee  is  now  call'd  in  queftion  by  fome  perfons :  and  in  particular
by  a  phyfician,  in  other  refpeds  very  experienc'd.

'  Lodovico  Albertini,  arch-deacon  of  the  church  of  Forli,  an  equally  noble
and  pious  old  man,  began,  in  the  fpring  of  rhe  year  17  ii,  to  be  troubled
with  3  kind  oi  dyfuria ;  and  while  they  endeavour'd  to  mitigate  this  diforder,
by  emollient  and  demulcent  remedies,  the  left  leg  was  firft  feiz'd  with  a  pain,
and  after  that  with  an  abfcefs.  As  from  this  abfcefs,  after  being  open'd,  pus
continued  to  flow  for  a  very  long  time,  in  fuch  a  quantity,  every  day,  as  might
very  eafily  carry  off  a  man  who  was  within  one  year  of  fourfcore  ;  the  phy-
fician thought  proper,  in  order  to  prevent  the  progrefs  of  this  diforder,  to
give  the  decoftion  of  woods,  as  it  is  call'd  ;  and  the  furgeon,  to  apply  fuch
things  to  the  abfcefs,  as  fhould  tend  to  heal  it  up.

And  now  the  very  orifice  of  this  abfcefs  feem'd  to  be  fhut  up  ;  when,
on  a  fudden,  a  violent  fever  came  on,  which  greatly  affefted  the  head,  and
began  to  bring  on  a  delirium.  Then  blood  was  taken  from  the  other  foot,
and  the  abfcefs  was  again  open'd  :  and  by  this  means,  the  fever  was  indeecl-
put  to  flight ;  but  Irom  the  abfcefs,  fo  great  a  quantity  of  pus  was  again
difcharg'd,  and  continued  to  be  difcharg'd,  that  they  defpair'd  of  the  pa-
tient's life  ;  and  not  without  reafon.  For  I,  being  then  call'd  in,  for  the
firft  time,  faw  that  the  patient,  who  had  been  before  of  a  good  habit  of  bo-
dy, and  robuft,  confidering  his  age,  was  now  nothing  more  than  flcin  and
bone,  and  very  weak  and  languid  :  being  never  free  from  fever,  and  having
every  now-and-then  the  moft  excruciating  pains  in  his  leg,  which  difcharg'd
every  day,  from  its  abfcefs,  fuch  a  quantity  of  pus,  as  I  could  not  eafiljs
have  believ'd.

It  appear'd  to  every  one,  that  the  patient  could  not  polTibly  recover,  un-
lefs  his  leg  was  healed.  Bat  how  difficult  it  was  to  bring  this  about,  all  the
hitherto  ufelefs  endeavours  of  the  phyficians,  as  well  as  the  care  and  pains  ot
the  furgeon,  demonftrated  :  and  to  thefe  things  was  added,  the  advanc'd
ao-e  of  the  patient,  the  very  hot  feafon  of  the  year  ;  for  the  middle  of  fum-
mer  had  in  the  mean  while  come  on;  and,  what  was  worfe  than  all  the  other
circumftances,  a  ftomach  quite  tired  out  with  rem.edies.

Two  remedies,  neverthtkfs,  ftill  remained  untried:  the  firft  of  which,  I-
mean  broth  made  from  the  land  tortoife,  his  fenior  phyfician  recommended  ;
and  the  lafl,  that  is  the  puhis  vipcrinus,  another  old  phyfician,  whom  they
had  fent  for  from  another  place  fome  days-  before,  had  propos'd,  when  he-
quitted  the  patient.  My  opinion  being  ask'd  in  regard  to  both  thefe  reme*
dies,  I  did  not  difapprove  the  firft,  if  the  ftomach  would  bear  it :  but  that  it
might  be  the  m.ore  eafily  borne,  and  might  be  of  more  ufe,  I  faid  that  a
greater  part  of  the  fecond  fhould  be  added,  yet  in  that  particular  manner
which  I  v/as  about  to  n:iention  >,and  that  our  chief  confidence,  muft  be  placed
in  this,

I  meant


Letter  LV. Article  15.  261

I  meant  by  this  to  fay,  that  what  remains  in  the  pulvis  viperiiius  does  not
feem  to  be  of  fo  much  advantage  as  the  frefh  viper  icfelF,  if  a  quantity  ot  the
fiefli  of  this  animal  were  boil'd  in  thin  veal  broth,  with  an  equal  quantity  of
the  flefli  of  the  tortoife ;  and  the  fame  flcfh  of  the  viper  that  had  been  boil'd,
were  beaten  up  with  o\d  J'accharum  rofatutn,  as  it  is  call'd,  and  were  eaten
every  day  in  the  morning,  drinking  after  it  the  broth,  of  which  I  have  been
fpeaking  :  and  to  thele  1  faid  might  be  added,  betwixt  dinner  and  fupper,  an
emulflon,  as  it  is  call'd,,  of  frefli  almonds;  adding  a  little  fugar,  wherewith
Goral,  finely  levigated,  was  mix'd. .

The  phyfician  was  fo  far  from  being  difpleas'd  with  this  propofal,  that,  as
he  was  pretty  far  advanc'd  in  life,  and  his  health  impair'd,  he  begg'd  of  me,
in  conjunction  with  the  patient  and  his  relations,  that  I  would  fee  to  the  exe-
cution of  the  plan  i  had  propos'd.  I  look'd  to  it  therefore ;  and,  by  the
bleffing  of  the  Almighty,  the  pains  of  the  legs  began  to  be  diminifh'd  gra-
dually, and  the  dilcharge  of  the  pus  to  be  leffen'd  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  on
the  fortieth  day  from  the  time'  of  beginning  this  method,,  the  abfcefs  was
almoft  tending  to  cicatrization.

And  although  the  iever  had  now  long  been  taken  ofFj  and  the  weaknefs
and  emaciated  If  ate  of  body  had  decreas'd  ;  yet,  in  order  to  confirm,  and  en-
creafe  thefe  advantages,  I  continued,  in  compliance  with  the  fpontaneous  en-
treaties of  the  patient,  and  not  merely  by  his  confent,  to  make  ufe  of  the
fame  method  oF  cure  ten  days  longer.  At  the  end  of  which  period  the  pa-
tient, who  had  been  confin'd  to  his  bed  from  the  latter  end  of  April  to  quite
the  middle  of  September,  began  to  rife;  and  recovering  his  health  and
ftrength  more  and  more  every  day  after  that,  not  only  recover'd  his  former
habit  of  body,  but  fliow'd  me  that  very  leg,  from  whence- fo  great  a  quantity
of  pus  had  flow'd  tor  fo"  long  a  time  ;  and  from  whence  fo  many  oblong  pieces
of  membranes  had  come  away,  together  with  the  pus  ;  differing  nothing  at
all,  either  in  point  of^nourilhment  or  ftrength,  from  the  other,  when  I  hap-
pen'd  to  meet  him  in  the  beginning  of  December  :  and  he-liv'd  fome  years-
afterwards  in  very  good  health  ;  till  at  length  he  was  carried  off,  in  an  ex-
treme old  age, when  1  liv'd  at  Padua.

15.  I  was  impell'd,.  by  more  than  one  reafon,  to  relate  this  cure  to  you
thus  fully.  For  there  are  fome  who  afcribe  to  vipers,  properties  which  they
have  not  ;  as,  for  inftance,  fo  great  a  power  of  warming  and  drying,  as  to^
create  an  inextinguifhable  thirft,-  and  to  difTipate  thole  few  fpirits  that  olcL
men  have  remaining :  for  which  reafon  Claudinus  admonifh'd  (;«'),  that  the-
ufe  cf  them  fhould  be  forbid  to  perlons  far  advanc'd  in  age  ;  and  efpecially  in
the  fummer-time,  and  in  a  warm  region.

Redi  (j)  indeed  has  obferv'd,  that  no  thirft  was  excited  in  an  old  man,  or
in  young  men,  by  a  much  larger  ule  of  the  vipers  ;  although  it  was  fometimes
fummer  when  the  experiment  was  made.  And  as  I  have  never  obferv'd  any
thirft,  or  difTipation  of  fpirits,  from  the  ufe  of  the  vipers,  even  in  this  old.
man,  at  the  moft  hot  feafbn  of  the  year,  and  in  a  country  that  is  rather  warm  ;.
nay,  have  even  obferv'd  a  revival  of  the  ftrength  and  fpirits,  and  that  nothing
was  dried,  except  what  I  wilh'd  to  be  dried  up,  that  is,  the  abfcefs ;  fo  I

ix)  Append,  ad  Traft,  de  Ingrefi".  ad  Infirm,  Sed.  6.  fy)  Offervaz,  int.  alia  Vipera...

4.  ba.ye, ,


262 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

have,  on  the  other  hand,  feen  the  body,  in  general,  always  recruited,  inltead
of  being  dried  up.

Otliers,  on  the  contrary,  fay,  that  no  more  is  to  be  expefted  from  vipers,
than  "  from  the  other  dried  parts  of  all  animals,  which  are  endow'd  with  a
"  kind  of  gelatinous,  mildly  fulphureous,  and  vaporofe  juice."  You  per-
ceive that  thefe  things  were  written  in  thole  countries  wherein  there  is  not  3
plenty  of  frelh  vipers.  For  which  reaibn,  I  am  not  furpriz'd,  that  in  thefe
places  "  various  medicines,  prepar'd  from  vipers,  have  done  nothing  in  an
*'  atrophy,  a  confumption,  a  fcabies,  and  other  diforders  of  this  kind  ■"  or
that  it  fliould  be  faid,  that  "  no  folid  advantage,  at  leaft,  which  can  make
"  it  worth  our  while  to  try  the  experiment,  can  be  expefted  from  thefe  re-
"  medies,  in  correcting  the  impurities  of  the  blood."  I  do  not,  however,
here  fpeak  of  dried  vipers,  or  of  remedies  thus  prepar'd,  but  of  frefh  vipers  j
for  you  have  feen  that  I  preferr'd  the  latter  to  the  former ;  as  it  was  in  the
cafe  of  an  abfcefs,  which  to  that  time  could  not  be  heal'd :  following  the
praftice  of  an  illuftrious,  and  more  ancient  author,  than  thofe  whom  they
commend,  I  mean  Antonius  Mufa,  who,  as  he  liv'd  in  Italy,  and  was  the
phycian  of  Auguftus,  "  when  he  happen'd  to  light  on  ulcers  that  had  been
"  incurable,  gave  vipers  to  be  eaten  •,  and  by  this  means  cur'd  them  with  a
"  furprizing  celerity,"  as  Pliny  has  deliver'd  down  in  his  writings  (z).

For  as  to  their  adding,  that  "  if  any  good  was  done  by  thefe  medicines,
"  it  was  rather  to  be  afcrib'd  to  other  ingredients  that  were  mix'd  therewith,
"  and  to  medicines  given  in  conjundion  therewith  ;"  though  this  might  be
true  of  their  preparations  thereof,  yet  certainly  of  the  vipers  which  Mufa
gave  to  be  eaten,  I  do  not  think  you  can  fufpect  any  fuch  thing  :  as  it  ap-
pears, that  they  were  eaten  alone,  and  not  mix'd  with  other  remedies  •,  nor
yet  of  thofe  that  were  "  prepar'd  after  the  manner  of  filh,"  which  a  miferable
flave,  who  was  cur'd  by  himfelf  in  this  manner,  had  been  order'd  to  feed
upon,  by  that  great  phyfician  among  the  Greeks,  Craterus ;  from  whom  the
very  learned  Mead  conjectures  (a)  that  Mufa  had  learn'd  this  remedy  ;  nor
of  thofe  which,  another  very  great  pyhfician,  Aretaeus  {l>),  "  gave  at  fupper
"  by  way  of  food,  boil'd  and  pickled,  juft  in  the  fame  rnanner  as  fifh,"  that
is,:"  vvith  fait  and  oil,"  as  it  is  very  eafy  to  underftand  from  Cselius  Aure-
lianus  (c).  Galen  alfo  (d)  ordered  the  viper-catcher  to  make  ufe  of  vipers
"  prepar'd  in  a  pot,  after  the  manner  of  eels."

But  it  appears,  you  will  fay,  that  he  did  not  cure  the  viper-catcher  by
vipers  alone :  for  he  confeffes  what  he  did  before.  But  the  fame  does  not
appear  of  thofe  two  phyficians  above-mention'd.  And  if  taking  away  blood,
and  atrabilis  by  medicines,  had  cur'd  the  viper-catcher,  Galen  would  not
have  given  the  vipers  afterwards,  nor  have  attributed  his  cure  thereto.

And  you  may  fuppoie  the  fame  thing  to  be  faid  by  me,  if  you  (hould
happen  to  make  the  lame  objection  to  the  cures  happily  perform'd  by  vipers,
or  by  parts  of  them  ;  either  by  the  Greeks,  whom  I  have  quoted  ;  or  by  the
Arabians,  who  were  followers  of  Galen  ;  or  by  the  phyficians  who  have  liv'd

(z)  Nat.  Hiftor.  1.  30.  c.  13.  (f)  Morb.  Chron.  1.  4.  c.  i.  verf.  fin.

(a)  Dz  Venen.  Tentam.  i.  (d)  De  fimpl.  medicam.  facult.  1.  11.  c.  1.

{&}  De  curat,  tardar.  ssgritud.  1.  z.  c.  13.


Letter  LV. Article  1 5-.  263

In  the  awes  nearer  to  our  own  :  for  thefe  are  fo  many  in  number,  that  it  would
not  only  take  up  a  great  deal  of  time  to  mention  them  here,  but  it  would  be
luperfluous ;  as  you  may  fee  them  mention'd  in  Marcus  Aurelius  Seve-
rinus  (<?).

And  though,  out  of  thefe  cures,  there  are  fome  which  you  cannot  readily
admit,  yet  I  do  not  think  you  will  rejeft  them  all  as  fables,  and  circulatory
frauds ;  fmce  the  moft  bitter  enemy  thereof  you  can  mention,  Redi  (/),  has
exprefsly  aflerted  that  the  flelh  of  vipers  is  alexipharmac,  and  "  a  remedy
"  againft  many  difeafes  -,"  and  his  fagacious  imitator,  Vallifneri  (g),  has  openly
fhown  what  he  thought,  when  he  affirm'd  "  that  our  vipers  about  Verona
"  are  more  efficacious  in  the  cure  of  difeafes,  than  thofe  about  Ferrara  and
"  Mantua,  and  fuch  other  moift  and  marfliy  places :"  and  I  remember  how
often  he  recommended  them  in  his  medical  opmions,  and  how  often  in  con-
jundlion  with  me;  and  you  may  fee  how  often  he  prefcrib'd  them  in  thofe
works  that  he  has  publifti'd.  And,  indeed,  in  thofe  countries  where  you
would  have  thought  that  this  remedy  was  lefs  known,  you  will  find  that  it  has
been,  and  is  ftill,  in  ufe.

Thus,  for  the  fake  of  example,  Etmuller,  I  mean  the  fon,  although  I
might  quote  the  father  (h),  and  the  more  ancient  German  phyficians,  ex-
prefsly relates  (i),  that  in  the  neighbouring  province  of  Silefia,  "  the  de-
"  coftion  of  vipers  in  chicken-broth,  was  almoft  univerfally  made  ufe  of
"  among  the  richer  fort  of  people,  to  cure  hedics,  and  impurities  of  the
"  blood  and  lymph."

Thus  Hoffman  himfelf  (k) ;  I  fay  himfelf,  for  he  was  not  always  confiftent
with  himfelf  in  this  refpedl ;  when  he  examin'd  a  method  of  cure  which  had
been  improperly  begun  upon  an  illuftrious  man,  who  labour'd  under  a  fpaf-
modic  afthmaand  a  dropfy,  whofe  difleftion  he  alfo  gives  ;  does  not  indeed
commend  the  improper  time  in  which  both  the  powder  of  vipers,  and  the
viper-broth,  had  been  give^n  :  but  them  he  commends  highly  •,  for  "  it  is
"  certain  from  frequent  experience,"  fays  he,  "  that  vipers,  given  both  in
"  powder,  and  in  deccdlion,  poflefs  antifpafmodic  virtues,  attemper  acrid
"  humours,  promote  tranfpiration,  and  for  that  reafon  cleanfe  the  mafs  of
"  blood  from  all  impurities."

So  Adolphus  (/)  fpeaks  of  a  foldier,  who  "  was  freed  from  a  very  trouble-
"  fome  diforder,  and  one  that  was  obftinate  againft  all  medicines,  by  a  con-
"  tinned  ufe  of  remedies,  particularly  thofe  of  the  viperine  kind."  So,  finally,
not  to  omit  thofe  things  which  have  been  publifh'd  among  the  fame  Germans,
while  I  was  writing  thefe  letters,  Jo.  Bapt.  Molinarius  (m),  a  phyfician  whom
I  have  before  quoted,  commending  "  decodlions  prepar'd  from  the  vipers
"  then:ifeives,"  fays,  "  for  rhey  are  approv'd  by  many  experiments,  both
"  thofe  of  learned  men,  and  mine."

(e)  Viper.  Pyth.  P.  3.  c.  7.  &  alibj.  (/)  Eph. N,  C.  Cent.  7.  &  8.  in  Append.

C/J  Opere  Tom.  4.  Lettera  ANN.  che  n.  ult.

tommcxa.  La  Vipera.  {k) Confult. & Refp. Medic. Ceuc. i.

{g)  Opere  Tom.  3.  nel  Saggio  d'lilor.  Med.  Caf.  93.

alia  paiola  Fipera.  (/) AA.  N.  C.  Tom.  2.  Obf.  158.

(/j)  Schroder,  dilucid.  de  Animal,  CI.  1.  {m)  Specim.  de  Apopl.  P.  2.  S,  4.  n.  180.
ubi  de  Vipcra,  &  alibi,

2  There


z6^ Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

There  is  no  need  to  fpeak  of  other  polite  nations,  fince  Mead  (»)  heard
from  a  learned  phyfician,  who  had  refided  many  years  at  Bengal,  that  in  re-
gard to  the  very  Indians  themlelves,  "  it  was  a  conftant  cuftom  there,  for
"  praditioners  to  prefcribe  the  ufe  of  the  viper  of  that  country,  by  way  of
"  diet,  to  thofe  who  had  been  exhaufted  by  a  long  difeafe."

But  thefe  are  barbarians,  and  therefore  not  fo  fkilful.  What  then  will
you  fay  of  Mead  himfelf,  to  whom  you  cannot  well  prefer  any  one  of  the
moft  eminent  phyficians,  either  in  point  of  fcience,  (kill,  judgment,  or  au-
thority ?  He  certainly  (<?)  judg'd  with  great  propriety  of  the  broth  of  vipers ;
their  jelly,  flcfli,  and  volatile  fait ;  found  fault  with  nothing  but  the  too
great  fparingnefs  of  the  Englifh  phyficians  in  prefcribing  this  remedy,
"  which  was  proper  to  anfwer  the  beft  intentions,"  and  the  great  efficacy  of
which  he  himfelf  "  had  feen  in  obftinate  leprofies."

Shall  we  fay  then,  that  he  ought  not  to  have  attributed  this  efficacy  to  the
vipers,  but  to  the  other  remedies  which  were  mix'd  therewith  ?  He  had,
however,  mix'd  nothing  with  them,  having  only  made  ufe  of  the  wine,  in
which  he  had  macerated  two  or  three  vipers  in  a  moderate  heat.  Nor,  to
return  at  length  to  the  patient  in  quellion,  do  I  fuppofe  you  will  readily
imagine,  when  you  have  confjder'd  all  the  other  things  I  gave  him,  which
have  been  particularly  made  mention  of  to  you  by  me,  that  the  cure  ought
to  be  fet  down  to  the  account  of  thofe,  rather  than  of  the  vipers.

But  if  you  Ihould  happen  to  have  any  doubt  remaining,  I  have  other  ex-
amples of  fuccefsful  cures  at  hand,  in  which  I  gave  nothing  but  the  vipers,
nor  was  under  a  neceffity  of  giving  any  thing  elfe.  For  though,  in  general,
as  1  love  to  make  ufe  of  the  moft  fimple  medicine  I  can,  I  give  only  the  flefli
of  the  vipers  and  the  broth,  particularly  againft  an  obftinate  fcabies  -,  which,
when  other  remedies  were  of  no  effeft,  1  have  driven  away  by  this  means,  fo
as  to  make  the  patients  become  clean,  fmooth,  and  fat  -,  yet  it  fometimes
happens  that  I  have  to  do  with  thofe,  who  are  not  only  very  obftinately  averfe
to  vipers  in  particular,  but  to  almoft  all  remedies  in  general :  and  as  it  ne-
cellary  to  relieve  thefe  perfons  by  fuch  kinds  of  medicines  as  they  themfelves
jcould  not  perceive  and  obferve,  I  have  reftor'd  their  health  to  them,  by  the
falutary  fraud  of  boiling  vipers  in  the  broths  which  they  made  ufe  of:  and
this  without  their  fufpefting  the  deceit.

Among  thefe,  in  particular,  was  a  noble  Venetian  fenator,  whofe  cafe
was,  in  moft  of  the  circumftances,  comparable  with  the  cafe  of  the  arch-
deacon (p)  already  propos'd.  For  this  patient  alfo,  when  he  was  a  very  old
man,  labour'd  under  a  Jong  continued  abfcefs  of  the  leg,  in  the  fummer-
feafon  of  the  year  17^2.  And,  without  any  other  internal  medicine  befides
that  I  have  fpoken  of,  I  fucceedtd  fo  far,  that  a  man  of  this  age  (hould  be
able  to  bear  fo  long  a  difeafe,  and  thofe  continual  difcharges  of  pus ;  and
fhould  have  his  vitiated  humours  chang'd  fo  much  for  the  better  ;  that  the
a-bfccis  being  thus  heal'd,  he  return'd  to  his  former  ftrength  and  plumpnefs
in  his  whole  body,  and  in  th^t  leg  in  particular,  much  fooner  than  could  be
expefted  :  and  for  fix  years  afterwards,  -for  he  liv'd'  thus  long,  he  did  not
jieed  the  affiftance  of  medicine.

{»}  Tent^ai.  i,  cit.  (s)  Ibid.  (/■)  n.  14.

Will


Letter  LV. Article  i6.  26s

Will  any  one  fay,  then,  that  the  veal  or  chicken-broth,  in  which  I  order'd
a  Qic'd  viper  to  be  boil'd,  both  for  him  and  for  other  perfons,  was  of  fiich
an  efficacy,  that  whatever  advantage  follow'd  therefrom,  ought  to  be  afcrib'd
to  this  rather  than  to  the  viper  ?  Some  perfons  will,  perhaps,  rather  aflc  me,
why  that  which  has  fucceeded  with  me ;  and  not  only  with  me,  but  with
moft  phyficians  of  every  age,  and  of  almoft  all  nations  •,  does  not  fucceed
with  all  ?  as  if,  except  this  one,  all  other  remedies  anfwer'd  always,  and  with
all  perfons.

With  fome  perfons  it  certainly  has  not  anfwer'd;  for  this  very  reafon,  that
it  has  been  mix'd  with  other,  and  ftill  other  remedies.  With  fome,  becaufe
they  did  not  give  it  for  a  fufficient  time.  With  fome,  becaufe  they
have  been  deceiv'd  in  the  choice  of  the  vipers,  they  not  having  been  catch'd
in  thofe  regions  and  places  that  they  fuppos'd,  nor  at  the  time  of  the  year
it  was  proper  they  fhould  have  been  taken.  With  others,  becaufe  they  lit
on  fuch  patients,  on  fuch  a  caufe,  violence,  or  inveteracy  of  difeafe,  as  did
not  leave  room  for  any  remedy  ;  or,  at  leaft,  not  for  this.

Add  other  circumftances  of  this  kind,  in  as  great  a  number  as  you  pleafe  ;
fo  that  they  do  not  impeach  the  fcience,  or  the  veracity,  of  thofe  perfons,  to
■whom,  however,  it  was  not  fufficient,  in  this  affair,  to  differ  from  their  an-
ceftors,  without  endeavouring,  at  the  fame  time,  to  convid  them  of  the  va>-
nity  of  mountebanks  :  and  I  could  with  this  were  not  too  much  the  cuftom
at  prefent.

16.  The  mention,  juft  now  made,  of  that  noble  fenator,  brings  into  my
mind  a  circumftance  relative  to  abfceffes.  Hippocrates  (q)  has  taught  us,
that,  "  while  pus  is  forming,  pains,  and  fevers,  happen  more  frequently  than
"  when  it  is  already  form'd."  Yet  he  has,  even  himfelf,  fignified,  in  the
fourth  book  of  the  Epidemics  (r),  of  this  dogrrta,  as  he  has  of  what  is  con-
tain'd  in  many  other  aphorifms  alfo,  that  though  it  is,  for  the  moft  part,
true,  yet  not  fo  always  :-^and  that,  if  not  where  he  has  faid  that  fome  mature
abfceffes,  in  difeafes,  are  borne  eafily,  and  without  a  fever;  for  this,  Mar-
tianus  (j)  contends,  is  to  be  underftood  of  thofe  that  are  already  fuppurated ;
and  not,  as  Vallefius  (/)  underftands  it,  of  thofe  which  are  in  a  ftate  of  fup-
puration  ;  at  leaft  foon  after,  where,  in  the  opinion  of  both  thefe  commen-
tators, he  fays,  that,  in  Leambios,  "  the  flioulder,  and  the  fundament,  were
"  ulcerated  without  a  fever."

In  the  caft  of  that  fenator,  alfo,  when  I  faw  the  tibia  ;  which  had  been  al-
ready fwell'd  from  an  oedematous  tumour  of  fome  ftanding,  and  a  late  flight
contufion,  that  had  been  follow'd  by  a  very  inconfiderable  eryfipelas,  and  a
fmall  degree  of  fever  ;  become  more  and  more  tumid  foon  after,  though
neither  the  patient,  nor  I,  obferv'd  any  peculiar  fever,  any  rigors,  any  fenfe
of  pain,  heat,  or  pulfation  ;  I,  neverthelefs,  began  to  fufpedl,  that  pus  was
in  the  mean  while  preparing,  and  not  without  reafon ;  as  the  very  evident
fluduation  of  matter,  felt  under  the  hands  foon  after,  confirm'd.

Does  it,  therefore,  happen  in  old  men,  or  even  in  limbs  affedted  with

(y)  S.  2.  Aph.  47.  (j) Annot.  ad  hunc  locum.

(r)  N.  22.  apud  MarijielL  (/)  Comm.  ad  eund.  locum  qui  ipfieftn.py.

Vol.  III.. . "  Mm;  eedematoua


■2.6  6 _Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univeifal  Diforders.

cedematous  tumours,  that  pus  is  form'd  without  any  marks  of  its  being
form'd,  or  with  fewer,  and  more  flight,  fymptoms  ?  Both  of  thefe  circum-
ftances  I  have  heard  feveral  times  from  experienc'd  furgeons  :  and  when  I
ccnfult  reafon,  I  fee  that  both  of  them  may  be  conceiv'd ;  but  the  fecond
ftill  more  than  the  firft.  For  all  old  men  have  not  very  lax  fibres,  and
fluggi(h  and  inert  humours.

In  the  archdeacon,  therefore,  of  whom  I  fpoke  above  (u),  pus  was  not
form'd  without  pains  :  and  in  that  very  fenator  we  are  fpeaking  of,  it  hap-
pen'd  that,  at  the  fame  time  the  former  abfcefs  was  open'd,  another,  much
lefs,  began  at  the  lower  part  of  the  thigh,  where  there  was  no  cedematous
tumour ;  and  we  obferv'd  the  fymptoms  that  generally  are  obferv'd  to  attend
the  formation  of  pus.

Yet  that  pus  may  be  fometimes  generated  without  a  fever,  even  in  thofe
who  are  robuft,  and  at  a  fiourifhing  time  of  life  -,  and  that  in  parts  which
were  not  affefted  with  cedematous  tumours  •,  appears  from  the  obfervations
of  others,  and  in  particular  from  thofe  of  my  celebrated  friend  and  collegue
Pujati  (;v),  who,  like  Hippocrates,  in  the  cafe  of  Leambios,  faw  ablc'eiTes
brought  on  without  a  fever-,  at  firft,  indeed,  in  an  old  woman,  but  after-
wards in  a  young  woman  alfo  :  and  left  you  fhould  fay  that  this  young  woman
had  her  humours  in  a  very  inert  ftate,  as,  fome  months  after,  llie  died  of  a
dropfical  diforder  ;  he  faw  the  fame  alfo  in  a  robuft  man.

17.  Now,  then,  let  us  alfo  touch  flightly  upon  fome  things  which  relate
to  the  caries,  that  frequently  lies  conceal'd  beneath  abfcefles  and  ulcers.  You
Jiave,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  letter  (j),  obfervations  relating  to
a  caries  of  this  kind.  But  this  particularly  lies  conceal'd  in^that  kind  of
difeafe,  to  which  the  Arabians  have  given  the  name  of  Ventofitas  Spina :  al-
though there  does  not  always  appear  a  very  evident  caries,  but  only  a  tu-
mour and  foftnefs  of  the  bones ;  as  in  the  two  that  IVlauchart  (z)  examin'd
after  death.

Therefore,  as  it  is  equally  proper  to  fpeak  of  this  difeafe,  even  upon  tu-
mours as  upon  ulcers  •,  I,  for  that  reafon,  in  the  fiftieth  letter  («),  when,  in
treating  of  tumours,  mention  was  made  of  certain  exoftofes;  took  fome
notice  of  caries,  and  its  origin.  But  you  will  alfo  find,  in  the  Sepulchretum,
in  both  places,  fome  things  relative  to  the  fame  difeafe,  moft  of  which  were
obferv'd  at  Padua;  that  is,  in  the  fecond  fecfion  (Z-),  which,  in  this  fourth
book,  is  entitl'd  Be  Tumoribus,  and  in  this  fourth  fedion,  which  is  intitl'd
De  Ulceribus  (c).

Yet  in  neither  place  is  Pandolphinus,  who  publifli'd  a  treatife  of  the
"  ventofity,"  fpokenof;  nor  Merclinus,  who  increas'd  it  with  fo  many  an-
notations and  obfervations  :  nor  is  any  thing  added  from  Schelhammer  (i),
yjha  treats  of  the  diforder  briefly  indeed,  but  with  learning  and  ikill ;  pro-
ducing obfervations  alfo((?),  fome  of  which  I  do  not  fee  in  the  Sepulchretum,

{u)  N.  14.  ('^)  Obf.  20,  &  in  Addit.  Obf.  10.

{x)  Dec.  Obf.  7.  n.  3.  (0 Obf.  5.  §  i.  &c.

(y)  N.  3.  &  feqq.  (d)  De  hum. corp.  Tumorib. S.  2. P.  1,

{z)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  9.  Obf.  33.  &  34.  n,  94.  &  feqq.
■ W  N.  57.  59.  (O  N.  98,  99,

and


Letter  LV. Article  i  8.  2(^7

and  among  thefe  even  his  own  :  which,  at  that  time,  excellently  well  defended
Van  Home  (/);  who  differ'd  from  Tulpius  (^),  againft  the  anfwer  of  Mer-
dinus(>&),  who  contends(/)  that  Corn.  Celfiis  (/c),  in  the  pafTage  which  Tulpius
referr'd  to,  had  meant  by  the  word  cancer  of  the  bone,  a  diforder  very  fimilar
to  the  ventofitas  fpina.  ,  ■

And,  certainly,  the  reading  of  that  paflfage  fhews,  that  the  word  cancer  is
not  faid  of  bone,  as  Schelhammer  rightly  aflerts  j  which  I  do  not  fo  much
wonder  that  Tulpius  and  Merclinus  had  not  feen,  as  that  they  (hould  have
feen  what  is  not  in  this  place  ;  I  mean,  the  term  cancer  of  the  hone.  For  he
fays,  and  even  repeats  it  over  and  over  again,  that  Celkis  does  not  call  this
diforder  fimply  a  cancer,  but  a  cancer  of  the  bone ;  (o  that  he  does  not  feem
to  have  infpeded  this  paflage  of  Celfus.,

1 8.  But  the  queftion  here  is  of  names  :  furgeons,  however,  are  fometimes
deceiv'd  in  the  thing  itfelf ;  and  thofe,  even  fuch  as  arc  pretty  far  advanc'd  in
life,  and  very  much  experienc'd  ;  that  is,  they  are  deceiv'd  in  judging  of
the  caries,  which  lies  open  neither  to  the  eyes  nor  to  the  probe.  It  is  true,
indeed,  that  it  is  an  indication  of  a  caries,  if  the  matter  which  proceeds
from  an  ulcer  is  brown,  or  fomewhat  black.

Yet  if  the  matter  difcharg'd  be  not  ting'd  with  fuch  a  colour,  we  mufl:  not
immediately  deny  that  there  is  a  caries  beneath.  For  if  this  caries  occupy
a  fmall  part  of  a  bone  which  is  not  thick,  and  it  lie  under  a  confiderable
quantity  of  fiefb,  which  is  hollow'd  out  by  large  ulcerous  finufles ;  even  this
one  fimple  circumftance  may  be  the  reafon,  why  the  matter  difcharg'd  from
the  orifice  of  the  ulcer  is  not  of  a  brown  colour  -,  in  confequence  of  the  very
little  matter  which  flows  from  the  bone,  being  mix'd  and  diluied  with  that
which  flows  from  the  fiefli  in  confiderable  quantity,  and  the  brown  colour
thereof  being  hid.

And  this  1  know,  for  a  certainty,  to  have  happen'd  in  a  young  Venetian
matron,  in  the  year  ij^6;  who  having  had  a  large  abfcefs  form'd  in  one
fide  of  the  buttock,  and  not  having  it  open'd  till  late,  had  been  already
treated  with  a  great  number  of  remedies,  both  internal  and  external,  for  a
long  time  together,  ;  but  to  no  effeft.  The  furgeons  were,  therefore,  long
deceiv'd  by  the  colour  of  the  pus  not  being  brown,  and  thereby  prevented
from  fufpedling  a  caries ;  till  at  length  they  obferv'd  the  probe  to  pafs  very
eafily  through  that  part  of  the  correfponding  os  ilium,  which,  about  the
middle  of  it,  particularly  in  women,  and  thofe  that  are  pretty  young,  is
tranfparent,  by  reafon  of  its  thinnefs,  and  which,  in  this  patient,  was  already
eroded  by  a  caries  :  fo  that  the  probe  pafs'd  on  quite  into  the  cavity  of  tha
belly.

Nor  do  I  doubt,  but  as  the  thinnefs  of  that  bony  part  in  this  very  worthy
matron,  who  deferv'd  a  more  happy  lot,  afforded  a  very  eafy  paflTage  for  the
pus  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  fo  that  in  others  who  have  wounds  inflifted
upon  them  with  (harp  inftruments  at  that  place,  it  admits  the  point  of  a
fword,  or  any  fimilar  inftrument,  to  injure  the  inteftines  without  difficulty.

On  the  other  hand,  it  frequently  happens  that, by  examining  the  colour.

CfJ  Mi;rotechn.  S.  z.  P.  i.  §  33;  (;)  P.  i.  cit.  n.  100.-

'  (g)  Cbf.  Medic.  1.  4.  c.  13.  {k)  De  Medicina,  1.  8.  c.  10.  Edit.  Alme-

(h)  Ad  Pandolphin.  c.  7,  Annot.  i.  Ibven.  p^  532.  ].  15.  &  Xeqq.

M  ni  2-  of-


2  6B Book  IV,  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

of  the  probe,  which  they  have  made  ufe  of  in  the  examination  of  ulcers
many  lurgeons  do  not  hefuate  to  pronounce  the  cafe  bad ;  not  attending,  I
fuppofe,  to  this  circumllance,  that  it  is  faid  by  Hippocrates  (/),  "  thofe  who
"  have  the  probe  colour'd  from  the  pus,  as  if  from  fire,  the  greateft  part
"  (not  a\\)  of  them  die  •,"  nor  yet  obferving,  that  the  queftion  is  here  of  em-
pyematic  patients,  and  not  of  any  colour  of  the  probe,  but  of  that  which,
inftead  of  fufl^ering  this  inftrument  to  retain  its  "  white  and  filver  hue,  caufes
«'  it  to  be  extrafted  with  the  appearance  of  lead,  and  as  if  burnt  by  the
"  fire,  which  is  a  proof  of  the  great  acrimony  and  corrofive  nature  of  the
"  pus,"  to  ufe  the  words  of  that  very  excellent  interpreter  Duretus  (m).

Finally,  among  the  other  fpecies  of  caries,  that  fpecies  would  not  only  be
worthy  of  peculiar  mention,  but  very  worthy  of  examination,  under  which,
after  having  corroded  the  cranium,  "  appear'd  to  the  eye  "  of  Slevogtius  («),
"  by  the  help  of  glafles,  a  congeries  of  innumerable  fmall  worms,  entangl'd
"  in  a  vifcid  humour;  many  of  which,  upon  being  thrown  into  warm  water,
"  oave  tokens  of  their  being  alive,  by  their  motion."  But  as  the  obiervator
himfelf,  who  faw  thefe  appearances  in  the  dead  body,  and  might  alio  have
obferv'd  fome  things  relative  thereto  in  the  living  patient,  has  deferr'd  the
(stiolo^y  of  this  venhinous  caries  to  another  time  {o) ;  you  will  be  lefs  furpriz'd
if  we  do  not  take  upon  us  to  make  any  conjedlures  thereupon.

J 9.  But  now  let  us  fubjoin  thofe  things  that  belong  to  the  fecond  of  the
two  heads  propos'd(/)))  •,  that  is,  to  ulcerated  tumours  and  gangrenes.

Befides  the  obfervations  that  have  been  already  fent  to  you,  relating
to  thofe  tumours,  this  one  remains ;  which  was  made  by  our  Mediavia,  in
the  latter  end  of  September,  in  the  year  1739.  _

20.  A  young  man  had  an  ulcerated  tumour  in  one  fide  of  his  neck.  As
it  feem'd  proper,  to  the  furgeon,  that  fomething  in  this  ulcer  ftiould  be  con-
fum'd,  by  the  help  of  that  arcanum  which  Philip  Maffieri  was  wont  to  call
the  fulvis  corrcftvus  magiftralis,  and  he  us'd  to  apply  with  great  fuccefs,  but
at  the  fame  time  with  great  caution  ;  both  the  fever  and  pain  of  the  head,
which  exifted  before,  were  fo  increas'd  by  the  application,  that  neither  in
confequence  of  repeated  lofl'es  of  blood,  in  which  a  polypous  cruft  was  not
wanting,  nor  yet  by  diluents,  and  other  remedies  that  were  given  and  ap-
plied, did  they  give  way  or  decreafe.  For  although  the  pain  in  the  ulcer
itfelf  was  diminilh'd  ;  yet  in  the  forehead,  where  it  v/as  more  fevere,  it
never  remitted. The  patient,  therefore,  died  delirious  and  convuls'd.

The  tumour  had  not  at  all  injur'd  the  fubjefted  mufcle.  This  was  what
they  call  levator  fcapula^  and  in  that  part  which  lies  immediately  under  the
common  integuments.  The  jugular  glands  of  that  fide  were  tumid  and
hard.

The  veffels  of  the  brain  were  all  diftended  with  blood  :  the  medullary  fub-
ftance  was  diftinguilh'd  with  bloody  points  wherever  you  cut  into  it,  and
much  fofter  alfo  than  it  ought  naturally  to  be ;  whereas  the  cortical  fubftance
was  in  a  natural  ftsts.  In  the  lateral  ventricles  was  a  great  quantity  of  lim-
pid water.

(/)  Coac.  Prsnot.  apud  Dure:,  1.  z,  c.  56,  («)  Diflert.  de  Carie  Cran.  in  Hiftoriae  fine,-
n.48.  '  (")  §  26.

{m)  Ad  earn  iociiai,  (p)  N,  14.

2  1.  Although


Letter  LV. Article  21,  22,  2,3.  i^^

SI.  Although  how  much  danger  there  is  in  attempting  io  deftroy,  by
fefcharotic  medicines,  fungous  flefh,  that  grows  up  in  ulcers,  in  the  extreme
parts  of  the  body,  appears  in  particular  from  the  obfervation  of  that  faith-
ful writer  Benevoli  {q)  ;  yet  the  ufe  of  thofe  kinds  of  remedies,  to  the  fame
purpofe,  even  in  other  places,  is  not  without  danger,  where  the  habit  is  de-
jprav'd  :  as,  from  the  fever  join'd  with  a  pain  in  the  head,  in  the  young  man
in  queftion,  it  appears  to  have  been.

But  let  us  go,  from  this  ulcerated  tumour,  to  that  difeafe  which  is  clafs'd
among  tumours,  by  the  writers  of  chirurgical  infticutions,  and  is  at  the
fame  time  join'd  wirh  a  great  corruption  of  the  parts  ;  I  mean  to  a  eangrene  :
and  I  fhall  begin  with  fome  obfervations  of  Valfalva.

22.  A  young  man,  of  two-and-twenty  years  of  age;  of  a  moderate  ftature
and  of  a  tolerable  good  habit  of  body,  though  of  a  pale  and  yellowifh  co-
lour •,  falling  from  a  high  building,  upon  a  very  (harp  {tone,  broke  the  neck
of  the  OS  femoris ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  was  wounded  in  that  part  by  the
ilone.  Being  receiv'd  into  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Morte,  and  treated
there  in  a  proper  manner,  he  not  only  complain'd  of  a  weight  in  his  cheft,
join'd  with  a  difficulty  of  breathing  ;  although  he  fpat  nothmg  bloody,  and
had  no  contufion  on  the  external  parts  of  his  thorax,  that  could  come  un-
der the  notice  of  the  fenfes ;  but  moreover,  on  the  fourth  day  began  to  be
delirious,  and  to  complain  of  a  pain  in  the  wound,  and  of  certain  convulfive.
iriQtions  in  that  part.

Oh  the  following  night,  the  fame  part  was  feiz'd  with  a  very  violent  gan-
grene; which  had  fo  encreas'd,  about  the  fourteenth  hour  of  the  next  day,
as  to  extend  itfelf,  from  the  boundaries  of  the  abdomen  oppofite  to  the
wound,  to  the  whole  foot.  The  cuticle  of  the  femur  was"  raifed  up  in  ma-
ny places,  juft  as  if  medicines  of  the  bliftering  kind  had  been  applied  :  and
thefe  veficles  were  fill'd  with  a  ferous  humour,  which  had  eroded  the  fl<in  in
many  places,  by  its  Acrimony ;  fo  that  a  great  quantity  of  water  was  dif-
charo'd. In  this  manner  the  patient  died  on  the  fifth  day.

The  body  was,  a  few  hours  after  death,  ting'd  with  the  greatefl  blacknefs  »
as  if  it  had  been  affefted  with  an  univerfal  gangrene  :  and  it  fweli'd  foon  af-
ter to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  feem  three  times  thicker  than  it  naturally  is.

23.  I  did  not  think  this  hiftory  ought  to  be  pafs'd  over  ;  as  it  fhows  an
exceedingly  deprav'd  difpofition  of  the  humours,  and  a  very  fpeedy  progrefs
of  the  gangrene ;  although  Valfalva  has  not  given  the  difleftion  :  which,  I
fuppofe  to  have  happen'd,  becaufe  it  was  not  in  his  power  to  perform
it.

For  it  appears,  that  if  it  had  been  in  his  power,  he  would  not  have  omit-
ted it ;  not  only  from  other  circumftances,  which  I  have  related  in  his  life,
tut  particularly,  from  that  which,  if  he  himfelf  had  not  added  it  here,  I
fhould  not  very  eafily  have  believ'd.  The  ferum  which  gives  rife  to  a  gan-
grene is  fo  acrid,  fays  he,  that  when  I  tailed  it,  at  another  time,  I  not  only
perceiv'd  the  greateft  acrimony,  but  it  alfo  irritated  the  papillas  of  the
tongue  almoft  for  a  whole  day.  See  how  far  the  defire  of  knowing,  and
inaking  experiments,  has  carried  fome  men  !

'  (?)  30-

However,


27© Book  IV.  Of  Chiruvgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

However,  you  have  an  inftance  of  a  univerfal  gangrene  in  Tulpius  (r)  ;
but  in  an  old  man,  whofe  ftrength  had  been  puU'd  down  for  a  long  time
paft,  You  will  alfo  have  one  in  Warren  (j),  but  in  a  yellow  fever,  which
was  a  fpecies  of  the  plague.  Yet  the  internal  caufe  of  gangrenes  does  not
always  confift  in  the  fole  depravity  of  the  humours.  For  they  fometimes
fsize  upon  the  legs,  becaufe  the  great  artery  is  comprefs'd  by  a  fcirrhous  tu-
mour in  the  belly  (/)  :  to  which  caufe  that  obfervation  of  Hildanus,  which
you  will  read  in  this  fourth  fe6lion  of  the  Sepulchretum  («),  relates;  al-
though in  that,  not  only  the  aorta,  but  the  neighbouring  vena  cava  alfo,  was
comprefs'd  ;  for  this  eafily  happens  in  trunks  that  are  fo  near  to  each
pther.

Yet  it  does  not  follow,  on  the  other  hand,  that  whatever  can  fufficiently
comprefsany  vein,  is  equally  fufficient  to  comprefs  a  neighbouring  artery;
fo  that  the  conjecture  of  the  celebrated  Van  Swieten  {x),  is  equally  agreeable
to  probability,  and  reafon,  where  he  accounts  for  the  tumour,  and  threaten-
ino-  aano-rene,  of  the  left  foot,  from  the  ftriiflure  of  the  iliac  vein  on  that
fide ;  which  veflel,  and  which  only,  was  prefs'd  upon  by  the  extremity  of
the  inteftine  colon,  that  was  very  much  diftended  with  flatus.

And  the  influx  of  blood  into  the  limbs  is  prevented,  or  diminifh'd,  by  fuch
tilings  as  prefs  upon  the  artery,  by  lying  thereupon  -,  and  moreover,  by  (till
other  caufes  :  among  which  is  the  very  rare  cafe,  of  gangrene,  in  the  flefhy
coat  of  the  artery  itfelf,  although  the  parts  that  lie  round  about  are  found  ;
as  in  the  cafe  publifli'd  at  Hall,  in  the  year  1742,  entitled,  "  Of  the  ampu-
"  tation  of  a  thigh,  without  any  effufion  of  blood."  That  caufe  is  Icfs  rare,
which  produces  the  fame  eff^edt  in  amputation  •,  I  mean  the  degeneracy  of.
the  coats  of  the  artery  into  a  bony  nature,  which  not  only  takes  away  their
flexibility,  but  ftreightens  the  paflage  of  the  blood.  Kulmus  (j  ),-  therefore,
judg'd  it  to  be  from  this  caufe,  that  "  thofe  in  particular  who  are  advanc'd
"  in  age,  are  fometimes  feiz'd  with  a  gangrene  of  the  foot,  without  any  ex-
«'  ternal  caufe  having  preceded."  And,  without  doubt,  it  was  from  this,
♦aufe  in  a  noble  old  man,  whofe  hifliory  you  will  find  in  the  works  of  the  il-
luftrious  Van  Swieten  (z).

24.  Moreover,  there  is  a  certain  fpecies  of  gangrene,  and  even  of  fphace^
lus,  which  very  rarely  occurs  among  the  natives  of  this  country,  fo  that  it
had  never  yet  been  feen  by  Valfalva,  when  he  related  to  me,  at  that  time  a.
young  man,  from  the  report  of  others,  a  cafe  of  an  exficcation  beginning
from  the  great  toe,  and  being  gradually  produc'd  quite  to  the  femur  -,  fo
that  the  foot  and  the  whole  leg  were  dry,  and  without  any  difagreeable
fmell,  as  in  a  mummy  :  and  that  this  had  brought  on  death,  in  a  certain
woman,  feme  years  before.

But  he  faw  the  cafe  afterwards, and  I  with  him,  before  I  left  Bologna,

(r) Obf.  Medic.  1.  3;  c.  46.  W  Comment,  in  Boerh. Aphor.  422.  ad

(s)  Vid.  Haller  in Addend,  ad  pag.  66.2. E-
fuar.  Acceflion.  ad  Boerh.  Meth.  Stud.  Medic. (y  )  Difpot.  de  Tend. Achill.  difrupto  &c.

(/)  Vid. Ada  Erud. Lipf.  A. 1693. M. in  ipfo  fine.
Nov.  in  Relat.  Chirurg.  Barbet.  '  (s)  Comment,  cit,  §  424.

(;/)  Obf.  10.  §  2.
4


Letter  LV. Article  24.  271

in  the  hofpital  of  incurables.  And  indeed,  among  his  con/ilia,  I  have  read  one
which  was  written  for  a  monk  that  labour'd  under  a  difeafe  of  this  kind.
This  man  was  more  than  forty  years  of  age,  of  a  full  habit,  and  had  his
fluids  inclining  to  a  fcorbutic  dyfcrafy  •,  belides  that,  he  had  been  before  fub-
jeift  to  tetters,  and  the  gout ;  and  alfo,  even  then,  and  for  a  long  time  paft,
to  frequent  fuppurations  of  one  of  his  great  toes,  from  whence  that  part  had
always  retain'd  a  brown  colour,  till  it  began  to  be  feiz'd  with  an  exficcation,
■which  was  very  flowly  propogated  through  the  whole  of  that  toe,  and,  after-
wards, through  the  whole  of  the  next  toe,  in  like  manner.

And  this  toe,  like  the  great  toe  ;  which  they  had  ampulated  in  vain  ;  had
always  remain'd  wither'd,  and  dry,  from  the  time  it  had  been  feiz'd  with
this  difeafe  ;  except  that  lately,  about  the  extenfor  tendon  of  that  toe,  fome
figns  of  incipient  pus  had  been  obferv'd.  And  although,  for  the  moft  part,
there  feem'd  to  be  fome  obfcure  inflammation  in  the  metatarfus ;  yet  this
■was  without  any  traces  of  a  ftagnating  humour,  and  attended  with  moderate
pain.  A  fever  alfo  had,  more  than  once,  come  on,  which  had  its  exacerba-
tion about  the  evening  ;  but  without  any  previous  horror,  and  without  any
very  violent  fymptom  to  attend  it.

Thefe  circumftances  I  was  willing  to  defcribe  to  you  accurately,  that  you
may  compare  them,  prefently,  with  thofe  examples  which  I  have  fince  read
in  authors,  or  have  been  fince  propos'd  to  me.  Thefe  cafes  have  been  very
frequent  in  lomeof  the  provinces  of  France,  as  well  as  in  other  places.  And
not  only  about  the  year  1710,  was  this  dry  gangrene  remark'd,  but  alfo
about  the  year  1676,  as  is  faid  in  the  Hiftory  of  that  Royal  Academy  of
Sciences  {a) :  and  even  in  the  year  1706,  as  you  may  fee  taken  notice  of,  at
large,  by  Rudolphus  Jacobus  Camerarius  (b) ;  and  again  in  the  year  iy:i.7,  as
you  will  find  by  turning  over  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  (c),  laft  fpoken
of.  _  _  ,

And  there  the  fault-is  always  laid  to  the  vitiated  grains  of  rye,  in  confe-
quence  of  being  left  by  the  poor  people,  in  preparing  their  flour,  together
with  the  found  and  good  grain,  in  a  time  of  fcarcity  ;  for -none  but  thefe
poor  people  were  feiz'd  with  this  difeafe  :  and  the  unfound  grain  was  ac-
cus'd,  on  another  occafion,  by  Brunnerus  (d),  that  is  to  fay,  when  the  inha-
bitants of  the  Black  Foreft  were  troubled  with  the  fame  difeafe.  Yet  I
fhould  not  believe,  that  this  grain  could  have  had  fo  much  effedl,  witKbut  a
certain  difpofition  of  body  previous  thereto  ;  or,  at  lead,  at  the  time  v/hen
males  only,  and  not  females,  if  you  except  a  few  little  girls,  were  attack'd
with  the  iame  kind  of  gangrene,  in  the  fame  villages.

However,  at  other  times  it,  tor  the  mofi:  part,  afFedted  both  fexes  indifcri-
minately  :  and  fomewhat  differently  at  different  times  ;  fo  that  it  occupied
other  limbs,  and  other  parts  alfo,  but  in  general  began  in  the  toes :  the  other
differences  you  will  fee,  of  yourfelf,  by  examining  the  books,  and  the  au-
thors, that  1  have  nam'd.  For  I  return  to  thofe  cafes,  wherein  the  grain
could  not  be  accus'd.


{«) A.  1710.  Botanique.  (<r)  A.  1748.

{i)  Eph,  N.  C,  Cent.  6.  Obf.  82.  {aj  Eph,  cit.  JD«c,  3.  A.  2,  Obf.  224.


Indeed


2  7  2 Book  IV. Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

Indeed  Benivenius  {e),  where  he  fpeaks  of  the  unhappy  event  of  gan-
grenes, that  begin  from  the  toe,  efpecially  in  old  men,  feems  to  hint  fome-
thing  that  relates  to  this  fiibjeft,  when  he  fays,  "  that  the  flefli  begins,  by
"  degrees,  to  grow  black,  or  to  become  livid  :  and,  indeed,  fometimes  to
"  grow  dry,  and  wiiher'd,  at  the  fame  time."

But  Hildanus  more  certainly,  and  openly  (/) ;  in  a  man  of  feventy  years
of  age,  who  had  been  fubjeft  to  the  gout ;  defcribes  a  gangrene  which  crept
upwards,  by  degrees,  from  the  toes,  (after  an  uneafy  fenfacion  of  cold,  and
a  ftupor)  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  foot  and  leg  became  black,  like  char-
coal, and  cold,  immoderately  dry,  and  extenuated  ;  but  without  any  pain  at
any  time  :  the  pulfe  being  but  little  chang'd,  and  the  appetite  for  food  fcarce-
]y  diminifli'd.

The  fame  'author  produces  an  obfervation  of  Smetius  {g),  that  is  to  fay,
an  obfervation  of  a  woman's  foot  being  feiz'd  with  a  fphacelus  of  this  kind  ;
fo  that  becoming  wither'd,  dry,  and  black,  it  refembl'd  an  ox's  tongue,
harden'd  with  fmoke.  And  to  this  fubjeft  belongs,  in  part,  what  Barbette
{h)  fays  of  the  fcorbutic  gangrene  ;  I  mean  that  it  generally  takes  its  begin-
ning from  the  toe  ;  that  it  degenerates  into  a  dry  cruft  ;  has  no  bad  fmell  j
and  fometimes  no  pain.

Now  attend  to  a  cafe  that  was  defcrib'd  to  me  by  letter,  when  Matthew
Tornieri,  who  was,  when  living,  an  eminent  phyfician  at  Vicenza,  con-
fulted  me  in  the  latter  end  of  February,  in  the  year  \  J20,  for  a  noble
count.

25.  This  nobleman,  being  of  a  {lender  habit,  but  an  excellent  colour,  was
as  yet  brifk,  healthy,  and  robuft,  when  he  completed  his  four-fcore-and-
fourth  year  ;  having  been  never  feiz'd  with  any  diibrder  that  was  worthy  of
remark,  during  the  courfe  of  fo  long  a  life.  About  the  latter  end  of  Janua-
ry he  was  feiz'd  with  an  unufual  fenfe  of  coldnefs :  and  three  days  after,,
with  fo  great  a  coldnefs,  that  he  was  oblig'd  to  go  to  bed ;  and  was  there,
neverthelefs,  cold  for  fome  hours  :  till,  by  the  frequent  application  of  warm
clothes,  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  at  length,  grew  warm  ;  but  all  the
toes  of  the  left  foot,  and  the  metatarfus,  remain'd  very  cold,  felt  nothing,
and  were  but  juft  bent  by  the  force  of  the  flexor  mufcles  •,  the  flefh  of  which,
you  know,  does  not  lie  on  the  toes  themfelves  :  and  what  was  much  worfe,
the  following  day,  a  fomewhat  livid  colour  was  obferv'd  to  be  now  proceed-
ing from  the  great  toe,  into  the  metatarfus.

Remedies  were  given  internally,  and  applied  externally,  to  obviate  this
diforder.  But  although  the  lividnefs  in  the  metatarfus,  and  the  coldnefs,
feem'd  to  be  fomewhat  lefs ;  yet,  about  the  end  of  February,  the  extremi-
ties of  the  toes  were  already  cover'd  with  a  black  fldn,  which  was,  at  the
fame  time,  dry,  and  hard  like  a  mummy  :  nor  were  the  beginnings  of  a  fu-
ture difeafe  wanting  in  the  metatarfus,  the  fkia  being  already  black,  in  twa
places,  on  the  back  of  it,  and  even  in  one  of  thofe  places  already  hard.

It  was  alfo  fomewhat  hard  at  the  tarfus,  in  one  certain  place,  where  it  was

(f)  De  abditis  nonnullis  &c,  morbor.  caufis (g)  de  Gangr.  U  Sphacel.  c.  7.  in  fin.
c.  71.  {h)  Chirurg.  P.  2. 1,  !.  c.  14..

(f)  Cent.  4.  Obf.  Chir.  92

6  black.


Letter  LV. Article  2  j-.  273

black.  And  the  tarfus  itfelf  was,  laft  of  all,  become  fomewhat  tumid  ;  and,
if  you  prefs'd  ic  with  the  finger,  preferv'd  the  marks  of  the  preflure,  and  was
in  pain.  And  indeed  a  fmall  and  white  veficle  had  rais'd  itfelf  up  under  the
fole  of  the  foot ;  which  veficle  contain'd  but  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  water.
At  the" ankle  was  almoft  the  fame  tumour  as  in  the  tarfus.  The  other  pare
of  the  leg  was  rather  fomewhat  wafted  and  thin.

Under  thefe  fymptoms  the  patient  preferv'd  his  ufual  alacrity,  the  ufual
llrength  of  his  pulfe,  and  the  vigour  of  his  appetite  ;  although  the  fever,
which  was  flight  indeed,  continued  conftantly  neverthelefs,  from  the  feventh
day  of  the  diieafe,  when  it  had  firft  begun ;  fo  that  he  ate  his  food  very
freely,  efpecially  for  a  man  who  had  never  been  us'd  to  eat  much  ;  and  this
was  allow'd  him  not  only  in  confiderable  quantity,  but  of  a  pretty  folid  con-
fiftence  j  in  order  to  preferve  his  flrength.

After  having  read  this  account,  and  perceiv'd  that  no  other  hope  remained,
except  that  the  patient's  life  might  be  prolong'd  for  a  confiderable  time,  I
immediately  wrote  back  an  anfv/er  to  that  effeft  :  but  there  is  no  need  to  tell
the  whole  of  it  here.  For  I  difcours'd,  pretty  much  at  large,  upon  the  re-
medies which  had  been  made  ule  of,  and  of  fuch  as  might,  in  my  opinion,
be  added,  with  that  ir,"^^enuoufnefs  which  is  requifite,  and  which  I  have  al-
ways made  ufe  of  on  thefe  occafions.  When  I  had  fignified  what  I  difap-
prov'd,  or  what  I  was  fufpicious  of;  I  exprefly  recommended,  among  other
things,  with  Hildanus  (z),  the  juice  of  earth-worms,  prepar'd  in  the  manner
that  Wierus  us'd  to  prepare  it,  to  be  applied  externally  to  the  part  yet  found, .
in  order  to  prevent  the  progrefs  of  the  exficcation.

Yet  I  did  not  forbear  to  mention,  that,  unlefs  the  feafon  of  the  year  for»
bad  expofing  the  patient's  foot  frequently  to  the  cold  air,  it  might  alfo  be
confider'd,  whether  that  method  which  had  fucceeded  fo  well,  for  the  fame
purpoie,  with  that  phyfician  at  the  Hague,  Samuel  Cabliau  (/^),  was  not
Vv'orchy  of  imitation  in  this  cafe  :  for  he,  having  order'd  the  foot,  and  leg,
which  was  almoft  wholly  dead  with  a  fphacelus,  to  be  "  continually  touch'd,
"  or,  as  it  were,  painted,  with  a  pretty  large  pencil,  or  brufli,  dip'd  in  the
*'  beft  fpirit  of  turpentine;"  brought  about,  that  the  leg  fhould  adhere  to
the  part  that  was  yet  found,  and  the  fphacelus  not  proceed  upwards ;  the
fphacelated  part  being  "  torrid,  and  dry,  and  almoft  like  an  asgyptian  mum-
•'  my:"  and  by  thefe  means  he  preferv'd,  for  nearly  fix  months  together,  an
old  woman  of  almoft  ninety-two  years  of  age.

The  other  things  which  I  had  approv'd,  or  added,  being  done ;  the  pa-
tient, if  he  did  not  live  fo  long  as  this  woman,  at  leaft,  liv'd  much  longer
than  thofe  who  were  prefent  had  fhown  any  expedtations,  or  hopes  of.  For,
about  the  later  end  of  IVfay,  I  was  again  confulted  by  letters,  in  which  Tor-
nieri  related,  that  the  patient  was  ftill  full  of  fpirits,  as  before  ;  his  pulfe  not
being  weak,  and  his  natural  rofy  colour  almoft  the  fame  ; that  his  appetite

as  good ;  he  had  no  thrift;  he  difcharg'd  his  urine  in  a  proper  quantity -,
which  was  of  a  colour  and  confiftence  that  was  natural ;  but  that  he  did  not

(/)  I.  fupra  ad  n.  24.  cit.  c.  13.  (-5)  Eph.  N. C.  Dec,  3.  A.  5.  &  6.  OhP.

Vol.  III.  N  n  difchargc


'i7  4 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

difcharge  the  harden'd  intellinal  foeces,  more  than  once  in  five  or  fix  days,
as  he  us'd  to  do  in  health.

And  as  to  the  diforder  itfelf,  he  faid  that  it  had  made  fome  progrefs  within
thofe  three  months,  but  fo  (lowly  and  gradually,  that  about  fifty  days  had
pafs'd  before  the  toes,  and  the  metatarfus,  and  the  tarfus,  quite  to  the  ankle-
bones,  were  become  black,  hard,  and  perfeftly  fimilar  to  a  mummy.

But  after  that,  when  the  black  and  hard  fkin  had  rais:.'d  itfelf  up  near  ths
ankles,  an  ulcer  was  difcover'd  to  be  under  it,  when  taken  away  by  the  for-
ceps:  and  this  ulcer  was,  at  the  time  of  writing,  of  the  breadth  of  a  man'^s
hand,  of  a  lively  red  colour  at  its  upper  circumference,  and  not  without  pain
at  the  time  of  dreffing  ;  but  that  the  external  ankle,  and  a  part  of  the  tibia,
were  black  :  at  the  lower  circumference  of  the  ulcer  the  flefh  was  foft  and
putrid,  and  fomewhat  ftinking ;  and  when  this  was  taken  away  by  degrees,
as  they  attempted  to  do,  and  as  it  was  in  that  place  where  the  drynefs  and
hardnefs  of  the  tarfus  ended,  they  fhould  fee,  he  faid,  whether  there  was  any
thing  putrid  beneath  :  or  whether  all  the  foft  parts  of  the  tarfus  had  been
really  converted  into  a  mummy,  as  they  feem'd  to  have  been.

As  to  what  related  to  the  leg,  he  faid  that  anteriorly  it  was  in  a  natural
ftatej  but  that  the  calf  was  fomewhat  tumid:  that  when  the  leg  was  com-
prefs'd,  a  drop  of  pus  was  prefs'd  down  into  the  ulcer;  which  pus  was
fometimes  of  a  white  colour,  and  fometimes  ting'd  with  red :  yet  that  tha
limb  preferv'd  the  natural  warmth  and  colour  of  its  llcin.  That  the  pus  of
the  ulcer  was  variegated  :  and  that  to  the  part  of  it  which  was  putrid,  fucli
things  were  applied  as  are  enemies  to  putretaftion  -,  but  that  vv-hen  it  was  of
a  lively  red,  the  juice  of  earth-worms  was  applied,  as  they  alfo  found  it,  by
experience,  to  be  of  advantage  in  this  part.

As  to  what  remains,  he  faid  that  this  flow  fever  never  had  gone  off;  bu£
was  fometimes  even  increas'd  :  that  fome  nights  were  pafs'd  in  a  very  reftlefs
manner,  on  account  of  the  itching  on  the  furface  of  the  body,  and  fometimes
from  fpafmodic  motions  of  the  Ibund  leg :  finally,  although  the  (kin  was
even  then  foft,  the  patient  was  neverthelefs  reduc'd  to  the  la(t  ftateof
leannefs.

I  was  difpleas'd  with  this  laft  circumftance  in  particular,  as  well  as  many
ethers,  becaufe  it  very  greatly  diminilli'd  my  hope  of  protrafting  life  for  a
very  long  time.  Yet  that  I  might  not  be  wanting  to  this  noble  old  man,
and  to  his  very  benevolent  phyfician,  both  of  whom  alcrib'd  more  merit  to-
what  I  had  written  before,  than  I  could  by  any  means  acknowledge  ••  when
J  fent  my  anfwer  to  the  letter,  1  recommended  fuch  things  in  particular,  as-
were  fuitable  againft  the  other  fymptoms ;  but  particularly  againll  the  ema-
ciated ftate  of  body.

I  therefore  recommended,  of  the  two  remedies  which  are  the  moft  povver^
fill  at  that  time  of  the  year,  I  mean  the  viper  and  milk;  to  try  which  they
fhould  prefer  :  adding  this  alfo,  in  regard  to  milk,  that  if  they  thought  I
had  propos'd  any  thing  ufeful  from  Hildanus,  in  my  former  opinion,  they
Ihould  alfo  take  this  from  the  fame  author  (/) ;  v/ho  recommends,  againft
that  very  fame  fpecics  of  diforder,  not  only  "  wometis  milk,"  but,  '•  if  this

{!)  c.  i3.dt.

"  cannot


Letter  LV. Article  26.  ■ ^7S

*'•  cannot  be  got,  the  milk  of  afles  :"  from  which,  if  it  lliould  be  borne  well,
there  would  be  a  natural  tranfition  to  that  of  cows^.  Which  of  thefe  remedi^'S
they  preferr'd  I  do  not  know  :  this  however  I  know,  that  the  life  of  the  pa-
tient could  not  beprolong'd  to  the  beginning  of  the  fummer,

?.6.  Thus  you  have  at  large,  as  it  is  of  a  difeafe  not  very  frequent  among
vs,  what  was  written  to  me,  and  what  I  anfwered  thereto.  But  whether  in
this  fpecies  of  gangrene  alio,  there  was  room  to  propofe,  internally,  the  Pe-
ruvian bark,  and  externally,  warm  water,  I  fhould  perhaps  have  confider'd,
if  the  obfervations  upon  the  former  had  been  then  extant ;  although  it  an-
fwered differently  at  different  times ;  I  mean  the  obfervations  made  by  many
very  ingenious  men,  but  particularly  thofe  fo  often  repeated  at  Bologna,  by
the  very  fkilful  and  experienc'd  academics  (m) :  and  if  the  cu{l:om  of  the
celebrated  Benevoli,  in  regard  to  warm  water,  had  been  known  ;  particularly
from  that  obfervation  («)  wherein  he,  by  thefe  means,  overcame  gangrenes,
which  not  only  produc'd  a  black  but  a  hard  fkin  alfo.

And  as  to  what  relates  to  the  Peruvian  bark,  although  I  know  that  it  is
commended  by  the  celebrated  furgeon  Guilfard  (<?),  in  a  dry  gangrene ;
yet,  on  the  other  hand,  I  know  that  its  efficacy  has  been  call'd  in  queftion.
by  another  (.p)  :  however,  as  am.ong  feveral  things  which  have,  at  different
times,  fhown  the  utility  of  the  Peruvian  bark  againft  other  gangrenes,  that
experiment  feems  principally  to  deferve  attention,  wherein  every  thing  became
better  while  the  bark  was  taken,  but  worfe  while  it  was  omitted  ;  and  finally,
better  agajn  while  it  was  again  made  ufe  of:  fo  I  fhould  believe  that  there  is
no  inconfiderable  weight  in  a  fimilar  obfervation,  which  is  extant  in  the  hiftory
of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (a),  in  order  .to  compute  the
fame  utility  in  a  dry  gangrene  :  for  a  dry  gangrene,  which  had  begun  in  the
foot,  was  alternately  better  and  worfe,  according  to  the  alternate  exhibition
and  intermifTion  of  the  bark ;  till  at  length  it  was  quite  overcome  by  the  ufe
thereof,  without  any  farther  interruption.

Neverthelefs,  you  fee  it  is  here  to  be  wifh'd  that  the  experiment  were  often
repeated,  and  not  only  in  an  incipient  gangrene,  but  where  it  was  ahe?,dy
perfefl: :  and  you  alfo  fee,  to  go  on  to  external  remedies,  that  there  is  no
room  for  the  method  of  Benevoli,  when  it  is  determin'd  not  to  remiove  whac
is  hard,  but  to  make  it  ftill  more  dry  and  hard,  that  the  patient  may  be  pre-
ferv'd  the  longer :  to  which  purpofe  fuch  things  ought  to  be  applied,  as  may
preferve  the  dead  part,  in  the  fame  manner  that  an  embalm'd  carcafe  is
preferv'd.

,  On  the  other  hand,  we  muft  fee  to  it,  with  the  utmoft  caution,  that  we
do  not  eafily  defcend  to  the  ufe  of  fuch  applications  as  excite  a  generation  of
pus  i  bearing  in  mind  thofe  phyficians,  who,  hoping  to  feparate,  by  fuppu-
ration,  that  part  of  the  great  toe  which  was  dead,  from  the  living,  caus'd
the  gangrene  which  Boerhaave  (r)  had  put  a  flop  to,  in  that  part,  for  fix
months,  to  fpread  quite  up  to  the  thigh  in  the  fpace  of  three  days.

(,m]  Comment,  de  Bonon.  Sc.  Acad.  Tom.  (/>)  Vid. A£V.  Erud,  Lipf. A, 1751. M.

2.  P.  I.  inter  Medica.  Jul.

(«) 16.  (?)  A.  ,748,

(0)  Vid.  apud  Haller.  in  Acceff.  ad  Boerh.  (?)  Vid. apud Svvieten.  in  Comment, ad

Meth.  Stud.  Med.  i'.  13.  c-.  4.  illius  Aphor.  §.  424.

N  n  2  "  And,


i']6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal Diforders.

And,  indeed,  although  there  was  already  a  kindly  fuppuration  in  a  very
fimilar  cafe,  yet  the  celebrated  Dieter.  Sproegelius  {/)  relates  that  the  patient
could  not  be  fav'd ;  and  admonifties  us,  that,  in  diforders  of  this  kind,  we
mud  not  very  readily  truft  to  fuppurations  -,  not  even  thofe  that  have  beea
wifh'd  for,  and  have  fucceeded  according  to  our  defire.  "Which  circumftance,
of  itfelf,  might  check  the  hopes  of  thofe  who  would  recommend  the  ampu-
tation of  the  dead  member,  in  gangrenes  of  this  kind,  in  old  perfons.

But  other  circumftances  are  alfo  to  be  taken  into  the  acccount ;  as,  for
inftance,  if,  as  Kulmus  (/)  fuppos'd,  and  as  it  certainly  fometimes  happens,
the  gangrene  had  its  origin  from  the  arteries  being  become  bony,  and  confe-
quently  ftreighten'd,  higher  up  :  or  if,  in  the  blood,  as  very  froquently  is
the  cafe,  there  was  an  infuperable  caufe  of  gangrene,  from  whence  it  happens,
for  the  moft  part,  that  the  fame  diforder  will  attack  the  remaining  parr,
either  of  the  fame  limb,  or  of  another,  foon  after  the  feparation  has  been
made  ;  whether  this  has  been  done  by'means  of  amputation  by  the  furgeon,
as  in  the  obfervations  of  Hildanus  («),  Tulpius  (at),  and  others,  or  by  means
of  nature  itfelf,  as  you  may  fee  in  the  examples  of  gangrene  from  the  vitiated
grains  of  rye,  which  we  have  referr'd  to  above  (j).

Thefe  reafons  therefore,  befides  a  decrepid  age,  did  not  permit  me  to  think
of  amputating  the  foot  in  the  patient  defcrib'd  by  me.  But  even  if  this  ex-
treme kind  of  remedy  could  have  been  borne  by  a  very  old  man,  and  the
fame  diforder  had  return'd  to  no  other  part  foon  after,  yet  it  would  have  been
attended  with  this  difficulty,  that  the  patient  would  perhaps  have  -been  car-
ried off  foon  after  by  fome  new  difeafe;  that  is,  by  one  of  thefe  to  which  this
extreme  old  age  is  fubjeft.

For  to  ufe  the  example  of  one  diieafe  only,  and  one  therefore  that  relates
to  the  fubjeft  of  this  letter,  among  my  auditors  of  long-ftanding  is  a  phy-
fician  who  faw  three  old  men  here,  and  that  not  long  fince  ;  one  of  whom  was^
feiz'd  with  an  ulcer  of  the  calcaneum,  and  the  others  with  a  gangrene  of  that
part ;  happily  and  perfeftly  cur'd  :  yet  in  each  of  them  the  cure  was  fucceeded
by  a  difcharge  of  fandy  particles  in  the  urine ;  which  difcharge  was  fucceeded
by  an  inflammation  of  the  bladder,  and  this  inflammation  by  death.

Wherefore,  although  in  the  more  firm  and  robuft  times  of  life,  there  is
room  for  heroical  cures,  as  they  are  call'd ;  for  to  the  danger  is  oppos'd  the
hope  of  a  long  and  happy  life  ;  yet  in  extreme  old  age,  as  there  is  fearcely
any  hope  to  be  oppos'd  to  the  very  great  danger,  and  men  far  advanc'd  ia
life,  though  cur'd  by  a  fafe  and  mild  method,  neverthelefs  die  foon  after  •,  it
does  not  feem  that  we  fhould  rafhly  recede  from  this  fecond  method  of  cure  ,
ki  like  cafes. Farewell.

(i)  Obf.  Seka,  §.  37>  {x).  Obf.  Med.  I.  3.  c.  47.  .

|/)  Vid.  fupra,  n.  Z3.  (y)  n.  3i4,,_

(«)  Cent.  4.  Obf.  92,:


IjE  T  T  E  R'


Better  LVI. Articles  i,  2.  277


LETTER the FIFTY-SIXTH

Treats of  Fra6lures  and  Luxations  of  the  Bones,  and  of
other  Difeafes  that  are  injurious  to  Motion.


fi  ALTHOUGH  the  Sepulchretum  divides  the  diforders,  at  prefenC
_/\_  to  hi  treated  of,  into  the  two  next  fedions,  that  is,  the  fifth  and
{ixth ;  yet  thefe  are  fo  fhort,  that  the  obfervations  and  fchoha  of  both  of
the  feftions  are  contain'd  in  two  leaves  :  nor  would  they  fill  up  this  fpaec»
if  feme  things  that  had  been  already  faid  were  not  repeated  :  and  this  you
will  find  to  be  done  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  fifth  fedtion,  if  you  com-
pare the  firft  article  of  the  firft  obfervation,  and  the  two  firft  heads  of  the
fcholium  fubjoin'd  thereto,  with  the  third  article  of  the  fifteenth  obfervation,
in  the  fecond  feftion,  and  with  the  fcholium  that  is  tack'd  to  this  article.  It  is
my  pleafure,  however,  as  I  am  determin'd  not  to  repeat  over  again  what
has  been  faid  already  of  fraftur'd  bones,  when  treating  of  wounds  and  blows,
to  comprize  every  thing  that  remains  in  the  papers  of  Valfalva,  or  in  mine,
in  relation  to  the  diforders  in  queftion,  in  this  one  letter  -,  beginning  with
that  bone  upon  which  our  obfervations  have  been  chiefly  exercis'd,  as  we
enquir'd  whether  it  was  broken  or  luxated.  Which  circumftance  obliges  us
to  fpeak  promifcuoufly,  and  not  feparately,  of  both  kinds  of  difeafe.

2.  The  ancients  did  not  doubt  but  the  head  of  the  femur  might,  like  the
heads  of  other  bones,  be  diQodg'd  from  its  fituation  ;  and  this  lb  much  the
lefs,  becaufe,  although  they  knew  that  the  replacing  of  it,  when  fallen  out,
was  difficult,  and  the  preierving  of  it  in  its  place  flill  more  fo,  yet  they
were  not  ignorant,  from  the  teftimony  of  Hippocrates,  Diodes,  Philotimus,
Nileus,  and  Heraclides  Tarentinus,  that  both  of  them  had,  fometimes,  been  .
exceedingly  well  brought  about.

For  thefe  "  very  celebrated  authors  have  tranfmitted  down  in  their
"  writings,"  as  Celfus  (,?)  fays,  "  that  they  had  wholly  reftor'd  them  •,"  and
this  Heraclides,  indeed,  more  than  once-,  as  appears  from  that  paflTage  of
his  which  is  preferv'd  to  us  by  Galen  {l>),  who  has  affirm'd  that  he  himfelf,
alfo,  "  had  already  cur'd  a  luxation  of  the  femur  twice,  in  fuch  a  manner,
"  that  it  did  not  fall  out  for  the  time  to  come :"  and  the  fame  author  has

{a)  De  Medic.  1.  8.  c,  zq.  (i)  In.Hippocr.  de  Artie.  Gomment.  1.  4.  n.  42.

affirm'd.


ijS Book  IV.  Of  Cbirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

affirm'd,  that,  after  Heraclides,  "  many  other more  modern  pradlitioners"
had  done  the  fan^e.  ^

But  as  to  what  had  been  remark'd  by  Heraclides  and  Galen,  that  this  at-
tempt fucceeded  when  the  ligamentum  teres,  as  it  is  call'd,  is  rehx'd,  and
■  not  ruptur'd  ;  that  is,  the  ligament  whereby  the  femur  is  join'd  with  the
acetabulum,  and  for  this  realon  ;  becaufe  by  medicines  it  may  be  brought
aboAit,  that,  the  laxating  humour  being  confum'd,  the  relaxed  ligament  may
ao-ain  be  cor.trafted,  but  not  that  the  ruptur'd  ligament  may  again  coalefce  :
thou'^h  phyficians  are,  in  part,  taught  the  truth  thereby,  yet  they  are,  in
part,  drawn  away  ftill  more  and  more  from  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.

For  it  is  true  th.it,  when  this  ligament  is  relax'd,  the  head  of  the  femur
falls  out  of  the  acetabulum  ■,  but  it  is  not  equally  true,  that  the  fame  head
often  falls  out  of  its  acetabulum,  becaufe  that  ligament  is  ruptur'd.  There-
fore, although  the  luxation  of  the  femur  from  an  internal  caufe,  that  is,  one
-whereby  the  ligament  may  be  relax'd,  cannot  be  denied  -,  yet  the  luxation  of
this  bone  from  an  external  caufe,  that  is  to  fay,  from  a  violence  which  rup-
tures the  ligament,  ought  not  fo  eafily  to  have  been  plac'd  amongft  the  moft
frequent  luxations.

Nor  would  it  have  been  plac'd  there,  if  the  difficulty,  on  the  one  hand,  in
breakino-  through  a  very  ftrong  ligament,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  diffi-
culty in  pulling  away  the  head  of  the  thigh  from  its  cervix,  or  in  breaking
t-lie  cervix,  had  been  compar'd  one  with  another.  For  it  would  have  been
perceiv'd,  that  the  force,  whereby  this  ligament  can  be  broken,  could  much
fooner  pull  away  this  head  from  its  cervix,  or  break  the  cervix  ;  and  that,  by
thefe  means,  unlefs  fome  bodies  (c)  have  any  thing  peculiar  in  this  part,  the
femur  would  fail  out  of  its  fituation,  by  reafon  of  the  head  being  puU'd
away,  or  by  reafon  of  the  frafture  in  the  cervix,  and  not  in  confequence  of
a  luxation.

But  thefe  things,  and  others  of  a  fimilar  nature,  did  but  jufl:  begin  to  be
taken  notice  of  at  length,  when  diffedion  perform'd  on  dead  bodies  very
evidently  fnew'd,  that  what  was  fuppos'd  to  be  a  luxation  of  the  head  of
the  femur,  from  an  external  caufe,  was,  in  fact,  almoft  always  either  a  fepa-
ration  of  the  head,  or  a  frafture  of  the  neck.

Nor  was  it  immediately  confider'd  what  were  the  caufes  of  this  circum-
fta'nce,  from  the  time  in  which  Parey  ingenuoufly  confefs'd  {d),  that  it  had
fometimes  happen'd  to  cautious  furgeons,  that  they  had  taken  the  feparation
of  the  head  of  the  femur  ;  and  even  to  himfelf,  in  the  cafe  of  a  matron,  that
he  had  taken  the  fradture  of  the  neck  ;  for  a  luxation.  But  Parey  had  been
deceiv'd  by  the  great  trochanter  of  the  femur,  which  he,  touching  above
the  ifchion,  had  fuppos'd  to  be  the  head  of  the  bone ;  till  on  the  day  after,
while  he  was  again  endeavouring  to  force  the  bone  into  the  acetabulum,  he
was  warn'd  of  a  fracl«re,  by  hearing  the  collifion  of  the  broken  bones  againft
each  other:  and  was  the  firft  of  all,  as  far  as  I  know,  who  difcover'd  this
fallacy  in  the  thigh-bone  -,  which  is  the  more  confiderable,  as,  by  reafon  of
fht  commonnefs  and  fimilitude  of  the  figns,  it  happens  the  more  eafily.

[c)  Vid.  infra,  r.-  5.  in  fin?.  (i)  Oper.  1.  14.  c.  21.

For


Letter  LVI. Article  3.  27  9

For  onr  Columbus  (e)  had,  in  general,  hinted  at  it,  (but  in  children  only)
when,  after  having  taught,  that  "  if  we  boil  the  bones  of  a  kid,  or  a  lamb,,
"  or  any  other  animal,  lately  born,  we  fliall  fee  certain  parts  in  their  extre-
•^^  mities,"  that  is,  the  appendices,  or  epiphyfes,  "  to  be  pull'd  away  and  fall
"  off";"  he  then,  after  many  things  being  interpos'd,  admonifn'd  us,  that  if
"  the  tender  bones  of  children  are  very  roughly  handl'd  by  an  un{]<ilful  phy-
"  fician,  the  ligaments  are  extended  lo  far  as  to  pull  off  the  appendages
"  with  them."

And  you  will  readily  perceive  that  divulfion,  and  fradlure,  as  far  as  relates-
to  the  prefent  difcourfe,  come  to  the  fame  thing  -,  and  may,  for  that  reafon,
be  promifcuoufly  confider'd  by  me  -,  when  you  obferve  that  whether  the  head
of  the  feraur  be  pull'd  away  from  the  cervix,  or  the  cervix  from  the  femur,
thefe  things  can  certainly  not  happen  in  adult  bodies  without  a  frafture :  no
more  than  if  the  very  cervix  itfelf  be  broken  in  the  middle.

Nor  yet  will  you  think  it  of  any  very  great  importance,  not  to  feparate  a.
divulfion  from  a  fracture,  if  you  attend  to  the  eifed  and  the  figns  of  the
Gale;  unlefs  you  fuppofe  that  the  fign  which  is  taken  from  the  found  of  the:
bones,  when  mov'd  upon  one  another,  is  more  evident  in  the  latter,  and  lefs
evident  in  the  former :  although  in  children  a  divulfion  generally  happens,,
and  not  afrafture;.  nor  is  there  fo  much  importance  in  that  fign  when, it  is-
abfent,  as  when  it  is  prefent.

For  the  extremities  of  the  broken  cervix  rarely  correfpond  with  each,
other-,  nor  is  it  always  in  the  power  of  the  furgeon  to  move  one  againft'the
other,  fo  as  to  make  a  collifion  :  nor  can  the  found,  which  is  generally  flight
and  obfcure,  be  always  fufficiently  heard  :  for  which  reafon  it  happens  fome-
times  that  it  cannot  be  heard  till  the  following  day,  as  I  have  faid  of  Parey,,
and  even  that  it  cannot  be  heard  till  after  many  days,  when  the  inflammation
is  at  length  difcufs'd..

3.  I  have  faid  above,  that  from  the  time  wherein  Parey  had  difcover'd.
the  cafe,  the  caufes.  of  it  were  not  immediately  enquir'd  into^  but  that  dif-
fe£tions,  which  might  fliew  ths  circumftance  more  evidently,  were  waited
for.  And  they  mull  have  been  waited  for  much  longer,  if  they  were  firft
perform'd  by  Du  Verney,  as  fome  are  of  opinion,  or  by  Ruyfch,  as  is  the
opinion  of  others-;  or  even  if  they  were  firit  perfor.n'd  by  Rolfinc.

But,  indeed,  Rolfinc  (/)  has  hihted  who  had  done  this  thirty  years  befora
himfelf ;  I  mean,  Cafpar  Hoffmann  ;  who,  having  publifli'd  his  Commentaries
on  the  books  of  Galen  De  Ufu  Parlium,  and  having  admonifli'd  {g),  "  thit
"  what  is  thought  to  be  a  luxation,  fom-etimes  happens  to  be  a  frafture,.
"  that  is  to  lay,  when  the  femur  is  broken  even,  in  the  upper  part  of  ir,
"  where  the  appendix  is,  or  in-  the  neck  itfelf,"  fays,  "  The  former  Co-
"  lumbus  admoniflies  of  all  appendages,  book  the  firjl,  chapter  the  fecond  ;,
"  the  latter  1  have  feen  in  the  thigh  of  a  cat  :"  and  he  has  fubjoin'd  his  ob-
fervation  of  the  cat,  which  was  fuppos'd  to  have  fufi-'er'd  a  luxation  of  ths
femur,  from  the  time  that  he  had  been  continually  In.me,  ia  confequence  of  -
having  fufier'd  fome  external  violence  when  he  was  very  young,  and  in  which,,

(f)  Dt-  Re  Anat,  1.  r.  c.  2.  (g)  Vid.  1,  3.  in  fin..

(fj  Diffeit,  Anat.  1.  2,  c.  i,Q,

I.  when';


28 o Book  IV.  Of  ChirurgicalandUniverfalDiforders.

when  diflefted,  he  neverthelefs  found  the  femur  not  luxated,  but  the  neck
of  the  femur  broken  ;  the  head  of  the  cervix  even  then  adhering  in  its  ace-
tabulum.

And  he  has  immediately  added  the  reafons  why  the  humerus  is  eafil/
luxated,  and  the  thigh-bone  with  difficulty  ;  the  firlt  of  which  is,  "  becaufe
"  the  former  is  without  this  round  ligament,  and  the  latter  has  ic :"  the  fe-
cond  is,  becaufe  the  acetabulum  of  the  latter  is  more  confin'd  and  deeper :
and  the  third,  becaufe  the  joint  of  the  thigh  is  fupplied,  and  girt  around,
with  firmer  mufcles.  -  All  which  reafons  are  commonly  advanc'd  at  prefent  :
.  although  Rolfinc  has  defcrib'd  the  obfervati9n  of  Hoffman,  and  has  omitted
them  :  and  this  you  will  find  even  from  the  Sep'ulchretum  [h).,  which  gives
you  every  thing  that  Rolfinc  has  upon  this  head  ;  except  that  it,  neverthelefs,
pailes  by  thefe  words,  which  ought  to  be  interpos'd  betwixt  the  fcbolium  and
the  obfervation  of  Hoffman  :  "  Many  times  we  have  here  obferv'd  a  great
"  miftake,  and  the  like  has  been  remark'd  by  Hoffman."

But  whether  he  obferv'd  it  by  dilTeiting  dead  bodies,  or  by  handling  living
bodies,  as  is  faid  of  Diemerbroeck  in  another  part  of  the  ichoUum,  you  your-
felf  will  determine.  At  leaft  none  of  thefe  authors  has  mention'd  the  remarlc
of  Parey,  upon  that  matron,  and  his  admonition  in  relpetl  thereto.  For  ic
is  quite  another  thing  that  is  produc'd  from  I  knov;  not  what  chapter  of
Parey,  by  Rolfinc,  who,  when  he  inculcates  that  this  epiphyfis  is  eafily  fepa-
rated  in  infants,  and  young  animals,  by  the  fault  of  nurles,  and  from  flight
caufes,  as  he  proves  from  the  boiling  of  bones,  (hews  that  he  had  rather
profited  from  Columbus,  than  from  Parey.

But  Hoffman,  in  his  pofthumous  work  (z),  has  univerfally  confirm'd  what
he  fornerly  had  taught  from  that  obfervation  of  the  young  cat ;  and  deter-,
min'd  it  to  be  "  exceedingly  true,  that  a  frafture  in  the  neck  of  the  femur
"  happen'd  more  frequently  than  a  luxation  of  the  head  of  the  femur,  par-
"  ticularly  on  account  of  the  ligamentum  teres,  which  is  in  the  acetabulum
"  itfelf :"  although  in  the  year  1641,  Veflingius  {k),  in  writing  to  him,  feem'd
to  contrad  the  affair  in  fome  meafure,  in  confidering,  for  inftance,  when  that
happens,  not  only  the  ftrength  of  the  ligament,  but  alfo  the  fragility  of  the
bones,  "  which  in  fome  conftitutions  is  remarkable."

And  I  thought  proper  to  write  thefe  things  to  you  pretty  much  at  large,
of  thofe  perfons  who  have  made  mention  of  the  cafe  in  queftion  before  our
time,  that  it  might  appear  what  is  to  be  attributed  to  every  one  ;  either  in
leading  the  way  to,  or  in  acknowledging,  or  in  demonftrating,  or  in  enquiring
into,  the  caufes  of  the  circumftance  itfelf.

From  the  obfervations  of  thefe  authors,  perhaps,  that  more  ancient  one  of
Jacobus  Sylvius  (/)  does  not  differ ;  that  is  to  fay,  an  obfervation  made  upon
a  ftone-mafon  falling  from  a  high  place,  and  breaking  his  crus,  or  leg,  "  at
"  the  head  of  the  hip-bone  ;"  and  what  he  meant  by  the  word  crus  is  not
only  manifeft  in  other  places,  but  there,  in  particular,  where  [m]  defcribing
•  the  ligamentum  teres  which  I  have  fo  often  fpoken  of  above,  as  rifing  from

(h)  Sea.  hac  6.  Obf.  z.  cum  Schol.  (/) Obferv.  poft  Ifagog.

(/)  Apolog.  pro  Galeno,  1.  2,  c.  81.  (wj  Ifagog-  !•  !•  c-  3-

{k)  Epift.  25.

4  the


lettei*  LVI. Article  4,  281

the  fundus  of  the  acetabulum,  he  fays,  "  it  is  inferted  into  the  head  of  the
"  crus."

4.  Yet  I  fhall  not  here,  however,  point  out  all  the  obfervations  of  thofe
who  have  written  in  our  age  ;  and  what  I  do  refer  to,  I  fliall  refer  to  only
in  3  curfory  manner ;  as  well  becaufe  thefe  are  very  generally  in  the  hands
of  all  perfons,  as  becaufe  the  chief  of  them  are  extant  in  the  differtation  of
Ijalzmann  («),  publifli'd  in  the  year  1723,  in  which  he  has,  if  any  other
perfon  has,  inform'd  us  of  the  caufes,  on  account  of  which  the  luxation  of
the  femur  is  with  difficulty  diftinguilh'd  from  the  frafture  of  its  neck  :  and
yet  he  has  fliewnj  that  the  latter  happens  more  eafily,  and  confequently  more
frequently,  than  the  former,  from  the  application  of  external  violence.

Thofe  obfervations  were  made  upon  liich  perfons  as  were  fuppos'd  to  have
their  lamenefs  from  a  luxation,  and  not  from  a  fradlure :  fome  belono-  to
Ruyfch,  fome  to  Chefelden,  and  others  to  Erndlius ;  fome  obfervations  of
Borftius  being  added,  with  the  approbation  of  Rau  ;  which  firft-mention'd
obferver,  having  difledled  the  bodies  of  eight  perfons,  that  had  been  lame  in
the  fame  manner,  had  never  found  a  luxation,  but  always  a  frafture  of  the
femur  in  its  neck,  as  the  fore-mention'd  authors  had  done.

But  Ruyfch,  by  whofe  authority,  in  particular,  the  cafe  has  begun  to  be
confirm'd  in  our  times,  has  both  produc'd  the  caufes  of  the  circumLl:ance((7),
together  with  the  obfervations,  and  in  feveral  of  them  has  remark'd  fomewhac
peculiar;  I  mean,  that  the  fragments  of  the  cervix,  which  had  been  for-
merly broken,  and  divided  into  fmall  pieces,  not  only  did  not  remain  behind  ;
but  that,  ibmetimes,  in  the  place  thereof  (f),  many  hard  ligaments  have  been
found,  of  fome  confiderable  thicknefs,  and  round  in  their  figure  ;  which  not
pafTing  externally,  but  internally,  connefted  the  head  of  the  femur  v/ith  the '
upper  part  thereof:  and,"fometimes  (q),  that  the  head  has  been  found  to  be
conglutinated,  and  form'd  into  one  lubftance,  with  this  upper  part  of  the
femur.  ^

To  which  two  peculiar  remarks  there  are  fome  things  that'may  be  added.
To  the  firft,  that  Salzmannus,  in  another  differtation  (r),  publilli'd  five  years
before  that  which  I  have  fpoken  of,  had  faid,  that  thofe  hard  and  thick  liga-
ments, which  Ruyfch  had  feen  betwixt  the  head  and  the  femur  ;  and  which
he  did  not  doubt  were  fubflituted,  by  nature,  in  the  room  of  a  cervix;  were
made  up  of  the  periofteum,  which  being  lacerated  by  a  fradure,  frequently
becomes  very  hard  and  thick  in  that  part,  and  is  wont  to  put  on  the  ap-
pearance, and  perform  the  office,  of  a  ligament :  an  example  of  which  cafe
had  already  been  propos'd  in  the  Jffa  Eniditorum  Lifficvfia  (j),  in  a  certain
.  frafture  of  the  ulna  and  radius.

But,  neverthelefs,  I  would  have  you  attend  to  this,  at  leafl,  that  thofe  liga-
ments of  Ruyfch  did  not  go  to  the  external  parietes  of  the  fradur'd  bones,
as  the  periofteum  generally  does  where  it  is,  but  went  to  their  internal  part.
To  the  other  peculiar  remark,  that  is,  to  the  obferv'd  conglutination  of  the

(»J  De  Luxat.  ofT,  femor.  &c.  c.  4;  (r)  De  Articul.  Analog.  &c.  c.  2.  §  i.  &  4.

(5)  Thef.  Anat,  8.  n,  103.  &  c.  3.  §  z.

(/).Thef.  9.  n.  74,  (j)  A,  1685.  M.  Nov.

(f)  Ibid.  n.  44.  -

Vol.  III.  O  o  broken


282 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

b^-olcen  bone  with  its  head,  which  at  other  times  is  wont  to  be  found  fepa-
rately  in  the  acetabulum,  we  mqltadd,  that  when  this  conglutination  happens;
and  I  have  known  it  happen  more  than  once;  it  ,is  to  be  attributed  to  thofe
bandages,  v/hereb/  the  femur  is  kept,  for  a  very  long  time,  prefs'd  very
ciofely  againft  the  head  of  the  bone ;  and  to  the  refolution  of  the  patient  in
keeping  himfelf  ftill,  and  avoiding  all  motion.

Yet  that  old  woman  was  not  free  from  lamenefs  in  whom  Ruyfch  found  a
cono-lutination  of  this  kind.  For  although,  when  the  neck  of  the  femur  is
deficient,  the  whole  of  the  bone  is  lels  oblique  outwards,  and  for  that  rcafon
the  limb  lefs  fhort  than  it  would  have  been  ;  yet,  by  thefe  means,  the  femur
is  brouo-ht  nearer  the  other,  and  the  diredlions  of  the  mufcles  that  move  the
thigh  and  the  leg  are  chang'd.

But  even  that  woman  was  lame,  of  whom  the  queftion  is  in  the  obfer-
vation  of  Erndlius,  already  referr'd  to  ;  although  the  fraftur'd  cervix  itfelf
had  coalefc'd,  by  means  of  a  callus  of  the  breadth  of  a  man's  thumb,  which
was  protuberant  under  the  head  of  the  bone ;  fo  that  the  cervix  might  feem
not  to  be  wanting  •,  and  no  injury  appear'd  in  the  ligaments  and  the  neigh-
bouring tendons,  nor  any  ftate  of  the  parts  that  was  preternatural  :  fo  eafily
does  a  lamenefs  happen  after  a  frafture.  And  in  proportion  as  that  whole
part  of  the  femur,  at  its  fuperior  extremity,  wherewith  the  cervix  coheres
by  its  bafis,  is  larger  and  more  firm  than  the  cervix  itfelf,  the  coalition,  of
•which  1  have  firft  fpoken,  is  lefs  difficult  than  this  fecond  :  the  difficulty  of
which  is  increas'd  by  the  fame  circumftance  that  renders  the  fradure  eafy ;  I
mean,  by  the  oblique  direftion  of  the  neck.

For  that  impulfe  which  the  ftrait  bones  of  the  legs,  and  the  thighs,  often
fuffer  without  any  mifchief;  as,  for  inftance,  in  a  man  who  falls  from  a  con-
fiderable  height  upon  his  feet ;  the  cervix  of  the  femur  can  fcarcely  ever
bear,  by  reafon  of  its  tranfverfe  dircftion  :  efpecially  as  it  is  very  fragile,
and  prevented  from  following  the  motion  of  the  femur  when  driven  up-
wards, by  the  refiftance  that  the  head  meets  with,  in  its  afcent,  from  the  ace-
tabulum, which  is  immoveable.

And  thefe  fame  caufes,  when  the  mufcles  draw  the  femur  upwards,  disjoin
and  un^lue  the  parts  of  the  broken  cervix,  which  are  again  contiguous  to
each  other,  and  beginning  to  coalefce.  And  the  moft  ancient  authors  were
not  ignorant  of  this  pofition  of  the  cervix ;  therefore,  Hippocrates  (/)  has
exprefsly  faid,  "  that  the  head  and  neck  of  the  femur  are  naturally  oblique."
And  Anftotle  (u),  when  he  faid  that  the  femur  was  liicep,  or  double-headed,
had  not  the  fame  meaning,  that  Niphus  (x)  has  given  to  him  in  his  inter-
pretation of  the  paflage,  that  is  to  fay,  "  that  there  is  one  femur  on  the
♦'  rio-ht  fide,  and  another  on  the  left ;"  for  this  he  had  fufficiently  faid  al-
ready •,  but  having  in  his  eye,  on  the  one  hand,  the  large  trochanter,  and,
on  the  other,  the  cervix  in  the  upper  part  of  the  femur,  he  has  afferted  that
the  bone  is  double-headed.

Why  it  is  thus  divided,  and  has  a  neck  running  almofl:  tranfverfely,  is  far
more  manifeft  than  why  the  neck  fliould  have  fo  fragile  a  ftrufture. For  it

(/)  L.  de  Articul.  n.  63.  apud  Marinell.  (*)  In  Expof.  ejus  loci.

(k)  DeHift.  Animal.  1.  1.  c.  15.


Letter  LVL Article  j-.  283

is  common  to  fome  other  bones  alfo,  and  is  not  peculiar  to  this  only,  as  fome
learned  men  fay,  to  fend  out  certain  parts  which  make  an  angle  with  them-
fdves  ;  as,  for  inRance,  the  fcapulse,  and  the  lower  jaw.

But  the  parts  fent  out  from  thefe,  are  of  a  far  more  firm  ftrudure,  if
compar'd  with  the  bones  from  whence  they  are  detach'd,  than  the  neck  of
the  femur  when  compar'd  therewith.  Nor  is  this  cervix  fo  much  thicker
than  the  bone  to  which  it  is  added,  that  we  can  fay  equally  thereof,  as  of
the  extremt:  parts  of  the  longer  bones,  that  they  refill  breaking,  by  their
thicknefs  ;  if  not  by  their  ftrudure.

5.  But  what  happens  in  mott  perfons  in  whom  the  cervix  is  broken,  (for  on
account  of  the  impediments,  which  I  have  mention'd,  it  is  very  rare  that  ic
does  coalefce),  we  fhall  fee  prefently,  when  we  go  on  to  that  other  differta-
tion  of  Salzmannus,  and  at  the  fame  time  point  out  thofe  obfervations  which
he  could  not  relate  in  the  diflertation  hitherto  fpoken  of :  yet  not  all ;  for
we  know,  that  many  are  extant  in  other  authors ;  but  make  mention  of  one
or  two  only,  which  were  in  my  hands  while  I  was  writing  on  this  fubject.

That  experienc'd,  and  induftrious  furgeon,  Gregory  Barbett,  as  well  as
thofe  whom  we  omit,  faw,  as  you  have  it  in  his  Apologia  {y ),  which  he,  with
great  kindnefs,  fent  to  me  ;  the  fame  thing  in  a  woman,  of  eighty  years  of
age,  that  was  diflTedtcd  by  him  ;  in  whom,  although,  until  the  fourteenth
day  after  flie  had  fallen,  the  injur'd  limb  had  not  been  fhorter  than  the  found
one,  the  neck  of  the  femur  was  neverthelefs  broken :  could  this  be,  as  he
fufpefts,  becaufe  it  was  not  quite  broken  in  the  beginning ;  and,  there-
fore, refilled,  for  fo  long  a  time,  the  mufcles  which  mov'd  the  femur  i*

Yet  the  fame  author  produces  another  obfervation,  of  a  man  who  had  been
lame  for  a  long  time,  from  a  violent  kick  upon  the  fame  joint  of  thcj  fe-
mur. In  him  he  found  the  femur  luxated  ;  fo  that  with  its  head,  it  lay
contiguous  to  the  back  of  the  os  ilium,  no  traces  of  the  ligamentum  teres
being  left  behind :  the^orbicular  ligament  being  quite  disfigur'd,  and  the
acetabulum  almoft  deftroy'd.

And  Salzmannus  himfelf;  who  confefs'd  ingenuoufly,  that  neither  of  the
cafes,  which  he  treated  of  with  great  Ikill,  and  feparateiy,  in  thofe  two  fepa-
rate  diflertations,  had  as  yet  happen'd  to  be  feen  by  him  in  difleftion  -,  could,
five  years  after,  affirm,  that  both  of  them  had  been  met  with  by  him,  in  the
mean  time,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  in  regard  to  the  firft,  he  alTerted,  "  it
*'  happen'd  to  him  to  find  a  fradlure  of  the  femur,  more  frequently  than  a
*'  luxation  :"  and  as  to  the  fecond,  that  he  could  produce  two  examples  of
luxations  of  the  femur,  in  one  of  which,  the  head  of  that  bone,  without  a
fradture  of  the  neck ;  and  in  the  other,  the  cervix  (a),  broken  off  from  the
head,  which  had  been  confum'd  and  deftroy'd,  "  lay  againft  the  external
"  part  of  the  os  ilium,  a  little  above  the  acetabulum ,  and,  by  attrition,
"  which  had  fubfifted  for  a  long  time  together,  had  form'd  to  itfelf  a  certain
*'  cavity,  and  a  kind  of  fuperficial  finus,  from  whence  both  of  the  fubjedls,

CjJ  Apologia  di  due  Cure.  (a)  Vid.  etiam  Aft.  N.  C. Tom.  2.  Obf.

(z)  Vid.  in  Comment.  Imp.  Acad.  Petro- 101.
fol.  Tom.  3.  Obf.  Anat,

O  0  2  .  *«  notwithflandinff


284 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal.and  Univerfal  Diforders.

«'  notwithftanding  the  foot  on that  fide  was  fhorter, could  walk  in  fome
"  meafure  ;  though  not  with  facility,  nor  expedition."

Nor  indeed  does  the  firft  of  thefe  two  examples,  nor  the  obfervation,  which
he  himfelf  had  produc'd  in  the  diflertation  {b),  from  the  Berlin  tranfaflions,
nor  any  other  oblervations  of  this  kind,  fimilar  to  thefe  which  1  juft  now  took
notice  of,  in  the  fecond  place,  from  Barbett,  and  which,  as  he  fays  with
juftice,  are  "  not  frequent ;"  run  counter  to  his  opinion,  which  fufficiently
appears  from  the  very  title  of  the  diflertation  itfelf ;  "  De  luxatione  oflis  fe-
•'  moris  rariore,  frequentiore  colli  fradlura."

For  as  more  examples  are  extant  of  the  latter,  than  of  the  former  ;  or,  at
leafl-,  in  adults,  and  from  an  external  caufe ;  fo  that  Ruyfch  {c),  afRrm'd
a  luxation  to  happen  "  rarely,"  and  Rau  {d),  "  very  rarely ;"  fome  contrary
examples  will  not  at  all  be  deftrudlive  of  the  cautious  and  prudent  opinion  of
Salzmannus ;  and  if  there  were  none  of  thefe  examples,  his  opinion,  which
pronounces  the  luxation  to  be  "  more  rare,"  would  of  courfe  fall  to  the
ground.

And  indeed,  when  he  enumerates  the  caufes  (e),  on  account  of  which  this
fometimes  happens ;  as,  for  inftance,  the  well  known  laxity  of  the  ligaments
from  the  gout ;  the  paralyfis  of  the  furrounding  mufcles  and  tendons ;  the
fize  of  the  acetabulum  being  naturally  too  large,  or  the  head  of  the  femur
being  naturally  too  fmall ;  as  likewife  a  frafture  in  the  margin  of  the  aceta-
bulu.m  ;  or  a  defed:  of  it  ;  or,  in  fine,  tumours  that  had  arifen  within  the
acetabulum  :  ic  is  eafy  for  us  to  conceive,  that  where  any  one  of  thefe  caufes
is  not  fo  confiderable,  as  to  be  able,  of  itfelf,  to  thruft  the  head  of  the  fe-
mur out  of  the  acetabulum  as  yet ;  if  any  external  violence  then  happen  to
be  applied,  ic  will  not  be  difficult  for  a  luxation  to  follow  :  and  the  fame
thing  may  take  place  in  thofe  likewife,  who  happen  to  have  their  ligaments
naturally  very  lax,  or  in  v/hom  the  ligamentum  teres,  (which  is  a  rare  ob-
fervation of  Nicolaus  (/))  is  entirely  deficient.

6.  Now  fince  there  are  fome  obfervations  taken  notice  of,  wherein  it  is
Ihown  what  has  happen'd  in  thofe  perfons,  whofe  femur,  when  broken,  or
wholly  prolaps'd  out  of  its  feat,  could  not  be  reftor'd  thereto ;  we  muft  fub-
join  others  which  relate  to  the  fame  fubjeft.

And  as  John  Salzmannus,  in  that  diflTertation  which  is  referr'd  to  above,,
and  which  is  entitled,  "  Of  analogous  articulations  that  fucceed  to  the  frac-
"  tures  of  bones ;"  treats  of  this  fubjeft  in  general,  he  has  many  things
which  yon  Vi^iil  be  very  willing  to  examine,  and  transfer  hither  -,  but  he  pro-
duces obfervations,  the  greatelt  part  of  which,  not  only  relate  to  other  bones,
but  were  made  in  the  living  body,  by  the  judgment  of  the  touch  only,  and
not  taken  from  diflefted  bodies,  where  the  eye  could  judge  alio:  of  thofe
therefore,  which  we  principally  enquire  after  here,  he  has  none  ;  unlefs  you
choofeto  confiderthat  of  Ruyfch,  wherein,  inftead  of  the  cervix,  fome  thick
ligaments  join'd  the  head  with  the  upper  part  of  the  femur,  as  relating  ta
the  prefent  fubjedt-,  for  thofe  which  are  from  Diemerbroeck,  as  I  have  ob-
ferv'd  above  (g) ;  do  not  relate  to  anatomical  infpedion.

(b)  c.  2.  §  7.  {e)  Ibid.  c.  ^.  §  5.

(0  Thef.  Anat.  8.  n.  103.  §  2.  (/)  Dec.  illuftr.  Anat.  Obf.  7,

(<^)  Vid.  DifTert.  Salzmaa.  modo  cit, c.  4. [g)  n.  3. -


Letter  LVI. Article  6.  285

But  that  double  obfervation,  on  one  woman,  which  I  have  read  in  an
ofteological  diflertation  {h),  publifli'd  under  the  aufpices  of  the  very  cele-
brated Gaubius,  and  fent  by  him  to  me,  with  great  kindnefs,  does  relate  to
this  queftion.  Both  the  thigh-bones  had  fallen  out  of  the  acetabulum.  The
head  of  the  right  femur  was  found  ;  that  of  the  left  entirely  confum'd  by
a  caries.

Therefore,  as  a  new  acetabulum  was  feen  correfponding  to  each  of  thofe
heads,  in  each  of  the  offa  ilia;  the  left  acetabulum  was  hollow'd  out  but
nightly,  the  right  very  deeply  ;  and  the  old  acetabula  were  almoft  obliterat-
ed :  fo  that  it  might  be  eafily  fuppos'd,  that  thefe  old  fockets,  being  de-
priv'd  of  the  heads  of  the  bones,  which,  by  their  bulk,  preffure,  and  mo-
tion, preferv'd  them,  had  almoft  loft  their  cavity  :  and  that  thofe  new  ones
were  thus  unequally  hollow'd  out,  becaufe  the  left  head  being  deftroy'd,  be-
fore it  could  be  prefs'd  fufficiently  clofe,  the  body  was  fupported  by  the
head  of  the  bone,  on  the  right  fide,  which  was  found  ;  and  by  preffino-  the
right  OS  ilium,  ftill  more  and  more,  againft  this  head,  had  caus'd  the  os
ilium  to  be  hollow'd  out  thereby.

And  I  have  obferv'd,  that  fomething  fimihr  to  this  was  feen  formerly  by
Parey  ;  as  you  will  learn  from  a  certain  paflage  of  his  (z),  which  I  think  it
worth  while  to  copy  to  you  here.  His  words  are,  "  it  happens,  not  uncom-
"^  monly,  that  excrementitious  humours  fall  with  fuch  violence  upon  the  ca-
"  vity  of  the  hip-joint,  in  the  cafe  of  a  fciatica,  that  the  ligaments  being
"  relax'd,  they  eafily  pulh  the  head  of  the  femur  out  of  its  place,  never  to
"  be  reftor'd,  if  it  continue  difplac'd  for  fome  time  :  becaufe  a  humour,
"  which  has  in  the  mean  while  fallen  into  that  cavity,  concretes  by  delay  in-
"  to  a  kind  of  ftony  fubftance  ;  and  that  joint  of  the  thigh  has  form'd  a  new
"  cavity  for  itfelf  by  attrition,  in  the  neighbouring  bone  :  and  the  lips  of
"  the  true  cavity,  which  are  cartilaginous,  have  become  more  ftreighten'd,
"  and  more  deprefs'd^'

Moreover,  thefe  obfervations  and  others,  if  there  are  any",  when  the  fe-
mur, either  found  or  broken,  has  lain  upon  the  external  part ;  obfervations^
that  is  to  fay,  of  a  new  acetabulum  being  hollow'd  our,  fometimes,  in  the  os
ilium,  without  diflcdions  of  bodies,  the  fuccefibrs  of  Hippocrates  could  not
have  been  ignorant  of,  any  more  than  Hippocrates  himfelf,  in  that  paflao-e^
of  his  book  de  articuUs  (k)  ;  which,  if  I  quote  it  according  to  the  verfion
generally  foUow'd  after  Cornarius,  you  will  underftand  it  lefs  eafily,  in  my
opinion,  than  if  I  produce  it  from  the  verfion  of  Felicianus,  join'd  with  the
interpretation  of  Galen.

Thus  then  Hippocrates,  when  fpeaking  of  the  head  of  the  femur  bein^--
luxated.  "  Yet  when  the'  joint  has  made  fome  delay  in  the  flefhy  parts,
"  whereinto  it  has  fallen  ;  and  the  flefli  has  contrafted  a  lentor;  it  becomes
"  free  from  pain  in  procefs  of  time.  And  when  it  becomes  free  from  pain
"  they  can  walk  without  a  ftick,  if  there  be  no  other  impediment  :  and  caa
"  fupport  the  body  upon  the  injur'd  limb."


(i)  De  modo  quo  offa  fe  vicinis  accommo. (/)  Oper.  1.  17.  c.  22.
dant  partib.  §  42.  (*)  n.  63.  apud  Marinsll.


And


zSb Book  IV.  Of  Chimrgical  and  Univerlal  Diibrders.

And  thus  ic  is  that  Galen  interprets  thefe  words  (/) :  "  By  metonymy  h  e
"  has  made  ufe  of  the  word  -rfi^ov,  or  delay,  from  the  places  which,  by
"  the  long  continuance  of  travellers,  are  become  beaten  and  familiar.  And
"  this  is  the  purport  of  his  difcourfe.  When  the  head  of  the  femur,  which
•'  has  been  diQodg'd,  from  its  proper  feat,  into  the  external  part,  is  fix'd  in
"  the  flefti :  thofe  who  are  thus  affefted  fuffer  pain,  in  the  beginning,  from
*'  the  compreffion ;  but  afterwards,  in  procefs  of  time,  the  flefh  grows  cal-
"  lous  in  this  part,  jwft  as  the  hands  of  labourers  do.  And  when  this  is
"  the  cafe,  the  place  becomes  fimilar  to  an  articulation  ;  the  head  of  the  fe-
"  mur  making  ufe  of  this  beaten  path,  or  bed,  as  it  before  made  ufe  of  the
"  acetabulum  of  the  hip."

And  after  having  faid  how  "  a  ropy  and  mucous  kind  of  humour"  is  left
there,  after  inflammation  ;  "  that,"  fays  he,  "  is  very  convenient  for  the
*'  motion  of  the  head  of  the  femur.  For,  by  reafon  of  this  humidity,  they
*'  make  ufe  of  this  path,  or  bed,  as  if  it  were  a  joint."  From  the  compa-
rifon,  therefore,  of  thefe  things,  you  plainly  perceive  what  thole  ancients
conjedur'd  in  this  affair  ;  and,  moreover,  what  was  Ihown  by  the  difTcdtion
of  morbid  bodies.

And  all  thefe  things  I  have  premis'd,  by  a  long  difcourfe  in  the  very  be-
ginning of  this  letter,  that  I  may  clearly  ftiow,  in  a  few  words,  to  what  pur-
pofe  each  of  them  tend  ;  and  which  of  them  are  confirm'd  by  the  oblerva-
tions  prefently  to  be  produc'd.  The  firft  of  thefe  obfervations  is  from  Val-
falva.

7.  A  woman,  of  fixty  years  of  age,  who  labour'd  under  a  difRcuk  refpi-
ration,  and  a  cough,  had  her  os  femoris  luxated  by  a  fall.  A  continual  fe-
ver then  came  on  :  which  encreas'd  the  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  carried
off  the  woman  on  the  eleventh  day.

The  belly  being  laid  open,  the  liver  was  found  to  be  hard  :  and  in  the
galKbladder  were  many  calculi.

On  opening  the  thorax,  the  lungs  appear'd  to  be  vai'iegated  with  large
black  fpots ;  both  internally  and  externally.  On  the  right  fide  was  about  a
pint  of  water ;  on  the  left  fide  of  the  thorax  was  a  little  only.  The  right
auricle  of  the  heart  was  dilated,  and  fiU'd  with  a  polypous  concretion  :  and
in  the  left  ventricle  v;as  another,  which  was  produc'd,  from  thence,  into  the
veffels.

At  length,  as  to  what  relates  to  the  femur  itfelf,  it  was  found  to  be  really
luxated ;  in  confeqiience  of  that  ligament  being  relax'd,  whereby  the
head  of  the  femur  is  connected  to  the  acetubalum  of  the  os  innomina-
tum.

8.  Thofe  fymptoms  which  had  preceded  the  luxation,  the  difficult  refpi-
ration,  and  the  cough,  may  be  accounted  for  from  the  dilatation  of  the  au-
ricle, from  the  water  found  in  the  thorax,  and  from  the  hard  liver.  The
fever,  which  fucceeded  the  luxation,  may  be  afcrib'd  to  the  pain  and  irri-
tation which  the  luxation  brought  on  the  neighbouring  parts :  and  from  the
febrile  motion  of  the  blood,  affeifting  the  lungs,  a.nd  the  other  vifcera,  may

(/)  in  1.  Hippocr.  de  Artie  Comment.  1.  j .  n.  95.


Letter  LVl. Articles  9, lo.  287

we  account  for  the  difficulty  of  breathing  being  encreas'd,  and  for
death.

Bdc  as  to  the  luxation  happening  without  a  fradure  of  the  cervix,  that  is
to  be  attributed  to  the  laxity  ot  the  ligamentum  teres,  as  it  is  call'd ;
which  was  perhaps  naturally  lei's  firm,  and  ftrong  than  ufual,  and  therefore
already  difpos'd  to  be  more  relax'd  from  the  fall,  and  eafily  to  give  way.
Nor  is  this  obfcrvation  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  Ruyfch  ;  as  he  has  affirm'd,
that  this  rarely  happens,  as  I  have  faid  above  (»z)  ;  but  has  not,  as  fome
pretend,  denied  that  it  ever  happens.

But  now  take  thefe  two  obfervations  of  the  cervix  being  fra-6tur'd  ;  the
firft  of  which  was  made  by  the  pupils  \yho  praftife  diffeftion  with  me,  and
the  other  by  myfelf

9.  A  ruftic  man,  having  fallen  down  from  a  tree,  was  fuppos'd  to  have
luxated  the  femur.  The  furgeons  having  endeavour'd  to  replace  this  bone
with  the  more  diligence,  as  they  thought  they  could,  with  their  hands,  per-
ceive the  head  of  the  bone  which  had  been  diflodg'd  ■,  it  happen'd,  acciden-
tally, that  thefe  young  men,  who  had,  more  than  once,  heard  me  afferr,,
that  a  frafture  of  the  cervix  happens  much  more  eafily,  from  external  force,,
than  the  luxation  of  the  femur ;  and  mention  in  what  manner  the  great
trochanter  had  impos'd  upon  Parey  himfelf  (k),  for  the  head  of  the  femur  ^.
did  not  fcruple  to  interpofe  their  fufpicions,  but  could  not  withdraw  the  fe-
nior  furgeons  from  their  prejudg'd  opinion.

Therefore,  about  the  end  of  two  months,  a  diforder  of  the  thorax  having
feiz'd  upon  the  man  ;  who  had  not  as  yet  rifen  out  of  bed  ;  and  carried  him
off  by  a  kind  of  fufFocative  catarrh,  before  the  end  of  the  year  1727,  they
were  refolv'd  to  determine  their  doubts  by  difledion,  and  fee  whether  they  or
the  furgeons  were  deceiv'd.

The  upper  part  of  the  os  femoris  being  laid  bare,  and  the  acetabulum  into
which  it  is  inferted,  they  clearly  ftiow'd  to  all  the  fludentsof  anatomy  and
furgery  who  were  prefenr,  that  the  cervix  was  broken  through  in  the  middle ;
one  half  of  it  adhering  to  the  head,  which  remain'd  firmly  fix'd  in  its  aceta-
bulum, and  the  other  to  the  os  femoris,  near  to  the  trochanter ;  which,  in
the  man's  life-time,  had  been  taken  by  the  furgeons  for  the  head  of  the
femur.

But  how  many,  and  what  kind  of  calculi,  were  found  by  them  in  the  o-all-
bladder  of  this  man  (who  was  not  ifteric)  and  brought  to  me  ;  and  what  ex-
periments  I  made  thereupon  ;  I  fhall  not  repeat  m  this  place,  as  I  have
written  to  Schroeckius  upon  the  fubjeft ;  and  he  has  publifh'd  the
letter  (o).

10.  A  woman,  about  forty  years  of  age,  of  a  fat  habit  of  body,  and  lame
on  the  left  fide,  had  lately  receiv'd  a  violent  contufion  upon  the  lower  ribs  ;
and  being  friz'd  with  a  fever,  was  carried  off  thereby  within  fifteen  days,  in
the  year  1742  :  at  which  time,  as  I  was  teaching  anatomy  in  the  coUeoe,  the
carcafe  was  carried  thither  from  the  hofpital.  Where  I  obferv'd  nothing  pe-
culiar in  regard  to  that  contufion.

(m)  n.  5.  (»)  fapra,  n.  z.  (»)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  2.  Obf.  167.

But


iSS Book  IV.  Of  Clni'urgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

But  I  made  other  remarks  there,  and  in  particular  fuch  as  rela  e  to  the  Caufe
of  lamencfs.  And  chefc,  after  relating  fome  appearances  obferv'd  in  the  tho-
rax, and  belly,  I  will  accurately  defcribe  to  you, 'as  1  then  demonftrated  them
to  the  great  number  of  auditors  who  were  prefent.

The  right  auricle  of  the  heart,  and  the  inferior  vena  cava,  contain'd
polypous  concretions,  not  without  a  great  quantity  of  white  fubftance  :  and
concretions  of  the  fame  kind  were  contain'd  in  both  the  ventricles ;  that  in
the  left  being  much  the  largeft.  From  the  curvature  of  the  aorta  arofe  not
three,  but  four  arteries  •,  for  the  left  vertebrse  did  not  arife  from  the  fubcla-
vian,  but  betwixt  that  and  the  carotid  of  the  fame  fide.

In  the  belly  the  genital  pans,  the  kidnies,  and  the  fanguiferous  veflels,
oflered  thefe  things  which  were  worthy  of  remark.  The  furface  of  one  of
the  teftes  was  very  unequal.  The  ofculum  uteri  was  furrounded  with  no
corona;  lb  that  there  was  not  any  protuberance  within  the  vagina.  And  the
kidnies,  in  proportion  to  the  middle-fiz'd  ftature  of  the  woman,  were  both  of
them  longer  than  they  generally  are  :  the  left  was  fomewhat  hollow'd  out,
by  a  cicatrix,  on  its  external  furface,  and  at  the  lower  extremity  ;  and  the
circumference  of  this  cicatrix  approach'd,  in  fome  meafure,  to  the  figure  of
a  circle ;  the  diameter  of  it  being  equal  to  a  finger's  breadth  ;  and  the  whole
cicatrix  being,  as  I  fuppos'd,  the  remains  of  an  hydatid,  which  had  been
formerly  partly  buried  in  the  fubftance  of  the  kidney,  and  partly  prominent
therefrom.

The  trunk  of  the  large  artery  was  thinner  than  ufual,  and  did  not  fehd
forth  the  fpermatic  artery  ;  but  this  came  out  from  the  emulgent ;  nor  did  it
give  out  the  lumbar  arteries  in  the  ufual  manner  -,  nor  was  the  left  iliac  of  an
equal  length  with  the  right,  but  a  third  part  ihorter.

And  1  beg  of  you  to  attend  to  this  circumftance,  as  we  now  go  on  to  thofe
things  which  related  both  to  the  caufes  and  to  the  effefts  of  lamenefs.  For
on  the  left  fide  the  woman  had  been  lame,  as  I  faid  ;  that  limb  was  four
inches  fhorter  than  the  other,  and  had  the  calcaneum  turn'd  towards  the
oucfide ;  yet  was  not  lefs  fat  than  the  right,  but  even  flill  thicker,  though
this  was  owing  to  an  cedematous  tumour.

The  iliac  vein  therefore,  on  the  right  fide,  was  wider  than  it  naturally  is ;
but  the  left,  and  its  branches,  were  fo  thin,  flender,  and  pale,  that  being
furpriz'd  at  an  appearance  which  I  never  faw  before,  I  open'd  the  trunk  of
the  vena  cava  at  its  lower  part.  Which  being  done  I  was  ftill  more  furpriz'd.
For  inftead  of  thtt  orifice  of  that  iliac  vein  I  found  a  line  which  was  a  mark  of
its  coalition ;  in  which  line  were  two  or  three  fmall  orifices  communi-
cating with  the  iliac  vein.

Having  cut  into  this  vein  in  a  longitudinal  diredion,  and  having  feen,  be-
fides  filaments  of  a  polypous  nature,  a  kind  of  fafciculus  of  fibres  protube-
rating  internally  ;  I  foon  after  eafily  obferv'd  that  the  parietes  of  the  vein
had  coalefced  with  each  other  on  one  fide;  and  by  thefe  means  reprefented
that  fafciculus,  the  appearance  of  which  entirely  vanilh'd  by  drawing  the
parietes  aiunder  with  both  hands :  nor  was  the  feparation  difficult.

But  then  laying  bare  the  crural  arteries  and  veins,  from  the  belly  quite  to

the  ham,  in  both  limbs,  no  difference  appear'd  in  the  arteries  ;  yet  the  vein

which  was  afTociated  with  the  left  artery,  appear'd  to  be  at  leaft  a  third  part

6  narrower


Letter  LVI.- Article  i  i.  289

narrower  than  that  of  the  right  fide  :  and  although  it  had  not  parietes  which
were  folded  together,  and  beginning  to  coalefce,  yet  it  had,  betwixt  its  coats,
a  kind  of  black  blood  as  it  were,  and  perhaps  a  real  blood  ;  but  fuch  as
to  all  appearance  feem'd  to  have  been  concreted  a  long  time  before.

Having  examin'd  thefe  things  fufRciently,  I  enquir'd  into  the  caufe  of  the
lamenefs,  by  laying  bare  the  articulation  of  the  os  femoris  with  the  os  inno-
minatum  :  and  the  os  femoris  was  found  to  be  depriv'd  of  its  neck  and  head.
As  to  the  head  of  it,  this  rcmain'd  fix'd  in  its  acetabulum,  though  the  carti-
lage, wherewith  both  of  thefe  parts  were  incrufted,  was  corroded  here  and
there:  and  indeed  the  bony  fubftance  of  the  head  of  the  femur,  both  where
it  was  turn'd  to  the  left  parietes  of  the  acetabuluin,  and  where  it  had  formerly
coher'd  with  the  cervix,  was  not  quite  found  and  entire.

And  as  to  the  cervix,  no  traces  of  it  remain'd,  if  you  excepted  fome  bony
fragments,  adhering  to  very  thick  ligaments,  into  which  the  capfular  liga-
ment feem'd  to  have  been  chang'd  ;  at  leaft  thefe  ligaments  were  produc'd
from  the  margin  of  the  acetabulum  to  that  part  of  the  fuperior  extremity  of
the  femur,  from  whence  the  cervix  formerly  began^nd  connected  the  femur
to  that  margin.  And  in  the  cavity  which  lay  betwixt  them,  in  the  place  of
the  cervix,  was  a  thickifh  matter  of  a  flefhy  colour,  but  brown  and  dirty  j
yet  not  foetid,  nor  in  great  quantity.

Befides  thefe  appearances,  the  os  innominatum,  on  the  left  fide,  was  more
prominent  forwards  than  the  right ;  fo  that  it  was  natural  to  fufped:  that  the
lame  external  violence,  which  had  broken  the  cervix  of  the  os  femoris  in  this
■woman,  when  fne  was  an  infant,  or  when  flie  was  very  young,  had  likewife
luxated  the  os  innominatum.

II.  If  you  compare  thefe  two  obfervations  with  each  other,  you  will  eafily
come  into  this  opinion,  that  Ruyfch's  (p)  finding  no  remains  of  the  fradtur'd
cervix,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  length  of  time,  and  to  the  frequently^
repeated  agitations  and  friftions  of  the  fragile  extremities  of  the  broken  cer-
vix one  againft  another  :  and  befides  thefe  to  the  eroding  power  of  the  acrid
particles,  diftilling  from  the  injur'd  and  vellicated  membranes,  and  bringing
on  a  caries  by  ftagnation.

But  as  to  what  I  have  taken  notice  of,  in  rega^||fo  the  periofteum  being
lacerated  by  a  fradture  (^"!,  I  mean  that  it  frequently  becomes  harder  and
thicker  than  natural  •,  you  perceive,  from  the  fecond  obfervation,  that  the
fame  thing  happens  to  ligaments.  And  as  to  what  is  faid,  in  the  fame  obfer-
vation, of  the  extenuation  of  the  iliac  veins  that  correfponded  to  the  injur'd
limb,  I  would  have  you  compare  it  with  thedifleftion  of  another  lame  woman
that  1  have  already  defcrib'd  to  you  (r).

For  you  will  find  that  the  iliac  veffels,  going  to  the  lame  limb,  were
thinner  than  ufual.  Yet  you  will  not  only  find  it  extenuated  to  fuch  a  de-
gree through  the  thigh,  but  will  not  find  it  contradted  in  the  belly  by  the
coalition  of  the  parietes  on  one  fide;  nor  yet  almofl  ftopp'd  up  at  the  orifice
by  which  it  opens  into  the  vena  cava.  For  it  is  a  very  raje  appearance,  and
not  eafily  to  be  underixood,  the  limb  from  which  it  return'd  labouring
under an cjedematous  tumour  indeed,  but  yet  being  alive  ;  although we

(f)  fupra,  n.  4,  {j)  Ibid.  (r)  Epili.  46.  n.  17.

Vol.  III.  P  p  fuppofe

"0


cpo Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

fuppofe it not  to have been reduc'd to this ftate for a long time
before.

However,  the  os  feraoris,  in  this  woman,  could  not  have  receded  far  from
the  acetabulum,  by  reafon  of  the  connefting  ligaments.  And  the  man,  of
whom  I  fpol\.e  before  her,  having  always  lain  in  bed,  had  no  occafion  to  make
ufe  of,  and  to  ftand  upon,  that  limb.  Now,  therefore,  give  me  leave  to  tell
you  what  appearances  I  found  in  another  woman,  and  in  another  man  alio,
who  had  for  a  long  time  had  the  head  of  the  os  femoris  luxated,  and  not  re-
plac'd  ■,  and  had  for  a  long  time  borne  upon  the  limb.

12.  A  lame  old  woman  was  now  very  near  to  her  eightieth  year,  when
being  feiz'd  with  an  apoplexy,  fhe  died  not  long  after  •,  yet  not  fo  much
from  the  apoplexy,  as  from  the  effeft  of  it,  which  was  but  little  attended  tOv
For  as  the  power  of  the  bladder,  by  which  it  both  retain'd  and  difcharg'd
the  urine,  was  loft  by  paralyfis ;  the  afliftant  women,  deceiv'd  by  the  conti-
nual dripping,  thought  that  as  much  urine  was  difcharg'd  from  the  bladder,
as  was  continually  flowing  down  into  it :  and  the  old  woman  herfelf  either
could  not  feel,  or  could  not  make  known,  this  very  great  diftenfion  ;  fo  that
it  happen'd  to  her,  as  it  has  happen'd  to  others  from  the  fame  fallacy  {s)i
that  the  died  very  fooa.

For  the  body  being  brought  into  the  theatre,  that  I  might  begin  to  teach
anatomy  from  thence,  in  the  month  of  January  of  the  year  17^:^5,  that  caufe
of  death  came  firft  into  view,  and  perverted  the  order  of  teaching.  For
when  the  belly  was  open'd,  the  bladder  appear'd  to  be  fo  diftended  with
urine,  as- to  reach  to  the  navel,  and  to  occupy  both  the  ilia-,  the  inteftines
being  driven  upwards  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  on  one  fide  they  forc'd  the
liver  and  diaphragm  up  very  high,  and  on  the  other  fide  pufh'd  the  fpleen
and  the  ftomach  towards  the  middle  of  the  e.pigaftrium.

But  the  vifcera  were  all  of  a  green  colour,  and  had  a  very  putrid  fmell  j-
fo  that  I  order'd  them  all  to  be  immediately  taken  out  of  the  belly,  and
buried  in  the  ground.  What  appearances  therefore  I  obferv'd  in  the  thorax^
the  neck,  and  the  limbs,  that  were  preternatural,  I  fliall  add  here ;  for
having,  in  the  mean  while,  got  better  bodies,  we  did  not  touch  the
head.  ^i^

The  pericardium  was  conneded  with  the  anterior  furface  of  the  great  vef-
fels,  and  of  the  heart :  with  the  former  by  filaments,,  but  with  the  latter  by
itfelf ;  and  that  for  as  great  a  fpace  as  two  inches  would  have  cover'd,  both  in
length  and  breadth.  And  this  circumftance  made  me  enquire,  from  him
who  had  been  the  phyfician  of  this  apopledic  woman,  whether  her  pulfe  had
been,  in  any  fenfe,  peculiarly  irregular  ,  and,  in  particular,  whether  they,
had  intermitted ;  which  he  immediately  and  exprefsly  anfwer'd  in  the
negative.

The  great  artery  began  to  become  rough,  on  its  internal  furface,  at  a
fmall  diftance  above  the  valves  -,  as  if  from  a  prominence  of  fibres  drawn  in  a
longitudin?!  diredtion,  and  disjoin'd  from  each  other  here  and  there  :  this
roughnefs  was  extended  for  two  inches  in  length,  and  fomewhat  lefs  in
breadth. The  thyroid  gland,  befides  being  very  large,  had  its  anterior  fur-

{1)  Vid.  Epift.  42.  n.  22,  ubi  &  hsc  biftoria  promittitur.

face
6


Letter  LVI. Article  13.  291

face  alfo  prominent  with  certain  globular  bodies  as  it  were,  or  at  leafl  in
fome  places.

The  left  of  the  lower  limbs,  on  which  fide  the  woman  had  been  lame,  was
turn'd  with  the  knee  towards  the  infide,  and  with  the  heel  towards  the  out-
lide :  it  was  alio  fhorter  than  the  right,  and  if  you  excepted  the  back  part  of
the  foot,  in  which  part  it  feem'd  to  be  pretty  thick,  was  very  much  extenu-
ated, and  moreover  deform'd  with  a  large  cicatrix,  as  if  from  a  large  ulcer
which  had  occupied  the  external  part  of  the  fibula  longitudinally ;  whereas
the  right  limb  had  a  very  good  appearance,  was  well  nourifh'd,  and  furnifh'd
with  fuch  wide  veins,  that  I  never  remember  to  have  feen  wider  in  any
lower  limb  whatever.

And  as  this  was  a  proof  of  a  greater  quantity  of  blood  flowing  into  that
limb,  in  proportion  as  lefs  flow'd  into  the  oppofite,  fo  it  made  me  regret
having  order'd  the  vifcera  and  vefiTels  of  the  belly  to  be  buried  ;  as  it  was
now  no  longer  pofllble  to  fee  how  the  left  iliac  vein  appear'd  near  to
the  cava.

Finally,  the  fuperior  joint  of  the  left  os  femoris  being  laid  bare,  we  found
the  head  of  that  bone  not  fo  globular  as  it 'generally  is,  but  become  almoffc
flat  as  it  were,  and  Ibmewhat  enlarg'd ;  nor  was  it  furnilh'd  with  any  round
ligament  by  which  it  could  be  conneAed.  It  was  receiv'd  into  an  acetabulum
lefs  hollow  than  it  naturally  is,  yet  incrufted  with  a  cartilage.  And  there
was  at  the  anterior  border  of  this  acetabulum,  another  cavity  much  lefs  than
itfelf :  a  cavity  of  which  kind  was  no  where  before  the  acetabulum  of  the
right  OS  femoris.

Moreover,  the  acetabulum  of  the  left,  although  if  you  referr'd  it  to  its
own  OS  ilium,  that  is,  to  the  os  ilium  of  the  left  fide,  feem'd  to  be  neither
lower,  nor  higher,  nor  more  pofl:erior  than  that  of  the  right,  if  you  com-
par'd  this  alfo  with  its^  own  os  ilium  ;  yet  it  was  more  diftant  from  the  com-
miffure  of  oflTa  pubis  than  the  acetabulum  of  the  right  fide.  For  the  left  os
ilium  was  alfo  much  more  diftant  from  the  fame  commiifure  than  the  rio^ht
OS  ilium.

13.  Thofe  things  that  relate  to  the  connexion  of  the  heart  and  peri-
cardium, join'd  with  no  intermiffion  of  the  pulfe,  you  will  refer  to  that
place  (/)  where  we  have  already  treated  of  connexions  of  this  kind,  and  their
effecls.

But  as  to  what  relates  to  the  acetabulum,  in  which  the  head  of  the  femur
was  receiv'd,  I  do  not  doubt  but  by  comparing  this  obfervation  of  ours,
with  thofe  of  the  celebrated  men  taken  notice  of  above,  you  will  readily
acknowledge  that  this  had  been  hollow'd  out  by  the  head  of  the  bone,  which
had  long  before  fallen  out  from  its  natural  acetabulum  ;  the  veftices  of
which  were  fl:ill  remaining  in  that  very  near,  anterior,  and  much  lefs
cavity.

For  as  to  the  new  acetabulum  being  lefs  deep  than  the  natural  acetabulum
is,  and  the  head  of  the  femur  being  inclin'd  from  a  globular  to  a  flat  figure  ;
you  very  well  underftand,  from  thefe  marks,  that  while  one  bone  was  preis'd
againft  the  other  by  its  weight,  or  forc'd  by  the  motion  of  the  mufcles,  the

(/)  Epift.  23.  n.  iS,  («)  n.  5,  &  6.

P  p  2  one


2  p  2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

one  was  mutually  rubb'd  by  the  other,  and  deprefs'd  ;  fo  that  by  this  means
the  acetabulum  was  hollow'd  out,  which  if  nature  iti'elf  had  prepar'd,  would
not  only  have  been  form'd  deeper  and  nearer  to  the  commiflure  of  the  pubes,
but  the  head  of  the  bone  would  have  been  globular,  and  connected  by  the
ligamentum  teres.

For  as  to  its  being  incrufted  with  a  cartilage,  the  cartilaginous  nature  per-
haps had  not  been,  as  yet,  chang'd  into  a  bony  nature  in  that  part  when  the
excavation  was  begun  ;  fo  that  it  was  not  fuperinduc'd  afterwards,  but  only
preierv'd.

As  to  that  other  cavity,  however,  which  was  neareft  to  the  commiflTure  of
the  pubes,  being  the  old  acetabulum,  and  prepar'd  by  nature  itfclf  formerly,
this  is  clear  from  the  fituation  of  it ;  nor  does  the  fmallnefs  of  it  contradidl:
the  fuppofition :  whether,  as  it  perform'd  that  office  in  the  beginning  of  life,
it  never  was  requir'd  to  be  of  a  larger  fize  ;  or  whether,  as  we  frequently  fee
in  the  lockets  of  the  teeth,  upon  taking  away  the  bone  which  was  before  in-
ierted,  the  bony  fubftance  around  it  increafes,  and  fills  up,  or  nearly  fills  up,
the  finus :  and  this  I  alfo  have  feen  in  a  lame  man,  whofe  hiftory  I  promis'd
to  compleat  in  this  place.

14.  The  wool-comber,  therefore,  whofe  mortal  wound  I  have  defcrib'd
on  a  former  occafion  (x),  was  lame  on  the  right  fide,  as  I  have  there  faid.
This  man  being  born  with  an  equality  of  both  lower  limbs  (for  of  one  who
was  well  known  I  could  learn  the  circumftances  I  enquir'd  after,  though  I
have  endeavour'd  at  it  in  vain  in  regard  to  others  very  frequently)  his  mother
obferv'd,  when  fhe  was  taking  him  out  of  the  cradle  while  he  was  yet  very
young,  and  even  in  the  firft  months  of  his  life,  that  he  had  a  pain  in  the
right  limb ;  whether  fome  external  accident,  unknown  to  her,  had  brought
it  on,  or  fome  internal  caufe.

After  this  pain,  that  limb  then  became  fliorter ;  fo  that  when  the  boy
began  to  walk  afterwards,  it  was  furprizing  to  nobody  that  he  ftiould  be
lame.  And  by  habit  he  gain'd  an  eafy  and  expeditious  method  of  walking,
notwithftanding  his  lamenefs.

The  dileafe  of  the  joint,  from  whence  the  occafion  of  another  diforder,
though  but  inconfiderable,  had  arifen,  in  my  opinion ;  that  is  to  fay,  a
diforder  which  had  incurvated  the  fpine  of  the  thorax,  fomewhat  to  that  fide,
while  the  man  endeavour'd  to  incline  the  weight  of  his  body  to  the  left  limb,
which  was  more  firm ;  the  difeafe  of  the  joint,  I  fay,  on  the  left  fide,  ap-
pear'd  in  the  following  manner.

The  acetabulum,  which  nature  had  prepar'd  in  its  ufual  fituation  from  the
original  formation,  remain'd  only  in  one  half  of  it,  and  that  anteriorly:  and
in  the  fundus  thereof  was  a  kind  of  fubftance  of  a  reddifh,  but  pale  colour,
fo  as  to  feem  morbid  ;  and  if  you  touch'd  it,  you  would  fuppofe  it  to  be  nOC
of  a  ligamentous,  but,  in  fome  meafure,  of  a  glandular  nature.

The  other  half  part  of  the  acetabulum  was  fill'd  with  a  bony  fubftance,
and  was,  befides,  cover'd  over  with  a  bone  in  fome  meafure  round ;  into
which  the  neighbouring  furface  of  the  os  innominatum  had  grown  out.
Above  this  old  acetabulum  was,  on  the  external  furface  of  the  os  iliun?,

{x)  Epift.  54,  n.  46. .

another


Letter  LVI. Article  1 5-.  293

another  acetabulum  as  it  were,  conftrufled  of  a  white  firm  fubftance,  and
very  fimilar  to  that  whereof  the  ligaments  are  conftrudled  ;  a  border  being
moreover  added,  into  which  it  was  prominent,  not  only  on  the  anterior,  but
alfo  on  the  fuperior  part ;  and  which  was  of  a  middle  nature,  betwixt  carti-
lage and  ligament.

This  furface  of  the  acetabulum  was  fmooth,  if  you  excepted  one  place
therein,  which  was  lower  than  the  other  part ;  and  was  fill'd  up  by  a
reddilh,  and  not  very  fmall,  fubftance,  that  was  eafily  known  to  be  a  muci-
laginous gland.  Into  this  acetabulum  the  head  of  the  femur  was  receiv'd,
which  was  furnifh'd  with  no  ligamentum  teres,  as  ufual,  nor  endow'd  with
its  wonted  magnitude,  form,  or  fmoothnefs.  For  where  it  began  to  afcend
from  the  cervix,  there  none  of  thefe  properties  was  wanting.  But  after  it
had  proceeded  thus  for  fome  little  vi^ay,  it  was  deprefs'd,  and  fliow'd  the
bony  fubftance  depriv'd  of  its  cartilage  :  yet  this  bony  fubftance  appear'd
firm  on  the  upper  part,  hard,  and  of  a  white  colour;  but  granulated,  juft
as  we  frequently  fee  the  furface  of  calculi  of  the  urinary  bladder  to  be.

15.  If  it  feem'd  furprifing  to  you,  that,  in  the  old  woman  of  whom  I
fpoke  juft  now  (jy),  the  new  acetabulum  did  not  want  a  cartilaginous  cruft  ;
it  will  perhaps  feem  more  wonderful  that,  in  this  man,  it  did  not  want  a  mu-
cilaginous gland  :  not  to  mention  the  border,  or  fupercilium,  as  it  is  call'd,
of  the  fame  kind  with  that  wherewith  the  natural  acetabulum  is  furnifh'd.

Without  doubt  many  things  are  form'd  whofe  mode  and  ratio  of  forma-
tion are  very  obfcure.  Nor  does  it  fail  to  excite  admiration,  that  the  old
acetabulum,  in  fo  long  a  time,  was  not  more  fiU'd  up  at  leaft,  if  not  en-
tirely obliterated  :  and  it  is  alfo  furprizing,  that,  as  the  bones  were  tender,
the  new  acetabulum  itfelf  was  not  hollovv'd  out  into  the  bones,  but  was  even
made  up  of  a  fubftance  which  may  feem  to  agree  more  with  the  opinion  of
Hippocrates  and  Galen  (z),  than  with  the  obfervations  of  later  authors.

But  it  is  my  bufinefs  to  defcribe,  with  the  utmoft  fidelity,  thofe  things
that  I,  and  all  who  were  prefent,  perceiv'd  with  our  hands  and  our  eyes;
whether  they  are  of  a  furprizing  nature  or  not :  and  it  is  your  bufinefs  to
obferve,  that  the  loft  ufe  of  limbs  is  repair'd  by  nature,  in  more  than  one
way :  and  although  the  method  difcover'd  by  the  more  modern  authors  may
be  true  in  other  bodies,  it  does  not  therefore  follow,  that  the  method  v/hich-
the  more  ancient  authors  had  hinted,  can  never  happen  in  any.

But  if  you  ftill  defire  other  examples  of  analogous  articulation,  as  it  is
call'd,  either  that  you  may  compare  them  with  thofe  which  are  given  by  us,
or  that,  at  leaft,  you  may  have  more  to  join  to  the  Sepulchretum  ;  read  over
attentively  the  very  learned  diflertations  of  Saltzmann,  and  other  obfervations
of  other  perfons,  and  of  his  alfo,  which  I  have  referr'd  to  above.  And  to
thefe  join  thofe  that  are  extant  in  the  writings  of  thofe  celebrated  men  Gut-
termann  (a),  Schlitingius  (i^),  and  Ludwigius  (c)  ;  and  if  you  defire ,  to
know  of  a  new  articulation,  made  from  a  luxation  in  the  upper  limb  alfo,
that  of  Henry  Albertus  Nicolaus  (i).

CyJ  n.  12.  {^)  Comraer.  Litter.  A.  i74i.Hebd.  T.  n.  2,

1 [z)  Supra,  n.  6.  (<■)  Prog,  de  Collo  Femor,  &c.

(a),  Aa.  N.  C.  Tom.  3.  Obf.  105..  in  fin.  {d)  Dec.  Obf.  illuffr.  Anati  Obf.  6.

And:


3-^4 Book  IV. Of  Cliimrgical  and  Unlveifal  Diforders.

And  not  to  recede  from  the  lower  limb,  whereof  we  are  at  prefent  fpeak-
ino-;  in  the  fecond  and  third  of  thefe  authors,  and  in  like  manner  in  Plat-
ner  {e)  and  others,  you  wdl  find  a  great  number  of  remarks  relating  to  the
fracture,  or  luxation,  of  the  thigh  at  its  upper  part  -,  and  the  latter  of  thefe
fometimes  from  external  force,  fometimes  from  an  erofion  of  the  ligaments,
and  at  other  times  from  laxity.

From  erofion,  for  inftance,  as  In  the  cafe  publifh'd  at  Flail,  in  the  year
1742  (/),  and  in  others  before  propos'd  by  Mauchartus  (g),  and  by  Schul-
zius  {h)  ;  and  from  laxity,  as  in  the  example  of  the  celebrated  Boctti-
cherus  (?),  than  which  you  will  not  eafily  find  one  more  extraordinary  -,  for
the  ligaments,  of  which  we  are  fpeaking,  were  fo  relax'd,  in  confequence  of
a  peftilential  fciatica,  that  "  they  made  both  the  feet  longer  to  the  meafure
"  of  a  whole  fpan,  than  they  had  been  in  their  natural  ftate  :"  which  is  indeed
furprizing  ;  but  another  circumftance  ftill  more  fo  ;  I  mean  that  the  patient
was  perfeifily  cur'd,  "  fo  that  (he  could  walk  again,  after  that,  freely,  and
"  without  any  inconvenience."

Finally,  you  will  alfo  add  to  the  number,  that  luxation  which  is  fpoken
of  by  Petit  the  furgeon  {k)  ;  which  did  not  happen  fo  much  from  an  external
caufe,  as  from  an  injury  brought  thereby  upon  the  mucilaginous  glands  of
the  acetabulum  :  fo  that  the  mucilage,  being  fecreted  in  greater  quantity,
and  relaxing  the  ligamentum  teres  gradually,  or  breaking  it,  forc'd  the
head  of  the  bone  out  of  its  cavity,  after  a  long  time,  though  not  imme-
diately.

16.  Thus  far  you  have  heard  of  the  more  confiderable  difeafes  that  we
have  met  with  in  the  upper  joint  of  the  thigh.  Nor  was  that  inconfiderable
which  was  obferv'd  in  a  lame  woman,  whofehiflory  I  defer  to  the  next  letter,
in  which  the  gout  will  be  treated  of  (l).  There  are  alfo  fome  more  flight
diforders,  with  regard  to  which,  as  they  have  been  feen  in  lame  perfons,
■we  muft  not  here  fail  to  fpeak,  and  endeavour  to  lay  open  theirnature.

17.  An  old  woman  of  Tufcany  was  fo  lame,  from  a  contufion  of  the  cox-
■endix,  that  fhe  was  oblig'd  to  confine  herfelf  to  bed  for  a  long  time.  A  pain
of  the  Vi'hole  body  came  on;  and,  from  her  long-continued  pofture,  a  gan-
grene about  the  buttocks.  Therefore  gradually  finking,  and  becoming
weak,  Ihe  died  about  the  beginning  of  March  in  the  year  1744,  in  the  hof-
pital  at  Padua.

Althoucrh  the  body  of  this  woman  was  of  ufe,  in  order  to  take  notice  of,  and
demonftrate,  to  the  pupils,  many  parts  in  their  natural  ftate,  which  are  foreign
to  the  prefent  purpofe ;  yet  in  doing  of  this  I  did  not  fail  to  remark  fome
things  which  related  more  to  the  prefent  occafion.

In  the  belly,  the  right  lobe  of  the  liver,  on  its  upper  and  convex  furface,
and  from  the  pofterior  to  the  anterior  part,  was  hollow'd  out  into  fo  deep  a
fulcus,  that  it  would  admit  the  finger ;  nor  were  other  fulci  wanting  rnore  to
the  right  hand  than  this :  and  if  thefe  kinds  of  fulci  were  found  in  women

{e)  Inftit.  Chir.  in  not.  ad  §.  1193.  &  1 194.  {■/>)  Ad.  N.  C.Tom,  i.  Obf.  235.

CfJ  De  Amput.  Femor.  non  cruenta  §  18.  (/)  Eorund.  Aft.  Tom,  7.  Obf.  zi.

ad  n.  6.  (i)  Mem.  de  V  Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1722.

(g)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  9.  Obf.  34.  -  (/)  Epift.  57.  n.  2.

only.


Letter  LVI. Article  1 8.  . 295.

only,  there  might  be  room  for  hefitation,  whether  they  were  not  the  efiefts
of  having  worn  very  ftiff  ilays,  which  women  are  wont  to  do  while  they  are
young.

The  liver  itfelf  feem'd  to  be  made  up,  both  internally  and  externally,  of
very  fmall  and  white  corpufcles,  which  vvere  intercepted  by  very  flender  in-
terftices,  of  a  brown  or  reddilh  colour  inclining  to  yellow.  The  gibbous
furface  of  the  fpleen  was  white,  as  if  from  a  kind  of  thick  cruft  ;  the  flat
furface  was  black.

The  teftes  were  very  much  contraded,  and  deprefs'd  into  a  kind  of  thin
lamina.  The  orifice  of  the  uterus  was  large,  in  fome  meafure  triangular,,
and  furrounded  with  no  protuberating  ring.  The  whole  internal  furface  of
the  fundus  was  black  and  gangrenous.

The  thorax  was  encompafs'd  with  twelve  ribs  on  the  right  fide  ;  but  on
the  left  with  eleven  only.  .  For  the  firll  and  fecond  of  thefe  confided,  in  the
chief  part,  of  no  more  than  one  bone  :  that  is  to  fay,  thefe  two,  having  come
out  feparately  from  the  vertebrjE,  by  their  little  heads,  had  fcarcely  pafs'd  the
length  of  an  inch  but  they  became  one  broad  bone  -,  in  which  there  was  not.
the  leaft  appearance  of  there  ever  having  been  any  divifion.

That  bone,  when  it  had  gone  fo  far,  as  to  be  diftant  from  the  fternum.
about  the  fpace  of  three  inches,  fent,  from  its  upper  border,  a  round  oblong
cartilage  into  the  fternum ;  which  cartilage  was  fcarcely  equal  to  half  the.
breadth  of  a  little  finger :  and  the  bone,  being  then  contradted  in  its  other,
part,  yet  fo  as  to  retain  its  breadth  ;  which  was  not  lefs  than  that  of  the  firft
right  rib  •,  and  leaving  a  fmall  fpace  betwixt  itfelf  and  that  round  cartilage,,
was  join'd  to  the  fternum  by  another  proper  cartilage.

In  the  pericardium  was  fome  quantity  of  water.  The  right  auricle  of  the.
heart  was  diftended  with  blood.  The  heart  itfelf,  even  when  the  fat  was  re-
mov'd  from  it,  was  much  larger  than  it  ought  to  be  ;  and  not  only  on  ac-
count of  the  ventricles  being  wider  than  ufual,  and  particularly  the  left,  but_
alfo  on  account  of  the  parietes  of  this  laft-mention'd  ventricle  being  much
thicker  than  when  of  their  natural  fize.

Part  of  one  of  the  mitral  valves  was  become  bony;  or  at  leaft  had  a
little  bone  fubjoin'd  to  it,  which  was  made  up  of  many  bones,  as  it  were,
and  for  that  reafon  unequal,  of  a  roundifti  figure,  and,  in  its  magnitude,,
equal  almoft  to  the  point  of  the  little  finger.  In  the  heart  were  Ibme  poly-
pous concretions,  and  a  great  quantity  of  black  blood  :  and  the  fame  kind
of  blood,  though  more  fluid,  flow'd  out,,  in  feveral  places,  from  the  larger
veins,  when  cut  into.

Finally,  upon  examining  the  upper  joint  of  the  lame  limb,  I  found  the
Ijgamentum  teres,  which  has  fo  often  been  mention'd,  to  be  lefs  thick  and'
firm  therein,  than  it  naturally  is;  and  to  be  almoft  univerfally  ting'd  with  a,,
pale  rednefs.

18.  Another  old  woman,  who  v/as  already  crooked  from  age,  and  who
was  wont  to  walk  as  if  fhe  were  lame,  had  lately  fallen  down  ftairs  in  the
night,  and  greatly  hurt  her  head.  And  this  was  the  caufe  of  her  death.
As  (he  was  diflTefted,  by  me,  in  the  fame  place,  before  the  fpring-time  of
the  year  1749,  fome  things  were  obferv'd  that  relate  to  the  prefent  fub-
jea


2  9^ Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgicai  and  Univerfal  Diforders,

In  the  thorax,  the  trunks  of  the  large  vefTels  were  fo  much  on  the  left'
fide  •,  although  the  woman  was  not  gibbous,  but  only  crooked  with  age,
as  I  have  laid  ;  that  I  never  law  the  vena  fine  pari  more  infleded  to  the  left
fide,  in  order  to  open  itklf  into  the  cava.

In  the  belly,  the  external  furface  of  the  kidnies  was  not  altogether  na-
tural: and,  indeed,  one  of  them,  moreover,  fhew'd  Ibme  fmall  hydatids,
which  were  fomewhat  protuberant  therefrom.  In  examining  the  genitals,
I  obferv'd  that  the  left  nyinpha  was  not  to  be  found  at  prefent,  nor  ever
had  exifted  ;  and  the  right  was  fmall.  The  hypogaftric  arteries  were  wider
than  ufual,  and  hard  •,  and  one  of  them  was  not  without  an  offificacion,  where
it  fent  out  the  umbilical  artery.  When  I,  at  the  fame  time,  examin'd  the
neighbouring  iliacs  from  whence  they  arife,  and  faw  that  the  right  did  not  at
all  differ  from  its  natural  ftate,  either  in  breadth,  or  in  the  thicknefs  of  its
coats ;  I  wonder'd  to  find  the  left  not  only  lefs  wide  than  ufual,  but,  parti-
cularly, furnifh'd  with  fuch  very  thin  parietes,  that  it  feem'd  to  be  a  vein,
almoft  from  that  place  where  it  gave  off  the  hypogaftric  artery,  quite  to
the  part  where  it  came  out  of  the  belly.

And  this  circumftance  brought  to  mind  what  I  had  feen  in  two  other-
women  {m)  ;  although  in  them,  not  the  arteries,  but  the  veins,  were  nar-
rower than  ufual,  nor  ceas'd  to  be  narrow  in  the  thigh,  of  which  they  had
been  lame.  But  the  artery  of  this  woman,  when  it  had  come  out  from  the
belly,  entirely  recover'd  its  proper  width,  and  thicknefs  of  parietes  ;  as  I
clearly  perceiv'd  by  comparing  it  with  its  fellow  on  the  right  fide.

However,  in  the  upper  joint  of  the  thigh,  on  the  left  fide,  I  could  ob-
ferve  nothing  from  whence  to  account  for  that  flight  lamenefs ;  unlefs  you
fliould  fuppofe  that  two  fmall  and  flight  contufions,  as  it  were,  of  a  brownilh
colour,  which  were  diftinguifh'd  in  the  cartilage  that  invefted  the  head  of
that  femur,  and  lay  near  to  each  other,  might  have  a  relation  to  this
effeft.

19.  There  were  two  other  lame  v/omen  alfo,  (for  it  has  happen'd  to  me
to  find  this  difeafe  more  frequently  in  them  than  in  men,  whether  by  mere
accident,  or  becaufe,  by  reafon  of  their  fl:ru6ture  of  body,  being  lefs  robuft,
women  are  more  fubjeft  thereto)  in  differing  of  whofe  bodies  I  thought
that  I  had  found  a  more  manifeft  caufe  of  that  diforder ;  but  I  afterwards
doubted  whether  I  was  not  deceiv'd.  Be  this  as  it  will,  I  will  here  firft
relate  to  you  both,  of  the  obfervations ;  for  they  contain  other  remarks  that
are  not  to  be  doubted,  and  that  were  promis'd  you  by  me  formerly,  amongfl:
thofe  obfervations  that  relate  to  lamenefs ;  and  then  will  likewife  declare  the
caufe  of  my  doubt.

20.  A  lame  woman,  who  was  not  very  old,  had  been  carried  off  by  a
dropfy,  about  the  middle  of  December  in  the  year  1746.  As  I  demon-
ftrated,  from  this  body,  only  the  brain,  the  genitals,  and  the  left  limb,  of
which  fhe  had  been  lame,  to  the  ftudents  of  anatomy  in  the  hofpital ;  I  ob-
ferv'd no  more,  in  relation  to  the  prefent  fubjeft,  than  what  follows.

In  taking  out  the  brain,  I  obferv'd,  in  the  dura  mater,  where  it  inveffed
jhe  bafis  of  the  cranium,  a  little  before.;  but  fomewhat  on  the  outer  fide;

(«)  Supra,  n,  10.  &  12.

a  little.


Letter  LVI. Article  21.  297

a  little,  I  fay,  before  the  foramen  into  which  the  left  optic  nei-ve  paffes,  that
ibmething  adher'd,  which,  if  .1  trtifted  to  the  colour,  feem'd  to  be  a  fmall
part  of  the  cortical  fubftance.  Yet  it  was  not  foft,  nor  was  the  pia  mater,
which  anfwer'd  to  that  place,  lacerated  ;  but  even  appear'd  to  be  found  and
fmooth.

Then  attending  to  it  more  diligently,  I  faw  it  to  be  a  globule,  of  the  big-
nefs  of  a  fmall  grape,  fomewhat  hard  in  its  fubftance,  and  foiid  ;  nor  did  ic
adhere  to  any  thing,  but  at  the  lower  part  of  it,  as  its  fmoothnefs  fhew'd  ;
and  by  this  it  was  very  firmly  fix'd  to  the  dura  mater  only,  and  not  to  the
bone  which  lay  beneath  it :  fo  that  I  judg'd  it  to  be  an  excrefcence  of  the
fame  membrane,  of  a  glandular  kind,  as  the  modification  of  its  fubftance
fhew'd ;  and  the  beginning  of  a  tumour,  which,  if  it  had  increas'd,  would
not  only  have  injur'd  the  neighbouring  optic,  and  olfadbory  nerves,  but  the
brain  alfo.

From  the  upper  and  exterior  part  of  the  fundus  uteri,  to  the  ricrht  fide,
a  tubercle  was  prominent,  of  the  fame  figure  and  magnitude  which  was  juft
now  taken  notice  of,  in  that  excrefcence  of  the  dura  mater ;  being  equally
folid,  but  white.  To  this  correfponded  another,  internally,  that  was  pretty
foft  and  low,  and  manifeftly  made  up  of  a  congeries  of  veficles,  of  the  fame
kind  with  thofe  we  generally  fee  in  the  cervix  uteri ;  for  they  were  fill'd  with
the  fame  limpid  mucus  as  thefe :  and  this  is  the  tubercle  which  I  promis'd,
in  the  forty-feventh  letter  (;z),  to  fpeak  of  here.

The  fubftance  of  the  uterus,  which  lay  betwixt  both  thefe  tubercles,  was
perfedly  found.  But  the  other  parts,  that  belong  to  the  genitals ;  if  you
except  the  teftes,  on^  of  which  was  lefs  than  the  other,  but  both  of  them,
contraded,  of  an  unequal  furface,  and  internally  and  externally  white-,  were
not  only  found  ;  but  the  loweft  of  all  were  nearly  in  the  fame  ftate  as  they
are  in  virgins.  •

For  that  part  whichHs  call'd  the  furcula,  was  tenfe  ;  the  orifice  of  the  va-
gina was  narrow;  and  furnilh'd  with  a  hymen;  except  that  here,  contrary
to  what  we  generally  fee,  it  became  lefs  broad,  in  proportion  as  it  was  more
diftant  from  the  orifice  of  the  urethra;  as  I  fliall  more  accurately  defcribe
in  another  place.  Yet  this  woman  did  not  feem  to  have  had  knowledge  of
a  man.

Finally,  it  was  manifeft  to  all  who  faw  the  lower  limb  on  the  left  fide,
that  it  was  fo  fituated,  as  to  make  the  toes  of  the  foot  be  turn'd  towards
the  other  foot;  nor  was  it  eafy  for  the  hands  to  reftore  them  into  their  na-
tural fituation  :  and  the  wo.Tian  was  faid  to  have  walk'd  by  bearing  on  that
part  of  the  metatarfus  which  is  neareft  to  the  toes.  But  as  the  foot,  the  leo-,
the  knee,  and  the  thigh,  as  far  as  could  be  judg'd  by  looking  upon  them
externally,  were  free  from  diibrder,  and  feem'd  to  be  each  of  a  proper
length;  I  laid  bare  the  upper  joint  of  the  thigh,  and  thought  that  the  cervix
of  that  limb  feem'd  to  be  Ihorter  than  the  middle-fiz'd  ftature  of  this  woman
"  feem'd  to  require.

21.  A  little  decrepid  old  woman,  who  was  lame  alfo,  died  about  twenty

(«)  N.  20.
Vol.  Ill  Q^q  days


398 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

days  after  her  laft  fpoken  of,  of  an  abfcefs,  if  I  remember  rightly,  of  the
arm.  Diflefting,  therefore,  the  lame  and  other  parts  over  again,  we  found
the  following  preternatural  appearances.

When  I  look'd  upon  the  brain,  after  it  was  taken  out  from  the  cranium,
and  inverted  ;  1  obferv'd  that  the  trunks  of  both  carotid  arteries,  and  the
larger  branches  thereof,  appear'd  very  firm  :  and  I  found  that  the  parietes
thereof  were  really  become  much  thicken'd.  On  the  other  hand,  though
the  nerves,  and  particularly  thofe  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  pair,  were  very
fine,  firm,  and  thicker  than  ufual ;  yet  I  faw  the  optic  nerves  to  be  de-
prefs'd  into  the  form  of  a  thin  bandange,  narrow,  and  of  a  cineritious  co-
lour ;  and  that  medullary  part,  which  is  interpos'd  betwixt  them,  where  they
join  one  another,  to  be  pretty  broad  indeed,  but  not  at  all  different  from
them  in  colour,  or  thinnefs.

And  they  themfelves  -,  though  when  they  had  gone  within  the  orbits,  they
were  of  a  white  colour,  and  of  a  moderate  kind  of  thicknefs ;  when  cut
into,  neverthelefs,  fhew'd  that  whitenefs,  and  a  confiderable  part  of  that
thicknefs,  to  be  owing  to  their  meninges  being  become  thicker  than  ufual :
within  which  meninges,  as  within  a  pretty  firm  kind  of  tube,  was  contain'd
a  bloody  fubftance,  particularly  in  one  of  the  nerves.

As  the  eye,  to  which  this  nerve  went,  as  well  as  the  other,  fhew'd  no
diforder  when  look'd  upon  externally  -,  fo  neither  did  it  fliew  any  internal
difeafe,  when  it  was  differed  by  me:  fo  that  I  very  clearly  perceiv'd  this
diforder,  which  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  formerly  (o),  in  the  optic  nerves,
not  always  to  have  its  occafion  and  origin  from  difeas'd,  and  perfeftly  blind
eyes,  (for  they  affirm'd  that  this  woman,  furprifing  a^-it  is,  was  not  blind,
unlefs  it  was  that  Ihe  faw  a  little  with  the  other  eye)  nor  yet  from  the  brain,
but  that  it  firft  arifes,  fometimes,  in  the  nerves  themfelves  (/>).

In  this  woman,  at  leaft,  though  I  accurately  differed  the  brain ;  within
which  1  could  fcarcely  follow  thefe  nerves,  by  reafon  of  their  thinnefs  -,  I
met  with  no  diforder  in  their  paffage,  or  in  their  thalami. And  although  ■
I  obferv'd  the  hippocampi,  at  their  lower  and  extreme  parr,  to  be  not  at -
all  dilated,  as  they  generally  are,  yet  there  was  not  the  leaft  reafon  to  be-
lieve but  they  had  been  fo  from  the  original  formation.

And  befides  this,  there  was  nothing  unufual,  not  to  fay  morbid,  in  the
whole  brain  :  except  that  in  the  fourth  ventricle,  inftead  of  thofe  medulkry-
fibres,  which  occur  on  both  fides,  for  the  moft  part,  and  go  to  the  acouftic.
nerves,  there  was  but  one  on  each  fide,  and  that  flender ;  rifing,  and  having .
its  fituation  lower  than  ufual.

In  the  lower  jaw  I  obferv'd  fome  things,  which,  in  this  letter  in  particular, .
where  we  treat  of  luxations  and  fraftures  of  the  bones,  ought  not  to  be
omitted.  For  the  fmall  head  of  this  bone,  to  the  left,  grew  out  from  one
fide  of  its  fuperior  furface  upwards,  as  if  from  a  new  additamentum ;  as  I
have  heretofore  faid  (q)  was  feen  by  me  in  the  internal  parts  of  the  cranium  of
acertain  old  woman;  for  this  bony  excrefcence  alfo  was  white  and  firm  ;  and.


(0)  Epifl. 13.  n.  'j, &  feq. &  Epift. 52. fpj  Vid.  Epift.  63,  n,  8.  in  fin.
n.  30.  '  {({}  Epift.  27.  n.  z..


befidesj


Letter  LVI. Article  21.  ^95;,

befides,  like  the  remaining  part  of  that  head,  incrufted  with  a  thin  and
very  fmooth  cartilage.

If  this  additamentum  had  been  rais'd  up,  more  and  more,  by  its  increafe,
there  is  no  doubt  but  it  muft  have  thrown  the  head  out  of  its  finus  ;  or,  at
leaft,  that  it  muft  have  very  much  incommoded  the  motions  of  the  lower  jaw.
And  indeed  that  it  had,  in  part,  begun  to  do  fo  already,  this  perhaps  was  a
tellimony  ;  that  the  moveable  cartilage,  which  lies  betwixt  the  head  and  the
finus,  appear'd,  in  the  middle  of  it,  to  be  cut  with  a  knife,  as  it  were,  in
two  places ;  in  one  longitudinally,  in  the  other  in  a  tranfverfe  direction,  and
obliquely.

And  I  faid  perhaps,  even  becaufe  the  cartilage,  anfwering  thereto  in  the
right  joint,  was  pierc'd  through  with  a  very  fmall  foramen,  in  the  form  of  an
ellipfe,  and  fliut  up  by  no  membrane,  (though  I  know  that  a  larger  than  this
was  feen  formerly  (r)  )  and  although  this  was  fituated  in  the  middle,  but
neareft  to  one  of  the  extremities,  and  placed  longitudinally,  I  neverthelefs
evidently  demonftrated,  that,  in  this  fubjedl  aifo,  neither  of  the  cartilages
confifted  of  two.

But  as,  befides  the  dentes  incifores,  this  old  woman  had  no  tooth  left-;
having  fliown  the  whole  part  of  that  jaw,  on  both  fides,  which  had  been
formerly  furnifh'd  with  the  other  teeth,  not  only  to  be  without  all  traces  of
fockets,  but  to  want  that  portion  of  the  bone  in  which  the  fockets  formerly
bad  been ;  fo  that  the  foramina,  through  which  the  nerves  go  out  (they  are
cnWdfommina  mentalia),  were  now  almofl:  in  the  upper  and  external  margin
of  the  jaw;  and  therefore  that  the  height  of  this  bone  was  greatly  reduc'd,
as  is  very  clearly  obferv'd  and  reprefented  by  Ruyfch  (j) ;  1  added,  that  it
foUow'd  from  hence,  in  regard  to  thofe  perfons,  in  whom  the  body  of  this
bone  has  thus  decreas'd  after  the  lofs  of  the  teeth,  that  in  them,  unlefs  a
greater  hardnefs  of  the  bone,  on  account  of  the  advanc'd  age,  prevent  it,  the
whole  of  the  bone^on  that  part,  muft  be  much  fooner,  and  more  eafily,
corroded,  fometimes,  by  a  fupervening  caries;  or  broken  by  a  pretty  heavy
ftroke.

Upon  examining  the  thorax,  I  Ihow'd  four  arteries  to  arife  from  the  cur-
vature of  the  aorta  ;  for  the  vertebral  artery  of  the  left  fide  did  not  arife
from  the  left  fubclavian,  which  was  much  more  thin  than  the  right,  but,
betwixt  that  and  the  left  carotid,  yet  nearer  to  the  former  than  the  latter ;
and  as  this  circumftance  has  occurr'd  to  me  in  another  woman,  of  whom  we
have  fpoken  above  (/),  and  in  others  alfo  (a)  fometimes,  it  does  not  feem  to
deferve  a  place  among  the  more  rare  appearances.

But  the  great  artery,  betwixt  the  heart  and  the  right  fubclavian,  was  ma-
nifeftly  dilated  ;  and  when  it  was  cut  into,  quite  to  the  feptum  tranfverfum,
it  (how'd,  here  and  there,  in  feveral  places,  larger  or  leffer  fpaces,  fomewhat
prominent  internally,  and  of  a  white  colour ;  wherein  the  more  compact
fubftance  of  the  artery  would  afterwards  have  been  chang'd  into  a  bony
fubftance.

(r)  Vid.  Stephan.  cit.  in  Adverf.  11.  Ani- (/)  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  8z.  &  Fig.  65.  66.
Hiad.zS.  (/)  n.  10.

(a)  Vid.  Epift.  3.  n.  20.  &  Epift.  15.  n.  26.

Q^q  2  At


36 o Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Difordcrs.

-  At  the  upper  fiart  of  the  genitals,  and  within  one  of  the  teftes,  was  arr
hydatid,  of  a  confiderable  fize  ;  fo  that  it  extended  itfelf  to  make  up  a  part
of  the  furface  of  the  teftis  :  and,  at  the  lower  part,  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,,
from  whence  the  internal  coat  of  that  tube  ;  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  in-
ternal coat  of  the  vagina,  or  redum,  fometimes  is -,  having  inverted  itfelf  in
afmall  degree;  was  prolaps'd  outwardly  on  one  fide  :  and  this  I  have  already
faid  (.v)  I  had  feen  in  another  woman,  as  well  as  that  1  was  to  fpeak  of  this
woman  in  the  prefent  letter.

Laft  of  all,  the  right  limb,  of  which  fhe  had  been  lame,  was  ihorter  than
the  left :  and  being,  as  in  the  former  woman,  turn'd  inwards,  feem'd  to
have  the  fame  caufe  of  this  diibrder  as  in  the  former  ;  I  mean  the  fhortnefs  of
the  neck  of  the  femur.

22.  And  thus  it  really  feem'd  to  me  at  the  time;  and  perhaps  I  was  not
entirely  deceiv'd.  But  I  was  difpleas'd  with  myfelf  afterwards,  that  I  had
not  compar'd  the  neck  of  the  lame  thigh  with  the  neck  of  the  found  one  .--
which  would  have  been  the  only  proper  method  of  demonftrating,  whether"
I  had,  with  juftice,  fuppos'd  the  former  to  be  fhorter  than  natural,  or  nor.
For  perhaps  that  might  feem  fliorter  than  ufual,  which  was  of  a  proper,
length,  and  well-proportion'd  to  a  body  of  no  large  ftature  :  and  there  are  fo-
many  caufes  of  lamenefs,  not  only  above  the  acetabulum,  but  in  the  aceta--
bulum,  and  below  the  acetabulum,  that,  although  I  faw  many  of  them  ta-
be  abfent,  vet  perhaps  I  could  not  fufRciently  difcern  whether  all  of  thenrr
v.'ere  abfent  or  not.  And  I  choofe  here  to  take  notice  of  the  greateftpart  of
them,  in  that  order  which  was  juft  nov/  referr'd  to.

Above  the  acetabulum  is  any  deprav'd  fituation  whatever  of  the  os  inno-
minatum  ;  a  fituation  of  which  kind  was  added  to  the  other  diforders,  in-
rhofe  two  lame  women  whom  I  defcrib'd  above,  before  the  others  (y),  parti-
cularly in  the  firft.  And  the  celebrated  Baffius  (2)  produces  many  examples
of  a  diaftafis,  or  feparation,  of  tW  i^  facrum,  from  this  bone,  inchildren
that  are  lame;  adding  the  reafons  why  this  eafily  happens  to  infants,  the
figns  whereby  it  may  be  diflinguifli'd,  and  the  caufes  for  which  it  is  difficult
to  be  cur'd,  and  therefore  may  remain  through  the  whole  of  life;  as  in  a .
Venetian  young  man-who  was  brought  to  me  for-  the  fake  of  taking  my
advice,  I  faw  that  it  had  remain'd  from  childhood,  andjudg'd  that  it  would
always  remain;

And  if  you  confider  duly  thefe  things;  whenever  you  fee  thatone  limb
is  manifeftly  longer  or  fhorter  than  the  other,  and  the  caufe  of  this  inequality
is  not  manifeft  in  the  limb  itfelf ;  you  will  firft  of  all  examine  whether  the
fituation  of  the  ofTa  innominata  is  imequal ;  for  this  fituation  is  foUow'd  by
that  of  the  acetabulum,  as  it  is  hollow'd  out  inthefe  bones,  and  that  of  thfe
acetabulum  by  the  limb  ;  left  by  fuppofing  thofe  bones  to  be  alike  in  their
fituation,  which  are  not  fo  either  naturally,  or  by  the  force  of  difeafe,  you
are  foon  after  deceived,  in  judging  whether  the  limb  itfelf  be  really  longer  or
Ihorter  than  it  ought  to  be.


(x)  Epjft. 50. n. 51.  Vid.  &  Epift.  '70. OJ  n-  10.  &  12.-

10.  (3)  Dec.  4.  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  2.


23.  And


Letter  LVI. Articles  23, 24.  301

23.  And  in  the  acetabulum  itfelf,  you  very  well  conceive,  from  what  has
been  more  than  once  faid  above,  that  the  capacity  and  figure  of  the  liga-
mentum  teres,  and  the  head  of  the  femur,  may  be  dileas'd  in  many  ways.
And  to  thefe  things  we  mull  add  tumours,  whether  they  are  form'd  in  the
ligament,  as  our  Falloppius  {a)  hints  ;  or  in  any  other  part  within  the  aceta-
bulum, as  our  Veflingius  likewiie  (^)  in  general  fays  ;  where  he  fays,  that  he
had  frequently  vifited,  with  Sala,  a  Venetian  nobleman,  *'  in  whom  a  tu-
"  mour  having  arifcn  within  the  acetabulum  of  the  coxendix,  the  head  of  the
"femur  was  evidently  pufli'd  outwards."

And  Valfalva,  in  an  opinion  which  he  wrote  for  a  noble  youth,  in  whom
the  left  limb  was  become  longer  than  the  right,  fufpefted  that  the  mucila-
ginous gland  of  the  acetabulum  had  gradually  become  tumid  ;  not  only  be-
caufe  in  a  boy,  in  other  refpedts  found  and  healthy,  he  did  not  think  it  pro-
bable that  the  ligaments  were  relax'd,  but  becaufe  it  is  fo  natural  to  the
glands  to  fwell  :  and  laft  of  all,  becaufe,  after  laying  in  bed  a  long  time,-  in
confequence  of  an  acute  difeafe,  that  limb  was  found  to  be  very  much
longer  than  before,  which  he  accounted  for  from  the  increafe  of  the  gland,
by  reafon  of  being  fo  long  uncomprefs'd  by  the  head  of  the  femur ;  he  there-
fore advis'd,  among  other  things,  that  the  ftioe  under  the  right  foot,  on
which  the  child  us'd,  for  the  moft  part,  to  bear  firmly,  when  ftanding,
fhould  be  fo  much  higher  than  the  other,  as  to  make  both  the  limbs  equal,.
and  enable  him  to  bear  on  the  left  alfo,  and  comprefs  the  gland.

But  in  a  foldier,  whofe  cafe  was  publilh'd  at  fiall,  and  which  has  been
quoted  above  by  me  (c),  a  kind  of  fpongy  fubftance  was  really  found  ;  which
by  filling  more  than  half  of  the  acetabluum,  had  forc'd  the  head  of  the  fe-
mur from  thence.

24.  Finally,  under  the  acetabulum  itfelf  there  are  many  more  caufes  of
lamenefs.  For,  to^mit  mentioning  the  frafture  of  the  cervix  femoris,
whereof  we  have  fpoken,  and  the  difeafes  of  the  capfular  ligament,  as  it  is
cail'd,  the  mufcles,  in  the  firft  place,  which  preferve  the  thigh  in  its  fitua-
tion,  if  they  are  paralytic,  do  not  prevent  the  very  weight  of  the  whole
lower  limb  from  extending  the  ligaments,  and  drawing  the  head  of  the  fe-
mur downwards  :  or  h  they  are  contrafted  by  pain,  tumour,  or  convulfion,
they  keep  the  head  of  this  bone  buried  fo-  much  the  deeper,  and  prefs'd  up
fo  much  the  clofer,  in  the  acetabulum,  as  to  make  the  limb  feem  a  little
fliorter  than  it  really  is.

And  with  how  great  a  force  the  fame  mufcles  fometimes  aft,  even  by  the
natural  government  of  the- will,  is  demonftrated,  in  particular,  from  the  cafe
defcrib'd  by  Ingraffias  (d),  of  the  leffer  trochanter  of  the  thigh  being  puli'd
away  from  the  other  parts  of  the  bone,  ,by  forae  only  of  thofe  mufcles  which
a  young  man,  of  noble  birth,  had  immoderately  ftrain'd  in  the  exercife  of
tilting:  and  this  cafe  becomes  lefs  incredible  by  the  figures  of  Ruyfch  ((?)
more  than  by  others  ;  in  which  he  reprefents  the  fame  trochanter,  that  had  -
-feparated  from  the  os  femoris  of  a  young  man  by  boiling.

(a)  Praefat. in  Traft..  de luxat,  & fraft. (c)  n.  i;.
Ofiium.  j^dj  in  Gal.  1.  de  Oflib,  c.  zo.  Comm.  4.

l})  Epi.1-.  ?5.  (f)  Thef.  Anat.  5.,Tab.  2.  fig.  2.  &  3.

Indeed


3  o  2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

Indeed  any  frafture  of  the  femur  itfclf  is  fo  rarely  ctir'd,  without  a  lame-
nefs  being  the  confequence  thereof,  that  Celfus  has  exprefsly  faid  (/),  "  we
"  muft  not  be  ignorant  that,  if  the  femur  be  broken,  it  becomes  Ihorter  ^
"  becaufe  it  never  returns  afterwards  into  its  former  flate  :  and  that  wc
"  tread,  for  the  future,  on  the  upper  parts  of  the  toes  of  that  leg."

And  it  becomes  (hotter,  becaufe  betwixt  the  extremities  of  the  frafture
fome  part  is  loft,  which  has  been  fhiver'd  into  fragments  j  or  beca.ufe  thofe
extremities  are  adapted  to  each  other  with  fo  much  difficulty,  in  fuch  a  man-
ner as  to  preferve  the  natural  figure  and  pofition  of  the  bone;  as  in  that
femur  in  particular,  the  figure  of  which  is  publilli'd  by  Grutzmacker  (g)  ;
or  becaufe  even  when  well  adapted  to  each  other,  the  extremities  are  after-,
wards  mov'd  afunder  by  the  aftion  of  the  mufcles,  which  very  eafily  happens
in  an  oblique  and  oblong  frafture  ;  whereas  in  a  tranfverfe  frafture,  one  ex-
tremity puflies  againft  the  other,  fo  that  by  this  means  they  are  mutually  pre-
ferv'd  in  their  rtftor'd  pofuion.

To  theie  other  caufes  of  that  kind,  Valfalva  added  this  •,  that  in  thofe  ob-
lont^  and  oblique  fraftures,  which  are  brought  on  by  great  violence  and  im-
petus, fome  fibres  of  the  neighbouring  mufcles  may  fometimes  be  inter-
cepted betwixt  two  parts  of  the  fraflur'd  bone,  fo  as  to  hinder  an  exaft  co-
aptation and  coalition  ;  or  even  retard  the  coalition  for  a  very  long  time.
,But  although  none  of  thefe  things  which  have  been  mention'd  may  happen,
or  though  none  of  them  may  happen  in  that  manner  which  we  fpeak  of  here,
fo  as  to  make  the  os  femoris  fhorter  than  it  naturally  is ;  yet  lamenefs  can-
not be  avoided,  if  the  mufcles,  the  tendons,  or  the  nerves,  being  very
much  weaken'd  by  the  fradluring  caufe,  or  by  the  confequent  inconveni-
ences, either  cannot  move  the  thigh,  or  the  parts  which  lie  beneatli  it,  with
a  proper  ftrength,  or  in  a  proper  manner.

25.  It  is  alfo  manifeft,  that  even  the  parts  which  lie  beneath  the  femur,
are  not  only  liable  to  moft  of  thofe  difeafes  that  are  mention'd,  but  bring  on
lamenefs  in  the  perfon  fo  affefted.  It  will  therefore  be  fufficient  for  me  tp
fay  much  lefs  of  each  of  them  •,  beginning  with  the  joint  of  the  knee  ;  which,
however,  is  a  part  that  belongs  in  fome  meafure  to  the  thigh.

26.  A  woman,  of  whom  mention  is  made  in  the  iifty-fccond  letter  (h)^
though  her  hiftory  was  deferr'd  to  this  letter,  becaufe  fhe  could  not  bend
one  of  her  knees ;  having  receiv'd  a  violent  blow  on  her  forehead,  which
the  worft  kind  of  fymptoms  were  immediately  the  confequences  of,  had  thefe
fymptoms  difappear-,  and  lay  ill  in  the  hofpital,  of  fo  flight  a  fever,  that  on
the  feventh  day  (he  afk'd  for  a  lefs  (lender  diet.  But  on  the  fourteenth  day.
behold  a  more  violent  fever  attack'd  her,  with  a  coldnefs  and  perturbation  of
mind :  and  death  follow'd  on  the  feventeenth  day,  there  being  never  any
fymptom,  either  in  thefe  latter  days  or  in  the  former,  of  the  thorax  being
affefted  ;  and  no  complaint  of  this  kind  being  made.

It  was  now  the  month  of  December  in  the  year  1745-:  at  which  time,  as
it  was  my  annual  cuftom  to  demonftrate  a  great  number  of  things  to  the
pupils  in  the  hofpital ;  and  as  thefe  requir'd  the  dilTedion  of  the  thorax,

f/J  De  Medic.  1.  8.  c.  10.  Sefts  5.  <*)  n.  p.

y^;  Differt.  de  Off.  Medulla.


Letter  LVI. Article  27.  303

the  belly,  and  the  limbs,  they  did  not  allow  us  time  to  difedl  the  head;  it
was  not  therefore  open'd.  But  in  the  diffedtion  of  thofe  other  parts  thefe
preternatural  appearances  were  obferv'd.

One  of  the  thoracic  cavities  had  almoft  four  pints  qf  water,  of  a  middle
colour  betwixt  green  and  yellow ;  but  the  other  much  lefs  :  the  lungs  in  both
of  them  being  perfeiStly  uninjur'd.  In  the  pericardium  was  the  ufual  kind  of
moifture ;  nor  more  than  that :  but  the  heart  was  lax  :  and  in  the  right  au-
ricle thereof  was  a  polypous  concretion  of  a  white  colour,  thick,  and  com-
padt.  In  the  bcrlly  fcarcely  any  thing  was  obferv'd,  befides  an  inclination  of
the  uterus  to  one  fide.

Finally,  after  having  compar'd  the  limb  ;  the  leg  of  which  could  not  be
bent  even  by  my  hands,  being  prevented,  in  appearance,  by  the  knee ;
with  the  found  limb,  and  not  being  able  to  find  any  external  difference  by
the  eye,  except  that  the  rotula  was  Ibmewhat  more  prominent  than  ufual ;  I
determin'd  firft  to  try  whether  the  extenfor  mufcles  of  the  leg,  whatever  was
the  caufe  of  the  difeafe,  could  a£t  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  prevent,  by  this
contrary  adlion,  the  knee  from  being  bent.

Cutting  thefe  mufcles  therefore  tranfverfely,  at  a  little  diftance  above  the
knee,  the  leg  could  immediately  be  bent.  And  yet  the  knee,  as  the  promi-
nence of  the  rotula,  which  ftill  continued,  demonftrated,  was  not  wholly  free
from  difeafe.  For  the  rotula  was  prominent,  becauTe  the  external  condyle
of  the  femur  was  not  only  longer  from  the  pofterior  to  the  anterior  part ;
which  was  manifeftly  prov'd  by  comparing  it  with  the  external  condyle  of  the
ether  femur  ;.  but  was  even  prominent  forwards,  more  than  it  is  wont  to  be:
at  other  times.  Yet  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  equally  prov'd,  by  compa-
rifon,  that  the  lateral  external  ligament  of  the  knee  was  much  thicker  in  the
other  knee  than  in  this".

27.  As  it  has  been  fufficiently  pointed  out  in  the  letter  which  I  juft  now-
referr'd  to,  from  whence  that  water  in  part,  and  its  filthy  colour,  could  be
brought  into  the  thorax;,  and  as  the  other  circumftances  in  the  obfervation  ■
in  queftion,  are  fufficiently  clear  of  themfelves ;  I  will  mention  feme  things
of  the  contrary  affedtion  of  the  knees,  and  of  fome  of  their  difeafes.

The  knee  of  which  we  fpoke  juft  now  could  not  be  bent. And  the  illuftri-
ous  Haller  («'),  having  lit  upon  another  which  could  not  be  extended,  found  ^
no  other  caufe  of  this  impediment,  "  but  a  hard  and  almoft  tendinous  celu-  -
lofity,"  on  that  part,  I.fuppofe,  or  at  lealt  mofl  on  that  part,  which  was
pofterior  in  the  limb.

That  the  rotula  fhould  be  very  frequently  broken  tranfverlly,  as  moft  ge-
nerally happens,  is  not  at  all  to  be  wonder'd  at,  when  in  confequence  of  vio-
lent blows ;  but  this  is  furprizing,  that  either  from  a  violent  and  ftidden  con^
tradlion  of  the  mufcles  which  extend  the  leg,  or  from  the  refiflance  of  them,
this  very  bone  is  fometimes  broken  ;  or  the  flrong  tendons  of  the  mufcles  are
broken  afunder  above  it.  An  example  of  which  kind  of  rupture  you  will
read  in  the  celebrated  Baffius  {k\  and  before  him  two  in  Ruyfch  (/) ;  in


{;)  Opufc.  Pathpl,  Ohf.  50.  (/)  Adv.  Anat.  2.  c.

(k)  D-ec.  3.  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  6.


whona^


304 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

whom  (w),  and  in  Palfin  (n)  ;  not  to  mention  other  authors  belides  thofe
that  are  in  my  hands  while  I  am  writing  j  you  will  find  oblervations  of  this
kind  of  frafture.

The  celebrated  Baflius  (o)  has  alfo  obferv'd,  that  the  femiUinar  cartilages,
which  lie  in  the  joint  of  the  knee,  betwixt  the  femur  and  the  tibia,  may
lometimes  grow  out,  from  an  afflux  of  humours,  and  bring  on  a  lamenefs.

And,  finally,  in  regard  to  thofe  who  are  bandy-legg'd,  to  omit  what  Se-
verinus  has  written  at  large  (p) ;  Ruyfch  (j)  found,  in  an  adult  who  was
bandy-leo-g'd,  the  cavities  of  the  upper  part  of  the  tibise,  which  lie  beneath
thefe  cartilages,  not  equally  deprcfs'd  to  receive  the  condyles  of  the  femur  ;
and,  confequently,  both  thofe  bones  fituated  in  a  different  manner  from
their  natural  difpofition  :  which  circumilances  will  better  appear  from  the
figure  (r)  than  from  the  defcription.

Fori  have  talien  notice  of  thefe  things,  that  you  may  be  more  fully  in-
form'd,  from  the  books  of  thofe  that  1  have  quoted  ;  and  may  learn  from
thence  the  figns  by  which  you  may  diftinguiih  them,  and  how  and  when
you  may  undertake  the  cure  ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  when  the  time  is  paft
in  which  it  was  in  your  power  to  -be  of  fervice.

Neverthelefs,  in  fome  of  thofe  inftances  which  have  been  mention'd,  and
particularly  in  the  frafture  of  the  patella,  and  the  rupture  of  the  tendons
that  extend  the  leg,  a  length  of  time  is  of  more  ufe  fometimes,  than  we
could  hope  or  expefl :  and  this  it  happen'd  to  me  to  fte,  in  ivjo  perfons,
fome  years  ago.

The  firft  was  a  tall  and  fat  man,  who  leaping  down,  fome  years  ago,
from  a  chariot,  and  frafturing  his  right  patella  tranfverfely,  had  applied  to
the  art  of  forgery  in  vain  ;  till  having  fent  for  that  moft  excellent  profefibr
of  furgery  in  this  college,  Jerom  Vandelh',  on  the  twenty-fecond  day  after
the  accident,  he  brought  the  upper  part  of  the  rotula  to  the  lower  as  much
as  he  could  ;  fo  that  the  one  might  be  diftant  from  the  other  by  a  much
lefs  interval  than  before  ;  and  confin'd  them  in  that  part  by  the  help  of
bandages.

This  interval  was  about  a  finger's  breadth  :  and  therein  nature  herfelf
gradually  generated  fomething,  whereby  the  parts  of  the  rotula  might  be
Ermly  connefted  to  each  other.  The  man,  therefore,  made  ufe  of  that
limb  freely  •,  when  happening  to  fall  down  upon  the  fteps  of  a  certain  bridge
at  Venice,  and  bending  that  leg  violently  and  ftrongly,  he  heard  a  noife  as
if  of  fomething  being  ruptur'd  in  the  knee  :  and  the  fafl:  was,  that  by  this
violence  of  flexion,  whatever  it  was  that  had  kept  the  parts  of  the  rotula
-conncded  together  was  ruptur'd.

The  furgeons,  finding  it  in  vain  to  attempt  to  bring  the  broken  parts
fo  nearly  into  conjundion,  as  they  had  been  a  little  before,  at  length,  en-
deavour'd  to  make  the  joint  as  firm  as  poffible  by  applying  an  initrument
to  the  knee,  and  ftrengthcning  it  by  means  of  the  clay  from  the  baths  near
Verona. And  after  a  long  fpace  of  time,  the  man,  who  had  fuffer'd  great

(ct)  Obf.  Aat.  Chir.  3.  ip)  De  recond.  Abfce/T.  nat.  1.  6.  P.  2.

C>fJ  Anat.  du  corps  ham.  tr.  5.  ch.  17.  (?) Adveif.  2.  cit.  c.  6.

(0)  Dec,  2.  Obf.  5.  ('•}  Ibid.  Tab.  i.  Fig.  2.

pains


Letter  LVI. Article  27.  30^

pains  from  both  falls,  and  could  not  at  all  ufe  his  limb,  had  gain'd  fo  much
advantage,  that  he  makes  ufe  of  it  now,,  without  any  inftrument,  and  with-
out any  trouble  or  uneafinefs :  and  this,  whether  he  ftands,  bend*  his  knee,
or  walks ;  which  he  does  with  great  expedition,  being  but  flightly  lame  on
that  fide.

■  In  examining  this  knee  with  accuracy,  I  faund  the  parts,  of  the  rotula,
which  were  almoft  equal  in  fize,  disjoin'd  from  each  other  by  a  very  confi-
derable  interval ;  and  that  much  greater  ftill  when  the  knee  was  bent :  for
where  the  rotula  ought  to  have  been,  there  then  appear'd  a  cavity,  which
was  extended  about  two  thumbs'  breadths  in  length,  and  not  lefs  in  width  ;
being  about  a  finger's  breadth  deep  :  fb  that  we  could  perceive,  by  the
touch,  the  condyles  at  the  lower  part  of  the  femur^  and  the  upper  border
of  the  tibia.

This  gentleman  was  brought  to  me  by  the  profe(K)r  befoTe-men-tio»'d,
that  I  might  fee  the  circumftances  I  have  related  :  and  he  faid  that  I  might
likewife,  if  I  pleas'd,  fee  the  fame  things  nearly,  in  a  certain  fervant-man
at  Padua.

But  the  fecond  of  the  patients  of  whom  I  fpoke  above,  was  a  noble  Ve-
netian, whom  I  faw  in  conjunftion  with  the  profeflbr  before-mention'd  ;
being  defir'd  to  confult  what  method  might  to  be  made  ufe  of,  to  ftrengtheni
his  knee.  This  gentleman,  after  two  falls,  by  the  firft  of  which  his  rotulai
was  faid  to  have  been  broken  tranfverfely,  and  afterwards  to  have  coalefc'd
by  the  help  of  art;  though  it  was  certainly  wholly  drawn  upwards  by  the
fecond  ;  now  walk'd  expeditioudy,  and  in  an  upright  pofture,  through  even
places,  like  other  men,  and  without  any  fupport ;  but  had  not  yet  gain'd
much  ground  in  going  up  ftairs ;  for  though  he  could  go  up,  he  could  not
go  up  with  equal  expedition.

In  this  patient  alfo,  v/hen  he  flood,  in  the  very  feat  of  the  rotula,  which
had  been  drawn  up  Trom  thence,  zs  I  have  faid,  a  cavity  _occurr'd  to  the
eye.  And  I  did  not  doubt  but  the  prominent  fides  of  this  cavity  were,  as
in  the  former  man  alfo,  the  very  large  lateral  parts  of  that  aponeurofis,
whereby  the  mufcles,  extending  the  leg,  are  inferred  thereinto  :  and  to  thefe
parts  it  feem'd,  that  whatever  motions  either  of  the  patients  perform'd  with-
out the  rotula,  were  to  be  afcrib'd.

That  is  to  fay,  it  had  happen'd  to  both  of  them,  that  the  intermediate
part  of  the  aponeurofis  was  broken  afunder,  without  any  injury  being  done
to  the  lateral  parts :  to  the  former  of  them,  in  that  part  where  it  envelopes
the  rotula,  to  which  it  very  firmly  adheres  ;  but  to  the  latter,  as  far  as  I  fav/,
betwixt  the  rotula,  and  the  tuberofity  that  is  prominent  in  the  tibia.

Nor  do  I  think  that  this  inferior  part,  which  I  know  that  others  alfo  have
feen  ruptur'd  more  than  once,  is  made  lefs  liable  to  be  eafily  broken,  by  the
ligament  which  moft  authors  fuppofe  to  be  under  it,  going  from  the  rotula
to  that  tuberofity.  I,  at  lead,  nocwithftanding  I  have  look'd  for  it  very  di-
ligently, and  frequently,  in  bodies,  could  never  be  fo  keen-figHted,  as  very
clearly  to  diftinguifh  any  thing  that  differs  from  a  tendinous  nature,  in
the  fibres  of  that  aponeurofis ;  or  any  thing  that  could  properly  and  ftriftly
be  call'd a  ligament.

Vol.  III.  R  r  Wherefore,


■306 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Difordcrs.

Wherefore,  I  am  ftill  of  the  fame  opinion  with  Vefalius  (j),  who  exprefsljr
fays,  "  that  the  patella  is  join'd  neither  to  the  femur,  nor  to  the  tibia,  other-
"•  wife  than  by  the  interpofition  of  tendons:  and  that  the  patella  has  this  in
"  peculiar  to  itfclf,  that  it  is  not  conneded  to  any  other  bone  by  the  help
•'  of  ligaments."

And  I  could  wifli  that,  as  Weitbrecht  (t)  has  profefs'd  to  follow  this  very
oreat  anatomift  in  this  place,  he  had  alio  foUow'd  him  more  conftantly.
However,  this  is  not  the  place  to  examine  fome  pafiages  in  his  otherwife  ex-
cellent book,  entitled,  Syndefmologia,  which  relate,  for  the  moft  part,  to  the
too  great  facility  in  fuppofing  ligaments ;  at  other  times,  to  diflentions  that
are  not  at  all  neceflary ;  and,  fometimes,  to  a  filence  that  is  rather  unjuft.
Now  let  us  go  on  with  our  purpofe.

28.  How  far  the  bones  of  the  leg,  alfo,  may  be  prejudicial  to  walking,
and  how  far  they  may  be  the  occafion  of  lamenefs,  no  one  is  ignorant ;  I
mean,  where  the  frafture  of  either  of  thefe  bones  is  improperly  cur'd,  and
particularly  the  frafture  of  that  which  is  the  chief  of  the  two;  I  mean,  of
the  tibia  :  from  the  difeafes  of  which  I  faid,  juft  now,  that  men  became
bandy-legg'd  likewife.

And  although,  by  reafon  of  the  natural  ftraitnefs  of  thefe  bones,  it  is
more  eafy  to  cure  a  frafture  of  them,  in  fuch  a  manner  that  the  limb  may
not  be  unlike  the  other  either  in  figure  or  in  length,  than  that  of  a  curv'ci
or  inclin'd  bone,  fuch  as  the  thigh- bone  is ;  yet  if  the  fradture  is  oblique,  it
very  eafily  happens,  that  the  limb  becomes  fhorter,  and  fometimes  diftorted.

And  for  this  reafon,  fome  of  my  countrymen,  in  my  memory,  have  chofen
rather  to  fuffer  what  many  formerly  fufFer'd  (^0  ;  1  mean,  that  their  bones
fhould  be  broken  again,  and  put  in  a  better  direftion  •,  and  1  know  that
this  has  fucceeded  well  with  fome  :  but,  on  the  other  hand,  I  know  a  phy-
fician  here,  not  without  erudition,  who  having  permitted  the  bones  of  his
lee,  which  were  beginning  to  coalefce,  to  be  broken  again  by  the  hands
of  the  furgeon ;  brought  on  himfelf  the  moft  violent  fymptoms,  and
death.

You  will,  perhaps,  afk  me  at  what  time  fradur'd  bones  begin  to  coalefce,
and  at  what  time  they  come  to  a  perfedt  confolidation  with  each  other  ?  But
this,  in  my  opinion,  is  a  thing  of  fuch  a  nature,  that,  if  we  confider  the
mode  of  coalition,  the  time  cannot  certainly  be  defin'd.  For  confolidation  ;
to  fet  afide  the  confideration  of  gravid  women,  in  whom  we  read  not  more
than  one  example  of  a  fradiire  being  confolidated  in  that  part,  where  we
read  many  of  its  not  being  confolidated  (x)  ;  for  confolidation,  I  fay,  will
not  begin,  or  be  perfefted,  fo  foon  in  difeas'd  as  in  found  bodies  -,  nor  in
found  and  healthy  bodies,  in  like  manner,  with  equal  celerity,  in  old  men
as  in  youncr  men  ;  or  in  all  thofe  who  have  not  the  fame  frafture,  or  are  not
treated  with  the  fame  method  of  cure.

{s)  De  Corp.  hum.  fabr.  1,  i.  c.  31.  {x)  Eph.  N.  C. Dec.  i.  A.  i. Obf.  25.

(/)  Syndefmolog.  S.  5.  §  13.  cum  notula  ««. cum  Scholio.
(a)  Vid.  Celfum  de  Medic.  1.  8.  c.  10.
prope  fin.

Nor,


Letter  LVI. Article  29.  307

Nor,  indeed,  does  experience  teach  us  otherwife,  if  we  attend  to  the  ex-
periments which  the  celebrated  Du  Hamel  (y)  has  made  on  brute  animals.
For  in  a  difeas'd  animal,  he  found  the  callus,  on  the  fifteenth  day  from  the
fradure,  not  perfe6t,  as  in  others,  at  an  equal  diftance  of  time  from  the
frafture ;  but  equally  imperfedt  as  in  another  on  the  tenth  day.  Thefe
animals  were  both  young  pigeons :  the  bone  was  the  fame:  and  had  been
broken,  replac'd,  and  tied  up  in  exactly  the  fame  manner :  for  in  thofe
where  it  was  very  ftreightly  tied  up,  either  a  gangrene,  which  Celfus  (2)
foretels  from  too  tight  a  bandage,  brought  on  death  before  the  cartilaginous
firmncfs  of  the  callus  could  appear,  as  this  was  not  obferv'd  in  the  others
before  the  fourth  day  ;  or  even  on  the  eighth  day  (a),  on  which  the  callus
began  to  be  bony  in  others,  there  was  not  the  leaft  beginning  of  any  callus  :
but  every  thing  was  in  the  fame  ftate  as  if  the  bone  had  been  jull  then
broken.

29.  And  all  thefe  experiments,  as  well  as  many  others,  that  very  expe-
rienc'd  man  explains,  by  accounting  for  the  callus  ;  not,  as  others  do,  from
the  bony  fibres  producing  themfelves,  or  from  the  bony  juice  which  diftils
from  thefe  fibres,  or  from  the  blood  which  is  efFus'd  and  adheres  to  the
fradur'd  bones ;  but,  according  to  his  own  obfervations,  from  the  external  or
internal  periofteum,  becoming  tumid  and  thicken'd  at  the  place  of  the
fradture  -,  and  changing  its  laminas,  firft,  into  a  cartilaginous,  and,  after  that,
into  a  bony  firmnefs.

But  in  regard  to  this  firmnefs  of  the  callus ;  whether  you  fliould  chufe
to  explain  it  according  to  the  obfervations  of  Du  Hamel,  that  I  have  com-
mended ;  or  whether  you  fhould  chufe  to  explain  it  according  to  the  obfer-
vations of  that  ingenious  man  Dehtleefius  {b),  which  welldeferve  notice ;  you
will  not  doubt  but  v/e"  muft  think  in  the  fame  manner  of  thi?,  as  we  have
faid  of  the  beginning  and  completion  of  the  callus  :  I  mean,  that,  according
to  the  various  conditions,  which  are  mention'd,  and  others  of  that  kind ;  to
which  the  longer  or  Ihorter  time,  alfo,  from  that  of  its -being  completed
muft  be  added  ;  the  callus  may  be  more  or  lefs  compact,  or,  at  leaft,  more
or  lefs  hard  and  firm.

And  by  thefe  means,  I  think,  that  the  oppofite  opinions  of  many  very  ce-
lebrated men  are  to  be  reconcil'd  to  each  other.  For  there  are  Ibme  who
affert  that  the  callus  is  of  the  fame  firmnefs  as  any  part  whatever  of  the  bone  ^
and  that  even,  if  it  be  of  a  diameter,  as  it  often  is,  larger  than  the  bone,  it
is  fo  much  the  ftronger  in  proportion  to  its  diameter  being  increas'd  ;  and
that  this  is  prudently  provided  by  nature,  becaufe  the  fradlur'd  bones,  being
very  rarely  replac'd  according  to  their  former  direftion,  would  otherwife  be
more  fubjeft  to  a  new  fradture  in  that  part ;  and  might  coalefce  with  diffi-
culty in  the  fame  place  again,  becaufe  the  callus  is  deftitute  of  a  vafcukr
ftruiflure.

To  lay  afide  which  opinion,  (not  only  becaufe,  according  to  the  obfer-
vations of  Du  Hamel,  the  callus  does  not  feem  to  be  deducible  from  bone,

{y)  Memoir,  de  I'Acad. R. des Sc. A. («)  Mem.  2,
I741.  Mem.  I.  {6)  Diilert.  exhib.  offiuni  calli gsneratio-

(iz)  C.  10,  cit.  S,  I.  nem,  &c.

R  r  2-  nor


SoS Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

nor  from  callus,  but  from  the  periofteum,  as  we  have  faid  •,  but  alfo  becaufe
a  furgeon  of  fome  eminence  affirms,  that,  when  the  former  callus  is  broken,
a  fecond  is  form'd  fooner  than  the  former)  and  to  atiend  to  this  one  thing,
that  the  callus  is  faid  to  be  not  lefs  refifting  and  firm,  at  leaft,  than  the  bone
itfelf;  there  are  certainly  many  other  grave  men,  who  advance  things  which
do  not  at  all  agree  therewith.

For  fee  how  Celfus  (c) ;  in  order  to  lefTen  the  too  great  quantity  of  callus,
which  is  form'd  upon  bones  that  are  rightly  gkitinated  to  each  other-,  applies
fuch  things  to  the  limb,  as,  if  the  callus  were  of  a  bony  hardnefs,  could
be  of  noefFeft;  as,  for  inftance,  long  and  gentle  fridions  of  oil,  fait,  and
nitre :  various  fomentations  of  warm  falt-water,  digeftive  malagmas,  and
tighter  bandages.

Or  if  you  do  not  think  that  thefe  things  were  ufeful  ;  you  will  read  Da
Hamel  (d)  afferting,  that  a  dripping  of  water  was  not  only  frequently  ufe-
ful for  that  purpofe  ;  but  alfo  that,  where  there  had  been  too  free  a  ufe  of
it,  it  had  fofcen'd  the  callus  to  fuch  a  degree  fometimes,  that  the  two  extre-
mities of  the  bone,  which  had  coalefc'd  with  one  another,  were  fpontaneoufly
disjoin'd  again.

But  whether  thefe  calli  were  either  not  of  a  very  large  diameter,  or  were
very  recently  form'd,  as  that  of  two  months  growth,  and  but  little  pro-
minent, in  the  leg  of  a  young  lamb,  which  was  uncemented  by  being  put
into  a  pretty  acrid  lixivium,  during  the  ebullition,  as  mention'd  by  the  fame
Du  Hamel  (^) ;  at  leaft,  thofe  two,  which  the  Sepulchretum  (/)  defcribes
•from  Rolfinc,  in  the  thigh-bones  of  a  certain  dead  body,  were  of  a  very
"confiderable  and  monftrous  bulk  and  diameter,  and  not  at  all  recent,  as  ap-
pears from  the  relation  :  yet  in  this  body,  "  when  boil'd  after  diffeftion,  in
♦'  order  to  reduce  it  to  the  ftrudture  of  a  fkeleton,  both  of  thefe  calli  were
"  mutually  aud  totally  feparated."

And  that  obfervarion  which  was  communicated  to  Salzmann  (g),  by  an
eminent  furgeon,  dcfcrves  pardcular  mention  in  this  place.  A  foldier  had
•been  cur'd  of  a  fradure  of  the  tibia,  by  means  of  fo  firm  a  callus,  that  he
could  walk  and  bear  upon  the  limb  which  had  been  fraftur'd,  as  well  as
upon  the  other,  and  without  the  leaft  inconveniency  of  any  kind  •,  when
Irappening  to  be  fei^'d,  eight  months  after,  with  an  acute  fever,  and  being
brought  into  the  fame  hofpital  wherein  he  had  lain  before  with  the  frafture,
it  was  obferv'd,  that  while  the  fever  was  counteracted  by  the  ufual  courfe  of
remedies,  the  extremities  of  the  bone  were  again  fpontaneouQy  disjoin'd  ;.
the  callus  being  gradually  confum'd,  as  it  were,  by  the  febrile  heat :  and  al-
though thefe  extremities  could  not  be  re-agglutinated,  during  the  continuance
of  the  fever  i  yec,  foon  after,  when  the  fever  was  remov'd,  the  tibia  was  re-
ftor'd  to  its  former  ftate  of  found nefs  by  nature  itfelf,  without  any  _great
apparatus  either  of  remedies,  or  of  bandages.

Finally,  the  compages  of  the  callus  itfelf,  when  examin'd  in  dead  bodies^
is  fometimes  of  fuch  a  nature,  that,  notwithftanding  its  diameter  is  found  to

Xc)  In  fine  c.  lo.  paulo  ante  dt,  f/J  Seft.  hac  5.  Obf.  1.  §  8.

f^J  Mem.  2.  cit .  1^)  Diflsrt.  dc  Artie.  Aualog.  &c.  c.  2.;§  7.

'{{)  Ibid.

2:  ■ '  be


Letter  LVI. Articles  30,  31.  ^op

be  much  larger  than  that  of  the  bone  to  which  it  has  grown,  it  is  far  more
fragile,  neverthelefs.  Nor  is  it  a  fubftance  of  hard  bone,  but  a  fpongy  fub-
ftance,  iuch  as  is  feen  betwixt  the  two  laminse  of  the  cranium.

A  callus  of  this  kind  being  defcrib'd,  and  reprefented  in  a  plate,  by
Ruyfch  [b),  in  the  wing  of  a  hen,  and  a  duck  ;  this  author  fays,  "  That  he
"  had  alfo  obferv'd  the  fame  thing  in  men  fometimes  :  fo  that  we  niuft  not
"  give  too  much  credit  to  thole  who  fuppofe  the  callus  of  fradures  to  be
"  -always  fo  exceedingly  firm,  that  bones  formerly  broken,  and  glued  toge-
"  ther  again,  are,  if  they  undergo  a  fccond  fracture,  fooner  broken  in  any
"  neighbouring  parr,  than  in  the  callus  fpoken  of :"  and  he  does  not  doubt
but  from  thence  ic  is,  that  fome  perfons  receive  a  frefh  fracture  from  the
{lighten  occafion,  after  the  conglutination  "  of  fractur'd  bones  :'*  and  eyea
merely  by  walking.

But  if  you  wifh  for  many  examples  of  the  ftrufture  obferv'd  in  calli,  and
of  the  wonderful  length  that  they  fometimes  have-,  you  will,  1  believe»
fcarcely  find  them  in  a  larger  number,  in  any  other  authors,  than  in  the
learned  Jo.  Beniam.  Boehmerus  (z).  Yet  this  number  you  may  increafe,
I  think,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  ftrufture,  by  the  obfervation  of  that  cele-
brated man  Alexander  Camerarius  {k),  on  the  thigh-bone  of  a  child  ;  and,
in  reipeft  to  the  length,  by  the  example  givtn  by  Jo.  Jacob.  Bajerus  (/),  oa
jthe  lower  jaw  of  a  miller ;  the  callus  being  "  about  the  fize  of  three  inches^
*'  from  the  chin  to  the  middle."

go.  Now  to  return  from  the  circumftances  that  happen  to  broken  bones,
■not  of  the  leg  only,  but  to  other  bones  alfo,  and  to  come  to  the  peculiar
•fradures  of  thofe  bones;  I  will  fubjoin  an  obfervation,' which  contains  a
tind  of  rare  circumft-ance  befides.

3.1.  A  ruftic  old  man,  of  a  pretty  fat  habit,  had  fallen  from  a  tree  upon
h'ls  feet,  while  he  was- pruning  a  vine  ;  and  had  broken  his  right  leg  in  fuch
-a- manner,  -that  the  bones  were  prominent  on  the  internal  fide',  a  little  above
the  foot :  and  this  through  a  wound  which  they  themfelves  had  made.
Thefe  bones  being  replaced  in  the  beft  manner  they  could  be,  the  man  was-
xarried  into  the  city,  and  into  the  hofpital,  in  the  cold  fealbn  of  the  year  -„
for  it  was  about  the  middle  of  February,  in  the  year  1736.  As  he,  there-
fore, was  expos'd  to  the  injuries  and  inclemencies  of  the  weather  alfo,  he
could  not  befav'd  j  but  was  carried  off  within  four  days  after  the  fradure.

Although  the  anatomical  demonftrations,  which  I  was  then  giving  in  the
theatre,  began  to  draw  to  a  conclufion  ;  I  was  not,  however,  v/illing  to  neg-
led  the  opportunity  that  was  offer'd  me,  of  examining  the  vifcera  of  a  body
of  this  kind  ;  and  of  infpeding  the  difeas'd  limib.  In  which  parts  I  ob-
ferv'd the  following  preternatural  appearances.

The  abdomen  ;  which  was  fomewhat  tumid  the  day  after  death,  for  no
iOther  reafon,  however,  but  becaufe  the  air  included  in  the  intcftines,  made
'thefe  fomewhat  tumid  alfo  •,  when  it  was  cut  into  and  laid  open,  (hew'd  the
(Omentum  to  be  fo  drawn  upwards,  as  not  to  defcexid  below the  tranfverfe

(-?.)  Thef.  Anat.  8.  n.  49.  &  Tab.  3.  Fig.  5.  (i)  Aa.  N.  C.  Tom.  i.  Obf.  53.  verf.  finv
&  Catalog.  Rarior.  Theca  B.  Refpof-.z.  n.  2,  (/)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  7.  Obf.  4.


(i)  Diflfei-t.  de  Qffium  Callo.


pact


3 1  o Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgkal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

part  of  the  colon,  which  it  cover'd. The  fpleen  was  larger  than  ufual,  and
cafily  to  be  lacerated.

The  liver  was  pale,  and  in  v/hatfoever  part  it  was  tnrn'd  to  the  diaphragm,
}o  cloiely  conneded  therewith,  that  the  membranes  which  invefted  both  of
thefe  parts,  did  not  fcem  to  be  two,  but  one  only.  The  gall-bladder  was
oblong,  and  fat,  although  of  a  bright  yellow  colour  externally  ;  yet  it  con-
tain'd  bile  that  was  of  a  yellow  colour  inclining  to  green,  and  fluid,  but
not  faeculent :  and  contain'd,  though  in  a  man  who  had  not  been  ifteric,
nineteen  calculi.

All  thefe  were  in  the  fundus,  nor  were  any  elfewhere,  unlefs  a  very  ftnall
one  lay  hid  in  a  certain  gland,  betwixt  the  coats  ot  the  cyft,  as  a  black  point,
which  was  fcen  through  the  coats,  in  one  or  two  places  of  the  internal  fur-
face,  feeai'd  to  prove.  But  thofe  of  which  I  had  begun  to  fpeak,  were  all
fomewhat  round  in  their  figure,  fmall  in  their  fize,  black  in  their  colour,
and  granulated  on  their  furface,  refembling  nothing  more  than  ripe  mul-
berries.

Thefe  calculi  being  then  thrown  into  water  by  me,  they  all  of  them  im-
mediately went  to  the  bottom,  and  continued  quiet  there.  But  being  pre-
fently  taken  out  of  the  water,  and  laid  on  it  after  fome  days  ;  not  throvv'n
upon  it;  they  fubfided  fomewhat  more  flov/ly,  and  emitted  bubbles:  and
being  laid  upon  the  water,  in  the  fame  manner,  two  months  after  likewife,
they  remain'd  very  long  on  the  furface.

At  which  time,  applying  one  that  was  dry  to  the  flame  of  a  candle,  it  did
not  catch  the  flame,  but  only  fent  forth  fome  ff  arks,  and  the  difagrerable
odour  of  a  burnt  feather,  and  was  withdrawn  from  the  flame  nearly  in  the
fame  ftate  it  had  been  in  before.  However,  fome  fragments  of  the  others
were  become  not  at  all  fofter  by  a  two  months  maceration  in  water  j  and  re-
tain'd  the  fame  firmnefs  always.

You  may  add  thefe  remarks  to  thofe  which  I  formerly  wrote  to  Schro-
eckius  (?«),  upon  cyftic  calculi.

But  now  take  that  circumfl:ance  which  I  faid  was  very  rare ;  at  leafl:  I
never  faw  it  but  in  this  body.  The  trunk  of  the  inferior  vena  cava,  where
it  became  one  by  the  junftion  of  the  iliac  veins,  did  not  occupy  the  right
fide  of  the  lumbar  vertebra-,  as  it  always  us'd  to  do  ;  but  occupied  the  left
tide,  and  went  on  to  the  left  of  the  great  artery,  till,  bending  itfelf  obliquely
to  the  right  fide,  over  the  anterior  furface  of  this  artery,  immediately  under
the  fuperior  mefenteric,  it  return'd  to  its  ufual  fituation  on  the  right  fide.

From  this  inflexion  it  happen'd,  that,  akhoygh  the  left  emulgent  vein
open'd  into  the  cava,  two  or  three  inches  lower  than  the  right  emulgent,  if
you  extended  the  cava  into  a  ftrait  line  ;  yet  the  left  kidney  had  not  a  much
lower  fituation  than  the  right.  As  I  fhould  have  been  furpriz'd  at  this  paf-
fige  of  the  vena  cava,  over  the  furface  of  the  aorta,  in  any  body  whatever  j
I  could  not  fufficiently  admire  the  circumfl:ance,  in  the  body  of  a  man  who
had  grown  old  in  the  continual  and  hard  labours  of  a  country-life.  However,
the  aorta  had  fome  little  hardnefs  at  its  divifion  into  the  iliacs  -,  and  in  like
manner  at  the  mouth  of  the  fuperior  mefenteric.

(«)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  2.  Obf.  167.

Upon


Letter  LVi. Article  32.  511

Upon  opening  the  thorax,  the  lungs  feem'd  to  be  in  a  found  ftate,  not-
withftanding  they  every  where  adher'd  to  the  pleura  very  clofely ;  whether
this  membrane  invefted  the  cheft,  the  fides,  the  back,  or  the  diaphragm  j
nor  was  any  diforder  obferv'd  in  the  neighbouring  heart.

Laft  of  all,  I  examin'd  the  broken  leg.  It  did  not  fwell  a  great  deal.  The
tibia,  and  fibula,  were  both  broken,  a  little  above  that  place  where  they  are
join'd  to  the  foot;  the  fradture  being  continued  longitudinally,  but  not  in  a
direft  line.  Yet  there  was  not  a  great  quantity  of  blood  extravafated  there-
about :  nor  were  the  odour,  and  the  colour,  bad  in  their  appearance.

32.  I  examin'd  this  fradture,  not  becaufe  in  an  adult  man,  and  an  old
man  too,  I  expeded  to  fee  any  thing,  fo  foon,  that  related  clearly  to  the  in-
cipient callus ;  but  rather  with  a  view  to  other  things  ;  and  to  this  among  the
reft,  whether,  if  any  fragment  had  been  disjoin'd  from  the  bones,  this  was
involv'd  in  a  kind  of  mucous  humour,  as  1  had  read  in  Valfalva's  papers,
that  he  had  found  it  to  be  involv'd.

There  is  alfo  this  remark  in  a  certain  letter  of  his,  that  relates  to  the  pre-
fent  queftion  :  where  a  frafture  happens  to  be  complicated  with  a  wound^
the  blood  (hould  be  fuffered  to  flow  out;  for  by  thefe  means  the  bones  and
the  flelh  would  be  more  eafily  join'd  together  :  and  it  was  for  this  reafon,  he
fays,  that  in  the  cafe  of  a  broken  thigh  and  tibia  propos'd  to  him,  the
former  had  been  confolidated  fooner  than  the  latter,  becaufe  the  fradlure  of
the  femur  was  join'd  with  a  wound,  by  which  the  blood  had  been  difcharg'd ;.
and  the  fradure  of  the  latter  was  not.

And  now  that  I  have  begun  to  remark  thefe  things,  1  will  not  omit  that
which  was  related  to  me  by  a  furgeon  of  fome  eminence,  in  regard  to  him-
felf.  His  leg  being  broken,  and  the  bones  being  again  replac'd,  and  pro-
perly difpos'd,  he  firfl  obferv'd,  that,  at  the  end  of  an  hour  after  the  furgeons
had  bound  up  the  leg,  his  pain  was  encreas'd :  and  as  they  denied,  upon  ex-
amination, that  this^ould  be  owing  to  the  bandage  becoming  more  tight  ia
the  mean  time,  he  perceiv'd  that  it  was  owing  to  a  ftupe  whrqh  they  had  laid
around  it,  moiften'd  with  the  white  of  an  egg  after  being  beaten  up ;  and
which,  while  it  was  growing  dry,  prefs'd  fome  of  the  bony  fragments  to  the
fenfible  parts  that  lay  around  them.

And  in  tlie  fecond  place,  he  had  obferv'd,  that  while  thofe  who  were  about
him  walk'd  too  and  fro  in  the  room,  the  pain  was  encreas'd  by  the  tremor  of
the  room  and  the  bed  ;  and  that  his  fear  was  always  encreas'd,  left  this  tre-
mor fliould  be  injurious  to  the  conglutination  of  the  bones.

And  finally,  when  his  frafture  was  perfectly  cur'd,  that  he  had  an  unea-
iinefs  and  difficulty  remaining  in  his  heel  for  a  very  long  time,  when  he  at-
tempted to  walk  ;  though  he  was  a  young  man,  and  in  other  refpefts  in  good.
health  :  and  that  becaufe  fufficient  care  had  not  been  taken,  through  the
whole  courfe  of  the  long  time,  wherein  he  had  kept  his  leg  immoveable,  to.
prevent  his  prefting  upon  the  heel  :  and  from  hence  you  will  learn  why  inge-
nious and  attentive  furgeons  would  have  the  heel  of  the  fradlur'd  limb  be  laid,
quiet  and  eafy  in  a  foramen,  form'd  by  the  convolution  of  a  ftupe,  or  fofc
rag,  into  the  form  of  a  ring  ;  fo  that  the  patient  ftiould  not  fupport  the  leg
immediately  upon  the  heel.
6

35,.  "  That


3 1  2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

33.  "  That  both  bones  of  the  leg  are  fometimes  luxated  near  the  foot,"
has  been  aflerted  long  ago  by  Hippocrates  («)  ;  and  that  luxation  would  cer-
tainly make  the  limb  fhorter,  if  at  any  time  they  were  fo  disjoin'd,  that  the
allragalus  afcended  betwixt  the  two  :  yet  that  this  cannot  come  to  pafs,  un-
lefs,  belides  the  moft  violent  fymptoms,  the  foot  appears  to  be  very  evidently
carried  to  the  external  fide  of  the  leg,  is  fufficiently  demonftrated  in  a  certain
refponfe  of  mine  :  and  if  you  read  this  in  the  work  of  the  celebrated  phy-
lician  who  has  publifh'd  it,  you  will,  I  imagine,  perceive  the  cafe  to  be  fo
clear,  as  not  to  think  necelTary  that  I  fhould  add  any  thing  on  this  fubjeft
here.

34.  Hitherto  I  have  written  fo  many  things  upon  the  lowei'  limb,  that
Tjnleis  we  fhould  choofe  to  be  very  long,  we  muft  add  only  a  few  things  of
the  upper  limb,  and  of  the  vertebra.  A  part  of  which,  however,  will  be-
long to  the  lower  limb  likewife,  as  you  perceive  that  part  of  what  has  been
faid  may  be  transferr'd  to  other  bones  likewife.  For  in  the  number  of  thefe
things  alfo  is  that  which  I  have  taken  notice  of  from  Columbus  (0),  I  mean
that  the  epiphyies  are  eafily  Icparated  from  the  bones  in  children.  And  he
who  does  not  attend  to  this,  may  be  fometimes  deceiv'd  in  them,  by  taking
thele  feparations  for  fraflures.

I  remember  this  to  have  happen'd  to  a  furgcon,  in  other  refpefts  expe-
rienc'd  ;  who,  feeing  both  the  arms  of  a  noble  boy  tumid  at  the  wrifts,  and
perceiving,  by  examining  with  the  hand,  that,  beneath  a  kind  of  fludtuating
humour,  the  extreme  parts  of  the  radius  and  ulna  were  there  become  move-
able-, accus'd  the  woman  that  us'd  to  carry  him,  of  fufFering  the  child  to
have  fallen  out  of  her  hands,  and  to  have  broken  both  its  arms.

But  as  fhe  conftantly  denied  it,  the  parents,  not  knowing  which  of  them
they  fnould  believe,  begg'd  of  me  to  hear  the  relation  of  the  furgeon ;  and
judge  whether  he  might  be  deceiv'd  or  not.  As  they,  during  their  conver-
lation  with  me,  had  faid  that  the  child  had  labour'd,  fome  little  time  before,
xinder  a  very  violent  kind  of  fmall-pox,  and  this  was  confirm'd  by  the  fur-
geon ;  fee,  laid  I  to  him,  1  befeech  you,  left  abfceffes,  which  foliow'd  the
Imall-pox,  fhould  have  fcparated  the  epiphyfes  of  thefe  bones,  by  eroding
the  periolleum,  whereby  they  were  connedled  therewith  :  for  Parey  formerly
faw  this  circumftance  happen,  not  only  from  other  internal  caufes,  but  in
particular,  "  frequently  from  the  fmall-pox-,"  and  as  that  paffage  of  Parey,
which  relates  to  this  queflion,  is  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  alfo  (p),  I
wonder  how  it  (hould  efcape  men,  in  other  refpefts  very  learned,  who  have
quoted  furgeons  of  later  date  than  Parey  upon  this  fubjed.

You  a(k  me  the  event  of  the  cafe.  It  was  juti  as  1  fufpefted  ;  the  furgeon
himftlf  ingenuoufly  confeffing  foon  after,  that  my  admonitions  were  true  ;
and  thereby  meriring  the  praife  of  an  ingenuouihefs,  v/hich  many  others
would  not  condefcend  to  obtain,  not  only  when  I  have  fuipeded,  but  even
demonlirated,  their  errors.  However  when  the  difeafe  was  known,  the  child
was  perfectly  cur'd  foon  after.

(»)  1.  de  Fraflur.  n.  14,  apud.  Marinell.  (/)  Seft.  hac  5.  Obf.  i.  §  7.  cum  Sehol.

(0)  fupra,  n.  2.

Moreover,


Letter  LVI. Article  sj*.  3r3

Moreover,  in  regard  to  "  the  reparation  of  the  epiphyfes,  in  confequence
"  of  the  fmall  pox,"  as  I  know  that  fome  obfervations  are  extant  even  in  a
Programma  (j),  which  has  not  yet  come  to  my  hands,  I  mean  one  of  the  ce-
Jebrated  Weiffius  ;  fo  I  do  not  doubt  but  if  any  one  were  to  write  at  this
time,  "  of  the  relics  of  the  fmall-pox,"  he  would  not ;  as  Georgius  Fran-
cos (r),  a  man  in  'other  refpefts  very  learned,  did  formerly,  on  the  fame
fubje6t ;  omit  the  confideration  of  the  reparation  of  the  epiphyfes,  which  does
not  happen  very  rarely.

Yet  nobody  faw  a  greater  number  of  epiphyfes  feparated  from  the  bones,
in  one  feafon,  from  an  internal  caufe,  though  of  another  nature,  than  Pou-
part  (j),  in  that  multitude  of  fcorbutic  patients,  which  crouded  into  the
hofpital  at  Paris,  in  the  year  1699.  For  by  reafon  of  this  disjunftion  it  hap-
pen'd,  that,  if  thefe  patients  were  mov'd,  the  bones,  and  their  epiphyfes,
were  heard  to  rub  againft  each  other.  Which  obfervation  is  one  of  thofe,
otherwife  very  few,  obfervations,  that  are  wanting  in  the  medical  treatife  of
the  celebrated  Hertius,  de  Crepitu  Offium  •,  for  he  has  diligently  collefled
whatever  elfe  is  extant  in  authors  upon  this  fubjedt,  interfperfing  the  obfer-
vations of  his  father  alfo  now  and  then  :  although  we  want  the  light  of  dif-
feftions  in  determining  the  caufe  of  this  diforder,  as  happens  in  moft
perfons.

But  if  we  attend  to  the  queftion,  it  feems  that  this  caufe  ought  more  fre-
q^iently  to  be  plac'd,  agreeably  to  the  opinion  of  Hertius,  in  a  liind  of  ex-
ficcation,  than  a  moifture  and  laxity.

Nor  did  it  feem  otherwife  to  me,  when  you  confulted  me  for  a  matron  of
the  firft  rank,  who,  at  the  end  of  her  fifth  time  of  child-bearing,  began  to,
perceive  a  kind  of  troublefome  crackling  of  the  bones  in  her  knees,  while
Ihe  turn'd  herfelf  from  one  fide  to  the  other  ;  and  fometime  after  that  in  all
the  joints  of  both  her^upper  limbs  :  yet  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  it  was  the
moft  troublefome  in  her  knees,  in  confequence  of  being  join'd  with  a  confi-
derable  pain  in  the  extenfion  of  her  legs.

For  how  could  I  deduce  from  laxity  alone,  that  which  was  join'd  with  pain.
As  I  therefore  had  recommended  fuch  remedies,  both  internally  and  exter-
nally, as  would  moderately  moiften  and  relax  tenfion  ;  in  the  following
year,  when  fhe  confulted  me  again,  there  were  no  longer  any  complaints  of
that  crackling  of  the  bones,  no  more  than  if  they  had  never  exifted  j  but  as
file  had  been  wont  before  that,  to  be  fubjedl  to  very  confiderable  hypochon-
driac affeflions,  (he  complain'd  of  thefe  only.

35.  Whether  the  vertebrae  are  moft  eafily  broken,  or  luxated,  is  a  con-
troverfy  among  the  moft  eminent  men,  which  I  have  taken  notice  of  in  a
former  letter  (/).  And,  in  regard  to  the  uppermoft  of  them,  why  ;  though
I  formerly  did  not  want  frequent  opportunities  of  examining  into  this  cir-
aumftance,  in  the  bodies  of  hang'd  perfons ;  I  did  not  examine  into  it,  I
have  faid  in  the  fame  place.

(?)  Vid.  adnot.  ab  Hallero  ad  c.  4.  P.  13. (j)  Mem,  de  1' Acad.  R.  des  Sc,  Ai  i6gg;
Meth.  Stud.  Medic.  Boerhaav.  \t)  Epift.  19.  n.  14.

(0  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  4.  Obf.  1.

ToL.  III.  Ss  Since


3 1  4 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

Since  that  time  I  have  not  had  the  opportunity.  And  in  regard  to  the
other  vertebrtE,  though  Valfalva  and  I  have  both  of  us  infpedted  them,  after
the  moft  violent  blows,  neither  of  us  have  found  them  luxated  ;  but  both
have  found  them  broken  :  as  you  have  already  learn'd  from  the  fifty-
fourth  (z^  and  fifty-fecond  (x')  letters.  Yet  if  two  obfervations,  on  a  fubjeft
like  this,  feem  to  you  too  few ;  add  to  them  three  of  the  celebrated  Tabar-
ranus  (j);  who,  with  his  ufual  fkill  and  diligence,  has  not  only  examin'd
other  things,  but  this  in  particular.

This  author  did  not  always  find  the  vertebree  mov'd  from  their  places :  and
when  he  found  them  mov'd  at  all,  he  did  not  fee  them  to  be  fo  much  mov'd
from  their  places  in  general,  as  to  allow  him  to  believe  they  were  luxated  j
but  he  always  found  them  broken.  Nor  do  I  fuppofe  that  you  will  here
propofe  to  me  the  obfervations  of  our  Veflingius  (z)  and  Pujati  {a).

I  very  well  remember  that  the  former  of  thefe  authors  had  feen  feme  of  the
vertebra  of  the  back  mov'd  outwards,  in  a  flight  degree,  in  a  ceriain  woman,
a  native  of  Dalmatia-,  and  in  a  man,  a  native  of  Padua,  all  the  vertebrse  of
the  loins  remarkably  inclin'd  outwards,  with  a  ftupor  of  the  inferior  parts.
So  I  alfo  remember  that  the  excellent  Piijati  had  feen  in  others,  and,  what
I  bore  with  great  difpleafure,  on  account  of  the  affeftion  which  I  juftly  en-
tertain'd  for  him,  in  himfelf  alfo,  the  fuperior  lumbar  vertebras  prolaps'd
outwardly  ;  and  not  without  torpors  of  the  legs.

S  Yet  I  remember,  at  the  fame  time,  that  both  of  them  had  afcrib'd  thofe
fubluxations  to  internal  caufes,  vitiating  the  ligaments.  But  the  difcourfe
that  I  have  undertaken  relates  to  thofe  luxations  which  are  faid  to  happen
from  external  violence,  when  the  body  and  the  ligaments  are  in  a  natural
and  healthy  ftate  :  which  I  do  not  take  upon  me  to  deny  ;  although,  as  par-
ticularly in  the  cafe  of  the  celebrated  Targioni  (b),  in  whatever  manner  you
endeavour  to  conceive  of  it,  the  explication  thereof  is  very  difficult;  but  I
do  not  very  well  know,  whether  it  is  demonftrated  by  the  diffedlion  of
dead  bodies,  that  thefe  luxations  happen  without  a  fraflure  of  the
vertebrs.

1  have  formerly  read  a  hiflory,  which  was  faid  to  be  written  by  Bellini,  of
a  mafon,  who,  falling  from  an  upper  ftory  of  a  houfe,  and  receiving  a  blow
upon  his  loins,  either  in  falling,  or  from  the  ground,  began  to  lofe  the  fenfe
of  feeling  in  his  feet,  and  to  difcharge  the  contents  of  the  inteftines  and  blad-
der involuntarily,  and  to  have  the  other  fymptoms  that  are  defcrib'd.

As  this  man  died  after  four  days,  the  three  upperm.oft  vertebras  of  the
loins  were  found  to  be  fo  luxated,  as  to  be  prominent  a  finger's  breadth  into
the  cavity  of  the  belly  ;  and  therefore  to  comprefs  the  large  trunks  of  the  vef-
fels  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  bring  their  oppofite  parietes  into  mutual  eontafl:  :
from  which  it  happen'd,  among  other  things,  that  all  the  veins,  from  both
the  extremities  of  the  feet  quite  to  the  luxation,  were  turgid  with  blood,  and
hard,  juft  as  if  they  had  been  ftufFd  up  by  force.


(u)  n.  26.

{x)  n.  34.

fyj  Obferv.  Anat.  poll  n.  7.

(2)  Epift.  25.


(a)  Dec.  Medic.  Obf.  6.  n.  10.  &  feqq-
{i)  Semiluflaz.  delle  vertebre  lombari  nella
I,  Raccolta  d'  Qflervaz.  Med,


/In


Letter  LVL Article  3^.  3rj:

In  this  cafe  who  can  doubt  of  the  luxation  of  the  vertebrse  ?  We  would  ra-
ther doubt  whether  the  external  force,  which  could  overcome  the  ligaments,
had  not  broken  the  vertebree  ?  and  whether  this  had  not,  perhaps,  by  break-
ing them,  been  equally  injurious  to  the  fpinal  marr6w,  and  its  appendix,
with  the  luxation  itfelf  ?  But  of  thefe  things,  that  is  of  infpefting  the  verte-
brae with  attention,  and  the  medulla  itfelf,  among  fo  many  other  circumftances
that  are  defcrib'd,  not  the  leaft  mention  is  made.

Thus  in  the  fourth  book  of  the  Sepulchretum,  and  in  the  third  fedlion  of
that  book  (c),  an  obfervation  ofFontanus  is  extant  (for  the  obfervation  of
Panarolus,  of  luxations,  which  is  in  this  fixth  fedtion  (i;,  relates  to  the  fupe-
rior  vertebras  •,  nor  is  it  fufficiently  certain,  as  I  have  faid  elfewhere,  whether
the  luxation  was  without  a  frailure ;  and  e^^eni,  as  I  fhall  fhow  juft  now,
whether  it  was  a  true  luxation),  in  which  obfervation  ofFontanus,  we  read,
indeed,  that  a  porter  who  had  fallen  from  a  high  place,  with  his  back  upon
a  piece  of  timber  that  lay  beneath,  had  "  didocated  and  loofen'd  "  the  verte-
h'ie  dorfi;  in  confequence  of  which  his  body  was  curv'd.  and  his  face  turn'd
towards  the  ground  as  long  as  he  liv'd.

,  But  when  his  body  was  examin'd  after  death  by  diiTedVion,  and  particularly
his  back,  inftead  of  knowing,  as  you  would  expedt,  whether  thole  vertebrse
were  broken,  or  not,  you  are  told  nothing  about  this,  but  only  that  five  ver-
tebrsE  were  feen  to  be  "  conglobated  into  a  gypfum,"  the  vifcid  matter  which
adher'd  to  them  "  being  converted  thereto  by  a  kind  of  natural  infpiffating
heat."

Nor  do  I  know  that  there  are  other  dilTeftions  in  the  Sepulchretum,  be-
fides  thefe,  that  relate  to  the  prefent  fubjeft  :  you  now  fee  therefore,  whether
it  is  with  reafon  we  wifh"  that  the  queftion  had  been  more  frequently  and
diligently  enquir'd  into  by  our  predeceflbrs.

That  obfervation  Of  Fontanus  may,  at  leaft,  give  room  for  a  fufpicion,
whether  thofe,  or  whether  other  vertebras,  may  not  be  prominent  fome-
times  ;  not  from  a  luxation,  but  from  a  matter,  which  an  external  or  inter-
nal caufe  may  produce  around  them,  and  indurate ;  from  whence  not  only
the  nerves,  that  arife  therefrom,  are  prefs'd  upon,  but  the  adjacent  mufcles
which  are  deftin'd  to  the  extenfion,  or  flexion,  of  the  body,  and  even
the  vertebras  themfelves,  are  impeded  and  difturb'd  in  their  aftions  and
ufes.

And  in  proportion  as  the  nerves  fliall  be  lefs  hurt,  or  the  life  of  the  man
protradted  to  a  greater  length  of  time,  the  greater  room  will  be  given  for  this
fufpicion,  or  any  other  of  that  kind  :  which,  efpecially  in  an  unufual  affair,
Panarolus  ought  to  have  remov'd,  when  he  fpoke  of  the  fecond  vertebra  of
the  neck  being  luxated,  and  that  "  by  a  very  great  luxation  "  too  ;  and  ne-
verthelefs  faid  that  the  man  "  had  liv'd  in  this  manner  for  a  great  number  of
"  days :"  for  it  was  not  enough  to  fay  that  this  "  was  obferv'd  from  the  dif-
"  fedtion  of  the  dead  body;"  but  it  ought  to  have  been  added,  with  accu-
racy, to  what  fide  the  vertebra  was  luxated  ;  and  whether  he  had  not  found
fome  of  the  ligaments,  at  leaft,  to  be  ruptur'd  from  that  violent  fall,  if  not
the  vertebras  itfelf;  or  its  dentoid  procefs  broken.

(0  Obf.  2S.  §.  I.  (d)  Obf.  i.§.  I.

S  s  2  But,


3  I  6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirnrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

But,  on  the  contrary,  I  commend  the  mofl:  excellent  Trevv  (e),  who,
having  laid  that  he  had  feen  the  firft  vertebra  of  the  loins  "  a  little  kixated"
in  a  man,  has  not  fail'd  to  fay,  that  the  body  of  the  fame  vertebra  "  was
"  divided  quite  through  by  a  longitudinal  frafture  :"  and  has  afferted  that,
in  another  man,  "  the  body  of  the  left  vertebra  but  one,  of  the  back,"  was
found,  by  him,  "  to  be  entirely  puH'd  away  from  its  cartilage,  at  its  con-
''■  juniflion  with  the  laft;  and  not  only  this,  but  alfo  that  it  was  ground  into
"  feveral  little  pieces  at  the  fame  place."

And  I  could  wifh  that  others,  when  they  met  with  the  fifth  vertebra  colli-
luxated  to  the  left  fide,  and  the  fixth  to  the  right  fide,  a  great  aperture  be-
ino-  interpos'd  betwixt  both  (/) ;  or  when  they  found  the  fecond  vertebra  of
the  neck  "  difiocated,"  though  not  fo  much  in  a  boy  of  fcven  years  of
aore  (g),  as  in  a  foldier  (h) ;  had  taken  time  to  enquire,  accurately,  whether
there  v?as  any  part  broken  in  thofe  vertebras,  but  particularly  in  the
fecond  ;  and  what  part ;  or  whether  there  was  any  rupture  in  the  liga-
ments.

In  faying  of  which  I  do  not  call  into  queftion  the  veracity  either  of  Pana-
rolus,  or  of  any  other  perfon  :  I  only  require  diligence  when  there  is  oppor-
tunity ;  and  even  exped  it  (/)  from  thofe  who  fliall  happen  to  light  on  fuch'
cafes  for  the  future.

q6.  But  as  to  what  I  have  faid  of  the  motion  of  the  mufcles  which  extend
Of  bend  the  vertebra,  or  of  the  vertebra  themfelves  being  impeded;  this  is-
common  to  other  bones  that  are  join'd  together  by  a  moveable  joint.  For  as.
to  what  relates  to  the  mufcles,  you  might  have  feen  from  our  obfervation
above  (k),  that  the  leg,  for  inftance,  was  inflexible,  by  reafon  of  too  ftrong
an  aftion  of  the  mufcles  which  extended  it ;  whereby  the  adion  of  the  flexor
mufcles  was  impeded.

And,  on  the  other  hand,  you  will  perceive,  from  the  obfervation  and
monitum  of  Cafpar  Hoflrnann  (/),  that  the  leg  fometiraes  cannot  be  ex-
tended, in  confequence  of  being  prevented  by  the  oppofite  mufcles;  which,,
by  reafon  of  the  negligence  of  the  furgeons,  and  their  very  ftreight  bandages,
are  at  length  dried  up,  in  the  ham,  into  a  hard  knot.  And  that,  when
the  mufcles  are  not  impeded  in  their  adion,  the  motion  of  the  bones  them-
felves is  impeded  for  this  reafon,  that  though  they  fliould  be  no  more
than  one  in  number,  they  are  become  one  ;  you  have  examples  in  this  fixth
feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (m) :  and  not  only  in  the  knee,  but  alfo  in  the
elbow ;  and  even  in  all  the  joints  of  the  body  of  an  old  man,  from  the  head
quite  to  the  extremities  of  the  toes.

in  this  old  man  the  vertebrae  had  coalefc'd  with  each  other,  as  well  as  the
reft  of  the  bones ;  but  in  other  old  men,  this  coalition  was  peculiar  to  the
vertebrse,  from  the  obfervation  of  Paawius  (n). So,  long  before  him,  it  had

(.■)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  2.  Obf.  ;i.  {i)  n.  26.

(fj  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  1738.  Hebd.  (/)  Comment,  in  Gal.  de  Ufa  Part,  in  fin.
40.  II.  1.  3.

(g)  A.  1734.  Hebd.  11.  port  n.  6.  (m)  Obf.  3.  §.  3.  &  Obf.  4.  §.  3.  &  2.

('*)  A.  1740.  Hebd.  52.  n,  3.  («)  Ibid.  §.  I.

(/)  Vid.  infra,  n.  37.

been


Letter  LVI. Article  37.  -  317^

been  feen  in  the  vertebras  of  the  loins,  in  particular,  by  Cattus  ((r) :  and  our
Falloppius  {p)  has  faid,  that  the  vertebra,  "  which  produce  a  gibbofity,  are.
"  fo  connefted  together  in  procefs  of  time,  as  to  become  quite  one  vertebra
♦<  and  leLive  no  trace  of  any  joint."

But  1  do  not  fo  much  wonder,  that  thofe  obfervations  have  not  been  added
to  the  Sepulchretum,  as  that  the  more  furprizing,  and  more  known,  obfer-
vations of  Ruyfch  {q)  have  not  been  added  :  for  Ruyfch  not  only  obferv'd
the  fame  thing  in  gibbous  bodies,  but  this  alfo  "  many  times ;"  that  the
bodies  of  the  vertebrs,  which  had  been  curv'd  forwards,  were  fo  compaded
into  one  fubftance,  that  fome  of  thefe  bodies  feem'd  to  have  been  annihilated;
and  fometimes  four,  or  feven,  bodies  of  this  kind  of  vertebrae  made  into
one  bone,  fo  as  fcarcely  to  equal  the  body  of  one  vertebra.

After  thefe,  I  purpofejy  omit  other  obfervations,  efpccialjy  thofe  that  I
have  referr'd  to  elfewhere  (r),  together  with  thofe  of  Ruyfch,  thouoh  in  a
brief  manner,  of  the  vertebrae  being  join'd  into  one,  both  from  The  an-
cients and  moderns ;  not  to  fpeak  of  my  own,  as  I  faw  five  vertebrae  lum-
borum  join'd  together  thus,  that  were  found  in  the  burying-ground  of  this
hofpital,  and  preferv'd  by  our  Mediavia.  For  I  fuppofe  that"\vhat  has  been
hitherto  faid  of  fractures  of  the  bones,  luxations,  and  other  diforders  injurious
to  motion,  v,/ill  feem  to  you  to  be  quite  fufficient. Farewel.

37.  Thus  far  had  I  written,  when,  among  the  many  differtations  which
that  ilkiftrious  man  Albertus  Haller  lately  fent  to  me  with  great  kindnefs,
and  according  to  his  cuftom,  I  read,,  with  great  pleafure,  one  relacino-  to
what  I  have  juft  now  touch'd  upon  in  regard  to  the  luxation  of  the  vertebrae,
publifh'd.  at  Tubingen  by  the  celebrated  profefTor  Mauchart,  in  the  year

^•747- . . •

In  this  differtation,  that  very  ingenious  man  inquires  into  the  luxation  of
the  neck ;  and,  in__the  firft  place  {s),  fays,  that  there  was  "  not  even  the
*«  fliadow  of  a  luxation,"  in  the  vertebrjE  ol  the  neck  of  any  one  of  all
the  bodies  which  he  had  differed,  after  their  being  publicly  hano-'d,  not-
withftanding  the  executioners  had  very  violently,  and  tor  a  Ion©  time  too-e^
ther,  prefs'd  their  heads  forwards:  and  he  declares  below  (/):  which  I  would
have  you  compare  with  what  we  have  faid  in  the  nineteenth  lctctr(«)  ;  thas
in  two  young  men,  one  of  whom  he  differed,  and  th:?  other  the  celebrated
prcfeffor  Weiffius,  that  the  mufcles  had  been  lacerated  by  the  halter  •,  in
the  firft,  the  fterno-thyroidasi,  not  to  mention  the  fterno-hyoidcei;  and,  in
the  fecond,  thefe  and  the  fterno-maftoidgei  -,  and,  in  the  fame  body,  that  the
cricoid  cartilage  was  broken  into  many  little  pieces ;  and  the  trunk  of  the
afpera  arteria  entirely  torn  away  from  ti'ie  larynx.

But  as  to  what  relates  to  other  external  violences  ;  as,  for  inflanee,  to
blows,  falls,  and  fuch-like  accidents  ;  he  denies  that  there  is  extant  any
certain  and  accurate  obfervation  of  a  luxation  of  the  firft  vertebra,  from  the^


W  I%og-  Anat.  c.  3.  (,) §  5.

( p)  Prxfat.  ad  Traft,.  de  Lux,  &  Fraft,  Offib.  (/)  §  16.

{a)  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  67^  (»)  N.  8.  &  13,

\r)  Epift.  27.  n.  32.  W  §  9-  &  iJs


headj


3 1  S Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders..

head,  as  far  as  he  knew :  though  he  had  turn'd  over  more  than  fifty  cele-
brated writers  of  furgery,  and  chirurgical  obfervations.

And  of  the  receding  of  the  lecond  vertebra  from  the  firft,  and  of  the
f  Airth  from  the  fifth,  he  produces,  in  all,  two  examples  (jy),  which  well  de-
ferve  reading ;  as  many  monita  alfo  do,  that  relate  to  luxations  of  thefe  ver-
tebras; as,  for  inftance,  that  they  are  deceiv'd  (2),  who  do  not  doubt  but
the  fecond  vertebra  is  luxated  from  the  firft,  when  the  point  of  the  finger
may  be  inferred  betwixt  both  -,  as  if,  in  fad,  this  could  not  happen  natu-
rally :  and  that  lb  much  the  more,  if  the  ligaments,  which  lie  betwixt,  have
fuff^er'd  any  confiderable  violence  in  extenfion  :  and,  in  like  manner  (a),  that
the  fecond  vertebra  cannot  be  luxated  forwards,  unlefs  by  a  furprifingly  great,
and  almoft  incredible  impetus,  the  very  ftrong  ligaments  of  the  dentoid  pro-
cefs  be  ruptur'd,  or  the  procefs  itfelf  broken.

I  omit  other  things :  for  you  very  well  perceive,  even  from  what  has  been
already  laid,  whether  it  is  with  juftice  that  I  have  complain'd  {l>)  of  many
things  being  omitted  by  Panarolus,  in  his  defcription  of  a  luxation  of  the
fame  vertebra.

And,  certainly,  if  you  fuppofe  that  the  firft  vertebra  cannot  be  luxated
from  the  head  ;  it  muft,  of  courfe,  be  an  obfiiacle  to  the  tooth-like  procefs
of  the  fecond  vertebra,  either  by  its  anterior  bony  arch,  which  prevents  it
from  being  carried  forwards,  or  by  its  very  firm  tranfverfe  ligament,  which
prevents  it  from  being  carried  backwards,  with  the  fecond  vertebra  when
impell'd,  fo  that  this  vertebra  fhall  be  luxated  •,  unlefs  either  the  ligaments
are  ruptur'd,  or  the  dentoid  procefs  itfelf  broken  :  and  you  fee  it  will  happen
nearly  in  the  fame  rnanner,  when  you  obferve  what  lies  in  the  way  of  the
tooth-like  procefs  laterally,  if  you  Ihould  chufe  to  fuppofe  this  vertebra  to
be  luxated  to  either  fide.

For  my  difcourfe  was  of  true  luxations  of  this  kind.  Of  which  kind  I
could  wifh  that  they  had  been  in  the  two  examples  of  Mauchart :  for  although
he  fays,  that  he  could  introduce  his  thumb  betwixt  vertebra  and  vertebra  j
yet,  in  the  firft,  he  even  exprefsly  denies  (c)  that  there  was  "  a  true  luxa-
"  tion."  And  I  even  wifh  that  the  firft  example  had  been  from  his  own
obfervation,  and  not  from  the  obfervation  of  a  certain  neighbouring  phy-
fician ;  for  in  that  cafe  mention  would  have  been  made  of  the  ligaments
being  ruptur'd,  or  of  the  bone  being  fraftur'd,  or  not  fra£tur'd  :  which  de-
ficiency is  not  in  the  fecond ;  yet  if,  inftead  of  being  merely  prefent,  he  had
perform'd  the  diiTeftion  in  this,  there  would  have  been  no  doubt  whether
the  lioaments  had  been  lacerated  by  the  violence  of  the  fall,  or  by  the  knife:
and  the  vertebrs  being  examin'd  very  accurately,  both  internally  and  exter-
nally, it  v/ould  have  been  now  much  more  certain,  that  there  was  no  fradture
of  the  bones.

For  which  reafon  it  is  to  be  wiQi'd,  from  him  in  particular ;  both  in  regard
to  thofe  vertebrse,  and  all  of  them ;  that  according  to  the  occafions  which
may  prefent  themfelves  for  the  future,  this  controverfy  may  be  totally  deter-


OJ  ^  11.  Sc  12.  {i)  Supra,  n.  35.

(z)  15.  {a)  §  10.  (0  §  16.  in  fin.


min'd  5


Letter  LVII. Article  i .  31c?

min'd ;  and  the  anatomical  doftrine  of  the  ligaments  may  at  the  fame  time
be  completed ;  wherein,  not  only  I  have  obferv'd  that  fome  things  ftill  re-
main to  be  treated  of,  more  accurately,  after  Weitbrecht ;  but  Maucharr,
by  that  peculiar  fl<.ill  and  accuracy  which  he  is  remarkable  for  in  difledion,
really  ftiews,  in  the  diflertation  entitled  «  The  Articulation  of  the  Head  with
*'  the  firft  and  fecond  vertebra."

And  thefe  few  things  I  was  willing  to  fay,  by  way  of  poftfcript  to  this
letter  ;  left,  becaufe  the  copies  of  that  other  diflertation,  fubfequent  to  what
1  juft  now  mention'd,  are  very  fcarce  in  Italy,  you  (hould  be  ignorant  what
fo  great  a  man  has  thought,  or  feen,  in  regard  to  the  luxation  of  the  upper
vertebrse. Once  more  farewel.


LETTER  the  FIFTY-SEVENTH

Treats  of  the  Gout,  and  other  Pains  of  the  Joints.

1.  T  HOPE  you  will  not  be  greatly  furpriz'd  at  my  not  treating,  fcere,
J^  of  the  impediments  to  lying  down  on  the  back,  or  the  fides  ;  and  pro-
ducing very  few  oblervations  that  relate  to  the  gout ;  when  you  have  confi-
der'd  the  two  next  feftions  of  the  S^pulchretum,  and  the  thing  itfelf.  For
as  to  patients  not  being  able  to  lie  in  a  fupine  pofture,  or  on  their  fides ;
this  generally  happens  from  difeafes,  on  which  you  have  often  receiv'd  other
letters  from  me,  that  take  no  lefs  notice  of  the  troublefome  fymptoms,  or
inconveniencies,  wherewith  thofe  difeafes  are  join'd,  than  of  the  difeafes
themfelves.

For  this  reafon,  the  feventh  feflion  alfo,  that  is  allotted  to  the  treating  of
thefe  impediments,  in  the  Sepulchretum,  is  very  fhort :  not  becaufe  hiftories
are  wanting  which  relate  to  the  fubjeft,  but  becaufe  almoft  all  of  them,  having
been  already  produc'd,  each  in  its  proper  place,  are  refer'd  to  here  in  three
words,  by  pointing  out  the  place  where  they  may  be  read  at  pleafure ;  in
the  fame  manner  as  the  fixteenth,  the  twentieth,  the  twenty-firft,  the  twenty-
fecond,  and  the  thirty-eighth  letters,  may  be  pointed  out  to  you  by  me,  in
preference  to  other  letters.

As  the  gout  is  generally  a  diforder  of  the  rich,  and  very  feldom  of  the
poor  J  and  the  carcafes  of  the  latter,  not  of  the  former,  are  deliver'd  to
anatomifts  ;  or  as,  if  at  any  time  the  bodies  of  the  rich  are  to  be  open'd,
the  vifcera  only  are  fubjefted  to  examination,  for  the  moft  part,  and  fcarcely
ever  the  limbs  j  it  happens  from hence,  that  obfervations which  properly

relate
6


320 Book  IV.  Of  Chimrgkal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

relate  to  the  gout,  are  far  more  rare  in  the  books  of  anatomifts,  than  thofe
of  a  great  number  of  other  difeafes.

For  this  reafon  it  is,  that  but  few  could  be  transferr'd  into  this  eighth
feclion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  that  treats  of  the  gout ;  which  fedion,  there-
fore, is,  for  the  moft  part,  made  up  of  fcholia  :  and  out  of  thofe  few  ob-
fervations  which  it  does  contain,  fome  had  been  already  produc'd  in  the
preceding  books;  and  you  will  find,  that  the  lafl:  which  is  added  had  been
already  propos'd  by  Bonetus  himfelf  a  little  before,  in  that  fame  feftion  ;  and
what  is  Itill  more,  even  in  the  immediately- foregoing  page  ;  and  in  fo  many
words  •,  if  you  compare  it  with  the  eleventh  obfervation,  and  its  fcholium.

1,  however,  am  Hill  refolv'd  to  repeat  no  hiftory,  though  I  might  take
.occafion  to  repeat  many  from  Valfalva's,  and  from  my  own.  When  it  be-
comes neceffary  to  bring  back  to  your  memory  any  of  thefe  obfervations,  I
will  point  out  the  letters  in  which  you  may  read  them.  Here  you  will  have
very  few  indeed  -,  but  then  they  will  be  what  I  have  not  fent  you  on  any
former  occafion.

2.  A  woman  was  frequently  afflifted  with  ifchiadic  pains,  at  the  joint  of
the  femur,  on  the  right  fide  -,  on  which  fide  Ihe  was  lame,  and  fomewhao
oibbous.  At  length,  Ihe  was  firft  feiz'd  with  a  palfy,  and  after  that  with
aB  apoplexy  ;  which  carried  her  off  before  the  end  of  January,  in  the  year
174.1,  at  the  time  I  was  reading  anatomy  in  the  college  :  to  which  place  the
body  was  carried  from  the  hofpital.

The  belly  being  open'd,  the  omentum  appear'd  to  be  ftretch'd  down  al-
moft  to  the  pubes.  And  in  attempting  to  turn  this  up,  we  turn'd  up,  at
the  fame  time,  the  inteftine  colon,  which  was  curv'd  towards  the  lower  part
of  the  belly,  and  adher'd  clofely  to  the  omentum.  That  is  to  fay,  the  feat
of  xhis  intedine  was  different  from  what  it  generally  is.  For,  befidcs  that
the  beginning  of  it,  as  well  as  the  csecum,  was  lower  in  the  belly  than  it  ge-
nerally is  -,  when  it  had  afcended  from  that  beginning,  almoft  quite  to  the
liver,  it  v/as  reflected  downwards  from  thence,  into  the  upper  part  of  the
hypogaftrium,  in  the  form  of  an  arch ;  and  afcended  upwards  from  hence,
very  high,  by  a  curvature  quite  fimilar,  into  the  left  hypochondrium :  and
ix\  the  whole  of  this  arch,  as  has  been  already  faid,  it  was  firmly  tied  to  the
omentum.

Both  of  the  Falloppian  tubes  were  (hut  up  at  their  uterine  orifices.  The
cfculum  uteri  was  not  furrounded  by  any  corona  on  the  back  part.  The  va-
gina was  fliort.  The  fpace  from  the  glans  clitoridis,  alfo,  to  the  orifice  of
the  urethra,  was  (hort ;  io  as  not  to  be  equal  to  the  breadth  of  a  little  finger.
The  trunk  of  the  great  artery,  which  is  in  the  belly,  fent  out  the  fuperior
mefcnteric  artery  of  a  larger  fize  than  the  celiac  :  and  was  diftinguifh'd  in
feveral  places  inrtrnally  by  whitilh  fpots.  The  other  veflels  we  did  not  exa-
mine ;  thefe  parts  being  replac'd  by  better  from  other  bodies ;  and  we  fearing
left  our  confinement,  as  to  time,  fliould  p-event  us  from  examining  the
liead. .

1  have  already  told  you,  on  a  former  occafion  (a),  what  kind  of  thyroid

(^);Gpift,  50.  n.  31,.

eland


Letter  LVII. Article  3.  321

crland  I  met  with  in  going  on  to  the  mufcles  of  the  neck,  the  remaining
part  of  the  trunk,  and  the  limbs  :  and  what  kind  of  joint  of  the  right  os
femoris,  with  the  acetabulum,  I  found,  I  muft  now  tell  you ;  agreeably  to
my  promife  in  the  preceding  letter  {b) ;  only  firft  making  this  remark,  that
the  bony  fmus,  wherein  the  right  fcapula  receiv'd  the  head  of  the  os  humeri,
had  its  edge  manifeftly  deficient,  where  it  Ihould  have  approach'd,  with  its
anterior  fide,  to  the  upper  pare.

The  head  of  the  right  os  femoris  was  not  rounded  into  a  globular  form  :
and  was  deprefs'd,  and  not  cover'd  by  a  fmooth  and  white  cartilage,  but  by
one  of  a  pale  afli-colour:  and,  indeed,  this  cartilage  was  totally  deficient  in
the  pofterior  part  of  the  head  ;  fo  that  the  bone  appear'd  naked  in  that  parr,
and  form'd  into  many  roundifli  and  protuberant  particles.

The  internal  furface  of  the  acetabulum  was  bloody :  and  the  fuperciliuni
thereof,  as  it  is  call'd,  had  two  bony  laminse  buried  within  its  natural  carti-
laginous and  ligamentous  fubftance  ;  which  laminas  were  not  fmall,  and  lay
near  to  each  other.

3.  Fernelius  (c),  indeed,  judg'd  that  an  arthritic  humour  "  never,  or  very
"  feldom,"  penetrates  into  the  cavity  of  the  joints,  but  only  falls  upon  the
furrounding  ligaments,  membranes,  and  tendons  ;  making  ufe  of  this  ar-
gument, amongft  others,  that  in  the  tophaceous  podagra,  or  chiragra,  the
humour,  which  is  already  concreted  into  a  calculus,  is,  for  the  mod  parr,
taken  out  from  the  joints  of  the  fingers,  or  toes,  the  capfular  "  ligament
"  being  found  and  unhurt."

But  others,  afterwards,  as  you  will  learn  from  the  Sepulchretum  {d),  feem
to  have  attempted  fomething  more  than  Fernelius ;  fince  they  endeavour  to
prove,  that  even  the  tendons,  which  are  inferted  into  the  joints,  have  either
"  no  fenfation  at  all,  or  a  very  obfcure  one  :"  and  that  this  gypfeous  matter
is  indeed,  at  length,  collefted  near  the  joints,  by  reafon  of  other  additional
caufes,  but  not  always;  as  it  is  met  with  in  other  neighbouring  parts.  In
the  woman  in  queftion,  however,  who  was  fo  tortur'd  with  ifchiadic  pains,
I  found  no  diforder  near  the  joint ;  but  all  of  it  within  the  joint.

Yet  we  do  not  deny  that  this  tartareous  matter  concretes,  alfo,  near  to  the
joints ;  as  in  that  prieft  in  whom  Valfalva  (e)  found  it  immediately  under  the
fkin,  in  the  membrane  that  enwraps  the  tendons  of  the  fingers.  Nor  fhall
I  make  any  obje£tion,  if  they  fhould  chufe  to  underftand  the  words  Of  Are-
tsus  (/)  in  the  fame  manner  :  "  In  the  joints,  alfo,  tophaceous  bodies  are
"  form'd :  in  the  beginning  they  appear  like  abfcelTes :  but  afterwards  they
"  are  more  infpiflated,  and  when  the  humour  is  concreted,  it  is  even  dif-
"  ficult  to  bend  the  joint :  at  length,  they  become  white  and  folid  tophi."

And  I  will  even  refer  you  to  the  obfervations  of  our  Sandtorius  (g).  His
words  are  as  follow :  "  I  have  fometimes  feen,  that  in  a  certain  old  knee-
"  gout,  a  gypfeous  pituita,  fimilar  to  a  liquid  lime,  had  flow'd  down  to  the
"  fkin  •,  upon  the  perforation  of  which  it  was  difcharg'd  in  that  liquid  ftate :

{h)  Epift.  56.  n.  16.  (/)  De  fign.  &  cauf.  diuturn.  morb.  1.  2;

{c)  Patliolog.  1.  6.  c.  18.  c.  12.

{li)  Seft.  hac  8.  in  Schol.  ad  Obf.  1.  {g)  Comment,  in  I. F.  i.  1.  Can.  Avic.

\e)  Epift.  40.  n.  2,  D.  4.  c.  I. t.  J.

Vol.  Ill  .  T  t  «  ftirr'd


3  2  2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgtcal  and  Univerfai  Diforders.

"  ftirr'd  up  by  which  experiment,  I  once  made  ufe,  in  the  cafe  of  a  knee-
"  gout  from  a  gypfeous  pituita,  of  the  dripping  of  water  from  unwafli''d
"  wool,  in  which  mallows,  crefTcs,  and  other  herbs  of  the  emollient  kind,
"  had  been  boil'd  ;  and,  after  a  long  interval,  I  made  fome  portion  of  that
"  gypfeous  pituita,  which  lay  under  the  flcin,  liquid  and  foft  j  and  evacuated
"  it  from  thence,  by  cutting  into  the  fkin."

This  curative  experiment  I  was  not  willing  to  omit  here  ;  although  it  did
not  efcape  me  (^),  that  the  calcarious  matter  of  gouty  joints  had  been  "  re-  .
"  folv'd  by  warm  water  alone,"  but  when  taken  out  of  the  body,  as  I  fup-
pofe-j  and  that  from  thence  hopes  were  conceiv'd,  that  by  means  of  fre-
quent draughts  of  lime-water,  to  which  foap  is  added,  it  would  happen  that
this  matter  (hould  be  diffolv'd  in  the  very  joints  of  gouty  bodies :  and  1
could  wifh  this  hope  might  have  been  more  juft,  if  the  fuccefs  could  prove,
that  as  great  a  quantity  of  this  water  was  carried  into  the  joints,  as  was  car-
ried into  the  bladder.

We  therefore  grant  to  thofe,  whom  we  have  referr'd  to  in  the  Sepulchre-
tnm,  that  near  the  joints  alfo,  and  that  not  uncommonly,  a  tophaceous  mat-
ter is  collefted.  And  I  moreover  even  add,  that  it  is  fometimes  coUefted  far
from  the  joints ;  as  we  have  feen  in  a  tumour  of  the  bread  of  a  gentle-
man (/),  whofe  grandfather  and  father  had  been  afflifted  much  with  the  gout,
he  himfelf  not  having  been  wholly  free  therefrom.

But  we  cannot,  for  this  reafon  alfo,  approve  what  they  aflert :  that  as  the
capfular  ligaments  fhut  up  the  cavities  of  the  joints,  and  as  "  no  paflagelies
"  open  "  thereto,  nor  any  vein  enters  thefe  places,  the  gouty  humour  cannot
l)e  carried  within  them.  For  there  is  the  fame  paflage,  into  thefe  cavities,,
"fdr  this  humour,  as  for  the  mucilage  that  lubricates  the  cavities  :  and  that
the  glands  which  fecrete  this  humour,  are  furnilh'd  with  their  little  arteries,
is  not  only  demonftrated  by  reafon,  or  injeftions ;  but  even  by  the  eyes
themfelves,  when  unfurnifh'd  with  glafles,  and  looking  upon  thofe  reddifli
and  (lender  flaps  of  thefe  glands.  Wherefore,  when  the  blood  is  loaded  with
tartareous  particles,  thefe  particles  may  be  depofited  in  the  cavities  of  the
Joints,  by  means  of  thefe  fame  veflels,  together  with  the  mucilage  ;  as  well
■as  by  means  of  other  arteries  about  the  tendons,  and  membranes,  which  lie
adjacent  to  the  joints.

And  thefe  particles  concreting  into  tophi,  and  little  ftones,  by  gradually
drawincr  afunder  the  bonfes,  and  by  diflblvrng  the  ligaments,  "  break  the
"  joints,"  as  Perfius  (k)  fays  of"  the  ftony  chiragraj"  or  as  Cselius  Aure-
lianus  (/)  fays  of  thefe  gouty  "  ftones,  they  loofen  the  joints,  and  diftend  the
"  fkin,  and  by  burfting  forth  become  prominent,  and  are  taken  out  by
"  the  hands  of  the  furgeon :"  all  which  circumftances  I  have  feen,  and
particularly  in  the  joints  of  the  fingers  of  a  certain  Venetian  nobleman.

Nor  v/ill  you  have  any  room  left  to  doubt,  whether  they  are  really  form'd
within  the  very  cavities  of  the  joiiits,  when  you  read  the  obfervations  re-


[h) Vid. § II. Differt. cit, Epift. 42.  {i)  Sat.;,  v.  59.

■n.  19.  (0  Morb.  'Chroii.  1.  5,  c.

(;■)  Epift.  50.  n.  45,  46.


counted


Letter  LVII. Article  4.  323

counted  in  the  Sepukhretum,  from  Harderus  (»?},  Schneider  {n),  and
Dobrzenfl<y  {o).

4.  Yet  it  is  not  always  necefiary,  that  the  tartareous  particles  {hould  enter
the  cavities  of  the  joints,  together  with  the  mucilage,  in  order  that  arthritic
affedtions  may  be  there  produc'd.  It  is  fufficient,  if  you  attend  to  Boer-
haave  {p)  on  this  head,  that  the  mucilage  itfelf,  if  not  attenuated  by  a  proper
attrition,  and  for  that  reafon  not  abforb'd,  "  flagnates  a  con fiderable  time"
in  the  joints,  "  and  becomes  acrid  by  this  very  ftagnation."  For  by  this
means  it  produces  the  moft  violent  pains :  and  "  frequently  thefe  very  great
"  diforders  arife  merely  from  a  fedentary  kind  of  life."

And  to  this  other  things  ought  to  be  added,  which  we  reckon  among  the
caufes  either  of  diminiih'd  attrition,  or  of  difficult  abforption,  or  of  both ;  I
mean  moift  cold,  which  injures  the  natural  tone  of  the  joints  in  a  great  de-
gree, and  that  fo  much  the  more  eafily,  becaufe  the  cartilages  and  the  liga-
ments, of  which  they  are  compos'd,  and  the  tendons  wherewith  they  are
moft  of  them  cover'd,  are  not  furnifh'd  with  a  great  number  of  fanguiferous
veffels,  if  compar'd  with  moft  other  parts;  and  thefe  veffels  are  certainly
very  fmall ;  for  which  reafon  it  happens  that  they  are  more  fubjedl  to  cold ;
and  efpecially  in  thofe  joints  which  are  very  much  expos'd  to  the  injuries  of
the  cold,  as  in  the  feet.

We  muft  likewife  add  preffure  -,  as,  for  inftance,  from  tight  fhoes,  from
whence  many  of  the  reforbent  veffels  are  either  made  too  narrow,  or  quite
obliterated  :  and  this  fo  much  the  more  eafily,  as  they  are  prefs'd  againft  the
very  hard  parts  of  which  I  have  faid  that  the  joints  confift.

Other  caufes  are,  the  diftance  from  the  heart,  from  whence  the  impulfe  in
propelling  the  humours  is, very  languid  :  the  eafy  and  perpendicular  paffage
through  which  the  fame  humours  are  to  be  carried :  the  indulgence  us'd
during  the  pains  of  the^affefted  parts,  in  which  delicate  patients  remain  even
much  longer  than  there  is  occafion  :  a  lentefcent  and  vifcid  ftate  of  the  mu-
cus, either  from  morbid  caufes,  and  in  particular  from  gluttony,  drinking,
or  venery,  or  from  any  parental  taint ;  whereby  the  abforbing  veffels  are  alfa
ftreighten'd,  and  there  is  a  weaknefs  of  the  propelling  fibres :  and  other  cir-
cumftances  of  the  like  kind.

A  great  number  of  which  I  have  enumerated,  becaufe  I  have  obferv'd
that  fome  perfons  in  defcribing  them  from  Hoffman  {q),  (in  whofe  works
almoft  all  thefe  circumftances  are  taken  notice  of)  without  making  any  men-
tion of  this  author,  have  omitted  fome  things  that  ought  not  to  be
pafs'd  over  ;  whether  we  undertake  to  explain  nothing  elfe  but  what  Hoff-
man has  done,  that  is  to  fay,  why  the  feet  are,  more  frequently  than  other
parts,  feiz'd  with  the  gout;  or  even  why,  and  that  in  the  beginning  alfo,
fome  other  part  is  feiz'd  therewith.

For  in  fadl: ;  as  is  faid  by  Cselius  Aurelianus  (r) ;  "  the  arthritic  pain
"  takes  its  beginning  from  the  feet  fometimes,  and  fpreads  to  the  other

(»)  Sea.  hac  8.  poll.  Obf.  2.  (?)  Medic.  Rat.  Tom.  4.  P.  2.  S.  2.  c.  11

(«j  Obf.  3.  Thef.  Pathol.  §  16.

(0)  Obf.  5.  <r)  c.  2,  pauloante  cit.

(/.)  Pi-slea.  ad  Inft.  §  258.


Tt


joints  I


3  24 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

"joints-,  and  fometimes  beginning  in  the  other  joints,  attacks  the  feet  af-
"  terwards."  And  chofe  joints  which  are  not  only  in  more  frequent  motion
than  others,  but,  at  the  fame  time,  fubjeft  to  fewer  of  thofe  caufes  that  I
have  enumerated,  fcarcely  ever,  or  never,  are  feiz'd  with  the  gout :  nor  do
1  remember  ever  to  have  heard,  or  read,  that  thofe  joints  were  thus  affefted,
whofe  obfolete  memory  I  have  endeavour'd  to  reftore,  by  fhewing  that  there
was  no  part  deficient  in  them,  by  reafon  of  their  fmallnefs,  that  was  given
to  the  larger  joints ;  for  we  have  evidently  demonftrated  (s)  thofe  very  fmall
joints,  that  are  interpos'd  betwixt  the  cricoid  and  arytenoid  cartilages,  to  be
fupplied  with  a  membranous  capfular  ligament,  with  the  flap  of  a  mucila-
ginous gland,  and  with  mucilage.

But  thofe  joints  are  chiefly  affected  by  adventitious  morbid  caufes,  which-
are  fubjedt  to  mofl:  of  thofe  other  caufes  that  I  have  mention'd ;  I  mean  the
joints  of  the  feet :  wherefore,  when  ancient  authors  (/)  faw  an  epidemical
gout,  fo  that  eunuchs  alfo,  women,  boys,  and  girls,  and  flocks  of  goats,
in  like  manner,  were  affefled  therewith  -,  it  was  that  foot-gout  which  attack'd
the  inhabitants  of  the  place  promifcuoufly,  for  twenty  years  together.

But  it  was  lefs  furprizing  that  two  illuftrious  young  men  of  fifteen  years  of
age,  who  began  to  labour  under  the  gout,  fhould  have  been  known  to  Brafa-
volus  («)  ;  as  I  myfelf  have  feen  little  children,  who  were  feiz'd  with  fevere
pains  of  the  joints,  and  greatly  diforder'd  thereby,  before  they  had  well  got
out  of  their  infant- fliate  :  and  have,  at  the  fame  time,  known  that  their  father,
grand- father,  and  great-grand- father,  had  been  fubjeft  to  the  gout.

5.  And  how  acrid  the  mucilage  of  the  joints  fometimes  becomes,  by  fl:ag*
nating  in  their  cavities,  is  fufficiently  argued,  I  think,  from  the  bloody  ap-
pearance of  the  acetabulum  of  the  woman  in  quefl:ion  (x),  and  from  the  ero-
fion  of  the  head  of  the  femur.  But  when  the  acrimony  has  come  to  this
pitch,  do  you  think  it  poflible  that  the  hip-gout  may  be  cur'd  by  any  inter-
nal or  external  remedy  .''

I  certainly  do  not  think  it  is :  not  even  if  you  make  ufe  of  "  the  laft  and
"  mofl  efficacious  remedy  in  inveterate  diforders ;"  for  thus,  I  believe,  we
ought  to  read  the  words  of  Celfus  (y)  ;  "  by  ulcerating  the  fkin,  in  three  or
"  four  places,  upon  the  hip,  by  means  of  red-hot  irons  ■"  not  to  mention
other  and  milder  kinds  of  cauteries  befides,  that  were  us'd  by  Hippo-
crates (z),  fuch,  and  many  more,  as  are  taken  notice  of  by  Cselius  Aureli-
anus  {a) ;  among  which  is  this  alfo,  that  was  likewife  us'd  by  Hippo-
crates, and  which  feems,  more  than  any  other,  to  have  correfponded  to  the
moxa  of  the  Indians,  I  mean  a  kind  of  fungus  that  was  fet  fire  to  at  the  upper
part:  all  which  kinds  of  burning  Cselius -,  although  he  acknowledges  them
to  be  "  moderate  by  their  gentle  penetration  -,"  neverthelefs  poftpones  ;o
other  remedies,  on  account  of  being  attended  with  a  great  deal  of  uneafniefs,

(,)  Adverf.  Anat.  1.  n.  15.  CyJ  ^e  Medic.  1.  4.  c.  22.  Vid.  Epift.  6;

(/)  Vid.  apud  Donat.  de  Medic.  Hift.  Mir. nollram  in  Celf.
1.  ,.  c.  8.  (~)  Vid.  apud  le  Ckrc.  Hift,  de  la  Medic.

(«)  Vid.  ibid.  P.  i.l.  3.  c.  28.

tr)  n.  2,  . W  !•  cit.  5.  c.  I.

and


Letter  LVII. Article  5.  325

and  forbidding  the  ufe  of  thofe  remedies,  "  as  the  ulcerated  parts  cannot
"  bear  the  application  of  them."

But  burning,  in  order  to  contrad:  and  corroborate  relax'd  parts,  has  its
ufe;  and  ulceration  of  the  fkin,  in  order  to  carry  off,  and  eliminate,  from
the  internal  parts  of  the  body,  fome  portion  of  the  morbid  matter  which  has
fallen  thereupon,  has  its  ufe  alfo  :  wherefore  you  will  not  think  a  mild  burn-
ing of  this  kind,  and  timely  applied,  a  remedy  entirely  to  be  rejefled  in  fome
cafes  ;  efpecially  when  you  call  to  mind,  noc  only  the  cures  of  the  ancients,
but  alfo  fome  more  modern  cures,  that  have  been  fuccefsfully  perform'd
thereby.

You  will  think  much  the  fame  of  fome  other  remedies.  "  So  great,"
fays  Arantius  (^),  "  is  the  efficacy  of  glyfters,  in  the  hip-gout,  efpecially
"  when  incipient,  that  I  have  reftor'd  many,  who  were  grievoufly  afFecSled
"  therewith,  to  their  former  health,  without  the  application  of  any  other  re-
"  medy  befides  thefe."  And  the  firft  glyfters  which  he  propofes  you  will,
without  doubt,  readily  approve,  as  they  do  not  greatly  differ  from  thofe. that
Cslius  (c),  who  has  been  fo  often  mention'd  by  us,  recommends  ;  "  whereby
"  the  internal  parts,  being  fomented  and  moiften'd  with  vapour,  confent  ia
"  a  univerfal  relaxation."

But  where  thofe  firft  glyfters  have  not  been  fufficient,  Arantius  prefcribes
another  kind,  and  that,  as  he  himfelf  acknowledges,  a  ftrong  purging  clyfter.
Will  you  then  rejeft  them  all  entirely  through  fear  of  irritation  ?  Nay,
where  there  are  thofe  caufes  and  thofe  bodies  that  he  fuppofes,  you  will  make
ufe  of  fome  other  kind  of  glyfter,  if  you  do  not  make  ufe  of  that,  whereby  to
obtain  the  fame  purpofe.

And  certainly,  if  you  read  the  more  ancient,  or  more  modern,  phyficians
than  Arantius,  you  will  find  that  there  are  many  teftimonies  which  agree
with  his.  Thus  Montagnana  (d)  fays,  that  ifchiadic  pains,  "  by  the  tefti-
"  mony  of  all  prudent  phyficians,  are  cur'd  by  acrid  "glyfters,"  And  Rive-
rius  (e),  after  other  clyfters  being  frequently  applied,  at  length  propofes  acrid
ones  alfo ;  fo  that  you  may  perceive  him  to  be  very  manifeftly  of  the  fame
opinion  with  Arantius.

Moreover  Etmuller  (/) ;  to  omit  others  ^  not  only  fays  that  clyfters  are
fuitable,  and  particularly  when  repeated  •,  but  adds  this  :  "  and  it  is  necef^
'•  fary  that  they  fliould  be  acrid."  Who  then  dare  fufpedl,  that  what  fo
many  very  experienc'd  profefTors  fo  greatly  recommend,  has  not  an-
fwer'd  fometimes  with  them  ?  This  remedy  therefore  has  fometimes
its  ufe.

But  at  other  tim,es  there  is  room  for  thofe  glyfters  which  Caslius  approv'd,
or  others  that  aft  in  a  different  manner  •,  among  which  I  know  that  thofe
have  fometimes  been  of  advantage,  that  have  been  prepar'd  from  water
wherein  the  cs  penta  had  been  boil'd :  even  more  than  glyfters  made  up  of
elaborate  pharmaceutical  preparations,  not  to  fay  of  preparations  equally


(i)  1.  de  Tumor,  p.  n,  cip.  63,  (/?)  Prax.  Medic.  1.  16.  c.  2.

(f)  c.  I.  cit.  (/J  Prax.  1,  z,  S.  2.  c.  3.  art.  8.

{«')  Confil.  Z.C7,

Yet


32  6 Book  IV.  Of  Cliimrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

Yet  I  fliould  fuppofe  that  fome  of  them  were  compos'd  of  fuch  things  as
were  ufeful  to  the  nerves,  that  lie  near  to  the  inteftinum  redum  ;  which,
defcending  behind  the  os  ifchium,  fome  cdnfider'd  as  the  feat  of  the  ifchia-
dic  pain  :  efpecially  from  the  time  Coiterus  (g)  had  faid,  that,  he  had  found
the  fpace  betwixt  the  lower  part  of  the  fpinal  marrow,  and  its  dura  mater,
through  which  thofe  nerves  are  carried,  to  be  "  frequently  fiU'd  with  a  thin
"  ferum,  in  arthritic,  ifchiadic,  and  podagric  patients  ;  and  fometimes  with
*'  a  vifcid  pituita."  And  this  obfervation  is  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchre-
fum  (/&),  though  not  quite  in  the  words  of  Arhifaeus,  who  takes  notice  of
it;  yet  this  I  am  the  more  carelefs  about,  becaufe  a  fluid  of  the  fame
kind  is  found  in  thofe  alfo,  who  have  not  labour'd  under  a  diforder  of  this
nature,

6.  And  I  muft  think  the  fame  of  purging  medicines,  and  of  blood-
letting, as  I  have  thought  of  glyfters.  For  as  to  what  relates  to  blood-
letting, to  fay  nothing  of  the  opinion  of  thofe,  we  fuppofe  that  the  ifchiadic
o-out  is  from  a  vain  effort  of  nature,  in  attempting  to  expel  the  fuperfluous
blood,  by  the  way  of  the  hsemorrhoidal  vefiels ;  certainly  the  more  ancient
authors  have  led  the  way  to  the  obfefvations  of  thofe  perfons  :  among  which
more  ancient  authors  is  Joannes  Zecchius  (z),  who  has  faid,  in  dependance
upon  reafon  and  experience,  that  blood  taken  from  thofe  veins  "  is,  in
"  a  furprizing  manner,  ferviceable  to  ifchiadic  patients."

The  fame  author  relates  ftill  more  furprizing  things  of  the  very  fpeedy  fo-
lution  of  this  diforder,  if  the  vein  which  lies  upon  the  external  ankle,  on  the
fame  fide,  be  opeti'd  :  and  this  is  confirm'd  by  an  alrnoft  fimilar  obfervation
of  Riverius  {k).  Who  will  deny  that  thefe  authors  had  feen  what  they  fay
they  had  feen  ?  But  would  you  attempt  that  in  a  very  weak  conftitution,  and
one  that  has  but  little  blood,  which  it  is  natural  to  fuppofe  had  fucceeded
with  them  in  a  robuft  and  full  habit  •,  or  in  one  that  had  become  ifchiadic
froni  a  fupprefTion  of  the  hsemorrhoidal  flux  ?

I  alfo  know  that  you  would  not  give  purging  medicines  to  an  arthritic  pa^
tient  whofe  body  is  extenuated,  and  ftrength  decreas'd ;  or  whofe  nerves  may
be  eafily  drawn  into  confent :  or,  finally,  to  one  whofe  ftomach  is  of  fuch  a
nature,  as  eafily  to  be  injur'd  therefrom.

Yet  I  do  not  iuppofe  you  therefore  think,  that  every  purging  medicine  is,
at  all  times,  and  in  all  conftitutions,  injurious.  For  if  this  were  the  cafe,
moft  of  the  more  ancient  phyficianS  would  never  have  prevented,  or  got
rid  of,  the  oout,  even  when  it  was  incipient ;  as  they  afl^ert  that  they  had
gain'd  both  thefe  points,  by  the  ufe  of  purging  medicines  in  particular.

I  am  prevented  from  mentioning  each  of  them  feparately,  by  their  fol-
lower, Demetrius  Pepagomenus,  phyfician  to  Michael  Palsologus;  who,  by
the  command  of  his  mafler,  wrote  a  little  book  on  the  gout,  which  has  beefli
printed  at  Padua  in  my  memory,  as  the  work  "  of  an  uncertain  author,"
and  not  to  be  had  feparately  from  large  volumes :  whereas ;  to  fay  nothing
of  the  more  ancient  edition  ;  it  had  been  publifh'd  feparately  at  Paris,  in
the  year  1558,  and  not  without  the  name  of  the  true  author;  as alfo  at

U)  Obferv.  Anat.  (i)  Confult.  Med.  4^.

{h)  Sea.  hac  3.  Obf.  6.  (^)  Cent,  2.  Obf.  Med.  25.

8  St.


Xett^r  LVIi. Article  6.  327

St.  OiTiers,  in  the  year  16 19,  Joannes  Bergefius  publilKer;  who,  I  fuppofe,
would  not  have  given  himfelf  the  trouble  to  turn  the  French  verfion  of  Jamot
into  Latin,  if  he  had  not  been  ignorant  of  its  being  publilh'd  in  Greek
and  Latin  at  Paris,  and  of  its  being  elegantly  tranHated  into  Latin  by  Mar-
cus Mufurus.

If  you  therefore  turn  over  this  boolc,  even  haftily,  yoy  will  immediately
fee  how  much  this  Greek  phyfician,  as  a  follower  of  thofe  ancient  Greek
•phyficians,  attributed  to  purging  remedies,  in  curing,  and  preventing,  the
gout.

But  kft  you  ftiould  imagine  this  to  have  fucgeeded  in  the  cpuncry  of
Greece  only,  and  objedt  to  me  that  a  phyfician  of  great  note,  in  our  time,
ajSerts  ev^ry  kind  of  purging,  even  "  by  means  of  lenient  medicines ;"  not
to  fpeak  of  itronger  remedies ;  to  be  for  the  moft  part  injurious  to  gouty
patients,;  whether  you  mean  to  cure  the  prefent  paroxyfm,  or  prevent  a  fu-
ture one  :  and  that  even  he  had  found  it,  by  experiments  made  upon  him-
felf, as  well  as  upon  others,  fo  little  to  anfwer  his  wifhes,  "  that  it  invited
"  and  incr-eas'd  the  very  evil  which  it  was  expedled  to  prevent,  and  to  cureV
left  then,  I  fay,  you  (hould  obje£t  thefe  things  to  me  ;  I  will  oppofe  to  yog
two  phyficians  among  our  countrymen,  who  were  very  famous  when  living;
who  were  themfeives  gouty,  and  had  tried  purging  on  themfplyes ;  I  meap
Marcus  Gatinaria  and  Petrus  Bayrus.

The  former  of  thefe  gentlemen  (/)  having  made  ufe  of  evacuation  every
.imonth,  for  the  fpace  of  two  years,  and  made  ufe  of  redu(5lion  by  abftinence
jtwice  a  week,  fays,  by  thefe  means  "  I  certainly  was  cur'd,  and  have  never
"  been  afflifted  with  the  gout  fince."  And  Bayrus  {m)  having  already  la-
-bour'd  eight  or  ten  times  under  the  moft  violent  pains  in,  ail  his  joints,  fo  as
not  to  be  capable  of  moving  any  other  part  befides  his  tongue ;  and  being
;*gain  affli(5kd  therewith  ;  couW,  upon  taking  his  own  eleftuariurn  caryocofti-
;num,  walk  on  theiame  day,  and  the  day  after  was  free  from  diforder:  aHd
;ithis  experiment  he  made  twice  afterwards  with  the  fame  fuccefs.

And  in  fine,  after  having  made  ufe  of  the  fame  medicine  three  or  four
times  a  year,  whenever  he  began  to  perceive  any  figns  of  plenitude,  he  fays,
"  it  is  now  more  than  fix-and-twenty  years  fince  I  have  been  at  all  troubled
*'  with  thefe  pains;  and  this  experiment  I  have  made  not  only  upon  myfelf,.
•'•  but  upon  a  very  great  number  of  patients ;  and  that  with  the  fame  fuc-
"  eefs ;"  and  this  eleftuary,  of  which  he  fpeaks,  is  the  fame  that  our  Ca-
pivacci  (?;)  faid  "  deferv'd  the  higheft  commendations,"  in  the  gout,  "  as
"  had  often  been  prov'd  by  experiment."

I  have  fpoken  thus  at  large  of  Bayrus,  left  you  fliould  fey,  that  the  purgings,,
made  ufe  of  by  Gatinaria,  had  fucceeded  fo  well,  becaufe  he  began  juft  then
to  be  troubled  with  the  gout ;  and  befides,  through  the  whole  fpace  of  twO'
years,  drank  little  or  no  wine  :  although  I  know  a  learned  man  v^ho,  being
troubled  very  much,  and  for  a  long  time,  as  his  brother  was  alfo,  with  the
gout;  and  having  tried  all  other  things,  and  amongft  thefe  water-drinkino-,

(/)  Vid,  apud  Donat.  c.  8.  fupra  ad  n,  {m)  Dejnedend.  hum.  corp,  mails  Enchin
4,,  cit.  Did.  ig,  tr.  I.  c.  I.

(»)  Confil.  Medic,  a  Scholz.  edit,  232.

inftead:


328 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univeifal  Diforders.

inftead  of  wine,  for  a  year  together ;  gain'd  not  the  lead  advantage  thereby,
and  even  became  weak  and  emaciated,  till  he  began  to  make  ufe,  every  day,
before  his  fparing  fupper,  of  one  of  the  PiluLs  Mehnogcg^  Langelotti :  by
means  of  which  pills  he  had  itools  that  were,  for  the  moft  part,  mucous,
but  not  in  great  quantity.

For,  by  thefe  means  beginning  to  be  better,  he  went  out  from  home :
and  I  faw  him  afterwards  walking  firmly,  and  expeditiouil,,  without
any  ftaff  or  fupport ;  being  of  his  former  habit  of  body,  and  in  good
health ;  at  which  time  he  took  one  of  thole  pills  only  every  fifth  day.

Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  the  raoft  modern  writers  in  medicine,  would,
if  they  had  not  well-known  inftances  of  this  kind,  have,  themfelves  alfo,
forbid  every  kind  of  purging  to  gouty  patients :  and  indeed  they  do  not
approve  very  violent  medicines  of  this  kind,  elpecialiy  in  the  paroxyfm  ;
but  they  recommend  the  more  mild  purgers,  when  the  paroxylm  is
at  hand,  and  even  when  it  is  incipient ;  and  ftill  more  to  prevent  other  pa-
roxyfms.

7.  In  regard  to  the  milk-diet  alfo,  as  it  is  call'd,  it  is  certain  that  we
ought  to  confider  of  it  again  and  again,  before  we  prefcribe  it  to  arthritic
patients  •,  left  it  fliould  happen  to  be  injurious  to  an  impure  body,  or  one
that  is  liable  to  hypochondriac  affeflions :  or  fhould  be  of  more  detriment
than  utility  to  a  weak  ftomach.  And,  indeed,  the  moft  eminent  phyficians
have  afferted,  that  this  utility  is  very  precarious,  and  of  (hort  continuance  •,
even  in  thofe  who  bear  milk  well :  and  that  foon  as  ever  the  milk-diet  is
omitted,  and  they  return  to  the  diet  of  healty  perfons,  although  mild  and
gentle,  the  gout  returns,  and  troubles  them  far  worfe  than  before  ;  or  that,
in  the  ftead  of  ir,  the  moft  violent  internal  diforders  come  on,  which  are
foon  after  follow'd  by  death.

However,  neither  every  kind  of  milk,  nor  milk  taken  in  every  way,  of
courfe  leaves  thefe  inconveniences  behind  it  ;  as,  for  inftance,  if  it  be  given
to  thofe  with  whom  it  agrees :  and  not  milk  only,  but  other  proper  foods
alfo;  nor  too  great  a  quantity  of  thefe  foods  be  given  at  the  fame  time ;  ia
the  fame  manner  as  we  do,  not  uncommonly,  in  other  diforders.

At  leaft,  among  the  obfervations  which  Daniel  Puerarius,  as  I  fuppofe,
added  to  the  obfervations  of  Thomas  Burnet  (0),  there  is  one  of  a  count,
who,  when  his  ftomach  was  not  able  to  bear  the  farther  ufe  of  milk,  liv'd
upon  puddings  made  with  milk  and  fugar,  and  chickens  fed  with  bread
foak'd  in  milk  ;  by  v/hich  means  returning  to  his  former  method  of  living,
he  was,  indeed,  fubjed  to  very  flight  pains  of  the  joints,  and  fuch  as  could
be  eafily  got  rid  of,  but  not  to  fuch  as  he  had  been  formely  troubled
with.

And  "not  a  few"  other  perfons  of  gouty  habits,  having  taken  milk
about  the  fpace  of  two  years,  "  indulg'd  themfelves  afterwards  in  drinking
"  freely  of  wine  without  any  difadvantage."  Thus  far  he.  But  Cornelius
Celfus  (p)  has  deliver'd  down  to  us  in  his  writings,  "  that  fome  gouty  pa-
"  tients,  having  cleans'd  themfelves  univerfally,  by  the  ufe  of  alTes-milk,
*'  had  efcap'd  this  diforder  for  ever."

(«)  Thef.  Med.  Praft.  I.  i.  S.  40.  in  fin,  {p)  De  Medic.  1.  4.  c.  24.

And


Letter  LVII. Articles.  329

And  Pliny  {q)  has  confirm'd  this  by  faying,  "  There  are  examples  of  thofe
*'  who  have  been  freed  from  the  hand- gout,  or  the  foot-gout,  by  drinking
aflTes-milic."  "Which  paflage,  I  fee,  is  copied  in  the  annotations  to  the  Qon-
filia  of  Ballonius  (r),  not  without  a  remark,  how  a  eafy  remedy  of  this  kind,
and  one  proper  to  corre6t  the  acrimony  of  the  arthritic  ferum,  fhould  be
omitted  by  the  phyficians  of  that  time.

And  when  different  things  were  objedted  by  different  perfons  to  thofe
who,  after  that,  renew'd  the  Hippocratic  ufe  of  milk  againft  this  diforder ;
Lodovico  Tefti  arofe,  aa  excellent  old  man,  and  an  intimate  friend  of  mine,
who  found  out  a  method  of  ufing  milk  that  was  liable  to  lefs  difficulties ;  by
inventing  the  fugar  of  milk,  as  he  call'd  it.  The  fuccefsful  effeds  of  which
were  prov'd  by  many  perfons,  both  among  our  countrymen  and  foreigners ;
yet  when  the  author  was  dead,  the  ufe  of  his  invention  feem'd,  I  know  not
how,  to  decreafe.

8.  But  do  not  expedt  that  I  treat  of  quickfilver  in  like  manner,  the  ufe
of  which,  fo  as  to  excite  a  falivation,  has  been  recommended  by  fome  au-
thors againft  this  difficult  diforder,  among  other  remedies,  as  Etmuller(j)
will  Ihevv  you  ;  though  fome  in  a  different  manner  from  others,  among  whom
is  the  celebrated  Pujati  (/).

For  I  will  not  fpeak  of  this  remedy  more  particularly  here,  than  of  dia-
phoretics, and  of  the  more  bitter  or  heating  herbs :  nor  only  to  prevent
prolixity,  but  alfo  that  I  may  fay  no  more  of  thefe  remedies  than  of  others ;
I  mean,  that  they  may  fometimes  have  their  ufe ;  and  that,  at  other  times,
they  are  not  only  ufelefs,  but  even  injurious  ;  and  efpecially  the  more  violent
kinds.

I  therefore  remember  that^  when  a  certain  phyfician  was  relating  to  me,
that  he,  by  giving  quickfilver  to  gouty  patients,  who  were  moreover  affedled
with  a  lues  venerea,  having  promoted  a  plentiful  falivation,  had  driven  away
the  lues  indeed,  but  h2d  not  in  the  leaft  diminifh'd  the  caufe  of  the  gout,
as  they  continu'd  to  be  attack'd  therewith  no  lefs  violently  than  before ;  I
remember,  I  fay,  to  have  anfwer'd.  You  have  reafon  to  be  content  that
their  fits  have  not  been  more  violent.

And  although  in  this  difeafe,  as  well  as  in  others ;  not  to  fay  more  in
this  •,  we  ought  to  ufe  the  feweft  and  mildeft  medicines  we  can  ;  and  though
this  is  the  plan  I  have  always  purfu'd  ;  yet  if,  at  any  time,  fome  peculiar
caufes  require  a  remedy  which  wc  fliould  otherwife  avoid,  we  muft  give
credit  to  Boerhaave  (a),  who  writes,  in  regard  to  the  gour,  "  that  whatever
"  remedy  is  moft  oppofite  to  the  caufe  from  whence  the  diforder  had  its
"  origin,  this  is,  in  every  one,  the  greateft  and  beft  remedy  •,"  efpecially
where  this  feems  to  agree  widi  the  conftitution  of  the  body  which  we  en-
deavour to  cure.  And  hence  it  is,  that  fome  medicines  which  have  been
lufpeded  by  many  phyficians,  have  been  of  great  ufe  in  this  difeafe.

Thus ;  to  fpeak  a  little  of  external  medicines  alfo ;  how  ufeful  in  pre-
venting and  curing  the  pains  of  the  joints,  the  oil  from  the  roots  of  the

(j)  Nat.  Hift.  1.  28.  c.  9.  {t)  Diflert  de  Hydrarg.  n.  51.  &  feqq.  &

(r)  L.  2.  Conf.  3.  Annot.  4.  in  fin,

\s)  Prax.  art.  8.  fupra  ad  n.  5.  cit.  {«)  Aphor.  de  cogn.  &  curand.  morb.  1280.


Vol.  III.  U  u


cinnamon-


3  30 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

cinnamon-tree  has  been,  appears  from  the  Tranfaiiions,  as  they  are  call'd,  of
the  Royal  Society  of  England  {x).  Thus,  how  many  and  various  things,
that  have  given  eafe  to  thefe  pains,  when  externally  applied,  do  we  meet
with  in  turning  over  the  writings  of  phyficians.

To  fpeak  only  of  fat;  I  remember  that  the  fat  of  frogs,  hedge- hogs,,
geefe,  wether-fheep,  and  dogs,  have  been  recommended.  I  have  alfo  feen
that  of  afles  fomctimes  prefcrib'd  by  Albertini,  which  you  will  find  men-
tion'd  by  Paullinus  (j),  and  yet  not  for  this  purpofe.  Will  you  fuppofe,
then,  that  becaufe  any  one  of  thefe  things  has  been  fometimes  of  ufe  to
fome  perfons,  it  muft  be  fuitable  to  all  perfons,  and  at  all  times  ?

It  is  certain,  that  Albertini  applied  the  fat  of  affes,  in  a  certain  ifchiadic
man,  who  was  neither  affedted  with  very  great  pain,  nor  inflammation.  But,
at  other  times,  in  order  to  aflliage  the  pains  of  the  joints,  as  far  as  it  was
proper,  he  made  ufe  of  no  other  remedies  than  what  mod  of  us  make  a
practice  of  ufing  -,  yet,  in  every  one  of  them,  he  chiefly  made  ufe  of  that
wherewith  every  one  us'd  to  be  eas'd  :  as,  for  inft:ancc,  a  piece  of  frefli
beef,  chang'd  twice  a  day  -,  or,  to  take  notice  of  a  thing  which  I  have  no-
where read  of,  but  was  us'd  to  a  fenator  of  Bologna,  with  great  advantage  j.
a  rag  moiften'd  with  the  juice  prefs'd  out  from  the  leaves  of  elder,  and
flightly  warm'd.

I  know,  indeed,  that  the  flowers,  or  tender  ftalks,  of  elder,  or  even  the
leaves  themfelves,  but  join'd  with  other  things,  have  been  recommended  by
the  Greek  (z)  and  Latin  {a)  writers ;  yet  the  fimple  juice  of  the  leaves  I  do
not  remember  to  have  fecn  recommended.

9.  But  thefe  external,  and  thofe  internal  remedies,  likewife,  whereof  we
havefpoken;  and  others  that  are  recommended  by  authors;  whether  they
have  been  ufeful  to  any  perfon,  for  the  reafon  which  was  juft  now  pointed
©ut,  or  have  been  applied,  by  accident,  near  the  decline  of  the  diforder,
which  fometimes  comes  on  much  fooner,  of  itfelf,  than  it  generally  does  ;
or  even  (which  I  would  have  you  underftand,  in  particular,  of  thofe  medi-
cines that  are  call'd  prefervatives)  whether  the  health  which  is  afcrib'd  to
their  ufe,  would  be  more  juftly  afcrib'd  to  the  exaft  method  of  living  which
is  order'd  to  be  obferv'd,  at  the  fame  time,  for  a  long  while  (both  of  which
circumfliances  Caelius  Aurelianus  {b)  fufpedted  alfo :  and  Celfus  {e),  and
others,  teftify  the  fecond,  even  of  itfelf,  to  have  brought  "  a  fecurity  from
*'  the  diforder,  through  the  whole  courfe  of  life ") ;  this  is  certain,  that
moft  of  them  have  either  never  been  at  all  ufeful.  or,  at  leaft,  very  little,
to  moft  perfons:  and  that  fome  of  them -have  thrown  patients  into  very
great  danger,  or  have  brought  on  the  caufe  of  their  death.

Therefore,  if  you  compare  all  the  circumftances  I  have  taken  notice  ofj
with  the  diforder  of  that  woman  (i)  whofe  hiftory  led  us  to  thefe  remarks ;
you  will  readily  conceive  how  few  things  could  have  been  of  any  ufe  (for
as  to  perfed  health,  after  the  bone  was  in  part  corroded  and  deftroy'd,  that

{x)  Saggio  delle  Tranfaz,  &c.  Tom.  4.  {B)  C.  2.  fupra  ad  n.  3.  cit.

(y)  L.  de  Afino,  S.  4.  c.  3.  §  iz.  (c)  C.  24.  fupra- ad  n.  8.  ciu

(z)  Diofcorid.  de  Med.  Mat.  c.  168.  (dj  Supra,  n.  2.
l«)  Scribon.  Comp.  Medic.  160.  Samonic.
de  Medic,  c.  4a.  Marcell.  de  Medicasn.  c.  36.

could


Letter  L VI I, Article  9.  331

could  not  be  expefted) ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  how  many  would,  with-
out doubt,  have  been  very  injurious.

Among  thefe  you  will  reckon  thofe,  alfo,  that  I  have  not  yet  mention'd,
but  only  had  a  view  to ;  I  mean,  fuch  things  as  repel  the  arthritic  matter
already  depolited  about  the  joints,  or  beginning  to  be  depofued,  force  it
inwards  to  the  veins,  and  prevent  it  from  being  depofited,  (then  or  after-
wards) by  aftringing  the  fmall  veflels  that  carry  it  to  the  joints,  and  unfea-
fonably  corroborating  the  fibres.  For  how  m.uch  injury  it  may  do  when  ex-
cluded therefrom,  may  be  even  conceiv'd  from  the  utility  which  it  very
often  brings  with  it,  when  admitted  thereto.

See,  for  inftance,  how  the  diforders  of  the  hearing  with  which  a  gentle-
man was  troubled,  and  to  which  other  remedies  gave  no  relief,  us'd  to  be
entirely  remov'd  by  the  gout  coming  on ;  and  return  when  the  gout  went
off;  as  Reufnerus(^)  remark'd:  and  how  the  wife  of  Gerbezius  (/)  was
wont  to  have  a  fevere  pain,  for  a  long  time,  in  her  bread  and  ftomach,  till
(he  was  immediately  freed  therefrom  by  the  appearance  of  the  gout.

But  why  do  I  feek  examples  from  thefe,  and  other  writers,  (that  could
furnifh  one  with  fo  many)  of  the  utility  of  this  diforder,  which  I  have  ex-
perienc'd  in  myfelf.  For  when  I  was  afflidted  with  that  inflammation  of  both
eyes,  whereof  I  have  formerly  made  mention  (§■),  which  now  almoft  ap-
proach'd  to  a  chemofis,  and  had  made  ufe  of  other  remedies  in  vain ;  and  I
myfelf  thought,  and  my  friends  confirm'd  the  opinion,  that  blood-letting
fliould  be  delay'd  no  longer ;  it  came  into  my  mind  to  try,  before  I  had  a
vein  open'd ;  for  I  never  had  been  bled,  nor  ever  have  been  to  this  day,
though  I  am  now  in  my  feventy-ninth  year;  to  try,  I  fay, -whether  bathing
the  feet  with  warm  water,  and  ufing  gentle  frictions  thereto,  would  be  of
any  advantage.

And  I  had  not  dope  this  for  more  than  two  evenings,  before  a  pain,
which  came  in  the  very  joint  of  the  right  toe  with  the  metatarfal  bone,
fhew'd  that  the  gout  was  at  hand  :  and  this  pain,  being  increas'd  flightly  in
the  night-time,  immediately  diminilh'd  the  inflammation  of  my  eyes ;  and
in  a  few  days  took  it  off.

This  gout  was  very  mild,  as  I  had  never  had  it  before,  and  my  parents
and  ancefliors  had  not  been  fubjedl  thereto ;  nor  did  I  feel  any  thing  of  ic
afterwards  for  five  years,  at  the  end  of  which  period  it  appear'd  in  the  left
knee,  but  in  a  very  flight  degree ;  fo  that  the  effedt  of  this  pediluvium,  in
bringing  on  the  gout,  was  fimilar  to  that  in  the  young  man  whofe  hiftory
I  fee  in  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (h),  but  the  gout  very  diffimilar  in  its
violence  :  nor  is  this  to  be  wonder'd  at:  fince  he;  to  omit  other  things;
did  not  make  ufe  of  a  milk-warm  bath,  as  I  did,  but  of  one  extremely  hot.

However,  in  proportion  as  the  gout  is  of  advantage,  when  the  joints  af-
ford a  free  admiflion  to  it ;  fo  much  injury  does  it  bring  on  the  other  parts,
when  the  joints  will  no  longer  admit  it.  And  though  this  might  be  confirm'd
by  innumerable  obfervations,  many  of  which  you  may  fee,  if  you  pleafe,

(<■)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  5.  Gbf.  8.  CgJ  Epift.  13.  n.  24.

(/J  Earund.  Cent.  8.  Obf.  6.  (-5-)  A.  1741.  Hebd.  33.  n.  i.  propius  fin.

U  U  2  in


3  32 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgieal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

in  the  volumes  of  the  Casfarean  Academy,  and  particularly  Dec.  3.  A.  5,  &  6.
Obf.  55 ;  it  will  be  fufficient  for  me  to  take  notice  of  one  from  him  whom
I  frequently  and  defervedly  commend  ;  I  mean,  Hippol.  Franc.  Alber-
tini  (z).

For  a  goldfmith,  who  us'd  to  labour  under  the  gout,  every  year,  and  had
more  than  once  driven  it  away  by  anointing  his  feet  with  petroleum,  when
the  difeafe  was  at  hand ;  fell  into  many  more  violent  diforders,  which  would
not  be  put  to  flight,  unlefs  by  difcharging  a  great  quantity  of  matter  from
the  inteftines  ;  which,  that  you  may  readily  perceive  it  to  have  been  of  a
gouty  kind,  was  made  up  "  of  lime,  or  gypfum,  as  it  were,  lately  cemented
"  together."

This  matter,  therefore,  when  excluded  from  the  corroborated  joints,  fre-
quently falls  upon  the  parts  that  are  contain'd  in  the  abdomen,  the  thorax,
or  the  cranium  ;  bringing  on  prefent  danger,  and  frequently  death.  And
the  fame  things  happen  when  any  internal  caufe  prevents  the  matter  from
being  carried  to  the  joints  ;  and  particularly  a  decreafe  of  vital  power.  And
this  you  may  not  only  argue  from  two  obfervations  that  I  have  fent  you
heretofore  (k),  but  you  will  more  evidently  learn  from  the  following.

10.  George  Corneli,  cardinal  of  the  holy  Roman  church,  and  biHiop  of
Padua,  having  been,  for  a  long  time  paft,  extremely  fubjed:  not  only  to  pains
of  the  joints,  but  to  pains  of  the  kidnies  alfo ;  and  being  now  free  from
thefe  pains,  no  calculi  appearing  any  more,  and  the  difcharge  of  urine  being
greatly  diminifli'd  ;  feem'd  to  be  falling  into  a  dropfy,  and  perhaps  was  really
fo  ;  but  that  a  very  powerful  diuretic,  which  was  given  him,  caus'd  a  great
quantity  of  urine  to  be  difcharg'd.

At  that  time,  not  the  leaft  calculus  was  feen  :  nor  for  many  years  after-
wards was  there  any  fymptom  of  the  kidnies  being  affefted  ;  notwithftanding
he  travell'd  in  his  chariot  through  a  long  and  rough  road,  and  had  changes
of  horfes  for  the  fake  of  difpatch  ;  I  mean,  in  the  year  1721,  when  he  went
from  hence  to  Rome,  and  from  Rome  to  Padua  again.

However,  though  the  nephritic  pains  did  not  trouble  him  in  thofe  years,,
he  was  not,  for  that  reafon,  free  from  the  arthritic  complaints  ;  but  thefe  re^
turning  now  and  then  at  times,  were  even  the  more  violently  and  frequently
troublefome  to  him,  becaufe,  by  reafon  of  his  being  of  a  fat  habit  of  body,
and  but  weak  in  his  lower  limbs,  and  by  reafon  of  his  advanc'd  age,  he  was
prevented  more  and  more  every  day,  from  making  ufe  of  his  wonted
exercife.

To  thefe  complaints  were  added  a  continual  coftivenefs  for  a  long  time
together,  a  heavinefs  of  the  head,  and  of  hearing  after  that,  together  with
a  propenfity  to  fleep ;  and,  finally,  frequent  fwoonings.  In  this  manner
having  fcarcely  pafs'd  his  fixty-fourth  year,  he  at  firft  loft  his  appetite  for  all
kinds  of  food  -,  and  then  was  attack'd  with  the  arthritic  paroxyfm  :  and  now
his  right  hand,  and  his  left  knee,  began  to  fwell,  when  he  receiv'd  the  me-
lancholy news  of  the  fatal  diforder  of  his  moft  fcrene  brother  Giovanni,  Doge
of  Venice,  whom  he  fincerely  lov'd.


(j)  Comment,  de  Bonon.  Sc.  Inft.  Tom.  i. {i)  Epift.  25.  n.  lOi  &  Epift.  40.  n.  z.
in  Opuf.  de  Cort.  Peruv.  haud  ita  procul  a  fin.


Frorn


Letter  LVII. Article  lo.  333

From  this  time  he,  though  in  other  refpedts  a  man  of  a  great  mind,  was
feiz'd  with  incredible  grief  and  uneafinefs  •,  and  foon  after,  not  only  the
gouty  matter  ceas'd  to  be  expell'd  to  the  joints,  but  even  that  which  had
been  expell'd  return'd  into  the  veins,  and  brought  on  a  ftreightnefs  and  op-
preflion  of  the  prscordia,  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  befides  thefe  a  kind
of  fudden  paroxyfm  ;  wherein  the  fundtions  both  of  the  brain  and  heart
failing,  death  feem'd  to  be  at  hand.

Then  his  fenior  phyfician,  and  thofe  who  were  prefent,  either  of  relations
or  friends,  haftily  fent  for  me  into  confultation.  I  found  the  patient,  how-
ever, a  little  recover'd  in  the  mean  time  ;  but  fo  unlike  himfelf  in  mind,  as
well  as  body,  that  I  was  immediately  ftruck  therewith,  and  call'd  to  mind
that  prsenotion  of  Hippocrates  (/) :  "  To  do  any  thing  contrary  to  cuftom
"  is  a  bad  Hgn."

For  he  who  before,  ia  the  moft  difficult  affairs,  was  never  wanting  to-
himfelf,  or  to  others,  had  entirely  given  up  all  hope  of  life,  as  I  perceiv'd
from  his  words  ;  in  which  he  advis'd  us  not  to  attempt  to  relieve  him  by  our
vain  endeavours  :  nay,  he  even  commanded  and  aflc'd  it ;  and  this,  in  par-
ticular, he  begg'd  again  and  again  of  me,  while  I  was  feeling  his  pulfe,  and-
conjur'd  me  by  that  great  regard  and  friendfhip  which  he  had  always  borne
me.

His  pulfe,  as  I  then  and  afterwards  perceiv'd,  was  very  bad  •,  for  it  was
very  weak,  and  generally  intermitted  after  two  ftrokes,  but  always  after  a-
few  ftrokes.  It  was  manifeft,  that,  unlefs  the  peccant  matter  could  be  re-
call'd'to  the  joints,  the  patient  could  not  be  fav'd.  Yet  it  was  not  lefs  evi-
dent, that  the  difficulty  of  recalling  it,  in  that  dejeftion  of  ftrength,  would
be  very  great ;  and  particularly  as  he  was  firmly  perfuaded  in  his  own  mindj
that  every  thing  was  to  no  purpofe.

I,  therefore,  faid  apart  to  thofe  to  whom  it  was  my  duty  fo  to  do^  that
he  was  in  the  greareft  danger :  and  I  took  care  that  this  fhould  be  imme-
diately fignified,  by  a  running  footman,  to  his  brother's  fons  at  Venice,  in
letters  diftated  by  me.  However,  nothing  was  at  that  time,  or  afterwards,-
omitted,  out  of  all  the  things  that  we  had  determin'd  to  do ;  or,  at  leaft,  a&
far  as  the  ftrength  of  the  patient  would  permit,  and  we  could  prevail  upon
him  by  intreaties  to  fubmit  thereto^

And  now  the  knee  began  to  fwell  again  ;  on  which  day  we  obferv'd  the
pulfe  to  be  grown  a  little  better.  But  nature  foon  after  growing  languid,
every  fymptom  grew  worfe ;  and  the  difficulty  of  breathing  increas'd  :  his
head  was  more  and  more  opprefs'd  with  fleep  :  and  not  only  the  internal
parts,  but  the  limbs  alfo,  were  feiz'd  with  convulfions  •,  though  we  did  every
thing  in  our  power  to  prevent  it.  And  in  this  manner  that  moft  excellent"^
cardinal,  that  beft  of  priefts,  and  great  encourager  of  learning,  was  fnatch'd"
away  on  the  tenth  of  Auguft,  in  the  year  1722  ;  at  which  time  nearly,  his
brother  alfo,  who  was  the  beft  of  princes,  and  fubjefl  to  the  gout  in  the
fame  manner,  was  carried  off  likewife;  all  good  people  being  griev'd  at  the-
fate  of  thefe  unhappy  brothers.

(/)  In  Caac.  n,  I .  apud  MarinelL

. -  ■  A«-


334 -^odk  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  andUniverfal  Diforders.

As  the  body  was  to  be  embalm'd  on  the  following  night,  in  order  to  have
the  funeral-rites  perform'd  after  the  manner  of  his  ajiceltors  -,  I  fent  a  pupil
of  mine,  who  was  well  pradlis'd  in  difleftion,  to  take  out  the  vifcera,  and
examine  them  attentively,  for  I  could  not  bear  to  be  prefent  myfelf.  From
this  pupil,  therefore,  and  from  the  phyfician  whom  I  fpoke  of  before,  I  foon
after  made  every  proper  enquiry  in  regard  to  the  appearances.  And  this  is
the  fubftance  of  what  both  of  them  related.

The  belly,  which  was  very  fat,  had  its  mefentery,  and  the  fmall  inteftines,
loaded  with  a  great  quantity  of  fat :  the  ftomach  was  large  ;  but  the  coats
thereof  were  greatly  extenuated  :  the  liver  itfelf  was  in  a  natural  ftate ;  but
the  gall-bladder  was  fmall,  and  the  coats  of  it  fo  thin  and  flaccid  as  to  be
^broken  by  the  touch  j  a  round  calculus  falling  out,  which  was  not  fmall  in
proportion  to  the  fmallnefs  of  the  veficle,  and  was  the  only  one  contain'd
■therein,  and  that  without  any  bile.  ^

The  kidnies  were  larger  than  they  naturally  are,  but  the  right  was  the
largeft',  fo  that,  together  with  the  fat  whereby  it  was  cover'd,  it  was  almoft
-equal  to  the  fize  of  a  man's  head.  Therein  were  eleven  {tones,  moft  of
them  large  and  ramifying.  In  the  left  was  one,  and  that  alfo  was  ramified
and  fmall.

Thefe  calculi,  in  their  colour  and  branches,  refembled  nothing  more  than
black  coral ;  for  they  brought  them  to  me  that  I  might  look  at  them  ;  but
they  could  not  have  been  feen  by  thofe  who  have  hinted,  that  they  were
fimilar  to  the  ftones  which  Alghifi  (m)  has  delineated  in  his  third  tabic.
However,  that  fubftance  of  the  kidnies  which  lay  next  in  order  around
them,  was  hard  and  callous.

Upon  opening  the  thorax,  nothing  was  found  in  the  lungs  that  was  pre-
ternatural -,  but  the  trunk  of  the  afpera  arteria  had  its  cartilages  very  hard,
and  not  eafily  yielding  to  the  hand,  when  conftringing  them.  Which  fpecies
of  diforder  was  alfo  obferv'd  in  the  iliac  arteries,  and  in  the  neighbouring
trunk  of  the  aorta,  from  whence  they  arife.  Nor  was  it  wanting  within  the
thorax  j  but  there  the  more  the  great  artery  receded  from  the  heart,  the  more
manifeft  it  became.  And  this  artery  was  much  broader  within  the  thorax
than  it  ought  to  have  been.

In  the  heart  was  no  polypous  concretion  :  and  but  a  very  fmall  portion  of
blood,  and  that  frothy.  Nor  was  there  much  blood  in  the  whole  body  ;  if
you  except  the  integuments  of  the  head,  in  cutting  into  which  a  pretty  con-
fiderable  quantity  of  blood  flow'd  out.

The  cranium  being  open'd,  befides  the  ferum  which  was  obferv'd  therein,
the  whole  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum  was  lax  to  a  very  great  degree.

1 1 .  Too  many  and  confiderable  diforders,  befides  thofe  that  were  manifeft,
lay  hid  in  this  body,  to  fufFer  the  arthritic  matter  to  be  thrown  back  upon
the  joints,  either  by  nature  or  by  art.  It  is  true,  the  laxity  of  the  cerebrum
appear'd,  in  great  meafure,  from  the  preceding  fymptoms  of  heavinefs  of
the  head,  and  of  hearing,  and  the  propenfity  to  fleep.

But  would  you  have  fuppos'd  it  to  be  grown  fo  lax,  as  to  be  already  al-
jnoft  unfit  for  performing  its  principal  office,  and  very  fit  for  receiving  a

{m)  Liiotomia.

quantity


Letter  LVII. Article  1 1 .  3:  yjr

qiiantity  of  arthritic  ferum  ;  from  whence  thofe  external  and  internal  convul-
fions,  to  which  the  ftreightnefs  of  the  prscordia,  and  the  very  great  difficulty
of  breathing,  as  the  lungs  were  in  other  refpefts  unhurt ,  (for  neither  did  Joer-
denfius  («)  find  any  thing  morbid  within  thefe  vifcera,  in  a  cafe  almofl:  fimi-
lar)  were  to  be  attributed.

And  with  what  force  could  the  great  artery,  that  was  wider  than  ufual,
and  had  its  coats  very  hard  ;  as  the  iliac  branches  of  it  had  alfo  ;  impel  the
peccant  matter  into  the  upper  and  lower  limbs  ?  It  was  certainly  more  likely
to  retard,  now  and  then,  the  motion  of  the  blood ;  from  whence  not  only
thofe  deliquia,  but  that  lafl:  attack,  and  the  intermiffion  of  the  pulfe,  are  to>
be  accounted  for :  efpecially  fince  the  heart  was  greatly  debilitated,  as  ap-
pear'd  from  the  weaknefs  of  the  pulfe,  and  not  without  reafon  j  inafmubh  as;
the  ftrength  of  the  heart  could  not  be  preferv'd  by  fuch  a  brain  as  that
was.

To  this  was  added,  that,  though  the  heart  wxs  weak,  and  the  arteries,  in
their  ftate  of  hardnefs,  had  by  no  means  ftrength  equal  to  circulate  even  the
beft  and  moft  vivid  blood  ;  they  were  under  a  neceflity  of  propelling  an  efFet&
and  impure  blood  :  for  this  was  Ihown  to  have  been  fuch,  not  only  by  the
latter  part  of  his  life  having  been  pafs'd  without  any  exercife,  or  agitation
of  body,  but  alfo  by  the  many  preternatural  appearances  found  in  the
belly.

For,  in  the  firft  place,  the  ftomach,  in  fo  lax  and  extenuated  a  ftate,  could
not  wellprepare  the  aliments.  And,  in  the  iecond  place,  the  inteftines  were
not  able  to  prepare  the  chyle ;  as  no  bile  was  now  difcharg^d  from  the:
veficula  fellis,  and  only  a  fmall  quantity,  and  that  not  good,  had,  for  a  long
time,  flow'd  down ;  the  former  of  which  circumftances  was  prov'd  by  that
fmall  bilious  calculus,  and  the  latter  by  the  fmallnefs  of  the  cyft,  and  the
long-continu'd  coftivenefs  of  the  inteftines :  and  you  readily  perceive  how  far
this  aftriftion  of  the'bowels  was  likely  to  prevent  the  purgation  of  that  impure
blood.

And  as  to  the  purgation  finally,  which  blood  of  that  kind  certainly  neededj
if  any  at  all  did,  as  that  is  made  principally  by  the  fkin,  and  by  the  kidnies  ;,
this  was  not  done  fo  much  by  the  fkin,  in  a  quiefcent  ftate  of  body :  and
who  can  fuppofe  that  it  was  fufiiciently  done  by  the  kidnies,  which  were  fo^
opprefs'd,  and  in  part  callous  ?

Nor  does  it  efcape  me,  who  took  notice  of  the  caufe  thereof,  upon  aformeri
OGcafion  ((?),  and  particularly  confirm'd  it  in  fat  perfons ;  nor  does  it  efcape-
me,  I  fay,  that  calculi  of  the  kidnies  are  often  join'd  with  the  gout;  and  I
even  know  that,  on  account  of  thefe  calculi,  the  blood  of  arthritic  patients  is  >
lefs  purg'd  ;  and  that  by  thefe  means  the  gouty  matter  is  encreas'd.  Yet  I-
would  not  have  you  infer  from  hence,  that,  in  all  thefe  perfons,  this  matter
could  not  be  fo  well  propcll'd  to  the  joints  :  or  if  it  fhould  have  happen'd  to  ■
recede  therefrom,  and  fall  upon  the  internal  parts, ,  that  it  cannot  be  recall'd:
to  the  jointSi

And  indeed,  L  remember,  that  in  the  fenator  of  Bologna,  whom  1  took<-

(o)  Aft»N.  C  Tom,  4,  Append,  n.  5,  in  fine  §  j.  (»)  Epift.  40.  n,  3.  &  5.

8;  notice-


3  3<^ Book  IV.  Of  Cliirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

notice  of  above  (p),  and  who  was  troubled  with  calculi  of  the  kidnies  alfo  ;
befides  the  gout ;  when  the  knees  and  hands  began  to  fwell,  and  foon  after,  of
a  fudden,  and  without  any  manifeft  caufe,  the  pain  and  the  tumour  va-
nilh'd  almoft  totally,  and  a  confequent  difficulty  of  breathing  alarm'd  every
one;  I  remember,  I  fay,  that  in  this  patient  however,  the  peccant  matter
was  recall'd  to  the  joints  by  Albertini,  by  means  of  the  fame  remedies  we
made  ufe  of  here  to  no  effeft.

But  then  the  age  was  not  the  fame,  nor  had  the  fenator  any  grief  to  op-
prefs  his  mind ;  nor  thofe  diforders  of  the  brain,  and  the  great  artery :  and
although  calculi  did  not  fail  to  be  difcharg'd  now  and  then,  yet  they  were
not  to  be  compar'd  with  thofe  of  which  we  are  at  prefent  fpeaking.

12.  For,  in  the  firft  place,  thefe  refembled  the  form  of  coral.  Which  it  is
neceffary  you  fliould  attend  to,  not  fo  much  for^the  fake  of  admiration,  as
for  knowing  their  caufe  and  effect.  For  you  will  read  in  the  Sepulchretum,
that  calculi  were  found  in  the  kidney,  which  refembled  the  fliape  of  a
moufe  {q)  ;  not  to  mention  thofe  which  refembled  the  form  of  coral  (r).  And
Euftachius,  who  gave  almoft  the  firft  obfervation  of  all,  of  a  calculus  in  the
form  of  coral,  has  fufficiently  Ihown  the  caufe  of  a  figure  of  this  kind  {s).
According  to  which,  Piccolhominus  (0  has  afterwards  explain'd  the  form  of
a  moufe  alfo,  in  a  calculus  dcfcrib'd  by  him.

And  if  the  hiftory  thereof  had  been  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum
from  the  author  himfelf ;  the  readers  would  not  have  been  ignorant  after
what  fymptoms  it  had  been  found.  Therefore,  as  the  calculous  matter  ftag-
nates  in  the  pelvis,  and  the  beginning  of  the  ureter ;  it  is  by  that  means
moulded  into  the  figure  which  refembles  the  body  and  head  of  the  moufe ;
or  which  refembles  aftump  of  coral:  and  as  it  ftagnates,  at  the  fame  time,
in  the  tubuli  that  open  into  the  pelvis  >  fo  the  calculi  reprefent  the  tail  and
legs  of  a  moufe,  or  the  branches  of  coral.

When  the  urinary  paflages  are  all,  or  moft  of  them,  befet  with  calculi  in
the  manner  I  have  mention'd  ;  and  the  very  fmall  and  contiguous  inftru-
ments  whereby  the  urine,  if  feparated  from  the  blood,  are  comprefs'd  ;
you  certainly  fee  that  the  fecretion,  and  excretion,  of  the  urine  muft  be  di-
minifli'd  ;  or  the  laft  altogether  intercepted :  and  unlefs  afTiftance  be  brought
by  nature,  or  by  art,  or  by  both,  that  a  dropfy  m~uft  begin  to  come  on,
or  fome  other  great  diforder  arife.

You  fee  then,  from  what  caufe  the  dropfy  had  begun  to  arife  in  the  very
eminent  man  in  queftion,  when  the  urine  being  urg'd  on  by  a  very  ftrong
diuretic  remedy,  the  obftrudted  pafiages  were  partly  clear'd  thereby,  but  the
pafiTages  which  were  not  as  yet  befet  with  calculi,  were  immoderately  dilated;
and  this  was  the  chief  pare  of  the  effed:  lb  that  the  urine  flow'd  plentifully
then,  and  afterwards  ;  nature  lending  her  affiftance  at  the  fame  time,  as  fhe,
after  that,  fent  the  matter,  which  would  have  added  new  branches  to  the
/calculi,  more  frequently,  and  in  greater  quantity,  to  the  joints.

But  although  fome  tubuh  were  preferv'd  in  an  open  ftate,  and  even  wider

(p)  n.  8.  in  fin.  Obf.  20.  &  S.  z«.  Obf.  26.

{y)  1.  3.  S 22.  Obf.  26.  §  6.  (0  Vid.  §  4.  cit.

{r)  Ibid.  Otfet.  21.  §  4.  &  feqq.  &  S.  25. \t)  1.  z.  Anat,  Prsltd,  23.

than


Letter  LVII. Articles  13, 14.  337

than  naturally ;  yet  many  remain'd  entirely  ufelefs,  being  entirely  full,  and
ftopp'd  up  with  branches  of  calculi :  and  what  is  more  to  be  attended  to,
the  fubllance  of  the  Icidnies,  which  lay  neareft  round  about  them,  was  ren-
der'd  hard  and  callous  together  with  them,  by  continual  compreflion

And  this  was  the  reafon,  why  no  uneafmefs  was  perceiv'd  in  the  kidnies,
even  from  the  greateft  agitation  of  body ;  efpecially  as  the  very  clofe  adhe-
fion  of  the  tubuli  to  the  branches  of  the  calculi,  prevented  thelefro  n  being
agitated  :  as  yowi  will  learn  from  the  Sepulchretum  («),  that  it  had  done  in
others,  when  great  {tones,  fimilar  to  coral,  and  "  driven  in  like  nails  or
"  fpikes,"  adher'd  i;nmoveably  in  the  kidnies.

But  fo  many  parts  of  the  fubftance  of  the  kidnies  being  made  callous,
and  for  that  reafon  ufelefs,  can  we  fuppofe  that  the  function  of  thefe  vifcera
had  fuffer'd  no  detriment  ?

Befides,  thefe  calculi  were  not  only  in  great  number,  but  large;  fo  thar,
of  courfe,  the  remaining  fubftance  of  the  kidnies  would  be  partly  over-
loaded, and  partly  diftracted.  And  the  parts  which  were  thus  over-loaded
and  diftraded,  certainly  could  not  perform  their  office  perfeftly,  in  feparating
the  ufelefs  and  noxious  particles  from  the  blood,  which  at  other  times  they
are  wont  to  do.  Finally,  theie  calculi  were  in  the  body  of  a  man,  in  v/hofe
gall-bladder  another  was  contain'd  ;  and  confequently  in  that  body  which
needed  more  the  feparation  of  thofe  particles,  as  is  hinted  above  (x).

Nor  am  I  ignorant,  indeed,  that  calculi  of  the  gall-bladder  may  alfo  bepro-
duc'd  in  the  fame  bodies  that  are  liable  to  calcuH  of  the  kidnies ;  but  have
even  confefs'd  it  formerly  in  another  letter  (j),  wherein  I  have  made  men-
tion of  thofe  found  in  this  very  eminent  cardinal  :  nor  is  any  thing  more
eafy  for  me,  than  to  produce  a  great  number  of  obfervations,  of  thofe  perfons
who  have  found  them  in  both  places  at  the  fame  time.

For  befides  fo  many^thers,  that  you  will  find  taken  notice  of  by  me  in
other  places  (z) ;  and  befides  that  remarkable  one  which  is  referr'd  to  by  the
celebrated  Pohlius  (a),  and  might  be  added  to  theSepulchretum;  I  remember
to  have  read  fix  in  the  Sepulchretum,  and  all  thefe  in  the  third  book  (^) :
among  which  is  one  of  Grembfius,  that  agrees  with  the  one  I  have  here
given  in  this  circumflance  likewi'fe,  that  "  no  gall"  was  found  in  the  gall-
bladder. But  none  of  thefe  perfons,  that  I  know  of,  was  troubled  with  the
gout :  or  if  any  one  was  troubled  therewith,  he,  at  leaft,  had  not  fo  many
other  confiderable  injuries  of  the  vefTels  and  vifcera.

1  3.  There  are  other  diforders  alfo,  which  fometimes  fhow  themfelves  in
the  joints  ;  as,  for  inftance,  that  which  I  law  in  a  woman,  whofe  diflection
is,  for  more  than  one  reafon,  worthy  to  be  defcrib'd  to  ,you  on  the  prefent
occafion.

14.  An  old  woman,  who  was  the  mother  of  many  children,  had  been
feiz'd  with  an  apoplexy  about  three  months  before.  This  apoplexy  had  been
fucceeded  by  a  paralyfis  of  both  limbs,  on  the  right  fide  ;  yet  in  fuch  a  man-
fa)  Cit.  Obf.  20.  &  26.  (a)  DifTert.  de  Proft.  calcul.  affea.  §.  7.
{x)  N.  u.  ,  (6)  S.  22.  Obf.  1,  S.  23.  Obf  4.  §.  10,  S.
CyJ  Epift.  Anat.  i.  n.  48.  24.  Obf.  2.  §.  12.  Obf.  6.  §.  4.  Obf.  10.  fe-
(»)  Epill.  37.  n.  43. cunda  §.  4,  &  S.  25.  Obf.  9.  §.  5.

Vol.  III.  X  X  ner


338 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

ner,  that  they  could  be  mov'd  a  little,  and  had  the  faculty  of  feeling  left
entire.  But  laft  of  all ;  when  a  kind  of  fleepinefs,  as  it  were,  had  connc
on,  and  a  confiderable  hefitation  of  fpeech  ;  being  brought  into  the  hofpital,
fhe  there  gradually  funk  away,  and  died  :  this  was  after  the  beginning  of
December,  in  the  year  1746.

Of  the  many  things  which  I  obferv'd in  the  courfe  offeveral  days  diffec-
tion,  in  this  body,  thefe  are  the  principal  that  relate  to  the  prefent  fubjedt.

In  the  belly,  the  uterus  was  fo  fhort  in  its  length,  that  even  externally,
from  the  orifice  to  the  upper  part  of  the  fundus,  it  was  fcarcely  equal  to  two
fino-ers  breadths.  But  it  was  wholly  contradted  into  itfelf,  and  conglobated  ;
fo  as  to  refemble,  in  fome  meafure,  a  kind  of  little  ball,  depreffed  on  the
fore- part  and  back  part,  the  parietes  being  thicker  in  proportion:  and  in
cutting  into  the  fubftance  of  thefe  parietes  I  found  it  to  be  livid,  and  did
not  judge  it  to  be  perfedly  found.  The  larger  extremity  of  one  of  the  tubes
was  not  only  impervious,  but  entirely  grown  into  one  fubftance  with  the
tefticle,  which,  like  its  fellow,  was  hard,  and  in  fome  meafure  chequer'd  on
its  furface.

In  the  thorax,  the  heart  contain'd  large  polypous  concretions.
On  the  integuments  of  the  fkull,  where  they  cover'd  the  left  temple,  a
large  blacknefs,  as  if  from  contufion,  appear'd  externally  and  internally  ;
although  no  blow  had  been  receiv'd,  upon  the  head,  any  little  time  before
death,  (as  far  as  we  could  learn  by  enquiry)  or  foon  after.  In  the  whole  left
hemifphere  of  the  cerebrum,  contrary  to  what  the  hemiplegia  had  given  us
reafon  to  expeft,  no  diforder  was  found.

But  in  the  right,  I  firft  obferv'd  that  the  veflels  which  pafs  through  the
pia  mater,  efpecially  where  they  correfponded  to  the  vertex  of  the  head,  were
'  very  turgid  with  blood  :  and  through  the  fatije  membrane  I  faw  water,  as  it
were,  mix'd  with  particles  of  air  -,  and  this*  water  was  really  beneath  :  but
in  fo  fmall  a  quantity,  that  the  pia  mater  was  not  eafily  drawn  off  by  the
fingers.  And  after  this  I  found  a  Angular  diforder  of  the  fubftance  of  the
brain,  and  that  a  very  confiderable  one  ;  being  about  the  vertex,  to  the  ex-
tent of  three  or  four  fingers  breadths,  in  the  longitudinal  direction  of  the
head  :  and  for  as  many  in  breadth,  where  the  diforder  was  the  wideft  •,  for  in
fome  places  it  was  much  more  narrow.

This  diforder  began  from  that  upper  border  of  the  hemifphere,  where  it
is  neareft  to  the  left  fide,  and  extended  itfelf,  from  thence,  in  breadth.  From
the  furface  of  the  cerebrum  ;  which  it  occupied  ;  it  did  not  defcend  inwards
more  than  an  inch.  In  the  whole  of  that  fituation  then,  which  is  mark'd  out,
both  the  fubftances  of  the  cerebrum  were  of  a  faint  and  browniili  blood-
colour  ;  and  not  lefs  foft  than  if  it  had  been,  for  a  long  time  together,  cut,
and  in  a  manner  chopp'd  with  a  knife,  fo  as  to  become  almoft  fluid.  Yet  it
was  no  where  foetid.

But  the  remaining  part  of  the  cerebrum ;  except  that,  if  you  compar'd  it
with  the  cerebellum  and  medulla  oblongata,  it  was  more  lax  than  thefe  parts ;
~^  ofFcr'd  nothing  that  was  preternatural,  even  upon  the  moft  diligent  enquiry  ;
fo  that  I  did  not  find  any  ferum  extravafated  in  the  ventricles,  although  I
obferv'd  the  pituitary  gland  to  be  very  much  contradied,  and  fuak  in  its
fituation.

Finally,


Letter  LVIT. Article  15.  339

Finally,  as  in  the  left  knee  (which  was  cut  into,  in  order  to  demonftratc
the  internal  ligaments,  cartilages,  and  glands,  to  a  crowded  circle  of  fpedtators,
who  had  likewife  feen  all  that  has  been  fpoken  of  above)  I  faw  no  mucilage;
1  began  to  infpeft  all  the  parts  very  attentively,  which,  however,  were  pretty
well  lubricated  :  and  I  faw  the  cartilaginous  cruft  of  the  rotula.  in -the  part
where  it  correfponded  to  the  external  condyle  of  the  femur,  rubb'd  away,
as  it  were,  and  mark'd  with  flight  and  fmall  parallel  furrows  ;  much  in  the
fame  manner  as  if  any  one  had  prefs'd  the  point  of  a  chiflel,  or  graving- tool,
upon  it,  and  drawn  the  inftrument  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  feveral  times :
and  the  cruft  of  the  condyle,  which  I  juft  now  mention'd,  where  it  was
turn'd  to  the  fame  part  of  the  rotula,  was  fo  extenuated  as  to  appear  fome-
what  livid,  by  reafon  of  the  bone  being  feen  through  it.

But  what  was  much  more  worthy  of  obfei  vation  than  all  thefe  things,  was
a  great  number  of  globules,  the  five  largeft  of  which  were  almoft  equal  to
fmall  grapes ;  the  remaining  globules,  which  were  more  than  twenty,  being
fome  a  little  lefs,  and  fome  much  lefs,  than  the  former.  All  of  them  were
v/hite,  and  of  a  fmooth  furface  :  and  all  of  them,  being  disjoin'd  from  each
other,  were  prominent  within  the  cavity  of  the  joint;  adhering  by  a  very
/mall  part,  and  even  being  continu'd,  the  lefTer  of  them  to  the  capfular  li-
gament, about  the  inferior  fides  of  it,  (fo  that  fome  of  them  were  difpos'd
into  an  obiong  feries)  but  the  larger  to  a  cartilaginous  cruft ;  or,  rather,  to
the  fimbria  of  a  mucilaginous  gland,  which  clofcly  cover'd  the  cartilaginous
cruft,  in  fome  recefles  of  the  bones  that  belong  to  the  cavity  of  the  joint.

Yet  others  were  entirely  bony ;  and  fome  contain'd  a  bony  nucleus  under
a  cartilaginous  cruft.  I  fhould  have  examin'd  the  other  knee  likewife,  to
fee  whether  any  of  the  fame  appearances  were  there,  and  .whether  any  thing
there  might  better  (hew  their  origin  ;  but  1  was  difappointed,  as  I  found
that  this  had  been  buried  together  with  moft  of  the  other  parts  of  the
body.  ^

15.  But  from  whence-foever  their  origin  was,  this  is  certain,  that,  if  they
had  grown  out  from  the  mucilaginous  glands,  they  might,  by  diminifhing
the  fecretion  of  the  mucilage,  do  an  injury  to  the  joint ;  or,  if  they  were
from  any  other  part,  and  had  not  hitherto  done  much  mifchief,  (fince  this
could  not  be  known  for  a  certainty)  they  would  have  been  injurious,  to  a
confiderable  degree,  by  their  increafe.

And,  indeed,  if  any  one  fhould  happen  to  fay,  that  fome  one  of  the
fmalleft  of  thofe  bony  globules  was  pull'd  away  from  its  fituation  by  the
agitation  of  the  knee ;  and,  being  interpos'd  betwixt  the  condyle  and  the
rotula,  had  made  thofe  appearances  in  the  cartilage  that  are  fpoken  of;  he
-would  not  affert  any  thing  that  was  utterly  abfurd  :  although  I  remember,
when,  in  the  following  year,  I  examin'd  the  knee  of  a  man  in  the  fame
place,  to  have  found  the  cartilaginous  cruft  of  the  fame  condyle  corroded,
as  it  were,  in  fome  meafure,  in  that  fame  part  where  it  touches  the  rotula,
though  not  for  a  larger  fpace  than  what  the  nail  of  a  man's  little  finger  could
have  cover'd;  yet  fome  other  fmall  fpaces  in  that  neighbourhood  were  af-
fefted  in  the  fame  manner:  however,  there  was  no  appearance  of  diforder
in  the  rotula,  nor  any-where  elfe  in  the  whole  joint;  and  ftill  lefs  did  any
globules  protuberate. The  defcription  of  which  circumftances  I  thought

X  X  2  lefs


34° Book  IV.  Of  Chirurglcal  and  Unlverfal  Diforders.

kfs  proper  to  be  pafs'd  over,  becaufe  I  do  not  tliink  I  have  read  any  au-
thor (c)  who  has  made  mention  of  a  diforder  of  this  kind  in  the  knee-
joint

Yet  when  1  was  revifing  this  letter,  there  came  out  an  obfervation  of  the
illuftrious  Haller(i)  upon  another  joint,  which  was  pretty  fimilar  to  this.
That  is  to  fay,  in  a  decrepid  woman  ;  in  whom  many  of  the  arteries,  and
fome  of  the  valves,  of  the  heart,  were  not  without  bony  fcales,  or  the  be-
einnings  thereof;  while  he  was  infpefling  the  joints  of  the  lower  jaw,  with
the  bones  of  the  temples,  he  obferv'd  one  of  them  to  be  "  ftripp'd  of  its
*'  cartilaginous  cruft  •,  and  the  lunated  cartilage  ajmofl  half-conium'd,  and
"  perforated.  And  the  cruft,  which  attrition  had  deftroy'd,  the  fame  attri-
"  tion  had,  chang'd  into  almoft  twenty  globules,  half-bony,  and  collefted
"  loofely  in  the  caviiy  of  the  capfula."  In  the  other  joint  there  was  nothing
of  this  "  wonderful  appearance,"  but  every  thing  was  in  a  natural  ftate.

I  fhould  have  copied  more  to  you,  if  he  had  added  more,  that  you  might
have  compar'd  all  the  circumftances  with  my  obfervation.  But  it  does  not
feem  that  it  was  in  his  power  to  learn,  what,  and  how  great,  inconveniences
the  woman  had  fuffer'd  therefrom.

Nor  have  I  read  many  authors,  who  have  taken  notice  of  that  kind  of
corruption  in  thefubftance  of  the  cerebrum,  which  I  found  in  the  old  woman
in  queftion,  as  I  did  nearly  in  a  few  others  (e).

Moreover,  a  paralyfis  of  the  body,  on  that  fide  which  lies  beneath  the
injury  of  the  brain,  inftead  of  being  oppofite  to  it,  is  not  a  very  common
thing.  You  may,  therefore,  add  this  obfervation  to  the  few  others  which  I
have  referr'd  to  heretofore  (/),  among  the  much  greater  number  of  op-
pofite paralyfes,  as  if  by  way  of  fome  exceptions :  unlefs  you  fhould  happen
to  fay,  that  the  injury  here  was  either  not  fudden,  or  too  remote  from  thofe
parts  of  the  brain,  (I  mean,  the  ventricles  and  the  protuberances  therein)
to  the  fudden  injury  of  which,  chiefly,  the  hemiplegia  in  the  opppfite  fide
is  obferv'd  to  fucceed.

Yet  whether  this  can  be  faid  of  that  obfervation  which  I  have  referr'd  to
formerly  (^),  as  propos'd  by  Curti,  a  Neapolitan  phyfician ;  it  is,  perhaps,,
not  very  eafy  to  determine.

For  to  a  refolution  of  the  right  fide,,  in  confequence  of  an  apoplexy,  he
faw  a  correfpondent  corruption  of  the  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum,  (not  far
unlike  that  of  which  I  was  fpeaking  juft  now)  not  in  the  left,  but  in  the
right  hemifphere  ;  and  that  in  the  whole  of  it  ;  fo  that  even  the,  meninges
were  converted  into  a  mucous  fubftance  :  although,  as  he  fays  nothing  of
the  crura  medulte  oblongatse,  which  grow  out  into  thofe  protuberances,
there  may  feem  to  be  fome  reafon  for  doubt  ftill  remaining.

1 6.  There  is,  in  fad:,  fo  great  a  fimilarity  betwixt  the  rheumatifm  and  the
gout,  whereof  we  treat  in  this  letter,  that  phyficians  have  diftinguifh'd  the
former  from  the  latter  but  lately  -,  although  not  fo  lately,  that  this  was  firft
done  about  the  middle  of  the  preceding  century,  as  fome  fay  who  forget


(f)  Vid.  Epift.  6g.  n,  i  j.  ^  C/J  Epift.  Anat.  13.  n,  25.

(i/J  Progr.  deindurat.  corp.hum.partib.  §5. (g)  Epift.  9.  n.  19.
{e)  Epift.  5.  n.  6.  &  Epift.  9.  n.  16.  18.


BaHonius.


Letter  LVII. Article  17.  341

Ballonius  (b).  But  no  mention  in  particular  is  made  of  rheumatifm  in  the
Sepulchretum,  not  even  in  that  place  where  it  would  have  been  mod  proper;
I  mean,  about  the  end  of  the  elevetith  fcdtion  of  this  fourth  book,  where  it
relates  to  pains  "  of  the  external  parts."

Yet  1  do  not  wonder  at  it,  as  I  fcarcely  remember  to  have  lit  on  any  other
difleclion  of  a  rheumatic  patient,  but  that  taken  from  the  mouth  of  Drelincurf,
and  made  mention  of  by  Havers,  in  his  Ofteology  (/) ;  in  which  difleftion
JDrelincurt  found  "  a  jelly  concreted  on  the  furface  of  the  mufcles,  equal  to
*'  two  or  three  ducats  in  thicknefs."  Which  obfervation  might  be  added  to
the  part  of  the  fection  of  the  Sepulchretum  that  I  mention'd  before ;  as
it  is  very  fhort,  and  is  made  up,  in  good  meafure,  of  hiftories  which  are
prbduc'd  in  other  places ;  and  even  ends  in  one  that  had  been  already  given
in  this  very  page  (k).

I,  who  have  treated  of  things  which  relate  to  the  other  parts  of  the  fame
fedlion,  in  other  places,  will  fubjoin  here,  left  I  feem  to  have  entirely  omitted
this  laft  part,  two  obfervations  of  our  Mediavia's;  the  firft  of  which  relates
to  pains  of  the  external  parts:  and  the  other  would  have  feem'd  to  relate
thereto,  if  difleftion  had  not  difcover'd  the  cafe  more  clearly.

1  7.  A  young  man,  who  was  a  goldfmith,  had  a  violent  pain  in  his  loins,  .
on  the  right  fide,  which  yielded  to  no  remedy.  A  year  being  thus  pafs'd
over,  the  pain  began  to  attack,  the  left  fide  of  his  loins  alfo :  nor  v/as  he
fr^e  from  pains  in  his  neck,  which  feem'd  rheumatic  ;  when  an  inability  of
moving  his  legs  came  on,  a  hydrops  tympanites,  and  finally  death,  about
the  middle  of  April,  in  the  year  1753.

We  were  permitted  only  to  cut  kito  thofe  external  parts  of  the  body  which
Bad  been  the  feats  of  that  very  obftinate  and  violent  pain  of  the  loins.  The
fkin,  therefore^  and  theadipofe  membrane,  being  taken  off  from  thefe  parts  j
in  the  cells  of  which  membrane  fome  water  was  feen  ;  and  thkt  large  tendon,
from  whence  the  nnifcle  latiflimus  dorfi  arifes,  being  remov'd,  and  no  mark
of  injury  being  obferv'd  in  this  tendon  on  either  fide  ;  when  we  came  to  that
thick  flclhy  body  which  affords  a  common  origin  to  the  facro-lumbus  and
longilTimus  dorfi- mufcles  ;  behold  !  an  unufual  colour  appear'd  in  that  body,
fuch  as  we  fee  in  old  furniture,  made  of  the  nut  tree;  and  yet  not  in  the
whole  of  that  body,  but  only  for.  about  the  fpace  of  five  inches  in  length,
and  in  breadth  in  like  manner  :  and  this  was  continu'd  inwards,  from  the
furface,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  be  feen  in  the  fubjefted  mufcles  likewife  ;
that  is,  the  facro-lumbus  and  quadratuslumborum.

The  fibres,  in  the  .whole  of  that  fpace  which  I  have  pointed  our,  were
furprizingly-  lax .  and  yielding,  and  disjoin'd  by  frequent  coagula  of  blood
lying  betwixt  them.  And  all  thefe.  diforders  that  1  have  fpoken  of,  appear'd
fo  much  the  more,  in  proportion  as  the  mufcles  were  nearer  to  the  fpine  :
but  without  that  fpace  in  the  loins,  neither  a  preternatural  colour,  nor  any
thing  preternatural,  was  obferv'd  in  the  mufcles. And,  indeed,  there  was

{i>)  Vid.  ejus  librum  de  Rheutnatifmo,  &  • (/)  Difc.  4.  ubi  de  Rheuraatifmo,
^.uselj.  medic,  iili  adjeftam..  [i)  Obf.  7.  §  ii,  &  7.


34-2 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

no  very  difagreeable  fmell  in  the  part  where  thefe  diforders  were  obferv'd.
All  thefe  appearances  were  found  in  both  loins  :  but  thofe  in  the  left  were
much  the  flighteft.

18.  I  am  here  aware  that  you  will  make  two  enquiries  of  me ;  one,  from
whence  arofe  that  inability  of  moving  the  legs  ?  the  other,  from  whence  the
pains  in  the  neck  ?  And,  indeed,  you  will  eafily,  of  yourfelf,  conjetture  the
caufe  of  thefe  pains ;  if,  bearing  in  mind  my  obfervations  (/)  which  1  have
fConfirra'd  in  the  following  years,  you  are  not  ignorant  that  the  longi;fimi
ifiufcles,  whafe  origins  we  found  to  be  difeas'd  in  this  body,  were  concinu'd
to  the  neck,  in  all  thofe  bodies  wherein  I  have  made  the  enquiry.

And  as  to  that  inability  of  moving  the  limbs,  perhaps,  nothing  forbids
us  fufpeding  it  to  have  arifen  frorh  hence,  that  the  diforders  obferv'd  in  the
quadrati  lumborum  mufcies,  alio,  (and  thefe  fo  much  the  more  confiderabkj
as  they  approach'd  nearer  to  the  vertebras)  might,  at  length,  have  reach'd  to
thofe  nerves  from  which  the  crural  are  made  up;  not  to  fay,  to  the  pfose
mufcies  themfelves  J  as  thofe  diibrders  were  continu'd  from  the  external  to
the  internal  parts  :  for  that  they  had  not  been  propagated  from  the  internal
to  the  external  parts,  notwithftanding  we  were  not  allow'd  to  examine  the
belly,  appears  from  this  circumltance,  that  there  were  no  complaints  of  the
kidnies,  and  that  no  fymptoms  of  any  injury  of  thefe  parts  were  taken
notice  of;  and  the  legs  were  not  weaken'd  when  the  difeafe  was  mcipient,
but  when  it  had  already  proceeded  for  fome  length  of  time.

19.  Now  take  the  fecond  obfervation,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  though
it  might  feem  to  relate  to  external  pains,  yet,  infant,  was  found  to  relate
to  the  internal  parts,  and  therefore  better  deferves  not  to  be  pafs'd  over.

20.  A  monk  of  Padua,  who  was,  at  leaft,  feventy  years  of  age,  had
begun,  after  a  kind  of  fever  attended  with  a  coldnefs,  to  labour  under
pains,  which  he  fuppos'd  to  be  from  defluxions,  as  he  call'd  them.  Thefe
pains  feem'd  to  lie  in  the  mufcies,  which  were  about  the  os  innominatum
on  one  fide,  and  a  little  above  anteriorly  :  and  in  thofe  that  are  extended
.through  the  femur  on  the  fame  fide,  being  fometimes  more,  and  fometimes
lefs  troublefome  ;  fo  as  not  to  prevent  him  from  walking.  When  he  had
fuffer'd  thefe  pains  for  two  or  three  years,  they  at  length  grew  more  violent :
and  he  died  about  the  middle  of  July,  in  the  year  1737  ;  there  appearing,
the  day  before  he  died,  in  the  groin  of  that  lide,  a  tumour  wherein  a
matter  was  perceiv'd  to  fluduate.

The  abdomen  being  cut  into  in  that  part,  in  order  to  enquire  from  whence
this  matter  had  its  origin ;  contrary  to  all  expeftation,  a  great  quantity  of
pus  was  found  betwixt  the  peritonzeum  and  the  os  innominatum,  which  was
there  cover'd  with  thofe  mufcies  that  I  fhall  mention  prefently.

21.  You  will  think  that  this  obfervation  deferves  fo  much  the  more  to
be  attended  to  by  phyficians,  as  internal  diforders  may  the  more  eafily  im-
pofe  upon  us  under  the  appearance  of  defluxions,  and  degenerate  into  ab-
fcefles  of  that  kind  :  and  in  proportion  as  the  fame  diforders,  perhaps,  more
frequently  lie  hid  under  a  mafl<  of  this  kind.

(/)  Adverf.  Anat.  2.  Animad.  15.  in  fin.

At


Letter  LVII. Articles  i,  2.,  343

At  leaft,  this  was  feen  three  times  by  one  furgeon  ;  I  mean,  the^  celebrated
Benevoli  (/») ;  who  adds,  that  the  fame  thing  was  likewife  feen  by  Querci :
and  he  very  properly  explains  what  kinds  of  tumours,  lying  near  the  mufdes
which  we  call  pfo£,  or  iliaci  interni,  may  not  only  be  the  caufe  of  con-
tradtions  that  are  troublefome  in  the  thighs ;  but,  finally,  may  alio,  when
fuppurated,  fend  down  pus  into  the  upper  parts  thereof.  Thefe  remarks,
however,  you  will  fee  more  at  large  in  the  author  himfelf. Farewel.


LETTER the FIFTY-EIGHTH

Treats  of the  Lues Venerea.


I.  T  N  the  letters  that  I  have  already  fent  you,  I  have  communicated  many
^  obfervations  which  relate  to  the  lues  venerea.  There  is,  then,  no
reafon  why  you  fhould  be  furpriz'd,  if  I  fay  that  there  are  fcarcely  any  left
to  be  copied  here.  But  if  you  infped  thofe  letters  which- 1  fhall  immediately
refer  to  -,  you  will  fee  that  this  has  been  fufficiently  done,  when,  on  the  oc-
caQon  of  other  difeafes,  which  either  arofe  from  this,  or  were  join'd  with  it,
I  did  not  omit  making  mention  of  this  diforder ;  or,  if  there  feem'd  to  be
any  internal  injuries  from  thence,  that  thefe  were  not  omitted  likewife.

2.  Tor  in  the  very  firft  letter  (13),  when  I  fpoke  of  fevere  pains  in  the
head,  I  have  told  you  what  diforder  there  was  in  the  meninges,  the  cere-
brum, and  cerebellum :  and  what  in  the  cerebrum  and  cranium,  when,  in
the  ninth  letter  (^\  I  wrote  of  the  epilepfy.  And  in  the  forty-iecond  let-
ter (f),  and  the  forty-fourth  (d),  we  meet  with  injuries  either  in  the  epiglottis
alone,  or  in  the  other  cartilages  of  the  larynx  alfo,  and  the-  afpera  arteria  :
and  in  the  fame  letters  (e)  (/)  internal  difeafes  of  the  great  artery  are  Ipoken
of;  fo  that,  fuppofing  thefe  circumftances,  it  is  lefs  to  be  wonder'd  at,  that,
in  the  eighteenth  letter  (g\  this  artery  is  dilated  into  an  aneurifm  j  or  that,
in  the  fortieth  {h),  twenty-feventh  (i),  and  fifty-third  {k),  an  aACurifm,
moreover,  or  the  artery  itfelf,  could  be  ruptur'd.

In  the  eighteenth  letter  (/)  you  have  the  lungs  on  one  fide  purulent ;  but
particularly  in  the  twenty-fecond  (w). And  m  the  fou'-:h(3};  forty-fecond  (0)5

{m)  DueRelaz.  Chir.  Vid.  I.  fgj  N.  25.  ((>)  N.  29.

(fl)  N.  14.  {i)  N.  23.  («)  N.  28.  W  N.  7

(r)  N.  39. 40.  C^J  N.  15.  (/)  N.  25.  (m)  N.  10.  n.  ic.

CO  N.  39.  (/;  N.  3.  {»)  N.jg.  {o)  N.  2.  40.

forty'.


344 Book  IV.  Of-Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

forty-fourth  (p),  and' forty-eighth  (5),  you  have  the  kidnies  puruknt,  or
otherwile  difeas'd ;  and  other  parts  of  the  urinary  organs.  Moreover,  the
forty  feventh  letter  (r)  fpeaks  of  an'  excrefcence  in  the  uterus,  and,  at  the
fame  time,  a  cicatrix  in  the  lower  part  of  the  vagina  near  to  the  urethra.

In  the  forty-fourth  letter  (s)  you  have  an  unufual  moifture  and  rednefs  of
'the  male  urethra ;  and  in  the  fame  (?),  and  the  forty-fecond  [u),  you  have
the  urethra  narrow  and  contradted  in  fome  places:  and  thefe  two  laffmen-
tion'd  letters  (x)  (jy),  the  fourth  (z),  and  the  fortieth  (a),  fpeak  of  excre-
fcences  of  the  urethra,  or  the  remains  of  excrefcences.

And  ;  to  omit  the  fifty-fecond  letter  {b) ;  the  eighth  (c),  the  twenty-fcr
■venth(ij,  the  forty-fecond  (f),  and  the  forty-fourth  (/),  fhew  thefe  larger  cana-
liculi  to  have  been  generally,  or  in  pare  deftroy'd  :  and,  finally,  this  laft  letter
either  ipeaks  of  other  traces  of  dilorders  in  the  urethra  (g)^  or  of  the  in-
flammation of  the  part  furrounding  Littre's  gland  (^)  •,  or  of  the  induration
of  one  of  Cowper's  glands  (z'j,  or  its  being  contrafted  and  ftrigofe  (k) ;  or
of  the  orifices  of  both  the  dufts  not  being  in  a  natural  ftate  {l);  or  of  the
orifices  of  thofe  du£ts,  which  bring  in  the  femen,  being  ftopp'd  up  (;»)
or,  at  length,  of  .the  veficulas  feminales  being  contradledj  and  without
moifture  («).•

^.  Nor,  indeed,  have  I  fent  to  you  obfervations  of  thefe  diforders  only
that  I  have  fpoken  of;  but  even  in  thofe  two  letters  particularly,  that[
often  made  mention  of  juft  now  ;  I  mean,  the  forty-fecond  and  forty-fourth  ;
I  have  purfu'd,  pretty  much  at  large,  fome  fymptoms  that  attend,  or  are
fubfequent  to,  the  lues  venerea  :  that  is  to  fay,  the  gonorrhoea,  and  the**  ca-
runcles, as  they  are  call'd,  of  the  urethra.

For  in  that  forty-fecond  letter  (0),  I  have  not  omitted  to  fay  what  others
have  thought  or  feen,  and  what  it  happen'd  to  me  to  fee,  in  refpeft  thereto.
And  in  regard  to  the  gonorrhea,  on  the  fubjecl  of  which  the  whole  forty-
fourth  letter  turns ;  I  have  faid,  in  order,  what  has  been  feen  by  others,  and
by  myfelf,  in  regard  to  its  particular  fituations :  and  have  not  omitted  fome
other  things  that  related  thereto.

As,  therefore,  I  am  determin'd  not  to  repeat  any  thing  which  has  been  al-
ready faid,  it  now  remains  only  to  produce  three  or  four  obfervations  in  this
place,  which  relate  to  the  lues  venerea ;  as  I  have  no  more  than  this  number
ftill  left  behind. The  two  .firft  of  thefe  are  from  Valfalva.

4.  A  woman,  who  had  completed  her  fiftieth  year,  was  attack'd  with  a
pain  in  the  lower  jaw,  attended  fometimes  with  fo  large  a  flux  of  blood,  that
it  was  intended  to  'have  reftrain'd  this  difcharge  by  the  application  of  the
a^ual  cautery  ;.  if  it  :had:not  ceas'd  of  itfelf.  In  a  little  time  after,  the  wo-
man beo-an  to  be  troubled  with  pains  in  her  bones :  with  which  having  long

[p)  N.  1;.  27.  (?)  N.  32.  W  N.  39.  40.

(r)  N.  28.  WN.  3. 5.V.  //;n.  7.  9.  12.

(/)  N.  10.  («)  N.  39.  4Q.  (g)  N.  9.  14.  (i)  N.  15.

{x)  N.  7.  10.  18.  (/)  N.  3.  (k)  N.  12.

(y)  N.  39.  (z)  N.  19.  (/)  Ibid.  (ot)  N.  7.

(a)  N.  29.  {&]  N.  30.  CnJ  Ibid.

;{0  N.  6.  f^d)  N.  28.  (0)  N.  38.  &  feqcj.

been


Letter  LVIII. Articles  5", ^.  345"

been  afflifired,  (he  began,  as  often  as  ever  (he  was  mov'd,  to  complain  that
all  her  bones  were  broken  -,  and,  indeed,  thofe  who  ftood  by  her  heard  a
crackling  in  her  joints  at  that  time.  To  this  fymptom  another  was  after-
wards added,  that  the  bones  of  the  lower  limbs  began  to  be  bent,  as  if  they
were  made  of  wax-,  and  to  be  in  pain  even  on  the  (1  ghteft  motion.

At  length,  in  examining  her  body  after  death,  the  ofla  innominata,  the
oflTa  femoris,  and  tibia;,  and  thofe  bones  that  make  up  the  arch  of  the
cranium,  were  found  to  be  flexible,  juft  as  if  they  were  made  up  of  pretty
thick  paper :  on  their  furface  they  were  fpongy  j  and  at  the  meditullium,  in
(bme  places,  carious.

5.  From  whence  that  great  quantity  of  blood  was  difcharg'd,  of  which
mention  is  made  in  the  beginning  of  this  hiftory,  Valfalva  has  omitted  to
fay.  But  I  have  heard,  from  thofe  who  had  feen  the  woman  together  with
him,  both  when  living  and  dead,  that  (he  had  an  abfcefs  on  one  fide  of  her
neck ;  fo  that  I  (hall  fuppoie  it  to  have  flow'd  from  thence.  The  fame
perfons  alfo  added,  that  fome  other  bones  likewife,  among  which  were  many
of  the  ribs,  and  the  bones  of  the  feet,  were  flexible  in  the  dead  body  -,  and
admitted  the  knife  like  cartilages  :  and  that  all  the  bones,  which  yielded  to
the  force  that  bent  or  comprefs'd  them,  difcharg'd  a  certain  fluid,  fimilar  to
diluted  blood,  during  the  aftion  of  bending  or  compre(fing.

I  afterwards  faw  thefe  bones  likewife  myfelf -,  for  Valfalva  had  preferv'd
them  :  the  oblong  ones  were  curv'd  into  the  form  of  an  arch,  and  thofe  that
compos'd  the  vault  of  the  cranium  deprefs'd  into  the  figure  of  a  plane  ;  and
all  of  them  were  of  a  very  bad  colour  and  fmell,  becaufe  they  could  not  be
clean'd  internally,  giving  an  unftuofity  to  the  fingers  in  handling  them.

But  as  they  had  now  been  preferv'd  for  a  long  time ;  I  <:ould  not  learn
fome  circumftances  which  I  (hould  have  enquir'd  into  in  their  fre(h  ftate,  and
even  in  the  body  itfelf :  among  which  was  this ;  in  what  ftate  the  heads  of
thefe  bones  were  in  the  joints  ;  that  is,  whether  they  were  more  or  lefs
daub'd  over  with  mucilage ;  I  mean,  on  account  of  that  crackling  which
was  heard  in  the  joints,  by  the  afliftants,  when  the  patient  mov'd  them :  but
ftill  much  more  (hould  I  have  wi(h'd  to  know  in  what  ftate  the  genital  parts
were,  in  a  woman  who,  they  faid,  had  been  fo  infefted  with  the  lues  venerea,
that  they  did  not  doubt  but  this  very  great  difeafe  of  the  bones  had  taken
its  origin  from  that  diforder.

6.  We  (hould  have  the  moft  ancient  examples  of  the  human  bones  being
become  foft,  if  what  Sachfius  (/>)  feems  to  think,  with  Peter  a  Caftro,  that
this  diforder  is  call'd  "  by  the  Arabians  Alachad,  and  Alzemena,  and  was  cur'd
"  by  Avicenna,"  were  certain  -,  as  it  is  certain,  from  the  Latin  increas'd  in-
terpretation of  Arabic  words  of  Andreas  Bellunenfis  {q),  which  is  publilh'd
with  Avicenna,  "  that  there  is  an  alzemena,  or  zemena,  when  the  patient,-by
«  reafon  of  the  foftnefs,  or  paralyfis,  of  the  feet  or  hands,  is  prevented  from
«  moving  thofe  limbs :  fo  that  this  title  of  the  obfervation  of  Peter  a  Caftro,
De  Mitnbrorum  &  Ofium  MoUificatione,  feems  to  refer  to  the  refolution  or  pa-

(f)  In  Schol.  ad  Obf.  37.  A.  i.  Dec.  i.  Eph.  N.  C,  {q\  Ad  rocem  Alachad.

Vol.  III.  Y  y  ralyfit


3  4<^ Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diibrders.

ralyfis  of  the  limbs,  or,  as  the  interpreters  of  Avicenna  fay,  to  the  molli-
fication (r)  thereof;  and  not  to  the  foftnefs  of  the  bones.

Yet  there  are  examples  fufficiently  ancient,  which  Fernelius  (j),  and
Ruelliiis,  whom  he  quotes,  have  deliver'd  down  in  writing ;  adding,  that  the
difeafe  had  been  happily  cur'd  by  means  of  aluminous  baths :  which  method
you  will  underftand,  from  Sachfius  (/),  that  others  alfo  had  foUow'd.

But  as  I  could  not  learn  from  thole  cafes  what  was  the  ftrudlure  or  nature
of  thefe  bones  thus  foften'd,  as  they  appear'd  from  dilTeftion,  by  reafon  of
firmnefs  being  reftor'd  ;  fo  neither  have  1  learn'd  this  circumftance,  in  the
manner  1  hop'd  I  fhould,  from  other  cafes  that  are  generally  enumerated  ;  as^
forinftance,  from  thofe  that  are  mention'd  by  Jacobus  HoUerius  («),  by  Gu-
lielmus  Fabricius  Hildanus  {x),  by  Peter  Borellus  (jy),  by  Thomas  Bartho-
lin (2),  and  by  Daniel  Prottenius  {a).

And,  indeed,  I  even  omic  thofe  which  relate  rather  to  a  peculiar  degene-
racy of  any  one  bone,  than  to  that  which  is  at  the  fame  time  common  to
moil  of  them  ;  and  among  thefe  I  place  that  which  is  related  from  Bartholin,
whom  I  have  already  mention'd,  in  the  Ephemerides  of  the  Csefarean  Aca-
demy {b).

Coming  down,  therefore,  to  thofe  authors  who  have  flouridi'd  in  our  me-
rriory,  1  fird  found  Gabrieli  (c),  among  the  Italians,  who,  not  later  than  the
eighty-eighth  year  of  the  preceding  century  (for  Gagliardi  (i),  mentioning  the
fame  obfervation  briefly  in  the  following  year,  has  laid  that  it  was  "  very
"  lately  communicated "  to  him)  ;  who,  1  fay,  about  that  year,  then,  in
diffefting  the  bones  of  a  matron  ;  none  of  which  had  retain'd  their  former
hardnefs,  and  whofe  more  oblong  bones  had  almoft  all  of  them  become
flexible  to  every  fide  •,  found  the  latter  converted,  not  into  a  fibrous  flefh  in-
deed, but  into  a  reddifh  fleQi.

After  this  I  read  an  almoft  fimilar  obfervation  of  Courtialis  {e)  oh  another
woman  :  and  even  not  only  all  her  bones,  the  teeth  excepted  -,  of  which  Ga-
brieli has  made  no  mention  ;  could  be  bent,  but  all  of  them  refembled  fun-
gous and  foft  flefh,  impregnated  with  a  bloody  ferum.

And  although  I  do  not  fee,  that  fome  obfervations  of  the  celebrated  fur-
geon  Petit  (/)  are  of  a  different  kind,  as  they  fpeak  of  the  bones  being  ■
chano'd  into  a  fubftance  fimilar  to  flefli,  without  the  neighbouring  or  inter-
pos'd  cartilages  being  injur'd,  as  far  as  he  could  obferve  ;  and  although  they
have  brought  back  to  my  memory,  that  thofe  thick  cartilaginous  ligaments,
■which  are  interpos'd  to  the  bodies  of  the  vertebras,  were  found  to  be  quite
Uiiinjur'd  where  the  vertebrae  were  deeply  difeas'd  by  a  caries  {g) ;.  yet,  as.

dr)  Vid.  c.  2.  Fen.  z.  1.  3.  Can.  Avicen.  (z)  Cent.  6.  Hift.  Anat.  40.

{s)  De  abdit.  rer.  Cauf.  1.  2.  c.  9..  {a)  In  Aft.  Med.  Hafn.  Vol.  3.  Obf.  34.

(/)  Schol.  cit.  {b)  Obf.  37.  fupra  cit.

(a)  In  adjedtis,  1.  i.  de  Morb. Int.  Rarls  (f)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  3.  Obf.  3.

qmbufd.  n.  7.  (d)  Anat.  Off.  c.  2.  Obf.  3.

{x)  Cent.  I. Obf. Chir.  45.  &  Cent.-  6.  («)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc,  A.  1700.

Obf.  74.  Obf.  2.

(y)  In fine Epilog, additi ad Cent.  4.  (/)  Mem.  de  la  meme  Acad.  A.  1722..

Hift.  &  Obf.  Med.  Phyf.  {g)  Epift.  40.  n.  26.  &  29.

thefe


Letter  LVIII. Article  6,  347

thefe  obfervadons  of  Petit  never  fpeak  of  that  difeafe  as  occupying  many
parts  at  the  fame  time,  and  always  as  being  join'd  with  a  tumour,  they  can-
not be  referr'd  by  me  to  the  fpecies  whereof  we  are  fpeaiiing.

And  the  fame  muft  be  faid  of  many  others ;  as,  for  inftance,  of  that  which
is  from  Mauchart  (/j),  of  the  upper  parts  of  the  thigh-bone  being  grown
large,  and  fo  foft  as  to  yield  to  the  handle  of  the  knife,  and  even  to  the
fingers ;  and,  when  prefs'd,  to  emit  a  kind  of  bloody  medulla,  fimilar  to  thac
which  is  in  the  fmall  cells  of  the  bones :  or  of  that  obfervation  which  is  twice
publifh'd  from  Nebelius  (i),  of  adiibrder  which  confifted  in  the  much  greater
part  of  the  fame  bone  being  converted  into  a  large,  whitifh,  and  fpongy  mafs  j
except  that  a  great  number  of  fmalKlamellfe  remain'd  divided  within  it,  and
the  medullary  Tyftem  was  femi-lacerated  and  become  empty  :  the  whole  being
furrounded  by  a  white,  hardilb,  and  even  almoft  cartilaginous  membrane,
which  was  fuppos'd  to  be  the  periofteixm.

A  membrane  of  this  kind,  you  will  alfo  find,  was  met  with  by  Alexander
Camerarius  (k),  furrounding  tumours,  under  which,  in  a  ricketty  boy,  cer-
tain parts  of  the  ofla  humeri  and  femoris  were  fo  confumed  and  Wafted  away,
as  to  have  degenerated  into  a  fluid  matter ;  not  at  all  foetid,  of  a  white  co-
lour, and  almoft  like  coagulated  milk :  Which  diforder  he  therefore  call'd
"  the  white  caries  of  the  bones."

If  you  have  the  differtation  of  Platner  which  is  intitled,  De  'Thoracihus  ;
you  will  be  able  to  fee,  whether,  and  how  far,  thofe  words  of  that  differ-
tation which  I  have  read  in  the  JSfa  Eruditorum  (/)  relate  to  this  fubjefl:  i
"  That  the  bones,  in  thofe  who  are  pretty  far  advanc'd  in  life,  are  fometimes
*'  fo  preternaturally  foften'd,  and  become  waxy  and  fragile,  as  to  be  fluid
*'  as  if  melted  down ;  and  this  was  found,  by  his  own  experience,  in  the
*'  right  OS  innominatum  of  a  certain  man."

Finally  ;  to  return  from  fluid  bones  to  thofe  that  are  eafily  to  be  Cut  with
the  knife  ;  there  is  extent  an  obfervation  of  the  illuftrious'  Haller  {m)  upon
rhe  fibula ;  which,  without  any  change  in  the  periofteum,  being  "become  quite
flefhy,  or  fimilar  to  foft  cartilage,  was  made  divifible  by  a  knife,  in  the  fame
manner  as  pretty  hard  cheefe  :  being  tumid,  and  internally  eroded  by  a  foetid
ulcer.

All  thefe  obfervations  %  though,  for  one  or  other  of  the  reafons  mention'd
above,  or  for  both  of  them,  they  do  not  relate  to  the  fubjeft  in  queftion  any
more  than  the  obfervations  of  Petit ;  I,  neverthelefs,  was  not  willing  to  pafs'
over:  as  I  do  not  doubt  but  you  may  fometimes  transfer  thefe  appearances,
that  are  found  in  particular  parts,  to  thofe  which  will  occur  in  many  at  the
lame  time,  or  in  almoft  all,  in  order  to  explain  them  thereby.

But  now,  to  refer  the  obfervations  of  Gabrieli  and  Courtialis,  taken  aotice
of  above,  to  that  fpecies  of  diforder  which  we  have  undertaken  to  confider
here ;  as  the  obfervations  are  very  fimilar  to  that  given  above  from  Valfalva
in  this  refpedl  alfo,  that  pains  of  the  whole  body  had  preceded  this  ftate  of

{h)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  9.  Obf.  30.  (/)  A.  1751.  M.  Sept.  P.  2.  ex  ej=us  Differ-

(/)  hh.  N.  C.  Tom.  I.  Obf.  45.  &  Tom.  tationum,  pag.  139..
5.  Obf.  III.  (ra)  Opuf.  Pathol.  Obf,  54.

{k)  Tom.  cod.  1.  Obf.  53.

y  y  2  foftnefs


3  4^ Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Difordcrs.

Ibftnefs  in  the  bones ;  it  is  certainly  fiirprizing,  that,  after  fo  great  a  fimi-
litude  of  difeafe  while  thofe  three  women  liv'd,  fo  great  a  diffimilitude
(hould  be  found  in  the  bones  after  death  :  fo  that,  although  in  two  of  them
they  refembled  fleih,  in  one  they  were  become  fpongy  and  carious,  yet,  ne-
verthelefs,  ftill  remain'd  in  the  form  of  bones.

But  a  much  greater  dilTimilitude  (unlefs  you  ftiould  chufe  rather  to  account
for  this,  and  others  fimilar  thereto,  from  the  exceffive  progrefs  of  the  diforder)
occurs  in  that  inftance  which  is  made  mention  of  by  Boerhaave  (»).  For  a
man,  who  had  liv'd  with  his  bones  in  a  ftate  of  foftnefs,  and  not  without
the  mod  fevere  pains,  had  his  bones,  after  death,  "  fimilar  to  a  pultaceous
"  fubftance,  and  fuch  as  is  prepar'd  from  bones  in  Papin's  digefter."

And  this  being  the  ftate  of  the  qucftion,  you  naturally  fee  that,  if  at  any
time  diforders  of  this  kind  recur,  the  phyfician  muft  be  very  cautious  in
predifting  what  will  be  the  ftate  of  the  bones;  as  the  ftate  was  found  to  be
fo  very  different  in  the  four  bodies  after  being  affefted  by  thefe  diforders.

7,  And  of  thefe  three,  the  fpecies  of  diforder  which  was  found  by  Val-
falva  cannot  be  referr'd  to  that  conftitution  which  phyficians  have  fometimes
obferv'd,  but  particularly  from  the  lues  venerea  -,  I  mean,  a  caries  which
has  proceeded  lb  far,  that  the  bones  may  be  eafily  broken  in  the  dead  body,
or  by  any  motion  whatever  of  the  body  while  living:  more  than  one  example
of  which  kind,  (not  to  digrefs  too  far  in  pointing  out  what  Blawius  (0)  and
others  have  publifti'd)  you  have,  in  this  ninth  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (/>),
and  in  the  fifth  (q)  of  this  very  fourth  book.

For  in  the  woman  of  Valfalva's  in  queftion,  the  bones  indeed  were  fpongy
on  their  furface,  and  carious ;  but  in  other  places  at  the  meditullium,  and  in
the  whole  part  which  lay  betwixt  the  meditullium  and  the  furface,  they  were
without  a  caries.  They  were  not  broken,  therefore,  but  bent ;  and  by  that
means  ftiew'd  that  the  fibres  were  not  in  great  meafure  eroded  and  deftroy'd,
but  foften'd.

Yet  from  whence  this  foftening  ?  For  if  they  had  been  made  flefhy,  or
pultaceous  ;  you  would  have  the  moft  ingenious  men  to  follow  in  their  con-
jeftures,  that  into  the  place  of  the  bony  particles,  which  are  fuppos'd  to  be
rubb'd  off",  and  carried  away,  from  the  bones ;  even  in  healthy  perfons ;  new
particles  of  the  fame  kind  are  not  fupplied,  as  they  ought  to  have  been  :  but
particles  of  a  totally  different  nature,  which  can  never  coalefce  into  the  hard-
nefs  of  a  bone.

]f,  therefore,  it  is  your  pleafure  alfo  to  indulge  yourfelf  in  conjeftu-res ;
you  muft  here  endeavour  to  think  of  a  humour,  which,  when  carried  into  the
bones,  could  foften  them.  For  without  the  body  ;  that  is,  when  the  bones
are  much  more  rigid  ;  Ruyfch  (r)  has  fhewn  the  poffibility  of  doing  this,
when'he  has  faid  that,  by  means  of  a  liquor  wherein  he  had  preferv'd  the
ribs,  and  which  was  made  pretty  acid,  thefe  bones  were  foften'd  to  fuch  a
degree,  that  they  could  be  diftorted  into  a  fpiral  figure  ;  juft  as  we  would  a

(«)  Praleft.  ad  Inftit.  §  461.  (/)  Obf.  i.  §  13,  14.

(e)  Eph.  N.  C. Dec.  3. A.  7.  &  8. Obf. (?)  Obf.  j.  §  2.  &  Schol.  ad  §  10,
151.  (r)  Thef.  Anat.  6.  n.  13.

cord :


Letter  LVIII. Article  7.  34^

cord  :  and  this  he  afterwards  confirm'd  by  macerating  others  in  an  acid  liquor;
for  he  could  reduce  them  (j)  into  the  form  of  the  letters  C.  and  ?.

And  in  the  fecond  of  his  Adverfaria  (t)  he  has  aflerted,  not  only  that  the
ribs  become  foft  and  flexible,  from  a  fimilar  maceration  ;  but  aUb  that  the
human  bones  in  general  were  thus  changeable :  and,  indeed,  he  has  exprefsly
added  the  following  words:  "  Does  it  fjom  hence  appear  in  what  manner
"  that  memorable  difeafe  was  brought  about,  wherewith  a  virgin,  in  France,,
"  being  afFefted,  had  all  her  bones  loften'd  down  like  pafte  ?"

But  as  in  thofe  former  experiments  he  has  only  mentron'd  the  ribs  of
infants,  and  here,  with  the  fame  view,  the  bones  of  children ;  you  may  add
to  thefe  the  bones  Ihewn  by  Hunauld  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at
Paris  (ji),  which,  being  macerated  in  vinegar,  were  become  foft  by  that
means  :  and  becaufe  ic  does  not  appear  from  what  bodies  thefe  bones  had
been  taken,  you  may  join  with  them  the  inftances  which  were  related  to  the
fame  Academy,  by  the  two  celebrated  men  Fauchy  and  Geoffroy  (x),  of  two-
ivory  fpoons ;  one  of  which  having  been  left  in  milk  for  along  time,  through
forgetfulnefs,  and  confequently  in  milk  that  was  become  acid,  was  found  tO'
be  flexible  like  leather  :  the  other,  which  was  fmall,  and  feen  by  the  Aca-
demy itfelf,  had  been  made  flexible,  like  horn,  and  pellucid  ;  after  having,
remain'd  a  long  time  in  that  kind  of  fauce  which  we  call  muftard.

But,  to  return  to  vinegar,  I  would  alfo  have  you  attend  to  this ;  that  when
thofe  bones  which  Hunauld  fhew'd  to  the  Academy,  had  been  fofcen'd  by-
vinegar,  they  recover'd  their  former  hardnefs  by  being  macerated  in  water  ;.
and,  again,  loft  that  hardnefs  in  vin^ar :  and  from  all  thefe  circumftances,,
and  from  that  I  have  taken  notice  of  above  (7),  of  aluminous  baths,  which
have  reftor'd  loft  firmnefs  to  the  bones  of  living  men ;  you  may  take  a  new
argument  of  the  various  and  manifold  caufes,  and  alfo  of  the  various  and
manifold  diforders,  whereby  the  bones  may  be  made  flexible  :  for,  certainly,
if  they  had  been  fl«fliy,  or  pultaceous,  there  could  have  been  no  room  for
any  remedy  whatever.

And  if  it  were  determin'd  univerfally,  that  the  bones  in  ricketty  children
were  of  a  waxy  flexibility,  and  Mayow,  as  you  even  have  it  in  the  Sepul-
chretum  (2),  did  not  contend  that  they  are  "  rather  more  firm  than  in.
"  others  -,''  1  fhould  have  taken  notice  of  fome  external  remedies  here,  which
are  faid  to  have  been  ufeful  to  fuch  patients,  and  have  compar'd  them  with,
the  experiment  of  Hunauld.

But  as,  in  order  to  explain  the  curvatures  of  the  bones  which  are  in  thofe
children,^  it  does  not  fcem  abfolutely  neceflary  to  fuppofe  that  waxy  foftnefs
of  the  bones  ;  fince  it  is  quite  fuffieient  that  they  are  much  lefs  hard  than  ia
adults,  as  that  age  requires ;  fo  that,  by  the  prevailing  force  of  the  mufcles,
which  belong  to  one  furface  of  the  bones,  they  may  be  bent  to  that  fide,  as-'
has  been  fliewn  on  another  occafion  {a),  where  I  have  alfo  fpoken  of  the  fke-
leton  of  a  young  girl  pVopos'd  and  explain'd  by  Mery  (h)  :  I,  therefore,  did;

(s)  Thef.  Max. n.  164. &  Thef.  Nov. n.  Cy)  N.  6.

129.  (')  C.  6.  (z)  L.  2.  S.  12.  in  fin.

(a)  Hift.  A.  1742.  Obf.  de  Phyf.  &  c.  7.  {a)  Epift.  27.  n.  33,  34,

{x)  Ibid.  &  Hill. A.  1743.  Obf,  de  Phyf,  (i)  Mem.  de  l'A?ad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1706.

&c.  13.

8  not


350 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Untverfal  Diforders.

not  think  that  the  bones  of  this  young  woman,  which  were  fo  curv'd  in  the
limbs,  and  the  low  ftacure  in  confequence  thereof,  had  any  reference  to  this
fubjeft ;  notwithftanding  fimilar  circumftances  to  thefe  have  happen'd  in
thoie  perfons  whole  bones  I  have  faid  were  made  flefliy  or  pultaceous ;  nor
yet  that  the  fhortnefs  of  dwarfs,  by  reafon  of  their  bones  being  diftorted
from  the  rickets,  have  any  relation  to  the  point  in  queftion  :  although  1  know-
that  not  all  who  are  dwarfs  are  ricketty.

For  if  you  can  poffibly  doubt,  whether  any  perfons  are  born  with  a  very
ihort  body,  and  grow  very  little,  and  yet  have  their  bones  ftrait,  and  all
their  limbs  correfponding  to  each  other  in  proportion  ;  you  may  be  convinc'd
even  by  that  laft  example,  which  you  will  read  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Academy
that  I  have  commended  (c),  of  a  boy  who  was  now  five  years  of  age,  and  yec.
not  longer  than  two-and-twenty  inches.

But  now  •,  before  we  pafs  on  to  other  things  •,  I  choofe  to  add,  to  thofe
caufes  which  we  have  fpoken  of  above,  of  flexibility,  and  of  fragility,  in  the
bones,  the  following  things  alfo.  Dominic  Gagliardi  (d)  has  fuppos'd  that
the  bones  are  made  foft,  and  confequently  fragile,  in  thole  bodies,  wherein
they  have  happen'd  to  be  naturally  lefs  hard  than  in  others  :  and  that  they
are  not  of  the  fame  hardnefs  in  all  perfons,  but  more  or  lefs  hard  in  different
perfons,  according  to  the  various  degree  of  the  coagmentation,  and  confoli-
dacion  of  the  bony  juice  ;  which  perhaps  might  be  confirm'd  from  thence,
that  they  much  more  frequently  become  foft  in  women,  than  in  men  :  and
that  this  bony  gypfum,  as  he  call'd  it,  is  foften'd,  in  confequence  of  its  being
akaline,  by  the  acids  which  are  thrown  into  the  vefiels  of  the  bones ;  and  that
from  hence  it  is  that  perfons  fubjedl  to  "  rheumatic  and  arthritic  pains,
"  but  particularly  to  pains  from  the  lues  venerea,"  are  alfo  fubjedt  to  have
their  bones  become  foft.

And  by  thefe  means  he,  in  fome  meafure,  led  the  way  to  the  experiments
of  thofe  perfons,  who,  as  I  faid  juft  now,  affirm'd  afterwards,  that  the
bones  are  foften'd  by  means  of  acid  liquors.  And  that  it  has  more  than  once
happen'd  to  rheumatic  and  arthritic  patients,  to  have  their  bones  become
flexible,  we  learn  from  feveral  obfervations ;  to  which  you  will  alfo  add  that
of  the  celebrated  Targioni  {e),  on  a  woman,  in  whom  the  vehemence  of  arth-
ritic pains  had  diftorted  the  oflTa  humerorum,  the  ulns,  and  radii,  into  the
form  of  an  arch.

But  as  to  the  humours  being  infedVed  with  acid  particles,  in  the  difor-.
ders  which  Gagliardi  has  made  mention  of ;  as  this  cannot  be  prov'd  by
every  one-,  you  will  only  admit  of  the  argument  from  him  as  far  as  you
think  proper,  and  leave  the  reft  undetermin'd.

Moreover,  in  regard  to  the  fragility  of  the  bones,  the  celebrated  Lovifius
(f)  fhows,  that  this  is  not  always  brought  on  by  a  caries.  For  when  he  dif-
fecfted  the  body  of  a  woman,  who  had  broken  the  os  humeri,  and  foon  after
the  OS  femoris  alfo,  by  a  flight  effort,  he  found  the  bones  "  not  carious,
"  but  dry,  and  fragile ;  and  the  medulla,  in  like  manner,  dry, friable,  and

(<r)  A.  1746.  Obf.  Anat.  8.  Defcriz.  d' un  Tumore  FoIIicuI.

(d)  Obf.  3.  fupra  ad  n.  6.  cit.  (f)  Vid. Aft. Erud. A. 1751. M.  Jun,

\e)  Prima  Raccolta  d'  Offervaz.  Med,  nella P.  i.  ubi  de  ejus  Obfervationib.

"  quite


Letter  LVm. Articles  8,  9.  ^S^

"  quite  loofe  from  the  parietes  of  the  bony  cavities."  And  this  woman  was
adually  fixty  years  of  age  ;  but  of  a  pretty  fat  habit  of  body  :  full  of  health
befides,  and  alacrity  ;  except  that  fhe  had  already  labour'd,  for  fome  time,
under  a  cancer  of  the  breafts.

But  now  take  the  other  hiftory  of  Valfalva's  that  I  have  promis'd  you.

8.  A  man,  who  was  a  native  of  Bologna,  had  been  afflidted  with  pains,  in
confequence  of  the  lues  venerea,  which  return'd  every  day  at  a  certain  period,
Thefe  pains  were  very  violent  at  the  diaphyfis  of  the  tibiae,  and  at  the  anlcle-
bone  at  the  fame  time ;  where  a  fmall,  and  fomewhat  foft,  tumour  was  per-
ceiv'd  by  the  fingers,  and  by  the  eyes.  Internal  and  external  remedies  being
made  ufe  of  in  vain,  Vallalva  applied  the  fcalpel,  and  gave  the  wifti'd-for
relief.

For  having  open'd,  and  laid  afide,  the  common  integuments  ;  and  taken
away  a  fmall  quantity  of  yellow  jelly,  which  was  interpos'd  betwixt  thofe
integuments  and  the  fubjedted  tendons,  and  made  up  the  tumour ;  the  pain
in  the  ancle  did  not  return  on  the  following  day.

However,  as  the  patient  faid  that  he  was  prick'd  with  needles  as  it  were,
if  the  neighbouring  tendons  were  by  any  means  prefs'd  upon ;  it  was  eafily
conceiv'd  that  fome  part  of  that  jelly  lay  hid  beneath  them  :  which,  at  length,
being  wholly,  and  dextroufly,  taken  away  quite  from  the  very  bone,  with-
out injuring  the  tendons,  that  fenfe  of  the  pricking  of  needles  vanifh'd  alfo.

But  the  pain  in  the  tibia  remain'd,  contrary  to  expedfation  ;  for  it  was  fup-
pos'd  to  be  produc'd  by  confent  of  parts.  The  periofteum,  therefore,  was
laid  bare  by  the  knife  ;  and  was  found  to  be  not  quite  in  a  natural  ftate  :  fo
that  it  was  neceflary  to  procure  a  feparation  thereof  from  the  bone,  which
was  in  other  refpedls  found.  This  being  done,  no  pain  any  longer  remain'd  r
and  the  wounds  being  eafily  brought  to  a  cicatrix,  the  patient  was  difmifs'd
in  good  health.

9.  When  Va]fal\ia  related  this  obfervation  to  mej  for  he  did  not  leave  it
in  writing;  I  remember  him  to  have  added,  that  other- fimilar  tumours,,
from  a  venereal  caufe,  had  alfo  been  cur'd  by  him  in  the  fame  manner ;  fa
that  neither  they  nor  the  pains  return'd  afterwards.  And  he  clafs'd  them
among  the  venereal  gummata,  as  they  are  call'd  ;  thinking  it  by  no  means  ne-
ceffary,  that  they  fhould  all  arife  under  the  periofteum,  or  be  comprehended
in  a  peculiar  coat.

Nothing  is  more  fimilar  to. the  obfervation  in  queftion,  than  that  of  Fa-
bricius  ab  Aquapendente  (g)  ;  which  has  been  already  taken  notice  of  by  me
alfo  ;  except  that  the  tumour  was  not  at  the  ankle,  but  at  the  wrifb,  and
brought  on  fevere  pains  every  day,  at  a  certain  hour ;  being  made  up,  as  he
found  by  difleifling  out  the  tumour,  of  a  Cnall  quantity  of  vitreous  pituita,,
according  to  the  manner  of  fpeaking  made  ufe  of  at  that  time,  lying  in  con-
taft  with  the  internal  tendons.

And  I  fuppofe  that  Nicolaus  Mafia  refcrr'd  to  a  matter  of  this  kind,  when,,
m  the  carcafes  of  thofe  perfons  who  had  been  afHicled,  while  living,  with  the
venereal  difeafe;  and  he  had  diffefted  a  great  number;  he  aflerted,  as  you
have  it  in  the  Sepulchretum  {h),  that  he had  found  "  the  painful  places  to.

[{g)  De  Chirurg.  Oper.  ubi  de  Artkulor.  Uft. {i)  Seel,  hac  IX.  Obf.  j,  §  i.

"  bs
6


35  2 Book  IV.  Of  Ghirurgkal  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

■"  be  moift  with  a  pkuitous  matter  :"  and  this  Fracaftorius  (/)  alfo  -,  where  he
aflerted  his  having  found  out  the  caufe  of  the  pains  which  afflidt  venereal
patients  by  night,  from  the  fame  lues,"  by  making  a  number  "  of  diflec-
*'  tions  ;"  fpoke  of  under  the  title  "  of  a  kind  of  lentor,"  which  he  had
feen  upon  the  tendons  and  mufcles :  and  he  has  exprcfsly  afferted,  "  that
*'  gummofities  are  made  up  of  concreted  phlegm."

Nor  is  it  of  any  importance  that  Fabricius  has  not  faid  whether  the  tu-
mour which  he  cut  out  was  venereal ;  for  he  acknowledged  gummata(/^)  to  be
frequently,  but  not  always,  from  that  caufe.

However,  I  would  rather  you  fhould  of  yourfelf  doubt,  whether  two  ana-
tomifts,  and  at  the  fame  time  very  excellent  furgeons,  Fabricius  and  Yal-
falva,  were  not  themlelves  alfo  at  thofe  times  deceiv'd,  when  both  of  them
fuppos'd  that  the  tendons,  and  the  latter  of  them  even  that  the  periofteum,
were  affeded  with  thefe  pains  •,  I  fay,  I  had  rather  you  would  of  yourfelf
doubt,  than  that  I  ihould  give  out  the  fufpicion.

But  that  gummata  are  not  always  feated  betwixt  the  periofteum  and  the
bone ;  although  you  fhould  not  digrefs  from  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  ;
you  will  naturally  conceive  :  and  not  only  from  Rhodius  (l),  who,  in  this
very  theatre  of  ours,  faw  "  three  white  gummata"  demonftrated  by  An-
thony Molinetti,  upon  opening  the  cranium,  "  and  thefe  gummata  adhering
'*  to  the  dura  mater  ;"  but  alfo  from  Guarinoni  (m),  who  afferts,  that  he
*'  had  feen  the  gummata  fpoken  of  concreted  in  the  brain."

This  fituation  I  mention  in  particular,  becaufe  thefe  things  are  added  to
this  author's  obfervation,  wherein  "  three  little  bodies,  like  venereal  gum-
*'  mata,"  are  faid  to  have  been  feen  in  the  brain  of  a  man  •,  who  having  beer^
fubjedt  to  epilepfy,  and  convulfion,  after  the  lues  whereof  we  are  fpeaking,
was,  at  length,  carried  off  by  a  very  heavy  fleep.

And  as  this  caufe,  and  thefe  diforders,  are  likewife  read  of  in  a  hiftory
which  I  have  written  to  you  fome  time  ago  (») ;  you  may  compare  them  one
with  another,  and  confider  again,  if  you  plcafe,  of  what  I  then  left  undeter-
min'd  (o),  in  regard  to  that  fmall  and  roundifti  abfcefs  within  the  cerebrum  ;
I  mean,  whether  it  bclong'd  to  the  clafs  of  gummata,  or  not.

And  while  you  are  doing  this,  you  will,  at  the  fame  time,  call  to  mind
thofe  gummata  of  the  head,  which  generally  begin  under  the  integuments
of  the  cranium,  and  erode  the  bone,  unlefs  they  are  attended  to  in  time  ;  as
the  fame  hiftory  (hows  ;  fince  obfervations  of  this  kind  are  here  wanting  in
the  Sepulchretum  :  with  which  otherwife  it  might  have  been  encreas'd ;  and
amongft  thefe  with  that  which  the  celebrated  Heifter  (p)  has  produc'd,  to-
gether with  the  difledtion  of  the  body  after  death.

lo.  For  the  two  remaining  obfervations  ofValfalva,  which  I  have  given,
I  will  fubjoin  as  many  of  my  own  that  remain  behind  ;  beginning  with  that
which  is  particularly  requir'd  by  the  difcourfe  I  have  begun,  upon  a  caries
corroding  the  cranium. For  that  this  fpreads  far  and  wide,  unlefs  you  pre-

(«)  De  Morb.  Contag.  1.  z.  c.  12.  («)  Epift.  9.  n.  23;

{i)  1.  cit.  ubi  de  Gummatib.  (0)  n.  24.

(/)  Obf.  I.  §.  9.  (/)  Diflert.  de  Off.  Tumorib.  n.  15.

(^m)  in  Schol.  ult,  ad  Additanii

vent


Letter  LVIII. Articles  ii,  12.  353

vent  it  in  time,  I  have  even  feen  without  the  difledlion  of  the  body,  and  you
will  conceive.

11.  An  old  woman,  in  the  hofpital  of  Incurables  at  Bologna,  had  fo  much
of  the  left  OS  fincipitis,  and  the  neighbouring  os  frontis,  confum'd  by  a  ve-
nereal caries,  that  the  brain  was  laid  open  by  a  foramen  of  three  fingers
breadth  in  every  direftion  ;  and  you  could  plainly  fee,  while  you  felt  the
artery  at  the  wrift,  that  this  artery  and  the  brain  rais'd  themfelves  up,  and
fublided,  at  the  fame  paint  of  time.

And  left  you  fhould  doubt  of  this,  I  faw  her  frequently  in  that  year,  which
I  think  was  1700  ;  for  the  woman  did  not  live  there  a  little  time  ;  although
the  eroding  virus  was  not  yet  entirely  overcome,  nor  the  ulceration,  which
was  external  about  the  edges  of  the  foramen,  was  drawing  on  to  a  cicatriza-
tion. But  the  membrane  of  the  cerebrum  itfelf  appear'd  to  be  clean  and
bright  in  its  colour.

12.  It  does  not  efcape  me  that  the  cranium  is  confum'd  for  a  much  wider
fpace,  if  the  caries  goes  on,  as;  to  omit  others ;  I  have  read  our  Fallop-
pius  {q)  faying,  "  that  the  whole  finciput  is  fometimes  corrupted ;  and
"  fometimes  alfo  a  part  of  the  occiput:  and  at  other  times  that  the  whole
«  fkuU  is  corrupted,  and  taken  away ;  and  this,"  fays  he,  "  I  have  feen
"  firft  in  my  mother's  fifter,  who  had  receiv'd  the  lues  venerea  from  her
«  hufband :  and  I  took  away  from  her  the  whole  cranium  :  the  membrane
"  is  cover'd  with  a  kind  of  pellicle  ;  and  the  pulfatile  motion  of  the  dura
"  mater  is  always  perceiv'd."  And  he  adds,  that  "  he  had  many  other  ex-
*'  amples  of  the  fame  kind,  both  here,  and  in  other  places."

But  in  that  old  woman,  there  was  not  a  manifeft  pellicle  which  cover'd
the  meninges  :  and  the  part  even  appear'd  as  if  the  dura"  mater  had  been
taken  off,  and  we  were  looking  upon  the  brain  when  cover'd  only  with  the
pia  mater,  having  a  reddifh,  fmooth,  and  moift  furface.  I  could  not,  there-
fore, fufficiently  admire,  how  the  humour,  which  had  been  able  to  erode  the
bone,  had  not  injur'd,  in  the  leaft,  that  membrane;  and  how~ir  was  that  the
woman  labour'd  neither  under  convulfion,  paralyfis,  nor  any  other  mark  of
injury  in  the  brain,  or  its  membranes:  although  whether  (he  had  labour'd
under  thefe  fymptoms  before,  or  not,  I  cannot  inform  you.

Nor  was  Hildanus  lefs  furpriz'd  formerly  (r),  that  no  fymptoms  of  injury
done  to  the  fpinal  marrow,  were  prefent  in  a  man  who  had  it  "  laid  quite
"  bare,  and  cover'd  over  only  with  its  membrane;"  whereas  three  of  the
bodies  of  the  thoracic  vertebrae  were  deftroy'd  by  the  caries.

Arid,  indeed,  thefe  things  are  more  furprizing  than  that  the  mufcles,
which  lie  upon  the  bones,  or  the  integuments,  fliould,  fometimes,  not  be
injur'd  by  the  humour  which  erodes  the  fubjefted  bones  both  internally  and
externally,  without  any  exterpal  tumour,  or  diicolouration  betraying  the
diforder :  which  circumftance  miferably  deceives  incautious  lovers,  who  are
ignorant  that  under  a  fair  appearance  of  body,  though  not  disfi^ur'd  in  the
flighteft  degree  in  any  part,  even  the  moft  confiderable  caries  may  lie  hid  ;
an  example  of  which  kind  is  particularly  to  be  read  in  Novefius  (^),  from

{q)  Traft.  de  Ulcer,  c.  47.  (A  Letter  6,1

tr)  Cent.  ;.  Obf.  Chir.  56.

, Vol.  IIL  Z  2  whom


3  3-4 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

whom  it  might  be  referr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum,  with  the  approbation  everfc
of  Guilielmini  {i).

"When  Benivenius  {u)  formerly  propos'd  an  inftance  oftheos  frontis  being
almoft  wholly  confum'd  (but  by  a  caries  of  another  kind,  as  it  is  natural  to  fup-
pofe),  without  any  mark  being  confpicuous  externally  ;  he  made  ufe  of  the  ex-
ample of  thunder,  which  fometimes  melts  gold  without  injuring  the  cafe  wherein
it  is  kept ;  or  does  other  things  of  the  fame  kind,  which  Marcellus  Donatus  {x)
adds,  when  he  relates  the  obfervation  of  Benivenius.

But  others  choofe  rather  to  make  ufe  of  the  example  of  aqua  ftygia,  which
deftroys  iron,  for  inftance,  but  does  not  touch  fuet.  You  may  either  devife
fome  other  comparifon,  or  follow  thefe  authors.  For  it  will  not  only  be  of
ufe  in  the  cafes  in  queftion,  but  in  others  alfo.

So  our  Fabricius  (jy),  in  a  boy ;  Matthseus  Blawius  (z),  in  a  man  ;  fo  Jo.
Jacob  Scheuchzerus  ((?),  in  a  woman ;  faw  the  fkull  entirely  perforated,  in
more  places  than  one,  by  a  corroding  caries  ^  and  yet  the  dura  mater  un-
hurt: fo  as  to  make  it  evident,  that  the  acrid  and  corrofive  humour,  to  ufe
the  words  of  Fabricius,  was  "  contrary  to  the  nature  of  the  bones  of  the
"  head,  but  by  no  means  to  that  of  the  fubjeded  membrane."

But  left  you  (hould  fuppofe  this  to  happen  in  every  caries  of  the  cranium,
you  may  learn  the  contrary  from  many  obfervations ;  and  among  others  from
two  of  Laubius,  one  on  a  woman  {l>),  the  other  on  a  man  (e);  in  both  of
whom  the  cranium  was  fo  confum'd,  by  a  caries,  to  a  confiderable  extent,
or  perforated  thereby,  that  the  correfponding  parts,  not  only  of  the  meninges,
but  of  the  cerebrum  itfelf,  gave  accefs  for  the  pus,  quite  to  the  lateral  ven-
tricle, and  the  right  ventricle  in  both  :  although  in  the  woman,  there  at
length  came  on  a  paralyfis  of  the  fubjedted  fide  ;  which  had  already  exifted
for  a  long  time  in  the  .man:  and,  as  it  is  then  wont,  for  the  moft  part,  to
be,  on  the  left  fide.

And  as  I  have  fpoken  fufficiently  of  this  difference  already,  on  other  oc-
cafions  •,  you  yourfelf  will  confider  of  the  other,  which  relates  to  the  prefent
fubjefl :  that  is  to  fay,  why  the  eroding  ichor  of  a  caries  fhould  vitiate  the
meninges  of  fome  perfons,  and  leave  thole  of  others  unhurt  ?  Is  it  becaufe,
in  the  laft-mention'd  cafes,  it  has  a  free  difcharge  outwards  j  and  in  the  for-
mer has  not  ?  Or,  becaufe  in  the  latter  it  is  infedted  with  a  venereal  viru-
lency  ;  and  is  not  in  the  former  ?

But  as  cafes  are  not  wanting  to  be  repugnant  to  either  one  or  the  other  of
thefe  explanations ;  as  to  the  firft,  that  which  has  been  propos'd  by  Blawius,
in  a  man  ;  as  to  the  fecond,"that  which  has  been  propos'd  by  me,  in  a  wo-
man ;  you  are  certainly  under  a  neceffity,  at  othes-  times,  of  accounting  for
it  from  fome  certain  nature  and  difpofition  of  the  ichor,  and  the  bodies
affeded  therewith. But  I  go  on  to  my  other  obfervarion,  fuch  as  it  is.

13.  A  butcher,  of  forty  yeap  of  age,  who  was  infe<^ed  with  a  venereal
lues,  and  frequently  intoxicated  with  wine, had been, for a long time,

(/)  Reponfe  6.  (a;)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  7.  Obf.  151.

(«)  De  abdit.  &c.  Morbor.  caufis  c.  1-8.  {«)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  7.  Obf.  47.

{x)  Medic.  Hift.  Mirab.  1.  5.  c.  i.  {i)  Eph.  cit.  Cent.  8.  Obf.  21,

CyJ  De  Cbirvng.  Oper.  ubi  de  Gummatib,  (0  Earund.  Cent,  9,  Obf.  14.
in  fin. -

6  fubjta


Letter  LVIII, Article  14.  ^ss

fubjed  to  diforders  of  the  thorax,  and  had  been  in  this  hofpital,  on  that  ac-
counr,  at  other  times.  Laft  of  all,  returning  into  the  fame  hofpital,  befides
an  acute  fever,  on  account  of  which  blood  had  been  twice  taken  away,
(which  neither  the  firft  nor  the  fecond  time  was  without  a  polypous  cruft)
he  was  afflided  with  a  continual  cough,  which  attack'd  him  fo  violently  three
or  four  times  every  hour,  that  he  became  livid  therefrom:  he  expeftorated
purulent  matter :  and  had  a  vibrating  pulfe.

Having  been  thus  afFeded  about  fifteen  days ;  laft  of  all,  his  ftrength  de-
creafing  more  and  more,  within  one  day,  he  ceas'd  to  live  about  the  end  of
January,  in  the  year  1747.

The  body ;  if  you  except  fome  parts  of  the  thorax  ;  I  had  not  in  my
power  to  examine  at  that  time,  being  taken  up  with  other  things  relative  to
the  public  demonftrations  of  anatomy,  The  lungs  were  half-rotten,  and
fmelt  very  ftrong.  The  heart  was  lax.  In  one  of  the  valves  of  the  great
artery,  the  corpufculum  Arantii  was  much  larger  than  it  naturally  is.  And
under  it,  on  that  furface  where  the  valve  was  turn'd  towards  its  fellows,  the
membranous  laminae,  of  which  it  was  compos'd,  were  fo  disjoin'd  to  a  con-
fiderable  traft,  that  where  they  open'd  I  could  introduce  a  probe  betwixt
both.  And  the  neighbouring  trunk  of  the  artery  was  diftinguifli'd,  here  and
there,  internally,  with  whitilh  fpots :  nor  was  it  very  fmooth,  but  even  fome-
what  unequal.  And,  foon  after,  being  diftended  into  an  aneurifm  of  the
curvature  ;  I  was,  for  this  reafon,  lefs  furpriz'd,  as  I  have  faid  heretofore  (d),
at  what  I  obferv'd  in  that  valve.

14.  Although,  for  the  reafon  juft  now  mention'd,  I  could  not  fufficiently
compleat  this  obfervation  ;  yet  I  was  willing,  however,  not  to  pafs  it  by,
that  you  may  join  it  with  the  others  referr'd  to  in  the  beginning  of  this
letter  (^);  whereby  we  have  fhewn,  that  the  lungs  are  frequently  injur'd  in
a  lues  venerea  ;  and  that  the  great  artery  is  fometimes  injur'd  from  the  fame
caufe,  and  dilated  into  an  aneurifm.

Perhaps,  we  Ihould  alfo  have  found  the  kidniei  to  be  difcas'd  in  that  man.
For  thefe  four  parts,  the  lungs,  the  aorta,  and  the  kidnies,  together  with
their  appendages,  we  have  found  to  be  injur'd  ;  in  thofe  who  have  labour'd
confiderably,  and  for  a  long  time,  under  this  lues ;  fomewhat  more  fre-
quently than  you  will  eafily  imagine  from  the  reading  of  mod  books.

But  as  to  that  vifcus,  which  very  learned  men  had  formerly  faid  was  af-
fefted  more  than  others,  and  indeed  was  the  feat  of  this  lues,  as  you  fee
from  the  Sepulchretum  (/)  ;  to  which,  however,  others  do  not  affenc,  as
you  will  learn  from  the  fame  book  (g),;  I  mean  the  liver-,  I  do  not,  at  pre-
ient,  remember  that  it  ever'appear'd  to  me. to  be  vitiated  in  thefe  bodies.

Yet  I  (hall  not  for  this  reafon  deny,  that  thofe  things  which  happen  rarely,
or  never,  to  me,  might  not  have  happeri'd  frequently  to  others  ;  or,  on  the
contrary,  that  thofe  things  which  happen  frequently  to  me,  might  not  have
happen'd  rarely  to  others :  for  I  mean  nothing  elfe  here  but  to  inform  you
what  I  have  happen'd  to  meet  with  the  moft  frequently ;  as  I  very  well

fdj  Epift.  27,  n.  7.'  {/)  Obf.  2.  §  I,  2,  3.

{')  N.  2.  {g)  Ibid.  §  4,  5.  &  Obf.  4.

Z  z  2  know,


35<^ Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

know,  that  this  lues,  fince  it  may  fometimes  lie  hid  under  the  mafk  of  any
difeafe  whatever,  may  alfo  vitiate  any  vifcus  whatever.

But  what  vifcera  it  really  affedls  more  frequently,  or  what  lefs  frequently,
you  cannot  eafily  determine,  before  many  obfervations  of  different  perlbns  are
compar'd  together.  Yet  I  cannot  help  being  furpriz'd,  that,  as  fo  many  are
infcdted  with  this  difeale,  and  lb  many  die,  the  difleftions  by  no  means  cor-
refpond  to  their  number.  And,  certainly,  you  will  not  lee  a  great  number
transferr'd  into  this  feflion  of  the  Sepulchretum.

The  feftion,  therefore,  is  fhbrt ;  and  fo  much  the  fhorter  ftill,  becaufe  the
whole  of  it  is  not  of  the  lues  venerea,  but  alfo  of  the  plica  polonica :  and
where  it  is  upon  that  lubjetfl,  it  confifts  in  great  part  of  fcholia,  one  of  which
is  not  even  found  in  its  proper  place  ;  as,  for  inftance,  that  which  is  afRx'd
in  the  third  place  to  the  firft  article  of  the  firft  obfervation,  wherein  there  is
nothing  of  "  tumid  and  fuppurated  bones ;"  whereas  it  belongs,  as  far  as
I  can  judge,  to  the  eleventh  article,  which  is  three  pages  diftant  from  thence :
and  almoft  all  the  fcholia  are  from  Sylvius ;  who  endeavours  to  build  up  his
theory  of  the  acid  nature  of  this  poifon  ;  out  of  which  fome  things  might
have  been  omitted,  and  others  have  been  fubdituted  in  their  places  :  as,  for
inftance,  when  he  has  conjeftur'd  {h),  that  bubos  arife  in  the  inguinal  glands,
becaufe  "  they  are  near  to  the  fpermatic  velTels."

They  judg'd  better,  who  faid  formerly  with  Brafavolus  (z),  "  that  a  kind
"  of  deprav'd  quality  afcended,  by  the  penis,  to  the  emunftories,  and  to  the
"  glandular  parts  of  the  groins ;  and  excited  bubos  there."  For  although
they  did  not  point  out  the  way  which  led  into  thefe  glands  ;  they  did  not,
however,  propofe  a  paflagc  which  did  not  lead  thereto.

What  paffages  can  lead  to  thefe  glands,  finally,  William  Cowper  (hew'd
fix  years  before  the  Sepulchretum  came  out  with  its  Additamenta ;  among
which  this  ought  to  have  been  pur,  as  you  have  read  in  our  Adverfaria  (^),
where  we  have  transferr'd  the  iame  conjefture  to  women  alfo :  and  have  made
ufe  thereof,  fince  that  time,  in  confultations  where  the  queftion  was  of
bubos,  that  had  fucceeded  to  erofions  of  the  glans  and  prasputium,  degene-
rating into  deep  cancerous  ulcers ;  as  I  have  more  than  once  feen.

Yet  remarks  are  not  wanting  in  thefe  fcholia  that  feem  to  be  owing  to  dif-
fedtions  ;  as  that(/j  of  the  venereal  infeftion  arifing  from  the  loculi  o£.
women,  "  quite  to  the  cornua  uteri,  corrupting  them,  and  exciting  ulcers
there  :"  which  exceedingly  well  agrees  vv-ith  the  obfervation  of  our  Vallif-
neri  {m)  on  a  woman,  in  whom,  in  confequence  of  the  fame  lues,  not  only
all  the  loculi,  but  the  whole  right  tube  alfo,  was  ulcerated.

By  thofe  appearances  that  have  been  feen  by  Vallifneri  in  the  vifcera  of
women,  and  by  Genfelius  («),  by  Salzmann  {o),  by  Cafpartus  (/>),  by  Pet-
fchius  (^),  and  by  others,  in  the  vifcera  of  men  alfo,  and  in  other  parts  of
shofe  perfons  who  iiad  died  after  this  difeafe,  you  may  increafe  the  number

{h)  Schol.  ult.  ad  §  4.  Obf.  I.  (»)  Eph.  N.  C.  Gent.  6.  ObC  84.

(/■)  L.  de  Morbo  Gall,  ubi  de  Cauf.  (0)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  2.  ObT.  99.

\k)  IV.  Animad.  22.  &  27.  (p)  Diilert.  de  Exoft.  cran.  §  8.  ubi  nura

\l)  Ad  §  4.  cit.  Schol.  1..  Aorts  aneurifma.

(/«)  1ft.  della  Generaz.  P,  2.  c.  5,  n.  21,  (?)  Syllog.  Anat,  Obf.  §  87.

(which,


Letter  LVIII. Article  r  j*.  ^57

(which,  as  I  have  already  faid,  is  not  very  large)  of  obfervations  that  are
conrain'd  in  this  fedtion  of  the  Sepulchretum.

i£.  Nor  does  it  efcape  me,  that  a  book  has  been  publifh'd,  in  our  ao-e,
"  on  the  difeafes  of  the  pudenda,  and  the  lues  venerea  •"  wherein  you  have
many  obfervations,  relative  thereto,  made  even  upon  dead  bodies.  But  whe-
ther thefe  might,  as  well  as  thofe  juft  now  fpoken  of,  be  referr'd  into  the
Sepulchretum,  I  do  not  very  well  know.  Yet  I  do  not  fay  this  becaufe  I
doubt  the  author's  veracity,  but  becaufe  I  do  not  know  how  far  his  eyes,
and  his  diligence,  are  to  be  depended  upon.

For  there  are  fome  things  that  he  has  affirm'd  he  had  feen  in  other  writino^s,
which  others  believe  he  had  feem'd  to  himfelf  to  fee,  though  they  themfelves
could  never  fee  them.  And. things  of  this  kind  are  not  wanting  in  his
book  ;  as,  for  inftance,  when  he  fays  that  the  uterus  is  interpos'd  betwixt  the
inteftinum  rectum  and  the  lacunas  of  the  vagina  :  that  the  peritoneum  rifes
up  and  is  fuperextended  upon  the  inguinal  glands  on  the  external  part,  that  is
betwixt  them  and  the  fliin  :  that  the  lymph  is  carried  by  the  lymphatics  of
the  mefentery  to  the  glands  of  Peyerus,  that  is,  to  the  inteftinal ^■glands :  that
the  pancreas  Afellii  is  in  the  human  mefentery  alfo  ;  for  he  fays  that,  in  thofe
who  have  died  of  a  lues  venerea,  the  pancreas  of  Afellius  is  reduced  to  nothing:
and  other  things  of  a  fimilar  kind,  which  I  purpofely  pafs  over.

And  at  the  fame  time  that  he  fees  thofe  things  which  others  do  not  fee,
he,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  fee,  or  does  not  know^  what  others  fee  and
know  ;  as,  for  inftance,  when  he  writes,  that  in  the  veficute  feminales  no-
thing anfr acinous  or  contorted  is  contained,  hy  means  of  which  fome  delay  to  the
femen  may  he  pretended:  or  where  he  fays,  of  a  mucous  body  betwixt  the  cu-
ticle and  the  fkin,  /  fi)id  no  mention  made  among  anatomijls,  except  thofe  of
Montpslier  :  and  to  this,  moreover,  Polfenus  firfi  attributed  the  colours  of  the
Jkin,  but,  in  particular,  the  blacknefs  of-  the  Ethiopians.

But  he,  who  does  not  feem  to  have  read  Malpighi  {r),  and  others  after
him,  who  teach  the  fame  things,  takes  a  great  deal  of  pains  in  producino-
authorities  from  many  writers,  both  medical  and  not  medical,  to  perfuade
us  to  embrace  an  opinion  which  has  been  confuted  by  a  much  greater  number
of  authorities ;  1  mean,  that  the  lues  venerea  is  a  very  ancient  difeafe,  and,,
finally,  nothing  more  than  the  elephantialis.

This  I  fuppofe  he  would  never  have  attempted  to  prove,  if  he  had  then
had  it  in  his  power  to  read  that  very  learned  and  able  phyfician  Joha
Aftruc  (j),  by  whom  thefe  perfuafions  are  entirely  rooted  out ;  although  this,,
however,  is  furprizing,  that  he,  who  was  not  ignorant  how  great,  and  how
imrnoderate  a  mixture  of  nations  there  was  formerly  in  the  Roman  ftews,,
while  the  power  of  the  Csfars  was  at  its  height,  Ihould  have  fuppos'd  that,
there  was  the  fame  lues  at  that  time ;  but  divided  by  phyficians  into  many
diforders,  and  not  conGder'd  as  cne  diforder,  before  "  a  coUeclion  of  them
"  all  "  was  obferv'd  "  in  the  camp  at  Naples  :"  as  if  there  had  been  a
greater  mixture  of  nations  in  thofe  camps  than  formerly  at  Rome,  where
ene  and  the  fame  harlot  (as  Martial  (/)  confefles  in  fo  many  words)  profticuted


(?)  De  Ext.  Tra£V.  Organo.  (/)  L.  7.  Epigr.  2g^

t-O  De  Morb.  Vener.  1,  1.  c.  i,  &  feqq^.


Eerfslf


3  5  S Book  IV.  Of  Cliirurglcal  and  Univerfal  Diforders*

herfelf  to  Catti,  to  Germans,  to  Dacians,  to  Cilicians,  to  Cappadocians,  to
Indians,  to  Jews,  &c.

The  American  nation  was  the  only  one  then  wanting  at  Rome:  and  in
thefe  camps  were  not  wanting  fuch  as  had  commerce  therewith  themfelves,
er,  at  leaft,  by  means  of  others  ;  fo  that  it  may  be  eafily  conceiv'd  from
whence,  not  a  new  coUeftion  of  difeafes,  but  the  lues  itfelf,  came  into
Europe.

And  you  may  not  only  obferve  a  great  negligence  in  thefe  things,  but  alfo
in  the  enumeration  of  the  years  from  that  time;  which  is  in  other  refpedts
very  eafy ;  and  in  the  reading  of  the  beft  phyficians  from  thence  quite  down
to  the  prefent  age;  where  ic  is  foon  after  faid,  that  the  lues  venerea  "  had
"  already  lafted,  under  this  title,  more  than  three  hundred  years,  and  had
"  even  remitted  nothing  of  its  atrocity  ;"  fince  it  is  certain  to  every  one,
that  this  Neapolitan  war  had  not  begun  before  the  year  1494 :  and  by  the
author  whom  1  have  before  quoted,  I  mean  Aftruc  (u),  fo  many  authors  are
produc'd  ;  and,  amongft  thefe,  fome  who,  as  they  were  celebrated  phyficians,
fo  their  writings  are  in  the  hands  of  almofl"  every  one :  by  the  teftimony  of
whom  it  is"  very  evident,  that  this  diforder  is  become  more  flight.

After  thefe  remarks,  and  others  which  for  brevity's  fake  I  omit;  and,
amongll  thefe,  that  next  prognoflic  aphorifm,  "  a  fever,  fucceeding  to  a
'■  lues  venerea,  folves  the  difeafe ;"  I  would  have  you  yourfelf  confider,
whether  we  can  afcribe  fo  much  to  his  eyes,  and  to  his  diligence,  as  to  ad-
mit of  all  his  obfervations  without  any  the  leaft  doubt  or  hefitation.

16.  Do  not,  however,  imagine  that  thefe  things  are  faid  by  me  for  any
other  reafon  than  from  a  defire  after  truth  :  as  they  are  of  an  author  who
was  not  known  to  me  while  he  was  living,  either  on  the  fcore  of  injuries  or
benefits ;  and  in  whofe  book  I  do  not  deny  that  there  are  alfo  fome  good
things.  But  do  not  afk  me,  whether  in  that  method,  likewife,  whereby  he
taught  that  this  difeafe  is  to  be  overcome.

For  from  the  time  that  this  difeafe  was  known  to  phyficians,  that  different
methods  of  cure  have  been  us'd  by  different  perfons,  and  what  had  been
formerly  made  ufe  of  has  been  deferted  in  the  fame  places,  and  that  which
had  been  exploded  fubftituted  in  its  room,  in  this  difeafe  more  than  in  any
other,  I  fuppofe  no -body  can  be  ignorant;  fo  that,  if  you  approve  of  any
thing  in  preference  to  others,  or  difapprove  any  thing,  it  is  to  be  fear'd  that,
on  the  contrary,  others  may  difapprove  or  approve  it:  and  not  only  of  thofe
who  are  to  come  after  us,  but  of  thofe  who  are  living  at  prefent,  in  fo  great
a  rautability<  and  diverfity  of  opinions.

For  in  regard  to  the  two  moft  celebrated  remedies  againft  this  diforder,
the  decoftion  of  the  woods,  as  it  is  call'd,  and  quickfilver,  how  many  dif-
fenfions  and  different  opinions  do  ftill  fubfift  .''  and  not  only  which  is  to  be
preferr'd  to  the  other,  but,,  if  you  prefer  one  to  the  other,  in  what  manner
this  is  to  be  made  ufe  of.

It  is  certain,  that,  in  the  very  beginning  of  this  diforder,  the  mercurial
uncftions  were  applied  :  and,  afterwards,  that  the  decoftions  of  the  woods

(a)  L.  cit.  I.e.  14..

were


Letter  LVIII. Article  16.  33-^

were  preferr'd  to  them  :  and  that  mercury  was  again  made  ufe  of  internally  ;
and  yet  that  the  decodlions  of  the  woods  had  not,  for  this  reafon,  become  fo
exploded,  as  not  to  be  ftill  had  recourfe  to  in  fome  cities  in  particular :  nay,
thefe  only  were  preferv'd,  and  both  the  methods  of  ufing  mercury  rejeded
entirely ;  till,  at  length,  in  the  fame  cities,  they  again  return'd  to  one  or  the
other  method  of  ufing  mercury,  where  a  very  violent  lues  did  not  yield  to
the  decoftiion.

I  remember,  when  I  was  quite  a  young  man,  and  went  to  Bologna,  that
both  methods  of  applying  mercury  were  fo  far  deferted,  that  I  never  faw  any
phyfician  make  ufe  of  it ;  or  even  heard  of  his  ufing  it  (for  the  whole  fpace  of;
eight  years,  during  which  I  fi:udied  phyfic  there)  in  either  one  or  the  other
way  ;  and  that  was  very  furprizing  in  the  city  where  Jacobus  Berengarius
Carpenfis  had  formerly  flourifh'd,  and  had  been  fam'd  for  the  ufe  of  mercu-
rial unftions,  which  he  was  one  of  the  firft  promoters  of,  if  not,  as  moft  au-
thors imagine,  the  firft  inventor :  certainly  if  he  was  born  fome  years  before
1467,  as  that  paflage  of  his,  which  has  been  produc'd  by  me  in  a  former,
work  (x),  feems  to  fhow  ;  he  was  of  fuch  an  age,,  when  the  lues  venerea  was
firft  known  in  Europe,  that  he  may  be  fuppos'd  to  have  made  ufe  of  this
method  in  the  very  beginning.

But  how  much  mercury  had  not  only  begun  to  be  fufpeded,  but  to  be
very  rarely  applied,  at  Bologna,  before  I  went  to  refide  there  ;  to  omit  fome.
of  the  more  ancient  of  the  Bononian  writers;  fufficiently  appears  from  the
Empirica  Rationalis  of  Claudinus  (j),  where  he  fpeaks  of  both  thefe  methods
of  ufing  mercury  :  and  not  only  of  the  fumigations  thereof,,  which  are  very,
frequently  pernicious;  and  therefore  not  fo  much  as  mention'd  by  me  at.
prefcnt,

Vv''hat  remedies  then,-  have  you  feen  thofe  very  excellent. phyficians  make,
ufe  of,  you  will  fay,  againft  the  lues  venerea  ?  Why  the  decoftion  of  woods,
either  in  the  common  method  of  giving  them.;  and  this  for  the  moft  part;.,
or  in  another  way,  wherein  I  have  feen  them  us-'d  by  Valfalva,  and  that  fre-
quently.

For  having  obferv'd  fome  perfons  to  take  in  a  great  quantity  of  that  de-
codtion  which  they  call  Aqua  Stibiata,  or  Aqua  Corji,  with  fuccefs  ;  he  faid,.
that  it  came  into  his  mind  to  make  ufe  thereof,  in  the  fame  manner  that  we
generally  make  ufe  of  bath-waters.  That  he  had  therefore  given  it,  at  firft^.
to  the  quantity  of  two  or  three  pints,  and  obferv'd  whether  it  was  eafily  dif-
charg'd,'  and  by  the  way  of  the  bladder  ;  not  through  the  inteftines,  or  the
Ikin,  as  it  fometimes  is.  For  if  it  was  not  eafily  dilcharg'd,  or  if  by  thefe
two  laft-mention'd  ways,  that  he  defifted.  But  if  it  pafs'd  off  eafily,  and
only  by  the  urinary  pafTages,  that  on  the  following  day  he  had  encreas'd  the
quantity,  and  fo  on  more  and  more,  till  it  came  to  ten  pints.  And  that  by
this  means  he  had  gain'd  great  advantages  in  a  little  time  ;  fo  that  fometimes,
within  not  more  than  three  days,  he  had  feen  old  ulcers  heal'd,  and  gum-
mata  deprefs'd  ;  as  in  a  certain  knight,  for  inftance,  whom  he  particularly
niention'd  to  me.

[x)  Epift.  Anat.  6.  n.  2.  in  fin.  (yj  I.  6,  S.  i,  tr,  i.e.  ^.

Anxr"


3^0 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  aad  Uaiverfal  Diforders.

And  certainly  by  this  method  of  cure  1  myfelf  faw  a  woman  made  perfedly
well,  who  had  fuffer'd,  for  the  fpace  of  two  years,  under  venereal  ulcers ;
one  that  was  very  large  in  her  knee,  and  three  or  four  in  her  palate,  which
were  fmall  ones  indeed,  but  fuch,  neverthelefs,  as  fuffer'd  the  aliments  to
pafs  from  the  mouth  into  the  noftrils,  to  the  very  great  inconvenience  of  the
patient :  and  1  faw,  in  like  manner,  a  gentleman,  a  felloV-citizen  of  mine,
cur'd  thereby,  in  whom,  from  the  fame  caufe,  the  hypogaftrium  and
the  thighs  were  cover'd  with  foul  ulcers,  to  a  very  confiderable  extent.

And  as  this  happen'd  in  the  few  days  of  drinking  thefe  decoftions,  1  could
wifli  thofe  perfons  to  have  been  prefent,  who,  by  reafon  of  the  very  quick
difcharge  of  a  great  quantity  of  bath-waters,  by  the  bladder,  have  imagin'd
to  themfelves  certain  paffages,  whereby  thefe  waters  might  defcend  into  the
bladder,  without  mixing  and  circulating  with  the  blood  -,  for  unlefs  this  de-
coftion  had  been  circulated  with  the  blood,  and  carried  to  all  parts  of  the
body,  it  could  not  fo  foon  have  heal'd  thofe  parts  that  were  ulcerated,  or
otherwife  difeas'd.

However,  the  fame  thing  that  came  into  the  mind  of  Valfalva,  in  regard
to  the  ufe  of  a  ftibiated  water  of  that  kind,  had  formerly  come  into  the
mind  of  Johannes  Manardus  (z),  in  regard  to  the  decodtion  of  guaiacum  -,
for  he  fays,  "  Among  the  various  ufes  of  this  wood,  I  moil  approve  of  that
*'  method  wherein  the  decoflion  of  it  is  drunk,  in  the  manner  of  medicated
"  waters,  or  whey  fpoken  of  by  Diofcorides.  For  from  thence  comes  the
*'  manner  of  drinking  medicated  waters,  which  is  made  ufe  of  among  the
"  Italians  in  general ;  that  is  to  fay,  of  drinking  four  or  five  pints  at  in-
"  tervals."

And  this  method  of  ufing  the  decoftion  is  fo  far  approv'd  by  our  MafTa-
ria  {a),  that  he  wonder'd  how  it  could  happen,  that  nobody,  quite  to  his
time,  had  follow'd  "  fo  clear  and  excellent  a  pra6lice  of  fo  illuftrious  a
"  man  :"  and  he  afTerted,  that  he  had  made  ufe  of  this  method,  more  than
■once,  "with  the  greatell  facility,  and  the  greateft  fuccefs ;"  fo  that  the
patients  "  obtain'd,  without  much  trouble,  and  in  a  few  days,  the  good  ef-
"  fedts  which  others  are  fcarcely  wont  to  obtain  after  a  great  deal  of  uneafi-
"  nefs,  and  a  very  long  courfe  of  time  :"  and  yet  it  did  not  feem  to  him  ;  as
you  will  find  by  reading  over  the  pafTage ;  of  any  importance  which
of  the  three  difcharges,  that  I  jull  now  fpoke  of,  was  the  confequence.

But  to  return  to  my  former  fubjeft;  from  the  time  that  I  refided  at  Bo-
logna to  this  time  ;  that  is  to  fay,  in  the  fpace  of  almoft  four-and-fifty
years;  mercury  was  alfo  again  brought  into  the  clafs  of  antivenereal  remedies,
in  that  city.

17.  And  I  have  obferv'd,  in  a  not  much  lefs  fpace  of  time,  fome  vicifH-
tude  in  thefe  remedies,  in  this  city ;  though  not  fo  great  a  one.  For  as
among  phyficians,  in  other  refpefts  very  fkilful,  fome  were  never  wanting
there  that  lov'd  the  ftronger  remedies,  rather  than  the  more  fafe ;  fo  I  have
heard,  that  though  almoit  any  method  whatever  of  ufing  mercury  was,  for
the  moft  part,  far  lefs  efteem'd  than  the  decodions,  it  neverthelefs  was  at  no
time  defcrted.

{^)  L  14.  EpiK.  rvledic.  4.  («)  Pradt.  Medic.  1.  6.

From


Letter  LVIII, Article  17.  3  (5 1

From  the  time  therefore  that  I  came  hither,  except  fu (Fumigations,  men-
tion of  which  I  do  not  ever  remember  to  have  heard,  I  know  that  tnofl:  other
methods  of  ufiing  mercury  have  been  pradis'd  ;  and  amongft  thefe,  even  that
of  giving  it  internally:  and  this  either  join'd  with  fuch  things  as  open  the
bowels,  or  fo  prepar'd,  as  to  bring  on  a  falivaiion,  or  even  a  diaphorefis :
or  of  fmearing  it  upon  the  fkin,  when  mix'd  up  into  the  form  of  an
ointment.

This  laft  method;  facwiever,  was  more  rarely  us'd,  and  the  three  laft  not
very  commonly ;  but  the  deco6tion  of  woods  very  frequently :  and  thefe
■were,  for  the  naoft  part,  prepar'd  from  exotic  woods ;  and  fometimes,  as  for
inftance,  for  the  pooreft  patients,  from  our  own  plants  ;  on  which  occafion  I
muft  not  conceal  from  you  what  Vallifneri  affcrted  to  me :  I  mean,  that
having  prefcrib'd  to  a  poor  man  who  had  labour'd  under  a  mofl:  violent  lues
venerea,  for  a  long  time  together,  a  decoftion  of  the  roots  of  bardana,  hore-
hound,  and  the  green  hufks  of  walnuts,  great  fweats  were  brought  on,  and
the  man  was  perfedlly  cur'd.

Moreover,  I  have  feen  things  chang'd  gradually,  and  Ilowly,  in  fuch  a
manner,  that  unlefs  the  difcafe  is  very  flight,  decodtions  are  very  rarely  given
to  excite  fweat,  but  mercury  is  very  frequently  given  to  excite  a  falivation  ;
vinftions  being  almoft  deferted  :  for  the  phyficians  alledge  againft  thefe,  that
by  this  method  they  do  not  well  know  how  great  a  quantity  of  quickfilver
may  enter  the  body,  and  for  that  reafon  are  ignorant  how  it  is  neceflary  to
proportion  their  applications.

And  I  wifh  to  God,  the  prefent  method  of  cure  alfo  made  ufe  oi}^T&,
had  never  brought  with  it  thofe  violent,  and  fometimes  fatal,  difad vantages,
•which  I  know  not  what  extollers  thereof  conceal,  and  fmother,  among
certain  fidtitious  pofitions-,  and  exaggerated  narrations,  of  theirs  j  and  tha^:
it  was,  for  this  reafon,  to  be  preferr'd  to  all  others.

But  confidering  what  has  happen'd  in  former  times,  atid  what  tiow  hap-
pens, and  what  begins  to  happen  here  again,  they  cannot  but  foon  exped:
new  viciflitudes  here  alfo.

Not  only  the  method  of  taking  quickfilver  internally,  but  the  efficacy  of
certain  properties  thereof,  (againft  this  diforder)  which  was  not  unknown  to
the  profeffors  at  Padua  formerly,  if  they  had  efcap'd  the  memory  of  the
lefs  learned  pra6litioners ;  may  without  doubt  again  be  forgotten  :  that  is,
when  a  different  method  of  cure,  and  a  different  mode  of  explication,  have
prevail'd  among  moft  perfons.

And  I  do  not  think  that  you  will  enquire  what  profeffors  thofe  were,  as  I
know  that,  to  mention  no  others,  you  have  read  Falloppius  (^),  Tomita-
nus  (c),  and  Saxonia  (d) :  the  laft  of  whom  defcribes  mercury  as  exhibited  in
more  ways  than  one;  that  is  with  cathartics,  and  without  them,  "  fo  as  to
*'  excite  a  copious  fpitting  in  fome  perfons :"  and  relates  that  this  remedy
was  then  us'd  by  a  very  celebrated  profeffor,  and  phyfician,  at  Padua,  Al-
bertini  Bottoni.

{i)  Tradl.  de  Morbo  Gall.  c.  79.  C^J  Traft.  de  lue  Vener.  c.  22.

(f)  De  Morbo  Gall.  1.  2.  c.  15.

Vol.  III.  ' '  A  a  a  Nor


362 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  thofe  who  fucceeded  afterwards  in  this  col-
lege ;  though  they  did  not  make  ufe  of  that  precipitated  mercury  which
Bottoni  did  -,  either  us'd  themfelves  this  fublimate  which  is  at  prefent  us'd,
when  properly  dulcified  ;  or  at  leaft  extremely  well  knew,  from  many  books
which  were  publifh'd,  that  this  had  been  propos'd  by  phyficians  of  eminence
in  order  to  excite  a  falivation.

And  the  efficacy  of  fome  of  the  properties  of  mercury,  againft  this  lues,
was  not  entirely  unknown  by  two  at  leaft  of  our  ancient  profeflbrs,  Hierony-
mus  Fracaftoriiis,  and  Benediclus  Viftorius  -,  for  the  latter  of  thefe,  though
pafs'd  over  by  Papadopolus,  is  fhowrr  to  have  taught  here  before  the  middle
of  the  fixteenth  century,  by  Tomafmi  {e);  and  the  former,  though  omitted
by  Tomafini,  Papadopolus  (/)  proves  to  have  been  a  profelTor  at  Padua,
in  the  beginning  of  the  fame  century.  Of  quickfilver,  therefore,  thus  Fra-
caftorius  {g) :

^odque  eji  condenfum,  humores  dijfolvit,  agiique
Fortius ;  &c.

"  As  it  is  of  a  very  denfe  nature,  it  diffolves  the  humours,  and  ads
"  very  powerfully  j  &c."

And  Victorius  thus  (h) :  "  By  its  gravity  it  penetrates  the  fkin  of  the
•'  body,  being,  by  fome  means,  aftuated  by  the  heat  of  the  body :  and
foon  after  alfo,  when  it  has  enter'd'^  the  body,  mention  is  made  of  its
■"  gravity."

18.  I  pafs  by  other  things  that  our  Tomitanus  (i)  took  notice  of,  as  if
from  other  perfons,  in  regard  to  "  the  very  (lender,  the  very  fmall,  the
"  minute  particles"  of  which  mercury  confifts ;  that  I  may  fubjoin  the  ob-
fervation  and  the  conjllium  of  our  Trincavelli  (k)  likewife,  which  relates  ts
the  difeafe  in  queftion,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  thcfe  baths  of  the  ancient
Aponus.

Being  confulted  for  a  noble  matron  ;  who  had  this  lues  join'd  to  many
other  diforders  ;  after  having  propos'd  other  things,  and  come  to  two  which
feem'd  to  be  capable  of  being  particularly  ufeful,  the  decoftion  of  guaiacum-
wood,  and  the  bath  waters  -,  and  having  anfwer'd  that  the  former  was  likely
to  be  uferul,  not  only  againft  the  lues,  but  againft  the  other  diforders  alfo ;
when  he  goes  on  to  fpeak  of  the  waters,  and  their  manifold  ufe  by  drinking,
wafhing,  and  receiving  them  on  the  body,  when  dripping  from  a  pretty  high
place,  he  fays  •,  the  other  diforders  indeed,  and  the  caufes  of  them,  "■  we
"  may  hope  they  will  p?rfe£tly  overcome :  but  as  far  as  relates  to  this  lues
"  venerea,  or  gallica,  I  fhould  believe  they  would  be  of  very  little  or  no
"  fervice  to  that :  nay,  if  I  muft  confefs  the  truth,  I  think  I  have  obferv'd,
"  that  they  are  generally  rather  hurtful,  to  thofe  who  labour  under  this
"  diforder,  than  advantageous."


Is


(«)  Gymn.  Patav.  1.  3.  c.

8.  ad  A.  1532.

[h)  1.  de  Morbo  Gall.  c.  7.

(f)  Hift.  Gym.  Patav.

1.  3. S.  2.  c.  II.

(0  c.  15.  paulo  ante  cit.

55-

\k)  1.  2.  Confil.  Medic.  63.

(gj  Siphil.  1.  2.

Letter  LVIir. Article  19.  363

Is  not  this  an  obfervation  modeftly  propos'd  ?  The  confilium  follows:
** ,  But  at  length,  to  open  to  you  the  whole  of  my  fentiments  in  this  affair  :  I
*'  would  make  ufe  of  both  remedies  :  and  would  firft  try  the  decoction  of
"  the  wood ;  and  afterwards  would  have  her  brought  to  Padua  to  the
*'  baths."  In  this  manner  then,  even  in  the  year  1561,  did  the  Paduan
profeffors  obferve.  And  thus  did  they  anfwer  to  thofe  who  confuked
chem.

And  if  any  perfons,  lefs  converfant  in  their  monuments,  are  perhaps  ig-
norant of  that ;  they  will  not,  therefore,  pour  darknefs  and  (hades  upon  the
glory  of  their  predeceflbrs,  as  if  they  had  confirm'd  it  by  no  obfervation,  and
efpecially  by  fo  eafy  a  one.  And  indeed,  that  which  is  added  to  this  feftion
•  of  the  Sepulchretum,  from  the  confultation  of  Guarinoni,  does  not  feera  to
differ  from  thofe  things  which  Trincavelli  had  remark'd.

Nor  do  they  differ,  certainly,  which  Andrew  Bacci  (/),  a  very  celebrated
writer  upon  warm  baths,  has  faid.  For  although  he  judges,  that  not  all
•warm  baths  are  noxious  in  this  diforder  (in  which  we  muft  certainly  give
credit  to  his  experience,  and  that  of  others,  even  modern,  and  very  fa-
mous men),  he  exprefsly  affirms  that  the  Aponian  baths  are  injurious;  and
he  even  fays,  "  I  know  that  the  fame  thing  has  happen'd  to  a  certain  illuftri-
*'  ous  prince,  at  the  Aponian  baths ;  I  mean,  that  he,  unmindful  of  his  paft
"  venereal  contagion,  brought  back  upon  him  his  old  pains,  from  the  ufe
"  of  the  baths."

Perhaps,  likewife,  you  would  not  imagine  any  thing  foreign  to  probabi-
lity, if,  to  the  other  caufes  for  which  that  very  great  concourfe  of  patients  to
the  Euganean  baths,  near  Verona ;  that  had  continu'd  down  from  the  moft
ancient  times,  has  now  decreas'd  ;  you  fhould  alfo  add  this  \  that  they  muft
not  only  have  ceas'd  to  be  ufeful  to  a  great  number,  but  have  been  in-
jurious, in  proportion  as  the  number  of  men  who  are  afFedted  with  the  vene-
real difeafe,  among  others,  either  openly,  or  occultly,  is  increas'd.

But  if  this  difeafe,  as  it  was  imported  into  Europe,  fhould, "at  length,  at
any  tirhe,  as  Fracaftorius  (m)  hop'd,  entirely  be  driven  therefrom ;  and  phy-
ficians  fhould  not  be  wanting  at  that  time,  who  might  be  adorn'd  with  great,?
but  with  juft  praifes  •,  I  have  fcarcely  any  doubt,  but  the  reputation  of  the
Aponian  baths  ;  which  is  at  prefent  much  diminifh'd,  indeed,  for  other  rea-
fons,  but,  on  the  fcore  of  their  admirable  properties,  was  never  wholly  lofl ;
would  again  become  far  different  from  what  it  is  in  the  prefent  age,  and  what
it  will  probably  be  for  fome  confiderable  lengths  of  fucceeding  time :  unlefs
the  fingular  fkill  of  two  friends,  whom  you  know,  in  enquiring  into  the  na-
ture of  thefe  fountains,  and  their  diligence  in  obferving  and  publifhing  their
effefts,  fhould,  by  holding  up  the  fuccefsful  inflances  of  their  ufe  before  the-
eyes  of  all  mankind,  allure,  with  a  kind  of  new  invitation,  a  much  greater
number  of  patients  to  feek  health  for  themfelves  in  thefe  places.
.  19.  Now  fince  the. love  of  truth  has  impell'd  me  to  fhow  what  ought  to
be  reftor'd  to  the  ancient  teachers  of  this  college,  neither  will  I  conceal  this
which  relates  to  the  controverfy  fpoken  of  above  (»)  ;  1  mean,  that  they

(/)  De  Therm.  1.  3.  c.  2.  in  fin.  {m)  De  Morb.  Contag.  l.g.  c.  12.

CnJ  n.  15.

A  a  a  2  thought


364 Book  IV. Gf  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

thought  the  fame  in  regard  to  the  novelty  of  the  lues  veneres,  as  moft  other
learned  men  have  thought :  and  that  they  denied  its  being  known  to  Hip-
pocrates, Galen,  and  Avicenna,  with  fo  much  the  greater  authority,  as  they
were  more  converfant  in  their  writings  than  fome  of  their  fucceflbrs,  to  whom
it  has  feem'd  differently  ;  and,  amongft  thefe,  to  that  otherwife  very  learned
man  Carolus  Patinus.

For  this  author,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fcholaftic  year  1687,  in  order  to
open  the  exercifes  of  his  office  "  by  this  paradox ;"  I  make  ufe  of  his  own
words  (0) ;  made  and  publifh'd  an  oration  with  this  title,  "  That  the  lues
"  venerea  is  not  a  new  diforder ;"  in  which,  however,  the  celebrated  Aftruc
would  have  found  nothing  that  had  not  been  fufficiently  refuted  by  him,  or
might  not  be  fufficiently  refuted  in  the  fame  manner.

But  this  author  imagin'd  that  oration  never  to  have  esifted  (/),  fbr  this
reafon,  that  Papadopolus  had  made  no  mention  of  it  in  the  hiftory  of  our
college,  where,  fpeaking  pretty  much  at  large  of  Patin(g'),  he  has  enu-
merated, in  a  particular  manner,  his  works.

As  to  Papadopolus,  however,  who  was  a  very  learned  man,  and  deferv'd
very  well  of  this  college  ;  as  he  had  not  fufficient  time  for  writing,  propor-^
tionably  to  the  multiplicity  of  his  matter,  and  the  largenefs  of  his  work ;  it
is  not  furprifing  if  he,  undefignedly,  pafs'd  over  fome  things  both  in  the
lives  of  the  profeflbrs  and  of  the  pupils,  and  particularly  in  enumerating
their  lucubrations ;  of  which  he  has  told  us,  in  his  preface,  "  that  he  ha&
*'  added  the  beft  catalogue  he  could  procure,  under  each  of  their  names.'*

I,  then,  as  to  what  relates  to  the  teachers  of  the  feveral  arts  in  particular^
will  not  omit  to  fupply  the  defect  of  his  writings  in  fome  meafure,  as  oc-
cafion  fliall  offer  itfelf:  and  this  fo  much  the  more  eafily  in  regard  to  Pa-
tin,  becaufe  there  are,  among  our  books,  two  volumes  in  which  he  has  dif-
pos'd  his  own  opufcula  nearly  in  that  order  wherein  they  were  publilh'd ;
and  moft  of  them  correfted  and  increas'd,  by  his  own  hand,  in  the  mannec
he  intended  they  fhould  have  been  once  more  publifh'd.

"What  Papadopolus,  therefore,  has  omitted  in  the  firft  volume,  are  the  fol-
lowing works  :  "  That  a  phyfician  and  furgeon  may,  without  any  difgrace
"  to  his  art,  attend  to  the  cure  of  beafts :  an  oration. — On  the  phaenix  im-
"  prefs'd  upon  the  coin  of  the  emperor  Antoninus  Caracalla :  an  epiftle.—
*'  An  oration  on  the  city  of  Vienna  being  fet  at  liberty :"  which  two  are
written  in  the  name  of  his  daughters.---"  That  praftical  medicine  is  not
"  enough  efteem'd  :  an  oration. — That  a  phyfician  ought  to  be  noATMA-
*'  ©H2,  or  very  learned  :  an  oration. — A  commentary  upon  three  Greek  in-
"  fcriptions  lately  brought  from  Smyrna. — EPilTHMATA  IATPIKA,  or  me-
"  dical  queftions,  in  regard  to  the  phyfician.—  Philofophical  and  medical
"  theorems  upon  life  and  death.— That  the  circulation  of  the  blood  was
*'  known  to  the  ancients  :  an  oration.— The  flowers  of  theoretic  medicine.
"  --Public  exercitations  on  fevers-,"  that  is  to  fay,  not  an  oration,  as  Papa-
dopolus was  willing  to  prove,  but  a  fynopfis  of  the  lectures  that  he  was  to

^Ve.  2t)l«l'./T; fi ;

(e)  Pag.  penult.  (^)  S.  2.  fupra  ad  n.  17.  cit.  c.  35.  n.  159^

(^)  DeMorb.Yener.  1.  8.S.i7.adA,  1687.

'"2^-  And


Letter  XVIII. Article  t  f.  5%

And  out  of  the  other  volume  are  omitted  the  following  works  :  "  Polj-
*'  tical  thefes  on  liberty  and  flavery.-  -Medical  opinions  upon  fevers.— The
«  idea  of  the  human  head  :  an  oration.— An  oration  deliver'd  in  the  Dodo-
«  nasan  academy  at  Venice.---The  flowers  of  praftical  medicine.— -That  the
«'  lues  venerea  is  not  a  new  diforder:  an  oration.— Public  exercitations  upon
<'  particular  difeafes  of  the  thorax  and  abdomen.— A  commentary  upon  an
*'  ancient  monument  of  Marcellina,  lately  brought  from  Greece. --That  in
"  the  cure  of  fevers,  the  urine  ought  to  be  attended  to  :  an  oration. — A
"  commentary  upon  the  ancient  honorary  fepulchre  of  iVIarcus  Artorius,
"  phyfician  of  Auguftus  Csfar. — Public  exercitations  on- the  difeafes  of  the
"  head.— An  oration  upon  ^ecific  remedies. — Medical  and  chirurgical
"  flowers."

-  Why  Patinus  did  not  interpofe  betwixt  thefe  two  laft  writings,  as  the  order
of  publication  requir'd,  an  oration  which  I  have  by  me  in  a  feparate  ftate,,
intitled,  "  Vain  aftrology  altogether  unworthy  of  the  phyfician  ;"  and  which.
he  had  deliver'd  here,  committed  to  the  prefs,  and  afterwards  publifh'd ;  t
no  more  know,  than  why  the  two  volumes  of  opufcula,.  whereof  I  have-
fpoken,  were  left  fo  negledled  by  him,  that,  unlefs  they  had  come  into  my
hands,  little  papers  might  eafily  have  been  dropp'd  and  loft  j  for  fuch  pa-
pers he  had  inferted,  here  and  there,  in  great  number  j  without  being  con-
nefted  by  means  of  any  pafte  or  glue  ;  which,  befides  amending  fome  things-
in  thefe  opufcula,  exceedingly  well  illuftrate  and  much  increafc  others.

Thefe  papers,  however,  have  been  now  accurately  read  over  by  me,  and
collated  ;  and  each  faften'd  by  glue  to  its  proper  place  whereto  it  belong'd  ;
fo  that  thefe  writings  may  very  eafily  be  brought  out  again  in  a  fecond  edi-
tion, as  the  intention  of  their  very  learned  author  had  been,  either  by  rae^
if  I  fhould  at  any  time  have  fufRcient  leifure,  or  by  others.

And  thefe  papers  relate  to  the  commentaries  I  have  mention'd,  fome  upon;
the  fepulchre  of  M-Srcus  Artorius,  a  greater  number  upon  the  firft  and  fe-
cond of  the  three  infcriptions  from  Smyrna,  and  a  very  great  number  uport.
the  monument  of  Marcellina.  To  which  laft  is  added  a  manufcript  epiftle,,,
and  not  a  very  ftiort  one,  fent  by  that  famous  man  Gilbertus  Cuperus  ta
Patinus ;  which,  if  I  am  capable  of  judging,  is  worthy  of  them  both.

Nor  do  I  doubt  but  Patinus  intended  to  have  publilh'd  this  alfo,  as  he
had  laid  it  amongft  his  papers ;  if  an  aneurifm  of  the  great  artery,  by  whichs
!  fuppofe  him  to  have  been  kill'd,  rather  than  by  the  polypus  concreted
within  it,  as  is  generally  the  cafe  (r),  had  not  prevented  his  defign.

If  this  had  been  done,  that  very  learned  man  would  have  fhewn  how
much  more  capable  he  v/as  of  explaining  ancient  coins  and  monuments^
than  of  confirming  that  medical  paradox  o£  the  antiquity  of  the  lues  ve-
nerea, by  paflages  from  Avicenna  and  Galen ;  and  even,  with  divine  per-
miflion,  from  paflfages  of  Hippocrates  himfelf. FareweL

(r)  Vid.  PafisB  Epift.  ie  Cordis  polypo  in  dub.  revoc.  n.  5.


hE  T  te:


■3,66 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.


LETTER the FIFTY- NINTH

Treats  of  Difeafes  that  are  brought  on  by  Poifon.


I.  rr^HE  tenth  feftion  that  fucceeds  in  the  Sepulchretum  relates,  partly
J_  to  occult  and  chronical  difeafes,  and  partly  to  thofe  that  are  brought
on  by  means  of  poifon.  But  there  is  nauch  more  utility  in  fpeaking  of  the
latter  than  of  the  former,  on  this  occafion.  For  the  former  are  put  down,
each  by  its  obfervator,  either  with  no  figns  at  all,  or  with  fome  only :  if
with  no  figns,  you  can  fcarcely  reap  any  advantage  from  the  difTeftion  fub-
join'd  i  but  if  they  have  any  fymptom  adjoin'd  -,  as,  for  inftance,  a  fever,  a
vomiting,  a  difficult  refpiration,  or  any  thing  of  that  kind;  they  certainly
might  have  been  transferr'd,  with  much  more  advantage,  into  thofe  fedions
wherein  thefe  fymptoms  are  each  of  them  treated  with  particular  regard.

And  as  this  is  done  in  refpeft  to  fome  obfervations  referr'd  to  in  this
feftion,  fo  it  ought  to  have  been  done  in  refpedt  to  others  ;  as  it  might  with
very  great  propriety.  You  fee,  then,  why  in  this  part  1  do  not  follow  the
Sepulchretum,  and  even  why  I  cannot  follow  it,  as  I  have  thrown  the  obfer-
vations of  this  kind,  every  one  in  their  proper  places,  into  other  letters,

2.  But  in  the  other  parr,  which  relates  to  poifons,  I  fhall  readily  follow  it :
and  will  immediately  communicate  to  you  a  few  examples  that  have  been
obfeiv'd  by  me,  (for  from  Valfalva  I  have  none)  or  by  our  Mediavia.  This
firrt  is  Mediavia's.

3.  A  woman,  of  fixty  years  of  age,  having  juft  din'd,  ate  up  fome  little
rolls  of  almond-pafte,  which  were  laid  in  a  by- place  in  the  upper  part  of  the
houfe:  this  Ihe  did  unknown  to  her  matter,  who  had  laid  them  there

Scarcely  had  an  hour  pafs'd  but  fhe  began  to  be  feiz'd  with  a  kind  of  fen-
fation  in  the  ftomach,  as  if  (lie  were  troubled  with  flatus.  And  this  continuing
a  very  long  time,  and  after  that  growing  more  and  more  violent,  Ihe  both
vomited  up,  and  difcharg'd  by  ftool,  a  great  quantity  of  matter;  and  by
ihefe  means  (he  feem'd  to  be  eas'd.

But  foon  after,  a  more  violent  uneafinefs  returning,  and  not  without  fainting-
fits, {he  at  length  confefs'd  what  fhe  had  eaten  ;  but  this  confefTion  was  too
late.  For  thefe  rolls  of  pafte,  having  been  prepar'd  in  order  to  kill  mice,
had  arfenic  mix'd  with  them.

Within  twelve  hours,  therefore,  after  Ihe  had  eaten  them,  being  rather  de-
prefs'd  in  her  ftrength,  than  affeded  with  very  (harp  pains,  or  evident  con-

vulfions.


Lettei' LIX. Anicle  4.  367

vulfions,  this  miierable  old  woman  died ;  and  thereby  fuffer'd  for  the  chrldifh  ■
curiofity  of  her  appetite.

The  body  was  examin'd,  and  difleded,  on  the  following  day,  by  public
authority.  This  was  about  the  7th  of  May,  in  the  year  1727.  The  pofte-
rior  furface  of  the  body,  not  excepting  even  the  calves  of  the  legs  and  the
heels,  were  univerfally  black.  The  body  itfelf  was  not  rigid.  The  belly
was  not  tumid :  and  this  cavity  and  the  ftomach  being  open'd,  the  internal
furface  thereof  was  eroded  here  and  there,  efpecially  at  the  antrum  pylori ;
the  arfenic  itfelf  being  feen  to  adhere  to  the  eroded  parts  betwixt  the  little
pieces  of  membranes. Nor  was  the  duodenum  free  from  erofions.

In  the  thorax,  the  lungs  were  blackifh  :  in  the  heart  were  two  polypous
concretions  of  the  Ihape  and  length  of  a  finger;  whereas,  otherwife,  the
blood  was  found  to  be  fluid,  and  of  a  lively  red  colour,  in  all  the  veflels.

4.  As  in  other  diforders,  fo  alfo  in  difeafes  which  arife  from  poifon,  neither
the  fymptoms,  nor  the  effefts,  can  be  expefted  to  be  entirely  the  fame  in  all
perfons.  For  in  different  bodies  are  different  conftitutions,  both  of  the  fluid
and  folid  parts ;  efpecially  thofe  that  relate  to  the  ftomach :  and,  befides,  the
emptinefs  or  fulnefs  of  that  vifcus,  and  thefe  from  aliments  of  different
kinds,  may  be  the  caufe  why  poifons,  although  the  fame,  and  really  of  the
fame  weight,  (for  they  may  be  the  fame  in  name,  but  differently  prepar'd)
do  not,  neverthelefs,  difcover  themfelves  by  the  fame  figns  and  effedls.

Arfenic,  for  inftance,  by  which  word  we  mean  that  which  is  white,  and  is
frequently  join'd  with  the  adjunct  of  chryftalline,  is  itfelf,  as  thofe  very,
learned  men  Mead  (a)  and  Boerhaave  (l>)  affirm,  faftitious ;  and,  therefore,
may  be  differently  prepar'd  by  different  perfons ;  fo  that,  although  you  read
in  the  works  of  Mead,  that  it  is  wholly  foluble  in  water,  you  may  read  in
other  authors,  not  only  that  its  particles  were  obferv'd  in  the  ftomach  ;  as  in
the  woman  in  queftion  ;  but  were  alfo  known  to  be  arfenic  from  hence,  that
little  pieces  of  it  had-remain'd  in  warm  water,  like  whitelittle  ftones  :  as  you
have  it  in  the  hiftory  of  Wepfer,  which  is  the  firft  in  obfcrvation  the  thir-
teenth, among  the  additamenta  to  this  fediqn  of  the  Sepulchretum.

This  hiftory  fpeaks  of  a  little  boy  of  two  years  of  age,  who  had  been
emaciated  by  preceding  fevers ;  and  two  almoft  adult  girls,  who  were  in  very
good  health ;  the  former  of  whom  had  taken  but  two  fpoon-fuls,  and  the
two  latter  the  remainder,  of  a  pudding  in  which  arfenic  was  mix'd,  the  one
with  an  empty  ftomach,  the  other  two  with  ftomachs  full  of  meat :  the  firft:
did  not  vomit :  the  others  vomited  frequently,  and  in  a  large  quantity  after-
wards, being  afliifted  by  remedies.

Thefe  differences  were  attended  with  different  events.  The  girls  efcap'd.
But  the  little  boy,  in  whom  no  convulfions  were  obferv'd,  among  the  other
fymptoms,  had  his  ftrength  decreafe  more  and  more  till  he  died,  the  ftomach
being  internally  ulcerated ;  and  the  lungs  of  a  black  colour  degenerating
into  lividnefs.

In  the  fame  place  you  will  fee  other  examples  produc'd  of  children,  who,
having  vomited  immediately,  or  not  many  hours,  after  having  fwallow'd  ar-

^a)  Expof.  mechan.  Venenor.  Tent.  4.  {i)  Element.  Chem.^  Tom.  a*  P.  z.  ubi  de  Sulph.

fenic.


3<^S Book  IV.  Of  Cliirui'gical  and  Univerfal  Di'forders.

fenic,  and  being  affifted  by  remedies,  recover'd.  Among  the  fymptoms,  a
tremor  of  the  limbs  is  mention'd  in  one  (f).  But  a  boy  who  had  lick'd  up
arfcnical  paint,  or  red  arfenic  (d),  and  who  was  nine  years  of  age,  and  had
not  made  ufe  of  medicines  till  after  the  fourth  day,  is  faid  to  have  perifh'd
in  convulfions.

Nor  are  the  terrible  convulfions  which  preceded  the  death  of  a  girl  (f),
who  vomited  very  late  after  taking,  as  they  fufpeded,  a  corrofive  poilbn,
omitted.  A  boy,  of  four  years  of  age(/),  and  his  little  filler,  who  was
fomewhat  more  than  a  year  old,  both  of  whom  vomited  pretty  early,  elcap'd  ;
convulfions  being  cbferv'd  in  the  latter,  but  not  in  the  former.

But  in  thefe  alfo  the  poifon,  which  was  ii)  other  refpedls  corrofive,  was  to
^11  appearance  unknown  ;  as  alio  that  in  a  woman  (g),  in  regard  to  whom
thofe  convulfions  are  not  obl'erv'd  j  and  who,  if  you  attend  to  nothing  elfe
hat  that  fhe  threw  up  blood  by  the  mouth,  might  feem  to  have  died  of  fub-
iimate  mercury:  fince  not  only  Ardoynus(^)  has  fpoken  of  vomiting  of
blood  as  being  one  of  the  firft  fymptoms  of  this  poifon,  but  Wepfer  alfo,
in  the  fourteenth  obfervation  (z),  faw  both  bloody  vomitings  and  bloody
ftools  (which  even  Ardoynus  has  not  omitted)  in  a  dog,  that  he  has  exprefsly
faid  had  never  been  convuk'd,  nor  had  its  limbs  rigid  after  death  ;  but  had
its  inteftines  and  ftomach  inflam'd,  as  that  woman  had  in  part,  both  internally
and  externally,  and  the  blood  no-where  concreted,  either  in  the  heart  or  in
any  of  the  veffels.

And  this  1  have  hinted  at,  without  being  ignorant  how  much  the  celebrated
Mead  (k),  who  faw  globules  in  arfenic  like  to  thofe  in  quickfilver,  thinks
that  thefe  agree  with  iLblimate  mercury  in  their  manner  of  becoming  de-
ieterious.

But  let  us  return  to  thofe  things,  moreover,  that  are  added  in  regard  to
arfenic  itfelf,  in  the  thirteenth  obfervation  before-mention'd.  What  hap-
•pen'd  to  two  dogs  after  eating  arfenic  is  fcarcely  faid  (/),  except  that  they
died  :  yet  in  their  bodies  after  death,  how  far  the  ftomachs  of  both  of  them
were  inflam'd  ;  and  the  coats  of  that  vifcus  extenuated  in  one  of  them,  the
inteftines  eroded  and  perforated,  and  that  in  the  cavity  thereof  was  black
and  grumous  blood;  is  not  omitted.

Finally,  it  is  alfo  faid  («?),  that  mountebanks  and  jugglers  fwallow  down
arfenic  into  ftomachs  full  of  fat  and  oily  fubftances,  without  any  mifchief
enfuing,  as  they  foon  after  vomit  it  up  privately ;  but  that  they  perifh,  if
they  are  oblig'd,  contrary  to  their  cuftom,  to  defer  vomiting.  But  all  thefe
things  are  contain'd  in  the  additamenta  ;  where  this  alfo  is  faid  :  that  a
cat  {n)  which  had  been  made  very  ill  by  arfenic,  having  a  vomiting  brought
on  by  a  little  piece  of  tobacco  being  thruft  in  with  his  food,  recover'd
•thereby.

And  in  this  fedion  itfelf,  that  obfervation  is  particularly  to  be  attended

{c)  Hift.  2.  CdJ  Hift.  8.  (0  Hift.  z.  {i)  Tentam.  cit.

CeJ  Hift.  9.  (/J  Hitt.  10.  (/)  Hift.  12.

Cg)  Hift.  11.  -  (m)  Vid.  etiam  Schol.  ad  Obf.  3.

(^  De  Venen,  1,  2.  c.  5.  (n)  In  eod.  Scho).

to


'  Letter  LIX. Article  4.  3(^9

to  {0)  which  confirms  what  has  been  juft  now  afferted.  That  is  to  fay,  &
difh  came  on,  in  the  laft  courfe,  wherein  arfenic  had  been  mix'd  inftead  of
flour;  and  the  guefts,  who  had  as  yet  eaten  and  drunk  very  Httle,  were  car-
ried off  immediately  after  taking  the  poilbn  :  but  they  who  had  diftended
the  ftomach  with  food,  and  with  drink,  were  cur'd  by  means  of  vomiting ;
yet  with  this  circumftance,  that  in  their  bodies  after  death  (notwithftanding
they  did  not  die  till  many  years  afterwards)  there  appear'd  marks  of  erofions
that  had,  neverthelefs,  been  extenfive  and  deep.  And  if  you  read  over  what
follows  next  from  Parey(^),  you  will,  perhaps,  not  difapprove  what  1  con-
jeftur'd  a  little  before  of  that  woman.

There  are,  befides,  in  the  Sepulchretum,  other  obfervations  relative  to
poifon ;  although,  contrary  to  what  is  generally  done  elfewhere,  they  are
not  referr'd  to  in  this  feftion.

You  will  find  them  in  the  feventh  and  eighth  feflions  of  the  third  book  ;
in  the  former  feven,  or  rather  fix  •,  for  that  which  is  propos'd  in  the  feven-
teenth  obfervation,  in  the  fecond  place,  is  fo  evidently  the  fame  as  that  which
had  already  been  produc'd  in  the  third  obl'ervation,  in  regard  to  a  profef5>r
at  Padua,  that  it  is  aftonifliing  it  had  not  been  obferv'd  :  and  in  the  other
feftion,  five  or  fix  -,  the  firft  of  which,  that  is  the  fifth,  relates  particularly
to  arlenic  ;  .about  twelve  little  pieces  of  which  were  found  to  adhere  lo
clofely  to  the  coats  of  the  ftom.ach,  that  they  could  fcarcely  be  pull'd  away :
the  fame  coats  being  extenuated,  as  we  have  faid  they  were  in  the  dog ;  and
the  fundus  of  this  vifcus  being,  befides,  eroded  and  inflam'd  ;  and  the  car-
cafe  quite  livid  on  the  back  part.

But  befides  vomitings  and  ftools,  no  other  fymptoms  are  taken  notice  of.
And  the  other  fymptoms  which  we  have  enumerated  in  both  the  fedions,
relate  either  to  other  poifens,  or  to  fuch  as  were  unknown.  The  effeds  of
which,  when  confider'd  in  the  dead  body,  were  generally  an  inflammation
and  erofion  of  the  ftorKach  and  inteflines  ;  but  in  living  bodies  there  were
different  fymptoms  at  different  times  :  yet  none  was  more  frequent  than  vo-
miting ;  inftead  of  which,  if  there  was  at  any  time,  or  foon  after  fucceeded,
a  fruitlefs  effort  to  vomit,  the  patients  then  were  worfe,  and  died  fooner,  than
thofe  in  whom  the  other  fymptoms  feem'd  to  be  equal.

And  as  this  fymptom  of  vomiting  is  alio  common  to  thofe,  in.,  the  fame
manner,  who  have  taken  arfenic  ;  if  you  lliould  happen  to  enquire  what,  be-
fides this,  has  been  obferv'd  to  be  moft  frequent,  you  will  find  that  it  has
been  dejtdion  of  ftrength,  or  fuch  ciivumitances  as  denote  it;  I  mean,  a
coldnefs  of  the  extremities,  or  of  the  whole  body  ;  cold  fweats,  palenefs,
and  fomecimes  a  fyncope  itlelf. ■

This  dejedion  of  ftrength  ;  which  depends  upon  the  ftomach  being  af-
feded,  and  drawing  the  heart  into  confent,  by  means  of  the  nerves ;  a  very
uneafy  anxiety,  as  1  fuppofe,  rather  than  a  (harp  and  cutting  pain,  precedes
and  accompanies.  At  leaft,  in  thofe  perfons  whofe  fymptoms  v/e  have  de-
fcrib'd,  and  even  in  children,  or  in  dogs,  we  do  not  read  that  there  were
any  clamours  ;  but  we  read  of  an  anxiety  in  two  children,  which  children
fcarcely  know  how  to  exprefs,

(0)  §  5.  in  Obf.  4.  (f)  Ibid.  §  6.

Vol.  III.  Bbb  However,


3  7  G> Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

However,  in  one  the  fymptoms  of  tormina  and  (ingiiltus  are  remark'd  •,  in
one  a  tumour  of  the  abdomen  ;  in  fome  a  thirft ;  in  others  a  fwoUen  tongue,
or  apthas  in  the  mouth  -,  or  an  impeded  deglutition  :  or  a  fenfe  of  burning  and
heat.  And  in  whom  convulfions  were  manifeft,  or  not  manifeft,  has  been
pointed  out  above.

But  fome  of  thefe  fymptoms  have  now  and  then  happen'd,  and  fome
pretty  frequently,  from  other  torrofive  poifons  alfo.

And  indeed,  when  you  (hail  depart  from  the  Sepulchretum  ■■,  in  which
alone,  confider'd  with  a  view  to  the  effefts  of  arfenic  and  fublimate  mercury,
thofe  things  that  I  juft  now  faid  of  clamours,  and  pains,  and  what  I  hinted
at  above,  in  regard  to  bloody  excretions,  feem  reafonable  to  be  faid  j  I  do
not  doubt  but  you  will  immediately  think  otherwife,  and  not  without  good
reafon.

5.  That  you  therefore  may  read  over,  and  compare,  the  more  attentively,
the  hiftories  which  we  have  not  in  the  Sepulchretum-,  I  will  immediately
point  out  a  confiderable  number:  and  all  of  them  likewife  relating  to  mine-
ral poifons.  From  the  glafs  of  antimony  (which  had  been  heedlefsly  given
to  a  coachman)  among  other  fymptoms,  the  celebrated  Baeumlinus  {q)  ob-
ferv'd  bloody  (tools  •,  fpafmodic  motions ;  and  finally,  death  itfelf ;  the  (lo-
mach  being  internally  abraded,  and  ting'd  with  a  red  fpot,  near  the
pylorus.

Although  the  dog,  into  which  Jo.  Adr.  Sproegelius  {r)  had  forc'd  the  fame
glafs,  fulFer'd  nothing  but  (trong  convulfions,  while  he  attempted  to  vomit,
but,  by  reafon  of  his  mouth  being  tied  up  with  a  muzzle,  could  not;  yet
that  experienc'd  man  {s)  has  admonilh'd  us,  that  the  nature  of  brutes,  which
is  "  much  ftronger  than  ours,  and  for  the  moft  part  extremely  different
"  therefrom,"  may  overcome  thofe  poifons  which  our  nature  cannot.

And  indeed,  obfervations  are  extant  (/),  which  (how  what  paralyfes  and
convulfions,  join'd  with  howlings,  have  been  the  confequence  of  the  glafs  of
antimony  in  another  dog;  and  in  what  part  of  the  ftomach  an  evident  in-
flammation arofc ;  fo  that  if  he  had  not  been  open'd  while  he  was  yet  alive,
perhaps  more  violent  fymptoms  might  have  been  brought  on :  and  they
fpeak  alfo  of  a  woman,  who,  by  reafon  of  having  taken  in  a  quantity  of  this
glafs,  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  after  enormous  vomitings,  and  lay  like  a
dead  perfon,  rigid  and  convuls'd  ;  but  was  foon  after  feiz'd  with  a  very  vio-
lent pain  in  one  foot,  which  was  fucceeded  by  a  gangrene  and  fphacelus  ;
ib  that,  as  in  the  cafe  of  the  coachman,  this  medicine  did  not  bring  on  the
proximate  caufe  of  death  in  this  woman,  but  neverthelefs  gave  occafion  and
origin  thereto.

Another  experienc'd  rhan.  Jacobus  Fselix  (a),  having  given  emetic  tartar
to  a  dog,  and  open'd  him  while  he  was  yet  vomiting,  faw  a  very  great  in-
flammation at  the  pylorus  for  the  fpace  of  fome  inches.

is)  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  1739. Hebd.  16. {t)  in  Addltam.  ad  Seft. hanc  Sepulchr.

B-  J.  _  Obf.  12.  Hift.  z.  &  3.

(r)  Experim.  circa  varia  venena  &c.  Ex- (a)  Experim.  11.  inter  ea  quas  addidit  Dif-

P«""-  4'-  fert.  de  Mot.  perift.  inteftin.

t»)  Ibid.  §.  50.

2  It


Letter  LIX. Article  j.  371

It  does  not  efcape  me,  that  there  are  very  celebrated  men  {x),  who  con-
tend that  true  arfenical  particles  have  never  yet  been  demonftrated  in  anti-
mony :  nor  have  I,  for  that  reafon,  quoted  thefe  examples  ;  and  ftill  lefs  will
I  produce,  from  the  celebrated  Henckel  (jy),  that  of  butter  of  antimony
being  given  through  miftake,  and  a  conftriftion  of  the  fauces  and  llomach
immediately  coming  on ;  together  with  a  very  great  heat;  and  after  that,
for  months  and  years,  fuch  diforders  of  the  ftomach,  as  to  make  it  evident,
that  unlefs  milk  had  been  immediately  and  largely  given  (and  this  was  done
alfo  in  the  cafe  of  the  coachman,  but  too  late,  and  therefore  to  no  purpofe),
•which  ;  not  fo  much  by  affifting  the  vomiting,  as  by  entangling  and  con-
fining the  very  fharp  and  corrofive  poifon  amidft  hard  curds,  and  cheefe-
like  coagula,  that  were  thrown  up  in  great  number;  brought  relief  to  the
patient,  he  muft  have  perifh'd  in  a  moft  miferable  manner.

Yet  there  would  not  have  been  fo  erofive  a  quality  in  that  poifon,  if  it  had
not  been  prepar'd  with  fublimate  mercury.  But  that  you  may  compare  the
effedts  of  this  mercury  with  the  effects  of  that  butter,  read  the  cure  of  Kra-
merus  (z),  which  was  happily  brought  about,  not  by  milk  only,  but  by  the
mixture  of  oil  of  tartar  per  deliquium,  as  it  is  call'd,  and  other  things ;  in
order  to  reftify  and  correft  the  mercury.

You  will  find  that  there  were  fuch  erofions  of  the  mouth,  the  oefophagus,
and  ftomach,  before  the  remedies  were  adminifter'd,  as  caus'd  great  quanti-
ties  of  blood  to  be  difcharg'd,  both  by  vomiting  and  ftool ;  and  that  very
frequently  ;  together  with  writhings,  tormina,  deliquia,  convulfions,  and
other  fymptoms  of  that  kind.

And  Baccius  {a)  obferv'd,  from  the  fame  fublimate  mercury ;  but  to  all
appearance  in  lefs  quantity,  and  certainly  taken  with  other  things  ;  fevere
tormina  and  violent  vomi^tings ;  by  means  of  which,  at  length,  a  purulent
and  "  burnt"  ichor  was  difcharg'd  after  three  days,  and  therewith  alfo  life
itfelf  What  appearance  was  found  upon  diffedion,  if  any  difleftion  was
made,  he  does  not  fay.

Sproegelius  {b\  however,  having  given  fublimate  mercury  to  a  cat  and  a
rabbet,  relates  that  the  former  died  within  the  firft  five  minutes,  and  the
latter  as  foon  as  ever  the  poifon  was  taken  in  ;  and  that  without  any  preceding
fymptoms,  except  very  flight  convulfions  in  the  former,  and  in  the  latter,  a
vomiting  :  and  he  adds,  that  in  the  cat,  the  internal  coat  of  the  ftomach
was  every  where  inflam'd,  moft  in  the  fundus,  but  no  where  in  the  latter ;
nor  indeed  could  it  be  by  reafon  of  the  cole- worts  which  had  been  eaten  juft
before ;  but  that  death  had  come  on  fo  fpeedily,  becaufe  the  poifon  being
given  with  water,  and  diffolv'd  therein,  had  immediately  cxercis'd  its  force
upon  the  nerves.

But  when  he  had  given  it  to  a  dog  in  like  manner  U),  whofe  ftomach  was
empty,  he  found  the  villous  coat  thereof,  in  this  animal,  every  where  fiU'd
with  the  fpiculse  of  the  poifon  ;  and  for  that  reafon  partly  red,  and  partly

{x)  Commerc.  Lift.  A.  cit.  Hebd.  24.  n.  i. {a)  De  Venenis  &c.  ubi  an  venenum  nu«

r>;  Aa.  N.  C.  Tom.  5.0br.  95.  triat.  &c.  n.  6.
(z)  Commerc. Lit. A. 1735.  Hebd. 30. {b)  Exper.  cit.  Exp.  26.  &  zg.
n.  3.  {c)  Exp,  2&.

Ebb  2  liv'd:


37  2, Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

livid :  as  he  alfo  faw  the  whole  mouth,  and  even  the  ftomach,  but  particu-
larly the  upper  orifice  of  it,  very  much  inflam'd,  black,  and  gangrenous-,
notwithftanding  he  differed  the  animal  when  it  was  yet  living,  and  after  he
had  obferv'd  it  to  vomit  with  violent  (trainings  for  an  hour  or  more;  the
flrainino-s  being  join'd  with  inquietude  and  howlings.

In  none  of  thefe  three  animals,  except  the  firft,  has  he  made  mention  of
black  and  coagulated  blood  in  the  heart,  I  fee  one  experiment  only  of  Ja-
cobus Fslix  (d)  of  the  fame  kind  of  poifon  being  given,  though  with  an
.equal  weight  of  arfenic  at  the  fame  time  :  this  experiment  was  on  a  dog,
which  he  open'd  immediately  after  having  twice  vomited,  inftantly  from
taking  the  poifon  into  the  ftomach  :  yet  he  found  a  violent  inflammation  of
the  ftomach.

And  this  he  found  in  the  ftomach  of  another  dog  alfo  {e) ;  efpecialjy  to-
wards the  pylorus,  and  to  a  very  violent  degree  in  the  neighbouring  in-
teftines  ;  but  the  (lighter  in  proportion  as  it  came  nearer  to  the  large  inteftines.
It  is  true,  he  cut  open  this  dog  alive  ;  but  not  till  after  he  had  vomited  nine
times :  whereas  he  had  given  nothing  poifonous  but  arfenic.  And  as  the
queftion  is  here,  principally,  of  this  poiibn,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the
hiftory  I  have  propos'd  (/)  -,  I  will  not  omit  the  experiments  made  by  Sproe-
o-elius  (_g-),  either  with  this  poifon,  or  others  of  the  fame  kind.

He  forc'd  into  the  ftomach  of  a  cat,  and  a  dog,  a  quantity  of  "  white
*'  crude  "  arfenic.  Strainings  to  vomit  being  obferv'd,  together  with  marks  of
anxiety,  and  convulfions,  or  concufTions  -,  both  the  animals  were  open'd  be-
fore they  died  :  and  in  the  ftomach,  which,  both  about  the  pylorus,  and  in
every  other  part,  was  inflam'd,  he  found  coagula  of  blood  that  had  been  ex-
travaiated  betwixt  the  rugse,  or  among  the  villi,  and  concreted  there :  and
in  the  dog,  this  kind  of  blood  furrounded  the  arfenic.

Cobalt,  which  is  the  ore  of  arlenic,  having  been  thrown  up  in  vomiting,
by  one  or  two  dogs,  without  any  injury  ;  he  tied  up  the  mouth  of  2t.no-
t\\ex  {h),  that  the  animal  might  not  vomit:  and  the  moft  violent  efforts  to
vomit  came  on  ;  together  with  anxiety,  convulfions,  weaknefs,  and,  within
a  very  few  hours,  death.

In  this  doo-  the  ftomach  was,  in  fome  places,  a  little  livid,  and  every
where  greatly  inflam'd,  as  the  inteftines  were  alfo  ;  but  proportionably  lefs,
as  they  were  more  diftant  from  the  ftomach.  Nor  are  obfervations  wanting
of  the  fatal  efFeds  of  cobalt,  when  taken  into  the  ftomach,  in  human  bodies;
fo  that  one,  of  the  celebrated  Kundmannus  (z),  contains  the  death  of  three
at  leaft,  which  follow'd  from  thence  within  a  few  hours  ;  all  of  them  having
been  feiz'd  immediately  with  the  moft  violent  tormina,  enormous  vomitings,
and  cold  fweats :  the  back  part  of  the  bodies  after  death  being  livid,  the
ftomach  very  much  inflam'd,  and  a  bloody  humour  flowing  from  the  eroded
velTels  of  that  vilcus.

The  fame  obfervation  alfo  fpeaks  of  the  death  of  a  woman,  after  tormina
and  vomitings  of  that  kind  ;  death  coming  on  within  a  itv;  hours  after  fwal-


{d)  addit.  adDiffert.  cit.  Exp.  lo.  {£)  Exper.  cit.  Exp.  30.  &  31.

(e)  Exp.  o.  {h)  Exp.  35.

(f)  n,  3.  (0  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom.  5.  Obf.  loz.


lowing


l,etter  LIX. Article  j.  3.73.

lowing  red  arfenic.  And  as  to  yellow  arfenic,  or  aur-ipigmentum,  as  it  is
call'd  ;  what  fenfe  of  heat  and  erofion,  and  how  many  .repeated  vomitings
and  ftools  have  been  excited  thereby  ;  and  in  how  great  quantities ;  Gerbe-
zius  {k)  will  inform  you :  and  from  him  you  will  alfo  learn,  that  it  almoft
kill'd  a  whole  family,  fome  of  whom,  difcharg'd  blood  from  the  mouth  and
from  the  inteftines  -,  and  that  it  kill'd  a  girl  entirely  :  fo  that  what  you  will
read  in  Heydius  (/),  of  chryftals  being  taken  out  of  auripigmentum,  and
given  to  a  hen,  whereby  fhe  was  kill'd  ;  and  this  by  means  of  a  flux  of  the
inteftines  being  brought  on  ;  is  lefs  to  be  wonder'd  at.

And  although  litharge  has  no  relation  to  arfenic,  but  to  lead ;  yet  it  is
worth  your  while  to  read  the  experiment  made,  by  Brunnerus,  upon  a  dog,
by  giving  him  this  poifon  dilTolv'd  and  boil'd  in  vinegar ;  and  his  account
of  the  diffeftion  :  and  the  obfervations  alfo  of  Jo.  Jac.  Franc.  Vicarius  (;;;),
made  upon  perfons  who  had  drunk  of  wine,  into  the  cafks  whereof,  litharge,
boil'd  with  bole,  had  been  thrown,  in  order  to  correal  its  acidity,  deferve
your  notice  and  attention.

Nor  are  others  lefs  worthy  of  attention  •,  as,  for  inftance,  one  of  the  cele-
brated Jo.  Mat.  iVIuUerus  (?z),  and  another  of  the  celebrated  Juft.  David
Hammerus  {o).  For  from  the  tormina,  vomitings,  ftools,  anxieties,  deli-
quia,  and  thirft,  which  we  read  of  in  thefirft;  and  from  the  tliirll,  heat,
and  bloody  ftools,  that  are  read  of  in  the  fecond  •,  and  alio  from  the  fpeedy
death  in  both  cafes  ;  and  in  lil<e  manner,  from  the  fpots  of  the  whole  body,,
the  red  marlcs  of  the  whole  alimentary  canal,  and  the  fubtile  perforation  of
the  intertinal  coats,  in  feveral  places,  which  we  read  of  in  the  firft;  and
from  the  black  colour  of  the  body  pofteriorly,  the  great  external  inflamma-
tion of  the  fl:omach  and  all  the  inteftines,  and  the  inter-nal  erofion  of  thofe
parts,  that  are  propos'd  in  the  fecond  ;  it  is  very  certain,  that  a  corroiive
poifon  had  occafion'd  thefe  appearances  in  both  cafes:  although  what  this
was, by  no  means-appears  for  a  certainty.

But  it  is  certain,  that,  in  the  hiftories  I  (hall  point  out- briefly,  both  the
fymptoms,  and  the  difeas'd  appearances  of  the  vifctra,  were  the  confequences
of  arfenic  having  been  taken  in.  Preuffius  {p)  mentions  a  conftriftion  of
the  fauces  and  chefl;  -,  a  thirfl:,  heats,  gnawings,  tormina,  very  great  vomit-
ings, and  frequent  inteftinal  difcharges.  Mullerus  {q),  whom  I  have  al-
ready commended  ;  befides  thefe  fymptoms,  and  pains  of  the  belly  ;  fpeaks
alio  of  the  fwelling  of  this  cavity  immediately,  and  anxieties^  And  IMaurice
Hoffrnann  (r)  likewife  takes  notice  of  a  fpeedy  fwelling  of  the  belly,  but  a
much  more  confiderable  one;  a  lividnefs  of  the  face  and  eyes;  and  contor-
tions of  the  neck.

The  celebrated  Heimrechius  {s)  mentions  continual  vomiting,  for  four^
and-twenty  hours  fucceflively,  together  with  horrible  clamours,  a  tremor  of.

(^)Eph.N.  C.Dec.  3.A.  5.&6.  Obf.  137.  {p)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  3.  Obf.  15.

(/) Obf.  Med.  49.  \q)  Obf.  pauIo  ante  cit.  &  Schol.

(m)  Dec.  modo  cit.  A.  4.  Obf.  100.  (r)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent. 9.  & 10. Append.

(«)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  5.  Obf.  51.  in  Schol.  n.  I.  Obf.  38.

(0)  CommerCi  Litter.  A.  1738.  Hebd,  10.  (/)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tcm.  z.  Obf.  10.  circa  me-

B'  2Lf ^  dium,

tlic;


3  74 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Difoiders.

the  limbs,  and  a  palfy  of  the  feet.  The  celebrated  Jo.  Phil.  Wolffius  (/)
fpeaks  of  very  fevere  pains  of  the  ftomach  and  belly  ;  join'd  with  a  cholera
morbus.  Hammerus,  whom  I  have  quoted  shove  (u),  and  the  moft  ex-
cellent Quelmalzius  («■)  alfo,  mention  very  fevere  fymptoms :  the  former
violent  vomitings,  great  weaknefs,  and  contraftions  of  the  limbs ;  and  the
latter,  moreover,  anxieties,  cardialgias,  a  fwelling  of  the  eyes  and  the  whole
head,  very  fevere,  cutting,  and  eroding  pains  of  the  inteftines,  heats,  and
other  fimilar  effeds.

But  as  the  arfenic  in  thefe  cafes,  in  general,  though  not  in  all,  was  in
great  meafure  thrown  up  by  thefe  vomitings ;  and  as  whatever  remain'd
thereof,  and  the  beginning  diforders  arifing  therefrom,  were  invelop'd  and
reftrain'd  by  mild  oily  medicines,  and  particularly  by  milk  ;  I  fhall  point  out
other  obfervations  made,  both  before  death  and  after,  upon  thofe  who  could
not  be  fav'd.

Etmuller  the  fon  (y)  relates  of  a  girl,  that  having  taken  arfenic,  and
thrown  up  a  great  quantity  of  vifcid  fluids  in  the  beginning  of  the  night,  fhe
was  found  d«ad  in  the  morning  :  and  yet  the  carcafe,  befides  a  kind  of  livid
and  blueifh  traft  externally,  did  not,  when  diffedted  foon  after,  fhew  any
appearance  in  the  vifcera,  that  you  could  impute  to  the  poifon :  there  was
no  where  any  thing  putrid,  or  foetid  in  the  inteftines ;  no  inflammation  or
erofion  in  thefe  vifcera,  or  in  the  ftomach  :  although  the  ftomach,  among  other
things,  contain'd  a  white  powder,  which,  when  thrown  upon  burning  coals,
afforded  an  arfenical  fume  •,  and  a  powder  fimilar  thereto,  which  had  been
found  in  the  houfe,  being  forc'd  into  the  ftomach  of  a  little  dog  and  a  cat,
kill'd  the  former  in  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  the  latter  in  three  hours,  after
having  excited  very  great  vomitings:  the  ftomach  of  the  cat  being  inflam'd
in  a  fmall  part,  and  that  of  the  dog  in  a  large  part  •,  as  was  alfo  the  neigh-
bouring inteftinum  duodenum,  near  to  which  there  was  an  enormous
erofion.

But  from  thefe  efFefts  the  ftomach  of  the  girl  feems  to  have  been  defended,
by  the  oreat  quantity  of  vifcid  matter  and  food,  which  fhe  had  before  taken  ;
yet  not  fo  from  the  irritation  of  the  internal  coat,  and  of  the  nerves  that  go
thereto.

And  examples  are  produc'd  of  arfenic  being  applied  even  externally,  and
exerting  its  efficacy  ;  either  where  there  are  ulcers  of  the  fkin  (in  regard  to
which  affair,  as  it  does  not  greatly  relate  to  the  prefent  queftion,  we  refer
you  to  thofe  things  that  I  have  written  in  a  former  letter  (z)  )  or  where  it  is
found ;  to  the  examples  of  which  kind,  that,  in  particular,  may  be  added,
on  which  the  obfervation  of  Heimrechius,  juft  now  quoted,  turns  ;  whether
you  confider  the  celerity  wherewith  it  was  injurious,  or  the  violence  and  ob-
ftinacy  of  the  injury,  when  arfenic  was  fprinkled  on  the  hair,  infle_ad  of  what
is  call'd  Cyprus  powder:  not  to  fay  when  it  was  endeavour'd  to  diftinguifli
it  by  fmclling.

(/)  Eorund.  Tom.  5.  Obf.  29.  5n  fin.  .  CyJ  Eph.  N. C.  Cent.  3.  &  4.  Obf.  iz6.

(;*)  Commerc.  Litt.  A.  cit.  Hebd.  27.  n.  2.  cum  Schol.

{x)  Commerc.  ejufd.  A.  1737.  Hebd.  28.  (z)  Epift.  5;.  n.  iz.
n.  2.

Yet


Letter  LIX. Articled.  37^

Yet  becaufe,  in  the  flomach  of  the  girl  in  queflion,  neither  puftules,
nor  tumour,  nor  rednefs,  were  feen  ;  for  that  reafon,  I  fuppofe,  examples  are
not  omitted  of  injuries  of  another  kind,  and  thefe  attended  with  the  oreateft
danger :  which,  though  they  generally  arife  from  taking  arfenic,  are  alfo
frequent!y^brought  on  by  the  vapours  thereof.

But  let  the  cafe  be  however  it  will  in  this  girl ;  there  will  be  no  occafion
to  enquire  very  ftriflly,  how  three  or  four  others,  whofe  hiftories  1  will  here
only  touch  upon,  being  about  to  add  fome  below  (a),  were  kill'd  by  arfenic.
For  that  dilTedled  by  Tyfon  {b)  had  a  foramen  in  the  ftomach,  which  was
neither  very  fmall,  nor  regular.  And  the  fundus  of  this  vifcus  was,  in  an
old  woman,  examin'd  by  Maurice  Hoffman  (cj,  found  to  be  ulcerated,  as
it  were,  fphacelated,  and  black.

So  alfo,  in  another  woman  defcrib'd  by  Wolffius  (i),  already  quoted,  it
was  found  to  be  quite  eroded  ;  and  not  without  a  very  violent  inflammation
of  the  pylorus,  which  inclin'd  to  a  fphacelus.  And  in  a  man  whom  the
celebrated  Henckel  {e)  open'd,  were  fpots  of  a  confiderable  fize,  either  of
a  yellow  colour  degenerating  into  brown,  or  reddilh,  extending  themfelves
towards  the  pylorus ;  and,  moreover,  two  angular  foramina  of  the  villous
coat :  one  towards  the  pylorus,  and  the  other  near  the  cefophagus.

This  man  had  been  carried  off,  in  a  fhort  Ipace  of  time,  by  very  violent
heart-burnings,  heats,  great  pains,  faintings,  and  vomitings.  And  that  wo-
man was  feiz'd  with  great  anxieties  of  the  prsecordia,  and  with  vehement,
and,  at  the  fame  time,  continual  vomitings  and  ftools  ;  and,  finally,  with
convulfive  motions ;  whereby  her  limbs  were  miferably  diftorted  :  fo  that
fhe  died  within  ten  hours,  or  lels,  amidft  the  moft  violent  tortures.  And
that  you  may  not  have  any  room  to  doubt  from  whence- all  thefe  fymptoms
had  their  origin  ;  in  the  flomach  of  both  of  them  was  found  arfenic.

6.  Thus  far  1  have  taken  notice  of  the  fymptoms  which  are  the  confe-
quences  of  taking  arfenic,  in  particular  ;  as  I  could  gather  them  from  hiftories
that  are  extant,  cither  in  the  Sepulchretum,  or  in  other  authors,  whofe  ob-
fervations  might  be  added  thereto :  and  though  this  reviewal  has,  probably,
been  more  prolix  than  you  would  wifh,  yet  it,  perhaps,  has  not  been  alto-
gether ufelefs.

Now  I  ftiall  tell  you  what  I  have  feen  myfelf  at  two  different  times  ;  firft
in  one  perfon,  and  in  the  fecond  place  in  three :  all  of  whom  I  fuppos'd  to
be  affefted  with  this  poifon,  when  I  well  weigh'd  and  confider'd  all  the  cir-
cumftances  that  I  could  find  out  by  enquiry  afterwards.

The  firft  was  a  man  of  a  robuft  and  large  body,  and  of  a  pretty  full  habit,
whom,  having  been  feiz'd  with  a  fever,  I  had  now  almoft  cur'd  ;  the  fever
being  fo  much  remitted,  that  he  fometimes  rofe  from  his  bed.  This  man  j
within  lefs  than  half  an  hour  after  his  fupper,  wherein  he  had  taken  nothing
but  fome  bits  of  bread  boil'd  in  broth ;  was  feiz'd  with  a  very  troublefome
vomiting :  and  the  more  fo  becaufe  it  very  frequently  return'd.

At  an  unfeafonable  hour  of  the  night,  one  of  his  domeftics  came  to  me,

{a)  N.  9.  &  21.  {d)  Cit.  Obf.  29.

{b)  Aft.  Lipf.  Supplem.  Tom.  3.  S.  4,  {e)  Aft.  N.  C.  Tom,  2.  Obf.  155.

\c)  In  cit.  Append.  Obf.  35.

telling


-^"/■S Book.iy.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

telling  me  the  cafe,  and  begging  to  know  what  was  neceflary  to  be  done;
Suppofing  the  uneafinefs  to  be  increas'd  from  thence,  that  the  patient  was
oblig'd  to  vomit  with  an  empty  ftomach,  I  order'd  broth  to  be  given  him  j
and  if  the  vomiting,  neverthelefs,  continu'd  to  be  troublefome,  defir'd  that
a  glyfter  fhould  be  given  to  take  it  off.

All  this  being  of  no  effed,  he  return'd  ;  and  I  order'd  other  things  -,  a-mong
which  was,  at  length,  one  grain  of  purified  opium  •,  faying,  that  if  this  had
no  effe6t,  I  myfelf  would  come.  The  opium  alfo  being  thrown  up  in  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  I  arofe,  and  went  to  the  patient  together  with  the
fervant.

As  I  was  going  along ;  being  furpriz'd  that  fo  violent  a  vomiting  fhould
come  on  fuddenly,  and  continue  fo  long  without  a  manifcft  caufe  ;  I  aflc'd
the  fervant  whether  the  patient  had  been  guilty  of  any  irregularity,  and  whe-
ther he  had  taken  more  or  lefs  of  any  thing  at  his  fupper  than  had  been  al-
ready faid.  The  fervant  faying  that  nothing  had  been  taken  befides  that
bread  boil'd  in  broth  ;  '■  Nay,  fays  he,  and  that  powder  which  you  order'd  was
fprinkled  upon  it  by  N."

I,  however,  who  had  order'd  no  powder  to  be  fprinkled  upon  it,  and  was
not  ignorant  what  might  be  the  intention  of  this  perfon  who  had  fprinkled
the  powder,  thought  to  myfelf,  without  taking  any  notice  to  the  fervant,  what
I  muft  immediately  do  ;  how  far  1  mufl;  conceal  what  I  had  learn'd  ;  and  what
I  was  to  beware  of  hereafter,  and  in  what  manner.

And  now  I  had  come  to  the  patient,  who  complain'd,  miferably.  not  fo
much  of ■  a  vomiting,  as  of  an  inexplicable  kind  of  writhing  pain  at  the  fcro-
biculus  cordis,"  as  it  is  call'd  ;  and  implor'd  affiftance  as  foon  as  poffible.
There  was  no  tenfion  in  that  part,  or  in  the  remaining  region  of  the  fto-
mach ;  nor  any  pain.  But  a  fingultus  troubled  him  very  frequently  ;  being
attended  with  eruftations,  and  often  with  a  kind  of  difficulty  of  breathing.
His  pulfe  was  very  frequent-, but  rather  weak  and  fmall.

'Be  of  good  courage,  faid  I;  you  fee  hovi?  much  deprav'd  and  vitiated  hu-
mour you  have  thrown  up  (and  a  great  quantity,  indeed,  there  was  ;  the  vifcid
phlegm,  wherewith  he  abounded,  fvvimming  at  top;  and  at  the  bottom  was
the  bread  which  he  had  taken  :  nor  had  he  thrown  this  up  at  firft,  but  fome
hours  after)  ;  you  muft  now  be  recruited  with  a  very  mild  and  good  fluid  :
and  I  immediately  gave  him  a  large  glafs  of  cow's  milk,  which  I  got  as  foon
as  poffible.

No  fooner  had  hedrunkit,  but  he  cried  out  that  I  had  given  him  hew
life.  And,  indeed,  all  his  fymptoms  became  better  :  fo  that  his  pulfe  re-
turn'd,  within  two  hours,  to  its  natural  magnitude  and  ftrength ;  the  pain
grew  more  mild;  and -the  vomiting  return'd  no  more;  not  even  on  pro-
voking it  by  means  of  art.

But  by  giving  the  milk  in  repeated  dofes,  and  in  greater  quantity  than
before  ;  fo  that  it  might  be  thrown  up  by  the  mouth,  if  the  ftomach  was  fo
inclin'd  ;  or  that  it  might  fheath  over,  and  wafh  the  inteftines  ;  I  obtain'd  this
fecond  point,  by  loofening  the  belly  :  the  pulfe  being,  at  the  fame  time,
become  lefs  frequent ;  and  the  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  fingultus,  (both
of  which  fymptoms  were  now  obferv'd  lefs  frequently)  being  remov'd  to
fuch  a  degree,  as  to  be  obferv'd  but  once  or  twice  on  the  following  days ;

puddings,


Letter  LIX. Article  7 .  377

puddings,  alfo,  prepar'd  from  barley,  or  rice,  together  with  milk,  were
given.

And  as  much  whey  as  he  chofe  was  given  him  to  drink ;  for  as  the  in-
teftinal  difcharges  came  on,  the  thirft  and  heat  grew  greater,  both  which  were
reliev'd  by  drinking  a  quantity  of  whey.  Whey  alfo,  or  milk,  injefted  by
way  of  glyfter,  footh'd  the  fenle  of  heat  wherewith  the  reftum  and  anus  be-
gan to  be  troubled.

Not  to  make  the  hiftory  too  long  ;  within  two  or  three  days,  all  the  fymp-
toms  that  had  been  the  confequences  of  this  poifonous  powder,  were  driven
away:  nor  did  the  man,  as  long  as  he  liv'd;  and  he  liv'd  many  years  after-
wards •,  find  any  remaining  marks  of  injury  in  the  ftomach  or  inteftines.

Thus  the  vifcid  humours  wherewith  this  man,  as  I  have  faid,  abounded ;  and
the  fpeedy  and  frequently-repeated  vomitings  ;  and,  finally,  the  milk  and
ferum,  by  the  quantity  of  which,  whatever  of  poifon,  or  its  efi^efts,  remain'd
in  the  ftomach  or  inteftines,  was  entangled,  diluted,  wajh'd  off,  and  carried
out  by  the  inteftines  j  fav'd  him  from  the  threaten'd  and  imminent  de-
ilruftion.

I  might  now  openly  declare  by  what  means  I  took  care  that  this  powder,
which  I  afterwards  underftood  to  be  white,  fhould  not  be  again  given  to
the  patient ;  for  it  is  long  fince  that  the  perfons  have  been  dead  -,  and  at  the
fame  time  (hew  in  how  much  danger  a  phyfician  may  frequently  be,  unlefs
he  diflembles  his  knowledge  of  fome  things  :  and  in  how  much  danger  the
patient  may  be,  whether  he  hears  certain  things  from  the  phyfician  or  not  i
and  yet  in  what  manner  I  prevented  new  fnares  being  laid  for  the  patient's
life  :  and,  at  the  fame  time,  efcap'd  the  revenge  of  a  wicked  man,  who  would
have  been  greatly  irritated,  if  he  had  perceiv'd  that  his  defigns  were  obviated
by  my  endeavours.

But  it  is  better  to  pafs  over  to  thofe  things  which  I  have  feen  in  three  other
perfons,  in  whom  the-^ame  conjedure,  but  not  the  fame-diffimulation,  was
neceflary.

7,  In  the  month  of  May  of  the  following  year,  which  was  1711,  that  ex-
cellent prieft  Francefco  Balducci  was  returning  home  from  a  facred  peregri-
nation, when  he  ftopp'd  a  little  while  at  Cefena,  juft  that  he,  and  the  three
others  with  him  ;  who  were,  as  well  as  himfelf,  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  in
very  good  health  ;  might  dine  frugally  and  without  delay.

Thefe  perfons  were  his  own  brother's  wife,  another  woman,  and  a  man.
Soon  after  dinner  they  went  out  from  the  inn,  and  continu'd  their  journey.
But  they  had  not  gone  far  before  the  prieft  was  feiz'd  with  fo  great  a  pain
in  his  belly,  that  he  was  under  a  necefllty  of  being  taken  from  his  horfe.

When  he  was  taken  off,  he  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity  of  matter,  both  by
vomiting  and  by  ftool ;  and  yet  this  pain,  join'd  with  an  inexplicable  angorj
or  writhing  pain  and  anxiety,  increas'd  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  he  feem'd  to
be  giving  up  the  ghoft.  Being  carried  back  to  Cefena,  he  was  fuppos'd  by
the  phyfician,  to  be  affedted  only  with  a  colic  pain  ;  becaufe  the  feat  of  the
.diforder  was  in  the  right  epicolic  region.  Through  the  whole  of  that  day,
therefore,  and  a  great  part  of  the  night,  he  applied  as  many  glyfters,  fo-
mentations, potions,  and  bolufles,  both  of  an  anodyne  and  purging  nature,  as

Vol.  III.  C  c  c  any


378 Book, IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  tJniverfal  Diforders.

any  other  phyfician  would  have  prefcrib'd  within  many  days ;  but  all  were
to  no  purpofe.

And  although  this  phyfician  faw  one  of  the  women,  in  the  mean  while,
feiz'd  with  vomitings  and  purgings  ;  and,  moreover,  with  fwoonings ;  and
heard  the  man  complaining  of  a  heat  and  weight  in  his  ftomach  ;  ftill  he  did
not  fufpedl  any  thing  of  poifon  ;  I  fnppofe,  becaufe  the  other  woman,  who
had  din'd  at  the  table  with  them,  had  not  found  the  leaft  bad  fymptom ;
and  the  mafter  of  the  inn,  alfo,  very  firmly  aflerted  that  there  could  be  no-
thing hurtful  in  that  dinner  ;  and  becaufe  the  man,  who  had  of  his  own  ac-
cord taken  theriaca,  found  the  heat  of  his  ftomach  greatly  increas'd  there-
from.

He  himfelf  prefcrib'd  an  anodyne  emulfion  for  the  woman  who  was
diforder'd.  But  both  this  woman  and  the  prieft  were  reliev'd  by  the  difeafe
itfelf ;  by  the  force  whereof  a  great  quantity  of  matter  continu'd  to  be  dif-
charg'd  from  the  ftomach  and  inteftines.  And  thefe  difcharges  being  drmi-
nifti'd  about  the  morning,  they  all  went  together  in  a  carriage  to  Forli,  im-
mediately fenc  for  me,  and  related  every  thing  that  had  happen'd.

Upon  hearing  the  relation,  I  inftantly  enquir'd  whether  there  was  any  dilh
in  the  dinner  whereof  the  woman,  who  had  not  been  affedled,  had  eaten  no-
thing: and  when  I  heard  that  there  was,  (to  wit,  a  pudding  made  of  rice,
which  was  brought  firft  of  all  in  a  large  difti)  I  faid  that  there  muft,  then,
be  poifon  in  that  pudding.  And  fo  we  ftiould  believe,  faid  they,  if  they
who  ate  the  moft  of  it  had  been  the  moft  affefted  ;  and  they  who  ate  only
little,  the  leaft  :  but  the  cafe  is  quite  otherwife ;  for  this  prieft,  who  ate
the  leaft  of  that  difti,  as  he  did  of  all  the  others,  has  been,  and  is,  the  moft
violently  affeiSted :  the  woman,  who  ate  fomething  more  than  he,  has  been
lefs  violently  affefired  :  and  the  man,  who  ate  a  great  quantity,  was,  and  is,
diforder'd  in  the  leaft  degree  of  any.

But  was  not,  faid  I,  fome  fcrap'd  cheefe  fprinkled  over  this  pudding,  as
there  generally. is  ?  When  they  anfwer'd  that  there  was  ;  and  that  the  prieft,
having  no  appetite,  had  taken  fcarcely  any  thing  except  that  cheefe  ;  buc
that  the  woman  had  eaten  much  more  of  the  rice  than  of  the  cheefe ;  and,
finally,  that  the  man  had  fcarcely  taken  any  cheefe,  but  a  great  quantity  of
rice ;  You  yourfelves,  faid  I,  perceive  plainly,  without  any  hint  of  mine,
that  there  was  a  corrofive  poifon  in  the  cheefe  ;  perhaps,  mix'd  therewith  in
order  to  deftroy  mice ;  and  that  this  cheefe,  not  having  been  laid  afide,  (as
it  ought  to  have  been  with  the  utmoft  caution)  fomebody,  who  was  ignorant
of  fuch  a  mixture,  had  fprinkled  it  upon  the  pudding,  at  the  time  when  the
fervants  of  the  inn  were  in  a  hurry  to  prepare  your  dinner.

I  feem'd  at  that  time  to  have  conjeclur'd  juftly.;  and  ftill  more,  when,  a
long  time  after,  the  innkeeper  •,  having  heard  that  thefe  perfons  had  efcap'd
the  danger  ;  being  lefs  fearful  on  his  own  account,  made  no  fcruple  to
whifper  fomething  privately.  Neverthelefs,  after  clearing  up  the  cafe  thus
far,  two  occafions  of  doubt  feem'd  ftill  to  remain:  one,  that  in  eating  they
had  perceived  a  certain  odour  of  not  a  very  agreeable  nature ;  I  fuppofe,
from  the  bad  cheefe  ;  but  no  unufual  tafte,  and  no  fenfe  of  erofion  after-
wards, either  upon  the  tongue  or  upon  the  fauces :  the  other,  that  although

Lfup.


Letter  LIX. Articles.  379

1  fuppos'd  the  poifon  to  have  been  corrofive,  it  was  not  certain  which  of  the
corrofive  poifons  it  was,  fo  that  any  peculiar  antidote  might  be  oppos'd
thereto.

But  in  the  preceding  cafe  (/\  alfo,  there  might  have  been  the  fame  oc-
cafions  of  doubt.  For  neither  in  that  cafe,  as  you  may  fafely  argue  from
my  filence,  was  there  any  mark  of  erofion  upon  the  tongue,  or  in  the  fauces  -,
nor  did  I  know  what  poifon,  in  particular,  had  been  given :  and  yet  my  con-
jefture  of  corrofive  poifon  was  confirm'd  by  the  great  advantage  wherewith
milk  and  whey  had  been  given;  and  it  was  at  the  fame  time  Ihewn  thereby,
that  where  the  fpecies  of  poifon  is  unknown,  and  you  cannot  apply  its
proper  remedy  ;  you  muft,  "at  leafl,  make  ufe  of  that  which  is  oppofite  to
the  genus  thereof,  which  is  lefs  unknown.

I  fhould  have  done  the  fame  thing  in  this  cafe  as  in  the  former,  if  a
greater  number  of  difcharges  by  vomiting  and  fbool,  which  had  preceded,
but  were  now  entirely  remov'd,  and  the  vanifhing  of  the  angor  and  tormina,
had  not  already  feem'd  to  prove  the  poifon  to  have  been  evacuated.  Yet,
in  order  to  obviate  the  effects  of  any  that  might  happen  as  yet  to  remain  ;
and,  at  the  farrie  time,  that  the  thirft  and  the  fever,  which  had  follow'd  fo
great  a  quantity  of  evacuations,  and  fo  violent  a  commotion  of  nature,  might
be  allay'd  ;  I  prefcrib'd  a  large  quantity  of  whey  to  be  drunk  by  the  prieft
and  the  woman.

For  as  to  the  man ;  who  was  neither  thirfty  nor  feverifh,  nor  afk'd  any
thing  elfe  of  me  than  that  I  would  remove  the  fenfe  of  weight  whereby  his
ftomach  was  opprefs'd ;  I  aflented  to  his  petition,  by  giving  him  oil  of  al-
monds, with  this  intention,  that  I  might  rather  excite  vomitings  than  ftools ;
and  that  with  a  remedy  of  fuch  a  nature,  as,  if  any  eroding  particles  ftill
remain'd  in  the  ftomach  or  inteftines,  might  be  of  ufe  by  entangling,  and,
at  the  fame  time,  fheathing  them.

However,  as  vomitings  could  not  be  excited,  even  by  thrufting  the  fingers
into  the  fauces  as  far  as  poffible ;  the  inteftines  were  made  lax,  and  the  fenfe
of  weight  was  entirely  remov'd.  And  as  he  was  very  well  after  this,  1  re-
commended to  him  nothing  but  puddings  made  of  rice  and  milk.

Thefe  I  gave  to  the  others  alfo  by  way  of  fupper  •,  when  I  had  already
obferv'd  the  fever  and  the  thirft  to  have  grown  very  flight,  by  large  draughts
of  whey.  They  had  a  very  good  night ;  fo  that  the  woman,  on  the  following
day,  was  quite  free' from  fever,  or  any  other  fymptom  ;  and  the  prieft,  whofe
fever  and  thirft  decreas'd  gradually  more  and  more,  had  nothing  now  re-
maining to  complain  of  befides  thefe  :  for  the  fenfe  of  heat  which  he  had
felt  the  day  before  in  difcharging  his  urine,  was  now  quite  remov'd.

And  though  through  the  whole  of  that  day,  and  the  following  night,  and
a  great  part  of  the  next  day,  every  thing  continu'd  to  grow  better ;  and  the
inteftinal  difcharges  were  free  and  eafy,  and  unattended  by  any  fenfe  of  heat ;
I  did  not,  however,  omit  to  give  the  fame  things  that  I  had  given  for  two
days  before.

8.  But,  behold !  on  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  day  from  the  time  that

(f)  N.  6.

C  c  c  2.  -  the


S  S  o Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

the  prieft  had  ^been  feiz'd  with  that  very  violent  pain,  at  the  fame  hour  iti
the  afternoon,  and  without  any  previous  manifeft  caufe,  he  was  feiz'd  again
with  it  in  the  fame  manner.  His  feet  were  cold  in  the  beginning  ;  his  pulfe
was  fomewhat  contrafted.  Befides  the  pain,  there  was  a  certain  inexplicable
anguifh  in  the  whole  belly  ;  whereby  the  patient  complain'd  that  there  was
a  great  interception  to  his  breath,  and  that  by  this  chiefly  he  was  oblig'd  ta
writhe  himfelf  here  and  there,  in  a  miferable  manner,  fometimes  to  rife  and
fometimes  to  walk.

But  the  pain  occupied  the  right  epicolic  region,  and  the  neighbouring  part
of  the  loins,  fometimes  extending  itfelf  from  thence  tranfverfely,  through
the  hypogaftrium  ;  at  one  time  into  the  right  fide  of  the  fcrotum,  and  at
others  into  the  neighbouring  thigh  :  fo  that  it  might  feem  to  be  nephritic.

But  the  man  had  not  ever  been  fiibje6t  to  this  nephritic  pain  :  and  that
the  pain,  extremely  fimilar  to  the  prefent,  if  you  except  the  vomitings  and
the  ftools,  wherewith  he  had  been  attack'd  four  days  before,  had  not  been
nejjhritic,  not  only  that  proximate  preceding  caufe  which  I  have  fpoken  of
above,  but  the  violent  efFefts  thereof  upon  his  companions,  at  the  fame
time,  evidently  Ihew'd :  and,  finally,  the  urine  being  nothing  chang'd,  but
perfeflly  fimilar  to  that  of  a  healthy  perfon,  contrary  to  what  is  ufual  in  ne-
phritic patients,  join'd  to  prove  that  the  pain  was  not  of  that  kind.

However,  as  none  of  thofe  things  which  I  had  order'd  to  be  applied  ex-
ternally were  of  any  fervice  ;  and  the  patient  aflTerted,  that  he  could  not  bear
the  application  of  glyfters,  for  this  reafon,  that  a  tumour  of  the  hsemorrhoids,
and  a  very  great  pain,  had  come  on  at  the  fame  time,  together  with  a  te-
nefmus ;  fo  that,  if  this  pain  fhould  be  exacerbated  by  the  introduftion  of
a  pipe,  he  could  not  be  capable  of  fupporting  himfelf  under  it;  the  urgent
neceffity  of  relaxing,  and  the  fimilitude  of  the  nephritic  pain,  impell'd  me
to  try  a  remedy  which  is  ufeful  in  this  pain ;  I  mean,  a  warm  and  emollient
bath.

Nor  did  my  expeftation  deceive  me.  For  fcarcely  had  the  patient  fat
down  in  the  bath,  when  firft  the  angor,  and  a  little  afterwards  the  pain,  re-
mitted. But  upon  his  coming  out  of  the  bath,  and  being  again  attack'd
therewith ;  I  was  oblig'd  to  procure  him  a  little  fleep,  and  by  that  means  to
refrelh  him.  By  taking  one  grain  of  purified  opium,  therefore,  he  flept
an  hour.

Being  awak'd,  and  finding  himfelf  fomewhat  lefs  troubled  with  his  pain^
fo  that  he  could  now  take  lome  food ;  I  gave  him  a  ptifan  of  fat  broth :.
after  taking  which  he  flept  the  remaining  part  of  the  night.

On  the  day  foUov/ing,  the  patient  being  feverilh,  but  having  no  pain  in
his  belly,  I  gave  him  oil  of  almonds,  and,  at  a  certain  hour,  a  clyfter  of
milk  and  mucilages  :  and  left  this  glyfter  fhould  be  obftrufled  by  the  pain
of  the  piles,  though  this  was  now  become  lefs,  a  very  fmall  tent  was  pre-
vioufly  introduc'd  into  the  redum,  fmear'd  over  with  the  fat  of  frogs  ;  as
this  fat,  according  to  the  obfervation  of  a  phyfician  who  was  my  friend,  was
proper  to  aiRiage  the  pains  of  thofe  veins ;  and  when  the  tent  was  taken  out,
the  glyfter-pipe,  in  order  to  make  it  lefs  troublefome,  was  cover'd  over  with
the  inverted  gut  of  a  young  chicken,  and  by  this  means  flowly  and  gra-
dually introduc'd.

The


Letter  LIX. Article  9.  381

The  glyfter  being  injedled,  and  he  having  retain'd  it  for  an  hour  or  more,
he  eot  Ibme  relief  from  a  kind  of  angor,.  which  was  even  then  ftill  remaining
in  tTie  belly  ;  and  from  his  thirft.  Againft  which,  and  t/he  bitternefs  of  the
mouth,  a  great  quantity  of  the  water  of  Nocera,  being  drunk,  was  profitable.

After  this  time  every  thing  grew  better  and  better  continually.  And  the
woman  obtain'd  relief,  aUo,  from  almoft  the  fame  medicines,  when  yellow,
but  at  the  fame  time  ufeful  ftools  were  now  and  then  troublefome  ;  by
bringing  with  them  a  thirft,  and  certain  flight  and  wandering  pains  of  the
belly,  together  with  a  tenefmus,  which  was  attended  by  a  fenfe  of  heat.

Nor  was  the  prieft  free  from  yellow  ftools,  but  lefs  fluid  than  in  the  other
cafe  ;  and  attended  with  no  inconvenience,  but  that  of  bringing  on  the  pain
of  the  piles.  In  thefe  ftools  were  quantities  of  mucus,  which,  being  once
compared  into  a  globular  figure,  and  attentively  examin'd  by  me,  feem'xl  to
refemble  a  kind  of  indigefted  fat,  wherewith  a  fort  of  tendinous  fubftance
was  mix'd.

This  globular  body  was  difcharg'd  on  the  fourth  day  after  the  relapfe,  to-
gether with  folid  excrements  tiniftur'd  with  blood  ;  this  blood  not  being
mix'd  with  its  fubftance,  but  only  fprinkled  upon  the  furface  :  fo  that  you
might  perceive  it  to  be  from  the  piles.

Thus  thefe  two,  alfo,  recovering  within  eleven  days  from  that  almoft  fatal
dinner,  liv'd  many  years  after,  without  any  mark  of  injury  being  left  in  the
ftomach,  or  in  the  inteftines.  And,  indeed,  the  prieft  was  carried  off  by
no  other  diforder  than  an  aneurifm  of  the  aorta,  within  the  thorax  ;  which,,
beginning  fix  years  after,  he  bore  for  a  long  time,  even  to  the  utmoft  extre-
mity that  was  poITible.

9'.  Now,  to  begin  from  what  was  faid  laft,  and  remark  fbmething,  by-
way of  addition  to  the  other  circumftances  that  were  obferv'd  in  the  four
patients  in  queftion  •,  if  you  happen  to  find  Paawius  giving  his  opinion,  i»
this  tenth  fecStion  or'the  Sepulchretum  (g),  that  the  figns  of  poifon  having
been  given,  were  a  very  great  dilatation  of  the  right  ventri-gle  of  the  heart,
and  of  the  neighbouring  vena  cava  ;  and  the  blood  concreted  in  the  heart,
and  all  the  veins,  as  he  imagin'd,  in  the  living  body,  and  by  the  force  of
the  moft  cold  poifon  -,  as  if  it  had  not  been  at  feven  hours  after  death  that
hedifTefted  the  body;  do  not  fuppofe  that  the  aneurifm  of  this  prieft  is  to
be  confider'd  as  a  confirmation  of  his  opinion.

For  dilatations  of  that  kind  are  not  fo  foon  brought  about  as  he  feems  to
imagine  ;  and,  certainly,  in  our  patient,  the  figns  of  an  incipient  aneurifm
did  not  fhew  themfelves  till  many  years  after,  as  I  have  already  faid  ;  fo  that,
if  you  fufped  it  to  have  had  its  firft  origin  from  the  conftriftions  which  hap-
pen'd  at  the  time  of  the  pain  and  angor ;  yet  you  cannot  contend,  that  this
is  to  be  confider'd  as  a  fymptom  of  poifon,  which  others  may  fuppofe  to
have  been  brought  on  by  fo  many  other  caufes,  and  at  fo  long  an  interval
of  time.

But  as  to  what  relates  to  the  blood  being  coagulated  both  in  the  veins  and
the  heart  itfelf;  I  have  frequently  related  this  appearance  to  you,  as  having

ig)  Obf.  4.  §  I.

beer>


382 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

been  feen  in  bodies  that  had  been  kill'd  by  caufes  far  different  from  poifon  :
lb  that,  if  it  happen'd  from  the  blood  being  concreted  within,  as  it  is  con-
jeftur'd  in  the  fabjefted  fcholium,  that  the  heart  of  Germanicus  {h)  could  not
be  burnt  -,  a  great  number  of  hearts  of  other  perfons,  alfo,  in  v.'hom  there
could  be  no  fufpicion  of  poifon,  would  be  incapable  of  being  confum'd  by
fire.

And  what  if  you  add  to  that  which  is  here  faid,  the  opinion  of  the  very
ingenious  Mead  (/)  ?  that  poifons  ad:  chiefly  upon  the  nerves,  and  not  upon
the  blood  ;  which  opinion  alfo  feems  to  be  confonant  to  that  of  Harderus  {k) :
and,  indeed,  in  regard  to  fome  poifons,  this  cannot  be  denied  ;  as,  for  in-
ftance,  thofe  that  kill  inftantly  ;  fuch  as  Vibulenus  Agrippa  (/)  "  drew  from
"  his  bofom  in  the  very  fenate-houfe  "  fnot  from  his  ring^  as  Baccius  (w)
aiferts,  who  had  fome  other  perfons  in  his  mind  at  that  time,  as  I  fup-
pofe(«));  "a  poifon,  whereby  he  fell  down  and  died  fo  foon,  that  he
"  could  not  be  carried  away  into  prifon,  even  by  the  hafty  hands  of  the
'"  liftors,  before  his  eyes  were  clos'd  in  death,  the  halter  being  applied
"  to  his  throat  in  vain  ;"  or  fuch  as  Locufta  {0)  prepar'd  by  the  command
of  Nero,  "  very  fpeedy  and  inftantaneous  "  in  its  effedls  :  whereby  not  only
a  little  pig  "  was  ftruck  inftantly  dead,"  but  even  Britannicus  "  fell  down  at
"  the  firft  tafte  :"  for  the  virus  [p)  "  fo  pervaded  all  his  limbs,  that  his  voice
"  and  his  breath  were  equally  and  inftantly  taken  from  him."

And  to  Mead  himfelf  (^)  none  feem'd  more  proper  to  confirm  his  opinion,
than  that  poifon  which  he  fays,  from  the  experiments  of  Nichols,  had  kill'd
a  dog  in  its  very  paffage  through  the  oefophagus,  "  in  lefs  than  half  a  mi-
"  nute  in  all;"  and  even  when  injefted  into  the  extremity  of  the  inteftine,
did  the  fame  thing  in  a  moment,  without  leaving  any  marks  of  inflammation
or  erofion  behind  :  fo  that  we  need  be  lefs  furpriz'd  at  thofe  things  1  have  re-
mark'd  above  (r),  of  the  rabbet  from  Sproegelius,  or  of  the  girl  from  the
fon  of  EtmuUer  ;  as  both  of  them  explain  the  cafe  in  the  fame  manner,  for
this  reafon.

Yet  as,  while  poifons  affefl:  the  nerves,  it  happens  that  the  motion  of  the
blood  becomes  "  various,  or  is  intercepted  ;"  to  ufe  the  words  ,of  Wep-
fer  (j) -,  or  that  "the  circulation  is  at  one  time  impeded,  and  at  another
"  time  very  confus'd  ;"  it  will  happen,  alfo,  that  the  blood  is  found  to  be
in  a  different  ftate  in  different  bodies.

Mead  (/),  therefore,  fuppofes  it  to  happen,  that,  if  by  an  univerfal  palfy
brought  on  by  poifon,  the  circulation  be  fuddenly  fupprefs'd,  the  blood  con-
tinues perfeftly  fluid  in  the  veffels,  the  fecretions  being  at  other  times  («),
as  in  a  difturb'd  circulation,  interrupted ;  and  when  the  fmall  veffels  are  ob-

{h)  Sueton.  de  duodec.  Casfarib.  1.  4.  c.  i.  (0)  Sueton.  I.  6.  c.  33.

[i]  Traft.  de  V<enen.  paffim.  (/>) Tacit.  Annal.  1.  13.

\k)  Sepulchr.  S.  cit.  in  Schol.  ad  Obf.  17.  (7)  Traft.  cit.  in  Append.  Tentam.  5.

Additam.  (') N.  5.

(/)  Tacit.  Annal.  1.  ;.  W Sepulchr.  ibid,  in  Schol.  ad  Obf.  3.

{m)  De  Venenis  ubi  de  venenor.  ingell.  fas-  (/)  Append,  cit.

vitia.  («)  Introduci.  is  fia.

(,;  Vid.  Plin.  Nat.  Hift.  1.  33. c.  i.  &
Annot.  Dalecamp.

ftru(aed


Letter  LIX. Article  9.  383

ftrufled  by  ftagnation,  (all  which  circutnftances  happen  hy  reafon  of  the
nerves  being  affefted)  that  the  blood  itfelf  is  varioufly  chang'd  ;  in  conie-
quence  of  its  being  a  humour  compos'd  of  divers  other  humours  mix'd  to-
gether, and  liable  to  any  changes  whatever,  from  a  change  of  its  motion
alone.

But  thefe  changes  of  the  blood,  befides  that  they  are  neither  the  firft,  nor
the  proper,  eftefts  of  taking  poifon,  may  be  far  different  in  different  bodies  ;
according  to  the  various  affedion  of  the  nerves :  and  not  only  this,  but  ac-
cording to  the  various  difpofition  of  the  blood.

Therefore,  not  to  quit  the  confideration  of  arfenic,  the  woman  who  died-
from  taking  that  poifon,  as  you  have  read  above  (x),  had  her  blood  fluid,
and  of  a  bright  red  colour ;  but  the  dog,  which  was  kill'd  by  the  fame  poi-
fon, as  I  related  juft  now  (jv),  had  his  blood  black  and  grumous.  And  1  re-
member that ;  when  I  diffedted  nine  rats,  of  the  larger  fize,  which  had  been
kill'd  by  poifon,  and  fent  me  by  a  friend  -,  I  faw,  in  every-one  of  them,  both
the  auricles  of  the  heart  diftended  with  black  blood :  but  not  coagulated  ;
nor,  as  in  living  bodies,  very  fluid.

Yet  becaufe  1  difl^efted  thofe  little  animals,  not  to  fee  what  were  the  effeds
of  the  poifon,  but  in  order  to  be  better  acquainted  with  fome  things  relative
to  the  natural  ftrudure ;  I  have  nothing  to  obferve  here  in  relation  to  the
prefent  queftion  ;  except  that  the  ftomach  was  very  full  in  all  of  them,  and
not,  as  far  as  appear'd  externally,  inflam'd  in  any  one,  and  much  lefs
perforated  :  and  both  thefe  aflTertions  will  hold  good  of  the  inteftines
alfo.

Nor  does  Heydius  (2)  fay,  that  in  two  rats,  after  having  taken  the  fame
poifon,  the  ftomach,  which  was  fiU'd  with  flime  and  bread,  was  inflam'd  or
eroded.  But  this  he  fays,  that  when  he  difl'eded  one  of  them  after  death  ;
for  the  other  he  had  open'd  when  alive ;  "  no  blood  flow'd  out  of  the  vef-
"  fels  :  and  even  that  from  the  ventricles  of  the  heart,  upon  cutting  off  the
"  apex  thereof,  not  a  drop  of  cruor  diftill'd  :"  but  whether  this  was  becaufe
it  had  been  confin'd  in  other  vefl!els  or  refervoirs,  or  becaufe  it  was  coagu-
lated, is  uncertain  ;  as  he  does  not  add  a  word  upon  this  fubjed.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  certain  from  the  experiments  of  the  moft  excellent
Ellerus  (a),  that  when  with  blood  newly  drawn,  he  had  mix'd  a  third  or
fourth  part  of  the  folution  of  arfenic,  the  blood  was  immediately  thicken'd  ;
though  its  globules,  if  examin'd  by  the  microfcope,  were  greatly  extenuated,
diffolv'd,  and  driven  into  motion  as  it  were  :  among  which  globules  appear'd,
here  and  there,  fmall  triangular  chryftals,  that  refembled  the  cutting  points
of  arrows ;  fo  that  from  all  thefe  things  he  conceiv'd,  that  very  ftrong  cor-
rofive  poifons,  of  this  kind,  ad  by  deltroying,  not  fo  much  the  fluid,  as  the
folid  parts  of  our  body.

But  he  was  not  ignorant  likewife,  that  arfenic,  when  taken  into  the  fto-
mach, v/as  not  fo  immediately  mix'd  with  the  blood -,  and  you,  in  fad,  fee
that  it  cannot  be  mix'd  in  that  proportion.  It  will  be  better,  therefore,  to
return  from  drawn  blood  to  the  living  body ;  and  from  dogs  and  rats  to

(x)  D.  3.  {y]  n.  4.  (a)  Hift.  de  1'  Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  de  Berlin

(2)  Obf.  Medic,  48.  "  A.  1752.  Claff.  Philof.  Experira.

human


384 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

human  bodies  •,  and  I  will  produce  the  appearances  which  Ruyfch  (l>)  fouud,
from  arfenic  having  been  taken  in.

He  fometimes  infpefted  carcafes  of  that  kind :  and  contrary  to  thofe  who
"  think,  that,  in  fuch  a  cafe,  the  blood  only  is  coagulated,"  he  never  found
it  coagulated,  but  the  ftomach  ulcerated  ;  if  there  had  been  time  enough
for  it  i  as  in  a  woman,  a  great  part  of  whofe  flomach  he  preferv'd  in  fpirits :
to  the  internal  coat  of  which,  that  was  in  various  places  affefted  with  ulcers,
white  arfenic  "  adher'd."  But  if  it  had  happen'd  that  they  died  fooner,
then  he  faw  bloody  points,  lying  at  a  diftance  here  and  there,  through  the
ftomach.

10.  From  thefe  obfervations  of  Ruyfch,  join'd  with  thofe  that  are  men-
tion'd  above  (c),  it  is  very  clearly  perceiv'd,  that  the  firft  and  proper  effed:
of  arfenic,  when  taken  into  the  body,  or  of  other  corroding  poifons  of  this
kind,  is  exerted  on  the  internal  coats  of  the  alimentary  canal ;  efpecially  of
the  ftomach,  wherein  they  firft  harbour :  the  nerves  of  thefe  coats  being  irri-
tated, and  the  coats  themfelves  being  prick'd ;  and  if  time  be  given,  inflam'd,
ulceratec^,  and  pierc'd  through.

In  misfortunes  of  this  kind,  therefore,  nothing  can  happen  more  defirably,
than  that  the  ftomach  may  foon  throw  up  what  it  had  taken  in ;  or  at  leaft
as  foon  as  poffible  :  and  from  hence  it  has  chiefly  happen'd,  that  they  who
have  been  attended  by  me,  in  thefe  cafes  (d),  efcap'd.

And  it  happen'd  ftill  much  more  happily  to  a  certain  gentleman,  that ;
when,  inftead  of  cream  of  tartar,  he  had  taken  two  drachms  of  emetic  tartar  ;
by  fome  vomitings  which  follow'd  thereon,  not  unattended  with  ftridures  upon
the  prascordia,  he  was  immediately  freed  from  all  inconveniences  of  the
ftomach :  the  celebrated  Dethardingius  (e)  fuppofing,  that  no  fooner  had
fome  moleculsE  of  this  medicine  been  diflblv'd,  and  ftimulated  the  ftomach
to  contraiStion,  but,  without  giving  time  for  the  diflbkuion  of  the  remaining
particles,  the  whole  of  it;  which  otherwife  muft  certainly  have  kill'd  the
man  by  its  great  quantity  ;  was  thrown  up  by  vomiting.

But  there  are  fome  who  are  by  nature  lefs  prone  to  vomit.  There  are
fome  alfo,  in  whom,  after  accidents  of  this  kind,  the  fibres  of  the  left  orifice
of  the  ftomach  and  oefophagus  are  fp  ftrain'd  into  ftrong  adhion,  as  to  refift
the  fibres,  which  contrad  themfelves,  in  the  other  part  of  the  ftomach :  nor
does  it  always  follow,  that,  if  any  thing  be  then  given,  or  forc'd  down  into
the  ftomach,  thefe  refifting  fibres,  as  Wepfer  (/}  teaches,  are  relax'd  ;  for
there  are  cafes  wherein  the  man  then  fwallows,  and  yet  is  troubled  with  a
fruitlefs  effort  towards  difcharging  the  contents  of  his  ftomach  at  the  fame
time  (g).

And  even  thofe  who  do  not  vomit  foon,  are  fometimes  lefs  in  danger;  as,
for  inftance,  if  they  take  the  poifon  upon  a  full  ftomach.  Baccius  (i>)  there-
fore advifes,  that,  when  we  cannot  avoid  a  banquet,  which  we  fufpeft,  we
neither  come  thirfty,  nor  hupgty  ;  but  full  of  milk,  and  fat  and  vifcid  foods,

fi)  Thef.  Anat.  8.  n.  70.  C/J  Scholio  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  9.

(c)  n.  3.  4.  5.  (^)  n.  6.  7.  (g)  SeQ.  hac  Sepulchr.  Obf.  4.  §  6.

{e)  Eph. N. C.  Cent.  9.  Obf. 74.  cum (A)  De  Venen.  ubi  de  Particulari  Praeferv.

Schol,  n.  I.

8  that


Letter  LIX. Article  i  o.  385

that  we  have  previoiifly  taken.  For  he  had  feen  (/),  that,  from  the  fame
poifonous  food,  which  had  been  eaten  by  a  whole  family,  the  mafter  alone
died  on  that  very  day  ;  as  he  had  eaten  upon  an  empty  ftomach  ;  the  others,
who  had  eaten  on  a  full  ftomach,  being  fav'd.

And  though  this  circumftance  does  not  always  defend  from  poifon,  yet  it
very  frequently  retards  the  pernicious  effeflrs  of  it ;  as  you  have  feen  in  the
woman  with  whofe  cafe  this  letter  began  :  and  to  the  fenators  of  Capua  alfo,
who  were  about  twenty-eight  in  number,  death  happen'd  very  late,  for  this
reafon,  that  they  had  taken  the  poifon  when  fiU'd  with  food  and  wine  •,  and,
by  this  means,  "  had  made  the  force  of  the  poifon  lefs  efficacious  in  bring-
"  ing  on  a  fpeedy  death,"  as  Livy  {k)  has  tranfmitted  down  to  memory  in
his  hiftories.

So  if  a  little  poifon  be  fwallow'd  down  into  an  empty  ftomach,  together
with  a  great  quantity  of  food,  it  is  not  furprizing,  if  the  danger  become
lefs.  For,  by  thefe  means,  either  the  poifon  is  kept  at  a  diftance  from  the
coats  of  the  ftomach,  or  is  (Heath'd  over,  and  obtunded,  by  a  great  quantity
of  matter  being  mix'd  with  it.  And  in  this  manner  may  be  explain'd  moft
of  the  things  that  have  been  faid  above  by  ys.  I  fay  moft  of  them;  for
fome  of  them  are  certainly  more  difficult :  and  this  in  particular,  Vi^hy  the
prieft  (/)  was  not  feiz'd  with  pains  in  the  region  of  the  ftomach,  but  in  the
right  epicolic  region.

Yet  if  this  had  happen'd  only  on  the  fourth  day,  it  might  then  be  con-
je£tur'd  that  fome  particles  of  the  poifon,  and  particularly  thofe  retain'd  in
the  cells  of  the  inteftine  colon,  had  vellicated  and  prick'd  the  coats  thereof.
But  that  it  fhould  happen  fo  foon  after  taking  the  poifon  ;  unlefs  you  fuppofe
the  ftomach  to  have  been  fomewhat  more  to  the  right  fide  ;"  as  it,  in  fad,  is  '
in  fome  bodies ;  or  becaufe  this  is  very  rare,  the  inteftine  duodenum  to  have
been  fomewhat  more  to  the  right  fide,  or  fomething  elfe  of  a  fimilar  nature,
you  will  not  eafily  account  for  and  explain.

II.  However,  that  it  never  came  into  my  mind  to  make  ufe  of  the  theri-
aca,  or  other  antidotes  of  that  kind,  in  the  cure  of  patients  who  liave  taken
poifon,  I  know  you  will  not  be  furpriz'd.  For  why  fhould  I,  when  it  was
pretty  clear  that  the  poifon  was  of  an  eroding  nature,  add  fuel  to  the  fire,
and  ftill  more  ftir  it  up ;  or  at  leaft  encreafe  its  effedls  ?

And  indeed,  I  faw  that  when  one  of  the  four  that  I  cur'd,  had  taken
theriaca  of  his  own  accord  (ot),  the  heat  of  his  ftomach  was  encreas'd :  for
which  reafon  I  am  lefs  furpriz'd  that  the  boy,  taken  notice  of  in  the  Sepul-
chretum  («),  who  had  theriaca  given  him  twice,  fliould  have  died  within
four  hours  after  taking  arfenic  :  and  if  Jo.  Faber  {0)  had  given  nothing  but
mithridate  to  the  young  man  who  had  us'd  the  powder  of  tz/^^^/Zk^^,  or  or-
piment,  inftead  of  cinnamon,  he  certainly  would  not  have  fav'd  him.

But  he  did  fave  him,  becaufe  he  gave  him  fat  broths  at  the  fame  time,
and  a  great  quantity  of  milk.

(i)  Ibid,  ubi  Venena  quibus  modis  fieri  pof-  (»;)  n.  7.

fint  irrita.  n.  10.  (?0  Seft.  hac  in  Addit.  Obf.  13.  Hift.  7;

(/{)  Hiftoriar.  1.  26.  (0)  Ibid.  Hilt.  12.
(/)  fupra,  n.  7.  8.

Vol.  III.  D  d  d  So


^B6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

So  I,  alfo,  fuppofe  a  boy  and  two  girls,  who  were  in  great  danger  from
hiving  taken  arienic,  to  have  been  fav'd  by  Jo.  Jod.  Cyfatus  (p),  not  becaiife
he  had  given  the  eletfitariiim  Orvietanum,  but  becaufe  he  had  given  milk  fre-
quently before ;  and  becaufe  nature  had  previoufly  alTifted  them  all  by  fpeedy
vomitings.

For  alexipharmac  remedies  of  this  kind  cannot  entangle  the  eroding  par-
ticles ;  nor  can  fo  envelope  and  cover  them  over,  as  to  prevent  them  from
inflaming  and  ulcerating  by  their  afperities  :  nor  yet  can  they  footh  and
cleanfe  the  ulcerated  pares :  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  muft  add  new  motion
and  power  to  thefe  corrofive  particles ;  and  to  the  ulcerated  parts,  new  heat
and  inflammation.

Whereas  it  is  evident,  on  the  other  hand,  that  milk,  oil,  and  other  fome-
what  vifcid  fubftances,  whey,  and  even  water  itfelf,  by  entangling  fome,  by
diluting  others,  of  thefe  particles  ;  and,  in  fine,  by  foothing  and  clearifing
the  parts  as  much  as  poffible  -,  muft  ftrongly  counteraft  the  tendency  thereof:
cfpecially  if  they  be  given  in  fuch  a  quantity  as  to  affift  the  vomitings ;  and,
if  any  poilbnous  quality  remains  after  thefe,  be  continu'd  fo  as  to  dilute  and
obtund  its  noxious  energy.

And,  indeed,  although  the  ancients  propos'd  fome  things  that  are  lefs
fuicable  ■,  Ardoynus  (q),  neverthelefs,  fufHciently  fhews  how  much  they
efteem'd  thofe  remedies  we  jufl"  now  mention'd.  But  the  more  modern  phy-
ficians ;  omitting  the  ufclefs  and  the  noxious  applications  ;  have  approv'd  of
the  others,  when  occafion  has  ofFer'd  :  fome  in  their  writings,  and  fome  evea
in  the  obfervations  of  others  that  they  have  collefted.

Thus,  in  regard  to  milk,  befides  thofe  that  I  have  referr'd  to  above  (r),
many  other  obfervations  are  extant ;  among  which  is  one,  in  particular,  that
Henry  Doorfchodt  (j)  fays  he  had  taken  from  Hoffmann  :  that  is  to  fay,  an
obfervation  of  ten  young  men  being  taken  ill  in  a  fhort  time  after  eating
water-gruel,  wherein  rather  more  than  two  ounces  of  arfenic  had  been  mix'd
with  as  many  ounces  of  fugar  -,  who  were,  neverthelefs,  fav'd  by  means  of
milk  being  given  to  drink,  for  fo  long  a  time,  till  all  the  efforts  to  vomit
ceas'd  :  and  it  was  neceffary  to  give  this  remedy  in  fo  great  a  quantity,
*'  that  fcarcely  ten  meafures  of  milk  were  fufficient  for  each  perfon."

Thus,  to  fpeak  of  oily  remedies,  (and  oil  of  almonds,  indeed,  was  given  to
thefe  alfo,  as  well  as  to  many  others)  what  the  moderns,  as  well  as  the  ancients,
thought  of  them,  you  will  find  propos'd  by  that  celebrated  man  John  Gen-
tilis  (/).

And  in  regard  to  aqueous  remedies  •,  among  which  is  whey,  and  water  it-
felf;  turn  to  a  difputation  in  Etmuller,  which  is  entitled,  "  The  fmall  be-
"  ginnings  of  great  difeafes."  Therein  you  will  have  an  example  («)  of  a
man  who,  having  by  miftake  drunk  that  fluid  which  is  call'd  aqua  fcrtis,  was
prevented  from  receiving  any  injury  by  drinking  a  large  quantity  of  water
foon  after. To  which  add  another  from  Sydenham  {x) ;  who,  by  means  of

(;.)  Ibid.  Hift.  2.  &  feq.  {s)  Differt.  de  Lafte  in  Corollar.

{(/)  De  V^enen.  1.  2.  c.  1,  2,  3.  5.  ubi  de  (/)  Annotaz.  alia  pag.  6+.  v.  5.  della  Lett.
Curat.  Filof.  («) §  47.

' (r)  N.  5.  {x)  Epill.  Refponf.  L  \sx(.  fin.

this


Letter  LIX. Article  12.  387

this  remedy  alone,  given  copioufly  by  the  mouth,  and  injefted  by  the  redum,
fa/d  a  man  "  who  had  taken  down  a  very  confxderable  quantity  of  corrofive
"  fublimate  mercury."

And  Boerhaave  (jy) ;  where  he  propofes  fuch  things  as  he  thinks  it  necef-
fary  to  apply  where  the  fpecies  of  the  poifon  taken  in  is  unknown  ;  not  only
commends  that  cure  of  Sydenham's,  but  alfo  recommends  moft  of  the  re-
medies that  we  have  mention'd  above,  and  made  ufe  of  in  thofe  patients;
not  even  the  bath  and  opium,  finally,  being  omitted  :  and  he  ftiews  how  far
the  latter  of  thefe  remedies  may  be  ufeful.

The  other  remedies  are  not  omitted  in  that  part  of  EtmuUer's  works  which
I  juft  now  referr'd  you  to  -,  and  how  far  thefe  have  been  advantageous  when
the  poifon  was  lefs  known,  the  obfervation  of  Screta,  in  the  Sepulchre-
turn  (2),  demonftrates.

Yet  when  its  fpecies  is  known ;  how  much  more  advantageous  it  may  be
to  make  ufe  of  the  remedies  that  are  peculiarly  oppofite  thereto,  you  will
learn  from  two  hiftories  that  are  pretty  fimilar  in  moft  refpeds,  except  in
their  event ;  the  one  in  the  fame  place  (a),  the  other  in  the  works  of  the
celebrated  Mead  (1^)  ;  if  you  will  compare  them  one  with  another.

However,  I  fhould  here  admonilh  you,  if  you  were  not  capable  of  ob-
ferving  yourfelf,  how  different  fymptoms  arofe  in  thofe  three  perfons  whom
I  had  under  my  care  at  the  fame  time  (c) ;  though  from  one  and  the  fame
poifon.  But  of  minerals  enough  ;  as  you  have  alfo  heard,  on  a  former  oc-
cafion  id),  what  mifchiefs  I  have  feen  from  fulphur,  when  taken  into  the
ftomach.

Now  let  us  add  a  few  things  upon  the  fubjed  of  vegetable  poifons.

12.  A  poor  woman,  about  fixty  years  of  age,  who  (whatever  the  caufe
of  this  intention  might  be)  had  attempted  feveral  times  to  throw  herfelf  into
the  river,  having,  laft^f  all,  gather'd  a  great  quantity  of  tKe  leaves  of  the  rho-
dodaphne;  a  fhrub  that,  in  our  country,  is  cdWA  oleajjdro  ;  and.  having  drunk
the  juice  exprefs'd  from  them  together  with  wine  ;  was  heard,  about  three
hours  after,  by  the  women  who  were  in  the  next  cabins,  to  vomit  very  vio-
lently.

They  ran  to  her,  and  perceiv'd  what  £he  had  done  :  and,  as  flie  was
thirfty,  they  gave  her  a  glafs  of  water,  thinking  that  there  would  be  no  re-
maining mifchief  after  the  vomiting.

But,  as  they  foon  after  perceiv'd  her  to  be  much  worfe,  they  firft  fent  for
the  priefts,  and  in  the  next  place  for  our  Mediavia  ;  who  happen'd  not  to
be  far  off:  and  this  was  about  five  hours  after  the  woman  had  drunk  that
poifonous  juice.

In  her  refpiration  he  obferv'd  nothing  that  defcrv'd  to  be  greatly  taken
notice  of ;  nor  in  her  face,  if  you  except  her  lips  of  a  brown  colour,  and
particularly  the  lower  lip  -,  for  the  other  parts  were  eitlier  of  a  natural  co-


Cy)  Y'lA. Inftjt. § 1129. &  PrKled. ad (<i)  Trafl.  de  Veaien.  Tentam,  4.  in  fin,
eund.  §.  (0  N.  7,  8.

(x)  Hift.  10.  in  cit.  Obf.  13.  {d)  Epilt,  55.  n.  9.  &  feqcj.

[a)  Hift.  13.


Ddd2  Mour,


388 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

lour,  or  were  but  juft  a  little  inclin'd  to  a  pallid  hue':  nor  was  her  body
cold,  but  only  a  little  lefs  than  warm.

As  the  v/omen  who  were  about  her  faid  that  fhe  had  now  no  power  of
fpeech  remaining  ;  he  cried  out  aloud  in  the  patient's  ear,  who  lay  like  a
perfon  afleep,  to  ftretch  out  her  hand.  But  fhe  eafily  rais'd  herfelf  up  to
fit ;  and  the  women,  in  the  mean  while,  having  ftretch'd  out  one  arm,  fhe
foon  after  gave  the  other  herfelf.

Her  pulfe  was  fmall,  weak,  and  fomewhat  hard.  Endeavouring  to  give
an  anfwer  to  a  quellion  that  was  afk'd  her,  fhe  made  a  kind  of  inarticulate
noife  indeed,  but  utter'd  no  diflinfl  word  ;  pointing,  at  the  fame  time,  with
her  finger  to  the  matter  that  fhe  had  vomited  on  the  ground,  which  was
confiderable  in  its  quantity.  He  prefcrib'd  remedies  to  be  given  her  to
drink  immediately;  but  in  vain.  P'or  llie,  taking  fcarcely  any  thing,  died
v^ithin  four  hours  after  he  had  feen  her ;  fo  that  fhe  did  not  live  more  than
nine  hours  after  drinking  the  juice  I  have  mention'd.

The  carcafe  being  order'd  to  be  di&dted  on  the  following  day,  which  was
the  feventeenth  of  November,  in  the  year  1745,  by  the  judge  of  capital
matters ;  and  Mediavia,  by  whom  all  thefe  circumftances  were  related  to  me,
prefiding.at  the  difieftion;  it  was  firft  of  all  obferv'd,  that  there  was  no-
where any  lividnefs  in  the  fore-part  of  the  body  ;  nor  did  any  tumour,  not
even  of  the  belly,  appear :  but  on  the  back-part  it  was  univerfally  of  a
violet  colour,  from  the  head  to  the  bottom  of  the  lower  extremities.

1  he  abdomen  and  the  cheft  being  open'd  foon  after,  fome  heat  was  per-
ceiv'd  internally,  even  at  that  time  ;  although  it  was  feventeen  hours  after
death.  Within  the  former  cavity  every  part  was  in  a  natural  itate,  and  a
natural  pofition  ;  fo  that  neither  the  ftomach,  nor  any  other  vifcus,  was
fwollen  :  for  as  to  the  tranfverfe  tra£t  of  the  colon  being  reflefted  downwards
for  the  (pace  of  three  or  four  inches,  and  returning  up  again  from  thence  ;
this  is  an  appearance  which,  as  you  may  have  learn'd  from  my  letters^  is
met  with  very  frequently,  even  in  thofe  perfons  wherein  it  feems  to  have
happen'd  thus  naturally,  rather  than  from  difeafe.

But  when  they  fix'd  down  their  eyes  very  attentively,  they  obferv'd  that
the  veins  which  pafs  through  the  ftomach,  the  omentum,  and  a  part  of  the
inceftines  annex'd  to  the  mefentery,  were  very  much  diftended.

On  cutting  into  the  ftomach,  they  faw  therein  a  green  humour,  in  a  fmall
quantity.  This  being  wip'd  away,  no  mark  of  diforder  was  found  any-where
in  the  ftomach  :  except  that  the  rugse,  which  pafs'd  through  the  fundus  lon-
gitudinally, near  to  the  antrum  pylori,  were  harder  than  they  naturally
are.

Nor  was  there  any  thing  preternatural  in  the  duodenum,  when  open'd  :
notv^ithftanding  it  contain'd  fome  of  the  fame  green  humour  that  they  had
feen  in  the  ftomach  :  which,  perhaps,  was  from  bile  that  had  been  pcur'd
out,  and  mix'd  with  acid  juices ;  although  the  gall-bladder  was  found  to  be
moderately  full :  for  that  juice  which  the  woman  had  drunk,  would  ra-
ther have  retain'd  its  black  colour  from  the  wine  that  was  mix'd  there-
with.

In  the  thorax,  the  right  lobe  of  the  lungs  was  connected  to  the  pleura  ;

being  very  red  on  the  back-part,  and  feeming  to  have  fome  coagulatecl  blood,

6  as


Letter  LIX. Article  13.  389

as  it  were,  within  its  fubftance.  Yet  the  left  lobe  was  not  only  every-where
loofe  and  unconnefted ;  but  fo  collaps'd  into  itfelf,  as  if  fcarcely  any  air  was
left  within  :  and  it  was  but  a  little  red  on  the  back-part.  In  the  ventricles
of  the  heart  there  was  not  the  leaft  fluid  or  coagulated  blood.  However,
when  the  larger  veflels  of  the  heart  were  cut  into,  a  great  quantity  of  blood
flow'd  out,  which  was  neither  grumous  and  coagulated,  nor  yet  more  fluid
than  natural.

The  head  was  not  touch'd.

13.  1  have  the  more  willingly  committed  this  obfervation  to  writing,  be-
caufe  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read,  in  any  author,  the  diffeclion  of  per-
fons  kill'd  by  this  poifon  ;  nor  yet  that  the  fymptoms  which  enlue  upon  its
being  taken  into  the  ftomach,  have  been  obl'erv'd  by  any  one  of  the  more
modern  authors.

And  the  ancients  have  not  all  aflerted  it  to  be  hurtful  to  the  human  body  ;
nay,  fome  of  them,  on  the  contrary,  have  aflTerted  it  to  be  ufeful.  "  The
'  rhododendros"  fays  Pliny  (^),  "  does  not  even  find  a  Latin  name  amongfb
'  us  :  they  call  it  rhododaphne,  or  iierium.  What  is  furprizing  of  this  fhrub
'  is,  that  the  leaves  of  it  are  a  poifon  to  quadrupeds ;  but  a  fecurity  to
'  man  againft  ferpents,  when  drunk  in  wine,  with  the  addition  of  rue.  For
'  fheep  and  goats  are  faid  to  die,  if  they  drink  water  wherein  the  leaves  of
'  this  (brub  have  been  macerated."

And  you  will  fee  that  Diofcorides  (/)  has  written  what  is  pretty  fimilar  to
this  ;  and  that  neither  Apuleius  {g),  nor  even  Lucian  (^),  whom  he  then  al-
moft  copied,  had  taken  notice  of  it  as  being  pernicious  to  any  creature  but
beafl.s.  It  is  certain,  indeed,  that  the  former  has  faid  the  flowers  of  this
fhrub,  which  were  commonly  call'd  "  laurel  roles,"  are  ^'  a  poifon  :"  but
he  fays  this,  becaufe  "  it  is  death  to  all  cattle  to  eat  them."

Nay,  Lucianus  had  even  aflTerted  that  they  were  not  pernicious  to  all  thole,
animals,  but  only  to^flTes  and  horfes.  For  thus  have  they  faithfully  render'd
him  into  Latin  :  "  This  food  is  bad  for  every  afs  and  horfe  ;  for  they  fay,
"  that  any  of  thefe  creatures  which  have  eaten  of  it,  die  immediately."  On
the  contrary ;  to  pafs  over  Scribonius  (z),  who  fays,  with  fome  confiderable
plainnefs,  that  he  who  fliould  be  willing  to  chew  the  leaves  of  the  rhodo-
daphne  as  a  remedy  againft  the  tooth-ach,  muft  not  fwallow  his  fpittle ;  Ga-
len, at  leaft  [k),  has  exprefsly  taught  us,  that  this  fhrub  is  not  only  pernicious
to  cattle,  but  to  men  alfo.

And  all  the  principal  'of  the  Arabian  phyficians,  whom  you  will  find  par-
ticularly quoted  by  Ardoynus  (/},  have  propos'd  remedies  againft  this  poifon.
And  as  to  the  fymptoms  which  follow  upon  its  being  taken  into  the  ftomach;
that  are  collefted  both  by  the  fame  author  {m)  and  by  Matthiolus  (»)  -,  they
come  pretty  nearly  to  thele  :  a  violent  ftreightnefs  arifes,  the  belly  fwells,  is
painful,  and  becomes  lax ;  an  inflammation  is  created  %  and  a  heat  of  the

(f)  Nat.  Hift.  1.  24.  c.  II.  [k)  De  Simpl.  Med.  facuU.  1.  S.

(f)  De  Med.  Mat.  1.  4.  c.  77.  (/)  De  Venen.  1.  3.  c.  21.

\g)  Metamorph.  1.  4.  prope  initium.  («)'  Ibid.

\h)  In  Lucio,  five  Afino.  (it}  Comment,  in  c.  12.  I.  6.  Diofcorid,

(;■)  Ccrapof.  Med.  55.  cum  Rhodii  not.

whole


59© Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

whole  body,  a  lofs  of  fenfe,  a  fyncope,  and  death,  follow  after :  and  thefe
becaufe  the  rhododaphne  is  immoderately  heating  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  in-
cides,  bites,  ulcerates,  and  refolves.

But  as  you  will  readily  acknowledge,  that  fcarcely  any  of  thefe  fymptoms
and  effefts  were  obferv'd  in  the  patient  we  have  defcrib'd,  when  living ;  or
m  her  body  after  death  ;  fo  you  fee  plainly  that  there  were  other  and  far  dif-
ferent appearances :  for  which  reafon,  I  doubt  not,  but  you  will  wifhwith  me,
that  whenever  any  one  was  hurt  by  this  poifon,  whether  in  ancient  tinies,  or
fince,  we  could  have  the  hiftories  of  what  had  happen'd  to  them  written  ;
rather  than  the  diagnofes  of  many  authors,  who  frequently  copy  from  oae
another  ;  and  which  fometimes  corrcfpond  more  to  their  own  hypothefes  than
to  obfervations.

And  as  experiments  have  been  made  upon  dogs  from  fo  many  other  vege-
table poifons,  by  Wepfer,  and  by  others  ;  and  as  the  fymptoms  they  fuffer'd  '
while  living,  and  the  appearances  found  in  their  vifcera  after  death,  have  been
obferv'd  by  thefe  authors  ;  fo  I  could  wi(h,  that  either  the  fame  thing  had
been  done  in  regard  to  this,  or  that  I  had  time  to  do  it  at  prefent :  I  would
do  nothing  more  willingly  than  compare  all  the  obfervations  of  this  kind  one
with  another ;  that  we  might  fee  what  difference  we  could  diftinguifh  in  one
from  the  other,  in  regard  to  the  fpecies,  the  temperature,  the  age,  the  country,
the  part  of  the  plant,  or  the  ftate  of  it ;  or,  finally,  in  regard  to  the  fluid
that  was  mix'd  therewith.

14.  Now,  if  we  confider  this  one  obfervation  ;  we  fhall  think  it  probable
that  this  poifon  had  ad:ed  upon  the  ftomach  and  its  nerves,  and,  confequently,
upon  others  that  cohere  therev/ith.  For  what  were  the  very  hard  rugae  of
the  ftomach  -,  what  thofe  vomitings ;  what  that  bile,  as  it  feem'd  to  be,  prefs'd
out ;  what  the  loft  power  of  fpeech  ;  what  that  kind  of  deep,  as  it  were  ;  what
were  other  circumftances  that  I  now  pafs  over  ;  but  fymptoms  that  lead  us
naturally  to  conjefture  fome  internal  convulfions  and  concradtions,  whereby
the  blood  alfo  might  be  ftopp'd  in  its  courfe,  and  diftend  thofe  external  veins
of  the  ftomach  and  inteftines  ?

Nor  would  I  have  you  fay,  that,  if  all  thefe  things  happen  by  the  ftomach
beino-  vellicated  internally,  the  internal  furface  of  the  ftomach  itfelf  ought
to  have  appear'd  to  be  more  inflam'd  with  diftended  vefiels.  -  For  it  is  luf-
■ficient  that  the  ftomach  is  fo  vellicated  as  to  irritate  its  nerves,  in  order  to
explain  thofe  things  that  I  have  fpoken  of;  but  that  it  ihould  be  inflam'd,  is
by  no  means  neceffary.

For,  to  take  notice,  firft,  of  an  obfervation  made  on  the  human  body ;  in
j-ecrard  to  the  coriaria,  or  that  plant  which  was  call'd  rhus  myrtifolia  woufpe-
Haca,  C.  B.  how  fpeedy,  how  repeated,  how  horrible,  and,  in  a  fliort  time,
how  fatal  an  epilepfy  it  excites,  is  fliewn  by  that  very  celebrated  man  Des
Sauvages  (<?).

Yet  the  fame  author  could  not  find,  by  examining  the  body  of  this  man
af  er  death,  (who  was  kill'd  by  eating  only  fifteen  of  the  berries  of  tha|t  plant,
at  moft)  any  injury  of  the  brain,  or  of  any  other  paft ;  and  particularly  of

{0)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1739.

the


Letter  LIX. Article  1 4.  3  9-r

the  ftomach  itfelf ;  wherein  there  were,  even  then,  five  berries  of  the  cori-
aria  ;  the  others  having  been  thrown  up  by  means  of  an  emetic,  that  had
been  given.

And  to  pafs  on  to  many  obfervations,  and  thofe  upon  feveral  brute  ani-
mals of  different  kinds  ;  certainly  a  great  number  of  violent  fymptoms  were
undergone  by  a  dog,  and  in  like  manner  by  a  cat  ;  the  former  of  which  was
kill'd  by  Heydius  (/>),  by  giving  two  of  the  nuts  call'd  vomicas  ;  and  the
latter  by  Sproegelius  (j),  by  forcing  down  a  drachm  of  napellus.

Yet  in  the  dog  "  the  ftomach,  the  oefophagus,  and  the  inteftines,  were
"  quite  in  a  natural  ftate  :"  and  the  ftomach  of  the  cat  was  "  very  fimilar
"  to  one  in  its  moft  natural  ftate;  and  nothing  like  erofion  was  feen  :  the
"  vifcous  coat  being  very  bright  and  fmooth,  and  the  inteftines,  together
"  with  the  other  vifcera,  in  a  very  healthy  ftate."

Therefore,  as  Heydius  had  thought  it  to  be  pretty  plain,  from  his  obfer-
vation,  that  the  fluid,  by  which  the  brain  and  nerves  are  moiften'd,  was
chiefly  "  infefted  by  this  poifon  ;"  fo  Sproegelius  (r)  has  conJuded  as  fol-
lows from  his:  "  Since  1  have  feen  no  fign,"  fays  he,  "  either  of  erofion,
"  or  inflammation,  in  the  animal  killed  by  this  poifon,  it  muft  chiefly  have
*'  exerted  its  influence  upon  the  nerves  ;  by  vellicating  the  nervous  mem--
"  brane  of  the  ftomach."

And  indeed,  turn  to  the  experiments  of  Wepfer,  Brunnerus,  and  Nichols,
made  upon  thofe  animals,  to  whom  they  had  given  fome  vegetable  poifon-,
and  to  fome  of  them  the  fame  that  Sproegelius  and  Heydius  had  given ;
you  will  read  that  there  were  violent  fymptoms  in  all  of  them;  which  came
on  foon  after  taking  the  poifon  :  yet  you  will  not  find  that  the  ftomach  was
inflam'd  in  all  of  them.

For  in  one  of  them  (j),  "  the  internal  furface  of  the  ftomach  was  white:
"  nor  did  the  leaft  fign  of  inflammation  appear  in  any  part."  In  another  (/},
"  the  rugae  of  the  ftemach  were  white;  and  if,  in  fome  places,  they  were  a
"  little  more  red  than  is  obferv'd  at  other  times,  they  neverthelefs  were  not
"  manifeftly  inflam'd."  In  a  third  (u),  "  no  figns  of  inflammation  could  be
"  obferv'd  in  the  ftomach,  notwithftanding  the  furface  of  the  rugs  was  lefs
"  white  than  it  is  found  at  other  times  to  be."  And,  finally,  in  a  fourth  (x),
the  ftomach  and  inteftinum  duodenum  "  were  quite  white  on  their  inter-
"  nal  furface,  and  free  from  all  inflammation."

And  in  none  of  thofe  that  Nichols  dideifted  (y),  "  was  any  inflammation
*•  of  the  membranes  to  be  feen  internally;"  but  the  veins  were  diftended
with  fluid  blood,  fuch  as  they  were  diftended  with  in  the  cat  of  Sproegelius  :
and  this  1  take  notice  of,  becaufe  there  was  not  any  coagulum  of  blood  in
the  four  animals  juft  now  taken  notice  of  from  the  Sepulchretum  ;  and  in-'
deed,  in  one  of  them  (z),  as  well  as  in  the  woman  in  queftion  (a),  "  noE
"  the  leaft  quantity  of  blood  remain'd  in  the  ventricles  of  the  heart."

fp)  Obr.  Medic,  50.  (a)  Ibid.  Obf.  7.  Hift.  i,

(^)  Experim.  circa  venena  Exp.  2;  (x)  Obf.  ead.  Hift.  5.

\-r)  §i  5.  fyj apud Mead, in Append; fuprs ad.

Is)  in Additam.  ad  Seft. hanc  Sepulchr.  n.  9.  cit.

Obf.  5.  Hift.  1.  («)  Obf.  5.  cit.  Hift.  I.

(OJbid.  Obf,  6.  Hift.  1.  H  n.  12.

3.  However;.


392 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and Unlverfal  Diforders.

However,  the  fame  appearances  were  not  found  in  all  thefc,  as  in  thofe
four  to  whom  the  fame  poifon  had  been  given  :  and  even  in  many  of  them  was
an  inflammation  of  the  ftomach  ;  fo  that  it  ought  to  feem  lefs  furprizing  to
you,  if  I  fhould,  by  producing  two  recent  hiftories,  fhow,  that  the  fame  had
exilted  in  the  neareft  inteftines  at  leaft,  or  in  thefe  and  the  ftomach  at  the
fame  time,  from  fome  one  or  other  of  the  vegetable  poifons.

The  pernicious  effefts  of  the  berries  of  the  folanum,  which  they  call
furiofum,  have  been  feveral  times  obferv'd  •,  but  never  more  than  in  a  little
boy,  who  died  in  a  miferable  manner,  in  a  few  hours :  his  body  being  dif-
fered by  that  celebrated  man  Schreckius  (^),  had,  among  other  appear-
ances, the  inteftines  jejunum,  and  colon,  very  much  inflam'd.

And  muflirooms,  particularly  muQirooms  of  that  fpecies  which  Vaillant
has  deicrib'd  thus,  "  the  mufhroom  of  the  middle  fize,  univerfally  white,"
did  almoft  the  fame  thing  near  Paris,  as  they  had  formerly  done  at  Rome,
while  Pliny  was  writing  his  hiftory  {c)  ;  I  mean,  "  kill'd  a  family  -,"  but  that
nature,  affi'fted  by  the  art  of  that  experienc'd  phyfician  Monnier  (J),  who
defcribes  all  the  fymptoms  accurately,  and  in  order,  out  of  the  fix,  that  had
eaten  them,  lav'd  five.

The  fam,e  author,  in  examining  the  body  of  a  virgin  ;  who  was  the  only
one  that  could  not  be  fav'd  of  all  thefe ;  among  many  other  appearances,
which  you  will  fee  in  his  own  relation,  found  fome  marks  of  inflammation  in
the  fliomach,  about  the  pylorus  :  and  the  inteftine  duodenum  had  the  vefl"els
of  its  coats  quite  fill'd  with  blood  internally  -,  being,  at  the  fame  time,  be-
fidcs  fonie  flight  excoriations,  diftinguifli'd  with  purple  fpots,  and  inflam'd
at  the  upper  part  thereof.

And  I  have  feen  an  inflammation  of  the  ftomach,  and  inteftines,  brought
on  by  a  vegetable  medicine  :  but  one  of  the  moft  acrid  kind  ;  and  one  which,
for  that  reafon,  fometimes  brings  on  death  as  certainly  as  poifon  :  I  mean,
the  black  hellebore. The  hiftory  of  the  cafe  is  as  follows.

J  5.  A  man ;  who,  if  you  judg'd  from  his  countenance,  did  not  feem  to
be  fifty  as  yet  -,  of  a  well-form'd  body,  fomevvhat  fat,  and  of  a  good  colour,
though  a  little  inclin'd  to  brown  (having  black  hair  and  black  beard)  being
in  the  hofpital  under  cure,  on  account  of  a  melancholic  delirium,  was  about
to  depart  from  the  hofpital  immediately,  when  he  took  the  extraft,  as  it
is  cali'd,  of  black  hellebore.  By  t;his  medicine  he  was  purg'd  to  a  con-
fiderable  degree.

But  when  no  mifchief  was  expefted  ;  in  the  beginning  of  the  night,  that
is,  at  the  feventh  or  eighth  hour  from  the  time  he  had  taken  it,  he  was  at-
tack'd  with  vomitings,  and  pains  of  the  belly.  Yet  thefe  feem'd  to  be  quieted
foon  after  by  drinking  fome  v/arm  broth ;  that  is,  about  the  fecond  hour  of
the  night.

At  the  fifth  hour  they  again  came  on  ;  and  feem'd  again  to  be  diminifli'd;
fo  that  he  went  to  bed  before  the  fixth  hour :  and  he  had  thrown  up  nothing
by  vomiting,  but  as  much  of  a  green  kind  of  matter,  degenerating  into
black,  as  two  or  three  fpoons  could  have  contain'd. When  he  lay  down

{b)  Commerc.  Litter.  A, 1743.  Hebd.  8, W  Nat.  Hift.  I- 22.  c.  13.
».  4. ,  (dj  Mem.  de  1'  Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1749.

he


Letter  LIX. Article  i  jr.  3pg

'he  feem'd  to  be  quiet  and  eafy  ;  at  leaft  he  made  no  noife.that  (how'd
him  to  be  in  pain  :  nor  any  which  the  patients,  who  lay  in  the  neareft  beds,
heard.

At  the  eighth  hour,  however,  a  certain  found,  which  came  from  his
mouth,  was  heard  by  the  attendants :  at  which  they  running  to  him,  found
him  already  dead.

Thefe  things  being  accidentally  related  to  me ;  for  I  was  at  that  time  (it
being  about  the  middle  of  December,  in  the  year  174.7)  teaching  anatomy
in  the  hofpital ;  I  firft  enquir'd  what  kind  of  extraft  of  hellebore,  and  how
much  he  had  taken.  And  I  found  that  it  was  the  fame  which  had  been  gene-
rally given  to  others  there  ;  I  mean,  an  extraft  made  from  the  frefh-drawn
roots,  bruis'd  and  prepar'd  with  fimple  water :  he  had  taken  the  quantity  of
half  a  drachm  ;  whereas,  very  frequently,  the  weight  of  a  fcruple  was  given,
and  fometimes,  to  thofe  who  are  not  eafily  purg'd,  more  than  half  a
drachm,  without  any  injury.

As  I  enquir'd,  after  this,  whether  the  man  had  taken  any  thing  elfe  that
could  be  hurtful  •,  I  was  anfwer'd,  that  fo  far  was  this  from  being  the  cafe,  that
he  had  even  done  wrong  by  not  taking  every  thing  he  ought  to  have  taken.
For  the  patient,  to  whom  this  extradt  was  given,  ought  to  drink  whey  after
taking  it :  but  he  had  not  drunk  his  whey  ;  as  was  certainly  known  after  his
death,  by  the  whey  being  found  in  the  very  fame  place  where  it  had  been
put  for  him  to  drink.

Having  learn'd  thefe  particular  circumftances,  relative  to  the  cafe,  I
undertook  the  diffeftion  of  the  body,  at  eight- andthirty  hours  after
death.

The  limbs  of  the  carcafe  not  being  obferv'd  to  be  rigid,  or  contrafted,
the  belly  was  open'd.  We  faw  the  ftomach  and  inteftines  to  be  inflam'd,
here  and  there,  even  on  the  external  part :  fo  that  as  the  inteftine  ileum
was,  in  fome  places,  ot  a  natural  width,  and  in  other  places  of  a  greater  or
kfler  width  than  natural  •,  where  it  was  narrower  than  natural,  there  the
coats  were  very  thin,  and  without  any  rednefs :  but  in  other  places  they
were  feen  to  be  diftinguifh'd  with  red  ftrias.

Then  the  ftomach,  and  all  the  inteftines,  being  wafh'd  out  with  water
pafs'd  through  them,  and  open'd  ;  we  found  the  ftomach,  together  with  a
fmall  part  of  the  annex'd  gula,  to  be,  in  part,  inflam'd;  but  on  the  left
fide  only,  and  not  on  the  right :  and  the  inteftines  were  here  and  there
inflam'd  •,  yet  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  inflammation  was  lefs  flight  in  the
thin  than  in  the  thick  inteftines  :  if  you  except  the  redlum,  wherein  fome
fpaces  were  equally  and  evidently  inflam'd,  as  in  the  ftomach.  Yet  no
violent  inflammation  appear'd  any  where  through  the  whole  of  this  body.

The  fpleen  was  a  little  larger  than  natural :  and  on  its  flat  furface,  that  is
to  fay,  where  it  was  in  contact  with  the  ftomach,  of  a  rofy  colour  ;  and  uni-
verfaJly  fo  lax,  that  the  interior  parts  of  it,  when  cut  into,  were  almoft  fluid.
In  the  liver  was  nothing  worthy  of  remark,  unlefs  the  colour  of  the  bile;
v/hich,  as  was  feen  through  the  coats  of  the  gall-bladder,  appear'd  to  be  of
a  green  colour,  degenerating  into  palenefs.

The  thorax  being  open'd,  the  lungs  were  found  to  be  every  where  un-
connected and  found :  nor  had  the  heart,  or  the  great  veflels,  any  thing

Vol.  Ill,  .  E  e  e  worthy


3  94 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

worthy  of  remark,  except  that  in  the  latter  there  was  little  blood,  and  in  the
former  a  flight  polypous  concretion.

"When  the  cranium  was  cut  into,  a  little  bloody  ferum  flow'd  down  :  and
foon  after  we  obferv'd,  that  there  was  but  a  little  blood  in  the  finufles  of  the
dura  mater,  and  the  larger  branches  that  are  fpread  through  the  pia  mater.

The  brain,  which  I  was  at  firft  furpriz'd  at  in  one  who  had  labour'd  under
a  melancholic  delirium,  was  fo  lax,  that  when  it  was  taken  out,  and  laid
upon  the  anatomical  table,  the  very  weight  of  the  hemifpheres  collapfing
outwards,  made  a  diftraftion  upon  the  pofterior  part  of  the  corpus  callofum  :
and  yet  it  was  not  then  the  fixth  day  after  death.

This  diftraftion  did  not  prevent  us  from  diftinguifliing,  upon  the  remain-
ing upper  furface  of  the  fame  corpus  callofum,  which  was  found,  that  faf-
ciculus  which  is  protuberant  in  the  middle  longitudinally  j  and  which,  in
this  body,  did  not  differ  from  its  ulual  appearance.

In  cutting  through  the  cerebrum  foon  after,  I  faw,  that  neither  in  the  fmall
vefiels  which  pafs  through  the  medullary  fubftance,  nor  yet  in  the  plexus
choroides,  was  blood  wanting  :  but  I  every  where  obferv'd  the  fame  laxity
as  1  did  alfo  in  the  cerebellum,  and  the  medulla  oblongata ;  and  in  the  glan-
dula  pinealis  itfelf ;  which  appear'd  rather  bigger  and  more  globular  than
Tjfual.

But  in  fo  great  a  laxity  of  the  other  parts,  it  was  furprizing  that  the
lacunar.,  or  roof,  which  joins  the  right  and  left  paries  of  the  third  ventricle
together,  was  not  at  all  overftretch'd.

16.  From  the  latter  part  of  this  hiftory,  you  would  have  fomething  to
add,  by  way  of  exception,  to  thofe  things  that  I  have  already  faid  {e)  upon
the  brain  of  perfons  who  had  been  melancholically  delirious  ;  if  the  man
had  not  feem'd  to  be  recover'd  before  death.  And  from  the  remaining
part  you  have  what  fometimes  happens  from  black  hellebore;  and  what  is
found  in  the  ttomach  and  intefl:ines  in  this  cafe.

It  is  afferted  by  fome,  and  particularly  by  Gulielmus  Fabricius  (/),  noc
only  that  he  had  read  of  a  prince  being  kiU'd  by  a  medicine  prepar'd  from
black  hellebore  -,  but  alfo  that  he  remember'd  a  matron,  of  a  pretty  ftrong
habit  of  body,  to  have  died,  within  fix  hours,  after  having  taken  fome  pills
for  her  head,  wherein  a  little  of  the  fame  extraft  of  hellebore  had  been
mix'd  -,  notwithftanding  they  had  brought  on  a  difcharge  from  the  ftomach
and  inteftines  no  more  than  twice  :  both  of  which  deaths  he,  with  juftice,.
fuppos'd  were  not  to  be  afcrib'd  to  the  hellebore  itfelf,  or  to  its  extract ;
which  he  had  made  ufe  of  very  fuccefsfully  both  on  himfelf  and  others,  but.
to  the  negligence  of  thofe  who  prepar'd  the  extradl,  or  the  hellebore ;  or  to
their  unfkilfulnefs.

Yet  what  fymptoms  had  preceded  thefe  deaths,  or  what  injuries  were
found  in  the  internal  parts  of  their  bodies  after  death,  I  do  not  now  remem-
ber to  have  read,  either  in  him  or  in  others.

For  as  to  Ardoynus  (£)  enumerating  the  fymptoms  that  arife  from  this  helle-
bore, and  llippofing  them  to  be  a  very  great  flux  of  the  belly,  a  parch'd  ftate.

(1)  Epift.  R.  n.  14.  {g)  De  Venenis  1.  3.  c.  13.

\f)  Bsfponf.  ad,  Doring-,,

of


-Letter  LIX. Article  17.  .  29S

of  lire  tongue,  a -very  great  erudacion,  and  inflammation  ;  befides  other
fymptoms  that  are  common  to  fome  other  poifons,  and  among  thefe,  to  white
hellebore;  in  the  number  of  which  are  ftrangulation,  fyncope,  lofs  of
ftrength,  cold  fweat,  and  fpafm  from  inanition;  if  we  are  to  form  a  judg-
ment from  the  obfervation  in  queftion,  moft  of  thefe  fymptoms  probably
agree  better  with  the  white  hellebore,  than  the  black.  At  leaft  they  did  not
appear  in  the  man  I  have  defcrib'd.

But  fome  of  them  have  been  obferv'd,  together  with  a  violent  vomiting,
(which  he,  with  great  juftice,  afcribes  to  the  white  hellebore)  in  thofe  who
have  died  from  taking  this  medicine  ;  as  in  a  woman,  who,  as  Johannes  de
Muralto  {h)  relates,  had  very  frequent  vomitings  therefrom;  after  which
(he  was  agitated  with  horrible  convulfions,  wherein  fhe  died  :  and  as  in  a
young  whelp,  which  Wepfer  fpeaks  of  {i)  as  having  died  in  the  fame  man-
ner; although  the  dog  of  which  Courtenius  [k)  fpeaks,  that  had  taken  down
four  times  the  quantity  of  the  fame  hellebore,  did  indeed  fuffer  vomitings,
inteftinal  difcharges,  fingultus,  fuffocaiions,  and  even  to  all  appearance,
pains ;  and  yet  efcap'd  neverthelefs.

But  be  this  as  it  will,  you  have  heard  what  happen'd  in  this  man  from
black  hellebore  ;  as  you  likewife  have  heard  what  appearances  were  found  in
his  vifcera  after  death.  For  you  might  have  learn'd  from  the  well-known
diffedions  of  the  whelp,  and  the  woman  fpoken  of  above,  that  from  white
hellebore  the  ftomach  has  been  found  to  be  red,  and  even  internally  cor-
roded, and  of  a  black  colour.

But  what  mifchief  had  been  done  to  the  ftomach  and  inteftines  of  the  hu-
man body,  by  black  hellebore,  you  perhaps  could  not  have  known  for  cer-
tain ;  except  from  the  prefent  defcription.  And  if  the  mifchief  really  hap-
pen'd, as  it  feems  to  have  done,  from  this  circumftance,  that  the  man,
after  taking  the  extraft,  did  not  drink  a  large  quantity  of  whey,  as  others
always  did,  and  as  is^order'd,  even  by  Hippocrates  (/),■  after  black  hel-
lebore ;  hence  then,  likewife,  thofe  things  we  have  faid  above  (vi),  in  regard
to  the  advantage  of  drinking  whey,  in  perfons  who  have  taken  an  acrid  poifon,
iare  eonfirm'd.

And  neither  the  quantity,  nor  the  ftate,  of  the  blood,  fiiow  the  man  to
have  been  difpos'd  to  inflammation  ;  as  it  was  in  fmall  quantity,  and  fluid
in  confiftence.  Yet  I  would  not  deny  that  the  efi'edts  of  poifon  are  en-
creas'd  by  the  difpofition  of  the  body  ;  as  I  readily  acknowledge,  that  a
poifon  may  be  fometimes  generated  by  the  very  difpofition  of  the  body
itfelf.

17,  And  indeed  the  ancient  phyficians  alfo  («)  acknowledg'd,  "  that
*'  the  fame  diforders  are  produc'd  from  taking  down  into  the  ftomach
«'  a  deadly  poifon,  and  from  a  corruption  which  has  its  origin  from  the
*'  body  :"  that  is  to  fay,  this  corruption  may  be  fo  violent  "  as  to  equal
*'  both  the  quality  and  the  ftrength  of  the  poifon."

i {h)  Sepulchr.  1.  3.  S.  8.  Obf.  6,  (/)  De  Intern. Affeft. n.  46.  apud  Ma-

(/)  I.  4.  S.  hac  10.  in  Additam.  Obf.  8.  rinell.

{i)  Saggio  delle  Tranfaz.  trad, dal  Dere- («»)  n.  11.
fem  T.  3.  c.  9.  §.  6.  (»)  Vid.  Gall.  1.  6.  de  loc.  aff.  c.  5.


2^6 Book  IV.  Of  Cliirurglcal and  Univerful  Difoi'ders,

Nor  were  the  greater  part  of  the  fucceeding  phyficians  averfe  to  this  opi-
nion.  Which  I  believe  no  obfervation  can  more  evidently  confirm  than,
this,  which  was  formerly  communicated  to  me  by  Giovanni  Francefco  Ci-
cognini,  who  was,  while  living,  an  eminent  and  experienc'd  lurgeon  at
Forli  ;  and  who  having  learnt  the  experiment  at  Florence,  made  it  after  the
manner  of  Redi.

18.  A  little  Ton  of  Francefco  Ridolfi,  a  painter  at  Forli,  being  emaciated
and  extenuated  by  a  tertian  fever,  was  at  laft  carried  off  by  dreadful  convul-
fions ;  wherewith  he  was  aitack'd.

Upon  opening  the  abdomen,  the  inteftines  appear'd  to  be  drawn  up  to
the  mefentery,  which  was  contradled  ;  their  coats  being  fomewhat  rigid,  and
in  a  manner  dried  up.  And  thefe  vifcera,  as  well  as  the  Itomach,  contain'd
a  great  quantity  of  jeruginous  bile ;  by  the  contact  of  which  the  fcalpel  was
ting'd  of  a  violet  colour.

This  fcalpe),  tinflur'd,  and  even  dropping,  as  it  was,  with  the  fame  bile  ;
he  imprefs'd  flightly  upon  the  flefh  of  one,  and  another,  pidgeon  ;  in  fuch  a
manner,  however,  as  to  leave  the  bile  remaining  within  the  wound  :  in  codt
fequence  of  which,  they  both  died,  in  tremblings  and  convulfions,  foon  after.
And  indeed,  a  piece  of  bread  mix'd  with  this  bile,  being  taken  down  by  a
cock  ;  this  animal  alfo  died  in  a  fimilar  manner.

19.  Although  that  formerly  very  excellent  phyfician,  and  Paduan  pro-
feflTor,  Jo.  Dominic  Sala  (0),  aflerted  that  internal  poifons  "  are  rarely  ge-
"  nerated  in  bodies,  in  other  refpefts  of  a  good  habit,  and  that  had  not  com*
"  mitted  any  errors  in  their  method  of  living-,  and  very  rarely  fo  fuddenly
"  that  the  patient  does  not  forefee  it  from  other  parts,  or  from  other  acci-^
"  dents ;"  yet  in  this  very  circumftance,  of  not  denying  that  this  might  hap-
pen rarely,  or  very  rarely,  he  differ'd  from  thofe  phyficians  that  were  fpoken
of  above  (p)  ;  who  did  not  doubt  (q)  but,  on  the  appearance  of  fymptoms
of  poifon  in  the  human  body,  "  thofe  who  had  taken  in  poifon  might  eafily
"  be  diftinguifli'd  from  thofe  who  were  affefted  from  fome  other  caufe  :"
that  is  to  fay,  from  a  poifon  generated  within  the  body.

For  thfey  faid,  that  thofe  who,  by  their  own  nature,  abounded  with  good
juices,  and  "  were  like  healthy  perfons,  had  taken  poifon."

It  is  certainly  of  fome  importance,  informing  fuch  a  judgment,  whether
the  man  in  queftion  was  in  health,  or  nor.  For  in  Severinus  Falckius  ;  to
ufe  examples  taken  from  the  Sepulchretum  (r) ;  neither  the  vomiting  of
every  thing  taken  in,  nor  the  ftomach  being  internally  red,  andalmoft  exr
coriated,  could  raife  a  fufpicion  of  poifon  having  been  given ;  efpecially
in  the  laft  ftage  of  life:  as  the  fcurvy  and  irregular  fevers-,  and  after
that,  loft  appetite,  and  very  fevere  pains  of  the  ftomach,  had  long  been
troublefome.

On  the  other  hand,  in  a  young  man  for  whom  the  opinion  of  Sala  was
adc'd  ;  befides  other  fymptoms  of  poifon  having  been  taken,  this  circum-
ftance, that  he  was  of  a  good  habit  of  body,  and  enjoy'd  good  health,  had.


(o)  Vid.  Sepulchr.  1.  3. S.  7.  in  Schol.  ad (?)  Galen,  c.  5.  ibid.  cit.
Obf.  I.  &  2.  {r)  Obf.  1.  &  2.  modo  est.

if)  n.  17.


fo.


Letter  LIX. Article  r  9.  3:^7

ib-  much  influence  upon  Sala's  opinion,  that  he  never  Ibften'd  his  fufpicioa'
of  poifon,  till,  in  another  relation  of  the  cafe,  it  was  faid  that  he  was  a  va-
Letudinarian  ;  and  of  a  bad  habit  of  body.

Yet,  as  he  was  a  prudent  man,  he  would  not  pronounce,  in  his  firfl  opi-
nion, that  poifon  had  beea  given  ;  nor  in  his  fecond,  that  it  had  not,  for  a-
certainty.

And  indeed,  although  the  body  abounds  with  good  juices;  that  very
abundance  is  a,  reafon  why  a  man  "  ought  to  have  a  iuipicion  of  his  own
"  happinefs  ;"  that  is  to  fay,  left  "  every  thing  be  again  carried  backwards,
"  by  a.  kind  of  ruin  :"  which  are  the  words  of  Celfus  (j),  who  follows  the
monitum  of  Hippocrates  (/).  And  we  know  that  wicked  men,  who  attempt
to  poifon  others,  frequently  feek  for  the  occafion  of  weak  health  ;  that  there
may  be  no  fufpicion  of  their  wickednefs :  and  this  is  fljown  by  one  of  our
obfervations  above  (u) :  and  I  have  elfewhere  obferv'd  that  it  has  been  done
before  in  ancient  times.

Thus,  that  moft  crafty  woman,  Agrippina  (x),  who  was  more  worthy  of
her  fon  than  of  her  parents,  having  determin'd  to  take  off  her  hufband'  by.
poifon,  and  he  being  feiz'd  with  ill  health,  did  not  think  that  flie  ought  to.
omJt  this  occafion  which  was  offer'd  her  :  and  the  fame  woman  made  ufe,.
moreover,  of  other  fallacies ;,  not  unufual  among  perfons  who  attempt
to  kill  by  poifon ;  in  order  to  hide  her  wickednefs.

For  with  this  view,  I  fuppofe,  it  was  that  ihe  pour'd  the  poifon  "  into  the
*^  delightful  food  of  mufhrooms ;"  her  hufband  "  being  very  fond  of  fuch  a
"  di(h  "  (y) ;  fo  that  he  might  feem,  by  eating  much  of  them,  to  have  hurt
himfelf  from  the  too  great  quantity  ;  and  alfo  from  £bme  pernicious  mufh^
room,  which  was  thrown  among  the  good  ones,  as  if  by-  the  error  of  the
cook  :  whether,  as  it  happen'd,.  "  he  was  troubled  with  pains  -,"  or  "  a  vio-
"  lent  vomiting,"  or  "  a  purging ;"  or  even  "  a  fever "  fhould  trouble
Him  moft  -,  for  that  the  latter  of  thefe  "  continu'd  with  him  many  years,  evea
"  to  his. dying  day,"  is  hinted  by  L.  Annaeus  Seneca  (2).

If  you  take  notice  of  thefe,  and  other  fuch  cafes,  with  me  ;  you  will  be
able,  more  eafily,  to  diftinguifli  the  crafts  of  wicked  men,  who  frequently.
impofe  upon  phyficians  in  the  cafes  of  fome  patients:  or,  at  leaft,  you  will
be  led  to  fufpedl  them;  and  I  wilh  it  may  be  before  it  is  too  late:  and  you.
will,  at  the  fame  time,  perceive,  not  only  by  reafon,.  but  by  obfervations
alfo,  that  fome  certain  fymptoms,  as  thirft,  and  fome  certain  diforders,  as.
fever,  which  are  faid  by  many,  to  attend  when,  a  poifon  is  inbred,  may  alfo
attend  when  poifon  has  been  adminifter'd  ;  and,  even  may  have  pre-
ceded.

Therefore  Sala,  whom  I  have  already  commended, although he  denied
that  poifon  "  is  generated  without  a  fever ;"  yet  did  not,  for  that  reafon,
in  his  fecond  anfwer,  afcribe  fo  much  to  this  fymptom,  as  to  affirm  that  the-.  '
young  man,  had  died  from  poifon  generated  within. Nor,  indeed, are  v/e.

(j)  De  Medic.  1.  2.  c.  2.  (y)  Vid.  Sueton.de  duodec.  Csfarib.  .1.  5,.

(?)  Sgft.  I.  Aph.  3.  c.  44.

(a)  n.  6.  {x.)  Apocolocynt.

(.y)  Vid.  Tacit.  Annal.  1.  12.

«nda?r


398 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univafal  Diforders,

ainder  a  necefiity  of  affirming  the  fame,  becaufe  no  unufual  odour  or  tafte,
nor  any  pain,  is  perceiv'd  in  the  mouth,  or  fauces,  in  fvvallowing,  or  after
fwallowing.

For  to  pafs  over  tlie  promife  of  that  wicked  king  Perfeus  {a),  of  poifon,
which  could  not  be  detected  by  any  fign  whatever,  *'  either  in  being  given,
or  after  being  given  •,"  and  to  omit  here  other  things,  alfo,  that  might  be
iiiid  ;  you  perceive  fufficiently,  from  the  obfervations  1  have  related  to  you
above  (i'),  that  poifon  has  been  taken  in  without  any  mark  of  it  having  been
perceiv'd.

And,  on  the  other  hand,  you  fee,  that,  from  any  animal's  being  diforder'd
by  eating  what  has  been  thrown  up  by  vomiting  in  thefe  fufpe<5ted  cafes,  it
is  not  to  be  inferr'd  that  this  vomiting  was  from  poifon  that  had  been  taken
in;  and  not  from  an  in-bred  poifon;  as  the  laft-propos'd  obfervation((r)
clearly  demonftrates.

20.  But  that  even  the  appearances  found  in  the  ftomach  after  death  may
fometimes  impofe  upon  us,  we  are  taught  by  that  circumftance  which  I  juft
ROW  took  notice  of  (J)  in  regard  to  Falckius.  And  to  this  you  will  add  what
has  been  transferr'd  into  the  bepulchretum  from  Ballonius  (f),  and  from  Rio-
lanus,  in  like  manner  (/),  when,  in  a  body  where  poifon  was  fufpefted  to
have  been  given,  the  ftomach  was  found  to  be  befet  with  exanthemata;  and
the  phyficians  were  juft  upon  the  point  of  abfolutely  determining  and  af-
ferting,  that  thefe  exanthemata  were  owing  to  poifon  ;  if  they  had  not  been
inform'd  that  they  were  owing  to  the  meafles  ;  which  had  begun  to  break
out  on  the  fkin,  but  were  repell'd  by  reafon  of  weaknefs  in  the  patient,  and
occupied  the  ftomach  :  and  the  fame  fufpicion,  in  many  who  died  fuddenly,
has  arifen  from  hence,  that  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach,  and  particularly  the
left  part  of  it,  was  black,  both  internally  and  externally  -,  whereas  this  was
not  to  be  attributed  to  poifon,  but  to  the  blood  ftagnating  there,  within  the
fmall  veins  which  belong  to  that  branch  formerly  call'd  vas  breve.

But,  on  the  contrary,  all  fpots  obferv'd  in  the  ftomach  are  not  to  be  de-
fpis'd.  And  we  ought  to  expand  the  ftomach  betwixt  our  eyes  and  the  light,
after  opening  it.  For,  by  this  means,  that  ftomach,  which  feem'd  only  to  be
fprinkled  here  and  there  with  fome  fpots,  was  found,  as  Ballonius  {g)  relates,
to  be  perforated  with  very  imall  foramina,  which  are  marks  of  poifon :  al-
though even  then  I  ftrould  think  we  ought  to  determine  by  other  marks"
whether  the  poifon  was  external  or  internal.

And,  indeed,  fometimes,  not  only  a  manifeft,  but  a  large  ulcer  may  be
found  in  the  ftomach  ;  the  firft  fymptoms  of  the  origin  of  which  may  feem
to  have  been  the  confequences  of  poifon  that  was  taken  in  ;  and  yet  the
marter  may  not  be  clear  from  doubt.

Thus  in  a  young  man  fpoken  of  by  Fabricius  Hildanus  {h),  a  pain  of  the
ftomach  had  begun  firft  after  a  plentiful  meal :  and  this  pain  increafing  gra-
dually from  that  time,  and  becoming  more  fevere,  fo  as  to  kill  the  patient,

{a)  Vid.  Liv.  Hift.  1.  42.  {e)  Sea.  hac  lo.  Obf.  4.  §  10.

(*)  N.  7.  (f)  L.  3.  S.  7.  in  Schol.  ad  Obf.  10.

ic)  N.  ig.  (g)  Sea.  ead.  Obf.  17.  §  i,

y)  N.  ig.  (i.)  Ibid.  Obf.  5.  cum  SdioL

a  large


Letter  LIX. Article  21.:  3pc)

a  large  ulcer  was  found  in  his  ilomach  after  death  ;  extending  itfelf  from  the
upper  orifice  of  the  ftomach,  downwards,  into  the  ftomach  :  which  ulcer  the
parents  accounted  for  from  poifon  having  been  given :  but  Fabricius  thought
it  more  probable,  that  the  ulcer  had  begun  from  fome  little  fliarp  bone  being
infix'd  in  one  of  the  rugse  of  that  orifice :  for  if  the  ulceration  had  been
made  by  poifon  that  was  taken  in  -,  this,  fays  he,  "  would  have  exiiled  ra-
«  ther  in  the  fundus  itfelf,  than  in  the  orifice  of  the  ftomach."

Yet  thofe  who  fhould  chufe  to  difTent  from  Fabricius,  might  take  objedtions-
from  the  cafes  of  thofe  two  girls  who  were  fufpefted  to  have  died  by  poifon,
and  in  one  of  whom  Joannes  de  Muralto  (z)  found  five  black  marks,  as  if
they  had  been  burnt  in,  near  to  the  fame  orifice ;  and  in  the  other  of  which„
Peter  Paaw  {k)  found  that  very  orifice  eroded  in  two  places  :  and,  to  fay  no-
thing of  a  man  open'd  by  the  fame  Paawius  (/)  on  account  of  the  fame  fufpi-
cion,  (for,  befides  the  fubftance  of  that  orifice  being  eroded,  he  had  alfo  the-
remaining  part  of  the  ftomach's  internal  furface  eroded  alfo)  they  might,  how-
ever, produce  the  inftance  of  a  dog  fpoken  of  in  the  hiftories  publifh'd  by
Wepfer(?»)  ;  which  having  taken  arfenic,  and  died  the  next  day,  fhew'd,,
when  differed,  "  the  furface  that  lay  near  to  the  cefophagus,  in  the  ftomachj,
*'  to  be  red  and  inflam'd  ;  but  fhew'd  no  mark  of  inflammation  about  the
"  pylorus,  or  in  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach."

Finally,  that  it  may  better  appear  how  difficult  it  is  to  judge  in  this  matter^,
it  may  fometimes  feem,  in  cafes  of  this  kind,  that  the  poifon  itfelf  has  been
found  in  the  ftomach ;  as  in  a  matron  fpoken  of  by  Bened.  Silvaticus  (k),
"  that  fine  powder,  of  a  cineritious  colour,  adhering  to  the  ulcerated  part
"  of  the  flomach,  was  taken  for  the  moft  clear  and  certain  mark  of  poifon  "
having  been  given  :  or,  as  in  the  girl  of  Muraltus  juft  now-  taken  notice  0?^,
that  other  kind  of  "  fandy  "  powder,  which  fubfided  from  the  fluids  found.
in  the  ftomach,  and  receiv'd  in  a  clean  vefTel.

But  unlefs  the  po-^der  be  found  in  fuch  a  quantity  as  to  be  capable  of
being  well  examin'd  by  fliilful  perfons,  and  known  to  be  poifon  ;  or,  unlefs
the  particles  of  it,  adhering  to  the  eroded  coats  of  the  ftomach,  are  of  fuch:
a  kind  as  eafily  to  difcover  themfelves  •,  as  that  gilla  which  Heerfius  (0)  found-:
adhering  to  them  ;  or  as  the  little  pieces  of  white  arfenic.which  Salmuthus  (p)
faw  adhering  to  them,  and  juft  puU'd  away  ;  or  unlefs,  as  in  the  woman,  alfo,,
of  whom  is  the  firft  obfervation  of  this  letter  {q),  they  had  other  circumftances
whereby  to  determine  ^  it  will  not  be  pofTible  to  pronounce  any  thing  certain
therefrom.

21.  And  as  often  as  I  confider  with  myfelf  all  thefe  things,,  and  others  thaCr
Etmullcr ;  I  mean  the  fon ;  has  confider'd  in  a  very  learned  and  judicious,
manner,  in  a  programma  publifh'd  at  Leipfic  in  the  year  1729,  fhewing  how
difficult  and  dangerous  it  is  to  determine  any  thing  certain  in  queftions  of
this  kind  ;  I  fay,  as  often  as  ever  I  confider  thefe  things,  fo  often  do  I  think
that  I  afted  very  juflly  and  properly,  when,  in  ibme  difTedions,  which  i

(0  L.  eod.  3.  Sepukhr.  S.  8.  Obf.  7.  (»)  Ead.  S.  10.  Obf.  5.

Ik)  L.  4.  Sepulchr.  S.  hac  10.  Obf.  4. §  7.  {0)  Sepulch.  1.  3.  S.  8.  Obf.  8.

(/)  Ibid.  §  8.  (p)  Ibid.  Obf.  s.

[m]  Ibid,  in  Additam.  Obf.  13.  Hifi.  12.  (j)  N.  3.

might


40  0 Book  IV. Of  Chimrgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

might  Tiave  given  you  here,  but  have  written  to  you  formerly  fr),  I  would
not  pronounce  whether  the  poifon  was  generated  within,  or  taken  in  from
without.

Yet  in  that  woman,  in  whom  I  found  not  only  the  ftomach  and  the  in-
teftine  duodenum,  but  alio  the  oefophagus,  eroded  {s) ;  I  {hould  have  been
able  to  take  upon  me  to  fay  more,  if  it  had  been  certainly  known  that  there
iiad  been  no  vomitings,  whereby  the  poifon,  which  was  perhaps  in-bred,
being  thrown  up,  had,  by  ftagnating  in  forae  part  of  it,  happen'd  to  injure
the  oefophagus.

It  will  not,  therefore,  be  a  flight  proof  of  poifon  having  been  taken,  that
there  are  erofions  of  the  ftomach,  if  they  are  join'd  with  no  vomiting,  and
nevertheleis  with  an  erolion  of  the  oefophagus  ^  efpecially  if  they  be  found
in  a  perfon  who,  being  m  good  health,  and  having  committed  no  error  in
his  method  of  living,  v/as  luddenly  feiz'd,  after  taking  fomething  into  the
ftomach  ;  particularly  any  thing  of  an  unufual  tafte  or  fmell ;  with  pains  of
the  ftomach,  or  anxieties,  and  other  fymptoms  of  poifon  being  taken  in,  and
died  within  a  very  fliort  time :  not  a  flight  conjecture  will  be  drawn  from
all  thefe,  I  fay,  or  the  greateft  part  of  them,  being  join'd  into  one.

But  the  cafe  will  be  certain  where  the  poifon  itfelf  fliall  be  found  in  the
ftomach,  or  in  the  neighbouring  inteftines,  in  fuch  a  quantity  as  to  be  eafily
known.  See  alfo  the  marks  of  Hoffman  (?),  on  occafion  of  fome  hiftories
that  well  deferve  to  be  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  :  for  they  propofe
both  the  fymptoms  and  the  difledions  in  a  proper  manner,  by  no  means
omitting  the  reafons,  from  whence,  among  the  marks  of  poifon  having  been
given,  and  particularly  of  arfenic,  that  are  common  to  many,  we  may  un-
derftand  that  poifon  was  not  given  to  one,  and  was  given  to  others.

But,  in  regard  to  that  principal  teftimony  of  poifon  having  been  given  ;
I  mean,  a  portion  of  it  found  in  the  vifcera  •,  as,  according  to  the  different
ftate  of  the  poifons,  their  very  fmall  quantity,  and  their  mixture  with  other
things,  it  does  not  often  occur;  we  muft,  therefore,  take  our  evidences
from  other  circumftances  -,  fome  of  which,  as  they  belong  to  the  judges  of
capital  affairs,  are  omitted  by  me  :  but  one  which  concerns  phyficians  muft
not  be  omitted  ;  though  of  itfelf  obvious,  and  obferv'd  once  or  twice  by  me
in  the  courfe  of  my  enquiries.

For,  befides  that  which  1  faw  in  the  y^ear  171 1,  and  took  notice  of
above  («) ;  I  mean,  when  three  who  ate  of  the  fame  difn  were  all  affedled
with  fymptoms  of  poifon  foon  after  ;  it  had  already  happen'd  before,  in  the
year  1709,  that  many  of  my  fellow-citizens,  whom  I  knew  to  be  familiar
with  each  other,  and  to  be  accuftom'd  to  feaft  together  fometimes,  call'd  me
to  them  within  a  few  days ;  and,  fufpefting  that  there  was  fome  one  common
eagle  of  the;r  falling  flck  at  one  time,  1  found,  by  enquiry,  that  fince  the
time  they  had  all  din'd  together  laft,  they  had  begun,  at  firft,  not  to  be
very  well,  and  foon  after  to  be  ill.

1  afk'd  whether  there  were  any  others at  this  dinner  befides  themfelves.

<r)  Epift.  29.  n.ji8.  &  fe^q.  (')  Medic.  Rat.  Tom.  4. P.  3.  S.  z. c.  8.

is)  Ibid.  n.  20.  in  Enarrat.  Morb.  Obf.  z,  3,  4,

(;/)  N.  7.  &  feq.

I  And


Letter  LIX. Article  22.  401

And  having  heard  that  there  were,  and  that  all  of  them,  not  one  excepted*
now  were  ill  of  the  fame  difeafe ;  and  yet  that  none  of  them  had  eaten  im-
moderately, or^ny-thing  that  was  not  quite  wholefbme  ;  and  obferving  that
few  perfons  were  difeas'd  in  the  city  that  autumn  ;  I  thought  it  was  fcarcely
to  be  doubted,  but  fomething  of  a  deprav'd  nature  and  fimilar  to  poifon,
had  been  mix'd  up  either  in  the  foods  or  the  liquors  which  had  been  made
ufe  of  at  that  dinner  :  though,  probably,  owing  to  lome  accident.

But  eafy  as  it  was  to  conjedture  this  in  general,  fo  difficult  was  it,  either
from  the  lymptoms  of  the  patients,  or  from  an  accurate  and  often-repeated
enquiry,  to  learn  what  ingredient  this  was.

For  the  fymptoms  were  different  in  different  perfons,  according  to  the  va-
rious age,  difpofition,  and  temperature,  in  different  bodies ;  although  in  many
of  them,  among  other  fymptoms,  were  an  inteftinal  flux,  and  tormina  ;  and
one  of  them  difcharg'd  pure  blood  from  the  inteftines,  without  tormina.  But
that  I  might  have  the  beft  opportunity  of  enquiring  into  the  truth,  I  under-
took the  more  willingly  to  attend,  without  any  rewara,  to  the  cure  of  the
fervant-maid  who  had  drefs'd  the  dinner,  and  eaten  the  remains  of  it  ;  be-
fides  the  perfon  who  gave  the  dinner :  for  both  of  them  were  greatly  af-
fefted  ;  and  the  fervant  maid  very  greatly  indeed.

And  though  I  frequently  faid  to  the  maid,  how  much  more  eafy  the  cure
would  be,  if  fhe  would  juft  tell  ;ne  alone  what  flie  had  done  by  miltake,  or
what  flie  could  conjefture  had  been  done  by  any  one  elfe  ;  I  could  never  get
any-thing  out  of  her  but  this  only,  that  the  more  fhe  thought  of  it,  the
more  ignorant  (he  was  in  refpecl  thereto.

This,  then,  being  the  ftate  of  the  cafe,  I  was  neceffarily  oblig'd  to  treat
every  perfon  accordingly  as  they  were  troubled  with  this  or  th=i[  fy  i.ptom,
in  a  greater  or  a  leffer  degree.  Some  of  them  were  f^v'd  by  a  fhort  and  eafy
method  of  treatment ;  but  the  others  by  a  long  and  difficult  courfe  :  fo  that  in
fome  the  cure  was  continu'd  for  the  fpaie  of  two  months ;  and.  in  him  who
difcharg'd  blood  from  the  inteftines,  for  the  fpace  of  four  months.

One  out  of  them  all,  who  had  made  light  of  the  difeafe  for  a  very  long
time,  was  carried  off  on  the  nineteenth  aay  from  the  time  of  taking  to  his
bed,  by  a  fever,  which  was  attended  with  a  fingultus,  convu'fivc  tremors,
and  other  malignant  fymptoms :  notwithftanding  his  fenior  phyfician  and
myfelf  gave  him  all  the  afliltance  in  our  power.

22.  The  only  way  that  was  now  left  ot  inveftigating  the  unknown  cufe
of  fo  many  difeafes ;  I  mean,  anatomy  •,  it  was  not  poffible,  for  m.iny  and
various  reafons,  to  have  recourfe  to.  And  fome  of  the  fame  reafons,  alfo,
prevented  the  d  flection  of  another  perfon,  who  it  was  conjedlur'd,  or,  pretty
good  grounds,  had  been  taken  off  by  means  of  opium  being  given  in  too
great  a  quantity,  by  a  miftake  of  the  apothecary.  Yet  this  diffeftion  would
now  have  been  the  more  agreeable  to  me,  becaufe  I  fee  that  the  appearances^
obferv'd  in  brute  animals,  which  were  open'd  after  a  very  large  dofeof  opium
being  given  them,  by  the  very  experienc'd  Sproegelius  (,v),  do  not  verv  well
agree  with  thofe  things  that  the  celebrated  Mead  {y)  had  obferv'd  in  a  dog,

(*)  Exper.  circa  varia  venena,  &c.  Exp.  i  j.  &  feqq.  CyJ  Trad,  de  Venenis  Tent.  5.

Vol.  III.  Fff  However,


40  2 Book  IV.  Of  Cliirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

However,  I  would  not  have  you  exped  a  word  from  me,  in  thefe  letters^
in  regard  to  the  dcteftable  abulc  of  opium  in  the  hands  of  wicked  men.  For
fuch  things  as  thefe,  though  they  ought  not  to  be  unknown  to  phyficians  for
many  realons,  yet  ought  never  to  be  committed  to  public  writings,  but  agi-
tated in  private  conferences;  left  that  which  is  neceflary  to  be  known,  in
order  to  find  out  the  proper  method  of  cure,  fhould  be  fo  abus'd  by  wicked
men,  as  to  give  occafion,  from  thence,  to  kill  fecretly  and  with  impunity.

Wherefore,  Galen  (z)  fo  far  blames  Orpheus  firnam'd  the  Divine,  Horus:
Mendefius  the  younger,  Heliodorus  the  Athenian,  and  other  authors  of  books
upon  thefe  compofitions,  as  not  even  to  grant  that  the  knowledge  of  them
is,  at  leaft,  neceffary  to  phyficians,  in  order  to  enable  them  to  aflift  thofe
who  have  taken  them.  Be  this  as  it  will,  it  would  certainly  have  been  more
prudent  for  fome,  in  other  refpefls  very  great  phyficians,  who  have  fucceeded
him,  to  have  fupprefs'd  many  things  upon  poifons ;  and  not  to  have  made
them  public  in  letters,  or  even  in  books  that  are  read  univerfally.

23.  But  I  do  not  remember  that  any  diffeflions  have  been  made  by  me,,
or  by  my  friends,  of  perfons  who  have  died  of  the  bite  or  wound  given  by
a  venomous  animal ;  if  you  except  thofe  which  relate  to  the  bite  of  a  mad
dog,  and  have  been  already  communicated  to  you  by  me  (a).  For,  to  ufe
the  real  words  of  Celfus  (1),  "  Italy  and  the  colder  regions  have  the  ad-
*'  vantage  of  being  preferable  in  this  refpeft  alfo,  that  they  produce  lefs  ter^
*'  rible  fnakes "  than  the  hot  countries.

Nor  is  the  cafe  much  different,  in  general,  in  regard  to  venomous  animals
that  are  lefs  than  fnakes  :  and  it  is  certain,  in  regard  to  thofe  lefs  hot  parts
of  Italy  in  which  I  have  been  converfant,  that  thofe  perfons  did  not  fay  true
things,  who  related  the  following  to  Boerhaave  (c) :  "  That  in  Italy,  where
"  there  is  a  great  number  of  Icorpions,  no  perfon  comes  into  an  inn,  but
*'  the  hoft  immediately  points  out  to  him  a  bottle  full  of  the  oil  of  fcorpions ;;
*'  that  he  may  inftantly  anoint  the  wound  therewith,  if  he  has  had  a  wound
"  infiifted  by  that  animal,  in  order,  by  this  means,  to  efcape  the  danger  of
«*  death."

Yet  I  would  not  have  any  foreigners  fuppofe  them  to  be  fo  rare  in  the
regions  of  Italy,  as  Pliny  feems  to  have  aflerted  (d).  "  The  Pfylli,"  fays  he  ^
that  is,  a  people  of  Afric,  whofe  bodies  were  fuppos'd  to  be  natural  antidotes
againft  the  poifon  of  ferpents,  and  other  venomous  animals ;  "  who,  by
•'  bringing  in  the  poifons  of  other  regions,  have  fiU'd  Italy  with  foreign
*'  evils  for  the  fake  of  their  own  lucre,  have  endeavour'd,  alfo,  to  import
*'  thefe  fcorpions  :  but  they  could  not  live  within  the  region  of  the  Sicilian
*'  atmofphere. Yet  they  are  fometimes  feen  in  Italy,  though  harmlefs."

If  thofe  things  which  follow  upon  the  fubjeft  of  common  fcorpions  would
fuffer  me  ;  I  fhould  much  more  readily  interpret  Pliny  fo  as  to  fuppofe  him
not  fpeaking  of  thefe,  but  of  the  wing'd  fcorpions  of  Africa,  whereof  he
had  fpoken  laft :  ^nd  this  on  account  of  what  he  had  faid  juft  before.

But  as  thefe  things  do  not  fuffer  me  to  interpret  him  thus,  I  fufped  that

(z)  De  Antidot.  I.  2.  c.  7.  (<•)  Prsleft.  ad  Inftit.  §  1132.

(a)  Epill.  8.  C<<J  Nat.  Hift.  1.  II.  c.  25.

{i)  De  Medic.  1.  5.  c.  27.  n.  10.

fomethins:


Letter  LIX. Article  23,  403

fomething  .is  wanting  :  at  leaft,  thofe  who  wrote  at  Rome  before  Pliny,  Lu-
cilius  and  Cicero,  would  not  have  fpoken  of  a  rare  animal  by  way  of  example
in  this  manner  :  the  former  of  thefe  authors  fays  (e),  "  like  a  fcorpion  bereft
"  of  his  tail ;"  and  the  latter  (/),  "  We  fee  that  fnakes  cre-ep,  that  duck-
"  lings  fwim,  that  blackbirds  fly,  that  oxen  make  ufe  of  their  horns,  and
"  fcorpions  their  flings  :"  but  Cicero  would  rather  have  faid,  vefpas  aculeis
mi,  or  "  that  wafps  make  ufe  of  their  flings,"  as  unfkilful  perfons  had  for-
merly publifli'd  it ;  either  becaufe  they  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  the
word  nepa,  which  is  an  African  word  for  a  fcorpion  ;  or,  at  leaft,  becaufe
they  were  ignorant  that  Nonius  {g)  had  the  two  laft  words  of  Cicero  in  the
very  manner  I  have  produc'd  them :  and,  indeed,  that  he  could  not  have
produc'd  them  otherwife,  according  to  the  order  of  writing,  and  agreeably
to  the  fentiment.

But  if  any  one  believe,  however,  that  Pliny  aiferts  the  fcorpions  in  Italy
to  be  "  harmlefs  -,"  this  is  fo  for  the  moft  part :  nor  do  I  remember  that  in
the  cities  where  I  have  refided,  even  the  moft  crowded  cities,  a  phyfician,  or  a
furgeon,  was  ever  call'd  to  cure  a  wound  inflifted  by  a  fcorpion ;  and  ftill
lefs  that  any  one  ever  died  of  fuch  a  wound,  fo  that  the  effects  of  the  poifon
could  be  enquir'd  into  in  the  body  after  death.

And,  indeed,  you  will  fee  that  the  fame  thing  is  confirm'd  by  our  Fal-
loppius  and  Vallifneri.  For  the  latter  has  written  {h),  that  "  a  kind  of  in-
*'  nocent  poifon  "  comes  forth  from  the  fling  of  our  fcorpion  ;  and  Fallop-
pius  {i)  has  faid,  that  "  in  our  region,  where  fcorpions  are  lefs  venomous,"
a  tumour  does  not  arife  in  the  part  which  is  wounded  by  them,  as  in  the  hot
regions;  but  "  only  puftuks,  and  fmall  tubercles,  fimilar  to  the  fmall-
pox."

And  that  we  may  prove  the  fame  thing  by  the  authority  of  phyficians  who
have  liv'd  in  Italy,  either  in  times,  or  in  places,  or  in  both,  more  diftant  from
us  than  thofe  two  ;  do'you  imagine  that  Scribonius,  if  he  had  feen  noxious
fcorpions  in  Italy,  would  have  written  in  this  manner  (k)  :  "~  In  Africa,  or
"  wherefoever  the  fcorpions  are  noxious :"  and  that  Cornelius  Celfus(/)  would
have  plac'd  the  poifon  of  the  fcorpions  "  among  the  foreign  poifons,  and
thofe  that  were  fomewhat  more  peftiferous  "  than  our  own  ?

And  that  he  did  fo  place  it,  not  becaufe  the  fcorpion  was  foreign,  but  be-
caufe the  pernicious  fcorpion  was  foreign,  feems  to  me  to  be  fufficiently  prov'd
by  thofe  words  of  his  which  follow  after  having  recounted  many  remedies  (*):
*'  Yet  I  know  phyficians  who  have  done  nothing  elfe  againft  the  bite  of  a
*'  fcorpion,  but  let  blood  from  the  arm."

But  Redi  was  diftant  from  me  in  place,  not  in  time ;  and  Gentilis  is
now  diftant  in  place :  both  being  Tufcan  phyficians.  The  firft  of
whom  {m)  affirm'd  the  fame  as  Pliny,  for  this  reafon,  that  he  had  a  hundred
times  feen  the  fellers  of  fcorpions  thruft  their  naked  hands  into  the  facks  that

(e)  Ex  Satyr.  1.  30.  n.  23.  (I)  Compof,  Medic.  164.

(f)  De  FJnib.  1.  5.  ,  (/)  C.  27.  cit.

(g)  De  Propr.  Serm.  in  Nepa.  (*)  Ibid  n.  5.

{h)  Opere  Fif.  Med.  Tom.  2.  P.  i.  {m)  Efper.  int.  agl.  Inf.

(0  Traa.  deTumor.  c.  3.

F  f  f  2  v/crc


404 Book  IV.  ^f  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

were  full  of  them  -,  and  often  have  blows  from  them  :  and  yet  never  faw  the
leaft  fign  of  poifon  follow  thereupon-,  although  it  was  the  very  height  of
the  dog-days  when  thefe  things  happen'd.  And  the  other  («),  that  fatal
diforders  fcarcely  ever  arife  from  the  bites  of  fcorpions,  except  in  Africa.
For  that  fome  perfons  indeed  have  died  by  being  bitten  with  the  Italian
fcorpions  •,  but  that  very  few  examples  of  this  kind  are  related  by  the  writers
of  natural  hiftory.

24.  That  learned  man  produces  two  examples  ;  one  from  Ferrarius,  and
the  other  from  Lanzonus.  In  both  of  them  a  vomiting,  and  even  in  one  of
them  a  volvulus,  was  fatal  within  a  few  hours.  And  I  think  it  will  not  be
improper  to  add  other  examples,  as  many  as  occur  while  I  am  writing,
which  perhaps  would  have  ended  fatally,  if  they  had  not  been  timely  pre-
vented by  remedies.  And  I  fhall  produce  them  the  more  readily,  becaufe
mod:  of  them  happen'd  at  Padua.

Our  Cortufus  being  call'd  to  a  fellow-citizen  of  his,  who  had  been  wounded
by  a  laro-e  fcorpion,  "  and  was  already  feiz'd  with  a  deliquium  animi,  re-
«'  call'd  him  to  life,  in  a  very  (hort  time,"  by  the  external  afliftance  of  a
powder,  which  he  had  rectiv'd  from  Matthiolus  (0).  Benivenius  {p)  cur'd,
in  a  little  time,  a  fervant-man,  who  had  been  inftantly  thrown  into  a  very-
cold  and  profufe  fweat,  by  a  fimilar  blow  -,  by  giving  him  theriaca  in  generous
wine,

Peter  a  Caflro,  a  famous  phyfician  at  Verona,  had  his  fore-finger  wounded
by  a  fcorpion  ;.  in  confequence  of  which  wound,  pain  and  coldnefs  foon  feiz'd
upon  the  whole  arm  •,  when  he,  having  found  but  little  effeft  from  other  re-
medies, was  cur'd  by  that  which  his  friend  Rhodius  {q)  has  tranfmitted  dowa
to  us  in  his  writings :  adding  this  alfo,  that  the  pain,  neverthelefs,  return'd
in  the  foUowino-  year,  at  the  fame  time,  together  with  a  tumor  ■phlegmonoiei
of  the  finger.

But  he  fays,  that  he  had  feen  fome  "  bites  of  fcorpions  to  be  of  impor-
"  tance,  by  reafon  of  their  tumour,  and  their  pain,"  at  Padua.  And  in-
deed Vallifneri  himfelf,  who,  as  I  have  faid  above  (r),  had  acknowledg'd
that  the  poifon  of  thefe  animals  is  in  a  manner  harmlefs  among  us,  finally
chanpes  his  opinion  in  fome  meafure  ;  in  an  alphabetic  fpecimen  of  medical
and  natural  hiftory  (j),  which  he  left  imperfeft ;,  and  affirms  that  this  poifon
is  indeed  "  harmlefs  in.  the  winter,  but  that  in  fummer  it  is  deadly, .  even  in
"  our  regions."

Of  this  he  has,  however,  produc'd  only  one  example;  which  is  an  inftance
of  a  young  woman,  who,  being  ftung  in  the  neck  by  a  fcorpion,  in  the  time
of  the  dog-days,  "  had  her  limbs  gradually  become  cold:"  nor  was  any-
other  rei^edy  of  advantage,  out  of  the  many  made  ufe  of,  but  the  oil  of
the  o-reat  duke  of  T.ufcany,  which  is  call'd  controvekni,  applied  internall/.
and  externally.

(a)  Annotaz.  alia  pag. 66.  v. 23.  della  (?)  Cent.  3.  Obf.  Med.  90.

Lett.  Filof.  (0  n-  z3-  ^ „ „ „

(5)  Vid.  hujus  Comment,  in  Diofcor.  1.  6.  (j)  Opere  Tom.  3,  P.  4.  alia  voce  Scot'

c.  29.  /!"««•

(/)  De  abditis  Morbor.  cauf.  c.  56,

But-


letter  LIX. Article  25".  405

But  I  would  firft  have  you  take  notice,  that  thefe  were  not  fatal  examples
in  the  end :  and  in  the  fecond  place,  what  are  fo  few  examples  to  innumera-
ble others,  which  are  quite  different  therefrom  ?  What  is  this  laft  to  fo  many
others  that  I  have  pointed  out  (/)  of  Redi's,  at  the  fame  very  hot  time  of
year  ?

For,  although  I  grant  that  this  poifon  becomes  more  acrid  at  fuch  a  time
of  year,  and  that  the  bodies  of  men  are  more  liable  to  be  injur'd  by  it;  yet
in  the  month  of  Oftober  happen'd  the  cafe  of  Peter  a  Caftro,  and  about  the
end  of  June  that  which  is  defcrib'd  by  Lanzonus  (a),  in  the  words  of  a  phy-
fician  who  had  been  prefent.

And  though  this,  and  the  other  alfo,  of  Ferrarius,  were  fatal  by  means  of
vomitings ;  yet  in  the  latter,  the  fcorpion  had  crept  into  the  mouth  of  the
boy  while  afleep,  and  had  wounded  it :  and  in  the  former,  the  extremity  of
the  inteftinum  reftum,  of  a  woman  who  labour'd  under  a  chlorofis,  had  been
ftruck  by  this  animal,  while  (he  was  fitting  down,  and  difcharging  the  foeces
from  her  intcftines.

And  how  much  it  tends  to  increafe  and  acceferate  the  noxioufnefs  of  the
poifon,  if  not  only  the  wounded  body  be  very  tender,  weak,  and  difeas'd ;
but  the  part  itfelf  alfo  is  more  foft,  and  endow'd  with  a  more  exquifitc
fenfe  ;  yoa  can,  of  yourfelf,  very  eafily  conceive  :  and  indeed,  unlefs  we  do
adtnit  thisfuppofition,  it  is  fomewhat  more  difficult  to  have  any  idea,  why  the
wounds  of  fcorpions  are  not  equally  pernicious  to  all  perfons  :  and  not  only
amongft  us,  but  among  other  nations  ;  if  you  except  Africa,  and  places  that
lie  in  an  equally  hot  climate.

25.  For  when  I  attend  to  the  experiments  which  have  been  madeat  Mont-
pelier,  I  am  eafily  induc'd  to  believe,  that  the  wounds -of  fcorpions  are,  for
the  moft  part,  harmlefs  there  alfo ;  as  they  are  among  us.  Nor  do  I  only
fpeak  of  the  experiments  which  were  made  there,,  by  Courtenius  (x),  in  the
year  1679.  ^

For  as  to  the  whelp  being  prick'd  by  many  fcorpions  in  the  tongue,
and  being  ftruck  by  them,  more  than  once,  upon  the  abdominal  mufcles,
after  the  common  integuments  were  taken  off;  the  fting  being  prefs'd  againft
the  part  more  ftrongly,  even  by  art,  and  the  poifon  being  prefs'd  out  of  the
fubjefled  veficle  into  the  wounds ;  and  yet  the  dog's  receiving  no  injury
therefrom ;  nor  yet  a  pigeon,  which  was  frequently  wounded,  in  the  fame
manner,  by  a  fcorpion  :  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  a  mole,  whofe  fide
had  been  prick'd  by  a  fcorpion,  immediately  died  convuls'd :  you  may
aflign  this  reafon  for  the  difference,  that  the  whelp  and  the  pigeon  were
wounded  by  weak  and  languid  fcorpions  ;  as  it  was  in  the  beginning  of  Ja-
nuary that  thefe  experiments  were  made  ;  but  that  the  mole  was  wounded
by  a  ftrong  and  keen  fcorpion  :  as  this  experiment  was  made  about  the  mid-
dle of  July.

I,  therefore,  chiefly  have  my  eye  to  thofe  experiments,  which  were  made
there  by  the  celebrated  Maupertuis  (y),  fifty  years  after.  Out  of  nine  dogs,
three  little  chickens,  and  one  moufe,  which  the  fcorpions  had  wounded,. one.

(f)  n.  23;  (jf)  §.  fupra  ad  n.  16.  cit.

(«.)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  i*  Obf.  zo.  (j)  Mem.  de  1' Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1731.

dog:


%|.o6 Book  IV.  Of  Chinirgical  and  Univeifal  Diforders.

dog  only  died  convuls'd ;  and  he  at  five  hours  after  being  wounded,  and  after
vomitings  being  frequently  repeated :  the  twelve  other  animals  receiv'd  not
■the  leaft  injury  therefrom.

Yet  in  thefe  animals  the  fame  places  had  been  wounded,  to  all  appear-
ance, within  a  few  days ;  and  certainly  by  fcorpions  of  the  fame  kind,  and
in  like  manner  ftrong,  acrid,  and  fierce  :  fo  that  no  caufe  of  the  difference
can  be  deduc'd  from  hence,  why  one  dog,  and  no  more,  died  ;  efpecially
as  this  was  wounded  only  by  one,  and  fome  of  the  others  by  many  fcor-
pions ;  and  even  a  much  greater  number  of  times ;  and  had  the  fting  fix'd
more  deeply  into  them  :  and  this  promifcuoufly,  both  by  males  and  fe-
males ;  and  in  like  manner  fuch  as  were  frefli  caught ;  fo  chat  we  are  not  at
liberty  to  fuppofe  the  caufe  of  this  difference  to  confift,  either  in  the  variety
of  the  fex,  or  in  the  poifon,  which  was  perhaps  quite  confum'd  in  former
blows,  as  Redi  (z)  has  juftly  conjeftur'd  •,  and  not  only  in  regard  to  vipers,
but  alfo  in  regard  to  the  fcorpions  of  Africa.

Yet  it  may  be  fuppos'd  to  confifl;  in  feveral  diff'erent  circumftances ;  and
perhaps  in  fome  one  of  them  that  are  pointed  out  by  Maupertuis,  But  be-
caufe  it  happens  fo  rarely  that  fcorpions  bring  on  any  great  injury  -,  I  Ihould
more  readily  believe,  that  it  is  neceffary  for  many  of  them  to  confpire  to-
gether to  bring  it  on  :  or,  perhaps,  that  fome  other  ought  to  be  added,  as
the  moft  confiderable. I  will  illuftrate  my  meaning  by  an  example.

26.  Among  the  ancients  was  a  little  flying  animal,  "  whofe  Roman  name
*'  is  afilus  ;"  to  life  the  words  of  Virgil  (a) :  "  the  Greeks,,  by  tranflation,
"  call  it  aeftron."  That  the  fame  has  been  call'd  by  the  Latins  "  tabanus,"
alfo,  is  fhown  by  M.  Varro  (i)) ;  but  ftill  more  clearly  by  Pliny  (c).  Whether
this  animalcule  be  the  fame  that  is  call'd  by  us  iabanus,  horfe-flie,  or  gad-
bee,  I  fhall  certainly  deny  if  you  alk  me  :  but  whether  it  be  what  the  Tuf-
cans  ftill  call  afilus,  I  fhall  be  in  doubt.

For  certainly,  either  that  is  not  the  afilus  of  the  ancients,  or  does  not  al-
ways do  the  fame  thing  that  the  antients  have  defcrib'd  to  us ;  I  mean,  that
they  excite  the  oxen,  which  they  wound,  into  madnefs.  And  this  is
true,  that  the  very  excellent  Reaumur  {d)  thought  he  ought  to  enquire
into  the  reafon,  why  this  eff^efl:  fometimes  follows,  and  fometimes  does
not.

Therefore,  as  he,  contrary  to  Vallifneri  (f),  ackiiowledges  no  acrid  juice
in  this  animal,  which  it  leaves  in  the  wound  ;  he  does  not,  of  courfe,  at  all
enquire  whether  it  leaves  more  at  one  time,  and  lefs  at  another  :  neither
does  he  believe  that  the  caufe  of  the  difference  is  to  be  accounted  for,  from
the  fting  being  fix'd  in  more  or  lefs  deeply  ;  and  for  this  reafon,  that  it  is
neither  more  flender,  nor  is  fix'd  lefs  deeply  than  the  goad  of  herdfmen  j
who  often  pierce  through  the  fkin  of  oxen,  but  never  excite  them  to  fury
by  that  means.

(z)  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  23.  (^)  Memoir,  pour  ferv.  a  I'Hift.  des  Infeft.'

(a)  Georg.  1.  3.  V.  147.  Tom.  4.  Mem.  12.

\b)  De  Re  Ruft.  1.  2.  c.  5.  (?)  OpereTom.  i.  P.  4.

(f)Nat.  Hift.  1.  ii.c.  28.

He


letter  LIX. Article  27.  407

He  therefore  fuppofes  that  when  the  fting  of  the  afilus  happens  to  prick
fome  pretty  large  fubcutaneous  nerve,  the  ox  is  then  furious;  that  when
no  nerve  of  this  kind  is  prick'd,  the  ox  is  not  furious.  I  however,  if  I  were
even  very  greatly  praftis'd  in  the  difTedion  of  this  animalcule,  would  not  even
then  take  upon  me  fo  much  as  to  pronounce  any  thing  againft  either  of  thefc
gentlemen  ;  who  have  not  had  their  equals,  in  the  very  difficult  invefticration
of  the  hiftory  of  infefts,  in  this  age  ;  and  whofe  diffenfions  deferve  the  moft
mature  confideration  :  but  I  ftiould  rather  endeavour,  as  my  refpedt  towards
th^  memory  of  both  requires,  that  if  it  were  by  any  means  poffible,  both
their  opinions  might  be  compounded  together  ;  having  a  regard  to  a  pretty-
thick  nerve  being  prick'd,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  an  acrid  juice  being  in-
ftill'd  into  the  wound  ;  if  I  could  poffibly,  at  any  time,  find  that  fuch  a  juice
did  proceed  from  the  afilus  into  the  wound  :  and  by  that  means  entirely
root  up  a  certain  fcruple  from  my  breafl,  in  fuppofing  it  very  difficult  to
happen,  that  the  goad  of  the  herdfmen  alfo,  fhould  never  light  on  fome
pretty  thick  nerve,  and  drive  the  ox  into  a  fury.

But  now  transferring  the  conje<Sture,  of  this  very  great  man,  from  the
afilus  to  the  fcorpion  ;  in  regard  to  which  we  may  compound  both  the  opi-
nions ;  I  fufped;  that  very  confiderable  diforders  may  probably  follow  from
the  ftroke  of  this  animal,  when  the  wound  is  inflifted  upon  any  pretty  thick
nerve  ;  or  any  other  part  of  exquifite  fenfation  i  and  at  the  fame  time  a  very
acrid  poifon  inftill'd  into  the  wound.

And  indeed,  not  only  the  animals  that  I  have  taken  notice  of  (/),  as
having  died  from  hence,  but  thofe  alfo  that  Redi  (g)  kill'd  by  means  of  an;
African  fcorpion,  perifli'd  in  convulfions :  and  that  woman  alfo,  of  whortr.
we  fpoke  above  (^),  was  convuls'd ;  and  whatever  other- fymptoms  appear'd-.
in  her,  and  in  others  of  the  human  fpecies  likewife,  who  did  not  die,  may
eafily  be  explain'd  upon  the  hypothefis  of  convulfions :  and  it  is  the  laudabls
opinion  of  the  celebrated  Mead  (?),  that  other  poifons  alfo,  communicated-
by  the  ftroke  or  bite  of  venomous  animals,  are  injurious,-  by  means  of  the^-
nerves  in  particular.

27.  But  in  regard  to  a  poifon,  alfo,  being  infus'd  together  with  the  fting,,
there  is  no  longer  any  doubt.  For  although,  after  Pliny  {k)  had  affertecl
"  that  the  ftings  of  fcorpions  are  perforated  with  a  fiender  tube,  through
"  which  the  poifon  is  infus'd ;  and  "  that  ApoUodorus  (/)  affirm'd  this-,
"  poifon  to  be  of  a  white  colour,  when  effus'd  by  them  ;"  Galen  {m)  arofe,
and  aflerted,  "  that  no  foramen  could  be  feen  in  their  fting ;"  and  there-
fore, "  that  it  was  either  a  very  fmall  quantity  which  they  injefted,  or  nothino-^
"  at  all :"  and,^  indeed,  though  Redi  (a)  in  a  very  large  fcorpion,  that  is,
an  African  fcorpion,  could  not  fee  any  foramen,  notwithftanding  he  made  ufe
of  the  moft  exquifite  glalTes ;  yet  this  author  has  confirm'd  ;  not  onjy  from
Aretinus,  an  ancient  writer,  (who  might  have  copied  from  Pliny )  but  from  many,
of  his  own  obfervations  upon-  that  fame  fcorpion  ;  that  a  white  fluid  is.  dif-

(f)  fapra  n.  25.  {k)  Nat.  Hift.  1.  11.  c.  370.

\g)  Efper.  fupra  ad  n.  23.  cit.  (/)  Ibid.  c.  25.

(h)  n.  24.  {m)  De  Loc.  aff.  I,  6.  c.  5.

(/}  Introd.  ad  Expof.  Mech.  Venen.  {«)  Efper,  cit.^

charg'd


Ao8 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

cl^ara'd  from  the  fting.  But  others  have  feen  the  foramina  ;  not  to  fay  the
fc  men  •,  among  whom  was  Vallifneri  {o)  in  particular,  who  publifli'd  this
diicovery  more  than  once  after  that,  and  Ihow'd  why  they  were  not  feen  by
Jledi,  who  fouo-ht  for  them  in  the  very  extreme  point  of  the  fting  :  and  alfo
•why  they  ought  not  to  have  been  in  the  extreme  point ;  that  is  to  fay,  left
if  the  canal  of  the  poifon  fhould  be  brought  on  quite  to  the  extremity  of  the
ftino-,  it  fhould  not  only  prevent  the  necelTary  (lendernefs  and  firmnefs  of  the
ftino-,  but  fhould  become  liable  to  be  ftopp'd  up  by  any  the  fmalleft  particle
of  matter  wherewith  it  fhould  meet.

And  left  you  fhould  doubt,  whether  there  are  foramina  in  the  fcorpions  of
our  country  alfo  ;  and  thefe  not  in  the  extreme  part  of  the  fting  v  Ferdinand
Anthony  Ghedini,  a  man  of  a  moft  elegant  genius,  not  only  wrote  to  me
in  the  year  1707,  by  what  means  he  faw  them  in  thefe  fcorpions"-,  but  Vallif-
neri has  publilh'd  the  letters  of  Ghedini,  which  I  had  communicated  to  him.

There  are  thefe  peculiar  circumftances  in  Vallifneri :  that  the  fting  has
three  furfaces  like  a  triangular  pyramid  :  that  in  each  of  thefe  is  a  fingle  fora-
men :  that  through  thefe  foramina  a  very  fluid  humour  is  difcharg'd  :  and
that  this  humour  is  carried  by  a  fmall  canal,  which  pafTes  through  the
internodes  of  the  tail,  into  the  extremity  from  whence  the  fting  ftioots
forth.

"You  may  enquire,  in  thofe  foreign  and  larger  fcorpions,  from  whence  he
feems  to  have  taken  this  defcription,  whether  thefe  peculiarities  are  perpe-
tual; and  this  moreover,  what  is  the  internal  ftrudure  of  the  laft  in-
ternode.

For  befides  the  veficle  which  Coiterus  (/>)  formerly  referr'd  to,  by  faying
that,  "  under  the  fting  of  the  tail,  wherewith  the  fcorpion  ftrikes,  a  blad-
«  der  full  of  poifon  lies  hid  ;"  it  is  very  natural  to  fuppofe,  that  fome  muf-
cular  fibres  are  contain'd  there,  whereby  the  poifon  may  be  prefs'd  out.  For
the  external  part  of  the  jnternode  cannot,  of  itfelf,  do  that ;  as  it  is  of  a
horny  nature :  and  in  an  African  fcorpion,  as  Redi  {q)  has  experienc'd,  ic
does  not  yield  to  external  comprefTion.

And  under  that  cruft,  as  we  fee  in  the  claws  of  crabs,  it  muft,  of
courfc,  be  that  the  mufcles  are  included  ;  whereby,  as  well  as  the  other
internodes,  the  laft  alfo  may  be  mov'd :  and  fo  fome  flelhy,  or  ten-
dinous expanfion,  reaching  within  the  laft  internode,  might,  by  a  ftronger
Gontradtion  than  that  whereby  it  moves  this  internode,  comprefs  even  the
veficle.

28.  But  this  poifon  is  far  lefs  powerful  and  ftrong  in  the  fcorpions  of  this
country,  and  of  other  regions,  not  very  hot  j  as,  for  iniUnce,  IVIontpelier ;
than  it  is  in  the  African  animals  of  this  fpecies.  Wherefore,  the  violent
fymptoms  which  arife  from  thence,  in  Africa,  do  not  occur  frequently
among  us  •,  and  even  are  very  rarely  met  with,  as  has  been  fhown  above  (r) :
fo  that  unlefs  many  eaufes  ;  'and  among  thefe,  perhaps,  the  chief,  that  is  to


(0)  Vid.  loca  fupra  ad  n.  23.  &  24.  in- (y)  Efper,  ctt.
dicata.  .('•)  n.  23.  &  feqq.

CfJ  Obf.  Anat.  ex  diverfis  brutis.


fay,


Letter  OX. Article  28.  *  409

fay,  the  pricking  of  fome  pretty  large  nerve,  confpire  together  in  one  perfon,
it  feems  to  be  innocent,  and  without  efFe£t.

And  when  we  ftippofe  this,  we  naturally  come  doVvn,  with  the  celebrated
Maupertuis  (j),  to  that  fufpicion  of  many  remedies  which  are  recommended
againft  the  bites  of  fcorpions,  having  feem'd  to  be  of  advantage  for  this
reafon,  that  they  have  often  been  made  ufe  of  upon  fuch  men  as  have  had
a  wound  inflifted  upon  them  indeed,  but  an  innocent  poifon  (if  I  may  be
allow'd  thus  to  fpeak)  inftill'd  thereinto.

Amongft  thefe  remedies,  you  know  that,  from  the  moft  ancient  times,  one,
of  the  efficacy  of  which  that  celebrated  man,  in  particular,  doubts,  and  which
is  taken  from  the  fcorpion  itfelf,  has  been  recounted.

"  The  fcorpion,"  fays  Celfus  (J),  "  is  the  beft  remedy  for  itfelf,  either
*'  rubb'd  down  and  'laid  upon  the  wound,  or  upon  burning  coals,  that  the
«'  wound  may  be  fumigated,"

But  the  doubts  of  this  gentleman,  whom  I  have  commended,  feem  to  be
confirm'd  by  this  fumigation  having  been  applied  to  that  woman  who  was
fpoken  of  above  («),  without  effedt ;  as  fhe,  neverthelcfs,  died  of  the  wound
of  the  fcorpion  :  and  alfo  by  the  circumftance  of  the  fcorpion  itfelf  having
been  bruis'd,  and  applied  without  effeft  to  the  wound  of  Peter  a  Caftro ;
whofe  cafe  we  have  alfo  faid  {x)  to  be  fimilar  to  thofe  of  perfons  bitten  hj
the  tarantula  in  this  refped:  alfo,  that  in  the  following  year  the  pain  return'd
at  the  fame  time.

For  this  was  obferv'd  by  Baglivi  of  thofe  who  were  wounded  by  the  ta»
rantula  {y)  :  and  this  author  has  alfo  aflerted  (2),  "  that  it  is  clear  from  ob-
"  fervation,  that  thofe  who  are  prick'd  by  the  fcorpion,  in, la  Puglia,  fufFer
*'  almoft  the  fame  fymptoms  as  if  they  were  bitten  by  the  tarantula."  But
I  have  not  recited  thofe  fymptoms  and  deaths  above,  as  I  have  excepted  the
very  hot  parts  of  Ital;^  He,  moreover,  produces  the  difleftion  of  a  rabbet
which  was  kill'd  by  the  tarantula  {a)  :  and  does  not  fcruple  to  aflert  {b),  that,
in  perfons  bitten  thereby,  "  many  fymptoms  feem  to  depend  upon  a  deprav'd
"  imagination."

But  thefe,  and  other  circumftances  relative  to  the  tarantula,  I  hope  we  fhall
have  better  explor'd  and  fettled  ;  if  that  very  learned  man  Francefco  Serao
fhall  be  able,  at  any  time,  to  complete  what  he  has  begun  on  the  fubjeft  of
this  infedl.

Yet  in  the  mean  while,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  fcorpions  of  our  country,  I
am  not  quite  free  from  doubt,  whether  many  of  thofe  perfons  who  have
feem'd  to  fuffer  violent  fymptoms  from  being  wounded  thereby,  were  not
rather  affedted  by  a  fear  which  difturb'd  the  imagination  :  and  not  fo  much
from  the  poifon,  (which  was,  perhaps,  quite  innocent)  as  from  the  agitation
of  the  mind  drawing  the  body  violently  into  confent.

And  this  doubt,  in  which  I  alfo  fee  that  Maupertuis  {c)  is  involv'd,  may

(j)  Comment,  fupra  ad  n.  25.  cit.  (iz)  Ibid.  c.  7.  &  Hift.  3.

{t)  De  Medic.  1,  5.  c.  27.  n,  5.  {a)  Ibid.  c.  10.

(a) N.  24.  (B)  Ibid,  c.  6.

{x)  Ibid.  (f)  Commenc,  cit.

(y)  Differt.  de  Tarant.  c.  9.  k  Hift.  i.

Vol,  III,  G  g  g  ,  be


41  o Book  IV.  Of  ChirurgicalandUniverfalDiforders.

be  in  part  prov'd  by  this  circumftance  •,  that  fome  of  them,  who  have  fca,rcely
receiv'd  any  wound,  immediately  complain  of  thofe  fymptoms  whicl)  have
not  happen'd  fo  foon  even  in  thofe  that  died  from  the  fame  poifon  :  ahd  yet
the  fame  peribns,  by  the  application  of  an  antidote,  or  of  fome  of  thofe
thino-s  which  the  common-people  and  they  make  great  account  of;  or  of
that  which  any  phyfician,  in  whom  they  put  great  confidence,  has  recom-
mended as  a  very  certain  remedy  ;  immediately  cry  out  that  they  feel  no
more  diforder,  and  that  they  are  quite  reftor'd.

For  this  certainly  feems  to  be  a  cure  of  the  mind,  not  of  the  body  :  and
if  this  has  happen'd  to  procure  reputation  to  any  antidote,  you  fee  how  un-
delervedly  it  mull:  have  procured  it ;  and  that  more  certain  remedies  ought
to  be  fought  after.

29.  But  the  poifon  of  the  vipers  among  us  is  not,  like  that  of  the  fcorpions,
frequently  innocent :  fince  a  great  number  would  certainly  die  of  their  bites,
or  would,  at  leaft,  be  very  greatly  affefled  thereby,  if  thefe  animals  were  not
much  more  rare  than  the  fcorpions ;  and,  by  reafon  of  their  magnitude,  could
not  be  more  eafily  obferv'd  and  guarded  againft  :  I  fay,  would  be  very  greatly
affefted,  as  I  do  not  know  of  any  remedy  being  yet  found  out,  on  which  the
human  fpecies  can  or  dare  depend,  in  order  to  obviate,  or  overcome,  tho.'e.
very  violent  fymptoms  which  lucceed  to  the  bite  of  a  viper.

It  had  been  very  greatly  recommended  to  eat  the  heads,  and  other  parts
of  the  vipers,  for  this  purpofe.  But  in  the  experiments  of  Redi  (d)  and
Francini  {e),  the  propofal  did  not  at  all  anfwer.

bince  this,  we  have  heard  the  fat  of  the  vipers  greatly  cried  up,  and  ftill
more  of  common  oil,  when  applied  to  the  part  that  was  bitten.

Althouoh  it  fcarcely  feem'd  credible,  that  through  fo  narrow  and  pretty
deep  foramina  by  which  the  biting  viper  immits  its  poifon,  fufficient  accefs.
Ihould  be  given  to  oily  liniments  in  particular ;  yet  I  chofe  rather  to  leave,
the  determination  to  time  :  which,  as  it  has  demonftrated  the  more  certain
and  ufeful  efficacy  of  new  remedies,  as  of  the  Peruvian  baik,  has  alfo  dfe-
monftrated  that  of  the  transfufion  of  the  blood  to  be  doubtful  and  dan-
o^erous  ;  and,  not  to  go  too  far  from  the  matter  now  in  queftion,  as  it  has
Ihewn  fomany  other  remedies,  formerly  recommended  againft  the  venomous,
wounds  of  animals,  to  be  of  no  effeft,  and  has  buried  them  in  great  oblivion  :
fo  that,  for  the  fake  of  example,  which  Abbatius  (/)  has  faid  "  was  tried
"  and  tried  at  Padua,  and  found  to  be  very  ufeful,"  1  have  never  heard  of
as  being  barely  mention'd  •,  much  lefs  as  being  made  ufe:  of  by  any  one.^
for  almoft  the  fifty  years  that  I  have  liv'd  in  this  city.

Scarcely,  tlierefore,  had  a  few  years  pafs'd,  when  thofe  Memoirs  of  the
Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  came  forth  {g),  in  which  we  have  feea
it  demonftrated,  by  the  experiments  of  thofe  celebrated  men  GeoftVoy  and
Hunauld,  how  flight  and  dubious  are  thofe  boafted  efFecls  of  the  oily  or
unftuous  applications  :  and  that  this  judgment  was  right,  even  that  very
learned  Englifti  phylkian  Mead  {h^  has  confirm'd.

(J)  Lettera  fopra  alcune  oppoffeioni, '&C.  (/)  De  acmirab.  Vipsrse  natura.  c.  31.  in

[e)  Lettera  del  Piatt  fra  le  Opere  del  Redi fin.  (g)  A.  1737.

Tom.  z.  deir  Ediz.  Veaera.  (*)  Expof.  Median.  Veaen  ir.  T-nt.  1.

And


Letter  LIX. Article  30.  411

And  dchoiigh  this  author  has  added,  that  a  more  probable  praife  might
be  afcrtb'd  to  the  viper's  fat ;  yet  he  has  ingenuoufly  confefs'd,  that  this
method  of  cure  is  not  to  be  depended  upon  :  and  this  you  will  eafily  allow,
from  the  example  produc'd  in  the  Memoirs  1  have  mention'd,  of  a  man  who
was  bitten  by  a  viper.

Buc  he  recommends,  in  preference  to  other  remedies,  that  eafy  and  expe-
ditious one,  which  I  meant  to  fpeak  of  above,  when  I  denied  that  any  re-
medy was  yet  found  out  whereto  men  dare  truft ;  I  mean,  that  fudion  of
the  poifon  which  is  immediately  made  with  the  mouth.

For  although  Celfus  {i)  has  lb  confidently  recommended  this  againfl:  the
bites  of  all  ferpents,  as  to  aflert  that,  by  this  means,  the  perfon  who  fucks
"  would  be  lafe,  and  would  fave  the  perfon  whole  wound  he  fhould  fuck;"  and
though  this,  which  was  commended  even  byDiofcorides(/^),  was  in  ufe,  not  only
in  thetimesof  Galen(/),butalfointhofeof  Aetius(;«),Paulus  («),  and  Aftuarius
(«?),by  whom  it  is  prefcrib'd;  to  omitRhazes  (p),  and  others;  and,  indeed,  to
deicend  to  thofe  who  liv'd  nearer  to  our  own  times,  though  it  has  been  re-
commended by  Tagaultius  alfo  (y),  Velalius  (^),  Abbatius  (.f),  Severinus(/),
Redi  (//),  and  Charafius  (x),  and  by  others  (jy) :  I  fay,  although  it  depends  upon
fo  many  and  lb  great  authorities,  yet  we  muft  not  readily  expedt  that  the
people  can  be  induc'd  to  give  credit  to  Celfus  (2),  or  any-one  elfe,  when  he
fays  that  this  poifon  is  injurious,  "  not  by  being  tailed,  but  only  in  a  wound:"
not  even  if  Severinus  {a)  fhould  cry  cut  never  fo  long,  "  Let  any  one  fuck

"  the  poifon  our,  and  depend  upon  me, I  pronounce,  upon  my  word

*'  and  credit,  and  will  be  furety  for  the  event,  that  whoever  (hall  fuck  out
"  this  poifon,  will  be  free  from  every  taint  and  danger."

30.  And,  indeed,  I  fliould  think  that  the  people  were  very  wife  not  to  de-
pend upon  this  furety,  that  there  would  be  no  danger  in  fuch  an  operation  {b)\
notwithftanding  the  perfon  who  fucks  (hould  not  attend  to  the  monitum  df
Celfus  (f),  which  is  exprefsly  confirm'd  by  mod  of  the  authors  I  have  quoted:
I  mean,  "  That  he  has  no  ulcer  in  his  gums,  palate,  or  any  other  part  of
"'  the  mouth."

This  monitum  Redi  made  fo  much  account  of,  and  with  great  juftice,  that
I  remember  to  have  heard,  from  fome  one  of  thofe  who  were  then  with  him,
that  when  one  of  them  who  drank  the  poifon  prefs'd  out  from  the  vipers,
dipp'd  a  cruft  of  bread  into  it  at  the  fame  time,  and  ate  it,  Redi  immediately
blam'd  him  ;  left  the  crull,  by  wounding  the  gums,  as  it  often  happens  to
do,  fhould  bring  on  inflantaneous  danger,  inftead  of  humouring  the  joke.

And  the  fame  author  anoong  other  caufes  why  a  mountebank,  who  fuck'd

(;•)  De  Medic.  1.  5.  c.  27.  S.  3.  (/)  Vipers  Pyth.  P.  3.  c.  5.

•  {k)  De  Medic.  Mat.  1.  6.  c.  40.  (a)  Oflervaz.  int.  alle  Vipere.

(/)  Meth.  medend.  I.  13.  c.  6.  ad  fin.  \x)  Vid.  Sepulchr.  S.  hac  10.  in  SchoL  ad

(«;■)  Tetrabibl.  4.  Serm.  i.  c.  10.  Obf.  6.

(«)  De  Re  Med.  1.  5.  c.  2.  (y)  Vid.  du  Hamel  Reg.  Sc.  Acad.  Hid.

(0)  De  Meth.  Med.  1.  6,  c^  11.  1.  4.  c.  6.  in  fin.
{ p)  8.  Almanf.  c.  i.  (z)  S.  3.  cit.

[j)  Inftit.  Chir.  1.  2.  c.  11.  (a)  C.  5.  cit.

(r)  Chirurg.  magn.  I.  3.  c.  14,  {p)  Ibid.  &  alibi.

U)  L.  cit.  c.  31,  &  32  .  (c)  S.  3.  cit.

G  g  g  2  the


41 1 Book  IV.  Of  Cliirurgical  and  Univcrfal  Diforders.

the  wound  of  his  arm  which  had  been  bitten  by  an  afp,  died ;  and  everj
why  two  men  who  fuck'd  their  fingers  which  were  wounded  by  a  viper,  died
neverthelefs;  as  iElianns  (li),  Matthiolus  (tf),  and  Amatus  Lufitanus(/),  have
written;  conjedlur'd (^),  that  we  ought  to  take  for  granted,  that  they  hap-
pen'd  to  have  their  mouths  injur'd  by  a  kind  of  little  ulcer.

Yet  thefe,  and  other  events  to  be  taken  notice  of  below  {h\  terrify  men,
while  they  are  afraid  left  that  which  has  happen'd  to  any-one,  whatever  the
eaufe  of  it  might  be,  fhould  happen  to  them  in  the  fame  manner  j  efpecially
thofe  who  have  a  fcorbutic  laxity  of  the  gums,  or  any  thing  nearly  of  the
kind  :  fince  Matthiolus  (/)  has  obferv'd,  that,  even  without  this,  "  blood
"  eafily  flows  from  the  gums  by  the  force  of  ftrong  fuftion."

They  are  alfo  terrified  by  tbcfe  other  monita  which  moft  of  thefe  authors,
who  we  have  faid  approve  fudion,  in  concurrence  with  Avicenna  {k\  have
inculcated  :  I  mean,  that  the  perfon  who  fucks  it  may  not  be  fafting ;  that
he  muft  hold  oil  in  his  mouth  after  walhing  :  and  that  he  muft  immediately
fpit  out  what  he  has  fuck'd.

Thefe  warnings  are  fo  much  the  more  terrifying,  becaufe  the  very  learned
Mead  (/)  himfelf  commends  almoft  the  fame  things  :  although  he  fays  for
this  reafon,  "  that  the  acrimony  of  the  poifon  may  not  inflame  the  lips  and
"  t^ie  tongue  "  of  the  perfon  that  fucks  it ;  nor  without  occafion  :  fince  he,
upon  tafting  the  poifon  of  the  viper,  together  with  other  perfons,  though
jnix'd  with  water,  perceiv'd  it  to  be  "  of  an  acrid  and  fiery  tafte,  as  if  the
•"  tongue  were  perforated  by  any  hot  and  burning  body,"  this  fenfation  lafting
two  or  three  hours  :  and,  indeed,  his  companion,  who  would  tafte  it  undi-
luted, got  a  little  ulcer  thereby  upon  his  tongue,  together  with  fome  inflam-
mation and  tumour,  which  remain'd  for  the  fpace  of  two  days.

Men  were  far  lefs  terrified  when  they  read  either  Severinus  (m)  aflerting
that  this  poifon  had  a  tafte  like  "  the  unripe  fervice-berry  ;"  as  Branchinus,  a
principal  apothecary  at  Siena,  perceiv'd,  when,  in  the  prefence  of  Severinus,.
"  he  lick'd  it  with  his  tongue,  and  tafted  it,  without  fufi^ering  any  mifchief
"  therefrom  :"  or  Charafius  («)  affirming  "  that  it  had  been  tafted,  and
"  fwallow'd;  as  he  had  often  experienc'd;  and  that  it  had  neither  hurt  any
"  man  nor  any  animal ;"  fo  that,  as  he  at  length  adds,  "  he  himfelf  did  not
"  decline  taking  it  into  his  own  mouth,  without  any  previous  or  confequenc
•'  walhing  of  his  mouth  -."  or  Rhedi  (c),  in  particular,  faying  "  he  had  feen
"  in  an  infinite  number  of  inftances,  that  the  lips  of  thofe  who  lick'd  it,  and
"  fwallow'd  it,  did  not  fweli ;"  and  fpeaking  of  his  fervant  Jacob,  who  lick'd
or  drank  it  every-now-and-then  with  a  kind  of  pleafure;  as  he  certainly
would  not  have  done  it  on  the  follov/ing  day,  if  he  had  receiv'd  any  injury
in  his  mouth,  or  ftomach,  therefrom,  or  had  perceiv'd  an  acrid  and  burning
tafte  -,  which,  on  the  contrary,  Redi  aflerts  to  be  "  a  fweet  infipid  "  in  that
poifon,  "  and  very  fimilar  to  the  favour  of  oil  of  fweet  almonds."

(i)  De  Hlft.  Animal.  1.  9.  c.  62.  (-f)  Canon.  I.  4.  F.  6.  tr.  3.  c.  1.

((?)  Comment,  in  Diofcor.  1.  6.  C.  40.  (I)  Tent.  1.  ci<.

(f)  Cent.  3.  Curat.  Med.  14.  («)  Cit.  P.  2.  c.  4.  ad  fin.  &  c.  8.

(g)  OITerv.  cit.  (n)  Vid.  Sepulchr.  in  Schol.  ad  Append*


.(/£-)  N.  33.  cit.  Obf.  6.

■\i)  Ad  c.  40.  cit.  (0) Offerv-  cit


But


Letter  LIX. Article  31.  415

But  in  regard  to  fo  great  a  diflenfion  among  authors,  it  will  be  our  plac*
to  fpeak  of  that  prefently  again.

Now,  then,  judge  whether,  from  this  very  diflenfion,  courage  can  be  given
to  the  people  to  make  ufe  of  fuftion :  efpecially  as  they  fee  that  moft  authors,
either  among  the  ancients  or  moderns,  who  have  recommended  it,  do  not
truft  more  to  that  alone,  in  general,  than  to  the  remedy  which,  as  well  as
the  fuflion  of  the  mouth,  is  immediately  at  hand,  and  yet  not  unlike  it ;  or,
at  leaft,  is  lefs  liable  to  fufpicions  ;  I  mean,  that  of  cupping-glafTes  :  for,,
after  the  ufe  of  either  of  thefe  remedies,  they  order  ftill  other  and  other  re-
medies •,  which  is  a  very  evident  proof  that  fuclion,  therefore,  is  not  the  re-
medy by  which  we  may  always  depend  upon  the  poifon's  being  drawn  out  of
the  bottom  of  a  very  narrow  wound;  and  even  out  of  the  windings  and
turnings  of  the  adjacent  cellular  membranes,  into  which  it  may  fometimes
have  infmuated  itfelf.

And  this  you  may  fuppofe  to  be  faid  of  other  methods  of  fuftion,  either
by  fiphons,  or  leaches,  or  by  any  other  means  whatever.

But  as  to  the  more  efficacious  chirurgical  remedies ;  fuch  as  deepfcarifications,
burnings,  or  amputation  -,  1  have  not  fpoken  of  them  for  this  reafon,  that
moft  perfons  who  are  bitten  by  a  viper,  either  do  not  admit  of  thefe  re-
medies while  they  promife  themfelves  the  fame  happy  event  which  they  hear
many  have  receiv'd  from  a  milder  method  of  treatment,  or,  at  length,  cry
out  for  the  ufe  of  them  too  late  :  for  that  which  Kramerus  [p)  aflerts  is  very
rare ;  I  mean,  that  he  knew  a  perfon  who  had  his  finger  wounded  by  a.
viper,  whereby  his  whole  arm  was  inflam'd,  and  a  fever  and  frequent
fwoonings  had  come  on,  together  with  deliria,  fpafms,  and  other  fymptoms
of  the  like  kind  :  and  yet  that  this  perfon,  "  at  the  end  of  two-and-thirty
*'  hours  after  receiving  the  wound,  was  cur'd  perfedly  by  the  amputatfon  of
*'  the  finger."  You  fee,  therefore,  why  I  omitted  thefe  things,  and  confi-
der'd  only  the  milder  methods ;  fome  of  which  I  fhadl  even  take  notice  of
below  {q).  , _

31.  But  how  happen'd  it,  you  will  fay,  that  fo  much  reputation  has  been
gain'd  by  fudlion,  and  many  other  of  the  milder  kind  of  remedies,  even  in-
ancient  times ;  unlefs  men  had  been  feen  to  be  fav'd  by  them  .''

I,  however  ;  to  omit  this  confideracion,  that  it  is  very  feldom  any-one  has
efcap'd  without  making  ufe  of  many  remedies,  fo  that  it  was  difficult  to  de-
termine to  which,  in  particular,  he  ow'd  his  fafety ;  fliall  certainly  think  this
worthy  to  be  attended  to,  that  many  inftances  occur,  among  thofe  who  have
frequently  made  the  experiment,  of  beafts  who  have  had  their  lives  fav'd
after  the  wound  of  a  viper,  without  the  application  of  any  remedy  either  in-
ternally or  externally  ;  notwithftanding  they  have  had  violent  fymptoms  there-
from :  and,  indeed,  you  will  meet  with  inftances  where  the  bite  had  no
bad  effects  at  all ;  or,  at  leaft,  only  very  flight  fymptoms.  Thus  you  will
read  that  it  happen'd  very  frequently  to  Redi  (r).

So  there  are  other  obfervations  of  the  Parifians,  as  well  thofe  that  Du

{p)  CJommere.  Litter.  A,  1735.  Hebd.  11. (?)  N.  33.
.»,  3.  in  fin.  [/]  Ofierv.cit.eLettepacit.  int.  alleOppofiz.^

3  '  Hamsl


414 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univ^erfal  Dlforders.

Hamel  (s)  quoted  formerly,  as  thofe  that  I  have  commended  above  (/),  re-
lative thereto.  And  if  you  enquire  into  the  caufe  of  thele  differences  ;  I
Ihall  fay  that  it  might  have  been  manifold,  whether  you  conlider  the  vipers
that  biie,  or  the  animals  that  are  bitten,  or  both  of  them.

1  hole  circumflances  that  are  common  to  both  are  age,  conftitution  of  body,
ftrength,  feafon  of  the  year,  food,  and  chmate  -,  from  the  variety  of  which
there  may  be  a  various  degree  of  the  injury  given  or  received.

Thus  •,  to  fpeak  of  different  regions ;  you  fee  which  Severinus  («)  excepts,
as  thofe  whofe  vipers  are  not  noxious  by  their  bites  ;  although  what  had
been  related  to  him  of  the  EngHdi  vipers  (x)  by  Houghton,  does  not  at  all
agree  with  thofe  things  that  Mead  (y)  and  others  affert  :  elpecially  where
Mead  affirms  that  the  experiments  of  Redi  had  anfwer'd  with  him  in  Eng-
land, as  they  had  with  Du  Verney  before  in  France;  or  where  he  af-
firms that  the  fame  dilbrders  "  are  wont  to  arife,  every-where,  almoft  in  a
"  fimilar  manner,"  from  the  bite  of  a  viper :  although,  what  is  fufficieac
for  our  prefent  defign,  he  confcffes  that,  according  to  the  "  difference  of
"  climates,"  and  of  the  other  circumftances  nearly  that  1  have  mention'd,
"  thefe  diforders  may  be  heighten'd  or  diminifh'd."

And  you  will  eafily  conceive  that  one  or  the  other  of  thefe  two  circum-
ftances may  happen,  according  to  the  difl'erent  magnitude  of  the  biting
viper,  his  rage,  and  the  acrimony  of  his  poilbn ;  if  you  fuppofe  that,  Trom
a  larger  and  more  enrag'd  viper,  a  greater  quantity  of  poifon  is  inferted  into
the  wound,  and  this  wound  is  inflidted  very  deeply :  for  as  to  acrimony,  the
queftion  is  very  clear ;  and  that  this  is  different  in  different  vipers,  is  prov'd
by  the  difference  which  we  have  fpoken  of  above  (2),  amongft  the  authors
I  have  referr'd  to,  in  regard  to  the  tafte  of  the  poifon,  and  its  effeds  upon  the
lips  and  the  tongue  :  for  no  one  would  be  fo  prefumptuous  as  to  doubt
whether  thofe  things,  which  are  faid  to  be  obferv'd  by  thefe  authors,  were  really
obferv'd  or  not.

To  thefe  things  we  muff  add  that  which  is  the  chief;  I  mean,  that  there
is  a  great  deal  of  difference  betwixt  the  viper  which  has  juft  bitten  fre-
quently and  repeatedly,  and  that  which  has  not  done  it  yet  after  refting  a
confiderable  time.

For  this  was  long  ago  recounted  among  the  frauds  of  impoftors,  by  the
author  of  the  book  to  Pifo  (a),  De  Theriaca,  that  the  vipers  "  were  made
"  continually  to  bite"  meat  that  was  laid  before  them  in  private;  for  by
thefe  means  "  they  muft  of  courfe  throw  out  the  poifon  that  was  contain'd
"  in  their  mouths ;"  from  whence  you,  on  the  contrary,  may  deduce  one
caufe  why  the  hungry  vipers  wound  more  dangeroufly ;  and  add  it  to  the
caufes  whifch  others  have  fuppos'd.

However,  what  that  ancient  author  has  afferted  is  confirm'd  by  Redi  {b),
where  he  fays,  he  had  many  times  experienc'd,  that  vipers  throw  out  all
their  poifon,  if  not  at  the  firft,  at  leaft  at  the  fecond  bite  ;  fo  that  the  third

W  Reg.  Sc.  Acad.  Hift.  1. 4.  S.  1.  c.  i,.  n,6. (y)  Tent.  i.  cit.
(0  N.  26.  (z)  N.  30,

(a)  L.  cit.  P.  3.  c.  I.  ■ (a)  C.  12.
(*■)  Vid.  &  P.  I.  c.  7.  §  3.  (b)  Offerv.  cit.

and


Letter  LIX. Article  32.  415-

and  fourth  are  afterwards  quite  free  from  poifon  :  and  although  he  hints
below,  that  by  the  third  alfo  a  poifon  may  fometimes  be  communicated  j
and  even,  in  another  place  (c),  not  only  propofes  an  experiment,  from
whence  the  third,  but  alfo  another,  from  whence  the  fourth  appears  to  have
been  fatal ;  and  the  Parifians  (i)  one  from  whence  the  feventh  appears  to  have
been  fo  ;  yet  if  you  Ihould  choofe  to  confider  thefe  things  alfo,  which  happen
very  rarely ;  you  fee  that  it  is  not  oppofite  to  our  purpofe  ;  for  we  muft  ac
length  come  to  that  bite  which  is  not  injurious,  fooner  or  later,  in  proportion
as  the  viper  is  larger  or  lefs.;  or  at  lead  as  it  has  lefs  or  more  poifon  collefted  j
or. as  it  more  flowly  repairs  the  lofs  of  this  humour;  or  more  fpeedily ;  or
pours  it  out  more  plentifully  or  fparingly  at  every  bite-,  or,  in  fine,  as  it
generates  a  lefs  or  more  acrid  poifon ;  fo  that  even  the  very  la{l  drop  may  be
able  to  do  what  a  larger  drop  is  wont  to  effeft.

32.  To  thefe  circumftances  add  thofe  that  are  peculiar  to  animals  when
bitten  :  fuch  as  the  magnitude  or  fmallnefs  of  their  bodies ;  the  hardnefs  or
tendernefs  of  their  fkins ;  the  inert  or  acrimonious  ftate  of  their  humours;
the  fmaller  or  larger  quantity  of  blood-vefiels,  or  nerves,  that  go  to  make
np  the  part  bitten  -,  and  other  circumftances  of  this  kind.  For  the  fmall
animals,  cateris  paribus,  die  fooner  from  the  fame  quantity  and  acrimony  of
the  poifon -,  as  reafon  evidently  Ihows,  and  the  experiments  of  Redi  (f),  and
of  the  Parifians  (/)  confirm.

Wherefore,  it  is  not  to  be  wonder'd  at,  if  we  read  in  the  firft,  that  -,  when
the  fame  viper  had  bitten  five  ducks,  and  three  pigeons  immediately  after,
and  neither  of  the  three  laft '  ducks  perifli'd ;  the  firft  of  the  pigeons
died  :  or  that,  although  birds  very  eafily  die  from  the  bite  of  the  viper,  the
horfe,  bull,  and  other  larger  animals,  that  have  an  exceedingly  hard  fkin,
very  frequently  do  not  die  :  for  they  muft  of  courfe  receive  lefs  deep
wounds.

Nor  fhbuld  I  be^nuch  fdrpriz'd,  if  the -experiments  that  are  transferr'd
into  the  Sepulchretum  {g),  fhould  anfwer  in  the  fame  manner,  when  often
repeated  :  fo  that  it  would  be  certain  thefe  animals  die  the  fooneft,  who  are
fupplied  with  the  moft  acrid  humours,  and  have  the  moft  vivid  circulation  ;
but  thofe  that  are  fupplied  with  more  watry  and  vifcid  humours,  and  have  a
flow  circulation,  more  flowly  ;  and  indeed,  that  fome  cannot  be  kiil'd  at  all
by  thefe  means.

And  certainly,  as  in  one  and  the  fame  fpecies  of  animals,  there  may  be  a
different  conftitution  of  the  humours,  and  even  of  the  folid  parts  :  in  which
way  I  think  we  muft  uiiderftand  what  is  prudently  hinted  by  the  Parifians ;  I
mean,  how  far  it  is  to  be  fuppos'd,  that  fome  animals  of  the  fame  fpecies
fuffer  more  or  lefs  grievous  effedts  from  the  viperine  poifon  ;  fo  that  although
this  be  emitted  in  the  fame  quantity,  and  the  bites  feem  equal,  they  do  not
die  equally,  or  not  equally  foon  or  late :  fince,  I  fay,  thele  things  are  fup-
pofable  ;  It  feems  that  we- may  gather  from  hence,  why  the  animals  of  one
fpecies  do  not  always  die  in  the  fame  order  in  which  they  were  bitten  by  the

(c)  Lett.  cit.  ,  (f)  cit.  fupra.

(d)  cit.  fupra.  (a)  in  Addit.  ad  Sefl,  iianc  lo.  Schol.  2.  ad
(i)'Lett,  cit.  . Obf.  2,

4  viper  i


4 1  6 Book  IV.  Of  Cbirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

viper ;  but  fometimes,  as  of  the  five  pigeons  of  Charafius  (h),  that  firft  which
receiv'd  the  fifth  bite,  and  of  the  three  chickens  of  the  Parifians,  that  much
the  lateft  which  receiv'd  the  fecond  :  although,  as  Charafius  is  entirely
filenr,  whether  all  the  pigeons  were  wounded  in  the  fame  part  of  the  body,
or  in  a  different  part ;  and  the  Parifians  had  before  faid,  that  not  all,  but
"  almoft  all "  the  chickens,  on  whom  they  made  the  experiment,  were
bitten  in  the  fame  part ;  other  caufes  may  be  added,  whereto  we  may  attri-
bute that  change  of  order  in  dying.

For  the  bite  being  receiv'd  in  that  part  where  there  are  a  great  number  of
blood-veflels,  and  thofe  large  -,  or  where  there  are  very  few,  and  thefe  fmall ;
or  where  there  are  many  or  few  nerves  in  like  manner;  may  be  more  perni-
cious, or  more  flight;  fo  that,  even  by  the  very  dilchargeof  the  blood,  when
it  is  quick  and  hafty,  the  poifon  may  at  the  fame  time  be  thrown  out,  to-
gether with  the  blood ;  as  has  been  obferv'd  by  Redi  (i) :  and  whether  this
rejedtion  might  happen,  in  fome  meafure,  by  the  ferum  flowing  out  of  the
wound,  you  yourfelf  will  judge;  for  the  Parifians  deny  their  having  feen  lb
great  a  difcharge  in  thofe  animals  which  perifli'd,  as  in  thofe  that  were  pre-
ferv'd.

33.  You  will,  without  doubt,  here  afk  me,  whether  the  poifon  of  the
viper,  or  its  noxious  quality,  is  carried  into  the  internal  parts  of  the  body,
by  means  of  the  veins,  as  moft  perfons  imagine ;  or  by  the  nerves,  as  the
celebrated  Mead  (k)  fuppofcs.  You  will  perhaps  be  influenc'd  to  think  with
the  firft,  by  that  experiment,  befides  others,  which  is  propos'd  in  the  Sepul-
chretum  (/),  as  made  "  more  than  once"  upon  dogs;  1  mean,  that  by  the
poifonous  juice  extrafted  from  the  heads  of  vipers  (which  were  wafh'd  with  a
little  warm  water,  while  they  were  prefs'd)  and  injefted  into  the  blood-vef-
fels,  they  perifli'd  in  a  ftiort  time.

But  when  you  obferve  that  many  other  things  which  are  by  no  means  poi-
fonous, when  injefted  in  the  fame  manner,  bring  on  death  in  a  (hort  time
equally  {m);  you  will  more  willingly  confider  the  arguments  which  arepro-
duc'd  by  Mead  for  the  way  of  the  nerves.  For  he  himfelf  alfo,  did  not  be-
fore difallow  the  way  of  the  veins  (n) ;  efpecially  where  the  queftion  was  of
poifons  being  introduc'd  by  the  wounds  or  bites  of  animals.

But  he  afterwards  chang'd  his  opinion,  and  fuppos'd,  that,  like  poifons
when  taken in,  thofe  alfo  that  are  infus'd  by  a  wound,  attack  the  nerves -
chiefly  ;  as  he  had  attended  to  the  furprizing  celerity  wherewith  the  bite  of
a  rattle-fnake  kills  a  dog,  that  is  to  fay,  "  in  lefs  than  a  quarter  of  a
*'  minute."

And  even  when  the  common  viper  had  bitten  the  finger  of  a  man,  and  he,
as  is  mention'd  above  {0),  had  immediately  applied  his  mouth  to  the  wound
and  fuck'd  out  the  blood  ;  "  he  fell  down  dead  fuddenly  the  moment  it  was
"  done  :"  or  as  the  fame  Matthiolus,  who  faw  it,  fays  in  another  place  (j>)y

(i)  Sea.  ead.  Obf.  6.  §.  8.  (w) Vid.  ex.  gr. inter  injeft. Courtenu

(<■)  Lett.  cit.  •§.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  16.

{i)  Tent.  1.  cit.  (k)  Vid.  Introd.  ad  Tentam.

(*)  Schol-  2.  fopracit.  (0)  "•  30.

(f)  Comment,  in  Prasf.  Diofc.  ad  I.  6.

«  fell


Letter  ox. Article  33.  4.1^

"  fell  foddenly  o'own  upon  'the  ground,  where  being  imraediately  depriv'd
«'  of  fpeech,  he  died."

The  effeft  v/as  noc  fatal  indeed,  but  very  noxious  and  fudden,  from  the
fame  caufe,  in  a  viper-catcher,  whom  Sommerus  (q)  cur'd.  For  he  having
fuck'd  with  his  own  mouth,  two  little  wounds  which  were  inflifted  upon  his
finger  by  a  viper;  "  his  tongue  immediately  became  tumid,  as  if  he  held  an
"  apple  in  his  mouth,  together  with  an  impediment  of  fpeech  and  degluti-
"  tion,  an  obfcurity  of  the  fight,  a  tumour  and  heavinefs  of  the  head."

Nor  would  I  have  you  immediately  believe,  becaufe  we  have  produc'd  the
conjefture  of  Redi  (r),  referring  the  caufe  of  events  of  this  kind  to  fome
little  ulcer  of  the  mouth  ;  that  the  poifon  had  enter'd  into  fome  veins  which
were  open  in  the  ulcer:  for  thofe  who  are  of  the  opinion  with  Mead,  might,
on  the  other  hand,  lay,  that  not  only  the  little  veins,  but  the  fmall  nerves
alio,  lie  open  to  the  injuries  of  the  poifon  in  this  ulcer.

And  left  you  fhould  blame  fuclion  more  than  a  bitej  read,  even  in  the
Memoirs  of  the  Parifjans,  what  happen'd  to  that  Englifhman,  who  would
have  the  experiment,  of  being  bitten  by  a  viper,  made  upon  him.  That  is
to  fay,  from  a  bite  upon  his  hand,  a  violent  pain  extended  itfelf  immediately
through  the  whole  remaining  part  of  the  upper  iimb,  even  before  the  viper
had  ceas'd  to  bite.

And  you  \\'\\\  be  led  to  fuppofe,  that  the  pain  is  to  be  imputed  to  the
nerves,  not  as  wounded,  but  as  infected  with  poifon,  from  that  memorable
circumftance  taken  notice  of  by  Mead  (j),  "  that  the  dog  had  bark'd  but
"  little,  while  a  wound  was  inflided  "  with  a  fharp  needle,  in  a  form  fimi-
lar  to  the  tooth  of  a  viper ;  but  that  when,  by  the  fame  needle,  "  the  poifon
"  was  introduc'd,  he  then  howl'd  exceedingly."  - ■

But  befides  the  very  fpeedy  progreffion,  or  at  leaft  fometimes,  of  this
poifon,  or  of  its  noxious  effedls ;  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  from  the
flow  motion  of  the  btood  through  the  veins  ;  add  thereto  the  experiments  of
the  fame  celebrated  man  upon  the  human  blood,  when  receiv'd  in  a  glafs
veflel  -,  as  it  was  not  at  all  chang'd,  "  either  in  colour,  or  confidence,"  by
reafon  of  having  the  poifon  of  the  viper  join'd  with  it  :  fo  that  neither  at  that
time,  nor  afterwards,  couid  it  be  diftinguilh'd  from  a  like  portion  of  the
fame  blood,  to  which  nothing  had  been  added.

Nor  would  I  have  you  be  ttagger'd  by  what  you  will  read  in  the  Sepul-
chretum  (t),  that,  in  animals  kili'd  by  this  poifon,  the  blood  was- found  to
be  coagulated  ;  and  even  in  the  heart,  and  all  the  veins,  "  to  be  concreted
"  into  very  tenacious  polypi."  From  the  fame  Sepulchretum  you  will  meet
with  contrary  obfervations  (//),  of  the  blood  being  found  "  more  fluid  than
"  coagulated  ■"  or  "  exceedingly  thin  and  acrid  ;"  or  difl"olv'd  "  in  part,
"  and  corrupted  ;"  and  no-where  "  coagulated."

But  if,  neverthelefs,  you  obfcrve  fome  obfervations  amongft  thefe,  which
mention  coagula  and  concretions  •,  read  frequently  the  Parifians  I  have  com-
mended, who,  although  they  relate  that  in  England  two  pigeons  had  their

{q)  Eph.N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  3.  Obf.  152.  (/)  in  Addit. ad banc lo. S. Obf. i.  &

{r)  n.  30.  Schol.  2.  ad  Obf.  2.

(4  Ten:.  I.  cit,  («)  Obf,  ead.  3.  &  Seel.  ead.  Obf.  6.

Vol.  III.  H  h  h  blood


41  S Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

blood  coagulated,  yet  at  the  fame  time  aflert,  that  in  the  fame,  and  many
other  fpecies  of  animals,  no  fign  of  coagulation,  but,  on  the  contrary,  marks
of  fluidity,  were  found  in  the  blood  :  and  even  Redi  (x),  who  never-
thelefs  had  found  a  coagulation  in  fome,  exprefsly  denies  his  having  found
it  in  all.

It  therefore  fufficiently  appears,  that  it  is  not  the  itmnsdiate  and  proper
efFe<5t  of  this  poifon  to  coagulate  the  blood  ;  nor  yet  to  diflblve  it :  but  ac-
cording to  the  various  difpofitions  of  this  fl-uid,  and  according  to  the  vari=-
cus  aft'edions  of  the  nerves  in  particular,  whereby,  as  is  faid  above  (jy"),  the
motion  of  the  blood  is  furprizingly  difturb'd,  it  is  vitiated  in  a  various  man-
ner ;  fo  that,  as  you  will  perceive  by  reading  over  again  the  greater  part  of
the  obfervations  referr'd  to,  in  fome  it  is  of  a  very  lively  and  bright  red,  in
others  black,  and  prone  to  corruption.

And  this  being  the  ftateof  the  queftion,  you  readily  fee,  of  yourfelf,  that
whenever  medicines  which  are  fiU'd  with  volatile  particles,  that  have  been
long  fince  recommended  againft  the  bites  of  vipers,  have  feem'd  to  be  of
advantage,  they  have  cither  lit  on  thofe  cafes  'wherein  the  blood  was  inclin'd
to  concretion,  or  have  rather  been  ufeful  by  helping  the. nerves.

And  this  there  would  be  the  more  reafon  for  faying,  if  that  method  which
fucceeded  fo  happily  in  the  botanical  pupil  of  that  celebrated  man  Juffieu  (z)  j.
who  had  three  fingers  bitten  by  a  viper,  not  without  a  numbnefs  and  infen-
fibility  of  them  almofb  immediately  coming  on,  and  a  confiderable  tumour
extended  quite  to  the  very  hand  ;  from  a  volatile  alkaline  remedy  being
given  internally,  and  applied  externally  alfo,  to  the  wound,  join'd  with  the
oil  of  amber;  if  this  method,  I  fay,  when  recurr'd  to  very  early,  as  it  is  faid
to  have  anfwer'd  in  a  great  number  of  brute  animals,  Ihould  likewile  be
found  hereafter  to  anfwer  in  the  human  fpecies,  or  at  leaft  in  the  greateft
part  of  that  ipecies.

34.  Yet  we  are  not,  for  that  reafon,  to-  deny  that  the- vitiated  blood  of
thofe  who  are  bitten  by  a  viper,  accelerates  death  :  and  we  muft  even  grant
to  the  Parifians  (e),  that  it  contributes  much  thereto  •,  efpecially  as  when  it  is
infefted  by  a  gangrene,  which  is  generally  wont  to  fcize  the  wounded  parr,
and  the  parts  nearetl  to  it,  it  carries  the  fame  taint  into  the  diftant  and  in-
ternal parts ;  as  was  feen  by  them  in  the  heart  and  liver  of  a  goofe ;  and
had  been  fometimes  feen  by  others  in  the  liver,  which  was  of  a  blackilh  co-
lour inclining  to  yellow  ;  at  other  times  in  the  ftomach,  the  colour  of  which
was  "  in  fome  meafure  obfcure,"  not  without  "  a  kind  of  appearance  of
"  lividnefs,"  or  "  more  obfcure  •"  and  in  like  manner  in  the  mefentery
and  inteftines,  wherein  that  colour  was  "  more  manifeft  ;"  or,  either  thofe
"  that  were  painted  here  and  there  with  livid  fpots,"  and  atthe  entrance  of
the  biliary  duels  were  "  infedled  with  a  lividnefs,  or  rather  with  a  gangrenous
"  blacknefs,"  as  you  will  find  by  reading  over  the  obfervations  pointed  out.
above  {b)  in-  the  Sepulchretum, .  and  the  fcholium.

(x)  Qffetvai,  cit,-  (z)  Hift.  de  1'  Acad,  R. des  Sc.  A.  1747?

(j  )  R^.Q..  Obfi  Anat.  2.-

{a)  cit.  fupran.  zg. {b)  n.  33.


Letter  liX. Article  34.  419

Tet  it  fometimes  happens,  not  only  that  thefe  appearances  are  not  re-
fnark'd,  but  even  that  no  external  lividnefs  appears  any  where  ;  as  in  the
Jittle  dag  of  Francini  (c),  whicli  had  "  no  tumour  or  livid  appearance  in  any
"  part  of  the  body :"  and  it  is  probable  that  from  the  fmall  nervous  branches
themfelves,  that  are  there,  being  irritated  by  the  envenom'd  bite,  con-
tractions of  the  fibres  are  brought  on,  which  caufe  the  blood  to  ftagnate  ira
the  neighbouring  veflels  ;  from  whence  arile  the  beginnings  of  tumour,  in-
flammation, lividnefs,  and  gangrene  :  unlefs  it  (hould  happen  that  there  is
iuch  a  difpofition  of  the  body,  or  of  the  wounded  part,  that,  although  in
other  places,  as  in  that  little  dog,-the  nerves  begin  very  foon  to  be  convuls'd,
^yet  the  part  which  was  bitten  neither  fwells  nor  is  livid ;  although  it  fwells
io  very  haftily  at  other  times,  that  the  Parifians  have  .allerted  (_d)  the
beginning  of  the  tumour  to  be  obferv'd  in  the  fame  moment  that  the  bite  is
receiv'd  :  yet  in  that  noble  youth  whofe  hiftory  you  fee  defcrib'd  by  Cha-
rafius,  in  the  Sepulchretum  {e),  it  was  not  obferv'd  till  "  after  fome
*'  hours."

Nor  does  it  feem  that  any  other  reafon,  befides  the  different  difpofition  of
bodies,  can  be  affign'd  why  the  tumour,  in  fome  perfons,  extends  itfelf  but
little,  and  in  others  extends  itfelf  very  confiderably  •,  fo  that  in  the  very  fame
noble  youth,  when  the  whole  limb,  which  had  been  wounded,  was  occupied
thereby,  together  with  the  neighbouring  hypochondrium  and  breaft,  it
feem'd  to  be  now. proceeding  on  to  attack  the  oppofite  fide  alfo  :  and  in  ano-
ther example  propos'd  by  the  Parifians,  the  tumour  feiz'd  on  the  hand  op-
pofite to  that  which  was  wounded  ftill  much  fooner :  -and  indeed  our  Fallop-
^ius  (/),  a-nd  Albertini  (g),  faw  that  the  whole  body  was  fwollen  from  the
bite  of  a  viper  -,  to  omit  Diofcorides  (h),  whofe  words  1  know  are  differently
read  by  different  perfons"  (z).

Yet  fometimes  cafes  happen,  in  which,  if  you  would  vvifh  to  explain  the ,
■effedts  of  the  bite  of^ny  venomous  beaft,  it  is  not  fufHcient  to  fpeak  of  the
peculiar  difpofition  of  bod-y  ;  as  when. a  horfe  {k),  whofe  rfght  foot  behind
■was  faid  to  have  beenijitten  by  a  field-moufe,  and  which  died  in  the  fpace
of  tw©  days,  appear'd,  upon  dilTedtion,  to  have  not  fo  much  the  cells  of  the
adipofe  membrane,  from  the  foot  quite  to  the  neck,  fiU'd  with  a  yellow
ferum,  and  black  here  and  there,  as  if  from  contufion,  and  the  mufcles
-flaccid  ;  and  thefe  appearances  on  the  right  fide.;  as  to  have  the  right  lobe
of  the  lungs  diftinguifh'd  with  black  fpots,  and  the  right  auricle  of  the  heart
itfelf  yellow  and  fill'd  with  ferum  -,  at  the  fame  time  that  the  mufcles  on  the
-left  fide,  as  well  as  the  lungs,  and  the  auricle,  were  perfeftly  found  :  which
difference  you  will  not  deduce  from  the  virulence  being  carried  into  the  blood
from  the  wound,  nor  from  a  certain  difpofition  of  the  blood ;  but  rather
.from  the  nerves  on  the  right  fide  being.irritatedi  efpecially  if  you  have  an
eye  to  the  ftate  of  the  auricles.

(c)  Lettera  cit.  n.  29.  non.  Tom.  i.
,/<f;  Ibid.  dt. _  (,^)  De  Med.  I.  6.  c.  10.

(e)  Append,  ad  Obf.  6.  hujus  lo.  Seft,  (z)  Severin.  c.  i.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  31.

l/J  De  Tumor,  prset.  nat.  c.  3.  {k)  Vid.  Many  Qusfl.  Med.  Parif.  prppof,

(gj  Opufc.  3.  in  Comment.  Inft,  Sc.  Bo-  die  ult.  A,  1749.  n,  4..

-H  h  h  2  35,  But


4  20 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

55.  But  that  you  may  account  for  the  varieties  which  are  to  be  obferv'd  irj-
the  efFedts  of  the  viperine  poilon,  in  other  cafes  \,  as  well  as  in  thofe  which
1  fpoke  of  juft  now  ;  from  one  or  other  of  the  caufes  tliat  I  mention'd  lately,
1  will  take  notice  to  you  here  of  fome  of  the  principal  varieties.

A  vomiting,  if  you  attend  to  the  greater  part  of  the  obfervations  pointed
out,  you  will  fcarcely  ever  fuppofe  to  be  abfent.  And  yet  Paulus  (/),
Aetius  (?»),  and  Avicenna  (;/),  would  not  have  fpoken  of  it  as  they  have
done,  if  they  had  not  feen  it  wanting  in  many;  for  the  two  latter  fay
that  they  have  feen  it  "  fometimes,"  and  the  former  that  it  happen'd  in
"  fome  perfons."

Nor  does  Courtenius  (0),  thougti  he  fpeaks  of  many  dogs,  and  among
other  fymptoms  does  not  fpare  to  mention  a  kind  of  lethargic  ftupor-,  which
is  otherwife  not  taken  notice  of  by  many  -,  as  the  "  ufual "  effeft  of  this
poifon-,  give  the  leaft  hint  of  a  vomiting  :  nor  is  this  done  in  the  experi-
ments of  that  fecond  Icholium  -,  nor  in  thofe  of  that  fixth  obfervation,  which
we  have  referr'd  to  above,  from  the  iiepulchretum  (p) ;  if  you  except  one
however,  the  words  immediately  fubjefted  to  which  exprefsly  fay,  "  no  vo-
"  miting  was  the  confequence."

In  like  manner  in  thefe  experiments,  and  thofe  of  Courtenius,  I  do  not
fee  that  inteftinal  difcharges  which  were  worthy  of  notice,  are  fpoken  of;
qnd  yet  the  violence  of  thefe  difcharges,  or  their  peculiar  nature,  has  been
obferv'd  by  many  authors :  and  the  celebrated  Mead  (q)  has  faid,  in  refpecl
to  the  dog  which  he  had  infefted  with  this  poifon,  by  introducing  the  needle
infefted  therewith  :  "  the  ufual  difturbances  came  on,  vomitings,  ftools,  &c'."
And  certainly,  in  the  third  example  of  a  man  bitten  by  a  viper,  which  is  de-
fcrib'd  by  the  Parifians  (r),  it  is  very  evident  how  violent  both  of  them
were.

But  in  the  two  which  precede  that,  ftools  are  not  fo  much  as  mention'd  ;
nor  yet  formerly  by  Diofcorides  [s),  Aetius  (/),  Paulus  (ti),  or  Avicenna  (x):
the  three  firft-mention'd  of  whom  take  notice  of  "  tormina,"  Avicenna  "  a
"  heavinefs  in  the  back,"  all  of  them  "  a  difficulty  of  urine;"  and  indeed,
inftead  of  this,  Aetius  mentions  "  bloody  urine,"  and  almoft  all  of  them
"  bloody  gums."  Yet  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  of  thefe,  and  the
difficulty  of  urine,  in  later  obfervations.

Bloody  urine,  however,  is  taken  notice  of  in  both  the  dogs  of  Harde-
rus  (r) ;  and  I  know  that  the  man,  fpoken  of  in  that  firft  example  among  the
Parifians,  complain'd  of  his  back,  and  of  tormina ;  and  likewife  that  Ehe
young  man  of  Charafius  (z)  complain'd  of  fevere  and  continual  pains  about
the  navel :  and  in  him  alfo  was  a  tumour  of  the  lips,  which  Redi  (a)  fays
was  mention'd  by  Avicenna. .

If  this  author  therefore,  and  thofe other  ancient  phyficians,  have not

(/)  De  Re  Med.  1.  5.  c.  12.  (r)  cit.  fupra  n.  29.

(m)  Tetrab.  4.  S.  I.  c.  21.  {s)  (0 («) W  capitib.  cit.

(a)  Canon.  1.  4.  F.  6.  tr.  3.  c,  32.  CyJ Sepulchr. S. hac 10. in Additam.

(0)  §.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  i6.  Obf.  2.

(P)  n-  33-  ,  (=■•)  ^'■^  "•  34-

(£)  Tent.  I,  cit,  (^j)  Offervaz.  cit.

omitted


Letter  LIX. Article  36.  421

not  omitted  the  lefs  frequent  fymptotns  ;  fo  much  the  more  reafonable  does
it  feem  to  fuppofe,  that  they  would  have  fpoken  of  inteftinal  difcharges,  if
they  were  fo  frequently  obferv'd  by  them.

But  I  do  not  remember  one  author,  either  among  the  ancients  or  moderns,
who  has  not  feen  convulfions,  and  has  not  fpoken  of  them  either  under  this
very  name,  or  under  that  of  convulfive  motions,  tremors,  tendons,  or  hor-
rors ;  or  at  leaft  who  has  not  produc'd  fome  fymptom  which  could  not  be
eafily  explain'd  without  them.

I  omit  other  things  which  I  am  not  at  leifure  to  produce  :  I  omit  all  the
fymptoms  I  have  fpoken  of  but  vomiting ;  which  I  have  faid  to  have  been
fo  frequently  obferv'd  ;  and  which  deferves  fo  much  the  more  attention  here,
as  the  rarilians,  who  have  acknowledg'd  it  to  come  on  "  pretty  conftantly,"
have  neverthelefs  denied  that  they  had  "  generally  "  found  any  mark  of  in-
flammation in  the  ftomach,  and  much  lefs  of  gangrene  :  fo  that,  in  the  greac
number  of  animals  which  they  had  diflefted  at  leaft,  it  feems  that  it
ought  to  be  accounted  for  from  the  nerves  being  vellicated  and  con-
vuls'd.

36.  Nor  indeed  can  we  eafily  diffent  from  that  very  learned  man,  whom'
I  have  often  commended,  when  he  thinks  that  from  thence  we  ought  to  de-
duce the  reafon  why  thofe  who  are  bitten  by  a  viper  become  idteric  ;  for  the
mixture  of  a  very  little  poifon  cannot  fo  foon  change  the  nature  of  the  par-
ticles in  the  blood,  nor  the  mode  of  their  mixture,  as  it  can,  by  convulfively
conftringing  the  beginnings  of  the  biliary  dufts  in  the  liver,  retain  the  par--
ticles  of  the  bile  which  ought  to  be  continually  thrown  ofl"  from  the
blood.

I  a'lfo  give  credit  to  him  in  this  refpecl,  that  the  colour  of  the  whole  {l<ia:
becomes  "  yellow"  within  lefs  than  a  complete  hour  :  yet  I  fuppofe  this  to-
be  fometimes  only  ;  and  not  fo  often  that  we  can  pronounce  an  efteft  of  that
kind  to  be  "  proper  to  this  poifon."

And  I  remember  indeed  to  have  found  Cardanus  (5)  wondering  that
"  thofe  who  are  bitten  by  vipers,  very  frequently  contradt  fuch  a  colour  in  ■
"  the  twinkling  of  an  eye."  *

But  I  have  alfo  read  Donatus  (c)  fince  affirming,  "  that  men  feldom  be—
"  come  jaundic'd  "  from  a  virulent  wound  •,  and,  for  that  reafon,  fuppofing
this  to  happen  only  to  thofe  perfons  whofe  blood  abounds  vj'ith  a  very  great .
quantity  of  bile ;  which,  if  it  be  yellow,  tinges  the  fkin  of  a  yellow  colour ;
if  black,  of  a  black  colour  ;  and  if  porraceous,  of  a  porraceous  colour.

And  that  the  fkin  w&s  ting'd  of  this  colour,  and  not  very  foon  neither,  is-
certain  from  the  example  of  Galen  (J),  which he  produces;  and with  3..
citron  colour,  from  another  example  which  he  quotes  from  Avenzoar  (e)  -,
and  not  from  the  bite  of  a  viper,  as  in  the  former,  but  from  taking  poifon
into  the  ftomach.

To  this  add,  that  a  yellow  jaundice  has  been  obferv'd  to  come  on  from  the  ■
pricking  of  fpiders,  as  you  have  it  in  Etmuller(/);  yet  not  always,  nor.

(^)  Comment,  in  Hippocr.  Aph.  62.  1.  4.  fej  1.  i.  tr.  13.  c.  6.

(<:)  De  Med.  Hilt;  Mirab.  1.  i.  c.  9.  C/^  Pj'ax.  1.  u  S.  17,  c,  3.  aft.  4,;

{a'J  De  Loc.  afF.  1.  5.  c.  non  6.  fed  7,


&


fr©avi


42  2 Book  IV.  Of  Clilrurgical  and  Unhrerfal  Diforders.

from  the  pricking  of  all  fpiders.  For  you  may  fee,  for  inftance,  what' cofT»
£derable  diforders  that  brought  on  of  which  Bernerns  (§)  fpeaks ;  and  how
different,  and,  frequently,  how  much  more  pernicious,  thofe  of  which  that
karned  man  Brogiani  (h)  has  written,  under  the  name  of  the  Etrufcum  Pha-
langmni,  or  venomous  fpider  of  Tulcany,  in  a  treatife  which  I  could  wi(h
had  been  publifli'd  before  I  revis'd  thefe  letters  that  I  had  already  written.

From  them  he  alfo  remark'd  this,  on  account  of  which  you  may  compare
them  with  the  venomous  fpider  of  La  Puglia,  and  with  that  fcorpion  whereby
I  have  faid  {i)  that  Peter  a  Caftro  had  been  wounded  ;  I  mean,  that  in  the
following  year  the  fymptoms  return'd  at  the  fame  time.  Yet  you  will  ob-
ferve  that,  among  fo  many  different  injuries,  no  writer  makes  mention  of  the
jaundice.

Moreover,  although  Etmuiler  fiibjoins  the  following  words,  "  That  the
*'  ancients  had  already  obferv'd  a  jaundice,  in  general,  to  arife  from  'the
*'  bite  of  the  viper,  as  Zacutus  Lufitanus,  1.  5.  Medic.  Princ.  Hift,  29.
relates  ;"  yet,  if  you  examine  this  author,  you  will  find  that  he  relates  nothing
more  on  this  head  than  Donatus,  whom  he  follows  more  than  any-one  can
fufpeft  who  does  not  compare  them  both  together :  yet  he  does  not  follow
him  well,  where  he  defcnbes  the  obfervation  of  Braiavolus  {k)  upon  Tom-
befius  ;  as  if  Donatus  had  produc'd  this  by  way  of  an  example  which  related
to  a  jaundice  brought  on  by  the  bite  of  a  venomous  animal.

Paulus,  indeed  (7),  and  Aetius  (»?)»  both  of  whom  he  quotes,  have  made
mention  of  the  jaundice  from  venomous  bites  :  and,  indeed,  Aetius  ex-
prefsly  fays  that  it  "  is  wont  to  happen  "  from  thence.  But  both  thefe  au-
thors fpeak  of  poifons  in  general :  and  not  particularly  of  the  viperine  poifon^
and  although  the  fecond  mentions  this  for  the  fake  of  example,  yet  he  aflerts
that  the  flcin  is  from  thence  ting'd  with  a  "  porraceous  "  colour-,  and  even
when  he  has  a  peculiar  treatife  thereon  («)  "  with  a  leaden  colour ;"  and
Paulus  (c),  in  general,  fuppofes  "  a  depravity  of  colour,"  which  Avicenn:a(p)
fays  is  "  inclin'd  to  greennefs."

And  that  you  may  conceive  the  jaundice  to  be  not  always  produc'd,  and
to  be  of  different  colours  in  different  perfons  ;  I  would  have  you  obferve
that  Diofcorides  {q)  had  written,  that  "  a  whicifh  colour  is  brought  on  "
thereby  :  and  that  the  moft  ancient  of  all  thefe  authors,  Nicander  (r),  has
■faid,

.Nigricat  ipfa  cutis,  plumbi  modo  fufca  colm'e^
derulea  inter dum  eft,  arifve  fimillima  fieri.

And  to  return  to  Zacutus ;  he  has,  in  another  place  (j),  an  obfervation
which  relates  very  much  to  the  prefent  fubjed;  an  obfervation  which  I  wonder
is  not  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum,  by  reafon  of  a  gangrene  found  in,

{g)  Eph.  N.  C.  Cent.  9.  Obf.  49.  (0)  L.  j.  c.  12.

\b)  De  Venen.  Animant.  P.  I'.  Cp)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  35.

((■)  Supra,  n.  24.  (?) Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  34.

\k)  Comment,  in  cit.  Aphor.  6z.  [/)  Apud  Severin.  Viper.  Pyth;  P,  3.  c.  i.

{/)  De  Re  Med.  1.  3.  c.  50.  (/)  De  Medic.  Princ.  Hift,  I.-2.  Hith  1115.

{?«)  Tetrab.  3.  S.  i.  c.  17.  Obf.  zo.


(«)  Tetrab,  4,  S.  i.  c.  21.


the


letter  LIX. Article  37.  42  j

the  liver.  That  is  to  fay,  two  reapers  who  were  faft  afleep,  having  been  bitten
by  the  fame  viper,  and  both  being  agitated  by  convulfions  an  hour  after,
©ne  of  thefn  "  fell  into  the  mod  yellow  jaundice  after  ten  hours ;  and  the
"  other,"  who  could  not  be  fav'd,  "  fell  into  the  moft  black  jaundice  after
"  fourteen  hours ;  fo  as  to  bear  the  refemblance  of  an  Ethiopian."

But  what  varieties  of  the  ifteric  colour  later  obfervators  than  Zacutus  hava
remark'd,  1  cannot  fay ;  as,  in  the  examples  of  the  human  fpecies  that  are
defcrib'd,  perhaps,  on  account  of  the  regions  wherein  they  were  being  lefs
hot,  I  do  not  remember  any  mention  to  be  made  of  the  jaundice  :  nor  yet
in  the  great  number  of  brute  animals,  whofe  eyes,  at  lead,  while  they  were
yet  living,  or  membranes,  here  and  there,  when  diflefted  after  death,  would
have  fhown  an  unufual  colour  (efpecially  a  yellow  one)  even  to  the  moft  cur-
fory  examiners.

37.  Thus  you  have  a  long  difcourfe  upon  the  viper,  (though,  perhaps,  not
without  its  ufe  in  your  ftudies)  fram  comparing,  one  with  another,  the  writings
which  were  in  my  hands,  not  only  of  the  ancient,  but  alfo  of  the  modern
authors  :  fo  that  I  think  you  cannot  retort  upon  me  what  was  formerly  re-
torted, in  regard  to  the  letters  fent  to  Lancifi  (/),  upon  the  poifon  of  the
alp,  by  gentlemen  very  learned,  and  in  other  refpefts  very  humane  towards
me  ;  I  mean,  "  that  it  would,  perhaps,  have  been  better  to  have  made  ufe
"  of  my  own  experiments,  than  of  the  authority  of  Aetius,  and  the  reft  of
*'  the  ancients,  who  frequently  proceed  too  incautioufly  in  thefe  matters."

I  have  here,  without  doubt,  made  ufe  of  the  experiments  alfo  of  the  moft
cautious  moderns :  and  thefe  I  would  likewife  have  made  ufe  of  in  that  dif-
putation,  if  any  fuch  had  exifted.  For  I  had  none  of  my  own  experiments
to  fend  you  upon  the  viper,  as  I  was  always  taken  up  withVarious  and  various
©ther  occupations ;  even  when  my  time  of  life  would  have  permitted  me  to
make  them  -,  and  as  I  was  always  averfe  to  experiments  fo  full  of  danger,
•which  would  eithei^have  been  injurious  to  me,  as  they  had  been  to  others,
who  had  been  long  exercis'd  in  them  (z^),  or  would,  at  leaft,  have  created
irkibmenefs  and  deteftation  (x).

But  fuppofing  I  had  not  been  reftrain'd  by  thefe  confiderations  •,  I  do  not
fee  how  thefe  very  learned  men  could  expeft  that  I  ftiould  have  made  expe-
riments upon  afps,  who  have  never  been  in  Africa,  and  ftill  lefs  in  ^gypt.
For  Strabo  (y)  writes,  "  that  the  ^Egyptian  afp,"  of  which  our  difputation.
chiefly  was,  "  has  fomething  peculiar  to  itfeif,  in  preference  to  the  afps
"'  of  other  places."  For  as  to  afps  being  fpoken  of  as  having  been  found
out  of  Africa,  and  even  in  Italy  itielf,  both  by  ancient  and  not  ancient  au-
thors;  without  doubt,  thefe  writers  have  been  led  by  the  opinions  and  ex-
preffions  of  the  common-people.
For  "  what  we  commonly  call  afps  have  fcarcely  any  refemblance  to  thofe"  of.


(/)  In  Append,  ad  Metallothecam  Vatica. (x)  Vid  Redi  Lett.  int.  alle  Oppo£zi
3>am  Mercati.  (j/J  De  Situ  Orb.,  I.  17.

(a)  Vid.  Gentili  Annotaz.  ^aUa  pag.  73,
V.  2,5.  della  Lett.  Filof.


Which-


424 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.'

which  we  were  fpeaking,  as  Salmafius  (z)  has  juftly  imagin'd  :  and,  certainly,
neither  Lucan  (a)  would  have  laid  of  the  afp,

Jpfa  caloris  egens,  gelidum  non  tranftt  in  orhem
Spcnte  p.ia^  Nilcque  tenus  melitur  arenas  ;

nor  would  it  have  been  thusfpoken  of  by  Ovid  {b),
P knaque  fomniferis  ferpens  peregrina  venenis ;

if  "  thefe  fpecies  of  fepents  "  were  not,  to  ufe  the  words  of  Celfus  (c),  realljr
"  not  only  foreign,  but  fomewhat  more  peftiferous  j  and  efpecially  thofe  that
"  are  generated  in  hot  places."

Nor  is  this  to  be  wonder'd  at  •,  fince  even  within  Italy  itielf  the  venomous
wounds  of  fome  animals  have  different  effefts,  in  proportion  as  the  places  are
more  or  kfs  warm.  Thus  the  tarantula,  fays  Baglivi  (i),  "  is  only  poifonous
"  in  La  Puglia ;  and  elpecially  that  which  is  found  in  the  plains  :  for  that
"  which  is  found  in  the  mountains  round  about,  either  has  no  poifon  at  all,
"  or  not  one  which  is  hurtful :"  and  ftill  lefs  even  thofe  tarantula  of  the
plains,  when  carried  into  the  other  regions  of  Italy  ;  as  even  the  hiftory
propos'd  (e)  confirms.

We,  certainly,  have  not  fuch  a  country  as  Lombardius  (/)  obferves  the
Irilb  to  have,  when  he  from  thence  deduces  the  reafon  why  he  could  never
fee  any  poifonous  animals  there  ;  and  why  the  different  animals  of  this  kind
which  he  had  brought  from  England,  were  leen,  for  the  moft  pare,  to  die
inflated  and  convuls'd,  almoft  as  foon  as  ever  they  were  let  loofe  on  Irifft
ground.

Yet  if  the  fame  thing  had  happen'd  to  the  afps  when  brought  here  from
Africa,  as  happens  to  the  tarantula  when  carried  elfewhere  from  La  Puglia,
muft  not  my  experiments  have  of  courfe  fail'd  me  ?

Since,  therefore,  there  was  no  poffibility  of  making  experiments  without
beincr  very  doubtful  •,  and  fince,  it  there  had  been,  the  bufinefs  of  writing
immediately,  in  which  I  was,  for  more  than  one  reafon,  necefliarily  employ 'd,
would  not  have  given  me  time  to  make  the  experiments  ;  what  was  there  left
for  me  to  do,  but  to  make  ufe  of  the  teftimonies  of  thofe  perfons  who  had
either  themfelves  feen  the  effefts  of  the  bites  of  an  afp,  or  had  read  the
writinos  of  thofe  who  had  feen  thefe  effefts  ?

38.  And  here  you  will,  without  doubt,  enquire  of  me,  in  regard  to  the
difputation  which  I  had  with  that  very  eminent  man  Lancifi  on  the  kind  of
death  which  Cleopatra  fuffer'd,  what  I  really  thought  in  my  own  .mind  ;  fince
it  feems  to  have  been  undertaken  by  me,  as  frequently  happens  betwixt
friends,  for  the  fake  of  exercife  and  fpeculation  :  nor  is  any-thing  publilh'd
by  me  by  way  of  reply  to  his  fecond  anfwer.

I,  however,  in  an  affair  which  could  not  be  certainly  determin'd  without

(z)  Plinian  Exercit.  in  Solin.  (d)  Differt.  de  Tarant.  c.  7.

{a)  Pharfal.  1.  9.  (e) C.  11.  Hill.  8.

li)  Metam.  I.  9.  (/)  Eph,  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  3.  Obf.  79.

(f)  De  Medic.  1.  5.  c.  27.  S.  10.

.the


Letter  LIX. Article  38.  42  j-

the  teftimonies  of  the  ancients,  having  happen'd  to  obferve  thefe  remarks,
made  by  Lancifiin  the  Vaticana  Metallotheca  (^g),  upon  the  image  of  dyino-
Cleopatra  :  "  On  her  arm  is  feen  the  afp,  by  the  bite  of  which  it  is  the
"  vulgar  opinion  that  Cleopatra  died  ;  although  others  contend  that  fiie  kiU'd
"  herlelf  by  a  draught  of  poifon :"  and  fufpc-dling  that  fome  paffage  was
extant,  in  an  ancient  author,  to  this  effeft,  though  unknown  to  me ;  1  had  a
view  to  nothing  elfe,  in  both  the  letters,  but  to  get  the  knowledge  of  this
paffage,  if  there  were  fuch  a  one,  from  Lancifi.

Wiih  this  intention  I  wrote  once,  and  a  fecond  time,  to  him,  fuch  things
as  could  be  immediately  advanc'd  and  affirm'd  by  me  in  favour  of  the  more
common  opinion.  And  though  I  underllood,  from  the  firft  and  fecond  of
his  letters,  that  there  was  no  paffage  of  this  kind ;  I  readily,  however,  pur-
fu'd  his  defire  to  make  an  end  of  the  difputation  ;  efpecially  in  a  controverfy
which  had  begun  and  proceeded,  on  the  one  hand,  with  fuch  a  diffidence,
and,  on  the  other,  with  fuch  politenefs  and  condefcennon,  as  to  obtain  great
praifes  from  learned  men  {b)  :  fo  that  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  one  of
thefe  gentlemen,  by  whom  it  is  laid  to  have  been  "  very  acrid,"  had  nothing
clfe  in  view  but  the  ready,  nervous,  and  full-ftrain'd  arguments,  that  were
made  ul'e  of  on  both  fides.  For  he  is  very  favourable  to  both  of  us  ;  and
he  afcribes  fo  much  merit  to  me,  in  confcquence  of  a  humanity  which  is
equal  to  his  doftrine  and  erudition,  that  I  dar'd  not  even  wilh  for  fuch
afcriptions. But  I  return  back  to  my  fubjeft.

I,  therefore,  did  not  think  proper  to  make  any  corrections,  when,  almoft:
two  years  after,  it  happen'd  that  Lancifi  was  to  add  an  appendix  to  the  Mi-
tallotheca  ;  and  wrote  to  me,  that  it  was  the  pleafure  of  our  moft  holy  matter
that  this  difputation,  which  he  had  been  fo  condefcending  as  to  read,  fiiould
be  publifh'd  .with  it  -,  and  that  his  holinefs  defir'd  he  would  fignify  this  to
me,  if  I  fhould  wilh  to  make  any  alterations  or  correftions  in  my  letters,  as
he  had  done  in  his.  For  I  wrote  back  to  him,  that  the  command  of  our
mafter  mull  be  obey'd  ;  and  that  it  would  be  the  more  readily  perceiv'd  by
every-one,  that  thefe  letters  were  not  written  by  me  with  an  intent  to  publilh
them,  if  they  came  out  in  the  fame  extempore  drefs  in  which  they  were  firft.
penn'd.

Nor,  indeed,  v/ere  the  things  I  might  have  added  of  any  great  moment ;
yet  fome  things  there  were  which  I  fhall  now  point  out  to  you  :  not,  however,
in  order  to  renew  the  controverfy  after  it  has  fubfided,  nor  to  (ct  up  the
common  opinion  as  a  certain  one  ;  but  only  that  you  may  not  fuppofe  there
is  nothing  at  all  to  be  faid  in  behalf  of  one  or  the  other  opinion.  Some  of
thefe  arguments  are  to  be  taken  from  hiilorians,  fome  from  phyficians,  fome
from  both,  and  fome  from  ftill  other  authors.

Among  the  hiftorians,  Vellejus  (z),  i?ilianus  (,^),  and  Florus(/),  have  al-
ferted  with  common  and  full  confent,  and  without  any  doubt,  that  Cleopatra
kill'd  herfelf  by  the  bite  of  an  afp.  But  Vellejus  was  addidled  to  the  vice
of  flattery  and  adulation  above  what  can  be  believ'd ;  and  is  not  reckori'd

{g)  Ad  fin.  Armar.  lo.  (:')  Hift.  Rom.  1.  2.  c.  87.

\h)  Giornale  de'  Letter,  d'ltal.  Ton?..  33. \k)  De  Hift.  Animal.  1.  9.  c.  61.
P.  z.  Art.  8.  in  fin.  (/)  De  Geft.  Rom.  1.  4.  c.  1 1.

Vol.  III.  I  i  i  among


426 Book  IV.  Of  Chlrurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

among  the  hillorians  by  Quinflilian  :  Florus  has  fufFer'd  himfelf  to  be  carried
away  by  a  childifli  defire  of  faying  wonderful  things,  even  at  the  expence  of
truth  :  and  if  to  thele  accufations,  taken  from  Sigonius,  Lipfius,  and  Scaliger,
you  add  another,  talcen  from  Verderius  (»;),  againfl:  ^lianus  j  this  author,
alio,  recedes  from  the  truth,  while  he  endeavours  to  feem  a  different  perfon
from  Ariltbtle.

Yet  it  would  have  been  much  more  eafy  to  produce  the  praifes  of  each
hiftorian  from  a  much  greater  number  of  authors,  than  to  have  fearch'd  out
thefe  accufations  in  Ibme  of  them.

Thefc  praifes,  however,  I  omit ;  fmce  it  is  fufficient  to  obferve,  in  refpeft
to  the  accufations,  that  it  was  of  no  importance  to  Ariftotle  of  what  kind  of
death  Cleopatra  fhould  die  in  future  times  :  and  there  was  nothing  wonderful
in  this,  that  fhe  who,  after  having  made  the  experiment  upon  criminals,
had  found  for  a  certainty,  no  poifon  to  be  more  fpeedily  and  mildly  fatal  than
that  from  the  bite  of  an  afp,  (hould  make  ufe  of  the  fame  to  deftroy  her-
fclf :  and,  finally,  there  was  no  adulation  in  refpeft  to  Auguftus,  by  faying
that  (he  died  of  this  bite rather  than  by  a  draught  of  poifon.

For  as  to  Vellejus  not  being  nam'd  among  the  Latin  hifVorians  by  Quindli-
lian  (ft)  ;  neither  is  Casfar  himfelf  nam'd  :  I  fuppofe,  becaufe  he  did  not  con-
fider  the  writings  of  either  of  them,  though  commendable,  in  the  light  of
regular  hiftory,  of  which  the  queftion  was  in  that  place  ;  fince  Ceefar  had
left  his  book  in  the  form  of  memoirs,  or  commentaries ;  and  Vellejus,
having  promis'd  a  larger  volume  in  more  than  one  place  {0),  had  touch'd,  in
general,  only  upon  the  principal  heads  of  his  narration.

39,  But  to  thefe  three  hiftorians  are  oppos'd  an  equal  number  who  have
not  affirm'd  the  fame  thing  ;  as  Suetonius  (p),  Plutarch  (q),  and  Dio  (r)  :  and
it  is  even  contended,  that  greater  credit  is  to  be  given  to  the  two  laft:  authors,
by  reafon  of  their  being  Grecians ;  and,  therefore,  accuflom'd  to  enquire
after  the  truth  of  hiftory  with  greater  diligence  than  the  Latins :  particularly
in  an  affair  v^hich  relates  to  the  Grecian  empire  -,  and  as  they  are,  if  you  at-
tend to  the  places,  more  near  to  the  fpot ;  and,  if  you  attend  to  the  proofs
of  fadts,  better  furnifli'd  therewith,

I  do'  not  intend  to  mention  that  faying  of  Quinflilian  (j),  "  There  is  ge-
"  nerally  a  licence  in  the  Grecian  hiflories,  fimilar  to  that  of  poets  •,"  and
ftill  lefs  that  of  Juvenal  (/),

^licquid  Grecia  mendax  audet  in  hifioria  :

"  Whatever  glaring  falfity  Greece  dare  affert  in  hiftory.'*

And,  indeed,  I  readily  confefs  that  there  were  excellerJt  hiftorians  among,  the
Greeks,  by  the  help  of  whom  we  may  even  learn  the  Roman  affairs;  efpe-
cially  as  to  what  relates  to  the  public  rites  and  ceremonies.

For  thefe  cuftoms,  and  other  things  of  this  kind,  (as  I  think  I  have  read

"  {m)  Cenfion.  in  Auflor.  (?)  Grac.  Rom.  q 111.  Vit,  in  Anfon.

(nj  Inftit.  Orator.  1.  10.  (r)  Rom.  Hift.  1.  51.

(0)  L.  2.  c.  48.  96.  qg.  103.  114.  119.  (■>)  Inftit.  Orat.  1.  2.  c.  4.

tj)  De  duodec.  Csfar.  1,  2.  c.  17.  (/)  Juvenal.  Sat,  iq,

in


Letter  LIX. Article  39.  427

in  a  certain  eplflie  of  Grotius)  foreigners  remark  and  deliver  down,  more
pundually  than  citizens  -,  as  the  latter  fuppofe  that  it  was  to  no  purpofe  to
give  an  account  of  cuftoms  which  were  fo  well  known  to  every-body.

But  we  alfo  learn  a  great  many  circumftances  in  regard  to  the  political
tranfaftions  of  the  Romans,  from  thofe  great  hiftorians  among  the  Greeks  i
and  in  particular  down  to  thofe  times  wherein  the  Latins,  at  length,  began
to  write  their  own  aftions  with  a  greater  degree  of  elegance.

For  even  "  from  the  beginning  of  the  Roman  ftate,"  as  Cicero  afTerts  («),
"  quite  down  to  the  time  of  P.  Mutius  the  Pontifex  Maximus,  all  the  public
"  tranfaftions  of  every  year  were  wont  to  be  committed  to  writing  by  that
"  fupreme  officer  of  religion  ;"  the  manner  of  which  annals,  he  fays,  "  had
"  been  imitated  by  many,  who  left,  without  any  ornaments,  only  the  mo-
"  numents  of  times,  men,  places,  and  affairs  that  had  been  tranfafted  ;"  as
the  elder  Cato,  Piclor,  and  Pifo  :  which,  without  doubt,  was  the  reafon  why
their  writings  did  not  come  down  to  us,  contrary  to  the  fate  of  thofe  writers
who  took  upon  them  to  fpeak  of  the  Roman  affairs,  in  more  elegant  and
pompous  language.

And  I  think  I  do  no  injuftice  to  the  merit  of  any-one,  if,  in  regard  to  the
mode  of  the  adion,  which  is  chiefly  in  queftion  here,  and  which  increafes
the  glory  of  neither  party,  I  give  more  credit  to  one  Latin  author,  in  Roman
•hiftory,  than  to  two  Grecians.

And  to  what  purpofe  is  it  to  (hew,  whether  the  war  finifli'd  by  Auguftus,  by
the  conqueft  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  fo  as  to  drive  them  to  the  neceffity
of  killing  themfelves,  relates  to  the  Roman  or  to  the  Grecian  hiftory  ;  fince
both  of  them  were  Roman  generals,  and  the  prize  of  war  was  the  kingdom
of  ^gypt  reduc'd  into  a  Roman  province  ?

Yet  Cleopatra  was  a  Grecian,  and  that  was  a  Greek  kingdom  ;  as  their
empire  and  their  language  flourifh'd  at  Alexandria.  Let  it  be  fo;  for  who
denies  it  ?  The  ancient  origin  both  of  the  queen  and  of  the  kingdom  were
from  the  Greeks.

But  do  you,  therefore,  fuppofe  the  Grecian  laws,  cuftoms,  and  language,
to  have  reign'd  in  that  kingdom  after  almoft  three  hundred  years  ?  or  the
^Egyptian  ?  or  fome  other  ?  a  kingdom,  whofe  kings,  as  Plutarch  {x)  him-
ftlf  confeffes,  had,  before,  "  even  not  learn'd  the  Egyptian  language,  nor
"  left  the  Macedonian  :"  and  that  part  of  the  people  which  had  been  *'*  an-
"  ciently  from  the  Greeks,  and  was  not  unmindful  of  the  cuftoms  and  manners
*'  common  to  the  Greeks,"  had  already  "  dwindled  away  "  in  the  age  of
Polybius,  as  Strabo  (_y)  aflerts.

For  as  to  what  is  faid  of  Plutarch  and  Dio  being  nearer  in  refpe^l  of  place,
and  better  furnifh'd  with  fa£ls  •,  it  is  fo  long  a  tradl  of  land  that  disjoins
Bceotia  and  Bythinia,  of  which  countries  they  were,  from  ^^gypt,  that  it
may  feem  not  to  be  a  very  much  greater  extent  which  is  interpos'd  betwixt
JEgypt  and  Italy.

Bur,  what  is  principally  to  be  confider'd  in  hiftorians,  there  was,  certainly,
a  lefs  interval  of  time  betwixt  the  death  of  Cleopatra  and  the  time  of  Vel-

[u)  De  Oratore,  1.  2.  (.»)  In  Antonis.  (y)  De  nig  Orbi«,  ].  17.

1  i  i  2  lejus


428 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

'lejus,  than  that  of  Plutarch  ;  and  of  ^lianns,  than  that  of  Dio.  And  can
we  fuppofe  that  Plutarch  receiv'd  the  more  certain  proofs  of  facfts  from  his
grandfather,  when  relating  what  he  had  heard  from  Philotas,  an  intimate  ac-/
quaintance  of  one  of  Anthony's  cooks ;  or  that  Vellejus,  who  liv'd  very  near
to  that  time,  might  have  frequently  heard,  both  in  peace  and  war,  (in  the
fiinftions  of  which  (2)  he  was  very  well  vers'd,  and,  like  his  noble  anceftors,
had  obtain'd  illuftrious  pofts  and  badges  of  glory)  the  relations  of  thefe  fads
from  eminent  men  who  had  been  with  Augiiftus  at  Alexandria  ?

But  if,  as  to  this  author,  is  objefted  his  adulation  towards  Tiberius,  who  was
then  living,  and  not  yet  come  to  his  worft,  but  had,  as  Tacitus  {a)  fays,  "  a
"  mixture  of  good  and  bad  during  the  life  of  his  mother;"  with  whofe
death  Vellejus  has  made  an  end  of  this  his  hiftory,  fending  it  foon  after  to
Vinicius,  who  was  conful  in  the  following  year  ;  fo  we  fhould  be  inclin'd  to
accufe  Dio  and  Plutarch  ;  the  cenfures  of  Vallefius,  Rapin,  Bodinus,  Voffius,
and  Lipfuis,  which  exprefsly  charge  the  former  with  plagiarifm,  with  devia-
tion from  truth,  with  hatred  againft  the  moft  virtuous  charadlers,  with  fre-
quent adulations,  and  with  frequent  blunders,  would  not  be  wanting  ;  nor
the  cenfures  of  other  authors  to  charge  the  latter  with  a  great  want  of  know-
ledge in  the  affairs  of  the  Romans  •,  and  not  only  of  the  very  ancient
tranfadions,  but  of  thofe  that  have  happen'd  in  not  very  ancient  times  :
examples  of  which  kind  ;  to  omit  what  is  laid  in  Lambinus  {b)  -,  Paulus  Ma-
nutius(c)  produces  a  great  number  of,  even  in  regard  to  one  fad:  and
wonders  "  that  he  fhould  blunder  fo  fhamefully ;"  which  he  alfo  fays,  in  other
places  {d),  had  happen'd  to  the  fame  author  "  frequently  :"  although  Bo-
dinus (f )  denies  this  to  be  furprifing  "  in  a  man  who  was  a  native  of  Greece,
"  and  confeiTes,  in  the  life  of  Demoflhenes  (/),  that  he  did  not  underftand
"  the  Latin  language  fufficiently  well."

And  of  the  fame  kind  is  that  accufation  mention'd  by  Rhodius  (^),  that
Plutarch,  "  having  made  ufe  of  the  Latin  codexes,  was  very  often  deceiv'd
"  in  the  affairs  of  the  Romans."

Nor  are  thofe  miftakes  unknown,  which  Robortellus,  an  author  whom  I
have  commended  heretofore  {b),  had  remark'd  in  the  fame  author,  even  in
reo-ard  to  the  names  of  the  Romans  :  nor  that  which  Lipfius  (/)  fays,  where
he  exprefsly  denies,  not  only  that  Plutarch,  but  that  the  Grecian  hiftorians
in  general,  are  to  be  preferr'd  to  the  Romans ;  efpecially  in  thofe  things  that
relate  to  foreign  nations ;  and  contends  that  the  former  "  had  not  only  err'd
"  in  regard  to  the  fac1:s  themfelves,  but  had  fhamefully  blunder'd  about
"  proper  names  in  particular."

I,  however,  on  account  of  the  other  very  great  merits  of  both  thefe  hifto-
rians ;  I  mean,  of  Dio,  and  Plutarch  in  particular ;  omit  thefe  objedions  the

(k)  Vid.  Voir,  de  Hift.  Lat.  1.  i.  c.  24.  & (d)  Epift.  5.  1.  ejufd.
Boecleri  Indie.  Vellejanum  in /^f/Zfrw,  cui  adde (£-)  Meth.  Hift.  c.  4.
Velleji,  1.  2.  c.  124.  in  fin.  (/)  In  Procem.

(a)  Annal.  1.  5.' in  fin.  {g)  Not.  ad  Scribon.  Epift.

(b)  Adnot.  16.  in  Cicer.  Orat.  pro  Dejot.  [h)  Epift.  ad  Cel.  Polen.  de  III. Conful-
(<■)  Comment,  in  Epift.  i.  1.  2.  Cicer.  ad  Frontin.

Q.  Fr.  '  (0  Var.  Left.  I.  3.  c.  20.

more


Letter  LIX. Article  40.  429

more  willingly,  becaufe  neither  of  them,  any  more  than  Suetonius ;  who
was  himfelf  likewife  (o  much  later  than  Vellejus ;  denies,  finally,  what  this
author  has  afierted  in  regard  to  the  kind  of  death  whereof  Cleopatra  died  :
and  although  they  do  not  affirm  it,  yet  they  have  many  circumftances  from
which,  join'd  together  with  the  diagnoftic  do£brine  of  phyficians,  to  wliom
we  pafs  on,  we  may  defend  the  opinion  of  Vellejus.

40.  For  Dio  {k)  affirms,  "  that  only  fmall  punftures  were  found  in  the
"  arm  "  of  Cleopatra  after  death  :  "  two  "  of  which  punctures  Plutarch  (/)
alfo  takes  notice  of.  And  the  fame  author  and  Suetonius  (m)  affert,  that
"  pjylli  were  brought  by  Auguftus,  that  they  fhould  fuck  out  the  poifon."
From  whence,  then,  Ihould  they  fuck  it,  except  from  thefe  envenom'd  punc-
tures ?  For  how  advantageous  a  remedy  fuftion  muft  have  been,  when  applied
thereto,  is  fufficiently  demonftrated  above  (w),  from  the  opinions  both  of
ancient  and  modern  phyficians.

And  that  thefe  very  fmall  punftures,  and  in  number  two,  agree  very  well
with  thofe  things  that  the  fame  ancient  phyficians  have  deliver'd  down,  with
xiniverfal  confent,  in  regard  to  the  bite  of  the  afp,  the  fecond  letter  of
mine  demonftrates.

For  they  have  been  univerfally  compar'd  to  little  obfcure  wounds  that  are
inflifted  by  "  a  needle  j"  and  almoft  all  of  thefe  authors  have  afferted  that
they  were  "  without  any  fwelling ;"  and  fome  have  not  omitted  to  tell  us
that  they  were  "  two  in  number."

Nor  would  I  have  you  defpife  their  united  teftimonies,  as  if  they  had
copied  from  one  another ;  for  they  did  not  alv/ays  write  from  the  knowledge
of  other  perfons,  but  from  their  own  likewife  :  and  this  you  will  readily  learn
from  reading  them  attentively,  or  from  Freind's  Hiftory  of  Medicine,  where
he  has  treated  of  each  "of  them  :  and  thofe  things  that  they  have  advanc'd
from  the  knowledge  of  other  perfons  are,  generally,  the  confequences  of
obfervations  of  excellent  phyficians ;  which,  if  they  had  not  preferv'd  them
to  us,  we  fhould  be  intirely  ignorant  of.

Nor  becaufe  Diofcorides  ;  who,  neverthelefs,  had  himfelf  alfo  previouQy
afierted  (0)  the  fame  things  that  were  written  by  all,  or  almoft  all,  thofe  other
authors,  as  I  juft  now  faid  •,  either  was  not  the  perfon  we  have  heard  was  the
domeftic  of  Cleopatra,  or  has  not  made  any  mention  of  her  being  kill'd  by
the  bite  of  an  afp  •,  are  we,  therefore,  not  to  believe  what  he  had  faid  of  the
very  fmall  punfture  without  any  tumour,  which  is  the  confequence  of  this
bite  :  although  the  paflTages  wherein  Cleopatra  was  mention'd  may,  perhaps,
like  fo  many  other  things  which  Maranta  refers  to  (p),  have  been  lofl:  from  the
codex  of  Diofcorides  by  the  depredations  of  time  :  nor  are  there  ftill  wanting
fome  perfons  who  give  credit  to  Suidas  (q),  when  he  afierts,  that  this  was  the
very  Diofcorides  who  "  liv'd  in  Cleopatra's  palace  under  Anthony ;"  as  we
have,  in  my  opinion,  fome  circumftances  whereby  the  arguments  of  thofe
who  think  otherwife  are  cali'd  into  queftion.

(.k)  L.  51.  cit.  ^  (0)  De  Medic.  Mat.  I.  6.  c.  54.

(/)  Vit.  Anton.*  cit.  (/)  Meth.  cognofc.  Simplic.  1.  2.  c.  ulfr

(m)  C.  17.  cit..  (g)  Hiftoric.  ad  Vocem  U/c/fcmV/.  ,
(nj  N.  23,


4  3^ Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Difoiders.

But  to-pafs  over  thefe  things ;  I  certainly  do  not  think  you  will  be  ftagger'd
by  this  confideration,  that  it  does  not  feem  probable  the  traces  of  fo  per-
nicious a  bite  fhould  be  fo  flight  and  obfcure  as  the  ancients  have  taught;
but  rather  be  led  thereby  to  inquire  into  the  caule  of  this  admirable  cir-
cumfl-ance,  as  they  had  even  attempted  to  do  in  the  time  of  iEHanus  (r).

For  they  thought  that  this  caufe  muft  be  fuppos'd  to  confift  in  "  the  fur-
"  prifing  celerity"  vi^herewith  that  poiibn  "  pafTes  on  to  the  internal  parts:"
by  which  means,  externally,  "  there  is  nothing  of  a  prominence  or  tumour-,
"  and  for  this  reafon,"  fays  he,  "  it  was  not  eafy  for  the  party  of  Oftaviws
"  to  diicover  in  what  manner  Cleopatra  had  brought  about  her  own  deatJi ;
"  till  at  length,  after  a  long  enquiry,  they  difcern'd  two  pun6tures  that  were
«'  difficult  to  be  feen,"

And  if  you  chufe  to  illuftrate  this  ancient  thought  by  a  recent  explication ;
you  may  fo  much  the  more  eafily  make  ufe  of  that  which  we  have  often
made  ule  of  above,  when  we  fuppos'd  the  poifon  to  attack  the  nerves,  in
proportion  as  it  is  more  evident,  that  this  happens  from  the  poifon  which  the
afp  inferts  by  its  bite  •,  and  which  is  call'd  "  foporlferous "  by  Ovid,  as  I
have  before  related  (j)  j  as  the  afp  itfelf  is  call'd  "  fomniferous"  by  Lu-
can  (/) ;  and  with  the  fame  view,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  mod  learned
men,  by  Helvius  Cinna(a),  fomniculofa  ;  and  exprelsly  by  Solinus  {x)  "  hyp-
"  nale  :"  and  thus  he  explains  it,  "  The  hypnale  kills  by  fleep,  an  inftance
*'  of  which  we  have  in  Cleopatra."

For  in  what  manner  •,  unlefs  you  fay  that  the  efficacy  of  this  moft  minute
poifon  is  carried  to  the  brain  very  fpeedily,  by  means  of  the  nerves  ;  will
you  explain  the  following  things,  which  I  will  quote  in  the  words  of  Lu-
can  ( j),  when  Ipeakihg  to  a  perlbn  wounded  by  an  afp  :

Nulloque  dolore
Teftctiis  morfus,  fuhiia  caligine  mortem
Accipis,  ^  Siygias  fomno  defcendis  ad  umbras.
Non  iam  veloci  corrumpunt  pocula  letho  ;  &c.

a\nd  I  have  us'd  the  words  of  more  than  one  poet,  not  becaufe,  in  regard
to  the  fomniferous  poifon  of  the  afp,  and  of  "  the  fpeedy  dimnels  "  from
thence,  as  Diofcorides  himfelf  (z)  fays,  the  words  of  phyficians  were  wanting  ;
but  that  you  might  perceive  the  efficacy  of  this  poifon  to  have  been  fo  com-
monly and  certainly  known  to  be  hypnotic,  as  to  be  not  only  confider'd  in
that  view  by  phyficians,  but  even  in  the  writings  of  poets  alfo.

The  brain,  therefore,  being  fo  fpeedily  and  vehemently  attack'd,  it  is  not
furprizing  if  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  which  depend  thereupon,  are  foon
after  depriv'd  of  their  ftrength  ;  juft  as  if  an  univerfal  paralyfis  were  brought
on ;  and,  therefore,  that  the  motion  of  the  blood  being  inftantly  ftopp'd,
efpecially  through  the  fmall  fubcutaneous  branches,  a  rednefs,  a  lividnefs,
or  a  tumour,  can  fcarcely  more  fhew  tbemfelves  in  the  pundlur'd  part,  than
if  a  mere  carcafe  were  prick'd.

^)  C.  6i.  fupra  ad  n.  38.  cit.  {x)  Polyhift.  c.  29.

(5)  N.  37.  (/)  L.  ibid.  cit.  (y)  L.  cit,

(«)  Apud  Gell.  Nod.  Attic.  1.  9.  c.  12.  (z)  C.  54..  cit.

And-


Letter  LIX. Article  41.  431

And  thus  it  feems,  that  where  the  moft  inftant  death  follows  the  bite  of
an  afp,  the  cafe  may  be  explain'd  :  and,  indeed,  how  fpeedy  the  effed;  of  it
was  in  Cleopatra,  is  manifeft  from  thofe  things  that  Plutarch  {a)  relates.

41.  Aetiiis  (i-),  you  will  fay,  has  indeed  afferted,  that  from  one  fpecies
of  afps  follows  the  "  moft  inftantaneoiis "  death  ;  but  that  from  another
fpecies  death  follows  only  "•  in  three  hours  at  moft  :"  nor  are  fome  wanting
who  affert  it  to  be  ftill  more  flow ;  and  not  to  happen  till  after  the  body  has
become  green  and  difcolour'd.

And,  indeed,  the  author  of  the  book  De  Theriaca  to  Pifo  (c),  although  he
confefTes  that  afps  "  do  really  kill  very  fpeedily,  as  he  frequently  faw  in
♦'  Alexandria  the  Great ;"  neverthelefs,  fufficiently  {hews,  by  immediately
fubjoining  the  following  things,  that  the  perfons  bitten  do  not  immediately
fall  down  therefrom  :  "  For  when  they  do  not  chufe  to  kill  any  criminal  by
"  this  kind  of  punifhment  without  long  torture  and  delay,  they  apply  the
"  afps  to  their  breafts,  and  make  them  walk  about  a  little,  and  by  this  means-
•'  kill  them  in  a  ihort  time."

And  even  Plutarch  {d)  relates,  that  one  of  the  fervant-maids  of  Cleopatra
was  found  fitting  the  diadem  to  the  queen's  head,  and  not  incapable  of
fpeaking.  I  grant  it ;  but  fhe  was  half-dead  :  and  immediately  fell  down,
after  uttering  a  few,  and  almoft  inarticulate  words.

Nor  did  they  who  walk'd  about  a  little  while  fail,  for  that  reafon,  to  die  in
a  jhort  time,  and  fpeedily.

And  if  any  perfons  dragg'd  on  their  life  to  a  longer  extent  of  time,  it  is
not  at  all  furprizing  that  they  fhould,  at  length,  have  their  bodies  difcolour'd
and  green,  for  this  very  reafon  :  but  if  this  had  been  common  to  all  thus
bitten,  the  pfylli  would  not  have  been  made  ufe  of  to -Cleopatra ;  for  her
body  being,  as  Plutarch  relates  (^),  "  neither  deform'd,  nor  bearing  any  other
"  mark  of  poifon,"  befides  thofe  two  punctures,  would  have  demonftrated
that  (he  had  not  been  bitten  by  an  afp.

But  I  have  difputed  of  thefe  things  in  fuch  a  manner,  ss  if,  where  fome-
hours  have  pafs'd  betwixt  the  envenom'd  blow  and  death,  it  cannot  poffibly
be  otherwife,  but  that  the  place,  whereby  the  poifon  is  introduc'd,  contracts
a  tumour  and  a  lividnefs.

Yet  certain  inftances  are  extant,  which  fhew  that,  even  after  five  or  fix
hours  have  been  interpos'd,  no  lividnefs  or  tumour  has  appear'd  in  the  place  ;
as  in  the  pigeons  which  Redi  (/)  kill'd  by  the  wounds  of  an  African  fcor-
pion.  And  in  the  dog  which  the  fcorpion  of  Montpelier  had  wounded,  and
which  died  fix  hours  after  the  ftroke,  the  celebrated  Maupertuis  (^)  found
no  tumour  in  the  part  where  the  wound  had  been  receiv'd  ;  whereas  a  tu-
mour is  generally  the  confequence  of  the  punflure  of  a  bee  or  of  a  wafp  ;
but  in  the  place  where  every  ftroke  was  given,  he  found  a  red  point  only :
and  he  denies  that  he  had  ever  feen  it  otherwife,  in  the  great  number  of
animals  upon  which  he  made  the  fame  experiment.

(^)  Vit.  c!t.  («)  Ibid.

\h)  Tetrabib!.  4.  S.  i.  c.  20.  (f)  Efper.  int.agl.  infetti.

('■)  C,  8.  (i)  Vit.  dt.  Q\  Comaiei^ti  fupja  cit.  adn.  25.

Aoii


43- Book  IV.  Of  Chlriirgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

And  to  turn  my  difcourfe  from  the  afp  to  an  animal  very  fimilar  thereto,
that  is,  the  viper  j  you  know,  for  a  certainty,  from  what  I  have  faid
above  (/?'),  that  in  the  whelp  of  Francini,  no  part  of  the  body  was  livid,  or
t-iimid,  even  many  hours  after  it  had  receiv'd  the  fatal  bites  from  a  viper }
and  that  in  the  finger  of  a  noble  youth  (i),  which  a  viper  had  wounded,  in
fuch  a  manner  as  to  produce  the  moll  violent  fymptoms,  though  with  one
tooth  only,  a  tumour  at  length  appear'd,  after  fome  hours  ;  whereas  to  that
very  time,  nothing  could  be  diftinguifh'd  but  "  a  punfture  not  larger  than
"  that  which  is  made  by  a  fmall  needle :  the  foramen  appearing  very  fmall
"  on  the  furface,  and  being  attended  with  the  flighteft  rednels ;  fo  as  to  be
"  known  by  the  colour  alone."

And  if  it  is  fometimes  no  more  from  a  viper,  how  riiuch  lefs  will  it  be
from  an  afp,  the  pcifon  of  which,  by  creeping  on  fo  fpeedily  to  the  brain,  does
not  leave  time  to  the  wounded  part  to  be  livid,  and  railc  itfelf  up  into  a
tumour.

42.  Now  we  are  to  fee  what  Plutarch  and  Dio,  if  they  are  join'd  with
other  authors  befides,  fupply  us  with  in  order  to  defend  thecomrn.on  opinion
more  eafily.  In  the  firft  place  then,  we  have  this  from  Flmardi  (k),  that
Cleopatra,  who  was  a  woman  neither  of  a  ftupid,  nor  a  huf»ble  mind,  having
forefeen,  before  (he  came  into  the  power  of  Auguftus,  what  fate  might  await
her-,  had  refolv'd  to  die,  rather  than  from  a  queen  to  become  aflave,  and  be
carried  in  triumph  before  the  chariot  of  the  viflor.

With  this  view,  that  fhe  had  procur'd  a  great  quantity  of  poifons,  and  had
made  experiments,  with  each  of  them,  upon  the  bodies  of  criminals  who
had  been  capitally  condemn'd  :  I  mean,  that  fhe  might  choofe  out,  for  her-
felf,  a  poilbn  whereby  fhe  fhoulddienot  only  without  pain,  but  very  fpeedily  ;
left,  if  death  fliould  be  flow  in  coming  on,  fhe  might  be  compell'd  to  live,
by  the  unwelcome  afTiftance  of  remedies.

Which  of  all  thefe,  then,  fhould  we  fuppofe  fhe  had  felected  ?  She  would,
without  doubt,  have  rejected  minerals,  as  being  contrary  to  both  thefe  her
wifhes,  if  they  had  been  us'd  by  way  of  poifon  at  that  time ;  which  I  do  not
ever  remxmber  to  have  read  of  ;  efpecially  as  thofe  chymical  artifices,
whereby  their  powers  are  exafperated,  and  made  more  pernicious,  were  un-
known.

The  poifons  in  ufe  were  from  vegetables  and  animals :  nor  was  various
art  wanting  to  make  them  fpeedily  fatal.  One  of  thefe  artifices  we  learn
from  Suetonius  (/),  when  a  poifon,  which  kill'd  within  five  hours,  being,
foon  after,  "  boil'd  and  reboil'd  frequently"  by  Locufta  ;  I  fuppofe  that  the
much  greater  part  of  the  aqueous  particles  being  diffipated,  the  poifonous
ones  might  be  more  crowded  together ;  "  became  inftantly  fatal."

And  although  this  poifon  ■,  whether  it  confiiledof  thq  juices  of  vegetables,
or  animals,  or  of  both  ;  was  probably  known  to  Cleopatra,  as  that  certainly
was  which  was  taken  from  animals,  and  made  ufe  of  by  favage  nations  to
tinge  their  arrows  ;  a  poifon  of  the  fame  kind  with  that,  among  the  Scythians,


{i)  n.  34.  (i)  Vita  cit.

(;)  Hiftor,  ibid,  indicata.  (i)  De  duo.'jc.  Ca;far.  I.  6.  c.  33.

6


mention'd


Letter  LIX. Article  42.  '433

mention'd  by  Pliny  (m),  "  irremediable,"  as  he  fays,  "  and  bringing  on
"  death  inftantly  by  the  flighteft  touch  ;"  yet  at  the  fame  time  that  fhe
might  approve  the  quicknefs  of  the  death,  ftie  Was  averfe  to  that  very  ftiorc,
indeed,  but  very  fevere  agony,  the  marks  of  which,  I  fuppofe,  flie  would
have  known  from  violent  convulfions ;  which  I  conjeiSture  to  have  been  the
immediate  confequences  of  that  poifon  of  Locufta,  becaufe  Nero  believ'd,
that  the  deadly  efFeft  thereof  might  be  conceal'd  by  a  kind  of  epilepfy  to
which  Britannicus  was  fubjeft  (k)  :  and  Mead  (o)  relates,  that  the  water  of
Nichals,  prepar'd  from  the  lauro-cerafus,  was  very  fpeedily  fatal  indeed ;
but  not  without  violent  convulfions :  and  finally,  it  appears  from  the  expe-
riments of  Reaumur  (p),  that  animals  (lightly  prick'd  with  the  points  of  ar-
rows, when  daub'd  over  with  a  certain  poifonous  compoiition,  by  the  inha-
bitants of  the  coaft  of  Maragnonia,  had  died  very  foon  indeed  ;  but,  as  he
particularly  relates  of  a  bear,  that,  before  death,  they  had  been  fliaken  and
agitated  by  convulfions.

For  thefe,  and  other  reafons  fimilar  thereto,  I  fuppofe,  then,  Plutarch
related  of  Cleopatra,  that,  having  firft  tried  other  poifons  in  vain  ;  as  they
did  not  well  anfwer  both  her  intentions ;  (he  turn'd  her  thoughts  to  animals,
as  Dio  alfo  alTerts  (q) :  and  after  having  tried  animals  likewife  for  many  days,
in  vain,  at  length  found  that  "  the  bite  of  the  afp  was  almoft  the  only  poi-
"  fon  "  whereby  (lie  could  have  both  her  ends  anfwer'd.

And  if  you  attend  to  all  thefe  circumftances  ;  you  will  eafily  underftand
why,  rejeding  other  poifons  which  kill'd  inftantaneoufly  -,  fome  of  which  fhe
had  at  hand,  as  I  fhall  fhow  below  (r)  ;  it  is  by  far  the  mofl-  reafonable  to
fuppofe  that  fhe  preferr'd  the  bite  of  the  afp ;  efpecially  as  the  other  things
that  are  faid  above  of  thofe  two  very  fmall  puniflures,  and  of  the  pfylli- being'
applied  (j),  exaftly  agree  therewith.

For  as  to  a  learned  man,  perhaps,  feeming,  to  thofe  who  may  read  him
with  but  little  attention,  to  have  thought  of  the  pfylli,  as  if  they  had
been  applied  by  Auguftus,  only  through  a  kind  of  mockery;  it  is  fufEcient
to  infpecL  Suetonius  (/),  and  Dio  (?i),  in  order  to  fee  plainly  that  it  was
done  by  Auguftus,  with  intent  that  Cleopatra  "  might  be  fav'd  to  adorn
"  his  triumph,  as  he  earneftly  defir'd  :"  and  that,  after  he  faw  fhe  could  not
be  fav'd  by  the  pfylli,  "  who  fuck'd  out  the  poifon  and  the  virus,  he
"  griev'd  exceedingly  ;  thinking  himfelf  depriv'd  of  all  the  glory  of  his
"  triumph."

And  if  he  who  was  immediately  prefent,  and  infpeded  the  body,  and  by
means  of  his  power  and  ingenuity  could  examine  into  every  circumftance,  and
make  every  neceffary  enquiry,  luppos'd  her  to  have  been  kill'd  by  the  bite
of  an  afp,  as  Plutarch  (x)  relates  ;  "  for  in  the  triumph  he  bore  the  image
"  of  Cleopatra,  having  an  afp  fix'd  to her by  its teeth  ;"  why  fliould  vve

(«1  Nat.  Hift.  1.  II.  c.  33.  (j)  1.  51.  cit.

(«)  Vid.  Tacit.  Annal.  1.  13.  {/)  n.  44.

{0)  in  Append,  pod  Tentam.  5.  de  Venen.  (i)  n.  40.

,•/)  Hift.  de  1'  Acad,  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1747. (/)  c.  17.  cit.  fupra  ad  n,  50.
Obf.  Anat.  E.  («)  1.  51.  cit.

(x)  Vita  eit.

Vol.  hi.  K  k  k  not


43  4 Book  IV,  Of  Chirurgical  and  tJaiverfal  Diforders.

not  believe  what  he  believ'd  ?  efpecially  as  other  corroborating  circumftances
are  moreover  added,  which  we  fhall  immediately  produce  from  the  fame
Plutarch,  from  Dio,  and  others,  even  medical  authors.

43.  For  what  is  to  be  argued  from  the  circumftance  related  by  Plu-
tarch (y)  for  a  certainty  ;  I  mean,  that  on  the  fame  day  whereon  Cleopatra
died,  and  even  a  few  hours  before  her  death,  a  box  was  brought  to  her  out
of  the  fields,  "  full  of  figs,  and  cover'd  with  leaves,"  but  that  which  he
tells  us  was  afterwards  faid,  that  the  afp  had  been  hidden  in  the  box  ?

And  this  Dio  (2)  alfo  relates  from  others-,  although  he  fays,  "  that  an
*'  afp  was  brought  in  an  urn,  or  among  fome  flowers  ;"  and  the  author  of  the
book  De  Theriaca  (a),  that  it  was  "  cover'd  over  with  figs  and  grapes."
And  while  I  attend  to  thefe  relations,  I  feem  able,  at  the  fame  time,  to
conjeffture  what  fpecies  of  afp  it  was.

For  as  they  have  aflerted  that  there  are  three  fpecies  {h) ;  calling  fome
ptyades,  others  terreftres,  and  others  chelidonise  -,  and  have  faid  that  thofe
of  the  firft  fpecies  were  "  of  the  length  of  two  cubits,"  the  fecond  fome-
times  "  of  the  length  of  five  cubits,"  and  that  the  third  fpecies  were  found
to  be  only  "  a  little  longer  than  a  cubit ;"  thefe  laft,  not  only  as  more
eafily  to  be  found  ;  having  their  lurking-places  about  the  banks  of  rivers,
"  and  efpecially  about  the  Nile,"  which. was  fo  near;  and  in  like  manner
as  bringing  on  a  more  fpeedy  death  than  the  others  ;  for  from  the  bite  df
thefe  "  the  moil  inftantaneous  death  comes  on  ;"  and  not  only  thefe  cir-
cumflances,  but  being  much  more  eafily  conceal'd  under  flowers  and  leaves,
by  reafon  of  their  Ihortnefs ;  thefe  lafV,  I  fay,  I  do  not  doubt  were  more  con-
venient for  Cleopatra,  and  particularly  more  proper  to  deceive  thofe  who
kept  guard  at  the  gate.

And  herewith  agrees  the  very  ancient  and  learned  artift  of  the  Vatican
ftatue,  who,  not  only  very  fkilfully  exprefs'd  the  dying  Cleopatra  as  if  in  a
placid  fleep,  but  alfo  plac'd  upon  her  arm  a  fliort  afp,  and  that  on  the  left
arm  ;  having,  I  fuppofe,  taken  this  idea  from  fome  ancient  writer,  from
whom  Orofius  (c)  likewife,  otherwife  an  hiftorian  of  the  fifth  century,  fcema
to  have  taken  it.

But  whether  the  affair  was  manag'd  in  this  manner,  or,  as  others,  fpoken
of  by  the  fame  Plutarch  (^),  related,  "  the  afp  was  kept  fhut  up  in  a  cer-
"  tain  veffel,  and  brought  forth  by  Cleopatra  through  a  golden  pipe ;"
either  one  or  the  other  relation  has  a  final  tendency  to  prove  that  Ihe  fuffer'd
herfelf  to  be  bitten  by  an  afp.

You  fee  then,  that  what  has  been  related  by  Plutarch,  and  others,  agree
with  the  things  that  have  been  afferted  by  Vellejus  and  feveral  authors
fpoken  of  in  the  beginning.  And  the  author  of  the  book  De  Theriaca  (^),
whom  I  mention'd.  before,  fufficiently  (hows  that  the  fame  opinion  was  the
moft  probable  to  him.  And  whether  this  author  was  Galen,  or  fome  other,
at  leaft,  who  was  cotemporary  with  Galen;  as  he  fays  (/),  that  Androma-

Cy)  Ibid.  (c)  Hiftoriar.  1.  6.  c.  17.

(k>  1.  5 1 .  cit ,  \d)  Vita  cit.

\a)  c.  8.  \e)  c.  cit.

\b)  Vid.  Aetii  c.  20.  fupra  ad.  n.  ^i.  cit.  (/)  c.  5.^

chus-.


Letter  LIX. Article  4  3 ,  4  3  j

chus  "  was  not  many  years  before  him,"  and  "  that  Marcus  Antoninus
"  had,  feme  little  time  before,  govern'd  the  Roman  empire  with  the  greateft
"  integrity  "  (g)  ;  he  is  not  to  be  defpis'd  by  us :  fmce,  if  you  confider  his
age,  he  was  neither  younger  than  Dio,  nor  finally,  a  great  deal  later  than
Plutarch  ;  for  it  is  certain,  not  only  that  Plutarch  liv'd  during  the  reign  of
the  emperor  Hadrian,  but  that  Galen  was  born  at  that  time ;  and  if  you  at-
tend to  experience,  he  alone  of  all  thofe  authors  that  I  have  quoted  abovq,
exprelsly  fays,  as  you  have  read  juft  now  (h),  that  he  had  often  feen,  ac
Alexandria,  in  what  manner,  and  how  fpeedily,  afps  kill  when  applied  to
the  body.

Nor  becaufe  he  fays,  that  Cleopatra  had  made  ufe  of  one  of  thofe  call'd
ptyades ;  which,  however,  I  do  not  find  to  be  afferted  by  any  one  of  the
older  authors ;  will  you  fuppofe  that  (he  wilh'd  to  do  it  for  this  reafon,
that  Ihe  might  be  fpit  upon  by  the  ptyades  ;  for  from  thence  "  death  fol-
"  lows  very  Qowly,"  as  is  afferted  by  Aetius  (z) ;  but  that  Ihe  might  be
bitten  :  for  this  kind  of  afp  bites,  as  the  fame  author  fubjoins  ;  and  by
biting,  as  Galen  lays  in  Paulus  (k),  "  brings  on  the  moft  fpeedy
"  death."

And  indeed,  unlefs  Paulus  had  his  eye  to  fome  other  paffage  of  Galen,  in
the  books  that  have  been  loft ;  he  muft  have  confider'd  this  very  book
De  'TBeriaca,  as  one  of  Galen's  ;  and  have  taken  from  thence  what  he  fpeaks
of  as  faid  by  Galen  :  I  mean,  thefe  three  kinds  of  afps,  and  the  ingenuity  of
the  ptyades,  in  reaching  by  his  fpittle  perfons  at  a,  diftance  from  him  ;  and
Cleopatra  killing  herfelf  therewith.  For  thefe  things  are  faid  in  both
places.

But  as  to  its  being  faid  in  the  book  De  Theriaca,  that  the  queen  had  made
ufe  of  a  ptyades  to  kill  herfelf,  this  Paulus  has  fuppos'd,  with  great  juftice
and  propriety,  is  to  be  underltood  of  the  bite ;  for  it  was  by  no  means  ne-
ceffary  to  apply  it  to^er  body,  in  order  to  be  fpit  upon  by  it,  as  it  was  ac-
cuftom'd  to  fpit  afar  off.

And  as  to  thofe  things  that  are  foon  after  fubjoin'd,  in  that  fame  book,  of
the  fpeedy  death  of  condemn'd  criminals,  by  applying  an  afp  to  the  breaft  \
perhaps  Paulus,  thinking  that  thefe  circumftances  were  to  be  connecbed  with
the  former,  brought  in  Galen  as  leading  to  the  licence  of  the  painters  and
ftatuaries  •,  as  if  he  had  faid,  that  the  queen  "  had  applied  to  her  left  breaft
"  an  afp  of  the  ptyades  kind,  and  had  been  deftroy'd  by  the  bite  of  that
*'  animal."

But  we  are  prevented  from  believing  this  by  Plutarch  and  Dio,  who  deny,
as  we  have  feen  above  (/),  that  there  appear'd  any  mark  of  poifon  in  her
body  after  death  ;  except  two  very  fmall  punctures  in  her  arm.  And  this
circumftance  is  alio  fufficient  to  (how  us,  that  it  was  not  without  reafon  the
fame  author  of  the  book  DeT'heriaca,  in  relating  a  different  narration  of  fome
other  perfons,  did  it  in  fuch  words  as  fhow'd  himfelf  to  be  not  at  all  fatisfied
therewith:  a  narration,  that  is  to  fay,  "  of  a  large  and  deep  wound,"  which

{g)  c.  2.  (/•)  De  Re  Med.  1.  5.  c.  18.

\h)  n.  41.  (/)  n.  40.  41,

(/)  J.  20.  cit,  ~

K  k  k  2  Cleopatra


43 6 Book  IV.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

Cleopatra  "  made  upon  her  arm  with  her  teeth  ;  and  ofpoifon  which  fhe
"  had  prev'oufly  procur'd  from  the  afp,  being  brought  to  her  in  a  certain
" box,  and  infus'd  into  that  wound"  foon  after.

44,  But  thofe  very  fmall  pundlures  in  the  arm,  as  they  difprove  the  re-
port of  a  large  and  deep  wound  in  the  arm  ;  fo  they  exceedingly  well  agree,
you  will  fay,  with  another  narration,  which  is  extant  in  Dio  (m),  though  not
in  the  author  of  the  fame  book  :  I  mean,  that  Cleopatra  had  taken  the
needle,  or  bodkin,  which  (he  was  wont  to  pin  up  her  hair  with,  and  wear
conftantly  therein,  from  her  head  ;  and  after  having  daub'd  it  over  with  the
moll  virulent  poifon,  had  prick'd  her  own  arm  with  it.

But  I  would  have  you  read  Redi  («),  where  he  admonifbes  you,  in  confe-
quence  of  his  own  experiments,  that  if  the  wound  you  make  be  narrow,  it
is  difficult  to  introduce  the  poifon  :  and  whatever  the  wound  may  be,  that
the  animal  does  not  die  fo  foon  after  having  the  poifon  of  the  viper  injedted
in'o  the  wound  already  made,  as  after  the  bite  of  the  viper  itfelf.

And  after  thefe  confiderations,  can  you  fuppofe,  that  fhe  who  wifh'd  the
moft  certain,  and  moft  fpeedy  death,  would  have  made  ufe  of  an  uncertain
and  Icfs  fpeedy  method  of  dying  ?  And  yet  our  difputation  was  not  of  poi-
fon being  thus  introdiic'd,  but  chiefly  ofpoifon  being  drunk,

And  as  there  is  no-where  any  mention  made  of  that,  as  I  have  faid
above  (0),  in  fo  many  narrations  •,  left  you  ihould  happen  to  think  that  this
paflage  of  Plutarch  {p)  may  be  fuppos'd  to  refer  thereto :  "  It  was  found  that
"  Cleopatra  had  poifon  in  a  kind  of  hollow  plate  which  fhe  conceal'd  under
"  her  hair  -,"  and  left  you  fhould  fufpedl  it  to  have  been  that,  or  fimilar
thereto,  wherewith  fhe,  having  fmear'd  over  the  flowers  of  her  banquetting
<^'ar!and,  and  throv/n  them  foon  after  into  a  bowl,  "  had  commanded  a  per-
"  fon  brought  out  of  prifon  to  drink  thereof,  who  inftantly  expir'd-,"  as  you
have  it  in  Pliny  (q) ;  or  of  the  fame  nature  with  that,  which,  not  many
l!{JI}-a  after  the  death  of  that  queen,  was  fent  from  Alexandria  to  Jerufalem
to  kill  Herod  ;  as  Jofephus  (r)  has  faid;  that  is,  the  virus  of  afps,  and  the
"  poifonous  juices  of  other  ferpents,"  by  the  drinking  of  which  poifon  "  a
"  criminal  capitally  condemn'd  died  immediately,"  left  then,  I  fay,  you
fliould  fufpedl  thefe  things,  I  will  not  produce  this  paflage  from  the  fame
Pliny  (^)  :  that  the  poifon  of  afps,  "  when  drunk  in  the  largeft  quantity,  is
*«  not  hurtful.  For  there  is  no  contagious  efficacy  therein  :  fo  that  the  ani-
"  mals  kill'd  by  the  bite  of  this  creature,  are  not  improper  for  food ;"
which  things  agree  with  the  experiments  of  Redi,  and  others,  upon  the  vi-
perine  poifon  (;)  :  nor  will  I  fay  the  other  things  in  general,  which  I  have
hinted  at  in  my  fecond  letter  to  Lancifi,  from  whence  you  may  conjefture
that  this  poifon  rather  related  to  that  wherewith  Dio  has  faid  the  hair-needle,
or  bodkin,  was  befmear'd  ;  that  is  to  fay,  one  which  was  not  injurious,  as
he  openly  aflerted,  except  introduc'd  into  a  wound.

I  will  only  add  one  thing  from  the  fame  Dio  and  Plutarch,  from  whence
you  may  very  clearly  and  inftantly  perceive,  that  Cleopatra  did  not  die  from

-  (?«)  1.  51.  cit.  (?)  Nat.  Hift.  1.  21.  c.  3.

(«)  Lett.  int.  alle  Oppofiz.  (»)  De  Bello  Jud.  1.  i.

[ (0)  n.  38. (/)  Vita  cit.  (i)  Nat.  Hift.  1.  29.  c.  4. (c)  fupra,  n.  30.

the


Letter  LIX. Article  45'.  437

the  taking  of  poifon,  which  Ihe  carried-  in  a  hollow  plate  under  her
hair.

.  For  Dio  (a)  relates,  as  fafl:,  that  before  Ihe  kill'd  herfelf,  fhe  gave  to  Epa-
phroditus,  to  whom  the  cuftody  of  her  was  connmitted,  a  letter  to  be  carried
to  Auguftus,  that  he  "  being  remov'd  from  his  poft,  under  the  pretence
"  of  fending  a  letter  to  Auguftus,  fhe  might  have  opportunity  to  execute
"  what  fhe  had  propos'd."

Plutarch  (x)  likewife  had  alTerted  without  any  doubt,  that  the  queen,
when  about  to  kill  herfelf,  had  given  a  letter  to  be  carried  to  Auguftus,
"  and  having  difmiffed  all  her  attendants,  but  two  women,  had  fhut  the
"  gate."  To  what  purpofe  was  it  then,  I  pray  you,  that  fhe  fhould  fend
away  Epaphroditus,  and  the  other  attendants,  from  about  her,  and  (hut  the
gate,  in  order  to  take  poifon  from  that  hollow  plate  ?

She,  therefore,  mull  have  intended  to  do  fomething  elfe  which  fhe  could
not  do  without  the  removal  of  all  witnefles,  who  would  have  prevented  it :
that  is  to  fay,  (he  intended  "  to  handle  fierce  ferpents,  in  order  to  drink  the
"  black  poifon  from  them,  by  her  body,"  as  Horace  (7)  fays,  and  not  by  her
mouth.

And  the  teftimony  of  this  author  I  confider  as  of  very  great  weight,  not
only  for  other  reafons  which  I  have  hinted  at  in  the  letters  fent  to  Lancifi  ;
but,  in  particular,  for  this  reafon,  that  he,  to  ufe  the  words  of  the  younger
Pliny  (z),  "  has  follow'd  the  relations  which  were  made  of  the  faft  imme-
"  diately  after  its  tranfadion ;  at  which  time  they  have  generally  the  molt
"  truth  in  them."

45.  Do  you  think,  then,  it  was  any-thing  elfe  but  the  handling  of  the
afps  which  Cleopatra  could  do,  and  perhaps  did,  when  all  her  attendants  were
remov'd,  in  order  to  afford  her  an  opportunity  of  killing  herfelf  with  poifon  ?
When  I  had  written,  thus  far,  I  accidentally  lit  on  a  pafTage  of  a  Greek  au-
thor, and  a  cotemporary  of  Vellejus,  which  I  think  fliould,  net  be  omitted
in  this  controverfy.

For  Strabo  (a)  has  faid  the  following  things  :  "  Cleopatra  kill'd  herfelf
"  by  applying,  privately,  the  bite  of  an  afp  ;  or  with  a  poifon  fmear'd  over
"  her  ;  for  it  is  faid  in  both  ways."

It  appears,  therefore,  that,  if  fhe  was  determin'd  to  anoint  her  body  with
this  poifon,  fhe  ought  to  have  fhut  the  gate  before,  and  kept  no-body  but
her  maids  about  her.

But  before  you  fay  this,  read  Plutarch  (b).  You  will  fee  that,  on  this  day,
the  queen,  having  made  ufe  of  the  bath,  might  have  anointed  her  body  v/ith
what  ointment  Ihe  pieas'd,  as  the  cuftom  was  then,  without  any  one  being
furpriz'd  at  it,  or  prohibiting  it  :  that,  after  this,  fhe  din'd,  and  magnifi-
cently too,  (from  whence  you  might  draw  a  new  argument,  that,  therefore,
(he  had  not  determin'd  to  kill  herfelf  foon  after  by  fwallowing  or  drinking
down  poifon  ;  as,  by  means  of  having  m.ade  fo  many  experiments,  fhe  could
not  be  ignorant  how  far  food,  previoufly  taken  in,  may  either  prevent  op

(u)  L.  cit.  51.  (z)  L.  6.  Epift.  16.

[x) Vita  cit.  (/?)  De  fitu  Oibis,  r.  I-.  f  ■

(j)  Carm.  1.  i.  Od.  37.  {i\  Vita  cu.

6  rerard


438 Book  lY.  Of  Chirurgical  and  Univerfal  Diforders.

I'etard  the  efFeftsof  poifon  that  is  fwallow'd  (c) ) :  that,  while  (he  was  at  dinner,
the  box,  full  of  grapes  and  figs,  was  brought  in,  together  with  the  afp  •,  as
ihe  feems  previoufly  to  have  order'd :  and  then,  finally,  that  flie  deliver'd
the  letters  diredted  to  Csfar, and,  all  witneflls  being  remov'd,  fhuc  the

You  therefore  perceive,  from  this  very  feries  of  things^  whether  it  is  moft
probable  that  fhe  kill'd  herfelf  by  a  poifonous  ointment,  or  by  an  afp.

Add  to  this,  that  Epaphroditus,  who  kept  her  lb  cautioufly  and  attentively,
as  immediately  "  to  take  off  the  upper  garment"  of  his  prifoner,  "  left  fhe
"  Ihould  have  conceal'd  any  poifon  underneath;"  as  Plutarch  has  aflferted
above  -,  would  certainly  not  have  left  her  boxes  of  ointment  without  a  di-
ligent examination  and"  ftri£t  enquiry :  or,  what  was  much  more  ready  and-
fafe,  would  have  chang'd  them  for  others  fiU'd  with  innocent  ointments,  of
whatever  price  they  might  be  ;  fince  Auguftus  had  given  this  charge  to  him,
'^  That  he  (hould,  above  all  things,  take  care  fhe  might  not  have  it  in  her
"  power  to  kill  herfelf:  but  as  to  every  thing  elfe,  that  (he  fhould  be  quite
"  at  her  liberty."

One  thing  only,  therefore,  remains  for  you  to  conjedure  ;  I  mean,  that
there  was  but  a  little  of  that  poifonous  ointment,  fo  that  it  could  "  be
"  hid  under  the  hair  in  that  hollow  plate  "  which  has  been  fpoken  of
above  (d).

For  thus,  alfo,  "  in  Martina  ;  famous  for  the  preparing  of  poifons ;  who
"  died  of  a  fudden  death  at  Brundufium,"  while  fhe  was  brought  to  Rome
as  an  accus'd  perfon  (as  we  read  in  Tacitus  (e)  )  -,  "  poifon  was  hid  in  the
"  knot  of  her  hair,  nor  were  any  marks  of  the  poifon  (he  had  taken  found
"  upon  her  body."

Yet  if  you  (bould  make  this  conjefture,  the  argument  then  returns  that
was  brought  above  (/)  in  oppofition  to  the  opinion  of  thofe  who  contended,
that  the  poifon  wherewith  Cleopatra  had  kill'd  herfelf,  by  fwallowing,  was
included  in  that  plate.

For  as  a  little  ointment  was  not  fufficient  to  anoint  the  whole  body  all  over,
but  only  certain  parts ;  as,  for  inftance,  the  noftrils,  and  other  fimilar  parts;
to  what  purpofe  was  it  to  fhut  the  gates  or  doors,  in  the  mean  time,  and  to
remove  all  witnefTes,  in  order  to  do  what  fhe  might  have  done  in  the  night,
when  (he  appear'd  to  be  aQeep:  and  that  without  the  fufpicion  of  any-
one?

And  to  this  we  might  add  a  great  number  of  other  arguments,  which  it
is  not  neceffary  to  repeat,  and  which  do  not  at  all  agree  with  the  fuppos'd
ointment ;  but  agree  perfedtly  well  with  the  bite  of  the  afp  ;  as  the  appli-
cation of  the  pfylli,  the  two  punctures  obferv'd  in  the  arm,  and  other  things :
among  which  are  the  very  ancient  ftatues  and  images,  whereto  fome  refpcct
iDuft  be  paid  ;  and,  in  particular,  that  which  gave  the  firft  occafion  to  the
difpute,  in  which  the  afp  is  tied  to  the  arm,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  feem  to
be  irritated  and  provok'd  to  bite  by  the  very  conftridion  of  the  bandage.


{()  Vid.  fopra,  n.  10,  (e)  Annal.  1.  3.

(dj  N.  44.  (/;  N.  44.


Nor


Letter  LIX. Article  4^.  43  9

Nor  let  it  ftagger  you  that  it  has  been  objefted  hereto,  that  no-body  dare
tie  an  afp  to  the  arm  of  another,  left  the  afp  fhould  bite  the  perfon  who
binds  it  rather  than  the  other's  arm.  For  what  elfe  did  thofe  two  fervant-
maids  defire,  but  to  die  by  the  fame  fate  as  their  miftrefs  ?  following  the
example  of  the  eunuch  their  colleague,  who,  as  Dio(^)  relates,  "  volun-
"  tarily  expos'd  himfelf  to  be  bitten  by  ferpents,"  as  foon  as  ever  the  queen
was  taken  prifoner.

And  as  to the  other  arguments ;  taken  from  the  foft  and  timorous  minds
of  women,  or  from  the  fuppofition  of  one  afp  not  being  fufficient  to  kill
three  women  by its  bite;  and  any  other  objections  that  might  be  drawn
from  Redi,  or  elfewhere  ;  I  think  I  have  pretty  well  overcome  them,  either-
in  the  letters  before  publifh'd,  or  in  the  prefent  letter.

46.  And  thus  far  I  had  to  add  to  thofe  fame  letters :  not  that  you  fhould
prefer  what  I  have  now  written  to  the  things  faid  on  the  contrary  fide  of  the
queilion  by  that  illuftrious  man,  and  in  an  ingenious  and  learned  manner ;
but  that,,  by  comparing  both  of  the  difputations  together,  it  might  be  the
more  eafy  for  you  to  diftinguifh  whether  I  have  flood  up  for  that  part  of
the  queftion,  in  this  controverfy,  which,  at  leaft,  does  not  ftand  greatly  wide
of  probability.

And  although  this  point  of  itfelf  is  not  of  any  great  moment ;  yet,  by
reafon  of  the  feveral  quotations  that  I  have  been  under  a  neceffity  of  making
on  account  of  it ;  not  only  from  hiftorical,  but  from  medical  authorities,
and  even  from  other  fources  ;  it  has,  I  hope,  lelfen'd  the  irkfomenefs  of
long  reading  to  you,  to  whom  it  may  be,  perhaps,  in  fome  meafure  ufeful :
or,  at  leaft,  it  has  alleviated  to  me  this  laft  labour  of  writing ;  fo  that  I
think  myfelf  at  liberty  to  conclude  my  treatife  to  you  on  this  fubjeft  almoft
in  the  fame  words  as  the  author  of  the  book  De  Theriaca  (h),  whom  I  have
often  commended,  finilhes  his  narration  to  Pifo  upon  the  death  of  Cleo-
patra :  "  I  have  treated  of  this  fubjeft  with  a  fccret  pleafuce  of  mind,  that
"  I  might  be  able  to  fatisfy  that  defire  which  you  have  after  all  learning.'"
Farewel.

r^;L.  5i.cit.  (A)C.  8.


End of the Fourth Book.


THE


THE


S  E  A  T  S  and CAUSES


O  F


DISEASES


INVESTIGATED BY ANATOMY.


BOOK the FIFTH,


Wherein  many  Things  are  added  by  way  of  Supplement
to  the  four  preceding  Books.


Vol.  III.  L  1 1


LETTER the SIXTIETH

Relates to the Apoplexy.


i.V  THOUGHT  I  had  already  done  more  than  was  requifite ;  and,
I as  I  did  not  fcruple  to  fay  in  the  conclufion  of  my  laft  letter,  had  put

Jl.  the  finilhing  hand  to  my  labour  on  thefe  fubjedls.

But  behold !  your  letter  is  come  to  hand,  wherein  you  thank  me  in  fuch
a  manner  as,  at  the  fame  time,  pretty  plainly  to  fliew  that  you  expedb  thofe
obfervations  of  mine  which  it  was  impoffible  for  me  to  infert  in  their  feveral
proper  places  ;  as  they  have  been  made  fince  the  refpeftive  letters  to  which
they  belong  were  finilh'd  :  and  that  this  is  very  well  underftood  by  you,  not
only  becaufe  you  know  that  I  examine  many  different  dead  bodies  every
year,  but  alfo  becaufe  you  have  not  receiv'd  as  yet  fome  of  the  obfervations
of  this  kind  which  I  have  now-and-then  promis'd  you  as  -I  was  writing.

What  can  I  fay  ?  You  have  certainly  a  right  to  infill  upon  what  you  alk ;
particularly  from  a  man  who,  unlefs  you  would  of  your  own  accord  releafe  him,
is  a  very  pundtual  obferver  of  his  promifes.

I  beg  therefore,  at  leaft,  that  you  will  receive  thefe  obfervations  with  the
fame  candour  that  you  have  receiv'd  the  former:  and  I  will  add  as  many  as
I  am  able  ;  beginning  with  diforders  of  the  brain,  and  in  preference  to
others,  with  the  moft  violent  of  them  all,  the  apoplexy.

2.  An  old  man  had  died  apopledtic,  in  the  hofpital  at  Padua,  about  the
beginning  of  December,  in  the  year  1744;  at  which  time  I  was  there  de-
monftrating  fome  parts  of  the  human  body,  to  the  young  gentlemen  who
fludied  there.

I  made  a  diligent  enquiry  into  a  number  of  circumftances,  according  to
my  ufual  cuftom,  but  could  learn  no  more  than  thefe  ;  that  having  been
feiz'd  with  an  apoplexy,  thirty  days  before,  he  was  at  length  brought  into
that  place,  without  any  fenfe  or  motion  ;  his  eyes  being  red  to  a  very
great  degree.

While  the  afiiftants  were  cutting  into  the  cranium,  I  happcn'd  to  be.
looking  upon  the  thoracic  vifcera,  which  were  juft  taken  out;  and  in  the
upper  part  of  the  right  lobe  of  the  lungs,  obferv'd  a  hardnefs,  fuch  as  is
wont  to  be  left  after  an  old  difeafe.  And  therein  was  contain'd  a  fmall  tu-
bercle, in  which  was  a  purulent  matter.

li  1 1  2  The


444 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

The  heart  contain'd  polypous  concretions,  and  afforded  no  appearance
worthy  of  remark  ;  except  that  the  aggeres,  or  tubercles,  of  the  lemilunar
valves,  were  become  very  thick,  and  of  a  white  colour.

Thele  vilcera  being  then  remov'd,  I,  in  the  mean  while,  turn'd  my  hands
and  eyes  to  the  laying  open,  and  examination  of  the  brain.  And  having
taken  off  tlie  exterior  of  the  meninges,  one  difference  appear'd  betwixt  the
left  and  the  right  hemifphere  of  the  brain,  which  confifted  in  this ;  that  the
pofferior  furface  of  the  latter  feem'd  to  be  black,  and  very  red  in  the
middle.

The  blacknefs  was  owing  to  the  velTels,  which  creep  through  the  pia  mater,
being  there  dittended  with  black  blood,  to  a  very  great  degree ;  and  the  red-
nefs  was  owing  to  blood,  which,  being  extravafated  betwixt  thofe  veffels,  as
if  by  exfudation,  feem'd  to  have  occupied  the  fpaces  interpos'd  to  the  veffels,
by  a  very  thin  kind  of  cruft  :  or  rather,  as  we  could  not  in  fad  find  any  ex-
travafated blood  there,  it  was  owing  to  the  blood  Huffing  up  all  thofe  fmall
veffels,  which  lie  fo  exceedingly  thick  in  this  membrane.  '

Then  on  opening  the  lateral  ventricles,  in  both  of  them,  equally,  was
feen  a  very  bloody  ferum,  to  the  quantity,  perhaps,  of  one  drachm,  occu-
pying only  the  anterior  part ;  the  plexus  choroides,  on  both  fides,  being  pale,
and  the  feptum  lucidum  entire.

The  left  hemifphere  alfo  was  found,  both  internally  and  externally ;  and
every  other  part  within  the  cranium  was  tolerably  found,  except  the  right
hemifphere  alone.

For  within  the  medullary  fubftance  of  this  hemifphere  was  a  cavity,  which
had  almoft  a  middle  fituation  in  refpeft  to  all  the  different  regions  of  the  he-
mifphere ;  being  at  leaft  five  inches  lon^,  two  and  a  half  in  breadth,  and
as  many  in  depth ;  very  full  of  black  blood,  which  was  partly  fluid,  but
partly,  like  wife,  concreted  into  coagula.

And,  this  coagulated  blood  being  taken  away,  the  parietes  of  the  cavity
appear'd  to  be  very  difagreeably  lacerated,  and  unequal.

The  fubftance  which  lay  round  about  them  was  very  lax  :  and  not  only
that  which  made  up  the  medullary  part,  but  that  which  went  to  compofe
the  external  fide  of  the  whole  corpus  ftriatum,  and  the  whole  thalamus  nervi
optici ;  and  that,  alfo,  which  made  up  fome  part  of  the  neighbouring  bafis
of  both  thofe  protuberances.

3.  As  1  have  already  explain'd  to  you,  in  a  former  letter  {a)^  how  a  cavity
of  this  kind  feems  to  be  form'd  in  the  cerebrum ;  and  how  fatal  it  is  when
in  the  neighbourhood  of  thofe  protuberances ;  there  is  no  occafion  to  repeat
the  explication  here.

You  will  rather  afk  this  queftion  of  me  -,  I  mean,  how  it  was  poffible  for
a  man  to  live  fo  long  as  thirty  days,  with  fo  great  a  difeafe  of  the  brain ;  and
in  fuch  a  part  ?  But  do  not  imagine  that  this  was  the  ftace  of  the  parts,
from  the  firft  attack  of  the  apoplexy.

It  is  much  more  probable,  that  a  fmall  quantity  of  blood,  diftilling  from
fome  fmall  internal  veffel,  which  was  ruptur'd,  had  then  begun  to  prepare

(«)  Epilh  3.  n.  g.  &  18.

that


Letter  LX. Article  4.  44^-

that  cavity  for  itfelf ;  and  did  not  immediately  enlarge  it  to  that  dilated  ftate
wherein  we  found  it :  but  that,  moreover,  by  diftilling  gradually  more  and
more,  it  had  gradually,  alfo,  dilated  the  cavern  to  that  extent,  till  a  great
number  of  the  canals,  through  which  the  animal  fpirits  circulate,  being
ruptur'd  ;  and  many  other  comprefs'd  by  the  increas'd  weight  and  bulk  j.  it
at  length  took  away  all  external  fenfe  and  motion  ;  and  laft  of  all  the  in-
ternal fenfe  and  motion  alfo;  whereby  death  was  brought  on:  or,  you  may
conceive,  as  I  fhould  more  readily  fuppofe,  that,  a  new  impulfe  being  added
from  fome  caufe  or  other,  and  many  fmall  vefTcls  being  broken  at  the  fame
time,  thefe  laft  effeds,  which  I  have  mention'd,  were  brought  on  by  a  fudden
and  large  eruption,  not  a  very  long  time  before.

But  in  whichfoever  of  thefe  two  modes  you  chufe  to  explain  the  diforder,
it  will  be  very  eafy  for  you,  not  only  to  folve  your  own  enquiry,  but  alfo  to
underlland  clearly,  how  ufeful  it  may  be,  when  certain  fymptoms,  which
threaten  a  fanguineous  apoplexy,  firft  exift,  to  diminilh  the  quantity  of  ali-
ments ;  efpecially  thofe  that  abound  with  acrid  and  thin  particles ;  to  ab-
ftain  from  too  great  motions  of  the  mind  and  body,  and  to  draw  away  blood ;.
and  where  fuch  an  apoplexy  has  already  come  on,  fo  much  the  more  to  dl-
minifh  its  quantity,  and,  as  I  think  I  have  written  to  you  before,  to  avoid
fuch  remedies  as  may  too  much  move  and  agitate,  in  an  untimely  manner  ;
thofe  remedies,  for  inftance,  that  are  pregnant  with  volatile  corpufcles  ;  that
produce  vomiting,  fneezing,  and  other  effects  of  that  nature.

4,  A  hufbandman,  of  a  middle  age,  and  rather  fat,  was  brought  into  the
fame  hofpital,  in  the  year  1748,  when  I  was  teaching  anatomy  there ;  he
having  been  feiz'd  with  an  apoplexy,  which  was  faid  to  be  the  third,  and
was,  in  fafl,  fo  violent,  that  being  immediately  taken  into  the  hofpital,  from
the  road  wherein  he  had  fallen  down,  not  far  from  the  hofpital,  he  had  al-
ready a  ftertor,  and  was  paralytic  in  his  whole  body  ;  fo  as  not  to  give  the
leaft  fign  of  fenfe  or  rfiotion  in  any  part :  and  his  pulfe  being  very  fmall,  fo
that  they  did  not  dare  to  take  any  blood  away,  he  died  within Teven  or  eight
hours.

On  the  fourth  day  after,  all  thefe  circumftances  were  related  to  me  ;  and,.
at  the  fame  time,  the  body  was  offer'd  for  diffedion.

But  before  I  would  touch  the  carcafe,  1  enquir'd,  though  to  no  purpofe,
at  what  time,  with  what  preceding  caufes,  with  what  concomitant  figns,  or
remaining  injuries,  thofe  two  foregoing  apoplexies,  which  were  mention'd,.
had  been  obferv'd  ;  or  what  marks  of  difeafe  they  had  left  behind  them:
for  I  could  learn  nothing  in  refpedl  to  them,  and  of  this  laft  only  what  I
have  mention'd.

However,  when  I  faw  that  the  veffels  about  the  head  were  turgid,  and.
heard  that  there  had  been  fo  violent  an  apoplexy,  in  a  body  rather  fat ;  I
made  no  fcruple  to  fay,  to  a  very  crowded  circle  of  ftudents,  that  it  would
be  furprizing  if  I  did  not  Ihew  this  to  have  been  from  a  fanguineous
caufe.

The  fkull,  therefore,  being  immeniately  open'd-,  when  this  was  done,  and
ftill  more  when  the  brain  was  taken  out  •,  a  confiderable  quantity  of  black
blood  flow'd  down  :  and  it  was  even  evident,  that  it  flow'd  out  from  the
infundibulum.

2  The


44<^ Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

The  fame  kind  of  blood  had  not  only  diftended  all  the  veffels  that  pafs'd
through  thepia  mater,  where  it  invefted  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,  but
alfo  under  this  membrane,  in  the  middle  of  the  left  hemifphere,  a  fmall
quantity  was  extravafated  :  and  a  great  quantity  in  all  thq  ventricles.

For  as  to  the  lateral  ventricles  ;  befides  a  coaguhim,  which  feem'd  to  be
equal  to  two,  not  to  fay  three,  ounces  in  weight;  almoft  all  the  remaining
part  of  thofe  ventricles,  and,  moreover,  the  third  and  fourth  ventricle,  were
occupied  thereby.

When  1  came  to  enquire  from  whence  it  had  been  difcharg'd,  I  found  the
cafe  as  follows.  The  pofterior  furface  of  the  left  ventricle,  and  of  the  tha-
lamus therein,  that  is,  the  thalamus  nervi  optici,  difcover'd  laceration  by
their  inequality  :  and  this  was  ftill  much  more  apparent  from  the  furface  of
the  right  ventricle  ;  inafmuch  as  it  was  not  only  every  where  unequal,  but,
moreover,  preferv'd  fcarcely  any  traces  of  its  thalamus,  and  none  at  all  of  the
corpus  ftriatum  ;  the  feat  of  v;hich  was  poflefs'd  by  a  kind  of  lurid  fubftance,
of  a  colour  that  confided  of  a  fomewhat  red  and  yellowifh  hue,  mix'd  to-
gether as  it  were  :  being  quite  corrupted,  but  without  any  very  difagreeable
fmell.

The  cavity  of  both  the  ventricles  was  enlarg'd  ;  the  feptum  lucidum  was
broken  through  -,  there  was  no  trace  of  the  formix  remaining  •,  fcarcely  any
of  the  plexus  choroides,  and  that  of  the  left  only;  the  veffels  being  not
turgid,  but  pale.

This,  however,  could  not  be  at  all  confider'd  as  furprizing,  where  there
had  been  fo  great  a  quantity  of  blood  extravafated  as  I  have  faid  ;  and  where
fo  large  a  coagulum  had  been  form'd  from  thence,  as  that  which  had  occu-
pied the  right  and  the  left  part  of  the  cavity  ;  but  the  latter  more  than  the
former.

By  reafon  of  that  confiderable  effufion  of  blood  therefore,  I  did  not  wonder
even  at  this  circumftance  -,  1  mean,  that  the  fides  of  the  third  ventricle  did
rot  appear  lb  perfpicuoufly,  whether  they  had  fubfided  from  compreffion,  or
from  diftraftion,  or  even  from  laceration  ;  for  the  neighbouring  furface  alfo
of  the  nates,  and  teftes,  was  fo  lacerated,  that  thefe  protuberances  could  not
be  diftinguifh'd.

To  thele  preternatural  appearances,  which  were  feen  in  the  head,  two  re-
main to  be  added  ;  to  wit,  that  the  left  vertebral  artery  was  fomewhat  hard,
thick,  and  white,  in  one  half  of  it,  before  it  open'd  into  the  bafilary  artery  :
and  that  the  greater  part  of  the  pofterior  and  inferior-  dentes  molares,
were  either  become  mere  ftumps,  and  black  even  in  their  very  roots ;  as  was
the  cafe  on  the  right  fide  •,  or  had  quite  fallen  out ;  as  on  the  left  fide  ;  and
that  not  a  very  Ihort  time  before  :  for  there  did  not  remain  the  leaft  traces  of
fockets ;  and  even  the  bony  body  of  the  maxilla  had  already  contradled  itfelf
in  that  parr,  and  fubfided.

And,  not  to  disjoin  from  the  head  its  bony  fulcrum,  and  the  cavity  of
the  cranium  which  is  produc'd  thereinto  •,  when  I  examin'd  all  the  vertebrae
of  the  neck,  and  many  of  the  thorax,  and  infpefted  the  included  fpinal
marrow,  I  faw  betwixt  this  and  the  pia  mater,  as  it  is  call'd,  at  leaft  in  the
fuperior  vertebrae  of  the  thorax,  blood  extravafated  in  a  confiderable' quan-
tity i  and  this  on  the  pofterior  furface  i  and  on  the  fame  furface  the  pia  mater

had


Letter  LX. Article  5.  447

had  fo  much  red  mix'd  with  a  flefh  Colour,  that  you  could  not  diftinguifh
any  blood-veflel  therein,  from  the  head  almoft  to  the  middle  of  the  thorax:
whereas,  on  the  anterior  furface,  the  artery  which  pafs'd  fingly  through  the
middle,  was  feen  to  be  diftended  with  blood.

And  even  the  dura  mater,  where  it  invefted  the  internal  fides  of  the  ver-
tebrae, was,  in  a  manner,  black  from  ftagnating  blood.

The  thorax ;  which,  as  well  as  fome  of  the  parts  before  fpoken  of,  I
examin'd  on  the  following  days  ;  contain'd  a  heart,  which,  in  proportion  to
the  man,  who  was  pretty  fat,  was  not  at  all  fat ;  but,  together  with  a  fmall
quantity  of  black  and  coagulated  blood,  contain'd  a  few  ftnall  polypous  con-
cretions: yet  thofe  in  the  right  ventricle  were  fomewhat  the  largeft;  fo  that
one  of  them  enter'd  into  the  pulmonary  artery.

The  fubftance  of  the  heart  was  very  lax.  The  coronary  vein,  where  it
goes  round  the  bafis  of  the  heart,  on  the  poilerior  part,  was  wider  tha;i  ic
naturally  is :  the  pulmonary  artery  itfclf  indeed  was  not  wider  than  it  natu-
rally is  •,  but  was  feen  to  have  very  thin  parietes,  and  thin  valves  alfo :  but
the  left  finus  of  the  heart,  where  it  receiv'd  the  venous  branches  from  the
lungs,  was  very  much  enlarg'd.

The  lower  edge  of  one  of  the  valvulse  mitrales  was  thicken'd  to  a  confi-
derable  degree :  and  bony  concretions,  not  of  a  large  fize,  but  pretty
thick,  had  been  form'd  upon  the  aggeres,  or  tubercles,  of  the  femilunar
valves.

Yet  the  great  artery  itfelf  was  found,  quire  to  that  part  from  whence  it
fent  forth  the  left  fubclavian.  Bui  from  thence  it  began  to  Ihow  white  fpots,
pretty  frequently,  on  its  internal  furface,  and  particularly  on  its  pofterior,
furface  :  fome  of  which,  .and  efpecially  the  firft,  had  degenerated  into  a  bony
fcale.

That  firft  anfwer'd^to  the  canalis  arteriofus,  which  formerly  open'd  there  j
but  was  now  according  to  cuftom  fhut  up  ;  except  that  in  this  man,  by  way
of  rare  inftance,  I  faw  the  orifice  of  that  canal  gaping  in  the  pulmonary  ar-
tery, from  whence  it  begins ;  fo  that  I  could  introduce  a  probe  to  the  extent
of  half  a  line  of  Bologna,

In  the  belly  I  oblerv'd  the  following  preternatural  appearances.  The  fur-
face of  both  kidnies  was  in  a  manner  tuberous ;  but  in  a  flight  degree :  that
one  of  them,  moreover,  had  fubfided  in  a  certain  place ;  which  place  was
circumfcrib'd  by  the  cTcumference  of  a  circle,  the  diameter  of  which  was
equal  to  an  inch  :  the  fubftance  of  the  kidney  beneath  was  fomewhat  hard  in
that  part,  but  only  to  an  inconfiderable  depth.

Both  the  iliac  arteries  were  tortuous :  and,  to  fpeak  thus,  varicofe,  almoft
like  the  fplenic  artery :  in  the  left  I  faw  a  bony  lamella.  The  other  parts
that  I  examin'd  in  this  body  were  in  a  natural  ftate.

5.  From  whence  fo  great  a  quantity  of  blood  had,  for  the  chief  party
burft  into  the  lateral  ventricles  of  the  brain,  is  fhown  by  the  almoft  univerfal
deftruftion  of  the  plexus  choroides  -,  the  veftels  whereof  had  probably
been  ruptur'd  fuddenly,  here  and  there,  after  having  been  conliderably
dilated.

I  faid  for  the  chief  part  -,  for  it  muft  have  been  that  other  vefiels  alfo,.
which  pafs  through  the  furfaces  of  the  lateral  ventricles,  were  lacerated  like-

8  wife,.


448 Book  V,  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

wife,  in  the  laceration  of  thefe  ventricles  ;  which  was  efFefted  not  only  by
the  impetus,  but  alfo  by  the  diftracling  quantity  of  the  blood,  flowing  out
from  the  plexufles.

But  it  is  probable,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  blood  had  come  out  of  the
velTels  on  the  right  fide  ;  for  on  the  right  fide,  we  faw  all  the  furfaces  lace-
rated, and  the  whole  plexus  confum'd.

Nor  would  I  have  you  think  it  unfavourable  to  fuch  a  fuppofition,  that
this  large  coagulum  of  blood  was  more  on  the  left  fide  than  the  right  j  fince
I  apprehend  the  very  contrary.

For  as  the  firft,  and  larger,  refolution  is  generally  brought  on,  in  the
fide  of  the  body  which  is  oppos'd  to  the  mod  injur'd  hemifphere  of  the
brain  ;  it  is  very  natural  to  fuppofe  that  the  man  fell  down  towards  the  left
fide  {b) ;  and  that,  for  this  reafon,  the  larger  quantity  of  blood  had  flow'd
from  the  right  ventricle  into  the  left,  through  the  rupture  of  the  feptum
lucidum.

And  that  he  fell  on  the  left  fide,  appears  alfo  from  this  circumftance,  that
the  blood  effus'd  under  the  pia  mater  was  in  a  part  of  the  left  hemifphere,
and  not  in  the  right.

And  of  the  right  there  was  the  greateft  injury  in  this  refpefb  alfo,  that  in-
fl:ead  of  the  corpus  ftriatum,  it  had  a  mucous  fubftance.  A  change  of  which
kind  in  the  fubftance  of  the  brain,  I  have  already  told  you  (c),  I  had  found
niore  than  once.

But  as  to  the  queftion  whether  the  apoplexies,  two  of  which  liad  pre-
ceded, had  in  part  been  the  caufe  of  this  change  ;  or  whether  the  dilatation
of  the  veffels,  or  fome  certain  parts  of  the  brain,  being  render'd  more  lax,
were  the  eftefls  of  thofe  apoplexies  ;  as  we  cannot  certainly  determine  it ;  ic
is  better  to  pafs  on  to  the  third  hiftory  of  the  fanguineous  apoplexy.

6.  A  fat  woman,  of  eighty-five  years  of  age,  who,  as  far  back  as  her
acquaintance  could  remember,  had.  been  always  lame;  and  who,  having
been  formerly  married,  had  brought  forth  twenty  children  ;  had  been  feiz'd
with  an  apopleftic  paroxyfm  ;  firft  in  the  laft  fummer,  and  with  a  fecond,
ten  days  before  (he  was  carried  off  by  the  third.

All  of  thefe  paroxyfms  began  in  the  fame  way,  and  had  a  vomiting  pre-
cede them.  But  the  two  firft  were  folv'd  in  a  (hort  time,  without  any  re-
medies ;  and  without  leaving  any  paralyfis  behind.  Yet  this  laft  of  the  at-
tacks, carried  her  off  within  fourteen  hours  ;  fhe  being  brought  into  the
hofpital  without  any  fenfe  or  motion  ;  if  you  except  the  refpiration  and  the
pulfe ;  the  latter  of  which  was  without  any  diforder,  and  refifted  the  fingers
when  prefs'd  upon  it :  and  the  refpiration  rais'd  up  the  chcft  and  the  belly
alternately,  without  any  ftertor.

On  the  firft  of  February,  in  the  year  1 754,  when  I  had  already  demon-
ftrated  almoft  all  the  abdominal  vifcera  from  another  fubjeft ;  I  afterwards
began  to  make  ufe  of  this,  in  order  to  finilh  the  anatomical  demonftrations.

In  the  belly,  I  obferv'd  thefe  preternatural  appearances.  The  trunks-df
ihe  large  veffels  both  feem'd  to  be  wider  than  natural ;  efpecially  as  it  was
in  a  woman. And  if  you  afcribe  this  to  the  number  of  utero-geftations  j  yet

(*).  Vid.  Epift.  2.  n.  25.  &  Epift.  3.  n.  14.  (f)  Epift.  g.  n.  i6.  &  feqq.

you


Letter  LX. Article  6.  44  (>

you  certainly  will  not  refer  thereto  the  beginnings  of  offification  ;  and  even
the  bony  fcales ;  wherewith  the  aorta,  and  the  iliacs,  that  arife  from  thence,
and  the  two  branches  into  which  each  of  thefc  iliacs  are  divided,  were  di-
ftinguifh'd  here  and  there,  on  their  internal  furface.

And  if  we  fay  thefe  appearances  were  the  effefts  of  age ;  we  fliall  fay  that
the  difeafe  is  a  difeafe  of  old  age.

But  certainly,  that  diforder  form'd  upon  the  left  kidney,  which  I  remem-
ber to  have  promis'd  you,  heretofore  (d),  the  explanation  of,  in  the  hiftory
of  a  certain  old  woman,  who  was  the  prefent,  was  neither  the  effe<5t  of  old
age,  nor  of  utero-geftation.

That  kidney  might  feem,  at  firft  fight,  to  be  immoderately  long.  But  fixing
the  eyes  a  little  more  attentively,  we  could  fee  water  within  it,  which,  by
being  confin'd  there,  increas'd  its  length.

The  judgment  of  the  eyes  was  confirm'd  by  the  touch  ;  and  ftill  more  by
the  difre5:ion  foon  after.  For  by  cutting  into  the  kidney,  a  yellowifh  water
was  difcharg'd  •,  which,  when  receiv'd  in  a  vefTel,  feem'd  to  all  who  were
prefent,  to  be  equal  to  the  weight  of  four  ounces.

This  water  having  been  under  the  proper  coat  of  the  kidney,  where  it  in-
vefts  the  upper  extremity  of  that  vifcus,  had  expanded  it  upwards  in  that
manner ;  fo  as  to  form  the  appearance  of  a  produced  kidney.  The  expanded
coat  was  become  much  thlcken'd,  and  had,  internally,  the  appearance  of
protuberating  plicse,  or  folds  ;  and  a  kind  of  firm  bands,  but  irregularly
plac'd.

Both  of  the  teftes  had  fpherules  almoft  of  the  diameter  of  a  double  line  of
Bologna  ;  internally  hollow,  but  quite  empty  -,  the  parietes  of  which,  being
of  a  white  colour,  both  internally  and  externally,  were  pretty  thick  ;  and  fo
firm,  that  in  one  fph'erule  in  particular,  which  protuberated  outwards,  they
feem'd  bony  :  although  they  were  in  fadl  only  of  a  middle  firmnefs  betwixt
that  of  a  cartilage  andt  that  of  a  nerve.

In  the  thorax  the  lungs  were  found  to  be  found  •,  notwithftanding  the
right  lobe  adher'd  to  the  fide,  and  in  the  bronchise  was  a  great  quantity  of
thick,  though  at  the  fame  time  llifficiently  fluid,  matter.

In  the  heart  every  thing  was  natural  ;  if  you  except  one  of  the  femilunar
valves,  a  part  of  the  upper  border  of  which,  near  to  the  agger  or  tubercle,
was  already  almoft  bony.  Yet  fome  neighbouring  part  of  the  great  artery  j
for  the  other  part  which  is  in  the  thorax  I  did  not  diffeft  -,  had  nothing  at
all  bony.

The  centrum  nerveum,  or  tendineum,  of  tlie  diaphragm,  as  it  is  call'd,
had  neither  the  figure  it  generally  has,  nor  the  fize  ;  and  it  was  pierc'd  thro*,
not  with  one  foramen,  but  with  three  :  this  appearance,  however,  I  have
feen  before  (e),  and  that  more  than  once-,  two  of  thelefler  foramina,  for  in-
ftance,  which  were  contiguous  to  the  larger,  being  form'd  for  the  tranfmit-
ting  of  two  veins  from  the  liver ;  but  if  thefe  veins  had  open'd  into  the
trunk  of  the  cava  below  the  diaphragm,  as  they  generally  do ;  and  not
above  it,  as  they  did  in  this  cafe ;  there  would  not  have  been  three  foramina
in  that  tendon,  but  one  only.

C^J  Epift.  38.  n,  41.  C«J  Epift,  5.  n.  9.

Vol.  ill.  M  m  m  The


4  J  o Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

The  upper  limbs  alfo  had  fomething  peculiar  in  them.  For  havins  ob-
ferv'd  the  longus  palmaris  mulcle,  in  the  right  arm,  not  to  be  thick  and
flelhy,  as  it  generally  is  at  its  origin,  but  to  be  thin  and  (lender  even  there,
and  almoft  tendinous  -,  and  Teeing  the  fame  mufcle,  when  laid  bare  in  the  left
hand,  to  be  twice  as  thick  as  the  right ;  having  a  greater  quantity  of  flelb,
and  this  going  much  farther  down  ;  and  fufpefting  what  was  the  efFeft  of
this  difference,  and  what  in  part  had  been  the  caule  -,  I  order'd  fomebody  to
make  enquiry,  from  the  acquaintance  of  the  eld  woman,  whether  fhe  had
been  accuftom'd  to  ufe  her  left  hand  inltead  of  her  right :  and  I  was  afllir'd
that  this  had  really  been  the  cafe.

However,  to  this  queftion  relate,  ftill  more,  the  appearances  which  I
found  in  the  lower  limbs  of  this  lame  woman.  She  had  been  lame  on  the
right  fide  :  nor  could  the  caufe  be  referr'd  to  luxation,  as  there  was  none  at
all  -,  nor  to  the  acetabula  ;  as,  when  compar'd  one  with  another,  they  (how'd
no  difference,  either  in  their  fituation,  their  pofition,  or  their  depth.

But  if  you  compar'd  the  bones  of  the  thighs  one  with  another,  there
appear'd  an  evident  difference  betwixt  both ;  from  whence  you  might
conceive,  that  the  right  limb  muff,  of  courfe,  be  fhorter  than  the  left,
as  it  really  was.

For  the  os  femoris  on  the  right  fide,  was  fo  much  (hotter  than  the  left,
that,  if  you  plac'd  them  both  near  to  each  other,  the  upper  part  of  the  head
of  the  former  corrcfponded  to  the  lower  part  of  the  latter.  And  the  caufe
of  this  fhortnefs  was  the  greater  incurvation  of  the  former  than  of  the  latter  ;
which  was  extremely  manifeft.

Nor  were  other  appearances  of  difeafe  wanting,  in  that  bone,  befides
thefe-,  as,  for  inflance,  the  diminifh'd  breadth  of  the  head  at  the  lower  part,
no  finking- in  of  the  bone,  betwixt  the  great  trochanter  and  the  cervix ;  and
both  thefe  parts  were  thicker  than  they  naturally  are  :  fo  that  if  the  woman
was  ever  thin,  this  thicknefs  might  have  deceiv'd  any  furgeon,  who  examin'd
the  bone,  under  the  appearance  of  a  luxation.

That  OS  femoris  was,  in  like  manner,  thicker  than  it  naturally  is,  from
the  cervix  to  at  leaft  the  middle  of  its  length  ;  and  had  the  convex  part  of
the  curvature  turh'd  towards  the  external  fide  :  and  confequently  the  pollerior
furface  of  its  condyles  look'd  towards  the  left  femur ;  fo  that  the  leg  alfo,
and  the  foot,  could  not  be  in  their  proper  fituation.

In  attending  to  all  which  circumftances ;  you  will  readily  perceive,  that
thefe  diforders,  of  the  lower  limb,  had  exifted  from  the  original  formation ;
or  at  leaft  from  the  time  of  infancy :  and  therefore,  that  it  was  not  furprizing
the  woman  had  always  been  lame.

At  leno-th  the  head  (on  the  account  of  which  chiefly,  I  defcrib'd  this  dif-
feflion  to  you)  was  open'd  :  and  the  dura  mater  being  remov'd,  we  faw  the
veffels  that  pais  through  the  pia  mater  indeed  to  be  diftended  with  blood  j
but  no  blood,  nor  ferum,  was  found  to  be  effus'd  any  where,  till  we  came
to  the  left  ventricle,  by  cutting  into  the  left  hemifphere  of  the  cerebrum,  the
fubftance  of  which  was  firm.

\For  then  a  bloody  ferum  began  to  be  difcharg'd,  and  not  in  a  fmall
quantity  ;  that  is  to  fay,  it  came  from  a  large  quantity  of  blood,  which  had
coagulated  in  that  ventricle. The  fame  kind  of  ferum  was  alfo  found  in  the

righe.


Letter  LX. Articles  7, 8.  4j'i

right  ventricle,  and  in  the  iter  ad  quartum  ventriculumy  as  it  is  call'd  ;  but  we
did  not  find  any  injury  from  whence  we  could,  for  a  certainty,  fay,  that
the  blood  feem'd  to  have  been  difcharg'd  :  although  I  fuppofe  it  to  have  lain
hid  in  the  left  ventricle.

Then  transferring  the  knife,  from  thence,  to  the  cerebellum  ;  which  ap-
pear'd  to  be  every  where  found  on  its  external  furface  -,  behold,  within  its
right  lobe,  we  found  a  cavity,  and  not  a  fmall  one,  which  was  very  full  of
blood  form'd  into  coagula.

7.  Enough  was  faid  juft  now  of  the  caufes  of  the  lamenefs  I  have  fpoken
of.  In  regard  to  other  things  1  have  already  treated  of  them  (/),  and  (hall
treat  hereafter  {g).  But  in  regard  to  the  two  apoplexies  which  had  preceded
this  laft,  it  is  to  be  fuppos'd,  that  both  of  them  had  left  luch  difpofitions
in  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,  as  prepar'd  a  more  eafy  accefs  for  the
third  ;  fo  that,  by  rupturing  the  internal  veflels,  it  carried  off  the  woman  :
and  this  the  more  eafily,  as  no  remedies  had  been  made  ufe  of.

And  fince  veflels  were  ruptur'd  not  only  within  the  cerebellum,  but  within
the  cerebrum  alfo  ;  as  the  blood  extravalated  in  both  leems  to  (how  ;  they  have
therefore  render'd  two  things,  v/hich  might  have  been  deduc'd  from  this  dif-
itSCxon,  in  relation  to  the  cerebellum,  uncertain  and  doubtful;  I  mean,
whether  an  injury  of  one  of  its  lobes  is  foUow'd  by  a  paralyfis  in  the  oppo-
fite  fide  of  the  body  •,  and  in  like  manner,  whether  the  pulfe  and  refpiration
depend  upon  the  cerebellum.

For,  what  if  that  cavity  in  the  cerebellum  were  only  produc'd  by  the
force  of  the  blood,  when  death  was  coming  on  ?  Or  what  if  the  refolution
which  was  on  both  fides,  were  to  be  accounted  for,  from  the  blood  extrava-
fated  into  both  the  lateral  ventricles  of  the  cerebrum  ?

However,  an  obfervation  of  mine,  which  I  (hall  write  to  you  {h)  at  ano-
ther time,  will  afford  me  an  occafion  of  treating  upon  both  thefe  queftions
more  clearly.  -^

But  now  left  you  Ihould  imagine,  that  the  fanguineous  apoplexy,  which
kills  very  fpeedily,  cannot  exift  without  a  rupture  of  the  veflels  •,  we  will
immediately  fubjoin  to  the  three  which  are  propos'd  with  this  rupture,  as
many  which  have  been  fatal  very  foon  -,  or  at  leail  in  not  a  very  long  time  ;
without  this  effeft.

8.  A  man,  to  appearance  of  forty  years  of  age,  having  come  from  Milan
to  Padua  on  foot,  before  the  end  of  January  of  the  year  1756,  was  fo
wearied  with  his  journey,  that  he  went  immediately  to  the  hofpitalj  into
which  he  was  receiv'd,  merely  on  account  of  his  wearinefs,  and  not  for  any
fever :  and  while  he  was  fitting  there  ftill  out  of  bed,  and  taking  food,  he
was  fuddenly  ftruck  with  a  violent  apoplexy,  without  any  mark  of  external
fenfe  or  motion  ;  and  though  blood-lettings  were  made  ufe  of,  yet  they
feem'd  to  be  injurious  rather  than  ufeful ;  and  he  died  within  two
days.

The  body  was  given  us,  in  order  to  purfue  the  public  demonftrations  of

(f)  Epift.  56.  paffim.  (4)  Epift.  62.  n.  J5,

(i)  Epift.  69.  n.  2.  10.  &  Teqq.

M  m  m-  2 ■  anatom^'.


4 3*2 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books,

anatomy.  And  while  we  were  doing  this,  before  the  time  of  opening  the
Ikvill  came  on,  I  obferv'd  thefe  few  things.

In  the  belly,  the  gall-bladder  was  turgid  with  bile.

In  the  thorax,  the  figure  of  the  heart  was  fuch  as  I  do  not  remember  ever
to  have  feen  in  a  human  body  at  any  other  time  ;  and  refembled  that  whicb^
we  fee  form'd  by  the  moft  unfkilful  painters  ;  as  if  the  right  fide  of  the  heart
were  finifli'd  by  a  curv'd  line  :  that  is  to  fay,  the  upper  part  of  the  bafis  and
the  lower  part  of  the  apex  were  prominent  towards  the  right  fide.  And  in-
deed the  feptum  of  the  heart  itfelf  follow'd  the  fame  uniifual  curvature.

The  heart  was  rather  fmall  than  large  ;  but  had  its  valves,  and  other  parts
of  that  kind,  fmall,  even  below  this  proportion.  The  great  artery,  after
having  fent  out  the  left  fubclavian,  was  rough  to  fome  extent  internally,  by
realbn  of  prominent  fibres  ;  as  if  the  internal  coat  were  wanting.

At  length  having  remov'd  the  upper  part  of  the  cranium  and  dura  mater,
we  faw  the  veffels  of  the  pia  mater,  indeed,  to  be  very  much  diftended  with'
blood  •,  as  we  alfo  did  thofe  very  fmall  veflels,  that  pafs  fo  plentifully  thro'
the  medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain  ;  but  we  could  no- where  find  any  ex-
travafated  blood  •,  notwithftanding  what  ferum  was  contain'd  in  the  lateral'
ventricles,  the  quantity  whereof  was  not  fmall,  we  faw  to  be  bloody  :  and
notwithftanding  in  the  plexus  choroides,  where  they  are  inflefted  in  the  ter-
mination of  their  afcenr,  fmall  hydatids  were  feen  ;  but  particularly  in  one  of
thefe  plexufles.

9.  Thefe  hydatids  we  have  been  wont  to  fee  there  frequently,  and  equally,
in  others  who  have  not  been  carried  off  by  an  apoplexy  :  and  as  to  the  ferum,
h  can  fcarcely  happen,  but  that,  while  we  cut  into  the  brain  ;  whofe  crowded
veflels  are  diftended  with  blood ;  it  muft  appear  bloody,  even  from  a  very
few  drops  of  blood  being  mix'd  therewith.

And  if  you  fliould  choofe  to  fuppofe,  that  this  apoplexy  was  in  part  owing
either  to  the  acrimonious  and  irritating  property  of  the  ferum,  or  to  the  quan-
tity of  it,  though  not  large,  encreafing  the  compreflions  of  the  brain;  ac-
cording to  what  I  have  formerly  written  to  you  (^yin  treating  of  ferous  apo-
plexies ;  I  fliall  not  conteft  your  opinion  :  for  it  is  fometimes  difficult  to  fe-
parate  the  fanguineous  apoplexies  from  the  ferous  ;  and  to  determine,  in  re-
gard to  fome  particular  hiftories,  to  which  fpecies  they  certainly  belong..

Yet  I  would  have  you  previoufly  well  confider  the  conjedures  which  may
be  advanc'd  on  both  fides ;  and  where  the  external  and  internal  vefifels  of
the  cerebrum  are  both  very  greatly  diftended  with  blood,  at  the  fame
time-,  as  in  the  man  in  queftion;  take  care  how  you  too  eafily  deny,  that
the  caufe  is,  in  chief  part,  to  be  deduc'd  from  the  blood.

But  whether  to  that  great  laffitude,  foilovving  the  fatigue  of  a  long  journey
perform'd  at  fuch  a  time  of  year,  any  thing  might  be  contributed  by  the
ccnftitution  of  the  man  ;  which  that  unufual  figure  of  the  heart,  and  that  in-
ternal injury  of  the  aorta,  probably  Ihow  not  to  have  been  the  moft  robuft  ;  I
leave  quite  undetermin'd  :  yet  that  laffitude  diminilhes  the  ftrength  of  the
whole  body,  and  of  the  brain  alfo,  and  its  vefl^els ;  and  therefore  makes  the
brain  more  liable  to  compreflions,  and  the  veflels  to  diftenfions ;  I  have  not
the  leaft  occafion  to  doubt.

('■)  Epift.  4.

10.  A  woman*


Letter  LX. Articles  lo,  ii,  12.  ^^'$

10.  A  woman,  nearly  of  the  fame  age  as  that  man,  being  receiv'd  int&
the  hofpital  not  many  days  after  him,  was  brought  from  thence,  (where  fhc
died)  within  two  days,  into  the  anatomical  theatre.

The  caufe  of  her  death  had  been  an  apoplexy  of  fuch  a  kind,  that,  on
the  fourth  day  from  the  beginnning  thereof,  when  ftie  was  brought  into  the
hofpital,  {he  then,  at  leaft,  retain'd  no  fign  of  any  remaining  power  of  feeling
or  motion  ;  and  fcarcely  open'd  her  eyes,  while  red-hot  plates  of  iron  were
applied  to  the  foles  of  her  feet,  in  order  to  excite  her  ;  but  in  vain  ;  for  fhc
foon  after  (hut  them  again.

The  carcafe,  if  you  excepted  one  leg  that  was  disfigur'd  with  an  ulcer,  had
no  appearance  externally,  that  made  it  unfit  for  the  ufe  of  teaching .-  and
even  internally,  in  thofe  parts  that  I  examin'd,  I  found  very  few  things  dif-
fering from  the  ufual  and  regular  appearance  of  nature.

For  in  the  trunk  of  the  aorta,  where  it  goes  down  through  th«  belly,  were
flight  internal  whitenefTes  in  fome  places  ;  which  were  the  beginnings  of
future  bony  fcales  :  one  of  which,  though  fmall,  was  already  form'd.

The  left  Falloppian  tube  adher'd  to  the  teftis  in  the  middle  of  its  courfe  r
this  teftis  was  but  fmall,  if  compar'd  with  the  right,  and  had  a  few  white
globules  within  •,  in  differing  one  of  which  I  faw  it  to  be  made  up  of  a
compaft  fubftance,  hollow  in  the  center.

But  the  right  teftis,  which,  in  magnitude,  would  have  been  fuitable  even
to  a  younger  fubjeft,  contain'd  no  globules,  and  no  vefides ;  yet  was  of  a
tuberous  furface ;  and  if  you  fix'd  your  eyes  attentively  down,  was  not  with-
out marks  of  fmall  cicatrices.

It  was  alio  obferv'd,  in  the  difleftion  of  this  carcafe,  that  the  membranes
gave  more  refiftance  to  the  fcalpel,  than  they  naturally  do  ■;  although  fat  was
not  wanting.

Finally,  upon  opening  the  cranium,  all  the  veffels  within  this  cavity,  not
excepting  even  the  pkixus  choroides,  were  found  to  be  turgid  with  blood.  But
fetting  afide  a  little  quantity  of  water  in  the  lateral  ventricfes,  I  could  not
find  any  difeas'd  appearance  in  the  cerebrum,  cerebellum,  or  medulla  oblon-
gata, wherefoever  I  cut  into  their  fubftances.

11.  If  you  ftiould  chufe  to  compare  together  all  the  appearances  that  had
been  feen  in  the  living  bodies,  or  in  the  bodies  after  death ;  I  imagine  yow
will  not  very  greatly  be  furpriz'd,  that  this  woman  died  later  than  the  man
of  whom  we  fpoke  before  %  and  ftill  much  later  both  of  them  than  another
man  of  whom  I  fhall  fpeak  immediately.

12.  A  barber  of  five-and-fifty  years  of  age,  whofe  head  was  in  great  mea-
fure  bald;  and  who  drank  to  fo  great  a  degree,  as  to  be  brought  home
drunk,  on  the  eve  of  the  i6th  of  January,  in  the  year  1757,  was  found
dead  the  next  day  in  the  morning,  lying  on  the  ground  betwixt  the  bed  and
the  wall,  near  to  a  brol^en  chamber-pot ;  but  without  any  injury  being  done
to  any  part  of  his  body.

As  1  made  ufe  of  this  body  to  begin  the  public  demonftrations  in  ana^
tomy  that  year,  I  obferv'd  thefe  things  that  were  preternatural.

The  belly  being  open'd,  a  large  ftomach  came  into  fight ;  the  internal
furface  of  which  was  ting'd  with  the  colour  of  wine.  The  omentum  was-
fill'd  with,  a  great  quantity  of  fat,  as  the  external  coat  of  moft  of  the  inteftines-

i  "  W3.S~,


454  BookV.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

was,  and  the  mefentery  alfo ;  in  which  fome  glands  were  of  a  larger  fize
than  that  age  generally  exhibits.

The  bile,  which  was  of  a  yellow  colour  degenerating  into  brown,  had
left,  on  the  internal  furface  of  the  cyft,  many  white  granules  of  fand,  as  it
were  ;  but  luch  as,  when  rubb'd  betwixt  the  fingers,  were  not  at  all
hard.

The  furface  of  the  kidnies,  one  of  which  was  longer  than  the  other,  was
not  without  fome  traces  of  diforder  ;  among  which  was  a  fmall  cavity  under
the  coat,  that  was  full  of  moifture.

The  bladder  was  fo  diftended  with  urine,  that  the  upper  part  of  it  was
higher  than  the  bones  of  the  pubes  ;  and  that  confiderably  too.  And  as  it
is  to  be  luppos'd,  that  it  had  alfo  been  often  immoderately  expanded  in  the
living  body,  fo  it  was  not  furprizing  that  the  form  of  it  was  uncommon  :  for,
although,  at  the  lower  part,  it  was  fomevvhat  broader  than  at  the  upper;
yet  at  firft  fight  it  refembied  a  cylinder,  or  a  prifm,  rather  than  any  other
figure.

The  urethra  was  every-where  white  internally  ;  and  not  only  furnifli'd
with  fewer  and  fmaller  orifices  of  our  canaliculi,  but  moreover  had  the  fe-
minal  caruncle  almoft  obliterated,  as  it  were  ;  fo  that  in  this  urethra  nothing
could  be  clearly  demonftrated :  and  as  the  roftrum  of  the  caput  galinaginis
was  quite  wanting  befides,  it  was  natural  to  fuppofe,  that  neither  the  caruncle,
nor  the  other  part  of  the  urethra,  had  been  formerly  free  from  a  greater
diforder.

The  internal  furface  of  the  great  artery,  where  it  runs  down  upon  the  ver-
tebra of  the  loins,  fhew'd  the  beginnings  of  offification  :  and  the  iliacs  had
bony  lamellse  perfcftly  form'd  ;  which  were  fo  much  the  harder,  the  more
they  approach'd  to  the  lower  parts,  after  being  divided  into  the  external  and
internal  veffels  ;  fo  that  the  crural  arteries,  in  feveral  places,  and  even  when
receiv'd  betwixt  the  condyles  of  the  femur  in  the  ham,  were  hard,  and  rigid:
and  the  arteries  feem'd  to  be  the  more  fubjed  to  this  diforder,  the  farther
they  became  remov'd  from  the  heart.

And  above  the  belly,  at  leaft,  where  the  aorta  fent  forth  the  inferior  inter-
coftals,  appear'd  the  beginnings  of  oflifications ;  but  thefe  were  quite  flight.
Beiides  which  I  obferv'd  no  other  diforders  in  the  thorax,  nor  in  the  reft  of
the  body  ;  if  you  except  what  I  am  about  to  mention.

For  the  upper  part  of  the  cranium,  and  the  external  of  the  meninges,
being  taken  away  -,  both  of  which  parts  were  pretty  thick,  lb  that  the  latter,
where  it  is  interpos'd  betwixt  the  cerebellum  and  the  cerebrum,  refitted  the
fcalpel  more  than  it  generally  does  -,  though  I  examin'd  all  the  appearances,
and  pafs'd  over  none  of  thofe  parts  that  are  within  the  fkull  without  dif-
fedion ;  I  not  only  did  not  find  any  extravafation  of  blood,  or  ferum,  but
not  the  leaft  diforder,  befides  that  which  I  fhall  mention.

That  is  to  fay,  the  veflels  which  pafs  through  the  pia  mater  were  fo  fill'd
with  blood,  and  fo  dilated  thereby,  that  I  never  remember  to  have  feen  them
more  fo.  Thofe  alfo  which  make  up  the  plexus  choroides,  and  which  are
carried  through  the  parietes  of  the  lateral  ventricles,  (where  there  was  a  little
water)  were  diftended  :  and  on  the  left  fide  particularly.

13,  I  would  have  you  compare  this  obfervation  with  that  which  I  made

upon


Letter  LX. Article  14.  45' jr

upon  Peter  Fafolati  (k).  You  will  find  many  circumftances  in  both  of  them,
which  agree  with  one  another ;  and  many,  likewife,  in  the  remarks  I  made
thereon,  in  order  to  explain  it ;  which,  therefore,  I  need  not  repeat  here.
Yet  we  may  add  fome  things  which  are  peculiar  to  this  man.

This  man  had  been  a  drinker,  and  of  courfe  frequently  intoxicated  :  and
how  much  drunkennefs  tends  to  increafe  the  quantity  of  the  blood,  and  to
weaken  the  veffels  which  are  within  the  cranium,  you  eafily  conceive.

Add  to  this  thofe  offifications  in  the  inferior  arteries ;  which,  as  they  pre-
vented the  motion  of  the  blood  downwards,  forc'd  it,  in  like  manner,  to  be
carried  upwards  in  a  greater  quantity.

But  this  alfo  muft  in  particular  be  added,  that  when  the  man  lay  under
the  effects  of  that  laft  very  great  drunkennefs,  and  flept,  a  great  quantity  of
•what  he  had  taken  in  began  to  be  added  to  his  former  quantity  of  blood  ;
particularly  the  wine  ;  and  when  the  bladder  had  receiv'd  fo  much  of  it,  as
not  to  be  able  to  admit  any  more,  and  yet  the  man  ;  in  confequence  of  being
opprefs'd  by  his  drunkennefs  and  fleep  ;  did  not  perceive  the  necefllty  of  un-
loading his  bladder,  by  which  means  he  would  have  prepar'd  a  fredi  receptacle
therein  for  the  remaining  matter  of  urine  ;  which  was  in  the  mean  while
carried  into  the  general  channel  of  the  circulation  ;  when  this,  I  fay,  was
the  ftate  of  the  cafe,  it  muft  have  happen'd,  that  the  veffels  were  more  and
more  diftended,  from  this  retain'd  matter,  and  thole  in  particular  that  are
within  the  fkull,  (as  they  had  already,  for  a  long  time,  been  v/eaken'd)  and
particularly  in  the  pofture  of  lying  down  ;  wherein  they  were  more  fubjedt  to
repletion.

See  how  Lower  (/)  explains,  almoft  in  the  fame  manner,  violent  diforders
of  the  brain,  which  had  occurr'd  to  him,  (and  among  thefe,  in  particular^
the  apoplexy)  that  have  arifen  from  lying  down,  and  flteping,  immediately
after  drinking  largely  •,  and  before  the  greateft  quantity  of  the  liquor,  that
has  been  drunk,  has  been  difcharg'd  by  the  bladder.

14,  I  fuppofe  therefore,  that  the  man  of  whom  I  have  given  the  hiftory,
having  perceiv'd  the  fullnefs  of  his  bladder  when  it  was  too  late  ;  and  having
attempted  to  take  hold  of,  or  rather  having  aftually  laid  hold  of,  the  chamber-
pot, and  endeavour'd  to  difcharge  the  urine  from  his  over-diftended  bladder,
which  is  not  a  very  eafy  talk ;  had  fallen  down  in  a  very  violently  apoplexy,
in  that  very  nifus,  which  retains  a  greater  quantity  of  blood  in  the  veffds  of
the  brain.

For  the  external  and  internal  veflels,  that  are  within  the  TkuII,  might,  at
length,  have  come  to  fuch  a  degree  of  diftention,  as  vehemently  to  comprefs
whatever  is  contain'd  in  the  cranium.

But  becaufe  both  in  thefe  and  other  letters,  tlie  caufe  of  the  apoplexy  has
often  been  deduc'd  from  compreffions  of  this  kind  ;  be  cautious  how  yoii
fufpedl  that  the  experiments  of  the  celebrated  Laghius  (fn)  are  contrary  to
this  explication  ;  in  which  experiments,  by  _  means  of  that  truly  elegant  in-
ftrument,  invented  by  the  very  noble,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  very  ingenious-
count  Gregory  Cafali,  he  fhews  that,  in  dogs,  the  brain  may  be  comprefs'd

■ (I)  Epift.  3.  n,  z6.  (J]  Traa.  de  Coide,,c.  2.  [{m]  De  Senfibilit.  &c.  Serm,  2^

to


45  6  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

to  at  leaft  fix  lines  of  London,  without  any  fign  of  uneafinefs  in  them :  and
indeed,  that  when  they  do  begin  to  complain,  they  foon  after  grow  quiet,
unlefs  the  comprefllon  be  increas'd  :  and  that  they  do  not  fall  down  as
feiz'd  with  an  apoplexy,  betore  the  degree  of  compreffion  amounts  to  about
an  inch.

For  this  compreffion  is  a  very  different  thing  from  what  we  are  now  fpeaking
of  i  fince  the  former  is  applied  only  to  a  part  of  the  brain,  and  that  a  very
fmall  part ;  but  ours,  of  which  the  queftion  is  in  this  man,  is  applied  all
round  about  ;  and  even  internally  in  every  part;  to  the  cerebrum,  the  cere-
bellum, and  the  medulla  oblongata,  at  the  fame  time.

But  if  it  was  not  of  that  kind  in  others  at  any  time  ;  yet  we  have  ftill
added  other  circumftances,  and  have  fuppos'd  it  to  take  place  in  a  cranium
every-where  fhut  up,  at  leaft,  and  refitting;  and  not  open  in  any  part:
although  that  woman,  of  whom  Poupart  prefented  a  memoir  to  the  Royal
Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  («),  had  half  the  fkull  deficient ;  and  yet  when
any-one  touch'd  the  dura  mater  (Tightly  with  the  point  of  his  finger,  fuch
an  uneafinefs  was  brought  on,  that  a  thoufand  little  torches  feem'd  to  be
flying  about  before  her  eyes,  and  fhe  was  oblig'd  to  cry  out  exceedingly.

But  I  would  have  you  confider  thofe  experiments,  as  far  as  the  matter  con-
cerns me ;  and  make  ufe  of  them,  in  order  to  allow,  without  any  furprize
or  admiration,  not  only  other  things,  but  in  particular  this ;  that  the  brain
may  be  capable  of  enduring  a  certain  degree  of  compreffion,  without  any
uneafinefs :  and  that  it  can  accuftom  itfelf  thereto,  when  increas'd  gradually
fo  as  to  be  troublefome ;  provided  it  does  not  increafe  beyond  that  point;
till  at  length  fuch  a  degree  of  preflfure  be  finally  added,  as  muft  necefl*arily
overcome  and  deftroy  the  animal.

15.  Thus  far  (for  other  obfervations,  relative  to  this  difeafe,  it  will  be
better  to  delay  the  defcription  of,  till  we  come  upon  the  fubjeft  of  the  he-
miplexia  (0),  and  the  aphonia  {p) ;  thus  far,  I  fay,  of  the  apoplexy.  From
which  we  fliall  go  on,  prefently,  to  other  diforders  of  the  brain. Farewel.


LETTER  the SIXTY-FIRST

Relates  to  thofe  Deliria  which  happen  without  any

Fever.

1.  PT^H  AT  diforder  of  the  brain,  whereof  I  wrote  to  you  lately,  is  cer-

X tainly  a  violent  one ;  I  mean  the  apoplexy. But  violent  alfo,  and

indeed  ftill  more  pitiable,  is  that  of  which  we  are  now  about  to  fpeak ;  I

(«)  Hift.  A.  1700.  Obf.  Anat.  zo.  («)  Epift.  6z.  n.  7.  9.  11.  (/)  Epift.  63.  n.  13.

mean


.Letter  LXI. Articles  2,  3.  4j-7

mean  madnefs,  or  delirium  without  a  fever. I  have  as  yet  three  difleilions
relative  thereto.

2.  A  woman  afFe£ted  in  her  fenfes,  to  all  appearance  of  a  middle  age,  after
various  misfortunes,  died  in  this  hofpital ;  and  in  the  beginning  of  the  year
1746.

Left  I  fhould  be  in  great  ftreights  to  get  bodies,  in  order  to  finilh  the  ana-
tomical demonftrations  to  the  pupils  there ;  I  enquir'd  whether  this  body
would  be  proper  for  that  purpofe.

Having  heard  that,  by  reafon  of  its  being  greatly  emaciated,  and,  in  like
manner,  by  reafon  of  a  very  large  and  fcetid  gangrene  on  the  os  facrum,
the  thorax  and  the  head  were  the  only  parts  proper  for  my  intentions ;  I  or-
der'd  all  the  others  to  be  buried,  and  only  the  head,  together  with  the  thorax,
if  this  were  without  any  purulency,  which  the  extremely  emaciated  ftate  made
me  fufpeft  the  exiftence  of,  to  be  preferv'd.

The  thorax  therefore  being  open'd,  and  my  fufpicion  appearing  not  to  be
a  vain  one ;  fince  one  lobe  of  the  lungs  was,  in  great  meafure,  full  of  pus ;
1  order'd  thefe  vifcera  likewife  to  be  buried ;  and  began  the  dilTedlion  of  the
head.

The  cranium  being  open'd,  this  one  thing  was  obferv'd  in  the  meninges ;
that  the  pia  mater,  though  but  (lightly  laid  hold  of,  and  drawn,  very  eafily
follow'd,  and  came  out  from  the  convolutions  of  the  brain.

There  was  no  doubt,  then,  but  water  was  beneath ;  a  quantity  of  which
was  found  even  in  the  ventricles  :  but  a  larger  quantity^had  flow'd  out  from
the  tube  of  the  vertebras.  And  yet  the  fubftances  both  of  the  cerebrum
and  cerebellum  were,  beyond  the  leaft  difpute,  more  hard  than  they  ufually
are.

The  plexus  choroides  I  indeed  faw  to  be  difcolour'd  ;  but  where  they  lie
upon  the  chink,  or  fifTure,  of  the  third  ventricle,  they  were  fo  firmly  con-
join'd,  by  their  fmall  vefTels,  with  its  edges,  that  the  fifTure  did  not  open
at  all,  till  after  thofe  veflels  were  accurately  difunited.

Befides  thefe  things,  nothing  worthy  of  remark  occurr'd,  except  the  pineal
gland;  which  feem'd  to  be  larger  than  ufual,  and  annex'd  to  its  feat  by
longer  medullary  radicles  :  and  at  the  fame  time  was  more  of  a  mucous
nature  than  ufual.

3.  As  I  have^  treated  of  perfons  afFefted  in  their  fenfes  heretofore,  you
may  remember  what  difeafes  I  took  notice  of  (a)  in  them,  as  obferv'd  by
others,  and  particularly  by  me,  in  relation  to  the  pineal  gland :  and  thefe  I
have  not  been  filent  upon  even  in  another  letter  {!>).

Since  that  time  has  come  out  the  Prqlujio  (r)  of  Juftus  Godofredus  Gunzius,
which  I  could  wifh  had  been  then  publifh'd.

For  as  he  was  a  man  of  great  erudition,  he  has  quoted  moft  of  thofe  au-
thors who  have  made  mention  of  the  diforders  of  this  gland  ;  and  by  that
means  would  have  lelTen'd  my  labour,  fuch  as  it  was,  in  producing  thefe
authors  :  and  that  either  as  to  what  relates  to  perfons  that  are  infane,  .or  as

[a)  Epift.  8.  n.  14.  &  16.  (0  De  Lapillis  Gland.  Pineal,  in  quinque

\b)  Ut  59.  n.  15.  mente  alienat.  invent.

Vot.  riT.  N  n  n  tQ


458 Book  V,  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

to  what,  in  general,  relares  to  thofe  who  have  had  little  ftones,  or  particles
of  fand,  in  this  gland  (i).

Neverthelefs  that  has  happen'd,  which  is  very  eafy  in  affairs  of  this  kind  ;  I
mean,  that  one  of  thofe  who  are  mention'd  by  me,  has  efcap'd  him  ;  and,
on  the  other  hand,  that  feme  of  thofe  quoted  by  him,  have  efcap'd  me ;  as
in  general  I  am  not  wont  to  mention  any  others,  but  thofe  that  occur  to  me
while  I  am  writing.

And  to  this  1  may  add  another  reafon,  why  I  am  not  very  forry  for  havinw
undertaken  that  labour  ;  becaufe  from  thence,  join'd  with  my  obfervations,
which  I  have  given  at  the  fame  time,  or  feparately,  it  is  eaiy  to  perceive,
not  only  that  it  has  not  happen'd  to  others,  as  it  has  happen'd  to  a  celebrated
anatomift  at  prefent  living,  "  That  in  all  the  carcafes  of  adult  men,  who
"  died  of  any  difeafe  whatever,"  they  found  the  pineal  gland  "  fill'd  with  a
"  great  number  of  fandy  particles  ;"  but  this  alfo,  that  there  is  no  longer
any  room  to  hope,  that,  from  the  foundnefs  of  this  gland  in  thofe  who  were
not  unfound  In  their  minds,  or  from  the  difeafes  of  it  in  thofe  who  were,
the  opinion  of  Des  Cartes,  in  regard  to  the  feat  of  the  foul,  fhould  be
confirm'd.

At  leaft,  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  diforders  feen  in  that  gland»  or  about
that  gland,  thirteen  times.  And  you  will  fee,  that  in  nine  of  thefe  in-
llances  (e),  it  was  without  madnefs ;  or  any  alienation  of  the  mind.  On  the
contrary,  you  will  fee  that  there  was  an  affeftion  of  this  kind  in  others  (/),
in  whom  this  gland  had  no  diforder  j  as  you  will  gather  from  my  filence  on
that  head.

For  almoft  always,  when  I  diflc6t  a  brain  ;  and  not  only  in  the  bodies  of
infane  perfons  ;  I  make  a  pradice  of  infpefting  the  pineal  gland  attentively,
both  within  and  without :  and  if  there  be  any-thing  in  it  worthy  of  remark,
to  transfer  it  into  my  common-place-book  j  and  from  thence  into  my  de-
fcriptions.

4.  And  this  my  almoft  univerfal  cuftom  fufEciently  Ihews,  that  the  laudable
exhortations  of  Gunzius  were  not  waited  for  by  me ;  but  that  long  before,
I  had  not  neglected  to  remark,  in  my  obfervations,  not  only  what  was  na-
tural in  this  gland,  but  what  was  preternatural  therein  ;  and,  at  the  fame
time,  as  you  very  well  know,  fD  mark  down  the  appearances  in  the  other
parts  of  the  brain,  and  in  the  remaining  parts  of  the  body  :  and  not  thefe
alone,  but  what  had  preceded  in  the  living  bodies,  as  far  as  I  could  fee,  or
be  inform'd  ;  although,  when  I  happen'd  to  have  occafion  to  mention  this
gland,  1  have  not  been  willing  to  touch  upon  any  other  things,  than  thofe
which  were  fufficient  for  our  purpofe  :  nor  do  I  as  yet  repent,  that  for  thofe
reafons ;  which  whether  he  has  invalidated  altogether,  is  not  the  place  to
determine  here  ;  I  have  fpoken  of  the  nature  of  this  gland  in  fuch  a  manner,
as  to  feem  doubtful,  whether  it  was  not,  in  fome  reipefts,  different  from  the
other  part  of  the  fubftance  of  the  brain.

(d)  Epift.  5.  n.  12.  VI.  n.  iz.  VII.  n.  15. X.  n.  17. XI.  n.  u.

(0  Epift.  1.  n.  14. III.  n.  14.  V.  n.  11. XIV.  n.  35. XXI.  n.  24.

(/)  Epift,  8.  n.  4.  8.  1 1.
6

There


Letter  LXI. Article  s-  4j^9

There  is,  certainly,  no  other  part  in  tliis  whole  fiibftance,  which  is  fo  fre-
quently, as  that  gland,  fiibjeft  to  particular  diforders ;  and  efpecially,  tha^
contains  Tandy  particles  and  ftony  concretions  fo  often.  -

And  although  you  have  heard  above,  that  this  diforder  has  been  found
with  madnefs,  and  without  it  alfo ;  yet  I  would  not  have  you  forget,  that
there  is  not  any  one  diforder,  wherewith  it  is  fo  frequently  found  to  be  join'd,
as  with  madnefs.

And  if  the  obfervations,  which  I  have  given  heretofore,  and  pointed
out  (g),  fhould  happen  not  to  be  fufficient  to  demonllrate  this  circumftance  j
yet  there  are  ftill  others  in  Gunzius,  which  you  may  add.

I  do  not  fpeak  of  thofe  wherein  he  conjectures,  that  there  was  an  alienation
of  mind,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  leave  you  at  liberty  to  deny  it,  if  you
think  proper.

But  I  fpeak  of  others,  in  which  there  was  an  evident  and  real  madnefs  ;
and  thefe  either  taken  from  authors  that  he  has  quoted,  or  made  by  himfelf :
and  I  fpeak  of  the  latter  in  particular,  fince  they  are  taken  with  fuch  accu-
racy, as  to  make  them  worthy,  if  any  others  are,  of  being  added  to  the  Se-
pulchretum.

And  if  you  read  thefe  obfervations  over,  I  would  have  you,  among  other
things,  obferve  that  the  ftony  concretions,  which  he  found  in  tlie  pineal
gland,  were  either  yellow,  or  approaching  to  yellow  :  and  then  obferve  what
other  diforders,  which  I  am  prefently  to  take  notice  of  alfo,  were  feen  by  the
fame  author;  not  only  in  that  gland,  but  in  the  brain  of  infane  perfons  in
general ;  as  you  have  feen  of  what  nature  thefe  were  in  the  woman  in  queftion,
and  will  fee  below  (h)  in  another.

5.  A  man,  about  forty  years  of  age,  from  the  time  of  being  a  rower  in
the  gallies,  became  at  firft  hypochondriac,  and  after  that  mad :  but  his  madnefs
v/as  of  a  joyful  kind:  in  this  ftate  he  continu'd  ten  years;  when,  at  length,
being  fqmewhat  fwell'-d  in  his  whole  body  from  a  cachexy,  and  having  a
difficult  refpiration,  he  died  in  the  hofpital  about  the  firft  days  of  January,
in  the  year  1750.  In  his  body  were  the  following  things  worthy  of  re-
mark.

The  thorax  contain'd  a  great  quantity  of  water :  and  fome  part  of  the
lungs  was  indurated.

"When  the  head  was  cut  off,  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  water  flow'd  out  of
the  cranium  :  and  this  they  obferv'd  when  they  cut  into  it,  and,  in  like
manner,  when  they  took  out  the  brain.  Which  I,  for  certain  reafons,  had
not  in  my  power  to  difieft,  till  the  third  or  fourth  day  after  it  had  been
taken  out,  as  I  likewife  could  not  at  all  examine  the  parts  contain'd  in  the
belly.

In  examining  the  brain,  therefore,  with  accuracy  ;  if  I  omit  the  fmallnefs
of  the  pineal  gland,  which  is  a  doubtful  circumftance ;  I  found  no  other
things  that  relate  hereto,  except  that  the  medullary  fubftance  of  both  he-
mifpheres  was  fomewhat  harder  than  ufual ;  and  that  the  traft,  which  is
fomewhat  prominent  through  the  middle  and  upper  furfaces  of  the  corpus

(g)  Epift.  8.  n.  16.  {i)  N.  7.

N  n  n  2  ,  callofum


460 Book  V.  Byway  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

callofiim  longitudinally,  was  not  fingle  only,  from the  beginning  quite  to
the  end,  but  in  one  place  double.

6.  In  regard  to  the  hardnefs,  we  will  confider  that  afterwards.  Now  let
us  confider  what  relates  to  the  corpus  callofum.

As  that  celebrated  man  Joannes  Fantonus ;  to  whom  Lancifi  wrote  his
diflertation  upon  the  feat  of  the  anima  cogitans,  or  foul,  in  the  corpus  cal-
lofum •,  had  feen  in  a  certain  man  (z')»  who  was  not  diforder'd  in  his  fenfes,
the  pineal  gland  "  three  times  as  thick  as  ufual ;"  fo  he  alfo  faw  another
man(i)j  in  whofe  corpus  callofum  he  found  a  hard  tumour  bigger  than  a
walnut ;  troubled  with  an  obftinate  cephaloea  in  the  crown  of  the  head,  and
with  epileptic  attacks  :  but  did  not  obferve  him  to  utter  any  abfurd  things
till  the  lad  months  of  his  life,  and  even  then  not  always,  but  only  fre-
quently ;  and  that  merely  when  the  pain  in  his  head  was  very  violent.

And  I  have  obferv'd  many  appearances  of  lefs  confequence  in  that  fatne
corpus  callofum.  For  inftcad  of  that  traft  whereof  I  fpoke  laft,  which  is
in  fome  fingle  and  fimple,  and  in  others  double ;  fo  that  Lancifi  call'd  the
double  appearance  7tervu:i  longitudinales,  as  I  have  taken  notice  of  hereto--
fore  (/) ;  I  have  met  with  two  fulci,  and  thofe  of  a  confiderable  depth,  in
the  body  of  an  infane  perfon  (m).

And  you  will  fee  that  Gunzius  {n)  had  obferv'd,  not  only  the  nervuli  of
Lancifi  in  another  perfon,  but  a  fulcus,  or  furrow  alfo,  "  proceeding  on  in
"  a  winding  courfe,  and  feeming  to  be  defedive,  as  it  were,  in  fome
"  places."

And  Lancifi  himfelf  had  obferv'd  thofe  nervuli,  in  an  idiot,  not  to  have
been  "  parallel  to  one  another,  in  the  manner  they  generally  are."

Shall  we  then  allow  the  caufe  of  infanity  of  mind  to  confift  in  things  of
this  kind  ?

I  have  not  now  that  reafon  for  doubting,  which  1  had,  from  a  frequent
fufpicion  that  thefe  trails,  and  fulci,  in  thofe  parts,  are  not  form'd  by  nature
for  the  fake  of  any  utility  or  advantage  ;  but  either  from  the  compreffions
of  both  hemifpheres  of  the  cerebrum  -,  where  the  right  and  the  left,  coming
rear  to  each  other,  terminate  in  the  lower  border,  and  change  the  cortical
fubftance  into  that  medullary  part  which  lies  like  a  vaulted  roof-,  as  I  fliall
Ihew  very  clearly  in  another  place  ;  upon  the  right  and  left  fide  of  the  cor-
pus callofum  i  or,  as  I  fee  it  has  lately  come  into  the  mind  of  a  very  inge-
nious man,  that  they  are  owing  to  the  pulfations  of  the  arteries,  which  lie
longitudinally,  in  like  manner,  upon  the  middle  of  the  fame  corpus  cal-
lofum.

For  both  thefe  fufpicions  feem  to  be  invalidated,  by  thofe  lower  and  more
(lender  parallel  tradls,  which  pafs  on  one  fide,  and  on  the  other,  to  the  middle
of  the  fame  furface  ;  the  conformation  of  which  tradts  cannot  be  accounted
for  from  the  caufes  I  fufpeflied.

And  indeed,  although  both  the  fufpicions,  and  particularly  the  fecond,
fliould  fi:and  good ;  and  any  perfon  fliould  fuppofe  himfelf  at  liberty  to  con-

(0  De  Obf.  Med.  &  Anat.  Epift.  8.  n.  3.  («>)  Ibid.

\k)  Epift.  5.  (")  Proluf.  fupra  ad  n.  3.  cit.

(/)  Epift.  8.  n.  6,

jefture


Letter  LXI. Articles  7,  8.  461

jefture  a  different  and  noxious  internal  conftitution  of  the  corpus  callofum,
from  a  different  courfe  of  the  arteries ;  yet  how  could  he,  by  thefe
means, explain  madnefs,  which  is not  innate,  nor  congenial, but  adven-


titious


My  reafon  for  doubting,  therefore,  is  taken  ./rom  other  confiderations ;
that  is  to  fay,  from  obferving,  not  only  that  thofe  irregular  conformations
of  the  furface  of  the  corpus  callofum  are  very  feldom  found  in  the  bodies  of
infane  perfons,  but  alfo  that  they  have  been  feen  by  me  in  many  bodies,  in
which,  when  living,  there  had  been  a  perfedt  fanity  of  mind.

As,  therefore,  I  judge  that  thefe  things  deferve  farther  confideration,  I
will  pafs  on  to  that  appearance  which  always,  or  at  leaft  almoft  always,  has
occurr'd  to  me  in  the  brain  of  infane  perfons  ;  and  which  was  remark'd  even
in  the  two  obfervations  in  queftion.

7.  A  woman,  of  more  than  thirty  years  of  age,  who,  from  her  very  birth,
had  been  infane  ;  at  laft  taking  a  refolution  not  to  ear,  nor  to  drink,  had  died
in  the  hofpital,  at  that  time  in  which  it  was  my  cuftom  to  purfue,  in  that
place,  the  anatomical  exercitations  that  had  been  a  little  while  intermitted  j
that  is,  about  the  beginning  of  January  in  the  year  1757.

In  examining  the  parts  of  the  belly  -,  for  thofe  which  belong  to  the  thorax
I  had  previoufly  dem'onftrated  from  another  body  ;  nothing  feem'd  more
furprizing,  than  that  a  woman,  who  was  yet  in  the  prime  of  her  life,  and  an
idiot,  fhould  have,  to  all  appearance,  preferv'd  her  virginity.

For  at  the  orifice  of  the  vagina,  which  was  narrow  as  in  a  virgin,  the  ring
of  the  hymen  was  not  wanting :  nor  had  it  any  rupture  ;  although  it  had  a
broad  foramen,  as  it  generally  has  in  thofe  of  a  more  mature  age.  But  I  was
the  more  doubtful  upon  this  fubjecl,  when  I  faw  the  vagina  to  be  extremely
fmooth  in  its  whole  furface,  excepting  a  very  few  rugse  at  the  lower
part.

The  orifice  of  "Ehe  uterus  and  the  uterus  itfelf  were  found ;  and  in  the
ftate  that  was  to  be  expedted  in  a  virgin.  Neither  of  the  tubes  gave  paffage
to  a  flender  probe  introduc'd  by  the  larger  orifice  :  or,  at  leaft,  not  farther
than  to  one  half  their  length.  Both  the  teftes  were  pretty  hard,  white,  and
of  an  unequal  furface-,  having  no  veficle  within.

But  when  I  cut  into,  and  examin'd  with  attention,  all  the  parts  compre-
hended in  the  cranium,  I  found  them  all  in  a  natural  ftate.  And  if  you  afk
particularly  in  regard  to  the  corpus  callofum,  and  the  pineal  gland  -,  in  the
former  was  one  fimple  traft ;  the  latter  was  fomewhat  large  indeed,  and
from  a  brown  colour  almoft  yellow  as  it  were.

One  thing  only,  therefore,  was  worthy  of  particular  obfervation  :  I  mean,
that  wherever  I  cut  into  the  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum,  and  cerebellum,  I
found  it  to  be  evidently  harder  than  ufual.

;  8.  For  this  was  the  very  circumftance  which  I  faid  was  in  the  two  obfer-
vations in  queftion  ;  and  even  in  almoft  all  the  others  that  1  have  made,  re-
lative to  the  diffccStion  of  perfons  affeded  in  their  fenfes.

Turn  back  to  my  eighth  letter  (0),  you  will  fee  that  in  all  the  bodies  of
infane  perfons,  which  I  had  difleded  to  that  time,  the  appearance  was  al-

(")  n.  14.

•ways


462 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

ways  the  fame.  And  in  what  bodies  this  circumftance  occurr'd  to  others,
you  will  find  in  the  fame  place  (/>).

And  you  may  now  add  Gunzius  (q),  who  faw  the  brain  "  dry  and  com-
"  pad"  in  two  bodies,  andoffuch  "  a  firninefs,"  that  he  could  not  con-
iider  it  as  very  found.

Yet  it  certainly  did  not  happen  to  him,  nor  yet  to  thofe  others,  as  far  as  I
know,  as  it  had  happen'd  to  me  ;  I  mean,  that  in  diffedling  the  bodies  of
many  maniacs,  tbey  found  the  brain  very  hard  in  them  all.

But  it  has,  at  length,  happen'd  to  me  ;  as  you  will  read  in  the  fifty-ninth
letter  (r)  ;  that  in  the  body  of  a  man,  who  had  labour'd  under  a  kind  of
melancholic  delirium,  I  found  the  brain  very  lax:  perhaps  becaufe  the  deli-
rium had  been  very  flight;  or  becaufe  it  was  now  cur'd:  although  it  is  of
very  little  confequence  to  me,  from  which  of  thefe  caufes  it  was,  or  whether
from  any  other  -,  as  I  did  not  fcruple  to  declare  (s)  who  had  feen  the  brain  lax
in  maniacs,  and  did  not  attempt  to  conceal  (/)  that  it  may  be  hard  without
madnefs,  in  the  place  where  I  exprefsly  added  this  remark,  that  the  very
frequent  oblervation  of  a  hardiiefs  in  the  brain,  in  this  kind  of  difeafe,  is  not
to  be  neglected  indeed  ;  but  yet,  what  I  now  confirm,  that  it  did  not  feem
as  if  this  were  to  be  principally  regarded.

And  it  will  be  thought,  that  this  is  to  be  fo  much  the  lefs  regarded,  if  any
perfons ;  following  the  opinion  of  a  learned  man,  who  choofes  to  deduce  the
caufe  of  madnefs  from  the  blood  being  become  very  thick  and  vifcid,  and
circulating  very  flowly,  for  that  reafon,  through  the  fmall  internal  arteries
of  the  brain,  diftending  them,  and  by  the  diftenfion  thereof,  compreffing
the  contiguous  medullary  fubdance,  and  by  that  means  rendering  it  lefs  fie
to  perform  its  ufual  offices  ;  if  any  perfons,  I  fay,  following  this  opinion,
fhall  add  that  the  fubftance  of  the  brain,  when  prcfs'd  by  the  diftention  of
the  fmall  arteries,  is,  by  thefe  means,  compared  together  and  conftipated,
and  confequently  becomes  harden'd  ;  but  that  the  caufe  of  madnefs  is  to  be
deduc'd  from  the  internal  difpofition  of  that  fubftance  being  chang'd,  in  fome
way  or  other ;  and  not  from  the  hardnefs  which  accidentally  accompanies
this  change.

However,  if  you  Ihould  wifli  to  judge,  from  my  obfervations,  whether,
in  the  brain  of  infane  perfons,  the  veflels  are  fo  frequently  found  to  be  im-
moderately diftended  with  blood,  as  that  hardnefs  is  found  ;  read  the  obfer-
vations once  more  :  and  fince  other  learned  men  are  not  wanting,  who  think,
that  madnefs  may  be  owing  to  polypi  form'd  within  the  finuffes  of  the  brain,
and  produce,  with  that  view,  two  or  three  difleftions  of  the  brain  and  vifcera
of  maniacal  perfons  ;  I  would  have  you  confider  thefe  diffeflions,  as  fuch
whereby  you  may  encreafe  the  number  of  obfervations  relative  to  this  fub-
jedt :  but  in  regard  to  polypi,  I  would  not  fo  much  as  wifti  you  to  enquire,
whether  I  have  ever  met  with  them  in  the  finufles  of  maniacal  perfons,  as  to
call  to  mind  thofe  things  that  you  have  already  receiv'd  from  me  («),  in  re-

(p)  n.  17.  (0  Epift.  8.  n.  18.

{g)  Proluf.  fupra  cit.  (/) Ibid.

(r)  n.  15.  li()  Epift.  24.

fped


Letter  LXI. Article  9.  463

fpeft  to  polypi  not  being  to  be  allow'd  of,  except  in  a  dying  or  a  dead
body.

But  now  let  us  go  on  to  other  things.

9.  Though  all  hydrophobic  perfons  are  not  delirious,  as  has  been  fhown  in
the  eighth  letter  (x)  -,  yet,  in  that  letter,  left  I  fliould  recede  from  the  order  of
the  Sepulchretum,  I  have  fpcken  of  hydrophobic  patients  after  maniacs.

We  will  do  the  fame  thing  in  this  letter.  And  as,  in  this  interval  of  time,
it  has  not  happen'd  that  I  had  any  opportunity  of  diffedling  the  bodies  of
patients  of  this  kind ;  I  will  make  mention  of  thofe  obfervations,  of  other
authors,  on  thefe  bodies,  which  were  not  then  extant.

And  I  could  wilh  they  had  given  them  in  full :  for  though  the  intention
of  fome  was  fo  to  do,  yet  different  caufes  interven'd  to  different  perfons.

And  indeed  that  illuftrious  man  Senac  (j)  was  prevented,  by  the  very  in-
tention of  his  writing,  from  faying  more  than  this  ;  that  he  had  feen  the  pe-
ricardium fo  conftricled,  and  annex'd,  to  the  furface  of  the  heart;  in  a  man
who  died  of  dog-madnefs ;  that  it  could  not  be  feparated  therefrom.

And  Alexander  Bruce,  in  a  differtation  publifh'd  at  Edinburgh  (z),  in  the
year  1755,  relating  an  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Rutherfoerd,  made  upon
a  hydrophobic  patient,  whilft  living  and  after  death  •,  which  patient  had  been
in  the  hofpital  there -,  after  having  mention'd  other  appearances;  and  among
thefe  the  great  diftention  of  the  large  inteftines  with  air,  a  flight  inflamma-
tion of  the  ileum,  with  lividnefs  here  and  there,  as  alfo  a  difeafe  of  a  portion
of  the  liver,  and  the  circumftance  of  this  vifcus  being  forc'd  out  of  its  feat,
together  with  the  reft  of  the  vifcera,  but  nothing  unufual  in  the  thorax  ;
when  you  expedt  to  hear  what  was  the  ftate  of  the  brain,  the  larynx,  and  the
pharynx,  fays  nothing  more  than  this :  that  the  infpeftion  of  thefe  parts  was
prevented  by  the  relaiions.

And  for  the  fame  reafon,  probably,  I  fliould  fuppofe  it  to  have  happen'd,
that  Morando  Morandi  (a),  a  man  whofe  untimely  death  I  cannot  but  la-
ment, wrote  nothing  upon  thefe  three  parts,  when  he  publifh'd,  in  that  very
year,  fome  of  his  diffeftions  of  perfons  who  died  of  the  fame  difeafe.

For  in  one  of  them  I  fee  nothing  taken  notice  of,  but  that  fome  of  the
external  and  internal  mufcles  of  the  thorax  were  inflam'd;  and  even  very
near  to  a  gangrene,  and  to  a  putrefaction  as  it  were.

Yet  in  two  he  has  given  no  hint  upon  the  fubjeft  of  thefe  mufcles :  but
has  faid  that  the  ftomach  and  inteftines  were  affeded  with  a  gangrene,  and
daub'd  over  with  a  black  and  foetid  bile  ;  that  the  bladder,  and  the  corpora
cavernofa  penis,  were  feiz'd  with  an  inflammation  ;  that  of  the  membranes
many  were  dry  and  tcnfe  ;  and  many  others  clofely  cohered  with  the  vifcera,
as  in  a  peripneumony  ;  being  all  nearly  depriv'd  of  their  fat,  and  the  omen-
tum almoft  dried  up  ;  finally,  that  the  veins  were  quite  full  of  the  moft  fluid
blood  :  but  that  the  arteries  were  empty,  contrary  to  what  others  ;  which  is
a  circumftance  he  was  by  no  means  ignorant  of ;  though  not  all,  had  feen  in
hydrophobic  patients.

{x)  n.  19.  &  22.  {a) Delia Cura  prefervat. della Rabbia

("yj  Traite  du  Ccsur.  1.  2.  ch.  I.  n.  i.  Canina.


(z)  De  Hydrophobia.


10.  And


464 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

10.  And  thefe  obfervations,  if  you  confider  svhat  is  deficient  in  each  of
them,  will  immediately  (how,  that  hereby  is  not  encress'd  the  number  of
thole  which  1  complain'd,  in  tlie  eighth  letter  (Z*),  were  as  yet  too  few.

But  if  you  confider  what  each  of  them  propol'es,  as  being  found  even  in
fome  pans  of  the  body  only  ;  and  compare  ic  with  the  obfervations  of  every
kind  -,  the  united  fum  of  which  I  have  referr'd  to  diftinttly,  and  in  order,  in
that  very  fame  letter  (c)  ;  you  will  at  leaft  fee,  that  they  will  be  ufeful  to  con-
firm the  great  variety,  which  I  there  fliow'd  to  exift,  among  hydrophobic
patients  :  nor  is  it  to  be  wonder'd  ar,  fince  even  thefe  few  which  I  have  at
prefent  added,  are  fo  difterent  from  each  other,  that  what  circumftances
ibme  have,  others  have  not  -,  or  at  leafl:  not  entirely.

And  the  more  1  fee  thofe  varieties  confirm'd  by  new  obfervations,  the
more  clearly  I  perceive,  that  no  equally  probable  conjedure,  upon  the  caufe
of  the  hydrophobia,  can  be  taken  from  any  other  iburce,  but  that  from
•whence  1  took  it,  in  conjundion  with  the  mod  eminent  men  (i).

For  how,  by  way  of  example,  can  I  account  for  the  difficulty  of  fwallow-
Ing  water,  which  is  common  to  all,  from  the  diforder  of  the  blood;  which  I
know  has  been  fcen  to  be  different  in  difll;rent  perfons  ?  And  indeed  the
blood  of  that  hydrophobic  patient,  which  the  Edinburgh  differtation  {e)  men-
tions, when  taken  from  the  veins,  "  was  good  through  the  whole  courfe  of
"  the  difeafe."

But  if  I  fupecl  fome  peculiar  change  to  be  brought  on  by  this  poifon,  in
the  brain  and  the  nerves ;  from  whence  they  may  be  eafily  conftrain'd  to
excite  external  or  internal  convulfions ;  fcarcely  any  thing  will  prevent  me
from  explaining  therefrom,  that  difficulty  of  fwallowing  which  is  common  to
all ;  and  that  great  number  of  varieties  in  the  living  and  dead  bodies,  ac-
cordino-  to  the  various  difpofition  of  various  perfons:  but  if  you  think  that
even  then  I  have  not  done  enough,  you  may  read  the  differtation  I  have
commended,  which  not  only  follows  the  fame  conjefture,  but  thereby  ex-
plains every  appearance  in  the  living  and  dead  body ;  particularly  in  the
living  body  -,  fufficiently  and  at  large.

II.  You  fee  how  far  I  fufpedt  the  brain  to  be  affeded,  and  that  by  the
force  of  this  poifon  too  ;  left  you  ftiould  fuppofe  me  to  be  of  the  opinion  of
thofe  perfons,  who  have  attributed  all  this  difeafe  to  the  force  of  the  imagi-
nation merely.

I  confefs  however,  that  I  do  not  take  upon  me  to  deny,  but  it  may  be
encreas'd  by  fear,  and  a  conception  of  danger.  Yet  I  do  not  think  that  fear
alone  is  fufficient  to  produce  it.

For  how  could  it  be  brought  on  by  fear,  in  many  perfons  (whofe  cafes  I
{hall  take  notice  of  a  little  below  (/)  ),  who  being  ignorant  that  the  animal,
whereby  they  had  been  bitten,  was  mad,  thought  of  every  thing  but  this;
and  yet  fiiow'd  that  they  were  already  affefted  with  a  difeafe  of  which  they
had  not  the  leaft  fufpicion  :  and  that  by  very  manifefl,  and  foon  after  fatal,
fymptoms.

The  poifon,  therefore,  which  is  admitted ;  in  whatfoever  manner  it  may

{h)  n.  32  in.  fin.  («)  <upra  ad  n.  9.  cit.

(c)  n.  30.  31. {d)  n.  32.  (jrj  n.  15.

be


Letter  LXI. Article  12.  465

be  fuppos'd  to  aft  ;  muft  be  acknowledg'd  to  be  the  caufe  of  the  difeafe.
And  indeed  the  more  latently  and  infiduoufly  this  poifon  preferves  its  force,
and  at  length  brings  it  into  aftion,  the  more  cautious  ought  we  to  be  in  pre-
venting its  admiffion  ;  and  if  it  has  been  accidentally  admitted  into  the  body,
the  more  diligent  ought  we  to  be  in  counterafling  its  efficacy ;  before  it  can
exert  its  pernicious  qualities.

If,  therefore,  it  fhould  at  any  time  be  a  queftion,  \vhether  the  flelh  of  an
animal  afFefted  v/ith  canine  madnefs,  can  affeft  therewith  the  perfons  who
eat  it ;  I  fflould  be  lefs  influenc'd  by  the  example  of  Scaramucci  (g) ;
wherein  the  flefli  of  a  fow,  which  had  been  bitten  by  a  mad  dog,  was  eaten
without  occafioning  any  injury,  although  it  were  certain  that  this  .madnefs
was  already  manifeft  in  that  fow  ;  I  fhould  be  lefs  influenc'd,  I  fay,  by  thefe
examples,  than  by  thofe  of  a  contrary  nature ;  and  particularly  that  of
Bauhin  (h)  -,  to  which  may,  moreover,  be  added,  the  obfervation  of  Lem-
mery  (z),  of  a  dog  becoming  mad,  by  eating  blood  which  had  been  drawn
from  a  patient  affefted  with  the  hydrophobia  :  nor  does  it  make  the  matter
very  different,  that  the  blood  was  not  boil'd,  as  flelh  generally  is  ;  fince  a
very  different,  and  even  extreme,  force  of  fire  is  requir'd,  in  order  to  make
us  fuppofe,  that  a  virus,  which  adheres  very  clofely  and  obftinately,  can  be
entirely  driven  away.

And  although  the  obfervations  which  are  produc'd  from  Zacutus  (k),  of
the  blood  of  mad  dogs  adhering  in  fuch  a  manner  to  a  fvvord  wherewith
they  had  been  ftabb'd,  and  preferving  its  poifon  to  fuch  a  degree,  that,
being  introduc'd  from  thence  into  wounds,  even  many  years  after,  it  brought
on  canine  madnefs  ;  although,  1  fay,  thefe  obfervations  are  too  much  of  the  .
marvellous  kind  to  be  readily  believ'd  by  every  one ;  yet  I  think,  if  I  am
not  miftaken,  I  have  read  a  more  credible  one  in  the  work  of  the  celebrated
Brogianus  (/)  ;  and  would  not  deny  but  it  is  neceffary  for  thofe  who  diffedl
dead  bodies,  to  be  frequently  admonifti'd,  that  they  be  very  attentively  cau-
tious in  the  examination  of  hydrophobic  bodies  -,  and  that  they  do  not  acci-
dentally prick,  or  cut,  their  fingers;  nor  rafhly  prefume  to  daub  over  their
hands,  if  they  happen  to  be  affefted  with  little  ulcers,  with  the  blood,  or
any  other  juice,  of  thefe  bodies.

12.  But  in  regard  to  thefe,  and  other  cautions  againft  admitting  fo  dread-
ful a  poifon  ;  if  we  are  to  be  faulty  on  one  fide,  none  will  deny  that  it  is  better
to  be  over-cautious,  than  but  little  fo  ;  and  efpecially  one  who  confiders  how
difficult  an  undertaking  it  is,  and  how  uncertain  in  its  event,  to  overcome
this  poifon,  after  it  has  been  admitted,  before  it  betray  itfelf  by  the  dread
of  water,  and  the  difficulty  of  drinking  thereof.

For  when  the  matter  is  fo  far  advanc'd,  fo  rare  are  the  fuccefsful,  ftable,
perfedt,  and  certain  cures,  that  to  thofe  who  confider  what  generally  hap-

{g)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3.  A.  9.  &  10.  in  (/)  Hift.  de  1' Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1707.
Append,  fub  n.  VI.  Obf.  Anat.  i.

{h)  apud  Stalpart. Cent.  I.  Obf.  100.  in (k)  apud  Stalpart.  Scho!.  cit.
Schol.  baud  procul  a  fine,  (/)  De  Veneno  Animant.  P.  2.


Vol.  III.  O  0  o


pen  9%


4*5  6 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

pens,  that  which  Ovid  {m)  faid  of  medicine  in  his  time  may  ftill  feeni
true.

J^ec  formidatis  auxiliatur  aquis.

*«  Nor  do  the  dreaded  waters  give  relief."

For  which  reafon  it  is  the  more  to  be  wiih'd,  that  the  difeafe  may  not
come  to  this  ftage.

And  as  to  the  bath,  which  has  been  fo  much  recommended  in  other  places,
we  find  there  are  many  in  thofe  very  places  ;  as  we  have  formerly  feen  («) ;
and  even  among  our  own  countrymen,  who  do  not  put  any  confidence
therein.

Wherefore  fome  did  not  fail  to  have  recourfe  to  mercury ;  and  to  the
remedies  prepar'd  therefrom.  In  purfuance  of  which  method,  others;  par-
ticularly in  this  age,  and  even  among  the  Italians ;  began  to  make  ufe  of
the  fame  prefervative  method.

Thus  Morand  {o)  has  produc'd  many  obfervations  of  his  own  to  this  effedl.
Yet  he  has  join'd  a  mercurial  remedy  with  others  that  are  alexipharmac  ;  and
indeed  has  fince  added  mufk,  in  imitation  of  the  Chinefc  :  and  this  that  the
prefervative  cure,  as  he  himfelf  fays,  may  be  the  "  more  fafe."

This  great  number  of  remedies,  and  cupping-glafles,  which  are  applied
to  the  v/ound,  in  the  beginning,  by  fome  perfons,  and  even  the  red -hot  iron
deeply  imprefs'd  upon  alraoft  all  wounds  of  this  kind,  not  only  leave  it  un-
certain, among  phyficians,  to  what  remedy  chiefly  the  fafety  of  patients  is  to
be  afcrib'd ;  but  alfo  make  the  mind  of  a  man  ;  who  has  been  bitten,  and
is  about  to  make  ufe  of  them  ;  fearful  and  uncertain,  whether,  even  by  thefe
means,  he  ftiall  be  fafe  for  the  future :  and  efpecially  a  man  who  is  in  doubt,
whether  thofe  who  are  faid  to  have  been  fav'd,  had  really  contrafted  the
poifon ;  and  would  certainly  have  fallen  into  an  hydrophobiaj  without  the
ufe  of  thefe  remedies.

And  although  this  doubt  may  not  be  juft  of  all  perfons ;  yet  the  very
fufpence  of  mind  muft,  of  courfe,  bring  on  fo  much  uneafincfs  -,  in  an  affair
of  the  utmoft  importance-,  that  even  for  the  falie  of  avoiding  this  very
anxiety  alone,  no  caution,  in  avoiding  the  poifon  of  a  mad  dog,  can  feem
too  great  to  any  perfon.

I  3.  Nor  ought  we  to  afcribe  fo  much  to  the  remedy,  which  was  com-
municated to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  {p)  ;  notwithftanding  it  has
been  furprizingly  ufeful,  not  only  by  way  of  prefervation,  but  by  way  of
cure  •,  as  to  acquiefce  therein,  before  it  be  certain,  that  it  had  produc'd  the
fame  etFeft  in  all  perfons  :  and  that  for  a  long  courfe  of  time  in  fuc-
celTion.

For  by  continu'd  experiment  it  has  been  found,  that  many  remedies  which
had  been  formerly  in  great  efteem  ;  as  prefervatives,  or  curatives,  of  this
kind  ;  do  not  anfwer.


(»;)  De  Ponto  1.  i.  Eleg.  4.  («)  fupra  ad  n.  9.  dt.

(?;J  Epift.  8.  n.  26.  &  29.  (p)  Hift.  de  1'  A.  1749.  Obf,  Anat.  4.


The


Letter  LXI. Article  14.  467

The  x'\cademy  therefore  ;  in  purfuance  of  that  wifdom  for  which  it  is  fo
refpeclable  -,  did  not  think  proper,  in  an  affair  "  of  fuch  great  moment,"  to
omit  mentioning  the  hiftory  communicated  thereto,  but  without  interpofmg
its  own  judgment  on  the  fubjeft, '

And  that  hiftory  is  certain  iy^worthy  to  be  read ;  ,as  it  is  written  with  accu-
racy, and  confirms,  againft  all  who  may  doubt  thereof,  that  they  have  writ-
ten true  things,  who  have  aflerted,  that  the  poifon  of  a  mad  dog  had  fome-
times  been  introduc'd  into  the  conftitution  without  a  wound  ;  and  only  by
the  foam  being  flabber'd  upon  the  patient :  the  names  of  which  authors  I
have,  in  a  former  letter  {q),  (hown  you  where  to  find  -,  and  you  will  add,
befides  others,  the  celebrated  Piedmont  profefTor  Mazzucchelli  (r).

1  wifh  the  time  may  come,  wherein  that,  or  any  other  equally  fimple  re-
medy, may  be  fufBciently  approv'd  of,  by  frequent  and  long-continu'd  ex-
perience :  or  even  that  remedy  which  the  learned  Arrigoni  (j)  has  propos'd,
while  I  was  writing  thefe  things  •,  that  is,  arteriotomy  in  the  back-part  of  the
foot,  perform'd  in  the  manner  he  ufually  performs  it ;  which  he  fhows  by  an
oblervation  he  has  added,  to  have  had  a  happy  event.

And  although  this  oblervation  is  fingle,  and  the  cure  was  not  perform'd
without  the  joint  ufe  of  other  remedies  ;  which  feveral  authors,  and  among
thefe  IVIorand,  have  been  v.'ont  to  exhibit ;  yet  you  will  readily  read  it  over,
as  you  will  three  others,  in  like  manner,  that  relate  to  maniacs,  who  were
difmifs'd  from  the  hoipital,  in  good  health,  both  of  body  and  mind,  after
having  been  cur'd  by  the  fame  remedy-,  if  you  except  one,  who  was  carried
otf  by  a  phlegmon,  within  five  days  after  he  had  been  already  reftor'd  to
foundnefs  of  mind.  For  this  phlegmon,  beginning  from  the  metacarpus;
which  they  had  previoully  bruis'd  by  the  iron  chains,  while  he  was  furioufly
raving,  and  agitating"  himfelf  with  vehemence-,  had  extended  itfelf  from
thence  to  the  arm  ;  and  from  the  arm  to  the  fhoulder,  with  great  im.petuofity
and  celerity.  "

And  while  you  read  this,  you  will  commend  the  advice  of  Valfalva,
which  I  have  formerly  taken  notice  of  to  you  {t)  ;  I  mean,  that  patients,
who  are  furious,  fhould  be  bound  by  firm  chains  indeed,  but  not  by  chains
of  a  hard  nature.

However,  in  regard  to  the  arteriotomy  which  has  been  recommended,  I
would  not  have  you  remain  uninform'd,  that  the  ftudents  here,  having  begg'd
of  me  that  I  would  order  the  artery  to  be  laid  open  -,  in  that  part  of  the
tarfus  where  it  is  to  be  cut  into;  we  certainly  found  it  to  lie,  in  that  body,
not  only  under  the  common  integuments,  but  alfo  under  the  tendons,  which
extend  the  toes.

14.  Before  I  make  an  end  of  writing,  I  think  it  may  not  be  improper  to
mention  a  cafe,  which  was  obferv'd  at  Padua,  in  the  year  1754,  by  a  phyfi-
cian  whofe  veracity  is  very  well  known  to  me.

It  does  not  altogether  relate  to  the  hydrophobic  indeed  ;  yet  it  relates  to
a  diforder  that  has  fome  affinity  thereto,  and  has  many  circumftances  feem-

{q)  Epift.  8.  n.  31.  (■■)  Diflertaz.  della  Mania  &c.  P.  3.  f.  2.

(r)  apud  Morandiura  paulo  ante  cit.  \t)  Epift.  8.  n.  5.

O  0  o  2  in'gly


468 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

ingly  of  a  fimilar  nature ;  as  you  will  learn  from  his  fhorc  narration,  and
from  a  very  few  animadverfions,  which  I  fhall  add  thereto,

A  cat,  which  was  afraid  left  a  little  whelp  fhould  do  any  injury  to  a  kitten
Ihe  had  brought  forth  not  long  before,  ran  to  encounter  him.  The  mafter  of
the  cat  took  up  the  poor  little  dog  in  his  arms.  But  the  mifchievous  cat  fell
foul  upon  her  mailer's  leg,  at  the  lower  part,  with  her  teeth,  and  her  claws  j
and  wounded  him  a  little  above  the  larfus  anteriorly.

The  mafter,  for  three  days  after,  neither  felt,  nor  fear'd,  any  harm ;  as
the  cat  had  not,  either  before,  or  fince,  Ihew'd  the  leaft  figns  of  being
mad.

But  on  the  fourth  day  after  the  bite,  he  was  feiz'd  with  fo  great  an  anxiety
about  the  prscordia,  that,  being  no  longer  able  to  endure  it,  he  had  recourfe
to  the  phyfician  who  related  all  thefe  circumftances  to  me  -,  and  begg'd  his
afliftance  with  fuch  earneftnefs,  and  with  fuch  an  appearance  in  his  eyes  and
his  countenance,  that  made  him  apprehenfive  of  madnefs  being  very  near
at  hand.

Leeches  and  cupping-glaffes  being 'therefore  immediately  applied  to  the
wounds,  (on  which  was  laid  for  a  long  time  after,  by  the  particular  defire
of  the  patient,  that  exotic  ftone  they  call  cobra)  and  blood  being  more  than
once  taken  away,  from  the  upper  and  lower  limb,  on  the  oppofue  fide ;  as
the  fullnefs  and  ftrength  of  the  pulfe  requir'd  ;  and  a  great  quantity  of  water
being  frequently  given,  which  the  man  drank  without  any  repugnance  or  dif-
ficulty, and  yet  thefe  remedies,  and  others,  not  having  been  of  the  leaft
efFeft  ;  and  even  a  flight  delirium  having  come  on  ;  there  was  only  one  re-
medy which  would  relieve  his  anxieties  :  and  this  was  a  water-bath  made  ufe
of  in  fuch  a  manner,  that,  as  often  as  ever  thefe  anxieties  were  troublefome,
the  patient,  of  his  own  accord,  threw  himfelf  therein  ;  which  he  often  did ;
for  it  was  a  warm  feafon  of  the  year.

Laft  of  all,  being  feiz'd  with  a  confiderable  fever,  though  but  of  fhor.t
continuance  -,  and  having  fweat  to  a  great  degree  ;  he  feem'd  now  to  be  quite
well  on  the  1 4th  day  after  the  bite.

But  at  every  full-moon  after  that  time,  from  the  place  which  had  been
bitten ;  and  which,  as  the  wounds  had  been  too  haftily  heal'd  up,  was  fur-
rounded  with  a  livid  colour,  in  the  manner  that  a  contus'd  place  generally  is-,
he  began  to  feel  certain  irritations  arife,  which,  as  foon  as  they  had  reach'd
up  to  the  prsecordia,  brought  on  thofe  fame  very  great  anxieties  that  he  had
before  experienc'd  :  and  he  could  not  be  freed  therefrom,  but  by  lofing
blood  from  a  vein.

After  thefe  fymptoms  had  return'd  in  the  fame  manner,  and  at  the  fame
time,  quite  to  the  two-and-twentieth  month,  they  began  to  return  at  every
fourth  full-moon  only  :  and  this  period  they  ftill  kept  in  the  I'ourth  year  after
the  bite  had  been  receiv'd  ;  that  is,  the  time  of  my  writing  this  letter.

15.  If  you  except  dogs  •,  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  of  hydrophobias,
or  violent  injuries  of"  this  kind,  having  been  brought  on  more  frequently,  in
general,  by  any  animals,  than  by  cats.

But  if  to  dogs  and  cats  only  thofe  follicles  were  given,  which  emit  a  kind
of  ftrong-fmelling  fluid  to  the  anus ;  a  very  confiderable  confirmation  might
be  taken  from  hence,  of  the  conjecture  of  thofe  perfons,  who  recount,  among

the


Letter  LXI. Article  i6.  46 ^

the  caufes  from  whence  dogs  become  mad,  an  obftruftion  "  of  the  facculus ;"
and  even  of  the  faccuii;  for  there  are  two  that  contain  this  foetid  matter,
"  which  feems  to  be  the  moft  acrid  part  of  the  humours ;  fo  that  if  it  be
"  re-abforb'd  into  the  blood,  or  be  lefs  properly  fecreted  therefrom,"  it  be-
comes capable  of  generating  every  very  violent  diforder.

And  that  this  humour  is  certainly  endow'd  with  a  great  power  of  irrita-
tion, I  have  feveral  times  been  convinc'd  ;  but  particularly  when,  in  dif-
fering a  vveazel,  and  in  difcharging  the  fluid  from  thofe  facculi ;  which  it
had  very  large  in  proportion  to  its  ownfize;  I  immediately  perceiv'd  my
noftrils  to  be  ftruck  -with  a  kind  of  acute  odor  fyhejlris,  fo  that  it  feem'd  to
refemble  nothing  more  than  the  odour  of  burning  fulphur,

Thefe  facculi,  however,  are  not  given  to  weazels  only,  but  to  a  great
number  of  other  animals  alfo  ;  as  you  have  already  read  (even  before  others,
and  in  particular  Peyronnius  {u),  had  fliewn  them  to  exift  in  the  mofchiferous
animal)  in  our  Adverfaria  (x')  ;  fo  that  it  is  not  furprizing  it  has  been  lince
written,  by  men  of  eminence,  "  that  they  are  found  in  almoft  the  whole
"  genus  of  quadupeds;"  or,  at  leaft,  fince  many  fpecies  are,  neverthelefs,
to  be  excepted,  "  moft  of  all,"  as  the  celebrated  Fantonus  fays  (j),  "  in
"  carnivorous  quadrupeds,  and  fuch  as  have  claws."

That  caufe,  therefore,  of  canine  madnefs  being  fet  afide  ;  if  we  confider
the  thing  itfelf  only,  it  is  fcarcely  to  be  doubted,  but  after  dogs,  cats  brincr
on  a  hydrophobia,  as  I  juft  now  faid,  or  injuries  approaching  to  the  nature
thereof  very  nearly,  more  than  other  animals.

Scaramucci  (z)  has  three  examples  of  this  kind  :  that  is  to  fay,  in  two
women,  and  in  a  prefbyter  ;  Brogianus  two  (a);  one  in  a  prieft,  and  another
in  a  certain  man  :  Lindernius  (^)one :  and,  not  to  be  too  tedious,  Stalparc
alone  (c)  had  produc'd  nine  examples,  of  perfons  being  infeflied  with  canine
madnefs  by  cats,  and  kill'd  thereby  ;  the  firft  of  whom  he  himfelf  had
feen,  and  the  otheTs  Amatus,  Hiidanus,  and  Zacutus,  had  mention'd.

Nor  was  an  example  wanting  at  Padua,  fome  years  ago",  in  a  nobleman  •■
who,  like  the  prieft  of  Brogianus,  begg'd  of  thofe  who  came  to  fee  him,  to
ftand  at  a  diftance  from  him,  left  he  fhould  bite  them  ;  thereby  confirming
what  more  than  one  phyfician  had  admonifh'd:  I  mean,  that  all  patients,  af-
fefted  with  a  hydrophobia,  are  not  delirious.

But  if  you  (hould  be  willing  to  examine  moft  of  the  examples  I  have  re-
ferr'd  to  •,  you  will  moreover  know,  that  it  had  happen'd  more  than  once,
that  no-body  could  contend  for  the  diforder's  having  arifen  from  fear;  as  the
perfons  were  ignorant  that  the  cat,  who  had  attacked  them,  was  mad  :  and
they  were  not  feiz'd  with  the  m.adncfs  till  many  months  after,  when  they  had
almoft  forgotten  the  accident ;  as  in  the  obfervaiions  of  Stalpart  and  Hii-
danus. '

And  indeed  thofe  two  men  fpoken  of  by  LIndernius  and  Brogianus,  feem
to  have  been  ignorant,  and  unapprehenfive  ;  particularly  the  fecond  ;  as  he

[u)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1731.  {a)  P.  2.  ibid.  cit.

(r)  IV.  Animad.  29.  {i)  Cooimerc.  Litter.  A.  17.35.  Hebd,  ir.

{y)  Differt.  Anat.  Renov.  4.  u.  2.

\z)  Supra  ad  n.  u.  cit.  (f)  Cent.  1.  Obf.  loo.  &  in  Sciol.


47  o Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

was  bitten  by  a  cat  which  he  ftruck  :  fo  that  the  animal  feems  to  have  been
provok'd  by  anger,  rather  than  by  madnefs,  as  in  the  cafe  I  have  re-
lated {d).

And  lo  the  fame  cafe  relates,  in  fome  meafure,  that  which  happen'd  in  the
prefbyter  of  Scaramucci  ;  I  mean,  that  a  ftreightnefs  of  the  fauces,  from
which  he  had  foon  efcap'd,  return'd,  "  for  many  years,  at  the  fame  time  of
"  year  "  wherem  he  had  been  attack'd  by  a  mad  cat :  though  this  animal
had  left  an  imprefiion  of  its  teeth  only,  without  any  laceration  of  the  flcin
whatever.

But  two  other  examples,  of  the  fame  authors,  relate  thereto  ftill  more.

For,  in  a  woman  ;  of  whofe,  and  of  other  fimilar  cafes,  I  have  fpoken
too  briefly  in  the  eighth  letter  (e) ;  the  firft  figns  of  a  hydrophobia  difcover'd
themffjlves,  when  from  the  wound,  which  was  ah-eady  fhut  up,  "  flie  felt
"  a  kind  of  ray,  as  it  were,  moving  upwards  through  her  arm,  towards  her
"  breaft,  with  an  inflammatory  fenfation."

And  in  a  man  ;  who  was  one  of  the  three  bitten  by  the  fame  dog,  and
who  liv'd  about  four  years  after  two  had  died  from  the  fame  caufe;  out  of
the  wound,  to  which  a  red-hot  iron  had  been  applied  ;  for  it  had  never  come
to  cicatrization  ;  a  great  quantity  of  blood  was  difcharg'd  every  year,  at  the
time  wherein  the  wound  had  been  inflicted  ;  "  till  a  vein  was  open'd  in  the
*'  tibia,  where  the  wound  had  been  receiv'd."

And  now,  fince  I  have  made  mention  of  the  mad  dog  alfo ;  befides  other
obfervations  relating  hereto,  I  would  have  you  read  that  which  Rofcius  has
given  in  the  works  of  Hildanus  (/).

You  will  fee  how  many,  and  how  violent  fymptoms  -,  except  thai  the
drinking  of  v/ater  was  never  refus'd ;  were  fuffxjr'd  by  a  matron,  after  a  very
fevere  pain  of  the  arm,  which  had  been  bitten  by  a  mad  dog  feven  years
before;  and,  in  like  manner,  after  as  many  more  years,  the  beginning  of
her  diforders  always  arifing  from  the  fame  arm ;  and  a  third  time  after  the
interval  of  fix  years-,  then  after  one  year  only,  twice  in  the  following  year,
and  three  times  in  the  year  fuccceding  that ;  but  with  this  peculiarity,  that
the  more  frequent  the  attacks  were,  the  more  Ihort  they  were  alfo.

After  the  wound  had  been  receiv'd,  a  great  number  of  remedies  had  been
immediately  applied  thereto  ;  but  after  thefe  applications  the  wound  was
brought  to  a  cicatrix.

And  as  this  clofing  up  of  the  wound  fucceeded  very  badly  alfo  with  the
woman  mention'd  from  Scaramucci ;  and  as  the  contrary  treatment  was  very
advantageous,  to  a  man  of  whom  it  is  faid,  from  his  obfervation,  that  the
wound  never  coalefc'd  ;  it  may  eafily  appear  that  the  monitum  of  all  thofe,
who  have  taught  that  the  wound  (hould  be  kept  open  a  long  while  ;  and  if
it  happen  to  be  {tiut  up  too  foon,  Ihould  be  open'd  again  ;  is  a  very  ex-
cellent rule  to  follow.

And  as  we  have  recommended  this  pra<5lice(^')  in  a  former  letter ;  fo  I
could  wifli  it  had  been  made  ufe  of  in  the  cafe  which  I  have  related  to  you
lately.


(■JJ  N.  14.  f/J  Cent.  I.  Obf.  Chir.

(f)  N.21.  ^  Ig)  Epift.  8.  n.  26.


16.  However,


Letter  LXII. Articles  1,2.  471

1(5.  However,  as  the  fame  cafe,  join'd  together  with  others,  which  have
been  formerly  produc'd  {h) ;  and  particularly  with  thofe  that  have  been  juft
now  taken  notice  of  by  me  ;  confirms  what  I  have  conjedtur'd  in  regard  to
the  communication  of  this  poifon  by  the  nerves,  and  the  convulfive  nature
of  it,  in  a  very  confiderable  degree ;  fo  the  one  inftance  of  relief,  from  a
water-bath,  agrees  with  thofe  things  which  I  have  before  thought  proper  to
fay  (i),  of  the  ufe  of  a  remedy  of  this  kind,  not  deferving  to  be  entirely
defpis'd  :  and  the  advantage  which  refulted  from  a  large  difcharge  by  fweat,
confirms  what  has  been  afferted  on  this  fubjedl,  both  by  ancient  and  modern
authors.

The  chief  of  whom  ;  that  I  may  not  take  up  your  time  in  mentioning
them  here  particularly ;  will  be  fufficiently  fhewn  by  that  Edinburgh  difler-
tation  which  I  have  commended  above  [k). Farewel.


LETTER the SIXTY- SECON

Relates  to  Epilepfy,  Convulfion,  and  Palfy.


O  W  take  thej-emaining  obfervations,  which  relate  to  the  three  other
violent  diforders  of  the  brain,  and  nerves ;  epilepfy,  -convuliion,  and
palfy.

As  to  the  epilepfy,  however,  I  fhould  have  no  obfervation  to  add  here,  if
I  were  not  unwilling  that  fliould  be  loft,  which  was  communicated  to  me  at
Venice,  about  the  year  1708,  by  my  refpeftable  friends,  whom  I  have  al-
ready mention'd  to  you  with  encomiums,  Alexander  Bonis,  and  John  Jerom
Zanichelli.

2.  A  young  man,  of  two-and-twenty  years  of  age,  was  feiz'd  with  a  fever
without  any  manifeft  caufe ;  nor  did  he  complain  of  pain  or  uneafinefs  in  any
part  but  in  the  head.  To  this  were  added  epileptic  paroxyfms  ;  which
brought  on  death  within  twenty-four  hours  after  the  beginning  of  the  fever.

"When  the  cranium  was  open'd,  no  difeas'd  appearance  was  found  any-
where, if  you  except  a  mucous  ferum  •,  which,  being  colledted  upon  the  an-
terior part  of  the  cerebrum,  betwixt  the  dura  and  pia  mater,  had  drawn
thefe  membranes  to  a  confiderable  diftance  from  each  other,  and  had  com-
prefs'd  the  cerebrum.

[h)  Ibid.  n.  21.  &  32.  (0  Ibid.  n.  29.  {k)  N.  g.

The


47  2, Book  V,  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

The  flomach  indeed  appear'd  to  be  inflam'd :  and  a  conglomeration  of
round  worms  was  found  in  tlie  firft  inteftines.  But  there  had  not  been  the
leall  fymptom  of  thefe  appearances.

3.  Whether  the  pain  of  the  head  was  fo  great  as  to  "  obfcure  "  the  pain
of  the  ftomach  and  inteftines,  as  Hippocrates  (a)  fays,  or  not ;  at  leaft  his
other  aphorifin  (b)  is  confirm'd,  by  death  being  the  confequence  of  convul-
fions,  that  come  on  in  a  feverifii  patient.

But  as  thefe  convulfions  made  a  diforder,  which  would  not  have  been  fo
fhort  from  its  own  nature,  v.ery  ihort-,  what  could  be  the  caufe  of  their  beino-
fo  vehement  ?  Was  it  the  worms  irritating  the  fmall  inteftines  ?  I  fhould
believe  it,  if  any  uneafmefs  in  tiie  belly  had  preceded,  the  pain  of  the
head.

But  what  caufe  had  produc'd  this  lafl-mention'd  pain  ?  Was  it  the  fever?
Whatever  the  caufe  of  it  was  ;  if  we  acknowledge  it  to  be  very  violent;  we
fliall  not  wonder  that  the  blood  was,  from  thence,  obftrudted,  or  at  leaft  de-
tain'd,  in  the  velfels  of  the  meninges ;  and  that  the  ferum  was  feparated
therefrom.

And  as  we  ha%'e  fliown  in  a  former  letter  (c),  that  an  epilepfy  may  be
brought  on,  even  by  a  lefs  quantity  of  ferum  than  was  found  here  ;  there  is
not  the  leaft  occafion  to  repeat,  at  prefent,  what  you  may  read  over  again  in
that  letter.

And  if  you  examine  Bohn  (J),  where  he  tells  you  what  appear'd  to  him,
in  a  boy  of  ten  years  of  age,  whofe  body  he  dilTeded  ;  and  who,  while
living,  had  labour'd,  "  firft  under  a  very  great  pain  of  the  head,  after  that
"  under  an  epilepfy,  and  a  ftupor  of  all  the  fenfes,"  in  which  ftate  he  died  ;
you  will  eafily  conceive  what  that  very  learned  man  feems  to  have  thought  of
ferum,  or  rather,  if  you  pleafe,  of  lymph,  even  when  not  extravafated,  but
ftagnating  in  the  veffels  round  about  the  convolutions  of  the  brain.

4.  Let  us  go  on  to  convulfion.  ■  For  epilepfy  indeed  cannot  be  without
convulfion :  and  convulfion  is  very  often  without  epilepfy  ;  as  it  was  in  that
perfon  alfo  whofe  hilfory  I  fhall  immediately  fubjoin.

5.  A  night-man,  who  Vt^as  about  fifty  years  of  age  to  all  appearance,  of  a
robuft  habir,  of  a  good  colour  and  conftitution,  but  rather  inclin'd  to  a
plethora ;  being  given  to  liquor,  and  frequently  drunk  ;  was  bufied,  to-
gether with  his  lervants,  in  cleaning  out  the  jakes  of  the  hofpital,  at
an  unfeafonable  time  of  night,  as  the  cuftom  of  fuch  perfons  generally  is.

And  as  they  were  going  to  and  fro,  every  now  and  then,  as  that  filthy
bufinefs  requires,  the  mafter  himfelf  thought,  once  when  he  happen'd  to  be
alone,  that  he  faw  a  fpeftre  cloth'd  in  white  ;  and  being  immediately  feiz'd
with  a  trembling  of  his  whole  body,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  with  a  diftortion
of  the  mouth,  was  found  in  this  ftate  by  his  fervants  v/hcn  returning,  and
carried  to  bed  immediately.

Antifpafmodics  and  cardiacs  being  inftantly  given  ;  whereby  the  tremors
grew  milder,  and  ftrength  return'd  to  the  pulfe ;  blood  v/as  taken  away  from
the  arm,  to  the  quantity  of  fix  ounces,  the  fame  night.


{a)  S.  2 Aph.  46.  (0  IX.  n.  10.  &  alibi.

(6)  Ibid.  Aph.  26.  \d)  Differt.  de  Trepanation.  Difficult.


And,


Letter  LXII. Article  s-  47  3,

And,  In  thejnorning,  as  large  a  quantity  was  taken  from  the  other  arm;
when  the  tremors  had  grown  more  inconfiderable,  and  the  pulfe  was  ex-
panded and  become  febrile.

And  even  on  the  following  day,  a  vein  was  open'd  in  the  foot ;  fome  al-  '
kviation,  though  but  fhort,  being  gain'd  by  each  blood-letting ;  and  the
blood,  particularly  at  the  firft  time  of  opening  a  vein,  coming  out  in  a  frothy
and  very  black  ftate  ;  the  craffamentum  being  fomewhat  hard,  and  the  ferum
only  in  fmall  quantity.

The  fever  continu'd  :  and  inftead  of  the  clonk  convulfions,  the  isnic  were
exceedingly  troubleforne,  every  now  and  then,  in  the  whole  body.

The  man  could  not  fpeak  fo  as  to  be  underftood  ;  nor  did  he  fpeak  intel-
ligibly, from  the  time  of  relating  to  his  fervants  what  had  happen'd
to  him.

Yet  he  plainly  fhow'd  that  he  knew  the  perfons  about  him,  and  could  di-
ftinguilli  them  one  from  another :  and  when  he  was  able,  he  fignified,  by
means  of  geftures,  that  he  was  troubled  with  a  very  oppreffive  pain  of  his
head.  And  by  the  effcft  of  thefe  diforders ;  againft  which  other  external
and  internal  remedies  were  made  ufe  of  in  vain  -,  he  died  within  fix  or  feven
days,  and  on  the  lafl:  day  of  January  in  the  year  1747.

The  carcafe  being  brought  into  the  college  on  the  following  day ;  in  ctder
to  finifh  the  public  anatomy  of  the  year ;  the  arms  indeed  were  not  rigid,
but  the  fingers  were  extremely  rigid.  The  penis  and  fcrotum  were  of  a
blackifli  colour,  but  only  on  their  furface.

The  belly  being  open'd  ;  and  the  omentum,  which  had  very  little  fat,
being  taken  av/ay ;  I  obferv'd  the  inieftine  colon-,  which  was  almoft  every
Vv'here  tumid  from  included  air ;  to  have  fuch  a  direftion,  that,  after  having,
gone  up  to  the  liver,  it  went  down  from  thence  below  the  navel,  to  the  ex-
tent of  two  or  three  inches  on  the  right  fide  of  the  navel ;  and,  on  the  other  ,
hand,  when  it  had  return'd  to  its  ufual  fituation,  and  had  kept  its  natural
courfe,  in  a  tranfverfe  direction  under  the  ftomach ;  had  pafs'd  in  an  oblique-
direction,  in  the  left  part  of  the  left  hypochondrium,  and  in  a  ftrait  direc-
tion, over  the  whole  anterior  furface  of  the  fubjeded  kidney  ;  it  return'd
from  thence,  into  the  fame  hypochondrium  -,  going  down  from  whence,  and
entering  the  pelvis,  it  degenerated  into  the  re<5l;um  inteftinum  without  any,
flexure.

The  fmall  inteftines ;  if  you  except  fome  trafts  thereof,  and  among  thefe  ,
not  an  inconfiderable  part  of  the  ileum,  which  went  down  low  into  the
pelvis  i  were  diftended  with  air  :  and  a  yellownefs,  with  which  they  were  in-
ternally ting'd,  was  feen  through  their  coats.

For  as  the  bile,  wherewith  the  hepatic  cyft  v/as  almoft  fill'd,  had,  by  ex-
fuding,  made  the  neighbouring  inteftines  externally  yellow ;  fo,  by  flowing
into  them,  it  had  made  their  internal  furfaces  yellow  likewife.

The  liver,  hovi/ever,  was  of  a  blueifh  colour,  as  the  fpleen  was  alfo ;  but
although,  at  the  edge  of  the  former  vifcus,  that  colour  was  very  much  fatii-
rated,  in  no  place  did  it  go  beyond  the  furface  ;  nor  yet  in  the  fpleen.  The
fpleen  was  of  a  middle  fize  5  bus  the  liver  was  large :  yet  both  thefe  vifcera
were  found.

Voi,.  III.  P  p  p  The


47  4 Eook  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

The  thorax  being  open'd,  the  lungs ;  which  adher'd  to  the  pleura  but
flightly,  and  in  few  places,  and  thefe  on  the  back-part ;  were  rather  turgid,  and
fhow'd,  in  fome  places,  pretty  large  areas,  which  were  fomewhat  more  eleva-
ted than  the  reft  of  the  furface  ;  and  in  which  a  kind  of  veficles,  as  it  were,
evidently  appear'd  to  be  included.  There  was  not  any  intermediate  lobe
on  the  right  fide,  but  the  appearances  were  the  fame  there  as  on  the  left.

The  pericardium  being  open'd,  1  found  no  fluid  therein,  not  even  a  drop ;
notwiihftanding  the  internal  furface  of  it  was  ftill  moift,  lb  as  not  to  adhere
entirely  to  the  heart,  it  already  began  to  adhere,  in  a  manner,  in  fbme
places.

In  the  heart  was  but  very  little  blood  ;  perhaps  becaufe  it  had  flow'd
down  previoufly,  at  the  time  of  cutting  through  the  large  vefTels  beneath
the  diaphragm  ;  efpecially  as  the  blood  was  obferv'd  to  be  fluid,  in  feveral
places,  in  this  body.

Yet  I  found  two  polypous  concretions,  one  of  which  went,  from  the  right
auricle,  into  the  vena  cava  fuperior  -,  and  the  other,  which  was  fomewhat
more  confiderable,  from  the  ventricle  of  the  fame  fide,  into  the  pulmonary
artery  •.  being  round,  and  thicker  than  a  man's  little  finger.

Finally,  when  the  cranium  and  the  dura  mater  were  cut  into,  nothing.
■wort'ny  of  remark  occurr'd.  But  the  pia  mater  had  its  veflTels  fo  full  of  blood,
that  even  the  fmalleft  branches  appear'd,  in  every  part,  as  if  they,  had  been
fill'd  by  injeftion.

They  were  full  alfo  in  the  ventricles,  and  even  within  the  medullary  fub-
ftance  of  the  brain :  and  when  I  conhprefs'd,  gently,  the  beginning  of  the
fpinal  marrow,  which  had  been  taken  out  together  with  the  medulla  oblon-
gata ;  I  obferv'd  not  only  that  blood  iffu'd  forth  from  the  fiflfure  of  that  mar-
row, but  alfo  from  the  feftion  of  the  fubftance  itfelf,  which  was  neareft  to
the  fiflTure.

In  both  the  lateral  ventricles  I  found  a  pretty  confiderable  quantity  of
limpid  water  ;  yet  the  plexus  choroides  were  red  :  and  therein  were  not  vefi-
cles, as  there  generally  are,  but  very  fmall  red  particles ;  and  thefe  folid,
fo  as  to  feem  glandular.

The  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  were  of  a  natural  firmnefs;  but  the  fornix
was  lax :  the  crura  medullas  oblongatee,  and  the  trunk  thereof,  were  lax :.
but  the  lafl-mention'd  parts  only  on  their  internal  furface.

Nor  indeed  will  I  omit  to  mention  an  appearance,  which  ;  like  fome  other
things  defcrib'd  to  you  from  this  diflTeftion  ;  relates  to  circumftances  that  are
lefs  common  indeed-,  but  fuch  as  are  to  be  deduc'd  from  the  original  con-
formation, and  not  from  difeafe  :  that  is  to  fay,  the  anterior  lobes  of  the
cerebrum,  where  they  are  contiguous  to  one  ant^ther,  had,  at  the  middle
nearly  of  their  height,  fome  part  of  their  furface ;  which  was,  in  other  re-
fpedts,  convoluted  in  the  manner  of  the  inteftines ;  fo  form'd,  that  the  one
was  receiv'd,  and  the  other  was  the  recipient  in  that  part.

6.  What  effedls  even  a  vain  terror  can  produce,  is  fhown  by  the  hiftory  in
queftion.  You  fee  that  infl:antly,  both  the  clonic  and  tonic  convulfions,  as
thofe  at  the  mouth,  arofe  from  the  difturb'd  motion  of  the  fpirits ;  and,  by
detaining  the  blood  in  the  velTels  fubfervient  to  the  brain,  and  by  this  means
bringing  on  an  effufion  of  ferum,  certainly  brought  on  newcaufes,  for  which

2  thefe


Letter  LXII. Article  7.  47^'

ihefe  very  convulfions  continu'd  even  to  death;  unlefs  you  ihould  rather
choofe  to  fuppofe  that  limpid  water  to  have  been  efFus'd  into  the  lateral  ven-
tricles, from  a  compreffion  of  the  veficles,  moreover,  which  had  previoufly
exifted  in  the  choroid  plexufles  ;  as  we  frequently  fee ;  the  remains  of  which,
perhaps,  when  burft  afunder,  and  contrafted  into  themfelves,  reprcfented
thofe  kind  of  glandular  bodies ;  as  might  have  appear'd  to  anatomifts  for-
merly, and  from  fimilar  caufes  likewife  ;  whereby  they  were  led  to  acknow-
ledge glands,  of  this  kind,  in  thefe  plexufles.

Of  which  things ;  as  thofe  that  have  fometimes  equally  occurr'd  to  my
mind,  although  I  would  not  perhaps  be  of  quite  a  contrary  opinion  to  you  ;
that,  however,  which  1  have  faid  of  the  blood  being  retain'd,  is  fo  much  the
more  credible,  in  proportion  as  this  fluid  was  in  greater  quantity,  by  reafon
of  the  patient  being  a  drunkard  and  plethoric  -,  and  in  proportion  as  the  al-
leviation of  the  difeafe,  brought  on  by  every  blood-letting,  was  more  evident
though  fhort ;  and  in  proportion  as  the  diftenfion  of  the  veflels,  even  the
fmallefl:  vefl^els,  of  the  brain,  was  more  manifeft ;  as  it  was  perceiv'd  to  be
in  a  very  great  degree,  even  from  the  compreffion  of  the  fpinal  marrow  :  for
very  feldom  is  it  poflible  to  prefs  the  blood  out  of  the  very  fubftance  of  that
marrow.

Add  to  this,  the  acrid  particles  which  get  into  the  blood  of  a  man  em-
ploy'd  in  fo  fordid  an  art ;  fo  that  thofe  which  Ihould  be  difcharg'd,  during
the  detention  of  this  fluid,  might  irritate  and  vellicate  the  more.

But  in  regard  to  epilepfy  and  convulfions,  enough  -,  efpecially  as  many
things  remain  to  be  added  upon  the  fubjeft  of  the  oppofite  diforder,  that  is,
paralyfis.

7.  An  old  woman  ;  lefs  than  eighty  years  of  age,  but  more  than  feventy  j
was  fuddenly  feiz'd  with  a  very  violent  apoplexy.  She  was  immediately
brought  into  the  hofpital,  with  a  ftertor  upon  her,  a  weak  pulfe,  and,  what
moft  relates  to  the  point  in  queftion,  with  a  paralyfis  of  both  limbs.

And  there  fhe  died  within  two  days,  at  the  fame  hour  the  apoplexy  had
come  on  ;  which  was  after  the  middle  of  iVIarch,  in  the  year  1750.

The  upper  part  of  the  cranium  being  faw'd  round  about,  the  next  day,
and  nothing  having  been  difcharg'd ;  before  it  was  rais'd  up,  I  faid,  in  the
hearing  of  a  large  circle  of  fl:udents,  that,  although  by  reafon  of  the  confti-
tution  of  this  old  woman,  and  her  manner  of  life,  and  the  diforders  to  which
Ihe  had  been  liable,  being  unknown  to  me,  I  did  not  take  upon  me  to  de-
termine, for  a  certainty,  what  we  fhould  find  to  have  been  the  caufe  of  the
apoplexy  ;  yet  I  would  not  deny,  that,  even  in  a  woman  of  this  age,  it
might  be  from  blood  -,  efpecially  as  the  veins  in  her  neck  were  very  tumid
therefrom,  and  the  apoplexy  had  been  violent :  but  whatfoever  had  been  the
caufe,  fo  that  it  confifted  in  any  confpicuous  injury  of  the  organs ;  that  it
might  be  conjeftur'd,  with  great  probability,  from  the  paralyfis  of  the  right
limbs  j  according  to  the  many  obfervations  of  Valfalva,  and  mine ;  that  it
would  appear  in  the  left  hemifphere  of  the  brain.

Then  pulling  off,  from  the  fubjefled  meninx,  the  arch  of  the  cranium  ;
and  feeing  no  morbid  appearance  in  that  membrane,  but  obferving,  foon
after,  the  greater  part  of  the  veflels  which  creep  through  the  pia  mater,  to
be  turgid  with  black  blood;  and  finding  a  little  bloody  water  about  the

P  p  p  2  lower


47^ BookV.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  fouiier  Books.

lov/er  terminations  of  the  medulla  oblongata^  I  came  to  the  difil-cStion  of  the
cerebrum,  which  was  firm  ;  whereas  the  cerebellum  was  lax.

And  firft  opening  the  lateral  ventricle  on  the  right  fide,  a  confiderable
quantity  of  water  offer'd  itfelf  to  our  view  ;  which  circumftance  might  feem
to  indicate  fonaething  that  did  not  correfpond  to  the  obfervations  mention'd
juft  now.

But  as,  in  the  whole  of  that  ventricle,  I  faw  nothing  ruptur'd  or  lacerated;
except  fome  part  of  the  feptum  lucidum  ;  we  went  on  to  open  the  l^ft
ventricle.

And  the  whole  of  this  cavity  was  fillVl,  in  part  with  the  fame  bloody
water,  but  in  part  alfo,  and  particularly  towards  the  back  part,  with  a  con-
fiderable quantity  of  black,  blood  ;  and  that  coagulated.

And  from  hence  it  was  evidently  perceiv'd,  that  this  bloody  water  had
been  prefs'd  out  from  that  blood,  while  in  the  adt  of  concretion  ;  and  had
made  a  way  for  itfelf  through  the  feptum  which  divides  the  ventricles  one
from  another,  from  the  left  of  thefe  cavities  into  the  right ;  which  had  no
appearance  worthy  of  notice,  except  that  the  choroid  plexus  was  fomewhat
pale;  and  diftinguifh'd  with  a  great  number  of  hydatids,  where  it  was  in-
flefted  in  an  anterior  diredtion  :  thefe  hydatids,  however,  were  of  a  fmall
lize  only.

But  in  the  left  ventricle,  the  plexus  choroides  had  been  fo  injur'd,  by  the
eruption  of  blood,  that  it  was  not  poffible  to  diftinguifh  clearly,  what  the
ttate  of  it  was.

This  blood  had  burft  out  from  a  large  cavity  to  which  it  adher'd ;  which
cavity  was  hollow'd  out  in  almoft  the  whole  of  that  part  of  the  lacerated  cor-
pus ftriatum,  which  is  extended  from  the  middle  of  the  length  thereof,  to
the  pofterior  parts ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  in  the  lacerated  and  contiguous
thalamus  nervi  optici,  and  even  almoft  in  the  whole  of  it ;  for  but  a  very
fmall  portion  of  this  body,  and  that  of  a  lurid  colour,  was  remaining  at  th^
border  of  the  third  ventricle,  which  was  full  of  that  fame  kind  of  bloody
water :  and,  on  the  other  fide  of  the  fame  thalamus,  the  difcharge  of  blood
had  lacerated  not  only  the  thalamus  itfelf,  but  fome  contiguous  part  alfo  of
the  left  hemifphere.

Having  carefully  differed  the  other  parts  within  the  cranium,  and  found
them  all  in  a  natural  ftate  ;  fo  that  even  the  arteries  had  nothing  hard  in  their
coats ;  I  neverthelefs  found,  that  almoft  all  the  other  arteries,  and  even  the
carotids  themfelves,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  neck,  were  not  without  bony
lamellas  in  this  old  woman.

Nor  did  T,  in  demonftrating  and  cutting  into  the  fpinal  marrow,,  in  its
fituation,  on  the  following  days,  find  any  thing  which  was  preternatural.

The  vifcera  of  the  thorax  alfo,  and  the  belly,  offer'd  nothing  worthy  of
remark  ;  if  you  except  the  colon,  which  was  infledled,  from  its  fituation,
downwards,  in  the  form  of  an  arch;  and  that  for  a  confiderable  fpace.:
and  it  wa?,  as  the  ftomach  was  alfo,  very  much  contrafted.

A  corpufcle  likewife  was  obferv'd  in  one  of  the  axillje,  of  the  form  and
magnitude  of  a  lupin,  and  of  a  middle  nature  betwixt  bone  and  (lone;  which
corpufcle,  if  it  had  not  been  more  near  to  the  pleura  than  the  axillary  glands,  j
you  would  perhaps  have  fuppos'd  to  be  made  up  of  one  of  diem.

8.  This


Letter  LXII. Articles  8,  9,  lo,  ii.  477

8.  This  difleclion,  as  well  as  a  great  number  of  others,  has  confirm'd
the  aphorifm  of  Hippocrates  (*),  which  fays,  that  "  to  folve  a  violent  apo-
"  plexy  is  impom Vie ;"  and,  at  the  fame  time,  confirms  the  dogma  of  Val-
falva,  whereof  I  have  fo  often  fpoken,  and  which  I  have  rnention'd  above:
and  it  has  moreover  fhown  us,  how  deftruftive  is  an  extravafation  of  blood
from  the  corpora  ftyata,  or  the  neighbouring  thalami;  or  at  leaft  from  the
parts  thereabout.  All  which  hypothefes  will  alfo  be  confirm'd  by  the  next
hiftory.

g,  A  woman,  who  was  already  hoary-headed,  died  about  the  middle  of
Decem.ber,  in  the  year  1756,  in  the  fame  hofpital,  and  of  the  fame  difeafe  •,
a  palfy  having  been  obferv'd  in  her  right  limbs.

Being  about  to  cut  into  the  cerebrum  in  its  fituation  ;  and  having  predifled
the  fame  thing,  as  in  the  former  woman,  to  thofe  ftudents  who  remain'd  in
confiderable  numbers,  after  I  had  finilh'd  a  general  lefture  upon  the  bones ;
I  remov'd  the  dura  mater,  and  fhew'd  the  veflels,  which  run  through  the
pia  mater,  to  be  very  full  of  blood  on  the  left  fide  j  where,  alfo,  fomething
fimilar  to  jelly  appear'd  under  that  membrane.

Then  cutting  into  the  cerebrum,  the  fubftance  of  which  was  firm ;  whereas
tliat  of  the  cerebellum  was  very  foft ;  and  having  feen  a  little  water  in  the
lateral  ventricles,  but  none  in  the  right  hemifphere,  nor  yet  having  found  in
any  other  of  thofe  parts  that  are  contain'd  in  the  fkull,  the  leaft  appearance
which  was  contrary  to  the  common  order  of  nature;  on  cutting  deeply  into
the  left  hemifphere,  in  a  longitudinal  diredion,  1  found  black  and  coagulated
blood  to  the  quantity  of  two  ounces,  as  we  all  of  us  judg'd.

This  blood  was  effus'd  at  the  fide  of  the  corpus  ftriatum,  and-  under  this
very  body,  within  the  medullary  fubftance  :  and  although  it  had  lacerated
this  fubftance,  yet  it  had  open'd  no  pafTage,  for  itielf,  from  thence,  whereby
it  might  come  into  the  neighbouring  ventricle ;  or  on  the  outfide  of  the  ce-
rebrum. Being  bujied  with  other  purfuits,  1  diffedted  no  other  part  of  this
body.

10.  Thus  far  had  I  written  on  the  firft  day  of  January,  fn  the  year  1758,
when,  returning  to  the  hofpital  on  the  following  day,  in  order  to  refume
the  interrupted  anatomical  exercitations,  I  immediately  had  an  opportunity
there,  of  making  another  obfervation,  which  muft  be  join'd  to  thofe  of
Valfalva's  that  I  have  commended.

11.  A  beggar,  of  about  fifty  years  of  age,  whofe  fpine  was  in  the  pre-
ternatural ftate  I  Iliall  defcribe  below,  had  fallen  down  in  an  apopledtic  pa-
roxyfm  a  month  before,  when  he  was  in  the  market-place ;  he  alfo  having
his  right  limbs  paralytic,  and  his  mouth  diftorted.

Being  immediately  receiv'd  into  the  hofpital,  and  venasfections,  and  other
iifual  remedies,  being  made  ufe  of;  he  had  fo  far  receiv'd  advantage  as  to
be  able  to  fpeak  a  little.  But  after  feme  days  had  pafs'd,  he  was  again  feiz'd
with  an  apoplectic  paroxyfm ;  and  was  again  reliev'd  by  medical  affiftances.
And  finally,  by  a  third  attack  he  was  carried  off.

In  cutting  the  cranium  round  about,  and  pulling  it  away  from  the  dura

(♦)  42.  S.«.-

^  mater,


47  8 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

mater,  which  adher'd  to  it  very  clofely  -,  nothing  worthy  of  notice  having
been  difcharg'd,  and  I  having  predicted  as  ufual,  to  my  circle  of  au-
ditors, which  was  very  much  crowded  ;  the  ev?nt  confirm'd  my  pre-
diiftion.

For  by  difledlion  there  was  no-where  found  any  morbid  appearance  within
the  cranium,  except  in  the  left  hemifphere  of  the  cereBrum.  The  internal
medullary  part  of  which  hemifphere ;  that  was  adjacent  to  the  lateral  ven-
tricle, being  feparated  by  blood  ;  contain'd  fuch  a  quantity  of  fluid,  in  a
black  and  half-concreted  ftate,  as  a  fpoon  of  a  middle  fize  would  fcarcely
contain.

But  the  fpine  of  this  man  was  fo  infleded,  that  I  do  not  remember  ever
to  have  feen  it  more  fo,  in  any  body.  For,  at  the  lower  vertebra  of  the
thorax,  it  was  fo  bent  to  the  right  fide,  as  to  make  an  angle  downwards
which  was  lefs  than  a  right  angle  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  turn'd  the  bodies
of  that  vertebra,  and  of  four  or  five  of  the  vertebrse  that  lay  upon  it,  to
the  left  fide ;  fo  that  they  did  not  look  towards  the  anterior  , paries  of  the
thorax,  but  entirely  towards  the  left  fide.

Indeed  the  infieclion,  which  was  feen  in  all  the  vertebra  of  the  loins,  in
the  upper  vertebrse  of  the  thorax,  and  the  lower  ones  of  the  neck,  was  much
lefs  than  that  I  have  defcrib'd.

Neverthelefs  there  was  a  manifeft  inclination  of  the  fpine,  on  both  fides,  that
refembled  a  bow  ;  the  convexity  whereof  was,  in  the  loins,  on  the  right
fide,  and  the  concavity  in  the  left ;  and  in  the  upper  part  of  the  back,  and
the  neighbouring  cervix,  the  convexity  was  on  the  left  fide,  and  the  con-
cavity on  the  right.

Finally,  I  obferv'd  the  ligament,  which  embraces  pofteriorly  the  procefs
of  the  fecond  vertebra  of  the  neck,  that  is  call'd  procerus  dentoides,  or  tooth-
like procefs,  -within  the  firft  vertebra  \,  and  in  the  manner  of  half  a  ring ;  to
be  grown  into  one  fubftance  with  that  procefs ;  and  particularly  on  the
right  fide :  perhaps  in  confequence  of  the  continual,  or  at  leaft  the  very
frequent,  pofition  of  the  head,  Vv^hich  was  more  commodious  to  a  man  thus
form'd.

12.  In  proportion  as  this  deprav'd  figure  of  the  fpine,  which  I  have  de-
fcrib'd, made  an  inflexion  upon  the  great  artery  that  adher'd  thereto;  fo
much  did  it  refifl:  the  ready  and  eafy  flux  of  the  blood  towards  the  inferior
parts  of  the  body.  The  confequence  of  this  therefore  was,  that  a  greater
quantity  was  fent  from  thence  to  the  brain  ;  whereby  a  difpofition  to  [a  fan-
guineous  apoplexy  was  brought  on.

Yet  this  was  prevented  from  being  more  fpeedily  fatal,  not  only  by  thofe
two  protuberances,  in  the  bafis  of  the  ventricles,  being  uninjur'd,  but  by
venfefeftions  alfo  opportunely  applied  ;  for  by  thefe  it  was,  without  doubt,
brought  to  pafs,  that  the  injury  fhould  not  be  continu'd  to  thofe  protu-
berances; and  that  the  effufion  of  blood  (hould  not  be  brought  on,  but
ilowly,  fparingly,  and  at  intervals.

13.  And  how  very  frequently  I  have  found  the  injury,  in  this  fpecies  of
apoplexy,  in  that  hemifphere  of  the  brain,  which  is  oppofite  to  the  para-
lytic fide,  not  only  thefe  obfervations,  but  a  great  number  of  others,  made
by  us,  confirm;  and  although  the  greater  part  of  thefe  I  have  pointed  out,

or


Letter  LXir. Article  ;/[.  479

©rpropos'd,  in  other  places  (e),  yet  there  are  fome,  neverthelefs,  which  re-
main ;  and  among  thefe  one  that  I  (hall  fend  you  in  the  next  letter  (/).

And  not  only  our  obfervations,  but  the  obfervations  of  others  alfo,  which
have  likewife  been  referr'd  to  in  other  places  (g)  ;  to  which  you  will  add
that  quoted  by  the  celebrated  Sulzerus  (h)  from  Archibald  Adams ;  and  thofc
which  Mead(/)  afierts  to  have  been  made  by  him  "  formerly,  more  than
«'  once»  in  the  hofpital  ;"  and  the  obfervation,  at  length,  which  occurr'd  to
that  very  experienc'd  man  Marc  Anthony  Caldani  (k),  and  which  is  very
fimilar  to  ours  ;  when  after  a  violent  apoplexy,  and  a  paralyfis  of  the  whole
right  fide,  he  faw  the  left  corpus  ftriatum  eroded  in  one  half  of  its  fubftance,,
and  full  of  grumous  blood.

Yet  there  are  fome  obfervations,  alfo,  of  that  fide  which  is  oppofite  to  the;
injury  not  being  paralytic  -,  and  of  that  fide  which  is  fubjefted  to  the  he-
mifphere  of  the  cerebrum,  wherein  the  difeafe  is,  being  refolv'd.

I  confefs  there  are  :  nor  did  Valfalva  (/)  diflemble  it  among  his  obferva-
tions ;  nor  do  I  diflemble  it  among  m'me{m).  Nay,  in  my  anatomical
epiftles  («)  I  have  produc'd  fcven,  that  are  taken  from  the  books  of  other
authors.

And  if,  with  thefe,  you  fiiould  be  willing  to  reckon  one  from  the  excellent.
Bergenius  (o),  and  one  or  two  that  you  have  in  the  already  commended  SuW
zerus  (/))  ;  I  Ihall  fay  nothing  againft  it :  yet  I  will  beg  of  you  to  confider
thofe  things  which  may  be  replied  to  many  of  them :  and  this  1  have  done
to  fome  of  them  (q),  as  Sulzerus  (r),  who  had  not  feen  my  anatomical
epiftles,  did  afterwards  to  others  ;  although  you  may  fuppofe  there  to  be
fome,  to  which  no  objeftion  can  be  made :  and  I  will  likewife  beg  of  you
to  compare  the  very  fmall  number  of  thefe,  with  the  almoft  innumerabl*-
ones  of  Valfalva,.  and  others.

For  by  this  means  you  will  immediately  underftand,.  to  which  of  the  two
claffes  of  obfervatioris,  a  phyfician,  who  confiders  what  happens  for  the  moft
part,  is  to  have  the  greateft  regard,  and  upon  which  he  ought  moft  to  de-
pend; and  not  only  in  theory,  but  in  praftice  likewife  :  fo  that  if,  in  parti-
cular, as  Sulzerus  (j),  whom  I  have  often  mention'd,  takes  notice,  the  trepan,
is  to  be  applied  to  the  fkull  after  having  receiv'd  a  blow,  by  reafon  of  bloodj
or  pus,  being  extravafated  underneath;  and  to  the  other  fymptoms  a  refo-
lution  of  one  fide  be  added ;  we  may  from  thence  argue  the  feat  of  the
compreffion,  which  has  taken  place  in  the  cerebrum  ;  and  confequently  the
feat  of  the  extravafation,  whereby  this  compreffion  is  occafion'd.

14.  And  as  to  what  relates  to  the  cerebrum,  I  have  faid  enough  on  that--
head.

CeJ  Epift.  11.  n.  10.  &  feqq.  III.  n.  2j  3. (m)  EpM.  57.  n.  14,  15.  Sc  Epift.  Anat.  15^-.

14.  Si  feqq.  V.  n.  7.  XI,  n.  10.  iz.  LI.  n.43.  n.  23.  25.
f/J  Epift.  63.  n.  12. .  («)  Ibid.  eod.  n.  25.

(^)  Vid.  eafd.  epiftoJas.  (0)  Ventriculor.  Lateral.  Cerebri  nava  Tab. -

(h)  Be  Aftione  Cerebri  decuff.  §  8.  not.  M.
(;')  Monit.  Med.  c.  2.  §  2.  (/>)  §  13.

(i)  Lsttera  full'  Infenfitiv.  &c.  §  51.  (y)  Vid.  Epiftolas  indicatas.

(/)  Traft.de  Aur.  Huia.  c.  5.  n.  5,  (V)  §  16.  &  feqq.

■  '  W  §-.21.

Butr.


480 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

But  what  if  the  injury  reach  to  the  cerebellum  ?  The  queftion  then  is,*
whether,  if  this  injury  be  in  one  or  other,  or  about  one  or  other,  of  the
lobes  of  this  body,  it  bring  on  an  hemiplegia  ;  and  if  it  does  bring  it  on,
whether  in  the  oppofite,  or  the  fubjefted  fide,  of  the  body  ?

This  problem  I  have  propos'd  in  the  third  of  my  anatomical  epiftles  (/) :
nor  am  1  ibry  that  I  have  made  it  my  general  cuftom,  which  I  even  then  ad-
her'd  to,  to  determine  nothing  from  any  one  obfervation ;  nay  indeed,  as  I
there  confefs'd  that  this  obfervation  may  be  explain'd  in  various  ways,  I  ad-
monifli'd  that  we  ought  to  wait  for  other  obfervations,  and  obfervations  of
a  different  kind.

For  I  afterwards  lit  on  an  obfervation  of  a  lefs  modern  date,  and  read
another  new  one,  in  both  of  which  the  hemiplegia  j  correfponding  to  the  in-
jury in  one  of  the  lobes  of  the  cerebellum  ;  was  in  the  limbs  of  the  fubjefted,
and  not  of  the  oppofite  fide.

Thefe  obfervations  I  have  fpoken  of  to  you  in  other  letters  {u) :  although,
admonifh'd  by  thofe  varieties,  which  have  fometimes  occurr'd  in  contradidion
to  the  very  dogma  of  Valfalva,  which  is  otherwife  confirm'd  by  a  great
number  of  clear  and  conQftent  examples ;  I  thought  it  the  moft  fafe  and
prudent  method  of  proceeding,  not  to  determine  any  thing  very  haftily  even
from  two  examples  -,  but  previoufly  to  add  thereto  ftill  others  and  others,
which  might  fhew  the  fame  thing  :  for  this  Valfalva  did  before  he  made  his
opinion  public.

I  am  not  ignorant ;  if  you  Siould  chufe  to  take  the  whole  of  the  circum-
ftances  into  confiderationj  as  you  ought  to  do ;  that  thefe  examples  occur
more  rarely  than  thofe  which  relate  to  the  cerebrum  ;  as  you  may  have  learn'd
from  the  remarks  that  I  have  made,  in  regard  to  a  certain  obfervation  of
mine  {x),  wherein  I  have  found  no  very  fmall  cavity  within  one  lobe  of  the
cerebellum,  and  that  very  full  of  blood :  and  you  may  learn  it  from  a  fecond
obfervation  that  I  have  promis'd  you  there  ;  and  in  another  place  alfo  (j)  j
and  this  I  will  immediately  communicate.

15,  A  man,  about  eight-and-forty  years  of  age,  who  had  been  accuftom'd
to  make  ufe  of  lighted  charcoal,  even  more  than  his  bufinefs,  which  was  that
of  a  cook,  requir'd  •,  and  to  ftand  very  near  to  thefe  fires  v;'ith  his  head  over
them  ;  had  begun  to  complain  of  very  acute  pains  in  that  part  a  year  before.

To  thefe  pains  was  added  a  debility  of  both  the  lower  limbs  likewife,  to  fo
great  a  degree,  that  he  could  no  longer  fupport  himfelf  upon  them.  In  con-
fequence  of  which  affeftion  ;  and  thofe  pains,  join'd  with  a  flight  fever  that
had  lately  come  on  ;  being  oblig'd  to  confine  himfelf  to  his  bed,  and,  finally,
to  fend  for  a  phyfician,  blood  was  firfl:  drawn  from  his  arm,  and  then  from
his  foot  ;  and  that  for  this  reafon  alfo,  that  he  now-and-then  labour'd  under
a, flight  delirium  :  and  the  fever  indeed  was  folv'd  by  this  means;  but  all
the  other  fymptoms  ccntinu'd."

The  phyfician  being  difmifs'd,  he  went  on  to  make  ufe  of  the  cephalic
remedies  that  he  had  order'd  ;  but  fo  far  to  no  purpofe,  that,  after  havifig


{/)  N.  23.  {x)  Epift.  60.  n.  7.

^•*)  Epift.  52.  n.  27.  (yj  Epift.  52.  n.  z6.


kept


Letter  LXII. Article  is-  481

kept  his  bed  at  home  for  four  months,  being  afflifted  with  all  the  diforders
that  I  have  now  mention'd,  and  for  that  reafon,  at  length,  brought  into  the
hofpital,  he  there  liv'd  no  more  than  ten  days.

His  pulfe  was  tenfe  and  vibrating  ;  though  in  other  refpeds  moderate  and
never  febrile.  His  refpiration  was  natural,  as  his  appetite  for  food  alfo  was.
And  although  the  lower  limbs,  as  far  as  motion  was  concern'd,  were  para-
lytic ;  yet  neither  the  upper  limbs,  nor  any  other  parts  of  the  body,  were
attack'd  with  an  affeftion  of  that  kind.

In  the  day-time  he  flept  for  the  moft  part ;  but  in  the  night  was,  in  a
flight  degree,  delirious.  Venasfefliion  having  been  made  ufe  of  in  the  arm
amongft  other  remedies  of  no  effedt,  and  a  few  days  after  that,  vensfedion  in
the  foot  alfo  ;  it  happen'd  that  he  died  on  the  following  night,  without  having
.given  any  figns  cf  his  approaching  diflblution,  through  the  whole  of  that
day :  and  indeed,  having  taken  his  dinner,  as  he  had  been  v/ont  to  do,  and
even  a  part  of  his  fupper  in  the  beginning  of  the  night,  it  was  fuddenly  ob-
ferv'd  that  he  was  giving  up  the  ghoft.

When  he  was  in  his  perfedl  fenfes ;  as  he  was  at  incervals,  though  not  at
all  for  the  moft  part  ■,  he  us'd  to  fay  to  his  fifter  while  h^was  at  home  fre-
quently, and  had  faid  to  others,  while  he  was  in  the  hofpital,  that  he  wifh'd
his  Ikull  might  be  open'd  after  death  ;  in  order  that  the  caufe  of  his  violent
and  obftinate  diforder  might  be  found  out.

And  this  was  done  by  me  on  the  following  day ;  that  is,  on  the  eighth  of
January,  in  the  year  175+  ;  being  attended,  during  the  diffedlion,  by  many
who  had  remain'd  in  the  hofpital- theatre  after  the  anatomical  lefture  was
finifh'd.

While  the  head  was  cut  off,  and  the  fkuU  cut  open,  a  quantity  of  water
had  flow'd  out.  Before  Icut  into  the  brain,  and  ftill  more  after  I  had  dif-
fered it,  I  Ihew'd  that  the  cavity  of  the  cranium  was  oblique  in  this  man  ;
and  that  the  left  fide  crfit,  particularly  at  the  pofterior  part,  was  more  diftant,
and  that  confiderably,  from  the  middle,  than  the  right.

The  veflels  which  creep  through  the  meninges,  and  through  the  parietes
of  the  lateral  ventricles,  had  a  greater  quantity  of  blood  than  they  naturally
have  :  and  this  was  demonftrated,  in  refpedt  to  the  fmall  veflels  which  pafs
through  the  medullary  fubfl:ance  of  the  cerebrum,  by  the  bloody  points  being
more  than  ufually  confpicuous.

That  fubftance  indeed  was  pretty  hard  in  the  hemifpheres.  On  the  other
hand,  the  corpus  callofum  was  lax.  But  the  former,  and  the  medullary
iraft,  which  is  drawn  before  the  columns  of  its  bafis,  were  ftill  more  lax  j
and  thofe  columns  lax  in  a  very  great  degree  ;  fo  that  their  fubftance  might
feem  to  be  diflTolv'd.  The  corpus  ftriatum,  on  the  left  fide,  was  more  lax,
alfo,  than  the  fight. But  the  feptum  lucidum  was  pretty  firm.

In  the  three  anterior  ventricles  was  a  great  quantity  of  limpid  water;  and
therein  the  alse  of  the  plexus  choroides  floated,  but  were  not  of  a  pale  co-
lour. The  pineal  gland  ;  which  was  diftended  with  the  fame  water,  and
€afiiy  ruptur'd,  in  raifing  up  the  middle  part  of  thofe  plexufles ;  left  nothing
of  itfelf  behind,  but  a  very  fmall  part  of  its  bafis  ;  which  was  affix'd  to  its
feat.

The  third  ventricle  feem'd  to  be  fliorter  than  it  naturally  Ihould  be ;  but

Vol.  hi,  Q^q  q  the


48  2 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

the  fourth  ventricle  certainly  appear'd  to  be  longer  than  it  generally  is,  after
the  cerebellum  had  been  cut  through  the  middle,  in  the  ufual  manner,  and
laid  afide  on  one  hand  and  on  the  other.

And  in  cutting  this  fubftance  in  the  manner  I  have  faid  -,  I  found  a  cir-
cumftance  of  dileafe,  which  the  furface  thereof,  that  was  fimilar  to  what  it
generally  has,  did  not  fo  much  as  fuffer  me  to  fufpedt.

That  is  to  fay,  no  fooner  had  I  proceeded,  with  the  knife,  to  the  depth
of  a  finger's  breadth,  but,  perceiving  an  unufual  refiftance,  I  ftood  ftill,  and
drawing  afunder  that  part  which  I  had  cut  into,  was  very  much  furpriz'd  that
no  mark  of  the  medullary  tree  or  fhrub  appear'd  ;  but  that  in  its  place  were
parallel  medullary  ftriae,  drawn  betwixt  the  cortical  fubftance :  from  which
ftriffi  no  fmall  branches  were,  in  any  place,  fent  forth.^

Then  attempting  the  divifion  with  a  fharper  and  ftronger  knife  ;  whatever
remain'd  of  the  middle  fubftance  of  the  cerebellum,  I  cut  afunder,  quite  down
to  the  fourth  ventricle ;  and  began  to  fee  that  diforder,  on  account  of  which,,
chiefly,  I  defcribe  to  you  this  obfervation.

It  was  a  fubftance  not  foft,  not  of  two  colours,  nor  cut  betwixt  with  deep
and  very  frequent  fulci ;  but  a  fchirrhous  fubftance,  and  of  one  colour,  which
approach'd  pretty  nearly  to  that  of  a  very  dilute  flefh-colour  j  being  made
up  of  roundilh  corpufclcs,  as  it  were,  fo  compacted  one  with  another,  that
there  no-where  occurr'd  any  interftice,  no  membrane,  no  fanguiferous
Teflels.

A  diforder  of  this  kind  extended  itfelf,  on  the  one  hand,  towards  the  right
fide  in  fome  meafure  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  through  almoft  the  whole  left
lobe  of  the  cerebellum.

For  if  you  excepted  the  furface  of  this  lobe,  which  was  made  'up  of  its
natural  fubftance  ;  that  was  in  fome  places  very  little,  and  at  the  lower  part
none  at  all ;  all  the  remaining  part  was  occupied  by  juft  the  fame  diforder :
and  at  the  lower  part  in  particular  it  was  clofely  conneded  with  the  dura
mater;  fo  that  the  diforder  might  be  fuppos'd  to  have  taken  its  origin  from
that  place,  and  to  have  been  propagated,  from  thence,  into  the  other  parts
whereof  I  have  fpoken.

Anxl  the  right  lobe,  although  it  confifted  of  a  foft  fubflrancei  and  that
double,  alfo  -,  I  mean  a  cortical  and  a  medullary  fubftance ;  nevcrthelefs  did
not  Ihew,  when  cut  into  tranfverfely,  that  difpofition  of  both  thefe  fubftances,.
which  it  is  wont  to  do  in  other  bodies;  but  a  difpofition  evidently  different
therefrom :  although  not  to  fuch  a  degree  as  that  middle  part  of  the  cere^
bellum  V  which,  where  it  was  foft,  and  made  up  of  a  double  fubftance,  ofFer'd
fedlions  fo  very  different  from  what  we  have  always  feen,  as  thofe  of  which -
I  have  juft  now  given  you  a  defcription.

Nor  could  I  obferve  any  thing  more  that  v;as  contrary  to  the  ordinary  ap-
pearances of  nature ;  notwithftanding  I  diffefted  all  the  parts  accurately^  and^
in  their  fituation  likewife.

But  I  had  no  time  to  examine  any  other  part  in  this  body.
16.  From  what  part  this  fchirrhus  of  the  cerebellum  might  feem  to  have-
taken  its  beginning,  has  been  already  hinted. But  whether  it  began  on  the
left  fide  for  this  reafon,  that  the  cavity  of  the  cranium  was  there  immoderately
large  ;  I  Ihall  no  more  take  upon  me  tq  fay,  than  from  whence  the  unufual

difpefitioa


Letter  LXIL Article  i^.  483

difpofition  of  the  medullary  fubftance ;  through  the  right  lobe,  and  that
middle  part  of  the  cerebellum  ;  took  its  rife,  or  occafion.

For  that  the  cafe  had  been  thus  from  the  original  formation,  or  from
birth,  does  not  feem  credible,  in  him  who  liv'd  feven-and-forty  years  without
any  complaint  of  his  head.

It  is  rather  probable  -,  to  pafs  on  to  other  things  ;  that  as  the  fchirrhous
difordcr  increas'd,  and  lefs  and  lefs  blood  was  admitted  into  that  whole  part
of  the  cerebellum,  wherein  were  no  longer  feen  any  of  the  great  number  of
veffels,  which  go  down  here  and  there  deep  betwixt  the  fegments  (here  en-
tirely obliterated)  in  all  bodies  j  fo  much  the  greater  quantity  of  blood  was
propell'd  both  into  the  external,  and  into  the  more  internal,  veffels  of  the
cerebrum ;  and  that,  from  thence,  not  only  the  pains,  but  the  frequent
flight  deliria  arofe :  and  finally,  that  from  thence,  when  at  the  fame  time  a
great  quantity  of  water  flow'd  down  upon  the  cerebrum,  death  was
brought  on.

All  which  circumftances  might  the  more  eafily  happen,  not  only  on  account
of  the  bufinefs  wherein  the  man  was  continually  occupied  ;  and  his  too  incau-
tious method  of  excrcifing  it ;  but  alfo  on  account  of  that  depf av'd  difpofition
of  the  brain,  to  which  the  other  circumftances  had  been  added:  and  this
difpofition  is  fhown  by  the  irregular  figure  of  the  cranium ;  whether  this  was
brought  about  in  the  uterus,  or  in  its  exit  therefrom.

For  I  believe  that  this  happens  very  frequently  when,  in  a  difficult  birth  of
the  infant,  the  head  thereof  is  long  detain'd  in  a  ftreight  paffage  ;  and  the  un-
Ikilful  and  regardlefs  mid  wives;  after  having  dcform'd,  by  a  rude  and  un-
equal preffure,  the  head  which  they  had  violently  laid  hold  of,  and  dragg'd
forth ;  are  either  entirely  ignorant  how,  or  do  not  take  any  care,  to  reftore  it
into  a  natural  form,  by  a  proper  and  gentle  application  of  the  hands.

And  how  much  injury  then  arifes  to  the  tender  ftrufture  of  the  cerebrum
and  cerebellum;  and 'not  then  only,  but  afterwards  alfo ;  when,  by  in-
creafing  within  an  ill-form'd  cranium,  it  is  under  a  neceffity  of  accommo-
dating itfelf  to  the  figure  thereof;  you  will,  without  doubt,  readily  perceive,
though  I  fhould  fay  nothing  on  the  fubjeft.

Nor  becaufe,  when  I  found  a  fimilar  conformation;  except  that  the  cavity
of  the  cranium  was  larger  in  the  occiput  only,  and  not  on  the  left  fide,  but
on  the  right ;  in  another  man  (z),  I  did  not  know  that  the  man  had  been  fub-
je£t  to  diforders  of  the  brain  ;  nor  yet  that  an  old  man,  diffefted  by  me  in
the  hofpital,  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  1755,  whofe  forehead  was  fo
prominent  on  the  right  fide,  and  his  occiput  on  the  left  fide,  that  the  longeft
axis  of  the  cranium  was  vcxy  oblique ;  nor  that  this  old  woman,  I  fay,  had
been  fubjeft  to  any  fuch  diforders ;  will  you,  therefore,  of  courfe  fuppofc,
that  they  were  not  liable  thereto  :  for  it  is  not  eafy,  in  regard  to  obfcure  and
unknown  plebeians,  to  learn  after  their  deaths  all  the  complaints  they  fuffer'd
while  living.

Nay,  rather  fee  in  what  ftate  the  cerebrum  was  in  two  women  ;  one  of
whofe  fkuUs  {a)  I  found  to  be  in  a  ftate  of  male-conformation,  as  in  the

(«)  Epift.  55,  n.  26.  (a)  Epift.  i.  n.  14.

Q^q  q  2  man  ;


4B4  ^00^  V-  Byway  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

man  -,  and  that  of  the  other  (h)  ill-form'd,  as  in  the  old  man ;  and
read  with  what  fevere  pains  of  the  head  the  firft  was  troubled  :  to  the
obftinacy  and  long  continuance  of  which,  how  much  adeprav'd  figure  of  the
head  contributes,  you  will  even  learn  from  the  opinion  of  others  (c).

Add  to  thefe  the  little  boy  (d),  the  pofterlor  part  of  whofe  cerebrum
feem'd  not  to  approach  to  the  figure  of  a  fphere  •,  but  rather  to  the  fuperficies
of  a  cube  ;  and  who  was  carried  off  by  convulfive  motions :  and  add  the
woman  alfo  (e),  in  whom  the  cavity  of  the  cranium  was  very  narrow,  in
proportion  to  its  length  -,  who  had  been,  probably,  feiz'd  more  than  once
with  an  apoplexy  ;  but  at  leaft  had  been  kill'd  thereby.

And  if  you  (hould  think  proper  to  fay,  that  other  caufes  had  been  added
to  the  male- conformation  of  the  head  ;  and  thefe  of  an  external  kind  ;
why  then  you  would  fay  the  very  fame  thing  that  I  fay  of  the  cook  in
queftion.

17.  And  if  to  the  fchirrhus  of  this  man's  cerebellum  ;  neglefting  all  the
other  diforders  that  were  in  the  brain,  as  if  none  of  their  beginnings  could
have  exifted  before  the  paralyfis  -,  contrary  to  v/hat  is  Ihown  by  thofe  very
acute  pains  of  the  head  which  had  preceded;  if  to  this  fchirrhus  alone,  I
fay,  you  fhould  choofe  to  impute  the  paralyfis ;  you  will  feem  not  to  have
remember'd,  that  not  only  the  lower  limb,  which  was  fubjedted  to  the
fchirrhus,  was  refolv'd,  but  both  of  them  equally  fo :  which  circumftance,
beyond  a  doubt,  is  the  reafon  why  that,  which  I  faid  had  occafion  to  be
confirm'd  by  other  obfervations  (/),  certainly  cannot  be  confi.rm'd  by
this.

And  we  fhould  have  been  prevented  from  making  the  fame  conclufion,
by  other  circumftances,  in  two  obfervations,  wherein  I  have  defcrib'd  one  or
other  part  of  the  cerebellum,  either  as  moft  injur'd,  or  folely  injur'd  ;  by
blood  being  extravafated  v-fithin  it,  or  by  an  eroding  pus  being  collefted
about  it :  and  thefe  in  the  fecond  (g)  and  the  fourteenth  letter  (h).  For  in
one  of  them  it  could  not  be  obferv'd  whether  there  was  any  hemiplegia  or
not :  and  in  the  other  there  certainly  was  none.

1 8.  But  the  hiftory  of  the  cook  that  is  defcrib'd,  fay  you,  will  at  leaft  con-
firm that  which  learned  men  now  produce,  in  feveral  places,  againft  thofe
funftions  which  were  attributed  to  the  cerebellum  by  Willis.

For  with  fo  great  a  diforder  of  that  vifcus,  the  refpiration  and  appetite
for  food  were  in  their  natural  ftate  in  this  cook  :  and  the  pulfe  itfelf  was
tenfe  and  vibrating  ;  being  in  other  refpecls  in  a  moderate  ftate.

As  to  me,  however,  though  I  do  not  allow  of  every  thing  that  Willis  has
faid  of  the  cerebellum  •,  yet  1  now-and-then  fear,  left  fome  perfons  fhould  de-
traft  too  much  therefrom.

Wherefore,  if  I  have  given  any  hint  in  favour  of  this  vifcus,  in  my  letters-
to  you  (z) ;.  particularly  before  the  objedtions  againft  it  had  fo  much  en-
crcas'd ;  I  would  have  you  confider  them  in  fuch  a  light,  as  to  fuppofe  that

ii)  Ibid.  eod.  n.  in  fin.  &  Epift,  12.  n.  2.  C/J  n-  54-

{c)  Epift.  I.  n.  15.  \g)  n.  22.

(^)  Epift.  10.  n.  9.  {h) n.  3.

!<■)  Epift.  3.  n.  6.  7.  (0  Epiil,  2.  n.  24.

Ijudg'd


Letter  LXIII. Article  i.  4^^^

I  judg'd  it  proper  not  to  be  entirely  of  a  contrary  opinion  to  others ;  but  to
go  on  cautioufly  and  warily  in  the  change  of  this  dodrine  alfo,  as  well  as  of
others.

Nor  was  I  influenc'd  by  any  other  motive ;  when  it  was  my  bufinefs  toe
write  upon  wounds  of  the  cerebellum  (k)  ;  not  to  omit  thofe  things  which
you  have  read  there  ;  nor  thofe  things  in  lilce  manner,  which  relate  to  inju-
ries of  the  lame  viicus,  that  are  not  inftantaneoufly  brought  on  as  wounds
are,  but  happen  in  fome  fhorter  or  longer  fpace  of  time  (/) ;  fuch  asfchirrhi
in  particular.  Which  things,  as  you  may  read  them  over  again,  I  fliall  noc
repeat  here.

But  do  not  imagine  that ;  when  I  found  this  very  great  diforder  in  the
cerebellum,  which  I  have  fo  accurately  and  ingenuoufly  defcrib'd  to  you ;  I
was  lefs  furpriz'd  than  you  have  been  in  reading  it,  that  the  man's  refpira-
tion  and  pulfe  were  in  that  ftate,  which,  upon  diligent  enquiry,  I  found
them  to  have  been.

For  certainly,  I  faw  plainly  that  more  was  afcrib'd  to  this  vifcus,  before
thefe  later  times,  than  was  proper;  and  that  thofe  excellent  men  were  to  be
commended,  who  have  admonifh'd  us,  that  we  ought  not  to  afcribe  fo  much,
thereto.

And  indeed  it  appears,  that,  as  lefs  importance  is  to  be  attributed  to  fome
other  parts  of  the  body,  in  another  refpeft,  than  in  former  times  ;  fo  Itfs  is
to  be  attributed  to  the  cerebellum  than  heretofore.  Yet  how  far  that  im-
portance is  to  be  diminifh'd,  deferves  confideration  :  and  this  I  think  our
pofterity  will  be  better  able  to  determine  upon  than  we  are  at  prefent,
Farevi^el.


LETTER the SIXTY-THIRD

Relates  to  Blindnefs,  to  Aphonia,  and  Angina..


LT HOUGH, befides thofe  obfervations  which  I  had  publilh'd

before  (a),  I  have  fent  to  you  more  than  one  {b)  of  my  obiervatioris

upon  blindnefs ;  but  one,  and  no  more,  that  related  to  aphonia  (c) ;  and  one,
in  like  manner,  that  related  to  angina  (d)  ;  yet  it  has  fo  happen'd,  that  out
of  thofe  which  1  have  made  fince  that  time,  I  can  defcribe  to  you  only  one

{k)  Epift.  52.  n.  27.  (,i]  Epift. 13.  n.  8.  9.  15.

(/)  Ibid.  n.  26.  (0  Epift.  14.  n.  35.

(a)  Epill.  Anat.  18.  n.  zzi  38.  40.  ■  (^)  Epift.  44.  n,  3,

%  that


48^  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books*

that  relates  to  each  of  the  two  laft-mcntion'd  diforders ;  whereas  I  have  many
that  relate  to  blindnefs,  with  which  I  therefore  (hall  begin.

2.  The  eye  of  a  certain  old  woman  was  brought  to  me,  amongft  a  great
number  of  others,  to  be  made  ufe  of  in  the  public  anatomical  demonftra-
tions  of  the  year  1747  :  which  I  the  more  willingly  took  upon  me  todifleft,
becaufe  the  figure  of  it,  that  was  not  fo  much  fpherical  as  it  naturally  is,
Ihow'd  it  to  have  been  blind  ;  and  the  greater  part  of  the  cornea  was  very
opaque  from  large  white  fpots.

The  choroides  adhcr'd  more  clofely  than  ufual  to  the  tunica  fclerotica  j
efpecially  in  the  pofterior  part.  The  anterior  furface  of  the  chryftalline  hu-
mour was  unequally  hoUow'd  out  in  the  middle  ;  and  that  to  a  confiderable
depth  :  the  other  parts  of  the  fame  humour,  although,  when  held  up  againfl:
the  light,  they  refembled  yellow  amber,  were  found  neverthelefs,  if  confider'd
in  refpedt  to  that  age.

When  I  attempted  to  remove  the  iris  from  the  cornea ;  I  found  that  I
could  not  remove  the  whole  of  it ;  particularly  in  the  middle.  For,  altho'
it  adher'd  from  one  fide  quite  to  the  middle,  and  even  beyond  the  middle  of
the  cornea;  yet  it  adher'd  no  where  fo  clofely  as  in  the  middle,  where  that
furface  of  the  cornea  was  unequal,  and  had  a  lamella  beginning  to  abfcede,
as  it  were,  and  protuberating  inwards  in  fome  meafure  -,  whereas  the  external
furface  was  fmooth  :  nor  could  I  obferve  any  other  preternatural  appearance
therein,  except  fome  very  minute  points  as  it  were,  and  thefe  rather
obfcure.

g.  And  this  being  the  (late  of  the  parts ;  and  no  cicatrices  being  feen
any  where  on  the  external  furface  of  the  eye ;  juft  as  in  another  eye,
which  that  celebrated  anatomift  Phil.  Conr.  Fabricius  {e)  dilTefted,  and
which  had  other  circumftances  that  deferve  to  be  read  by  you,  but  did  not
agree  with  this  of  mine,  in  the  feat  of  the  excavation  of  the  chryftalline
Iwmour  ;  it  was  not  very  difficult  for  me  to  refer  all  the  diforders  that  I  have
defcrib'd,  to  an  internal  caufe,  which  had  formerly  preceded  -,  whether  that
had  been  an  inflammation,  or  any  other  caufe  whatever.

On  the  contrary,  I  was  much  in  doubt,  whether ;  in  an  eye  which  I  like-
■vi'ift  dilTefted  in  the  college  in  the  following  year  ;  all  the  circumftances  that
J  (hall  immediately  enumerate,  were  to  be  imputed  to  a  caufe  of  this
jkind.

4.  The  eye  of  a  man  had  its  cornea  opaque,  for  a  long  time  together,  as  it
feem'd  ;  and  this  part  likewife  retain'd  Qender  indeed,  but  evident,  traces  of
»  cicatrix.

The  chryftalline  humour  was  connefled  with  the  coat  juft  now  mention'd;
yet  was  not  hard,  although  it  had  decreas'd  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  fcarcely
a  fourth  part  of  it  remain'd.  The  uvea  was  not  in  a  very  bad  (late  ;  but  the
vitreous  humour  and  the  retina  were  in  a  much  worfe  ftate.  The  optic
perve,  being  become  very  (lender,  inftead  of  the  medullary  fubftance,  con-
tain'd  in  the  whole  of  that  tradt,  which  had  lain  within  the  orbit,  a  fomewhat
white  and  clofely  compared  fubftance. But  of  what  nature  it  had  been  within

(0  Progr.  quo  Obf.  Anat,  receaf.  A.  1754.

:  the


Letter  LXIII. Articles  Si  ^«  487

the  orbit,  I  could  not  learn ;  as  the  brain  had  been  inconfiderately  buried
fome  time  before.

5.  How  much  I  was  chagrin'd  by  this  diftppointment ;  and  why  I  was
chagrin'd  thereby ;  you  will  eafily  gather,  both  from  what  I  have  written  in
the  anatomical  epiftles  (/),  and  in  other  places  {g)  alfo,  to  you.  And  I  was
the  more  pleas'd  therefore,  at  leaft  in  the  beginning,  when  an  occafion  pre-
fcnted  itfelf  to  me  ;.  in  the  hofpital  j  in  the  following  year  1749,  about  the
beginning  of  January ;  of  purfuing  that  nerve,  from  a  blind  eye,  within  the'
cranium.

Which  obfervation,  as  it  is  one  of  the  two  that  I  formerly  rcferr'd  to(i>)  „
and  as  I  had  fent  the  other  to  you  afterwards  (;),  but  have  not  fcnt  this  to
you  yet ;  Ihall  now  be  accurately  defcrib'd.

6.  A  man  had  formerly,  when  a  boy,  had  his  right  eye  fo  very  much  af-
fefted  by  the  fmall-pox,  as  to  fee  nothing  therewith.  But  his  parents,  by
licking  it  with  the  tongue,  for  a  long  time  together,  had  been  fo  far  of  ad-
vantage thereto,  that  it  at  length  faw  a  little,  yet  very  obfcurely.  Nor  did-
this  eye,  from  that  time  ta  the  very  day  of  the  man's  death  j  that  is,  to  fome
time  in  his  fortieth  year ;  ever  fee  more  diftindlly.

And)  indeed,  this  eye  was  not  only  lefs  than  the  other^  but'  even  the
cornea  itfelf  v^  in  which,  in  other  refpefts,  there  appear'd  to  be  no  trace  of
injury,  fo  that  the  whitenefs  which  was  behind  it,  might  be  clearly  feen'
through  it>;  was  not  equal  to  the  other  cornea.

Having  therefore  but  flightly  cut  into  the  tunica  fclerotica  on  the  Back-
part  J  a  quantity  of  limpid  water  immediately  flow'd  out :  into  which  water
a  great  part  of  the  vitreous  humour  might  feem  to  have  degenerated  j
whereas  the  remaining  part,  which  was  in  fome  meafure  fhnilar  to  the  humour
in  its  natural  ftate,  had  remain'd  annex'd  to  the  chryftalline  humour^  as  it
generally  does  :  and  this  humour  follow'd  it  when  I  drew  it  backwards.

This  chryftalline-was  fmall  in  every  dimenfion  y  and  even  fomewhat  lefs
in  thicknefs,  than  was  fuitable  to  an  eye  of  that  kind.  On  its  anterior  furface
it  was  white  in  the  middle,  as  I  had  feen  it  through  the  cornea ;  in  other
relpedlSj  it- was  of  a  whitifti  colour :  and  when  I  comprefs'd  it  flightly  be-
twixt my  fingers,  it  was  foft.

But  when  I  had  begun  to  eut  into  the  coat  of  this  humour^  water  imme-
diately burft  out  j  having' nothing  purulent  in  it,  but  being  even  pure  and
limpid,  and  in  fuch.  a  quantity,  in  proportion  to  the  fmallnefs  of  the  chry-
ftalline, that  this  humour;  was  immediately  reduc'd  to  a  much  lefs  thicknefs.

Whatever  remain'd  of  its  fubftance,  retain'd  its  priftine  lenticular  figure :
and  when  I  had  cut  it  through  according  to  its  diameter;  both  feftions  (hew'd
a  feries,  as  it  were,,  of  v«ry  fmall  blackilh  particles,  which  was  carried  di-
reftly  through  the  middle,  from  one  extremity  of  the  fedtion  to  the  other ;
whereas,  in  every  other  part,  the  colour  appear'd  of  a  dirty  and  obfcure
white. The  other  parts  of  the  eye  were  not  in  fo  bad  a  ftate.

In  the  upper  eye-lid,  the  febaceous  glands  j .  which  L  had  feen^  in  the


ff)  XVIir.  n.  40.1  (h)  Ibid.  n.  lo.

^)_j,Epift.  13.  n.  7f  (0  Epift.  52.  n.  30.


former


488 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  tlie  former  Books.

former  man  (■^),  to  be  even  more  beautiful  and  more  thick  than  ufual ;  I  ob-
ferv'd,  in  this  man,  to  be  lefs  confpicuous  than  they  generally  are ;  perhaps
by  reafon  of  the  fmall  pox :  yet  I  plainly  faw  two,  very  near  to  each  other,
which  had  mutual  decufiations  towards  the  upper  part.

And  this  circuniftance  I  was  willing  to  take  notice  of  here,  in  order  to
{hew  you,  that  fome  perfons,  who  (without  attending  to  this,  I  fuppofe,  that
.  when  a  figure  of  any  appearances,  Vvfhich  were  not  well  reprefented  before,
is  given,  thefe  things  muft  be  delcrib'd  from  a  body,  wherein  they  appear  in
the  mod  elegant  manner,  whereas  in  mine  there  was  not  one  reprefentation
as  it  were,  but  a  manifold  one)  would  complain  of  the  want  of  thofe  varieties
which  they  folicitoufly  enumerate,  were  neverthelefs  ftrangers  to  this  of
which  I  have  juft  now  fpoken.

But  now  let  us  go  on  to  t-hat  circumftance,  for  the  fake  of  which,  chiefly,
I  write  this  obfervation  to  you.  The  optic  nerve  that  belong'd  to  the  de-
fcrib'd  eye,  contain'd  a  medullary  iubflance  indeed,  under  its  thicken'd  coats,
where  it  lay  within  the  orbit ;  but  this  fubttance  was  thinner  than  it  naturally
■is  :  and  if  you  comprefs'd  it,  you  found  it  to  be  more  moift  than  ufual,  as
if  it  had  a  quantity  of  water  mix'd  with  it.

But  within  the  cranium,  the  fame  nerve  was  quite  in  a  natural  (late;  ex-
cept that  where  it  was  join'd  with  its  fellow,  there  it  feem'd  to  be  fomewhac
lefs  thick  than  the  latter  :  but  above  that  place  ;  for  I  trac'd  it  up  as  high
as  I  could  go  •,  1  did  not  even  obferve  this  difterence,  nor  any  other  what-
.ever ;  notwithftanding  I  enquir'd  by  every  kind  of  means  :  nor  could  others,
.who  had  been  exercis'd^  by  me  in  anatomical  purfuits,  and  examin'd  it  very
attentively,  diftinguiih  the  leaft  difference.

7.  In  regard  to  water  being  found  by  me,  at  other  times  alfo,  in  the  place
of  the  whole  vitreous  humour;  not  to  mention  the  pofterior  part  of  it;  you
may  fee  what  I  have  laid  on  this  fubjedl,  in  my  anatomical  epiftles  (/)  :  and
in  regard  to  the  optic  nerve  which  goes  to  a  blind  eye,  you  may  fee  what  I
wrote  in  the  places  referr'd  to  above  (?«).

But  as,  when  I  was  treating  upon  this  fubje£t  («),  I  promis'd  you  two
qbfervations,  from  whence  you  might,  not  without  admiration,  perceive,  that
there  are  fometimes  diforders  of  this  nerve  ;  and  even  that  very  extenuation
itfelf ;  and  yet  no  blindnefs  of  the  correfponding  eye ;  and  as  I  have  hitherto
only  lent  you  one  of  thofe  obfervations  (<?) ;  you  will  now  have  the  fecond.
.  8.  In  diflefting  the  carcafe  of  an  old  man,  who  died  in  the  hofpital,  in
the  beginning  of  the  year  1752,  of  a  cachexy,  as  was  faid  ;  although  this
was  not  done  with  a  view  to  inveftigate  the  caufes  of  his  difeafe ;  I  never-
thelefe  remark'd  the  following  preternatural  appearances.

The  thorax  had  no  extravafated  water  in  it,  as  the  belly  had  not  likewife :
but  the  lungs  were  not  without  hardnefs  ;  particularly  the  left  lobe,  which,
moreover,  adher'd  to  the  fpine  very  clofely.

The  upper  part  of  the  cranium,  which  could  not  be  puU'd  away  without
force,  was  hollow'd  out,  on  the  infide,  with  a  greater  number  of  pits,  or

(i)  N.  4..  (»)  Epift.  13.  n.  II.

(/)  XVIII.  n.  38.  (o)  Epift.  56.  n.  21.

(mj  N.  5.  •  _

;  cavities.


Letter  LXIII. Article  9.  409

cavities,  than  ufual,  in  the  os  frontis,  and  in  one  of  the  ofia  fincipitis ;  molt
of  them  being  fmall  indeed,  but  three  of  them  very  large  and  deep  ;  two  of
which  belonged  to  the  firft-mention'd  bone,  and  the  other  to  that  laO;  fpoken
of:  and  that  in  this  bone,  as  well  as  thofe  in  the  other,  was  not  only  cover'd
over  with  a  thin  lamella  externally,  but  with  one  fo  very  thin,  that  it  ap-
pear'd  to  be  perforated  with  fmall  foramina.

And  from  hence  you  plainly  perceive,  how  eafily  this  cranium  might  have
been  broken  through,  and  with  how  much  danger  even  from  the  flighted
blows,  not  to  fay  from  the  trepan  of  the  furgeon,  if  it  had  happen'd  to  have
been  applied  thereto ;  as  under  this  lamella  was  nothing  mere  than  a  few
bony  fibres,  difpos'd  into  the  form  of  a  reticular  web,  wherewith  the  dura
mater,  that  invefted  thefe  cavities,  was  intangled  :  and  from  hence  arofe  that
confiderable  difficulty  in  pulling  away  the  cranium.

But  I  do  not  defcribe  thefe  appearances  to  you,  becaufe  I  fhould  fuppofe
them  to  have  been  the  effedt  of  a  foregoing  difeafe  ;  whereof  there  did  not
here  appear  the  leaft  token;  rather  than  the  work  of  nature  herfelf;  for-
getting thofe  things  which  I  have  hinted  in  regard  to  thefe  cavities,  when
writing  to  you  on  a  former  occafion  {p) ;  but  becaufe  they  were  both  very
large,  and  no  protuberance  was  prominent  from  the  fubjefted  meninges,
made  up  of  the  corpufcles  Vi'hich  were  call'd  glandulse  Pacchioni ;  not  one
of  which  was  in  this  fubjeft,  although  protuberances  of  this  kind,  as  I  then
aflerted  to  you,  are  wont,  at  other  times,  to  be  receiv'd  within  thefe  cavities.

However,  although  in  the  difleftion  of  the  cerebrum,  I  found  the  feptum
lucidum,  and  the  fornix,  mod  immoderately  lax ;  and  even,  betwixt  the
two  laminae  of  that  feptum,  found  a  little  water  ;  and  in  the  lateral  ventricles,
a  water  fimilar  to  that  wherein  frefh  meat  has  been  wafh'd  -,  though  not  in
great  quantity  indeed,  nor  join'd  with  a  palencfs  of  the  plexus  choroides  ;
yet  I  found  the  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum  itfelf,  and  of  the  medulla  oblon-
gata, and  nerves,  arifing  therefrom,  to  be  pretty  firm,  and  quite  in  a  na-
tural ftate.

And  I  was,  for  this  reafon,  the  more  ftruck  with  the  ftate  of  the  optic
nerve  on  the  right  fide ;  which,  being  perfeftly  found,  quite  to  its  union
with  the  left,  and  entirely  fimilar  thereto,  appear'd,  inftantly  after  this  con-
junftion,  to  be  very  evidently  lefs  thick  than  the  left ;  and  to  be  inclin'd  to
a  cineritious  colour :  and  in  this  manner  it  went  on  to  the  orbit.

Wherefore  I  immediately  enquir'd,  whether  this  man  had  been  blind  of
his  right  eye :  and  as  this  queftion  was  pofitively  anfwer'd  in  the  negative,
I  examin'd  that  eye,  and  found  it  to  be  no  lefs  beautiful,  and  found,  than
the  left :  nor  did  I  fee  that  the  optic  nerve  of  that  eye  differ'd  any  more
from  the  left,  within  the  orbit,  than  that  it  was  certainly  fomewhat  lefs
thick.

9.  But  deferring  thofe  circumftances  in  the  explication  of  which  there
may  be  fome  difficulty,  to  another  occafion,  let  us  now  return  to  thofe  things
that  are  more  eafily  accounted  for  :  and  after  having  added  another  obfer-
vation,  we  will  fubjoin  a  certain  conjefture.

(/)  Epift.  8.  n.  3.
Vol.  III.  Rr  r  10.  The


49° Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books..

10.  The  eyes  of  a  miller-,  who  was  faid  to  have  been  blind,  and  yet  was
•wont  to  walk  through  the  city,  without  any  other  guide  than  his  ftick  ;  were
brought  to  me  to  be  differed  in  the  hofpital,  about  the  latter  end  of  the
year  1755.  When  look'd  upon  externally,  through  the  cornea,  they  feem'd
to  be  turbid  rather  than  white.

I  found  both  the  chryftalline  humours  to  be  fomewhat  opaque :  yet  not
fo  as  to  be  more  opaque  in  fome  places,  and  lefs  in  others  ;  but  to  be  equally
opaque  every-where.  Under  the  finger,  and  betwixt  the  fingers,  both  of
them  feem'd  ro  be  hard  in  an  equal  degree.  Neverthelefs  one  of  them,  which
was  the  more  flender,  had  its  fubftance  the  more  dry  and  more  compaft.

The  other,  which  was  the  thicker,  was  more  moift  than  it  naturally  is ;
fo  that  it  feem'd  to  difcharge  the  whole  of  its  moifture  upon  diffeclion :  yet
this  moifture  did  not  burft  forth,  but  exfude.  One  of  them ;  for  which  it
was  my  notes  do  not  fay ;  had  a  pupil  of  a  pretty  large  diameter  correfponding
to  it ;  and  the  other  a  pupil  of  a  Imall  diameter.

11.  If  you  fhould  wilh  for  other  examples  of  opacity,  not  fo  much  of.
the  chryftalline  humour,  as  of  its  coat  -,  you  may  have  them  from  the  cele-
brated Haller  (q).  In  reading  of  whofe  obfervations  (r),  and  thofe  of  the
celebrated  Zinnius  (s),  which  confirm  the  exiftence  of  the  memhana  pupillans,.
found  by  the  moft  excellent  Wachendorffius  (t) ;  it  feem'd  that  I  might  very
eafily  conjefture,  what  that  "  kind  of  membranaceous  integument,  laid  over
"  the  pupil,  from  the  body  of  an  infant,  and  having  even  the  fmall  arteries
*'  which  creep  through  it  fill'd  with  the  moft  liquid  wax,"  which  was  fhewn  to
that  eminent  man  Richard  Mead  (a),  was ;  notwithftanding  he  made  ufe  of
it  to  prove,  that  the  cataraft  was  fometimes,  though  very  feldom  indeedj,
found  to  be  really  membranous :  that  is  to  fay,  when  "  any  little  thin  mem-
"  brane  has,  by  any  misfortune,  happen'd  to  contrad  a  ftate  of  drynefs."

I  therefore  think  it  very  probable,  that  the  pupillary  membrane,  being,,
in  fome  foetufles,  very  thick,  and  adhering  firmly  to  the  iris,  cannot  be  dif-
Iblv'd,  and  vanifti  before  birth  -,  but  remains  there,  and  caufes  the  pupil  to-
be  fhut  up  from  the  birth,  and  for  that  reafon  brings  on  blindnefsj  juft  in.
the  fame  manner  as  deafnefs  is  brought  on  by  any  very  thick  matter,  which,
adhering  clofely  to  the  membrana  tympani,  does  not  fall  out  from  the
meatus  auditorius  of  new-born  infants;  as  it  generally  happens  in  others,,
in  the  manner  I  have  mention'd,  in  more  than  one  place,  in  the  Anatomical;
Epiftles  (x).

There  are  other  diforders  alfo  •,  and  thofe  even  internally  feated  ;  which,
may  be  fet  in  a  much  clearer  point  of  light,  by  comparing  the  organs  of
hearing  and  of  vifion  with  each  other :  but  thofe  things  that  happen  to  the
eye,  may  happen  fo  much  the  more  eafily,  in  proportion  as  the  ftrufture  of
it  is  more  fubtle.

And  if  this  circumftance  appear'd  from  nothing  elfe,  it  might  be  very,
eafily  conjeflur'd,  merely  from  the  different  method,  in  which  the  all-wile-

(j)  Opufc.  Pathol.  Obf.  3.  (?)  Commerc.  Litter.  A.  1740.  Hebd.  18.  !.

(r)  Opufc.  Anat.  XIII.  (»)  Monit.  Medic,  c.  ii.  S.  2.

(j)  Defer.  Anat.  Oculi  hum.  c.  z.  S.  3,  §,4. {x)  V.  n.  2.  &  6.  &  XIII.  n.  3.

Fabricator;


Letter  LXIII. Articles  12,  13.  4^1

Fabricator  of  our  frame,  has  carried  the  nervous  fibres  that  adminifter  to  tl  e
fenfes  of  fmelling,  hearing,  and  feeing ;  that  is,  the  olfaftory,  the  auditory,
and  the  vifory  nerves  ;  each  into  their  proper  organ.

For  he  has  fent  them  into  the  noftrils,  through  the  evident  foramina  of
the  OS  ethmoides,  and  they  are  confequently  pretty  thick-,  they  pafs  into  the
ears  by  much  fmaller  apertures,  and  are  for  that  reafon  much  more  flender  ;
and,  at  length,  the  foramina  by  which  they  pafs  into  the  eyes,  are,  as  the
moft  modern  anatomifts  have  fiiewn,  extremely  fmall,  and  thefe  fibres  of
courfe  extremely  flender ;  fo  that  the  great  Author  of  our  exiftence  feems  to
me  to  have  pointed  out,  by  a  kind  of  gradation  as  it  were,  the  fubtle,  the
more  fubtle,  and  the  very  fubtle,  fabric  of  each  of  thele  inftruments  of  the
fenfes.  But  thefe  things  I  fliall  perhaps  fpeak  of  more  at  large  on  another
occafion.

Now  let  us  pafs  on  to  the  difeafes  of  thofe  parts,  which  were  form'd  for
the  purpofes  of  fpeaking,  and  fwallowing  ;  as  we  have  promis'd  ;  and  par-
ticularly to  thofe  of  the  nerves  that  go  to  thefe  parts.

12.  Of  a  fatal  aphonia  after  drunkennefs,  I  have  written  to  you  on  a
former  occafion  (y) ;  when  I  likewife  fent  an  obfervation  of  mine  join'd  with
a  difleftion. I  fliall  here  add  another.

13.  A  fervant-man ;  who  was  about  lixty  years  of  age,  of  a  tall  fl:ature,
and  a  good  habit  of  body,  but  much  given  to  drinking ;  having  been  often
receiv'd  into  the  hofpital  before ;  once  on  account  of  a  violent  venereal  go-
norrhsea,  in  the  courfe  of  which  fo  great  a  quantity  of  virulent  humour  had
been  difcharg'd,  that  he  complain'd  of  a  weaknefs  in  his  loins ;  but  having
been  brought  there,  more  than  once,  by  reafon  of  being  fpeechlefs  after
drunkennefs,  and  yet  having  gone  away  in  good  health  the  following  day,
this  aphonia  being  difcufs'd  together  with  his  drunkennefs ;  was  at  length
brought  thither  again  from  the  fame  caufe.

At  this  time,  however,  he  had  lain  in  the  road  in  the  night,  and  was  taken
for  a  dying  man  ;  and  indeed  his  pulfe  was  very  low  :  and  although,  after
being  brought  into  the  hofpital,  he  vomited  up  a  great  quantity  of  wine  j
yet  he  never  more  utter'd  a  fingle  word.

And  indeed,  being  feiz'd,  on  the  following  day  in  the  morning,  with  a
violent  fever,  and  being,  befides  that,  depriv'd  of  the  faculty  of  feeling,
and  moving  in  the  left  upper  limb  only ;  for  the  other  parts  appear'd  to
have  feeling  when  flimulated  ;  he  had  fome  blood  taken  away,  and  feem'd
to  reap  fome  little  advantage  therefrom  :  but  even  eroding  plaflrers,  of  the
kind  that  are  call'd  veficatories,  being,  at  length,  applied  to  the  legs,  and
being  not  of  the  leafl:  effeft,  he  continu'd  fpeechlefs  in  the  fame  manner  he
had  been  brought  into  the  houfe,  to  the  very  hour  of  his  death ;  which
happen'd,  without  the  leafl  convulfion  at  any  time  being  obferv'd,  on  the
beginning  of  the  fourth  day  :  and  this  was  the  fourteenth  of  March,  in  the
year  1756.

I  could  not  examine  the  body  before  the  feventh  day  after  death,  on  ac-
■count  of  being  detain'd  at  home,  by  a  fudden  and  unforefeen  knee-gout  j

(>)Epift.  14.  n.  34.  &feqq.

R  r  r  2  ^nd.


49  2 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

and,  as  I  fear'd  left  I  might  be  detain'd -there  for  a  much  longer  time,  I  or-
der'd  that  the  head  at  leall,  and  the  penis,  together  with  part  of  the  annex'd
bladder,  fhould  be  preferv'd.

While  the  head  was  divided  from  the  body-,  which  was  done  in  the  fpace
of  two  days  after  death  ;  a  great  quantity  of  black  and  denfe  blood  had  flow'd
our.  And  for  this  reafon  I  was  the  lefs  furpriz'd,  that  upon,  at  length,
opening  the  cranium,  the  veffels  of  the  pia  mater  were  feen,  by  me,  not  to
be  diftended  with  blood.

In  the  right  lateral  ventricle  I  found  a  great  quantity  of  water  :  the  plexus
choroides  was  of  a  pale  colour ;  and  where  it  bends  itfelf  in  an  anterior  direc-
tion, was  increas'd  in  its  bulk,  by  the  addition  of  fmall  but  very  thick-fown
hydatids.

In  the  left  ventricle  was  much  lefs  water,  and  fewer  hydatids.  Yet  from
this  difference  betwixt  the  two  ventricles,  that  paralyfis,  on  the  right  fide,
had  not  proceeded.  For  although,  befides  the  cerebellum,  and  the  medulla
oblongata,  the  left  hemifphere  of  the  cerebrum  was  in  a  proper  ftate  alfo  ;  I
neverthelefs  found  a  fomevvhat  round  and  fmall  cavern  in  the  right  hemifphere,
capable  of  containing  a  fmall  walnut,  and  full  of  black  blood.

This  cavern  was  not  only  contiguous  to  the  external  fide  of  the  corpus-
ftriatum,  and  the  thalamus  nervi  optici,  but  alfo  occupied  fome  part  of  both
thefe  bodies ;  yet  fo  as  not  to  open  within  the  ventricle.  And,  after  exam-
ining thefe  parts,  I  turn'd  my  refearches  to  that  lower  part  of  the  bladder^,
and  the  annex'd  urethra.

The  coats  of  the  bladder  were  pretty  much  thicken'd,  in  confequence  of
the  patient's  having  labour'd  under  a  difficulty  of  urine,  at  the  time  of  being
affefted  with  the  gonorrhoea.  And,  on  that  internal  furface  of  the  bladder,
fuch  a  number  of  fanguiferous  veffels  tended  towards  the  orifice,  and  were  fo
diftended  with  blood ;  that  you  would,  at  firft  fight,  have  fuppos'd  as  many
hsemorrhoids  to  be  prominent  there,  and  covering  that  place,  as  there  really
were  congeries,  or  groupes  as  it  were,  of  parallel  veffels.

Having  open'd  the  urethra,  from  that  orifice  quite  to  the  termination
thereof;  I  found  no  ulcer  in  any  part ;  nor  even  any  colour  but  what  was
natural.  And  indeed,  although  I  prefs'd  out  a  kind  of  putrid  matter  from
the  orifices  of  the  proftate  gland,  that  was  of  a  white  colour,  inclin'd  to
cineritious ;  I  imputed  this  appearance  to  the  delay  of  fo  many  days  :  but  the
other  appearances,  which  I  fhall  now  mention,  I  afcrib'd  to  the  gonorrhoea
that  had  formerly  preceded.

In  the  caruneula  feminalis,  the  orifice  of  my  finus  was  confiderably  lax ;
and  the  finus  itfelf  was  longer  than  it  generally  is.  And  from  both  fides  of
the  caruncle  were  fome  parallel  lines,  that  pafs'd  in  a  longitudinal  direftion.
But  thefe  were  very  low.  Yet  not  fo  a  ring  that  was  prominent  from  the  in-
ternal fubftance  of  the  urethra,  like  a  fafciculus  of  mufcular  fibres ;  fo  that  it
might  feem  to  have  been  capable  of  being  an  obftacle  fometimes  to  the  de-
fcent  of  the  urine,  or  to  any  other  fluid.

This  ring  pafs'd  over  almoft  the  lower  part  of  the  beak  of  the  caruncle  ^
being  affix'd  to  this,  as  well  as  to  the  remaining  furface,  and  in  no  part  free
and  unconnected.

2-

Although,


Letter  LXIII. Article  i  4.  -  493,

Although,  about  Littre's  gland,  and  that  part  wherein  the  orifices  of
Cowper's  glands  open,  I  could  diltinguifli  nothing  that  was  preternatural ;  I
again  obferv'd,  in  that  part  v/hich  is  about  three  or  four  inches  above  the
termination  of  the  urethra,  fome  white  fibres,  as  it  were,  which  protuberated
obliquely  ;  but  only  in  a  flight  degree. Thefe  fibres  were  on  the  fides.

And  as  to  what  orifices  of  ray  canaliculi  were  in  this  tra£t,  it  was  fufficient
to  look  at  them  in  order  to  fee  that  they  had  formerly  been  afi^ected  by  dif-
order ;  fo  mucli  more  were  they  contrafted  than  the  orifices  of  the  others,
and  fo  different  was  the  neighbouring  furface,  on  both  fides,  from  all  the.
remaining  ilirface.

Having  defcrib'd  fuch  appearances  as  related  to  violent  diforders,^!  imagine
you  will  not  be  difpleas'd  with  me,  if  I  add  a  few  things  that  were  obferv'd.
in  the  head  of  this  man  ;  one  of  which  relates  to  difeafe  indeed,  but  to  a
flight  one  only  ;  and  three  others,  though  not  to  difeafe,  yet  to  appearances
quite  unufual,  and,  in  great  meafure,  preternatural.

The  firft  was  an  encyfted  tumour,  not  larger  than  a  fmall  grape,  which,
protuberated  in  the  right  temple,  not  very  far  from  the  forehead.  It  was
fullof  a  white  matter  like  milk  ;  but  fomewhat  lefs  fluid  than  milk.  The
cavity  of  the  coat  containing  that  matter,  which  was  of  a  fpherical  figure,
belong'd,  in  one  half  of  it,  to  the  fkin  j  the  other  half  was  below  the
fliin.

In  the  fecond  place,  there  were  no  pituitary  finuffes  of  the  forehead.

In  the  third  place,  there  were  fphenoidal  finufles  of  the  fame  kind  indeed,,
which  however  were  not  divided  into  the  right  and  left,  but  into  the  fuperior
and  inferior  •,  the  latter  of  which  was  the  largeft..

Finally,  in  the  fourth  place,  the  flyloid  procefs,  on  the  left  fide,  was  aU
moft  four  inches  long  :  fo  that  it  is  fcarcely  diftant  by  the  breadth  of  a  little
finger  (for  I  ftill  preferve  it  by  me)  from  the  os  hyoides  ;  this  interval  being,
fill'd  up  by  that  round^  ligament,  whereby  it  is  connefted  with  this  bone  %
unlefs  you  fhould  rather  choofe  to  fuppofe,  that  all  the  upper  part  of  the
fame  ligament  was  become  much  thicker  than  ufual,  and  converted  into,
bone :  for  it  happen'd  to  the  right  ligament  alfo,  in  almofl  the  middle  of  its
length,  that  for  the  extent  of  an  inch  and.  a  half,  it  became  very  thick  and.
bony  ;  and  that  very  evidently,  as  there  is  nothing  either  above  or  below  buL
ligament.

.  14..  But  whether  we  are  at  liberty  to  deny  the  cxiftence  of  this  ligament  ;^,
as  Weitbrecht  (z)  has  made  no  fcruple  of  doing  •,  it  is  not  the  proper  place.
to  difpute  here.

I  will  only  fay,  by  way  of  objeftion  to  him  :  it.  were  to  be  wifli'd,  that,.,
before  he  denied  this  exiftence,  he  had  lit  (if  not  upon  the  appearances
which  I  juft  now  defcrib'd)  at  leaft  upon  a  feries  of  little  bones,  fuch  as  Ve-
falius  {a)  and  Euftachius  {b)  have  reprefented  in  their  figures  as  having  beea,
feen  by  them ;  and  as  I  have  in  great  meafure  feen  :  which  little  bones  are
fo  form'd  and  connected,  and  go  on  fo  direcftly  from  the  ftyloid  procefs  to
the  OS  hyoides,  that  you  may  perceive  them  to  have  been  parts  of  that  ligar

(2)  Syndefmolog,  S,  6.  §.  15.  &  feqq.  [b) Tab.  47.  Fig.  14,

{a)  De  Corp.  hum.  fabrv  1.  z.  c.  \p

men«2.><


494 Boole  T.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

ment;  which  at  firft  became  cartilaginous,  and  then,  as  the  appendices  of
the  very  fame  bone  are  wont  to  do,  were  themfelves  chang'd  into  bone  like-
wife;  ftill  preferving  the  place  and  fundtion  of  the  ligament  whereof  we
fpeak.

But  Weitbrecht  feems  never  to  have  lit  on  any  thing  more  than  "  one  or
•"two  bony  granules,  form'd  "  upon  the  os  hyoides  (c).

We  will  confider  therefore,  on  another  occafion,  how  far  we  ought  to  in-
dulge his  opinion,  where  we  (hall  examine  other  things  likewife  that  relate
to  the  fame  bones ;  as,  for  inftance,  that  which  has  fallen  even  from  fome
of  my  predeceflbrs,  that  the  ligament,  of  which  we  are  fpeaking,  is  inferted
into  the  appendages  added  to  the  extremities  of  the  apices  of  the  horns ;  and,
in  like  manner,  whether  thefe  other  appendages,  or  at  leaft  thofe  which  are
frequently  form'd  upon  the  very  fhort  ligament,  which  connefts  thofe  extre-
mities with  the  upper  procelTes  of  the  cartilage  thyroides,  have  been  fo
neglefled  by  anatomifts,  as  fome  learned  men  feem  to  believe,  who  forget
our  Fabricius  ab  Aquapendente  {d).,  Bauhin  {e),  and  others-,  and  thefe  even
the  more  modern  authors,  as  Verheyen  (/),  Winflow  [g),  and  Weitbrecht  {h) ;
fome  of  whom  have  formerly  reprefented  them  in  figures  even  doubled :
others  have  defcrib'd  them  :  fome  have  propos'd  fome  ufe :  but  almoft  all  of
ihem  have  made  mention  thereof  fufficiently.  But  of  thefe  things,  as  I  have
already  laid,  on  another  occafion.

It  is  more  to  the  purpofe  at  prefent,  to  confider  a  little  while  what  circum-
ilances  you  have  read  in  the  hiftory  propos'd,  that  relate,  beyond  a  doubt,  to
•diforders,  and  thofe  not  flight  diforders  neither.  For  they  relate  to  fubjefts
which  we  have  treated  of  at  large  in  other  letters,  as  that  laft  appearance  ;
to  begin  from  thence ;  which  I  faw  in  the  urethra.

I  would,  therefore,  wilh  you  to  compare  it  with  thofe  appearances,  which
we  have,  at  other  times,  feen  left  after  a  virulent  gonorrhoea  {i).  You  will
read  that  protuberating  lines  occurr'd  to  me  then  alfo  in  the  urethra ;  and
that  I  found  the  orifices  of  the  canaliculi,  not  only  contradted,  but  oblite*
rated  :  from  whence  we  might  conjedture  foregoing  e^ulcerations  and  ob-
ftructions  oppofing  themfelves  to  the  urine  and  the  catheter,  and  might
clearly  perceive  what  had  been  frequently,  and  unjuftly,  confider'd  as  ca-
runcles.

But  in  regard  to  the  little  cavern,  fiU'd  with  blood,  found  in  that  hemi-
fphere.of  the  brain  which  was  oppofite  to  the  paralytic  limb;  and  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  corpus  ftriatum  and  thalamus  nervi  optici ;  there  is  no
occafion  to  point  out  the  obfervations  of  ours,  wherewith  you  may  compare
it ;  as  I  have  already  done  this  in  the  laft  letter  {k)  I  fent  you.

And  in  regard  to  the  fatal  aphonia  after  drunkennefs  (as  I  have  told  you
above  (/),  where  I  have  related  a  cafe  of  the  kind),  if  you  compare  that
•hiftory  with  this;  you  will  obferve  that  both  the  men  died  almoft  within

(0  S.  cit.  §.  17.  -{g)  Expof.  Arat.  tr.  de  la  Telle  n.  433.

(d)  De  Larynge  Fig.  g.  (h)  S.  cit.  §.  20.

(e)  Theatr.  Anat.  1.  3.  c.  44.  &  Tab.  33.  (/)  Vid.  Epift.  42.  n.  41.  &  Epift.  44.  n.  9.
Fig.  I.  '  &  Epift.  60.  n.  12.

(/) Anat.  Corp.  hum.  tr.  3.  c.  u.  I^k)  E.pift.  62.  n.  13. (/)  n.  12.

the


Letter  LXIII. Articles  is,  i6.  j\.^s

l3ie  fame  time,  and  both  without  convulfions,  and  the  laft  even  though  he  had
been  foon  feiz'd  with  a  fever  :  fo  that  if  you  (hould  be  willing  to  examine,
and  prove  thefe  events"  by  thofe  dogmata  of  Hippocrates  which  I  then  pro-
duc'd  ;  you  may  underftand,  even  from  hence,  how  few  didates  of  phyficians
are  extant,  which  you  may  receive  without  any  exception.

And  you  will  even  plainly  perceive,  from  what  I  have  written  to  you  on
former  occafions,  that  thofe  things  which  are  faid  of  a  fever  folving  an
apoplexy,  whereto  it  fucceeds,  cannot  be  true  without  many  exceptions.

Yet  1  confefs  we  are  not  here  at  liberty  to  make  ufe  of  that  exception,
which  is  made  mention  of  in  the  latter  part  of  the  eleventh  letter  {m) ;  for
the  fever  foon  came  on.

And  in  regard  to  another,  which  I  have  referr'd  to  in  the  fecond  letter  («),.
you  will  perhaps  be  doubtful  here  at  firft  -,  as  you  will  fee,  that  in  both  of  the
aphonous  patients,  there  was  watei-  in  the  brain :  although  in  this  laft  wha
was  feiz'd  by  a  fever,,  we  are  fcarcely  at  liberty  to  fuppofe  the  apoplexy  to
have  been  of  aferous  kind:  but,  by  reafon  of  the  little  cavern,  hollow'd  out
by  blood,  we  are  rather  under  a  necefiity  of  fuppofing  it  to  have  been  of  a
fenguineous  nature.

15.  But  as,  when  I  treated  of  aphonia  before,  I  fpoke  not  only  of  that
which  is  fatal,  and  from  drunkennefs,  but  alfo  of  another  far  unlike  this,  re-
lating a  certain  cure  of  mine  -,  I  now  alfo  think  it  will  not  be  improper  to.
give  the  hiftory  of  two  other  cafes,  of  virgins  who  were  fpeechlefs  j  which  I
Ihall  do  in  a  very  few  words.

I  was  confulted  for  both  of  them,  and  gave  an  anfwer  in  writing.  And
indeed  both  of  the  young  women  were  cur'd,  the  one  perhaps  by  me,  the
other  certainly  rather  by  accident.  For  being  carried  into  the  country  at  the
time  of  the  vintage,  it  there  happen'd,  while  fhe  was  tafting  a  grape,  that
fomepartofit  falling  down  into  the  larynx,  excited  a  violent  cough,  after
which  (he  could  immediately  fpeak  ;  but  not  for  a  very  long  time;  nor  was
this  to  be  wonder'd  at,  in  one  who,  during  fo  long  a  courfe  of  the  diforder,
had  fometimes  been  free  therefrom;  .but  had  fallen  back  into  the  fame  inca-
pacity of  fpeaking  afterwards.

And  the  fame  thing  had  likewife  happen'd  to  that  other  virgin,  be-
fore her  noble  parents  afk'd  my  advice  for  her.  But  I  was  inform'd  that
ihe,  after  the  ufe  of  remedies,  had  recover'd  her  voice  again  ;  and  have  never
yet  heard  that  fee  loft  it  any  more.

But  for  what  lengthof  time  the  cough  cur'd  this  diforder;  by  what  means
it  cur'd  it ;  whether  by  difcuffihg  any  matter,  which,  however,  did  not  fall
•under  the  notice  of  the  fenfes  ;  or  by  exciting  the  inert  mufcles  of  the  larynx  j
or  by  bringing  about  any  other  change  of  this  kind  in  the  nerves  ;  it  would
perhaps- be  very  ufeful  to  phyficians  to  know  :  and  this  that,  in  a  fimilar
cafe,  they  may,  with  the  more  confidence,  try  what  advantage  could  be  ob-
tain'd  by  the  affiftance  of  a  cough ;  although  this  fhould  be  excited  in  a  mo-
derate degree  only.

16.  But  now  let  us  go  on  to  another  diforder  of  the  larynx,  or  pharynx,
or  both  of  them  ;  I  mean  the  angina. When,  in  writing  to  you,  1  made

(»)  n.  24.  In)  n.  iQ,

mention


49  6 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  tlie  former  Books.

mention  of  this  diforder  (o),I  complaiii'd,  and  was  at  the  fame  time  fur-
priz'd,  that  no  difleftions  of  peribns  who  died  of  this  difeafe  were  extant.

For  it  did  not  feem  that  this  could  have  happen'd,  in  a  difeafe  that  is  not
only  fo  dangerous,  but  alfo  not  uncommon  -,  and  a  difeafe  that  even  fome-
times  fpreads  abroad  epidemically,  in  the  manner  it  did  formerly  •,  as  Ma-
crobius(p)  has  related  from  Julius  Modeftus ;  when  facrifices  were  inllituted
to  the  goddefs  Angeronia,  "  becaufe  the  Roman  people  was  freed  from  a
"  diforder  which  is  call'd  avgina,  by  the  previous  blowing  of  a  fouth
"  wind."

And  in  times  nearer  to  our  own,  it  has  produc'd  great  and  long-continu'd
flaucrhter,  by  falling  upon  children  for  the  moft  part.  Yet  although  the
laudable  cullom  of  diffeding  human  bodies  was  then  much  praftis'd,  and
phyficians  no  little  vers'd  in  anatomy  were  prefent ;  as  among  the  Sicilians
Jo.  Bapt.  Cortefius,  and  amongft  the  Neapolitans  M.  Aurelius  Severinus,
who  not  only  vifited  the  patients,  but  wrote  of  this  their  difeafe  {q) ;  you
will  not  find  any  difTeiflion  relative  thereto  in  their  writings.

And  indeed  Cortefius  was  one  of  thofe  who  perluaded  the  fenators  of
Meflina,  when  they  infilled  upon  having  enquiries  made  into  the  diforder  by
diffedion  ;  or,  at  leaft,  one  of  thofe  who  thought  the  perfuafion  to  be  juft ;
"  that  the  diflcdtion  of  carcaffes  was,  altogether,  of  no  ufe,  in  regard  to  the
"  knowledge  of  that  difeafe ;"  as  he  judg'd  it  to  confift  in  the  inflammation
and  gangrene  of  parts,  which  could  very  well  be  feen  upon  opening  the
mouth  ;  and  particularly  of  the  tonfils.

Severinus  alfo,  fuppofing  it  to  be  fufficiently  known  by  the  fymptoms,  was
not  willing  "  to  take  upon  him  the  tedious  labour  of  delineating  the  feat  of
"  the  diforder,  or  the  diforder  itfelf ;"  not  even  in  words  (r).  He  there-
fore, at  laft,  fent  only  one  fingle  obfervation  to  the  printer  at  Francfort,  which
could  not  be  inferted  in  the  book  that  was  already  copied  out  in  proper  form
for  the  prefs ;  for  which  reafon  it  was  publilh'd  in  the  latter  part  of  the
volume,  among  other  things  which  were  alfo  to  be  added  to  the  foregoing
books.

This  obfervation  you  have,  indeed,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (j),  where  I  alfo
had  read  it  -,  but  fo  negligently  copied,  that  amongll  other  words  which  have
a  tendency,  in  general,  to  confirm  the  hypothefis  of  Severinus,  thefe  very
few  things,  which  alone  related  to  the  title  De  Angina,  are  omitted  :  *'  The
"  larynx,  being  ftri£lly  examin'd,  was  found  to  be  cover'd  with  a  kind  of
"  pituitous  cruft  on  the  external  furface,  without  the  appearance  of  an
"  ulcer."

And  this  was  the  only  obfervation  which  I  could  find,  from  the  time  of
having  written  to  you,  of  the  larynx  of  a  perfon  who  died  of  an  angina,
being  examin'd  by  difleftion  j  though  I  made  no  doubt,  but  if  Severinus
had  chofen  to  make  thefe  enquiries,  not  once  only,  but  frequently ;  as  be

(o)  Epift.  14.  n.  39.  cond.  Abfceff.  Nat.  ].  8.  five  Diatriba  de  Pe-

(p)  Saturnal.  I.  i.  c.  10.  danch.

(f)  Mifcel.  Med.  Dec.  o.  Epift.  6.  De  Re- (r)  Part,  i  in  fin.

^  (0  L.  i.S.  23.  Obf.  4.

certainly


Letter  LXIII. Article  1 8.  497

certainly  had  fiifficient  opportunity  of  doing,  fince  that  angina  had,  from,
his  own  teftimony  (/),  kill'd  "  many  thoufands  of  children  ;"  I  made  no
<ioubt,  I  fay,  but  other  appearances  would  liliewife  have  occurr'd  in  other
bodies.

Wherefore,  as  I  could  not  find  any  other  obfervations  upon  the  angina
that  were  faid  to  be  made  upon  human  bodies,  befides  this  one  of  Severinusj
I  enquir'd  whether  any  were  extant  from  beafts  at  leaft  :  and  yet  I  could  only
find  that  thefe  appearances  had  been  feen,  in  dogs  which  died  of  an  angina,
by  Stegmannus  («) ;  that  is  to  fay,  "  The  necks  were  externally  tumified  :
"  the  internal  furface  of  the  fauces,  and  the  mufcles  of  the  throat,  were  in-
"  flam'd."

But  if  the  feat  of  this  difeafe,  as  well  as  that  of  others,  were  enquir'd
into  more  frequently,  and  defcrib'd  ;  do  you  think  there  would  have  been
any-one  in  our  age,  who  fhould  alTert,  withflut  producing  any  .enquiry  of
this  kind,  that  the  thyroid  gland  "  is  the  very  fole  and  only  part,  which
"  constitutes  the  feat  of  the  angina,  when  in  its  moft  violent  degree."

17.  But  fince  the  time  I  made  that  obfervation,  which  I  afterwards  fent
to  you  (*),  upon  the  fauces,  larynx,  and  afpera  arteria  of  a  young  man  who
had  been  carried  off  by  an  angina  ;  1  know  that  others  have  come  forth,  '
which  were  made  in  the  fame  year,  efpecially  upon  children,  who,  as  we  have
faid  was  the  cafe  formerly  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  and  Sicily,  were  then
carried  ofi^  in  France  by  the  moft  violent  angina.

^  The  phyficians  there  were  not  fatisfied,  either  with  the  figns  of  the  difeafe,
or  with  the  infpeftion  of  thofe  pares  only,  which  come  in  view,  when  the
mouths  of  the  patients  are  open'd  :  nor  was  this  without  efi^eft ;  for  upon
,  diffedting  the  bodies  of  children,  they  evidently  found  how  great  a  diforder'
might  lie  hid  in  the  afpera  arteria,  as  you  will  learn  from  two  difleclions,  the
accounts  of  which  were  fent  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences,  by  that  in-
genious phyfician  of  Orleans,  Arnaulr,  and  publifh'd  by  this  Academy  (x).

But  even  fome  of  our  countrymen,  of  approv'd  diligence'  and  veracity,
have  not  been  wanting  to  themfelves  in  this  refpeft ;  as  I  have  learn'd  from
a  hiftory,  which,  being  written  by  one  of  them,  has  come  into  my  hands.
The  fummary  of  it  was,  that,  in  a  man  who  had  been  kill'd  by  an  angina,
the  larynx  was  found  to  be  inflarn'd  ;  and  that  the  upper  part  of  the  pha-
rynx, together  with  the  palatum  mobile,  and  tonfils,  was  found  to  be  cor-
rupted, and  quite  black  with  a  gangrene  and  fphaceius.,

18.  You  perceive  that  I  here  fpeak  of  the  true,  that  is  the  inflammatory,
angina-,  juft  as  I  did  in  the  fourteenth  letter  (j).  But  in  regard  to  the
fpurious,  which  I  now  fee  is  call'd  the  watery  angina  by  eminent  phyficians  5
by  whom  the  other  fpecies  of  angina,  and  amongft  thefe  the  convuUive,  are  -
taken  notice  of;  if  you  wilh  to  know  what  I  have  feen  by  means  of  dif-
feclion  relative  thereto  ;  take  what  follows.  That  in  regard  to  the  fpurious
angina  I  differed  one  or  two,  whom  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  in  tiie  fame

(/)  De  efficac.  Med.  1.  i.  p.  2.  ubi  de  Phle-  (*)  Epift.  44..  n.  3.

bot.  c.  16.  (x)  Memoir.  A,  1748,

(a)  Eph.  N.  C.  Dec.  3. A,  5,  &  6.  Obf.  CyJ  N.  39.
169.

Vol.  III.  S  f  f  letter


49 8  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Book?.

letter  (2),  and  who  died  with  this  diforder,  if  you  pleafe,  but  certainly  not
of  it.  And  to  the  convulfive  fpecies  I  cannot  refer  that  which  rather  ap-
proach'd  to  the  nature  of  the  Paralytodea,  as  fome  call  it,  in  that  wo-
man whofe  hiftory  I  fliall  immediately  fubjoin.

19.  An  old  woman;  who  had  lain  a  long  time  in  the  hofpital,  and  was
become  fo  emaciated  as  to  feem  to  be  nothing  but  fkin  and  bone  ;  having  a
fever  at  length  come  on;  or,  at  leaft,  made  more  evident;  and  Ihe  not
being  able  to  fwallow,  nor  yet  to  open  her  mouth,  fo  as  to  give  room  to
examine  the  internal  parts  fufEciently,  was  fuppos'd  to  die  of  an  angina,
about  the  end  of  the  year  1755.

Upon  diffefting  the  head  in  the  hofpital,  we  found  the  internal  maxillary
olands  to  be  large,  and  efpecially  the  right ;  fo  that  it  might,  perhaps,  have
prevented  the  depreffion  of  the  jaw,  fo  much  as  was  necelTary  to  the  opening
of  the  mouth  to  any  confiderable  degree  :  and  in  fome  meafure  might  even
have  been  injurious  to  deglutition  :  yet  not  fo  as  entirely  to  prevent  it.  But
the  larynx  was  found  :  and  the  afpera  arteria,  and  the  fauces,  together  with
the  palatum  mobile,  were  found  to  be  in  a  found  ftate  ;  as  the  tonfils  and
root  of  the  tongue  were  alfo  :  nor  did  that  enlargement  of  the  maxillary
glands  feem  to  be  recent.

The  thorax  had  a  fmall  part  of  one  of  the  lobes  of  the  lungs  in  a  ftate
of  hardnefs  ;  and  not  without  fome  purulency.  Then  the  fpine,  alfo,  was
obferv'd  to  be  fomewhat  deviating  from  its  natural  courfe  ;  though  but
flightiy.  Yet  this  inclination  had,  probably,  been  the  caufe  of  the  woman's
carrying  her  head  in  fuch  a  manner,  that,  of  the  two  round  ligaments  whereby
the  dentoid  procefs  of  the  fecond  vertebra  is  connefted  to  the  edge  of  the-
great  foramen  of  the  fkull,  I  found  the  right  to  be  longer  and  thicker  thaa
the  left.

?.o.  And  Mead  {a),  indeed,  had  not  found  "  even  the  very  leaft  mark  of
"  inflammation,  in  the  glands,  or  the  mufcles,"  of  the  fauces ;  whea
he  difiedied  them,  in  the  body  of  a  man  who  had  been  carried  off  by  a  con-
vulfive angina :  but  all  the  veffels  were  turgid  with  very  thick  blood,  and
every-where  prominent.  Nay,  and  he  goes  fo  far,  as  to  make  mention  of
a  convulfion  of  all  the  nerves  in  this  angina  ;  and  calls  the  diforder,  in  exprefs
words,  "  a  ftrangulation  of  the  fauces."

But  as  there  was  no  fenfation  of  this  kind,  nor  the  other  appearances  that
were  juft  now  fpoken  of,  in  the  old  woman  in  queftion  ;  and  as  there  were
fome  other  of  thofe  figns,  which  Boerhaave  {¥)  takes  notice  of,  in  an  angina
"  that  has  the  nerves  and  mufcles  paralytic;"  as,  for  inftance,  not  only  that
/'  it  appears  without  any  mark  of  external  or  internal  tumour,"  but  alfo
"  in  the  end  of  long  difeafes,"  when  the  body  is  "  very  greatly"  exhaufted
of  its  juices  :  "  and  that  it  is  then  almoft  always  the  fign  of  death
_"  being  at  hand,  and  after  death  fliews  the  lungs  to  have  been  fuppurated  ;"
I  (hould  therefore  believe  that  this  angina  is  not  to  be  referr'd  to  a  convulfLve^
but  rather  to  a  paralytic  afFeftion,  if  we  muft  refer  it  to  one  or  the  other
fpecies  of  difeafe.

(z)  N.  24.  &  feqq.  (I)  Aphor,  de  cogn.  &  curan.  morb.  §  784..

\a)  Monit.  Med.  c.  4.  &  feq^q,.

21.  Thus


Letter  LXIV. Articles  i, 2.  49  9

21.  Thus  far  I  had  written,  when  turning  over  the  volume  of  the  J^a
Erudiiorum  (c),  lately  imported  here  from  Leipfic,  I  learn'd  fome  things
from  books  that  we  have  not  in  this  country,  relative  to  one,  and  to  another
fpecies  cf  difeafe,  which  we  have  treated  of  in  this  letter ;  I  mean,  the  angina,
and  blindnefs.

To  the  former  relates  the  hiftorical  diflertation  (d),  written  in  French,
upon  the  gangrenous  angina  of  children  ;  the.  fame,  I  fuppofe,  that  we  have
been  fpeaking  of  above  (e) ;  and  to  blindnefs  the  obfervation  of  that  cele-
brated man  Philip  Adolphus  Boehmerus  (/),  upon  a  woman,  who,  having
been  feiz'd  with  an  obfcurity  of  vifion,  after  obftinate  diforders  of  the  head,
and  at  length  with  a  lofs  of  fight,  had,  in  her  body  after  death,  befides  other
appearances  ;  and  particularly  a  quantity  of  ferum,  in  part  foetid,  wherewith
the  three  firft  ventricles  of  the  brain  (for  the  pituitary  gland  was  fchirrhous
and  ulcerated)  were  diftended  ;  had,  I  fay,  befides  thefe  appearances,  a
fungous  excrefcence  lying  upon  the  conjunftion  of  the  optic  nerves.

And  you  will,  at  the  fame  time,  find  other  obfervations  in  this  book,  that
relate  to  different  diforders  ;  fo  that  I  do  not  doubt,  but  it  will  be  very  agree-
able to  you,  that  I  have  referr'd  you  thereto. Farewel.


LETTER  the  SIXTY-FOURTH

Relates  to  Diforders  of  the  Thorax.-

I.  TN  proportion  as  the  interval  oF  time  betwixt  fending  you  my  firft  letter,
J_  on  the  diforders  of  the  head,  and  the  prefent  year  is  greater ;  and  in
proportion  as  there  are  more  parts  in  the  head  than  in  the  thorax ;  fo  many
the  fewer  obfervations  had  I  the  opportunity  of  making  upon  the  diforders  of
this  laft-  mention'd  cavity  :  fo  that  I  can  eafily  comprize  them  all  in  this  one
letter ;  wherein  I  Ihall,  in  the  firft  place,  declare  what  appearances  I  have
feen  in  the  lungs,  and  after  that  in  the  heart,  and  its  large  veffels.

2.  A  woman,  of  a  middle  age,  had  died  in  the  hofpital  of  an  inflamma-
tion of  the  lungs,  about  the  end  of  January,  in  the  year  1755;  at  which
time  I  was  teaching  anatomy  in  the  college.  And  that  I  might  go  on  to  do
this  the  more  fully,  there  were  carried  thither  from  her  body  alfo  (for  I  had
the  fame  fupplies  from  feveral  other  bodies),  together  with  thofe  parts  with

(f)  A.  1758.  OJ  n.  i8.

id)  Vid.  M.  Jul.  ■ C/J  Vid.  M,  Janaar.

S  s  s  2  which


5  o  o Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

which  women  are  furnifh'd  for  the  fake  oF  generation,  and  the  fecretion  of
urine  ;  the  vifcera  of  the  thorax  itfelf,  fnch  as  they  were,  together  with  the
diaphragm.

In  examining  thofe  parts  of  the  belly,  I  found  fome  things  which  only  de-
viated from 'the  general  rule  of  nature  :  and  others  which  were  entirely  pre-
ternatural.

In  the  number  of  the  firil  was  a  roundifli  body,  of  the  diameter  of  a  full
inch  ;  of  a  reddifli  colour,  and  furrounded  with  its  coat ;  which,  although  it
was  in  the  adipofe  membrane  of  the  left  kidney,  yet  was  certainly  neither  the
ren  fuccenturiatus,  which  was  double  on  that  fide,  nor  another  very  fmall
kidney,  nor  a  lymphatic  gland  ;  but  rather  another  very  fmall  fpleen,  as  the
nature  of  it,  when  cut  into,  demonftrated.

For  in  the  circumference,  as  I  have  often  obferv'd  in  the  fpleen,  it  was  of
a  bright  red  colour  -,  and,  in  other  refpeds,  of  a  red  colour  degenerating
into  brown :  fo  that,  although  the  ftrufture  gave  fomewhat  more  refiftance
to  the  knife  than  the  fpleen  gives,  every  one,  who  faw  it,  readily  allow'd
it  to  be  a  fpleen.

The  fame  left  kidney  was  longer  than  the  right :  nor  was  this  to  be  won-
der'd  at ;  as  it  was  furnifli'd  with  a  double  pelvis,  one  at  the  upper  part,  and
another  at  the  lower  part  •,  being  quite  diftind  from  each  other,  as  the.
ureters  were  alfo:  for  thefe  canals  coming  out,  one  from  each  pelvis,  open'd
at  the  ufual  part  of  the  bladder,  by  an  orifice  (an  appearance  which  it  had
never  happen'd  to  that  very  experienc'd  anaromift  EulJachius  (a)  to  fee  ;  but
which  I  have  happen'd  to  fee  three  times  at  leaft  (b) )  •,  by  an  orifice,  I  fay,
proper  to  each  ;  the  one  being  at  a  little  diftance  below  the  other.

But  v^hether  that  which  I  obferv'd  in  the  uterus  related  to  difeafe,  or  only
to  the  time  of  the  menflrua  being  at  hand,  was  a  matter  of  doubt.  For  the
upper  part  of  the  fundus  was  internally  red  •,  but,  although  the  fanguiferous
veffels  were  feen  through  the  internal  membrane  •,  by  preffing  the  fingers  un-
derneath, no  blood  was  difcharg'd  neverthelefs,.  as  is  frequently  the  cafe  at
other  times.

Yer,  certainly,  thofe  appearances  which  I  faw  in  the  trunk  of  the  great  ar-
tery, and  its  iliac  branches,  were  to  be  referr'd  to  difeafe.  That  is  to  fay,,
in  the  former  were  white  fpots  internally,  the  beginnings  of  future  offifica-
tions ;  and  in  thofe  branches,  and  on  their  interna!  furface  likewife,  paj-allel
lines  drawn  in  a  longitudinal  direftion  were  prominent:  and  thefe  lines
could  not  be  obliterated  by  any  means;  noteven  by  drawing  both  fides  in  op-
pofite  direftions.

The  thorax  alfo  exhibited  difeas'd  appearances ;  and  ftill  more  than  the-
fore-mention'd  parts  :  yet  there  were  fome  which  are  rather  unufual  than  pre-,
ternatural.  For  the  diaphragm  tran^fmitted  the  venous  blood,  that  came  up
from  the  belly,  not  through  one  foramen,  but  through  two  foramina  (which.
1  alfo  found  very  lately  in  the  year  1759,  and  publicly  demonftrated,  in  the
body  of  a  man);  I  fay,  through  two  foramina  very  near  to  each  other;
in  the  fame  manner,  fot  inftance,  that  I  formerly  told  you  of  by
three.


{a)  De  Renib.  c.  19.  (f)  Vid.  Epift.  7.  n.  17.  &  Epift.  54.  n.  33.


But


Letter  LXIV. Article  3.  501

Yet  in  the  heart,  the  orifice  of  the  coronary  vein  was  not  furnifli'd  with
a  membranous  valve  ;  but  fo  cover'd  with  {lender  and  frequenj  parallel  fila-
ments, going  down  from  the  upper  part  to  the  lower ;  as  well  on  the  right
fide,  as  on  the  left ;  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  blood  could  neverthelefs  pafs
through  betwixt  filament  and  filament ;  and  ftill  more  through  the  middle  of
the  orifice,  where  the  filaments  were  entirely  wanting.

But  as  to  the  morbid  ftate  of  the  blood,  hereto  related  the  white  polypous
concretions,  which  were  drawn  out  from  the  large  veflels  of  the  heart ;  and
to  the  morbid  conftitution  of  the  folid  parts,  related  not  only  thofe  tubercles,
whereby  the  border  of  the  valvule  mitrales  was  become  thicken'd  ;  as  I  have
fecn  at  other  times,  and  that  not  unfrequently ;  but  particularly  that  which
brought  on  the  caufe  of  death ;  I  mean,  a  great  part  of  one  lobe  of  the  lungs
being  fwollen,  hard,  heavy,  and  denfe  internally,  and  of  a  firm  fubftance;
which  was  not  only  of  a  colour  dilutely  red,  like  that  of  liver  after  being
boird  ;  fuch  as  I  have  very  frequently  feen  in  inflammations  of  the  lungs ;
bur  alfo  of  a  colour  fomewhat  white,  from  purulent  matter  being  mix'd  with
it,  as  it  was  natural  to  conjedture :  and  this  purulency  was  concreted  by  the
froft,  which  was  very  powerful  and  fevere  in  that  feafon.

On  the  back  part  of  the  afpera  arteria,  the  cellular  membrane  was  fo
diftiended  by  the  fluid  detain'd  therein,  that  the  glands,  which  1  formerly  de-
lineated there  (c),  fcarcely  or  not  at  all  appear'd.

3.  I  have  not  made  this  one  difl^edlion  only,  that  related  to  diforders  of  the
thorax,  fince  the  time  I  fent  fuch  a  great  number  in  the  twenty-firft  letter.
For  you  have  receiv'd  the  defcriptions  of  others  after  that  in  other  letters  (d);
particularly  the  laft ;  which  you  will  join  with  thofe,  propos'd  in  that  letter
and  in  the  twentieth,  wherein  the  pleura  was  not  free  from  inflammation ;
although  the  patients  had  been  free  from  a  fenfe  of  pungent  pain.

And,  although  I  have  not  omitted  to  conjedlure,  by  what  means  it  had
happen'd  thus,  when  I  gave  you  thefe  obfervations ;  yet  as  very  experienc'd
men  now  teach  us  that  the  pleura  is  devoid  of  fenfation,  by  the  original  in-
ilitution  of  nature  ;  which  certainly  no  one  could  have  prov'd  at  that  time ;
I  fiiall  not  be  difpleas'd,  if,  when  that  controverfy  fliall  be  at  length  accom-
modated to  their  opinion,  you  prefer  their  dogma  to  my  conjectures ;  and,
by  this  means,  much  more  eafily  explain,  not  only  thofe,  but  other  obferva-
tions fimilar  thereto  •,  among  which  is  the  obfervation  made  by  that  celebrated
■man  Ignatius  Vari  (e),  and  that  which  the  fame  author  has  referr'd  to,  as-
formerly  made  by  Petrus  Crifpus.

Certainly  each  of  them,  in  whatever  manner  you  may  choofe  to  explain
them,  is  well  worthy  to  be  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum.

However,  in  regard  to  what  relates  to  pains  of  the  chefl:  and  fides,  there
are  others  -,  and  thefe  of  more  than  one  kind  ;  which  deferve  your  confidera-
'tion ;  and  in  particular  that,  which,  from  an  acute  pain  near  the  left  fide  of
the  fliernum,  join'd  with  the  figns  of  a  peripneumony,  feem'd  to  relate  to  an
inflammation  of  the  anterior  part  of  the  left  lobe  of  the  lungs-,  whereas,
after  the  death  of  the  patient,  which  was  then  unexpeded,  the  celebrated

U)  Adv.  I.  Tab.  2.  Fig.  i.  {e)  apud  P.  Tofctti  full' Infenfib.  &c.  Lett.

.^^)  Epift.  36.  n.  23.  Si  Epiil,  75.  n.  16.  4.  n.  24,

Lieutaud


Soz  Book  V.  By  way  of  SCipplement  to  the  former  Books.

Lieutaud  (/)  found,  that  it  had,  in  fad,  related  to  an  inflammation  and
fuppuration  of  the  membrane  that  invefts  the  pericardium  internally,  and  the
heart  externally.

Yet  this  obfervation,  which  well  deferves  your  reading,  on  account  of  the
very  remarkable  feat  of  the  diforder;  and  which  you  ought  to  compare  with
others  of  the  fame  kind,  that  I  (hall  tell  you  where  to  find  below  (g) ;  be-
long'd  to  the  clafs  of  inflammations  neverthelefs.

But  there  are  others  which  belong  to  quite  another  clafs  of  difeafes ;  as,
for  infl:ance,  that  which  you  will  read  from  the  relation  of  John  Larber,
formerly  my  auditor,  but  now  a  learned  and  very  experienc'd  phyiician.  For
this  author ,  in  the  annotations  which  he  has  interfpers'd  in  his  edition  of
Palfin  (b) ;  relates  of  a  young  man  ;  whom  he  faw  labouring  under  a  cough
of  long  {landing,  a  fpitting  of  blood,  and  a  recurrent  pain  of  the  right  fide ;
that  he  was  freed  from  thefe  complaints,  by  having  cough'd  up  a  piece  of
ilony  matter,  fimilar  to  white  coral.

And,  in  the  fame  place,  he  takes  notice  of  the  lungs  of  a  man  ;  who  had
labour'd,  for  a  long  time,  under  the  morbus  niger  of  Hippocrates,  and  had
died  in  the  lafl:  ftage  of  a  marafmus;  being  flaccid:  and  in  many  parts  of
them  he  found  hard  little  bodies,  of  the  bignefs  of  peas,  and  of  a  globular
form.

Which  things,  as  he  has  added  them  to  that  obfervation  of  his  author,
wherein  he  relates  that  a  flrone  was  found  by  him,  in  the  lungs  of  a  foldier ;
not  lefs  than  a  pigeon's  egg,  and  not  unlike  an  egg  in  figure ;  I  here  take
notice  of  alio,  that  you  may  add  thefe  three  obfervations  to  the  former  ;  and
may  compare  them  with  fome  of  thofe  which  I  have  collefted  for  you  in
great  number  in  the  fifteenth  letter  (i),  when  I  difcours'd  upon  calculi  of
the  lungs,  and  their  effe6ts.

4.  But  to  thofe  things  that  I  have  produc'd  in  the  nineteenth  letter  (^) ;
which  were  not  a  few,  and  of  various  kinds ;  in  regard  to  the  long-agitated
controverfy,  whether  water  be  in  the  lungs  and  llomach  of  drown'd  perfons,
or  not,  fome  diflfedions  which  1  read  not  long  ago  relate.  For  that  very  ac-
curate anatomift  Meckel ;  in  defcribing  the  fifth  (/)  of  his  obfervations  upon
the  diforders  of  the  heart,  made  upon  a  foldier,  who  had  thrown  himfelf
into  the  river  ;  fays,  that  the  lungs  were  entirely  full  of  air  and  blood  :  that
is  to  fay,  full  of  the  latter  within  the  veflels  -,  which  he  found  to  be  very
tumid,  with  fluid  blood,  in  the  other  vifcera  alfo,  as  in  other  drown'd
perfons :  but  if  he  had  feen  the  ftomach  to  be  fwollen  with  water,  it  does
not  feem  that  he  would  have  omitted  to  mention  the  circumfl:ance.

Another  difledion  is  that  of  an  epileptic  patient,  who,  having  thrown
himfelf  into  the  cold  bath,  was  foon  after  found  fufibcated  therein.  But  in
none  of  this  man's  vifcera,  was  any  water  found  by  the  celebrated  Wefzpre-
mus(i'?Os  who,  when  the  afpera  arteria  was  perforated,  heard  "  the  air,

Cn  Mens,  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1752.  {k)  N.  40.  &  feqq.

I.  Mem.  {I)  Sea.  i.  Vid.  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.

(g)  N.  14.  de  Berlin,  A.  1755.

(h)  Anat.  Chirurg.  Tom.  3.  P.  6.  C.  9.  {m)  Obf.  Med.  8.  §  2.
\i)  N.  19,  &  feqq.

1  •*  which


Letter  LXIV. Article  4.  503

"  which  was  then  contain'd  in  the  lungs,  rulh  out  with  a  kind  of  whiftling
"  noife :"  for  which  reafon  he  thinks  that  it  is  not  water,  but  air,  which,
being  before  "  accumulated  by  repeated  infpiration,  and  diftending  the  ve-
"  ficuls  pulmonales,"  prevents  the  tranfit  of  the  blood  through  the  lungs;
and  confequently  the  circulation  thereof  through  the  whole  body  -,  and  by
this  means  kills  thofe  who  are  immers'd  in  water"  "  and  perhaps  ftrangulated
"  perfons."

And  as  to  what  relates  to  fbrangled  bodies,  you  may  remember,  what  I
fufpefted  in  that  very  fame  letter  («),  of  the  air  being  retain'd  in  their  lungs,
and  dilating  itfelf.

However,  in  regard  to  drown'd  perfons  •,  being  mindful  of  thofe  things
that  others,  and  I  myfelf,  have  feen  by  experience ;  I  am  the  more  in  doubt,
in  proportion  as  I  read  the  more  attentively,  another  obfervation  (0)  which
the  fame  celebrated  man  has  immediately  fubjoin'd  to  the  former.

For  when  he  endeavour'd  to  recal  to  life  a  certain  failor,  who  had  been
drown'd  in  the  river  Thames,  and  was  not  found,  and  taken  out,  till  "  after
*'  a  quarter  of  an  hour  and  half  a  quarter ;"  and  had  then  no  figns  of  life
remaining  in  him  ;  he  did  not  immediately  perforate  the  afpera  arteria,  bur,
at  length,  perforated  it  after  confuming  "  a  whole  hour  "  in  the  ufe  of  other
remedies  :  nor  did  he  obferve  any  fign  of  air  burfting  forth,  as  he  fays;  and
even,  introducing  a  pipe  through  that  foramen,  forc'd  in  the  air  "  at  repeated
*'  times,  fo  that,  the  veficles  of  the  lungs  being  inflated,"  and  other  re-
medies being  made  ufe  of,  (all  vi^hich  you  will  read  were  not  without  effedt)
he  might  pufh  on  the  circulation  of  the  ftagnating  blood ;  which  he  at  length
happily  brought  about.

Nor  indeed  within  the  time  of  that  cure,  which  exceeded  two  hours  ;  that
15  to  fay,  till  "  the  dead  failor,"  as  he  at  firft  feem'd  to  be,  "  was  recall'd  to
"  life  ;"  is  any-thing  faid  to  have  been  thrown  out  of  his  mouth  :  fo  that
we  cannot  reconcile" this  with  our  obfervations,  and  thofe  of  others  ;  and  in
particular  thofe  of  the  very  ingenious  Haller,  whofe  diflTeftions ;  though  not
fo  much  that  which  was  made  on  a  wornan,  who  had  been  immers'd  many
hours,  as  on  a  cat,  and  dogs,  which  were  immers'd  for  a  very  fhort  time  ;  it
will  be  fufficient  to  have  referr'd  to  here  in  a  word,  not  only  becaufe  you  may-
fee  them  taken  notice  of  in  that  letter  of  mins(/)),  but  becaufe  you  may  fee
them  propos'd  afrefh  by  him  very  lately  (q)  -,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  learn,
that  he  hitherto  exprefsly  aflerts  (r)  ;  of  the  vifcid  fpume,  which  arifes  from
water  agitated  with  air,  in  the  lungs  of  drown'd  perfons,  and  is  found  thereirr;
that  it  can  "  be  forc'd  out,  and  ejeded  from  thence,  by  no  art  yet  known  to
"  us ;"  and  that,  as  long  as  h  ftagnates  there,  it  prevents  the  neceflary
pafTage  of  the  blood,  from  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  to  the  left.

And  this  he  the  more  conviftedly  aflerts,  after  having  tried  that  even  the
moft  violent  (hock  of  eleftricity  is  not  fufficient  for  this  purpofe.

Yet  he  himfelf  alfo  confeffes,  that  there  is  the  higheft  difficnity  in  con^-
ciliating  hi-s  obfervations  with  the  number  of  oppofite  ones,  wherein  art  has

(»)  N.  38.  (y)  Mem.  fur  plufieurs  phenom.  de  la 're-

(0).  Sub  n.  9..  fjjir.  S.  4.

{j>j  N.  45.  (r).  Ut  antea  opufc.  pathol.  Obf.  6z.

[  excitedi


50  4  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

excited  the  perfons  to  life  ;  fo  as  to  make  the  mind  of  the  conciliator,  not  to
mention  others,  acquiefce  therein  :  and  feme  obfervations  of  this  kind  he,
contrary  to  what  you  would  have  expecled,  produces,  in  his  Elements  of  the
Phyfiology  of  the  Human  Body  (j),  which  he  has  lately  pubiifh'd,  among
the  arguments  for  a  matter  which  he  there  treats  upon.

But  as,  among  the  experiments  which  relate  to  that  controverfy,  he  has
added  fome  things  which  relate  to  another;  that  is  to  fay,  whether-it  be  rio-htly
argued  from  the  lungs  of  a  foetus  fwimming  in  water,  that  it  was  born  alive,
or  not ;  I  would  have  you  attend  to  thefe  things  alfo,  and  thofe  that  he  de-
duces therefrom.

For  you  will  find  fomething  to  add  to  what  I  have  written  to  you,  upon
the  cautious  ufc  of  that  medico-legal  experiment,  in  the  fame  nineteenth
letter  (»') ;  either  when  I  confider'd  a  foetus,  whofe  carcafe  has  been  attack'd
by  putrefaftion  ;  or  when  I  had  one  in  my  eye  who  has  drawn  in  the  air  as  it
is  coming  out  from  the  belly  of  its  mother,  and  died  in  the  very  birth  ;  or,
finally,  whether  one  into  whofe  mouth  the  air  has  been  impell'd  :  for  you
will  obferve,  that  out  of  fo  many  inflated  lungs  offoetufles,  the  air  could  not
be  prefs'd  out  from  any,  except  in  one  lamb  only,  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to
prevent  the  lungs  from  fwimming  any  more  in  water.

The  remainder  of  this  queftion,  and  any  thing  elfc  that  relates  to  the
lungs,  we  at  prefent  omit.  For  now  we  muft  pafs  on  to  other  things,  whereof
much  is  to  be  written  ;  that  is,  to  the  diforders  of  the  heart  and  its  large
veflels  ;  beginning  with  the  pulfe,  and  with  that  very  rare  pulfe,  in  regard
to  which  ;  as  1  have  already  faid,  when  I  hinted  at.  its  having  been  obferv'd
by  me  in  an  old  man  («),  it  might  happen  that  I  fhould  fometime  or  other
give  the  full  hiftory  of  it  to  you ;  I  now  fend  you  the  whole  relation,  as  I
gave  you  reafon  to  expeft.

5.  This  man  was  a  merchant,  at  Padua,  of  fixty  four  years  of  age,  of  a
fquare  ftature,  and  of  a  fat  habit  of  body  •,  but  not  to  excefs.  He,  having
been  formerly  fubjecl  to  a  rheumatifm,  and  contradlions  of  the  nerves,  had
been  cur'd  by  medical  remedies :  fo  that  notwithftanding  he  was  taken  up
with  many  and  various  bufineiTes  continually,  he  was,  neverthelefs,  in  good
health,  to  that  very  age  which  I  juft  now  fpokeof;  when,  of  a  fudden,
fome  circumftances  happen'd,  from  whence  he  was  feiz'd  with  very  violent
afi"e6lions  of  the  mind,  with  terror,  fear,  anger,  and  fadnefs.

A  few  days  after  thefe  commotions,  a  kind  of  vertigo  coming  on,  he  fell
down.  And,  on  the  day  following,  he  began  to  be  troubled  with  convulfive
motions,  together  with  an  attack  fimilar  to  an  epilepfy.

This  attack  was  fhort,  but  frequent,  and  was  folv'd  by  the  breaking  forth
of  foetid  eructations ;  a  rednefs  of  the  face  fometimes  coming  on,  and  lome-
times  a  palenefs  :  but  it  was  violent,  by  reafon  of  the  fenfe  of  narrownefs
and  conftriftion  of  the  fauces,  which  attended  it  continually  ;  and  by  reafoin
of  the  fame  conftridlion  of  the  ftomach  alfo.

The  pulfe  was,  at  that  time,  ftrong  indeed,  but  hard  and  rare :  and  the
inteftines  and  bladder  excreted  only  a  very  fmall  quantity.

(j)  Tom.  1.1.  4.  S.  5.  §.  II,  (/)  n.  45.  &  feqq.  (i)  Epill.  .24.  n.  33.

A  As


Letter  LXIL Article  5.  joj'

As  veriS:re6lions  had  been  repeatedly  made  ufe  of,  from  the  very  begin-
ning, to  no  purpofe,  the  difeafe  feeni'd,  to  the  phyficians,  to  depend  upon
the  ftomach  -,  efpecially  as  the  patient  was  previouQy  fenfible  that  the  fit  was
coming  on,  from  the  lenfe  of  a  kind  of  fmoke,  as  it  were,  rifing  up  from
the  hypochondria.

Therefore,  befides  the  more  mild  remedies  againft  an  epilepfy,  they  took
care  to  cleanfe  the  ftomach,  from  time  to  time,  by  means  of  gentle  ec-
coprotics  ;  and  to  cleanfe  the  inteftines  every  day  by  the  help  of  glyfters.

But  if  any  thing  mitigated  the  violence  of  the  diforder,  it  was  the  oil  of
almonds  frefti  drawn  ;  which  they  made  ufe  of  from  time  to  time.

However,  although  the  patiettt  was,  perhaps,  never  better,  to  appear-
ance, than  on  the  twenty-feventh  day  from  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe  ;  the
attacks,  which  had  been  abfent  for  fome  days,  return'd  fo  vehemently  on  this
very  day,  that,  befides  the  other  circumftances  which  I  have  mention'd,  he
began  to  be  averfe  to  any  kind  of  food  whatever  from  that  time :  he  alfo  be-
gan to  throw  up,  now  and  then,  by  vomitings,  whatever  he  had  taken  in,
to  be  troubled  with  a  fingultus,  and  to  have  a  kind  of  foetid  halitus ;  and
although  there  had  never  been  any  difficulty  of  refpiration,  to  fpic  up  blood
and  putrid  matter  frequently.

To  thefe  fymptoms  were  added  fweats,  at  the  time  of  the  extreme  parts  _
being  cold,  and  every  now-and-then  a  delirium.

And  in  this  manner;  the  fymptoms  fometimes  being  more  violent,  and
fometimes  more  mild  ;  he  went  on  to  the  thirty-fourth  day  of  the  difeafe  ;
and  on  that  day,  after  having  difcharg'd  by  ftool,  bloody,  grumous,  and  putrid
matter,  of  the  weight  of  almoft  three  ounces  -,  all  the  fymptoms  grew  milder
in  a  furprizing  manner :  nor  did  the  pulfe  only,  laying  afide  its  rarenefs  and
hardnefs,  return  to  its  natural  ft&te  foon  after ;  but  his  former  health  was
perfedly  reftor'd.

This  ftate  of  healtMafted  about  four  months,  till,  after  a  fliort  walk,  and
going  up  of  ftairs,  thofe  former  convulfive  attacks  began  again  to  come  on  5
notwithftanding  they  were  lets  frequent  and  fliorter  ;  and  to  bring  back  a
rarenefs  of  the  pulfe.

It  was  then  the  month  of  December.  From  which  time,  to  the  very  begin*-
ning  of  June,  the  difeafe  ftill  continuing,  and  not  yielding  to  remedies ;  I
was  then  fent  for  to  confult  with  the  other  phyficians,  and  heard  that  rela-
tion of  the  cafe  which  I  have  now  given  you  -,  and  found  the  patient
to  be  fuch  a  one  as  you  may  learn  from  the  letter  I  have  mention'd.

That  rarenefs  of  the  pulfe  in  particular,  was  found  by  me  to  be  fo  great,
that  the  number  of  pulfations  was  lefs,  by  about  two  third  parts,  than  it
ought  to  be :  and  1  had  the  fame  acco"i.]nt  from  the  other  phyficians,  in
regard  to  what  they  had  before  obferv'd  in  the  courfe  of  the  diieafe.

And  this  rarenefs,  which  was  perpetual,  and  had  been  fo  for  many  months,
was  perceiv'd  to  be  -even  much  more  confiderable,  as  often  as  ever  the  at-
tacks were  at  hand  ;  fo  that  the  phyficians  were  never  deceiv'd,  if,  from  the
increafe  of  the  rarenefs,  they  foretold  a  paroxyftn  to  be  coming  on  :  during
the  time  of  which  the  pulfe  not  only  became  frequent,  when  compar'd  with
its  former  ftate,  but  fo  frequent,  that  it  would  have  been  call'd  fo  in  any
patient.

Vol.  III.  T  1 1  When


5  o  6 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

When  I  had  heard  thefe  things,  and  had  confider'd  all  the  other  circum-
ftances ;  I  anfwer'd,  that  the  diforder  ieem'd,  to  me,  to  be  complicated,  and
therefore  to  be  fuch  a  one  as  could  not  be  diftinguifh'd,  in  every  refped^
without  danger  of  an  error.

For  this  reafon,  I  faid  that  nothing  fhoiild  be  attempted  rafhly  j  but  that
•we  muft  make  ule  of  thofe  harmlefs  remedies  which  had  been  wont  to  bring
fome  relief.

However,  as  the  diforder,  which  had  preceded  fome  time  before,  the
caufe,  beginning,  and  moft  of  the  fymptoms  of  the  prefent  diforder,  fliow'd
that  the  nerves  were  affefted,  or  at  leaft  drawn  into  confent  •,  I  faid,  that  in
order  to  mitigate,  at  leaft,  the  convulfive  irritations  of  the  nerves,  a  fmall
quantity  of  opium  might  be  tried  ;  and  if  it  (hould  happen  to  be  of  any  fer-
vice  ;  as  it  had  been  of  much  advantage  in  that  fellow-citizen  of  mine  (_x),
who  labour'd  under  almoft  fimilar  affeftions ;  that  the  cautious  and  well-tim'd
life  of  it  muft  not  be  neglefted.

And  indeed  the  celebrated  Jacob  Placentini,  with  whom  I  had  had  this
confultation,  related  to  me  afterwards,  that  it  had  been  tried  by  him  ;  and
not  without  fome  utility  to  the  patient.

But  the  diforder  continu'd  that  fummer  neverthelefs.  At  the  end  of  which;,
the  difficulty  of  refpiration  being  encreas'd,  together  with  the  cough,  and
the  expedorated  matter  being  ting'd  with  a  leaden  colour  ;  the  attacks  were
alfo  made  more  frequent,  longer,  and  more  violent ;  and  the  fenfes,  which
were  perfeft  betwixt  the  paroxyfms,  as  well  as  the  memory,  feem'd  to  be-
quite  gone  when  they  were  prefent.

Yet  I  learn'd,  from  thofe  who  had  feen  him  on  the  twentieth  day  before
death,  that  his  pulfe  was  ftrong  neverthelefs,  but  ftill  rare.  And  his  death
happen'd,  at  length,  on  the  laft  day  but  one  of  September,  in  the  fame  year
1747  •,  on  which  day  three  or  four  attacks  had  preceded.

As  the  patient  always  had  it  in  his  power  to  lie  on  his  back,  or  upon  either
of  his  fides,  fo,  in  lying  upon  his  left  fide,  he  died  like  a  fufFocated  perfon  ;
his  tongue  being  thruft  out,  and  the  veffels  of  his  face  being  tumid  quite  to
blacknefs.  From  the  firft  beginning  of  the  difeafe  to  tke  very  laft  period,
that  is,  for  fifteen  months,  no  fever  ever  appear'd,  nor  any  pain  of  the  head
was  troubkfome.

On  the  day  following  I  was  prefent  at  the  difleftion  of  the  body,  according
to  defire.

The  right  cavity  of  the  thorax  contain'd  many  pints  of  water  refembling,
urine  ;  and  the  left  cavity  contain'd  a  confiderable  quantity  too,  but  fome-
what  lefs  than  the  other.  The  lungs ;  which  no-where  adher'd  to  the  pleura,.
v?ere  no-where  hard,  but  of  a  cineritious  colour  here  and  there,  throughout
the  anterior  furface ;  when  cut  into,  did  not  fhow  the  leaft  diforder  in  any
part :  except  that  it  was  obferv'd,  in  cutting  into  the  fuperior  lobe,  on  the
left  fide,  that,  in  many  places,  a  white  fluid,  and  puriform,  rather  than  a.
purulent,  matter  was  difcharg'd ;  I  fuppofe  from  the  bronchia,  which  were
cut  into.

(jc)  Epift.  g.  n,  6.  7.


Letter  LXIV. Article  o.  ^07

In  opening  the  afpera  arteria  alfo  longitudinally ;  together  with  one  of 'the
larger  bronchia  ;  not  the  leaft  mark  of  diforder  could  be  feen  on  the  internal
furface  of  that  artery,  befides  a  colour  degenerating  from  rednefs  into  brown.
Within  the  pericardium  was  a  fmall  quantity  of  water  of  the  fame  kind  with
that  in  the  thorax.

But  the  heart  was  very  large,  by  reafon  of  the  ventricles  being  dilated  ;
and  not  from  the  parieces  being  become  thicker  :  yet  the  columnas  were  en-
larg'd  ;  as  I  particukrly  remark'd  in  the  right  ventricle.  The  auricles  in  like
manner,  and  all  the  valves,  were  enlarg'd  ;  but  found  neverthelefs ;  the
orifices  of  the  coronary  arteries  alfo,  were  unufually  dilated.

The  great  artery,  likewife,  was  wider  than  is  natural,  quite  to  the  begin-
ning of  the  curvature.  On  the  internal  furface  of  that  artery,  a  little  above
the  valves,  I  obferv'd  a  few  protuberances  as  it  were  •,  and  the  fubflance  of
the  artery  was  there  pretty  thick,  hard,  and  more  white  than  ufual.  I  alfo^
law  one  of  thofe  protuberances  where  the  fame  artery  defcended  in  the  courfe
of  the  thoracic  vertebrae ;  for  quite  to  that  part  did  I  order  it  to  be
open'd.

But  the  pulmonary  artery,  arid  the  lower  part  of  the  veins  of  the  fame
name,  and  both  the  vense  cavs,  near  to  the  heart,  were  internally  and  ex-
ternally in  a  natural  ftate.  1  faw  a  great  quantity  of  black  and  fluid  blood,
without  any,  even  the  moft  flight,  polypous  concretion,  in  both  the
venss  cavse  ;  but  fl:ili  more  in  the  right  auricle,  and  in  both  the  ventricles.

The  belly  being  open'd,  the  intellines  were  found  to  be  turgid  with  air  in
fome  meafijre  j  the  fmall  inteftines  covering  the  omentum  ;  which  was  drawn
up  to  the  fl:omach.  The  liver  was  fomewhat  hard,  and  inclin'd  to  a  blue
colour. The  fpleen  was  fomewhat  larger  than  when  in  a  natural  ftate.

The  ftomach  was  alfo  large :  and  the  internal  furface  of  it  was  of  a
red  colour  degenerating  into  brown  ;  being  of  a  black  colour  in  fome
places  :  and  this,  as  I  fuppofe,  from  blood  ftagnatihg  there  very  lately  ;
for  the  fmall  inteftines,  alfo,  were  of  a  reddilli  colour  externally.

Yet  thefe,  and  the  colon  5  when  examin'd  with  the  hand,  and  turn'd  about
to  one  fide  and  to  the  other ;  had  not  the  leaft  mark  of  difeafe  that  any  of  us
could  obferve.  Neither  was  there  any  hardnefs  or  diforder  of  any  kind  in  the
pancreas,  or  mefentery,  in  like  manner.

And,  finally,  we  muft  not  omit  this  circumftance  ;  that,  when  firft  the  in-
teftines were  mov'd  to  one  fide  with  the  hand,  a  quantity  of  water,  by  no
means  inconfiderable,  appear'd  under  them.

As  to  the  diflTedtion  of  the  cranium,  neither  the  place,  nor  the  time,  per-
mitted us  to  attempt  this  enquiry.

6.  From  this  fui),  as  I  promis'd  you,  and  even  prolix  hiftory  ;  defignedly
omitting  thofe  circumftances  which  were  the  evident  effefls  of  the  difeafe,
and  which  would  require  a  difcourfe  longer  than  the  hiftory  icfelf;  I  (hall
return  only  to  thofe  things  which  I  faid  to  the  very  celebrated  Placentini,
and  that  very  fkilful  public  Profe£lor  Mediavia ;  and  to  others  who  were
prefent ;  immediately  after  the  dilTeflion  of  the  body  •,  I  mean,  that  we  had
indeed  feen  a  dilatation  of  the  whole  heart,  and  of  the  great  artery  :  but  that
this  certainly  had  not  exifted  before  the  man's  mind  was  ftruck  and  agitated
by  thofe  very  violent  pafllons ;  for  he  was  then  in  very  good  health  :  it  there-

T  1 1  2  fore


^oS Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

fore  feem'd,  that  the  beginning  of  this  dilatation  was  to  be  accounted  for^
from  the  very  difturb'd  motion  of  the  fpirits  through  the  nerves ;  and  in
particular  thofe  which  go  to  the  heart  and  to  that  artery  :  and  from  the  fame
nerves  being  now  and  then  irritated,  as  they  go  to  the  ilomach  likewife,  both
that  fenfe  of  a  fmoke,  as  it  were,  rifing  up  from  thence,  and  thofe  convulfive
paroxyims  which  follow'd  that  fenfe,  were  to  be  deduc'd ;  and  that  the  firft,
and  not  very  confiderable,  flownefs  of  the  pulfe  was,  without  doubr,  to  be
aflrib'd  to  a  certain  diforder  of  the  fpirits  and  nerves,  which,  however,  was
not  yet  encreas'd  and  confirm'd.

And  if  all  thefe  fymptoms  were  firft  appeas'd  by  that  bloody  difcharge
from  the  inteftines;  the  caufe  may  perhaps  be  conjecflur'd  without  difEculty,.
by  thofe  who  account  for  this  difcharge  from  the  haemorrhoids,  and  are  not
ignorant  of  all  the  roots  of  the  vena  portarum ;  efpecially  thofe  that  come
from  the  ftomach,  and  at  length,  open  in  common,  into  the  trunk  of  that
veino-

Yet  we  are  not  therefore  to  deny,  that  this  dilatation  of  the  heart  and
great  artery  ;  efpecially  after  it  had  been  encreas'd ;  had  contributed  any
thing  to  the  rarer^efs  of  the  pulfe;  as  both  of  thefe  parts  were,  by  this
means,  lefs  apt  to  contrafl  themfelves  than  is  necefiary  :  and  particularly  as
the  nerves  fuffer'd  diftraftion  by  reafon  of  the  dilatation.

However,  that  fo  great  a  rarenefs  of  the  pulfe  is  not  folely,  nor  chiefly,  to.
be  attributed  to  caufes  of  that  kind,  it  would  be  eafy  to  conceive  from-
hence  ;  that  in  fo  many  other  perfons,  in  whom  we  found  aneurifms  of
the  heart,  and  great  artery,  ftill  much  larger  than  thofe,  there  were  not
pulfes  of  this  kind :  fo  that,  unlefs  fbme  other  caufe  be  added,  it  is  very
certain  that  fuch  a  fymptom  is  not  brought  on.

And  it  is  very  difficult  to  conjefture,  what  kind  of  additional  caule  this-
can  be,  unlefs  we  fuppofe  it  to  be  a  certain  diforder  of  the  fpirits  and
nerves.

Thus  far  then  I  remember  to  have  faid  at  that  time :  and  I  now  choofe  to
confirm  thefe  things,  as  far  as  it  is  in  my  power,  by  another  obfervation
which  relates  to  the  pulfe.

7.  A  ruflic,  who  was  already  near  eighty  years  of  age,  being  admitted
into  the  hofpital ;  on  account  of  a  tertian  intermittent  fever ;  ftaid  there  lb-
long,  on  the  fcore  of  his  poverty,  after  being  cur'd,  that,  in  the  eighth,
month,  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  diarrhoea  two  or  three  times ;  and  a  flight  fever
coming  on,  he  was  gradually  carried  off  thereby.

In  this  laft  month  his  urine  was  thick,  and  had  a  kind  of  milky  and
inodorous  fediment.  There  was  no  diforder  of  the  refpiration,  nor  yet  of  the
pulfe;  except  that,  having  been  before  foft,  and,  as  you  would  expeft,.
both  from  the  diforder,  and  from  the  age,  of  the  patient,  low  and  fmall,,
it  was  fo  much  diminilh'd  on  the  three  laft  days  of  his  life,  that  it  could  not.
be  perceiv'd  in  any  degree.

The  carcafe  being  brought  into  the  college,  where  I  was  teaching  anatomy;:
for  the  end  of  January,  in  the  year  1754,^  was  coming  on;  I  obferv'd  the
following  things  in  the  belly.

Within  the  lower  part  of  the  inteftinum  reftum  the  haemorrhoidal  veflels.

•were  tumid. The  other  inteftines  were  found  ;,  as  the  ftomaeh,  pancreas,

7  and;


Letter  LXIV. Article  8.


509


and  fpleen  were  alfo.  In  the  mefcntery  indeed,  there  were  fome  glands
which  were  not  fmall,  when  confider'd  with  refpedl  to  the  age  of  the  man  ;
yet  they  were  not  morbid.  The  liver  alfo  was  found  ;  although  contracted
into  itfelf,  and.  fmall  :  and  the  gall-bladder  was  very  much  diftended  with
bile.

The  kidnies,  if  you  look'd  upon  the  external  furfacc  of  them,  were  not
in  a  very  good  ftate.  But  the  bladder  was  perfedly  found.  In  the  mean
while  the  fcrotum  ;  of  which  the  man  had  never  made  any  complaint  in  the
hofpital,  though  he  had  been  there  for  fo  long  a  time  -,  was  obferv'd  not  to^
be  free  from,  diforder  on  either  fide.

For  on  the  right  fide,  within  the  tunica  vaginalis  ;  which  was  not  more
moift,  than  it  naturally  is }  we  found  two  calculi  that  were  unconnected  on
all  fides ;  one  being  pretty  large,  the  other  very  fmall :  but  both  of  them
hard.  And  the  left  tunica  vaginalis,  being  much  thicken'd,  contain'd  no
calculus  indeed ;  but  a  great  quantity  of  water,,  which  refembied  a  lixivium.
in  its  colour.

That  part  alfo  of  the  vas  deferens,  which  was  within  the  water,  was  much
thicken'd  likewife  ;  as  the  albuginea  which  invefted  the  epididymis  alfo  was :.:
and  the  epididymis  was  here  conneded  clofely  to  the  tefticle,  by  a  larger
trad  than  ufual.  Nor  was  a  roundilh  corpufcle  wanting  near  to  the  upper
globe  of  the  epididymis ;  being  prominent  from  the  albuginea,  and  of  the
fame  kind  which,  as  I  have  faid  in  other  letters  to  you  (j),  I  have  generally
found  in  this  fpecies  of  the  hydrocele.

In  the  thorax,  the  lungs  were  found  to  be  in  a  found  flate  :  and  the  fur-
face  of  the  heart  was  almoft  univerfally  cover'd  with  a  great  quantity  of
hard  fat.  The  finus  of  the  pulmonary  vein  was  of  fuch  a  fize,  that  every,
one  wonder'd  at  fo  great  a  dilatation  ;  the  flelhy  fibres  being  prominent  upon
its  interior  furface.

In  all  the  valves^of  the  great  artery,  we  faw  the  corpufculum  Arantii
chang'd  into  a  fmall  indeed,  but  unequal,  and  in  part  bony,  excrefcence  :.
.and  on  the  internal  furface  of  the  fame  artery,  in  the  v/hole  of  that  tradl,
in  which  it  defcended  from  the  extremity  of  the  curvature,  quite  to  the
diaphragm,  were  bony  fcales  in  feveral  places;  though  not  large,  and  but
thin  :  and  from  thence,  quite  down  to  the  divjfion  into  the  iliacs,  andv
in  the  ihacs  themfelves,  were  only  the  beginnings  of  thofe  fcales  ;  but
»hefe  were  very  much  crowded  together,  and  render'd  the  internal  furface
unequal.

The  head,  as  I  made  ufe  of  other  bodies  afterwards,  I  did  not
examine.

8.  Therefore ;  to  omit  other  things,  and  even  thofe  excrefcences  of  the
valves  of  the  great  artery;  you  very  well  fee,  that  there  was  no  peculiar
diforder  in  the  pulfe  even  from  fo  great  a  dilatation  of  the  finus  of  the  pul*
monary  vein  ;  notwithftanding  it  appears  that  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart,
and  confequently  the  great  artery  which  proceeds  therefrom,  could  not  have
rcceiv'd  a  proper,  and  always  equal,  quantity  of  blood  (as  is  naturally  the
cafe)  from  a  finus  fo  enlarg'd  :  nor  could  this  finus,  in  like  manner,  admit,

(jj  XXI,  D.  19.  &  XLIII.  n.  16.  &  feqq;

..  it


5  I  o Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

it  from  the  lungs  ;  fince,  by  reafon  of  its  dilatation,  it  was  no  more  in  a  proper
ftate  to  conftringe  itfelf,fo  as  to  throw  out  alternately, fuch  a  quantity  of  blood,
as  the  law  of  nature  precifely  requir'd  ;  in  order  to  make  room  for  the  new
blood,  that  was  about  to  come  in  from  the  lungs.

Yet  there  was  no  diforder  in  the  refpiration  :  which,  neverthelefs,  has  been
frequent  in  fuch  cafes  •,  as  I  have  fhewn  on  a  former  occafion  (z).  We  may,
therefore,  learn  from  hence,  that  -not  even  the  ufual  and  frequent  injuries  do
always  and  neceflarily  fucceed  to  dilatations  of  the  large  veffels  ;  not  to
mention  that  moft  unfrequent  rarenefs  of  the  pulfe,  on  occafion  of  which  I
thought  proper  to  fend  you  this  hiftory.

9.  When  I  was  writing  to  you  of  the  inequality,  and  intermiflion,  of  the
pulfe  {a)  ;  and  enquiring  whether  diforders  of  that  kind  could  be  accounted
lor  from  polypi,  as  many  had  done  ;  you  will  remember,  I  think,  that  I  paid
fo  much  regard  to  the  doubts  of  that  celebrated  man  Andrew  Pafta,  as  to
fay,  that  until  another  experienc'd  and  learned  man  fliould  arife,  and  very
clearly,  and  effedually,  take  away  from  me  all  thofe  doubts,  I  fhould  fo  long
be  doubtful  with  Pafta  whether  polypi  were  form'd  before  death  ;  efpecially
any  length  of  time  ;  and  yet  that  it  was  not  very  ealy  to  remove  from  my
breaft  thefe  occafions  of  doubting.

And  I  am  fo  much  the  lefs  difpleas'd  with  myfelf,  for  having  made  thefe
affertions,  fince  I  have  lit  on  two  writers,  neither  of  whom  I  fhould  fuppofe
to  have  known  any  thing  of  that  epiftle  of  Pafta,  if  they  did  not  refer
thereto. But,  at  leaft,  I  do  not  think  they  have  read  it  with  attention.

For  both  of  them  make  fome  objedlions,  which  had  been,  already,  more
than  fufficiently  obviated  by  him.  And  one  of  them,  moreover,  thinks  that
all  the  reafonings  of  Pafta  are  fufficiently  anfwer'd  by  one  obfervation  that
he  propofes ;  as  if  it  were  really  very  difficult  to  explain  that  obfervation,
without  fuppofing  the  polypus  to  have  been  form'd  long  before  death.

However,  that  polypus  had,  at  leaft,  been  in  the  number  of  the  few,  which
I  alio  thought  ftiould  be  excepted.  But  it,  neverthelefs,  does  not  belong  to
the  fpecies  of  the  former ;  nor  comes  near  to  the  nature  of  thofe  which  can-
not be  explain'd  without  difficulty.

Yet,  perhaps,  that  polypus,  which  was  defcrib'd  to  me  in  a  letter,  bearing
date  the  fixth  of  June,  1707,  by  that  very  eminent,  and  worthy  friend  of
mine,  John  Anthony  Stancari,  who  was,  while  living,  profeflbr  at  Bologna;
would  have  been  difficult  to  account  for.

The  purport  of  his  letter  was,  that,  on  this  very  day,  had  been  fhewn  to
him,  by  our  friend  Laurence  Bonazoli,  a  fegment  of  the  vena  cava  of  a
woman,  together  with  its  emulgents ;  all  which  veins  were  much  dilated :
being  furnifli'd  with  coats  in  great  meafure  cartilaginous,  and  even  in  fome
meafure  bony ;  but  full  of  a  hard  and  polypous  fubftance,  fo  that  they  feem'd
to  be  entirely  ftopp'd  up  :  however,  in  examining  one  of  them  more  atten-
tively, a  kind  of  finus  was  obferv'd  in  that  fubftance,  through  which  the
blood  might,  though  with  difficulty,  be  carried.

And  he  faid  that  it  was  afTerted  to  him,  by  Bonazoli,  that  the  iliac  veins

(2)  Epift.  24.  n,  36.  (a)  Ibid,  n.  30.

alfo.


Letter  LXIV. Article  i  o.  511

alfo,  the  ven£B  pudend^e,  and  even  the  capillary  veins,  throughout  the  mufcks
of  the  abdomen,  were  full  of  the  fame  polypous  and  hard  fubftance.

Yet  as  BonazoH  had  open'd  the  belly  of  that  woman  haftily  ;  and  for  no
other  reafon,  but  that  he  might  take  out  thofe  parts  which  were  neceffarily  to
be  taken  out,  in  order  to  prepare  the  parts  of  generation  for  the  demonftration
it  was  requifite  he  fhould  make,  in  the  manner  it  is  generally  made  ;  he  had,
befides  thofe  fmall  capillary  veins  full  of  blood,  but  juft  obferv'd  a  little  ferum
efFus'd  betwixt  the  mufcles,  which  was  of  a  fanious  nature,  as  it  were ;  and  in
the  cavity  of  the  belly  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  water.

But  that,  beginning  his  preparation  very  late,  and  when  the  carcafe  was
already  buried,  he  had  then  perceiv'd  thofe  circumftances  which  I  have  re-
lated of  the  cava,  and  of  the  other  veins ;  fo  that  he  was  much  chagrin'd,
he  had  neither  open'd  the  thorax  nor  the  head,  and  enquir'd  into  the  ftate
of  the  veins  in  thofe  parts.

And  as  nothing  elfe  could  be  learn'd  in  regard  to  the  body  after  death,  fo
no  information  could  be  got  of  her  while  living  ;  except  that,  in  the  hofpital
of  St.  Mary  de  Morte,  where  fhe  had  died,  fhe  had  been  taken  for  a  drop-
fical  woman  ;  as  fhe  was  univerfally  tumid,  and  every-where  of  a  livid  co-
lour, fuch  as  the  fldn  is  naturally  of,  where  a  great  number  of  veins,  turgid
with  blood,  are  lying  beneath  it :  that  fhe  had  breathed  with  the  greateft  dif-
ficulty, and  had  always  had  a  very  low  pulfe  ;  v/hich,  at  the  fame  time,  gave
but  little  refiftance  to  the  fingers  of  the  phyfician  who  examin'd  it.

This  hiflory  I  have  not  defcrib'd  to  you  with  an  intention  to  explain  ir,.
by  reafon  of  its  being  imperfed: ;  but  becaufe  it,  in  pact,  comes  near  to  thac
of  the  moft  excellent  Haller,  which.  I  have  endeavour'd  to  explain  hereto-
fore (^)  ;  and  likewife,  becaufe  it  is  one  of  the  moft  rare.at-leaft,  and  that
for  more  than  one  reafon.

But  let  us  go  on,  from  thofe  things  which  I  have  written  of  polypi  in  the
twenty-fourth  letter,^o  thofe  that  1  have  hinted  at  in  the  latter  part  of  the
fame  letter  (c),  upon  the  violent  pulfations  of  all  the  arteries.  -

10.  That  thefe  violent  pulfations  proceed  not  only  from  the  abufe  of  wine,
but  particularly  from  the  irritation  of  the  nerves,  I  did  not  merely  conjedture
then,  but  even  promis'd  that  I  would,  at  another  time,  confirm  to  you  ftill
more,  by  the  example  of  a  certain  merchant.

This  man  i  who  confulted  me  more  than  once,  even  after  that  time  ;  had
been  begotten  by  a  father,  who  was  fo  far  affefted  with  a  hypochondriac,  or
rather  a  melancholic  fadnefs,  that  he  fought  for  the  end  of  his  troubles  by
fwallowing  a  large  quantity  of  opium  ;  and  who,  although  he  was  foon  after
forry  for  what  he  had  done,  and  endeavour'd  to  throw  it  up  by  vomiting,
yet  found  that  his  efforts  were  of  no  avail ;  and  died  by  the  force  of  the
poifon.

This  accident  ftruck  the  mind  of  his  fon,  wiio  was  then  a  young  man,  v.'it!i
great  terror  and  furprize.  After  v/liich  he  addicted  himfelf  too  much  to  the  ufe
of  wine,  and  venery.  And  thefe  abufes  were  fucceeded  by  convulfive  coughs,
and  a  fejife  of  ftupor  in  his  hands ;  which  v/ere  at  the  fame  time  fo  affeftedj,
that  he  was  not  able  to  grafp  and  take  up  v.'hat  he  wifh'd  to  lay  hold  of.

{t]  Ibid..  (<■)  N.  35,  &  feaq.

Afircr


e  I  2 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  -to  the  former  Books,

After  thefe  iympcoms,  at  length,  began  violent  pulfations  of  the  heart  and
arteries,  throughout  the  body:  fo  that  it  was  not  to  be  doubted,  but  thefe
pulfations  alfo  were  brought  on  by  means  of  the  nerves  ;  cfpecially  as  he
-was  frequently  oblig'd  to  bend  his  head  and  neck,  and  move  his  (houlders
againft  his  will  :  and,  at  the  end  of  fome  months,  when  the  arteries  puHated
with  lefs  violence,  he  was  oblig'd  to  do  thefe  things  more  frequently,  and  in
a  greater  degree  :  he  likewife  became  fubje6t  to  palpitations  of  the  mufcles ;
which  I  myfelf  faw  in  the  calves  of  the  legs  ;  and  to  very  troublefome  con-
tradions  in  the  limbs,  in  the  belly,  and  at  the  heart  itfelf :  and  by  thefe
he  was  awak'd,  even  when  he  firft  dropp'd  alleep,  and  could  Deep  no
more.

But  the  heart,  although  the  arteries,  as  I  have  faid,  did  not  vibrate  any
more  to  that  degree,  did  not  only  vibrate  itfelf,  but  its  vibrations  were  per-
ceiv'd  by  the  eye  ;  not  to  mention  the  application  of  the  hand  ;  and  efpecially
in  the  intercoftal  fpace,  at  a  little  diftance  below  the  left  nipple  ;  where,  for
the  extent  of  three  or  four  inches,  whatever  was  betwixt  thofe  two  ribs,  was
rais'd  up  at  every  vibration :  and  if  you  touch'd  this  part  with  the  hand,
-at  that  time  of  pulfation,  it  gave  way  almoft  like  a  bladder.  What  mifchief
happen'd  to  the  man  afterwards  I  do  not  know.  What  the  difeafe  then
threaten'd,  or  rather  what  effedh  it  had  produc'd,  you  plainly  perceive  :  and
you  are  beyond  a  doubt  fenfible,  from  whence  it  had  its  origin.

11.  Now,  fince  wehave  begun  to  fpeak  of  aneurifms,  I  will  not  omit  to
add,  on  this  occafion,  what  obfervations  I  have  made  on  that  fubjeft,  fince  the
great  number  I  fent  you  before.  One  relates  to  an  aneurifm  of  the  heart,
and  tfee  larger  arteries  •,  the  other  only  to  an  aneurifm  of  the  aorta.  The
former  of  which  was  not  fuddenly  fatal ;  but  the  latter  almoft  inftantaneoufly
deftrudlive.

12.  A  certain  man  had  already  lain  two  months  in  the  hofpital,  on  account
of  many  difagreeable  fymptoms ;  all  of  which  were  in  the  thorax.  For
befides  a  fiftula,  which  did  not  reach  to  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  he  labour'd
under  a  palpitation  of  the  heart ;  and  a  greater-than-natural  pulfation.

Thefe  two  fymptoms  had  begun  a  year  before;  not  being  conftant  indeed,
but  fo  frequently  troublefome,  that  when  the  cheft  was  laid  bare,  they  ap-
pear'd  to  the  eyes  of  every-one.  The  pulfe,  however,  in  the  wrifts,  was  not
vibrating  at  leaft.  But  fo  great  a  quantity  of  puriform  matter  was  expec-
torated, that,  if  any-one  did  not  diftinguifh  it  from  real  purulency,  he  might
fufpef^that  this  fiftula  penetrated  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax.

At  length  when  the  patient  was  dead,  his  body  was  differed  by  our  Me-
diavia;  who  is  a  very  eminent  phyfician,  as  well  as  an  excellent  anatomift;
and  the  lungs  were  found  to  be  in  a  found  ftate.

But  the  heart  was  not  found  :  and  for  that  reafon  it  was,  he  took  care  it
fhould  be  brought  to  me  into  the  colleges  together  with  the  neighbouring
part  of  the  large  vefl"els ;  when  I  was  teaching  anatomy  there,  in  the  latter
.part  of  January,  and  in  the  year  1757.

I  faw,  therefore,  both  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  dilated  -,  the  thickn^s
of  the  parietes,  however,  not  being  diminifh'd.  The  trunk  of  the  pulmo-
nary artery  was  alfo  more  wide  than  it  naturally  is  ;  but  that  of  the  aorta
'iA'as  very  wid-e,  quite  to  the  beginning  of  the  curvature  :  for  the  remaining

part


■Letter  LXiy.' Article  I  3 .  513

part  of  it  was  wanting.  The  whole  internal  fiirface  of  it  was  white,  very-
hard,  and  unequal.

i^.  I  had  exanain'd  the  fame  parts  of  a  certain  beggar-man,  which  were
brought  into  the  college  at  the  (ame  time  of  year ;  but  two  years  before.
What  fymptoms  of  dife'aTe  this  man  had  been  previoudy  afifecSed  with,  I
could  not,  for  a  certainty,  learn  ;  except  that  he,  had  been  affe£bed  with  two
flight  ulcers  in  one  of  his  legs,  which  he  even  then  had  :  and  that,  on  the
■days  near  to  his  death,  he  had  been  troubled  with  a  very  frequent  cough  ;
efpecially  in  the  night-time,  by  the  concuffion  of  which  1  fuppofe  the
internal  hsemorrhage,  as  you  will  fee,  to  have  been  accelerated.

This  man  was  brought  into  the  hofpital,  in  confequence  of  having  been
feiz'd  with  a  fyncope,  as  was  faid,  on  a  fudden  •,  wherein  he  was  taken  for  a
dying  man ;  and  chough  he  foon  after  came  to  himfelf,  hf  was  neverthelefs
quite  ignorant  of  all  the  circumftances  which  had  then  happen'd  :  he  had,
however,  at  that  time,  a  turgid  pulle,  biit  one  that  did  not  refill  the  prefllire
of  the  pliyfician's  fingers  who  examin'd  it.

This  phyflcian  was  Jerom  Trivifani ;  formerly  my  very  afTiduous  auditor,
now  a  learned  man,  and  a  phyfician  of  eminence  :  and  he  it  was  who  re-
lated thefe  things,  and  the  following;  for  he  had  been  prefent ;  with  ac-
curacy. .  '  • ■'

When  he  enquir'd  of  the  patient  w.hat  was  then  troublefome  to  him,  and
where  his  uneafihefs  lay  ;  he  anfwer'd  it  was  a  pain  in  this  place,  and
pointed  to  the  lower  part  of  one  of  his  hypochondria.

Trivifani  had  fcarcely  gone  forwards,  to  fee  the  patients  that  lay  by  him,
when  he  was  fuddenly  feiz'd  with  another  attack ;  which  certainly  was  not  a  true
fyncope  ;  for  although  there  was  no  pulfe,  yet  the  face  was  rather  red  :  and
when  the  fpiritus  falis  armoniaci,  as  it  is  call'd,  was  put  under  his  noftrils,
the  patient  agitated Jaimfelf  in  fome  meafure.

Within  half  an  howr,  therefore,  from  the  time  this  new  attack  had  begun,
he  ceas'd  to  li\re-,  the  inteftinal  excrements,  from  whence  that  pain  in  the
lower  part  of  thb  hypochondriu'm  feems  to  have  been,  being  previoufly  dif-
charg'd  into  the  bed.

'  When  Mediavia  difleded  the  body, , he  found  the  pericardium  to  be  full
of  blood  ;  and  the  great  artery,  in  the  whole  of  it  that  was  in  the  thorax,
to  be. dilated.'  He  was  willing,  therefore,  that  this  vefiel,  and  the  adjoining
heart,  fhould  be  examin'd  by  trie.  -  V '

And  the  heart  indeed,  when  look'd  at  internally  and  externally.  Was  olT  ,a
proper  magnitude,  and  in  a  proper  fliate.  But  the  artery,  from  its  very  be-
ginning at  the  heart,  quite  to  the  feptum  tranfverfum,  was  wider  than  it  na-
turally is'-,  being  the  lefs  in  a  ftate  of  dilatation,  in  proportion  as  it  defcended
the  more:  except  that,  in  alrtioft  the  middle  of  its  defcent,  it  grew  broader
for  this  reafon  ;  becaufe  it  protuberated,  on  one  fide,  into  a  fegment  of  a
hollow  fphere,  the  orificje  of  which 'cavity,  opening  within^  the  aorta,  Was
two  fingers  breadths  in  diameter.

A  lateral  protuberance  fimilar  to  this,  but  larger,  occurr'd  betwixt  the
heart  and  the  firft  branch  that  took  its  origin  from  the  curvature  of  the  aorta;
fo  that,  if  the  man  had  liv'd  any  confiderable  time  longer,  it  appear'd,  that
to  the  dilated  trunk  of  the  artery,  two  aneurifms,  in  the  form  of  facculi,
, Vet.  HI.  U  u  u  would


^  X  4 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

would  have  been  added  befides  i  no  fmall  beginnings  thereof  being  evidently
cxifting  in  thofe  protuberances.  The  three  arteries  alfo,  which  proceed  from
that  curvature,  were  wider  than  ufual ;  and,  as  well  as  the  trunk  of  the  whole
artery,  diftinguilh'd  here  and  there,  on  the  internal  furface,  with  the  white
beginnings  of  offification :  thefc  oflifications  were  not  large,  however,  nor
thi'ck,  nor  prominent  internally  -,  nor  did  they  ulcerate  the  internal  coat,  as
they  frequently  do,  when  they  have  attain'd  to  the  hardnefs  of  a  real  bone  r
for  this  they  had  not  done  even  where  I  found  them  carried  on  to  this  ftate
of  hardnefs  -,  that  is  to  fay,  in  fome  few  places  of  the  trunk.

However,  at  almoft  the  interval  of  an  inch  and  a  half  above  the  femilunar
valves,  I  faw  a  flight  tranfverfe  fifllire ;  which  would  have  been  equal  in  its
length  to  half  an  inch  of  Bologna.

To  this  fiflure,  on  the  external  furface  of  the  artery,  but  a  little  lower  than
that,  correfponded  a  foramen,  the  diameter  of  which  had  fcarcely  been  equal
to  two  lines  of  that  inch  :  and  the  borders  thereof  were  bloody  and  half  la-
cerated ;  fo  that  it  was  evident  the  blood  had  enter'd  betwixt  the  coats,  by
means  of  this  fiflure,;  and  that  the  external  of  thefe  being,  at  length,  broken
"through,  it  had  been  forc'd  out  into  the  pericardium.

14.  Similar  hiftories  to  thefe  you  have  already  had  from  me,  particularly
in  the  twenty-fixth  letter  (d) ;  by  way  of  remark  to  which  I  have  obferv'd
many  things,  and  among  thefe,  fome  that  relate  to  the  prefent  likewife :
and  thefe,  therefore,  we  have  no  occafion  to  repeat  here.

But  if  you  fliould  defire  rather  to  read  obfervations  of  other  aneurifms  j
you  will  find  one  not  far  unlike  ours,  in  the  Programma  (e)  which  Waltherus,
tormerly  an  illuftrious  profeflTor,  publifli'd  at  Leipfic  in  the  year  1738  t
and  you  may  find  a  great  number  of  different  hifl:ories,  in  the  trea-
tife  of  that  ingenious  phyfician  at  Piftoia,  Anthony  Matani  (/),  whether
you  would  confider  them  as  made  on  the  heart,  which  he  faw  of  a  very  large
fizc,  and  that  from  perpetual  gluttony  (g),  in  one  patient,  and  in  another  of
a  magnitude  more  than  twice  its  natural  fize  (b) ;  or  on  the  whole  genus  ar-
Urio/um,  as  in  an  old  man  (/),  through  the  whole  of  whofe  body,  innume-
rable aneurifms  were  difpers'd;  or  on  the  great  artery,  as  in  a  young
man  {k)^  the  cavities  of  whofe  thorax  and  belly  were  occupied  with  an  aneu-
rifm,  in  confequence  of  an  inveterate  lues  venerea  -,  or  in  a  man  (/)  whofe
aneurifm,  adhering  to  the  cefophagus,  had  open'd  a  way  for  the  blood
through  that  canal,  by  which  means  the  flomach  was  fill'd.

I  could  wifli  he  had  been  willing,  or  able,  to  compleat  the  hifl-ories ;  by
the  addition  of  thofe  fymptoms  that  had  preceded,  which  were  peculiar  to
the  aneurifm ;  or  at  leaft  by  thofe  which  had  appear'd  lafl;  of  all  before
death ;  as  he  did  in  that  man  (»«),  in  whom  the  abdomen,  growing  tumid
before,  death,  refembled  an  afcites  ;  whereas  the  tumour  was  not  from  water,,
but  from  blood,  which  had  flow'd  down  from  the  trunk  of  the  fame  aorta;
about  the  emulgent  arteries,  where  it  was  eroded  -,  into  the  cavity  of  the'


{</)  n.  13.  &  feqq.  (^)  not.  ad  §.  9.

(0  De  Aneur.  (»)  §•  27.

f/J  De  Aneurifm.  Pr»cord.  Morbis.  i^)  §•  50-  \, . ,

is)  §.  7.  (/)  §.  6z. (mj  laid.


belly


Letter  LXIV. Article  14.  s^S

belly ;  and  in  him,  in  like  manner  (»),  whom  the  rupture  of  the  pulmonary
artery  had  carried  off,  by  pouring  out  its  blood,  within  the  contiguous  bron-
chium,  as  I  fuppofe,  in  prodigious  quantities;  and  from  thence  into  the
fauces.

But  this  is  the  very  thing  of  which  we  ourfelves,  not .  to  mention  other
anatomical  phyficians,  are  every  now  and  then  complaining ;  I  mean,  that  we
cannot  always  have  a  proper  knowledge  of  the  fymptoms  which  have  attended
the  difeafe,  or  preceded  death:  and  this  not  only  for  other  reafons  fome-
times,  but  frequently  for  this  reafon  alfo,  that  the  bodies  which  we,  for  the
moft  part,  difled,  being  thofe  of  the  lower  clafles  of  the  people,  it  happens,
much  more  frequently  than  we  could  wifli,  that  by  reafon  of  very  great
poverty,  or  very  great  ignorance,  their  diforders  are  either  not  obferv'd,  or
not  underftood.

This  is  the  very  complaint  of  that  celebrated  man  Meckel  (0),  prefix'd  to
the  firft  of  his  two  feftions,  into  which  he  has  divided  his  otherwife  accurate,
and  not  common,  obfervations  of  the  diforders  of  the  heart,  which  he  had
been  collecting  for  the  fpace  of  many  years,

Neverthelefs,  read  them  attentively.  For  they  deferve  your  notice  if  any
others  do  ;  as  they  relate  not  only  to  the  prefent  fubjeft,  but  are,  in  a  pecu-
liar manner,  proper  to  be  added  to  the  Sepulchretum  :  nor  are  they  all  de-
ficient in  their  figns ;  nay  fome  have  the  hiftory  of  the  difeafe  very  accurately
exprefs'd.

Add  to  this,  that  explications,  which  are  certainly  very  pertinent,  are  here
and  there  interpos'd ;  and  ufeful  animadverfions  are  thrown  in,  in  order  to
diftingui(h  the  nature  and  feat  of  the  diforders  in  queftion  ;  as,  for  inftance,
that  we  do  not  fufFer  ourfelves  to  be  carried  away,  at  any  time,  by  the  ap-
pearances of  anxieties  and  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  raflhly  accufe  the  lungs
of  fuch  patients,  as-harbouring  the  difeafe ;  but  that,  well  weighing  all  the
circumftances,  we  impute  the  difeafe  to  the  heart,  as  it  becomes  us  to  do,
where  we  judg'd  the  lungs  to  be  found ;  unlefs  it  fhould  happen  (as  he  has
admonifh'd  us  in  another  place  (p)  with  equal  juftice)  that  the  caufe  of  thofe
fymptoms  is  in  the  belly  ;  which  circumftance  being  quite  unobferv'd,  is  the
reafon,  more  frequently  than  is  imagin'd,  why  any  curative  method,  applied
to  the  thorax,  is  hurtful,  rather  than  falutary.

When  you  read .  thofe  obfervations  therefore,  whether  of  inflammations  of
the  pericardium  and  heart,  and  of  fuppurations  of  this  vifcus  ;  or  rather  of
the  fat  wherewith  it  is  overfpread  ;  or  of  cohefions  of  the  pericardium  and
heart,  either  by  means  of  a  fteatomatous  matter,  whereby  the  heart  is  more-
over comprefs'd ;  or,  as  more  frequently  is  the  cafe,  by  a  kind  of  net- work,
as  it  were,  and  fibres  ;  and  thefe  tied  chiefly  to  the  apex  -,  or  of  the  valves
belonging  to  the  heart,  being  either  ofljfied,  as  it  is  call'd,  or  grown  tumid,
fo  as,  in  part,  to  ftop  up  the  paflage  of  the  orifices  ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,
of  the  laceration,  and  almoft  total  deftruftion  of  thofe  parts  ;  or  of  the  en^
largement  of  one  or  other  of  the  cavities  of  the  heart ;  or  of  the  dilatation  or
conftriftion  of  the  arteries  that  go  off  from  thence;  or  of  internal  roughnefs,

(»)  §-63.  ^  .  1755.  &  A.  1756.

(0)  Hift.  de  1'  Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  de  Berlin  A. Cj>J  Hift.  A.  1757.

U  u  u  2  fmall


J- 1 6 Book  V. By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

fmaUulcers,  and  ofTification  in  the  great  artery  itfelf;  or,  finally,  of  the  di-
latation, not  of  one  or  other,  but  of  both;  that  is,  not  only  of  the  heart,
but  of  the  aorta  ;  when  therefore  you  read  obfervations  of  this  kind,  if  you
happen  to  call  to  mind  feme  that  I  have  formerly  written  to  you,  which  are
nearly  fimilar  to  many  of  thefe  in  their  circumftances';  1  know  that  you  will
be  very  ready  to  compare  them  together.

And  this  was  thereafon  why  I  pointed  out  thefe  obfervations  to  you,  and
is  the  reafon,  at  the  fame  time,  why  I  refer  you  alio  to  a  defcription  of  an
aneurifm  of  the  fame  great  artery,  and  of  the  heart  moreover ;  which  ano-
ther of  that  .faiTiouis  Royal  Academy,  i  mean  that  eminent  man  RolofF(j),.
has  given. ''^ ) :  " i • '

iFor  you  may  coriipare  it  with  that  defcription,  which  I  fent  to  you  in  the'
twenty-fixth  letter  (r),  of  a  man,  whom  the  fame  difeafe  of  the  aorta  had-
carried  of}";  th^  fame  bones  being  in  part  confum'd,  and  the  blood  efFus'd
outwardly  in  like  manner ;  and  ybu  may  learn  why  this  other  man  did  not,
however,  immediately  perifb,  as  mine  did.

But  as  to  my  hoping,  that  you  would  find  fdmething  not  quite  unlike  the
obfervation  of  Verlichius  ;  in  that  differtation  which  I  mention'd,  when
fpeaking  of  the  cafe  of  Trombelli  in  the  fame  letter  (s)  ;  I  was  difappointed
in  this  hope,  when,  at  length,  having  procur'd  that  difl"ertation,  I  found  the
queftion  not  to  be  of  fteatomata,  which  had  been  form'd  in  the  coats  of  the
great  artery,  but  of  concretions  adhering  in  the  cavity  of  this  velTcl,  when-
dilated  to  twice  its  natural  fize  :  and  of  concretions  which  have  not  any  very
clofe  connexion  with  the  fide  of  the  artery  ;  fo  that  I  perceiv'd  thefe  mighf
be  conlider'd  as  polypous  concretions,  which  had  been  form'd  gradually,  iff
tl^e  manner  of  ftrata,  in  aneurifms.

But  of  the  two  obfervations  of  the  heart  being  ruptur'd,  that  I  have  pro-
mis'd  you  (/),  and  that  were  communicated  to  me,  by  that  very  eminent  phy-
fician,  and  friend  of  mine  while  living,  Laurence  Mariani,  we  may  now  pafs
over  the  firft,  whereof  he  had  written  in  the  year  1,750;  as  you  will  read  if
given  at  large,  fince  then,  by  Galeati  (a),  the  very  perfon  who  made  the  ob-
fervation, and  who  attended  to  the  cure  of  the  patient  for  the  chief  part.

The  other,  however,  I  will  immediately  defcribe,  as  Treceiv'd  it  in  Ma-
riani's  letters  dated  the  fifteenth  of  March,  in  the  year  1755  ;  and  that  fo-
much  the  more  readily,  becaufe,  by  this  means,  the  number  of  thofe  obfer-
vations will  be  encreas'd,  in  regard  to  which  there  can  be  no  doubt;  if  we
confider  thofe  things  that  had  preceded,  and  thofe  appearances  that  were
found,  when  blood  was  feen  to  be  efFus'd  within  the  pericardium  ;  whether
this  blood  had  been  previoufly  difcharg'd  by  the  force  of  difeafe,  or  after
death  by  the  carelefsnefs  of  diffeclers  only  :  that  is  to  fay,  difTefters  who  do
not  at  all  obferve,  that,  while  they  open'd  the  pericardium,  they  had,  at  the
fame  time,  wounded  the  parts  included  therein  ;  for  perfons  are  not  wanting,
who  fyfped  that  it  might  have  happen'd  thus,  even  in  moft  of  thefe  obfer-
vations ;  how  little  coloui  foever  they  may  have  for  their  fufpicion.

(q)  Hid.  A.  1757.  (r)  N.  9.  (a)  Vid. Commen. de Bonon. Sc.  IriA.

(s)  N.  40. (/)  Epift.  27.  n.  10.  Tom,  4^  in  opufculis^

i^r  A  phyfician


Letter  LXil. Articiesij,'  i6.  s'^l

15,  A  phyfician  of  fifty- eight  years  "of  age;  being  very'  hypochondriar!^
if  any  perfon  in  the  world  was,  and  of  a  pale  and  fallow  complexion  ;  was,
in  the  beginning  of  the  year  I  juft  now  mention'd,  feiz'd  with  a  pain  which
role  up  from  the  belly  to  the  thorax  -,  not  without  fome  convulfive  motions,
and  an  anxiety  of  refpiration.  Thefe-  fymptoms  indeed  were  much  mi-
tigated by  repeated  blood-letting.  But  all  the  fyniptoms  returning  in  the
fame  manner,  on  the  following  day,  they  carried  off  the  patient  in  a  very
ftibrt  time.

The  belly  fliew'd  no  mark  of  difordei:,  except  in  the  liver,  and  the  in-
teftine  ileum  ;  the  latter  of  which  was  livid  in  fome  degree  for  a  confiderable
fpace,  and  the  former  of  a  much  larger  fize  than  it  naturally  is.

But  in  the  thorax  we  found  blood  effus'd  within  the  pericardium  :  and
this  had  flow'd  thither,  through  three  foramina,  from  the  left  ventricle  of
the  heart.  This  ventricle  was  lb  dilated,  as  to  form  a  cavity  of  three  times
the  magnitude  it  generally  forms.

16.  1  believe  that  this  phyfician,  as  "I  wroteback  to  Mariani,  Vv?buld  not
have  died  of  this  diforder  -,  or,  at  leaft,  not  fo  foon  by  a  confiderable  time  ;
if  he  had  not  been  fo  fubjedt  to  the  hypochondriac  diforder :  and  not  only
becaufe  he  would  not  have  been  opprefs'd  with  fo  frequent  and  ftrong  in-
ternal and  hypochondriac  convulfions,  from  whence  I  account  for  the  dila-
tation of  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart,  and,  finally,  the  perforations  thereof  j
the  blood,  for  inftance,  being  very  frequently  cpnfin'd  within  that  ventricle;
which,  for  this  reafon,  was  irritated  to  contrafb  itfelf  frnre  ftrongly,  nd
expel  its  contents ;  but  becaufe  he  would  hav^e  endeavour'd  to  obviate  th^
beginning  and  progrefs  of  his  aneurifm,  if  he  had  not,  as  is  frequently  th^
cafe,  referr'd  the  fymptoms  of  it  to  the  hypochondriac  diforder,  ^

For,  without  doubt,  this  very  great  detriment  too  frequently  arifes/r,om
the  laft-mention'd  diforder,  that,  by  reafon  of  the  greater  part  of  the  figns,:
•which  are  common  to  this,  and  to  or^antcal  diforders,  phyfidans:  hefitate  too
long  on  the  method  of  cure ;  not  only  in, the  cafes  of  others,  but  particularly
in  their  own ;  and  readily  believe  the  diford^  to  be  that  of  the  two  which
they  would  wifb  it  to  be;  I  mean,  the  more  flight ."  in  confequence  of  which
perfuafion,  they  negled  to  do  what  is  neceifary  to  be  done  for  themfelves.

However,  although  when  I  promis'd  you  this  obfervation,  I  fuppos'd  that"
the  inftances  of  rupture  in  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  were  much  more
rare  than  thofe  of  the  left  -,  I  do  not,  at  prefent,  believe  them  to  be  fo  mucH
more  rare  as  I  then  did,  notwithftahding  t  ftill  believe  thern  to  be  more
rare,  '  '  '  ;.'.-.,

For  when  I  was  accidentally  looking  for  fomethtng  elfe;  in  a  certain  dif-
fertation  {x)  of  the  celebrated  Chriftian  Vater ;  I  lit  on  the  difieftion  of  a
foldier,  who  d'ltd  in  ajiu  venerea,  not  much  unlike  that  which  I  had  pro-
duc'd  from  Bohn  (j),  except  that  a  violent  and  long-continu'd  dancing  had
alfo  preceded ;  and  that  the  rupture  was  found  to  be  in  the  right  ven-
tricle.

But  befides  this,  I  fee  that  two  examples,  of  the  rupture  of  the  fame  ven-

(*■)  De  mort.  fubit.  non  vulg.  cauf.  thef.  8v >  (j)  Epift.  27.  n,  i,

tiicle


5 1  8 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

trick  from  other  caufes,  are  lately  referr'd  to  by  the  illuftrious  Haller  (z).
And  in  the  works  of  this  author,  you  will  meet  with  many  teftimonies  of
other  authors :  but  fome  of  their  books  I  have  not  by  me  at  prefent ;  and
the  obfervations  of  others,  relative  to  the  internal  diforders  of  the  thorax,
which  I  have  read  formerly,  I  am  not  capable  of  retaining  in  my  memory  :
otherwife  I  certainly  Qiould  not  have  omitted  them  among  others  which  I
have  produc'd  ;  but  (hould,  without  doubt,  have  quoted  fome  which  would
make  more  to  my  purpofe,  and  would  feem  to  be  more  worthy  of  your
regard.

I  would  therefore  wi(h  you  to  feek  them  there  (a),  and  feleft  fuch  obfer-
vations, as  you  may  join  to  thofe  that  have  occurr'd  to  me,  while  I  was
writino-  letters  to  you,  wherein  I  confider'd  the  dilatations  of  the  cavicies  of
the  heart,  and  the  veflels  adjoining  thereunto ;  and  either  the  caufe  of  thefe,
and,  in  particular,  the  diforders  of  the  valves,  or  the  effefts  thereof,  as  the
preternatural  refpirations,  pulfes,  fyncopes,  and  internal  hasmorrhages.  If
you  do  this,  you  will  have  many  things  to  add  to  the  Sepulchretum.

17.  Before  I  make  an  end  of  fpeaking  of  fudden  deaths,  from  aneurifms  of
the  great  artery,  or  of  the  heart,  and  their  rupture  j  you  will,  perhaps,  afk
me  whether  I  think  that  thofe  deaths  had  happen'd  among  the  ancients  alfo,
from  the  fame  caufe.

It  certainly  cannot  be  denied  that  many  died  fuddenly  even  in  thofe  times  j
as  I  remember  to  have  (hewn  in  other  letters  to  you  (^);  and  could  now
confirm,  if  there  were  occafion,  even  from  Cicero  himfelf,  whofe  words,  for
inftance,  are  thefe  (c) :  "  But  he  perifh'd  by  a  fudden  death.  Let  us  fup-
»«  pofe  it  the  cafe ;  yet  this  circumftance  would  not  give  us  fufficient  caufe
*'  to  fufpedl  poifon,  by  reafon  that  many  perfons  die  the  fame  kind  of
*'  death."

Why,  therefore,  may  we  not  fuppofc,  that,  among  the  number  of  fudden
deaths  which  then  happen'd,  fome  of  this  kind,  whereof  we  are  fpeaking,
happen'd  alfo  ?  Is  it  lefs  probable  for  this  reafon,  that  in  thofe  times  they
were  more  abflemious  in  their  4)leafures,  and  did  not  indulge  their  pafllons  in
many  refpefts  wherein  the  men  of  our  days  are  by  no  means  abftinent  ?

From  their  hiftories,  and  books,  it  appears,  that  they  had  indulg'd  their
paffions  and  appe;tites  ftill  more.  And  although  it  by  no  means  appears
therefrom,  that  they  were  infefted  with  the  lues  venerea ;  which,  after  having
been,  at  length,  brought  from  America  into  other  regions,  is  itfelf  alfo  one
of  the  great  number  of  caufes  of  diforders  of  this  kind,  in  the  heart  and
arteries  j  yet,  as  they  abus'd  the  other  caufes  of  thefe  diforders,  flill  more
than  the  men  of  our  days,  I  do  not  at  all  fee,  why  we  fiiould  not  fuppofe
them  to  have  been  fubjed  to  their  bad  effefts  in  the  fame  manner.

And  I  am  ftill  more  confirm'd  in  my  opinion,  when  I  call  to  mind  thofe
difpofitions  to  thefe  difeafes,  which  you  will  remember  that  I  have  already
acknowledg'd,  with  Lancifi  (i),  to  have  cxifted  from  the  firft  formation  of

(2)  Elem.  Phyfiol. Corp.  Hum.  Tom.  i.  (3)  Epift.  26.  n.  1.

1.  4.  S.4.  §  13.  (V)  Orat  pro  A.  Cluentio.

(a)  Ibid.  §  10.  14.  16.  18.  &  S.  3.  §  17.  {//J  Epift.  27.  n.  6.
&:1,  2.  S.  2.  §9.

the


Letter  LXIV. Article  j 8,  19.  ^r^

the  animal. For  who  can  contend  that  the  bodies  of  the  ancients  were  en-
tirely free  from  thefe  difpofitions  ?

You,  therefore,  readily  perceive,  that  thofe  perfons  are  approv'd  by  me,
who  have  thought  that  nearly  the  fame  anfwer  fliould  be  given  to  others,
who  have  made  the  fame  enquiry  as  yourfelf,

x8.  And  now  I  was  about  to  feal  up  this  letter,  when  an  occafion  was
given  me,  of  making  an  obfervation,  which  would  naturally  belong  to  the
letter  wherein  we  treated  of  the  diforders  of  the  pulfe,  and  of  the  encreas'd
magnitude  of  the  heart;  as  we  do  at  prefent.  I  will  therefore  add  it
here.

19.  A  man,  of  almoft  fixty  years  of  age,  had  died,  in  the  hofpital,  of
a  difficulty  of  breathing,  on  the  beginning  of  the  twenty-fixth  of  January,
'  of  the  year  1759.  He  had  complain'd  of  nothing,  from  the  time  of  his
coming  into  the  hofpital,  but  of  this  difficulty  ;  nor  had  he  gain'd  the  leaft
advantage  from  any  other  remedy  but  vensefeclion :  and  the  advantage  he
gain'd  from  this  was  very  little  and  fliort.

On  the  tenth  day  before  his  deathj  fcarcely  any  pulfe  could  beperceiv'd  ;
and  ftill  lefs  on  all  the  days  which  follow'd :  whereas  the  man  was  in  his
perfeft  fenfes  even  to  the  laft ;  took  his  food  with  pleafure ;  and  was  able
to  move  himfelf  in  bed :  and  indeed,  if  you  except  the  laft  day,  he  was
always  capable  of  railing  himfelf  up,  as  often  as  ever  any  very  conliderable
difficulty  of  breathing,  which  oblig'd  him  to  fit  in  an  ereft  pofture,  came
on  ;  and  this  adtion  he  even  perform'd  with  a  kind  of  impetus*

His  face  was  of  a  red  colour  inclining  to  that  of  violets.  He  expedtorated
nothing  which  was  morbid ;  except  that,  two  days  before  death,  fome  bloody
ipittings  appear'd.  As  to  what  relates  to  the  beginnings  of  the  difeafe,  and
its  caufes  ;  it  was  not  in  our  power  to  learn  any  thing  of  this  kind :  for  the
man  was  a  foreigner,  and  confequently  not  known  here.  Yet  it  was  fufpeiflcd
that  he  had  been  given  to  drinking.

The  belly  and  thorax  being  open'd,  by  our  Mediavia,  in  tlie  hofpital,  he
inform'd  me  that  in  the  latter  was  fome  water,  but  in  the  former  a  great
deal  more ;  and  that  the  ftomach  was  very  large :  in  the  thorax,  alfo,  the
right  lobe  of  the  lungs  adher'd  clofely  to  the  pleura.

This  lobe,  together  with  the  left,  and  the  other  parts  that  are  within  the
thorax,  he  took  care  Ihould  be  brought  to  me  •,  according  to  my  defire :
and  this  he  did  likewife  in  regard  to  thofe  in  the  belly,  the  large  veffels,  and
all  thofe  that  belong  to  the  urinary  organs,  and  the  organs  of  generation,  in-
general ;  as  I  was  then  teaching  anatomy  in  the  college.

I  therefore  examin'd  them  accurately  ;  nor  did  I  fee  any- thing  morbid  in
the  lungs.  The  pericardium  was  dilated,  and,  as  the  fiuftuation  fhew'd,
contain'd  a  fluid,  which  was  a  fmall  quantity  of  water  ;  and  that  of  a  yellow
colour ;  with  which  we  foon  after  obferv'd  the  internal  furface  of  the  heart
and  arteries,  when  laid  open,  to  be  ting'd  univerfally  ;  as  they  alfo  reported
the  ferum  of  the  blood,  when  taken  from  the  living  body,  to  have  been.

The  heart  was  large :  all  its  cavities  except  one,  that  is  the  left  auricle,
being  enlarg'd,  but  the  thicknefs  of  the  parietes  not  extenuated ;  nay,  it
was  even  increas'd  in  feveral  places,  as  well  as  the  length  in  all  the  parts  of
the  heart ;  and  particularly  in  the  columnas.

The


J 2  o Book  V.  By  way  of  Supsplemqnt  to  the  former  Books.

,  .The  right, auticle  itfejf^  being  moft  m^nifeftly  ejilarg'd  both  in  length  and
breadth,  fhew'd  the  internal  falciculi  to  be  very  thiclc  and  protuberant.  Ip
this  cavity  was  a  great  quantity  of  blood  -,  as  there  was  alfo  in  both  the  ven-
tricles,:_and, this  was  very  black  and.  half-concreted,  but  had  nothing  of  a
polypous  appearance.  .!!%:"./,':  '::  ■:

The  aggeres,  or  tubercles,  of; the  valves  of  both  arteries,  were  more  pro-
minent than  ufual :  but,  although  there  was  fomething  of  a  bony  formation
near  to  one  of  the  femilunar  valves  ;  there  was  no  where  any  thing  of  that
kind  in  any  of  the  valves  themfelves.  In  one  of  the  valves,  ho.wever,  which
lie  below  the  orifice  of  the  vena  cava,  and,  in  like  manner,  in  the  lefier  mitrai
valve,  we  obferv'd  a  kind  of  cartilaginous  hardnefs  in  foffie  places.  /

The  pulmonary  artery  was  found  to  be  not  dilated,  and  the  great  artery
was  undilated  likev/ife.  But  in  this  laft-mention'd  veflel,  when  laid  open,
quite  to  the  iliacs,  and  wip'd  clean  ;  although  thofe  whitenefles,  which  are
the  marks  of  future  oflification,  were  not  wanting  in  fome  places ;  there  was,
neverthelefs,  nothing  really  bony  any  where  ;  except  in  one  place  only,
which  was  far  from  the  heart,  and  inconfiderable  in  its  fize.

As  to  what  remains;  the  urinary  bladder;  which  1  infpe£ted  together
with  thofeiparts  I  have  fpoken.of,  before  the  feventieth  hour  after  death ;
had  already  begun  to  degenerate  from  a  fomewhat  livid  colour  into  that  of  a
green  ;  but  this  was  only  externally :  for  internally  it  was  in  a  natural  ftate,
as  you  will  alfo  learn  from  a  circumftance,.  which,  as  I  cannot  explain.it
here  in  a  few  words,  I  fhall.not  omit  (^)  at  ,a  more  convenient  place  and
time. ,

.  20.  You  perceive  that  when  I  .adjoin'd  this  hiftory,  I  was  taken  up
jwith  occupations  of  a  public  nature.  For  which  reafonvyouiwiU  ftP£ib.e.fiJr?-
priz'd*  that  I  added  nothing  upon  this  fubjedl:. Farewel,,n  ■>■■'>  :\  ;  toii^.i  v.\


LETTER the SIXTY-FIFTH

Relates  to  moft  of  the  Diforders  of  the  Belly.


F  I  am  hot  able  to  do  in  regard  to:  the  diforders  of  the  belly,  what  I
_  have  done  in  refpeft  to  thofe  of  the  thorax  ;  I  mean,  to  comprife  all
the  obfervations  you  are  to  expe6l  from  me  in  this  one  letter  only ;  yet  at
lead  I  fhall  endeavour  to  comprehend  them  in  as  few  as  poffible.  For  they
are  not  in  very  great  number,  and  moft  of  them  are  but  fhort.

{e)  Vid.  epift.  66.  n.  10.

However,


Letter  LXV. Article  2 .  5-21

However,  as  for  fome  years  pad,  the  opportunities  I  have  had  of  dif-
fecfling  the  bodies  of  patients  who  died  of  dilbrders  of  the  belly,  have  not
been  very  frequent ;  fo  I  have  lit  frequently  on  the  fame  appearances,  that
others  have  found  in  the  mean  while;  or  previoufiy  thereto;  in  diirecling
bodies  of  this  kind.

Wherefore,  that  you  may  have  wherewith  to  add  to  the  Sepulchretum,
I  will  point  out  thofe  appearances  to  you,  as  I  have  done  in  the  letter  I  fenc
you  before;  obferving  the  order  of  that  letter  in  general.

2.  And  firft,  as  to  what  relates  to  injur'd  deglutition,  I  would  have  you
Tead  what  a  kind  of  ftreightnefs  Abraham  Vater  (a)  obferv'd,  in  the  lower
part  of  the  cefophagus,  from  the  tumefaftion  of  its  coats  ;  and  not  without
marks  of  an  excrefcence  having  preceded  in  the  fame  place:  and  not  only  this^
but  alfo,  if  you  have  not  already  feen  them,  thofe  cafes  that  are  related,  from
many  obfervators,  in  the  commentaries  of  the  very  illuftrious  Van  Swieten  (^),
of  the  gula  being  extremely  narrow,  in  the  fame,  or  even  in  fome  fuperior
part;  by  reafon  of  the  coats  being  chang'd  into  a  fubllance  that  was  fchirrhous,
and  fill'd  with  vomica,  or  into  a  cartilaginous  fubftance  ;  or  by  reafon  of
the  cavity  of  this  tube  being  ftopp'd  up,  by  a  glandular  tumour;  or  becaufe
fome  large  fteatomatous  tumour,  thereto  adjacent,  or  a  part  of  the  lungs
which  had  become  fchirrhous,  prefs'd  upon  it,  and  ftreighten'd  it.

In  regard  to  men  that  chew  the  cud,  there  is  nothing  that  I  fhould  add  to
thofe  things  which  I  have  curforily  hinted,  in  the  twenty-ninth  letter  (c) ;  ex-
cept that  the  little  horn  which  the  father  had  borne  upon  his  forehead,  or  a
little  above  it,  does  not  feem  to  have  had  the  leaft  connexion  with  the  rumi-
nation of  his  fon ;  fince  Sachfius'(i},  although  he  has  produc'd  fo  many
examples  of  men  that  had  horns,  has  not  only  not  remark'd'that  any  of  thefe,
or  their  fons,  had  chew'dthe  cud,  befides  that  one;  but,  finally,  has  admo-
nifh'd  us,  "  that  moft  authors  had  pronounc'd  thefe  horns  to  be  of  the  fpecies
^'  of  verrucas:"  and'who  can  take  upon  him  to  fay,  that  there  is  the  leaft
■connexion,  or  affinity,  betwixt  thefe  verruca;,  and  chewing  the  cud,  whether
he  confiders  the  origin,  or  the  nature  thereof?

And  certainly,  that  horn,  which  I  very  lately  faw  on  an  old  man,  who  came
from  .a  part  of  the  country  about  Padua,  was-  of  the  fpecies  of  the  ver-
ruca.

for  he  faid  that  a  verruca,  or  wart ;  which  he  had  long  borne  on  the  left
part  of  the  finciput ;  had,  four  years  before,  degenerated  into  this  horn  ;  and^
by  degrees,  grown  out  to  that  length  which  it  then  was  of;  that  is,  more
than  four  inches.

Unlefs  you  prefs'd  it  back  towards  the  bafis,  the  man  was  not  in  pain  :  nor
was  this  furprizing;  for  the  flcin,  being  afFefted  with  a  kind  of  phlogofis,
as  it  were,  about  the  bafis,  was  rais'd  up  in  fuch  a  manner,  and  coher'd  fo
therewith,  that  you  might  perceive  the  horn  to  be  made  up  of  the  cutis,
according  to  the  opinion  of  Malpighi  {e)  :  and,  finally,  what  elfe,  in  fad,  are
verrucas,  but  the  papillae  of  the  fliin,  produc'd  and  become  morbid  .''

(a)  Difp.  de  Deglut.  Diffic.  &  imped.  Hift. (c)  N.  4.
3.  (ii)  In  Schol.  ad  Obf.  30.  A.  i.  Eph,  N.  Ci

{h)  Comment,  in  Boerh.  Aph.  §  797.  {e)  Differt,  Epiftol,  de  Corn.  V«get.

Vol..  III.  X  X  X  It


42  2 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

"  It  was  equal  to  the  fize  of  a  man's  thumb  at  its  bafis,  from  whence,  like
a  cone  that  was  curv'd  in  an  anterior  direftion,  growing  gradually  fmall,  it  de-
generated into  a  point.  The  whole  of  it  was  of  a  horny  hardnefs,  and  of
a  ftriated  furface  longitudinally  •,  which  appearance  was  without  doubt,  alio,
occafion'd  by  the  intervals  left  betwixt  the  papillae,  when  produc'd  in  a  lon-
gitudinal direction.

There  was  this  fingularity  in  the  cafe,  that,  as  a  fhoot,  or  twig,  raifes
itfelf  up,  and  fprouts,  from  the  ground  which  is  neareft  to  its  own  tree  ;  fo
from  the  fldn,  which  was  neareft  to  the  fide  of  the  larger  horn,  another  little
horn  had  already  begun  to  grow  ;  being  fimilar  to  the  former,  except  that,
as  it  was  yet  lefs  than  a  third  part  of  the  length  of  that,  and  lefs  than  a  third
part  of  the  thicknefs,  fo  it  was  not  as  yet  bent  in  any  direction.  But  of
this  enough.

And  in  regard  to  pains  of  the  ftomach  ;  befides  thofe  things  which  we
fhall  take  notice  of  below  (/),  when  fpeaking  of  the  difcharge  of  cyftic  cal-
culi through  the  narrow  biliary  duds  ;  there  are  many  oblervations  extant
which  are  produc'd  by  Chriftian  Wencker,  together  with  the  hiftory  of  a
virgin,  who  had  her  ftomach  perforated  for  feven-and-twenty  years  {g")  :  all
which,  or  almoft  all,  fpeak  of  ulcers  in  the  ftomach.

In  the  fame  obfervations  a  frequent  vomiting  is  mention'd  -,  in  one  even
of  blackifti  matter  (h) :  whereof  mention  is  alfo  made  by  Gothofr.  Sandius,
in  defcribing  "  an  extraordinary  abfcefs  of  the  ftomach  (i)."  But  Jo.  Kamp-
fius  (k)  fpeaks  of  a  frequent  vomiting,  as  join'd  with  an  incredible  diftenfion
of  all  the  veftels  of  the  ftomach,  from  black  and  fphacelous  blood  ;  and,  in
like  manner,  with  a  narrownefs  thereof,  and  a  thicknefs  of  its  coats,  and  al-
moft a  change  of  them  into  a  cartilaginous  nature  :  and  Langguthus  (/)  men-
tions a  frequent  vomiting,  from  the  coats  of  the  ftomach  being  thicken'd  to
an  immenfe  degree,  and  become  fchirrhous  ;  fo  as  every-where  to  aftringe
the  pylorus,  and  render  it  very  narrow:  in  which  ftate  it  alfo  Was  in  the
virgin  taken  notice  of  from  Wencker.

And  the  greater  part  of  thefe  obfervations  agree  with  thofe  which  were,
long  ago,  delizrib'd  to  you  by  me.  And  the  laft,  moreover,  bring  back  to
my  mind  the  cafe  of  a  man  of  Feltri ;  for  whom  I  was  confulted  in  the
month  of  January,  in  the  year  1754.  The  difleclion  of  whole  body  I  had
afterwards  the  relation  of,  from  the  celebrated  Pujati,  who  had  then  repre-
fented  his  cafe  to  me  by  letter.

3.  A  man  of  four-and-forty  years  of  age;  being  abfent  from  the  place
of  his  habitation,  and  travelling  in  mountainous  and  uncultivated  places ;
took,  for  a  flight  gonorrhoea  virulenta,  many  remedies  of  the  mercurial  kind;
being  fuch  as  he  could  get,  and  perhaps  badly  prepar'd  and  badly  pre-
ferv'd.

While  he  was  making  ufe  of  thefe  remedies,  the  ftomach  was  not  only  ir-
jitated,  but  he  was  alfo  oblig'd  to  vomit. From  that  time,  whatever  he  ate

(/J  N.  12.  &  feqq.  {k)  De  Infarft.  vafor.  ventric.  caf.  5.  &  9.

(g)  Aigentor.  A.  1743.  0)  Progr.  de  Tabe  ex callofa  pylori  an-

{/?)  Obf.  I.  guftia.  Wittemberg.  A.  1750.
(;■)  Regiomont.  A.  170J.

or


Letter  LXV. Articles  4,  5.  523

or  drank,  he  began  to  throw  it  all  up  in  general :  and  if  he  did  not  difcharge
the  contents  of  his  ftomach,  he  was  much  more  troubled  with  an  anxiety
and  pain  of  the  ftomach  ;  wherewith  he  was  almoft  always  afFefted,  but
(lightly ;  and  he  was  troubled  with  a  fingultus  alfo :  but  if  he  took  food
afrelh,  after  having  thrown  up  what  he  had  taken  before,  he  then  fre-
quently retain'd  it.

He  fpat  out  a  great  quantity  of  faliva,  which  was  thick  and  ill-tafted.  His
belly  being  coftive,  he  difcharg'd  nothing,  upon  milk  being  thrown  up,  but
hard  globules  of  excrements.  And,  although  the  pulfe  had  not  any  circum-
ftance,  as  yet,  which  was  contrary  to  the  natural  appearances  ;  there  was,
neverthelefs,  a  confiderable  wafting  of  flefli.

Many  and  various  remedies  were  made  ufe  of  againft  this  difeafe ;  but  all  to
no  purpofe :  fo  that,  at  length,  the  poor  man  was  under  a  neceffity  of
yielding  to  his  fate.

The  ftomach  had  its  pylorus  in  a  ftate  of  contraction,  and  very  hard  :
near  the  pylorus  was  a  little  ulcer:  and  on  the  remaining  part  of  the  internal
furface,  were  a  great  number  of  glands,  as  it  were,  fcattcr'd  at  fome  diftance
from  each  other.

4.  Come,  now  let  us  touch  flightly  upon  thofe  things  that  relate  to  the
difeafes  of  the  inteftines ;  and  firft  upon  thofe  that  relate  to  the  difeafes
wherein  the  ftomach  alfo  is  often  wont  to  be  afi^efled.

The  celebrated  anatomift  Phil.  Conr.  Fabricius  (jn)  has,  now  and  then,  in
dyfenteric  bodies,  feen,  befides  the  large  inteftines,  the  fmall  inteftines  alfo,
and  the  ftomach  inflam'd.  So,  in  one  body,  he  even  faw  the  large  inteftines
more  corrupted,  and  cover'd  over  with  a  bloody  pus ;  the  fmall  inteftines,
however,  being  at  the  fame  time  all  aft^edled  with  a  fphacelus,  and  the
ftomach  itfelf  inflam'd ":  although,  in  another  body,  he  found  the  feat  of
the  dyientery  to  be  in  the  colon  only,  and  the  inteftinum  reftum.

But  Henricus  HeTirici  («)  found  the  ftomach  to  be  thin,  and  flaccid,  in  a
woman  whom  a  cholera  morbus,  that  attack'd  her  very  violently,  had  re-
duc'd  to  the  moft  extreme  weaknefs  in  thirty-five  hours ;  and  the  upper  part
of  it  to  be  affedled  with  a  kind  of  fpot  obfcurely  red,  and  refembling  a
lividnefs  from  contufion  j  fpots  fimilar  to  which  were  here  and  there  in  the
inteftine  colon  :  but  thefe  were  lefs  in  their  fize.

And  this  obfervation  prevents  me  from  omitting  my  difledion  of  another
woman,  who  had  been  carried  ofi^  by  a  flux  of  the  inteftines :  which  dif-
feftion  was  performed  before  the  latter  end  of  January,  in  the  year  1753.

5.  The  body  of  an  old  woman,  who  had  been,  by  means  of  a  long  and
obftinate  diarrhea,  reduc'd  at  length  to  the  greateft  ftate  of  weaknefs,  and
lofs  of  flefh;  and  even  to  death  itfelf;  was  brought  into  the  college  for
diflfeiflion.  We  only,  however,  examin'd  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  as  we  foon
after  got  a  male  body ;  which  was  a  much  more  proper  fubjed  for  profecuting
the  anatomical  demonftrations.

The  abdomen  ;  which  was  fo  emaciated,  that  it  had,  under  the  fkin,  not
an  adipofe  membrane,  (a  rare  circumftance  even  in  the  moft  lean  and  ema-

(«)  Progr.  quo  Obf.  Anat.  &c.  Helmft.  A. («)  Differt,  de  Cholera  morbo.  c.  i.  §  20.
J754.  M.  Oft.  pag.  19.  &  not,  V, .

X  X  X  2  elated


3'  2  4  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

elated  women)  but  a  thin  membrane,  like  a  net-work,  that  retain'd  fcarcely
^ny  the  moft  fmall  remains  of  fat  in  any  part  of  it ;  when  laid  open,  had
hfeither  any  ill-fmell,  nor  immediately  fliew'd  any  thing  that  was  worthy  of
remark  ;  except  that  the  gall-bladder,  defeending  below  the  liver,  and  that
in  a  confiderable  degree  too,  the  bile,  which  was  there  in  a  pretty  large  quan-
tity, and  of  a  dark  colour,  had  ting'd  the  neighbouring  inteftines  with  a
yellownefs,  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  it  generally  does.

But 'neither  any  of  the  fmall  inteftines,  nor  the  iiomach,  which  was  con-
tracted, had  any  mark  of  difeafe.  Only  fome  parts  of  the  large  inteftines  %
as  thofe,  which,  in  the  colon,  and  the  coecum,,  are  neareft  to  the  valve  of
Bauhin  ;  were  internally  red  from  inflammation.

Yet  the  redum  was  almoft  univerfally  livid,  in  confequence  of  inflam-
mation ;  and  was  here  and  there  tumid  internally  :  but  efpecialiy  at  the
lower  part ;  from  whence  a  fpot,  in  the  form  of  a  circle,  as  it  were,  ex-
tended itfelf  upwards  to  the  breadth  of  a  man's  thumb  ;  being  fomewhat
foft  and  prominent,  as  if  it  had  been  form'd  by  blood  half-coagulated  there,.
\fnder  the  internal  coat.

And  above  this  part  wci-e  protuberant,  either  true  lenticular  glands,  or
glands  fimilar  thereto  -,  lying  at  a  diftance  from  each  other,  and  being  of  a
reddifli  colour  inclining  ftill  more  to  brown.

However,  fome  of  the  glands  in  the  mefentery,  although  they  had  the
"appearance  of  being  found,  were  larger,  neverthelefs,  than  Was  fuitable  to
that  age.  And  there  was  an  appearance  which  is  pretty  frequent ;  I  mean,
that  the  trunk  of  the  great  artery  was  fomewhat  hard  in  feveral  places,  and
whitifti,  on  its  internal  furface,  by  reafon  of  many  incipient  offifications.

But  there  v/as  this  peculiar  circumftance,  that  if  you  examin'd  the  fanle
furface,  the  coats  which  make  up  the  left  fide,  and  pofterior  part,  of  the
artery,  feem'd  to  be  join'd  to  each  other  at  an  angle  i  and  not  in  the  manner
of  a  curv'd  line.

6.  Thofe  things  that  I  faid  juft  now  of  the  reftum,  bring  to  my  mind
that  membrane,  which  hung  out  from  the  anus  of  a  Jewifli  merchant  (<?),  and
which  had  not  been  protruded  without  blood  and  deprav'd  ichor,  and  pre-
cedino-  violent  pains  of  the  fame  inteftine  ;  though  he  liv'd  in  good  health,
neverthelefs,  from  the  year  1729,  to  the  beginning  of  the  year  1748.  I  now
add,  that  he  liv'd  fo  long  as  to  the  year  175!^  -,  in  which  year  I  have  heard
that  he  was  carried  off  by  a  far  different  difeafe ;  that  is,  a  difeafe  of  the
thorax.

But  why  I  make  no  other  remarks  to  the  obfervations  I  have  given,  of  the
man,  and  of  the  old  woman,  you  readily  perceive  ;  as  you  know  how
much  I  hate  repetitions,  and  remember  fufficiently,  as  I  fuppofe,  what  I
have  already  written  to  you  upon  difeafes  of  this  kind  (p).  And  this  I  would
have  you  fuppofe  to  be  laid  of  the  greater  part  of  the  other  obfervations
likewife,  which  will  be  taken  notice  of  below.

Of  the  imperforation  of  the  anus  in  particular,  and  of  the  prolapfus  of
it,  I  have  nothing  to  add;  exfcept  that  I  lately  read  an  obfervation  of  the

■ (0)  Epift.  31.  51.  s^.  (/)  Epift-  ead.

celebrated


Letter  LXV. Articles  7,  8.  . j^^

celebrated  Philip  Adolphus  Boehmerus  (^),  made  upon  the  dead  body  of  a
new-born  infant :  to  whom  it  had  happen'd,  by  reafon  of  the  anus  beintj  im-
perforate, that,  from  a  part  of  the  inteftine  colon  ;  which  had  been  feiz'd
with  a  fphacelus,  and  ruptur'd  thereby  ;  fo  great  a  quantity  of  meconium
was  pour'd  out,  that  the  abdomen  was  very  tumid  and  hard.

I  have  likewife  read,  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  (r),
the  account  of  the  difledion  of  a  boy  of  three  years  of  age,  who  had  always
difcharg'd  the  inteftinal  excrements  through  the  urethra;  into  which  the
re£lum  inteftinum  terminated  :  and  the  cauie  is  there  fiiewn  why  thefe  ex-
crements were  at  length  retain'd.

And  in  regard  to  the  prolapfiis  ani,  that  which  the  illuftrious  Halkr  fignified
to  me  by  letters,  dated  the  tvventy-feventh  of  January,  in  the  year  1758,  I
•will  here  faithfully  copy  to  yon.

"  I  lately  faw,"  fays  he,  "  a  furprizing  fpedtacle  ;  and  one  which  I  (hould
"  fcarcely  have  given  credit  to,  if  it  had  been  related  to  m>e  by  another  per-
"  fon ;  I  mean  a  prolapfus  of  the  large  intefl:ine,  in  which  you  mio-ht  fee
"  the  valve  of  the  colon  itfelf;  being  very  eafy  to  be  diftinguiili'd,  and  lying
"  open.  The  villous  coat  was  very  red  ;  and  when  fprinkle'd  over  v^ith  nitre,
"  fweated  out  a  fluid  :  but  was  in  other  refpefts  unmov'd.  The  difeafe  is
*'  of  long  ftanding :  the  inteftine  has  often  been  replac'd  to  no  purpofe ;  as
*'  it  every-now-and-then  flips  out  again,  and  the  furgeon,  during  that  ope-
"  ration,  evidently  feels  the  ftomach,  through  the  colon,  with  his  "hands."

7.  But  to  the  pain  of  the  intellines,  and  even  to  the  iliac  paffion,  relates
the  programma  of  the  celebrated  Kaltfchmidt  (s),  which  will  afford  you
pleafure  and  profit  in  the  perufal.

For  befides  that  he  found  the  whole  tract  of  the  inteftines  inflam'd  ;  and
moft  in  that  part  where  the  ileum  was  torn  afunder,  near  to  the  valve  of
Bauhin ;  he  faw  this  inteftine  quite  obfl:ruded,  and  not  only  in  that  part,
but  for  the  length  of  an  ell,  with  foeces  lb  hard,  and  fo  compafted  together,
'that  a  pound  of  quickfilver,  which  had  been  given  to  the  patient,  could  not
■make  its  way  through  them  :  he  remark'd  other  things  moreover,  and  among
thefe  the  caufe  of  preternatural  hunger,  wherewith  the  man  had  been  fre-
quently troubled  ;  that  is  to  fay,  the  pylorus  twice  as  large  as  it  gene-
rally is  in  other  bodies.

I  who  have  already  fent  you  many  obfervations  upon  the  iliac  paffion  here-
tofore, will  now  add  only  one  upon  the  pain  of  the  inteftines  :  and  this  I
made  in  the  college  likewife,  at  the  fame  time  of  year  as  I  made  the  formerj
■but  in  the  following  year  1754.

8.  An  old  woman,  of  fourfcore-and-fix  years  of  age,  who  had  formerly
been  a  cook,  had  already  labour'd  under  a  paralyfis  of  various  kinds,  in  the
lower  limbs,  for  fifteen  months  ;  the  three  laft  of  which  (he  fpent  in  the
hofpital ;  when  being  there,  at  length,  feiz'd  with  an  acute  fever,  and  a. pain
under  the  region  of  the  hypochondria ;  not  without  great  thirft,  and  a  redncfs

(j)  Vid.  A£l.  Erud.  Lipf.  A.  1758,  M.  Ja-  (s)  De  Ileo  a  fcrupul.  piror,  m^fpil.  perfor.
nuar.  Jens  A.  1747.  M.  Oftob,

(r)  A.  1752.  Obf.  Anat.  4.

. . of


526 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

of  the  cheeks ;  and  all  thefe  fymptoms  continuing  -,  her  life  was  brought  to
its  final  period  within  ieven  days.

The  abdomen,  when  look'd  upon  externally,  (hew'd  no  diforder,  but  a
little  tumour  in  one  of  the  groins :  and  this  I  took  for  a  hernia ;  nor  was  I
deceiv'd  •,  for  I  foon  aiter  faw  that  it  contain'd  a  fmall  pare  of  the  inteftine  :
and  indeed,  I  {hould  have  confider'd  it  as  the  caule  of  tli'e  pain,  if  the  wo-
man had  ever  complain'd  of  that  place  ;  and  particularly  when  the  pain  was
violent.

But  while  the  abdomen  was  incis'd,  I  faw  that  the  mufcles  thereof  were
green ;  and  when  the  cavity  was  laid  open,  that  the  inteftincs  and  mefentery
were  variegated  with  green  and  red  ;  and  were  infeded  with  a  very  violent
itench  :  fo  that,  although  the  body  was  open'd  at  only  the  third  day  after
death,  and  at  fuch  a  time  of  year,  it  was  necefiary  to  bury  the  carcafe  imme-
diatefy  ;  after  having  juft  obferv'd  a  few  things,  which  I  (hall  immediately
inform  you  of,  in  the  genitals  and  the  liver.

The  vagina  had  fome  Ipots  on  its  internal  furface,  lying  at  a  diftance  from
each  other,  and  degenerating  from  a  red  colour,  into  that  of  a  dirty  yellow.
Of  the  teftes,  there  were  but  the  mod  inconfiderable  remains.

The  latter  of  thefe  circumftances  is  to  be  afcrib'd  to  age ;  and  the  former
to  inflammation,  which  that  part  had  contrafted  from  the  neighbouring  in-
teftine, that  was  already  beginning  to  degenerate  into  a  gangrene-,  as  to  the
beginning  of  a  peculiar  difeafe,  is  to  be  afcrib'd  a  flightly  unequal  protu-
berance, of  a  red  colour,  inclining  to  blacknefs,  which  was  prominent  from
the  upper  and  internal  fide  of  the  fundus  uteri ;  and,  by  difleftion,  feem'd,
in  part,  to  be  made  up  of  a  few  veficles  full  of  a  fluid.

And  in  the  liver  were  peculiarities,  fome  of  which  were  to  be  deduc'd
from  the  original  formation  ;  others,  probably,  from  early  youth ;  and  others
entirely  from  difeafe.  From  the  original  formation  may  we  deduce  that  un-
ufual  figure  of  the  lower  border,  fo  that  being  deeply  curv'd  into  the  form
of  an  arch,  betwixt  the  right  and  the  left  lobe,  it  had  the  right  lobe  on  one
fide,  and  the  left  on  the  other,  going  down  to  an  almofb  equal  extent,  which
at  other  times  the  left  lobe  is  not  wont  to  do  :  and  from  early  youth ;  if
any  place  is  to  be  given  to  the  fufpicion  which  1  formerly  (/)  communicated
to  you  ;  that  of  a  deep  parallel  fulcus,  pafiing  over  the  convex  furface  of  that
vifcus,  from  the  upper  part  towards  the  lower;  but,  certainly  from  difeafe,
two  hydatids  upon  the  fame  furface  ;  one  on  the  right  fide,  and  the  other  on
the  left  -,  both  of  them  cover'd  with  the  coat  of  the  liver,  both  of  them  fur-
rounded  internally  with  a  membrane,  which  -,  being  unequal  with  rugas,  or
rather  with  a  kind  of  bands  or  fillets,  as  it  were  ;  contain'd,  in  the  former,
a  confiderable  and  very  d?ep  cavity,  and  in  the  latter  a  very  fmall  one.

From  thefe  hydatids,  and  ftill  more  from  that  rare  figure  of  the  liver,  you
perceive  that  this  was  the  old  woman,  from  whom  I  was  willing  to  defcribe,
more  fully  and  clearly,  both  thefe  circumftances,  which  I  only  hinted  at  be-
fore (a)  in  a  curfory  manner.

9.  But  now  to  thofe  obfervations  which  I  have  produc'd,  when  writing  to

(<)  Epift.  56.  n.  17.  («)  Epift.  5S.  n.  42.

yoB


Letter  LXV. Article  51.  527

you  of  pain  and  tumour  in  the  hypochondria,  I  would  have  you  add  thefe,
Ibme  of  which  relate  to  the  liver,  others  to  the  fpieen,  and  one  of  thenri  even
to  the  ftotpach ;  and  in  regard  to  the  liver,  that  in  particular  wherein  (x)  a
vomica  thereof  is  dcfcrib'd,  which  "  open'd  into  the  right  cavity  of  the
"  cheft."

I  heartily  wi(h  the  very  ingenious  Richertzius  could  have  inform'd  us,
what  fymptoms  had  preceded  death,  as  well  as  have  dcfcrib'd  with  exasftnefs
and  accuracy,  the  appearances  which  he  found  in  the  body  after  death.

For  you  will,  without  doubt,  remember,  that,  when  I  wrote  to  you  (y)  a
very  rare  obfervation,  and  perhaps  the  firil  of  a  cafe  of  that  kind,  from  the
papers  of  Valfalva,  I  complain'd  of  the  deficiency  of  a  great  number  of  cir-
cumftances  ;  although  he  did  not  fail  to  remark  many  things  which  had  exifted
in  the  patient.

And  that  I  the  more  complain  of  in  this  other  obfervation,  in  proportion
as  it  appears;  from  the  infpeclion  of  the  right  lobe  of  the  lungs,  and  from
the  infpeftion  of  the  pleura  on  the  fame  fide;  that  the  patient  had  been
troubled  for  fj  long  a  time,  with  an  empyema  of  that  fingular  kind  ;  and
from  the  magnitude  of  the  liver,  and  the  purulent  cavity  in  it,  that  he  had
fuffer'd  the  mofl:  violent  uneafinefies  there  alfo.

There,  I  fay,  for  at  Paris  it  happen'd,  when  a  certain  patient  (z)  com-
plain'd "  of  a  very  great  pain  in  the  right  hypochondrium,"  that,  though
the  furgeon  denied  the  pain  to  be  feated  in  the  liver,  contrary  to  what  the
phyfician  had  pronounc'd,  the  liver  was  neverthelefs  found  to  be  "  inflam'd,"
when  the  body  was  open'd  after  death.

But  if,  by  reafon  of  "  fome  delirium  being  join'd,  at  intervals,"  to  the
inflammation  of  the  contiguous  diaphragm;  v^/hich  however  neither  the
furgeon,  nor  the  celebrated  author,  would  have  conceal'd  ;  you  Ihould  choofe
rather  to  fufpedl  the  caufe  of  the  pain  to  have  confided  therein;  you  mufb
firft  confider  other-ebfervations,  and  among  thefe  fome  which  relate  to  the
difcourfe  I  have  begun.

For  I  do  not  doubt,  but  that  woman  was  afBided  with  confiderable
uneafinefies  in  the  fame  hypochondrium  alfo,  in  whom,  as  you  may  fee  in  the
fa.Tje  place  (a),  the  liver  was  found  to  be  large,  and  not  inflam'd  ;  though
it  is  to  be  lamented,  that  thofe  fymptoms,  which  appear'd  in  the  living  body,
could  not  be  made  known.

But  I  certainly  know,  that,  in  the  difi!ertation  of  the  celebrated  Rudolphus
Jacobus  Camerarius  and  Jonas  Brunnerus,  which  recounts  "  the  appearances
"  found  in  the  vifcera  of  thofe  who  died  of  an  hepatitis  (3),"  the  cafe  of  a
•woman,  and  of  a  young  man  likewife,  is  produc'd  ;  the  former  of  whom
having  made  "  a  very  great  complaint  of  the  right  hypochondrium,"  and
the  latter  having  had  "  an  almofl:  intolerable  pain"  in  the  fame  place;  the
liver  was  in  both  of  them  very  large  and  hard,  from  a  calculous  matter  ;  and,
in  the  woman  moreover,  encreas'd  by  a  very  confiderable  atheroma.

{x)  Obferv.  Vifcer.  Abdom.  Labis  Epicris.  (z)  Vid.  Eulchvvald.  Obf.  Quadrig.  Obf.  2.
Obf.  2.  -  Mtiol.  §.  g.

CyJ  Epift.  36.  n.  4.  &  feq.  {a)  Obf,  2.  cit. (i)  cit.  I.

1  Now


5 28 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

Now  then,  will  you  afcribe  all  the  pain,  in  thefe  patients  likewife,  to  the
adjacent  parts,  which  the  tumour  and  weight  of  the  liver  comprefs'd,  and
drew  downwards  ?

If  you  think  you  may  take  upon  you  to  make  this  aflertion  the  more
freely,  becaufe  a  calculous  matter  had  obcunded  the  fenfation  of  the  liver  j
whatever  this  fenfation  may  be  ;  by  indurating  it ;  I  fhall  not  be  very  ob-
ftinately  averfe  to  your  fuppofition  :  for'  in  \yhatever  manner  you  choofe
to  explain  the  cafe;  the  obfervations  which  I  have  here  added  to  the
former,  will  always  relate  to  pains  and  tumours  of  the  right  hypochon-
drium ;  as  I  have  promis'd  you  they  fhould  ;  in  the  fame  manner  as  thofe
which  immediately  follow  will  relate  to  the  left  hypochondrium.

lo.  That  tumour  of  the  fpleen  was  certainly  large,  efpecially  as  it  was
in  a  boy  of  nine  years  of  age,  which  is  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated
Kalifchmied  {c)  ;  in  which  tumour,  if  examin'd  with  the  hands,  the  boy
perceiv'd  a  pain  ;  unlefs  you  (hould  choofe  rather  to  attribute  this  to  the  en-
larg'd  pelvis  of  the  fubjeded  kidney,  which  was  then  prefs'd  upon,  and
pritk'd,  by  a  rough  calculus  therein  included.

But  lometimes,  on  the  contrary,  the  pain  is  not  found  to  be  in  the  tumour
of  the  fpleen,  biit  in  the  lower  part  of  the  left  fide  which  inclines  to. the
back  ;  as  in  a  man,  who,  having  been  afflifted  with  other  fymptoms  befides,
which  refembled  a  phthifis,  fhow'd  at  length,  after  death,  nothing  at  all
morbid  in  the  lungs  -,  but  fhow'd  an  enlargement  of  the  fpleen,  which  was
likewife  very  hard  and  heavy,  in  confequence  of  being  made  up  of  a  denfc
fubftance,  which  Abraham  Vater  {d)  compar'd  to  a  gammon  of  bacon  fome-
what  harden'd  by  the  "  fmoke."

The  tumour  of  the  fpleen  is  alfo  deceptive,  when  it  extends  itfelf  greatly ;
or  when  it  contains  what  it  is  very  rarely  wont  to  contain.  And  an  example
of  both  thefe  ftates  taking  place,  at  the  fame  time,  in  one  and  the  fame
«Ran,  you  will  have  from  the  Hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at
Paris  (e).

For  he  being  feiz'd  with  the  figns  of  an  afcites;  among  which  was  a  very
manifeft  flu<5buation  of  a  fluid  in  the  belly,  and  having  twice  undergone  the
operation  of  paracentefis,  and  had  pus  drawn  off  inftead  of  water ;  and
having  died  the  day  after  the  fecond  operation;  had  the  fpleen  enlarg'd  to
fuch  an  enormous  fize,  that,  reaching  from  its  natural  feat  to  the  bones  of
the  pubes,  it  cover'd  the  vifcera  before  and  on  the  fides,  and  comprefs'd
them  all,  in  confequence  of  its  containing  as  great  a  quantity  of  pus,  as  had
been  drawn  from  the  living  body;  and  a  very  great  quantity  had  been
drawn.

That  pus  indeed,  as  well  as  water,  has  been  fomerimes  found  in  the
fpleen,  1  have  taken  notice  to  you  before  (/) ;  but  I  do  not  remember  that
it  has  been  ever  found  in  fuch  an  immenfe  quantity.  In  fo  great  an  extenfion
of  a  vifcus,  which  is  not  large,  and  a  fenfation  of  a  fiu6luating  fluid,  who
would  have  blam'd  the  fpleen  in  particular  ?  The  feat  of  the  pain,  except  in
the  beginning  perhaps,  could  not  have  fliown  this.


(r)  Progr.  de  hoc  Turaore.  {e)  A.  1753.  Obf.  Anat.  5.

(<i)  Diffeit.  de  Schirrbis  Vifcer.  .  f/;  Epift.  36.  n.  18.


For


Letter  LXV. Article  ii.  ^-29

For  the  violent  colic  pains  which  had  at  length  come  on,  could
not  be  confin'd  to  that  one  part  of  the  belly  only ;  as  they  certainly
were  from  the  compreffion  of  the  inteftines.  The  only  circumftance  from
whence  a  fiifpicion  might  arife,  was,  that  the  diforder  had  fucceeded  a  quartan
fever,  which  lafted  eighteen  months  or  more.

In  that  admirable  cafe  alfo,  which  you  will  read  of  in  the  very  excellent
Fantonus  (g),  who  would  have  fuppos'd,  that,  in  an  abfcefs  open'd  at  the
navel,  the  fpleen  lay  hid  ?  It  was  only  the  moft  flight  conjedture,  that  could
be  drawn  from  thofe  very  violent  pains,  of  which  the  patient  had  complain'd;
and  efpecially  below  the  left  hypochondrium.

Yet  the  fpleen  had  fallen  down  to  the  navel,  from  whence  it  wa,s  not  only
extradted  at  that  time,  but  the  woman  having  died  five  years  after  this  ex-
tradtion  ;  and  having  conceiv'd  and  brought  forth  in  the  mean  time ;  left
any  one  (hould  doubt  of  the  extraftion  of  this  vifcus,  no  fpleen  was  found  in
any  part  of  the  body  upon  difledlion  j  '*  only  cicatrices  appear'd  in  the
"  neighbouring  parts  -,  to  whicli  it  is  wont  naturally  to  adhere."

II.  But  becaufe  there  is  another  vifcus  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  be-
fides  the  fpleen  ;  I  fhall  prefently  point  out  a  Angular  hiftory  of  the  tume-
fadtion  of  this  vifcus  alfo ;  if  you  will  firft  give  me  leave  to  fpeak  of  the
fpleen  being  oflified,  or  become  ftony  -,  and  add  this  ;  for  you  will  remember
I  have  written  to  you  on  the  fame  fubjedt  before  (^j  •,  that  I  obfery'd,  in  an
old  man,  already  taken  notice  of  in  the  fixty-fecond  letter  (z),  an  account  of
the  oblique  figure  of  the  cranium.

A  part  of  the  membrane  of  the  fpleen  ;  as  much  as  could  be  cover'd  by  a
circle,  the  diameter  of  which  was  equal  to  two  fingers  breadths  5  feem'd
to  be  become  ftony :  and  the  fubftance  of  the  vifcus  adher'd  clofely
thereto.

Having  taken  off  this  part  of  the  membrane,  and  macerated  it  fome
days  in  water  ;  and  fcrap'd  away  the  adhering  fubftance  of  the  fpleen  ;  I  faw
that  there  was  nothing  elfe  remaining  in  the  membrane,  but  a  thin,  and  in
fome  places  deficient,  incruftation  of  a  matter  evidently  tartareous.

I  was  not  forry,  therefore,  I  had  left  a  place  for  tartareous  matter  in  that
thirty-fixth  letter  likewife  ;  nor  yet  that  I  had  faid  this  induration  generally
begins  from  the  convex  furface  of  the  fpleen,  and  extends  itfelf  from  thence
to  other  parts.

For,  when  I  took  away  the  membrane  next  to  the  indurated  part,  I  did
not  indeed  perceive  it  to  be  very  hard,  but  grown  rigid  neverthelefs :  and
all  thefe  circumftances  I  faw  in  that  furface  of  the  fpleen  which  was  contiguous
to  the  diaphragm.

But  whether  I  rightly  conjedlur'd,  that  this  might  be  afcrib'd  to  the  alter-
nate compreffion  of  that  mufcle,  I  fometimes  doubted  fince  then;  as  I  have
obferv'd  that  the  furface  of  the  liver,  which  is  liable  to  the  fame  compref-
fion, does  not  contraft  the  fame  induration,  unlefs  it  be  very  feldom,  and  by
accident.


{g)  De  Obf.  Med.  &  Anat.  Epift.  i.  &  6.  0  a,  16.

{/>)  Epift,  36.  n.  14.  &  feqq.

Vol.  III.  Yyy  Now


5  30 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

Now  I  wi)l  point  out  that  fingular  obfervation  of  the  ftomach  fwelling  con-
tinually, and  not  without  uneafinefs,  from  Lieutaud  (k).

The  patient  complain'd  of  a  fenle  of  plenitude,  or  weight,  in  the  region
of  the  Itomach,  which  was  always  more  elevated  than  it  naturally  is  j  he
being  at  firft  cacheftic,  and  after  that  dropfical ;  and  of  certain  pains  about
that  region,  which  were  by  no  means  acute.  Deglutition  was  quite  eafy  and
free  :  but  the  belly  was  coftive  ;  fo  that,  without  giving  purgatives,  there  was
no  difcharg^  at  any  time,  and  even  then  but  little.

There  was  a  naufea,  and  an  inclination  to  vomit:  but  neither  nature  nor
art  could  aftually  bring  on  a  vomiting  :  and,  although  'very  little  aliment
was  taken  in,  during  the  whole  courie  of  this  difeafe;  and  though  in  the
latter  part  of  it  fcarcely  any  thing  was  taken  •,  yet  that  fenfe  of  plenitude,  or
of  weight,  did  not  by  any  means  decreafe.

Finally,  after  death  the  ftomach  was  found  to  be  immoderately  extended
and  full :  and  all  the  inteftines ;  though  fo  narrow,  as  not,  in  the  whole  of
them,  to  exceed  the  bulk  of  the  ftomach  ;  were  perfeftly  pervious,  as  well
as  the  pylorus ;  fo  that  it  was  natural  to  think,  from  thefe  appearances,  which
were  feen  in  the  dead  body,  and  from  what  had  been  obferv'd  in  the  patient
when  living,  that  the  diforder  ought  to  be  referr'd  to  a  kind  of  paralyfis  of
the  ftomach.

And,  fince  we  are  fpeaking  of  tumours  of  the  belly,  I  will  not  fcruple  to
affert,  that,  if  this  patient  had  liv'd  fome  time  longer,  a  tumour  of  another
kind  would  certainly  have  made  its  appearance,  in  the  fame  fide  of  the  belly.
For  the  caufe  of  a  very  fevere  pain,  which  had  arifen  there  fifteen  days  be-
fore death,  was  found  to  confift  in  blood  efFus'd  betwixt  the  oblique  mufcles,
on  the  left  fide,  to  the  quantity  of  two  pounds.

But  even  the  right  hypochondrium  was  not  without  difeafe.  For  the  liver
contain'd  many  very  folid  ftones  ;  fome  of  which  were  very  evidently  pro-
minent above  the  furface  of  that  vifcus,  and  were  nearly  of  the  fize  of  a
filbert.

12.  And  in  regard  to  thefe  calculi;  which  were,  without  doubt,  of  the
biliary  kind,  whereof  I  have  already  written  many  things  (/)  to  you,  and  not
only  of  hepatic  calculi,  but  of  cyftic  alfo,  and  that  chiefly ;  a  few  things
now  remain  to  be  added :  and  firft  I  fhall  give  you  an  obfervation  from  a
letter,  which  happen'd  lately  to  fall  into  my  hands  again,  and  had  been  fent
many  years  ago  by  a  phyfician  of  fome  note,  whQ  had  formerly  been  my
very  attentive  auditor.  And  thus  it  was  that  he  wrote  what  he  himfelf  had
then  been  witnefs  to.

13,  An  old  man,  who  had  reach'd  quite  to  his  fixtieth  year,  without  any
difeafe  that  was  worth  notice,  was  feiz'd  with  violent  pains  at  his  ftomach  ;
with  a  bilious  and  copious  vomiting,  attended  with  obftinate  coftivenefs,  and
a  fever  not  of  a  very  acute  kind.

The  phyfician,  by  giving  him  frefli-drawn  oil  of  almonds,  and  fome  other
remedy  of  that  kind,  ^mitigated  the  difeafe,  but  did  not  carry  it  ofi^;  the
pains  ftill  returning  every-now-and-then  ;  till  at  length  two  drachms  of  mag-

{i)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1752.  (/)  Epiit.  37.

nefia


Letter  LXV. Article  14,  531

nefia  being  frequently  made  ufe  of,  the  patient  feem'd  to  himfeJf  to  be  per-
fe<5lly  cur'd.

But  having,  contrary  to  the  advice  of  his  phyfician,  return'd  to  his  former
cares  and  occupations,  and  eaten  unwholefome  foods  j  his  pains  return'd  alfo  j
but  were  foon  driven  avv'ay  by  the  ufe  of  the  magnefia.

In  a  few  days,  however,  the  phyfician  was  much  chagrin'd  to  find,  that
the  pulfe  was  become  fmall,  and  had  even  fome  little  intermiffion  ;  that  the
appetite  for  food  decreas'd  ;  but  particularly,  that,  fome  days  after,  the  pa-
tient difcharg'd,  by  ftool,  a  quantity  of  black  matter,  which  refembled  the
atra  bills  of  the  ancients.

Finally,  a  very  confiderable  fainting-fit  having  come  on,  and  foon  after
gone  offr  the  patient  began  to  be  fomewhat  delirious,  and  to  complain  of  a
very  violent  pain  in  his  head.  After  feven  days,  therefore,  being  fpent  under
the  influence  of  thefe  diforders,  (that  is,  about  the  fixth  month  from  the  be-
ginning of  the  difeafe)  not  without  intermifilons  of  the  pulfe,  and  great  de-
jeftion  of  the  ftrength,  he  died.

The  abdomen  being  open'd  and  laid  afide,  no  diforder  was  found  in  the
ftomach  ;  nor  in  the  liver,  except  that  it  was  fomewhat  paler  than  it  generally ,
is.  But  the  veficula  fellis  was  almoffc  three  times  larger  than  it  naturally  is  ;
and  contain'd  a  very  black  bile,  or  rather  dregs  or  lees  of  bile,  in  which  were
eight  calculi  of  different  figures ;  and  all  of  a  very  extraordinary  magnitude :
befides  which,  others  were  feen,  to  the  number  often,  in  the  very  parietes  of
the  veficle  ;  being  not  larger,  in  their  fize,  than  the  granules  of  millet-feed.

14.  Thefe  very  fmall  calculi,  obferv'd  in  the  parietes  of  the  cyft,  certainly
belong'd  to  the  clafs  of  thofe  which  I  have  heretofore  taken  notice  of  in  the.
glands  of  this  veficle  ;  or  at  leaft  betwixt  its  coats  (m).

And  perhaps  fome  calculi  a  little  larger  than  thefe ;  by  endeavouring  to
pafs  through  the  cyftic.  and  common  duft,  though  not  obferv'd  in  the  in-
teftinal  foeces  ;  excited  thofe  pains  of  the  ftomach,  and  vomitings  :  whereas
thofe  eight  very  large  ones,  which  lay  ftill  in  the  veficle,  by  reafon  of  their
magnitude,  did  not  give  the  leaft  token  of  their  exiftence  ;  not  even  by  a
fenfe  of  weight  -,  perhaps  becaufe  we  eafily  accuftom  ourfelves  to  any  fcn-
fation,  which  comes  gradually  upon  us.

You  fee  here  alfo,  that  no  mention  is  made  of  the  jaundice.  And  cer-
tainly that  very  noble  man  ;  for  whom  I  was  not  long  ago  confulted  by  letterj
after  having  fpent  all  his  nights  without  fleep,  for  a  long  time  together ;  by
reafon  of  a  very  violent  pain,  wherewith  he  was  feiz'd,  at  the  region  of  the
pylorus,  and  perpetual  efforts  to  vomit;  did  but  juft^  at  length,  begin  to  be
fomewhat  idlerical  at  intervals.

Yet  the  caufe  of  the  difeafe  was  Ihewn  by  the  cure  ;  for  the  pain  defcended
gradually  from  the  ftomach  towards  the  navel,  and  from  thence  to  the  region
of  the  pubes,  where  it  remain'd  fome  days ;  and,  at  length,  by  the  difcharge,
from  the  reftum,  of  two  bodies  not  very  fmall,  and  almoft  of  a  cubical
figure,  all  pain,  of  both  the  ftomach  and  liver ;  for  this  vifcus  was  in  pain  j
a§  well  as  all  pain  of  the  inteftines,  was  carried  off.

[  Cm  J  Ibid.  n.  21.  &  29,

Y  y  y  2 .,  Theie


S$2  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

Thefe  bodies  were  of  a  yellowifli  colour,  and  made  up  of  ftrata,  con-
taining  a  nucleus,  and  catching  flame  ;  fo  that,  confidering  all  circumftances,,
you  would  not  doubt  but  thefe  were  cyftic  calculi.  Yet  fee  how  much  dif-
ference there  is  in  the  fame  difeafe,  in  different  bodies.

Fr.  Slare  (»)  obferv'd,  that  a  noble  woman,  who  was  very  much  tortur'd
with  pains  of  the  liver,  had  perceiv'd  great  eafe  "  immediately  "  after  having
difcharg'd,  into  the  inteftinum  duodenum,  two  cyftic  calculi  at  different
times  ;  and  that  thofe  calculi  had  remain'd,  "  but  a  few  hours  only,"  in  the
whole  courfe  of  the  inteflines,  notwithftanding  they  likewife  were  by  no
means  fmall ;  for  one  exceeded  the  diameter  of  the  middle  finger,  and  the
other,  though  fothewhat  more  flender,  was  not  much  fo  neverthelefs.

But  in  regard  to  calculi  of  this  kind  -,  thofe  things  which  the  very  excellent
Ellerus  (o)  has  written  on  the  fubjeft,  it  behoves  you  to  read :  and  his  ex-
plication of  the  nature,  and  origin,  of  that  ftone  in  particular,  which  had.,
been  difcharg'd  through  an  abfcefs  of  the  right  hypochondriuin,  together,
with  the  pus,  you  will  doubtlcfs,  confirm  by  thofe  three  fimilar  examples,,
which  I  have  given  you  in  the  thirty-feventh  letter  (/>).

And  you  will,  at  the  fame  time,  learn,  what  this  very  experienc'd  man*
has  alio  advanc'd,  on  that  occafion,  in  regard  to  the  origin  of  renaL
calculi ;  and  even  of  a  ftone  which  be  faw  lying  hid  betwixt  the  coals  of  the.
Urinary  bladder.

But  to  other  diforders  of  the  kidnies  relate  not  only  the  dropfy  of  thefe :
vifcera,  or  a  diftenfion  thereof  by  yellow  ferum,  but  the  cafe  of  their  fub-
ftance  being  in  great  meafure  annihilated,  and  of  their  adipofe,  membrane
being  indurated  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  in  a  woman  troubled  with  an  afcites,.
that  of  one  of  the  kidnies  being  enlarg'd  to  twice  its  natural  fize  ;  the  other
being  lefs  than  it  naturally  is,  and  having  the  ureters,  and  the  blood- veffels,
extremely  contracted.

Thefe  obfervations  of  Bohemerus,  you  will  find  related  in .  the.  fame  book .
that  others,  which  I  pointed  out  to  you  above  (^),  are  related.

And  if  in  turning  over  that  book,  you.  (hovild  happen  to.  light  on  a  paflage, ,
where  Morgagnus  is  faid  "  to  have  endeavour'd,  lately,  to  confirm,  by  new
"  arguments,  the  opinion  of  a  paflage,  for  the  urine,  from  the  fliomach  to^
•'  the  bladder ;"  do  not  be  furpriz'd,  as  you  know  that  I  was  always  in  the
contrary  opinion,  and  ft:ill  am  fo;  but  afcribe  it  to  the  profufe  liberality  of.
the  printers  towards  me :  for,  by  adding  one  Angle  letter,, that  is  g,  they  have
been  kind  enough,  more  than  once,  to  pay  me  the  compliment  of  things,
which  belong'd  quite  to  another  perfon.

15.  Thofe  things  which  I  faid  juft  now  of  calculi,  do  likewife  relate  to  >
diforders  of  the  belly,  as  well  as  the  preceding ;  and  not  only  thereto,  but
alfo  to  the  difcourfe  of  tumours  of  that  cavity,  which  I  had  begun,  and  which  .
I  probably  feem'd  to  you  to  have  forgotten,  relate  thofe  obfervations  that
r  lately  pointed  out  from  Bohemerus,  of  the  dropfy  of  the  kidnies,  and  of.
the  afcites.

Jn)  In  Epift.  edita  a  Sigifm.  Koenig  in  fuo (0)  Hiil.  dcl'Acad.  R,  des  Sc.  de  Berlin^,
ilithogen.  hum.  Specim.  A.  1755

W.N.-52.  (?)N.6.

Andi


Letter  LXV. Article  15.  533

And  the  programma,  publifh'd  by  Hamberger,  Be  Ruptura  Inteftini  Buo-
deni,  may  contribute  to  illuftrate  fome  things  which  we  have  hinted  at,  when
treating  of  the  tympanites ;  as  this  rupture  of  the  duodenum  was  foUow'd
by  a  very  fliort  indeed,  but  very  great,  and  fatal,  tumour  of  the  tympanitic
kind.

I  would,  therefore,  wifli  you  to  read  it  over  again.  For,  as  I  confider  the
many,  and  various  things  which  I  have  written  to  you,  upon  other  tumours
of  the  belly  ;  and  likewife  that  not  a  few  things  muft  be  faid  prefently,  on
thefubjedtof  another  dropfy ;  I  cannot  infift  much  now  upon  every-thing
that  may  arife.

Wherefore,  I  fliall  here  fay  nothing  more,  in  regard  to  the  mefentery,  but
that  I  would  have  you  take  out,  from  the  writings  of  thofe  celebrated  men
Henricus  Henrici  (r),  and  Joannes  Fantonus  (s),  the  obfervations  which  then
efcap'd  me,  and  which  may  be  join'd  to  the  Sepulchretum.  For  the  latter
has  given  an  account  of  a  large  tumour  of  the  mefentery  j  and  the  former
of  a  confiderable  number  of  abfceffes  of  the  fame  vifcus.

And  thefe  obfervaiions'  are  indeed  ufeful ;  but  more  ufeful  ftill  are  thofe
wherein  the  feat  of  the  vifcera  being  chang'd,  the  phyfician  may  be  deceiv'd
thereby.  We  will  therefore  add  as  many  •,  which  you  may  join  ^  with
that  remarkable  one  of  Valfalva's  (/),  of  the  ftomach  being  prolaps'd  out
of  its  feat,  and  forming  a  tumour,  in  a  part  where  the  ftomach  is  not  wont
to  be  naturally.

One  of  thefc  is  that  very  obfervation,  which  wc  have  in  part  taken  notice
of  above  («),  from  the  celebrated  Langguthus  :  for,  as  afchirrhous  tumour
of  the  coats,  which  furrounded  the  pylorus,  had  ftreighten'd  this  orifice  by
its  immenfe  thicknefs ;  fo,  by  its  weight,  it  had  mov'd  the  ftomach  quite-
from  its  place,  and  made  the  upper  orifice  thereof  be  diftant  from  the  dia-
phragm, by  the  fpace  of  a  very  large  fpan  ;  at  the  fame  time  that  the  fundus-
was  ftretcWd  oat  below  the  navel,  into  the  hypogaftric  region  ;  and,  by  its
fituation,  and  moveablenefs  in  the  living  body,  refembled  a  large,  tumour
form'd  upon  the  ome^^tum.

And  the  other  obfervation  is  that  of  the  celebrated  Schknker  (x),  who  faw
the  ftomach  "  reaching  from  the  pylorus  quite  to  the  os  pubis,  in  a  perpen-
"  dicular  line."  The  proper  caufe-  of  which  prolapfus  does  not  appear  fron*
the  remaining  part- of  the  hiftory  ;  for  the  principal  difeafe,  on  account  of'
which  he  then  wrote,  was  among  the  other  vifcera  of  the  belly,  in  the  left
ovarium,  which  was  "  ftony, .  large,  and  ponderous  ;"  and  well  deferves  to'
be  put  in  the  lift  of >  thofe  tumours  of  the  ovaria,  which  I  have  taken  notice
of  heretofore  (j),  and  that  in  confiderable  number.

Among  thefe  tumours,  however,  I  believe  that  fome  fpoken  of  by  Fan-
tonus, whom  I  have  fo  often  commended  (2),  are  deficient ;  as  when  the  left
ovary  was  ten  times  larger  than  its  natural  fize,  and  fchirrhous  ;  or  when  the-
right  ovary  contain'd  within  it  a  hollow,  whitifti,  and  hard  globe,  made  up

(r) Diflert.  de  Abfcefs.  Merent.  (>)  Differt.  de|Singulari  Ovar.  fine  Morb.

(j) r)e  Obf.  Med.  &  Anat.  Epift.  8.  n.  9.  (yJ  Epift-  38.  n.  54.  &  feqq.  &  Epift.  39..

(*)  Epift.  39.  n.  14.  n.  37.  &  feqq.

(a)  N.  I,  (z)  Epift.  cit.  8.  n.  13.  &  16.


5  3  4  Book  V. By  way  of  Supplenient  to  the  former  Books.

of  a  febaceous  matter,  and  fimilar  to  a  pigeon's  egg ;  or,  finally,  when  both
of  them  were  turgid  with  a  yellowifh  ferum,  in  the  manner  of  a  diftcnded
bladder.

1 6.  But,  although  I  have  tiot  taken  notice  of  a  greater  number  of  examples
of  tumours  in  the  teftes  of  women,  of  any  fpecies,  than  of  this  third  ;  when,
writing  to  you  upon  the  encyfted  dropfy  (a),  I  at  length  went  fo  far  as  to
enquire,  whether,  and  in  what  manner,  dropfies  of  the  peritonasum,  of  the
tube  of  the  uterus,  and  others  of  that  kind,  can  be  diftinguilh'd  from  the
dropfy  of  the  ovarium  ;  yet  fome  obfervations  of  the  fame  kind  remain,  which
I  think  it  would  not  be  without  advantage  to  point  out;  briefly  indeed,  but
in  fuch  a  manner,  that  you  may  eafily  compare  them  with  the  former;  and
with  thofe  which  I  then  fpokc  of;  and  determine  what  feems  the  beft  method
to  you,  not  only  in  diftinguifhing,  but  in  curing  diforders  of  this  kind.

To  begin  with  the  more  ancient,  and  come  down  to  the  more  modern  ;  in
the  year  i6yt,  was  publifh'd,  by  Ludovicus  Salzmann  (^),  an  inftance  of  a
woman,  in  whom,  after  a  long-continu'd  fuppreffion  of  the  menftruous  blood,
the  abdotnen  was  gradually  rais'd  up  from  the  left  hypogaftrium,  towards
the  left  hypochondrium  ;  all  fymptoms  of  an  afcites  being  abfent,  and  the
face  being  of  a  pretty  good  colour.  ^

But  from  the  time  that  fhe  fell  upon  the  ground  with  fome  impetus,  the
figns  of  an  afcites  foon  came  on,  together  with  a  large  tumour  of  the  whole
abdomen  ;  and  foon  after  Ihe  died.

.  In  the  belly  ;  befides  water,  and  pus,  in  fuch  a  quantity  as  was  to  be  ex-
pedted  from  fo  great  a  diftenfion ;  a  large  tumour  was  found  covering  the
vifcera,  containing  many  cyfts  of  different  magnitudes,  and  each  of  them  in
general  fiU'd  with  a  different  matter.

And  as  to  the  common  coat  of  the  tumour,  although  it  was  every-where
connedted,  by  membranes,  to  the  contiguous  parts,  and  the  uterus  itfelf  was
found  ;  yet,  as  the  tumour  had  begun  in  the  living  body,  "  under  the  left
"  groin,"  and  is  faid  to  have  been  feen  there,  in  particular,  in  the  body  after
death  ;  you  will  not  quite  give  up  all  pretences  to  fpecioufnefs  and  proba-
bility, if  you  fuppofe  it  to  have  taken  its  origin  from  the  left  ovarium  :  al-
though you  would,  perhaps,  rather  chufe  to  refer  it  to  the  clafs  of  other  en-
cyfted dropfies,  and  dropfies  that  have  arifen  from  other  parts.

Of  which  kind  that  certainly  was,  whereof  1  read,  not  long  ago,  among
the  medical  obfervations  of  the  celebrated  Wefzpremus  (c),  as  found  after
death  in  the  body  of  a  man,  who ;  having  been  confider'd,  for  two  years
together,  as  a  perfon  labouring  under  an  afcites  ;  fhew'd  a  ftrong-fmeUing
fluid,  in  which  fwam  large  hydatids,  to  be  fl^ut  up  within  a  kind  of  vaft
bladder,  the  neck  of  which  was  implanted  betwixt  the  true  bladder,  and  the
inteflinum  redlum  ;  vv'hereas  the  remaining  part  was  connected  to  the  neigh-
bouring parts  only  by  a  cellular  contexture.

And  of  this  kind,  except  that  no  hydatids  were  contain'd  in  the  limpid
water,  1  now  fee,  from  the  hiftory  more  accurately  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated


(a)  Epift.  indicatis  38,  &  39.  (f)  Obf.  11.  Caf.  I.

(i)  De  Abfceflu  interno  mirae  magnitud.  &c.


Steubius,


Letter  LXV. Article  i  6.  S3S

Steubiiis  (d),  that  the  dropfy,  upon  which  I  was  before  with  good  reafon
doubtful  (0,  really  was  ;  1  mean  the  dropfy  of  a  virgin,  whofe  belly  having
been  tumid  for  ten  years  together ;  although  it  was  moft  prominent  on  the
left  fide  ;  had  not  the  marks  of  an  afcites  join'd  with  it-,  but  was  even  at-
tended with  a  florid  colour  of  the  face  :  yet  fiie  ;  being  alfo  very  rafhly  fup-
pos'd  to  be  affefted  with  an  afcites,  and,  for  that  reafon,  thought  a  proper
fubjedl  for  the  operation  of  paracentefis ;  had  no  fooner  undergone  the
puncSture,  but  too  great  a  quantity  of  water  was  immediately  drawn  off,  and
fudden  death  by  that  means  brought  on  :  yet,  upon  difTeftion,  appear'd  a
membranous  fac,  wherein  the  water  had  been  contain'd ;  being  conneded  to
no  other  parts  but  the  fpleen  and  the  left  kidney,  wherewith  it  fo  firmly  ad-
her'd,  as  to  have  its  veffels  in  common  with  them.

Therefore,  that  I  may  refer  you  to  other  obfervations  of  dropfy  in  the
ovaria,  whereof  you  cannot  doubt  ;  let  us  come  on  to  thofe  authors  who  have
publifh'd  their  obfervations  fince  Ludovicus  Salzmannus,  according  to  our
promife.

Abraham  Vater  (/)  has  defcrib'd  a  woman,  who  could  not ;  like  the  two
of  whom  we  fpoke  juft  now,  and  others  (and  amongft  thefe  a  widow,  of
whom  I  fliall  fpeak  prefently)  who  were  falQy  fufpefted  by  the  phyficians,  in
the  firft  year  of  their  difeafe,  to  be  pregnant ;  which  circumftance,  in  pro-
portion as  it  delays  the  cure  for  a  longer  time,  renders  it  more  difficult  in
proportion  ;  who  could  not,  I  fay,  be  afpers'd  with  a  fufpicion  of  that  kind,
as  not  other  perfons  only,  but  Ihe  alfo  fuppos'd  herfelf  to  be  pregnant  by
her  own  hufband  :  and  her  breafts  being  now  turgid  with  a  fluid  fimilar  to
milk,  (he  affirm'd  that  fhe  could  even,  by  the  application  of  her  hand,  per-
ceive the  motions  of  the  infant ;  motions  which  were  well  known  to  her,  in
that  part,  from  the  time  that  ftie  had  borne,  in  the  uterus,  twins,  whom  flie
brought  forth  by  a  very  difficult  birth  :  but  as,  after  having  a  very  vio  enC
fall,  ftie  felt  thefe  motions  no  more,  fhe  had  no  doubt,  through  the  whole
period  of  her  life  ;  and  fhe  liv'd  three  years  and  a  half;  but  the  foetus  was
dead  :  the  tumour  of  her  belly  remaining  very  hard  indeed,  but  not  being  fo
heavy  at  firfl ;  yet  being  after  that  encreas'd  to  a  furprifing  degree,  and  be-
come troublefome.

In  the  belly  of  this  woman,  therefore,  was  a  very  hrge  tumour,  with  a  very
great  quantity  of  the  moft  foetid  water  :  and  this  tumour  did  not  belong  to
the  uterus,  which  it  had  pufli'd  down  into  the  vagina  by  its  weight,  but  en-
tirely to  the  right  ovarium ;  the  whole  of  which  had  been  chang'd  into  round,
capfulae,  fiird  with  a  vifcid  and  purulent  liquor.

But  this  tumour  is  very  far  exceeded,  by  that  which  we  may  read  of  in
the  diflertation  of  the  celebrated  Nicolaus  Willus  (g).  For  the  abdomen
having  begun  to  fwell,  gradually,  in  a  widow,  at  the  fame  time  that  her
ftrength  and  appetite  were  quite  entire ;.  her  habit  of  body  not  being  ca-
chectic, and  her  urine  being  naturally  excreted ;  in  the  fpace  of  five  years  it
grew  out  into  a  very  large  bulk,  but  had  an  unequal  appearance  however  j

(d)  Differt.  de  infelici  hydr.  faccat.  curat.  (g) Differt.  infcripta Stupendus  Abdom.

fej  Epift.  38.  n.  63.  in  fin,  Tumorj.  n.  5.

(/J  Diflert.  infcripta  Graviditas  Appauens.

-for


-5  S"^ Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Boolcs.

for  it  was  moft  prominent  on  the  right  fide  -,  nor  did  it  give  any  fenfe
of  fluftuation  when  (lie  turn'd  herfelf  from  fide  to  fide  in  her  bed.

And,  indeed,  although,  within  the  fpace  of  fome  years,  it  was  fo  en-
■creas'd,  as  to  hang  down  to  the  length  of  a  fpan  below  the  knees,  as  the
patient  lay  continually  very  high  in  the  bed;  though,  at  the  fame  time,  (he
was  a  very  tall  woman  ;  neither  were  her  feet  fvvell'd,  nor  her  face  much
dilcolour'd,  nor  her  appetite  decreased  :  nor  had  flie  any  third,  except  in  the
morning,  and  then  only  a  flight  one,  nor  any  febrile  pulfe ;  nor  was  fhe
•  diilurb'd  with  unquiet  fleep.

But  the  difeafe  continuing  after  that,  fo  long  as  to  the  twelfth  year ;  and
the  abdomen  being  more  fwell'd  ;  moft  of  thefe  circumftances  were  at  length
chang'd  :  and,  although  from  the  tumefied  and  eroded  feet,  a  great  quantity
of  water  diftill'd,  yet  the  tumour  of  the  belly  was  not  decreas'd  thereby  ;  aad
the  feet  being  feiz'd  with  a  gangrene,  death  came  on  in  confequence
thereof.

No  water  was  found  in  the  belly,  in  the  thorax,  or  the  pericardium  ;  the
vaft  quantity  thereof  being  entirely  Ihut  up  within  a  membranous  fac.  The
coat  of  the  fac  was  double ;  the  external  coat  being  white,  thick,  and  made
up  of  tenacious  fibres :  the  fac  had  only  one  cavity  and  one  origin  ;  for  the.
right  ovarium  had  grown  out  into  fo  furprizing  an  extent ;  the  fpermatic
veflTels,  which  belong'd  thereto,  being  twelve  times  thicker  than  they  are
wont  to  be  naturally.

17.  In  the  fame  differtation  (h)  alfo,  you  will  find  .the  marks  colleded
•whereby  this  dropfy  is  fuppos'd  to  be  known  and  diftinguiftiable  from  others ;
, particularly  from  thofe  of  the  uterus  itfelf ;  and  you  will  alfo  fee  (i)  how  va-
rious it  is  found  to  be  in  various  bodies.

And  ;  in  comparing  all  thefe  cafes  with  other  examples  that  I  have  pro-
duc'd  heretofore,  or  at  prefent ;  you  will  plainly  perceive,  what  occurs
more  frequently,  or  more  rarely,  both  in  the  living  and  the  dead  body  :  but
if  you  attend  to  my  caution,  you  will  not,  for  that  reafon,  take  upon  you
to  affirm  any  thing,  for  a  certainty,  in  making  a  diagnofis ;  and  ftill  lefs
promife  any  thing  efficacious,  from  any  method  of  cure  whatever  ^  and  efpe-
cially  from  the  chirurgical  method.

For  whatever  fome  authors  may  aflert  in  their  writings ;  the  learned  author
of  the  diflertatioii  himfelf,  alfo,  exprefsly  confeflfes  {k),  "  that  no  medical
"  praftitioner  whatever  has  hitherto  been  able  to  boaft,  that  he  had  ab-
"  folv'd  himfelf  of  his  engagements,  after  having  promis'd  to  do  a  great
"  deal  in  this  dropfy  of  the  ovarium  :"  and  although,  where  he  fpeaks  of
trying  the  operation  of  paracentefis  (/),  he  neither  omits  to  mention  the
place  where  the  punfture  fhould  be  applied  ;  nor  the  manner  of  applying
it  J  nor  the  method  of  cure,  in  .particular,  which  muft  befollow'd,  in  order
to  make  the  parietes  of  the  tumour  coalefce  with  each  other  ;  yet  he  firft  of
all  admonifhes  the  phyfician  and  the  furgeon,  that  they  do  not  fail  "  pre-
"  vioufly  to  pronounce  the  event,"  of  that  method  of  cure,  "  to  be
*'  doubtful."

[h)  n.  9.  (/•)  n.  10.  {i)  n.  16.  (/)  n.  iff.

For


w


Letter  LXV. Article  i  8.  537

For  he  particularly  urges  and  inculcates  this  confideration  {m}^  that  the
figns  are  yet  wanting,  whereby  we  might  determine  ;  before  that  cure  be
undertaken  ;  whether  the  water  is  colleded  within  one  cavity,  or  dilpers'd
into  many.

And  you  fee,  that;  though  it  had  even  come  into  my  mind(«),  toconjedure
this  difference,  from  the  fludluation  being  fenfible  at  one  time,  and  not  at
another;  this  ground  of  conjedlure  muft,  neverchelefs,  be  totally,  and
beyond  a  doubt,  rejefted,  from  confidering  the  hiftory  of  the  widow  laft
fpoken  of.

I  omit  other  difficulties,  which  have  either  been  fufficiently  obferv'd  al-
ready, or  explain'd  to  you  in  other  places :  to  which  I  would  rather  have
you  now  add,  thofe  that  are  drawn  from  the  obfervacions  of  the  celebrated
man  George  Chriftian  Brehmius  (0),  and  Stephanus  Wefzpremus  (p) ;  neither
of  which  I  have  taken  notice  of  before,  becaufe  the  latter  is  v.'ithout  the
figns  of  the  difeafe,  ind  the  former  complicated  with  the  difeafes  of  many
parts.

For  what  muft  the  furgcon  do,  if,  as  the  fecond  of  thefe  gentlemen  did,
he  fliould  light  on  a  large  fac,  containing,  together  with  a  foetid  humour,
a  very  confiderable  bony  concretion  ;  v^hich  fac  is  Ihown  to  have  belong'd
to  the  left  ovary,  by  a  kind  of  fmall  rope,  whereby  it  was  connected  thereto ;
though  the  greater  part  of  this  ovarium,  together  with  the  neighbouring
tube,  and  the  ligaments  of  the  uterus,  was  putrified  and  lacerated  ;  fo  that
it  was  very  natural  to  conceive,  from  whence  the  afcites  of  this  virgin  had
taken  its  origin  ?  Or  what  muft  the  furgeon  do,  if,  after  many  figns  of  an
encyfted  dropfy,  the  trocar  being  plung'd,  to  a  confiderable  depth,  in  the
fofteft  part  of  the  tumour,  a  fmall  quantity  of  glutinous  water,  and  a  great
number  of  hydatids,  fhould  be  difcharg'd  ?  for  thefe  were  found,  by
Brehmius,  in  an  almoft  incredible  number  after  death  :  extending,  together
with  a  very  thick  fcliTrrhous  flefh,  each  ovarium  "  to  the  fize  of  two  fifts ;"
and  even  befetting  almoft  all  the  vifcera  of  the  belly  and  the  diaphragm  in
like  manner.

18.  It  does  nt)t  feem,  therefore,  that  any  other  method  of  cure  can  be,
with  any  degree  of  prudence,  recommended  in  cafes  of  the  encyfted  dropfy,
but  that  which  1  have  already  recommended  {q)  ;  I  mean,  the  palliative
method.

For  by  thefe  means,  patients  might  have  liv'd  much  longer  very  fre-
quently, and  labour'd  under  fewer  and  {lighter  inconveniences ;  and,  indeed,
after  living  many  years  in  this  manner,  might,  fometimes,  be  cur'd  by  the
affiftance  of  accident  and  nature  co-operating  together.

See  what  happen'd  to  the  virgin,  the  accurate  defcription  of  whofe  hiftory
we  owe  to  the  diligence  of  Villus  (r).

For  this  virgin,  having  labour'd,  for  fourteen  years  together,  under  fo
great  a  bulk  of  belly,  that,  within  the  firft  eight  years,  her  body  weigh'd

[m)  Ibid.  &  n.  i6.  (/>) Obf.  Med.  i.

(b)  EpifL  38.  n.  64.  in  fin,  '  (j)  Epift.  38.  n.  71.

(o)  Diflen.  de  Hydatidib.  \r)  Differt.  ad  n.  16.  fupra  cit.  n.  6.

Vol.  III.  Z  z  z  '  twice


5  3  § Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

twice  as  much  as  before  the  difeafe  began  ;  that  is  to  fay,  when  fhe  was  two-'
and-twenty  years  of  age ;  fhe  at  length  fell  down  upon  her  belly  ;  and  a
cracking  noife  being  perceiv'd  in  the  left  epigaftric  region,  finiilar  to  that  of
the  burlting  of  a  drum  (which  circumftance,  and  the  beginning  cf  the  tu-
mour from  the  lame  fide  of  the  pelvis,  and  even  fome  figns  which  accom-
pany dropfies  of  chat  kind  whereof  we  fpeak  at  prefenr,  Ihow'd  that  it  was,
beyond  a  doubt,  to  be  referr'd  to  feme  one  of  thefe  clafles),  flie  began  to
difcharge,  at  intervals,  fuch  a  vail:  quantity  of  inodorous  water,  by  the  uri-
nary pallages,  that  the  tumour  of  the  belly  vanidi'd  away  within  nine  days  i
and  flie  foon  after  recover'd  her  health,  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  (he  had  now
liv'd  five  years  in  very  good  health,  when  the  hiftory  was  written.

But  an  obfervation  had  been  before  publifh'd,  by  the  celebrated  Chriftopher
Erneftus  Conus  (s),  of  a  matron,  wlio,  fuppofing  herfelf  to  be  pregnant  at
firft,  had  fpent  the  fpace  of  five  years  with  a  tumid  belly  ;  but  with  a  florid
colour  of  the  face,  and  an  undeprav'd  appetite  ;  her  fleep  being  tranquil,
and  her  refpiration  very  free  •,  having  no  tumour  of  the  feet,  and  no  diminu-
tion of  the  urinary  diicharges :  but  after  that,  her  feet  becoming  tumid,
and  her  belly  being  diftended  to  the  degree  that  will  be  mention'd  prcfently  ;
end  the  diforder  having  now  continu'd  feven  years ;  it  happen'd  that  fhe  fell
down,  and  ftruck  her  belly  mofl  violently,  againft  a  flinty  pavement.

And  foon  after  this,  the  fame  thing  happen'd  to  her  that  happen'd  to  the
virgin  •,  I  mean,  fhe  now  and  then  excreted  urine  of  the  fame  kind  ;  and
that  in  fo  large  a  quantity,  that,  by  the  help  of  a  copious  fweat,  which  flow'd
ipontaneoufly  at  the  fame  time,  it  was  fufiicient  to  empty  her  belly  ;  which,
by  this  means,  becoming  rugous,  and  entirely  coUaps'd,  was  extended  be-
yond her  knees :  fhe  therefore  liv'd  in  good  health  for  two  years  -,  till  at
length  fhe  was  carried  off  by  a  dyfentery  of  an  epidemic  kind.

To  thefe  two  women  therefore,  an  accidental  fall  was  as  happy,  as  it  was
unhappy  to  an  equal  number  fpoken  of  above  (i).

And  left  you  fhould  happen  to  fufpedt,  that,  in  the  cafes  of  this  virgin
and  matron,  the  water  was  difcharg'd  for  this  reafon,  that  it  was  included  in
the  cavity,  not  of  the  belly,  but  of  the  uterus  ;  as  in  fome  patients  fpoken  of
by  Cunradus  (a),  whofe  fall  was  happy  likewife ;  you  may  take  it  for
granted,  that  in  the  two  women  we  have  fpoken  of  now,  the  water  did  not
flow  out  from  the  uterus  :  as  they  did  not  difcharge  it  in  an  involuntary
manner,  but  could  even  reftrain  it  at  pleafure.

19,  But  in  regard  to  that  dropfy  of  the  uterus,  which  I  fpoke  of  jufl  now,
and  of  the  tube  of  the  uterus ;  there  are  certainly  very  few  things  to  be
pointed  out  and  added  to  the  Sepulchretum.

There  is,  indeed,  one  inftance  however,  of  a  dropfy  of  the  tube,  and
one  that  I  have  already  made  mention  of  to  you  {x)  -,  but  in  too  brief  and  cur-
fory  a  manner,  as  the  book  was  not  then  in  my  hands :  for  it  is,  certainly,
by  no  means  a  common  inftance  ;  that  is  to  fay,  it  is  an  inftance  of  the  tube
containing  about  a  hundred and fifty  pints  of  water,  in  a  woman,  who.


(i)  Differt.  infcripta  Cafus  Hydropicslapfu (a)  Differt.  de  Hydr.  Uteri  c,  4.  §.  3.
fanatae.  (at)  Epift.  38.13.66.

{I)  B,  16.


having


Letter  LXV. Article  20.  s^^^

having  been  fuppos'd,  at  firft,  to  be  pregnant,  and, 'after  that,  to  labour
under  an  afcites,  died  at  length,  and  was  diflefled  hy  Abraham  Cypri-
anus  (_y),  who  had  not  been  willing  to  undertake  the  cure  of  the  patient ;
and  that  certainly  for  very  prudent  reafons  too  :  for  befides  water,  he
would  have  found,  within  the  tube,  many  "  carcinomatous  tumours."

And  you  will  have  an  inftance  of  a  dropfical  uterus,  from  Brehmius  (2),  in
a  matron,  who  ;  being  fuppos'd,  by  a  great  number  of  phyficians,  to  have
labour'd  under  an  encyfted  dropfy,  for  the  fpace  of  two  years  ;  by  means  of
an  emenagogue  medicine,  which  Ihe  had  taken,  difcharg'd  cyfts  from  the
uterus,  to  the  number  of  feven  ;  in  one  of  which  the  fkeleton  of  a  foetus
was  adiually  contain'd  ;  and  in  the  others  a  ferum  which  fmelt  very  difagree-
ably  -,  lo  that  you  might  perceive  the  dropfy  to  have  arifen  from  an  unhappy
pregnancy,  though  ic  was  contain'd  within  facs.

And  you  will  find,  in  the  hiftory  which  you  read  in  Cunradus  (a),  that
a  very  great  quantity  of  water  was  contain'd  in  one  large  bag,  in  a  woman
who  complain'd  of  nothing  elfe  but  a  fenfe  of  weight ;  her  feet  not  being
tumid  ;  and  flie  having  no  fenfe  of  fluctuation  of  water  when  Ihe  mov'd  her
body  ;  and  what  every  one  moft  of  all  wonder'd  at,  for  about  fix  years  to-
gether; for  fo  many  years  was  it  that  fhe  labour'd  under  this  tumour;  fhe
was  not  only  not  emaciated,  but  was  not  even  deficient  in  her  menftrua,
which  continu'd  to  have  their  regular  difcharge  all  the  time.

Which  circumftance,  and  the  diffcdion  likewife,  may  make  you  doubt-
ful whether  that  bag  was  to  be  confider'd  as  the  uterus  itfelf :  for  many
of  thofe  perfons  who  were  prefent  at  the  diffeclion,  fufpefted  fome  other  body
rather,  which  refembled  the  uterus,  and  occupied  the  feat  of  it ;  and  from
thence  the  tumour  had  firft  begun,  by  the  fize  of  a  man's  fift  ;  to  be  really
the  uterus.

But  becaufe  that  verybody  was  fchirrhous,  and  deprav'd  by  other  diforders  ;
and  did  not  commtThicate  with  the  vagina,  which  was  quite  fhut  up  beneath
it;  and  the  fanguiferous  veffels,  which  crept  through  that"  bag,  did  com-
municate therewith  ;  when  you  have  read  over  all  the  circumftances,  and
confider'd  them  attentively,  you  will  judge  whether  that  bag  is  not,  at
leaft,  to  be  confider'd  as  a  diftended  part  of  the  uterus ;  and,  in  the  mean
while,  will  eonfider  from  the  fame  differtation  (b),  the  marks  whereby  it
is  faid  that  the  hydrops  uteri  may  be  diftinguifh'd  either  from  other  fpecies
of  dropfy,  or  from  diforders  of  the  uterus  itfelf;  I  mean,  fuch  as  fchirrhus
and  cancer.

20.-In  regard  to  thefe  laft-mention'd  difeafes,  to  my  two  obfervations,
which  I  have  already  given  you  (f),  you  may  join  as  many  from  thofe  cele-
brated men,  Kieflingius  (i),  and  Roederer  {e) ;  and  compare  them  with  that


{y)  Epift.  hift.  exhib.  foetus  hum.  poft.  21. (r)  Epift.  38.  n.  34.  &  Epift.  39.  n.  33.
menfes  &c.  \d)  Diflert. quse infcribitur Uterus poft.

(a)  Differt.  fupra  ad  n.  17.  cit.  §.  2.  pan.  infiainm.  §.  13.
[a)  Differt.  fapra  ad  n.  18.  cit.  c.  1.  §.  14. («)  Differt.  de  Uteri  Scirrho  n.  18.
W  c.  3.  §.  3.

Z  z  z  2  ftate


540 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

ftate  of  the  ovaries  alfo,  of  the  tubes,  and  of  the  urinary  bladder,  which  was
found  by  me,  and  by  both  of  thefe  authors ;  or  one  of  them  -,  at  that  very
time.  For  I  do  not  here  add  anything  eHe  on  the  uterus  and  bladder,  or
upon  the  other  urinary  and  genital  parts  •,  as  I  fhall  write  majiy  things  upon
their  diforders  in  the  following  letters. Farewel.


LETTER  the  SIXTY-SIXTH

Treats  chiefly  of  Diforders  that  affeil  the  Urinary  Bladder.


1.  ^  S  I  am  about  to  write  of  difeafes,  which  relate  to  the  urinary  and  genital
_/\_  parts ;  according  to  my  promife  in  the  preceding  letter;  I  will  firft  pro-
duce an  obfervation,  which  relates  to  both  one  and  the  other  clafs  of  organs;
nnd  afterwards  I  will  give  you  fome  that  relate  to  the  former,  and  others
that  relate  in  particular  to  the  latter  :  and  thefe  I  fliall  communicate  to
you  in  this  and  the  following  letter,  in  the  fame  method  I  am  wont  to
purfue.

2.  An  old  wom.an,  who  had  already  labour'd,  for  feven  months,  under
pains  in  the  lower  part  of  the  belly  ;  particularly  at  the  time  of  difchargino-
her  urine  ;  had  been  in  the  hofpital  for  the  firft  months.  She  return'd  home
however  from  thence,  but  at  length  came  back  to  the  hofpital  again ;  being
tortur'd  with  thofe  excruciating  pains,  and  the  urine,  as  often  as  ever  it  was
difcharg'd,  depofiting  a  great  quantity  of  pus.  Finally,  being  feiz'd  with
convulfions,  (he  died  near  the  end  of  the  year  1757.

As  I  had  immediately  order'd  the  inteftines,  at  leaft,  to  be  taken  out  of
the  body,  which  1  was  not  at  leifure  to  examine,  till  fome  days  after  death  ;
I  at  length  look'd  carefully  over  all  the  organs  that  were  created  for  the
fake  of  the  urine,  and  for  generation.
;  Betwixt  the  ovaries,  which  were  white,  fchirrhous,  and  fmall,  was  a  fmali
uterus  alfo,  that  was  pretty  found,  both  internally  and  externally  ;  except
that,  externally,  it  had,  on  the  back  part  of  its  fundus,  a  kind  of  round
pirnple,  as  it  were,  full  of  whitifh  ferum.

But  the  vagina ;  from  the  orifice  of  which  a  very  filthy  matter  was  dil-
charg'd  ;  and  the  bladder  alfo,  being  laid  open ;  the  whole  internal  furface
of  both  of  them  appear'd  to  be  eroded  as  it  were,  and  cover'd  with  a  cine-
ritious,  thick,  and  very  foetid  pus :  and  if  you  attempted  to  remove  this
pus  by  the  handle  of  the  knife,  the  fubftance  of  both  thefe  corroded  parts
foUow'd  at  the  fame  time;  fo  that  it  was  manifeft  both  of  thefe  organs  had
labour'd  under  a  moft  filthy  cancer.

And


Letter  LXVI. Articles  3,  4,  j".  541

And  fo  great  had  been  the  purulent  difcharge,  that  the  bladder ;  which,,
before  it  was  cut  into,  feem'd  to  be  half  full  of  urine  •,  appear'd  to  be  fo
from  the  pus  which  it  contain'd.  However,  although  both  the  ureters  were
in  a  ftate  of  confiderable  dilatation  ;  and  in  particular  the  right ;  yet  I  could
find  no  diforder  by  cutting  into,  and  examining,  the  kidnies.

3.  1  have  produc'd  this  hiftory,  that  you  may  compare  it  with  others,
which  1  have  already  pointed  out  {a)  :  among  thefe  is  mine  alfo  {b),
which,  though  of  a  different  natpre  in  fome  things,  is  neverthelefs  fimilar  in
this,  that  a  violent  diforder  had  occupied  the  genital  and  urinary  organs  at
the  fame  time.  We  will  now  add  other  things,  which  relate  to  thefe  laft-
mention'd  parts  in  particular.

4.  And  firft,  when  you  read  over  again  that  letter,  wherein;  fpeakingof
the  difficulty  of  making  water,  and  particularly  from  calculi ;  I  hinted  a  few
things,  in  regard  to  waters,  which  are  more  or  lefs  apt  to  generate  cair
culi  (c) ;  I  would  have  you  add  the  experiments,  which  were  made,  in  con-
fiderable number,  and  with  great  accuracy  ;  in  the  examination  both  of  the:
waters  of  his  own  native  place  and  others ;  by  Vincent  Menghini  {d)^  who.
was  lately  fnatch'd  away,  from  his  fellow- citizens  at  Bologna,  by  an  un-
timely death,  and  that  to  their  great  grief  and  difappointment.

For  he  even  found  amongfl:  well-waters,  fome  which  not  only  do  not  in-
creafe  calculi,  butdiminifh  them  ;  and  quite  diflblve  fome.  And  the  fame-
water  ;  being  drunk  by  perfons  afFe(5led  wich  calculi,  and  made  ufe  of  to  pre-
pare wines  and  broths ;  have  prov'd  their  own  efficacy,  in  this  way,  by  the
fuccefsful  event.

And  with  that  needle,  which  was  carried  through  the  male  urethra,  into
the  bladder,  and  there  encreas'd  in  its  fize,  by  the  addition  of  a  caleulus,
which  had  form'd  itfelf  thereupon  ;  as  1  have  defcrib'd  in  the  fame  letter  {e) ;
you  may  alfo  compare  that  ear  of  wheat  (for  of  an  ear  of  barley  you  have
read  of  in  the  fame'place  (/) )  which  another  man  {g) ;  when  he  was  formerly  in'
the  country  ;  and  was  there  very  much  excruciated  by  the'difcharge  of  fandy
particles  in  his  urine  ;  had  introduc'd  into  his  urethra,  in  the  room  of  a  fmall
candle  ;  but  had  not  been  able  to  draw  back  again,  by  reafon  of  the  refin-
ance that  was  given  by  the  Iharp  points,  fo  as  to  occafion  the  moft  fevere
pain  ;  and  had  therefore  left  within  the  urethra  :  and  this  ear  of  wheat  the
lithotomift  finally  extracted  from  the  bladder  itfelf,  in  the  form  of  aclufter-
of  grapes,  which  a  ftony  matter  had  incrufted.

When  you  have  compar'd  thefe  things ;  you  will  alfo  compare  thofe  re-
marks which  I  then  made,  that  the  great  difference  which  there  was
betwixt  my  obfervation,  and  others  of  the  like  kind,  might  evidently
appear.

5.  But  in  regard  to  the  obftacle  which  is  oppos'd  to  the  difcharge  of  the
urine,  by  the  growing  out  of  the  proftate  gland  ;  you  will  remember  that  Ii

f«):  Epift.  47.  n.  26.  (f)  n.  28.

{b)  Epift.  39.  n.  33.  (fj  n.  29.

(<r)  Epift.  42.11.  17.  {g)  Hill,  de  I'Acad.  R.  de  Sc.A.  17530


(dj  Comment,  de  Bonon.  Sc.  Inft.  Tom.  4. Obf.  Anat
Opufc


have-


$^2  Book  V.  Byway  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

have  not  only  written  on  this  fubjefl:,  in  the  fame  letters,  but  in  others  alfo  ;
and  particularly  in  thole  which  had  immediately  preceded  them  {h).

But  now  we  muft  add  other  things.  For  that  tubercle,  which  I  had  fome-
times  found  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  urethra ;  and  had  confider'd,  at
leaft,  as  an  incipient  excrefcence  of  this  gland  -,  I  have  lately  found  to  be  con-
fider'd as  a  fmall  part,  that  is  quite  natural  and  common  to  all  bodies,  and  is
call'd  uvula  by  a  celebrated  anatomift  ;  whofe  name  I  do  not  omit  to  mention
here,  becaufe  I  do  not  efteem  his  ingenuity,  his  diligence,  and  his  other
merits,  as  much  as  I  ought  to  efteem  them,  and  as  thefe  very  letters  of
mine  fhew  that  I  do  in  more  places  than  one  ;  but  only,  in  order  that  t  may
preferve  my  ufual  cuftom,  whenever  I  am  oblig'd,  by  my  love  of  truth,  to
diffent  from  any  learned  and  eminent  man  who  is  ftill  living  ;  and  efpecially
from  any  one  who  is  a  member  of  that  famous  fociety,  of  which  he  is  a
member.

If  therefore  that  uvala  of  his  really  exift  in  all  bodies ;  for  I  will  here
make  ufe  of  that  word  by  way  of  brevity  ;  it  is  with  great  reafon  that  he
wonders  I  have  never  feen  it.

But  I  have  much  more  reafon  to  be  furpris'd  here,  than  when(/)  I  very
plainly  faw,  in  that  part,  a  (lightly  protuberating  line,  which  goes  down  to
the  feminal  caruncle ;  and  even  another  fmall  line,  much  more  flender  than
the  former,  in  this  caruncle  ;  which  line,  for  inftance,  is  the  orifice  of  the
finus  contain'd  within  that  caruncle  ;  I  neverthelels  could  not  attain  to  the
fight  of  a  body  fo  much  more  protuberant,  and  comparable  with  the  uvula:
and  not  only  then,  when  I  firft  obferv'd  the  little  line  of  the  caruncle ;  but
neither  before,  nor  fince,  when  1  attentively  infpefled  that  part  of  the  urethra
in  its  natural  ftate  •,  which  I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  fay  how  many  times
I  have  done  :  this  however  I  can  affirm,  that  I  had  begun  to  do  this  before
the  beginning  of  the  prefent  century  ;  and  in  how  great  a  number  of  bodies,
my  frien'ds  at  Bologna,  and  Venice,  very  well  know  :  for  in  how  many  I  have
done  it  at  Padua,  every  year,  for  thefe  four-and-forty  years  paft,  either  in
the  college,  or  in  the  hofpital,  all  the  fludents  have  been  witnefles.

What  then  is  the  ftate  of  the  argument  ?  Do  I  call  in  queftion  what  has
happen'd  to  others  ?  No.  I  only  declare  ingenuoufly  what  has  happen'd  to
me.

For,  that  you  may  plainly  perceive,  how  feldom  I  faw  this  ;  in  fo  great  a
number  of  examinations  that  I  have  made  ;  you  may  take  it  for  granted,
that  all  the  obfervations  of  this  kind,  return  to  thofe  very  few,  which;  having
already  written  them  to  you,  on  former  occafions  ;  I  fliall  only  take  notice  of
now  •,  or  which,  if  I  have  never  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  writing,  I  (hall
here  faithfully  fubjoin.

See  therefore,  how,  in  the  fhoemaker  (k),  I  found  a  pyriform  beginning
of  that  uvula :  for  it  was  fomewhat  larger  than  the  fubjefted  feminal  ca-
runcle ;  whereas,  in  the  body  which  had  been  affefted  with  an  afcites  (/),
and  in  the  ruftic  (m),  in  like  manner,  I  met  with  it  of  a  larger  fize ;  as  it


(h)  Ep'ift.  41.  n.  17.  &  feqq.  (/)  Epift.  41.  n.  18.

(/)  Adverf.  Anat.  I.  n.  9.  (m)  Epift.  43.  r>.  24.

(i)  Epift.  37.  n.  30.  in  fin.


equall'd


Letter  LXVI. Articles  6,  7.  5 4 3

equall'd  that  of  a  fmall  grape  -,  and  fomewhat  larger  in  a  man,  whofe  hiftory
I  fliall  immediately  defcribe  to  you  for  that  one  reafon  only.
-  6.  A  man ;  who  was  very  near  fixty  years  of  age,  of  a  mufcular  habit,
and  tall  in  ftature ;  had  died  in  the  hofpital,  of  a  fuppurated  inflammation
of  the  thorax ;  and  that  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  dileafe.  None  of  the
vifcera  therefore,  but  the  vifcera  of  the  belly,  were  brought  to  me  from  this
body  ;  at  the  time  of  ray  beginning  to  teach  anatomy  in  the  college,  before
the  end  of  January,  in  the  year  lyss-  ■^^'^  J"  '^hefe  vifcera  I  only  obferv'd
the  following  preternatural  appearances.

In  the  ftomach,  from  the  ring  of  the  pylorus,  a  roundilh  ^.x^crefcence  was
prominent ;  which,  internally  and  externally,  was  of  the  fame  colour  with
that  ring  of  the  fubftance  whereof  it  was  compos'd.

In  the  mefentery,  were  very  few  glands  indeed  ;  but  thefe  weie  larger,
than  were  proportion'd  to  that  age.  The  fpleen  was  rather  fmall,  and  inter-
nally almoft  in  a  liquid  ftate.  The  large  artery  had  begun  to  ftiew  whitifli
fpots  on  its  internal  furface ;  which  fpots  would,  afterwards,  have  degenerated
into  bone.

And  finally,  the  urinary  bladder,  having  been  diftended  with  a  fufficient
quantity  of.  introduc'd  air,  appear'd  to  be  fmall,  if  you  compar'd  it  with
the  ftature  of  the  man  ;  and  with  the  greater  part  of  the  abdominal  vifcera.

When  open'd,  however,  it  did  not  feem  to  have  very  thick  coats,  nor  any
other  diforder ;  except  that,  from  the  pofterior  part  of  the  orifice,  a  body  of  the
fhape,  and  magnitude,  of  a  fmall  cherry,  was  prominent  within  it :  and  the
more  this  defcended  through  the  beginning  of  the  fubjefted  urethra,  the  more
and  more  was  it  extenuated ;  fo  that  it  did  not  reach  to  the  feminal  ca-
runcle.

Externally  it  was  fnfiooth  :  white  both  externally  and  internally ;  and  fo
evidently  a  continuation  of  the  proftate  gland,  and  fimilar  thereto,  in  the
other  part  of  its  ful5ftance,  that  you  would  not  doubt  but  it_muft  have  grown
out  from  thence.

7.  Now  if  you  compare  this  fourth,  and  thofe  other  three  defcriptions  of
mine,  which  I  referr'd  to  before  (ft),  of  this  excrefcence,  with  the  defcription
of  that  uvula  whereof  I  am  fpeaking  •,  it  will  be  very  eafy  for  you  to  fee,
that  I  had  feen  the  fame  things,  whether  this  corpufcle  was  fmall,  or  become
much  enlarg'd.

Why  then,  if  it  were  in  all  perfons,  Ifliould  not  have  feen  it  in  other  almoft
innumerable  bodies ;  in  which  I  had,  down  to  that  very  time,  infpefled  thefe
parts  with  equal  attention,  as  my  cuftom  is ;  I  can  by  no  means  conceive.

But  perhaps  you  will  fay,  take  care  left  your  memory  deceive  you ;  for  I
think,  I  remember  to  have  feen  you  take  notice  of  excrefcences  in  thofe
parts,  in  fome  other  bodies  alfo,  in  your  writings.  And  indeed  I  had  feen
excrefcences  about  thofe  parts,  and  even  in  thofe  very  parts  ;  but  not  ex-
crefcences of  this  kind.

For  that  which  I  have  defcrib'd  in  Cortini((?),  was  about  thofe  parts  indeed  ;
but  at  the  fide,  and  not  from  the  fubftance,  of  the  proftate  :  being  produc'd

i»)  N.  5.  in  Hn.  '  (o)  E£»ift.  4.2.  n,  13,

from


S  44 Book  V. By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

from  the  fubftance  of  the  bladder.  And  as  to  that  which  I  have  taken  notice
■of,  in  the  firft  of  the  Anatomical  Epiftles  (/>),  in  a  certain  old  man,  vvhofe
body  I  examin'd  twelve  years  after  the  other ;  this  was  indeed  found  at  the
beginning  of  the  urethra,  fo  as  to  flop  up,  in  fome  meafure,  the  orifice  of
•the  bladder :  but  it  was  flefhy,  unequal,  flaccid,  and  reddifh.

And  that  which  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you,  from  the  body  of  a  certain  man
who  died  fuddenly  (q),  in  its  form,  fituation,  fubftance,  and  origin,  perfectly
agreed  with  that  we  are  fpeaking  of  here;  but  differ'd  from  it  in  this,  that
at  was  double  ;  and  not  fingle  only.^

Yet  that  double  excrefcence,  which  you  have  read  of,  as  being  found  by
me,  in  a  woman  (r),  vvas  ftill  more  different ;  as  it  was  not  only  made  up  of
two  excrefcences,  fo  disjoin'd  from  each  other,  that  one  of  them  was  pro-
minent from  each  fide  of  the  orifice  of  the  bladder,  within  its  cavity ;  being
equal  in  fize  to  the  point  of  a  man's  thumb;  but  thefe  bodies  were  more-
over of  an  irregular  figure  :  as  to  other  circumflances,  both  of  them  were
white,  and  produc'd  from  the  furrounding  corpus  glandofum  urethrs,  which
very  body  was  white  alfo  here,  hard,  and  become  thici<.

For,  although  I  will  not  fay,  that  this  body  performs  the  fame  offices,  in
general,  with  the  proltate ;  I  fhall  not  deny,  neverthelefs,  but  it  correfponds
to  it  in  fome  of  them.

And  this  I  was  willing  to  add,  becaufe  I  fee  that  this  uvula  is  fuppos'd  to
exift  in  women  alfo,  yet  to  be  lefs  prominent  than  in  men  ;  although  it  has
rot  yet  ever  happen'd  to  me,  to  find  an  excrefcence  of  this  kind  in  females,
in  the  fame  fituacion  as  in  males  ;  either  in  a  fmaller  or  a  larger  degree.

And  left  you  fhould  fufpeft,  that  if  I  had  read  thofe  things,  which  have
been  juft  now  faid  of  this  uvula,  before  I  very  attentively  examin'd  the  upper
part  of  the  urethra,  fo  frequently,  in  both  fexes,  I  (hould  probably  have  been
more  ready  to  acknowledge  thefe  appearances,  both  in  men  and  women;  I
will  faithfully  communicate  to  you  all  the  diffeftions  which  I  was  capable  of
making  in  the  very  ftiort  time  fince  I  have  read  thofe  things ;  notwithftanding
they  contain  nothing  befides  this  circumftance,  that  relates  to  our  prefent
purpofe  :  and  I  -will  begin  with  that  of  a  woman.

8.  The  urinary  and  genital  parts  of  a  woman ;  who  died  in  this  hofpital,
of  I  know  not  what  diforder ;  were  brought  into  the  college,  where  I  was
teaching  anatomy,  before  the  end  of  January  in  the  prefent  year  1759.

In  the  genitals  I  obferv'd  nothing  that  was  preternatural,  befides  one  or
two  roundifti  prominences ;  both  of  which  were  fmall,  and  protuberated,  in
fome  meafure,  on  the  internal,  and  pofterior,  furface  of  the  fundus  uteri ;
being  of  the  fame  kind,  that  you  will  remember  to  have  been  defcrib'd  by
me,  at  other  times,  of  a  larger  or  leffer  magnitude.

But  as  to  what  relates  to  the  urinary  parts ;  befides  the  emulgent  artery
•which  is  common  to  all,  another  artery,  which  has  been  feen  by  me  in  fome
bodies,  and  by  many  other  anatomifts,  went  off,  in  like  manner,  from  the
trunk  of  the  great  artery  to  the  kidney.


OJ  N.  43.  (r)  Epift.  39,  n.  33.

(^)  Epj-ft.  42,  n.  u.  in  fin.


But


. Letter  LXVI. Article  p. '  ^^45-

But  this  was  only  a  lefs  ufual  appearance  of  nature  :  yet  the  trunk  itrelf
of  the  aorta  had  this  preternatural  circumftance,  that  it  fhew'd  white  fpots
internally  of  a  confiderable  fize  -,  which  were  the  marks  of  future  oflifica-
tion  :  and  not  only  this,  but  that  it  was  more  narrow  in  its  diameter,  than
fecm'd  fuicable  even  to  a  woman  of  a  low  ftature.

The  bladder,  being  found,  had  no  prominence  at  the  lower  part,  and  none
at  the  upper  part,  of  the  urethra,  in  like  manner ;  and  even  not  any.  the  leaft
trace  of  a  prominence.

9.  The  body  of  an  old  man  ;  of  fixty  years  of  age,  as  it  appear'd  to  be;
was  difieded  at  the  fame  time  and  in  the  fame  place.  In  regard  to  which
man,  1  could  learn  nothing  more  than  this  ;  that  before  he  begg'd  for  his
living  at  Padua,  he  was  on  board  the  gallies ;  having  been  condemn'd,  pro-
bably, on  account  of  fome  quarrels.  At  leaft  many  fears  of  wounds  which
he  had  receiv'd,  appear'd  in  the  abdomen  and  the  neighbouring  parts.

The  belly,  and  the  thorax,  being  cut  into,  it.  was  found  that  none  of  thofe
wounds,  but  one,  had  penetrated  into  their  cavity  :  this  one,  however,  had
gone  no  farther  than  the  omentum,  as  a  fmall  part  of  this  membrane  adher'd,
in  a  ftate  of  agglutination,  within  an  elliptical  little  cavity  of  the  peritoneum,
which  had  formerly  been  perforated  ;  at  the  fame  time  that  the  vifcera  be-
neath were  unhurt.

The  ftomach;  which  was  almoft  empty,  and  yet  larger  than  ufual ;  (hew'd
a  night  phlogofis  internally,  towards  the  oefophagus:  and  the  fmall  inteftines,,
externally,  fhew'd  a  colour  which  was  partly  yellow,  but  degeneratino-  into
brown  ;  and  the  cyftic  bile  was  yellow,  but  dilute,  and  almoft  effete.

The  hollow  furface  of  the  liver,  on  the  right  fide,  was  disfigur'd  by  a
very  black  fpot :  the  figure  of  which  fpots  approach'd,  in  fome  meafure,  to
the  area  of  a  circle ;  the  diameter  whereof  did  not  exceed  the  breadth  of
a  man's  thumb.  As  fome  fluid  feem'd  to  lie  beneath,  I  cut  into  the  coat  of
the  liver,  and  found  if^o  be  femi-coagulated  blood,  comprehended  in  a  not
very  deep  cavity.

The  internal  furface  of  the  great  artery  had  fome  bony  particles  fcatter'd
up  and  down  ;  but  they  were  fmall,  and  not  in  great  number.  Among
thefe ;  to  fay  fomething  of  the  parts  of  the  thorax  alfo  ;  that  was  certainly
one  of  the  largeft  which  lay  upon  the  very  orifice,  in  which,  the  canalis  ar-
teriofus,  that  had  formerly  been  open  in  the  foetus,  terminated.

The  heart  was  large  :  and  the  mouth  of  the  coronary  vein  had  nothino-
elfe,  in  the  place  of  a  valve,  but  a  flender  filament,  produc'd  from  the  upper
edge  of  the  orifice  to  the  lower.  And  this  I  have  related  here;  as  I  have
other  things  alfo ;  that  you  might  perceive  I  had  made  an  accurate  obferva-
tion,  ev-en. of  little  things,  in  this  body.

With  how  much  more  accuracy  do  you  fuppofe,  then,  that  the  uvula  was
enquir'd  after,  by  me,  in  the  orifice  of  the  bladder  of  this  man,  and  another
to  whom  I  fliall  refer  prefently  ?  and  of  that  old  woman  who  was  fpoken  of
juft  now  ?  efpecially  as  in  this  man,  when  the  bladder  was  abeady  open'd,
fomething,  that  was  of  a  roundifli  figure,  and  moderately  prominent,  feem'd
to  protuberate  within  the  neighbounng  part  of  the  urethra,  which  was  not
yet  open'd.

But  neverthelefs,  when  the  urethra  was  at  length  laid  open,  it  immediately
Vol.  III.  4  A  ■  appear'd


^^6 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

appeared  that  I  had  been  deceiv'd  ;  and  not  only  I,  but  all  the  more  diligent
ftudents  who  were  prefent  -,  together  with  the  experienc'd  difleftors  :  fince
thefe  obfervations  1  made  in  public,  according  to  my  general  cuftom.

For,  whatever  the  caufe  of  the  deception  might  be  ;  certainly  there  was
not  the  Icaii  prominence  ;  that  we  could  now  attain  to  the  fight  of;  in  that
whole  fpace,  which  lies  betwixt  the  bladder  and  the  feminal  caruncle.

JO.  But  becaufe  I  am  fo  defirous  of  learning  truth,  as  to  think  that  what-
ever I  hear,  or  read,  of  the  ftrudture  of  the  body,  that  is  new,  I  (hould  en-
quire after,  even  in  thofe  parts  wherein  I  remember  to  have  feen  nothing  of
this  kind,  though  they  have  been  carefully  examin'd  by  me  a  hundred  times  j
I  wifh  to  infpeft  them  again  and  again,  to  the  great,  though  filent,  admiration,
and  perhaps  irkfomenefs,  of  thofe  perfons  who  affift  me :  for  which  reafon,
it  gave  me  a  very  Angular  pleafure,  that  an  opportunity  ofFer'd  itfelf,  in  thofe
very  days,  of  cutting  into  and  examining  a  third  bladder.

1  therefore  begg'd,  that  not  only  the  vifcera  of  the  thorax ;  of  that  man
■whofe  hiftory  I  have  written  to  you,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  fixty-fourth
letter  (s) ;  wherein  the  feat  of  the  diforder  was,  might  be  brought  to  me,  but
alfo  the  organs  ferving  for  the  offices  of  generation.

As  the  bladder  therefore,  and  the  urethra,  when  open'd,  feem'd  to  me  to
be  fufficiently  proper,  wherein  to  make  an  attentive  enquiry  after  that  pro-
minence 1  I  made  this  enquiry  very  accurately  ;  but  in  vain  :  for  not  the  leafl:
appearance  of  it  was  found.

Nay,  and  even  when  human  bodies  were  wanting ;  that  is,  after  the  ana-
tomical demonftrations  were  finilh'd  ;  I  was  determin'd  to  enquire  after  it  in
a  dog  of  a  confiderable  fize.

This  animal  I  had  order'd  to  be  cut  open  alive,  in  the  college,  after  the
cuftom  of  my  anceftors ;  not  only  for  other  reafons,  but,  moreover,  that  ic
might  appear,  whether  no  interflice  be  left  betwixt  the  pericardium  and  the
heart,  either  in  its  fyftole,  or  in  its  diaftole ;  as  I  had  read  not  long  before  j
but  the  pericardinm  fo  exaftly  embraces,  at  all  times,  whatever  it  contains ;
or  2t  Icaft  in  living  and  healthy  bodies ;  that  no  vacuity  remains  within  it&
cavity.

For  as  this  method  of  determining  it  was  an  obvious  one,  fo  it  feem'd  not
to  be  liable  to  doubt ;  I  mean,  if  the  thorax  of  the  dog  being  open'd ;  in
fuch  a  manner,  that  not  much  blood  was  extravafated  ;  we  immediately  tried,
while  the  heart  ftill  exercis'd  its  motions  ftrongly,  whether  the  membrane  of
the  pericardium,  before  it  was  open'd,  were  fo  clofely  contiguous  to  the  heart,
that  it  could  be  by  no  means,  or  at  leaft  not  eafily,  laid  hold  of  and  rais'd  up-
betwixt  two  fingers.

And  this  it  could  be  very  eafily,  'as  was  tried  by  feveral  perfons,  and  feen-
by  all :  and  I  know  that  the  fame  experiment  was  fince  made,  upon  other
dogs,  with  the  fame  fuccefs.  In  that  dog  therefore,  after  having  fought  in-
vain,  as  I  had  often  done  before,  whether  the  veficula;  feminales  are  not
wanting ;  but  as  fome  feem  to  believe,  are  lefs  confpicuous ;  I  fought  after
this  uvula  to  no  purpofe  in  like  manner.

For  the  bladder,  and  the  urethra,  being  open'd,  as  I  faw  no  eminence  in

(0  N.  19.

the


Letter  LXVI. Article  ii.  547

the  firft,  befides  thofe  two  round  bodies,  which,  defcending  from  the  ureters,
came  together  at  length  at  an  angle  ;  fo  I  faw  that  there  was  no  prominence,
from  this  angle  quite  to  the  feminal  caruncle  ;  but  that  line  into  which  thofe
bodies  were  produc'd,  and  which  was  not  only  much  narrower,  but  much
more  deprefs'd  than  they.

I  found,  I  fay,  nothing  protuberating ;  nor  did  I  find  that  tiiangle  in  the
bladder  (as  I  fee  it  is  call'd) ;  of  which,  what  I  obferv'd  before,  not  to  fay
afterwards,  in  human  bodies;  and  what  it  feems  to  me  that  we  ought  to  think
on  this  fubjeft  ;  and  of  other  things  of  this  kind  ;  fince  it  is  not  a  proper
place  to  fay  much  here  -,  let  us  immediately  return  to  the  uvula,  of  which  I
was  here  under  a  neceffity  of  fpeaking.

For  I  do  not  doubt,  but  you  arc  convinc'd,  that  it  is  with  juftice  it  has
been  confider'd  by  me,  as  a  morbid  excrefcence  of  the  proftate  gland  -,  from
thofe  things  which  have  either  not  occurr'd  to  me,  for  the  moll  part,  in  hu-
man bodies,  or  have  occurr'd  fometimes  only.

1 1.  Nor  will  you  find  that  it  has  been  confider'd  in  any  different  light  by
others ;  and  particularly  by  Valfalva  and  Pohlius  ;  from  thofe  things  which
I  have  already  communicated  to  you  in  the  forty-firft  (/),  and  forty-fccond
letter  («),  that  I  have  fent  to  you.

For  when  one  of  thefe  appearances  was  feen  by  each  of  them,  as  arifing
from  the  fame  part,  in  the  proftate  gland  of  an  old  man  ;  the  one  refembling
a  pear,  and  the  other  a  cherry  ;  of  the  fame  forms,  that  is  to  fay,  which  it
was  feen  by  me  to  have  in  that  fhoemaker,  of  whom  1  have  fpoken  elfe-
where  (x),  and  in  the  man  whom  I  have  fpoken  of  above  (j)  •,  neither  Val-
falva nor  Pohlius  confider'd  it  as  any  certain  natural  part  of  the  proftate
gland,  which  was  accidentally  become  enlarg'd  ;  but  as  an  excrefcence  alto-
gether, as  it  was  :  or  as  a  preternatural  tumour.  And  indeed,  how  far  the
proftate  gland  is  liable^ to  excrefcences,  which  raife  themfelves  up  from  its
fuperior  circumference,  or  all  round,  or  from  a  certain  part,  into  the  cavity
of  the  bladder ;  it  would  be  very  eafy  for  me  to  Ihew,  if  I  were  difpos'd  to
repeat,  on  this  occafion,  what  I  have  faid  on  a  former  (*).

It  will  be  better  for  you  to  read  it  over  again  :  and  although  there  is  much
on  this  fubjedl:,  you  will  ftill  find  that  there  are  other  things  which  may  be
added,  in  order  to  be  referr'd  to  the  Sepulchretum  -,  as,  for  inftance,  that
example  of  the  celebrated  Fantonus  (2)  :  an  example,  that  is  to  fay,  of  an
old  man  of  fixty,  who,  having  died,  after  a  very  long-continu'd,  and
troublefome  ftillicidium  of  urine,  had  the  proftate  not  only  purulent,  hard,
and  immoderately  tumid,  but  "  produc'd  far  and  wide,  towards  the  lower
"  part  of  the  bladder  alfo  :  the  capacity  of  the  bladder  was  very  fmall :  and
"  the  membranes  very  thick  :"  which  circumftance  you  will  add  to  thofe  I
have  written  of  to  you  before  (a).

Do  not  be  furpriz'd,  that  there  was  no  fuppreflion  of  urine  ;  but  only  a
very  troublefome  ftillicidium  thereof :  for,  even  in  the  cafe  of  Pohlius,  only

It)  N.  6.  (a)  N.  37.  (*)  Epift.  41.  n.  17.  &  19.

ix)  Epift.  37.  n.  30.  (2)  De  Obf.  Med.  &  Anat.  Epift.  8.  n.  18.

CyJ  N.  6.  (a)  Epift.  42.  n.  33.  &  35.

4  A  2  more


5-48 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

more  frequent  ftimuli  to  make  water ;  whereto  were  added,  at  ftated  times,
a  dyfuria  and  ftranguria  ;  are  made  mention  of:  and  in  that  phyfician  re-
ferr'd  to  by  me,  from  Vallifneri,  in  the  forty-firft  letter  (i^)  •,  although  the
excrefcence,  which  afcended,  from  the  fubftance  of  the  proftate,  within  the
bladder,  was  equal  to  the  magnitude  of  a  walnut  •,  to  the  fuppreffion  of
.urine,  neverthelefs,  a  ftillicidium  thereof  only  fucceeded,  join'd  with  excru-
ciating pains  of  the  ureihra,  and  a  tenefmus  :  nor  in  regard  to  the  woman,
and  of  the  man  ;  whole  excrefcences  of  the  fame  kind  I  have  taken  notice
of  above  (c)  •,  have  I  heard  any-thing  in  relation  thereto ;  except  that  fhe
was  affefted  with  a  continual  ftillicidium  of  urine,  and  that  he  was  fometimes
heard  to  complain  of  an  acrimony  therein  :  and  I  faw  the  bladder,  in  each  of
their  bodies,  to  be  diftended  with  urine;  as  it  was  in  that  phyfician  like-
wife.

It  therefore  appears,  that,  according  to  the  various  difpofition  of  circum-
ftances,  a  different  inconvenience  is  brought  on  by  different  caufes  ;  and  that,
as  thefe  circumftances  are  almoft  infinitely  variable,  a  greater  or  lefs  impe-
diment is  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  egrefs  of  the  urine,  by  excrefcences  of
the  proftate  gland.

12.  And  I  am  very  well  pleas'd  to  find,  that  three  obfervations  ;  which  I
read  in  the  fame  place  where  I  fee  that  this  uvula,  of  which  the  queftion  is
at  prefent,  is  propos'd  •,  agree  with  what  I  juft  now  faid.

For  this  uvula,  having  been  found,  in  three  bodies,  of  the  thicknefs  of
a  fmall  nut,  (perhaps  of  a  filbert)  the  firft  had  labour'd  under  a  very  trouble-
fome  difficulty  of  urine,  with  frequent  ftimuli  to  make  water  ;  the  fecond,
for  eight  days,  under  an  ifchuria  ;  of  which  they  were  cur'd  by  the  catheter;
and  the  third,  under  one  or  the  other  of  thefe  complaints ;  for  which  of  them
it  had  been  was  not  known  ;  and  the  bladder  of  all  of  them  was  found  to
be  very  full  of  urine.

But  in  this  we  differ,  that  in  them  the  uvula  is  fuppos'd  to  have  been  en-
creas'd  •,  whereas  I  am  perfuaded,  by  my  obfervations,  that  an  excrefcence,
quite  of  a  preternatural  kind,  had  protuberated  from  the  proftate  gland  ;
without  fuppofing  any  uvula  naturally  to  have  exifted.

And  my  obfervations  are  affifted  by  this  circumftance  ;  which  I  have  alfo
obferv'd  heretofore  (d),  and  have  even  confirm'd  in  this  letter  ;  that  none  of
the  appearances  of  this  kind,  which  I  remember  to  have  feen  or  read  of  be-
fore, were  in  young  bodies,  but  all  in  old  men :  that  is  to  fay,  in  bodies
which  every  one  knows,  down  from  the  time  of  Hippocrates  (e)  to  the  pre-
fent, are  more  liable  to  diforders,  and,  in  particular,  to  "  ftillicidia  and  dif-
"  ficulties  of  urine."

Nor  is  that  other  remark  -,  which  you  have  read  of,  as  being  made  by  me
at  the  fame  time  ;  any  objedion  to  my  opinion ;  1  mean,  that  thefe  excre-
fcences are  wont  to  be  from  that  part  of  the  proftate,  through  which  the
protuberating  line  is  drawn  :  for  it  is  very  eafy  for  a  line,  already  fomewhat
protuberant,  to  become  more  tumid ;  and  it  is  ftiewn,  in  the  fame  place,  that
excrefcences  of  the  proftate  do  not  begin  from  that  part  alone.

[h)  N.  17,  &  ,9.  {c)  N.  7.  W  S.  3.  Aph,  31.

(^)  Epift.  <{.!.  n,  19,

And


Letter  LXVI. Article  12.  549

And  we  difagree  no  lefs  in  this  particular ;  I  mean,  that  this  uvula,  by
growing  our,  is  the  feat  of  a  very  frequent,  but  very  unknown  difeafe.

It  is  not  rare,  I  confefs  ;  but  yet  it  is  not  fo  frequent,  that ;  although  out
of  thefe  three  patients,  the  fecond,  who  was  a  very  old  man,  was  treated,  by
the  phyficians,  in  the  fame  manner  as  if  he  labour'd  under  a  paralyfis  of
■  the  bladder  ;  to  which  caufe,  without  doubt,  that  diiorder  fo  common  to  old
men  is  attributed  -,  it  therefore  follows,  that  it  is  not  frequently  to  be  attri-
buted to  paralyfis  alfo;  or  at  ieaft  to  the  ftate  of  the  expulfive  powers  of
the  bladder  being  weaken'd  through  age  :  and  indeed  if  this  hitherto  un-
known caufe,  as  ic  is  fuppos'd  to  be,  were  very  frequent ;  there  would  be
great  reafon  to  wonder  how  it  ftiould  happen,  that  among  thofe  fixty  or
feventy  bladders,  which  were  examin'd,  no  more  than  thefe  three  had  been
found  to  have  this  caufe  exifting  in  them.

But  how  this  caufe  can  be  faid  to  be  hitherto  quite  unknown,  I  confefs  I
am  at  a  lofs  to  conceive :  nor  do  I  fay  this  only  on  account  of  thofe  very
many  examples,  which  I  have  refcrr'd  to  (/)  already,  as  made  public  by
others  ;  but  for  this  reafon  chiefly,  that  fuch  an  affertion  is  made,  where
thefe  very  words  of  Santorini  (g)  are  foon  after  quoted  :  "  The  orifice  of
"  the  bladder,  whereto  is  prefix'd  a  fomewhat  prominent  body,  which  "  is
fometimes  fo  very  prominent  in  difeas'd  bladders,  "  as  entirely  to  intercept
"  the  paflage  of  the  urine."

And  indeed  in  the  figure  ;  for  the  fake  of  explaining  which,  Santorini  had
written  thefe  things ;  the  triangle  and  the  uvula  are  faid  to  be  well  ex-
prefs'd  (both  of  them,  therefore,  before  thefe  lafl.  fix-and-thirty  years)  ;  but
why,  I  pray,  is  not  the  fame  thing  faid  of  the  difeafe ;  the  caufe  of  which»
he  has  in  the  fame  place,  as  you  fee,  exprefsly-  afferted  the  uvula
to  be .''

Nay  verily  -,  as  if  he,  who  had  made  this  aflertion,  had  not  in  the  Ieaft
obferv'd  thofe  things  which  he  explain'd  ;  it  is  doubted  whether  we  do  not
rather  owe  thefe  appearances  to  the  limner,  who  faithfully  exprefs'd  what  he
faw  :  and  that  fo  much  the  more,  becaufe,  in  the  book  of  Santorini ;  on  ac-
count of  which,  that  figure,  as  well  as  the  others,  is  added  ;  the  defcrip-
tion  of  this  uvula  is  fought  for  in  vain  ;  and  becaufe  of  the  triangle  there  is
not  even  a  lingle  word,  in  the  very  article  which  correfponds  to  than
figure.

But  as  you,  when  you  examine  the  book  of  Santorini,  will  not  doubt  but
the  tenth  chapter  correfponds  to  that  figure  ;  as  it  is  entitled  De  Viroruin
Naturalibus ;  fo  you  will  alfo  find  that  this  very  figure  is  often  referr'd  to
there  in  the  margin  :  and  thofe  little  parts,  whereof  the  queftion  is  at  pre-
lent,  are  at  length  twice  fpoken  of  (^).

And  in  the  firft  place  in  the  following  manner :  "  Although  I  have  now
"  and  then  feen  fomething  pofterior,  of  which  I  (hall  fpeak  prefently,  pro-
"  tuberate,  into  a  confiderable  bulk,  at  the  orifice  of  the  neck  of  the  blad-
"  der  •,  it  is  either  very  rarely  met  with,  or  we  have  obferv'd  it  to  be  fo  far
_"  protuberant, in  thofe  fubjedts  only, whofe bladder was affedted wi.th


Cf)  Epift.  41.  n.  12.  17.  19.  ad  I.

{g)  Obf.  Anat.  in  Explic.  Tab.  2.  Fig.  z. (/?-)  §.  20.  &  22


*'  difeafe ;


550 BookV.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

^'  difeafe :  fo  that  this  circumftance,  which  is  difeas'd  and  unfrequent,  does
"  not  deferve  to  be  exhibited  as  perpetual  and  conftant,  to  the  great  detri-
*'  meat  and  mideading  of  younger  praditioners ;  or  thofe  who  have  had
*'  but  little  experience."

And  in  the  fecond  place  the  words  run  thus:  "  But  that  which  is  fome-
«'  times  fo  prominent,  at  the  orifice  of  the  cervix  veficse,  as  to  be  capable'
*'  of  intercepting,  in  fome  degree,  the  paflage  of  the  urine,  is  cover'd  over
•'  by  the  thin  internal  membrane  of  the  bladder,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  I
"  have  fbmesimes  leen  it  made  up  of  confpicuous  and  aggregated  glands  :
'■'■  and  1  remember  to  have  feen  the  wide  circumference  of  this  body,  round
<'  about,  occupied  by  protuberating  glands-,  though  of  a  fmall  fize -,  in  an
<'  old  man,  within  whofe  bladder  above  fix-and-thirty  calculi,  of  a  white
•<  colour  inclining  to  yellov;,  were  contain'd  ;  fome  of  which  calculi,  being
"  not  much  kfs  than  a  filbert,  were  (hut  up  in  facciili  conftrufled  of  the  very
*«  ftrong  and  divided  fafciculi  of  the  fame  bladder."

It  therefore  appears,  what  Santorini  thought  of  the  uvula,  and  of  the  tri-
angle alio ;  for  he  feems  to  have  fpoken  of  both  at  the  fame  time  ;  although
my  opinion,  in  regard  to  fome  things  there  propos'd  by  him,  is  different
from  his  :  however,  I  confider  nothing  here,  but  that  the  difeafe,  which
is  fomecimes  to  be  afcrib'd  to  this  excrefcence,  was  not  unknown  even
X9  him.

13.  But  in  regard  to  the  very  fmall  glands  of  the  bladder;  what  I  have
feen,  and  what  1  think  of  them,  has  been  faid  by  me  on  a  former  occa-
fion  (i).  And  as  to  thofe  facculi,  or,  as  I  have  call'd  them,  vefical  hernias,
obferv'd  by  me  in  the  fpaces  which  the  fafciculated  fibres  of  the  bladder
furround  ;  in  confequence  of  the  coats  giving  way  to  the  prefTure  of  the
urine,  which  is  fometimes  retain'd  in  too  large  a  quantity;  it  has  been
fufficiently  declar'd  by  me,  in  the  forty-fecond  letter  {k),  how  long  ago  I
publifh'd  thefe  things,  and  in  what  work ;  in  which  letter  I  alfo  faid  much
upon  the  fubje£l  of  calculi  included  in  thefe  faceuli ;  and  of  the  deceptions
which  may  arife  from  thence  to  lithotomifts.

And  for  this  very  reafon,  I  take  notice  of  thefe,  and  the  following  things,
to  you  ;  I  mean,  becaufe  I  am  under  a  neceffity  of  adding,  if  not  many
things,  at  leaft  not  very  few,  as  well  in  regard  to  that  uvula,  as  in  regard  to
other  matters,  which  I  have  fometimes  .advanc'd,  when  writing  to  you,  or
to  others ;  things  which  I  am  compell'd  by  a  love  of  truth  to  remark,  when
I  confider  what  I  have  lately  read  of  this  uvula,  and  of  the  bladder ;  and
what  I  had  formerly  read  of  this  laft-mention'd  part ;  not  only  in  the  greater
number  of  anatomical  writers,  but  particularly  in  an  author  who  was  to  be
preferr'd  before  many,  I  mean  my  friend  Santorini,  in  that  very  tenth
chapter  which  1  juft  now  quoted.

Attending  therefore  to  his  defcriptions  and  figures,  and  the  defcriptions
and  figures  given  by  others,  of  the  flelhy  fibres  of  the  bladder,  and  com-
paring them  with  what  1  had  been  able  to  fee  (/)  in  the  laft  months  of  the
year  1725,  and  the  firft months  of  the  following  year;  I  thought  I  might


(0  Epift.  Anat.  i.  n.  63.  (/)  Epift,  Anat.  1.  n.  60,

(i)  n,  30.  &  feqq.


make


Letter  LXVI. Articles  i  3.  SS^

inake  this  conclufion  in  particular :  that  there  is  fo  great  a  variety  in  the
difpofition  of  thofe  fibres,  as  to  make  it  impoffible  to  reduce  them  to  any  one
certain  and  conftant  defcription.

I  was  not  greatly  furpriz'd  therefore,  when  I  lit  on  the  varying  figures,
of  others;  as,  for  inftance,  of  that  eminent  man  William  Rutty  (m)-,  or
when  I  found  the  illuftrious  profefTor  of  anatomy,  Albinus  («),  admonifhing
us,  in  refpedt  to  that  mufcle  of  the  bladder ;  which  he  gives  a  figure  of  as
rifing  from  the  offa  pubis,  and  extending  itfelf  through  the  lower  part  of
the  bladder,  almoft  tranfverfely,  and  continuing  itfelf  to  the  reft  of  the  fibres-
thereof;  that  it  had  been  "  very  ftldom  "  feen  by  him.

Nor  did  I  wonder,  when  in  the  year,  if  I  remember  rightly,  1731,  I
read  the  defcription  of  Joh.  Wilhelmus  Albrecht  (0),  the  whole  of  which.
I  muft  copy  to  you  here  ;  not  only  on  account  of  the  variety,  but  for  this-
reafon  alfo,  that  he  has  propos'd  it,  contrary  to  the  opinion  and  cuftom  of
other  anatomifts.

"  In  the  urinary  bladder  of  a  robuft  man,"  by  the  anatomical  pipe  of
Wolfius,  "  we  feparared  fix  very  diftinft  coats,  which  are  commonly  con-
"  fider'd,  by  authors,  as  a  triple  membrane.  But  as  to  that  which  is  call'd.
"  the  mufcular  coat;  I  do  not  fee  with  what  propriety  it  can  be  number'd
"  amongft  the  coats.  For  the  mufcular  fibres  do  not  coalefce  into  one-
"  continu'd  membrane ;  but,  being  collected  on  one  fide  and  on  the  other,
"  like  fillets  of  an  inch  in  breadth,  or  even  not  fo  broad,  go  round  thq-
"  bladder,  meet  one  another  without  any  order,  and,  cutting  one  another
"  at  different  angles,  are  terminated  in  membranes,  either  about  the  neck,
"  or  about  the  fphinfter  itfelf."

I,  however,  do  not  believe  that  any  one  author;  wTio  has  enquir'd  inta
the  flelhy  fibres  of  the  bladder,  more  than  once,  in  a  proper  manner ;  has
fail'd  to  fee  the  interftices  which  they  leave  betwixt  one  another :  and  I^
therefore,  fuppofe'  that  this  author,  or  any  others  of  the  fame  clafs ;  if  they
happen'd  to  be  afk'd,  whether  thefe  fibres,  which  are  fo  entangled  one  with
another,  as  to  comprehend  betv;ixt  them  areas;  under  which  name  I  have
fpoken  of  thefe  interftices  in  the  Adverfaria  {p)  -,  whether  thefe  fibres,  I  fay,
eould  with  propriety  be  call'd  by  the  name  of  a  reticular  mufcle  ;  would  no
lefs  readily  affirm  it  of  thefe  fibres,  than  of  thofe  of  the  detrufor  urinse  mufcle;,
nor  with  lefs  readinefs  than  they  have  call'd  that  membrane  of  the  bladder
mufcular,  by  realbn  of  thefe  fibres ;  which  membrane  had  thefe  fibres  lying
upon,  or  interwoven  with,  itfelf,  and  join'd  them  together  by  its  inter-
texture^

You  fee  then»  in  what  fenfe  I  have  alfo,  in  conjnnflion  with  others^
call'd  this  membrane,  or  coat,  flefliy  or  mufcular;  I  fay,  in  conjundion
with  others.

For  although  he,  whofe  lofs  we  lately  lamented,  I  mean  the  celebrated:
Fantonus  (j),  faid,  twenty  years  before  Albrecht,  the  following  things  uporr.
the  fubjed:  of  thefe  fibres,  and  upon  this  membrane  of  the  bladder :  "  Thefe

{m)  Treatife  on  the  Urinary  Paffages.  Tab. (o)  Obfervat.  Anat.  §.  5.
(;?)  Tab.  Sceleti,  &Mufc.  corp.  hum.  Tab. Cp)  III-  Animad.  36.
12.  Eig.  41.  (?)  Anat.  corp,  hum.  Diflert.  7.

fibrc%


S s^ Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

"  fibres,  however,  do  by  no  means  form  a  compleat  membrane  ;  for  when
"  the  bladder  is  extended,  they  are  found  to  be  very  much  drawn  afunder
"  from  each  other  •,"  yet  he  did  not  deny  but  the  coat,  which  was  not  made
complete  by  thefe  fibres,  was  completed  by  the  membrane  that  lies  betwixt
them.

And  moreover,  although  he  inimediately  added  the  following  words  :
"  And  hence  it  happens  that  the  urine  muft,  of  courfe,  flow  out  through  the
"  interftices  of  thole  fibres,  at  any  time  when,  the  internal  membrane  is
"  eroded,  if  the  external  membrane  did  not,  by  its  denfity,  refift  this
"  efcape  -,"  I,  however,  do  not  think  that  we  mull,  of  courfe,  underftand
them  lb  as  to  fuppofe,  that  he  did  not  hold  thefe  intervals  to  be  fill'd  by  a
thin  membrane,  at  Icaft,  if  not  by  a  denfe  and  firm  one  ;  efpecially  as  he
has  aflerted,  "  that  the  bladder  is  neverthelefs  compos'd  of  three  coats,
"  the  external  of  which  is  made  up  of  the  peritonaeum,  the  middle  is  flelhy,
*'  and  the  inner  coat  a  nervous  one,  being  made  up  of  white  fibres  very
"  denfely  woven  together."

1 4.  Yet  there  is  no  membrane,  or  coat,  you  will  fay,  in  thofe  iaterftices.
But  tell  me,  I  beg  of  you,  do  you  think  that,  if  there  were  none,  this
would  not  have  been  found  out,  and  acknowledg'd,  among  the  excellent
anatomifts  of  former  days  ?  Euftachius  was  certainly  very  eminent  and  fkil-
ful  among  them  ;  if  any  other  was  •,  and  yet  that  he  had  obferv'd  thefe  in-
terftices, appears  very  evidently  from  that  figure,  fuch  as  it  is,  which  you
fee  exhibited  under  number  feven,  in  his  twelfth  table.

Did  he,  therefore,  think  you,  exclude  this  membrane  we  are  fpeaking
of,  from  among  the  number  of  coats  of  the  bladder  ?  No  truly,  but  has
even  afferted  the  very  contrary,  in  the  following  words  (r) :  "  Ihe  proper
"  coat  of  the  bladder  is  double,  and  the  external "  (which  is  what  we  are
fpeaking  of  here)  "  has  very  confpicuous,  thick,  and  almoft  flefhy  fibres,
*>  which  are  diftributed  fo  varioufly  in  every  direftion,  that  to  thofe  who
*'  look  upon  them,  they  feem  to  have  the  appearance  of  many  coats."

But  you  will  perhaps  fay,  he,  like  the  reft  of  the  ancients,  did  not  di-
ftinguifh  a  cellular  web  from  a  membrane.

To  this  I  will  not  reply,  that  the  cuftom  of  thefe  authors  was  to  confider
parts,  rather  as  they  are  found,  naturally,  in  the  human  body ;  than  to  en-
quire into  what  they  may  be  refolv'd,  v/hen  you  drive  in  the  air  forcibly  -,  as
Albrecht  did  •,  or  water,  as  others  have  done;  that  is  to  fay,  they  enquir'd
of  what  ftrufture  they  were  from  the  hand  of  nature  herfelf,  and  for  what
purpofe  they  were  form'd  in  the  manner  they  naturally  occur ;  and  not  to
what  ilate  they  may  be  reduc'd  by  artifice.

It  is  fufEcient  for  me  to  fay,  that  Winllow  ;  the  very  eminent  anatomift
of  thefe  times  (j);  though  he  very  well  knew  that-the  flelhy  fibres  of  the
bladder  were  conneded  jo' one  another  by  a  cellular  ■  texture  ;  and  might
therefore  be  feparated  from  each  other  by  the  introduclion  of  air  artificially  ;
has  neverthelefs  enumerated  this  mufcular  membrane,  among  the  other
coats  of  the  bladder  :  being  very  well  aware,  that  if,  becaufe  membranes,
and  many  other  parts,  can  be  refolv'd,  by  the  fame  artifice,  into  a  more  or

(r)  Traft.  de  Renibus.  c.  19.  {s)  Expof.  Anat.  tr.  du  bas  Ventre  n.  451.

lefs


Letter  LXVI. Article  i  5-.  '  5^-3

kfs  evident  cellular  texture,  they  ought  to  be  call'd  by  a  name  very  different
from  what  they  have  been  accuftom'd  to  bear-,  a  much  greater  confufion
would  be  introduc'd  into  the  anatomical  fchools  thereby,  than  ever  it  could
adminifter  utility.

I  confefs  that,  if  the  queftion  were  now  of  impofing  names  upon  parts,
in  the  manner  of  the  firft  fathers  of  this  fcience,  or  of  thofe  who  formerly
-  encreas'd  it,  and  further'd  its  progrefs ;  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  many
better  names,  than  the  prefent,  might  be  thought  of;  and  fuch  as  would  be
better  accommodated  to  the  parts  that  bear  them.  But  it  is  better,  in  my
opinion,  to  teach  the  truth  which  has  been  fince  obferv'd.  and  to  retain  the
ancient  and  ufual  appellations.

Thus,  I  by  no  means  omit  to  teach,  on  proper  occafions,  what  mem-
brane, of  what  a  nature,  and  how  variouQy  divided  at  the  lower  part,  is  fub-
jedted  to  the  venous  orifices  of  the  heart ;  but,  although  I  very  much  ap-
prove of  names  lately  impos'd  thereon,  by  the  moft  ingenious  men,  I  never-
thelefs  ftill  go  on  to  make  ufe  of  the  ufual  terms  of  valvule  tricufpides  and
mitrales  -,  and  continue  to  fay  right  and  left  ventricle  of  the  heart,  the  more
willingly,  becaufe  fome  of  them  exprefsly  allow,  that  when  they  had  chofen
rather  to  fpeak  of  thefe  parts,  under  other  new  names,  they  were  not  urider-
ftood,  even  by  very  learned  auditors.

But  as  I  hope  that,  if  I  am  not  prais'd  for  this  my  intention,  1  (hall,  at
leaft,  be  pardon'd  for  it ;  fo  I  alfo  hope,  that  if  I  fhould  ftill  prefume,  as  you
have  feen  me  do,  to  number  the  proftate  in  the  clafs  of  glands,  I  ftxall  be
pardon'd  in  like  manner;  becaufe  every  one  knows,  that  not  only  other  per-
fons,  but  even  thofe  who  had  declar'd  war  againft  glands  in  general,  have
done  it,  and  ftill  do  it.

For  though  they,  without  doubt,  knew  very  well,  that  not  all  the  parts
of  the  proftate  could  be  fit  for  the  fecretion  and  prefervation  of  the  humour
peculiar  thereto ;  yet  they  knew,  at  the  fame  time,  "  that  almoft  the  whole
"  proftate  was  made  up  "  of  the  glandular  tubuli  of  this  body  ;  to  ufe  the
words  of  Santorini ;  who  has  not  only  defcrib'd  that  in  the  fame  chapter
which  I  have  quoted  above  (/),  but  has  alfo  defcrib'd  the  levator  mufcle  of
this  gland,  the  ligament,  and  the  capfula  (»).

And  in  proportion  as  the  tubuli  are  in  greater  number  and  thicker,  fo
much  the  more  does  it  appear,  that  the  proftate  ought  to  be  retain'd  amono-
the  number  of  the  glands ;  and  a  certain  opinion  of  mine  is  confirm'd,  in
regard  to  the  caufe  why  the  extremities  of  the  feminal  veffels,  and  the  thinner
part  of  them,  is  carried  through  that  gland  ;  I  mean,  that  while  thefe  tubuli
are  depleted  by  venery,  the  continual  compreffion  of  thofe  veffels  may  be,
at  the  fame  time,  remitted,  and  the  included  femen  may  be  thrown  out.

15.  But  to  return  to  the  difeafes  pf  the  urinary  parts;  when  I  lately  read
thofe  things  which  laid  me  under  a  neceflity  of  interfperfing  thefe  remarks,
in  behalf  of  myfelf  and  others,  who  think  and  fpeak  in  the  fame  manner;
I  alfo  lit  on  that  paffage  where  the  fymptoms  of  a  certain  ifchuria  are  pro-
pos'd  ;  and  an  ifchuria  which  is  faid  to  be  very  frequent;  being  of  a  middle

{/)  10.  §  22.  (aj  §  5.  17.  zo.

Vol.  IIL  4  B  nature


S^S^  Book  V.  Byway  of  8upple?nent  to  the  former  Books.

nature  betvyijjt  (;li?  renal  qn^  the  vefical :  th^t  is  t©  fayv,  h^viog  itfr  k^p.  ie  thf
ureters,  which  are  dikted  to  an  extr  me  degree  by  the,  urine,  tfe3.t  cannoi
flow  down  into,  the  bladder,  by  reafon  of  their  Yiolent  ftran,gu.l.ation  %t  th^
point  of  infertion.

Ar\d  thefe  are  the  fycnptoms  w^ich  are  praduc'd  :  a  dgll  p,9Jjo  jojn'd  with
the  ifchuria,  and  a  certain  fenfe  of  weight  in  the  loins,  nearer  to.  t;.^?  blsddts
than  to  the  kidnies.

There  are  extant  indeed,  as  you  very  well  know,  many  examples  of  di,l;9r
tation  in  the  ureters  ;  from  different  cagfes  which  conftrioge  the^m,  %t  ih^it
infertipn,  or  even  ftop  up  their  orifices,

But  if  thefe  caufes  continue  fo  long,  that  the  urine  nauljli,  of-  Qoyr^,.  diilat*
them  in  a^n  extreti^e  manner;  it  muft  happerj,  long  befoiie  thi3r  b&  the  c^ie,
that  the  urine  which  is  continually  fecreted,  will  fill  up  the  very  fmall  g^f-,
fages  within  the  kidnies,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  apply  violence  thereto  ;  apd,
by  preffing  vipon  them,  prevent  the  fccretion  which  is  there  made  :  4nd.  this;
in  fo  fpeedy  ai  manner,  that  there  can  fcarcely  be  time  to  obferve  the  $gnS;  of- '
this  ILhuria  media,  disjoin'd  from,  thofe  of  the  renal  ifchuj^ia,  of  this,  fcipd,,
\y,hich  obfcure  th.em  :  or  if  we  have  opportunity  of  obfenvi^g  th|e  flgr^i
of  this  ifchuria  media,  either  before  or  after;  certain,ly,  if  they  will  be:n|^re.-r-
to  the  bladder  than  to  the  kidnies,  they  will,  of  courfe,  be  perceiy'd,  notiJJ^
the  Ipins,  which  the  kidnies  themfelves  occupy,  but  below  the  loins.

Other  things,  however  ;  to  fay  nothing  of  thofe,  \yhich  are  advanc'd  frppa,
conjedure,  not  from  obfervation  ;  I  purpofcly  omit ;  that  I  may,  r^thei;,
among  many  things  which,  I  ingenuouQy  commend,  praife  one,  from  whence
a_  certain  new  caufe  may  be  taken,  and  number'd  among  the  caufes,  not  onljr
of  an  incontinence  of  urine,  but  of  a  vefical  ifchuria,  as  far  as.  they  relate;  to,
the  fp  hinder.

You  are  not  ignorant  how  many  and  various  things  haye  been  hitj>ertp  faid.,
of  the  fphindler  vefics,  on  account  of  which,  and  my  ovyn  obfervations  alfp ;
that  have  been  made  fome  at  one  time,  and  fome  at  another ;  I  haye  keen
under  a,  neceflity  of  thinking,  differently  of  it  at  different  times.

But  now,  as  I  fee  propos'd,  inftead  of  the  fphinflrer,  thofe  very  fibres^,
which  ;  being  fituated  at  the  orifice  of  the  bladder,  and  having  not  a  rnuf-
cular,  but  a  ligamentous  nature,  and  keeping  up  a  preffure  round  abouf  by
means  of  their  own  elafticity  ;  fhut  up  the  paffage  of  the  urine,  till  at  length,
they  yield  to.  the  ftronger  powers  vyhich  expel;  that  fluid;  and  when  thele;
powers  ceafe  to  ad,  immediately  reftore  themfelves  by  their  ovyn  elaftic;
force,  and  return  to  their  former  office;  the  very  fimplicity  of  the  thing-
recommends  itfclf  to  me,  and  fhews  me  how  I  may  impute  an  incapa-
city of  retaining  the  urine,  to  the  diftradion,  erofipn,  or,  incifipn  pf  thefe
fibres.

Nor  am  I  lefs  pleas'd  with  the  folution  of  a  confideraJDle  difficulty,  as  it
certainly  is.  For  if  there  is  no  pov^er  of  the  will  over  the  ligamentous
parts,  but  over  the  mufcular  only  ;  how  does  it  happen,  you  would  naturally
fay,  that. men  have  it  in  their,  power,  immediately  to  reftrain  the  urinp  iqthe
middle  of  its  courfe  ?

It  is  anfwer'd  therefore,  that  it  is  poffible  to  do  this,  not  by  reafon  of  the
contradion  of  thofe  fibres,  but  by  reafon  of  the  contradion  of  the  levator


L^ttet-LXVI. Article  ij-.  JSS

ani  mufcle ;  in  that  part  of  it  which  lies  beneith  the  bulb  of  the  urethra,
betwixt  that  and  the  proftate,  like  a  handle.

And  this  pare  of  the  mufcle  I  would  call  by  the  name  of  pfetido-JfhihSler
vefiize  ;  which  name,  however,  fuppofes  a  fphittftef,  though  there  is,  in  faHt,
none  at  all.

But,  in  order  that  I  might  be  underfl-ood,  I  made  ufe  of  the  fame  name
that  they,  againft  whom  I  there  difputed,  had  made  ufe  of:  although,  if  I
had  happen'd  to  be  defirous  of  impofing  that  name,  inftead  of  the  ancient
name  -,  a  cuftom  which  I  have  always  been  averfe  to ;  I  do  not  fee  how  it
would  follow,  that  a  fphinfter  of  the  bladder  is  fuppos'd,  as  it  is  fufficient
that  other  true  fphinfters  are  not  wanting  in  feme  parts ;  and  as,  by  com-
paring with  thefe  one  which  is  not  true,  any-one  may  call  the  latter  iLpJeudo-
JphlnSier.

You  fee  that  this  part  in  particular,  if  it  reftrain  the  urine  by  the  force  of
the  will  upon  it,  may,  if  it  be  at  any-time  feiz'd  with  a  convulfion,  bring  on
a  Vefical  ifehuria;  and  that  with  fo  much  the  more  eafe,  as  it  has  even  often
brought  on  that  very  ifehuria,  when  contradled,  for  a  long  time  together,  in
order  to  retain  the  urine  in  obedience  to  the  will ;  whether  alone,  or  in  con-
junftion  with  other  mufcles,  which  the  celebrated  Gyfbert  Beudt  {x)  fuppos'd
ihould  be  number'd,  at  that  time,  wirii  the  fame  levatores  ani ;  or  thofe  which
others  have  fuppos'd,  and  particularly  the  celebrated  Winflow,  in  the  latter
part  of  his  nevdr-to-be-fufficiently  commended  Expofition,  where,  in  defcribing
thofe  that  are  to  be  added  to  his  treatife  on  the  belly  (jy),  he  has  taught  us,
that  by  thefe  is  forn^'d,  in  part,  and  p'erhaps  "  principally,"  that  mufcle
•Which  is  call'd  the  fphinfter  veficEfe.

For  although,  in  thofe.  things  which  have  been  lately  advanc'd,  I  commend
the  fimplicity  ;  yet,  at  prefent,  I  leave  the  matter  to  your  determination,  in
cohfequence  of  preftxving  my  ufual  cuftom,  and  confidering  it  as  certain,
that  if  any  thing  has  been  aifcrib'd  to  me,  (who  am  in  other  refpefts  unde-
lerving)  by  the  candour  and  humanity  of  the  moft  eminent  nien,  they  have
dSone  this,  not  becaufe  I  determin'd  any  thing  haftily,  but  becaufe  I  made
hafte  flowiy  ;  if  I  may  be  allow'd  the  expreffion  ;  and  even,  where  I  thought
if  n^ceflary  to  paufe  and  take  time,  there  paus'd  and  waited,  till  fufficiently
repeated  obfervations,  and  the  never-to-be-omitted-reading  of  thofe  authors,
who  might  perhaps  have  feen,  and  written  upon,  the  fame  thing  on  which  I
was  in  doubt,  have  taught  me  that  there  was  no  longer  any  neceffity  for
paufing.

Arid  both  of  thefi^  things  I  will  certainly  do  now,  if  ever  I  did  in  my
life.

For  brfbre"!  adjoin  that  Uvula,  which  was  juft  now  fpoken  of,  to  the  other
parts  which  naturally  exift  in  the  body,  I  will  read  what  others  have  thought
of  it  in  the  mtan  while -,  I  mean  thofe  to  whom- we  can,  with  propriety,  deny
none  of  the  great  number  of  affiftances,  which  are  requir'd,  if  we  fpeak.
ingenuoufly,  in  a  great  anatomift' :  and  1  will,  at  the  fame  time,  of  how  little
iniportalrice  ibever  1  may  be,  add  other  enquiries  to  thofe  which  I  have  related;

(*•)  Difiert.  de  Fabrica  &  Ufu  Vifter.  Urop6ieticor.  Clafs.  3.  (>  )  N.  660.  &  feq.

4  B  2  And


^  ^6 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books,

And  thefuccefs  of  thefe  inveftigations  I  will  make  known  to  you,  after
the  diflections  of  the  following  winter  are  finilh'd  (z).

1 6.  But  I  will  write  to  you  the  other  things  which  relate  to  the  difeafes  of
the  genital  parts,  as  foon  as  ever  I  am  able ;  according  to  the  promife  i  made
you  in  the  beginning  of  this  letter. Farewel.


LETTER  the  SIXTY-SEVENTH

Relates  to  the  Diforders  of  the  Genital  Parts  of  botk
Sexes,  but  particularly  to  thofe  of  the  Female  Sex.

I.  "WrHAT  ftill  remains  to  be  written  upon  the  diforders  of  the  belly,

W  relates  to  the  genital  parts  of  both  fexes.  But  the  greater  pare
will  turn  upon  thofe  of  women.

2.  After  I  had  written  to  you  (a)  upon  hernia  which  happen  in  the  fcro-
tum,  came  out  a  difleftion  perform'd  by  the  celebrated  Richer^ius  (^),  in
reading  which,  you  will  perceive,  that  it  is  not  only  of  itfelf  accurate,  but
ufeful  in  refpedt  to  the  chirurgical  cure.

In  the  fame  author  (c),  you  will  alfo  fee  a  peculiar  hernia,  cither  produc'd
after  birth,  or,  which  is  moft  probable,  congenial ;  that  is  to  fay,  in  a  girl
fix  months  old,  whofe  left  ovary,  and  adjoining  tube,  he  found  within  that
finus,  through  which  the  round  ligament  of  the  uterus  goes  out  of  the
pelvis.

But  this  is  to  be  referPd  to  the  clafs  of  bubonoceles.  Of  which,  and
of  ventral  hernias,  if  I  were  to  difcourfe  at  prcfent ;  I  fliould  take  notice  of
two,  amongft  others,  that  are  worthy  of  being  remember'd  •,  on  account  of
awhat  was  contain'd  in  the  dilated  inteftines ;  and  that  are  propos'd  in  the
Hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (i).

3.  But  to  thofe  things  which  we  have  written  upon  the  defcent,  and  ex-
cifion,  of  the  uterus  {e),  relates  the  obfervation  of  Schlenckerus  (/),  of  a
defcent  thereof,  in  confequence  of  the  ligaments  being  relax'd,  by  the  weight
of  the  impending  ovary  •,  which  had  become  cnlarg'd  and  ftony.

Thus  Abraham  Vater  (g)  had  fcen  the  fame  thing  happen  to  another  wo-

(»)  Vid.  Epift.  totam  70.  (f)  Epift.  45.''

[a)  Epift.  43.  &  alibi.  f/J  De  Singularl  Ovar.  Morb.  in  Proosmio,

{i)  Obferv.  Vifcer.  Abdom.  labis  Epicrif.  &  §  19.

Obf.  I. (f)  Obf.  3.  Ig)  Differt.  infcripta  Gravidic.  Appar.  in

(d)  In  Obf.  Anat.  A.  1752.  n.5.  &  A.  1723  Hift.  &  Thef.  18.
n.  7.


liCtter  LXVn. Articles  4,  5.  557

man,  from  the  oppreflive  tumour  of  a  large  ovary.  And  as,  from  thefe
obfervations,  it  is  confirm 'd,  by  diffedion,  that  the.  uterus  itfelf  defcends
within  the  vagina  ;  and  it  is  (hewn  what  caufes,  fometimes,  produce  this  de-
feent ;  fo  from  the  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Kakfchmied  (^) ;  whether
be  cut  out  a  large  fchirrhus  from  the  uterus,  or  a  fchirrhous  mola,  which,,
without  doubt,  coher'd  with  the  uterus  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  it  was  ne-
ceflary  to  cut  it  out  with  a  knife  ;  the  fiifpicion  may  certainly  be  encreas'd
of  the  deception  of  thofe  perfons,  who  have  believ'd,  in  times  of  lefs  light
and  knowledge  than  the  prefent,  that  the  uterus  had  been  amputated  by-
them.

4.  And  although,  where  I  was  fpeaking  of  the  hyfterical  affeflion  (/),  I  ex-
prefsly  profefs'd,  that  I  would  not  enter  into  any  altercation  with  thofe  perfons,
who  contend  that  this  ought  to  be  diftinguifh'd  from  the  hypochondriac
diforder ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  with  thofe  who  deny  it ;  yet  you  will  re-
member that,  in  general,  I  commended  thofe  who  refer  both  of  thefe  dif--
orders  to  the  paflion  of  the  nerves.

And  in  this  opinion  I  have  been  ftill  more  and  more  confirm'd,  very  lately,
by  the  authority  of  that  very  excellent,  and,  in  refpefl  of  me,  very  humane"
man,  count  Sylvefter  Ponticelli,  very  dcfervedly  Archiater  and  counfellor  at'
the  court  of  Parma  (k) ;  as  I  had  alfo  been  confirm'd  therein  by  other  ob-
fervations of  other  authors  ;  and  among  thefe  by  two  of  that  learned  man'
Anthony  Fracaffini  (/) :  and,  in  particular,  by  the  fecond,  which  is  join'd
with  the  difledilion  of  the  body.  And  when  you  read  what  circumftances-
happen'd  in  thofe  two  men  that  are  defcrib'd;  of  what  nature  thefe  circum-
ftances  were;  and  in  what  manner  they  happen'd  j  you  will  readily  conjedure  '
why  I  made  this  affertion.

5.  Now  let  us  go  on  to  fubjecls  on  which  we  fhall  dwell  fomewhat  longer^  ■
I  mean,  to  thofe  whjch  relate  to  the  impediments  to  venery,  and  fterility. As,
when  I  was  fpeaking  of  thefe  things  in  males,  we  confider'd  a  diforder  of.
the  urethra,  when  it  is  not  in  the  form  of  a  canal,  but  of  half  a  canal  only,
carried  over  the  inferior  furface  of  the  penis ;  we  alfo  made  mention  of  the  ■
obfervation  of  Salzmann  (»2),  of  the  urethra  being  open'd  in  the  manner  of
afemi-canal,  but  on  the  op  pofite  furface ;  that  is,  through  the  whole  dorfum
penis.

As  this  feat  of  the  urethra,  although  not  open,  Ruyfeh  faw,  not  twice
as  he  fays,  but  once  only,  if  you  confider  the  matter  attentively  (;?),  and  con-
feffes  "  that  he  had  never  obferv'd  it  before  ;"  I  do  not  doubt  but  it  will  be
doing  a  thing  agreeable  to  you,  if  I  communicate  another  example,  which
was  related  to  me  by  John  Gianella,  fon  of  Charles,  formerly  the  pro-
fefibr  here;  who  himfelf  examin'd  the  cafe  accurately,  and  is  to  be  de-
pended upon,  in'  his  narration  ;  as  well  on  account  of  his  ingenuity  and  fkill, .
as  his  diligence,  and  uprightnefs  of  manners :  having  been  formerly  my  au-

(k)  De  Mola  fdrrhofa  in  utero  inverfo  ex-  (/)  Natura  Morbi  Hyppchondr.  &c.  Invefti-

tirpata.  gat.  P.  3.  c.  i.

(«)  Epift.  45.  n.  17.  ('mj  Epift.  46.  n.  8.

(i^)  Tratt.  di  tre  Specie  di  Affez,  Ifter.  e  {»)  Thef.  Anat. 3,  n.  5.  not.  i^  &  2.  &

Jppchondr^  n.  22..  not.  i,  2,  3.

ditor,.


5"  5  8  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

ditor,  and  very  much  efteetn'd  by  tne ;  and  being  at  prefent  fettled  in  the
pia<Sice  of  phyfic  at  Stalimene  with  confiderable  reputation.

6.  There  was  a  man  in  the  country  of  Stalimene,  who,  although  he  was
faid  to  be  an  hermaphrodite,  was  neverthelels  call'd  before  a  magiftrate,  by
a  woman  who  affcrted  that  fhe  was  with  child  by  him,  and  without  defending
himfelf  fettled  money  upon  her.

This  man,  being  afterwards  about  to  feek  himfelf  a  wife,  and  being  re-
prefented  by  the  brother,  and  others,  as  not  being  at  all  fit  for  matrimony  j
and  the  phyficians  of  the  neighbouring  city  ;  who  were  men  of  eminence,
and  had  infpedted  his  genitals ;  having  confirm'd  this  reprefentation  -,  incens'd
with  the  ftiame  of  his  repulfe,  and  having  enter'd  into  a  law-luit  with  the
brother,  fell  into  fo  violent  a  difeafe,  from  thefe  feveral  vexations,  that  he
foon  ceas'd  to  live.

Leave  being  given  to  infpedl,  but  not  to  difieft,  the  Jjody,  the  fcrotum
and  the  teftes  appear'd  quite  in  a  natural  ftate  as  to  their  fituation,  their  mag-
nitude, and  form.

But  in  the  penis,  which,  in  other  refpefts,  was  not  fmall,  nor  feem'd  to
have  been  flaccid  in  the  living  body,  were  thefe  unufual  appearances  obferv'd  :
it  was  turn'd  upwards  towards  the  abdomen,  and  the  glans,  which  was  of  its
ufual  figure  and  magnitude,  was  entirely  unimpertorated  ;  and,  finally,  the
urethra  was  unufually  fhorr,  and  had  a  peculiar  fituation  and  ftrufture.

For  it  did  not  reach  quite  to  the  glans,  nor  did  it  lie  on  the  inferior  fur-
face  of  the  penis  -,  but  upon  the  dorfum  penis:  nor  was  it  a  perfeft  canal,
but  was  open  in  the  manner  of  a  femi  canal ;  fo  that  the  mouths  of  my  ca-
naliculi,  which  could  not  be  in  the  oppofite  paries,  as  they  are  wont  to  be,
immediately  became  obvious  to  the  eyes  in  that  which  was  not  wanting  -,  in
confequence  of  their  being  larger  than  they  are  in  other  perfons  :  and  upon
infpedfing  thefe  parts,  it  was  lels  to  be  wonder'd  at,  that  the  man  ftiould  have
been  formerly  infeded  with  a  virulent  gonorrhea,  as  they  faid  he  had  been.

Moreover,  in  the  beginning  of  that  femi-canal,  which  was  wider  in  the
other  part  of  it,  a  kind  of  vulva,  as  it  might  formerly  have  feem'd  to  the
mother,  and  other  good  women,  hung  over.

But  no  foramen  belong'd  to  this,  except  that  it  carried  the  urine  into  the
beginning  of  the  femi-canal ;  which  it  was  very  certain,  from  other  tefti-
monies,  had  been  wont  to  flow  out  from  the  femi-canal,  at  the  time  of  dif-
charging  it,  and  to  have  fome  part  of  it  fprinkled  upon  the  man :  but  we
had  no  information  of  what  happen'd  to  the  ejaculated  femen,  in  like  manner,
which  v/as  under  a  neceflity  of  paifing  through  that  fame  foramen,  into  the
femi  canal.

And,  indeed,  you  might  introduce  a  probe  into  the  foramen,  and  pafs  it
on  to  fome  cavity  or  other,  which  it  was  natural  enough  to  conjedure  be-
long'd to  the  bladder  ;  but  to  examine  into  the  grounds  of  our  conjedures,
and  other  circumftances,  by  diflfedlion,  v/e  were  not,  as  I  have  already  faid,
permitted.

7.  Gianella  not  only  related  what  he  himfelf  had  been  able  to  fee,  in  this
man,  without  diflTeftion  -,  but  he  alfo  told  me  of  a  fituation  of  the  pudendum
in  a  certain  woman,  which  is  ftill  more  furprifing:  he  himfelf,  however,  had
only  feen  the  reprefentation  of  it ;  but  he  had  heard  it  for  a  certain  and  at-

tefted


Letter  LXVir. Article  8.  9.  SS9

tefted  fe(fl,  from  the  inhabita.nts  of  Stalimene ;  and  this  was  the  tenor  of
his  HaFration.

About  forty  years  ago,  there  was  a  maid-fervant  in  the  houfe  of  the  Ve-
netian nobleman  who  was  governor  of  Stalimene,  that  was  married  to  one
of  her  fellow-fervants ;  but  fhe  had  that  part  wlich  we  have  mention'd
above,  not  in  the  place  where  it  ought  naturally  to  be,  but  above  the  navel,
and  ther^  very  narrow.

Being  impregnated,  however,  but  not  able  to  bring  forth  ;  fhe  fent  for  a
fuFgeoB,  to  enlarge  the  paffage  for  the  infant,  who  endeavour'd  to  extricate
himfcif  from  his  confinement,  in  vain  :  and  this  the  furgeon  did  in  fuch  a
manner,  that  the  feftion  being  produc'd  from  the  lower  part  of  that  aperture,
quite  to  the  os  pubis  ;  whether  it  was  entirely  from  want  of  fkiJl,  as  was
there  fuppos'd,  or  rather  becaufe  he  intended  to  make  uie  of  the  Cselarean
fefiioB,  as  it  is  cajl'd,  which  was  not  fufficiently  well  known  to  him:  it  is
obtain,  however,  that  the  infant  was  fav'd,  and  the  mother  at  length  per-
feiStly  cur'd  alio,  after  a  long  courfe  of  attendance.^

But  what  happen'd  to  her  afterwards,  is  not  known  at  Stalimene  ;  becaufe.
ihe  went  away  from  thence,  together  with  her  hufband,  as  neither  of  them
were  natives  of  the  place  :  but  it  is  fufEcient  for  our  prefcnt  purpole,  that
the  figure  ftill  remains  there,  which  was  left  by  the  phyfician  of  the  woman,
and  which  faithfully  reprefents  her  abdomen,  as  it  had  been  before  the  foSSon
was  made.

8.  Now  fince  I  have  begun  to  fpeak  of  women  that  are  unfit  for  matri-
mony, I  will  immediately  fubjoin  what  I  have  obferv'd  in  the  difleftion  of
two  of  them,  not  in  regard  to  the  fituation  indeed,  but  in  regard  to  the  oc-
clufjion  of  the  genitals.

9.  A  woman,  of  feventy  years,  of  age,  had  already  lain  a  long  time  in  the
hospital,  on  account  of  an  afthmatical  diforder ;  when  a  peripneumony  came
on,  and  carried  her^oS^:  this  happen'd  about  the  middle  of  March,  in  the
year  1752.

From  the  carcafe,  which  was  emaciated,  the  lungs  were  extra(Sted  by  our
Mediavia  ;  and  thefe  he  affirm'd  to  be  adlually  hard.

But  I  myfelf  afterwards  demonftrated  fome  parts,  to  the  ftudents,  from
this  body ;  and  particularly  in  the  head  and  the  genitals.  And  in  the  head
indeed,  I  found  nothing  that  was  preternatural ;  except  a  coalition  of  the
tendon  of  the  trochlearis  mufcle  of  one  of  the  eyes,  with  its  trochlea :  fo
that  the  mufcle  did  not  follow  the  fingers  of  the  perfon  who  drew  it  back.

But  in  the  parts  which  were  created  for  the  offices  of  generation,  I  found  a
much  greater  number  of  appearances,  quite  different  from  the  natural  ftate,
than  I-  could  have  wifli'd.  For,  in  the  firft  place,  one  of  the  Falloppian
tubes  had  coalefc'd  with  the  t^ftes ;  by  means  of  its  fimbriated  extremity  ;  in
fuch  a  manner,  that  the  orifice,  which  lies  betwixt  the  fimbrise,  did  not  ap-
pear :  and  the  other  had  that  orifice  in  an  impervious  ftate,  and  its  moft
neighbouring  part  immoveable,  by  reafon  of  the  ala  vefpertilionum,  which  j
not  being  pretty  wide  there,  as  it  generally  is,  but  very  narrow  j  conneded
the  tube  to  the  tefiis.

The  parietes  of  the  uterus  were  thick  :  and  the  feftion  thereof  fliow'd  a  fan-
guiferous  vefie!,  or  if  you  pleafe  a  finiis  rather,  comprehended  within  their

fubftance,


5^0 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

fubftance,  for  the  length  of  a  full  inch,  and  of  a  diameter  equal  to  a  line  and
a  half  of  the  inch  of  Bologna,  And  in  this  finus  we.faw  a  little  coagulated
blood.

The  internal  furface  of  the  uterus  was,  in  the  whole  of  ir,  very  flightly
moid  :  in  the  fundus,  and  in  the  lower  part  of  its  neck,  it  was  brown  :  and
in  the  other  part  of  a  white  colour :  and  why  I  mention  thefe  circumftances
here  you  will  fee  below.  The  fame  lower  part  of  the  cervix  was  narrower
than  it  ought  to  be  ; and  the  ofculum  uteri  very  fmall.

When  I  attempted  to  pafs  a  probe  down  through  this  orifice,  into  the
vaf^ina  ;  I  felt  an  obftacle  in  the  way,  which  prevented  it  from  going  down
below  the  orifice,  except  in  the  extreme  part  of  it.  I  was  therefore  oblig'd
to  introduce  the  probe  through  the  orifice  of  the  vagina.

But  as  it  was  not  poffible  to  pafs  it  up  above  the  length  of  a  fmall  inch  j  I
cut  into  the  vagina  deeply,  in  a  longitudinal  diredion  ;  that  if  there  were
any  cavity  it  might  come  into  fight.  As  I  fearch'd  in  vain  for  any  fuch  ap-
pearance by  thefe  means  -,  I  then  cut  into  the  vagina  tranfverfly  in  more  than
one  way  :  but  no  where  did  it  appear  hollow,  nor  did  even  any  traces  of  a
cavity  appear.

The  whole  of  the  vagina  ;  if  you  except  the  beginning  and  the  end  ;  was
perfeftly  like  .a  folid  cylinder :  being  made  up  of  a  fubftance  which  was
every  where  white,  and  hard  in  fome  degree  :  fo  that  it  was  not  poffible  to
diftinguifli  the  parietes  from  that  fubftance  which  was  included  therein  i
.they  being  continu'd  into  each  other,  and  perfedhly  fimilar.

Although  this  was  the  ftate  of  the  vagina,  it  feem'd,  neverthelefs,  to  have
loft  nothing  of  its  diameter,  when  look'd  upon  externally  ;  but  it  had  loft  fo
much  of  its  length,  that  although,  from  the  orifice  thereof  to  the  upper  part
of  the  uterus,  there  was  an  interval  of  eight  fingers  breadths  -,  the  vagina
was  equal  only  to  three,  and  the  five  others  belong'd  to  the  uterus :  yet  with
this  variation,  that  the  cervix  was  longer  than  the  fundus,  contrary  to  what
is  generally  the  cafe.

But  the  cervix  had  no  fafciculi,  nor  lines,  protuberating  internally.  And  it
was  in  vain  that,  in  this  part,  or  in  the  fundus,  or  in  the  extremities  of  the
vao-ina  where  it  was  not  ftopp'd  up,  any  traces  of  cicatrices  were  carefully
look'd  for  by  me  :  nor  were  they  to  be  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  ge-
nitals. The  inferior  part  of  the  vagina  was  without  any  traces  of  the  hymen,
lo.  Hov/ever,  I  believe  this  very  confiderable  coalition  of  the  vagina  to
have  taken  its  rife  from  erofion;  or  from  fome  laceration,  which  had  not
been  attended  to  at  all  in  a  curative  method,  or  at  leaft  only  with  great  ne-
gligence :  and  we  may  fuppofe  that  this  was  a  confequence  of  her  laft  child-
bearing  -,  for  the  woman  had  been  married,  and  had  not  loft  her  hufoand
many  years  before,  with  whom  fhe  could  not  have  liv'd  in  matrimony,  nay
could  not  have  barely  liv'd,  if  (he  had  been  in  this  ftate  of  occlufion  from
the  original  formation.

For  how  do  you  think  that  the  menftruous  blood,  which  we  have  no  reafon
to  fuppofe  did  not  flow  from  a  uterus  of  that  kind,  in  a  flourifhing  time  of
life,  could  be  retain'd  within  the  cavity  thereof,  without  the  deftrudlion  of
the  woman  ?  I,  at  leaft,  could  hardly  conceive,  that  it  would  happen  other-
wife  io  regard  to  the  fluid  wherewith  the  uterus  is  internally  moiften'd  in  a

natural


Letter  LXVII. Article  ii.  s^i

natural  ftate  ;  as  I  have  alfo  faid  that  I  faw  it  to  be  in  this  woman ;  if  it  were
not  carried  back  by  the  lymphseduds,  or  other  abforbent  veflcls.

But  can  you  imagine,  that  thcfe  veffels  are  equal  to  the  talk  of  carrying
back  the  blood  alfo,  and  in  that  quantity  wherein  we  know  that  it  flows  into
the  cavity  of  the  uterus  every  month  ?  And  nearly  the  fame  queftion  that  I
aflc  you  in  regard  to  this  woman,  I  afk  you  of  another  alio,  whofe  body  had
been  dilfefted  in  the  college  but  two  months  before,  and  had  afforded  the  fol-
lowing occafions  of  remark.

II.  An  old  woman  had  died,  in  the  hofpital,  of  no  other  diforder,  to  all
outward  appearance,  but  of  a  decay  of  natural  ftrength  :  nor  was  this  to  be
wonder'd  at  in  a  perfon  who  was  more  than  fourfcore  and  twelve  years  of  age.

The  body  was  very  lank  and  contracted.  From  the  abdomen  two  hernia:
were  prominent;  the  one  in  the  middle  of  the  hypogaftrium,  which  was  equal
in  fize  to  the  head  of  a  child,  and  the  other  at  the  right  fide  of  the  former.
In  both  of  thefe  hernias  was  a  part  of  the  inteftinum  ileum  ;  but  in  the  leflfer
was  a  part  of  the  omentum  alfo  :  which,  except  that  they  adher'd  to  the  her-
nial facs,  had  no  mark  of  difeafe  befide.

The  llomach  feem'd  to  be  lower  than  it  naturally  is ;  which  it  might  be,
either  becaufe  it  had  been  drawn  downwards,  by  that  part  of  the  omentum
which  was  included  in  the  hernise,  as  we  have  faid  ;  or  rather  from  other
caufes,  and  amongfl:  thefe  from  a  certain  gland,  as  it  feem'd  at  firft  to  be,
which  was  form'd  in  the  omentum,  near  to  the  fpleen,  and  was  of  the  fize
and  fliape  of  a  very  large  pigeon's  egg.

When  I  infpeded  this  gland  a  little  more  attentively,  I  fufpefted  it  to  be
another  fpleen  ;  and  this  fufpicion  was  very  clearly  confirm'd  by  difleding,
and  comparing  it  with  the  neighbouring  fpleen  :  for  the  ftrufture  and  fub-
ftance  of  the  two  were  exadly  the  fame.

l"o  the  leflfer  fpleeii  went  fome  pretty  thick  fanguiferous  veffels  that  be-
long'd  to  the  omentum.  The  artery  of  the  larger  fpleen  was  large  ;  but
tortuous  in  the  flightef!:  degree  only  :  nor  had  it  any  thing  hard  In  fuch  an  ad-
vanc'd  age  -,  nor  had  any  other  of  all  the  arteries  I  examin'd,  any  thing  bony
in  them  ;  if  you  except  the  iliacs  ;  nor  yet  any  of  the  valves  of  the  heart,  not-
withftanding  thofe  that  lie  at  the  beginning  of  the  aorta,  were  very  much
contracted, and  in  fome  meafure  difeas'd.

Yet  the  whole  portion  of  that  trunk,  which  lies  in  the  belly,  was  difpos'd
to  odlfication  ;  as  it  was  of  a  furface  almoft  every  where  diftinguifli'd  with
white  fpots,  and  with  certain  inequalities,  and  that  internally.  And  the  fame
trunk  had  this  unufual  appearance  befides,  that  immediately  below  the  emul-
gents,  it  was  inflefted  to  the  extent  of  two  or  three  inches  :  which  inflexion
could  not  be  imputed  to  the  vertebras,  as  thefe  I  fav/  to  be  in  a  proper  fifua-
tion,  and  in  a  natural  ftate.

But  to  return  to  the  vifcera ;  the  glands  of  the  mefentery  were  neither
fmall,  nor  hard,  nor  yet  of  a  black  colour,  or  at  leaft  externally,  but  rather
fomewhat  red  :  the  appendicula  vermiformis  was  fliorter  than  ufual  by  the
extent  of  two  inches,  very  flender,  and  intirely  folid  ;  fo  that  it  feem'd  never
to  have  had  any  cavity  :  and  you  would  certainly  have  been  in  doubt  whether
the  liver  had  always  been  found.

Vol.  in.  4  C  For


562 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books. .

For  the  right  lobe  •,  in  that  part  where  it  was  now  very  near  to  the  left,
and  from  whence  it  continu'd  to  extend  itfelf  downwards,  contrary  tocuftom  ;
fi:iow'd  the  convex  furface  to  be  not  fmooth,  and  of  a  white  colour:  and,  if
you  cut  into  this  part  to  fome  confiderable  depth,  you  found  the  fame  colour ;
and  the  fubftance  thereof  approach'd  to  the  nature  of  a  ligament.

h  now  remains  to  fpeak  of  the  genitals,  as  I  have  promis'd  you  to  do.  Both
of  the  tubes  were  lb  grown  into  one  fubftance  with  their  ovaries,  that  the
fimbrias  of  neither  of  them,  and  ftill  lefs  the  orifice  which  lies  betwixt  thole
fimbria,  appear'd. And  within  the  ovaria  were  hydatids.

The  fundus  uteri  being  cut  open ;  in  the  middle  of  its  pofterior  furface
was  ken  a  pretty  high  and  fomewhat  round  excrefcence,  which  at  firftfeem'd
to  be  made  up  of  veficles  as  it  were  ;  but  when  cut  into  was  found  to  confift
of  thefolid  fubftance  of  the  uterus.

As  T  attempted  to  pafs  a  probe  from  the  fundus  into  the  vagina,  but  was
not  able  -,  I  cut  open  the  cervix,  and  found  that  the  parietes  of  the  lower
part  of  it  had  coalefc'd  together,  for  a  very  fhort  fpace;  and  even  that  the
parietes  of  the  ofculum  uteri  itfelf  had  fuffer'd  a  coalition,  in  fuch  a  manner,
that  no  paflage  remain'd  ;  unlefs  perhaps  the  moft  ftreight  and  confin'd.

22.  That  thefe  coalitions  might  be  brought  on  by  fome  laceration  left  after
a  difficult  birth,  as  I  have  faid  (0),  is  perhaps  confirm'd  from  hence ;  that,
in  both  the  women,  there  was  found  to  be  an  occlufion  of  the  tubes,  and  a
concretion  thereof  with  the  ovaries.

For  Abraham  Cypprianus  (p)  obferv'd  the  tubes  to  have  been  in  the  fame
llate ;  as  he  alfo  fhows  by  the  reprefentation  which  he  has  added  (q) ;  in  a  wo-
man, who,  from  the  difficulty  of  her  fourth  child-bearing,  and  ftill  more  from
the  moft  violent  dragging  of  an  unflcilful  midwife,  having  been  thrown  into
a  very  violent  inflammation  of  the  uterus,  and  of  the  parts  annex'd  thereto ;
as  was  fhown  by  the  very  fevere  pains  of  her  belly,  and  particularly  by  the
pains  about  the  loins  ;  and  at  length  efcap'd  from  thence  with  difficulty  -,  in-
ftead  of  being  a  child-bearing  woman,  became  barren  ;  and  continu'd  fo
as  long  as  Ihe  liv'd,  and  (he  liv'd  ten  years.

But  thefe  things  happen  to  women  ;  and  I  wifh  I  could  fay  to  a  few  only ;
from  the  farne  or  fome  other  fimilar  caufe  ;  and  make  thofe  barren,  who  had,
of  themfelves,  been  fertile,  and  would  continue  to  be  fo.

Yet  it  is  certain  that  fome  have  occlufions,  or  obftruftions,  of  the-pafiages
neceffary  for  generation  ;  even  from  their  original  conformation  ;  and  not  on-
ly of  the  hidden  parts,  but  of  thofe,  likewife,  .which  are  obvious  to  the  fight
or  to  the  touch  •,  as  I  have  taken  notice  on  a  former  occafion  (r).

And  you  will  have  a  double  example  of  this  kind  alfo  from  Boehmerus  (s):
Who  not  only  diffeded  a  virgin,  that  was  entirely  without  any  perforation  in
the  natural  parts ;  at  the  fame  time  that  no  traces  of  a  cicatrix  appear'd ,
but  alfo  infpefted  the  body  of  a  woman,  with  whom  her  hufband  had  never
been  able  to  perform  the  conjugal  duties,  and  found  the  orifice  of  the  genital
open  indeed  ;  but  in  the  place  of  one  vagina,  found  two,  leading  to  a  bipar-

(0)  n.  10.  (>■)  Epift.  46.  n.  1 1.  &  feqq.

Ip)  Epift.  ad  Millington.-  W  Vid.  Aft. Erud, Upf. A. 1758. M.

Iq)  Tab.  2.  Januar.

tite


Letter  LXVIL Articles  13, 14.  563

tite  uterus;  as  in  cows  and  fheep  ;  and  thefe,  as  far  as  we  can  fuppofe,  fo
narrow  that  neither  of  them  was  capable  of  receiving  a  man.

But, of  thefe  occlufions,  or  impediments;  which  are  not  occult,  but  ob-
vious, either  to  the  fight  or  to  the  touch  ;  there  are  fome  that  may  be  remov'd,
and  fome  that  can  not.

For  thofe  can  eafily  be  remov'd,  that  confift  in  the  membrane  which  is
ftretch'd  over  the  orifice  of  the  vagina ;  or  in  bands,  or  fillets  as  it  were,  of
the  fame  kind  ;  by  one  of  which  I  found  the  parietes  of  the  vagina  tied  to-
gether in  a  young  virgin,  as  I  have  related  to  you  (/).  But  thole  that  are  of
the  fame  kind  with  the  impediments  juft  now  referr'd  to,  by  me,  from
Boehmerus,  and  found  in  that  married  woman,  who  can  remove  ?

13.  And  that  the  caufe  of  an  accidental  coalition,  or  occkifion,  may  not
only  be  from  laceration,  or  from  inflammation,  but  from  erofion  alfo,  has
been  acknowledg'd  by  me,  both  above  and  elfewhere  ;  whether  fuch  an  ero-
fion be  -the  confequence  of  the  lues  venerea,  or  of  an  uterine  fluor.

For  from  the  latter  of  thefe  diforders  having  preceded,  even  in  the  moft
pure  and  untouch'd  virgins ;  fuch  as  fhe  was  whofe  difl"e(5lion  I  have  given
you  the  relation  of,  in  the  forty-fixth  letter  (a) ;  I  believe  we  may,  if  we
choofe  it,  account  for,  with  fome  pretence  to  plaufibility,  that  whitifh  little
membrane,  which  fhuc  up  the  lower  part  of  the  cervix,  near  to  the  ofculum
uteri.

But  this  fiuor  muft  have  been  of  the  more  acrid  kind  ;  and  not  of  that
more  frequent  fpecies,  whereof  I  have  fentyou  many  of  my  oblervations,  in
the  forty-feventh  letter.  To  thefe  you  may  add  that  which  I  now  fubjoin  ;
although,  by  reafon  of  other  things,  of  greater  moment,  which  it  contains,
I  Qiould  rather  have  fent  it  to  you  at  the  time  in  which  I  wrote  the  fixtieth,
fixtyfecond,  and  fixty-third  letters,  if  I  had  made  it  before  that  time.

14,  A  woman,  about  fixty  years  of  age,  had  been  carried  off  by  an  apo-
plexy, within  four  days  and  no  more.  Three  of  thefe  days  were  pafs'd  at  her
own  home  :  but  on  the  fourth  fhe  was  at  length  brought  into  the  hofpital ;  at
which  time  Ihe  was  fo  opprefs'd  by  her  difeafe,  in  the  whole  of  her  body,  that
we  had  no  mark  whereby  to  judge  of  a  very  violent  paralyfis  being  in  the;
left  fide,  but  the  vencefeflion  which  had  been  perform'd  at  home  on  the
right  fide.

1  was  at  this  time  teaching  anatomy  in  the  college  ;  it  being  that  very  cold
feafon,  which  began  before  the  latter  end  of  January,  in  the  year  1758,  and
continu'd  to  be  very  troublefome  to  every  one  :  and  this  body  was  brought
to  the  college,  where  the  greater  number  of  its  parts  were  differed,  but  par-
ticularly the  brain  ;  and  this  about  the  eighth  day  after  death,  when  that  ce-
lebrated manCaldani;  who,  in  confequence  of  his  great  partialicy  to  me,
would  coOiC  hither  from  Bologna,  to  attend  all  the  public  exercitations  of
that  year  ;  was  prefent.

The  fcuU  adher'd  fo  clofely  to  the  dura  mater,  that  it  could  not  be  pull'd
away  without  the  moft  ftrong  exertions.  The  vciTels  that  ran  through  the  pia
mater^were  diftended  with  blood.  The  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum  was  without
moifture,  and  hard  ;  I  fuppofejl^from  the  violence  of  the  extreme  cold,  where-

(0  Epia.  50.  n.  51.  &  feq. ,  {u)  n.  17.

4  C  2  by


564 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

by  the  bloody  ferum,  which  we  found,  in  great  quantity,  in  the  left  lateral
ventricle,  had  been  frozen,  and  concreted  into  a  great  number  of  lamellEe.

Moreover,  although  in  the  pofterior  extremity  of  the  fame  ventricle,  there
was  a  little  black,  coagulated,  and  pretty  hard  blood  ;  and  the  bails  of  the
ventricle  feem'd  there  to  have  fubfided  into  a  kind  of  a  cavity,  which  con-
tain'd  that  blood  ;  yetfince  fo  great  a  quantity  of  ferum,  as  that  I  have  men-
tion'd,  could  r.ot  have  come  from  fo  fmall  a  quantity  of  blood  ;  I  conjeclur'd
that  both  this  blood,  and  the  greateft  part  of  that  ferum,  had  pafs'd  through
a  rupture  of  the  feptum  lucidum,  from  the  right  ventricle  into  the  left.

Nor  was  1  deceiv'd  in  my  conjecture.  For,  upon  opening  the  right  ven-
tricle, there  was  no  ferum  to  be  feen  -,  unleis  that  there  might  be  a  little
perhaps  in  the  anterior  extremity  :  but  there  was  fo  great  a  quantity  of
blood,  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  defcrib'd  in  the  left  ventricle;  being
black,  and  coagulated,  and  even  having  got  that  degree  of  hardnels  which
is  naturally  brought  on  by  freezing  ;  that  we  faw  the  whole  of  this  ven-
tricle to  be  very  much  dilated  :  the  fubflance  of  the  cerebrum  being  very
greatly  extenuated,  not  only  at  the  bafis,  but  alfo  in  the  external  fide.

Yet  no  difeafe  appear'd  in  the  cerebellum  ;  none  on  the  external  furface
of  the  medulla  oblongata.  But  what  difeafe  there  was  on  the  internal  furface
of  the  bafis  of  the  ventricles ;  efpecially  of  the  right ;  how  great  this  was,
or  of  what  nature,  and  in  what  parts  thereof  it  chiefly  was  •,  I  could  not
very  well  difcern  :  and  that  on  account  of  the  great  efFufion  of  blood,  as  well
as  from  the  efFefts  of  the  froft  in  particular.

The  thorax,  which  had  been  open'd  before,  fliow'd  two  foramina  in  the
diaphragm,  as  I  had  before  feen,  infl:ead  of  one  through  which  the  vena  cava
is  carried.  And  in  the  heart,  which  was  fat  -,  as  the  reft  of  the  body  alfo
was  in  a  confiderable  degree  ;  I  obferv'd  little  bony  fcales  about  the  fub-
jefted  valves  of  the  aorta,  and  on  the  neighbouring  internal  furface  of  the
fame  artery  :  and  not  there  only,  but  up  and  down  in  the  remaining  trunic
likewife-,  and  even  in  the  part  where  the  curvature  of  this  veflel  terminated  ;
which  part,  as  well  as  the  curvature  itfelf,  was  dilated  •,  was  feen  moreover
a  kind  of  inequality  of  furface,  and  a  colour  different  from  the  natural
colour.

But  in  diffeding  the  belly,  and  examining  its  parts,  we  met  both  with
bony  lamellse,  and  with  greater  inequalities  of  furface  :  and  indeed  here  and
there  were  appearances  of  bloody  erofions  ;  all  which  appearances  we  alfo
faw  to  be  propagated  through  the  iliac  arteries.

The  crural  arteries  likewife,  where  they  defcended  through  the  thighs,
were  very  rigid  ;  and,  in  the  hollow  of  the  ham,  as  I  at  leaft  obferv'd  on
one  fide,  bony.

And  certainly  little  bony  fcales  were  not  wanting  in  one  of  the  carotids :
and  in  the  fpermatics  themfelves  was  a  hardnefs,  which  Ihow'd  offification  to
have  been  begun.

Finally,  that  the  woman  had  labour'd  under  a  uterine  fluor ;  from  whence
I  took  occafion  to  fend  this  obfervation  to  you  in  the  prefent  letter ;  was
fliown  by  a  great  quantity  of  matter,  v/hich  was  thick,  and  of  a  white  co-
lour inclining  to  cineritious;  and  with  vv^hich  the  cervix  uteri,  and  the  neigh-
bouring part  of  the  vagina,  wer€  daub'd  over.

And.


Letter  LXVII. Article  i  j" .  j  6  j"

And  as  I  faw  the  lower  part  of  this  laft-mention'd  cavity,  and  the  orifice  it-
felf;  which  was  very  large;  and  the  lower  parts  thereabout,  to  be  very
red  ;  going  on  from  thence,  therefore,  with  the  fcalpel,  to  the  upper  parts,  I
not  only  faw  the  fame  kind  of  matter,  but  found  the  ofculum  uteri,  and  the
cervix,  both  of  tbem  to  be  very  wide  -,  and  that  in  an  equal  degree.

And  through  the  internal  furface  of  the  fundus  uteri,  which  was  in  other
refpefts  fmooth,  I  faw  fanguiferous  vefTels ;  in  a  great  number,  and  thick,
and  difpos'd  in  no  certain  order ;  v/hich,  by  prefling  the  fingers  upon  them
from  below,  were  tumid  with  blood  that  feem'd  ready  to  burft  forth ;
juft  as  I  have  been  wont  to  fee  it  in  thofe  women  who  had  lately  men-
ftruated.

15.  1  imagine  he  would  not  fee  a  ftate  of  the  vafcular  fyftem  different
from  the  prefent,  who  fhould  infpe6t  the  internal  membrane  of  the  noftrils,
when  affefted  with  a  coryza  ;  for  that  a  uterine  fluor  of  fuch  a  kind,  has  an'
affinity  to  this  diforder,  I  have  already  fufficiently  fhown,  on  a  former  occa-
fion  {x),  that  the  ancient  phyficians,  not  to  mention  the  more  modern,  have-
allow'd.

And  I  have  faid  enough  on  the  other  circumftances ;  which  are  obferv'd  in
this  drffeftion  alfo  ;  I  mean,  thofe  that  relate  to  the  caufes  of  the  fanguineous
apoplexy  and  hemiplegia.

And  indeed,  in  another  place  (^),  you  are  told,  what  effefts  of  a  very
cold  feafon  have  been  found,  by  me,  within  the  cranium  :  and  after  you
have  compar'd  therewith  thefe  others  that  have  been  obferv'd  in  a  fomewhat
lefs  cold  feafon,  and  both  of  them,  with  the  difledion,  which  was  made  by
the  celebrated  Leipfic  profefTor  Quelmalzius  (2),  upon  the  body  of  an  old
man,  who  was  kill'd  with  cold,  when  he  was  upon  a  journey,  in  the  month
of  January  ;  you  will  be  furpriz'd,  that  in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain  of  this-
man,  there  was  only^  "  vifcid  "  lymph,  and  not  a  lymph  coagulated  by
the  froft :  for  although  the  body  had  been  previoufly  kept  warm  in  a  gentle
heat  ;  yet  as  this  had  been  done  ftill  more  in  that  of  ours,  and  the  ferum-
which  had  concreted,  in  the  fame  ventricles,  was  not  for  that  reafon  un-
frozen ;  and  indeed  as  that  old  man  diffefted  by  us,  or  this  old  woman,  had
not  been  opprefs'd  by  the  effedts  of  cold  in  journeying,  but  had  both  of
them  died  in  their  beds  in  the  hofpital ;  fo  I  muft  fuppofe,  either  that  the
cold  which  kill'd  the  old  man  of  Quelmalzius,  was  not  fo  fevere  as  our  cold
then  was  ;  or  rather  that  the  body  had  been  brought  into  a  warm  place  much
fooner  than  our  bodies,  which  had  lain  in  the  open  air.

But  as  to  what  relates  to  the  diforders  of  the  arteries,  obferv'd  in  the  fame
old  woman  ;  you  may  remember  how  many  times  I  have  feen  the  fame  in
other  bodies ;  and  how  many  difadvantages,  to  the  blood's  circulation,  j
have  accounted  for  from  thence  {a).  And  as  thefe  diforders  were  here  more
in  the  inferior  arteries,  than  in  the  fuperior ;  and  the  blood  could  for  that
reafon  not  be  mov'd  fo  eafily  through  them  ;  I  Ihould  believe  that  it  was

{x)  Epift.  47.11.  II.  (z)  Progr. quo frigoris acrioris in corp,

(jj  Epift.  13.13.  15.  .  hum.  effeftus  expend.

(a)  Epift.  26.  n.  32.

drive-a-'


^66 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

driven  in  fo  much  the  greater  quantity,  into  the  upper  veflels,  and  extrava-
iared  within  the  cerebrum  of  the  old  woman.

But  when  you  oblerve,  that,  in  proportion  as  the  arteries  went  down  far-
ther from  the  heart,  they  had  the  more  large  bony  lamellas  ;  do  not  be  im-
mediately of  opinion  with  thofe,  who  objeft  this  to  Boerhaave,  when  he  de-
duces the  ofiification  of  the  arteries  from  the  impulfe  of  the  blood,  where  it
is  the  ftrongeft ;  that  is,  where  it  is  neareft  to  the  heart  •,  as  you  may
call  to  mind  what  I  have  laid,  in  more  than  one  place,  may  be  replied
thereto.

For  it  is  more  than  once  that  I  have  feen  the  fame  thing  as  in  this  woman  ;
although  never  in  fo  many  arteries,  as  it  has  happen'd  to  the  celebrated
Buchwald  (b)  to  fee.  Who  having  found  the  great  artery,  in  a  decrepit  old
man,  from  the  heart  to  almoft  the  whole  of  the  curvature,  not  much  unlike
a  cartilage  only-,  and  from  thence  become  bony,  together  with  its  branches,
through  almoft  the  whole  of  the  body ;  obferv'd  this  in  particular,  "  that
"  the  arteries  of  the  extremities  were  the  more  offified,  the  nearer  they  came
"  to  the  hands  or  the  feet,"

And  I  wifh  that  he  had  been  able  to  add  the  fymptoms  which  this  old
man  fuffer'd  :  and  the  kind  of  death  vv^hereby  he  was  carried  offj  as  well  as
have  added,  in  the  Etiology  which  he  has  adjoin'd  (c),  fome  figns  of  con-
ilitutlons  of  this  kind  from  conjecture  merely.

1 6.  Now  it  would  be  neceffary  to  return,  from  the  confideration  of  thefe
diforders  common  to  both  fexes,  to  thofe  that  are  peculiar  to  women  ■,  if  I
had  no:  written  fo  much  upon  thefe  fubjefts,  in  that  very  long  and  forty-
eighth  letter,  that  I  have  but  juft  thefe  few  things  to  add,  in  regard  either
to  unfuccefsful  utero-geftation,  or  unhappy  birch  -,  and  this  either  as  it  re-
lates to  the  mother,  or  the  foetus.

And  in  regard  to  utero-geftation  ;  to  omit  that  I  am  not  difpleas'd  with
myfelf  on  account  of  thole  things  which  I  hinted  on  the  force  of  the  mother's
imagination  upon  the  foetus,  after  having  lie  on  fome  things  which  have  been
publifh'd  by  the  moft  learned  men,  and  which  fhow  nothing  more  than  that
it  is  not  poffible,  even  for  the  moft  ingenious  men,  to  avoid  the  difficulties
which  arife  from  a  different  mode  of  explication,  in  fome  examples  that  can
neither  be  denied,  nor  underftood  :  and  indeed  that  they  evidently  throw
themfelves  into  greater  difficulties,  if  you  confider  what  muft  neceflarily
be  the  cpnfequence  of  the  explications  propos'd ;  to  omit  thefe  things  there-
fore, among  the  obfervations  of  Boehmerus ;  which  I  have  frequently,  and
with  great  good  reafon,  recommended  {d)  ;  befides  others  that  relate  to  the
hypochondriac  or  hyfterical  affection,  to  the  dropfy  of  the  ovarium,  to  an
infant  who  was  born  with  the  hydro-rachitis,  I  would  have  you  read  one  which
has  a  peculiar  reference  to  the  prefent  occafion,  and  therewith  increafe  the
number  of  fcetuffes  found  in  the  Falloppian  tube.

And  the  celebrated  Kierlingius  {e)  has  produc'd  two  obfervations  ;  of  un-
fuccefsful labour,  or  of  the  time  fucceeding  to  child-birth  being  fatal ;  which,

{b)  Obf.  Quadrig.  Obf.  3.  («)  Differt.  de  Utero  poft.  partum  inflamm.

[c)  §.  13.  §.  14.  &6.

{d)  Vid.  Aa.  Lipf.  A.  1758,  M.  Januar.


Letter  LXVII. Article  17.  ^6-j

as  well  as  the  former,  I  would  have  you  add  to  theSepulchretum.  The  one
is  of  a  lying-in  woman,  who  died  of  an  inflammation  of  the  uterus,  nine
days  after  delivery.  And  the  other  of  a  woman  in  labour,  of  two  infants,
who  loft  her  own  life,  together  with  the  lives  of  her  children,

I,  however,  happen  to  have  only  one  relative  to  this  fubjeft:  and  this,
fuch  as  it  is,  I  will  defcribe  to  you  the  more  willingly,  becaufe  1  have  here-
tofore faid  (/),  that  1  lliould  probably  give  you  the  relation.

17.  A  foetus,  of  the  female  fex,  was  brought,  from  fome  other  place,
into  the  hofpital,  by  the  ftudents,  that  I  might  difleft  it ;  and  this  was  about
the  middle  of  March,  in  the  year  1751.

The  perfon  who  had  given  it  to  them,  faid  that  it  was  a  foetus  of  nine
months ;  that  it  had  liv'd  two  hours ;  and  that  the  death  of  its  mother  had
fucceeded,  foon  after,  to  that  of  itfelf:  that  what  kind  of  difeafe  the  mother
had  been  carried  off  by,  was  unknown  to  him  ;  but  that  thefe  things  had
certainly  happen'd  two  days  before.

Thefe  laft  circumftances  might  poffibly  be  true  :  but  whether  the  former
were  true  likewife,  I  doubted  very  much  ;  for  the  fize  of  the  whole  body
fhow'd  the  fcEtus  not  to  have  been  fo  far  advanc'd  -,  and  the  funiculus  umbili-
calis  not  being  tied,  lliow'd  that  it  had  not  liv'd  as  was  faid  ;  and  what  we
found  upon  diffeftion  feem'd  moreover  to  confirm  my  fufpicidns.

For  when  the  thorax  was  open'd,  I  found  the  lungs  to  be  of  a  red  colour,
degenerating  into  a  dark  brown;  and  I  faw  that  parts  of  thefe  lungs,  when
laid  upon  water,  fell  immediately  to  the  bottom.

Upon  opening  the  abdomen,  a  very  great  quantity  of  blood  was  found  ex-
travafated  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly.  Upon  exhaufting,  and  wiping  away
of  which,  no  inteftine  appear'd  ;  if  you  except  the  re£tum,  and  fome  part
of  the  colon,  continued  "therefrom  ;  but  neither  the  mcfentery,  nor  the  greater
part  of  the  mefocolon,  were  any  where  to  be  feen.

Then  obferving  tlie  whole  convex  furface  of  the  liver  to  adhere  to  the  dia-
phragm, and  to  the  neighbouring  mufcles  of  the  abdomen"-,  and  the  other
furface,  or  the  concave,  to  be  not  a  little  unequal;  and  gueffing  how  the
cafe  was  ;  I  found  all  the  inreftines,  and  mefentery,  which  feem'd  to  be  de-
ficient, confin'd  under  this  hollow  furface,  and  cover'd  over  with  a  pretty
thick  membrane,  which  was  of  a  tenacious  nature,  and  rough  with  fome
fmall  fandy  particles  as  it  were ;  being  alfo  connedled  with  that  furface  of
the  liver.

The  fame  furface  being  eroded,  or  lacerated,  for  a  very  confiderable  fpace,.
ihow'd  from  whence  fo  great  a  quantity  of  blood  had  flow'd  into  the  belly.
And  neverthelefs,  from  the  vena  cava,  which  was  foon  after  cut  into  at  the
diaphragm,  a  great  quantity  of  blood  flow'd  forth:  and  this  was  black;  of
which  kind  that  effxis'd  in  the  belly,  and  that  found  in  the  velTels  of  the  whole
body,  was  alfo.

I  omit  other  things  which  do  not  belong  to  the  prefent  place,  as  they  were
demonftrated,  by  me,  to  be  in  a  natural  Ifate  in  this  foetus :  this  one  thing,
however,  I  will  mention,  that  although  there  was  meconium  in  fome  of  the
upper  inteftines,  there  was  none  in  the  redtum  :  which  circumftance,  and  the

(f)  Epift.  39.  n.  28.

6  fmallnefs


5  68  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

fmallnefs  of  the  vifcera,  that  correfponded,  in  fize,  to  the  other  part  of  the
body,  confirm'd  that  the  foetus  had  not  arriv'd  to  the  age  of  nine  months;
and  efpeciaJly  as  thefe  circuniftances  were  join'd  with  a  very  great  foftnefs  of
the  parts,  which  was  very  remarliable  in  the  brain,  as  well  as  elfewhere.

For  when  I  had  open'd  the  cranium,  we  faw  thefubftance  of  the  cerebrum
and  cerebellum  flowing  abroad,  almoft  in  the  manner  of  a  kind  of  jelly.

However,  there  was  no  ftrong  fmell  in  the  whole  body,  nor  was  any  mark
of  putrefaclion  obferv'd.  And  all  the  membranes  gave  an  immoderate  re-
fifl:ance ;  if  you  attempted  to  tear  them  afunder  with  the  knife,  or  with  your
fingers.

1 8.  Any  one  who  knew,  for  a  certainty,  what  fymptoms  had  preceded  or
accompanied  delivery  ;  or  had  even  examin'd  the  placenta  ;  might  perhaps
conjefture  the  caufe  of  thofe  things  which  we  faw  in  this  foetus  :  or  if  not  of
all,  at  leaft  of  fome  ;  and  particularly  of  the  efFufion  of  blood.  And  you
will  call  to  mind,  that  mention  of  this  efFufion  of  blood,  in  a  foetus,  has  been
made  formerly  (g)  to  you  by  me  ;  and  that  from  a  laceration  of  the  liver  alfo.
But  we  muft  now  pafs  on  to  a  far  different  kind  of  diforders. Farewel.


LETTER  the SIXTY-EIGHTH

Contains  fome  Things  in  regard  to  Fevers,  but  flill  more
in  regard  to  Tumours.


FTER  the  forty  eighth  letter ;  which  was  the  lafl:  upon  the  difeafes

of  the  belly  ;  the  fubjefts  of  the  others,  that  .1  fent  to  you  afterwards,

related  to  thofe  difeafes,  which  either  exift  in  the  body  univerfally  -,  or  if  in
parts,  which  require  a  furgeon  more  than  a  clinical  praditioner.  As  I
now,  therefore,  intend  to  preferve  the  order  which  I  then  follow'd,  I  fhall
begin  with  the  confideration  of  fevers,  and  tumours ;  treating  of  the  firft  in  a
very  few  words,  and  of  the  fecond  fomewhat  more  diff"ufely.

2.  In  regard  to  fevers,  as  they  injure,  and  become  fat^iU  chiefly  by  means
of  another  diforder  which  is  joined  to  them  •,  and  even  frequently  arife  there-
from, and  are  fomented  thereby  ;  you  readily  perceive  of  how  much  impor-
tance it  is  to  know  the  nature,  and  feat,  of  this  difeafe,  which  is  joined
thereto.

However,  as  difleftion  fometimes  fets  both  of  thefe  clearly  before  our
eyes ;  as,  for  inftance,  an  inflammation  of  the  vifcera,  or  fome  ulcer  j  fo  very

{g)  Epift.  48.  n.  19.  &  feqq.

frequently


Letter  LXVIII. Article  2.  569

frequently  it  fhows  neither  of  them  ;  of  which  cafe  there  are  obvious  examples :
and  fome  of  thefe  we  have  even  produc'd  from  the  papers  of  Valfalva,  when
writing  to  you  [a)  on  the  fubjeft  of  fevers.

And  this  is  the  more  to  be  lamented,  when  it  happens  in  thofe  fevers ;  as
ic  frequently  does  ;  which  are  not  only  mod  pernicious,  but  attack  in  greater
numbers  at  the  fame  time ;  I  mean  malignant  and  epidemical  fevers.  For  it
is  not  then  of  io  much  importance  tocounceradl  the  fever,  as  it  is  to  counteradt
that  malignant  quality  which  is  join'd  thereto;  and  which  is,  to  the  great
increafe  of  the  difficulty  in  fuch  a  counter-aftion,  almoft  peculiar  in  every
conftitution.

And  certainly,  unlefs  you  endeavour  to  overcome  this  malignant  quality
for  the  moft  part ;  you  do  the  fame  thing,  as  if  you  fliould  endeavour  to
overcome  a  fever,  which  had  its  origin  from  the  bite  of  a  viper,  by  antife-
brile remedies ;  without  paying  any  regard  to  the  poifon  infus'd  ;  to  make
ufe  of  the  fame  example,  which  I  perceive,  from  the  Hiftory  of  the  Royal
Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  {i>),  the  celebrated  Du  Quefnay  has  made  ufe
of  alfo.

For  which  reafon,  we  ought  the  more  to  give  thanks  to  the  providence  af
Almighty  God,  that,  in  fovery  great  an  obfcurity,  and  variety,  of  cafes,  it
has  favour'd  us  with  a  remedy,  the  powers  of  which,  in  overcoming  fome
dangerous  fevers  at  leaft,  is  prov'd  by  experience ;  though  the  method  in
which  it  afts  is  fomewhat  obfcure  ;  I  mean  the  Peruvian  bark.

For  this  remedy,  although  fome  of  thefe  fevers  feem  to  have  one  kind  of
malignity  join'd  with  them,  and  fome  another  j  as  appears  from  the  external
caufes  and  fymptoms ;  can  neverthelefs  counteradt  the  one  and  the  other
equally-,  and  fubdue  their  malignity  ;  as  I  have  learn'd  both  from  my  own
obfervations,  and  thofe  of  others.

Nor  was  the  matter  which  has  begun  to  be  thrown  out  of  the  blood,  either
upon  the  fliin,  or  about  the  joints,  by  any  means  repugnant  to  the  falubrious
efficacy  of  the  bark ;  not  even  when  repell'd  inwards,  from  thence,  by  the
force  of  the  external  cold.

For  a  very  eminent  cardinal  was  cur'd  by  the  bark  of  a  malignant  fever,
into  which  he  had  fallen,  in  confequence  of  fuch  a  repulfion  ;  as  I  have  writ-
ten to  you  on  a  former  occafion  (c)  :  and  that  very  famous  man  Haller  was
alfo  cur'd  thereby  of  a  very  violent  fever,  which  had  come  upon  him  in
confequence  of  a  gout  being  thus  repell'd;  and  which  was  attended  with  an
eryfipclas  of  the  face  likewife  :  and  this  he  relates  in  the  remarks  that  he  has
made  upon  the  hundred  and  fifty-fecond  difputation,  among  thofe  which  h?
has  colleded  and  publifhed,  as  "  contributing  to  the  hiftory  and  cure  of  dif-
eafes."

For  it  is  paft  a  doubt,  that  thefe  things  are  not  fo  much  to  be  attended  to,
as  this  which  I  then  fpoke  of;  I  mean,  whether  the  fevers  are  periodical:
that  is,  whether  they  are  wont  to  have  an  intermiffion,  or  a  remiffion  at  leaft  ;
fo  as  to  afford  us  room  to  hope,  that,  by  a  timely  and  proper  ufe  of  the  bark,
both  the  fevers  themfelves,  and  their  attendant  malignity,  will  be  overcome.

(a)  Epift.  49.  n.  2.  &  n.  12."  &  feqq.  {c)  Epift.  49.  n,  30.  &  feqq.

(^)  A.  1753..

Vol.  111.  4  D  Nor


5'7  o  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

Nor  does  the  bark  only  overcome  what  is  febrile  •,  but  even  that  whic  h  i
not  febrile;  fo  that  it  does  but  recur  periodically  :  although  this  effeft  is  not
fo  general,  when  the  diforder  is  without  any  manifeft  fever :  and  as  we  have
already  faid  (d),  that  this  has  been  obierv'd,  fo  we  might  now  alfo  confirm  it
by  a  more  recent,  and  more  clear  obfervation  of  Stephanus  Wefzpremus  (e);
1  mean,  of  an  equally  fevere,'and  obftinate,  hemicrania  being  overcome  by  the
fame  remedy,  after  having  been  already  exacerbated  every  fourth  hour,  for
two  weeks  together  -,  and  not  having  remitted  till  after  two  hours.

And  if  this  obfervation,  which  was  made  and  publifh'd  in  the  year  1756,
could  have  exifted  fifty  years  before;  when  I  at  length  with  difficulty  put  to
flight  that  very  fevere  hemicrania  (/),  which  return'd  every  day  at  the  fame
hour,  by  the  preicription  of  a  number  of  different  remedies;  I  fhould  cer-
tainly have  made  ufe  of  none  more  readily,  and  perhaps  more  fuccefsfuUy
than  this ;  notwithftanding  I  had  been  ignorant  of  the  mode  in  which  it  pro-
duces its  effedts.

3.  And  I  could  wi(h  the  malignant  and  epidemical  fevers,  whereof  we  had
begun  to  fpeak,  were  all  periodical,  as  they  are  almoft  all  of  them  join'd
with  a  various  and  obfcure  force  of  malignity  ;  we  Ihould  then  have  in  this
cortex  a  medicine,  which,  although  we  might  be  ignorant  in  what  manner  it
operates,  we  might  neverthelefs  try  with  a  reafonable  hope  of  fuccefs.

But  they  are  very  often  fynocha?,  or  continual  fevers ;  and  fuch  as,  if  you
diffefl;  the  bodies  of  thofe  who  have  been  carried  off  by  them,  either  Ihow
nothing,  as  I  have  faid  in  the  beginning,  which  difcovers  the  peculiar  nature,
and  fituation,  of  the  principal  difeafe  ;  or  ftiow  confiderable  and  evident  in-
juries of  the  vifcera  indeed,  but  fuch  as  ;  if  you  compare  them  with  thofe
fymptoms  that  have  been  obferv'd  in  the  patients  while  living ;  you  will  na-
turally conceive  to  have  been  produc'd  by  Ibme  other  latent  and  principal
difeafe.

That  is  to  fay,  by  way  of  example,  an  inflammatory  fever  of  the  vifcera,
after  diffeftion,  fhows  the  vifcera  to  have  been  inflam'd,  whether  it  is  benign,
or  malignant ;  but  in  the  living  patient  if  it  be  benign,  it  is  alleviated  by  re-
peated blood-lettings:  if  malignant,  it  becomes  worfe,  and  is  very  foon  fatal.

The  caufe  of  the  difference  is  another  principal  difeafe  being  join'd  to  it ;
as  in  that  fever  at  Roan  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated  Malouin  (g).  which,
about  the  end  of  the  year  1753,  carried  off  a  great  number,  in  a  very  fhort
time,  in  that  place.

For  by  reafon  of  the  malignant  acrimony  of  the  matter  which  irritated  the
ftomach  and  inteftines,  that  inflammation  was  at  length  produc'd,  which
was  found  in  thofe  vifcera,  and  was  already  degenerated  into  a  gangrene :
the  other  internal  parts  being  unhurt,  and  particularly  thofe  of  the  head  ;
which  ctherwife  had  been  troubled  with  a  pain,  that  arofe  from  a  confent  of
parts,  and  increas'd  every  day  fo  as  to  bring  on  a  delirium.

The  college  of  phyficians  at  Roan,  therefore,  prudently  and  ufefully  deter-
min'd,  that  the  inflammation  was  not  then  to  be  attended  to ;  as  it  either  did
not  exift  in  the  beginning,  or  arofe  accidentally  in  the  progrefs  of  the  difeafe  :

(tl)  Ibid.  n.  29.  in  fin.  ("/)  Epift.  I.  i- II.

OJ  Obferv,  Med.  4.  (^)»Mexn.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1753.

but


Letter  LXVIII. Article  3.  571

but  that  every  method  muft  be  taken  to  eliminate  that  very  acrid  matter  from
the  firft  paffages  -,  for  from  this,  if  it  were  left  within,  a  permanent  irritation
is  much  more  to  be  fear'd,  than  a  tranfient  one  from  purgative  remedies,
efpecially  when  they  are  of  a  milder  kind.

And  you  will  do  rightly,  if  you  add  to  the  Sepulchretum  what  appearances
were  found  in  thofe  carcafes,  and  in  others  alfo,  when  epidemical  fevers  were
frequent;  a  diffeftion  of  which  kind  you  will  find  in  the  fame  author:  and,
in  like  manner,  what  appearances  were  found  while  peftilences  attack'd  men
in  this  age;  or  what  happen'd  much  more  frequently,  and  in  a  greater  num-
ber of  places,  when  they  attack'd  oxen.  For  we  have  accounts  of  the  appear-
ances found  upon  diffeftion,  in  the  vifcera  of  thefe  animals,  committed  to
print,  both  by  our  own  phyficians,  and  the  phyficians  of  other  countries.
Yet  you  will  never  fail  to  remember,  that  whatever  marks  of  difeafe  were
found  in  the  vifcera,  upon  difTedion  ;  whether  of  a  gangrenous,  or  any  other
kind ;  were  certainly  rather  the  effects  of  fome  latent  and  principal  difeafe,
than  the  difeafe  itfelf.

And  indeed  you  muft  remember,  that  fome  things,  which  are  propos'd  in
thofe  diffeftions,  as  if  preternatural,  might  perhaps  be  agreeable  to  the  cuf-
tomary  laws  of  nature;  as,  for  inftance,  when  in  oxen  which  died  of  the
peftilence,  you  will  fee  remark'd,  here  and  there,  too  great  a  fuUnefs  of  the-
gall-bladder  :  and  you  will  even  fee  it  confider'd,  by  fome,  as  the  cauie  of  the
dyfentery  wherewith  the  oxea  had  been  afflifted,  and  of  the  inflammation  and
fphacelus  of  the  inteftines ;  fuppofing  that,  in  proportion  as  the  bladder  was
more  fill'd  with  erofive  bile,  the  greater  quantity  would  of  courfe  be  difcharg'd
into  the  inteftines.

Only  one  of  thefe  authors,  that  I  know  of,  and  that  is  IVIauchart  (b)y
thought  the  matter  might  be  differently  explain'd ;  either  by  conjefturing  that
the  bladder  is  diftended,  not  fo  much  by  the  bile,  as  by  the  particles  of  the
air  expanding  icfelf  in  the  putrefcent  bile ;  or,  when  he  fays_  that  this  expatt^
fion  of  the  air  is  "■  fometimes"  (not  always)  obferv'd  ;  by  fuppofing,  that,.
frcxn  the  coats  of  the  inteftinum  duodenum  being  tumefied  ;  or  fpafmodically
conftrifted  ;  or  even  comprels'd  by  the  expanfion  of  flatus  ;  a  free  and  fuller
influx  of  the  bile  into  that  inteftine,  through  the  extreme  part  of  the  dudtus
communis,  is  prevented;  this  extremity  of  the  dufb  being  contrafbed  for  the
reafons  above  mention'd  :  from  whence  the  bile  is  diverted  into  the  veficle  ;
and  not  only  by  regurgitating,  but  by  flowing  in  very  plentifully;  and  by
thefe  means  diftends  it :  and  efpecially  (which  he  might  have  added)  as  there
are  feveral  paflTages  naturally  lying  open,  through  the  hepato-cyftic  dufts,  in-
to the  gall-bladder  of  oxen.

To  me  however,  before  I  read  Mauchart,  occur'd  another  reafon  for
doubting,  which  is  perhaps  lefs  intricate,  and  greatly  more  agreeable  to  the
common  laws  of  nature.  For  as  nature  has  fo  order'd  it,  that  a  fuller  afflux
of  bile  fhall  be  promoted,  at  the  time  when  the  ftomach,  and  the  neareft  in-
teftines, being  fill'd  with  aliments,  prefs  upon  the  veficle  themfelves  by  their
©wn  tumour  ;  and  as  the  animals  of  that  fpecies,  from  the  very  firft  days  of
tkeir  having  contrafted  the peftilence,  are  averfe  to  all  kind  of  food  ;,  t

(£,)  Difput.  de  Lue  Vaccar.  Tubingenfi  §,  j8.

, 4  D  2  thought


5  7  2 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

thought  it  muft  follow  from  hence,  that  the  veficle,  being,  never  comprelVdi
retains  a  far  greater  quantity  of  the  bile,  which  is  continually  flowing  in,
than  it  generally  does  at  other  times,  and  is  immoderately  expanded
thereby.

And  this  reafon  for  doubting,  fuch  as  it  is,  I  advanc'd  in  the  anatomical
theatre  ;  and  have  the  iatisfadion  to  find  that  it  gave  pleafure  to  my  auditory;
and  particularly  to  that  celebrated  profefibr,  and,  while  living,  my  very  hu-
mane friend,  Charles  Gianella ;  as  I  learn'd  from  the  diflertation  which
he  has  publifli'd  {i).

4.  But  in  regard  to  tumours-,  for  after  fevers  I  wrote  of  thefe  to  you  ;  both
the  fituation,  and  the  nature,  of  them  appear  very  frequently  of  themfelves ;
and  Hill  more  evidently  by  diffedtion  :  fo  that  you  may  transfer  into  the
Sepulchretum,  without  any  doubt,  thofe  things  which  are  propos'd,  and  made
mention  of,  by  that  diligent  obferver  J.  Alb.  Henr.  Reimarus,  in  his  very
ufeful  diflertation  on  the  tumour  of  the  ligaments,  which  is  eali'd  the  fungus
of  the  joints.

Nor  will  you  only  find  obfervations  of  that  tumour,  in  the  ligaments  about
the  joints  -,  although  chiefly  of  that  •,  but  of  others  alfo,  in  this  differtation  :
others,  for  inftance,  that  have  been  met  with  at  the  joints  in  like  manner ;
particularly  of  the  knees ;  fuppofe  either  from  an  acrid  humour  {k)  collefted
in  the  cavity  of  the  joint,  and  eroding  the  bones,  or  the  cartilages,  or  chang-
ing thefe  cartilages  (/)  into  another  fubtlance,  and  making  them  tumid ;  or
from  the  mucilaginous  glands  {m)  becoming  tumid,  and  giving  occafion  to
injuries  both  of  themfelves,  and  the  bones  ;  and  on  the  other  hand  receiving,
from  their  diminilh'd  prefTure,  a  caufe  of  becoming  flill  more  tumefied.

I  omit  other  examples  which  you  will  find  with  thefe ;  and  every  one
diftinguifh'd,  as  far  as  it  is  pofTible,  by  their. peculiar  figns :  fo  that  we  can-
not help  wifhing  to  read  the  other  things,  which,  in  coniequence  of  his  being
prefs'd  for  time,  he  had  not  in  his  power  to  add;  particularly  on  the  dropfy
of  the  joints  (»),  the  marks  whereof  he  had  propos'd.

But  he  even  very  clearly  explains  the  caules  of  the  figns,  from  the  appear-
ances that  are  feen  by  diflfeftion  ;  as,  for  inflance,  the  rotundity  of  the  gan-
glion (0),  its  mobility,  and  its  difcuflion  from  a  fall,  or  a  blow  :  and  that
•whether  inflided  purpofely,  or  by  accident ;  and  not  to  mention  any  thing
more,  the  expanfion  of  the  bones  in  the  fpina  ventofa  {p),  an  obfervation  of
■which  difeafe,  and  a  difTedion  of  the  part  difeas'd,  are  produc'd  :  and  thefe
are  fo  much  the  more  worthy  of  our  attention,  as  the  difeafe  had  attack'd  the
tibia  not  of  a  boy,  but  of  a  man  of  four-and-twenty  years  of  age.

Moreover,  you  will  find  in  other  authors,  ftill  more  obfervations,  and  dif-
feftions,  of  expanded  bones,  that  you  may  add  to  the  Sepulchretum.  For
befides  thofe  which  Abraham  Cyprianus  {q)  fhows  to  have  frequently  occurr'd
to  him,  there  is  another  extant  which  is  defcrib'd,  and  treated  of  at  large,  by
Frid.  Jac.  Titmannus  (r).

{i)  DifTert.  infcripta,  non  femper  ex  cade- («)  §.  46.
vercm  feftione,  &c.  (0)  §'65.

{k)  §.  48.  {/>)  §.  6z.

(/)  §.  58.  (?)  Epift.  ad  Millmgton.

iBi)  §,  ?o.  [r)  Diflert.  Ofteo-Steatom.  Caf.  rarior.  &c.

And


Letter  LXVIII. Article  4.  573

And  when  you  read  thefe  examples  that  I  have  taken  notice  of,  and
others,  of  the  expanfion  of  bones  ;  you  will  naturally  obferve  that  thefe  ex-
panfions  are  owing  to  the  quantity  of  deprav'd  fluid,  which  is  redundant  with-
in the  bones,  and  which  urges  the  parietes  thereof  outwards ;  as  thefe  parietes
give  way  without  difficulty,  where  the  fame  humour  has  foften'd  the  bony
fibres,  and  internal  lamins  ;  or  has  fo  eroded  and  diffolv'd  them,  that  a  very
few  external  lamins  are  now  remaining.  For  in  either  of  thefe  ways  the  bone
lofes  its  hardnefs.

And  a  great  number  of  hiftories  of  this  change,  you  will  fee  pointed  out
by  the  celebrated  Morand  (s) ;  where  he  gives  the  relation  of  that  admirable
one  which  he  himfelf  faw.  I  would  have  you  read  this  hiftory,  and  another
which  occurr'd,  fome  years  after  this,  to  that  eminent  profeflbr  at  Leipfic,
Ludwig  (/).

You  will  fee  that,  in  the  latter  cafe,  fome  bones  were  become  fo  fofr,  as  to
yield  to  the  flighteft  impreffion  of  the  finger;  and  others  fo  extenuated,  in
their  external  lamina,  that  the  fubjedled  cells  could  be  eafily  feen  through
them  :  and  in  the  former,  that  the  fame  external  lamina  was,  in  fome  places,
reduc'd  to  the  form  of  a  membranous  Iheath,  in  the  very  bones  of  the  femur
an^  tibia  ;  their  folid  fubftance  being  diflblv'd  and  carried  back,  as  it  feem'd,
into  the  general  circulation ;  and  at  length  thrown  out  by  the  urinary
paflages  :  for  there  was  a  furprizing  quantity  of  fediment  in  this  fluid :  and
this  fediment  was  encreas'd,  when  the  limbs  were  in  a  worfe  ftate;  being  alfo
of  a  peculiar  nature,  that  is  to  fay,  white,  earthy,  chalky,  and  foluble,  by
means  of  vinegar,  or  other  acids,  whereby  it  is  certain,  that  bones,  when
macerated  therein,  are  foften'd  down,  and  brought  to  a  fliate  of  flexibility  (u)..

When  you  read  over  thefe  remarks,  you  will  perhaps  call  to  mind  the  ob-
fervation  of  Zellerus  (x).  For  "  the  accr  which  exhal'd  from  the  abdo-
"  men"  of  a  boy  of  nine  years  of  age,  "  when  open'd,  was  very  confidera-
"  ble,  and  very  penetrating :"  and  this  boy  was  ricketty,  and  his  "  bones
"  were  fo  foft,  that  it  was  very  eafy  to  cut  afunder  the  crooked  tibise,  and
"  others  of  the  bones,  with  the  knife  ;  and  that  without  applying  any  confi-
"  derable  force."

Wherefore,  it  was  lefs  to  be  wonder'd  at,  that  he  had  nodes  about  the
joints ;  as  ricketty  perfons  generally  have  ;  and  thefe  "  very  confiderable,"
in  that  place  where  the  ilernum  is  join'd  to  the  ribs  on  both  fides :  and  the
ribs,  when  "  cut  afunder,  themfelves  alfo  diftill'd  blood."

And  it  is  natural  to  fuppofe,  that,  by  the  fame  deprav'd  humour  where-
with the  bony  fibres  are  foften'd  or  diffolv'd,  the  fmall  veffels,  which  carry
the  blood,  are  eroded ;  and  that  this  blood  being  extravafated,  the  medullary
oil  is  thereby  render'd  bloody ;  of  which  nature  that  humour  alfo  was,  which
Morand  found  within  the  bones  whereof  we  have  fpoken  :  and  Ludwig  found
the  medulla  fiU'd  with  bloody  coagula  in  fome  of  his  bones  :  yet  in  others  of
them  he  found  it  "  fcarcely  congeal'd,  but  extremely  foft,  and  almolt
•*  fluid  :"  and  even  "  fluid  and  almoft  watry."

<j)  Mem.  de  UAcad.  R.  des  Sc.  A.  1753.  (a)  Vid.  Epift.  58.  n.  7.

(?)  Progr.  Obferv.  in  Cadav.  cuju.s  offa  {x)  Difput.  de  Morbis  ex  Struflura  glandu-
emoilita  erant  propoa.  lar,  c,  2.  n,  15.

•  And


57  4  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

And  this  I  take  notice  of  here,  that  you  may  compare  it  with  that  medul-
lary oil,  which  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  heretofore  (j),  as  obferv'd  by  me
within  the  exoftofis  of  the  tibia  of  a  man  ;  and  within  a  cavity  alfo  of  the
fame  bone,  correfponding  to  the  exoftofis  -,  and  that  in  a  great  quantity  and
very  liquid  :  for  unlefs  it  be  in  a  confiderable  quantity,  it  cannot  urge  out-
wards the  foften'd  laminas  of  the  bones,  as  I  then  faid,  and  even  before
alfo.

In  the  obfervation  of  Morand  therefore,  the  os  femoris,  at  the  external
trochanter,  and  the  extremity  of  the  fibula,  were  become  very  thick :  and
the  thicknefs  of  the  cranium  was  greater  in  a  duplicate  proportion  than  it  na-
turally is :  but  when  the  blood,  which  lay  betwixt  the  two  tables,  was  prefs'd
out,  by  a  compreffion  of  fome  continuance,  a  great  thinnefs  fucceeded  to
that  very  confiderable  thicknefs.

Thefe  remarks,  therefore,  you  may  add  to  thofe  which  I  wrote  to  you  at
that  time,  upon  the  tumours  of  bones  (2)  j  and  upon  their  ftate  of  foft-
nefs  [a) :  for  by  this  means  you  will  perceive,  tibat  fome  things  are  ftill
more  confirm'd  ;  and  that  others  may  be  explain'd  fomewhat  differently  in
different  perfons ;  and  be  attended  with  circumftances  that  are  fomewhat
different.

5.  Come,  now  let  us  go  on,  from  tumours  of  the  moft  hard  parts,  to
confider  thofe  of  the  foftert  part  -,  1  mean,  thofe  of  the  membrana  adipofav
And  of  this  clals  of  tumours,  1  happen'd  to  have  the  opportunity  of  ex-
amining two  others,  befides  thofe  which  I  have  fpoken  to  you  of  al*
ready  {b).

6.  An  old  woman  had  died  in  the  hofpital,  about  the  time  of  beginning,
the  public  demonftrations  in  anatomy,  in  the  year  1755.  The  body  being
brought  into  the  college  ;  from  the  want  of  better  fubjefts  j  when  I  examin'd
it,  and  found  that  there  was  nothing  known  in  regard  to  the  patient,  but
that  (he  had  died  gradually  -,  I  obferv'd  ;  to  omit  other  things,  and  among
thefe  the  nails  of  the  great  toe  of  each  foot  growing  out  in  the  manner  of  a
little  horn,  which  pafs'd  in  a  tortuous  direction  over  two  or  three  of  the
neareft:  toes,  and  that  on  both  fides  equally,  I  obferv'd,  I  fay,  a  hemifpheri-
cal  tumour  to  be  protuberant  from  the  anterior  and  middle  part  of  the  left
thigh  longitudinally  :  having  a  diameter  which  exceeded  two  inches  j  and
being  fo  foft,  that  it  might  have  been  taken  for  a  meliccrides.

The  fkin,  in  that  part,  was  of  the  fame  colour  as  in  other  parts ;  nor  had
it  any  thing  ifteric  in  any  part :  but  only  a  flight  fcabies  appear'd.  "What
this  tumour  contain'd,  and  in  what  manner  the  contents  appear'd,  I  fliall
fay,  when  I  have  told  you  what  appearances  were  obferv'd  by  infpeding  the-
vifcera.

In  the  belly,  the  inteftines  were  in  a  lax  ftate,  and  among  thefe  the
-Kftum  ;  which  was  difeas'd  by  reafon  of  the  hemorrhoids  being  tumid  in-
ternally :  the  fpleen  was  fomewhat  larger  than  it  naturally  is  :  in  the  gall-
bladder was  a  yellowifli  bile  ;  and  in  this  bile  was  a  calculus  of  a  fphericai
form,  which  exceeded  even  a  very  large  filbert  in  its  fize,  was  black  in  its-

(yj  Eplft.  50.  n.  60.  (a)  Vid.  etiam  Epift.  58.  n.  6.  &  Teqq.

(»)  Ibid,  n.  57.  &  feqq.  \b)  Epift.  50.  n.  22.  &  feq.

colour^


Letter  LXVIII. Articled.  ^75

colour,  but  mark'd  externally with  a  kind  of  thickifti  points,  that  were
of  a  white  colour  degenerating  into  red,  one  of  them  being  prominent.

You  fee  now,  why  I  remark'd  above,  that  the  woman  was  not  of  an  iclerical
colour :  you  may  therefore  add  thisobfervationto  the  many  others  which!  have
formerly  taken  notice  of  to  you  (c).  And  that  you  may  not  complain  of  wanting
the  other  circumftances  relative  to  this  ftone,  take  them  as  they  follow  :  imme-
diately after  extraftion,  it  was  thrown  into  water  moderately  warm,  but  in-
ftantly  went  to  the  bottom ;  and  being  taken  out  from  thence,  was  foon  after
laid  on  the  top  of  the  water  very  gently,  but  immediately  fubfided  as  before.
However,  I  infpedled  i-t  that  very  day,  after  it  had  been  laid  afide  for  feme
time,  and  found  that  it  had  fpontaneoufly  feparated  itfelf,  in  fome  meafure,
into  a  great  number  of  black  pieces :  and  talcing  thefe  pieces,  which  were
wrapp'd  up  in  paper,  again  into  my  hands  about  forty  days  after,  I  laid  many
of  the  fmall  ones,  and  one  of  the  largeft,  on  the  furface  of  water :  at  firft  they
all  fwam  thereon  ;  but  fcarcely  had  a  fingle  minute  pafs'd,  before  the  largeft
of  them  went  to  the  bottom,  and  this  was  foon  after  follow'd  by  the  reft.
Moveover  this  largeft  being  extradled,  and  immediately  laid  upon  the  water,
immediately  fubfided.  One  or  two  of  thofe  which  I  had  not  put  into  the
water,  being  applied  to  the  flame  of  a  candle,  took  flame  indeed,  but  did  not
retain  it,  nor  were  melted,  but  fmelt  like  burnt  feathers.

Now  let  us  attend  to  the  appearances  which  were  feen  in  one  of  the  ovaria,
in  the  tubes,  and  the  uterus ;  which  you  may  likewife  add  to  other  fimilar
difeafes  that  I  have  written  of  elfewhere.

The  ovary  was  equal  in  fize  to  a  very  large  walnut,  and  was  made  up  of
white  and  thick  membranes,  including  water.  Both  of  the  tubes  were  fo
confus'd  with  the  broad  ligaments  of  the  uterus,  that  the  greater  extremity  of
them  did  not  appear.  The  fundus  uteri  had,  internally,  on  one  fide,  two  or
three  excrefcences -,  and  on  the  other,  the  fimple  beginning  of  one  only.  All
of  thefe  excrefcences;  indeed,  confifted  of  a  white  fubftance  -,  but  in  the
largeft  of  them  this  fubftance  was  made  up  of  white  membranes,  containing
cells  full  of  water.  The  figure  of  this  was  oval ;  being  fituated  longitudinally,
in  refpeft  of  the  uterus ;  to  the  internal  coats  of  which,  it  was  continu'd  by  a
pretty  broad  peduncle,  on  the  anterior  furface  of  that  cavity,  though  this  pe-
duncle was  much  narrower  than  itfelf.  And  on  this  anterior  furface  were  the
two  other  excrefcences  ;  being  continu'd  to  the  fame  coat,  not  by  a  peduncle
indeed,  but  by  the  whole  of  their  bafes,  deprefs'd  in  their  figure,  and  not
containing  water.

In  the  thorax  and  the  neck,  for  the  head  we  did  not  touch,  I  obferv'd
two  circumftances  that  relate  to  the  veflels.  The  great  artery,  within  the
thorax,  was  diftinguifti'd  by  white  fpots  internally,  which  evidently  foretold
that  bony  lamellse  would  have  been  generated  there,  had  the  patient  liv'd
longer.  ,  And  the  external  jugular  vein,  as  it  went  down  on  the  left  fide
through  the  neck,  was  divided,  in  the  middle  of  its  courfe,  into  three  parts  ;
which,  having  made  two  iflands,  came  together  again  into  one  tube,  after
having  pafs'd  down  about  three  inches.  But  the  latter  of  thefe  appearances
was  rather  rare  than  morbid  ;  and  the  former  is  very  frequent  at  fuch  a  time
of  life.

W  Epi'l-  37-

But


57  6 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

But  now  I  at  length  return,  according  to  my  promife,  to  the  tumour
which,  as  I  have  faid,  appear'd  hemifpherical  before  diflection,  and  on  the
thigh  refembled  a  melicerides  for  this  reafon  alfo,  that  it  did  not  hang  there-
from by  a  peduncle, but  hid  its  other  hemifphere  under  the  fkin.

The  fkin  therefore  being  cut  into,  it  was  evident  to  all  who  were  prefent,
that  i:  was  nothing  elfe  but  an  excrefcence,  as  I  underftand  it,  of  the  adi-
pofe  membrane,  For  of  this  very  membrane,  difpos'd  into  fo  many  parallel
parts  as  it  were,  was  it  entirely  made  up  ;  and  without  any  oiher  difference
than  this,  that  the  fat,  which  was  in  other  pares  fomewhat  brown,  was  more
white  in  the  tumour.  However,  there  was  not  any  other  membrane  under
the  fkin,  which  comprehended  the  tumour  in  the  manner  of  acyft ;  nor  was
there  any  thing  like  a  partition  under  the  tumour,  which  feparated  it  from
the  continued  membrana  adipofa.

7.  I  will  now  defcribe  another  tumour,  but  in  fewer  words  than  I  did  the
former,  as  the  obfervation  was  made  while  the  patient  was  yet  living.

g.  An  honeft  man,  who  liv'd  in  the  country  about  Padua,  had  a  tumour
almoft  like  a  fig,  of  a  confiderable  fize,  hanging  from  one  of  his  thighs,  by  a
ihort  peduncle,  not  thicker  than  a  man's  finger.  The  tumour  was  foft,  fo
that  if  you  handled  it,  you  might  perceive  it  was  not  a  farcoma,  nor  yet  dif-
tended  by  a  great  quantity  of  included  humour.

The  fkin  of  it,  which  was  of  the  fame  colour  with  the  other  parts,  differ'd
in  this  one  circumftance  only,  that  it  was  feen  to  be  unequal  here  and  there
with  protuberances,  which  were  of  a  hemifpherical  figure  -,  but  deprefs'd,
and  not  thicker  than  the  point  of  a  man's  little  finger.  The  tumour  had
never  any  pulfation,  and  never  was  in  pain,  even  when  prefs'd :  nor  did  it
ever  give'  him  the  leaft  uneafinefs,  unlcfs  when  he  was  obliged  to  ride.  For
this  fole  reafon  therefore,  join'd  with  a  fear,  left  it  Ihould  grow  bigger  and
bigger  every  day  -,  he  came  to  me,  and  defir'd  to  know,  whether  it  might  be
cut  away  without  danger.

Attending,  therefore,  to  the  circumftances  which  I  have  fpoken  of,  and
not  feeing  any  other  veflTel  pafling  through  the  fkin  of  the  tumour,  but  one
vein  ;  which  did  not,  even  at  the  upper  part,  reach  to  the  diameter  of  a  pigeon's
quill ;  and  calling  to  mind  many  fuccefsful  extirpations  of  this  kind  ;  I  readily
confented  that  it  (hould  be  cut  away  ;  efpecially  as  that  very  experienc'd  man
Jerom  Vandelli,  the  public  profefTor  of  furgery  in  this  univerfity,  had  under-
taken to  perform  the  operation.

And  this  he  did  with  great  fuccefs,  in  the  beginning  of  June  in  the  year
1757,  with  the  lofs  of  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  blood ;  notwithftanding  he  had
cut  a  little  deeper  than  the  beginning  of  the  peduncle  was:  and  a  cicatrix
being  eafily  brought  on,  the  man  was  perfedtly  cur'd  within  a  fhort  time.

The  tumour,  which  weigh'd  about  five  ounces,  being  fent  to  me  on  the
fame  morning,  by  the  fon  of  Vandelli  •,  who  is  worthy  of  his  father,  and  his
very  learned  uncles  •,  and  being  immediately  cut  into,  and  examin'd  by  me,
while  he  looked  on,  was  found  to  be  the  very  thing  I  had  taken  it  to  be ;  I
mean,  an  excrefcence  of  the  adipofe  membrane.

The  peduncle  of  this  tumour  was  of  the  fame  nature  with  the  peduncle
of  another  tumour,  which  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  heretofore  (d),  as  being

(JJ  Epifr.  50.  n.  23.
2  cut


Letter  LXVIII. Articles^,  lo,  it.  sh

tut  away  by  Valfalva  ;  that  is  to  fay,  it  confifted  of  the  'fainc  ftru(9^^re,  and
fubftance,  that  the  membrana  adipofa  has  in  a  found  (late,  contracted  iiito  a
kind  of  cylinders,  as  it  were,  going  down  within  the  peduncle,  and  con-
tinued from  thence  within  the  tumour  ;  being  of  a  yellowilh  colour,  foft,
and  undtuous,  and  making  tip  the  whole  tumour,  and  even  thofe  fmall
hemifpherical  bodies  which  protuberated  externally.  The  pjrts  of  which
they  were  compared,  not  only  adher'd  to  the  lldn  tenacioufly,  but  to  one
another  alfo  in  feveral  places  ;  fo  that  one  part  could  not  be  feparated  from
the  other  by  the  fingers  alone  :  yet  there  was  no  coat  at  all  befides  the  flcin,
which  comprehended  this  tumour,  in  the  manner  we  fee  in  cyftic  rumours  ;
nor  could  the  fkin  itfelf  be  divided  into  two  laminse,  notwithflanding  it  was
pretty  thick.  But  under  the  fkin,  here  and  there,  were  fmall  fanguiferous
veflels,  efpecially  towards  the  upper  parts.

9.  Thefe  tumours  which  have  bccn  examin'd,  and  cut  into,  by  us,  were
fmall  indeed,  if  you  compare  them  with  thofe  large  tumours,  examples  of
"which  I  have  formerly  referr'd  to  [e)  %  particularly  in  Palfin  ;  and  which  you
may  confider  alone,  or  in  conjundion  with  ftill  larger  tumours,  of  fixty
•pounds  weight,  or  more,  the  hiftories  of  which  have  been  added  thereto  by
men  of  eminence  {f ).  But  as  they  are  fuppos'd  to  be  fimilar  to  thofe  which
are  call'd  cyftic  tumours,  and  particularly  to  thofe  that  are  call'd  natte  in  our
language,  you  perceive  that,  notwithftanding  they  contain'd  fat,  they  muft
have  been  different  from  ours. ^

But  now  let  us  go  on  from  thefe  which  are  fimple,  and  frequently  of  a
coniiderable  fize,  to  others  which  are  complex,  and  very  fmall ;  or  at  leaft  of
a  moderate  fize.  And  let  us  infill:,  in  fome  rrteafure,  upon  thofe  whereof  I
fpoke  but  little  in  the  fiftieth  letter  -,  that  is,  of  tumours  which  are  form'd  in
the  upper  part  of  the  tongue,  and  of  others  that  grow  almoft  in  the  whole  of
the  body.  "

10.  Of  the  tongues  which  I  difleifted  in  the  college,  in  "the  month  of
February,  in  this  year  1759,  there  was  one  that  was  tumid:  and  in  this  the
line  which  is  called  the  linea  mediana,  at  firft  fubfided  into  the  form  of  a
■confiderable  furrow,  from  the  apex  to  the  extent  of  a  full  inch,  (which  did
'not  difappear  even  v/hen  the  tongue  was  drawn  to  each  fide)  and  at  length
was  no  more  feen  ;  and  even  the  middle  part,  as  well  as  thelateral  parts,. of
that  furface,  was  occupied  by  tubercles,  difpos'd  in  no  regular  order  what-
ever ;  being  low  indeed,  but  thick  to  the  extent  of  half  a  line  of  the  inch  of
"Bologna,  of  an  unequal  furface,  and  of  a  white  colour,  like  the  reft  of  the
tongue.

Thefe  tubercles  terminated  near  that  part,  where  thofe  laft  thicker  papillas
fhould  have  been :  the  place  of  which  was  fiU'd  up  by  very  fmall,  but  very
thick- fet  tubercles.  After  thefe  at  length  fucceeded  the  whole  of  that  part
-wherein  glands  are  wont  to  be  prominent ;  but  the  furface  was  entirely  with-
t)ut  any  trace  of  thefe  glands,  being  quite  even  and  fmooth.

11.  What  had  preceded  to  produce  this  ftate  of  the  tongue,  and  what  in-
convenience fuch  a  ftate  had  been  the  occafion  of,  it  was  not  in  my  power
to  learn,

:{e)  Ibid.  n.  22.  (f)  Vid.  in  Italica  Palfin.  Edit.  Part.  j.  c,  4.

Vol..  III.  4  E  B^u


5  7  8  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

But  on  the  contrary,  after  what  fymptoms,  not  a  confumption,  but  an  en-
largement of  the  glands  began  ;  and  what  fymptoms  it  brought  on  ;  and  the
very  fpeedy  produdion  of  new  glands,  as  it  were,  both  within,  and  without
the  body,  in  great  part  of  it ;  appears  from  a  hiftory  which  ought  not  to  be
pafs'd  over  here ;  and  which  being  communicated  to  me  by  Laurence
Mariani,  whom  I  have  before  commended,  and  by  his  fon-in-law,  who  is
worthy  of  him,  Jofeph  Boni,  in  the  year  1752,  was  the  more  agreeable  to
me,  becaufe,  though  I  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  a  fomewhat  fimilar
djfeafe,  in  former  years,  I  neverthelefs  had  no  opportunity  of  diffcdincr  it,  as
I  have  told  you  when  writing  upon  tumours  (g).

12.  A  noble  youth,  of  fifteen  years  of  age,  who  had  been  healthy  from
his  infancy,  and  was  of  a  good  colour,  being  receiv'd  with  a  very  fevere
chiding,  and  being  fo  much  the  more  ftruck  with  fear  therefrom,  becaufe  he
was  naturally  thoughtful,  pafs'd  three  days  in  a  ftupid  (late  as  it  were  at  that
time ;  and  three  months  after  began  to  obferve  fmall  glands  in  his  neck,
which  at  firft  encreas'd  gradually  :  but  foon  after  the  difeafe  was  fo  fpeedily
encreas'd,  that,  befides  a  tumour  of  the  falivary  and  axillary  glands,  in  a
fhort  time  were  obferv'd  throughout  the  back,  and  the  breaft,  but  particularly
about  the  clavicles,  prominent  bodies,  of  the  fize  of  a  pigeon's  egg,  and  re-
fembling  ftrumous  glands  ;  tumours  of  which  kind  were  not  wanting  foon
after  in  the  integuments  of  the  abdomen  alfo,  and  even,  as  was  pereeiv'd  by
the  touch,  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly  likewife.

They  were  all  of  them,  in  general,  without  pain  ;  but  that  which  lay
upon  the  peftoral  mufcle,  and  which  was  three  inches  long,  and  livid  in  its
colour,  was  fomewhat  painful  to  the  touch,  as  the  interior  parts  of  the  belly
alfo  were  •,  particularly  on  the  left  fide,  where  a  great  tenfion  and  refjftance
were  pereeiv'd.

Many  remedies  were  made  ufe  of  both  internally  and  externally  ;  and  that
in  the  beginning  too,  but  ftill  more  in  the  progrefs  of  the  difeafe,  when  the
moll:  powerful  medicines  were  prefcrib'd  by  the  moft  ll<ilful  phyficians  in
concert :  but  whether  he  made  ufe  of  any,  or  none,  the  bulk  of  the  tumours
increas'd,  and  the  difeafe  had  fo  rapid  a  courfe,  that  although  it  had  begua
only  in  the  month  of  December,  it  finifh'd  its  period  in  death  about  the  end
of  May  following.

Not  long  after  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  an  acute  pain  had  attack'd
him  in  the  knee,  and  in  the  leg  ;  fometimes  in  the  right,  fometimes  in  the
left ;  and  with  this  pain  he  was  always  afflidled  afterwards :  fymptomatic
fevers,  and  fevers  of  an  uncertain  period,  being  added  to  it;  and  watchings,
and  wafting  of  flefh  attending  thereon.

However,  the  patient  was  lively  and  chearful  to  the  very  laft,  had  a  good
appetite  for  food,  and  even  a  keen  fcnfation  of  hunger,  but  particularly  on  the
laft  days  of  his  life  :  and  although  there  was  fome  uneafinefs  about  the  throat,
from  3  kind  of  mucous  catarrh,  which  was  eafily  thrown  up,  by  means  of  a
flight  cough  ;  yet  no  difficulty  of  breathing  was  ever  obferv'd  :  and  this  you
will  be  much  furpriz'd  at,  when  you  have  read  the  diffeftion  of  the  thorax.

{£)  Epift.  50.  n.  28..  in  fin.

I  The


Letter  LXVIII. Article  12.  57  9

■  The  common  integuments  of  the  neck,  breaft,  and  abdomen,  being  cut
into,  it  was  found  that  thofe  external  tumours  had  their  feats  in  the  cells  of
the  membrana  adipofa  ;  which  was  clofely  conneded,  in  that  part,  to  the
fubjefted  mufcles.  All  of  them  were  full  of  a  whitifli  matter,  which  was  in
part  famewhat  fluid  ;  bur,  for  the  moft  part,  folid,  and  febaceous.  Some  of
the  more  prominent  of  them  ;  as  thofe  which  adher'd  to  the  peroral  mufcles,
making  one  continu'd  body  with  the  axillary  glands ;  when  cut  into  difcharg'd
a  yellowifti  and  fanious  matter.

The  belly  being  open'd,  the  whole  of  the  omentum  appear'd  to  be  befet,
here  and  there,  with  hard  little  bodies,  full  of  that  whitidi  matter.  The  liver,
the  fpleen,  and  the  kidnies,  were  themfelves  indeed  in  a  natural  ftate  ;  but
about  each  of  them  the  following  circumftances  were  obferv'd.

To  the  right  part  of  the  liver,  the  peritonseum  was  ftrongly  connected  ;
and  being  become  one  and  the  fame  iubftance,  as  it  were,  with  the  contiguous
mufcles  (in  many  places),  after  that  grew  out  anteriorly,  into  a  body  of  the
bignefs  of  a  hen's  egg ;  which,  being  fill'd  up  with  that  matter  whereof  I
have  fpoken,  was  eonnedted  with  the  urinary  bladder.

Near  to  the  fpleen  alfo,  the  left  part  of  the  mefocolon  was  fwell'd  into  a
body  which  confifted  of  many  pigeons  eggs,  as  it  were,  connected  together,
and  ftuff'd  up  with  that  fame  matter:  of  which  tumours  the  pancreas  alfo
was  full :  and  ftrumous  fwellings,  of  the  fame  kind,  v/ere  feen  fcatter'd  up
and  down  through  the  mefentery.

Finally,  the  tunica  adipofa  of  the  kidnies  was  become  thicken'd  to  a  fur-
prizing  degree;  for,  on  the  part  where  it  was  turn'd  towards  the  vertebrae,
it  was  two  inches  thick  :  and  on  the  oppofite  part  five  inches  thick  -,  being
every  where  diftended  with  the  matter  that  I  have  fpoken  of:  and,  for  that
reafon,  the  left  kidney,  with  the  addition  of  a  hard  and  ftrumous  line,  which
interfered  that  matter^  was  about  fix-and-thirty  ounces  in  weight.

Nor  indeed  were  the  inteftines  free  from  difeafe.  For  not  only  the  adipofe
appendages  of  the  colon,  but  the  ligamentous  bands  which  pafs  through  that
inteftine,  were  feen  to  be  diftinguilh'd  with  little  bodies  of  the  fame  kind.
And  the  fmall  inteftines  had  the  glands  of  Peyerus,  in  fome  places,  of  the
figure  and  fize  of  a  lupin  :  and  among  thefe  glands  one  that  was  much  more
large  than  the  others,  being  affefted  with  a  phlogofis,  contain'd  a  corrupted
humour.

The  thorax  being  open'd,  the  mediaftinum  was  feen  to  be  frequently  befet
with  the  bodies  I  have  mention'd,  about  the  middle  of  it ;  and  among  thefe
with  one  not  lefs  large  than  a  fmall  hen's  egg,  which  was  not  only  contiguous
to  the  trunk  of  the  afpera  arteria,  but  even  comprefs'd  it.  The  lungs  were
found  internally,  notwithftanding  to  the  external  furface  thereof  were  infixed
hard,  and  ftony  globules,  of  the  bignefs  of  grains  of  barley.

The  fame  furface  was  wholly  hollow'd  out  on  both  fides,  on  the  back
part;  but  particularly  on  the  left  fide,  by  reafon  offtrums,  of  no  incon-
fiderable  fize,  which  were  form'd  upon  the  pleura  running  into  it;  fome  near
to  the  vertebrae  dorfi,  and  others  fo  difpos'd  into  a  kind  of  feries  as  it  were,
that  one  lay  upon  each  rib  regularly,  from  the  lower  part  to  the  upper.
The  heart  was  in  a  natural  ftate,  except  that  the  external  furface  of  the  right

4  E  2  auricle


5  So Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

aaricle  was  univerfally  granulated  as  it  were,  from  little  bodies  of  a  fimilar
nature.

Therefore  (for  thus  was  thehiftory,  which  they  fent  to  me,  concluded)  the
lumotirs  we  have  defcrib'd  were,  for  the  moft  part,  encyfted,  and  turgid
with  tophaceous,  hard,  and,  in  a  manner,  febaceous  particles,  depofited  within
the  cells  of  the  membrana  adipofa-,  belides  the  equally  hard  glandular  bodies,
which  are  defcrib'd.

13.  I  cail'd  this  hiftory  to  mind,  when  I  lately  read  another  of  a  black
boy  of  ten  years  of  age,  which  that  excellent  anatomift  Meckel  (h)  has
committed  to  print.  For  the  early  age  of  both  the  patients,  and  the  keen
hunger;  join'd  together  Vv'ith  the  difeafe,  and  conftantly  attending  upon  it ;
and  the  diffufion  of  the  diforder  even  through  the  internal  membranes  ;  par-
ticularly of  the  belly,  in  the  form  of  tubercles  •,  the  greater  part  of  which
was  fiU'd  by  a  febaceous  matter ;  thefe  things,  I  fay,  make  me  wifh  that  you
Ihould  compare  both  the  hiftories  together.

And  if,  as  you  read,  at  the  fame  time,  the  accurate  obfervations  of  this
very  ingenious  man  upon  that,  and  upon  another  black  (i),  as  far  as  relates
to  their  blacknefs  alfo  -,  you  Ihould  happen  to  be  furpriz'd,  that,  in  the  dif-
feftion  of  that  apopleftic  black,  which  1  formerly  fent  to  you  (^),  and  which
was  made  fifty  years  ago  at  Venice  -,  no  remark  was  made  in  regard  to  the
blackifh,  or  brown  parts,  in  the  brain  of  thefe  mrn,  and  none  in  regard  to
their  black,  rather  than  red  blood ;  I  would  have  you  know  that  I  had  it
not  in  my  power  to  difledt  that  body  before  night :  and  you  know  that  the
light  of  the  fun  is  one  thing,  and  the  light  of  candles  another  :  and  in  like
manner  that  I  had  it  not  in  my  power  to  preferve  any  other  part  to  the  day
following,  but  fome  fegments  of  the  cutis  and  cuticle  ;  and  what  I  happen'd
to  obferve  in  thefe  parts,  I  have  fhown  in  the  Adverfaria  (/).  But  of  thefe
things,  and  of  the  nature  of  the  cuticle,  neither  is  it  the  proper  place  to
write  here,  nor  doubtlefs  fhall  I  write,  before  I  have  fome  opportunity  either
of  differing  a  negro ;  or  before  I,  at  leaft,  know  fome  things  relative  to  the  in-
fants of  thefe  perfons,  for  a  certainty,  as,  for  inftance,  whether  they  have
the  beginning  of  the  funiculus  umbilicalis  not  like  our  children,  furrounded
■with  the  cutis,  which  afterwards  contracts  itfelf  into  the  navel  -,  and  whether,
on  thofe  few  days  after  birth,  when  they  firft  begin  to  grow  brown,  they  have
net  the  foles  of  the  feet,  and  the  palms  of  the  Ijands,  quite  fo  white  as  we
afterwards  fee  them  to  be  in  adults  ;  and  other  things  of  this  kind.  For
now  we  muft  not  digrefs  from  ourpurpofe.

Comparing  together,  therefore,  both  the  hiftories  of  fuch  a  number  of
febaceous  tubercles ;  as  you  will  fee  that  they  agree  in  this  circumftance  alfo,
of  fome  of  the  vifcera,  which  were  contain'd  under  a  coat  fo  difeas'd,  being
neverihelefs  found  ;  fo  you  will  obferve  them  to  differ  not  only  in  the  fymp-
toms,  but  in  the  feat  of  the  tubercles,  which  was  fo  far  from  being  in  the
cellular  fubftance,  in  the  Berlin  obfervation  ;  as  fchirrhous  corpufcles  alfo
were  in  a  certain  hiftory  of  Roederer(*) ;  that  they  had  this  fingular  circum-

{l)  Hift.  del' Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  de  Berlin (i)  Epift.  5.  n.  17.
A.  J753.  {/) II.  Animad.  4.

0  A.  1756.  (*}  Diir,  de  Uteri  Schirrhogn.  i3.

ftancc


Letter  LXVIII. Article  14.  581

ftance  in  them  ;  I  mean,  of  adhering  in  the  proper  and  firm  membrane  icfelf ;
of  the  peritonEEum,  or  pleura,  the  cellular  membrane  being  quite  unaffeflied:
and  finally,  that  there  were  no  tubercles  externally,  but  all  of  them  were  in-
ternal.

But  to  external,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  internal  tumours,  relates  another
obfervation,  which  Meckel  fpeaks  of  before  the  one  I  have  already  taken  notice
of;  r.nd  which  was  made  by  himfelf,  and  the  very  ceL-brated  profeffor  Zinnius,
upon  an  infant,  whofe  conglobate  glands  were  fchirrhous,  in  almoft  the
whole  of  its  body  ;  befides  that  fome  parts  of  the  cerebrum  were  indurated.

»4.  But  whether  to  both  external  and  internal,  or  to  external  tumours
only,  which  are  what  we  chiefly  atte;->d  to  here,  the  examples  that  Ifhall  im-
mediately take  notice  of,  are  to  be  referr'd  -,  fome  of  thefe  tumours  either  in-
cluded fuch  contents  as  were  evidently  preternatural,  orcontain'd  iubftances
whereby  they  would  fcarcely,  and  indeed  not  at  all,  have  feem'd  to  be  dif-
ferent from  the  modification  of  found  glands,  if  they  did  not  occur  in  parts
where  we  are  not  wont  to  fee  aoy  manifeft  glands.

To  the  firfl:  of  thefe  kinds,  befides  thole  which  we  have  juft  now  pro-
duc'd,  relate  a  confiderable  number  of  hillories,  which  are  transferr'd  into
the  Sepulchretum  (m) ;  fo  that  when  ftrumous  glands,  efpecially  if  in  great
number,  or  large,  were  protuberant  externally,  a  great  number  were  alfo
found  to  exift  internally  ;  being  feated  not  only  on  the  mefentery,  but  alio  on
the  omentum,  the  flomach,  the  inteftines,  the  pancreas,  the  urinary  bladder,
and  the  lungs,  according  to  the  obfervation  of  Foncanus  («)  ;  and  according
to  the  obfervation  of  Heurnius  (o),  even  on  the  peritonseum,  the  liver,  the
fpleen,  the  kidnies,  the  ligaments  of  the  uterus,  the  diaphragm,  the  mediae
ftinum,  and  the  dura  mater  of  the  cerebrum  itfelf.

I  omit  other  lefs  diffus'd  glands,  which  you  may  fee  defcrib'd  there,  and
which  were  all  ftruoaous :  though  fome  of  them  contain'd  gypfeous,  pukace-
9US,  purulent,  ferous,  white  and  yellow  matter.  And  to  thefe  you  may  alfo
add  that  great  number  of  tubercles,  which  Laubius  {p)  faw  in  the  lungs,
full  of  a  febaceous  matte-,  fimilar  to  that  which  was  feen  in  the  indurated
glands  of  the  neck  of  the  fame  man.

But  tothefecond  of  thefe  kinds,  by  reafon  of  that  opinion  which  M.  Aure*
lius  Severinus  produces  at  the  fame  time,  ofAetius,  and  even  ofLeonida,
I  fhould  fuppo'e  thofe  glands  to  have  belong'd,  which  Severinus  himfelf  {q)
faw  protuberating  in  the  form  of  tubercles  in  tne  Imibs,  breaft,  back,  under
the  arm-pits,  and  in  the  groins;  more  than  fixty  of  which,  that  were  dif-
pers'd  through  the  whole  body  of  an  old  man,  excited  his  admiration,  on  this
account  principally,  that  a  great  number  of  the  tubercles  w  re  icen  "  about
"  places  which  are  quite  deftitute  of  glands:  it  therefore  brought  into  my
mind,"  fays  he  "  that  faying  of  Actios,  whereby  he  has  pronounc'd,  Hetrah^.
"  4.  cap.  5  .  .  . .  that  white  and  red  caruncles  are,,  for  the  moft  parr,  form'd
"  in  the  body,  entirely  as  new  fubftances."

{>»)  L.  4.  S.  2.  (p)  Aa  N.  C.  Tom.  J.  Obf.  io6.

(»)  Obf.  6.  §.  E.  (j)  De  Reco,id.  AbfcelLNat.  I.  4.  c,  $•

(a)  Ibid,  §.  s.

But


582 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

But  Olaus  Borrichius  (r)  having,  in  the  differed  legs  of  an  ifleric  pa-
tient, lit  on  glands  which  were  latent  under  the  flcin  "  in  an  infinite  num-
"  ber;"  did  not  fuppofe  them  to  be  new  bodies-,  but  fuppos'd  "  that  they  are
"  fo  fmall  in  the  healthy  body,  as  almoft  to  eicape  the  fight  •,  and  that  they
"  become  more  confpicuous  in  the  body  when  difeas'd,"  Yet  1  can  fcarcely
doubt  but  thefe  may  alio  be  referr'd  to  the  fecond  clafs.

And  as  to  thofe  which  Wharton  faw  in  the  arms  and  thighs  of  a  foldier  j
as  related  in  an  obfervation  that  may  be  likewife  read  in  the  Sepulchre-
turn  (j) ;  I  know,  for  a  certainty,  that  they  ought  to  be  referr'd  to  the  fame
fpecies.  For  as  all  of  them  were  moveable  under  the  fkin,  and  when  handled
even  with  fome  confiderable  rudenefs,  were  indolent,  and  did  not  yield  to
the  moft  powerful  remedies  -,  and  as  he  found  a  pretty  large  one,  which  had
been  extrafted  by  a  furgeon,  to  be  "  without  any  putrid  or  corrupt  humour,
«'  being  made  up  altogether  of  a  folid,  glandulous,  and  white  flefli  -,"  this
very  experienc'd  inveftigator  of  glands  has  not  fcrupled  to  pronounce,  that
in  this  manner  "  perfectly  found  glands  are  adventitioufly  produc'd  ;  that  is
"  to  fay,  glands  in  every  lefpedl  healthy,  except  that  they  are  reckon'd  in
"  the  number  of  preternatural  parts."

Thefe  obfervations  certainly  relate  to  external  glands,  as  thofe  of  Anthony
Cocchi  (/)  alfo  do  ;  where,  fpeaking  of  mefenteric  difeafes,  he  fays,  that
what  Leonida  had  "  feldom  "  feen,  had  more  than  once  occurr'd  to  him
(and  it  had  "  often  "  occurr'd  to  Severinus);  I  mean,  that  the  external
conglobated  glands  were  not  only  encreas'd,  but  in  a  manner  created  as  it
were,  in  parts  wherein  they  do  not  feem  naturally  to  exift.

And  indeed  he  moreover  adds  an  example,  wherein ;  befides  fome  which
are  not  wont  to  be  feen  (as  in  the  fides),  and  which  were  flefliy,  and  not
fiU'd  with  any  purulency;  he  found  others  of  the  fame  kind  within  the
belly.  "Which  obfervation,  9s  well  as  that  of  Severinus,  as  one  that  I  have
not  yet  met  with  in  the  Sepulchretum,  you  will  add  thereto.  And  at  the
fame  time  farewel.


LETTER the SIXTY-NINTH

Relates  to  Blows  and  Wounds  of  the  Head  and  Thorax ;  to
Diforders  of  the  Joints,  and  to  the  Lues  Venerea.

I.  T  H  AV  E  not  fo  much  to  fay,  at  prefent,  in  relation  to  the  diforders
J.  compriz'd  by  me  in  the  fifty-firft  letter,  and  the  others  which  follow
after,  but  that  I  can,  finally,  comprehend  the  whole  of  it  in  this  one  letter.
To  that  letter  therefore,  in  which  I  have  written  of  wounds  and  blows  of  the
head,  you  will  add  the  following  things.

fr)  Sepulchr.  S.  z.  cit.  Obf.  17.  §.  2.  (/)  Dei  Bagni  di  Pifa.

ii)  Ibid.  O^f.  15.  in  Append,  ad  §.  i.

2. A


Letter  LXIX. Articles,  583

2.  A  man  not  yet  fifty  years  of  age,  being  much  given  ta  drinking,  and
intoxicated  with  liquor  at  the  very  time,  fell  down  as  he  was  going  up  ftairs  ;
and  that  fo  much  the  more  eafily,  becaufe  he  was  lame  of  one  leg,  and  had
been  fo  for  fome  years,  from  pains,  which  were  commonly  faid  to  have,  been
the  confequence  of  the  lues  venerea.

In  falling  he  receiv'd  fuch  a  blow  on  his  left  temple,  that  he  immediately
loft  all  power  of  feeling  and  of  moving  ;  and  in  this  manner  he  died  within  fo
ftiort  a  fpace  of  time  as  four  hours.  The  body  of  this  man  being  confign'd
to  the  theatre,  at  a  time  which  was  very  convenient  for  beginning  the  public
demonftrations  in  anatomy  ;  that  is,  a  little  after  the  middle  of  January,  in
the  year  1756  •,  it  was  accurately  difletted  there  :  and  in  the  courfe  of  the
difledtion  we  obferv'd  the  following  things.

In  the  belly,  when  open'd,  the  rtomach  was  found  to  be  ftill  greatly
diftended  with  bread  and  wine ;  fo  that  he  did  not  feem  to  have  vomited  at
all,  or  at  leaft  very  little,  in  confequence  of  the  blow.  After  all  thefe  con-
tents were  exhaufted,  not  the  leaft  appearance  of  ruga;  was  feen  on  the  inter-
nal furface  of  that  vifcus.

The  liver  and  the  fpleen  were  large,  yet  not  morbid  ;  except  that  the  fub-
ftance  of  the  fpleen,  when  cut  into,  feem'd  to  me  to  be  pretty  lax,  and  the
colour  of  it  dilute.  But  both  of  the  kidnies  were  hollow'd  out  by  a  great
number  of  hydatids;  which,  beginning  under  their  very  coat,  reach'd  fo  far,
as  to  be  contiguous  to  the  tubuli  that  receive  the  papillae  ;  being  of  an  un-
equal furface  internally,  but  comprehended  every  where  in  their  ovun  proper
membrane.

The  urinary  bladder  was  larger  than  it  generally  is;  particularly  in  refpedt
of  length;  fo  as  to  be  almoft  twice  as  long  as  it  is  in  common.  Thefe  ap-
pearances, however,  in  the  body  of  a  man  fo  much  given  to  drinking,  were
not  to  be  wonder'd  j,t.

But  whether  that  which  I  obferv'd  in  the  feminal  caruncle,  related  to  the
lues  venerea,  or  had  been  fo  from  the  original  formation,  1  would  not  readily
take  upon  me  to  determine.  The  finus  which  is  in  that  caruncle,  had  its
orifice  in  the  moft  dilated  ftate  I  ever  remember  to  have  feen  it  in ;  and
was  not  plac'd  in  a  longitudinal  direftion,  but  in  a  tranfverfe,  which  I  never
faw  before  in  any  body.

Yet  the  femen  exprefs'd  from  the  veficulse,  did  not  come  out  through  that
orifice,  but  by  the  two  apertures  which  are  on  the  fides  of  it ;  as  is  ufual  in
other  bodies.

The  internal  furface  of  the  aorta,  oppofite  to  the  orifice  of  the  celiac  ar-
tery, was  not  fmooth  ;  as  it  likewile  was  not  in  other  places  throughout  the
belly  ;  and  even  in  that  part  fbow'd  two  bony  fcales.

In  the  thorax  alfo,  the  fame  great  artery  had  a  like  diibrder  within,  but
particularly  near  to  its  valves ;  two  of  which  were  not  free  from  ofiification.
And  above  them ;  although  the  heart  was  of  a  moderate  fize ;  the  larger
finus  of  Valfalva  was  wider  than  it  naturally  is.  And  thefe  appearances  were
morbid.

However,  this  which  follows,  and  which  I  do  not  remember  to  have  feen
on  any  other  occafion,  was  from  nature.  The  right  fubclavian  vein  confifted
of  two,  which,  beginning  in  the  axillary,  did  not  join  into  one  tube,  before

they


5^4 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  Dd)  the  former  Books .

they  had  come  near  to  the  orifice  of  the  internal  3 agula-t  4  and  an  infula  of  five
incnci.  Ill  Icngta  had  been  forni'd.

Thcle  two  veins  which  comprehended  the 'mf^la  betw'ijTt  them,  were  both
of  equal  thickncfs :  and,  on  the  left  fide,  in  the  axillary  vein,  was  an  infola
alfo,  though  much  fhorter  than  the  former  ;  not  being  two  inches  in  length,
and  not  comprehended  betwixt  veins  of  equal  fize  ;  the  one,  for  inftance,  be-
ing niu(.h  more  flender  than  the  other.

Before  I  fpeakof  the  head,  it  is  neceffiry  to  interpofe  a  few  things,  fome  of
which  I  am  unwilling  to  omit  in  the  prefcnt  place,  and  others  1  cannot  omit.
Although  there  was  a  confiderable  quantity  of  fat  on  the  abdomen,  and  within
the  abdomen  •,  yet  in  the  neck,  back,  and  loins,  there  was  not  fo  mui.h;  but
in  fo  unufual  a  manner  did  it  adhere  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  mufcles,  and  of
the  fafciculi  of  which  the  mufcles  are  made  up,  and  was  even  fix'd  thereto,
that  it  gave  confiderable  trouble  to  thofe  who  diffefted  them.

When  we  came  to  the  lower  limbs,  in  that  which  was  found,  a  circutw-
ftancc  happen'd  to  me  which  is  very  rare  ;  I  mean  that,  in  regard  to  the  pofte-
rior  crural  nerve,  having  introduc'd  the  handle  of  the  knife,  or  my  hand  ;  ac-
cording to  my  ufual  cuftom  -,  betwixt  the  two  branches  into  which  it  at  length
is  feen  to  be  divided  in  the  ham,  I  could  not  by  going  upwards,  confirm
■what  is  generally  the  cafe,  that  it  is  not  one,  but  is  made  up  of  two,
through  the  whole  courfe  of  the  thigh ;  and  even  fometimes  above  that  alio :
for,  although  they  did  cohere  together  indeed,  yet  they  in  faft  never  coalefcM
into  one-  body.

But  when  I  cut  into  them  longitudinally  ;  which  I  have  been  wont  to  do
in  each  of  them,  or  at  leaft  in  the  larger,  in  order  to  demonttrate  the  parallel
fibres,  of  which  it  confifis ;  1  was  furpriz'd  to  fee  fo  much  fat  interpos'd  be-
twixt them,  that  the  nerve  feem'd,  every  where,  to  contain  more  of  this
fubftance,  than  of  fibres.

For  although  it  is  many  years  ago,  fince  I  have  frequently  obferv'd,  that
an  evident  pinguedinous  fubftance  is  interpos'd  betwixt  thefe  fibres  in  bodies
that  are  pretty  fat-,  contrary  to  what  is  believ'd  by  many,  and  particularly  by
thofe  who  chufe  to  compare  the  nerves  to  tight  mufical  chords  ;  I  had,  how-
fever,  never  before  fecn  it  interpos'd  in  that  quantity  which  I  then  faw  it  in  :
nor  had  ever  it  come  into  my  mind,  to  fuppofe  it  polfible,  as  you  eafily  con--
<:?eive,  that  if  any  other  fubftance  be  colleded  here,  in  a  preternatural  manner,
in  the  place  of  fat,  thofe  diforders  which  they  impute  to  obftrufted,  or  other-
wife  vitiated,  nervous  fibres,  mull:  arife  from  thence.  This  limb  however
was  found,  as  1  have  faid.

But  the  other,  of  which  the  man  had  been  lame,  was  fo  drawn  up,  that
the  leg  could  not  be  extended,  by  any  force  of  the  hands  which  might
be  applied.  Nor  could  it  be  perfectly  extended  ;  although  it  was  then  ex-
tended fomewhat  more  eafily  ;  when  the  tendons  of  the  flexor  mufcleis,
which  were  very  tight  in  the  ham,  were  cut  through  in  a  tranfverfe  direction  j
irtid  neither  thefe  mufcles,  nor  the  extenfors,  were  of  a  red  colour,  hke  the
reft,  but  of  a  brown  and  almoft  dirty  colour.

And,  indeed,  the  colour  of  the  very  fmall  quantity  of  mucilage,  which
was  in  that  knee,  difi^er'd  from  the  natural  appearance  :  the  mucilaginous
jgland  was  larger  than  ufuaJ,  and  appear'd  like  a  white  and  hardiih  fubftance

2  of


Letter  LXIX. Article  3,  4.  s^S

of  a  pingiiedinotis  nature.  But  almofb  al!  thefe  circumftances  feem'd  to  have
been  owing  to  the  cefTation  of  motion  in  thole  miifcles,  and  in  that  joint.

Finally,  in  differing  the  head,  I  faw  the  temporal  mufcle,  which  had  been
contus'd  by  the  blow,  to  be  tumid  and  black,  by  reafon  of  the  blood  ftagnat-
ing  in  it,  and  relaxing  its  internal  ftrudture.  But  the  cranium  I  did  not  find
to  be  injur'd  in  that  part,  nor  in  any  other,  by  fradlure,  or  by  fifflire ;  nor
even  by  deprefilon.

The  veirels  which  creep  through  the  pia  mater,  were  here  and  there  feen
to  be  very  turgid  with  blood  however,  which  was  very  black  ;  and  a  coagu-
lum,  of  no  inconfiderable  fize,  was  form'd  above  that  membrane,  from  blood
which  had  been  extravafated  there.  Of  this  extravafation  therefore,  and  of  the
concuffion  which  the  brain  had  receiv'd,  his  death  had  been  the  very  fpeedy
efFea:

3.  This  hlftory  you  will  add  to  the  others,  which  I  wrote  in  the  beginning
of  the  fifty-firft  and  fifty-fecond  letters  ;  and  which  fhow  the  cranium  to
have  been  unhurt  in  like  manner,  from  blows,  but  not  the  parts  which  lie
under  the  cranium;  although  in  none  of  them  did  fo  fpeedy  adeath  follow.
Now  take  one  which  you  may  add  to  another  defcrib'd  in  the  following
fifty-third  letter  (^a).  For  it  is  the  fecond  cal'e,  wherein  I  met  with  a  wound
of  the  heart.  Thus  we  (hall  pafs  on  from  one  principal  vifcus,  the  cere-
brum, to  another  principal  vifcus,  the  heart  -,  and  from  a  cafe  of  fpeedy
death,  to  an  example  of  the  moft  fpeedy  that  can  be  conceiv'd.

4.  A  ihoemaker,  of  about  forty  years  of  age,  going  up  ftairs,  was  met  by
his  enemy  who  was  coming  down  :  this  enemy  thruft  a  knife  into  his  breaft,
and  immediately  fled.  He,  however,  crying  out  that  he  was  wounded,  and
drawing  back  the  knife  from  the  wound,  died  fo  fuddenly,  on  that  very  fpot
where  he  receiv'd  the  wound,  that  thofe  perfons  who  ran  to  him  immediately
upon  hearing  the  alarm,  did  not  find  him  alive.

The  body  of  this  rnan  was  obtain'd,  without  difficulty,  by_the  ftudents :
and  they  took  care  it  fhould  be  brought  to  me,  who  was  then  teaching  anatomy
in  the  college  ;  it  being  the  month  of  January,  in  the  year  1753.

The  body  was  of  a  large  fize,  and  of  a  found  habit ;  fo  that  if  it  had  not
been  fomewhat  more  fat  than  we  could  have  wifli'd,  a  better  fubjedt  for  ob-
fervation,  and  demonftration,  could  not  be  defir'd;  and  both  of  thefe  circum-
ftances were  ftridly  and  accurately  attended  to  by  me :  although  I  fhall  take
notice  of  nothing  here,  but  fuch  things  as  relate  to  the  wound,  and  to  the
blows  receiv'd  in  falling.

The  wound  therefore ;  which  was  inflided  at  a  very  fmall  diftance  from  the"
left  fide  of  the  fternum,  betwixt  the  cartilages  of  the  third  and  fourth  rib  ;
was  fcarcely  longer  externally, -jthan  half  an  inch  of  the  foot  of  Bologna  :  it.
had  pafs'd  from  thence  through  the  mediaftinum,  and  the  pericardium,  to
the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  had  pierc'd  through  the  paries  thereof
very  near  to  the  feptum,  in  almoft  a  middle  fituation  betwixt  the  bafis  and
the  apex  ;  not  being  more  than  three  lines  in  length  in  that  part.

The  pericardium,  therefore,  we  had  found  to  be  diftended  with  black  and
grumous  blood  :  and  the  anterior  part  of  the  mediaftinum,  where  the  wound

(a)  N.  26.
Vol.  hi.  4  F  had


586 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

had  pafs'd  through,  and  above,  and  below,  to  a  confiderable  extent,  we
found  to  be  blackifh,  and  in  a  manner  turgid,  from  blood ;  but  there  was
no  blood  in  the  ventricles  of  ';he  heart,  nor  in  its  auricles.  Nor  was  there
any  other  injury  befides  thefe  within  the  thorax.

But  externally,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  back,  were  traces  of  a  contufion  ;
which  extended  themfelves  quite  from  the  fkin  into  the  fat,  that  is  interpos'd
betwixt  the  round  niufcles  of  both  the  fcapulse.

The  integuments  of  the  head,  alfo,  preferv'd  fome  marks  of  contufion  in
the  forehead,  which,  I  fuppofe,  had  been  got  in  the  fall ;  as  I  believe,  that
he  had,  at  length,  lain  in  fuch  a  manner  on  the  ftairs,  on  the  fteps  of  which
he  had  again  fallen,  in  endeavouring  to  rife,  that  it  was  much  more  eafy  for
the  blood  to  flow  into  the  head,  than  into  the  oppofite  part :  at  leaft  the
veflels  which  were  below  the  heart,  contain'd  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  blood  ;
and  thofe  that  were  above,  a  very  large  quantity.

The  furface  of  the  brain,  therefore,  was  red  from  a  difter^fion  of  the
veffels  which  pafs  through  the  pia  mater ;  and  from  a  diftenfion  of  their
fmall  branches,  which  was  fo  great  as  to  refemble  an  injeftion  of  red  matter.
Nor  did  thofe  veflels,  which  appear  within  the  medullary  fubftance,  at  other
times,  like  threads,  appear  to  be  lefs  full ;  for  it  was  here  evident,  to  every
one,  that  they  were  hollow  tubuli.

5.  If  you  compare  this  wound  of  the  heart,  with  that  which  I  have  dc-
fcrib'd  to  you  in  the  fifty-third  letter  (i^)-,  from  the  obfervation  of  Valfalva;
and  obferve  that  both  of  them  penetrated  into  the  cavity  of  the  fame,  that  is
of  the  right,  ventricle  ;  and  that  by  an  almofl:  fimilar  fiflure  which  was  open'd
in  its  paries ;  you  will  perhaps  be  furpriz'd,  that  the  man,  whofe  hiftory  is,
given  by  Valfalva,  did  not  die  till  the  eighth  day  j  and  that  this  man  was  fo
foon  kill'd  by  his  wound  :  efpecially  as  fo  great  a  quantity  of  blood  was  found
to  have  been  efFus'd  into  the  thorax  and  belly  by  the  former.

However,  you  will,  I  fuppofe,  naturally  imagine,  that  this  difi^erence
arofe,  on  account  of  that  very  extravafation  of  the  blood  ;  which  flow'd,  not
only  on  the  outfide  of  the  heart,  but  on  the  outfide  of  the  pericardium  :  for
it  could  not  ftagnate  betwixt  the  pericardium  and  the  heart;  as  in  our  obfer-
vation; and  thereby  diftend  the  former,  and  prefs  upon  the  latter.

And  if  you  do  this,  you  will,  from  comparing  together  both  thefe  obfer-
vations,  have  wherefrom  to  confirm  that  which  we  have,  in  a  former  letter  (f),
plac'd  among  the  other  caufes,  why  a  hemorrhage  within  the  pericardium
brings  on  death  far  fooner  than  when  it  happens  in  moft  other  places,  even
though  it  be  far  lefs  confiderable.

6.  I  have  faid,  that  when  it  happens  in  molt  other  places  ;  and  I  have
faid,  in  like  manner,  among  other  caufes  •,  as  I  am  not  ignorant,  how  fpeedily
even  a  fmall  quantity  of  blood,  efFus'd  within  the  cranium,  or  a  great
quantity,  but  even  when  extravafated  within  the  belly  itfelf,  is  wont  to  kill
perfons  thus  affefled  ;  as  for  inftance,  from  a  ruptur'd  fpleen,  which  you  will
learn  from  many  of  thofe  obfervations,  that  I  have  pointed  out  to  you,  when
1  was  treating  of  wounds  in  the  belly  {d),  that  you  might  have  an  opportunity
of  reading  them  over.


(i)  N.  3.  (t/J  Epift.  54.  n.  5.

(<•)  Epift.  26.  n.  18.


And


Letter  LXIX. Articles  7,8.  587

And  if  among  thefe,  I  fhould  have  happen'd  to  omit  thofe,  which  are  pro-
pos'd  by  Michael  Vanfelowius  (e),  or  by  J.  Valentine  Scheidius  (/)  (for  1  am
not  at  leifure  to  look  back  again  to  every  article)  I  would  have  you  turn  to
them,  and  you  will  then  be  the  more  convinc'd  that  what  I  advance  is
confiftent.

7.  And  the  calling  to  mind  thefe  obfervations  would  certainly  have  teen
very  opportune,  in  order  to  admonifh  me  to  add,  on  the  prefent  occafion,
any  thing  which  I  might  have  lit  on  in  the  mean  time  ;  by  reading,  orhy  dif-
fedion  ;  that  related  to  thofe  things  which  I  then  wrote  of  at  large.  But  as
nothing  at  prefent  occurs  to  me,  either  on  thefe  fubjefts,  or  on  ulcers,  I
fhall  pafs  on  to  thofe  things  which  relate  to  diforders  of  the  joints,  that  are  in-
jurious to  motion.  For  there  are  fome  of  thefe  which  I  have  either  feen  my-
felf,  fince  1  fent  you  the  fifty-fixth  letter,  or  have  read  of,  as  they  were  feen
by  others. To  the  firft  clafs  belong  the  two  following  hiftories.

8.  There  was  an  old  man  at  Padua,  of  whom  I  heard,  after  the  difleftion;
and  that  from  thofe  who  had  been  familiarly  converfant  with  him  for  a  long
time ;  that  he  could  not  have  inclin'd  his  head  to  one  fide  without  diffrculty.
This  man,  having  died  in  the  hofpital,  m  the  beginning  of  March,  in  the  year
I  755,  of  a  catarrh  ;  as  was  faid  ;  gave  me  an  occafion  of  obferving  the  fol-
lowing things ;  as  I  was  at  that  time  demonftrating  fome  circumftances  rela-
tive to  the  anatomy  of  the  head,  neck,  and  thorax.

The  thorax  being  open'd,  one  pretty  large,  and  one  rather  fmall,  hydatid
was  found  on  the  anterior  fiH-face  of  th^  right  lobe  of  the  lungs.

The  head,  when  cut  into,  ftiow'd  water  within  the  cranium ;  and  a  part
of  this  was  found  in  the  lateral  ventricles. The  pineal  gland  was  flender.

As  the  fmall  mufcles  which  are  interpos'd,  anteriorly,  betwixt  the  firfl:
vertebra  colli  and  the  head,  fcarcely,  and  indeed  not  at  all,  appear'd  ;  and
this  did  not  feem  to  me  to  be  imputable  to  the  very  bad,  that  is,  to  the  very
lax,  ftate  of  them,  wTiich  was  to  be  obferv'd  in  the  other  mufcles  alfo  -,  upon
examining  the  matter  more  attentively,  and  inquiring  into  it  more  deeply,
I  lit  on  that  circumftance,  on  account  of  which  I  was  willing  to  write  this  ob-
fervation  to  you.

That  is  to  fay,  not  only  what  had  occurr'd  to  Columbus  (g),  when  he
faid,  "  I  have  feen  the  firfl:  vertebra  adhering  to  the  os  occipitis,  in  fuch  a
"  manner,  that  it  could  not  be  mov'd  by  any  means,"  was  here  alfo ;  but,
befides  this,  an  adhefion  of  fuch  a  kind  was  feen  on  the  left,  and  particularly
on  the  anterior  fide,  that  this  vertebra  and  the  os  occipitis  were  one  and  the
fame  bone :  and  that  this  had  exifl:ed  from  the  original  conformation,  was
fliown  by  many  neighbouring  diforders  in  theflrudure.

For  the  fecond  vertebra  had  its  body,  I  do  not  fay  grown  into  one  fub-
ftance  with  the  third  •,  though  there  was  no  trace  of  divifion  (but  only  a  flight
appearance  of  a  divifion  having  fubfifted  in  fome  former  time)  any  more  than
there  was  betwixt  the  firft:  vertebra  and  the  os  occipitis,  as  I  have  faid ;  had
its  body,  I  fay,  and  the  dentoid  procefs,  nearer  to  the  right  fide  of  the  head

(«)  Difp>  exhib.  Hift.  de  Ruptura  Lien. .  (g)  De  Re  Anat.  1,  15.

{/J  Obfervat.  Lienum  Difrupt.

4  F  2  than


3-88  Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

than  to  the  left :  this  procefs  was  fliorter  than  ufual  alfo  ;  and  as  to  the  pro-
cefles  that  are  call'd  the  fuperior  oblique,  on  the  whole  of  that  furface  where
they  receiv'd  the  inferior  proceiTes  of  the  firft  vertebra  ;  which  here  perform'd
the  office  of  the  condyles  of  the  os  occipitis ;  they  were  by  no  means  fimilar  to
each  other  -,  as  that  on  the  right  fide  was  more  confin'd  than  the  left,  went
up  higher,  and  was  inclin'd  forwards,  rather  than  backwards.

There  are  other  circumftances  alfo,  which  I  the  more  readily  pafs  over  for
the  fake  of  brevity,  becaiife,  whenever  you  come  to  Padua,  you  may  fee
thefe  bones,  as  I  keep  them  by  me.  But  the  ligaments,  which  I  could  not
preferve  in  the  ftate  they  were  found,  I  will  not  omit  to  defcribe.

The  tranfverfe  ligament,  as  it  is  call'd,  embrac'd  the  whole  of  the  dentoid
procefs  on  the  back-part,  except  at  the  lower  part,  from  whence  the  lateral
ligaments  arofe  in  a  longer  and  more  flender  ftate  than  ufual ;  but  efpecially
that  on  the  right  fide.  Yet  from  the  left,  and  upper  fide,  as  it  were,  of  the
dentoid  procefs,  a  kind  ofveryfhort,  and  pretty  thick  ligament  proceeded.

9,  But  you  will  remember,  that  other  diforders  of  the  ligaments  I  juft
now  fpoke  of,  have  been  defcrib'd  in  one  or  two  of  the  preceding  letters  {h) ;
although  it  did  not  feein  that  ihofe  were  to  be  confider'd  as  the  effefts  of  ori-
ginal conformation,  as  thefe  are.  But  you  will  remember  ftill  more,  becaufe
it  has  been  frequently  done,  that,  when  mention  is  made  of  lamenefs,  among
other  caufes  diforders  are  defcrib'd  in  that  joint,  which  is  interpos'd  betwixt
the  head  of  the  femur  and  the  acetabulum  of  the  os  innominatum..  And  to
this  clafs  will  belong  the  following  hiftory ;  which  contains  fome  peculiar  cir-
cumftances that  you  have  not  read  of  in  other  writings.

10.  A  woman,  of  threefcore-and-feventeen  years  of  age,  had  been  born
healthy  and  found,  and  had  liv'd  in  that  ftate  fome  time,  fo  as  to  have  been
happily  deliver'd  of  a  fon.  But  at  the  fecond  time  of  child-bearing,  which
was  a  very  difficult  one,  having  brought  forth  a  daughter  (who  related  thefe
circumftances)  ftie  began  to  be  feiz'd  with  pains  about  the  ifchiadic  region  on
the  right  fide,  and  to  be  lame.

Thefe  diforders  could  not  be  at  all  reliev'd,  either  by  nature  or  by  art ;
notwithftanding  her  third  and  fourth  time  of  child-bearing  were  happy  ;  and
indeed  fhe  often  fell  down,  becaufe  the  right  limb  did  not  bear  the  weight  of
her  body  with  fufficient  firmnefs.

At  length  being  admitted  into  the  hofpital ;  more  on  account  of  her  poverty,
than  her  difeafe  ;  ffie  there  lay  in  bed  a  year  and  fome  months,  for  this  rea-
fon,  that  if  file  attempted  to  rife,  her  pains  were  cxafperated.  Her  appetite  for
food  being  very  confiderable,  but  her  ftrength  neverthelefs  gradually  failing
her  •,  and  (he  being  now  and  then  delirious  •,  flie  at  length  died  in  a  gradual
manner,  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  1754.

Some  parts  of  this  emaciated  body  were  not  without  their  ufe  to  us,  as
we  were  then  taking  notice  of,  and  demonftrating,  many  and  various  cir-
cumftances.

For  the  cerebrum,  the  cerebellum,  and  the  medulla  oblongata,  were  in  a
pretty  firm  ftate  :  and  although  a  fmall  quantity  of  limpid  water  was  contain'd
in  the  lateral  ventricles,  yet  the  plexus  choroidcs  were  red  ;  nor  did  the  pia

{h)  Epift,  62. n.  II.  &  Efift.  63.  n.  19.

mater


Letter  LXIX. Article  lo.  5-89

mater  eafily  follow  the  hand  which  drew  it:  and  from  hence  we  may  pretty
fairly  conclude,  that  this  water  had  not  been  long  within  the  cranium.

And  although  I  likewife  faw  the  uterus  to  be  inclin'd  to  the  fame  fide,  on
which  this  woman  had  been  lame,  and  to  be  attended  with  ovaries,  which
were  very  much  contrafted  ;  yet  it  was  proper  enough  for  the  demonftration
of  other  things ;  and  amongft  the  reft,  for  admonifliing  the  ftudents,  that
they  fhould  not,  from  what  I  had  faid  formerly  in  comparing  the  fituation  of
the  ofculum  uteri  of  a  cow  with  that  of  a  woman,  in  the  firft  of  the  Adver-
faria  (/),  fuppofe  me  to  deny,  that  the  corona  of  this  ofculum,  when  in  a  na-
tural ftate  in  women,  defcends  more  on  the  anterior  than  on  tiie  pofterior
part,  or  at  leaft  in  fome  degree  ;  although  not  always  fo  much  as  the  figures
of  Euftachius  {k),  when  compar'd  one  with  another,  reprefent.

I  laft  of  all  examin'd  the  joint  of  the  right  thigh,  together  with  its  aceta-
bulum :  and  as  I  fuppos'd  I  ftiould  find  a  very  cdhfiderable  difeafe,  by  reafon
of  that  part  being  enormoudy  protuberant  outwards,  in  the  fide;  lb,  foon
after,  when  the  diflTeftion  was  perform'd,  I  found  not  only  one,  but  many
confiderable  difeafes ;  and  that  I  might  be  the  better  able  to  judge  of  them  by
comparifon,  I  firft  laid  bare  the  upper  part  of  both  the  oflTa  femoris,  and  the
inferior  part  of  both  the  ofla  innominata.

The  OS  innominatum  on  the  right  fide  then,  whether  you  look'd  upon  its
external  or  its  internal  furface,  you  faw  to  be  extended  into  a  larger  circle
laterally  than  the  left,  and  found  the  acetabulum  to  be  comprehended  in.
thicker  parietes,  externally,  than  ufual.

And  this  right  acetabulum  had  a  larger  orifice  than  the  left ;  nor  was  the
fupercilium  thereof,  as  it  is  call'd,  of  a  flexible  nature,  but  bony :  and  as
the  left  correfponded  to  the  head  of  a  found  thigh-bone,  in  its  figure  and  di-
menfions,  fo  this  exadlly  correfponded  to  the  head  of  a  thigh-bone,  which  was
alter'd,  by  difeafe,  from  its  natural  figure  and  dimenfions.  For  the  form  of
this  head  was  not  hfmifpherical,  but  conical.

The  bafis  of  the  cone  on  the  external  fide,  began  at  the, very  roots  of  the.
larger  trochanter  ;  whereas  on  the  internal  fide,  it  was  diftant,  by  a  confidera-
ble interval,  from  the  lefter  trochanter.  The  figure  of  the  right  acetabulum,,
therefore,  was  the  fame  with  that  of  a  hollow  cone  :  and  the  depth  of  it
from  the  external  fide  was  very  great ;  fo  as  to  be  almoft  twice  as  deep  there
as  on  the  left  fide:_and  as  to  the  mucilaginous  gland  ;  which  feem'd  to  be
larger  than  it  generally  is,  on  the  left  fide,  and  to  be  prominent  out  of  its-
cavity,  as  it  were;  there  were  fcarcely  any  appearances  of  this  gland,  or  its.
cavity,  and  indeed  none  at  all  in  the  right  fide.

And  even  the  cartilaginous  cruft,  which  invefted  both  the  furface  of  the.
acetabulum,  and  the  head  of  the  os  femoris,  and  was  white  and  fiiining  on  the
left  fide,  was  feen  to  be  brown,  and  of  a  pale  colour  on  the  right  fide  ;  and.
to  be,  moreover,  red  in  feveral  places.

Having  fufiiciently  examin'd  all  thefe  things,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  ob-
ferv'd  how  flaccid  the  ligamentum  teres,  as  it  is  call'd,  of  the  head  of  the-
femur  on  the  right  fide,  was ;  I  then  order'd  the  fame  head  to  be  cut  with  a
faw  ;  paffing  the  inftrument  through  its  axis  from  the  vertex  to  the  bafis ;

(0  N. rs.  .  {k)  Tab.  14.  Fig.  3  &  4.

6,  and


^  ^  o Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

and  the  feffion  to  be  carried  on  into  the  neighbouring  part  of  the  femUr  alfo :
and  this  that  I  might  lee  what  difference  there  was  betwixt  the  two  parts
internally. This  difference  was  very  manifeft.

For  although  this  parr,  and  that  head,  were  feen  to  be  every  where  co-
ver'd  with  their  firm  bony  lamina;  yet  the  marrow  which  this  neighbouring
part  of  the  os  femoris  contain'd,  and  that  which  the  head  contain'd  within
its  cancelli,  were  evidently  of  a  different  nature  :  for  the  marrow  in  the  head
was  of  a  white  colour  inclining  to  yellow,  and  when  you  prefs'd  it  betwixt
your  fingers,  more  of  a  watry  than  of  an  oily  nature ;  whereas  in  that  part
of  the  thigh-bone  it  inclin'd  more  to  rednefs,  and  was  of  an  oily  nature.

Finally,  when  I  compar'd  both  the  ofTa  femoris  together,  it  feem'd  well
worth  while  to  take  notice  of  that  part  which  was  under  the  trochanters,  at
fome  little  diftance,  not  only  in  relpefl:  to  its  figure  ;  which  being  very  diffe-
rent from  that  of  a  round  body,  came  very  near  to  the  fhape  of  an  angular
body  ;  but  alfo  in  refpeft  to  its  incurvation  in  the  form  of  the  fegment  of  an
arch,  which  had  its  convex  part  looking  forwards :  this  incurvation,  however,
was  greater  in  the  left  femur  than  in  the  right;  and  that  you  would  eafily
conceive,  if  the  pains  and  lamenefs  had  exifted  at  the  time,  in  which  the
bones,  being  ftill  flexible,  would  yield  more  to  the  weight  of  the  body  in
that  limb-,  on  which  fhe,  when  a  little  girl,  was  accuftom'd  to  fupport  her-
felf  the  moft  ;  and  this  in  confequence  of  its  being  more  firm,  and  giving
lefs  occafion  to  pain,  than  the  other.

II.  How  is  it  then  ?  Did  not  the  daughter  give  us  a  true  relation  ?  or
did  the  mother  go  lame,  in  a  fmall  degree,  from  the  beginning,  and  when
flie  was  in  the  flower  of  her  youth,  having  been  born  with  fome  of  the
difeafes  of  that  ilrudture  which  I  have  defcrib'd  ?  And  when  from  a  very
difficult  birth ;  from  which  caufe  I  have  already  taken  notice  (/),  that  lame-
nefs has  happen'd  to  others  in  different  ways;  a  new  caufe  was  added  to  the
diforder  of  the  ftruclure,  did  the  fevere  pains,  and  the  very  manifeft  lame-
nefs then  in  fa£t  come  on  ?  And  did  the  mother,  as  the  manner  of  women
is,  choofe  to  have  it  fuppos'd,  that  her  diforder  had  taken  its  origin
from  thence  ;  as  if  by  misfortune;  rather  than  that  it  had  exifted  from  the
birth  ?

Certainly  no  perfon  can  readily  fuppofe,  that  all  thefe  changes,  and  all
the  changes  of  that  kind  which  were  found  by  me,  had  happen'd  in  the
bones  of  an  adult  woman,  and  one  who  was  the  mother  of  two  children ;
efpecially  as  he  will  obferve,  that  the  humour  which  he  may  fuppofe  to  have
been  depofited  there,  and  to  have  created  ifchiadic  pains,  was  not  endow'd
with  fuch  an  acrimonious  property,  as  I  very  evidently  knew  it  to  be  in
another  lame  woman,  who  was  afHidted  with  ifchiadic  pains  (m) :  and  that
from  the  erofion  of  the  cartilage  which  cover'd  the  head  of  the  femur,  and
from  the  bloody  furface  of  the  acetabulum.

Yet  I  would  wifh  you  to  read  that  hiflory  over  again  if  you  pleafe,  and
join  it  to  this,  or  if  you  choofe  rather  to  thofe  alfo,  wherein  I  have  defcrib'd

(/)  Epift.  48.  n.  32.  («)  Epift.  57.  n.  2.

a  lamenefs


Letter  LXIX. Article  12.  5 pi

a  lamenels  and  an  inclination  of  the  uterus  at  the  fame  time  («)  j  as  I  have  in
the  prefent.

12.  Thus  far  what  I  myfelf  faw:  now  attend  to  fome  things  which  I
have  lit  upon  in  the  mean  time  by  reading  ;  and  which  have  been  both  feen
and  remark'd  by  others,  in  regard  to  the  diforders  of  the  joints ;  fuch  as  an-
chylofis,  arthritis,  and  other  morbid  dfFedions,  which  are  touch'd  upon  in
the  obfervations  produc'd,  or  taken  notice  of  by  me  juft  now,  or  at  other
times.

Not  to  refer  you  to  many ;  turn  to  that  one  diflertation  which  I  alfo  com-
mended in  the  former  letter  {0) ;  I  mean,  the  diflertation  of  Reimarus  {p).
As  to  what  relates  to  the  anchylofis,  he  firfl:  tells  you  {q)  what  the  celebrated
John  Hunter  faw,  at  London,  in  a  thigh-bone  which  had  not  been  long
broken  ;  that  is  to  fay,  the  callus,  which  was  interpos'd  betwixt  the  two  ex-
tremities, was  yet  foft,  and  the  bony  fibres  Ihot  from  both  of  thefe  extremiT
ties ;  the  fmall  fanguiferous  veffels  evidently  proceeding  from  the  meditullium
of  the  bone,  and  being  produc'd  within  the  callus.

And  Reimarus  obferves  from  hence,  that  if  the  cruft  of  bones,  which
are  brought  together  in  order  to  form  a  joint,  be  injur'd,  the  fibres  and  vef-
fels may  (hoot  forth  on  each  fide,  and  be  join'd  with  the  oppofite  fibres  and
veffels,  fo  as  to  produce  that  diforder  which  is  call'd  the  true  anchylofis,  and
is  incurable.

But  as  to  that  appearance  which  he  faw  in  the  diffcftion  of  a  boy's  knee  (r) ;
and  which  was  produc'd  by  a  kind  of  membrane,  "  fuch  as  we  generally
"  fee  generated  by  inflammation,  in  the  thorax,  and  in  other  parts ;"  con-
nedting  the  extreme  cartilages  of  the  oppofite  parts ;  he  not  only  does  not
doubt  but  this  may  be  cur'd,  but  even  thinks  it  may  happen,  that  by  a  fud-
den  force  accidentally  applied  ;  as,  for  inftance,  in  falling,  or  in  the  exten-
lion  or  flexion  of  a  rigid  joint ;  a  cohefion  of  this  kind  may  be  broken  thro' :
and  by  this  hypothefis  he  happily  explains  a  certain  obfervation  of  Meekre-
nius,  which  is  otherwife  noteafily  to  be  undcrftood.

And  you,  perhaps,  will  think,  that  certain  fudden  cures  of  an  adventi-
tious inflexibility  of  the  joints,  are  to  be  referr'd  to  the  fame  clafs ;  cures,  for
inftance,  that  have  been  brought  about  by  a  ftrong  flexion  of  the  fubjeded
limb,  being  made  by  the  furgeons ;  or,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  limb  cannot
be  extended  of  itfelf,  by  a  flirong  extenficn  ;  and  that  from  hence  we  are  to
account  for  the  cracking  noifc  which  is  then  heard  :  that  is,  from  the  rupture
of  a  membrane  of  this  kind,  which  is  now  pretty  firm ;  and  not  from  the
rupture  of  any  other  part.

For  which  reafon  it  were  the  more  to  be  wilh'd,  that  the  figns  of  an  an-
chylofis, produc'd  by  this  membrane,  were  known  :  for  if  this  membrane
has  true  veffels  ;  in  the  fame  manner  as  fome  of  thofe  membranes,  whereby
the  lungs  are  conneited  to  the  pleura  -,  it  is  natural  to  fuppofe,  that,  within
the  joint  alfo,  as  well  as  in  the  thorax,  fome  injury  had  formerly  preceded,
and  that  from  thence  the  fibres  and  veffels  might  fhoot  out  in  the  manner  we


(fi)  Epift.  48.  n,  32.  &  feqq.  (j)  § 6i.

(f)  De  Fungo  Anicul.


have


J  9  2 Book  v.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

have  faid  of  the  extremities  of  broken  bones;  though  in  the  cafe  fpoken
of  at  prefenr,  the  fibres  and  vefTels  would  be  of  a  membranous  nature.

13.  But  in  regard  to  other  difeafes  of  the  joints ;  as  I  have  already  fuffi-
ciently,  though  briefly,  in  that  letter  wherein  I  have  faid  this  diflertation
is  commended,  pointed  out  how  many  various  obfervations  occur  in  the
fame  diflertation ;  I  will  here  touch  only  upon  thofe  things  that  relate  to  a
difeafe,  which  is,  as  -Reimarus  himfelf  acknowledges  (s),  "  fingular ;"  I
mean  to  globules,  internally  bony,  and  externally  cartilaginous,  which  I  ac-
curately defcrib'd  to  you  in  the  fifty- feventh  letter  (/),  as  I  had  found  them
within  the  knee  of  an  old  woman.

In  England,  where  a  difeafe  fo  rare  amongft  us,  is  not  unufual  •,  fo
that  the  common  People  call  the  diforder,  "  mice  in  the  knee  ;"  he  faw,
heard,  and  read,  msny  examples  of  the  fame  kind.

Thefe  bodies  are  moveable  to  and  fro,  through  the  cavity  of  that  joint,
with  great  freedom  ;  infomuch  that  in  no  more  than  one  inftance,  as  far  as
could  be  diftinguidi'd  without  difledlion,  "  the  globular  body  feem'd  to
"  adhere,  in  a  manner,  to  fome  one  of  the  ligaments,  fo  that  it  could  not
"  wander  through  the  whole  joint."

They  may  be  forc'd  accidentally,  or  by  the  application  of  the  hand,  into
thofe  parts  of  the  joint  where  they  can  neither  be  injurious  to  motion,  nor
create  pains.  And  in  thefe  parts  they  could,  fometimes,  be  fo  retain'd,  by
means  of  remedies  externally  applied  •,  and  the  application  of  bandages ;  that
they  did  not  even  fall  out  therefrom,  after  the  difcontinuation  of  fuch
affiftances.

But  the  impediment  to  motion,  which  others  perceiv'd  therefrom,  or  the
pain  which  troubled  them  whenever  they  attempted  to  move  the  joint,
oblig'd  them  to  haverecourfe  to  furgeons ;  who,  by  cutting  into  the  parietes
of  the  joint,  took  them  out :  and  this  fometimes  with  good  fuccefs  ;  but  at
other  times  ;  by  reafon  of  the  fymptoms,  which  may  fucceed  to  fuch  inci-
fions  into  the  cavities  of  joints,  and  which  this  diligent  author  (u)  even  ob-
ferv'd  to  have  foUow'd,  more  than  once ;  with  an  event  truly  fatal.

And  in  regard  to  the  origin  of  thefe  corpufcles,  although  he  produces  two
examples,  from  whence  it  may  feem,  that  they  are  little  pieces  of  bones,
which  have  been  torn  off  from  the  extremities  of  the  bones,  by  the  applica-
tion of  fome  accidental  force  ;  yet  as  they  are  feen  to  be  every  where  "  in-
"  vefted  with  a  fmooth. cartilage,"  and  the  difeafe  has  not  always  been  pre-
ceded by  the  application  of  external  force ;  he  prudently  confeffes  that  no-
thing certain  can  be  determin'd  by  him,  before  the  examination  of  a  great
number  of  frelh  inftances.

I  therefore  am  not  forry,  for  having  written  to  you,  not  only  what  I
myfelf  faw  formerly,  but  alfo  what  his  illuftrious  preceptor  Haller  had
feen.

For  the  very  learned  Reimarus  forgets ;  as  is  frequently  the  cafe ;  when
he  aflerts  that  no  examples  were  known  to  him,  of  this  diforder  attacking
any  other  joint  but  the  knee  j  he  forgets,  I  fay,  the  obfervation  of  Haller,


(j) §.  54.  &  feqq.  (a) §.  26.  &  feqq.

(/)  n.  14.


who


Letter  LXIX. Article  14.  593

who  found  this  difeafe  in  the  articulation  of  the  jaw ;  and  found  the  carti-
lages of  that  joint  to  be  partly  confum'd  at  the  fame  time  :  fome  of  which  I
alio,  at  that  time,  faw  to  be  cut  into  furrows,  and  extenuated,  and  yet  not
fo  much  as  was  neceflary  in  order  to  form  many  fewer  little  bodies  than  I  met
with  ;  for  there  were  not  twenty,  as  in  the  obfervation  of  Haller,  but  more-,
and  among  thefe  were  five  of  fuch  a  magnitude,  as  to  be  equal  to  fmall
grapes  :  and  all  of  thefe  bodies  found  by  both  of  us,  were  in  the  form  of
globules  ;  whereas  Reimarus  fpeaks  only  of  one,  or  at  mod  of  two,  and  does
not  mention  any  thing  of  the  magnitude,  or  the  figure  of  them,  except  that
one  was  "  nearly  equal  to  a  kind  of  horfe-pea  in  its  bulk."

And  it  has  happen'd  to  me,  in  particular,  not  to  find  all  of  them  cover'd
with  a  cartilaginous  cruft,  but  many  of  them  entirely  bony:  yet  I  found
none  of  them  loofe,  but  all  of  them  continu'd  from  the  cartilages,  or  rather
from  the  mucilaginous  glands ;  although  I  perceiv'd  that  it  might  happen,
■without  any  great  difficulty  (x),  for  fome  of  them  to  be  puU'd  away  from
thence,  in  the  various  motions  of  the  knee.

Confider  then,  whether  thefe  things  which  I  have  faid  ;  not  for  the  fake  of
repetition,  but  for  the  fake  of  comparifon  ;  may  be  of  any  ufe  (when  join'd
to  the  examples  of  Reimarus)  to  help  us  out  in  fome  conjedlures  upon  the
origin  of  this  difeafe ;  to  confirm  thefe  conjedlures,  or,  in  the  mean  while,  to
fet  them  afide.

14.  Nor  muft  we  omit,  on  the  prefent  occafion,  that  obfervation  which
the  fame  refpeftable  author  refers  to,  as  made  by  him,  together  with  the  ce-
lebrated Gaubius  (y)  :  for  it  relates  to  difeafes  of  the  joints  ;  and  even  to
that  which  is  nam'd  from  the  joints :  I  mean,  the  arthritis,  or  gout.  That
is  to  fay,  in  a  man  •,  who,  having  labour'd  under  the  gout  in  his  feet,  had
died  afthmatic  on  the  going  off  of  this  paroxyfm  •,  they  found  here  and  there,
within  the  lungs,  "  a^white  matter,  refembling,  in  fome  parts  of  it,  a  pretty
"  thick  and  gypfcous  nature."

And  in  reading  of  this,  you  will  naturally  call  to  mind  what  I  have  writ-
ten to  you  on  the  fubjeft  of  arthritic  matter  (2)  ;  either  when  deferting
the  joints,  it  falls  upon  other  parts,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  when  it  is  op-
portunely eliminated  from  the  body  -,  as,  for  inftance,  by  the  inteftines  j
which  I  have  faid  was  feen  by  Albertini,  "  in  the  form  of  a  kind  of  calx,
"  or  gypfum,  lately  condens'd  together ;"  or  by  the  urinary  pafiages ;  a  re-
markable hiftory  of  which  kind  you  have,  as  publifh'd  by  the  Royal  Aca-
demy of  Sciences  at  Paris  (a) ;  of  a  man,  that  is  to  fay,  who  having  begun
to  be  attack'd,  at  intervals,  by  flight  arthritic  paroxyfms,  was  freed  from
the  much  more  violent  return  thereof,  as  was  fuppos'd,  by  the  difcharge  of
a  milky  urine,  for  about  the  fpace  of  nine  months  fucceflively  •,  an  argilla-
ceous matter  fjbfiding  therein,  foon  after  its  excretion,  and  within  an  hour
or  two  coming  to  the  hardnefs  of  a  perfect  gypfum.

But  if  it  be  not  difcharg'd,  and  yet  cannot  fall  upon  the  joints ;  or  at
leaft  does  not  continue  to  fall  thereon  ;  what  fatal  diforders  it  brings  after  it,
I  have  not  only  already  ihown  by  the  example  of  the  moft  eminent  car-
ter) n.  15.  {z)  Epift.  57.  n.  9.

{jj  in  notula  a  ad  §.  40.  (a)  Hift.  A.  1747.  Obf.  Anat.  3.

Vol.  IlL  4  G  dinal


5  94 Book  V.  Byway  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

dinal  Cornell  (b),  but  could  alfo  now  confirm,  by  the  example  of  another
very  eminent  cardinal ;  and  even  by  that  of  the  auguft  emperor  Charles  the
feventh,  as  fpoken  of  by  that  celebrated  man  Jo.  Godofr.  de  Hahn  (c) ;  if  ic
were  not  my  determination  by  no  means  to  infill:  here,  upon  any  other  hifto-
ries  of  arthritic  patients  ;  but  to  add  fomething  upon  a  far  different  kind  of
difeafe.

Neverthelefs,  it  will  not  be  without  its  ufe,  for  you  to  compare  both  the
examples  given  by  de  Hahn  (c),  with  what  I  have  faid  in  regard  to  the  cardinal
Cornell ;  tor  in  the  firtl  of  them  you  will  find  the  conftitution  of  body,  and
at  leaft  the  fufpicion  of  a  calculus  in  the  gall-bladder:  in  the  other  there
was  a  calculus  of  the  kidnies  ;  and  in  both  of  them  you  will  find  fome
fymptoms  that  relate  to  the  thorax  and  head,  which  you  may  alfo  obferve  in
our  cafe  of  the  cardinal.

15.  You  will  eafily  remember,  that  when  I  fent  to  you-my  letter  upon  ths
lues  venerea  •,  that  is,  the  fifty-eighth  letter;  I  had  written  the  fewer  obfer-
vations  therein,  becaufe  I  had  before  fent  many,  at  different  times,  in  other
letters,  on  occafion  of  various  difeafes  wherewith  that  lues  was  join'd  i,
which  obfervations  I  particularly  referr'd  to  in  that  letter  (d),  and  at  the  be-
ginning thereof.  To  thofe  you  will  now  add  others ;  and  efpecially  that,
which,  in  writing  of  the  aphonia  (e),  I  did  not  omit,  though  it  related,  at  the
fame  time,  to  diibrders  brought  on  the  male  urethra  by  a  virulent  go-
Horrhcea.

And  what  diforders  have  been  feen  to  be  produc'd,  in  the  genital  parts  of
women,  from  that  lues,  by  the  celebrated  Roederer,  you  will  learn  from  his
differtation  de  Uteri  Sdrrho  (/)  -,  which  had  not  as  yet  come  out,  when  I
firft  wrote  ;  and  what  mifchiefs  have  occurr'd  to  me  therefrom,  you  will  fee  by
this  obfervation  of  mine,  which  I  had  not  made  at  that  time  of  writing.

16.  It  was  certain  in  regard  to  a  woman  of  a  middle  age,  that  fhe  had  been;
affefted  with  an  oedematous  fwelling  of  the  legs,  which  had  afterwards  difap-
pear'd  ;  but  by  what  difeafe  ftie  had  been  chiefly  carried  off,  was  unknown..
There  was  no  doubt,  however,  but  fhe  had  labour'd  under  a  lues  venerea.
As  this  body  was  diffecfed  by  me  before  the  middle  of  iVIarch,  in  the  year
1754;  and  that  in  the  hofpital ;  in  order  to  examine  and  demonftrate  the
natural  ftate,  and  ftrutflure,  of  fome  of  the  parts  -,  I  obferv'd  the  following;
things  to  be  quite  contrary  to  the  ufual  appearances  of  nature.

The  thorax  indeed  contain'd  fome  water  ;  but  the  cranium,  and  the  ven-
tricles of  the  cerebrum,  and  the  cavity  of  the  fpine,  contain'd  more.

In  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  the  uterus  was  found  to  be  very  much  inclin'd
to  the  left  fide.  And  on  the  fide  of  inclination,  I  could  find  no  traces  of  the
extremity  of  the  tube,  though  I  enquir'd  very  attentively.  For  the  tube,  as
far  as  I  could  fee,  was  not  hollow,  but  folid  ;  and  had  fcarcely  pafs'd  to  the
extent  of  three  fingers  breadths  from  the  uterus,  when  it  fuddenly  terminated:
there;  nor  did  even  the  very  leaft  mark  of  injuryj  of  corruption,  or  cicatrix,,
appear  thereabout,  nor  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that  part :  fo  thatic  feem'dt


{b)  Epift.  57.  n.  10.  (O  Epift.  63.  n.  13.

(f)  Hift.  PodagT.  &  cset.  ad  fiaem.  (fj  N. 18.

{d)  N.  2.


natural;


Letter  LXIX. Article  17.  j-ji^

natural  to  fuppofe  the  tube  to  have  been  in  this  ftate  from  the  origiHal  con-
formation.

On  the  right  fide,  the  tube  had  its  termination  at  the  ovary  indeed ;  but
fo  concreted  was  it  with  this  part,  that  neither  any  of  the  fimbriae  of  it  appear'd ;
nor  could  the  ovarium  be  brought  into  view,  without  cutting  away  the  tube
which  had  grown  into  one  fubftance  with  it,  and  cover'd  it ;  efpecially  as  the
ovarium  was  fmall  in  this  fubjedt.

This  body  confifted  of  a  whitifli  fubftance,  which,  when  cut  into,  was
feen  to  be  internally  moift  with  a  whitifh  humour,  and  to  contain  fome  white
globules.  While  the  uterus  was  taken  out  of  the  body,  together  with  the
vagina,  and  the  bladder ;  which  was  extremely  large,  and  diftended  with
urine ;  and  likewife  together  with  the  inteftinum  reftum  ;  a  large  and  un-
ufual  quantity  of  fat  was  obferv'd  to  be  lying  around  that  inteftine  :  and  this
was  the  more  remarkable  in  a  woman  who  was  not  fat :  and  at  the  fame
time  a  ftrong  and  putridly-fmelling  ichor,  fimilar,  in  its  appearance,  to  water
wherein  frelh  meat  has  been  wafh'd,  was  dilcharg'd  from  the  pudendum
and  anus.

The  internal  furface  of  the  fundus  uteri,  was  univerfally  moift  with  a
ropy  humour  of  a  yellowifh  brown,  and  obfolete  colour :  and  through  this
furface  were  feen  reddifla  points,  and  little  lines,  which  were  increas'd  by  the
prefTure  of  the  fingers  underneath  ;  that  is,  from  the  blood  being  prefs'd  out
from  the  lower  part  into  them.  In  the  cervix  and  the  ofculum  uteri,  there
was  nothing  worthy  of  remark.

But  the  vagina,  which  was,  internally,  of  a  pale  and  brown  colour  uni-
verfally, had  a  foramen  of  a  circular  form,  in  the  middle  of  its  pofterior
paries,  fomewhat  nearer  to  the  lower  orifice,  than  to  the  ofculum  uteri :  the
diameter  of  this  foramen  was  equal  to  two  fingers  breadths;  being  compre-
hended within  edges  of  a  very  black  colour,  and  of  a  very  difagreeable
odour. This  forameri  open'd  into  the  inteftinum  reftum.

17.  In  regard  to  the  diforders  brought  oa  by  poifon,  whereto  related  the
fifty-ninth  letter,  I  have  nothing  to  add  here.  For,  although  the  praifes
which  an  antidote^  found  out  by  that  eminent  phyfician,  whom  I  have  de-
fervedly  commended  at  other  times ;  I  mean  John  Larber ;  againft  both  the
bite  of  a  viper,  and  of  a  mad  dog,  have  fince  then  been  brought  to  me,  by
no  vulgar  fame  ;  yet  as  I  am  pretty  well  inform'd  that  this  celebrated  man
is  now  writing  a  differtation,  wherein  he  relates  not  only  his  experiments  .
made  upon  dogs,  by  the  fame  antidote,  but  alfo  gives  us  very  happy  in-
ftances  of  cures  peform'd  thereby,  upon  human  bodies ;  I  choofe  rather  to
refer  you  thereto  ;  that  from  thence  you  may  fully  and  diftinftly  learn  every
circumflance  relative  to  this  remedy  ;  rather  than  give  any  few  and  imperfect
hints  at  prefent.

You  muft  wait,  therefore,  till  this  differtation  fhall  appear,  as  I  hope  it  will
foon. Farewd.


4G  2  LETTER


S$6 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.


LETTER  the SEVENTIETH

Contains  fome  Things  which  were  promis'd  in  the  latter
Part  of  the  Sixty-listh  Letter ;  and  relates  to  fome
Diforders  of  the  Belly  and  Thorax.

'•  "VT"  O  U  congratulate  me,  my  friend,  upon  having  finifli'd  the  dif-
\_  feftions  and  lectures  of  this  winter  alfo ;  and  I  acknowledge  your
benevolence,  towards  me,  therein.  But  1  am,  at  the  fame  time,  very  fen-
fible  what  fecret  view  you  have  in  fuch  a  gratulation  -,  that  is,  you  intend  to
put  me  in  mind  of  the  promife  I  made  you,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  fixty-fixth
letter,  that  *after  I  had  finifli'd  the  bufinefs  of  this  anatomical  year,  I  would
give  fome  farther  remarks  upon  a  fubjed:  treated  of  in  that  letter.

And  indeed  you  have  a  right  to  claim  my  promife  ;  nor  will  I  fuffer  you
to  call  upon  me  again.  For  I  will  not  only  fulfil  my  engagement,  but  will
go  much  farther.  For  I  will  give  you  an  hiftorical  account  of  the  infpedlion
of  each  body  that  I  have  made  fince  the  writing  of  that  letter  to  you,  of
whatever  kind  thefe  may  be,  although  one  well  deferves  to  be  written  to  you
of  itfelf ;  as  by  thefe  means  you  will  learn  what  was  the  event  of  our  far-
ther enquiries, by  difledion,  after  that  uvula.

2.  There  were,  in  all,  five  bodies  diflefted  this  winter  •,  at  the  fame  time
that  feveral  experienc'd  diffeclors,  not  to  mention  the  ftudents  whom  I  taught
anatomy,  and  who  form'd  a  crowded  circle  around  us,  were  looking  on.  The
firft  was  diffedted  in  the  hofpital,  before  the  middle  of  December  in  the
year  1759.

3.  This  body  was  that  of  a  woman  who  had  labour'd  under  a  hernia,  and
had  been  carried  off  by  an  inflammation  of  the  intefl:ines  arifing  therefrom;
and  from  this  they  had  taken  out  the  greater  part  of  the  vifcera,  in  order  to
feledt,  and  prepare,  parts  from  the  remainder  of  the  body,  proper  for  the
demonfl:ration  of  the  elements  of  anatomy,  as  my  method  of  beginning  is ;
fo  that  I  examin'd  no  other  part,  befides  the  head  and  the  genitals.

The  cerebrum,  although  it  was  firm,  and  even  fomewhat  hard;  neverthe-
lefs  had  that  very  part  of  the  choroid  plexufles,  within  the  lateral  ventricles;
where  they  are  reflefted  upwards  at  an  angle,  to  cover  the  thalami  nervorum
opcicorum  ;  befet,  on  both  fides,  with  a  heap  of  mucus  as  it  were,  of  a
dirty  afli-colour,  form'd  into  the  figure  of  a  fpheroid,  and  of  the  thicknefs  of
an  inch.  But  there  was  no  other  appearance  that  deferv'd  notice  ;  except  a
heap  of  hydatids,  which  arc  frequently  found  to  be  feated  upon  that  part  of
the  plexufles  in  particular,  though  not  in  fuch  a  quantity  as  here.

In


Letter  LXX. Articles  4,  s-  S97

In  the  genital  parts  there  was  nothing  worthy  of  obfervation.  I  therefore
laid  open  the  annex'd  urinary  bladder,  which  was  contradted  into  itfelf.  to-
gether with  the  urethra.  And  on  the  internal  furface,  indeed,  of  the
bladder,  before  it  came  near  to  the  orifice,  we  faw  two  roundifli,  fmall,  de-
prefs'd,  fomewhat  red,  and  fmooth  glands,  as  it  were,  protuberant;  but  at
the  very  orifice,  or  within  it,  we  could  fee  no  prominence  whatever,  not  even
the  moft  flight,

■  And  that  you  may  conceive,  with  what  attention  and  diligence  I  made
the  enquiry ;  I  did  not  fail  to  obferve  an  unufual  kind  of  little  line,  v/hich,
confidering  the  fhortnefs  of  the  urethra,  defcended  for  a  confiderable  tradl,  in
a  diredt  and  longitudinal  courfe,  through  the  interior  and  pofterior  furface  of
the  urethra  -,  and  in  the  middle  of  its  defcent  became  fomewhat  wider.

Yet  this  little  line  did  not  begin  but  below  the  beginning  of  the  urethra  -,  and
was  fo  low  and  deprefs'd,  that  it  could  fcarcely  be  perceiv'd,  amongft  thofe
blackifh  blood-veffels,  which  we  frequently  fee  defcend  through  the  female
urethra  in  a  parallel  direftion  ;  and  whether  fuch  a  deprefs'd  ftate,  and  fuch
a  fituation,  fliow  it  to  have  any  relation  to  that  uvula,  which  is  dtfcrib'd  to
us,  you  readily  perceive,  though  I  am  filentupon  the  fubjed.

4.  The  fecond  body  which  was  dilTeched  in  the  fame  place,  about  the  be-
ginning of  the  year  1760,  off^er'd  many  things  to  us  that  were  worthy  of  ob-
fervation ;  for  which  reafon  my  defcription  will  alfo  be  longer.

5.  A  porter,  of  two-and-fifty  years  of  age,  who  was  much  given  to  drink-
ing, and  frequently  intoxicated  thereby  •,  and  who  us'd  to  indulge  his  appe-
tite for  food  very  much,  though  not  with  what  was  unwholefome  -,  was  not
only  not  of  a  valetudinarian  conftitution,  but  fo  far  healthy,  that  being  dili-
gently queftion'd  by  his.  companions,  for  the  reafons  you  will  hear  below,  no-
thing elfe  could  be  learn'd,  but  that  he  was  wont  to  complain,  every  now  and
then,  of  a  kind  of  ujieafinefs,  the  feat  of  which  he  pointed  out  by  laying  his
hand  upon  the  epigaftrium,  about  the  fcrobiculus  cordis.

■  This  man,  therefore,  having  come  three  months  before  into  the  hofpital^
on  account  of  a  continual  tertian  fever;  began,  upon  the  going  off  of  this
fever,  to  be  fubjedl  to  vomitings,  whereby  his  food  was  thrown  up  :  and
thefe  return'd  again,  after  having  mtermitted  fome  time,  nor  went  off"  any
more  through  the  whole  courfe  of  his  life.

Therefore,  although  he  never  vomited  up  any  thing  but  what  he  took,
down,  and  thefe  without  any  ill  tafte,  or  fmell,  except  that  generous  wirie
which  they  call  Mofchato  ;  befides  which,  that  was  given  by  way  of  cordial,
he  could  retain  nothing  to  fupport  him,  for  the  whole  laft  month  of  his  life  ;
yet,  for  this  reafon,  he  was  opprefs'd  with  a  very  great  wafting  of  flefh,  and
the  return  of  a  fever,  though  now  of  a  flow  kind  :  and  in  this  manner  he
haflen'd  to  his  end,  never  having  complain'd,  in  the  hofpi^ial,  of  any  tumour
of  the  belly,  or  of  pain  whatever;  nor  did  his  pulfe,  fave  a  little  |intermif-
fion  at  fome  times,  (how  any  thing  thai  was  peculiarly  difagreeable.

Whatever  was  internally  or  externally  applied,  in  order  to  reftrain  thefe
vomitings,  was  without  effeft.

And  indeed  quickfilver  itfelf,  which  had  been  given  about  a  month  before
his  death,  in  the  quantity  of  three  ounces,  at  a  time  when  an  obftinate
cotlivenefs  gave  fome  apprehenfions of  an  iliac  palTion  coming  on  ;  v/as

neitlierr


5^8  "Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

neither  of  any  advantage,  nor  was  feen  by  any  one  afterwards,  when  the
-glyfters  which  had  been  thrown  up,  were  return'd  j  although  the  attendants
fuppos'd  it  to  have  been  difcharg'd  together  with  the  foeces,  fome  time  after,
when  the  inteftines  began  to  be  a  little  more  relax'd.

Finally,  when  I  examin'd  the  body  after  death,  I  faw  it  reduc'd  to  ib
emaciated  a  ftate,  that  on  the  back  of  the  hands,  and  the  upper  part  of  the
feet,  the  bones  of  the  metacarpus,  and  of  the  metatarfus,  could  be  exceed-
ingly well  demonftrated  :  and  the  eyes,  by  reafon  of  the  defeft  of  fat  in  the
back-part  of  their  fockets,  were  funk  inwards  to  a  furprifing  degree,  yet
were  found  neverthelels  •,  although  from  the  lobe  of  the  left  external  ear,  a
.{lender  ring  of  brafs  hung  down,  which  is  generally  a  mark  of  a  diforder
having  formerly  preceded  in  the  neighbouring  eye.  As  the  mouth  happen'd
to  be  open,  I  obkrv'd  that  few  teeth  remain'd.

Thele  were  the  appearances  externally  :  but  by  opening  the  feveral  cavities,
I  found  fuch  appearances  in  the  belly,  the  thorax,  and  the  head,  as  I  fliall  ac-
curately defcribe  ;  beginning  with  thofe  of  the  head.

Indiflefting  the  cerebrum,  a  fmall  quantity  of  water  was  found  in  the  la*-
teral  ventricles :  and  on  the  plexus  choroides,  in  that  very  place  where,  in
the  body  fpoken  of  above,  I  faw  a  great  number  of  hydatids,  I  faw  one  at
leaft ;  but  this  was  pretty  large,  and  at  firft  refembled  mucus  likewife  :  I
then  faw  the  pineal  gland  to  be  very  fmall ;  but  this  gland  had,  within  it,  a
•corpufcle  which,  in  proportion  to  the  fize  of  the  gland,  was  not  very  fmall ;
being  of  an  irregular  figure,  hard,  not  friable,  and,  in  colour,  of  an  obfolete
yellow.  The  fpinal  marrow  -,  for  this  part,  and  all  the  moft  confiderable
nerves,  I  demonftrated  to  the  pupils,  in  their  fituations,  according  to  my
tifual  method  ;  was  very  lax.

In  the  thorax,  1  faw  the  heart  to  be  without  any  fat,  as  I  expedted  it  to  be ;
but  I  found,  what  I  did  not  expeft,  particularly  in  a  man  who  was  of  a  tali
ilature,  rather  than  otherwife,  and  who  had  been  always  employ'd  in  a  labo-
rious life,  and  us'd  to  lift  and  carry  burdens  ;  I  found,  I  fay,  the  heart  to  be
fo  fmall,  as  I  never  remember  to  have  feen  it  in  adults :  for  it  feem'd  to  be
the  heart  of  a  child,  and  not  of  a  man  ;  being  correfpondent  to  this  fmall-
nefs  in  all  its  dimenfions,  and  in  the  thinnefs  of  its  parietes.

However,  befides  the  veins,  which  were  in  a  varicofe  ftate,  in  fome  places,
on  the  furfaceof  the  heart,  no  mark  of  difeafe  occurr'd  internally,  or  exter-
nally •,  nor  yet  was  there  any  in  the  valves  of  the  aorta,  though  the  trunk  of
that  veflel  feem'd  to  be  dilated.

Before  I  fpeak  of  the  belly,  I  cannot  omit  here,  that  the  diaphragm,  in
the  right  part  of  its  centrum  tendineum,  or  nerveum,  as  it  is  call'd,  was  be-
come bony  ;  or  at  leaft,  that  in  this  part,  betwixt  the  pleura  and  peri-
tonseum,  was  a  bony  lamina  not  very  thin  •,  confifting  of  an  inch  and  a  half
in  length,  but  narrow,  particularly  in  a  part  near  to  one  of  the  extremities  :
the  nearer  it  approaches  to  the  other  extremity,  the  wider  it  becomes,
yet  never  exceeds  the  b»^=adth  of  a  man's  little  finger  at  the  apex  ;  for  I  have
preferv'd  it,  and  had  it  before  my  eyes  when  I  wrote  this  defcription.

Finally-,  the  belly  had  fcarcely  any  appearance  but  what  was  natural ;  if  you
-except  the  inteftines,  and  the  ftoraach  in  particular.

1>e


tetter  LXX. Article  6.  J'5>5>

The  inteftines  were,  here  and  there,  diftinguifh'd  with  a  livid  fpot :  I
omit  what  is  the  natural  confequence  of  that  long-continu'd  difcharge  of  the
aliments,  which  I  have  related  ;  I  mean,  that  they  were  uniifiially  thin  and
contrafted,  and  the  large  inteftines  as  well  as  the  fmall ;  though  the  former
were  fo  only  for  a  ihorter  traft,  as  they  contain'd  fome  excrements,  though,
very  few.

But  the  ftomach,  being  in  an  unufual  fituation,  of  a  furprizing  length,  and
infledted  in  a  ftrange  manner,  afforaed  us  an  uncommon  fpeftacle.  For,  be-
ginning from  whence  it  generally  does  (nor  was  any  part  of  the  oefophagus-
carried  down  into  the  belly  in  this  fubjefi)  it  extended  itfelf  through  the  left,
fide  of  the  belly,  in  a  ftrait  direftion,  quite  to  the  os  pubis,  and  reflefting  it-
felf upwards  from  thence,  and  to  the  right  fide,  it  terminated  in  the  inteftinum.
duodenum.

The  breadth  of  this  ftomach  was  but  fmall  in  proportion  :  nor  did  it  con-
tain any  thing  elfe  but  a  kind  of  thin,  and  pultice-like  mafs,  as  it  were,,
which  I  fuppofe  was  the  remains  of  that  fmall  part  of  the  aliments,  which  had
been  fometimes  retain'd.

You  will  allc  me  then,  whether  I  think  there  was  no  quickfilver  in  the-
ftomach;  and  I  anfwer,  that  I  fuppofe  there  was;  but  that  while  the  fto-
mach was  mov'd  to  one  fide,  it  had  pafs'd  into  the  inteftinum  duodenum..
For  in  this  inteftine,  which  had  been  previoufly  conftring'd,  by  applying  a^
ligature  a  little  below  the  pylorus,  it  was  found  to  the  quantity  of  an  ounce
and  a  half:  but  in  the  other  inteftines  there  was  none  ;  as  thofe  to  whom  the
care  of  the  enquiry  had  been  committed,  reported.

But  this  was  laft  in  order.  For  having  previoufly  perceiv'd  a  hardnefs,  by.
handling  the  feat  of  the  pylorus  externally  ;  upon  opening  the  ftomach,  I  faw
the  ring  of  the  pylorus,  divided  as  it  were,  into  two  or  three  protuberances,.,
not  large  indeed,  btit  hard.

The  part  of  the  ftomach  neareft  to  the  pylorus,  was  hard  alfo,  for  the
fpace  of  two  fingers  breadths,  the  coats  being  grown  very  thick  in  that  parr,j,
and  approaching  to  the  hardnefs  of  a  bone;  yet  not  being  really  bony,  nor
capable  of  ftreightening  the  pafiage  :  but,  by  reafon  of  their  inflexible  ftate, .
they  were  not  fufficiently  capable  of  impelling  the  aliments  into  the  inteftinum .
duodenum.

Befides  thefe  things,  and  a  flight  lividnefs  on  the  internal  furface  of.  the,-
ftomach;  which  was  extended  from  thofe  indurated  coats  for  aftiort  fpace,  I:
obferv'd  no  other  morbid  appearance  in  that  vifcus.

But  having  before  obferv'd  the  bladder  in  its  fituation,  and  found  it  to  be-
found  externally,  and  to  contain  no  large  quantity  of  urine  ;  and  having  re-
mark'd  fome  things,  which  do  not  belong  to  this  place  ;.  I  open'd  it  and  found
it  be  equally  found  within,  as  the  annex'd  urethra  was  alfo. Bat  we  could:
hot  fee  the  leaft  fign  of  a  roundifh  protuberance,  at  the  orifice  from  whence-
the  urethra  begins ;  that  is,  we  could  not  fee  the  leafk  appearance  of  a  uvula :
but  in  the  place  where  this  ought  to  have  been  found,  came  into  fight  only
that  flender  little  line,  which. terminated  in  the  feminal  caruncle,  as  it  does,
generally.

6.  Although  I  do  not  remember  to  have  lit  on  an  ofiification  of  the  feptum .
tranfyerfum  before.;  yet  that  very  confiderable  fmallnefs  of  the  heart,,  and  th&

feat-


6oo Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

feat  of  the  ftomach,  fo  different  from  the  natural  appearance,  ftruck  my
mind  far  more  than  the  other;  as  1  could  not  readily  devife  any  rcafon,
whereby  I  could  conciliate  both  of  the  circumftances  with  the  appearances
which  had  been  in  the  patient,  when  living,  and  with  thofe  that  had  been
wanting.

For  if  I  had  ever  feen  the  heart  alfo,  as  well  as  the  other  mufcles,  to  be
diminilh'd  in  its  bulk,  in  an  extremely  emaciated  flate  of  body;  I  certainly
fliould  not  enquire,,  how,  before  this  emaciated  ftate,  it  had  been  capable  of
affording  ftrength  to  a  porter.  Did  the  arteries  then,  fupply  what  the  heart
could  not  ?

But  how  eould  their  parietes  be  fufficiently  urg'd  and  dilated,  by  a  heart
which  was  not  only  diminifii'd  in  its  fielh,  and  its  muicular  fi:rength,  but
which,  by  reafon  of  its  fmallnefs,  had  little  blood  to  impel  into  them  ;  fo  as
to  make  them  reftore  themielves  very  ftrongly  loon  after,  and  pulh  on  the
circulation  ?

But  thefe  difficulties,  I  readily  leave  for  that  ingenuity  which  you  are
well  known  to  poffeis,  to  determine;  as  I  alfo  do  that  which  relates  to  the
fituation  of  the  ftomach.  For  you  muft  either  deduce  it  from  the  original
formation,  or  from  fome  caufe  which  brought  on  a  prolapfus  of  the  vifcus  ;
examples  of  which  kind  I  have  before  taken  notice  of  to  you  (a).

But  if  you  choofe  to  fuppofe  the  latter ;  it  is  furprifing  that  fymptoms
Ihould  be  wanting  to  indicate  this  new  difeafe ;  fuch  as  an  unufual  pain,  or
tumour;  and  efpecially  in  a  man  who  was  by  no  means  a  valetudinarian.

And  if  you  fuppofe  it  to  have  exifted  from  the  original  formation  ;  you  fee
it  is  no  lefs  furprizing,  not  only  that  there  never  were,  at  any  time,  very
manifeft  fymptoms  of  the  ftomach  being  affefted  ;  but  even  that  a  very  great
quantity  both  of  wine,  and  of  food,  which  was  continually  taken  in  and  di-
gefted,  and  that  without  being  fufficiently  reduc'd  by  maftication,  as  there
were  few  teeth,  had  fhown  in  how  flourifliing  a  ftate  this  vifcus  was,  till  at
length,  after  the  tertian  fever,  thofe  vomitings  were  firft  brought  on.

For  that  an  irregular  method  of  living  of  this  kind,  had,  at  length,  fo  vi-
tiated the  pylorus,  and  the  neighbouring  part  of  the  ftomach,  that  the  mo-
tions of  the  ftomach  muft  of  courfe  be  inverted  ;  rather  than  the  aliments
be  driven  down  into  the  inteftinum  duodenum  ;  is  fo  far  probable,  that  there
is  no  neceflity  to  account  for  the  vomitings  from  that  fituation  of  the  ftomach,
whether  you  confider  it  as  congenial,  or  as  new  ;  as  they  muft  have  exifted
always,  if  they  had  been  the  confequence  of  fuch  a  congenial  fituation  :  and
if  they  had  been  from  a  new  fituation  of  this  kind,  they  would  not  have  come
on,  without  fome  tokens  of  this  change  which  was  fo  recent.

But  we  muft  now  go  on  to  the  appearances  obferv'd  in  the  third  body.

7,  A  wool-comber,  who  was  a  young  man,  or  at  leaft  not  much  more  than
that,  having  lain  in  the  hofpital  three  or  four  days,  had  departed  this  life
juft  at  the  time  of  beginning  the  public  anatomy  of  this  year  1760.  The
body  was,  therefore,  brought  into  the  theatre  ;  and  every  one  who  look'd  at
it,  fuppos'd  it  to  be  very  proper  for  diffeftion,  from  the  fmooth  flcin,  and
■Jound  appearance  which  it  every  where  feern'd  to  have;  befides  that  it  was
rather  of  a  large  ftature.

(a)  Epift.  39.  n.  14.  &  feqq.  &  Epift,  65.  n.  15.

As


Letter  LXX. Articles  8,  9.  60 r

As  the  belly  had  fwell'd  in  a  fhort  time,  and  begun  to  look  green  ;  al-
though I  fufpeded  what  marks  of  difeafe  might  be  latent  in  the  body  of  a
wool  comber,  and  was  foon  after  well  inform'd,  by  an  acquaintance  of  this
man,  when  living,  that  he  had  formerly  expedorated  blood  ;  yet  I  began  to
demonftrate  the  vifcera  of  the  belly  in  the  mean  time,  till  I  could  light  on  an
opportunity  of  having  a  better  fubjed;:  and  about  thefe  vifcera  lay  a  confidera-
ble  quantity  of  water,  fimilar  to  urine;  but  fcarcely  any  ftench  was  obferv'd,
and  but  a  flight  lividnefs  of  the  inteftines.

And  indeed  the  omentum  was  found,  though  wafted  :  the  fpleen  was  larger
t-han  it  naturally  is,  and  that  in  a  confiderable  degree-,  but  was  neither  hard,
nor  lax  :  the  coats  of  the  gall-bladder  were  thick,  and  the  bile  contain'd  there-
in fomewhat  pale  ;  but  the  liver  was  found,  and  of  a  proper  magnitude :  the
glands  of  the  mefentery  were  larger  than  they  naturally  are;  but  not  hard.

Nor  did  there  appear  to  be  any  diforder  in  the  ftomach,  nor  even  in  the
inteftines  themfelves  ;  although  they  were,  as  I  have  faid,  fomewhat  livid.
For  as  to  the  colon  defcending  towards  the  navel,  in  almoft  the  middle  traft
of  that  tranfverfe  arch  which  lies  below  the  ftomach,  and  being  reflefted
upwards  from  thence  to  the  left  hypochondrium ;  it  feem'd  natural  to
confider  that  rather  as  a  variety,  than  as  a  difeafe,  as  this  certainly  was ;
though  it  had  never  occurr'd  to  me  before  •,  I  mean,  that  an  artery,  of  no
very  (lender  dimenfions,  pafs'd  from  the  left  emulgent,  quite  to  the  urinary
bladder,  in  fo  oblique  a  diredion,  that  it  was  inferted  into  the  pofterior  fur-
face  of  that  vifcus,  near  to  the  right  veficula  feminalis.

But  whether  the  circumftances  of  there  being  no  flexures  in  the  fplenic
artery,  or  of  fome  few  fulci  being  carried  through  the  whole  anterior  furface
of  both  kidnies,  obliquely,  and  without  any  certain  order  -,  were  to  be  confi-
der'd  in  the  clafs  of  varieties  only,  you  yourfelf  will  judge  :  this  however  is
certain,  that  I  found  the  ftrudure  and  fubftance  of  the  kidnies,  and  of  all
the  other  parts  which  were  form'd  for  the  fake  of  urinary  fecretion,  to  be
very  found.

Yet  neither  within  the  lower  part  of  the  urethra,  nor  within  the  upper
part  of  the  bladder,  could  I,  or  any  of  thofe  many  perfons  who  were  pre-
fent,  fee  any  thing  protuberating,  befides  that  which  was  fpoken  of  in  the
laft-preceding  carcafe.

However,  we  did  not  go  on  to  demonftrate  any  other  part  in  this  body ;
for  it  would  have  been  neceffary  to  pafs  on  to  the  thorax,  which  ;  as  I  had
fufpeded,  and  as  they,  who  were  willing  to  examine  it  flightly  before  bu-
rial, evidently  confirm'd  ;  contain'd  lungs  half  rotten,  out  of  which  a  putrid
and  ftrongly  fmelling  matter  was  effus'd.

8.  The  fourth  and  fifth  bodies  were  both  of  them  thofe  of  women^  who
had  died  in  the  hofpital  in  the  mean  time.  But  from  the  firft,  only  fome  of
the  thoracic  and  abdominal  vifcera  were  brought  into  the  theatre.  Let  us
begin  with  thefe.

9.  An  old  woman  had  died  of  an  afcites.
The  fubftance  of  the  heart  was  pallid.

The  left  kidney }  though  lefs  than  the  right,  and  of  a  furface  fomewhat
¥oi.  III.  4  H  unequal.


6  o  2 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books.

unequal,  by  reafon  of  a  very  few  furrows,  as it  were ;  had  nothing  inter-
nally, however,  which  differ'd  from  the  ufual  appearances  of  nature.

While  I  was  examining  thefe  parts,  I  obferv'd  that  two  casliac  arteries
arofe  from  the  aorta  inftead  of  one,  though  indeed  they  were  very  near  to
each  other,  and  even  contiguous  ;  being  each  of  them,  however,  furnifh'd
with  its  proper  orifice  ;  and  likewife  that  two  fpermatic  veins  return'd  from
the  corpus  pampiniforme  on  the  left  fide,  into  the  emulgent  vein  of  the  fame
fide  :  and  that  one  of  thofe  two  arteries,  and  one  of  thefe  two  veins,  was
lels  than  the  other. Yet  thefe  were  only  varieties  in  nature.

But  it  was  the  effeft  of  difeafe,  that,  in  the  fundus  uteri,  was  prominent'
laterally,  a  round,  white,  hard,  and  middle-fiz'd  excrefcence.  At  length,
opening  the  urinary  bladder,  which  was  perfedly  found,  I  faw  that  thofe
S',vo  bodies  indeed,  which  defcend  from  the  ureters,  did  not  come  together
at  an  an^le ;  but  by  a  curv'd  body,  into  which  they  degenerated,  and
which  was,  equally  with  themfelves,  thick  and  prominent  :  but  that  any
thing  was  fent  from  hence  to  the  orifice  of  the  bladder,  which  was  at  leafl;
at  the  diftance  of  a  finger's  breadth  therefrom,  1  could  not  fee  ;  and  fl:ill
lefs  that  any  roundifii  protuberance  was  prominent  in  the  whole  of  that
fpace,  or  within  the  urethra,

lO.  Another  old  woman  had  been  carried  off  by  an  inflammation  of  the
lunos,  and  a  diarrhsea  added  thereto.  7  he  body  of  this  woman  was  brought
into  the  theatre,  after  all  the  abdominal  vifcera,  except  the  uterus  and  the
bladder, were  taken  out.

The  thorax  being  open'd,  the  inferior  lobe  of  the  lungs,  on  the  right
fide,  adher'd  clofely  to  the  pleura  -,  and  this  lobe  being  extremely  enlarg'd
and  heavy,  refembled  a  boil'd  liver,  v/hen  it  was  cut  into.  The  heart  of
this  woman,  who  had  been  but  of  a  moderate  ftature,  was  almolt  as  much
laro-er  in  proportion,  as  it  had  been  lefs  in  the  porter  {]?).

Nor  yet  was  it  eniarg'd,  becaufe  the  parietes  of  its  cavities  were  feen  to
be  extenuated  and  diftrafted  ;  for  thefe  were  even  of  a  proper  thicknefs  at
leafl:,  if  not  thicker  than  ufual ;  and  their  columna:  and  fafciculi  were  cer-
tainly thicker  than  ufual,  as  the  fafciculi  of  the  auricles  alfo  were :  fo  that  I
was  lefs  furpriz'd  at  a  circumllance,  which  I  do  not  remember  to  have  feen
on  any  other  occafion  ;  I  mean,  that  the  coronary  arteries  had  orifices  which
in  their  diameters  exceeded  two  lines  of  Bologna,  and  that  the  artery  which
was  nearefl:  to  the  fide  of  one  of  them,  probably  one  of  the  membrana  adi-
pofa,  was  not  even  itfelf  furnifli'd  with  a  very  fmall  orifice:  and  in  the  finus
of  the  pulmonary  vein,  befides  many  fmall  orifices,  I  obferv'd  one  to  lie
open,  which  was  fcarcely  lefs  in  its  diameter,  than  that  I  have  taken  notice
of  in  the  coronary  arteries  :  and  by  cutting  into  this  orifice,  I  faw  that  two
or  three  veins,  which  brought  back  blood  from  the  parietes  of  the  finus,
open'd  thereinto.

'  This  heart  had  its  ventricles  full  of  polypous  concretions.  And  as  I  ex-
amin'd  that  part  of  the  great  artery  which  was  contain'd  in  the  thorax,  I  ob-
ferv'd one  place  only,  where  the  internal  furface  of  it  was  not  fmooth,  but
prominent  interoally  i  and  in  that  part  was  a  bony  hardnefs  betwixt the

{h]  fupra  n.  5.

coats  J


Letter  LXX. Article  i  o,  603

coats ;  which  however  poffefs'd  no  greater  a  quantity  of  fpace  than  the  nail
of  a  man's  thumb  might  cover.

This  place  was  on  the  right  fide,  where  the  aorta,  having  now  finifh'd.
its  curvature,  began  to  defcend  in  a  ftrait  line.  And,  at  the  fame  time,
a  circumftance  occurr'd  to  my  eyes,  which  was  not  unworthy  of  notice.  For
amongft  the  arteries,  which  come  out,  two  and  two,  from  the  polk-rior  pa-
ries of  the  defcending  aorta,  quite  to  the  divifion  of  its  trunk,  it  is  not  rare
that  inftead  of  two,  one  only  is  fometimes  difpatch'd.

But  here,  below  the  two  upper  pairs  of  the  lower  intercoftal  arteries,  the
three  next  were  wanting ;  one  middle  orifice  occurring  three  times  fuccef-
fively,  inftead  of  two  :  and  this  not  larger  than  the  others,  nor  immediately
divided  into  two  ;  as  generally  is  the  cafe  where  there  is  but  one,  but  even
produc'd  into  a  folitary  artery,  for  the  fpace  of  a  finger's  breadth  at
leaft ;  that  is  to  fay,  as  far  as  it  had  been  left  adhering  to  the  aerta
beneath.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  diaphragm  (for  now  that  we  have  begun  to
fpcak  of  varieties,  I  am  not  willing  to  omit  this,  although  it  has  been  fre-
quently both  feen  and  demonftrated  by  me)  inftead  of  one  foramen,  for
tranfmitting  the  vena  cava  into  the  thorax,  had  two  foramina,  divided  by  a
very  (lender  interpofition  indeed,  but  by  one  that  was  very  evident.

Finally,  the  belly  exhibited  fome  remarkable  appearances,  in  thofe  lower
parts  which  had  been  left  in  it.  Each  of  the  ovaries,  and  particularly  the
right,  being  of  a  white  colour,  very  much  larger  than  it  us'd  to  be,  and  of  a
tuberous  texture,  was  made  up  of  tuberofities,  or  hydatids,  among  which
were  fome  fo  diftended  with  water,  more  than  the  others,  that  if  you  prick'd
them  pretty  deeply,  the  fluid  burft  forth  with  impetus.  Yet  both  of  the
tubes  were  entirely  free  therefrom.

The  internal  furface  of  the  fundus  uteri,  was  of  a  red  colour  inclining  to
black,  by  reafon  of  the  blood  flagnating  there  in  many  pla,ces  -,  and  if,  in
order  to  prefs  out  this  blood,  you  laid  your  fingers  under  the  uterus  exter-
nally, that  internal  furface  was  lacerated  by  reafon  of  its  laxity.

This  circumftance,  and  another,  that  I  obferv'd  in  this  body,  which  on
account  of  its  fingularity  ought  not  to  be  omitted  here  ;  I  mean  in  regard  to
the  two  nerves  (c),  into  which  1  had  divided  the  pofterior  crural  nerve  by
the  interpofition  of  the  hand  only  ;  for  when  I  had  cut  one  of  them,  which
■was  fomewhat  larger  than  its  fellow,  afunder  into  two  parts,  and  that  in  a
loncritudinal  direftion,  I  found  a  vefl^el  betwixt  the  fibres  thereof,  and  almoft
parallel  thereto,  nor  lying  far  from  the  axis  of  the  fame  nerve,  full  of  blood,
the  diameter  of  which  veflfel  was  almoft  equal  to  a  line  of  Bologna  ;  thefe
two  circumftances  therefore,  as  I  had  begun  to  fay,  gave  me  a  fufpicion  that
blood  would  alfo  be  found  to  have  ftagnated,  not  only  in  the  ve.Tels  of  the
pelvis,  and  thofe  that  go  thereto,  but  in  the  bladder  alfo,  and  the  annex'd
urethra ;  and  that  perhaps  in  fuch  a  quantity  as  to  prevent  my  ufual
enquiry.

But  when  both  thefe  laft-mention'd  parts  were  laid  open,  I  found  the  in-
ternal coat  of  the  urethra  indeed,  to  be  univerfally  0:  a  blackifii  colour,

(<:)  Vid.  Epift.  69.  n.  2.

4  H  2  from


($0  4 Book  V.  By  way  of  Supplement  to  the  former  Books,.

from  the  great  number  of  its  fmall  veflTels  ;  which  were  parallel  in  a  longi*
tudinal  direction:  and  the  more  lb,  the  more  it  defcended  to  its  lower
orifice,  which  was  lax,  and  fufFer'd  a  relax'd  little  part  of  the  fame  coat,  oa
the  right  fide,  to  be  prolaps'd  outwards,  as  I  have  feen  in  fome  other  wo-
men {d) ;  yet  the  upper  part  of  the  urethra  had  nothing  befides  its  colour
that  prevented  our  obfervation,  and  the  bladder  not  even  that.

For  it  was  very  found,  and  fliow'd  thofe  two  protuberating  bodies,  which
conne  from  the  ureters,  to  be  join'd  together  pretty  nearly  at  an  angle  j.
which  angle  was  diftant  from  the  orifice  of  the  bladder,  by  the  fpace  of  a
finger's  breadth.

Jiut  neither  in  this  interval,  nor  in  that  orifice,  nor  in  the  neighbouring,
urethra,  did  any  thing  roundilh,  or  even  flightly  protuberant,,  ofi^er  itfelf  to
my  eyes,  or  the  eyes  of  thofe  who  attentively  infpefted  thofe  parts  with.
me ;  and  to  fay  all  in  a  word,  there  was  neither  trace  nor  fhadow  of  that
uvula.

11.  Thus  you  have  the  event  of  this  my  enquiry,  after  being  repeated  in
five  difl^erent  bladders,  none  of  which  was  diftended,  either  with  a.  quantity  ■
of  urine,  or  with  a  quantity  of  injefted  air,  if  you  except  the  third  ;  into,
which,  however,  fo  great  a  quantity  of  air  had  not  been  introduc'd,  as  was-
fufficicnt  to  demonftrate  its  figure  to  the  full  extent.

Nor  did  we  difledt  any  more  bodies  this  winter  ;  but  took  different  parts
from  different  bodies  among  thefe,  in  order  to  be  fubftituted  in  the  place  of,
thofe  that  were  lefs  found  ;  and  by  this  means  at  length,  not  unfuccefsfully,,
put  the  finifhing  ftroke  to  my  leftures  -,  in  which  the  whole  round  of  anato-
mical fcience  is  comprehended  -,  for  this  year  alfo :  and  it  is  now  the  five-
and-fortieth  year  fince  1  undertook  the  very  wearifome  ofBce  of  teaching  this,
part  of  medical  knowledge.

12.  As  to  what  remains ;  if  you  fliould  wonder,  that  in  this  letter  I  have
not  prefervM  my  ufual  method  •,  I  mean,  of  making  fome  remark  upon  al-
moft  every  tiiftory,  and  even  fometimes  of  making  a  great  number ;  and,,
on  the  other  hand,  of  interfperfing,  here  and  there,  only  very  few  varieties,
that  I  had  obferv'd  in  diffecling,  and  not  fo  frequently  ;  as  to  the  firfl:
occafion  of  your  wonder,  let  me  obferve,  that  I  did  not  preferve  my  method,,
both  beeaufe  I  chofe  to  fend  you  very  foon  an  accomplifhment  of  my  pro-
mife,  and  beeaufe  I  had  already  made  a  fufficicnt  number  of  remarks  upon;
moft  things  of  this  kind  in  many  other  letters  :  and  as  to  the  latter  occafion
of  furprize,  be  affur'd,  that  I  did  not  do  it  fo  much  beeaufe  this  letter-
might  otherwife  feem  to  be  too  Ihort,  as  beeaufe  my  hope  now  begins  to  fail,
me,  of  having  fo  long  a  time  yet  to  live,  as  would  enable  me  to  collect,
into  a  feparate  work,  all  the  varieties  that  I  have  omitted,  and  many  in  like:
manner,  to  which  1  every  now  and  then  denied  a  place  among  the  defcrip-
tions  of  morbid  parts ;  that  is  to  fay,  in  fome  obfervations  of  mine,  which,
relate  to  the  anatomy  of  the  fame  parts,  when  in  a  natural  ftate.  You  will
therefore  receive  both  my  intentions  in  good  part,  according  to  your  bene.-,
volence. Farewel.

(d)  Epill.  50.  n.  51.  &  Epift.  56.  n.  21.

1-

INDEX


INDEX the FIRST,

Which-  exhibits  the  Subjects  of  the  whole  Work  in  the
Order  wherein  they  are  treated  of.


L


Fook  I. Of  Bif orders  of  the  Head.

ETTER  r. Of  pain  in  the  head.

2.  Of  the  apoplexy  in  general,  and  particularly  of  the  fanguineous  apoplesyi.

3.  Of  the  fame  fanguineous  apoplexy.

4.  Of  the  ferous  apoplexy.

5.  Of  the  apoplexy  which  is  neither  fanguineous  nor  ferous.

6.  Of  the  remaining  foporific  affections.

7.  Of  the  phrenitisj  paraphrenitis,  and  delirium..

8.  Of  madnefs,  melancholy,  and  hydrophobia.

9.  Of  epilepfy.

10.  Of  convulfion,  and  convulfive  motions..
IX.  Of  paralyfis.

12.  Of  the  hydrocephalus,  and  hydrorachitis. .

1 3.  Of  the  catarrh  ;  and  of  afFedtions  of  the  eyes.

14.  Of  aiFedtions  of  the  earsj  and  noftrils ;  and  of  ftammering.

Book  11. Of  Biforders  of  the  Thorax.

Letter  15.  Of  refpiration  being  injur'd,  particularly  from  caufes  that  lie  on  the  out*
fide  of  the  thorax,  and  alfo  from  fuch  as  lie  within  the  lungs,  and  efpe—
cially  from  calculi.

16.  Of  refpiration  being  injur'd  from  a  dropfy  of  the  thorax,  or  pericardium.

17.  Of  refpiration  being  injur'd  from  aneurifms  of.  the  hearty  or  aorta,  withia.

the  thorax.

18.  Of  the  fame.

ig.  Of  fuiTocation,.and  of  cough.

20.  Of  pain  in  the  breaft,  fides,  and  backi

2.1.  Of  the  fame.

22.  Of  the  fpitting  of  blood,  and  of  purulent  fpittings,.  the  empyema,  and  ■

phthifis.

23.  Of  palpitation  and  pain  of  the  heart. .

24.  Of  preternatural  pulfes..

25.  Of  lipothymia  and  fyncope.

26.  Of  fudden  death,  particularly  from  a  diforder  of  the  blood-^veflels  In  thet-

thorax.

27.  Of  the  fame  from  a  diforder  of  the  heart.

Book  III. Of  Biforders  of  the  Bellyy

Letter  28.  Of  preternatural  hunger ;  of  ftarving  to  death ;  and  of  injur'd  deglutition.  .
29.  Of  the  finguUusj-.of  chewing^  the  cudJn  men  j  and  of  pain  in  the  ftomach. .

Letterr


INDEX of the SUBJECTS.

Letter  30.  Of  vomiting.

31.  Of  inteftinal  profluvia,  without  blood,  or  bloody.

32.  Of  coftivenefs ;  and  of  the  piles.

33.  Of  the  prolapfus  of  the  inteftine  re6lum.

34.  Of  the  pain  of  the  inteftines.

35.  Of  the  fame.

36.  Of  tumor  and  pain  of  the  hypochondria.

37.  Of  the  jaundice;  and  of  bilious  calculi.

38.  Of  the  hydrops,  afcites,  tympanites,  the  dropfy  of  the  peritonsum,  and

others  which  we  call  encyfted  dropdes.

39.  Of  the  remaining  internal  tumors  of  the  belly.

40.  Of  pain  in  the  loins,

41.  Of  the  fuppreflion  of  urine.

42.  Of  the  diiBculty  of  making  water,  the  ardor  urinat,  and  other  diforders  is.

which  the  urine  is  concern'd.

43.  Of  herniae.

44.  Of  the  gonorrhaea.

45.  Of  the  defcent  of  the  uterus,  and  of  the  afcent  thereof,  as  the  women  call  it.

46.  Of  the  impediments  to  venery,  and  of  fterility  in  both  fexes.

47.  Of  the  diforders  of  the  menftrual  flux  ;  and  of  the  fluor  muliebris.

48.  Of  falfe  pregnancy  ;  of  abortion  j  and  of  unfuccefsful  birth.

Book  IV. Of Chirurgkal  and  Unherfal  Diforders.

Letter  49.  Of  Fevers.

50.  Of  Tumours.

51.  Of  wounds  and  blows  of  the  bead.

52.  Of  the  fame.

53.  Of  wounds  and  blows  of  the  neck,  breaft,  and  back.

54.  Of  wounds  and  blows  of  the  belly,  loins,  and  limbs.

55.  Of  ulcers  and  fphacelus.

56.  Of  fraflures  and  luxations  of  the  bones,  and  of  other  diforders  injurious  to

motion.

57.  Of  the  arthritis,  or  gout,  and  other  pains  of  the  limbs.

58.  Of  the  lues  venerea.

59.  Of  diforders  brought  on  by  poifon.

Book  V. Of  fuch  Things  as  may  be  added  to  the  former  Books.

Letter  60.  Of  the  apoplexy.

61.  Of  deliria  which  happen  without  a  fever.

62.  Of  the  epilepfy,  of  cohvulfion,  and  paralyfis.

63.  Of  blindnefs,  aphonia,  and  angina.

64.  Of  many  diforders  of  the  thorax.

65.  Of  moft  diforders  of  the  belly.

66.  Of  diforders  of  the  urinary  bladder  in  particular.

67.  Of  diforders  of  the  genital  parts  in  both  fexes,  but  particularly  in  the  female

fex.

68.  Of  fevers,  and  of  tumors.

69.  Of  blows  and  wounds  of  the  head,  and  thorax;  of  diforders  of  the  joints;

and  of  the  lues  venerea.

70.  Of  fome  things  which  were  promis'd  in  the  latter  part  of  the  66th  letter  j

and  at  the  fame  time  of  fome  diforders  of  the  belly  and  thorax.

INDEX


INDEX the SECOND,

REFERRING TO

Difeafes  and  their  Symptoms,  to  their  External  Caufes,  to
the  different  Stages  of  Life,  to  the  various  Employ-
ments of  Life,  and  other  Things  of  a  iimilar  Nature.


The  Reman  or  Capital  Figures  refer  to  the  Letters ;  the  Common  or  Small
Figures  to  the  Articles.


ABDOMEN,  blackift,  XLI.  lo.
Beaten  with  aftick,XLIX.  6.
Kick'd  byaborfe,  LIV.14.4.1.
Bruis'd  in  the  right  epicolic  region,

LIV.  39.
Pain  of,  XUX.  6.
Gangrene  of. See  Gangrene.
Wound  of  in  the-epigaftrium,  LIV.
8.  10.
Intheleft  hypochondrium,LIV.35.
At  the  margin  of  the  right  os  ilium,

LIV.  4.
In  the  left  epicolic  region,  LIV.  37.
At  the  bottom  of  the  right  epicoUc

region,  LIV.  33.
Below  the  navel,  LIV.  6.  20.
In  the  hypogaftrium,  LIV.  31,
About  the  groin,  LIV.  2.
Abortion,  XXI.  24.  XXXIX.  12. Vid.

Foetus.
Achores,  X.  9,
Air,  efFedls  of  going  from  thin  into  foul,

XLIX.  14. Vid.  Cold.
Amaurofis,  IX.  20. Vid.  Eye.
Anafarca,  XVI.  4.  XXII.  10.  XXXVIIL

6.  26.
Aneurifm. Vid.  Arms,  Groin,  Ham.
Anger,  XXXV.  16.
Angry-man,  XXXV.  2.
Anus,  excrefcences  about  the,  XLVII.  28
Cofldylomata  of  the,  XLII.  2.


Anus,  conftant  bleeding  of  the,  XLII.  2.
Anxiety,  XXX.  4.  XXXIV.  9.  XXXVI.

17.  LV.2.
Aphonia. Vid  Speech,  lofs  of.
Apoplexy,  I.  4.  II.  9.  ri.  13.  15,  16,  17.
ig,  20.  22.  III.  2.  4.  6.  II.  14.
16, 17.  20.  24.  26. IV.  4.  9.
II.  13.  16.  20,  21.  24.  26,  28.
30.  V.  2.  15.  17.  19.  VJ.6.  XI.
6.  13. 15.22.  XiV.27.  XXXV.
6. XLVII.  24.-  LI.  30.  37.59.
LII.  38.  LVI.  12 LVII.  2.  14.
LX.  2.4.6.  8.  10. LXII.  7.9.
n.
three  attacks  of,  LX.  4. 6.  LXII.  1 1.
Coming-on on change of pofture

whilfl:  lying  down,  LI.  30.
Impcrfecl. IV.  2.  6,  7,  8.  ig. V.
6.  II. XLIV.  21. Vid.  alfo
Hemiplexy.
Appetite,  loft, XII.  16. XX, 15. 28.
XXIII.  4. XXVI.  13. XXIX.
10.  12. XXX.  7. XLIL 13.
XLIX.  2.  L.  48.  LXV.  13.
Arm,  aneurifm  of  the  from  bleeding,  L.  7.
Pain  of  the, XVI.  36. XXIV,  34.

XXVII.  8.
Numbnefs  of  the,  XXVI.  31.
Trembling  of  the,  XXX.  4.
Afphuxy. Vid.  Pulfe,  defeft  of.
Afthma,  XV.  13.  XVIII.  34.  XLVL  17.
• LH.  8.  LXVII.  g. Vid.  Refpi-
lation,  difficulty  of.

JB.  Back,


INDEX referring to


B


I  AC  K,  blow  on  the,  LII.  34. LIII.
35.  LVI.  10.
Wound  of  the,  LIII.  12. 16.

Penetrating  into  the -thorax,  LIII.

1.8.
On  thefcapula,  XVI.  28.  LIII.  14.
iarge  abfcefs  of  the,  open'd  of  itfelf,

LI.  19.
Pain  of  the,  XX.  28.  56.  XXXIX.

-2.  5.  LI.  15.
Great  heat  of  the,  XXIX.  10.
Incapacity  of  bending,  XX.  28.
Fall  on  the,  XX.  28. XXXIV.  27.
'Baldnefs,  LX.  12.
'Barber,  LX.  12.
Barrennefs,  XX.  7.  XXXVI.  17.  XLVI.

20. LV.  10.
■Baths. Vid.  Euganean,  and  Verona.
:Belchings,  frequent,  XXIX.  6.

Bitter,  or  acid,  XXXIV.  25.
iBelly,  uneafinefs  in  it,  XVI.  40.

Hflrd,XXXIV.5.  Vid.Hypochondres.

Refounding  on  ftriking  it  with the

. hand,  XXXIV.9.18.  XXXVIII.

3°-
Univerfal  tumour  of  it, X.  ir.  13.
XVL4. 10.  XVIL  10.  XXIL4.
6. XXIII. 6. XXXIV.  18.

XXXVIII.  2.  22.  30.  34-51.52.

XXXIX.  39.  XLl.  10.  XLVn.

8.  XLVIII.  28.  LIII.  16.
'Great  tumour  of  it,  XXXIX.  2.

But  foft,  XXXVIIL  6.
Sudden  and  univerfal,  XXXVI.  4.
LIII.  18.  LIV.  18.  39.
Slight  tumour  of  it,  XX.  16.  XXI.  34.

XLII.  8. XLIII.  27.
Diftenfionofit,XXXIV.i8.XXXV.
14.
Subfiding,  XXIX.  6.
Tenfion  of  it,  XVII.  6. XXIX.  6.
XXXIV.  9.  XXV.  2.  XXXIX.

9.  LIII.  18. LIV.  18.  39.
Swell'd  greatly  after  eating,  XVII.  10.

Chiefly  on  the  left  fide,  LXVIII.

12.
Belly,  hard  tumour  of  it in the  epigaf-

trium,  XXXVI.  25.
Between  the  fternum and navel,

XXXVIIL  52.
Moveable,  XXXIX.  21.
Above  the  navel  on  the  right  fide,

XLVIII.  55.


Belly,  hard  tumour  of  it,  unequal  on  oiiC
fide  of  the  navel,  XXVIII.  57.
In  the  umbilical  region,  XXXIX.  5.
Below  the  navel, and  on the  right

fide,  XXIX.  14.
At  the  iliac  region,  XXXIV.  25.
In  the  hypogaftrium,XXXlX.  3?.  27,
Hard,  XXXIX.  29.
Moveable,  XXXIX.  12.
Becoming fix'd from moveable,

ibid.
Suppurating  and  tlifcharging  pus

and  urine,  XLII,  20.
Pfotubera  ting  uncertainly,  but  with
a  conftant  depreflion  in  the  epi-
gaftrium,  XXXIX.  14.
In  the  groin,  XXXIX.  42.
Belly,  tumour  of  it  fufficiently  moveatle,
XXIX.  14.
Unequal  and  yielding  to  the  touch,
XLVIII.  55.
3elly,  tumefied  at  the  region  of  the  fto-
mach,  LIV.  6.
Hard  round  moveable  fubftances  ia
it,  XXV.  6.
Belly,  hardnefs  of,  XXX.  14.

As  it  were  in  the  whole  right  fide,

XXXVI.  2.

In the epigaftrium, XVI.  26.

XXIX.  6.
About  the  navel,  XXI.  49.
At  the  iliac  region,  XXXIV.  25.
At the region of the uterus,

XXXIX.  12.
Belly,  pains  of  it, XXXIV.  5.  q. u.

XXXV. 18. XXXVIIL 90.

XXXIX.  9.  21. XLVII. 14.

LI.  20.  LIV.  16.  35.  39.  LIX.

Increafing  at  intervals,  XLII.  13.
-Returning  at  a  certain  time  after
eating,  XXXV.  6.  XXXIX.  14.
Great  and  deep-feated,  XXXIV,

27.

Violent,  LIV.  24.

Gnawing, XXXIV. g. 18. 21;-.

XXXV.  6.  16.  XLIL  13.
Pricki-ng,  XX.  9.  XXXIV.  21.
Wandring, but foon after fix'd,

XXXIV.  23.
Belly,  pain  of  it  in  the  epigaftrium,  XX.

30.  XXXVL4.  XXXVIIL  qo.

XLIII.  5.  ^

At the region  of the ftomacb,

XXXVII.  2.

BelJ^


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS.


Pain  of  it  at  the  pit  of  the  flomach,

XLII.  13.
At  the  hypochondria. Vid.  hypo-
chondria.
Below  the  hypochondria,  LXV.  8.
About  the  navel,  XXXV.  2.  i6.
Abont  the  ilia,  XX.  43. XXXIV.

25.
In  the  hypogaftrium,  XXXV.  14.

XLII.  8.  XLV1I.8.  LXVI,2.
Very  fevere  at  night,  XXXIX.  33.
Pungent,  about  the region  of  the

uterus,  XXIX.  12.
In  alnioft  all  the  right fide  when

touch'd,  XXVI.  2.
Belly,  pain  in  it  juil  below  the thorax,

XXX 10.
Belly,  an  uneafy  internal fenfation in it

near  the  fcrobiculus  cordis, LXX.

Above  the  navel,  X.  11.
A  heavy  fenfation  inic.  XL.9.  L,III.3.
At  the  iliac  region,  XXXIV.  25.
In  the  hypogartriuni,  LIV.  14.
At  the  bottom  of  the  belly,  XXIX.
10.  XLVII.  8.
A  fenfation  of  heat in it  about  the

pubes,  XLII.  13.
A  troublefome  fenfation  of bubbles
under  the  right  hypochondrium,
Lll.  8.
An  appearance  of  extravafated  fluid
in  it,  when  it  was  ilaaken,  XXIX.
6.
A  great  pulfation  in  it  above  the  na-
vel, XXIV,  34.
Belly,  a  pain in it foon  proving fatal,
XXXIV.  23. XXXVI.  20.
Very  foon  proving  fo,  XXXV.  2.

10.
Gradually  going  ofF,  XXXVI.  4.
Belly,  frequent  borborygmi  of,  XXIX.  6.
Wound in  it,  LXVI,  9. Vid.  Ab-
domen.
Wounded  by  a  wheel  running  over
it,  XL.  26.  LIV.  16.
Birth,  very  difficult,  LXIX.  10.

Premature,  XLVIII.  28.
Black- man,  difeas'd,  L.  17.
Blackfmith,  difeas'd,  XXX.  16.
Bladder,  pains  in  it,  XLII.  4.  15.  20.  25.
28.
Stone  in  it,  XLII.  13.

Sometimes felt, fometimes not,
XLII.  8.
Vol.  III.


Stone  in it, extrafled with great
difficulty  and  pain,  XLII.  8.
BIindnefs,XlII.  15.17.  XVII. 21.  LXIII.
10. Vid.  Amaurofis.

Of  one  eye, XIII.  8,  9. LII. 30.
LXIII.  2.  4.  6.

Happening  in  illnefs,  LI.  2.
Blood,  on  opening  a  vein  firft  rufliing  out
with  great  force,  but  immediate-
ly afterwards  flopping,  XXXV.
2.

Taken  from a  vein  appearing  very
black,  LXII.  5.

Slowly and flightly coagulatino-,

XXIV.  13.  ■ "

With  a  th'ck  polypous  crufl:,  XVII.
17.  XXI.  19.  27.30  34.  XXII.
22.  XXXIV.  25:  LVlil.  13.
Separating  into  laminae  on  flight  mo-
tion, XXI.  24
With  a  thin  coat,  XXX.  4.  LV.  10.
Blood,  yellow,  XXI.  19,  29,  30.  XXXIV.
25
Green,  XXXVIII.  30.
Blood,  having  a  hard  craffamentum,  XXI.
34.  LV.  10.
Moderately  hard,  XLIV.  3.  LXIL

,  5-

Very  hard  and  very  black, XXI,

27.
Almoft  fluid,  XXI.  19,29 XXX.4.
Blood,  containing  little  ferum,  XLIV.  3.
LXII.  5.
Scarcely  any  ferum,  XXI.  ig.
No  ferum  at  all,  XXXIV.  25.
Grecnifh  ferum,  XXI.  27.
Milky  ferum,  XXX.  4.
Gold  colour'd  ferum,  XXI.  29.
Staining;  linea  with  a  yellow  colour,
XXXVIL  2.
Body,  unequally  nourifh'd,  V.  6. XXVI.

. 31-  35'

Univerfariy  fwell'd. Vid.  Tumor.
General  pains  of  it. Vid.  Pain.
Supported  chiefly  on  one  leg,  XXXIV.

25-  .
Bones,  becoming  flexible  like  wax,  LVIII.

4-
Long-continu'd  pains  of,  ibid.

Feeling  as  if  broken  when  mov'd,ibid.

Bones  of  the  lower  extremities  pain'd  by

gentle  motion,  LVIII.  4.

Bowls,  playing  too  much  at,  XXVI.  g.

Brain. Vid.  Cerebrum  &  Cerebellum.

Breaft, Vid.  Thorax.

4 1  BreafI,


INDEX referring to


Breaft,  blow  on  it,  LIII  32.
Compiefs'd,  XX.  28.
Wound  of  it,  LIII.  24.
In  the  middle  of  the  fternum,LIIL

3-

At  the  left fide of  the  fternum,

LIII.  29. LXIX.  4.
Below  the left pe£\oral mufcle,

LIII.  26.
At  the  lower  part  on  the  right  fide,
LIII.  40.
Breaft,  fwellina of  it  on the left  fide,
XXXI.  2.
A  puliating  tumor  at  its  upper  part,
XVIi.  25.  XVIII.  25. XXVI.

Tumor  at  the  bottom  of  it,  X.  13.
Pulfation  in  it,  XXIV 34.

Great  on  the  left  fide,  XVIII.  30.

Breaft,  pain  in  it  cot refponding  to  a  wound

of  the  back,  LIII.  18.

In  the  region  of  the  heart,  XXIV.

13.  XXV,  17.  XXVI.  17.

A  pinching  pain  in  the  lower  part  of

it,  XXIV.  13. XXXV.  16.
An  uneafy  finfation  at  the  bottom  of

it,  XVIII.  28.
A  fenfe  of  coldnefs  in  it,  XXV.  6.
Breaft  of  a  man,  a  very  hard  tumor  in  it

of  the  fize  of  one's  fift,  L.  45.
Breaft,  a  thick  hard tumor  with  pricking
pains  in  a  woman,  L.  48.
A  tumor  of  in  a  woman uneven  and

very  painful,  ulcerated,  L.  41.
Blow  on  a  woman's,  L.  48.
Bricklayer,  cafe  of  one,  XLlV.  3.
Bronchocele,  L.  31,  32,  33,  34.  36.
Buboes,  marks  ot  them  remaining,  XLIV.

15.  XLVIII.  32.
Bubonocele.  Vid.  Hernia.
Bullet,  leaden,  fhot  into  the thigh,  and

continuing  there,  XXVII.  28.
Butchers,  cafes of, XX.  13. XXI.  19.

LVIII.  13.
Buttock,  a  wound  in  the  left,  LIV.  22.


CACHEXY,  XVL2.  XVII.  17.
XVIII.  17.  XX.  32.  XXII.  24.
XLIII.4.  XLVII.  34.  L.  51.
LXI.  5.  LXin.  8.
Cachochymy,  IV.  7.  30.
Cancer,  one  fpreading  in  the  mouth,  XIX»
45-


Cancerous  tumor,  V.  4.  XXII.  22. L.  4.

Vid.  Breafts.
Carduus,  diforder  from  eating  it,  XXXIV.

5-
Carman,  cafe  of  one,  XX.  2.
Carpenter,  the  cafe  of  one,  XLIV.  3.
Catarrh,  XXXVII.  30.  XLV.  16.  LXIX.

8.
Suffocating,  XIII.  3.
SubjetS  to  one,  XIII.  3.
Catarrhal  affection,  proving  fatal,  XXI. 11.
Catheter,  an  impediment  to  its  introduc-
tion into  the  bladder  at  the  neck

thereof,  X.  13.  XXXI V.  7.
In  other  parts  of  the  urethra,  IV.

20.
Cauftics,  their  ufe,  LV.  20.
Cerebrum,  a  confiderable  part  of  it  laid

bare,  LVIII.  11.
Cheeks,  a  morbid  rednefs  of  them,  XLV.

16. LXV.  8.
Chefnuts,  diforder  from  eating  bread  made

with  them,  XXIX.  8.
Child,  cafe  of  one,  IX.  4.
Children,  difeafes  of  fome,  XIV.  3.  XLIL

8.
Cloth-fliearer,  cafe  of  one,  XVIII.  25.
Colic,  in.  2.  XXXV.  8.
Coma  vigil,  LII.  ii.
Coldnefs, univerfal of  the  body, IV.  8.

VIIL  23.  XXI.  44.  XXVI.  21.

XLVIII.  44.  LIII.  40.
Of  the  extremities, XX.  32. XXL

49.  XXX.  7.  LII.  13.  LIV.  16.
Of the air coming on fuddenly,

XXXIV.  18.

Injuries  from  it,  LIII.  4,  5.  XLIV.

3. XLV.  16. LL  3. LIL  6.

LVL  31.
Convulfion,  II.  23. IV.  11,  27,  28.  30.

V.  4.  X.  13.  XIV.  3.  XX.  16.

XV.  6.  XXXIV.  25.  XXXVII.

2.  4. XXXIX.  14. XLIL  2.

LI.  15.  LIV.  33.  LV.20.  LIX.

18.  LXII.  5.
Of  one  fide  of  the  face,  LI.  7. Vid.

Tetanus, Os  ilium.
Convulfive  motions, I.  2.  4. II.  g.  17.

III.  II.  16. VL6. VIL9.  13-

IX.  20. X.  5.  7.  9.  II.  17.  19.

XVII.  25. XX.  43. XX f.  34.

XXV.  6. XXX.  4. XXXI.  5.

XXXV.  16.  XXXIX.  25.  XL.
2.  XLI.  8.  XLV.  21.  XLVII.
8.15. XLVIII.  28. LI.  2.  II,

12.


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS.


12. 17. 26,  27. 32, 33. 38.  45.

50.59. LII. 6.  8. 19. LIV.
16. 22.  29. 31.  44. LV.  10,
II.  22. LVIl. 10. LXII.  5.
LXIV.  15.  LXVI.  2. Vid.  Tre-
mors convulfive.
Of  one  fide  of  the  body,  XL  6.
Principally  fo,  LI.  45.
Convulfive  motions,  veliement,  LI.  39.

Almoft  incredibly  fo,  LI.  17.
Confumption,  XLVII.  4.
Cooks,  cafes  of,  XXI.  49.  LIH.  29.  LXII.

15.  LXV.  8.

Coftivenefs,  IV.  30. XXX.  7. XXXIV.

5.9.  II.  18.  XXV. 14.  XXXIX.

21.  29. XLIl.  13.  28. XLIX.

14. L.48. LIV.  35.  39. LVII.

10.  LXV.  3.  13.  LXX.  5.
Coughs, XIII.  3. XV.  6.  25. XXVI.  2.

8.  10.  19.  21. XVJI.  6.  10.  14.

17.25.  XVIII.  2. XIX.  8.  XX.

3.  7.  9.  13.  16.  22.  28.  33.  35,

36.  39.  41.  43.  45.  47.  51.  55.

XXI.  19.  24.  30.  32,  33,  34.  44.

XXII.  4.  6.  8.  10.  14,  15,  16.
XXVIII.  12.  XXXI.  5.  XXXV.

16.  XXXVI.  4.  XXXVIII.  6.
13.18.30.  LI.  20.  LIIl.  14.  18.
LIV.  39.  LVI.  7.  LXIV. 5.  13.

Cough,  dry,  XVI.  6  38.  XVIII.  17.  XIX.

58.  XX.2.  30.49.56.  59.  XXI.

27.29.32.  XXIV.  2.  XXVI.  35.

XX VIII.  iT.  16. LI.  19. LIU.

16.
Whooping,  XVIIL  17.
Scarcely  tolerable, LXII.  3. LVIII.

Suffocating, XXVI.  35. XXXVIII.

13-

Continual,  XL.  23. LVIII.  13.

Frequent,  XX.  9,  LIV.  6.

Not  frequent,  XLVIII.  38.

Slight,  XLVIII.  38. LXVIII.  12.

Of  long  {landing,  LIIL  29.
Coughs,  liable  to,  XXI.  27.
Cranium. Vid.  Skull.


D


D'


.EAFNESS,  IV.  8.  XIV.  3. .

'  Imperfea,  IV.  11.  LVII.  10.

happening  in  fevers, and  other  difor-

ders,  VL4.  XXL  24.  XXXI,  2.
r  T ^ TO


Death,  of  a  patient,  unexpeiled,  XX.  5'
XLiX.  2. 10.  LI.  57.  LIX.  15*
LXil.  15.

Death,  coming  on  foon,  XXXVI.  17,
XXXVIT.4.  XLIL  13.  XLIlf.
5.  XLVL20.  XLVIH.  44  LI.
37.  50,51.  59.  LII.  25.30.  34,
35.37.  LIII.  7.  26.33  40.  LIV.
10.  16.  18.  20.  25.  31.  33.  37.
46.  LV.  10,  II.  LIX.  2.  12.
15.  LX.  4.  6.  12.  LXII.  2.
LXIX.  24.
Sudden.  Vid.  Apoplexy,  Suffoca-
tion, and  XVII.  10.  17.  XVIIL
2.  8.  14.  25.  XXI.  47.  XXIV.
13. XXV.  2.  10.  !2. XXVL

3.5.  7.  9.  II.  15.  17.  19.  21.
29-  31-  33-  35-  37-  XXVII.  2.
5.  8.  12.  16.  28.  XXVIII.  9,
10.  12.  XXX.  20.  XXXV.  8.
XL.  29.  XLII,  u.  34.  LIII.
35.  37.  LIV.  41.  LXlV.  13.

Death,  inltantaneous  in  the  a£t  of  venery,
XXVL  13. Vid.  alfoIL  12.
On  the  change  of  fituation  in  lying

down,  XX.  17.
From  a  blow  on  the  head,  VIII.  15.

Death,  foretold  by  the  fick  perfons,
XLVIII.  44. LVII.  ID.

Defluxions,  who  are  liable  to  them,  XVI.
43. Vid.  Rheumatifm.

Deform'd, Vid.  Gibbous.

Deliiium,  L  2.  4.  14.  IVr30.  V.  2.  4.
VI.  2.  VII,  6,  7.  15.17.  VIIL
25.  IX.  16.  X.  5.  17.  XIV.  3.
5.  XVI.  40.  XVII.  ig.  XX.2.
j6.  28.47.61.  XXI.  6.  23.  2g._
32,33.  35.  XXX.  4.  XXXV.

2.6.  XXXVII. 2. 4.  XXXVIII.
22.  30.  XLVII.  12.  XLIX.  6.
LI.  15.- 17,  18.  34,  35.  42.  44.
49.  LIL  6.  10.  19.  LIII.  2.  5.
LV.  H.20.  22.  Vid.Phrenzy,
Madnefs,  Melancholy,  Foolifh-
nefs,  Idiotifm.

Delirium, flight, LXII.  15. LXV.  13.

Vid.  Talk  incoherent.

Dentition, difficult,  IX.  4.  X.  9  XXXI. 5,

Diarrhosa, X.  7.  9. XX.  11.  30. XXI.

29.  35. XXX.  7. XXXI.  5.

XLII.  II.  28. XLVIII.  38.  L.

48.  LIV.  6.  LXX.  10.

Frequently  returning,  XXXVIIi.  30.

LXIV.  7.
Of  long  continuance,  LXV.  5.
4  I  2  Diarrhoea,


INDEX referring to


Of long continuance, and very

great,  XVI.  12.
Habitual,  XXXI.  2.
Painful,  XXXI.  12.
Bilious,  XX.g.  XXXI. 2.5.  XXXV.

6. XXXVIII.  30. XLII.  20.
With  different  colour'd  faeces,  XLII.

2.
Serous,  and  in  large  quari'dty,  XXII.

14. XXXVIII.  30.
Foetid,  XXXVIII.  34.
In  which a  fmall  quantity  of  vifcid

matter  was  excreted,  LIII.  3.
The  ftools  were  very  blaclc,  XXXI.

5-  .

Ting'd  with  blood,  ibid.

Supprefs'd,  ibid.
Difeafe,  apparent  alleviation  of  one,  LIII.

18.
Dog,  bite  of  one,  XLVIII.  30.
Drinking  too  much,  the  efFefls  of  it.  XLI.
13.  XLII.  34,  LX 12.  LXII.
5.  LXIX.  2. LXX.  5.
Dropfy,  LVI.  20.

(jf the whole body, XXX. 12.

XXXVIII.  10.  18.
Afcites,  XXXVm.  20.  28.  35.  XLI.
18. LXX.  9. Vid.  Beily,  tu-
mor of  the.
Evident,  XXXIX.  39.
Beginninp'  to appear, XLVII.  34.

LVII.  10.
Preceding,  XVII.  17.  XXXIX.  29.
Drunkards,  LXII.  5.  LXIII.  13. LXX.

5-
Drunkennefs, XIX.  58. LII. 30. 32.

LVIII.13.  LX.12.  LXIX.  2.
Occafioning  lols  of  fpeech.  XIV.  35.

LXIII.  13.  ^

Dullnefs  of  the fenfes,  unufual. III.  24.

XX.  61. XXXVII.  2. LI.  6.

30. LIII.  24. Vid.  Mind.
Dyfentery,  XXXI.  2.  25.
Conftant,  XXXI.  14.
Dyfpr.cea. Vid Refpiration,  difficult.
Dyfury. Vid. Urine,  difficulty in dif-

charging.


E


AR,  blood  flowing  from  it,  LI.  50.

LII.  25.  30.
Ichor, difcharg'd  from it in large

quantity,  XXII.  10.
Sanies  from  it,  LII.  28.


Matter  from  it,  XIV.  3.  5.

Pain  of  it,  XXI 24.
On  one  fide,  LI.  33.
Ellebore,  black,  the  efFedfs  of,  LIX.  15.
Empbyfema, univerfal, but flight,

XXXVIII.  22.

Attending  wounds  of  the  abdomen,

LIV.  37.
Empyema,  XXII.  6.  8.  10.  12.  22.
Enterocele. Vid.  Hernia.
Epilepfy,  IX.  2,  3, 4.  g.  12.  14.  16.  18.

20.23 25. XXX.  4 XL.  4.

LI.  6 27.  LXII.  2.  LXIV.5.
Perfons  liable  to,  IX.  17.  LII.  11.
Epiplocele. Vid.  Hernia.
Eryfipelas, in the feet, XXII. 16.

XXXIX.  2.

Euganean baths and mud, effe£ls of,

XXV.  6.
Eyes,  lividnefs  under  them,  XXXIV.  g.
Sinking  in  their  orbits,  XXXIV.  25.

LXX.  5.
Fix'd and immoveable, IV.  26.  35.

LI.  12.
Looking,  as  it  were,  at  different  ob-

jedts,  IV.  35.
Appearing  in  fome  meafureconvuls'd,

XXXV.  2.
Gliftening,  IV.  35. VII.  7.
Eye,  a  very  final!  wound  in  it,  LI.  57.

A  wound  under  it,  LI.  59.
Eyes,  pain  in  them,  I.  2.

Severe  in  one,  LI.  7.
Bruife  of  one,  LI.  7.  57,
Contorted,  IV.  28.
Rednefs  of  them,  LII.  10.  LX.  2.
Inflammation of both, XVII. 21.
XXV.  6.
Of  one  only, XLII. 11. Vid.
Amaurofis.
Eyebrow,  blow  on,  LI.  39.
Wounded,  LI.  7.  17.  33.


ACE, of an unpleafing afpefl:,

XXXIV.  9.  XXXV.  2.
Cacheaic,  XLII.  28.
Cadaverous,  IV.  9. XXI.  44.
CEdematous,  XVI,  2.  10.
White  and  fomewhat  fwell'd, XXI.

Tumid,*i6. 19.  30.  XVII.25.  XVIII.
25.  XXII.  6.  XXXVIII.  4.
LI.  14.  37.  LII.  6.

Face,


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS.


Appearing  like  that  of  a  perfon  dying
of  an  atrophy,  VIII.  25.

of  an  apoplexy,  XXL  23.

of  a  lurid  colour,  LXIV. 15.

of  a  bad  colour, XLVIII.  44.
Face,  pale,  XX.  30.  XXI.  19.  36.  XXVI.
3.5.  XXVII.  8. XXXVI.  ir.
23.  25. LI.  37. Lll.  28. LV.

2,2.

And  fubfiding,  XII. 16.
Sometimes  pale,  fometimes  livid, LI.

51-

Livid,  IV.  4. XVIII.  6. XXVI.

21. XXXVIII.  4.
Very  red,  XVil.  19.  XX.  15.  XXI.
34. XXXV.  16. LI.  38.  42.
50.  54. Lll.  10.
Suddenly  fo,  XXV.  6.
Morbidly  red. Vide  Cheeks.
Changing  from  red  to  brown,  XVIII.
25.
To  a  violet-colour,  LXIV.  ig.
Growing  yellow,  XXXVI.  2.  XLIV.
7. LI.  14. LII.  8.
Somewhat yellow. XXIX. 8.
XXXVI.  li. XXXVIII. 52.
LV.  22.
Face,  convuls'd  on  one  fide,  LI. 7.

Or  paralytic,  LI.  27.
Faintings,  XVI.  43. XVIL 14,17,21.
XVIII.  2. XXIV. 2.  13. 34,
XXV. 6. 15. XXVI. 21.
XXVII.  2.  ^XX.  10.  XXXV.
14. XXXVIII.  4. XXXIX.
14.  XLII.  2.  XLVI.  20.  LIII.
14  18. LIV.  8.  39.  LVII.  10.
LIX.  3. LXV.  13.
Increas'd  at  night,  XXIV.  34.
Fainting,  an  internal  fenfe  of,  XXVII.  28.
Faintings,  perfons  fubjedt  to,  XXIV.  13.

34. XXV. 4.
Fall  from  a  high  place,  XL.  9. LI.  7.  9.
11.28.37,42.50. LII. 2,3.
8.  15.  34,  35. LIII. 7.  9.  37,
LIvTiS. LV.  22. LVi:2i.
Fall  on  the  ground  immediately  after  a  blow
or  wound, LI. 15.  17,  18,  19.
^5-  45-  59- LII.  ig. LIII.  2.
Not  immediately,  LI. 27.  aa..
Falling,  XXIV.  34. LXI.  7.  '_

Without  taking  even  any  liquids  for
fix  days,  XVIL  25.
Fat,  in  too  large  a  quantity,  XIV.  27.
XX.  9.  XXVII.  2.  XXXV.
18,  XXXIX.  21.  XL.  4.  LVII.
10.


Fat  of  the  limbs  and  head,  not  correfpond-
ing  with  that  of  the  reft  of  the
body, XLV.  23.
Fauces,  convulfion  of  the,  LIV.  22'.  29.
Rheum  from  the,  XVI.  40.
Drynefsofthe,  XL VII. 8.
Pain  of  the,  XLII.  34. LIV.  2.
A  fenfe  of  heat  in  the, LI.  26.
A  fenfe  of  pricking  in  the,  XLII.  2.
Erofion  in  the,  XXII. 22.
Ulcerated, XIX. 50.
Fear,  LXVIII.  12.

Unreafonable, perfons fubjedl to,
XLV.  23.
Fecundity,  great,  LX.  6.
Fevers  preceding  other  diforders, XXII.

12.  LVII.  17.
Fever,  flight,  XVL21.  XVII.19.  XVIII.
30.  XXI.  15.32.  XXII  10.
II.  22.  XXIV.  6.  XXXVI.
23.XXXVni.34.52.XXXIX.
9. 21. XLVIII. 38. LXIi.

15.  LXIV.  7.
Increaiing  by  night,  XXXVI.  25.
Irregular,  XVI.  38.  LXVIII.  12.

Fever,  XIV.  5. XVi.  19.  40. XXIL

16.  XXIX. 10.  14. XXXl.
5.  XXXIV.  g.  15.  25.  XXXVI.

20.  xxxix:.  14. 21. 23.  XL.

23. XLI.  ~i3. XLII. 8. ic;.

25.  28. XLVII. 12 XLIX.

14. L.  48. LI.  12.  14.  15.  i8.

27. 45. LII. 10, II.  15.  ig.

23. LIII.  16.-29. LIV.  2.  37.

LV.  10.20.  LVI.  7.10.  LXII.

2.5. LXIII.  19. LXV.  13.
Fever,  returning,  XXII.  6.  8.

Periodical,  XVI.  12. XXI.  49.
With  frefli  exacerbations  every  day,

XXI.  32. XXXV.  16.
Abating,  and afterwards increafing,

XL.  9. LI.  7.
Fever,  catarrhal,  epidemic, XIII.  3.

Chronica],  XX. 2.  30.51. XXIL

II.  XXXVL  17.  XLVII.  36.
Slow,  XVI  6.  XXII.  15.  18  XLVL

27.  XLIX.2.  LIIL12.  LXX5.
Great, LXIII. 13.
Acute, XVI. 17. XX.  3. XXL

47. XXV. 17. XXXL 2.

XXXVL II. XXXVII. 2.

XXXVIII.  22. XXXIX. 12.

XLII.  20. XLV.  16. XLVII.

33. XLIX.  12. LI.  42. LIIL

9. LVIIl.  13. LXV.  8.

Fever,


INDEX relating to


Fever,  ardent,  IV.  26.  VII.  6.  XXI.  9.
XXII.  8. XXV.  A. XXXIV.
7. XLIX.  8.
Going ofF  without any perceptible
crifis,  XXXIV. 23.
Fever,  inflammatory,  XX.  9.  11.  17.  22.
26.  28.  30.  33.  39.  43.  45.  47.
49.  51.  56.  59.  61. XXI.  6.  9.
■  17- 19-  23,  24.  27.  29,30.  32,
''S- 35' 36- 44- XXII. 22.
XXXVI.  23.  XLIV.  3.  XLV.
16. XLVIII.  28. LV.  II.
Fever,  Lypirias,  VI.  8. XXI.  44.

One  nice  it,  XXX.  14.  XXXIX.  25.
Fever,  malignant,  IV.  9. VI.  2.  4.  VII.
2. XXX.  4. XLIX.  24. LV.
II.
Unexpectedly  cured,  IV.  g.
Fever  increafing,  XLVIII. 28.
Fever  attacking  with  coldnefs, XXXII,
7. LI. 2.  3.  II.  33.  34. LII.
28. LVI.  26. LVII.  20.
With  flight  {hiverings,  XLII. 2.
With fhiverings and tremor,

XXXVIII. 30.
Withrigors^XXXVI.  17.  XLVIII.
28. L.  48. LI. 3.  17.  20.  25,
26.  49. LIII.  14.
With  long  continu'd  rigors  and  cold-
nefs, XL.  4.
With  rigors  returning  more  than  once
every  day, LI. g.
Every  day,  LI.  30. LIV.  4.
Fever,  with  horrors  frequently  recurring,
LI.  19.
Qiiotidian,  LI.  3.

Becoming  worfe in the evening,
XXIX.  12.  XXX.  7.  LII.  28.
Fever,  tertian, XVII. 21. XXXI. 2.
LIX. 18.
Double,  XXX.  4. XLIX.  6.  8.
Continual,  LXX. 5.
Quartan, LI. 17.
Fever  becoming  continual  from  intermit-
tent, LI. 17.
Fevers, perfons liable to, XVII. 17.

XXXVL  17.
Fiflierman,  the  cafe  of  one,  V.  19.
Fiftula  above  the  maftoid  procefs,  XIV.  5.
Of  the  thorax,  not  penetrating,  LXI V.
12.
Flatulent  complaints,  V.  19. XXXVIII.
30-
Eruaations,  XLVII.  8.
Flax-dreffer's  cafe,  XXXVI . 11.


Fluor  muliebris,  or albus,  XXXIX. 3'*.

XLVII.  8.  12.  &c.  LXVIL  14.
Foam  about  the  mouth,  IV. 4. XVIII.

25. XXVL35.
Bloody,  XL.  4.
Foetus,  immature  and  dead,  expell'd  after

a  copious  haemorrhoidal  flux  and

a  fever,  XLVIII.  5.
After  a  large  bleeding,  XLVIII.  7.
After a long  and  great  difcharge  of

blood  from  the  uterus, XLVIII. 9.
After  a  fudden  and  violent  afFe£lionof

the  mind,  XLVIII.  18.
With  the  umbilical  cord  twifted  tight-
ly round  the  leg,  XLVIII.  53.
Fcetus,  monflrous,  inftances  of,  XLVIII.
_  48. 50. 52,  53,  54.
Without the cranium and neck,

XLVIII.  48.  50.  52.
Without  a nofe,  the  eyes  touching

each  other, XLVIII.  53.
With  the abdomen  expanded  in  form

ofapurfe,  XLVIII.  48.  52.  55.
With  the  abdomen  open,  and  the  in-

teftines  lying  out,  XLVIII.  53.
With  two  heads  and  necks,  XLVIII.

57-
Food,  faked,  abufe  of, XXIX. 12.

Bad,  the  conftant  ufe  of,  XL, 23.
Food,  eating  it  voracioufly.  IX.  14.  XXI.
17. LXX.  5. Vide  Gluttons.
Ofagrofs  kind,  XXI.  9.  XXXIV.

9-  .
Incapacity  of  eating  much,  XVIIL  25.
Loathing  of,  XIX.  48, XLII.  20,

XLVII. 8.
Abftinence  from,  XXIV.  34.  LXI.  7.
And all kinds of  liquids,  for  fix

daye,  XVIL 25.
A  fenfe  of  weight  afcer  it,  XXII. 4.

^■^•
Occafioning a  fenfe  of  tightnefs  in

the  ftomach,  XLVII.  8.

Foolifhnefs,  I. 10. VIII.  6.  8, 9. 11,

12.  15. IX.  9. XI.  6. LIL

4. LXI.  2.  5.  7. LXIX.  10.

Vide  Madnefs.

Foot,  bruis'd  near  the  toes,  LIV. 29.

About  the  heel,  by  a  carriage- wheel,

LIV.  49.

Forehead, blow  on, LI.  30. LII.  32.

LVI.  26.

Large  blacknefs  of,  LII,  32.

Wound  of,  LI. 3. 5. 12. 15. 37.

LII. 23.

6  Forget-


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS.


Forgetfulnefs,  II.  13. XXVII.  2.

Of  a  fall  that  had  juft  before  happen 'd,
LI.  9.
Fumes,  a fenfation of,  rifing  up  to  the
head,  XXVII. 8.


GALLEY- flaves,  LI.  5. LXVI.  9.
Gamefter,  XXVII. 28.
Gangrene,  XXIII.  II. See  Wounds.

Proceeding  very  faft,  LV.  22.
Gangrene  of  the  abdomen,  XL V III.  55.
Extending  to  the middle of the
thighs,  XLI. 10.
Of  the  penis, XI. 13.
About the os facrum, XVII. 21.

LXI.  2.
Of  one  buttock,  XI.  15.

Both,  LI.  19. LVl.  17.
Of  one  of  the  lower  extremities  iini-

verfally,  LV.  22.
in  the  bam,  L.  55.
Gibbous, IV. 16. X. 13. XIII. 3.
XXXVIII.  4.  40. XLIII.  17.
XLVIII. 34, 35. LV. 10.
LVII.  2. Vide  Deform'd.
Gluttons,  IV.  19, XI.  6. XV.II.  30.
XXXVm. 18. XLII. II.
Vide  Food.
Goldfmith,  LVII.  17.
Gonorrhoea,  virulent,  XXIV.  18. XXV.
6. XLII.  2: XLIV,  3.  5.  7.
15. LXIII.  13.
Gout,  XXIX.  10. XL.  2. LVII.  10.
Vide  Sciatica.
Hereditary,  XXV.  6. L.  46.
Repell'd,  LVII. 10.
Gummata,  venereal,  of  the  cranium,  IX,

23. LVIII.  8.
Gums,  itching,  XXXI.  5.


H


HAIRS,  vranting  in  almoft  all  parts
befides  the  head,  XLVI. 2.
Ham,  aneurifm  of  it, L.  55.

Burfl-, from  a  fphactlus,  L.  55.
Hand  wounded  by  fplinters  of  wood  forc'd

into  it,  LlV. 44.
Hanging,  XIX. 3.  5.  7,  8.  13. 15.  17.

19, 20.

Head,  larger  than  natural,  IX.  4. XII.  1 6.

Pain  of,  I. 4.  6.  10.  12.  14. 11. 9.

IV.  2.  9.  21.  26. V.  15. VI.

12. VII.  6. IX.  25. XX.  5.


11.28.33.  XXV.  2. 6.  XXIX.
18. XXXIX.  12. XLIX.  8.

14.  LI.  15.  LII.  15.  LV.  20.
Head,  pain  of,  frequent,  XX.  5.

Conftant,  XIX.  58.

Obftinate,  XXIX. 12.

Very  acute,  XVL  17. XVII.  ig.

XXXVIII.  22. LI.  17. Lll.

38. LXII.  15. LXV.  13.
In  the  forehead,  LV. 10.
Above  the  eyes, I. 2.
Beginning  at  the  occiput,  LII.  38.
Deep-feated  at  the  occiput,  II.  20.

V. 2.
Head,  fenfation  offulnefs  in,  III. 11.  XXV.

6.
Heavinefs  in,  VI. 12. VII. 9. IX.

25.  XLII.  2.  LI.  6.  LXII.  10.

15.  LVIL 10. LII.  5.
At  the  back  of,  LI.  9.

V^eaknefs  in,  XXV.  4.  6. XXXIV.

23 LI.  6.
Heat  in,  XXV. 6.
Strifture  in,  LII.  38.

At  the  occiput,  XXV.  6.
Uneafinefs  in,  XXVIl.  8. LI.  15.
Confufion  in,  XXVI. 35.
Head,  difficulty  of  turning  to  one fide,
LXIX. 8.  -
Raifing  up,  troublefome, XXf,  49.
Inclination  of,  to  the  fternum,  of  ier-
vice  to  the  patient,  XVIII.  17.
Head,  blow  on,  VIII. 15. IX.  20. LL
38. LII. 3,-4. II. 25. 34.
LVI. 18.
Wound  of,  LI. 42. LIL  28.
With  contufion,  LI.  34.
On  the  back  and  fore  parts,  LI.  53,
And  blow  on  the  back  part,  LI.
25.  27.
Head,  wounds  or  blows  of,  on  its  different
parts.  Vide  Occiput, Sinciput, &c.
Heart,  pulfation  of,  greater  than  natural,
LXIV. 12.
Palpitation  of, XVI.  30. XVII.  14.

21.  XXIII.  2  4-6.8.  xxvn.

5,  XXX,  7.  XLII.  13.  XLIX.
24. LXIV. 12.
Scnfation,  uneafy,  of,  XVII.  6.  17,
Of oppreffion or conftriition,
XVI,43.  XXII!. 8.  XXXIV. 23.
Of  a  weight  laid  on,  XVi.  43.
Of  puncture  on, ibid.
Heat,  internal,  XXI. 44.
Hemicrania,  XXiX.  10.

Heml-


INDEX referrinoi to


Hemi|-lexy,  II.  9.  11.  13.  15,  16,  17.  III.
2.  II. 14.  16,  17.  IV. 13.  19.  V.

6.  15.  Xi.2.  4.  6.  13.  XLV.
1 1.  LI.  27.  35.  LXIl.  7.  9.  II.
LXIII.  13 LXVII.  14.

Slight,  IV.  2. V.  24.  XI.  II.  15.
Hemiplexy,  affecting  tiie motion  of the
body,  LI.  II.  17.  42.  54.

Imperfedt,  LVIL  14.
Hemorrhage. Vid.  Nofe,  Anus,  Uterus.
Hsemorrhages,  great,  from  wounds,  XLIV.

7.  46.

From  an  ahicefs,  LVIII.  4,  5.
Hemp-drefiers,  VII.  13. X.  13. XV.  6,

XXIV 13.
Herdfman,  XLIII.  22
Hernia,  Bubonocele,  LXV.  8.

Circocele,  VII,  1 1.  XX.  24.  XXI. 19.
Crura],  XXXiV.  15.
Enterocele, V.  2.  19. XXI.  15.  19.
XXIV.16.XXVI.37.  XXXIV.
5.  7.9. II.  18. XXXVIIi.  2.
XLI.  10 13. XLIll.  2.  4.  5.
27.  LXVII.  II.
Epiplocele, II. 20. XXI. 15.  19.
XXXIV.  9.  II.  18. XLIII.  2.
31. LXVII.  II.
Hydrocele, XX.  24. 26. XXI,  19.
XLIII.  17,  j8,  19,  22.  24,  25.
31. LXIV.  7.
Omphalocele,  XXXIV.  11.
Ofcheocele,  XLII.  34.
Hiccup,  XXX.  4.  XXXI.  5.  XXXIV.  9.

XLII.  2.  XLVJII.  28.
Hip,  contufion  of,  LVI.  17.
Hoarfenefs. Vid.  Voice.
Horror,  XXI.  32.  36.  44.
HoCpitals,  long  continuance  in,  XX.  3.
Hunger,  XVII.  10.

Sharp,  efpecially  in  the  laft  ftage  of
thedieafe,  LXVIII.  12.
Huntfmen,  XXXIV.  21. XXXVI.  u.
Hufbandmen, IV.  26 30. 35. XXL  9.
XXXIV.  9 XLI.  4.  XLII.  28.
LX.  4. LXIV.  7.
Hydrophobia, VIII  23.  25.  27.
Hypercathaifis. Vid.  Purging.
Hypochondriac  affection,  VI.  2.  XXXIX.

21. LXI.  5.  LXIV.  15.
Hypochondres,  wound  of. Vid.  Abdomen.
Pain in, heavy and ftretching,
XXXVI.  II.
As  though  bound  round,  XXII.  8.
One  of  them,  LXIV.  13.
Convulfive  in  both,  XXXVIII.  34.


Hypochondres, fenfation of air arlfing

from,  XVIII.  17. LXIV.  5.
Hypochondriura,  right, pain  in, XXIV.

„  13-  .

Periodical,  I.  4.
Tenfion  of,  XXX.  14.
Very  c;reat  hardnefs  of,  XXX.  14.
Refifirng tumor of, XXIV. 12.
XXXVI.  23.  25.
Gradually  difappearing,  XXI V.  13.
Hypochondrium,  left,  pain  of,  XXX.  14.
XLVII.  12.
Violent,  XXXVI.  20.
Heavy,  XXXVL  11.
Tumor  of,  XXXVI.  17.
Great,  XXXVL  11.
Hard, ibid.
Hyflerical  affeaions,  XXXIX.  14.  XLV,
21.23.  XLVII.  8.
Women,  fubje£t  to,  XLVIII.  44.


JAUNDICE, X.  7. XXXVn.  2.
4.  7. XLIX.  10. Vid.  ]aeric..
Jaw,  lower,  pain  of,  LVIII.  4.
Ideric  colour  after  a  wound,  LIII.  16.
Idiotifm,  L  10.

Attending  a  difeafe,  LI.  12.
Ilium  OS,  a  fpafmodic  pain  at  the  margin

of,  LIV.  22.
Iliac  pafllon,  XXXIV.  5.  9. 11. 15.  18.

21.25. XXXIX.  29.
Illncfs,  perpetual,  XVII.  12.
Incubus,  a  difeafe  fimilar  to, XVIII.  6.

Vid.  Night-mare.
Infants,  IX.  4. X.  7.  9. XII.  16. XX.

15. XXXl.  5.
Infanity. See  Delirium,  &c.
Itch, XV.  25. XVIII. 2. XXI. 17.
XXV.  6.  XXXIV.  18.  LIII.26.
LV.  10,  II.
Dried  up,  X.  9.

Repell'd, XVI.  34. XXXVIII.  22.
XLI  4.
Itch,  dry,  difappearing, XXI.  32.
Itching,  very  great, LIII,  18.


K


KI D  N I E  S,  perfon  fubjeft  to  difor-
ders  of,  XL.  18.
Kidnies,  diforders  of, not  appearing  for
many  years,  LVII.  10.

Pains


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS.


Pains  of,  XL.  2.  LVII.  10.

The  right,  XXIX.  10.
Stone  in,  XXIX.  10.
Knee,  inflexible,  LVI.  26.


LABOUR,  too  hard,  IX.  14.  X.17.
XXI.  6.  27.  30.  36.  49 XXII.
4.  XXVIl.  12. XXX.  14.
Lamenefs,  XLVI.17.  XLVIII.  32.  LVI.
10.  12.  14.  17,  18.  20,  21.  26.
LVIL  2. LX.  6.  LXIX.  2.  10.
Languor,  LI.  34.
Laxity  of  the  belly,  conftant. Vid.  Di-

arrhsea,  habitual.
Leg,  frafture  compound  of,  LVI.  31.

Abfcefs  increas'd  at  the  time  of  men-

ftruation,  XXXVI.  17.
Incapacity  of  moving,  LVII.  17.
Legs,  Pain  of,  LXVIII.  12.
Venereal,  LVIII.  8.
Ulcers  of,  V.  15.  XXV.  12.  XXXVI.
17.  XLVII.  33.  LII.  30.  LX.

Old," XXI. 32. XLVIL 4.

XLVIII.  35.  LXIV.  13.
Improperly  cur'd,  XX VII.  8.  Vid.
Tibia.
Leprofy,  XX. 56.
Light,  dread  of,  VIII.  27. -
Limbs,  pain  of,  LI.  15.

In  infancy,  hV-t. 14.
Of  long-ftanding,  XXXVUI.  22.
Weaknefs  or  palfy  of,  LXII.  15.
Limbs  fuperior,  pains  of,  XXIII.  4.  XXVI.
9. Vide  Arms.
Numbnefs  of  one  at  intervals,  XLII.
13-
Limbs  inferior. Vide  Leg.

One  fhortened,  LVI. 14.

Very  much,  LX.  6.
One  fmaller  than  the  other,  LVI.  42.
Pain  in  the  whole  of  one,  except  the

foot,  L.  II.
Pains in  one, with  a fenfation of
fomething  moving  upwards  in  it,
XXIX. 10.
Lips  livid,  XXVI.  21.

Puftules  on,  XLII.  2-
Liquors,  the  abuie  of  cold,  XXXVIII.  30.
Taken too  freely in a  Ihort  time,
XVI.  43.
Loins,  itching  of  the  (kin,  XLII.  2.
Vol.  in.


Unearinefsin,XXVI.ii.XXXVI.25.

Weaknefs  in,  XXVI.  25.

Pain  in,  XVI.  38. 40. XVIL 2^.

XXIX. 12. XL. 4. Q. 26,

LI.  53. LVIL  17.
On  one  fide,  XXXIX.  2.  XLL  4.
Great  heat  in,  XXXiV.  21. ■
On  one  fide,  XX. 30.
Loins,  Wound  in,  LIV.  20.  22.
Pulfation  in,  XL.  26.
Soft  tumour  in,  on  the  left  fide, ap-

pearing greater at one time

than  at  another,  XXXVI. 29.
great  tumor in,  rafing  up  the  ribs,

XL. 26.
Lying  down  with  the  head  low,  XX.  35,

36. XXII.  4.
Lying  on  the  belly,  XX. 35.

On  the  back,  VI.  10.  XVI.  8.  XX.

13.  22.  XXI.  9.  17.  19.  23.  29.
On  the  fides  rather  than  on  the  back,

XX.  24. XXI. 24.
Lying  down  on  the  back  with  difficulty,

XXXVIII.  15.
On  one  fide,  with  difficulty or  with

eafe,  VI.  12. VII.  13. XVL

10.  12.  26.  38. XVII.  6.  14.

XX.  3.  16, 17.  33.  35, 36.  41.

43-  51-  55'  56-  59- XXI.  24.

29.  32. XXII.  4.  6. 10. 12.

15,  16. XXIV.  2. XXIX.  14.

XXX.7.  XXXV.16  XXXVIIL

4.  6.  15,  16.  30. XLir.  2.
On  either  fide  with^difficulty,  XXit

26.  30.  45.  53.  63. XXL 27.

36. XXXVIIL  12,  13.
In  any  pofture with  difficulty,  XXL

49.


M


MADNESS,  VIII.  2.  4. XLV.  21.
Married feven  times, a woman,
XXXVII. 29.
Marfliy places, inhabitants of, IX. 9.

XXII.  8.  10.
Melancholic  delirium,  VIII.  27.  LIX.  15.
Menfes  appearing  later  than  ufual,  XLVII.

2.

Greatly  leffened, V. 4. XlX.  51.
XXL 29.

Suppreffion of, XX.  32. XXXV.'
i6. XXX VL  17. XXXVIIL
34. XLV.  21. XLVII.  4.
4  K  Too'


INDEX relating to


Too  great  a  flux  of. Vide  Uterine

Haemonhage.

Mercurial  medicines,  the  abufe  of,  LXV.  3.

Mercury  given  in  the  iliac  paflion,  LXX.  5.

Millers,  cafes  of,  XXIV. 18. LIV.  37.

39. LXIII. 10.
Mind,  aflfedtions  of,  XVI.  4. XVIII.  ■?o.
XXIII.  4. XXV.  6. XXIX.
18.  XXXVll.  2.  XLVIII.  44.
LII.  4 LXiV.  5. Vide  Anger,
Terror.
Confufionof,  X.  13.  Vide  Dullnefs.
Stupor  of,  XXXI.  2.
Uneafinefs  of, LII.  38. LVI. 26.
LVII.  10.
Continually,  XLIX. 14.
Monfters. Vide  F cetus.
Mouth,  diftortion  of,  X.  11. XIV. 27.
LXII.  5.  II.
Incapacity  of  opening,  LXIII.  19.
Mouth,  a  difagreeable  tafte  in,  XXIX.  10.
XXXIV. 18.
Bitter  tafte  in,  XXiX. I2.
Stinking  breath  from,  XXiX.  10.  12.
Reddifh  frothy  fluid  difcharged  from,

XXI. 29.
Blood  from,  LL  37,  38.  51. LIV.
35-


N


NAILS,  livid,  XXIX.  10.
Navel,  wound  at,  XXXVIII. 15.
Naufea,XXlX.  10. 12.  XXX. 7. XXXIV.

25. XXXIX. 29.  33.
Neck,  pain  in,  VI.  12.
Neck,  thicker  than  ufual,  XXIII.  4.
Somewhat  fwell'd,  XLIV.  3.
Tumified, XVI.  38.
Livid,  XVIII. 6.
Neck, glands  of, enlarg'd, XXII. 18.
,  Vide  Bronchocele.

Tumid  and  hard, LV. 20.
Swell'd  and  painful  on  both  fides,

XXIX. 12.
With  palfation,  XXVI.  ai.
With  ulcers,  LV. 20.
Arteries  of,  beating  ftrongly,  XVII.

23. XXIII.  6.
Conftring'd  as  it  were  with  a  cord,
XVill. 17.
Neck,  wounds  of,  XLIV.  7.  LIII.  2.  21.
Difcharging  bony  fragments,  LIII.  2.
Negro. Vide  Black  man.


Nephritis. Vide  Kidney.
Night-man,  LXII. 5.
Night-mare. Vide Incubus.
Noftrils,  two  or  three  drops  of  blood  from,
XLII. 13.
Hjemorrhage  from,  XXI.  6. XXV.
6. LI.  50,  51. LII. 19.  25.
LIV.  35. -
Not  returning  again,  XXVII.  12.
Noftrils,  haemorrhage  from,  perfons  liable
to,  in.  24. IX.  25. XL.  2.
Noftrils,  polypi  of,  XIV. 18.

Itching  of,  XXXI.  5.
Numbnefs  of  one  fide,  X.  11.


O


OCCIPUT,  blow  on,  LL  51. LIL
, 38.
Wound  of,  LI.  28. 49.
Oedema  of  the body  in  general,  XVI.

2.
Of  the  fuperior  limbs,  L.  48.
Of  the  arms,  XVII. 25.
Of  one  arm,  XVI.  36. L.  4.
Of  the  hands,  XXUI.  6.
Oedema  of  the  lower  limbs,  L.  48.
Difappearing,  LXIX.  16.
Of  one  of  them,  XL. 26. XLIL

II. L. II. LVI.  10.
Of  the  thighs,  XXXVIII. 30.
Of  the  legs, XVII.  25. XXI. 34.

49. XXllI.  4.  6. XXIV.  18.

XXXVIII.  30.
Of  one  leg  and  foot,  L.  55.
Of  one  foot,  XVL  8.
Of  the  feet,  IV.  2. X. 11. XVL

2.  6.  10.  12.  21.  36. XVIII.

30. XXI.  34. 49. XXI.  4.

14.  16.  XXIV.  34.  XXX.  12.

14.  XXXVI.  4. 25.  XXXVIII.

2.  12,  13.  30. 34. XXXIX.

2.

Subfiding,  X.  11.
Difcharging a large quantity of
ferum,  IV. 2.
Oedema  of  the  loins  and  back,  XXXVIII.

30-
Of  the  penis,  X.  11.
Of  the  fcrotum,  XXXVI.  25.
Old-age,  decrepid,  II.  17. III.  11. IV.
II. VL  12. VIL  9,  10. XL
6. XII.  2. XV. 15. XVL
8.  12. XVII.  14. XVIII.  28.
XIX.


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS.


XIX.  58.  XX.  5.  33.  39.  63.
XXI.  4.  15.  17. 19. XXIII.

6.  n.  XXVII.  28.  XXXIV.
25.  XXXVII.  30.  XXXVIII.
12,  13.  XLI.  6.  XLIV.  15.
XLVII. 24. LX. 6. LXII.

7.  LXIV.  7.  LXV.  8.  LXVII.
9.  II. LXIX.  10.

Omentum,  part  of,  protruded  through  a

wound,  LIV.  6.  10.
Onions,  effedls  of  eating,  XXIX.  8.
Orthopnoea,  XV.  6. XVI.  2.  4.  6.  19.

21. 30. 34. XVII. 8. 25.

XVIII. 17. 28. 30. XX.  9.

II.  13.  24.  26.  32.  53. XXI.

32.  34. XXII. 12.  22. XXIII.

6. 8. XXIV.  34. XXXVI.
17. XLV.  16. LIV.  10.  20.
Chiefly  troublefome  at  night,  XXII.
22.
Oftler,  IV,  19.


PAIN  of  the  whole  body,  XXI. 35.
XLIX.  8. LVI.  17. Vide  Rheu-
matifm,  and  the  feparate  Parts  of
the  body.
Felt  in  a  particular  part  of  the  divided

integuments,  XIV. 3,
Afcending  from  the  belly  to  the  tho-
rax, LXIV.  15.
Pains,  tenfive,  LIV.  29.

Spreading from  the  loins over the
whole  body,  LI.  53.
Palenefs, X. 13. XVI. 14. 30.  -iS.

XXXIV.  23.
Palatum  moUe,  eaten  away  by  an  ulcer,

XXVIII.  12.

Palfy,  X.  II.  LVII.  2.  Vide  Hemiplexia.
Imperfeft,  XI.  22. XLV.  11.
And  of  fliort  continuance,  XXV,  6.
Palfy  of  the  tongue. Vide  Tongue.

Imperfe£l,  of  the  mufcles  of  the  neck,
V, 2.
Of  all  the  limbs,  LIIL 2.
Of  the  limbs of the right  fide,

XXIX.  10.

Of  one  hand,  LI.  44.
Of  all the  parts  below  the  thorax,

Lin. 18.
Of  one  of  the  fuperior  limbs,  XX.
5. XXX.  4. LL  28.
Iniperfed,  L.  48.


Of  the  lower  limbs.  XXVL  21.  LII.
25. LXV.  8.
Imperfea, VIII. 13. LIV. 26.
LXII.  15.
Of  one  foot,  L.  11.
Paraphrenitis,  VII.  13.
Parotid  glands  tumefied,  XXII. 18.
Peripneumony,  VI, 10,  12.  14. VII.  4,
XX.  2.  5. XXI.  2,  3,  4.  6,  7.

15.  17.  19.  23,  24.  27.  29,  30.
32.  33'  34.  35.  36-  XXII.  10.
22.  XXXVI.  23.  XLV.  16.
LXIV.  2.  LXVII.  9.  LXX.
10.  Vide  Thorax,  inflamma-
tory difeafes  of.

Peripneumony  attacking  under  the  appear-
ance of  a  flight  catarrh,  and  un-
expeftedly  killing,  XXI, il.

Peripneumony,  a  difeafe  fomewhat  fimilar
to,  XIX.  58. L.  51.
Perfons  frequently  afFedled  with,  VII.
13. XXI.  4.

Peripneumony  preceding  other  diforders,  I*
?. XXIV.  2.
Immediately  before  them,  XXII.  6.  8.

Phrenzy,  VII.  2.  4.  9. 11. 13.

Phthifis  pulmonalis,  XXII, ii, 14,  15,

16.  XXVL  29.

Perfons  fuppos'd  labouring  under,  IV.
21. X.  II. XLIX. 16.

Piles,  a  perfon  frequently afFefted with,
XXXII.  10.
Difcharge of blood from, ceafing,
XXXIX.  21.  ~

Placenta,  left  in  the  uterus,  XLVIII.  28.
44.

Plethora,  XXI.  27.  29,

Pleuripneumony,  Vll.  11,  13.  XLV.  16.
Vide  Thorax,  inflammatory  dif-
eafes of.
Without  any  expectoration,  VII.  11.
13. XLV. 16.

Pleurify.  Vide  Thorax,  inflammatory  dif-
eafes  of.

Pleurify  returning,  XXI.  34.

Attended  with  no  expectoration,  XVI,
12. XXII.  22.

Pleurify,  a  different  difeafe  under  the  ap-
pearance of,  X[>]II. 29.

Poifons  taken  by  the  mouth.  Arfenic,
LIX. 3. Vide  Rhododaphne.

Porters,  III.  4.  VII.  6.  X.  13.  XXXIV.
18.  XXXVI.  25.  L.  32.  LIII.
37. LXX.  5.
4  K  2  Pjlfe,


INDEX referring to


Potter,  VII.  II.

Pracordia,  a  very  great  uneafinefs about
them  in  walking,  IV.  4.^
Frequent  tremblings  in,  XXIX.  10.
PrsEcordia, ftreightnefs in,  XVI, 2. 10.

XXXI. 5. LVIL 10.
Pregnancy,  XVI.  38.  XX.  9. XL. 12.
18.
An  attempt  to  lift  a  heavyweight  in,
XLVIII.  28.
Pulfe, great, XXI. 9. 17. XXX. 7.
XXXIV.  25. L[.  17.
Full,  XXI.  30.

Turgid,  XLII.  11.  13.  LI.  27.  50.
LIII.  3.  LXIV.  13.
Pulfe,  fmall,  IV.  30.  VI.  8.  12.  XIV.
35.  XVI.  14.  28.  XVII.  10.
25.  XX.  59.  XXI.  4-23.  29.
-10.  ri.  36.  44.  XXIIL  II.
XXIV.  II.  13.  16. XXIX.  6.

12.  XXX.  4.  7.  XXXI.  2.
XXXIV.  II.  18.  XXXV.  12.
XXXVI.  II.  25.  XLIL  13.
XLVII.  12.  XLIX.  6.  24.
LII.  8.  LIII.  3.  LIV.  20.
LIX.  12.  LXIV.  7.  LXV.  13.

Contraftcd,  LV.  10.

Conftriaed,  XVI.  40. XXXV.  2.

16.
Retraced  as  it  were,  XXI.  29. LII.

34-
Scarcely  to  be  felt.XXII.  10.  XXIII.

6. XXVI. 21. XXX. 14.

XXXVIII. 6. LIII. 3. 40.

LIV.  16.  18.
Pulfe,  ftrong,  XVII.  6.  XVIII.  30.  LI.

17.  27. LII.  28. LIII.  29.
Vibrating, VI. 12. XVII.  6.  14.

17.  21. XVIII.  28.  30. XXL
, 9. 17. 32. 47. XXIV. 34.

XXXIV.25.  XLIL13.  LVIIL

13.  LXIL  15.

Felt  in  all  the  arteries  by  the  fick  per-
fon,  XXIV.  34.  XXIX.  20.
Pulfe,  weak,  IV.  30.35.  XI.  13.  XVI.
40.  43.  XVII.  14.  25.  XVIII.-
2.  XX.  30.  59.  XXI.  15.  19.
20,30.32.  XXIIL  II.  XXIV.
II.  13.  16.  XXVIL8.  XXIX.
6.  10.  12.  XXX.  2.  4.  7.
XXXI.  2. XXXIV. 9. 18.

25. XXXV.  12. xxxvm.

4.  13.  30.  XL.  23.  XLII.
13.  20. XLVII.  12. XLVIIL


38. LI.  54. LII.  10. LIII.

14.  LIV.  20.  31.  LVIL  10.
LIX 12. LXIV.  13.

Creeping,  XXX.  7.
Pulfe,  hard,  VI.  8.  XVI.  12.  28.  XVIL

6.  10.  14-,  17.  19. XX.  9.  32,

33.  XXI.  17.  27.  30.  32.  34.

XXIX.  20.  XXXVI.  1 1.  XLV.
16.  LIII.  5.  29.  LV.  10.  LIX.

Tenfe,  XVIL  21.  XXL  35. LXIL

IS-
Pulfe,  quick,  XVIL  6.  lo.  19. XX.  9.

30.59. XXI.  32. XXXI.  2.

XXXIV.  23.25. XXXVI.  II.

XLII,  2. XLIX.  6. LI.  27.

LIII.  3.
Pulfe,  frequent,  XVI.  2.  30.  XVIII.  2.

2.  XX,  9.  30,  33.  59.  XXI.  9.

15.  17.  19.  23.  29,  30.  32.  36.
XXIII.  II.  XXIV.  13.  XXXI.

2.  XXXIV.  9. 29.  xxxvm.

30.  XXXIX.  25.  XLII.  2.
XLVII.  12. XLIX.  10. LIL

8.  28. LIII. 14.  29.

Lefs  fo  than  the motion  of the
heart,  XVI.  30.
Pulfe,  rare,  XVIL  6. 14 17.  21.

Very  rare,  LIV,  5,
Pulfe,  unequal,  IV. 26. 35. XVI.  30,
XVIL  6.  14.  19. XVIII. 2.
XX.  9,  30. XXL  2.  19.  23.

34.  44.  XXIII.  6.  XXIX,  10.
XXXIV.  18.  XXXV,  18.
XLIL  13.

Pulfe,  intermitting,  IV.  g. VL  8. XX.

9.  30. XXI.  19.  34. XXIL

22.  XXV.  4,  XXIX,  10,  XXX.

7.  XLI.  13.  XLV.  16. LVIL

10.  LXV. 13.
Sometimes,  XLVIII,  38. LXX.

5-
Pulfe,  very  much  confus'd,  XXI.  34,
Pulfe,  very  bad,  LIII,  29.
Pulfe,  not  alike  perceptible  in  both  armSj,

IV-  35-
Not  equally  bad  in  both  arms, XVIII.

30, XXIX,  10. XLII.  13.
Pulfe,  obfcure, VI.  8. XVI.  6.  8.  10.

43.  XXIV.  13.  XLI,  13.  XLIX,

14.  24. LXIV,  7.
Pulfe,  privation  of,  IV,  8,  XIV.  3.  XXL

23.  XXIV.  2.  6. XXIX.  10.

XXX.  14. XXXV, 2. 14.

XLIIL


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS.


XLIII.  5.  XLVIII.  44.  LXIV.
13.  19.
Pulfe,  privation  of,  at  intervals,  XXXIV.
25. XLII.  13. XLIX.  14.
In  the  wrifts  only,  XVIII,  34.  XXI.
49.


Q


UINSY,  VIII.  8. XLIV.  3.

Terminating  in  a  pain of  the
back,  XX.  56,
Occafioning  a  palfy of the parts,

LXIII. 19.


R


RESPIRATION, difficulty  of,  VII.
II.  13.  X.  II.  XI.  4.  13. XIII.

3.  XIV.  27.  XV.  15.  25.
XVI.  8.  10.  12.  14.  17.  26.
36.  XVII.  6.  10.  12.  14.  17.
XVIII.  2.  6.  8.  17.  22.  25.  30.
34.  XIX.  58.  XX.  2,  3.  7.
9.  II.  17.  20.  24.  26.  28.  30.

32-  35'  36-  41-  43-  45-  47-  49-
51.  XXI.  9.  19.  23,  24.  27.
29'  30-  33-  36-  44-  49- XXIl.

4.  10.  15.  22.  24.  XXIV.  13.
34.  XXV.  2.  XXVI.  3.21.
33.  XXVII.  12.-  XXIX.  12.
XXX.4.  XXXIV.  25.  XXXV.
2.  16.  XXXVI.  2.  4.  25.
XXXVIII.  2.  4.6.12,13.  15,
16.  18.  22.  52. XL.  23. XLI.

4.  XLII.  8. XLIV.  3. XLV.

16.  XLVm.  28.  XLIX.  10.
24.  L,  4.  48.  LI.  6.  17.  20.
30.  50.  54.  59. LII.  8. LIII.

5.  9.  14.  16.  18.  29.  LIV.
2.  4.  6.  LV.  10,  II.  22.  LVI.
7.  LVII.  10.  LXIV.  5.  19.

Refpiration,  difficult,  chiefly  after  eating,

XXVI.  35.
Only  after taking warm things,

XVI.  38.
From  fitting  in  bed,  XXXVIII.  4.
From  motion,  XXXVI.  11.
From  increas'd  motion,  XVII.  14.

19.  24. XXVI. II.  31.
Growing  worfe  by  exercife,  XVII.

17.  XIX.  8.  51.  XXIL  8.
14.

la  going  up  a  deep  place,  LIII.  7.


At  night,  XXIV.  34.
Lefs difficult after blood-letting,

XXVI.  5.
Becoming  very  eafyunexpe£ledly,VII.

13-  . ,

Refpiration,  difficulty  of,  with  wheezing,
XVII.  23. VideAfthma.

With  the  found  of  a  fluid  in  the  tho-
rax, XLIX.  10.

Whh  a  ftertor,  XLI.  6.

With  quicknefs,  XVII. 14.

Happening  fometimes,  XXVI,  3.  5.
21. XXIX.  20.

With  pain,  XX.  61.

With  groaning,  XXI.  30.

Sighing,  XX.  26. XXXVII.  2.

With  anxiety,  LXIV. 15.

As  it ufually is in dying perfons,
XXIV.  13.

With  the  neck  ftretch'd  out. Vide
Orthopnoea.

Very  difficult,  XLI. 4. LIII.  32.
LIV.  14.

Of  long  {landing,  LIII.  29,
Refpiration,  frequent,  XXI. 17.  23.  30.
L.  48.

Slow,  XVL  ro.  XXVI.  21.  LI.  51.

Weak,  XXI.  23.
RefllefTnefs,  XX.  9.  XXI.  23.  44.  XXVII.

8.  XXX.4.XXXI.5.  XXXIV.

9.  XXXVI.  17.  XXXVIL
2.  XXXVIII.  22.  XLII.  8.
XLIV.  3. LIV.  16. LV.  II.

Rheumatic  pains,  XXVI.  35.  XXVII.  8,
Rheumatic  pains,  refemblance  of, LVII.

17. 20.
Rhododaphe,  eftedls  of its  juice  drunk,

LIX.  12.
Ribs,  fradture  of,  LIII. 5.

Seeming  to  be  fallin?  down  into  the
belly,  XXVI.  21. XLV.  26.
Rigors,  XXIX.  12. XLI.  13. LII.  6.
LIII.  24. Vide  Fever.
Frequent,  XXXIV.  21.
Periodical  quotidian,  XXI.  6.  XXXV.
16.


ADNESS,  XII.  16. XXXV.  2.  16.
XLII.  2. LVII.  10.
Sailor's  cafe,  XLII.  34.
Salt-fi(hmonger,  IV. 24.
Scapula,  wound  of. Vide  Back..

Sciatica^


INDEX referring to


Sciatica,  XLVII.  8. LVII.  a.

Very  fevere  after  child-bearing,  LXIX.

10.

Scrophulous  tumours,  XXI.  36. L.  29.
Scrotum,  blackifh,  XLI.  lo,
Swell'd,  XLI.  18.
Ulcerated,  XLII.  28.
With a  hard tumour on the left
fide, XXXIX.  2.
Sedentary  life,  XXXIX.  21. XLII.  13.
Senfes,  internal,  becoming  torpid,  XLII.
13. LI.  54. LII.  10.  19.  32.
Impair'd,  LI. 18.  38,  39  45.  54.
Loft, LL  50,  51.  53.  59. LII.

25.  LIII.  40.
Shoulder,  pain  in,  XL  15.
Sight,  injury  of,  II. 13.

Greatly  impair'd,  XIII. 15.

Intire  lofs  of.  Vide  Amaurofis.  Blind-

nefs.
Sinciput,  blow  on,  IX.  16, LI.  6.  11.

20. 35.  50. LII.  15. 19.  35.
Wound of, LI. 2.  9.  14.  18,  19.

26.  32.  54. LII.  2.  8.  10.
Skin,  colour  of,  like  that  of  a  cachedlic

perfon,  XVIII.  2. 14.
Citron-colour'd,  XVII. 17.'
Of  a  livid  colour  as it were,  XVII.

12.
Very  ill-looking  puftules  in,  IV.  35.
Skull, venereal gummata of, IX. 23.
LVIII.  8.
A  prominence  with pulfation, from

an  opening  in  it,  IX.  23.
Great  loii  of,  by  a  venereal  caries,
LVIII. II.
Sleep, inclination  to, II.  9.  III.  2.  n.
IV.  2. VL  2. IX.  g. XVL
10. XLVII. 12. L.  48.
Greater  than natural after eating,

XXVL  II.
Laborious,  XX.  9.
Difturb'd,  XX. 30.
Sleep,  profound,  XLVIII.  12. LII.  23.
LVII.  10.
Imperfea,  L.  11. LIX.  12. Vide
Coma.
Sleepy  affeiftion,  1,2. 11.20. VI.  2.4.
6. 8. 10. 12. 14. IX. 23.
X. 17. XIV. 5. XXI. 33.
XXXVII. 2. XXXVIII.  30.
LL  14.  17.  28.  34,  35- LVIL
14.
Slownefs  in  anfwering  a  queftion,  IX.  20,
XIII.  3. LL  6.  44.


Very  remarkable,  XII.  14.
Small-pox,  XLIX.  32.

Confequences  of,  XIV.  3.
Sneezing,  too  great,  XIV.  27. XXVII.

28.
Snoring. Vide  Stertor.
Soldier,  cafe  of,  XLIII. 17.
Solitude,  fond  of,  XXXV.  2.
Spafm. Vide  Convulfion.
Speech,  interrupted  as  it  were  from  con-
vulfion, XXXIV.  25.
Rendered fcarcely,  or  not  at  all,  in-
telligible from difeafe, XLIV.

15. Lxn.  5.
Speech,  difficulty  of,  XLIV.  3.  LVII.  14.
Lofs  of,  XXVI.  3. LIX.  12. Vide
Aphonia.
Spine,  fenfation  of  erofion  in  it,  internal-
ly, XXIII,  4.
Spine,  pain  of  the  whole,  II.  20.
At  the  loins  only,  XVI.  40.
With  a  tumor,  XII.  16.
Blow  on,  at  the  loins,  LIV.  25,  26.
Spitting,  copious, XIII. 3. XVIL  10.
14. XVm. 17. XX.  II.  20.

22.  XXIV. 26. 39. XXIL
8..  10.  14. LXIV. 12.

Supprefled,  XIII.  3. XX.  9.  22.

39-  55-
Spitting, lerous, XVIL 6. XX. 26.

XXIL  10.
Vifcid  and  tough,  XX.  26.  XLII.  2.
Thick,  XVIL  10.  14. XVIIL

25.  34. XX.  9.  39  49. XXI.

19.  30.  XXIL  14.  XXXV.  16.
And  of  a  bad  tafte,  LXV.  3.
Catarrhous,  XX.  32.  39. XXXVL

4. XXXVIII.  6.  12,  13. XL.

23.  L.  4. LXVIII.  12.
And  bloody,  XX.  32.

Spitting,  bloody,  XVI.  28.  XVIIL  30.
39-  43-  57-  XX.  3.  28.  33.
XXI.  19.  35.  44.  XXXV.  16.
LIII.  14.  29.  LIV.  39.  LXV.
19. lXx.  7.

And  vifcid,  XXI.  34.
Bloody  and  frothy,  XXXVL 17.
Bloody  and  afli-colour'd,  LIII.  29.
Spitting, rofe-colour'd and froihy,  XX.

I.7-
Red,  inclining  to  yellow,  XIII.  3.
Yellow,  XX.  9. 39.
From  vtUow  variegated  and  frothy,

XXI.  30.

DilFerent-


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS.


DifFerent-colour'd,  XXII.  24.
Inclining  to  green,  XX.  3.
Afh-colour'd and livid, XXI, 32.

LXIV.  5.
Livid  and  thin,  XX.  9.
Yellow  and  thin,  XXI.  30.
Reddifli  and  thin,  XVI. 36.
Black,  XXI.  32.

White  and  unconcoded, XXI.  44.
Spitting,  in  inflammatory  diforders  of  the

thorax,  lefs  than  it  ought  to  be,

XX.  13.  41.  47- 5'- 55- XXI.

34-
Quite  wanting,  XX. 17.  35.  45.  63.

XLV.  16.
Diminifli'd,  XXr.  19.
Difcontinu'd,  XXI. 35.
Spitting  of  blood,  XVII.  14.23. XXII.

4.14,15,16.  XXVI.  3.  XXXI.

14. LIII.  18.
Of  a  piece  of  bone,  XXII.  24.
Spittingmatter  like  pus,  XVII.  25.  XVIII.

34,  35. LXIV.  12.
Mix'd  with  blood,  XVI.  ig.
Spitting,  purulent  and  bloody,  XV. 15.
Spitting,  purulent  and  of  a  round  form,

XX.  61.

Purulent,  XX.  5. XXI.  32. XXII.

6,  II.  14,  15,  16,  24. LI.  18,

19,  20. LIV.  6. LVIII.  13.

Supprefs'd,  XX.  5. XLVIII.  37.

Spitting  matier  of  a  bad  fmell,  XX.  26.

XXI.  32-

Matter  undigefted,  XXVI.  33.

Matter  fomewhat  ting'd  with  blood,
LII.  15.

Gelatinous  reddifli  fluid,  XVII.  21.

Particles  white  and  as  it  were  poly-
pous, XXI.  19.

Saliva  of  an  eroding  quality,  XVIII.

Spittle,  faline,  IV.  2.

Deficient,  ibid.
Staggering,  XXV.  2.  6.
Stammering,  adventitious,  X.  11. XI.  2.

4. XLIII.  5. LI.  35.
Sternum,  originally  deprefs'd,  L.  46.
Stertor,  VI. 12. XIIL 3. XVII.  14.
19. XVIII.  25. XX.  9.  15.

17. XXI.  9. 17. 23.  xxvn.

2. XLI.  6. LII.  6.  LIV. 49.
Stomach,  weaknefs  of,  XXV.  4.  XXIX.
6. XXXIV.  23.
Languor  of 3  V,  i-j.


Uneafinefs  in,  LII.  23. LXV.  3.
Pulfation  in,  XXIX. 10.
Senfe  of  fullnefs  in,  XXX.  4.
Senfe  of  heat  in,  XXIX.  10.  LV.  i  r.
Stomach,  pain  in,  XXV.  2. XXIX.  6.
8.  10.  12.  14.  18.  20. XXX.
4.  7. 14-  16. XXXV.  14.
From  fait  of  wormwood.  XXX.  2.
From food. XXXVI. 2. LIX.

3-

Stomach,  great  pain  of,  LIII. i6.

Very  fevere  pain of, XXXVI. 2.
LIV. 14.
Of  long  continuance  at  intervals,
LXV.  13.
Stomach, tenfion  of, very troublefomc,

XLVII.  8.
Stones. Vide  Bladder.

Difcharg'd  with  the  urine,  IV.  2.  X.
II. XI.  6. XL.  4. Lvn,
10.
Ceafing,  ibid.
Stone-cutter's  cafe,  XXI.  35.
Stools. Vide  Faeces.

Green,  XXIX.  18.  XL.  9,
Black,  XXXV.  18.  XL.  9.
Watery,  and  of  a  footy  colour,  XXX,

2.
Of  various  confiftence, and foetid»

XXXII. 7.
Very  black,  refembling<7/rflW//f,LXV,

13-
Reddiih,  XX.  28.
Bloody  and  foetid,  XXXV.  16.
With  much  blood,  XXIX.  10.  LIV.

39-
Lifcp  pitch,  very  foetid,  XXIX.  10.
Straining  hard in  lifting  a  weight,  efFefts

of,  XXXVI.  25.
Strangulation,  fenfation  like  to,  XX.  26^
Strength, abatementof,  XXV.2.  XXXIV.
23. L.  11^  48.
Sudden,  IV.  30. XXV.  2.
Lofs  of  intirely,  XX.  41. XXf.  44.
XXIL22. LIII.  3.40. LIX,
3. LXV.  13.
Stupor,  IV.  26,  27. XI.  22. XXV.  6.
LI.  9.  25,  33.  LIL3S.  LIV.  18.
Of  one  arm,  XXVI.  31.
Of  the  lower  extremities,  LIIL  18.
Suckling-woman,  XLVIII.  37.
Suifocation,  VIII.  4. XV.  13. XVIIL
28. XIX.  49,  50,  SI. XXI.

32.  xxn.4.  xxvm.  9, 10.


INDEX referring to


12. XXXVIII.  30. XLIV.  3.
XLIX.  32. Llil.  21.  26.

A  perfon  dying  with  the  appearance
of,  XLIV.  5.
SutFocation  from  hanging,  XIX.  3.  5.  7,

8.  13. 15. 17.  19,  20.
Suffocation,  fenfation  of,  XXII.  22.  24.
XXVIII.  30. XLV.  23.
Danger  of,  from  gentle  motion,  XVII.

From  fwallowing,  ibid.
Sulphur,  drunk  in  wine,  LV. 10, 11.
Swallowing,  pain  in,  XXVIII.  9, 10.
Danger of  fulFocation  from,  XVII.
25. XVIII.  17.
Swallowing,difficultyof,XV.i5. XXVIII.
o,  ]0.  12. XLII.  2. XLIV.
3. LIV.  2.
At  the  lower  part  of  the  oefophagus,
XXIII.  4.
Swallowing,  impofTibility  of, XVII. ig.
XVIII.  22. LXin.  ig.


TALKING, incoherently, VIL 17.
X.11.XXXIV.25.XXXIX.
25. LXIV.  5.
Taylors, cafes  of,  V.  ii. XXVI.  37.

LIII.  40.
Tears,  in  confequence  of  difeafe,  XLVII.
12.
Morbid  flux  of,  of  long  {landing,  XIII.
27.
Teeth,  few,  and  corroded,  XVI.  40.

Very  few  remaining,  LXX.  5.
Teeth,  all  falling  out,  IV.  2. XXXVII.

3°-
Temples,  blow  on,  LII.  30. LXIX.  2.

Livid,  LI.  37.
Temporal  mufcle,  wound  of,  LI.  44,  45.

LII.  6.
Temporal  arteries,  evident pulfation of,

xvn.  17.

Tendon,  fenfation  over  the  whole  body,

LL  9.
Terror,  XXII.  i8.  XXXVII.  4.  LXII.  5.
Tetanus,  X.  2. XX.  28. LIV. 49.
Thigh,  top  of,  wounded,  LV.  22.

Lower  end of,  pierc'd  through  with
a  knife,  LIV. 46.
Thigh,  luxation  of,  LVI. 7.
Neck  of,  frafiur'd,  LV.  22.
Suppoa'd  {o,  LVI.  g.


Thinperfons,XXXIV.  21.23.25.  XXXV.

16. XXXVI.  17. XXXVIII.

4.  15. XXXIX.  14. LI.  14.
Thirft,  IV.  g. VI.  z. X.  13. XVI.

2.  4,  8.  10.  12.  14.  17.  ig-  21.

40. 43. XVII. 10. XX. 9.

3S»  36-  49-  56-  61. XXIL  4.

6.  8.  10. 12.  14. XXIIl.  II.

XXIV.  2. XXV.  6. XXIX.

6.  10. XXX.  4.  10. XXXIV.

9. 18. 23. XXXV. 14.  16.

XXXV1.2.4.1 1. 25.  xxxvin.

2.6.  12, 13. 15 16.  22.  30.  34.

XLII.  8.  13. XLVm.  38. L.

4.  48. LIX.  12. LXV.  8.
Thorax,  one  fide  of,  deprefs'd,  IX.  4.
Verygreat  fenfe of heat in,  on  one

fide, XVI.  2.
Thorax,  fenfe  of  tightnefs  in,  XIV.  27.

xvn.  10.  21.  23. XVill.  17.

XXI.  49.  XXII.  10.  22.  XXV.

4. XXVL 31. XXVII. 8.

XXIX.20.  XXXVL17.  XLIX.

24-
Opprefllon in, XVII.  6.  8,  9.  21.
XL. 23.
On  one  fide,  XVI.  12.
Weight  in,  XV.  25. XVL  4.  36.
XXI.  49. XXIL  12. XLV.
16.  LI.  20.  LIII.  14.  LV.  22.
On  one  fide,  XX.  32.
Fullnefs  in,  XVII.  21.
Fludiuation  in,  XVI.  36.
Heat  and  irritation  in,  on  one  fide,
XX.  32.
Thorax,  pain  in, XX.  24.  28.  36.  51.
XXn.  4.  16.  18.
On  one  fide,  XVI.  17. XX.  7.
13.  22.  45.  49.  61. XXII.  10.
15, 16. XLIX.  10. LI. 6.
LIV.  6.
At  the  fternum,  VI.  12. XX.  11.

13. XXI.  30. XXVII.  8.
From  the  flernum  to  the  middle  of

the  abdomen,  XX.  45.
From  the  fternum,  fuddenly  afcend-

ing  to  the  head,  XXV.  6.
In  the  middle,  XX.  53.
At  the  bottom,  XVIII.  2.
As  if  girt  round,  XX.  56.
Towards  the  fcapula,  XX.  9.
At  the  lower  vertebrae  of,  X. 13.
On  one  fide, VL  10. VII.  11,
XX.  3, XXXVIII.  15,  16.
Thorax,


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS-.


Thorax,  pungent  pain  in,  XXI.  30.  36.
On  one  fide,  XVII.  14. XX.  9.
35. 39. 41. 43. 47.  49-  55-
XXI.  17.  19.  23.  29.  32,  33.
35. XXII.  22. UII.  5.
Abating,  XX.  9.
Ceafmg preternaturally,  XX.  47.
XXI.  32.
Thorax,  heavy  pain  in,  XVII.  6. XX,
56. XXI.  27.  34.  49.
On  one  fide,  XVII.  14. XX.  5.
9.  33. XXI.  34. LIII. 5.
Thorax,  pain  gnawing  in,  XXIII.  42.
Not  fixed,  XL  II.
Pain  in,  firft  on  one fide,  then  on
the  other,  XX.  i6. 20.  XXI.  37.
Pain, flight  in,  XVII. 19.

On  one  fide, XX.  17.
Pain,  obtufe,  in,  XXI, 44.

Aggravated  by  the  touch,  XX.  59.

XXI.  29.

Thorax,  pain  in, foon  going  off,  VI.  12.

VII.  4. XXI. 44.

Remitting  after  blood-letting,  XX.  49.

Contrary  to  expedtation, XX.  41.

Thorax,  certain  internal  pains  in,  IV.  21.

XX.  63.  XXI.  24.  XXXVJII,

18.

On  one  fide,  XXI,  47.
Thorax,  inflammatory  difeafe  of,  XX.  3.

7.  9.  II.  13.  15,  16,  1-7.  20.  22.
. 24.  26.  28.  30.  33,  35,  36.  39.

41.  43.45.^7.  49- 51- 53- 55.

56. 59. 61, XXI. 44,  45.

XXII.  16.  XXXVIII.  29.
XLVIII.  32.  LII.  15.  Vide
Peripneumony,  Pleuripneumony,
Pleuritis.

Thorax,  wound  of,  XXI.  28.  Vide  Back.
Blow  on  one  fide  of, LI.  6.  LIII.  5.9.
Comprefs'd  by  the  wheels  of  a  carri-
age, LIiI.  33.
Throat,  evident  pulfation  at,  XVII.  17.
Tumor,  of  a  farcomatous  appearance,
at,  XVII. 18.
Throat,  fpafmodic  affeftion,  XXXIX,  33.
Tibia,  pains  of. Vide  Legs.
Tobacco,  abufeof,  II.  19.  V.  2.  LV.io.
Tongue,  drynefs of, IV.  9. XXL  17.
29,  30. XXIX.  6. XXXIV.
9,  25. XLVIL  12.
Roughnefs  of,  XXX.  4.
Rednefsof,  XLVII. 12.
Pain,  great,  in,  XL 15.
Tremors  in,  IV.  35,
Vol.  in.


Pal fy  of,  Xr.  ir.
Glands  of,  deficient,  LXVIiI.  10.
Tubercles  in,  ibid.
Tremors, IV. 11. V. 17. XII. 16.
XXVI. 15. XXXVIIL 30.
LI.  12.
Noaurnal,  XXXIV.  23.
Great,  IX. 20.

Convulfiye, XXL 34. XXX,,  4.
XLI.  13. LI.  54. LIV.  2.  37.
49. LXIL  5. .
Trumpeter,  cafe  of,  XVIII.  22.
Tumor  of  the  whole  body,  XLI. 4.  LIV. 2.
Cancerous. Vide  Cancer.
Called  frt^(7,  degenerating  into  an  ab-

fcefs,  XXIV. II.
On  one  of  the  cheeks, IV. 24.
Behind  the  ear, XIV. 3.
On  the  occiput,  XXIV.  11.  LIL  38.
Of  the  neck,  at  the  fide  of  the  os  hy-
odes, L. 18. Vide Broncho-
cele,  Scrophulous  Turner.
Of  the  breafts. Vide  Breafts.
Small,  in  the  groin, XXI. 19.
At  the  groins, LVII. 17. 20.
Large,  hanging  down  from  one  of  the

buttocks,  L.  23.
Of  the  thigh,  very  hard,  L. 60.
With  the  appearance  of  a  meliceris,
LXVIIL  6. -
Of  the  knee,  L.  20.
Hanging  down  from  the  leg,  LXVIII.

8.
At  the  ancle,  fmall,  but  very  painful,
L.  15. LVin.  8."
Tumors, fubcutaneous, on the neck,
breafts, abdomen, and back,
LXVIIL  12.

V

VAletudinarians,  XVII.  10 XXVI.
29.  XXVIL  2.  XXXV.  11.23.
Venery,  intemperate,  IV.  11. XVII.  i^.
XVIII.30.  XX.26.  XXVII.28.
Death  in  the  ad  of,  XXVI.  13.
Venereal  difeafe,  I.  14. XVII.  25. XXI.
36. XXII.  10,  II. XXV.  6..
XXVI.  35, XXVJI.  28. XL.
26.  29. XLIL  39,40. XLIV.
15.  XLVII.28.  Llil.7.  LVIIL
8.  II.  13. LXiX.  2.  16.
Verona,  baths  of. Vide  Euganean.
Vertigo,  I.  6. IL  9.  22. III.  16. IV.
II. VI.  2.  6. X.  II. XVIII..
2.  XXV.  2.  XXVIL  2.  LXIV.5.
4  L  Virgins,


INDEX referrins: to


Virgins,  VIII.  2.  X.  5.  XV.  13.  XVI.
17.  19.  34.43.  XVJI.  10.  12.
XIX.  51.  XX.  II.  16.  32.  43.
XXI.  27.  2g.  XXlI.  16.  18.
XXXIV.  33.  XXXVl.  20.
XXXVIII.34.  XL.  9.  XLVII.

2.  4.  12.  14.  23. LXl 7._
Vjfceia,  ieeniingly  rtmovtd  from  their  na-
tural fituation, XXXIX. 14.

Voice,  hoarfe,  XVIII. 25. XXII.  2A.

Loud  and  fliriU, VII.  13. XX.  26.

Low,  IV.  26. XV.  13. XXIX.  10.

Lower'd,  and  like  a  woman's,  XVII.
19.

Obfcure,  XVIII. 25.

Loft,  XXVIII.  9,  10.  Vide  Aphonia.

Attended  with  fighing,  LI.  14.
Vomit, provocation  to,  XXIX.14.  LII.2.

W^ithout  eftVa, LI. 5.
Vomitings, I. 2. IV. 35. XX. 30.

XXIX.  10.  XXX.  10.  12.  20.
XXXIV.  15.  27.  33. XXXV.

14.  XXXVL  2.  XXXVII.  2.
XXXIX.  12.  33.  XL.  9.  XLI.
4.  XLII.  2.  8.  20.  XLVII.
8.  XLVIII.  38.  LL  2.9.  18.
32,  33>  34--38-  50-  51- LII.

15.  19.  32.  34.  LIII.  26.40.
LiV.  6.  8.  10.  14.  20.  31.  35.
37.  39.  49. LV.  10,  II. LIX.

3.  12.  15. LXV.  3.
Vomiting,  of  long-ftanding,  XXX.  7.

Very  obftinate,  XXXIX.  21.

In  very  large  quantity, XXX. 4.

XXXVI.  20. XXXIX.  29.
Some  hours  after  eatin?,  XXIX.  6.

XXX.  7.  14. XXXIV.  II.
Stopp'd,  I.  4.

Vomiting,  very  obftinate,  of  all  kinds  of
diet,  LXX.  5.
All  folids,  XLV.  33,
Only  feme  parts  of  the  food,  XLVII.

8.
Tood  not  alter'd  after  remaining  tw^o
days,  XXXIX.  21.
After  five  days,  XLII.  2.
Vomiting  worms,  XLVIII.  38.

Excrements. Vide  Iliac  Paflion.
A round body, which,  after  three
dayi,  became  very  hard,  XXX.  7
Vomiting  matter  thick  and  vifcid,  inth*'
morning,  ibid,  and  XX.  9.
Bitter,  XXXIV.  9.
Darkifh-colour'd,  XXXVII.  2.


G-reenifli, incliHing  to  black, in
fmall  quantity,  LIX.  15. -
Vomiting  humours  of  different colours,
XXX. 14.
Bilious,  X. 13. XX. 9. XXIX.

10.  XXXIV.  23.  Li.  30  LIV.
35. LXV.  13.

And  green,  VII. 13.
Matter  yellowifh,  XXXIV. 9.
Green,  XVIII.  2. XXIX. 18.
Of  the  colour  of  leeks,  XXX.  4.
XXXV. 2.
Vomiting  of  a  fluid,  aqueous  and  bitterifli,
XXX. 10.
Not  at  all  bitter,  XXXIX. 21.
iEruginous,  XVI.  8. XXXV.  2.
Blackifli  and  ferruginous, ibid.
Of  a footy  appearance, XXIX. 6,

XXX.  2. XXXiV.  7-
Blackifli  and  foetid, XXXIX.  25.
Black, XXXVIIl. 52.
Like  ink,  XXX. 16.
Like  chocolate,  XXX. 4.
Like  water  in  which meat  has  been

foak'd, XLIX. 6.
Of  the  fmell  of  putrid  flelh,  XXIX.

6.
With  pieces  of  membranes  as  it  were
fwimming  in  it, XXX.  4.  14.
Vomiting  blood,  XXIX. 12. XXXVL

11.  XL.  2. LL  6.

A  fluid  mix'd  with  blood,  LII. ij.
A  reddifti  matter,  LI. 54.
Ulcers. Vide  Leg,  Fauces.

Old,  dried  up,  IV.  7.  1 3.  30. 35.  XIL
2.
Ulcer, not  difcharging,  L. 48.
Urinary  parts,  vices  of,  IX 12. XLII.  4.
Urine, copious  difcharge  of, XXI. 36*
XXIX.  6. XLII. 13. LVII.
10.
Difcbarg'd in  too  fmall a  quantity,
X.  II. XXI.  30.49. XXIX.
6. XXXVIIl. 16. 30. 34.
LVII.  10.
Suppreffion  of,  X.  13. XXXIV.  7.
XXXV.  18. XL.  4. XLI.  4.
6.  8.  10.  13. LIII.  iS. LIV.
20.  22.  26.
Incontinence  of,  IV.  9.  19. XLII.
2. 8. XLVII.  12. LII.  34,
LIII.  40.
Difcharg'd by  drops,  XXXIX. 33.
LVI.  12.

Frequent;


DISEASES and their SYMPTOMS.


Frequent difcharge  of, XXXIX.  2.

XLI.  13.
Difficulty  in  difcharging, XXXIX.

5. XL.  4. XLI. 6. XLII.

28.  34. XLIV.  15. XLVII.8.
Eas'd  from  once  ufing  the  catheter,

Lxir.  13.

Returning  periodically, IV.  2.
With  pain,  XLI.  4. XLII.  2.  13.

15. 20.
Very  fevere,  LXVI.  2.
Urine,  bad  appearances  of,  IV. 13.
Urine, difcharge  of,  with heat,  XXIX,
18. XLII.  ri.
Flame-coloured,  XXXVIII. 3  o
Red,  XX.  30. XXXVIII.  34.
Reddifh,  XXI.  30.
Inclining  to  brown,  XXXV.  2.
Of  the  colour  of  water  in  which  flefti

had  been  wafli'd,  LIV.  26.
High-colour'djXXXIV.g.XXXVIII

so-
Like  lye,  XLI.  4.
Of  ifleric  perfons,  XXX. 14.
Pale,  XIII.  3.
Of  a  pale  yellow,  XLII. 13.
Turbid,  XXI.  30. XXXV.  2.
Thick,  LXIV.  7.
With  filaments,  XLII.  8.
Putrid,  XLVII.  8.
Like  water,  becoming  mucilaginous,
\  in  large  quantity,  XL.  2.

With  a  milky  fediment,  LXIV.  7,
White, fometimes thin, fometimes

thick,  XLII. 13.
Bloody and tobacco  -  colour'd,

XXXVIII.  30.
Urine, fcetid, XL. 4. XLII. 13.  20.

Purulent,  XL.  4. XLII.  2.  15.  20.
LIH. 14. LXVI.  2.
Urine,  fometimes  bloody,  XLII.  8.

With  a  fmall  quantity  of  blood,  XLI.

13-
And  fetid,  XLVII.  8.
With  membranous  appearances  float-
ing in  it,  XLI.  13.
Uterus,  prolapfus  of,  XLV. 11.

Women fubje6t to, XXII. 22.
XLV.  16.
UterinehKmorrhage,XXXIX.33.XLVII.
8.
Continuingevcn  to  fainting,  XLVIII.
44.


Fluor. Vide  Fluor,  Sec.
Uterus, fcetid matter difcharged from,
XLVIII.  28.


W


WAGGONER,  cafe  of,  XVIL  17.
XL.  26.
Wafherwoman,  cafe  of,  XVill.  34.
VVafting,  XV.  25.  XVII,  14.  XVIII.  14.
17.  30.  XIX.58.  XX.  30.  XXI.
17.  XXII  11.15,16  22.  XXIV,
16.  XXV.  2.  XXVI.  13.
XXVII.  16.  XXVill.  9,  10.
XXX.  2.  XXXIl.  7.  XXXV.
6.  XXXVI.  25.  29.  XXXIX._
2  14.  21.  33.  XL.  23.  XLII.
15.  20.  28.  XLVII,  4.  8.
XLVIII.  38.  XLIX.  4.  16.  18.
LIX.  18.  LXI.  2.  LXIII.  19.
LXV.  3.  5.  LXVII.  0.  n.
LXVIII.  12.  LXX.  5.
Chiefly on  the left fide, XXIX..

14.
Of  the  fuperior  parts,  XXXVIII.  30,

Watchfulnefs, XL  2, XV.  6. XVIIL
17  XIX.58.  XX.  33.  XXIX.
10.  XLII.  2.  XLVIl.  8.  XLIX,
14.  L.  48.  LII.  8.  LXVIII.  12.
Of  a  month's  duration,  L. 11.
Weaknefs,  X.  13. XIV.  3. XVII.  12.
19. XVIII. 30. XXX. 7.
XXXVI. II. Vide  Strength.
Of  the  lower  limbs, Xll. 16.
Wearinefs, a  fenfe  of, X. 13. XXIV.
34.  XXVI.  13 XXX.  4.  LX.
8.
From  ulcers,  XX.  6r,
Weaverefs, cafe  of, XXVI.  17.
Womeninchild-bed,XLVI.  27.  XLVIIL

44.
Wheat  drefler,  cafe  of, XXI. 34.
Whores, cafes of, XXII. 15. XXVI.
13. XLV.  21. 23. XLVIIL

Widow,  cife of,  XXVI. 17. XXXV,

16.
Wine, the  abufe  of. III.  2.  6. IV. 16.

19. V.  2. II. VL  8. VIL

u.  XIV.  27.  XVII. 21.  XVIII.

25,30.  XXI.4.  32.49.  XXIV.

34. XXVI.  9.  13.37:  XXVII.

28,  XXIX.  12. XXXIV,  23.
4  L  2  25.


INDEX referring to, &c.


25.  XXXV.  10. 14.  XXXVII.

29. XXXVIII.  18. XLIV.  3.

XLV. 21.  23. LII.  30. LV.

10,11. Vide  Drunkards.
Wine,  the  eftefts of drinking it new,

XXVI.  37. XXVII.  2.
Wine,  fpiritsof,  bad  effects  from,  XXVII.

■28. XXXV.  14.
Woolcomber's  cafes, X. 17, 18. XVI.

28. XXVII.  16.  XXXVI.  23.

LII.  35. LIV.  46. LXX.  7.
Wool-drefTer, cafe  of,  XVII. 23.
Worms  in  a  Fever,  XLVI. 2.
Worms  difcharg'd  by  the  mouth, XXI.

44. XXXIV.  9. XXXV.  14.

XLVIL  12.  XLVIII.  38.  LIV.

49.
By  ftool,  XXI.  44.
Wounds,  narrow,  LIV.  44.

And  obJique,  LIV.  35.
Wounds,  with  fwelling  of  their  lips,  or

adjacent  parts, LI. 2.  15.  26,

27.  49. LII.  6. LIII.  14.
After  an  haemorrhage,  LIII. 12.
Wound,  fcetid  fmeli  from,  LI.  26.


Of  a  bad  afpefl:,  LI.  27. LII.  10.

Of  a  livid  appearance,  LI.  14.  LII.  2.
Gangrenous, LI.  3.  9. 11.
Creeping fenfation  in,  LI.  32.
Wound,  very  painful,  LII.  28; LIV.  8.
LV. 22.
Tender  to  the  touch,  LI.  28. LIV.

22.  29.
Not  difcharging,  LII.  2.
Difcharging  but  little  LII.  10.  28.

And  pale,  LI. 34.
Wirhout  pus  or  fuppuration,LIV.  29.
Wound  difcharging  blood,  LIII. 12.

A fmall  quantity  of  pus  and  ichor,

LIV.  44.
Ichor  very  fcetid,  LI. 14.

Serous  and  bloody,  LI. 15.
Sanies, in large  quantity, LI. 18.

LIII. 12.
Matter  like  faeces,  LIV.  4.
Wound,  with  livid  lips,  LII. 10.
Brown  lips,  LII.  23.
Incurable,  the  bone being  laid  bare..
LI.  19.


INDEX the THIRD,

O  F T  H  E

Preternatural  Appearances  which  have  been  obferv'd,  both  in-^-
ternally  and  externally,  in  dead  Bodies.

^be  Roman  or  Capital  Figures  refer to  the  Letters  ; the  Common  or  Small
Figures  to  the  Articles.


ABDOMEN,  livid,  XXI.  o.  XXII.
22. XXV.  14.
About the ilia, XXI. 30.
XLVII.  12.
Somewhat  livid  about  one  of  the  ilia,

with  a  flaccid  tumor,  XXI.  19.
Of  a  green  colour,  LIV.  39.
Tenfe,  XXVI.  13.
Very  tenfe,  LIV.  16.
Tumid,  XXX.  4. LII.  8.  30.  LIV.
39.  49. LV.  10.
From  the  epigaftrium  downwards,
XXI.  24.
Surprifmgly  tumid,  XLVIII. 44.
Become  lefs  tumid  in  the  body  after
death,  XXIL  6. XXXV.  14.
XXXVIII.  52. XXXIX.  9.
Abdominal mufcles,  hvid,  XXVIil. 12.
LI.  19.
Contus'd,  XLIX.  6.
Black  and  b'ue,  as  from  contufion,  in
a  certan place on  the  interna!
part,  LIV. 49.
J^ax,  and  fomewhac  green  at  the  lower

p^t,  XXXVl.  23.
Foetid,  XXVIIL 12.
Imbni'u  witrt  blood  for  a  confiderable
fpjcc,  LIV.  8.  '
Abdominal mufcles, ferum betwixt,
XXXVIII.  2.
In  great  quantity,  XXXVIII.  6,.


Grumous  blood,  XLVII.  36.
Coagulated  blood  in  great  quantity, ,

LIV.  2.
Under  them  a  very  great  quantity  of
the moft ill-fmelling water,
XXXVIII. 51,  52.
Adipofe membrane,  cells of, containing-^
water  inftead  of  fat,  IV.  24.  30.
XVII.  25.  XXVL  9.  XXX VIIL.
26.
In  one  of  the  upper  limbs,  L.  4,
Adipofe  membrane,  excrefcences  of.  Vide

Tumor.
Aneurifms. Vide  Aorta,  aneurifm  of.
Aorta,  tuberous  as  it  were  externally,  IV. .
21-
Ruptur'd,  XXVI. 7. 15. 17.  21.
XXVIL 28. LIIL 7. Vide
Aorta,  aneurifm  of..
Aorta,  defcending,  tortuous, IV.  16.  XIX.
58.. XXXVII.  30. XLII.  34.  .
Infledted,  LXVII.  u.
Separated  from  its  fituation  for  fome  •

fpace,  XVIL  6.
Ruptur'd  tranfverfly,  LIIL  35,
Aorta  narrower  than ufual, XVIII.  2.
XXI.  36. XXIII.
12.  XXXVIII.  34.
LIV.  37. LV.  10.
LXVI.  8.
Wider  than  ufual,  XXI.  17.  XXIIL
6.  XXVII.  28. XXXVIL3o._
XLII.  34. XLIIL  17.

A  litile:-


4. XXX.

XLV.  23.

LVL  10.


Index referring to


A  little  wider  than  it  ought  to  be,  a-

bove  the  heart, XLIV.  3. 19,

LXIV.  5.
Aorta  dilated,  LXX.  5.

Very  much  dilated,XVII.  21.  LXIV.

12.
Inlmediiitply  above  the heart,  IV»

24. XXV. 10. LVI.  21.
A  little  above  the  heart,  XLII.  39.

LXIX.  2. .
From  the  heart  to  the  curvature,

XXVI.  33.  35. XL.  23.
In  ihecurvature,and  beyondjXX  V  I.

31. XLV.  23. LXVII. 14.
Quite  to  thediaphi  agm,  LXIV.  13,
Quite to  the emulgeiUSj  XXVI.

21. LVII. 10.
From  the  emulgents  to  a  great  ex-
tent in  the  iliacs,  XXXVIII.  40.
Aorta,  aneurifm  of,  near  the  heart,  XVII.

17.  23. XVIII. 17.28.
Similar to a lacculus, ruptui'd,

XXVI.  13.

From  tiie  heart  ta  the  whole  of  the
curvature,  XVIII.  34.
Oolite  to  the  diaphragm,  ulcerated

and  ruptur'd,  XVII. 14.
Quite  to the  emulgents,  XVIII.
30..
Aorta, aneurifm of, at the curvature,
LVIII.  13.
Like  a  large  bag,  XVII.  2S.X VIII.
25.
In  the  curvature  itfelf, XVIII.  22.

L.  9.
Large,  ruptur'd  in  the  pericardium,
XXVL  5.  19.
Ruptur'd  externally,  XXVI.  g.
Double,  begun  in  the  heart,  LXIV.

„ 13- .

Ruptur'd  in  the  thorax,  near  the  dia-
phragm, XXVI.  ir.
Immediately under the diaphragm,
and through  that  mufcle  in  the
thorax,  XL.  26.
Beginning  betwixt  the  appendages  of
the  diaphragm,  and  occupying  one
half  of  the  belly,  XL.  26.
A little  above  the  divifion  into  the
iliacs,  XXXVIII.  40.
Aorta,  aneurifms  in  the  branches  of. Vide
Brachial, Crural, Popliteal,
Subclavian  artery.
Aorta, coats of, thinner  than natural,

XXVII.  12.


Parietes  of, coming  together  in  an
angle  on  one  fide, LXV.  5.
Aorta  reticulated  internally for  feme  ex.
tent,  with  white  and  prominent
fibres,  LIII.  37.

Showing  its  fibres  drawn  afunder  as  it
were. XVIII.  34. LVI.  n.

Having  lines  and  furrows  in  a  longi-
tudinal dire£tion,  XVIII.  34.
XX1IL6.  XXIV.  34  XXVL
13.  21.  XXVII.  12.  XLV.
23.  LtV.  37.
And  other  furrows  tranfverfly,
XXVI.  13.

Rugous,  IV.  21.

In  a  certain  place,  XLII.  34.

Unequal,XXI.47  XXIII.  8.  XXVI.
21.  33.  35.  XXXVIII.  40.
XLII.  39.  XLIII,24.  LVm.
13. LX.  8. LXVII. ir.  14.

Unequal,  and yellowifli,  XXIII.  4.

XXV.  10.

Of  a  preternatural  colour,  LXVIL

H-
Of  a  red  colour,  degenerating  into

brown,  XLIV.  3.
Of  a  black  and  reddifli  colour,  as  from

inflammation, XXVI.  35.
White,  hard,  and  unequal, LXIV.

12.
Aorta,  internally,  with  feme  tubercles,  and

prominences,  and  puftules, XVIII

8. XXVL 17. XXVII. 28.

LXIV.  5.
With  fome  marks  of  a  beginning  ero-

fion as it were, XXIV. 11.

XXVI.  13. XL.  II.  34.  39.
XLVI.  26.

With  bloody  erofions,  LXVII. 14.
Here and there ulcerated, VII.  g.

XXVI.  17. XXVII.  2. XL.

24.
Ulcerated  in  one  place,  XXIV.  16.

XXVL  21.
Internal coat,  or lamina,  of, eafily

feparated,  XXIIL  4.  6. XXV.

10. XXVII.  28. XLV.  23.
Aorta,  with  bony  fcales  internally,  IV.  4.

20. VII. 9. II. XVIL  17.

23. XVIIL 8. 28. 30. 34.

XIX. 49. 58. XXI. 4.  "ic.

XXIII.  8.  II. XXIV.  6.  16.

XXVI.  15.17.  31.  37.  XXVIL

2. XXXV.  10. XXX VIL  30.

XXXVIII.  40. XL.  22,  23,
24.


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead  Bodies.


24.  XLIil.  17.  22.  24  XLIV.
,9.  21.  XLVI.  26.  XLVIL
16.  XLIX.  18.  LIII.  37.  LX.
4.  6.  10.  LXIV.  7.  13.  LXVI.
9. LXVII. II. 14. LXIX.

2.  LXX. 10.

With  the  beginnings  of  them,  IV.
21.  VII.  17.  IX.  18.  X.  13.
19.  XIV.  35.  XVIII.  2.  25.
34.  XIX.  58.  XXIV.  6.  II.
XXVI.  13.  17.  21.  31.  33.  35.
XXVIL16.  XXIX.  20.  XXX.
12.  XXXVII.  30.  XLII.  II.
34. 39. XLIII.  24. XLIV.

3.  19.  XLV.  23.  XLVI.  29.
XLVIL  21.  30.  33.  XLIX.
18.  LIIL  37.  LVI.  21.  31.
LVII.  2.  LVIII.  13.  LX.  4.
6.  10.  12.  LXIV.  2.  7.  19.
LXV.  5.  LXVI.  6.  8.  LXVIL
II. LXVIII.  6.  ■ ^

Aorta,  branches  of,  becoming  more  offifi-
ed  and  rigid,  in proportion  ta
their  defcent,  LX.  12.
Aorta, harder  than  natural, LXIV,  3.
The  harder  in  proportion  as  it  was
more diftant from the heart,
LVn. 10.
Harder and thicker than natural,

XVIII.  34. XXVI.  21.  33.
Rigid,  XVIII.  30. XXVL  21.
Cartilaginous,  XVII. 21.

Aorta, fanguiferous  vefiels  of, extremely

confpicuous  externally, V.  17.

VII.  9.
External  cells  of,  fill'd  with  extrava-

fated  blood,  XXVL  13.  XXVIL

28.
Part  of  the  parietes  of,  confum'd  in

an  aneurifm,  XXI.  47. XXVL

3-9-
Aorta,  beginning  of,  narrower  than  ufual,

XIX.  51.

Harder  than  ufual, XVIII.  2.
Having  thick'^r  parietes than ufual,
XIX.  51.

Internally  of  a  lurid  colour,  and  un-
equal,  XVIII.  2.
Aorta, valves  of,  enlarged,  XLIH.  17.

Very  fmall,and  corrugated, XX  VII.
12.

Strigofe,  XVIII.  2. XXVI.  13.

Contracted,  XXIII.  11. XXIV.
18. LXVIL II.

Sorrewhatdif  as'd, LXVII. 11.

Proiuberating  internall},  by  teafjn


of  excrefcences form'd there,-
XXIV.  18.
Somewhat  hard,  III.  26. IV.  2r.

26. viL  9.  X.  19.  xvm.

2.  XXIiL8.  II.  XXVI.  31.
XLII.  34.  XLVIL  16.  XLIX.
18.

Harder  and  thicker  than  natural,
particularly  at  the  borders, XXIII.
6.

Hard,  and  extremely  thick,  at  the
borders,  XXVI.  33. XXX.  7.

Having  the  corpufcula  Arantii
harder  and  thicker  than  natural,
XXLIL  4. XXV.  10.

Changed  into  an  excrefcence,  in
part  bony,  LXIV.  7.

Having  one  of  thefe  bodies  degene-
rating into  a  flefhy  excrefcenc?,
XLVm.  j8.

Much  larger  than  it  is  naturally,,
LVIII.  13.

Having  the  aggeres,  or  tubercles,
thickened,  XVill.  34.  LX.  2.
LXIV.  19.

Almoftbony,  XXIV.  16.

In  part  bony,  LX.  4. LXIX.  2^

Bony,  XXXVII. 30.
Aorta,  valves  of,  having  fomething  tendin-
ous," XXiX.  20.

Oflifying  in  part,  XLVIH.  38.

Bony  in  part,  X.  19.  XXVII.  2.
LXVIL  14.

Bony,  and  protuberant  internally,,
XXI.  15.

Bony,  and  growing out into  ex-
crefcences, at  the  border,  XXIiL
11^
One valve  of, oflifying, XIX.  49.
XXIX. 12.

Bony  in  part,  XXX  VII.  30.  XL.,
23. LX. 6.

Almoft  univerfally  bony,  XLVIII.

Bony,  XXIII. 8.

Become  fmaller  tranfverfTy,  XXIVl

18.
With  a  hiatus  and  disjunftion  of

its  laminae,  LVIII. 13.
Ruptur'd  from the  border  to the

tubercle,  or  flg-^^r,  XXIV 18.
Arteries. Vide  Aorta. Limbs. Bafilary,

Brachial. Bronchial. Carotido-

Caeliac. Coronary  of  the  heart.

Hepatic,  where  of  the  liver, Hy—

pog  dfu.C


INDEX referring to


pogaftric.  Iliac.  Poplilnsal.  Pul-
monary. Splenic.  Subclavian.
Coroiury  of  theftomach.  Ver-
tebral.

Arteries,  blood  within  them,  IV.  24.  26.
V.  ir.  17.  ig.  XIX.  17.51.
XXI.  19.  XXIV.  16.  XXVI.
21. XXVll.  2. XLV,  23.

Arteries filled with coagulated blood,
LIV.  25.
Every  wheie yellow  internally,  LXIV.
19.

.'Vrteries,  many  become  bony,  XXVIl.  2.
Having  bony  fcales  internally,  XXIV.
16. XXVI. 15. LXil.  7.^
Prominences  and  puftules,  XXVII.

28.
Some  excrefcences,  XLIV.  3.

Artery,  tumor  form'd  in  a  certain,  and
protuberating internally, XI.

15-
Afoera arteria comprefs'd, XVII. 25.
XVIII.  22.
By  a  ftcatomatous  tumor,  LXVIII.
12.
Full  of  froth  internally,  VIII.  4.
Of  a  confiderable  part  of  the  food,
LIU.  26.
Internally  unequal from a  kind of

large  fafciculi,  XLIV. 15.
Of  a  red  colour,  degenerating into

brown,  LXIV.  5.
Of  a  red  colour,  degenerating  into
black,  VIII.  25.
Afpera arteria, external membrane of,
diftended  with a  fluid,  LXIV.
2.
External  gland  of,  inlarg'd, XLIV.

Tumor  form'd  upon  the  trunk  of,,

XV.  15.
Rings  of,  very  hard,  LVII. 10.
In one  part, or various become

bony,  VII.  II. XXIV.  16.
Chang'd  in their  figure,  ibid.
Afpera  arteria,  wound  of,  LIII. 21.
Axillary  glands, grown thick, fcirrhous,
and  livid,  L.  48.
The  adipofe  membrane lying  about
them  converted into  a kind of
hard fteatoma,  L.  48.
Azygavena,  diftended  with  blood, XXXIV.

15-
A  varix  of  i^,  and  rupture, XXVI.
29.


ACK,  rednefs  of,  XXXIX.  1 8.

Red, and degenerating  into li-
vidnefs,  XXVII.  2. XLV.  23.
Livid  on  one  fide, LII. 35.
Abfcefs of, with  large cavity, and

blackifh  parietes,  XVI.  28.
Many  finuffes  of,  in  a  winding  direc-
tion, from  a  wound,  LIII.  12.
Bafilary  Artery,  unequal  dilatation  of,  IX.
18.
Hardnefs  of.  XXVII.  2.
Hardnefs  and  internal  inequality  of,
XXV. 10.
Belly. See  alfo  Abdomen.
Belly,  from  the  navel downwards,  with-
out thefmall  inteftines,  XXXIX.
26.
Belly,  internal  parietes  of,  green and  foe-
tid, XXXIV. 15.
Ulcer  therein,  XL.  9.
Belly,  very  fmall  glands  throughout  the,
inflam'd by ftagnating blood,

xxvn.  1.  "

Water  therein,  I.  4.  IV.  26.  28.  30.
XVI.  2.4.  10.  19.  XVII.  6.
XVIII.  2. XX.  2.  43. XXL

3.  19.  XXIII.  4.  8,  XXIV.
18.  XXVI.  19.  XXVII.  16.
XXiX.6.  XXX.12.  XXXVIII.
2.  13.  28.  XLVII.  4.  12.  36.
XLVIII.37.  XLIX.  10.  LIII.
18.  LIV.  49.  LV.  10.  LXIV.
19.

In  great  quantity,  XXVIII.  6.  10.
12.  16.  20. LIV.  2.  39.
Water therein limpid, XVIf. 25.
XX.  2.  XXII.  6.  18.  XXXVI.

4.  20. XXXVIII. 4. 22.

Limpid,  but  having  an  urinous  o-

dour,  XLI.  4.
Water  therein  like  urine,  XXXVIIL

15. LXX.  7.
Yellow, or  yellowifh, VII. 11.

XVII.  10. XXI.  34. XXIL

4.  10. XXIV.  34. XXX.  7.

XXXVIII.  34.
Yellow  and  bitter,  XXXVL  2.
Green and yellow,  or fomewhat

green, and  fcetid, XVI. 30.

XXXVL  25. XXXVIII.  30.
Brownifli  and  turbid,  X.  13.  XXIL

22. XXXVIII. 18.

'Acrid,


Preternatural APPEARAKCES in dead Bodies.


Acrid,  XXVI.  13.
Salt,  and  therein  pieces  and fila-
ments of  the  omentum,  XL VII,
8.
Of  a  livid  colour,  and  mixed  with

pus,  XXXIV. 25.
Of  a  reddifli colour, and mixed

with  pus,  XXXVIII.  52.
Bloody,  or fomewhat bloody,  V.
19. XIV.  35. XXI.  24.  29.
XXVI. 3 r.  XXIX. 6.  XXXIX.
26. XLVIII.  44.
Bloody, and  ^mix'd  with faeces,
LIV.  37.
Belly,  therein blood extravafated, LIV.
10. LVI.  20.  35.
Coagulated,  LIV.  31,
Fluid,  LIV.  16.
Fluid,  to  the  quantity  of  a  pound

and  half,  XXXV.  2.
Of  twenty  pounds,  LI.  40.
In very great quantity,  LIV.  8.

LXVII.  17.
In  great  quantity,  and  beginning

to  be  corrupted,  LIV.  14.
Sanious  ichor,  XXXI.  2.
Pus,  XLII.  25. LIV.  6.
Sanies,  filling  the  belly,  XXXIV.

21. XL.  9.
A  great  quantity  of  the  mofl  ill-

fmelling  matter,  XXXV. 14.
A  great  quantity  of  fluid  and  yel-
lowifli  matter,  XXXIV.  9.
Belly,  very  ofFenfive  fmell  therein,  LIV.
6.  20.  39.
Gangrenous  foetor  therein. III. 2.
V. 19. XXI. 29. XXXIV.
II. 18. XXXV.  2. 10. 16.
XXXIX.  26.
Belly,  vifcera  of,  very  fat,  LX.  12.

Rather  contra£ted, and  fomewhat

livid,  XXXIX.  2.
Somewhat  green,  LII.  4.
Green  and foetid,  moft  of  them,

LVL  12.
The  inferior  of  them  blackifh,  XLI,

10.
Here  and  there  unequal,  with  tu-
bercles, XLVII.  14.
All  of  them  unufually  connefledto

one  another,  XVII.  17.
Almofl;  all  of thofe, on the  left
\  fide, driven  towards  the  right,

XL.  26.
Vol.  IIL


Many  of  them  hanging  outwarJs,
within  akindof  purfe,  XLVIII..
48.  52.
Blacknefs. See  Livor.
Bladder, full  of  urine, I.  2. IV.  19.  26.
V.6.  Vlf.  II.  XL.  4.  XLVII.
12.  XLVIII.  34.  Ln.30.  LX.
12.
Very  much  diftended  with,  XXXIX.
33. XLL 8.  13. XLIL II.
XLIX.  18.
Enlarg'd, XXXIX.  33. XL. 22.
XLI.  13. XLIL  34.  40. LIIL
24. LXIX.  2. 16.
Connedled  with  the  peritonaeum,  high
above  the  pubes,  XXXIX. o-?.
XLII.  20.  ^^

Extended  almoft  to  the  navel,  IV.  ig.
V.6. XXXIX.  33. LVL  12.
LX.  12.
More  oblong  than  natural,  XLII.  11.

LXIX.  2.
Small in proportion, XLIV. 21.

LXVI.  6.
Very  much  contraded,  XLII.  20.28.

XLIII.  24.,
Not  of a  natural figure, LII.  -?<.

LX.  12.
Hernia  thereof,  and a certain fac,  ■
VIL  II. XXI.  15. XLII.  28.
Dilated  forwards,  at  its  lower  part,

XLII.  8.
With  an  external  puftule,  XXXV.

16.
With  an  external  cicatrix,  XXXVIII.

28.
Befet  with a  few  tubercles,  XXIL

18.
With  its  external  veflels  turgid  with

blood,  XLI.  13.
With  the  external  coat  eafily  feparat-
ing  from  the  others,  XLVl.  10.
Bladderj  coats  of,  with  flefhy  fibres,  more
red  than  ufual,  XL.  23.
Thick,  like  the  fafciculi  of  fibres
in  the  heart,  XL.  4. LXI.  6.
Thick  and  hard,  IV. 13.  9 X.
13.  19. XIV.  35. XXXIX.
33. XL.  22. XLI.  13. XLIL
15. 20. 28.  30. 40. XLIV.
15.  19. XLVIIL  32. XLIX.
J  8. LXIIL  13,
So  as  to  prevent  the  dilatation  of
the  bladder,  XLIII.  24.
4  M  Scirrhous,


INDEX referring to


Scirrhous,  XXXIX.  33.  XLII.  15.

28.
With cartilaginous concretions,
XXII.  4.
Bladder,  internally,  as  if  made  of  a  very
fine  tomentum,  XLII.  13.
Of  an  unequal  furface, XLVIII. 32.
With blood-veffels more confpicu-
ous  than  natural,  X.  13.  XXIX.
20. XL.  23,  24. XLVII.  12.
Much crowded at the  lower part,
XLVn.  34. LXIII. 13.
And  turgid,  Vil.  11.  XLVII.  36.
XLVIII.  34.
With bloody  drops appearing un-
der the internal  coat, XLVII.
12.
Somewhat red, and  red, XL.  21.

23.  XLI.  13.

At the lower part, XLIII. 24.
XLVI.  17.
Inflam'd, V.  6. XLII.  8. XLVIL

34-
Blackifh  univerfally,  or'in  part,  XL,

24.  XLI.  10. XLII.  28.
Gangrenous,  XLII.  20.

Seiz'd  with  a  fphaceius,  XLII.  25.
With a  flight abrofion about the

ureters,  XLII.  2.
Ulcerated,  IV. 19. XLII.  15.  20.
28.
Wholly  from  a  cancer,  LXVI.  2.
Overflowing  with  a  white  and  turbid

humour,  XLIV.  15.
Purulent,  XLII.  40.
Half  full  of  pus,  LXVL  2.
Having its fundus perforated, and
communicating  with  an  external
.  ulcer,  XLII. 20.
Bladder,  having  a  tubercle  at  the  cervix,
XLII.  13.
A  double  tubercle,  LXX. 3.
Two  fcirrhous  bodies  at  the  orifice,  pro-
tuberating  internally,  XXXIX.
33. See  alfo  Proftate.
Bladder,  containing  ftones,  and  of  what
kind,  IV.  2. XLII.  8.  13.  28.
Adheringto  the  internal  coat,  XLII.

20.  25.
Which  have  been  formed about
needles  or  bodkins,  XLII,  15.
20.  25.  28.
Much  vifcid  and  bloody  mucus  about
a  ftone, XLII. 15,
Bladder,  biliary. See  Liver.


Blood,  fcarcely  any  in  the  body  after  death,,

XLVII.  8.
Not  much,  or  in  very  fmall  quantity,^

XXVL II. XXXVin. 34.

LIV.  46. LVII.  10.
In  the  arteries,  fee  arteries.
Long  warm  after  death,  IX. 12.
With  many  air-bubbles  in  it,  V. 17..

19. XXIV. 6. XXVIL 2.

XXXI.  2. XLIIL  22.
Blood,  filthy,  XLIX.  2.

Thick  and  vifcid,  XVI.  14, XVIIL

2.
Inclining  to  coagulation,  VIII.  23.

XVIIL 30. XXL 19. 45.

XLVIII.  37.
Concreted,  VII.  13.  XX.  11.  XXL

27.  30. XXXVII.  2.
Almoft  univerfally,  XX.  41.  XXL

33. XXX.  7. XXXVIII.  4.

13.  LIV.  25.
Extremely  coagulated,  XLIX. 14.
Inclining  rather  to  fluidity  than  to

concretion,  XX. 13.
Without  any  polypous  concretion  in

any  part,  Lll.  30.
Fluid, I. 2. III.  24.  26. IV.  2.

8,  9.  II.  24.  26.  35.  V.  17.
VIL  2.  7.  VIIL  4.  IX.  12,
X.-2.  7.  XV.  6.  XVI.  4.  10.
19.  XIX.  3.  17.  19.  XX.  15.
47.  49  XXII.  8.  10.  XXIII.
4. XXV.  2. XXVI.  21.31.

XXIX.  8.  XXXI.  2.  XXXV.
10.  XXXVL  2.  20.  XXXVIIL
2.  6.  10. 12.  16.  22. XLIIL

28.  XLV.  23.  XLIX.  12. LI.

14.  Llir.  26.  40.  4-4.  46.  LVI.
17. LXII.  5. LXIV.  5.

Almoft  wholly  fluid,  XXIV.  13;
XXVI.  33.  XLII.  34.  XLVIL
36. LIV.  26. LIX.  3.

Serous,  withoutfibres,  and  difcolour'd,
XLIII.  4.
Blood,  of  a  dilute  red,  XXXVIIL  6.

Of  a  bright  red,  LIX.  3.

Black,  V.  6,  19. VIIL  4.  2.5. IX.

9.  12.  20.  X.  17.  XVIIL  2.
30. XIX.  49. XX.  16. XXI.

19-  27-  33'  34,  35- 45- 47- 49-
XXIIL6.  XXIV.6.13  XXVI.
21.  31.  33. XXVIL  2.  8.  12.

XXX.  7.  XXXV.  10.  12.
XXXVII.  4.  XXXVIII.  34.
XLII.  34. XLIIL  28. XLV.

16.


^Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead  Bodies.


i6 !Z3. XLVIII.  15.  37.  38.
LIV.  37.  44. LV.  ro. LVI.
17. LXIV.  5.  ig.
Black,  and  refembling  fluid  pitch  or
tar,  IV. ig. Vlil.  27.

Body. See  Carcafe.

Bones.  See  Cranium.  Leg.  Femur.  Fi-
bula. Frontis.  Hyoides.  Ilium.
Innominatum.  Occiput.  Eye,
orbit  of.  Sinciput.  Pubes.  Tem-
poris.

Bones,  become  flexible  and  foft,  LVIII.  4,

Spongy  on  the  furface,  carious  in  the

meditullium,  LVIII.  4.
Such  as  could  be  made  white  by  no
art  whatever,  XLVIII.  50.
Brain. See  Cerebrum.
Brachial  artery,  with  bony  fcalts,  XLIII.

17-
Breafl:. See  Thorax.
Breaft,  livid  in  a  certain  place,  LII. 15.
Bread,  gibbofity  of,  X. 13.
Narrownefs  of,  XL VI.  17.
Water  betwixt  mufcles  of,  XXXI.  2.
Breaft  of  a  man,  having  a  matter  within  it

fimilar  to  calx,  L.  45.
Breafts,  here  and  there  hard,  XXI.  47.
With  a  green  2nd  black  fluid  within

them,  ibid.
With  a  bony  body  witTiin,  L.  41.
With  bodies  which  degenerate  from  a
fcirrhous  to  a  cancerous  nature,
and  in  what  manner,  L.  48.
Bronchial  glands. See  Lungs.
Bronchial  artery,  three  times  wider than
ufual,  XXI.  4.


c


ARCASE,  of  a  violet  colour  on  its
whole  pofterior  furface,  LIX. 12.
Black,  LIX. 3.
Very  black,  as if  from  an  univerfal

gangrene,  LV.  22.
Of  an  ifteric  colour,  VII.  it. LI.

14.
Soon  becoming  green  in  fome  places,

LIII.  24. LXV.  8. LXX.  7.
Foetid,  or  ill-fmelling. See  Foctor.
Become  three  times  as  large  as  ufual,

univerfaljy, from tumefadiion,

LV.  22.
ContraSed,  LI.  3.
Rigid,  LII.  34. See  Limbs.


Carcafe,"  blood  from  the  mouth  of,  XXI.
4g. XXIII.  2. XXXVIH.  30.
LII.  34.
Foetid  water,  XLVIII.  44.
Foetid  matter,  LII.  15.
From  the  noftrils  of,  blood,  LII.  34.
From  a  wound of,  an  eruption  ot  a
great quantity  of  blood,  LIII.
18.
Carcafe,  long-continued  warmth  of.  III.
2.  4. IV.  I..  35. V.  6. VII.
9. XIX. 17. 19. XXI. 6.
XXIII.4  6.XXV1I.2.  XXXIV.
Q.  33. XLII,  34. XLV.  23.
Lll.  30. LIX.  12. _
Carcafe,  flefli  of,  foft  and  flaccid,  XLIIL
4. L.  48.
Difcharging much fluid,  when cut
into,  XLIII.  5.
CjECum  intettine, that  is,  the  appendicula
vermiformis,  very  fhort  and  not
at  all  hollow,  LXVII. 11.
Cascum  intefi:ine  of  the  ancients,  furpriz-
ingly  dilated,  XXXIV.  27.
Inflam'd,  ibid.
Carotid  arteries, tortuous  in the neck,
XXXVII.  30.
Infleded to the  form of  a fcrew,

XLIX.  18.
Dilated,  IV.  ig. VIIL  11. XLIIL

17.  22. LXIV.  13.
One of them dilated, XXIV. 6.

XXVI.  21. XXIX.  20.
Diftinguifli'd  internally  with  incipient
offifications,  LXIV. 13.
And with  furrows  alfo,  ibid,  and

XXVI.  21.
With bony fcales, XLIII. 17.
LXVil.  14.
Become  bony  in part,  XXVI.  37.

LXII.  7.
One  of  them  become  bony  in  part,

XXIV.  6.
Carotid  arteries,  harder  than  natural,
at  the  bafis  of  the  brain,  XXV.
10.
Having  their  coats  thicken'd,  LVI.
21.
Cava  vena,  without  blood,  LIV. 18.

Verv  much diftended with blood,

' XIX.  17. XXI.  35. XXXIV.

15. XXXV.  10.

Cava  vena,  fuperior  tiunk  of,  more  on  ths

left  lide  than  ufual,  LVI.  18.

4M 2  In


INDEX referring to


In  the  very  extremity anteriorly
eroded  as  it  were,  LIII.  37-
Inferior  wider  than  natural,  LIV.  37.
Without  blood,  XXIX.  20.
With  an  oblong  and  thick  polypous
concretion,  XLV. 16.
Cerebrum,  none,  XLVill.  48.  50.

Not  of  a  natural  figure,  I,  14. XIL

2.

Cerebrum,  abfcefsof,  V.  2.

Ab(ce{s  fii!  generis  o(,  V.  6,  7. IX.
16.
Cerebrum,  arteries  ef. See  Bafilary. Ca-
rotid. Vertebral.
Cerebrum,  arteries  of,  with  bony  fcales,
IV.  2.  II.
With  firmer  coats  than  ufiial,VIII.
15. XXIV.  6. XXVII.  2.
All the  veflels  of,  diftended  greatly
with  blood,  III.  26. VII.  7.  13,
VIII. 12.  15.  23. IX. 12.  14.
20. XIV.  5, XXIII.  6. LV.
20.
With  air-bubbles,  LIII.  26.
With  polypous  concretions,  XLV.
21.
Cerebrum,  meninges  of,  fomewhat  thicker
than  ufual  in  fome  places,  LI.  3.
With  their  veflels  pretty  full  of  blood,

LXII.  15.
A  little  green  and  livid  in  fome  places,

LIl.  2,  3.
Ting'd  with  the  colour  of  pus,  LI.

28.
Sanious  in  fome  places,  LI.  3.
Water  beneath  them,  Lll.  2.
Cerebrum,  meninges  of,  both  having  their
veflels  much  dilated  with  blood,
XLIII.  27.  XLIV.  3. LII.  35.
Having  their  arteries  thicken'd,  indu-
rated, and  bony  in  feveral  places,
XXVII.  28.
Perforated  by  an  erofive  humour,  IX.

20. XIV.  3. LL  12.
Wounded,  LI.  45.

By  great  bony  fragments,  LI.  35.
Chang'd  into  a  more  thick  and  flaccid
nature,  IX.  23.
Cerebrum,  dura  mater  of,  acitlulated  wa-
ter thereabout,  I.  6.
A  few  drops  of  water,  X.  5.
A  gelatinous  concretion, VI.  10.
A  little  jelly  as  it  were,  LII.  23.
Something  like  mucus, LII.  19*
A  thickilh  ichor,  LII.  8.


A  fanies, LI. 5.  7.  34.

Much  fanies,  LI. 15.

A  kind  of  condens'd  pus,  LI.  14.

Pus,  LII. 4.

A  little  purulent  matter,  LI. 57.

Purulent  matter  adhering  clofe  to,  LI.

49.
Coagulated  blood, LI.  37.  50. LII.

30- 3^-
Adhering  very  clofely,  LI.  6.  38.
A  great  quantity  of  blood, LII.  35.
Cerebrum,  dura  mater  of,  fixed  moreclofe-

Iv than  ufual  to  the cranium,

III.  ir.  XXVII.  2.  XXX VIL

30. LXVII.  14.
More  clofely  than  ufual  in  fome  places,

LII.  38. LXIII.  8.
Grown  into  one  fubfl:ance  with  the

pia  mater  and  cerebrum,  I.  14.

IX.  25.
Having  its  veflTels  diftended  with  blood,

VII.  13. VIII. 4. 25. 27.
XXIV.  6.

More  on  one  fide  than  on  the  other,

LII.  30.
And  dilated  more  on  one  fide,  LII.

38-
Somewhat  turgid,  XIX. 7.
Artery  of,  lacerated,  LI.  37.
With its finufes, diflrended by a
great  quantity  of  blood,  V.  iq.
XVIII.  2.
With  air-bubbles  alfo,  LIV.  49.
With  polypous  concretions,  V.  n,
VI. 12. VII.  4.  6.  9.  ri.  13.

VIII.  2.  23.  XIV.  35. XXIV.
16. LII.  6.

Sinus,  longitudinal,  perforated,  LI.

54.
Lateral,  on  each  fide'ruptur'd,  LIL
25.
The  falx  thicker  and  harder  than  ufu-
al,  XXVI.  33.
And  a  great  bone  therein.  III.  20,
A  fmall  one,  XXI.  35.
Many  iharp-pointed  bones,  XXV.
6.
Cerebrum,  dura  mater  of,  very  much  cor-
rugated, VII.  9.
Become  thicker than ufual, V.  6;
VIII. 15. XLIX. 16. LX.
12.
In  fome  places,  I.  14. LI.  2.  45*.
LK.  6.  19.  38.
Almoft  bony  in  fome  places,  I.  10.


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead  Bodies.


Of  a  granulated  furface  as  it  were,

LII.  19.
Of  a  cineritious  colour,  I.  2.

Almoft  in  fome  places,  LI. 27.-
Yellowifh  in  fome  places,  LI.  2.
Somewhat  livid  here  and  there,  LI.

19.
Somewhat  black,  from  a fullnefs  of

the  veflels,  III. 11.
Slightly  black, as from contufion,

LII.  28.
Diftinguifh'd  with  bloody  drops  as  it

were,  VII.  15. LII.  6.
Inflam'd  in  fome  places,  LI.  39.

Slightly,  LI.  32.
Slighdy  injur'd  in fome  places,  LI.

ASeSted  with  a  fphacelus  as  it  were,

LII.  4.
Eroded  with  pus,  XIV.  5.
Injur'd by a  fcale  of  the  deprefs'd

bone,  LI.  30.  34.  39.
By  fliarp pieces  of  the fraftur'd

bone  being  fix'd  into  them,  LI.

18.  ^

Cerebrum, dura  mater  of, under  this  a.

piece  of  pfeudomembrana,  or  falfe

membrane,  adhering,  LII.  8.
Air-bubbles,  VIII.  23.
Water,  V. 19. VL 12. VII. 6.

VIIL II.  15. IX.  2. X.  7.

9.  II. XL  6.  II. XVL  36.

40. XXV. 2. XXXVII. 2.

LI.  9.  14.  17.  32. LII.  38.
Limpid water,  I. 2. II. 22- IV.

II.  30. VL  8. XL  4.
Mucous  ferum,  LII.  2.
Gelatinous  ferum,  VII.  6. XI.  2.
Sanious  ferum,  I.  2.

A  kind  of  yellow  jelly,  LII.  15.

Sanies,  LI. 11.

A  puriform  matter,  I. 12.

Pus, LI.  2.  17.  27,  28,  30. LIL

6 19.
BJood,  LII.  34.

In  great  quantity,  LI.  51.  54.
Blood  at  one  fide  of  the  cerebrum,  IL
17. III.  2.  14. 17.  20. IX.
2.  4. X. 13. LX.  4.
About  the  cerebellum,  II.  21.  22.

III.  2.  24.

At  the  egrefs  of  the  foinal  marrow,
II.  20.
Cerebrum,  pia  mater  of,  thereto  adhering
externally  a  little  jcbor,  LII.  8.


A  little  mucus  of  a  yell  w  and

green  colour, and very fee  id,

LII.  10,  II.
A  coagulum  of  blorid,  by  no  means

fmail, LXIX 2.
Cerebrum,  pia  maer  of,  its  veflels turgid

with blood,  I. 14. III.  2.  6.

II. IV.  13.  16 19.  21.  24.  V.

6.  II. VI.  14.  VII.  13.  15.  17.

VIII.  4.  25.  27. XL  II.  22.

XIV.  3.  27.  35. XV.  8. XVL

40. XVIII.  2. XXI,  23.  29.

33.35. XXIV.  6. XXV.  10.

XXVI  19.21.35. XXXVIL

4. XLVII.  12. 33. LI.  35.

42. LII.  6. LIII.  40. LIV.

39. LV.  10. LX.  4.  6.  8.  12.

LXII.5.7.  LXVII.14.  LXIX.

2.  4.
Not  all  of  them,  V.  15. VII.  g.
Mofli  on  one  fide, LII. 30.
On  one  fide  only,  VII. 11. LX.

2. LXII.  9.
Turgid  with  air  alfo,  IV.  19.  V.  17.

19. VIII.  9.
With air-bubbtes, XLVII, 38.

LIII.  26.
With polypous  concretions, VI.

14.
Some  veflels  varicous  as  it  were,  LI,

15.
Some arteries dilated, IV. 19,

XXXVIL  30.
Trunk  of  the  carotid  lacerated,  II.  30.
A  certain  artery  with  a  peculiar  dif-

order,  III.  6.  IV.  19.
Cerebrum,  pia  mater  of,  become  thicken'd,

LI.  30.
Whitifli  here  and  there,  XI.  13.
Externally  greenifh  and  yellow  for  a

confiderable  fpace,  XXXVIL  7.
Inflam'd,  VII.  11. 13. LI.  59.
Slightly  inflam'd,  VL  8. LL  42.
Perforated,  III.  2. 17.
Eafily  feparable,  IV.  4.  16.  24. V.

II. 19. VII. 17. VIII. 12.

XI.  II.  XXIV.  34. xxvn.

28.  XLVII.  33.  LI.  30.  LXI.2.
Cerebrum,  pia  mater  of,  within  it  water,

I.  4. II.  17.  22. IV.  2.  6,  7.

16.  19.  24.  26.  30.  35. V.  6.

17.  19. VL  8. VII.  13.  15.
VIIL 6.-  9. II. IX.  3. X.

II.  i3>  15. XXI.  23.  24.  29.
XXV.  10.  XXVII.  2.  XXXV.

160.


INDEX relating to


r&.  XLVIII.  38.  LI.  42.  LII.

6.  8. LIV.  39.
Almoft  limpid,  X.  13. XIV.  35,
Turbid,  VII. 2.
Yellow,  VI. 14.
A  little  bloody,  VII. 9.
Infipid,  or  very  flightly  fait,  LIV.

49.
In a manner  gelatinous, II.  22.

III.  14. IV.  4.9.  13. V.  II.

VI.  2. 12. VII.  2. II. IX.

Q. X.  7.  17,  19. XL  2. XV.

6.  XXI.  35.  XXXVII.  2. LI.

6. LXIl.  9.
Air-bubbles,  IV,  26. 35. VIII.  9.

IX.  .9. X.  17.  XIV.  35. LIV.
39.  49. LVII.  14.

Blood,  IL  19. III.  4.

Ononefide,  III.  16.  LII.  30.
Sanies,  V.  11.
Cerebrum,  laxer  than  ufual,  I.  6.  II.  9
III.  6.  IV.  4.  9.  II.  13.  26
35.  V.  II.  VIL  4.  IX.  4
23.  X.  II.  XI.  II.  22.  XV
6.  XVI.  40.  XVII.  23.  XXI
29.  35.  XXVI.  21.  XXXIV
23.  XXXVIL  2.  30.  XLVII
12.  36.  XLIX.  16.  LI.  9
LV.  10. LVII. 10.  14. LIX

Cerebrum,  hard,  I. 10. V.  6 VIII.  4

6.  8, 9 II,  12.  15. IX.  9

X.  17. XXIV.  6. LXI.  2.  5

7.  LXIL 15.
Rather  dry,  VIII. 23.
Difcoiour'd, I. 12. IV.  4 II.
Isloc quite of its natural colour,

XXXVIL  2.
Som-what  yellow. III. 2. IX. 20.
Having  a  fomewhat  difagreeable  fmell,

VII.  9.
Foetid and blackiih,  from  a  ferous  collu-

vifs,  LI. 12.
Wounded  anteriorly,  LI. 59.
C:relirum,  part  of,  fomewhat  pale,  LI.  28.
Somewhat  brown, LI.  7.  11.
Somewhat  livid,  LI.  27.
Livid,  LI. 14. LIL  2,  3.
Inclining  to  a  cineritious  colour,  LI.

30-
Being  fomewhat  black,  LI.  49. LII,

10.
Half  putrid,  I. 14. IX.  18.
Deeply  corrupted  and  fanious,  LI,  33,
Hard,  IX,  23.  25.


Not  of  a  natural  figure,  X.  g,
Confiderably  aft'edled to  fome  extfnt,
both  in  breadth  and  depth,  LI.

34-
Cerebrum, cortex of, fomewhat yellow
and  pale,  XXV. 10.
Somewhat  black  here  and  there,  LII.

10.

In  a  certain  place  of  the  colour  of  pus
on  the  furface,  LI.  17.

Corrupted  on  the  furface,  in  one  very
fmail  place,  LI.  3.
Cerebrum, medullary  fubftance  of,  fofter
than  the  cortical,  LV.,  20.

Brown,  IV.  21. VIIL  9. XXXVIL

30-
On  one  fide  only,  V, 15.

With  fmall  vefTels,  or  bloody  drops
more  evident  than  ufual,  I.  14
III. 6.  14.  26. IV. 21. V

19.  VII.  13.  VIIL  25.  X
17.  XV.  8.  XXI,  33.  35
XXV.  10.  XXVI.  19,  XXXIV
15.  XXXV.  16.  XLIV,  3
XLV.  16.  L.  55.  LII,  30
LIII.  40. LIV.  39.  44. LV

20.  LX.  8. LXIL  5.  15.
Extremely  evident,  LXIX.  4.

Cerebrum,  one  hemifphere  of,  white and
green  in  great  part  of  it,  LII.

23-

Somewhat  eroded,  XL  2.

More  deeply  eroded,  LI.  44,  45.

Corrupted  in  one  part,  I.  6.

To  the  bignefs  of  an apple,  LII.

28.
The  fubftance almoft  fluid  for  a
certain fpace, and of a  dirty
blood-colour,  LVII.  14.

With  a  fmus  in  the  corrupted  fub-
ftance, XI.  6.

With  an  abfcefs,  V.  2.

With  a  very  fmall  abfcefs,  containing
a  very  thick  pus,  LL 19.

With  an  abfcefs  fui  generis,  V,  6.

With  a  fanious  ulcer,  LI.  28.

Internally  lacerated  and  hollowed  out
by  the  blood.  III.  2.  4.  6.  17.
LX.  2. LXIL  9.  II.

With  a  certain  large  cavity,  in  which
was  a  brown  ferum  and  a  coagu-
lated blood,  IX.  20.

With  a  certain  fmaller  cavity,  in
which  was  a  ferum  with  fila-
ments, IX.  23.

Full


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead  Bodies.


Full  of half-dried mucus. III.

6.
Full  of  black  blood,  LXIII.  13.
Subfiding  from the compreffion of

blood  upon  it,  LII.  30.
Deeply  perforated with a wound,

LI.  54.  57.
Deeply  lacerated  with  a  wound,  LL

53-
With  a  wound  in  which  was  coa-
gulated blood,  LI.  35.
In  which  was  a  ferous  colluvies,

LI.  44.
In  which  was  afanious  humour,
• LL45.
Cerebrum,  corpus  callofum  of,  lax,  LXII,
15.
Therein  two  furrows,  VIII.  6.
The  longitudinal  traft  doubled  in
a  certain  place,  LXI.  5.
Cerebrum, ventricles  of, therein water,

IV.  7. 35.  XI.  15.  LL9.  Lxin.

13.  LXIX.  16.
In>  creat  quantity, IV.  6.  21.  24.

VI.  6. XXXIV.  23. XXXV.

6.  LIV.  49.
In  little  quantity, IV.  9. 13. VI.

2. 10. VII. 7. XLVIII.  38.

XLI.  6.  27,  28.  38.  45. LIV.

29.LXL2.
None,  VIII.  9.
A great quantity and fomewhat

fait,  II.  20.
A great quantity and limpid,

XXXVII.  30.
A  little  and  pretty  thick,  IV.  8.
Yellow,  VI 14.  VII.  27.
Somewhat  red,  XLVII.  12.
In  all  of  them  blood. III.  11. LIL

34.  LX.  4.
Almoft  in  all  coagulated  blood, LI.

59-
Cerebrum,  lateral  ventricles  of,  flrorter
than  they  ought  to  be,  X.  17.
Therein  water,  I.  4.  III.  14.-  24^
IV.  16.  19.  V.  II.  15.  Vill.
2.  ir.  IX.  2,  3.  19.  X.  II'.  XI.
13.  XIV.  3. 27.  XVL36.  XX.

5.  XXIV.  6.  16.  XX vn.  2.

XXXI.  5.  XL.  2.  XLIII,  4.
LXIX.  8.  LXX.  5.
Limpid,  1. 10.  III.  26.  V.  6.  IX.
12.  XIV.  35.  XV.  6.  XXV.
10.  XXIX.  12.  LIII.40.  LV.
20.  LXIX.  iQ.


In  great  quantity, XXV.  4.  10.

XLVIII.  15.
In  fmall quantity, LX. 10. 12.

LXII.  9.
Limpid and in great quantity,

LXII.  15.
A large quantity and fomewhat

turbid,  LII.  35.
The  fame  in  fmall  quantity,  XLIL

11.  XLIV.  7.  LII.  30.

In  great  quantity  and  turbid,  VlII,
4.  XII.  2.  XXI.33.  XXVL19.
XXXVIII.  34.

And  of  the  colour  of  urine,  XXVL

33-

Yellow,  IX.  9.

Yellowifh,  XLV.  16.

Brownifh  and  in  large  quantity,  J,^

Of  a  yellow  and  red  colour,  and
in  great  quantity,  VIII.  15.

Reddifl],  VIIL  25.  IX.  4.  16,
XXI.  23.  29.  XXXV.  16.  LII.
6.  9,  10.  LXII.  5.  LXIIL  8.

Bloody, III.  4. IV.  26. VI.  8.

12.  VII.  9.  13.  XI.  II.  XVL
10.  XXVI.  35.  XLIV.  3.  LII.
23.  LX.  2.  8.  LXII.  7.

Frozen  by  the  cold,  XIII.  15.
Salt," IV.  2,  4.
Blood,  IL  19,  20.  III.  2.  16,  17.

A  great  quantity  of,  II.  13.
Purulent  matter,  V.  2.
Cerebrum,  lateral  ventricles  of,  in  one  of
them  a  follicle  fiil'd  with  a' great
quantity  of  water,  I.  6.
Limpid  water,  IX.  20. XI.  4.
Bloody  water,  LX.  6.
.^ruginous  water,  XI,  4.
Very  acrid  and  biting,  Ll.  53.-
Water  with  grumous blood, LI,-

54.  LX.  6.
Salt  water,  X.  2.

Concreted  by the  froft, LXVIL.
14. '
Blood,  II.  9.  II.  15.  22.  III.  6.  11^
16,  17.
In  confiderable  quantity,  LXII.  7^
In  fo  great  a  quantity  as  to  dilate
the  ventricle,  LII.  23. LXVIL
r4.
Pus,  V.  4.  XIV.  5.
Cerebrum,  lateral  ventricles  of,  their  fur-
face  of  a  brownilh  colour,  1. 14.^
V.  6.

Veflela.


INDEX referring to


VelTels  diftendeJ with  blood,  III.

14. V.  II. VIII.  4. X. iq.

XXVIL30.  XLV.16.  XLVII.

12.  LII.  30.  LIII.  40.  LX.  12.

LXII.  15.
Membrane through which they

creep  eafily  feparable, XLVII.

12.
Their  feptum  lucidum,  with  the  vef-

fels  running  through  the  fides,

very  much  diftended  with  blood,

LIV.  39.
More  lax than ufual, XIV  35.

LXIII.  8.
Kaving  water  within  its  duplica-

ture,  IV.  19.  VIII.  II.  LXIII.

8.
Ruptur'd, III.  2.  4.  17. V. 15.

XIV.  3. XXV.  10. LX.  4.

LXII.  7.  LXVII.  14.
Fornix  in  them,  very  lax,  VIII.  12.

IX.  10.  XIV.  3.  35. XXL  33.

XXV.  10.  LXn.5.  LXIII.  8.
Confum'd,  LX.  4.  LXII.  15.
Cerebrum, lateral  ventricles of, therein

the  plexus  choroides  difcolour'd,

1.  10.  III.  2.  6.  IV.  16.  21.
V.  II.  15.  IX.  9,  X.  II.  XIL

2.  XIV.  35.  XXI.  19.  XXVL
33.  XXIX.  12.  XXXV.  6.
XXXVII.  30.  XXXVIII.  34.
XLII.  II.  XLIV.  7.  XLVIL
12.  LII.  10.  30.  LX.  2.  LXI.
2.

One  of  them,  IX.  20.  LXII.  7.
LXIII.  13.

Somewhat  pale,  but  blackifli  in  the
middle,  XXV.  10.

Fuller  of  blood  than  ufual.  III.  14.
VIIL23.  X.17.  XXL35.LIL
38.  LX.  10.  12.  ^

In  a  manner  inflam'd,  II.  19.

Of  a  fomewhat  black  colour  degene-
rating into  red,  LIII.  40.  LIV.
44.

One  of them  very much injur'd,
LXII.  7.
Lacerated,  II.  9.  11.  13.  15.

Both  confum'd,  LX.  4.

Very  lax,  IX.  9.

Connected  more  firmly  than  ufual
with  the  fubjeded  optic  thalami,
LXI.  2.

One  of  them  varicous,  VII.  4.

In  them  veficles  full  of  water,  I,  10.


III.  14.  IV.  II.  16. ,19.  26.  35.
V.  6.  19.  VI.  12.  VII.  II.  13.
15.  IX.  2.  3.  X.  II.  XL  1 3.
XX. 5. XXI. 23. 29. 33.

XXIV.  16.  XXXV.  16:  LV.
10.  LX.  8.  LXII.  7.  LXIII.
13.  LXX.  3.  5.

Very  large.  III.  ix.  IV.  2.  VIII.  4.

XXV.  10.

A  body  confifting  of  hydatids,  XL  6.
Many  fraall  red  bodies,  in  a  manner

glandular,  LXII.  5.
Glands  larger  than  natural, II.  22.

IV.  24.  VIII.  2.

Very  tumid,  XXlV.  4. XXXIV.

Cerebrum,  lateral  ventricles  of,  their  pa-
rietes  not  fo  fmooth  as  ufual,
XL  II.
Eroded  or  burft  through,  II.  <).  11,
13.  15,  16.  III.  2.  4.  6.  16,  17.
LX.  4.
In  one  of  them  a  fordid  ulcer,  LI. 54.

An  ulcerous  cavity,  XI.  4.
Their  cavity  enlarg'd,  LX.  4.

In  one. See  above  in  one  of  them
Blood.
Cerebrum,  third  ven  tricle  apparently  fliorter
than  ufual,  LXII.  15.
With  its  Tupper  fiffure conftrlfted,

LXI.  2.
With  its  fides  fcarcely  to  be  diftin-

guifh'd,  LX.  4
Therein  water,  III.  24.  VI.  4. XL
22.
Much,  but  not  turbid,  XXV.  10.

LXIL  15.
Bloody,  LXIL  7.
Blood,  III.  6.
Pituitary  gland fubjefled  to it,  of  a
yellow  and  brown  colour,  XII.
2.
With  mucus  within,  IV.  ig.
Contrafted and fubfiding. III.  6.
IV.  26.  35. IX.  20. XIL  2.
XXXVII.  30.  LVII.  14.
In  part  confum'd, IV.  ig. XII.  2.
XXV.  10.
Cerebrum,  the  fourth  ventricle  of,  as  it
is  call'd, longer  than the  na-
tural, LXII.  15.
Cerebrum, medulla  oblongata  of, laxer
than  ufual, XII.  2. XIV.  35.
XXL  33.  XLVII.  12.  LV.  IG.
LIX.  15.  LXIL  5.

Betwixt


Preternatural  APPEARANCES  in  dead  Bodies.


Betwixt -that  and  the  pia  mater,  wa-
ter, XLVIL  12.
The  crura  thereof  befet  with  round
corpufcles,  II.  20.
The corpora  ftriata of the  ventricles
having  medullary  points  inftead
of  ftrise,  XII.  2.
One  of  thefe  bodies more  protube-
rating  than  the  other,  IX.  g.
More  deprefs'd,  IX.  20.  XL  ir.
Of  a  dirty  brown  colour,  IX.  20.
Of  a  yellow  colour, and almofl:
fluid,  XI.  II.
With  a  red  tubercle,  ibid.
Separated  from  the  brain, XI.  2.
Lacerated by blood, or by pus,

III.  4. V.  2. LXII.  7.
More  lax  than  ufual,  LXII.  5.
Confum'd,  LX.  4.
Lacerated  by  blood,  LXII.  7.
Cerebrum, medulla  oblongata of, nates
and  tefces  of,  fomewhat  yellow,

xr.  II.

Lacerated,  LX.  4.
Pineal  gland  lying  thereon  of  a  brown

colour,  and  llightly  yellow,  VIlI.

12.
Of  a  rofy  colour,  X.  17.
Thin  and  Itrigofe,  VIII.  12.  LXiX.

10. LXX.  5.
Very  lax,  VIIL  12.  XXXVII.  30.

LIV.  39. .
Tumid,  X.  17.  XXXVII.  30.
Tumid  with  limpid  water,LXII.  15.

V^ith turbid waier, and yel-
lowifli  matter,  XXI.  24.
Larger  than  ufual,  with  longer  ra-
dicles, and more  of a mucous

nature,  LXI.  2.
Larger,  laxer, and  more globofe

than  ufual,  LIX.  15.
Larger,  firmer, and  whiter,  v^ith

fom.e  loculi,  as  it  were,  within,

I.  14.
More  firm, globular, and white,

XXIX.  12.
Wholly ronfift'ng of a hardifh

matter,  XI.  1 1.
Containing  little  pieces  of  hardifn

matter,  V.  II. VI.  12. X.  17.
' LXX.  5. _

H'aving a kind of yellow Lmdy

particles  adhering  to ir, I.  10,

III.  14. VII.  iq. VIIL  6.  9.

15.  XtV.35. '
VoL.IIL


Cerebrum, medulla oblongata of, its

nerves  flaccid,  V.  2.  XIV.  35.
About  fome  pairs  of  them  a  fanies,

LI.  33-
Cerebellum,  fomewhat  pale,  VI.  12.

Cortex  of,  fomewhat  pale  and  yel-

lowift,  XXV.  10.
Pretty  lax  in its fubflance, IH,  6.

24. V.  II. VII.  9.  15. VIIL

4.  9.  II.  15. XIL2. XV.  8.

XXL  29. XXV.  10. XXVI.

21. XXVII.  2. XXXVIL  30.

XLIL  II.  XLVIL  12.  LII.  8.

LIV.  39. 49.  LV.io.  LIX.  15.

LXII.  7.  9.
More  firm  than  ufual,  LXI.  2.  7.
Half  rotten  in  feme  places,  11.  22.

XIV.  3.
Having I'mall veffels and bl.oody

points  more  evident  than  ufual

internally,  V.  19.  LII.  30.
Having blood efFus'd internalK',

11.22.

Within  one  Jobe  only,  LX.  6.
Cerebellum,  fubftance  of,  grown  into  one
body  with  both  the  meninges  in
fome  places,  I.  14.
With  the  pia  mater,  LXII.  15.
Somewhat  injur'd  from  a  blow,  LII.

Scirrhous  in more  than one  half  of
it,  LXII.  15.
In the remaining,  part, with an
unufual  difpofuioii  of  both  fub-  '
fiances,  ibid.
Chefl. See  Thorax.
Clavicle,  fraflur'd,  LII.  35.
Clavicles,  part  of,  confum'd by  an  aneu-
rifm,  XXVI.  9.
Part  of  one,  XVII.  25.

Broken  and  eroded,  XVIII.  25.'
Clitoris,  glans  of,  entirely  fhut  up  under
the  fkin  of  the  pudendum  from
the  original  formation, XLVI. 20.
Cceliac artery, with bony icales inter-
nally, XL.  24.
Ulcerated  here  and (here  internallv,
ibid.
Cceliac,  branches of. See  Splenic,  Sto-
mach.
Colon  inteftine,  k-fs  frequent fitnation  of,
.IV. 16. 26. 30. XVL  8,  9.
XVII.  25. XIX.  19. XX.  i&.
XXL  33.  35.  47. XXIZ.  12.
XXXiV.  2,  &  ftq.  XLIIL  22.
4N  XLVIIL


INDEX referring to


XLVIII.  ^8. LII.  2. LVII.  z.

LIX.  12.1x11.5.  7.  LXX.7.
NarroWiiefs  and  contraction  of.  111.

2. IV. 16. 35. XVIII. 2.

XXIV.34.  XXIX.12.  XLVIII.

37,  38.  55- LIV.  39.  46. LV.

10. LXU.  7.
Diftenfion  of  with air, XX. 16.

XXI.  19,30.33  35,36-XLIlL

22.  LII.  2.  LV.  10,  II.
Few  cells  of>  III.  2.
Convoiutioiis  of,  very  large  at  its  ter-
mination, ibid.
Befet with febaceous tubercles,

LXVIII.  12.
Livid,  LII.  12.
Inflam'd fo as to be  almoll  black,

XXXV 8
Part  of,  green,  'XXXIV.  15.
Pinguedinous  appendages  of, fome-

wliat  livid,  LV.  11.
Coalition of, in a certain place,

XXXIX.  29.
Paries  of,  not  the  whole  tube, in-
tercepted within  a  hernia,  and

blackilh,  XXXIV.  15.
Beginning of, very red, XXXV.

10.
Of  a  bright  red  degenerating  into

brown,  LIV.  39.
Affeded  with  a  gangrene,  XXXI.

2. XXXIV.  25.
Ulcerated,  XXXl.  2.
Colon,  wound  of,  LiV.  20.  37.
On  the  furface,  LIV.  35.
Conception,  falfe. See  Mola.
Cranium,  integuments  of,  having  a  great

blacknefs  from  contufion,  LVII.

14.
Colour  of  a  little  chang'd in  fome

-places,  LII.  11.
Cranium,  ill  conformation  of,  I.  14.  XII,

2.  LIII.  26.  LXII.  15.
Narrower  than  it  ought  to  be.  III.  6.
In  refpedl:  of  the  cerebrum,  LI.  30.
More  capacious  than  it  ought  to  be

in  the  fame  refpefl,  LI.  9.
Thicker  than  ufual, III.  2. IV.  16.

XIV.  35.  XXVII.  2.  LX.  12.
Thinner  than  ufual,  IX.  20.
Hollow'd  out  internally  with  deeper

cavities  than  ufual,  LXIII.  8.
In  fome  places  confifting  of  a  very

thin  lamella,  ibid.
Having  the  fulci  for receiving  the


veflels  larger  and  deeper  on  one

fide  than  on  the  other,  LII.  38.
With  the  feat  of  the  futures  pellucid»

IX.  9.
Some  futures  of  the,  laxated,  LI.  19.

25,  26,  27,  28.  LII.  28.
Become  foft,  LVIII.  4,  5,
On  internal  furface  of  a  red  colour

degenerating  into  black, I.  12.

Protuberating  in  feveral  places,  as
if  from  a  new  acceflion  of  bony
matter,  XXVII.  2.
An  acute  prominence,  LII.  11.
Cranium  fiiTur'd,  LI.  42.  44.

With  a  very  long  fiffure,  LII.  35.

In  both  fides,  LI.  34.

With  two  fiffures,  one  of  which  was

very  long,  LII.  28.
Perforated,  IX.  20.  23-
Deprefs'd in  fome  places,  an acute
lamina  being prominent inter-
nally, LI.  34.
Fradur'd,  LI.  38. LII.  28.
Broken  into  fragments,  LIII.  37.
Fradur'd  tranfverfely  thro'  the  whole
bafis,  LII.  25.
Cranium,  both  the  oOa  petrofa  of,  unequal
on  their  furfaces,  LV.  10.
One  of  them  perforated  by  a  caries,
XIV.  3.5.
Os  ethmoides  of,  eroded,  and  there-
fore quite  pervious,  I.  6.
The  other  bones  thereof. See  under
their  proper  heads.
Cranium,  acid  odour  within,  XXI.  29.
All  the  veflels  within  diftended  with

blood,  LX.  10.
Water  within.  III.  14.  IV.  4.  13.
19.  28.  35.  V.  6.  VI.  6.  VIL
4.  9.  X.  17.  19.  XL  2.  13.
XVII. 23.  XXI.  7.  33.  XXIV.
6.  XXV.  10.  XXXI.  2.
XXXIV.23.  XXXV.16.  LVIL
10.  LXIX.  8.  16.
In  fmall  quantity, XX.  16. LI.

19,  20.
Of  a  pretty  thick  nature,  IV.  9.
Bloody,  LXIX.  15.
Blood  extravafated  therein, IX,  25.
XL  2.  XXVI.  17.  LIL25.
In  very  fmall  quantity,  LI.  25.
Pus  therein,  XIV.  3.  5.
Cranium,  bony  fragments  within  it  from
a  blow,  LI.  59.

Crural


Preternatural  APPEARANGfiS  In  dead  Bodies.


Crural  arteries,  hard  and  rigid,  LX.  12.
Crural  artery,  large  aneuriftn  of, in  the
upper  part  of  the  thigh,  L.  1 1.
Large  aneurifm  of  in  the  ham,  L.  55.
Tranfverfe  incifion  of,  wi;h its af-
fociated  vein, above the ham,
LIV.  46.
Crural  vein,  one  narrower  by  a  third-part

than  the  ©ther,  LVI.  10.
Cutis,  very  hard,  XLIX.  16.
Cutis,  much  water under it  univerfaliy,

XXXV m.  6.

A  fmall  quantity,  XXX.  I2.


D


klaphragm,  driven  very  high up  into

the  thorax,  XXXVIII.  34.
Deprefs'd on the  right fide, XVI.

26.  XXVI.  II.
On  the  left  fide,  XLV.  16.
Falling  downwards on both fides,

XXVI.  21.
Diaphragm, fomewhat  green  colour of,

LII.  4.
Lower  membrane  diftinguifh'd with

black  fpots,  XXXV.  2.
All  the  fmall  veflels  of,  confpicuous

by  reafon  of  their fullnefs, X.

13-

Subftance  of,  chang'd  on the  right

fide,  XVI.  26.
Center  of,  ting'd  on  both  fides  with
a  bilious  fpot,  XXX.  20.
In  part  bony,  LXX.  5.
Of  an  unufual  figure  and  fmallnefs,

LX.  5. -
Foramen  of, for vena cava, very
large,  LIV.  37.
For  cefophagus,  much  larger  than
ufual,  XXXV II.  30.
Diaphragm, inflammation of, VII. 13.
VIII.  25.  XXI.  35. LIII.  5.
Inflam'd,  as  it  v/ere,  XXI.  36.
Perforation  of  by  an  abfcefs of  the
liver,  XXXVI.  4.
By  a  fubje(?ted  aneurifm,  XL.  29.
Wound  of,  LIII.  3.  5.  LIV.  10.
Double,  LIII.  40.
Duodenum  inteftine,  longer  than  ufual  on
the  right  fide,  XLVIII.  38.
Much  wider  than  ufual,  ibid.
Near  to  the  ftomach,  hard  and  thick,
XXXIX.  26. .


Scirrhous,  XXX.  12.

Livid,  from  inflammation,  XXXIV,

9-
Of  a  black  colour,  XXX.  12.  16.
Duodenum,  internally  red,  as  if  from  in-
flammation, XXX.  7.

Witherofions,  LIX.  3.

With  gangrenous  erofions,  XXlST.
20.

With  the  traces  of  an  old  erofion,
XLIV.  21.

Containing  a  green  humour,  LIX.

12.

Drum  of  ear. See  Tympanum.


EAR,  bony  meatus  of,  broken,  LII.
25.
Perforated  by  a  caries,  XIV.  3.
Membrana  tympani  of, ting'd  with
blood,  XIX.  8.
Injur'd,  XIV.  5.
Ruptur'd,  LII.  25.  30.
Tympanum  of,  blood in  its  cavity,
ibid.
Sanious  matter,  VI.  4.  XIV,  5.
A purulent matter, as it were,
XXI.  24.
Emphyfema,  beginning  of  about  a  v/ound

of  the  abdomen,  LIV.  37.
Enterocele,  facculus  of. See  Herniae.
Epiplocele,  facculus  of. See  Herniae.
Excrefcences. See  Adipofe  Membrane,
Eye,  externally  putrefcent,  LI.  7.
Lefs  than  the  other,  LXIII.  6.
Become  lefs,  and of  the  figure  ©f  a

low  cone,  LII.  30.
Not  fuificiently  fpherical  in  its  figure,
LXIII.  2.
Eye, cornea  of, become  lefs, LII. 30.
LXIII.  6.
Not  natural  in  its  figure,  LII.  30.
Opaque,  XIII.  17.  LII.  30.  LXIIL

2.4.
Internally  unequal,  LXIII.  2.
Having  a  fmall  cavity  hollow'd
out,  XIII.  17.
Uvea  of,  not  entire,  LII.  30.

Iris  of,  adhering  to  the  cornea,XIII.

17.  LXIII.  2.
Pupils  of,  unequal,  LXIII.  10.
Choroides  of, very  clofely adhering
to  the  fclerotica,  LXIII,  2.
4  N  2  Retina


I N D E X referrlnsr to


Retina  of,  having a  bloody colour,
XIX.  8.
Being  in  a  very  bad  ftate,  LXIII.

4-

Become  bony,  LII.  30-
Another  oflification witliin the  eye,
XIII.  9.
Eye,  aqueous  humour  of,  fomev.^hat  black,
chryftalline,  and  vitreous  none,
LII.  30.
Chryftalline  humour  of, adhering  to
thecornea,  XIII.  17.  LXIII.  4.

Lefs  thick than -it ought to  be,
XIII.  15.  LXIII.  6.  10.

Much  diminifti'd,  XIII.  17.

Unequally  hollow'd  out  anteriorly,
LXIII.  2.

Imperfedt  at  the  fide,  XIII.  15.

Scarcely a fourth part  of it re-
maining, LXIII.  4.

Anteriorly  white, and whitilh  in
other  parts,  LXIII.  6.

White  and  opaque,  XIII.  17.

Somewhat  opaque,  LXIII.  10.

Made  up  of  two  fubftances,  white
and  brown,  XIIL  15.

Of a  dirty yellow colour inter-
nally, iijid.

Containing  a  feries  of  black  par-
ticles internally,  LXIII.  6.

Containing  more  than  natural of

the  aqueous  humour,  ibid.
Softer  than  it  ought  to  be,  XIII.

Hard,  and  humid,  LXIII.  10.
Hard,  and  dry,  ibid.
Eye,  vitreous  humour  of,  in  great  meafure
converted  into  water,  LXIII.  6^
Like  a  tough  pituita,  XIII.  15.
In  a  very  bad  ftate,  LXIII.  4.
Eye,  blind,  ftate  of,  XIII.  8,  9. LII.  30.

LXIII.  2.  4.  6.  10.
Eye,  optic  nerve  of. See  Nerve.
Eye,  coalition  of its trochlearis mufcle

with  the  trochlea,  LXVII.  9.
Eye,  fornix  or  arch of  its  orbit,  flightly
eroded,  LI.  7.


ACE of carcafe, rofy colour of,

XIV.  3.
Somewhat  red,  XXVI.  33.
Red  and  livid,  XXI.  30.


A  little  livid,  XXVI.  31.

Livid, XVIII.  25. XIX.  3.  5.  7;,

XXI.  g. XXIV.  13..  XXV.  2.

XXVL.  35,.
Black,  and foon  after pale, XLII.

T 34-

Like that  -of a fufFocated perfun,
LIII.  26.
Face  of  a  carcafe,  fomewhat  tumid,  XX  VI.

33-
Turgid,  XVIIT.  25.  XXV.  2.
Become  disfigur'd,  LIV.  20.
Face,  mufcles  of,  all  of  a  bright  red  co-
lour degenerating into brown,
LII.  30.
Fat,  very  tenacious  in  fome  places,  LXIX.

2.
Fat,  colour  of,  brown.  III.  26.

Globe  of  fat  under  the  Ikin  at  the
enfiform  cartilage,  of  the  bignefs
of  afift,  XIX.  58.
Femur,  both  bones  of,  curv'd  anteriorly,
LXIX.  10.
One  more  curv'd  and thicker  than  is
natural,  LX.  6.
Turn'd  to  the  e:^.ernal  fide,  ibid.
Head  of,  not  entire,  pull'd  away  and
left  within  the  acetabulum,  LVI.
10.
Pull'd  away  entire and  left  there,

LVI.  9.
Conic and longer than ufual,

LXIX.  10.
Made  almoft  flat,  and  rather-larger

than  ufuat,  LVI.  12.
Deprefs'd,  diminifli'd,  not  fmootb,

LVI.  14.
Not  round,  but  deprefs'd,  and  un-
equal, LVII.  2.
Lefs  broad  than  ufual  at  its  lower

parr,  LX.  6.
Without  a ligament, and in an
acetabulum  not  natural, LVI.
12.  14.
Head  of, having its cartilage con-
tus'd,  as  it  were,  LVI.  "18.
Lurid,  bro  vn,  and  in  fome  places

red,  LXIX.  20.
Lurid, not  fmooth, and in part

deficient,  LVII.  2.
With its marrow almoft watry,
LXIX.  10.
Head  of,  with  its  round  ligament  re-
lax'd,  and  luxated  from  thence.
LVI.  7.

Lefs


Preternatural  APPEARANCES  in  dead  Bodies.


Lefs  thick and firm than ufua],

LVI.  17.
Flaccid,  LXIX.  10.
Ting'd  with  a  pale  red,  LVI.  17.
Head  of,  with  its cervix  thiclten'd,
LX.  6.
Apparently  iliorter  on  one  fide  than

the  other, LVI.  20,  21.
Broken,  LVI.  9,
Confum'd,  LVI.  10.
Femur, trochanter larger of, thicken'd,

LX.  6.
Femur,  exoftofis  of  near  its  lower  heads,
and the cells of that  exoftofis
overflowing with a liquid and
yellow  oil,  L.  60.
Femur,  lower  heads  of,  eroded,  L.  55.
One  of  them  longer  than  it  ought  to
be,  LVI.  26.
With  its cartilaginous  cruft  exte-
nuated, LVIl.  14,
Fibula,  upper  part  of,  eroded,  L.  55.
Fingers,  a  tartareous  matter  at  their  joints,
■  XL.  2.

Eoetor  of  carcafe,  more  difagreeable  than
ufual,  VIII.  23.  XVII.  23.
XVni.  34.  XIX.  20.  XXIV.
II.  XXVII.  2.  XLIII  27.  LL
57.  LI[.2.  15.  LIV.  20.  LXV.
8.
Such  as proceeds from  acid matter,

XXV.  16.
Dead,  XX  9. XLVIII.  5.  7.  9.  18.
Head  and neck  of,  black  as  if  from

contufion,  XLVIII.  9.
With  its  head  comprels'd,  as  it  were,

on  tiie  ildcs,  XLVIII.  5.
With  its  vifcera  bloodlefs,  ibid.
Placenta  of,  with  large  blackiHi  globes,
as  it  were,,  be'neath,  ibid.
Containing  a  white  body,  XLVIII.

23-
Very  much  extenuated,  XLVIII.

18.
Navel-flring  of,very  nender,XLVIIL
5.  18.
Foot,  fubcutaneous  gland  of,  L.  15.
Forehead,  bone  of. See  Frontis  is.
Frontis os, fomewhat rough externally,
LI.  14.
Injur'd  externally,  LI.  15.
With  an  external  chink,  LII.  23.
With  external  chinks  and  a cavity,

LI.  12.
FiiTur'd,  LI.  17.  39.  LII.  32.


Throughout  with a part of the
fphenoid,  LII.  34.
Deprefs'd,  LI.  30.

With an unequal fcale protube-
rating  inwards,  ibid.  &c  33.  39.
Broken  afunder,  LI.  39.

In  the  orbit  of  the  eye,  LI.  37.
Perforated  in the orbit  of  tlie eye,
LL57.


ALL-bladder.  See  Liver.
Glands.  See  Afpera  arteria.  Axil-
lary, Inguinal,  Jugular,  Maxil-
lary, Mefenteric,  Parotid,  Pi-
neal, Pituitary,  Proftate,  •Sali-
vary, Thymus,  Thyroid,  Ton-
fil.
Glands  of  Cowper. See  Urethra.

Mucilaginous. See  Knee.
Glands,  mofl:  of  them  difeas'd, XXIX.

12.
Gummata. See  Tumours..


H


'  AND  S,.  a  certain  mufcle  of,  very
flender  and  tendinous,  on  the
right  fide,  but  not  fo  on  the  left,
LX.  6-

Fingers of,  ^contrafted and rigid,
XXVII.  2.
Very  rigid,  LXII.  5.
Hand, palm of, vvfith fome tendons,
mufcles, and nerves wounded
and  injur'd,  LIV.  44.
Heart,  double, XLVIII.  57.

Differing  from  its  ufual  form,  XVII,

12.  LX.  8.
Plac'd  lower  and  more  to  the  left  fide
than  ufual,  XVII.  25.
Heart,  large,  III.  26.  IV.  2.  16.  V.  19.
XVi.  6.  XVII.  23.  25. 'XVIIL
2.  34.  XX.  35.  XXL  30.
XXIIL 4. XXVI. 15. 91.

xxvn.  28. xxxviL  30.

XLII.  34.  XL  ill.  17.  22.
XLIV.  3.  19.  XLV.  16.  LIV.
37.  LXIV.  5.  19.  LXVI.  9.
LXX.  10.
Very  large,  XVIL  6.  8.  21.  XVIIf.
6.  14.28,3c.  XXI. 49.  XXIV,

13-


INDEX referring to


17.  xxvii.  12.  xxxvin.

12. XL.  23. LIII.  9. LVl.

SmallVxXVr.  17.  LX.  8.
Very  fmall,  XXVII.  12.  XXX.  10.
L.  4.  LXX.  5.
Ikart, very far, ill. 20. XVI. 36.
XXVII.  2.  XXXV.  18.  XLIII.
17.-LII.  34.
Almoil univerlally cover'd with a

thick  and  hard  fat,  LXV.  7.
"With  a  fat  partly  unequal,  and  of  a
brown colour  mix'd with  red,
XLV.  23.
With  a  little  fat,  XIV.  35.
Entirely  deftitute  of  fat,  XLIX.  18.

LXX  5.
Cover'd  with miliary  granules,  as  it
were,  XLIX.  4.
With  white  concretions  in  feveral

paits,  XX.  36.  51.
And  having  an  appearance  of  ero-

fion,  XXI.  2.  XLIII.  17.
With  a  kind  of  puriform  matter,

XLIII.  17.
With a polypous pfeudo-mem-

brana,  XLV.  16.
With a certain reticular body,
XX.  20.
Heart, furface of, lurid and unequal,
XLIX.  18.
Unequal, and in a manner  cor-
roded, LIII.  29.
Slightly  eroded,  XVI.  17.  43.
With  a pretty  large bony fcale,

XXVII.  16.
With  vefTels  diftended  with  blood,
and  almoft  varicous.  III.  26.
XVIII.  2.  30.  XIX.  49.  XXI.
35.  49.  XXXVI.  23.  LX.  4.
LXX.  5.
With  varicous  veffels,  XXXVIII.

10.
With  a  kind  of  tuptur'd  hydatid,

III.  26.
With a large hydatid pendulous

from  its  apex,  XXV.  15.
With a cyftic tumour, XXI.

4-
With the apex  ilightly inflam'd,

XVI.  40.
Heart,  fomewhat  green,  LII.  4.

With  its  membrane  become  thicken'd,
XXIV.  2.
Eroded,  XXXVIII.  10.


Heart,  Wholly  or  partly  adhering  to  the

pericardium. See  Pericardium.
Heart,  flaccid,  IV.  4.  26.  V.  u.  19. X.
II.  XI.  II.  XVIII.  14. XXL
30. XXVIL  16. XXXIV.  18.
XXXV.  16. LH.  2. LVL  26.
LVIII.  13.  LX.  4.
Very  flaccid, XI. 13. XXI.  49.
XXX.  14.  XXXI.  2.  XLVm.
44.  LIII.  29.
Very  hard,  XXVI.  11.  31.
Contradled  into  itfelf, XXVI.  11.
Heart,  fubltance  of,  pallid,  LXX.  9.

Univprfally  of  a  cineritious  colour
degenerating into lividnefs,
XXV.  10.
Having  a  pretty large  bony  fub-
ftance  within  it,  XXVII.  2.
Parietes  of,  thick,  XLIV.  19.
Heart,  ventricles  of,  chang'd  one  into  the
other,  as  it  were,  XVII.  12.
Dilated, XVIII.  28.  30.  34. XXI.
34.49. XXIII.  6. XL.  23.
L,V1.  17.  LXIV.  5.  12.
Full of  black and grumous  blood,
XXX.  7.
Coagulated blood, XXII. 16.

XLVni.  15. XLIX.  2.
Polypous  concretions,  LXX.  10.
Containing  a  little  frothy  and  fluid
blood,  LI.  50.
Pretty  thick  blood,  VI.  8.
Scarcely  any  blood, XXVI. 3c.

LIII.  33.
No  blood, XXII.  4. XXVI.  13.
17.  XXIX.  18.  LIX.  12.
Heart,  right  ventricle  of,  dilated,  XVIII.
6.  XXV.  2.
With its parietes extenuated,
XXVII.  28. XXIX.  20.  XL,

23-
With its columnae thicken'd,

LXIV.  5.
With  fcarely  any  cavity,  by  reafon

of the entangled flate of  its

fibres,  XXVII.  28.
Diftended  with  a  great  quantity  of

blood,  XXV.  2.  XLIX.  24.
Therein  blood  with  air-bubbles,  LIV.

49.  LVII.  10.
Scarcely  any  blood, XLVIII.  44.

LVII.  10.
A  remarkable  polypous  concretion,

XXV.  2.  XXXIV.  23.
Heart,  left  ventricle  of, dilated, XVII.

21.


Preternatural APPEARANCES  in  dead  Bodies.


21.  xvm.  8.  XXVI.  21.  33.

XXVIII.  12.  28. XLV.  23.
LVI.  17.  LXIV.  15.

With  its parietes  extenuated,  XVII.
2 J.  XVIII.  2.
Thicken'd,  XXIX.  20. LVI.  17.
Thicken'd  and harden'd, XXV.

12.  XL.  23.
Become  tendinous  in  feveral  places,
XLV.  23.
With  its  columnse  thicken'd,  XXV.
12.  XLV.  23.
Become  tendinous,  XLV.  23.
In  a  manner  inflam'd,  IV.  21.
Therein an  external,  and  not  recent,
erofion,  XXVII.  8.
Some remains of internal erofion,

XXIV.  18.
A  great  quantity  of  diftending  blood,
XXVII.  12.
Of  fluid  blood,  XL.  4.
Scarcely  any  blood,  XXV.  10.
No  blood, XXI.  3. XXXVIII.  30.
XLVIII.  44.
Heart, auricles of, dilated, XVIII.  2.
XXIII.  6.  LXIV.  5.
Turgid  with  blood, III.26.  X^IIL
6.  XXXVIII.  12.
Therein  none,  or  fcarcely  any  blood,

XXIX.  18.  XLVIII.  44.
Remarkable  polypous  concretions,

VI.  12. VII.  II.
Heart,  right  auricle  of,  mark'd  with  white

fpots  externally.  III.  26.
Befet with febaceous granules,

LXVIIL  12.
With  a  bony  fcale,  XXVII.  16.
Dilated, XVIII.  8. XXI. 49.

XL.  23.  LVI.  7.
Very  much  dilated, XVII.  6.  8.

10.  XVIII.  6.  XXV.  2.
Much  dilated  with  air,  VIII.  23,24.

By  a  polypous  concretion,  XX.
63.  XXI.  3.
Diftended  with  a  very  great  quan-
tity of  blood,  XVII.  10. XXL

35.  XLV.  23.  LVI.  17.
With  extenuated  parietes,  XL.  23.
Heart,  left  auricle  of,  much  longer  than

it  is  wont  to  be,  XXI.  4.
Larger  than  ufua],  XXIII.  6.
Very much dilated, XXXVIII.

10.
Contrafted,  XXVI.  21.
Its  adjacent  linus  larger  than  ufual.


and more internally unequal,
XVIII.  34.
Very  large,  LXIV.  7.
Heart,  foramen  ovale  of,  without  the  leaft

traces  of  a  valve,  XLVIII.  62.
Heart,  valves  of,  all  fmall,  LX.  8.

One  of  them  having  an  offification,
XXX.  12.
Sigmoid  and  femilunar  valves  of. See

Pulmonary  artery.  Aorta.
Valvulas  tricufpides  &  mitrales,  fome-
what  hard,  XLVII.  16.
Here and there  thick,  hard, and

white,  XIV.  35.
With  a  kind  of  glandular  border,
HI.  4.  X.  ig.^XXVL  17.
Valvulss tricufpides of, remarkably
unequal  with  one  another,X  VII.
12.
Valvulas  mitrales, thicken'd,  XXI. 15.
XXV.  10.  XXVi.  33.  XLVIIL

38-
With  a  tuberous  border,  XXIX.

12.  XL.  23.  LXIV.  2.
Somewhat-hard,  or  hard, IV.  26.

VII.  9.  XXVI.  33.
Bony,  XXVII.  2.
Enlarg'd  and  thicken'd,  XL.  23.
With a cineritious excrefcence,.
-XI.  II.
One  of  them  of  a  cartilaginous  hard-

nefs  in  fome  pkces,  LXIV.  lo.
Pretty  hard,  HI.  26.
With  oflification,  XLIL  34.  LVL

With  an  orifice  and  interftice  be-
twixt its  membranes,  XXIil.  6.
Heart, coronary arteries of, with ver}'
large  orifices,  LXX.  10.
Very  much  dilated,  XXVII.  28.
One  of  them  bony,  XXIV.  16.
Heart,  coronary  vein of,  a  valve  fix'd to
its  orifice  all round, and  only
pierc'd  through  with, fmall fora-
mina, III.  20.
A  {lender  filament  of  the  valve  in
the  fame  place,  LXVI.  g.
Heart,  fili'd  with  blood,  XIX.  49. XXI
34.  49.  XXIIL  6.  LXIV.  in.
Extremely  full,  XLVIII.  62.  LXVI.

J7-
Therein  a  fluid  and  frothy  bloodj  Lllf
18. LIV.  16.
No  blood"  at  all, LIV.  46. LXIX,

4. ■

A  re-


I N D EX referring to


A  remarkable polyoous  concretion,

IV. 21. VII.  4. XX. 63.

XLIX.  10.  24.  LVII.  14.
Polypous  concretions  on  both  fides,

VII.4.  9.  II.  XI.  11.22.  XiV.

35.
Which refifted diftradiion very

much,  XLIII.28.  XLVIII.38.
Some  on  the  right  fide,  not  on  the

left,  V.  II. VI.  10. X.  7.  II.

XXI.  3. XXX.  4. XL.  4.
XLIX.  6.  8.  10. LXII.  5.

Etviceverfa,  XXf.47.  XXXVIII.

Th'e  larger  on  the  right  fide,  X.  5.
XVI.  2. XX.  2,  3. 5. 24.  32,

33-  35>  36-  39-  41-  43-  47-  49-
51.  55.  59.  61. XXi.  19.  23.

XXII.  15.  22.  XXIV.  6.  13.  18.
XXV.  4.  XXX.  2.  XXXVIIL

4.  XLI.  4. XLII.  34. XLin.

5.  LI.  6.  20.  Llll.g.  16.  LIV.
26.  LX.  4.

Et  vice  verfa, VII.  4. XVI.  17.

XX.  26. XXI.  30.  32. LVI,
10.

Larger  about  the  auricles  than  the
arteries, X.  13. XX,  2,  3-  51.

XXI.  32.

Not  altogether  fo, XX.  59,
XXI.  23.
Remarkable  ones,  produc'd  into  all
the  larger  vefiTels  that  communi-
cate with the heart, VI. 12.
VII.  13.  LXIV.  2.

Into  the  pulmonary  artery,  X.

7-
Keare,  ulcer  of,  XXV.  17.

Rupture  in  left  ventricle  cf,  XXVII.

2.  5.  8.  LXIV.  15.
Wound  of  the  fame  ventricle,  LIU.
26.
Of  the  right,  LIII.  3.  LXIX.  4.
Hernia,  crural,  facculus  of,  XXXIV.  15.
Enterocele,  facculus  of,  XXXVIIL
2.
Gangrenous,  V.  19. XXXIV.  5.

9-
With  an  orifice  three  inches  wide,

XXVI.  37.
-Epiplocele,  facculus  of,  XXI.  15.  19.

XXXIV.  g.
Omphalocele,  facculus  of,  XXXIV.

II.
Ofcheocele,  fiicculus  of,  XLII.  34.


Hydatids,  large. See  Kidnles. ,
Hyoides  os, fmall watery tumour con*

nedled  to,  L.  18.
Hypogafl:ric  arteries,  wider  and  harder  than

ufual,  and not  without  offifica-

tion,  LVL  18.


AW. See  Maxilla.
Jejunum  inteftine,  mark'd  with  fmall
fpots  of a red  colour degene-
rating into  lividnefs,  IV.  26.
Ileum  inteftine, with unufual folds  and
convolutions, XXI.  19., XXXIX,

29-
With  a  part  of  it  defcending  deeper

than ufual into the pelvis,

LXII.  5.
The  whole  of  it  drawn  up  above  the

navel,  and  heap'd  up  into  a  pro-

tuberating tumour, XXXIX.

26.
In  great  mcafure  inflam'd,  XXXIV.

"23-
A  little  livid  in  part,  LXIV.  J5.
Beginning  to  be  livid,  XXXV.  2.
For  confiderable trades of a black

and  red  colour,  XXI.  g.
Blackidi in fome part, XLI. 10.

XLIII.  27.

AfFefted  with  a  gangrene,  XXXI.  2.

XXXiV.g.  II.  18.  XXXV.  6;

Ileum  inteftine,  of  a  red  colour  internally,

■  in  fome  places,  degenerating  into

lividnefs, and tumid. III. 4.

XIX.  17.  18.

Inflam'd at  the  termination,  XVII.

ig.
Mark'd  with  black  fpots  at  the  termi-
nation, XLIX.  8.
Of  a  bright  red  colour  degenerating

into  brown,  LIV.  3g.
Gangrenous,  XXXI.  2.
Ulcerated,  ibid.
Having glands  internally full of a
kind  of  white  matter,  XXXV.  6.
Two  prominsnces of  a red fub^
ftance,  XIV.  35.
Ileum  inteftine,  wounded,  LIV.  33.

Lacerated  in  three  places  by  mufquet-
balls,  LIV.  20.
Transfix'd,  LIV.  31.
Quite cut afunder tranfverfely,
LIV,  14.

Ileum


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead Bodies-.


Ileum  inteftine,  ulcer  of,  IV.  26.

Foramen  of,  XXXIV.  9.
Iliac  region,  black,  LIV.  26.

Veffels, cover'd with a chain of
glands,  XLIX.  18.
More  flender  on one  fide  than  on
the  other,  XLVI.  17.
Iliac  arteries,  dilated,  XXXVIII.  40.

One  of  them  more  narrow  than  na-
tural,and  having  thinnerparietes,
LVI.  18.
Both very tortuous, XIX. 58.
XXXVII.  30. XL.  23. XLIL
34.  XLIX.  18.  LX.  4.
One  of  them,  XLIII.  22.
Both  very  hard,  LVII.  10.
Internally  rugous  and  brown,  XLIIL
t  22.

Having  parallel  lines  in  a  longitu  ■
dinal  diredion,  LXIV.  2.
Bony  fcales,  XXIV.  16.
XXXVII.  30.  XL.  23,  24.
XLU.  II.  XLIII.  17.  LX.
4.  6.  12.  LXVII.  II  14.
Bony  hardnefs  and  white  fpots,

XLII.  34.
Beginning  of  offificationsjLXIV.

7-
Bloody  erofions,  LXVII,  14.
J.lia<;  veins, very much diftended with
blood,  VIII.  27.
Affefted  with  a  kind  of  corruga-
tion, XL.  23.
One  of  them  twice  as long as  the
other,  XLVIII.  34.
Wider  than  ufual  ;  the  other  con-
trafted  by  the  coalition  of  the
parietes  with each other, and
opening by fmall orifices into
the  cava, LVI.  10.
The  external of  them harder than
ufual, by reafon of its coats
being  thicken'd, and fume in-
ternal little chords, XXXVI.

23-

Ilia  oiTa,  junflurcs of, Vi'ith the  facrum
relax'd,  XLVIII.  44.
The margin of one broken into

fmall  pieces,  LIV.  4.  22.
The  internal  furface  of  one  covei'J
by  gangrenous  mufcles, XXXIV.
25.
Innominatum  os,  one  larger  and  thicker
than  ufual,  LXlX.  10.
More  prominent  anteriorly,  LVI.  10.
Vol.  III.


Pus  betwixt  it  aftd  the  peritonaeum.

See  Peritonsum.
Having  a  very  deep  acetabulum,  the
furface  of  which  was  that  of  a
conic  cavity,  and  the  orifice  very-
large,  LXIX.  10.
A  bloody  acetabulum,  LVII.  2.
An  acetabulum  with  a  bony  fuper-
ficieSj  LXIX.  10.
With a fupercilium including
two  bony  laminae,  LVII.  2.
With  the  cartilage  of  the  acetabulum
here  and  there  eroded,  LVI.  id.
Brown,  lurid,  and  in  feme  places
red,  LXIX.  10.
With the  natural acetabulum  dimi-
nilh'd,  and a  nsw  one  form'd,,
LVI.  12."  14.
With  the mucilaginous gland, and
the  cavity  for it  to  lie  in,  de-
ficient, LIX.  10.
The  mucilaginous  gland  of  one  en-
larg'd,  ibid.
Inguinal  glands,  become  preternatural  or
thicker  than ufual, XXI. ig,
XXXIV.  18.
Intercoilal  mufcles,  black  from  inflamma-
tion, as  if  bruis'd,  XXI.  45. .
Intercoftal  veffels,  broken  through, LIL

34,  35-  Lin.  18.
Inteftines, connected to one another^
XVII.  17.  XL.  9.
By  a  kind  of -flaccid  membranes-,
X.  13.
Drawn  up  to  the  mefentery,  LIXo

7.  18.
Driven  upwards,  LVI.  12.
Almofl:  all  drawn  up  under  the  livery
and  connected  with  it  by  a  kind
of  membrane  that  cover'd  them,
LXVII.  17.
In  a  difturb'd  fituatiori,  XLV.  23.
Thinner  than  ufual,  LXX.  5,
Very much contrasted, XXX.  7,

XXXIX.  33.  XLIX.  14.
With  coats  fomewhat  rigid,  and  il-
moft  dried  up,  LIX.  18.
Lax,  XLIV.  21.  LXVI1I.6.
Ouite empty and almoft coUaps'd^

XXXVIII.  24.
Diftended  with  air,  V.  ig,  VIl.  11.
VIIL  25.  27.  X.  II.  XI.  i^.
XVlLio.  XXL  9.  36.  XXlf.
10.  22.  XXX.  4.  XXXI.  s-
XXXIV.  5.  XXXVI.  20.
4O  XXXV  uJ.


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead Bodies.

XXXVIII. 22. XLV. 23.

XLVIII.  28.  32.  LII.  8.  LIII.

16.18,  LIV.  16.35. LV.  10.
Very much diftended with air,

XLVIII.  44.  LIV.  2.  49.
Diftended  with  hard  excrements,  IV.


30.
Containing much seruginous, and,
by experiment, poifonous  bile,
LIX.  18.
Bloody  matter,  XXIX.  10.
A livid ferum mix'd with pus,

XXXIV.  25.
A  black  humour,  LIII.  18.
A  very  black  matter,  XXXI.  5.
Smelling  more  ofFenfively  than  ufual,
XXL  3.  9.  17. XXVIII.  12.
Inteftines,  having blood very clofely  ad-
hering to  their  furface, LIII.  3.
Perfeaiypallid,XXII.lo.XXXVIIL

16.
Of  a  preternatural  colour  anteriorly,

XXX.  4.
Ting'd  with  the  colour  of  the  bile  to
a  great  extent  externally,  LXV.

With  their  veins  very  much  diftended,

LIX.  12.
Here  and  there  red,  XXXV.  2.
Of  a  yellow  colour  degenerating  into

brown,  LXVI.  9.
Somewhat  livid,  XLl.  13.  XLII.  20.

LXX.  7.
Livid, XXVIII.  12. XXIX. 14.

XXXIX.  29.  XL.  2.
Here  and  there,  LXX.  5.
Black,  as if from  contufion, LIV.

22.
Here and there red, livid, black,

XXXIV.  25.
Red,  XXXV.  2.
Inflam'd,  as  it  were,  XXXVIII.  52.

XLIV.  21.
SufFus'd with  a  flight inflammatory

rednefs, VL  8. VII.  9. 11.

VIII.  8.
In  feme  places, XXI.  3. XXVI.

Inflam'd,  XXXI  25.  XXXIV.  7.  21.
XXX  v.  12.
Here  and  there,  LIX.  15.
All very much inflam'd and red,

XXIX.  10. LIV.  20.
Of  a red colour  degenerating into
green,  LXV.  8.


Some  of  them  aff^efled with  a  gan-
grene, XXXV.  J  8.
Of a blackifh  colour, XXXVIII.

30-

Black  in  moft  places,  LIV.  36.

Perforated  in  many  places,  XXXF.
2.

Externally  unequal  with  little  tu-
bercles, XXII.  18,  XXXVIII.

34-
With  hydatids,  XXXVIII.  34.  35.
Inteftines,  fmall. See  Duodenum,  Jeju-
num, Ileum.
Extended within  the lower  part  of

the  pelvis,  XXXV.  10.
Conneded clofely to one another,

and  contrafted into  one heap,

XXXIX.  26.
Some  of  them  connected  together  by

a  kind  of  cartilaginous  fubftance.

XXXIX.  29.
Very  ftreight  in  fome  places,  XXXV.

18.
Very  much  diftended  with  air,  LIV.

39-
In  the  greater  part,  XXXVIII.  34.

LXII.  5. '
Some  of them full of  globules  of

faeces,  XXXIX.  29.
Diftended  with  a  fluid  and  yellowifli

matter,  XXXIV.  9.  11.  18.
Inteftines,  fmall,  unequal  in  fome  places

with  very  fmall  tubercles  full  of

air,  XXVI.  21.
Livid,  XLVIII.  38.

In  a  certain  place,  LIII.  37.
Of  a  cineritious colour  degenerating

into  brown,  LIV.  46.
Variegated  with  a  livid colour,  IV.

Somewhat red and flightly livid,

XXVI.  31.
Of  a  brown  colour  degenerating  into

lividnefs,  XVIII.  2.
In  fome  places  brown,  and  in  others

red,  ibid.
Somewhat  red  and  dilated,  XVI.  38.

XXXIV.  33.
Somewhat  red,  LXIV.  5.
Some  of  them  partly  red,  XLV.  23.
Very  red,  XXVI.  13.
Red for conflderable fpaces, XXI.

17-
Of  a  bloody  colour  here  and  there,

in  2.

Beginning


INDEX referring to


Beginning  to be  inflam'd in a  few
places, XXI.  23.  35. XLVII.

In a manner inflam'd, XXI. /Lg.

XLVill.  37.  LII.  8.
Inflam'd  in  a  certain  place,  V.  iq.
Inflam'd  in the  greater  part, XX.

43-
Here  and there, XXXIV.  9. n.

18.  XXXIX.  26.
Some  of  them almofl black, as it
•  were,  XXXVIII.  15.

Almofl:  all  of  them  of  a  red colour

inclining  to  black,  XXXV.  16.

Blackilh  in  fome  places,  XXXVIil.

34-
Almofl:  all  of  them,  XXXIX.  26.
Black  in a certain place,  as  if  from

contufion,  LIV.  41.
Gangrenous,  V.  19.
Black,  XXXIV.  5.
All  very  black,  XXXV.  14.
Inteftines,  fmall,  mark'd  for  fome  extent
internally with bloody fpots,

XXXIV.  33.
Internally  yellow,  LXII.  5.

With  the  glands  of  Peyerus  enlarged,

LXVllI.  12.
With  an  intus-fufception,  XXXIV.

33- ,
Inteftines,  fmall,  fome  in  the  facculus  of
a  hernia, V.  ig. XXVI.  37.

XXXV.  5.  9.  II.  XLIII.  4,  5.

With a  part  of  their  parietes  only,

XXXIV.  18.

Strongly  annex'd  to  the  tefticle,  V.
2.
Inteftines,  large. See  Caecum  of  the  an-
cients. Colon,  Re£tum.

Narrow,  XLIX.  14.

Red in fome places, XIV. 35.

XXXV.  10. LXV.  5.
Inflam'd,  XXIV.  18.
Black,  XXXI.  14.

With  bloody  glands,  ibid.
With  glands  eroded,  ibid.
Their  appendicula  vermiformis, none,
XXVI.  37. ,
Somewhat  turgid  and  red,  XXX.

7-
In  the  fcrotum,  XLIII.  2.
Jugular glands, indurated, XVII. la,
XXIX.  12.
Hard  and  fwollen,  LV.  20.


Enlarg'd,  p^p.rticularly  the  two  larger
ones,  and  purulent,  XXIX.  12.
Jugular veins, internal,  wider than na-
tural, VIII.  ir.  XLIII.  22.
Very  much difl:ended with  b'ood,
IV.  24.
Internal  and  external,  diflended  wi  h
blood,  XIX.  49.
Jugular  vein  on the  left  fide,  coat  of  it
grown  very  thick,  XVII,  ig.


K


KIDNIES,  one  only,  XXV  4.
Kidnies, larger than natural,
XXXVI.  20. XLI.  4. XLII.
20.  28. XLVI.  17. XLVIII.

32-
One  of  them  very  large,  LVII.  10.
Weighing, together with its

thicken'd coats, fix-and-thirty

ounces,  LXVIII.  12.
Kidnies,  fmall,  XXXVIIL  12. XL.

22,  23. XLIL 2. XLIV.

15-
One  much  lefs  than  the  other,  XL.
24.
By  one  half,  XII.  2.
Kidnies,  longer  than natural, XXXVT.

23.  XLIV.  19.  LVI.io LVil.
10.

One  longer than the  other, LX.
12.
Shorter  and  curvM  into  itfelf,  X.

. . ^9-
Kidnies,  one  of  them  very  large,  and  the
other  more  contracted  than  ufual,
XLII.  40.
One of  them larger than natural,
and  the  other  almofl:  confum'd,
XL.  12.  18.
One  of  them  much narrower  than

the  other,  XLVilL  35.
One  round,  and  difeas'd  by  calculi  3
the  other  twice  as  big  as  is  na-
tural, IX.  12.
Kidnies,  unufual  figure  of,  XLII.  2.
Kidney,  coats  of, join'd one with  ano-
ther, thicken'd,  and  indurated,
XLII.  20.
Proper  coat  of,  indurated,  XXXVlI.
28.
Blood extravafated under it,
XXXIV,  21.
4  O  2 .  Kidnies,


I N D E X referring to


Kidnies,  adipofe  coat  of,  monftroufly  thick
from the fteatomatous matter,
LXVIII.  12.
Stuff'd  up  with  hard  fat,  IV.  19.
In  one  of  them  with  a  fomewhat
livid  fat, LV.  11.
K^idnies,  pallid,  XLII.  28.

Not  in  a  good  ftate  externally, LXIV.

7-
Not very found in their furface,

XLVIII.  34.  LX.  12.
Surface  of,  furrow'd,  LXX.  7.  9.
Cicatriz'd,  or  apparently  fo,  XL.
21.  XLII.  39.
One, XXVII.  2. XXIX.  12.
XL.  21.  23.  XLII.  39.  LVI.
10.  LX.  4.
Unequal,  IV.  19.  XL,  21,22,23,
24.  XLVIII.  37.  LX.  4.
One,  XLVL20.

From  fanious protuberances,
XLII.  2.
Both  made  unequal  on  their  fur-
faces by fo  many fmall hemi-
fpheres,  as  it  were,  XLIV.  15.
One,  XLIL  13.
Surface  ulcerated  in  one,  XXVII,  2.
XLII.  20.
Hollow'd  out  with  deep  hydatids,
LXIX.  2.
Kidnies,  to  one  of,  a  morbid  gland  lying

near  externally,  XVII,  25.
Kidnies,  more  hard,  more  firm,  and  com-
padt  than  ufual,  XLIV.  15.
One  of  them,  XLII.  20.
Both  more  foft  and lax than  is  na-
tural, IV.  2. XXVII. 2.  28.
LV.  10.
One,  XXI.  36,  XLII.  13.
W^ith  their  cavities  eniarg'd,  and  their

fubftances  diminifh'd,  IV.  19.
With  a  e;reat  quantity  of  fat  within,
XLVI.  29.
Kidnies,  internal Itrudure  of, confus'd^
XLII.  II.
Not  without  marks  of  ulceration,

IV.  19.
With  fanies  externally,  XXXVI,

20.

With  a  little  pus  within,  ibid.  &
X.  13.
Kidnies,  one  inflam'd in feme meafure,
XVII.  10.
Smelling  ofFenfively, XL.  24.
Abounding  v/ith  puf,  XLII.  ao.  28,
4


Diftended  with  pus  and  urine,  XLII.

15-

Suppurated,  XLII.  25.
Half-corrupted,  XLII.  28,

Almoft  the  whole  fubftance  in  one
being  utterly  confum'd,  XL.  12.
18.  XLIL  13.
With  the  cells  internally  diftended
with  pus,  XLII.  20.
Kidnies,  diftended  with  urine,  IV.  19.
With  finuous  cavities  full  of  urine,^

XL.  20.
One  with  a  cell fiU'd  with a  uri-
nous fluid,  IV.  19,  X.  19.
In  fo  great  a  quantity  as  to  oc-
cupy half  the  kidney,  XVIL
14.
With  large  cells  full  of  a  fluid  of

that  kind,  XL.  2.
With  cells  full  of  an  aqueous  kind
of  fluid,  XXI.  15.  XXIV.  6.
XXVn.  2.  XXXVIII.  40.
XLII.ii.  XLVI20.  XLVn.
. 34.  LX.  12.

One protuberating outwardly,
like  an  apple,  XXXVII!.  40.
With  hydatids,XXV.4.XXXVIIL
12. LVI.  18.
One  very  large,  form'd  upon  it,
LX.  6.
Kidnies,  with  calculi.  X.  11.  XL.  2.

Within  a  hard  and  callous  fub-
ftance, LVII.  10.
Large  and  ramifying,  ibid.  &  XLII.

4-
Onewithcalculi,  IX.  2.  XL  6.  XL..
12.  XLIL  13.  XLVII.8.
With  fandy  particles,  XXXIX.  5.
Kidnies,  membranous  tubuli  of, dilated,
XXXIX.  33.
Pelves,  dilated,  ibid.  &  XII.  2,  XL.
18.24.  XLII.  II.
One  much dilated, XXXIX.  5..
XL.  2.  18.
Diftended  with  pus,  XLII.  20.'
With  white  and  turbid  ferum,

XLIV.  15.
With  ichor,  XXXVIII.  30.
Pelves,  with  a  kind  of  purulent  urine,

XLVIII.  32.
Pelves,  none,  XXVIL  28.
Kidnies, one of, pafs'd through by a

wound,  LIII.  40.
Knee,  lateral  ligament  of,  thinner  than  is
natural,  LVI,  26.

Gapfulair


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead Bodies.


Capfular  ligament  and  mucilaginous
gland  of,  many  bony  globules
growing  thereto,  LVII.  14.

Mucilaginous  gland  of,  become  en-
larg'd,  and  fomewhat  hard,
LXIX.  2.

Mucilage  of,  having  a  colour  not
natural,  ibid.

Mucilage  of,  none,  LVII.  14.
Knee-pan. See  Patella.


LAch/ymal  6u&,  larger,  coalition  of,
XIII.  27.
Canal  and  punctum,  diLtation  of  one,
ibid.
Lachrymal  pun£la,  occlufion  of  in  others,

ibid.
Larynx,  external membranes of, turgid
with  ftagnating  ferum,  IV.  24.
26.
Protuberating  pofteriorly  into  two
condylomata,  as  it  were,  XLIV.

3-
Veffels  of,  turgid,  XXI.  30.
Larynx,  befet  with  a  pultaceous  pus,  XV.

13-

Externally  livid,  internally  fomewhat

red,  IV.  26.
Gangrenous,  V.  ig.
Of  a  red  colour  inclining  to  black-

nefs,  VIII.  25.
With a  puftuie  of the  fmall-p'ox,

XLIX.  32.
With  cancerous  tumours,  XXVIil.

9,  10.
With  the internal membrane  more

red th?n ufual, and fomewhat

tumid,  XLIV.  3.
Ulcerated,  XV.  13.
L'arynx, annular cartilage of, iroken,

XIX.  13.
One  of  its arytenoids  luxated,  as it

were, and not parallel to its

fellow,  XLIV.  15.
Membrana  epiglottidis  of,  crifp'd  up,

VIIL  27.
Tumid,  very red, and  beginning

to  be  f'jppurated,  XLIV.  3.
Epiglottis  of,  not  quite  found,  XLIL

39'  40-
Perforated  with  an  ulcer,  XXVIIL
10.


Deform'd  with  cicatrices,  XLIV.

Leg,  extenfor mufcles of, refilling the
flexion,  LVI.  26.
Bones of, broken longitudinally,
LVI.  31.
Lips,  lividnefs  of,  XXIV.  34.
Liver,  large,  IV.  16.  30.  XIII.  3. XVI.
4.  38. XXL  33. XXX. 12.
XXXVI.  23.  XLVIII.  37,  38.
LIV.  37.  LXIX.  2.
Somewhat  larger  than  natural,  XLIL

II.  39.  LIII.  24.
Very  large, XXL  24.  36. XXX.
10.  14.  XXXVI.  2.  25. XLV.
16.  LXIV.  15.
Very  long tranfverfely, XIX.  58.

XXI.  30.  XXVI.  31.
Extended into the left  hypochon-

drium,  XLVIII.  37.  LIV.  37.
Gontraded,  XXII.  4.  LXIV.  7,
Part  of  its  fubftance  deficient  from
the  original  formation,  III.  4.
Liver,  right lobe  of, deeplv fubdivided,
• XLVIII.  37.
Extending downwards in part,

LXVII.  II.
Growing  out  quite to  the  lower
part  of  the  belly,  XXXVI.  z.
Growing out to the left fide,

XXXVI.  25.
More  convex than it  naturally is,

XXXVIII.  34.
Confiderably  furrow'd on its  convex"
furface,  XLVIII.  38.  LVI.  17.
LXV.  8.
Liver,  thruft  downwards,  XVIL  25.

Downwards,  and  to  the  left  fide,
XVL  26.
Driven  upwards,  XXXIX.  2.  LVI.
12.
Liver,  grown  into  one  fubftance  with  the
diaphragm, VII.  11. XL  6.
XXXVni.34.  XL.  23.  XLIV.
ig.  LVI.  31.
Clofelv  connected with the fpleen,

xvn.  6.

Tied  to the  neighbouring parts  by
unufual membranous textures,-  ■
XVI.  30.
Liver,  of a  colour not  natural, XLIL

Colour  of,  loft  in  one  p?.rt,  in  ano-

thsr  yellowifh,  XLIII.  22.
Pall  d, XVl.  3.8. XXL  35.  47.
XXII


INDEX relating to


l;


XXII.  4. XXIII.  4. XXX.  7.

XXXVI.  25.  XXXVIII.  6.  52.
XXXIX.  25.  LIV.  39.  LVI.
31. LXV.  13.

Somewhat  pallid, XIV.  35. XVI.
10. XIX.  58. XXIV. 18.

XXXVII.  2.  XXXV.III.  34.
Whitifh,  III.  2.  IV.  16.  35 VI  12.

VII. II. X.  13. XVI.  30.

XXI.  9. 24. 29,  30. 33. 36.

XXII.  22.  XXX.  12.  14.
XXXVI.  II.  XL.  9.  XLII.
20.  XLIX.  6.

Somewhat  cineritious,  XVI.  12.

Blue,  LXII.  5.  LXIV.  5.
Livid,  III.  2.  IV.  24.26. V.  ij-  19.
VII.  9.  II.  13.  VIII.  25.  XVI.
34.  XXVIII.  12.
On  its  hollow  furface, XXI.  23.

30-
On  its  edge,  XL  11. XXL  3.  9.

17.23.30.
Of a livid colour, and becoming

fomewhat  pale,  XXI.  34.
Somewhat  brown,  XIII.  3. L.  4.
Of  a  tobacco  colour,  XVI.  30.
Of  a  more  faturated  colour  in part,

XXVI.  31.
Blackifli on the hollow furface,

XXXIV.  9.
At  the  edge,  XXXV.  10.
Black,  XXII.  10.  XXXVIII.  10.
Of a dark colour at the edge,

XXXIV.  9.
Variegated,  III.  4.  IV.  30.  VII.  11.

X. 19. XVI. 38. XIX.  58.

XXI.  9.  34.  XXII.  22.  XXIV.

13.  18.34. XLII.  34.
Mark'd  with  brown  ftrise,  IV.  13.
With  red  fpots,  XXXVI.  11.
With  a  very black fpot on  the

hollow  furface,  from  blood  being

extravafated under the coat,

LXVI.  9.
With  yellowilh  and  protuberating

fpots,  XXXVI.  25.
With  a  cell  full  of  a  half-coagulated

blood,  X.  13.
With  inherent  hydatids,  XXXVI.  4.

XXXVIII.  42.  XL.  23.  LXV.
8.

river,  hard,  I.  4.  IV.  16.  24.  35.  VI.
12.  VII.  II.  X.  II.  19.  XIII.
3  XIV.  35.  XVI.  34.  XVIII.
25.  XXI.  23,  24.  34. 49.  XXII.


22.  XXX.  12.  14.  XXXVI.  2.

4.  23.  25. XXXVIII.  i6.  20.

30.  XLIV.  7.  LVL  7.
Partly  hard,  XXVI.  31.
Somewhat hard, XXIV-. 13. 34.

XXXIV. II. XXXV. 16.

XXXVill.  34 XXXIX.  26.

XLIX.  6. LXIV.  5.
Like  one  that  has  been  boil'd,  III.  4,

XLV.  21.
Shewing  its  fmalleft  lobule  very  evi-
dently, III.  4. XXX,  12.  14.

XXXVIIL30.  XLIV.  7.  LVL

17-
Grating  under  the  knife,  XXXVIII.

Flaccid,'  XXXVII.  2.

With its  left  lobe  lax,  and  with  a
fphacelus,  XXXIV.  25.
Liver  inflam'd,XXXlV.  21.  XXXV.  12,

Somewhat  inflam'd,  XLVIII.  32.

Eroded  on  its  hollow  furface,  or  la-
cerated, LXVII.  17.
Liver,  internally  of  a palifh colour in-
clining to  brown,  XXXVI.  23,

Mark'd  with  whitifh  fpots  both  inter-
nally and  externally,  XXXVIIL
6. XLVII.  12.

Mark'd  with  white  bodies,  XXXVI.
2.
With  fome  brown  points,  XXXVI.

23-
Confifting  of  a  white  fubftance,  fimi-

lar  to  a  ligament  in the  part  of

the  right  lobe,  LXVII.  11.
With  white  fcirrhi,  XXIX.  12.
With frequent tubercles, fome of

which  were  fuppurated,  LI.  20.
Full  of  fteatomata,  XXX.  14.

Of white tumours, XXXVIIL

28.
Of a yellowifh, tough, and

fomewhat purulent fubftance,

XXXVI.  25.
Beginning  to be eroded internally,

XXXVL  2.
With a large abfcefs ruptur'd,

XXXVI.  4.
Liver,  pierc'd  through  by  a  wound,  LIII.

40.
Deeply  lacerated  in  part,  LIV.  16.
Liver,  Aifpenfory  ligament  of,  thicker  than

ufual,  and dragg'd to the left

fide more than is natural,

XXXVI.  25.

Artery


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead  Bodies.

Artery  of,  larger  than  ufual,  XLII.  Empty,  but  turgid  with  air,  XXX,


39-

Dudtus  communis  biliarius  of,  wider
than  natural,  XXI.  33.
Hepaticus,  wider  than  natural,  XL.
24. XLIII.  22.
Dilated  wiihin  theliver, XLVII.

37-
Veficula  fellis  of,  none,  XL VIII. 55.
Lefs than natural, XXXVII. 29.

XL.  22.
Small  and  empty,  L.  4.
Small, with thin and very flaccid

coats,  LVII.  10.
Very  fmall,  the  coats  being  thicken'd,

XX.  32.
Contraded  in  the  middle,  XXXIX.

18.
Contraaed,IIL2.  XVL30.  XXVII.

2.  XXXVL2.  25. XLII.  13.
Contraded, and having little bile,

IV.  30. Vn.  13. XXXVI.  23.

LIV.  46.
VVith  its  coats  thicken'd, XXII.  4.

XXX.  7. XXXVI.  2. LXX.

7-
Externally  whitifh,  XXXVI,  11.
Externally  whitifh,  but  internally
black,  XXX.  7.
With  its  coats  befet  with  little tu-
bercles, XXII.  18.
With  its  coats  black,  XXIV.  13.
Somewhat  black,  XXXIV.  g.
Ill-form'd,  and  twifted. III.  i.. IV.
26.
Liiver,  veficula  fellis  of,  enlarg'd,  LXV.

5-
Very  large,  XLIX  6.  LXV.  13.
Dilated by a quantity of bile,

XXIV.  13.
Turgid  with  bile,  I.  2.  V.  6.  VI.

12.  Vm.  25. X.  19. XX.  II.

XXII.  22. XXIX.  12. XXX.

7.  XLV.  23.  XLVII.  36.  LX.

8.  LXIV.  7.  LXV.  8.

With a fmall  quantity  of  bile,  IV.

9.  Vil.  II.  VIII.  27.  XXL  30.
36.  XXXI.  14.  XXXVIII.  34.
LV.  10.

And  not  natural,  XXI.  9.
And  difcolour'd,  XXIII.  4.
With  fcarcely  any  traces  of  bile,  XX.

32.  XXI.  35.
With  no  bile,  XXXV.  18. LVII.
10.


4-

Liver,  velicula  of,_  containing  bile  of  a
very  dilute  colour,  XXXVI.  i  r.

Of  a  white  colour  inclining  to
yellow,  XXI.  36.

Of  a  pale  colour,  XXV.  16.
XXXVIII.  18.  LXX.  7.

Of a  colour almofl: cineritious,

XXXVI.  23.

Very  yellow, XXIX  i2.XXXVn.

28.  LII.  30.
Of a faffron-colour, VIII. 27.

XVIII.  2.  XLV.  21.
Of  a  tobacco  coloui,  VIL  13.
Brown, VIII. 25. XXI. 35.

XXXVII.  2.  XLIII.22.  XLIX.
2. LXV.  5.

Brown, and fomewhat yellowifti,

XXXVIII.  34. LXVI.  9.
Bloody,  as  it  were.  III.  2. IV.  26.

VIL  II.
Livid,  and almoft  black, XXI.  24.

XXX.  14, XLVII.  12.
Black,  or  nearly  fo,  IV.  35.  XX[V.

16.  XLIX.  6.
Very  black, VIII.  23. XXIV. 13.

XXX.  7. LXV.  13.
Of  a  green  colour,  and  pale,  XIV.
35.  LIX.  15.
And  inclining  to  black.  III.  4.
Similar  to  blackifh  lees  or  dregs  of

oil,  XXXIX.  26.
Turbid  and  faculent,  XXXVIII.  34.

XLIIL  22.
Somewhat-vifcid,  and  vifcid,  XXIV.

16.  XXXVIII.  34.
Vifcid,  black,  thick,  XXXVI.  2.
With white fandy particles, as  it
were,  LX.  12.
Liver,  veficle  of,  with  calculi.  III.  4.  IV°.
13. V.  6.  iQ. XXI.  2.  30.  36.
XXIV.16.  XXVI.2..  XXVII.
2. XXX.  14. XXXIV.  15.
XXXV. 16. 18. XXXVI.  4..

xxxvii.28,29,30.  xxxvin.

20.  XLIX.  2.  LVI.  7.  9.  31.
LVII.  10.  LXV.  13.  LXVUL
6.

Some  of  them  betwixt  the  coats  of
the  gall-bladder,  XXXVII.  29.
LVI.  31. LXV.  13.
Lividnefs  of  carcafe. III.  24. IV.  4.  16.

21.  26.  VII.  2.  II.  13.  Vlli.
4.  25.  XVI.  30.  XIX.  3.  5.  20.

XXIV..


INDEX referring to


XXIV.  13. XXVI.  13. LIV.

20. See  alfo  Abdomen,  Neck,
Back,  Face,  Lips,  Sides,  Breaft,
Livor. See  Lividnefs.
Loins,  mufcles  of,  ftufF'd up  with coa-
gulated blood,  LIV.  25,  26.
Precernatural  in  the  colour,  laxity,
and  disjundion  of  their fibres,
LVII.  17.
Wounded  on  the  internal  furface,
LIV.  37.
Lumbar  region,  black,  LIV.  26.
Lungs, not quite found, XXVI. 37.
XLIII.  24.  LIII.  32.
One  lobe  of, in  a very bad ftate,

LIII.  29.
Slightly  and  loofely  connefted  to  the

pleura,  XXL  32.  LIV.  46.
Having  a  confiderable  quantity  of
turbid  ferum,  or  a  kind  of  fanies,
lying  in  the  very  connexion
with  the  pleura,  XXI.  27.  LIII.
16.
Every-where  connefled  to  the  pleura,

III.  20,  35.  XXI.  4.  9.  29.
XXIV.  II.  XXXVIII.  22.34.
LVI.  31.

One  lobe  only,  LIII.29.  LXIV.19.
Almoft  every-where,  or  in  great  parr,

IV.  16.  30.  V.  17.  VI.  12.
VII.  13.  XVII.  17.21.  XVIIL
a.  14.  XIX.  58.  XX.  II.  24.
XXI.  19.  24. 33- 35' 36.  XXIL
22.  XXVI.  35.  XXIX.  30.
XXX.  7.  XXXIV.  18.
XXXVm  13.  XL.  23.  XLIIL
29.  XLVL  16. LV.  10.

On  a  certain  furface  or  part  only,
IL  19.  XI,  II.  XVI.  8.  XX.
47.  XXI.  30.  XXXI.  14.
XXXV.  16.  XLI.  4.  XLIIL
5.  XLVII.  12.  LII.  8.
One  lobe  only,  III.  26.  IV.  19.
26.  V.  6.  VIL  9.  X.  5.  9.
,  XVLio.  14.  30.  34.  XVIL19.

XX.  3.  16.  26.  28.  35,  36.51.
XXL  3.  17.  27.  XXII.  4.  8.
10.  XXIII.  4.  XXIV.  34.
XXV.io.  XXVI.  33.  XXVIL
2.  28.  XXX.  4.  XXXIV.  15.
XXXVI. 23.  XXXVIII.  6.  15,
16.  18.  XLII.  II.  XLIII.  17.
XLIV.  3.  XLV.  23.  XLIX.
10.  L.  48.  LI.  6.  LIII.  9.  16,
40.  LIV.  39,  LIX.12.  LX.6.


Connected  with the  pleura  after  in-
flammation, I.  2. IV. ig,  20.
VIL  13. XXL  4,  5.
Clofely  connefted with the pleura,
XX.  39.41.  XXIX.18.  XLIIL
22.
One  of  them,  XX.  a.3 59. LIII,
37.  LXIII.  8.  LXX.  10.
With  the  mediaftinum  one,  or  both)
XX.  II.  13.  39.  XXIX.  18.
Lungs, one lobe of, drawn upwards.
LIII.  40.
Driven  backwards,  and  downward?,
and  comprefs'd,  XVTil.  25.
Small,  or  contrafted,  on  one  fide,  or
both, XVII.  25. XXII.  6.  8.
XXVIL  12. XXX.  12. L.  4,
LIV.  6.
Coliaps'd  and  flaccid,  on  one  fide,  or
both,  IV.  19.  XVI.  12.  XXIV.
II. XXVIL  28. XXX. 14.
XLIII.  24.  LIII.  29. LIV.  46.
LIX.  12.
Lungs,  on right  fide, middle  lobule of,

dead,  X.  ig.
Lungs,  turgid,  particularly  from  air,  IV.
9.  24. XV.  6. XVIII.  2.  14.
34.  XXVL33.  XXIX.  12.20.
XXXVII.  2. XXXVIII.  30.
XL.  4. XLI.  4. XLV.  16.
XLVIIL38.  LI. 50.  LVIL  10.
LXII.  5.
Turgid  in  the  inferior  lobules,  or  at
the  edges,  XIX. 49.  XLII.  11.
Lungs,  tumefied,  VIII.  4.  25;  XXI.  45.
One  lobe  only, VI.  12. XX.  5.
51.59. XXI.  6.  9.  II.  15.  17.
23.33,34.  XXXVIII.  4.  LIIL
18.
Lungs,  hard,^ -VII.  4.  9.  X.  19.  XVI.  2.
4. XIX.  58. XX.  24.  47.  49.
XXI.  6.  17.  24.27.  30.  XXIV.
13. XLIII. 2g. LXIII. 8,
LXVII.  9.
On one fide only, VI. 10. 12.
VII.  9.  It.  13. X.  17.  XI.  13.
XX.  5.  13.  26.  28.  33.  36.  41.
51.  63.  XXI.  4.  9. II.  15.  ig,
23-  32- 34'  35- XXII.  4-  12.
I  A. XXVI.  33. XXVIII,  12.
XXXIV. 18. XXX VL 23.
XXXVIII.  15,  16.  LI.  6.  LIII.
g.  LIV.  49.  LXIV.  2.
In  a certain place, XVII.  8.  10.
XIX  8.  XX.20.22. XXII.  10.
XXXVIII.


Preternatural  APPEARANCES  in  dead  Bodies.


XXXV-III.  34.  XL.  23.  XLV.
16.  L.  48. LIX.  12. LXI.  5.
LXIII.  19.
Lungs,  heavy, IV.  24. V.  11. XIIT.  3.

XXI.  27. 35, 36. XXiV.
18.

On  one  fide  only,  VI.  12.  VII.  ir.
13. XXI.  6.  9.  19.  23,  30.  33.
LXIV.  2.
Lungs,  coats  of, become thick on one
fide,  XXII.  8.
Cover'd  with a  kind  of  yellowilh
jelly,  XVI.  28.
With  yellovvifh  reiiculated  fibres,

XXI.  30.
With  a  kind  of  membrane,  VII.
J  I.  X.5.  XX.  20.  47.  XXI.
19. 27. 29, 30. 32. 36.
XXIV.  34. XLV. 16.  23.
LII.  8.
Eafily  feparable,  XX.  33.
Eroded in a  certain place,  LIII.

18.
Hydatids  under  it,  LXIX.  8.
Small vefTels of, diftended with
blood,  XXIV.  13.
Lungs,  very  vi'hite,  XL.  26.

Whitifh,  XIII.  3.  XX.  49.

Of  a  cinerifious colour  inclining  to

white,  LIV.  46. LXIV.  5.
In  fome  places  white,  in  fome  places

red,  XVI.  19.
Livid,  XXL  32.  XLViII.44.
Somewhat-green,  XX.  45.
Mark'd with black  lines here-and-
there,  XIX.  49.
With  black  points,  and  variegated

with  black  blood,  XLIII.  5.
With  black  fpots,  IV.  9. XV.  6.
XVI.  4. XVII.  16.  19. XiX.

8.  XX.  7.  15.  41.  45.  49.  63.

XXII.  8. XXVI. 2. 20.
XXXVIII.io.  XLIX.2.  Llil.

9.  LVL  7.

Black, or  fomev/hat-black, IV.  4.

VIL'ii. VIII.  23.  37. XVll.

6.  21.  23. XX.  13.43. XXI.

4. 17. 24. 35. 45. XXIV.

13. XXVIl. 28. XXX.  4.

XXXVIII.  30. LII.  2. LIII.

29.  LIV.  6. LIX.  3.
Of  a  black  colour  inclining to  red,

XX.  33.  XXL  33.
Of  a  browa colour mix'd  with  pur-

pie,  XXI.  34.
Vol,  IlL


Of  a  red  colour,  IV.  2.  VI.  12.
VII.  13.  X.  2.  II.  XL  II.  13.
XVI.  4. XVII.  19. XIX.  5.

XXI.  6.  19.  27.  XXtl.  4.  22.
XXXVIII.  4.  LI.  18.  Llil.  18.
LIX.  12.

Slightly  inSam'd,  XIX.  8.  XX.  56,
XXIX.  10.  XXX.  2.  XLIII.5.
XLIX.  8.  LIV.  26.

Infiam'd,  XX.  15,  16.  24.  XXXVI,
II. XLIX.  6. LIII.  9. LIV.

One  of  them, XX.  2. 7.  9. 17.
26.  28.  30.  35.  41.  43.  51.  59.
61. XXI.  '45. XXII. 10.
XXXVIIL  18.  XLIX.  10.
And  very hard from inflam-
mation, XX.  q.  30.  32.  39.
45'  53-  59-  XXII.  16.
With a phlegmon, XI.  4.
XX.  3.  35.
Lungs, fubftance of, ehang'd into one
like  that  of  the  liver, XXI.  2,
3.  17.  19 27. LXX.  10.
On  one  fide,  VI.  12. VII.  11. XL
13. XXI.  9.  23. 29, 30. 33.
LIV.  49.
Black  with  very  thick  blood-veffels,

VI.  -19.
Suppurated, VII.  11.  13.  XX,  ^^5.
Seiz'd with a fphacelus, XX.

41.
Corrupted,  V.  6. VI.  12. IX.  4.
XVIII.28.  XIX.50.  XXII.io,
11.22.  XXVIII.  12.
Whitifh,  and inclining tr> cor-
ruption,  as  it  were, XXL  23.

30-
Indurated  like  that  of  the  pancreas,

XXII.  15.

Denfe  and  compaft,  XX.  33.
XXI.  6.  24.  34,  35,  36.
XXXIV.  18.  XXXV.  16.
XLV.  16.  LXIV.  2.
On  both  lobes  refilling  didradion,
and  of  a  tendinous  hardnefs,  as
it  were,  XVIIL  2,  30.  XLV.
. 23.

Internally  and externally brown,
XXVI.  25.
Lungs,  fcetid,  and  half- corrupted,  XXIV.
II. LVIIL  13.
On  one  fide,  or  both, full of  little
purulent  abfceffes,  XX.  2. LI.
18,  19.
4P  Internally


INDEX referring to


Internally  and externally  beret  with
veficles  containing  pus, XXII.


24.
On  one  fide  with  an  abfcefs.  XX.
.9.  II.  20.  41.  61. LIII.  9.
With  an  abfcefs  ruptur'd  within

the  thorax,  LIII.  14.
Full  of  pus  every-where,  or  in
part,  LXII.  2.  LXtll.  19.
Lungs,  with  pus,  XXI.  17.  27.
With  ulcers, XXil.  15.

On  one  fide  with  an  ulcer, XX.
5.43.63,  XXn.14.16.18.
With  a cancerous ulcer, XX.
39.
Luncrs,  on  one  fide,  or  on  both,  with  tu-
bercles, either  not  yer,  or  already
fuppurated,  I.  2.  VII.  13.  XVI.
2S.  XX.  49. XXI.  27. XXIL

6.  14,  15.  18.  XXVI.  29. LI.
17.  20 i.III.  16.  LX.  2.

With  purulent  fteatomata,  XXII.  22.
With purulent, or puriform ichor,

XIX.  49.  XXIV.  13.  XXX,  4.

LXIV.  5.
With  a  putrid  humour,  VI.  12.  XX.

7.  45.  XXI.  45.  XXII.  4.
With certain finuffes, as it were,

containing  different  pus,  XXI.
33.
With  much  blood, II.  19. IV.  21.
VIII. 4. 25. 27. XIX. 51.

XXVIl  2.  12.  LI.  54.
With  much,  and  even  bloody  ferum,

XVII.  19. XXL  33. XXX.  2.

XXXIV.  18.  XXXVI.  17.
With  froth,  V.  II.  XVIII.  30.  34.
With  a  fomewhat-bloody  jelly, XVII.

21.
With  a  frothy  humour,  VI.  12.  VII..

II. XXI.  29. XXVI. 31.

XXXVI.  II.
With  a  catarrhous  matter,  Xllt.  3.
With much fluid of  a yellow or

tawny  colour,  XXI.  23.
With  empty  cells  within a  fubftance

of  a  livid  and  deep  black  colour,

XXI.  19.
With  the  veficles  of  which  they  con-

fift  dilated,  XXII.  12.  LXII.  5.
Lungs,  with  very  fmall  calculi,  XLII.  2.
With  many  globules  of  a  tartareous

matter,  XVII.  19.  XLVIL  12.
With  a  white  fubftance,  as  if  of  tar-

tirizated  granules,  XXI.  36.


With  ftony  granules  in  feveral  places
through  the  coat,  LXVIII.  12.
Lungs,  tophaceous,  XV.  25.
Lungs,  on  one  fide,  wounded,  LIV.  10.

Ruptur'd,  LIII.  33.
Lungs,  bronchia  of.  part  of  the  food  in
them,  LIII.  26.
A  confiderable  quantity  of  ferum,

IV.  24.  26.  V.  17.
A  reddifh  foam,  IV.  16.
Bloodv  humour,  XXI.  34.  XXIII.

6.  XXVI.  21.
Blood,  XXXV.  2.
Pus,  or  puriform  matter,  XVI.  30.
XXL 29, 30.  XXIIL6.  XXVI.
33.  XLI.  23.  LX.  6.
Lungs,  bronchial glands of, more  than
ufual,  XLVill.  38.
In greater number and thicker,

XVin.  2.  XXI.  33.
Enlarg'd,  XVII.  14.  17,  18.  XLIIL
.  ,17.29.  XLViII.38.  LIV.  37.
Not  all  found,  XXI.  29.
Become harder than ufual, larger,

and  more  purulent,  XXIX.  12.
Having a  tartareous matter  within
them,  XLVIII 38.
Lungs,  on  one  fide,  having  their  blood-
vefTels very clofely connedted
witli  the  bronchia,  XXI.  4.
Having  fome  one  of  their  veHels  di-
lated, ibid.


M


"AXILLiE,  very  clofely  conftridled,

IV.  26.

Maxilla, inferior, longer and narrower
than  ufual,  XLVIII.  50.
In  one of its heads a bony ex-
crefcence,  LVI.  21.
Some  fifllires on  its  interarticular
cartilage,  ibid.
Maxillary  internal  glands,  larger  than  na-
tural, LXIJI.  19.
One  of  them  indurated,  XXVIII.  9.
Mediaftinum,  forc'd  towards  the  left  fide,
XVI.  26.
Cover'd,  in  part,  with a  reticulated
texture yellowifli and bloody,
XXI.  30.
Become  thicken'd,  XVI.  26.
Befet  with  febaceous  tubercles  about
the  middle,  LXVIII.  12.

Wounded,


Preternatural  APPEARANCES  in  dead  Bodies.


Wounded,  LIII.  3.  26.  LXIX.  4.
Medulla  Oblongata. See  Cerebrum.
Medulla  Spinalis. See  Spine.
Medulla  Spinalis,  none,  XLVIII.  48.  50.
Without the tube  of  the  vertebras,

XII.  16.
The meninges of it fufFus'd with

blood,  LX.  4.
Dura  mater  of  it adhering to the
arachnoides,  XLIX,  16.  i

The  veffels  of  itfelf and its nerves

turgid  with  blood,  X.  17.
Blood extravafated about  it.  III.  2.
LX.  4.
Water,  IV.  7.  21.  24.  30.  V,  11.
XV.  6.
At  the  beginning  of  it,  LI.  27,
28.
Medulla  Spinalis,  very  lax,  LXX.  5.

From  the  external part  of  it  a  con-
fiderable  quantity  of  water  dif-
charg'd,  XXXVII.  2.
Blood,  exprefs'd  therefrom,  LIT.  5.
Membranes,  all  giving  great  rcfiftance  to
the  knife, XLIV.  3. LX.  10.
LXVII.  17.
Membranous follicle, form'd about a

leaden  ball,  XXVII.  28.
Mefentery,  contraded,  LIX.  18.

Extending  itfelf  into  the  hernial  fac,
XXVI.  37.  XXXIV.  9.  II.
And there flefhy, as it were,
XXXIV.  5.
The  fmalleft  particles  of  its  fat  agi-
tating themfelves by a  tumul-
tuary motion,  XXXI.  5.
Mefentery,  inflam'd,  XXXIV.  18.

Of  a  red  colour  inclining  to  green,

LXV.  8.
Blackifh,  XXXVIII.  30.
Wounded,  LIV.  33.  35.
Tumid,  LIV.  35.
Mefentery,  glands  of, enlarg'd, XXIV.
J  8. XXVIl.  16. XXIX.  20.
XXXVIII. 34. XL. 23.
XLVII. 24. XLVIIL 38.
XLIX.  18. LIV.  39. LX.  12.
LXIV.  7. LXV.  5. LXVL6.
LXX.  7.
Some  very  large  and  purulent,  XXIX.

12.
Somewhat hard and fcirrhous,

XXVn.  16.  XXXVIII.  34.
Converted into a fanious tumour,
XXXI.  2.


Mefentery,  fome obflruaion  of, XXX,
10.
Frequent  tubercles  of,  XXII. '18.
Tubercle  of,  partly  bony  and partly

flony,  XXXVI.  23.
Peculiar  globe  of  fat  therein,  XLIV.

3'
Tumours  of,  XXXIX.  9.
■ Large  tumour  of,  XXXIX.  5:
Very  large,  XXXIX.  2.
Abfcefs  of,  fuddenly  ruptur'd,  XLVL

20.
Many  fmall  abfcefles and ulcers  of,

XXXIV.  21.

Sebaceous  tumours  of,  LXVIII.  12.
Mefocolon, part  of, rigid, and mark'd
with  red  fpots,  LV.  10.
Sebaceous  tumours  in  the  left  part  of,
LXVIII.  12.
Mola,  fpurious,  difcharg'd  with  the  fcetus,

XLVIII.  g,  10.
Mouth,  diftortion  of,  XIX.  3.
Mouth,  foam  from the,  in  a dead  body,
XXVI.  35.
A  bloodv  fluid, IV.  16. XX Vh

35.  XXVII.  2.
A  great  quantity  of  putrid  matter,

XXXV.  14.
Pus,  XXII.  6.

Muliebria. ;See  Clitoris,  Nymphs, O-
varia, Pudendum, Falloppian
tubes, Vagina, Urethra, Ute-
rus.
Mufcles,  pallid,  LI.  ig.~

Of  a  brown  and  dirty  colour,  LXIX.

2.
Lax,  Xf.  11.13.  XIX.58.  XXXV.

10.  LII.  8.  LXIX.  8.
Many  abfcefTes  betwixt,  LIII,  24.^
Mufcles,  that  lie  upon  the  fpine,  wounded
on  their  internal  furface,  LIII.
40.


N


NAILS  of  the  great  toes,  growing
out  into  oblong  and  infleded
little  horns,  LXVIII.  6.

Nerves.  See  Cerebrum,  Medulla  Oblon-
gata.

Nerve,  fmall,  one  of  the  cervicals,  cer-
tainly prick'd.  XIV.  3.

Nerve,  pofterior  crural,  eroded,  L.  u.  55.

Nerve,  intercoftal,  trunk  of,  wounded,
LIII.  40.

4  P  2  Nerve,


INDEX referring to


Nerve, optic, extenuated, XIII. 8, 9.

LII.  30. LVI.  21. LXIIi.  4.

8.
Of  a  brownifli  colour,  XIII.  9.
Oi-" a cineritious colour, XIII.  8.

LVI.  21.  LXIII,  8.
-Of  a  dirty  fiefli-colour,  LII,  30.
Havin!^  its  coats  tbi-ken'd.  XIII.  8.

15.  LII.  30. LVI.  21.  LXIII.

6.
Confiding of  a fubftance lefs and

more  moift  than  ufual,  LXIII.

6.
Harder than ufual, XIII. 9.

LXIII.  4.
Hollow,  and  full  of  turbid  humour,

xin.  8.

Of  a  bloody  fubftance,  LVI.  21.
Of  a  mucous  fubftance  of  a  dirty
fiefh-colour,  LII.  30.
Noflrils  of  a  carcafe,  pus  from  them,  V.
19.
A  bloody  froth,  XXVI.  35.
A  foetid  water,  XLVIII.  44.
Noftrils,  polypi  of,  beginning  glandulous
from a glandular membrane,
XIV.  18.
NymphjE,  in  women,  one of  them very
long, water lying betwixt  its
fubftance,  XL VII,  12.


O


^CCIPITIS  Os. See  Occiput.
Occiput, bone of, flightly incis'd
externally,  LI.  49.
FifTur'd,  ibid.

Univerfally  with a broad fiflure,
LI.  51.
Eroded  and  perforated,  LII.  38.
CEfophagus, comprefs'd, XVII.  19.  25.
XVIII.  22.
Having  gangrenous  erofions,  XXIX.
20.
CEfophagus,  upper  part  of,  of  a  red  co-
lour inclining to blacknefs,
VIII.  25.
Lower  tra£l  of,  red  and  very  wide,
XXXVII.  30.
Infiam'd,  LIX.  15.
Omentum,  drawn  upwards, IV.  19, 2f^.
V.6.  VILii.  XI. 6.  XXIII.  4.
XXVIL 16. XXXVI. 25.
XLII.  34. XLV.  23. LII.  2.


30.  LIV.  39.46.  LV.90.  LVL

31.  LXIV.5.

Roird  upwards  and  extended,  XXIX,

12.
Contracted  upwards into  itfelf,  and

converted into a fcirrhuf,

XXXIX.  26.
Drawn  upwards  in  part,  and  covering

the  ftomacb, LIII.  40.
Drawn  downv/ardp,  XXXIV.  9.
Defcending  within the  fcrotum,  II.

20. XXI.  15.  ig. XXXIV.  g.

XLIIL  2.  31.
Within  the  fac of  an  omphalocele,

XXXIV.  II.
Of  a  bubonocele,  XXXIV.  18.
Very  fliort, V.  17.  Vll.  11.
Very  large,  XXV.  4.
Omentum,  annex'd to the peritonaeum,

XXII.  18. XXX.  7. XLIL

20.
To the inteflines, XXI. 33.

XXXIV. 21. XXXVII.  30.

LVII.  2.
To  the  mefentery,  XXII.  18.
To  the  fundus  uteri,  XLVII.  14,
Omentum, very thick, and very fat,

XIV.  27. XLVII.  14.
Extenuated,  and  without  tat,  XXX.

7. XXXVIII.  4. XXXIX.  2.

XLII.  20.
Very  flaccid,  XXIIL  4.
Rigid,  LV.  10.
Ahnoft  confum'd,  XXX.  22.
Torn  into  pieces,  and  fvvimming  in

the  water  of  the  bel!y,XXXVin.

30.  34. XXXIX.  2. XLVII.

8.
Omentum,  with  its veins very  much  di-

ftended,  LIX.  12.
W^ith  hydatids,  XXXVIIL  4.
With  pretty  large  glands,  XLIII.  22.
Twifted  like  a  rope,  XXV.  4.
Twifted  into  protuberances  of  various

colours,  XXiX.  6.
Chang'd  in a  part  of  it  into  a  round

body,  XXXIV.  9. XXXVIII.

34-
Omentum,  mark'd with red fpots, LV.
10.
Inflam'd,  XXXIV.  18.
With its fat  fomewhat  livid, LV.

II.
Black,  as  if  from  contufion,  LiV.
22.

Cf


preternatural  APPEARANCES  in  dead  Bodies.


Of  a  blackifh  colour,  XVI.  30.

Of  a  brownifh  colour  inclining  to
green,  XXXVI.  25.

Green  in  part,  LIII.  24.

Cover'd  with  a  kind  of  glandular
globules,  XVI.  30.  XXII.
18.

Full  of  febaceous  tubercles,  LXVIII.
12.

V/ith  many  fmall  abfceffes  and  ulcers,
XXXIV.  21.

With  its  fanguiferous  veflels  ruptur'd,
LIV.  14.

Annex'd  to  the  peritonaeum,  on  ac-
count of  a wound having  for-
merly preceded,  LXVI.  g.
Ovaries,  none,  XLVI.  20.

One  entirely  deficient,  the  otiier
fmall  and  morbid,  LXIX.  i6-

One  fhorter  than  the  other,  XXIX.
10.  20. XXXV.  16. XLVIII.

35-  , ,

Converted  into  hydatids,  and  of  what

kind,  XXXIX.  12.
Hydatids  upon  them,  XLVII.  16.
Large, and  of  what  kind, XXI.
47.  XXXIX.  12.  XLVI.  29.
An  hydatid protuberating  fiom one

of  them,  LV.  10.
A  hollow  little  body  on  one  of  them,
the  remains of  a ruptur'd hy-
datid, XLVII.  12.
Ovaries, proper ligament  of, thicken'd,

XLV.  16.  XLVIII.  32.
Ovaries,  one of them not  quite  found,
XLVIII.  32.
Grown  almoft  into  one  fubflance
with  the  tube  and  the  colon, in
part confum'd by an abfcefs,
XLVL  27.
Both  confus'd with the tubes and
their  ligaments, and converted
into  a febaceous and  lacerated
mafs,  XXXVIII.  34.
Ovaries,  encreas'd in-  their  fize, XXII.
2-2 XXIX.  12. XXXIX.  33.
-XLV.  21.  LU.  4.  LXX.  10.
Drawn behind the uterus  by their

v/eight,  XLV.  2!.
More  turgid with fluid than ufual,

LII.  4.
Tumid from included cells, XLV.

23-
One  of  them  large,  and  containing
wa:er,  LXVIII.  6.


Diftended by  an  internal  hydatid,
XV.  8.  XLVIII.  34.  LVI.  21.
Enlarg'd into a confiderabJe  cel-
lular tumour,  XXIX.  14.
Veficular for the moft part,

XXXIX.  37.
In  fome  part  of it, XXXIX.

^ 39- .

Expanded  into  a  tumour  of  nve-
and-twenty  pounds,  ibid.
Ovaries,  very  long,  XLV.  16.

Strigofe, or  flirivell'd, XXVI.  31,

XXXIV.  33. XLV.  16. XLVL

24.  29. XLVII.  28.  30. LV.

10.  LVI.  17.  20.

Small,  XLVII.  30.

Deprefs'd  into  a  thin  lamina,.  LVI,

Of  an  unequal  rnagnitude,  LVI.  20.
LX.  10.
Ovaries,  furface  of,  black,  XXI.  47.

Become tuberous from hydatids,

LXX.  10.
Divided  into  chequers,  as it  were,

XLVL  17.  LVII.  14.
Very  unequal,  LVI.  10.  20.  LXI.

7-
Coat  of,  mark'd with  cica-trices,  as

it  were,  LII.  28.
Perforated with a kind of  fmall

ulcer,  ibid.
Cartilaginous,  in  a  manner,  in  fe-
veral  places.  XXXV.  16.
Ovaries,  confifting  ^of a pretty foft  and
whitifh  fubftance,  XLVII.  4.
One  converted  into  a  febaceous  mat-
ter,  XXXIX.  33.
Pretty  foft,  and  almoft  gelatinous,
XLVI.  27.
Ovaries,  fomewhat  hard,  LXI.  7.

Indurated, XVI.  4. XX.  2. XXL

47. XXII. 22. XXIU. 4.

XXXIV.33.  XLV.16.  XLVIL

31.  L.  4.  LII.  2.  LVII.  14.

Almofl:  univerfally  fcirrhous,  XXVI.

17.
Scirrhous, XV. 13. XLV. 21..
XLVL  17.  LXVI.  2.
One  of  them. XXXIX.  3:;.  37.
Ovaries, without  any vcficles, XLVII.

4-  3^-
Without  any  natural  veficle?,  XLVI.

29.  XLVII.  30.
With  veficles  full of  ferum  that  flew

ofF  by  boiling,  LII.  28.

With


INDEX referring: to


With  black  cells,  XXII.  22. XLV.
23.  XLVII.  12.  28.
Grecji,  yellowifh,  yellow,  or  white
cells, XXI.  29. XXIII.  4.
XLVII.  30.  LII.  6.  28.
Containina: a bloody humour,
XXIII.  4.
A  half-coagulated  blood,  or  quite
fo, XXIX.  12. XLVII.  12.
XLVIII.  44.  LII.  6.
Black globules, XXI. 24. 29.

XXXIX.  37.
A brovvnifli fluid, and fome
fmall  bodies  of  a yellow  co-
lour, XXXVI.  17.
White  pus,  XLV.  23.
Or  empty, XXI.  29. XXIII.  4.
XXIX. 12. XXXVIII.  28.
XLVI.  27. XLVII.  12. 30.
LX.  6.  10.
With  cells  almoft  cartilaginous,  LII.

Bony,  XLVII.  28.  XLVIII.  44.
Ovaries,  with  blood  half-coagulated, XXl.
47 XXVI.  13.
With  whitifti  globules,  LXIX.  16.
Ovaries,  fanguiferous  veflels  of. See  Sper-
matic.


AN  C  RE  AS,  very  much  extenuated,

XXX.  14.
Larger  than  ufual,  XXX.  10.
Become thicken'd, XXIV. 12.

XXV.  16.
. In  part,  XVI.  36.
Partly  growing  out  into a  foft  white
fubflance,  XXIX.  12.
Into a white and hard tumour,
XXXVII.  28.
Pancreas,  white, XXX.  7.
In  part  red,  XLV.  23.
In  a  manner  inflam'd,  XXVI.  21.
Of  a  red colour  inclining  to  black,
in  part,  XXVI.  31.
Pancreas,  fomewhat-hard, XXI.  17.  33.
XXVL31.  XXX.7.  XXXVIII.
34.  XLVII.  12.
Hard, IV.  16. V.  19. XVI.  36,

XXII.  22.  xxvii.  2.  xxix.

12.  XXX.  10.  12.
With diftinft and dry lobules,
XXX.  7.


And  more  firm  than  ufual,  XLV.

Of  indurated  globules,  as  it  were,

XXXV.  16.
Tuberous,  XV.  ir.  XXX.  10.
Full of febaceous tubercles,

LXVIII.  12.
With  a  bony  artery,  XVI.  12.
Parotid gland,  tartareous  matter  therein,

XI.  15.
Parulis,  IV.  26.

Patella,  cartilaginous  crufi: of, furrow'd,
and  almoft  worn away,  LVII.
14.
Penis,  tenfion  of,  in  a body  after  death,
XIX.  19.
Preputium  of,  very  much  conftrifled,
LII.  30.
With  little  ulcers,  VIII.  6.
Of  a  blackifh  colour,  LXIL  5.
With  the  glans  verging  to  a  gan-
grene, XVIII.  25.
Glans of, mark'd with cicatrices,
XLII.  34. 39,  40. XLIV.  12.

15-
Urethra  of. See  Urethra.
Pericardium,  dilated,  LXIV.  19.

Affeded  wiih  a  phlogofis,  XLV.  16.
Inflam'd,  VII.  11.
Wounded,  LIII.  3.  26.
Thicker than ufual, XVIII. 34.
XX.  20.  35.  XLIIL17.  XLV.
16.
In  part,  LIII.  29.
Very  thick in fome places,  XXII.

10.
Harder  than ufual,  X.  19. XVIIL

34-
Cartilaginous  in  fome  places,  XXII,

10.
With  a  white  fpot,  XXXV.  12.
Pericardium,  beginning  to  adhere  to  the
heart,  LXII.  5.
By  a  mucous  and  yellowifh  matter,

XVIIL  25.
By  a  few  fibres,  XXXVIII.  22.
By  many,  XXXVIII.  13.
Partly  adhering  to  the  heart,  XXV.
15.  LIIL  29.  LVI.  12.
By  two  ftrong  ligaments,  as  it  were,
XXIV.  2.
Every-where  adhering  to  the  heart,

IV.  19.  V.  19.  VIII.  6.  xxn.

4.  10. XXIV.  II. XXX.  7.
XXXV.  12.

Strongly


Preternatural APPEARANCES  in  dead  Bodies.


Strongly  connedled,  XL.  9.  4.
Adhering  to  the  right  auricle, and
to  the  large  veffels,  XXX.  7.
Pericardium,  cover'd  internally  by  a  po-
lypous falfe  membrane, XLV".
16.
With  whitifb  concretions  here-and-

there,  XX.  35,  36.  XXI.  2.
With a certain reticular boJy,
XX.  20.
Pericardium,  without  water,  VII.  2.  XI.
13. XX.  24. XXXIV.  18.
XXXV. 16. XXXVIII. 13.
LXII.  5.
Having  fcarcely  any  water,  IV.  21.
Vil.  9. XXII.  16. XLIX.  2.
LI.  20.
A  little,  or  in  moderate  quantity,
XX.  55. XXVL  37. XXIX.
10.  XXXVIII.  2.  XL.  23.  26.
LVI.  17.
Not  in  very  fmal!  quantity,  I.  2.
XVII.  14.  25.  XX.  2. XLIII.

17-
In  large  quantity, X.  rr. XVI.

2.  43.  XX.  41.  47.  59.  XXI.
2.  17.  XXII,  14.  18.  LL  19.
LIIl.  9.
A  very  sreat  quantity,  XVL34,36.
40.  XVIII.  28.  XLIIL  29.
Full  of  water,  X.  2.  XVI.  ig.  21.
XX.  II.  1-3.  30.  XXII  6.
XXV.  1 5.  XXV  1. 20.  XXVIII.

12.  Lni.  18.

Very much diftended therewith,
XX. 35, 36. XXIV. 2.
XXXVIII.  6.
Very  greatly  diftended, XXXVIIL

10-

Pericardium,  containing  much  limpid  wa-
ter, XVI.  6.
A  gr«at  quantity  of  a  whitifn  colour,

XLV.  16.
Turbid,  or  fomewhat  turbid,  V.  17.

X.  13. XX.  53. XXI.  9.  24.

36. XXII.  24. XXIV.  34.

XLII.  II.  XLV.  23.
A great quantity fimi:ar to cow's

whey,  XX.  57.
Yellow, or yellowilh, VII. 11.

VIII.  27. X.  7. XVII.  10.  21.

XX. 20. XXI. 9. 30. 34.

XXn.22.  XX1II.6.  XXIV.  1 3.

XXXVIII.  34. LII.  8. LIV.

37-


Yellowiflij  together  with  thick,  and,
in  a  manner,  mucous  webs,
XVI.  38.

Similar  to  urine,  XXVL  33.  LXIV.

^ 5-

Of  a  yellow  colour  inclinino-  to
green,  XVI.  30.  XXI.  17.
XXXVIII.  30.

Of  a  yellow  colour  inclining  to  red-
dilh,  XXI.  33.

Reddifh,  XXI.  ig.  24.  29.  XXVII.

12.  XXXI.  2.  XLV.  23.  LIL
8.  LIV.  39.

Red,  XVIII.  2.
Somewhat  bloody. III. 2. IV. 24.

XXVL  35.  XXX.  10.
Bloody, III.  26. IV.  26. XXI.  2.

XXXVi.  23.  XLIV.  3.
Thick,  XL  II.  XVL  17.
A  great  quantity  and  purulent,  XXIV.
2.
Pericardium,  full  of  blood,  XXVI.  5.  7.

13.  15.  17.  19.  XXVII.  2.  5.
8.  LIU.  7.  LXIV.  13.  15.
LXIX.  4.

Half-full,*  XXVI.  21. XXVIL
28.  LIIL  26.
Containing  a  ^yellow  pus, mucous,,
and  not  in  great  quantity,  LIIL

^ . .  ^9'

Pericranium,  become  thick  from  juices  of
a  gelatinous  nature,  I.  4.
Eroded  by  f-anies,  LI.  5.
Peritonasum,  livid,  XLI.  13.

Rough  with  fmalF  globules,  XVI.  30.

XXIL  18.  XXXVIIL  34.
Cover'd internally with a kind of
hard  glands,  XLVII.  8.
PeritoncBum, tumour form'd upon.,
XXXVIIL  51.52.
Containing  a  very  great  quantity  of
fcetid water v/ithin its  eroded
fubltance,  XXXVIII.  52.
Peritonseum,  a  great  quantity  of  the  moft
fi:inking water betwixt it and
the  mufcles,  XXXVIII.  51.
Peritcnasum,  betwixt  it and the os in-
nominr.tum a great  quantity  of
pus,  LVII.  20.
Pharynx, become  rugous,  XV.  15.

Full of foam, of .  a yellow  colour

inclining  to  green,  VIII.  25.
Smelling  ofFenfively,  as if from aa
inflammasion  inclining  into  gan-
grene, XXL.  29.

Having:


INDEX referring to


Hiving  its  fides  thicker  than  ufual,
and  of  a  fubftance  almod  glan-
dular, and yet viftid, XLII.

3+-  . .  ,, .

Of  a  red  colour inclining  to  blacK-

nefs,  VIII.  25.

With  an  ulcer,  XXVIH.  12.

With  cancerous  tumours,  XXVIII.

9-
Ulcerated,  XXVIII.  10.
With  its  veilels  turgid, XXI.  30.
Pineal  gland. See  Cerebrum,  medulla  ob-
longata of.
Pituitajy gland. See Cerebrum, third

ventricle  of.
Pleura,  very  clofely  adhering  to the ribs
in a certain part, and almoft
callous,  L.  48.
Eafily  to  be puU'd away, VII.  11.

13.  XXI.  9.  LII.  8.
Become  thicken'd, VIL  11. XXI.

29,  30.  35,  36.  XXXIV.  18.
Very  much,  XVI.  30.

Become  bony,  XXI.  19.

Rough  with fmall globules, XVI.

30.  XIX.  ,3.

With very  fmall and almoft red

tubercles,  XXI.  32.
With  bony  tubercles,  XXI.  ig.
Almoft  bony,  XXI.  23.
Evidently  injur'd,  XXXI.  14.
Slightly  red,  XX.  51.  53.
Red,  VII.  II.  13. XVI.  40. XXI.  33.
34.  XXII.  16.
Of a rofy- colour for confiderable
traas,  XLV.  16.
Here-and- there, as if from veiy
fmall  blows,  XVI.  30.
Inflam'd,  XX.  55,  56.  XXI.  45.
Almoft livid, and fomewhat-black,

XXI.  35,  45.  LIII.  14.
Half-corrupted,  and  very  lax,  XXI.

36.
Putrid,  LII.  8.
Pleura,  lax,  as  if  cover'd  internally  by  a
membrane,  XX.  47.  56.  59.
In  a  certain  place,  XLV.  16.
Yellow  and  thin,  XXI.  9.  17.
Firm for  a  coniiderable  tradt, XL;
23.
Apparent  corruption  of,  only  by  reafon
of  a  membrane  of  that  kind  ad-
hering to  it,  XX.  56.  59.
Pleura,  ftrumous tumours  of, LXVIII.
12.


Pleura,  betwixt  it  and  ribs,  a  confiderable

tumour,  LIII.  32.
Plexus  Choroides. See  Cerebrum,  lateral

ventricles  of.
Popliteal  artery,  aneurifms  of,  L.  g,  10.
Proftate  gland,  fmall,  XXIV.  18.

Tumid,  XLI.  13. XLIX.  18.
Proftate,  excrefcences of, XLI. 6 18,
XLII.  II. XLIII.  24.  LXVI.
6.
Great  hardnefs  of,  XLI.  13.
Bo  h  the  fiirfaces  of,  blackifh,  ibid.
Internal  furface  of,  ulcerated,  XLII.
28.
V\^ith three very fliort finufles,

XLIV.  15.
With granules of tobacco, as  it
. were, at the orifices thereof,
VII.  II.  XXIV.  6.  XLIV.  21,
22.
Proftate,  within  it  many  granules  of  that
kind,  VII.  II. XLIV.  19.
A  cavity  fill'd  with  thofe  granules,

XLIV.  20.
An  empty  cavity,  XLIV.  ig.
A  fmus  containing  a  kind  of  cal-
culous matter,  XLII.  13.
Proftate,  caruncle  of. See  Seminal.
Pubes,  bones  of  the. See  Pubis.
Pubis Ofla, almoft disjoin'd from each

other,  XLVIII.  44.
Pudendum Muliebre, fmall red tuber-
cles of,  XLVI.  17.
Phlogofis  of,  ibid.  &  XLVn.  14.
Pudendum Muliebre. See  alfo  Clitoris,

Nymphae.
Pulmonary artery, wider than ufual,
XXIII.  6.  XXV.  10. XXVII.
28.  LXIV.  12.
Much  blood  therein,  XXVI.  21.  31.

XXVII.  2.  XLV.  23.
A  polypous concretion therein,  VI.

12.  VII.  II.  XLV.  23.
In  its  branches  blood  coaG;ulated  into
the  form  of  tubuli,  XXin.6.
Pulmonary  artery, valves  of, thicken'd,
XXVI.  33.
Become  lefs flexible than ufual,

XL.  23.
More hard than natural, VIII,

4-

One  of  them only  harder  than
ufual,  XXIV.  34.
Cartilaginous and bony, XVII,
12.

So


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead  Bodies.


So  connefted  togethei^as  fcarcely
to  leave  a  foramen  for  the  blood
to  pafs  through,  XVII.  12.

Pulmonary  vein,  trunk  of,  larger  than  it
naturally  is.  See  Heart,  left  au-
ricle of.

Putrefaflion,  fpeedy  and  very  confiderable
figns  of.  XVIII.  34.


R


RECTUM  inteftine,  very  much  con-
traded,  LIV.  39.

Very  much  comprefs'd,  XXXIX!  12.

Surrounded with too much fat,
LXIX.  16.

Inflam'd,  and  already  livid,  XXI.  20.
LXV.5.

Black,  X.  7.

Internally  tumid,  LXV.  5.

Harder  and  thicker  than  ufual,  and
befet  thick  with  glands,  as  it
were,  protuberating  internally,
XXXII.  7.
With  the  fame  of  a  red  colour  in-
clining to  brown,  LXV.  5.

With  varicous  knots  of  veins  inter-
nally, XXXII.  10.

With  the  haemorrhoidal  veffels  inter-
nally tumid  at  the  lower  part,
LIV.  7.  LXVIII.  6.
Ren  fuccenturiatus,  tumour  continu'd  to,
XVII.  8.


SALIVARY  glands,  larger  than  ufual,
LII.  30.  See  alfo  Maxillary,
Parotid,  Tonfils.
Scapula,  on  one  fide,  the  finus  of  it  which
receives  the  humerus  deficient
in  a  part  of  its  edge,  LVII.  2.
Scrotum,  tumefied  with  air,  V.  ig.

Black,  as  it  were, from  contufion,
XIX.  15.  19. LII.  30. LXII.

5-

Scrotum,  varicous  veins  of,  refembling  a
chain,  XX.  24.
Fat  of,  lying  under  it  even  at  the

lower  part,  XLIII.  29.
A  great quantity of  water in the
cellsofthedartosofjXXXVIIL
26. XLL18.
Vol,  IIL


Scrotum,  calculi  within  it,  LXIV.  7^
Scull. See  Cranium.
Semtn  Vas  Deferens, in  part icirrhous,
XLVL  5.
Become- thicker  than  natural,  LXIV.

7'
Seminales  Veficulaej  firigofe,  XLIV.  7.
Containing  a  watey  femen,  XXIV.

18.
Containing  none  at  all, XLIV.  7.
10.
One  of  them  fcirrhous,  XLVL  $r
Seminal  caruncle,  ftrigofe,  XLII.  28.
Defac'd  and  difeas'd,  XL.  4g.
Almoft  fluid,  as  it  were-,  LX.  It  2.
Having  its  roftrum  confuni'd,  ibid.
Seminal  caruncle, finus  of, longer  than
ufual,  and  having  a  lax  orifice,
LXIII.  13.
With  a very large orifice, and

plac'd  tranfverfely,  LXIX.  2.
With  its  orifice  almoft  obliterated,
XL.  29.
Orifices  of,  for  emitting  the  femen,
larger  than  ufual ;  and  fome  of
them larget than the other,
XLIV.  22.
One  of  them  blind,  the  other  very
narrow,  XLIV.  7.
Septum  Lucidum. See  Cerebrum,  lateral

ventricles  of.
Sides,  of  a  brown  colour  inclining  to  li-*

vidnefs,  XXVL  35.
Sinciput,  bones  of,  eroded  and  perforated,
Ln.38.
One  only,  LI.  19.
Sinciput,  bones  of,  livid  in  a  certain  place,
both  internally  and  externally,
LII.  2.  8.
The  external  table  of  it  deprefs'd,  as
it  were,  LII.  8.
Fiffur'd  with  a  chink,  LI.  11.
Broken  into  little  pieces,  LI,  9.
Sinciput,  bones  of,  fifiur'd,  LI.  50. LII.

35-
Broken  and  deprefs'd,  LI,  i8.  32.
Broken,  and  having  two  large  frag-
ments thruft  down  into  the  brain,
LI.  35.
Perforated,  a  bony  fcale  protube-
rating, LI.  54.
Smell,  ofi^enfive. See  Fpetor.
Spermatic  veflels,  fafciculus  of,  having  a.
great  quantity  of  fat,  XLIII.  22.
See  alfo  Teftes,  veflels  of,
4  0.  Very


INDEX referring to


Very  turgiJ  with  blood,  XXXIV.  5.
Spermatic  vellels,,  in  a woman, contain-
ino; blood of a violet colour,
XXXVI.  17.
Arteries,  hard,  LXVII,  14.
Spine. See  Vertebra.
Spine,  In great part double, XLVIII.

57-
Almoft  univerfally  bifid,  XLVIII.  50.
Spine,  univerfal  tortuolity  of,  with  a  very
great  flexion  at  the  lower  parts
of  the  thorax,  LXII.  11.
Total  diftortion  of, the  cervix  ex-
cepted, XLVIII.  50.
In  the  thorax, XIII.  3. XLIII.

17. LVI.  14.
lathe  thorax  and  loins,  LV.  10.
^ LXIII.  19.

Very remarkable, IV.  16. X.
13. XXXVIIL40.
Spine,,  diftortion  of at the lower part,

XLVin.34,  35.
SpinCi  vertebras  of,  five  only  in  the  neck,
XLVIII.  50.
Forc'd together, and condens'd
into  one  fubftance,  at  the  upper
part  of  the  thorax,  ibid.
Thoracic  vertebra of, a hiatus in

them  pofteriorly,  XLVIII.  52.
Lumbar,  hiatus  and  confumption  of,
on  the  back- part,  XII.  16.
Exoftofes  of,  XXXVII.  30.
Spine,  vertebra  of^  hollow'd  out  by  an

aneurifm,  XVII.  17.

Spine^  tube  of  for  fpinal marrow,  none

at  all,  XLVIII.  48.

Water  therein,  X.13.  XL  13.  XXL

47.  XXXVIII.  34.  LXIX.  16.

In  great  quantity,  X.  17. XL  15.

LIV.  49.  LXl.  2.
Blood,  grumous,  in  the  loins,  but
not  in  great  quantity,  LIV.  25.
Pus,  XIV.  3.  5.
Spine,  tumour  of,  wherein  were  the  fpinal

marrow  and  water,  XII 16.
Spinal  marrow. See  Medulla,  and  Spine^
Spleen,  forc'd  upwards,  XXXIX.  2.

Driven  towards  the  fcrobiculus  cor-
dis, LVI.  12.
Situated  lower  than  ufual,  XXI.  33.
Fallen down to the groin on the

right  fide,  XXXIX  42.
Pretty  ciofely  connected to  the  dia-
phragm, XVUL2, XXI.  49.
XXIX.  20.


To  the  ftomach,  XiXIX.  20.
The  liver,  XVII.  6.
All  the  neighbouring  parts,  XX.
26.  XXII.  4.
Spleen,  very  fmall,  XVI.  10. XXV.  icf.
XXVII. i6.  28. XXX. 14.
XLIV.21. L.  4.
A li.tle thicker than ufual, XIV.

35-
Thicken'd  preternaturally,  XVIII.  2.

XL.  23. XLVIII.  38. XLlX.

18.
Thicken'd  and  become  wider,  XLIV.

Somewhat  larger  than  ufual,  XVI.

38.  XIX.  58.  XXiX.  12.  20.
XXXVIII.  10.  16.  XLIL  20.
L.  48. LKL  24.  26. LIV.  37.

39.  LVL3r.  LIX.  15  LXIV.
5.  LXVIII.  6.

Large, IV.  16. 24.  26.  30; V.  19.

X.  19.  XL  6.  XVI.  2.  XVUJ.

25.  XXI,  6.  9,  24.  30.  33.  35.

XXII,  22.  XXV.  2.  XXX.  12..

XXX(.2.  XXXv^.io.  XXXVl.

4.  23.  25.  29. XXXVIII.  30.

34.  XLII.34,  XLIV. 7.  XLV.

16.  LXIX.  2.  LXX.  7. '
Verylarg", XL  11. XVI.  6. XX.

2. 30. 43. 51. XXII.  4.

XXXVI.  II. 17. XXXVIIL

13.  18. XXXIX.  42. XLIIL

22. Lll.  30.
Very  long,  XLVII.  36.  LII.  2.
So long as to fill the left fide  of

the belly almoft univerfally,

XXXVL  17.
Folded  up  into  itfelf,  LII.  30.
Turgid  with  frothy  blood,  XX VIL

2.
Spleen,  fiamewhat  rough  on  one  fiirface

with a kind of granules,.

XLVIII.  38.
Having  a  whitilh  and  thick  cruft  en

one  furface,  LVI.  17.
Rough  with  a  kind  of  milia:iy  gra-
nules, XXVIII.  13.  34.
With  hydatids,  XXXVIIL  34.
Of  a  whitifii  colour, X.  13. XXL

9.  30 XL.  23.
Mark'd with white fpoSs, IV.  24.

V.  r7.
Of  a  pale  colour, XXX.  7.
Of  a  blueifh  colour,  LXIi.  5.
Of  a  very  dark  colour,  XI. .6.

Of


Preternatural APPEARANCES in  dead  Bodies.


Of  a  more  livid  colour  tlian  ufual,

XLIL  20.
In  one  half  of  it.  LTV.  26.
Somewhat-black,  XLVII,  12.
Blatkifl)  with  obione;  fpots,  IV,  30.
Black,  XVIt.  JO.  XyiII.30.  L.48.

LVL  17.
Very  black  on one  futface, XXI.

Inclining  to  red,  XX.  39.

Red on  one fmface, XLVII.  36.

LiX.  15.
InEam'd,  XXXIV.  21.
Partly  zffe&td  with  a  gangrenous  li-

vidnefs,  XXI.  29.36.  XXXIV.

II 18. XXXV.  16.
AfFeaed  with  a  fphacelus,  XXXV.

14.
Coat  of,  become  thick,  VII.  9.
Hard in  a part  of it, VII.  11.

XXIV.  18.
Partly  cartilaginous,  VII.  9.
Partly bony, X. 19. XL. 23.

XLIX.  18.
Spleen,  lax,  IV.  g. 16.  24.  26. VII.  9.

X.  19. XIX.  58. XXI.  9.  30.

35. XXII. 8. XXIX. 20.

XXXIV.  1 1.  XL.  23.  XLVII.

35. L.  48. LVI.  31. LXIX.

Very lax, XXI. 23. XXV. 10.
'XXVL 31. XXVIL 28.

XXXVL29. XLin.22. Lll.

8,  LIX.  15.  LXVI.  6.
Rather  firmer  than  ufual,  LIV.  46.
Harder  than  natural,  XVIII.  25.  30.

XXI.  49. XXII.  22. XXIII.

Very  hard, XVIL  lO- XXXVIII.
6.
Spleen, internally pallid, XIX. 58.
XXIX.  12. XLVIII.  38.  LIL

3°-
Of a flelhy-colour, XLIV. ig.

XLVIII.  37. LXIX.  2.
Of  a  compad  fubftance,  and  with-
out blood,  XXXVm.  30.
Having a  pretty folid body  v/ithin,
XXXVI.  II. ^
A  fpherical bone within  the  ex-
ternal part,  XX.  41.
Spleen,  ligaments  of,  thicken'd,  XLIX.
18.
Vefiels of, externally enlarg'd,
XXXVI.  17.  XXXIX.  42.


Vein  of,  thicken'd,  XXVIL  16.
Artery  of,  fcarcely  Inflefted,  XXXVI.
23.  LIV.  37. LXVIL  II.
Without any flexures at a'l,

XLIV.  10.  LXX.  7.
Very  tortuous,  XL.  24.
Wider  than ufual, XL.  22,  23,

24.
More flender  than ufual, LIV.

37-
At fiift more flender, and after

that  more  wide,.  XLIX.  18.
Having  th'cken'd  coats,  XL.  24.

Cartilaginous  coats,  XX.  26.
■  Having  coats  in  fome  places  bonv,

XLr  24.
Almoft  every-whera bony, XL.

22.  See  alfo  Splenic  artery.
Splenic  artery. See  Spleen.

With frequent bony laminae with

a  bony  diverticulum.  III.  2.
Spots  of  a  purple  colour,  throughout  the

fkin,  IV.  9. X.  2.  7.
S.ternum', refembling  the fegment  of  a

circle,  IV.  16.
Prominent about the middle out^

wardly,  XLV.  23,
Sternum, part of, internally black, as

from  contufion,  LIII.  29.
Parts  of,  confum'd  by  an  ancurifm,

XVII.  25.  XXVLg.
Stomach,  in  an  unufual  fituation,  IV.  16.

VI.  12. XVIL  25. XIX. iq.

XXL  24.  XXIX.  12.  XXXIV.

18.  XLV.  16.  XLVIII.  38.
LIL  2.  LVL  12,  LXVIL  I  r.

Defcending  in  a  ftrait  line  from  the

diaphragm  to  the  left  os  pubis,

LXX.  5.
Prolaps'd into the hypogaftrium,

XXXIX.  14.
Drawn  up  within  the  thorax  through

a  wound  of  the  diaphragm,  LIV,

10.
Stomach,  larger  than  it  naturally  is,  XI.

6. XXIIL4. XXVI.  17.  37.

XXIX20.  XXXVin.18.  XL.

23.  XLIL  II.  XLIII.  22.
XLVTl.  18.  XLVIII.  38.  L.  9,
LIII.  24.  LV.  10.  LVI.  12.
LVII.  10. LX.  12. LXIV.5.

19.  LXVI.  9.  LXIX.  2.
Very  long,  XLVIiL  37.  LXX.  5,
Narrower  than ufual, XXXVIII.

30-
4  Q.  2  Contracted,


T N D E X referring to


Con'wae<f, XVIH.  a. XXIV.  34.

XXIX.  14.  XXX.  7.  LV.  n.
LXII.  7.

Very  much,  XXXIV.27.  XXXIX.
33.  XLVIl.  8.
Very much diftended, XXIX.  8.
XXXVIII.  22. XLVIII.  28.
44.  LII.  30.  LIV.  49,
Diftended  with  air,  V.  19.  VIII.  25.
-XVI.  4. XVII.  10. XXI.  24.
36.44.  XXIX.  8.  XXXVI.  20.
LI.  50.  LII.  8.  LV.  10.
Stomach, figure  of, not  quite natural,
XXVII.  30.
More  contraifted  and longer than
ufual  at  the  upper  part,  XXXIX.
14.
Narrower  than  ufual  in  the  middle,
XVI.  38.  XXVI.  31.  XXX.  7.
XXXVI.  2. XXXVII. 28.
XLVIII.  37.
Stomach, externally fomewhat white,

XXXVIII.  16.

Livid,  XXIX.  12. XXXIX.  29.

Blackiih,  XXXVIII.  30.

Red, livid, and black, in feveral

places,  XXXIV.  25.
SufTus'd  with  a Hight  inflammatory

rednefs,  VL8.  XXIX.  8.
Of  a  preternatural  colour,  XXX.  4.
Of  a  brownifh  colour,  LV.  11.
Having  a  very  black fpot, XXX.

16.
Affefted  with  a  gangrene,  XXXV.

With  its  veflels  diftended  by  blood,
VIII.  25. XXX.  4. LV.  10.
. LIX.  12.
Artery  of,  dilated,  XXIX.20.

Surprizingly  tortuous,  XLIII.  24.
With  a  tubercle  form'd  upon  it  ex-
ternally, IV.  19.
With  a  fcirrhous  tuberofity  annex'd

to  it  externally,  XIX.  58.
With  tubercles  that  were  black  by
reafon  of  blood  ftagnating  be-
neath, XXXV.  2.
Stomach,  coats  of,  more  lax  than  ufual,

XXX.  14.  XLIII.  22.

In  fome  places  half-corrupted,  XXIX.

Very  thin,  LV.  10.  LVII.  10.
Thick  and bard altogether, or
in  part, XXIX, 6. 12. I4.

XXXIX.  a6.


Near  the  pylorus,  almeft  of  a
bony  hardnefs,  LXX.  5.
Very  deeply  ting'd by  the bile  of
the gall- bladder in that  place,
XXX.  20.
Stomach, therein  many worms,  XLIII.
22.
A  fmall  quantity  of  bile,  or  a  great

quantity,  XVIIL  2.  XX.  15.
Black  bile,  XLIX.  26.
Eruginous  and  poifonous  bile,  LIX.

18.
A  blackifli  humour  of  a  very  ofFen-

five  fmell,  XXXIX.  26.
A  humour  very  fimilar  to  ink,  XXX.
-i6.
Of  a  green  colour,  or  fomewhat-

green,  VIII.  25.  LIX.  12.
Somewhat-livid,  XXXIX.  29.
Ting'd  with  foot,  as  it  were,  XXIX.
6.  XXX.  2.
5omewhat-thick,  and  of  a  cineri-
tious  colour,  VIII.  27.
Of  a fimilar kind, but  very
foetid,  XXIX.  12.
Very  fimilar  to  the  white  of  an
egg,  XXX.  20.
A  great  quantity  of  yellowifh  matter,
XXXIV.  9.  18.
Stomach,  flightly  red  internally  from  in-
flammation, XXX.  7. LXVI.

9-
With  inflammatory  ftriae,  XVIII.

2.
Beginning  to  be  inflam'd,  LIV,  37.
Inflam'd here-and-there in  feveral

places,  XXJX.  14.
Inflam'd, XXX.  4.  LV.  11. LIX.

Mark'd  with  bloody  points  in  a  cer-
tain place,  XXV.  2.  XXXVIL
2.

Having  blood  on  its  internal  furface,,
which  might  eafily  be  prefs'd
out,  XXIX.  18.
Many  bloody,  and  fome  gangre^
nous  fpots,  ibid.
Stomach,  internally  brown,  livid,  and
fomewhat  black,  XXXIX.  26.
XL.  2 J.  XLII.  13.  XLIX.  14.
LXIV.5.  LXX.  5.

Having  fpots of  a  black  and  livid
colour,  XXI.  30.  XXX.  14.
Very  final!  and  gangrenous,  XIV.

Blacky


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead  Bodies.


Black,  and  affefted  with  a  gangrene,

XXX.  i6.  XLIII.  22.
With many gangrenous erofions,

XXIX.  20.

"With  erofions  whereto arfenic  ad-

her'd,  LIX.  3.
Eroded  in  a  certain  place,  LV.  10.
Very  flightly  ulcerated,  XIV.  35.
With  an  ulcer,  LXV.  3.
Perforated  by  an  ulcer,  XXIX,  14.
Stomach,  within  it  a  tubercle,  XXXVII.
30.  XXXIX.  26.
A  caruncle,  XVI.  36.
Many  glands,  as  it  were,.  LXV.

A cancerous tumour ulcerated,

XXX.  2.

A  very  bad  kind  of  tumour  rup-
tur'd,  XXIX.  12.
Stomach,  extenuated  in  a  certain  place,
XXV.  2.
Wanting  the  internal  coat  in  a  cer-
tain place,  XLIII.  22.
Without  any  rugae,  XLII.  39. LV.

10.
With its rugae  harder  than  ufual,
LIX.  12. «
Stomach, left orifice of, very large,
XXXVn.  30.
Internally  livid, and fomewhat-
black,  XVIII.  2.
Right  orifice  of,  or pylorus,  larger
than  ufual,  and  having  its  ring
deficient  in  one-half  of  it,  XXI.

Hard  and  very  narrow, XXIX.  6.
LXV.  3.

Callous,  XXX.  14.

paving  an  excrefcence  in  its  rin^,
LVI.  6.

Its  ring  fomewhat tumid in two
places,  XXXVII.  30.
With two glandular tubercles,

XXIX.  17.
Divided  into  two  or  three  protu-
berances, as it  were, LXX.

Having  fcarcely  any  traces  of  a  ring
remaining,  LV.  10.
Stomach,  wourided  in  the  middle,  LIV.
8.
Pierc'd  through in  the  upper  part,
LIV,  10.
Subclavian  arteries,  wider  than  naturally,
XLin.  17.  XLIX.  J  J.


Mark'd  internally  with  beginning  of-
fifications,  LXIV.  13.
One  of  them  dilated at the  firft
divifion,  XXIX.  20.
Aneurifm  of  one of  them, XXVI.
21.
Succenturiatus  Ren. Sec  R?n  Succentu-
riatus.


TEMPORAL  mufcles.  VIL  9.
One  of  them  contus'd, LI.  50.

LII.  35.
Wholly  fuffus'd with  blood,  LL

38-
Blackilh  from  a  great  quantity  of
ftagnating  blood,  LII.  30.
And  tumid,  LXIX.  2.
Temporal  artery, branch  of, lacerated,

LI.  50.
Temporal  bone. See  Temporis  Os.
Temporis  Os,  eroded  on  its  furface  by
pus,  LI.  27.
FifTur'd  quite  to  the  tympanum  auris,

Ln.3Q.

Broken in the meatus auditorius^
LII.  25.

Teftes,  coats  of,  become  thick  and  white,
XLII.  28.
Tunica erythroides of, become
thicker  than  ufual,  XLIII.  17.
Vaginalis  of,  having  its  cavity  en-
larg'd  upwards,  XLIII.  22.
And  to a very great  degree,
XLIII.  25.
Every-where  growJi  to  the  teftis,.

VII.  II.  XLII.  28.
Become more denfe than ufual^
XXI.  19.
I'hicker,  XLIII.  17.  LXIV.  7.
Teftes,  tunica  vaginalis  of,  full  of  ferum,
XX.  24.  26,  27.  XLin.  24.
Much  diftended  with  a very  yel-
low water,  XLIII.  22.
Full  of  yellowifh  water,  XXI.  19,
Containing  much  water,  turbid,  or
like  a  lixivium,  XL. 22.  LXIV,

7-
Containing  more  or  lefs  of  a  brown
water  inclining  to  a  yellowj,  or
fimilar  to  urine,  or  to  the  wafh-
ings  of  flefh,  or  difcolour'd,
XLI.  18,  XLIIL  17.  19.  27.
28.

•  Containing


INDEX relating to


Containing  limpiJ  water,  in  which
was  a  certain  corpufcle,  XLIII.

Ttftes, tun'ca albuginpa of, become
thicker  than  ufual, XLIil.  28.
LXIV.  7.
Unequal with fmall tubercles,

XLIII.  18.  28.
Having  a  yellowifh  water  betwixt
its  laminse,  XLIII.  31.
Teftes,  fanguiferous  veffels  of. See  Sper-
matic veflels, un-ufually large,
XXI.  19.
T^ftes, one  of  them furrounded  every-
where  by dilated veins, VIL
II-
A  flap  of  fat  on  one  of  them,  XLIII.

22.
A  bony  little  body beneath  one  of
them,  VII.  II.
Teftef,  a  large  hydatid  lying  upon  each
of  them, and  with what  kind
of  fluid,  IV.  30.
Others  of  a  lefe  fize  lying  thereon,
VII.  II.  XXI.  19. XLin.  17,
18.
A  roundifh  corpufcle  lying  thereon,
XXIV.  16.  XL.  22. XLI.  18.
XLII.  II. XLIII.  22.  24.  25.
27.  LXIV.  7.
A fmaJl reddifli excrefcence lying

thereon,  XLIII.  29.
A  fmall fimbria, or little hydatid
hanging  from  each,  XLIII.  17.
19.
Teftis,  confiderably  larger  than  the  other,
XLIII.  25.
Three  times  as  large,  XLII.  11.
With its epididymis longer than
ufual,  XLIII.  17.  22
• Diminifh'd in  its  fize, XXIV.  16.
XLIII.  24.
Teftis,  canaliculi  of,  whereof  it  confift.«,
more  evident  than  ufual,  XXI.
jg.
Subftance  of,  brown  in  its  colour,
and  inclining  to red, XXIV.
16.
Chang'd into a compaft body,
VIL  li.
Into  a  mentbtanous  body,  II.
20.
Teftis, , cancerous  tcmour  of, continu'd
to  another  which was in the
jnefentery,  XXXIX.  2.


Teftes,  purulent  and  blackifh  at  the  lower

part,  XLII.  28.
Teftis, epididymis  of, very clofely an-
nex'd  to  the  tefiis,  LXIV.  7.
Vas  Deferens  of. See  Semen.
Teftes,  in  women. See  Ovaria.
Thigh-bone. See  Femur.
Thoiax, cavity of, fmall, XIV, 27.

XVI.  4.

Very  fmMl, IV.  16.

On  one  fide  only,  XIII.  3.
Thorax,  within it water, IV. 28. 30,
X.  2. XVIII.  6.  28. XX.  20.
43. XXI.  30.  49. XXIil.  8.
XXIV. 18. XXIX. 20.
XXXVIII.  10.  12,  13.28.  XL.
.23. XLIIL  24. XLVII.  4.
LIII. 16. LIV. 2. LXIX.
16.
In  one  part  only,  or  chiefly,  IV.
35. X.  5. XI.  13. XXII.  14.
16.  XXXVin.6.  LI.  6.  LIV.
49 LVL  7.
Much  water,  or  a  very  great  quan-
tity, X.  II.  XVL2.4.
In  one  part  only,  or  chiefly,  XVI.
19.  26. XVII. 6. XX.  33.

XXIL16.  xxiir.4.  xxxvin.

4.  16.  L.  48.  LXI.  5.
Limpid  water, XVI.  6. XVUI.  2.

XX.  32.  XXXVIII.  22.
In  one  part  only,  XX.  30.  36.
Water  fimilar  to  cow's  whey,  XX.

47-
In  one  part  only,  XX.  39.

In  great  quantity,  LIll.  14.
With  white  concretions,  like  the

white  of  an egg  boil'd, XX.

White  water  in  one  part,  XX.  7.

In  great  quantity,  XLV.  16.
Water of  the  colour  of urine, in
"Confiderable quantity, XXVI.

33-
On  one fide  particularly,  LXIV.

Yellow, or  yellowilh  wafer. XVI.
10.28.  XXIII.  6.  XXVI.  9.
On  one  fide  only,  or  chiefly,  VII.

II.  XVL38.  XXIV.  34.
With  a  kind  of  mucous  pellicles,
XVI. 25.  XXI.34.  XXXVIil.
13.  L.  4.
Water  inclining  to  a  green  or  hhe
colour,  LVI.  26,

In


Preternatural APPEARANCES in dead  Bodies.


In  great  quantity,  XVI.  30.  34.

36.  LIL  8.
With  jelly  and  membranes,  as  it
were,  XVI.  30.  38.
In one part only, or chiefly,
XXXVIII.  30.  LVI.  26.
Brown  or  turbid  water,  XXI.  24.  34.
XXXVU.  30.
In  one  fide, XX. 2.  45. XXI.

In  great  quantity,  with white
concretions,  XVI.  17.
Water,  with  gelatinous  concretions,

XXX.  12.
Water,  with  fmall  membranes,  as  it

were,  fwimming  in  it,  or  a  kind

of  filaments in one part  only,

XVI. 12. 17. 40. XX. 30.

XXII.  8. LIL  8.
Saltifli water on one fide only,

XVI.  14,
Thorax,  within  it  red,.fomewhat-bloody,

or  bloody  water, IV.  26- XL

II. XIV. 35. XVIL 23.

XVIII.  8. XXL  15. XXV  i.

21.  31.  35. XXX.  10. LIV.

39-
On one fide, V. 11. VI, 12.
XVIL  17.  XXL  7.  XXn.  22.
LII.8.
Blood,  extravafated,  XXI.47.  XXXI.
14.  LIII.  33.  LIV.  10.
On  on  fide  only,  XX.  17. IX.  4.
XVIL 14. 17. XXVII. 28.
XL.  29.  LIL  35.  LIII  40.
Blo#d,  extravafated  in  great  quantity,
LIl.  34.
On  one  fide  only,  XXVI.  3.  11.
29.  LIII.  3.  5.  26.29.
Coagulated  blood,  feme  fmall  portions

of  it  on  one  fide,  XXII.  16.
A  very  great  quantity  of  pus,  LI.  20.
On  vne  fide only,  XXII.  6. 10.
J  2.  XXXVI.  4,  LIV.  6.
A  puiiform  ferum on  one  fide  only,

.X^-53-.

A  kind  of  fanious  ferum,  or  faniius
on  one  fide  only,  VI.  12.  XXI.
16.

A  puni'ent  ferum,  filling  one  fid'-,
XX.  56.

A  foeiid  ferum  of  a  cineritious  co-
lour, XXI.  32.

A  putrid  and  offenfive  matter,  LXX.


Thymus,  large  in  a  young  woman,  XVIL

10.  ■
Thyroid  gland,  diforder  of,  XL  15.  XVL
30. XXm.4. L.  31,  32,  33,
34,35,36.  LIL  8.  LVl.  II.
Thicknefs of, greater than ufual,
XXXIV.  15.  L.  31.  33,  34.  36.
LVI.  12.
Confiderable,  XVI.  38.  XXin.4.
XXVI.  21.
Hardnefs  of,  ibid.  &  L.  31,  33.
Tibia  Os. See  Leg.
Tonfils,  tumid,  XLIV.  3.

One  of  them  harder  than  ufual,  and

fuppurated,  ibid.
Coat  of,  become  harder  than  ufual,
and  almoft  gelatinous  in  both,
ibid.
Tongue,  very  long,  XLVIII.50.

Become  thick,  VIII.  25.  XLIV.  3.
Tongue,  veflels  of,  become  large on  the
upper  furface,  XLIV.  3.
Glandular  expanfion  of,  eroded  with
little ulcers here -and -there,
XLII.  40.
Maik'd with cicatrices, XLIV.

15-

Trachea  Aneria. See  Afpera  Arteria.

Triangularis mufcle of bread,  inflam'd,
XXI.  36.

Tubes,  Falloppian,  ligaments  of,  aiTeiled-
with  phlogofis,  XLVl.  17.
Bcfet with globular bodies con-
taining a  ftony  nucleus,  XLVL

24-
One  of  them  contradted,  LXVII.

9-
In one of their ligaments nerves
thicker  than  ufual,  XLV.  23.
A larger nervous pl-'xus in one

than  in  the  other,  XLVII.  30.
The fame plexus very fmall in
one,  in  the  other  none  at  all,
XLVII.  30.
Tubes, Falloppian, with hydatids near
the  larger  orifice,  XLV.  23.  L.

One  of  th'em  drawn downwards  by

a  neighbouring  hydatid,  XLVII.

12.
One  of  them become thicker and

larger  than  ufual,  XXIX.  14.
One  of  them  d'fiitnded  near  ro  the

uteru', with an almoft  li.mpid

mucus,  XXI.  47.,

One


INDEX referfing to


One  of  them  immoveable,  LXVII,

9-
The  fimbriae  of  one  of  them  rough
with very hard corpufcles,
XLVI.  20.
One  of  them  without  fimbriae,iXLVI.

26.
One  of  them  partly  confum'd  by  an
abfcefs,  XLVI.  27.
Tubes,  Falloppian,  white,  XXVII.  2.
Aft'cdcd  with  a  phlogofis,  XLVI.  17.
Having final! bodies adhering to

them  externally,  XLVII.  28.
Become  thicker  than ufual,  and  di-
lated near  the  uterus,  XXI,  47.
Wider  than  ufual  at the  extremity

oppofite  thereto,  XXVI.  13.
Abounding  much  with  their  puriform
humour,  XXI.  24.  XXVI.  13.
With  a  white  mucous  fluid,  XLV.

23.
Witn  a  vell^w fluid inclining  to
a  flefli-colour,  XXXV,  16.
Tubes,  Fallopoian,  fhut  up  in  great  part,
XXL  4.7.
Impervious,  XLVI.  23,  24. LII.  2.
Shut  up  at  the  fimbria:,  LXVII.  g.

LXVIII.  6.
Shut  up  there,  and  agglutinated  to

the  ovaries,  XL.  21.
Shut  up  there,  and  agglutinated  to
the  ovaries,  but  without  fimbrije,
XXVI.  13.  LXVIII.  II.
One  of  them  feeming  to  be  fliut  up
there,  but  not  being  fo,  XXI.
24.
One  of  them  fliut  up  there,  and  one

at  the  uterus,  XXIX.  12.
One  of  them  folid,  and  terminating
in  the  midft  of  its  ufual  courfe,
LXIX.  16.
Both  of  them  fliut  up  towards  the

uterus,  XVI.  2.  LVII.  2.
Both  of them  fliut  up about  the
middle  of  their  length,  XXIIL
II.  LXL7.
Tympanum  of  the  ear.  "See  Ear.


V


A  G  I  N  A  Muliebris, very fmal),

XLVI.  20.
Short, and very foft, LVU.  2.
LXVU.  9.


Voiy  much  contrafled  by  reafon  of
its  parietes  being  conne£led  to-
gether on  one  fide,  L.  51.
Almofl:  altogether  without  any  cavity,

LXVU.  9.
Longer  and  wider  than  ufual,  XLV.

16.
Lax  and  drawn  downvirards,  XXXIV.

II.
Smear'd  over  internally  and  univer-
fally with a fomewhat  -  white
matter,  XXL47. XXXIV. 33.
L.  51.
With  a  thick  matter  of  a  cineri-
tious  hue,  LXVII.  14.
AfFeded  with  a  phlogofis,  ibid.
Thick, prolaps'd, and ulcerated,

XLV.  II.
Having  thick,  cancerous,  and  ulce-
rated parietes,  XXXIX.  33.
An  excrefcence  of  a  fcirrhous  na-
ture on  both  fides,  XLV.  16.
Univerfally  eroded  on the internal
furface by a cancer, LXVI.
2.
Blackifli  and  eroded,  LII.  2.
Very  near  to  a  gangrene, XLVII.

12.  LXV.  8.
Gangrenous,  livid,  and  fmelling  very
ofFenfivcly,  XLVII. 36.  LXIX.
16.
Perforated  by  an  ulcer  which  open'd
into the inteftinum redtum,
LXIX.  16.
Having  the  fat  which  lies  near  to
its  fides  converted  imo a  fcir-
rhus,  XXXIX.  33.
Vas  Deferens. See  Semen.
Veffels,  fanguiferous.  See  Arteries,  Veins,

Intercoflal,  Spermatic.
Veflels,  fanguiferous, with  bony  fcales,
or  the  beginnings  of  them,  in
their  coats. See  Aorta,  Cere-
brum, arteries  of.
So  flaccid  as  not  to  bear  the  touch.

LL57.
Fill'd  with  a  great  quantity  of  blood,

LU.  2.
Narrower  in  proportion  than  ufual,
XXX.  12.
Large,  larger  in  the  belly  than  in  other
parts  in  proportion,  LX.  6.
Their  external  coats  apparently  mu-
cous by  reafon  of  collefted  wa-
ter, XXf.  29.

V^ins.


t-j.;.


Preternatural APPEARANCES  in  dead  Bodies.


Veins. See  Azyga,  Cava,  Iliac,  Jugular,
Pulmonary.
Turgid  with  air,  XXXI.  2.
Diftended with blood in feveral
places,  LIV.  44.
Veins,  more  blood  in the  upper than  in

the  lower,  XXIX.  20.
Vertebrae. See  Spine.
Vertebra,  holiow'd  -out  by  an  aneurifm,
or  very  much  injur'd,  XXI.  47.
XXVI.  3.  II.  XL.  26.29.
Vertebra,  firft,  anchylofis  of  the  with  the
occipital  bone,  LXIX.  8.
And  of  the  fecond with the  third,
and  other  preternatural  appear-
ances, ibid.
Vertebra,  fecond,  the  ligament  of  its  den  ■
toid  procefs  grown  into  one  fub -
ftance  withitfelf,  LXII.  11.
One  of  the  lateral ligaments  of  its
dentoid procefs longer and
thicker  than  the  other,  LXIII.
19.
Other  diforders  of  thefe  lateral  and
of the tranfverfe ligaments,
LXIX.  8.
Vertebrae,  fix  of  the  fuperior  of  the  back,
broken,  LII.  34.
One  of  the  lumbar fraclur'd,  LIV.
26.
Vertebral arteries, wider than ufual,
XXVL  21.
One  of  them four- times  wider  than

the  other,  LIIl.  40.
Tortuous,  XXXVII.  30.
Vertebral  artery,  not  coming  ofF  from  the
fubclavian,  but  from  the  aorta,
III.  20.
Somewhat-hard,  thick, "and  white,  in

one  half  of  it,  LX.  4.
Unequally  dilated,  IX.  18.
Veficula  fellis. See  Liver.
Veliculae  Seminales. See  Seminal.
Vifcera. See  B^lly.
Vifcera,  almoft  white,  XXX  VL  11.

Of a fomewhat  -  brown colour,

XXXVIII.  18.
So  lax  as  not  to  bear  the  touch,  LI.

57-
Ureters, one or both of them dilated,
XIL  2. XXXIX.  33. XL.  2.
XLII.  II. 15. 20. 28. 40.
XLIV.  15.  XL VII.  8.  LII.  35.
LXVI.  2.
Dilated  here-and-there,  XLVI.  2.
VoL.m.


One  of  them  become  longer  than  the

other,  XLII.  11.
Both  of  them  very  much  enlarg'd  in

length  and  in  width,  IV.  ig.
One  of  them  very much  contradled,

XL.  18.
Containing  urine,  or  diftended  there--

with,  IV.  ig.  XLVII.  8.
Diftended with urine and pus,

XLII.  15.  20  28.
One  diftended  with  urine,  the  other

with  air,  XXXIX.  33.
Half-full  of  a  mucous  matter,  XLIV.

Opening  with  very  large  orifices  into
the  bladder,  XL.  23,  24.  XLIL
11.28.  XLVI.  17.  LII.  35.
Ureters, coats of, become thicker  than
ufua!,  IV.  ig.  XLII.  11.
Internally  red,  XLII.  1 1.  XLIV.  15.
Having  hydatids  internally,  ibid.
The  internal coat  of one  of  them
doubled  into  the  form  of  a  valve,
XLIV.  15.
Urethra, male, very much contraiSed,
XLII.  40.
By  a  third  part  of  its  length,  XLIL

39- ^
To  two  fingers  breadths,  XLIV.
10.
More  moift  than  ufual  on  its  internal

furface,  XLIV.  3.  5.  7.
White  on  the  internal  furface,  LX.

12.
Redder  than  ufual  on that  furface,

XLIV.  3  5.
Inflam'd  on  that  furface,  V.  6.
Ulcerated  internally  near  the  bladder,

XLII.  28.
Mark'd with cicatrices internally,
VIII.  6.  XL.  29.
With  whitiflj, oblong, and  pro-
tuberating  lines,  IV.  ig.  XLIV.
7.  10.  LXIIL  13.
With  fibres  protuberating  near  the

bladder,  XL.  2g.
With  an  oblong,  thin,  and  flefiiy

excrefcence,  XLII.  39.
With  a  kind  of  prominent  ring,
XLIII.  13.
Urethra,  male,  internal  coat  of, become
thicker  than  ufual,  and  whiter
XLII.  28.
Larger  canaliculi  of,  all  of  them,  or
almoft  all  of  them,  obliterated,
4  R  VIIL


I N D E X referring to


VIII.  6. XXIV.  6. XLII.  39,
40. XLIV. 7.  9. 12. LII.

3°-
The  orifices  of  them fewer  and

more  fmall  than  ufual,  LX.  i3.
LXIII.  13.
Cowper's  glands  therein,  one  of  them
hard  like a  ligament, XLIV.
3.

One  of  them  become  thicker,  and
the  other  more  flender,  than  na-
tural, XLIV.  12.
One  of  them  having  its  du£t  con-
trai^lcd,  or  obliterated, ibid.

One  of  the  du£ls  of  this  gland  di-
lated, but  contradled  at  its  ori-
fice, ibid.
Littre's  gland  of,  cover'd  over  very
thickly  with  fanguiferous  veflels
on  its  internal furface,  XLIV.

Profta;e  gland  of. See  Proftate.

Catuncula  Seminalis. See  Seminal.

Bulb  of,  without  any  blood  therein,
XLIII.  20.
Urethra,  female,  red  at  one  orifice,  and
at  the  other  mark'd  with  protu-
berating  fmall  veflels,  XLVI,
24.

Internal  coat  of,  relax'd,  and  pro-
minent through  the  inferior  ori-
fice in  the  form  of  a  fmall  red-
difh  body,  L.  51.  LVI.  21.
LXX.  10.
Very  fmall  veflels,  as  it  were,
throughout  that  coat,  XLVI.
19,  20.

The  veffels  diftended  with  blood  un-
der that  coat, XLVII.  12. L.

5'-
Small  calculi  underneath  it,  XXXIV.

33-
A  white  and  tough  matter  proceeding

from  its  canaliculi,  XLV.  2i.
Corpus glandofum of the, become

thicker  and  heavier  than  ufual,

XXXIV.  II.

Thicker  than ufu.l,  and  fcirrhous,

XXXIX.  33.
Uterus, firuated fomewhat lower than

ufual, XXXIV. II. XLV.

II.
Fa  Ing  forwards,  XLV.  16.
Indin'd  to  one  fide,  XXiX.  12.  20.

XXXV.  12. 16.  XL.  24.  XLV.


16.  XLVII.  18.  36. XLVIII.

32-  34.  35-  37»  38- LV.  10.

LVI.  26.  LXlX.  10.  16.
Large,  and  very  large, XLVII.  28.

XLVIII.  44.
Small,  and  very  fmall,  XXXIV.  rr,

XLVL  20.  XLVII.  2.
Contrafted into  itfelf fo  as to re-

femble  a little ball, XLVIL

Slightly furrow'd anteriorly, LII.

28.
Uterus,  external  pimple  or  little  tubercle

of, full of a whitifh pus,

LXVI.  2.
External tubercles of, XIX. er.

XXII. 18. XXXVII. 29.

XXXVIII.  28. XLV. 27,
LVI.  20.

Scirrhous  tumour  of,  almoft  external,

XLVII.  34.
Large  cancerous  tumour  of,  XXXIX.

12.
Uterus,  fomewhat  inflam'd,  XX.  9.

Very much inflam'd in a certain

place,  XLVIII.  28.
Livid  from  inflammation,  XXI.  29.
Smelling  offenfively,  XXVI.  31.
Having  the  ofFenfive  fmeil  of  a  fpha-

celus,  as  it  were,  XXI.  24.  29.
Uterus,  parietes  of,  become  thicker  than

ufual, XXI. 24. XXIII.  4.

XLVII. 14. 28. LII. 6.

LXVIII.  9.
Thinner  than  ufual,  XXXIV.  ir.
Harder  than  ufual, XXIII.  4. L.

48.
Softer  and more lax than ufual,

XXXIX.  33.  XLV.  II.
^  Without  blood,  XXI.  24.

'  Having  a  fanguiferous finus  dilated
within  their  fubftance,  LXVII.

9-
Internally  livid,  XXXIV.  11.  LVIL

Chang'd on  their internal  furfaces
into a febaceous fubftance,
XXXVIII.  34.
Uterus,  cavity  of,  very  narrow,  XL.  24.
Having  its furface  fomewhat-bloody
and  blackifh,  IX.  16.
Befet  with  many  glandular  bodies,
XLVII.  4.
With  many  excrefcences  of  va-
rious kinds,  VII,  17.  XII.  2.
XXIII.


Preternatural  APPEARANCES  in  dead  Bodies.


XXIII.  II. XXXVII.  29.
XLV. 16. LXVn. II.
LXVIII.  6.
Uterus,  fundus  of,  fmall,  LV.  10.

Somewhat-green  externally,  and  in-
clining to  a  red  colour,  XXVI.

31-
Having  its parietes thicken'd,  LII.

4-
Parietes of  the, having a globular
tumour  within  their fubftance,
XLV.  23.
Uterus,  fundus  of  the,  having  its  cavity
enlarg'd tranfverfely, XLVIl.

28-  33-
Having  its  anterior  and  pofterior  fur-
face  conne6ted  to  each  other  by
fmail  membranes,  XXXIX.  37.
XLVII.  28.
Having  its  furface  lax,  LII.  6.  LXX.
10.
Rough,  XLVIII.  38.
Unequal  with  very  fmall  tubercles
of  a  white  colour,  and  fmall
verrucas,  as  it  were,  XLV.2it
XLVII.  14.
With  excrefcences  and  protube-
rances of  various  kinds, XLVI.
17,  24.. XLVIL  21.  23.  28.
31.33,  34.  XLIX.8.  LXV.
8.  LXVL  8.  LXX.  9.
Mark'd with bloody drops  lying
imder  it, or  points,  and little
lines,  LII.  6.  LXIX.  16.
Of a red colour, XXXV. 12.
XLVI. 17. XLVII. 12. 18.
LXVIL  14.
Of  a black colour inclining  to
rednefs, XXIII. ii. XLVII.
16.  LXX.  10.
Livid,  XXI.  24.

Black  and  gangrenous,  LVI.  18.
Smear'd  over  wirh  a  bloody  mucus,
XLV.  21.  23.
With black blood, XLVIII.
38.
Moift with a vifcid humour,
LXIX.  16.
Uterus,  fundus  of, containing a  yeilo,w
ferum  in  its  cavity,  XLVII.  16.
Having  its  cavity  full  of  a  white  and
fomewhat  green  matter,  XLVII.
14.
Of  a gelatinous mucus, XLV,
16.


A  large  mafs  of  concreted  blood,
XLVIII.  44.
Containing  part  of  the  placenta  ad-
hering to  rr,  or  very  clofely  af-
fix'd,  ibid.  &  XLVIII.  28.
Uterus,  cervix  of  the,  longer  than  it
ought  to  be,  and  very  long,.
XXI.  47. XLV. 2. LXVII.

9-

Narrower  than it ought to be at
both  extremities,  XLVII.  28.
Narrower  than  it  ought  to  be  at
the  lower  extremity,  LXVII.  9.
Uterus, cervix of the, parietes thereof
containing  two  cells  within  their
fubftance,  LV.  10.
Parietes  thereof  thicker than ufual,
XXXIX.  33.  LV.  10.
With  a  fmall  membrane  pendulous-

therein,  XXIX.  20.
With  excrefcences, XLVII,  23.

28.  30.
With  its  internal  furface  tuberous,

as  it  were,  XLVII.  34.
With  fmall  red  lines  on  the  inter-
nal furface,  XLV.  16.
With the  internal  furface  red,  as
if  from  inflammation,  XLV..
-23.
Of  a  brown colour  inclining-  to

red,  XXVI.  13.
Of  a  blackifh  colour, XLVL

27.
Eroded  in  (bme  places,  LII.  2.
Having  a  fordid  ulcer,  XLVII».

8.
Having a cancerous ulcer,.

XXXIX.  33.
Having  a  great  quantity  of  ge-
latinous mucus,  XLV.  16.
Having  a  very  tenacious  mucus^
of  a black colour, and in-
clining to  yellow,  XXI.  47.
Having  a white fluid matter,,
LII.  6.
Uterus,  ofculum  of,  dilated,  XXVI.  31.
LII.  6.  LXVII.  14.
Very  fmall,  LXVII.  9.
Corrugated,  as  it  were,  in  the  corona,.

XLVI.  17.
Without  any  corona, XLVII.  14..

LVI.  10.  17.  LVIL  2.
Surrounded  with  a  corona  that  was
thicker  than  ufua],„  XLVI.  27-
XLVIIL  38.  LV.  10.
'  4  R  2.  Having;


INDEX referring to, &c.


Having  its  corona  harder  than  ufual,
too-ether with fome tumour,
XLVII.  36.
Together  with  a  fcirrhous  promi-
nence, XLVI.  23.

Divided  into  two  prominences,  as  it
were,  XLVII.  16.  18.

With  other  excrefcences  and  promi-
nences, XLVII.  24.  30.

Befmear'd  with  a  white  and  thickifh
humour,  XXVI.  13.  LV.  10.

Having  a thick cineritious matter,
LXVII.  14.
A  puriform  mucus,  XLVII.  18.
Uterus,  ofculum  of,  affected  with  a  phlo-
gofis.  XLVII.  14.

Of  a  violet  or  red  colour  inclining
to  blacknefs,  XLVI.  27.
XLVIII.  42.

A  little  eroded  in  fome  places,  LII.
6.

Lacerated  in  fome  places,  XLVIII.
44.

Coalefc'd,  LXVII.  11.
Shut  up  with a little membrane,
XLVI.  17.
Uterus,  Vagina  of. See  Vagina.


Uterus,  ligaments  of,  lax,  XLV.  ii.

OF  o  black  colour,  XXXIV.  n.
Broad ligaments of, with varicous
blood-veffds,  XLV.  16.
Uterus,  tubes  of. See  Tubes,  Falloppian.
Uvula,  in part deftroy'd and cicatriz'd,
XLIV.  15.


W

WOMEN,  genital  parts  of. See
Muheoria.
Womb. See  Uterus.
Worms,  round,  in  the  ftomach,  XLVIII.

37-
In  the  inteftines,  XXXV.  14.
In  the  fmall inteftines, XXXV.
16.  XLVII.  12.  LXII.  2.

In  great  number,  XVI.  38.
In  the  jejunum,  XXXiV  33.
In  the  ileum,  XiX.  17, 18.  XXX.

20.  XXXIV.  9.
Jn  the  beginning of  the colon,

LIV.  49.
Worms,  odour  of,  VL  2.  XXI.  19.  29.


INDEX


INDEX  the


REFERRINGTO

Names and  Paffages  mod worthy  of Notice.

'The  Roman  or  Capital  Figures  refer to  the  Letters  ; the  Common  or  Small
Figures  to  the  Articles.


ABDOMEN  may  not  appear
tenfe,  though  its  cavity  be  fill'd
with  extravafated  blood, LIII.

40. LIV.  8.
Abdomen,  tumour  of  only, though  the

vifcera feem'd to be affeded,

L.  49.
Mufcles  of,  the  miftakes  of  a  certain

perfon  in  eftimating  their  powers,

LIV.  12.
Abdomen,  violent  blow  on,  how  fudden

death  may fometimes follow,

though  no  part  within  is  rup-

tur'd,  LIV.  42.
Abdomen found, the  vifcera, neverthe-

lefs,  divided  by  blows  or  prefTures,

LIV.  14.
When  this  cafe  may  be  greatly  fuf-

pefted,  LIV.  15.
Abortions  of  male  fcetufles, not  fo  fre-
quent as they feem to be,

XLVIII.  9,  10.
Abortion,  of  fome  of  its  caufes,  XLVIII.

17.  25.
Abftinence  from  all kinds of  food  and

drink  for  fix  days,  XVIII.  25.

Vid.  Fafting.
Abftinence,  too  great, why  the bile in

fuch  a  cafe  is  found  in  a  large

quantity in the gall-bladder,

XXIX.  13.  XXX.  7.
Academy,  Royal,  at  Bononia,  commended,

Pref.  6.  15.  XVII.  26.  LV.  26.


Royal,  of  Paris,  commended, LXI.

13-
Imperial,  at  Peterfburgh,  XLII.  30.

Achores,  repell'd. Vid.  itch.

Adipofe  Membrane,  remarks  on  its  ftruc-
ture, and fome writers con-
cerning it,  L.  25.
Excrefcences  of. Vid.  Excrefcences.

Adolphus,  Chrift.  Mich,  of  the  Caefar.
Acad.  N.  C.  commended,
XXXVIIL  25.  XLIL  42.  LV.

IS-

After-birth. See  Placenta.
Air  is  naturally  in  the  blood,  and  why,
V.  18.
How  it  is  admitted  and difcharg'd,
V.  27,  28.
Air,  many  bubbles  of  in  the  blood,  how
occafion'd,  V.  18.  25, 26. 28,
29.  XXXI.  3.
How they prove; very injurious,
V.  18,  20,  21.  23,  24. XXIII.
16.
What  animals  naturally  have  fuch,
V.  22.
Air,  injefled  into  the  veins  of  living  ani-
mals, efFecSs  of, and why not
always the fame, V. 21, 22,
23.
Who  firft  made  the  experiment,
V.  21.
Agricola,  Jo.  Will.  M.  D. at  Ratifbon,

commended,  XXIII.  18.
Alberti,  Mich.  P.  Profeff.  at  Hall,  com-
mended, XIX.  48.

Albertiniis,


INDEX referring to


Albertinus, Hippol. Franc, formerly  P.
Profeir.  at  Bonon-.  commended,
IX.  3. XVI.  42. XVil.  J.  21.
XViri.  19. XXI.  31. XXIII.
22.  XXXI.  28.  XL.  28.  XLIL
16.
Medical obfervation communicated
by, V.  13. VI.  c. X.  21.
XXVI.  6. XLI.  5. XLVIII.
14.  L.  38.
Anatomico-medical  obfervations  by,
IX.  4. XV. II. XVI. 42.
XXV.  17,  XXVIII.  3.
What  he  was  wont  to  do,  or  omit,
in  the  treatment  of  epileptic  pa-
tients, IX.  6.
His  method  of  eafmg  arthritic  pains,

.LVII.  8.
From  what  figns  he  fufpe£ted  a  latent
inflammation and fphacelus of
the  inteftines,  XXXV.21.
His  advice  concerning,  and  method
of  curing,  abfcefles  in  the  liver,
XXXVI.  6.
His  fuccefsful  treatment  of  a  fcirrhus

of  the  uterus,  XXXIX.  35.
His  relation  of  the  cure  of  three  con-
firm'd  phthifes,  XXXVIII.  32.
Albinus,  Bern.  Siegr.  P.  Profeff.  at  Ley-
den, commended, XIV. 38.
LVIII.  13.
Albrecht, Jo.  Seb. P.  Profeff. Coburg,
commended,  XIII. 4.  XXIII.  18.
XXXVIII.  19.  45.  XLVIII.  14.
25.
Amaurofis  fometimes  comes  on  gradually,

xni.  5.

From  obftruflion,  but  not  of  the
optic  nerve,  ibid.

Who  formerly  fuppos'd  it  to  arife
from  convulfions  injuring  the
optic  nerve,  ibid.

A  paffage  of  Hippocrates  concerning
them,  in  confequence  of  wounds
of  the  eye-brows,  explain'd,
ibid.

Obfervations  on,  arifing  from  dif-
ferent caufes,  XIII.  6.  II,  12.

Perfons  counterfeiting,  how  detedled,
XIII.  13.
Amputation  of  a  cancerous  leg,  and  its
confequences, hiftory of, V.

4-
Amyand, Claudius, Serjeant  -  furgeoiij
commended,  XXX.  8.


Anafarca,  how  it  feems  to  be  occafion'd
by  a  kind  of  jelly,  XXXVIU.
26,  27.
When  great,  is  not  feated  only  under

the  (kin,  ibid.
Reliev'd by drinking cow's urine,
XXXVIII.  ID.
Anatomy,  ufeful  in  the  difcovery  of  the
latent  caufes  of  difeafes, XLVIII.
64.
Of  external  difeafes,  L.  26.
And  in  the  proper  treatment  of  an
ozaena,  XIV.  22.
Anatomy,  diligent  attendance  to,  its  ufe
in the cure of, and progno-
flication concerning, difeafes,
XXXVIII.  7.
Not  eafy  to  determine  thereby,  that
there  is  no caufe  of  a difeafe
which  could  fall  under  the  no-
tice of  the  fenfes,  XV.  14,
Its ufefulnefs in detefling errors,
XVI.  25.
Anatomical  experiments,  cats  proper  fub-
jefls for, as being difficultly
kill'd,  LII.  26.
Aneurifms,  internal,  why  fuppos'd  known
by  the  ancients,  LXIV.  17.
Whether  fufficiently  known to the
ancients,  and  why  not  fo,  XVII.
I,  &  feq.
Why  ufually  attended  with  a  ftrong
pulfation  of  the  artery,  XXIV.

r 35-
Why  they  fometimes  exift  without
any  pulfation, and whence a
pulfation  without  an  aneurifm.
Vid.  Pulfation.
Aneurifms,  divifion  of,  XVII.  5.

Two  in  the  fame  fubjeft,  viz.  one
of  the  heart,  and  another  of  the
aorta;  which  preceded,  and  why,
XVIL  22.  ^

Within  the  thorax,  how  they  hinder
refpiration,  XVII.  i.
Bending  the  body  forwards  being
found  the  moft  eafy  pofture,  a
confirm'd  fign  of, XVIIL  17.
&  feq.
Other  figns  of,  XVIIL  19.
How  arifing  from  coughs,  and  af-
fedions  of  the  mind,  ibid.
From blowing  a trumpet,  XVIIL
24.
How  one  of  the  bones  of  the  fter-
num.


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  inoft  worthy  of  Notice.


num,  which  was  deficient,  feem'd

to  be  included  within  an  aneu-

rifm,  XXVII.  24.
Aneurifms within the  abdomen, to all

appearance, though not really

exifting,  XXXIX.  19,  20.
How  to  be  fuppos'd  in  the  brain,  III.

8,  &  feq.
Whether  they  happen  between  the

bones,  LII.  39.
Why  they  fometimes  form  cavities  in

the  adjacent  bones,  without  af-

feding  the fofter  parts, XXI.

48.
Aneurifm,  one  of  the  parietes  of  which

was  form'd  by  the  lungs,  XXI.

47-
The greateft part of which was

form'd by  the  vertebra,  and  ef-

pecially  their  mufcles,  XL.  26.

29.
Many  found  in  the  fame  man,  L.  9.
Two,  each  fituated  in  the  fame  parts

of  the  arm.  III.  8.
Aneurifms,  fpurious, what kind of ap-
pearance they have at firft,

XXIV.  37.
Which appearances are fometimes

produftive  of  very  great  difor-

ders,  and  even  death,  ibid.
Their  exiftence,  how  certainly  known,

ibid,  at  the  end.
Aneurifms,  external, how  they  occafion

death  without  burfting,  L.  12.
In  the  bam,  cafe  of  one  cur'd,  L.  9.
At  the  bending  of  the  arm,  L.  7,  8.
Method  of  curing  by  ligature,  how

old,  L.  54.
How  certainly  known in  the  inter-

coftal  artery,  L.  49.
At  the  groin,  L.  ii.  &  feq.
Of  the  aorta. Vid.  Aorta
Aneurifms,  fuppos'd  to  be  form'd,  though

not  found  fo  on  diffe£tion,  XL.

27-
Anguifola,  Jo.  Bapt. the  pope's  legate,

his  difeafe,  and  the  appearances

on  difleiStion,  IV.  13.
AnhorniusjSylv.  Sam.  (Caefar.  Acad.N.C.)

commended,  XXXVIII.  35.59.

63-
Anus,  prolapfus  of. Vid.  Reflum.

Sphinfter  of,  whether  not  frequently
relax'd  in  apoplexies,  and  why
fo,  II.  24.


Though entirely divided, reco-
vering its powers of adtion,
XXXII.  8.
Anus,  imperforate,  cafe  of  a  perfon  living
an  hundred  years  with,  XXXII.

3-

When  an  opening  fhould  be  at-
tempted to  be  made  in  it,  and
when  not,  ibid.  &  4.

Why  in  the  cow,  fpoken  of  by  Ari-
ftotle,  it  could  not  be  kept  open
after  cutting,  ibid.
Anus,  whence  difcharges  from  it  of  the
appearance  of  pus,  though  not
fo,  XXXII.  13.

Membranes,  and  excrefcences  falfe
and  true,  or  compos'd  of  both,
excreted  by.  Vid.  Inteftines,
polypous  concretions  of.

Calculi,  difcharg'd  by. Vid.  Biliary,
Cyftic,  Inteftine.
Aorta,  not  only  three, but  four  arteries
arifing  from  its  curvature, Vid.
Vertebral.

Its  trunk  inflefled,  LXVII.  11.

When  its  valves,  become  bony,  are,
or  are  not,  the  caufe  of  fuddea
death,  XXVIL  19.
Aorta,  inflammation  of,  fcarcely  mention'd
firice  the  time  of  Aretaeus,
XXVI.  36.
Aorta,  coats  of,  thinner  than  natural,
confequences  of,  XXVII.  14,

Internal  coat  of,  how  render'd  un-
equal, XXIII.  5.

Whence  longitudinal  depreflions
form'd  in, XXXIV.  35.

A  large  tubercle  form'd  in,  how  cer-
tainly known,  XXVI.  39,  40.
Aorta,  dilatations  of, on what account
they  occafion  death,  XXVI.  32.

How  thefe,  and  other  vices,  happen
in  fome  branches  of  the  arteries
rather  than in  others, XXVI.

23-

Whence  the  parietes  are  fometimes
thicker  and  harder  in '  thefe
places  than  in  others,  XXVf.
24.

Why,  when  they  happen  near  the
heart,  they  generally  burft  on
their  pofterior  fide,  ibid.
Aorta,  aneurifms  of,  obfervations  on  their
beginning  and  progrefs,  XVII.
35  4-

Their


INDEX referring to


Their divifion into fac-like and
others,  XVII.  27.
Whence this firft  arofe, XXIV.

37  •
Sac-like, not unfrequent, XVIII.

-35-  , .  r „

Their internal panetes not form  d,

as  is  generally  fuppos'd,  by  the

coats  of  the  arteries,  XVII.  29.

XXVI.  9.

By  whom  this was firft obferv'd,
XVII.  29.

Whence  occafion'd,  ibid.
Whence  a  matter  like fuet  or  lard
has been fometimes found in
them,  XVIII.  23.
Aorta,  aneurifms  of,  fometimes  very  dif-
ficultly known,  XL.  29.
Signs  of, fometimes attended with
thofe  of  other  difeafes, XLII.
14.

How  the  abfence  of  fome  of  them
frequently  deceives  phyficians,
who  therefore  deny  that  there
arefuch,  XVII.  26,  27.  XVIII.
17,  &  feq.  XLV.26.
Aorta,  aneurifms  of,  how  they  fometimes
feem to  become lefs, XXVI.

How  they  occafion  pain  and  numb-
nefs  of  the  fuperior  extremities,
XXVI.  23.

Pulfation,  fometimes  wanting  in  thefe,
as  well  as  in  external  aneurifms,
and  why,  XVIII.  20.
By  whom  this  was  firft  obferv'd  in
bo:h,  ibid.
Aorta,  aneurifms  of,  why  more  frequently
in  its  curvature,  or  between  this
and  the  heart,  than  in  any  other
part  of  it,  or  in  the  pulmonary
artery,  XVIII.  24.

How  they  erode  or  confume  the  bones
to  which  they  are  contiguous,
XVIIL  27.

Eroding  ichors  may  not  only  be  the
effe£i:,  but  even  the  caufe  of
thefe,  XVIIL  26.

Whether  a  caries  of  the  bones,
whereby  the  fupport  of  the  ar-
tery is  remov'd,  may  be  the
caufe  of  the  aneuril^ms  ;  and
whether  the  efFufion  of  the  bony
juices  can  occafion  bony  la-
mellae in  them,  XVIIL  29.


Aorta,  aneurifms  of,  may  form  cavities  in
the  vertebrae  without  injuring
their  ligaments,  XL,  26.  29.  &
feq.

May  fometimes  form  fuch  cavities  in
the  vertebrae,  as to  difpofe  the
fpine  to  be  broke,  XL.  27.
Aorta,  aneurifm  of,  fo  large  as  to  fill  half
the  belly,  XL.  26.

How,  after  their  burfting  internally,
perfons  may  live  fome  hourSj
XVII.  16.  XXVI.  24.

Burfting  externally,  cafes  of,  XXVI,
9.  XL.  26.
When likely to happen, what
ought  to  be  avoided,  and  what
done,  XXVI.  10.
Aorta, aneurifms  of, what treatment is
requifite  in  their  incipient  ftate,
XVII.  30.

Obfervations  concerning  this  treat-
ment, ibid.

Anatomical  obfervation  of  one  fo
cur'd,  ibid.

Advantages  arifing  from  blood-letting
and  a fpare diet  in  preventing
/  their  farther progrefs, fhewn,

XVII.  31.

When  abftinence  and  blood-letting
feem  to  be  prejudicial,  and  even
fometimes  to  kill,  ibid.  XVIIL

Two  obfervations  relative  to  this,
XVII.  31,  32.
What remedies were fufpefled by
Malpighi  to be bad in  thefe
cafes,  XVIIL  17.
How hurt by violently ftraining,
XXVI.  3,  4.
Aphony  Kar'^  s^ox.hi',  (b  call'd,  fome  ob-
fervation on  it,  XIV.  34,  &c,
Arifing  from drunkennefs, ibid. &
LXIII.  13,  &  feq.
Aphony,  flight,  from  whence  arifing,  and
how  car'd,  IV.  15.
Another,  flighter  and  frequent,  XIV.
37. Vid.  alfo  Voice,  lofs  of.
Apona, baths of, why lefs frequented

now  than  formerly,  LVIII.  18.
Apoplexy,  whether  a  rare  difeafe  formerly,
II.  I,  2.  &  feq.  &  8.
By what figns prognofticated, IT.

10.
Whether  the various  degrees of  it
are  always  to  be  determin'd  by
the


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


the  manner  in  which  refpiration

is  perform'd,  11.  14.
How  refpiration  and the  motion  of

the  heart  are continu'd in it,

II.  24.
Apoplexies,  divifions  of,  II.  5,  6.  V.  i.
The  diftindlion  of  one  i/ito  fangui-

neous, and the other ferous,

confirm'd, II.  6.  &  feq. IV.  I.

V.  I.
Which  of the ancients knew the

fanguineous,  II.  7,  8.
The fanguineous that  wiiich feiz'J

the  emperor  L.  Verus,  II.  8.
Who  firfl:  taught  that  this  arofe  from

an  efFufion of blood into the

ventricles  of  the  brain,  and  who

firft  faw  it.  II.  7.
"Whofirft  obferv'd  it  from  an  efFufion

of  blood into  the fubftance  of

the  brain,  III.  10.
From  what  caufe  this  arifes.  III.  3.
May  be  occafion'd by  blood,  though

not  extravafated,  and  how  this

may  be,  III.  25.  &  feq.
How  it  may  fometimes  arife  from  an

aneurifm within the thorax,

XVIIl.  26.
Apoplexy,  fanguineous,  figns  of, II.  10.

14,
When it is doubtful whether its

caufe be external or internal,

II.  12.
Why  frequently happening  to  very

fat  people,  XIV.  27.
Why  fhort-neck'd  people  fubje£l  to

it.  III.  28.
Why it frequently attacks perfons

feemingly  in  very  good health,

II.  23.  III.  17.
Why  it  iometimes happens  to  old,

and  pale  perfons,  11.  14.
Not  always  the  moft fevere,  II.  10.

145  15-
Not  always  fatal,  II.  16.
May  bring  on  death  fometimes  very

fpeedily  without  any  rupture  of

the  veffels,  LX.  7.
How  caus'd  by  concuffions,  and  even

gentle  motions.  III,  12.
How fometimes from change of

pofture  in  lying-down  from  one

fide  to  the  other,  LI.  12.
^ How  from  lying-down,  chiefly  on  the

back,  after  a  full  fupper,  111,28.
Vol.  Ill,


How  much  more  eafily  whilfl:  afleep
after  hard  drinking,  LX.  13.
Apoplexy,  fanguineous,  figns  of  one  ap-
pearing, what  to  be  done,  and
what  avoided,  II,  23.  III.  13.
17.  LX.  3.

Advantage  of  bleeding  m  the  jugular
vein  in  it,  II.  g.  13.
Obfervations on that operation,
'II.  10.

To  promote  the  difcharge  of  food,
or  any  thing  taken  into  the  flo-
mach,  very dangerous in it,

III.  12.

What  kind  of  remedies  to  be  avoided,
and  why,  III.  11,  J2.
Apoplexy, ferous, not all fuch which
feem  fo,  IV.  i.
May  arife from even a  fmall  quan-
tity of  ferum,  ibid.
How  this  is  occafion'd,  IV.  5.  14.
17.  27.  29.  32.  &  feq.
Apoplexy, ferous, whether  it comes  on
gradually,  IV.  31.
When it requires venaefecSion, or

not,  IV.  14,  15.
What  remedies  are  requir'd in  one,

IV.  15,

Apoplexies- are  of  different  kinds  befides
fanguineous  and  ferous,  V.  i.
Purulent, appearing on diffection,

V.  2.  4.  6.  II.

Which  of the ancients obferv'd
this,  V.  7."
Atrabilious,  as  they  are  call'd,  found

on  dJffe£lion,  V.  13.
Flatulent, appearing on diflTedlion,
V.  17.  19.
Who  among  the  ancients  obferv'd

this,  V.  18.
From  Vi'hence  arifing,  ibid.  &  24,
29.
Apoplexy,  what  compreffion  of  the  brain
can occafion one, and what
cannot, IV.  29.  33. XI.  17.
LX.  14.
Suppos'd  by  fome  to  arife  from  an
eroiion  of  the  brain,  III.  3.
How  far  this may  be  true,  ibid.
&  iV,  5.
Whether  alv.'f.ys, or, at  leaft,  very
frequently;  occafion'd  by  polypi,
or polypous concretions, IV.

Whether always, or generally, a
4  S  conftridtion


INDEX referring to


conftri(3:ion  of  the  vefTels  of  the
neck  attends  one,  ibid.
'Apoplexies  arife  from  an  afFeflion  of  the
cerebrum,  at  other  times  from
one  of  the  cerebellum,  and  fome-
times  from  both, III.  27. IV.

Apoplexy,  hereditary,  IV.  2.  10.

Apoplexy,  perfons  feiz'd  with ;  retention
of  the  urine,  which  frequently
happens  in  thefe  cafes,  to  be  at-
tended to,  and  prevented,  V.  8.
LVI.  12.
Fever  coming-on. Vid.  Fever.

Whether  of  greater  fervice in  fe-
rous or in fanguineous apo-
plexies, II.  10.
Not  eafy  to determine  to  which
of  thefe  kinds fome  diffe£lions
relate,  LX.  9.
Olllfications  frequently  found  in  fuch
fubjeds,  HI.  22.

Aretffius,  on  dropfies  occafion'd  by  ve-
ficks,  how  to  be  underftood,
XXXVIII.  45.

Ariftotle  did  not  affert  that  no  kind  of
calculi  were  found  in  beafts,
XLII.  17.
A  paffage  in  the  common  tranflation
of  his  fecond  book  on  the  ge-
neration of  animals,  correfted,
XXVIII.  16.

Arms,  pains  in,  from  a  difeafe  of  the
aorta,  XXIII.  5.

Arnault,  N.  a  phyhcian  at  Orleans,  com-
mended, LXIII.  17.

Arrigonius,  Antony,  a  celebrated  phyfi-
cian,  commended,  LXI.  13.

Arteries.  Vid.  Aorta,  Bronchial,  Carotid,
Coeliac,  Emulgenr,  Heart,  co-
ronary, Hepatic,  Lumbar,  Pul-
monary, Splenic,  Vertebral.

Arteries,  fome,  though  not  fmall,  when
cut  afunder  in  a  living  dog,  are
fometimes  fo  contracted  as  not
to  fufFer  any  haemorrhage,  XIX.

34-
Arteries,  fill'd with coagulated blood,

LIV.  25.
Arteries, found full of puftules where-

ever  open'd,  XXVII.  28.
Thefe  pultules  fatal,  XXVII.  30.
Arteries, become bony. Who  formerly

o'-lerv'd them, XVIII. 35.

XXVil,  19.


What  concretions  in  their  coats  are-
bony,  and  what  tophaceous,
XXVII.  20.  &  feq.

The caufes of thefe concretions,
XVII.  24. XVIII.  31.  &  feq.
XXVII.  21.  &  feq.
Some  opinions  concerning them,

difapprov'd,  XVIII.  29.
Boerhaave's, mention'd, XVIIL
31.  &feq.  XXVII.  27.

Scarcely  found  prejudicial  in  a  wo-
man of  more  than  ninety  years
of  age,  LXVII.  11.

More  fo  towards  the  extremities,
LXVII.  14,  15.

How  preventing  the  circulation  of
the  blood,  XXVI.  32.  LXVn.

15- . ,

What  attributed  (o  this  difeafe  by
Santorini,  XXVI.  36.  38.

What  remedies  proper  in  this  cafe, •
XXVII 30.

Spots  denoting  the  beginning  of  thefe
concretions,  their  feat  and  na-
ture, XXVII.  26,  27.
Arteries,  internal  exulcerations  of,  with
and  without  hard  concretions,
XXVII.  22.  24,  25.

Who  fuppos'd  them  to  be  occafion'd
by  concretions,  XXVII.  24.

Injuries  arifmg  from  them,  XXVII.
24.
Arteries  of  the  whole  body,  vehement
pulfation  in,  whence  arrfincr,
XXIV.  35.  XXIX.  20,  21.
LXIV.  10.
Arteriotomy,  propos'd  in a  mania,  VIIL

4-

Artificers,  fcdentary,  why  fubjedl  to  pe-
culiar dif>;ares,  XVIII.  4.

Arytasnoid  glands,  that  thefe  were  not
pointed  out  by  Galen,  Carpus,
Fabricius,  or  Schelhammer,  is
evidently  fliewn,  XIX.  55,  56.
Found  by  Lancifi,  fomewhat-mon-
ftrous in one fubjedl, XIX.

55-
Afilus,  how  its  fling  makes  an  ox  furious,

LIX.  26.
Afp,  true,  whether  found  any-where  but
in  Africa,  LIX.  37.
Its  bite  may  fometimes  not  be  at-
tended with  livor  or  tumor  of
the  part  bitten,  and  how,  LIX.
40.  &  feq.

Whether


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  mofl  worthy  of  Notice.


Whether  this,  or  a  poifon  inferted,
or  taken  by  the  mouth,  occa-
fion'd  the  death  of  Cleopatra,
LIX.  38.  &  feq.
Afpfra  Arteria,  gland  of,  greatly  diftended,
with  iis  figns,  XV.  15,  16.
'Cartilages  of, become  bony,  and  al-

ter'd  in  their  form,  XXIV.  16.
Polypous  concretions  in. Vid.  Spit-
ting, polypous.
Stubborn ulcers in, how heal'd,
XXII.  27.
Afthma,  convulfive,  who  defcrib'd it  be-
fore Willis,  XV.  4.
Why  it  appears  ftrange  that  it  was
not  icnown  to  the  ancient  phy-
ficians,  XV.  5.
May  arife from  injuries  done  to  the
brain,  though  there be no  ap-
(  parent  figns  of  thefe,  XV.  g.

Aftruc,  John,  (R.  Sc. Societ. Monfpel.)
commended,  XLII.  38.  XLIV.
2.  8.  LVIII.  15.  19.
Attalus,  King,  of  what  kind  of  apoplexy

he  died.  III.  17.
Atticus,  Pomponius,  fome  obfervations  on

hisdifeafe,  XXVIII.  4.
Avicenna  taught  that  an  apoplexy  is  fome-
times caus'd by an.  efFufion  of
blood  within the ventricles of
the  brain,  II.  7.
Whether  he  found  the  bones  become
foft, and  cur'd them, LVIII.
6.
Axillary  Veins,  an  infula  form'd  in  them,

LXIX.  2.
Azygos  -  Vein, varicous and ruptur'd,
XXVI.  29.


^ACK,  pains  of,  follow'd  by  fudden

death,  XL.  27,  28.

liack,  pains  of,  one  caufe  of,  feldom  or

never  noted  before,  XXI.  46.
Baeulminus,  Jo.  Chrift.  M.  D.  Weickarf.

commended,  LlX.  5.
Baglivi,  miftaken,  VIII.  13.  XXXVII.  13.
Bajerus,  Jo.  Jac.  formerly  prefident  Acad.

N.  C. commended, XXXIV.

19.  XLII.  19.
BarbadJci,  Jo.  Franc,  S.  R.  E.  Cardinal,

and  Bifhop  of  Padua,  his  difeafe,

and  the  method  of  cure,  XLIX.

30-


The  difeafe  of  which  he died,  and
the  diffeaion,  XIII.  3.

Barbette,  Paul,  fome  paflages  in  his  works
not  approv'd,  XXVKI.  13.  LI.
2-2.

Barbette,  Gregory,  Surgeon  at  Bonona,
ccmlnended,  LVI.  5.

Bark,  Peruvian,  who  firft  eftablifli'd  the
ufe  of  it  amongft  the  Italians,
in  the  cure  of  dangeroiis  inter-
mittent fevers,-  XXX.  5.
Its  ufefulnefs,  even  in  fevers  where
any  matter  has  been  repell'd  in-
wardly, LXVllI.  2.

Baronius,  Philip,  M.  D.  Meldulenf.  com-
mended,  XLVIII.  51.
An obfc-rvation mr.de by him,
XLVIII.  52.

Baron  d'  Henouville,  M.  D.  of  Paris,
commciided,  XXIX.  15.

Barrennefs,  certain indications of, taken
from  the  (kin,  XLVI.  3.
Caufe  of,  in  the  veficks  of  the  ova-
ries, XX,  7,  8.
Owing to the extreme  fmallnefs
of  the  uterus,  XLVI.  20.

Barrennefs,  \vhether  it  can be  caus'd by
the omentum compreiBng the
OS  uteri,  XLVI,  14.
What  may  be fubftituted  for  the
omentum,  ibid.

Barren-women,  fome  have  no  appearance
of  breads  befides  the  papilbe  and
areolae,  XLVI.  21.

Barren-women,  from  what  caufe  render'd
fruitful,  LXVII.  12.

Bartholin,  Thomas,  miftaken,  XIII.  7.
II.  XXVII.  19.  XXIX.  4.
XLIL  32.

Baffius,  Henry,  P.  ProfefT.  at  Hall,  com-
mended, XXX.  15.  XXXIL
16.  XXXVIII.  23.  XXXIX.
40.  XLI.  12.  14.  XLIII.  14.
34.  L.  44.  LVI.  22.  27.

Baverus,  Jo.  Frid.  formerly  of  the  Casf.
N.  C.  commended,  XXXII.
8.

Bauhin,  Cafp.  fome  things  of  his  cen-
fur'd,  XIV.  14.

Beaulieu,  Frere  Jaques,  his  fuccefs  in
cutting  for  the  ftone  at  Padua
mention'd, XLII.  24.

Beccario,  Jac.  Bartholom.  Prefident  Inili-
tut.  Sc.  Bonon,  commended,
IV.  25.  XXVIIL  6.

4  S  2  Bechmann,


INDEX referring: to


Bechmarn,  Jo.  Andr.  Acad.  N.  C.
commended, XXXVII. 19.

XXXVIII.  19.

-Behcrenfius,  Conr.  Barth.  formerly  Phy-
sician to  a  king  of  Great-Britain,
commended,  XIX.  48.

Behlineius,  |o.  i-Veder.  commended,
XLVIII.  30.

Belchings  from  handling  any  part  of  the
body,  XLIII.  9.

Belly,  in  fluxes  of,  the  inteflinal  glands
are  often  enlarg'd  or  eroded,
and  how  this  happens,  XXXI.

15-
Always  loofe,  how  hurtful,  XXXI.

3.

By  what  means  becoming  coftive,
and  how  this  may  be  fafely  pre-
vented, XXXII.  II.

Bound  for  a  month  without  injury,
XXXII.  1.

Contents  of  it  difcharg'd  by  different
pafTages  than  the  anus,  in  feme
perfons,  during  their  whole  lives,
XXXII.  2.  &  feq.

Bound,  various  caufes  of  it,  ibid.  &
5.  LXV.  6.
One  mention'd  which  is  not  gene-
rally known,  XXXlL  2.  &  feq.
Belly,  who  firft  taught  that  there  is  no
cavity  or  fpace  between  the
vifcera  contain'd  therein,  LI.
10.

Caufes  of  the  difficulty  of  afcertaining
the feats of tumours therein,

XXXIX.  23.

In  examining  the  belly  of  a  thin  and
emaciated  perfon,  how  the  fpine
may  be  taken  for  a  hard  tumour,
X.  12.
Bellv,  tumour  of,  extraordinary,  obferv'd,
XXXIX.  21,26,  29.
Signs  of,  examin'd,  ibid^  28.
Remaining fometimes after child-
bearing,  whence,  XLVIII. 46.
Seemingly  caus'd by the inteftines,
though  not  fo,  ibid.  55.
By  different vifcera, though not
fo,  L.  49.
Belly,  pains  of,  fpeedily  and  very  unex-
pededly  killing, XXXV.  2.  4.
8.  10.
Attended  with an  uneafy  fenfation
.above  the  navel  internally,  ex-
plain'd,  X.  12.


With  the  fenfation  of  a  certain  great

internal  pulfating  body,  cafe  of,

confider'd,  XXXlX.  18,  &  feq.
Pulfations  in,  where  there  is  no  aneu-

rifm,  ibid,  ig,  20.
Belly,  vifcera  of,  fometimes  divided  by  a

blow,  though the abdomen  be

unhurt,  LIV.  14.  &  feq.
Often  wounded through  the  thorax.

Vid  Diaphragm.
Wounds  of,  what  is  neceffary  to  be

attended to,  to know  the feat

of  them  exaftly,  LIV.  38.
Belly,  wounds  paffing  through,  fome  foon

heal'd,  ibid.  7.
Benedic  XIV.  Pope,  encomium  on,  XX.

62.
Benevoli, Ant. Surgeon, at Florences-
commended, XXVII. ^i.

XXXI. 20. XXXIV. 19.

XXXVIII.  64. XXXIX.  40.

XLI. 12. XLII. 12.  27.  38.

XLIII. 6. 10. 13, 14. 3^

XLIV. 17. XLVI. 12. 16.

XLVII.  6. L.  10. 19.  26.  50.

LI.  23. LV.  20.  26. LVIL

21.
Berengarius Carpus, if  we  confider  the

time when he liv'd, may b&

call'd  the  inventor  of  mercurial

unrSions  in  the  cure  of  the  lues

venerea,  LVIII.  16.
a  Bergen,  Charles  Aug.  once  P.  ProfefL

at  Francfort,  commended, IIL

8.  XXXVII.  19.  LXII.  13.
Bernardoni, Jo.  Franc, formerly  Chief-

phyfician  at  the  court  of  Mif-

tina,  his obfervations, XXIIL

2.  XXXI.  II.
Bernerus,  Gottl.  Ephr.  Caef.  Acad.  N.  C,

Soc.  commended,  LIX.  36.
Bernoullius,  Daniel,  R.  Sc.  Acad.  PariL

Soc.  commended,  XIII.  7.
Bertinus,  Jof.  Exup.  R.  Sc.  Ac.  Par.  Soc.

commended,  XXIII.9.  XXVII.

27.  XLVIII.  45.
Beudt,  Gyibert,  commended,  LXVI.  15^
Bezoldus, John George, commended,

XXXVII.  20.  46.
Blerlingius,  fufpicion  of,  not  approv'd  of,

XXXlX.  II.
Bile. Vid.  Liver,  cyft  of.
Bile,  matter  of. Vid.  Jaundice.
Biliary  Duds  may  be  iometimes  enlarg'dj

XXXVII.  46,  47.

Who


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  mofi  worthy  of  Notice.


Who  formerly  mention'd flefhy  ex-

crefcences  being  found in  thyrij

ibid.  33.
Biliary  Dufls  ot an extraordinary  fize,

who  formerly  and lately have

feen  them,  ibid.  34.
Biliary Calculi. Vid. Hepatic Calculi,

and  Cyftic.
What fymptoms precede their  dif-

charge  per  anum,  XXXVII.  41,

42.  46,  47.
Pain  from them extending  toward

the  navel,  how  to  be  explain'd,

XXXVII.  42.  _
The  method of  curing  them,  three-
fold, XXXVII.  48.  &  feq.
When they require blood-letting,

ibid.  49.
When emetics and cathartics are

neceffary,  ibid.  50.
Whether forcing medicines are  of

fervice,  ibid.
Why,  and  when  gentle  cathartics  are

to  be  adminifler'd,  ibid.
Experiments,  with  various  kinds  of

folvents, made  on them  when

difcharg'd  out  of  the  body,  ibid.
What conclufions to be drawn

from  them,  ibid.
Which  deferve  the  preference,  ibid.
The  difference  between  biliary  and

urinary  lithontriptics,  ibid.
When  the  preventive  cure  does  not

anfwer,  what  ought  then  to  be

done,  XXXVIf.  51.
Of  the  new  method  of  cure  by  cut-
ting into  the  cyfl,  ibid.  52.
Bills  Atra of the  ancients,  what it is,

XXX.  17.  XXXI.  6,  7.
How  ic  may  fometimes  appear  gru-

mous,  XXX.  17.
Difcharg'd  by  the  anus,  proving  fa-
tal, XXXI.  6. .
Hiftory  of  a perfon very  difficultly

fav'd  after  the  difcharge of  ic,

ibid.  7.
Birds,  old,  their bones becoming  bony,

by whom formerly obferv'd,

XVIII.  23.
Tame,  fymptoms  arifing  from  their

bite. Vid.  Bite.
Bite  of  tame fowls fometimes  bring- on

violent  fymptoms,  LIV.  45.
Of  a  fparrow,  obfervation  on  its  ef-
fects, ibid.


Bladder,  who firft gave its true  figure,

XLII.  30.
Inteftines between the  fibres in  its

mufcular  coars, by whom  firft

obferv'd,  LVI.  13.  &  feq.
Whether,  therefore,  this  is  not  to  be

admitted  among the  number  o£

its  coats,  ibid.
Obfervers of  abfcefles  of its inner

coat  defended,  XLI.  16.
Bladder, caruncles of the, obferv'd by

whom,  XLI.  12.
Whether nature has form'd at its

orifice a  tubercle  fimilar  to  the

uvula, LXVI. 5. & feq. &:

all  LXX.
Tumours of,  miftaken for tumours

of  the  uterus,  XXXIX.  34.
Diftended  a  long  time  without  any

fubfequent  inflammation  or  re-

folution,  XLI.  8,  9.  11.
Capacity  of, may be  greatly  dimi-

nilh'd  ;  how,  and  to  whom  this.

may happen, with its confe-

quences,  XLII.  33.  &  feq.
Ulcers of, why difficultly heal'd,

XLII.  16.
Probps'd into  the fcrotum  or  elfe.»

where,  XLIII.  14.
Bladder,  facculi  growing  to,  whether  thefe

may  not be one  caufe of its

hernias,  XLII.  30.
Ought  to be well  known  by  litho-

tomifl-s,  ibid.  10.-  32.
May  fometimes  impofe  upon  perfons^

as  another  bladder,  ibid.  32.
The  great  hydatid  obferv'd  by  Coi-

terus, wrongly thought fuchj

ibid.
Bladders,  many,  even  five,  found  in  one

perfon,  ibid.
Bladder, flefhy fibres and coats of,

thicken'd from a difficulty of

difcharging the urine, XLII»

^  33-

From other caufes, which may
even  encreafe,  or  continue,  the
difficulty of difcharging the
urine,  ibid.  &  feq.
Bladder,  difeafes  fuppos'd  to  exifl  therein,
found to be in the kidnies,
XLIL2.&feq.
Whence  this  happens,  ibid.  5.
How  the  urine  may  be  return'd  from.-
it  into  the  kidnies,  ibid.  21.

Bladder*


INDEX referring to


BUJder,  calculi  of,  who  firft  fuppo.s'd
them  to  be  form'd  in  thekidnies,
and  who  in  the  bladder  itfelf,
XLII.  1 8.

How  they  may  be  lodg'd  with  the
coats  of  the  bladder,  ibid.  31,

Voided  by  women  without  affiftance,
ibid.  42.

Very  great,  why  found  oftener  in
men  than  women,  ibid.

Signs  of,  fcarcely  perceptible  on  the
return  of  the  gout,  ibid.  10.
How  thefe  may  difappear,  and  re-
turn, ibid.

When  they  may  not  obftrucl:  the
proper  difcharge  of  the  urine,
ibid.

Obfervation  of  one  of  an  annular
form,  with  fome  conjeftures  on
its  origin,  ibid.

How  they  may  be  fometimes  felt  by
the  lithotomift,  and  at  ether
times  not,  ibid.

^Account  of  one  in  a  dog,  with  the
figns  of  it,  ibid.  17.
One  found  in  a  cow  of  the  colour
of  brafs,  ibid.

.Found  form'd  on  needles,  ibid.  19.
&  feqq.  to  30.
Who  firlt  taught  that  thefe  needles
could  only  get  into  the  bladder
through  an  adjacent  part  of  the
intefliines,  ibid.  27.
When  this  is  to  be  admitted  of,  or

not,  ibid.  2g.
Obfervation  of  a  long  and  ftrait
needle  pafiing  through  the  ure-
thra of  a  man  into  the  bladder,
ibid.  &  28.
Examples  of  needles,  and  other
extraneous  fubftances,  found  in
the bladders of men, ibid.

^9-  .  .

W^hy  needles  are  chiefly  found  in

the bladders of  women, ibid.

21.

How  fome  are  voluntary  difcharg'd,
ibid.

Why  no  concretions  are  fome-
times found  on  them,  and  fome-
times only  on  part  of  them,
ibid.

Iviftances  of  perfons  who  have  re-
cover'd  where  calculi  have  been
.form'd  on  needles,  ibid.


Miftakes  of  fome  writers  •con-
cerning a  cafe  of  this  kind,  re-
lated by  Molinetti,  ibid.

Inftances  of  the  fuccefsful  extrac-
tion of  needles  before  calculi
were  form'd  on  them,  ibid,  22.
26.

In  what  manner  one  was  extradled,
ibid.  22

When  calculi  are  form'd  on  them,
what  is  to  be  confider'd  previous
to  their  extraflion,  ibid.

How  needles  have  made  a  way  for
themfelves  into  the  vagina,  ibid.
25,  26. -

What  method  propos'd  for  the  ex-
traction of  needles  with  calculi
form'd  on  them,  ibid.
Bladder,  calculus  of,  why  diuretics  are
hurtful  in  a  fit  of  the  flone,
XLII.  16.
What  lithontriptics  are  bcTt,  ibid.
19.

When  not  to  be  adminifter'd,  ibid.
The  operation  of  cutting  for  it,  why
rather  to  be deferr'd from au-
tumn to  fpring,  than  from  fpring
to  autumn, ibid.  iS.

Before  this  is  undertaken,  when,
or  from  what  figns,  we  ought
to  fufpedt  an  incurable  difeafe  in
the  kidnies, ibid.  22.  &  fcq.  &

30-
.Not  to  be  broken by  the  lithotomift
without  there  be  a  neceffity  for
it, and  why,  ibid.  9.
Blindnefs. Vid.  Amaurofis.

From a  pain of  the  fhead  remov'd,

I.  II.
That  perfons  blind  from  their  birth
have  no  idea  of  light,  doubted,
XIIL  14.
Blood,  experiments  relative  to  its  circu-
lation. Vid.  Pecquet.
Whether  a  diminution  of  the  poly-
pous  cruft, at the fecond or
third  bleeding,  be  a  good  or  bad
fign,  fhould be cautioufly de-
termin'd,  XXII.  21.  21.
Alterations  in the  cruft  and  crafla-
mentum after the firft blood-
letting, whether  better  or  worfe
to  appearance, no  certain  fign
•of the patient's recovery or
death,  XXI.  31.

A}d-


NAMES  and PASSAGES  moll  wort-hy  of  Notice.


A  yellow  colour  of  the  cruft  often
indicates a very dangerous in-
flammation, ibid.
Serum  of,  whitifli,  obferv'd  in  fome

fevers,  XLIX.  22.
Acid odour of, in  what cafes  fre-
quently obferv'd,  ibid.  25.
Brood,  flowing  cold  out  of  the  vein,  ibid.
26.  &  feq.
Though  greatly  alter'd  from  its  na-
tural ftate, perfons have fome-
times  recover'd,  XXXVII.  7.
Air  in  it,  both  naturally  and  preter-

naturally. Vid.  Air.
Effus'd within the body, may be
black,  and yet  from  the  aorta,
XXVI.  26.
Why  fuch  efFufion,  efpecially  if  it
be  within  the  pericardium,  tho'
in  fmaller  quantity,  fooner  oc-
cafions  death  than  a  larger  ex-
ternal difcharge,  ibid.  18. Vid.
alfo  Pericardium.
Within  the  body,  is  not  chang'J
into  pus,  V.  3.
Render'd  more  fluid  by  a  large  quan-
tity of  fluids  lately  drank,  LUL
26.
EfFufion  of  it  into  the  cellular  fub-
ftance, who formerly demon-
ftrated,  XXVI.  40.
Body, inclination of forwards, being
eafier  to  fome  perfons  labouring
under  an  orthopnoea,.  what  di-
feafes it indicates, and why,
XV HI,  17.  &  feq.
Bocclerus,  Phil. Henr. Prof. P. Argen-

torat.  commended,  L.  ^7.
Boehmerus, Jo. Beniam.  P. Prof.  Lipf.

commen^ded,  LVI.  29.
Boehemerus,  Phil.  Adolph.  P.  Prof.  Hall,
commended, XLV.  5. LXIII.
21.  LXIV.6.  LXVII.  12.  i6.
Boerhaave,  fome  opinions  of, explain'd,
XXIII.  17.
A  doubt  of his remov'd, XLVJ.

20.
Impos'd  upon,  L.  47.
Bohn, Jo. formerly Prof. Lipf. com-
mended, LIV.  47.  &c.
du  Bois,  Godfr.  commended,  XIV.  ii.
Bonazoli, Lawrence, P. Anat. Bonon.
commended, X.  13. XXXIV,
17.  XL VIII.  16.
An  oblervation  of  his,  LXIV.  g.


Boncompagno, Jac. S.  R.  E. Cardinal,
his chief complaints, and the
caufe of his death, XXVI.,
26.
Bones. Vid.  Hyoides,  Sphenoides,  Tem-
poral.
Bones,  become  foft,  by  whom firfl ob-
ferv'd, and  cur'd,  LVIII.  6.
Who  firft  examin'd their ftru£turB

anatomically,  ibid.
Their  foftnefs  of  various  kinds,  ibid.
&.  7.
Conjeflures about this, ibid. &

LXVIIL  4,
Whether the bones of ricketty
children are to be referr'd  to
this,  LVIII.  7.
Bones,  excrefcences  and  tumours  of. Vid..
Exoftof.
Ankylofes  of,  LXIX.  12.
Caries  of,  fometimes  without  the  dif-
charge of  a  brown  matter,  and
why,  LV.  18.
Whether it may fometimes be
owing  to  internal aneurifms  of
bones  themfeives,  LII.  39.
Cavities  in  thenj  from  adjacent  aneu-
rifms, when  firft  to  be  obferv'dj

May  appear  fradur'd,  when  only  their
epiphyfes  are  feparated  from
them,  LVI.  34.
Bones,  broken,  the  time  of  the  beginning
or  the  completion  of  the  callus
cannot  be  precifely  determin'd,
LVL  28.
Whence  it  is  that  fome  affirm  that
the  callus  iS'  harder  than  the
bone,  and  others  deny  it,  ibid.

Bones,  crackling  of  in  the  joints  on  their
being  mov'd,  whether  from
moifture  or  drynefs,  ibid.  34.
Whence  arifing  in  the  cure  of
fome  inflexibilities  of  the  joints,
LXIX.  12.

Bones,  preternatural  generation  of,  or  of-
fification  oL  Vid.  Aorta,  Ar-
teries, Bronchia,  Cerebrum,.
Heart,  SIpeen,  Eye,  Pleura,
Medulla  Spinalis.
What  are  true  bones,  and  how  they
may,  or  may  not,  be  diftin-
guifh'd  from  the  fpurious,  XXV.
9.  XXVII.  20.  &  feq,

Hov/-


I N D EX relating to


Howr  this  may  be  prevented,  or  a
flop  put  to  it,  XXIX.  9,
XXVII.  30.

Bony  juices,  recent  eftufions  of,  obferv'd,
XXVII.4.  LVI.  21.
Not  eafily  in feme  cafes  to  be  ac-
counted for,  XXVII.  4.

Bonetus,  Tiieophilus,  Omiflions  in  the
fecond  edition  of  his  Sepul-
chretum,  Pref.  n.  4.  &  feq.  &
Letter  I.  7,  8.  85.  IV.  31.  36.
VII.  14.  VIII.  32.  XII.  4.  XV,
3.  XXVIII.  4.  14.
Additions  to  be  made  to  his  Sepul-
chretum  from  various  authors,
1.  7,  8,  9.  15, 16,  17.  II.  8.  10.
14.  16.  21.  III.  3.  12.  17,  18.
30.  IV.  31,  32,  33.  V.  3.  24.
VL7.  16.  VII.  8. 16.  VIII.  13,
14.  16,  17,  18.  20.  31.  36.  IX.
3.  II.  19.  21.  24.  X.  6.  15.
XI.  7.  12.  23.  X!I.  3.  5,  6.  8,
^,  10,  II,  12,  13,  14,  15.  XIII.
45  5?  6,  7.  10,  II,  12.  16.  18.
Q.O.  26.  XIV.  2.  6.  8,  9.  12.
■17.  22,  23,  24.  36.  38,  39,
XV.  2.  g.  II,  12.  16,  17.  19.
&  feq.  XVI.  II.  23,  24.  33.  35.
37.  42.44,45,46.  XVII.  13.
ic.  28.  XVIII.  4.  9.  II.  15.
18, 19.  24.  26.  36. XIX.  9,

10. 14. 20. 38, 39, 40. 43.

XX.  52.  57.  XXI.  20.  28.  38,
39,  40.  44.  46.  48.  XXII.  7.
13.  17.  19,  20.  XXIII.  3.  9.
I''.,  13, 14. 18, 19. 23,  24.

XXIV.  3,4. 7,8. 12. 17.  22,

23.  28,  29,  30. XXV.  3.  7,  8.
'  13.  16.  23,  24. XXVI.  10.  12.

23.  26,  27,  28.  38,  39,  40.
XXVlI.  I.  4.  6.  9,  10.  18,  19,
20.  24,  25,  26,  27. 30,  31,  32.

34.  XXVill.  2,3,4.6.  15.16.
18. XXIX.  3.  9. II. 13.  15,

16,  19.  22. XXX.  8. II.  13.

17.  XXXI.  4.  13.  15.20,21,

22,  23,  24. 26. XXXII. I,  2,

3,  4,  5,  6.  10.  XXXIII,  15.
XXXIV.  13 16. 19.  32.  34,

35,  36. XXXV. 4. 15. 22.

XXXVI.  5.  6.  10.  12-  14,  15,
16.18.21.24.26,27.  XXXVII.
II,  12,  13.  16.  21.  24.  32.  34,

35-  37'  38'  39-  415  42'  43-  45^
46,  47. XXXVill. I.  8.  19.


23,  24,  25.  31.  33.  3S,  36.  38.

41,  42,  43,  44,  45-  47-  49'  50-
54.  59.  61.  63,  64,  65,  66,  67,
68.  70,  71.  XXXIX.  3.  7,  8.
II.  15.  20.  23.  28.  36.  4.0,  41.
44'  45- XL.  5.  13,  14,  15 ig,

20.  25.  27.  XLl.  I.  2.  5.  g,
II,  12.  15,  16,  17.  XLII.  5,6,
7.  10 18,  19.  23,  24.  30,  31,

32'  33-  35'  36.  37'  38-  42-  45'
46.  XLIII,  3.  6,  7,  8.  10.  13,

14-  36'  37'  38.  39-  4i'42,  43-
XLIV.  2.  8.  II.  13,  14.  17.
XLV.  2.  5,  6.  12,  20.  24.
XLVI.  3.  16.  20,  21.  25.  30,
XLVIL  II.  25,  26,  27.  29.
XLVIII.  II,  12,  13,  14.  16,
17.  25.  29.  30.  36.  39.  42.  45,
46.  49.  54.  56.  61.  XLIX.  19.
28.  33-  35'  36- L.  6. 10.  12.

14.  16,  17,  18,  19.  22.  24,  25.
37.  38.  44.  46.  49.  53,  54  56,
57,  58.  LI.  4.  10.  12.  22,  23.
40.  47,48.  58.  LII.  13.  21.  24.
26.  36,  37.  39.  LIII.  4.  22.  27,
28.  34.  36.  41.  LIV.  9.  1 1,  12,
13.  15.  17.  27.  32.  34.  36,  37.

42,  43.  47.  LV.  2.  7.  12.  15.
17,  18.  23. LVI.  3,  4,  5,  6.

15.  22,  23,  24.  34,  35,  36,  37.
LVII.  3.  11,12.16.21.  LVIII.
6.  9. 12.  14,  15.  LIX.  5.  9.  14.

21,  22.  28.  33,  34,  35'  36.
LXI.  4.  6.  8,  9.  LXII.  3.  13.
LXIII.  3.  II.  16,  17.  20.
LXIV.  3,  4.  14.  17.  LXV.  2.
4.  6,  7.  9,  10,  II.  14,  15,  165

17,  18,  19,  20.  LXVI.  ir.
LXVII.  2,  3.  12.  15,  16.
LXVIII.  3,  4.  9.  13,  14.
LXIX.  6.  12,  13,  14,  15.

Unneceflary  repetitions  in  it,  VII.  i.

18.  VIII.  13.  36.  IX.  3.  13,
X.  I.  XI.  23.  XilL  I.  20.
XIV.  16,  17.  22.  30.  XV.  2.
XIX.  I.  XXI.  40.  XXII.  2,
XXIII.  I.  XXIV. 5.  XXV.  14.

xxvm.  I.  8.  18.  XXIX.  I,

2.  II.  16,  17.  XXX.  18.
XXXI.  I.  XXXII.  I.  XXXIV.
I.  XXXVI.  7.  XXXVII.  32.
XXXVIII.  I.  38.42.  XL.  II.
14.  27.  XLL  I.  XLIL  43.
XLIII.  43.  XLVI.  I.  2.1.
XLVII.  I.  XLVIII.  I.  XLIX.


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


I.  32.  L.  I.  LI.  4/.  LIII.  I.
LV.  r. LVII.  I.  16. LVIII.

14.
Emendations  to  be  made  in  it,  I.  8.
IX.  8.  XII.  3,  4.  10.13.  XIII.
6.  II.  14.  19,  20.  26.  XIV.  2.
12.  14.  16,  17.  22,  23-  26.  30.
32.  38.  XVI.  15.  XIX.  10.  39.
XX.  10.  12.  XXI.  28.  46.
XXII.  2. XXIII. I. 15.  23.

XXIV.  21. 23, 24. 2Q. 36.

XXV.  14.  19.  20.  22.  XXVI.
a6.  XXVIl.  I.  18,  19.
XXVIII.  2,  3.  14.  XXIX.  4.
XXX.  18.  XXXI.2I.  XXXII.
I.  XXXIV.  3.  XXXVI.  12.
18.  28.  XXXVII.  6,  7.  11.40.
XXXVIII.  42.  XL.  11.15.  27.
XLI.  I.  II.  15.  17.  XLIl.  23.
XLIII.  39.  XLIV.  26,  27.
XLV.  25.  XLVI.21.  XLVII.

I.  XLVIII.  I,  2.  XLIX.  13.
21 .  L.  28.  30.  37.  56.  LI.  22.
40.  47.  58. LIII.  I. LIV.  5.

II,  12.  LV.  I.  LVIII.  14.
LXIIL  16.

Bonfigli,  Onuphr.  Csf,  Acad.  N.  C.
commended,  XXXVI.21.  XLIL

5-
Bonis,  Alexander, formerly  Ptiyfician  at

Venice, commended. III. 17.

V.  II.  XIL6.  LXILi.
Boni,  Jof.  M.  D.  Placentin.  commended,

LXVIIL  II.
An  obfervation  from,  ibid.  12.
Bonetus, N. F.R.S.  Load. XXXIV.

37' ^

Bontius,  an  obfervation  from,  concerning
the  adhaefion  of  the  lungs,  not
always  right,  XXII.  17.

Bonzius,  Gotard.  fnft.  Sc.  Acad.  Bonom
commended,  XXXIX.  41,

Borelli,  Peter,  how  an  obfervation  of  his
fhould  be  read,  LII.  2,7.

€ofchu8,  Hippolit.  miftaken,  XLIII.
8.

Brain. Vid.  Cerebrum,  Cerebellum.

Breafts,  moft  excruciating  pains  in  tu-
mors of  their  glandular  parts,
one  caufe  of,  as  is  generally  fup-
pos'd,  not  approv'd,  XXXIX.
II.
Of  women,  tumors  in,  arifing  at  the
time  of  fuckling,  cannot  always
be  cur'd,  L.  39.
Vol.  ill.


Whether  thofe  that  are  incurable
degenerate  into  cancers,  ibid.
Obfervations  of  tumours  coming-on
wfhen the menfes were ob-
ftru6teii,  and  difappearing  at  the
time  of  their  flowing,  ibid.
Obfervations  of  bony  matter found
in  them,  L.  41.  43.
Calculous  or  tartareous  matter  alfo,

ibid.  44,  45.
The  caufe and cure of one of
tbefe,  ibid.  46.
A  method  of  preventing  the  progrefs
of  cancers  in them, XXXiX.

T  /I  35-

Inftance  of  one tumified  and exul-

cerated  cut-ofF  by  a  little  at  a

time,  L.  16.
Breafts  of  men,  tumors  alfo  are  found  in,

L.  44,  45.
Brebefius,  Jo.  Geo. Casf, Acad. N.  C

Soc.  commended,  XLIII.  6.
Brehmius, Geo. Chrift. commended,

LXV. 17.
Brehmius,  Jo.  Martin. Phyfician to  the

king of  Sweden, commended,

XXXVIII.  65.
Brendelius,  Adam,  P. Prof.  Witemberg,

coinmended,  XLII.  18.  XLIII.

13-

Erinius,  Jo.  Thorn.  Caef.  N.C.  Acad.  S.
XII.  5.

Brogiani,  Dominic.  P.  Prof.  Pifan.  com-
mended, VIII.  31,  32.  LIX,
35.  LXI.  II.  15.

Bronchial Glands,  whether they  always
contain a black  fluid, XXLL
21.
Whether  the  expe£toratIon  of  black

matter  is  from  thefe,  ibid.
Whether  they  have  any  communica-
tion with  the  bronchia,  ibid.
Whether  tubercles  of  the  lungs  arife
from  an  enlargement  or  vitiated
flate  of  them,  ibid.

Bronchial  Artery,  known  to  Erafiftratus
and  Galen,  but  not  Jhe  vein,
XXI.  42.

Bronchia, expedtoration  of, obferv'd  by
Hippocrates,  XXII.  25.
Cartilages  of,  fometimes  become  of-
fified  even  within  the  lungs  be-
fore old-age,  XV.  18.

Bronchocele,  women  oftener  affefled  with
it  than  men,  L,  37.

4T  ■$■


I N D E

A  diforJer  of  the  thyroid gland,  ac-
cording to  fbme,  though  denied
by  others,  L.  30.
Generally lea:ed in this gland,
ibid.  si.  feq.

a  Brunn,  ]o.  Henry,  commended,  XIX.
23.  XXXIV.  35.

Buboes,  venereal,  who  forn:icrly  excell'd
in  explaining  the  manner  of
their  produdtion,  LVIII.  14.

Buchner,  And.  Elias.  Pref.  Casf.  Acad.
N.  C.  commended,  XVI.  n.
XXII.  13.

Bruckwald,  Bartb.  Jo.  commended,
LXVII.  15.

Budasus,  Gottl.  Csef.  N.  C.  Acad.  S.  com-
mended, XXX.  17.  XXXVI.
12.

Buddeus,  Aug.  Csef.  N.  C.  Acad,  S.
commended,  LV.  7.

BufFon,  N.  Reg.  Sc.  Acad.  Parif.  com-
mended, XIII.  20.

Burggrave,  Jo.  Phil.  Caef.  Acad.N.  C.  S.
commended,  XXXIV.  34,
XXXVII.  45.  XXXIX.  20.
XLIII.  14.

Burgmann,  Peter  Chriftoph.  M.  D.
Roftoch.  commended,  XIX.  II.
XLII.  45.

Burn  of  the  whole  fkin,  obfervation  of,
LV.  13.


CACHECTIC-perfons, their  brain
very  white,  XXXVI.  13.

Caecum  Inteftinum,  i.  e.  appendicula  ver-
miformis,  very  fhort,  and  with-
out any  cavity,  LXVII.  11.

Caelius  Aurelianus,  how  fome  paffages  of
his  are  to  be  underftood,  or  cor-
refled,  XX.  42.  XXI.  31.

Caefalpinus,  a  pofition  of  his  not  always
true,  X.  15.
An  objeftion  made  by  him,  not  right,
XIX.  29.

Calculi.  Vid.  Biliary,  Cyftic,  Bladder,
Hepatic,  Inteftines,  Kidnies,
Lungs,  Proftates,  Scrotum,
Stomach.

Calculi,  urinary,  frequently  attended  with
calculi of the gall-bladder,
LVn.  12.
Found  in  brutes^  XLIL  17*


X referring to

Whether  abftemious  perfons  are  free

from  them,  XLII.  17.
Why  the  inhabitants  of  Ibme  coun-
tries  are lefs fubjeft to  liliem
than  thofe  of  others,  ibid.
Why it is not probable that all
fhould be equally  diffjlv'd by
the  fame  medicines,  XL.  16.
Canierarius, Alexander, formerly P.
Prof. Tubing. commended,
XXXVIII.  44.  LVI,  29.
Elias,  formerly  P.  Prof,  ibidem,  com-
mended, L.  25.
Rud. Jac. formerly P. Prof. ibid,
commended, XXXVIII. 19.
. XLI.  I. XLII.  33. XLVIII.
39.  LXIV.  9.  LXV.  9.
Canalis Arteriofus, found open in an

adult,  LX.  4.
Cananus,  fome  things  relative  to  his  life,

XXIV.  24.
Cancers, their cure unfuccefsfuUy at-
tempted by a  cauftic  herb,  L.

47-
Caper, Maur.  Ant. Caef.  Acad.  N.  C,

Soc. commended, XVIII.  ig»

XXII.  13.
Carburi,  Jo.  Bapt. P. Prof. R.  Turin.

commended,  L.  47.
An  obfervation  of  his,  L.  48,  49.
Cardanus, miilaken in the meaning of

a certain paffage in Danti,

XXVIII.  7.
Caries. Vide  Exoftofis,  Bones.
Carl, J.  S. M.  D. Witgenftein, com-
mended, XXXVII.  43. LV,

7-
Carotid  Artery,  on  the left  fide  dividing
into  two  branches  much  fooner
than  ufual,  XXIX.  20.

Its  pofterior  branch,  at  the  bails  of
the  cerebrum,  not  communi-
cating with  thofe  of  the  ver-
tebral, III.  20.

Other  variations  of  the  fame  branch  ,,
ibid.
Carotids,  divided  in  a  living  dog,  blood
flowing  from  each  branch,  and:
why  ;  but  in  lefs  quantity  from
the  fuperior,  XiX.  33,  34.

This  feems  to  have  been  known  to
Galen,  ibid.

The  inferior  part  of  the  artery  con-
tra<a:ing  itfelf,  fcarce  any-thing
flow'd  out  of  it,  ibid,

Carotids>


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Carotids,  tied  in  living  animals ;  whether
Ariftotle,  as  many  think,  men-
-  tions  the  experiment,  XJX.  21.
The  experiment made long before

Galen's  time,  XIX.  29.
A  miftake  of  the  ancients  in  making
the experiment, detefled by
Ruffus,  ibid.
The fame repeated without that
miftake by Galen  ; and what
was  obferv'd  thereby,  XIX.  24.
By  many  others,  but  with  different

fucccl's,  ibid.
By  Valfalva  frequently,  and  for  a
long  time,  with  the  appearances
after  the  death of  the  animals,
XIX.  20.  25.  &  feq.  32.
The  reafon  of  thefe  different  ap-
pearances, XIX.  28,  2g.  32.
How  an  animal  can  live  under  this
experiment,  XIX.  28,  29.
Carotids, aneurifms of, their  more  fre-
quent caufe  feemingly  not  known
by  the  ancients,  XXVI.  22.
The  method  of  cure  by  conftridlion,
praflis'd by the ancients, not
approv'd  of,  ibid.
Cartilages,  found  foft  in  a  very  old  fub-

jea,  XXIII.  6.
Caruncula  Seminalis. Vide  Seminal.
Cafali,  Greg.  Count,  at  Bononia, com-
mended, LX.  14.
a  Caftro,  Peter,  miftaken,  LVIII.  6.
Catalepfy,  which  of  the  ancients  treated

of  it  more  largely,  II.  2.
Cataract. Vide  Suffufion.
Catarrhs,  how  now  explain'd,  XIII.  i.
Chiefly  fufFocative,  XIII.  2.

Confirm'd  by .  an  example,  XIII,

3'4- .

Catullus,  a  paflage  from  him  explain'd,
XLVI.  I.

Catto,  Franc.  Ant.  an  anatomift  of  the
fixteenth  century,  undefervedly
negletled  by  writers  on  anato-
mical and  medical  fubjeiis,  III,
21.

Cauftics,  ufe  of,  where  and  when  dan-
gerous, LV.  21.

Celfus,  whether  he  knew  the  contrafilTure
properly  fo  call'd,  LI.  41.

' What  kind of  hernia  he  meant  by
Ramex,  XLIII.  36.
Whether  he  mentions a  can  er  of
the  bone,  LV.  17.


Always  call'd  the  Pterygium  by  the
Latin  name  Unguis  in  the  eye,
XIII.  25.
An  attempt  to  interpret  and  correft
a  paffage  in  him,  II.  2.

What anatomy has taught the
moderns  concerning  another  paf-
fage, LII.  I,
Cephalic  Vein,  wanting  in  a  certain  per-

fon,  LIV,  44.
Cerebrum,  meninges  of  the,  their  glands,
as  they  are  call'd  by  Pacchioni,
not  unknown  to  the  ancients,
VIII.  3.
Convulfions, whether following  an
irritation  of  them,  or  not, en-
quir'd  into;  and  different  obfer-
vations and experiments con-
cerning them reconcil'd, IX,
21.
True  bones  found  in  the  dura  mater,
XXV.  8,  9.

Whether  diftinguilhable  by  pecu-
liar figns,  ibid.

Whether  they  can  be  cur'd  or  pre-
vented by  medicines,  ibid.
A  great  bone  found  in  the  falx.  III.
20.

Others  found  there  alfo,  XXV,
6.  8.

Who  firft  treated  of  thefe,  and
who  after  him.  III.  21.

How  far,  and  when  they  are  hurt-
ful, III.  21.  &  feq.  XXV.  8.

Whether  any  ought  to  doubt  ot
the  ufes  of  the  falx  and  dura
mater  from  thence,  ibid.
Dura  Mater,  which  of  the  Italians
firft  fhew'd  the  neceffity  of  di-
viding at  fome  times,  LII.  12.
Pia  Mater,  why  only  found  inSam'd
on  the  fame  fide  that  the  lungs
were  inflani'd,  VII.  12.

Why  a  gelatinous  aqueous  fluid  is
often  found  under  it,  VI.  12, 12,
VII.  II.

Who  formerly  fufpeded this,  VI,

13-
Cerebrum,  preternatural  formation  of,  X.

Peculiar  conformation  of  its  anterior
fuperficies,  LII,  5.

Cerebrum,  in  order  to  determine  its  na-
tural and  preternatural  confti-
tution, ought to be diflTedled

4  T  2  before


INDEX referring to


before  the  head  is  feparated  from
the  body,  IV.  19.

Cerebrum,  hardnefs  of,  obferv'd  in  per-
fons diforder'd in their  fenfes,
VIII.  2.  &feq.  14.  17-  LXI.  8.
Efpecially  of  the  medullary  fubftance,

VIII.  18. -
Sometimes  alfo  in  perfons  not  difor-
der'd in their minds, ibid. &
LXI.  8.
How  this  may  be  explain'd  by  feme,
ibid.

Cerebrum  of  perfons  diforder'd  in  their
minds,  and  of  cacheftic  perfons,
the  propereft  to  examine  the  ori-
gins of  the  nerves,  and  the  other
parts,  VIII.  6.  17.  XXXVI.  13.

Cerebrum,  difleiSted,  bloody  points  in
foon  dilating  themfelves  into
drops,  what  they  denote,  X.
17,  18.

Cerebrum,  what  method  nature  has  taken
to  prevent  too  great  an  impetus
of  the  blood  on  it.  III.  23.  VI.
16.
A  kind  of  pellucid  lymphaedu£t  found
in  it,  VIII.  6.

Cerebrum,  feemingly  concreted  intoftone,
by  whom  firft  obferv'd  to  be
only  offified,  V,  12.

Cerebrum,  not  found  in  adults,  obferva-
tions  concerning,  fallacious  and
incredible,  XII.  14.
How  to  be  accounted  for,  ibid.

Cerebrum,  not  found  in  foetuffes,  new
obfervation  concerning,  XII.  6.
XLVIII.48.  50.  52.
With  the  medulla  fpinalis  deficient
alfo,  mention'd  before  this  cen-
tury, XII.  8.  10.
Late  obfervations  added,  XLVIII.
48.  50.

Cerebrum, when wanting in foetuffes,
not  originally  fo,  but  fhewn  to
have  been  wafted  by  an  hydro-
cephalus, XII.  5.  &  feq.
The  fame  confirm'd  alfo  concerning
the  medulla fpinalis, XII. 8.
XLVIII.  49,  50.
Foetuffes  fupplied  with  animal  fpirits
by  the medulla  fpinalis  in  this
cafe,  XII.  14.
This generally happens  in  females,
and  thofe  of  a  fmaller  fize  than
ufual,  XII.  6.  XLVIII.  49.


Cerebrum,  how  injur'd  by  too  great  cold,

or  too  great  heat,  LI.  4.
Cerebrum,  concuffion  of,  and  the  bad  ef-
fedls  thereof;  how  and  in  what
fubjedts  they  more  eafily  happen,
LI.  4.  10.
Wounds  of  it,  whether  thofe  which
reach  to  the  medullary  fubftance
are  certainly  deadly,  LII.  27.
Examples  of  fome  penetrating  into
the  ventricles,  and other  large
ones,  cur'd,  ibid.
Some  fuppos'd  to  reach  to  the  pi-
tuitary finuffes  and  cavities  of
the  nofe,  LII.  41.
Cerebrum,  peculiar  kinds  of  vices  found
in  it,  V.  6,  7. IX.  16.  18,  IQ,
LVIL  14,  15.
Ulcers,  as  it  were,  found  in  it  inter-
nally ; what they are, and
whence  they  arife.  III.  3.  7.  &
feq.  XI.  8.
Why  thefe  are  often  found in  or
near the corpus ftriatum, and
thalamus  of  the  optic  nerve  on
the  right  fide, III. 18. V.  7.
XI.  12.
Why  on  the  left,  LXII.  7,  &  feq.
Great injuries of it from  internal
caufes,  cur'd  by  nature,  11.  I&..
III.  6,  7.
Remarkable  hiftory  of  pus  difcharg'd-

from  it  by  urine,  V.  13.
Abfceffes  in it  not  certainly  prov'di
from  a  difcharge  of  pus  by  the-
noftrils,  VL  5.  XIV.  22.,
Difeafes  in  it  may  continue  a  long
time,  XI.  8.  &  feq
Cerebrum,  corpus  callofum of, whether
the  trafls  and  fulci  found  in  it
are  natural  or  accidental,  LXI.
6.
Obfervations  concerning  it,  ibid.
Cerebrum, lateral ventricles  of, fliorter
than  natural,  X.  17.
Water,  whether  naturally  found  in
them';  and  how  far  Littre's  ob-
fervation made  on  puppies  proves
it,  XII.  3.
Signs  whereby  to  know  whether  it
was  lately  collefled  or  not,  IV..
16.  IX.  10.  LXIX.  10.
Though limpid, and in fmall
quantity,  may  fometimes  be  the
caufe,  as  well as the  effcQ  of
difeafeSj


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  mofl  worthy  of  Notice.


(lifeafes,  I.  3.  7.  IV.  i.  3.  5.
14.  17,  18,  19.  28,  29.  32,  33,
34.  IX.  II.
Or  may  encreafe  the  dlfeafe;  fo
that  it  ought  not  to  be  unknown
to  the  phyfician,  IV.  i.  34.
How  it  may  be  colle6led  in  the
ventricles  in  a  large  quantity,
IV.  36,  37.  XIL  3.

Pituitary  gland,  whether  it  receive
all  the  water  returning  from  the
ventricles,  IV.  36.
When  the  tranfmiffion  of  water
to  the  gland  be  prevented  by  an
ill-formation  of  the  gland,  or
the  bad  quality  of  the  water,
XII.  3.
Liable  to  frequent  obftruflions
from  mucus,  iV.  36.

Septum  lucidum,  how  capable  of
being  ruptur'd  by  fome  accident
after  death.  III.  9.

Plexus  choroides,  how  hydatids  of
thefe  may  occafion  apoplexies,
III.  12.

Pineal  gland,  of  an  uncommon  mag-
nitude in a very  witty  body,
I.  2.
Preternaturally  deprefs'd  on  its  an-
terior and  pofterior  furfaces,  X.

17-
Of  a  doubtful  nature,  LXI.  4.
Often  vitiated in infane  perfons,

VIII.  14. 16.  LXI.  3,  4.
Sometimes  fo  alfo  in perfons  who

are  not  fo,  XXI.  24,  25. LXI.

4,  &c.
What  kind  of  hardifli  corpufcles

thofe are  which  are  frequently

found  in  or  near  it,  V.  12.  VI.

12.  X.  17,18.  LXI.  4.
Whether  there  are  any  certain  figns

of  their  exiftence,  V.  12.
Who  has  collected  many  examples

of  this  kind,  ibid.
Who  firft  feems  to  have  notic'd

them,  ibid.
Corpora ftriata, found without

flriae, and the cerebrum and

nerves arifing therefrom, not

injur'd,  L.  55.
Hippocampi,  found  not  dilated  at

their  extremities,  LVI.2r.
Cerebrum,  fourth  ventricle  of,  found  with

only  one  flender  fibre  on  each


fide  belonging to the acouflic
nerves,  LVI.  21.
Cerebellum, why fofter than the cere-
brum, IV.  17.
Seems  to  fecrece  more  animal  fpirits-

than  the  cerebrum,  II.  24-
The  paffages  from  this  to  the  inter-
coftal  nerves wider  than thofe
from  the  cerebrum,  ibid.
Too  much  attributed  to it  by  fome,.
and  too  much  detracted  from  it
by  others,  LXII.  i8-.
Whether  wanting  or  not  in  an  ob--
fervatiou  made by  Benevenius,
LII.26.
Whether  converted  into  a  membrane,

doubted,  ibid.
Diforder'd  without  bringing  on  fud-
den  death,  ibid.
Inftances  of  this  and  the  contrary,
ibid.
Whether  flight  wounds  of  this  kill-
more  fpeedily,  or  certainly,  than
thofe  of  the  cerebrum,  ibid.  &
27.
Few  inftances  occur  where  thefe  do
not  kill  inftantaneoufly,  ibid.
Inftances  of  the  cure  of  fuch  when
■flight,  ibid.
Cerebellum  and  cerebrutn,  experiments  or
wounds  made  in  them in  living
birds  and  cats,  LII.  26.
And  in  dogs,  LII.  27.
Cerebellum  found  without  any  medullary
tree  or  fhrub,  LXII,  15.
More  than  half  of  it  obferv'd to  be
fcirrhous,  ibid.
How  this  brings  on  difeafes  of  the

cerebrum,  LXII.  16.
Not  afFefting  the  refpiration  and
pulfe,  ibid.
Cerebellum,  injuries  of  if,  whether  to  be
known  from an infpeftion of
the  naked  dead  body,  and  how,
II.  25.
Whether  produflive  of  hemiplegias
on  the  fide  injur'd,  or  on  the
oppofite  fide, LII.  27. LXII.

14-  17-
Charifius, Chrift. Lud, P. Prof. Re-
giomont. commended, XIX.

43-
la  ChaulFe,  B.  Ignat.  commended,  XLIII.

14.
Chefelden,  Will.  R.  S.  L.  S.  commended,

VL


INDEX referring to


VI.  7. XIII.  6, 7. 10,  II.

XIV. 12. XXI. 20. XLII.

28.
Chcfnuts,  how  bread  made  of  them,  eaten

with  onions,  brought  on death

within  three  hours,  XXIX.  9.
Child-bearing,  the  difcharge  of  the  waters

fortie  time before  delivery  found

not  to  be  prejudicial,  XLVIII,

9-
Whether  the  modern  opinion  con-
cerning thefe  waters be  true  or
not,  ibid.  10.

The  bad confequences of  improper
efforts to haften delivery ob-
ferv'd,  XXXIX.  38.
What  more immediately  happen,
XLVIII.  29,  30.

Delivery,  feveral  times  eafy,  render'd
afterwards  difficult  by  the  bad
conduil  of  the  furgeon,  ibid.  41.

Various  caufes  of  its  difficuhy,  ibid,

39'
Remedy  for  it  cafually  difcover'd,

ibid.  41.
Spurious  convulfive  pains,  obflruding  the
delivery,  cure  of,  ibid.
Caufes  of  unexpeded  death after  de-
livery, ibid.  30.
Ruptures  of  the  uterus  happen  in  it
more  frequently  than  is  generally
fuppos'd,  ibid.
The  reafons  of  this,  with  the  figns
of  it,  ibid.  &  31.
Abdomen of women dying at  the
time  of,  or  foon  after,  delivery,
remarkably  diftended,  ibid.  45.
Separation  of the bones of  the  os
pubis  and  os  factum  at the  time
of  delivery, whether  impoflible
or  unneceffary,  ibid.
This  fometimes obferv'd after a
delivery  not  very  laborious,  ibid.
44.
Child-bed-women,  difeafes  of, XLVIII.

43.  &  feq.
Chomelius, R. Sc. Acad. Parif. com
mended,  XXIII.  14.  XXXVII.
24.  XXXVIII.  48.  50.
Chyliferous  VefTels  obferv'd  in  men,  V.  17.
XVII. 14. XIX. 7, 8. 19.
XXV.  2.  LIII.  37.
With  little  cifterns  turgid  with  chyle,
throughout  the  inteftines,  XVII.


Who  have  obferv'd  them,  and  how
they  are  caus'd,  XVII. 15.
Chyliferous  veffel  running  along  the  fto-

mach,  LII,  30.

Cicognini, Jacob, formerly Prof. Pad.

commended,  LIII.  34.

An  obfervation  of  his,  L!II.  35.

Cicognini,  Jo.  Franc. Surgeon at  Forli,

obfervation  by,  LIX.  17.
Clavus,  what  different  difeafes  are  meant
by  it,  L.  61.
Obfervation  on  that  of  which  Silius
Italicus  died,  ibid,
Cleopatra,  the  caufe  of  her  death. Vid.

Afp,
le  Clerc,  Daniel,  miftaken,  XIX.  23.
Clyfters,  nourifhing,  fuccefsfuliy  us'd for
a  long  time  in  a  certain  cafe,
XXVIIi.  14.
The method of injedting  them by
pipe and bladder known long
ago,  L.  54.
Coeliac  Artery,  and the fuperior mefen-
teric,  found  with  one  common
origin,  XXIX.  20.
Obfervations of two and three in
different  bodies,LIII. 37.  LXX. 9.
Coeliac  Artery,  why  very  fubjett  to  aneu-

rifms,  XXXiX.  19.
Coeliac  Flux,  not  to  be  confounded  with
the  Cceliac  Difeafe  mention'd by
Celfus,  XXXI.  4.
What  kind  of  difeafe  it  is,  and  the
caufe  of  it,  ibid.  &  13.
Cohaufen, Valent. Ern. Eugen, Caef.
Acad.  N.  C. Soc.  commended,
XXIIL 9. XXXIV. 19.
XXXVIII.  19.
Coiterus, appearances found by him  in
the  diffedlion  of  phtifical  bodies,
are  not  conftantly  found,  XXII.

17-

Cold,  very  fevere  in  1740.  &  1758.  ef-
feds  of  on  the  contents  of  the
cranium,  XIII.  15.  LXVII.  14.
&  feq.

Columbus,  Realdus,  an  obfervation  from
him,  explain'd,  XIX.  20.
How  another  obfervation  of  his  con-
cerning a  gelatinous  fluid  in  the
cerebrum  of  apopleftic  perfons
is  to  be  underftood,  V.  i.

Commendoni,  Jo.  Franc.  S.  R.  E.  Car-
dinal, his  death,  with  the  dit-
feiSlion  of  him,  IX.  3.

Confumption,


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moil  worthy  of  Notice.


Confumption,  Pulmonary,  inbred,  the
firft  marks  of  in  the  lungs.  I.  3.
XXII.  19,  20.

Various  external  caufes  of  it,  XXII.
20.

From  a  defiiixion  from  the  head,  and
hov/,  ibid.  26.
Flow averted by Mercurialis and
Gavafetti, ibid.

Scrophulous,  figns  of,  ibid.  18,  19.

How  brought  on  by  drinking  cold
water  whilft  a  perfon  is  very
hot,  ibid.  20.

Violent  exercife,  fometimes  advan-
tageous, at  other  times  preju-
dicial in  ir,  ibid.  13.

Inftance  of  an  incipient  one,  or  a
difeafe like one, cur'd, ibid.

Sometimes attended with the lues
venerea,  ibid.  1 1.
Confumptive  perfons, expecStorations of,
why examin'd by Hippocrates
in  fea-water  in  a  brazen  veffel,
XXII.  28.
How  this  is  done,  ibid.
This  experiment  by  water,  and  ano-
ther by  fire,  propos'd  on  account
of  the  prognojis,  not  the  diagnojis,
ibid.
Who  of  the  ancients  approv'd  of
this,  and who  did  not,  ibid.  &
29.
Who taught that riding-on-horfe-
back  is  not  equally  advantageous
to  all,  XXII.  13.
Some  beneficial  remedies mention'd

for  them,  ibid.  28.
DiiScultly  cur'd,  and  why,  ibid.  30.
Confumpiive  perfons, faid to be cur'd,
when  they  were  not  fuch,  ibid.
27.  &  feq.
Generally  die,  according  to  Valfalva,
during  a  foutherly  conflitution
of  the  air,  XXII.  15.
The  fuperior  part  of  the  lungs ge-
nerally obferv'd  afFefted  by  Val-
falva, ibid.  13. &  feq.
The  reafon  of  this,  ibid.  47.
Some  have  a  fmall  quantity  of  blood,
others  fcarcely  any,  in  the  pul-
monary and the other velTels,
ibid.  20.
Why  fome  die  with  the  lungs  almoft
deftitute of fluids^ vvhilfl: in


others they are flufPd with
pus,  ibid.  20.
Who  formerly found water in the
thoraces  of  fuch,  ibid.  17.
Whether  this  is  only  found  on  the
right  fide,  ibid.
ContrafiiTures. Vide  Cranium.
Conus, Chrift. Erneft. commended,

LXV.  18.
Convulfion frequently arifes from the
brain,  even  though  it  feems  not
to  do  fo,  XV.  9.
Not  always  fo,  XV.  10.
How this may be join'd with a
palfy  of  the fame limb, Vid.
Pal  fy.
Convulfions,  extraordinary,  cafe  of, dif-
ficultly accounted  for,  X.  16.
V/hen  frequently  returning,  attended
with  danger,  though  fome  good
figns  attend,  X.  13.
Convulfive affe£lions, efpecially  on one
fide  of the body,  the caufe  of
enquir'd  into,  II.  18.  XI.  7.
Whether  they  arife  from  an  irritation
of  the  meninges. Vid.  Cere-
.  brum.
Why  they  fometimes ceafe a little

•  .  while  before  death,  LI.  48.
The  caufe  of  thefe  and tonic con-
vulfions  the fame, though  ap-
parently difFerenf,  X.  15.
The  caufes  of  thefe  different  in  per-.,
fons  dyihg,  or  weaken'd  by  too
great  haenriorrhages  or  purgings,
X.  20,  21.
Convulfive affed^ions, phyficians often
fubftitute  organical difeafes  for
thefe,  XV.  10.  14.
When  and how far thefe may be

join'd  together,  XXVI.  32.
The  method of  curing them  when

of  long  ftanding,  X.  21.
Convulfive  afthma. Vide  Aflhma.
Convuls'd  perfons,  water  generally  found
in  the  brain  of,  X.  6.
Limbs  of  fuch,  fometimes  remain  (a
even  after  death,  X.  15.
Convulfions,  caus'd  by  poifonous  fteams,

a  terrible  example  of,  X.  21.
Cornell,  Geo. S. R.  E. Cardinal, and
Bifliop of Padua, account  of
his  illnefs,  death,  and  difi^edlion,
LVn.  10.
Cortefiusj  error  of,  III.  22.  LI,  41,

Cofchwitzius,


I N D E X referring to


Cofchwitzius, Geo. Dan, formerly P.
Prof. Hal. commended, XL.

Cough  and  fever  compar'd  together,  XIX.

5..3-

Coughs,  divided according  to their  va-
rious caul'es,  ibid.
This  divifion  illuftrated by  exam-,
pies,  ibid.  &  feq.  &  57,  58.

How  produc'd  by  caufes  feated  within
the  abdomen,  efpecially  in  the
ftcmach,  ibid.  37.

Prov'd  to  arife  fometimes  from  difeafes
of  the  head,  ibid.  54.

How  occafion'd by  fcratching the
ears,  ibid.
Cough, convulfive, or chin-cough,
XXVI.  36.

Caufe  of  one,  as  it  was  fuppos'd  by
fome,  according  to  Malpighi
and  Lancifi,  XIX.  55.
Cranium,  different  make  of,  though  na-
tural, dangers  arifmg  from,
LXllI.  8.

Capacity  of,  in  rerpe6t  to  the  brain,
jiot  the  fame  in  all  perfons,  and
at  all  times,  IV.  32.  LI.  10.  30,

31-

By  whom  this  was  obferv'd,  and
the  caufe  of  it,  ibid.
Bad  formation  of,  and  confequently
^ of  the  brain,  I.  14.  &  alibi.
The  caufe  of  this,  LXII.  16.
Cranium,  futures  of,  feparated  in  a  man
of  feventy  years  of  age,  III.  8.
Bad  cffefts of, when happening
fuddenly,  LI.  29.
The  commonly-receiv'd opinion of
their  ufe  (hewn  to  be  wrong  by
very-long  fiffures  of  the  cranium,
LII.  35,  36.
Examples  of  contrafiffures,  properly
fo  call'd,  found  to  be  very  rare,
if  cautioufly  examin'd,  LI.  40.
&  feq.
Cranium,  a  confiderable  part  of,  deftroy'd
by a caries, without injuring
the  cerebrum,  LVIII.  11,  12.
How  the  defed  may  be  fupplied  by
nature,  LI.  39,  40.
Though  found,  may  be  pervaded  by

pus  in  feme  places,  LI.  4.
Who firft defcrib'd watry tumours
coiTimunicating  with  its  cavity,
XII.  10.


Whether  worms are found In it.-

Vide  Worms.
Blood,  extravafation  of, within it;
why  the fymptoms  of  it  come-
on  fometimes  fooner,  fometimes
later  ;  and  why  thefe  are  flighter
or  greater,  LI.  4.
Cranium,  blow  on, though  neither  this
or  its contents feem'd to be
hurt, may in procefs  of time
occafion  death  ; and  how  this
happens,  LIL  37.
Cautions  neceflary  in  the  exami-
nation of  fuch  a  cafe  after  death,
LIL  7.
Cranium,  perforation  of, why  not  prac-
tis'd  in  fome  places, LII.  12.
&  feq.
Dangers  and  difficulties  attending  this

operation,  ibid.
Inftances  of  its  fuccefs,  though  per-
form'd  long  after the  hurt  re-
ceiv'd,  LII.  16.
Craufius,  Rud.  Wilh.  P.  Prof.  Jen.  com-
mended, XLIII.  40.
Caellius,  Jo.  Frid.  Prof.  Helmftad.  com-
mended, XXIV.  17. XXV.  9.
XXVII.  20.  &  feq.
Curtius, Car. M. D. Neapolit. com-
mended, IX.  19.  LVII.  15.
Cyft. Vide  Liver.

Cyftic  Calculi,  by  whom  formerly  found,
XXXVII.  15.  22.
Why  more  frequent  than the he-
patic, ibid.  14.
Caufes  of  their  formation,  by  whom
pointed  -  out even formerly,
ibid.
Some  of  thefe  not  to  be  allow'd

of,  ibid.  22.
Others to be admitted, ibid.
19.
At  what  times  of  life,  and  in  which
fex,  they  more  generally  happen,
and  why,  ibid.  15.  22.
Whether their  colours  are  different
according  to  the  different  ages,
ibid.  16.  &  feq.
Whether  they  are  generally  black  or

brown,  ibid.  17.
Of  what  colours  they  are  often  found,

ibid.  18.
Are  not  always  of  the  colour  of  the
bile  in which  they  are  found,
and  why,,  ibid.  16.

A  pale


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


A  pale  hollow  one  containing  many
of  a  black  colour,  XLIX.  2.

By  whom  they  were  found  very  large,
or  very  fmall,  or  in  vcy  great
quantities,  XXXVII.  19.

The  figures,  with  obfervations  there-
on, ibid.  &  20.

Whether  the  more  there  are,  the  more
angular  they  become,  ibid.

Have  been thought by fome to be
compos'd of different circular
ftrata,  ibid.  2?.
Exceptions  to  this  doftrine,  ibid.

Who  have  obferv'd  lines  in  fome  of
them  tending,  like  radii,  from
the  circumference  to  the  center,
ibid.  &  feq.

Who  have  found  them  pellucid  and
fhining,  ibid.  18.  23.

Form'd  within  the  coats  of  the  cyft,
ibid.  21.
Hence  obfervations  of  fome  found
involv'd in  a  membrane  may  be
explain'd,  ibid.

Who  firfl:  mention'd  their  fwimming
on  water,  ibid.  25.
Who have obferv'd that all do

not,  ibid.
Thefe  exceptions  difficult to be
reduc'd to any certain heads,
ibid.
Some  conje£lures  at  the  caufes  of
this  variety,  ibid.

Who  have  written  of  their  inflam-
mability, ibid.  26.
Who  have obferv'd that all are
not  fo,  ibid.

Whether  their  being  an  hereditary
difeafe  be  fully  prov'd  by  a  cer-
tain obfervation,  ibid.  19.

Why  fome  of  thefe  have  been  taken
for  inteflinal  calculi,  ibid.  24.
Whether  and  how  they  are  to  be
diftinguilh'd, ibid. Sc feq. &

» 43- .

Are like urinary calculi in fome

things,  but  diii'erent  in  others,

ibid.
What  injuries  they  may  do  to  the

cyfl,  ibid.  20,  21.
Whether, and  when, they may  be

the  caufe  of  an  apoplexy,  IV.  5.
How  they  may  occafion  a  diarrhsea,

when  they  iiU  the  whole  cyft,

XXXVII.  36.
Vol.  III.


Whether  a  flubborn,  or  frequenily-
returning  jaundice  be  a  certain
fign  of  them,  XXXVII.  4.  13.
27-  et  feq.  to  36.
V/hv  fometimes  join'd  with  them,
ibid.  32.  35.

Whether  vomiting,  the  colic,  too
great  coftivenefs,  or  laxity  of
the  belly,'  be  a  certain  fign  of
them,  ibid.  36.

Whether  a  fenfe  of  weight,  punc-
ture, or  diflenfion,  be  a  fign  of
them,  ibid.  37.

Whether  any  other  fign  of  them  has
yet  been  olferv'd,  ibid.  38.  43.

Whether  there  be  any  conftant  fign
of  them,  at  leaft  when  they  db-
ftruft the cyflic dufl:, ibid.

39-

Whether  Wepfer's  fign,  that  is,  a
pain  at  the  cartilage  enfiformis,
is  to  be  depended  upon,  ibid.
Whether  this  fign  be  conftant
when  calculi  are  got  into  the
dudlus  communis,  ibid.  40.  &
feq.

Have  fome  fymptoms  proper  to  make
,us  fufpeft  their  exifience;  ihj'
they  do  not  prove  it, ibid.  43..

4-4-
Some  of  thefe  mention'd,  ibid.  43.

The  mark  of  their  exifience mottly
to  be  depended  on  j  with  the  firfl
obfervers  of  them,  ibid.  44.
This  to  be  attended-to  with  cau-
tion, ibid.  45.  &  feq.

The  method  of  cure.  Vide  Biliary
Calculi.

Fartherobfervations  concerning  them,
LXV.  12.  &  feq.


D


ALECHAMPIUS,  miftaken,  LIII.

6.
UnnecefTary  doubt  of  his  concerning

a  pafTage  in  Pliny,  LV.  12.
Deaf-perfons, recovering their hearing,

whether  they  are  oblig'd  to  learn

words  and  fpeaking  over  again,

XIV.  II.
Dcafncfs,  attending  all the  girls in  the

family  from  their  birth, whilft

all  the  boys  were  free  from  it,

XLVIII.  48.
4U  Whether


INDEX relating to


Whether,  and  when,  this  neceffarily
follows,  when  the  bones  of  the
tympanum,  and this  membrane
itfelf,  are  broken,  XIV.  lo.
Proceeding from an oflification of
the  membrane which connefls
the  ftapes  with  the  feneftra  ova-
lis,  ibid.  II.
Other  caufes  of  it,  XIV.  15. XXI.
25.
Dead,  how  it ma)/  be known  whether
women are fo or not. Vid.
Hyfteric,
Deaths,  fudden, not uncommon in the
preceding  ages, II. 2. & feq.
XXVI.  I.  LXIV.  17.
Difcovery  of  their  caufe  at  a  certain
time  eafing  the minds  of  many
perfons,  and  how,  11. 4.  XXVI.

35-
The  feat of their caufes,  XXVII.

2.

Under  what  conftitution  of  the  air
at  Padua  thefe  were  more  fre-
quent, and  why.  III.  11.  13.
29.  IV.  21.

In  what  month  they  chiefly  happen'd
at  Bonona,  iV.  12.

What  fubjedts  they  frequently  attack
when  lying-down,  and  why,  III.
28.

Whether  fome may  not  arife from
fyncope  rather than  from apo-
plexy, enquir'd into. III. 27.
&  feq.  IV.  22.
Or  from  fuffocation,  IV.  25.  27.

In  confequence  of  a  violent  blow  on
the  head,  without  any  apparent
injury  done  to  the  cranium  or
cerebrum,  VIII.  15,

How  caus'd  by  chang;ing  fides  whilft
lying-down,  XX.  18.

That  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart
of  a perfon fo dying  has no
blood in it, is  not univerfally
true,  XVII.  15.
Deulutition. Vide  Swallowino;.
Degnerus,  Jo.  Hart.  Csef.  Aca^d.  N.  C.  S.
commended, XXXVIII. 61.
L.  38.
Delirious  peifo.ns are to be  bound  with

care, VIII.  5.  LXI.  13.
Delirium,  attended  with  a  JAVeac of  the
whole  body, and why, VII,
16.


Arifes from very different caufes,.

VII.  8.
How it  may  precede or fucceed  a

peripneumony,  XXI.  7.
How  it  may  fucceed a  foporofe  dif.
order,  X.  18.  LI. 48.
Delivery. Vid.  Child-bearing.
Delius,  Henr.  Frid.  Caef.  Acad.  N.  C.  S.
commended,  XIV.  38. XXIX.

3-
Dethardingius, Geo. formerly P.  Prof.

Hafn. commended, XIII.  24.

XXII.  26. XLII.  23. LIX.

10.
His  opinion  concerning  the  caufe  of

the  death of perfons drown'd,

and  rnethod  of  relieving  them,,

examin'd,  XIX,  44.
Derhleefius, Peter, commended, LVI.

29.
Diabetes,  few  diffe£lions  extant  of  perfons

dying  with,  XLI.  15.
Obfervations  concerning  it,  ibid.  &

14.
Who  even  formerly  fuppos'd  it  to  be

caus'd  by  air,  ibid.  15.
Diagnofis,  attended  with  difficulty  in  that

region  of  the  body  which  con-
tains many vifcera, XX,

31-

Diaphragm;,,  fometimes  perforated  in  many
places  only  for  the  tranfmiffion
of  veins,  V.  6.  9.  LX.  6,
LXIV.  2.  LXVIL  14.  LXX.
10.

Foramen  of,  for  the  oefophagus,
fometimes  much  longer  or
fiiorter  than  ufual,  X.  ig..
XXVIII.  16.

Appendices  of,  join'd  together  by  a
tranfverfe  tendon  ;  ("0  that  the
aorta  did  not  pafs  through  a
femi-foramen,  but  through  a
foramen,  XVIII.  2.

Offified  in  part  of  the  centre,  LXX.

5-
Inflammation of, fometimes is at-
tended with a  delirium, othef-
times  not.  VII.  14  LIII.  6.
Wounds  of,  fometimes  attended  with
a rifus fardonius, fometimes
not,  ibid.
Which  of  them  not  mortal,  LIV.

II.
Signs  of  them,  LIII.  4.  6.

Frequently


NAMES and  PASSAGES  mofl  worthy  of  Notice.


Frequently accompanied with
wounds of the abdominal  vi-
fcera,  LIII.  41.
Conformation and fituation of it
Ihevv that humours contaia'd
within  the  cavity  of  t"he  thorax,
cannot  be  difcharg'd  by  wounds
of  the  anterior  part  of  the  tho-
rax without  the  affiflance  of  in-
fpiration,  LIV.  1 1.
How,  and by what force, feme  of
the  vifcera  of  the  belly  may  pafs
through wounds of, or oiher
paffages  in,  it  into  the  cavity  of
the  thoraK,  ibid.  &  feq.
Diarrhoeas,  and  their  efFedts, caufes  of,
XXXI.  8.
Watry  efpecially, whence in great
quantities,  and  of  fuch  bad  con-
fequence,  XXXI.  8.  &  feq.
Hiftory  of  one,  ibid.  9,  10.
Different defcription of the fame
kind, mention'd by the name
of  dyfentery, given by  Syden-
ham and  Willis,  ibid.  11.
Cafe  of  one  of  this  kind,  where  the
inteftines  were  not  found  in  the
leaft  injur'd,  ibid.  12.
Difficulties  made by fome perfons  con-
cerning fome  quotations  in  the
Adverfaria  and  Anatom.Epifties,
remov'd,  XXVIII.  16.
Dilienius,  Phil.  Eberh.  Caef.  Acad.  N.C.  S.

commended,  VIII.  31.
Dionis,  a  certain  prediflion  of  his  not  al-

• ways  right,  XLVI.  8.
Difeafes  of  infants. Vide  Infants.
Of  the  thorax. Vide  Thorax.
Wonderful fucceffion of. III. 8.
VIII.  10. XXIX.  10. XLII.
II.
Who  have  treated  on  this  fubjeft,
VIII.  10.
Difeafes,  fymptoms  of,  are  generally  much
to be depended upon, though
not  always,  LIII.  30.
Their  original  caufes  and  beginnings,
though  feemingly  contemptible,
fliould  be  carefully  enquir'd  into,
XIII.  23.
Their  hidden caufes  fometimes  dif-
ficultly determin'd, XXXIX.
16,  17.
In  gueffing  at  thefe  many  marks
are  to  be  join'd  toge.her,  ibid. 40.


Their  firfl:  attacks  are  to  be  re-
garded, ibid.  44.  &  XXXVIII.
60.
Enquiry  fhould  be  made  after  the
difeafes  of  the  patients'  an-
ceflors,  XXX.  22.

Hereditary,  cafes  of.  Vid.  Apoplexy,
Vomiting.

Of  the  organical parts, when thsy

are  not  continual,  frequently  are

niiftsken for  others,  XVII.  26.

'XVIII.  17.  &feq.  XXIII.  22.

How  it  happens  that  thefe  aie  not

continual,  XVII.  27.

Obfcure,  what  rnedici.ies  the  ftck
fhou'd  not  be  compeil'd  to  take
in  thefe  cafes,  XVII.  32.

Great,  attacking  perfons  after  en-
joying uninterrupted  health  from
the  time  of  birth,  III-  5,

Why  more  fevere  when  from  an  in-
ternal, and  efpecially  congenial,
caufe,  than  from  an  external
one,  XII.  12.

Signs  of  an  approaching  favourable
ciifis,  VIII.  10.  XLIX.21. ,

Accurate  hiftory  of  one  follow'd  by
fudden  death  from  a  rupture  of
an  abfcefs  of  the  liver,  or  aa
aneurifm  of  the  aorta,  XL.  28.
Diftichiafis.  Vide  Eye-laflies.
Diuretics,  the  ufe  gf  them  not  to  be  per-
fifted-in,  when  terebinthinate
medicines  do  not  give  a  violet
odor  to the uiine,  XXXVIII.

.30-
An  improper  ufe  of  them,  inftead  of
encreafing  the  urinary  difcharges,
accelerating the motion  of  the
blood,  ibid.
Dodonaeus. The  year  in  which  his  obfer-
vations  were  firfl:  publifh'd not
known,  XXXVIII.  48.
A  remarkable  obfervation  of  his,  how

to  be  explain'd,  ibid.
Miftaken  in  one  particular,  XLVIF.
I.
Dogs,  mad. Whence  the  opinion  arofe
that they have worms under
their  tongues,  VIII.  34.
Who firft obferv'd, and gave the
figure of, this natural  worm-
like appearance,  ibid.  *
An accurate defcription of  this,
ibid.
4U  2 Whether


INDEX referring to


Whether  they  become  fo  from  an  ob-
ftuftion  in  the  duds  of  the  fol-
licles near their anuffes,  LXI.

IS-
Donatus,  Marcellus,  miftaken,  XVI.  32.
XLII.  17. LI.  46.
An  obfervation  of  his,  how  to  be  un-

derftood,  XXXII.  5.
The  right  meaning  of  a  certain  paf-
fage  of  his,  XXXVIII.  46.
Dormice,  amongft  us, have fcareely  an

apparent  epiglottis,  XIX.  41.
le  Dran,  Henry  Franc.  Surgeon  at  Paris,

cooimended,  XIV.  25-
Drelincurt, remarks on his  experiments

on  dogs,  XIX.  25.  31.
Dropfy,  cafe  of  one  encreafmg  very  faft,
and  very  foon  going  off,  VIII,
10.
Known by the appearance of  the
eyes,  XXXVIII.  29.
Caufe  of  it,  ibid.  ig.
Dropfy,  afcites,  diforders  of  the  liver  or
fpleen  not alw/ays the  caufe  of
them,  XXXVIII.  19.
How  a  vitiated fpleen  or liver  may

caufe  it,  XXXVI.  26.
How  known  to  arife  from  hydatids,

XXXVIII.  35.  &  feq.
From  what  kind  of  hydatids  Aretseus
fuppos'd  it  to  arife,  ibid.  45.
From  whatever  kind it  aiifes,  in-
curable, and  why  fo,  ibid.
The  vifcera  are  not  always  corrupted
by  the  water  furrounding  them,
but fometimes by that which
they  contain,  ibid.  42.
Why  the  omentum  is  frequently  torn,
ibid.  36.
Cafes of  fome cur'd by nature,
ibid.  32.  XXXIX.  29.
Why difficultly cur'd, XXXVIII.

31-

Inflances  of  a  cure  by punfture  of

the  fcrotum,  and  other  parts  not

to  be  depended  upon,  ibid.  32.
Who long ago recommended the

urine  of  quadrupeds  for  a  cure,

ibid.  30.
The  efredl  of  cow's  urine,  ibid.
Who firfl: advis'd the paracentefis.

Vide  Paracentefis.
"^Vho formerly  fjid that the water

was  di'charg'd  by  the  umbilical

vein,  ibid.  33.


How  the  obfervations  of  thofe  who
fay  they  found  this  vein  entirely
clos'd,  are  to  be  explain'd,  ibid.

Who  firft  prov'd  by  experiments  that
one  might  arife  from  a  rupture
of  the  ureters,  XXXVIII.  19.

Other  fpecies  of  dropfies  are  fre-
quently join'd with  this, ibid.

3-  . . , .

A  tympanites  is  fometimes  found
with  it,  ibid.  21,  25.
Dropfical perfons, water of, examin'd..
Vid.  Waters.
Whether, if limpid, it proceeds
from lymphsedufts, XVI, 7,
XXXVIII.  7.  &  feq.
The ftate of the  blood  found  dif-
ferent in  fuch,  XXXVIII.  14.
Why  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  blood,
is  found  in  fome,  ibid,  32,
Dropfy  of  the  thorax. Vide  Thorax.
Anafarca. Vid.  Anafarca.
Tympanites. Vid.  Tympanites,
Of  the pericardium. Vid.  Pericar--
dium.
Peritonaeum. Vid,  Peritonaeum.
Ovaries, Vid,  Ovaries,
Dropfy,  encyfted,  XXXVIII,  63.  &  feq.
Signs  of  one,  ibid,  67. LXV.  16.  6s

feq.
The  method  of  cure,  ibid.  38.  68.
Obfervation of one burfting, and
caufing  an  afcites,  ibid.  69,
Drown'd. Vide  Letter  LXIV.  4.

The opinion of different perfons,.
whether  water  pafs  into  the  flo-
mach or the afpera arteria  of
thefe,  or  either  of  them,  XIX,.
41.
Experiments  made  on  many  and  va-
rious kinds  of  animals  whilll  the
foramen  ovale  and canalis  arte-
riofus  were open, with obfer-
vations thereon,  ibid.  &  feq.
The  epiglottis  found deprefs'd,  or
the larynx clos'd in none of
thsm,  XIX.  41.
The  reafons  of  water  being  found  in
the  ftomachs  and  lungs  of  fome
fubjedls, examin'd, ibid, 43,
44.
The  method  of  cure  propos'd  by  De-
thardingius,  examin'd,  ibid.  44.
Whether  there  be  any  hopes  of  re-
lieving fuch,  ibid.

What


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moil:  worthy  of  Notice.


What  drown'd fubjefls  are  moft  fit
for  diffeaion,  XIX.  40.

Whether  the  fwelling  of  fuch  be  oc-
cafion'd  by  water  pafling  through
the  pores  of  the  fkin,  or  from
the  expanfion  of  the  internal
air,  ibid.
Drunkennefs,  bad  efFedls  of,  VI.  9.

Occafioning  lofs of fpeech, Vid.
Aphony.
Duifingius,  Juft.'Gerh.  Prof.  P.  Marburg,,
commended,  XVIII.  24.  XXII.

13-

Duodenum,  inteftine, a kind of  cellule

found  in,  XXXIV.  17.
Duretus,  miftaken,  XXVI.  25.
Dwarfs,  whether  all  are  ricketty,  LVIII.

7-
Dyfenteries,  the  inteftines  are  frequently,

but  not always, ulcerated in,

XXXI.  13.  &feq.
The  large  intefUnes  are  oftener  fo

than  the  fmall,  ibid.  16.
Whether the gall-bladder in thefe

cafes is always diftended with

bile,  ibid.  15.  23.
Mucous and flefhy difcharges  in,

what  they  oftentimes  are,  ibid.

, i7>  i8-
The  appearance  of  caruncles  not

dangerous,  ibid.
What  the  membranous  appearances

from  the  inteftines  generally  are,

ibid.  &  feq.
What thefe may fometimes be,

ibid.  26.
Whence an extravafation of blood

in  them  within the inteftines,

ibid.  &  23,  24.
Dyfentery,  fatal,  why  Ibmetimes  without

any fever, ibid. 26, XXXV.

23-
Dyfentery, why generally fucceeded  by
a  tenefmus,  XXXI.  27.
The  bad  efFefts  of  one  related,  ibid.,
28.


E


'AR,  helix  of,,  furnifli'd  with  a  large
quantity  of  very  long  hairs,
XXIV.  6.

Ear,  meatus of, incifion into propos'd
by fome of the ancients and


moderns,  in  order  to  extradl  ex--
traneous  bodies,  XIV.  13.
Other  methods propos'd for that-
purpofe,  and  examined,  ibid,
The  chirurgical  method  of  extracting
indurated wax from it, XIV.
II.
The  methods  made  ufe  of  by  brute'
animals  to  get  rid  of  this,  ibid.
The  beft  method  of  conveying  light

into  it,  ibid.  13.
Calculi  form'd  in  it,  not  known  to
the  ancients,  XIV.  11.
By  whom they  were firft men-
tion'd,  ibid.
Worms  found  in  it,  occafioning  vio-
lent diforders,  XIV.  7.
Methods  of  expelling  them,  ibid.
Ulcers  of,  not  to  be  inconfiderately
heal'd,  XIV.  5.
Ear,  membrane  of. How  medicines  may
be  injedted  as  far  as the  tym-
panum without injuring it,,
XIV.  7.
Another  membrane  frequently  found
oppofite  to  it  in  fcetuffes,  with
obfervations  thereon, -XIV.  12.
Tympanum and the little bones

broken,  cafe  of. Vid.  Deafnefs.
If  the  fiapes fall  out,  deafnefs foon

neceffarily  follows,  XIV.  10.
The ufe  of the new foramina^  ac-
cording to Vajfalva, defended,
XIV.  9.
Ear,  tinnitus  of, whether  this can pof-
fibly  be  heard  by  the  by-ltanders,,
ibid.
Edinburgh Medical  Obfervations, com-
mended, XXXVII.  13. .
Elaftic  Vis,  defcrib'd  by  Piato, V.  18.
ElKbore,  black,  bad  efFeds-  of  taking  its-

extract. Vid.  Poifons.
Ellerus,  Jo.  Theod. Chief Phyfician  to
theKing  of  Pruffia,  commended,,
XXXVII.  21. LIX.  9 LXV.
14.
Emett,  Rob.  R.  Soc.  Sc.  Monfpel.  com-

menJed,  XIX,  24.
Emphyfema  is  not  only  caus'd  by  wounds-
penetrating  the  thorax  and  af-
pera  aneria,  LIV.  3,  37.
Emulgent  arteries  arifmg  from  the  very
middle  of  the  anterior  fuiface  of
the  aorta  a  little  above  the  iliacs,,
XXXVJ.,23.

An.


INDEX referring to


An  artery  found  paffing  from  the  left

emulgent  to  the  bottom  of  the

urinary  bladder,  LXX.  7.
Emus,  An^el.  a  fcjiator  at  Venice,  com-
mended, XXII.  31.
Ens,  Abr.  commended,  XlX.  23.
Epit^lottis  has no mufcles by which it

can  be  ftrongly  deprefs'd, ibid.

44.
Epilepfy.  A  fenfe  of  a  kind  of  foetid  fmell

preceding  it,  XIV.  28.
Brought  on  by  anger,  IX.  5.

By  a  fright; with the  proper re-
medies, ibid.  6.
Arifmg  from  the  hypochondres  ;  \viih

the medicines found ufeful in

it,  ibid.  7.
Beginning  from fome  other  part  of

the  body,  ibid.  8.
Who firft took notice of this,

ibid.
This  happens  more  frequently  than

is  fuppos'd  by  V/illis,  ibid.
Who  firft  taught  a  method  of  pre-
venting fuch,  ibid.
Two  new  remedies  propos'd for  it,

IX.  6.
Whence  fo  great  a  number  of  ufclefs

remedies  propos'd  for  it,  ibid.
The  cure  of  it  neceffarily  of  various

kinds,  ibid.  26.
Cafe  of one attended with a  very

copious  difcharge  of  the  urine,

ibid.  6.
Sometimes  brought-on,  or  encrcas'd,

by a  large  difcharge  of  urine,

ibid.  7.  9.
The  reafon  of  this,  ibid.  11.
When  not  caus'd by water effus'd

within  the  cranium,  IX.  5.  &

feq.
May  fometimes  be  caus'd  by  a  fmall

quantity  of  water,  and  that  very

limpid,  ibid.  11.
From  a  turgefcency  of  the  veffels  of

the  cerebrum, and how, ibid.

How  this  may  be  prevented,  ibid.

May  alfo  be  caus'd  by  a  peculiar  kind
of  diforder  of  the  fubftance  of
the  cerebrum,  ibid.  16.  18.
Whether  the  fpot  mentiori'd  by
Petraus  has  any  reference  to
this  cafe,  ibid.  19.


From  an  abfcefs  in  the brain,  ibid.

20.  24.  26.
From  an hardnefs  of  the  brain  alfo,

ibid.  24.  &  feq.
Whether  one  can  be  brought-on  by
an irritation of the  meninges,
ibid.  21.
Whether  it  may  not  be  brought-oa
by  caufes  altogether  imperceptible
to  our  fenfes,  ibid.  15.
Such  preternatural things as fall
under  the  notice  of  our  fenfes
in  epilepfies,  though  they  might
not have been the caufe of
them,  ought  neverthelefs  to be
remark'd,  ibid.  &  26.
Erififtratus,  his  opinion  of  the caufe of
bloody expeftoration in pleu-
rifies  wrongly  explain'd  by  fome,
XXI.  42.
Erndel,  Chr.  Henr.  formerly  Chief  Phy-
fician  to  a  king  of  Poland,  com-
mended, XIIL  29.
Etmuller,  Mich,  his  prudence  commend-
ed,  VIII.  34.
Miftaken in  fome  things,  VIII.  26.
XXIX.  4.
Evers,  Eman.  Jo.  Alb.  commended,  XIX.

43-
Excrefcencies,  carneous,  whether  they  al-
ways arife from the adipofe
membrane,  L.  21.
Of  the  adipofe  membrane,  are  not  to
be  reckon'd  among  fteatoma,  or
other  encyfted  tumours,  ibid.  &
feq.  &  LXVIII.  9.
What  they  are,  and  in  what  they
differ  from  moft  other  fatty  tu-
mours,  L.  2r.
Obfervations  of  fuch, L.  23,  24.

LXVIII.  6.8.

Signs  of  them,  with their caufes

and  cures,  L.  23.  25.  LXVIII. 8.

Of  the  reftum. Vide  Redtum.

Exoftofis. Who  ufe  this  appellation  with

propriety,  and  who  do  not,  L,

56.
Of  various  kinds,  ibid.  57,  58.
A  large  one  found in  the  clavicle,

L.58.
What  fometimes  appears  as  fuch,  L.

13-  59-
Who  have  prov'd  that  they  frequently
have  their  origin from  the  pe-
rioflreum,  ibid.

, How


N  AMES  and  PASSAGES  moil:  worthy  of  Notice,


How  they  may  fometimes  arife  from
the  lamellas  of  the  bones,  ibid.
&  LXVIII.  4.

What  kind  of  medullary  oil  one  con-
tain'd,  L.  60.

Carious in  three thigh-bones, LII.

39-
With  the  appearance  of  foliated  fun-

guffes  in  a  carious  Ikull, LII.

38.
Eye, femilunar membrane of, whether

mention'd  by  Vidius,  XIII.  25.
Found  fometimes  to  form  an  un-
guis, ibid.
Pupillary membrane of, inconve-

niencies  from  its  not  vanifliing

before  birth,  LXIII.  11.
Its  vitreous  and  chryftalline  humours,

why plac'd too backv/ards by

former  anatomifts,  XIII.  15.
Gnats  and  atoms  appearing  to  fwim

in  them  :  their  caufes  and  feat,

XIII.  14.
Caufe  of  the  appearance  of  light  on

prefling  it,  ibid.
Eyes,  internal  inflammation  of,  XIII.  21.
External. Vide  Opthalmy..
Ulcers  of  the  cornea,  like  an  albugo

or  hypopyon,  how  diftinguifh'd,

XIII.  24.
Pupil dilatation or  conftritSion of,

when the  difeafe  itfelf, or  the

eWe&  of  the  difeafe,  ibid.  19.
Shut  up  from  birth,  LXIII,  11.
Retina, become oflified, LII. 30,

,31-.

Oflincations  found  within  them,
XIII.  9,  10.  LIL  31.

Chryftalline  humour,  corrupted  in  a
particular  manner,  XIII.  15,
16,
Difeafes  of,  fomewhat  of  the  na-
ture of  a  fuffufion,,  ibid.  15.  17,
18.
Opacity  of,  from  a  defeft  of  its
aqueous  humour,  ibid.  14.

Procidentia  of,  remarks  en,-  ibid.
20.

Difeafes. of them,, why. fo many,
XIII.  29.
Why  they  happen  fo  eafily,  LXIII.

II.
How  fome  are  reliev'd,  XLVI.  g.
Wounds  of,  why  fome  are  inftanta-
jKOjfly  mortal,  LII.  40.


Who  have  taught  tbat  the  fight  iS'
not  loft,  if  only  the  aqueous
humour  be  difcharg'd,.  LII.  40.

Whether  this  is  ever  the  cafe  after
a  Jifcharge  of  all  the  humours,
ibid.

Chryftalline,  whether  after  its  ef-
flux it  ever  be  regenerated,
ibid.

Who  both  before  and  after  Barrhus
believ'd  it  to  be  fo,  ibid.
Orbits,  v/ounds  of  may  eafily  reach
the  brain,  LI.  58.

How  this  may  be  known,  ibid.

Inftances  of  thefe,  ibid.
Eye-lafhes. Of  their  difeafes, the tri-

chiafis  and  diftichiafis,  XIII.  29.
Eye-lids.  Some  remarks  on  their  febaceous-
glands,  LXIIL  6.


FABBRI, Albert, formerly M.  D.
Bonon.  his  cafe,  VIII.  32.
1^'abbri,  Laur.  Cajet.  Prof.  Florent.  com-
mended, VIII.  31.
Fabricius, Phil. Conr. Prof. Helmftad.
commended, V.  12.  24. VIII.
- 14.  18. XVIII.  24. XIX.  II.
XXXIV. 17. XXXVir. 15.
XLV. 13. XLVIII. 14. 39.
XLIX.  ig. L.  37. LXIII.  3.

Face,  warts  and  tubercles  of,  are  not
rafhiy  to  be  treated  with  the
aSual  or  potential  cautery,  L.
26.
Wound  of,  large  of  itfelf,  appearing
much  larger  than  it  really  was,
LIL  41.

Fackius,  Andr.  Caef.  Acad.  N.  C.  com-
mended, XVIII.  27.

Fall.  How  the  forehead  and  vertebrae  of
the  back  may  be  broken  by  orre
at  the  fame  time,  LII.  36.

Falloppius, fhewn to  be the author  of
certain  obfervations,  XVI.  32.
Of  the  firft  edition  of  thefe,  and  af
his  expoiition  of  Galen's  book
on  the  bones,  ibid.  *

Falfe-conceptions. Vide  Moles.

Fantonus,  Jo.  formerly  Prof.  R.  Taurin.
commended,  VIII.  18. IX.  24.

xii.9,12, 13.  xvi  12.  xvr,.

37.  XiX.  55.  XX.  52.  XXIII.


INDEX referring to


tv XXIV.  3.  32. XXVIIL

4.  17. XXX,  8.  13. XXI.  13.

16. 20, 21. XXXVI 14.

XXXVIII.  24. XXXIX.-  28.

XL.  ^.  13,  14. XLII.  23.  32.

35,  36.  XLVL  12.  XLIX.  19.

LI.  58. LII.  26.  32. LIIl.  27.

LIV.  12. LXI,  6.  15. LXV,

10.  15.  LXVI.  I !.  13.
Fafling,  What  ages  bear  it  b.ft,  XXVIIL
^ 6,  7.
Examples of it from the Roman

hiftory,  ibid.  7.
A  difEculty  in  reluion to it,  arifing

from an obfervaiion made by

Fernelius,  foiv'd,  ibid.
Perfons  dying by  it:  what  is necef-

fary  to  be  attended-to  in  differing

them,  XXVIIL  4.
Symptoms attending a woman fo

dying,  XVIII.  25.
A  puppy fo  dying,  with  the  dif-

fcdion,  XXV ill.  5.
Fat, in too great a  quantity, does  not

correcSt:  acrimony  in  bodies  ;  and

why,  XXVII.  3.
Its  fmall particles found  agitated  by

a  tumultuary  motion  after  death,

XXXL  5.
Moft  prone of  any  of  the parts  to

contraft  the  fafFron-like  colour

from the  ferum  of the  blood,
■  XXXVII.  8.
Fat- perfons  have  the  cavity  of  the  thorax

much  too  little,  XXVII 2.
The  reafon of this, and their  not

eafily lying on the back,

ibid.
Why  ruptures  and  erofions  of  their

vefTels are very frequent,  ibid,

3'.

Their  carcaffes foon  have a  very
ill-fmel!,  ibid.

Fauces,  impediment  found  about,  often
the  forerunner  of  convulfions
after  wounds,  XV.  9.  LIV.  3.
23.  28,  29.

F«v,  de  la,  N.  Surgeon  at  Paris,  com-
mended, XXIII.  18.

*cmur:  this  not  the  only  bone  part  of
which  runs  in  an  oblique  di-
re£lion,  LVI.  4.
Cervix  of,  its  obliquity  known  to
the  mofl  ancient  writers,
ibid.


Fradlure  of  it  feeming  to  be  onJy
a  luxation,  by  whom  firft  re-
mark'd,  ibid.  2.

By  whom  this  was firfl:  con-
firm'd  by  diffedion,  ibid.  3.

Whence  a  fracture  of  it  from  an
external  caufe  happens  more
frequently  than  a  luxation,  ibid.

^2,  3.

Cafes of  a  luxation, ibid, 5.  7.

Why  a  coalition  of  the  feparated
parts  is  here  more  difficult  than
in  any  other  part ;  and  why  it
is  generally  foUow'd  by  lame-
nefs,  ibid.  4,

Whence  it  is  that,  according  to
the  opinion  of  fome  modern  and
ancient  writers,  perfons  are  ca-
pable of  walking  after  a  frac-
ture or  luxation  of  this  part,
when  not  properly  replac'd  and
agglutinated,  LVI.  5,  6.

Not  only  animadverfions  on,  but
obfervations  of,  this  are  added,
ibid.  7,  &  feq.

A  very  remarkable  inftance  of
this,  confirming  the  opinion  of
the  ancients  concerning  it,  ibid,

T. ^'^'^'  ^^■

Fractures  of,  why  generally  follow'd

by  lamenefs,  ibid.  24.

Fernelius.  A  paffage  of  his  explain'd,XIV.

22.

Defeats  in  a  certain  divifion  of  his,
XLV.  2.
Fevers.  How  a  violent  one  may  be  ex-
cited when  there  is  but  a  fmall
quantity  of  blood,  and  that  very
dilute,  XXXVI.  13.

Inflance  of  one  in  which  the  habit
of  the  body  was  not  alter'd,
though  it  continu'd  above  an
hundred  days,  XLIX.  20,

Puftules  coming  on  the  lips  are  fome-
times  not  to  be  depended  upon
as  a  fign  of  recovery,  ibid.  21.

Inftances  of  the  folution  of  fome
without  any  crifis,  XXXIV.
23,  24.

Catarrhal,  at  Padua,  1730,  with  the
conftitution of the air^ XIII.

4-
The  method  of  cure,  with  the  pre-
vention, ibid,

©bfer-


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy*  of  Notice.


Obfervations  on  the  malignant  win-
ter fever  at  Forii,  VII.  i6.

MaJignity  of  them  does  not  confift
in  a  diflolv'd  or  coagulated  ftace
of  the  blood,  or  even  a  con-
jun(3:ion  of  them,  XLIX.  13.
22,  23.

Gangrene  of  the  vifcera  frequently
attending,  ibid.  35.
Thefe  rather  their  effe£l  than  their
caufe,  LXVIII.  3.

Malignant,  intermitting,  method  of
curing,  IV.  10.  XLIX.  30, 31.
In  whom,  when,  and  after  what
fymptoms,  their  return  is  more
or  lefs  to  be  expefted  and  fear'd,
XLIX.  31.

Thefe  are  not  fo  much  to  be  attended-
to  and  oppos'd  as  the  adjoin'd
malignity,  or  fome  other  great
afFedtion,  LXVIII.  2.  &  feq.

How  they  kill  is  frequently  not  to
be  found  out  by  diffeftion,  ibid.
&  XLIX.  I.

Whether  the  bodies  of  perfons  dying
of  malignant  fevers  can  be  fafely
differed,  ibid.  32.

Chronic,  What  vifcera  are  princi-
pally injur'd  by  them,  XX.  52.
XXXVI.  18.  XLIX.  36.

What  kinds  are  ufeful,  or  otherwife,
in  apopledlic  diforders  ;  and
■when  they  are  fo,  II.  i<s.  XI,
24.  LXIII.  14.

Sextan,  examples  of,  XLIX.  36.
Fickius,  Jo.  Juftus,  M.  D.  Jen. com-
mended, XLVIII.  25.
Fifcher, Dan. Caef.  Acad. N.  C. Soc,
commended, XVI.  47. XXI,

39-
Fifli  have  air-bubbles  in  their  blood,  V.

22.
FJatus,  eruption  of, how  affording eafe
' in'  organical  diforders, XVIL
16.
How  tbg  patient  and phyfician  may
not  be  deceiv'd  in  thefe  cafes,
ibid.
What  is  frequently  reckon'd  fuch  by
fick  perfons defcrib'd, XXVI.
II.
Flemyng,  Malcolm,  commended, XLV.

Fluor  Alb  us. The  fources  and  caufes  of

it,  XLVn.  II.  19.  &  feq.
» Vox.m.


By  whom  it  was  formerly  confider'd
as  a  rheumatic  affedtion  of  the
uterus,  ibid.  11.

May  attend  delicate  young  females,
ibid.  15.

How  cur'd,  ibid.  25.
Foam  from  the  mouths  of  epileptic  per-
fons  does  not always proceed
from  the  lungs,  JX.  6.
Foelix,  Jac.  commended,  LIX.  5.
Foetus, difeafes of, XLVIII. 17. &
feq.

Obfervation  of  one  born  alive  fifteen
hours  after  the  difcharge  of  the
fxces,  ibid.  40.
This  difcharge,  and  other  figns  of
a  ,dead  one,  may  be  fallacious,
ibid.

If  it  cannot  be  immediately  extrafled
after  the  death  of  the  mother,
what  ought  then  to  be  done,
ibid.  42.

Extraction  of  one  dead  whilft  the
mother  Is  living,  whether  and
when  it  ought  to  be  perform'd,
ibid.  41,  42.
What  mould  be  done  in  the  mean
time,  ibid.  41.

That  their  lungs  are  heavy,  obfer/d
by  Galen,  XIX.  45.

WJiether  it  can  be  known  from  an
examination  of  the  lungs,  that
one  was  born  dead  or  alive.
Vid.  Lungs.

The  exit  of  the  faeces  at  delivery
may  arife  from  other  caufes  than
the  rough  handling  of  the  mid-
wives,  XLVIII.  54.
Foetuffes,  bones  of,  difcharg'd  by  the
anuffe^  of  their  mothers,  hiftories
of,  ibid.  42.

Of  cows.  Obfervations  of  their  livers

being  found  diftended with  ex-

travafated blood, ibid. 19. &

feq.

Foot,  how  infenfible in every  part  but

one,  L.  12.
Fouchyi  N. R.  Acad. Sc.  Parif. Secret.
Perpet. commended, LVill.

7-
Fracaflini, Ant. Phyfician at Verona,

commended,  LXVII.  4.
Fracaftorius, though not mention'd by

Tomafinus,  was a  Profcflbr  at

Padua,  LVIII.  17.
4X  Freind,


r N D E X referring to


Freind; His  hiftory  of  phyfick,  a  great
blunder found in the French
tranflation  of,  XVII.  3.
Miftake  of  his,  apologia'd  for,  XVI.

20.
Some  other  miftakes  of  his,  XVII.  3.
XVIII.  23.
French-children,  having  the  right  fcapula
higher  than the  left,  by  whom
niention'd before Riolanus,
XXV 11.  32.
Friedius,  Jo.  Jac. Acad.  N.  C.  Caefar.
Soc. commended, XLV.^  13.
XLVUI.  25.
Fromondus,  Andr.  Phyfieian  at  Cremona^

commended,  XLVI.  13..
Frontis Os. Vid.  Cranium, Pituitary

Sinus.
Fuchfius,  Jo.  Henr.  Cxf.N.C  Acad.Soc.

commended,  XLVIIL46.
Fungus,  fcarlet  of  Malta,  fcarcely  to  be

had  genuine,  XIV.  25.^
Furfteneau,  Jo.  Herm. P.  Proftff.  Rintel.
commended,  XXXVIIL50.


a


GAD-FLY. VideAfilua..
Galeati,  Gufman.  P-  Prof.  Bbnon.
commended, XXVII. 2u 24..
LXIV.  14.
Galen. Whether  the  book  De  Theriaca

was  written  by  him,  LIX.  43.
Gallus,  Jo.  Ant.  P.  Prof. Bonon. com-
mended, XLIL10,
Gangrene. Obfervation  of  the  very  rapid:
progrefs  of  one,  LV.  22.
The  tafte  of  the  ferum  difcharg'd
from  it,  ibid.  23.
Obfervations on the dry without
fmell  or  pain,  ibid.  24,  25.
By  what means its  progreis  was

ftopp'd,  ibid.
Other  remedies  propos'd,  ibid.  26.
What  are  to  be  avoided,  ibid.
Who  firft mention'd this, ibid.
24.
Obfervations  of  gangrene  or  ulcers
in  three  old  men  cur'd,  with  an
account  of  the  difeafes  fucceeding
the  cure,  ibid.  26.
Garellius,  Pius  Nicol.  formerly  Csf.  Ar-
chiater, commended, L. 58.
LII.  37.


His  obfervations  and  remarks,  LII.

38,  39-  '

Garengeot,  Jac.  Cr. Surgeon  .at  Paris,

commended, XXXVII. 18,

LIV.  38.
Gafparetti,  Stephan.^  Phyfician  and  Sur-
geon at Feliri, commended,

LIII.  27.
Gavafetti,  Mich,  was  not  a  Profeflbr  at

Padua,  IX.  3.
Gaubius  Hieron,  David, P.  Prof.  Leid.

commended, LVI.  6. LXIX,

13.  \

Genfelius,  Jo.  Ad. formerly  Cief. Acad,

N.  C.  S. commended, VIII.

31-

Gentifi,  Jo.  Phyfician  of  Florence,  com-
mended, LIX.  II.  23 24.

GeofFroy,  Steph.  Franc,  a  fenior,  and'
other  younger  members  R.  Sc.
Acad.  Parif.  commended,  VIII..
13.  17.  XXX VIL  18.  Lvm.
7^  LIX.  29.

Georgi,  Georg.  M.  D.  Pifaur,  com-
mended, XLI.  12.

Gerbezius,  Marc,  formerly  deC.  Acad,
N.  C.  Soc. conwnended, IX.

7-

Gcfner,  Conr.  an  account  from  him  not
to  be  credited,  XXIX,  16.

G«fner,  Jo.  Inft.  Sc.  Bonon.  Acad,  com-
mended, XXI.  14.  29.

Ghedini,  Ferd.  Ant.  of  the  fame  Acad»
commended,  LIX.  27.

Gianellay  Charles,  formerly  Piof.  at  Pa-
dua, commended,  VIII.  lOi
XXI.  39,  LXV'II.  5.  LXVIIL

3-

Gianella, Jo. M. D. Lemniac. com-
mended, LXVII.  5.
An  obfervation  of  his,  ibid.  6.
Gibbofity. Vid.  Spine,  diftortion  of.

Anterior  one,  is  not  always,  but  ge-
nerally caas'd  by  a  diftortion  of
the  ("pine, XXVII.  31,  32.
Gibbous-perfons. Their  vl-fjxra,  nerves,
and blood-veflels chang,e  their
fituation,  ibid.  31.
Inftance  of  a  middle-aged  man  be-
coming fuch,  or  growing  worfe,
X.  14.
Glands,  arytenoid. Vtd.  Arytaenoid.

Call'd  Cawper's, had went by the
name  of Mery's,  had he not
given  up  his  claim,  XLIV.  n.
Sebaceoum


NAMES and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Sebaceous. Obfervations on them,
.and  the  matter  fecreted  by  them,
LV.  12. Vide  alfo  Eye-lids.
■Grtielinus, Phil. Frederx, commended,

xxxvm.  8.

Goetzius,  Jo.  Chriftoph.  of  the  fame  Acad,
commended,  XXXVIII.  35.
XLII.  19.

Gonorrhoea,  legitimate:  whether  the  dt<f-
charge  in  this  always  conlifts  of
true  femsn,  XLIV.  1,6.

•Gonorrhcea,  vinuknt : when  true  femen
is  difcharg'd,  ibid.
The  appearance  of  dileafe  in  the  ure-
thra is  found  much  lefs  than  is
generally fuppos'd, XLIV. i.

8-

The  nature  of  the  difcharge  in  the
firft  flage  of  the  dileafe,  ibid.
2.

By  whom  the  firft  feat  of  it  is  fup-
pos'd  to  be  in  the  larger  cana-
iiculi  of  the  urethra,  ibid.
How  it  is  prov'd,  ibid.  9,  10.

Marks  of  another  feat  of  it  in  Cow-
per's  glands.,  ibid.  11.  &  feq.

A  third  feat  in  Littre's  gland,  ibid,
14.  &  feq.

A  fourth  feat,  why  formerly  gene-
rally fuppos'd  to  be  in  the  pro-
ftate  gland  and  feminal  caruncle,
ibid.  16.
When  this  fuppofition  was  xight,
ibid.  17.  &  feq.

A  fifth  feat,  when  more  likely  to  be
in  the  veficulas  feminales,  ibid.
25.
A  certain  fuppos^d  fign  of  this  not
to  be  depended  upon,  ibid.

A  fixth  feat  never  to  be  admitted-of
in  the  tefticles  of  women,  tho*
fometimes  it  may  be  fo  in  thofe
of  men,  ibid.  26.

Whether  the  feat  of  one  may  be  ex-
tended from  the  urethra  to  the
kidnies,  ibid.  27.

By  what  means  the  dyfury  is  to  be
reliev'd,  ibid.  8.

Caufes  of  pain  found  in  the  peri-
nsum,  ibid,  j^.

Whence  is  is,  that  fometimes  after
a  cure  perfons  are  liable  to  a
greater  or  lefs  ftimulus  frpm  the
urine,  and  even  to  erofion,  ibid.
9-


Gonorrhoeas  of other kinds men  ionV,

XLIV.  2.
Godzius,  Jo.  Adam,  Caef.  Acad.  N.  C.  S.

commended,  XXlI.  20.  XXIX,

16,
Gornia, Vidoriiis, Acad, Infiitut. Sc.

Bonon.  S.  commended,  XXVIII.

15-

Gottwaldt,  Jo  Chriftoph.  formerly  Cs'".
N.  C.  Acad.  See.  commended,
XLVIIL  13,
Goulard,  R.  Sc.  Societ.  Monfp.  Soc.
commended,  XIV,  25.  XLII.
38.  42.  LV.  12.
Gout. Vide  alfo  Sciatica.

Why  it  does  not  always  begin  at
the  feet,  LVII,  4.

What  joints  it  never  affefls,  and
which  it  generally  does,  with
the  reafons  of  it,  ibid,

Obferv'd  in  little  children,  ibid.

Various  caufes  of  it  affign'd,  LVIf*
3.  &feq.

Matter  of,  prevented  from  fixing  on
the  joints,  not  to  fay  repell'd
from  them,  may  bring- on  dan-'
gerous  difeafes,  LVII.  o.  &
feq.

Whether  the  gouty  humour  can  pe-
netrate into  the  cavity  of  the
joints,  ibid.  3.

Why  pains  of  the  kidnies  often  fol-
low this,  and  afterwards  difor-
ders  of  the  brain,  XL.  3,

In  the  foot,  brought  back  by  ufing
a  pediluvium  ;  and  that  fome-
times with  advantage  to  the
patient,  LVII.  9.
The  true  author  of  a  book  on  this
fubje£l  difcover'd,  ibid.  6.
Gouty-perfons  are  not  the  only  fubjefls
in  whom  a  fluid  is  form'd  in  the
cavity  of  the  lower  part  of  the
fpine,  ibid.  5.

Whether  all  kinds  of  purgatives  are
injurious  to  them,  ibid.  6.

Whether  milk  of  every  kind  is  al-
ways hurtful to them, ibid.

7-
When the  ufe  of this was  firft
neglecSled,  ibid.  7.
What  we  ought to  think  of  fome
internal  and  external  medicines
which  are  recommended, ibid.
. 8.  &feq.
■4X2  ■ Whence


INDEX referring to


Whence  fome  appear  to  have  been
ufeful,  ibid.  9.

de  Graaf,  miftaken,  XLV.  6.

GraOiius,  Jo.  Casf.  Acad.  N.  C.  Soc.
commended,  XXVIII.  18.

Gratflus,  Sam.  of  the  fame  Acad,  com-
mended, XXXVIII.  19.

Graetziu?,  Jo.  Henr.  commended,  V.  20.
XVI.  21.  XXV.  13.

Gravidity,  an  examination  of  the  prin-
cipal figns of  it, XLVIIi.  3,

4-
Many  obfervatiohs where  phyficians

have been miftaken about it,
ibid,  3.  &  feq.
Inflance  of  one  attended  with  a  vio-
lent  uterine ha;morrhage,  ibid.

9-
The  abdomen being  found without

wrinkles  is  no  certain  proof  that

has  not  been  pregnant,  XXIII.

4-
Greenwood^ Ifaac, commended, XIX.

39-

Gnmmius,  Jo.  Cafp.  Casf.  N.  C.  Acad.
Soc.  commended,  XXIII.  14.

Groundpine. Its  virtues  in  diilolving  an
apparent  fcirrhus  of  the  uterus
related,  XXXIX.  35.
In  what  cafes it is  not  proper,
ibid.

Guattanus,  Charles,  Surgeon  at  Rome,
commended,  L.  6.

Guilermius,  Ant.  Phyfician  at  Forli,  com-
mended, XLV.  19.
His  obfervations,  ibid.

Gulielmini,  Dominic,  formerly  Prof,  at
Padua,  firft  introduc'd  the  ufe
of  the  Peruvian  bark  in  bad
fevers  attended  with  ^exacerba-
tions, XXX.  5.
His  explanation  of  the  problem  of
a  certain  furgeon,  L.  54..

Gulltnan,  Ben.  Casf.  Acad.  N.  C.  com-
mended, XXIV.  3.  28.
XXXVIII.  24.  64.

Guramata  are  not  alv/ays  form'd  betwixt
the  periofteum  and  the  bone,
nor  always  included  in  a  coat,
LVIII.  9.

Gunzius,  Juft.  Godofred.  formerly  P.  Prof.
Lipf.  commended,  XIII.  i8.
XIV.  22.  XLIX.  32. LXI.  3,

^  4-

Gutterman, Geo. Frid. Acad. Caefar,


N.C.  S.  commended,XXXVIIL
64.  XLVIII.  9.  12.  J4-  25.
LVI.  15.

H

HiEHNE,  Tob.  Hen.  Caef.  Acad.
N.  G.  S.  commended,  XVI.  16.
Haemoptoe,  caufes  of,  XVII.  24. XXII.

5-
Remtdy  for,  XLVH.  7.
Of  a  fcorbutic  kind, very  difficuk

to  be  explain'd,  XXII.  5.
Haemorrhage. Vide  Nofe.

Obfervations on certain remedies.

propos'd for it, XIV. 25.

XXXII.  12.
Hajmorrhoids,  why  fome  are  call'd  white,,

XXXII.  13.
Various  caufes  of  them,  ibid.  10.
Why  brutes  are  not  fubjedl  t&them,

ibid.
How  far  the  veins  may  be  diftended

in  them,  ibid.
How  they  fometimes  put  on  the  ap-
pearance of condylomata, L»

13-

Why  they  are  not  to  be  wifli'd-for,

XXXII.  II.
What  things  prevent  them  and  theic

confequent  difeafes,  ibid.
What  eafe  them,  ibid.  &  12. LIX»

8.
What  difeafes  fometimes  deceive  both;

patients  and phyficians,  mftead

of  thefe,  XXXII.  8.
Haemorrhoids  of the  mouth  r who firft

defcrib'd  them,,  and their  figns^

and  who  have  illuftrated  them,.

XXII.  26.
Haemorrhoids of the  vagina, by  whom

firft  mention'd,  with  their  caufe,

figns,  &c.  XLVIII.  46.
Hereditary  difeafes. Vide  Difeafes.
Hsevelius,  Chrift.  Fred.  IVI.  D.  Schneberg,

commended,  LI.  10.
Haguenot, Hen. R. So. Monfp. Sec,

commended,  XXXIV.  2,8.
Hahn,  Jo.  Goth.  Caf.  Acad.  N.  C.  Soc.

commended.  XIV.  38.  LXIX.

Hairs  found  in  tumors. Vide  Tumors.
Cafe  of an entire defeiSt of them
without  any  vice  of  the  genitals,
XLVI.  2.

PerfoBS


NAMES  and  PASSA  G  E  S  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Perfons  born  with  white,  why  they
become  blind,  XIII.  29.
Haller,  Albert,  Prefident  of  the  Royal
Society  at  Gottingen,  com-
mended, II.  8.  IV.  37.  V.  9.
12.  VIII.  18.  XII.  6.  XIII.
24.  XIV.  17.  19  38.  XVI.  32.

xvm.  33.  XIX.  38. 43.  XXI.

22.  39,  40.  XXII.  7.  20.
XXIil.  9.  12.  13.  17,  18.
XXIV,  3.  17.  30.  XXVII.  20.
27.  31,  32.  &c.  XXVIII.  6.
XXIX.  3.  16.  XXX.  II.
XXXI.  23.  XXXIV.  31,  32.
34. XXXVII.  8.  15. 17,  18.

23.  25.26.  32.41.  XXXVIII.

24.  XXXIX.  11.  41.  XL.  3.
XLII.  36.  XLIII.  7.  14.  35.
XLIV.  2.  XLVI.  16.  25.
XLVIII.  14.  16.  30.  XLIX.
20.  L.  8.  10.  37.  53.  59.  LII.
26.  31.  LIV.  13.  15.  LVI.  27.

-  37. LVII.  6.  15. LXIII.  II.

LXIV.4.9.  LXV.6.  LXVIII.

2.  LXIX.  13.
du  Hamel, Henry  Ludov. R. So.  Acad.

Parif. commended, XVIII.  29.

L.  59.  LVI.  28,  29.
Hammerus,  Juftin.  David,  M.  D.  Neoft.

commended,  LIX.  5.
Hanged-perfons. What fenfation thofe

who  have  recover'd  after  hanging

declare  they  had from  the  con-

ftridion of the halter, XIX.

36.
By  what  means  they  have  been  le-
cover'd,  ibid.
-  Why  their  penes  are  frequently  tenfe,

ibid.  16.  18.  &  feq.
How  their  lungs may fometimes be
found  without  any  great  quantity
of  blood  or  froth  in  them,  ibid.

9-
How  the  veflels  of  their  brain  may
be  fometimes  turgid  and  rup-
tur'd,  and  at  other  times  not  fo,
though  the  external  blood-veflels
of  their  heads  are  full,  ibid.  10.

.T '5-38.

How  lome  mufcles, cartilages, and

vertebrae  of  their  necks  may  be

greatly  or  very  little  hurt,  ibid.

12.  14.  16.
Their  fudden  deaths  are not  occa-

fion'd by ftridures on the


nerves,  arteries,  or  veins  of  their
necks,  ibid.  35,  36.
Nor  from  fractures  or  luxations  of

the  higheft  vertebra,  ibid.
But  from  a  compreffion  of  all  the
parts mention'd above,  -.and at
the  fame time  a  ftrifture  made
on the  afpera  arteria,  ibid.  ^7,
38.
The  reafons  for  this  opinion,  and
the  manner how  fudden death
may  be  fo  brought- on  by  flecp,
ibid.
Hanging. This  kind  of  punifhment  pro-
perly exprefs'd by the Latins,
who  term'd it  Breaking of  the
neck,  ibid.  14.
Harvey  did  not  properly  attend  to  a  certain
experiment propos'd by Galen
and  Vefalius,  XIX.  30
Not  eafily follovv'd in one place,
XXV.  18.
Hafeneft,  Jo.  Geo. Csf.  Acad.  N.  C.  S.

commended,  XXXII.  5.
Hazonius,  Jac.  Phyfician  at  Paris,  com-
mended, XLII.  19.
Habenftreit,  Jo.  Ern.  Prof.  Lipf. com-
mended, XXXIX.  J.
Head. Who have obferv'd that  infe(3s
will  live  after  it  is  cut  off,  LII.
" 26.
How  the  firft  feat of  a  difeafe  may
feem  to  be  in  it,  when  it  is  not,
XXVL  33.
Pain  in  it  alone  cannot  occafion  death,
I.  I.
Periodical, very difficultly  cur'd,
and  why,  I.  11.
Deep,  may  have  its feat  in  various
parts,  I.  7.
At  the  crown  of  the  head  having
its  caufe at  a great  diftance,
ibid.
Has  manifold  caufes,  I.  paffim.
Occafioning a fsparation of the
futures in an old man. III.
8-
Head,  wounds  of  the. In  thefe  the  ce-
rebrum  and meninges may be
hurt, though the  fkull be  not
injur'd,  LI.  4.
Into  what  vifcera  pus  may  be  tranf-
lated from thefe, XXV. 20.
LI.  21.  &  feq.
Who  have  obferv'd  this,  ibid.

Haw


I N B E X referring to


How  tills  may  probably  happen,  LI.

How  more  pus  may  be  found  in
them  than  a  fmall  wound  could
feemingly  produce,  ibid.
The  figns  of  an  abfcefs  cccafion'J
thereby  in  the  liver  are  very
many,  and  fometimes  fallacious,
ibid.

If  they  happen  near the  orbit,  what
care neceffary  to be taken  in  ■
examining tlrem to prevent
miflakes,  LII.  6,  7.
Head,  peribns  wounded  in  the. Whether
they  are  frequently feiz'd  with
convulfion or pally  of  the  fide  •
oppofite  to  the  wound,  and  why,
LI.  46.  &  feq.

When  a  diarrhosa  or  vomiting  is  not
to  be  reckon'd  amongft  the  bad
figns  in  thefe  cafes,  LII.  21.

What  advantages  or  injuries  may
arife  to  them  from  xeftralning
refpiration,  ibid.  13.

Why  the  operation  of  the  trepan  was
negleiied  in  fome  cities,  ibid.
12.  &  feq.

When  this  operation  is  not  approv'd
of,  what  ought  to  be  done
according  to  the  ancients  and
moderns,  LII.  30.
Ruyfch's  fomentation  particularly
recommended,  ibid,  ic  21.

On  what  day,  and  after  what  figns,
man^y  died,  LII.  12.

Obfervations  of  injuries  proving  fatal,
after  long  lying  latent,  LII.  17.
24.

Why  frequently  but  a  fmall  quantity
of  offending  matter  is  found
within  the  flcull  on  difledion,
LII.  9.
Hearing.  Why  more  perfons  have  been
without  this  fenfe  than  without
any  other  from  their  birth,  XIV-

14-
Heart. One  found  double,  XLVIII.  57,
Of  an  unufual  form,  LX.  8.
Whether  it  has  ever  been  found  truly
hairy,  or  can  be  fo,  XXIV.  3,

4-
Why  it  appears  fo is  (hewn  by
Riolan.  ibid.  3.
Of  the  fize  of  a  child's  in a  very
lobuft  man,  LXX.  5.


Great  in  all  its  parts,  LXX.  10.
Infenfibility  of  it,  whether  prov'd  by
fome  of Harvey's  obfervations,
XXV.  18.
Motion  of  it  and  the  auricles  conti-
nuing in  new-born  kittens  after
their  heads  were cut  off,  Ll!,
26.
Taken  from tortoifes  dees not de-
prive them of the power of
moving  about,  as  was  obferv'd
by  Arillotle,  XII.  14.
Lymphatic  veffels  plainly  feen  in  one,

XLIII.  5.
Coronary  arteries, three, and even
fometimes four, found in it,
XVHL  34.  XLVIIL  34.
One  of  thele  offified,  XXIV.  16.
By  whom  this  was  before  obferv'd,
XXIV.  17.
Coronary  vein,  valve  of, confifting

of  parallel  filaments,  LXIV.2.
Foramen  Ovale  of,  without  any  kind
of  valve, XLVill.  62.
Sometimes open in adults  ; and
why fo in a certain woman,
XVIL  12,  13.
But  neither  the  opennefs  of  this,
and  ihe  canalis  arteriofus,  con-
duce much  towards  preventing
fuflFocation,  XIX.  43.
Adhaefions  of  to  the  middle  of  the
pericardium,  varying  the  pulfe,
XXIV.  3,  4.  12.
True  prolapfus  of,  XVII.  25.  28.
How  this may deceiye  the  phy-
fician,  XVn.  28.
Concretions,  and,  as  it  were,  mem-
branes adhering to its fuper-
ficies,  whence  they  arife,  XX.

37-
Bone  of,  fo  call'd by  the  ancients,

what  it  is,  and  in  whom  it  is

found,  XXVII.  19.
Bony  fcales  found  externally,  XXVIL

16.
A  fmall  bone,  and  a  large  one,  found

in  its  fubftance,  HI.  22.  XX VII.

2.
Whether  thefe  are real  bones  or

not,  examined  into,  XX VII.  17.

&  feq.
How  they  may  be  form'd  from  the

flefhy  fubftance,  ibid.  &  XLV.

26.

Whether


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  nioft  worthy  of  Notice.


Whether  thefe  bones  are  wont  to
caufe  fudden  deaths,  XXVII.
15.  &  feq.
Fltflxy  fubftanee  of  it  obferv'd  d<:ge-
nerating  into  tendinous,  XLv .
23.

The  injuries  arifing  from  this  de-
generacy, XLV.  i6.
Heart,  palpitation  of  the.  Who  formerly
fuppos'd  it  to  be  caus'd  by  a
vitiated  ftate  of  the  brain  or
nerves,  XXXIII.  3.

Remarks  on it proceeding from
this  caufe,  ibid.
Aorta  oflifi?d  does  not  always  caufe
it,  ibid.g.

Nor  an  pflification  or  hardnefs  of
the  valves  of  this  or  of  the
heart,  XXIII.  10.  &  feq.

When  they  do,  how  it  feems  to
be  done,  XXIII.  9.  12.
-  Whether  the  "adhaefion  of  the  peri-
cardium to  the  heart  always
brings  one  on,  XXIII.  17.  &
feq.

Why  it  does  fo  in  fprpe,  and  not
in  others,  XXIII.  23.
IJpiy  caus'd by an enlargement  of
the  auricles  of  the  heart,  XXIII.

9-

How  far  it  may  be  occafion'd  by  air,
XXHI.  16.
Heart,  convulfion  of.  This  was  known
to  the  ancients,  and  is  confirm'd
by  the  moderns,  XXV.  13.
XXVI.  12.  32.
Palfyof,  XXV.  13.

Who  formerly  mentioned  it  as
follow'd  by  fudden  death,  XXVI.

How  this  is  occafion'd,  ibid.
Heart,  diftenfion  of. When  this  can  hap-
pen from  air,  XXV.  13.
When  an  encreas'd  fize  of  it  occa-
fions fmall and weak pulfes,
XXIV.  15.
Who  firft  obferv'd  thefe  dilatations,
XVII.  2.
Who  firft  call'd  thefe  aneurifms  of

the  heart,  XVII.  5.
Difficulty of breathing brought-
on  by  them,  and  why,  XXVII.

13-
Sudden  death  alfo,  ibid,  &  XVIII.

3-


But  not  always,  XXVII.  15.
Whence thefe dilatations arife,
XVIII.  4. XXI.  34.
Heart,  ventricles  of  the.  From  what  caufe
either  of  them ran be  dilated,
XVJTI.  5,  XXVII.  14.
Which  is  more  frequently  fo,  XVIII.

^ 5-

Whether  the  left  is  felJomer  fo  than
its  auricle,  ibiJ.

Why  this  is  oftener  fo  than  the
right,  which  is  weaker,  ibid.
Whether  the  dilatation  of  the  right,
and  its  auricle,  can  be  certainly
known  by  a  pulfation  of  the  ex-
ternal jugular  veins.  Vide  Ju-
gular.

Other figns of it mentioned,
XVIII.  II.

How  far  the  pulfe  is  to  be  con«
fider'd  as  a  fign  of  it,  ibid.
In  what  manner  an  increas'd  thick-
nefs  of  their  parietes  was  join'd

. with  their  dilation,  XVIII.  35.
Vid.  &XV1I.  13.
Who  firft obferv'd them ruptur'd,
XXVII.  I.

Nine  or  ten  obfervations  of  this,
ibid.  &  feq.

Many  obferv'd  by  Lancifi,  XXVII.
6.

Others  have  alfo  found  them  fo,
LXIV.  14.  &  feq.

How  this  is  occafion'd,  XXVII.
1.6.  10.- LXIV.  16. .

Why  oftener  happening  in  the  left
than  in  the  right,  XXVII.  10.

Why  more  eafily  in  the  right  from
a  blow,  LIIl.  34.
Chang'd,  as  it  were ;  the  right  ap-
pearing as  the  left,  and  the  left
as  the  right,  XVIl.  12.
Polypous  concretions  found  in  them
or  the  auricles.  Vid.  Polypi  in
the  blood-vefiels.

Oftener,  or  larger  for  the  moft
part,  in  the  right  than  the  left,
VII.  4.  &  paflim.
Worms  in  them  or  the  pericardium,
what  opinion  to  be  form'd  of,
XXIII.  15.  XXIV.  23.
Heart,  valves  of  the.  An  orifice  and
fmall  interftice  found  between
their membranes, XXIII. 6,

2-

The


INDEX referring to


The  facculus  found  by  Morand  in
one  of  the  mitral  valves,  ac-
counted for,  XXIII.  12.

Have  not  only  been  found  bony,  but
even  fometiraes  ftonyj XXIII.

9-

When  indurated,  or  become  bony,
do  not  always  caufe  an  inequa-
lity or  intermiffion  of  the  pulfe,
5CXIII.  12.

Mitral  valve  found  with  an  ex-
crefcence,  XI. ii.  XXIII.  13.

Mitral  and  Tricufpid  found  tuberous
and  inclin'd  to  become  bony,
ibid.
Heart,  difeafes  of.  Their  violence  and
long-continuance,  why  denied
by  the  ancients,  XXV.  ig.

Why  men  more  fubjedl  to  them  than
brutes,  ibid.

An  encyfted  tumour  growing  to  the
heart  without  any  figns  of  it,
XXI.  4.

Tubercles  and  ulcers  of  the  heart
are  not  always  attended  with
deliquia  and  intermiflions  of  the
pulfe, XXV. 19. & feq. &

Ulcers  may  be  form'd  in  it  without
pain,  XXV.  18.
Who  firft  obferv'd them, XXV.
19.

Erofions  of  the  heart  and  large  veffels
have  different  figns  in  different
perfons,  XXVII.  9.

The  external  furface  of  the  heart
may  appear  corroded  when  it  is
not  fo,  XXI.  2.  XXV.  24.

Cicatrices  of  the  heart,  how  to  be
accounted  for,  XXXVIII.  43.

Obfervations  of  the  whole  heart  being
wafled  away  are  incredible,  un-
kfs  explain'd  in  a  particular
manner,  XXV.  21.
Of  more  than  half  being  wafted,
how  to  be  underftood,  XXV.
19.  22.
Heart,  wounds  of.  Why  thefe  feldomer
happen  in  the  left  ventricle  than
the  right,  Llli.  27.

Though  they  penetrate  into  the  ven-
tricles, yet  the  wounded  perfon
may  live  much  longer  than  was
fuppos'd  by  the  ancients  ;  and
why,  ibid. Vid.  alfo  3,  4.


But not fo, if the left be  pe-
netrated, as  if  it  was  the  right,

LIII.  27.
Hedge- hogs  have  a  Ihort  epiglottis,  XIX.

41.
Abound  with  fleas  as  well  as dogs

do,  ibid.
A  worm found in  the  bronchia  of

one  in  other  refpecEts  found  and

lively,  ibid.
Heimreichius,  Ern.Frld.  Caef.  Acad.  N.C.

Soc.  commended,  LIX.  5.
Heifter, Lawrence, formerly P.  ProfelT.

Helmftad. commended, II,  10.

VII. II. VIII. 14. X.  ic.

XIII.  6. XIV.  19.  25. XIX.

46.  XXII.  20. XXIIf.  18.20.

XXVIII.  14.  16. XXIX.  22.

XXX.  8.  II. XXXIV.  15.32.

XXXVII.  18. XXXVIII.  24,

25. XXXIX.  41. XLI. 17.

XLII.  19.  31.  38. XLIII.  3.

13-  32-  38.  42. XLVI.  3.  20.

L. 10. 12. 17.  44. 50. 59.

LIII.  41, LIV.  i<.  17.  47.

LVIII.  9.
Helwickius,  Chriflian.  Caef.  Acad.  N.  C.

Soc. commended, XVI. 11.

XXII. 26. XXVII.  31,  32.

XXVIII. 14, XLII. 16. 45.

XLV.  20. LI.  58.
Hemipledlic  perfons. From  which arm

of  fuch  blood is to  be  taken,

III.  17.
Hemiplexy. The  caufe  of  this  difeafe  is

not  always  found  in  the  part  of

the  cerebrum  oppofite  to  the  fide

afFefted,  LVII,  14,  15. LXIL

12.
The  caufe  moft  frequently  found  in

the  oppofite  fide of  the  brain,

II.  10.  &  feq. III.  2,  3.  14.  ic

feq. V.7. XI.  10.  12. LI.  43.

LXIL  13.  ^

The  ufefulnefs  of  this  obfervation

in  praftice,  LXII.  13.
Why  fome perfons  were  difpos'd

to  think  differently,  LI.  43.46.
A  declaration  relative  to  this  con-

firm'd  by  diffedtion.  III.  14.
Remarks  on  the  firft  obfervers  of

this,  XI.  10.
Whether  the  caufe may  not  fome-

times  be  in the  oppofite  iide  of

the  cerebellum,  LII,  27.

The


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


The  caufe  has  fometimes  been  feen
in  the  oppofite  part  of  the  be-
ginning of  the  Ipinal  marrow
itielf,  LIII.  23.
A  remarkable  obfervation  of  one
coming-on  and  going-off  every
evening,  XI.  19.

Hen,  a  fcirrhous  tumour  found  in  the
mefentery  of,  witii  the  figns  at-
tending it,  XJl./n.'-I.  6.

Hencke],  Jo.  Fred.  Csef.  Acad.  N.  C.  See.
commended,  LIX.  5.

Henrici,  Henr.  commended,  LXV.  15.

Henfingius,  Fred.  Will.  P.  Prof.  Giefien.
commended,  XLIIL  3.

Hepatic  artery,  twice  found  very  much
dilated in an  obflru£ted  liver,

XXXVI.  24.
Hepatic  .calculi. Vid.  Biliary.

Whether  fo  common as the renal,

XXXVII.  II.

By  whom  even  formerly  found,  ibid.

Obfervations  of  fome,  ibid.  13.

In  what  part  they  more  frequently,

or  feldomer,  concrete,  ibid.  11.

&  feq.
Hermaphrodite, as  fuppos'd, uncommon

ftruaure  of,  LXVII.  6.
Herniae. What  appearances  may  deceive

us  in  regard  to  them,  XLIIL  g,

10.
How  they  may  caufe  fterility,  ibid.

12.

Whether,  or  at  leaft  when,  the  pe-
ritonseum can be ruptur'd  in
hernije,  ibid.  6,  7.
Befides the peritoneum, fometimes
the  tendons of the abdominal
mufcles  fall  down  into  the  her-
nial fac,  ibid.  42.
What  alterations  happen  to  the  parts,
ibid.  12,  13.
Xhe  great  importance  of  knowing
thefe,  ibid.  13.
The  coats  of  the  parts  are  generally
thicken'd  in  thesi,  ibid.  42.
Bubonocele. The  lefs  this  is,  the  more
dangerous  it  is,  XXXI V.  j6.
In  this,  and  the  ofcheocele,  the  fdc
is  on  the  outfide  of  the  tunica
vaginalis, though it fometimes
may  feem  to  be  within  it,  XLIIL
8.
Omphalocele. Obfervations on this,

ibid,  6.  14.
Vol.  III.


Merocele. Remarks  on  it,  ibid.  14.
Cyflocele. Vid.  Bladder.
Ventral  of  other  kinds,  XLIIL  14.
Enterocele. A  laxity  of  the  mefentery
is  theiirft  origin  of  this,  XLIIL

13-

Who  firft  obferv'd  this,  and  have
fmce  confirm'd  it,  ibid.

The  fac  of  this  hernia  is  on  the
outfide  of  the  vagina  of  the
fpermatic  veffels, V.  ig. XXL

15.  XXXIV.  5.  9. XLIil.
8.  ,

Whether  the  feat  of  it  in  refpe£l
to  thefe  velTels  is  always  the
fame,  ibid.

The  effedi  this  fometimes  has  on  the
teftis  of  the  fide  ailedted,  ibid.
12.  &XXIV.  16.

May  occafion  a  rupture  of  the  lateral
veflels  of  the  mefentery,  and  fo
bring-on  an  afcites,  XXXVIII.

3-

Cafes  of  enteroceles  from  a  portion
of  the  colon,  XXXIV.  15.  &
feq.

From  the  appendicula  vermiformis
only,  XLIIL  3.
In  what  manner  the  excrements,  &c.
may  pafs  and  be  excreted  in  an
incarcerated  hernia,  XXXIV,
14.  &  feq.  ig.

Who  fuppos'd  this  to  be  becaufe
the  inteftinal  tube,  or  the  whole
of  it,  was  not  intercepted,  ibid.
16.

This  is  very  often  true,  ibid.  15.
&  feq.

But  not  always  fo,  and  why,  ibid.
18.  &  feq.
Whether  clyfters  are  not  proper  in
this  diforder,  XLIil.  11.

What fort Valfalva approv'd or
condemn'd,  ibid.
Hydrocele. Whence the fluid found
within  the  tunica  vaginalis  ge-
nerally arifes, XXI.  ig.  XLIIL

16.  &  feq.  &  32.

A  particular  fpecies  of  this  diforder
now,  perhaps,  firfl  difcover'd
between  the  coats  of  the  tunica
albuginea,  XLIIL  31,  32.
Another  kind,  that  is  amongfi:  the
cells  above  the  tunica  vaginalis,
by  whom  obferv'd,  ibid.  32.
4  Y  A  dif-


INDEX referring to


A  different  kind, call'd Dropfy  of
the  Scrotum,  how  it  happens  in
afcitical  perfons,  XLIIl.  33.
How  it  may  happen  at  other  times,
ibid.

The  explication  of  it  eafier,  if  it  in-
deed more  frequently  happen  on
the  left  fide,  ibid.  34.

How  an  affeilion  of  the  fpermatic
veins  may  produce  this  and  mofl
fpurious  herniae,  ibid.  33,  34.

How  to  prevent  its  encreale, ibid,

34-
Cirfocele. This  only  is  call'd  ramex  by

Celfus,  XLIII.  36.
Sarcocele. The opinions  of  different
writers  concerning the nature
and feat  of  this  diforder, ibid.

38-

Another  opiliion  of  it,  ibid.  37,

38-
Steatocel«. How  this may be  form'd

in  the  fcrotum,  ibid.  37.
Spermatocele. By  whom  the  difeafe  Is
fo  call'd,  and  properly  explain'd,
ibid.  39.
Examples  of  this  difeafe,  ibid.  40.
Hertiuf,  Jo.  Cafimire,  commended,  LVI.

34-  .  ,  ■ „

Hiccup,  two  obfervations  of, from Bar-
tholin, iliuftrated,  XXIX.  3.
Two  fuccefsful  remedies  for  it  irom

Valfalva,  ibid.
Obfervations  of  in fevers  with very
bad  figns,  not  fatal,  ibid.

Highmore,  miftaken,  XIV.  30.

Hildanus,  the  explication  of  a  certain  ob-
fervation  of,  not  approv'd,  XIII.
20.

Hilfcherus,  Simon  Paul.  P.  Prof.  Jen.
commended,  XLVIII.  16.

Hippocrates'  aphorifm  concerning  water
difcharg'd  from  the  liver  on  the
omentum, explain'd,  XXXVIII.

36-
Of  lofs  of  fpeech  from  drunkennefs
confider'd, and confirm'd by
examples,  XIV.  34.  &  feq.
Some exceptions made to it,

Lxni.  14.

Concerning  the  froth  at  the  mouths

■of  flrangukted  perfons,  as  well

as  fome  other  of  his  aphorifms,

to  be  admitted  with  exceptions,

XIX.  36.


Of  the  difcharge  of  atra-bilis  by  fiool

foon  provmg fatal, confirm'd,

XXIX.  II.
Of  a difficulty  of fwallowing in a

diftorfion of  the  neck, how  to

be  underftood,  XXVIII.  17,
Of the figns of.  pus whilft it is

forming,  not  always  right,  LV.

16.
©f  an acute  difeafe in  a  pregnant

woman proving  mortal, to  be

underftood as Celfus  tranflates

it,  XX.  10.
Of  the  faftings  of  old  perfons,  to  be

underftood  alfo  in  Celfus's  way,

XXVIII.  6.

Whether  this  is  confirm'd  by  the
manner  in  which  count  Hugo-
lini  and  his  fons  died  as  related
by  Dante,  ibid.  7.
Hippocrates's  Epidemics.  How  a  fick
woman,  as  is  there  related,  had
her  hand  paralytic  andconvuis'd
at  the  fame  time,  X.  15.
An  obfervation  therein  of  a  mortal
fingultus  confirm'd  by  eminent
phyficians, excepted  -  againft.

XXIX.  3.

Coacs.  A  paffage  in,  of  an  obfcura-
tion  of  the  fight  from  a  wound
of  the  eye  -  brow,  explain'd,
XIII.  5.

How  a  pafl'age  concerning  a  perip-
neumony  is  to  be  underftood,
XXI.  39.

The  phthilical  and  fuppurated  pa-
tients mention'd  therein,  dif-
ferent, XXII.  29.

His  method  of  trying  the  expectorated
matter  of  confumptive  perfons
with  fea-water  in  a  brazen-vef-
fel,  confider'd,  ibid,  28.
Predi£lions.  A  paflage  in,  of  an  erup-
tion of  blood  being  at -hand
vi^hen  a  palpitation  is  felt  about
the  belly,  confirm'd,  XXlX.
II.

De  Ptifana.  Whether  this  title  was
given  to  a  certain  book  of  Hip-
pocrates by Pliny, XXVI.

How  the  vifcera  hanging-down  111
perfons  who  eat  no  dinner,  as
mention'd  in  his  book  De  Diata^
is  to  be  underftood,  ibid.

The


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  mofl  worthy  of  Notice.


The  account  of  a  polypus  giving
forth  a  found  on  touching  it,  in
the  book  De  Morbis,  faid  to  be
written  by  Hippocrates,  explain'd
by  conjecture,  XIV.  17.
Why  he  oblig'd  his  fcholars  by  an
bath  not  to  cut  for  the  ftone,
XLII.  9.-

Hiftorians,  Grecian,  whether  to  be  pre-
ferr'd  to  the  Latin  in  their  Ro-
man hiftories,  LIX.  39.

Hoarfenefs,  obfcrvations  on,  XIV.  33.

Hoffman,  Cafp.  miftaken,  II.  7.

A  doubt  of  his  remov'd,  Ilf.  ig.

Hoffman,  Daniel,  Casf!  N.  C.  Acad.  Soc.
commended,  XXII.  20.  XXIII.
18.  XXV.  20.  XXXVIII.  25.
L(.48.

Hoffman,  Fred, commended, XXXVII.
46.
Sli2;ht miftakes of, XXVII. 8.
''  XLVII.  25.

A  certain  opinion  of,  not  approv'd^
XLVIII.  II.

Hommelius,  Jo.  L.  commended,  XXXIV.
34.  XLIII.  6.

Horn,  growing  on  the  finciput  of  an  old
man  from  a  wart,  LXV.  2.

Horn-cattle,  in  peftilential  fevers  of,
whence  too  great  a  fuilnefs  of
the  gall  bladder,  LXVIII.  3.

Hofpital,  long  continuance  in,  on  account
of  flight  difeafes,  dangerous,
XX.  24.  XLVIJ.  33.

Hettinger,  Jo.  Henr.  Caef.  Acad.  N.  C.  S.
commended, XXI.  22. XLII.

Hoyerus,  Jo.  Geo.  formerly  of  the  fame
Acad,  commended,  VIII.  14.
XX.  52.  XXII.  17.  XXXII.  3,
4.  XXXVI.  18.  XXXVIII.  ig.
50.  XLVIII.  29.  L.  25.

Huberus,  Jo.  Jac.  of  the  fame  Acad,
commended,  XII.  10. XXXIf.

4- ,
Humors,  found  in  dead bodies,  how  exa-
min'd by Valfaiva, IV. 2,

3-

Hunauld,  Ft.  Jof. Reg.  Sc.  Acad.  Parif.

commended, IV. 32. V. 10.

XII.  8.  LIX.  29.
Hunger. Vid.  Abltinence,  Fading.

Too great from an obitruclion of

the  mefenteric  glands,  XXVIII.

3-


Hungry-people,  what  things  are  good  or

bad  for,  XXVIII.  4.
Hunter,  John,  commended,  LXIX  12."
Hurterus,  Leonh. Csef.  Acad.  N.  C.  S.

commended,  XXXVIII.  25.
Hydatids. One  large  and  deep-feated  in

the lungs of a fow, XVI,

o 33-

Some  found  in  the  fpleen,  and  efpe,-
cially  the  liver,  of  others,
XXXVIII.  42.
A  large  one  in  the  liver  of  a  calf,
and  another  in  the  ovary  of  a
pigeon,  ibid.  37.
Galen  faw the  liver full of  them,

ibid.  36.
Who  afterwards  obferv'd  them  in  moll

of  the  vifcera,  ibid.  35.
Who  have  examin'd  into  their  firuc-
ture,  ibid.  37.  44.
Additions to their obfervations,

ibid.
The  commonly- receiv'd  opinion  of
them  mention'd,  but  another  ap-
prov'd  of,  ibid.  38.
According  to this the  origin of
thofe  which  hang  down  from  a
long  peduncle  is  fhewn,  ibid.  &
XLill.  20,  21.
Obfervations  of  -fome fix'd in  the
vifcera,  and  efpecially  the  kidnies,
of  human bodies, XXXVIII.
39.  &  feq.
On  the  teftes,  XLIII.  16.  &  feq.
Who  have  found  them  quite  detach'J
from  any  part,  ibid.  44.
Of  this  kind  thofe feem  to  have
been  which Aretseus mentions
his having feen in a dropfy,
ibid.  45.
Of  their  origin,  ibid.  43.
What  feems to favor  the  common

opinion  of  them,  ibid.  38.
Degenerate into ceitain tubercles,
when  ruptur'd  on  the  external
furface  of  any  parts ;  and  how,
XXXVIII.  35.  &  feq.
Into  cicatrices,  when  form'd  in  the
internal  fubftance, ibid.  42.  &
feq.
Hydrocephalus,  internal,  how  form'd,  IV.
36,37. XIL3.6.
V/hat  injuries  may  arife  therefrom  to
the  cranium  and  cerebrum,  XII.
7,  8.  13. XLVIII.  40.
4  Y  2  Not


IN D E X referring to


Not  e?.fy  to  determine  whether  it  be
curable  or  not,  XII.  13.

From  whence  arifes  the  very  great
danger  in  opening  it,  ibid.

Who  have  principally  coUefted  ob-
fervations of  this  difeafe,  XII.

15-

Hydrophobia,  cats  more  frequently  af-
fefled  with  than  any  other  ani-
mals, except  dogs,  LXI.  15.

Whether  fometimes  occafion'd  by
inbred  poifons,  whence  to  be
doubted,  VIII.  28.  31.

Inftances  of  it  in  three  perfons  fiom
drinkins;  very  cold  water  whilll
they  were  hot,  with  an  account
of  their  dilTedions,  VIII.  31.

Whether  caus'd  ft  nietimes  by  the  fa-
liva  of  a  mad-dog,  twenty,  or
even  forty  years  after  the  bite,
juftly  to  be  doubted,  VIII.  28.

Whether  ever  fi-om  imagination  or
frights,  LXI.  II.  15.

The  chief  feat  of  it,  VIII.  32.

How  far  to  be  attributed  to  convul-
fions,  ibid.  &:  LXI.  10.  16.
Who  have  attributed  the  difficulty
of  fwallowing to them, VIII.
19,  20.  32.

A  drynels  of  the  bodies  of  perfons
dying  with  this  difeafe  is  not
always  found  ;  nor  if  it  was,
fliould  it  be  efteem'd  the  caufe
of  it,  ibid.  32.

Whether  occafion'd  by  worms,  ibid,
23.  k  feq.

Is  not  always  attended with a  deli-
linum,  ibid.  ig.
Nor  the  abftaining  from  drinking

owing  to  one,  ibid.
Nor  always  the  very  great  averfi&n
to  if, VIII.  29.

Whether  it  be  a  fpecies  of  angina,
ibid.  19.  &  feq.

Whether  it  appear  earlier  in  impure
bodies,  ibid.  22.
Or,  from bites on the lips or
cheeks,  ibid.  &  29.

Sign  of  its  foon  appearing,  ibid,
21.

Hiftories  of  it  not  before  publifli'd,
VIII.  22,  23.  25.  27.  29.

How  to  be  prevented,  LXI.  11.

The  preventive  cure  after  the  bite,
VIIL26.  29.  LXL12,  13.


The  ufe of  the cold-bath here,.
LXI.  16.

Cold-bathing, unfuccefsful in  fome
cafes  of  it,  VIII.  23.  25,  26.
Not  fo  generally  ufeful  as  fuppos'd
by  fome,  ibid.  26.

Whether  cantharides  art  ferviceable
in  it,  ibid.  31.

Perfons  feiz'd  with,  are  afraid  of  the
air,  VIII.  28,  29.

Whence  the  variety  of  fymptoms  in
this  difeafe,  ibid.  &  32.

Why  the  difleilions of  thefe bodies
ought to vary in their ap-
pearance, ibid.  19.  32.
Appearances  hitherto  related,  men-
tion'd, ibid. 20, 21. &  LXf.

9-

Other  appearances added, VIII-.
- 23.25.27.31.
The whole accurately compar'd

together,  ibid.  30,  31.
Deduftions  from  the  comparifon,

ibid.  32.  LXI.  10.
What  obfervations are  farther  to
be  wifh'd-for,  VIII.  32.
A  cafe  of  one,  LXI.  14.
Symptoms  of  it come-on  at  different
times  after  the  wound  is  heal'd^
ibid.  &  15.
The  wound  made  by  a  mad-animal
fhould bs heal'd very flowly,
ibid.
Hydrorachitis. Vid.  Spina  Bifida.
Hymen,  found  lefs  broad  in  proportion  as
it  was more diftant from thq
orifice of the urethra, LVI.
20.
Foramen  of,  divided into  two  parts,
-— the  columnas,  and  pijifhrm  ca-
runcles,- -remarks  on, XV,  12.
XXI.  29.
Hyoides, Os, fufpenfory ligament of,
whether  its exiftence  is not  to
be admitted -of according to
V/eitbiecht,  LXIII.  14.
Some  things  relative  to this  and the
little  bones  form'd  on  it,  ibid.
Hypochondriac  difeafe,  what  great  injury-
it frequently caufes, LXIV,
16.
The  complaints  of  perfons affefted
with this are not always to
be  difregarded  by  the  phyfician,
XLV.  27.

Hypo-


N  AMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Hypochondria,  pains  in,  fometimes  arife
from  the  parts  above,  at  other
times  from  the  parts  beneath
them,  XXXVI.  21.
A  fenfe  of  air  arifing  from  them,
and  other  things  of  the  fame
kind,  fometimes  deceive  us  in
organical  difeafes  of  the  thorax,
XVIII.  17,  18.

Hyfteric  AfFeftions. What  they  properly
are,  XLV.  17.  20.  27.
What they  have in  common with
hypochondriac difeafes, ibid.

17-
Whether  thefe  can  be  fo  eafily  di-
ftinguifh'd from each other  as
fome  fuppofe,  ibid.  20.
How  the  periodical  attacks  of  each
have  been  prevented by  opiates,
ibid.  17.  &  feq.
By  what  means  they  have  been  fome-
times brought-on,  ibid.  20.
Hyfteric-women. Phyficians fhould be
cautious  in  giving  their  opinions
concerning  fome  of  them,  ibid.
27.
How  it may be  known that fuch
perfons  are  certainly  dead,  ibid,
23-


JAW,  lower,  in  whom  it  feems  moft
liable to be fraftur'd, LVI.
21.
Its  interarticular  cartilage  fiiewn  not
to confift of two cartilages,
ibid.
Jaundice,  how  occafion'd  by  afreilions  of
the  mind,  XXVII.  3.
Whether  cacheftic and phlegmatic
perfons are  free  from it, ibid.

9-

Whence  arofe  a  certain  opinion  of
Helmont's  concerning  the  caufe
of  this  difeafe,  ibid.  7.

How  the  matter  occafioning  the  jaun-
dice may  be  increas'd  in  the
blood,  ibid.  g.

Caufes  hindering  the  palTage  of  the
bile  from  the  liver  into  the  in-
teftines,  ibid.  10.  33.  &  feq.

Who  has  taught  that  a  jaundice  does
not  follow  an  obftruQion  of  the


cyftic ducft, unlefs the ductus
communis be obftrucTted alfo,
ibid.
In  what manner the duflus com-
munis may  be  obflrufled  with-
out this  difeafe  always  following,
ibid.  34.
When  a  jaundice  from  the  bite  of
a  viper  may  be fuppos'd to  be
brought-on  by  this  obftrudion,
ibid.  10. Vid.  alfo  Viper.
When  it  is,  or  is  not,  occafion'd  by
hepatic calculi, ibid. 11. &
feq.
How  it may  fometimes afFeft  only

one  fide  of  the  body,  XI.  14.
An examination of the fuppos'd
caufes  of this difeafe in  new-
born children,  XLVIII.  60.
Ideric-perfons. The  blood  of  fuch  is  not
always  fluid,  XXXVII.  6.
Sometimes  yellow  like  gall,  as  has
formerly  been  found,  ibid.  7.
Why  the  cerebrum,  humours  of  the
eyes,  and the cornea of  fuch
are  often without any yellow-
nels,  ibid.  &  feq.
What  made  the  ancients,  "and  Tome
of  the  moderns,  believe  that  ai'l
objedis  appear  yellow  to  icteric
perfons,  ibid.  8.
Some,  but  rare,  infbances  of  this
kind  are  found,  with  the  reafons
of  it,  ibid.  &  feq.
Idiots,  cerebrum of, found harder than
natural, I.  10. VIII. 14.  17..
LXI.  8.
Not  always  fo, VIII.  17,  18. LXL

8.
Why it  is fo, enquir'd-into,  VIII.

i8.  LXI.  8.
The  pineal  gland often vitiated  in
fuch, VIII.  14. 16. LXI.  II.
&  feq-.
Ileum,  inteffine,  fome  appendages  or  di-
verticula of, natural ; others
from  difeafe,  XXIV.  16.
Why thefe are chiefly found in
this  intefline,  and near  its ex-
tremity, ibid.  17.
Hov/  this  might have  been  wounded
in thiee places by two  leaden
balls,  LIV.  21.
Iliac-paffion. How  far  a  twifting  cf  the
inteftines is to be admitted
among


INDEX relating to


among  the  caufes  of  this  difeafe,
XXXIV.  32.
How  far,  and for  what  reafon, an
intus-fufception  of  the  inteftincs
may  caufe  it,  ibid.  Sz  34.
Is frequently caus'd by worms  ;
which  fliould be  attended-to  by
phyficians in their treatment
of  young  patients,  ibid.  32.
Whether,  and  how,  this  difeafe  may

be  without  pain,  XXXIV.  12.
Whether  true  fceces  are  vomited  up
in  it,  ibid.  28.
Or  clyfters  frequently,  ibid.  29.
Who  formerly, and lately, have
obferv'd this of clyfters even
.without  an  iliac  paffion,  ibid.
Whether this can be explain'd
without  fuppofmg an inverted
motion  of the  inteftines, ibid.
30.  &  feq.
How  far  a palfy of  the valvula
Bauhini  may  be  fuppos'd  to  al-
low of  it,  ibid.
When  it  is  dangerous  to  give  leaden-
balls  or  quick-filver  in this  di-
feafe, ibid.  13.
iliac  vein,  contradled  from  a  partial  coa-
lefcence  of  its  parietes,  LVI.  10,
II.
Almoft  clos'd  at  its  opening  into  the
vena  cava,  ibid.
Ilium-Os. Fradures  of  its  fpine  not  al-
ways mortal,  LIV.  5.
Thinnefs  of  it  in  one  part  to  be  re-
garded in  abfcefles  and  wounds,
LV.  18.
Infants,  difeafes  of. The  neceffity  of  duly
attending to them, XLVIII.
58.
Of  what  kind thefe are, and why
they  are peculiar to new-born
children,  ibid 59.
Examples  of  thefe illuftrated in
part  by  certain  new  conjedlures,
ibid.  60 &  feq.
Obfervations  concerning  them,  how
to  be  made  and  form'd  into  one
body,  ibid.  64,  65.
Inflammations. Thofe  of  the  lungs  and
of  the  liver  may  eafily  fometimes
be  taken  the  one  for  the  other,
XX.  31.
Produftive  of membranes between
»  the  parts, when  they  may  be


furnifli'd  with  blood-veffels,
LXIX.  12.
Infedls.  The  ftudy  of  their  hiftory  has  in
various  cafes  made  phyficians
more  cautious,  XLII.  6.
Inteftines.  What  caufes,  efpecially  in  an
afcites,  connect  them  one  with
another,  or  with  the  peritonaeum,
XXXIX.  30.

Cafes  of  their  connexion  together  by
means  of  a  hard  fublfance,  ibid.
&  32.

Inftance  of  their  being  retracted  up-
wards in  a  foetus,  XXXIX.
28.

Obfervation  of  a  large  globular  tu-
mor from  their  contradtion,  ibid,
21.  &  26.  &  29.
The  figns  of  this  contradion,  ibid.

28.
The  caufes  of  it,  ibid.  31.

How  milk  may  fometimes  feem  to
adhere  to  their  external  furface,

■ .L-38-
A  livid-rednefs of  them  may  fome-
times be  brought-on  after  death,
XIX.  18.
Care  therefore  fhould  be  taken  that
we  are not  impos'd-on  with  the
notion  of  an  inflammation  having
preceded,  ibid.
Inflammation  of  them. Whence  the
hazard  of  trying  fome  remedies
in this difeafe, XXXV.  3.  &
>  feq.

Whether  this  can  be  without  fe-
ver, pain,  and the other  ufual
figns  of  inflammation, ibid,  20.
Si  feq.
When  thefe are wanting, from
what  other  figns we  may  fup-
pofe  its exiftence,  ibid.  20. &
feq.
No part of  the  body,  perhaps, be-
comes fooner or more eafily
gangrenous  than the inteftines,
XXXV.  5.
Whether  a gangrene can come-on
without the previous figns of
inflammation, or at leai-t the
principal  figns  of  one,  ibid.  19.
&  feq.
How without thefe figns  a  gan-
grene may  be  known,  ibid.  21.
&  feq.

May


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  mod  worthy  of  Notice.


May  fometimes  become  mortified,
and  the  pain  not  ceafe,  with  the
reafon  of  it,  XXXV.  23.

The  pain  of  them  remitting,  or  going
quite  ofF,  what  danger  fometimes
attends,  XXXV.  13.  &  feq.  &

23-

What  is  to  be  attended-to  when
there  is  no  pain,  XXXIV.  16.

The  feat  of  it,  whether  in  the  fmall
or  large  inteflines,  why  eafily
known,  ibid.  2.  et  feq.  XLIil.
22.

Many  caufes  of  pain  in  an  incar-
cerated hernia,  XXXIV.  5.

Contorfion  and  intus-fufception  of
them. Vid.  Uiac-paffion.

The  rupture  of  the  difeas'd  inteftine,
and  an  efFufion  of  the  putrid
coUuvies  into  the  cavity  of  the
belly,  is  fometimes,  but  not  al-
ways, immediately  foUow'd  by
death,  XXXV.  15.
Inteftines,  polypouj  concretions  of,  XXI.
20.

Thefe  were  obferv'd  by  the  ancients,
XXXI.  18.

The  origin  of  them,  ibid.  17,  18.
By  whom pointed out  long ago,
ibid.  18.
^May  fometimes  be true  membranes,
^  ibid.  20.

Hiftory  of  one  attended  with  excru-
ciating fymptoms,  ibid.  19.
LXV 6.

With  a  flefhy  appearance,  may  fome-
times be  really  flefh,  or  excre-
fcences  form'd  of  a  polypus  and
fiefti  mix'd  together,  XXXI.
21.
Hiftory  of  one  of  the  latter  kind
difcharg'd  with  great  pain,  ibid.
22.

Calculi  of.  At  what  time,  and  by
whom,  thefe  were  firft  obferv'd,,
XXXVil.  41.

Why  lome  of  the  cyftic  kind  may
be  taken  for  inteflinal,  ibid.
24.
Remarks  on  this,  ibid.
What  things  are  neceflary  to  be
attenced-to,  to  prevent  falling
into  this  m.iflake,  ibid.  45.  &-
feq.

Valvula  Bauhini. Vid.  Valvula.


Their  periftaltfc  motion  known  to
the earlieft writers, XXXIV.

.31-
Their  alternate  periftaltic  and  anti-

periftaltic  motion,  in  vihat  fpecies

of  animals  principally  obferv'd,

ibid.
Wounds  of  the  fmall  inteftines,  the

diagnofis  and  prognofis  of,  LIV.

32-.

Appendicula  Vermiformis.  How  this
can  caufe  an  ofcheocele,  XLIIL

3-
Who  have  found other appendages
or  diverticula,  XXXIV.  16.  &
feq.
Other obfervations concerning
thefe, ibid. & 18.

Found  in  geefe,  ibid.  17.
In  which  of  the  inteftines  they  are
more  frequently  or  rarely  found,,
and in what parts of them,
ibid.
Their  origin,  ibid.  16.
Colon.  Unufual  fituation  of  it.  Vid,
Colon  in  the  third  index.
By  whom  this has been  formerly

obferv'd,  XXXIV.  3.
The  caufes  of  it,  ibid.
Part  of  it  found within the  thorax,

LIV.  II.
Redlum. No  anatomical  obfervation
of its. prolapfus is extant,,
XXXIII.  I.  15.
What fhbuld be enquir'd  after  by
anatotriifts  in  differing  the  bo-
dies of  perfons  who  v/ere  fubjeft
to  this  complaint,  ibid.
An  enquiry  into,  and  examination  of,,
its  various  caufes,  ibid.  3,  4.  8.

An  examination  of  the  inftruments
and  other  remedies  for  the  pal-
liative cure  of  it,  ibid.  7.  13.
16.

And  for  the  radical  cure,  ibid.  10..
&  feq.
An  account  of  a  very  bad  and not-
much-known  dilorder  of  this  in-
teftine,  XXXII.  6.  &  feq.

The  reafons  why  a  radical  cure
cannot  be  made  of  this,  ibid.
8.

How  the  palliative  is  to  hi  at-
tempted, ibid.  9..

twicers


I N D E X ^ referring to


Ulcers of this intefline, of what.
kinds  they  oftentimes  are,  ibid.

13-
What  happen'd whilft an  excre-

fcence  of  it  was  cutting  off,  L.

50.
Jourdenfius,  Chr.  Frid.  Csef.  N.  C.  Acad.

S.  commended,  XXIV.  28.
Joints, a very extraordinary difeafe of.

Vid.  Knee.
Itch,  animalcules  frequently  exciting,  to

whom  formerly  known,  and  by

whom  fiifl:  delineated,  LV.  4.
Whether  only  caus'd  by  them,  ibid.

5,6.
Though  caus'd by  them,  is  not  al-

v/ays  to be cur'd by externals

only,  ibid.  7.
When  it  can,  or  cannot,  be  cur'd

by  thefe  only,  ibid.  4.  &  feq.
Repell'd,  occafioning violent difor-

ders,and  fomettmes  death,  XVI.

34,35. XXXVIII.  22. XLI.4.

LV.  2,  3.
Obfervations  on  dead  bodies  after

this  repulfion,  LV.  2.
Jugular  Veins, external, a  pulfation  in,

obferv'd  by  Galen,  XVIII.  11.
What  is  to  be  regarded  that  we  may

not  be  deceiv'd  in  this,  ibid.
From how many caufes this may

happen,  ibid.  g.  &  feq.
When  it  arifes  from  a  contra£lion  of

the  right ventricle, and when

from  that  of  the  right  auricle,
'ibid.  12.
A  fign  whereby  to  know  that  it  is  not

from a dilatation  of the  right

cavities  of  the  heart,  ibid.  9.  &

feq.
What  things are to be obferv'd

that  we  are  not  deceiv'd  in  this,

ibid.  II.
Occafion'd in fome  meafure by  an

impediment  to  the  circulation  of

the  blood  through the  right  ca-
vities of  the  heart,  ibid.  10.
Experiments  made  in  them,  on  living

dogs,  by  a  ligature  tied  on  them,

XIX.  29.  31,  32.
Obferv'd  to  be  turgid  in  expiration,

and  fubfiding  in  infpiration,  or

the  contrary,  ibid.  33,  34.
Of  taking  blood  from  them  in  apo-

pledic  cafes,  II,  10,


Obfervation  of  one  of  them  dividing
into  three  branches  in  the  neck,
and  forming  two  infulse  before
its  reunion,  LXVIII.  6.

Internal.  Experiments  made  on  thefe
in  living  animals  by  ligature,
mention'd  by  Ariftotle,  XIX.
21.

What he  or others meant by this
experiment  on  living  men,  hard
to  be  underflood,  ibid.  22.
Whether Hippocrates mentions
this  experiment,  ibid.

Whether  we  ought  to  fuppofe  that
the  veins  only  are  coiiitring'd  in
this  experiment,  ibid.  37.

The fame experiment repeated by
Galen,  ibid.  24.  29.  31,  32.
Made  by  fewer  than is  generally
fuppos'd,  and the efFeds  of  it,
ibid.  31,  32.

Whether  the  corjftringing  them  is
the  caufe  of  death  by  ftrangu-
lation,  ibid.  29.  35.

External  and  internal,  ligature  made
on  in  living  dogs,  XIX.  32.

Whence  the  different  fuccefs of  an

experiment  made?'  oji them by

Novefius and Lower. Vid.

Lower.

Juncker,  Jo. P.  Prof. Hal.  commeoded,

XXXIII.  4.  ^

de  Juflieu.  Ant.  R.  Sc.  Acad.  Par.  com-
mended, LIX.  33.


K


'A AW  Boerhaave,  Abr.  Imp.  Pe-
tropol,  Acad.  S.  commended,  IX.
ig.  XXIII.  17,  18.
Kaltfchmied,  Car.  Frid.  Prof.  P.  Jenenfis,
commended,  XIIL  6.  L.  57.
LIV.  37.  LXV.  7.  10.  LXVir.

3-

Kannegiefferus, Gottl. Hen. Prof. P.

Kilon.  commended,  XLVI.  12.

XLVIII.  13.
Kellner,  Wilh.  And.  Csf.  Acad.  N.  C.  S.

commended, XVI.  45. XLII.

7-

Kerckringius,  certain  obfervation  of,  how

to  be  corredled,  XII.  11.

What  he  relates  of  vifion  being  re-

ftor'd,  after  all the  humors  of

the


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  mofl  worthy  of  Notice.


the  eye are  prefs'd  out,  not  to

be  regarded,  LII.  40.
Keffebringius, Jo. Hen. commended,

XLII.  35.
Kidney. When  the figns of its  being

difeas'd  are  doubtful,  how  they

may  be  render'd lefs fo, XL.

13-

Mortal  difeafe  of  it,  when  feme  par-
ticular figns  are  wanting,  by
what  it  may  be  fuppos'd  to  exift,
XXX.  22.
Kidnies,  how  they  may  be  fuppos'd  to  be
difeas'd  in  diforders  of  the  blad-
der, XLII.  22.
How  this  is  to  be  explain'd,  ibid.

23-
How  the  urine  may  return  to  them
from the bladder through  the
ureters,  ibid.
One fign of their being difeas'd
fometimes are very fevere
pains  at  the  fcrobiculus  cordis,
XLII.  13,  14.
Pain  in  the  loins  fometimes  wanting
in  the  moft  violent  diforders  of
them,  ibid.  5.  &  feq.  13.  et  feq.
&  20.
Cellules  of  them,  found,  as  it  were,
full  of  urine,  to  what  to be  re-
ferr'd,  XXXVIII.  39.  &  feq.
By  whom  thefe  were  formerly  ob-

ferv'd,  ibid.  41.
An  examination  of  them,  ibid.  40.

Ct  feq.
By  what  means  they  may  occafion
an  afcites,  ibid.  41.
Cicatrices in them, whence fome

arife,  ibid.  42.
Worms in. Obfervation  of  thefe,
and  one  fign  of  them, XL.  6.
&  feq.
Calculi  of. How  more  eafily  gene-
rated in  fat-perfons  and  gluttons,
ibid.  5.
Why  fometimes  there  are  no  figns
of  thefe, or they foon ceafe,
ibid.  15.  LVII.  12.
Whether they are always of a
fafFron-colour  or reddifli, XL.
16.
Found in the fhape  of  a  coraJ,

explain'd,  LVII.  12.
In  dogs',  XLII.  17.
- In  what  manner,  and  why. they
Vol.  IlL


are  prejudicial to  pregnant  v/o-
men,  XL.  17.
Of  remedies  for  them,  ibid.  i6.
Kidnies. Which  of  theth more fubjeil
to  ulceration  and  calculi,  XL.

Who have cbfcrv'd their external

fufface  lobular in adults, ibid.

19.  &  feq.
Who  have  obferv'd this  fl:ru<£lure

attended  with violent pains  of

the  loins, or diforders of the

kidnies,  ibid.
An  attempt  to  account  for  thefe,

XL.  25.
Found of an unufual length and

make,  and  with  an  uncommon

origin  of  their  arteries,  XXX  V^I,
^ 23.
One  ot  them  very  long  from  a  large

hydatid in its fubftance, LX.

6.
One  with  two  pelves,  LXIV.  2.
Both  having  fponey  fubftances  inftead

of  pelves,  XXVII.  28.
The  appearance  of  one  difeas'd,  XL.

18,  19.
One  larger  than the  other,  IX.  i8.

XL.  12.
The reafon of this, XL.

Whether,  when  one  does  not  its
proper  office,  the  orher  ceafes  to
doit  alfo,  XL.  15 XLl.  i.

Their  fhape  not  properly  liken'd  to
that  of a leaf  of afarum, X.

^ 19-.

Obfervations  of  one  only  inftead  of
two,  XXV.  4,  5.  XXXI.  2  5.
XL.  14.  XLVm.  16.
How  it  is  to  be  determin'd,  whe-
ther one  of  them  was  originally
wanting,  or  loft  by  difeafe,  XL,
14.
Who  formerly  taught  that  it  was

fo  originally,  ibid.
Obfervations  of the moderns on
this  fubjeft,  colle(£led  together,
divided into clafl'es, and wtll-
examin'd,  XLVIII.  16.
Keiflingius, Chrift. Goth, commended,

LXV.  20.  LXVII.  16.
Knee,  joint  of. A  di.'eafe in its  cavity
very  rare  amongft  us,  defcnb'd,
LVII.  14,  15.
4  Z  Obfer.


14,


INDEX referring to


Obfervatlons  on  the  fame  difeafe,
LXIX.  13.
Rotula  of. Obfervations  of  two  per-
fons  walking  ftraight  without  its
afliftance,  explain'd,  LVI.  27.
Whether a  ligament under it  is
not  to  be  doubted  of,  ibid.
Koch,  Dan.  commended,  XLIII.  14.
Kochlsrus,  Jo. Pet.  Franc, commended,.

Vlll.  31.  XXIX.  19.
Kramer,  Jo.  Geo.  Henr.  (Cop.  Caef.  Med..

Prim.)  commended,  XX.  52.
Krut^erus, Jo.  Gottl. formerly P. Prof.
Helmftad. commended, XLII,
19.
Kulbelius, N Med.  Prim, commended,

XXXIV.  35.
Kulinus,  Jo.  Adam,  formerly  P.  Prof.
Ged.  commended,  XXVII.  19.
L.  57.  LIl.  39.
Kundmann,Jo.Chrift.Casr.N.C.Acad.S.
commended,  XIX.  44..  LIX.
5-


LACHRYMAL- caruncle  is  not  a
fcbaceous gland,  except on its
furface,  XIII.  26;
Ladeal-veins. Vid.  Chyliferous.
Laghius, Tho. P. Prof. Bonon. com-
mended, LX.  14.
Laloxette,  Pet.  Med.  Parif.  commended,

L.  37-
Lamenefs,  as  it  v/ere,  from  a  diforder  of

ihe  mufcles lying  internally  on

the  OS  ilium, XXXIV.  16.
Whether  women  are  more  fubjeft  to

it than men  ; and why they
' fliould  be  fo,  LVI.  19;
One  caufe  of  it  from  tumors  within

the  acetabulum, by  whom  ob-

ferv'd,  LVL  23.
The feat of thele tumo'irs very.

probably in the mucilaginous

gland  of  the  acetabulum,  ibid.
Some caufec of it from delivery,

XLVIII.  33.
Manifold caufes of  it,  LVI.  almoft-

the  whole  letter.
Vices  of  the  iliac  or  crural  veffels  on

the  fide  of  the  lame  limh  which

are frequently found, XLVI,
17.  LVI.  10.  12.  18.


Lamur, N. R.  Sr.  Soc.  Monfp. conr-

mended,  XIX.  24.  31.
Lamzwerdius, His  bock  of  uterine  molar,
ufelefs for the greateft part,
XLVIH.  10.
Lancifi,  (formerly  Archiater  Pontif. )  com-
mended, XII. 9. XVII. 5..
XXVI.  2.  XXXL  18.
Defended,  XVII.  5.
His  works  on  the  motion  of  the  heart
and  dneurifms,  corrupted  by  the
printers,  ibid.  4.
Some  pafTages in  thefe,  to  whicH
he  did not put the finifliing
hand,  not readily  approv'd of,.
XVilL  5.
Saw  the  gall  bladder  of  an  uncom-
mon length,  XXXVIII.  t^.
Allow'd  of  caruncles  in  the  urethra,,
even  in  the  feminal  when  tumid^.
XLII.  38.
Langhanfius,  Dan.  commended, XI.  12..

XIX.  44.
Langguth,  Geo.  Aug.  P.  Prof.  Wittem-
berg. commended, XIII. 14.
XIX.  g.  LXV.  15.
Langius,  Guolfg.  Hannib.  M.  D.  Weif-
fenberg.  commended,  XL  VII. 27.
Lanzoni, an obfervation of, explain'd,,
XXXVII.  50.
Miftaken,  XLII.  21.
Larber,  Jo.  late  Phyfician  to the  prince
and bifliop of Trent, com-
mended, LXIV.3.  LXIX.  17.
Larynx. Vide  Lpiglottis.

Diffedlion  of, in what  fubje£ts  not

to  be  neglefted,  XV.  14.
Ulceration  of,  feeming  to  be  an  ul--
ceration  of  the  lungs, how  to
be  diftinguifh'd  from  it,  ibid.
Violent  diforders  of,  often  occafion-
ing fudden death, XXII.  25,
XXVIII.  II.
Latin-tongue, men  of  learning write in
more  fafely  than  in  their  native,.
XVIl.  3:
Lavarini, Jo. Dominic. J. C. Veron,

commended,  XLVIII.  56.
Labbius, Hieron.  Phyfician  to  the  king  of
Denmark,  commended, XXII.
19.  XXIII.  18.  XXVI.  26.
Lauirerus,  Jo.  Jac.  commended,  XII.  6i

XXX.  II.
Laurenti, M. Ant. formerly Archiater
Poatif.  commended,  XVIII. 5.
His


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moll  worthy  of  Notice.


His  obfervations,  ibid.  &.  &  XXXIV.
26,  27.
Leannefs. Vid.  Wafting.
Leg,  frafture  of,  obfeivations  on, LVI.

32-
Leprotti,  Ant.  formerly  Archiat  r  Pontif.

commended, If.  16. XIX,  43.

XXVI.  39.  XLVIII.  61.
His  obfervations, II. 16. XLVIII.

62.
I/ethargy,  cafe  of  from  an abfcefs, cur'J

by  a  difcharge  from  the  noftrils,

VL5.
Lientery,  how  caus'd,  XXXI.  4.  13.
Lieutaud,  N.  R.  Sc.  Acad.  Parif. com-
mended, LII.  26.  LXV.  II.
Ligaments. The doiSlrine concerning

them  at  prefenc  imperfeS,  LVI.

37-
Limbs. It  a  large  artery  be  cut  in  wounds
of  them,  what  fhould be  done,
.  LIV.  47-
Lithontriptics. Some  acid,  fome  alkaline,
and  others compos'd of both,
XLII.  19. Vid.  alfo  Calculi.
Littre. An  examination of his  opinion
concerning drowning, XIX.
44.
Concerning  the  caufe  of  a  tym-
panitis, XXXVIII.  23.  &  feq.
Of  a  lipoma as diftinfl: from a
fteatoma,  L.  22.
Liver. A  double  one. XLVIII.  55.

Of  a  remarkable  form, XXXVIIL

42.  LXV.  8.
Sulci,  or  furrows, fometimes  found
on its convex  furface,  whence
probably their origin, LVI.

^7-
The  unufual  extenfion  of  it  both  in

a  found and  morbid  ftate  ought

not to  be unknown to  phy/i-

clans  ; and  in  a  found  ffate  how

this  may  be  reafonably  fuppos'd

to  be  the  cafe,  XXXVI.  3.

Artery  of  it. Vid.  Hepatic.

A  large  vein  found  going  from  it
into  the  emulgent  in  a  whelp,
XL.  14.

The  conftant  open  pafTage  from  it
into  the  inteflines,  wrongly
omitted  in  fome  explanations,
XXXVI.  10.

The  confequences  of  injuries  of  if,
ibid.  26.


Obferv'd  boil'd  as  it  were,  in  whom,
XLV.  22.

Glandular  lobules  of  it,  by  whom
formerly  feen  more  plainly  after
a difeafe of it, XXXVlIi.

.31-
T  he  effect  of  this  difeafe,  ibid.

The  whitifh  net-work  which  in-
tercepts ihefe  Icbuli  found  very
thick in a morbid fow, ibiJ.

How  it  may  render  deglutition  dif-
ficult, XXVin.  17.

Why  the fplsen is frequently,  and
not  always,  tumid when  this  is
fo, XXXVI.  26.  &  feq.
Why  it  fometimes becomes lefs,
ibiJ.  27.

Tumor  of  it,  why  fometimes  feeming
to  be  in  the  abdominal  mufcles,
XXXVL  6.

Abfcefs  of  it.  Remarks  on  the  ve-
ficles  fometimes in one, ibid.

9-
Not  feen  byBallonius  to  arife  from
wounds of the  head, as fome
have  fuppos'd,  LI.  22.
What  may  miflead  us  in  prognofti-
cating  this,  ibid.  &  23.

Emptying itfelf through the dia-
phragm into the thorax,
XXXVI.  4.
Into  the  belly  not  fufSciently  taken
notice  of  in  anatomical obfer-
vations, ibid.  5,  6.
Whether the burfting of one
fhould  be accelerated by  exer-
cife,  ibid.  6.
How  to  be  cur'd,  ibid.

Calculi  of. Vide  Hepatic.
Liver,  cyft  of. Plac'd  tranfverfly  and  on
the  outfide  of  the  liver,  XXIV.
16.

Divided,  as  it  were,  into  two,
XXIX.  18.

Without  any  marks  of  veficles  at  its
fundus,  XXIV.  16.

In  making  obfervations  and  experi-
ments on  ir,  what  millake  may
happen,  XXXVII.  21.

Meatus  of  it  did  not  fignify  with
the  ancients  the  duflus  cyfticus,
ibid.  33.

Its  too  great  fullnefs may  arife  from
various  caufes,  LVIIl.  3.
4  Z  2  By


INDEX referring to


By  whom  found  of  a  monftrous  fize,
XXXVII.  13.
How we may be deceiv'd in
the  diagnofis of this difeafe,
ibid.
Whether,  and  when,  the  tinilure  of
the  bile  which is  found  in  the
parts about  the cyft, can  be
noxious,  XXX.  19.  &  feq.
How  far  it  may  be  injur'd  by  calculi

form'd  in  it,  XXX.  20.
Calculi  of. Vide  Cyftic.
Livy, fome paflages from, relating to
apopledlic  or  paralytic  afFeiSlions,
explain'd,  III.  17.  XI.  21.
Lividnefs  of  dead  bodies,  efpecially  about
the  backs,  caufe  of, XIX.  3.
&  feq.
Loadftone. Its  ufe in extrafting  little
pieces  of  iron  fix'd  in the  eye
or  the  fkin,  XIII.  21,  22.
What  is  to  be  obferv'd  in  ufing  it,
ibid.
Loios. A  foft  tumor  in  the  left,  appear-
ing fometimes  lefs  and  fometimes
greater,  caus'd  by  a  very  lax  and
tumefied  fpleen,  XXXVI.  29.
From  a  very  large  internal  aneu-
rifm,  XL.  26.
Pains  of. Some  caufes  of  them  men-
tion'd, XVI.  41. XVII.  24.
XL.  11.28.
How  they  may  arife  from  the  blad-
der, XL.  5.
From  an  internal  ulcer  at  the  iliac

region,  ibid.  10.
May fometimes be abfent  when
the  kidnies are  very badly af-
feded,  XLII.  2. &  feq. 13.  &
feq.  &  20.
What  kind is  follow'd  by  fudden
death,  XL.  27,  28.
Louifius,  a  French  Surgeon,  commended,

LVIII.  7.
Lower,  a  certain  experiment made by,
why  fucceeding  difierently  witb
him  than one  of  the  fame  kind
did  with  Novefius,  XIX.  32.
du  l/uc,  a  French  Surgeon,  commended,

XXX.  13.
Liidwig, Chrift.  Gottl. P. Prof. Lipf.
commended,  LVI,  15.  LXVIII.

4-
Lumbar  Arteries. Inftead  of  going  out
from the  aorta  two-and-two.


one  only  is  not  rarely  difpatch'd,

LXX.  10.
Lungs. Obfervations  where  they  feem  to

be  deficient,  XXII.  7.
Between  them and the parietes of

the  thorax, whether there be

any  fpace  or  not,  XVI.  5.
Who  firft  formerly mention'd  their

adhsefion  to the pleura, ibid.

IS-

What  this  adhsefion  is  fometimes

caus'd  by,  XXI.  24.
Various  caufes of it aflign'd by

different perfons, XVl. 15.

XXIII.  17.
Another caufe of it, XVIII.

^15-.

This  is  fo  frequent,  that  it  (hould
not  always  be  attributed  to  a
difeafe,  XVl.  15,  16.
What  feems  to  be  the  more  pro-
bable caufe  of  it  in  this  cafe,,
ibid.  16.
Cautions  neceflary  for  furgeons  oa

account  of  its  frequency,  ibid.
Whether  it  never  happens  on  the

left  fide  only,  XXIL  17.
Different  opinion  of  authors  whe-
ther it  be  injurious  to  refpiration,
or  not,  XVI.  15,  16,.

Thefe  opinions  not  eafily  re-
concil'd,  ibid.  1.6.
When  it  is  fuppos'd  to  be  hurtful^
how  accounted  for,  ibid.
Blacknefs  generally  found  on  their
pofterior  furface,  by  whom  for-
merly obferv'd,  IV.  13.
The  caufe  of  it,  ibid.  XIX.  4.  &

feq.
This  wrongly  fuppos'd  by  many  to-
be  morbid.  IV.  13 26.
Lobes  of,  fometimes  more  than  twO'
found on the left fide, when
there  is but  one  on-  the  right,
XX.  41,  42.
The  middle  one  on  the  right  fide
fometimes deficient from the
birth,  and  once found to have^
been  long  wafted,  X.  19..  LXIL,

5-
Strudture  of  them, appearing very

plainly,  XXII.  12.
Surface  of,  how  feeniing  white  when

it  is  not  fo,  XIII.  3.
Senfibility  of,  XX.  32.  &  feq.

Whether


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Whether  air  paffes  through  them  into

the  blood,  V.  27.
Inflam'd,  how  they  look,. VL  i2^

13.  XX.  21.
Who  firft  elegantly  defcrib'd  this

appearance,  XXI.  28.
How  they  from  inflammation  be-
come like the  fubftance  of  the

liver,  ibid.  20.
Hardnefs  of,  how  caus'd,  XV,  17.  &

feq.  &  24.  XXI.  20.
Black fpots of, in what fubjeils

found,  XXII.  9.
Tubercles  of,  what  they  indicate  in

a  phthifis,  ibid.  18,  ig.
Their  various  contents,  ibid.  19,.
From  whence  their  increafe,  ibid.
Whether  they  are the bronchial

glands preternaturally enlarg'd

and  vitiated,  ibid.^21.
Ulcers  of,  fometimes  feeming  to  be

ulcers  of  the  lungs,  how  to  be

diftinguiili'd from thefe, XV.

14.
Rupture  of,  how  happening  in  the

part  under  the  found  ribs,  and

not  thofe  that  are  broke,  LIIL

34-

Wafted.  By  whom  their  veffels  have
been  found  opening  into  the
thorax,  XXII.  7.

Dropfy  of,  properly  fo  call'd,  XVI.

33-

Bones of no fmall fize fometimes

found in them, from whence

they  arife,  XV.  18.
Leaden-ball weighing two ounces

found  in  them,  when  there  was

not  any  fenfe  of  weight,  XXI.

12.
Calculi  and  tophs  in,  from  whence

and where the/ are generally

found,  XV.  19.  23.
Who  have collefled obfervations

of  chefe,  ibid.  19.
Wha  firft obferv'd them, ibid,

20.
In  what  numbers  they  have  been

fometimes  found, ibid.
Of  what  fize  they  have  been  fre-

quenilv,  and  fcmetimes,  found,

ibid.
Cf  what confiftence they gene-
rally, aid  fomeiimes,  are,  ibid.

21.


Symptoms  of  them  ;  and  whether,
though  angular,  they  are  always
attended  with  great  pain,  ibid,
21.  &  feq.  LXIV.  3.

Some  things  relative  to  their  cure,
XV.  21.

Why  they  frequently  occafion
death  ;  and  why  there  are  many
inftances  to  the  contrary,  ibid.
22.
Lungs,  themfelves,  how  becoming  ftony
or  tophaceous,  ibid.  23.
Indications  of  this,  with  obfervations,.

ibid.  25,  26.
Silbfiding  or  fwimming  in  water,  tO'
know  whether  a  child  was  born
dead  or  alive,  no  new  experi-
ment, XIX.  45.

This  carefully  us'd  may  be  ufeful,
ibid.  &  48.  LXIV.  4.

Danger  of  being  deceiv'd  thereby,
and  the  way  to  prevent  it,  XlX.

46,  47.  r  . '

Lying-down  on  the  contrary  fide,  diffi-
culty of,  not  always  owing  to
the  fame  feat  of  the  caufe,  XVI.
II.  13.  XX.  19.  27.  42,  43-
XXI.  25. XXXVIII.  5. 14.

-  17-
More  eafy  or  difficult  on  the  back  in
fome  inflammations  of  the  tho>
rax,  and  other  diforders,  the
caufes  of  enquir'd-into,  XX. 23.
25.  31,  XXI.  25.
Lymphseduds,  difcovery  of,  whether  it
has  not  alter'd  the  prognoftics
and  cure  in  dropfies,  XXXVIII.

7-
Why  frequently  turgid  in  dropfical
perfons,  XVI.  3.
The  examination  of  them in  fuch
fubjeds,  how  ufeful,  XXXVUL
7-,


M


ALOET, Pet. Reg. Sc.  Acad.
Parif.  commended, I.  g. XXI.
48. XXII. 21. XXVI.  23.
XLrX,  60.  LXVIII.  3.
Malouin, Paul.  Jac. R.  Sc.  Acad.  Parif.

commended,  L,  38.
Malpighi. Pafiages  in  his  works  defended,
XVII.  4.  XVin.  12.

His


INDEX referring to


His  medical Confultations, of  what

compos'd,  XVIII.  i6.
His  diagnofis  of,  and  obfeivation  on,

tophaceous lungs, not before

publife'd,  XV.  24  &  feq.
His  diagnofis  of  an  organical  difeafe,

XVIII.  17.
His  opinion  of  a  particular  cough.

Vid.  Cough.
Manfred,  Herjclit.  formerly  Soc.  Bonon.

Acad.  Sc.  commended, IV.  25.

XXVI.  28.  XXX.  9.  15.  17.
XXXIX.  18.  4-3-

His  obfcrvations,  XXVI.  29.  XXX.
10.  16.  XXXIX.  39.  41,
42.

Mania,  fometimes  eafily  cur'd,  VIII.  5.
7.  10.
Obfervation  of  one  fucceeding  a  con-
tinual autumnal  (ever,  and  even
a  dropfy,  with  the  method  of
cure,  ibid.  10.

Maniacal-pcrfons.  By  whom  the  me-
ninges of  fuch  have  been  found
harder  and  thicker  than  is  na-
tural, ibid.  13.

de  Marchettis,  Pet.  Grandfon  of  Peter
the  Chevalier,  formerly  S.  Med.
Coll.Patav.  commended,  XXX.
7.  XXXVI.  30.

Manot,  N.  R.  Sc.  Societ.  Monfp.  com-
mended, XII.  5.

Mariani,  Laur.  formerly  Phyfician  at  the
court  of  Placentia,  commended,

XXVII,  8.  XXX.  13.  XLII.
22.  24.  &  feq.  XLVI.6.  LXIV.
14.  LXVIll.  10.

His  obfervations,  XXVIL  8. XLII.
25.
Marks on children from the mother's
imagination,coniider'd,XLVIII.

54-
Married-women,  if  barren, ofren fubjefl

to  great  difeafes,  XXXVI.  17,

18.
Maritranu=,  fome  things  in,  not  approv'd,

XXI.  37.  39.
Martinetti,  Cafp.  Diiid.  Phyf.  at  Ravenna,

commended,  V.  12.  XV.  22.
Matanus, Ant. Med. Piftorienf. corh-

mended,  L.  10. LXIV,  14.
Matter. Vid.  Pus.

Matthias,  N.  commended,  XXXlX.  3.
Matthiolus,  miftaken,  XXXVII.  11.
Mauchart,  Burchard.  David,  P.  Prof.  Tu-


bing, commended, XIII, 18,
XXVIII.  15,  16.  LVI.  37.
Mauchart,  Jo.  David, Caef.  N. C.  Ac,
Soc. '-ommended, XVI. 37.
XXXIV.  22.  XXXVIII.  64.
de  Maupenuis, Pet.  Lud. formerly  Pre-
fident  R.  Sc.  Acad at Berlin,
commended,  LIX.  25.  28.  41.
Maurer,  Jr. Geo M.  D. commended,

XXXVI 35.
Mauroceni,  Andr. formerly Senator and
Hiftorian at  V-nice,  his  difeafe
and  difiedtion,  ibid.
Mauroceni,  Fortunato,  Bilhop  of  Brefcia,
his  verv rare  difeafe  and diflec-
tion,  XXXIX.  21.  &  feq.
Mauroceni, Micnael, Knight and very
illuftrious Senator of Venice,
commended,  XXXIX.  21.
May,  Jo.  Chnft. commended, XIII.  18.

XLII.  32.
Mayer,  Jo.  Ignat. P.  Profef,  Prag.  com-
mended, XLV.  20.
Mazzucchellius, N. Prof. Ticin. com-
mended, LXI.  13.
Mead, Richard, R. S. Lond.  S. com-
mended, VIII. 19, 20. 24.
XLII.  28. LI.  10. LIX.  4.  9.
22.  26.  29.  &  feq.  33.  35.
Meckel,  Jo.  Frid.  Reg.  Sc.  Acad.  Ber.  S.
commended,  XIII.  5.  XIV.  28.
XVIII  4. LIII.  6. LXIV.  4.
14.  LXVIII.  13.
Mediaftinum. Inflammations of, by
whom  firil  found  or  conje£lur'd
at  from  figns,  XXI.  46.
Inflances  of  blood being effus'd be-
tween  its cellules,  XXVI.  39,
40.
Why  attended  with  pains  at  the  fter-
num  rather  than the  vertebrae,
as it is connected to both of
them,  XX.  12 XXI.  46.
Mediavia,  Nicolas,  Coll.  Med.  Patav.  Soc.
formerly  Diffeftor there, com- "
mended, V.  14. VIII.  14.  22.
XIIL  8. XIX.  34. XXX.  I  J.
LII.  9. LIII.  28. LXIV.  6.
12.
Obfervations  of,  V.  15. VIII.  15. 23.
25 IX.  14.  23. XIV.  4 &  feq,
XV.  12.  15.  XVI. 28.  XXVII.
12.  XXX.  II.  XXXVI.  25.  29.
XXXVIIL  51.  &  feq. XLIII.
25.  XLVIIl.  54.  &  feq.  XLIX.
23.


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


23,  24.  26.  L.  19,  20.  55.  LII.

10,  II.  15-  19.  23.  25. LIII.

29. LV.  20. LvII.  17.  19;

LIX.  3.  12.
Medicine,  praftjce  of,  why  attended  with

very  great  diiEculty,  IX.  26.
Medulla  Spinalis. Vid.  Spine.
Meekrenius,  miftaken,  XXV.  23.
Meibomius,  Hen.  miftaken,  XLI.  9.
Membranes,  falfe,  from  whence  they  arife,.

XX.  37.
Menghinus,  Vincent,  formerly  Prof.  Bo-

non. commended, XXXI.  41.

LXVI.  4.
Menltrual Flux, whether  depending  on

the  gall  or  not,  XX.  34.
Caufe  of,  feated  in  the uterus  itfelf,

XL.  7.  23.
How  the uterus appears when the

eruption is  at-hand, XV L  34,

XLVII.  23.
Its  too  late  appearance, from  what

caufe  fometimes  owing,  XLVII.

3-

Why  in this cafe the phyfician
ought  to  do  nothing,  ibid.
Whether the diminution of it in
fome perfons is owing  to  the
ufe  of  too much  fire  put  under
their  cloaths,  XXI.  29,.
Gr  the  frequent  drinlcing  very  cold
water,  XLVII.  5.
The  flate  of  the blood in its  fup-

preifion  or  retardation,  ibid.
When  medicines which promote  it
are proper, and of what  kind
they  ought  to  be,  ibid.
When  none  fliould  be  given,  ibid.
6.
When  it  has  been  of  too  long  con-
tinuance, or  in  too  great  quan-
tity, what  has been  of fervice
to  many,  ibid.  7.
Abfceffes^  though  almoft cur'd,  fre-
quently  become worfe during
this difcharge, XXXVI. 17,
18.
Merolinus,. miftaken  in  his  annotations  on

Pandulphinus,  LV.  17.
Mercurialis,  obfervation  from,  of  a  wo-
man with  an  imperforate  anus,
who  liv'd  to  be  an  hundred
years  o!d,  XXXIL  3.
Mery.  Inftance  of  his  forgftfulnefs,
XLL  12.


In a difcovery made by himfelf,

XLIV.  11.
Mefentery, glands  of, oblong  and  large,

found  in  its  centre,  in  a  certain

perfon,  V.  17.
Found  very  large  in  a  decrepid  old

woman,  XLVIF.  24.
An  enlargement  or  emaciated  ftate

of  them  may be productive  of

extreme  leannefs,  XLlX.  19.
By  what  means they are  chang'd

into  a  fanious  tumor, XXXI.

3-
Tumors in it, whether known to
the  ancient  phyficians,  XXXIX.-
6.
By  whom  firft  mention'd,  ibid.  &■

7-

Whether  fome  certain  aflertions  of
anatomifts  in  regard  to  knowing
them  are  credible,,  ibid.  11.

Whether  thefe  could  be  very
moveable  in  Affeilius's  pancreas,
provided  this  was  found  in  men,
ibid.  22.-

How  feated  fometimes  immediately
under  the  anterior  parietes  of
the  belly,  XXXIX.  22,  23.

Large,  and  coming  down  into  the

" fcrotum,  ibid.  2,  3.

The  efFcfts  of  thele  tumors  ex-
plain'd,  ibid,  4.  6,

Whether  pains  are  perceiv'd  a-
mongft  them;  and,  if  they  are^
that  they  belong  to  the  inteftines,
and  not  to  the  mefentery,  ibid.
6.  &  feqq.  &  1,0.
Wounds  of  it.  When  and  how  they
are  mortal,  LIV.  34..  Si  fcq.
Michelottus  very  fuccefsfully  gave  cow's
urine  in  an  anafarca,  XXXVIII.

30-

Michinus,  Franc.  Whether  he  publifh'd
any  obfervations  of  his  own,
XVI.  32.

Midwives,  too  great  hurry  of,  in.  many
refpe£ls  hurtful  to  women  in
child-birth,  XLVIIL  29,  30.

Militia,  Dominic,  form.erly  phylician  at
Naples,  commended,  XXX.  7,
XXXVII.  13.

Milk,  found in  the difleclion  of  a  pure-
virgin,  XVI.  24.
By what medicmes lepeli'd, L.

38.

Why


INDEX teferring to


Why  frequently of  little fervice in
medicine,  XXII.  27.
Moehringius, Paul. Gerh Csef. Acad.
N.  C  Soc.  commended,  XLVill.

Moles,  uttnne,  are  divided  into  legitimate
and  fpurious,  XLVIII.  11.
The  matter  of  which  they  are  form'd,
and their  fubdivifions, ibid.  &

How  they are diftinguiih'd  from
each  other,  ibid.  10.  13-
Which  of  them  can,  or  cannot,  be
form'd without any  communi-
cation with  men,  ibid.  11.
What  fhould  be  attended-to  before
the  probability  of  its being  fo
be  admitted, efpecially  in wi-
dows, ibid.  13.
Additions to Ruyfch's obfervations

on  them,  ibid.
Obfervations  of  veficles  found  in  them,
ibid.  14.
In  the  uterus  of  ^  bitch,  ibid.
Obfervation  of  fome  very  remarkable
on  account  of  the  time  of  their
difcharge and their conforma-
tion, ibid.  12.
Signs  of  their  exiflence, XLVIII.

9,  10.
How  they  caufe  abortion,  ibid.  II.
Molindario,  Jo.  Bapt. commended.  III.

30.  XVI.  48.  LV.  15.
Molinelli,  Pet.  formerly  Phyfician  at  Bo-
nona,  commended,  IX.  4.
An  obfervation  of  his,  XXX V.  17.
Molinelli, Pet.  Paul. P. Prof. Bonon.
commended,  IX.  21.  XIII.  28.
XXIV.  29. XXV.  20. XXX.
13. XXXI.  22. XXXIX.  15.
L.  8.  LI.  22.
Molinetti, his opinion  defended, XIV.

38.

Monnier, M.  D. R. So. Acad. Parif.

commended.  LIX.  14.
Monftrous-births. A  calf  with  two  heads,
neclcf, hearts, &c. XIX.  48.
XLVIII.  57.
Human, obfervations on, XII. 7.
XLVIII.  48.  &  feq.
Whether from the force of the
mother's imagination, ibid.  52.
54-
Vv'hether  form'd by two  fcetufles
growing  together,  ibid.  56,  57.


Morandi, Morando, Med.  Final, com-

mfnded,  LXI.  9.
MoianJ, Salvaior, R. Sc. Acad.  Parif.

commended,  XIII,  16. XVIIL

9 II. XXIII.  12. XXVII.  r.

7.  XXXIV.  15. XXXVII.18.
, 23. XXXVIII.  44. XLII.  10.

19.  24.  28.  42. LII.  31. LV,

12.  LXVIII.4.
Muller,  God.  G.  Csf.  Acad.  N.  C.  Soc.

commended,  XXXVII.  45.
Muller, Jo.  Matth. of the  fame  Acad.

commended, XLII. 42. LIX.

5-
Mufcles, The longiflimi dorfi  do not
terminate  in the back, LVII.
i8.
May be preternaturallv enlare'd,
'XVIII.  35. .  ^ '

Divided  tranfverfly  in  a  living  dog,
did  not  contrad;  themfelves  to-
wards their  extremities, XIX.

34-
Muffchenbroeck, Peter, P. Profeff. at
Utrecht,  commended, XXVII.

3-  .

Myopes, Vid.  Short-fighted-perfons,


N


NA  B  O  T  H, Mart. vindicated,
XLVI.  18.
Mames  given  to  parts  byanatomiftslhould

not  be  chang'd,  LXVI.  14,
Nanni,  Pet. formerly  Prof.  Bonon.  His
obfervations, XIX. 38. XLI.

5-

Other  obfervations  of  his  illuftrated,
XXI.  42.

Narcotics,  obfervations  on,  VIII.  5.  7.

Nebelius,  Dan,  formerly  P.  Prof.  Mar-
burg, commended, XLVIII.

Neck,  deeply wounded. The  difficulty
of  flopping  an haemorrhage  i^
if,  from  whence,  LIII.  22.
Negro,  difleflion  of,  V.  17.

Obfervations on the caufe  of  their
colour,  LXVIII.  13.
Nephritfs,  why frequently  following  the
gout,  XL.  3.
How  it  may  caufe  deadly  convuifions.,
ibid,  &  feq.

Nerves.


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moH  worthy  of  Notice.


Nerves.  Fat  has  been  frequently  found
amona;  the  fibres  of  fome,
LXIX.  2.

Sometimes  a  blood-veffel  neither
fmall  nor  ihort,  LXX.  lO.

What  may  be  argu'd  from  thefe,
LXIX.  2.
Gang'ia  of. Obfervations  on their

fubftance,  XII.  14.
Stri£lure  on,  how  occafioning  a  palfy,

XL  18.  XXVL  23.
The  fibres  of  the  olfa£lory,  audi-
tory, and  vifory  nerves,  com-
par'd  together,  LXill.  11.
Nerves,  optic.  Whether  where  they  join
they  are  in;iaiateiy  blended,  fo
as  to  be  both  injur'd  alike  when
one  is  fo,  XIII.  7.

By  whom  they  have  been  feen  en-
tirely feparate,  ibid.

This  obfervation  fuvor'a  by  Ber-
nouilli,  ibid.
Injury  of  them  found  without  any
fenfible  hurt  of  the  eye  or
cerebrum,  LVI.  21.  LXIII.
8.

Of  that  anfwering  to  the  blind
eye,  not  always  plainly  found
above  the  conjundlion  of  thefe
nerves, XIII. 7.  & feq. LIL

30-
What  has  been  obferv'd  In  fuch  a

cafe,  ibid.  &  LXIII.  6.

When  this  happens,  the  wafting
of  the  eye  not  always  to  be  ac-
counted for  from  thence,  XIII.
II.  LVI.  21.

A  wafting  of  the  nerve may  not
always  be  the  occafion  of  biind-
nefs,  but  be  caus'd  by  blindnefs,
ibid.
Nerve,  auditory. The  portio mollis of
it  not  known  to  arife from  the
calamus fcriptorius by either
Zerbus, Varolius, or Piccol-
hominus,  XIV.  14.
Whether  always  found threefold  on
each  fide  when the  hearing  is
very  acute,  doubted,  ibid.
Recurrent. Thefe  were  obferv'd  by

Galen,  notwithftanding  what  Le
Clerc  fays  to  the  contrary,  XIX.

Some  things on the divifign  or
conftridion  of  thefe  and other
V0L.IIL


nerves  in  the  necks  of  living
animals;  ibid.
How,  after  the  divifion  of  thefe
or  other  nerves,  dogs  may  re-
cover their  voices  again,  LII.
26.

Ninth,  or  Fifth  pair.  Which  of  them
is  moft  fubfervient  to  tafting,
XIV.  32.

Brachial.  Why  a  compreffion  of  it
from  an  aneurifm  caufes  torpid-
nefs  or  pain,  XXVL  23.

Crural,  pofterior,  found  divided  into
two,  LXIX.  2.
One of them abraded, L, ir.

55-
Nicholls,  l"ranc.  R.  S.L.  S.  commended,

XXI.  20.
Niphus,  miftaken in his  obfervations  on
the  anatomiral  paflages in  Ari-
fiocle,  XIX.  21.-  LVI.  4,
Nofe,  internal  parts  of. That  the  feptum
is  differently  formed  originally  in
difFerent perfons ought to be
known  by  furgeons,  XIV.  16.
How  this  ill- formation,  when  very
great,  may  be  known,  ibid.
Nofe,  warts, as it  were, and glandular
,  tubercles  found  on,  ibid.  2o-
Polypi in. Their various nature,
ibid.  17,  18.  20.
Which  are.  truly polypous, ibid.

The  vanoiis  feats  of  them,  ioid.
&  20.

Why  they  more  frequently  have
their  feats  in  the  maxillary
finuffes  than  in  any  other,  ibid.

17-
The  method  of  extracting  polypi,

ibid.  19.
Ulcers  in. Vid.  Ozasna.
Cafes  of  remarkable  wounds of  it,

LIL  41.
An  extraordinary  flux  from,  of  Jong

continuance.  XIV.  21.
Epidemic  nafal  haemorrhage  provirg

fatal  within  twenty-four  hou;s,

ibid.  25.
Hsmorrhages  from, when attended

with  a  vitiated  ftate  of  ihe  vi-

fcera,  ibid.  23.
Whether  they are caus'd by  tin

erofion  of  the  finus  of  the  falx,

ibid.
5  A  Some-


INDEX referring to


Sometimes coming from vefTels

which  may  be  comprefs'd  by  the

finger,  ibid.  24.
This method ub'd by Valfalva,

ibid.
Th-J  utility  of  putting  doffils  within

the noftrils conhrnri'd by an

example,  ibid.  24.
What  method may generally be

taken,  when  the veffels in the

portenor  part  of  it  are  ruptur'd,

ibid.

What at other times fuc-
ceeds,  and  why  it  does  nor,
ibid.
Habitual, when ceafing, what

ought  to  be  done,  and  in what

fubjedts principally, XXVII.

13-

Pus,  diicharge  of  from  it,  not  readily
to  be  fuppos'd  to  come  from  the
cavity  of  the  fkull,  XIV.
22.

Novefius.  What  was  thought  by  him  ne-
ceffary  to  be  attended-to  in  re-
peating an  experiment  made  by
Lower,  XIX.  32-

Nuck, miftakes of, XXXVIII. 46.

50-
Forgetfulnefs  of,  ibid.  59.
Nydalopia, of both kinds, how to be

explain'd,  XIII 19.
How  it may be  diftinguifh'd from

fhort-fightednefs,  ibid.
Nymphae  of  women,  their  ufe  according

to  Dionis,  confirm'd, XLVIIl.

44.
None  found on the left  fide,  and

only a  very fmall one  on the

right, in a certain woman,

LVI.  18.


O


.CCIPITAL  Vein.  Of  the  bene-
fits arifing  from  taking  blood
from  it,  11.  10.

Odours. What kind are agreeable to
fome  perfons,  and  what  are  not
fo.  III.  12,  IX.  6.
What  kind  affefled a  perfon  who
could  not  fmell,  IX.  7.

Oeder,  Geo.  Chrift.  commended,  III.  17.
XIX.  32.


Oeheme,  Jo.  Ben.  Godfr.  commendedi.
XIII.  5.

CEfophagus, become cartilaginous, by
whom fuppos'd to have been,
firft  obferv'd,  XX VIII.  15.
Whether  this  may  be  attributed  to

drinking  warm  water,  ibid.
An  inftance  of  this  without  any  im-
pediment to  fwallowing,  ibid.

Oil  of  f\A  eet  almonds,  fometimes  preju-
dicial in  a  peripneumony,  XXL
26.  44.

Oid-rr.en.  One  reafon  affign'd  why  they
generally  become  lean,  XLIX.
19.
Why  they  are  fubjeiS  frequently  to
diforders  of  the  brain,  one  ana-
tomical reafon  given,  HI.  22.
Decrepid,  why  negligent  of  many
figns  of  approaching  chronical
diforders,  XX.  34.

Omentum,  why  generally  vitiated  in  af-
citical perfons, XX  XVI 1 1.

36-
Who  before  Ruyfch  Ihevi^'d  it  to  be

contraftcd  into  a  tumour  in  fome

pregnant  women,  ibid.  46.
How tumors of it, when prefs'd,

fometimes  excite  pain,  XXXIX.

23-
Opthalmy. Vid.  Eye.

The  caufes  of  it  fometimes  wrongly
taken  for  the  effeiSls,  XIII.  21.

23-

Obfervation  of  a  very  bad  one,  oc-
cafion'd  by  the  wing  of  a  fly
adhering  to  the  cornea  fcarcely
attended-to,  ibid.  23.

Remarks  on  fome  medicines  recom-
mended for  the  cure  and  pre-
vention of  it,  ibid.  24.

Obfervation  of  one  cur'd  by  a  fu-
pervening  gout,  LVII.  9.
Opium.  A  large  dofe  of  it  fometimes
has  the  fame  efFeft  as  a  fmall
dofe,  aiiH  fometimes  quite  a  con-
trary efFeft,  VIII.  5.

Should  be  cautioufly given in  fome
epileptic  cafes,  IX.  6,  7.
In a  llownefs and inequality  of

the  pulfe,  ibid.
Againft periodical hyfleric pa-
roxyfms,  XLV.  17.  &  feq.

By  what  means  it  may  increafe  an
orthopnoea,  XV.  7.

Ovaries,


Names  and  passages  moii  wofthy  of  Notice.


Ovaries,  why  more  frequently  afFe£ted
with  tumors  and  other  diforders
in  women  than  in  oiiier  females,
XXXIX.  38.
Their  ufe  in  generation  muft  not
therefore be denied, XL VI.

31-

How  they  may  become  fciirhous,
and  their"  tubes  fometunes  im-
pervious, in  child-bed,  and  even
pregnant  women,  ibid.  28.

A  white  corpufcle  in  the  humor  of
their  veficlcs,  not  a  fign  of  fce-
cundity,  but  an  efFedl  of  difeafe,
ibid.  30-

A  very  rare  inftance  where  they  were

quite  wanting,  ibid.  20.  22.

A  defedl  of  one  only,  LXIX.  16.

Obfervation  of  one  weighing  twenty-
four  pounds,  XXXlX.  39.

Of  the  marks  of  a  dropfy  and  other
tumours  of  the  ovaries  and
neighbouring  parts,  XXXVIII.
59,  64.  &  ieq.  XXXIX.  40.
Vid.  alfo  Encyfted  Dropfy.
Who  have  formerly,  and  fince
then,  obferv'd  them,  XXXlX.
40.
Who  found hairs in them,  ibid.

An  obfervation  of  thefe,  ibid.
Of  what  nature  the  fmall,  as  it  were,
fieJQiy  glands  are  which  fome-
times  hang  from  it  by  peduncles,
XLIII.21.
Ozsena.  Of  the  method  of  curing  them
in  the  maxillary  and  frontal
finuffes,  XIV.  22.


PAAW,  two  very  extraordinary  obfer-
vations  of,  how  to  be  expLin'd,
XXXVII.  48.
Pacchioni's  glands,  as  they  are  now  call'd,

formerly  known,  VIII.  2,  3,
Padua,  and  the  neighbouring  places,  why
the  inhabitants  of  lefs affli£led
with  urinary  calculi  than  thofe
of  other  places,  XLII.  17.
Profeffors  at. Vid.  Fracaftorius,  Ga-

veJTetus,  Viftorius.
Univetfity  at,  fome  things  concerning,
XXIV.  4,


Pagliarini, Thyrf. commended, XXIV.

24.
Pains, fiidden and unexpe£led difap-

pearatice  of,  dangerous,  XXXV.

17- -
Paitonij  Jo.  Kapt. Bonon.  Inft.  Sc.  Aca-
dem. S. commended, XLVI.

3'-
Palate,  di\'ifion  of. How  infants  may  be

fav'd  in  this  cafe,  XLVIII.  60.
Pallas, Aug. Frid. commended, XLII.

35-
Palfin,  commended,  XIV.  17.  22. LVL
27.
Whether  a  prediftion  of  his  be  cer-
tain, XLVI.  8.
Palfy, of the  fuperior extremities, how

moie  eafdy cur'd than one  of  »,
the  inferior,  XI.  10.
How this difeafe and a convulfion
may  be  in  the  fame  limb  at  one
time,  X.  15.
Arifing  from  convulfions,  various  ex-
planations of,  XI.  18.  20.
Explanation of it from any caufe
exifting  in the  cellular  webs  of
the  nerves,  fubjedi:  to  many  dif-
ficulties, ibid.  20.
Limbs aifedled-with, what kind of
external remedies, and'  when,
proper,  ibid.  2r.  23.
Panarolus,  error  of,  XXXI.  16.
Pancreas, vitiated ftate of, how occa-
fioning, chronic  or  continual  vo-
mitings, .XXX.  8.  &  feq.
Thefe  not  conftant,  ibid.  9.
Tumors  of  it, why  rarely  felt by
the  hand,  aud  how  they  are  to
be  known,  ibid,  n,
Papen, Chrift. Hen. Pbyfician  at  Got-
tingen, commended, XLIII.
14.
Paracentefis. How this operation was
pointed-out  by  nature  itfelf  for
the  cure  of  an  afcites, XXXVIII.
32.  &  feq.
Whence  it  was  advis'd  that  the  wa-
ters in  this  operation  fhould  be
let  out  by  degrees,  ibid.  33.
Why  phyficians  omitted advifmg  it

at  the  navel,  ibid.
Seldom  fucceeds,  ibid.  32.  45.
Condemn'd  by  Erififtratus,  defended
by  Celfus ;  and  the  reafons  why,
ibid,  31.
5  A  2  What


INDEX referrinp; to


What  ought  to  be  avoided  by
thofe  who  are  of  Celfus's  opi-
nion, ibid.
What  additions  have  been  made  to
it  by  the  moderns,  ibid.  33.
Whether  after,  and  on  account  of,
this  operation,  the  in'.eftines  and
peritonaeum  are  affedled  with  in-
flammation and gangrene, ibid.

3'-
Parey,  milhiken,  VIII.  26.  XXVII.  24.
What difficulties occur in a cele-
brated obfervation  of  his,  XXIV.

Paraphrenitis.  Obfervation  on  it,  VII.
14.  LIII.  6.

Paraplegia,  hiftory  of,  attended  with  tin-
common circumftances, LIII.

23-
Parot  d  glands,  induration  of, how  hap-
pily fometimes  cur'd,  L.  27.
Parotis,  tumor  fo  call'd,  whence  it  arifes,
ibid.
Sometimes  happens  in  a  perfon  who
is  on  the  recovery,  ibid.
PaiTer', Dominic, formerly an eminent
Phyfician  at  Peflaro,  commended,
XXII.  7.
Pafla,  Andreas,  a  Phyfician  at  Bergamo,
commended,  IV.  22. VIII.  10.
XVII.  26.  29.  XVIlI.g. XXI.
20.  XXIII.  18.  XXIV.  22.  26.
&  fcq. XXXI. 18. XLI.  2.
XLVIII.  29.  LXIV.  g.
Patinus,  Ch.  left  his  Opufcula  corredled
and enlarg'd to two volumes,
not  yet  publifh'd,  LVIII.  19.
What  Papadopolus  omitted  in thofe
Opufcula,  fliewn,  ibid.
Patuna,  Nicol.  formerly  Surgeon  at  Ve-
nice, commended,  XLVIII. 42.  I
Paulucci, Aloyfio, Marquis  and Com-
mander-in-chief of the Ponti-
fical forces,  his  difeafe  and  dif-
fediion,  XVIL  26,  27.
Peafe,  difcharg'd by ftool five months
after  eating  them,  in  what  part
of  the  belly  they  could  be  lodg'd,
XXXL  27.
Pechlinus,  miftaken,  XII.  8.
Pecquet. A certain experiment of his
relative  to  the  circulation  of  the
blood  does not  anfwer  without
a  caution  which  he  has  omitted
to  mention,  XIX,  30.


Pedratti, Ignat. Phyfician at  Cremona,
commended, XXI.  43. LIII.

3'-

His  obfervations,  XXI.  43.  Sc  feq.
LIII.  32.
Penis.  Whether  the  matter  found  under
the  praepuce  came  from  the  gra-
nules of  the  corona  of  the  elans,
XLIV.  2.  ^

That  it  is not  from the  urethra,
,  prov'd by a  fingle  obfervation,
XLVI.  20.

In  what  manner  it  may  be  diftended,
if  there  be  a  large  quantity  of
urine,  or  a  large  ftone  in  the
bladder,  ibid.  10.
Various  caufes  of  this  diftenfion
found  in  dead  bodies,  XIX.
20.
When  it  arifes  from  a  conftridlion
of  the  carotids  in  Hving  ani-
mals, ibitl.

Retraction  of  ir,  almoft  incredible  in
a  ftiftocative  paroxyfm,  XVIL
26.

Glans  of  it,  in  a  certain  perfon
pendulous, caufe of, XLVI.

^  9-

Flaccid, though the refl of the
penis was diftended, ibid. &
10.
Amputation  of  it,  L.  50.
Pericardium. Who  fuppos'd  it  fometimes
to  be  wanting,  XXXIII.  17.
Whence  they  were  deceiv'd who
fo  thought,  ibid.
Its  ftruflure,  according  to  Malpighi,

XXILio.  ^

Whether  there  be  any  interftice  be-
tv/een that and the heart in
living  bodies,  LXVI.  10.
Caufes  of  its  adhaefion to  the  heart,
XXIII.  17.
Who  have  obferv'd  this,  with  the
fymptoms attending it, ibid.
18.
Fluid  in  it,  by  whom  firft  mention'd,
XVI.  42.
This  is  certainly  fometimes  of  it-

felf  naturally  red,  XLIV.  3.
Its nature difficultly determin'd,
XVI.  44.
Dropfy  of  it. Whether  Avenzoar  or
Galen  firft  mention'd  this,  ibid.
20.

Is


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Is  of  itfelf  a  very  rare  difeafe;  but
frequently join'd with others,
ibid.  &  XX.  34.
Some obfcrvations of it alone,

XVI.  21,  22.  24.  43.
From  whence  arifes the  difficulty
of determining its  figns, ibid.
20.

An  examination  of  thefe,  ibid.

22. & feq. 3g. & feq.

XVII.  28. XXXVII.  II.

14.  XLV.  10.

How  far  it  may  caufe  a  fmall  and

weak  pulfe,  XXIV.  14,  15.
How  far  a  cough,  XVI.  45.
Whether  it  always  comes  on gra-
dually, ibid.  41,  42.
The  caufes  of  it,  ibid.  44.  XXV.

15.  &  feq.
Various  kinds of  fluid found in
it,  XVI.  44.
Tumors  of  it,  innate. Why  found
attended with different figns,
XXIII.  23.
Blood  eff'us'd  within it. Who  for-
merly obferv'd  this,  XXVI.  26.
28.  XXVII.  I.
From  what  parts  this  efFufion  may

be  made,  XXVI.  27.
From  what  eafily ;  and how  to  be
known  from  which it  is, ibid.
26,  27.
Why  an  hsemorrhage  there,  foiall
in  refpefl:  to  thofe  in  other  parts,
fliould  kill  fo  much  fooner  than
thefe,  ibid.  18.  LXIX.  5.
Perinseum,  fedlion  of,  in  a  fuppreffion  of
urine,  XLII.  36.
In  perfons  affli^ed  with  the  ftone,
— to  promote  a  more  eafy  efflux
of  the  urine,  whether  invented
by  Zechius,  ibid.
Peripneumony,  whether  feated  oftener  on
the  right  fide  than  on  the  left,
XX.  65.
Fat  perfons  lefs  liable  to  a  true  one

than  lean  are,  ibid.  10.
Why  more  dangerous  in  pregnanJ-

women,  ibid.
Elood  often  found  in  it  concreting,
or  with polypous concretions,
but  not  always,  ibid.  14.  XXI.

34,  35-
The  appearance  of  the  lungs  in  it.
Vid.  Lungs^  inflam'd.


Often  accompanied with  dropfies  of
the thorax and pericardium,
and  why,  XX.  34..  XLV.  16.
And  a  delirium,  XXt.  7.

Sometimes  feems  to  exift  without  any
pain,  XX.  4.  30.  and  why,
XXI.  7,  8.  &  feq.
At  other  times  attended  with  a
very  pungent  pain,  with  tha
caufes  of  it,  XX.  10.  38.  40.
42. 44. 46. 48. 50. 52. 54.

5.7-  .
Fever  in  it,  fometimes  not  very  acute,
ibid. 4. 26, 27. XXII. 10,
II.
Perfons  afflifted with it frequently
lie-down  much  eafier  on  the  af-
fefted than  on  the found fide,
ibid.  42,
Diarrhaea  in  it,  when  dangerous or

fafe,  ibid.  10.
Large  blood-lettings in  it,  what  to

be  fear'd  from,  ibid.  23
Fata!,  efpecially  amongft  the  monks,

hiftory  of, XXI.  26.  &  feq.
Frequently  returning, what  injuries
it  may  occafion  to  the  lungs  and
heart,  and  how,  XXI.  5.  34^
Peripneumonies, fpurious, appearing as
flight catarrhal diforders, ne-
verthelefs very dangerous, do
not  fhew  their infidious nature
in  the  fame  manner  in  all  per-
fons,- ibid.  10.  &  feq.
Cafes  of  thefe;  with  the  importance
of  enquiring  into  their  particular
figns,  ibid.
Peritoneum. Vid.  Hernia.

External  coat  of, who are faid to
have  denied  when  they  did  not,
XLIII.  8.
Whether  it is a continu'd  tube,
and  forms  the  tunica  vaginalis,
ibid.
Who formerly  taught that it  is
not  perforated  by  the  fpermattc
vefl^els,  ibid.
Dropfy  of it. By  whom this was
formerly obferv'd, XXXVIII.
46.  &  feq.
By whom it was afterwards il-
luftrated,  and  had  a  name  given
it,  ibid.  49.  Sc  feq.
By  whom  it  was  acknowledg'd  to
be  in  a  living  body,  ibid.

By


INDEX referring to


By  whom  in  the  laft  century  it
was  obfeiv'J  to  be,  not  between
the  coats  of  the  peritoneum,
but  between  this  and  the  abdo-
minal mufcies,  ibid.

What  feem  to  be  the  general  caufes
of  this  difeafe,  ibid.  53.  &
feq.

Why  more  peculiar  to  women,
ibid.  &;  54.

Ocher  caufes  added  to  the  above,
ibid.  &  55.

Cafe  of  it  in  a  man,  ibid.  59.

The  water  occaiiouing  it,  when
fcetid  and  corrofive,  is  not  al-
ways owing;  to  its  ftagnation,
nor  can  arife  from  that  only,
>  ibid.  56.

How  it  fhould  be  collefted  in  a
large  quantity,  and  fometimes
like  a jelly or glue, ibid.,  &i

57- ■  ,  , . ,

Whether, when the abdominal

mufcies fcem wafti'd away in
this  difeafe,  they  really are fo,
ibid.
Peritonaeum, dropfy of, figns of,
XXXVIII.  58,  59.
Sufncient  to  diltinguilh  this,  unlefs
it  be  too tar  advanc'd,  fiom  an
-afcites,  ibid.
But  not  fufficient  to  diftinguifti  it
from the  dropfy  of  fome  other
parts,  ibid.  59.  60.
Whether  the  navel  never  protuberate

in  this  dropfy,  ibid.  59.
This  difeafe  oftentimes  lalts  for  many

years,  ibid,  56.  58.
Who  firfl:  recommended  the  paracen-
tefis  in this  difeafe, and why
they  did  it,  ibid.  61.
What  exceptions  have  fince  been

made  to  this,  ibid.
What may now be made, ibid.
62.
Petechjae,  obferv'd  both in a  coagulated
and  difTolv'd ftate  of  the  blood,
ibid.  22.
Petit,  Franc.  R.  Sc.  Acad.  Parif.  S. His
opinion  concerning  the  water  of
the  chryftalline  humor  refuted,
XIII.  14.
Petit,  Jo.  Ludov.  of  the  fame  Acad ,  com-
mended, XVI.  13. XVII.  29.
XXXI'V.  26.  XLVIII.  60.


Pctche,  Jo.  Zachar.  commended, XXII.

26. XXX.  8. XXXIV. 15.

XLIII.57.
Petz,  Will.  Chrift.  M.  D. Marclcfchein-

feld,  commended,  LI.  48.
Peyer, Jo. Conr. trifling miftakes of,

XXIX.  4.
Peyer, Jo.  Jac. commended, XXVIII.

4-
Philctheus,  fufpicions  concerning  a  certain

paflage  of  his,  in  which  Galea

is  quoted,  XXV.  14.
Phrenzy, and other  kinds of delirium,

attended with fever, arife in

different  perfons from  different

caufes,  VII.  8.
And  in  many  cafes  from  too  great

a  quantity  of  blood  in  the  vefTels

of  the  meninges,  or  water  effus'd

within  them,  ibid.  8.
■Foretold in a certain perfon from

his fuppos'd hearing  an organ

playing,  ibid.  16.
Phthifis. Vid.  Confumption.
Phyfical  phfEnomena,  fome  which  feem  to

be  of no ufe  in  medicine,  are

fometimes,  on  the  contrary,  found

very  ufeful,  XIII.  22.
Phyfiology,  neceflary  to  difcover  fome  very

hidden  difeafes,  XVIII.  12.
Piccolhominus, Archang. his afTertion

concerning deep pains in the

head,  not  always  true,  I.  7.
Miftaken  alfo  concerning the  num-
ber of  the  ribs,  V.  10.
Piella, Paul, formerly a Phyfician and

Surgeon  at  Bonona,  commended,

XXII.  27.  LIIL  14.
Pigs, Guinea, have almofl: the whole

tongue  fix'd  at the  bafis  of  the

mouth,  XIX.  44.
And the epiglottis very fliortj

ibid.
Pineal  Gland. Vid.  Cerebrum.
Pifo, Homob. formerly  Prof,  at  Padua,

commended,  XIX.  30. XXIV.

15-  .

Pifo,  Ch.  his  dodlrine  defended  in  part,
VI.  15.

Pitfchel,  Fred.  Lebegott.  commended,
XII.  18.

Pituitary  Sphenoidal  SinufTes,  found  di-
vided, not  into  right  and  left,
but  into  fuperior  and  inferior,
LXIII,  13.

Thefe


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Thefe and  the maxillary wanting,
others fupplying their places,
XXI.  29.
Thefe  and  the  frontal  wanting,  LII,

12.  30.  LXIII.  13.
Worms  in  them,  and  the  method  of
cure,  I.  8,  9.
Placenta,  various  difeafes  of,  XLVIII.  18.
&  feq.
Abortion,  or  danger  of  abortion,
from  them,  ibid.  17.
Obfervation  of  an hydatid  in  it  ex-
cluded with  the  foetus,  ibid.  13.
Whether it be frequently chang'd
into  hydatids  before  the  exclufion
of  the  foetus,  ibid.
Of.  its change  into  veficles. Vid.

Mole.
May  be  very  large  when the  foetus
is  imperceptible,  XLVIII.  26.
What  hurts  may arife  from  inat-
tention to  this,  ibid.
Why  it  fometimes  adheres  very  clofely

to  the  uterus,  ibid.  29.
Whether its extradion fhould be
perform'd  by  art,  or  left  to  na-
ture, has  been  long  and  fharpiy
.^  difputed before thefe times,

ibid.
Placentinus, Jac. an eminent Prof, at
Padua,  commended, LXIV.  5,
6.
Plague.,  Whether  (he  bodies  of  thofe  who
die  of  it  can be  fafely  differed,
XLIX.  32.
Plancus,  Jan.  Bonon.  Inft.  Sc.  Acad.  Soc.
commended, II 16. VIII.  31.
XIX. 44. XXIIL 9. 18.
XXIV.  17.  XXVI. 39.  XXVII.
28.  30. XXIX.  16. XXXVI.
16. XLVill.  61. L.  37. LII.
26.
His  obfervations,  II.  16.  XXVII.  28:
30.  XLVIII.  62.
Platerus, in feme inftances condemn'd,

XIII.  19.
Plainer,  Jo.  Zachar.  formerly  Prof.  Lipf.
commended,  XII.  1 1.  XXXIV.

IS-

Plempius, fome paflages  from, not  ap-

prov'd,  XIII.  20.
Pleura. Some  parts  of  it  offified,  XV.  18.
XXI.  19,  20.
Found inflam'd without any pre-
ceding pain,  or  at  leaft  without


a  pungent  pain,  XVI.  21.  XX.
51, 52. & feq. XLV. 16,
LXIV.  3.
Inflammation, or  corruption, of it
is  not  frequently  found  amongfl
us,  even though the lungs  are
inflam'd, XX. 58. XXI.  39,
40.
When  found with  it,  a  very  bad
inflammation  is  generally  found
at  the  fame  time, XX.  57,  58.
XXI.  28,  Iz  feq.
When found without it, what
caufes  the particular  inflamma-
tory appearance,  XX.  58,  59.  ti
feq.  XXL  31.
If  it  be  inflam'd,  the  caufe  of  the
death  of  a  perfon  is  not  to  be
deduc'd  from  thence  only,  XX.
57,  58.  XXL  28.  &  feq.  41.
Blacknefs  of  it, whether  frequently
found  by  the  ancient  phyficians ;
and  their  manner  of  accounting  -
for  it,  XXL  31.
Pleurify. Some figns of it frequently
found  in  a  peripneumony  when
a  pleurify  is  abfent,  XX.  g.  33.
35.  39.  41.  43.  47.  49.  62.  &c
feq.  XXL  16.  &  feq.
The  caufes  enquir'd-into,  and the"
reafon  affign'd  why  thev  do  not  •
always. caufe  a pleurify, XXL
10, 38. 40. 42. 44. 48. 50.-
52.  -
Who  of  the  ancient phyficians  fup-
pos'd  this  difeafe feated  in the
lungs,  XXI.  37.
Who  even  formerly  confirm'd  this
opinion by  difledion,  and  who
did  not,  ibid.  &  38.
Whether  this  controverfy  be  of  no  ■
moment  in  the  pradice  of  me-
dicine, examin'd,  ibid.  41.
Truepleurifies  have  no  ligns  which  are
not  fometimes  found  in  the  fpu-  •
rious,  XXL  46.
The bloody  expeclora;ion of pleu-
ritic perfons,  how they may  be
explain'd, and how they are
fometimes  explain'd,  ibid.  42.
Obfervation  of  one  fpeedily  cur'd  by
the  excretion  of  foetid grumous
blood  by  the  mouth,  ibid.  43.
And  of  another  by  throwing-up  a
worm,  ibid.

Who-


INDEX,  relating to


Who firft, and  fince  then, have
publifh'd  obfervations  of  the  like
kind  as  the  laft,  ibid.
How even true pleurifies, and fo
pleuropneumonieSjtnay  be  caus'd
by  worms, ibid.
A  delcription of this verminous
pleiuopneumonic conftitution,
ibid.  43.  &  feq.
When,  and  in  >^hat  perfons  efpe-
cially, care fhould be taken,
that  pleurifies of  this kind,  as
they  are  fpurious,  fhould  not  be
taken  for  the  true,  ibid.  46.
Whether  this  difeafe  chiefly attend
the  riciht  fide, and feldom  the
left,  XX.  65.
This  difeafe  was  formerly  very rare
amongft the Engiifti, though
now  very  frequent  with them,
XXI.  21.
Pliny. A p.-.flage  from him relating  to
Hippocrates, how to be read,
XXVI.  25.
Another  paffage of his concerning
fcorpions,  whether  corrupted  or
not,  LIX.  23.
Another  of  his  concerning  the  little-
worm  found under  the tongue
of  dogs,  illuftrated  by  anatomy,
VIII.  33,  34.
Pliny,  the  younger. A  place from  him
concerning  an incurable  clavus
thoroughly  examin'd,  L.  61.
Plutarch,  why  frequently  miftaken  in  what
he  wrote  of  the  Roman  affairs,
LIX.  39.
Pohlius, Jo.  Chrifl. Prof. Lipf. com-
mended, XXXVIII.  8. XLII.
37.  XLIII.  38.
Poifons. The  pofTibility of their  gene-
ration ia  living  bodies  confirm'd
by  obfervation,  LIX.  18.
The  difficulty  of  determining  whe-
ther thel'e  are inbred  or  admi-
nifler'd  in fome  cafes, fliewn,
ibid.  19.  &  feq.
In  what  cafes  this  difficulty  is  lef-
fen'd,  ibid.  21.
Some kinds of them are better
difcours'd of by phyficians
than  publifh'd by them, ibid.

22.

The  fame kinds  taken  of  an equal
weight,  why  they  have  not  al-


ways the  fame  figns  and  efFefls,

ibid,  4.
This  confirm'd by  various  cafes,

efpecially  where  arfenic  has  been

taken,  ibid.  &  feq.
The  figns  confequent  to  taking  the

fame fort of poifon in four

cafes  related,  with  the  means  by

which  the  patients were  cur'd,

LIX.  6.  &  feq.
The  effefts  of  drinking  the  juice  of

rhododaphne,  ibid.  12.
Remarks on them, ibid. 13,

14.'
What happen'd after taking black

ellebore,  ibid.  15.
The  elFeds  of  this,  and thofe  of

white  ellebore, compar'd, ibid.

16.
EfFeiSfs  of  them,  when  communicated

by  biting  or  flinging. Vid.  Afp,

Hydrophobia, Mad-dog, Scor-
pion, Viper.
Polypi  of  the  nofe. Vid.  Nofe.

Of  other  kinds. Vid.  Afpera  Arteria,

Inteflines,  Uterus.
Polypi in the heart and blood-vefTels,

whether  generally  form'd  before

death. IV. 22. XVII. 29.

XVIII.  9. XXIV.  27.  &  feq.

LII.  34.  LXIV.  9.
The  too  great  readinefs  to  affirm  this

detrimental both in medicine

and  the  adminiftration  of  juflicc,

XXIV.  27.
Which ought neverthelefs to be

excepted,  and  which  ought  not,

XVII.  29,  30.
Why all obfervations of thefe in^

dead  bodies  fhould  be  committed

to  writing,  XXIV.  31.
By  which of  the  ancients  they  have

been  noted,  IV.  23.  XXIV.  22.

&  feq.
Who  firft  delineated  them,  XXIV.

24.
Who  firfl  publifh'd their  peculiar

traft,  ibid.
By  whom  they  were  rightly  con-

fider'd as falfe  worms, and  by

whomerroneoufly  as  true  worms,

ibid.  25.
Whether  they  always,  or  at  leaff  for

the  mofl part, happen in  apo-

ple£lic  cafes,  IV.  23.

Whether


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Whether  they  are  always  greateft  in  the
right  cavities  of  the  heart,  XVI.
17.  XX.  26.
Or  for  the  moft  part  fo,  XXIV.

The caufes of this difference,

ibid.

Effe<Ets  fuppos'd to  arife  from  them

may  be  otherwife  explain'd,  ibid.

7. 29.

Of  what  matter they are  form'd,

ibid.  26.
When  they  may  be form'd hollow

and  tubulous,  ibid.  30.
Animadverfions concerning their
diagnofis,  ibid.  28,  29.
Polypous  matter  obftrudting  almoft  all  the
veins,  a  rare  indance  of,  LXIV.

9-

Pontedera,  Julius,  formerly  Prof,  at  Pa-
dua, commended,  VI.  14.

Ponticelli,  Sylvefter,  Count,  Counfellor,
and  Firft-phyfician  at  the  court
of  Parma,  commended,  LXVII.

4-
Portarum  Vena. Signs  of  the  motion  of

the  blood  m  it  being  impeded,

XXXIX.  23.
Poft-boys  are  moftly  (ubje£t  to  aneurifms,

and  why,  XVII.  18.
Poterius, two obfervations of in dead

bodies, very obfcure, XXVI.

28.
Pregnancy. An  examination  of  the  prin-
cipal figns  of  it, XLVJII.  3,

4-
Few  obfervations  of  it  are  publifli'd

by  Phyficians,  and why, ibid.

3.  &  feq.

An  obfervation  of it  goingon fuc-

cefsfully,  though  attended  with

a  great  uterine  haemorrhage, ibid.

^ 9-

The  fmoothnefs  of  the  abdomen  no

fign  that  there  has  not  been  one,

XXIII.  4.

Preufius,  Godofr.  Benjam. Casf.  N.  C.

Acad.  S.  commended,  XLVIII.

55-

Preuflius,  Maximilian,  of  the  fame  Acad,
commended,  I.  7.  L.  53.

Procopius.  His  narration  of  a  wonder-
ful wound,  explain'd  by  ana-
tomy, LII.  41.

Proftate  Gland,  increas'd  in  its  fize  fo
Vol.  III.


as  to occafion a  fu'ppreflion  of
urine,  by  whom  obferv'd,  XLI.

Who  found  this  fupprefllon  only
from  cxcrefcences  from  it,  ibid.
&  feq.

From  what  part  of  it  thefe  arife,
and  at  what  time  of  life,  ibid.
&XLII.  ir.

Whether  thefe  are  to  be  look'd-
upon  as  rare  and  morbid  ap-
pearances, or  as  natural  and
common  to  all  bodies,  LXVI.  5.
&  feq.  and  the  whole  of  letter
LXX.

They  do  not  always  caufe  a  fup-
preflion  of  urine,  but  a  ftillici-
di«m,  &c.  LXVI.  u.  &  feq.

Whether  this  efFecSt  has  been  here-
tofore quite  unknown,  ibid.  12.
Calculi  found in  them,  obfervations
of,  XLII.  13.  17.

The  bad  effeds  thereof,  ibid.  37.

The  proper  figns  of  them  are  not
yet  known,  ibid.

Of  what  matter  they  are  form'd,
ibid.
Small  grains,  as  it  w^ere,  of  tobacco
■often  found  in  this  gland,  or
adjoining  to  it,  XLIV.  20.  &
feq.
Pudendum,  found  opening  in  a  certain
woman  above  the  navel,  LXVII.

^ 7-

Of the  conception and delivery  of
this  woman,  ibid.
Pujati,  Jof.  Ant.  once  an eminent  Prof,
at Padua, commended, XXL
43.  XXXr.20.  XLL12.  XLIL
12.  LV.  16.  LVI.35.  LVII.8.
LXV.  2.
Pulfation,  great,  may  be  perceiv'd  where
there  is  no  aneurifm,  and  vvbv,
XXXIX.  19,  20.
An  aneurifm without a pulfation,
XVIII.  20.  XLV.  26.
Pulfe. The  ancients  were  too  diffufe  in
the differences they made of
pulfes, whilft the moderns  are
too fparing in that refpeft,
XXIV.  32.
Rarity  and  inequality  of  it  remaining
after  epileptic  fits,  IX.  7.
Leflen'd  and  cur'd  by  the  cautious
ufe  of  opium,  ibid.
5  B  Other


INDEX referring to


. Other inftances  of the remarkable
rarity  of it, ibid. XXIV,  33.
LXIV.  5.
Onlyobferv'd  in  one  wrift,  XXIV.

33-

How  to  be  accounted  for,  ibid.

Rarity  and  celerity  of  it,  contrary
to  what  fome  have  faid,  may
be  evidently  perceiv'd  together
fometimes in fick perfons,

XXIV.  32.

Frequency  of  it,  which  fliould  not
be  attended  to  after  ftubborn
fevers,  the  probable  caufe  of,
ibid.  33.

inequality  of  it,  from  what  caufe
fometimes  arifmg,  XXXV.  19.

inequality  and  intermiffions  of  it,
whether  they  are  figns  of  po-
lypi, XXIV.  28,  29.  32.

Whether  it  always  intermits  when
there are ulcers in the  heart,

XXV.  19.  &  feq.

The  various  caufes  of  its  intermiffion
confider'd,  XXIV.  19.  &  feq.
When  it  may  be  of  fervice  not  to
regard  it,  ibid.  20.

Hardnefs  of  it  in  old-perfons,  when
to  be  attended  to,  ibid.  33.
.  Debility  and  fmallnefs  of  it,  the  va-
rious caules  of,  well-weigh'd,
ibid.  io.  12.  14,  15.  19.  XXXI.
2.

Vehemence  and  vibration  of  it,  both
with  and  without  an  aneurifm,
confider'd as to their caufes,

XXIV.  as-.

A  peculiar  fault  in  it  does  not  always
follow  from  a  dilatation  of  the
large  veflels,  LXiV.  8.
The  various  caufes  of  a  privation  of
it,  confider'd,  XXIV.  3,  4.  7.
&  feq.  &c  12.
What  is wonderful in fome  af-

phuxies,  ibid.  g.

What  ought to  be  done  in  fome,

ibid.  8.

Pus,  fometimes  difficultly  known  in  fome

expectorations, on account of

» the  different  opinions  of  authors

concerning  it,  XXII.  28,  29.
In  whom  it  is  fometimes  forni'd  with-
'  out  the  ul'ual  figns  of  it,  LV.  16.
Is  not  form'd  from  extravafated  blood,
V.  3-


Sometimes  flowing  from  the  nolc.
Vid.  Nofe.

Colouring  a  probe  not  always  a  mor-
tal fign,  LV.  18.

This,  or  a  puriform  matter,  the  ori-
gin of  which  does  not  appear,
whence  it  may  arife,  I.  13, V.

5-  13-
Pylorus. Vid.  Stomach.


Q'


a

^UELMALTZIUS,  Sam.  Theod..
formerly P. Prof. Lipf. com-
mended, XIV. 16. LIV.  43.
LXVII.  15.
Quefnay,  Fr. R.  Sc.  Acad.  Par.  S.  com-
mended, LXVIII.  2.
Quickfilver. Vid.  Venereal  Difeafe,
Quinfy. Remarks  on  it,  XIV,  39.

Its  feat,  nature,  and  efFedls,  have  not-
been  fufficiently  enquir'd  into  by-
difTeaions,  ibid.  &  LXIII.  16.
Examples  of  difleftions,  XLIV,  3.
LXIII.  16.  &  feq.
Obfervation  of  a  kind  of  paralytic
palfy,  LXIII.  19.


R


AMMAZZINI,  Bernardin.  for-
merly an  eminent  Prof,  at  Pa-
dua, commended.  III.  8.

An  account  of  the  difeafes  under
which  he  labour'd,  and  the  caufe
of  his  death,  ibid.

Obfervations  of  his  not  yet  pub-
lifh'd,  VIII.  29.  IX.  8.  XVIIL
16.  &  feq. XXII.  II. XLL.


Ravenous-people. Vid.  Hunger.
Rayman,  Jo.  Adam. Casf.  Acad.  N.  C,

Soc.  commended,  XIV.  36.
Reaumer,  Renat. formerly  R.  Sc.  Acad,

Parif. commended, IV. 32.

xiv.  7.  XXXII.  4.

LIX.  26.  42.
Re(3um. Vid.  Intefline.
Reimann,  Jo.  Adam. Csef.  N

commended,  XVI.  11

12.  XXXVII.  18.
Reimar, J. Alb. Henr. commended,

LXVIII.  4.  LXIX.  12.  &  feq.
■  Refpinger,


XLII.  6.


C.  Acad,
XXXIIL


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Refpinger,  Jo.  Henr, Phyfician  at  Bafil,
commended, XXXVIII. 50.

59-
Refplration. The  caufes  which  impede  k
divided  according  to  their  various
feats  and the  manner  in  wliich
they  a£l,  XV.  3.  17.  &  feq.
Why  phyficians frequently fuppofe
thefe  caufes  to  be  in  the  thorax,
when  they  are  in  the  belly,  ibid.
II.
Difficulty  of  it,  from  what  caufe  we
may fuppofe to arife  in fome
women,  XLV.  24.
Sometimes  caus'd  by  a  palfy;  with

the  figns  thereof,  XV.  7.
From  an  enlarg'd  gland  behind  the
afpera  arteria,  ibid.  15,  16,
A too great dilatation of the
heart  ;  and  how  this  occafions
it, XVII. I. XVm. 15.
XXIV.  15.
Shortnefs  of it^ when  but a very
fmall  quantity  of  blood  can  pafs
through  the  lungs, XVII.  12,

Stoppage  of  it, how foon proving

fatal,  though  it  does  not  entirely

prevent the paffage of blood

through  the  lungs,  XIX.  38.

Reverhorft,  miftakes  of,  XXXVII.  i6.  &

feq.  25.  &  feq.
Reufner,  Chri(t.  Gottl.  Caef.  Acad.N.C.
Soc.  commended,  XLII.  46.
XLVIII.  42.
Rheumatifm.  Whether  this  difeafe  began
to  be  diflinguifh'd  from  the  gout
about  the  middle  of  the  laft  cen-
tury, LVII.  16.

Very  few  obfervations  on  this  difeafe,
where  difledlions  were  made,  are
to  be  found,  ibid.

Under  the  appearance  of  this  difeafe
how  much  mifchief  may  fome-
times  lie  hid,  ibid.  20,  21.
Rhododaphne.  Vid.  Poifons.
Ribs.  Twenty- fix  found  in  one  woman,
and  but  twenty-three  in  another,
V.6.  LVI.  17.

Other  obfervations  on  their  number,
V.  10.

Why  they  feem,  as  it  were,  fallinp--
down,  XXVI.  25.  XLV.  zs-''

Depreffions  of  them,  though  confi-
derable, bow fometimes they


may not be perceiv'd, XLV.

23,  24.

Richertzius, Geo. Fnd. commended,

LXV.  9. LXVII.  2-
Rickets. 0( the  caufes  of this  difeafe.

Vid.  Spine,  &  LVIil.  7.
Whether  all ricketty perfons are  of

fhort  ftature  or  dwarfs,  ibid.
Rideux,  N. R.  Sc.  Acad. Monfp.  Soc.

commended,  XLVIII.  13.
Rigors,  periodical,  when  follow'd by  no

heat,  how  cur'd.  XLiX.  29.
Rinaldi, Senenf. a Venetian Phyfician,

commended,  XXII.  22.
Riolan, mifiaken, IK. 22. VIII. 13.

XXI.  31.  XXIV.  23.  xxvn.

34.  XL.  25.  XLII.  32. XLV.

24.  L.  28.

Inftance  of  his  forgetfulnefs  or  dif-

fimulation,  XXVII.  32.
Some  exceptions to  what  he wrote
on  the  prolapfus  of  the  fpleen,
XXXIV.  44.

Rifus  Sardonius,  the  obfervation  of  from
a  wound  of  the  diaphragm  very
ancient,  LIII.  6.

Ritter,  Albert.  Caef.  N.  C.  Acad.  S.  com-
mended, XXII.  7.

Riverius,  whether  miftaken  in  believing
that  the  pleura  is  corrupted  in
a  pleurify  ;  and  whence  this
miftake  might  happen,  XX-  56.
59.  &  feq.

Roederer,  Jo.  Geo.  R.  Sc.  Soc.  Gotting.
commended,  XLVIII. 25.  LXV.
20.  LXIX.  15.

Rolfinck,  whether  miftaken  in  fome  in-
ftances,  and  in  others  not  fo,
xxvn.  I.  XXXVIII.  33.

Roloff,  N.  R.  Sc.  Acad.  Berol.  Soc.  com-
mended, LXIV.  14.

Roncall,  Parolin.  Franc.  Count,  and
Inftit.  Sc.  Acad.  Bonon.  S.  com-
mended, XXIV.  27.  XXXVII.

38-

Rofa,  Geo.  Lud.  a  very  celebrated  Phy-
fician, commended,  XXXV.
22.

Rofen,  Nicol.  Archiat.  &  Prof.  UpfaJ.
commended,  I.  9.  XIII.  5.  LII.

37-
Roftius, Jo.  C. Caef.  N.  C. Aclid. S.

commended, XXXVI. 24.

XLIIF.  13,  14.
Rotula. Vid.  Knee.
5  B  2  Rubeus,


IN D E X referring to


Rubeus,  Jerom.  miftaken,  XIX.  22.
Ruminating-men, where  the firft  obfer-
vations  and  dilTe<Sions  of  are  to
be  found,  XXIX.  4.
Miftakes  concerning thefe, ibid.  &
LXV.  2.
Rutheiford, John, Med.  Profefl". com-
mended, LXI.  9.
Ruyfch, Additions  to  his  obfervations  on
moles,  XLVIII.  13.
A paflaoe in his works explain'd,

XXXIV.  17.
His  opinion  in  one  inftance  not  agree-
able  to obfervations, XLVIII.
39.
Interpretation  and  defence  of  him  in
feme places, XII. 11. LVI.
8.
Miftakes  of  his,  XVII.  29. XXIII.
9.  XLII.6.  XLVI.25.  XLVII.
32.  XLVIII.  54.  LI.  5S.


SACHSIUS,  miftaken,  LVIII.  6.
Salius,  trifling  miftake  of,  XIX.  31.-
Salmonicus, a paffage from, explain'd,

^^^-  33-  ,  ,,  , ,

Sandlorius. Some  experiments  of  (jalen  s
on  the  arteries,  repeated  by  him,
XIX.  24.  30.
Sandenius,  Henr. Csef.  Acad.  N.  C.  S.
commended,  XXXII.  4.  XLV.
13.  XLVIII.  46.
Sandri, Jac. Prof. Bonon. commended,
XXX.  9.  LIV.  40.
His  obfervations,  XXX.  9.  XXXV.
8.  XLIX.  33.  LIV.  41.
Sanguiferous  Vellels. Why  thefe  in  cer-
tain parts of dead bodies are
fometimes  found  full of  blood,
at  other  times empty, X, 18.
XXVI.  34.
Why  they  are  eafily  ruptur'd  in  old
perfons,  II.  lo.
Both  in  fummer  and  winter,  ibid.

&III.  13.
And in fudden changes of the
temperature of  the  air,  III,

13-
What fhould principally be

avoided  by  perfons  fubje£t  to

this  diforder,  ibid.  12,  13.

Why thefe changes are to be


dreaded  when  a  lick  perfon  is
recovering,  II.  23.
Santorini,  Jo.  Dominic, formerly  Chief-
phyfician  at  Venice,  commeiidecf,
III.  2. IV.  16.  24. V.  17.  ig.

XVIII.  7. 25. XXVI. 36.
XLV.  33.  XLVI.  20.

Some  obfervations  of  his  not  before
publifti'd, XII.  6. XVIII.  7.

XIX.  15.  XXVL  11.37. XL.
18.  XLIII.  9.

One  or  two  inaccurate  paflages  from

him,  XIIL  7.  XLV.  23.
Defended,  LXVL  12.  &  feq.
Sanvitalis,  Ant.  Franc.  S.  R.  E.  Cardinal,
his  difeafe,  death,  and  diffcdlion,

n.  9.

Sarpi. The inftrument us'd by him

for  prolaps'd ani, XXXIIl.  7.

16.
de  Sauvages,  Franc.  R.Se.  Soc.  Montpeli.

commended,  LIX.  14.
Saxonia,  Here,  miftakes  of,  IX.  8.  11.
Scapula,  wound  of. In  this  cafe  the  arm

to  be kept quite ftill, LIIl.

38.
Scardona, Jo. Frane. M. D. Rhodig.

commended,  XXXVIL  8.
Scents.  What  proper  for  fick  perfons,  and

what  not,  III.  12.  IX.  6.
What kind aff"edled a perfon who

had  no fenfe of  fmelling, IX.

7-
Schacherus,  Polyc.  Gottl. P.  Prof.  Lipf.

commended,  XXXIIl.  4.  15.
Scearfchmidius, Sam. P. Prof. Berol.

commended,  XL.  15.
Scheffelius,  Chrift.  Stephan.  commended,

XXXVIL  49.
Schefflerus, Jac. Chrifto. commended,

XXXVin.  63.
Schelhammer,  miftakes  of,  XIX.  55. L.

28.  30.
Scherbius, Jo. Georg. commended,

■  XXXVin.  31.
Sciatica,  perfons  afFefted  with,  who  can.-
not  be  cur'd,  LVII.  5.  9.
In  whom  flight  burnings  are  of  fer-

vice,  ibid.
Glyfters  fometimes  ferviceable ;  and
of  what  kind  they  ought  to  be,
ibid.
The  benefit  arifing  from  taking  blood
from  the  hasmorrhoidal  veflels,
ibid,  6.

Schlenckeru!^


N  A  M  E  S  and  P  A  S  S  x\  G  E  S  moll:  worthy  of  Notice.


Schlenckerus, Jo.  Ehrenfr. commended,

LXV.  i6.
Schlichtingius,  Jo.  Dan.  M.  D.  Amflelo-

dam. commended, XIV. 25.

XIX.  33.  LIII.  22.  LVI.  15.
Schlierbackius,  Jo.  Jac. Caef.  Acad.  Soc.

N.  C. commended, XLVIII.

Schmidtius.  £rn.  Gottl.  commended,  IX.

19.
Schreckius, Frid.  Theod. M.  D.  LaufF.

Noric.  commended,  LIX.  14.
Schoberus,  Gottl.  formerly  Chief-phyfician

at Ruflia, commended, LIV.

13-

Schreiberus, Jo.  Fred. Sc. Acad.  Imp.

Petropol.  commended,  XVI. 46.

XVIII.27.  XXI.48.  XXV. 24.

XLII.  32.  XLIII.  3.
Schreyus, Volf.  Hen. Csf.  Acad.  N.  C.

Soc.  commended.  XVIII,  15.
Schulzius, Jo. Hen. P.'  Profeff. Hal.

miftaken,  XXIV.  22.
Scirrhous  tubercles,  hanging  from  the  vi-

fcera  by  a  fmall  peduncle,  from

what  they may  arife,  XXXIX.

Scirrhus  in  the  ftomach  and  other  parts
of  the  fame  kind,  how  it  may
caufe  pain,  XXIX.  7.  XXXIX.

23-

de  Scopulo,  Jac.  P.  Prof.  Patav.  com-
mended, LII.  33.

Scorpions  are  neither  fo  frequent  in  Italy
as  Boerhaave  relates,  nor  fo
fcarce  as  Pliny  thought,  LIX.

23-

Are  almoft  harmlefs  in  Italy,  ibid.
How  they  have  neverthelefs  occa-
fion'd  death,  or  very  bad  difor-
ders  in  Italy  or  Montpelier,  ibid.
24.  &  feq.

Whether  any  certain  remedies  have
been  hitherto  difcover'd  againft
their  bites,  ibid.  28.

Who  firft  obferv'd their  flings  per-
forated, ibid.  27.
Who  formerly  knew  that  there  is
a  bag  at the  bottom  of  them,
ibid.
Scrotum. Two  calculi  found  in  it,  LXIV.

7-
Scultetus  Ulmenf.  miftaken,  L.  28.
Sedentary  arti&cers,  why  liable  to  certain

diforders,  XVIII.  4.


Segnerus,  Jo.  Andr.  P.  Prof.  Getting,
commended.  III.  17.

Semen,  male. Whether  it  reach  the  Fal-
lopian tubes  or  not,  XXVI.  14.
Emiffion of it in fleep, how pre-
vented by  fome  people,  XLIV,
16.

Seminal  Velfels,  why  paffing  through  the
proftate  gland,  LXVI.  14.

Seminales  Veficulse.  Whether  they  are
not  entirely  wanting  in  dogs,
LXVJ.  10.

Seminal  receptacles  vitiated  on  one  fide ;
how  they  may hurt  the  femen
and  its  receptacles  on  the  other
fide,  XL VI.  6.
An  obfervation  of  this  kind,  ibid.

Senac,  Peter,  Firft-phyfician  to  the  King  of
France,  commended,  XVI.  48.
XVII.  27,  28.  XVUI.  15.  36.
XIX.  40.  44.  XXI.  20,  2r,
34.  40.  XXII.  7.  XXIII.  24.
XXIV.  12:  17.  29,  30.  XXV.
5.  20.  23.  XXVL  18.  26.
XXVII.  18,  19,  25.  XXXVIIL
8.33.43.  XLIV.2.  XLV.23,
Llil.  27.  LV.  7.  LXL  9.

Sennertus,  his  explanation  of  a  pafiage
in  the  Coacae,  not  approv'd  of,
XXI.  39.

Sepulchretum. Vid.  Bonetus.

Sepulchres,  of  fom-e  kinds,  with  what
fymptoms  perfons  kill'd  by
going--into,  were  afFecSed,  XIX,

39-

Seraus,  Franc.  Prof.  Reg.  Napol.  com-
mended, X.  8,  XLII.  45.
XLVIII.  42.  L.  26.  LIX.
28.

Severinus,  M.  Aure>.  An  obfervation  of
bis  very  difficult  to  be  under-
ftood,  L.  12.

Shoemakers,  why  liable  to  certain  difor-
ders, XVIII.  4.

Short-fighted  perfons,  XIII.  19.

Sight,  defe(Rs  o£ Vid.  Amaurofis,  Blind-
nefs.  Myopia,  Nyflalopia.
A  very  extraordinary depravation  of
ir,  explain'd,  XIII.  20.

SiJvaticus,  Jo  Baptift:.  His  method  of
detecting  thofe  who  counterfeit
Blindnefs,  improv'd,  XIII.  13.

Simfon, Tho. commended, XXXV»

32.

Skin,  difeafes  of. Vid.  Itch.

Thii


INDEX referring to


This  and  the  mufcles  wounded,  tho'
the  cloaths  were  not  hurt,  LIV..

17-
Harder  than  natural in  perfons  who
die  emaciated,  XLIX.  17.

Skull. Vid.  Cranium.

Sleep,  why  frequentiy  coming-on  after
eating,  XXVI.  12.

SlevQotius,  one  paffage  from,  not  aDprov'd-
of,  XLV.  13.

Small-pox.  Puftules  in  this  difeafe  may
be  form'd  in  other  parts  befides
the  flcin,  and  not  only  in  the
vifcera  befides,  XLIX.  33,  34.
A  collyrium  to  defend  the  eye-lids
and  eyes,  ibid.  33.

Smelling,  fenfe  of,  greater  from  the  birth
in  one  noftril  than  the  other,
with  the  reafon  of  it,  XIV.
16.

Solids  of  the  human  body,  having  but  a
fmall  proportion  to  the  fluids,
is  not  prov'd  by  all  the  expe-
riments made  ufe  of  for  that
purpofe,  XLIX.  19.

Soporofe  diforders,  frequenty  join'd with
a peripneumony, Vl. 11. &
feq.
How  this  is  occafion'd,  ibid.  16.
How  brought on after a delirium,

X.  18.
Water  is  generally  found  within  the
Ikulls  of  perfons  who  die  of
thefe  diforders,  VL  5.  15.  and
almoft  all  the  letter.
When  yellow,  it  frequently  occa-
fions  other  diforders alfo, VI.

The  veflels  of  the  cerebrum  are  at
the  fame  time,  for- the-moft-part,
found  diftended  with  blood,  VI.
15,  16.
Sphacelus  of  the  inteftines,  whether  ever
coming-on without a previous
inflammation, or  the figns of
one,  XXXV.  19.  &  feq.
Sphenoides  Os. Vid.  Pituitary  Sinus.
Spigelius,  fome  miftakes  of,  XXIV.  23.
Spifte. Vid.  Vertebrae.

Diftortion of  it  is  not  always, but
moft frequently, the caufe of
gibbofity,  XXVn.  31,  32.
Who  firft  gave a figure  pf this

diftortion,  ibid.  32.
Who  firft  formerly  remark'd,  that.


in  this  caf®,  feveral  vertebrae  are
united  into  one  bone,  ibid.  &
LVI.  36.
Two  kinds  of  caufes  of  this  di-
ftortion iUuftrated  ; ,  and  which
of  itiem  nas  ths  preference,
Ihewn,  XXVII.  33.
How  this  is  vtry  olten  in  a  feipen-

tine  foi  m,  ibid.  34.
This  diftortion is fometimes the
caufe  of aneurifms, and other
vices  ot the  aorta, XXXVIII.
40.

Inflexion  of  it  into  lefs  than  a  right-
anglt,  LXII.  II.

Cavity  of  ir, iound  entirely  wanting,
XLVill.  48.

Water  colletSed within  it  preterna-
turally,  by  whom  firft  obferv'd,

XI.  16.

An  eafy  method  of  difcovering  this,

propos'd,  ibid.
Some  quantity  naturally  contain'd
in  it ;  which  is  to  be  attended-

to,  ibid.
From whence this water  comes,

XII.  9.

By  what  means,  though  it  be  con-
tain'd  in both  fides,  it  may  in-
jure one  moft,  ibid.  &  feq.
Bifid throughout almoft its whole
length,  XLVIII.  50.
The  caufe  of  this,  and the  watry
tumors  of  it,  XII.  9.
An  obfervation  and defcription
of  one  of  thefe  tumors,  ibid.
i6.
Why  feldom  found  at  the  na-
tural  opening  of the  os  fa-
crum,  ibid.  g.
Why  they  do not  foon prove

fatal  there,  ibid.  12.
The  method of treating  them
not  different  from  that  of  the
internal hydrocephalus, ibid.
10.
Whether  furgeons  ought  to  do
anything  in  thefe  cafes,  ibid.
12.
Whether  the tumors  defcrib'd
by  C.  Bauhin  and Muys  are
of  thi-s  kind,  ibid.  10.
Whether  Hippocrates  in  a  cer-
tain place refers to them,
ibid.

Who


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


Who  (eems  firft  to  have  obferv'd

this  difeafe,  ibid.
Found frequently  in  fome  coun-
tries, ibid.  15.
Wrong  opinions  of  its  ufual  ori-
gin, ibid.  II.
Whether  the  vertebrse  and  fpinal-

marrow  are  divided,  ibid.
Very  rarely  occafion'd by water
ftagnating in the fatty  cells  of
the  dura  mater,  ibid.  12.
When  fometimes  curable,  ibid.
What nerves are found within

thefe  tumors,  ibij.  11.
How  palfies and convulfions are
caus'd  by  the  tumors,  efpecially
when  they  are  open'd,  ibid.  12.
Who have coUeded obfervations

of  this  affection,  XII.  15.
Who  have  more  accurately  treated

of  it,  ibid.
Whether  a  particular  obfervation
of  Stalpart's  relates to this  dif-
order,  ibid.  16.
Whether  all zffeQed  with it are
born  with  diftorted  legs,  ibid.
Spina  Ventofa,  obfervation  on,  LV.  17.
Spinal-marrow. The  efFecSs  of injuries
done  to  it,  when  compar'd to-
gether, are  not eafily  explain'd,
LIV.  27.
A dropfy of its cortical part, by

whom  feen,  XII. 11.
Continu'd farther than ufual,  even
almoft  to  the os  factum,  ibid.
16.
A  beginning  ofTification  found  in  the
arachnoid  coat,  XXV.  9.
Spitting. Vid.  Confumption,  Pus.

Of a fuppos'd catanhous matter,
which impofes upon the fick
perfons and fome phyficians,
XX.  40.
Black,  by  whom formerly  obferv'd,
XXII.  21.
Whether  this  comes  from  the  bron-
chial glands,  ibid.
Bloody  in  a  pleurify,  how  explain'd^

Vid.  Pleurify.
Polypous  and  ramified  fubftances,  ob-
ferv'd, XXI.  20.
By whom thefe were feen, deli-
neated, and  illuftrated,  ibid.
How,  and  where,  ttiey  are  form'd,
ibid.


Who  have  wrongly  fuppos'd  them
to be the pulmonary vefiels
thrown  up,  ibid.
Whether  Hippocrates  has  obferv'd
thefe,  ibid.
• A  fmall  bone,  XXII.  24.

From whence this could come,
ibid.  25.
Spleen, found double, XXXVII. 30.
XXXVm. 34. LXIV. 2.
LXVII.  II.
Almoft  fo,  XVI.  34.
Prolapfusof,  XXIX.  42.

Who formerly, and fince then,

have  feen  this,  ibid.  44,  45.
The  caufes  of  this,  ibid  43,  44.
The  figns  of  it  enquir'd  into  and
examin'd,  ibid.
Some  exceptions  to  thofe  men-
tion'd  by  Riolan,  ibid.  44.
Of  the  method  of  cure,  ibid.  46.
Very large, by whom found,-

XXXVI,  18.
Larger  than  natural  in  many  perfons
after  long  fevers,  XX.  2.  31.  52.
XXXI.  2. XXXVI, 17, 18;
and  why,  XXXVI.  18.
Smaller than natural, from what

caufe,  XXX.  15,  XXXVI.27.
Tumor  of,  why  for-the-moft-part,
though  not  ^always,  attended
with  a  tumor  of  the  liver.  Vid.
Liver.
Why  ^increafing  after  a  copious
vomiting of blood, XXXVI.

13-
Bony or ftony concretions in, by
whom  feen,  ibid.  14.
More  frequent  in  old  perfons  than
in  young,  on its external fur-
face  than within  it,  and  on  its
convex fide than  its flat,  ibid.
16.
Obferva'ions  on one cafe  of  this
kind,  ibid.  ]6.
Bony  or  fl:ony  in  its  whole  fubilance,
ibid.  14.  &  feq.
What  inconveniencies  may  attend

fuch  a  ftate,  ibid.  15.
Flow  it  may  become  fo  fometimes,
ibid.  16.  LXV.  II.
Splenic  Arctr^',  why  fometimes  found  with-
out any  flexures, XXXVI.  24.
Spoeringius, N. Reg.  Sufc. Sc. Acad,
commended,  XXXVIII.  24.

Spoerlinus,


INDEX referring to


Spoerlinus,  N.  commended,  XII.  6.
Spoletus,  Francif. formerly  firft Prof,  at
Padua,  commended,  VIII.  5-
The  caufe  of  bis blindnefs  and  apo-
plexy, XIII.  12.
Sproegelius, Dieter. M. D. at Berlin,

commended,  LV.  26.

Spregelius, Jo. And. Theodor. at tlie

fame  place,  commended,  V.21.

LV.  12.  LlX.  5.  22.

Stalpart,  miftakes  of,  XXXVIII.  46. L.

56.  59.
Stammering. What  kind  Sandorlus  fays
thofe  labour under who have
the  foramina  of  their  mouth  too
open,  XIV.  38.
What  is  to be thought  of this,
ibid.
Different caufes of  ftammering in
different  petfonf,  ibid.
Stancarius, Jo. Ant. formerly Prof, at
Berlin,  commended,  XVII.  30.
LXIV.  9.
Obfervations  of  his,  XVII.  30.
Stancarius,  Vidlor.  Franc,  formerly  Prof.
at Berlin,  commended, XXII.
28.  XXXVII.  25.
Stays,  how  hurtful  to  women  on  account
of  the  whalebone  or  other  hard
fubftances  in  them,  XXVI.  23.
XXXVIII.  5.  LVI.  17.
Stegmannus,  Ambrof. Caef.  Acad.  N.  C.
commended, XXXVIII. 35.
XLVIII.  39.
Stehelinus,  Benedidt. commended, LIV.

II.
Steno,  Nicol.  And.  Whether  he  learned
from  the  ancients  his  experi-
ment on  the  ceffation  of  muf-
cular  motion  in  confequence  of
a  ligature  made  on  the  arteries,
XIX.  22.
S'tenzelius,  Chriftian.  Godf.  P.  Prof.  Vi-
temberg,  commended,  XXVI.
40.  _ .

Sternothyroid  mafcles,  entirely  wantmg  in

one  fubjed,  VIII.  12.

Sternum,  found  fliorter than  natural  on

the  left  fide,  fo  that  the  cavicle

was  deprefs'd,  X.  19.

Steubius,  Jo.  Sebaft.  commended,  LXV.

16.
Stomach. One  found,  as  it  were,  double,
XVI.  38.  XXVI.  31.  XXX.  7,
8.  XXXVI.  3.  XXXVII.  28.


Whether  fuch  formations  make  it
fubje£t  to  vomitings,  XXX.  8.

Generally  very  large  in  people  who
eat  and  drink  largely,  XI.  7.
XXVI.  13.  37.  LXIV.  19.

Found  very  large,  XXXIX.  15.

Its  lenticular  glands,  XXIX.  14.  17,
18.  XXX.  12.

Whether  lice  can  live  in  it,  examin'd
into,  XXVIII.  3.

Prolapfus of it, with the figns,
XXXIX.  14.
Obfervations  relative  to  this  eom-

par'd,  ibid.  &  fcq.
The  wonderful  fituation  and  length
of  one,  defcenJing  ftraightdown
from  the  diaphragm  to  the  left
fide  of  the  os  pubis,  and  bending
up  again from thence, LXX.

Rifing into the thorax through a
wound  of  tke  diaphragm,  LIV.
10.
How  this  may  happen  even  without
a  wound,  ibid.  11.  &  feq.

How  the  middle  coat  of  it  may  not
be  black,  though  the  outward
and inward be fo, XXX.  16,

17-
Verrucas  in  it,  as  the  Arabians  call'd
them,  whether  they  are  always
excrefcences  of  it, XXIX.  16,

^ 17-

Excrefcences  in  it, internal, many

examples  of,  ibid.
From  whence  thefe  arife,  ibid.
What  feem'd  of  fervice in a very

bad  tumor  of  it,  XXIX.  12.
In  injuries of  it, the pylorus  very

often  affedled,  ibid.  16.
Pylorus,  very  lax, and  wanting  its

ring  in  great  part;  and  yet  the

perfon  neither  fubje£i  to  a  lien-

tery  or  cceliac  paflion,  XXXI.

4,
Wounded unexpeftedly through a

tumor of the abdomen, and

cur'd,  XXXVI.  31.  &  feq.
Perforation  of  it,  how  known  to  be

owing  to an  ulcer,  and  not  to

the  diffedor's knife,  XXXIX.

14-
How  there  may  be no difcharge

through it  into the abdomen,

ibid.  &  I  J.

Difcharges


NAMES  and  P  A  S  S  A  G  E  S  moil  worthy  of  Notice.


Difcharges through it.  into the
beily,  whether  they  always  bring
on  fpeedy  death,  ibid,  15.
May  be penetrated by a wound,
without  occafioning  bloody  vo-
mitings or  ftools,  LIV.  8,  9.
Calculi  of. Vid.  Vomit. ,
Stone. Vid.  Calculi.
Stools,  black. Vid.  Bilis  Atra.
Strabifmus, various caufes of, fliewn,
XIII.  20.
Who  long  before  Plempius  affirm'd
that  fome  of  the  mufcles  of  the
eye  were  paralytic  in  this  dif-
order,  ibid.
Strangled-perfons. Vid,  Hang'd-perfons.
Woman,  though  frothing  very  much
at  the  mouth,  recover'd,  XIX.

36.
Strumous  tumors,  external,  whether  ever

exifting  unlefs the  raefentery  is
.  ftrumous  alfo,  L.  28,  29.

How  cur'd in a certain girl,  ibid.

27.
Struvius,  Ern.Gottl.  formerly  Caef.  Acad.

N. C. commended, XXXI,

22.
Stuart,  Peter,  commended,  XLVIII.  25.
Styloid  procefs,  obferv'd  extended  almoft

as  far  as  the  os  hyoides,  LXIII.

Subclavian  and  Axillary  Veins,  long  in-
fula  found  in,  LXIX,  2.

Sucking-kittens,  ftomachs  of, contain  a
femi-concreted  milk,  XIX.  42.

Sudorifics,  wrongly  fuppos'd  to  be  firft
us'd  by  the  Arabians,  XLIX.
20.
The  too  great  diflike  of  fome  prac-
titioners to  their  ufe  in  acute
difeafes,  ibid.

Suffocated-perfons.  Vid.  Hang'd-perfons.
How  known  whether  a  new-born
child  was  fufFocated  or  not  from
the  lungs.  Vid.  Lungs,
Who  have  grumous  blood  in  their
heart,  and  who  have  not,  XiX.
10.

Suffocation  from  a  ftraitnefs  of  the  aorta,
ibid.  50.  &  feq.

Suffocating  paroxyfms.  What  method
moft  readily  prevents,  cures,  or
mitigates  thefe  and  other  difeafes
of  the  like  kind  ;  and  why  it
does,  XVII.  27.
Vol..  III.


Suffocating,  ajjd  not  cephalic  pfffaions,
fliewn  to  have  kill'd  men  in
fome  vaults,  wine  -  ceHars,
and  the  cave  call'd  la  grotta  de'
cani, XIX.  39.

Suffufion, why fometimes appearing to
be  membranous,  LXIIF.  u.
Different  objeclii  feen  previous  to  it
varioufly accounted for, XIII.
14.
The  chryftalline  humor  found  vi-
tiated in  the  cafes,  ibid,  ic 17,
i8.
What  fpecies of fuffufion is the
longefl:  in  coming  to  maturity,
and  thereafon  of  it,  ibid.  18.
All  the  females  in  one  family  affeded
with  it,  whiift the  males  were
free  from  it,  ibid.

Sulphur,  Injuries  arifing  from  taking  it ;
and  the  caufe  of  them,  LV.  9.
&  feq.  &  12.

Sulzer,  Henry,  commended,  LXII,  13.

Supercilia  (eyebrows)  wounds  of,  dan-
gerous, and  why,  LI.  16.  40.

Surgeons  vindicated  againft  calumny  by
anatomy,  Ji.iV.  4.

Surgical  obfervations  and  operation=,  a
method  propos'd  for  throwing
lights  on  particular  parts  for,
XIV.  13.

van-Swieten,  Gerrard,  L.  B.  Baron  and
Caef.  Archiat.  commended,  II.
2. III.  12. IV.  33. Vin.  13,

14,  32. IX.  8. X.  3. XVIH.

15.  XiX.  24.  31.  XXX.  17.
XXXV.  22.  XXXVi.  6.  12.
XXXVII.  13.  15  32.  42.  46.
50.  XXX, X.  45.  XL.  6.
XLViil  54  L.  14.  LiV.  97.
LV.  23.  LXV.  2.

Swallowing  of  liquids,  how  perform'd,  and
by  what  oieans  render'd  difficult,

xxvin.  13.

Of  the  laft morel, how  fometimis

impeded,  XXVIII.  14.
Other  impedimcntb  to  it,  ibid.  &  feq.
Stoffelius's propofai of  priarynv,o-
tomy  in thele cafes cxamiu'd,
ibid.
Whether  any  other  method  can  be
us'd,  XXVIII.  14.
Sydenham. Some things in his  works
very commendable,-  otners not
fo  muchib,  XXL  .1.38.
5  C  bylvijs.


INDEX referring to


Sylvius,  Jac.  an  extraordinary  obfervation

from,  XXXVI.  27.
Syncope  is  fometimes  nothing  lefs  than  an  •

apoplexy  arifing  from  a  vitiated

ftate of the cerebellum. III.

27.
Arifes as well from a convulfion

as  palfy  of the  heart, XXV.

J3-


TYBARANUS,  Pet.  Bonon.  Inft.
Sc.  Acad.  S.  commended,  XIII.
29.  XXVI.  26.  XXXIX.  20.
XLVIII.  45.  LVI.  35.
Tacconus,  Cajet.  P.  Prof.  Bonon.  com-
mended, XXXVII.  16.  XLIII.

3-

Targioni,  Jo,  P.  Prof.  Bonon.  com-
mended, 11.  8.  XVIII.  29.
XXIV.  28.  XXVIII.  13.
XXXVI.  16.  XXXVIII.  33.
64.71.  XXXIX.41.  XLII.  35.
42.  LVI.35.  LVIII.7. .

Tailing.  Whether  the  ninth  or  fifth  pair
of  nerves  are  moft  fubfervient
to  this,  XIV.  32.

Tears, natural flux  of, explain'd,  ibid.
26.
Preternaturally  flowing,  occafion'd  by
a  calculus  in  the  lachrymal  ca-
runcle, ibid.
Other caufes of this difcharge,
ibid.  27.
What kind is curable, and what
not,  ibid.  &  28.

Teichmeyer,  Herm.  formerly  P.  Prof.  Jen.
commended,  XLllI.  31.

Temporal  bone. Vid.  Styloides.

Mufcle.  Who  formerly  amongft  the
Italians  taught  to  cut  it,  when
there  was  occafion  for  it,  LII.
12.
Tranfverfe  incifion  of  the  whole,  in
many  inftances,  without  any
fubfequent  convulfions,  ibid.
Pierc'd  through  in  its  upper  and  an-
terior part,  without  any  fever
following,  ibidi

Tenefmus. Vid.  Dyfentery.

Terraneus,  miftaken,  XLI.  19.

Terror.  Why  blood  fliould  be  taken-
away  after  a  fright,  IX.  6^


Teftis. What  put  on  the  appearance  of
a  third tefticle in a certain
perfon,  XLIII.  2.
Tunica  Vaginalis, not reaching to  the
peritoneeum,  by  whom  obferv'd,
ibid.  8.
From  this  and  the  albuginea  drops
prefs'd  out,  ibid.  i6.
A  very  thin  coat  found  under  the  al-
buginea immediately inclofing
the  teftis,  ibid.  27.
Hydatids  obferv'd hanging  from or
•  growing  to  the  albuginea,  ibid.

16.  &  feq.
Small  tubercles alfo, from what
part  and  what  they  are,  ibid.  18.
&  feq.  to  31.
Fat fometimes found between the

teftis  and  epididymis,  ibid.  37.
Why  the  tefticles  fometimes  are  tu-
mified  from  air  within  the  in-
teftines,  XLIII.  3.
Tumors  of  them  confift  of  different
matter, fome perhaps of  fat,
within  them,  ibid.  41.
Hiftory  of one of furprifing mag-
nitude, ibid.
Their  increas'd  magnitude  moft  fre-
quently owing  to  a  preternatural
thicknefs  of their  coats, ibid,
42.
Tetanus. Obfervations  on this difeafe,

X.3.
Thebefius, Adam.  Chrift. Csf. N.  C.
Acad.  S.  commended,  XVI.  44.
XVIII. 15. XXXVIIL 19.
42.
Thigh. Vid.  Femur.
Thirft,  why  abating or entirely going-
off  in  fome dropfical cales  be-
fore death,  XXXVIII.  9
Thorax. Difeafes  of  it  difficultly  known,
and  why,  XV.  r.
Dropfy  of  it,  not  eafy  to  be  diftin-
guifli'd,  XVI.  25.
Of  the  figns  of  it, XVI.  9.  n,
25.  27. 29. 33,  34.  36.  &  feq.
XLIIL  17.
Whether a great difficultly of
breathing, fuddenly attacking
foon  after  the firft  fleep,  be  a
pathognomonic  fymptom  of  it,
XVLii.
Who firft mention'd ths as a
fign,  ibid.

Hovi?


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


How  this  may  be  explain'd,  XVI.
1 1.

Refpiration  render'd  difficult  in
this  difeafe,  not  on  account  of
the  quantity  of  water,  but  from
the irritation it caufes, ibid.

How  a  cough is  occafion'd  by  it,

ibid.  45.
Who  firft  difcover'd  this  difeafe  in

human  dead  bodies,  ibid.  33.
The  efFefts  of  blood-letting  in  this

difeafe, ibid.  30.  34. ,
How  this  difeafe  may  attend  a  pe-
ripneumony,  XX.  34.
Inflammations  of  it. In  tiiis  difeafe
the  blood generally  has  a  ten-
dency to  concrete,  though  feme-
times it remains fluid, XX.
14.
Why  a  fuppreflion  of  expectora-
tion in  this  difeafe  foon  proves
fatal,  ibid.  6.
Wounds  of  ir.  Why  and  when  fluids
extravafated  into  the  thorax  are
more  eafily  difcharg'd  in  the  a£t
of  infpiration,  LIV.  11.
Thyroid  Gland. Some  things  relative  to
its  being  fingle,  its  ftrudture,  and
tubuli,  L.  37.
Of  its  difeafes. Vid.  Bronchocele.
Tinnitus. Vid.  Ear.
Tita, Antony, Botanift at  Padua. His

death  and  difTedtion,  III.  11.
Tittman,  Frid.  Franc,  commended,  XXI.

40.
Tobacco,  neither  powder  or  fume  of  can
reach to the brain, I. 8, 9.

Tongue,  papillae  of,  thicker  than  na-
tural, miftaken  by  a  furgeon
for  preternatural  tubercles,  L,
26.
Part  of,  cut  off,  and  pendulous,  ob-
ferv'd  not  to  be  any  hindrance
in  fpeaking,  LII.  43.
Worm-like  fubftance  in,  natural  to
dogs,  accurately  defcrib'd,  VIII.

34-

Tonfils. Whether  it  be  advifeable  to  ex-
tirpate them,  L.  26.

Tooth,  drawn,  why  the  haemorrhage  after
is  difKcultly  ftopp'd,  XIV.  25.
Pain  in. Remarks  on the  reinedies
for  it,  XIV.  31,


Canine,  cutting-of,  attended  wLth
danger,  IX.  4.

Toothlefs  old-m^n,  the  temporal  mufcles
of,  fnund  extremely  weak  and
flender  after  death,  VII.  9.

Tooth-cutting,  difficult,  occafions  con-
vullions,  and  diarrhaea,  which
it  is  dangerous  to  flop,  XXXI.
6.

Torres,  N.  a  celebrated  Phyfician,  com-
mended, XXIV.  7.

Trachea. Vid.  Afpera  Arteria.

Trew,  Chrift.  Jac.  C?ef.  Acad.  N.  C.
commended,  IV.  15.  XII.  10,
II.  XIII.  18.  XIV.  25.  XIX.
48.  XXiV.  28.  XXVII.  19.
XXXVII.  16,  17.  22.  XL.  20.
XLII.  33.  42. L.  6.  40. LVI.

^  .35-

Treylingius,  Jo.  Jac. formerly  Prof, at
Ingolft.  commended,  XXXI.  26.
XLVIII.  14.
Triangular  mufcles  of  the  breaft  entirely
wanting  in  one  fubjedl,  XLIU.
29. ^
Trichiafis. Vid.  Eye-lalhes.
Triller,  Dan.  Wilhelm. P.  Prof.  Vitem-
berg. commended, XX. 10.
■ XXI.  40, 41- XXVIII. 15.
XXX.  13.  L.  16.
Trivifanus,  Hieronym.  M.  D.  at  the  col-
lege at  Padua,  LXIV.  13.
Trombellius, Jo. Chryfoft. the  Abbot, ,

commended,  XXVI.  39.
Trombellius,  Sebaft.  Ant.  formerly  P.  Prof.
Bonon.  commended,  ibid.  &  IX.
II.  XLVIII.  54.
His  obfervations,  IX.  12.
His  difeafe, death, and difliedtionf
XXVI  39,40.
Tubes,  Falloppian. One  of  them  folid
from  the  original  conformation,
LXIX.  16.
Occlufion  of, and concretion with
the  ovaries, from whence fre-
quently happening, LXVII.
12.
Ligaments  of.  Theirnervous  plexufles
flrft  defcrib'd  in  the  Adverfaria,
1706,  XLV.  23.  to  the  end.
Tubercles, fmall, of a peculiar kind,
found  on  the  furface  of  the  pe-
ritonaeum, pleura,  or  other  vi-
fcera,  from  whence they  arife,
XXXVIII.  35.  &  feq.
5  C  2  Tulpius,


IN D E X referring t©


Tulpius,  miftaken,  XLII.  32.
Tumors. Vid.  Cranium,  Spine,  Teftes,
Wrift.

Flatulent.  Whether  any  of  the  kind
circumfcrib'd  under  the  flcin  are
found  ;  and  if  there  are,  whence
they  arife,  XXXVIII.  22.  25.

Large  from  a  matter  which  is  not
fluid,  nor  capable  of  being  ren-
der'd  fo,  L.  53.

Cyflic. Their  various  caufes,  XXII.
20.
Obfervations  of  veficles  fometimes
found  in  them,  XXXVI.  9.

Nattse,  as  they  are  call'd.  What
they  fometimes  contain,  beyond
what  is  generally  fuppos'd,  L.
19,  20.

Compreffion  of,  what  effeds  attri-
buted to  by  Valfalva,  L.  ig.

Hairs  found  in  them  at  different
times,  by  whom,  XXXIX,  41.

Bloody,  L.  53.

The  remarkable  one  mention'd  by

Plutarch  and  Xenophon,  ibid.
A  large  one  in the thigh  difap-

pearing  of  itfelf,  ibid.
Some  in  horfes  cur'd  by  a  ligature
made  on  the  vein  belonging  to
them  ;  and  how,  L.  54.

Opening  of  them,  how  caufing  a  de-
liquium,  if  a  large  quantity  of
matter  be  difcharg'd,  ibid.  53.

Glandiform,  obfervers  of,  where  there
are  not  glands  naturally, LX  VIII.
14.
Obfervations  of  tumors  of  this  fort,
internal  or  external,  or  of  both
kinds,  ibid.  12.  &  feq.
Tympanites,  whether  frequently,  and  hov/
far,  Cound  join'd  with  an  afcites,
XXXVIII.  21.

Rarely  found  out  of  the  ftomach
and  inteftines  ;  though  fome-
times fo,  and  from  what  caufes,
ibid.  24.  &  feq.

Appearing  in  an  acute  difeafe,  and
from  whence,  ibid.  23.

After  chronic  difeafes,  whether  to  be
explain'd  by  a  relaxation  or  con-
ilrifSlion  of  the  fibres,  ibid.  &
feq.

Of  its  diagnofis,  and  method  of  cure,
ibid.  25.
Tympanum. Vid,  Ear,


V


AGINA  of  the  uterus, Vid.  Ute-


Valcarengus, Paul. Prof. Ticin. Prim.

commended, XVII. 16. 27.

XVIII.  24. XL. 14. XLI.

12.
Valerius  Maximus,  how  a  certain  pafTage

of fliould be read, XXVI.

Vallifneri,  Ant.  the  Chevalier,  formerly
Prof.  at  Padua,  prais'd,
XXXVII,  42.  XL.  26.  LIX.
26.

Wifh'd  for  a  particular  treatife  on
biliary  calculi,  XXXVII.  52.

Obfervations  of  his  not  publifli'd  be-
fore, X.  21.  L.  27.  38. LVIII.

A  certain  obfervation  of  his  explain'd,
XLUI.  21.
Additions  made  to  another,  XL VI.
8,  9-

The  difeafe  of  which  he  died,  which
was  worthy  of  attention,  accu-
rately defcrib'd,  XXI.  13,  14.
Vallifneri,  Ant.  the  Chevalier,  fon  of  the
above,  and  Prof,  at  Padua,  com-
mended, XXX.  7.  XXXVL  15.
Valfalva,  his  ingenuoufnefs,  XX.  30.

His  incredible  defire  of  knowing  and
making  experiments,  LV.  23.

Obfervations of his. Concerning

thefe  vid.  Pref.  n.  12. See

the  beginnings  of  almoft  all  the
letters  of  the  four  firfl  books,
and  different  parts  of  others,
V.  20.  X.  12.  16.  XIV.  iQ.
XV.  9.  XVII.  30.  XX,  42.
XXII  20.  25.  28.  XXIV.  c;.
XXIX.  3.  XXXII.  6. 8.  XLiL
4.  XLIiI.  42, XLV.  8. L,  6.  '

13-

His  experiments  on  living  dogs,  XIX.
20. 25. &  feq. 33. XXXIJ.
8.
And  birds,  LII.  26.
What  experiments  he  thought  necef-
fary  to  deteritgne the  caufe  of
apoplexy,  IV.  3.
What  he  was  wont  to  examine  into,
in  the  diffedlion  of  dropfical  per-
•  fons,  XXXVIIL  7.

His


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


His  opinion  of  the  abdominal  ring,
and  the  procefs  of  the  peritonaeum,
XLIII.  8.

The  jugular  veins  in  dogs,  obferv'd
by  him  to  be  turgid  in  expira-
tion, and  to  fubfide  in  infpi-
ration,  XIX.  33.

What  he  has  faid  on the  rupture  of
the  membrane  of  the  tympanum,
defended,  XIV.  10.
And  of  the  ufe  of  the  new  fora-
mina of the  tympanum, ibid.

9-

Propos'd  opening  the  punfla  lachry-

malia  with  a  fmall  probe  before
Anell  did  it,  XIII.  28.
His admirable diagnoftics, 11. 25.
XXI.  II.  XXXII.  7.  XXXIX.
14.
And predidtions, XXIV, 21.
XXXV.  2.
His  conjectures  concerning  a  tumor
in the mucilaginous gland of
the  acetabulum,  LVI.  23.
His  happy  and  eafy  method  of  curing
an  obftinate  nafal  hsemorrhage,
XiV 24.
His fuccefsful method of treating
incipitnt internal aneurifms,
XVII.  30.
And  external,  L.  10.
Obfervations of cures made of
them  in  the  bending  of  the  el-
bow and the ham, L.  7,  &
feq.

Of  the  venereal  gumma  at  the
ankle,  LVIII.  8. &  feq.  &
alibi.
His  method  of  amputating  the  penis,

L.  50.
His  fuccefs  in  taking-off  a  large  can-
cerous breaft  by  little-and-little
at  a  time,  ibid.  16.
What  method  he  us'd  to  cure  polvpi
and ulcers of  the  nofe, XiV.
19 22.
His  manner  of  treating  the  piles  and
ulcers of the anus, XXXIL

Haemorrhages,  XIV.  25.  XXXII.
12,  13.
The  inftrumcnt  mention'd  by  him  to
prevent  the  prolapfus  at  the
time  of  going-to-ftooi,  XXIII.
16.


What  palliative  remedies  he  us'd in
fome  difeafes  of  the  inteflinum
reftum,  XXXII.  9.
His  manner  of  treating  the  lues  ve-
nerea, LVIII.  16.
Of  preventing  the  farther  progrefs
of cancers of the uterus or
breafts,  XXXIX.  35.
What  courfe  he approv'd or  difap-
prov'd  in the  cafe  of  calculi  in
the  bladder,  XLII.  16.
What method he propos'd to be
taken in an ifchury  from the
bladder,  where  the  urine  could
not be difcharg'd by the ca-
theter, or  pundure  of  the  peri-
naeum,  ibid.  36.
Suppos'd  that  the  glutinous  and  thick
pus which fubfides in urine,
comes  much  feldomer  from the
kidnies than the parts below
them,  ibid.  44.
Valvula  Bauhini. The  very  great  ufe  of

its  two  fraena,  XXXIV.  30.
Vandellius, Jerom. P. Prof at Padua,
commended, XIII. 25. LVI.
27. LXVIII.  8.
Vari,  Ignat. P.  Prof,  sat  Ferrara, com-
mended, LXIV.  3.
Varolius, obfervations of, in apopledic
cafes, how to be underftood,
IV.  I.  V.  I.
Vaterus,  Abr. formerly  P.  Prof.  Vitem-
berg. commended, XIII. n,
XLVllI.  II.
A  paflTage  from  him  not  approv'd-of,
XXXVII.  46,  47.
Vaterus,  Chrift.  formerly  P.  Prof,  ibidem,
commended,  X  VIII.  27.  XXVL
12.  XXVII.  10.  LXIV.  16.
Veins. Vid.  Axillary,  Azygos,  Cephalic,
Iliac,  Jugular, Occipital, Sub-
clavran.  Umbilical.
Their  fyftole  and  diaftole. Vid.  Ju-
gular.
Blood  obferv'd  to flow  along  them
towards the heart, though it
could  not  be  urg'd-on in  con-
fequence of a ligature, XIX.

,  33'  34
Whetner  the  effufion  of  ferum  in
Lower's  experiments  was  owing
to  a  ligature  made  on  them  only,
or  a  coii.preflion  of  the  lympha-
tics at  the  fame  time,  ibid.  32.
Veil  ejus


INDEX relating to


Vellejus  Paterculus,  why  not  nam'd
amongft  the  hiftorians  byQuinc-
tilian,  LIX.  38.

Velfe,  Corn. Henr.  commended, XXXVIII.

Vena-cava.  An  obfervation  of  its  ac-
companying the  aorta  on  the
left  fide,  and  then  pafling-over
it  to  its  ufual  fituation  on  the
right  fide,  LVI.  31.
A  venous  trunk  running  parallel  to

it  m  thebeliy,  XLVII.  30.
Varices  of  it,  when  and  how  to  be

fought-for,  XXVI.  27.
Why  this  vein  becomes  varicous  and
ruptui'd more frequendy than
the  pulmonary,  XXVI.  27.
Rupture  of  it  mention'd  by  Aretseus,
XXVI.  28.
By  whom  fince  obferv'd,  ibid.
Vens-fection,  confequcnces  of  in  a  .^ropfy
of  the  thorax,  XVI.  30,  34.
Improper in the arm, cauhng a
continual  tremor  of  the  part,  L.
6.
Unfkilful,  at  the bending  of  the
elbow, occafioning other bad
efFefts,  ibid.  &  feq.
Venery. DifTedtion of a woman dying
intheaa,  XXVI.  13.
Inftances  of women dying thus

are  very  rare,  ibid.  14.
The  caufes  of  this  kind  of  death,
ibid.
Venereal Difeafe. Whether this be a
very  ancient  difeafe,  or  of  mo-
dern  date in Europe, LVIII.
15,  ig.
Few  diflections of  perfons dying  of
this  difeafe  in proportion  to  the
number of fuch, ibid. 14,

What  injuries  the  parts  are  gene-
rally found  to  have  fuftain'd,
ibid.  14.

What  vifcera  are  ofteneft  found  in-
jur'd,  ibid.  14.
Whether  the  liver  is  fo,  ibid.

Inftances  of  its  bringing-on  a  phthifis
are  very  frequent,  XXII.  11.

Gummata  of. Vid.  Gummata.

The  remarkable  alteraiion  of  opinion,
concerning  the  ufe  of  quickfil-
ver,  or  decodlions  of  the  woods,
in  the  cure  of  this  difeafe,  even


amongft  the  moft  learned  cities,
noted,  LVIII.  15,  i6-
Who  firft  advis'd,  for  the  cure  of  it,
the  drinking  decoftions in the
manner that bath-waters are
drank  ;  and  who  have  fince  con-
tinu'd  their  ufe,  ibid.  16,  17.
Obfervacioiis of the fuccefs at-
tending this  method,  ibid 16.
The  various  methods  of  ufing  quick-
filver  and its properties, were
long  ago not  unknown  to  the
P'ofeflbis at Padua, ibid.  17,
18.
Nor  were  they  ignorant  that  the
waters of >^pona were rather
prejudicial than ferviceable in
this  difeafe,  ibid.  18.

Veratti,  Jo.  Jofeph,  P.  Prot.  Bonon,  com-
mended, II.  14.

Vercelloni,  miftakes  of,  XLIV.  26.
LVili. 15.

Verdries,  ]<),  Melch.  formerly  of  Caef.
A  a'L  N.  C.  commended,
XXVIII. 16.  XXX.ii.  XXXI.
26.  XXXIV.  22.  LIV.43.

Verus,  L.  the  Emperor.  The  apoplexy
of  which  he  died,  as  mention'd
by  Capitolinus,  Eutropius,  and
Vidor,  was  of  the  fanguineous
kind,  II.  8.

Verna,  Jo  Bapt.  a  celebrated  Phyfician
at  Venice,  commendisd,  XXL
43.  46.

Vernoius,  Jo.  Geo.  formerly  Tmper.  Acad.
Petropol.  commended,  XVI.  i6.
His  conjecSure  concerning  the  caufe
of  the  fo  frequent  cohasfion  of
the  lungs  and  pleura  in  adults,
ibid.

Vertebrae,  true,  twenty-five  found  in  one
woman,  V.  15.
Whether  thefe  are  more  frequently,
broke,  or  luxated  ;  and,  when
they  are  luxated,  whether  they
are  broke  at  the  fame  time,
XIX.  14.  LVL  35.  37.
By whom formerly found growing

together,  LVI.  36.
A  late  obfervation  of  a  coalition  of
the  lumbar  vertebrae,  ibid.

Vertebral  Artery,  the  left  going- ofF  not
from  the  fubclavian,  but  the
arch  of  the  aorta.  III.  20.  XV.
26.  LVI.  10.  21.

Veilingius,


NAMES  -and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


VeflingiOs,  to  be  defended  by  a  juft  in-
terpretation of  his  words,  XL.
20.
Veflels. Vid.  Sanguiferous.

Large,  in  the  thorax  found  more
toward  the  left  fide  than  is
natural,  LVI.  18.

Why  the  aorta  is  fooner  injut'd  by
a  fall  from  a  high  place,  than
the  vena  cava,  LIII.  8.  36.

The  thicker  and  larger  trunks,  why
plac'd  where they are, LIIl.

Method  of  making  ligatures  on  them
to  flop  haemorrhages,  how  an-
cient, L.  54.
Viflorius,  Benedi£l.  though  not  men-
tion'd  by  Papadopolus,  was  a
Profeflbr at Padua, LVIIL

Vidius,  Vidus. Whether  he  has  defcrib'd
the  femi-lunar  membrane  in  the
eye,  XIII.  25.
Vieufen. Some  things  from  him  not  to

be  approv'd-of,  XXIIL  g.
Vipers  have  bubbles  of  air  in  their  blood,
V.  22.
Obfervations  of  the very great  ufe
of frefti  vipers  in an atrophy,
ulcers,  and  cutaneous  diforders,
LV,  14.  &  feq.
They neither occafion thirft, nor
diflipate  the  fpirits  in  old-men,
ibid.  15.
Who  among  the  anciefits  found  them
ferviceable  in  incurable ulcers,
ibid.
Poifon of. The  different accounts
given  of  its  tafte  by  thofe  who
have  tried  it,  LIX.  30.
Whether  this  be  receiv'd  into  the
blood  by  the  veins  or  nerves,
ibid.  33.
Why  theii  bites  are  moft  prejudicial
when  they  have  been  long  with-
out food,  ibid.  31.
Why  not always equally preju-
dicial, ibid.  &c  feq.
Whether  they  always  and  very  ex-
peditioufly  bring  on  the  jaundice,
ibid.  36.
Why  produftive  of  different  effcfts
on  different  perfons,  ibid.  34.  &
feq.
The  principal  remedies propos'd


for its cure examin'd  -  into,
ibid.  29.  &  feq.
The  method  of  curing  of it by
fuflion,  how  ancient,  ibid.  29.
What  is  principally  to  be  at-
tended-to  in  this,  ibid.  30.
Vifcera, feeming  to  be  hanging down-
wards, to  what  owing,  XXVL
25.  LIV.  38.
Obfervations  of  their  not  being  found
in  the  belly,  how  to  be  explain'd,
XXXVm.  47.
Various  caufes  of  their  coalefcence,

XXXIX.  30.
Small  granules,  as  it  were,  adhering
to  their  furface,  how  to  be  ac-
counted-for,  XXXVIII.  35.  &
feq.
Cicatrices  in,  .when  neither  wounds
or  figns  of  ulcers  have  preceded,
haw  occafion'd,  ibid.  42.
Ulcers,  old  external,  are  not  eafily  to  be
cur'd,  XXVIII.  9.  LV.  13.
When  they  are  heal'd,  what  ought
to  be  done,  ibid.
Umbilical Vein, how appearing to be
open'd  again  in fome  fubjedls,
XXXVIII.  33.
,  Chord. Some  particular,  vices  of  it,
XLVKI.  25.
Unguis  in  the  eye. Vid.  Celfus,  Eye.
Voice,  formation of  by the  glottis,  de-
fended, XIV.  33.
Lofs  of: Vid.  Aphony.

The  caufes  of  this,  XIV.  33.
Obfervations  of  its  coming-on  at
certain  intervals  ; and  the  me-
thod of  cure,  XIV.  37.  LXIII.

Cafe  of  one  of  long  continuance,
curM  by  accident,  LXIII.  15.
Whether  phyficians  may  imi-
tate this in their  praflice,
ibid.
Vogelius,  Paul.  Henr.. P.  Prof. Erfurt.

commended,  XXXVI.  13.
Vomiting, the  different  fuppos'd inftru-
ments  of, mention'd and  exa-
min'd, LIV.  11,  12.
Obfervation  of  a  vomiting  of very
long {landing, and hereditary,
XXX.  7.
Very  obftinate,  the  various  caufes  of
enumerated, and confirm'd by
obfervations,  XXXiX.  23.

The


I N D E X referring to


The  advice  given  to  a  perfon  af-
flidled witn an incurable vo-
miting, ibid.
How  this may^arife from a  preter-
natural  thicknefs of the  coats
of  the  gall-bladder,  XXX.  8.
From  a  vitiated  ftate  of  the  pan-
creas, ibid.  &  feq.
From a ftraitnefs or  hardnefs of

the  pylorus,  ibid.  13.
From  difeafes  of  the  inteftine  duo-
denum, ibid.
Hiftory  of  a  vomiting  from  a  diforder
in  the  kidnies, though  it was
fuppos'd  to  be owing  to  fome
fault in the ftomach, XXX,
22.
Matter  of  various  colours  thrown-up,
to  what  owing,  3.  15.  ibid.
Very  black  efpecially,  ibid 37.
Of  an  asruginous  colour,  examin'd,
XVI.  8.
Obfervations,  ancient  and  modern,  of
calculi vomited-up, XXXVII.
41.
Frogs  and  lizards  fuppos'd  to  be  vo-
mited-up, what  they probably
were,  XXX.  21.
Obfcrvation  of  an  herb-like  fubftance
thrown-up by a perfon who
never  ate  any  herbs,  ibid.
What  this  might  be,  ibid.
Bloody in a tumor  of  the  fpleen,
whether  fufficiently  demonftrated
by  anatomifts  to  arife  generally
from  an aperture or dilatation
of  the  vas  breve,  XXXVI.  12.
How  this  is  to  be  explain'd,  ibid.
U.eters,  two  from  one  kidney,  VII.  17,
LIV.  33.  LXIV.  2.
Valves  of,  demonftrated,  IV.  19.
An  extraordinary afteftion of from
hydatids within them, XLII.
12.
Urethra,  male. Whether  its  opening  be-
neath  the  glans is always  at-
tended with fterility, XLVI.
8.
The  lower  paries  of  it  found  wanting

in  two  fubjefts,  ibid.  &  9.
The  greater canaliculi of  it found
only in living fubjefts, ibid.

9-

Obfervation  of one running along
the back of the fenis, and


wanting  its  fuperlor  paries,  but

not  thofe  canaliculi,  LXVU.  6.
Certain  fibres,  as  it were, found

in  it,  whence  probably  arifing,

XLII.  41.
Sometimes preventing the intro-

dudlion of the catheter, X.

An  impediment to  this  of  a  dif-
ferent  kind, XXXIV. 7. &
feq.
Caruncles  in. What is to be at-
tended-to and ob'erv'd in the
controverfy concerning them,
XLlI.  38.  &  feq.
Urethra,  female. How  calculi  may  fome-
times  be  form'd  in  it,  ibid.  42.
Ofculum  of,  miftaken  by  a  phyfician
of  no  fmall  note  for  the  orifice
of  the  vagina,  XLVI.  12.
A  membrane  prolaps'd  through  this
orifice, the probable  caufe  of,
XLII.  42.
Urinary parts. The  diagnofes  of  their
difeafes  oftentimes  prove  deceit-
ful, XLII.  3.  16.
May  fomeiimes  be  ulcerated,  though
blood  is  not  feen  in  the  urine,
ibid.  16.
Whether  there  are  other  pafiages  for
the  urine  into  the bladder  than
by  the  ureters,  XLI.  2.  LVIII.
16.
Urine. Vid.  Diuretics.

Depofitingfandy  particles,  as  it  were,
at  the  fides  of  the  urinal,  gene-  -
rally  denotes a happy folution
of  the  difeafe,  VIII.  10.  XLIX.
21.
Becoming  mucilaginous  from  watery
in perfons afflided with the
ftone,  why  frequently before a
fatal  convulfion,  XL.  3.
The controverfy concerning the
urine  of  a  certain  perfon,  whe-
ther it  was  bloody  or  not,  how
ended,  XLII.  45.
Account  of  a  diTpute  at  Padua,  whe-
ther the urine  was milky  from
chyle  mix'd  with  it,  or  purulent,
ibid.  44.
Membranes, as it  were, or  broken
hydatids,  obferv'd  fwimming  in
fome  urine,  found  to  be  polypous
concretions,  XLI.  13.

How


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  Notice.


How  grape-ftones,  and  fome  other
fubftances  feem'd  to  be  difcharg'd
with  it,  XLII.  45.

Difcharg'd  by  the  anus,  by  whom
firft  obferv'd,  ibid.  46.
Various  obfervations  of  the  fame
kind,  different  and  fometimes
very  difficult  explanations  of,
ibid.

"Worms  faid  to  be  difcharg'd  with  it,
how-to  be  conlider'd,  ibid.  6,  7,
29.

Continually  dripping  away,  though
the  bladder  is  ftill  diftended  with
urine,  XXXIX.  34.  XLII.  22.
This  may  deceive  an  ^incautious
perfon,  V.  8.  XXXIX.  33.
LVI.  12.

How  a  retention  and  incontinence  of
the  urine  may  fubfift  at  the  fame
time,  XXXIX,  34.

Dripping-away  and  incontinence  of^
at  the  fame  time,  how  occafion'd,
XLII.  36.

Suppreffion  of, in  the  bladder, de-
pending on  many  caufes  out  of
the  bladder.  XLI.  11,  J2.
One  caufe  from  the  proftate  gland,

ibid.  13,  14.  17.
Obfervation  of  a  kind  of  epidemic

fuppreffion,  ibid.  14.
A  kind  of  diabetes  is frequently
join'd  with  a  fuppreffion,  ibid.
5f  15.
A  cafe  of  a  very  obftinate  fdp-
preffion  cur'd  by  leeches  applied
to  the  anus,  or  by  clyfters,  ibid,
II.
When,  and  why,  neither  purga-
tives  nor other flimulants are
of  fervice  in  this  difeafe,  XLI.
II,  12.
Of  the  pundure  in  the  perinaeum
or  the  hypogaftrium,  when  ne-
celTary,  XLII.  36.

-In  what  cafes,  though  much  urine
fhould  not  feem  to  be  in  the
bladder,  it  is  neverthelefs  necef-
fary  to  draw  it  off,  XLII.  35.

Excretion  of  it,  fometimes  fupplied
for  a  time  by  other  evacuations,
XLI.  5.

How  a  fuppreffion  from  a  fault  in
the  kidnies  or  bladder,  may  be
diftinguifli'd,  LXVI.  15.
Voi.  III.


Uterus. Who  firft  publifli'd  an  account
of  one  really  bipartite.  III.  21.
In  vi^hom we cannot poffiblv deny
that  it  is  wanting, XLVI.  12,

13-

Whether  it  has  been  fomeumcs  cut
away,  and  the  woman  recover'd
afterwards,  XLV.  3.  &  feq.

A  obfervation  of  one  found  extre.Tiely
fmall,  XLVI.  20,  21.

Obliquity  of  it,  and  its  diagnofis,
and  caufes,  were  partly  known
to  the  ancients, XLVJII.  31.

Sometimes  originally  oblique,  ibid.

Frequently  fo,  ibid.  &  39.

Not  more  frequently  fo  towards  the

right  fide,  ibid.  39.
The moft common caufe of  it,

ibid.  &  feq.
Whether  fuch  a  pofition  can  caufe
lamenefs,  ibid.  33.
If  it  can  have  other  bad  confe-
quences,  efpecially  affeit  the
difcharge  of  urine,  ibid.  39.
Its  lymphatics,  XL VIII.  45.
Ofculum  of, how  to be feen in a
living  fubjea,  XLVI.  18.
Corona of  this, naturally lower
before  than  behind,  LXIX.  10.
Valve  of its  cervix obferv'd to be

turn'd  upwards,  XXXV.  12.
The  examination  of  the  uterus  of  a
late-married- woman,  XVI.  2.
Of  that  of  a  woman  who  died  in
" the  a£l  of  venery,  XXVI.  J3.
Sinus  of  it  juft before  menftruation

didended  with  bloodj  XVI.  3^.
Prolapfus  of  it, how to be  under-
ftood,  and its various fpecies.
XLV.  2.
Thefe  were  known to  the.  moft

ancient  phyficians,  ibid.  3.
The  caufes  of  them,  ibid.  2.  6,  7.

10.  12.  &  feq.
Obferv'd  alfo  in  brutes,  ibid.  8,  &

feq.
Why  a  prolaps'd uterus is more
difficultly  kept  in  its  place  when
return'd than the anus,'  ibid.
'5-
The  advantages  and  difadvantages
of  peffaries, XXIL  22. XLV.
J 5.  &  feq.
5D  Who


INDEX referring to


Who  before  Ruyfch  obferv'd  the
bladder  falldown  with  the  uterus,
XLV.  12.
Who  firft  taught  that  a  woman
may  become  pregnant  notwith-
ftanding  a  prolapTus,  ibid.  13.
What  may  impofe  upon  the  I'ur-
geon  as  a  prolapfus,  though  it
is  not  fuch,  and  how  it  may  be
diftin^uifli'd  from  one,  XXXIV.
II.  XLV.  4,

Cicatrices  of  it  externally,  how  pro-
bably caub'd,  XXXVIII.  42.

Excrefcences,  circular  internal,  fome
not  caus'd  by  an  adhefion  of
the  placenta,  XLVII.  32,  33.

Tubercles  in  it  growing  larger,  the
different nature of, XXXIX.

36.
Steatomata fometimes found in it,

but  not  often,  ibid.
Tumors  in it,  whether  immoveable

or  not,  XXXIX.  13.
Some figns of thefe mention'd,

ibid.
Scirrhous,  as  it  was  fupppos'd  to

be,  inftance  of  one  cur'd,  ibid.  35
Various kinds of thefe difeafes,

ibid.  35,  36.
From whence thefe arife, ibid.

36-
Cancerous, how prevented from

increafing,  ibid.  35,
Cancer ulcerated of it, incurable
from  its  very  beginning,  XLVII.
25.
,How  fometimes it may be  alle-
viated, ibid.

Sometimes  not  attended  with  a
foetid  difcharge,  or  with  one
of  a  white  inodorous  matter,
XXXIX.  33.  35.  XLVII.  25.

The  fmall  beginnmgs  of  this  di-

feafe obferv'd in diffeflions,

XLVn.  27.  &  feq.

Parietes  of  it  internally  chang'd  into

a  febaceous  matter,  XXXVIII.

34-  . ^

Veficulas  proper  to  the  cervix,  fome-
times alfo  found  at  the  fundus,
XLVII.  20.  &  feq.

Obfervation  ef  the  cervix  extended
to  a  very  great  length,  XLV.
II.

Moles. Vid.  Moles.


Ruptur'd  in  delivery. Vid.  Delivery.
Polypi, or  polypous  concretions,  found

in  it,  XXI.  20.
Vagina,  orifice  of,  found  quite  fiiut

up  from the  birth,  XLVI.  12.

Vid.  VVomen-iinperrorate.
I.  leers  of,  how  frequently  caus'd,

and what they are, XXXII.

13-
Whether  the interna! coat of  it
can be  inverted, XXXIII.  jir,
XLV.  14.
Clos'd  juft  below  its  middle  in  a
certain  woman  from  her  birth.
XLVL  II.
Condylomata  of,  how  fometimes  from
the  very  original  formation,  L.
50,  &  feq.
Uterine  Fluor. Vid.  Fluor  Albus.

Furor  is  not  caus'd  by  an  extraordi-
nary bignefs  of  the  ovarium,
Vm.  35.
Vulpius,  Jo.  fiaptift,  P.  Prof.  Patav.
commended,  VI.  14.  VIII.  6.
XVIII.  22.  37.  XIX.  34.
XXXVL24.  XLn.22.  LIIL
26.


W

WAGNERUS, Petrus  Chrif^.
Caef.  Acad.  N.  C.  commended,
XXXII.  3.
Wagnerus, Reinh. Med.  Hafn. com-
mended, XXXI.  23.  XLIL  7.
Wahrendorffius,  Jo.  Petrus, formerly  of
the  Csef.  Acad. N. C. com-
mended XXXIV.  13,  34.
Wahherus, Aug.  Frid. formerly  Chief-
phyfician  to  the  King  of  Poland,
commended, XII. 11.  .XIV.
12.
Walthieri,  Balth.  M.D.  at  Venice,  com-
mended, IX.  3.  24.
Obfervations  of  his,  IX.  3.  25.
Wafting, the more frequent caufe  of,
XLIX.  19.
Very  great,  to  what  owing,  ibid.
Why  the  ikin  of  people  who  die  of
it  is  harder  than  natural,  ibid.

17-
What  is generally obferv'd in the
bodies of fuch, ibid. 18. &
feq.

Waters,


NAMES  and  PASSAGES  moft  worthy  of  NotJc?^*


Waters,  whether  river  or  well  are  more
wholefome,  XLIL  17, LXVI.

4-  ' .  c

Waters  efFas'd  into  difFerent  cavities  of
the  bodv,  an  examination  of,
IV.  2.  XVL2.  6.  10.  XX.  26.
32.47.  XXII.  10.  14.  XXXVI.
2.  8.  XXXVIII.  6.  8.  22.  34.
XLI.  4.  XLIII.  16.
What  advantages  can  arife  from  this,

XXXVIII.  7,  8.
What  is  to be  attended  to,  that  we

are  not  deceiv'd  therein,  ibid.
How  it  is that  concretions  or  mem-
branes, as it  were, are often
found  fwimming  in  thefe  waters,
XX.  37.
Or  certain  new  coats,  as  it  were,
covering the  vifcera, included
in  thefe  waters,  ibid.
Who  even  formerly  obferv'd  thefe,
ibid.
Weiffius, Jo. Nicol. P. Prof. Altorf.
commended, XIX. 14.. 47.
XXXIV,  16.  34. XXXVI.  16.
i8.  LVI.  34.  37.
Weitbrecht,  Jonas,  formerly  of  the  Imp.
Acad. Petropol. commended,
XXIV.  4.
Some  things  relative  to  his  Syndefmo-
logia,  LVI.  27.  37.
Wencker,  Chrift.  commended, XXXII.

5.  XXXVI.  32.
'Wepfer, obfervations of his explain'd,

XI.  9,  10.
Werlhofius, Paul.  Gottl. of  the  R.  S.
Lond. commended, II. 10.
XXXIV.  16. XXXVIII.  25.
33-  LV.  5.
Weftphal, And. commended, XXXI.

26.
Wefzpremus,  Step,  commended,  LXIV.

4.  LXV.  x6,  17.  LXVIII.  2.
Whytt, Rob. Phyfician at Edinburgh,

commended,  XLII.  19.
Widmannus, Jo. Guil. formerly Csef.
Acad. N. C. commended,
XXVIII.  15.  XXXIX.  15.
Willi, Nicol. commended, LXV, 16,

17,  18.

Willis,  defended,  VIIL  13.

Miftaken,  XI.  14.

Animadverfion  on  a  certain  obferva-
tion  of  his  on  a  morbid  dead
body,  XL.  ig.


'^  His  opinion  concerning  the  caufe
of  a  tympanites,  confider'd,
XXXVIII,  23,  &  feq.
Wine,  new,  principally  to  be  avoided  by
thofe  whofe  vefl'els  of  the  heart,
or other veffels, are vitiated,

xxvn.  3.

Winkler,  Adolp.  Bernh.  commended,
XXIV.  16.  30. XXVII.  20.

Winflow,  Jac.  Benig.  formerly  of  the
R.  Sc.  Acad,  at  Paris,  com-
mended, XIV.  12.  XXiV.  37.
XXVI.  23.  XXVIil.  17.
XXXVIII.55.XLV.  23.  L.8.
LII.  6.  LIV.  38. LXVI. 14,

Wogan,  Jo.  David, of the  Casf. Acad.

N,  C. commended, XLVlIL.

II-
Wolffius,  Jo.  Mart,  formerly  of  the  fame

Acad, commended, XLIV.  2.

L.  44.
Wolffius,  Jo.  Phil, of  the  fame Acad.

commended,  XVL37.  XXXIV.

19.  LIX.  5.
Woman, feven-times married, the  dif--

feaion  of,  XXXVII.  29.
Women,  imperforate,  when  faf'ely  to  be

cut,  and  when  not,  XL VI.  12,

13-

Womb. Vid.  Uterus.
Woolcombers,  why  fubjecl  to  difeafes  of
the  lungs,  and  death  from  thence,
X,  18.
Worms, fomefigns of,  fallacious,  XXXr.6.
A  great  number  of  them,  attended
with  very  ereat  hunger  and  thirfl:
obferv'd,  XXVIII.  3.
Sometimes  found  with  fcarcely  any.
fign  of  them,  XXXIV.  26.
What are cali'd broad, or tape-
worms ; with obfervations on
them,  ibid.  37.
How  fome  are  faid  to  have  perforated

' the  inteftines,  ibid.  36.
Some  writings  concerning  them-  are
to  be  underftood in  a  difFerent
fenfe than what they at firit
feem  to  have,  ibid.  37.
Of  the  kidnies. Vide  Kidnies.
Some  may  poflibly  be  found in the
membranes  of  the  pericardium  ;
though  pofitive obfervations  of
this are wanting, XXXill.

IS-

What


INDEX, Sec.


What  muft  lie  tliought  of  thofe  which
are  laid  to  have been  found  in
the  heart  and  fanguiferous  vef-
fels,  XXIV.  23.
What,  of  thofe  fuppos'd  to  be  dif-
charg'd  with  the urine, XLII.
6.  29.
Whether  worms  or  other  animalcules
have  hv'd within the  fkuli,  L
8,9.
How they may live withint he
t\ofe,  ibid.
-Dbfervation  of  one  found  within  the
found bronchia of a found
hedge-hodge,  XIX.  41.
How  they may caufe  true,  not to
fay falfe  pleurfies. Vid.  Pleu-
lifies.
"^Vounds. Vid.  Bread,  Diaphragm,  Head,
Inteftines, Mefentery, Scapula, Sto-
mach.
Haemorrhages  from  them  are  to  be
moderated, and not entirely
ftopp'd,  LIII.  12,  13-
How  fuch  which  are  flight  fometimes
bring  on  very  violent  diforders,
and  death,  LIV.  50.
How  pus  may  be  carried  from  them
to  other parts. Vid. Head,
wounds  of,  and  LIII.  17.  25.
An  account  of a gangrene which
attended  all  wounds  at  Bondna
in  June  1689,  LI.  12.
And  of  one  formerly  attending  all
wounds  of  the  head  at  another
place,  LI.  13.
Of  the  eye-brows,  LI.  16.40.
The  figns  of  an  approaching  convul-
fion  in  wounds. Vid.  Fauces.
"IVounded-perfons, fome fymptoms at-
tending are  not  to  be  imputed  to
the  wound  itfelf,  LIII.  15.  17.
Their  dead  bodies, why  frequently
putrefying  foon,  Lll.  5.


Wrift,  fmall  tumor  of,  fuddenly  difap-
pearing,  and  as  fuddenly  re-
turning of  itfelf,  L.  19.


OUNG,  James,  R.  S.  L.  S.
an  obfervation  from,  difficult  t©
be  expIain'cJ,  how  probably  to
be  underflood,  XLII.  45.


ZACUTUS,  Lufitanus  miftaken  LIX.
36- ^
Zambeccarius, Jofeph, alfo miftaken,

XXVIII.  7.  LII.  40.
Zanichelli,  Jo.  Jerom.  formerly  a  chemift
at  Venice,  commended,  XXII.
28.  XLVII.  7.  LXII.  I.
Obfervations  of  his  on  confumptions,
XXII.  28.
On  the  balfam  Copaiba,  XLV.  20.
Remedies recommended by him  in
uterine  haemorrhages,  XLVII.  7^
Zani,  Valer.  a  very  learned  count  at  Bo-
nona,  difeafe  and  difTeiSlion  of,
IV.  2.
Zanottns,  Franc,  perpetual  Secretary  Inft,
Sc.  Bonon.  commended,  XXI.
42.
Zeviani, Jo.  Verard. Phyfician  at  Ve-
rona, commended, XXXII.  i,
XXXVni.25.  XLI.5.  XLIX.

36-

Zinn,  Jo.  Gottfr.  [lately  Prof,  at  Berlin,
commended,  XIII.  14.  LII.  27.
LXin.  II.  LXVIII.  13,

Zuinger,  Jo.  Rud.  P.  Prof,  at  Bafil.  com-
mended, XII.  6.  13.  15.
XXXIV.  34.

Zwinger,  Theod.  formerly  Prof,  at  the
Tame  place,  commended,  XXIII.


THE


E N D„
