The Seats and Causes of Diseases Investigated by Anatomy, Vol. II
Giovanni Battista Morgagni, trans. Benjamin Alexander (1769)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Alexander's 1769 translation of Morgagni's 'De sedibus', vol. II (ends 'End of Book III'). This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

SEATS  and  CAUSES

D I S E A S E S

INVESTIGATED BY ANATOMY5

IN FIVE BOOKS,

CONTAINING

A  G'c-at  Variety  of  DISSECTIONS,  with  Remarks.

. TO WHICH ARE ADDED

Very Accurate and Copious INDEXES of the
Principal  Things  and  Names  therein  contained.

Translated  from  the  Latin  of

JOHN BAPTIST MORGAGNI,

Chief  ProfeiTor  of  Anatomy,  and  Prefident  of  the  Univerfity  at  Padua,

By BENJAMIN AL  E  X  A  N  D  E  R,  M.  D.

INTHREEVOLUMES.
VOL. 11.


SM


LONDON,

Printed for A.  Millar  ; and T. Cad  ell, his SucceiTvr, in the  Strand;

and  Johnson  and  Payne,  in  Pater-nofter  Row,

MDCCLXIX.


THE  LAMAR  SOUTTEB  LIBRARY  /  UMMS


RDTDEl lbSM7


T  O


R.


U  S  S  E  L  L


SIR,

IT  gives  me  a  fecfet,  and  a  fincere,  pleafure,  that  I  have
the  honour  of  addreffing  myfelf  to  You  on  this  occa-
fion.  1  have  been  long-«'wi£hing  for  an  opportunity  of
difcharging,  in  fome  meafure,  the  debt  of  gratitude  and
refpe<5t  which  I  owe  to  Your  Chara6i:er.  And  I  might  have
waited  ftill  longer,  for  fuch  an  opportunity,  had  not  the
occafion  before  me,  which  I  gladly  embrace,  prefented
itfelf.

Various  are  the  views  in  which  Dr.  R  u  s  s  e  l  ftands
intitled  to  my  efteem,  I  mean  as  the  Preceptor,  the  Phyli-
cian,  and  the  Friend.  In  each  of  thefe  departments  have
his  Humanity  and  Capacity  been  confpicuous.  And  to
Him,  in  each  of  thefe  Charadiers,  do  I  ftand  almofl  equally
indebted.  From  His  examples,  as  a  Preceptor,  I  long  had
the  pleafure  and  advantage  of  receiving  the  moil  excellent
maxims  in the Pradice  of  Medicine,  and  of  learning  an

•a 2  accurate


iy  DEDICATION.

accurate  Attention  to  Difeafes.  And  that  ptaclical  Skilly
which  I  had  often  been  witnefs  to  in  others,  I  have  been
happy  enough  to  experience  in  myfelf.  Nor  is  it  without
a  peculiar  pleafure  that  I  exprefs  my  gratitude  on  this  head,
as  well  becaufe  it  is  the  only  tribute  I  can  be  allowed
to  beftow,  as  becaufe  the  kind  offices  of  Friendfhip  went
hand-in-hand  with  the  endeavours  of  the  Phyfician.

The  Public,  then,  Sir,  will  at  once  be  a  judge  of  the
propriety  of  this  Addrefs.  The  Public,  which  is  always
grateful  itfelf,  and  refpeds  that  principle  in  individuals,
will  fee  how  juft  and  indifpenfable  it  is  to  dedicate  to  You
a  part  of  the  Labours  of  that  Life,  which  You  have  been
thus  inftrum€ntal  in  preferving.  That  You  may  live  hap-
pily and  long,  in  the  exertion  of  that Medical  Skill,  for

the  benefit  of  your  fellow-creatures and  that  Your  friends

may,  confequently,  be  long  indulged  with  that  conde-
fcenfion,  and  readinefs  to  oblige,  which  I  have  fo  often
experienced  at  Your  hands are  the  earneft  wiflies  of

Your  flneere  Friend,.

And  refpedful  humble  Servant^


BENJ.  ALEXANDER.


[  V  ]


CONTENTS

O  F T  H  E

SECOND VOLUME.

BOOK  III. Of  Disorders of  the Belly.

Letter

XXVIII.  /^  F  preternatural  Hunger  -,  of  Jlarmng  to  Death ;  and  of

injured  Deglutition.

XXIX.  Of  the  Singultus  j  of  chewing  the  Cud  in  Meny  and  of  Pain:
in  the  Stomach..

XXX.  Of  Vomiting.

XXXI.  Of  intejlinal  Frofluvia,  without  Blood,  or  Bloody..

XXXII..  Of  Cofli'uenefs ;  and  of  the  Files.

XXXIII.  Of  the  Frolapfus  of  the  Inteftine  ReBum,

XXXIV.  Of  the  Fain  of  the  Intejlines,

XXXV.  Of  the  fame.

XXXVI.  Of  Tumor  and  Fain  in  the  Hypochondria*

XXXVII.  Of  the  Jaundice  •.  and  of  bilious  Calculi.

XXXVIII.  Of  the  Hydrops  Jfcites,  Tympanites;  the  Dropfy  of  the  Feri^
tonaum ;  and  others  which  we  call  incified  Dropfies.

r  XXXIX..


VI  CONTENTS.

Letter

XXXIX.  Of  the  remaining  internal  I'limours  of  the  Belly.

XL,  Of  Pain  in  the  Loins.

XLI.  Of  the  Suppreffon  of  Urine.

XLII.  Of  the  Difficulty  of  Making-water ;  the  Ardor  TJrince  -,  and
other  Diforders  in  which  the  Urine  is  concerned.

XLIII.  Of  Heriiice.

XLIV.  Of  the  Gonorrhcea.

XLV.  Of  the  Defcent  of  the  Uterus;  and  of  the  Afcent  thereof  as
the  Women  call  it.

XL VI.  Of  the  Impediments  to  Venery  ;  and  of  Sterility  in  both  Sexes.

XLVII.  Of  the  Dforders  of  the  Menfirml  Flux  ;  and  of  the  Fluor
Muliehris.

XLVIII.  Of  falfe  Pregnancy;  of  Abortion ; and  of  unfuccefsful  De-
livery.


ERRATUM.
Page  3.  Line  i.  for  Letter  XXVII.  read  XXVIII.


THE


SEATS and CAUSES


O  F


I


A S E


INVESTIGATED. BY ANATOMY.


O O K. the T H I


Which  treats  of  Disorders  cf  the  B


ELl^Yo.


LETTER  the  TWENTY-SEVENTH,.

Contains  fome  Obfervations  on  preternatural  Hunger,  and'
upon  Death  from  the  fame  Gaufe :  and  afterwards:
treats  of  injur'd  Deglutition..


I.  ^'^^F  all  the  four  books,  into  which'  the  S'ep\ilchretum  Anatomicum  is'
■  1  divided,  the  third  is  by  far  the  lOngeft,  inafmuch  as  it  compre-
\,.^  hends  the  diforders  of  all  parts  whatever,  that  relate  particu-
larly to  the  belly,  and  not  only  in  the  male  body,  but  in  the  female  alfo.
For  which  reafon,  I  fhall  now  take  the  more  pains  to  ftudy  brevity,  as  far  asy
I  am  able;  which  I  am  under  a  neceffity  of  doing,  if  I  would,  at  length,
ever  put  a  finifhing  hand  to  this  work,  that  I  have  undertaken  for  you.
And  there  feems  to  me,  to  be  the  moft  room  for  doing  this,  in  thofe  feve-
ral  fubjefts,  which  are  fpoken  of  feparately,  in  the  four  firft  fedlions,  "  Lofs
"  of  appetite,  preternatural  hunger,  morbid  thirft,  and  injur'd  deglutition.'*
For  if  you  except  the  laft,  there  is  not  one  difledtion,  which  has  been  per-
form'd  by  Valfalva,  or  by  me,  that  relates,  in  particular,  to  thefe  arguments^
And  left  you  (hould  be  furpriz'd  at  this,  only  confider,  how  feldom  it  hap-
pens, that  any  perfon  dies,  whom  a  loft  appetite  for  food,  or  too  great
hunger,  or  thirft  has  confum'd,  without  fome  violent  diforder  being  joined
with  it,  or  being  the  confequence  of  it.  Wherefore,  if  where  Ihave  treated
of  this  violent  diforder,  or  fhall  treat  of  it,  you  find  that  thefe  diforders  are,
at  the  fame  time,  taken  notice  of,  Vi^hat  occafion  is  there,  that  thofe  things,,
which  are  neceflarily  faid,  or  to  be  faid,.in  other  places,  fhould  be  needlefsly
repeated  here  ?  Turn  over,  I'  befeech  you,-  thefe  three  firft  feftions^  of  the
Sepulchretum.  You  will  fee  that  a  languid  appetite,  or  a  deficiency  there-
of, was  generally  join'd  with  great  injuries  of  the  vifcera,  that  is  with  great
diforders;  and  that  great  thirft  was  generally  join'd  with  fevers,  .with  in-
flammations, and  with  dropfies.  For  which  reafon  Bonetus  tells  us,  that
fome  of  the  fame  obfervations  are  again  produc'd  by  him,,  in  other  places,
and  even  fome  of  thofe,  in  regard  to  which  he  makes  no  fuch  declaration',
are  reproduc'd  in  other  places.  But  this  is  lefs  furprizing,  than  that  the  fame,
obfervations  ftiould  be  again  repeated,  in  one  and  the  fame  fedion.  For  in
the  firft  feftion,  the  third,  and  fourth,  obfervations  are  no  others  than  thofe

B,2-  which.


4  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly,

which  are  produced  in  article  the  feventh,  under  the  ninth  obfervation,  and
article  the  firft,  under  the  tenth  obfervation.  Nor  in  the  third  feftion,  in
lilie  manner,  are  the  third,  and  fourth,  obfervations,  any  other  than  what
arc  again  given,  under  the  fifth  obfervation,- article  the  feventh  and  third,"
as  thole  alfo  are  one  and  the  fame,  that  are  found  under  obfervation  the
feventh,  article  the  fecond,  and  in  the  additamenta,  under  obfervation  tlie
fourth,  article  the  firft, befides  others  which  you  perhaps  will  remark.

2.  Thefe  things,  however,  I  do  not  fay  of  the  fecond  feftion.  Yet  one
thing  I  fay,  that  this  exceffive  hunger  was,  alfo,  join'd  together  with  fome
confiderable  difeafe,  as  either  the  various  fymptoms,  here  and  there,  in  the
living  patients,  or  the  diforders  in  the  vifcera  of  the  bodies  after  death,  de-
monftrate.  Befides,  if  you  except  fome  certain  conformations,  that  are
very  rare,  and  thofe  fuch  as  were  imprefs'd  on  the  very  ftamina  of  the  body,
as  for  inftance,  the  pylorus  being  deficient,  or  wider,  and,  at  the  fame  time,
much  fliorter  than  is  natural,  and  the  tube  of  the  inteftine,  being  lefs  dif-
torted  into  folds,  and  circles,  to  which  I  wonder  thefe  two  other  caufes,
that  are  fo  well  known,  one  of  which  was  found  by  Ruyfch  to  be  adven-
titious (a),  and  the  other  by  Dionis  to  be  congenial  (^),  are  not  added  -,  I
fay,  if  you  except  thefe,  in  moft  other  obfervations  there  will  be  reafon  to
doubt,  whether  a  true,  or  a  falfe,  caufe  of  unufual  hunger  be  advanced  •,
as  when  that  caufe  is  fought  after  in  the  fpleen,  as  if  it  difcharg'd  fomething
into  the  ftomach  (c),  and  when  it  is  fuppofed  to  confifb  in  the  enlarg'd  ftate.
of  the  ftomach  (d),  which  you  will  fay,  v^^as  rather  the  efitct  of  too  great
a  quantity  of  food  being  taken  in,  than  the  caufe,  juft  as  in  the  firft  feftion
(e),  you  would  fuppofe,  that  the  very  fmall  capacity  of  the  contrafted
ftomach,  in  a  man  who  had  eaten  nothing  for  a  long  time,  was  the  effeft  of
taking  in  no  food  for  fo  long  a  time,  and  by  no  means  the  caufe  why  the
patient  could  eat  nothing.  And  in  regard  to  the  fpleen,  and  the  magnitude
of  the  ftomach,  you  will  doubt  fo  much  the  more,  by  and  by,  when  you
have  read  the  appendix  after  the  feventh  obfervation,  and  the  tenth  ob-
fervation itfelf.  But  will  you  believe  the  unufual  magnitude  of  the  liver  (f)j
to  have  been  the  caufe  of  exceffive  hunger,  either  becaufe  it  cheriihed  the
ftomach  more  by  its  warmth,  or  becaufe  it  feparated  a  greater  quantity  of
bile?  or  rather  an  efi^eft,  becaufe  from  an  encreas'd  quantity  of  nourifhment,
this  foft  vifcus  had  been  much  encreas'd  in  Its  fize,  juft  as  it  happens  in
geefe  that  are  full-fed  ?  and  if  you  think  thus,  in  regard  to  the  liver,  will
you  not  judge  nearly  the  fame'of  the  pancreas  alfo  (g)  ?  as  if  truly,  becaufe
it  was  furnifh'd  v/ith  two  du£ts,  which  went  to  the  inteftines  in  diftin£t
^places  (an  appearance  that  has  been,  more  than  once,  found  in  other  bodies,
and  even  in  thofe  that  had  not  been  troubled  with  a  morbid  hunger)  the
vifcus  muft,  for  that  reafon,  fecrete  a  much  greater  quantity  of  juice,  which
circumftance  was  not  to  be  argued  from  the  number  of  the  ducSts,  as  thefe
might  be  fmall  in  proportion,  but  entirely  from  the  more  enlarg'd  ftate  of
the  vifcus,  which  was,  in  other  refpefts,  found,  if  its  ftate.  was  really  en-

(a)  Obf.  anat.  chir.  74.  (e)  Obf.  5.

(i)  Anat.  de  I'homme  demonftr.  z.  ([fj  Obf.  2.

(c)  Obf.  4.  &  feq.  (^)  Obf.  13.
{d)  Obf.  I.  &  8.

larg'd.


Letter  XX VII. Article  3.  5

iarg'd.  Finally,  to  omit  other  things,  fhould  ic  have  been  faid,  that  the
"  pica  had  arifen  from  the  ftomach  being  almoft  in  a  fphacelated  ftate  ?"
certainly  not  •,  for  this  mortal  difpofition  of  the  ftomach,  as  it  was  in  a  wo-
man, who  was  juft  at  tlie  point  of  death,  could  not,  without  doubt,  have
exifted,  at  the  time  "  when  fhe  was  fond  of  eating  cinders  and  afhes."

3.  But  do  you  approve  of  nothing, in  this  whole  fedion,  you  will  fay  ?
yes :  I  do  approve  of  many  things, notwithftanding  I  could  wifh,  there  had

.been  a  better  choice,  in  fome  things,  and  in  others,  a  more  nice  judgment.
There  are,  alfo,  Itill  other  cafes,  that  I  cannot  admit  without  fome  hefitation  :
iind  others  on  the  contrary,  that  I  am  even  able  to  confirm.  You  fee,  for
inftance,  what  is  faid  in  the  ninth  obfervation,  of  fome  lice  being  de-
vour'd  by  an  idteric  boy,  fo  that  they  grew  in  the  ftomacli,  to  "  a  mon-
tlrous  magnitude,  and  to  a  very  confiderable  multitude,"  and  brought  on  "  an
"  infatiable  hunger,  by  confuming  the  aliment"  taken  in. Do  thefe  crea-

■  tures  then,  like  to  feed  upon  the  fame  kind  of  nourilhm.ent  as  men  ?  and  do
they  thrive  very  well  therefrom  ?  or  is  the  ftomach  a  very  proper  place  for
them  to  live  in,  fo  that  they  fhall  neither  be  overwhelm'd  with  the  liquors
taken  in,  nor  carried  away  to  the  inteftines,  together  with  the  food  in  which
they  are  fo  greedily  entangled ;  and  is  it  even  a  proper  place  for  them  to
propagate  in  ?  In  Ihort,  if  they  had  really  liv'd  there,  would  they  not  ra-
ther have  quickly  brought  on  an  intolerable  erofion,  in  a  vilcus  of  this  de-
licate nature,  and  a  fenfe  of  erofion,  rather  than  of  hunger  ?  and  yet  no
erofion  is  mention'd,  as  having  been  feen  in  the  dead  body.  Wherefore,
for  more  than  one  reafon,  the  obfervation  that  is  adjoin'd  in  the  fcholium,
and  is  given,  in  another  place,  under  this  title  (/&),  "  A  pairi  of  the  ftomach,
from  bladders  full  of  lice  being  affix'd  to  it,"  may  feem  fomewhat  Icfs  in-
credible :  although  I  am  much  inclin'd  to  fufpeft,  that  in  both  of  the  cafes,
fome  little  bodies,  or  if  you  will  havo  it  fo,  fome  little  animals,  were- feen,
which  in  fome  meafure  refembled  lice,  efpecially  as  it  is  clear,  that  he  who
relates  the  fecond,  was  not  himfelf  prefcnt  -,  and  he  who  related  the  firft,
has  not  expreOy  faid  that  he  was  himfelf  prefent ;  and  neither  of  them,  whe-
ther the  lice  were  at  that  time  ftill  alive,  in  order  to  ftiow  us  from  the  mo-
tion, at  leaft,  that  they  were  animalcules.  But  as  I  obferv'd,  after  I  had
written  thefe  things,  that  the  cafe  leem'd  credible,  to  more  than  one  of  my
learned'friends  •,  1  would,  for  that  reaibn,  fo  much  the  more  have  you  re-
member, that  I  do  not  fay  thefe  things,  as  a  perfon  who  abfolutely  denies
the  truth  of  the  fafts,  but  rather  as  one  who  doubts  thereof.  On  the  other
hand,  when  in  the  appendix,  which  is  fubjoin'd  to  the  fcholia  of  the  obfer-
vation, the  queftion  is  of  worms  in  the  human  body,  caufing  exceffive
hunger,  by  their  peculiar  magnitude,  or  number,  there  is  no  reafon  for
hefitation  thereon.  For  thefe  creatures  live  in  their  proper  places,  and  feed
on  their  natural  provifion  :  and  if  their  place,  and  provifion,  be  not  in  pro-
portion to  their  magnitude,  or  at  leaft  to  their  multitude,  it  is  evident  that
the  animal,  in  which  thefe  worms  are,  being  defrauded  of  its  nourifhmenc,
muft  be  often  troubled,  with  an  incredible  hunger,  and  often  even  with  an
incredible  thirft. For  both  of  thefe  circumftances  have  not  only  been,  fre-

{h)  L.  hoc  3.  f.  6.  obf.  38.

quently.


6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

quently,  obfervM  by  others,,  but  by  me  alfo,  and  particularly  in  that  young
whelp,  which  I  accurately  diffedted,  and  in  which,  though  it  died  after  being
troubled  with  thele  fymptoms,  I  could  ho  where  find  any  morbid  appear-
ance befides  a  great  number  of  woi'ms,  as  I  have  written  in  the  letter,,  which
was  formerly  publifh'd  by  our  Vallifneri  (/).  So  likewife,  when  the  obfer-
vations  of  Bontius  are  pointed  out  {k)  "  of  exceflive  hunger,  and:  canine
appetite,"  as  it  is  call'd,  being  the  coniequence  of  infarxStions  in  the  me-
fentery,  they  bring  to  my  mind  what  Albertini  had  formerly  related  to
me,  that  he,  in  fome  bodies,  who  had  labour'd  under  this  kind  of  diforder,
and  particularly  in  a  boy,  who  was  hungry  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  be  fre-
quently feiz'd  with  fvvoonings  from  that  very  cauie,  had  found  the  glands,
that  lie  in  the  belly,  to  be  tartarizated,  as  the  common  phrafe  is,,  fo  as  to
turn  the  edge  of  the  knife  by  their  hardneis.  But  whether  there  was  an
abdominal  flux  in  thefe  perfons,  and  of  what  kind  it  was,  when  the  frefh
fupplies  of  chyle  were  continually  intercepted  by  the  mefentery,  or  whether-
there  was  none  at  all ;  for  in  Bontius  (/)  you  will  read  that  there  was  a.
lientery ;  I  do  not  certainly  remember.

4.  I  am  alfo  pleas'd  with  thofe  diffeflions,  that  are  produc'd  in  the  laft
place  (m),  of  two  men  who  were  kill'd,  by  a  long  abftinence  from  meat,
and  drink,  but  fliould  have  been  ftill.  more  pleas'd,  if,  as  they  fhow  "  that
"  the  veins,  and  arteries,  were  furprizingly  emptied,  and  that  from  the  vena
*'  cava,  fcarcely  two  or  three  fpoonfuls  of  blood  flow'd  out,  and  from  the
"  aorta,  none  at  all ;"  fo,  in  like  manner,  they  had  Ihown  other  things-,  that
are  worthy  of  obfervation,  as  for  inftance,  the  ages  of  thefe  men,  their  confti-
tution,  habit,  ftrength,  and  the  exad:  number  of  the  days  of  their  abftinence^
the  fymptoms  which  preceded  their  death,  the  ftate  of  tlicir  vifcera,  and  other
things  of  this  kind.  Which  accuracy  would  have  been  extremely  ufeful,  in
the  firft  of  thefe  men  partictilarry,  as  he  was,  "in  other  refpefts,  of  a  found
"  and  healthy  body,"  when  he  took  the  refolution  of  killing  himfelf  with
hunger.  For  thofe  who,  in  confequence  of  difeafc,  or  the  torture  of  it,  are
brought  to  fuch  a  ftare,  as  to  be  ^ble  to  take  no  nouridiment,  can  teach  us
nothing  certain,  either  living,  or  dead,  as  you  are,  without  doubt,  entirely
ignorant,  how  many  days  this  difeafe,  itfelf,  mighty  perhaps,  have  taken  away-
from  life,  and  what  unufual  appearances,  the  privation  of  nourifliment.had, .
of  itfelf,  brought  upon  the  vifcera.  So  in  the  works  of  the  celebrated
Peyerus,  I  mean  the  fon,  we  have  the  diffeftions  of  a  man,  and  a  woman  (»),
who  v/ere  ftarv'd  to  death  with  hunger ;  but  in  both  of  them,  we  read  of
morbid  appearances,  of  the  internal  parts,  and  of  fuch  akind,  that  when  we
acknowledge  thefe  to  have  related  to  diforders,  we  do  not  very  greatly  wifll,
for  thofe  other  informations,  which  I  mentioned  juft  now,.  On.  the  contrary,
moll  of  thefe  circumftances  are  accurately  taken  notice  of  by  the  very  ex-
cellent Fantonus  (0),  in  a  woman  who  obftinately  refus'd'  taking,  food  for  •
fifty  days,  when  fhe  died.  But  as  fhe  did,  however,  take  a  little  twice,  and
which  is  of  ftill  more  confequence,  made  ufe  of  water  by  way  of  drink,
although  "  in  very  fmall  quantity,"  {he  is  by  no  means  to  be  compar'd  with*

CO  Confideraz.  int.  allageneraz.  de'  vermi. ("mj  Obf.  18.  §  i.  &  2.
CiJ  Obf.  12.  (■„;  Obf.  anat.  i.  &  7.

f/^  Vid.  Sepulchr.  1.  3.  f.  10.  obf.  i.  (e)  Divert,  anat.  renov.  i..

S  the-


Letter  XXVII. Article  5, 6.  7

the  man,  of  whom  I  made  mention  in  the  firft  place.  For  how  much  the
drinking  of  water,  may  contribute,  by  diminishing  the  fCarcity  of  the  hu-
mours, and  tempering  their  acrimony,  which  are  the  two  things  moft  in-
jurious to  hungry  perfons,  to  lengthen  out  their  lives,  is  proved  by  the
experiments  of  Redi  (p),  who  keeping  many  capons  without  any  food,
obferv'd  that  of  thofe  to  which  he,  alfo,  denied  drink,  not  one  of  them  liv'd
beyond  the  ninth  day,  whereas  that,  to  which  he  gave  as  much  water,  as  he
would  have,  which  he  drank,  very  greedily,  and  frequently,  for  the  firft  fixteen
days,  lived  more  than  twenty  days.  Nor  indeed  do  I  believe,  although
Pomponius  Atticus  (q)  ended  his  life,  together  with  his  very  violent  difeafe,
within  the  fifth  day  of  his  abftinence  from  food,  it  would  firft  have  hap-
pen'd,  "  that  the  fever  left  him  all  at  once,"  and  the  difeafe  have  begun  to
be  more  mild,  "  if  he  had  abftain'd"  from  drink  alfo,  "  for  the  fpace  of
*'  two  days,"  as  he  had  "  from  food."  However,  whether  that  fhort  alle-
viation of  Atticus,  is,  perhaps,  to  be  explain'd,  from  the  forty-feventh
aphorifm  of  the  fecond  fedlion,  of  Hippocrates,  as  if  the  pus  had  then  ceas'd
to  be  prepar'd,  which  afterwards  "  burft  out  by  the  loins,"  or  whether  it  is
rather  to  be  attributed  to  his  abftinence  from  food,  fince  Redi  (r)  affirms
that  it  is  incredible,  how  beautiful  the  vifcera  of  thofe  animals  are  found  to
be,  that  have  died  of  hunger,  you  are  quite  at  your  own  liberty  to  determine.
I  will  confirm  to  you  another  maxim  of  Redi,  in  regard  to  thofe  things  which
I  have  above  thought  deficient  in  obfervations  of  this  kind,  by  a  certain
experiment  of  Valfalva's.  Much,  fays  Redi  (jj,  do  the  age,  and  ftrength,
of  animals  contribute  to  make  them  bear  up  the  longer  under  hunger.  And
the  following  is  the  experiment  of  Valfalva,  which  is  written  with  the
accuracy,  and  care,  that  we  require.

5.  A  dog  was  taken  away  from  his  mother's  dngs,  a  little  after  being
whelp'd,  and  kept  from  all  kind  of  nourifhment.  On  the  third  day  of  his
hunger,  he  began  to  be  attack'd  with  convulfive  motions  in  his  whole  body,
fometimes  more  violent,  fometimes  more  mild.  He  died  on  the  fourth  day.
The  belly  being  open'd,  the  gall-bladder  was  found  to  be  very  full  of  bile.
The  thorax  being  open'd,  the  lungs,  in  the  right  fide,  were  ting'd  with  a
very  black  oblong  fpot :  the  auricles  of  the  heart  were  much  dilated  by
coagulated  blood  :  of  which  the  ventricles  were  alio  full.  And  in  all  the  fan-
guiferous  vcffels  likewife,  but  particularly  in  the  veins,  whatever  blood  there
was,  had  become  coagulated,  fo  that  it  was  no  where  found  to  be  fluid.  At
length,  the  cranium  being  cut  through,  the  cerebrum  was  found  to  be  foft,
and  flaccid,  and  not  very  well  diftinguifti'd  into  tv/o  fubftances,  fo  that  the
cortical  part  could  be  known  from  the  medullary.  Both  the  tym.pana  of  the
ears,  being  full  of  a  pellucid  jelly,  had  the  little  bones  exactly  well-form'd
indeed,  but,  even  at  that  time,  preferving  their  membranous  fofcncfs.

6.  The  convulfive  motions,  which  had  preceded  death,  arc,  in  fomc
meafure,  like  thofe,  that  Valfalva  had  obferv'd,  before  the  death  of  that
woman  (i\  who  had  abftain'd  fix  days  from  meat,  and  drink. But  thofe


(pj Oflervaz. int. agli  aniniali viventi, (rj  Offerv.  cit.
&c.  fs)  Ibid,

(qj  Vid.  ejus  vk.  apnd  Corn.  Nep.  (tj  Epill.  17. n.  25.


appearances


8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

appearances  that  were  in  the  whelp  after  death,  are  moft  of  them  properi.
rather  to  the  foetus,  than  to  the  animal,  who  has  died  of  hunger, yet  fome-
of  them  are  common  to  both,  as  the  quantity  of  bile,  by  reafon  of  the  gall-
bladder not  being  comprefs'd  by  the  ftomach,  or  the  neareft  inteftine,  both
of  which  were  of  courfe  flaccid. But,  alfo,  whatever  bile  flows  down  from
the  liver  to  the  inteftines,  fo  much  the  more  readily  appears  therein,  as it
is  not  hid  by  a  mixture  with  the  food  that  is  taken  in. Nor  does  reafon.
'  only  confirm  this,  but  obfervation  alfo,  as  well  in  almoft  all  thofe  animals,.
which  Redi  had  kill'd  by  hunger,  as  we  know  from  the  teftimony  of  Cal-
defi  (u), as  in men  who were  deilroyed by  abftinence, which  the  joint
obfervations  of  Peyerus (x), Fantonus  (y),  and Haller  (z) demonftrate..
It  is  alfo  fhewn  by  reafon,  (as  by  long  abftinence,  from  all  kind  of  meat  and
drink,  the  humours  of  the  body  become  very  acrid,  and  tend  to  putre-
faftion)  how  eafily  it  may  happen, that  the bodies  of  thofe  who  die  of
hunger,  fhall  fmell  very  ftrongly, as  is  afl"erted  by  a  very  celebrated  writer,,
of  the  bodies  of  men,  but  particularly  of  dogs :  which  mark  added  to  others,
would  certainly  be  ufeful,  not  only  to  thole  who  defire  to  know,  whether
fome  men  were  carried  ofFmore  by  hunger,  or  by  difeafe ;  but  alfo,  fome  times,
to  thofe, who  I  fee  doubt  whether  the  dogs  on which  experiments  have
been  made,  have  died  of  thefe  experiments,  or  of  hunger. But  I  will  now  leave
thefe  confiderations,  to  thofe  who  fliall  hereafter  make  the  experiments,  and;
pafs  over  other  things  alfo,  to  infift  upon  that  which  I  promifed  you. How
long  the- dogs  lived,  which  Redi  (a)  had  thus  kept, from  all  kind  of  meat
and  drink,  you  will  underftand  from  hence,  that  fome  of  them  reach'd  to
thirty-four  days,  others  to  thirty-fix, and  that  a  little  whelp  feemed  likely  to-
live  for  many  more  days, if  he  had  not  thrown  himfelf  headlong  from  a
very  high  window. But  although  this  was  in  faft  a  fmall  whelp,  he  never-
thelefs  was  not  juft  born,  as  that  was  which,  according  to  the  obfervation
ofValfalva,  could  not  live  over  the  fourth  day. Indeed,  that  there  may  be-
wonderful  varieties  in  thefe  things,  I  the more  readily  confefs,  the  more  I-
attend  to  the  great  number  of  difitrent  inftances  of  long  abftinence,  whicb
are  both  learnedly  produc'd,  and  accurately  confider'd,  by  that  very  learned
man  Beccarius  (h.) Neverthelefs  I  Ihould  fuppofe, that  what  is  deliver'di
down  by  Hippocrates  {c)  pretty  well  agrees  with  truth, if  you  except  fome
very  rare  conftitutions  of  bodies,  and  circumftances  of  cafes, I  mean  that
"  young  perfons"  bear  fafting  "  with  lefs  eafe,  and  children  leaft  of  all,"'
%vh'.ch,  on  the  contrary, they  bear  more  eafily, who  "  are  middle-ag'd, and
*'  old  men  the  moft  eafily  of  all,"  unlefs, perhaps, they  are  quite  decrepid
with  age,  as  Celfus  wifely  (d)  interprets  Hippocrates,  by  giving  his  opinion
in  the  following  manner  : "  men  of  a  middle  age  bear  abftinence  very  eafily,,
"  but  young  men  not  fo  well, and  children, and  men  very  far  advanc'd  in.;
"  years,  cannot  bear  it  at  all ; — but  that  perfon  is  moft  of  all  under  ne-^

CiiJ  OITcrvaz.  int.  alle  Tartarughe.  faj  Oflervaz. cit.  fupra  ad  n.  4.

fxj  Obf.  7. cit.  fupra  ad  n.  4.  fl,;  -Vid.  de  Bonon. Sc.  Acad. t.  2. p.  i.

CjfJ  Diff.  ibid. cit.  inter  Medica.

f'x^  Ad  Boerh. Pi-arled. §  98. not, 2. & fc)'  Se&.  2.  aph.  13.
•pufc. Pathol,  obf.  24.  f^/j  De  Medic.  1.  j.  c.  3,,

"  ceftit^"


Letter  XXVIII. Article  7.  9

**  ceffity  of  taking  food,  whofe  growth  is  mofl:  advancing :"  which  Hippo-
crates, alfo,  had  exprefly  taught,  in  the  next  aphorifm  (e).

7.  And  the  opinion  of  Hippocrates  would  be  furprizingly  well  confirm'd
by  one  ftory,  if  this  were  really,  as  Cardan  (f),  and  Zambeccarius  (g),  have
haftily  fuppos'd,  a  hiftory,  and  not  a  poetical  figment  of  Dante  (h),  of  the
count  Hugolini,  and  his  four  fons,  who  were  ftarved  to  death  with  hunger
(which  one  fa<5t  is  undoubted),  fo  that  all  of  them  lived  fome  days,  bur  tlie
boy,  of  three  years,  died  on  the  fourth  day,  and  the  other  children,  who
were  fomewhat  older,  or  almoft  young  men,  on  the  fifth,  or  the  fixth  day,
and  laft  of  all,  the  father,  as  he  was  of  a  middle  age,  or  at  leaft  only  juil
entering  upon  old  age,  died  on  the  eighth  day  :  all  which  circumftances
were,  without  doubt,  imagin'd  by  the  poet  himfelf,  in  conformity  to  the
aphorifm  of  Hippocrates,  the  author  being  at  that  time  very  learned,  or  at
leaft  in  conformity  to  probability,  as  the  poet  himfelf,  fufficiently  fliews  in
that  place,  though  thefe  worthy  men  have  not  attended  to  it,  where  he  in-
troduces the  fpirit  of  Hugolini  relating  thefe  things  to  him,  which,  as  he
exprefly  fays,  "  he  could  not  have  been  informed  of  "  by  any  other  means,
inafmuch  as  they  had  happen'd  in  the  dark  recefles  of  a  high  tower,  the  keys
of  which  were  thrown  into  the  river  by  the  enemy,  immediately  after  they
had  been  fhut  up  therein.

If  therefore  you  happen  to  want  a  number  of  hiftories,  to  prove  the
feveral  parts  of  the  aphorifm  of  Hippocrates,  as  they  are  explained
by  Cdfus,  I  will  take  notice  of  fome  from  the  Roman  hiftory,  which
come  into  my  mind,  as  I  am  writing.  I  have  faid  above  (i),  that  Pom-
ponius  Atticus,  being  fick,  died  on  the  fifth  day  of  his  abftaining
from  food.  But  Sextius  Baculus,  as  you  have  it  in  Csefar's  Commen-
taries (k)t  although  he  was  fo  far  fick,  "  as  to  have  been  without  food  for
*'  five  days,"  was  fo  far  from  death  as  to  take  up  arms  and  repel  the  enemy,
inafmuch  as  he  was  at  fuch  a  flourilhing  time  of  life,  as,  not  long  before,
to  have  perform'd  the  office  of  firft  centurion,  to  the  legionary  foldiers  -,  but
Atticus  had  compleated  his  feventy-feventh  year:  fo  we  muft  not  be  fur-
priz'd,  that  Suetonius  (I),  when  he  fpoke  of  Tiberius  having  "  abftain'd
"  from  food,  for  the  fpace  of  four  days,"  did  not  only  not  add  what  injury
he  receiv'd  therefrom  ;  but  even  afTerted,  that  Tiberius  "  immediately  went
"  down  to  Oftia";  for  Tiberius  was  at  that  time  of  a  middle  age,  and  a  firm
conftitution.

To  thefe,  you  will,  yourfelf,  add  examples  of  younger  perfons :  nor
will  you  eafily  find,  I  believe,  when  you  come  to  children,  and  infants,
any  who  have  born  faftings  of  this  kind,  in  fuch  a  manner.  Nor  indeed
would  I  have  you  objeft  to  me,  from  the  obfervation  of  Fernelius  (m),  the
inftance  of  a  foetus  who  feems,  as  a  really  memorable  example,  to  have
born  a  want  of  nouriftiment  for  the  fpace  of  two  months.  For  notwithftand-
sYig  the  mother,  who  "  in  the  opinion  of  all  thofe  that  attended  her,  had
*'  fwallowed  down  no  meat,  nor  drink,  for  the  whole  two  months,"  at
length,  m  the  latter  end  of  the  fever,  of  which  Ihe  died,  "  brought  forth  a

W  14-  (0  N.4.

(f)  Com.  in  clt.  Aph.  13.  {k)  De  Bell.  Gall.  1.  6.  c.  38.

(g)  Experim.  circa  diverfa  e  viventib.  exfefta. (/)  De  duodecim  Csfarlb.  1.  3.  c.  10.
{h)  Inferji.  cant.  33.  f«)  Pathol.  1.  6.  c.  1.  in  fin.

Vol.  ll.  ,  C  "  child


8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Bellv.

«  child  that  Hie^eft  furviving;"  yet  as  often  as  ever  fhe  got  down  food,  or
drink,  quite  to  the  lower  part  of  the  oefophagus,  which  fhe  immediately
brought  back,  and  threw  up,  it  is  to  be  fuppos'd,  that  fome  portion  of  the
.ingefta,  which  were  going  backwards  and  forwards,  had  always  entered  the
mouths  of  the  abforbent  veflels,  in  the  mouth,  the  fauces,  and  the  oefopha-
gus, and  that  by  thefe  means,  this  woman  was  preferv'd  for  fo  long  a  time,
nearly  in  the  fame  manner  as  another  gravid  woman  mention'd  by  Hilda-
pus  (n),  who  was  kept  alive,  for  the  fpace  of  fix  weeks  together,  with  her
foetus,  by  nourifhing  glyfters  alone.  And,  indeed,  it  is  not  abfurd  to  fup-
pofe,  that  the  tubercle  with  which  the  mouth  of  the  ftomach  was  Ihut  up,
as  appeared  in  her  body  after  death,  had  not  been  fo  large  while  (he  was
living,  as  quite  to  obftrudt  that  orifice,  unlefs,  perhaps,  in  the  latter  part
of  her  life  •,  for  diforders  of  this  kind  are  continually  increafing,  and  confe-
quently  extend  themfelves  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  reach  thofe  parts,  that
they  did  not,  fometime  before,  reach.

8.  This  obfervation  of  Fernelius  brings  to  my  mind  the  fourth  fedtion  of
the  Sepulchretum,  in  which  even  this  very  obfervation  is  (o),  of  which
fedion  I  made  fuch  mention  in  the  beginning  (p),  as  to  difcover,  that  I  was
not  wanting  in  obfervations  relative  thereto,  or  in  other  words,  to  impeded
deglutition.  And  certainly,  I  fhould  not  be  at  all  deficient,  if  I  thought
proper  to  imitate  what  is  done,  even  in  this  fedion.  For  you  will  fee,  that
the  fourth  obfervation  in  it,  differs  from  the  feventeenth,  only  by  being  re-
lated in  fomewhat  fewer  words :  and  you  will  wonder  ftill  more,  at  the  fame
thing  taking  place  in  the  nineteenth,  if  compar'd  with  that  to  which  it  is
immediately  i'ubjoin'd,  I  mean  the  eighteenth.  And  in  the  additamenta
themfelves,  does  not  one  part  of  the  fecond  obfervation  repeat,  in  fo  many
•words,  what  had  been  already  given,  with  fufficient  fullnefs,  in  the  fame
fedlion,  in  a  part  of  the  fcholium  to  the  eighth  obfervation  ?  I  however  Ihall
not  repeat  here,  even  thofe  which  I  have  produc'd  in  other  letters,  from
Valfalva's  obfervation,  or  my  own.  But  whatever  of  this  kind  remains,
I  will  give  you  here  -,  thofe  others  I  fliall  but  juft  make  references  to.  And
two  hiftories  do  remain  from  the  papers  of  Valfalva.  The  firll  of  thefe  is
as  follows..

9.  A  man  of  fifty  years  of  age,  began  to  complain  of  his  deglutition  be-
ing impededi  The  impediment  was  by  degrees  encreas'd:  his  voice  was
loft :  he  had  a  confiderable  pain  in  fwallowing :  a  portion  of  the  food  re-
mained in  his  fauces,  which  fometimes  return'd  after  that,  by  degrees,  into"
his  mouth,  feemingly  corrupted  :  his  body  became  emaciated  :  nothing  pre-
ternatural was  to  be  feen  externally  ;  only  the  left  internal  maxillary  gland
was  perceiv'd  to  be  indurated. He  died  fuddenly  fufFocated  as  it  were.

The  gland  juft  now  mention'd,  as  being  indurated,  had  at  the  fide  of  it,  a-
matter  like  the  white  of  an  egg.  And  many  tumours  were  feen  in  the
pharynx,  and  at  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx,  which  were  of  a  cancerous
nature.

10.  A  young  man,  likewife,  who  died  almoft  in  the  fame  manner,  after
very  fimilar  fymptoms  of  difeafe,  difcover'd  tumours  of  the  fame  nature,
particularly  at  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx,  and the neighbouring  fides.

(.v)  Cent.  4.  obf,  30.  (s)  Obf.  2h.  (/.)  N.  !,.


Letter  XXVIir. Articles it, 12, 13.  it

•of  the  pharynx. But  the  tumours,  in  fome  places,  were  already  ulcerated :
and  an  ulcer  had  perforated  the  epiglottis  itfelf.

ir.  As  to  what  relates  to  the  fudden  death  of  both  thefe  perfons,  you
may  from  hence  confirm  what  I  have  before  faid  (q)  Valfalva  had  told
ine,  I  mean  that  he  had  twice  feen  a  death  of  this  kind,  from  a  violent  dif-
order  of  the  larynx,  at  which  time  he  perhaps  had  thefe  two  cafes  in  his
eye.  The  fame  was  alfo  obferv'd  by  me,  in  a  virgin,  of  whom  I  took  no-
tice in  the  fame  place,  and  perhaps,  alfo,  in  a  very  excellent  finger,  who
was  troubled  with  a  very  manifeft  ulcer  in  the  fauces,  which  caus'd  a  great
difficulty  in  fwallowing.  But  as  it  was  not  poffible  to  determine,  in  the
living  body,  to  what  parts  this  ulcer  extended  itfelf,  nor  yet  permitted  to
examine  it  after  death,  I  therefore  did  not  lay  down  the  thing  as  certain,  and
well  enquir'd  into,  efpecially  as  ulcers  of  that  kind,  fometimes  do  not  reach
to  thole  parts  you  would  fuppofe  them  to  reach,  and  reach  to  others  that  you
would  not  have  fuppofed.  And  this  will  be  clearly  fhown,  by  the  cafe  of  a
man,  who  was  fnatch'd  away  by  the  fame  kind  of  death :  which  cafe,  al-
though I  have  partly  hinted  at  it  in  the  Epiftolse  Anatomicse  (r),  and  partly
in  a  letter  which  I  have  before  fent  to  you  (s),  yet  \  have  no  where  given  at
large,  but  purpofely  defer'd  it  to  the  prefent  occafion,  as  relating  to  impeded
deglutition.

12.  There  was  a  man  in  whom,  as  he  fwallow'd,  part  of  what  he  drank
return'd  by  his  noftrils.  The  bony  palate  of  the  man  was  quite  found;  but
the  palatum  molle,  together  with  the  uvula,  had  been  confum'd  by  an  ulcer
that  was  not  recent,  and  which,  as  far  as  could  be  diftinguifh'd  by  the  eye,
•was  already  brought  to  a  cicatrix ;  but  where  the  eye  could  not  reach,  ic
continued  even  then,  as  the  matter,  which  was  thrown  up  by  fpitting,  de-
monftrated.  This  join'd  to  a  cough,  that  was  fometimes  troublefome,  and
other  fymptoms  of  a  fimilar  kind,  although  flight  and  ambiguous,  created  a
fufpicion  of  an  ulcer  extending  itfelf  downwards.  And  this  fufpicion  was
encreas'd, by  the  patient  dying  fuddenly,  as  if  fufFocated.

Neverthelefs,  the  inferior  part  of  the  pharynx,  and  the  larynx  which  lies
within  it,  and  the  canal  of  the  afpera  arteria,  that  lies  below  the  larynx,  were
altogether  uninjur'd:  although  the  left  lobe  of  the  lungs,  at  the  upper  part,
which  was  hard  to  the  touch,  was  found,  when  I  cut  into  it,  to  be  exceedino-ly
corrupted,  to  a  very  confiderable  extent.  But  the  ulcer  had  extended  itielf
to  the  higher  parts  of  the  pharynx,  and  to  the  pofterior  foramina  of  the
noftrils,  and  there  continued.  As  to  the  other  parts,  when  the  belly  was
open'd,  I  found  the  liver,  the  inteftines  in  fome  places,  and  the  internal
mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  livid,  as  if  from  foregoing  inflammation,  and
fmelling  very  ftrongly.

13.  Where,  and  at  what  time,  I  diflTefted  this  body,  you  will  find  in
thofe  epiftles,  to  which  I  juft  now  referr'd  (/),  and  in  the  fame  place,  and
alfo  in  the  twenty-fecond  of  thefe  letters  to  you  (u),  you  will  fee  what  I  hint-
ed in  regard  to  the  wigin,  and  caufes  of  that  diforder,  of  the  lungs.  But
for  what  relates  to  the  caufes,  and  manner,  in  which  deglutition  was  injur'd,
in  this  man,  or  -  in  the  two  diflTefted  by  Valfalva,  that  I  have  given  you  the

(y)  Epift,  22.  n.  25.  (/)  N.  II.

(r)  Epift.  9.  n.  9.  &  10.  •''  *(«)  N.  26.

{s)  Epift,  19.  n.  50.

C  2  hiftorics


12  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

hiftories  of,  they  are  fo  evident  to  any  one,  not  ignorant  of  the  fhotions  of
the  whole  pharynx,  and  larynx,  that  are  necelTary  for  the  performance  of
deglutition,  that  there  is  not  the  leaft  occafion  to  explain  them.  To  thefe
belong  feventeen  obfervations,  in  this  fourth  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum,
v/hich  are  in  two  appendixes,  that  are  fubjoin'd  to  the  twentieth  obfervation.
And  although  when  I  have,  frequently,  found,  as  I  have  already  faid,  the
cartilages  of  the  larynx  become  bony,  in  old  men  (x),  the  epiglottis  was
never  yet  found  to  be  bony  by  me,  1  do  not,  however,  doubt  but  it  may
fometimes,  become  lefs  flexible,  and  yielding :  which  is  a  circumftance  that
feems  to  be  more  prejudicial  to  the  fwallowing  of  food,  than  of  drink.  For
the  liquors  that  we  drink,  when  they  have  reach'd  as  far  as  the  epiglottis,
flow  down  on  one  fide,  and  on  the  other,  where  there  is  a  kind  of  fulcus
at  the  fides  of  the  larynx,  and  flip  down  to  the  lower  part  of  the  larynx :
nor  does  it  then  happen  that  they  enter  the  larynx,  unlefs  they  either  flow
back,  in  too  great  a  quantity,  from  the  fulci,  or  thefe  fulci,  by  inflamma-
tion, and  a  tumid  ftate  of  the  parts,  are  deftroy'd,  or  a  kind  of  convulfiori
excited,  by  irritation,  or  any  of  the  mufcles,  that,  by  reafon  of  being  af-
fected with  a  paralyfis,  is  unequal  to  its  office,  difturb  the  eafy  flowing
down  of  the  liquors :  the  latter  of  which  I  have  obferv'd,  in  a  woman  of
princely  rank,  after  an  attack  of  the  epileptic  kind,  and  the  former,  in  a
Boble  Count,  whofe  very  troublefome  diforder  I  have  already  defcrib'd  to
you  (y),  and  which  was,  in  part,  fimilar  to  a  convulfive,  but  very  fhort,
angina.

I  would  not  here  have  you  fuppofe,  that  the  confideration  of  the  epi-
glottis is  fuperfluous,  when  the  queftion  is  of  impeded  deglutition,  be-
caufe  Targioni  (z)  lit  on  the  body  of  a  man,  in  whom,  although  the  epi-
glottis was  entirely  deficient,  perhaps  from,  having  been  formerly  deftroy^d.
by  an  ulcer,"  the  power  of  {peaking,  and  of  fwallowing,  without  any  diffi-
culty, were  not  v>^anting,  or  at  leaft,  in  the  laft  acute  diforder  of  v/hich  he
died.  For  although  the  arytenoid  mufcles,  which  were  in  him  much  thicker,
and  ftronger,  than  they  in  general  are  ;  might  have  been  able  to  fliut  up  the
glottis  fo  exacSlly,  as  by  way  of  an  vinufual  inftance  in  the  human  body,  to
fupply  the  office  of  the  epiglottis,  as  other  parts  have  fupplied  the  office  of  the
iivula,  fometimes,  and  fometimes  of  the  tongue,  when  originally  deficient,
or  from  difeafe  {a),  or  whether  accurate  obfervations,  and  examinations,,
might,  while  he  v/as  living,  have  fliown  other  things ;  we  ought  certainly  to-
take  care,  in  confideration  of  what  happens  naturally  in  the  greater  part  of
mankind,  and  not  of  what  happens  by  way  of  prodigy  in  any  one,  not  to
sun  into  fuch  abfurdities,.  as  to  fuppofe  the  epiglottis  almolt  ufelels,  as  it
were, in  deglutition.

I  am  not  ignorant,  that  there  are,  at  this  tim.e,  cslebrated  men,  to.
whom  it  feems  that  deglutition  may  be  explained  fo  differently,  from
the  manner  in  which  others  explain  it,  that  if  you  are  of  their  opinion,
you  will  not  want  that  explication  which  I  hinted  at,  jufi;  now,  of  the
difference  there  is  betv/ixt  fluids,  and  folids,  ia  pafllng  from  the  mouth  into

(x)  Adverf.  i.  2.  zj.  {'aj  Ephem.  n.  c-  Dec.  3.  A.  9.  obf.  212. &

fy)  Epift.  14.  n.  37..  Sievogt.  diff»  de  Gurgul.  §..6i.  63.

fzj  Prima  Raccolta di  offer,  msd.  verSj
il  fine..


Letter  XXVIII. Article 14.  13

the  fauces,  I  confefs  it  is  not,  at  prefent,  either  a  proper  place,  or  time,  to
confider  the  whole  of  tli^ir  opinion,  as  the  importance  of  it  requires,  yet  I
will,  at  leaft,  venture  to  fay,  that  there  is  in  this  opinion,  more  than  one
thing,  which  I  can  by  no  means  admit.

IS'Or  does  itefcape  me,  that  there  is  a  remark  made  by  Paul  Barbette,  that  is
alfo  to  be  read  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  {b),  which  by  no  means  agrees  with
that  explication  I  have  given  you  above.  But  if  there  was,  at  the  fame  time,
"  an  abolition  of  fpeech,"  there  muft  have  been  other  diforders,  befides  a
rigidity  of  the  epiglottis,  "  not  fufFiciently  {hutting  up"  the  larynx,  in  the
palTage  of  liquors,  or  "  an  induration"  of  it,  to  which  one  circumftance  Pau-
lus  attribirtes  all  the  fymptoms.  But  what  part  was  affeded  with  difeafe,  be-
fides the  epiglottis,  in  another  certain  obfervation,  in  which  I  read  that  the  de-
glutition "  both  of  folids,  and  fluids,"  was  impeded,  I  fliould  perhaps  be
able  to  conjedlure,  if  I  underftood  what  appearances  were  found  in  the  body
after  death.  And  the  following  appearance  is  faid  to  be  found  ;  "  the  epi-
"  glottis,  by  means  of  a  catarrhous  ipafm,  was  fo  drawn  up,  towards  the
"  orifice  of  the  cefophagus,  that  the  orifice  of  the  afpera  arteria  remained
"  quite  open,  and  neither  fluids,  nor  folids,  could  be  taken  down,  for  fear
*'  of  fuffbcarion."  But  I  cannot  pofllbly  conceive,  how  the  orifice  of  the
larynx  could  be  quite  open,  while  the  epiglottis  was  drawn  up  in  fuch  a
manner,  as  this  orifice  fhould  have  been,  in  that  cafe,  quite  cover'd.  And
in  this  manner  I  fhould  be  ready  to  fuppofe  it  was  written  by  the  author,
and  ill-Gopied,  which  is  eafily  done  by  fubftituting  aperium  inflread  of
cpertum,  only  that  the  patient  would  then  have  been  under  a  neceffity  of
thinking  how  to  breathe  merely,  inftead  of  thinking  how  to  fwallov/.

14  But,  to  return  to  the  obfervation  of  Paulus  given  in  the  Sepulchretum  5
as  to  the  attempt  in  the  fcholium,  which  is  immediately  added,  to  explain  that
impediment  of  deglutition,  by  '*  a  convulfion  of  the  mufculi  hyoid^i,  be-
'''•  caufe  the  larynx  is  then  drawn  upwards  ;"  the  explanation  ought  to  have
been  more  fhrift,  and  exprefs,  efpecially  as  the  mufcles,  which  may  be  fig-
nified  by  that  name,  are  many  in  number,  and  fome  of  them  perform  of-
fices direftly  oppofite  to  each  other.  Nor  yet  is  it  to  be  doubted,  that  not  only
the  OS  hyoides,  and  larynx,  but  even  the  parts  that  belong  to  them,  if  they
are  by  any  means  confiderably  aflFefled,  may  caufe  an  impediment  to  de-
glutition. For  you  will  call  to  mind,  that  this  had  happen'd  from  the  upper
appendages  of  that  bone  being  luxated,  as  is  rel;ited  by  Valfalva  (r),  and,  in
like  manner;  from  the  cartilages  of  the  larynx  being  luxated,  as  Boerhaave
{d)  writes,  from  the  obfervation  of  Cowper,  the  thyroid,  I  fuppofe,  being
remov'd  from  the  cricoid ;  for  the  book,  in  whiich  Cowper  gives  you  this-
cafe,  I  have  not  in  my  poflfefTion  ;  and  whether  thofe  things  which  you  may
read  of,  in  the  afts  of  the  Csfarean  academy  (^),  are  referable  to  the  fame
dafs,  you  will  judge  >  the  method  of  cure,  at  leaft,  comes  pretty  near  to  that
of  Valfalva.

But  in  regard  to  the  convulfion,  or  paralyfis,.  of  the  mufcles,  even
of  the  xEfophagus  itfelf,  it  is  to  very  little  purpofe  to  fay  any  thing,  fince

{h)  OhL  6.  (fi")  Praleft.  ad  Inftit.  §.  8o6v

(r)  De  aure  hum.  c.  2.  n.  20.  (f),  Tom.  6.  obf.  50.

1  examples


2^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

examples  of  the  former  are  very  often  to  be  met  with,  in  hyfterical  pa-
tients, and  obfervations  of  the  latter,  though  more  rare  indeed,  are  not
wanting,  notwithftanding  it  is  a  difeafe,  like  other  paralytic  affedlions,  of
much  longer  continuance,  and  more  obftinate,  than  the  firft,  fo  that  the
patients  have,  for  this  realbn,  either  been  deftroy'd  by  hunger,  as  you  may
lee  in  Willis  (/),  Helwich  (g),  and  others,  or  fometimes  by  means  of  ali-
ments being  thruft  down  into  the  ftomach,  by  the  help  of  a  chirurgical  in-
ilrument,  have  been  kept  alive,  for  twelve,  or  fourteen  months,  and  at
other  times,  even  for  fixteen  years,  the  latter  of  which  kind  of  cafes  the  fame
author,  Willis,  has  in  his  Pharmaceut.  Ration,  (in  the  firft  part  indeed,  but
in  the  fecond  fedlion,  and  in  the  firft  chapter,  not  as  it  is  faid  in  the  Sepul-
chretum  (h),  fedion  the  third,  chapter  the  third),  and  the  former,  nature  at
length  having  overcome  the  diforder,  Job  Bafterus,  in  the  year  1682,  com-
municated to  Stalpart  {i),  and  the  fame  author,  being  a  lively  old  man,  in
the  year  1744,  which  is  a  remiarkable  inftance,  communicated  it  to  the
Csefarean  academy  (k).  And  Rammaz'ni  (/)  faw  aparalyfis,  of  a  lliorter  con-
tinuance than  that  indeed,  overcome,  without  the  intrufion  of  this  inftrument,
into  the  cefophagus,  which  is  a  very  troublefome  operation,  as  he  laved  a
female  patient  without  the  leaft  food,  or  drink,  for  threefcore  and  fix  days,
by  the  means  of  nourifliing  glyfters,  a  longer,  and  more  ufeful,  praftife  of
which,  I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have  read  -,  and  this  is  a  kind  of  remedy,
which,  as  it  is  always  eafy,  and  always  innocent,  ought  never  to  be  ne-
gledled  by  the  phyficians,  in  every  fpecies  of  impeded  deglutition,  and  not
only  in  that  from  a  paralyfis  of  the  mufcles.

Moreover,  you  will,  Ifuppofe,  think  with  me,  that  the  cafe  which  you  read,
related  by  the  celebrated  Heifter,  in  a  certain  diftertation  of  John  Charles
Spies  {m),  is  to  be  refer'd  to  a  kind  of  flight  paralyfis.  This  cafe  is  of  a  noble-
man, and  one  who  was  already  old,  and  had,  for  a  long  time,  been  affefted  in
fuch  a  manner,  that  though  he  could  fwallow  every  thing  very  well  but  his  laft
bolus,  he  could  not,  however,  fwallow  that,  which,  for  this  reafon,  frequently
remained  in  his  fauces,  from  one  meal  to  another,  till  it  was,  at  length,  pufli'd
down  in  the  following  meal,  unlefs  it  had  happen'd  to  be  previoufly  thrown  up,
by  the  help  of  fpitting,  or  fome  flight  cough.  And  I  made  no  doubt  but  this
circumftance  happen'd  much  in  the  fame  manner,  as  in  men  pretty  far  ad-
vanc'd  in  years,  all  the  urine  is  expell'd  from  the  bladder,  one  part  urging
another,  till  it  comes  to  the  laft  drops,  which  the  weaken'd  power  of  the
mufcles  is,  now,  not  able  entirely  to  expel,  as  they  had  been  us'd  to  do  at
a  more  flourilhing  time  of  life.  So  likewife,  in  this  man  the  former  bo-
luffes  were  pufh'd  forwards  by  the  weight  of  the  following  ones,  till  the
laft  being  without  that  afliftance,  and  not  being  fufficiently  help'd  on  by
the  mufcles  of  the  pharynx,  was  under  a  neceffity  of  remaining,  where  it
had  been  already  thruft.

15.  But  as  this,  and  moft  of  the  diforders  of  which  I  have  hitherto  fpo-
ken,  related  to  the  pharynx,  and  the  parts  that  lie  neareft  to  it, fo  others

C/J  Pharm.  rat.  p.  i.  f.  i.  c.  2.  {k)  Aft.  t.  8.  obf.  21.

Ig)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  i.&  2.  obf. 147.  (/)  Conft.  epidem.  a.  1691.  n.  22.

{i>)  Se&.  hac  4.  in  addit.  obf.  2.  in  fin.  {m)  De  Degl.  c.  2.  n.  9.

(*')  Cent.  poft.  p.  I.  obf.  27.

are


Letter  XXVIII. Article  15.  15

are  alfo  to  be  met  with,  which  relate  to  the  oefophagus  itfelf,  and  the  parts
that  lie  thereabout.  As  to  convulfion,  and  paralyfis,  there  is  no  occaiion  to
fay  any  thing  more  upon  thefe  heads.  But  there  are  two  other  diforders,
which  are,  in  like  manner,  contrary  to  each  other,  that  may  be  the  caufes  of
difficult  deglutition,  I  mean  the  drynefs  of  the  glands  of  the  osfophagus  («),.
and  their  oedematous  turgefcency  {o).  Befides,  the  gula  is  fometimes  ulcer--
ated  :  a  remarkable  inftance  of  which  you  have  in  the  Sepulchretum  (j>).
And  although  an  ulcer  of  itfelf,  if  it  be  painful,  or  at  leaft  if  it  be  large,
and  have  prominent  lips,  one  of  which  kind  was  feen  by  Brunnerus  (y),  whom
you  muft  turn  to  on  this  occafion,  impedes  the  ufe  of  deglutition  ;  yet  if
there  be  none  of  thefe  circumftances,  and  the  ulcer  itfelf  begins  to  be  in-
clin'd  to  a  healing  ftate,  or  is  even  already  in  part  healed  ;  it  may  frequently
happen,  that  fome  confequences  of  the  ulcer  may  remain,  and  obftruft  de-
glutition, as  a  caruncle,  callus,  narrovvnefs,  or,  in  fine,  coalition,  which  is
taken  notice  of  by  Francifcus  Sylvius  (r).

And  the  caruncle  at  the  termination  of  the  gula,  feems  to  have  been
formerly  hinted  at  by  Galen  (j),  when  he  faid  "  it  fometimes  hap-
"  pens,  that  even  fomething  flelhy  (fuch  as  we  often  fee  externally)  is
"  generated  in  the  ftomach,  which  either  entirely  obftrufts  the  paffage  of
*'  the  aliments,  or,  at  leaft,  hinders  it  in  fome  meafure."  And  here,
in  the  Sepulchretum  (/),  you  certainly  fee  that  a  caruncle  js  taken  no-
tice of,  which  arofe  from  an  ulcer  of  the  osfophagus,  that  was  heal'd
up.  And  notwithftanding  all  calli,  of  the  gullet,  are  not  to  be  account-
ed for  from  ulcers,  as,  for  inftance,  where  you  read  in  Cselius  («),  of  the-
"  beginning,  and  upper  pait,  of  the  ftomach,  being  callous,"  nor  yet
all  narrownefs,  or  contraftion,  as  that  which  is  related  in  this  ieftion  {x)^  to
have  happen'd  after  an  ardent  fever,  unlefs  you  will  fuppofe,  that,  in  this
cafe,  there  were  aphthae,  or  internal  puftules  (jy) ;  yet  where  an  ulcer  has
preceded,  or,  in  part,  yet  remains,  as  in  a  foldier  (z),  who  found  great  dif-
ficulty in  fwallowing,  but  not  the  leaft  pain,  we  muft  attribute  "  the  coardta-
"  tion,  and  callofity,"  of  the  oefophagus,  to  the  erofion,  which  was  found  at
the  fame  time,  being  not  entirely  remov'd,  all  round.  Nor  is  it  to  be
doubted,  but  the  fame  caufe  that  brings  on  contraftion,  or  narrownefs,  may
alfo  produce  coalition,  under  which  name,  I  here  underftandj  with  the
learned  Mauchart  {a),  that  coarftation,  which  leaves  no  pafiage  at  all,  or
fcarcely  any.  And  indeed,  the  coalition  which  he  faw  {b),  of  a  calloua
nature,  and  fcarcely  admitting  a  flender  probe,  was  not  without  a  purulent,
ichor.  Neverthelefs,  a  coalition  does  fometimes  happen,  from  other  caufes.
alfo  (as  that  perhaps  did  in  fome  meafure)  many  of  which  I  fliall  take  no-
tice of  below  (c),  and  fome  of  them  relate  to  tumours  generated  in  the  very
coats  of  the  oefophagus, obfervations  of  which  kind  are  given  us  in  this

\n)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  i.  append..n.  lo.obf.  («)  Morb.  chron.  I.  3.  c.  2.-

162., -  (.v)  Obf.  14.

(ij)  Earund.  cent.  5.  obf.  59.  ubi  I.M.  HofF-  {y)  Vid.  aft  Hafn. t.  i,  oBi".  109.  &  Eph»

man.  &  Benedift,  Sylvaric.  citantur,  n,  c.  dec.  2.  a.  g.  obf.  45.

(/>)  In  addit.  ad  hanc  feft.  obf. i..  (z)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1741.  hebd.  2^.-a.l„

(q)  Gland.  Duoden.  c. 10.  («)  Diff.  de  ftruma  sefoph.  §.  18.  22,

{>■)  Prax.  med.  1.  i.  c.  5.  (^)  §.  n.

{s)  De  fympt.  cauf,.  1.  3.  c.  3.  ,(f)  N,  16,-

W  Obf.  21..

ii  fedtioJl-


1 6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  oftlie  Belly.

feftion  of  the  Sepukhretum  {d),  and  another,  which  well  deferves  reading,
is  added  by  the  celebrated  Widmann  {e).  But  that  fpecies  of  coalition,
which  is  brought  about  by  means  of  a  cartilage,  merits  our  attention  above
all  others,  three  inltances  of  which  are  produc'd  in  the  Sepukhretum  (/)  :
and  to  thefe,  you  will  particularly  add  two  others,  one  of  which  is  accurate-
ly defcrib'd  by  our  Vallifneri  (^),  and  the  other  is  moreover  illuftrated  in  a
very  learned  diflertation, by the  celebrated  Trillerus  {h).

There  are  fome  very  eminent  men,  to  whom,  that  diforder  "  feems  to  arife
*'  from  the  drinking  of  hot  water,"  a  cuftom  fo  frequent  in  this  age,  which  I
do  not  altogether  deny.  But  I  wonder,  neverthelels,  as  even  the  ancients  or
at  leaft  as  the  Chinefe,  who  are  very  tenacious  of  their  cuftoms,  have  made
ufe  of  hot  liquors,  for  fo  long  a  time,  and  do  ftill  ufe  them,  that  there
have  not  been  formerly  found,  and  are  not  at  prefent  found,  among  them,
fuch  as  labour  under  an  impeded,  or  injur'd,  deglutition  ;  and  it  is  even
not  often,  or  rather  it  is  fo  very  feldom,  that  the  oefophagus  is  found  to  be  car-
tilaginous amongft  us,  that  I  do  not  remember  who  has  ever  met  with  this  ap-
pearance, in  Italy,  befides  Vallifneri,  and  even  he  found  it  in  fuch  a  man,
in  fuch  a  place,  and  at  fuch  a  time,  that  it  does  not  feem  poflible  to  account
for  it,  from  the  abufe  of  coffee,  or  tea :  and  I  do  not  mention  that  Trillerus,
in  his  cafe,  had  accounted  for  it  from  quite  an  oppofite  caufe  {i).

Be  this  as  it  will,  I  mention'd  coalition  by  means  of  a  cartilage,  becaufe  here
alfo  I  obferve  the  oefophagus,  if  not  to  be  entirely  ftop'd  up  by  a  cartilage,  as
in  the  obfervation  of  Stoffelius  {k),  at  leaft  to  be  fo  far  obftrucSted  in  the  other
inftances,  that  only  a  very  fmall  foramen  remain'd.  But  what  if  the  carti-
lage did  not  protuberate  outv/ards ;  but  left  the  pafTage  open  to  its  natural
fize  ?  do  you  think  that  the  faculty  of  deglutition  would  be  unhurt  ?  that
very  experienc'd  phyfician,  Vidorius  Gornia,  communicated  to  me  a  dif-
fedtion  made  in  Germany,  of  the  body  of  a  moft  high,  and  mighty  prince,
whofe  oefophagus  was  externally  membranous,  but  internally  carulaginous,
and  towards  the  ftomach  bony,  to  the  extent  of  an  inch.  Yet  this  prince
had  not  only,  for  the  laft  two  years  of  his  life,  vomited  every  day  at
the  interval  of  two  hours  after  dinner  ;  but  had  even  never  complained  of
any  vineafinefs,  or  difficulty,  in  fwallowing.  Does  it  not  follow  then,  that
the  food,  alfo,  may  be  driven  on  by  the  ftronger  mufcles  of  the  pharynx,
through  the  gula,  when  not  collaps'd  in  its  parietes,  nor  ftanding  in  need  of
dilatation,  but  perpetually  kept  open  by  the  rigidity  of  its  fides,  in  the
very  fame  manner  as  the  blood  is  propell'd  through  a  bony  artery,  by  the
force  of  the  heart,  and  the  arteries  which  lie  behind  it  ?

You,  therefore,  will  confider  of  this,  and  at  the  fame  time  adding  the  laft
obfervation,  to  the  five  I  mention'd  above,  you  will  again  confider  with  your-
felf,  whether  it  feems  proper,  to  attribute  to  the  abufe  of  hot  water,  that  dif-
order, which,  as  is  demonftrated^by  four  out  of  thefe  fix  examples,  did  not  oc-
cupy the  tongue,  the  fauces,  or  the  upper  trad  of  the  gullet,  but  chiefly  the
lower  part  of  this-  tube.  And  of  the  other  two,  one  deicribes  the  diforder,  as  be-

{d)  Obf.  22.  §.  I.  &  in  addit.  obf.  2.  (A)  De  fame  lethali  ex  callofa  oris  ventric.

(e)  Aft.  n.  c.  t.  6.  obf.  149.  anguftia.

(fj  Obf.  8.  9. 20,  (/)  Ibid.  §.  42.

\g)  Opere,  t.  3.  ofTerv.  36.  {h)  20.  hie  in  Sepulch.

ginning


Letter  XXVIII. Article  i6.  17

ginning  from  the  region  of  the  clavicles  •,  fo  that  there  is  one,  in  which  the
beginning  of  the  oefophagus  is  faid  to  be  ftiut  up  by  a  cartilage,  together
with  the  termination  of  the  pharynx  :  and  for  this  reafon  StofFelius  enquir'd,
which  others  would  not  even  have  thought  of,  whether  we  might  not  make
.  ufe  of  pharyngotomy,  in  imitation  of  the  operation  that  they  call  laryngo-
tomy,  or  rather,  whether  an  incifion  might  not  be  made  into  the  upper  part
of  the  cefophagus,  through  which  a  pipe,  carrying  in  nourifhment,  might
be  convey'd,  by  prefering  an  uncertain  remedy,  as  he  fays,  to  a  certain
death  ;  but  at  the  fame  time,  which  is  to  be  lamented,  a  very  difficult  and
dangerous  operation,  as  all  muft  readily  conceive,  who  compare  the  deep  fi-
tuation  of  the  upper  part  of  the  cefophagus,  with  that  of  the  afpera  arteria,
which  lies  quite  at  hand,  and  is  almoft  fuperficial,  efpecially  as  it  is  attended
with  fo  many  mufcles,  nerves,  and  confiderable  veffels.

16.  And  that  the  parts,  lying  near  to  the  oefophagus,  may  impede  de-
glutition, in  more  ways  than  one,  is  fliown  even  by  thofe  obfervations,  which,
as  1  have  written  them  to  you  in  other  places,  it  will  be  fufficient  here  to
point  out,  in  purfuance  of  my  promife.  For  thefe  parts  can  not  only  be  in-
jurious, by  making  fuch  a  comprelTion  as  to  obftrudt  the  paflage,  in  the
manner  of  that  tumefied  gland,  in  a  woman  of  eighty  years  of  age  (/),  or
of  the  great  artery,  when  dilated  in  the  trumpeter  (;»),  or  as  even  both  of
them  together,  in  a  man  diffefted  by  Valfalva,  when  he  was  a  young  man
(») ;  but  alfo  by  deterring  the  patient  from  fwallowing,  fince  even  when  the
pafTage  is  open,  thefe  parts,  being  comprefs'd  by  the  aliments  that  are  fwal-
low'd,  bring  on  danger  of  fuffocation,  as  the  dilated  aorta  did,  in  the  womarj
who  was  difledted  by  the  fame  perfon  (o),  in  the  marquis  Paulucci  {p)  and  in
Ferrarini  phylician  at  the  court  of  Modena  [q).  But  to  return  to  the  glands
that  comprefs  the  oefophagus,  what  the  thymus,  when  tumefied,  can  do  to
produce  this  efFeft,  is  not  only  fhown  in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum
(r),  but  alfo  confirm'd  by  the  obfervation  of  Verdriefius  (j).  And  there
are  other  glands,  which,  by  their  diftention,  preffing  immediately  upon  the
gullet,  v/ithout  any  thing  being  interpos'd,  do,  in  like  manner,  produce
narrownefs,  and  coalition,  and  in  particular  thofe  that  are  call'd  glandulze
dorfales:  and  this  you  will  learn  from  the  fame  feftion  (/),  and  ftiU  more
from  fome  obfervations  of  a  great  number  of  diffeftors,  which  are  pointed
out  by  me,  in  the  Epiftolfe  Anatomic^  (a),  and  which  you  may  join  to  the
Sepulchretum,  carelefs  of  the  hefitation  of  Mauchart  {x),  when  he  wonder'd
that  thofe,  at  leaft,  which  are  taken  from  Laurentius,  and  Diemerbroeck,  for
the  others  he  readily  admitted  of,  were  not  to  be  found  in  his  copies  of  thofe
authors  works,  becaufe  he '  would  not  have  wonder'd,  had  he  obferv'd,
that  as  Laurentius,  and  Diemerbroeck,  had  both  of  them  revis'd  their  writ-
ings, the  firft  fince  the  year  1595,  and  the  laft  fince  the  year  1679,  and  had
made  additions  to  them  at  the  lame  time,  it  was  proper  for  me,  not  to  make

(J)  Epift.  15.  a.  15,  {,■)  Obf.  10.

{m)  Epift.  18.  n.  22.  (j)  Eph- n.  c,  cent.  8.  obf.  90.

{k)  Epill.  17,  n. 19.  (/)  Obf. 16.

(a)  Ibid.  n.  25.  • - (i/)  Epiil.  9.  n.  46.

(/>)  Ibid.  n.  26.  (.<)  Dilfert.  fupra  ad.  n.  15.  cit.  §.  6.

(?)  Epift,  iS.  n.  17.

Vol.  11.  D  ufe


r8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ufe  of  thofe  former,  but  of  the  latter,  editions,  in  which, if  you  enquire,
thofe  very  words  are  to  be  found,  that  I  have  quoted  from  each.

Mauchart  however,  as  he  is  a  man  no  lefs  cautious,  than  humane,  on  fuch
an  occafion,  has  at  leaft  faid,  that  which  cannot  be  denied,  I  mean,  that  the.
words  are  not  to  be  found  in  his  copies  of  thefe  authors.  But  another  gentle-
man who  is,  in  other  refpe<5i:s,  very  learned,  having  in  his  difputation  on  the
fiftula  lachrymalis,  happen'd  to  light,  among  other  things  that  he  took  from
me,  on  a  paffage  of  Ariftotle,  from  the  fecond  book  De  generatione  anmalium
C.  V.  which  was  quoted  by  me,  en  pajfant,  in  the  fixth  of  the  Adverfaria  (jy),
and  having  copied  the  words,  as  they  are  given  by  me,  has  pretty  confi-
dently pronounc'd,  "  that  thefe  words  were  not  really  to  be  found,  in  the
"  place  quoted,"  not  once  calling  to  mind,  that  fome  might,  perhaps,  make
life  of  copies,  which  were  differently  divided  from  his.  And  as  with
Sylvefter  Maurus,  I  follow'd  not  only  "  the  common  divifion,  of  the  works
"  of  Ariftotle,  into  books,  and  chapters,  but  alfo  the  common  trandation,"  or
rather,  the  very  words  of  Ariftotle  himfelf,  I  hop'd,  indeed,  that  if  any
lliould  choofe  to  collate  the  paflage  with  the  original,  from  whence  it  was
taken,  they  would  look  for  it  according  to  the  common  divifion,  or,  if
they  happen'd  to  be  without  this,  that  they  would  readily  find  the  paflage,
in  their  editions  of  that  fecond  book,  in  which  the  queftions  of  the  proofs
of  fecundity  are  treated  of,  and  in  that  paflage  would  find  the  fame  words,
or  at  leaft,  the  fame  fentence.

And  I  fay  the  fentence,  left  you  fliould,  perhaps,  be  put  to  a  ftand  by
that  one  word  colorent ;  for  that  Ariftotle  meant  this,  is  not  only  demon-
ftrated  by  reafon,  but  affirmed  by  phyficians,  and  amongft  them  by  Niphus
(2),  who  had  explain'd  the  fame  book,  and  pafl^age,  of  Ariftotle,  a  hun-
dred and  twenty  years  before  the  paraphrafe  of  Maurus  {a).

And  indeed,  when  I  examined  the  word  jtpco/aaT/^wo-t,  which  Ariftotle  has
made  ufe  of,  in  the  Greek  text,  as  it  was  proper  I  fliould,  and  which
certainly  fignifies  colorent,  tingant,  inficiant,  that  is  "  colour,  ftain,  or  dye ;"'
I  made  not  the  leaft  doubt,  but  it  ought  to  be  thus  render'd,  and  confe-
quently,  fuppos'd  it  to  be  owing  to  an  error  of  the  copifts,  or  printers,  that
in  the  tranflation  perficiant  is  fooliftily  inferred,  in  the  place  of  infidant.  And
this  remark,  I  was  willing  to  throw  in,  on  this  occafion,  left  thofe  who  read
hefitations,  or  cenfures,  of  this  kind  in  diflTertations  that  have  been  much
commended,  and  have  gone  through  more  than  one  impreflion,  fliould  fup-
pofe,  in  confequence  of  my  perpetual  filence,  and  ftill  more  from  the  autho-i
rity  of  thofe  by  whom  both  thefe  diflfertations  were  written,  that  thefe
ftriftures  are  juft.

For  as  to  a  fomebody,  whofe  name  I  would  not  fo  much  as  enquire  in-
to, but  only  into  this  one  thing,  whether  he  could  fay,  which  has  been
denied,  that  he  had  receiv'd  any  provocation  from  me;  as  to  fome-
body, I  fay,  whether  m.ore  fool,  or  knave,  I  know  not,  having,  as  I  was
told  in  former  years,  babbled  out  fomething  raflily,  and  injurioufly,  in  op-
pofition  to  the  opinion  of  the  greateft  men,  and  the  moft  proper  judges,  in
regard  to  my  method  of  writing,  formerly,  upon  fome  books,  which  was  ne-

(j)  Animad.  65.  (a)  Ejufdem  1.  2.  c.  5.  art.  3.  ad. n. 11.

(2)  Expof.  in  1.  2.  Ariftot.  de  generat.  animal.

4  cefl!ary,


Letter  XXVIII. Article  17.  19

ceflary,  and  ufeful  •,  I  fhall  never  be  fo  weak  as  ta  fuppofe,  that  wife  men
expeft  me  to  make  any  reply :  I  will  therefore  leave  him,  and  fuch  as  he,
if  there  are  any  fuch  befides,  to  their  own  dreams,  with  the  ridiculous  in-
terpretations of  which  I  hear  he  is  delighted.  But  if  men  who  deferve  an-
fwers,  objed  any  thing  to  me,  with  humanity,  and  good  nature  (and  I  wifh
there  were  not  many  things  to  be  obje6i:ed)  I  fhall  always  be  ready  to  give
them  every  fatisfadlion  in  my  power,  and  if  by  no  other  means,  at  lead  by
the  modefty  of  my  reply.

But  now,  returnmg  to  our  fubjeft-,  befides  the  dorfal  glands,  from
the  turgefcency  of  which  Mauchart  {b)  mentions,  that  Mangetus  had
alfo  feen  a  coalition  of  the  gula,  there  are  others,  I  fay,  which  do  not
always  occur  to  anatomifts  •,  although  the  dorfal  glands  do  not  always
occur;  that  are  more  morbid,  or  at  leaft  more  frequently  fo,  which
may  produce  the  fame  effect,  as  thofe  that  were  feen  by  the  fame  author
Mauchart  (c),  near  to  the  termination  of  the  oefophagus,  and  at  the  termi-
nation itfelf,  would  certainly  have  done,  if  their  fwelling  had  been  more
encreas'd,  as  thofe  were,  which  Vallifneri  {d)  found,  together  with  that
change  into  cartilage.  And  thus  the  fame  thing  happen'd  in  the  very  ter-
mination of  the  oefophagus,  from  a  tumour  that  was  either  fchirrhous,  or
made  up  of  hard  fat,  the  obfervations  of  Bonetus  {e)  in  preference  to  others,
and  of  a  furgeon  commended  by  Mauchart  (/),  demonftrate.  But  there  is
another  part  befides  thefe,  which  exifts  in  all  bodies,  and  which,  by  im-
moderately conftringing  the  lower  part  of  the  gula,  produces  an  impedi-
ment to  deglutition.  This  part  is  the  diaphragm,  betwixt  the  mufcular
flelh  of  which,  the  lower  part  of  the  oefophagus  paiTes.  Wherefore  you
fee,  why  in  that  fervant-man,  whofe  diaphragm  the  celebrated  Heiller  {g)  faw
"  very  much  inflam'd,"  there  was  an  incapacity  of  fwallowing,"  and  why
fome  hyflerical  women  perceive,  in  the  place  juft  pointed  out,  an  obftacle
oppos'd  to  deglutition,  as  in  that  woman  (h\  in  whom  I  accounted  for  it,
from  thofe  very  mufcular  parts  of  the  diaphgram  being  convuls'd,  betwixt
which  there  is  a  foramen,  or  fiffure,  to  tranfmit  the  oefophagus ;  for  that
woman,  when  fhe  had,  already,  got  her  food  down  almofl  to  the  ftomach,
j)erceiv'd  an  obflacle  in  that  place.  It  gave  me  no  fmall  difpleafure,  that
when  I  had  found  this  foramen  to  be  much  fhorter  than  ufual,  in  fome  bo-
dies, as  in  a  certain  old  man  who  had  been  a  porter  {i),  and  in  another  old
man,  of  whom  I  fhall  write  hereafter  {k),  had  met  with  it,  as  well  as  the
oefophagus  itfelf,  which  was  in  that  part  much  wider,  and  more  red,  than
ufual,  very  large,  efpecially  in  its  breadth,  I  was  much  difpleas'd,  I  fay,
that  I  could  get  no  certain  information  in  regard  to  either,  whether  they  had
perceiv'd  any  uneafinefs,  or  difficulty,  in  fwallowing,  at  that  part.
••  17.  And  befides  thofe  that  I  have  hitherto  fpoken  of,  I  have  alfo  ob-
ferv'd,  that  there  is  another  part,  which  may  comprefs  the  oefophagus,  and
that  at  the  lower  part. I  mean  the  liver. For  as  there  is  an  excavation,  or

{b)  Diff.  cit.  §.  12.  {£)  Differt.  fift.  obf.  med.  mifcell.  obf.  15.

(f) §. II-  {h)  Epift.  23.  n.  4.  &-feq.

{d)  Obf.  fupra  cit.  ad  n.  15.  (?)  Epift.  10.  n.  19.

{e)  Seft.  hac  SepLikhr.  obf.  32.  §. 2.  {k)  Epift.  37.  n. 30.


(/)  DifT.  cit.  §.  9.


D  2  hollow-


20  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

hollowing,  in  the  pofterior  margin  of"  this  vilcus  taken  notice  of  by  the  ce-
lebrated Winflow  (I),  which  gives  way  both  to  the  protuberance  of  the
fpine,  and  to  the  lower  part  of  the  oefophagus,  when  about  to  expand  it-
felf  into  the  ftomach ;  it  can  be  eafily  conceiv'd,  that  if  the  liver  fliouid,  at
any  time,  become  much  fwell'd,  particularly  in  this  part,  and  hard,  it  may
prefs  the  cefophagus  clofe  upon  the  fpine.  And,  indeed,  I  fee  that  in  this
feclion  of  the  Sepulchretum  {m),  the  liver  is  taken  notice  of,  among  the
cauies  of  impeded  deglutition,  but  not  as  being  injurious  in  this  manner,
although  Ballonius  {n)  feems  to  come  fomewhat  nearer  thereto.  There  is
a  far  different  method,  which  is  a  juft  one  indeed,  but  in  part,  by  which
the  celebrated  Fantonus  teaches  ((?),  why,  the  ftomach  being  thruft  down
into  the  umbilical  region,  by  the  vaft  bulk  and  weight  of  the  liver,  and  its
fuperior  orifice  being  comprefs'd,  aliment^  and  efpecially  fluid  ones,  were
fwallow'd  with  difHculty,  For  he  fays,  "  that  the  cavity  of  the  cefophagus
"  being  thus  elongated,  by  the  force  that  was  put  upon  it,  had  become  much
"  narrower  than  ufual,"  and  that  the  ftomach  itfelf,  being  ftreighten'd  by  the
compreffion,  had  refitted  the  food  which  was  about  to  enter  into  it.  And  I
think  that  the  former  part  of  this  kind  of  explication,  might  be  added  to
the  others,  in  order  to  render  it  more  eafily  intelligible,  in  the  firft  obferva-
tion  of  this  feftion,  why  a  foldier  "  being  feiz'd  with  an  opifthotonos,  could
"  fwallow  nothing."  For  the  neck  being  bent  backwards,  the  ceibphagus
is  diftended,  and  thus  as  it  becomes  longer,  lb  much  in  proportion  is  it
made  narrower,  the  anterior  paries  thereof  approaching  nearer  to  the  pofte-
rior. And  the  fame  kind  of  explication  may,  in  fome  meafure,  take  place,
where  Hippocrates  {p)  fpeaks  of  "  a  diftortion  of  the  neck"  coming  otij
fo  that  the  patient  "  could  fcarcely  fwallow."

1 8.  It  does  not,  however,  efcape  me,  that  other  caufes  of  injur'd  deglu-
tition may  be  produc'd,  fome  of  which  you  will  even  find  in  the  Sepulchre-
turn.  Yet  you  will  not  eafily  be  perfuaded,  to  enumerate  among  thefe  as
certain,  that  which  is  promis'd  in  the  thirteenth  obfervation,  by  having  this
title  prefix'dto  it,  "  A  difficulty  of  deglutition  on  account  of  the  oefophagus
"  being  divided."  For  Blafius  defcribes  this  tube  to  have  been  fo  divided,
within  the  thorax  of  that  boy,  as  to  return  into  one  cavity  again,  a  little  be-  ,
low  its  divifion,  or  as  anatomifts  fpeak  at  prefent  to  have  become  infulated,  or
have  made  an  ifland.  But  of  any  difficulty  of  deglutition,  he  does  not  throw
in  the  leaft  hint ;  fo  that  this  conformation  feems  to  have  been  more  unufual,
than  injurious.  But  we  ought  to  form  quite  a  difi'erent  judgment,  of  that
which  the  excellent  John  Grailiuis  (q)  founs!,  I  mean  a  morbid  dilatation  of
the  oefophagus,  about  the  middle  of  the  thorax,  into  a  lateral  fac,  upon
which,  fymptoms  of  deglutition,  that  were  every  now  and  then  varying,  de-
pended, and  fymptoms  that  could  never  have  been  explain'd,  without  dif-  .
feftion.  You  may  very  foon  expe6l  another  letter,  which  will,  perhaps,  be
fomewhat  longer :  but  in  the  mean  while, farewell.

(/)  Expof.  anat.  tr.  da  bas  ventre  n.  259.  {0)  Infchol.  ad  patris  ohf.  anat.  med.  24.

\m) Obf.  26.  §. 2.  (/)  Sect.  4.  aphor.  35.

\ii)  In  fchol.  ad.  obf.  25.  {q)  Aft.  n.  c.  t.  6.  obf.  73.

A.  LETTER


Letter  XXIX. Articles i, 2.  21


LETTER the T  W  E  N  T  Y- N  I  N  T  H,

Contains  a  few  flight  Obfervations  upon  the  Singultus  or
Hiccup,  and  upon  Rumination  or  chewing  the  Cud,
in  Men.  The  other  Part  relates  to  Pain  in  the
Stomach.

LTHOUGH  you will  find  three feftions,  in  the  Sepulchretum, .

upon  the  next  diforders  of  the  ftomach, "  the  Singultus,  injur'd  con-

cocStion,  and  pain,"  one  upon  each,  yet  I  would  not  have  you  expedl  as
many  letters  from  me.  For  the  two  firft,  when  they  are  violent,  are  of
fuch  a  kind,  that  the  one  is  found  to  be  join'd  with  fevers,  inflammations,
wounds,  and  other  difeafes  of  the  like  kind,  and  the  other  with  more  con-
fiderable  diforders,  which  it  is  either  the  confequence  of,  or  has  itfelf  pro-
duc'd,  fo  that  they,  will  be  treated  of,  in  conjunction  with  thefe  diforders,  as
I  am  unwilling  to  repeat  the  fame  hiftories.  And  this  you  will  be  able  to
underftand,  very  clearly,  immediately  upon  turning  to  thofe  two  fedtions,
which  are  written  upon  thefe  fubjefts.  For  in  the  fixth,  which  is  upon  in-
jur'd concoftion,  you  will  fee  it  exprefly  declar'd  to  what  difeafes  mod  of
the  obfervations  more  peculiarly  relate,  and  in  what  places  they  have  been
produc'd  more  at  large.  And  in  regard  to  the  remaining  obfervations,  all
thofe  that  are  written  with  any  degree  of  accuracy,  of  themfelves  fufficiently
fliow,  whether  they  ought  to  be  refer'd  to  any  other  feftion.  For  there  are
fome,  in  which  you  will  not  find  a  fingle  word,  upon  the  fubjeft  of  injur'd
concoftioB,  as  that  which  you  have  under  number  eight,  article  the  fecond,
and  that  under  number  one,  in  the  Additamenta.  And  why  any  obfer-
vation,  like  that  which  follows  next,  which  refers  to  thofe  perfons  who.
"  were  able  to  concoft,  not  to  fay  retain,  their  food,  and  had  an  appetite
"  for  it,  almoft  to  the  latter  part  of  their  lives,"  fhould  be  inferted  there,
does  not  at  all  appear.

2.  And  what  obfervation  is  thereof  the  whole  fifth  fedion,  from  which
you  are  not  refer'd  to  another  feftion  ?  Or  if  you  are  not  openly  refer'd,  do
you  not  think  that  you  might  be  with  propriety,  not  to  fay  that  you  ought  ?
And  yet,  even  with  all  this  farrago  of  repetition,  the  whole  number  of  the
obfervations,  when  collected  together,  is  but  fmall ;  notwithftanding  one  of
them  (a)  feems  to  be  fet  down  more  than  once.  For  which  reafon,  I  fhould
fuppofe  four  appendices  were  thrown  in,  that  the  whole  feftion  might  not
fcem  to  be  immoderately  fhort ;  in  none  of  which  appendices,  any  body,  is

{a)  Ci-nfer^  obf.  6.  cum  §.  6.  obf.  j-

mentioii'd' '


2  2  Book  III. Of  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

mention'd  to  have  been  infpedled  •,  and  that,  for  the  fame  reafon,  two  dif-
feftions  were  added  of  ruminating  men,  which  I  fliould  lefs  wonder  at,  if
they  had  been  given  where  the  queftion  is  of  vomiting :  nor  is  that  fuffi-
oient ;  for  laft  of  all,  a  difcourfe  on  rumination,  or  chewing  the  cud,  is
added  from  Peyerus,  which  is  fo  long  as  to  exceed  the  length  of  the  whole
feftion.  But  do  not  imagine,  however,  that  thefe  things  are  taken  notice  of
by  me,  as  if  I  entirely  difapprov'd  them  -,  but  call  to  mind  my  intention.
And  even  attend  to  thefe  few  things,  which  naturally  arofe  in  my  mind,
when  I  read  over  thofe  appendices  upon  the  Singultus,  and  the  obfervations
of  men  who  chew'd  the  cud,  fome  from  one  occafion  and  fome  from  another,
as  is  generally  the  cafe.

3.  In  the  fecond  appendix,  when  Thomas  Bartholin  mentions  among  the
caufes  of  Singultus,  a  tumour  that  comprefs'd  the  nerves  going  to  the
ilomach,  and  fays  "  it  was  fufpedted  that  there  was  a  tumour  of  this  kind,
*'  in  that  man,  whom  I  knew  at  Padua,  and  who  was  troubled  with  a  perpe-
"  tual  uneafinefs  from  the  hiccup  ;"  the  obfervation  of  Jo.  Rhodius  {b)  came
into  my  mind,  which  relates  to  the  fame  cafe,  and  which,  although  it  is
fomewhat  obfcure,  may  neverthelefs  be  look'd  into  by  you.  The  fame
Bartholin  afks,  in  the  third  appendix,  "  why  juft  opening  a  vein  in  the
"  arm"  fhould  be  of  advantage  in  a  certain  Singultus,  which  he  defcribes,
and  which  is  really  extraordinary  ?  What  ?  if  the  fuperior  phrenic  vein,
which  you  know  accompanies  the  phrenic  nerve,  upon  the  quantity  of  blood,
which  was  about  to  return,  to  that  part  where  it  would  flow  into  that  vein,
being  diminifh'd,  having  been,  confequently,  reliev'd  of  a  part  of  its  load,
either  prefs'd  lefs  upon  its  attendant  nerve,  or  abforb'd  fomething,  from
whence  this  nerve  was  irritated  ?  And  as  in  all  thefe  appendices,  mention  is
made  of  remedies  againft  the  Singultus,  nor  even  externals  remain  unno-
tic'd  in  the  firft,  and  the  fecond  ;  it  brings  to  my  mind  the  fuccefs  of  an
eafy,  and  obvious,  remedy  of  Valfalva's,  in  a  noble  Count,  that  is  milk,  with
-which  he  fomented  the  abdomen ;  for  as  long  as  the  cloths  were  wet  with
the  milk,  fo  long  was  the  Singultus,  which  was  fo  troublefome  to  the
patient,  reftrain'd  :  in  which,  however,  theriaca,  when  laid  upon  the  part,
was  not  without  its  ufe.

But  as  to  the  remark,  which  is  made  in  a  kind  of  fcholium  (c),  that  is
plac'd  betv/ixt  the  third,  and  the  fourth  appendix,  of  a  Singultus,  which,
although  it  came  on  in  a  certain  fever,  that  was  attended  with  the  worft  of
fymptoms,  was  not  mortal,  it  is  a  very  rare  inftance  indeed,  and  the  con-
trary is  aflerted  by  two  very  eminent  phyficians  ;  among  the  reft,  Francifcus
Vallefius  {d),  and  Hieronymus  Mercurialis  (e),  who  deny  that  it  ever  hap-
pen'd  to  them  to  be  witneffes  of  a  favourable  event  in  a  cafe  of  the  kind,
nor  did  it  happen  otherwife  to  Hippocrates,  in  that  woman  who  lay  ill  in
the  forum  mendacum.

And  in  the  malignant  fevers,  in  like  manner,  defcrib'd  by  our  Rammazzini
(f)i  as  many  as  ever  were  troubled  with  a  Singultus,  all  perilh'd,  and  one  of

{b)  Cent.  2.  obf.  med.  61.  {e)  Prsleft.  pifan.  in  eand.  hift.  qus  ibi  26.

(f)  Ad  §.  6.  obf.  7.  (/)  Conftit.  a.  1692  &  duor.  feq.  n.  22.

{d)  Comment,  in  Hippocr.  epidem.  1.  3.  f.  2.
2gr.  12.

them


Letter  XXIX. Article  4.  23

them  being  differed,  the  ftomach  was  found  "  to  be  mark'd  here  and  there
"  with  blade  ipots :"  and  what  was  found,  in  the  ftomach  of  a  certain  man,
who  had  been  afFeded  with  the  hiccup,  you  will  learn  from  the  OpufcuJa  Pa-
thologica  of  the  celebrated  Haller  (g).  Ledelius,  however  (h)^  after  having
quoted  Epiphanius  Ferdinandus,  as  "  calling  God  to  witnefs,  that  he  had
"  never  been  deceiv'd  in  predifting  death  in  ardent,  and  malignant  fevers,
"  which  were  attended  with  a  Singultus,"  prudently  admonifhes  us,  "  that
"  a  patient  ought  not  to  be  deferted,  as  long  as  there  is  life,  becaufe  pro-
*'  digies  many  times  happen,  in  the  cure  of  difeafes,"  as  happen'd  to  him
in  a  certain  baker.  And  not  to  him  alone,  but  to  others  alfo,  as  to  Lanzonus
(i),  the  celebrated  Delius  {k),  and  to  me,  in  that  epidemical  conftitution
at  Forli,  in  the  year  171 1,  which  I  have  already  defcribed  to  you  (l).  For
the  two  patients,  whom  I  mention'd,  in  the  firft  place,  in  that  defcription,
were  ftill  alive  when  I  wrote  thefe  things  •,  although  whoever  had  then  {ttn
them,  and  particularly  Garavini,  who  was  more  like  a  dead  perfon,  than  a
living  one,  for  fome  days  together,  and  had  heard,  befides,  the  frequent
Singultus  of  each,  would  have  immediately  given  up  all  hope  of  their  re-
covery.

4.  But  as  to  men  who  chew  the  cud,  examples  of  which  Peyerus  has  col-
ledted,  in  the  greateft  number  he  was  able  (w),  and  has  refer'd  fome  to  ru-
mination which  was  in-bred,  and  congenial,  as  it  were,  and  others  to  that
which  is  the  confequence  of  difeafe ;  the  fame  perfon  has  imagin'd  that  two
obfervations,  of  a  nobleman,  and  of  a  monk,  both  of  which  you  fee  here  in  ■
the  Sepulchretum  (n)^  relate  to  thefe  two  kinds,  one  to  each.  Both  of  them
•were  made  at  Padua,  and  are  the  firft  of  them  all,  and  the  only  obfervations,
befides,  which  are  join'd  with  difledlion ;  one  thing  is  very  foolifhly  added
here,  "  that  this  monk  had  two  horns."  For  Rhodius  (0)  does  not  fay  it,
in  which  Peyerus  blunders  (^),  though  he  otherwife  juftly  blames  Bartholin,
who  has  added  it  (j),  and  thole  who  have  follow'd  Bartholin.

■  Certainly,  Fabricius  ab  Aquapendente  (r),  as  he  took  notice  of  this  fame
monk,  would  by  no  means  have  omitted  that  circumftance,  inafmuch  as  he
had,  a  little  before,  thought  it  quite  neceflary  to  add,  "  that  the  father  of
"  this  ruminating  gentleman,  had  born  a  little  horn  on  his  head.  And
"  among  others,  who  copied  that  blunder  of  Bartholin,  was  EtmuUer  {$),
"  who  added  one  of  his  own,  over  and  above ;  I  mean  that  in  thefe  rumi-
"  nating  men,  the  ftomach  had  been  obferv'd  to  be  much  more  fibrous,
"  and  flefhy,  than  ufual,  as  if  it  had  been  cover'd  with  a  mufcular  coat." '
I  wifli  we  could  fo  defend  him,  as  to  fuppofe,  that  by  the  term  ftomachus  he
meant  the  oefophagus  ;  for  this  part  Plazzonus  {t),  really,  found  "  every-
*'  where  flelhy,  like  a  mufcle"  that  is,  not  only  fuch,  as  "  all  men  evident-
ly have,"  as  Tryerus  would  have  it  fuppos'd  {u)  ;  for  unlefs  it  had  been

(£)  Obf.  14.  (;,)  c.  6.  ck.

{h)  Eph.  n.  c.  Dec.  3.  A.  7.  obf. 127.  {q)  Cent.  5. hift.  anat.  6i.

(0  Earund.  cent.  i.  obf.  6i.  (,)  De ventric. inteft. &c.  ubi de  van,

{k)  Ex.  aft.  T.  8.  obf.  108.  ventric.  in  fin.

(/)  Epift.  7.  n.  16. .  {s)  Prax.  ].  i.  f.  4.  c. i.

{m) Merycol.  1,  i.  c.  6.  &  1.  3,  c,  3.  [t)  Vid.  Rhod.  obf.  cit.  59  qus  9.  in  Se-

(«)  Obf.  10.  &  9. "  pulchr.

(0)  Cent.  2.  obf.  59.  («)  C.  6.  cit.

mvich


24  Book  III. Of  Diieafes  of  the  Belly.

much  more  flefliy,  an  anatomift,  of  fome  eminence,  would  not  have  obferv'd
this  one  thing  only,  at  the  fame  time  that  he  pronouac'd  "  all  the  other
"  parts  of  the  body,  to  be  in  their  proper  Hate."  But  for  EtmuUer  ;  if  how-
ever he  did  write  thefe  things;  we  cannot  m.ake  ufe  of  this  defence,  inaf-
much  as  he  -,  which  all  the  things  that  he  had  faid  before,  in  that  chapter,
ftiow ;  by  the  term  Jlomachiis  always  meant  ventriculus  or  ftomach.

Yet  that  blunder  of  Bartholin  is  ftill  more  confiderable,.  where  he  left
thefe  words,  in  his  Anatome  quarttini  renovata  (x) ;  "  and  indeed  we  cannot
doubt  but  the  ftomach  was  double,  in  a  ruminating  man,  fpoken  of  by  Sal-
muthus  and  others."  And  I  wonder  that  this  (hould  have  been  transfer'd
into  the  Sepulchretum,  in  that  Scholium,  which  is  fubjoin'd  to  the  two  ob-
fervations,  that  teach  the  contrary,  of  which  I  have  hitherto  fpoken,  efpecial-
ly  as  Bartholin  could  produce  no  diffeftion,  befides  thefe,  of  a  man  who
chew'd  the  cud,  not  even  from  Salmuthus,  and  as,  moreover,  hares,  and
rabbets  chew  the  cud,  and  neverthelefs  have  not  two  ftomachs.

5.  However,  although  it  never  happen'd  to  Valfalva,  nor  to  me,  to  fee
men  who  chew'd  the  cud,  and  much  lefs  to  diifeft  their  bodies  •,  yet  it  has
happen'd  frequently  to  us,  to  difleft  the  bodies  of  men,  who  had  been
troubled  with  a  violent  pain  in  the  ftomach,  of  which  the  feventh  feftion,
as  I  have  faid  above,  profelTedly  treats.  And  the  oblervations  of  this  kind,
■which  I  fuppofe  to  agree  better  with  the  purpofe  of  this  letter,  than  thofe  of
others,  I  fhall  immediately  purpofe.  And  firft  I  fhall  give  you  three  from
Valfalva.

6.  A  man  of  fixty  years  of  age,  of  a  bilious  conftitution,  had  begun,  for
many  years,  to  complain  ef  a  weaknefs,  and  pain,  in  the  ftomach,  when  at
length  a  hardnefs,  about  that  region,  came  on,  below  which,  fome  hard
globules  befides  (but  thefe  were  very  moveable)  v^ere  perceiv'd,  and  attend-
ed with  fome  tenfion  of  the  whole  belly.  The  belly,  when  fliaken,  evi-
dently fhow'd  that  a  kind  of  humour  was  extravafated  within  it.  There  were
frequent  borgorigmi  of  the  inteftines,  and  eructations  of  flatus.  Vomiting
retum'd,  more  than  once,  at  the  diftance  of  fome  hours  after  eating ;  which,
however,  had  happen'd  but  feldom  in  the  firft  years  of  the  difeafe.

In  the  mean  while,  the  patient  made  but  little  urine,  was  very  thirfty,  and
eomplain'd  of  a  drynefs  of  the  tongue  :  his  pulfe  was  weak,  and  fmall.  At
length,  though  a  great  quantity  of  ferum  was  difcharg'd,  by  the  urinary  paf-
fages,  and  the  fwelling  of  the  belly  was  diminifh'd,  yet  the  other  difagreeable
fymptoms,  neverthelefs,  becoming  every  day  more  and  more  fevere,  and  the
vomidngs  being  in  the  laft  month  of  his  life,  of  a  kind  of  ferum  ting'd,  as
it  were,  with  foot,  and  fmelling  very  ftrong,  fo  that  the  patient,  himfelf,
faid  it  refembled  the  bad  fmell  of  putrid  flefh-,  his  ftrength  was  gradually
diminifli'd,  his  fpeech  became  ftammering,  and  he  died.

The  abdomen,  even  then,  contained  a  pint,  or  two,  of  ferum,  fimilar  to
water,  in  v/hich  frefli  meat  has  been  walh'd.  The  whol?  omentum  was  con-
trafted  into  certain  tuberofities  of  different  colours,  which  were  mov'd,  as
that  v;as  mov'd.  The  ftomach  overflow'd  with  ferum,  of  the  fame  kind
with  that,  which  was  thrown  up  by  vomiting  :  but  it  was  become  quite
hard,  in  about  a  third  part  of  it :  this  part  lay  towards  the  pylorus,  and  had  lb

(,v)  L.  I.  c.  9.

ftreiwhten'd


Letter  XXiX. Articles  7,  8,  g.^  25

ftrcighten'd  it,  that  the  aliments  had  fcarcely  room  to  pals  through,  after  be-
ing prepar'd  in  the  ftomach.  But  although  the  whole  of  this  hard  part,
■when  cut  into,  fhow'd  a  white  and  folid  fubftance  internally,  of  which  it
confifted ;  yet  on  that  furface,  which  was  turn'd  towards  the  cavity  of  the
ftomach,  it  entirely  refembled  both  in  colour,  and  fmell,  putrid  flefli,  dil-
tinguifh'd  with  certain  bloody  points.

7.  You  fee  that  thofe  hard,  and  moveable,  globules  below  the  region  of
the  ftomach,  were  the  tuberofities  into  which  the  omentum  had  contracSted
itfelf :  and  that  the  upper  hardnefs  was  a  fchirrhus  of  the  ftomach,  which  as
long  as  it  did  not  extend  itfelf  by  its  encreafe,  fo  as  to  comprefs  the  pylorus,
and  ftreighten  the  paflage  through  it,  did  not  caufe  the  vomitings  to  happen
fo  frequently.  The  pain  alfo,  in  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  was  but
flight,  as  it  arofe  only  from  fome  weight  of  the  fchirrhus,-  and  from  the  re-
fiftance  of  the  coats,  which  it  occupied,  to  the  proper  extenfion  of  the
ftomach  being  made,  for  the  reception'of  the  food,  or  if  this  diftention  was
brought  on,  from  that  part  of  the  coats  which  was  ftill  found,  being
incapable,  of  themfeives,  to  bear  all  the  diftention  that  was  neceflary,  with-
out uneafinefs.  But  when  the  fchirrhus  was  encreas'd,  and  degenerated,  at
length,  into  a  cancer,  and  that  ulcerated ;  the  pains  muft,  of  courfe,  more
and  more  encreafe.  For  the  ftomach  being  thus  afFedted,  concoftion  being
vitiated,  and  the  balmy  nature  of  the  blood  deprav'd,  it  is  not  at  all  to  be
wonder'd  at,  that  the  other  circumftances  of  the  hiftory,  fhould  alfo  happen,
efpecially  as  that  hardnefs  of  the  ftomach,  and  the  tuberofities  into  which
the  omentum,  that  is  connefted  to  the  ftomach,  had  contrafted  itfelf,  made
a  refiftance  to  the  free  courfe  of  the  humours.  And  from  thefe  confidera-
tions  we  may  very  well  conceive  how  flatus,  vomiting,  afcites,  weaknefs,
and  death,  were  the  confequences  of  the  original  difeafe.

8.  A  woman  of  forty  years  of  age,  of  a  fleftiy  habit,  but  a  fallow  colour,
having  eaten  onions,  preferv'd  in  fait,  and  vinegar,  together  with  bread  made
from  the  meal  of  chefnuts,  began  immediately  to  complain  of  a  pain  in  her
ftomach.  Which  growing  more  and  more  violent,  at  the  end  of  three  hours,
after  eating  this  meal,  flie  died  in  cold  fweats,  and  a  fatal  fyncope,  which
had  feiz'd  her.

Her  belly  being  open'd,  on  account  of  a  fufpicion  that  fhe  had  been  poi-
fon'd,  every  thing  was  found  to  be  in  its  natural  ftate,  except  that  the
ftomach  was  diftended  to  a  very  great  degree,  and  fomewhat  inflam'd  j  but
the  blood  preferv'd  nearly  its  natural  fluidity.

9.  Valfalva  thought  proper  to  make  this  conjeflure,  in  regard  to  the
caufe  of  the  difeafe,  that  an  effervefcence  being  excited  by  the  incongruity
of  that  kind  of  food,  this  very  great  diftention  of  the  ftomach  had  been,
confequently,  brought  on,  which,  by  comprefling  the  fanguiferous  veflels
thereof,  caus'd  a  remora  to  the  blood's  motion,  from  whence  inflammation
arofe,  and  from  this,  an  irritation  of  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach,  from  whence,
again,  a  fyncope.

But  however,  this  hiftory  may  confirm  what  Diphilus,  and  Mnefithsus,
fay  in  Ludovicus  Nonnius  ( j),  of  chefnuts,  and  the  experience  they  had  had

y)  Djstat.  L  1.  c.  45.

VoiAl.  E  of


26  Book  lir. of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

■of  their  power  of  caufiiig  flatus ;  yet  the  fame  author  does  not  deny,  that
they  are  in  very  common  ufe,  among  many  of  the  people  inhabiting  the
Alps,  and  it  is  commonly  known,  that  a  bread  is  even  made  from  their  meal,
which  thofe  people  feed  on  in  common,  where,  as  Avantius  (z)  alfo  afferts,
"  a  great  quantity  of  them  grows."  Muft  we  therefore,  accufe  the  onion,
which  was  added  to  that  kind  of  bread,  and  fuppofe  it,  by  means  of  its  ac^
rimony,  to  have  attenuated,  and  cut,  the  grofs  particles  of  the  chefnucs,
and  fo  let  loofe  too  great  a  quantity  of  air?  As  if,  truly,  the  fame  ruftic  in-
habitants of  the  Alps  did  not  eat  onions,  occafionally,  with  their  bread.
This  woman,  however,  feems  to  have  had  a  ftomach  fomewhat  weak,  and
unaccuftom'd  to  fuch  a  kind  of  food  ;  and  thofe  ruftics  feem  to  have,  as
Horace  (<?)  fays.

Dura  mejforum  ilia ;

The  reapers  brawny  fides.

But  I  believe  that  thefe  circumftances  were  much  better  known  to  thofe  who
knew  the  woman,  than  to  us.  Whence  then  could  the  fufpicion  of  poifon  arife,
as  they  were  not  unacquainted  with  all  thefe  things  ?  For  if  the  woman  had
cramm'd  herfelf,  with  an  immoderate  quantity  of  this  food,  there  is  no  doubt
but  they  would  have  known  it,  and  have  had  lefs  reafon  to  fufpeft  poifon.
You  fee,  in  this  very  feventh  fedlion  of  the  Sepulchretum  {I;),  that  alittle  boy,
in  like  manner,  "  died  within  the  fpace  of  three  hours,"  from  the  immoderate
eating  of  grapes.  Yet  there  appear'd,  at  the  fame  time,  another  reafon,  why
this  child  died  in  that  manner.  "  For  the  ftomach  being  perforated,  con-
tained a  great  quantity  of  green  ichor,  which,  without  doubt,"  fays  Rho-
dius,  the  writer  of  the  obfervation,  "  was  an  acruginous  bile,"  that  was  en-
dow'd  with  a  very  great  acrimony.

How  then  was  the  cafe  ?  I  fliould  be  entirely  of  opinion,  that  in  this  wo-
man, alfo,  there  v/as  fome  other  peculiar  circumftance  lying  hid,  although
it  did  not  fall  under  the  notice  of  the  eyes,  in  diffedtion,  fo  that  by  this  flie
was  already  difpos'd,  if  any  caufe  did  but  happen  to  be  added,  as  that  fla-
tulent and  unufual  kind  of  food,  flie  was,  I  fay,  fo  difpos'd,  as  to  be  af-
fefted  in  this  manner  therefrom,  though  fo  many  others  are  not  us'd  to  be
at  all  affefted  by  the  lame  diet,  whether  this  difpofing  circumftance  lay  hid
in  thofe  juices,  v/hich  the  food  met  with  in  the  ftomach,  or  in  the  nerves,
which  were  endow'd  with  a  more  exquifite  fenfe,  and  confequently  more  prone
to  irritation,  and  more  ready  to  transfer  that  irritation  to  any  other  part,
that  is  to  the  heart,  in  particular,  to  which  the  fame  nerves  go,  that  go  to
the  ftomach.

In  this  manner  therefore,  or  nearly  fo,  you  will  underftand  what  Valfalva
Conjeftur'd :  although  we  have  fcarcely  any  proof  of  the  bad  habit  of  this
woman,  from  the  Jallov/  colour  of  her  flcin.  Without  doubt,  in  two  other
women,  both  of  whom  had  eaten  a  melon,  the  one  "  ftev/'d  in  an  oven  with
onions,  and  pepper,"  after  which  (he  drank  cold  water,  and  the  other,  "  boiled
in  milk,  and  well-feafon'd  with  pepper,"  after  which  flie  drank  cold,  and  four
fmallbeer,  and  who  were  both  taken  oflFfoon  after  by  a  Hidden  death  ;  in  thefe

(a)  Not.  ad.  Fierse  coenam,  ubidepane  non («)  Epod.  3.
firumentac.  (1^)  Obf.  7.,


Letter  XXIX. Article  lo.  27

women  I  lay,  without  doubt,  a  bad  difpofltion  of  body  was  more  evident,  as  in
one  of  them  there  had  been  a  fuppreffion  of  the  menfes,  for  thefpace  of  three
months,  and  in  the  other,  befidcs  an  advanc'd  age,  of  feventy  years,  a  long
weaknefs  of  theftomach,  and  a  decreafe  of  ftrength.  Yet  there  is  aifo  no'doubt,
but  Chriftophorus  Seligerus  (c),  and  Michael  Erneftus  Ettmuller  (d),  obferv'd
more  cachedic  appearances  in  the  body  oi  one  betore  dilfeftion,  and  more
morbid  appearances  in  the  ftomach  of  both,  or  at  ieafi  of  one,  by  means  of
drffedion.

JO.  A  nobleman  of  Bologna,  who  was  aged  more  than  fixty,  by  one  year,
having  been  already  troubled,  for  many  years,  at  one  time,  with  a  hemi-
crania,  and  at  another  time,  with  a  gout,  which  v/as  frequently  vague,  and
wandring,  and  fometim.es  alfo  fix'd,  and  at  other  times  with  calculi .  of  the
kidnies,  was,  laft  of  all,  feiz'd  Vt'ith  a  gout  in  the  right  hand,  without  any
tumour,  but  with  a  mild  pain,  which,  as  the  power  of  feeling  was  foon  be-
come lefs  quick,  and  foong,  could  fcarcely  be  perceiv'd.  His  hand  be-
came entirely  well ;  but  in  the  mean  v/hile  the  right  kidney  was  painful.
But  here  alfo  the  pain  was  alleviated,  fruitlefs  teachings  to  vomit  often  re-
curring :  however,  when  the  vomiting  ceas'd  the  gout  feiz'd,  in  the  fame
manner,  upon  his  lower  limb,  and  gave  the  patient  excruciating  pain  at  his
calf,  and  at  the  ankle  joint.  After  one  or  two  days  having  pafs'd,  that
whole  extremity  of  the  foot  was  entirely  depriv'd  of  the  powers  of  feeling,
and  moving.  Yet  the  day  following,  fome  fenl'e  of  pain  return'd  to  the
paralytic  foot,  and  to  the  patient,  both  good  fpirits,  and  good  pulfe,  which,
at  other  times,  was,  for  the  moft  part,  intermitting,  and  unequal,  in  the  right
arm.

At  length,  the  day  before  he  died,  he  threw  up  his  food,  mix'd  with  a
.watry  matter :  and  felt  a  flight  pain,  with  pulfation,  and  heat,  at  the  region
of  the  ftomach.  A  litde  after  that  he  vomited  t\vice  a  yellow  humour.
On  the  following  night  he  ilept  but  little.  In  the  morning,  he  complained
with  a  very  low  voice,  of  three  things,  v/hich  had  been  continually  trouble-
Ibme  to  him,  a  great  thirft,  a  bad  tafte  in  his  mouth,  and  lofc  appetite  :
and  the  fever,  which  had  before  difcover'd  itfelf,  in  the  pulfe  only,  and  that
at  times,  was  now  evident.  But  the  pain,  and  pulfation,  of  the  ftomach
continuing,  with  a  great  heat  in  the  back,  the  puiie,  which  had  been  very
languid,  the  evening  before,  v/as  nov/,  from  a  great  difcharge  of  blood,  by
ftool,  totally  abolifiied.

With  this  blood  was  mix'd  a  matter,  that  finelt  very  ftrong,  and  which,
like  melted  pitch,  fpllow'd  the  ftick  that  v/as  put  into  it,  if  you  drew  'it
back.  In  the  mean  while,  the  foot  was  very  much  in  pain ;  and  there  was
a  fenfation  of  fomethino-  afcendino-  as  it  were,  through  the  leo;,  and  after-
wards  a  fenfe  of  weight,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  belly.  But  in  the  right
irm,  the  power  of  motion  WoS  gradually  loft,  the  nails  of  the  fingers  be-
coming IFvid  :  and  that  arm  ,wa3  foon  after  render'd  quite  paralytic.  -Some
hours  before  death,  frequent  tremors  were  perceiv'd,  about  the  prscordia.
The  difcharge  of  blood  returning  by  ftool,  as  before,  and  the  vomiting  of
the  fame  kind  of  matter,  perhaps,  being  at  hand  (as  a  naufea,  and  ill  fmell,
like  that  of  fsces, proceeding from the mouth, feem'd  to  (how) the

(r)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  2.  a.  i.  obf.  139.  {J)  Earund.  cent.  9.  obf.  66.

E  2  patk'nt.


28  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

patient,  faying  he  was  fuffocated,  died  about  fix  and  thirty  hours  after  being
attacked  with  the  pain  of  his  ftomach.

The  abdomen  being  open'd,  the  v/hole  fubftance  of  the  inteftines  was
found  to  be  occupied  with  a  dreadful  inflammation,  from  the  ftomach,
quite  to  the  termination  of  the  reftum,  fo  that  not  the  leaft  part  of  them
was  left  unaffected  with  it.  And  in  the  inteftines,  a  bloody  matter,  like  that
which  had  been  difcharg'd,  was  contain'd.  The  ftomach  and  the  kidnies
were  found.  In  the  thorax,  the  pofterior  parts  of  the  lungs,  and  particularly
on  the  left  fide,  v/ere  flightly  inflam'd.  In  the  pericardium,  was  a  fmall
quantity  of  water. In  the  heart  were  no  polypous  concretions.

II.  The  aphorifm  of  Hippocrates  (e),  "  If  any  perfon  that  is  weaken'd,
*'  and  emaciated,  by  an  acute,  or  long  continued  diforder,  or  even  by  a
"  wound,  or  from  any  other  caufe  whatever,  difcharge  atra  hilis  or  black
"  blood,  as  it  were,  by  ftool,  he  dies  on  the  day  following,"  except  that  it
feems  to  have  been  fulfiU'd  in  a  fomewhat  fliorter  fpace  of  time,  fquares  ftill
better  with  this  cafe,  than  with  that  to  which  it  is  applied  by  Ballonius,  as
you  fee  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  (f).  For  his  patient,  who  was,  in  the
fame  manner,  troubled  with  pains,  at  the  region  of  his  ftomach,  did  indeed,
*'  difcharge  an  atrabilious  blood,"  the  day  before  he  died,  but  it  was  "  by
■"  the  mouth."  However  Ballonius  did  not  defcribe  any  diforder  in  the
ftomach  itfelf,  and  Valfalva  has  reprefented  it  as  being  found.  Both  of  them
difcover'd  fuch  appearances,  near  the  ftomach,  that  might  eafily  account  for
the  affeflion  of  that  part.  And  the  puliation  which  was  remark'd  by  Val-
falva, was  without  doubt  the  effed  of  the  blood,  which  was  collefted  in  the
neareft  parietes  of  the  inteftines,  and  the  caufe  of  its  difcharge  into  their  ca-
vity. For  the  veftels,  by  having  their  coats  ftill  more  and  more  diftended,
were  at  length  ruptur'd,  and  had  their  contents  evacuated.  To  which,  per-
haps, a  part  of  that  predi£tion,  to  return  to  Hippocrates,  may  be  applied
(^) :  "  palpitations  about  the  belly  fliow  an  eruption  of  blood  to  be  at
"  hand."

But  be  that  as  it  will,  this  one  thing  is  certain,  that  almoft  all  the  force
of  fo  long,  and  fo  various,  a  difeafe,  had,  at  length,  fuddenly  fallen  upon
the  vefltls  of  the  inteftines,  and  had  drawn  the  ftomach,  which  is  conjoin'd
by  veffels,  with  the  inteftines,  and  even  by  the  very  fubftance  Itfelf,  into
confent  with  them.  So  you  will  fee  it  was  drawn  into  confent,  in  another
perfon,  who,  through  the  whole  courfe  of  the  difeafe,  had  difcharg'd  a  black
matter  by  ftool,  and  in  another,  alio,  in  whom  the  upper  part  of  the  in-
teftines had  grown  livid.  Thefe  two  hiftories,  you  have  in  the  fifth  feftion
preceding  (-&),  which  relates  to  the  Singultus.  And,  without  doubt,  you
would  have  a  third  alfo,  in  this  (?),  where  all  the  inteftines  are  defcrib'd  as
being  extremely  red,  from  inflammation,  if  the  difeafe  were  alfo  defcrib'd,  as
the  difiedtion  is,  without  which  I  wonder  how  this,  and  perhaps  others,
came  to  be  plac'd  among  thofe  that  relate  to  the  pain  of  the  ftomach.

And  certainly,  in  the  volumes  of  the  Csl'arean  Academy  {k),  you  will
find  more  than  one  obfervation,  wherein  not  oniy  the  ftomach  was  affedled,

{e)  23,  §.  4.  (}=)  Obf.  1.  &  6.

Cf)  Obf. 19.  (i)  Obf.  50.

(gj  Pradia,  1.  I,  n.  2.9,  {k)  Dec.  3.  a.  9.  obf,  i22.  &  aft.  t.  2.  obf,

»o8.  2.  loco.
-%  while


Letter  XXIX. Article  12.  29

while  the  patient  was  living,  but  alfo  an  inflammation,  or  bad  (late,  in  fome
meafure,  of  the  inteftines,  and  not  of  the  ftomach,  was  found  after  death.  But
if,  in  regard  to  that  obfervation,  which  I  juft  now  copied  from  Valfalva,  you
rather  afk,  why  the  inteftines  themfelves,  as  they  were  fo  very  much  afFedt-
cd,  were  not,  confequently,  excruciated  with  the  pain,  by  v/hich  the  confent-
ing  ftomach  was  attacked  ;  I  believe  I  ftiall  not  be  very  far  fbort  of  truth,
if  I  fuppofe  that,  as  in  this  man  fo  many  nerves  fpeedily,  and  frequently,
became  paralytic,  the  nerves  which  went  to  the  inteftines,  alfo,  were  refolv'd.
But  now  I  will  likewife  add  fome  of  my  own  obfervations,  as  1  have  pro-
mis'd.

12.  A  woman  of  forty  years  of  age,  who  had  been  us'd,  for  the  moll
part,  to  eat  fait  viftuals,  and  drink  generous  wine,  had  been  for  many  years
fubjed:  to  pains  of  the  ftomach,  of  which,  a  lofs  of  appetite  for  food,  and  a
naufea,  were  the  confequences,  and  thefe  were  foon  after  foUow'd  by  repeat-
ed vomitings  of  blood,  with  a  continual  fever,  watchings,  and  thirft.  And
although  the  belly,  when  examin'd  with  the  hand,  never  difcover'd  any  re-
markable hardnefs,  in  any  part  of  it ;  yet  the  region  of  the  ftomach  was  not
quite  free,  at  times,  from  an  uneafy  fenfation  when  fcarcely  any  preflure  was  ap-
plied, and  this  even  when  the  more  violent  pain  was  abfent.  She  complain'd
alfo  of  her  loins ;  but  this  was  only,  either  when  ftie  was  about  fome  greater
labour  than  ufual,  or  when  ftie  lifted  any  confiderable  weight.

A  very  obftinate  pain  of  the  head  was,  moreover,  fometimes  added,  to
the  other  complaints.  Againft  all  thefe  diforders  of  the  ftomach  that  I  have
mention'd,  as  often  as  ever  they  recur'd  with  any  great  violence,  blood-letting
was  always  of  fome  advantage  :  drinking  plentifully  of  water  alfo,  in  which
a  piece  of  bread,  only,  had  been  boil'd,  was  likewife  of  great  ufe :  and  ftie
feem'd,  more  than  once,  to  have  been  quite  recover'd,  by  the  long  ule  of
milk-diet,  and  receiv'd  frelb  fpirits  every  month,  by  the  difcharge  of  blood
from  the  uterus,  which  continued  regularly  to  the  time  of  her  death.  In  this
manner  it  was  that  death  came  on.

Not  long  before,  a  hard  tumour  appear'd  on  each  fide,  above  the  clavicles,
where  the  external  jugular  vein  goes  down  on  the  neck  ;  this  tumour  created
pain,  nor  would  yield  to  any  remedies,  fo  that  it  encreas'd  every  day,  and  al-
ready caus'd  refpiration  to  be  carried  on  with  fome  difficulty.  To  this  was  ad-
ded a  continual  fever,  increafing  in  the  evening,  with  which  a  little  rigor  was,
fometimes,  obferv'd.  She  complain'd  that  her  head  was  in  pain,  befides.
her  ftomach,  where  the  pain  was  continual:  with  which,  however,  there
never  was,  at  this  time,  any  vomiting  of  blood.  She  had,  continually,  a.
troublefome  thirft,  and  a  fenfe  of  very  great  bitternefs  in  the  mouth,  front
which,  in  tlie  latter  days  of  her  life,  a  very  ill  fmell  proceeded ;  but  no  pus
ever  was  obferv'd  to  have  been  difcharg'd  therefrom.  Under  thefe  fytnp-
toms,  fhe  drag'd  on  life  much  longer,  than  could  have  been  fuppos'd  from
her  pulfe,  which,  befides  its  being  already  fmall,  and  weak,  frequently  be-
came fmaller,  and  more  weak,  particularly  in  the  laft  fifteen  days,  when  fhe
took  nothing  but  broth,  and  a  little  wine,  as  ftie  could  now  bear  no  kind  of
aliment  befides,  and  much  lefs  medicines.

This  lean  carcafe  was  brought  into  the  anatomical  theatre,  when,  as  I  was
teaching  anatomy,  in  the  month  of  February,  of  the  year  1 744,  and  had

alreatly


30  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

already  demonftrated  the  male  organs  of  generation,  the  female  organs  were
wanting.  The  belly,  therefore,  being  open'd,  1  faw  the  omentum  roU'd  up
towards  the  upper  part  of  that  cavity,  and  extended  fo,  that  the  tranfverie
arch  of  the  colon  immediately  occur'd  to  the  eye,  being  now  below  the  navel,
whereas  it  generally  lies  immediately  below  the  ftomach.  Into  which  fitua-
tion  it,  probably,  might  have  been  pufh'd  down,  by  the  ftomach,  in  fome
meafure,  though  not  entirely,  as  the  left  part  of  the  fundus,  of  this  vifcus,
defcended  lower  than  ufual.

And  tlie  ftomach  was  even  livid  externally,  and  particularly  in  a  very
confiderable  part  of  it,  and  had,  at  the  fame  time,  its  coats  very  miuch  thick-
en'd,  and  harden'd,  unlefs  where  they  were,  already,  become  fo  rotten  as
to  be  broken  through  with  a  touch,  and  to  difcharge  a  matter  of  a  cineritious
colour,  and  of  a  very  ftrong  fmell,  which,  like  a  kind  of  fluid  pultice,  was
contain'd  in  the  cavity  of  the  ftomach.  Into  this  cavity,  it  had  burft  out
of  the  pofterior  paries  of  the  ftomach,  which  was  immoderately  thick,  to
a  great  extent,  and  internally  tumid,  and,  in  the  fame  place,  unequal,  in  a
corrupt,  rotten,  and  gangrenous  ftate,  and  of  the  fame  lurid  colour  as  the
foremention'd  matter  was,  fo  as  to  make  it  certain,  that  a  tumour,  or  ab-
fcefs,  of  the  worft  kind,  had  been  ruptur'd  in  this  place.

The  pylorus  v/as  found,  and  all  the  inteftines,  among  which  was  the  co-
lon, were,  as  it  is  reafonable  to  fuppofe,  after  fo  long  an  abftinence  from
food,  contrafted,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  The  fpleen  alfo  was
found,  except  that  it  was,  in  proportion,  larger  than  ufual,  and,  internally,
fomewhat  pale.  But  the  right  part  of  the  liver  fliow'd  fome  roundifli  and
white  fchirrhi,  about  the  fize  of  fmall  grapes.  Thefe  tumours  lay  at  a  little
diftance  from  each  other,  on  the  furface,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  be,  in  fome
meaflne  hidden,  within  the  fubftance  of  the  vifcus ;  and  when  I  cut  into  the
liver,  I  law  one  of  them,  which  was  intirely  fur.ilar  to  the  others,  that  was
quite  buried  within  the  fubftance.  There  was  a  great  quantity  of  bile  in
the  gall  bladder,  which  v/as  extremely  yellov/,  and  had  ting'd  the  neigh-
bouring parts  v/ith  the  fame  colour.

The  pofterior  furface  of  the  left  kidney  had  an  oblique  line  upon  it,  to
a  confiderable  length,  and  of  a  whitifti  colour,  made  of  a  khid  of  tendinous
fubftance,  as  it  were,  which,  as  I  perceiv'd,  v/hen  I  cut  into  the  kidney,
was  carried  to  a  great  depth,  fo  as  to  reach  to  the"tubuli,  in  which  the  papilise
are  receiv'd.  You  would  have  been  ready'  to  fuppofe,  that  it  was  the  cicatrix
of  a  former  ulcer,  fo  much  fimilarity  had  it  thereto  :  but  no  where  did  there
appear  any  mark  of  injury,  though  we  look'd  for  it  in  the  neighbouring  tu-
nica adipofa,  and  in  the  mufcles  of  the  belly.

The  uterus  was  fmall,  and  lov/,  and  very  much  inclin'd  to  the  right
fide,  fo  as  to  be-  much  nearer  to  that  fide,  than  to  the  left.  But
the  round  ligament  was,  alfo,  ftiorter  on  the  right  fide,  than  on  the.
left.  The  cervix  uteri,  and  ftill  more  the  os  uteri,  were  nearly  in
the  fame  ftate,  in  v/hich  they  are  generally  found,  in  virgins;  for  the
former  was  internally  mark'd,  with  its  oblique,  and  prominent  rugse,  and
the  latter  had  its  aperture  veiy  round,  and  narrov/.  Nor  v;as  the  ring  of  the
hymen  wanting,- nucwithftanding  it  was  very  low,  and  fliow'd  no  traces  of
rupture. Yet  behind  it,  v/er'e  none of  thofc  roundifn  caruncles,  and  but

verv


Letter  XXIX. Article  12.  3^

very  few  rugse  in  the  vagina,  and  thefe  very  flight,  and  the  fliin,  which  at
the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  I  obferv'd  to  be,  as  it  were,  of  a  whitilh
"colour,  and  fpotted,  did  not  greatly  agree  with  v/hac  I  had  obferv'd  be-
fore.

The  teftes,  in  proportion  to  the  age  of  the  woman,  and  the  bulk  of  the
uterus,  were  large,  and  externally  convoluted  ■,  but  internally,  the  left  had  a
kind  of  fmall  and  empty  cells,  wrap'd  up  in  a  white,  and  thickifh  mem-
brane, and  the  other  contain'd,  in  a  cell,  not  much  larger  than  thole,  a
black,  and  half-concreced  blood.  The  right  falopian  tube  was  pervious
to  the  ovarium,  but  in  the  remaining  part  fluit  up  ;  on  the  contrary,  the
left  was  open  only  to  the  uterus.  It  was  furprizing  in  fo  lean  a  fubjeiSt,  ex-
cept we  allow  for  its  being  a  female  body,  that  there  was  fo  confiderable  a
quantity  of  fat  in  the  mefentery,  and  that  ev^en  fome  remain'd  in  the  omen-
tum, and  that  in  the  interfbices  of  the  mufcles,  alfo,  on  the  back,  and  the
limbs,  a  much  greater  quantity  v/as  found,  than  thofe  who  prepar'd  the
body  would  have  wifh'd  ;  and  thefe  mufcles  were  of  a  very  elegant  red  co-
lour.

Beneath  that  yellow  fat,  with  which  the  mefentery  cover'd  the  vertebree
of  the  loins,  and  the  trunks  of  the  large  velTcls,  that  adher'd  to  them,  fome
glands  lay  hid,  which  were  enlarg'd  to  a  great  degree,  and  fo  clofely  con-  "
nefted  to  thofe  vefTels  that  they  could  not  be  feparated,  without  great  dif-
ficulty. All  thefe  glands  were  internally  white,  not  very  hard,  but  abound-
ing with  a  purulent  ichor.  The  others,  throughout  the  mefentery,  were  not
enlarg'd.  But  near  the  ftomach,  I  obferv'd  one  of  the  lymphatic  glands  to
be  grown  much  thicker,  than  natural,  and  harder,  and  to  be  of  a  lurid  co-
lour.

I  then  alfo  faw,  that  the  pancreas  was  univerfally  thicken'd,  and,  at  the
fame  time,  fomewhat  dry,  and  become  a  little  hard,  if  you  except  a  certain
part  of  it,  which  had  grown  out  into  a  white  fubftance,  almoft  like  the
thymus.

When  we  open'd  the  thorax,  we,  firft  of  all,  found  the  two  loweft  jugular
glands  to  be  of  a  whitiCi  colour,  and  enlarg'd  in  every  one  of  their  dimen-
lions,  to  the  breadth  of  tv/o  inches,  at  leaft.  Thefe  glands  made  up  that
hard  tumour,  on  both  fides,  which  I  mention'd  before ;  for  they  were  alfo
found  to  be  hard,  notwithftanding  that  on  the  infide,  they  contain'd  a  pu-
rulent ichor,  part  of  which  fiow'd  out,  while  the  clavicles,  under  which,
and  the  neighbouring  part  of  the  fternum,  thefe  glands  harbour'd  them-
felves,  were  taken  away.  The  other  jugular  glands  were,  alfo,  fimilar  to
thefe,  in  colour,  and  hardnefs,  and  in  the  ichor  they  contained.  Yet  thefe
had  not  grown  out  into  fo  large  a  bulk.

The  axillary  glands,  however,  had  not  been  encreas'd  in  their  bulk,  nor
undergone  any  other  change  whatever.  On  the  other  hand,  thofe  that  are
plac'd  at  the  firft  divifion  of  the  afpera  arteria,  were  of  a  blackilh  colour,
mix'd  with  white  ;  and  from  a  very  fmall  fize,  were  become  not  lefs  than
middle-fiz'd  grapes  :  they  were  likewife  pretty  hard,  and  abounded  with
the  fame  kind  of  purulent  ichor,  which  I  faid  was  contain'd  in  fo  many
other  glands.

Yet  the  afpera  arteria  itfelf  was  found,  even  in  the  neck,  as  the  v/hole

tradt


3$  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

tradt  of  the  oefophagus  was,  in  like  manner,  from  the  upper  part,  to  the
lower.  Nor  was  any  diforder  obferv'd  in  the  lungs,  which  werefomewhat  tur-
gid with  air:  nor  yet  in  the  heart,  if  you  except  fome  roundifli  tubercles,
of  a  depreis'd  figure,  made  up  of  a  fomevvhat  hard,  and  compaft  fubftance,
and  fo  frequent,  as  to  be  almoft  contiguous  to  each  other,  which  befet  the
•whole  borders  of  the  mitral  valves ;  and  m  one  of  the  femilunar  valves,  a
kind  of  fmall  Icale  that  had  grown  to  it,  but  was  not  yet  become  bony.

Finally,  the  brain  was  not  only  not  lax,  but  inclining  to  hardnefs,  yet  feem'd
to  be  nearly  in  its  natural  ftate,  unlefs  that  in  the  lateral  ventricles,  there  was
fome  quantity  of  a  pellucid  water,  and  the  plexus  choroides  was  pale.  But
the  pineal  gland  was  a  little  more  firm,  and  globular  than  ufual,  and  in-
clin'd  more  to  a  white  colour,  than  it  generally  does.  And,  notwithftand-
ing  moft  perfons,  now,  do  not  take  this  for  a  gland,  yet  I  thought  it  might
not  be  amifs,  to  take  notice  of  this  circumftance,  in  "a  body  wherein  fo
many  glands  were  obferv'd  to  be  difeas'd.

13.  The  fame  obiervation  makes  us  fufpedt,  that  the  beginning  of  this
long  difeafe,  which  at  laft  carried  the  woman  off,  was  in  fome  gland  of  the
ftomach,  which  being  gradually  encreas'd,  and  grown  hard,  afforded,  by  its
tumefaftion,  an  obftacle  to  the  courfe  of  the  blood,  for  which  reafon  it  burft
forth,  more  than  once,  from  the  neighbouring  veflels  that  were  dilated,  and
particularly,  in  a  woman  who  made  a  free  ufe  of  generous  wine,  and  fait
provifions.  And  after  that  by  this  kind  of  intemperance,  not  only  the  bulk
of  the  gland,  and  the  extenfion  of  it,  had  been  by  degrees,  more  and  more,
augmented ;  but  alfo  the  nature  of  the  included  humour  had  become  more
deprav'd,  a  purulent  corruption,  at  length,  came  on,  from  whence,  even
before  the  tumour  had  any  aperture  in  it,  fo  great  a  quantity  of  ill-condi-
tion'd  ichor  had  been  thrown  into  the  fmall  veins,  and  the  lymphatic
veflels,  that  many  other  glands  were  infefted  with  the  fame  taint.

If  the  woman  had  liv'd  fome  time  longer,  it  is  not  difficult  to  forefee,
by  way  of  coniefture,  what  would  have  happen'd  to  the  pancreas,  and  the
fcirrhi  of  the  liver.  As  to  there  being  a  great  quantity  of  bile  in  the  gall-
bladder, it  is  not  at  all  furprizing,  as  I  faid  in  the  preceding  letter  (I),  that
this  fhould  happen,  where,  for  a  long  time,  nothing  had  been  contain'd  in
the  ftomach,  and  the  upper  part  of  the  inteftines,  which  by  diftending  them
could  comprefs  this  receptacle.  And  as  to  the  neighbouring  parts  being
tmo-'d  with  the  colour  of  the  bile,  this  is  a  circumftance  which  happens  fo
frequently,  in  dead  bodies,  that  in  regard  to  accounting  for  any  diforder
therefrom,  it  is  fomewhat  more  natural  to  follow  the  laft  fcholium,  which  is
fubjoin'd  to  the  fixteenth  obfervation,  in  this  fetlion  of  the  Sepulchretum,
rather  than  the  obfervation  itfelf,  efpecially  in  this  cafe,  where  there  was
in  the  feveral  parts  of  the  body  fo  great  a  number  of  real,  and  certain,  ap-
pearances of  difeafe.

However,  if  you  ftiould  defire  to  have  other  examples  of  tumours,  or  ab-
fceflTes,  in  the  ftomach,  befides  thofe  which  are  to  be  found  in  this,  and  the
next,  that  is  the  eighth,  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  ;  you  will  find  fome  to
add  to  them,  among  the  monuments  of  the  Csefarean  Academy  (m),  and

(/)  N.  6.  {ni)  Dec.  3.  a.  5.  obf.  175  &  a.  7.  obt  142,  &  cent.  3.obf.  13.

froni


Lettef  XXIX. Article 14.  ^3

from  other  books  befides,  but  in  particular,  from  the  works  of  Frederic
HofFtnann  (k).

14.  An  old  woman  had,  already,  lain  fome  months  in  this  hofpital,  on
account  of  a  tumour  which  rais'd  up  her  belly,  about  the  navel,  and  be-
low it,  but  more  on  the  right  fide,  than  the  lefc.  For  which  Feafon  ftic
could  not  lie  down  on  her  kit  fide.  The  tumour  was  really  large,  but  feem'd
larger,  for  this  reafon,  that  the  hypochondria,  and  moft  of  the  other  parts  of
the  belly,  hadfubfided  much,  from  a  lofs  of  flefh,  which  was  univerfal  through
the  whole  body,  but  mod  conuderable  on  the  left  fide  :  could  this  happen
becaufe  the  v/oman  always  lay  on  her  right  ?  Tht-  tumour  feem  d  very  n',p7e-
able,  if  you  took  hold  of  it  betwixt  your  hands,  and  pufh'd  it  to  one  fide,.-
and  to  the  other. And  it  had  fcarcely  any  pain.

On  the  other  hand,  tiiere  was  a  perpetual  complaint  of  a  kind  of  uneafy
fenfation,  in  the  ftomach.  For  which  reafons,  fome  v.;ere  ready  to  conjec-
ture, that  this  tumour  was  in  the  omentum,  by  which  means  the  ftomach
was  drawn  downwards,  and  troubl'd  in  its  funftions.  With  this  uneafy  fenfe
in  the  ftomach,  there  was  fometimes  a  defire  to  vomit,  but  no  vomiting.
And  now  there  was,  befides  thefe  fymptoms,  a  continual  kind  of  fever,  which,
continued,  in  conjundion  with  all  the  other  fymptoms,  that  I  have  fpoken  ot,;
even  to  the  very  clofe  of  her  life,  that  is  to  the  rniddle  of  October,  in  the
year  1735.

The  belly  being  hid  open  after  death,  it  was  evident  that  the  tumour  was,
in  the  right  ovarium :  which  had  grown  out  into  cells,  full  of  a  foft  matter
indeed,  but  not  fluid,  and  of  a  cineritious  colour  inclining  to  yellow,  but
without  any  difagreeable  fmell.  The  tumour  was  increas'd,  by  the  neigh-
bouring tube  being  condens'd  with  it,  which  was,  alfo,  much  enlarge,  and
become  pretty  thick  j  whereas  the  uterus,  and  the  other  parts  that  belong  to
it,  were  only  of  their  natural  fize,  and  in  a  found  ftate.  This  tumour  was
connedled  to  the  contiguous  fide  of  the  pelvis,  and  in  fome  meafure,  alfo,
to  the  neareft  inteftines,  fo  that  it  could  be  more  or  lefs  mov'd,  by  means  of
moving  thefe  parts.-  The  inteftines  were  livid  from  inflammation  :  yet  they
had  no  bad  fmell,  nor  yet  the  ftomach,  which  was  brought  to  me,  by  the
perfon  who  diflefted  the  body,  and  by  whom,  the  other  circumftances,  that
I  have  hitherto  fet  down,  were  accurately  related,  that  is  by  our  Mediavia.

The  reafon  of  his  bringing  the  ftomach  to  me,  was  that  I  might,  after
having  examined  it,  clear  up  a  certain  doubt  of  his.  The  cavity  of  it  was
very  much  contrafted,  on  its  internal  furface,  here  and  there  inflam'd,  in  fe-
veral  places,  and  in  the  very  middle  of  the  neck,  or  upper  part  of  the
ftomach,  was  an  ulcer,  nearly  of  a  circular  figure,  which,  in  its  diameter,,
was  fomewhat  fhorter  than  three  fingers  breadths,  and  of  a  very  fmall  depth,
as  in  it  there  appear'd  to  be  a  great  number  of  lenticular  glands,  of  a  mid-
dle fize,  and  fo  very  manifeft,  that  I  inferted  a  briftle  into  an  orifice,  which
was  feen  in  the  center  of  them.  Yet  this  ulcer  was  furrounded  with  pretty
thick  lips :  and  the  fubftance  of  the  coats  of  the  ftomach  was  become  more
thick,  and  hard,  in  that  whole  fpace  which  correfponded,  extern^ally,  to  the
ulcer,  than  in  any  other  part.

(«)  Medic.  Rat.  t.  3.  §•  i.  c.  7,  §.  26.

Vol.  II.  F  But


34  Book  III. Of  Dlfeafes  of  to  feelly.

But  as  the  ftomach  was  entirely  perforated,  almoft  in  the  middle  of  the
ulcer,  Mediavia  enquir'd  of  me,  whether  I  imagin'd  that  this  foramen
could  have  been  accidentally  made,  with  the  knife,  in  taking  out  of  the
ftomach ;  for  he  afFirm'd,  that  nothing  had  been  found  in  the  belly,  befides  a
little  ferum,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  pelvis,  which  could  be  fuppos'd  to  have
been  extravafated,  out  of  the  ftomach,  whereas  it  feem'd  that  much  ought
to  have  been  efFus'd,  in  confequence  of  the  patient  having  been,  conftantly,,
in  a  recumbent  pofture.

I  however,  although  I  thought  it  but  little  probable,  if  the  ftomach  had
really  been  cut  by  the  knife  accidentally,  that  this  ftiould  have  happen'd  ift
that  part,  in  particular,  which  correfponded  to  the  middle  of  the  ulcer,
nor  did  the  figure,  and  magnitude,  of  the  foramen,  which  was  almoft  capa-"
ble  of  admitting  a  little  finger,  feem  to  be  of  fuch  a  kind,  that  they  could
properly  be  refer'd  to  the  point,  or  the  edge,  of  the  khife  •,  yet  that  I  might
fatisfy  both  him  and  myfelf,  as  we  were  both  equally  defirous  to  know  the
truth,  I  examin'd  with  accuracy,  a  fecond,  and  a  third  time,  the  edges  of
the  ulcer.  And  when  I  faw  them  to  be  not  only  callous,  but  unequal^
ind  the  more  the  foramen  went  towards  the  outfide,  to  be  comprehended
in  the  lefs  circumference,  which  two  circumftances,  the  knife  certainly
could  not  have  been  the  caufe  of,  by  having  cut  from  without  inwards ;  I
judg'd  that  this  aperture  was  not  to  be  attributed  to  the  knife,  but  to  dif-
eafe.

For  as  to  nothing  having  been  extravafated,  from  the  ftomach  into  the
belly,  that  might  have  happen'd  for  this  reafon,  that  the  external  membrane
was,  by  degrees,  extenuated,  and  not  entirely  eroded,  or  perforated,  till  the
difeafe  was  come  to  the  laft  extremity,  and  life  was  at  the  clofe,  at  which
time  the  ftomach  of  the  dying  woman,  being  corrugated,  and  contradled,.
had  nothing  at  all  to  pour  out.

15. 1  lit,  afterwards,  on  an  obfervationof  JVIercklin,  which  you  will  alfo  find
to  be  related  here,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (0),  that  is,  of  a  foramen,  big  enough
to  admit  the  extremity  of  a  man's  thumb,  with  eafe,  feated,  in  like  man-
ner, in  the  upper  part  of  the  ftomach,  at  which  part  there  had  been,  for
many  years,  a  continual  pain,  not  very  confiderable  indeed,  but  always
pretty  troublefome.  And  that  foramen  was  alfo  fuppos'd,  by  this  learned
man,  to  have  been  open'd  after  an  old  erofion,  but  only  in  the  latter  part
of  life  •,  for  he  judg'd  that  life  could  not  have  been  drag'd  on  fo  long,  if  the
food  that  had  been  taken  in  formerly,  had  been  efFus'd  into  the  cavity  of
the  ftomach,  as  he  obferv'd  fome,  which  was  taken  in  the  day  before  her
death,  to  have  been.

In  the  fame  manner,  likewife,  you  will  explain  a  much  more  recent  ob-
fervation,  that  you  read  in  the  commentaries  of  the  illuftrious  Academy  of
Sciences  at  Peterftjurg  (p),  of  a  fiflure  in  the  ftomach,  through  which  no-
thing had  been  extravafated  into  the  belly,  and  which,  neverthelefs,  the
credible,  and  expert  difiedler  denied,  upon  his  oath,  having  made  with  the
knife :  for  that  ftomach  was,  alfo,  manifeftly  eroded,  particularly  in  the
part  which  is  oppofite  to  the  fundus,  and  had  been  the  ftomach  of  a  mart,

(0)  Obf.  48.  0*)  Tom.  7.

who


Letter  XXIX. Article  i6.  35

who  had  a  perfect  refemblance  to  a  confumptive  perfon,  and  who  had  died
of  conftant  vomitings,  which  no  remedy,  or  art,  could  appeafe.

Neither  was  any  thing  found  to  have  been  effus'd,  into  the  cavity  of  the
belly,  by  Tyfon  (q),  (who  is  even  faid  to  have  found  a  perforation  in  the
human  ftomach,  three  times)  in  an  American,  in  whom  he  found  the  fame
kind  of  fifflire.  I  do  not,  here,  fpeak  of  thofe  perforations,  from  which
nothing  co'uld  have  flow'd  down  into  the  belly,  either  becaufe  they  open'd
into  the  colon,  which  was  agglutinated,  as  it  were,  to  the  ftomach  (r),  or
becaufe  they  were  ftop'd  up  by  a  part  of  the  liver,  which  had  grown  to  them
(s).  I  alfo  pafs  over  thofe  cafes,  in  which  it  is  not  faid,  v/hether  there  was
any  efFufion,  or  not  (i).  When  there  has  been  an  effufion  of  the  contents
of  the  ftomach,  into  the  belly,  I  fee  that  either  a  very  fpeedy  death  was  the
confequence  (a),  or,  at  leaft,  that  frequently  it  was  not  delay'd  more  than  a
very  few  days  {x),  if  we  reckon  the  days  of  the  perforation,  from  the  day
of  the  difeafe  being  become  very  violent,  as  it  happen'd  in  an  obfervation  of
the  celebrated  Baron  (y),  which  certainly  deferves  well  to  be  read,  who,  al-
though he  tells  us  that  death  did  not  follow  till  the  eighth  day,  yet  at  the  fame
time  admonifhes,  that  the  foramen  was  in  the  upper,  and  interior,  part  of
the  ftomach,  fo  that  it  would  have  been  very  difficult  for  any  thing  that
was  drunk,  to  be  extravafated  into  the  belly,  unlefs  after  fome  time,  and  in
particular  motions  of  the  body.  And  I  made  ufe  of  the  word  frequently^  for
this  reafon,  becaufe  I  know  that  fome  obfervations  are  even  extant,  of  the
ftomach  being  perforated,  in  which  either  that  is  not  quite  clear  (zj,  or  the
contrary  feems  rather  to  appear  {a).  But  you  will  compare  thefe  circum-
ftances  together,  and  confider  them,

16.  And  although  all,  or  the  greater  part  of,  thefe  foramina,  found  in
the  ftomach,  relate  to  ulcers,  which  have  fooner,  or  later,  entirely  pervaded
the  coats  of  this  cavity ;  yet  you  have,  here,  in  the  Sepulchretum  {b),  many
other  obfervations  of  the  fame  vifcus  being  ulcerated,  both  internally,  and
externally,  notwithftanding  fome  are  repeated,  as  the  letter  fifth  (for  the
fame  number  five  is  fet  down  over  again,  through  negleft)  in  the  forty-
third  obfervation,  article  the  fourth,  and  the  fixth,  in  the  twenty-feventh,
under  article  the  fecond.  But  although  there  are  repetitions,  alfo,  of  other
obfervations,  that  relate  to  different  diforders  of  the  ftomach,  as  of  that
Avhich  is  under  number  twenty-fix,  article  the  fifth,  in  the  twenty-fourth ;
there  is  no  repetition  that  is  more  worthy  of  excufe,  than  where  the  twen-
tieth is  repeated,  in  the  additamenta,  under  number  two.  For  who  would
have  imagin'd  that  the  obfervation  which  had  been  propos'd  by  Blancar-
dus,  as  if  it  had  been  taken  from  "  a  citizen"  of  his  "  city"  of  Amfterdam,.
was  the  fame  with  that  vi'hich  Riverius  had  already  given,  as  taken  from  a

(y)  Vid.  aft.  erud.  lipf.  fuppl.  t.  3.f.  4.  (*■)  Earund.  cent.  3.  &  5.  obf. izo.  &  Se-

(r)  Sepulchr.  f.  hac  7.  obf.  13.  f.  i.  &  Brun-  pulchr.  1.  3.  f.  21.  obf.  25.
ner  Gland.  Duoden.  c.  9.  &  Haller. opufc. {y)  Memoir,  prefent.  all'  acad.  r. des,  fc.

pathol.  obf.  23.  torn.  i.

{s)  Seft.  ead.  7.  obf.  5.  fecunda,  &  in  addit. {z.)  Sepulchr.  1.  3.  f.  8.  obf.  14.
obf.  3.  &  eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3.  obf.  13.  {a)  Eph. n. c. dec. 3.  a. 9. obf  91. &

(?)  In  fchol.  ad.  obf.  j.  modo  cit.  primo  &  cent. i.  &  2.  obf.  151.
tenio  loco,  &  feft.  ead.  obf  7.  §.  i.  (Z-)  Adde  &  feq.  viii.  feftionem.

(a)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  5.  obf. 43.

F  2  goldfrnith


3^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

goldfmith  of  Montpelier ;  unlefs  any  one  who,  having  learn'd  the  ingenuity  of
Blancard,  in  transforming  hiftories,  and  remembering  a  fimilar  obfervation  to
have  been  given  by  Riverius,  had  compar'd  both  of  them  together,  and  not
only  found  them  fimilar  to  each  other,  but  had  found  that  they  were,  very
evidently,  altogether  one,  and  the  fame  ?

But  to  return  to  thofe  that  relate  to  ulcers,  among  others,  the  forty-
eighth  deferves  well  to  be  read  ;  for  it  is  my  opinion,  that  if  this  could  have
been  extant,  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  before,  it  would  have  prevented
Gefnerus,  not  to  mention  others,  from  being  fo  ready  to  publifh  that  which
you  have  here  under  number  thirty-fix,  of  lizards  for  inftance,  and  ferpents,
being  generated  within  the  vifcera,  and  killing  with  the  permiflion  of  the
almighty,  "  about  three  thoufand  men"  by  the  moft  cruel  pains.  For,  to
pafs  over  the  reafonings,  and  admonitions,  of  our  Vallifneri  (c),  which  I
could  heartily  wifli  had  been  read,  and  duly  weigh'd,  by  many  of  thofe
who  went  on  to  publiili  obfervations  of  this  kind,  afterwards,  without  any
doubt,  or  hefitation  ■,  at  leaft,  in  that  forty-eighth  obfervation,  alio,  which  I
juft  now  quoted,  the  hiftory  of  a  man,  is  copied  from  Hartmann,  who
was  fo  firmly  perfuaded  of  his  having  a  lizard  in  his  ftomach,  that  he  made
no  fcruple  to  delineate  the  figure  of  it,  and  another  is  fpoken  of  by  Lucas
Antonius  Fortius  (la'),  who  aflerted  that  he  had  a  frog  in  the  fame  place,
which  fometimes  croak'd,  and  if  he  drank  any  water,  fwam  about  in  it,  and
not  to  ufe  many  words,  you  will  find  from  Brunnerus  {e),  that  a  woman,  by
reafon  of  a  biting,  and  other  fenfations,  which  fhe  felt  in  her  ftomach,  was
fuppos'd  to  nourifh  a  living  animal  there.  Yet  this  woman,  inftead  of  her
living  animal,  and  the  laft  of  the  two  men,  inftead  of  a  frog,  and  the  firft,  in-
ftead of  a  lizard,  had  only  tumours  of  the  ftomach,  which  were,  for  the  moft
part,  ulcerated.

I  would,  therefore,  have  you  add  to  the  Sepulchretum,  the  two  more
modern  hiftories,  out  of  thefe  three,  with  their  figns,  whatever  they  are,  and
their  difieftions.  For  there  are  not  only  fome  others  to  be  added,  from  the
lefs  modern  hiftories,  as  for  inftance,  that  which  you  will  read  in  Freherus
(f),  of  the  very  famous  cardinal  Baronius,  who  was  deftroy'd  by  an  infupe-
rable  naufea,  which  arofe  from  three  ulcers  in  the  mouth  of  the  ftomach,
but  alfo  from  the  more  modern  in  particular,  many,  as  one  of  Brunnerus
(g),  with  an  ulcerous  tumour,  as  that  of  Bafterus  (h),  which  is,  in  general,
not  much  unlike  the  former,  as  two  of  the  celebrated  Plancus  (/),  both  of
a  callous  ulcer,  and  others,  in  like  manner,  among  which  are  fome  of  the
celebrated  Haller's  •,  for  befides  that  of  a  fcirrhous  ftomach  from  the  abufe
of  vinegar  (k),  he  has  two  others,  one  of  which  (/),  defcribes  many  tuber-
cles therein,  full  of  pus,  the  other  (w?),  defcribes  the  ftomach,  as  being
extremely deform'd with fcirrhi, and  abfcefles, betwixt  the  membranes,

(f)  Confideraz.  int.  alia  generaz.  de'  vermi.  (/)  Epift.  ad.  put.  a.  1726.  &  epift,  ad  eund«

(d)  Vid.  aft.  lipf.  a.  1704.  m. Septembri.  de  monllr.

(t)  Gland,  duoden.  c.  9.  (J:)  Opufc.  pathol.  obf.  21.

if/J  Theatr.  viror.  erud.  clar.  p.  i.  f.  2.  (!)  Ibid.  obf.  22.

(£)  C.  9.  cit.  CmJ  Ibid.  obf.  23.


{/j)  Aft.  n.  c.  t.  8.  obf. 16.


where


Letter  XXIX. Article  i6.  '  37

where  it  adhered  to  the  colon,  with  which  it  communicated,  by  means  of
an  ulcerated  paflage  that  lay  open.

. ,.  For,  as  you  read  over,  attentively,  all  thefe  obfervations,  beginning  v/ith -
that  of  Hermannus,  and  adding  another,  moreover,  of  the  celebrated  Gorit-
zius  (k),  you  will  readily  obferve,  that  there  are  but  very  few,  in  which
there  was  not  an  injury,  either  in  the  pylorus,  or  near  the  pylorus;  fo  that
for  this  reafon,  alfo,  the  opinion  of  Frederic  Hoffmann  (o),  may  feem  to  be,
for  the  moft  part,  at  leaft,  not  very  abfurd,  or  contrary  to  truth,  I  mean  that
the  pylorus  is  primarily,  and  principally,  affedled  in  a  cardialgia,  efpecially,
as  in  the  next,  and  eighth  fedtion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (p),  we  read  that  the
ftomach  was  internally  corroded,  alfo,  near  to  this  orifice,  and  in  this  (^),  that
the  orifice,  itfelf,  was  not  only  very  much  fwell'd,  externally,  and  had  vo-
micje  fill'd  with  white  pus,  but  was  likewife  fcirrhous,  on  the  internal  fur-
face,  and  befet  with  whitifh,  and  indurated  glands,  more  than  the  other
part  of  the  ftomach.

Moreover,  as  you  fee  that  in  the  obfervations,  which  I  have  quoted  from
Hermannus,  and  Bafterus,  either  glandular,  or  fungous,  excrefcences  of  the
pylorus  were  join'd,  in  fuch  a  manner,  with  ulcers,  of  this  part,  that  they
might  be  fuppos'd  to  have  grown  out  from  the  ulcerated  fubftance  of  the
pylorus  itfelf;  you  will  without  doubt,  enquire,  whether  the  other  excref-
cences, which  other  perfons,  and  I  myfelf,  alfo,  have  fometimes  feen,  both
at  this,  and  at  other  parts  of  the  ftomach,  are  all  of  them  to  be  fup-
pos'd to  have  proceeded  from  fome  ulcer  of  that  vifcus  ?  For  you  fee,  by  way
of  example,  in  the  additamenta  to  this  fection  (r),  that  two  verriu^,  or  wans,
were  obferv'd  by  Paulinus,  in  the  ftomach,  about  the  left  orifice,  "  adher-
"  ing  firmly  together  with  their  roots,"  one  of  them  of  the  fize  of  a  fmall
apple,  the  other  of  the  fize  of  a  pretty  large  filbert,  but  that  no  mention
is  made  of  any  ulcer,  from  whence  they  arofe  ;  although,  fome  time  before,
a  mafs,  equal  to  the  fize  of  an  acorn,  had  been  thrown  up  by  vomiting,
with  a  large  quantity  of  blood  :  and  indeed  we  generally  fee  warts  upon  the

.  fkin,  externally,  without  any  ulcer.

• .  But,  as  to  what  the  Arabian  Phyficians  have  written,  upon  warts  of  the
ftomach,  you  will  read  it  in  Marcellus  Donatus  (j),  and  you  have  it  in  part,

•  alfo,  in  the  fcholium  to  rhe  appendix,  which  is  fubjoin'd  by  Bonetus,  to  the
thirteenth  obfervation  of  this  feftion  :  although  as  the  wart,  which  is  there
fpoken  of  from  Avenzoar,  Vv-as  of  the  bignefs  of  an  apple,  it  is  not  eafily
underftood,  how  it  was  polfible  for  it  to  get  out  of  the  ftomach,  and  be
thrown  through  the  fmall  inteftines,  into  the  large  inteftines ;  fo  that  it  is
very  natural  to  ftifpeft  this  excrefcence  not  to  have  been  generated  in'  the

.ftomach,  but  in  that  part  of  the  colon  (/),  which  is  contiguous  to  the  fundus
of  the  ftomach,  efpecially  as  vomitings  are  never  faid  to  have  been  ob-
ferv'd in  that  patient,  but,  always,  ftools  of  a  morbid  appearance,  fome-
times bloody,  and  fometimes  of  various  colours.

(a)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  8.  obf.  20.  (y)  In  Addit.  obf.  6.

(0)  Commerc.  litter,  a. 1 731.  fpec.  44.  in  (r)  Obf.  5.

fin.  (/)  De  med.  hill,  mirab.  1.  3.  c.  5,

(f)  Obf.  4.  (/)  Vid.  etiam  epilt.  31.  n.  21.

17.  How"


38  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

17.  However  in  regard  to  what  the  Arabians  have  call'd  warts,  which,  if
they  were  not  polypi  of  the  inteftines,  or  of  the  ftomach  (of  which  kind
nearly,  I  fhould  fuppole  that  fiefhy  fubftance  to  have  been,  that  is  de-
I'crib'd  to  have  been  thrown  up  after  many  vomitings  of  blood,  in  the  appen-
dix, of  which  I  fpoke  jult  now)  might  be  flefliy  excrefcences,  as  the  verrucse
of  Paulinus  might  alfo  be,  which  in  fome  meafure  refembled  warts,  that
were  pendulous  from  a  root ;  if  you  choofe  to  fuppofe  that  thefe  ow'd  their
origin  to  a  kind  of  ulceration,  or  erofion,  I  fhall  not  be  repugnant  to  your*
opinion.  But  I  will  rather  enquire,  whether  you  are  to  fuppofe  the  fame
thing  of  fome  others,  as  for  inftance,  of  that  pretty  large  glandular  caruncle,
v/hich  was  fix'd  to  the  ftomach,  near  the  ring  of  the  pylorus,  by  an  oblong
ftalk,  or  radicle,  which,  as  it  is  delcrib'd  by  me  to  you,  in  the  fixteenth  let-
ter («)»  you  may  compare  with  that  which  is  given  in  the  Sepulchretum,
from  our  Praevot  (x),  which  is  faid  to  have  been  annex'd  to  the  fame  part  of
the  ftomach,  by  an  ohlong  membrane,  and  was,  I  fuppofe,  like  mine,  in  this
circumftance  alfo, that  it  was  not  injurious.

For  although  it  is  thus  faid  thereof  in  the  Sepulchretum,  "  this  body
"  falling  into  the  pylorus,  without  doubt,  all  the  exit  of  the  chyle  might
"  have  been  entirely  prevented,  and  various  fymptoms  might  have  arifen  ■"
this  exit  is  not,  therefore,  faid  to  have  been  prevented,  or  thefe  fymptoms
to  have  arifen  ;  fo  that  it  by  no  means  appears,  why  this  title  was  prefix'd  to
the  obfervation,  "  a  confumption  from,  a  glandulous  caruncle  adhering  to
*'  the  pylorus."  To  me,  I  confefs,  excrefcences  of  this  kind,  which  are  feen  to
hang  pendulous  from  the  fkin,  in  fome  perfons,  and  are  number'd,  by
fome,  among  the  marks  of  the  mother,  feem  to  have  almoft  a  fimilar  origin,
•which  does  not  relate  to  ulcers.

Yet  I  would  not  deny,  but  it  may  poffibly  happen,  that  from  accidental
injuries,  thefe  marks  may  be  broken,  and  ulcerated.  So  in  one  or  two
perfons,  and  particularly  in  an  old  man,  whom  I  fhall  defcribe  to  you  here-
after (y),  among  thofe  who  died  ot  a  blow  on  the  head,  I  faw  a  kind  of
membranous  flap,  or  fold,  hang  from  the  ring  of  the  pylorus,  in  a  lacerat-
ed ftate,  fo  that  you  could  not  doubt,  but  it  had  formerly  been  larger,  nor '
was  it  as  yet  quite  found  on  the  extremity  of  its  edge.  There  are  alfo,
other  verrucEB  taken  notice  of  by  me,  in  the  fame  ring,  not  pendulous,  but
feffile,  or  dwarfifh,  as  it  were,  as  in  a  porter,  whom  I  fhall  fpeak  of  hereaf-
ter (2),  as  having  fallen  from  a  houfe,  and  broken  almoft  all  his  ribs,  and,
in  like  manner,  in  an  old  man,  of  whom  I  fhall  make  mention  (a),  when,  in
treating  of  the  gonorrhoea,  I  touch  upon  the  diforders  of  the  proftate  gland.
For  in  both  of  thefe  bodies,  two  roundifb  corpufcles,  of  the  bignefs  of  a
vetch,  adher'd  to  that  ring,  in  the  firft  of  them,  fomewhat  livid,  in  the  fe-
cond,  of  a  red  colour,  and  in  both  of  a  glandular  fubftance.  And  indeed
in  the  fecond,  they  dilcover'd,  each  of  them,  their  feparate  little  foramina,
though  in  a  fomewhat  obfcure  manner,  which  we  could  fee  in  a  more  large,
and  more  clear  ftate,  in  the  neareft  lenticular  glands.  For  thefe  this  man
had  very much  enlarg'd  in  their  fize,  in  the  continuation  of  the  antrum

(«)  N!  36.  (2;)  Epift.  53.  n.  37.

("x)  L.  2.  f.  7. obf.  138.  {a)  Epift.  44.  n.  19^

(ji)  Epift.  52.  n.  8.

pylori.


Letter  XXIX. Article  i8,  19.  39

pylori,  through  which,  two  or  three  prominent  lines  were,  drawn  longitudi-
nally, and  terminated  in  thofe  two  roundifh  tubercles :  and  upsn  each  of
thefe  lines,  two  or  three  glands  adher'd,  being  disjoin'd  by  feme  little  in-
terval.

Thefe  lenticular  glands,  of  the  ftomach,  call  back  to  my  mind,  another
obfervation  thereof,  that  relates  particularly  to  this  occafion,-  as  it  was  not
taken  from  a  man,  in  whom  no  figns  of  a  diforder  in  the  ftomach  had  exift-
ed,  which,  to  the  beft  of  my  knowledge,  there  had  not  been  in  thofe  juft  now
taken  notice  of,  but  from  one  who  was  taken  off  by  fhort,  indeed,  but  very-
violent,  pains  of  the  ftomach.

18.  A  man  of  forty  years  of  age,  of  a  mufcular  habit,  and  much  given  to  in-
tenfe  thinking,  had,  for  fome  days  paft,  been  troubled  with  a  pain  in  the
head,  and  a  fenfe  of  heat  in  making  water,  when  after  a  fupper,  in  which
he  had  neither  eaten  too  much,  nor  any  thing  that  was  unwholfome,  he  was
feiz'd  with  violent  pains  in  the  region  of  the  ftomach.  The  pain  of  his  head
continued.  Thofe  of  his  ftomach  were  encreas'd.  A  great  quantity  of  green
matter  was  dlfcharg'd  by  the  inteftines,  and  by  the  mouth.  And  with  thefe
fymptoms,  he  died  at  Venice,  on  the  beginning  of  the  third  day,  which
was  in  the  middle  of  Auguft,  in  the  year  1707.

When  the  ftomach  was  open'd,  the  right  part  of  it  was  found  :  and  there-
in I  faw,  in  conjunftion  with  my  learned  friends,  a  great  number  of  lenti-
cular glands,  in  the  manner  I  have  defcrib'd  in  the  third  of  the  adverfaria
{h).  The  left  fide  of  this  vifcus  was  mark'd,  in  its  fundus,  with  bloody
^^ots,  and  thefe  of  a  lively  red :  among  which,  fome  that  began  to  be  co-
ver'd  over  with  an  ugly  ferruginous  little  cruft,  Ihow'd  that  the  diforder  had
already  inclin'd  to  a  gangrenous  ftate.  On  the  fame  fide,  where  there  were
no  fpots,  and  where  the  internal  coat  feem'd  to  be  found,  I  could  eafily  prefi
out  the  blood.  The  duodenum,  and  the  reft  of  the  inteftines,  even  whenexa-
min'd  internally,  had  no  appearance  of  difeafe.  The  gall  bladder  was  contradted
at  the  diftance  of  two,  or  three,  inches  from  the  lower  part  of  its  fundus,  and
was  again  dilated,  before  it  terminated  in  a  cyftic  du£t,  fo  that  it  might  feem.
to  be  divided  into  two  veficles.

The  lungs  adher'd,  by  means  of  their  own  fubftance,  to  all  the  parietes
of  the  thorax,  being  connefted  in  the  fame  manner  alfo,  to  the  mediaftinum;,
they  were  found  however  ;  for  as  to  their  being  red,  on  their  pofterior  part,
the  back,  and  the  pofterior  parts  of  the  arms,  were  ting'd  equally  of  the
fame  colour.  Nor  was  there  any  blood,  either  in  the  heart,  or  in  the  auri-
cles. In  the  other  parts,  all  of  which  I  examin'd,  except  the  brain,  there
was  nothing  worthy  of  remark.

19.  No  great  error,  or  irregularity,  in  point  of  living,  had  been  committed  by
this  man,  as  had  been  by  him,  whofe  ftomach  the  celebrated  Koehlerus(f)  found
to  be  inflam'd,  and  befet  with  black  fpots  :  there  was  not  the  leaft  fufpicion
of  a  medicine  which  had  been  of  a  nature  not  fuitable  to  his  ftomach,  as
was  the  cafe  in  the  hiftory  given  by  Klaunigius  {d),  or  as  you read,  more

fbj  Animav.  4.  fdj  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3  &  4  obf.  145.

(cj  Commerc. litter, a. 1743.  Hebd. 5.
n.  2.

than


40  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

thi-;n  once,  in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  of  poifon  being  either  fran-
dulendy,  or  accidentally,  given.  And  fome  things  had  even  preceded,  as. .
you  might  have  obferv'd,  which  feem'd  to  difcover  a  confiderable  acrimony
of  the  blood.  Yet  if  you  lliould  happen  to  be  furpriz'd  at  any  thing,  in  this
hiftory,  you  will  ftill  more  be  furpriz'd,  in  that  of  a  woman,  which  I  have
already  promis'd  you  (f),  and  will  at  prefent  give  you.

20.  A  poor  country  woman,  to  appearance  about  fifty  years  of  age,  had
been  liibjeft,  at  intervals,  to  a  difficulty  of  refpiration,  join'd  with  a  fenfe
of  ftreightnefs,  a  hard  pulfe,  and  a  violent  agitation  of  all  the  arteries,  fo
that  the  alternate  motion  thereof,  fell  under  the  notice  of  the  eye,  even  in
her  very  hands,  and  not  only  in  the  neck,  and  the  temples.  When  her  re-
fpiration was  extremely  difficult,  fhe  came  to  this  hofpital,  and  having  loft
a  large  quantity  of  blood,  which  was  fomewhat  hard  in  its  confiftence,  fhe
was  freed  therefrom.  Thus  fhe  liv'd  four  years,  when  being  feiz'd,  at
home,  with  pains  of  the  ftomach,  fhe  died  there,  within  four  and  twenty
hours.

Her  body  was  given  to  me,  that  I  might  teach  anatomy  from  it  in  public,
before  the,  latter  end  of  January,  in  the  year  1737.  As  we  examin'd  every
part  in  its  order,  thefe  things  feem'd  worthy  of  remark,  in  the  belly.  The
ftomach  was  large,  and  half-full,  and  when  we  came  to  open,  and  examine
it,  we  were  furpriz'd  that  the  contents  had  not  been  thrown  up  by  vomiting.
For  it  was  ulcerated  with  many,  and  various  erofions,  which  feem'd  recent,
and  were  already  afFe£l:ed  with  a  gangrenous  blacknefs.  Some  of  them  were
very  thick,  and  very  fmall,  at  the  upper  part  of  the  ftomach,  fome  of  which
kind  were,  alfo,  feen  in  the  neareft  part  of  the  duodenum :  others  were  at
a  greater  diftance  from  each  other,  and  larger,  in  the  fundus,  and  more  fo,
where  the  ftomach  began  to  expand  itfelf  from  the  termination  of  the  oefo-
phagus  :  nor  was  the  oefophagus,  itfelf,  free  from  erofions  of  the  fame  kind  ;
ib  that  they  feem'd  to  have  been  caus'd  by  the  food  which  had  been  taken
in,  though  of  what  kind  this  food  had  been,  there  was  no  certainty,  nor
could  we  form  any  tolerable  judgment,  from  the  matter  which  remain'd  in
the  ftomach.

The  fpleen  was  fomewhat  larger  than  it  naturally  is,  and  more  lax,  being
connefted,  in  the  greateft  part  of  it,  to  the  diaphragm,  and  in  fome  part  of
it,  to  the  ftomach,  which  it  is  poffible  might  arife  from  the  encreas'd  magni-
tude thereof.  The  uterus  was  very  much  inclin'd  to  the  left  fide;  and  for
that  reafon  the  round  ligament  was  much  fhorter  on  the  left  fide,  than  on
the  right.  To  one  fide  of  the  cervix  uteri,  internally,  a  membrane  of  a  pyramidal
form  adher'd,  that  had  its  upper  part  flatten'd,  being  fmall  in  its  fize,  thickifh
•and  white,  which  I  judg'd  to  be  the  remains  of  an  hydatid,  that  was  former-
ly diftended  with  water.  The  urinary  bladder,  quite  from  the  orifices  of  the
•ureters,  fhow'd  the  fanguiferous  veflTeis  very  confpicuous  by  their  rednefs  ;  lb
that  notwithftanding  they  were  very  minute,  the  communications  of  one
with  the  other,  could  not  have  been  more  clearly  feen,  if  they  had  been  fiU'd
by  an  injeftion  of  red  wax.  In  this  manner  they  were  continued,  in  very
great  number,  on  both  fides,  into  the  urethra,  the  internal  furface  of  which

(f)  Epift.  14.  n.  35.


Letter  XXIX. Article  21.  4^

was  taken  up  with  them  in  a  ftill  greater  degree  ;  but,  for  this  reafon,  thejr
were  not  quite  fo  beautiful  as  in  the  bladder.

In  the  difledion  of  the  mefentery,  which  abounded  with  fat,  and  that  of  a
very  good  colour,  and  confiftence,  as  the  other  parts  did  liliewife,  more  than
you  would  have  fuppos'd  from  firft  fight,  I  faw  glands  which  were  found  in-
deed, but  much  bigger  than  ufual,  as  many  of  them  were  even  equal  to  beans
of  the  largefb  fize.  The  beginning  of  the  fuperior  mefenteric  artery  was
common  alfo  to  the  coeliac.  The  coronary  of  the  ftomach  had  a  much  larger
diameter  than  ufual.  But  the  vena  cava,  while  it  was  cut  through,  above  and
below  the  liver,  as  is  the  cuftom  in  anatomical  theatres,  did  not  pour  out  a
lingle  drop  of  blood.

Both  cavities  of  the  thorax  had  a  little  water  in  them,  which  was  ting'd
with  no  colour  at  all  :  the  lungs  were  turgid  with  air,  and  conne<5ted  to  the
pleura,  on  the  back-part,  and  on  the  fides.  In  the  heart,  and  in  the  jugular
veins,  in  which  there  was  a  larger  quantity  of  blood  than  in  the  interior
veins,  was  fome  appearance  of  a  polypus.  The  parietes  of  the  heart  were,
evidently,  much  thicker  on  the  left  fide,  than  they  ought  to  be,  whereas,  on  the
right  fide,  they  feem'd  to  be  thinner  than  was  natural.  Yet  there  was  no  di-
latation of  the  ventricles,  or  of  the  veins,  or  of  the  pulmonary  arterv,  or,
finally,  of  the  trunk  of  the  great  artery.  There  was,  indeed,  fomewhat  of
a  hardnefs  in  the  valves  thereof,  and  in  the  trunk  itfelf,  both  near  the  heart,
and  in  other  places  up  and  down,  in  like  manner,  which  were  the  marks  of
offifications,  that  would  have  taken  place,  if  the  woman  had  liv'd  longer,
though  difcover'd,  at  prefent,  only  by  a  kindof  yellow  colour,  and  were  even
already  grown  very  hard,  a  little  above  the  diaphragm,  where  they  were  larger,
and  more  protuberant :  but  the  trunk  was,  every  where,  of  its  proper  dia-
meter.

Yet  it  was  not  fo  in  all  the  branches  of  that  trunk.  For  befides  that  co-
ronary, of  which  I  have  fpoken  already,  when  I  compar'd  the  carotid
arteries  one  with  another,  a  greater  breadth  was  evidently  to  be  feen,  in  that
on  the  left  fii^e,  than  in  the  other.  And  as  the  left  of  theie  arteries,  after
having  fcarcely  meafur'd  out  an  inch  and  a  half  in  length,  from  its  origin,
was  divided  into  two  branches,  by  a  very  extraordinary  inftance,  it  was  fome-
what more  dilated,  where  it  began  to  divide,  than  arteries  are  accuftom'd  to
be,  in  mofl:  perfons,  at  their  diftributions :  and  the  fame  thing  I  obferv'd,
at  the  firft  divifion  of  both  the  fubciavians,  into  the  larger  branches.

At  length,  having  open'd  the  cranium,  on  the  twenty-eighth  day,  after  the
woman's  death,  the  brain  was  not  only  without  any  morbid  appearance,  but
had  even  no  difagreeable  fmell,  nor  was  found,  in  any  relpeft,  worfe  than
others,  that  I  difleded  at  the  fame  time,  which  were  much  more  frefh.

21.  In  the  thicknefs  of  the  parietes  of  the  heart,  on  the  left  fide,  being  pre-
ternaturally  encreas'd,  you  have  a  part  of  that  caufe,  which  fo  violently  agi-
tated the  arteries,  and  in  the  feveral  dilatations  of  thefe  arteries,  and  the
many  beginnings  of  oflification,  the  effefts  of  the  fame  agitation :  all  v/hich
circumftances,  you  may  compare  with  thofe  things  that  1  have  already  faid
upon  the  fubjedl  of  fpurious  aneurifms,  as  Lancifi  call'd  them  (f).

(f)  Epift.  24.  n.  35.  &  feq.

Vol.  II.  G  You


43  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

You  have,  moreover,  which  particularly  relates  to  the  prefent  purpofe,  the
caufes  of  a  moft  fevere  pain  of  the  ftomach,  in  the  erofions  of  that  vifcus.
And  as  I  alfo  found  erofions,  pretty  fimilar  to  thefe,  in  a  fhort  time  after,
in  the  ftomach  of  a  drunlcen  man,  defcrib'd  in  the  fourteenth  letter  (g)  ;  to
omit  thofe  appearances,  which  I  defcrib'd  juft  now,  as  having  been  feen,  by
me,  in  that  Venetian  (h) ;  I  am  much  in  doubt,  whether  to  attribute  them
all  to  I  know  not  what  kind  of  food,  that  was  taken  in,  or  rather  to  fome
poifonous  juices  generated  internally.  Yet  though  I  might  perhaps  do  this,
with  fome  degree  of  colour,  in  one  of  thefe  hiftories ;  it  feems,  however,  lefs
polTible  to  fuppofe  it  in  the  laft,  in  which  the  paflTage  to  the  ftomach,  that  is
the  osfophagus,  was  alfo  befet  with  the  fame  erofions.

But  in  regard  to  the  effefls  of  poifons,  obferv'd  in  the  ftomach,  by  means
of  difleftion,  as  I  ftiould  rather  chufe  to  treat  of  them,  at  once,  in  their
proper  place,  than  here  and  there  irregularly,  as  I  fee  is  done  in  the
Sepulchretum  -,  I  fhall,  for  this  reafon,  refer  to  that  proper  place  (i),  what
I  forbear  to  add  at  prefent :  as  for  a  like  reafon  I  ftiall  alfo  defer  to  another
occafion,  thofe  things  which  relate  to  the  pain  of  the  ftomach,  from  a  confenc
with  other  parts,  and  particularly  with  the  kidnies.

2  2.  But  in  regard  to  thofe  pains  of  the  ftomach,  which  arife  neither  from
poifon,  nor  are  produc'd  from  caufes  that  lie  on  the  outfide  of  the  ftomach,
if  you  enquire  after  fuch  things,  as  you  may  add  to  thofe  you  have  read
above ;  I  think  you  ought  to  add,  in  the  firft  place,  the  obfervation  of  the
illuftrious  Heifter  {k),  in  which  he  defcribes  a  moft  violent  cardialgia,  brought
on  by  a  great  heap  of  worms,  which  had  fo  injur'd  the  ftomach,  about  the
left  orifice,  where  he  found  them  adhering,  that  it  was  bloody,  and,  in  a
manner,  eroded :  and  this  in  an  adult  woman  ;  not  in  children,  in  whom  it
is  lefs  furprizing,  that  almoft  fimilar  appearances  were  found  by  Bonetus,
and  by  our  Saxonia,  as  you  have  it  in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (/).
And  although  many  examples  (m)  are  given,  in  the  fame  feftion,  of  a  pain
of  the  ftomach,  from  calculi,  that  were  form'd  therein  ;  yet  you  may  add
frelh  examples  from  Lanzonus  (n),  from  Contulus  (o),  and  others.  Fare-
well.

ig)  N.  34.  (/)  Obf.  14.

{h)  N. 18.  (m)  Obf.  29.  31.  &  32.

(?)  Epift.  59.  n.  praefertim  2 J.  (k)  Aft.  n.  c.  t.  i.  obf.  64.

\ji)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  5.  obf.  86.  (0)  De  Lapidibus,  podagra,  &c.  c.g^


LETTER


Letter  XXX. Articles  i,  2,  43


LETTER the THIRTIETH,

Treats  of  Vomiting.


r.  TT  T I  T  H  the  pain  of  the  ftomach,  which  was  treated  of  in  the  former
VV  letter,  is  frequently  join'd  vomiting,  of  which  I  am  to  write  at  pre-
fent.  And  this  you  may  obferve,  not  only  by  reading  the  lait  letter ;  but
alfo  by  turning  over  the  eighth  fe£tion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  and  comparing
it  with  the  feventh.  For  you  will  find  many  obfervations,  in  which  both  of
thefe  fymptoms  are  defcrib'd,  and  not  a  few  which  are  equally  defcrib'd  in
both  fedions.

We  however  Ihall  keep  fteadily  to  our  former  refolution,  and  Ihall  not  pro-
duce any  one  of  thofe  here,  which  we  have  either  given  already,  or  are  to
give  hereafter.  I  feleft,  therefore,  out  of  all  thefe  of  Valfalva,  two  only  ;  one
relating  to  a  long-continued,  the  other  to  a  fhort  vorniting,  but  both  of  them
to  a  vomiting  which  had  fatal  events.  The  firft  of  thefe  obfervations  is  as
follows.

2.  A  man  of  about  fifty-four  years  of  age,  had  begun,  five  or  fix  months
before,  to  be  fomewhat  emaciated,  in  his  whole  body,  when  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  month  of  Auguft,  of  the  year  1689,  a  troublefome  vomiting
came  on,  of  a  fluid  which  refembl'd  water,  tindur'd  with  foot.  And  the
fame  kind  of  fluid  was  difcharg'd  by  ftool,  fometimes,  when  the  vomiting
was  upon  the  patient,  and,  fometimes,  when  it  was  abfent,  but  this  dif-
charge  was  not  conftant.  In  the  mean  while,  fcarcely  any  pain  was  per-
ceiv'd,  in  the  region  of  the  ftomach.  But  the  phyfician  having  prefcrib'd
fait  of  wormwood,  it  created  fuch  uneafinefs  in  the  ftomach,  that  it  was  ne-
ver given  afterwards.  At  length  the  vomiting  being  very  violent,  with  a
difcharge  of  the  fame  matter,  and  the  pulfe  growing,  by  degrees,  very  lan-
guid, death  took  place  of  life,  on  the  tiiirteenth  of  November,

All  the  limbs  of  the  body  were  flexible :  which  does  not  often  occur  in
other  carcafTes.  In  the  ftomach,  towards  the  pylorus,  was  an  ulcerated  can-
cerous tumour,  and  this  feem'd  to  be  made  up  of  a  congeries  of  glands,
which,  bemg  prefs'd,  difcharg'd  a  kind  of  humour,  like  the  male  femen
And  the  ftomach  contain'd  three  pints  of  a  matter,  almoft  of  the  fame  nature
with  that,  which  was  thrown  up  by  vomiting.  Betwixt  the  ftomach  and  the
fpleen  were  two  glandular  bodies,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  bean,  and  in  their
colour,  and  fubftance,  not  much  unlike  that  tumour  Vv'hich  I  have  defcrib'd
in  the  ftomach. Thefe  were  the  appearances  in  the  belly.

And  in  the  thorax,  the  right  lobe  of  the  lungs  was  fomewhat  inflam'd
on  the  pofterior  part :  but  ferum  ilfued  forth  from  both  of  the  lobes,  in  eve-

G  2  ry


44  Book  III. Of  Dlfeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

ry  part,  when  cut  into.  From  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  polypous
concretions  went  into  the  pulmonary  artery  :  and  a  fmall  one  from  the  left,
into  the  pulmonary  vein.

3.  If  you  compare,  one  with  another,  the  two  tumours  of  the  ftomach,  I
mean  this,  and  that  which  I  alfo  defcrib'd  from  Valfalva,  in  the  former  letter
{a),  both  of  which  he  call'd  by  the  name  of  cancer,  in  the  ftiort  references
to  his  obfervations,  and  has  faid  that  both  of  them  had  a  vomiting  attend-
ant upon  them,  by  which  a  fluid,  like  water  ting'd  with  foot,  was  dif-
charg'd  ;  you  will  perhaps  wonder  why  the  former  occafion'd  fuch  feverc
pains,  and  this  fo  flight,  and  why  this,  as,  when  prefs'd,  it  gave  out  a  hu-
mour that  was  not  fuliginous,  could,  neverthelefs,  be  able  to  tinge  fo  great  a
quantity  of  humour,  with  that  colour.  But  that  a  very  black  matter  has
been  thrown  up,  even  by  thole  who  had  no  tumour  of  this  kind  whatever,
you  will  not  only  perceive  from  the  obfervations  of  others,  but  alfo  from
one  of  thofe  which  will  be  given  below  •,  fo  that  it  is  by  no  means  neceflary
to  account  for  colours  of  this  kind  from  cancers  of  the  ftomach,  that  are
become  ulcerated.

As  to  that  difference  of  pains,  however,  unlefs  you  account  for  it,  in  the
firft  patient,  from  the  humours  being  more  irritating,  than  in  this,  as  the
firft  was  a  pretty  old  man,  and  of  a  bilious  temperament,  although  in  the
laft,  the  pains  became  very  troublefome,  by  the  taking  of  fait  of  worm-
wood ;  you  will  conjefture  that  there  had  been  flight  pains  in  this  latter  pa-
tient, at  firft,  juft  as  there  were  in  the  former,  but  that  after  the  tumour  was
fo  irritated,  by  the  fait  of  wormwood,  as  to  be  at  length  ulcerated,  they
not  only  became  more  violent,  but  continued  to  the  very  clofe  of  life.

4.  A  nobleman  of  two  and  forty  years  of  age,  having  come  out  of  Ger-
many into  Italy,  was  feiz'd  a  few  months  after,  with  a  double  tertian  fever,
at  Bologna,  which  was  attended  with  pretty  mild  fymptoms,  in  its  firft:
accefllons ;  but  in  its  fourth  accefllon  was  very  violent  indeed.  For  the  cold
fit,  which  began  about  the  twentieth  hour,  did  but  juft  remit  at  the  third
hour  of  the  night :  his  thirft  was  very  troublefome,  his  tongue  rough,  his
breathing  difficult,  he  felt  a  laflltude,  had  a  fmall  and  weak  pulfe,  a  pain,
and  fenfe  of  fulnefs,  in  the  ftomach,  and,  finally,  fo  great  was  his  reftlefiriefs,
and  anxiety,  that  he  fcarcely  remain'd  two  minutes  together,  in  any  one  part
of  the  bed.

All  thefe  fymptoms  continued  without  any  remiflion,  till,  the  heat  coming,
on  more  violent,  the  patient  had  leave  to  drink  a  draught  of  diftill'd  waters,
when  they  began  to  abate  -,  but  they  abated  only  a  little,  and  for  a  ftiort
time.  For  foon  after  all  the  fymptoms  were  again  exacerbated,  and  continued
violent,  through  the  whole  night.  Early  in  the  morning  he  found  that  he
had  a  vomiting  coming  on :  but,  at  firft,  he  could  not  excite  it  even  by
thrufting  his  fingers  into  his  fauces ;  yet  foon  after,  he  threw  up  a  fluid  to
the  quantity  of  four  pounds,  and  this  fluid  was  like  water,  in  which  cho-
colate has  been  diflblv'd.  In  this  humour  floated  fome  fmall  portions  of
membranes,  as  it  were,  which  had  the  very  fame  colour  :  and  the  odour  of
it  was  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  which  generally  exhales  from  the  bodies
of  patients  labouring  under  fevers.

(a)  N.  6.

Though


Letter  XXX. Article  5.  45

Though  the  diforder  of  the  ftomach  feem'd  to  be  fomewhat  alleviated  by
this  vomiting  ;  yet  the  other  difagreeable  fymptoms  not  only  continued,  but
were  even  more  violent  than  before.  In  the  morning  the  phyfician  order'd  a
a  vein  to  be  open'd,  and  fome  blood  to  be  taken  away,  and  the  blood,  in  the
firft  cup,  fhew'd  a  craflamentum  that  was  fofter  than  it  naturally  is,  a  thin
cruft  on  the  upper  part,  and  a  milky  ferum  around  ;  but  in  the  fecond,  all
thefe  feveral  parts  of  the  blood  receded  leis  from  their  natural  ftate.  This  and
other  remedies  being  made  ufe  of,  after  a  few  hours,  almoft  as  much  as  be-
fore, of  the  fluid  I  have  deicrib'd,  was  thrown  up  by  vomiting  :  and  the
fame  thing  happen'd  again,  and  again,  a  little  time  after;  fo  that  the  whole
of  the  quantity,  which  was  thrown  up  in  this  manner,  on  that  day,  was  equal
to  about  fixteen  pints.

The  night  following,  the  fame  fymptoms  were  violent,  a  tremor  of  the
left  arm  coming  on  befides  -,  which  had  a  delirium  preceding  it,  and  often
recur'd,  but  particularly  while  the  arm  was  expos'd  to  the  air :  and  in  the  -
morning,  degenerated  into  a  kind  of  epileptic  paroxyfm,  in  which,  not  only
the  arm,  but  the  mouth,  the  eyes,  and  the  left  thigh  alfo,  were  extremely
convuls'd.  Thefe  fymptoms  lafted  for  a  great  number  of  hours:  at  length,
that  arm  was  feiz'd  with  a  palfy.  Neverthelefs,  the  epileptic  attacks  conti-
nu'd  to  return  fo  frequently,  that  more  than  twenty  were  reckon'd  within
an  hour.  In  the  mean  while,  the  vomitings  were  alfo  more  frequent,  by
which  a  matter  of  a  porraceous  colour  was  difcharg'd,  and  in  this  matter
fragments  offmall  membranes,  as  it  were,  floated.

Moreover,  a  fingultus,  which  had  begun  after  the  palfy  I  mentioned,
about  noon,  began  now  to  be  much  more  violent.  And,  notwithfl:anding  all
thefe  fymptoms,  feem'd  to  be  fomewhat  more  quiet  after  dinner,  yet,  when
the  evening  came  on,  they  were  again  exafperated ;  fo  that  the  pulfe,  and
the  fl:rength,  being  more  and  more  decreas'd,  through  the  whole  night,  and.
the  patient,  being  troubl'd  with  gentle  vomitings,  at  one  time,  at  another
time,  with  the  delirium,  and  fingultus,  but  ftill  more  often,  with  dreadful,
though  Ihorter,  fpafmodic  paroxyfms,  died  at  the  twelfth  hour  in  the
morning.

The  abdomen  v/as  tumid,  as  the  inteftines  were  alfo.  Thefe,  and  the  fto-
mach, on  their  more  anterior  furfaces,  were  ting'd  with  that  fame  colour,
with  which  I  laid  the  fluid  had  been  ting'd,  that  was  thrown  up  by  vomit-
ing. The  ftomach  was  internally  inflam'd,  all  the  fmall  veflcls  whatever  be-
ing very  turgid  with  blood.  The  gall-bladder,  although  empty  of  bile,  was
neverthelefs  feen  to  be  very  turgid,  but  this  turgidity,  was  from  air.

In  the  thorax,  the  right  lobe  of  the  lungs  adher'^d  clofely  to  the  pleura :
and  this,  and  the  left,  were  ting'd  with  a  black  colour,  and  full  of  an  ichor-
ous matter.  In  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  was  a  flender  polypous  con-
cretion.

5.  The  fatal  event,  which  was  indicated  by  the  fourth  day  in  this  gentle-
man, was  finally  brought  on,  by  the  feventh.  But  if  before  fo  great  an  im-
petus of  the  diforder  had  fallen  upon  the  ftomach,  the  phyfician,  whoever
he  was,  fufpefting  from  fome  difcoveries  or  the  former  days,  what  was  at  hand^
had  made  an  early,  and  proper  ufe  of  the  peruvian  bark,  he  might,  perhaps,
have  been  able  to  prevent  the  progrefs  of  the  diforder,  and  thus  have  fav'd

the


46  Book  in. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  patient.  Bat  thefe  things  happen'd,  as  far  as  I  can  gather  from  this,  and
the  preceding  obfervation,  at  that  time,  in  which  they  were  as  yet  afraid  of
ufing  the  Peruvian  bark,  by  way  of  a  febrifuge,  in  the  manner  that  v*'e  ufe
it  at  prefent,  and  as  it  was  firft  made  ufe  of  at  Bologna  fuccefsfully,  a  few
years  after,  by  that  very  ingenious  phyfician  Dominic  Gulielmini,  in  the
cafe  of  a  gentleman  of  a  noble  family,  whom  the  next  exacerbation,  of  a
dangerous  fever,  would  otherwife  have  carry'd  off,  as  it  had  happen'd  to
others.

However,  from  whence  the  porraceous  tinfture  arofe,  with  which  the  hu-
mour thrown  up  was  colour'd,  is  fhown  by  the  emptinefs  of  the  gall-blad-
der. But  other  juices  were  mix'd  with  the  bile,  in  the  ftomach,  and  inte-
ftines,  before,  when  the  fluid,  which  was  thrown  up,  had  quite  a  different
colour.  But  with  which  of  thefe  colours  thoic  vifcera  were  ting'd,  asValfal-
va  has  not  made  it  fufficiently  clear  in  his  papers,  I  was  not  at  liberty  exprefs-
ly  to  determine,  in  the  hiftory.

6.  But  now  I  will  give  you  other  hiflories,  which  are  likewife  divided  into
two  kinds,  the  one  relating  to  vomitings  of  a  long  continuance,  and  the
other  to  thofe  of  a  fliort  continuance.  And  of  all  thefe,  that  fhall  be  the
firfl,  which  produces  an  example  of  vomiting,  than  which  not  many  of  lon-
ger continuance  will  be  found:  and  this  is  the  lame  that  I  remember  to  have
promis'd  you,  in  particular,  when  I  Ipoke  of  the  palpitation  of  the  heart  ('^j.

7.  A  noble  macron  of  Padua,  who,  from  her  very  bath,  had  often  thrown
up  the  milk  fhe  fuck'd,  fo  that  her  nurfe  delpair'd  of  her  living ;  having
neverthelefs  grown  up  to  an  age  of  maturity,  was  married,  and  became  the
mother  of  many  children,  and  being  now  in  her  thirty-fourth  year,  began,
in  her  lying-in,  to  be  frequently  troubl'd  with  a  vomiting,  from  which,  aftet
two  months,  Ihe  believ'd  fhe  fhould  be  free  for  the  future,  as  fhe  had  thrown
up  a  kind  of"  globular  body,  more  than  two  inches  in  diameter,  which,  at  that
time,  confifled  of  a  pretty  loft  matter,  but,  being  expos'd  to  the  air,  was,
after  three  days,  found  to  be  extremely  hard.

But  the  event  did  not  fucceed  to  her  wifhes.  The  vomiting  continu'd,  and
notwithftanding  it  was  contended  with  by  many  phyficians,  for  a  long  tiine,
fometimes  by  more  mild,  and,  at  other  times,  by  more  violent  remedies,  yet
it  continued  to  the  very  time  of  her  death,  that  is  for  four  and  twenty  years
together.  It  return'd  every  day  at  two  hours  after  dinner.  It  did  not  return
after  fupper  till  the  next  day  in  the  morning.  And  although  changes  were
frequently  made  in  the  nature  of  her  aliments,  it  always  return'd  in  the  fame
manner,  and  flie  always  threw  up  a  whitifh  matter,  which  v/as  thick  in  its
confiftence,  and  dutliie.  And  if  the  patient  endeavour'd  to  prevent  thefe
vomitings,  fhe  fuffer'd  great  uneafinefles  in  the  region  of  the  fbomach,  till
they  return'd,  and  the  matter  was  difcharg'd ;  but  this  did  not  happen  with-
out confiderable  Urainings :  however,  after  vomiting  every  thing  was  eafy,
and  quiet.

There  was  no  difcharge  from  the  inteftines  downwards,  but  by  means  of
purgative  medicines :  and  this  could  be  eafily  brought  about,  at  any  time,
wichout  any  injury to  the  patient,  by  a  particular  remedy,  that  is  by  St.

(J))  Epift.  23.  n.  21.  in  fin.

Fufca*s


Letter  XXX. Article 7.  . 47

Fufca's  pills,  as  they  call  them  at  Venice,  a  few  of  which,  being  kept  on  the
ftomach  at  night,  gently  mov'd  the  Bowels,  as  they  generally  do,  but  fcarce-
ly  brought  off  any  thing,  befides  watry  dilcharges.  Chocolate  alfo  ftaid  on
the  llonnach,  and  was  of  ufe  to  it.  If  you  examin'd  the  region  of  this  vifcus
with  your  hand,  you  perceived  nothing  there  that  was  preternatural,  nor  yet
in  the  other  parts  of  the  belly.  To  thefe  fymptoms  that  I  have  related,  was
added,  about  two  years  before  her  death,  an  intermiffion  of  the  pulfe.  Yet
the  patient  did  not  ceafe  to  perform  the  accuftom'd  duties  of  life,  both
at  home,  and  abroad ;  till  finding  that  fhe  was  not  quite  fo  well,  and  grown
weaker,  fhe  was  under  a  necefTity  of  pafTing  the  lafl  month  of  her  life  in
bed.  And  there,  every  thing  being  now  naufeous  to  the  ftomach,  and
amongft  others,  chocolate  alfo,  a  fever  was  obferv'd,  which  encreas'd  every
day  in  the  afternoon,  and  augmented  the  nofturnal  heat,  though  it  made  but
little  change  in  the  pulfe.  The  puliation  of  the  arteries  was  rather  large,
but  according  to  cuftom  intermittent.  As  fiie  was  extremely  coflive,  fhe
beg'd  of  her  phyfician,  that  he  would  fuffer  her  to  take  the  ufual  remedy,
that  is  the  pills  of  St.  Fuica  •,  by  which  a  very  great  palpitation  of  the  heart
was  brought  on  :  and  notwithftanding  this  was  alleviated,  almoft  immediate-
ly, by  talcing  away  a  few  ounces  of  blood,  from  the  arm,  yet  it  foon  after
grew  more  violent  again,  and  oblig'd  the  phyfician  to  order  as  many  ounces
to  be  taken  from  the  foot,  by  which  it  was  again  diminifh'd,  yet  not  to  fo
great  a  degree,  as  to  fuffer  her  to  lie  down  on  the  left  fide  afterwards.

There  was  no  cruft  upon  the  top  of  the  blood,  that  was  taken  away.  Some
days  after,  the  patient  being  again  coftive,  a  gentle  glyfter  brought  on  the
palpitation.  As  external  remedies  were  of  no  ufe  againft  this  diforder,  and  as
but  few  internal  remedies  were  admitted  of,  by  the  circumftances  of  the  pa-
tient, who  took  fcarcely  any  nourifhment,  and  that  unwillingly,  amono-  which,
remedies  were  the  diftill'd  cherry  water,  and  baum  water,  and  a  water  made
from  compofitions,  wherein  was  a  little  caftor,  to  which  was  once  added  a
grain  of  opium,  and  there  being  nothing  that  either  prevented  the  vomiting,
or  appeas'd  the  palpitation,  the  pulfe  growing  very  weak,  flender,  and  creep-
ing, on  thelaft  five  days  of  her  illnefs,  and  the  palpitation  continuing,  ftools
came  on  without  any  means  having  been  us'd  to  excite  them,  and  that  even
to  excefs,  fo  that  they  were  frequent,  and  in  great  quantities,  but  at  the  fame
time,  however,  hard.  Wherefore,  the  other  fymptoms  continuino-,  and
the  extreme  parts  of  the  body  growing  cold,  this  very  worthy  matron  ceas'd
to  live  any  longer,  I  fay  very  worthy,  on  many  accounts,  but  even  for  this  one
inftance  of  her  humanity,  and  virtue,  fhe  delerv'd  to  have  enjoy'd  a  much
longer  life  ;  I  mean  becaufe  fhe  gave  orders,  in  her  laft  moments;  which  ve-
ry few  women  have  the  virtue  and  refolution,  to  do;  that  her  body  fhould  be
open'd,  in  order  to  find  out  the  caufe  of  her  obftinate,  and  long-continued
vomitings,  that  if  it  fhould  chance  to  be  found  out,  it  might  be  of  fbme  ad.-
vantage  to  her  children,  againft  an  hereditary  dileafe  ;  for  fhe  had  a  daugh-
ter, who  already  began  to  be  affefted  with  the  fame  diforder,  and  her  ma-
ther,  who  had  been  dead  many  years,  had  alio  labour'd  under  the  fame
fymptoms  of  vomiting.  Being  therefore  defir'd  in  the  name  ot  the  noble  fa-
mily, by  my  moft  refpeftable  colleguc  Valliiheri  the  younger,  to  be  prefent
at  the  diffedion,  and  having  heard  ail  the  relation  that  I  have  given  you,  from
4  tha£;


4 8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

that  very  eminent  phyfician  Peter  de  Marchettis,  grandfon  of  Peter  the  Che-
valier, who  had  attended  this  matron,  for  the  latt  twelve  years  of  her  life,
and  treated  her  with  the  mildeft  methods  of  cure,  as  it  was  pioper,  in  her
difeafe,  that  he  fhouid ;  I  took  care,  in  prefence  of  him,  ana  other  phy-
ficians,  among  whom  was  the  celebrated  Dominic  Militia,  formerly  n^.y  au-
ditor, that  the  dilTedion  fhouid  be  accurately  perform'd,  on  the  evening  of
the  fame  day,  on  which  the  patient  had  died  in  the  morning,  that  is  on  the
eighth  of  April,  in  the  year  1744.

The  body  was  emaciated,  but  not  to  any  great  degree,  and  had  no  cede-
matous  tumour  of  the  limbs.  The  belly  contain'd  a  conliderable  quantity  of
yellowifh  water :  the  omentum  was  furnifhed  with  but  little  fat,  yet  cover'd
a  great  part  of  the  inteilines,  and  was  connefted  to  the  peritoneum,  on  the
left  fide :  the  ftomach  was  contracted,  and  where  it  began  to  approach  to
the  antrum  pylori,  it  was  ftill  more  contracted,  fo  as  to  be,  in  fome  meafure,
divided  into  two  cavities,  as  it  were  ;  however,  in  the  thicknefs,  and  colour,
of  its  parietes,  if  you  examin'd  it  externally,  it  was  natural ;  but  on  the  infide,
of  a  red  colour,  as  if  from  inflammation.  In  the  ftomach  were  contained  a
part  of  the  water,  or  broth,  that  had  been  laft  taken,  and  fome  pretty  thick
portions  of  that  vifcid  matter,  which  was  wont  to  be  thrown  up  by  vomiting.
In  the  pylorus  itfelf,  and  the  duodenum,  there  was  no  morbid  appearance,
befides  the  colour  of  the  internal  furface,  which  was  fimilar  to  that  I  have
mention'd  in  the  ftomach.

The  pancreas,  which  was,  in  other  refpedts,  of  a  proper  magnitude,  was
fo  white,  in  every  part  of  it,  and  when  I  order'd  it  to  be  cut  into,  confifted
of  lobules,  fo  diftinft,  and  fo  deftitute  of  moifture,  that  if  they  had  been  a
little  harder,  for  they  were  pretty  hard,  I  ftiould  not  only  have  pronounc'd,
that  the  pancreas  was  of  a  fcirrhous  nature,  but  that  it  was,  already,  quite  con-
verted into  afcirrhus.  The  fpleen,  and  the  liver,  were  internally  found,  al-
though the  former,  on  its  whole  external  furface,  and  the  latter,  on  its  infe-
rior furface,  on  the  right  fide,  were  pale.  But  the  gall-bladder  had  all  its
parietes  fo  much thicken'd,  that  I  never  remember  to  have  feen  the  like:  for
which  reafon,  notwithftanding  it  was  full  of  bile,  inafmuch  as  it  was  in  a
perfon,  who,  for  fo  many  days  together,  had  taken  very  little  nouriftiment,  and
notwithftanding  this  bile  was  fo  black,  as  to  have  ting'd  the  interior  furface
of  the  gall-bladder  with  a  black  colour;  yet  the  external  furface  of  it  was
white.  For  the  fame  reafon  that  I  hinted  at  juft  now,  in  the  contraction  of
the  ftomach,  the  mteftines,  and  particularly  the  fmall  ones,  were  contra<5ted
alfo,  to  a  very  great  degree,  as  even  that  exceffive  evacuation,  by  ftool,
which  had  fo  lately  preceded,  required.  Out  of  all  the  inteftines,  the  apen-
dicula  vermiformis  alone,  was  a  little  more  turgid  than  ufual,  and  red  on
the  external  furface.  In  the  mefentery,  and  the  other  parts  of  the  belly,  we
obferv'd  nothing  that  was  not  natural.

But  in  the  thorax,  water  was  contain'd  on  both  fides,  and  not  in  fmall  quan-
tities, nor  a  little  bloody.  The  lungs,  in  like  manner,  though  in  other  refpeCts
found,  were  connefted  to  the  fides  of  the  thorax,  by  many  thick,  and  pretty
long  knembranous  filaments.  The  pericardium  adher'd,  very  clofely,  to  all  the
furface  of  the  heart,  to  that  of  the  right  auricle,  and  of  the  large  vefi!els  be-
longing to  the  heart.  Neverthelefs,  the  heart  had  a  proper  thicknefs  in  its
4  parietes.


Letter  XXX. Article  8.  49

parietes,  and  a  proper  capacity  in  its  ventricles.  Both  of  th^fe  cavities  wera^
likewife,  full  of  blood,  fuch  as  iflu'd,  in  great  quantity,  from  the  vena  cava,
when  cut  into,  black,  and  in  great  meafure  coagulated,  and  grumous,  but
without  even  the  leaft  polypous  concretion.  The  valves  that  are  plac'd  at
the  venous  orifices  of  the  heart,  although  they  feem*d  to  be  white,  were  not
however  indurated.  But  out  of  the  remaining  valves,  thofe  that  are  fituated
at  the  beginning  of  the  great  artery,  had  their  extreme  borders  not  only  much
thicken'd,  but  of  a  cartilaginous  hardnefs.  The  artery  itfelf  was  in  a  very
natural  ftate,  both  internally,  and  externally :  nor  did  any  other  marks  of
difeafe  appear  in  the  thorax,  befides  thofe  which  I  have  mention'd.  There
was  no  reafon  for  us  to  go  through  a  diffedion  of  the  head.

8.  As  to  the  diforders  that  were  found  in  the  pericardiimi,  and  the  heart,
how  far  they  may  relate  to  palpitation,  and  an  intermittent  pulfe,  I  have  alrea-
dy hinted  in  feveral  places  {c).  But  thofe  which  were  found  in  the  gall-blad-
der, and  the  pancreas,  feem  to  me.  to  have  a  reference  to  the  vomiting*
And  perhaps  I  fhould  think  the  fame,  alfo,  of  that  eontracTtion  of  the  ftomaehj
by  which  it  feem'd  to  be  divided  into  two  cavities,  as  it  were,  if  I  had  not
defcrib'd  the  fame  ftrufture  to  you,  in  two  other  women  (d)^  neither  of  whom
had  been  fubjedt  to  a  vomiting,  nor  yet  a  woman  of  princely  rank,  and  others
befides  (e)^  in  whom  I  remember  that  the  ftomach  had  the  fame  appear-
ances.

For  it  happen'd  to  me,  when  I  faw  this  conformation  of  the  ftomach,  to
fee  it  in  women,  as  it  did  alfo  to  Valfalva  (f)  :  from  whence  I  began  to  fufpedl
whether  thefe  appearances  might  not  be  reckon'd  among  the  other  difadvan-
tages,  that  they  create  to  themfelves,  by  comprefllng  the  upper  part  of  the
belly  with  hard  ftays,  if  I  had  not  obferv'd  that  the  fame  thing  happen'd  to
women  of  every  ftation,  and  not  only  in  women,  but  even  in  men,  as  has
been  obferved  by  Riolanus  (g),  and  by  the  very  celebrated  authors^  Hei-
fter  (h),  and  Fantonus  (i).  And  not  one  of  thofe  obfervers,  nor  yet  the  cele-
brated Petfchius  (k),  and  Amyandus  (/),  who  have  feen  it  in  women,  have
ever  mention'd  a  word  of  vomiting,  in  thefe  men,  or  women,  though  they
might  have  mention'd  it,  and  indeed  fome  of  them  ought,  in  juftice,  to  have
mention'd  it,  if  any  thing  of  this  kind  had  been  obferv'd.

And  though  you  will  find,  in  this  eighth  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  an
obfervation  of  Blafius  {m),  who  met  with  the  ftomach  double,  in  a  man  who
had  been  long  troubl'd  with  very  frequent  vomitings,  you  neverthelefs  will
fee,  that  he  did  not  afcribe  the  vomitings  to  this  double  ftate,  but  to  the
great  narrownefs  of  the  foramen,  whereby  one  ftomach  communicated  with
the  other :  which  kind  of  narrownefs  never  was  found,  in  thofe  that  I  have
obferv'd.  But  if  you  read  this  obfervation  in  Blafius  (n),  you  will  find  it  to
be  join'd  with  another  of  the  fame  kind,  in  which,  although  there  was,  not
only  a  great  narrownefs  betwixt  the  two  ftomachs,  but  "  a  very  great  and

((■)  Epift.  23.  n.  21  &  23  &  alibi.  (i)  De  obferv.  ir.ed.  &  anat.  epilL  |.

(ci)  Epift.  16.  n.  38  &  epift.  26.  n.  31.  (k)  Syllog.  anat.  obf.  §.  84.

(t)  Epift.  37.  n.  28.  (/)  Vid.  conimerc.  litter,  a.  1734.  hebd.  25*

('/J  Epift.  36.  n.  2.  isi-Hn.

(g)  Anthropogr.  1.  2.  c.  20.  {m)  N.  26.

(/.)  Diff.  fift.  obf.  med.  mifcell.  obf.  6.  (»)  P.  a.  obf.  med.  9.

Vol,  II  H  "  ex-


50  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

*'  exceflive  ftreightnefs,"  the  man  was  neverthelefs,  except  his  being  very
hunoT)'^,  "  in  very  good  health,"  and  confequently  not  fubjed  to  vo-
mitings.

Yet  if  you  would  choofe  to  fuppofe,  that  this  ftrufture  of  the  ftomach,  m
the  matron  whofe  hiftory  I  have  now  given  you,  had  alio  contributed  fome-
thincr  to  the  produftion  of  the  vomitings,  inafmuch  as  it  had,  without  doubt,
exifted  from  the  firft  formation  of  the  ftomach,  join'd  with  that  deprav'd  dif-
pofition  of  the  gall-bladder,  and  the  pancreas,  which  becoming  more  evident,
as  the  patient  encreas'd  in  years,  brought  on  an  incurable  vomiting  ;  I  fhall
HOt  violently  conteft  the  opinion  with  you.  And  there  is  not  the  leaft  doubt,
but  fo  o-reat  a  thicknefs  in  the  coats  of  the  gall-bladder,  render'd  it  lefs  obfe-
quious  to  tlie  prefiure  of  the  ftomach,  and  the  firft  inteftines,  fo  that,  proba-
bly, a  fufficient  quantity  of  bile  was  not  prefs'd  out  from  thence,  and  this
bile  was  likewife  vitiated.

And  as  the  pancreas  was  without  any  moifture,  and  inclining  to  the  na-
ture of  a  fcirrhus,  you  may  eafily  imagine,  how  much  lefs  juice  it  muft,  o£
Gourfe,  fecrete,  and  how  much  lefs  fit  that  juice  muft  be  for  the  purpofes  to
which  it  was  intended,  and  you  may,  at  the  fame  time,  gather,  how  imperfedt
an  elaboration  of  the  chyle  there  muft  have  been,  from  the  defefl:  of  both  thefe:
humours,  and  the  diforder  in  the  duodenum,  and  how  much  grofs,  and  vif-
cid,  matter  muft,  confequently,  ftagnate  there,  which  would  irritate  the-
coats  of  that  inteftine,  infuch  a  manner,  and  particularly  in  the  motions,  and
ao-itations,  of  the  body  by  day,  as  at  length,  to  ftir  them  up  to  an  inverted'
motion.  And  if  to  thefe  you  are  allow'd  to  add  that  peculiar  ftrudure  of  the
ftomach,  which  was,  perhaps,  not  quite  fo  proper  to  prepare,  and  aft  up-
on, the  aliments,  or  at  leaft  to  thruft  them  on,  with  fufficient  difpatch,  into
that  inteftine,  it  will  be  fo  much  the  more  eafy  to  conceive  the  caufes  of  this.
very  obftinate,  and  long-continu'd,  vomiting.

o.  But  to  fpeak  of  one  of  thefe  caufes  only,  for  the  fake  of  brevity,  that
is,  of  the  difeas'd  ftate  of  the  pancreas,  you  will  fee  here  in  the  Sepulchre-
turn,  befides  the  fifty-third  obfervation,  and  thofe  that  follow,  others,  alfo,
that  are  pointed  out,  and  that  not  only  above,  but  in  particular  below,  un-
der numbers  fifty-feven  (o),  and  fifty-eight  (^),  and  other  numbers  ;  and  you
will  find  that  a  vomiting  was  join'd  with  the  diforders  of  the  pancreas.  It  is
true,  I  am  not  among  the  number  of  thofe,  who  have  fuppos'd,  that  I  know
not  what  difeafes,  and  even  vomitings  of  blood,  are  to  be  accounted  for,
from  "  tlie  pancreas  alone"  (q)  :"and  I  even  confefs,  that  this  vifcus  has  been
found  to  be  difeas'd  by  me,  and  by  others,  without  a  vomiting  being  the
Gonfequence  of  it.  Yet  I  cannot  deny,  that  diforders  of  the  pancreas  have
been  feen,  by  me,  to  be  join'd  with  vomitings,  and  that  I  have  heard  from
others  of  the  fame  thing  having  been  feen,  frequently,  by  them  alfo.

But  I  fhall  have  a  more  convenient  opportunity  to  give  my  obfervations
hereafter.  At  prefent  I  fliall  take  notice  of  fome  obfervations  from  others.
And  in  the  firft  place,  I  heard  from  a  follower  of  Malpighi,  who  was,  when
livincr,  a  learned  phyfician  at  Bologna,  and  my  preceptor,  1  mean  Jacob
Sandri,  that  he  had  made  remarks  upon  many  difleftions  of  perfons  who  had

(o)  §.  5.  7.  (;fr)  §::  2.4.  (f)  Vid.  ibid.  obf.  74.  in  fin.

L  been;


Letter  XXX. Article lo, ii.  51

been  fubjefl  to  vomitings,  and  particularly  of  a  humour  refembling  tobacco
in  its  coiour ;  and  that  in  all  thele  bodies  the  pancreas  had  been  in  a  difeas'd
ftate.  And  Heraclito  Manfredi-,  he  whofe  praifes  I  have  already,  widiju-
ilice,  proclaim'd  ;  when  I  return'd  to  Bologna  from  Forli,  the  place  of  my
nativity,  where  I  had  retir'd  for  fome  months,  which  I  think  was  in  the  year
1704,  related  to  me  an  obfervation  of  his:  which  I  will  here  communicate  to
you  ;  and  that,  rather,  becaufe  it  relates  to  the  difcourfe  which  I  have  begun
upon  the  pancreas,  than  to  the  order  which  I  promis'd  to  obferve.

10,  A  robuft  man,  without  any  manifeft  preceding  caufe,  was  troubl'd
with  a  continual  endeavour  to  vomit,  yet  befides  his  medicines,  and  his
food,  none  of  which  he  could  retain,  he  vomited  but  little  at  a  time,  and
feldom,  and  what  he  did  bring  up  was  watery,  and  for  the  moft  part  bitter.
Befides  this,  he  was  troubl'd  with  a  great  thirft,  with  a  kind  of  frequent
fwoonings,  and,  in  particular,  with  a  pain,  juft  as  if  he  were  torn  to  pieces  by
dogs,  at  the  common  boundaries  of  the  thorax  and  belly :  which,  if  you  ex-
amin'd  it  with  the  hand,  had  not  the  leaft  hardnefs,  or  refiftance,  whatever.
With  thefe  fymptoms,  and  with  a  low  pulfe,  he  died  within  the  eleventh
day.

The  belly  being  open'd,  the  liver  appear'd  to  be  very  large,  but  found.
The  inteftines,  likewife,  and  the  ftomach,  were  found.  And  the  mefentery,
alfo,  though  not  without  fome  obftrudlion.  But  the  pancreas  was  larger  than
its  natural  fize,  and  univerfally  unequal,  with  roundifh  tubercles  of  a  confi-
derable  magnitude,  and  was  itielf  almoft  of  a  cartilaginous  hardnefs.  In
the  thorax  was  much  water,  and  in  the  pericardium,  a  very  large  quantity,
like  to  that  in  which  frelh  meat  has  been  wafli'd.  The  heart  was  very  fmall :
and  in  its  right  auricle  was  fomething  of  a  whitifh  polypous  concretion.

11.  The  reafon  that  tumours  of  the  pancreas,  unlefs  they  themfelves  are
perhaps  large,  and  the  patient  very  much  emaciated,  are  feldom  perceiv'd  by
the  touch  externally,  or,  at  leaft,  not  without  difficulty,  arifes  from  the  remote
fituation  of  the  vifcus,  and  from  the  interpofition  of  whatever  ,  may  lie  be-
twixt that,  and  the  hand,  and  efpecially  from  the  ftomach  being  turgid  with
flatus,  or  from  the  liver,  as  in  this  man,  being  much  enlarg'd  in  its  fize.
And  as,  in  cafe  of  this  difficulty,  Riverius  has  hinted  what  ligns  v/e  may
make  ufe  of  (r),  fo  he  has  not  omitted,  in  the  number  of  thefe,  fuch  as  are
to  be  taken  from  the  pain  of  the  neighbouring  ftomach,  and  from  other  fymp-
toms. However,  the  pancreas  may  excite  a  vomiting,  in  many  different
ways,  as  when  it  irritates  the  contiguous  ftomach,  which  is  of  a  peculiarly
exquifite  fenfe,  by  its  hardnefs,  and  roughnefs,  or,  by  an  encreas'd  magni-
tude, prevents  it  from  being  fufficlently  dilated.

For  the  difcharge  of  all  the  ingefta,  by  vomiting,  is  the  natural  confe-
quence  of  the  impeded  dilatation  of  the  ftomach,  whether  this  vifcus  be  the
caufe  of  the  obftrudtion  to  its  own  dilatation,  by  reafon  of  its  coats  being  be-
come much  thicken'd,  and  fcirrhous,  as  in  the  obfervations  of  thofe  cele-
brated authors,  Laubius  (j),  and  Haller  (/)  -,  or  whether,  for  the  thing  comes
juft  to  the  fame,  there  are  other  obftacles  oppos'd  to  the  dilatation  thereof,  as,
for  inftance, large fteatomatous  tumours,  which  Verdriefius  («) faw  lying

(/-)  Prax.  med.  1.  13.  c.  4.  (/)  Opufc.  pathol.  obf.  21.

Is)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  7.  obf.  41.  (u)  Eph.  cit.  cent.  6.  cbf.  i6.

H  2  near


52  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

near  the  flomach,  or  that  large  body,  which,  as  you  will  read  in  the  very
excellent  Heifter  (x),  was  likewife  found  in  the  fame  fituation,  in  two  wo-
men. And  that  the  vifcera  themfelves,  which  are  contiguous  to  the  ftomach,
may  alio  be  obftacles  to  its  dilatation,  if  they  are  immoderately  fwell'd  and
hard,  was  prov'd  fome  years  ago,  by  the  untimely  death  of  a  moft  learned
archiater,  who  was  my  worthy  friend,  and  whofe  incurable  vomiting  I  heard
was  owing  to  the  liver,  and  the  pancreas,  which,  by  their  bulk  and  hard-
nefs,  comprefs'd  the  ftomach,  that  lay  betwixt  them.

But  the  pancreas  •,  to  go  on  to  fpeak  of  that  in  particular,  efpecially  as  it
is  fo  eafy  to  transfer  thofe  things  that  are  faid  of  this  viicus,  to  the  liver
alfo ;  the  pancreas,  I  fay,  may  excite  vomiting,  even  when  it  fecretes  a
juice,  which,  either  by  its  acrimony,  is  troublefome  to  the  duodenum,  or  by
its  ina£livity,  or  any  other  defedl  whatever,  is  the  caufe  of  a  bad  concoftion
of  the  aliments,  and  confequently,  of  fome  grofs  parts  thereof  being  left
behind,  to  create  uneafinefTes  in  that  inteftine ;  or  finally,  when  by  the  fmall-
nefs  of  its  quantity,  it  is  unequal  to  the  other  ufes,  and  among  thefe,  ta
that  by  which  it  moderates  the  force  of  the  bile,  that  flows  in  with  it,  parti-
cularly when  the  bile  is  more  acrid  than  ufual,  and  prevents  it  from  ftimu-
lating  the  coats  of  that  inteftine,  too  ftrongly,  and  inverting  their  motion  :
on  v/hich  fubje6t  you  may,  alfo,  confuk  Frederic  Hoffmann  (y),  who  fup-
pofes,  this  to  have  been  the  very  reafon,  why  the  bile,  and  the  pancrea-
tic juice,  are  wont  to  go  to  that  inteftine,  by  one  and  the  fame  orifice,  and
why  the  dogs  of  Brunnerus,  when  the  pancreas  was  taken  away,  died  of  bi-
lious vomitings.  Therefore  when  the  human  pancreas  is  reduc'd  to  fuch  a
ftate  as  to  fecrete  no  juice  at  all,  you  fee  very  clearly  how  much  more  eafily
thofe  things  that  I  have  faid  may  be  the  confequence.  But  a  vomiting
may  be  alfo  brought  on  in  a  different  manner  by  the  pancreas,  that  is,  if  by
its  roughnefs,  hardnefs,  or  encreas'd  magnitude,  it  irritates,  or  prefTes  upon,
the  inteftine  we  have  been  fpeaking  of  (to  which  it  is  fix'd  by  its  broader
extremity)  in  the  fame  manner  as  I  have  fuppos*d  of  the  ftomach.

According  to  thefe  pofitions,  or  others  of  this  kind,  you  may,  at  your  lei-
fure,  explain  all,  or  the  greater  part  of  all,  the  hiftories-  that  relate  to  this
iubjed,  and  much  more  thofe  which  have  a  diforder  of  the  pancreas,  and  the
duodenum,  join'd  together  at  the  fame  time,  as  this  that  I  ftiall  immediately
fubjoin,  which  v/as  taken  by  that  very  experienc'd  dilTefter,  our  Mediavia,
about  the  beginning  of  Oftober,  in  th^year  1733-,  and  communicated  to
me  at  the  very  fame  time.

12.  A  monk,  who  was  noble  both  in  his  birth,  and  his  manners,  and  one
of  the  holy  family  of  the  capuchins,  as  they  are  commonly  caii'd,  was  carry'd
off  by  a  complication  of  diforders,  but  particularly  by  a  dropi'y,  and  a  vo-
miting, when  hje  was  in  the  thirty-third  year  of  his  age.

There  was  [ome  water  under  the  fkin  of  the  carcafe  univerfally  ;  for  which'
reafon  the  feet,  alfo,  were  fomewhat  oedematous.  But  the  belly  was  not  greatly
iV/eird,  nor  had  it  any  greater  quantity  of  water,  within  its  cavity,  than  about
two  pints.  The  liver  and  the  fpleen  v/ere  larger  than  rhey  natural'y  are,  and.
the  former  of  thefe  vifcera  was  whicifh  befides,  and  hard,  and  its  lobules  conr-

[x)  Epift.  de  pilis,  offib.  g.n.  (j),  Diff.  depancreat.morb.  §_.  4.

ipicuou?,.


Letter  XXX. Article 13.  ^2

fpicuoiis.  In  the  ftomach  was  nothing  worthy  of  remark,  if  you  except  a
plexus  of  two  inches  in  breadth,  and  four  inches  in  length,  made  up  of
crowded  glands,  lefs  indeed  than  a  lentil,  but  furnifh'd  with  an  evident  ori-
fice :  that  plexus  was  in  the  bottom  of  the  ftomach,  near  the  antrum  pylori.
At  the  diPcanceof  an  inch  below  the  pylorus,  the  duodenum  was  black,  and
a  little  below  that,  was  fcirrhous. The  pancreas  alfo  was  pretty  hard.

In  both  the  cavities  of  the  thorax,  was  a  confiderable  quantity  of  water.
The  lungs  were  contrafted.  The  heart  was  not  without  polypous  concreti-
ons :  and  one  of  its  valves  not  without  a  bony  portion.  But  on  the  internal
furface  of  the  great  artery,  from  the  fuperior  branches  quite  to  the  emul-
gents,  were  beginnings  of  future  offification.  This  artery,  though  in  a  body
of  a  tall  ftature,  was  fcarcely  thicker  than  a  finger  of  a  moderate  fize  :  and
the  other  fanguiferous  vefiels,  alfo,  were  narrow  in  the  fame  proportion.

13.  As  this  great  narrownefs  of  the  veffels,  and  particularly  in  a  body  of
this  kind,  had  probably  been  the  beginning  of  all  its  difeafes,  fo  I  do  not
doubt,  but  that  the  hardnefs  or  the  pancreas,  and  ftill  more  of  the  duode-
num, had  been  the  caufe  of  the  vomitings.  For  whether  that  inteftine  is-
ftreighten'd  by  compreffion,  as  was  formerly  obferv'd  by  Riolanus,  whom
you  will  fee  quoted  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  (s),  or  whether,  by  realbn  of  its
coats  being  fcirrhous,  it  is  not  able  to  conftringe  itfelf,  the  fame  efi^eft  fol-
lows, notwithftanding  the  caufes  are  fo  oppofite,  that  is  the  ingefta,  which
were  about  to  be  carry'd  out  of  the  ftomach,  as  they  are  receiv'd  into  the
inteftine  with  lefs  eafe,  or  propell'd  forwards  with  more  difficulty,  remain,,
the  greateft  part  of  them,  in  the  ftomach,  and  being  there  corrupted,  or
heavy,  by  the  very  delay  itfelf,  grow  troublefome  to  the  ftomach,  and  bring:
on  a  vomiting,  a  very  clear  example  of  which  has  been  even  produc'd  by  the
celebrated  Molinelli  (a).

The  fame  thing  muft  happen,  when  the  pylorus  is  affefted  with  diforders
of  the  fame  kind.  And  you  have,  here,  many  examples  in  the  Sepulchre-
tum, as  in  the  eleventh  and  feventeenth  obfervations,  and  the  greater  part
of  thofe  that  follow,  almoft  quite  to  the  twenty-fixth,  and  again  in  the  fifty-
fixth,  article  the  thirteenth,  and  in  the  additamenta,  obfervations  the  firft
and  eighth  -,  and  indeed  in  other  places,  as  in  book  the  firft,  feftion  the  ninth,,
and  not  only  in  the  thirty-fourth  obfervation,  but,  moreover,  if  you  attend .
to  x}ciok  fubverfions,  rn  the  thirty-third.  And  among  thefe  that  you  will  read  in-
this  eighth  feftion,  v/hen  you  come  to  the  twenty-firft  obfervation,  which  is
not  far  unlike  another  from  Johannes  Bohnius  (i*),  and  find  in  that  a  vomit-
ing of  all  the  food,  which  was  taken  in,  and  death  itfelf  at  length  brought
en,  within  ten  days,  by  the  pylorus  being  ftop'd  up,  from  a  fmall  piece  of
filver  coin,  which  the  patient  had  fwaliow'd  down  -,  it  will,  without  doubt,
make  you  call  to  mind  that  piece  of  filver  coin,  which  was  of  a  much  larger
fize,  and  which  the  experienc'd  furgeon  du  Luc  {c)  happily  diflodg'd  from
thence,  and  even  carry*d  quite  out  of  the  body,  not  only  by  the  help  of
other  remedies,  but,  particularly, by  the  weight  of  quickfilver,  urging  it

(2,)  Schol.  ad  obf..  23.  {b)  Eph.  n. c.  cent.  3.  &  4.  obf. 121.  in

(«)  Comment,  de  bonon.  fc.  acad..  t.  2.  p.  i. fchol.  /

Liter  medica  obf!  i.  {c)  Hift,  de  I'acad.  r,  des,.  fc.  ai  1740.  obf.

anat.  4.
E  down,.


54  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

down,  and  by  means  of  this  laft-mention'd  metal  amalgamating,  as  the  phrafe
is  among  chymifts,  with  the  filver,  whereby  its  fize  was  diminifh'd,  notwith-
ftanding  flight  pains,  at  the  pylorus,  had  already  begun  to  appear,  together
with  an  inclination  to  vomit.

But  not  to  digrefs  too  far  from  thefe  obftrucStions  of  the  pylorus,  which  are
■produc'd  by  difeafe,  and  not  by  accident,  befides  thofe  obfervations  which  I
have  pointed  out  in  the  Sepulchretum,  there  are  others,  and  thofe  not  few
in  number,  which  you  may  add  thereto,  as  thofe,  for  inftance,  that  are  ex-
tant in  the  volumes  of  the  C^farean  academy  (i),  in  the  A£ta  Eruditorum
Liipfienfia  (e),  in  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (f),  and  any  others  be-
fides, amongft  the  great  number  taken  notice  of  by  the  very  learned  Trille-
Eus  (g).  Out  of  all  thefe  obfervations,  you  will  find  fome  which,  at  the  fame
time,  confirm  thofe  things,  that  I  hinted  juft  now,  when  I  fpoke  of  the  pan-
creas, and  the  duodenum,  and  fome  that  even  refer  to  the  letters,  which  I  have
lately  fent  you.  Of  this  kind  are  two  even  of  the  celebrated  Fantonus  (h),
that  ought  by  no  means  to  be  pafs'd  over  her6.

Nor,  finally,  am  I  wanting  in  obfervations  of  this  kind,  although  they  are
not  fo  extraordinary  as  the  fecond  of  his  is  :  one  of  thefe  I  have  already  given
you,  in  the  preceding  letter  (i),  and  for  that  reafon  fhall  not  repeat  ii  here  :
but  another,  which  I  made  on  the  bifliop  of  Brefcia,  I  defer  till  I  give  you
thofe  that  relate  to  tumours  of  the  belly  (k):  and  a  third,  that  was  commu-
nicated to  me  by  Marianus,  whom  I  have  elfewhere  commended,  in  which
calculi,  and  callus,  fo  clofely  fhut  up  the  pylorus,  that  it  could  not  be  per-
vaded, even  by  mercury,  I  fhall  fend  to  you  when  I  have  receiv'd  the  whole
of  it.  There  is  one  obferv^tion,  which'  may  be  produc'd  here,  without  any
great  impropriety  :  it  was  taken  at  Bologna,  in  the  year  1703,  about  the  be-
ginning of  December,  and  I  purpofely  preferv'd  it  for  the  prefent  occafion,
BOtwithftanding  it  agreed,  in  part,  with  another  fubjeft  alfo,  as  you  will  per-
ceive by  the  obfcurity  of  the  pulfe,  join'd  with  the  greateft  laxity  of  the
fibres  of  the  heart.

14.  Aprieft  of  the  famous  order  of  St.  Auftin,  whofe  name  was  far  from
■being  obfcure,  among  the  number  of  facred  orators,  being  fomewhat  more
than  forty  years  of  age,  began,  after  clofe  ftudies,  journeys,  and  other  fa-
tigues, to  perceive  a  kind  of  tenfion,  at  the  right  hypochondrium,  and
this  fome  months  before  any  other  fymptom  difcover'd  itfelf.  At  length  a  fre-
quent vomiting  came  on,  four  hours  after  taking  food.  And  other  fymptoms
were  of  eourfe  added.  Finally,  in  the  lafl  months  of  his  illnefs,  the  cafe
was  as  follows.

In  the  belly  was  great  hardnefs,  and  in  the  right  hypochondrium  very
great  hardnefs  •,  but  no  pain  if  you  prefs'd  upon  thefe  parts,  whereas,  on  the
contrary,  a  fpontaneous  pain  arofe  in  the  other  hypochondrium,  and  that  very
violent  indeed,  at  the  time  the  food  was  about  to  be  digefted.  A  humour
was  fometimes  thrown  up,  which  was  ting'd  with  the  colour  of  tobacco,  as

(«')  Cent.  7.  obf.  87.  &  cent. 8.  obf.  20.  &  (g)  Diflert.  de  fame  lethali,  &c.  §.  zg.

cent.  10.  obf.  10.  &  adl.  t.  4.  obf.  107.  &  135.  {%)  De  obf.  med.  &  anat.  Epift.  2.  &  3.

&  t.  6.  obf.  151.  {,)  N.  6.

(f)  A.  171 1,  m.  fept.  exDionis  difTert.  {i)  Epill.  39.  n.  21.  &  feq.

(f)h..  1743.  Hebd.  16.  n.  2.  cumHebd.  17.
u.  2.


Letter  XXX. Article 15.  55

i£  were,  but  the  difcharg'd  fluid  was,  at  other  times,  much  more  brown,  and
black,  and  fometimes,  again,  of  a  various  colour,  and  in  the  greateft  part  of
it,  different  from  thefe :  and  fome  perfons  did  not  even  fcruple  to  fay,  that
they  had  not  only  feen  mucous  concretions,  in  this  ejefted  humour,  but  even
that  they  had  obferv'd  pieces  of  real  membranes,  as  it  were,  fwimming  there-
in. Thefe  gentlemen,  therefore,  thought  that  the  patient  ought  not  haftily
to  give  up  the  ufe  of  turpentine  refin,  as  it  was  the  only  remedy  that  the  fto-
mach  would  retain,  when  all  others  were  thrown  up.  But  pills  of  aloes,  gum
ammoniacum,  and  vitriolated  tartar,  as  it  is  call'd,  which  another  phyfician
had  proposed,  they  difapprov'd  -,  though  the  patient  himfelf,  conceiving
great  hope  from  the  effect  of  ftools,  as  moft  patients  do,  eagerly  defir'd.
them.  7'hefe  pills,  therefore,  being  taken,  very  great  vomitings  were  the
confequence  of  them,  and  from  that  time  every  thing  began  to  grow  worfe  and
worfe.  For  the  pulfe  which  had  been  before  obfcure,  was  now  extremely  fo,.
and  there  was  a  fever  like  unto  a  lipyria :  and  the  urine  was  fuch  as  it  is  in  a.
jaundice.  Within  a  few  days,  therefore,  the  feet  being  fomewhat  affefted  with
an  oedematous  fwelling,  and  the  pulfe  being  quite  gone,,  the  patient  reach'd
the  clofe  of  life,  without  any  confiderable  difficulty  of  breathing,  or  any  per-
turbation of  mind.

When  the  abdomen  was  open'd,  the  liver  was  found  to  be  exceedingly
large,  full  of  fteatomata,  and  of  a  fubftance  lying  betwixt  them,  which  re-
fembl'd  the  thymus  when  boil'd,  white,  lobular,  and  hard.  In  the  gall-
bladder, together  with  a  livid  bile,  were  nine  calculi,  of  different  forms  from,
each  other,  every  one  of  which,  at  firfb,  inclin'd  to  a  green  colour,  but,  af-
ter being  dried,  became  yellow.  The  fpleen  was  very  fmall,  fo  as  fcarcely  to-
exceed  the  fize  of  that  filver  coin,  which  we  call  a  crown.  The  pancreas
was  fo  extenuated  that  it  feem'd  at  firft  to  be  wanting.  The  ftomach  was,,,
internally,  diftinguifh'd  with  black  fpots :  in  other  places  it  was  flaccid,  but-
in  the  pylorus  it  was  callous,  fo  that  it  could  not  yield  properly,  and  be  fuf-
ficiently  dilated.

The  vifcera  of  the  thorax  were,  alfo,  flaccid  and  lax ;  fo  that  the  fiefh  o£
the  heart  could  eafily  be  drawn  into  pieces,  by  the  hand.  Befides  thefe  ap-
pearances nothing  morbid  was  obferv'd ;  fo  that  there  was  no  extravafation,
of  any  kind  of  inoifture,  either  in  the  thorax,  or  belly.

15.  Whether  the  fpleen  happen'd  to  be  very  fmall,  in  this  priefl:,  from  the
original  formation,  as  is  perhaps  the  moft  probable,  or  whether  the  courfe.
of  the  blood  being  diverted  by  the  hepatic  artery,  from  the  fplenic,  into  the
enlarg'd  liver,  caus'd  an  extenuation  of  the  fpleen,  and  of  the  pancreas,  at
the  fame  time,  or  finally,  whether  the  bulk  of  the  liver  being  encreas'd  more
and  more,  together  with  its  weight,  and  liardnefs,  brought  on  this  extenua-
tion ;  you  plainly  fee,  that  neither  the  liver  could  have  fufficient  affiftance
from  fuch  a  kind  of  fpleen,  for  the  fecretion  of  the  bile,  nor  the  duodenum-
a  fufficient  quantity  of  juice,  to  attemper  the  bile,  from  fuch  a  kind  of  pan-
creas. The  nature  of  the  bile,  therefore,  being  chang'd,,  for  this  reafon,
but  flill  more  on  account  of  the  diforders  of  the  liver,  which  even  the  colour
of  it,  and  the  calculi  that  had  form'd  themfelves  in  the  bladder,  demonfl;rat-
ed,  confequently,  the  chile,  and  the  blood,  being  chang'd,  and  the  humours
that  are  fecreted  from  it,,  not  only  rn  other,  places,  but  particularly  in  the.

ftomach,.


56  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ftomach,  the  inteftines,  and  the  pancreas,  it  is  by  no  means  difficult,  clearly
to  underilind  the  origin  of  thole  things  that  happen'd  to  this  patient,  but
efpecially  of  this  very  great  variety  of  colours,  v^hich  appear'd  in  the  matter
that  was  thrown  up.  For  it  is  not  furprizing,  if  preternatural  colours  arife
from  humours,  which  recede  much  from  the  ordinary  appearances  of  nature  ;
nor  yet,  if  from  the  various  fecretion,  mixture,  and  delay,  of  all  and  of  each
of  them,  in  confequence  of  thofe  difeafes,  and  the  ftrainings  to  vomit,  at
one  time  thefe  colours,  and  at  another  time  thofe,  more  particularly,  arife.
It  is  rather  furprizing,  if  at  any  time,  in  thofe  who  have  fliovvn  no  mark  of
deprav'd  i'ecretions  of  this  kind,  a  vomiting  be  fuddenly  brought  on,  of  any
juice  ting'd  with  fuch  a  colour,  as  you  would  by  no  means  expeft.  An  obfer-
vation  of  this  kind,  is  that  which  was  communicated  to  me  by  letter,  in  the
year  1718,  from  the  fame  perfon,  whom  I  mention'd  above  (/),  I  mean  the
very  learned  Manfredi.  This  obfervation,  however,  relates  to  vomitings  of
jQiort  continuance,  as  you  will  immediately  fee.

16.  A  man,  who  was  by  trade  a  fmith,  went  out  from  home  in  the  morn-
ing, with  a  very  flight  pain  of  his  ilomach.  Which  growing  very  violent
foon  afterwards,  the  patient  began  to  throw  up  a  humour  extremely  fimilar
to  ink,  and  before  evening  he  died.

The  ftomach  contain'd  two  pints  of  a  humour  equally  black,  inodorous,
and  grumous.  The  internal  furface  of  the  duodenum  was,  almoft  univer-
fally,  and  the  ftomach,  univerfally,  ting'd  with  the  fame  colour.  The  ex-
ternal coat  of  the  ftomach,  alfo,  on  that  part  where  it  is  turn'd  towards  the
diaphragm,  had  a  very  black  fpot,  of  four  inches  in  extent,  every  way  :  and
it  was  furprizing,  that  the  intermediate  coats  were  no  where  ting'd  with
any  other  colour  but  that  of  tobacco,  even  in  the  parts  thereof,  that  lay  un-
der this  black  fpot,  fo  that  there  they  themfelves  were  not  black,  notwith-
ftanding  they  were  intercepted,  on  both  fides,  with  a  very  black  colour.

17.  This  fpot  was  perhaps  of  a  gangrenous  nature.  And  the  only  thing
that  prevents  me  from  believing  the  internal  blacknefs  of  the  ftomach,  and
the  duodenum,  to  have  proceeded  from  the  fame  caufe,  is  that  humour,
fo  exceedingly  fimilar  to  ink,  which  was  found  in  the  ftomach,  and  in  part
had  been  throv/n  up,  and  which  was,  of  itfelf,  fufficient  to  tinge  thefe  vif-
cera,  in  that  manner.  And  if  you  imagine  this  humour  to  be  atra  bills,  you
will  be  the  lefs  furpriz'd  at  the  patient's  death,  when  you  call  to  mind  the
aphorifm  of  Hippocrates  (»?),  who  foretells  death  to  any  perfon  whatever,
v^ho,  to  make  ufe  of  the  tranflation  of  Celfus  (?;),  "  has  a  difcharge  of  atra
"  bills,  in  a  recent  difeafe,  either  by  vomiting,  or  ftool."

But  from  whence  could  this  very  great  blacknefs  arife  ?  could  it  be  from  the
bile,  which  was  of  itielf  very  black,  being  extravafated  into  that  inteftine  ?
For  you  may  fee  in  the  obfervations  of  the  celebrated  Budsus  (0),  and  Scho-
berus  (^),  that  the  gall-bladder  was  very  large,  and  turgid  with  the  fame
blackifh  matter,  which  the  patients  had  thrown  up  by  vomiting.  Was  the
bile  which  had  grown  already  blackifti,  made  fo  much  the  more  black,  by

■ (/)  N.  9.  (0)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  i.  &  z.  obf.  105.

(«)  22.  f.  4.  (/)  Earund.  cent.  3,  &  4.  in  append,  n.  12.

(n)  De  medic.  1.  2.  c.  6.  c.  i.

fome


Letter  XXX. Article  17.  [57

fome  other  humours  being  mix'd  with  it,  in  that  inteftine  ?  Or  was  fome-
thing  black  alfo,  added  to  it  by  the  blood,  which  flow'd  out  from  the  fmall
veflels,  that  were  eroded  during  the  very  violent  pain  ?  Take  care  how  yon
fuppofe  all  this  humour  to  have  been  blood.  For  a  blunder  of  this  kind
could  not  poffibly  happen,  to  fo  accurate,  and  experienc'd,  an  obferver  :  nor,
indeed,  was  the  quantity  of  the  humour  difcharg'd,  if  we  fuppofe  it  to  have
been  blood,  fufficient  to  have  deftroy'd  the  patient,  in  fo  Ihort  a  ipace  of
time.  And  even  Hoffmann  himfelf  (q),  defcribing  a  young  man  v/ho  died
with  black  vomitings,  and  ftools,  notwithftanding  it  appear'd  in  the  ftomach,
that  many  fanguiferous  vefiels  v/ere  ruptur'd,  did  not,  neverthelefs,  account
for  his  death  from  the  eflufion  of  blood,  which  does  not  deftroy  fo  fuddenly,
even  when  greater,  but  from  the  putrefa6i:ion  of  the  blood  infecting  the  brain  ;
and  in  his  patient,  death  had  not  follow'd  within  a  few,  as  in  the  prefent  cafe,
but  within  four  and  twenty  hours,  and  the  matter  which  had  been  thrown  up,
and  that  found  in  the  ftomach  after  death,  were  both  of  them,  inftead  of  be-
ing without  any  fmell,  intolerably  foetid.

Nor  was  the  matron  of  Budseus,  nor  the  merchant  of  Schoberus,  notwith-
ftanding the  latter  was  carried  off  in  much  lefs  time  than  the  former,  fnatch'd
away  by  fo  fpeedy  a  fate,  as  the  fmithof  whom  I  am  fpeaking,  and  yet  they
had  vomited  up  corrupt  and  foetid  matter,  and  in  fo  great  a  quantity,  that
only  a  little  blood  remain'd  behind  in  the  veffels.  But  of  what  nature  this
blood  was  while  they  were  living,  not  only  the  foregoing  fymptoms,  but  the
internal  gangrenes  which  were  found  atter  death,  and  other  things,  clearly
fhow'd.  Yet  in  regard  to  fuch  a  kind  of  blood,  that  either  increafcs,  mor*;
than  others,  that  black  humour,  which  the  ancients  called  atra  bills,  or  de-
generates into  it,  you  may  read  what  two  very  learn'd  Archiarers  have  writ-
ten upon  the  fubjecl,  I  mean  Schoberus  whom  I  have  already  quoted  (?),
and  the  illuilrious  Vanfwieten,  who  is  much  more  full,  and  clear,  upon  this
head  (s).

And  you  will  believe  that  Hoffmann  differs  from  them  only  about  a  namic,
when  you  have  attentively  read  the  cafe,  and  diffeflion,  of  the  young  maa
I  have  fpoken  of,  and  thofe  of  a  woman  foon  after  (/).  For  he  deducej  the
black  vomitings,  of  both  thefe  patients,  and  their  black  ftools,  from  blood
indeed,  but  from  that  which  was  putrid,  and  foetid,  and  explains  the  more
fpeedy  death  of  the  young  man,  "  in  the  fame  manner  as  he  would  that,
*'  of  thofe  who  are  affefted  with  a  fphacelus  of  the  external  parts  only  ;"
for  the  fpirits  of  the  brain,  and  of  the  nerves,  being  infefted  by  a  blood  of  this
kind,  "  they  fuddenly  lofe  their  fcrength,  and  their  life."  But  if  there  was
any  other  humour  in  this  fmith,  it  was  certainly  the  miofi:  per^iicious,  and  of
the  mofl  deftruftive  properties,  by  whatever  name  we  may  call  it,  or,  rather,
it  was  the  refult  of  fuch  a  mixture  of  humours,  as  may  be  compar'd  with  an
in-bred  poifon.  For  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  every  black  juice  to  bring
on  fuch  violent  tortures  in  the  ftomach,  or  to  fnatch  off  the  patient  by  ib
precipitate  a  death  :  and  this  you  will  alfo  learn,  from  the  preceding  feventh
fettion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  when  you  read,  that  after  a  pain  of  the  ftomach,

(j)  Medic,  rat.  t.  4.  p.  2.  f. i.  c.  3,  Qbf..2. (j)  Comm.  in  Boerh.  aph.  §.  I05i,&  feq.pafSm.
(;-)  Append,  cit.  c.  2.  §,  5.  &  6.  {t)  C.  3.  cit,  obf.  3.

Voi.  IL  1  this


58  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.,

this  cavity  was  found  to  be  "  hali^full  of  a  black  juice  {ti)"  or  that  in  the
fundus  of  it  was  "  a  matter  like  ink  (x),"  and  other  things  of  the  fame
kind.

1 8.  Mention  being  made  of  bloody  vom.itings,  and  poifon,  you  will  per-
haps afic  me,  why  I  produce  no  examples  of  real  blood  being  difcharg'd
by  vomiting,  nor  any  inftances  of  that  which  is  the  confequence  of  moft
poifons,  that  are  drunk,  or  fwallow'd  •,  eipecialiy  as  in  this  eighth  fedion  of
the  Sepulchretum,  fo  many  of  each  kind  are  produc'd  ?  But  to  what  time  I
defer  conlidering  the  effefts  of  poifon,  I  have  declar'd  near  the  latter  end  of
my  laft  letter  (y).  And  the  obfervations  of  bloody  vomitings,  except  that
which  is  given  in  the  fame  letter  (zj,  remain  to  be  given  in  other  epiftles,
and  on  more  proper  occafions.  And  there,  perhaps,  I  fhall  not  fcruple,  to
declare,  what  we  ought  to  think  of  the  greater  part  of  thofe  obfervations,.
which,  in  this  feftion,  deduce  the  blood,  thrown  up  by  vomiting,  from  the
fpleen.  For  thofe  which  account  for  it,  as  coming  from  the  lungs  (a),  are
given  with  fuch  a  confcffion,  at  leaft,  as  gives  you  to  underftand,  that  they
are  not  fuit3,ble  to  this  fection :  which  confefTion,  however,  is  wanting  in
that  place,  v/here  a  vomiting  of  pus  is  deriv'd  from  a  large  vomica  of  the
lungs  {b).  There  is,  on  the  contrary,  where  what  was  a  true  vomiting,  as
fimilar  ttools,  about  the  fame  time,  demonftrated,  I  mean  of  blood,  mix'd
"  with  pieces  of  flefh,"  or  in  other  v^ords,  with  polypous  concretions,  is  ac-
counted for,  as  coming,  by  divine  permiffion,  "  from  the  heart,  through
"  the  lungs,  and  the  afpera  arteria  (<:)'"  and  for  what  reafon  ?  why  be-
caufe  the  heart  was  found  to  be  "  fill'd  with  the  fame  kind  of  matter,"  as
was  thrown  up  by  vomiting.

Nor  do  I  imagine  you  will  expeft  from  me,  in  this  letter,  thofe  obferva-
tions, which,  notwithftanding  they  have  a  vomiting  attending  upon  them,
properly  belong,  either  to  the  iliac  paffion,  and  thofe  hernias  that  are  call'd
incarcerated,  or  to  wounds  of  other  parts,  and  in  particular,  of  the  fto-
mach  itfelf,  or  to  other  diforders  of  lome  of  the  vifcera,  with  which  the
ftotrsach  confents.  For  I  do  not  doubt  but  you  clearly  underftand,  to  what
occafions  all  the  obfervations  of  this  kind  ought  to  be  defer'd  :  and  indeed
you  will  obferve,  that  moft  of  the  obfervations  of  this  kind,  are  produc'd  in.
I'uch  a  manner,  in  this  feftion,  that  we  are  exprefty  refer'd  to  other  fe£lions,
■where  they  are  copied- more  at  large.  But  befides  a  pretty  great  number
of  thefe,  others  may  alio  be  added,  that  are  let  down  twice  over  in  this
feftion  r  and  this  you  will  perceive,  by  comparing  the  twenty-ninth  obferva-
tion,  v/ith  article  the  fifth  of  the  fifty-ninth,  the  thirty-eighth,  with  the  forty-
third,  article  the  firft,  and  the  fifty-feventh,  article  the  ninth,  with  the  fixth
of  thofe  you  read  in  the  additamenta,  and  perhaps  others ;  and  you  may
fuppofe  the  fame  thing  to  have  been  faid  of  the  fchoha,  in  v/hich  obferva-
tions are  repeated,  as  thofe  that  are  fubjoin'^d  to  the  firft,  and  the  third,  will
fhow,  if  compar'd  with  the  fcholia  added  to  the  thirteenth,  and,  in  like  man-
ner, to  the  fifth  ;  and  perhaps  the  fame  may  be  remark'd  of  others.


(») Obf.  23.  (a) Obf.  75. §. I.  &  2.

tx)  Obf.  26.  §■.  I.  (^)  Obf.  65.

(_>■)  N.  21.  (f)  In  additam.  obf.  10.
{%)  N.  12.


1.5.  When:


Letter  XXX. Article  19,  20.  59

19.  When  I  read  over  that  firfl;  obfervation,  which  I  juft  now  mention'd,
and  thofe  things  which  are  upon  the  fubjeft  of  throwing  up  polypous  for-
Inations  by  vomiting,  and  on  the  fubject  of  vomiting,  in  confequence  of  dif-
eafes  of  the  parts  that  confent  with  the  ftomach ;  fome  things  were  brought
back  to  my  mind  which,  if  I  add  them  here,  you  will  perhaps  not  read
with  reluftance.  "Willis  then,  in  this  obfervation,  affirms  that  "  if  a  con-
*'  ftant  fufFufion  of  bile  happen,  in  the  parts  that  are  near  to,  or  in  contaft
"  with  the  ftomach,"  a  frequent  "  vomiting  is  excited,"  becaufe  the  external
coat  of  this  vifcus  is,  for  that  reafon,  frequently,  and  greatly,  irritated,  and
that  "  he  had  obferv'd  this  in  many  who  were  diflefted  after  death."  And
I  not  only  believe  that  this  may  have  been  feen  by  that  very  excellent  man,
but  even  confefs,  that  there  may  be  fometimes  fuch  an  acrimony  of  the
bile,  and  fuch  a  power  of  irritating,  and  penetrating,  as  to  make  it  the  ac-
cidental caufe  of  vomitings,  efpecially  in  thofe  perfons,  who  are  endow'd
with  a  very  exquifite  fenfe  ;  and  if  the  tincture  of  the  bile  extends  itfelf  very
far,  and  reaches  to  the  interior  parts  of  the  ftomach :  which  Platerus,  as
you  have  it  in  the  preceding  feventh  feftion,  of  the  Sepulchretum  (J),  has
particularly  obferv'd  in  thole  "  who,  when  living,  were  troubled  with  coa-
"  tinual  heats  of  the  ftomach."

Yet  there  is  more  than  one  reafon  which  has  fome  influence  in  preventing
my  aflent.  For  in  the  firft  place,  I  doubt,  whether  the  particles  of  the  bile
that  tinge  the  parts  which  lie  round  the  gall-bladder,  efcape  from  thence
while  the  perfon  is  living,  or  only  after  death,  where  the  refiftance  of  the
coats  is  leflen'd,  and  the  interftices  which  lie  betwixt  fibre  and  fibre,  are  re-
lax'd.  And  in  the  next  place,  I  have  fo  frequently  feen  the  neighbourino-
parts  of  the  gall-bladder  have  a  yellow  hue  in  dead  bodies,  as  I  have  like-
wife  faid  in  the  preceding  letter  (i?),  that  it  does  not  feem  to  be  the  caufe  of
any  peculiar  injuries  to  fome  perfons,  but  the  caufe  of  thofe  which  are  co.m-
mon  to  moft  perfons  while  living.  Finally,  unlefs  it  be  certain  ;  and  it  is  by
no  means  certain  ;  that  when  thefe  gentlemen  have  afcrib'd  fuch  a  tinfture
in  that  place,  there  was  nothing  elfe  in  the  bodies,  to  which  either  the  fcnfe
of  heat,  or  the  vomitings,  might  be  imputed  ;  there  is  a  very  great  propriety
in  doubting,  whether  thefe  effefts  are  to  be  afcrib'd  to  that  caufe.  An  in-
ftance  of  this  kind,  which  confirms  the  propriety  of  doubting,  I  will  give
you  in  a  little  whelp  that  1  diffeded,  when  I  was  a  young  man  at  Bologna.
For  it  is  much  to  our  prefent  purpofe,  and  I  fee  that  obfervations  taken  from
dogs,  are  not  only  produc'd  in  other  parts  of  the  Sepulchretum,  and  that
frequently,  but  particularly  in  this  very  feftion  (f).

20.  A  young  whelp  died  fuddenly  after  great  vomitings.  The  antrum
pylori,  where  it  was  contiguous  to  the  gall-bladder,  I  found  to  be  tino-'d
with  a  yellow  colour,  which  had  reach'd  from  the  outer  coats,  quite  to  the
inner ;  it  ftop'd,  however,  at  the  internal  coat,  fo  that  the  matter  which  was
contain'd  in  the  ftomach,  reiembl'd  even  the  white  of  an  ego-,  in  its  colour.
While  I  was  enquiring  whether  there  was  any  thing  elfe  which  delerv'd
remark,  I  faw  that  a  part  of  the  centrum  tendineum  of  the  diaphrao-m,  was
iikewife  yellow,  which  being  very  thin,  and  particularly,  in  that  tender  acre,

{J)  Obf.  16.  (.)  N.  13. •  CfJ  Obf.  68.

I  2  had


6o  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

had  tranfmitted  this  yellownefs  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  in  fiich  a  man-
ntr  that  fome  fma!)  contiguous  part  of  it  was  yellow,  though  but  (lightly.

All  the  parts  being  now  infpefted,  and  found  to  be  quite  found,  it  came
into  my  mind  to  lay  open  the  inteftines,  by  cutting  into  them  longitudinally^
In  their  cavities  was  a  great  quantity  of  mucus,  and  in  that  mucus,  near  to
the  more  extreme  part  of  the  fmall  inteftines,  were  ten  round  worms,  all
of  them  nearly  of  equal  thicknefs,  and  of  equal  length  alfo ;  and  this  length
was  about  feven  inches.

2  1.  Would  you  rather  choofe  then,  to  attribute  thofe  irritations,  which,
by  vellicating,  and  convulfing  the  fibres,  had  brought  on  fuch  violent  vo-
mitings, and,  at  length,  fudden  death,  to.  this  yellow  tin£lure,  although  it
had  not  only  infefted  the  ftomach,  but  a  tendon  of  that  nature  alfo,  or  to  fo
great  a  number  of  worms  of  fuch  a- kind,  whether  they  had  crept  into  the
ftomach,  or  had  continu'd  vi'here-  they  were  ?■  You  will  hefitate  at  leaft,  and
will  not  affirm  the  firft  pofition  for  a  certainty.

Bat  you  would  hefitate  ftill  more,  to  go  on  to  the  fecond,  if  you  fhould
chance  to  believe,  what  is  related  in  the  additamenta,  to  this  feftion  (g),  of
the  fervant-maid  of  Altcmburg,  who  dillharg'd  lizards,  toads,  and  frogs,
and  fometim.es  even  thofe  that  were  not  dead  neither,  but  fuch  as  liv'd,  by
the  fpecial  licence  of  heaven,  "  to  the  fixth  day,"  from  the  mouth,  and
anus,  and  even,  as  fhe  herfelf  faid,  from  thegenital  parts  1  It  happens  very
luckily,  that  the  learned  gentlemen  who  have  firft  written  fuch  abfurdities,  do
not  fay  that  they  were  prefent,  when  thefe  living  beafts  were  difcharg'd  ;  left
we  fhould  be  under  a  neceffity  of  concluding,  contrary  to  our  candid  inclin-
ations, that  their  eyes  v/ere  deceiv'd,  and  play'd  tricks  with,  by  a  fet  of  jug-
gling vv'omen.  For  I  fl:ioV)ld  fuppole  that,  in  fa6t,  there  was  nothing  real  in
the  things  of  this  kind,  which  the  woman  did  difcharge,  but  a  fort  of  ex-
ternal, and  accidental,  likenefs  to  thofe  animals  :  and  that  the  body,  and
confiftence,  of  them,  had  been  made  up  of  polypous  concretions,  ting'd  with
the  green  colour  of  the  bile.

It  happen'd  many  years  ago,  that  a  virgin  who  was,  herfelf,  very  virtuous,
and  honeft,  and  born  of  honeft  parents,  began,  at  the  latter  end  of  lent,  to
complain  of  a  kind  of  troublefome  fenfe  of  torture,  and  weight,  v/ith  which
the  ftomach  was  affected,  and  particularly  at  the  time  when  digeftion  was
going  on.  After  this  came  on  a  pallid  complexion,  and  an  evident  wafting
of  body.  At  length,  about  the  end  of  two  months,  from  the  beginning  of
her  complaints,  Cie  was  fciz'd,  a  little  bef^ore  the  m.iddle  of  the  day,  with  three
very  violent  (trainings  to  vomit,  join-'d  with  the  greateft  lofs  of  ftrength,  and
.a  fainting  ;  in  tne  firft  of  which  ftrainings,  ilie  brought  up  nothing  at  all,  in
the  leco-nd  not  a  great  quantity  of  a  very  bitter,  and  yellowidi  humour,  and
in  the  third,  at  which  time  the  phyfician,  who  gave  me  this  account,  by  let-
ter, was  preient,  fne  threw  up  a  fubftance,  which  I  fhall  defcribe  to  you,
exadly  in  the  fame  manner,  that  it  was  dcfcrib'd  to  me,  by  this  phyfician.

It  was  a  fmall  plant,  or  rather  a  little  herb,  about  an  inch  long,  furnifti'^d
with  radicles,  a  ftalk,  and  three  leaves  at  top,  one  of  which  was  denticulat-
edj  the  others  perfedlly  refembling  a  femicircle,  and  all  of  them  being  green.

C?)  Obf.  5.

The


Letter  XXX. Article  22.  61

The  ftaikv  on  its  upper  parr,  was  white,  and,  on  its  lower  part,  green,  ex-
cept that  it  was  diftinguiPn'd  with  foTC  very  fmall,  and  bloody  ftris.  Af--
ter  three  or  four  hours,  the  herb  being  now  dry,  had  contraflied  itlelf,  yet
ftill  retain'd  its  colour.  Being  accurately  examined  by  many  peribns,  and
amons  theie  by  fome^  who  were  fkillM  in  botany,  before  it  was  wafted  away
by  frequent  handling,  and  become  almoft  friable  ;  there  was  not  one,  among
them  -all,  who  could  fay  of  what  genus  it  was.  The  virgin,  however,  after
the  dilcharge  of  this  fubftance,  felt  not  the  lead  uneafmefs  in  her  ftomachi
and  indeed  evidently  recover'd  her  colour,  and  her  flefli,  when  this  account  was
fent  to  me,  by  letter,  which  was  not  many  days  after.  It  was  cnquir'd  oi  me
what  I  thought  of  fo  fbrange,  and  unhear'd  of,  a  kind  of  vomiting.  There
was  not  anv  reafon  for  me  to  imagine  the  fame  thing  to  have  happen'd,  in
this  cafe,  that  happen'd  in  the  obfervations  of  fome  perfons,  as  for  inftance,
of  Lentilius  (h),  who  fays  that  he  had  leen  "  lettices  thrown  up  by  vomit-
*'  ing,  with  the  flowers  of  the  Indian  crefs,  borrage,  and  rofes,  little,  or
*'  not  at  all,  chang'd  in  their  colour,  which  a  woman  of  the  hrft  rank,  had
*'  eaten  fourteen  days  before."

For  to  take  no  notice  of  other  things,  this  virgin  could  not  endure  tO'
eat  herbs,  fallads,  or  fucculent  plants  of  any  kind.  One  or  the  other,  therr,
of  theie  things  rem.ain'd  certain,  that  fhe  had  either  thrown  up  an  excrefcence
in  the  form  of  a  herb,  or  a  polypus,  from  her  ftomach.  And  the  preceding
diiagreeable  fymptoms,  the  vaft  ftrainings  to  vomit,  the  bloody  ftris,  ob-
ferv'd  on  the  body  that  was  thrown  up,  and  the  whitenefs  of  its  colour-,  for
whatever  there  was  of  greenefs,  that  might  have  been  brought  on  by  the
bile  being  mix'd  with  acid  juices  •,  all  thefe  things,  I  fay,  feem'd  to  confirm
one  or  the  other  of  theie  conjeftures :  but  which  it  would  be  the  beft  to  fol-
low, I  thought  would  be  beft  determin'd  by  the  enfuing  circumftances  of
the  cafe,  that  is  by  there  being  new  uneafinefies  of  the  ftomach,  or  none  at
ail,  or  what  not.  And  this  is  a  fummary  of  the  anfwer,  which  I  immediate-
ly return'd  to  the  phyfician,  who  confuked  me  thereon :  nor  did  I  afterwards
hear  any  thing  farther  of  this  virgin.

22.  What  I  fliall  add,  in  thc"iaft  place,  of  vomitings  that  relate  to  the
difeafes  of  thofe  parts,  with  which  the  ftomach  confents,  will  perhaps  be
more  ufeful  to  you.  For  that  which  prevents  me  from  putting  oiT  the  con-
fideration  of  thefe  vomitings,  till  we  come  to  the  diforders  of  thofe  parts,  as
r  have  done  in  regard  to  other  vomitings,  is  that  I  have  no  diffedion  to  give
you  under  this  head.  There  was  a  collegue  of  mine,  a  very  confiderable
man,  the  grandfon  of  a  celebrated  writer,  and  himfelf  alfo  worthy  of  great
praife  :  who,  when  he  was  lixty  years  of  age, ,  bfegan  to  be  atack'd  with  fre-
quent and  very  troublefome  vomitings,  though  they  fometimes  were  quite  at
reft  for  a  day.  What  he  threw  up  had  nothing  particular  in  it.  He  was
attended,  out  of  regard  to  the  dignity  of  the  patient,  by  three  phyficians,
who  were  thought  to  be  the  moft  fkilful,  at  that  time,  and  without  doubt  were
fo,  or  at  leaft  they  were  the  oldeft.  As  they  did  not  doubt  but  the  caule  of  !:he
diforder  was  in  the  ftomach,  they  applied  fuch  things  as  they  thought  proper
to  remove  it,  and  thefe  in  great  number,  and  variety,  and  for  a  long  time  to-

{h)  Vid.  appead.  ad  a.  i.  dec.  3.  eph.  n..  c.  inparall,  ad  obf.  92.

g€ther>:


62  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

gether  ;  but  every  thing  was  in  vain  -,  till  at  length  the  patient  becoming  more
emaciated,  and  tir'd  out  with  the  flavery  of  taking  medicines,  determin'd,
with  himfelf,  to  have  done  with  them  all,  and  retire  into  the  country;
whence  having  return'd  again  into  the  city,  not  long  after,  he  was  feiz'd  in
the  evening,  with  a  great  coldnefs  over. his  whole  body,  without  any  manifeft
caufe,  and  on  that  very  night  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity  of  blood,  with
his  urine.  Soon  after  a  great  quantity  of  pus  foUow'd  the  blood,  through
the  fame  pafTages.  Wherefore  bloody,  and  purulent,  urines- fucceeding  each
other  alternately,  his  ftrength  was  foon  puU'd  down,  and  within  a  very  few
days  he  clos'd  the  period  of  life.

From  this  event  of  the  difeafe,  it  is  natural,  and  eafy,  to  perceive,  that
the  caufe  of  the  vomiting  was  not  in  the  ftomach,  but  in  thofe  parts  that
ferve  for  the  fecretion  of  the  urine,  and  particularly  in  the  kidnies,  inafmuch
as  they  are  wont,  fo  eafily,  to  draw  the  ftomach  into  confent,  and  excite  it
to  vomitings.  And,  at  the  fame  time,  it  is  underftood,  what  was  indicat-
ed, not  by  the  ftupors  of  the  legs  indeed,  but  by  the  pains,  however,  of
which  the  patient  had  been  accuftom'd  to  complain  very  much  even  from
the  very  beginning  of  the  difeafe ;  what  was  indicated  by  the  unufual  ftimu-
lus  to  make  water,  fo  that  he  could  fcarcely  retain  his  urine,  till  he  got  the
chamber-pot  into  his  hand,  and  frequently,  indeed,  not  at  all,  but  efpecially
in  the  night ;  and,  finally,  you  will  perceive  what  conclufion  might  have  been
drawn,  from  a  kind  of  hardnefs  about  the  right  epicolic  region,  as  Glifibii
(/)  call'd  it,  without  doubt,  thefe  fymptoms  taken  all  together,  notwithftand-
ing  the  patient  did  not  generally  complain  of  his  loins,  might  have  given
fome  hint  to  the  phyficians,  particularly  in  conjunftion  with  the  inutility  of
every  method  of  cure,  which  had  been  applied  to  the  ftomach,  that  the
caufe  of  vomiting  was  inherent  elfewhere,  than  in  the  ftomach  ;  and  that  in
the  kidnies,  and  particularly  in  the  right,  that  fome  colleilion  of  morbific
matter  was  probably  made.

To  this  fufpicion  fome  weight  might  have  been  added,  from^  this  enquiry,
that  I  would  always  have  you  remember  to  make,  in  cafes  where  the  caufes
of  a  difeaie  are  obfcure,  and  uncertain,  and  obftinately  refift  a  cure,  I  mean
to  what  diforder  the  anceftors  of  the  patient  had  been  liable.  For  by  this
interrogation,  it  would  have  been  difcover'd,  in  the  prefent  cafe,  that  dif-
orders  of  the  kidnies  had  been  very  common  in  this  illuftrious  family.  And
thofe  things  which  naturally  occur'd  to  my  mind,  upon  hearing  the  cafe  of
my  collcgue,  and  from  knowing  the  preceding  fymptoms,  you  will  fuppofe
are  written,  not  to  accufe  any  one,  efpecially  the  dead,  which  is  not  the  lead
part  of  my  intention,  but  only  to  affift  your  ftudies. Farewell.


(z)  Traft.  de  partib.  continent,  c  2.  n.  10.


LETTER


Letter  XXXI. Article  i,  6'?


LETTER the THIRTY-FIRST,

Treats  of  Fluxes  of  the  Bellj^,  with  or  without  Blood.


i.?T~^H0SEfubje(5]:s  that,  in  theSepulchretumanatomlcum,  are  diftribut-
X  ed  into  four  feftions,  "  tlie  cholera  morbus,  fluxes  of  the  belly  without
"  blood,  dyfentery,  and  preternatural  excretions  of  the  belly,"  all  thefe,  I
fay,  I  choofe  rather,  fnould  be  comprehended  in  this  one  letter.  And  the
reafons  of  this  refolution  are  thefe.  In  the  firft  place,  the  cholera  "  may
"  feem  to  be  a  diforder  common  to  the  ftomach,  and  inteftines,"  as  Celfu's
rightly  fays  (a) ;  for  there  is  a  difcharge  by  ftool,  and  a  vomiting  at  the  fame
"  time."  And  as  I  have  treated  of  the  diforders  of  the  ftomach,  and  am
about  to  treat  of  the  diforders  of  the  inteftines,  it  is  impoffible  but  I  muft
have  already  lit  upon  this  diforder,  which  is  common  to  both,  or  muft  light
en  it  hereafter ;  fo  that  there  is  not  the  leaft  occafion  to  treat  feparately  of  it
here,  and  flightly  in  particular^  for  Bonetus  himfelf,  who  wrote  the  ninth
feftion  upon  this  fubjeft,  fcarcely  fill'd  up  three  pages,  and  the  greater  part
of  them  is  taken  up  by  the  fcholia,  that  are  plac'd  between.

You  know,  befides,  that  it  is  my  determination  to  repeat  nothino-.  But
he  taking  quite  a  different  method,  was  fo  far  from  hefitating,  whether  to
make  ufe  of  the  fame  obfervations,  here  alfo,  which  he  has  made  ufe  of  elfe-
■where,  that  even  in  this  very  fhort  feflion,  he  has  given  one  of  them,  and
has  not  only  interfpers'd  the  twelfth  fedion,  with  a  great  number,  as  well
as  the  two  remaining  fedtions,  but  has  even  almoft  wholly  made  it  up  of,
them.

To  this  yos  may  add,  that  parts  of  the  fcholia  are  not  only  repeated  in
different  feClions,  as  that  which  is  given  in  the  tenth  (i/),  from  de  Graaf,  is.
repeated  in  the  twelfth  (c),  but  even  in  one,  and  the  fame  fe6tion ;  as  for
inftance,  when,  in  the  tenth  feftion,  what  is  taken  from  Willis,  and  what  is
taken  from  Ballonius,  and  fubjoin'd  to  the  feventh  obfervation,  are  both,
equally  repeated,  the  former  in  the  appendix  that  follows  the  twenty-eighth,
obfervation  (d),  and  the  latter  immediately  below  this  very  obfervation.  Be-
fides, not  to  quit  the  tenth  feftion,  there  are  fo  many  things  added  upon
the  transfufion  of  blood,  &  cbiriirgia  infufcria,  as  it  is  call'd,  under  the  fixth.
obfervation,  rhat  they  exceed  the  whole  ninth  feflion.

(a)  De  medic.  L  4.  c.  II..  (<:)  Ad  obf.  15.

(b)  Ad  obf.  25.  {d)  §.  2,.

Finallj'^,.


64  .  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Finally,  thofc  bloody  ftools  which  are  the  immediate  confequences  of  a
wound,  inflifted  on  the  ftomach,  or  the  liver,  certainly  do  not  belong  to
the  clafs  of  dyienteries,  which  is  the  title  prefix'd  to  the  eleventh  fection.
Yet  I  fee  that  two  oblervations,  of  this  kind,  are  produc'd,  here,  under  num-
ber twenty-five.  As  I  do  not  permit  myfelf,  therefore,  to  take  pattern
from  any  of  thefe  improprieties,  there  cannot  be  fo  great  a  quantity  of  mat-
ter, but  it  may  be  very  v/ell  comprehended  in  a  fingle  letter.  Dividing
fluxes  of  the  belly  then,  into  thofe  that  are  without  blood,  and  thofe  that  are
bloody,  I  will  immediately  produce  two  obfervations  upon  the  firll  fubjedt,
from  the  papers  of  Valfalva.

■2.  A  young  man,  who,  through  the  whole  courfe  of  his  life,  even  when
he  was  in  the  higheft  health,  had  frequent  occafions  of  going  to  ftool,  having
reach'd  his  twentieth  year,  was  feiz'd  v^^ith  griping  tortures  of  the  bowels,
attended  with  frequent  bloody  ftools,  that  is  with  a  dyfentery.  After  twelve,
or  fifteen  days,  this  was  chang'd  into  a  fimple  diarrhoea,  with  ftools  of  a
yellow  colour,  but  without  gripings :  and  this  feeming  to  be  fomewhat  mi-
tigated, by  the  help  of  remedies ;  a  fimple  tertian  fever  came  on,  wiiiqh  was
put  a  ftop  to  within  a  month.  The  diarrhoea  ftill  continuing,  he  was  at-
tack'd  of  a  fudden,  with  an  acute  fever,  which  had  manifeft  acceflions.
His  pulfe  was  frequent,  quick,  foft,  fmall  and  weak.  To  thefe  fymptoms
was  added  a  ftupor  of  the  fenfes,  a  confiderable  deafnefs,  and  a  peculiar
kind  of  fwelling  of  the  anterior  part  of  the  thorax,  on  the  left  fide.  In  this
manner,  he  died  about  the  fourteenth  day,  from  the  beginning  of  the  acute
diforder,  at  which  time  of  the  difeafe,  what  kind  of  ftools  the  patient  had,
the  attendants  did  not  obferve.

The  belly,  although  it  feem'd  to  be  not  at  all  fwell'd,  contain'd,  neverthe-
lefs,  a  great  quantity  of  fanious  ichor,  which  iffu'd  out  of  the  inteftines,  in
many  places,  where  they  were  perforated  to  fome  confiderable  extent.  This
traft  comprehended  the  extremity  of  the  ileum,  and  the  neareft  part  of  the
colon  befides,  to  the  extent  of  two  hands  breadth.  In  that  part  the  intef-
tines were  eroded,  and  ulcerated,  and  on  their  internal  furface  even  affefted.
with  a  gangrene,  fo  that  you  fee  they  might  be  eafily  perforated.  Near  to
this  tract  fome  of  the  glands  of  the  mefentery  had  grown  out  into  a  tumour,
v/herein  was  ichor,  not  unlike  that  which  had  burft  forth  into  the  cavity  of
the  abdomen  ;  but  the  very  fubflance  of  this  tumour  was  foft,  and  flaccid,
and  feem'd  to  incline  to  corruption.  The  fpleen  was  three  times  as  large  as
it  naturally  is.

The  fkin,  and  mufcles,  of  the  thorax,  v/here  the  fwelling  was,  difcharg'd
a  great  quantity  of  ferum,  when  they  were  cut  into,  efpeciaily  at  the  upper
fide  of  the  fternum  :  for  from  thence,  that  is  from  the  borders  of  the  pec-
toral, and  fubclavian  muicles,  ferum  gufh'd  out,  as  if  from  feveral  little  ri-
vulets. The  lungs,  however,  w-ere  found.  Within  the  pericardium  was  a  fe-
rum, like  water  in  which  frefh  meat  has  been  wafh'd.  If  you  touch'd  the
heart,  you  found  it  to  be  fo  lax,  and  foft,  that  it  feem'd  to  be  not  mufcuJar,
but  membraneous.  In  the  ventricles  thereof  was  a  fluid  blood,  and  this
was  fo  frothy  that  it  refembl'd  the  lixivium  made  ufe  of  by  barbers,  when
agitated.  And  all  the  veins  contain'd  fo  great  a  quantity  of  air,  that  al-
though they  contain'd but  little blood, they  were  neverthelefs  extremely

5  turgid,_


Letter  XXXI. Article  3,  4.  65

Wrgid,  and  in  particular  one  branch  of  them  that  belongs  to  the  fpleen  •,  for
this  branch,  though  it  did  not  feem  poflible  that  it  fhould  be  more  dilated,
had  fcarcely  any  remains  of  blood  in  it.  Within  the  cranium  was  found  a
little  ferum  :  but  the  brain  itfelf  no  where  fhew'd  any  marks  of  injury.

3.  The  great  force  of  putrefaftion  (to  begin  from  the  latter  part  of  the
hiftory,  and  to  return  to  the  former  part  immediately  after)  in  this  body,
appear'd  from  the  great  quantity  of  air  that  had  been  difcharg'd,  the  greac
laxity  of  the  heart  agreed  very  well  with  thofe  fmall,  and  weak  pulfations.
I  have  frequently  obferv'd  the  fpleen  to  be  enlarg'd,  after  other  fevers,  efpe-
cially  when  they  had  appear'd  in  different  forms.

But  to  omit  other  things,  and  come  to  thofe,  on  account  of  which,  in  par-
ticular, I  related  this  obfervation  to  you,  at  prefent;  you  fee,  in  the  firft
place,  how  much  it,  at  length,  coft  this  young  man,  to  have  his  belly  per-
petually lax,  that  is,  not  moderately  moift  •,  for  we  are  not  ignorant  of  the
aphorifm  of  Hippocrates  (e) ;  but  more  moift  and  lax  than  it  naturally  is,  and
from  an  improper  mode  of  living  eafily  made  ftill  more  fo.  On  the  lax  inte-
ftines,  therefore,  an  attack  was  made  by  vitiated  and  redundant  humours,  fo
that  they  were  not  able  to  bear  up  under  it.  They  were  firft  troubled  with
a  dyfentery.  This  left,  according  to  the  appearance  of  the  cafe,  the  begin-
nings of  ulcerations,  which  were  the  lefs  attended  to,  becaufe  the  inteftines
being  then  already  more  relax'd,  were  not  fo  extremely  fenfible  to  pain,  as
they  would  otherwife  have  been,  and  becaufe  the  Tanious  ichor  was  hidden  by
the  yellow  flux,  which  had  fucceeded  to  the  dyfentery.

The  flux  had  fucceeded,  in  confequence  of  a  part  of  the  deprav'd  matter,
being  carry'd  back,  from  the  inteftines  into  the  blood,  after  having  been  vi-
tiated, in  the  inteftines,  ftill  more.  And  this  being  brought  back  again
into  the  inteftines,  together  with  the  bile,  and  the  other  juices,  whofe  recep-
tacles, and  containing  parts,  were  irritated  by  the  mixture  of  this  humour,
the  flux  was  not  only  kept  up,  but  the  erofions  were  alfo  encreas^d ;  fo  that,
at  laft,  where  thefe  erofions  were  made,  the  inteftines  were  not  only  feiz'd
with  a  gangrene,  but  corroded,  quite  through  their  fubftance,  by  the  molt
ill-condition'd  ichor.  And  that  this  deprav'd  matter  was  carry'd  back  in-
to  the  blood,  as  I  faid  juft  now,  is  not  fo  much  prov'd  by  the  fevers  that
follow'd  it,  as  by  the  tumour  of  the  myfentery,  which  lay  as  near  as  poflible
to  the  ulcerated  traft  of  the  inteftines.  For  thefe  ill-condition'd  ichors  being
•continually  taken  up,  from  that  traft,  and  carry'd  to  the  neighbouring  glands,
t)y  the  chyliferous  du61s,  at  length  deprav'd  their  internal  ftrufture,  fo  that-
the  pafl"age  of  thefe  humours  being  now  obftrufted,  they  evidently  ftag"-
4iated  in  thofe  glands,  and  rais'd  them  up  into  a  tumour.

4.  And  from  hence  another  caufe  was  added,  which  encreas'd  the  flux,  I
■mean  the  deprav'd  ichor  ftagnating  in  the  inteftinal  canal,  which,  before,
liad  been  carry'd  off,  by  the  paflages  that  were  now  obftruftcd.  This  kind
of  obftruflion,  when  it  takes  place  in  moft  of  thefe  paflages,  not  only  en-
creafes  fluxes  of  the  belly,  but  is  even  the  caufe  of  them,  and,  in  particular,
of  that  which  they  call  the  xajliac  flux :  with  which  take  care  not  to  con-
found the  caliacus  morbus  that  is  defcrib'd  by  Celfus(/j. For  in  this  "  there

W  53-  f-  2-  <f)  L.  4.  c  12.

yoL^  IL  K  •'  is


66  Book  III. Of  Diieafes  of  the  Belly.

"  is  no  motion  to  ftool,"  but  in  that,  of  which  I  fpeak,  even  the  chyle  it-
felf  is  difcharg'd,  mix'd,  beyond  doubt,  with  recrementitious  matter,  fo
that  the  ftools'are  render'd  almoft  of  a  cineritious  colour,  and  not  white,  as
they  imagine,  who  do  not  attend  to  this  circumftance,  that  the  chyle  is  not
to  be  found  feparate  from  the  other  ufelefs  parts  of  the  aliments,  except
within  its  own  proper  veffels.  Nor  have  they,  who  aflert  that  they  had  feea
white  ftools,  meant  any  thing  more  than  flools  of  a  whitifh  colour,  I  mean
if  they  are  compar'd  with  the  natural  excrements,  or  if  they  did  really  mean
white,  the  whitenefs  was  that  of  a  purulent  matter,  or  of  a  mucus  fimilar  to-
pus,  or  fomething  elfe  of  that  kind ;  as,  for  inftance,  if  any  one,  troubled  more
with  a  lienteric,  than  a  czeliac  diforder,  fhould  difcharge  by  ftool  the  milk.
that  he  had  taken  in,  unchang'd.

For  in  the  lienteric  flux,  the  aliments  are  not  concofted,  and  prepar'd,  aS'
in  the  czeliac,  whether  the  juices,  by  which  they  ought  to  be  prepar'd,  are-
unfit  for  performing  that  office,  or  the  ftomach,  by  too  precipitate  a  motion,
throw  them  out  almoft  as  foon  as  they  are  taken  in,  or  whether  the  ftomach
itfelf  being  lax,  and  there  being  a  total  refolution,  or,  at  leaft,  but  little
conftriftion  of  the  pylorus,  fufiers  the  aliments  to  flip  out  without  digeftion ;
although  there  was  nothing  lienteric  in  that  old  man,  the  orifice  of  whofe
pylorus  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you,  on  a  former  occafion  (g),  notwithftanding
it  was  not  only,  of  itfelf,  much  larger  than  it  ufually  is,  but  what  is  ftill
more  remarkable,  furnifti'd  with  no  protuberating  ring,  in  the  greater  part
of  its  circumference.  Nor  was  there  even  any  thing  of  a  cseliac  affedtion  ;
neverthelefs  there  are  many  learned  men,  who  fuppofe  that  the  pylorus  ia
"  too  much  dilated,"  in  this  diforder,  I,  however,  do  not  fuppofe  any  pe-
culiar caufe  to  be  latent  in  the  ftomach;  but,  fometimes,  rather  in  the  tube
of  the  inteftines,  whether,  by  an  accelerated  motion,  the  ingefta  are  prema-
turely difturb'd,  and  carry'd  off,  before  the  chyle  can  be  properly  extradted
from  them,  or  by  rcafon  of  the  motion  being  languid  and  flow,  that  which
has  been  extrafted,  is  impelled  no  farther-,  fo  that  ftagnating  in  the  fmalt
roots,  as  it  were,  of  its  proper  vefTels,  a  farther  abforption  of  chyle  is  pre-
vented, juft  as  it  is  prevented  from  going  on^  by  an  obftruflion  of  the  me-
fenteric  glands,  as  I  hinted  a  little  above  :  not  to  add  any  thing  upon  the
fubjeft  of  cicatriz'd  ulcerations  clofing  up  the  mouths  of  the  ladteal  veflels ;.:
of  which  circumftance  you  will  find  examples  in  the  Sepulchretum  (h),  as
you  will  likewiie  of  the  obftrudion  of  thofe  glands,  in  bodies  that,  when-
living, had  labour'd  under  the  paffio  caeliaca.

Obfervations  of  the  lienteric  flux,  or  of  one  that  was  nearly  of  the  lame
nature,  you  will  have  to  add  to  the  others,  from  the  volumes  of  the  Casfarean-
academy  (i),  not  indeed  without  obftrudions,  of  thefe,  and  of  other  glands^
but,  at  the  fame  time,  with  the  coats  of  the  ftomach  being  depriv'd  ofall'their
ftrength,  and  at  other  times  with  the  parietes  of  the  ftomach,  and  of  almoft.
all  the  inteftines,  being  reduc'd  to  the  thinnefs  of  paper.

But  let  us  return  from  this  digreflion,  into  which  I  fell  accidentally,,  and.
which  neverthelefs  it  may  not  have  been  altogether  ufelefe  to  have  touch'd
upon  here,  to  the  obfervations  of  Valfalva.

(g)  Epift.  21.  n.  15.  (/)  Aifl.  n.  c.  torn.  2,  obf.  65.  &  cant.  6..

{h)  Sedl.  hac.  10.  Obf.  2.  &  4.  ac  5.  obf.  94.

5.  An


Letter  XXXL Article  5,  6.  6y

5.  An  infant,  feventeen  months  c4d,  was  feiz'd  with  a  diarrhcea.  To  this  a
fever  was  added,  with  a  cough,  and  a  kind  of  itching  of  the  gums,  and  the
noftrils,  which  the  child  fignify'd  by  a  frequent  friftion,  with  his  fingers,  up-
on thofe  parts.  In  the  mean  while  the  diarrhoea  increased,  and  although  the
ftools  had,  before,  been  yellow,  or  green,  they  now  firll  began  to  be  ting'd
with  a  bloody  hue,  and,  at  length,  to  be  chang'd  into  a  black  colour,  and
be  attended  with  a  fingultus,  which  was  about  the  feventh  day.  On  the
beginning  of  the  ninth  day,  either  fpontaneouHy,  or  by  the  force  of  an  aftrin-
gent  kind  of  remedy  being  apply'd  to  the  feet,  by  the  advice  of  an  old  wo-
man, they  were  entirely  put  a  flop  to.  However,  feven  or  eight  hours  had
fcarcely  pafs'd,  after  this  obftrudion,  but  being  opprefs'd  with  ftreightnefles
of  the  prscordia,  and  agitated  with  continual  anxiety,  and  toffing  of  the
whole  body,  he  died  on  the  lame  day.

The  inteftines  being  turgid  with  air,  contain'd  a  fmall  quantity  of  very
black  matter,  fuch  as  had  been  before  difcharg'd.  In  the  mefentery  were
many  facculi  adipofi,  and  notwithftanding  more  than  twenty-four  hours  had
nqy/  pafs'd,  fince  the  time  of  the  child's  death,  they,  neverthelefs,  contain'd
"s^ery  fmall  particles  of  fat,  which  were  agitated  by  a  tumultuary  motion,  one
with  another.  The  lungs,  on  the  back  part,  were  fomewhat  black,  and  par-
ticularly the  right:  they  were  found  neverthelefs.  In  the  pericardium  was  a
little  water :  but  in  the  heart  was  not  the  leaft  appearance  of  any  polypous
concretion. In  the  brain  was  found  a  little  ferum.

6.  A  diarrhoea,  join'd  with  a  cough,  and  an  itching  of  the  noflrils,  might
liave  given  a  fufpicion  of  worms  in  this  little  boy  :  none  of  which  however
■were  found.  But  the  itching  of  the  gums  really  fhev/'d  that  teeth  were  about
to  cut  through  them.  For  fo  he  who  faw  the  cafe  judg'd,  that  is  Valfalva,
when  he  mark'd  out  this  obfervation,  in  his  little  index,  in  the  following
manner.  "  'A  diarrhoea  with  difficult  dentition,  and  convulfive  motions.'*
-And  how  eafily  dentition  may  excite  convulfions,  you  yourfelf  are  not  igno-
rant, and  I  have,  on  a  former  occafion,  confirm'd  {k),  by  giving  you  two
fatal  cafes  of  infants,  at  the  fame  time  pointing  out  where  I  fhall  demon-
ftrate,  by  what  means  it  alfo  brings  on  a  flux  of  the  inteftines,  and  by  what
means  this,  if  it  be  moderate,  prevents  convulfions  coming  on.  And  from
-Jience  you  perceive,  how  very  dangerous  it  muft  be,  for  an  intellinal  flux  to
be  fuddenly  and  totally  ftop'd,  at  this  time,  in  particular,  as  a  fudden  and
total  ftoppage  thereof,  at  other  times,  is  never  without  confiderable  danger.
But  if  the  matter  that  has  been  difcharg'd  by  ftool  is,  moreover,  of  the  moft
pernicious  properties,  this  matter  being  confin'd  within  the  body,  may  not
only  bring  on  death,  but  a  very  fpeedy,  and  a  very  violent  one.  And  that
the  matter,  in  this  cafe,  was  of  a  malignant  and  deftruftive  nature,  is  not
only  Ihown  by  the  colour  of  the  ftools,  and  the  fingultus,  but  by  that  very
ftrange,  and  unufual,  motion  in  the  particles  of  the  fat,  whatever  it  was  (for
fo  ftrange  it  is,  that  I  ftiould  credit  few  beildes  Valfalva,  in  this  matter)  is
more  than  fufficiently  demonftrated.

But  to  fpeak  only  of  the  colour ;  do  not  imagine,  becaufe  that  very  black
colour,  of  the  difcharg'd  matter,  fucceeded  to  the  bloody  tincture,  that  the

;;(/{)  Epift.  9.  n.  4.  &Ep!ft.  10.  n.  g.

K  2  ftools


68  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ftools  were  nothing  but  blood.  For  Valfalva  was  not  a  man  of  this  krnd»
that  he  could  not  eafily  diftinguifli  blood,  when  difcharg'd,  or  remaining  be-
hind, in  the  inteftines,  after  death,  if  it  had  really  been  blood.  Wherefore,
either  that  tin6lure,  which  was  fuppos'd,  by  tiie  women,  to  be  owing  to
blood,  was  fome  portion  of  very  ill-condition'd  humour,  then  firft  beginning
to  burft  forth,  and  to  tinge  the  matter,  that  was  before  contain'd  in  the  in-
teftines, or  if  it  was  really  bloody,  it  diftill'd  from  fome  fmall  vefTels,  which
the  more  acrid  part  of  this  deprav'd  humour  had  eroded.  And  this  recent
humour  being  encreas'd,  by  the  addition  of  other  juices,  either  in  the  gall-
bladder, or  in  the  cavity  of  the  inteftines,  the  nature  of  which  you  may,  in
fome  meafure,  guefs  at,  by  the  experiment  of  de  Graaf,  which  is  alfo  copied
in  the  Sepulch return  f/),  gave  that  very  black  colour  to  the  whole  mixture,
and  reprefented  the  atra  bills  of  the  ancients,  by  its  pernicious  effcds.  How
violent,  and  how  fpeedy,  a  death  it  alfo  brought  on,  in  that  fmith,  of  whom
i  wrote  in  the  laft  letter  (w),  you  certainly  remember.  Neverthelefs  it
fometimes  happens,  though  but  feldom,  and  with  difficulty,  that  a  perfon  in
thefe  circumftances  is  fav'd.  And  as  I  happen'd  to  meet  with  this,  in  an-
other fmith,  in  the  year  1710-,  1  will  not  make  any  fcruple  to  give  you  the
heads  of  that  obfervation,  in  this  place.

7.  A  young  man  of  a  {lender  habit,  but  ftrong,  both  in  regard  to  confti*
tution,  and  years,  nor  lefs  aduft  by  means  of  his  art,  than  by  his  tempera-
ture, being  fubjedt  to  haemorrhages  of  the  noftrils,  and  having  been  long
■without  them,  v/as  feiz'd,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fpring,  with  a  fever  of  a
malignant  kind.  Some  perfons  of  the  lirft  rank,  in  the  place  of  my  nativity,
■who  were  fond  of  this  man,  as  a  very  ingenious  artift,  beg'd  of  me,  that  t
■would  enter  into  confultation  with  his  phyfician,  who,  though  an  elderly
man,  had  no  objection  to  this  ftep.  The  reafon  of  this  defire  was,  that  the
eafe  was  reduc'd  to  a  great  extremity.  For  to  the  other  fymptouis  had  been
added,  on  that  day,  fo  great  a  difcharge  of  blood  from  the  noftrils,  that,  as
within  five  hours,  it  had  been  difcharg'd  to  the  quantity  of  leven  pounds,  nor
could  as  yet  be  ftop'd,  by  any  means  whatever -,  the  man's  ftrengch  and  pulfe
were  almoft  ready  to  fail.

We  both  of  us,  in  conjunction,  did  all  in  our  power  to  reftrain  this  hse-
morrhage,  and  to  obviate  the  other  fymptoms.  But  fcarcely  had  the  blood
begun  to  be  ftop'd,  when  what  we  were  afraid  of  came  on,  that  is  the  fever,
being  exacerbated,  according  to  cuftom,  about  noon,  renewed  the  hasmor-
rhage.  Being  again  bufy'd  in  giving  affiftance  to  the  patient,  behold  black
ftools  began  to  be  difcharg'd.  And  although  it  was  natural  to  fuppofe,  that
thefe  were  part  of  the  blood,  that  had  flow'd  down  by  the  pofterior  foramina
of  the  noftrils,  into  the  fauces,  and  ftomach,  the  patient  aiTur'd  us  that  he
did  not  perceive  any  thing  to  trickle  down,  from  the  fauces,  into  the  gula :  and
this  was  confirm'd  by  the  appearance  of  what  had,,  in  the  mean  while,  been
brought  up  by  vomiting,  in  which  there  was  nothing  bloody  or  black.  And
having  after  that  inlpefted  all  the  cloths,  upon  which  the  difcharges  from  the
inteftines  were  received, and  feeing  a  black  colour  indeed, but  nothing

{!)  Ad.  obf.  15.  feft.  12.  (m.;  N.  16.

5  bloody


Letter  XXXI. Article  7.  69-

bloody  amongft  them  ;  it  not  only  brought  tomy  mind  the  well-known  pre-
didlions  of  Hippocrates,  but  alfo  the  cale  of  that  young  man,  mention'd  by
Ballonius  («),  who  being  affefted  in  a  manner  very  fimilar  to  that  of  our  patient,
and  having  diicharg'd  black  ftools,  after  too  great  a  hsemorrhage  from  the
noftrils,  died  on  the  feventh  day  of  his  fever.

And  there  was  here  fo  much  the  greater  reafon  to  fear,  becaufe,  as  Bal-
lonius, neverthelefs,  fufpefted  that  the  blood  had  flow'd  down,  from  the  fau-
ces, into  the  ftomach,  we  were,  as  I  faid  before,  but  little  at  liberty  to  fuf-
pefl:  the  fame,  and  indeed  lefs  and  lefs  fo,  the  more  we  confider'd  all
things.

For  as  the  ancient  phylTcians,  in  the  opinion  of  whom  is  Sennertus(o),
divide  black  ftools  into  thofe  which  are  bloody,  and  thofe  that  are  owing  to
a  natural  melancholic  humour,  and,  finally,  into  thofe  which  are  from  atra.
bills,  and  teach  us,  that  the  twofirft  kinds  are  attended  with  lefs  danger,  but
that  the  laft  kind  is  extremely  dangerous,  that  is  to  fay,  thofe  that  "  are
*'  black,  fhining  and  acrid  -,"  thefe  which  we  favv  were,  certainly,  very  black,
and  fhining,  and,  as  the  patient  complain'd,  acrid  alfo.  On  the  following
night  he  had  the  fame  kind  of  ftools,  except  that  they  were  fomewhat
lefs  fluid.  Yet  after  that  he  had  no  more  of  the  fame  kind  :  but  the  milk
which  was  thrown  up,  by  way  of  glyfter,  he  difcharg'd  at  firft  tindlur'd  with
the  colour  of  tobacco,  and  on  the  following  days  of  a  brown  colour,  mix'd
with  a  flight  yellow :  yet  whatever  was  difcharg'd,  had  the  moft  ofFenfive
fmell.  Notvvithftanding  this  deplorable  ftate  of  thbgs,  however,  the  pa-
tient, by  the  blefllng  of  God,  efcap'd,  and  his  former  health  was  entirely  re-
flor'd  ;  but  he  was  not  free  from  his  black  ftools.  before  the  twenty-fourth
day,  and  they  had  begun  about  the  fixth  day  of  the  fever  ;  nor  was  he,  af-
ter that,  without  many  various,  and  grievous  iymptoms,  which  for  a  long  time
afflided  him.

Amongft  thefe,  were  pains  of  the  belly,  thirft,  a  roughnefs,  and  blacknefs
of  the  tongue,  and  though  he  drank  often,  a  drynefs;  and  while  he  drank,
there  was  a  found,  as  if  he  threw  what  he  drank  down  into  a  deep  place,  his
voice  was  hoarfe,  and  low,  he  had  a  trembling  of  his  hands,  a  fubfultus  of
the  tendons  in  his  wrifts,  an  inconftancy  of  the  pulfe,  and  often  a  fmallnefs,
and,  if  you  prefs'd  upon  it,  a  great  weaknefs,  and  fometimes  a  very  con-
fiderable,  and  almoft  inexplicable,  inequality,  but  always  a  frequency,  and
cfpecially  when  the  fever  was  very  hot,  and  violent,  which  was  very  often  the
cafe  J  the  refpiration  was  various,  fo  that  it  was  fometimes  deep,  ,a.nd  even,
fometimes,  not  without  difficulty  •,  his  fleep  was,  at  firft,  laborious,  and  af-
ter that  there  was  an  excefilve,  and  almoft  continual,  drowfinefs,  he  even  flept
with  his  eyelids  brought  near  together,  and  yet  with  his  eyes  not  quite  fliut,
he  was  fometimes  not  quite  free  from  delirium,  had  a  fljjwnefs  in  anfwering,.,
a  difficulty  in  forming  his  v?ords,  and  a  forgetfulnefs  of  giving  notice,  when
he  had  occafion  to  go  to  ftool,  or  to  make  water,  befides  being  heavy  of
hearing,  and  lying  on  his  back,  as  if  the  power  of  turning  himfelf,  on  his
fide,  was,  at  that  time,  taken  away,  whereas,  at  other  times,  there  was,  for

(»)  L.  1.  Confd.  98*^  (0)  Med.  praft.  1.  3.  p.  2.  f.  2.  c.  io.

die-


ja  Book  III. Of  Difeafcs  of  the  Belly,

the  mofl  part,  a  greater  power  of  exertion  in  the  mufcles,  and  a  greater  rea-
dinefs  to  take  nourifhment,  than  that  heavineis,  and  the  other  fymptoms,
I  have  mention'd,  feem'd  capable  of  permitting.

As  many  of  thefe  fmyptoms,  and  the  woril  of  them,  in  particular,  fhow'd
themfelves  more  than  once,  and  for  a  long  time  together,  they  caus'd  us  to
be,  for  a  long  time,  more  in  fear,  than  in  hope,  as  to|  the  event  of  the  dif-
ocafe,  while  every  other  perfon  whatever,  who  faw  the  patient,  pronounc'd
him  quite  defperate.  But  nothing  feem'd  to  us,  to  be  of  fo  much  advantage,
as  the  great  quantity^f  urine,  that  was  difcharg'd  ;  for  the  fweats  were  but
little,  and  not  frequent,  nor  did  they  ever  appear  over  the  whole  body,  and
•what  the  inteftines  difcharg'd,  was  generally  but  fmall  in  quantity,  and  not  of
fuch  a  nature  as  to  be  likely  to  give  relief,  notwithftanding  a  worm  was,  fome-
jtimes,  obferv'd  in  the  ftools.

8.  But  black  ftooI<!,  of  that  kind,  are  pernicious,  not  fo  much  on  account
of  their  quantity  frequently,  as  in  their  eftefts,  and  are  always  the  proofs  of
a  very  ill-condition'd  humour,  which  gives  rife  to  them.

Yet  other  inteftinal  difcharges,  that  are  equally  free  from  blood,  as  the
•yellow,  the  green,  the  watry,  and  others  of  this  kind,  are,  fometimes,  not
deftrudlive  by  the  pain  they  create  only;  but  by  their  quantity  alio.  And  all
thefe  exci  nions  generally  owe  their  origin  to  fome  ftimulus,  that  irritates
the  inteftines,  by  what  means,  or  from  what  part,  foever,  it  got  down  into
them  :  for  as  we  fee  that  a  great  quantity  of  humours  is  difcharg'd,  by  means
of  medicines  violently  purgative,  fo  we  may  fuppofe  that  from  fome  ftimu-'
lating  fluid,  which  is  generated  within  this  canal,  or  fent  down  thither,  from
the  arteries,  the  fame  thing  muft  of  courfe  happen.

For  befides  the  pancreas,  the  liver,  and  the  gall-bladder,  there  are,  by
reafon  of  the  very  large  extent  of  furface,  in  the  inteftines,  innumerable  paf-
fages,  though  very  fmall  indeed,  through  which  any  thing  unufual  may  be
feparated  from  the  blood.  And  thefe  fame  innumerable  paflages,  when  the
inteftines  are  frequently,  and  for  a  long  time  together,  ftimulated,  convey
an  incredible  quantity  of  ferum.  Nor  are  we  to  fuppofe,  with  the  common
people,  that  whatever  is  difcharg'd  of  a  yellow,  or  green  colour,  is  all  of  it
bile,  efpecially  fince  from  the  experiment  of  Diemerbroeck,  which  you  have
alfo  in  the  Sepulchretum  (p),  it  is  eafily  perceiv'd,  with  how  fmall  a  quantity
of  bile,  a  great  quantity  of  water  may  be  ting'd.  Nor  is  there  any  neceflity
for  afcribing  the  griping  pains,  with  which  the  patient  is  then  affefted,  to  the
quantity  of  bile,  which  is  mi^'d  with  the  ftools,  fince  Willis  has  defcrib'd
.diarrhoeas  "  almoft  watry,  and  limpid  {q)"  which  he  neverthelefs  chofe,  on
account  of  the  •'  griping  tortures,"  that  attended  them,  to  call  dyfenteries.
And  thofe  which  attack'd  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  London,  who  were,  the
day  before,  ftrong,  and  in  good  health,  particularly  in  the  autumn  of  the  year
1670,  reduc'd  their  ftrength  to  fo  great  .a  degree,  within  thefpace  of  twelve
hours,  that  they  feem'd  juft'ready  to  die,  and  that  not  from  the  great  quan-
tity which  had  been  difcharg'd  i  for  he  fays,  "  that  if  an  equal  quantity  of

//)  In.  fin.,  fchol.  adobf.  3.  §.  i.  fed.  9.  {j)  Pharmac.  Ration,  f.  j,  c.  3.

*'  putc

6


Letter  XXXI. Article  9.  71

«  pure  blood  had  been difcharg'd, it could not have produc'd  equal
"  weaknefs."

But  on  the  contrary,  even  the  vaft  quantity  of  ferum  alone,  that  was  dif-
charg'd, not  only  brought  on  an  immediate  fwooning,  in  the  woman  of
whom  Marcellus  Donatus  gives  the  hiftory(r),  but  alfo  brought  down  al-
moft  to  the  brink  of  death,  the  notary  of  whom  Poterius fpeaks  (s);  for  nei-
ther of  thefe  authors  mention  any  thing  of  pains ;  but  the  former  fays,  "  that
*'  by  one  excretion,  fo  great  a  quantity  of  clear  water  was  difcharg'd,  as  to
"  fill  a  veffel  of  a  very  large  fize,  that  was  made  ufeof  to  receive  it,"  and  the
latter,  "  that  through  the  whole  of  one  day,  more  than  forty  pints  of  ferous
"  matter  was  difcharg'd."  Yet  I  would  not  deny,  that  there  might  be_  fome
irritating  matter  in  thefe  difcharges,  join'd  with  a  redundancy  of  ferum  in  the
blood,  and  perhaps  with  fome  laxity  of  the  intellines.  I  only  fay  this,  that
it  does  not  feem  as  if  the  pains  had  been  fo  fevere,  as  to  make  them  deferve
notice,  and  that  after  fo  great  a  quantity  of  ferum  having  been  excreted,  no-
thing elfe  was  wanting  to  explain  what  happen'd  to  both  of  them.

For  the  blood  veflfels  cannot  contraft  themfelves  fo  foon,  as  to  embrace,
clofely,  the  column  of  blood  that  is  greatly  diminifh'd,  though  this  is  ex-
tremely neceffary,  in  order  to  put  the  blood  into  a  proper  motion,  efpeci-
ally  when  it  is  in  great  meafure  depriv'd  of  its  fluidity,  and,  of  confequence,
gives  more  refiftance  to  the  force  of  the  veflels  upon  it,  not  to  fay  ahy  thing
of  the  neceflity  there  is  of  the  fame  fluid  humour,  in  order  that  thofe  fe-
€retions,  from  the  blood,  may  be  fpeedily,  and  properly  made,  without
which  life  cannot  fubfilt,  nor  will  I  enquire,  whether  for  thefe  reafons,  where
the  queftion  is  of  a  very  great,  and  fudden,  effufion  from  the  vefl*els,  it  is  of
worfe  confequences  for  ferum  only,  or  for  blood,  itfelf,  to  have  been  dif-
charg'd, at  the  fame  time  -,  for  notwitwftanding  ferum  may  be  more  fpeedily
and  eafily  repair'd,  yet  the  blood  which  does  not  remain  in  the  veflels,  with-
out its  neceflJary  portion  of  ferum,  is  neither  unfit  for  the  fecretions,  nor
gives  more  refiftance  than  before,  to  the  caufes  which  put  it  into  motion.

9.  And  I  could  wifii  it  had  happen'd  to  me,  rather  to  bandy  about  this
queftion  in  difputation,  than  to  experience  any  thing  of  the  kind  myfelf,  in
any  fliape.  But  in  the  year  1733,  when  in  confequence  of  a  letter  from  hi&.
eminence  the  cardinal  Annibal  Albano,  to  which  it  became  me  to  be  obfe-
quious,  I  travel'd  to  and  from  Forli  to  Pefaro,  and  from  Pefaro  to  Forli,  on;
poft-horfes,  for  the  fake  of  confulting  with  a  certain  phyfician,  I  was  attack*^,
with  fo  great  a  flux  of  the  inteftines,  that  within  twelve  hours,  I  difcharg'd,
at  leaft,  fixteen  pints  of  almoft  limpid  water.  The  pains  were  flight:  tha
ftools  not  very  frequent,  but  very  large:  and  I  know  not  how  long  they  might
have  continued,  if  a  flight  naufea  had  not  put  me  in  mind  to  try  the  efte<5ts
of  vomiting,  by  drinking  a  little  quantity  of  warm  broth.  And  although^,
naturally,  I  am  by  no  means  inclin'd  to  vomit,  yet  it  fucceeded  fo  happily,
that  having  thrown  up  a  greenifli  little  body,  which  feera'd  to  be  a  fmall  leaf
of  a  boil'd  herb,  the  naufea,  and  the  inteftinal  flux,  were  cur'd  at  the  fame
time.  But  whether  it  was  a  real  leaf,  and  if  it  was,  where,  or  when,  I  had
eaten  it,  I  could  not  find  out,  unlefs  this  might  have  happen'd  on  my  jour-

(r)  De  med.  hsft.  mir»  L4.  c.  20.  j  (j)  Obferv.  cent.  2»jc62.


72  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

ney,  while  I  was  taking  fome  refrefliment,  in  an  inn,  haftily,  and  ]ufl:  while
the  horfes  were  chang'd  ;  for  in  this  manner  I  might  have  fwallovv'd  it  down,
whatever  it  was,  unnotic'd.

How  much  danger  I  had  then  been  in,  I  better  underftood,  when,  on  the
day  following,  I  perceiv'd  that  my  body,  and  particularly  my  face,  and
.hands,  were  grown  thin,  and  lank,  as  if  it  had  been  from  a  very  long,  and
acute  difeafe,  and  felt  fo  great  a -drynefs  in  the  mouth,  and  fauces,  that
although  I  wafh*d  them  over  and  over  again,  I  found  no  advantage  from
fhence,  and  I  faw  that  the  water,  which  I  had  us'd  for  that  purpofe,  when
I  threw  it  out  of  my  mouth  into  a  bafon,  was  made  almofl:  black  in  the
mouth.  And  thefe  fymptoms,  together  with  a  laffitude,  lafted  two  or  three
days,  and  were,  by  degrees,  diminifh'd.  But  the  lofs  of  appetite  for  food
of  all  kinds,  and  what  you  will  be  more  furpriz'd  at,  in  fuch  a  drynefs,  even
a  lofs  of  appetite  for  drink,  lafted  fomewhat  longer,  till  a  broil'd  fifti,  and
a  particular  kind  of  wine,  which,  in  its  own  nature,  is  bitterifh,  began  to
be  defir'd  by  the  ftomach,  and  be  well  born  by  it.  All  which  circumftances
I  was  willing  to  recolledt  minutely,  and  write  to  you,  as  they  were  not  re-
ceiv'd  from  any  other  hand,  or  obfervM  in  any  other  perfon,  but  taken  by  my-
felf,  and  from  myfelf  j  and  thefe  fuch  as  are  not  eafily  to  be  met  with,  among
thofe  who  have  written  upon  diarrhoeas,  not  even  Carolus  Pifo  excepted,  who
b  faid  (/)  "  to  have  given  a  perfeft  defcription  of  this  diarrhoea,"  that  is  of
the  watery  diarrhoea.  For  if  you  read  over  the  whole  chapter,  which  is  at  the
fame  time  quoted,  and  is  entitled  De  Diarrhoea  ferofa  («),  you  will  not  find  a
<:are  to  compare  with  mine.

lo.  And  if  you  enquire  into  the  caufcs  of  this  diforder,  you  fee  that  the  pri-
mary  caufe  had  been  in  the  ftomach :  and  I  think  you  cannot  doubt,  but
motion,  and  irritation,  from  which  an  excretion  of  ferum  is  brought  on,
may  be  propagated  to  the  inteftines,  from  a  ftimulus  affefting  the  ftomach.
Turn,  in  particular,  to^  the  obfervations  of  Jo.  Riolanus,  I  mean  the  elder,
which  you  alfo  have  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  {x) :  you  v/ill  fee  that  a  matron
died,  within  about  fourteen  hours,  of  inteftinal  difcharges,  "  fimilar  to  white
"  water,  milky  indeed,  but  hquid,  and  in  fuch  a  quantity,  as  to  fill  a  large
"  bafon,  every  time  {he  went  to  ftool,"  and  that  the  caufe  of  this  was  found
to  be  "  an  ulceration  in  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach."

But  whence  came  fo  great  a  quantity  of  water  ?  In  regard  to  my  own  cafe,
I  will  firft  fay,  that  in  the  preceding  fummer,  I  had  made  ufe  of  it,  to  tem-
per thofe  generous  wines,  with  which  only,  my  native  place,  at  that  time,
abounds,  and  had  drunk  water,  in  greater  quantity  than  ufual,  fome  part  of
which,  notwithftanding  when  I  was  feiz'd  with  that  flux,  I  feem'd  to  myfelf,
and  toothers,  to  be  in  very  good  health,  might  perhaps  have  remain'd  mix'd
with  my  humours  in  rather  a  greater  quantity  than  was  neceflary.  And  on
the  three  days,  which  had  preceded  the  two  days,  whereon  I  travel'd,  and
on  the  very  day  in  which  I  was  feiz'd  with  that  flux,  there  had  been  very
great,  and  almoft  continual  Ihowers  of  rain,  fo  that  I  might  have  drunk  in  a

(/)  Vid.  commerc.  litter,  a.  1734.  hebd.  42,  (k)  Obferv.  de  pratervif,  haften.  morbis  ab
poll.  num.  iii.  aqua  ortis  feet.  4.  c.  i.

(x)  Sea.  10.  obf.  18.

great


Letter  XXXI. Article ii.  73

great  quantity  of  water,  from  the  moift  air,  by  the  abforbing  furface  of  the
lungs,  and  the  whole  body  in  general.

In  the  laft  place,  this  happen'd  to  me  in  the  beginning  of  06lober ;  for
you  have  feen,  that  the  watery  fluxes  defcrib'd  by  Willis  (jy),  and  you  may
fee  that  the  flux,  which  I  refer'd  to,  as  defcrib'd  by  Poterius  (z),  happen'd
in  the  autumn,  and  near  to  the  fame  time  of  the  year,  that,  lifewife,  which  is
fpoken  of  by  Marcellus  Donatus  (a)^  as  did  alfo  the  three  firft,  which  are
taken  notice  of  by  Pifo  {h).  For  when  the  air  begins  to  grow  cool,  at  the  de-
cline of  the  Seafon,  this  watery  humour,  which  flow'd  copioufly  from  the
body,  during  the  time  of  the  fummer  heats,  and  not  by  means  of  fweat  only,
but  by  means  of  infenfible  perfpiration  alfo,  is  now  retain'd,  and  added  to
that,  with  which,  for  certain  caufes,  the  bodies  of  certain  men  do,  at  that
time,  more  abound;  io  that  it  is  not  to  be  wonder'd  at,  if  where  an  irritation
of  the  inteftines  comes  on,  as  it  did  come  on  in  me,  with  a  great  agitation,
and  concuffion,  of  the  body,  and  humours  befides,  from  travelling  very  faft
to  and  fro  on  horfeback,  and  that  for  a  long  way  too,  it  is  not,  I  fay,  to  be
wonder'd  at,  if  that  does  fometimes  happen, which  happen'd  to  me  then.

II.  But  if  you  are  not  content  with  the  many  caufes  which  I  have  hinted
at,  and  think  that  fome  other  ought  ilill  to  be  enquir'd  into ;  that  will  be  bet-
ter, than  if  you  were  to  acquiefce  in  one  of  them,  I  mean  the  autumnal  feafon.
For  the  fame  time,  the  fame  year,  the  fame  city,  that  is  the  city  of  London,
had  inteftinal  fluxes  fpreading  through  it  epidemically,  without  blood  in-
deed, but  attended  with  griping  tortures ;  yet  fo  different  were  thefe  difor-
ders,  that  if  you  compare  the  defcriptions  of  Willis  (c),  and  Sydenham  fJj,
one  with  another-,  you  will  be  very  much  furpriz'd  to  find,  that  although
both  of  them  give  you  an  account  of  the  fluxes,  v/ith  which  the  inhabitants
of  London  were  troubled,  in  the  autumn  of  the  year  1670,  the  one  defcribes
"  watery  fluxes,"  and  the  other  "  mucous  fluxes,"  nor  does  the  former  take
notice  of  fo  much  as  one  that  was  mucous,  nor  the  latter  of  one  that  was
watery.

How  could  this  happen  .''  For  my  part  I  fhould  fuppofe,  that  in  a  city  of
this  kind,  which  is,  perhaps,  more  than  any  other,  large  and  populous,  it
had  happen'd  to  each  of  them,  according  to  their  defcriptions,  fo  that  the
one  met  with  none  but  watery  fluxes,  and  the  other  none  but  mucous.
And  this  difi'erence  I  fhould  fuppofe  arofe  from  hence,  that  as  in  various  parts
of  a  great  city,  there  may  be  a  various  conftitution,  and  mixture,  of  air,  va-
rious arts,  and  occupations  of  men,  and  other  circumftances  of  the  like  kind,
fome  bodies  may  abound  with  a  more  fluid,  and  others  with  a  more  len-
tefcent,  and  mucous,  ferum  ;  fo  that,  although  there  might  be  the  fame  kind
of  irritation  in  the  inteftines  of  all ;  the  fluid,  neverthelefs,  which  is  prefs'd
out  from  the  internal  furface  of  their  tube,  will  not  be  the  fame  in  all.

But  if  mucus,  or  ferum,  are  now  and  then  difcharg'd,  ting'd  with  any  other
colour,  whether  this  is  added  by  the  bile,  or  they  appear  in  this  manner  of
themfelves,  there  are,  and  have  long  been,  many  phyficians,  who,  following
the  example  of  thofe  Englilh  gentlemen,  provided  there  be  frequent  dil-

00  Supra  n.  8.  (b)  C.  i.  ibid.  cit.  n.  9.

(«) _  (c)  Vid.  c.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  8.

(a)  Ibid.  {d)  Obf.  med.  circamorb.  acut.  feft.  4.  c.  3.

Vol..  IL  L charges.


74  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

charges,  not  unattended  with  gripings,  and  pain,  do  not  hefitate  to  call  fluxes
of  this  kind,  though  they  are  not  bloody,  dyfenteries.  So  I  remember,
when  I  formerly  liv'd  at  Bologna,  that  epidemic  fluxes  of  this  kind,  which
fpread  about  at  Modena,  were  call'd  by  the  phyficians  of  Modena,  in  letters
that  they  fent  to  the  phyficians  of  Bologna,  dyfenteries,  which  appellation  the
latter  did  not  difapprove.  Letters  of  this  kind,  in  particular,  I  read,  that
were  fent  to  Albertini,  by  one  of  whom  I  have  already  fpoken  to  you  (e),  I
mean  Jo.  Francifco  Bernardoni,  and  in  thefe  letters,  I  read  amongfl  others,
a  hifliory,  which  I  think  ought  not  to  be  pafs'd  over  here,  as  it  has  the  dif-
ledion  join'd  to  it.  For  as,  by  reafon  of  the  fame  griping  tortures  having  at-
tended thefe  fluxes,  which  attend  dyfenteries,  a  fufpicion  had  arifen  of  blood
being  difcharg'd,  but  conceal'd  under  other  colours  ;  Bernardoni  was  willing
either  to  remove,  or  confirm,  this  fufpicion,  by  diflieftion.  And  this  was  the
manner,  in  which  he  related  the  cafe,  in  thofe  letters,  which  he  afterwards
eonfirm'd  in  my  prefence,  with  his  own  mouth.

12.  A  prieft,  who  labour'd  under  an  intefl:inal  flux,  difcharg'd  various
kinds  of  humours,  and  thefe  difcharges  were  attended  with  very  fevere  pains
of  the  bowels,  but  in  them  there  appear'd  neither  any  thing  bloody,  nor
purulent. He  died  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  difeafe.

All  the  inteftines  being  examin'd,  clofely,  on  their  internal  furface,  and
that  more  than  once,  fliew'd  no  where  any  erofion,  mvich  lefs  any  ulceration.
And  what  feem'd  more  furprizing  fl:ill,  they  were  not  without  that  mucus,  as.
it  is  call'd,  with  which  they  are  naturally  fmear'd  over.

13.  But  is  it  fo  likewife  in  bloody  dyfenteries  ?  For  I  fliallcall  them  bloody
here,  to  diftinguifh  them  from  thofe  that  were  without  blood,  which  I  fpoke
of  laft ;  though,  at  other  times,  and  indeed  prefently,  I  fhall  call  thofe  that
are  bloody,  dyfenteries,  without  the  addition  of  any  epithet  whatever,  accord^
ing  to  the  cuftom  of  the  Greek  phyficians  ;  the  ancient  Latin  phyficians  us'd
to  name  them  tormina.  Both  of  which  appellations  you  may,  in  particular,
learn,  from  Celfus  (f).

Celfus  does  not  doubt,  but  that  in  a  dyfentery,  "  the  intefl:ines  are  ulce-
"  rated,  internally,"  and  that  blood  "  is  difcharg'd  from  them,  fometimes,
*'  with  a  kind  of  mucous  matter,  and  that,  at  other  times,  fome  kind  of
"  flefhy  portions,  as  it  were,  arc  difcharg'd,  together  with  the  blood,"  fol-
lowing the  opinion  of  the  more  ancient  phyficians,  and  amongfl;  thefe,  of
Hippocrates  [g),  who  had,  neverthelefs,  call'd  thefe  flefliy  portions,  "  a  kind
"  of  caruncles."  And  indeed  the  inteliines  are  often  ulcerated  :  but  not  al-
ways. Both  of  which  pofitions  are  to  be  demonftrated.

For,  in  the  firfl:  place,  there  are  fome  who  aflert,  that  this  fcarcely  ever
happens,  and  perfons  of  this  kind  have  even  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the
celebrated  Fantonus  {h).  And  as  he  has  given  two  of  his  own  obfervations,
in  opofition  to  their  oppinion,  fo  you  may  alfo  add  others,  not  only  from  this
eleventh  feclion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  but  even  fome  that  are  taken  from
other  places,  and  paticularly  from  the  commentary  of  Brunnerus  {i). For


(f)  Epift.  23.  n.  2.  (h)  De  obferv.  med.  &  anat.  epift.  4.

(/)  De  medic.  1.  4.  c.  15.  in  princ.  (/)  In  pancr.  fecund,  c.  7.

{g)  Se£l.  4.  aph.  26.


Brun-  "


Letter  XXXI. Article 14, 15.  75

Bninnerus  faw,  in  a  dyfenteric  woman,  the  mouths  of  the  glands  of  the  duo-
denum "  eroded:"  and  in  others,  who  had  labour'd  under  a  long  flux  of
the  inteftines,  he  alfo  found  "  ulcers  of  a  cancerous  nature,  as  it  were  {k)"
and  in  one  (/)  who  had  been  troubl'd  with  a  caeliac  flux,  and  in  another  (?7i),
•who  had  been  afflifted  with  a  lientery,  "an  ulcerous  difpofition,"  in  the  laft
mention'd  patient,  of  the  colon ;  and  in  the  former,  throughout  the  whole  trad:
of  the  inteftines,  he  reckon'd  up  "  more  than  lixty  little  ulcers : "  andthefe  things
I  was  willing  to  take  notice  of,  that  you  might  know,  what  caufes  may  fome-
times  happen,  fo  that  the  inteftines  being  irritated,  where  the  ulcers  are,  by
the  contaft  of  the  ingefta,  which  pafs  that  way,  thele  ingefta  may  be  fo  much
the  fooner  expell'd,  without  giving  time  for  the  chyle  to  be  perfcdled,  or
even  extrafted,  and  that  you  might  at  the  fame  time  coi^ceive,  if  in  thefe  kinds
of  fluxes,  the  inteftines  are  fometimes  affedied  with  ulcers,  how  much  more  eafily
they  may  be  feiz'd  with  the  famediforders,  where  the  violence  of  the  pain  is  a
proof  of  there  being  fo  much  a  greater  degree  of  acrimony,  I  mean  in  the  dy-
fentery.  And  left  we  fhould  feem  to  digrefs  from  our  fubjeft,  attend  to  two
obfervations  of  Valfalva's,  that  is,  not  only  the  one  which  is  defcrib'd  above  (n),
of  a  young  man,  in  whom  a  diarrhoea,  without  tormina,  fucceeding  to  a  dy-
fentery,  he  found  the  latter  part  of  the  ileum,  and  the  firft  part  of  the  colon,
ulcerated  ;  but  this  alfo  which  I  fliall  immediately  fubjoin.

14.  A  man  of  thirty  years  of  age,  was  feiz'd  with  a  dyfentery.  Thiscon-
tinu'da  long  time,  till  at  length  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  fpitting  of  blood,  and
with  death.

In  the  belly,  the  fmall  inteftines,  indeed,  were  found  to  be  unhurt :  but
the  large  inteftines  were,  in  fome  places,  ting'd  with  a  black  colour,  and  had
fome  of  their  glands  entirely  eroded,  the  remaining  glands  being  all  drench'd
with  a  bloody  humour,  in  the  very  excretory  orifice.  In  the  gall-bladder  was
but  little  bile.

In  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  towards  the  inferior  part,  was  no  fmall  quan-
tity of  blood  extravafated.  At  the  inferior  part,  alfo,  the  lungs  were  ftufi^'d
up,  and  both  lobes  adher'd,  on  their  fides,  clofely  to  the  pleura,  which  was
itfelf,  likewife,  evidently  injur'd.  The  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  contain'd
a  polypous  concretion.

15.  The  appearances  of  difeafe,  which  were  found  in  the  thorax,  refer  to
another  fubjedl.  And,  thofe  in  the  belly,  to  the  prefent.  But  as  thefe  things
which  Valfalva  has  remark'd,  of  the  glands  of  the  inteftines,  agree  both  with
thofe  that  you  will  fee  produc'd  from  Peyerus,  in  this  fedion  of  the  Sepulchre-
turn  (0),  and  with  thofe  that  you  have  feen  in  the  firft,  from  among  the  obfer-
vations of  Brunnerus,  juft  now  pointed  out  (*) ;  that  one  thing  only,  in  regard  to
little  bile  being  found  in  the  gall-bladder,  would  be  contrary  to  the  opinion  of
Spigelius,  if  he,  as  fome  learned  men  afl"ert,  had  pronounc'd  the  gall-bladder  to
be  "  large  in  dyfenteric  bodies,"  whereas  he  has  only  faid,  that  he  had  "  fre-
"  quently"feen  itfo(^).  Yet,  if  we  examine  this  whole  feftion  narrowly,  we  fliall
lee  it  obferv'd  but  once  by  others. For  Cummenus  (^),  was  the  only  perfon

{k)  C.  10.  (0)  Schol.  ad  obf.  4.

W  C.7. _  _  (*)  N.  13.

{m)  Exercit.  de  gland,  in  duodeno.  §.  6.  (/>)  De  hum.  corp.  fabr.  1.  8,  c.  ij.

(»)  N,  2.  {q)  Obf.  I.

L  2  who


76  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

who  found  "  the  gall-bladder  to  be  very  large,  and  very  full  of  bile,"  and
in  the  body  of  a  woman.  Bontius  (r),  and  Lamonjerius  (s),  found  it  to  be
diftended  indeed  -,  but  the  latter  with  pus,  and  the  former  with  a  white  hu-
mour, "  like  a  pultice  of  ftarch,  ib  that  no  traces  of  bile  were  left,"  where-
as Spigelius  has  declar'd,  that  the  increas'd  fize  of  it  was  owing  to  "  the
"  quantity  of  bile,  with  which  it  was  fiU'd."  But  Francifcus  Flaterus  (/),
not  only  found  it  not  dillended  with  bile,  as  others  likewife  feem  to  have
found  it,  who  fay  nothing  upon  the  fubjeft,  but  even  "  quite  empty."

Moreover,  the  patient  of  Platerus  had  the  inteftines  ulcerated,  after  a
dyfentery,  which  continued  "  I'ome  days  •,"  and  this  I  obferve,  left  you
lliould  be  apt  to  imagine,  that  this  did  not  happen,  but  after  dyfenteries  of
long  continuance.  And  there  were  innumerable  little  ulcers,  for  they  took
up  the  whole  extent  of  furface  in  the  ileum,  and  were  "  the  breadth  of
"  three  fingers  diftant  from  each  other;"  fo  that  this  obfervation  may
be,  in  fome  meafure,  compar'd  with  the  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Bai-  •
Iius  (u),  who,  after  a  dyfentery,  faw  the  fame  inteftine  diftinguifh'd  with
ulcers,  "  at  the  diftance  of  almoft  a  finger's  breadth  from  each  other,  and
"  fometimes,  at  the  diftance  of  a  joint  of  the  thumb,  proceeding  nearly  in
"  one  tradt,  or  ieries,"  as  the  figure  which  he  added  (x),  has  alfo  exprefs'd
(except  that  he  feems  rather  to  have  reprefented  the  jejunum,  than  the  ileum)
confirming  the  defcription,  in  which  the  fame  opinions,  of  Peyerus,  that  I
pointed  out  a  little  while  ago,  are  ftrengthen'd  by  a  probable  conjedture,  I
mean  that,  as  thofe  bodies,  which  he  call'd  glandular  plexuffes,  were  want-
ing, and  as  every  ulcer  feem'd  to  occupy  one  of  the  feats  of  thefe  glandular
plexuffes,  it  was  very  fuppofable,  that  the  beginnings  of  the  erofions,  had
been  in  the  fame  plexuffes,  which  were,  at  length,  entirely  confum'd.

Nay,  indeed  Brunnerus,  in  that  obfervation  (jy),  wherein  he  number'd
more  than  fixty  little  ulcers,  has  teftified  that  thefe  ulcers,  *'  had  their  fitua-
tion  in  no  other  part,  than  in  thefe  plexuffes."  And  certainly,  that  in  in-
teftinal  fluxes,  the  humours  are  thrown  upon  the  inteftines,  by  thefe,  or  other
glands,  may  be  even  argued  from  their  magnitude  being  increas'd,  as  hap-
pens in  all  other  glands  whatever,  while  their  fecretions  are  greater  than
ufual.  Thus  in  the  body,  wherein,  after  a  long  inteftinal  flux,  the  fame
Brunnerus  found  ulcers,  about  the  extremity  of  the  jejunum  (z),  he  not  only
faw  "  glandular  tuberofities,"  in  that  part  likewife,  but  alfo  found  the  in-
ternal coat  of  the  inteftine,  become  much  thicker,  than  it  naturally  is,  and
this  coat  "  feem'd,  from  the  beginning,  to  the  end,  to  be  entirely  glandu-
"  lar  and  luxuriant  with  glands."  And  of  his  glands  of  the  duodenum  he
fays  (g),  "  they  are  generally  found  to  be  much  thicken'd,  in  thofe  who  die
"  of  difeafes  in  the  inteftines,  fuch  as  a  diarrhoea,  or  a  dyfentery  :"  and  he
fays  that  the  fame  glands,  had  even  "  become  indurated  (b)"  in  that  dyfen-
teric  woman,  in  whofe  body  he  faw  the  orifices  of  them  "  eroded,"  as  I  have
already  faid.

(r)  Obf.  6.  Cy)  Supra  ad.  n.  13.

(j) Obf.  13.  (s:) C.  7.  ibid.  cit.

(t)  In  addit.  obf.  3.  (a)  In  earum  demonftr.  anatom.

{u)  Obf.  anat.  chir.  med.  dec.  3.  obf,  7.  {i)  Ibid.

{x)  Tab.  xi.  fig.  I.  '

4  16.  How-


Letter  XXXI. Article  i6,  17.  77

16.  However,  this  lafl  obfervation  of  Brunnerus,  and  the  two  which  I  re-
lated a  little  before  (c),  from  Platerus,  and  BaiTius,  and  a  part  of  that
■which  was  given  from  Valfalva,  in  the  beginning  of  this  letter  (d),  even  of
themfelves,  fufficiently  fhow  it  to  have  been  too  haftily  pronounc'd  by  Pa-
narolus,  as  you  have  it  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  (e),  "  that  an  excoriation,
"  and  corrofion,  could  not  be  brought  on  in  the  upper  inteftines  of  dyfen-
"  teric  patients,  as  happens  in  the  large  inteftines,  and  particularly  in  the
"  colon."  I  confefs  indeed,  that  in  moft  of  the  obfervations,  among  which
are  even  thofe  two  of  the  celebrated  Fanronus  (f),  it  was  found  tc  be  fo,
and  I  fliould  readily  believe  Panarolus,  when  he  fays  that  it  was  equally  foj
in  the  diffeftion  of  all  that  confiderable  number  of  thofe  "  bodies,"  to  which
he  refers :  and  I  fliall  alio  agree  with  his  reafoning  upon  the  fubjedt,  that  a
corroding  humour  may  very  eafily  flow  on,  in  the  fmall  inteftines ;  but  that
in  tlie  colon,  it  as  eafily  ftagnates,  by  reafon  of  the  cells :  and  I  would
even  add,  that  a  corroding  humour  is  often  temper'd,  and  made  much  mil-
der, in  the  fmall  inteftines,  by  the  mixture  of  chyle,  and  more  often  by  a
mixture  of  the  watery,  and  mucilaginous,  portion  of  the  rem.edies,  that  are
taken  in  ;  but  that  the  humour  goes  down  into  the  large  inteftines,  after  thefe
meliorating  fluids  have,  chiefly,  been  taken  up,  by  the  chyliferous  veffels.
All  thefe  things,  I  fay,  I  fee  and  confefs :  neverthelefs,  to  omit  other  methods
of  reafoning,  by  which  I  might  ftiow,  that  the  very  oppofite  fuppofition  may
fometimes  take  place ;  there  can  be  no  force  of  reafoning  fufficient,  I  do
not  fay,  but  there  can  even  be  no  number  of  obfervations,  whatever,  fuffi-
cient, to  prove  that  what  has  been  really  feen,  at  any  one  time,  cannot  come
to  pals.

17.  But  whether  there  are  ulcers  in  the  fmall,  or  in  the  large  inteftines  ;
it  fufficiently  appears,  from  all  thefe  obfervations, that  the  inteftines  were

^really  ulcerated,  in  thofe  dyfenteric  bodies,  from  which  they  were  taken.  Yet
in  thofe  dyfenteric  patients,  whom  we  have  it  not  in  our  power  to  diffeft,  are
we  alfo  to  fuppofe  ulcerations  for  this  reafon,  that,  as  Celfus  fays  (g),  they
have  difcharg'd  fome  kind  of  mucous  portions,  with  blood,  and  fometimes
portions  offlefti,  as  it  were  ?  it  is  worthwhile  accurately  to  confider  this
queftion.  And  formerly,  indeed,  they  did  not  doubt,  but  from  the  very
beginning  of  this  dileafe,  fome  fat  bodies  were  excreted,  which  they  fup-
pos'd  to  be  the  internal  fat  of  the  inteftines.  But  this  error  was  refuted,  by
thofe  who  demonftrated  that  the  fat  was  not  on  the  internal,  but  on  the  exter-
nal, furface  of  the  inteftines,  and  with  them  by  Cafpar  Hoff"mann  (h),  who  alfo
fliow'd  that  a  certain  whitifti  body  Avhich  had  been  difcharg'd  from  the  in-
teftines, and  was  brought  to  him  in  a  dry'd  ftate,  was  taken  for  fat  without
reafon,  becaufe  it  did  not,  in  the  leaft,  take  flame,  when  applied  to  a
flame,  and  emitted  a  fmoke  which  was  perfedlly  inodorous.  At  prefent,
however,  as  fome  fubftances,  which  were  difcharg'd  in  the  fame  manner,  have
been  found  to  be  really  adipofe,  from  an  experiment  of  this  kind  made  by
Tulpius  (i),  and  Stalpart  {k),  there  are  not  wanting  learned  m.en,  v/ho  teach


{c)  N.  ly.  CgJ Supra  ibid.

{dj  N.  2.  (h)  Apolog.  pro  gal.  1.  z.  f.  4,

(f)  Obf. ij.  '  (/)  Obf.  med.  1.  3.  c.  i3.

ffj  Supra,  n.  13.  ~  (4)  Cent.  1.  obf.  61.


that


78  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tHe  Belly.

that  they  muft,  "  without  doubt,"  have  proceeded  from  the  fat,  which  is
on  the  external  cellular  coat  of  the  inteftine.

Yet  to  me,  where  there  is  no  fufpicion  either  of  confumptive  colliquation,
or  of  a  deep  ulceration  of  theinteftines,  it  will  feem  lefs  improbable  to  account
for  thele  difcharges  of  fat,  in  concert  with  Stalpart,  and  Riverius,  whom  he
quotes  (/),  from  fat  being  plentifully  eaten,  and  not  concofted ;  though  I
might,  perhaps,  allow  of  fat  being  brought,  quite  from  that  cellular  coat,
when  I  have  found  that  there  are  ulcers,  which  open  a  paflage  fufficient
for  this  fat  to  get  into  the  cavity  of  the  inteftines,  provided  it  be  cer-
tain, that  this  fat  does  not  then  come  forth,  in  the  form  of  pus,  or  ichor.
But  becaufe  the  inteftines  are  ulcerated  ;  much  more  feldom  in  dyfenteries,
and  much  later  in  the  courfe  of  the  difeafe,  than  this  white  matter,  which
was  fuppos'd  to  be  fat,  appears;  what  fhall  we  then  fay  it  is,  or  from
whence  fhall  we  fay  it  proceeds  ?  Without  doubt  it  muft  be  mucous,  as
Celfus  alfo  call'd  it,  agreeably  to  what  1  have  faid  a  little  while  ago,  and  as
the  moderns  call  it,  if  it  be  not  very  thick;  but  if  it  be  very  thick,  we  muft
even  fuppofe  it  to  be  polypous.

For,  as  the  glands  of  the  bladder,  when  irritated,  fecrete  a  greater  quan-
tity of  humour,  and  not  of  the  fame  nature  with  that  which  they  fecrete  in
perfect  health,  fo  the  glands  of  the  inteftines,  likewife,  fecrete  a  greater
quantity  of  humours,  and  of  a  different  nature  ;  for  which  reafon,  in  both
cales,  a  white  and  mucous  matter  appears.  But  if  there  be,  moreover,  that
difpofition,  in  the  blood,  of  eafily  coalefcing  into  polypi,  this  humour  will
be  more  prone  to  concretion ;  and  that  fo  much  the  more,  where  blood  of
this  kind  having  exiuded,  or  having  been  extravafated  into  the  cavity  of  the
inteftines,  has  been  added  thereto.  For  thus,  v/hile  a  part  of  the  blood
fhall  remain  in  the  cells  of  the  colon,  the  watery  part  being  taken  up,  and
the  red  part  fubfiding,  thofe  fibres  of  the  blood,  as  they  are  call'd,  which
will  be  left  behind,  may  be  eafily  compafted  into  polypous  concretions,  and
by  reafon  of  their  whitenefs,  when,  foon  after,  difcharg'd  with  the  excre-
ments, may  be  taken  for  fat  here  alfo,  as  they  were,  formerly,  fo  often  in
the  heart  and  the  veflels,  where  they  belied  the  appearances  of  velTels,  and
organiz'd  parts,  and  deceiv'd  the  inipeftors.

1 8.  In  either  of  thefe  ways  then,  or  in  both  of  them,  or  even  in  any
other  way,  among  thofe  that  Lancifi  has  pointed  out  (m),  according  to  the
various  conftitution  of  the  patient,  and  according  to  the  various  nature  of
the  difeafe,  and,  finally,  according  to  the  time,  place,  and  manner,  in  which  the
lentefcent  matter  is  retain'd,  and  difpos'd,  not  only  the  origin  of  thofe  fat
bodies,  as  they  feem'd  to  be,  but  alfo  of  the  fhreds  of  membranes,  and  even
of  large  membranes  that  are  faid  to  have  been  difcharg'd,  may  be  under-
ftood,  and  the  origin  of  fome  of  thofe  bodies,  that  are  call'd  flefhy  by  Cel-
fus, may  be  very  eafily  accounted  for,  that  is  to  fay,  if  the  whole  portion  of
red  blood  be  not  prefs'd  out,  from  its  white,  and  coalefcent,  fibres.  And  from
hence  you  may  alfo  perceive,  how  cautioufiy  we  ought  to  ufe  that  prsdiftion
of  Plippocrates  (») :  "  if  a  perfon  labouring  under  a  dyfentery,  difcharge  a
"  kind  of  caruncles,  as  it  were,  'tis  a  mortal  fign :"  nor,  indeed,  was  this

(/)  In  fchol.  ibid.  (ot)  Diff.  de  tripl.  inteft.  polypo,  («)  S.  4.  aph.  26.

4  caution


Letter  XXXI. Article ig.  79

caution  overlook'd,  by  him  who  treated,  with  great  perfpicuity,  of  polypi,
I  mean  the  very  learned  Pafta  (o).

But  that  which  we  nov*  -''  a  mucous,  or  polypous,  matter,  the  ancients
were,  in  general,  accuftom'd  to  call  pituitous,  and  vifcid,  and  fome  of  thefe
were  even  us'd  to  acknowledge  thofe  things,  which  I  at  prefent  infift  on.
Thus  not  to  turn  to  the  moft  ancient  of  all,  I  obferve  that  Jacobus  Berenga-
rius  (p)  has  written  the  following  words :  "  and  I  myfelf  have  feen,  that
"  concretions,  like  pieces  of  thick  leather,  have  been  generated  in  my  intef-
"  tines,  from  pituita,  and  in  lilce  manner,  a  pituitous  flefli,  in  fome  meafure
"  red,  and  equal,  in  fize,  to  a  pretty  large  nut."  And  Fernelius  fuppos'd
the  matter  of  a  firm  body,  which  was  a  foot  in  length,  and  pier'c'd
through  with  a  middle  duft,  to  be  of  the  fame  kind ;  which  body  was  dif-
charg'd  by  the  ambalTador  of  the  emperor  Charles,  the  fifth,  who  was,  by
that  means,  reftor'd  to  his  former  health.  I  fay  nothing  of  Gabucinus  and
Platerus,  whofe  opinion  was  taken  notice  of  by  Sennertus  (r),  nor  was  un-
known to  Lancifi,  when  he  readily  confefs'd  (j),  that  both  of  them  had
aflerted  that  before  them,  were  no  inftances  of  the  toenia,  or  tape-worm,
which  is  a  kind  of  inteftinal  worm.

But  Sennertus  himfelf,  I  commend  ftill  more  (t),  becaufe  he  fuppos'd  that
the  membranes,  which  were  difcharg'd,  from  dyfenteric  patients,  who  re-
cover, were  nothing  more  than  "  mucous  excrements,  that  receive  this  form
"  in  the  inteftines :"  and  that  it  was  by  no  means  neceflary,  to  fuppofe  that
this  mucus  fliould  always  be  excreted,  either  in  its  own  proper  form,  or
in  the  form  of  blood,  mix'd  with  this  mucus  ;  but  that  it  may  put  on  another
form  ;  for,  fays  he,  "  we  fee  every  day,  that  the  fibrous  part  of  blood,  when
*'  thrown  into  warm  water,  grows  white."

Yet  you  fee  how  much  nearer,  that  which  ZollicofFerus  (u)  did  at  length
more  exprefly  throw  out,  in  the  year  1685,  comes  to  this  point;  I  mean
when  difcourfing  of  thofe  polypi,  which  are  found  without  the  blood  vefTels,
or  refervoirs,  and  among  them,  of  a  polypus  then  found  by  Sponius,  in  the
pelvis  of  the  kidney,  "  to  which  clafs,"  fays  he,  "  even  that  pituitous  con-
"  cretion  might  perhaps  be  refer'd  which  Juftus  Lipfius  difcharcr'd  by
"  ftool,  in  the  fhape  of  the  inteftines,  and  believ'd  to  be  the  very  intef-
"  teftines  themfelves."  And  this  opinion  was  at  length  very  particularly,
and  clearly  illuftrated,  and  confirm'd,  by  Lancifi,  in  many  different  ways,
and  not  after  the  manner  of  one  who  had  any  doubts  upon  the  fubjedt.

19.  It  appears  therefore,  that  in  a  dyfentery,  bodies  confifting  of  fat  in
appearance,  and  bodies  feemingly  fiefhy,  and  membranous,  may  be  equally
difcharg'd  from  the  inteftines,  without  any  ulcer  having  affedled  them  :  al-
though Sennertus  (x)  denies,  that  he  and  Crato  "  could  ever  fee  fuch  mem-
"  branes,  and  jagged  pieces  of  membranes,  as  others  defcribe,"  even  where
there  were  ulcers.  For  thefe,  certainly,  had  been  feen,  in  thofe  patients,
whofe  recoveries  defcrib'd  by  Meichfnerus  (y),  and  Saxonia,  feem'd  to  him

(0)  In  not.  adhunc  aphor.  (?)  Qu.  cit.

(p)  Super,  anat.  mundin.  comra.  7.  («)  Diff.  de  polypo  cord.  §.  6.

(?)  Pathol.  1.  6.  c.  g.  (x)  Qu.  cit.

(r)  Medic,  praft.  1.  3.  p.  2.  f.  2.  0.7.  qu.  3, {y)  Apud  Schenck,  obf.  med.  1.  3. ubi  de

U)  DifT.  cit.  epift.  2.  ad  Bianciard.  dy&nt.  cur.  obf.  4.

but


So  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

bin  little  (Credible.  For  the  patient  of  the  former,  had  often  difcharg'd,  to-
gether with  pus,  membranes  "  of  the  length  of  a  fpan,"  and  the  patient  of
the  latter,  a  membrane  from  the  ulcerated  redum,  "  of  the  length  of  an  ell."

Indeed  in  this  pantheon,  which  Sennertus  quotes,  I  fhould  fuppofe  that
what  is  publifli'd  under  his  name  (z),  deferves  but  little  to  be  attended  to,  after
the  jult  complaints  of  Saxonia,  againft  the  publifher  of  it,  UfFenbachius  (a),
efpecially  as  in  the  pradtical  leftures  of  Saxonia,  which  were  afterwards  pub-
lilli'd  here,  nothing  of  that  kind  has  been  found  by  me,  but  this  only  (3)  -,
with  which  Sennertus  is  alfo  difpleas'd. ;  that  Saxonia  "  had  feen  four  dyfen-
"  teric  patients,  in  whom  fo  large  portions  of  the  inteftines  were,  every
"  day,  excreted,  that  they  often  exceeded  the  meafure  of  three  or  four
*'  inches,"  out  of  whom  two  women  recover'd.  And  one  of  theie  perhaps
was  flie  who,  as  Cafpar  Hoffmann  (c)  fays,  was  fhown  to  him  at  Padua,  by
his  prasceptor  Saxonia,  and  who,  in  a  dyfentery,  had  difchartr'd  a  part  of
the  inteftine  to  the  "  length  of  a  fpan,"  that  is,  as  I  fuppofe,  if  all  thefe
excreted  portions  were  fuppos'd  to  be  join'd  together.  Yet  there  Sennertus
has  done  extremely  well  in  openly  confeffing,  "  that  many  things  might
'"  happen,  which  he  had  not  feen."  And  indeed,  if  a  very  few  years  had  been
added  to  his  life,  he  would  have  read  the  obfervation  of  Tulpius  (d),  who
faw  it  happen  from  fevere  pains,  and  ulceration  of  the  inteftines,  that  the
whole  internal  membrane  of  the  reftum  was  feparated  from  the  inteftine,  in
fuch  a  manner,  that  being  pendulous  from  the  inteftine,  it  might  be  feen  by
him  and  by  many  phyficians,  for  two  or  three  days  together,  its  toul  fepa-
ration  being  for  fome  time  prevented,  by  a  firm  adhefion,  to  the  parts  about
the  anus.

It  alfb  happen'd  to  me  here,  on  the  firft  of  June,  in  the  year  1729,  that  I
was  earneftly  defir'd  to  afTift  with  my  advice,  one  Jacob  del  Vecchio,  a  Jew
merchant,  on  account  of  a  fimilarcaie.  This  man  had  been  attack'd  with  a
very  troublefome  pain  at  the  reftum,  in  the  decline  of  a  malignant  fever,
toe-ether  with  a  fenfe  of  weight,  and  obftruftion  :  and  finally,  a  thickifti  kind
of  membrane,-  as  it  feem'd,  had  lately  begun  to  come  out  from  the  anus,
which  I  faw  hanging  from  thence  ;  its  lengch'  was  equal  to  the  breadth  of  fix
fingers,  and  its  width  exceeded  an  inch,  its  colour  was  cineritious,  degene-
ratino-  into  livid,  like  that  of  membranes,  which  are  afFefted  with  gangrene:
yet  it  did  not  fall  off,  in  confequence  of  being  continued  within  the  intef-
tine, and  connefted  to  it,  as  far  as  the  furgeon  could  ob;.  ,ve,  by  examining
very  orently  •,  for  although,  from  the  time  of  its  exit,  the  pain  was  become
milder,  yet  the  blood  ilTued  forth  now  and  then,  and  the  fever  was  more
confiderable  at  that  hour,  than  it  had  been  in  the  morning.

Wherefore,  having  fettled  what  feem'd  proper  to  be  done,  in  concert
with  the  phyfician  of  the  patient,  who  was  my  fenior,  I  departed.  And
from  him  I  was  inform'd,  on  the  following  days,  that  the  membrane  had
come  away,  being  rather  ruptur'd,  by  the  conftridlion  of  the  fphincler,  as  it
-feem'd,  than  found :  that  blood,  and an ill-condition'd  ichor, had  again

■  (z)  Panth.  1.  3.  c.  23.  ut  citat.  Sennert.  CcJ  C.  122.  cit.  fupra  ad.  n.  17,

(a)  Vi4.  Saxon,  prsf.  ad  libros3.dePulfib. {d)  Obf.  med.  1.  3.  c.  17.


Letter  XXXI. Artfcle  20.  :8i

iffued  out ;  and  that  a  fingultus,  which  terrified  every  body,  had  come  on :
neverthelefs,  that  he  had  fome  little  hope  remaining,  for  this  reafon,  becaufe
he  remember'd  that  the  father  of  the  patient,  who,  when  he  was  pretty  far
advanc'd  in  years,  had  had  a  fimilar,  but  a  fhorter,  membrane  come  from  the
redtum,  efcap'd  with  life  under  his  care,  though  with  this  inconvenience,  that
he  could  never  retain  his  excrements  afterwards :  and  becaufe  the  fon,  al-
though in  the  father  no  malignant  fever  had  preceded,  and  no  fingultus  had
come  on,  was  as  yet  fcarcely  five  and  forty  years  of  age.

Nor  was  this  well-reafoning  phyfician,  whofe  firname  was  Marina,  de-
ceiv'd  in  his  hope,  with  whom  having  again  fettled  thefe  things  which,  as
the  ftate  of  the  cafe  then  was,  were  neceflary  to  be  added  to  the  former,  it
happen'd  that  a  great  quantity  of  pus  being  difcharg'd,  I  faw  the  patient
out  of  bed,  on  the  fixth  day  of  July,  now  manifeftly  recovering  his  ftrength,
colour,  and  habit  of  body,  and  not  only  retaining  his  fseces,  but  even  heal-
ing injeflions,  which  were  thrown  up.  There  was  fome  pain  indeed  even
then ;  but  this  was  evidently  more  flight,  nor  was  it  any  longer  very  trouble-
fome,  in  that  fame  fituation  where  it  had  been  before.  Wherefore  this  pa-
tient alfo,  as  well  as  that  of  Tulpius,  and  others,  whom,  for  the  fake  of
brevity,  I  purpofely  pafs  over,  recover'd,  and  even  was  ftill  living,  and  in
good  health,  when  I  di6tated  this  hiftory,  from  my  manufcripts,  which  was
about  the  end  of  the  year  1747  (e).

20.  But  although  it  is  very  certain,  that  thefe  patients  efcap'd  with  life^
yet  if  you  afk  me  whether  it  is  equally  certain,  that  they  difcharg'd  real
membranes,  I  fliall  readily  anfwer,  no.  Nor  indeed  do  I  fee  that  the  na-
ture of  them  has  been  fufficiently  enquir'd  into,  which  perhaps  it  was  not
pofllble  for  others  alfo  to  do,  as  it  was  not  pofiible  for  me,  in  bodies  that
were  corrupted,  and  rotten,  with  putrefaflion.  And  I  fee,  that  even  where
the  intefl:ines  are  ulcerated,  polypous  concretions  may  be  more  readily
form'd  in  that  place,  either  in  a  round  form,  fuch  as  Lancifi  (f)  has  afHrm'd
that  he  had  feen  difcharg'd  by  dyfenteric  patients,  equal  to  three  or  four '
fpans  in  length,  or  flat,  in  the  form  of  a  membrane,  one  of  which  kind  the
celebrated  Jofeph  Ant.  Pujatus  (g)  faw  difcharg'd  by  a  matron,  who  labour'd
under  an  ulcer  of  the  reftum,  the  length  of  which  membrane  was  almofl:
equal  to  a  fpan,  and  which  he  fufpefted  to  be  of  the  fame  nature.

But  as  I  deny  that  it  is  certain  thofe  former  fubflances  were  membranes,
fo  I  deny  its  being  certain  that  they  were  not  membranes,  and  efpecially
thofe  which  feem'd  to  adhere  to  the  intefliine,  more  than  polypi  are  wont  to
do.  And  to  confefs  my  opinion  to  you  openly  ■,  I  believe  that  any  part  of
the  internal  coat,  of  the  intefliines,  may  be  feparated  by  the  force  of  difeafe.,
and  come  away,  juft  as  we  often  fee  it  happen  to  that  thin  membrane,  with
which  the  parts  of  the  mouth  are  invefl:ed,  from  the  contaft  of  very  hot  ali-
ments. And  this  is  certainly  done  without  any,  or  at  leaft  without  any  very
confiderable,  elFufion  of  blood,  without  convulfions,  and  other  dangerous
fymptoms,  which  fome  fear  from  the  innumerable  fmall  veflels,  and  nerves,
that  go  to  the  internal  coat  of  the  inteftines,  if  this  be  really  fuppos'd  to  be
feparated  ;  whereas  a  very  great  number  of  fmall  veflTels,  and  fmall  nerves
alfo,  go  to  the  internal  coat  of  the  mouth  in  like  manner.

(f)  Imo  vid.  etiam  epift.  65.  n.  6.  (g)  Dec.  med.  obf.  ti.  6.  obf.  i-.

(/)  Difl".  cit.  epill.  i.  ad  Biaaciard.

Vol.  II.  M  Nor


S2  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Nor  would  I  have  you  fay,  that  the  thin  membrane  which  is  then  feparat-
ed  in  the  mouth,  is  a  continuation  of  the  cuticle,  or  is  at  leaft,  proportion-
ably,  correfpondent  to  it.  For  the  fame  perfon  who  call'd  this  epithelia  in
the  prolabia  and  cheeks,  fhow'd  that  there  was  alfo  a  fimilar  epithelia  in  the
gula,  ftomach  and  inteftines ;  and  this  perfon  was  Ruyfch  {h) :  wherefore,  if
you  will  not  fuppofe  me  to  fpeak  of  any  other  part,  at  leaft  fuppofe  me  to
Ipeak  of  this,  which  the  acrimony  of  the.  humours,  or  a  fuperficial  gan-
grene, after  an  inflammation,  has  loofen'd  from  the  remaining  part  of  the
internal  coat,  and  left  to  be  involv'd  in  the  excrements,  and  carried  down-
wards. But  fometimes,  you  will  fay,  membranes  which  are  depofited  are
"  pretty  thick,"  as  Saxonia  fays  (i) ;  and  the  cuticle  is  thin.  And  fo  it  certain-
ly is,  unlefs  it  be  embrew'd  with  a  large  quantity  of  humours  ;  for  hence  the
celebrated  Fantonus  (k)  judg'd  it  to  happen,  that  we  often  fee  it  grow  fo
very  thick,  from  the  ufe  of  bliftering  applications,  as  to  become  from
thence,  according  to  his  conjecSture,  divilible  into  many  laminae,  or  to  confilt
of  a  ipongy  fubftance.

But  if  you  contend,  that  even  in  this  way,  the  matter  is  not  fufficiently
explain'd  by  m.e ;  I  then  beg  of  you,  in  your  turn,  to  explain  to  me  the  ob-
fervation  of  that  very  experienc'd  furgeon  Benevolo  (I),  of  a  membranous
canal  being  taken  away  from  the  anus,  equal  in  length  to  fix  inches,  as
broad  as  the  re£lum  generally  is,  and  fo  thick,  that  the  fphinfter  ani  feem'd.
univerfally,  or  almoft  univerfally,  to  have  come  away  with  this  canal :  and
indeed,  it  v/as  neceflary  to  make  ufe  of  medical,  and  chirurgical,  reme-
dies, for  almoft  the  fpace  of  a  year,  in  order  to  heal  up  the  ulcer  of  the
inteftine,  and  to  remove  the  other  inconveniences,  which  depended  upon,
the  feparation  of  this  tube,  as  well  as  to  obviate  the  incapacity  of  re-
taining the  excrements,  which  remain'd  in  confequence  of  this  feparation.
For  in  the  fame  manner  that  you  imagine  you  can  conceive,  how  fo  thick  a
part  of  the  inteftine  could  be  feparated,  without  deftroying  life,  you  will
much  more  eafily  conceive,  how  the  internal  coat  which  is  fo  much  lefs
thick,  may  have  been  fometimes  feparated.  And  if  you  readily  allow  of
this  even  in  thofe  who  have  recover'd,  how  much  more  readily  muft  you.
allow  of  it  in  thofe  who  have  perifti'd  ?  And  if  you  had  been  prefent  with
the  foldier  of  whom  Bontius  fpeaks,  or  with  thofe  patients  of  whom  Sylvius
(peaks,  each  in  this  eleventh  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (m),  and  had  faid
that  the  membranes,  which  they,  certainly,  difcharg'd  in  a  dyfenteric  flux,
that  was  fatal  to  them,  were  really  pieces  of  the  internal  coat ;  do  you  think,
you  would  have  had  reafon  to  retraft  your  opinion  upon  opening  their  bo-
dies after  death  ?  Not  in  the  leaft.  For  you  would  have  found,  with  Sylvius,
that  the  internal  coat  of  the  inteftine  was,  "here  and  there,  abraded,"  and
with  Bontius,  that  it  was  "  quite  abraded."

But  was  this  abrafion  univerfal  ?  What  Bontius  does  not  fay  exprefly
enough,  Piccolhominus  (fi)  fays,  in  an  obfervation,  which,  in  whatevec
way  it  is  iinderftood,  was  certainly  worthy  to  have  been  copied  in  the  Sepulr
chretum.  For  he  faw,  "  in  a  dyfenteric  patient,  who  fuffer'd  very  excruciat-
*'  ing  pains,  and  who  always  Ihiver'd  with  a  kind  of  horror,  upon  taking

(h)  Thef.  anat.  7.  n.  40.  (/) 18.  delle  quaranta.

(/)  C.  19.  fupra  ad  n. 19.  cit.  (/b)  Obf.  6.  &  16.

{i)  Anat.  corp,  hum.  diff.  2.  («)  L,  z.  anat.  pra;Iefl:..i5..

«  the


Letter  XXXI. Article 21.  83

*'  the  firft  morfel  of  food,  the  whole  internal  coat  of  the  ftomach,  and  in-
"  teftines,  from  the  upper  parts  to  the  lower,  (wonderful  to  fee,  and  to  hear,
"  and  alnnoft  too  wonderful  to  be  believ'd)  abraded;  and  that  which  was
"  left,  and  appear'd,  feem'd  flefhy,  from  the  mouth  of  the  ftomach,  quite
"  to  the  extremity  of  the  reftum,  fo  that  you  would  fay  it  was  a  kind  of
"  broad  fafcia,  univerfally  flefliy ;  and  that  the  ftomach,  alfo,  was  a  kind  of
"  bladder,  as  it  were,  univerfally  flefhy."  But  of  this  obfervation  mention  will
alfo  be  made  hereafter  (o),  in  which,  as  thofe  things,  that  he  fubjoins  foon  after,
fhow,  the  author  himfelf  acknowledg'd  an  inflammation  of  the  flefhy  fibres.

21.  Now  then,  as  it  is  more  than  fufEciently  fhown  above,  that  thofc
bodies  which  are  difcharg'd  by  dyfenteric  patients,  in  the  form  of  membranes,
fometimes  are  real  membranes,  but  often  are  falfe  membranes,  and  that  they
are  no  proof  of  the  inteftines  being  ulcerated,  unlefs  they  are  found  to  be
real  membranes ;  it  would  remain  to  demonftrate  the  fame  things,  in  pro-
portion, of  thofe  alfo,  that  are  difcharg'd  with  a  fiefliy  appearance,  if  it  had
not  been,  already,  fufEciently  fhown  above  (p),  how  polypi  may,  in  like  man-
ner, refemble  thefe  flefhy  excrefcencies,  or  caruncles,  without  any  ulceration
of  the  inteftines.  One  thing  only,  therefore,  remains  to  be  demonftrated;  I
mean,  that  thefe  bodies  are  not  always  entirely  made  up  of  a  falfe  flefh,  and
when  it  fhall  certainly  appear,  from  the  examination  of  them,  that  they  are
fo,  fome  ulcer  of  the  inteftines  is  then  to  be  fuppos'd,  provided  there  is  no
fign  of  an  ulcer  in  the  ftomach :  and  this  exception  I  make  on  account  of
thofe  verruciE,  as  the  Arabians  call'd  them,  of  which  I  have  treated  in  the
twenty-ninth  letter  (q).

For  although  I  have  faid  that  flefhy  excrefcences  may  exift  there,  without
ulceration  ;  I  have  not,  however,  denied  that  when  they  are  broken  off,  and
come  away,  an  ulcer  is  form'd  in  the  place  from  whence  they  were  torn  -,
and  indeed  that  an  ulcer  muft  happen  in  this  cafe  is  a  felf-evident  propofi-
tion.  Moreover  I  fpoke,  at  that  time,  of  the  ftomach,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as
to  allow  what  I  faid  to  be  transfer'd  to  the  inteftines,  and  I  even  fufpedted  that
a  certain  verruca  of  Avenzoar's,  was  not  generated  in  the  ftomach,  but  in  the
colon  that  lies  beneath  it,  on  account  of  the  bignefs  which  it  feem'd  to  have
in  the  ftomach,  if  you  prefs'd  upon  the  epigaftric  region.  Which  fufpicion
I  am  pleas'd  here  fo  to  confirm,  by  examples  of  the  fame  kind  in  general,
as  to  demonftrate,  at  length,  that  which  I  have  advanc'd.

Jo.  Baptifta  Cortefius  (r),  producing  a  pafTage  of  Galen,  from  which  ic
may  be  underftood,  not  only  that  indurated  faeces,  but  alfo  that  "  a  bulk
"  of  any  body  whatever,  prseternaturally  exifting  in  the  inteftines,"  had  al-
ready been  reckon'd,  by  him,  in  the  number  of  the  caufes  that  obftrudl  the
bowels,  has  confirm'd  the  opinion  of  Galen,  by  this  obfervation  of  his  own,
which  was  made  upon  the  body  of  the  Count  de  Caldarinis,  a  nobleman  of
Bologna.  That  is  to  fay,  "  in  the  cavity  of  the  colon,  was  found  a  large
"  portion  of  flefh,  which,  by  its  bulk,  was  the  caufe  of  impediment  to  the
"  defcent  of  the  faeces,  and  by  a  diforder  of  this  kind,  which  was  a  confe-
"  quence  of  that  obftruftion,  the  patient  was  carried  off.  Which  caufe,
"  being,  as  the  author  himfelf  fays,  worthy  of  particular  attention,"  I  was
willing  to  defcribe  in  his  own  words, for this  reafon  alfo,  becaufe  in  the

(")  N.  26.  (^)  N.  16.  &  17.

(/)  l:i.  17.  &  18.  ()■)  Mifcell.  med.  dec.  4..  c.  8.

M  2  catalogue


84  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

catalogue  of  thofe  authors,  whofe  obfervations  are  transfer'd  into  the  Sepul-
chretum,  1  have  in  vain  fought  after  the  name  of  Cortefius,  as  I  did  that  of
Piccolhominus  likewife  :  neither  is  this  obfervation  found  any-v/here  in  the
thirteenth  fedion,  v/hich  is  entitled  De  adftri^iom  alvi ;  but  inftead  of  it,  a
certain  obfervation  is  taken  notice  of  from  Willis  (i),  as  if  it  were  certain
"  that  a  liind  of  fiefhy  excrefcences,  which  adherM  to  the  larger  inteftines,
"  like  the  ears  of  a  moufe,  coming  out  in  great  number,  and  in  twins,  from
"  both  fides  of  the  colon  and  redum,  and  at  certain  diftances  from  each-
"  other,  hke  the  branches  of  a  tree,"  as  if,  I  fay,  it  were  certain  that  thefe
■were  not  on  the  external  furface,  as  they  feem  to  me  to  have  been,  and  were,
perhaps,  nothing  elle  but  the  adipofe  appendicles  of  the  colon,  and  reftum,
in  which,  the  fat  being  confum'd,  the  fanguiferous  veflels  appear'd  red  ;  for
thefe  things  Willis  obferv'd  in  a  confumptive  man,  and  fays  that  he  had
feen  "  fomewhat  fimilar  to  this  likewife  in  another  confumptive  body."

But,  juft  as  if  it  had  been  certain,  that  theie  excrefcences  had  been  on  the
internal  furface  of  the  inteftines,  and  thus  had  brought  on  an  aftridtion  of  the
bowels,  the  cafe  of  a  little  boy  is  fubjoin'd  in  the  fcholium,  who,  having  dif-
charg'd  a  large  flefhy  mafs,  that  preferv'd  the  mark,  by  which  it  had  adher'd  to
the  inteftines,  was  freed  from  an  obftinate  obftruftion  of  the  bowels.  But  you,
however,  by  turning  either  to  Willis,  or  to  the  other  book  of  the  Sepul-
chretimi  (;),  in  Tvhich  the  hiftory  of  that  man  is  given  more  at  large,  will
not  only  be  convinc'd  of  what  I  have  faid,  but  will,  in  particular,  perceive
this,  that  in  a  man  who  was  feiz'd  "  with  a  fpurious  palfy,  which  affedted
"  every  limb  of  the  whole  body,"  fo  that  he  had  fcarcely  any  power  of
moving  himfelf,  there  was  no  great  occafion  to  aftign  any  other  caufes  be-
lides  this,  for  the  bowels  being  coftive,  unlefs  irritated.

But  to  return  to  the  excrefcences,  that  certainly  were  in  the  cavity  of  the
colon  ;  befides  that  "  flefhy"  one,  which  I  look  for  in  vain,  in  the  Sepul-
chretum,  remark'd  by  Joannes  Rhodius  (a)  in  a  monk,  who,  "  being  troub-
*'  led  with  colic  pains,  together  with  a  vomiting  of  chyle,  difcharg'd  his
"  glyfters  back  again,  without  any  excrement,"  by  reafon  of  "  the  colon
"  being  obftrudled  by  this  fleftiy  excrefccnce  ■"  there  is  an  example  of  one,
which  very  peculiarly  relates  to  the  prefent  queftion,  in  the  fecond  of  thefe
two  obfervations  of  the  celebrated  Fantonus,  which  I  only  mention'd
above  {x).

In  a  man  whom  a  violent  dyfentery  had,  at  length,  carried  off",  he  found
"  the  colon  ulcerated,  not  far  from  the  caecum,  from  which  flow'd  a  h.\x-
"  mour  of  a  purulent  nature,  mix'd  with  blood;  and  there  he  found,  be-
"  fides  this,  a  flefliy,  thick  and  round  body,  almoft  eight  inches  in  length,
"  which,  taking  its  rife  by  a  flender  beginning,  and  being  connected  by
"  that  only,  as  by  a  peduncle,  to  the  ulcerated  coat,  had  the  other  part  of
"  it  pendulous  in  the  inteftinal  tube,  and  taking  up  the  greater  part  of
"  that  tube :  you  would  have  faid,  fays  he,  it  was  a  large  polypus  of  the
"  inteftine  ;  for  the  whole  of  this  body  exceeded  the  weight  of  a  medical
*'  pound." You  fee  that  this  excrefcence  was  attended  with  an  ulcer,  and

(j)  Obf.  I.  §.  4.  (a)  Aa.  Hafn.  vol.  4.  p.  I.  pag.  86.

(/)  I.  fetl.  13.  obf.  I.  \x)  N.  13.  &  16.

without


Letter  XXXI. Article  2 2.  8  5 :

■without  doubt  arole  from  an  ulceration  being  continu'd  through  this  lono^
dyientery  :  and  it  could  not  be  call'd  a  great  polypus  for  this  reafon,  that  it
had  the  nature  of  thole  polypi,  which  are  fpoken  of  above,  but  becaufe  it
refembled  a  polypus  of  the  nofe,  which  is  fo  call'd  from  its  fimilitude  to  a..
polypus,  not  only  in  its  figure,  but  in  its  nature  alfo ;  for  this  that  fldlful.
and  cautious  anatomift  pronounc'd  to  be  flefhy.

22.  Yet  I  do  not  doubt,  but  excrefcences  of  the  inteftines  may  fometimes^
eonfift  of  both  natures  ;  as  for  inftance,  if  to  flelhy  fimbria,  which  are  not
equal,  or  fmooth,  on  their  furfaces,  particles  of  vifcid  pus,  or  inteftinal  juice,
or  extravafated  blood,  begin  to  adhere :  and  to  thefe  others,  and  flill  others,
are  added  afterwards,  fo  that  the  root  and  the  nucleus  may  eonfift  of  real
flefh,  but  the  body  of  the  mafs  that  lies  round  it,  or  is  added  to  it,  and  the  ap-
pendages, may  eonfift  of  that  which  has  the  appearance  of  fiefti,  and  is  not
lb  in  effeft.

I  was  confulted,  in  the  year  1736,  for  a  nobleman,  who,  after  having.fre-
quent  difcharges  of  blood  by  ftool,  join'd  foon  after,  with  a  bilious  flux  of
the  inteftines,  and  with  a  continual  fever,  which  was,  at  firft,  fiight,  and  af-^
ter  that  acute,  when  this  fever,  and  its  violent  fymptoms,  did  not  at  all  re-
mit, from  the  ufe  of  the  moft  fuitable  remedies,,  and  even  when  that  fymp-
tom,  which  was  more  violent  than  any  of  the  others,  I  mean  the  pain  of"
the  belly,  was  of  a  fudden  become  extremely  fevere,  had  difcharg'd,  after  z
great  quantity  of  blood,  and  by  the  help  of  the  furgeon's  hand,,  a  certain;
body  almoft  of  the  length  of  a  fpan  and  half,  but  of  a  different  thicknefs,
and  figure,  in  different  parts.  For  on  the  upper  part,  it  refembled  an  ugly
head,  as  if  that  of  a  pretty  large  frog,  with  the  mouth  gaping;  the  other
part  of  the  body  was  almoft  round  externally,  internally  hollow,  and  was.
two  inches  thick,  till  growing  flender,  by  degrees,  it  terminated  in  a  tail  of  a.
confiderable  length,  and  bifid,  near  its  extremity.

If  you  remember  what  my  opinion  was,  in  almoft  the  latter  end  of  the-
preceding  letter  (jy),  of  frogs,  toads,  and  lizards,  being  difcharg'd  from  the
inteftines,  you  will  eafily  imagine  what  I  thought,  when  I  read  this  account
that  I  have  given  you  :  nor  was  there  any  occafion,  here,  to  fufpecl  what  youi
will  read  in  the  hiftory  of  a  certain  miller  (2),  whofe  difleftion  is  otherwife
worthy  of  infpeftion,.  on  account  of  chylous  excrements  having  been  con-
ftantly  difcharg'd,  for  a  year  and  half  together,  and  of  being  compar'd,  for
the  fake  of  finding  out  the  truth,  with  what  I  have  hinted  above  (a),  upon
the  cfeliac  flux.  But  a  toad  was  faid  to  have  crept  in  at  his  mouth,  when;
he  was  afleep,  and  to  have  done  much  mifchief  within,  till  at  length  it  was
difcharg'd  by  ftool,  in  an  over-grown  ftate,  and  dead  :  which  toad  I  could
wifti  the  excellent  author  of  the  obfervation  had  not  been  deter'd  by  the
very  filthy,  and  noxious  ftench,  from,  attentively  examining  into, ,  and  not
only  by  the  eye,  but  with  the  afliftance  of  the  knife.

As  far,  however,  as  relates  to  our  cafe  at  leaft,  the  learned  phyfician,  alfo,.
by  whom  I  was  confulted,  made  no  hefitation,  in  contempt  of  vulgar  opini-
ons, to  fuppofe  that  a  body  of  this  kind  was  of  the  nature  of  the  polypi  of
Lancifi. Yet,  as  befides  the  external  fibrous  ligaments,  by  which  it  leemM

(j)  N.  21.  (z)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3.  &  4.  obf.  163.  («)  N.  4.

5


S6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

to  have  been  connefted  with  the  inteftines,  he  defcrib'cl  a  foft  and  diftraiStlle
lubftance,  almoftof  a  black  colour,  whereof  it  confilled,  and  that  made  up
ot  pretty  ftrong  fibres,  with  various  glands  lying  betwixt  them  -,  and  as  he
mention'd  that  the  blood,  which  had  flow'd  frequently  before,  to  the  quantity
ot  fome  pints,  had  ceas'd  to  flow,  upon  the  removal  of  that  body,  and  that
purulent,  whitifh,  almoft  cineritious,  and  extremely  foetid,  matter  had  fuc-
ceeded,  which  fometimes  preceded  the  difcharge  of  the  excrements,  and
fometimes  follow'd  them,  and  always  with  very  great  pain,  and  that  thefe
iymptoms,  and  the  acute  fever,  had  continu'd,  till,  vulnerary  remedies  being
given,  which  were  afterwards  fucceeded  by  balfamics,  thefe,  and  the  other
difagreeable  fymptoms,  were  firft  diminifli'd,  and  at  length  quite  remov'd  ;
fo  that  the  patient  (who  liv'd  many  years  after)  defir'd  nothing  more  of  me,
than  to  advife  fuch  methods,  as  might  tend  to  preferve  him  from  the  return
of  this  diforder :  I  was  ready  in  my  own  mind  to  conjefture,  that  the  begin-
ning, and  roots,  of  this  body  were  excrefcences,  that  had  been  form'd  near
the  extremity  of  the  colon.

For  this  fituation  was  pointed  out,  by  that  very  fevere  pain,  which,  with-
out doubt,  began  below  the  navel,  in  the  part  where  the  colon  generally  has
a  kind  of  flexure,  before  it  terminates  in  the  reftum,  and  from  thence,  fol-
lowing the  adhefions  of  the  mefocolon,  was  extended  quite  to  the  back.  I
fuppos'd  therefore,  that  thefe  roots,  when  they  began  to  be  eroded,  ulcerated,
and  torn  off,  had  pour'd  out  blood,  and  moreover,  that  when  they  were  ul-
cerated pretty  deeply,  and  all  round  about,  the  pain,  and  the  other  fymp-
toms, had  come  on  :  and  that,  in  the  mean  while,  the  fibrous  and  other  vif-
cid  parts,  of  the  blood,  as  it  drip'd  down,  had  adher'd  to  the  excrefcences,
and  increas'd  their  fize,  and  by  this  means  brought  them  into  contadl  with
each  other,  and  form'd  them  into  that  fliape,  and  appearance,  which  they
had,  when  entirely  pull'd  away,  and  difcharg'd.  Yet  as  out  of  all  the  bo-
dies of  this  kind,  that  I  have  read  of,  as  being  difcharg'd  from  the  anus,  I
can  at  prefent  call  to  mind  only  one,  and  that  fpoken  of  by  Peyerus  (l>),
which  was  "  furnifli'd  with  blood-veflfels  •,"  and  as  where  I  plainly  fee  any-
body to  be  furnifh'd  with  thefe  velTels,  I  fliall  pronounce  that  it  is,  certainly,
to  be  refer'd  to  the  clafs  of  excrefcences ;  fo,  on  the  other  hand,  as  I  very
well  know,  how  eafily  we  may  be  deceiv'd,  and  impos'd  upon,  in  various
ways,  by  polypous  concretions,  I  fhall  anfvver  only  by  fufpeding,  and  con-
jediuring  fomething  of  this  kind,  in  regard  to  the  others,  which  either  are
without  thefe  true  veflels,  or  are  not  acknowledg'd  for  true  excrefcences,  by
the  judgment  of  a  cautious  and  experienc'd  furgeon.

Thus  I  formerly  gave  credit  to  Valfalva,  when  examining,  in  conjunftion
with  me,  a  bloody  ichor  that  was  difcharg'd  by  a  dyfenteric  patient,  whofe
life  was  defpair'd  of,  and  finding  therein  a  kind  of  little  fubfl:ance,  which,  if
you  confider'd  only  the  colour,  feem'd  to  be  nothing  but  a  fmall  coagulum
of  blood  -,  he,  after  enquiring  into  it  very  attentively,  and  confidering  it
thoroughly,  pronounc'd,  without  any  hefitation,  that  it  was  a  fmall  excref-
cence  of  the  ulcerated  intefl;ine. So,  alfo,  I  fliould  have  given  credit  to  the

{i)  Exercit.  I.  de  gland,  inteftin.  circa  finem.

5  v^'T


Letter  XXXL Article  23.  8j

very  flcilful  Molinelli  (c),  if  he  had  pronounc'd  a  hollow  body,  of  a  fpan  in>
length,  which  a  man  who  was  afflifted  violently,  and  for  a  long  time  too-e-
ther,  with  a  dyfentery,  had  himfelf  drawn  out  from  the  re£tum,  to  be  "  from.
"  the  fungous  flefln  of  ulcers,"  though  he,  in  confequence  of  his  great  pru-
dence, and  caution,  would  by  no  means  do  this,  but  only  faid,.  that  it  was
"  not  unlike"  fuch  a  kind  of  flefli.  And  perhaxis  the  celebrated  Struvius  (d)
had  his  eye  to  nothing  elfe,  fince,  when  he  dei(:rib'd  "  a  membranofo-carne-
"  ous  kind  of  mafs,"  as  he  exprefsly  calls  it,  of  equal  length  with  the  other,
of  an  inch  in  thicknefs,  and  "  interwoven  with  a  great  quantity  of  fat,"
which  was  difcharg'd  from  the  anus,  by  a  very  violent  ftraining  ;  he  was  wil-
ling, as  I  fuppofe,  to  fhew  his  own  doubts,  by  prefixing  this  title,  De  Majfa
Polypofa  per  alviim  excreta,  to  his  obfervation  :  and  yet  fuch  things  had  pre-
ceded, as  might  have  given,  as  well  as  the  dyfentery  itfelf,  a  jufl  fufpicion
of  a  flefhy  excrefcence.

23.  "While  I  have  been  fhowing  thus  far,  that  in  a  dyfentery,  adipous,
membranous,  and  flefny,  bodies  may  be  difcharg'd,  and  yet  that  the  inteftines
are  not  ulcerated,  for  this  reafon,  becaufe  tkefe  bodies  often  feem  to  be  what
they  are  not  -,  I  have  fear'd  now  and  then,  left  you  Ihould,  perhaps,  wonder,
that  I  do  not  feem  to  think  an  erofion,  or  rupture  of  veflels  to  be  prov'd^
even  from  the  mere  difcharge  of  blood  -,  fo  that  an  ulceration,  either  already,
form'd,  or  at  leaft  begun,  muft  of  courfe  be  acknowledg'd.  But  if  you.
have  wonder'd,  you  will  immediately  ceafe  to  wonder,  when  you  attend  to-
thofe  things  that  I  fhall  toLK:h  upon  in  a  few  words.

There  is  an  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Wagner  ("i?^,  in  which,  he  not
only  deferibcs  feveral  appearances  found  by  him,  in  the  vifcera  of  a  dyfen-
teric  woman,  and  amongft  thefe,  that  which  ought  to  be  remark'd  in  favour
of  Spigelius  f/j,  "  that  the  gall-bladder  was  turgid,"  but  this  alfo,  in  parti-
cular, that  the  inteftines  had,  no  where,  any  marks  of  difeafe,  except  that
all  "  the  fmall  and  large  inteftines  were  equally  ftrip'd  of  the  mucous  hu-
"  mour,  with  which  they  are  generally  cover'd,"  and  the  redlum  was  gan-
grenous. But  if  he  had  obferv'd  any  little  ulcer  in  thefe  parts,  he  then
fhould  not  have  look'd  for  the  paflages  of  the  blood,  which  the  patient  had
difcharg'd,  in  thofe  extreme  orifices  of  the  veins,  that  is  to  fay,  thofe  which
the  fcirrhous  glands  in  the  mefentery,  and  fpafms,  had  conftring'd,  fo  that
the  blood  ■•'  regurgitated  immediately"  through  thofe  orifices,  into  the  in-
teftines, in  the  fame  manner  as  a  blue  liquor,  injefted  into  the  fame  veins,  did
then  exhibit  to  him,  "  very  evident  marks  of  a  blue,  fweat,"  within  the  in--
teftines.

Befides,  there  is  an  obfervation  of  Wharton,  given  by  GlifTon,  in  his  trea-r
tife  of  the  ftomach  and  inteftines,  which,  as  it  is  defcrib'd  fomewhat  diffe-
rently from  the  intention  of  this  treatife,  in  the  Sepulchretum  ("_§-),  without  re-
ferring you  to  any  particular  part  of  it,  will,  if  you  read  it  in  the  twenty-third
chapter,  under  number  eleven,  fhow,  that  after  an  "  enormous  vomiting  of:
"blood,  frompoifon,  no  vein  in  the  ftomach,"  which,  even  after  death,  conr
tain'd  a  fmall  quantity  of  blood,"  had  appear'd  to  be  either  ruptur'd  or  erod-

(?)  Vid.  Comment,  de  bonon.  fc.  acad.  t.  2. (f).Epii.  n.  c.  cent.  i-&  2.  obf.  171.
|>.  I.  inter  medica  obf.  2.  ^/;  Vid.  fupra  n.  15.

{d)  KSi.  n.xur.  t.  2. obf.  195.  (^)  L.  3.  f,  8.  obf.  7.  in  additam.


B8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  ed,  but  that  the  internal  coat  being  wip'd  away  with  the  back  of  the  knife,
"  innumerable  little  bloody  points  had  then  gradually  appear'd,  on  the  de-
"  terg'd  furface."  But  whether  by  a  wiping  of  this  kind,  as  Glifibn  thinks,
a  kind  of  cuticle,  as  it  were,  was  abraded,  and  the  poifon  aded  in  no  other
manner  in  the  living  body,  as  the  internal  coat  itfelf  was  feen  to  be  bloody,
juft  as  the  cutis  appears  when  the  cuticle  is  abraded ;  or  whether  it  be  more
probable  that  the  extreme  orifices  of  the  arteries  being  dilated,  by  the  quan-
tity of  blood,  which  the  violence  of  the  poifon  had  brought  together,  had,  a
little  before,  pour'd  out  the  blood,  and  the  back  of  the  knife,  at  that  time,
prefllng  out  whatever  blood  remain'd  in  them,  brought  their  orifices  to  view,
I  would  rather  choofe  you  fhould  judge,  from  what  Boerhaave  (h)  has  faid,
in  more  than  one  place,  of  anaftomofis,  than  that  I  fhould  determine.

Attend  to  the  example  which  he  there  produces,  and  elfewhere  alfo  ;  as,
for  inftance,  when  fpeaking  of  the  menftruous  blood,  which  was  retain'd,  be-
ing difcharg'd  by  other  paiTages,  he  fays  (i),  "  I  have  feen  an  hasmoptoe  of
"  this  kind,  which  had  grown  habitual,  lb  that  every  month  a  florid  blood
"  was  fpit  up,  without  detriment  to  health,  though  join'd  with  a  flight  cough.
"  I  have  feen  the  blood  thrown  up  by  vomiting  :  I  have  feen  that  it  has  been
"  difcharg'd  by  llool,  and  by  fweat."  Compare,  moreover,  with  each  of  thefe,
the  other  examples,  that  the  very  learned  Haller  (k)  adds,  in  a  confiderable
number ;  and  in  whichever  you  find  this  to  have  happen'd,  "  without  detri-
"  ment  to  the  health,"  fuppofe  it  to  have  happen'd  equally,  without  ulcera-
tion, juft  as  when  blood  was  difcharg'd  by  fweat,  you  would  have  feen  the
fKin,  in  that  place,  to  have  been  very  found,  nor  any  other  appearance  there-
on, when  deterg'd,  but  "  thofe  innumerable  little  bloody  points,"  which
Wharton  law  on  the  internal  coat  of  the  ftomach,  when  wip'd.

Now  transfer  thefe  reafonings  from  the  ftomach,  to  the  inteftines,  and  you
will  conceive  how  blood  may  be  difcharg'd,  in  a  dyfentery,  without  any  ulce-
ration of  the  inteftines,  or,  if  you  are  a  little  in  doubt  on  this  head,  put  that
obfervation  of  Wharton  out  of  the  queftion,  at  prefent,  and  befides  the  ex-
amples which  I  have  given  you,  call  to  mind  that  of  blood  flowing  from  the
noflrils.  Are  the  veins,  or  arteries,  always  either  ruptur'd,  or  corroded,  in
this  cafe  ?  or  is  the  coat  of  the  noftrils  always  ulcerated  ?  If  they  are  ruptur'd
or  corroded,  how  does  it  happen  that  the  blood  often  ftops  fpontaneoufly,
without  the  leaft  remedy  being  apply'd  ?  If  they  are  ulcerated,  how  does  it
happen,  that  no  pus,  I  do  not  fay,  but  that  even  no  pain  is  the  confequence  ?
Nov/  then  itippofe  it  probable,  that  the  fame  thing  may  happen,  on  the  inter-
nal coat  of  the  inteftines,  which  you  fuppofe  to  have  happen'd  on  the  inter-
nal coat  of  the  noftrils,  cfpecially  as  the  fluids,  that  are  injected  by  the  ar-
teries, are  lb  eafily  carry'd  through  either  of  thefe  coats,  into  the  cavity  of
the  noftrils,  or  inteftines  (/).  Suppofe,  therefore,  that  the  quantity  of  blood
is  increas'd,  that  the  impetus  of  it  is  increas'd,  and  that  the  extremities  of
the  arteries,  on  the  internal  furface  of  the  inteftines,  are  made  more  lax  than
ufual,  and  particularly  in  thofe  in  whom  they  were,  before,  naturally  lax,

(*)  PrKledl.  aJ  inflit.  §.707.  775,814,  &c. (/)  Vid.  not. Haller. ai  §.  497.  earund.
{i)  Ad  §.  66j.  praekft.

{^)  In  not.  ad  cit.  mode  §.

either


Letter  XXXL Article  24, 25, 26.  89

either  from  a  kind  of  paralytic  affeftion,  or  from  fome  other  caufe,  as  for  in-
ftance,  from  having  been  too  much  moiften'd,  in  fluxes  of  the  inteftines  •,  and
you  will  eafily  conceive  with  Boerhaave,  that  blood  is  difcharg'd  from  thence
by  means  of  anaftomofis.

24.  And  you  muft  not  fuppofe  any  one  of  thefe  circumftances  only  to  take
place,  but  many  of  them  at  once.  B'or  as  Boerhaave  thus  teaches  (m) :  "  v/hen
"  the  blood  cannot  pafs  through  the  vena  portarum,  and  its  branches,  then
"  pure  blood  itfelf  may  be  extravafated  by  an  anaftomofis,  from  the  mefenteric
"  veflels,"  if  he  had  not  immediately  added  "  the  orifices  of  which  are  dilat-
"  ed,'*  any  one  might  doubt  upon  the  event,  who  had  read  that  Ortlobius  (k)s
when  he  made  a  ligature  upon  this  vein,  in  living  dogs,  "  could  never  ob-
"  ferve  that  pure  blood  burft  forth  on  the  inteftines,  notwithftanding  the
"  whole  coat  of  the  inteftines  was  dy*d,  as  it  were,  with  a  fcarlet  colour.'*
In  thefe  dogs,  without  doubt,  the  mouths  of  the-veflels  were  not  dilated.
But  they  were  very  confiderably  dilated,  by  reafon  of  the  laxity  of  the  fur-
rounding  fibres,  "  in  the  fphacelated  inteftines"  of  that  count,  of  whom  this
author  fpeaks  ;  for  in  the  inteftines  of  this  gentleman  he  faw,  "  the  meferaic
"  veins  having  their  orifices  open,  and  fiU'd  with  coagulated  blood,  as  if
"  they  had  been  fiU'd  with  wax."  And  thefe  things  I  hinted,  becaufe  in  a
dyfentery,  "  fometimes  there  is  a  true  inflammation,  and  a  fatal  gangrene
"  follows,"  as  Boerhaave  has  faid  a  little  after  thofe  things  that  I  have  relat^
ed  (o).  And  indeed  the  obfervations  of  many  authors,  in  this  eleventh  fec-
tion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (p),  Ihow  that  he  has  faid  what  is  true ;  and  be^
fides  that  which  is  produc*d  above  (f ),  this  other  of  Valfalva's,  alfo,  con-
firms it.

25.  A  woman  died  of  a  dyfentery.  The  inteftines  were  found  to  be  inflam'd.
The  left  kidney  was  altogether  deficient  in  this  woman  :  but  the  deficiency
Was  fupply'd  by  the  right,  which  was  twice  as  large  as  it  naturally  is,  and
furnifli'd  with  a  double  pelvis,  and  double  ureter.  And  both  of  the  ureters
■went  to  the  right  fide  of  the  bladder.

26.  Setting  afide  thofe  appearances  which,  as  it  is  evident  to  yotl,  muft
have  exifted  from  the  original  formation  of  the  woman  ;  the  inflammation  of
the  inteftines  relates  to  the  dyfentery.  Now  then  call  back  to  your  memory,
and  join  with  this  obfervation,  and  with  others,  that  which  I  have  defcrib'd
above  from  Piccolhominus  (r).  For  in  thar,  whether  the  abrafion,  which
feem'd  fo  far  furprizing  to  the  obfervator  himfelf,  was  very  great  •,  or  rather,
.whether  a  confiderable  inflammation  of  that  kind  was  join'd  with  the  abrafion,
fo  that  the  whole  coat  of  the  inteftines  was  red,  as  it  was  in  the  dogs  of
Ortlobius  (s)  ;  there  is  no  doubt  but  Piccolhominus,  alfo,  acknowledg'd  an
inflammation.  And  as  this  cannot  happen,  but  the  paflage  of  the  blood,
through  thofe  branches  of  the  vena  portarum,  muft  be  fuppos'd  to  be  im-
peded ;  I  have  already  faid  (t)  what  may  be  the  natural  confequence  of  this,
if  any  other  caufe  be  added,  even  before  the  inteftines,  by  the  impetus  of
the  blood  ftill  continuing,  begin  to  degenerate  into  a  gangrenous  laxity.

(;»)  Ad  §.  cit.  814.  (?)  N.  14.

(/;)  Hill.  part.  &  oscon.  horn.  diff.  8.  §.  7. {>)  N.  20.
{0)  Ad  §.815.  ..  (s)  Supra,  n.241

{/)  3.  9.  19.  §.  J  &  2,  {:)  Ibid."

■ Vol.  II.  N  llws


90  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Bellyv-

Thus  Brunnerus  (u),  in  a  foldier,  who  had  been  rarry'd  off  by  very  vlo-
k-nt  convuUionf,  which  came  on,  when  he  already  labour'd  under  a  diarrhoea,
found  through  the  v/hole  trad  of  the  inteftines,.  and  efpecially  the  fmaller
ones,  a  confiderable  inflammation,  from  which  even  the  ftomacli  was  not
altoo-ether  free,  and,  at  tlie  fame  time,  coagula  of  blood  in  the  laft-mention'd
cavity,  and  in  the  inteftines  a  red  mucus,  which  was  a  very  evident  proof,
that  the  diarrhcca  had,  already,  begun  to  degenerate  into  a  dyfentery,  al-
thouoh  as  yet  nothing  gangrenous  appear'd  in  thefe  vifcera.  And  an  inflam-
mation of  the  inteftines  may  eafily  pals  over  into  a  gangrene,  and  even  into  a
Iphacehis,  as  I  havcfaid  :  from  whence  it  probably  happens,  as  was  related  to
we,  by  a  very  experienc'd  phyfician,  when  I  was  a  young  man,  that  it  is  not
\incommon  for  the  fever,  in  dyfenteric  patients,  to  ieem  to  be  quite  gone
off,  for  a  few  days  before  death,  fo  that  a  phyfician,  if  he  did  not  attend  to
ether  fymptoms,' might  be  fliamefully  deceiv'd.  However,  in  regard  to  that
very  fallacious  diiorder  of  the  intefl;ines,  the  fphacelus,  I  fhall  have  a  more
convenient  opportunity  of  treating  of  it  hereafter  (,y).

Now  in  refpedto  m.embranes  being  difcharg'd,  either  together  with  bloodj.
or  together  v/ith  pus,  or  with  neither,  and  thefe  either  in  a  dyfentery,  or
when  there  is  no  dyfentery,  fomewhat  is  to  be  added  to  thofe  things  that  I
have  faid  above.  Without  doubt  I  have  wifli'd,  that  the  nature  of  fome  of
thefe  membranes  might  have  been  examin'd  into,  more  accurately.  Lenti-
lius  (y)  for  inftance,  has  exceedingly  well  determin'd,  what  inteftine  it  was,
from'whence  the  membranes  proceeded,  which  were  excreted  in  the  ftools  at
intervals,  with  or  without  blood,  and  in  a  greater,  or  in  a  lefler  numben
But  as  to  his  fuppofing  thefe  membranes  to  be  the  valvulas  conniventes,  every
one  is  at  liberty  to  give  credit,  or  not  give  credit,  to  his  fuppofition ;  and
even  to  believe,  or  difbelieve,  this  very  circumftance  alfo,  that  they  were  real
membranes.  For  it  appears  that  he  was  abfent  from  the  patient,  and  could
have  feen  nothing  elfe,  but  that  they  were  "  of  a  different  fize,  and  that,
"  when  dried,  they  refembled  the  pellicles  of  a  hog's  bladder,  when  fhrivel'd
up  with  heat."

But  Jo.  Maurice  Hoffmann  (2),  when  he  examin'd  very  attentively  mem"
branes  that  were  excreted  by  another  woman,  which  every  other  perfon  had
taken  for  the  internal  coat  of  the  inteftines,  found  them  to  be  avifcid  mucus,
*'  coacrulated  upon  the  valvulas  conniventes,  and  condens'd  into  the  form  of
"  a  membrane  :"  nor  does  the  opinion  of  the  celebrated  Trjelingius,  in  the
fifth  volume  of  the  A6la  Naturas  Curioforum  (a),  differ  from  this :  for  he,
on  examining  a  kind  of  tube,  or  fneath,  difcharg'd  by  the  wife  of  a.peafanc,
found  it  to  be  not  really  membranous,  "  although  it  refembled  the  figure
"  of  the  colon,  v.'ith  its  valvule  conniventes."  Qn  the  contrary,  Apinus(,J.)
made  not  the  leaft  doubt,  but  the  membranes,  which  were  difcharg'd  by  aor
other  patient,  were  really  pieces  of  the  internal  coat :  and  indeed  he  has  pro-
duc'd  many  reafons,  even  from  the  infpedlion  of  them,  why  he  fhould  be  be-
liev'd  :  although  the  reafon  which  he  gave  in  the  firft  place,  that  they  were

(u)  Exerclt.  de  gland,  duoden.  §.  4.  C:^J  Dec.  ead.  a,  9  &  10.  obf.  60.

{x)  Epift.  35.  C-^)  Obf.  laS.X

(y)  Eph.  n,  c.  dec.  3.  a.  3.  in  append,  n.  6. {i)  Dec.  cit.  a,  9  &  10.  obf.  179,
ad  obf.  68.

"  of


Letter  XXXI. Article  26.  gj

"  of  a  fiDrm  exactly  tubular,"  is  not  only  render'd  of  no  effect,  by  the  ob-
•fervation  which  was  juft  now  quoted,  but  alfo  by  the  obfervation  of  the  cele-
brated Verdriefius  (c),  who  having  examin'd,  very  clofely,  one  difcharg'd  by
■another  patient,  found  it,  very  evidently,  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  "  a  fiftu-
"  lous  pituita,  which  had  concreted  together,  and  accommodated  itfelf  to
"  the  figure  of  the  intefline,  wherein  it  was  contain'd."

But  mufl:  we  fuppofe,  you  will  fay,  that  the  fame  thing  happen'd  within
the  intefline  cscum,  which  Beckerus  (d)  almoft  afRrm'd  formerly,  his  hav-
ing feen  difcharg'd  by  ftool ;  that  is  to  fay,  "  a  membranous  body,  equal  in
"  length,  and  breadth,  to  the  finger  of  a  large  man,  open,  and  eroded,  atone
*'  end,  and  at  the  other  end  fhut  ?  For  he  has  immediately  fubjoin'd  the  fol-
lowing words,  "  made  up  of  a  threefold  coat,  thin,  flefhy,  and  ruo-ous."
Nay,  and  to  go  farther,  what  fhall  we  fay  to  three  other  obfervations,  in
which  not  the  appendix  vermiformis,  that  is  on  the  fide  of  the  intefline,  for
inflance,  but  a  confiderable  part  of  the  tube  of  the  inteftines  itfelf,  is  faid  to
have  been  difcharg'd  by  the  anus  ?  I  heartily  wifh  that  George  Francus  (e)  had
been  permitted  (for  his  patient  did  not  furvive,  as  thofe  of  Beckerirs,  and
others  did,  but  died  a  few  hours  after  the  difcharge  of  it)  to  examine  the  bo-
dy, after  death,  in  order  to  determine-  the  fituation,  from  whence,  "  an  en-
"  tire  part  of  the  fmall  inteftines,  of  the  length  of  a  fpan,  and  what  was
"  more,  with  a  portion  of  the  mefentery,  ftill  annex'd  to  it,"  had  been  torn
away,  which  he,  by  reafon  of  the  valvute  conniventes,  wherewith  it  was
internally  furnifh'd,  fufpefted  to  be  from  the  jejunum  :  although  if  a  feoa-
ration  of  this  kind  is  to  be  wonder'd  at,  th-e  coalition,  which  we  muit,'^of
courfe,  fuppofe  to  have  taken  place,  in  two  other  patients,  betwixt  thoic
parts  of  the  inteftine,  from  whence  the  intermediate  portion  was  torn  av/ay
is  ftill  more  to  be  wonder'd  at,  fince  neither  of  theie  perfons,  if  a  paffap-e  had
been  left  open,  from  the  inteftines,  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  -could  have
furviv'd.

But  Jo.  Peter  Albrecht  (f),  and  Andreus  Weftphal  (g),  when  they  pro-
duc'd  their  hiftories,  ingenioufly  imagin'd,  that  an  intufufception  had  preced-
ed, or  a  prolapfus  of  the  inverted  part  of  the  fuperior  inteftine,  v.-ithin  the
part  next  below  -,  fo  that  a  tearing  away  of  the  prolaps'd  part  did  not  happen,
by  means  of  inflammation,  and  gangrene,  before  there  was  Ibme  cono-Rui-
nation  in  the  place  of  the  feparation,  betwixt  the  receiving,  and  the  receiv'd
inteftine.  For  as  to  that  which  was  difcharg'd,  being  adlually  a  portion  of
the  inteftine,  although  "  many  doubted"  in  regard  to  the-  firft  obfervation,
and  in  regard  to  the  iecond  Bruckmann,  and  Hoffmann,  fuppos'd  it  to  be
cither  only  a  coat  of  the  inteftine,  or  a  mucus  in  the  form  of  a  coat ;  yet
witnefTes  of  the  firft  being  really  fo  were  not  v/ancing,  and  other  learned
men,  and  in  particular  the  -magnific  -order  of  phyficians  at  Gripfvvald,  to
whom  what  was  difcharg'd,  -in  the  fecond  obfervation,  is  faid  to  have  been
fent  to  be  examin'd,  hav€  pronounc'd  that  to  be  real.

(<.-)  Ephem.  earund.  cent.  i.  obf.  90.  f/J  Dec.  ead.  a.  3.  obf.  129.

•{<i)  Eai-und.  dec.  /.  a. -4.  obf. -68.  'fgJ  Difput.  qua  partem  inteft.  jejuni,  S:c.


(e)  Earund.. dec.  J.  a.  5  &-6.  obf.  177.


J^  .2  One


92  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

One  thing  I  have  obferv'd,  which  may  feem  to  eorrefpond  but  indifferently,
in  either  of  them,  to  the  fuppos'd  intvilufception.  For  the  valves,  in  the  in-
verted inteftine,  fhould  have  been  found  not  on  the  "  internal"  furface,  as
they  fuppofe,  but  on  the  external  furface,  nor  fliould  any  portion  of  the  me-
fentery,  or  omentum,  adhere  "externally,"  but  internally :  although  it  may
be  faid,  that  the  furfaces  were  not  fpoken  of,  as  they  then  were,  but  as  they
had  been  before,  in  their  natural  ftate,  or  that  the  inteftine  had  been  turn'd
back  into  its  former  ftate,  either  while  it  was  carry'd  down,  through  the  re-
maining part  of  the  canal,  quite  to  the  anus,  or  while  it  pafs'd  through
the  ftreight  paffage  of  the  anus  itfelf,  or  at  length,  even  by  the  hands  of
thofe  who  had  examin'd  it  after  it  was  difcharg'd.  Be  this  as  it  will,  when
you  have  read,  and  confider'd,  all  thcfe  circumftances,  you  will  judge  what
credit  is  to  be  given  to  thefe  obfervations  :  for  in  regard  to  me,  you  are  quite
at  your  liberty,  to  take  part  either  with  thofe  who  believe,  or  with  thofe  who
doubt,  or  with  thofe  who,  in  fome  meafure,  confent  therewith ;  and  I  fup-
pofe  you  will  be  lefs  furpriz'd  hereafter,  if  you  hear  that  any  dyfenteric  pa-
tients have  recover'd,  even  after  they  have  difcharg'd  real  membranes,  or
caruncles,  from  the  inteftines.

27.  Although  I  have  written  much  more  upon  the  fubjeft  of  the  dyfentery,
than  I  had  determined  in  the  beginning,  yet  before  I  come  to  a  conclufion,  I
Have  a  mind  to  add  fomething  on  the  fubjeft  of  tenefmus ;  not  in  the  man-
ner I  fee  it  is  here  done  in  the  Sepulchretum  (h),  where  it  is  confider'd  as
arifing  from  other  caufes,  of  which  I  ftiall  fpeak  on  a  future  occafion,  but
only  when  it  is  brought  on  by  the  dyfentery.  I  believe,  indeed,  that  in  the
end  of  this  flux,  the  caufe  by  which  the  reftum  is  irritated  to  difcharge  its
contents,  does  frequently  not  confift  in  the  diforder  of  the  fame  inteftine,
but  proceeds  from  the  remains  of  the  acrid  mucus,  and  blood,  ftagnating
in  the  neareft  cells  of  the  colon,  efpecially  if  there  be  the  obfolete  colour
of  this  blood  mix'd  with  the  mucus,  and  it  being  carry'd  down,  by  de-
grees, through  this  inteftine,  and,  in  like  manner,  through  the  redtum,  to
the  lower  part  of  it,  which  is  very  impatient  of  irritation.

It  is  furprizing  to  confider  how  long  fome  fubftances,  even  when  in  no
fmall  quantity,  nor  in  themfelves  vifcid,  feem  to  have  been  retain'd  in  the
cells  of  the  colon.  Inquiry  was  made  of  me,  in  the  year  1744,  in  the  name
of  a  learned,  and  ingenious,  phyfician,  where  I  thought  that  peafe  could
poflibly  have  remafn'd  in  the  belly  of  a  man,  five  whole  months  after  being
eaten  ?  For  he  aflerted,  that  there  was  a  man,  in  his  city,  who  having  eaten
them  frequently,  and  in  large  quantities,  in  the  month  of  June,  and  being
feiz'd  in  October  with  a  dyfentery,  and  fingultus,  could  not  be  cur'd  of  thefe.
diforders,  till,  in  the  beginning  of  December,  he  had  difcharg'd  by  ftool,
two  pounds  of  peafe,,  which  were  fo  entire,  that  many  of  them  were  pre-
ferv'd  as  curiofities  by  admiring  phyficians.  And  it  was  faid  that  the  fame  thing
had  happen'd  to  the  father  of  this  man  before,  only  they  had  not  remain'd  fo
many  months.  I  anfwer'd,  that  if  this' relation  were  truej^  for  as  the  ftory
was  well-known  in  that  city,  and  t^ftify'd  by  many,  I  could  not  fairly  difpute
the:  truth  of  it,  efpecially  as  I  had  read  hiftories,  in  medical  authors,  which

{h)  GM.  79.  &  feq..

wer&:


Letter  XXXL Article 28.  93

were  much  more  difRcult  to  be  fuppos'd  -,  and  if  thefe  tv/o  men  had  the  fame
ftru6lure  of  the  ftom.ach,  and  inteftines,  that  others  had,  I  did  not  fee  how
they  could  fo  eafily  have  adher'd,  as  by  being  difpers'd  into  many  cells  of
the  colon  :  for  if  they  had  been  join'd  together,  they  would  have  pbftrufted
the  pafiage  through  this  inteftine,  and  ftill  more  through  the  fmall  inteftines,
and  would  have  been  very  burdenfome,  and  uneafy,  to  the  ftomach,  as  they
were  in  fo  very  confiderabje  a  quantity,  and,  as  appear'd  from  the  circum-
ftances,  unbroken  with  the  teeth,  and  perhaps  not  fufEciently  boil'd  before,
nor  in  a  green,  and  tender  ftate,  but  already  grown  old,  yellow,  and  hard.
That  thefe  cells  probably  were,  in  thefe  men,  naturally  fomewhat  larger  than
they  are  in  others,  and  confifted  of  more  lax  fibres,  but  that  there  was  fcarce-
ly  any  doubt  of  very  vifcid,  and  tenacious,  matter  having  been  contain'd  in
the  tube  of  the  inteftines,  in  confiderable  quantity,  and  that  in  confequence
of  their  being  accuftom'd  to  mafticate  their  food  fo  little  ;  and  that  the  peas
being  entangled  by  this  matter,  and  glued,  as  it  were,  to  the  parietes  of  the
cells,  had  remain'd  in  this  ftate  of  adhefion,  till  they  were,  at  length,  loofen'd,
and  removed,  from  thence,  by  the  tormina  of  the  dyfentery,  and  the  frequent
ftrainings  to  ftool.

28.  But  although  in  explaining  that  tenefmus,  which  fucceeds  a  dyfentery,
I  am  often,  as  you  have  feen,  fo  far  of  opinion  with  Sydenham  (i),  that  I
do  not  allow  of  an  ulcer  exifting  in  the  reftum  ;  yet  do  not  imagine  that  I  fo
far  adhere  to  his  opinion,  as  not  to  fear  fometimes,  left  an  ulcer,  or  fome
other  confiderable  diforder,  ftiould  be  the  confequence  of  a  dyfentery  ;  as  I
was  warn'd,  even  when  I  was  a  young  man,  by  the  event  of  a  certain  pain
in  that  inteftine,  after  a  dyfentery,  upon  the  caufe  of  which  my  preceptors
had  opinions  different  from  each  other.

For  as  in  a  woman  of  the  firft  rank,,  a  dyfentery  had  ceas'd,  of  itfelf,  after
about  fifteen  days,  and  ftie  always  complain'd  of  a  pain  in  the  lower  part
of  the  inteftine,  when  £he  had  occafion  to  go  to  ftool,  and  at  other  times  alfo,
join'd  now  and  then,  with  a  kind  of  troublefome  pricking  ;  one  of  them  fup-
pos'd that  this  arofe,  as  it  was  in  a  delicate  woman,  only  from  a  flight  abra-
fion  of  the  internal  coat  •,  and  the  other,  that  is  Albertini,  v/ho  obferv'd  a
continual  fenie  of  weight  to  be  join'd  with  that  pain,  befides  a  fever,  not  with-
out a  kind  of  confent  in  the  thighs,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  loins,  but  no
tenefmus,  or  fcarcely  any  ;  was  afraid  of  fomething  of  greater  confequence,,
till  at  length  her  fever,  being  increas'd,  v/ith  a  rigor,  he  openly  foretold  the
fpeedy  appearance  of  an  abfcefs.  "Which  prediftion  was  foon  confirm'd  by
the  event,  pus  being  difcharg'd  to  the  quantity  of  two  ounces,  and  thephy-
fician  who  had  diflented,.  as  he  was  an  ingenuous  old  man,  not  only  confef-
fing  it,,  but  what  few  can  fubmit  to,  even  commending  the  true  prediftion;
of  the  other.

But  in  regard  to  a  very  confiderable  diforder  of  the  fame  inteftine,  and  one
that  is  lefs  known  among  the  common  people,  I  Ihall  have  occafion  to  fpeafc
of  it  in  the  next  letter  (k). Farewell.

(0,  Obf.  med.  circa.morb.  acut,  f.  4.  c.  3.  (i)  N,  6.  &  feq.


EETTER^


^4  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Beliy.


LETTER the THIRTY-SECOND

Treats  of  Coftivenefs  and  of  the  Piles.

THE  oppofite  dlforder  to  that  of  which  I  lately  wrote  to  you,  I  mean
the  dilorder  of  coftivenefs,  I  have  obferv'd  in  many  perfons,  without
any  evident  detriment  to  health,  notwithftanding  fome  are  accuftom'd  to  have
no  difcharges  from  the  bowels,  for  weeks  together,  and  even  (as  our  cele-
Ijrated  Zeviani  (a)  has  alfo  obferv'd)  for  a  month  together,  and  at  other
times,  and  that  more  frequently,  join'd  with  manifeft  injury,  of  which  death
itfelf  was  the  confequence.  Neverthelefs,  I  have  but  one  obfervation  of  this
diforder,  which  is  join'd  with  a  dilTedion,  to  defcribe  to  you  here :  for  the
other  obfervations  of  this  kind,  as  they  were  join'd  with  vomitings,  volvu-
lus, and  other  diforders  of  that  kind,  it  did  not  feem  proper  to  disjoin  from
them.  And  if  the  fame  thing  were,  likewife,  done  in  the  Sepulchretum,  the
obfervations  of  this  thirteenth  feiflion  would  be  greatly  reduc'd  in  their
number.

For  you  will  fee  it  remark'd  in  moft  of  them,  in  what  other  fedlion  that
part  of  the  obfervation  may  be  read,  that  has  been  taken  away  from  this.
But  that  there  are  others,  in  which  the  fame  remark  ought  to  be  made,  three
pao-es  only,  the  hundred  and  ninety-third,  the  hundred  and  ninety-feventh,
and  the  two  hundred  and  third,  if  you  turn  to  them,  will  clearly  demon-
ftrate.  For  if  you  read  in  the  firft,  the  fecond  article  of  the  third  obferva-
tion, you  will  naturally  fuppofe  that  it  belongs  only  to  that  place.  But  the
third  article  will  immediately  fhow  you,  that  the  fame  is  given  twice  over,
and  ftill  more,  that  what  is  deficient  in  both,  is  to  be  fought  for  elfewhere,
that  is  in  the  eighth  feftion  of  this  book,  in  obfervation  the  fifteenth.

A  fimilar  repetition  will  be  prov'd,  in  the  fecond  of  thofe  pages  I  refer'd
to,  by  comparing  the  fecond  article,  of  the  ninth  obfervation,  with  the  eighth
article  of  the  fame ;  for  we  are  not  to  fuppofe,  that  becaufe  by  a  Ihameful  ty-
pographical error  in  the  letter  it  is  faid  "  in  the  left  fide  under  the  region  of
"  the  liver:"  the  cafe  is  not  the  fame  which  in  the  former  is  properly  de-
fcrib'd,  bv  faying,  "  in  the  right  fide,"  for  that  it  is  lb,  will  be  clearly  de-
monftrated  to  you,  by  turning  to  the  next,  that  is  the  fourteenth  fefcion,
which  is  there  refer'd  to,  and  in  which  this  hiftory  is  given,  fomewhat  miore
at  large,  under  article  the  firft  of  the  eighth  obfervation.

Finally,  the  third  of  thofe  pages  tliat  1  pointed  out,  will  immediately  fliow
svhat  is  repeated,  and  what  is  neverthelefs  omitted, when  you  ftiall  have

(a)  Del  flato,  &c.  1.  z.  c.  1 1..

■';  con>.


Letter  XXXII. Article:  2.  95

Gompar'd  article  the  ninth  of  the  twelfth  obfervation,  with  article  the  third,
and  both  of  them  with  the  feventh  fedlion,  to  which  you  are  in  the  letter
defir'd  to  turn,  where  you  will  read  the  cafe  defcrib'd  more  at  large,  under
obfervation  the  thirty-third.

But  let  it  be  fufficient  to  have  pointed  out  thefe  repetitions,  which  are  fo
near  one  to  another.  However  out  of  the  more  difiiant  ones,  that  I  leave  to
be  enquir'd  into  by  you,  I  cannot  help  taking  notice  of  one,  which,  by  rea-
fon  of  the  ufual  litde  arts,  and  deceit  of  Blancardus,  is  not  very  eafily  de^
teded.  Read,  I  befeech  you,  the  fixth  article  of  the  firfl:  obfervation,  and
compare  what  Formius  has  related  of  the  (hoemaker,  with  thofe  things-
which,  in-  the  third  obfervation  of  the  additamenta,  Blancardus  has  faid  of
the  porter:  and  you  will  perceive  that  the  hiftory  is  the  fame  in  both  places;
but  that  the  fiioemakcr  of  Formius  was  chang'd  into  a  porter  by  Blancardus,
that  the  trick  might  not  be  found  out.  And  if  in  writing  to  you  I  frequently
deteft  artifices  of  this  kind,  of  which  he  has  been  guilty,  I  do  it  for  this
reafon, -that  you  may  withhold  your  alTent,  when  you  fhall  read  in  the  writ-
ings of  an  author,  in  other  refpefts,  learned,  that  Blancardus,  indeed,  "  in
*'  his  anatomic.  reforn:ata^  had  been  guilty  of  plagiarifm  which  was  fcarcelf
"  excufable  .  .  .  But  that  the  anatomia  praElica  rationalis.,  of  the  fame  author,,
"  deferv'd  a  greater  fnare  of  praife,"  that  is  to  fay  the  very  book,  from
which  thofe  examples,  that  I  produce  to  you  here,  are  transfer'd  into  the  •
Sepulchretum.

2.  And  yet  other  hiftories  were  not  wanting,  which  related  to  this  fedion*, ,
whether  they  were  to  be  taken  from  the  Sepulchretum  itfelf,  or  elfewhere.
For  example's  fake,  our  Saxonia  [h]  faw  a  fmith  in  this  city  "  who  after  a .
"  long  fuppreffion  of  fbools,  and  great  pains  of  the  belly,  pardy  by  the  ufe
"  of  acrid  glyfters,  and  partly  by  the  ufe  of  other  remedies,  difcharg'd  ma-
"  ny  fmall  ftones  of  the  bignefs  of  a  filbert,  of  a  yellow  colour,  and  fo  ex-
"  tremely  hard,  that  they  could  fcarcely  be  broken  by  violence."  And  this
obfervation  might  have  been  very  properly  introduced  in  this  fe£tion,  and  it
would  have  been  more  particularly  fuitable  in  that  place,  where  (f)  coftive'-
nefs  is  deduc'd  from  calculi  of  the  gall-bladder-,  or  if  they  (liould  feem  to
be  too  hard,  and  large,  to  be  refer'd  to  that  clafs ;  although  the  biliary  ca-
nals are  fometimes  found  to  be  much  dilated  -,  yet  in  this  fedlion,  at  leafl;  (li),
a  calculus,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  chefnut,  which  adher'd  to  the  colon,  is  fup-
pos'd  to  be  the  caufe  of  a  coftivenefs  of  the  fame  kind,  or  as  a  great  number
of  other  obfervations  which  were  already  explain'd,  pretty  much  at  large,  in
other  feftions,  are  repeated  in  this;  why  is  that  wonderful  hiftory  {e)  of  the
maniacal  man  omitted  here,  who,  though  he  devour'd  every  thing  he  met
with,  neverthelefs  fometimes  difcharg'd  nothing  from  his  belly,  v/hich  wa.s
very  tumid,  for  fifteen  or  fixteen  weeks  together  ?  or  not  to  digrefs  far  from
this  fubjeft,  as  among  the  examples  here  produc'd  of  infants,  who  being
born  without  any  aperture  from  the  reftum,  could  of  courfe  difcharge  no-»
thing  by  that  way,  the  obfervation  of  Holtzach  (/),  taken  from  one  of  themi^.

(h)  PrEle£l.  prail:.  p.  2.  c.  19.  (c)  L.  1.  f.  9.  in  addit,  obf.  I....

(c)  -Obf.  12.  §.  2.  3.  7.  8.  (f)  Obf.  u.  §.  6.

(d)  Obf.  9.  §.4.


96  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

■who  difcharg'd  the  excrement  of  the  bowels,  by  the  penis,  is  repeated  froirt
the  next  feftion  (g)  •,  why  is  another  fimilar  one  omitted,  which  had  been
there  produc'd  (h),  from  Hildanus,  or  two  of  Mcebius  {i)y  the  firft  of  which
is  very  much  hke  thofe,  and  the  fecond  relates  to  a  little  girl  of  fix  months
old,  who  difcharg'd  the  abdominal  fasces  through  the  vagina  ?

3.  Of  this  laft  kind  is  the  obfervation  of  my  fellow-citizen  Mercurialis
f/i),  v/hich  is  very  much  celebrated,  if  any  other  obfervation  is,  among  the
medical  writers  Daniel  Sennertus  (■/),  Thomas  Bartholin  (m)^  Johannes
Rhodius  (n),  and  others.  But  it  is  furprizing  that  Rhodius  who  refided
thirty-feven  years  at  Padua,  coUeded  his  obfervations  here,  and  publifh'd
them  in  the  year  1657,  did  not  enquire  what  had  become  of  that  fame
"  daughter  of  a  Jew,  who  went  under  the  name  of  a  German"  whom  Mer-
curialis faw  "  in  this  city,"  and  who,  being  born  without  any  natural  paf-
fage  from  the  reftum,  "  difcharg'd  her  fsces  by  the  vulva,"  and  neverthe-
lels,  contrary  to  what  might  be  expedted  by  fome,  "  furviv'd."

However  as  Rhodius  was  not  ignorant,  from  a  fimilar,  and  equally  cele-
'brated  obfervation  of  Benivenius  (c),  that  another  girl  had  not  liv'd  beyond
her  fixceenth  year,  he  would  readily  fuppofe  that  this  Hebrew  girl  alfo,  had
perhaps  died  the  fame  kind  of  death,  not  many  years  after  Mercurialis  had
feen  her,  (and  he  had  feen  her  before  the  year  1583),  that  is,  had  died  from
an  excruciating  pain  of  the  inteftines,  probably  from  the  excrements  being,
at  that  time,  much  indurated,  and  become  fo  thick,  that  they  could  not  be
difcharg'd  by  a  paffage  which  was  not  natural  to  them,  nor  yet  perhaps  pro-
per to  convey  emollient,  and  lubricating,  clyfters  commodioufiy  to  the  in-
teftines. But  whether  in  the  girl  of  Benivenius,  this  happen'd  the  more
eafily,  becaufe  flie  had  no  difcharge  by  ftool,  more  than  once  in  eight  days  ;
or  whether  the  Paduan  Jewefs  was  more  fortunate,  Rhodius  would  certain^
ly  have  found,  had  he  enquir'd,  that  fhe  was  alive  even  then,  and  had  pafs'd
her  feventieth  year,  (and  not  only,  as  a  certain  girl  whofe  hiftory  is  given
elfewhere  (/>),  of  twenty  years  of  age) :  and  indeed  fhe  even  furviv*d  Rho-
dius by  many  years,  inafmuch  as  ihe,  which  is  a  very  rare  inftance  even
among  thofe  that  are  moft  healthy,  liv'd  a  whole  century,  as  was  teftified  to
me,  by  one  who  had  fometimes  attended  this  old  woman,  as  a  phyfician,
I  mean  Ifaac  Cantarini,  when  in  the  year  1719,  he  liappen'd,  as  he  was  a
learned  old  man,  to  be  talking  with  me  of  Mercurialis.  But  (he  always
bore  up  under  her  misfortune  with  patience,  and  without  attempting  to  re-
lieve it,  well-remembering  the  advice  that  was  given  to  her  father,  by  Mer-
curialis.

And  there  is  no  doubt  but  where  another  paflage  is  open'd  by  nature  it-
felf,  through  which  you  may  make  a  fufficient  difcharge  of  the  excremen-
titious  matter,  the  inconvenience  is  to  be  prefer'd  to  the  many  and  various
dangers,  which,  unlefs  neceffity  itfelf  compels,  are  by  no  means  to  be  enter'd
into,  or  at  leaft  not  from  the  advice,  and  countenance, of  a  prudent  man.

{£)  Obf.  24.  §.  I.  (w)  Cent.  2.  hift.  G^.

^j)  §.  2.  («)  Cent.  2.  obf.  91.

(/')  Obf.  2a.  («)  De  abdit.  morbor.  cauf.  &c.  c.  86.

{k)  De  morb.  puer.  1.  i.e.  g.  (/■)  Eph-  n.  e.  dec*  2.  a.  lo.  obf.  75.

(/)  Medic,  prait.  1.  4.  p.  i.  f.  i.  c.  i.  in  lin.

I  For


Letter  XXXII. Article  3.  97

For  unlefs  the  aperture  of  the  rectum  at  the  anus,  be  found  to  be  fluit  up
only  by  a  membrane,  fo  that  by  an  eafy  and  fafe  incifion,  an  exit  may  be
given  to  the  excrements,  that  are  urging  from  above,  as  the  difTeftion  of  a
little  boy,  delcrib'd  by  the  celebrated  Baverus  (q),  fhovi's  might  eafily  have
been  done,  an  incifion  undertaken  raJhly  will  frequently  haften  the  death  of
the  infant,  and  will  make  that  remedy  infamous  and  horrible,  which  would
otherwife  be  advantageous  to  many,  if  prudently  made  ufe  of.  For  fuppofc
that  the  reftum  has,  in  the  whole  extent  of  it,  no  paflage  at  all,  but  is  folid
like  a  rope,  as  the  eleventh  oblervation,  in  this  part  of  the  Sepulchretum,
defcribes  it  (r) ;  or  fuppofe,  to  omit  examples  of  other  diibrders,  that  the
whole  of  that  inteftine  is  wanting,  of  which  you  will  find  an  obfervation  in
the  fame  place  (s).  Is  not  the  fuccefs  of  the  incifion,  which  you  read  there,
the  fame  with  that  which  you  read  of  in  Schenck  (t),  when  in  the  daughter
of  one  Sichard  an  apothecary,  the  furgeon  attempted  the  difleftion  indeed,
but  "  did  not  find  the  reftum  ?"  As  another  furgeon  did  not,  in  like  man-
ner, who  perforated  "  to  the  length  almoft  of  the  little  finger,"  in  one  of
thofe  infants,  I  mean,  whom  Ruyfch  found  to  be  entirely  without  that  intef-
tine (»).

Nor  indeed  are  inftances  of  this  kind  very  rare  ;  for  the  celebrated  Heifter
(x)  has  affirm'd  it  to  have  been  feen  more  than  once  by  him  alfo,  and  has
defcrib'd  one  exaniple  fully  (y) :  nor  are  we  without  another,  befides  thcfe,
which  you  may  read  elfewhere,  though  taken  notice  of  by  the  celebrated
Hoyer  (2)  only  en  pajfani :  and  indeed  that  fometimes  happens,  likewife,
which  may  eafily  deceive  the  operator,  that  is  to  fay,  the  lower  part  of  the
Teftum  is  not  wanting :  for  by  introducing  the  finger  per  anum,  for  fome
little  fpace,  which  is  fufficiently  pervious,  he  naturally  conceives  a  hope  of  a
fuccefsful  incifion,  as  if  nothing  but  a  kind  of  membrane,  wliich  was  inter-
pos'd,  cut  off  the  communication  with  the  upper  part  of  the  recftum,  and  yet
this  remaining  part  is  in  fa6l  no-where  •,  but  the  other  rectum  is  an  intefl;ine,
which  being  full  of  fasces,  is  inflefted  at  a  confiderable  diftance  from  the
anus,  to  the  upper  part  of  the  os  factum,  and  being  fliut  up,  and  firmly
concreted  to  that  part,  terminates  there,  as  has  -been  ken  by  the  celebrated
Peter  Chrifliopher  Wagner  {a).

It  is  true,  I  fhould  not  always  blame  the  furgeon,  if  an  infant  die  on  the
day  after  the  incifion  has  been  made,  as  that  did  whofe  two  little  brothers
had,  alfo,  been  born  with  an  imperforated  redlum  (i>).  For  although  I  have
read,  that  a  great  number  of  other  infants,  who  were  afiefted  with  the  fame
prjeternatural  diforder,  have  liv'd  feven,  ten,  twelve,  or  more  days ;  yet  I
have  alfo  read  that  fome,  in  other  refpefls  healthy,  and  who  had  not  under-
gone the  lead  incifion,  did  not  live  more  than  three  days.

However,  unlefs  it  appear  from  difieftion,  that  the  chirurgical  operation
has  not  beeji  the  caufe  of  death,  he,  in  particular,  will  not  efcape  all  fufpi-

(y)  Acl.  eorund.  t.  4.  obf. 147.  (x)  Inft.  cliirurg.  p.  2.  {.  5.  c.  163.  n.  i.

(r) §.  4.  QJ  Eph.  n.  c.cent. 3.  &  4.  obf.  193.

(s)  §.  17.  (2;)  Eanmd.  cent.  6.  obf.  59.

(t)  Obf.  medic.  1.  3. ubi  de  intellino  refto {a)  Commerc. Litter,  a.  1735.  Hebd,  46.

ebf.  6.  n.  4.

(ft)  Adverf.  anat,  dec.  ^.  c.  -lo.  (/)  Eph.  cit-dec.  3.  a.  5,  8c  6.  obf.  282.

Voi.  II,  O  cion


98  Book  III. Of  Dlfeafes  of  the  Belly.

cion  of  having  haften'd  the  death  of  the  infant,  who,  without  properly  con-
fidering  every  circumftance,  has  run  headlong  to  the  incifion,  as  if  to  a  re-
medy that  w-as  not  at  all  dangerous.  Wherefore,  when  any  other  paflage  is
fufficiently  open'd,  although  attended  with  great  inconveniencies,  and  it  is
not  certain  that  the  reftum  comes  down  fo  far  betwixt  the  buttocks,  that
its  canal  is  cover'd  only  with  the  cutis,  or  a  membrane  of  no  great  thicknefs;
we  muft  not  fearch,  in  that  part,  for  what  perhaps  terminates  in  another
place,  as  for  inftance,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  vagina.  For  unlefs  the  inci-
fion penetrate  thus  far,  it  can  have  no  efFedt  in  removing  the  complaifit ;
and  if  it  does  really  penetrate  thus  far,  tv/o  other  dangers  remain  behind,
befides  that  of  hemorrhage,  or  convulfions,  one  of  which  is,  left  the  paf-
fage  open'd  by  nature,  into  the  vagina,  may  never  be  quite  clos'd  up,  not-
withftanding  the  incifion ;  and  the  lecond,  left  that  which  is  open'd  artifi-
cially by  another  way,  fliould  from  the  want  of  a  fphinfter,  to  fliut  up  the
orifice,  not  remove,  but  double,  the  inconvenience.

4.  But  if  there  be  no  exit  at  all,  to  the  abdominal  fseces,  a  doubtful  me-
tliod  of  cure  ought  to  be  prefer'd  to  the  certain  death  of  the  infant.  For
nature  has  not  dealt  with  other  animals,  as  ftie  has  with  that  infeft,  which  is
call'd  by  the  French  Fourmi-lion,  and  which  according  to  the  obfervations
made  upon  infefts,  by  that  incomparable  natural  hiftorian  Reaumur  (c),  has
neither  any  anus,  nor  any  inteftinal  excrements  that  can  be  perceiv'd.  And
if  the  cow  at  Perinthus,  of  whom  Ariftotle  {d)  deliver'd  down  in  writing,
what  he  had  heard,  had  no  external  aperture  to  the  redlum,  "  in  which
"  the  excrementitious  part  of  the  food  being  attenuated,  was  difcharg'd
"  through  the  bladder,  and  the  anus  being  cut  afunder,  very  foon  clos'd
"  up  again,  fo  that  the  diforder  could  not  be  obviated  by  repeated  incifion  •"
I  have  no  doubt  but  I  may  fufpedt,  with  fome  probability,  that  the  laft  in-
teftine  terminated  in  the  bladder ;  and  the  ufelefs  incifions  confirm  what  I
juft  now  faid,  of  the  difficulty  either  of  penetrating  fo  far  as  there  is  occafion,.
or  of  Ihutting  up  a  paflage,  which  has  been  open'd  by  nature.

And  I  had  the  fame  fufpicion  formerly,  when  I  heard  that  there  was  a
virgin  at  Bologna,  who  difcharg'd  nothing  by  the  inteftines,  but  all  by  the
bladder,  diflx)lv'd  in  the  urine.  For  that  this  inteftine  has,  more  than  once,
been  inferred  into  the  bladder,  three  obfervations,  which  you  have  join'd
together  in  the  Sepulchretum,  teftify  {e),  or  at  kaft  two,  if  the  third  is  the
fame  as  the  firft,  which  this  twelfth  feftion,  being  quoted  in  the  former  (f),
feems  to  ftiow.  But  if  none  of  thofe  infants,  that  are  defcrib'd  in  thefe  ob-
fervations, furviv'd ;  the  caufe  of  their  death  is,  perhaps,  to  be  afcrib'd,  if
not  fo  much  to  the  very  narrov/  communication  betwixt  the  redlum,  and'
bladder,  fuch  as  is  defcrib'd,  and  delineated,  by  the  celebrated  Sandenius
{g),  yet  at  leafl:  to  the  narrownefs,  length,  and  winding,  of  the  male  urethra,
which  Is,  for  thcie  reafons,  unequal  to  the  talk  of  difcharging  the  urine  for
a  long  t:  ■  e  cogecher,  as  it  is  now  very  thick,  on  account  of  the  excrements
being  mix*d  with  it  (h).

(f)  Memoir,  pour.  I'hift.  des  infea.  t. 6.  (fj  Vid.  obf.  xi.  §.  6.

mem.  10.  (g)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  9.  &  10.  obf.  194-

{d)  Degenerat.  animai.  I.  4.  c.  4.  mfiji»  (hj  Vid,  tamen  epift.  65.  n..  6,
{e)  L.  3.  f.  xi.  obf.  24.  §.  1,  2,  3.

Be


Letter  XXXII. Article  5.  99

Be  this  as  it  will ;  as  often  as  ever  it  appears,  that  no  paffage  is  open  for  the
diicharge  of  the  fgeces,  from  the  intcftines,  we  miiit  not  delay,  till  the  long
retention  thereof,  begins  to  be  very  injurious  to  the  infant  -,  and,  for  that
reafon,  renders  it  lefs  fit  for  the  operation ;  but  the  cure  muft  neceflarily  be
attempted,  having  firft  declar'd  to  every  one  about  the  infant,  the  doubtful-
nefs  of  the  event ;  yet  the  attempt  mull  be  always  m.ade  with  caution,  and
with  fliill,  left  by  one  who  is  ignorant  of  anatomy,  the  bladder,  or,  in  females,
the  vagina,  be  wounded,  together  with  the  other  parts,  efpecially  where  the
inftrument  muft,  neceflarily,  be  introduc'd  very  high  up.

For  befides  a  very  thick  membrane,  a  fpongy  ikfli,  fometimes,  and  fat,  to
the  extent  of  two  inches,  may  be  interpos'd,  as  you  will  learn  from  the  Se-
pulchretum  (/),  and  even  fometimes,  as  you  will  read  in  the  fame  place  (k),
the  internal  coalition  goes  up  fo  high,  as  to  equal  the  length  of  "  two  joints
"  of  the  little  finger,  of  a  moderately-fiz'd  man  ■"  and  yet  the  child,
*'  having  loft  but  little  blood,"  in  the  perforation,  and  a  proper  cure  having
fucceeded,  was  preferv'd,  fo  that  being  at  length  "  an  old  woman,"  fhe
died,  as  it  feems,  of  quite  a  different  difeafe,  which  you  will  learn  from
reading  in  another  place  (I),  the  conclufion  of  that  obfervation,  which  is  very
improperly  omitted  there.  And  you  will  find  that  another  liv'd  till  it  was
four  years  of  age,  and  is  perhaps  ftill  living ;  I  mean  one  whom  Hoyerus
(wj,  that  I  have  commended  above,  cur'd  by  an  incifion,  longer  than  the
"  joint  of  a  man's  thumb :"  to  take  no  notice  of  that,  which  the  celebrated
Huberus  («)  ftiows  it  poflible  to  have  fav'd,  if  the  father  of  the  infant  had
fuffer'd  the  carneo-pinguedinous  mafs  which  he  faw  in  the  dead  body,  and
which  had  been  already  cut  through  with  the  knife,  in  the  living  body,
"  to  the  extent  of  almoft  two  fingers  breadths,"  to  be  cut  a  little  higher  j
for  by  this  m.eans,  the  incifion  would  have  reach'd  into  the  cavity  of  the  in-
teftine,  that  terminated  clofe  to  it.

5.  But,  although  this  kind  of  diforder  may  fometimes  be  cur'd,  even  when
there  feems  fcarcely  any  hope  of  a  cure,  many  of  them  are,  neverthelefs,
abfolutely  incurable,  as  when  there  is  an  occlufion,  or  adftriftion,  in  fome
one  of  the  higher  inteftines,  of  which  cafe  you  have  inftances  not  only  here
in  the  Sepulchretum,  but  will  alfo  have  other  inftances  from  me,  at  other
times.  And  to  thefe  you  will  add,  not  only  the  large  fleftiy  excrefcence,  faid,
in  the  preceding  letter  (o),  to  have  been  found  within  the  colon,  by  Cortefius,
but  alfo  the  fcirrhous  ring,  made  up  of  glands,  v/hich  the  celebrated  Haafius
(f),  found  in  the  fame  place,  and  which  left  a  foramen  fcarcely  fufficient  to
admit  a  (lender  probe  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  the  callus  of  the  fam.e  inteftine,
which  was  alm-oft  cartilaginous,  and  which  the  celebrated  Chriftian  Wencker
(j)  defcrib'd,  from  the  obfervation  of  his  brother,  as  rendering  the  tube,  in
that  part,  extrem-ely  narrow  \  nor  muft  that  be  omitted  which  is  defcrib'd  by
Laubius  Cr),  of  the  colon,  before  it  came  near  to  the  rc6tum,  having  its
coats  fo  contraded  in  a  great  pare  of  thetubcj  as  to  render  it  not  at  all  furpriz-

(0  Obf.  cit.  XI.  §.  14, '  (»)  N.  21.

\k)  Ibid,  in  fchol.  ad  §.  4,  \f)  Commerc, litter,  a. 1742. hebd,  4j.

(/)  Eph.  n.  c,  dec.  J.  a,  3.  obf,  257.  n. 2.

{in)  Obf,  59,  cit.  fupra,  ad.  n,  3.  (?)  Diff,  fill,  virgin,  ventric.  perforat.  \.  5.

\n)  Aft.  n.  e.  t.  8,  ob,  24.  (r)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  7.  obf.  41 .

O  3  inSs


100  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ino-,  that  the  fseces  covild  not  defcend  •,  and  ftill  lefs  miift  we  omit  the  fame
dilbrder,  when  it  is,  at  the  fame  time,  extended  to  the  greater  part  of  the
reclum,  fuch  as  was  feen  by  Wakherns  (j),  who  was,  when  living,  a  very
experienc'd  man.  And  not  to  quit  the  fubjeft  of  this  laft  inteftine,  external
compreffion  is  often  the  caiife  of  an  incurable  coarftation  therein.

Thus  in  the  cafe  given  under  the  eleventh  obfcrvation,  of  this  fcdlion  of
the  Scpulchretum  (/),  by  whom  could  it  be  well-known,  that  a  kind  of
glandular  tumour  comprefs'd  the  upper  part  of  the  rectum,  on  both  fides  -,
and  I  may,  with  much  greater  propriety,  perhaps,  fay,  by  whom  could  it
be  cur'd  ?  And  I  do  not  doubt,  but  the  coalition  of  this  inteftine  is  to  be
dcduc'd,  rather  from  a  tumour  of  that  kind,  than  from  "  fome  very  hot
"  medicines  {u)"  which  had  been  taken,  and  which  would  dry  up,  and  con-
traft,  the  inteftine,  juft  as  fire  is  wont  to  dry  up  membranes  ;  provided,
however,  that  the  coalition  was  really  in  the  reftum,  fince  a  portion  of  a
wax  candle  was  introduc'd,  as  Donatus  fays,  "  to  the  length  of  a  foot  and  a
"  half-,"  for  how  this  could  happen  in  any  man,  I  do  not  fee,  unlefs  the
candle  was  drawn  away  in  an  inflefled  ftate,  or  unlefs  the  inteftines  were
differently  difpos'd,  from  their  ufual,  and  natural  fituation.  But  let  the  co-
alition have  been  wherever  you  pleafe  to  fuppofe,  that  it  is  to  be  accounted
for,  rather,  from  the  caufe  which  I  have  mention'd,  than  from  any  different
caufe,  another  hiftory  of  the  fame  coalition,  which  is  transfer'd  hither  frorrj-
Tulpius,  will  demonftrate  (x).

For  this  author  faw  this  inteftine,  of  which  I  am  fpeaking,  fo  deprefsM  by
two  calculi  of  the  urinary  bladder,  "  that  being  ftreighten'd,  and  collaps'd,  it
"  produc'd  many  membranous  filaments,  which  fo  clofely  interwove  the  in-
"  ternal  parietes  of  its  tube,  as  to  prevent  a  pofTibility  of  its  tranfmitting
'*  any  excrement  ;'*  and  in  the  fame  manner,  he  had  feen,  at  another  time
fjj,  "  that  fimilar  filaments  had  obftrufted  the  gula,  which  was  ftreighten'd
"  by  a  cancer."  But  this  coalition  of  the  rectum  was  incurable,  alfo,  for
more  reafons  than  one,  as  you  will  learn  from  reading  that  obfervation,  in
the  writings  of  Tulpius  himfelf  (z).  Moreover,  how  much  the  inteftinum
reftum,  when  comprefs'd  and  made  narrow,  may  obftru£t  the  difcharge  of
the  faeces,  even  without  any  connection  of  the  parietes,  you  will  learn  from
other  obfervations,  which  you  may  join  to  thofe  of  the  Sepulchreturrv;  as,
for  inftance,  from  that  of  Riedlinus  (a),  who  found,  in  a  man,  that  had  died,
of  an  obftruftion  of  the  bowels,  "  a  mafs  partly  flefhy,  and  partly .  glandu-
"  lar,"  which  was  larger  than  a  fift,  and  comprefs'd  the  inteftine,  near  to  the
virinary  bidder  ;  and  in  the  inteftine,  alfo,  were  many  "  flefhy  excrefcences :"
or  from  thofe  of  Jannellius,  and  Lancifi  (i'),  who  faw  an  obftinate,  and  in--
fuperable,  coftivenefs  in  a  matron,  from  the  colon,  and  particularly,  in  its
lower  part,  being  fo  dilated,  and  heavy,  as  to  force  the  uterus  towards  th«-
re(3:um„  to  confine  it  to  a  very  narrow  compafs,  and  caufe  a  great  contrac-
tion of  its  canal :  or  finally,  from  that  of  the  celebrated  Hafeneft  (f),  who

(j)  Diflert..d;  inteftinor.  anguftia  §.  20.-  (z)  Cxit.

(/)  §.2.  (a)  Vid.  aft.  erudit.  Lipf.  m.  Jul.  ubi'ejus,

(«)  Vid.  fchol.  fubjeft.  curas  mcd.  referuntur.

('y)  Obf.  14.  §.  9.  {6)  Eph,  n.  c.  cent.  10.  in  append,  n.  4..

(jj  Vid.  ejas,  obf.  nied.  1.  3.  c.  1.  in  fin.  (r^Commerc,  litter,  a.  1740.  hebd.  30^  n.  i;

obferv'd:


Letter  XXXII. Article  6.  loi

obferv'd  many  adipofe  appendages,  hanging,  externally,  to  the  fides  of  the
reftum,  which,  in  their  fhape,  refembled  that  of  a  fmall  pear,  and  which,
though  in  confequence  of  their  foftnefs  they  did  not,  indeed,  bring  on  an
obftru(ftion  of  the  bowels,  "  greatly  prevented,  neverthelefs,  a  free  difcharge
from  that  canal.

6.  There  is,  befides,  another  diforder  of  the  fame  inteftine,  of  which  I
fee  that  no  mention  is  made  in  this  fedtion  of  the  Sepulchretum.  Ruyfch  in
his  Ohfervationes  Anatomico-chirurgica  (d),  and  likewife  in  his  Adverfaria  (e)  -^
defcribes  it  under  the  name  of  "  a  fcirrhous  thickening,  and  furprizing
coarflation  of  the  redlum,"  that  is  to  fay,  with  its  coats  almoft  exceeding  the
thicknefs  of  an  inch,  and  fo  much  indurated,  that  he  was  in  doubt,  whether
to  call  them  cartilaginous,  or  flelhy  •,  and  with  its  cavity  fo  much  diminiili'd,
in  circumference,  that  a  flender  probe  could  fcarcely  be  introduc'd  fome-
times,  nor  could  the  fseces  be  difcharg'd,  v/ithout  the  moil  violent  ftrainings,
and  that  either  in  drops,  or  in  a  flender  fubftance,  fcarcely  thicker  than  a
ftalk  of  grals.  This  diforder  he  afferts  "  to  happen  rarely,  and  for  that
"  reafon,  to  be  known  to  few  :"  nor  indeed  does  it  appear,  that  it  had  been
feen  by  him,  in  more  than  two  cafes  ;  fo  that  he  put  them  in  the  number  of
thofe,  which  he  fuppos'd never  to  have  been  feen  by  Bidloo  (f).

I  remember  that  Valfalva  was  fent  for  to  Faenza,  to  a  very  confiderable-
man,  who,  as  the  fame  fymptoras  demonftrated,  was  troubled  with  the  fame
difeafe,  or,  at  leaft,  with  one  which  was  very  near  akin  to  it.  I  accompanied
Valfalva  to  that  place,  and  he  told  me,  that  the  fame  kind  of  dilbrder  had
been  obferv'd  by  him,  before,  in  others,  and  by  diflfeftion  alfo,  as  I  fuppofe  ;,
for  I  find  no  fuch  thing  in  his  diffeftions :  but  only  in  other  papers,  as  far
as  relates  to  two  patients,  whom  he  faw  fome  years  after,  as  the  cafes,  which,
he  has  left  in  writing,  together  v/ith  the  treatment  of  them,  demonftrate.  In;
both  of  them,  he  refers  the  difficulty  in  difcharging  the  fsces,  from  the  in-
teftines,  to  the  glands  being  become  much  thicken'd  in  the  rettum,  and  in
part  ulcerated  ;  and  in  one  of  them  he  fays  that  a  tumour,  in  the  form  of  a.
ring,  was  perceiv'd  to  be  prominent  on  the  infide  of  the  inteftine,  about  three
inches  above  the  lower  part  of  the  reftum,

I  myfelf  was  alfo  confulted,  in  the  preceding  fummer,  for  a  noble  matron,
who  having,  for  many  months,  difcharg'd  the  inteftinal  excrements,  conir  ^
prefs'd  into  the  ftiape  of  a  flat  border,  or  fillet,  and  imagining  that  fiie  was
troubled  with  no  diforder,  but  that  of  the  piles,  had  been  lately  found  tO;
have  the  inteftine,  about  the  upper  part  of  the  fphinder  ani,  fwell'd  all
round,  to  the  extent  of  two  inches,  and  fo  much  ftreighten'd,  that  the  point
of  the  finger  could  not  be  introduc'd,  without  force,  and  uneafinefs.  As-
this  patient  had,  before,  been  fubjeft  to  tumours  in  the  glands  of  the  groins,
and  the  axills,  and  likewife,  to  puftules,  and  ulcerations,  and  as,  even  at
this  time,  fome  pus  was  diicharg'd  before  the  faices,  though  not  in  greai:
quantity  ;  I  readily  judg'd  that  the  fame  thing,  which  Valfalva  had  perceiv'di
in  thofe  patients,  by  means  of  the  finger,  was  to  be  perceiv'd,  alfo,  in  this
inatron,  and  wrole  back  this  opinion,  in  my  anfwer.  to  thofe  who  confulted

(^)  OW.95.  &96,  1'^;  Dec.  2.  c.  10.  OC^  Refponf.  ad  BidL


102 Book  III. Of  tlie  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

me  by  letter,  efpecially  as  I  was  led  to  the  fame  way  of  thinking,  by  fome
oblervations  of  my  own.

One  of  thefe  which  I  ftill  preferve,  together  with  the  diflbaion,  I  fhall
the  more  readily  write  to  you,  becaufe  I  fee  that  this  diforder,  or  at  leaft
one  very  fimilar  to  it,  is  defcrib'd,  as  far  as  it  could  be,  by  obfervations  taken
from  the  living  body,  in  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (g),  and  clafs'd,
"  with  iuftice,  among  thofe  that  are  more  rare  ;"  but  I  find  no  anatomical
infpedtion  of  the  patient,  who  died,  fome  time  afterwards  (h),  of  an  iliac
paffion.  And  although  I  read,  in  another  book  (z),  that  there  was,  in  a  little
boy,  "  fuch  a  diieafe  of  the  redtum,  as  Ruyfch  in  the  ninety-fifth,  and  ninety-
"  fixth,  of  his  Objervaliones  Aiiatomica,  defcribes  by  a  twofold  example,  that
"  is  to  fay,  a  diforder  in  which  the  fphindter  ani  was  concern'd,  and  by
"  means  of  which,  it  had  grown  rigid  all  round,  and  contrafted  a  very  great
"  fcirrhofity ;"  yet  I  obferve  that  the  fame  kind  of  diibrder  was  common
to  the  other  inteftines  alfo,  and  this  in  particular,  "  that  the  bowels  in  the
"  beginning  were  a  litde  coftive,  but  after  fome  time  very  lax  •,  and  that  the
"  aliments,  which  had  been  but  juft  taken  in,  were,  for  the  moft  part,  dif-
"  charg'd,  without  the  patient's  being  fenfible  of  it."  And  for  this  reafon
I  fubjoin  my  obfervation  which  is  as  follows.

7.  A  woman  who  was  more  than  fifty  years  of  age,  had  fallen  three  years
before  from  a  haemorrhoidal  affeftion,  as  fhe  herfelf  faid,  into  a  much  more
grievous  diforder  of  the  reftum,  on  account  of  which  flie  was,  at  length,  re-
ceiv'd  into  the  hofpital  of  incurables,  at  Bologna,  about  the  end  of  the  year
1 704.  Valfalva  having  only  afk'd  queftions  of  this  woman,  without  fo  much
as  introducing  his  finger,  to  examine  the  rectum,  immediately  pronounc'd
her  diibrder  to  be  incurable,  and,  turning  to  me  as  I  ftood  clofe  to  him,  faid,
this  is  a  diforder  of  a  fimilar  kind  with  that  which  I  found  at  Faenza,  fome
months  ago,  when  you  were  there  with  me  (/^),  that  is  to  fay,  a  glandular
tumour  occupies  the  circumference  of  the  rectum  here  alfo.  And  this  wo-
man, although  with  the  other  fymptoms  of  this  diforder,  fhe  perceiv'd  no
pain,  difcharg'd,  neverthelefs,  a,  great  quantity  of  foetid  matter,  fom.etimes
thin,  and  at  other  times  pretty  thick.  Wherefore,  being  brought  to  the  laft
itage  of  d  confumption,  flie  died  within  a  month,  or  two,  from  her  coming
into  the  hofpital,  after  fevers  which  attack'd  her  with  achilnefs.

The  in  teili  nu  m  rectum  being  laid  open  longitudinally,  and  difplay'd,  I  examin'd
it,  and  found  it  in  the  following  ftate.  At  fix  or  feven  fingers  breadths  above
the  anus  it  began  to  become  pretty  hard,  and  thick,  and  to  fwell  out,  every
where,  from  the  furface,  internally,  into  bodies,  which,  in  their  figure,  ana
fize,  refembled  very  large  beans.  They  were  all  fmooth  in  their  furfaces,
but  of  a  folid  and  compa£l  fubftance.  The  hardnefs  and  thicknefs  of  the
jnteftine,  and  the  bulk  of  thofe  bodies,  which  were  more  nearly  fimilar
to  conglobate  glands,  than  to  any  other  bodies,  and  in  their  colour  alfo,
as  well  as  in  their  fize,  and  figure,  were  proportionably  increas'd,  as  you
came  nearer  to  the  lov/er  part  of  the  canal.  Yet  the  lower  part  of  tlie  intef-
tine,  as  far  as  it  could  be  covered  with  the  breadth  of  a  finger,  was  found,

{£)  A,  1742,  hebd.  35.  f  3.  1).  J,  {;■)  Acl.  n.  c,  torn,  2.  obf.  6j.

(hj  A,  174.4,  heb,  z,  5,  3-  n.  2. ^  (/5)  Vid,  11.  pro.^imo  Ajpsrlore.

2  and


Letter  XXXII. Article  8.  103

and  from  the  very  extremity  of  the  anus  hung  two  excrefcences,  at  the  fame
time  that  the  cutis  was  flightly  ulcerated  about  the  anus.

8.  Now  in  order  to  perceive  that  Valfalva's  obfervations,  and  mine,  differ
lefs  from  thofe  of  Ruyfch,  than,  perhaps,  appears  at  firft  fight,  compare
them  together,  and  you  will  find  that  the  firft  patient  of  Ruyfch,  alfo,  had
excreted  (/)  the  inteftinal  faeces,  with  "  an  ichorous,  and  purulent  matter,"
and  that  the  difeafe  of  the  fecond  (m),  was,  by  fome  phyficians,  thought
"  to  be  the  piles  :"  both  of  which  happen'd  likewife  in  moft  of  our  patients.
And  indeed  I  believe  that  one  principal  reafon,  amongft  others,  why  this  dif-
order,  though,  perhaps,  not  very  rare,  has  been  known  to  very  few  ;  nor  has
been  found  out,  for  the  moft  part,  till  very  late  in  the  difeafe,  when  the
finger  was  at  length  introduc'd,  is  that  the  patients,  and  the  phyficians,  ge-
nerally fuppofe  no  difeafe  to  be  concern'd  in  the  cafe,  but  the  piles.  And
for  this  reafon,  in  that  fecond  cafe  of  Ruyfch's  it  was  refolv'd,  that  they
jQiould  be  taken  away  by  incifion,  which  was  even  attempted,  but  of  courfe
without  efixidt.  And,  indeed,  even  if  that  kind  of  diforder  which  I  have  de-
fcrib'd,  were  of  fuch  a  nature,  that  it  could  be  remov'd  by  the  chirurgical
knife ;  yet  the  very  feat  of  the  difeafe,  as  it  has  been  feen  by  Ruyfch,  and
by  us,  is  often  fo  very  high  up  within  the  inteftine  as  to  leave  no  room  to
admit  of  fuch  a  method  of  cure.

However,  that  ancient  opinion,  which  is  circulated  together  with  the
books  of  Hippocrates  («),  does  by  no  means  efcape  me ;  I  mean,  that  "  the
*'  inteftinum  reftum  may  be  cut,  and  repeatedly  cut,  may  be  few'd  up,  may-'
*'  be  burnt  with  adtual,  or  potential  cauteries,  and  may  be  Qough'd  away
"  afterwards,  and  yet,  notwithftanding  thefe  things  may  feem  fo  very  vio-
*'  lent,  they  will  have  no  mifchievous  confequences."  But,  at  the  fame
time,  neither  does  it  efcape  me,  that  this  dogma  is,  by  the  moft  fkilful  fur-
geons,  generally  refer'd  to  that  part  of  the  inteftine,  from  the  more  deep-
incifion  of  which  moft  of  the  ancient  furgeons  abftain'd,  left  they'fhould  cut
afunder  the  fphinfter  ani,  and  take  away  its  power,  and  ofiice,  for  ever.  And-
if  this  fear  had  not  been,  in  great  meafure,  remov'd,  by  the  obfervations  of
others,  I  could  have  aflur'd  you  of  my  having  heard  Valfalva  fay  that  he,  by
making  the  experiment  upon  dogs,  had  found  this  fphindler,  when  cut
afunder  through  the  whole  of  its  thicknefs,  to  have  again  recover'd  its
power,  and  perform'd  its  office,  though  not  fo  ftrongly  as  before,  and  that
he  htld  obferv'd  the  fame  thing,  in  the  human  body,  on  fome  occafions.

I  have  alfo  read,  in  a  certain  paper  of  his,  which  was  written  after  this-'
time,  that  a  man  had  been  cur'd  by  him,  in  the  year  1708,  in  whom  an  ab--
fcefs,  and  a  gangrene,  that  fucceeded  thereto,  had  eroded  part  of  one  buttock, .
together  with  that  whole  portion  of  the  fphindler,  which  correfponded  to  it,,.
fo  that  the  fasces  were  difcharg'd  involuntarily  :  that  this  man,  though  in
confequence  of  thefe  dilbrders, he  was  brought  to  the  very  threfhold  of  death,
had  efcap'd,  and  his  ulcer  being  perfeflly  heal'd  up,  that  the fphindter  had
return'd  to  its  former  ftate. But,  notwithftanding  the  truth  of  thefe  things,
the  farther  you  go  up,  above  the  fphindler,  fo  much  the  more  dangerous
the  incifi.on  will  be,  whether,  fome  larger  blood-velTel  being  hurt  thereby,

(/)  Obf.  ibid.  cit.  95.  {m)  Obf.  96,  («)  L.  de  Haemoriboid.  n.  i.

yo«-


^104  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

you  may  not  be  able  to  ftop  the  flux  of  the  blood  -,  or  fome  nerve,  being
prick'd,  give  rife  to  that  mortal  pain,  which  our  Fabricius  has  obferv'd  (o),
and  which  feems  to  have  proceeded  from  this  caufe  ;  or,  finally,  whether,
neither  the  artery,  nor  nerve  being  wounded,  you  only  perforate  the  inteftine,
and  by  this  means  open  an  exit  for  the  fsces  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  :
for  who  is  able  to  avoid  thefe  dangers,  in  blind  and  dark  incifions  ?

9.  For  thefe,  and  for  other  reafons,  therefore,  which  are  of  themfelves
fufficiently  manifeft,  when  there  is  not  room  to  attempt  an  efficacious  cure,
it  remains  that  with  Ruyli:h  (^),  and  Valfalva,  we  neceflarily  embrace  that
which,  h  ca.l\'d  palliaiive.  The  firft  commended  emollients,  and  glyfters,  that
alleviate  pain.  Nor  did  the  other  difapprove  of  them,  unlefs  they  flow'd  back
immediately  :  for  which  reafon,  he  rather  recom.mended  the  injeftions  of
fmall  quantities,  and  frequently,  and  even  to  bury  in  the  redlum,  as  far  as
the  patient  could  bear  it,  without  uneafinefs,  the  tube  through  which  thefe
clyfters  were  convey'd,  and  which  fhould  be  properly  perforated,  laterally,
fo  as  to  fuffer  the  fluid,  that  it  convey'd,  to  come  to  the  very  feat  of  the  dif-
order:  he  alio,  on  the  fame  plan,  advis'd  to  ufe  a  bath  of  an  emollient,  and
lenient  nature,  and  to  keep  a  pipe  of  this  kind  in  the  redtum,  while  the  pa-
tient fat  over  the  bath,  fo  as  to  admit  the  fluid  into  immediate  contadt  with
the  difeas'd  parts.

However,  the  fluid  that  he  recommended,  to  be  us'd  for  this  purpofe,  was
different  according  to  the  different  ftate  of  the  difeafe ;  fometimes  he  us'd
lime  v/ater  more  or  iefs  diluted  -,  fometimes  the  water  of  that  warm  bath,
which  is  above  Bologna,  -and  which  he  fometimes  alfo  gave  for  drink  ;  and,
at  other  times,  when  he  fuppos'd  there  to  be  no  ulceration  join'd  to  the  other
■diforders,  he  medicated  common  water,  by  boiling  in  it  fuch  ingredients,  as
-he  thought  would  be  of  moft  fervic-e.

So  he  alfo  prefcrib'd  various  remedies  to  be  taken  internally,  and  among
thoie  the  turpentine- refin,  after  which  was  to  be  drunk  a  water,  medicated
with  vulnerary  herbs,  (with  which  he  fometimes  mix'd  this  refin  diffolv'd  in
the  yolk  of  a-n  egg,  and  us'd  it  for  injedtions) ;  but,  fometimes,  when  the
feafon  of  the  year  was  very  vi^arm,  he  omitted  the  refin,  and  made  ufe  of
water,  in  which  the  fame,  or  other  herbs,  had  been  occafionally  boiled,  but
in  fmall  quantity  only,  in  proportion  to  the  water ;  fo  that  a  very  free  ule
might  be  made  of  it,  almoll  like  the  warm  bath  waters  •,  and  he  would
even  have  it  drunk  by  way  of  common  liquor  :  but  in  the  winter  he  recom-
mended wine  at  the  table,  and  that  of  the  domeftic  kind,  in  which,  at  the
autumnal  feafon,  when  it  fermented  in  the  cafl^,  fuch  roots,  woods,  and
leaves,  as  he  thought  to  be  moft  fuitable,  had  been  macerated.

Hitherto  I  have  follow'd  the  advice  and  example  of  both  thefe  gentlemen,
in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  recommend  fome  of  thefe  remedies,  in  preference  to
others,  and,  in  general,  to  mix  with  them  fuch  medicines,  as  are  efitftual
.againft  the  venereal  difeafe,  inafmuch  as  I  have  obferv'd  that  a  diforder,  of
the  venereal  kind,  has  been  generally  accuftom'd  to  precede  the  diforder  of
which  I  treat ;  and  ftill  Iefs  did  I  omit  fuch  things  as  I  have  knov/n  to  be,
Sometimes,  of  great  fervice,  in  dilTolving  hard  tumours. For  I  believe  that

(0  De  chiniyg.  oper.  c.  de  an  fiftiil.  in  fin.  (pj  Obf,  cit.  96.  in  fin,

thefe


Letter  XXXII. Article  lo.  105

tliere  ouglit  to  be  us'd  more  frequently  than  thofe  which  are  properly  emol-
lient, left  it  fliould  happen,  that  the  fibres  being  too  much  rekx'd,  the  parts
yield  to  the  matter  that  falls  upon  them,  and  the  tumour  being,  by  this
means,  increas'd,  all  paflage  for  the  excrements  is  intercepted  :  and,  in  like
manner,  we  are  to  endeavour  that  thefe  may  be  foft,  left,  being  hard,  and
large  in  their  dimenfions,  they  ferve  as  an  obftruftion  to  their  own  exit,
through  a  paflage,  which  is  already  too  narrow,  or  left,  if  they  do  pafs  through,
they  fhould  caufe,  by  their  violent  compreffion  upon  the  tumour,  pains,  and
ulcers,  or  if  there  are  any  already,  increafe  them  •,  yet  we  muft  not,  for  thefe
very  reafons,  ufe  fuch  medicines,  in  order  to  bring  this  about,  as  are  either
in  themfelves  acrid,  or  may  folicit  a  quantity  of  acrid  humours  towards  that
part.

10.  There  are  two  diforders,  which  are  the  confequences  of  that  coftivenefs,
•upon  which  I  have  written  to  you  this  fhort  letter,  the  one  more  frequently,
which  is  the  dilbrder  of  the  hsemorrhoidal  veflels,  commonly  call'd  piles,
and  the  other  not  very  rarely,  I  mean  the  prolapfus  ani.  In  regard  to  the
latter,  as  you  knew  there  was  no  feflion  in  the  Sepulchretum,  on  that  fub-
jeft,  it  is  for  this  reafon,  I  fuppofe,  that  you  have,  lb  long  fince,  earneftly
entreated  me  to  communicate  to  you,  a  long  opinion  which  you  had  heard
was  written  by  me,  and  this,  fuch  as  it  is,  I  will  fend  you  in  the  next  letter
upon  the  hsemorrhoidal  affedtion,  however,  there  is  a  feftion  in  the  Sepulchre-
tum {q) ;  but  fo  fhort  is  it  that,  if  you  take  away  the  fcholia,  it  fcarcely  fills
up  half  a  page.  For  which  reafon  I  choofe  to  add  fome  things  here,  upon
the  fubjefl  of  the  piles,  rather  than,  when  I  come  to  that  fedion,  write  a
whole  letter  upon  it,  efpecially  as  among  the  obfervations  of  Valfalva,  or
among  mine,  we  fcarcely  find  any  difleiflions,  which  properly  relate  to  thefe
•difeafes.  Therefore,  as  to  coftivenefs  of  the  bowels,  frequently  bring-
ing on  the  piles,  as  I  faidjuft  now,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  and  it  is  thus
explain'd  by  Boerhaave  (r),  that  in  the  ftraining  neceflary  to  difcharge  the
fseces,  "  the  inteftines  are  comprefs'd,  the  arterial  blood  is  circulated  more
"  brifkly,  the  venous  is  retarded,  and  even  ftagnating  in  the  veflels  of  the
"  inteftinum  reftum,  putrifies,  and  by  this  means  brings  on  a  difpofition  to
""  the  piles."

I  am  not  ignorant,  however,  that  the  blood  ftagnates  in  the  veins  of  the
fame  inteftine,  from  other  ,caufes  alfo.  For  as  the  moft  internal  of  thefe  veins,
finally  terminate  in  the  trunk  of  the  vena  portarum  -,  if  it  fbould  happen  that
thefe  veins,  either  in  their  paflage,  or  in  their  termination,  or  even  in  this
part,  fhould  be,  for  a  confiderable  time,  ftreightened,  or  prefs'd,  by  thecon-
vulfion,  diftention,  or  obftru£lion,  of  the  furrounding  parts ;  it  is  natural  to
fuppofe  that  the  blood  would,  certainly,  be  too  long  detain'd  in  thefe  veins :
fo  if  the  mefentery  be  convuls'd,  or  if  the  inteftines  are  too  much  diftended
with  flatus,  or  if  the  liver  be  obftruded,  the  fame  thing  may  eafily  happen.
And  of  this  kind  is  the  obfervation  of  Vefalius,  which  is  the  firft,  and  at  the
fame  time  the  principal,  of  thofe  three  that  you  read  in  the  very  fhort  fec-
tion,  wliich  I  juft  now  pointed  out.

{q)  L.  hujus  3.  feci.  15.  {i)  Prsleft.  in  inft.  §.  ^7.4.  in  £n.

Vol.  JL  J>  For


io6  Book  III. Of  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

For  in  him  who  had  labour'd,  at  intervals,  under  a  flux  of  blood,  from
the  hzemorrhoidal  veflels,  the  fpleen  was  not  the  only  vifcus  indurated,  as
you  will  perhaps  fuppofe,  from  turning  to  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  third
book,  Tie  Fabrica  Corporis  Humani,  from  which,  alone,  that  obfervation  is
copied  in  the  Sepulchretum  ;  but  "  the  liver  was  furprizingly  hard  "  alfo,  as
you  will  learn  from  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  fifth  book,  where  Vefalius
gives  the  fame  cafe  a  little  more  at  large,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  you  will
underftand,  or  at  leaft  in  part,  the  real  caufe  why  the  internal  haemorrhoidal
vein  "  was  equal  nearly  to  the  thicknefs  of  a  man's  thumb,  at  the  extremity
"  of  the  colon,  and  through  the  whole  length  of  the  redum  •"  which  in  his
time  he  could  not  underftand.

Without  doubt,  it  was  not  very  eafy  for  the  blood  to  pafs  through  a  liver
of  that  kind.  But  why  then,  you  will  fay,  did  it  not  ftagnate,  equally,  in
the  other  veins,  which  go  to  the  trunk  of  the  vena  portarum  ?  And  for  this
very  rcafon  it  was,  that  I  faid  you  would  immediately  underftand  it,  or  at
leaft  in  part.  Add  therefore,  to  omit  other  things,  the  very  great  length,
vi'hich  is  peculiar  to  this  one  vein  among  the  others,  fo  that  it  is  much  more
difficult  for  the  blood  to  be  carry'd  upwards,  from  this  vein,  than  from  the
others,  efpecially  as  the  fituation  of  the  human  body  requires  it,  which,  with-
o-ut  doubt,  is  one  of  the  reafons,  why  other  animals  are  not  fubjeft  to  the
piles.  And  if  you  afk  why,  in  thofe  bodies,  in  which  there  is  any  impedi-
ment to  the  quick  motion  of  the  blood  upwards,  the  veins  of  the  legs  in  par^
ticular  are  dilated  into  varices,  you  will  find  the  fam.e  thing  to  be  the  caufe,
of  them  chiefly,  which  we  affign  for  the  piles.

You  fee,  even  in  the  Sepulchretum  (j),  that  Walaeus  exprefsly  afl"erts  the
piles  "  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  varices  of  the  veins  of  the  anus."  And  you
will  find  Boerhaave  confirming  this  opinion,  in  another  place  (/),  where  he
has  declar'd  the  fame  things  which  1  copied  from  him  juft  now,  but  more  at
large,  and  without  the  leaft  mention  of  putrefadlion.  And  how;  much  thefe
veins  may  be  dilated,  I  obferv'd  in  a  certain  man  («)  of  a  good  habit  of  body,
but  inclin'd  to  be  plethoric,  who  died  at  Bologna,  in  the  year  1706,  of  a
wound  under  the, axilla,  and  whofe  body  I  difl"e£ted.  The  extremity  of  the
inteftine,  in  this  man,  appear'd  to  have  been  fubjedt  to  the  piles,  as  it  was
internally  unequal  with  varicous  knots  of  veins ;  and  as  I  look'd  upon  the
largeft  of  thefe  veins  very  attentively,  I  wonder'd  that  none  but  the  fmalleft
blood-veflels  communicated  with  it,  though  itfelf  was  diftended  with  a  large
quantity  of  grumous  blood  ;  fo  as  to  make  it  evident,  that  fome  very  fmall
vein  had  been  expanded,  into  fo  confiderable  a  fize.

II.  That  thefe  things  therefore,  may  not  happen,  which  it  is  well  known
do  by  no  means  happen,  without  fevere  pains  ;.  and  efpecially  at  the  time  of
going  to  ftool,  if  thefe  varices  are  really  turgid,  and  not  yet  ruptur'd  :  or  if
they  are  ruptur'd,  not  without  a  hsemorrhage  fucceeding,  which  is,  fometimes
immoderate,  and  leaves  fuch  confequences  behind  it  fometimes,  as  have  more
than  fufficiently  ftiown  us,  that  the  piles  are  not  greatly  to  be  defir'd;  in  the
firft  place  a  plenitude  is  to  be  avoided ;  for  in  men  there  are  not  pafl^ages  pre-

(i)  In  fchoU  ad  I.  obf.  fedt.  eiu  («)  D«Koc  vid.  epift.  44^  n..  32.

{t)  Praekft.  cit.  ad  §.  112.

par'd


Letter  XXXII. Article 12.  107

par'd  by  nature,  for  the  fuperfiuous  blood  to  be  conveniently  thrown  off,  as
there  are  in  women,  in  whom  it  was  neceflary ;  but  they  muft  be  open'd
by  difeafe,  which  is  then  fometimes  falutary,  but  often  dangerous,  and  al-
ways inconvenient.

In  the  fecond  place  fuch  things  ought  to  be  avoided,  as  render  the  belly
very  coftive  •,  and  I  do  not  only  mean  to  avoid  taking  in  a  great  quantity  of
ftyptic,  and  aftringent  juices,  which  by  crifpingup  the  minute  orifices  of  the
glands,  that  moiften  the  inteftines,  and  their  contents,  do  not  fuffer  a  fuffi-
cient  quantity  of  moillure  to  be  difcharg'd  -,  but  I  fpeak  even  of  the  cuftom
of  eating,  and  efpecially  of  drinking,  much  more  fparingly,  than  nature  can
bear.  Thus  we  read  in  the  life  of  Sarpi,  that  as,he,  when  a  young  man,  ate
very  fparingly,  and  drank  nothing,  even  for  many  days,  he  fell  into  an  ob-
ftinate  coftivenefs,  in  confequence  of  which,  he  not  only  went  to  flool  no
more  than  once  in  three  days  generally,  but  fometimes  only  once  in  feven,
and,  in  order  to  do  that,  was  oblig'd  to  ufe  fuch  violent  ftrainings,  that
brought  upon  him  great  pains  from  the  piles,  and  a  troublefome  prolapfus
ani,  under  which  he  labour'd  for  many  years.

But  if,  notwithftanding  thofe  things,  that  I  have  caution'd  you  againft,
being  avoided,  and  others  of  the  fame  kind,  the  inteftinal  fi^ces  ftill  continue
to  be  very  hard,  and  the  more  frequent  ufe  of  emollient  food,  is  not  of  ad-
vantage againft  this  coftivenefs ;  there  is,  perhaps,  no  remedy  to  be  prefer'd,
for  preventing  the  piles  being  the  confequence  of  thefe  ftrainings,  to  that
which  I  fee  is  us'd  by  phyficians  of  note,  in  order  to  prevent  their  being  fo
painful,  at  the  time  of  going  to  ftool,  when  they  are  already  form'd  in  the
inteftine.  They  injedb,  before  the  time  of  going  to  ftool,  an  ounce  of  any
emollient  oil,  and,  in  particular,  linfeed  oil :  which  I  have  alfo  been  accui-
tom'd  to  ufe  frequently,  and  fuccefsfully,  (when  the  hard  excrements  are  to
be  foften'd,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  inteftine  to  be  lubricated)  nearly  in
the  fame  quantity,  or  at  leaft  not  in  a  much  greater,  left  it  immediately  flow
back,  and  even  that  it  may  be  for  a  long  time  retain'd :  although  I  have
fometimes  prefcrib'd  olive  oil  in  this  manner,  from  the  very  time  in  which
Ramazzini  inform'd  me,  that  in  the  cafe  of  a  woman  in  child-bed,  who,  for
feven  days  together,  had  never  gone  to  ftool,  after  a  great  number  of  diffe-
rent things  had  been  tried  in  vain,  it  came  into  his  mind,  which  he  faid,  if
I  remember  rightly,  he  had  read  in  Martinus  Rulandus,  that  two  ounces  of
common  oil  fhould  be  injeded  every  hour,  and  that  by  this  means  he  had
procur'd  a  difcharge.

12.  The  mention  of  this  remedy  brings  to  my  mind  another,  which  I  have
heard  was  applied  by  an  illuftrious  woman,  who  had  been  troubled,  for  a
long  time,  with  a  tumefaftion  of  the  hsemorrhoidal  vefTels,  As  fhe  came
hither  for  the  fake  of  confulting  me,  after  I  had  examin'd  them,  I  afk'd  her,
by  what  means  fhe  was  able  to  put  them  up  again  as  they  were  fo  fwelled,
without  almoft  intolerable  pain ;  fhe  immediately  anfwer'd,  that  fhe,  after
having  made  trial  of  a  great  number  of  things,  had  found  nothing  more  ufe-
ful,  than  the  fat  that  lies  about  the  kidnies  of  a  dog,  which  has  yellow,
or  redilh  hair.  Thar  with  this  fat,  properly  prepar'd  for  the  purpofe,  fhe
anointed  the  piles  when  they  were  pufh'd  down,  at  the  time  of  going  to  ftool ;
apd,  by  this  .means,  had  been  us'd  to  pufh  them  up,  for  a  long  time,  with-

P  z  out


loS  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

out  pain^  or  at  leaft  with  much  lefs  pain  than  fhe  otherwile  could,  from  the-
very  time  that  others,  having  made  the  experiment,  communicated  it  to  her
as  a  fecret.

Indeed  I  had  before  known  that  phyficians,  fometimes,  made  ufe  of  the
fat  of  a  dog,  and  not  only  the  external,  but  the  internal  fat,  yet  the  ufe  of  it
for  this  particular  purpofe,  and  of  that  which  is  taken  from  a  particular  part
of  a  particular  dog,.  I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have  heard  of,  or  feen.  It
is  much  more  eafy  to  affign  a  caufe  for  the  utility  of  the  two  methods  that  I
Ihall  relate  to  you  ;  for  they  are  much  more  in  common  ufe,  although  not
made  ufe  of,  or  at  leaft  in  general,  againft  the  fame  difeafe,  nor  in  the  fame
manner.  That  is  to  fay,  I  faw  AJbertini  alleviate  the  violent  pain  of  the  tu-
mid hasmorrhoids,  in  a  certain  nobleman,  by  applying  to  them  the  internal
parts  of  gourds,  or  by  injefting  water  in  which  thefe  had  been  boird :  and
from  another  nobleman  of  the  fiirft  rank,  and  charafter,  who  had  lately  held,
the  office  of  vice-roy,  when  he  came  to  me,  to  afk  medical  advice  for  his.
children,  I  heard,  on  occafion  of  the  piles  being  mention'd,  that  flannels
fteep'd  in  warm  water,  in  which  linfeed,  and  the  flic'd  roots  of  marfh-
mallows,  had,  for  a  confiderable  time,  been  boil'd,  being  now  and  then
applied  to  the  parts,  he  had  fo  far  found  advantage  by  them  in  this  diforder,
that  they  not  only  alleviated  the  pains,  but  if  they  were  applied,  immediately
upon  the  beginning  of  them,  did  not  fuffer  the  hsemorrhoidal  tumour  to  in-
creafe,  and,  confequently,  did  not  fuffer  the  piles  to  burft,  and  caufe  a  con-*-
fiderable  lofs  of  blood.

But  where  this  hsimorrhage  was  in  too  great  a  quantity-,  Valfalva, to  re-
turn to the  phyficians,  commended  three  things,  in preference  toothers,,
from which  it  had  happen'd  that  he  had  feen  furprizing  effbfts  : the  firft,
to  anoint  the  umbilical  region with frefh  theriaca, in which opium  has-,
been mix'd  in  the  proportion  of  four,  or  even  of  fix  grains,  if  the  flux  is.
confiderable, to  about  fix  drams. The  fecond  was  to  apply  vitriol  reduc'd
into  a  calx,  which  is call'd  by  chymifts  colcothar,  to  the  part  from  whence
the  blood  flows. The  third,  to  take  care  that  the  patient  Ihould  prefs  the
lower  part  of  the  inteftine  downwards,  if  perchance,  as  fometimes  happens,,
the  open  foramen  of  the  fangulferous  veflTelmay  be  brought  into  view:  and
then  to  apply  a  little  piece  of  vitriol,  fitted  in  the  orifice  of  a  pipe,  as  pain--
ters  are wont  to  apply  the  hematites,  to  this  foramen,  and  to  continue  it
there  for  a  little  time,  till  it  bring  on  a  cruft. And  in  this  order,  in  which
he  propos'd  them,  he  would  have  them  be  applied,  one  after  another, that
Is  to  fay,  where  the  former  had  not  anfwer'd  their  end.

13.  And  becaufe  the  queftion  is  not  here  of  new  remedies,  or  of  unufual
methods  of  cure,  but  of  thofe  which,  from  the  teftimony  of  illuftrious  pa-
tients themfelves,  or  that  of  grave  phyficians,  have  been  found  ufeful,
and,  in  particular,  of  the  method  us'd  by  our  Valfalva ;  I  will  alio  add  this, .
as  you  defife  to  know  it.  If  be  happen'd  to  light  on  a  patient,  who  was
not  very  defirous  to  undergo  any  chirurgical  operation,  in  order  to  prevent
his  being  fubjedt  to  an  immodtrate  flux  of  blood,,  from  the  hemorrhoidal
veins,  in  the  future,  it  was  not  his  cuftom  to  follow,  unlefs  perhaps  in  a  re-
cent diforder,  and  indeed  by  another  method  of  cui-e,,  I  fay,  itVas  not  his  cuf-
5  tomi


Letter  XXXII. Article  13.  109

torn  to  follow  the  author  of  that  little  book  entitled  (x),  de  hamorrhoidibus,
which  teaches  us,  "  that  we  ought  to  leave  no  hemorrhoid,  or  pile,  un-
"  burnt,  but  to  deftroy  them  all  by  burning  •,"  he  rather  follow'd  the  author
of  the  fixth  feftion  of  the  aphorifms,  who  admonifhes  {y)  "  that  if,  in  a  per-
"  fon  who  is  cur'd  of  piles,  that  have  been  of  long  ftanding,  one  of  theni  is
"  not  preferv'd,  there  is  danger  that  an  anafarcous  dropfy,  or  a  confump-
"  tion,  may  come  on."  For  this  he  took  great  care  of,  even  in  curing  ul-
cers of  the  anus.  Thus,  once  when  he  fhow'd  me  a  certain  perfon  who  had
labour'd,  for  fixteen  years  together,  under  thefe  ulcers,  and  who  was,  even
then,  extremely  well,  though  it  was  in  the  eighth  year  after  his  cure;  one
ulcer,  faid  he,  which  was  lefs  troublefome  than  the  reft,  I  purpofely  left  un-
touch'd.

And  I  remember,  when  it  was  a  matter  of  controverfy  whether  the  dif-
orders,  with  which  two  knights,  of  diftinguifh'd  rank,,  were  troubled,  were
piles,  or  ulcers,  that  he  immediately  fhow'd  them  to  be  ulcers,  in  both  of
them.  For  in  one  of  them,  having  introduc'd  his  finger,  pretty  high  up
in  the  reftum,  he  pointed  out  to  the  others,  the  certain  fituation  of  the  ul-
cer, as  the  apex  of  his  finger  being  receiv'd  into  the  orifice  of  it,  feem'd  tO;
be  embrac'd  around,  with  a  kind  of  ring  as  it  were  •,  for  in  this  manner  he
aflur'd  them,  that  the  ulcers  of  the  reftum,  or  vagina,  were  frequently
found,  fo  that  a  narrow  mouth  is  dilated  into  a  more  capacious  finus.  And,
in  the  fecond,  without  introducing  his  finger,  he  not  only  fhow'd  that  there
was  an  ulcer,  but  alfo  that  it  was  not  very  high  up  •,  for  there  were  fome,.
among  the  others,  who  fuppos'd  that  what  was  excreted,  was  a  mucus  prefs'd
out  from  the  glands  of  the  redum,  which  are  pretty  high  up  in  the  inteftine..
But  thefe  he  eafily  convinc'd,  even  by  the  teftimony  of  the  patient  himfelf  ^.
for  as  he  confefs'd  that  this  matter  fiow'd  from  him  continually,  it  follow'd  of
courfe  that  the  original  fprings  of  it  could  not  be  above  the  fphinfter.  And
as  this  matter,  even  in  the  opinion  of  Valfalva  himfelf,  whole  judgment,  in^
an  affair  of  that  kind,  was  known  to  be  peculiarly  excellent,  was  without
any  hefitation  pronounc'd,  and  even  demonftrated,  to  be  purulent,  there
now  remain'd  no  doubt  at  all,  but  it  was  to  be  accounted  for  from  an  ulcer,.
And  they  fo  much  the  more  efteem'd  his  judgment,  in  this  cafe,  as  it  was
well  known  to  every  one,  that  he  was  extremely  clear,  in  regard  to  thofe
things  which  are  alio  taken  notice  of,  in  the  fcholia  to  that  firll  obfervation:
(2)  of  the  fifteenth  fe£i:ion,  of  certain  mucous,  and  whitifli  fordes,  fometimes
proceeding  from  the  anus,  which,  although  they  have  impos'd  upon  fome,.
and  been  taken  for  pus,  yet  are  known,  by  the  moft  learned  phyficians,
to  be  excreted  from  the  hasmorrhoidal  veins,  juft  as  a  fluor  albus  (v/hich.
was  the  comparifon  of  Platerus,  who  is  quoted  in  the  fame  fcholia)  is  often,
fecreted  from  the  veffels  of  the  uterus,  without  any  fufpicion  of  an  ulter.
And  this  will  be  eafily  explain'd  by  you,  in  the  fame  manner  that  you  fee».
an  uterine  fluor,  of  this  kind,  explain'd  by, me,  in  the  fourth  of  the  Adver-.
faria  (a),  that  is  to  fay,  if  you  conceive  that  the  apertures  of  the  veffels,  which,
when  in  a  more  dilated  'ila.te,  pour'd  out  red  blood,  being  now  more  con~


%


)'  N.  I.  (a;)Suj)ra,  ad  n.  lo.

)  Aphor,  12,  \a)  Animad.  27.

Jlring^d^


no  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ftring'd,  though  not  altogether,  do  not  fuffer  the  red  part  of  the  blood  to
efcape  any  longer,  but  only  the  ferum  of  it,  which  is,  of  itfelf,  vifcid  in  fome
perfons,  or  becomes  mucous  by  ftagnation,  and  that  this  diftills  gradually,
or  paffes  downwards,  when  prefs'd  out  by  the  excrements.  And  thus  far  I
had  to  add  on  the  fubjeft  of  the  piles.


LETTER the THIRTY-THIRD.

Treats  of  the  Prolapfus  of  the  Inteflinum  Redlum;


THERE  is  not  only  no  fedtion  in  the  Sepulchretum  Anatomicum,  upon
the  prolapfus  of  the  inteftinum  redtum ;  but  even  no  anatomical  ob-
fervations  are  extant  any  where,  as  far  as  I  remember  at  prefent,  which  relate
thereto.  And  fmce  upon  thefe,  as  upon  a  firm  bafis,  all  the  folid  reafonings
of  phyficians,  about  the  internal  origins  of  difeafes,  or  their  continued
caufes,  are  generally  founded  ;  it  is  for  this  reafon  not  to  be  wonder'd  at
that  no  treatife  has  ever  yet  been  publifh'd  upon  this  difeafe  (for  no  fuch
treatife  has  fallen  into  my  hands  at  leaft,  though  treatifes  have  been  pub-
lifh'd upon  more  rare,  and  much  flighter  diforders)  which  might  ferve  as  a
guide  to  any  one,  whofe  bufinefs  it  was  to  write  upon  this  fubjeft,  and
lelTen  his  labour ;  for  this  fubjedt  ought  not  to  be  handled  in  a  hafly,  and
confus'd  manner.

I  never  found  myfelf  more  in  want  of  a  treatife  of  this  kind,  than  when
I  was  afk'd  to  give  the  opinion  which  I  have  promis'd,  in  confequcnce  of
your  long-continued  entreaties,  to  fend  you  a  copy  of  in  this  letter.  And  I
fend  it  to  you  jufl  as  I  then  wrote  it,  its  translation  from  the  Italian  language
excepted.  And  I  know  very  well,  that  the  difcourfes  upon  difeafes,  which
are  requir'd  by  way  of  opinion,  either  almoft  immediately,  or,  within  a  very
few  days,  by  the  friends  of  the  patients,  can  have,  when  drawn  up  by  me,
no  merit  but  that  of  difpatch.  For  which  reafon  I  give  copies  of  them  to
none,  but  to  thofe  for  whom  they  are  intended :  and  from  thefe  perfons,
mull  have  come  thofe  copies  of  opinions  of  mine,  which  you  tell  me  you  have
read  in  great  number  ;  unlefs  fome  have  been  falfly  and  furreptitiouAy  taken,
by  thofe  whom  I  employ'd  as  copifts,  as  I  fee  has  fometimes  happen'd.

But,  although  this  which  you  will  have  at  prefent,  is  not  very  much  ap-
prov'd  of  by  me,  and  though  I  had  rather  have  fent  any  other ;  yet  if  it
will  not  fefve  to  fhew,  how  to  diftinguifh  thofe  opinions  which  are  really
mine,  it  will,  at  leaft,  fhow  you  the  greater  part  of  thofe  things,  which  I
would  wifh  to  have  enquir'd  into,  by  anatomifts,  in  relation  to  this  difeafe.
For  this  purpofe  then,  it  was  written,  and  in  the  following  manner.

2.  I  wifh


Letter  XXXIII. Article  2, 3,  4.  in

2.  I  wifli  the  internal  canfes,  by  which  the  diforder  of  this  noble,  and
very  learned,  man  was  firft  brought  on,  and  by  which  it  is  ftill  preferv'd,  were
as  evident  as  the  difeafe  itfelf,  and  the  caufe  which  increas'd  it ;  and,  what' is  of
ftill  greater  importance,  I  wifh  that  the  moft  effedtual  methods  of  remedying
this  difeafe,  were  as  well  afcertain'd  as  the  difeafe  itfelf.

The  difeafe  of  which  I  fpeak  is  a  prolapfus  of  the  inteftinum  reftum  :  and
the  caufe  by  which  it  was  increas'd,  was  a  violent  and  long-continu'd  {train-
ing at  the  times  of  going  to  ftool.  But  in  what  manner  it  was  increas'd,  by
thefe  ftrainings,  from  whence  it  had  its  beginning,  and  what  its  beginning
was,  and  by  what  caufes  it  is  ftill  preferv'd,  or,  as  the  language  of  phyficians
is,  continu'd ;  all  thefe  circumftances,  efpecially  at  fo  great  a  diftsnce  of
times,  and  of  places,  it  is  very  difficult  for  me  to  fubjoin,  and  to  know  al-
moft  impoffible.  But  if  there  were  any  one  who  had  been  able  to  obferve
the  fymptoms,  and  crifes,  of  that  obftinate,  and  troublefome  fever,  to  vvhich
the  beginning  of  this  diforder  fucceeded  ;  and  to  confider,  accurately,  at  that
time,  and  when  it  was  afterwards  increas'd,  and  at  this  time  alfo,  of  what
nature  the  upper,  and  lower,  extremities  of  the  tube,  which  came  forth,
were,  and  what  was  its  confiftence ;  it  would  perhaps  have  been  lefs  difficult
for  him  to  conjefture  the  true  caufes  of  the  diforder.

3.  Thefe  caufes,  if  they  are  even  only  confider'd  jointly,  may  be  many,
and  very  different  from  each  other.  That  very  learned  fellow-citizen  of  mine,
Hieronimus  Mercurialis  {a\  and  Ambrofe  Parey  (^),  aJTign  one  caufe  in  par-
ticular, I  mean  the  relaxation  of  the  fphinfter  ani,  which  fuffer'd  the  inteftine
to  come  forth.  But  medical  experience  does  not  eafily  fuffer  me  to  aflent
thereto,  as  thereby  I  am  taught,  that  a  prolapfus  of  the  inteftine  does  not,
immediately,  fucceed  to  a  true  paralyfis  of  that  fphinfter,  but  only  after
fome  time  has  been  interpos'd  :  and  in  our  patient,  in  particular,  I  underftand,
how  ftrong  this  mufcle  ftill  is,  fo  that  it  refifts  every  other  even  violent  motion.
But  Joannes  Riolanus  {c) ;  I  mean  the  father  ;  adds  to  the  relaxation  of  the
fphindler,  that  of  the  relaxation  of  the  levatores  ani  alfo  :  and  this  the  greater
part  of  phyficians  admit.  However,  that  this  was  the  cafe  in  the  prefent  in-
ftance,  and  had  been  fo  from  the  beginning,  I  would  neither  boldly  deny,
nor  for  a  certainty  affirm.  I  only  fay  this,  that  if  it  was  fo,  it  certainly  was,
not  the  only  caufe,  after  the  difeafe  had  continu'd  fome  little  time.  For  I
know  from  anatomy,  that  the  part  of  the  inteftine,  which  can  remain  with-
out the  anus,  from  this  caufe  alone,  that  it  is  not  rais'd  by  thefe  mufcles,  is
the  lower  part,  and  only  of  the  extent  of  a  few  inches  ;  and  that  the  part
which  lies  above  this  cannot  hang  out  for  that  reafon,  to  the  extent  of  eight
or  ten  inches  in  length,  and  even  to  fixteen  or  twenty,  if  it  be  confider'd,,
that,  by  being  inverted  outwards,  it  muft  be  in  a  double  ftate.

4.  It  becomes  neceflary  therefore,  to  look  out  for  other  caufes,.  and  ia
particular  that,  amongft  others,  which  was  hinted  at,,  by  the  learned  phyfi-
cian  who  confulted  me ;  I  mean  the  feparation  of  the  inteftine  from  the  me-
focolon,  or  fome  other  caufe,  which  amounts  to  the  fame  thing,  and  which
happens  more  eafily  ;  as  for  inftance,  a  relaxation,  gradually  brought  on,  of

{a)  De  morb.  puer.  1.  i.  c.  lo.  (r)  Meth.  med.  feft.  3.  ubi  de  Ueofi.

\b\  Of  er.  chirurg.  ].  7.  c.  i8i

the


112  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  latter  part  of  that  mefocolon,  which  ferves  as  a  ligament  to  the  reftum,
and  to  that  neareft,  winding,  and  moveable,  tra£t  of  the  colon,  into  which  the
reftum  terminates.

It  does  not  efcape  me,  that,  to  fome  very  modern  profeffors  of  medicine,
it  does  not  feem  probable,  that  the  whole  body  of  the  inteftine  fiiould  come
forth,  confidering  the  firmnefs  of  its  ligaments,  and  its  cloie  attachment  to
the  vagina  uteri  in  women,  and  to  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  and  the  neigh-
bouring parts,  in  men,  and  confidering  an  obfervation,  befides,  which  they
quote  from  Cowper  {d),  of  a  man,  who,  after  a  long  continu'd  prolapfus
ani,  and,  at  length,  a  iphacelus  of  the  prolaps'd  inteftine,  from  too  great
intemperance,  although  he  had  undergone  an  extirpation  of  the  corrupt  parts,
which  hung  down,  not  only  recover'd  his  former  health,  but  even  liv'd  quite
free  from  the  prolapfus.  They,  therefore,  and  the  celebrated  Junckerus(^),
believe  that  the  whole  body  of  the  inteftine  is  not  relax'd,  but  only  the  in-
ternal part,  and  that  this,  being  thicken'd,  is  inverted,  and  pufti'd  out:  and
I  would  not  deny,  but  that  which  is  fuppos'd  to  happen  in  the  prolapfus  of
the  uterus,  or,  rather,  in  the  more  frequent  prolapfus  of  the  vagina,  that
many  improperly  confound  with  the  prolapfus  of  the  uterus  itfelf,  which  is
indeed  very  rare,  is  favourable  to  their  opinion.

But,  although  I  am  not  unappriz'd,  how  much  membranes,  that  are
drench'd,  as  it  were,  with  moifture,  may  be  relax'd,  thicken'd,  and  made
long,  yet  when  I  read  over  what  our  Fabricius  ab  Aquapendente  (f)  aflerts
his  having  feen  in  fome  perfons,  that  is  to  fay,-  "  a  procidentia  ani  fo  long,  as
"  to  be  equal  to  the  length  of  the  fore-arm,  and  fo  thick,  as  to  be  equal
to  both  the  arms  join'd  together"  (which  paflage,  perhaps,  had  efcap'd  Junc-
kerus  (g),  when  he  judg'd  that  a  prolapfus,  mention'd  by  Muralt(^),  of  an
equal  length,  "  almoft  exceeded  all  belief") ;  when  I  read,  therefore,  fuch
things,  I  feem  inclin'd  to  believe,  in  fome  certain  cafes,  with  the  celebrated
Polycarp  Schacher  (/),  that  the  thing  happens  neither  in  that  firft,  nor  in  the
fecond  manner,  but  rather  in  the  third  which  is  propos'd  by  him.

That  is  to  fay,  the  lower  part  of  the  inteftinum  re6lum,  which  I  have
faid  to  be  firmly  connefted  with  the  neighbouring  parts,  being  unmov'd,  the
other  part,  which  is  fuperior  to  this,  falls  within  it,  together  with  the  fseces,
and  being  inverted,  comes  forth  on  the  outfide  of  the  anus.  For  it  is  fufli-
cient  that  the  mefocolon  is  there  relax'd,  where  it  confines  the  redum  ;  or
if  the  prolapfus  is  very  long,  that  it  is  relax'd  in  that  place  befides,  where
it  belongs  to  the  neighbouring  moveable,  and  winding  traft  of  the  co-
lon, which  being,  in  fome  perfons  longer,  and  in  others  lliorter,  as  I  have
laid  in  the  third  of  the  Adverfaria  (k)^  fo  it  may  be  more  or  lefs  extended,
and  defcend,  and  fuffer  the  redtum  to  be  prolaps'd.  But  if  this  additamen-
tum  of  mine  were  not  fufficient,  I  Ihould  then,  moreover,  think  of  another,
as  if  befides  thofe  three  methods  mention'd  above,  a  fourth  might  be  pro-
pos'd, according  to  which,  what  I  juft  now  fpoke  of,  in  the  third,  might
happen,  and  the  internal  coat  befides,  as  was  faid  in  the  fecond,  being  re-

(r/)  Anat.  of  hum.  bod.  6oi.  t.  39,  f.  7.  (h)  Eph,  n. c. dec.  2. a.  i.  obf.  113. in

{c)  Confp.  med.  tab.  1 10.  fchol.

(fj  De  cliir.  opcr.  c,  de  ani  procid.  .(/)  Difp.  de  morb.  afitu  inteft.  p.  n.  c.  2.  §.3.

.(^)  Tab.  cit.  {«)  Animad.  6.

lax'd


Letter  XXXIII. Article  5,  6.  113

lax'd,  inverted,  and  falling  down,  might  come  forth  through  the  lower  ex-
tremity of  the  prolaps'd  inteftine,  and  increafe  the  length  thereof,  by  being
added  to  it.

5.  It  is  not  my  cufrom,  indeed,  to  ufe  very  long  harangues  in  the  theo-
retical part  of  medical  opinions,  for  I  am  not  ignorant  that  moft  patients  are
like  the  empirics,  who  do  not  doubt,  as  Celfus  fays  (/),  "  that  thefe  conjec-
"  tures,  upon  occult  caufes,  are  very  little  to  the  purpofe,  becaufe  it  is  of

"  no  importance  what  has  produc'd  the  difeafe,  but  what  will  remove  it."
Yet  in  this  cafe  I  thought  proper  to  proceed  differently,  not  only  becaufe
the  patient,  who  requires  this  opinion  of  me,  is  very  learned,  but  alfo  be-
caufe, notwithftanding  fome  animadverfions,  which  I  may  deduce  from  thofe
things  that  I  have  hitherto  faid,  would  not  perhaps  fhow  the  utility  of  what
I  have  advanc'd,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the  empirics  (without  doubt  as
the  prolapfus  of  which  I  fpeak,  may  be  join'd  with  one,  or  with  , another,  or
with  many  of  the  caufes  that  I  have  hinted  at,  and  as  it  is  not  in  my  power,
for  the  reafons  I  gave  in  the  beginning  {m),  without  the  greateft  difficulty,
and  confequently  without  very  great  danger  of  erring,  to  determine  with
which  it  really  is  join'd)  it  is  neceflary,  at  leaft,  to  gather  by  a  kind  of  in-
duftion,  which  is  what  I  am  at  prefent  doing,  that  it  is  always  probable,  whe-
ther there  be,  in  this  cafe,  one,  or  another,  or  many,  of  thefe  caufes  join'd
together,  that  it  confifts  in  a  kind  of  relaxation,  and  this  a  relaxation  which
began  twenty  years  ago  and  more,  as  the  effefts  of  it  fhow,  and  was  after-
wards gradually  increas'd.

6.  And  as  from  this  indudion  an  indication  arifes,  of  refloring  to  the  re-
lax'd  parts  that  firft  and  proper  meafure  of  rigidity,  or  clofenefs  of  con-
nexion, their  former  fituation,  and  firmnefs  ;  fo  no  perfon,  whatever,  who
is  even  flightly  vers'd  in  medical  affairs,  can  fail  immediately  to  perceive,  that
it  is  very  difficult,  not  to  fay  impoffible,  to  bring  this  about.  And  if,  as
Galen  has  in  general  taught  (n),  diforders  of  the  anus,  or  fundament,  "  are
"  very  difficult  to  be  cur'd,"  which  was,  perhaps,  the  reafon  why  fome  phy-
Iicians,  formerly,  plac'd  all  their  ftudy  on  the  cure  of  thefe  alone  (c),  with
how  much  more  difficulty  muft  this  diforder,  which  is  fo  ftubborn,  and  of  fo
long  ftanding,  admit  of  a  cure  ?  Indeed  I  do  remember  to  have  read  of  other,
more  confiderable,  prolapfufes  being  cur'd,  as  that  was  which  I  have  fpoken
of  from  Muralt  {p).  But  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  of  an  inveterate
prolapfus,  or  one  which  had  afflifted  the  patient  for  twenty  years,  being  got
rid  of.  For  which  reafon  we  ought  to  be  fatisfy'd  in  the  prefent  cafe,  if  as
the  relaxation  cannot  be  remov'd,  we  can,  by  means  of  the  palliative  method
of  cure,  as  it  is  call'd,  prevent  the  daily  effefts  of  it,  or  render  them  lefs
confiderable,  and  more  tolerable  :  for  thefe  effeds  are  not  only  of  importance,
by  reafon  of  the  uneafmefs  they  give,  but  becaufe  they  increafe  the  difeafe,
and  alfo  becaufe  there  may  be  the  higheft  danger,  at  one  time,  or  other,
either  from  the  prolaps'd  part  being  very  much  increas'd,  or  not  being  early
rcplac'd,  or  injur'd  from  being  expos'd  to the  air,  or  finally,  from  its  beino-

(/)  De  medic,  in  praf.  {o)  Vid.  1.  Galen,  adfcr.  de  partib.  art.  med.

{m) N. 2.  c.  2.

(/;)  De  camp,  medic,  fee.  loc. 1,  o.  c.  6.  (/)  N.  4.

Vol.  II.  ,  '  Q  but


114  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

but  little  confin'd  by  the  fphinder,  which  in  a  courfe  of  time  may  be  relax'd,
and  particularly,  at  that  time,  when  the  ftrength  of  the  conftitution,  being
broken  down  by  age,  will  be  lefs  able  to  refift  this  relaxation,  or  prevent  that
which  is  already  preient,  from  being  farther  increas'd.

7.  But  as  I  find  that  the  moft  powerful  medicines,  whatever,  have  been  in
vain  apply'd,  to  remove  this  rtelaxation  •,  fo  I  likewife  fee,  that  in  the  pallia-
tive method  of  cure,  many  and  various  inftruments  have  been  made  ufe  of
in  vain,  againft  the  effects  of  it ;  and  that,  for  this  reafon,  others  are  re-
quir'd  of  me,  and,  in  particular,  a  defcription  of  that  which  is  faid  to  have
been  invented  formerly,  by  that  very  ingenious  monk  Paul  Sarpi.  But  I
fear  left  all  thefe  which  are  known  to  me,  may  at  length  be  refer'd  to  thofe,
which  have  been  already  made  ufe  of;  if  we  confider  that  which  is  the  prin-
cipal ;  and  amongft  thefe  that  of  Sarpi  alfo,  fince  I  find  no  defcription  of  it
but  this,  which  we  read  in  Rhodius  (q):  "  the  piles  being  return'd  back  in-
"  to  their  places,  fo  as  not  to  fall  down  again,  let  them  be  kept  there  with
"  an  iron  ring  aptly  applied  :  which  many  have  receiv'd  great  advantage
"  from,  and  afcribe  its  invention  to  Paul  Servita,  a  Venetian,  and  a  man  of
"  great  ingenuity.  This  ring  is  enclos'd,  on  each  fide,  with  foft  leather,
*'  which  is  faften'd  towards  the  perineum,  and  the  buttocks,  by  bandages
"  that  are  few'd  to  each  of  its  four  heads,  being  conne6ted  with  a  linen  girdle,
"  that  goes  round  the  waift."

The  inftrument  of  Sarpi,  therefore,  is  of  the  fame  kind  with  the  rings  that
have  been  already  made  ufe  of :  and  that  which,  not  to  mention  the  tabuing
anguftiffima  "  of  Hippocrates  (r),"  is  recommended  by  Riolanus  (s),  and  by
two  others  among  the  French,  Blegny  ((),  and  Dionis  (u),  and  before  the
latter,  even  by  Muralt  (x),  that  is  to  fay,  a  tablet  pierc'd  through  with  a
foramen  of  fuch  a  kind,  as  not  to  fuffer  the  inteftine  of  the  patient  to  pafs
through,  when  he  goes  to  ftool,  is  upon  the  very  fame  plan  :  and  this  ta-
blet Muralt  order'd  to  be  enclos'd  in  a  blue  cloth,  dyed  with  indigo,  not
what  comes  from  Madagafcar,  but  from  the  Caribbe  Iflands.  And  what  Pa-
rey  recommends,  amounts,  at  length,  to  the  fame  thing,  though  without  the
application  of  any  inftrument,  when  he  fays  (y),  "  if  the  patient  could  dif-
"  charge  the  fseces,  in  an  upright  and  ftanding  pofture,  the  inteftine  would
"  never  be  in  danger  of  being  thruft  out,  by  the  ftraining."

But  as  the  patient,  whofe  cafe  is  now  propos'd  to  my  confideration,  can-
not unload  his  bowels,  unlefs,  fetting  afide  every  kind  of  artifice  whatever,
he  fuffer  the  inteftine  to  come  out ;  I  feem  to  be  throwing  away  my  time,  if
I  do  not  endeavour  to  invent  any  other  artifices  of  that  kind,  and  do  not  ra-
ther inquire  into  the  caufe,  why  the  ufe  of  inftruments,  of  this  kind,  is,  in
the  prefent  cafe,  without  any  advantage,  fo  that  this  caufe  being  -known,
either  the  ingenuity  of  fome  fl<:illful  furgeon  may  be  excited,  to  find  out
one  of  a  quite  different  nature,  which  might  be  ufeful,  or  if  be  it  found,
upon  the  inquiry,  that  this  cannot  be  done  at  all,  that  the  part  affeded  may,
hereafter,  be  troubled  with  no  inftruments  whatever.


(y)  Cent.  2.  obf.  med.  94.  (a) Cours  d'oper.  de  chir.  dem.  4.

(*-)  De  fiftul.  n.  4.  (x)  Schol.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  4.

(s)  Sea.  cit.  fupra  ad.  n.  3.  (j)  Cap.  clt.  fupra  ad  n.  3.
(t)  L'art.  deguerirleshern.p.z.f.  2.C.8.


8.  And


Letter  XXXIII. Article  8.  115

8.  And  firft,  it  is  not  to  be  fuppos'd  in  the  prefent  cafe,  that  the  inteftlne
is,  neceflarily,  to  be  fufFer'd  to  come  down,  becaufe  the  excrements  are  fo
thick  and  hard,  that  they  cannot  pafs  through  thofe  inftruments  which  <I  have
fpoken  of;  for  if  this  had  been  the  cafe,  it  would  have  been  provided  againft
long  ago,  and  abfolutely  prevented  from  happening,  either  by  a  fuitable  diet,
or  by  folutive  medicines,  or  by  the  injeftion  of  a  fmall  quantity  of  a  liquor,
proper  to  lubricate,  and  foften.  It  therefore  remains,  that  the  relaxation  of
the  whole  inteftine,  or  of  its  internal  coat,  muft  be  fuppos'd  fo  confider-
able,  that  the  one,  or  the  other,  defcending,  when  pufli'd  down  by  the  ex-
crements, in  a  great  number  of  large  rugse,  laid  one  upon  another,  form
fomething  like  a  valve,  efpecially  as  often  as  being  retain'd  by  any  kind  of
artifice,  it  cannot  altogether  extend,  and  unfold  itfelf,  and  by  this  means
give  an  open  pafTage  to  the  excrements.  And  if  this  be  the  real  ftate  of  the
affair,  all  artifices  of  that  kind  are  to  be  remov'd ;  for  as,  by  this  means,
that  part  of  the  intefline  may  be  comprefs'd,  betwixt  the  fasces  which  are  in-
creas'd  above,  and  the  infirument,  no  advantage  can  be  expedted  from
thence,  but  even  a  very  confiderable  injury  may,  at  fome  time  or  other,  be
fear'd.

Inftead  of  thefe  inftruments  then,  a  new  one  fhould  be  fought  after,  which
might  not  only  fupport  the  lower  part  of  the  inteftine  externally,  as  the  for-
mer have  done,  but  might,  at  the  fame  time,  reach  fo  far,  as  to  be  able  to
fupport  internally,  and  opportunely  dilate,  the  relax'd  parietes,  that  they
may  not,  by  being  inverted,  and  pufh'd  before  the  fasces,  in  the  form  of
rug£e,  or  valves,  ftop  up  the  pafTage  of  thefe  fsces,  when  they  are  about  to
be  difcharg'd.  It  would  be  necefTary,  that  this  inftrument  fhould  beoffuch
a  nature,  as  to  render  it  eafy  of  infertion,  into  the  inteftine,  and  fhould  be
moderately,  and  gradually  dilatable,  as  foon  as  ever  the  necefTities  of  nature
may  begin  to  require,  nor  fhould  there  be  the  leaft  danger  of  its  injuring  the
inteftine,  either  laterally,  or  in  the  upper  part  of  it,  but  particularly  in
the  upper  part :  to  prevent  which  danger,  all  the  upper  parts  of  the  inftru-
ment might  be  inverted,  before  its  introduction,  with  the  foft  and  frefh  in-
teftine of  fbme  little  animal.

The  well-known  contrivance  of  thofe  inftruments  call'd  fpecula,  which
furgeons  us'd  to  dilate  the  vagina  uteri,  and  even  the  inteftinum  reftum  it-
felf, might  perhaps,  to  a  prudent,  and  fkillful,  contriver  of  inftruments,
fupply  a  much  better,  and  lefs  difagreeable,  idea  of  this  inftrument,  with
which  it  would  be  fufficient  to  keep  that  part  of  the  inteftine  extended,  that
is  eafily  dilated,  I  mean  the  part  which  is  above  the  fphindter ;  and  to  leave
no  larger  a  pafTage  open  through  this  part,  that  moft  refifts  dilatation,  than
would  befufHcient  for  the  foft,  and  almoft  fluid,  excrements  to  pafs  through-,
for  care  muft  be  taken,  by  a  fuitable  regimen,  to  keep  them,  conftantly,
in  fuch  a  ftate.

But  as  I  well  know  that  moft  machines,  when  apply'd  to  their  ufes,  gene-
rally correfpond  but  little  with  the  expedtation  of  the  inventors,  and  as  in  this
cafe,  in  particular,  I  fee  what  difadvantages  might  arife,  not  only  if  an  un-
experienc'd  hand  fhould  introduce  the  inftrument,  and  dilate  the  inteftine,
but  alfo  from  the  frequency  of  the  introduction,  and  dilatation,  and  even
from the very  motion,  and  comprelTion,  of  the  inteftine,  while  the  fsces

Q^  2  ihouid


ii6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fhould  be  expell'd  ;  and  as  I  cannot  know,  for  a  certainty,  that  the  relaxa-
tion does  not  begin  higher  up,  than  the  inftrument  can  reach,  I  profefs  that
I  have  enter'd  into  this  difcuffion,  with  no  other  intention,  than  to  excite
others  to  look  out  for  a  more  natural,  and  commodious  idea  :  and  if  it  were
certain,  that  this  could  be  reduc'd  into  praftife  fafely,  and  without  fufpicion
of  any  danger,  it  would  then,  indeed,  be  neither  improper,  nor  perhaps
ufelefs,  to  make  the  experiment  thereof.

9.  But  if,  as  I  am  very  much  afraid,  on  account  of  the  caufes  juft  now
hinted  at,  it  fhould  be  taken  for  granted,  univerfally,  and  not  without  rea-
fon,  that  in  the  palliative  cure,  there  is  no  room  for  the  trial  of  any  inftru-
ment whatever,  then  nothing  would  remain  for  medicine  to  do,  but  to  ex-
amine, whether  in  the  methods  of  cure,  which  have  been  already  made  ufe
of,  in  order  to  remove  that  relaxation,  any  remedy  had  been  omitted,  by
which,  ifthedifeafe  could  not  be  overcome,  it  might  at  leaft  be  in  fome
meafure  diminifh'd.

10.  Many  affiftances  were  formerly  taken  from  furgery  againft  this  dif-
eafe.  Riolanus  (z)  recommended  two  cupping-glafles,  to  be  apply'd,  one
to  each  fide  of  the  lower  part  of  the  os  factum,  or  to  the  buttocks,  as  Scha^
cher  (a)  mentions,  who  expefted  fome  advantage  from  thence,  when  the
chief  caufe  of  the  difeafe  confifts  in  the  mufcles  of  the  anus  being  languid.
Yet  I  have  no  more  expedtation  from  this  pra£life,  than  from  two  cauteries
being  apply'd  to  the  lower  part  of  the  fpine,  which  Mercurialis(^),  follow-
ing the  fedlaries  of  the  Arabians,  has  propos'd,  and  Marcus  Aurelius  Seve-
rinus  (c)  has  confirm'd  ;  unlefs,  perhaps,  they  ought  to  be  apply'd  in  a  per-
fon  whofe  habit  of  body  was  very  different  from  that,  of  our  patient's,  and  in
whom  the  prolapfus  had  been  brought  on,  or  continu'd,  from  too  great  an
afflux  of  humours  to  the  part.

But  as  to  the  famous  remedy  of  that  ancient  furgeon  Leonida,  whom  the
celebrated  man,  Daniel  le  Clerc  (i),  fuppofes  to  be  the  fame  with  Leonides,
the  phyfician  fpoken  of  by  Cselius  Aurelianus  (e),  under  the  title  of  Epifyn-
theticus  •,  I  will  neither  omit  the  opinions  of  others,  nor  conceal  my  own.
When  diet,  therefore,  had  been  of  no  advantage,  nor  medicines  had  contri-
buted any  thing  to  the  alleviation  of  the  diforder,  and  the  evil  was  now  grown
inveterate,  Leonida  judg'd  it  to  be  neceffary,  and  not  at  all  dangerous,  to
burn  the  external,  and  extreme,  part  of  the  anus  with  fome  cauteries  ;  for
that,  by  this  means,  a  folid  cicatrix  fucceeding,  the  anus  would  be  conftring'd
all  round,  and  the  prolapfus  remov'd.  Thefe  things  may  be  read  fomewhat
more  clearly,  and  diftinftly,  in  Aetius  (f),  who  has  preferv'd,  and  handed
down  to  us,  this,  and  other  curative  methods  of  Leonida  :  and  this  method
has  been  taken  notice  of  by  Fabricius  ab  Aquapendente  alfo  (g),  and  by  Ri-
olanus (h).

As  CO  Severinusfzj,  he  not  only  mentions  it-,  not  only  confirms,  by  many  ob-
fervations  of  his  own,  that  the  adlual  cautery  had  fucceeded  very  happily  with

(s)  Seft.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  3.  (e)  Acut.  paff.  I.  2.  c.  i.

(a)  §.  9.  cap.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  4.  (yi)  Medic,  tetrab.  1.  4.  ferm.  2,  c.  8.

(6) Cap.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  3.  {'gj  C.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  4.

(c)  De  effic.  medic.  1.  2.  p.  1.  c.  50.  (&)  Seft.  cit.

{d)  Hift.  de  la  med.  p.  2.  1.  4.  f.  2.  c.  1.  (0  Part.  cit.  c.  95.  .

him.


Letter  XXXIII. Article  ii.  117

Jiiin,  when  applied  to  this  part,  though  in  other  diforders  •,  but  he  calls  the
phyficians  timid,  and  flothful,  becaufe  they  would  not  lurfer  him  to  apply
the  fame  method  of  cure,  to  a  gentleman  of  the  noble  family  of  the  Surgen-
tii,  whofe  prolapfus,  like  that  of  our  patient,  was  of  twenty  years  fxanding,
and  had,  like  his,  received  no  benefit  from  all  kinds  of  medicines.

On  the  other  hand,  Blegny  (k)  entirely  rejetls  this  kind  of  cure,  as  not
lefs  troublefome,  than  unufual,  in  our  prefent  times.  And  Dionis  (/)  fays,
that  he  never  faw  it,  calls  the  authors  of  it  cruel,  and  the  operation  itfelf  hor-
rible, even  to  thofe  who  hear  of  it:  and  believes  that  if  there  fhould  happen
to  be  any  medical  practitioner,  who  would  willingly  try  it,  no  patient,  nor
anyone  elfe,  certainly,  would  confent  to  it,  and  that  with  great  good  reafon,  be-
caufe thefe  diforders  may  be  cur'd  without  it:  although  it  does  not  at  all  ap-
pear, by  what  means  he  could  prove  this  aflertion,  as  he  propofes  no  remedy
that  feems  to  be  equal  to  the  cure  of  this  diforder,  in  our  patient.

However,  it  is  by  no  means  neceflary  for  me,  here,  to  aflent,  either  to
the  epithets  of  timid,  and  flothful,  with  Severinus,  or  to  that  of  cruel  with
Dionis.  For  although  I  do  not  deny  but  the  method  of  cure  taught  by  Leo-
nida,  may  be  ufeful  in  a  fmall  relaxation,  when  it  is  pretty  low  down,  and
that  this  is,  in  fome  meafure,  confirm'd  by  the  obfervation  of  Cowper,  which
is  pointed  out  above  (?») ;  yet  in  this  relaxation  that  I  am  fpeaking  of,  which
is  fo  very  confiderable,  and  feems  to  begin  fo  high  up  in  the  inteftine,  I  am
very  much  afraid  that  it  would  not  be  of  any  great  advantage,  if  it  were  of
any  advantage  at  all.

II.  In  the  mean  while,  leaving  to  better  judges  than  myfelf,  the  farther
examination  of  thefe  methods  of  cure,  which  were  formerly  made  ufe  of
by  furgeons,  I  go  on  to  confider  a  more  modern  inftrument,  the  author  of
■which  teftifies  its  having  been  very  ufeful  in  m.any  prolapfufes.

This  author  is  Blegny  (n),  whom  I  before  mention'd,  a  man  truly  inge-
nious. He  took  the  craw  of  a  turkey-cock,  and  tied  the  orifice  of  it  faft  to
one  extremity  of  a  fhort,  and  (lender  tube,  made  of  filver  ;  and  at  the  other
extremity,  he  introduc'd  a  ftick,  which  was  blunt,  at  its  upper  part,  quite  to
the  bottom  of  that  pipe,  and  by  this  means,  firft  introduc'd  this  pipe,  and
afterwards  a  proper  part  of  the  tube,  daub'd  over  with  aftringent  remedies,
into  the  reftum;  the  remaining  part  of  it  he  kept  on  the  outfide  of  the  anus,
in  fuch  a  manner,  that  when  he  had  taken  away  the  ftick,  and,  in  the  place
of  it,  had  inferted  into  the  lame  part  of  the  tube,  the  pipe  of  a  fmall  pair  of
bellows,,  and  had  driven  in  fuch  a  quantity  of  air,  as  was  fufficient  for  filling
the  craw,  the  air  could  not  return  before  the  patient  was  willing,  and  beina;,
Gonfequently,  retain'd,  would  fupport  the  relax'd  parts,  and  caufe  by  its  fre-
quent, and  long-repeated  ufe,  that  they  fhould,  as  far  as  poflible,  recover
their  former  fituation,  and  ftrength.  But  it  is  better  to  fee  the  accurate  de-
fcription  of  this  inftrument,  its  delineation,  and  the  manner  of  fixing  it,  in
the  works  of  the  author  himfelf.

It  is  true  I  agree  with  Dionis  (o),  readily,  herein,  that  even  this  inftrument
is  not  without  its  inconveniencies,  nor  does  it  anfwer  the  end  of  retaining  the

(i)  Cap.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  7.  („)  Cap.  paulo  ante  indie.

(/)  Demonftr.  ibid.  cit.  (0)  Demonftr.  paulo  fupra  indie.

{m)  N.  4,  .


ii8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

intelline  in  its  fituation,  at  that  time,  when  there  is  mod  need  of  it ;  I  mean
when  the  patient  goes  to  ftool  -,  fince  it  muft,  of  courfe,  be  then  taken  out,
and  foon  after  be  replac'd,  when  the  inteftine  has  been  return'd  back  again.
Yet  I  deny  that  this  inftrument  produces,  as  he  fays,  the  fame  effeft  with
bandages,  and  other  external  applications.  And  indeed,  excepting  the  in-
convenience, which  is  not  very  confiderable,  and  that  a  cautious,  and  flcilful,
hand  is  requir'd  to  replace  the  inftrument,  I  fhould  fuppofe  that  it  would  be
not  altogether  without  its  advantage,  efpecially  in  the  beginning  of  relaxa-
tions of  this  kind.

It  might  even  be  confider'd,  whether,  inftead  of  that  craw,  it  would  not  be
better  to  make  ufe  of  the  foft  inteftine  of  any  animal,  which  was  furnilh'd
with  flender  coats,  of  fuch  a  proportion,  as  to  length,  and  breadth,  as  it  was
convenient,  or  neceflary,  to  introduce,  having  the  upper  extremity  clofely
fhut  up  internally,  and  being  daub'd  over  externally,  with  that  medicine  which
I  fliall  recommend  below  (p),  to  be  made  ufe  of  after  going  to  ftool :  this  in-
teftine being  thus  fufBciently  introduc'd,  and  air  being  foon  after  injefted,  or
even  fometimes  a  liquor  of  a  proper  quality,  it  might  be  entirely  diftended,
or  at  leaft  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  not  to  bring  on  a  deftre  of  going  to  ftool.

It  is  not  eaiy,  perhaps,  to  find  a  more  commodious,  and  at  the  fame  time
a  more  innocent,  remedy  than  this,  in  order  to  replace,  and  retain,  in  its  narive
feat,  the  relax'd  coat  of  the  inteftine,  and  even  the  inteftine  itfelf,  fo  that  by  this
means  the  ligaments  of  the  inteftine  may  beeas'd,  and,  the  weight  and  exten-
fion  being  taken  from  them,  they  may  have  an  opportunity  of  reftoringthem-
felves,  in  fome  meafure,  and  regaining  their  ftrength.  However,  although
I  fuppofe,  as  I  have  already  faid,  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  diforder  fome
,  advantage  might  be  hop'd  from  thence,  and,  certainly,  more  than  from  the
tents,  which  others  apply  with  the  fame  view,  impregnated  and  daub'd  over,
with  aftringent  remedies ;  yet  what  ufe  may  be  expefted  from  it,  in  an  invete-
rate difeafe,  I  confefs, I  do  not  fee.

12.  As  to  pharmaceutical  remedies,  it  becomes  me  to  be  fo  much  the  more
fhort  on  this  fubjeft,  as  I  am  inform'd  by  the  letter  of  the  phyfician,  who
confults  me,  that  all  the  medicines  have  been  already  made  ufe  of,  that  could
poflibly  be  devis'd,  whether  of  the  agglutinating,  vulnerary,  or  aftringent
kind,  or  fuch  as  help  the  nerves  -,  and  as  I  fee  that  all  the  books,  both  of
phyficians,  and  furgeons,  are  full  of  remedies  of  that  kind.  And  although
I  fee  that,  in  the  fame  letter,  fomentations,  femicupia,  injeftions,  cerates,
fumigations,  and  other  external  forms  of  medicine  only,  of  the  fame  kind,  are
taken  notice  of ;  yet  I  do  not  doubt,  but  internal  medicines,  correfpondent
thereto,  were  us'd  at  the  fame  time.  And,  indeed,  I  very  clearly  conceive,
that  what  could  not  hitherto  beobtain'd  by  thefe  remedies,  is  muchlefs  to  be
expefted  from  them  hereafter,  as  the  diforder  is,  in  the  mean  while,  become
more  confiderable,  and  the  caufes  of  it  more  confirm'd.

Neverthelefs,  as  long  as  the  life,  and  the  ftrength,  of  the  patient,  are  in
a  flouriftiing  ftate,  the  cure,  perhaps,  ought  to  be  repeated  •,  for  it  is  certain,
that  a  long-continu'd,  and  vigorous,  method  of  cure,  repeated  cautioufly,
.and  prudently,  could  never  be  of  any  difadvantage. And  in  this  regimen,

if)  N.  .3.  ^

mould


Letter  XXXIII. Article 13.  119

fhould  be  included  all  the  moft  corroborating  medicines,  which  however
fliould  be  taken  from  the  clafs  of  thofe  that  affift  the  nerves,  rather  than  from
thofe  that  have  ftrongly  aftringent  properties ;  for  the  fasces  being  harden'd
by  thefe,  the  patient  muft,  of  courfe,  make  ufe  of  more  violent,  and  a  greater
number  of,  ftrainings,  in  going  to  ftool,  whereby  the  diforder  would  be  more
and  more  increas'd.  For  which  reafon,  likewife,  all  thofe  medicines  are  to  be
rejefted,  that  are  call'd  purgatives  ;  for  they  lead  to  the  injur'd  part,  and
leave  very  troublefome,  and  noxious,  irritations  therein.  But  if  it  is  necef-
fary  to  loofen  the  belly,  fuch  things  muft  be  made  ufe  of,  as  will  be  prefent-
ly  taken  notice  of  in  the  diet,  or  fome  things  fimilar  to  them,  that  are  quite
innocent.  And  in  regard  to  remedies,  that  are  to  be  externally  apply'd,  I
Ihould  greatly  prefer,  as  to  the  form,  the  femiciipia,  and  injedtions ;  as  to  the
matter,  the  ftrengthening  waters  of  warm  baths.

13.  It  remains  to  fpeak  of  diet,  as  a  proper  regimen,  in  this  refpe6t,  is
altogether  neceflary,  fince  it  not  only  aflifts  the  effetlsof  the  remedies,  which
are  taken  from  furgery,  and  pharmacy,  but  alfo  becaufe,  if  thefe  remedies
are  not  at  all  repeated,  or  repeated  to  no  purpofe,  there  is  then  no  other  me-
thod, befides  this,  remaining,  by  which  we  can  endeavour,  with  the  greateft
eafe,  fafety,  and  frequency,  to  render  the  diforder,  at  leaft,  lefs  troublefome,.
or  leffen  its  danger.  Mercurialis  propofes  fuch.  a  kind  of  diet  {q),  as  has  a
drying  property  :  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  this  regimen  conduces  much  to
ftrengthen  the  habit :  but  if  we  confider,  and  well- weigh,  the  very  great,  and
frequent,  inconveniencies,  which  would  arife  from  the  inteftinal  feces  being
harden'd,  by  fuch  a  method  of  living ;  it  will  certainly  feem  to  us,  and  efpe-
cially  after  corroborating  medicines  have  been  fo  long  made  ufe  of,  to  no
purpofe,  that  a  mode  of  diet  which  is  of  a  moift,  and  foftning  nature,  is  to  be
prefer'd  to  that  which  is  fo  powerfully  drying,  as  fuch  a  regimen  would  ferve
to  keep  the  excrements  foft,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  correft  their  acri-
mony.

That  very  cautious  phyfician,  Francifco  Redi  frj,  in  his  advice  againft  a
hasmorrhoidal  flux,  and  paiij,  join'd  with  a  prolapfus  of  the  inteftine,  at  the
time  of  going  to  ftool,  order'd  meat-broth  to  be  drunk  in  a  morning,  to  the
quantity  of  half  a  pint,  without  any  fait,  and  in  this  broth  he  order'd  to  be
previoufly  boil'd,  a  pretty  large  quantity  of  violets,  and  after  thefe  could  be
no  longer  had  except  in  a  dried  ftate,  he  ordered,  in  their  ftead,  fuccory,  or
borrage,  or  buglofs,  or  fow-thiftle,  frefli  or  dried  prunes,  quinces,  or  fome-
thing  of  the  fame  kind.  He  recommended  the  ufe  of  depurated  whey,  fweet-
en'd  with  a  julep,  made  either  from  the  tinfture  of  frefh  violets,  or  quinces^
He  alfo  recommended  the  ufe  of  alTes,  or  goats  milk.  At  dinner,  and  fup-
per,  amongft  other  things,  he  order'd  a  pudding  to  be  a  conftant  dilh,  but
this  was  to  be  very  fimple,  and  to  confift  chiefly  of  broth,  in  which  apples
had  been  boil'd,  or  fome  herbs  of  the  number  mention'd  above,  and  fome-
times  alfo  a  little  barley,  or  rice.  He  prefer'd  boil'd  meats  more  frequently
than  roaft.  And  omitting  aromatics,  and  wine,  he  order'd  dinner  and  fupper
always  to  be  concluded  with  a  fcalded  apple,  or  a  bak'd  pear,  drinking  after
it  three  ounces  of  water,  fweeten'd  with  a  fyrup,  made  from  citron  peel.


(j)  Cap.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  3.  (r)  Opere  dell'  ult.  ediz.  t.  4.  verfo  il  fine.


4


From


120  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

From  thefe  things  that  I  have  related,  as  they  ftand  in  the  opinion  of
Redi,  I  (hould  not  recede  much  in  this  cafe,  or,  at  leaft,  only  lb  far,  as  to
prevent  the  bowels  from  being  too  much  open'd.  But  if  that  regimen  of
Redi's  were  not  fufficient,  for  it  ought,  by  being  continu'd,  to  be  fufficient
to  keep  the  belly  lb  far  lax,  as  to  prevent  there  being  any  neceffity  for
ftraining,  or  for  fitting  long  when  the  patient  goes  to  ftool ;  then,  indeed,  I
ll:iould  not  be  againft  imitating  Redi,  alfo,  in  giving  two  drachms  of  the
pulp  of  cafila  fometimes,  which  fliould  be  taken  in  the  morning  before  the
broth,  of  which  I  have  fpoken,  and  repeated  again,  in  the  fam.e  quantity,  a
little  before  fupper,  if  the  former  had  as  yet  produc'd  no  effeft.  But  if,  in
fpite  of  this  regimen,  the  excrements,  neverthelefs,  ftill  continu'd  hard  and
dry,  I  fhould  judge  that  they  ought  not  to  be  difcharg'd,  by  the  means  of
ftraining,  but  by  the  affiftance  of  glyfters.

Yet  thefe  glyfters  ought  not  to  confift  of  more  than  half  a  pint  in  quanti-
ty, that  they  may  be  retain'd,  with  the  greater  eafe,  for  a  proper  degree  of
time,  and  ought  to  be  made  up  of  broth  alone,  or  the  barley  emulfion,  as  it
is  caird,  or  an  emulfion  of  rice,  which  had  been  previoufly  half-burnt,  as  it
were,  and  boil'd,  and  this  alfo  in  imitation  of  Redi.  Who,  finally,  gives
great  commendations  to  a  certain  yellow  ointment,  (call'd  manteca)  and
made  from  roles,  fuch  as  was  prepar'd  by  the  perfumers  of  the  grand  Duke
of  Tufcany,  affirming,  that  the  prolaps'd  inteftine  is  much  fooner,  and  more
eafily,  replac'd,  if  the  extremity  of  it  is  fmear'd  over  with  that  ointment,
by  which,  befides  that  the  pains  being  alleviated,  he  fays  that  the  injur'd,
and  debilitated,  part  will  be,  not  a  little,  corroborated.

However,  the  replacing  of  the  inteftine  will  be  render'd  lefs  difficult,  by
the  method  of  living  prefcrib'd,  and  the  fparingnefs  of  diet.  For  by  this
means,  neither  a  quantity  of  excrements  will  be  accumulated  in  the  neigh-
bouring traft  of  the  colon,  which  is  acircumftance,  that  is  generally  a  very
confiderable  obftacle  to  the  return  of  the  prolaps'd  inteftine,  nor  will  blood
be  generated,  whicli  either  by  its  redundancy,  or  from  any  other  diforder
whatever,  can  tend  to  render  the  weak  part  preternatu rally  thick.  And  as
this  may,  alfo,  happen  from  violent  motions,  and  exercifes,  it  will  be  equally
necelTary  to  avoid  thefe  likewife  ;  and,  to  comprehend  the  whole,  in  a  few
words,  every  thing  ought  to  be  difus'd,  which  experience  itfelf,  much  better
than  the  advice  of  any  phyfician,  has,  through  the  long  courfe  of  fo  many
years,  demonftrated  to  be  injurious.

14.  Thefe  things  I  had  to  obferve,  in  regard  to  the  very  difficult  cafe,  up-
on which  my  opinion  was  requefted,  hoping  that  the  learned,  and  nobie  pa-
tient, on  whofe  account  they  are  written,  will  be  fo  condefcending  as  to  ex-
cufe  the  hafty  manner  of  putting  them  together,  as  I  am,  at  this  time,  much
taken  up  with  many,  and  various  purfuits,  and  that  the  very  experJenc'd
phyfician  who  confulted  me,  will  make  what  ufe  of  them  he  fnall  think  con-
fiftent  with  his  prudence,  and  the  circumftances  of  the  patient :  and  I  beg  of
the  almighty  God  that  he  will  fucceed  whatever  may  have  been,  or  ftiall  be,
det«rmin'd  upo^n.

15.  You  hav-e,  here,  the  opinion  juft  as  I  wrote  it,  at  the  time,  that  is  in
the  year  1725,  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  Auguft.  In  which,  befides  the  pro-
lixity, there  are  other  things,  wherewith  I  am  not  very  well  pleas'd,  at  pre-

4  fent.


Letter  XXXIIT. Article 15.  121

"fent.  But  as  it  happen'd  that  I  was  to  write  on  fubjecls  little  treated  of,  I
could  avoid  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  And  I  could  wifh  there  had  been
any  one,  fince  that  time,  whofe  anatomical  obfervations  would  have  fet  this
affair  in  its  defirable  light.  But  thefe  obfervations,  as  they  were  then  un-
known to  the  very  learned  Schacher  (s),  and  to  me,  lb  they  are  ftill  unknown.
And  what  circumftances  are  to  be  inquir'd  into,  particularly,  in  the  bodies  of
thofe  whofe  inteftine  has  been  accuftom'd  to  defcend  to  a  confiderable  length,
will  be  fhown  by  the  foregoing  opinion,  yet  perhaps  not  all.  For  who  Jcnows
whether  thofe  ligaments,  which  referable  three  fmall  bandages,  going  from
the  upper  part  of  the  redum,  into  the  neighbouring  colon,  are  not,  fome-
timep,  relax'd  by  ^too  great  moiflure,  or  drawn  afunder  by  the  quantity  of
excrements,  which  is  gathered  together;  or,  by  the  violent  and  long-continu'd
trainings,  to  difcharge  the  fseces,  do  not  only  fuffer,  in  confequence  of  this
diftraftion,  feme  of  the  laft  cells  of  the  colon,  but  alio  a  great  number  of
thofe  tranfverfe  rugse,  which  are  within  thefe  cells,  to  be  extended,  fo  as  to
increafe  the  length  of  the  prolaps'd  inteftine.

Care  muft  be  taken  then,  wherever  bodies  of  this  kind,  which  I  ftill
much  wifh  for,  fhall  happen  to  be  diflefted,  to  inquire,  accurately,  into  the
ftate  of  thefe  ligaments,  and  cells,  or  if  both  of  thefe  parts  are  in  their  na-
tural fituation,  to  fee  whether  the  internal  rugse,  at  leaft,  are  not  unfolded,
and  almoft  evanefcent,  which  circumftance  alone,  would  fuffer  the  internal
coat,  wherein  they  are,  to  be  fo  greatly  extended  downwards,  that  is,  in  con-
fequence of  being  drawn,  by  the  internal  coat  of  the  inteflinum  reftum,
which  is  a  continuation  of  that  of  the  colon,  and  which,  in  my  ConJtHum  (I),  I
have  fuppos'd,  following  after  the  modern  medical  writers  in  particular,  may
be  thus  inverted,  and  prolaps'd  outwardly.  Yet,  at  the  fame  time,  I  think
it  ought  to  be  inquir'd  in  thefe  very  bodies,  how  far  this  inverfion  may  really
happen,  or  be  allow'd  of,  as  I  have  many  doubts  upon  this  head.

For  the  queftion  is  not  at  prefent,  as  it  was  on  a  former  occafion  (u),  of
one  part  only,  and  that  to  be  compar'd,  in  fome  meafure,  with  a  kind  of  cu-
ticle, as  it  were,  which  is  feparated,  but  of  the  whole  internal  coat  of  the  rec-
tum :  and  that  this  fhould  be  let  loofe  from  the  mufcular  coat,  fo  as  not  to  be
a  dead  part,  nor  yet  to  have  any  very  violent  fymptoms  jbin'd  with  it,  is  dif-
ficult to  be  believ'd  among  thofe  who  have  obferv'd  the  innumerable,  I  do  not
fay,  fmall  fibres  and  nerves,  but  only  the  innumerable  little  arteries,  and  \'eins,
by  which  one  is  join'd  to  the  other.

Whether,  therefore,  thefe  fmall  vefTels  can  be  fo  relax'd,  and  extended,
by  degrees,  as  the  great  inverfions  of  the  internal  coat  particularly  require,
which  many  fuppofe  to  happen  in  this  cafe  ;  or  whether  the  example  of  tu-
mours, in  which  it  is  certain  that  a  great  extenfion  of  the  veffels  does  really
happen,  takes  place  here,  where  the  internal  coat  is  faid  to  grow  thick  indeed,
but  ftill  to  be  preferv'd  flexible,  and  in  a  proper  ftate  to  be  replac'd  ;  or
finally,  whether  thefe  inverfions,  which  are  generally  fuppos'd  to  be  of  the
fame  nature  in  the  reflum,  as  in  the  vagina  uteri,  are  in  faft  of  the  fame
nature,  and  how  far,  will  never  be  learn'd  with  more  certainty  from  any
thing,  than  from  a  very  accurate  diffection  of  thefe  bodies.  Nor  indeed
can  the  opportunity  of  diffeding  bodies  of  this kind, be  very  rare,  and

(s)  §.  3.  cit.  fupraadn.  4.  (/)  N.  eod.  («)  Epift. 31.  n.  20.

'Vol,  II.  R  efpe-


122  Book  III. Of  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

efpecially  in  great  cities.  For  this  difcafe  is  fatal  to  many,  that  is,  in  confe-
quence  of  inHammation,  and  gangrene,  feizing  upon  the  inteftine,  when  the
replacing  of  ichas  been  too  long  neglefted.  But  it  alfo,  fometimes,  happens,  in
thofe  who  have  been  taken  off  by  other  kinds  of  death,  that  many  things
offer  themfelves,  the  examination  of  which  may  be  ufeful,  in  refpecSt  to  this
matter,  whether  they  have  been  liable  to  a  prolapfus  of  the  inteftinum  rec-
tum, or  whether,  from  any  caufe  whatever,  as,  in  a  certain  common  Ibldier
(x),  "  a  prolapfus,  or  devolution,  of  the  colon  into  the  re6lum,"  occurs,  which
in  him  was  "  equal  in  length,  to  a  fpan."  And  Salmuthus  (y)  did  not
doubt,  but  the  colon,  as  well  as  the  retlum,  might  be  prolaps'd,  when  to
the  obfervation  of  a  fucking  child  (x),  who  forc'd  the  inteftines  out  at  the
anus,  in  a  violent  epileptic  paroxyfm,  "  to  a  very  great  length,"  he  prefix'd
this  title,  "  a  procidentia  of  the  inteftine  colon  from  an  epilepfy."

I  wifh  he  had  diffefted  the  body  of  that  girl,  who  was  about  fourteen  years
of  ao-e  {a),  in  whom,  from  the  negleft  of  a  very  violent  tenefmus,  "  the
"  whole  inteftinum  rcdum,  with  a  part  of  the  colon,  was  forc'd  out  at  the
*'  anus,  to  the  length  of  two  fpans  and  more."  For  as  it  could  not  be  pro-
perly reftor'd  to  its  natural  fituation,  and  as  a  gangrene  had  already  feiz'd
upon  the  extremity  of  the  rectum,  flie  died,  he  himfelf  being  llirpriz'd,  how
fo  o-reat  a  portion  of  the  inteftines  could  have  fall'n  down,  from  the  mefen-
tery.  But  if  many,  and  various,  bodies  could,  at  length,  be  accurately  dif-
fered, either  of  thofe  who  died  of  a  prolapfus,  that  liad  then  afflidted  them,
for  the  firft  time,  or  of  one  which  they  had  been  troubled  with  before,  or  of
thofe  who,  as  they  had  been  fubje£t  to  the  fame  prolapfus,  and  that  gradually
increas'd  to  a  great  length  (Z^),  were  differently  affedted  with  difagreeable
fymptoms,  and  different  kinds  of  uneafinefs  arifingfrom  thence,  of  whatever
diforder  they  may  have  died;  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  it  muft  be
much  more  eafy  for  phyficians,  to  point  out  the  caufes,  and  cure,  of  this  dif-
eafe,  when  confulted  thereon,

1 6.  But  as  the  conditions  of  the  cafe  then  propos'd,  led  me,  in  the  theo-
retical part,  to  fome  things  which  are  perhaps  not  very  probable,  fo  in  the
other  part  alfo,  they  naturally  led  me  to  many,  which  may  be  much  more
eafily  wilh'd  for,  than  brought  about.  But  if  the  patient  had  not  lain  under
that  peculiar  neceffity,  of  removing  every  inftrument,  or  artificial  contrivance,
from  him,  and  fuffcring  the  inteftine  to  be  prolaps'd,  when  he  wanted  to  dif-
charge  the  fasces,  affiftance  would  not  have  been  wanting,  which  I  could
propofe,  to  keep  the  inteftine  in  its  natural  fituation,  while  the  fseces  were
difcharg'd.

There  was,  in  the  firft  place,  the  ring  of  Sarpi :  in  regard  to  which,  be-
fides  what  I  have  related  above  (c),  from  Johannes  Rhodius,  I  alfo  remem-
ber to  have  read  thefe  things,  in  the  life  of  Sarpi ;  that  when  he  had  long  la-
bour'd  under  this  difeafe,  and  had,  at  different  times,  tried  a  great  number
of  remedies,  but  all  in  vain,  he,  at  length,  began  to  inquire  after  a  kind  of
inftrument,  whereby  he  might  retain  the  inteftine,  for  which  reafon,  after
many  attempts,  he  had,  at  length,  found  out  one  fo  proper  .|^to  the  purpofe,

{x)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  2.  obf.  103.  («)  Obf.  30.

(^)  Obf.  med.  cent.  i.  .  (^)  Vid.  Epift.  65.  n.  6.

(k)  31.  WN.  7.

2  that


Letter  XXXIII. Article 16.  123

that,  although  he  labour'd  under  the  diforder  to  the  very  end  of  life,  he
did  not,  for  that  reafon,  fufier  an  impediment  of  any  aftion,  any  more  than
if  he  had  been  without  the  dileafe,  and  thaf  the  fame  was  fo  fimple  in  its
contri^'ance,  and  fo  eafily  apply'd,  that  it  had  equally  the  fame  effedl  with
others,  to  whom  he  had  communicated  it.

But  if  this  life,  by  reafon  of  the  author's  (whoever  he  may  be  now  fup-
pos'd  to  be,  by  a  very  great  man,  who  will  be  commended  in  another  place),
I  fay,  if  by  reafon  of  the  author's  real,  or  craftily-pretended,  ignorance  of
fome  things,  fo  that  in  the  Epiftolas  Anatomicse  (^),  I  was  wiUing  to  make  no
other  ufe  of  this  life,  than  for  the  fake  of  refuting  by  means  of  it,  ad  homi-
nem  as  the  phrafe  is,  thofe  who  had  laid  this  real  or  pretended  ignorance  to
his  charge  ;  if  therefore  it  Ihould  be  fufpefted  in  this  point  likewife  ;  another
inftrument  would  not  have  been  wanting,  which  I  had  feen  taken  notice  of,
in  a  certain  opinion  of  our  Valialva's.  That  is  to  fay,  when  the  patient  went
to  the  clofe-ftool  to  difcharge  his  excrements,  a  cover  for  it  was  at  hand,  per-
forated in  the  middle,  and  tiiere  furnifli'd  with  a  leaden  tube,  which  was
firmly  fitted  to  the  aperture,  and  fmear'd  over  with  wax,  externally,  and  on
the  upper  border,  not  wider  than  two-third  parts  of  the  inch  of  Bologna,
and  about  two  inches  long,  but  not  to  be  admitted  into  the  rcftum  above  an
inch  and  a  half,  nor  without  the  affilfance  of  a  cautious  furgeon,  when  the
firfl:  experiments  of  it  were  made,  fo  that  if  they  fucceeded  happily,  nor
any  thing  was  to  be  alter'd  in  the  dimenfions  of  the  tube,  the  fseces  might
be  difcharg'd  in  this  manner,  and  the  inteftine  not  pufh'd  out.

But  if  neither  of  the  inftruments  had  anfwer'd  our  expedations  ;  for
you  perceive,  even  from  the  hints  I  have  given  in  my  opinion,  what  inju-
ries, not  to  fay  what  uneafinefles,  might  fometimes  arife  from  applications  of
this  kind  -,  there  were  ftill  others  befides  thefe,  that  might  be  thought  of.  For
you  fee,  by  way  of  example,  what  a  kind  of  ring  was  invented,  by  the  cele-
brated BalTuis  (f),  which,  "  without  being  any  obftacle  to  the  difcharge  of
"  the  ijBces,"  is  worn  without  any  trouble,  as  he  fays,  and  after  it  has
remov'd  the  difeafe,  may  be  as  eafily  taken  away ;  for  he  aflerts  that  it  had
remov'd  the  difeafe,  and  that  when  it  had  been  of  long  ftanding,  in  a  fhort
time,  even  within  the  fpace  of  two  months.  But  let  thefe  things  be  fuffi-
cient  upon  the  fubjefc  of  the  prolaps'd  inteftlnum  return.  In  the  next  lettef
I  will  go  on  to  confider  other  difeaies. Farewell.

(^)  15.  n,  68.  (f)  Dec.  i.  obf.  4.


R  s  LETTER


124  Sook  III.. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.


LETTER  the  THIRTY-FOURTH

Treats  of  Pain  in  the  Inteftines.

LT  HOUGH  the  greateft  part  of  the  obfervations,  of  which  the  four-

teenth  feftion  of  the  third  book  of  the  Sepulchretum  Anatomicum

confifls,  relates  to  pains  of  the  inteftines  •,  yet  there  are  even  many  therein,
•which  relate  to  other  vifcera  of  the  belly,  and  in  both  thefe  clafles  are  fome,
in  which,  not  internal  caufes,  but  fuch  as  came  from  without,  blows,  for  in-
ftance,  and  wounds  gave  rife  to  the  pain.  This  example  I  do  not  choofe
to  follow,  as  I  have  treated,  or  am  to  treat,  of  pains  in  other  parts  of  the
belly,  on  other  occafions,  and  of  each  in  its  proper  place,  and  am  likewife
to  write  feparately,  hereafter,  of  blows  and  of  wounds.  And  I  am  alfo  un-
willing to  be  troublefome  by  repetitions,  which  arefo  far  from  being  avoided
in  the  Sepulchretum,  that,  in  this  very  fedtion,  we  find  many  obfervations-
fet  down  twice  (a),  and  in  the  addltamenta,  to  the  fame  leftion,  we  find,  by
reafon  of  not  detedting  the  tricks  of  Blancard,  three  repeated  under  his
name,  that  is  to  fay,  the  fifteenth,  the  fixteenth,  and  the  twenty-third,  the
two  laft  of  which  had  already  been  given  in  this  very  fedtion  (Z-J,  as  the  firft
had  been  in  the  preceding  eighth  fedlion  (c),  in  the  names  of  their  real  au-
thors.

Nor  is  it  my  intention  to  imitate  the  author  of  the  Sepulchretum,  in  di-
viding my  obfervations  into  two  clafies,  that  is  into  thole  which  relate  to  the
colic  and  to  the  iliac  pain ;  not  that  I  altogether  difapprove  this  divifion ; ;
although  Diodes  Caryftius,  as  Celfus  teaches  us  (JJ),  nam'd  the  difeafe,  not
of  the  fmaller,  but  of  the  larger  inteftine,  siXscv ;  and  Alexander  Trallianus,
as  you  have  it  in  Salius  (e),  judg'd  "  that  the  iliac  paffion  was  nothing  more
*'  than  a  heightening,  and  increafe,  of  the  colic  affedlion,"  and  Salius  (hows  *'
that  the  primary  feat,  and  caufe,  of  the  ileos  might  be  in  both  of  thofe  in-
teftines -,  but  becaufe  it  is  not  fo  eafy  as  many  imagine,  to  diftinguifh  the
pains  of  one  inteftine,  from  the  pains  of  the  other,  and,  confequently,  not,
very  eafy,  by  means  of  the  figns,  that  have  beenobferv'd  ih  patients,  to  di--
vide  the  obfervations  of  this  kind  with  fufficient  clearnefs,  and  precifion.

2.  For  in  regard  to  the  iliac  pains  being  faid  to  be  more  fevere,  than  the -
colic  pains,  as  without  doubt  they  are,  whether  you  fuppofe  this  to  arife,  from  .

(a)  Confer, obf.  i. §.  2.  &  obf.  20. §.  14.  {i)  Obf.  zo.  §.  12.  obf.  3,

obf.  I.  §.  13.  &obf.  24.  §.  2.  obf.  I.  §.  14.  &  (rj  Inaddit.  obf.  5.

obf.  19.  §.  4.  obf.  2.  §.  1.  &  2.  obf.  5.  §.  2.  &  (d)  De medic.  1.  4.  c.  13.

fchol.  ad  §.  8.  obf.  19.  obf.  8.  §.  1 1.  &  obf.  14.  (f)  De  aifeft.  partic  c.  1 1.

^.  3.  obf.  28.  &  obf.  30.  §.  4.  *  Ibid.

the;


Letter  XXXIV. Article 3,  125

the  quantity  of  vefTels,  by  reafon  of  which,  the  fmall  inteftines  are  more  fre-
quently found  to  be  inflamed,  than  the  large,  or  whether  you  rather  fuppofe
it  to  arife  from  the  number  of  the  nerves,  efpecially  if  the  villi,  with  which
the  fmall  inteftines  abound,  to  fo  great  a  degree,  are  to  be  refer'd  to  the  clafs
of  papillse;  at  leaft,  there  is  no  doubt,  but  one  perfon  is  more  impatient
of  pain  than  another,  and  the  caufe  of  pain  is  different  in  different  perfons,  and
in  fome  lefs  violent  than"  in  others ;  fo  that  it  is  not  eafy  to  determine,  which
is  really  tortur'd  with  the  moft  excruciating  pain  :  and  from  hence,  perhaps,
it  arofe  that  Galen,  fom.e  pafTages  of  whofe  works,  that  are  contradiftory  to  ■
each  other,  Ballonius  ftudies  to  reconcile,  has  in  one  place  faid,  as  you  fee
in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  f/j,  that  the  iliac  diforders  were  the  moft
violent,  and  in  another  place,  that  the  colic  diforders  were  the  moft  vio-
lent.

But  as  to  the  vomiting,  which  he  has  afTerted  to  be  the  moft  violent,  and
continual,  in  the  iliac  pafTion,  you  will  find  that  thofe  colic  pains  are  juftly
excepted  in  the  Sepulchretum  (g),  which- have  their  feat  in  that  part  of  the
colon,  where  this  inteftine  lies  contiguous  to  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach.

And  not  to  lead  you  away  from  the  Sepulchretum,  you  may  likewife
be  warned  from  thence  {h),  how  liable  to  exceptions  frequently,  and,  for
this  reafon,  fallacious,  that  fign  may  alfo  be,  which,  in  other  refpeds,  ieems
to  be  the  chief,  I  mean  that  which  is  taken  from  the  very  fituations
of  the  fmaller,  and  larger  inteftines.  For  you  will  find  the  words  of  Fran-
cifcus  Sylvius  teaching,  "  that  the  colon  is  often  carried,  through  "  the
"  middle  of  the  abdomen,  to  the  navel,  and  fometimes  even  quite  to  the
"  bladder,  by  a  confiderable  deviation  from  its  more  ufual  courfe."  And'
if  it  be  true,  that  when  the  colon  deferts  its  own  proper  fituation,  it  takes
up  that  of  the  fmall  inteftines ;  you  plainly  perceive  how  much  he  may  be
deceiv'd,  who  depends  greatly  on  the  refpeftive  fituations  ofthefe  vifcera,
in  determining  the  diforder.  And  not  only  they,  whom  Sylvius  argues
againft,  will  be  then  deceiv'd,  but  they,  alfo,- who  follow  Sylvius.  Forv/hen
that  part  of  the  colon  which  generally  runs  in  a  tranfverfe  direftion,  to  the
direftion  of  the  body,  and  lies  in  contadl  with  the  ftomach,  is  not  really  in  ■
that  place,  but  is  fo  remarkably  inflefted  downward-,  there  is  no  doubt  but
thofe  perfons  muft  err,  who  deny  that  this  part  of  the  colon  is  feiz'd  witk
pain,  by  reafon,  that  the  pain,  and  torture,  do  not  run  acrofs  the  upper-
part  of  the  belly,  like  a  belt;  and  they  alfo  will,  of  courfe,  blunder,  who
fuppofe,  with  Sylvius,  "  that  a  pain  which  has  its  feat  in  the  circle,  and
"  circumference,  of  the  belly,  is  truly  of  the  colic  kind;"  for  the  pain, -^
which  then  arifes,  in  the  upper  circle  of  the  belly,  cannot  have  its  feat  in
the  colon,  v/hich  is  not  in  that  part.

3.  And  that  what  Sylvius  has  warn'd  us  of,  does,  in  faft,  frequently  hap-  -
pen  to  the  colon,  not  a  few  of  the  obfervations,  both  of  Valfalva,  and  of
mine,  which  have  either  been  already  propos'd,  or  are  to  be  propos'd  here-
after, will  confirm:  although  I  have  not  had,  nor  fhall  have,  occafion  to
take  notice  of,  in  thefe  letters,  all  the  bodies  in  which  I  have  found  it  thus  ,,
for  it  is  long  fince  that  I  began  to  obferve  this  variation,  even  before  I  hap-

CfJ  Schol.  ad  §.  5.  obf.  5.  (h)  Schol.  adobf.  41.  -

(g)  Schol.  ad  §.  z.  obf.  25.  in  Jin.  -

p.en'di


126  Book  III. Of  Difeafcs  of  the  Belly.

pen'd  to  light  on  this  paffage  of  Sylvius,  as  the  fecond  of  the  Adverfaria  will
denionftrate  (/).  But  in  the  third  of  the  Adverfaria  (k),  I  have  alfo  obferv'd
another  variety,  in  the  lower  fituation  of  the  colon,  which  is  by  no  means  to  be
pais'd  over  here  :  although  there,  in  like  manner,  for  the  fame  reafon,  I
could  not,  according  to  my  cuftom,  commend  thofe  who  had  obferv'd  it  be-
fore me,  Spigelius  (I),  and  Riolanus  {in);  to  whom,  however,  it/eems  to
have  happen'd,  contrary  to  v>'hat  has  occur'd  to  Valfalva,  and  to  me,  that
the  colon  has  been,  more  frequently,  winding  in  its  termination,  and  has
more  rarely  taken  a  pretty  ftrait,  and  fimple  courfe.

But  be  this  as  k  will,  as  thefe  flexures  not  only  extend  the  colon,  in  fom.e
bodies,  towards  the  right  groin,  but,  fometimes,  as  I  have  feen,  raife  itup
by  means  of  flatus  to  a  turgid  ftate,  and  particularly  at  the  navel ;  it  certainly
appears  from  hence,  how  eafily  the  pain,  which  is  in  that  inteftine,  may  be
then,  without  reafon,  fuppos'd  to  have  its  feat  in  the  fmall  inteftine,  of  which
this  place  is  the  common  and  natural  feat.  Both  thefe  fpecies  of  variety  then,
are  not  uncommon,  whether  from  the  firfl:  formation  of  the  body,  or  even
from  difeafe,  as  the  words  of  Riolanus  obfcurely  hint  {n) :  thefe  words  are,
"  I  have  feen  the  inteftinum  colon,  not  ft"retch'd  out,  diredtly,  betwixt  the
"  liver,  and  fpleen,  but  inflefted  in  the  manner  of  an  Italian  S,  and  PRO-
"  LAPS'D  quite  to  the  navel :"  and  Spigelius  (<?),  fpeaking  ftill  more
clearly,  and  more  generally,  fays,  that  the  lame  inteftine  "  when  preterna-
"  rurally  diftended  with  flatus,  in  colic  pains,  is  remov'd  from  its  natural
"  iituation."  But  if  you  choofe  to  fuppofe,  that,  for  this  reafon,  it  was  that
I  found,  in  an  apopleftic  woman  (p),  who  had  been  fubjedt  to  thofe  pains,
the  colon  not  only  with  fewer  cells  than  ufual,  but  alfo  writhing  itfelf  with
larger  turns  than  it  generally  does,  in  its  extreme  part,  towards  the  navel,
I  ftiall  not  contend  with  you  upon  the  fubjeft,  efpecially  as  I  fee,  from  the
obfervation  which,  in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  is  the  fifteenth,  and
is  read  more  at  large  in  the  ninth  feftion,  of  the  firft  book,  where  it  is  the
forty-eighth,  as  I  fee,  I  fay,  that  Francifcus  Sylvius  had  fuppos'd  another
woman  to  have  labour'd  under  the  fame  excruciating  pains,  not  fo  much  be-
caufe  the  omentum  did  not,  as  he  had  remark'd,  cover  all  the  inteftines,  or
becaufe  thefe  were  fomewhat  mov'd  from  their  places  •,  for  the  latter  occurs
pretty  often,  and  the  former  very  frequently ;  as,  unlefs  I  am  much  deceiv'd,
becaufe  he  had  found,  in  the  fame  woman,  both  the  fpecies  of  variety  which
are  juft  now  explain'd.

However,  if  the  fituation  of  the  inteftine  colon  were  chang'd,  only  from  a
caufe  of  that  kind,  yet  the  danger  of  erring  would  be  fo  much  the  more  to
be  fear'd,  as  the  queftton  about  thefe  fituations,  is  for  the  moft  part  in  thofe
perfons,  who  are  wont  to  be  fubjed  to  that  caufe.  But  in  thofe  perfons,
likewife,  in  whom  the  ftomach  is  much  dilated,  and  the  liver  enlarg'd  in  its
fize,  that  tranfverfe  part  of  the  colon,  which  lies  under  thefe  vifcera,  muft
be  lower,  in  the  fame  proportion  as  they  are  enlarg'd.  Add  to  thefe,  fuch
caufes  as  deprefs  the  ftomach,  and  with  it  the  colon,  as  I  have  feen  it  hap-

{i)  Animad.  2.  («)  Ibid.

li)  Anim.  6.  -  (<?)  C.  cit.

(/)  De  hum.  corp.  fabr.  I.  8.  c.  5.  (/)  Epift.  3.  n.  2.

(;«)  Anthropogr.  1,  2.  c.  14.

pen


Letter  XXXIV. Article  4^ 5,  6.  127

pen  in  a  yoiig  man  of  Venice  (q),  from  a  very  irregular  inflexion  of  the  fpine.
But  befides  difeafes,  there  are  alfo  naturally  different  conftitutions  of  bodies,  and
in  thefe  different  conftitutions,  different  fituations  of  the  colon.  For  even  from
the  birth,  as  was  hinted  juft  nov/,  it  may  be  differently  plac'd,  and  in  gravid
women,  when  the  uterus  is  fo  much  increas'd  in  its  fize,  in  the  laft  months
of  pregnancy,  that  tranfverfe  part  of  the  colon  is  higher,  as  Spigeiius  ob-
ferves  (r).

4.  And  thefe  things  being  granted,  and  it  appearing  fufficiently  from
hence,  why  I  do  not  divide  the  obfervations  relating  to  pains,  with  which
the  bowels  are  tortur'd,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  clais  fome  under  the  tide
of  iliac,  and  others  under  the  title  of  colic  pains ;  it  remains  to  point  out  the
divifion,  which  I  choofe  to  make  ufe  of.  Firft  then,  I  will  give  thofe  in  which
there  were  pains  from  a  caufe  that  did  not  proceed  from  without  indeed,  but
neverthelefs  was  vifible;  and  in  the  fecond  place,  thofe,  in  which  the  caufe
lay  hid  quite  within  the  body.  And  thefe  two  of  the  former  kind  I  give  you
from  Valfalva.

5.  A  man  of  forty  years  of  age,  of  a  temperament  partly  fanguineous,
and  partly  bilious,  who  had,  fometimes,  been  affe6ted  with  a  flight  hernia
in  the  groins,  was  feiz'd  with  an  iliac  paffion,  after  eating  artichoaks.  A
flight  tumour  appear'd  in  the  groins :  yet  the  patient  denied  his  having  any
pain  there  ;  though  he  confefs'd  he  had  much  pain  in  his  belly,  which  was
very  much  harden'd  from  the  retention  of  the  fasces.  All  remedies  being  with-
out effeft,  he  fank  under  the  violence  of  the  vomitings,  on  the  feventh  day
of  the  difeafe.

The  belly  being  open'd,  the  inteflines  appear'd  to  be  turgid  with  air,  and
were  livid  and  black,  in  that  part  where,  not  very  far  from  the  caecum,  they
were  doubled,  and  with  the  annex'd  portion  of  the  mefentery,  which  feem'd
to  be  flefhy,  as  it  were,  defcended  into  a  hernial  facculus,  which  was  four
inches  long,  and  had  a  very  narrow  orifice,  fo  that  they  could  not  return
back  through  it,  into  the  belly,  after  they  were  diftended  by  the  matter,  that
had  fallen  down  into  them.  This  facculus  was  in  the  right  groin,  and
form'd  out  of  the  peritonteum  indeed,  that  was  produc'd  and  dilated,  but
not  from  a  procefs  of  it;  as  many  believ'd  formerly-,  which  accompanies
the  vas  deferens,  and  fpermatic  veffels  :  and  it  even  lay,  anteriorly,  upon
this  procefs,  and  thefe  veflels,  which  were  very  tumid  with  blood :  and
was,  internally,  as  the  intercepted  pordon  of  the  intelline  was,  of  a  blackifn
colour,  or  rather  ting'd  with  a  black  that  began  to  change  into  green,  as  if
the  colour  had  been  given  by  a  tin£ture  of  vitriol.  And  in  the  left  groin
was  another  facculus,  very  much  fimilar  to  the  one  I  have  defcrib'd,  except
that  the  membrane,  of  which  it  confifted,  had  its  fibres,  and  veffels,  not
alter'd  in  their  colour,  or  other  qualities,  from  their  natural  appearances.

In  the  thorax  every  thing  was  found.  Yet  in  the  heart  were  polypous
concretions,  of  a  yellowifh  colour,  with  grumous  blood,  one  pretty  large,  in
the  right  ventricle,  and  another  fmaller  in  the  left ;  but  neither  of  them  was
produc'd  out  of  the  ventricles.

6.  There  was  an  evident  caufe  of  this  pain,  that  is,  according  to  the  com-
mon phrafe, an  incarcerated  hernia. Of  which  there  will  be  frequent  nieu-

(?)  Epift.  4.  n.  16.  (r)  C.  cit.

tion


12  8  Book  in. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

tion  made  in  this  letter;  but  only  as  far  as  a  part  of  the  inteftine  being  com-
prefs'd,  is  the  caufe  of  ftrangulation  to  the  vefiels  of  this  comprefs'd  part,
and  the  parts  neareft  to  it :  and  the  manner  in  which  pain,  inflammation,
and  fphacelus,  are  brought  on  from  hence,  it  is  by  no  means  neceflary  to
explain.  Other  circumftances  in  regard  to  hernia,  and  the  portion  of  the
peritoneum,,''  which  accompanies  the  fpermatic  velTels,  I  fhall  fpeak  of  elfe-
where  (s).  But  of  the  iliac  palTion,  I  ihall  treat  at  different  times,  in  this
letter,  as  much  as  will  be  fufficient  for  our  purpofe.  But  now  you  readily
conceive,  that  where  this  diibrder  arifes,  as  it  for  the  molt  part  does,  when
an  inteftine  is  intercepted,  and  comprefs'd,  that  then  the  upper  inteftines  are
of  courfe  diftended,  by  the  matter,  which  is  heap'd  up  above  the  intercep-
;tion,  and  that  from  this  diftention  another  caufe  of  pain  arifes,  which  is  alfo
increas'd  by  the  very  corruption,  of  the  matter  collected,  which  corruption,
is  the  confequence  of  ftagnation.

But  how  fliall  we  fuppofe  it  to  have  happen'd,  that  in  the  hiftory  I  have
given  you,  the  patient  fliould  deny  the  exiftence  of  any  pain,  in  that  part
where  the  diforder  was  the  greateft  ?  Was  it  becaufe  a  fphacelus  had  feiz'd
the  inteftine  which  was  intercepted,  without  any  previous  inflammation  ?
For  whether  this  could  happen,  we  fhall  fee  on  another  occafion  (i),  or  rather
was  this  the  reafon  of  the  patient's  denying  the  pain,  that  the  inflammation
had  already  degenerated  into  a  fphacelus  ?  For  there  are  other  things  alfo  in
that  hiftory,  as  it  is  written  by  Valfalva,  which  fliow  that  it  was  not  very  ac-
curately committed  to  paper.

Yet  he  does  not  make  the  leaft  mention  of  pain,  even  in  the  next  hiftory  ;
though  the  very  cafe  will,  of  itfelf,  fufEciently  fhow,  whether  pain  could  be
abfent,  or  not.

7.  A  man  in  his  fiftieth  year,  who  labour'd  under  an  enterocele,  was
feiz'd  with  an  ardent  fever,  and,  after  fome  days,  with  a  vomiting  of  hu-
mours, which  feem'd  to  be  ting'd  with  foot,  as  it  were  :  he  at  firft  made
water  v.'ith  difficulty,  and  after  that  made  none  at  all.  The  catheter  was
introduced  by  the  furgeon,  but  to  no  purpofe-,  for  when  it  came  near  to  the
bladder,  it  met  with  an  obftruftion.  Wherefore  being  troubled  with  thefe
fymptoms  the  patient  died.

The  belly,  and  the  fcrotum,  being  difTecled,  the  inteftines,  which  were
fallen  into  the  fcrotum,  were  found  to  be  affeifled  with  an  inflammation  :
and  notwithftanding  there  was  no  ulceration  in  them,  yet  a  little  fanious
ferum  was  feen  in  their  interftices.  Some  traces  alio  of  a  fanious  humour,  of
that  kind,  were  feen  in  the  pelvis  of  the  abdomen.  The  bladder  was  full
of  urine,  although  it  had  no  mark  of  injury  internally.  And  the  obftacle  which
was  near  the  bladder,  and  had  prevented  the  furgeon  from  introducing  the
catheter,  was  found  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  one  of  the  foramina,  by  which
the  femen  is  difcharg'd,  dilated  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  the  extremity  of  the
catheter,  naturally,  fell  into  it:  for  the  fame  thing  happen'd  to  the  probe
alfo,  which  was  incroduc'd,  in  the  dead  body,  through  the  urethra  that  had
,been  in  part,  laid  open,  in  order  to  examine  into  this  very  circumftance.

(s)  Epill.  43.  n.  6.  &7..  (/)  Epifl.  35.  n.  19.  &  feq.

2  8..  Is


Letter  XXXIV. Article  8, 9.  129

8.  Is  it  not  more  probable,  that  this  foramen  was  the  finus  in  the  feminal
caruncle,  fince  defcrib'd  by  me,  which,  in  this  man,  had  been  immoderately
enlarg'd  ?  For  if  it  had  been  one  of  the  feminal  du6ts,  it  feems  that  the  man
muft  have  labour'd  under  a  flux  of  this  kind.  And  there  is  no  doubt  but  the
orifice  of  that  finus  is  fometimes  bigger,  and  ibmetimies  lefs,  which  has  alfo
been  obferv'd  by  the  celebrated  Henricus  Bafiius  («).  But  it  never  more
happen'd  to  mc,  as  far  as  I  now  can  call  to  mind,  from  the  time  that  Ipub-
lifh'd  upon  this  finus,  in  the  year  1719  ('^J,  though  I  fliow'd  it  every  year
in  the  theatre,  and  fometim.es  in  more  than  one  body,  that  I  found  any  fe-
minal dudl,  which  open'd  into  it,  and  flill  lefs  that  it  feem'd  to  me,  as  it  did
to  him,  that  "  tliis  hiatus  was  fometimes  only  a  flight  fifliire,  or  fulcus,
which  appear'd  after  thefe  parts  had  fhrunk,  and  become  flaccid.

But  whether  the  caruncle  within  which  this  finus  lies,  as  well  as  the  finus
itfelf,  was  enlarg'd  ;  and  whether,  by  this  means,  the  orifice  of  the  finus
might,  perhaps,  be  able  to  obftrudt  a  very  flender  catheter,  and  likewife  caufe
a  fupprefTion  of  urine,  although  the  fuppoficion  is  probable,  yet  as  Valfalva
has  added  nothing  befides,  1  fliall  the  more  readily  leave  it  undetermin'd  :
becaufe  •,  to  fay  nothing  of  the  caufe  taken  notice  of  by  Wakherus  (y)  ;  when
the  neighbouring  parts  are  greatly  afi^efted,  it  is  not  very  unufual,  for  the
bladder  to  be  drawn  into  confent,  and  not  expel  its  contents,  fo  that  Sen-
nertus  (z)  recounted  this  among  the  figns  of  inflammation  of  the  intefl;ines :
and  indeed  Cslius  Aurelianus  {a)  plac'd,  formerly,  among  the  refl:  of  the
evils  that  attended  the  ileos,  "  a  total  fufpenfion  of  the  offices  of  the  blad-
der and  belly." But  of  the  fupprefTion  of  urine  I  fliall  fpeak  hereafter.

Now  let  me  fubjoin  to  thefe  two  obfervations  of  Valfalva's  fome  of  my
own.

9.  A  young  man  whofe  occupation  was  that  of  a  hufbandman,  had  had  a
rupture  of  the  intefl:ine  into  the  fcrotum,  in  the  right  fide,  but  as  the  in-
teftine,  was  removed  from  thence,  replac'd,  and  retain'd,  by  means  of  a
bandage,  or  trufs,  he  fuff'er'd  no  injury  from  thence  till  the  ufe  of  that  re-
tentive bandage  was  omitted.  This  however  being  at  length  omitted,  it
happen'd,  after  he  had  been  troubled  with  an  intermitting  fever,  for  about
two  months,  and  had  lately  fill'd  himfelf  with  hard  flour  dumplins  and  other
grofs  food  of  the  fame  kind,  that  the  inteftine  fell  down  again,  into  the  fame
place.  And  from  that  very  day,  which  was  the  laft  of  October  in  the  year
1705,  he  began  to  be  feiz'd  with  a  vomiting  of  a  bitter  matter.  On  the
fourth  day  of  the  difeafe,  a  fingultus  came  on,  and  a  pain  of  the  fcrotum.
A  fotus  of  warm  lixivium  being  applied  to  the  fcrotum  the  pain  feem'd  to  be
fomewhat  alleviated.  But  as  the  vomiting  and  the  fingultus  continu'd,  and
he  was,  befides,  troubled  with  pains  of  the  belly,  and  a  thirft,  he  was
brought,  on  the  fixth  day,  into  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Morte  at  Bo-
logna.

But  there  the  hand  of  the  furgeon  was  not  of  any  advantage  ;  and  the  re-
medies of  the  phyfician  gave  only  a  little  alleviation. For  the  fingultus  was

(k)  Dec.  I.  obf.  anat.  5.  §.  9.  (s)  Medic,  praft.  1.  3.  p.  2.  f.  i.  c.  z.

(x)  Adverf.  4.  animad.  3.  («)  Acut.  pafT.  1.  3.  c.  17.

(_>>)  Differt.  de  collo  viril.  veficse  &c.  §.  3.

Vol.  II.  S  remov'd


I  30  Book  III. Of  Dileafes  of  the  Belly.

remov'd,  as  the  vomiting  was  alio  ;  but  the  latter  only  for  a  (hort  time,  when
the  emplajlrum  de  crufta  pants,  as  it  is  call'd,  was  apply'd  to  the  region  of  tlie
ilomach,  and  a  glyfter  was  thrown  up  made  of  the  oils  of  linfeed  and  violets.
1.  firft  law  him  on  the  feventh  day.  There  v/as  a  flight  pain  in  the  icrotiim.  I
liCard  that  the  pulfe  was  lefs  frequent,  than  it  had  been  the  day  before  :  but
it  was  lower,  and  more  weak,  than  was  fuitable  to  fo  young  a  man.  His
thirft  ftili  continu'd.  Nor  did  he  difcharge  any  fsces,  except  when  the  oils
I  have  mcntion'd  were  injefted.

And,  indeed,  after  they  had,  on  this  very  day,  made  ufe  of  a  carminative-
decoction,  as  it  is  call'd,  by  way  of  glyfter,  to  which  fome  clarified  honey  was  •
added,  with  two  drams  of  the  electuary,  that  is  known  by  the  name  of  hf^e^
diSa  laxativa  ;  the  vomiting  of  bitter  matter  return'd,  in  which  there  was  a.
round  worm  ;  but  the  glyfter  did  not  return  till  after  m^any  hours.  On  the
eighth  day,  another  worm  was  difcharg'd.  The  abdomen  being  tenfe,  and
reibunding,  as  it  were,  under  the  hand,  after  the  manner  it  does  in  a  tym-
panites, which  I  had  alio  obferv'd  the  day  before,  it  did  not  fuffer  any  pairi'
from  pretty  rough  handling,  not  even  in  the  epigaftrium,  where  the  patient
felt  a  kind  of  little  biting  pain.  When  I  afl-i'd  him  whether  he  felt  any  heat
likewiie,  he  aniwer'd  in  the  negative.  The  pulfe  was,  in  other  refpecfls,
Cmilar  to  that  of  yefterday,  but  much  more  frequent.  His  tongue  was  dry.
His  urine  had  a  faturated  colour.  Under  his  eyes  was  a  lividnefs,  and,  even
without  this,  his  face  had  a  very  unfavourable  appearance.  The  night  fol--
lov^'ing  was  reftlefs.

On  the  ninth  day,  every  thing  was  in  the  fame  ftate :  the  countenance
and  pulfe  were  even  worfe.  For  the  latter  was  ftill  m.ore  frequent,  but  when
you  prefs'd  it,  it  gave  litde  or  no  refiftance.  And  the  former  was  nearly  of
the  fame  kind  with  that  which  you  call  the  facies  Hippocratica.  And  though,
the  patient  had  been  troubled  with  an  anxiety  on  the  preceding  days,  had^
a  feeble  and  lamenting  tone  of  voice,  and  was  every  now  and  then  changing
the  fituation  of  his  body  and  his  limbs,  yet  all  theie  fymptoms  were  ftill  more
remarkable  on  this  day.  For,  befides  a  pain  which  continu'd  conftantly  in
the  whole  belly,  the  fenfation  of  biting,  as  it  were,  recurr'd  at  times,  in .
every  part,  but  particularly  in  the  epigaftrium.  There  was  no  pulfanng,
pain,  fur  this  I  particularly  afk'd,  nor  any  pulfation  in  any  part.  Nor  was
the  pain,  which  he  felt  in  the  fcrotum,  or  in  the  neighbouring  part  of  the
belly,  in  thefe  laft  days,  of  any  great  moment.

However,  when  I  felt  the  pulfe,  I  found  that  the  fkin  was  really rough,,
and  dry,  and  yet  not  hotter  than  was  to  be  expefted. Having  taken  fome
food,  he  found  himielf  a  little  better. He  alfo faid  that he  had been  re-
Hev'd  by  the  glyfter  of  oik,  that  had  been  given  him  the  day  before,  and  this,
he  had  alfo  faid,  at  the  time  of  its  being  given. But  on  this  day  another.-
being  throv/n  up,  of  broth  in  which  the  feeds of  coriander  had  been  boil'd
and  fugar,  he  threw  up  the  food  he  had  t.:ken  while  the  glyfter  came  away.
In  the  evening  he  flept. Being  afk'd  after  his  fleep how  he was,  he  an-
fwer'd that he  felt  a  ftrange  kind  of  puliation  in  the  epigaftrium,  and that
there  was  fome  fenfe  of  heat in  the  belly. In  the  mean  while, he  was
troubled  with  a  vomiting  of  a  more  fluid  matter,  than  he  had  been  hereto-
fore, which  was  at  intervals, alio,  of  a  yellowilli  colour. And  this  vomit-


Letter  XXXIV. Article  9.  131

ing  continuing  through  the  whole  night,  together  with  the  reft  of  the  fymp-
toms  that  I  have  mention'd,  he  expird  in  the  morning,  that  is  on  the  tenth
day  of  tlie  difeafe.

The  belly  contaln'd  a  great  quantity  of  extravafated  matter,  of  the  fame
kind  with  that  which  had  been  thrown  up  by  vomiting  :  and  the  ftomach,  and
fmall  inteftines,  were  very  much  diftended  vvfich  the  fame,  quite  to  the  hernia:
but  in  the  whole  of  this  trad,  .was  no  more  than  one  worm,  like  the  two
others  which  had  been  thrown  up  by  vomiting.  The  large  inteftines  were
empty,  white  and  found.  The  ftomach  was  alfo  found.  But  the  adjoin-
ing inteftine,  which  receives  the  biliary  and  pancreatic  du<5b,  was  fo  livid,
in  confequence  of  inflammation  in  that  part,  that  it  had  already  a  gangren-
ous fmell.  An  inflammation  more  flight,  and  not  yet  livid,  affeded  the  je-
junum in  feveral  places,  and  the  much  greater  part  of  the  ileum.  For  the
remaining  part,  I  mean  that  v.'hieh  lay  mioft  contiguous  to  the  colon,  was
affecfled  rather  with  a  gangrene,  than  with  an  inflammation,  as  the  defcrip-
tion  of  the  hernia  will  Ihovv.

The  facculus  was  of  the  form  of  a  pear,  and  confifted  of  a  coat,  which
was  not  lefs  thick,  and  firm,  than  the  pulmonary  artery.  It  was  cover'd
not  only  by  the  f;rotum,  and  the  dartos,  but  alfo  by  the  crem.after  muicle,
and  with  that  membrane,  upon  which  this  mufcle  lies,  in  common  v/ith  the
teftis,  and  the  velTels  that  go  thereto.  The  teftis  v/as-  under  the  facculus,
and  the  veffels  adher'd  externally,  on  the  internal  fide,  and  went  to  the  belly,
near  to  the  orifice  of  the  lac,  but  not  through  that  orifice.  This  orifice  was
like  a  pretty  thick  ring,  which  the  peritonsum,  and  the  furrounding  ten-
don, form'd:  and  it  admitted,  befides  the  inteftinum  ileum,  and  a  imall  part
of  the  mefentery,  which  was  annex'd  to  it,  the  omentum  alfo,  of  vv'hich  I,
for  that  reafon,  had  feen  fcarcely  any  part  covering  the  inteftines,  on  the  left
fide,  becaufe  it  was  drawn  towards  the  right  fide,  to  the  hernia  :  nor  did  it
only  go  down  to  the  fundus  of  the  fac,  but  forming  itfelf  into  a  round  body,
which  I  fliould  not  have  known  to  be  made  up  of  the  comprefs'd  fubftance,
of  the  omentum,  if  I  had  not  cut  into  it,  return'd  up  again  from  thence,  and
connefted  itfelf  to  the  intercepted  ileum,  not  far  from  the  orifice  of  the  fac-
culus.

But  whatever  part  of  the  omentum  was  contain'd  in  this  facculus,  I  found
connecled  thereto,  by  a  redifli  kind  of  body,  that  was  interpos'd,  and  was
flaccid  in  its  fubftance,  fo  that  it  could  eafily  be  feparated  from  the  omen-
tum, and  the  facculus ;  nor  did  it  feem  to  be  any  thing  elfe  but  mem-
branous cells,  full  of  ferum  and  blood.  The  ileum,  however,  was  neither
connefted  to  the  facculus,  nor  did  it  reach  to  the  bottom  of  it-,  but  curving
itfelf  in  the  manner  of  an  arch,  a  little  below  the  orifice,  it  return'd  into  the
belly,  by  the  fame  way  it  had  come  down-;  fo  that  if  you  difpos'd  it  re-
gularly, you  would  find  that  no  more  than  four  or  five  inches  of  the  intef-
tine was  intercepted.  All  this  part  v/as  afix^fted  with  a  gangrene,  and  of  a
black  colour  ;  but  ftill  much  more  fo,  where  it  was  conftring'd  in  the  orifice
of  the  facculus  :  and  the  circumference  of  this  orifice  was  no  lefs  black  and
foetid,  as  the  neighbouring  upper  part  of  the  ileum  was  ;  and  this  was  even
fo  tender,  or  rather  rotttn  in  its  fubftance,  that  it  could  not  fupport  the
force  of  the humour,  which  diftended  it,  but  being  perforat-cd  with  one

S  2  foramen


132  Book  in. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

foramen  of  a  pretty  confiderable  fize,  pour'd  out  its  contents  by  that  way,
into  tlie  cavity  of  tiie  belly..  Among  the  remaining  vifcera  of  the  belly,
which,  as  well  as  the  inteftines,  were  as  yet  confiderably  warm,  notwith-
ftanding  it  was  thirteen  hours  after  death,  before  the  body  was  open'd,  the
liver  had  alfo  contrafted  a  difeafe  •,  for  it  was  black  on  its  edge,  and  on  the
hollow  furface,  together  with  the  gall-bladder,  which  was  of  a  moderate  fize,
fomewhat  black.

In  the  thorax  every  thing  was  found,  although  in  the  right  ventricle  of
the  heart,  there  was  a  polypous  concretion,  of  a  yellowifh  colour,  and  loft ;
which  extended  its  almofl-white  appendages  from  thence,  quite  into  the  ju-
gular veins.

10.  In  regard  to  the  many  things  that  might  be  obferv'd  here,  fome  I  fliall
hint  at  more  properly  below,  and  others  I  fhall  touch  upon,  as  foon  as  ever
I  have  given  you  another  obiervation,  which  I  took  about  four  months  after
the  former,  in  the  fame  hofpital.

11.  A  woman  of  more  than  fifty  years  of  age,  who  had  already  labour'd
under  two  hernia;,  for  the  fpace  of  two  and  thirty  years,  both  of  which  were
on  the  left  fide,  one  at  the  navel,  and  the  other  at  the  pubes,  having,  by
chance,  fallen  from  a  place  that  was  not  very  high,  was  not  at  all  hurt  by
her  fall,  except  that  flie  receiv'd  a  contufion  about  the  top  of  the  fcapula
and  the  fhoulder  bone.  From  this  contufion  flie  eafily  recover'd,  but  in  the
mean  while,  began,  at  the  interval  of  a  few  days  after  her  fall,  to  have  a  very
great  coftivenefs,  and  a  little  after  to  throw  up,  by  vomiting,  a  yellowifh,
and  -fluid  matter,  v/hich  had  exaftly  the  fame  fmell,  as  the  excrements,  dif-
charg'd  from  the  reftum,  generally  have.  The  vomiting  came  on  at  dif-
ferent times,  but  more  particularly  two  or  three  hours  after  food  had  been
taken  in.  .The  pulfe  was  neither  frequent  nor  devoid  of  refiftance,  when
prefs'd  under  the  fingers ;  it  was  extremely  fmall,  efpecially  after  vomiting,
;ind  grew  lefs  every  day.  As  glyfters  were  of  no  ufe,  mercury  was  given
twice,  to  the  quantity  of  two  dram.s,  the  firft  time  without  any  effeft,  but
the  fecond  time  with  fuch  an  effeft,  that  the  patient  had  three  flools,.  folid
excrements  being  difcharg'd  the  firft,  and  the  fecond  time,  and  the  third
time  fluid.  Nor  did  it  feem  that  this  remedy  had  done  any  mifchief.  Yet.
the  woman  died  about  twelve  hours  after  taking  mercury  the  fecond  time,
on  the  fourth,  or  fifth  day,  after  the  vomiting  had  begun,  and  half  an  hour
after  the  time  in  which  fhe  had  laft  vomited;  whereas,  through  the  whole
courfe  of  the  difeafe,  fhe  had  neither  labour'd  under  any  evident  fever,  nor
convulfion,  and  had  born  the  pains  of  her  belly  with  lb  little  complaining,
that  1  have  no  remark  made  upon  them.

When  the  abdomen  was  cut  into,  and  its  cavity  laid  open,  a  very  ftrong
fmell  of  putrefadlion  iflTued  forth.  The  inteftinum  jejunum,  and  the  neigh-
bouring part  of  the  ileum,  were  univerfally  diftended  with  the  fame  kind  of
matter,  which  had  been  thrown  up  by  vomiting.  But  the  remaining  part  of  the
ileum,  and  the  large  inteftines,  were  contrafted.  The  jejunum  being  dif-.
tinguilli'd,  in  fome  places,  with  lines  of  a  lively  red,  and  in  a  longitudinal
direction,  was  in  other  parts  of  a  brown  colour,  mix'd  with  red,  as  the  ileum
was  likev/ife,  aJmoft  in  every  part.  But  I  found  this  laft-mention'd  intef-
tine,  not  far  from  the  jejunum,  to  be  much  more  confiderably  afFefted,  to

the.


Letter  XXXIV. Article  12.  jjj

the  extent  of  three  or  four  inches ;  which  was  the  very  part  of  it,  that  to-
gether with  the  annex'd  mefentry,  went  down  into  the  facculus  of  the  lower
hernise,  curv'd  into  the  form  of  an  arch.  For  although  this  prolaps'd  part
of  the  inteftine,  was  neither  connected  to  the  facculus,  nor  to  the  orifice  of  it,
which  refembled  a  kind  of  ring,  as  it  were,  yet  being  feiz'd  with  a  gano-rcne,.
it  was  of  a  bloody  colour  inclining  to  black,  and  wept  a  bloody  feruni  from
its  furface.  However,  no  inteftine,  but  only  a  part  of  the  omentum,  en-
ter'd  the  upper  hernia,  which  when  look'd  upon  externally,  was  divided  into,
two  little  mountains,  or  rifings,  as  it  were,  and  internally  it  was  made  up  of
one  fac,  into  which  the  periton^Eum  had  been  extended.

As,  befides  the  inteftines,  we  look'd  over  the  other  vifcera  of  the  belly;
for  the  thorax  and  the  head  were  not  open'd ;  we  obferv'd  the  liver  to  be  fome-
what  hard,  the  fpleen  lax,  and  externally  livid,  but  only  in  ibme  places..
The  ligaments  of  the  uterus  were  black :  but  the  uterus  itfelf  was  very
fmall,  and  its  parietes  were  very  thin.  And  thefe  being  cut  into,  the  fub-
ftance  of  them  appeared  to  be  fo  livid  in  the  middle,  that  it  feem'd  to  be
inclin'd  to  a  gangrenous  ftate.  As  I  had  obferv'd  the  uterus  to  be  feated  a
tittle  lower  than  ufual,  it  came  into  my  mind  to  infpedt  the  vagina,  that  I
might  fee  how  low  the  uterus  had  fallen  down,  into  that  cavity.  And  it
happen'd,  that  no  fooner  had  I  laid  the  labia  afide,  and  difcover'd  the  orifice
of  the  vagina,  but  a  certain  body  appear'd  to  be  pufhing  forwards,  which  at
firft  any  one  might  have  taken  for  the  os  uteri.  But  as  I  had,  juft  before,,
feen  the  uterus  not  to  be  in  fo  low  a  fituation,  that  if  it  were  even  extremely
large,  it  could  have  reach'd  thither  •,  I  diffefted  that  and  the  vagina,  imme-
diately after  taking  them  out  of  the  body,  and  found  the  glandular  body  of
the  urethra  to  have  become  fo  thick,  and  to  have  drawn  the  vagina,  which,
was  in  other  refpects  lax,  and  without  any  rugse,  downwards  in  fuch  a  man-
ner, that  the  extremity  of  it,  which  is  perforated  to  make  an  orifice  for  the
urethra,  might  eafily  be  taken  for  the  os  uteri  falling  downwards,  and  eafily
impofe  upon  a  furgeon  who  was  not  well-experienc'd,  not  to  mention  that  it
might  eafily  impofe  upon  a  midwife.

12.  But  thefe  laft  circumftances  relate  to  another  fubiedl.  Let  us  now.
attend  to  what  relates  to  the  prefent.  As  to  the  woman's  having  fcarcely
complain'd  of  pains  in  the  belly,  and  being  without  a  fever,  through  the
whole  of  the  difeafe,  do  you  think  that  thefe  circumftances  can  be  accounted"
for,  from  fuppofing  the  iliac  paffionto  have  been  produc'd  in  her,  "  by  reafon
"  of  the  expulfive  faculty  being  abolifti'd,"  as  Salius  fays  (J') ;  or  by  reafon
of  "  an  atonia,  or  lofs  oftenfion,  from  the  nerves  of  the  inteftines  being  ob-
"  ftrufted,"  as  the  opinion  of  Ruyfch  (c)  is  ?  The  former  of  thefe  authors
fays,  that  fuch  is  the  ftate  of  the  cafe,  "  when  attended  with  no  pain  ;"  and
the  latter  did  not  at  all  doubt,  but  for  this  reafon  it  was,  that  the  ileos,  in  a.
certain  woman,  had  been  attended  "  with  no  remarkable  pain  or  fever."

But  not  to  enquire  now,  into  what  we  ftiall  fee  below  (d),  whether,  when
the  inteftines  are  in  fuch  a  ftate,  the  feveral  contents  thereof  can  be  thruft-
back,  and  driven  upwards,  into  the  ftomach,  fo  as  to  be  thrown  up  by


(/;)  C.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  i.  (</)  N.  30.

(cj  Obf.  anat.  chir.  91,


vomiting,


134  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

vomiting;  and  not  to  difciifs  this  point,  whether  the  other  figns  of  that  con-
ftitution,  which  Sahus  enunnerates,  did  really  exift  in  the  woman  whom  I
have  delcrib'd,  it  is  pad  a  doubt,  that  neither  Salius,  nor  Ruyfch,  fuppofe
an  inflammation  of  the  inteftines  to  exift  at  that  time-,  for  both  of  them
^mention  this  feparately,  and  the  firft  of  them  exprelly  fuppofes,  in  cafe  of  in-
flammation "  a  fever,  and  together  with  it,  violent  pains,  whereby  the  pa-
tients are  violently  excruciated."  Is  it  poflible  then,  that  there  could  be  an
atonia  in  the  inteftines  of  this  woman,  where  it  is  manifeft  there  was,  at  the
lame  time,  an  inflammation  ?  Be  this  as  it  will,  it  was  certain  that  none  of
the  many  caufes  of  this  diforder,  which  Salius  enumerates,  had  preceded.
But  in.  regard  to  the  queftion,  whether  a  fever  may  fometimes  be  abfent
from  an  inflammation  of  the  inteftines,  I  fhall  have  another  opportunity  of
determining  that  hereafter  (e).

13.  But  now  if  we  confider  what  are  the  confequences  of  inflammation,  in
the  two  hiftories  I  have  given  you,  it  will  be  eafy  to  conceive,  how  much  it
behoves  every  phyfician,  whofe  intention  it  is  to  prevent  the  progrefs  of  this
•difeafe,  to  admit  df  no  delay  ;  and  what  remedies  he  ought  to  be  fufpicious
of,  when  the  diforder  has  already  made  fonie  prcgreis,  leaden  bullets,  for
inftance,  and  mercury.  For  if  the  inteftines,  being  rotten  from  fphacelation,
as  in  that  young  man,  who  was  a  hufbandman  (/},  do  not  refift  even  the
matter  which  they  contain,  we  muft  beware  of  increafing  their  contents,  by
fufiering  the  patient  to  take  in  more  than  is  abfolutely  necelTary,  and  ftill
more  muft  we  be  cautious,  how  we  make  him  take  in  the  moft  ponderous
fubftances,  which  would  open  a  paflage  for  themfelves,  through  the  fubftance
of  the  inteftines,  inftead  of  opening  the  natural  paflage,  and  by  this  means
accelerate  death.  And  this  happens  much  more  eafily,  vvhere  there  is,  at
the  fame  time,  fuch  a  conftriflion  of  the  inteftine,  as  fufl^ers  nothing  to  pafs
through  it,  till  the  inteftine  is  replac'd.

For  the  fame  conftriftion,  by  vitiating  the  inteftine  that  lies  immediately
'above,  renders  it  unequal  to  fupporting  the  diftention,  and  the  weight;  and,
at  the  fame  time,  the  matter  which  diftends,  and  loads  it,  is  obftrufted,  in
that  very  place,  where  the  inteftine  is  moft  weak,  and  difeas'd.  But  yet
Hoffmann  (_§■),  you  will  fay,  fav'd  a  woman  in  a  volvulus,  from  the  in-
teftine being  intercepted  in  a  bubonocele,  by  giving  quickfilver  to  the
quantity  of  half  a  pound;  although  thofe  are  not  wanting  who  think  this
cafe  almoft  incredible.  To  me,  however,  it  feems  the  more  credible,  be-
caufe  Alphonfus  Khonius  (b)  had,  long  before,  remov'd  the  fame  diforder  in
a  man,  from  an  inteftine  being  intercepted  in  an  ofcheocele,  or  fcrotal  hernia,
by  giving  him  nine  ounces  of  quickfilver.  But  altho'  the  fymptoms,  in  both
cafes,  were  violent,  yet  the  conftridion  of  the  inteftine  might  be  lefs,  and  it
is  certain  the  diforder  had  not  yet  proceeded  to  a  fphacelus  :  as  it  is,  likewife,
certain  that  this. was  not  the  cafe,  in  the  great  number  of  patients  who,  as
v/e  read  in  feveral  authors,  were  cur'd  of  a  volvulus,  by  taking  even  a  much
greater  quantity  of  this  metal.

In  refpecl  to  thofe  patients  then,  in  whom the  inteftines  are  as  yet  firm,
jtnd  ftrong,  I  had  never  any  fear  of  this  kind  -^  for  it  firft  arofe  from  feeing  the

(^)  Epjft.  35.  n,  ;q.  _  (j)  Medic,  rat.  t.  4.  p.  z.  f.  2.  c.  4.  obf.  3.

(/')  N.  9.  -  (/))  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  9.  obf.  79.

ftate


Letter  XXXIV. Article 14.  135

ilate  of  the  inteftines,  in  that  hufbandman,  when  difledled,  which  put  me  on
fiippofing  how  much  the  inteftines  might  be  weaken'd  in  others,  alfo,  when
the  difeafe  was  much  advanc'd.  And  I  wonder'd,  from  that  time,  to  this
very  day,  on  which  I  revis'd  this  letter,  that  I  had,  to  my  knowledge,  lit  on
no  writer  in  praftical  medicine,  who,  when  he  fpoke  of  this  remedy,  againft
the  difeale  in  queftion,  as  moftof  them  have  done,  gave  us  the  leaft  warn-
ing of  this  probable  danger,  befides  one  whofe  opufcukim  (i)  I  have  lately
read,  I  mean  that  eminent  phyfician  Mead,  who  very  feriouily  admonilhes
lis,  "  that  we  ought  not  to  delay  long"  the  ufe  of  quickfilver,  in  the  iieos,
if  other  remedies  are  of  no  advantage,  "  becaufe  it  is  to  be  fear'd,  left  a
"  gangrene  fhould  fucceed  the  inflammation,  as  frequently  happens,  by
"  which  the  coats  of  the  inteftine,  being  corrupted,  fufter  the  ponderous
"  metal  to  efcape  through  them,  into  the  abdomen."

Nor  do  I  fuppofe  that  you  would  think  of  objefting  to  this  caution,  the-
obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Wahrendorff  {k),  which  relates  to  the  hiftory
of  a  patient  with  an  iliac  pafllon,  in  whom  half  a  pound  of  quickfilver,,
which  had  been  given,  had  rea(;h'd  quite  to  the  colon,  and  had  not  burft
through  the  corrupted  ftomach,  or  the  duodenum,  which  was  affe6led  with
a  fphacelus.  For  as  the  patient  died  "  three  days  after  "  he  had  taken  the-
mercury,you  eafily  perceive,  that  in  this  fpace  of  time,  the  inflammation,  which
was  Rill  in  thejcjunum,  and  the  ileum,  might  have  degenerated,  in  the  duode-
num, and  ftomach,  into  a  fphacelus,  which  did  not  exift  before.  And  I  fup-
pofe you  v;ould  make  ufe  of  much  the  fame  kind  of  anfwer,  if  any  one-
Ihouki  objeft  the  obfervation  of  Schroekius  'I),  who  in  a  patient  that  died  of  an
obftinate  obftru6lion  of  the  bowels,  found  about  two  pounds  of  quickfilver,  at
the  beginning,  and  termination,  of  the  inteftinum  ileum,  and  faw  it'adhering  to
the  coats  of  this  inteftine  divided  into  very  minute  particles,  without  thefe
coats  having  been  perforated  thereby,  notwithftanding  the  inteftines  were
not  inflam'd  indeed,  but  fo  extremely  v/eak,  that,  being  handled  a  little
roughly,  they  were  burft  through  "  in  feveral  places."  For  there  were  mcrs'
than  twenty  days  betwixt  the  laft  time  of  taking  the  mercury,  and  the  pa-
tient's death,  lo  that  the  inteftines  being  diftended  with  air,  and  with  fsces,,
they  might,  at  length,  become  corrupted,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  time  ;  nor
is  it  certain  whether  they  were,  in  fact,  thus  rotten  in  thofe  places,  alio,  ia,
which  the  quickfilver  had  ftagnated.

14.  You  will  perhaps  afk,  why  in  the  patients  whom  I  have  defcrib'd,  the-
inteftine  was  not  replac'd  .''  And  why,  as  it  was  not  replac'd,  a  part  of  the
contents,  nevertheleis,  elcap'd  from  the  fmall,  to  the  large  inteftines,  inibme-
of  the  cafes.  In  regard  to  the  firft  enquiry,  fuppofe  that  ibme  were  brought
into  the  liofpital,  much  later  in  the  difeafe  than  to  admit  of  this  operation,
that  others  were  brought  in  early  enough,  but  at  that  time,  v/hen  fcarcely  any
of  the  iurgeons,  in  the  greater  part  of  the  cities  in  Italy,  were  daring  enough-;-
to  make  ufe  of  the  knife,  in  order  to  lay  open  the  narrow  pafi'ages,  which,
prevented  the  inteftines  from  being  replac'd,  by  any  other  means.

In  regard  to  the  part  of  the  matter  contain'd  in  the  inteftines  having  pafs'd-

(0 Monita  medica  c.  7.  f.  2.  (/)  Eormid.  dee.  3.  a.  s;  &  6  obf.  299.

(/•)  Aft.  n.  c.  t.  3.  obf.  1.31.  ante  fin,

5  throusfe


13^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly,

through  thefe  naiTovv  pafiages,  in  fome  patients,  I  would  firft  have  you  obfcrve,
that  the  feces,  which  I  have  faid  was  difcharg'd  by  means  of  glyfters  (m),
had  been  below  the  place  of  conftriiftion,  before  the  inteftine  was  conftring'd  ;
and  that  it  may  happen  in  volvulous  patients,  not  only  by  the  affiftance  of
art,  but  by  the  help  of  nature,  that  the  contents  of  the  intefcines,  which  are
below  that  part,  may  be  difcharg'd,  Salius  (n)  has  confirm'd,  in  oppofition
to  the  common  doftrine  at  that  time,  not  only  by  reafon,  and  his  own  ex-
perience, but  by  the  experience  of  Hippocrates  fc?)  alfo,  in  the  woman  who  lay
ill  at  the  houie  of  Tifamenus,  except  that  he  aflerts  this  to  happen,  while
the  difeafe  is  coming  on,  and  not  when  it  is  already  form'd.

But  in  the  woman  whom  I  have  defcrib'd  (p),  it  is  evident  that  this  hap-
pen'd  near  the  clofe  of  a  mortal  difeafe,  and  that  not  only  the  contain'd
matter  which  was  below  the  conflrifled  inteftine,  had  been,  more  than  once,
difcharg'd  by  ftool,  but  finally,  perhaps,  even  a  part  of  that  which  lay  above
the  conftriclion,  and  efpecially  the  mercury  ;  unlefs  you  fhould  fuppofe  that
this  remedy  given  in  its  fimple  ftate,  in  a  very  fmall  dofe,  and  without  any
purging  medicine  being  join'd  with  it,  had  a-  power  of  propagating  I  know
not  what  irritation  through  the  intercepted  parietes  of  the  inteftine,  which
were  not  yet  feiz'd  with  a  fphacelus  indeed,  but  were  affedled  with  a  gan-
grene. Yet  as  this  is  not  eafy  to  fuppofe,  it  will  feem  very  probable,  that
the  inteftine  was  lefs  clofely  conftrifted  in  this  woman,  than  in  the  young
hufbandman  (q),  fo  that  the  weight  of  the  mercury,  afllfted  by  the  change
offituation  in  the  body,  by  the  agitation  of  vomiting,  and  by  the  prefTure
upon  it,  might  have  been  able  to  pafs  through  that  flaort  tra6l  of  the  intef-
tine, and  after  that,  by  the  help  of  the  found  inteftines,  promote  the  dif-
charge  of  the  matter  which  was  contain'd  below  the  conftridlion.  But  I  will
now  give  you  one  of  thofe  examples,  in  which  the  inteftines  did  not  ceafe  to
make  fome  little  difcharge,  through  the  whole  courfe  of  the  difeafe.

15.  Mary,  the  wife  of  Antony  Francifcati,  a  carman  at  Padua  (for  the
very  extraordinary  number  of  valves,  that  I  found  in  the  pulmonary  artery
of  this  woman,  made  me  enquire,  very  particularly,  into  her  name,  and
other  circumftances  relating  to  her)  aged  thirty-nine  years,  of  a  moderately
good  habit  of  body,  not  a  bad  colour,  and  much  lefs  of  an  ifteric  com-
plexion, having  had  many  children,  the  laft  of  which  ftie  had  given  fuck  to
for  fix  months,  when  ftie  was  feiz'd  with  this  fatal  difeafe,  and  having  been
fubjeft  to  no  other,  except  a  little  femoral  hernia,  from  which  this  laft  dif-
order,  at  lejngth,  had  its  origin,  and  which  fhe,  having  been  accuftom'd  to
replace  of  herfelf,  whatever  part  it  was  that  fell  down  from  the  belly,  had
attempted  to  replace  now,  likewife,  for  feveral  days  together,  but  not  being
able  to  fucceed,  was  feiz'd  with  a  fever  and  vomiting,  and  the  other  fymptoms
which  generally  attend  this  diforder,  except  that  fhe  could  always  make  fome
little  difcharge  by  ftool.  She  was  at  length  brought  into  this  hofpital,  much
later  than  fhe  ought  to  have  been,  where,  though  to  all  appearance  fhe  was
like  a  perfon  who  was  about  to  die  very  foon,  fhe  neverthelefs  drag'd  on  her

{'")  N.  9.  (/)  N.  II.

(/;)  C.  cit.  fupraad  n.  1.  (^)  N.  9,

;(a)  Epidem.  I.  3.  f.  2.

3  -  'i'f'^j


Letter  XXXIV. Article 15.  137

life,  for  many  days  together,  and  even  on  the  laftofthem,  feem'd  to  befome-
what  better,  and  to  be  eas'd  by  the  glyfters  which  were  thrown  np,  till,  at
length,  on  the  twentieth  day  of  November,  in  the  year  1704,  fhe  died.

The  belly  being  open'd  the  day  afterwards,  and  the  hernial  facculus,  at
the  fame  time,  laid  bare,  which  was  thick,  and  eafily  divifible,  into  many
lamina;  of  coats,  as  it  were,  it  was  obferv'd  to  be  quite  disjoin'd  from  the
ligamentum  teres  of  the  uterus,  but  connedted  to  the  crural  veffels,  to  which
it  lay  contiguous,  on  the  internal  fide :  nor  had  it  a  narrow  orifice  ;  but  all
the  confinement  which  the  hernia  fufffer'd,  was  owing  to  the  lower  border  of
the  external  oblique  mufcle  of  the  abdomen,  that  lay  upon  it,  which  border
is  call'd  the  ligament  of  Poupart,  or,  rather,  the  ligament  of  Fallopius ;
whereas  it  is  in  faft  only  the  tendon  of  that  mufcle  (r) ;  in  which  opinion
very  Ikilful  men  agree  with  me,  and  amongft  thefe  Heifter  (j),  and  if  you
read  him  attentively,  Platner  alfo  (/).  Under  this  border  then,  was  inter-
cepted fome  part  of  the  neighbouring  inteftinum  colon,  yet  in  fuch  a  manner,
that  a  paflage  remain'd  fufficiently  open  through  it,  only  the  paries  thereof
was  fhut  up,  which  had  lain  in  contadt  with  the  orifice  of  the  facculus.  This
paries,  cohering  with  the  facculus,  was  black  and  corrupted  ;  and  the  neareft
part  of  the  inteftine,  which  lay  without  the  facculus,  was  green.

The  internal  parietes  and  the  belly  were  green  alfo,  and  fmell'd  very  ftronp-
in  molt  places.  Yet  in  the  vifcera  of  this  cavity,  I  remark'd  no  morbid  ap-
pearances, except  in  the  gall-bladder,  which  was  fomewhat  larger  than  ic
ought  to  be,  and  with  a  bile,  that  was  not  of  a  black  colour,  contain'd  fix-
teen  calculi,  which  fcarcely  differ'd  from  each  other,  in  magnitude,  being
all  of  them  fmall  indeed,  but  not  very  fmall,  externally  yellow,  and  made
up  of  many  fmooth  furfaces.  And  having  apply'd  one  of  thefe  calculi  to  the
flame,  in  the  moift  ftate,  in  which  it  then  was,  I  faw  that  it  burn'd,  not
without  fparkling,  and  melted,  but  that  it  did  not  cherifli  and  preferve
the  flame.

As  we  diflfefted  the  remaining  part  of  the  body,  on  the  fame  day,  and
on  the  following  days ;  for  the  other  vifcera  were  very  proper  for  demonftra-
tion,  and  the  mufcles  were  extremely  red  •,  nothing  ofFer'd  itfelf  to  our  ob-
fervation,  in  any  other  part,  which  can  be  fuppos'd  to  relate  to  the  prefent
fubjeft,  except  that  in  the  medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain,  were  a  great
number  of  bloody  points,  and  a  great  quantity  of  blood,  which  gave  rife  to
thefe,  as  both  the  vense  cavse,  and  the  veins  that  flow  into  them,  and  efpe-
cially  the  vena  azygos  being  difl:ended  therewith,  fignify'd  ;  and  the  whole
left  lobe  of  the  lungs  was,  on  one  fide,  connected  to  the  pleura,  and  on  the-
other,  to  the  mediafl:inum,  and,  finally,  the  thyroid  gknd  was  fomewhat
thicker  than  it  naturally  is  :  although  many  other  circumftances  occur'd  which
are  not  unworthy  of  being  notic'd  in  another  place.  One  of  which  I  will
not  pafs  over  at  prefent,  as  it  had  never  before  occur'd  to  me,  nor  had  I  ever
heard,  or  read,  that  it  had  been  feen  by  any  one,  nor  did  I  even  hear  after-
wards, from  very  learned  foreigners,  who  came  with  great  politenefs  to  vifit
me. And  this  was  the  reafon,  why,  in  pointing  out  fome  of  my  obfervati-

(r)  Adverf.  anat.  3.  animad.  i.  (/)  Inftit.  chir.  §.  793,

(j)  Cpmpend.  anat.  not.-4.

Vol.  II.  T  ons.


138  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Bellj.

ons,  to  the  celebrated  Morand  (u),  in  as  few  words  as  poffible,  as  my  cuf-
tom  is,  and  particularly  pa.Ting  over  the  reft,  as  they  had  been  made  by
others,  as  well  as  by  me,  I  excepted  this  one.

That  is  to  lay,  in  a  woman,  who  had  been  fubjeft  to  no  diforder,  which
related  particularly  to  the  circulation,  and  had  reach'd  to  the  age  which  I  have
mention'd  above;  and  in  whom,  every  minute  part  of  the  heart,  and  the
adjoining  vefiels,  being  accurately  examin'd  by  me,  Ihow'd  no  difeas'd  ap-
pearance whatever,  nor  any  thing  preternatural,  I  found  at  the  orifice  of  the
pulmonary  artery,  inftead  of  three  valves,  four  valves,  and  demonftrated
them  to  a  crowded  circle  of  learned  men,  and  of  ftudents  who  were  prefent,
being  fimilar,  in  their  appearance,  to  thofe  that  are  generally  found  there,
except  that  one  was  in  every  dimenfion  confiderably  larger  than  ufual,  as
when  you  come  hither,  you  fhall,  fome  time,  or  other,  fee ;  for  I  ftill  keep
them  preferv'd  in  a  proper  liquor :  and  this  was  feated  anteriorly,  and  towards
the  left  fide,  in  refpeft  to  the  others.  But  when  I  revis'd  this  letter,  I  was
pleas'd  at  my  having  faid  above,  that  this  was  a  very  rare  obfervation,  in-
deed, but  not  that  it  was  the  only  one.  For,  at  length,  among  that  great
number,  and  variety,  of  obfervations,  which  are  publifh'd  by  the  celebrated
Jo.  Zacharias  Petfche  (x),  as  being  taken  in  concert  with  his  preceptor  Caf-
febomius,  I  lit  on  one  of  another  woman,  in  whom  "  the  pulmonary
"  artery  had  four  valves,  that  is  to  fay,  three  large  ones,  but  the  fourth
"  a  lels."  We  alfo  read  that  the  aorta,  of  this  woman,  had  fent  off  no
more  than  two  branches  upwards;  but  how  many  years  flie  liv'd,  what
health  fhe  enjoy'd,  and  of  what  difeafe  flie  died,  is  not  added.

16.  But  lea\^ing  an  appearance  which,  any  where  elfe  but  in  the  heart,
where  nature  is  generally  found  to  be  fo  fimilar  to  herfelf,  would  not  have
deferv'd  any  great  attention,  I  return  to  the  confideration  of  the  hernia,  which
though  very  fmall,  was  neverthelefs  fatal.  And,  indeed,  in  proportion  as
hernias  are  neglefted  by  patients,  on  account  of  their  fmallnefs,  fo  much  the
more  dangerous  do  they  often,  at  length,  become,  as  that  was,  the  facculus
of  which  "  would  fcarcely  admit  the  extremity  of  the  fore  finger  (y)."  For
the  inteftine  is  more  eafily  conglutinated  with  a  fmall  facculus,  and  more
clofely  conftring'd  thereby.  And  to  this  muft  be  added,  the  filence  of  the
patients  upon  this  head,  by  reafon  of  the  neglefted  fmallnefs  of  the  hernia,
even  when  they  begin  to  be  tortur'd  with  pains  of  the  belly  ;  fo  that  the  ce-
lebrated Werlhof  (2)  prudently  admonifhes  all  medical  praftitioners,  "  not  to
"  omit,  in  all  colic  diforders,  to  inquire  into  herniEC,  which  are  often  even
"  very  fmall,  and  overlook'd  by  the  patients  themfelves,  or  conceaFd  through
"  lliame-,"  and  he  relates,  that  to  him,  at  leaft,  it  had  happen'd  more  than
once,  that  notvvithftanding  he  had  made  the  inquiry  again,  and  again,  the
patients  denied  it,  almoft  quite  to  the  lafb.

It  happen'd  to  me,  alio,  in  the  cafe  of  a  young  man,  who  was  equally
learned,  noble,  and  pious,  and  who  is  now  a  very  eminent  man,  that  when
by  other  phyficians,  and  by  me  likewife,  it  was  much  inquir'd,  what  could  be

(a)  Hill,  de  I'Acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1741.  obf.  (j)  Vid.  afl.  lipf.  fuppl.  t.  i.  f.  12.  inrelat..
anat.  7.  libelli  launay.

(a)  Differt.  qua  Sylloge.  anat.  obf.  &c.  §. C^J  Commerc.littr.  a.  1735.  hebd.  i.  n-.  3..

thSL


Letter  XXXIV. Article i6.  139

the  caufe  of  pains  in  the  belly,  that  return'd  every  now  and  then,  and  the
more  we  inquir'd,  the  lefs  were  we  likely  to  find  it  out ;  it  happen'd,  I  fay,
that  from  this  very  abienceof  all  other  caufes,  I  fnfpeded  the  prefence  of  that
caufe  whereof  we  now  fpeak.  And  that  this  fufpicion  was  not  groundlefs,  I
found  out  by  inquiring  whether  he  receiv'd  any  advantage  from  a  fupine  fitu-
ation  of  body.  For  as  the  patient  anfwer'd  in  the  affirmative,  and  as  a  little
tumour  was  foon  after  found  which  he  himfelf,  by  reafon  of  its  fmallnefs,  had
not  in  the  leaftobferv'd,  the  inteftine  was  replac'd  foon  after,  and  kept  up  by  a
proper  bandage,  fo  that  the  pains  return'd  no  more.  But  thefe  pains  had  been
rather  troublefome,  than  violent.  And  that  colic  pains,  as  I  had  begun  to-
obferve,  are  often  brought  on  by  hernia,  is  not  only  fhown  by  frequent  ex-
perience, but  confirm'd  by  the  difledlion  of  a  woman,  given  by  the  cele-
brated Weiflius  (a),  who  had  been  often  troubled  with  colic  pains,  on  account
of  a  hernia,  in  the  fame  place,  where  I  have  faid  our  patient  had  one,  and  not
only  containing  a  portion  of  the  colon,  but  a  portion  of  the  ileum.,  and
omentum  alfo  ;  the  gall-bladder  being,  likewife,  loaded  with  a  greater  num-
ber of  calculi,  than  it  was  in  the  woman  defcrib'd  by  me.

The  hernia  of  this  woman  may  be  call'd  rare,  as  Littre  fays  {h),  if  it  be
compar'd  with  thofe  very  frequent  hernia,  that  are  made  up  of  the  fmall  in-
teftines.  He  defcribes  one,  in  a  noble-woman,  fimilar  to  this  of  ours,  whe-
ther you  confider  what  he  found  in  differing  the  dead  body,  or  the  power  of
difcharging  fome  excrements,  which  he  hadobferv'd  in  the  living  body.  On-
ly the  feat  of  it  was  higher.  Another  is  taken  notice  of  by  Palfin  (c),  who
feems  not  to  have  read  that  of  Littre,  I  fay  that  of  the  year  1714.  But  he
had  read  the  obfervation  of  Hildanus  (i),  which,  when  the  author  himfelf  had
accurately  confider'd  it,  he  had  explain'd  in  the  fame  manner  as  Littre  (1?) :
and  I  even  find  that  Bienaifius  had  thus  explain'd  another,  which  he  met
•with  at  Paris  alfo,  in  the  year  1 671,  as  J.  H.  Lavaterus,  who  was  prefent,  pub-
lifli'd  in  the  following  year  (f).  For  the  reafon  why  a  female  patient,  la-
bouring under  a  bubonocele,  "  had  difcharg'd  liquid  excrements  from  the
"  inteftines,  through  the  whole  time  of  the  compreffion  (quite  to  the  feventh
"  day)  was  found  by  the  operator,"  fays  he,  by  whom  he  means  the  gentle-
man I  juft  now  mention'd,  "  to  be,  that  the  inteftine  was,  in  part  only,  con-
"  ftriaed."

But  I  have  even  remark'd  of  Ballonius,  when  faying  f^),  "  that  when  the
"  apophyfis  of  the  inteftinum  cascum  is  prolaps'd  into  the  groin,"  notwith-
ftanding  it  may  become  putrid,  "  it  is  not  neceffary  that  thofe  fymptoms
"  fhould,  of  courfe,  follow,  which  are  generally  the  confequences,  in  a  fimi-
"  lar  affeftion  of  the  other  inteftines,  whether  fmall,  or  large  ;"  I  have  re-
mark'd, I  fay,  that  when  he  fays  thefe  things,  he  has  pretty  clearly  hinted
that  if  a  prolaps'd  part,  either  of  the  fmall,  or  of  the  large  inteftines,  fimi-
lar to  that  appendix,  be  intercepted  in  a  hernia,  the  patient  may  have  fome
difcharges  by  ftool,  contrary  to  what  happens  when  the  whole  tube  of  any
inteftine  is  intercepted. And  it  is  certain  that  there  are  fome  other  appen-  ^

(fi)  Commerc.  cit.  a.  1745.  hebd.  24.  n.  i,  (e)  Cent.  6.  in  obf.  71.

{b)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  r.  des  fc.  a. 1714.  ^f)  Difl".  de  inteftinor.  compreff.  thef.  6.

\c)  Anat.  du  corps  hum.  tr.  i.  ch.  8.  (g)  L.  I.  confil.  med.  103,

ii!)  Cent.  1.  obf.  chir.  55,

T  2  dasss


140  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

dages  n&w  and  then,  befides  that  natural  one,  which  are  alfo  call'd  diverti-
cula, and  that  they  enter  the  hernical  facculus,  whether  they  are  gradually  and
preternaturally  produc'd,  or  are  given  to  fome  bodies  from  their  firft  origin.
For  I  would  have  you  be  cautious  of  fuppofing  that  they  are  all  preternatu-
ral, and  efpecially  that  they  v/ere  all  form'd  from  the  fide  of  the  inteftine
being  prolaps'd  into  the  hernial  facculus ;  for  fometimes,  as  will  be  faid  be-
low (/&},  they  belong  to  thofe  inteftines  which  are  not  fituated  in  the  places
where  hernias  happen.

Wherefore,  you  will,  without  doubt,  be  of  opinion  with  Littre  (/),  and
Mery  (k),  that  thofe  appendages,  which  they  faw,  were  form'd  in  that  man-
ner, or  at  leaft  increas'd  :  and  if  you  alfo  choofe  to  fuppofe,  that  thofe  three
which  were  feen  by  Schrockius  (/),  in  a  young  man,  who  had  been  often
troubled  with  pains  in  his  belly,  but  not  from  hernise,  which  were  no
where  found,  took  their  origin,  or  increafe,  from  fome  morbid  caufe,  I  fhal!,
perhaps,  not  very  violently  oppofe  your  opinion.  But  if  you  Ihould  affert
that  fome  others,  as,  for  inftance,  that  which  is  defcrib'd  by  Weitbrecht  (ii»),
in  a  woman,  which  Was  furnifli'd  with  confpicuous  fibres,  in  the  fame  man-
ner as  the  other  inteftines,  did  not  exift  from  the  firft:  formation  of  the  body,
I  certainly  fliall  not  be  able  to  aflent  to  your  aflertion.

For  I  do  not  doubt  but  this  was  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  which  I  found
in  an  old  woman,  inafmuch  as  that  had  the  fame  fubftance,  and  thicknefs,  of
parietes,  with  the  other  inteftines,  and  hung  perpendicularly  from  the  ileum,
where  it  was  nearer  to  the  colon,  than  to  the  jejunum  :  and  this  I  would  have
you  add  to  my  very  ftiort  defcription  In  the  Adverfaria  (k),  fince  Hunauld  (o),
when  defcribing  another  which  had  been  feen  by  him,  has  defir'd  that  this
fhould  not  be  pafs'd  over.  And  perhaps  that  was  nearly  of  the  fame  kind,
which  I  faw  in  the  woolcomber  (p),  though  it  differ'd  from  the  former  in
thefe  circumftances,  that  it  was  fhorter,  and  hemifpherical,  in  its  figure,  and
plac'd  contrary  to  the  infertion  of  the  mefentery,  where  the  ileum  was  fo  re-
fieded,  as  to  make  an  angle,  which  continued  even  when  the  mefentery  was
cut  ofi^;  for  in  that  the  very  prominence  of  the  angle  was  protuberant,  much
in  the  fame  manner,  if  you  confider  the  fituation  only,  as  that  which  is  deli-
neated by  Ruyfch,  in  the  Mufasum  Anatomicum  (^).  Thofe  which  I  have
feen  befides,  I  have  not  a  defcription  of,  and  indeed  have  feen  but  very  few,
though  I  have  examin'd  the  inteftines  of  fo  many  bodies.

17.  And  from  hence  it  is,  that  the  more  I  confider,  the  more  I  fuppofe  that
the  words  of  Ruyfch>  in  the  feventh  Thefaurus  (r),  "  diverticula  of  this  kind
"  are  generally,  if  not  always,  to  be  met  with  in  the  ileum,"  are  to  be  taken
in  a  ditierent  fenfe  from  what  they  feem  at  firft  to  convey  -,  I  mean,  in  fadt,
that  when  they  are  really  found,  they  are  generally  found  in  this  inteftine.
At  leaft  in  tliis  inteftine  they  have  been  feen,  by.  thofe  who  are  mention'd  by

.  {h)  N.  17.  (0)  Hift.,  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1732.  obf,

(/)  Mera.  del'aead.  r.  desfc.  a.  1700.  anat.  z.

(/t)  Mem.  a.  1701.  obf.  1.  CpJ  De  quo  epift.  36.  n.  22.

(/)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  8.  obf.  50.  ({■)  Fig.  3.  ad  thee,  c.  repof.  3.  n.  11.

(m)  Comment,  acad,  imp.  petropol.  t.  4.  (r)  N.  XV.  3..
(»)  III.  animad...  5.

me,.  /


Letter  XXXIV. Article  ry.  141

me  at  prefent,  or  have  been  mention'd  before  (s),  and  befides  thefe  by  Hen-
ricus  Meibomius  (t)  formerly,  and  after  that  by  others,  and  amono-  the  reft
by  thofe  very  experienc'd  men,  Waltherus  (z/),  Schlitingius  (x),  and  lately
by  the  celebrated  Bonazoli  (y) ;  to  fay  but  little  of  myfelf,  who  neverthelefs,
not  to  omit  this  circumftance  that  relates  to  my  own  obfervations,  very
well  remember  that  the  bodies,  in  which  I  faw  thefe  appearances,  had  not
been  thofe  of  maniacal  perfons,  nor  do  I  ever  remember  to  have  feen  them,
in  the  bodies  of  maniacs,  that  I  have  happen'd  to  difleft.  I  have  alfo  feen
the  fame  appearance,  more  than  once,  in  geefe,  and  particularly  in  one  of
fuch  a  breadth,  that  it  could  not  be  taken  for  the  remains  of  that  duft,  which
had  formerly  belonged  to  the  vitellum.  And  in  thefe  creatures,  likewife,  it
communicated  with  that  inteftine,  which  anfwers  to  the  ileum,  and  even,
with  the  part  of  it,  that  is  neareft  to  the  large  inteftine ;  which  I  fee  has
happen'd  in  the  human  body,  both  to  me,  and  to  others,  who  have  ex-
prefsly  told  us,  to  what  part  of  the  ileum,  they  were  connedted.

From  hence  a  confirmation  may  be  taken,  of  the  caufe  pointed  out  by
the  celebrated  Fabricius  (z),  why  morbid  appendages  happen  chiefly  in  the
ileum.  For  if  the  inteftinal  contents,  which  defcend  to  the  ileum,  from  the
parts  above,  by  reafon  of  the  greateft  part  of  the  chyle  being  already  taken
up  into  the  lacteal  vefTels,  begin  to  acquire  fo  "  very  thick  a  confiftence,"  as
to  urge  the  thin  coats,  and  diftend  them ;  this  confiftence  will  certainly  be
thicker  and  thicker,  the  greater  progrefs  thefe  contents  fhall  have  made,,
through  the  ileum,  as,  by  this  means,  they  will  have  parted  with  ftill  more
chyle,  or  any  other  fluid  that  was  mix'd  with  them.  Wherefore  the  diverti-
Gulum,  alfo,  which  he  faw,  was  not  more  than  two  fpans  diftant  from  the
extremity  of  the  ileum.  What  then,  you  will  perhaps  fay,  are  we  to  under-
ftand  Ruyfch  fo  as  to  fuppofe,  that  thefe  diverticula  are  fometimes  to  be  met
with  in  other  inteftines,  in  like  manner  ?  Without  doubt :  for  when  I  read
over  my  obfervations,  I  cannot  help  believing  that  it  happen'd  to  him,  fome-
times, much  as  it  happen'd  to  me,  when  I  law  an  appearance  of  this  kind,
once  in  the  reftum,  and  again  in  the  duodenum.  This  appearance  in  the
reftum,  I  have  defcrib'd  in  the  Adverfaria  (a) ;  and  it  was  in  the  body  of
a;i  apopledic  man,  that  I  faw  a  diverticulum  connefled  to  the  duodenumj.,
almoft  two  inches  below  the  pylorus,  which  was  a  kind  of  cellule  not  very
protuberadng,  but  big  enough,  in  its  orifice,  to  admit  a  finger,  furrounded
■with  no  coat,  but  the  external  one  of  the  inteftine,  yet  having  not  tRe  leaft
traces  of  any  prefent,  or  paft,  ulceration  in  that  part,  as  indeed  there  were
not  in  the  ftomach,  or  the  whole  inteftinal  tube.

But  as  thefe  diverticula,  when  they  do  exift,  are  chiefly  to  be  met  with  in
the  ileum,  as  I  have  faid,  which  is  the  longeft  of  all  the  inteftines,  and  -plac'd
in  that  part  where  hernis  do  moft  frequently  happen,  it  is  not  to  be  wonder'd
at,  if  they  enter  into  hernias  chiefly  from  the  ileum.

And  then  JRuyfch  thought  it  might  happen  that  no  fymptoms  of  a  hernia,
fhould  follow  (l>). And  Littre  (c)  had,  before,  exprefsly  taught,  that  all  the-

(s)  Adverf.  III.  animad.  ^  (k)  Progr.  belmftadt.  editumjanu.  1750.

(?)  Epili.  de  vaf.  palpebr,  (:aj  Animad.  cit.  5.  in  fin..

(^0  Progr.  de  aneur.  (/5)  N.  3.  cit.

{x)  Aft.  n.  c.  t.  6.  obf.  JO..  (^/j.  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  170c.

{yj  Comment,  de  boruun.  fe.  aead.,  t.  2.  p.
h,  inter  anatom.

5  fymptotn*


142  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fypmtoms  of  hernije,  of  this  kind,  proceed  more  flowly,  and  are  lefs  violent,,
than  in  other  hernise,  where  the  whole  tube  of  the  inteftine  is  ftrangulated,
and  that  they  are  particularly  diftingulfli'd  by  this  circumftance,  that  a  dif-
charge  of  the  f^ces  is  never  impeded.  And  he  adds  other  things,  in  which
are  thefe  alfo,  that  the  abdomen  is  neither  tumid,  nor  tenfe,  nor  fiU'd  with
fiatus,  as  in  common  hernise.  Which  circumftances,  although  they  feem
to  be  agreeable  to  reafon,  on  account  of  the  paflage  through  the  inteftines
being  then  free,  and  are  very  properly  confirm'd,  by  the  approbation  of  Pal-
fin  (d),  and  of  others,  are  neverthelefs  not  always  to  be  depended  upon,  as
indeed  no  maxim,  whatever,  in  medicine  is  fo  well  fettled,  but  it  may  fome-
times  miflcad  us ;  and  in  order  to  evince  this,  I  will,  here,  add  an  obferva-
tion  of  my  own,  which  I  have  indeed,  already,  juft  hinted  at  in  the  Adver-
faria  {e),  but  not  wholly  defcrib'd ;  for  from  this  it  will  appear,  how  very
different  the  cafe  was  with  a  patient,  in  whofe  hernia  a  part  of  the  inteftine
was  fo  intercepted,  as  ftill  to  have  an  open  paflage  left  through  it.

18.  A  porter  of  Bologna,  who  was  fo  far  broken  down  by  continual  la-
bours, and  fatigues,  that  when  he  was  in  his  fiftieth  year,  he  appear'd  much
older,  had  a  hernia  in  his  right  groin,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  man's  thumb,
which  fometimes  feem'd  to  be  remov'd.  This  man,  about  the  middle  of
March,  in  the  year  1706,  without  any  previous  caufe,  except  perhaps  that
a  fnowy  day  had  come  on,  all  of  a  fudden,  after  very  temperate  weather,  was
feiz'd  with  a  pain  of  the  belly,  which  was  vague  indeed,  but  very  fevere,  and,
as  his  o\Nn  exprefTion  was,  juft  as  if  he  were  gnaw'd  by  dogs.  And  this
pain,  although  it  feem'd  to  have  grown  much  milder,  by  applying  I  know
not  what  kind  of  ointment  to  the  belly,  yet  foon  after  grew  more  violent
than  ever,  and  was  never  afterwards  diminifh'd.  As  the  man  was  brought
into  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Morte  at  Bologna,  when  the  difeafe  had  al-
ready continu'd  fix  days,  his  flefli  was  almoft  cold,  his  pulfe  was  very
frequent,  but  ftill  fmall,  and  gave  little  refiftance  to  the  fingers  whicli
preis'd  it,  and  ftruck  them  with  an  unequal  force  of  percufTions,  his  whole
abdomen  being  diftended  like  a  drum,  but  more  below  the  right  hypochon-
drium,  where  fome  cells  as  it  were  of  the  inteftinum  colon  feem'd  to  be  felt
with  the  hand,  and  the  hernia  being  become  much  harden'd  in  its  fubftance,
although  he  denied  that  this  was  the  principal  feat  of  the  pain.  He  threw
up  his  food.  For  four  days  he  had  difchirg'd  no  faeces  at  all,  from  his  in-
teftines. It  was  even  in  vain  that  he  endeavour'd  to  difcharge  the  flatus  it-
felf.

Frefli  drawn,  oil  of  almonds  was  given  him  ;  and  linfeed  oil  thrown  up  by
way  of  glyfter  to  the  quantity  of  ten  ounces.  The  latter  return'd  juft  as  it
went  up,  and  the  former  he  threw  up  from  his  ftomach,  and  complain'd  that
he  was  difturb'd,  and  agitated  thereby.  Being  afk'd  what  tafte  he  had  in  his
mouth,  he  ahfwer'd  that  of  poifon.  Hewasvery  thirfty.  His  vomiting  con-
tinu'd. On  each  of  the  following  days,  that  is  on  the  feventh,  and  the  eighth,
a  glyfter  was  thrown  up,  the  firft  compounded  of  the  benediSfa  laxativa  and
other  ingredients,  and  the  fecond  of  milk  and  the  white  of  an  egg  ;  but  they
were  of  no  more  ufe  than  the  former. As  no  excrement  at  all  was  dif-

(d)  C.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  17.  (e)  Animad.  ibid.  cit.

5  charg'd,^


Letter  XXXIV. Article  i8.  143-

charg'd,  and  the  other  fymptoms,  which  I  have  defcrib'd,  continu'd,  and  the-
pulfe,  although  after  the  fixth  day  it  was  no  more  unequal,  became  more
weak,  and  Imaller,  ib  that  on  the  ninth  day  we  could  hardly  feel  it  at  all,  and
as  the  f[<in  was  now  corrugated,  the  body  cold,  and  the  patient  unable  to  lift
up  his  eye-lids,  and  almoft  to  Ipeak,  notwithftanding  he  beg'd  for  wine,  he
fank  by  degrees,  and,  at  length,  on  the  night  following,  died  in  a  very  pla-
cid manner.

The  body,  which  had  a  fqualid  appearance,  the  (km  being  rigid  and  not
without  fome  fcabies,  I  differed  on  the  following  night.  When  the  abdo-
men was  open'd,  a  fmell  came  forth  like  that  which  generally  proceeds  from,
gangrenous  pans.  The  omentum  was  extended  quite  into  the  hernia,  and
entirely  red  from  inflammation,  except  fome  broad  lines,  as  it  were,  which
were  drawn  in  a  tranfverfe  diredlion.  The  fpleen  was,  in  fome  part  of  it,
infefted  with  a  morbid  livor,  which  was  alfo  carried  to  the  internal  part,  al-
though to  a  very  inconfiderable  depth.  The  ftomiach  ftretch'd  itfelf  much
more  to  the  right  fide,  than  it  ufually  does,  being  univerfally  diftended  with
a  yellowifh  matter,  that  refembled  nothing  more,  than  a  fluid  excrement,
with  which  the  fmall  intefl:ines,  from  the  ftomach  quite  to  the  hernia,  were
alfo  diftended,  to  a  very  great  degree.  For  whatever  us'd  to  be  carried  from
the  ileum  to  the  large  inteftines,  remain'd  there,  and  was  colledled  in  great
quantity  ;  and  the  large  inteftines  were  all  very  much  contra6led,  and  white,
fo  3^  to  make  it  manifeft,  that  nothing  had  pafs'd  through  this  part  of  the
ileum  v/hich  belong'd  to  the  hernia ;  although  the  tube  of  the  inteftine,  it-
felf, did  not  enter  the  orifice  of  the  facculus,  but  paffing  by  the  fide  of  it,,
fent  no  other  part  of  itfelf  into  that  cavity,  but  a  portion  of  its  paries,  relax'd;
into  the  form  of  a  femioval  cavity.

The  largeft  axis  of  this  cavity,  where  it  began  gradually  from  the  inteftine
was  about  three  inches,  according  to  the  length  of  the  inteftine  ;  and  the  leaft
axis  was  much  ftiorter,  inafmuch  as  it  extended  itfelf  through  the  anterior
furface  of  the  inteftine,  at  the  interval  of  a  fmall  inch  from  the  infertion  of
the  mefentery,  to  the  inferior  furface.  From  thefe  beginnings,  the  cavity
was  more  and  more  contracted  by  degrees,  as  the  femioval  figure  requires,  till-
it  defcended  to  the  depth  of  a  large  inch  in  the  middle.  This  part  there-
fore, whether  you  choofe  rather  to  call  it  a  cavity,  or  a  diverticulum,  was
the  only  part  of  the  inteftine,  intercepted  by  the  hernia,  together  with  the
extreme  part  of  the  omentum,  which  was  included  with  it,  fo  that  the  re-
mainder of  the  inteftinal  tube  was  not  at  all  comprefs'd  thereby.  But  neither
of  thefe  parts  could  be  drawn  up  from  the  hernia,  as  they  were  not  only
confin'd  by  the  nervous  orifice,  as  it  were,  of  the  facculus,  but  even  con-
nefted  to  the  facculus,  by  a  kind  of  fibrous  junction,  that  was  not  very
ftrong,  indeed,  but.  very  frequent ;  and  the  facculus,  in  the  part  where  thefe
connedlions  were,  was  fomewhat  rough,  but  in  other  parts  fm.ooth.  This,
iacculus  was  made  up  of  the  peritoneum,  relax'd  towards  the  external  fur-
face of  the  body,  and  carry'd  out  near  the  external  fide  of  the  fpermatic  vef-
fels :  and  on  one  fide,  and  on  the  other,  of  the  hernia,  were  two  tumid  inguinal
glands,  one  of  which  being  very  near  to  the  facculus,  had  its  fubftance  in
part  white.  The  inteftine,  in  that  part  which  was  neareft  to  the  facculus,  and
itiU  more  the  diverticulum  of  that  inteftine,  was  of  a  red  colour  degenerat—


•144-  ^ook  in. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ing  into  black.  And  the  inteftine  from  thence  upwards  (for  below,  as  I  have
faid,  it  was  white,  for  a  confiderable  extent)  was  of  a  red  colour,  inclining
to  livid :  but  the  whole  of  the  tube,  from  this  traft  quite  to  the  ftomach,
was  quite  red,  by  reafon  of  the  great  number  of  blood  veffels,  which  were
crowded  together  in  moft  places.  And  the  mefentery  was  of  the  fame  co-
lour.

1  chofe  alfo  to  open  the  thorax.  The  lungs  ad her'd  every  where,  except
on  the  right,  and  arterior  furface,  to  the  pleura,  and  particularly  at  the  fides,
and  back,  where  this  membrane  was  much  thicken'd,  but  no  where  more,
than  at  the  upper  part  of  the  thorax,  on  the  right  fide,  where  the  fubftance
of  the  lungs  was  extremely  hard,  as  if  from  an  old  difeafe ;  and  in  the  inferior
part,  and  on  the  right  fide,  likewife,  it  was  confiderably  more  compadt  than
It  generally  is.  However,  the  lungs  abounded  with  moifture,  almoft  in
every  part.

In  the  pericardium  was  no  water,  but  the  heart  was  flaccid,  and  contain'd
polypous  concretions,  in  each  of  its  orifices,  as  it  did  in  the  right  ventricle
alfo,  and  the  left  auricle,  all  of  them  being  moderately  condens'd,  and  moft
of  them  of  a  fmall  fize :  for  that  was  the  fmalleft  which  lay  in  this  auricle ;
and  that  was  the  longeft  which  reach'd  into  the  pulmonary  artery,  and  its
branches.

19.  I  do  not  doubt  but  you  will  naturally  enquire  of  me,  why,  notwith-
ftanding  the  paflage  remain'd  open  through  the  inteftine  ileum,  yet  nothing
pafs'd  through  it.  I  confefs  I  can  fufpeft  many  caufes,  but  can  affirm  none
for  certain.  The  inteftine  was,  in  that  part,  exceedingly  injur'd  by  inflam-
mation, and  at  the  fame  time  irritated,  on  account  of  a  portion  of  itfelf  hav-
ing fuffer'd  diftradion,  and  interception.  Did  the  periftaltic  motion,  there-
fore, by  which  the  contents  were  pufti'd  on,  ceafein  that  place.''  Or  was
there  fome  convulfion,  by  which,  that  part  of  the  tube  was  contra6ted,  in
the  living,  more  than  in  the  dead  body  ?  Or  finally,  did  inflammation  caufe
this  contraflion,  by  rendering  the  veflels,  and  the  parietes,  more  turgid,
-while  life  remain'd,  which  after  death  were  relax'd  ?  At  leaft  Littre  (f)  hints
at  fomething,  which  relates  to  this  third  caufe,  when  he  conjeftures  why  by
that  noble  woman,  whofe  hernia  took  !n  a  portion  of  the  colon,  fometimes
frequent,  and  large,  difcharges  were  made  from  the  inteftines,  and  at  other
times  lefs  large  and  lefs  frequent.  Nor  would  I  have  you  make  it  an  objedlion,
that  in  this  woman,  although  the  inteftine  was  inflam'd,  and  a  portion  of
it  intercepted,  more  or  lefs  of  the  contain'd  matter  could  always  be  carried
through  it,,  as  in  thk  woman,  alfo,  whofe  hiftory  I  gave  you  under  number
fifteen.

For  to  omit,  that  in  difl^erent  perfons  there  may  be  a  diff^erent  degree  of
injury,  a  diflferent  degree  of  power,  in  the  inteftines,  and  a  different  degree
of  fenfibility  ;  it  is  certain  that  in  thefe  women  the  queftion  is  of  the  colon,
and  in  this  man  of  the  ileum,  which,  not  to  inquire  whether  it  has  more
acute  fenfations,  is  at  leaft  more  narrow,  in  many  parts,  than  the  colon ;  fo
that  if  even  a  larger  portion,  according  to  the  breadth,  of  the  latter  than  of  the
former,  be  intercepted,  a  more  open  pafliage  will  remain  in  the  colon,  and

C/J  Vid.  fppra  n.  16.

a  larger


Letter  XXXIV. Article 19.  J45

a  larger  extenfion  of  the  parietes,  in  which  the  power  of  pufliing  forwards
the  contents  conlifts,  and  with  thefe  alfo  will  remain  thofe  three  ligaments,
that  is  to  fay,  thole  three  mufcular  bands,  which  it  is  fo  much  the  lefs  pro-
bable fhould  be  intercepted  within  hernije  of  this  kind,  as  it  is  the  more  dif-
ficult for  the  paries  of  the  colon  to  be  relaxed,  in  a  part  where  it  is  fortified,
externally  with  one  of  them  :  and  this  external  fituation,  and  more  compact
fubftance  of  the  fafcise,  or  bands,  may  alfo  have  this  efi^eft  •,  to  prevent
them  from  contradling  a  diforder  fo  eafily.  And  from  thefe  confiderations
you  will  perceive,  not  only  why  the  diagnofis  of  hernise  of  this  kind,  pro-
pos'd  by  Littre,  may  anfwer  much  better  in  the  colon  than  in  the  ileum  ;
but  alfo  why  it  will  anfwer  better  in  the  ileum  itfelf,  where  the  orifice  of  the
diverticulum  is  pretty  narrow,  fuch  as  it  is  defcrib'd  (g)  by  the  fame  author,
not  when  it  is  fo  large  as  my  defcription  Ihows  it  to  have  been  in  the  porter.
I  fay  anfwer  better  ;  for  I  dare  not  take  upon  me  to  fay  that  where  the  orifice
is  thus  narrow  it  will  always,  neverthelefs,  anfwer.

And  thefe  things  you  linow  I  had  written  to  you,  when  I  receiv'd  a
book  that  was  fent  to  me  by  the  celebrated  Benevoli  (h),  wherein  he  de-r
fcribes  in  the  fecond  place,  a  hernia  made  up,  as  was  confirm'd  by  the  dif-
feftion  of  the  body,  of  an  appendix  of  the  ileum,  extending  itfelf  into  the
fcrotum.  Which,  although  it  communicated  with  this  inteftine,  by  an
orifice  that,  in  the  dead  body,  was  not  larger  than  to  equal  the  diameter  of  a
fmall  filbert  j  yet  the  patient  had,  for  the  firft  fifteen  days  of  the  dlfeale,
which  was  very  violent,  thrown  up  every  thing  he  took  in,  by  vomiting,  and
difcharg'd  nothing  by  ftool,  and  had  thrown  up,  very  early  in  the  difeafe,  a
matter  like  the  fsces.  Befides,  the  inteftinum  ileum,  in  the  part  which  cor-
refponded  to  the  hernia,  was,  for  fome  confiderabie  length,  of  a  colour  that
was  not  quite  natural,  and  was  very  much  corrugated  and  ccncraded  ;  from
whence  it  was  eafy  to  conjefture,  that  the  inteftine,  being  violently  drawn
down  by  the  diftended,  and  inflam'd,  appendix,  was,  from  this  caufe,  at-
tack'd  with  inflammation,  deprefs'd,  and  convuls'd.

I  would  have  you  join  this  hiftory  with  the  hiftory  that  I  have  given  of
the  porter ;  and  the  conjedtures  which  depend  upon  what  was  remark'd  in  the
difleftion,  I  would  have  you  join  to  thofe  things  which  I  fufpefted,  in  regard  to
the  caufes  why  the  diagnofis  of  herniae,  of  this  kind,  which  is  given  by
Littre,  may  fometimes  not  anfwer.  But  if  not  only  the  appendix,  but  the
ileum  itfelf  alfo,  be  intercepted  within  the  hernia,  and  vitiated  by  an  in-
flammation, and  gangrene,  as  in  the  obfervation  of  IVlery  (i) ;  it  is  evident
that  a  difcharge  by  ftool  is  then  prevented,  and  that  the  other  circumftances
happen,  which  are  wont  to  happen  in  affedions  of  the  ileum  of  that  kind  :
are  wont,  I  fay  ;  for  although  thefe  things  happen  to  moft  patients  in  this
cafe,  there  are  fome,  in  whom  neither  the  bowels  are  quite  lock'd  up,  nor
are  there  vomitings  of  the  excrements,  or  matter  fimilar  thereto,  as,  for  in-
ftance,  in  thole  whom  the  celebrated  men  Wolf  (k),  and  Cohauien  (/),  have
defcrib'd  ;  fo  that  there  is  lefs  reafon  to  be  furpriz'd,  that  it  did  not  happen

CgJ  Mem.  de  I'a.  1700.,  (/■)  Aft,,  d.  c.  torn.  4.  oH.  63.

{iij  DueRelaz.  chirurg.  (/)  Commerc.  litter,  a. 1742.  hebd.  z6.  n.

^(/)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  16.  ,  II.  ad.  3.

Vol,  II.  '  U  other-


146  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

otherwife,  to  thofe  vvhofe  difeafes  and  difTeftions  are  related  by  the  cete-
brated  Scorch  (w),  and  Bajeru3  (»),  whereas  a  part  of  the  colon  was  inter-
cepted in  the  hernia,  and  not  of  the  ileum,  which  however  was,  univerfally,
together  with  a  large  tract  of  the  ileum,  affefted  with  that  inflammation,
from  which  the  colon  was  free.

20.  Having  thus  produced,  and  pointed  out,  the  obfervations  in  which  the
pains  of  the  inteftines  arofe  from  a  caufe  that  fell  under  the  notice  of  the
eye,  I  go  on  to  thofe  in  which  the  caufe  lay  entirely  hid  within  the  body.
And  I  will  begin  with  thofe,  that,  by  rcafon  of  the  vomiting,  and  inflamma-
tion, come  nearer  to  thefe  which  I  have  already  defcrib'd.  The  two  firfl:  are
from  the  papers  of  Valfalva.

21.  A  flender  man,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  began,  after  many  fatigues  in
hunting,  to  complain  of  a  great  heat  at  his  throat  and  cheft.  This  heat,  de-
fcrting  thofe  parts,  difcover'd  itfelf  in  the  loins,  and  in  the  belly,  in  like
manner,  where  being  join'd  with  a  punftorious  pain,  it  fo  troubled  the  pa-
tient, that  he  could  not  bear  the  parts  to  be  touched.  On  the  firft  days  the
man  was  frequently  feiz'd  with  a  cold  rigor.  But  five  or  fix  days  before
death,  a  volvulus  came  on,  with  a  throwing  up  of  the  faeces  by  vomiting :
and  this,  by  gradually  wearing  out  the  ftrength  of  the  patierst,  brought  him
to  the  final  clofe  of  life,  about  the  thirtieth  day  after  being  conffn'd  to  his.
bed.

The  belly  was  found  to  be  univerfally  fill'd  with  fanies,  which  had  con-
netted  the  omentum,  and  the  inteftines,  to  each  other.  The  left  kidney
Gontain'd  extravafated  blood,  under  the  internal  membrane,  but  not  in
every  part.  In  the  omentum,  and  on  the  edge  of  the  mefentery,  particu-
larly where  it  was  connected  with  the  colon,  were  obferv'd  many  fmall  ab-
fccfles  and  ulcers.

22.  When  the  abfcefTes  firft  began  to  be  form'd,  not  only  the  belly  was  af-
fected with  difagreeable  fymptoms,  but  the  loins  alfo,  to  which  the  mefentery
is  connected.  The  time  of  their  coming  to  fuppuration  is  pointed  out  by
thofe  frequent  cold  rigors.  And  the  fanies  being  extravafated,  left  ulcers  im
thefe  parts,  and  filled  the  abdominal  cavity.  Which  there  growing  more  and
more  acrid,  by  ftagnation,  irritated  the  coats  ofthevifcera,  and  of  the  inteftines
in  particular;  and  by  this  means  an  inflammation  of  all  the  vifcera  was
brought  on,  and  the  motion  of  the  inteftines  befides  v^as  inverted.  Hence
the  volvulus.

You  may  compare  this  obfervation  with  thofe  of  the  celebrated  Mauchart-
(•0),  and  Verdriefius  (p),  not  on  account  of  the  volvulus,  which  feems  to  be
butjufthinted  at  in  one,  but  by  reafonof  the  pains  of  the  belly,  efpecially  as-
in  both  of  them  were  abfcefles  of  the  mefentery,  in  like  manner,  in  one
open,  fo  that  the  belly  was  fill'd  with  fanies,  in  the  od:ier  not.open'd,  and
the  inteftines  which  were,  here  and  there,  infeftedwith  a.fphacelus,  coher'd.
clofely  one  with  another,  and  with  the  omentum.

23.  Another  man,. of  the  fame  age  with  the  former,  and  of  the  fame  habit
of  body,  but  of  a- pallid  colour,  having  been  feia'd,  two  years  before,  with,
an  ardent  fever,  was  at  length  freed  from  it  without  any  perceptible  traces.

{m)  Aft.  cit.  t.  7.  obf. loi.  (0)  Eph,  n.  c.  cent.  i.  obf.  14,

{*)  Com,  cit,  a.  1745.  ^^^^'  40-  n.  2.  (^)  AiX.  cit.  torn.  1.  obf,  87.


Letter  XXXIV. Article  24, 25.  147

of  a  crifis  •,  and  was  afterwards  affe6ted  with  a  great  thif  il,  a  very  great
weaknefs  of  the  head,  and  ftomach,  and  a  defe£t  of  the  ftrengch.  Being
every  day  troubled  with  thefe  fymptoms,  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  great  oppref-
fion  of  the  heart,  which,  in  the  night  When  he  was  about  to  fall  into  a  flecp,
was  fucceeded  by  a  tremor  of  the  whole  body.  He  was  thought,  by  other
phyficians,  to  labour  under  a  confumption,  but  by  Valfalva,  to  have  a  re-
dundancy of  water  in  the  cranium,  who  alfo  prefcrib'd  fuch  remedies  as  are
generally  made  ufe  of  in  hydropic  cafes.  But  the  patient,  -in  the  mean
while,  drinking  a  great  quantity  of  new  wine,  with  his  bottle  companions,
was  feiz'd  with  a  great  pain  in  his  belly,  which  was  unfix'd  however,  but  join'd
with  flatus,  with  a  vomiting  of  bilious  matter,  and  with  a  celerity  of  the
pulfe.  The  next  day  in  the  morning,  as  the  pain  was  not  only  more  violent,
but  fix'd  in  a  certain  part,  which  was  exceedingly  painful  when  touch'dj
Valfalva,  fearing  inflammation,  order'd  a  vein  to  be  open'd.  Yet  all  re-
medies were  to  no  purpofe,  and  the  patient  died  in  the  beginning  of  the
fourth  day.

In  the  belly  every  thing  was  found  to  be  in  a  found  ftate,  except  the-
inteftinum  ileum,  which  was,  in  a  great  part  of  it,  innam'd.

In  the  thorax  was  nothing  particular  to  be  obferv'd,  except  a  very  large
polypous  concretion  in  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  which  was  procluc'd
from  thence  into  the  vena  cava.  Within  the  cranium  was  found  a  great
quantity  of  ferum,  with  which  the  ventricles  of  the  brain  were  alfo  fill'd.
The  glandules  of  the  plexus  choroides  were  very  large,  and  abounded  with
a  great  quantity  of  ferum  :  and  the  corapages  of  the  brain  was  lax.

24.  How  dangerous  it  is  for  confiderable  fevers  to  be  folv'd  without  any
crifis,  is  confirm'd  by  the  firft  part  of  this  hiftory.  And  how  juft  both  the
opinions  of  Valfalva  were,  is  demonftrated  by  the  appeara'nces  found  in  the
head  and  in  the  belly.  But  as  to  there  being  only  a  vomiting  in  this  patient,
and  not  a  volvulus,  as  in  the  former,  you  will  not  inquire  into  the  caufes
thereof,  when  you  have  compar'd  the  diflTedlion  of  this  body  with  that  of  the
former,  or  of  the  following  :  which,  if  I  remember  rightly,  was  made  by
me,  in  the  hofpital  of  incurables  at  Bologna,  in  the  year  1705.

25.  An  old  man  of  feventy  four  years  of  age,  of  a  flender  habit,  and  giveri
to  wine,  had  begun,  for  a  month  pafl-,  to  walk  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  beaf
chiefly  on  his  left  leg.  Which  his  domeftics  had  obferv'd  more  than  himfelfj
gt  leaft  he  faid  nothing  of  it,  nor  compiain'd  of  pain  in  any  part.  Two  and
twenty  days  after  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  wandring  pain  in  his  belly,  join'd  with
no  fever,  whjch  he,  without  confulting  any  one,  expell'd  by  taking  theriaca*
But  after  twelve  days  had  pafs'd  over,  he  was  feiz'd,  about  noon,  with  a  pain
in  the  upper  part  of  the  iliac  region,  on  the  right  fide,  which  was  very  op-
prefTive,  and  as  he  himfelf  faid,  like  that  which  would  be  caus'd  by  the
gnawing  of  dogs.  The  pain'd  part  was  fwoUen,  but  had  not  chang'd  its
colour,  and  if  you  touch'd  it  was  foft :  but  prefling  your  hand  down  pretty
low,  you  perceiv'd  a  hardnefs.  The  pulfe,  though  in  other  refpedls  good,
was  quick  and  frequent.  His  eyes  were  funk  into  their  orbits.  His  tongue
was  dry. He  pafs'd  a  bad  night.

On  the  fecond  day  of  the  difeafe  his  pulfe  was  very  large,  and  vibrating.

The  pain  and  the  tumour  extended  themfelves  to  the  middle  of  the  belly,

I  U  2  and


148  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

and  at  length  were  continued  towards  the  left  fide.  Blood  being  taken  away
from  his  right  arm,  to  the  quantity  of  feven  ounces,  had  no  ferum  in  it-,  but
had  a  yellow  and  thick  cruft.  He  had  a  naufea  to  a  confiderable  degree,
but  not  fo  as  to  caufe  his  food  to  be  thrown  up  from  his  ftomach.  He  went
to  ftool  freely  and  without  any  uneafinefs.  The  fecond  night  was  extremely
bad.

On  the  third  day  his  pulfe  was  low :  he  had  frequent  eruflations,,  which
■were  bitter,  and  acid  :  his  fpeech  was  vitiated  as  if  by  a  convulfion  :  he  was
delirious  at  times,  as  was  demonftrated  by  the  childilh,  and  trifling  things,
■which  the  patient  related.

On  the  fourth  day  his  limbs  were  every  now  and  then  convuls'd,  and  the
whole  body  remain'd  rigid  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  :  during  this  convulfion
and  rigidity  there  was  no  pulfe :  and,  on  the  contrary,  when  the  convulfion
and  rigidity  v/ere  gone  off,  the  pulfe  alfo  return'd,  and  was  much  like  that
of  a  healthy  perfon,  except  that  it  was  low,  and  when  prefs'd  upon  by  the
fingers  gave  no  refifl:ance.  Refpiration  becoming  very  diflicult  after  that,
although  the  tongue  was  now  moift,  and  the  patient  was  no  more  delirious,
he  threw  up  the  faeces  by  vomiting,  and  a  little  after,  ■which  was  in  the
evening  of  the  fame  day,  he  died  convuls'd.

The  abdomen  being  open'd,  the  left  lobe  of  the  liver  was  found  to  be  hx,
and  univerfally  affected  with  a  fphacelus.  The  ftomach  and  the  inteftines,.
cfpecially  the  fmall  inteftines,  v/ere  in  fome  places  red,  in  fome  livid,  and
in  others  black.  But  the  beginning  of  the  colon,  ■where  it  lay  contiguous  to
the  mufcles,  which  cover  the  hollow  furface  of  the  os  ilium,  together  with
thefe  mufcles,  was  univerfally  affefted  ■with  a  gangrene,  and  fo  connedled  to
them  that  it  could  not  be  feparated  without  laceration.  From  thence  the
livid  ferum,  mix'd  with  pus,  which  had  been  feen  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly,,
feem'd  to  have  been  extravafated,  as  a  matter  fimilar  to  it  was  contain'd  in,
the'  inteftines.

26.  As  to  the  beginning  of  this  hiftory,  it  is  not  very  abfurd  to  fuppofe,
that  fome  diforder  had  been,  gradually,  generated  in  thofe  mufcles,,  which  I
juft  now  fpoke  of,  from  whence  the  neighbouring  crural  nerves  were  com-
prefs'd,  and  to  fuppofe  it  to  have  happen'd  from  hence,  that  the  patient,
when  he  walk'd,  bore  chiefly  upon  his  left  leg.  As  to  the  diforder  itfelf,
inflammation  and  putrefaftion  afterwards  corning  on,  the  deprav'd  and  cor*
rupted  juices  lo  vellicated  thofe  nerves,  as  to  caufe  a  convulfion  of  the
v/iiole  body.  And  it  is  probable,  that  in  a  boy  who  was  carried  off^  by  the
iliac  paffion,  the  convulfions  of  the  whole  body  arc  not  to  be  afcrib'd  to  any
other  caufe,  than  to  that  of  a  putrid  matter  flowing  from  the  inteftines,  with
which  the  fame  mufcles  were  bedew'd  :  for  ihefe  convulfions  affefted  the
lower  limbs  in  particular,  and  -were,  as  you  rea,d  in  this  fourteenth  fedtion  of
the  Sepulchretum  (q),  fo  obftinate,  that  c'le  boy  at  length  died  convuls'd.

But  in  what  manner  the  inflammation,  in  this  old  nxan,  crept  into  the
contiguous  inteftine,  and  other  circumftances  that  I  have  defcrib'd,  there  isi.
no  occafion  to  explain.  I  go  on  therefore,  to  an  obfervation,  which  that,
part  of  the  colon,  being  inflam'd,  recalls  to  my  mind,  and  v.'hlch  was  com-.

-  (j)  Obf.  2.1.  in  additam..

municated^


Letter  XXXIV. Article  27,  2S.  149

municated  to  me,  two  years  before  I  made  the  preceding,  by  that  very
learned  and  humane  man  M.  Anthony  Laurentio,  v/ho  is,  at  prefent,  one  of
the  pontifical  archiaters.

.  27.  A  woman,  who  had  had  a  fall  on  her  back  a  year  before,  having
been  lately  affiifted,  for  fome  days,  with  a  very  great,  deep  feated,  and  ex-
cruciating pain  in  her  belly,  join\i  with  vomitings,  was  taken  off  thereby.

Her  ftomach  was  found  to  be  furprizingly  contrafted,  and  the  cscum  in-
teftinum  of  the  ancients  fo  dilated,  by  yellow,  and  femifluid  fasces,  that  it
refembled  the  ftomach.  This  inteftine  had  been  feiz'd  by  an  inflammation,
which  alfo  began  to  diffufe  itfelf  through  the  neighbouring  vifcera.

28.  If  that  fall  had  any  reference  to  the  canfes,  which  gave  rife  to  this
difeafe  of  the  woman,  it  is  to  be  fuppos'd  that  Ihe  had  fall'n  upon  her  back
in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  hurt  the  right  fide  of  her  belly  and  that  part  of  the
colon  which  lay  in  this  fide.  And  that  this  part  of  the  inteftine  having,  for
that  reafon,  the  power,  by  which  it  propels  the  fasces  upwards,  more  and
more  diminifh'd  every  day,  was,  at  length,  expanded  by  the  ftagnation  of
its  contents,  in  the  manner  -I  have  defcrib'd,  particularly  with  the  cscum:
that  was  fubjoin'd  to  it,  and  that,,  on  account  of  the  diftraftion.  of  its  coats,
it  was  affefted  with  a  very  fevere  pain,  and  by  reafon  of  the  comprefllon  of*
the  veflels  inflam'd.  And  if  the  woman  had  dragg'd  on  her  life  a  little
longer,  perhaps  ftie,  alfo,  would,  like  fome  of  thofe  of  whom  I  have  already
fpoken  above,  have  vomited  up  excrements  in  a  filthy  and  miferable  manner,
or  rather  fomewhat  extremely  like  excrement.  For  many  being  deceiv'd  by
this  fimilarity,  have  fuppos'd  that  what  had  already  pafs'd  into  the  large  in-
teftines,  was  thrown  up  by  vomiting  in  a  volvulus,  which  muft  happen  much:
more  rarely  than  they  imagine,  by  reafon  of  the  valvula  Bauhini  being  in-
terpos'd,  and  this  is  alfo  fhown  by  other  circumftances,  which  are  taken  no-
tice of  by  me  ia  the  Adverfaria  (r).

That  they  have  really  been  deceiv'd  by  this  fimilitude,  it  is  not  difficult
to  demonftrate,  by  producing  many  obfervations  of  vomitings  of  that  kind,,
even  in  thofe  bodies,  v/hcrein  the  pafTage  from  the  large  inteftines  to  the
mouth  was  entirely  fhut  up.  For,  to  omit  others,  where  this  pafTage  was-
intercepted  by  a  very  clofely  confin'd  hernia,  or  by  an  obftruition,  or  coalition
of  the  tube,  turn,  by  way  of  example,  to  that  obfervation  of  Henricus  ab
Heers  in  the  Sepulchretum  (s).  A  mountebank  had  tied  up  the  intef-
tinum  ileum  of  a  boy,  who  had  a  rupture,  together  with  the  omentum
■with  a  piece  of  iron  wire,  fo  that  nothing  at  all  could  pa.fs  through.  And
the  boy  died,  as  the  obfervation  fays,  "  throwing  up  his  excrements  by  his
"  mouth."  Add  to  this,  the  feveral  experiments  of  the  celebrated  Hague-
not  (/),  upon  cats  and  dogs :  which  vomited  up  excrements,  to  appearance,
though  a  firm  ligature  was  put  upon  the  fame  inteftine.  Who  would  not,
at  firft,  have  imagin'd,  that  theie  fsces  were  carried  back  from  the  large
inteftines,  if  he  had  not  known  that  the  fmall  inteftines  were  quite  fhut  up.

For  without  doubt,  thofe  ingefta  which  are  carried  down  from  the  fto-
mach to  the  inteftines,  being  mix'd  with  the  juices  of  the  ftomach^  and  foon;

(r)  III  atiimad.  9-.,  (/)  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  desfc.  a.  1713.

(.)  Qbf.  24.  §.  3.,  •  ,  ■  ',

afteir


t^o Book  HI. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

jiAsr  «idi  die  jiwxs  of  die  imtfiBies,  vidi  ihs  fcrcus  poocreaiiais,  aod  die  bile,
aad  faavjaghtd  niany  of  dnr  fiaer  pans  canied  oJS'  inco  die  laofal  veflcls,
arc  uiK&T  a  necefflaiy  of  mtaVirw  rli^^-  deisy  in  die  linsD  intEfim^  vdien  dieir
pgi£^c  is  obfirafiEd,  wlacli  riiej  iiasara!I|'  mmld  have  made  in  die  large,
and  even  a  gteac'  ddbf  viEn  tfadb  ficali  inD^ines  aoe  igdam'd ;  So  rhar
tSiey  wSl  of  csKarfe  otaKnft  die  feme  potieiyii^  odoaria  dKiinall  iiiiffllurt,
dot  def  is'd  GO  mmuaO.  in  die  lai^  and  maj  be  calTd  fifimitait  widiouc
aaf  ioipEcpciay,  as  is  aflensed  hfv  Piccofiaooninos  (m),  wbo,  Sir  diis  icalbii,
doncs  doc  ic  m  OKXX&sjfor  die  renoinsaf  die  icgefia,  aiicr  die  cliyle  is
taken  np,  to  leadi  the  bige  iaiefiines,  in  osder  m  acqoire  the  nature  a£
esoemeoc  BncaldMK^chey  acenocdeceivM  intlus,  tbey  are,  neveniidels,
&am  iKBoe  canied  inai  an  aror,  ^Aea  dsy  fnppaSs  das  fsai  mataer  to
came  Ham  the  £stge  inwftiifti's  windi  conies  in  hA  (am  the  ifmlL

29.  BiK  dasx  ifae  feces  m^  be  canied  bock  quite  horn  the  faoge  impflliif*.,
as  demoiAratied  by  fe^ipofiumes  and^hp&Ers  beii^  tiaiown  i^  by^  titemoinb,
in  {MiirtMs  who  ^bour  aider  tbe  ilac  paSon.  I  Ibem  hoaiefTr  to  have
tad,  faflii  irmly,  what  I  Aas^  of  foppoGinies,  and  of  gjl^fiers  fikeaife,  in
de  AdvuQt'u  {x).  Bat  as  I  have  finoe  tcad,  in  the  vtitiE^  of  a  oooBder-
afaie  aathor,  thx  this  hypeas  "*  fiequendy,*  and  m  thofe  of  annriwT,  have
fees  this  dicamfiaoceexpian'd,  without  fuppofii^  an  inveited  motiop  of  the
wiHIiwi'S  m  a  method  eeoi^  mem  3  I  hare  detemnn'd  to  add  fane  few
dds^  in  this  {riboe,  upon  bodi  of  tfade  heads.  And  in  regard  to  the  fiifi;
Galen  has  one  cofy  rawghr  os,  in  mote  thai  one  pnt  t£  Ins  «mks  fy),  that
'  the  modoaof  theioEeflines  isinvetled,  in  an  ifiac  paflkm,  and  evcnwidiout
it,bm:dbmdaeidmdhodis.Jt^fa^imm.cem^(s)  has affcsted once  and  ag^on,
**  that  ibrae  peifins  have  had  patt  of  the  ^yflos,  that  have  been  iqieclcd*

*»  trrnnfH  oi^i  ^lffHnKt»at  U^  fe  as  inhp  «lmni»ii  tip  hy  wiiinicHiji  - and  bcBdcs,

"  that  ezcxement  was  fieqaendy  ijuown  vp,  m  ifiac  jafftmn,  that  prove

uiwtaL*

Bat  -6am  his  time,  qone  down  to  the  time  of  Jo.  M^thaais  de  Gtado  (#),
that  is  fpoai  the  fecoed  ^e  of  die  chnfiim  sra,  to  tfae.Okujith,  I  do  not
jcraeadier  m  have  lead  anyone  who  anfinns  ic  After  him,  and  in  the
CMtiMWh  CEmmy,  was  one,  that  is  Ji£as  .Alfruahiaos  (i%  who  lays  that  he
had  ieen  ic,  '^  not  very  oCeen,  bm  fometimes,"  as  Francos  HiUefins  has
^sd  he  Sd  twice  (f).  Bat  m  die  kfi  age,  aad  in  diis,  a  gieat  nomber  indeed
^veafierted  it.  For  yoa  may  lead  three oblenratkns  of  Abd  Rofiaos  {J),
of  D^Biid  Sesmeitns  {e%  as  it  ^ipeas  to  be,  of  John  JEle^ny  Lavaaeyus  (/%
of  Lote  &*r9clans  the  dder  (g\  sad  of  John  Mety  (h),  each  oae,  and
Tz^r :::- -  -  roii^ikxs  of  die  BibBnthrca  Anatocaca  (/) :  and  bcfides,

a£  iin.  in  : : ;  -  ; '-  :^:^  3-  aa.  33.  (f)  TleL  0.  cat.  i^wa  ao-  a.  16.

(x^  C  :  '^  £ah.  ■.  c  dec  z.  a.  5.  idboL  ad  obC

^  Apaaacr- ;;:''i  -irs-  ' _ : ' 195.

(4  iApodSc-t : : -;:  (^  OWl  i-dt.  fcpraad  b- i6.

vasK.  Ki^  «»n—  (i)  ToB.  I.  p.  I.  is  adaoc  ad  Fsrsr.  exeidi.

M  B^  u  &^aad.  iuet.


Letter  XXXIV. Article  30.  i;i

without  the  iiiac  or  colic  paffion,  one  of  Peter  Bcreili  (k],  anodier  cf  Fre-
deric Loffius  (L,  a  third  of  George  Segerus  {"«),  a  fourth  of  Gabriel  Ckii-
dcrus  (/r),  and  a  fifth,  in  fine,  of  Perer  Rcxnieilas  (^c\  •.  for  io  trany  are
there,  that  I  at  prefent  call  to  mind.  Tou  vouncif  wiH  eaiiiy  £ad  ctiers.
But  if  you  fliould  eren  find  as  many  as  thefe,  you  would,  I  fc|^x5je,  fey  'h^r
the  throwing  up  of  glyfters  by  the  mouth,  was  not  a  rery  r^e  thing,  but
would  not  lay  that  it  is  frequent.  For  the  greater  part  of  phyficbos  hzwe
never  fcen  it,  even  thofe  that  are  the  tao&  esperienc'd ;  as  tfaeir  writings
teftify,  where  tliey  happen  to  make  mention  os  tbefe  obfenrarkms,  for  in
order  to  prove  the  drccmftance,  they  produce  tbc  Eeftimosy  of  others,  ia-
fi:ead  of  tieir  own.

:o.  But  let  us  now  fee  by  what  new  method  the  tiirowiDg  tip  of  g'.rfers
by  the  mouth  is  explain'd.  It  is  fuppos'd  that  in  a  toIvuIus,  ail  the  intei-
tines  are  full,  or  nearly  full,  of  fiuids  that  are  either  coson-jaiij  Sowi*^  into
them,  or  taken  in  by  the  patients :  and  that  there  is  kKce  obilacie  or  other
in  the  lower  part  oi  the  rearum,  which  hinders  the  difcharge  of  theie  fii^gj
but  which  may  be  got  over  by  thofe  who  irrjeS  glyiters.  The  glyfters,  then,
that  are  thus  iniected,  increafing  the  fulineis,  and  cifbenrioa,  of  the  intenines,
and  an  alceraate  compreffion  of  the  abdomiaal  muiles,  and  diaphragni,
coming  on,  it  is  fuppos'd  that  they  are  driven  to  the  part  vBtre  tfaere  is  the
Icaft  refiitance,  and  that,  being  mix'd  wkh  thefe  hunxHirs,  they  are  at  lengtis
thrown  up  by  vomiting.  And  that  the  valvula  Bauhini  does  not  re£ir,  as  it
will  be  naturally  kept  open,  if  you  allow  a  fuilneis  of  all  the  inteuiaes.  Nor
is  there  any  need  of  the  Inverted  motion,  e^jedaily  as  in  beans,  who  were
already  feiz'd  with  a  vomiting,  on  account  of  a  ligature  being  n-id-e  upon
the  ileum,  this  motion  could  not  be  obferv'c,  and  even  not  the  periitaitic
motion,  which  feexs  no  longer  to  be  fiilly  acknowledg'a,  in  Irving  and
healthy  bodies,  if  you  attend  to  thofe  things  which  are  in  the  latter  part  of
this  explication.

V>  lien  I  fine  read  all  theie  things,  altbou^  there  were  iixne  which  I  found.
eould  not  be  eafily  proved,  yet  I  began  to  dOj,  what  ought  never  to  be
omitted  in  the  invefldgarion  of  truth,  that  is  to  attend  noc  ody  to  the  ar-
guments wh'xh  might  be  produced  agaimt  this  explicatioD,  but  aub  to  thcte
that  might  be  produc'd  in  favour  of  it.  In  confequence  wheretri"!  obleiv'd,
that  iome  of  thofe  fuppoiitioas,  which  the  ii^enious  author  had  coafirui'd,
not  only  by  his  ovm  reaionings,  but  by  his  own  experitnents,  were  slio  equsliy
proved  by  mine.  For  as  to  what  relates  to  the  plenkude  of  the  inteiines,  nxwn
the  cbftade  quite  to  the  ibomach,  this  has  been  ibund  jn  the  atenner  he  fuT^-
poles,  by  my  cbkrvations  alk)  upon  human  bodies  (which  he  ccecpLuriS  oc
being  without)  that  had  been  aSidied  with  ciibrders  of  this  kind  ;  as  the  h^-
tories  of  the  hufbandman  (p),  the  porter  ^:,  and  in  gre-Jt  tneafure  tkir  ot
a  certain  woman  (r),  wtich  I  have  given  you,  cemonibute.  And  fupronse
the  iuilcels  not  only  of  the  fmall,  but  of  the  large  inteftiaes,  1  law  tiit  the.

(*)  Cent.  r.  olrf.  i-.  (•)  Esruci  d^c  ;.  i^-.  cfcT.  15-

(^  Vid.  fchcl.  modo  d:.  in  epi.  c.  c.  ffj  Supra  s.  9- "

(«^  Earucd.  dec  1.  2.5.  ofcf.  ^  (^)  N.  iS.

fx,'  Eara:id.^dec  -..cbL.ck-  (r)  N.  n.

"  i^rediraen:.


152  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  impediment,  which  I  had,  in  a  general  way,  hinted  the  neceflity  of  in-
"  quiring  into,  in  the  Adverfaria  (s),  appear'd,  by  means  of  which  impedi-
"  ment,  being  interpos'd  for  a  time,"  the  valvula  Bauhini  "  could  not  be
"  properly  Ihut  up  ■,"  I  fay  for  a  time  •,  for  if  it  be  fuppos'd  perpetual,  it
will  not  be  underftood,  by  what  means  this  valve  may  have  immediately
return'd  to  its  office,  after  having  fufFer'd  glyfters  to  pals  through  it,  as  has
been  feen  in  fome  of  thefe  cafes  which  were  pointed  out  juft  now  {t).

For  in  thefe  cafes,  the  explication  of  thofe  who  have  conjeftur'd  that  the
valve  is  either  ruptur'd,  or  become  paralytic,  in  patients  afflidted  with  the
ileos,  would  not  be  lufficient.  As  this  laft  conjefture,  I  fuppofe,  cannot
take  place,  even  when  the  beginning  of  the  colon  is  fuppos'd  to  be  im^
moderately  dilated,  with  a  great  quantity  of  matter,  which  is  collefted  to-
gether. For  although  the  valve,  by  reafon  of  the  flefhy  fibres  of  the  two
inteftines  whereof  it  is  compos'd  being  become  paralytic,  fhould  lofe  that
power  of  conftringing  itfelf,  whatever  that  power  might  be;  yet  the  two
frsena,  or  bridles,  which  I  have  added,  are  fo  difpos'd  tranfverfly,  on  one
fide,  and  on  the  other,  through  the  internal  furface  of  the  colon  (u),  that
by  a  furprizing  utility,  the  more  this  inteftine  is  dilated,  the  more  do  they
conftringe  the  chink,  or  aperture,  of  the  valve,  which  ufe  I  believe  it  very
often  performs  in  life,  when,  perhaps,  there  is  a  great  quantity  of  matter  con-
tain'd  in  that  part  of  the  colon,  and  the  muicles  of  the  abdomen  are  in  flrong
a£tion  to  comprefs  and  propel  it :  and  as  I  do  not  doubt,  but  that  thefe
things,  in  regard  to  the  ftrufture  of  this  valve,  and  its  fr^na,  which  I  have
defcrib'd  in  words,  and  reprefented  in  plates,  in  the  Adverfaria,  are  admit-
ted by  you  •,  fo  1  could  wifli  that  thefe  things,  and  fome  others,  which  relate
to  me,  had  been  confider'd  a  little  more  attentively  by  fome  perfons  :  but  of
thefe  things  on  anotlier  occafion.

Finally,  to  omit  othrcr  things,  as  to  that  aftion  being  attributed  to  the
mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  and  the  diaphragm,  which  is  generally  attributed
to  the  inverted  motion  of  the  inteftines,  that  thi;  is  not  done  without  reafon,
may  be  prov'd  by  thofe  cafes,  in  which  the  ileos  has  happen'd  on  account  of
the  expulfive  faculty  being  abolifh'd,  or  from  a  lofs  of  tone  in  the  inteftines,
as  has  been  hinted  at  above  (x),  according  to  the  opinion  of  Salius,  and
Ruyfch.  In  which  place  the  authority  of  Boerhaave  (y)  may  alfo  be  produc'd,
who  afierts  '•  that  in  the  numerous  difledlions  of  living  animals,  he  had
"  never  feen  a  periftaltic  motion  in  the  large  inteftines,"  and  he  wonder'd,
for  this  reafon,  "  that  glyfters  ftiould  neverthelefs  be  thrown  up,  from  the
"  large  inteftines,"  by  the  mouth  •,  for  he  did  not  doubt  but  this  did  hap-
"  pen  "  fometimes,  as  men  of  learning  and  authority  bore  their  teftimonies
"  to  it."

31.  But  notwithftanding  I  had  obferv'd  thefe  things  to  be  favourable  to
the  propos'd  explication,  other  things  arofe,  by  way  of  objeftion  to  it,  which
very  evidently  argued  agalnft  it.  And  not  to  take  up  too  much  of  your
time,  this  in  the  firft  place,  that  if  all  the  inteftines  are  fuppos'd  to  be  full,  or


(s)  Illanimad.  9.  {x)  N.  12.

(.')  N.  29.  fjj  Prska.  ad  inftit.  ■§.  816  in  fin.

(:() Adi'erf.  3.  iig.  l.  -i


:ncarly


Letter  XXXIV, Article  31.  153

nearly  full,  It  is  not  poffible  to  conceive  how  the  glyfters  can  be  thrown
up  by  vomiting,  mix'd,  as  is  faid,  with  other  fluids,  but  quite  pure,  as  they
were  given,  and  that  not  very  long  after  their  injeftion,  and  without  any
great  difcharge  of  thofe  humours,  with  which  the  whole  canal,  from  the
rectum  to  the  ftomach, is  fiU'd,  or  almoft  fill'd,  having  preceded.

For  read  the  obfervations  of  P.ofcius,  of  Schrockius  the  elder,  and  of  the
compilers  of  the  Bibliotheca  Anatomica,  which  v/ere  made  upon  volvulous
patients,  and  which  I  have  pointed  out  above  (z)  :  read  ahb  thofe  that  I  have
taken  notice  of  from  Loffius,  Segerus,  Clauderus,  and  Rommelius  {a),  where
there  was  even  no  volvulus,  fo  that  very  ftrong  compreffions  of  the  mufcles
could  be  fuppos'd  ;  nor  was  there  any  obftacle,  except  a  flight  coftivenefs  in
one  or  two,  which  could  have  confin'd  the  humours  in  almoft  the  whole  tube
of  the  inteflines.  You  will  find  among  the  feveral  obfervations,  that  the
glyfters  were  thrown  up  by  the  mouth,  "  wholly,  entirely,"  and  thefe  "pure
"  as  they  had  been  applied,  nothing  at  all  chang'd,"  after  they  had  been
"  retain'd  in  the  inteltines  for  an  hour,  after  about  the  fpace  of  an  hour,
"  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  when  a  quarter  of  an  hour  had  fcarcely  elaps'd,
"  in  a  moment  of  time,"  without  any  vomiting  being  any  where  taken  no-
tice of,  betwixt  the  times  of  inje£ling  the  glyfter,  and  throwing  it  up  by  the
mouth,  not  to  fay  without  fo  confiderable  a  vomiting  as  you  perceive  there
muft  have  been,  had  the  inteftines  been  all  full.

Since,  therefore,  the  inteftinal  tube,  in  thefe  cafes,  was  neither  full,  nor
nearly  fo,  it  appears,  without  doubt,  that  another  explication  mufl  be  fought
after,  fi-om  which  it  may  be  clear,  not  only  what  caufe  could  propel  the
glyfters,  from  the  reftum  to  the  ftomach,  but  alfo,  by  what  means  the  val-
vula  Bauhini  could  be  kept  open.  And  we  muft  take  care,  now  in  parti-
cular, when  there  are  many  who  call  into  queftion,  the  powers  of  the  dia-
phragm, and  abdominal  mufcles,  to  excite  vomiting;  we  mufl  take  care,  I
fay,  lefl,  as  to  what  relates  to  the  firft  caufe,  that  be  too  haftily  reje6ted,
which  even  from  ancient  times  was  plac'd  in  the  inverted  motion  of  the  in-
teftines. For  although  this  motion  was  certainly  not  readily  to-be  allow"'d
of,  where  the  inteftines  were  tied,  diflended,  inflam'd,  or  paralytic,  why  is
it  to  be  denied  where  there  is  none  of  thefe  circumftances  ?  And  there  could
be  none  of  thefe  circumftances,  in  thofe  obfervations  which  were  taken  when
no  volvulus  v/as  prefent,  nor  was  it  necefiary  even  when  this  was  prefent,
or  at  leaftit  was  not  ahvays  necefTary,  that  it  fhould  be  in  a  great  part  of  the
inteftines,  and  efpecially  in  that  which  I  particularly  refer  to  here,  that  is  in
the  large  inteftines.

Why,  therefore,  muft  we  altogether,  and  at  all  times,  reje£t  this  caufe,
and  fuffer  it  to  have  no  part  in  the  performance }  Is  it  becaufe  the  periftal-
tic  motion  is  perhaps  fcarcely  to  be  acknowledged  any  longer  ?  Hov/  is  it
then  ?  Is  it  poffible  for  the  nature  of  animals  to  be  fo  chang'd,  that  in  our
age  the  circumftance  fcarcely  appears  any  more,  which  thofe  very  ancient
obfervers  have  feen,  in  confequence  of  whofe  opinion  Cicero  has  exprefly
written  (b),  "  that  the  inteftines  both  conftringe  and  relax  them.felves  alter-
"  nately,"  either  to  agitate  and  prepare  the  food,  or  to  drive  the  remains  of

(a)  N.  39.  {a)  Ibid.  (^)  L.  2.  denat.  deor.

Vol.  IL  X  it.


J  54  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

it,  after  concoftion,  downwards  ?  But  left  it  fliould  happen  to  any  one  of
ihofe  whom  I  have  refer'd  to,  in  the  preface  to  the  fecond  Adverfaria,  near
the  latter  end,  that  this  palTage  of  Cicero,  alfo,  may  feem  "  to  be  quoted"
by  me,  "  by  way  of  pretty  fcvere  reproach,"  I  choofe  rather  to  negleft  what
might  be  replied  on  this  occafion,  and  to  come  down  from  the  ancients,  to
the  more  modern  obfervers.  Shall  I  then  forget  the  great  number  of  obfer-
vations,  not  only  of  others,  but  of  my  own  alfo,  on  dogs,  fheep,  and  rab-
bits, diffefted  alive,  though  this  motion  often  occurs  to  the  eyes  of  thofe
perfons  who  do  not  look  for  it,  and  even,  as  happen'd  in  a  rabbit  particu-
larly, a  motion  alternately  antiperiftaltic.  But  it  is  very  little  to  the  pur-
pofe,  now,  to  fhow  that  one  of  thefe  motions  has  been  obferv'd  in  human
bodies  alfo,  and  fometimes  both,  fince  the  celebrated  Haller  (c)  has  produc'd
examples  thereof:  to  which,  however,  if  you  pleafe,  you  may  add  that  of  a
matron,  who  had  a  very  confiderable  omphalocele,  or  umbilical  hernia,  which
was  feen  by  the  compilers  of  the  Bibliotheca  Anatomica  (d).  And  the  fame
H-aller  (e),  even  before  he  pubUfh'd  fo  many  experiments  (f),  caution'd  us
from  believing  that  becaufe  it  had  happen'd  to  his  great  preceptor,  that  he
never,  as  I  have  faid,  faw  a  periftaltic  motion  in  the  large  inteftines,  it  had
therefore  never  been  feen  by  any  one ;  for  he  quoted  Wepfer,  in  particular,
■who  faw  it  very  evidently  in  thefe  inteftines  likewife,  and  not  only  the  peri^
ftaltic,  but  alfo  the  antiperiftaltic,  as  you  will  learn  from  the  pafTage  of  Wep*
fer,  which  is,  in  like  manner,  transfer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  (g).

32.  From  thefe  things,  which  I  have  confider'd  on  both  fides  of  the  quef-
tion,  you  will  eafily  perceive,  that  any  probable  caufe,  which  tends  to  explain
the  fymptoms  that  happen  in  the  volvulus,  particularly  thofe  that  are  difii-'
cult,  and  not  as  yet  fufficiently  clear,  ought  not  to  be  entirely  reje6ted.

But  as  to  the  caufes  which  create  an  obftacle  to  the  matter,  that  defcends
through  the  inteftines,  if  you  inquire  of  me,  whether  I  ever  found  that  con-
torfion,  or  twifting,  which  was  formerly  fo  much  talk'd  of,  or  at  leaft  an  in-
tus-fufception,  as  it  is  call'd,  which  is  even  very  frequently  eonfirm'd  by  the
more  modern  authors  •,  I  fliall  ingenuoufly  anfwer,  that  I  have  as  yet  lit  on  nei-
ther of  them,  juft  in  this  manner,  as  I  ftiall  explain  hereafter  (*).  Yet  I  do
not,  for  this  reafon,  in  regard  to  the  firft  caufe,  fufpeft  any  of  the  obftacles
of  this  kind  that  are  defcrib'd,  but  only  becaufe,  while  the  connection  of  the
inteftines  with  the  mefentery  i§  preferv'd,  this  contorlion  cannot  be  con-
ceiv'd.

But  the  fecond,  or  the  fufception  of  the  inteftine  within  the  inteftine,  iy
not  only  conceivable,  while  the  connexion  with  the  mefentery  is  preferv'd,  but
is  alfo  very  injurious,  on  account  of  this  very  connexion.  For  when  one
part  of  the  inteftine  enters  within  the  part  next  to  it,  the  portion  of  the  me-
fentery, that  is  annex'd  thereto, .  muft  enter  in  at  the  fame  time.  Wherefore,
if  it  ftay  there  for  any  confiderable  time,  and  any  conftringing  caufe  come  on, ,
the  motion  of  the  blood,  through  its  veffels,  being  retarded,  it  will  fwell  to-.*

(f) Ad  Boer,  prsledl.  §.  93.  n.  6.  ('/J  De  refpir.  p.  3.

(d)  Tom.  I.  p.  I. adnot.  penult,  ad  W.ir- (g)  Schol.  ad.  §.  2.  obf,  I.  hujiis  fe£l.  .
thon.  dc  mefent.  (*)  N.  34.

{e)  Ad  cit.  prskft.  §.  107.  not.  3-  &  §■  109.
_apt.  jOi.

fti,ch.i


Letter  XXXIV. Article  32.  153

filch  a  degree,  as  to  hinder  the  inteftine  that  has  enter'd  in,,  from  receding,
and  likewife  prevent  the  paflage  of  the  matter  that  was  about  to  defcend
through  the  cavity  ;  to  fay  nothing  of  the  fphacelus  that  at  length  comes  on,
on  account  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  being  entirely  precluded,  which,
as  the  illuftrious  Haller  faw  (h),  was  the  caufe  of  death  in  a  certain  man.
And  every  part  is  fo  much  the  more  conftring'd  and  comprefs'd  in  that  place,
in  proportion  as  the  part  of  the  inteftine  which  is  pufh'd  within  the  part
neareft  to  it  is  larger  or  more  complicated ;  for  this  complication  has  been
fometimes  fo  great,  that  a  portion  of  the  inteftine,  which  while  thus  conglome-
rated together  did  not  exceed  half  an  inch  in  length,  was  equal  almoft  to  two
fpans  when  drawn  out  (z).  And  fo  much  the  greater  extent  enters  in,  in  pro-
portion as  the  caufes  are  greater,  or  more  long-continu'd,  which  impel  the
part  that  enters,  and  dilate  the  part  which  receives.

Among  the  latter  caufes,  for  the  moft  part,  is  flatus,  and  among  the  for-
mer, fometimes,  is  weight,  as  in  the  obfervation  of  the  fame  compilers  of
the  Bibliotheca  Anatomica  {k\  whom  I  have  once  and  again  quoted,  which
is  an  extraordinary  obfervation,  not  on  that  account  only,  but  alfo  becaufe
the  fufception  had  happen'd  in  the  colon,  in  which  I  read  that  very  few  had
ever  fcen  it  befides  Ruyfch,  who  confeffes  (/)  that  he  had  feen  it  only  once,
whereas  he  had  feen  it  fo  often  in  the  fmall  inteftines,  that  no  body  more  fre-
quently. However,  no  caufe  is  fuppos'd  to  be  more  common  than  convul-
five  motions :  which  the  experiment  of  Peyerus,  wherein  the  inteftines  of  a
living  frog  were  ftimulated,  in  more  places  than  one,  ftiows  to  be  capable
of  producing  this  effeft :  this  experiment  you  will  read  in  the  Sepulchre-
turn  (?«).  And  the  fame  thing  feems  to  me  to  be  confirm'd,  by  the  obferva-
tions  of  Peyerus  himfelf(«),  but  in  particular  by  thofe  of  Ruyfch  (c?).  For
the  former  faw  in  the  inteftinum  ileum  of  a  girl,  in  which  were  three  fufcep-
tions,  worms  "  roll'd  up  together,  as  it  were,  in  one  place  •"  and  Ruyfch
faw  the  very  portion  of  the  ileum,  which  had  enter'd  into  another,  in  a  man,
"  fill'd  with  worms  circularly  plac'd,"  and  a  fecond  time  he  ftiow'd  a  fufcep-
tion of  the  fame  inteftine,  "  in  a  boy,  to  have  worms  in  it."  And  it  is  very
evident  that  the  inteftines  may  be  very  much  irritated  from  worms.

Indeed  that  eminent  phyfician  Heifter  (^),  having  found  a  double  flifcep-
tion,  in  the  fmall  inteftines  of  a  boy  of  twelve  years  of  age,  and  having  pb-
ferv'd  the  fame  inteftines  to  be  "  very  full  of  worms,"  thought  it  "  worthy
"  to  be  obferv'd  in  the  pra<5lice  of  medicine,  efpecially  if  they  are  very  young
"  fubjefts,  which  fall  under  our  care,"  that  the  iliac  paffion  may  fometimes
arife  from  worms  alfo.  And  for  this  reafon,  perhaps,  it  has  been.,  that  I
have  feen  the  greater  part  of  the  fufceptions  remark'd  in  children.  While
I  attend  pretty  diligently  to  fome  of  thofe  things,  which  I  have  hitherto  taken
notice  of,  I  cannot  help  adding  my  own  obfervation  in  this  place,  in  reading
of  which,  if  you  begin  to  v/onder  that  I  had  juft  now  denied  my  ever  having
feen  a  fufception  of  the  inteftine,  you  will,  at  leaft,  ceafe  to  wonder,  when  you
have  confider'd  thofe  things  which  I  fhall  fubjoin to  the  obfervation.

{h)  Strena  anat.  a.  9.  {m)  Schol.  ad  § 8..  obf.  20.

(;■)  Vid.  Sepulchr.  §.  2.  modo  cit.  {n)  §.  modo  cit.

ik)  Adnot.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  29.  (0)  Thef.  anat.  4.  n.  14.  &  Thef.  nov.  n.  57.

Q)  Adverf.  anat.  dec.  3.  5.  {p)  Eph.  ^n.  c.  cent.  1  &  2.  obf.  198.  n.  3.

X  2  _  33.  A


156  Book  III. Of  Dlfeafes  of  the  Belly.

33.  A  virgin  of  forty-five  years  of  age,  having  received  a  violent  blow  on
her  head  from  a  fall,  not  only  vomited  in  the  beginning,  but  continually  ;  (he
Hv'd  in  this  hofpital  more  than  twenty-one  days,  in  which  time,  however,  fhe
feem'd  frequently  upon  the  point  of  expiring.

In  the  abdomen  ;  for  I  only  infpefted  the  vifcera  of  this  cavity,  and  that
not  with  a  view  to  the  difeafe ;  the  inteftines  were  ftiU  warm,  although  it  was
many  hours  after  death,  that  I  handled  them,  and  at  leaft  one  hour  from  the
time  of  cutting  into,  and  laying  open  the  abdominal  cavity,  as  I  was  en-
gag'd  about  fome  other  bufinefs  in  the  mean  time,  and  although  it  was  at  a
time  of  the  year  which  is  generally  cold,  that  is  about  the  middle  of  De-
cember, in  the  year  1724,  when  the  feaibn  was  extremely  cold.  Part  of  the
fmall  inteftines  was  diftended  with  flatus,  efpecially  that  part  which  lay  under
the  CEecum,  for  which  reafon  this  inteftine,  with  its  appendicula,  was  turn'd
forwards  :  the  remaining  part  was  reddifli,  and  had  a  kind  of  putrid  fmell.
In  this  part  I  faw  the  fuiception,  of  which  I  am  fpeaking,  not  lefs  evident,
and  even  fomewhat  longer,  than  it  is  delineated  by  Ruyfch  (^).

But  vfhWe  I  was  defirous  to  learn  very  diftinftly,  in  what  part  of  the  intef-
tines it  was,  and  how  clofe  it  was,  and  for  that  reafon  turn'd  over  the  inte-
ftines gently,  as  one  generally  does,  in  order  to  begin  from  the  other  head  of
the  fmall  inteftines,  1  found  out  this  head  very  clearly,  but  the  fuiception  I
could  no  more  find.  For  all  the  fmall  inteftines  being  examin'd  accurately,
from  one  extremity  to  the  other,  and  back  again,  and  run  over  with  the
hand,  this  fufception  no  where  appear'd,  and  indeed  not  a  trace  of  it,  fo  that
it  was  very  plain  it  had  not  been  clofely  conftrifted.  Then  opening  the  fmall
inteftines,  which  was  all  that  remain'd  to  do,  I  faw,  in  the  duodenum,  a  mat-
ter like  fluid  fseces,  in  the  neigbouring  tra£l  of  the  jejunum,  a  round  worm,
and  in  the  fame  traft,  and  the  neighbouring  part  of  the  duodenum,  I  faw,
here  and  there,  bloody  fpots,  with  which  both  of  them  were  diftinguifti'd  in-
ternally, as  if  from  inflammation,  which  had  begun  to  be  the  conlequence  of
the  irritation,  And  in  the  remaining  inteftines,  and  the  abdominal  vifcera,
I  alfo  obferv'd,  and  demonftrated,  many  things,  but  not  fuch  as  had  refe-
rence to  the  difeafe,  if  you  except  fome  that  were  remark'd  in  the  organs  of
generation,  and  in  the  bladder,  or  rather  in  the  urethra.  For  the  uterus  be-
ing laid  open  with  the  knife  longitudinally,  from  the  fanguiferous  veflTels,
which  appear'd  to  be  parallel  throughout  the  internal  furface,  fome  black  cor-
pufcles,  as  it  were,  feem'd  to  be  prominent,  here  and  there,  fo  that  I  at  firft
took  them  for  very  fmall  varices.  But  when  I  examin'd  them  in  the  morn-
ing, by  the  light  of  the  fun,  I  found  that  they  were  not  varices,  and  indeed
I  much  doubted  whether  they  were  really  in  thefe  vefl"els.  For  I  faw  that
two  larger  bodies,  which  lay  in  the  common  boundaries  of  the  bladder,  and
urethra,  were  peculiar  fubftances,  brown  in  their  colour,  and  roundifli  in
their  figure,  and  when  I  touch'd  them,  I  perceiv'd  them  to  be  hard ;  fo  that
1  believ'd  them  to  be  czieuYifuJ  generis,  which  had  been  concreted  under  that
internal  coat,  and  rais'd  it  up ;  and  that  the  others,  as  they  v/ere  lefs  in  fize,
were  alfo  lefs  hard,  and  not  roundifli,  yet  were  made  of  a  matter  of  the  fame
kind,  and  in  the  fame  manner,  but  were  not  yet  perfeflly  form'd.

(j)  Ob£.chir.  an.it.  fig.-74.-

As.


-Letter  XXXIV. Article  33.  157

As  I  had  obferv'd  this  kind  of  diforder  which  is  perhaps  nev/,  and  which,.
in  procefs  of  time,  would,  probably,  have  made  the  urethra  very  narrow,  and
was  certainly  injurious  even  now  ;  1  diffefted  the  uterus,  to  fee  if  I  could  find
the  original  fprings  of  that  whitifh,  and  thickifh  humour,  with  which  I  law
that  the  vagina  was  too  much  moiften'd.  But  I  faw  nothing  that  was  not-
ufual,  in  this  cavity,  except  a  fmall  heap  of  little  veficles,  which  was  pro-
minent in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  area  thereof  did  not  exceed  the  circumfe-
rence of  the  nail  of  the  little  finger.  This  was  on  the  anterior  furface  of  the
cavity  of  the  uterus  itfelf,  on  the  right  fide,  and  nearer  to  the  upper  part  of
the  fame  cavity,  than  to  the  cervix  uteri ;  fo  that,  at  firft,  I  fufpeded  it  to  be
the  beginning  of  the  excrefcence,  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  which  you  have
read  my  defcription  of,  in  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  frequently,  upon  other
occafions.  And  this  fufpicion  was  confirm'd  by  the  prommence  :  but  the  na-
ture of  the  veficles,  which  cover'd  the  face  of  the  prominence,  did  not  agree
therewith  ;  for  they  themfelves,  and  the  mucus  they  contain'd,  v/ere  entirely
of  the  fame  kind,  and  had  the  fame  natural  appearance,  with  thofe  that  were
below  in  the  neck,  in  greater  number,  which  I  have  formerly  pretty  well  de-
fcrib'd,  and  reprefented  by  figures  (r)  •,  not  hydatids,  which  were  not  want-
ing here,  alfo,  at  the  tubes,  and  near  the  ovaries,  white,  hard,  and  ftri-
gofe.

But  veficles  containing  a  limpid  mucus,  which  could  be  drawn  out  into
threads,  plac'd  in  fo  high  a  fituation,  as  in  this  virgin,  and  there  colle6ted
into  a  heap,  I  do  not  remember  to  have  feen,  except  very  feldom.  For  if  they
had  always  appear'd  in  this  manner,  one  of  the  great  difficulties,  in  the
opinion  of  Nabothus,  would  be  remov'd.

34.  But  of  this  on  another  occafion.  Now  let  us  return  to  the  intended
difcourfe.  You  fee  that  in  this  virgin,  a  part  of  the  inteftine  had  fallen  into^
the  part  which  was  nearefl:  to  it :  that  on  one  fide  there  was  flatus  to  dilate ;  and
on  the  other  a  wonn,  which,  by  ftimulating,  might  contraft  the  inteftine,
and  excite  inflammation  :  that  an  obftinate  vomiting  was  not  wanting,  nor  yet
in  the  duodenum,  a  matter  like  liquid  fssces.  All  thele  circumftances  con-
cur'd  to  prevent  me  from  omitting  this  hiftory  here.  But  the  very  violent
blow  of  the  head,  which  of  itfelf  generally  excites  a  vomiting,  the  very  flight
inflammation  in  the  fmall  inteftine,  whicii  feem'd  to  be  but  lately  begun,  and.
which,  perhaps,  is  to  be  accounted  for  as  is  hinted  in  the  nineteenth  letter  (s),.
but,  in  particular,  this  fufccption,  which  v/as  fo  very  lax  that  it  eafily  be-
came evanid,  without  leaving  any  traces  behind  it,  have  influenc'd  me  not  to
confider  it  as  the  caufe  of  thefe  vomitings,  nor  yet  to  number  it  among  thofe
caufes  of  which  I  am  at  prefent  treating.  For  I  do  not  here  refer  to  thofe
■which  are  frequently  found,  and  are  eafily  develop'd,  fuch  as  I  fuppofe  thofe
three  to  have  been,  that  Abraham  Vater  (/)  faw  in  the  intefl:inum  jejunum
of  a  girl,  without  any  figns  of  a  volvulus  ;  and  fuch  as  they  probably  were,
that  are  defcrib'd  in  the  fame  inteftine  of  three  bodies,  in  the  obfervation  of
the  celebrated  Flommelius  (k),  wherein  no  mention  is  made  of  any  of  thefe
fymptoms  ;  and,  not  to  be  too  prolix,  fuch  as  they  were,  without  doubt,  that

(r)  Adverf.  anat.  i.  n.  32.  &  tab.  3.  {u)  Commerc. litter,  a.  1743-  hebd.  42,  iiv

(s)  N.I 8.  fin.

(0  Progr.  edito  a.  1727.  m.  April,

z  are-


158  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Be%.

are  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated  Haller,  not  in  the  Strena  Anatomica,  from
which  I  quoted  one  above  (*•),  but  in  the  Opufcula  Analomka  (y),  for  thefe
were  many  in  number,  and  had  various  fituations,  fo  that  one  of  them  was
from  the  lower  part  of  the  colon,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  inteftinum
redtum.

And  fome  are  even  met  with  that  are  not  fo  eafy  of  evolution,  as  that
v.'hich  was  found  by  the  celebrated  Jo.  Phil.  Burgravius  (z),  "  in  a  pretty
"  confin'd  ftate,"  yet  without  any  fign  of  the  iliac  paffion  being  join'd  with
it:  was  it  becaufe  no  inflammation  had  come  on?  Though  indeed  an  inflam-
mation had  not  fucceeded  to  the  other,  which  was  feen  by  the  fame  per-
fon  (a),  yet  there  had  been  fome  tormina  at  leaft,  and  a  vomiting  of  the  re-
medies which  were  taken  in  :  did  thefe  fymptoms  arife  from  the  inteftine  hav-
ing been  pufh'd  within  itfelf,  to  twice  the  depth  of  the  other,  in  this  fecond
cafe  ?

But  Hartmann  (b)  found  an  intus-fufception  of  the  inteftine  to  a  confider-
able  depth,  and  that  in  three  places,  nor  equally  eafy  of  evolution  in  them
all;  and  he  even  found  the  inteftine  to  be  there  "  fomewhat  turgid  externally,
"  and  bloody,  an  evident  mark  of  the  tumor  remaining  even  in  a  portion
"  that  was  cut  ofi^;"  nor  was  a  very  long  worm  wanting  in  the  fmall  intef-
tines  of  the  fame  body  :  yet  he  mentions  no  fymptoms  of  a  volvulus  ;  but
even  remarks,  "  that  the  inteftines  had  perform'd  their  funftions  very  well,
"  doubtlefs,  becaufe  the  paflage  was  not  entirely  obftrufted  by  thefe  fufcep-
"  tions."  And  Jo.  Guil.  Widmann  (c)  found  alfo  a  much  longer  portion  of
the  inteftinum  jejunum,  that  is  more  than  a  geometrical  foot,  fallen  within
the  part  next  to  it,  "  much  ftreighten'd  and  comprefs'd,  and  infefted  with  a
"  livid  colour,"  and  this  after  pains  which  had  been  indeed  very  fevere,  and
almoft  continual  vomitings,  yet  not  of  matter  like  f^ces,  nor  attended,  as
he  fays,  with  a  fuppreftion  of  ftools,  which  was  probably  becaufe  the  inverted
portion,  although  narrow,  was  found  to  be  ftill  "  pervious."

Wherefore,  I  ftiould  readily  believe,  that  thefe  two  fufceptions  v/ere  ftill
more  pervious,  and  not  only  Ihorter  and  lefs  comprefs'd,  which  that  celebrated
man  Jo.  Rod.  Zuingerus  (d)  found  in  the  inteftinum  ileum,  together  with  an
incipient  gangrene,  who  certainly  would  not  have  omitted  to  mention  fome
marks  of  an  iliac  paffion,  if  any  had  preceded  :  but  on  the  other  hand,  I
ftiould  fuppofe  thofe  two  were  lefs  pervious,  which  Valentinus  (e)  found  in
the  fame  place,  as  he  relates  the  fame  lymptoms  as  Widmann,  and  does  not
doubt  but  a  vomiting  of  excrement  would  have  come  on,  if  the  boy  had  liv'd
fome  time  longer :  which  you  will  find  did  come  on,  in  another  defcrib'd  by
Hoffmann  (f) ;  the  fufception,  which  was  in  the  fame  inteftine,  ferving  at
once  to  prevent  the  palTage  of  the  flatus,  with  which  the  upper  inteftines  were
diftended,  and  that  of  a  putrid  humour  which  was  feen  in  the  ftomacli,  of  the
fame  colour  with  that  which  had  been  thrown  up  by  vomiting.

(x)  N.  32.  (c)  Earund.  cent.  6.  obf.  89.

(j)  Obf.  27.  (V)  Earund.  cent.  7.  obf.  8j.

(z) AQ..  n.  c.  torn.  7. obf.  ;.  (c)  Earund.  cent.  3.  obf.  i.

la)  Earund.  t.  5.  obf.  80.  f/J  Med.  rat.  t.  4.  p.  2.  f.  3.  c.  4.  obf.  4.

Xi)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  5  &  6.  obf.  207.

To


tetter  XXXIV. Article 35.  159

To  thefe  you  will  add,  in  particular,  the  obiervation  of  the  celebrated
Weiffius  (g),  who  in  the  body  of  a  woman,  that  died  after  having  been  af-
fiifted  with  violent  pains  of  the  belly,  join'd  with  an  obftinate  obftruftion  of
the  inteftines,  and  at  length  with  a  volvulus,  found  the  extremity  of  the  ileuni
fallen  within  the  colon,  concreted  with  the  membranes  of  it,  and  contrafted
fo  as  to  prevent  the  progrefs  "  of  a  foetid  liquor,  almoft  of  the  nature  of  ex-
"  crement,"  with  which  the  fmall  inteftines  were  feen  to  be  "  furprizingly
"  diftended,"  being  attended  with  inflammation  at  the  fame  time.

Nor,  finally,  is  that  obiervation  to  be  omitted,  though  made  upon  a  dog,
which  the  celebrated  WahrendorfF(^)  has  given  us.  This  creature  having
had  no  difcharge  by  ftool  for  fome  weeks,  had  vomited  up  every  thing  he
took  with  miferable  howlings  ;  and  having  at  length  died,  difcover'd  no  in-
flammation, or  obftru<5i:ion,  in  the  inteftines,  except  that  "  about  the  begin-
"  ning  of  the  inteftinum  redlum,  there  appear'd  an  intus-fufception,  to  about
"  the  length  of  two  inches,  which  fliut  up  the  paflage  fo  compleatly,  that
"  not  even  the  leaft  flatus  could  be  tranfmitted."  From  all  thefe  obferva-  .
tions  which  I,  according  to  cuftom,  have  taken  notice  of,  in  order  that  yoii
might  have  fome  to  add  to  the  Sepulchretum,  you  eafily  perceive,  that  an  ob-
ftruftion  of  the  inteftinal  canal,  or  a  confiderable  and  long-continu'd  coarc-
tation, has  more  efitft  towards  producing  a  volvulus,  than  an  inflammation  j
and  that  therefore  an  intus-fufception  which  does  not  caufe  an  obftruftion,  or
Goardlation,  as  thofe  that  are  flight,  and  eafily  moveable,  by  no  n"V€ans  do,
ought  not  to  be  attended  to  by  us  here.

To  this  clafs  I  refer  thofe  that  I  have  hitherto  happen'd  to  fee,  and  readily
acknowledge  them  to  be  of  that  kind,,  which  an  eminent  author  in  anatomy,
and  furgery,  of  the  prefent  age,  has  aflTerted  to  occur  in  many  bodies,  who-
died  of  a  natural  death,  and  who  had  been  afflided  with  no  pain.  But  while
he  afcribes  fo  much  to  the  obfervations  of  this  kind,  as  to  fuppofe  that  the-
doftrine  of  others,  who  have  plac'd  intus-fufception  of  the  inteftines,  among
the  caufes  of  a  volvulus,  is  a  mere  figment,. I  cannot  coincide  in  opinion  witk
him,  unlefs  I  would  run  counter  to  fo  great  a  number  of  obfervations  of
other  perfons,  that  are  contrary  to  his,  and  even  run  counter,  to  reafon.
itfelf.

For  although.!  acknowledge,  that  it  is  not  at  all  necelTary  any  very  vio-
lent diforder  fliould  arife,  where  there  is  a  lax  fufception,  that  does  not.
ftreighten  the  paflage  greatly,  yet  on  xi\e  other  hand,  I  maintain,  that  if  the
fufception  is  not  lax,  and  fliuts  up  the  paflage  for  a  long  time  together,  or.
at  leaft  nearly  fliuts  it  up,,  a  volvulus,  or  pains,  inflalnmations,  and  other
fymptoms  of  this  kind,  are  the  confequences,  as  you  fee  in  the  hiftories
which  are  pointed  out  in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretumj  under  number
twenty,  and  in  others,  but  particularly  in  thofe  of  Ruyfch  (i),  and  in  fome
of  thofe  befides  which  are  referr'd  to  here,  or  above  (k).

35.  However,  it  is  evident  that  a  volvulus  may  be  brought  on,  not  only  by
fufception,  or  by  a  Jiernia,  or  by  an  inflammation  of  the  inteftines,  but  alfo

Cg^  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1745.  hebd.  24.11. 0  Obf.  anat.  chir.  91.  &  adverf.  anat.  dec
J*  ad  1 1.  3-  -5-  &  thef.  anat.  10.  n.  62.  &  alibi.

{b)  Ml.  n.  c.tQHJ.  3.  obf.  132.  {i}  N.  32.


i6o  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

:by  other  cavifes,  which  either  obftruft,  or  ftitnulate  them,  as  appears  both
from  the  obi'ervations  of  others,  and  from  mine  alfo,  which  I  fliail  commu-
nicate to  you  on  future  occafions  -,  and  from  caufes  that  obftruft,  neceflarily,
and  unavoidably,  provided  life  lafts  for  any  confiderable  time  with  them  ;
but  from  ftimulating  caufes,  fometimes  only.  And  the  obftrudting  caufes
often  relate  to  the  coats  of  fome  inteftinc,  as,  for  inftance,  that  Scirrhous
ring  fpoken  of  in  the  thirty-fecond  letter  (/)•,  for  ftercoraceous  vomitings
were  at  length  the  confequences  thereof:  and,  at  other  times,  relate  to  the
■contents  of  the  inteftines,  and  not  only  to  the  harden'd  excrements,  as  in  the
example  related  by  Hoffmann  (?«),  where,  being  collcdted  together,  to  about
the  quantity  of  twenty  pounds,  they  had  fo  diftended  the  colon  of  a  certain
prince,  who  was  afflifted  with  the  ileos,  that  they  at  length  burft  through  it ;
but  alfo,  fometimes,  to  a  calculous  matter,  which  is  gather'd  about  gall-
fbones,  or  about  gold  coins,  that  have  been  fwallow'd,  and  which  being  fo
increas'd  by  their  long  continuance  in  the  inteftines,  has  brought  on  the
fame  diforder,  by  fliutting  up  the  pafTage,  and  rendering  it  impervious  :  ex-
amples of  which  things,  to  pafs  over  thofe  of  others,  you  will  find  in  the
books  of  the  Cfefirean  Academy  (b).

Moreover  you  will  in  thefe  fame  volumes,  alfo,  find  inftances  which  you
may  let  down  to  the  clafs  of  ftimulating  caufes  (o)  ;  as  when  a  young  man,
by  a  fall  upon  his  abdomen,  ruptur'd  the  bladder,  and  caus'd  the  urine  to  be
pour'd  out  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  fo  that  the  inteftines  being  ftimulated
by  an  unufual  acrimony,  which  the  inflammation,  and  gangrene,  that  was
the  confequence  of  their  inflammation,  fhow,  inverted  their  periftaltic  mo-
tion-, or  when  the  abdomen  of  a  full-grown  foetus  being  bruis'd  by  a  like  fall
of  its  mother,  was  the  reafon  that  blood  ftagnating,  and  putrefying,  in  the
vefl!els  of  the  inteftines,  brought  on  equal  eff'efts  therein,  by  irritation,  for
the  infant  difcharg'd  nothing  at  all  from  the  re£tum,  but  every  thing,  even
the  meconium  itfelf,  by  the  mouth,  and  died  in  a  miferable  manner  within
eight  days  from  its  birth.  And  if  the  ftimulus  excite  convulfions,  what  they
are  capable  of  doing,  not  only  by  producing  fufceptions,  as  I  have  faid  above
(p),  but  alfo  without  thefe  by  inverting  the  motion  of  the  inteftines,  the
experiments  of  Brunnerus  (»)  will  ftiow ;  I  m.ean  the  grandfon,  who  was
worthy  of  his  grandfire  ;  by  which  it  appears  that  convulfions  being  excited
in  the  inteftines  of  beafts,  the  excrements,  which  could  not  now  be  difcharg'd
through  the  anus,  afcended  into  the  ftomach  and  oefophagus.  And  a  dif-
eafe  which  by  reafon  of  its  very  violent  tormina,  and  continual  vomiting,
and  by  reafon  of  the  large  inteftines  being  unufually  ftreighten'd,  when  the
fmall  inteftines  were  very  turgid,  and  red,  and  fill'd  with  a  remarkable  quantity
of  extravafated,  and  fluid  bloed,  is  very  fimilar  to  the  volvulus,  has  been
accounted  for  by  the  celebrated  Kulbelius  (r),  from  fpafmodic  contraftions.
And  whether  it  v/as  from  thefe  fpafmodic  contrattions  returning  now  and
then,  or  from  the  effeft  of  them  which  remain'd,  that  the  fame  inteftines

Q)  N.  5.  {0)  Cent.  7.  obf.  30.  Scs.Q..  t.  3.  obf.  131.

(jw)  C.  4.  pauIo  ante  cit.  §.13.  (/>)  N.  32.

{a)  Acl.  t.  7.  obf.  lOD.  &  cent,  i  &  2.  obf. (?)  Experim.  circa  llgat.  nerv.  §.31.
41:4.  ir)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1737.  hebd.  20.  n.  2.

had


- Letter  XXXIV. Article  36.  161

'liad  feme  parts  which  were  unequal,  and,  at  unequal  intervals,  prsterna-
turally  narrow,  in  that  anatomift  Jo.  Wilhelmus  Albrechtus,  who,  while  he
liv'd,  was  very  often  fubjefl;  to  the  iJeos,  you  yourfelf  will  judge  (s).

36.  But  among  the  caufes  which  fometimes  bring  on  the  iliac  pafTion  by
ilimulating,  worms  muft  of  courfe  be  enumerated.  For  fometimes,  as  is
hinted  at  above  (;),  by  exciting  convulfions,  they  caufe  intus-iufceptions,  and
volvulus :  and  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  they  can  excite  a  volvulus,
without  caufing  fufceptions.  At  other  times  they  create  pains  in  the
inteftines  only.  And  fometimes  not  even  thefe.  And  it  alfo  frequently
Jiappens,  that  a  great  number  of  worms  are  found  in  thole  bodies,  in  which,
while  living,  there  had  fcarcely  been  the  leaft  fymptom  of  worms :  and
this  you  will  fee  fufficiently  confirm'd,  by  reading  over  again  the  hiftory  of
the  country-woman  defcrib'd  in  the  fixteenth  letter  (u),  or  what  I  formerly
wrote  of  the  hound  (;c),  in  which  there  were  tsenise,  to  the  number  of
fjxty.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  fometimes  fymptoms  of  worms,
and  none  are  found,  as  you  learn  from  the  hiftory  of  the  boy  given  you
from  Valfalva's  papers,  in  the  thirty-firft  letter  (y)  -,  and  not  to  dwell  too  long
upon  an  obvious  thing,  the  fame  will  appear  from  another  alfo,  that  is
related  in  the  Sepulchretum  (2).

But  in  regard  to  worms  exciting  pains  of  the  belly,  I  fhall  perhaps  have
occafion  to  fpeak  on  this  fubjedt,  at  another  time,  and  to  enquire  more  at
large,  whether,  as  they  irritate  the  inteftines  in  the  living  body,  it  is  like-
wife  to  be  fuppos'd  in  all  the  hiftories,  which  are  produc'd  to  prove  it,
that  they  perforated  the  inteftines  before  death,  or  rather  that  they  per-
forated the  inteftines  after  death,  and  if  they  did  really  pervade  the  in-
teftines before  death,  whether  it  was  where  an  abfcefs,  or  fome  kind  of
ulcer,  had  open'd  them  a  paflage  from  the  inteftines.  For  many  and
various  obfervations  are  produc'd :  of  which,  however,  it  will  be  fuffi-
cient  to  point  out  fome  to  you,  of  thofe  that  you  may  add  to  the  Sepul-
chretum. See  firft  two  of  thefe  in  the  adls  of  the  Cgefarean  Academy  {a).
In  one  of  which,  in  proportion  as  the  inteftines  are  faid  to  be  more  fiU'd
with  an  incredible  quantity  of  worms,  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  part  of
that  tube,  it  may  perhaps  feem  to  be  render'd  fo  much  the  more  credible,
that  they,  efpecially  as  they  were  inftigated  by  a  quantity  of  bitter  elixir,
had  begun  to  perforate  the  inteftines  in  the  living  body,  from  which  they
were  already  protruded  by  half  their  length.  An  equal,  and  even  a  greater,
quantity  of  worms  was  found  by  our  Molinetti  {b)  ;  for  befides  thofe,  with
which  all  the  inteftines  were  fill'd,  and  ftuff'd  up,  others  had  got  out  from
the  inteftinal  tube,  which  was  perforated  like  a  fieve,  and  fill'd  the  abdo-
minal cavity  all  around.  But  thefe  appearances  were  feen  in  the  dead  body,
as  thofe  alfo  which  I  found  in  a  hen  (c).

But  how  is  it  when  they  are  feen  in  the  living  body  ?  A  very  ancient  ob-
fervation  is  extant  of  Hippocrates  (i),  made  upon  a  little  child  of  Dinius,
from  whofe  navel,  "  a  large  worm  fometimes  "  came  out. But  as  a  "  fif-

(j)  A.  1736.  hebd.  12.  n.  i.  C^)  Tom.  i.  obf.  172.  &  torn.  5.  obf.  6S.

{/)  N.  32.  propefin. .

(«)  N.  38.  [b]  Diflert.  anat.  Pathol.  1.  6.  c,  4.

(.v)  Epift,  anat,  14.  n.  48.  - (c)  Epift.  anat.  14.  n.  44.

(yj  N.  5,  (x)  Obf.  I.  §.  2.  (d)  Epid.  1.  7.  haud  ita  procul.  a  line.

Vol.  II.  y  >'  tula


r62  Book  III. Of  DiTeafes  of  the  Bellj.

'•'  tuli"^  had  befen  left  there  from  a  foregoing  wouhdi,  &nd  the  worm  andf
bilious  fordes  dartTC  throiigh  the  fame  place  -,  it  was  certain,  bej'ond  a  doubt,
that  the  fmall  inteftine  was  perforated  •,  but  it  was  from  a  wound  ■,  for  that  it
was  perforated  by  the  worm,  was  not  even  fufpefted  by  the  graVe  interpreter
Vallefius  (e).  There  is  likewife  extant  •,  not  to  digrefs  improperly  from
thofe  obfervations  which  are  join'd  Vvith  the  diffedlion  of  the  body  •,  there  is
extant,  I  fay,  in  the  a£ls  juft  no\V  quoted  (f),  an  example  of  fifteen  worms
coming  out  from  the  right  hypochondrium,  and  the  loins,  on  the  fide  that
correfponded  thereto,  yet  through  tumours  which  had  been  form'd  in  both
places,  and  fuppurated;  the  origin  of  which  is  attributed  to  the  worms,  in-
deed, having  gnaw'd  theinteftinum  colon,  but  at  the  fame  time  to  a  vitiated^,
corrupt,  and  eroding  faburra,  which  had  been  collefted  there.  When  yoti
read,  therefore,  in  the  firll  (g)  and  feventh  {h)  centuries  of  the  fame  Cjefarean
Academy,  other  obfervations  of  that  kind  ;  although  in  the  feeond,  for  the
lake  of  brevity,  perhaps,  no  mention  is  made  of  any  tumour,  or  abfcefs,
you  will  confider  what  any  one  might  fufpeft.  For  it  is  my  intention  here,
as  I  have  faid,  to  point  out  the  examples  which  relate  to  the  various  caufes  of
pains  in  the  inteftines,  and  not  to  enquire  how,  and  in  what  manner,  they
happen'd.

When  We  enquire  into  this,  another  thing,  alfo,  muft  of  courfe  be  en-
quir'd  into,  which  the  obfervation  of  Platerus  (i),  relating  to  the  volvulus
likewife,  affords  us  a  handle  for  the  inveftigation  of,  I  mean  whether  worms
are  viviparous.  For  he  faw  the  inteftines  of  a  boy,  or  rather  of  a  young
man,  furprizingly  convoluted,  twifted,  intangled,  and  diftended,  not  only
with  excrements,  and  flatus,  "  but  alfo  with  living  worms,  oblong  in  their
*■'  figure,  and  in  great  number,  which  were  again  fill'd  with  other  lefler
"  worms."  You  will  alio  read  this  obfervation  is  the  Sepulchretum,  not
©nly  in  the  fourteenth  fedlion  which  we  are  at  prefent  upon  (k),  but  alfo  in
the  twenty-firft  {!),  and  you  will  the  more  attend  to  it,  if  you  light  on  the
diflertation,  in  which  the  fi<ilful  phyfician  Zamponius  deicribes  to  the  cele-
brated Plancus,  a  worm  which  was  difcharg'd  by  another  boy,  and  which
brought  forth,  under  his  very  eyes,  foon  after,  many  fmall  living  worms  to
the  number  of  eight  and  twenty.  But  all  thefe  things  relate  to  the  round
worms.

37.  For  as  to  what  I  remember  to  have  read  of  the  tenia^,  and  afcarides,..
juft  as  if  they  perform'd  the  office  of  ovaria,  or  rather  of  a  uterus,  to  the
others  •,  either  I  am  much  deceiv'd  indeed,  or  the  queftion  is  of  fuch  a  na-  -
ture,  that  makes  it  very  needlefs  for  me  toconvafs  it,  as  this  alfo  is,  whether
"  the  taenise  are  afcarides,  that  are  mutually  join'd  to  each  other,"  efpecially
as  they  who  affert  it,  confefs,  "  that  the  afcarides  are  lodg'd  only  in  the  in-
"  teftinum  reftum,"  and  in  like  manner,  whether  the  afcarides  "  are  worms
proper,  as  it  were,  to  the  human  body  -,  whether  other  fpecies  of  worms  are
"  very  rare,"  and  other  queries  of  the  like  nature,  which,  in  my  opinion,
ought  to  be  interpreted  differently,  as  they,  at  the  very  firft  fight,  feem  to
Ihovv.

(f)  Comment,  in  eum.  1.  n.  105,^  (?)  L.  3.  obf.  irbi  de  extuberantia.  •
(/)  Tom.  6.  obf.  93. li)  Subn.  xxi.  §.  i.

(g)  Obf.  39.  (/)  S«b  n.  xxii.  §.  4.
{f>)  Obf.  7.

'At


Letter  XXXIV*. Article 37.  163

At  leaft  Vallifneri  (m)  did  not  doubt  but  the  taenia  was  made  up  of  vermes
<:ucurMHm fV/orms  which  he  thus  call'd  in  common  with  others,  and  which  laid
hold  of  one  another  mutually,  ufing  among  others  the  fimile,  that  I  fee  even
Homer  had  naade  ule  of  formerly  (n),  for  another  purpofe;  I  mean  that  of
bats,  which  hanging  from  a  rock,  in  the  recefs  of  a  great  cave,  are  mutually
held  by  each  other.  But  I  have  often  wonder'd  that  the  opinion  which  Val-
lifneri patroniz'd,  could  not  be  confirm'd  by  me,  in  fo  many  tenise  which  I
have  accurately  infpedled,  and  examin'd,  and  thefe  taken  from  quadrupeds,
fifhes,  and  birds  :  and  thus  you  will  eafily  perceive,  if  you  read  attentively
the  obfervations  which  I  have  publifh'd,  in  the  fourteenth  of  the  Epiftols
Anatomicse  (o) ;  and  even  if  you  read  that  which  Vallifneri  formerly  publifh'd,
with  my  letter  which  was  written  to  him  (p) :  from  which  obfervations,  it
will  rather  feem  to  you  to  be  gather'd,  that  each  of  thefe  tenis  are  diftindt
long  worms,  than  a  concatention  of  many.  But  now  I  have  ceas'd  to  won-
der, fince  I  have  learn'd  that  by  the  induftry  of  the  celebrated  Window,  a
duft  is,  at  length,  found  out,  and  clearly  prov'd,  by  an  injedtion  of  a  very-
fluid  matter,  which  went  through  the  whole  length  of  the  tenia.

If  this  duel  had  been  known  at  the  time  in  which  I,  or  Vallifneri,  wrote,
and  the  experiments  had  been  publifh'd,  by  which  it  appears  that  aquatic
worms,  divided  into  many  parts,  had  liv'd  about  three  months,  without  any
liourifhment  •,  and,  by  a  new  obfervation,  it  had  alfo  been  made  probable,  in
another  fpecies  of  teniae,  that  in  the  very  flender  extremity,  which  feem'd  to
be  the  tail,  was  the  head  of  the  teniae-,  not  only  I  fhould  more,  readily  have
iipderftood  what  I  faw,  but  he  would  have  fought  out  other  arguments  to
fupport  his  opinion,  or  rather,  as  he  was  a  man  very  fttidious  of  truth,  would
Jiave  entirely  difcarded  it.

But  thefe  things  that  I  have  mention'd,  Tiave  come  forth  fince  that  time,  as
you  will  learn  from  the  dilfertation,  of  the  very  experienc'd  Bonnet,  upon  the
tsenia,  which  is  written  accurately,  learnedly,  and  ingenioufly,  and  which
\vas  prefented  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (q):  TJiis  difler-
tation  will  perhaps  furnifh  us  with  an  occafion  of  enquiring  into  other  things,
at  fome  future  opportunity.  But  now,  ftill  keeping  my  fubjedt  in  view,  J
return  from  thefe  difquifitions,  which  came  accidentally  in  my  way,  to  my
original  intention,  as  I  fee  that  fome  things  ftill  remain,  out  ctf  thofe  which
relate  to  pains  of  the  inteftines,  which  deferve  confideration,  and  are  defire-
able  to  be  known  ;  but  as  this  letter  is  already  very  long,  Lfhall  defer  what"
remains  to  be  faid  on  this  fubjeft,  to. the  next. Farewell.

(m)  Confideraz.  int.  alia  generaz.  de  vermi  f/ij  In  cake  modo  cit.  libri.

&c.  .(j-)  Memoiresprefentes  a  I'acad.  r.  des  fc,

(?f)  Odyf.  1.  24.  fub  initium.  torn.  I.
(0)  N.  47.  ufque  ad  55.


Y  2  BETTER


164  Book  III, Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

LETTER the THIRTY-FIFTH

Concludes  the  Difcourfe  upon  Pains  of  the  InteftineSk


IT  is  true  that  I  have  compris'd  in  the  laft  letter,  a  great  number  of  ex-
amples of  pain  in  the  inteftines,  and  of  the  inflammation  and  gangrene
that  are  the  confequences  of  it.  Yet  other  examples  flill  remain,  which  fo
much  the  more  deferve  attention  from  you,  and  other  junior  phyficians,  as
you  will  find  that  the  pauents  were  fnatch'd  away  in  a  fliorter  time,  or  unr
der  ;i  more  deceitful  appearance  of  remiffion.  Ifliall  begin  with  thefe  of  the
firit  kind,  and  even  with  the  cafe  of  a  young  man,  who  was  extremely  well-
known  to  me,  when  I  was  at  Bologna,  and  whofe  difeafe  was  fo  rapid  in  its
progrefs,  that  I  had  fcarcely  heard  of  his  diforder  before  1  heard  of  his  death.
And  the  following  is  the  narration  of  the  cafe,  for  it  was  not  written  by
Vaitalva,  but  deliver'd  to  us  from  his  own  mouchj,  at  the  time  in  which,  it
happen'd.

2.  Laelius  Lselii,  a  native  of  Imola, .  in  the  papal  territories,  a  ftudent  in
medicine,  was  a  lover  of  folitude,  and  by  nature  cafily  irafcible:  this  young
man,  when  he  was  in  good  health  as  ufual,  without  any  previous  caufe,  ex-
cep'  that  he  knew  his  father  was  then  at  the  point  of  death,  and  expected,
every  hour,  the  melancholy  news  of  his  having  aftually  expir'd,  was  fud-
denly  fciz'd,  about  the  fourth  or  fifth  hour  of  the  night,  in  the  middle  of
November,  in  the  year  1705,  with  a  violent  pain  in  the  umbilical  region,
which  fometimes  was  moft  troublefome  in  one  part,  and  fometimes  in  the
other,  but  never  went  out  beyond  fome  certain  fpace  of  that  fame  region.
The  perfon  with  whom  he  lodg'd  being  wak'd  by  his  cries,  gave  him,  accord-
ing to  the  advice  of  fome  neighbouring  phyfician,  a  dofe  of  Philonium  Roma-
num.  This  was  thrown  up  by  vomiting  ;  for  he  had  already  begun  to  vomit
a  porraceous  bile,  which  afterwards  became  sruginous,  and  at  length,  when
he  was  near  death,  black,  yet  ftiilfoas  to  be  inclin'd  to  a  feruginous  colour.

]n  the  morning,  about  ten  hours  after  the  beginning  of  the  pain,  Val--
falva  was  cali'd  to  the  patient.  Who,  obferving  an  unpromifing  afpeftin'
the  face,  an  abdomen  tenfe,  and  painful  to  the  touch,  a  low,  and  as  it  were
conftrifted  pulfe,  which  coukl  hardly  be  felt,  a  urine  of  a  red  colour  dege--
nerating  into  brown  and  extremely  turbid,  and  other  things  of  this  kind,,
and  feeing  that  lb  much  mifchief  was  done  in  fo  fhort  a  time,  and  calling  to:
mind- other  obfervations  of  his,  of  diforders not  much  unlike  this,  pro-

nounc'd.


■  Letter  XXXV. Article  3.  165

aounc'd  that'  he  would  die  within  the  fpace  of  twenty  four  hours.  Yet  that
the  patient  might  not,  be  immediately  fenfible  of  this,  he  order'd  frefh-
drawn  oil  of  almonds  to  be  given  internally,  and  the  belly  to  be  anointed
with  oil  of  violets,  with  the  addition  of  camphor,  and  two  fenior  phyficians
to  be  fentfor.  Thefe  gentlemen  coming  four  hours  after,  he  faid  to  them,  you
will  fee  a  young  man,  a  worthy-fellow  citizen  of  mine,  ftruggling  with  fo
oppreflive  a-  diforder,  that  unlefs  you  can  adminifter  feme  relief,  I  fear  he
will  not  be  able  to  bear  up  under  it  long  ;  for,  in  regard  to  myfelf,  I  ingenu-
oufly  confefs,  I  do  not  fee  wherein  I  can  affift  him.'  At  the  fame  time  he  re--
lates  the  csCe,  and  introduces  them  to  the  patient.

After  having  examin'd  into  the  fymptoms,  it  was  their  opinion  that  he
was  opprefs'd  by  a  convulfion,  and  that,  therefore,  blood  fhould  be  taken
away  from  his  foot :  and  that  x  large  cupping-glafs  fhould  be  fix'd  to  the
abdomen.  Valfalva  was  averfe  to  the  idea  of  blood-letting,  but  as  he  de-
liver'd  his  opinion  with  mod^ily,  he  was  overcome  by  the  contrary  opinion
©f  the  fenior  phyficians.  A  vein  was  twice  open'd  :  from  the  firfl:  orifice  no
blood  at  all  came ;.  from  the  fecond,  blood  did,  indeed,  fpring  forth,  but  im-
mediately loft  its  impetus,  and  came  out  in  fo  languid  a-  manner,  that  al-
though the  orifice  was  foon  after  tied  up,  the  pulfe  could  no  more  be  pcr-
Geiv'd.  A  flight  delirium  afterwards  came  on  :  the  eyes  fliow'd  Ibmething
of  a  convulfive  appearance :  the  refpiration  became  difEcult  :  and,  finally,.
death  came  on,  according,  to  the  prediftion  of  Valfalva,  in  the  following
night,

Valfalva,,  when  he  put  his  hand  on  the  abdomen  of  the  carcafe,  perceiv'd
that  there  was  an  extravafated  humour  in  that  cavity.  It  was  a  fluid  blood,
which  had  been  effus'd  to  the  quantity  of  about  a  pound  and  half:  and
fome  blood  was  alfo  extravafated  into  the  bronchia.  However,  in  the  belly
was  a  ftrong  fmell,  but  not  to  a  very  great  degree.  The  intefliines  were,  in
a  great  part  of  them,  red  in  feveral  places,  efpecially  thofe  which  lay  upper-
moft  in  the  abdomen  ;  and  the  ileum  had  already  begun  to  be  livid.  The
peritoneum  was  mark'd  with  black  fpots,  in  feveral  places,  but  particularly
where  it  invefl:s  the  diaphragm.  But  where  it  cover'd  the  fliomach,  which
had  a  natural  appearance  on  the  internal  part,  it  v/as  unequal  with  black
tubercles,  rather  than  with  fpots.  And  thefe  tubercles,  although  at  firfl:
they  had  the  appearance  of  glands,  were  in  fa6t  (for  Valfalva  himfelf  fhow'd
them,  and  I  faw  fome  of  them  foon  after)  nothing  elfe  but  a  ftagnating;
blood,  or,  ifyoupleafe,  rather  the  beginning  of  a  gangrene.

3.  When  he  had  fliown  me  thefe  appearances,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  re-
lated the  cafe,  as  I  have  defcrib'd  it  to  you,  I  afk'd  him  why  he  had  neither
prefcrib'd  bleeding  himfelf,  nor  approv'd  of  it  when  others  prefcrib'd  it  ?'
He  anfwer'd,  that  he  had  noreafon  at  hand,  which  would  clearly  fatisfy  me;
but  I  have,  fays  he,  obfervation.  For  I  have  remark'd  that  blood-letting,
does  not  fucceed  well  in  inflammations  of  the  bowels:  and  indeed  I  have
even  often  obferv'di  that  patients,  of  themfelvcs,  become  exceedingly  bad  of
afudden  in  that  diforder,  and  contrary  to  expedtation,  fo  that  1  am  afraid  to'
make  ufe  of  any  remedy  of  this  kind,  left  the  blame  fliould  be  laid  upon  the;
remedy,  which  ought  to  be  laid  upon  the  very  nature  of  the  diforder.

z  Whac


-r66  Book  III. Of  Direafes  of  the  Belly.

"What  then,  you  will  naturally  fay,  when  you  read  this.  If  any  one  is
almoft  loaded  with  a  quantity  of  good  blood,  if  his  coniiitution  is  ftrong,
and  firm,  and  he  be  feiz'd  with  a  very  violent  pain  in  liis  inteftines,  muft  we,
upon  the  authority  of  Vallalva,  omit  to  take  blood  from  him  ?  What  is
this  but  to  fuffer  an  inflammation  to  continue,  which  it  would  be  eafy  for
you  to  prevent?  What!  If  the  pain  is  from  a  eonvulfion,  muft  we  not  en-
deavour to  counteraft  this  by  bleeding,  but  muft  we  even  fuffer  the  veffejs
to  be  the  more  dangeroufly  contra£ted,  in  proportion  as  they  are  more  full?
Softly,  I  befeech  you ;  for  who  has  told  you,  that  in  fuch  a  man  as  you  de-
fcribe,  Valfalva  would  not  have  immediately  taken  blood  away?  For  k  is
quite  a  different  thing,  to  open  a  vein  before  an  inflammation  is  forra'd,~or.
even  while  it  is  beginning  to  be  form'd,  and  efpecially  in  a  <;onfti'tUition  of
this  kind,  from  what  it  is  to  talce  blood  away  w'hen  the  inflammation  is
already  form'd,  when  the  ftrength  of  the  patient  is  dimihifh'd,  and  every-
thing is  in  a  very  critical  fituation  ;  or  in  other  words,  to  run  the  rifcjue,
as  Celfus  fays  (a),  "  of  feeraing  to  have  kild'd  the  patient,  "  who  muft
have  funk  under  his  own  fevere  fate."  (For  the  courfe  of  -this  difeafe  is  -of-
ten more  fpeedy  than  we  fhould  fuppofe  •,  lb  that  if  you  regard  the  hours,
you  would  think  it  in  its  beginning,  even  at  the  time  when  it  'has  done-  all
the  mifchief  in  its  power,  and  is  haftening  to  its  fatal  conclufion  :  wherefore
in  this  dilbrder,  if  in  any  other  whatever,  that  Hippocratic  maxim  (i)  is  true,
occq/io  praceps :  for  fliort  indeed  is  the  opportunity  of  relief.  There  'had
been  this  op.portunity  in  Lselius,  during  the  firft  hours  of  his  diforder,  -when
the  philoniuiT)  was  rafhly,  not  to  fay  to  no  purpofe,  adviS'd.  When  Valfalva
came  to  him,  this  opportunity  was  pafs'd,  and  ftitl  more  when -the  feniorphy-
ficians  were  call'd.

4.  For  as  to  their  thinking,  from  thefe  very  fymptoms,  iby  which  Val-
falva judged  the  young  man  to  be  overcome  with  the  force  of  a  diforder,
which  was  already  become  infuperable,  that  he  was  opprefs'd  by  a  convulfiQn^
which  they  believ'd  to  be  as  yet  moveable;  without  doubt -the  fuccefs 'of'
ver.Ee  feftion,  fhows  plainly, which  opinion  came  the  neareft  to  truth.

I  confefs,  however,  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  in  this  diforder  eonvulfion
has  frequently  a  great  fhare,  and  this  eonvulfion  is  fo  much  the  greater,  in
proportion  as  the  pain  is  more  fevere,  whether  the  pain  excite  the  eonvulfion,
or  is  excited  by  the  eonvulfion,  and  alfo  in  proportionas  it  makes  the  greater
fpeed  to  its  fatal  termination.  Thus  I  underftand  why  Boerhaave  (c)  has
accounted  for  the  exquifite  fenfe  of  the  inteflines,  from  their  great  number
of  nervous  papills,  and  immediately  adds:  ^' wherefore  perfons  are  very
"  foon  deftroy'd  by  inflammation,  and  excoriation  of  the  inteftines,  and  if
"  there  be  a  very  great  violence  of  pain,  the  ftrongeft  man  is  difpatch'd  in
-"  the  fpace  of  a  fingle  hour."  But  frequently,  alio,  in  a  violent  pain  of
the  inteftines,  manifeft  marks  of  eonvulfion  dilcover  themfelves,  even  more
than  in  Lselius  {d).

Thus,  not  to  mention  here  the  horrid  convulfions,  that  are  defcrib'd  in
.an  obfervation  (f),  which,  whether  you  confider  the  fymptoms,  or  the  dif-

(rt)  De  medic.  1.  5.  c.  26.  {d)  De  quo  fupra  n.  2.

(b)  Sea.  1.  aph.  I.  ■  {e)  Eph.  n,  c.  dec.  3.  a.  7  &  8  obf.  145,

j,f)  Prjeleft.  ad  inftit.  §.  gu

fedion.


Letter  XXXV. Article  5.  167

fedion,  certainly  relates  to  the  prefent  fubjeffl ;  thus,  I  fay,  I  remember  a
virgin  in  the  place  of  my  nativity,  pretty  far  advanced  in  years,  but  of  a
ftrong  conftitution,  who  was  fubjett  to  a  pain  in  the  belly,  which  her  fenior
phyfician  did  not  doubt  was  a  colic,  and  who,  being  feiz'd  with  the  fame  pain,
but  more  violently  than  ufual,  about  the  end  of  the  year  1709,  yet  without  any
fyniptoms  of  fever  attending  it,  whether  you  confider'd  the  pulfc,  the  urine,.
or  any  other  marks,  was  very  much  eas'd  by  a  glyfter,  which  had  brought
away  a  bilious  matter,  and  her  diforder  grew  milder  every  day,  fo  that  fl:e
•was  no  longer  vifited  by  her  phyfician  ;  I  remember,  therefore,  that  when
the  women,  who  attended  the  patient,  had,  inftead  of  a  glyfter,  which  had
been  injedted  every  other  day  in  the  evening,  introduc'd  a  fuppofitory  of
honey,  fhe  was  immediately  feiz'd  with  fo  violent  a  pain  in  the  anus,  that  in
the  morning  no  pulfe  could  be  found :  and  that  with  this  pain,  wasjoin'd
fo  great  a  conftiidion  of  the  anus,  that  a  glyfter  could  by  no  means  be  in--
jefted :  but  foon  after,  when  they  endeavour'd  to  cure  this  contraftion,  and.
pain,  by  emollients,  and  anodynes,  I  remember  that  all  of  a  fudden,  a  re-
laxation of  this  part  came  on,  juft  as  it  frequently  does  in  bodies  after  death,
and  about  noon,  death  itfelf.

Suppofe  then,  that  this  diforder  was  a  convulfion.  And  will  you  fuppofe
it  could  have  been  eafily  remov'd  by  blood-letting?  What  if  fuch  a  caufe
vellicate  the  nei"ves,  as  it  is  very  difficult  to  overcome,  or  if  it  can  perhaps  be
overcome,  for  a  very  fhort  time,  it  foon  after  attacks  the  patient  in  a  more-'
violent  degree,  as  is  frequently  the  cafe  in  convulfive  diforders  ?  Attend  to-
what  happen'd  v/hen  I  refided  at  Bologna.  There  was  a  monk,  who  was  an-
old  man  indeed,  but  very  ftrong.  This  man  was  feiz'd,  of  a  fudden,  with--
out  any  evident  caufe,  except,  perhaps,  from  cold,  and  fatigue,  with  a  paini
in  his  belly,  which  was  fo  violent  that  he  could  not  ftand  in  any  one  place,,
and  was  forc'd  to  cry  out.  Oil  of  almonds  was  given  to  no  effect,  glyfters.
were  inje6led  without  the  leaft  advantage,  and  blood  drawn  from  the  foot.-
No  remedy  being  of  any  ufe,  he  died  within  twelve  hours  at  leaft,  having,
gnafti'd  his  teeth  two  or  three  times.

I  do  not  write  thefe  things  againft  blood-letting,  which,  if  you  ufe  it  in>
time,  is  a  very  ufeful  reirjcdy.  But  I  put  you  in  mind  of  what  may  foon:
happen,  in  diforders  of  this  kind,  even  after  that  remedy  has  been  made
irfe  of,  when  very  violent  convulfions  prevail:  and  this  that  you  may  know,,
yourfelf,  and  previoufly  inform  others,  that  an  important  remedy  is  not  ta
be  rafhly  blam'd,  if  it  happen  that  a  fatal  terrrdnation  of  the  difeafefoon:
follow  its  ufe.  But  as,  whatever  previous  admonitions  are  given,  it  is  al-
ways a  reproachable  calamity  with  moft"  perfons,  if  a  fpeedy  death  fucceed  a.
confidcrable  remfcdy  that  has  been  made  ufe  of,  you  plainly  underftand  why
Valfalva  was  afraid  of  the  ufe  of  remedies  of  this  kind,  in  thefe  difeafes.

5.  But  what  if  the  difiedion  of  the  body  take  away  all  excufe  fromthe  phy-
fician ?  For  a  convulfion,  although  it  does  not  return,  may  neverthelefs  have
brought  on  fuch  a  diforder  in  the  inteftines  fuddenly,  and  contrary  to  ex-
peftation,  by  obftrudting  the  blood  in  the  conftrifted  veffels,  that  during  this
eonftridlion  blood  cannot  be  taken  away  with  propriety.  You  have  feen,  in
the  cafe  of  Lslius,  how  foon  the  inteftines  had  not  only  contradledan  inflam-
5  mationj.


i-6-8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ination,  but  a  lividnefs  likewife.  No  part  perhaps,  more  eafily,  and  fooner,
than  the  inteftines,  degenerates  into  a  gangrene,  and  becomes  black,  with-
out the  phyfician's  fufpedling  any  thing  of  that  kind.  Which,  although  I
could  ftill  more  properly  demonftrate  it  by  hiftories  that  are  ellewhere  pro-
duc'd,  or  will  be  produc'd  in  this  letter  (f)  ;  yet  I  will  alfo  fljow  here,  by
two  obfervations  that  I  receiv'd  from  my  two  preceptors,  the  one  from  Val-
ialva,  and  the  other  from  Jacob  Sandri. And  firft  take  this  from  Valfalva.

6.  There  was  a  man,  who  for  fome  months,  at  leaft,  had  been  feiz'd  every
day,  five  or  fix  hours  after  eating,  with  pains  of  the  belly,  as  if  he  were  torn'
by  dogs.  To  this  was  added  a  tiux  of  yellow  matter,  and  a  walling  of  flefh  •,
when,  of  a  fudden,  he  was  attack'd  by  an  apoplexy,  which  was  flight  in-
deed, and  after  a  day  or  two  feem'd  to  remit,  fo  that  his  hands  recover'd'
fome  power  of  motion,  and  his  fenfes  were  lets  opprefs'd  :  yet  he  died  on  the
■fifth  day.

His  body  being  examin'd,  every  thing  appear'd  to  be  found,  if  you  ex-
cept the  brain,  and  the  inteftinum  ileum.  For  in  the  ventricles  of  the  for-
mer, was  a  large  quantity  of  ferum,  from  which  the  plexus  choroides  had
become  pale.  And  in  the  ileum  were  feven  or  eight  annular  fpaces,  and  thofe
of  a  black  hue  :  in  which  fpaces  were  glands  of  the  bignefs  of  a  vetch,  and
motl  of  them  fill'd  with  a  white  matter :  thefe  glands  were  not  coUefted  into
heaps,  nor  plac'd  on  the  internal  furface,  but  were  fcatter'd  abroad  didindbly
from  each  other,  and  were  rather  prominent  betwixt  the  coats  of  the  in-
leftine.

7.  The  caufe  of  the  apoplexy,  as  it  does  not  relate  to  the  prefent  fubjefl:,
being  fet  aGde,you  fee  that  the  caufe  of  the  pains  which  recurr'd  everyday  at
a  certain  hour,  confifted,  without  doubt,  in  the  enlarg'd  glands  of  the  ileum,
whether  they,  as  Valfalva  thought,  by  what  he  had  feen  in  fome  other  in-
ftances,  could  not  bear  the  preffure  of  the  nutritous  matter,  as  it  pafs'd
through  the  inteftine,  without  pain ;  or  were  diftended  by  the  new
chyle,  which  was  unable  to  ftruggle  through  the  narrow  paflages  of  thele
glands,  that  were  in  part  obftruded :  which  both  the  nature  thereof,  that  to
Valfalva  feem'd  not  unlike  that  of  the  glands  in  the  mcfentery,  fliow'd  •,  and
that  white  matter  with  which  moft  of  them  were  ftuff'd  up,  in  fome  meafure
confirm'd.

But  what  I  would  have  you  principally  attend  to  here,  is,  how  eafily,  and
how  foon,  all  thefe  fpaces,  in  which  they  were,  contraded  a  blacknefs.  But
you  will  fay  that  the  apoplexy  had  increas'd  the  inertia  of  the  fibres  of  the
inteftine,  and  prevented  them  from  difpatching  the  blood  with  fo  much  ce-
lerity, through  thofe  fpaces,  which  were  vitiated  by  the  glands.  I  confefs
it :  but  a  gangrene  is  not  us'd  to  feize  upon  other  difeas'd  parts  fo  foon,
when  an  apoplexy  comes  on.  And  certainly  no  apoplexy  had  preceded  in
the  other  obfervation,  which  Sandri  related  in  the  following  manner.

8.  N.  Cupellini  being  afflifted  with  a  colic  diforder,  was  fitting  down
on  a  chair,  and  drinking  an  emulfion,  v/hen,  all  of  a  fudden,  he  faid  to  his
fcrvant,  who  was  ftanding  by  him,  take  it,  ftretching  out,  at  the  fame  time,
xkit  glafs  which  he  held  in  his  hand  ;  and  as  he  faid  this,  he  fell  backwards,

f/;  N.  16.  &  18.

and


Letter  XXXV. Article  9, 10,11.  169

and  died  in  an  inftant.  The  whole  body  being  examin'd  by  diffeclion,  no
dilbrder  was  found,  befides  an  inflammation  of  the  inteftinum  colon,  which,
inclin'd  to  blacknefs.

9.  From  this  obfervation  you  not  only  fee  what  I  advanc'd,  but  alfo  per--
ceive  what  diforder  there  certainly  might  be  in  the  fame  inteftine,  in  the
virgin  of  Forli,  alfo,  of  whom  I  fpoke  juft  now  (g).  And  I  would  not
have  you  be  furpriz'd  that  there  were  no  previous  fymptoms  of  a  fever  •,
as  we  are  about  to  fee  in  this  very  letter  {h),  whether  there  can  be  an  in-
flammation without  a  fever,  and  even  whether  there  can  be  a  fphacelus  with-
out an  inflammation.  But  we  muft  firfl:  confider  fuch  things  as  relate  to  the
celerity,  with  which  the  inteftines  contraft  a  fatal  inflammation.

10.  A  certain  running  footman  (that  is  to  fay  he  whom  I  have  taken
notice  of  in  the  fifteen'th  of  the  Epifliote  Anatomicse  (z),  where  I  wrote
other  things  of  him,  which  I  fliall  not  repeat  here)  of  a  low  {lacure,  and  a
fat  habit  of  body,  being  no  longer  able  to  do  bufinefs  as  a  fervant,  beg'd  for
his  livelihood  fome  years,  and  made  very  plentiful  ufe  of  wine,  when  he
could  get  it.  Wherefore  even  on  the  lafl:  day  of  his  life,  when  he  came  home,
and  laid  that  he  was  not  well,  he  took  nothing  to  cure  himfelf  but  bread  and
wine,  foon  after  which'  complaining  of  pains  in  the  belly,  he  died  with  them
about  midnight.  His  body  was  brought  on  the  day  following  into  the  col-
lege, where  about  the  beginning  of  February,  in  the  year  1736,  I  taught
anatomy.

The  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  which  were  lax,  being  cut  into,  and  the
belly,  from  whence  a  very  fl:rong  fmell  proceeded,  being  laid  open,  I  iavv
that  a  very  confiderable  part  of  the  fmall  intefl:ines  went  down,  to  a  conflder-
able  depth,  into  the  lower  part  of  the  pelvis,  fo  as  to  reach  quite  to  the  con-
junction of  the  bladder  with  the  reftum,  filling  up  all  the  fpace  that  was
there.  But  that  appearance  had  exifl:ed  from  the  original  formation  of  the;
body,  or  at  leafl:  was  not  recent.  This  however  was  recent,  that  thefe,  and
the  other  parts  of  the  fmall  inteflines,  were,  in  fome  places,  extremely  nar-
row, and,  at  the  fame  time,  brown,  but  in  other  places  red,  even  the  fmalleffc
veflTels  being  fo  much  diftended  from  the  flragnating  blood,  that  it  almcft
feerti'd  as  if  they  had  been  fill'd  with  an  injedlion  of  red  wax.  And  the  fame
appearance  was  feen  in  feveral  parts  of  the  large  intefl:ines,  but  efpecially  at
the  beginning  of  the  colon.  The  edge  of  the  liver  was  blackifh.  The  fpleen
was  larger  than  it  naturally  is.  The  trunk  of  the  great  artery,  as  it  pafs'd
through  the  belly,  was  not  free  from  fome  little  oflifications.  And  the  vena
cava  was  fill'd  with  much  fluid  and  black  blood.

11.  It  is  true  it  was  not  fo  fliort  a  fpace  of  time,  in  which  the  inflamma-
tion of  the  intefliines  carried  off  the  woman,  of  whom  I  am  to  write  next :
yet  it  was  fhort,  and  perhaps  fliorter  than  it  feems,  if  it  were  as  certain  when
the  inflammation  began,  as  it  is  when  flie  firfl:  began  to  be  diforder'd  at  all.
But  although  this  is  not  fo  clear,  yet  the  other  remarks  that  I  made  upon
this  woman,  I  muft;  not  pafs  over  here,  as  I  promis'd  them  when  I  wrote of

CgJ  N.  4,  (/•)  N.  70.  ad  fin.

{i>)  N.  ig.  &  feq.

Vol.  II.  Z  the


lyo  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  palpitation  of  the  heart  (k),  and  of  the  pulfe'  (/),  and  even  v/hen  1
treated  of  the  affeftions  of  the  eye  (m).  For  this  is  the  old  v/omari,  whofe
diforders  I  defcrib'd  in  that  place,  only  as  far  as  they  related  to  her  eyes,
and  defer'd  the  remaining  part  of  the  defcription  to  another  occafion.

12.  A  poor  old  blind  woman,  of  a  fmall  and  flender  body,  having  been  ill
for  three  days,  was  brought  into  the  hoipital  at  Padua,  being  fuppos'd  to
labour  under  an  inflammation  of  the  thorax.  For  from  the  patient  herfelf
nothing  certain  could  be  learn'd,  as  Ihe  was  then  very  weak,  and  her  pulfe
fo  very  low  and  fmall,  that  fhe  was  carried  out  dead,  on  the  very  fame  day  (he
had  been  brought  in.  This  woman's  body,  as  the  time  of  the  year  was  fuit-
able,  for  it  was  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  1742,  was  more  ufeful  than
I  expedled,  in  order  to  demonftrate  many  things  to  the  ftudents.  And  in
the  courfe  of  thofe  demonftrations,  I  lit  on  thefe  morbid  appearances,  which
I  fhall  take  notice  of.

In  the  belly  the  inteftines  were  inflam'd,  as  the  liver  was  alfo.  And  to
the  fame  caufe  it  was  to  be  afcrib'd,  that  "vvhen  the  uterus  was  open'd,  the
internal  furface  of  the  fundus  was  of  a  colour  not  lefs  red,  than  if  the  woman
had  lately  menftruated.  But  where  the  fundus  contrafted  itfelf  into  the
cervix,  and  the  anterior  and  pofterior  internal  furfaces  came  together,  and
form'd  an  angle  in  the  right  fide,  a  membrane  proceeded  from  this  angle,  not
very  fmall  in  its  fize,  and  pafs'd  tranfverdy  to  the  pofterior  furface,  univer-
fally  cohering  with  that  furface,  on  its  inferior  border,  but  being,  in  other  re-
fpefts,  loofe  and  floating,  fo  that,  contrary  to  the  ufual  appearance  of  the
valvulas  cervicis,  it  had  its  cavity  turn'd  upwards,  and  not  downwards :  for
which  reafon  I  fufpefted  that  this  had  not  exifted  from  the  original  formation,
but  had,  perhaps,  been  the  confequence  of  a  difficult  birth ;  for  it  was  cer-
tain the  woman  had  brought  forth  children,  and  I  faw  the  uterus  inclin'd  to
the  right  fide.

In  the  thorax  the  lungs  were  perfectly  found.  But  the  pericardium  was,
on  all  fides,  connected  to  the  heart,  by  a  univerfal,  though  not  very  firm  co-
hefion,  fo  that  the  two  membranes,  that  is  of  the  heart,  and  pericardium,  could
eafily  be  disjoin'd  from  each  other,  by  dividing  thefe  connexions  with  the
fingers,  and  without  lacerating  either.  The  pericardium  did  not  adhere  to
the  great  vefiels  :  but  on  the  furface,  by  which  it  had  adher'd  to  the  heart,
appear'd  a  certain  white  fpot,  only  in  one  place,  and  that  extending  itfelf  to
a  fmall  breadth  only.  In  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  was  fome  blood  which
was  black,  as  indeed  the  blood  was  every  where,  but  there  were  no  poly-
pous concretions  in  thefe  cavities.  Yet  in  other  parts  of  the  body  thefe  con-
cretions were  found,  round  in  their  figure,  and  white,  and  fome  thick,  firm,
and  long,  as  thofe  were  which  went  from  the  right  auricle,  to  the  internal
iugular  veins,  and  thofe,  alfo,  which  were  produc'd  from  the  orifices  of  the
heart  into  the  arterial  veflfels.  Finally,  what  appearances  were  found  in  the
eyes,  I  have  already  faid  in  that  letter  which  was  laft  pointed  out.

13.  Although  the  hiftories  which  I  have  hitherto  given  you,  fhow  howfoon
pains  of  the  inteftines  may,  fometimes,  become  fatal,  either  by  the  force  of
inflammation,  or  even  of  convulfion  ;  and  confequently,  how  cautious  aphy-

(i)  Epift.  23.  n.  21.  (0  Epift.  24.  n.  12.  (?»)  Epift.  13.  n.  17.

fician


Letter  XXXV. Article 14..  171

fician  ought  to  be,  and  even  fufpicious,  during  the  violence  of  this  difeafe :
yet  that  he  ought  to  be  much  more  cautious,  and  fufpicious,  left  he  fliould,
at  any  time,  be  deceiv'd  into  a  vain  hope  by  the  feeming  remiffion,  and,  as
it  were,  departure  of  this  diforder,  the  following  obfervations  will  fhow  you.

14.  A  young  man  who  was  much  given  to  the  ufe  of  wine,  and  fpirituous
liquors,  as  they  are  call'd,  having  labour'd  under  an  intermitting  fever,  not
long  before,  was  feiz'd  with  a  pain  of  the  belly,  which  a  difcharge  of  flatus,
downwards,  remov'd.  However,  after  fome  days,  the  pain  return'd  again ;
which  not  being  able  to  get  rid  of  at  home,  he  was,  at  length,  receiv'd  into  the
hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de  Vita  at  Bologna,  on  the  fixth  day  after  the  return
of  his  pain.  The  pain  was  continual  in  the  hypogaftrium,  but  flight,  ex-
cept that  it  now  and  then  increas'd,  and  the  belly  was  often,  at  thele  times,
more  fwell'd  in  that  part,  and  if  you  applied  your  hand  to  it,  you  perceiv'd
many  hard  globules,  as  it  were,  feated  in  that  region.  But  all  thefe  fymp-
toms  foon  vanifli'd  -,  yet  return'd  again,  at  intervals.  The  fliomach  alio
was  painful,  and  he  now  threw  up  all  his  aliments  by  vomiting,  as  well  as
his  medicines,  among  which  was  even  opium  itfelf.

Wherefore,  as  the  inteftines  difcharg'd  none  of  their  fsces,  but  by  means
of  glyfters,  it  was  determin'd  to  pay  a  regard  to  this  circumftance  and,  at
the  fame  time,  to  injeft  fomething  of  a  curative  and  nutritious  nature  in
the  glyfters,  as  broths,  for  inftance,  and  decoftions  of  emollient  herbs,  but
this  was  done  without  any  alleviation  of  the  pains,  fo  that  no  excrements
were  brought  away,  before  linfeed  oil  had  been  more  than  once  thrown  up.
Undlions  of  the  belly  with  the  fame  oil,  and  others,  were,  alfo,  tried  without
efled:.  The  patient  bore  the  pain  better  when  he  fat  up  in  the  bed,  than
when  he  lay  down,  for  which  reafon  he  fat  up  even  when  he  flept.  He  was
alfo  better,  and  flept  better,  with  an  empty  ftomach,  than  if  he  happen'd  to
keep  any  thing  down  :  which  circumftance,  and  the  ablence  of  fome  other
fymptoms,  that  frequently  fliew  the  exiftence  of  worms,  made  us  fuppofe
that  the  pain  did  not  arife  from  worms,  notwithftanding  he  had  thrown  up
one  very  long,  and  round  worm,  from  his  mouth,  three  days  before.

At  laft  he  began  to  retain  fome  of  his  nourilhments,  and  even  his  dinner
alfo.  His  cheeks  were  red,  which  he  himfelf  faid  was  owing  to  a  defluxion
of  humours  on  his  face,  to  which  he  had  been  fubjeft.  He  was  thirfty.  His
abdomen  was  univerfally  diftended.  It  was  now  the  fifth  day  from  the  time
of  his  coming  into  the  hofpital,  and  I  fpoke  to  him,  as  ufual,  about  the  fix-
teenth  hour,  for  the  winter  of  the  year  1 703  was  coming  on  :  he  faid  that  he
was  a  little  better,  which  was  confirm'd  by  his  countenance,  and  alacrity  of
ipeech,  and  by  a  more  firm  vigor  of  the  body,  in  fitting  •,  for  the  pulfe  ne-
"verhadhad  any  difagreeable  fymptom,  nor  had  even  then:  at  leaft  there
was  no  fever,  nor  could  any  ever  be  obferv'd,  during  the  whole  courfe  of  his
being  in  the  hofpital,  except,  perhaps,  once.  And  from  this  ftate  of  '5{-;|
diforder  who  could  have  fuppos'd  that  any  thing  fo  fatal  was  at  hand  ?  Yet
fcarcely  two  hours  had  pafs'd,  from  the  time  that  I,  and  the  ftudents  who
law  him  with  me,  had  made  thefe  obfervations,  when  he  began,  of  a  fudden,
to  cry  out  from  a  feverity  of  pain,  and  that  continually  even  to  the  ninth  hour
of  the  night.  In  the  mean  while  he  had  a  vomiting,  and  in  the  evening  he
himfelf  gave  notice  that  his  pulfe  could  no  more  be  felt,  nor  indeed  could  it

Z  2  be


172  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

be  perceiv'd,  by  thofe  who  were  preient.  When  it  was  the  ninth  hour,  to
which  time,  as  I  faid  jufl  now,  his  pain  continu'd,  he  faid  that  he  miifl;  get
out  of  bed,  in  order  to  have  a  ftool.  And  while  he  was  about  this  bufmefs  a
fwooning  came  on,  and  he  died,  in  this  manner,  within  half  an  hour.

While  his  body  was  wafh'd,  on  the  day  following,  a  great  quantity  of  pu-
trid blood,  as  it  were,  flow'd  out  of  his  mouth,  diluted  with  a  ftercoraceous
fluid,  of  the  colour  of  tobacco,  and  fmelling  very  ftrongly.  And  by  this  means
the  abdomen  became  fomewhat  flaccid  in  the  hypogaftrium:  and  although
in  the  epigaftrium,  which  was  livid,  and  in  the  other  parts,  it  was  flill
hard,  and  diftended,  yet  it  was  lefs  fo  than  it  had  been  in  the  living  body.
When  the  knife  penetrated  to  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  a  great  quantity  of
fluid  immediately  burft  forth  with  an  impetus,  being  fimilar  to  that  which  had
flow'd  from  his  mouth  -,  and  it  burft  forth  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  it  was-
doubtful,  not  only  to  us  who  flood  by,  but  even  to  the  perfon  who  per-
form'd  the  difleftion,  whether  it  came  from  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  into
which  it  had  been  before  extravafated,  or  from  the  diftended  inteftine,  which,
in  confequence  of  its  diftention,  might  eafily  be  wounded  together  with  the
peritonasum.

However,  foon  after,  when  the  abdomen  was  fully  laid  open,  the  cavity
thereof  appear'd  to  be  full  of  that  humour.  The  fmall  inteftines  were  all  as
black  as  a  chard-coal.  And  the  fpleen,  alfo,  was  afFedted,  or  at  leaft  in
part,  with  the  fame  fphacelus.  Yet  the  ftomach,  as  far  as  could  be  judg'd  from
the  external  appearance,  was  found,  and  all  that  part  of  the  large  inteftines,
likewife,  which  goes  from  the  termination  of  the  ileum,  to  the  left  hypo-
chondrium  :  for  we  were  prevented  from  inquiring  into  other  appearances,  by
the  almoft  inconceivable  ill  fmell  ;  which  was  fo  much  the  greater,  as  through
negligence,  and  hafte,  the  inteftine  had  been  perforated,  whereby  the  filthy
proluvies  was  increas'd,  with  which  a  round  worm,  of  a  moderate  fize,  had
alfo  come  out.

15.  You  have  feen  how  much  diforder  there  was  in  all  the  fmall  inteftines,
when  the  young  man  feem'd  to  be  better.  But  do  you  imagine  this  mifchief
was  done  before  he  came  into  the  hofpital,  or  afterwards  ?  If  before,  then  of
courfe  this  very  great  diforder  lay  hid  for  five  days,  without  thofe  fyrriptoms
which  generally  attend  upon  a  fphacelus.  And  if  you  fuppofe  it  to  have  hap-
pen'd  afterwards,  how  did  it  all  come  on  without  figns  of  inflammation,  and
particularly  v/ithout  a  continual  fever  ?  And  fuppofe  that  almoft  the  fame
queftions  may  be  aflc'd  you  by  me,  when  I  produce  the  obfervations  which
follow,  or  when  you  read  that  of  Segerus,  which  is  extant  in  this  fourteenth
feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  («).  That  is  to  fay,  an  old  man  after  having
complain'd,  for  fome  days,  of  pains  in  the  belly,  to  which  he  was  fubjeft,
yet  not  fo  violent,  as  to  confine  him  to  his  bed,  at  length  returning  home
iootit  evening  from  his  garden,  his  pains  became  fo  violent,  that  no  remedies
were  of  fervice  to  him,  and  he  died,  on  the  following  day,  about  the  fourth
hour  in  the  morning  :  and  indeed  other  difeafes  of  long  ftanding  were  found
in  the  pancreas,  the  liver,  and  the  fpleen ;  but  this  one  was  recent, that

(«)  Obf.  6.

«  the


Letter  XXXV. Article  1 6.  173

"  the  inteftines, particularly the fmall ones, and the colon, were  very
<'  black."

Is  it  poffible  then  that  all  this  mifchief  could  happen  within  a  few  hours,  from
the  time  that  Segerus  had  found  the  pulfe  to  be  fomewhat  more  quick  than
ufual  ?  But  in  regard  to  this  I  will  alfo  confider  below  {o).  At  prefent,  to  return
to  our  young  man,  if  it  had  been  certain  that  the  very  foetid  coUuvies,  which
I  h-ave  mention'd,  had  been  previoufly  effus'd  into  the  cavity  of  the  abdo-
men, by  a  rupture  of  the  inteftine  while  living,  and  not  from  a  wound  cf
the  inteftine  after  death,  as  we  had  fome  reafon  to  fufpedt,  we  ftiould  then
conjedlure  that  the  fvvooning,  and  death  which  was  the  confequcnce  of  it,
had  probably  happen'd  at  the  time  when  in  the  ftrainings  to  difcharge  tlie
fsces,  he  had  broken  through  fome  rotten  part  of  the  dillended  inteftine.  For
Wepfer,  alfo,  as  you  will  likewife  read  in  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulch return  (^),
fpeaks  of  "  the  inteftines  being  ruptur'd,  and  all  the  fordes  extravafated  into
"  the  cavity,  with  the  fudden  death  of  the  patients."  Which,  however,  does
not  always  necefiarily  follow,  as  two  obfervations  in  the  fame  feftion  of  Fer-
nelius  (q),  and  Riverius  (r),  jointly  demonftrate :  and  the  fame  may  be  ga-
ther'd  from  one  of  ours  defcrib'd  in  the  former  letter.  But  whether  thofe
which  you  read  in  the  Commcrcium  Litterarium  (j),  and  in  the  Ads  of  the
Csefarean  Academy  (/),  belong  to  one,  or  to  the  other  clafs,  1  leave  to  your
own  prudence  to  determine.  To  the  former  clafs,  however,  belongs  that
which  was  lately  given  us  by  the  celebrated  Galeati  (u)  ;  fo  fuddenly  was  the
man  carried  off  by  tormina  of  the  inteftines,  and  fo  full  of  excrements  was  the
abdominal  cavity,  likewife,  found,  which  had  been  difcharg'd  from  the  rup-
tur'd inteftine.

But  now  let  me  give  you  a  lamentable  hiftory,  in  which  the  pains  had  not
only  remitted,  but  entirely  gone  away.

1 6.  A  {lender  woman  of  a  fliort  ftature,  and  of  a  bilious  temperament,
as  it  is  call'd,  being  about  forty  years  of  age,  and  having  been  a  widow  for
three  years,  was  accuftom'd  to  fpit  blood  now  and  then,  which  fhe  attribut-
ed to  having  been  without  her  menftrua,  for  eight  years  paft,  though  to  me
it  feem'd  that  this  blood  came  from  the  larynx  rather  than  from  the  lungs,
when,  at  length,  from  anger,  and  uneafinefs  of  mind,  fhe  was  feiz'd  with  a
pain,  on  account  of  v/hich  fhe  was  oblig'd  to  come  into  the  hofpital  of  St.
Mary  de  Morte»  at  Bologna,  about  the  beginning  of  March,  in  the  year
1706.  This  pain  feem'd  to  be  from  the  cutting  of  knives,  as  it  were,  firft  be-
low the  left  breaft,  from  which  feat  it  extended  itfelf,  afterwards,  without
quitting  it,  to  the  part  below  the  right  breaft,  where  it  was  more  flight  how-
ever, fo  as  to  fufFer  the  patient  to  lie  on  that  fide.  For  it  increas'd  from  the
part  being  touch'd :  and  made  refpiration  difficult.  It  had  begun  with  a  fe-
brile rigor,  which  recurr'd  every  day  ;  but  the  fever  did  not  intermit.  The
face  was  red:  the  thirft  was  troublefome  ;  but  the  cough  ftill  more  fo,  as  it
exafperated  the  pain.  The  fpitting  was  frequently  bloody,  at  other  times
white,  thick,  and  frothy. There  was  often  a  fenfation  as  if  of  fomething

(c)  N.  19.  &  feq.  (s)  A.  1742.  hebd.  45.  n.  2.

(/)  In  addit.  obf.  3.  (t)  Tom.  8.  obf.  47.

(q)  23  &  21.  §.  4.  {u)  Comment,  de  bonon.  fc. acad. tom.  3.

{r)  N.  9.  '  inter  medica.

aicending


1 74  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

afcending  to  the  throat.  And,  finally,  there  was  a  pain  about  the  navel,
juft  as  if  dogs  were  tearing  that  part. The  belly  was  lax.

Blood  was  taken  from  the  foot :  and  other  remedies,  which  were  fuppos'd
to  be  ferviceable,  were  adminifter'd.  After  a  few  days,  without  any  previous
critical  evacution,  all  the  fymptoms  were  grown  fo  much  milder,  that  the
phyfician  pronounc'd  the  patient  already  well.  In  confequence  of  this  fhe
got  out  of  bed :  but  her  ftrength  foon  failing  her,  fhe  was  prefently  oblig'd
to  return  to  her  bed,  where  flie  was  found  contrafted  into  herfelf,  as  we  ge-
nerally are  from  cold,  and  without  any  pulfe.  She  was  afk'd  whether  llie
felt  any  pain  in  the  thorax,  or  belly,  to  which  fhe  anfwer'd  in  the  nega-
tive. On  the  fame  day  fhe  began  to  difcharge  a  foetid  blood  by  ilool.  She
was  afterwards  delirious  :  and  convulfive  ftartings  of  the  tendons  difcover'd
themfelves  in  the  wrifts.  Being  much  weaken'd  by  thefe  fymptoms,  fo  that
fhe  was  no  longer  able  to  fpeak,  flie  died  on  the  fixteenth  day  from  the  be-
ginning of  the  diforder.

The  abdomen  which  had  fubfided,  being  cut  into,  and  laid  open,  a  foetid
fmell  was  difcharg'd,  fuch  as  generally  comes  from  a  gangrene,  but  mix'd
with  that  odour,  which  v^fhere  there  are  worms  feems  to  be  emitted  from  an
acid  matter  as  it  were.  Nor  indeed  were  round  worms  wanting  in  the  fmall
inteflines,  all  of  which,  from  a  red  colour,  inclin'd  to  a  livid  and  blackifh  hue.
The  fame  morbid  lividnefs  occupied  the  flat  furface  of  the  liver,  on  the
lower  part  of  it,  and  penetrated  pretty  far  into  its  fubflance.  The  pancreas
being  become  thicker  than  natural,  confifted  of  indurated  globules,  as  it
were.  '  The  liver,  alfo,  was  fomewhat  hard,  and  the  gall-b^.j,dder  was  di-
flended  with  calculi,  to  the  number  of  a  hundred  and  twenty,  which  were
contain'd  in  a  palifh  bile.

The  largefl  of  thefe,  which  were  about  twenty  in  number,  were  equal  to
the  bignefs  of  a  filbert.  Other  circumftances  relative  to  thefe  calculi,  I  have  dc-
fcrib'd  in  the  Adverfaria,  in  the  firft  place  (x).  Where  (y)  fomething  is  alfo
faid  of  the  fituacion  of  the  uterus  in  this  widow,  which  was  fo  drawn  to  the
right  fide  of  the  pelvis,  by  the  round  ligament  being  fhorter  than  ufual,
that  the  middle  of  the  pelvis  was  without  a  uterus.  Moreover,  where  the
tube  emerg'd  from  the  uterus,  on  the  left  fide,  was  a  prominent  puflule,
turgid  with  a  white  pus,  equal  in  fize  to  a  lupin  ;  and  the  fubflance  of  the
uterus,  which  the  puftule  had  hollowed  out,  appear'd  to  be  black  after  the
puflule  was  open'd,  and  the  pus  difcharg'd.  The  tubes  contain'd  a  matter
which  was  not  white,  but  of  a  f^efhy  colour  degenerating  into  yellow.  The
tefles  were  contradted,  and  had  a  few  veficles  within  them  ;  and  the  coat  of
one  was  almoft  cartilaginous.

On  opening  the  thorax,  we  found  the  lungs,  on  their  anterior  furface,
conneded  in  a  few  places  to  the  pleura  by  membranes,  but  in  other  places
free,  and  found  alfo,  if  you  except  the  anterior  part  of  the  right  lobe,  the
fubflance  of  which  was  fomewhat  compaft,  but  not  very  hard.  There  was
no  moifture  in  the  pericardium :  but  in  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  which
was  flaccid,  and  at  all  the  orifices  of  that  vifcus,  were  fmall  polypous  con-
cretions.

(*•)  III,  animad.  28.  W  IV.  animad.  25.

As


Letter  XXXV. Article  17.  175

As  to  the  parts  of  the  pharynx,  from  whence  the  bloody  fpitting  had  pro--
ceeded,  I  have  fpoken  of  thefe  in  the  Epiftolse  Anatomicse  (z).

Finally,  when  the  head  was  fever'd  from  the  neck,  a  fmall  quantity  of
water  iflbed  forth,  through  the  great  foramen  of  the  occiput :  and  fome  wa-
ter was  aifo  found  under  the  pia  mater,  when  the  cranium,  was  open'd,  par-
ticularly on  the  right  fide.  In  the  lateral  ventricles  of  the  cerebrum  was  a
reddifli  ferum,  and  the  plexus  choroides  were  unequal,  with  a  great  number  of
hydatids,  which  were  eafily  broken  through  by  touching  them.  From  the
f;6tion3  of  the  medullary  fubftance,  where  fome  bloody  points  were  difco-
ver'd,  a  greater  quantity  of  blood  was  prefs'd  out  than  there  generally  is.
From  this  cerebrum,  as  alfo  from  the  tongue,  the  pharynx,  and  even  from
the  very  eyes  themfelves,  which  I  differed,  the  fame  kind  of  odour  of  worms
was'  perceiv'd,  that  I  fpoke  of  in  the  belly.

17.  Ifyoufetafide  what  relates  to  the  delirium,  to  the  convulfions,  to
the  fpitting  of  blood,  to  the  pains  of  the  breaft,  and  the  other  diforders,
which  are  not  the  objecSts  of  our  prefent  inquiry,  and  only  confider  the  pains
of  the  inteftines ;  you  will  eafily  conceive,  that  when  thefe  as  well  as  the  other
fymptoms,  had  fo  greatly  remitted,  without  any  critical  evacution  preceding,
that  the  woman  was  fuppos'd  to  be  recover'd,  nor  flie  herlelf  longer  felt  any
pain,  the  inteftines  had  then  begun  to  grow  livid,  and  black,  which  the  dif-
charge  of  a  foetid  blood  by  ftool,  beginning  on  that  very  day,  to  fay  nothing
of  the  afphyxia,  join'd  to  demonftrate.

Nothing  in  the  whole  pra6i:ice  of  medicine,  ought  more  to  be  fufpedted  than
the  fudden  vanilliingofpain  contrary  to  our  expectation.  I  remember  that  the
very  fagacious,  and  experienc'd  phyfician,  Peter  Molinelli,  whom  I  have  com-
mended in  the  life  of  Valfalva,  related  to  me  a  recent  obfervation  of  his,  to
the  fame  effeft.  A  young  man  of  a  melancholic  temperament,  v/as  feiz'd
with  an  acute  fever,  with  an  inflammation  of  the  jav^^s,  and  a  delirium.
About  the  fourteenth  day  all  the  other  fymptoms,  befides  the  fever,  left
the  patient,  but  that  continu'd,  and  was  conftant  -,  and  although  the  patient
perfpir'd  plentifully,  and  made  a  good  deal  of  water,  yet  the  fever,  except  that
it  feem'd  to  have  been  abfent  for  one  day,  ran  on  quite  to  the  thirty-fifth  day.
As  Molinelli  fufpefted,  from  the  obftinate  perfeverance  of  the  fever,  even  after
lb  great  a  difcharge  by  fweat,  and  urine,  that  fome  very  confiderable  difor-
der  was  lurking  beneath  it,  behold  without  any  previous  irregularity  of  the
patient,  or  the  attendants,  an  seruginous  diarrhoea  fuddenly  came  on,  which
was  attended  with  a  pain  a  little  above  the  region  of  the  bladder.  And  as
thefe  fymptoms  came  on  fuddenly,  fo  they  as  fuddenly  vanifh'd.

Then  indeed  the  phyfician  began  to  fear  fomething  very  violent,  and  not
without  reafon.  For  the  whole  abdomen  was  harden'd  to  an  incredible  de-
gree, with  a  fenfe  of  internal  hear,  and,  when  you  touch'd  it,  even  of  pain  :
at  the  fame  time  there  was  no  pulfe,  a  delirium  came  on,  a  difficult  refpiration,
and,  without  figns  of  convulfion,  death  within  the  third  day,  from  the  time
the  abdomen  had  grown  hard.  And  although  he  was  furpriz'd,  how  an  in-
flammation could  arife  from  blood,  which  was  eflTete,  as  it  muft  necefiTarily  be,
after  a  very  long,  and  violent  illnefs  •,  yet  that  it  was  arifen  he  did  not  doubt ;

CzJ  IX.  N.  14.

and


176  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

and  I  did  not  doubt  but-  a  gangrene  had  arifen  alfo.  But  what  it  was  not  pofTi-
ble  compleatly  to  afcertain,  by  reafon  of  the  liberty  of  opening  the  body  of  this
young  man  being  denied,  it  was  poflible  to  afcertain  in  a  woman  of  tiie  firft
rank,  whofe  hiilory  being  communicated  to  me  by  one  of  her  phyficians,
lliould  not  be  pafs'd  over  here,  as  it  was  very  much  like  thofe  which  are  de-
fcrib'd  above.

18.  A  very  great  princefs  of  fifty-four  years  of  age,  v/ho  was  not  fat  in  her
limbs,  but  very  fat  in  her  belly,  in  whole  pulfe  it  was  remarkable,  that  after
every  two  laudable  ftrokes,  immediately  follow'd  as  many  ftrokes  that  were
low,  and  of  unequal  celerity,  having  feem'd  to  be  recover'd  from  a  very
violent  pain  of  the  inteftines,  which  drew  the  bladder  into  confent,  and  pre-
vented the  power  of  making  water,  was,  a  very  few  days  after  that  pain  had
left  her,  feiz'd  with  a  diarrhoea,  by  which  ftools  of  a  black  colour  were  dif-
charg'd,  and  foon  after  with  death.

The  belly  being  open'd,  feme  of  the  inteftines,  and  the  ftomach,  were
found  to  be  affected  with  a  gangrene-,  the  gall-bladder  v^as  dry,  and  in  it
was  a  calculus  of  the  bignefs  of  a  fmall  pear  :  in  the  kidnies  were  rather  gra-
nules of  fand  than  calculi.  In  the  thorax  the  heart,  and  pericardium,  were
over-loaded  with  fat.

19.  Whether  this  oppreffive  quantity  of  fat,  or  even  fomething  here-
ditary, as  thofe  things  which  I  remember  to  have  read,  formerly,  of  the
king  her  father,  ieem  to  prove,  was  the  caufe  of  that  inequality  of  pulfe,  I
fhould  at  leaft  think  that  the  gangrene  of  the  inteftines  was  to  be  attributed
rather  to  the  foregoing  inflammation,  when  the  pain  troubled  her,  than  to
the  difcharge  of  atra  bilis,  as  it  is  commonly  call'd,  by  ftool.  For  this  dif-
charge  had  not  infedled  the  ftomach  ;  and  in  the  widow  of  whom  I  fpoke  jult
row  {a),  black  ftools  preceded  her  death,  which  did  not  confift  of  atra  bilis,
but  of  putrid  blood.

Yet  it  is  not  very  probable,  you  will  fay,  that  many  experienc'd  phyfi-
cians, and  efpccially  fuch  as  are  generally  call'd  upon  to  attend  princes,  did
not  diftinguiOi  an  inflammation,  nor  the  degeneration  thereof  into  gangrene.
And  as  it  is  my  cuftom  to  judge  of  others,  and  particularly  in  a  diforder
which  I  did  not  fee  myfelf,  as  I  would  have  others  judge  of  me,  I  will  here,
alfo,  preferve  my  cuftom  of  accufing  nobody  rafhly  •,  and  unlefs  you  diflfent,
I  will  fay  that  this  gangrene  came  on  without  any  previous  inflammation.
And  this  I  ftiall  do  under  the  countenance  of  a  great  authority,  I  mean  of
Fernelius  (^),  who,  after  a  very  violent  pain,  faw  "  the  extremity  of  the  foot
"  fuddenly  fphacelated,  without  any  confpicuous  rednefs,  fo  that  the  patient
"  was,  at  length,  carried  oflF  without  any  fever,  without  any  very  violent
"  fymptoms,"  Although  therefore,  "  the  greater  part  of  phyficians  think -
"  that  fphacelus  is  the  indivifible  confequence  of  violent  inflammation,"  yet
from  confidering  feveral  obfervations,  which  are  very  fimilar  to  that  of  Fer-
nelius, Frederic  Hoffmann  has  exprefsly  faid  (f),  "  wherefore  there  is  no  rea-
"■  fon  to  doubt,  but  the  fame  thing  may  happen  internally,  in  the  vilcera,
"  alfo,  without  a  previous  inflammation."

(a)  N.  16.  (0  Differ:,  de  morb.  hep.  ex  anat.  deduc.

(^)  De  abdit.  rerumcauf.  1.  2,  c.  15,  §. 19,

±  But


Letter  XXXV. Article 20.  177

•  But  if  you  want  inftances  In  the  inteftines  themfelves,  you  may  read  over
again  the  obfervation  of  Segerus  {d) :  or  rather,  as  in  his  obfervation  there  was
a  very  violent  pain  obierv'd,  and  a  very  quick  motion  of  the  artery,  turn  to
another  of  Frederic  Ortlobius  (e),  which  is  alfo  to  be  met  with  in  the  Se-
pulchretum  (f)  :  you  will  find  that  the  inteftines  were  "  livid,  black,  and
"  fphacelated,"  on  the  right  fide,  and  that,  as  Ortlobius  himfelf  wonders  at
in  the  fcholium,  "  without  previous  pains  of  the  belly,  and  without  a  pre-
"  vious  manifeft  fever."

20.  Yet  even  as  in  the  patient  of  Ortlobius,  "  obfcure  pains"  of  the  belly  had
preceded  ;  and  as  there  is  nobody  who  can  afiert  of  him,  as  Fernelius  did
of  the  foot  of  the  other,  whom  I  fpoke  of  juft  now  ;  or  v/ho  can  afcertain,
as  in  the  external  parts  in  general,  that  a  "  confpicuous  rednefs "  had  not
preceded,  in  the  vifcera  aUb,  you  will  not  deny  that  a  fphacelus  of  the  in-
teftines may,  fometimes,  happen,  without  any  inflammation  preceding-,  bui
will  at  the  fame  time  enquire  whether  it  may  not,  fometimes,  fucceed  to  an
inflammation,  the  principal,  and  common,  fymptoms  of  which  do  not  ap-
pear.

Not  to  recede  from  the  Sepulchretum,  turn,  I  befeech  you,  to  the  ob-
fervation of  Riverius  (g),  in  this  very  fourteenth  feftion.  The  inteftinum
ileum,  you  will  find,  was  afftdled  about  its  termination,  together  with  the
portion  of  the  mcfentery  that  was  join'd  to  it,  with  a  gangrene,  and  even
with  a  fphacelus,  in  a  patient  who  having  labour'd  under  a  pain  of  the
inteftines,  on  the  firft  day  of  his  diforder,  which  was  protrafted  to  the  thir-
teenth day,  but  "  being  free  from  pain,  and  from  fever,"  on  the  fecond
day,  caus'd  great  doubts  and  difficulties  to  arife  among  the  phyficians,  on
the  third  and  the  following  days,  as  "  the  fever  which  came  on  after  the  fe-
"  cond  day,  together  with  a  thirft,  and  drynefs  of  tongue,  feem'd  to  give
"  proofs  of  inflammation ;  but  they  could  not  conceive  how  an  inflamma-
"  tion  could  exift  in  the  inteftines,  without  pain."

Shall  we  fuppofe  then  that  the  fphacelus  happen'd  on  the  firft  day  ?  If  fo,  we
muft,  alfo,  fuppofe  that  the  patient  liv'd  in  this  ftate,  for  the  fpace  of  twelve
days.  And  can  this  be  fuppos'd  ?  Or  how  could  it  happen,  that  after  the
fphacelus  was  form'd,  a  fever,  which  did  not  exift  before,  and  a  drynefs  of
tongue,  came  on  ?  For  you  will  fee  in  the  preceding  letter,  that  the  pulfe  of
an  old  man  (b),  was,  from  a  febrile  ftate,  chang'd  at  length  to  the  appearance
of  a  healthy  ftate,  and  that  the  tongue,  from  a  dry  ftate,  was  become  moift,
although  in  his  body  after  death  we  found  a  part  of  the  inteftines  ftill  red,  and
another  part  livid,  black,  and  occupied  with  a  gangrene,  which  were  pretty
fure  marks  that  this  part  had  very  lately  pafs'd  from  inflammation,  to  gan-
grene. But  as  to  pain,  other  letters  of  mine  teftify,  that  inflammation  of  the
inteftines  had  exifted  without  it.

For  to  take  no  notice  that  in  the  twenty-ninth  (i),  the  inteftines  are  not
faid  to  have  been  troubled  with  any  pain,  notwithfl;anding  they  were  univer-
fally  inflam'd  to  a. great  degree;  as  I  fuppos'd  this  to  happen  on  account  of

(«')  Via.  fupra  n.  15.  fgj  Obf.  21.  §.  4.

{e)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  i.  obf.  14J.  f/jj  N.  25.

C/J  L.  3.f.  I.  obf.  II.  (0  N.  10.  1 1,.

Vol.  I.I.  A  .a  their


r78 , Book  m. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly. -

their  being  paralytic :  they  certainly  were  not  paralytic  in  other  patients,  as,
for  inftance,  in  the  two  who  are  fpoken  of  in  the  twenty-firft  letter  {k),  and
yet,  although  the  inteftines  were  found  to  be  inflam'd,  no  complaint  had
been  heard  of  pain  being  therein.  And  to  mention  a  patient  whom  you
may  more  eafily  call  to  mind,  a  woman  was  defcrib'd  in  the  preceding  let-
ter (/),  whofe  fmall  inteftines  were  red  in  the  chief  part  of  them  •,  yet  they
had  feem'd  to  be  pretty  free  from  pain.  And  indeed  the  other  principal
fymptom  of  inflammation,  which  is  fever,  had  never  been  obferv'd  in  this
woman,  through  the  whole  courfe  of  the  difeafe  :  and  in  the  porter,  whofe
hiftory  was  given  a  little  after  hers  (m),  the  fever,  whether  you  attended  to
the  pulfe  being  not  very  frequent,  or  the  flefh  not  hot,  was  flight ;  yet  the
infiummation  was  not  flight  •,  fo  that  there  was  no  room  in  him,  and  much
lefs  in  the  woman,  for  the  opinion  of  Ballonius  (n),  though  in  other  refpe6bs.
to  be  commended.  Who  after  having  faid  "  it  was  natural  to  fuppofe,  that
"  a  confiderable  fever  muft  be  the  confequence  of  internal  inflammations-,"
yet  immediately  adhering  to  the  opinion  of  Galen,  "  who  taught  that  in-
"  flammations  of  the  internal  parts  muft  be  very  great,  in  order  to  bring.
"  on  an  acute  fever,"  he  fays  this,  if  there  be  a  "  flight  inflammation  an
"  ardent  fever  does  not  come  on."

21.  And  all  thefe  things  being  confider'd,  when  together  with  the  other
fymptoms  of  inflam'd  inteftines,  you  find  a  violent  pain,  and  an  acute  fever,
attending  the  patients,  you  will  deiervedly,  and  with  juftice,  give  credit  to  thofe
medical  writers,  who  have  plac'd  thefe  two  appearances  among  the  principal
fymptoms  of  great  inflammation,  in  the  inteftines.  Yet  if  you,  at  any  time,
find  that  one,  or  both,  of  thefe  are  not  prefent,  or  but  in  a  flight  degree,  you,
will  not  immediately  fuppofe,  either  that  there  is  no  inflammation,  or  that  it  is
but  flight,  and  that  a  gangrene,  and  fphacelus,  cannot  exift  in  the  inteftines.
of  thofe  perfons,  in  whom  you  do  not  fee  that  thefe  two  fymptoms  have
preceded.  It  were  much  to  be  wifli'd,  I  confefs,  that  phyficians  when  they
have  recounted  the  fymptoms  of  this  inflammation,  and  of  a  gangrene  that
is  the  confequent  of  it,  would  not  omit  this  monitum  in  a  difeafe,  which  by,
a  deceitful  appearance  of  this  kind,  frequently  brings  on  a  fwift  and  fud-
den  deftruftion.  fay  frequently.  For  I  remember,  when  with  furprize
I  related  to  Valfalva,  and  Albertini,  the  cafe  of  the  young  man  which  I  de-
defcrib'd  to  you  above  (o),  that  both  of  them,  immediately,  affirm'd  nearly
the  fame  thing  to  have  happen'd  to  them,  more  than  once.

At  which  time  Albertini  inculcating  upon  me,  that  it  was  neceflary  to-v
watch,  and  be  cautious,  in  pains  of  the  inteftines :  for  that  he  after  flight.
pains,  or  at  leaft  with  thofe  which  were  by  no  means  confiderable,  without,
any  manifeft  fever,  without  any  convulfion,  without  any  vomiting,  when,
both  the  interna],  and  external,  fenfes  were  vigorous,  and  ftrong,  had  feen-
patients  fall  very  fuddenly  into  the  utmoft  danger,  and  be  foon  fnatch'd  away
by  a  latent  inflammation  of  thefe  vifcera,  degenerating  into  an  unexpe«5]:ed
fphacelus ;  I  fay  Albertini  inculcating  thefe  things  upon  me,  I  afk'd  of
that  very  attentive  phyfician,  and  diligent  obferver,  from  what  figns  then,

(i)  N.  9.  &  17. ■  («)  L.  1.  Confil.  med.  112.

(/)  N.  II.  .  ^)  N.  14.

H  N.  18.

we


Letter  XXXV. Article  22.  179

we  might  judge  of  the  danger  which  threatens,  and  be  able  to  foretell  it  at
leaft.  He  anfwer'd,  from  the  pulfe,  the  abdomen,  and  the  face.  For  the  pulfe
is  low  and  rather  weak,  and  if  you  attend  to  it  clofely  has  fome  little  irre-
gularity, which  makes  it  not  quite  fimilar  to  itfelf :  and  the  abdomen  is
tenfe,  hard,  and  attended  with  fome  pain  :  and,  finally,  the  face  has  fome-
thing  unufual  in  its  appearance,  though  diEFerent  in  different  perfons,  fo  that
fometimes  I  have  obferv'd  the  eyes  to  look  as  if  the  patient  were  frighten'd,
at  other  times  there  has  been  a  kind  of  lividnefs  about  the  lips  ;  and  thefe,
faid  he,  are  the  moft  general  appearances  that  it  has  happen'd  to  me  to  meet
with,  in  cafes  of  this  kind  ;  yet  I  have  fometimes  alfo  obferv'd  a  morbid  ap-
pearance of  the  tongue,  and  a  kind  of  thirft.

Thus  it  was  that  he  pointed  out  the  fymptoms,  with  that  ingenoufnefs
which  was  natural  to  his  chara6ter.  And  the  truth  of  his  remarks  has  been
prov'd  to  me  by  the  cafes  of  many,  but  particularly  by  that  of  Thomas  Ale-
otti,  a  fellow-citizen  of  mine,  who  was  equally  eminent  on  the  account  of
his  noble  family,  and  the  probity  of  his  manners.  For  he  being  confin'd  to
his  bed,  after  certain  pains  of  the  belly,  to  which  he  was  fubject,  and  not
recovering  with  the  fame  degree  of  quicknefs,  that  he  liad  been  accuftom'J
to  recover  with,  his  phyfician  was  fent  to  me  about  evening,  in  the  autumn
of  the  year  171 1,  if  I  remember  rightly,  when  1  was  prevented  from  going
abroad  by  a  flight  diforder,  to  confult  me  upon  the  cafe:  this  phyfician  hav-
ing told  me  that  the  patient  was  attended  with  fome  of  thofe  fymptoms,
which  I  mention'd  juft  now,  and  having  found  out,  by  the  queftions  I  afi-c'd
him,  that  others  were  not  wanting,  I  defir'd  him,  quite  contrary  to  his  ex-
peftation,  to  return  to  the  patient,  and  if  he  obferv'd  him  to  be  grown  ne-
ver fo  little  worfe,  to  take  care  to  inform  the  people  about  him,  that  a  very
confiderable  danger  might  be  at  hand,  and  that  the  patient  might  fettle  all
his  affairs  reipeding  both  himfelf,  and  his  family.

You  will  naturally  inquire  what  was  the  event?  Why  a  very  few  hours  af-
ter, the  patient  having  begun  to  grow  manifeftly  worfe,  and  having  imme-
diately done  thofe  things,  of  which  he  was  at  length  admonifla'd,  this  ex-
cellent man  was  fnatch'd  away  by  a  fpeedy  death,  within  the  courfe  of  that
very  night.

22.  But  as  the  nature  of  medicine  is  fuch,  that  the  fame  things  do  not  al-
ways anfwer  in  the  fame  degree,  I  would  have  you  make  ufe  of  what  I  have  faid
in  fuch  a  manner,  as,  if  at  any  time  you  fee  the  greater  part  of  thefe  fymp-
toms, which  I  have  mention'd,  come  together,  to  be  at  leaft  fufpicious  of  the
confequences,  and  obferve  the  fucceeding  fymptoms  with  great  caution  and
attention.  And  in  the  mean  while,  perhaps,  it  will  not  be  altogether  without
advantage,  if  you  compare  with  the  obfcrvations,  which  are  written  in  this
and  the  former  letter,  en  the  one  hand,  the  greater  part  of  the  fymptoms
recounted  by  Albertini,  and  on  the  other  hand,  thofe  which  are  generally
given  by  phyficians,  in  order  to  diftinguifh  the  inflammation  of  the  inteftines.
Albertini  had  obferv'd  the  pulfe  to  be  low,  and  rather  weak,  fuch  as  you  will
find  it  to  have  been,  in  general,  in  the  foregoing  letter,  under  number  nine,
eleven,  eighteen,  and  twenty-five,  and  in  this,  under  number  two,  to  fay
nothing  of  the  afphuxia,  which  was  at  laft  obferv'd  in  the  fame  caie,  and
under  number  fourteen,  and  fixteen.  He  had  alfo  obferv'd  the  abdomen  to  be
tenfe  and  hard  •,  the  face  and  eyes  to  have  fomething  unufual  in  their  appear-

-A  a  2  aace  :


i8o  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ance  :  of  which  circumftances,  yon  will  find  what  has  been  obferv'd  under
ail  the  numbers  mention'd  above,  except  the  eleventh,  and  fixtcenth,  where
nothing  is  faid  upon  the  fubjeft.

Medical  writers,  indeed,  agree  in  the  tenfion  of  the  abdomen.  But  they
add  many  other  fymptoms  which  prove,  beyond  a  doubt,  the  inteftines  to
be  inflam'd  •,  yet  they  mean  that  evident  inflammation,  which  all  may  eafily
afctrtain,  and  not  this  obfcure  dilorder  v.'hich  we  now  fpcak  of,  and  which
very  few  fuipeft.  Among  thefe  fymptoms  are,  particularly,  an  acute  fever,
and  a  violent  pain  :  without  which,  however,  I  have  fhown,  above  (p),
that  this  'inflammation  has  exiflied.  Befides,  in  regard  to  the  fever  itlelf
only,  1  would  have  you  read  the  obfervation  written  by  the  celebrated
Rofa  (q),  and  you  will  find,  "  that  the  whole  inteftinal  fyftem  was  in-
"  flam'd,  and  gangrenous,"  and  yet,  "  that  in  the  whole  courfe  of  the  diP
"  eafe,  not  the  leafl:  increafe  of  celerity  in  the  pulfe  could  be  obferv'd,  nor
"  any  febrile  motion."

This  author,  alfo,  defcrib'd  a  peculiar  cafe,  in  the  year  1745.  But  before
this ;  not  before  the  obfervations  of  my  preceptors,  and  mine ;  the  cele-
brated Simpfon  had  publifh'd  thofe  things,  which  gave  the  illuftrious  archia-
ter.  Van  Swieten  (r),  a  proper  occafion  of  commending  him,  and  confirm-
ing the  opinion  in  thofe  words,  which,  although  you  will  fee  them  repeated
by  more  than  one  of  our  Italian  writers,  in  the  years  laft  paft,  it  will,  ne-
verthelefs,  not  be  foreign  to  the  purpofe  to  quote  on  the  prefent  occafion  :
'•  Sim.pfon  has  given  us  a  caution,  which  muft  prove  very  falutary,  and
"  ufeful,  in  the  pra£tice  of  medicine,  and  tend  to  prevent  thofe  praftitioners
"  from  being  deceiv'd,  who  fuppofe  that  there  can  be  no  inflammation,  where
"  there  is  no  fever.  Whereas  an  inflammation  often  produces  fix'd  pains  of
"  the  inteftines,  and  ftomach,  although  no  fever  can  be  obferv'd  by  the  ex-
"  amination  of  the  pulfe."  You  fee  this  very  experienc'd  man  fays,  that
the  cafe  happens  "  often  •,"  fo  that  he  does  not  doubt  but  this  is  "  a  caution,
"  which  muft  prove  very  falutary,  and  ufeful,  in  the  pradlice  of  medicine."
And  this  was  what  I  mylelf,  in  the  year  1703  (s),  wonder'd  fhould  have  been
omitted,  by  thofe  phyficians  that  I  have  at  prefent  in  my  eye,  who  had  taught
us  the  fymptoms  of  inflammation  of  the  inteftines,  as  they  had  of  all  other
dilbrders. Thus  far  then  as  to  fever.

But  in  refpcd  to  pain,  it  muft  be  added,  at  prefent,  that  it  is  fuppos'd,
by  the  fame  phyficians,  to  be  join'd  with  a  fenfe  of  pulfation,  and  of  confiderable
heat,  fuch  as  you  will  find  in  none  of  our  obfervations;  and  you  will  even
read  one  (/),  in  v?hich,  when  I  exprefsly  enquir'd  after  a  fenfe  of  pulfation,  and
heat,  the  exiftence  of  both  one,  and  the  other,  was  particularly  denied.  In
many,  {u)  you  will  rather  find  the  pain  to  be  fo  defcrib'd  by  the  patients,
as  if  dogs  were  gnawing  them.

By  the  fame  writers  it  is  alio  fuppos'd,  that  there  is  obftinate  coftivenefi,
and  continual  vomiting,  efpecially  if  the  fmall  inteftines  are  inflam'd,  fo  that
the  excrements  are,  at  length,  difcharg'd  by  the  mouth.  But  you  will  cer-
tainly find  nothing  of  this  kind,  by  reading,  over  again,  what  is  faid  above  {x)^

{p)  No.  20.  (/)  Epift.  34.  n..  9.

(j)  Aft.  0.  c.  torn.  3.  obf.  47.  {u)  Ibid.  &  n.  18  &  25. &  in  hag  epiftola,,

(r)  Comment,  in  Boer.  aph.  §.  371...  n.  16.

{1)  N.  14.  &  31..  '  (5)  N.  10.  12..  16..


Letter  XXXV. Article  23.  i8e

of  the  fervantj  the  old  woman,  and  the  other  woman  at  leaft  :  nay,  the  lat-
ter had  even  a  laxity  of  the  inteilines.  Third  alfo  you  will  in  vain  fearch  for
in  many  :  I  do  not  mean  that  flight  thirft  which  Albertini  has  fometimes  ob-
ferv'd,  but  that  which  they  call  very  troublefome,  and  which  they  fay  is  the
natural  attendant  of  an  acute  fever.  I  omit  other  things,  for  it  is  not  my  in-
tention to  refute  writers,  whom  Igreatly  efteem ;  but  only  to  fhow  that  thofe
fymptoms  which  are  deliver'd  as  the  principal  arguments  of  inflam'd  intef-
tines,  are  not  always  to  be  depended  upon,  as  they  are  not  always  prefent,.
where  this  inflammation  exifts.

23.  However,  I  cannot  fufficiently,  and  according  to  their  merits,  com-
mend thofe  gentlemen,  for  admonifhing  us  that  the  inflammation  of  thefe-
vifcera,  eafily,  and  frequently,  degenerates  into  gangrene,  and  fphacelus,  and.
that  this  may  be  argu'd  from  the  fudden  departure  of  the  pain.  Without
doubt  it  is  from  the  fame  caufe,  that  if  this  happen  in  a  dyfentcry,  the  pa-
tients are  foon  carried  oflf,  when  they  themfelves,  and  thofe  about  them,  arc
lefs  apprehenfive  of  it.  You  have  in  this  third  book  of  the  Sepulchretum^.
and  in  the  eleventh  fedtion,  an  ingenuous  confefllon  of  Drelincurt  (j),  which,
is  worthy  of  Hippocrates  himfelf:  for  Drelincurt  "  being  rejoic'd"  on  account
of  the  pains  of  a  dyfenteric  patient  having  vanifli'd  away  at  once,  had  reafon-.
to  repent  of  his  joy  three  days  after,  when  the  patient  died  without  pain,  by
reafon  of  the  vifcera  being  "  blafted,"  or,  in  other  words,  fphacelated  to  a-
furprizing  degree.  And  when  I  wrote  to  you,  on  another  occafion  (2),  I
conjeftur'd  it  to  have  happen'd  from  a  fphacelus  of  the  inteftines,  that  in  the
laft  days  of  a  dyfentery,  and  of  life,  the  fever  has  even  fometimes  feem'd  ta
be  gone  off;  and  in  this  (a\  and  the  former  letter  (^),  I  have  fliown  what
not  only  the  ceflTation,  but  the  remifTion  alio,  of  thefe,  or  other  fymptoms,,
when  they  happen  contrary  to  ourexpeftation,  may  be  fuppos'd  to  be  argu-
ments of.

Yet  take  care  how  you  believe,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  thofe  patients,
iawhom  there  is  a  fphacelus  of  the  inteftines,  the  pains  always  ceafe,  as  you;
are  taught  the  contrary  by  the  hifliory  of  the  young  man  (f),  v/ho,  though  he
was  oblig'd  to  cry  out  inceflTantly,  with  excruciating  pain,  for  the  laft  fifteen
liours  of  his  life,  neverthelefs  had  the  greateft  part  of  his  inteftines  black,  to
as  great  a  degree  as  can  be  conceiv'd.  For  the  part  which  yet  remains  found,,
a  dreadful  inflammation,  or  fome  other  caufe,  may,  in  the  mean  while,  excru-
ciate ;  as,  for  inttance,  a  convulfion,  or  what  we  obferv'd  in  that  young  man,
and  frequently  in  others,  who.  labo.ur'd  under  the  fame  diforder  ("i),  I  mean,
inteftinal  worms.

But  whether  it  happen'd  accidentally,  oe  becaufe  deprav'd,  and  irritatino-,
remains  of  the  chyle  are  the  confequents  of  a  depravity  in  the  bile,  that
others  (^),  as  well  as  myfelf  (/j,  have  found  calculi  in  the  gall-bladders  of
fome  of  thefe  patients,  I  leave  quite  undetermin'd.

However,  difcharges  of  black  matter  by  ftool,  when  join'd  with  a  ceflTation
of  the  pain,  as  I  have  taken  notice  of  above  {g)^  are  with  great  juftice,  and.

{y)  In  addit.  obf.  4^  [d)  Supra  n.  16.  &  epift.  34.  n.  9.  &  33.

(2)  Epift.  31.  n.  26.  . \e)  Vid.  obf.  47.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  22.

{a)  N.  14.  16.  18.  (f)  Epift.  34.  n.  I5.&'fupran.  16.  18.

W  N.  15.  0  Num...iifd,
(0  Supra  n.  14.


1 82  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

propriety,  plac'd  in  the  number  of  the  moft  alarming  fymptoms,  and  thofc
which  lliow  death  to  be  near  at  hand  :  and  to  this  we  fhould  alio  add,  that
which  I  have  delcrib'd  to  you  in  another  letter  {h),  not,  indeed,  as  being
join'd  with  a  pain  in  the  inteftines,  which,  by  reafon  of  their  paralyfis,  had
never  taken  place,  but  as  being  join'd  with  a  great  inflammation, of  them  all.
The  next  letter  you  are  to  expedl  will  be  on  the  fubjedt  of  tumour  and  pain  of
the  hypochondria. In  the  mean  while  farewell.


LETTER the THIRTY-SIXTH


Treats  of  Tumour  and  Pain  of  the  Hypochondria;

FOR  thofe  reafons  which  I  have  given  in  the  thirty-fecond  letter  («),  I
pafs  over  the  very  Ihort  feftion,  upon  the  piles,  which  follows  in  the
Sepulchretum,  and  come  immediately  to  the  two  next  feftions  to  this,  that
is  to  the  fixteenth,  and  feventeenth,  and  intend  to  comprehend  the  argu-
ments of  thefe  two  feftions,  which  are  tumour,  and  pain,  of  the  hypochon*
dria,  in  this  one  letter.  For  thefe  two  affeftions  are  frequently  join'd  toge-
ther, as  it  will  be  eafy  for  you  to  perceive,  from  thofe  very  obfervations  of
Valialva,  with  which  I  begin.

2.  A  woman  of  forty  years  of  age,  of  a  yellowifli  complexion,  had  long
been  troubled  with  a  hardnefs  in  the  right  fide  of  her  belly,  which  went  down
quite  to  the  os  ihum,  and  below  it.  If  you  touch'd  the  tumid  part  it  was
painful.  She  was  thirfty.  For  about  a  month  before  her  death,  flie  com-
plain'd  of  a  pain  in  her  ftomach,  after  taking  food,  and  breath'd  with  diffi-
culty. On  fome  of  her  latter  days  a  vomiting  had  come  on  ;  but  on  the  two
laft,  a  very  fevere  and  violent  pain.

The  abdomen  was  found  full  of  a  yellow  water,  which  was  bitter  in  its
tafte,  and,  like  the  ferum  of  the  blood,  coagulated  when  on  the  gre.  The
ftomach  was  narrow  in  the  middle,  fo  as  to  refemble  the  flreightnefs  of  the
pylorus,  and,  in  fome  meafure,  to  bear  the  appearance  of  two  ftomachs.
'i'he  liver  had  grown  out  into  a  great  bulk.  For  with  its  right  lobe  it  reach'd
almoft  to  the  lower  part  of  the  belly.  The  fubfhance  of  this  lobe  was  uni-
verfally  indurated,  and,  in  many  places,  diftinguifh'd  with  whicifh  bodies,
fome  of  which,  that  were  the  largeft,  were  equal  to  a  filbert  in  magnitude  :
when  it  v^^as  cut  into,  it  fhow'd,  in  fome  places,  a  beginning  of  erofion,  and
a  putrefadion  of  the  juices  to  have  been  at  hand.  And  the  left  lobe  of  the
■liver,  being  in  like  manner  indusated,  prels'd  upon  the  ftomach  in  that  parr,

.(h)  29.  n,  10.  (a)  N, 10.

wher^


Letter  XXXVI. Article  3.  183

where  I  have  faid  it  was  fo  much  ftreighten'd.  The  coats  of  the  gall-bladder
were  become  thick,  and  the  cavity  very  much  ftreighten'd  -,  and  in  the  cavity,
was  contain'd  a  black,  thick,  and  vifcid  bile.  In  the  abdomen  of  this  body
was  no  appearance  of  lymphfedufts.

In  the  thorax  the  lungs  were  whitifh,  and  variegated  with  fpots  of  a  blackifh
hue  :  the  left  lobe  was  connedted,  in  fome  degree,  to  the  back  ;  but  the  right
was  every  where  free.  The  ventricles  of  the  heart  contain'd  a  fluid  blood  j,
yet  in  the  right  \Vas  the  flight  beginning  of  a  polypous  concretion.

3.  In  three  obfervations  which  I  have  produc'd  in  other  letters  (^),  I  have
defcrib'd  the  ftomach  to  be  double,  as  it  were,  yet  not  divided  by  fo  great
a  conftridion,  as  in  the  prefent  cafe  ;  though  I  have  taken  notice  of  a  con-
ftriftion,  which  was  ftill  greater  than  this,  from  Blafius  (c),  in  a  man  who  had
been,  in  every  refpeft,  healthy,  except  his  extreme  hunger.  Nor  did  I
doubt  but  fl:ruftures  of  the  ftomach,  of  this  kind,  had  exiftcd  from  the  ori-
ginal formation  of  the  body  (d) :  for  which  reafon,  I  did  not  fearch  after
the  caufe  of  thefe  conftrictions  in  the  liver,  although,  in  the  two  firft  of  thofe
ebfervations,  it  was  extended  towards  the  left  fide,  more  than  it  naturally  is,
but  not  hard,  efpecially  as  in  the  third,  the  liver  was  within  its  natural
bounds :  nor  indeed  in  the  laft-mention'd  obfervation,  did  I  account  for  the
vomitings,  and  pains  of  the  ftomach,  from  that  conftridtion  in  particular,  as
they  had  not  been  obferv'd  in  the  two  former.

Yet  here  I  fliall  afcribe  the  fame  fymptoms  to  the  greatnefs  of  that  con^t
ftridlion,  inafmuch  as  it  feems  to  have  been  more  and  more  increas'd,  con-
trary to  what  generally  happens  in  the  latter  part  of  the  difeafe,  from  the  hard-
nefs  of  the  liver  increafing  every  day,  and  comprefling  that  part  of  the
ftomach  in  particular.  For  not  only  reafon,  but  manifold  obfervation,  con-
firms how  much  thefunflions  of  the  ftomach  are  difturb'd,  when  this  vifcus
is  comprefs'd,  and  deprefs'd,  by  the  increas'd  bulk  of  the  liver :  as  you  will
fee  from  the  obfervation  of  Bartholin  {e),  on  a  girl  of  fix  years  of  age  ;  and
of  Fantonus  the  father  (f),  on  a  prieft,  tbe  latter  of  which  had  the  bulk  of
the  liver  fo  much  increas'd  as  to  fill  "  the  whole  epigaftrium,"  and  the  for-
mer, fo  as  to  occupy  almoft  "  the  whole  abdomen."  It  is  true  the  liver,  when:
not  at  all  morbid,  ftretches  its  thinner  part,  fometimes,  quite  to  the  fpleen,
as  I  have  taken  notice  in  a  former  work  (g)  :  but  when  it  is  difeas'd,  it  has,
fometimes,  fcarcely  any  bounds  to  its  extenfion  through  the  belly.  Neither  of
which  circumftances  ought  to  be  unknown  to  phyficians,  and  furgeons,  left,
they  ftiould  be  deceiv'd,  in  fome  cafes,  by  that  appearance  which  is  com-
mon.

Where  the  liver  is  found  there  is  room  only  for  fufpicion  -,  as  for  inftance,
if  a  wound,  by  chance  receiv'd  upon  the  left  hyochondrium,  be  attended
with  fymptoms  difl^erent  from  thofe,  which  generally  attend  the  wounds  of
the  vifcera,  that  every  body  knows  to  be  plac'd  there.  But  when  figns  of  a
difeas'd  liver  are  not  wanting,  as  in  the  woman  we  are  fpeaking  of,  the  yel-
lowifti  complexion,  and  hardnefs,  beginning  from  the  right  hypochondrium,

{i)  Epift.  16.  n.  38.  epill,  26.  n.  31.  epift. (e)  Sepulchr.  1.  hoc,  feft.  i.  obf.  4.
30-  n-  7-  f/J  Obf.  anat.  med.  24.

CcJ  Ibid.  n.  8.  {g)  Advcrf.  z.  anunad.  3..

(i/J  Epift.  26.  D.  32=  ''


1 84  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

it  will  be  lefs  difficult,  in  fuch  a  cafe,  to  afcertain  the  extenfion  of  the  liver
to  that  part,  to  which  the  fame  continued hardnels  extends  itfelf.

But  whether  in  the  other  woman,  whofe  hiftory  follows,  the  continuation
of  the  pain,  if  you  prefs'd  the  part  with  your  hand,  went  fo  far  as  to  prove
the  fame  thing,  may  better  be  conjettured  by  us,  than  affirm'd ;  as  Valfalva,
who  was  then  a  young  man,  and  wrote  his  obfervations  on  the  living  body
with  great  brevity,  has  not  determin'd  the  queftion.

4.  A  woman  of  fixty  years  of  age  complain'd  for  a  long  time  of  a  pain
above  the  umbilical  region  :  fhe  had  a  thirft  ;  flie  cough'd  •,  and  fpat  up  a
catarrhous  matter.  Laft  of  all,  fhe  breath'd  with  difficulty:  a  few  days  be-
fore her  death  her  belly  fwell'd  fuddenly  to  a  great  degree  ;  her  feet  were  af-
fefted  with  an  oedematous  tumour.  At  length,  that  pain  going  off  by  degrees,
fhe  came  to  the  final  period  of  her  life.

In  the  belly  was  a  great  quantity  of  limpid  water :  but  no  traces  of  the
lymphatic  vefTels.  The  fpleen  was  twice  as  big  as  in  its  natural  fize.  The  liver
was  hard  :  and  the  gall-bladder  was  full  of  fmooth  calculi.  But  in  another
part  of  the  liver,  a  congeries  of  veficles  was  feen  adhering  to  it,  from  which,
when  lacerated,  a  ferum  was  difcharg'd.  And  within  the  fubftance  of  the
fame  vifcus,  towards  that  part  which  was  turn'd  to  the  diaphragm,  was  found
the  cavity  of  an  abfcefs,  which  occupied  more  than  a  third  part  of  the  liver.
The  matter  of  the  abfcefs  had  burft  forth  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  on
the  right  fide,  which  was  univerfally  full  of  a  fanious  pus.  Yet  the  lungs
were  found.

5.  As  you  have  been  inform'd  into  what  part  the  abfcefs  of  the  liver  had
burft,  I  do  not  doubt  but  you  now  wifh,  with  me,  that  all  thefymptoms  which
attended  a  cafe  of  this  kind,  that,  perhaps,  had  never  before  occur'ci  to  any
one,  and  particularly  the  latter  fymptoms,  had  been  colle£ted  by  Valfalva
with  more  exadtnefs.  For  Stalpart  {h),  when  he  wrote  of  a  certain  man,  in
v/hom  pus  had  pafs'd  from  an  abfcefs  of  the  liver,  not  plentifully,  nor  into
the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  but  in  a  fmall  quantity,  and  into  the  lungs,  through
a  fiftula  that  perforated  the  diaphragm,  which  was  become  confolidated  with
both  of  thefe  vifcera,  added  no  example  of  the  fame  appearances  having  been
feen  in  difleftion,  by  any  other  perfon,  contrary  to  his  ufual  method,  and
contrary  to  what  might  have  been  expefted  from  his  extenfive  reading.
And  after  him,  if  we  look  for  obfervators  that  are  to  be  depended  upon,
as  we  certainly  ought,  I  do  not,  at  prefent,  remember  to  have  read  any  au-
thor, who  has  met  with  the  fame  appearance,  and  ftill  lefs  with  the  fame  as
Valialva  has  defcrib'd.  Who,  I  fuppofe,  has  left  in  writing  all  the  fymptoms
he  was  able  to  colledt.  But  amongft  them  you  fee  to  what  caufe  the  tumour
of  the  belly,  and  the  oedematous  fwelling  of  the  feet,  are  to  be  afcrib'd.
And  there  may  be  a  difficult  refpiration,  from  the  liver  being  thus  affected,
even  when  the  diaphragm  is  found ;  as  there  may  be  a  cough  alfo,  the  origin
of  which  was  fo  much  the  more  ambiguous  in  this  woman,  as  it  had  an  ex-
peftoration  of  catarrhous  matter  join'd  with  it.

There  are  extant  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  (/),  hiftories  of  abfceffes  in  the
iiver,  to  the  number  of  twenty. But  there  is  not  one  of  them  all,  in  which

IfJ)  Obf.  rar.  46.  cent.  i.  (/')  Seft,  17.  obf.  2.

a  o-reater


Letter  XXXVI. Article  6.  185

a  Greater  care  in  the  obfervation  of  the  fymptoms  is  not  to  be  defir'd,  if  you
except  that  of  the  man  of  Noremberg  (k),  which  is  defcrib'd  by  Coiterus.
But  in  him  a  vomica  had  pofiefs'd  the  flat  furface  of  the  liver,  lb  that  it  ap-
pears to  have  open'd  itfelf  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly.  And  on  the  fame
fiat  part,  it  was  in  a  young  man  whom  Paawius  (/)  diflefted-,  but  this  had
not  difcharg'd  its  pus  •,  fo  that  the  foramen,  "  which  was  big  enough  to  ad-
"  niit  two  clench'd  fifts,"  form'd  by  an  "  erofion"  of  the  diaphragm,  "  in
"  that  part  which  lies  on  the  left  fide  of  the  liver,"  is  not  fuppos'd  to  have
been  form'd  by  the  eruption  of  the  pus :  befides,  none  of  the  fymptoms,
which  preceded  the  patient's  death,  are  related,  as  none  are,  in  like  manner,
in  another  cafe  (ni),  wherein  the  fame  Paawius  found  two  ulcers  in  the  gib-
bous part  of  the  liver,  which  penetrated  inwardly.

Nor  will  you  read  the  peculiar  fymptoms  of  the  liver  being  fuppurated,
in  the  obfervation  of  Blafius  («),  where  the  abfcefs  was  of  fuch  a  nature,
that  the  coat  of  the  liver  was  the  only  part  which  feparated  the  pus  from
the  diaphragm,  to  which  the  liver  was  clofely  connefted.  And  thefe  things  I
took  notice  of  that  you  might  perceive  the  more  clearly,  how  very  defirable
it  was  that  what  others  had  not  done,  could  have  been  done  by  Valfalva  -,
I  mean  in  regard  to  the  fymptoms,  which  are,  for  the  moft  part,  common  to
abfcefles  of  the  liver,  and  which  are  not  yet  afcertain'd,  or,  at  leaft,  fuch  as
are  not  in  the  number  of  thofe  that  Coiterus  has  remark'd,  befides  a  cough,
and  a  thirft,  which  Valfalva  has  alfo  remark'd  :  and  whether  thofe  are  among
the  figns  of  a  ruptur'd  abfcefs  of  the  liver,  which  are  pointed  out  by  Coite-
rus, in  the  following  manner  :  "  the  tumour,  and  hardnefs,"  which  had  been
in  the  right  hypochondrium,  and  the  region  that  lies  beneath  it,  "  vanifh'd  ;
"  and  the  patient  being  feiz'd,  on  the  fame  day,  with  fome  fwoonings,  ex-
*'  pir'd."  For  Valfalva  mentions  nothing  to  this  purpofe,  but  that  the  pain,
which  had  been  above  the^umbilical  region,  "  went  off  gradually,"  perhaps
from  the  matter  of  the  abfcefs  being  carried  off,  more  and  more,  from  thence
into  the  thorax.  And  what  detriment  happen'd  to  the  aftion  of  the  thorax,
from  this  metaftafis,  he  does  not  fo  much  as  hint  at ;  as  he,  likewife,  does
not  fay  a  word  of  refpiration  being  made  more  difficult,  nor  yet  a  word  of
fwoonings.

6.  If  you  read  over  the  great  number  of  hiftories,  which  were  pointed  out  juft
now,  in  the  Sepulchretum,  you  will  find  that  the  laft-mention'd  lymptoms  have
no  more  been  obferv'd,  in  thofe  where  a  vomica  of  the  liver  had  difcharg'd
itfelf  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  (o),  than  fudden  death  itfelf,  if  you  except
a  man  whofe  cafe  I  have  mention'd,  as  being  defcrib'd  by  Coiterus  (p)  :  and,
on  the  other  hand,  you  will  read  that  a  baker  {q),  whofe  liver  had  fuppurat-
ed, "  was  fometimes  feiz'd  with  a  fwooning,"  though,  at  the  fame  time,  the
"  membrane  of  that  vifcus  was  untouch'd  and  found.  Neverthelefs,  both  of
thefe  circumftances,  which  are  not  to  be  met  with  in  thofe  hiftories,  has  fo
often  occur'd  to  phyficians,  and  among  others,  to  my  preceptor  Albertini,
that  he  prefs'd  it  very  earneftly  vipon  pradlitioners,  not  to  fuffer  a  patient  to

{k)  §.6.  (0)  §.  2.  &5.

(/)  Ibid.  §.  7.  8.  (/,)  §.  6.

(«)  §.  8.  (y)  §.  14.
(«)  §.  16.

Vol.  II.  B  b  be


1 86  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

be  mov'd  when  there  were  fymptoms  of  an  abfcefs  already  form'd  in  the
liver ;  not  becaule  he  was  ignorant  that  motion  has  been  prefcrib'd,  at  this
time,  by  authors,  who  are,  in  other  refpefts  excellent,  which  I  alio  read  has
fucceeded  happily  fometimes  in  our  memory  ;  but  becaule  he  fuppos'd,  that
without  ufing  motion,  it  would,  probably,  happen,  that  the  pus  of  an  abfcefs
fo  ruptur'd,  without  injuring  the  membrane  of  the  liver,  might  be  carried
down  to  the  inteftines,  through  the  branches  of  the  biliary  dudt ;  and  be-
caule from  a  contrary  pradice,  he  forefaw  how  eafily  the  external  membrane
of  the  liver  might  be  ruptur'd,  fo  that  the  pus  fliould  be  pour'd  out  into  the
cavity  of  the  abdomen,  and  kill  the  patient  inftantly,  by  bringing  on  a
fyncope.

For  this  he  remember'd  to  have  happen'd  at  Bologna,  at  the  time  he  was
a  young  man,  when  an  excellent  phyfician,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  an  emi-
nent furgeon,  following  the  praftice  of  thofe  authors,  had  prefcrib'd  motion
to  a  virgin  who  had  a  fuppuration  in  the  liver  •,  by  which  means  the  pus
being  pour'd  out  into  the  abdominal  cavity,  the  patient  died  foon  after,  in
the  arms  of  the  women  by  whom  fhe  was  fupported.  And  he  had  after'
■wards  obferv'd  the  fame  thing  to  happen,  even  without  motion,  at  lead  with
a  flight  motion,  fuch  as  we  naturally  ufe  in  bed,  or  while  we  are  rifing  from
bed,  in  fevcral  perfons,  but  particularly  in  a  noble  marquis,  who  had  ati
abfcefs  in  the  concave  part  of  the  liver.  And  by  thefe  obfervations  I  was
influenc'd  to  fufpeft,  that  almoft  the  fame  kind  of  death,  in  another  noble--
man  (all  the  fymptoms  of  whofe  diforder  I  will  write  to  you  accurately  at
another  time  (r)  )  was  to  be  accounted  for  from  almoft  a  fimilar  caufe.  But
he  fo  much  the  lefs  approv'd  of  motion,  becaufe  the  abfcefs  is  fometimes  fo
large,  or  of  fuch  a  kind,  that  although  it  may  find  an  exit,  by  chance,
through  the  biliary  dudls,  yet  the  padents  cannot  be  cur'd  with  that  fuccefs,
which  had  happen'd  to  him,  in  a  matron  of  the  firft  rank,  and  in  like  man-
ner in  a  fervant-maid,  both  of  which  he  aflur'd  me  he  had  perfeftly  cur'dj
by  a  long  perfeverance  indeed,  but  not  by  any  other  medicines-  than  tur-
pentine refin,  and  whey,  and  afterwards  by  the  juices  of  ground-ivy,  and
the  confolida  media.

For  where  a  vomica  of  the  liver  has  open'd  a  paflage  for  itfelf,  through
the  mulcles  of  the  abdomen,  two  inftances  of  which  happen'd  at  Bologna,
although  even  then,  all  endeavours  were  us'd  not  only  by  internal,  but  by
external  remedies  applied  to  the  cavity  of  the  abfcefs,  that  the  liver  might
be  heal'd,  yet  they  were  able  to  bring  about  this  effe£t,  only  in  one  of  the
cafes:,  but  in  the  other,  in  which  a  matter  fometimes  was  difcharg'd,  that  re-
fembled  water  wherein  frefh  meat  had  been  wafli'd,  and  fometimes  a  yellow-
humour,  they  could  not  obtain  the  fame- fuccefs ;  and  the  patient  died  at
lafl: :  notwichftanding  in  him  the  tumour  had  not  been  open'd  fo  much  by  the
fbrce  of  nature,  as  by  the  error  of  art.  For  the  phyfician,  although  a  man
of  good  reputation,  and  the  furgeon  with  whom  he  was  aflbciated,  by  no
means  attending  to  this,  that  the  jaundice  had.  preceded,  and  other  ap-
pearances, in  like  manner,  which  ihow'd  the  liver  to  be  affefted,  had  fuffer'd,
themlclves  to  be  deceiv'd  by  the  touch,  perhaps  for.  the.  fame  caufe,  which.

{,)  Epifl.  40.  n.  28,


Letter  XXXVI. Article 7.  187

was  found  by  Fantonus  the  father  (.f),  in  the  extenuation  of  the  abdominal
mufcles,  fo  as  to  imagine  the  tumour,  which  was  aftually  in  the  liver,  to  be
in  thefe  mufcles  ;  for  which  reafon,  by  applying  emollient  cataplafms,  they
had,  with  a  miflaken  diligence,  brought  on  a  fuppuration.
You  fee  what  it  is  I  difapprove.  For  I  am  not  one  of  thofe  who  hold  that
.  where  nature,  itfelf,  urges  the  fuppurated  tumour  of  the  liver,  to  the  mufcles
of  the  abdomen,  the  pus  fhould  be  fulfer'd  to  remain  there,  for  a  longer
time  than  is  neceffary,  and  by  this  means  be  increas'd  every  day,  become
more  acrid  by  ftagnation,  infeft  the  blood,  erode  ftill  other  and  other  parts
of  the  liver,  and  open  a  pafTage  for  icielf,  which  would  be  lefs  expedient,
as  for  inftance,  into  the  ftomach  ;  for  into  this  cavity  was  fuch  an  aofceft
found  to  have  burft,  by  Vogelius  (/),  through  a  large  foramen  ;  and  into  the
thorax,  as  I  have  Ihovvn  above-,  or,  which  happens  more  frequently  than  either
of  the  foregoing,  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  from  whence  a  flow  and  mi^
ferable  death  is  brought  on,  if  the  immediate  danger  is  avoided,  which  I  have
faid  was  feen  by  Albertini  («),  and  is  confirm'd  by  the  illuftrious  Van  Swieteii
(x).  His  words  are,  "  there  is  danger  left  a  fwooning,  and  fudden  death,
"  follow,  at  the  time  when  an  abfcefs  of  the  liver  is  ruptur'd :  for  the
"  branches  of  the  vena  portarum,  that  were  before  prefs'd  upon,  by  the
"  vomica,  being  now  free  from  that  prefllire,  by  the  difcharge  of  the  pus,
"  may  cafily  be  ruptur'd  from  the  blood  rufliing  into  them  with  impetuoiity;
"  efpecially  as  they  have  been  macerated,  and  almoft  half-eroded,  by  a
"  very  acrid  pus  having  fo  long  lain  upon  them."  Wherefore,  agreeably
to  the  opinion  of  this,  and  other  authors  of  weight,  I  would,  before  tliefe
fatal  accidents  could  happen,  inform  the  patient,  and  the  intimate  friends,
or  relations,  of  the  patient,  how  many  and  how  confiderable  dangers
threaten'd,  if  a  free  opening  were  not  given  to  the  pus,  as  foon  as  pof-
fible :  and  yet  that  if  this  free  opening  were  given,  with  all  that  caution
which  the  cafe  requires,  a  recovery  was  not  always,  but  fometimes  only,  to
be  expedled,  and  that  this  was  fignified  by  the  aphorifms  of  Hippocrates  (y)  j
and  even  that  thofe  abfcefles  of  the  liver  alfo  had  been  more  than  once  heal'd,
from  which  when  open'd,  far  different  humours  were  difcharg'd,  from  what
Hippocrates  had  wifla'd  ;  to  which  kind  of  inftances  you  will  alfo  add  that,  al-
though the  cure  was  long,  and  difficult,  which  is  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated
Jo.  Peter  Albrechtus  (z)

But  now  to  come  back  from  this  digrelTion,  let  us  go  on,  from  the  confl-
deration  of  thofe  fymptoms,  which  Valfalva  has  not  taken  notice  of  in  the
hiftory  of  this  woman,  to  the  confideration  of  thofe  that  he  has  remark'd.

7.  Dg  not  fuppofe  that  the  congeries  of  veficles,  adhering  to  the  liver,  and
when  lacerated  difcharging  ferum,  was  any  thing  elfe  but  hydatids,  as  he
himfelf  has  exprefsly  laid,  in  a  feparate  paper,  that  they  were  fuch  as  are
frequently  found  to  adhere  to  the  morbid  liver,  externally.  And  you  may
with  propriety  fuppofe,  that  the  quantity  of  limpid  water,  which  was  found
extravafated  in  the  belly,  was  the  effeft  of  many,  and  without  doubt,  of  the
larger  veficles  being  burft  afunder,  by  the  quantity  of  ferum,  with wliich

(j)  Obf.  anat.  med.  13.  (x)  Comment.  inBoerh.  aphor.  §,  939.

(/)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  5.  obf,  90.  CjJ  44-  ^  45-  f-  ?•

lu.)  N.  4.  {z)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  5.  obf,  23.

B  ~b  .2  they


1 88  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

they  were  turgid,  or,  at  leaft,  in  fome  meafure.  I,  therefore,  would  not
have  you  fuppofe,  that  thefe  were  of  the  fame  nature,  of  which  thofe  pecu-
liar veficles  were,  fiU'd  with  a  yellow  humour,  that  you  will  read  the  de-
fcription  of,  from  the  obfervation  of  Valfalva,  in  the  third  of  the  EpiJioU
Anatomise  (a).

But  I  fhall  not  repeat  thofe  hiftories  here,  notwithftanding  they  all  relate
to  diforders  of  the  liver,  and  fome  to  abfcefles  of  it,  as  I  am  determin'd  to
purfue  my  original  method,  which  is  to  avoid  that  negligence,  in  .confe-
quence  whereof,  you  will  find  that  a  great  number  of  repetitions  have  been
admitted  into  thefe  fixteenth  and  feventeenth  fedtions  of  the  Sepulchretum,
For  to  omit  taking  notice  that  in  the  former  feftlon  the  twelfth  and  eighteenth
obfervations  are  the  fame,  in  the  latter  thofe  are  certainly  the  fame,  which
are  pointed  out  in  the  fecond  obfervation,  under  article  the  tenth,  and  the
twentieth,  and  in  like  manner,  the  fourth  obfervation,  and  article  the  fourth
of  the  eleventh,  and  that  which  is  in  the  following  eighth  article,  and  that
under  number  two,  article  fifteen,  and  under  the  fame  number  eleven,  the
articles  two,  and  fix  ;  to  fay  nothing  of  the  fame,  which  are  repeated  totidem
verbis  in  the  fcholia  to  the  fixteenth,  and  eighteenth  obfervations.  But  with-
out repeating  what  I  then  wrote,  I  Ihall  add  only  three  things  to  thofe  hif-
tories of  Valfalva.

8.  And  firft,  to  that  which  is  given  there  under  number  eight,  it  is  pro-
per I  lliould  adhere  to  what  it  was  not  neceflary  to  add  in  that  place  :  I  mean
that  the  ferum,  with  which  the  belly  overflow'd,  emitted  a  particular  kind  of
halitus,  which  fmell'd  like  what  often  proceeds  from  perfons  in  fevers,  and
indeed  frequently  from  their  urine  :  but  that  when  put  on  the  fire,  in  a  Ihorc
time  it  became  fo  turbid,  inftead  of  continuing  limpid,  as  to  refemble  cow's
whey  not  well  depurated :  and,  at  length,  that  by  the  force  of  the  fire  it  was
wholly  diffipated.  Nor  Ihould  this  circumftance  be  omitted,  that  about  the
lumbar  glands,  fome  flight  traces  of  the  lymphatic  veflels,  which  were  much
emptied,  had  difcover'd  themfelves.

9.  But  to  the  next  hiftory  which  I  have  fubjoin'd  to  that  (b),  nothing  re-
mains to  be  added  to  make  it  compleat,  according  to  the  obfervation  of  Val-
falva, after  having  fufficiently  defcrib'd  it  to  you  in  a  former  letter  (f  j.  You
will  perhaps  rather  expeft  from  me,  that  as  the  veficles  defcrib'd  in  that
hiftory,  were  contain'd  within  a  very  large  one,  as  within  a  purfe,  I  Ihould.
defend  the  opinion  of  Valfalva  againft  many  authors,  the  number  of  whom
I  fee  is  much  increas'd,  within  thefe  few  years,  in  particular,  and  who  give
it  as  their  opinion,  that  the  veficles  found  in  encyfted  tumours,  which  fome-
times  occur  in  the  liver,  and  the  other  vifcera,  do  by  no  means  relate  to  the
glandular  follicles  being  enlarg'd.  But  I  have  no  difpofition,  nor  indeed  is
there  any  neceflity,  to  fall  into  that  difpute  again,  fince  the  opinion  of  Val-
falva did  not  depend  upon  that  hiftory  only,  nor  upon  any  obfervation  of
veficles  whatever.

You  may  even  fee  that  Vallifneri,  who,  in  like  manner,  long  before  them,
faw bladders,  or  cyfts,  pregnant  with  other  fmaller  bags,  or  veficles,  did

(a)  N.  8.  9.  10.  (0  XXI.  n.  f^.

{h)  N.  9.

not.


Letter  XXXVI. Article lo,  ir.  189

not,  in  that  very  writing  which  I  then  refer'd  to,  take  any  veficles  whatever,
for  glandular  follicles  dilated.  Nor  did  Valfalva  find  veficles  only  in  encyfteci
tumours  of  the  liver,  for  in  that  hiftory,  certainly,  which  I  have  juft  now
compleated  to  you,  he  had  found  the  whole  liver  made  up  of  veficles  :  al-
though even  in  thofe  cyftic  tumours  of  the  fame  vifcus,  it  is  not  put  beyond
all  doubt,  that  the  included  veficles  can  by  no  means  relate  to  glandular
follicles.  And  what  if  veficles  not  unlike  thefe,  have  fometimes  appear'd  in
external  encyfted  tumours  ?  Do  they,  as  they  are  external  parts,  for  that  rea-
fon  want  glandular  follicles  ?  But,  as  I  have  already  faid,  I  would  not  wifli
again  to  enter  into  thefe  difputations.

10.  It  is  much  better  to  attend  to  this  circumftance,  likewife,  in  the  laft
of  thofe  hiftories  of  Valfalva  (d),  which  Malpighi  exprefsly  commended  in
it;  I  mean  the  biliary  dutl  communicating  with  the  abfcefs  of  the  liver,  by
a  large  orifice,  and  dilated  in  the  remaining  part  univerfally,  fo  that  it  ma-
nifeftly  appear'd  how  this  du£t  might  take  up  the  veficles  from  the  cavity  of
the  abfcefs,  and  tranfmit  them  quite  to  the  duodenum.  For  which  reafon  we
have  the  lefs  occafion  to  doubt,  whether  this  du£l  does  not  frequently  tranfmit,
through  its  corroded  branches,  blood,  and  pus,  which  it  has  receiv'd  from
vomicse  of  the  liver,  down  to  the  inteftines,  in  the  manner  that  is  taken
notice  of  above  (e)  ;  and  as  the  biliary  dufts  being  much  enlarg'd,  having
the  orifice,  by  which  the  bile  flows  into  the  duodenum,  big  enough  to  ad-
mit a  little  finger,  with  great  eale,  evidently  confirm'd,  in  a  certain  girl  (f),
who  having,  at  different  times,  difcharg'd  many  pounds  of  pus  by  ftool,  had
a  great  quantity  of  the  fame  purulent  matter  in  many  abfceflTes  of  the  liver,
in  thofe  ducfls,  and  in  that  inteftine.

Thefe  things  then  being  granted,  and  as  we  have  frequent,  and  evident,
examples  of  a  fimilar  circumftance  in  the  kidnies,  from  whence  the  ureters
transfer  pus  and  blood  to  the  liver,  I  cannot  help  being  furpriz'd,  that  fome
very  learned  men  fliould,  neverthelefs,  fometimes  feem  fo  far  forgetful  of  this
open  paflage  from  the  liver,  as  to  aflfert  that  the  mefenteric  veins  "  often
"  produce  purulent  diarrhoeas,  and  carry  out  the  corrupted  fubftance  of
"  the  liver,"  as  if  thefe  vefl"els  convey'd  humours,  from  the  liver,  to  the  in-
teftines, and  not  from  the  inteftines  to  the  liver ;  and  that  others  hold  it  im-
poffible  to  conceive,  how  a  perfon  could  vomit  blood,  and  difcharge  it  by
ftool,  without  any  mark  of  injury  in  the  ftomach,  when,  at  the  fame  time»
they  are  not  ignorant  that  in  each  lobe  of  his  liver,  which  was  very  much
enlarg'd,  a  confiderable  abfcefs  was  found.

But  let  us  return  to  the  obfervations  of  Valfalva,  which  I  have  not  yet
publifh'd  ;  and  to  thofe  two  relating  to  the  liver,  which  I  have  defcrib'd
above,  let  me  add  as  many  which  relate  to  the  fpleen.

1 1.  A  young  man  of  about  twenty  years  of  age,  having,  from  an  original
ftrength,  and  firmnefs  of  conftitution,  degenerated  into  the  ftate  of  a  Vale-
tudinarian, for  two  years  paft,  attributed  this  change  in  his  health  to  hunt-
ing, and  dancing,  and  to  other  things  of  that  kind,  which  he  had  indulg'd
himfelf  greatly  in  the  practice  of,  and  to  the  effeft  of  the  bufinefs  by  which.

{d)  N.  10.  .  CfJ  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  4.  obf,  73.

(e)  N.  6.

he


i-go Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

he  earn'd  his  liyclihood  •,  for  he  was  by  trade  a  flax-drefier.  He  was  become
pallid  in  his  countenance,  and  complain'd,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  hypo-
chondriac pcrfons,  of  llight  dilbrders  of  the  belly,  and  thorax,  which  recur'd
now  and  then.  At  length,  in  the  fummer  of  the  year  1688,  a  large  and
hard  tumour  difcover'd  itfelf  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  with  a  fenfc  of
weight,  and  a  difficulty  of  refpiration  in  walking.  To  thefe  fymptoms  was,
fuddenly,  added  a  large  vomiting  of  blood,  with  a  great  lois  of  ftrength,  an
jncreafe  of  tumour,  and  a  fever.  By  the  affiftance  of  remedies  he  was  freed,
on  the  firft  days,  from  the  vomiting,  and  after  that  from  the  fever ;  and  hav-
iiig  us'd  chalybcates  for  the  three  fucceeding  months,  the  hardnefs  of  the
tumour  was  alio  remov'd :  yet  it  continued  equally  large,  with  a  pallid,  and,
as  it  wer-e,  almoft  citron  colour  of  the  countenance.

But  in  the  month  of  January,  the  vomiting  of  blood  returning  two  or
three  times,  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  violent  fever,  attended  with  a  hard  and
quick,  though  at  the  fame  time  fmall  pulfe,  a  pain,  weight,  and  tenfion,  of
both  the  hypochondria,  and  an  inextinguiPnable  thirft.  However,  on  the
ninth,  or  eleventh  day,  of  the  fever,  he  was  taken  off  by  a  very  placid  kind
of  death.

The  body  being  dlfleiled,  it  was  amazing  what  a  fmall  quantity  of  blood
remain'd  in  all  the  veffels.  And,  for  this  realbn,  the  vifcera  of  the  belly
attrafted  the  eyes  by  an  unufual  palenefs,  and  almoft  whitenefs,  except  the
fpleen  which  preferv'd  its  natural  colour;  but  this  vifcus  was  fo  much  increas'd,
as  to  exceed  the  liver  in  bulk,  and  weigh  four  pounds  and  a  half.  Yet  it  was
not  harder  than  it  generally  is,  except  that  on  its  convex  furface,  in  one  or
two  places,  was  contain'd,  deep  within  its  furface,  a  fubftance  of  a  very  folid
nature,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  large  nut.  In  the  trunk  of  the  fplenic  vein,  polypous
concretions  lay  hid,  which  divided  themfelves,  together  with  the  branches  of
that  vein,  in  a  very  elegant  manner,  even  within  the  fpleen.  The  liver  was
very  pale,  except  that  here  and  there  it  was  mark'd  with  black  fpots.  The
gall-bladder,  which  was  more  pale  than  the  liver,  and  even  whltifli,  contain'd
a  little  bile  of  a  very  dilute  colour,  a  fimilar  bile  to  which  was  not  wanting
in  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach. The  other  parts  of  the  belly  were  found.

In  the  thorax  the  lungs  on  their  anterior  furface  were  pale;  but  on  the
back-part  they  appear'd  inflam'd,  and  were  of  a  black  colour,  inclining  to
purple  :  but,  when  cut  into,  they  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity  of  frothy  fe-
rum.  In  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  was  only  a  fmall  polypous  concre-
tion •,  and  in  the  left  only  a  beginning  thereof.

12.  A  great  number  of  remarks  might  be  made  upon  this  hiftory.  But  a
reo-ard  muft  be  had  to  brevity,  and  therefore  many  things  muft  remain  un-
riifcufs'd.  The  large,  and  frequently-repeated,  vomiting  of  blood  in  this
young  man  would  have  been  eafily  accounted  for,  at  the  time  when  it  was  not
doubted,  but  any  thing  might  be  fent  from  the  fpleen  into  the  ftomach,  by
the  vein  which  is  call'd  vas  breve.  But  after  that  the  circulation  of  the  blood,
and  experiments,  have  taught  differently,  the  circum.ftance  requires  quite  a
different  explication  •,  as,  for  inftance,  if  we  fay,  that  in  proportion  as  lefs
blood  can  be  brought  by  the  casliac  artery  into  the  obftruded  fpleen,  fo
much  the  more  muft  be  carried  through  the  other  branches  of  the  fame  ar-
tery to  the  ftomach, or  that  the  return of  the  blood  from  the  ftomach,

I  tlirough


Letter  XXXVI. Article 12.  igr

through  the  vas  breve  is  unpeded  by  the  tumefadlion  of  the  ipleen,  which
frequently,  and  greatly  compreffes  this  veflfel,  betwixt  itfelf  and  the  dilated
ftomach  ;  fo  that  by  one  or  the  other  of  thefe  hypothefes,  or  any  other  of  a
fimilar  kind,  it  may  be  underftood,  how  the  blood  can  open  an  exit  for  itfelf,
from  the  over-dittended  veflTels,  into  the  cavity  of  the  ftomach,  which  is  al-
ready particularly  difpos'd  to  fuch  a  rupture.

Nor  will  it  I  fuppofe  feem  to  be  any  objedion  with  you,  that  the  ftomach
of  this  young  man  has  been  faid  to  be  found ;  for  you  will  imagine  that  the
blood  had  been  difcharg'd  by  a  great  nurrjber  of  orifices,  that  were  very
fmall,  into  this  vifcus,  which  was  probably  furnifh'd  with  very  lax  fibres.

But  if  you  examine  the  ancients  themielves,  or  thofe  who  continued  for
fome  time  to  be  their  fectaries,  and  look  into  the  dlffedtions  made  by  them,
and  colledled  in  the  Sepulchretum  (g),  of  fuch  patients  as  had  labour'd
under  a  diforder  of  the  fpleen,  and  a  vomiting  of  blood  at  the  fame  time,
you  will  find  only  one  (h),  which  ftiows  any  vefTel  to  have  been  found,  ma-
nifeftly  open  in  the  ftomach.  This  was  written  by  Riolanus,  in  the  fecond
iDOok  of  his  Anthropograhia  there  pointed  out,  yet  not  in  the  fifteenth  chap--
ter,  but  in  the  feventeenth,  and  about  the  end.  To  whom  I  ftiall  readily
give  credit  in  the  affair,  but  as  I  juft  now  explain'd  it,  in  regard  to  the
vas  breve,  which  was  dilated  to  the  thicknefs  of  a  little  finger:  I  will  alio
believe,  if  you  pleafe,  that  he  found  the  fame  vefTel  open'd  into  the  ftomach  ;
although  I  fee  that  he  is  there  much  difpos'd  to  magnify  thofe  things  which
confirm  his  own  opinion.

For  I  omit  that,  when  fpeaking  of  him,  vAo,  as  you  have  it  in  the  fifth
book  of  the  Epidemics,  was  fuffocated  by  a  vomiting  of  blood,  and  fayino-
"  that  a  great  quantity  of  blood  had  come  forth  at  the  fpleen  and  down-
"  wards,"  he  adds  nothing  in  relation  to  the  proper  interpretation  of  thefe
words  ;  as  if  he  chofe  rather  they  fhould  be  fo  underftood,  as  to  relate  to
die  difcharge  of  blood  within  the  belly,  (which  the  very  ancient  author  of
that  book  could  not  have  feen,  as  it  was  not  ufual  then  to  dilTeift  human
bodies)  rather  than  to  very  red  fpots  in  the  Jkin,  appearing,  according  to  the
interpretation  of  Vallefius  (i),  in  the  region  of  the  fpleen,  and  beneath  it.
I  therefore  omit  this.  But  I  can  by  no  means  pafs  by  his  faying,  that  in
the  body  of  cardinal  Cibo,  who  died  after  the  fame  kind  of  vomiting,  "  Val-
"  vcrda  had  remark'd  (in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  fixth  book)  that  by  com-
"  prelTing  the  fpleen,  the  ftomach.  was  fiU'd  with  blood,  v^^hich  was  carrie~d.
"  thither  by  the  vas  breve."

For  Columbus,  who  had  difTefted  the  body,  has  not  hinted  any-thino-  of
this  experiment,  as  he  has  faid  nothing  more  of  the  diffeftion,  than  what  is
read  in  the  Sepulchretum  (k)  :  and  Valverdus,  who  has  fpoken  of  it,  has
made  ufe  of  fuch  words,  that  you  cannot  properly  underftand,  whether  the
ftomach  "  was  turgid  with  blood  "  internally,  or  externally,  when  the  fpleen
was  comprefs'd  ;  and  indeed  Sanftcrius,  who  had  infpeded  both  of  the  au-
thors, underftood  them  fo  as  to  write  what  you  will  fee  in  the  fcholium,  fub-

fgj  L-  ">,■  f-  8,  obr.  ^].  &  feq.  (i')  Comment,  in  eum  locum,  n.  ^7,

(^XObfljj..  -  C^-)  Gbf.  cit.  73.  §.  2..  __

join'd.


192  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

join'd  to  that  obiervation  of  Columbus  :  "  while  the  region  of  the  fpleen
"  wa^  comprefs'd,  the  blood  regurgitated  to  the  orifice  of  the  ftomach."

Yet  many  bodies,  although  they  were  diflefted  after  very  great,  and  fatal,
vomitings  of  a  bloody  humour,  or  even  of  blood  itfelf,  have  lliown  no  fign  of
an  open,  or  eroded,  veflel  in  the  ftomach ;  and  even  the  vas  breve,  notwith-
ftanding  the  fpleen  was  much  bigger  than  in  its  natural  fize,  v^as  extremely
fmall,  and  the  roots  of  it,  though  they  reach'd  to  the  external  coats  of  the
ftomach  indeed,  yet  fcarcely  reach'd  to  the  internal :  obfervations  of  which
kind  you  may  find  even  in  the  Sepulchretum  (I).

Wherefore,  the  blood  is  either  brought  from  the  inteftines,  into  which  it
had  burft,  or  through  the  biliary  veffels,  from  the  liver,  which  the  celebrated
Van  Swieten  (»;.J  thought  to  be  the  more  probable  ;  as,  having  examin'd  with
great  care  all  the  vifcera  of  the  belly  in  the  body  of  a  perfon  who  died  of  a
diforder  of  this  kind,  he  could  no  where  find  any  appearance  of  a  ruptur'd
veflel,  nor  any  confiderable  injury  of  any  kind.

Indeed,  there  is  alfo  extant  an  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Budsus  (';?j,
which  I  have  already  pointed  out,  in  a  woman,  in  whom,  after  having
vomited  a  great  quantity  of  matter,  fimilar  to  grumous  and  corrupted  blood,
although  fhe  had  the  vas  breve  full  of  the  fame  kind  of  matter,  and  almoft
equal  to  a  finger  in  thicknefs,  yet  the  fubftance  of  the  ftomach  was  without
any  confpicuous  veins,  and  the  gall-bladder  was  enlarg'd,  and  turgid  with
the  fame  matter,  fo  that  it  was  eafy  to  perceive,  from  whence  this  matter  had
come  into  the  ftomach,  which  even  then  contain'd  a  large  quantity.

But  I  would  not  have  you  fuppofe  from  hence,  that  it  is  my  opinion
blood  can  never  burft  into  the  ftomach,  from  the  vas  breve,  in  confequence
of  the  dircflion  of  the  blood  being  preternaturally  chang'd  for  a  time.  For
it  does  not  efcape  me  what  Georg.  Wolffg.  Wedelius  {o)  has  iaid  was  found
in  a  matron,  after  a  vomiting  of  blood ;  what  Jo.  Dan.  Dolseus  {p)  in  a  girl ;
what  Stangius  and  Hillerus,  jointly,  according  to  Hoffmann  (^),  in  a  young
man  :  the  laft  of  which  obfervations,  I  have  taken  notice  of  to  you  elfewhere :
and  the  two  firft  I  imagine  are  the  fam.e  that  I  remember  to  have  read  in
Stahl  (r).  In  each  of  thefe  bodies  the  fpleen  was  either  larger,  or  harder,
than  it  naturally  is :  the  vas  breve  was  alfo  either  thicker,  or  in  part  turgid
with  blood,  or  at  leaft  confpicuous  by  its  black  colour,  in  the  infide  of  the
ftomach,  and  had  its  branches  there  ruptur'd,  or  fome  one  of  them  fo  far
pervious  into  the  ftomach  as  to  admit  a  probe  by  that  pafTage,  or  flatus,
or  even  blood,  when  this  veflxsl  was  gently  comprefs'd.

Yet  although  any  perfon,  who  is  not  ignorant  how  eafily  either  a  probe,
or  flatus,  or  impell'd  humours,  may  open  to  themfelves  a  pafl"age,  after
death,  through  the  lax  coats  of  the  diftended  branches  of  the  veflels,  which
was  not  before  open,  will  perhaps  be  in  fome  doubt  as  to  thefe  obfervations  ;
yet  you  are  at  liberty,  for  me,  to  admit  of  them,  fo  you  do  but  remember
that  they  were  few, when  compar'd  with  the  others :  and  that  we  cannot,

(/)  In  addlt.  ad.  cit.  feft.  S.  obf.  1 1.  &  13.  {p)  Earund.  dec.  3.  a.  5.  &  6.  obf.  257.

(m)  Comment,  in  Boer.  aph.  §.  950.  (y)  Medic,  rat.  t.  4.  p.  2.  f.  i.  c.  3.  obf. 2.

(«)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent. 1.  &  2.  obf.  105.  (>■)  Differt.  de  vena  port,  porta  malor.  f.  3.
(0)  Earund.  dec.  1.  a.  9.  obf.  20.

A  therefore.


Letter  XXXVI. Article 13.  193

therefore,  readily  afiert  with  Wedeliiis  (s),  "  that  a  bloody  vomiting  mod
"  frequently  arifes  from  a  preternatural  opening  of  the  vas  breve."  And  al-
though he  fhould  anfwer  in  regard  to  every  one,  according  to  what  he  ob-
ferv'd  in  a  young  ftudent,  that  the  vomiting  of  blood  returns,  chiefly,  at
the  time  when  the  patient  lies  on  his  right  fide,  and  that  therefore  it  was
neceflary  for  him  to  lie  on  the  left  fide,  as  he  had  order'd ;  would  it  from
thence  follow  that  the  blood  came  forth  from  the  vas  breve,  as  if  no  other
vefTels  befides  this  went  to  the  left  fide  of  the  ftomach'?

But  whether  thefe,  or  any  other  pafTages,  for  the  blood,  evidently  lie  open
Into  the  ftomach,  at  that  time,  or,  which  is  generally  the  cafe,  no  paflages  at
all  are  open'd ;  for  you  will  even  read  in  the  commentaries  of  the  famous
Academy  of  Peterfburg  ((),  of  a  man  who  was  carried  off  by  a  fudden  death,
whofe  ftomach  was  found  quite  full  of  coagulated  blood,  and  yet  "  per-
"  feftly  found,"  whereas  "  in  the  fpleen,  on  the  contrary,  were  found  evident
"  marks  of  putrefaction  ;"  whether,  therefore,  paflages  through  which  the
blood  has  been  difcharg'd,  do,  or  do  not,  manifeftly  appear,  you  will  always
explain,  after  fome  of  the  methods  which  have  been  hinted  at  by  me,  or  by
others,  or  at  leaft  after  fome  fimilar  method,  not  only  the  obfervations
that  I  have  taken  notice  of,  but  alfo  thofe  which  occur  in  this  fixteenth  fedtion
of  the  Sepulchretum  (a),  of  the  fpleen  having  become  more  than  once  tu-
mid, but  decreafing  after  a  very  large  vomiting  of  bloody  lerum,  or  blood  ;
and  to  thefe  you  may  add  that  which  Jo.  Maurice  Hoffmann  (x)  has  pub-
lifh'd,  from  the  papers  of  his  father  :  although  where  it  is  n6t  well-afcertain'd
by  dilfeftion,  what  part  is  difcas'd,  or  what  part  is  found,  the  fault  may  be
unjuftly  attributed  to  the  fpleen,  which  ought  to  be  thrown  upon  fome  other
part  that  is  near  it,  or  even  upon  the  ftomach  itfelf

13.  You  may  enquire  here,  why  therefore  in  the  young  man  in  queftion,
whofe  fpleen,  without  doubt,  was  not  free  from  difeafe,  not  only  this  vifcus
had  not  its  tumour  diminifh'd  by  a  large  vomiting  of  blood,  but  even  in-
creas'd  ?  To  which  may  be  anfwer'd,  that  a  great  lofs  of  ftrength  through
tlie  whole  body,  from  a  violent  profufion  of  blood,  being  added  to  the  great
laxity  of  this  vifcus,  which  was  already  become  very  infirm,  the  blood  could
not  be  propell'd,  and  carried  through  it,  but  with  great  difficulty,  efpecially
as  it  was  become  more  inert  from  this  profufion  ;  and  that  therefore  it  was
under  a  necelTity  of  ft'agnating  more  in  the  fpleen,  by  which  that  vifcus  be-
came more  and  more  relax'd.  But  it  may  feem  much  more  furprizing,  as  the
vomiting  of  blood  return'd  two  or  three  times,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  dif-
eafe, how  fo  violent  a  fever  could  follow  thefe  vomitings,  and  be  attended
with  thofe  figns  which  feem'd  to  fignify  fome  inflammjation  in  the  hypo-
chondria, of  which,  perhaps,  thefe  red  fpots,  diftinguifliing  the  liver  here
and  there,  Vv'ere  tokens.

For  the  blood  which  remain'd  in  all  the  vefl!els,  was  in  fo  fmall  a  quantity,
and  had  fuch  an  inertia  as  you  would  naturally  fuppofe  to  be  the  confe-
quence of  thofe h'smorrhages,  as the  diflleftion demonftrates. And  not

[s]  Obf.  20.  cit.  {x)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  &  10.  in  append,  n.

(/)  Tom.  I.  I.  obf.  6.

[ii)  In  fchol.  ad  obf.  13  &  i|.

Vol.  II.  C  c  to


194  Book  III. Of  DiTeafes  of  the  Belly.

to  ipeak  of  the  appearance  itlelf,  the  I'mall  quantity  of  blood  was  argued  from
the  palenefs,  and  almoft  whitenefs  of  the  vifcera,  and  at  the  fame  time  the
inertia,  efpccially  when  confidered  in  conjunftion  with  the  fmall  quantity  of
bile,  which  was  of  a  colour  extremely  dilute.  In  the  bodies  of  cachectic
perfons,  I  have  often  obferv'd  the  cortex  cerebri  to  be  very  pallid,  and  the
medulla  to  be  much  whiter  than  ufual,  in  confequence  of  the  fanguiferous
velfels,  which  go  thereto,  being  fome  empty,  and  fome  femipellucid,  and
for  that  reafon  fcarcely  at  all  obftrufting  the  enquiry  of  the  eye,  that  fhould
-endeavour  to  difcover,  by  looking  externally,  the  parts  whence  the  finall
roots  of  the  nerves  go  out  from  the  trunk  of  the  medulla,  fo  that  I  have
Ibmetimes  much  wifh'd  for  brains  of  this  kind,  either  in  order  to  fee  thefe
parts  the  more  eafily,  or  to  demonftrate  them.  However,  whether  the  fmall
quantity  of  bile,  and  the  very  dilute  colour  of  it,  fignified  that  the  more
acrid  particles  were  contain'd  in  the  blood,  you  may  of  yourfelf  determine.
In  the  mean  while,  I  will  enquire  what  that  was,  or  rather  what  that  was  not,
which  the  fpleen  of  this  young  man  contain'd,  deep  within  its  fubftance,  in
one  or  two  places,  of  a  more  folid  nature,  and  of  the  bignefs  of  a  large
nut.

14.  You  have  in  one  of  the  two  fedlions  of  the  Sepulchretum,  which  I  firft
mention'd,  that  is  in  the  feventeenth,  an  obfervation  (y)  of  the  fpleen  con-
taining, within  its  fubftance,  a  fteatoma  conlifting  of  an  "  adipofe  matter,
"  and  of  the  bignefs  of  a  nut."  You  have,  in  the  fame  fedtion,  many  obferva-
tions  of  the  fpleen  being  become  in  part  cartilaginous,  or  in  part  bony,  or
even,  as  Pechlinus  (2)  aflerts,  ftony ;  to  which  you  may  join  other  obferva-
tions,  not  only  from  the  preceding  feftion  (a),  but  alfo  from  the  firft  of  the
former  book  (I?).  But  I  believe  that  induration,  which  was  found  in  this
young  man  by  Valfalva,  was  of  neither  kind  ;  for  either  of  them  would  have
been  eafily  known :  and  he  himfelf,  when  he  had  found  in  the  old  woman,
of  whom  I  fpoke  to  you  in  the  twentieth  letter  (c),  a  bone  within  the  exter-
nal part  of  the  fpleen,  did  not  in  the  leaft  hefitate  to  affirm,  that  he  had
found  a  certain  bony  body  of  a  fpherical  figure.  I  fhould  therefore  imagine
that  it  was  of  fome  other  kind,  or  if  it  was  of  either  kind  that  I  have  fpoken
of,  I  fhould  fuppofe  it  was  of  the  fecond,  that  is  the  beginning  of  a  bony  or.
ftony  concretion,  rather  than  of  the  firft.

For  this  is  much  the  more  frequent  in  the  fpleen,  not  only  as  a  great
number  of  obfervations,  pointed  out  in  the  Sepulchretum,  fhow,  but  as
others  alfo,  which  are  fcatter'd  up  and  down,  in  anatomical  writers,  and  are
eafily  to  be  found,  confirm.  Wherefore,  you  will  find  a  great  number,  in
like  manner,  in  my  letters  which  I  have  already  fent  (d),  or  which  I  fhall
fend  hereafter.  However,  I  would  not  deny  but  this  has  been  more  fre-
quently obferv'd  in  old  men,  than  in  young,  and  likewife  in  the  coat  of  that
vifcus,  rather  than  within  the  fubftance  of  it.  For  in  the  coat,  or  at  leaft.
on  the  external  furface,  after  thofe who  firll  obf6-v'd  thefe  appearances,  as

Cv)  17-  (0  N.4I-

(c)  In.  additam.  obf.  2.  {t/J  Epift.  7. n.  9.  &.11. epift. 10.  n. 19..

('aj  In  addit.  obf.  i.  .i  frhoL  epiit,  .24..  n.  iS.

{i)  la.  addit.  obf.  31.  ov  fchoL.

Andernacus


Letter  XXXVI. Article 15.  195

Andernaciis  (e),  Vefalius  (f),  and  Columbus  (g),  they  have  continued  chiefly
to  be  feen.

Yet  this  appearance  has  even  been  feen,  fometimes,  in  young  men,  as  by  die
celebrated  Fantonus  (16),  and  by  myfelf(/'):  nor  are  obfervations  wanting,
which  (how  it  to  have  exifced  within  the  coat  likev.'iie.  For  Carolus  Stcpha-
nus  [k)  formerly  admonifh'd,  that  it  was  neceffary  to  cut  deep  into  the  fuh-
ftance  of  the  ijaleen,  "  that  we  may  fee  whether  there  are  any  calculi  in  i:s
"  fubftance,  as  they  fometimes  have  been  found  ;"  and  you  will  read  here
in  the  Sepulchretum(/),  that  a  flone,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  chefnut,  "  had  been
"  found  in  the  fpleen  of  a  beautiful  young  woman  :"  and  in  the  eighteenth
feftion  («2\  that  the  fpleen,  which  was  immoderately  enlarg'd,  "  was  full  of
"  veiy  white  ftones ;"  and  in  another  (?;),  "  that  it  contain'd  many  ftones  ;"
to  omit  mentioning  others  taken  notice  of  by  Lentilius  (o),  and  among  thefe,
"  two  pretty  large  ftones,  befides  many  others  which  accompanied  them  :"
and  I  myfclf  will,  on  another  occafion,  defcribe  to  you  a  cafe,  in  which  I
found  a  bony  body  going  inwards,  from  the  coat  of  the  fpleen,  that  was
alfo  bony  ;  and  to  this  clafs  I  fhould  likewife  fuppofe,  that,  which  Ijuft  now
faid  was  feen  by  Valfalva,  in  the  old  woman,  was  to  be  refer'd.  And  what
will  you  fay  to  this,  that  Littre  (p)  fhow'd  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sci-
ences at  Paris,  not  only  the  "  external  membrane,"  as  fome  write,  but  the
whole  fpleen  of  a  certain  old  man  become  bony  :  and  in  the  JVIufaeum  of  this
univerfity,  we  have  another,  taken  out  of  a  body  which  was  publicly  diflecled
in  the  college,  before  the  beginning  of  the  prefent  century.

15.  And  as  this  fpleen  has  hitherto  been  defcrib'd  by  no  body,  I  hope  it  will
not  be  difagreeable  to  you,  if  I  give  you  the  account  of  it.  As  I  have,  by  the
confentof  the  celebrated  Vallifneri  the  younger,  who  is  governor  of  the  Mu-
fsEum,  diligently  examin'd  it,  as  far  as  could  be  done  externally.  It  is  feven  inches
long,  and  four  inches  broad,  in  its  broadeft  part,  and  atone  extremity  more  than
two  inches  broad  ■,  for  with  the  other  it  terminates  in  an  angle :  in  one  place  it  is
as  thick  as  the  little  finger,  in  other  places  lefs  by  one  half,  and  in  many  places^
but  efpecially  at  the  borders,  much  thinner.  It  is  of  an  irregular  figure,  and
curv'd  longitudinally  :  of  an  unequal  and  tuberous  furface,  yet  more  fo
on  its  concave,  than  on  its  convex  part.  Almoft  every  where  about  the  edges
are  to  be  feen  the  dried  remains  of  the  membranous  coat :  thefe  remaining
parts  go  from  thence  to  each  furface,  but  moft  evidently  to  the  hollow  fur-
face,  which  is  ftill  evidently  invefted  with  its  memibrane,  and  for  that  reafon
appears  of  a  yellow  colour  inclining  very  much  to  a  brown  ;  but  the  convex
furface  is  of  a  yellow  colour  inclining  to  white,  if  you  except  fome  places  in
which  the  membrane  remains,  juft  as  it  does  on  the  hollow  furface.  And  it
is  probable  that  when  they  pull'd  away  the  fpleen  from  the  diaphragm,  to
which  it  adher'd  very  clofely,  they  tore  the  membrane  away  from  the  convex

{e)  Apud.  Bauhin.  theatr.  anat.  1.  i.e.  43.  (/)  Sefl.  16.  obf.  20.

in  adnot.  (m)  Obf.  22.

(/)  De  fabr.  corp.  hunt),  1.  ;.  c.  9,  {«)  Obf,  25.  §.  9.

(g)  Dere  anat.  1.  15.  (0)  Eph.  n.  c-.  dec.  2.  a.  7.  obf.  136.

{i>)  De  obf.  med.  anat.  ep.  8.  n.  10.  (/)  Hiit.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc,  a.  1700.  obferv.

(/■)  Epift._24.  n.  18.  anat.  7-.

{/:)  De  diffeft.  part.  corp.  hum.  1.  3.  c.  40.
ttbi  de  liene.

C  c  3  furface-


196 Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

furface  of  that  vifcus,  fo  as  to  leave  it  almoft  univerfally  fix'd  to  the  diaphragm,,
and  in  ibme  places  even  univerfally,  and  at  the  fame  time,  fome  lamellse  of
the  indurated  Ipleen  which  coher'd  to  the  membrane  in  thole  parts  •,  and  it  is
probable  that  from  hence  was  the  origin  of  certain  oblong  hiatuiles,  and  fora-
mina, of  which  there  is  fcarcely  any  on  the  hollow  furface,  as  there  is  not
the  leaft  trace of  thofe  places  through  which  the  veffels  formerly  enter'd.

If  you  look  at  thefe  hiatufles,  you  perceive  that  this  fpleen  is  not  every
where  folid  ;  you  even  fee  that  it  is  cavernous,  and  empty,  in  many  places ;
fo  that  it  is  not  at  all  furprizing,  it  fliould  weigh  no  more  than  ten  drachms  :.
although  that  Hone,  which  I  mention'd  juft  now  (q),  as  being  found  in  the-
fpleen,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  chefnut,  was  "  of  the  weight  of  two  ounces  and-
■  *'  a  half,  and  one  drachm."  For  this  was  made  up  of  laminje,  like  egg:
ihelk,  wrap'd  over  one  another,  "  in  the  form  of  a  cruil ;"  fo  that  no  empty,
fpaces  were  interpos'd,  as  in  this  Paduan  fpleen,  and  perhaps  alfo  in  that  Pa-
rifian  fpleen,  the  weight  of  which  we  know  to  have  been  an  ounce  and  a  half,,
but  are  ignorant  of  the  dimenfions.

It  is  alfo  known,  in  what  kind  of  man  this  fpleen  was  found,  that  is  in  a.
man  who  had  not  been  fubjefl:  to  diforders,  which  are  fuppos'd  to  have  a  re-
ference to  the  fpleen  ■,  and  of  what  fubftance  it  feem'd  to  confift,  that  is  of  a.
ftony  fubftance.  But  in  regard  to  ours  the  latter  circumftance  is  doubtr
ful ;  and  the  former,  as  I  have  heard  from  the  fon  of  my  predeceflbr,  who
had  been  prefent  at  the  diffedlion,  was  quite  different.  For  the  body,  from
wh'^nce  it  was  taken,  was  that  of  a  porter,  and  not  an  old  man,  who  had:
not  only  been  weaken'd  by  dreadful  and  incurable  pains  in  the  region  of  the
fpleen,  but  had  even  been  oblig'd  thereby  to  enter  into  this  hofpital,  where
he  died.

But  in  regard  to  the  fubftance  of  this  fpleen,  although  Vallifneri  the  el-
der, to  vi'hom  it  had  been  laft  given,  wrote  upon  it,  with  his  own  hand,
thefe  words  milza  cjfeffatta  d'uomo,  that  is  to  fay,  "  the  fpleen  of  a  man  offi-
*'  fied  :"  and  although  fome  fmall  parts  of  it,  which  are  protuberant  on  the
hollow  furface,  feem  to  be  bony,  yet  when  you  infpeft  the  other  furface,
you  will  certainly  think  that  it  would  have  heen  more  proper,  if  he  had
made  ufe  of  the  fame  word  here  alfo,  which  he  often  made  ufe  of  in  regard  to
the  brain  of  an  ox,  which  was  fuppos'd  to  be  ftony  (r),  and  had  written  oJ[eo-
lapideous  upon  it,  which  I  take  for  granted  he  would  have  done,  if  he  could
have  beftow'd  as  much  time  and  labour  upon  this,  as  he  beftow'd  upon  that.
But  it  might  be  more  eafy  for  Lanzonus  (s)  to  determine  upon  a  fimilar  ap--
pearance  -,  for  he  having  found  in  a  blackfmith,  who  was  five  and  fifty  years
of  age,  of  a  melancholic  temper,  and  v\?ho  died  of  a  quartan  fever,  among
other  marks  of  difeafe,  the  fpleen  fo  hard  that  it  did  not  yield  to  the  knife,
but  when  "  ftruck  with  the  hammer,  flew  afunder  into  three  feparate  parts
"  like  aftone  ;"  did  not  in  the  leaft  hefitate  to  pronounce  that  it, was  "  pe--
*'  trifled."

16.  And,  indeed,  I have  often- before  infpefted,  and  now  particularly,,
whilft  I  write  thefe  things  to  you,  Ihave  under  inipeftion,  a  membrane  of  four,

(q)  N.  14.  {/)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  7.

((-)  Confideraz.  int.  al.  creduto  cervello  di
bue  impietr,

inches^


Letter  XXXVI. Article 16.  tg;

inches  in  length,  and  two  inches  in  breadth,  which  was  taken  from  the  con-
vex furface  of  a  human  fpleen  in  my  prefence,  and  by  my  order.  This
feems  to  be  almoft  wholly  converted  into  flat  and  thin  laminae,  which  whe- •
ther  you  confider  them  on  the  external,  or  the  internal  furface,  you  imme-
diately perceive  to  be  entirely  bony,  without  the  leaft  occafion  for  doubt.
But  betwixt  them,  and,  in  part,  out  of  them,  grow  fmall  tubercles  exter-
nally ;  but  internally  larger  tubercles  lie  upon  them,  of  an  unequal  and  gra-
nulated furface,  which  went  down  within  the  fubllance  of  the  ipleen  to  the
depth  of  half  an  inch  :  and  thefe  feem  to  be  a  kind  of  excrefcences,  as  if
from  a  juice  of  a  middle  nature  betwixt  bone,  and  calculus,  which  had  been
effus'd  and  concreted.  Of  which  ambiguous  nature  that  fubftance  feems  tq,
me  in  great  meafure  to  be,  from  whence  the  fpleen  that  I  have  defcrib'd,
from  the  College  Mufasum,  became  indurated.  In  examining  of  which,  I
learn'd  that  what  I  had  conjeftur'd  from  the  membrane,  which  I  juft  now
fpoke  of,  and  others,  was  certainly  not  always  true,  though  perhaps  fome-  '
times;  I  mean  that  the  converfion  of  the  fpleen  into  a  bony,  or  (tony  nature,
begins  in  the  coat,  and,  in  general,  in  that  part  of  it  which  invefts  the  con--
vex  furface,  and  which  is,  for  this  reafon,  fubjetSt  to  the  alternate  prefilire  of
the  diaphragm.

For  as  often  as  ever  it  happen'd  to  me  to  fee  it,  in  that  part,  I  have  {een
it,  and  others  have  feen  it  there  likewife,  or  at  leaft  all  thefe,  nearly,  who
have  faid  in  what  particular  part,  of  the  inverting  coat,  they  found  the  ap-
pearance; for  what Pechlinus  (/)  found  on  the  oppofite  furface,  is  rare:  and'
to  this  I  fuppos'd  that  the  monitum  of  Bofchas  is  to  be  refer'd,  which  is
likewife  produc'd  in  the  Sepulchretum  (k),  of  "  the  upper  coat  of  the  fpleen
"  where  it  is  turn'd  towards  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  being  become  fo
'*  hard,  that  it  feem'd  to  be  a  fcirrhus  within  the  fubftance  of  the  fpleen,"'
though  without  reafon :  as  you  will  alfo  readily  fuppofe,  that  what  the  moft
excellent  PlancusC^)  remark'd,  in  a  nobleman  far  advanc'd  in  age,  that  is  to
fay  an  offification  "  in  the  membrane  of  the  fpleen,"  where  it  adher'd  clofely
to  the  peritoneum,  or  that  which  (y)  others  obferv'd  in  a  woman  of  three
and  thirty  years  of  age,  that  is  "  half  the  external  furface"  of  the  fame  vif-
cus,  "  intirely  chang'd  into  a  cartilaginous  nature,"  to  be  of  the  fame  kind.

For  as  to  the  very  fkilful  WeilTius  (z)  finding  the  beginning  of  a  change
of  this  kind,  that  is  to  fay,  "  a  white,  tendinous,  and  hardifli  fubftance,  up--
"  on  the  back  of  tfie  fpleen,  and  its  middle  furface,  in  an  oblique  and  tranf-
"  verfe  direction;"  or  as  to  an  old  anonymous  author,  as  you  have  it- in  the-
celebrated  Targioni  (a),  having  found  "  fo  great  a  hardnefs  of  the  fpleen
"  in  two  places,  where  it  had  adher'd  to  the  ribs,  that  the  part  feem'd  bony,.
"  or  at  leaft  cartilaginous,  but  very  hard  ;"  you  will  be  in  little  doubt,  I
fuppofe,  on  determining  that  thefe  are  to  be  refer'd  to  the  clafs  fpoken  of
above.  I  therefore  conjeftur'd  that  the  diforder  was,  afterwards,  propagated
from  that  part  of  the  coat,  which  covers  the  convex  furface  of  the  fpleen,
into  the  remaining  parts  of  the  coat,  and  that  by  this  means  the  whole  ipleen :

CtJ  Obf.  cit.  fupra.  ad  n.  14. .  (j)  la  cortiTnerc.  littr.  a.  1734.  hebd.  2j).

(a)  Sedt.  hae  ij.  obf.  21.  (z)  Eta.  1740.  hebd.  35.

{x)  Epill.  de  monftris...  {q)  Prima  raccolta  di  oiTervaz.  msd.


19^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  BcJIy.

was  at  length  furrounded,  as  Bauhin  (i')  found  it,  and,  if  I  rightly  und'er-'
iland,  Columbus  a.\[o{c),  and  they  in  like  manner  who  are  here  pointed  out
in  the  fixteenth  obfervation  of  the  Sepulchretum.  And  that  after  this,  tlie
i-jidurated  matter  increafing  more  and  more,  and  puQiing  inwardly  all  round
from  the  coat,  comprefies  the  whole  fubilance  of  the  viicus,  deftroys  it,  and
fills-  up  its  place.  Yet  this,  though  it  may  fometirines  happen,  as  I  have  faid,
certainly  did  not  happen  in  the  fpleen  defcrib'd  by  me  (d) ;  fince  whatever
part  of  its  coat  remains  (and  a  great  part  of  it  does  remain)  is  not  only  not
bony,  or  ftony,  but  is  even,  at  this  very  time,  of  fuch  a  nature,  that  when
moiften'd  externally  ;  for  I  have  made  the  experiment  in  more  than  one  place  •,
itlelf,  only,  becomes  foon  after  loft,  jull;  as  dried  membranes  are  wont
to  do.

But  thus  far  on  this  fubjccl.  Now  let  us  go  on  to  another  obfervation  of
Valfalva,  which  is  one  of  thole  that  relate  to  the  fpleen.

17.  A  woman  of  eight  and  twenty  years  of  age,  of  a  fiender  make,  being
married,  but  not  having  born  children,  had  been  formerly  troubled  with  ;t
-chronic  fever,  which  had  left  the  fpleen  fo  much  increas'd  in  its  bulk,  that  a
tumour  of  this  region  was  very  evidently  felt  :  flie  alfo  kept  her  pahlTi  com-
plexion, and  was  fometimes  taken  with  a  fever,  which  began  with  a  rigor,
and  continu'd  fome  days.  As  ihe  had  ceas'd  to  have  a  difcharge  of  men-
flruous  blood,  for  two  years  pad,  fhe  foon  after  was  troubled  with  a  cuta-
neous, but  obftinate  ulcer,  of  the  left  leg  :  at  the  fide  of  which  ulcer,  the
leg  fweliing  afterwards,  an  abfcefs  v/as  form'd.  This  abfcefs,  although  it  hud
been  exceedingly  well  cleans'd,  and  feem'd  to  be  coming  to  a  cicatrix,  yet
when  the  time  was  at  hand  that  the  menftrua  fhould,  according  to  their  re-
gular courfe,  have  been  difcharg'd,  the  ulcer  was  irritated,  increas'd,  and
emitted  a  much  larger  quantity  of  ferous  ichor  ;  and  on  the  contrary  the  far-
ther it  was  pail  the  time  of  menllruation,  the  lefs  was  the  ulcer  irritated,
and  the  lefs  matter  was  difcharg'd.  At  one  of  thefe  very  times  therefore,
when,  on  the  preceding  day,  not  only  a  fmall  quantity  of  ichor,  but  fuch  as
had  a  ftrong  fmell,  had  been  difcharg'd,  and  no  new  marks  of  death  being
at  hand,  had  come  on  -,  behold  fhe  was  oblig'd,  early  in  the  morning,  to  fit
upright  in  her  bed,  and,  turning  herfelf  to  one  fide  and  to  the  other,  com-
plain'd  fo  much  of  a  ftreightnefs  of  the  prsecordia,  and  of  a  very  great  anx-
iety at  her  cheft,  that  fometimes  flie  could  fcarcely  utter  a  word,  and  fpat
up  a  great  quantity  of  frothy  matter,  and  matter  that  was  tinftur'd  with
blood  :  and  thus  within  an  hour  fhe  died,

The  cavity  of  the  belly  was  fill'd,  almoft  univerfally,  on  the  left  fide  with
the  fpleen,  which  was  fo  much  increas'd  in  its  bulk,  and  efpecially  in  the
longitudinal  direftion,  that  it  weigh'd  eight  pounds  and  a  half.  The  inter-
nal parts,  of  this  vlfcus,  did  not  feem  to  differ  from  their  natural  conftitu-
tion  :  externally,  both  the  fanguiferous,  and  lymphatic,  vefl"els  appear'd  en-
larg'd,  fo  that  the  lymphatics  were  dii'cover'd  up  and  down  through  the  coat
of  the  fpleen,  and  made  a  very  beautiful  appearance.

The  fpermatic  veflels  contain'd  blood  of  a  violet  colour  •,  fo  th  you  might
perceive  it  had  been  retain'd  there  for  a  confiderable  time. T'^^  teftes  were

he

aj ,  ...  (,d)  N.  15.

(1)  Locis  fupra  indicatij  ad  n.  14,

alaioft


Letter  XXXVI. Article  1 8.  19^-

almoft  wholly  fcirrhous,  fo  that  no  body  need  wonder  at  the  woman's  being ;
barren  though  young.  In  them  was  no  veficle,  if  you  except  one  in  the  left,
which  was  equal  to  the  half  of  a  filbert,  irr  its  magnitude.  This  adhering
very  clofely  to  the  fubftance  of  the  teftis,  and  being  diftinguifh'd  with  fan-
guiferous  vefi'els,  ccntain'd  not  a  limpid,  but  a  brownifn  humour :  which
being  let  out,  a  body  of  a  yellow  colour  came  into  view,  of  the  bignefs  of  a
lentil,  and  almoft  of  the  form,  but  adhering  to  the  veficle  internally,  fo  as
to  be  fcarcely  prominent :  and  this  body  was  furrounded  with  fome  very
fmall  globules,  like  a  bulwark.  And  there  were  in  the  fame  teftis  fome  other
bodies  alfo,  which  were  of  the  fame  colour,  but  not  of  the  fame  figure,  no"r-
furnifli'd  with  the  fame  furrounding  bulwark.

As  to  the  thorax,  every  part  therein  was  found,  except  that  the  lungs  were
fuffus'd  with  a  rednels,  and  when  cut  into  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity  of-
matter,  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  which  1  have  faid  the  woman  fpat  up  be-
fore her  death,

1 8.  Of  barrennefs  from  a  diforder  of  the  ovaries,  and  of  fuffocatlon,  from
deprav'd  humours  fuddenly  falling  upon  the  lungs,  it  is  not  the  proper  place
to  treat  here ;  nor  yet  of  married  women,  who  do  not  bring  children,  being
frequently,  at  length,  liable  to  fome  very  great  diforder  ;  nor  of  fome  ab-
fcefies  in  women,  which,  to  ail  appearance,  tend  to  a  cicatrix,  and  are,  ne-
verthelefs,  frequently  very  difficult  to  be  brought  to  it,  and  for  this  reafon,.
that  when  the  tim.e  returns,  in  which  they  are  us'd  to  difcharge  blood  from,
t'he  uterus,  the  abfcefTcs,  which  were  already  almoft  heal'd,  from  the  tur-
gefcency  of  the  humours,  and  the  motion  thereof,  which  make  their  impe-
tus upon  the  whole  body,  and  efpecially  on.  the  weaker  parts,  open  afrefii,,,
and  enlarge  their  dimenfions,  v/hich  I  remember  to  have  happen'd  in  the  leg^
of  a  noble  matron,  in  particular,  for  many  months  fucccffiveiy.

As  we  are,  therefore,  paffing  on  to  the  confideration  of  other  things, more
fuitable  to  the  prefent  occafion,  we  cannot  avoid  thinking  of  thofe  long,  and
obftinate  fevers,  which  leave  an  enlargement  of  the  fpleen  behind  them  ;  and:
of  thofe  ulcers  of  the  legs  v/hich  are  the  confequence  of  enlarg'd  fpleens.
And  that  thofe  ulcers  have  been,  in  fa£l,  join'd  withfuch  enlargements,  even
fome  of  the  letters,  which  I  have  fent  to  you,  have  (hewn  (f).  But  that  the  fmie
has  been  obferv'd  even  from  the  moft  ancient  times,  a  pafiage  of  the  fecond
book  of  the  Prorrhetica  (f)  teaches  us:  but  take  care  how  you  read  it,  as  it  is.
quoted  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  {g),  in  the  fcholium  to  the  fixteenth  obferva-
tion :  "  they  Vv-ho  have  an  enlargement  of  the  fpleen  and  hsemorrhages,  but
"  not  an  illfmell  of  the  breath,  will  have  foul  ulcers  of  the  tibia";  for  in
the  Greek  the  very  words  are  {xn-^i  aliJ-o^l^ay'iai  y/vcvrai,  that  is,  "  nor  have  a.
"  haemorrhage  from  any  part,"  as  others  have  more  faithfully  tranflated  it  :
therefore  this  opinion  may,  in  fome  njcafure,  be  accommodated  to  that  wo-
man, who  had  no  eruption  of  blcod  froni  the  uterus.  And  as  fhe  was  of  a
Qender  habit,  that  would  alfo  very  well  fuit  v/ith  her  cafe,  which  is  imme-
diately liibioin'd  in  the  fame  fcholium,  from  the  obiervation  of  Spigeliu5,
"  that  lean  perfons  are  much  more  liable  to  tumefasftions  of.  the  fpleen  than,
"  fat  perfons."

{e)  Epiil.  4,  n.  30.  Eciil-.  12.  n..2..  (g)  £ei1.  16..

-  (f\  N.  42.

But


200  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

But  that  thefe  tumours  are  the  confequences  of  long-continu'd  fevers  is  de-
monftrated  to  you  by  more  than  one  of  my  letters  (h),  and  confirm'd  by
more  than  oneobfervation  {i),  in  the  fedtion  of  the  Scpukhretum.  To  wjiich
you  may  add  the  obiervation  of  Chriftian  Vater  (k),  made  upon  a  ftudent,
who,  having  been  long  afflifted  with  intermitting  fevers,  had  hiS'  fpleen  en-
larged to  the  fize  of  a  man's  head  ;  and,  what  is  remark'd  by  that  excellent
anatomical  profcflbr  Weifilus  (/j,  that  "  whenever"  he  lit  on  very  large
fpleens,  in  the  difleflion  of  bodies,  he  generally  found,  upon  inquiry,  that
thefe  perfons,  when  living,  had  labour'd  under  a  violent  fever  at  fome  time
or  other,  "  and  that  either  an  intermittent,  or  a  fynocha  continua  :"  to
omit  at  prefent  what  I  have  ellewhere  taken  notice  of,  from  thofe  celebrated
men  Hoyerus,  and  Kramerus  (m),  of  the  infarftion  of  the  fpleen,  after
intermittent  chronic  fevers,  and  particularly  the  quartan  ;  whofe  obfervations
I  could  wifh  were  not  confirm'd  by  examples  amongft  us,  alfo,  of  fevers  of
that  kind,  but  of  fuch  as  are  badly  cui'd.  And  that  fuch  have  been  ob-
ferv'd  by  the  ancient  phyficians  alfo,  thefe  words  of  Hippocrates,  or  jather  of
Polybus,  are  a  proof  ('h):  "  this  diieafe,"  that  is  the  tumour  of  the  fpleen,
*'  happens  when  from  fevers,  and  bad  management  of  thefe  fevers,  bile  or
"  pituita,  or  both,  have  fallen  upon  the  fpleen."  For  a  vifcus  which  is  of
itfelf  lax,  and  cellular,  and  from  v/hich  the  return  of  the  blood  is  flow,  as  it
is  to  pafs  through  the  liver,  before  it  enters  the  vena  cava,  is  extremely  lia-
ble to  tumours,  efpecially  if  that  little  fliare  of  ftrength  which  it  has  origi-
nally, being  weaken'd  by  a  difeafe  of  long  continuance,  and  the  blood  being
made  inert  and  fluggifli,  fome  particles  are  left  therein,  which  ought  either
to  be  corrected,  or  thrown  out  of  the  body.

For  the  fluggifli  motion  of  the  blood  being  increas'd  for  thefe  reafons,
while,  like  muddy  water  befide  its  channel,  it  is  diverted  into  the  cells  of  the
fpleen,  it  of  courle  depofits  therein  whatever  corpufcles  it  m.ay  contain,  which
are  heavier  and  more  grofs  than  the  conilitution  can  bear,  and  by  this  means,
in  part  obftrufting  its  own  return,  diftends  the  ce'ls  of  this  vifcus  more  and
more.  And  the  more  the  whole  fpleen  is  diftended  by  the  difl;ention  of  the
cells,  fo  much  the  weaker  it  is,  and  for  that  reafon  more  liable  to  retain,  in  great
mcafure,  thofe  fluids  which  afterwards  flow  into  it.  For  Vv'hich  reafon  it
fometimes  grows  out  in  an  incredible  manner,  fo  that  Aetius  wrote  even
formerly,  that  in  fome  perfons  "  the  fpleen  became  contiguous  to  the  groin,"
as  you  will  read  in  the  Scholium  jufl;  now  pointed  out  ;  except  that  as  he  is
there  faid  to  have  afl^;ried  this  in  the  feventh  book,  and  as  he  compil'd,  in
all,  only  four  bocks  of  medicine  collected  from  the  ancients,  each  of  which
were  divided  into  four  dilcourfes,  you  muft  look  for  it  in  the  third  book  of
the  Tetrabiblion,  difcourfe  the  fecond,  chapter  the  fixteenth.

This  blunder,  and  that  which  is  Hill  more  confiderable  in  the  fentence  of
the  Frorrhetica,  were  transfer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum,  by  copying  the  words
.of  Dieraerbroeck,-  and  not  turning  to  the  authors  he  has  quoted. For  he

(/?■)  Eplft.  i"^-  n.  6.  epill.  20.  n.  2.  30.  51.  (/)  Commerc.  littr.  a.  1745.  hebd.  24.  n.  i^
Epiit.  31-  "•  2.  ad  7.


(/■) II. 13.  17.  (m)  Epift.  20.  n.  52.

(,4)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3,  a.  5  &  -lo.  obf.  165.  («)  Deaffefticm.  n.  zi..


'intro-


Letter  XXXVI. Article 19,  20.  201

introduc'd  afterwards,  as  I  fuppofe  {o\  examples  of  very  large  fpleens,  in-
fifting  upon  that  which  weigh'd  three  and  twenty  pounds.  But  Bofchus  (p)^
if  I  underftand  him  properly,  had  aflerted  that  a  fpleen  had  been  found,  by
his  own  father,  which  "  weigh'd  three  and  thirty  pounds."  But  among  the
obfervations  that  are  more  modern  than  thefe,  although  I  do  not  remember  to
have  read  any,  in  which  the  fpleen  was  faid  to  come  near  to  that  weight,  yet
thofe  which  were  publifh'd  from  Henricus  Alb.  Nicolai(5),  and,  before,  from
Maurice  Hoffmann  (r),  are  by  no  means  to  be  defpis'd.  For  the  latter  found
the  fpleen  to  weigh  fifteen  pounds,  and  the  former  found  it  ftill  half  a
pound  heavier;  and  both  of  them  found  it  fo,  that  the  diaphragm,  on  the
left  fide,  was  driven  to  the  fuperior  ribs  ;  and  Henricus  fo  that,  at  the  fame
time,  the  fpleen  hung  down  quite  to  the  iliac  region.

But  Preuffius  (s),  in  an  infant,  faw  it  extended  in  its  magnitude,  from  the
left  hypochondrium  through  the  whole  fide,  quite  to  the  pubes :  and  Vercel-
lonus  {t)  ftill  farther,  that  is  to  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  ;  and  as  it  could
not  go  beyond  this  boundary,  it  was  reflefted  up  again,  and  terminated  be-
hind the  uterus,  in  a  mafs  equal  to  the  fize  of  a  fift.  It  is  true,  that  which
was  found  by  Jo.  David  Mauchartus  («),  chang'd  into  the  figure  of  a  cone,
did  not  extend  itfelt  fo  far ;  yet  it  was  large,  as,  being  fix'd  to  the  bafis  of
the  diaphragm,  it  was  equal  to  a  large  human  head  in  its  bignefs :  in  its
weight,  alfo,  it  did  not  exceed  four  pounds  with  as  many  ounces ;  but  it
contain'd  that  which  makes  this  obfervation  very  rare,  that  is  to  fay,  fo  great
a  quantity  of  water  within  a  kind  of  coat,  like  a  hydatid,  I  fuppofe,  which
had  occupied  all  the  internal  parts  of  that  vifcus,  fo  that  Mauchartus  did  not
hefitate  to  call  this  diforder  "  a  dropfy  of  the  fpleen ;"  for  four  pints  of  water
burft  forth  therefrom.

Thus  taking  the  word  empyema  in  the  moft  extenfive  fignification,  you
may  call  that  an  empyema  of  the  fpleen,  which  was  found  by  Anthony  de'
Haen(x),  as  that  vifcus  occur'd  to  him  "  full  of  pus,  which  was  in  great
"  quantity,  thick  and  white;"  though  by  its  inflammation  it  had  before  beeif
miftaken  for  a  pleurify.

19.  Now  before  I  pafs  on  to  other  obfervations,  from  thefe  of  Valfalva's,-
I  am  not  willing  to  omit  one  from  him,  which  will  give  you  to  underftand,
what  vifcera  befides  thofe  that  naturally  lie  in  the  hypochondria,  may  there
<:reate  very  great  and  even  fatal  uneafinefies;  efpecially  if  to  the  diforders  of
thefe  vifcera,  although  flight  in  appearance,  a  convulfion  be  added,  which  I
do  not  doubt  was  added  in  this  cafe.

20.  A  virgin  was  feiz'd  with  a  violent  vomiting  and  a  fever.  The  for-
mer was  appeas'd ;  but  the  latter  remain'd.  A  violent  pain  came  on  under
the  falfe  ribs,  by  which  flie  was  carried  off  within  two  days.

In  the  belly  was  found  a  very  limpid  ferum.  The  ftomach  and  the  intef-
tines  were  very  turgid  from  included  air. Both  of  the  kidnies  were  three

(0)  Anat.  1.  I.e.  16.  edit.  Patav.  (-0  Earund.  cent.  3.  obf.  11.

(/■)  De  facukat.  anat.  left.  2.  {t)  Earund.  cent.  7.  obf.  9.

(f) Commerc.  litter,  a.  1732.  hebd.  33.  n.  2. [u]  Earund.  cent.  9.  obf.  41.
ad  5.  {.x)  ApudSwieten  comment,  in  Boerh.  aph;

(r)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  9  &  10.  in  append.  §.  958.
n.  I.  obf.  5.

Vol.  II.  - D  d  times


202  Book  III. of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

times  bigger  than  their  natural  fize  ;  but  the  left  contain'd,  betwixt  it5  proper
membrane  and  the  fubftance  which  lay  beneath  it,  a  little  quantity  of  a  fa-
niovis  matter,  and  particularly  on  that  part  which  was  turn'd  towards  the  fpleen.

Jn  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  was  a  little  water.  The  lungs  were  lbund»
except  that  they  were  difcinguifh'd  with  black  fpots,  which  were  few  in  num-
ber. The  pericardium  was  full  of  ferum.  From  the  ventricles  of  the  heart
flow'd  out  a  pretty  fluid  blood  ;  yet  in  the  right,  was  the  beginning  of  a  po-
lypous concretion.

21.  The  increas'd  bulk  of  the  left  kidney,  and  a  diforder  therein,  at  the
fame  time,  have  more  than  once  excited  a  tumour,  or  pain,  in  the  hypo-
chondrium  of  the  fame  fide.  And  this  may  be  learn'd  from  fome  hiftories,
which  are  produc'd  in  thefe  two  feftions  of  the  Sepulchretum,  as  in  the  fix-
teenth,  that  which  we  have  under  article  tlie  fecond,  of  the  twenty-fecond
obfervation,  and  in  the  feventeenth  fedion,  two  which  are  read  under  the
ninth  article  of  the  thirtieth  obfervation,  where  Ballonius  fays  as  follows :
"  they  did  not  fuppofe  the  pain  to  be  nephritic,  and  yet  it  was  fo;  but  the
"  fituation  of  the  pain,  and  of  the  part,  deceiv'd  the  pra6titioner."  And
that  this  may  fometimes  happen  on  the  right  fide  alfo,  that  hiftory  which  is
given  in  the  fame  thirtieth  obfervation,  in  the  firfl:  place,  demonftrates.

But  that  which  is  read  laft  in  this  obfervation  fhows  that  the  fame  thing
may  happen,  not  only  from  the  parts  which  lie  below,  as  the  kidnies  do,  but
alfo  by  the  parts  which  lie  above ;  as,  for  inftance,  by  the  feptum  tranf-
verfum  being  overloaded  with  a  quantity  of  pus,  and  forc'd  downwards  :
for  thus  I  conjedture  that  this  hiftory  ought  to  be  explain'd,  rather  than  by  a
kind  of  confent,  and  affinity,  as  from  the  fame  feptum,  when  deprefs'd  by
the  force  of  water,  or  a  thick  ferum,  I  have  already  fhown  you  (j),  that  a
hardnefs  and  pain  have  been  brought  on  in  the  upper  regions  of  the  belly.
But  now,  Jiot  to  recede  from  the  kidnies,  and  from  other  parts  which  lie  be-
neath the  hypochondria,  I  think  the  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Bonfig-
lius  (z)  ought  to  be  added,  in  reading  of  which  attentively,  you  will  readily
perceive  that  an  inveterate  tumour,  that  had  been  formerly  felt  in  the  right
liypochondrium,  was  nothing  elfe  but  the  kidney,  which,  by  being  increas'd
more  and  more  in  its  bulk,  had  at  length  fallen  forwards  from  its  natural
fituation  into  the  iUac  region,  where  it  was  found  to  be  five  times  as  big  as
its  natural  fize.

But  in  regard  to  other  pacts,  the  celebrated  Goekelius  (a)  will  {how  you,
that  from  the  omentum,  having  its  bulk  enlarg'd  by  a  kind  of  fcirrhous  fat-
nefs,  wherein  the  whole  fpleen  was  enwrap'd,  there  was  a  tumour  of  fuch  a
kind  in  the  left  hypcchondrium,  and  with  fuch  a  refiftance,  that,  for  this
reafon,  the  tumour  "  exaftly  refembled  afcirrhus"of  the  fpleen.  And  Schroc-
kius  (^.),  Hurterus  (c),  and  Gerbezius  (d),  remark'd  a  tumour  in  the  other
hypochondrium,  together  with  a  pain  from  a  fcirrhus,  which  adher'd  very
clofely  to  the  inteftines,  ileum  and  colon  ;  or  from  the  colon  being  rais'd  into
fuch  a  bulk,  that  by  forcing  itfelf  againfl:  the  ligaments  of  the  liver,  it  drove

(j>)  Epift. 16. n. 26.  &  epift. 30.  n.  30 (i)  Et  cent,  i  &2.  obf.  186.
Si  11.  (c)  Ibid.  obf.  184.

{z)  N.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  4.  {d)  Et  dec.  3.  a.  7  5?  8.  obf.  186.

(«)  N.  c.  cent.  6.  obf.  94.  adn.  7.

that


Letter  XXXVI. Article 22,  23.  20^

that  vifcus  from  its  natural  fituation,  towards  the  left  hypochonch-ium  :  or  a
pain  only,  which  had  been  falfely  imputed  to  the  liver;  whereas  it  arofefrom
the  mefentery,  which  was,  foon  after,  found  to  be  "  eroded"  under  that
vifcus,  ^nearly  to  the  breadth  of  a  fpan.  But  let  us  return  to  the  diforders
proper  to  the  vifcera  which  lie  in  the  hypochondria.

22.  However,  as  I  have,  much  the  more  frequently,  defcrib'd  to  you
obfervations  of  the  liver  or  fpleen  being  tumefied,  it  will,  for  that  reafon,
be  fufficient  here,  to  add  to  thofe  which  I  have  hitherto  producM  from  Val-
falva,  a  few  that  are  common  to  the  tumours  of  both  theie  vifcera.

23.  A  woolcomber  of  about  forty  years  of  age,  came  into  the  hofpital  of
Padua  for  obftruftions,  as  he  himfelf  faid,  of  the  hypochondria.  And  that
he  faid  what  was  true,  not  only  the  bad  colour  of  his  face,  and  an  infirm
(late  of  health  for  a  whole  year  already,  and  a  flight  fever,  with  which  he
was  often  attack'd,  and  was  not  free  from  even  at  this  very  time,  demonurat-
ed,  but  the  application  of  the  hand  to  both  hypochondria,  and  chiefly  to  the
right,  particularly  confirm'd.  When  he  feem'd  to  have  receiv'd  fome  ad-
vantage from  a  courfe  of  remedies,  behold  he  was  feiz'd  with  an  acute  fever,
attended  with  fignsof  an  internal  inflammation  of  the  thorax;  and  by  that  he
was  carried  off  within  ten  or  twelve  days.

His  body  was  brought  into  the  college,  that  I  rriight  therefrdm  begin  the
anatomical  demonftrations  of  the  year  1746:  and  as  I  examin'd  the  carcafe,
I  faw  that  i|Hfc,d  a  pretty  clear  appearance  on  the  fkin,  and  was  not  alto-
gether lean^^r  were  the  feet  cedematous.  The  mufcles  of  the  abdomen
feeing  diflTecSed,  fcarcely  at  the  diftance  of  two  days  from  the  patient's  death,
and  that  in  the  month  of  January,  were  lax,  and  at  their  lower  part  inclin'd
to  a  greenifli  colour.  Yet  the  parts  which  were  contain'd  in  the  belly  had  a  na-
tural appearance,  if  you  except  the  following.  The  liver  was  immoderately
large ;  fo  that  the  very  great  magnitude  of  it  immediately  ftruck  the  eyes  of  eve-
ry one  :  and  although  it  had  not  a  bad  colour  externally,  yet,  internally,  I  ob-
ferv'd  it  to  be  of  a  palifli  colour  inclining  to  brown ;  and,  befides  this,  univerfally
mark'd  with  certain  brown  fpots,  if  you  examin'd  it  with  a  ftedfaft  and  atten-
tive eye,  either  on  the  infide  or  the  outfide ;  and  harder  than  it  generally  is,
which  appear'd  not  only  to  the  fingers,  but  was  alfo  evident,  by  cutting  into
it  in  feveral  parts,  and  in  feveral  direftions.  And  v/hile  I  was  making  thefe
incifions,  I  alfo  obferv'd  this  circumfliance,  that  no  yellow  point  had  appear'd
any  where  with  any  of  the  feiSlions  of  the  veins,  which  is  the  general  mark
of  the  fmall  branches  of  the  hepatic  dud:  being  cut  tranfverfly,  at  the  fame
time,  whether  this  happen'd  from  thefe  vefTels  having  coUaps'd  in  fome
meafure,  from  the  fmall  quantity  of  bile  which  was  fecreted  in  the  liver,  or
rather  becaufe  the  bile  was  of  a  more  pale  and  dilute  colour,  and  left  apt  to
tinge:  and  indeed,  in  the  cyfl:  was  but  a  fmall  quantity  of  bile,  in  proportion
to  the  bulk  of  the  liver;  the  cyfl:  itfelf  was  fmall,  and  had  thin  coats ;  and  the
bile  inclin'd  to  a  kind  of  cineritious  colour.

The  fpleen  was  twice  as  big  as  it  naturally  is  in  every  dimenfion ;  but  in
other  refpeds,  as  far  as  I  was  able  to  judge,  it  was  not  to  be  found  fault
■with.  The  fplenic  artery,  from  the  origin  to  the  termination,  contrary  to
the  general  appearance,  had  nothing  tortuous  in  it  in  any  part,  nothing  vari-

D  d  2  cous.


204  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

cous,  if  I  may  lb  fpeak,  excepting  one  place  only,  about  the  middle  of  its
length,  where  it  was  a  little  inflefted.

On  the  mefentery  had  grown  a  hard  body,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  fmall  cher-
ry, and  almcft  of  the  figure,  but  unequal,  and  granulated,  on  its  furface,
and  of  a  middle  nature  betwixt  bone  and  ftone  :  at  one  fide  of  this  body  was
an  arterial  and  venous  branch,  which  ran  very  clofe  to  it,  but  did  not  enter
the  fubllance,  going  out  from  thence  to  the  inteftines,  which  were  at  about
two  inches  diftancefrom  this  body.  The  ileum  had  that  appendix,  or  diver-
ticulum, if  you  chufe  rather  to  call  it  fo,  which,  as  I  have  deicrib'd  it  in  the
thirty-fourth  letter  {e),  it  vvfill  be  fufficient  to  have  (lightly  taken  notice  of
here.  For  it  will  be  more  to  the  prefent  purpofe,  to  obferve  what  other  ap-
pearances I  law  in  the  belly  of  this  man.  The  external  iliac  vein,  on  the  left
fide,  near  the  opening  of  the  internal,  was  hard,  and  yet  not  bony,  as  the
coats  were  only  much  thicken'd,  in  that  part,  for  fome  little  extent :  and
thefe  coats  being  laid  open,  I  faw,  in  the  cavity  of  the  vein,  on  one  fide,
where  it  was  perforated  with  no  orifices,  fmall  chords  protuberating,  and  a
kind  of  fmall  valves.

But  that  deferves  our  attention  flill  more,  which  I  faw  in  the  kidnies,  and
in  their  arteries,  though  it  was  rather  unufual,  than  preternatural.  Thefe
arteries  were  about  nine  inches  in  length,  but  narrow  in  proportion  to  this
large  extent,  except  that  they  were  rather  wider  in  the  upper  extremities.
The  length  of  the  finulfes,  alfo,  that  receive  and  fend  out  |0Hteflels,  was
unufual ;  which  was  the  more  ealy  to  be  taken  notice  of,  liMihat  whole
part  of  the  fubftance  of  the  kidnies  was  wanting,  which  fhould  have  made
up  the  anterior  paries  of  the  finufl"es :  and  for  this  reafon,  the  larger  of  thofe
branches,  that  convey  the  urine  into  the  pelvis,  were  quite  naked,  and  ex-
pos'd,  and  the  fanguiferous  veflels  were  expos'd  in  all  that  part  which  is  gene-
rally buried  within  the  finus.  But  as  two  arteries,  that  is  the  inferior  and
the  fuperior,  and  as  many  veins  went  to  each  kidney,  the  veins  went  out  from
the  finuffes  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  inferior  afcended  obhquely  into  the
luperior,  which  was  tranfverfe.  And  the  arteries  were  not  join'd  with  each
other,  but  the  inferior,  as  well  as  the  fuperior,  was  carried  in  a  tranfverfe
direction,  without  any  obliquity,  for  which  reafon  the  inferior  did  not  go  to
the  finus,  but  penetrated  the  kidney,  almofh  at  its  lower  fide,  beneath  the
finus.

From  this  defcription  you  perceive,  that  both  the  inferior  arteries  muft
have  arifen  much  lower  than  the  arteries  of  the  kidnies  generally  do  :  and
indeed  they  did  arife  from  the  aorta,  at  not  more  than  the  diftance  of  an
inch  above  the  divifion  into  the  iliacs  •,  and,  what  is,  perhaps,  much  more
-  extraordinary,  not  from  the  fides  of  the  aorta,  but  from  the  very  middle  of  its
■  anterior  furface,  where  they  were  fo  near  to  each  other,  that  their  orifices
were  but  juft  feparated,  by  a  very  thin  feptum :  coming  out  from  thence,  on
both  fides,  fimilar  and  equal,  and  being  divided  into  no  branches,  before-
their  infertion,  they  were  inferted  as  I  have  already  defcrib'd  ;  whereas  the
fuperior  arteries,  which  were  a  little,  but  not  much,  thicker  than  thefe,  dif-

(<■)  N-  16.

fbr'd;


Letter  XXXVI. Article  24, 25.  205

fe.r'd  neither  in  their  origin,  nor  in their  ramification,  from  thofe  which  we-
generally  fee.

The  infpedion  of  other  parts  we  could  not  profecute  with  the  fame  dili-
gence, as  a  better  body  was  procur'd  in  the  mean  while.  For  which  reafon
we  did  touch  the  head.

In  the  thorax,  finally,  we  found  the  right  lobe  of  the  lungs  annex'd  to  the
pleura,  and  hard  :  in  the  pericardium  was  a  bloody  water,  to  the  quantity
of  fome  fpoonfuls :  in  the  heart,  two  veins,  which  ran  longitudinajly  upon
its  pofterior  furface,  were  turgid  with  blood,  and  in  a  manner  vari-
cous.

24.  Setting  afide  the  confideration  of  the  appearances  which  have  jio-
affinity  to  our  prefent  fubjedl,  if  we  attend  only  to  th-ofe  that  relate  to  the
tumefied  fpleen,  and  to  the  tumefied  and  obftrufled  liver,  the  fplenic  artery,
if  we  are  to  fuppofe  that  it  was  not  without  inflexions  in  its  original  forma^
tion,  may  feem  to  any  one  to  have  loft  thefe  tortuous  diverticula,  while  the
courfe  of  the  arterial  blood  into  the  hard  liver  being  obftrufted,  a  greater
quantity  of  it  was  therefore  neceflarily  oblig'd  to  flow  into  the  fplenic  arte-
ry. And  how  much,  when  the  liver  is  obftruded,  the  fmall  arterial  branches
within  that  vifcus  are  comprefs'd,  and  how  much  lefs  a  quantity  of  blood
they  admit,  is  not  only  demonftrated  by  reafon,  butfometimes  alfo  confirm'd
by  evident  obfervation.  For  the  celebrated  John  Baptift  Vulpius  has  affirm'd
to  me,  that  he  twice  happen'd  to  find  the  trunk  of  the  hepatic  artery  fo  di-
lated, in  a  body  where  the  liver  was  cbftrufted,  that  he  could  introduce  his
thumb  into  the  cavity..

However,  when  the  liver  is  thus  affedled,  how  eafily  the  conftitution  dege-
nerates into  a  cachexy  plainly  appears  in  the  man  we  fpeak  of,  from  that,
fmall  quantity  of  difcolour'd  bile,  befides  other  things.

But  if  a  very  confiderable  difeafe  occupy  the  liver,  we  learn  from  a  great
number  of  obfervations,  that,  frequently,  the  conftitution  tends  not  only  to
«  cachexy,  but  even  to  a  dropfy.  Among  which  are  worthy  to  be  read,  thofe
given  by  the  celebrated  Roftius  (f),  and  Ufenbenzius  {g)  either  on  account  of
the  appearances  found  in  the  fcirrhous  liver,  or  on  account  of  its  weight..
And  to  thefe  you  may  alfo  add  that  which  I  fliall  immediately  fubjoin.

25.  A  porter  who  feem'd  to  be  of  a  middle  age,  and  who  had  never  been;
attack'd  v/ith  any  difeafe,  felt  a  very  confiderable  uneafinefs  in  his  loins  im-
mediately after  lifting  up  a  heavy  load,  which  then  oblig'd  him  to  lie  in  bed
for  two  days,  and  m.ade  him  fo  weak,  for  the  remaining  part  of  his  life,  that
he  could  not  now  lift  up  even  the  weight  of  twenty  pounds,  without  occa--
fioning  a  pain  in  his  loins.  A  month  after  this  accident  he  feem'd  to  him--
felf  to  hear  the  agitation  of  water  in  his  belly,  while  he  turn'd  himfelf  in  bed,,
and  foon  after  to  perceive  a  kind  of  body,  as  it  were,  afcending  from  the
hypogaftrium,.  imo  the^fcrobiculus  cordis,  as  it  is  call'd,.  which,  flopping
there,  caus'd  the  beginning  of  a  very  hard  and  pretty  large  tumour;  with.
which  being  afflidted,  and  with  a  flight  fever,  at  the  fame  time,  he  came  into
tJiis  hofpital,  in  the  fifth  month  after  his  lifting  that,  heavy  load,  and  related.
all  thefe  things  v/hich  I  have  related  to  you.

(fj  Aft.  n.  c.  tooj.  2.  obf.  178,. •  CiX^^  Cent,  9.  obf.  27.

It


2o6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

It  was  then  certain,  that  he  had  a  continual,  though  flight  fever,  which
was  exacerbated  in  the  night-time,  that  there  was  a  turiiour  in  the  fcrobi-
culus  cordis,  and  aUb  below  the  lower  ribs,  butefpecially  on  the  right  fide,  and
that  water  was  extravafated  in  the  abdominal  cavity.  In  the  meanwhile  this
extravafation  increased,  fo  that  when  I  happen'd  to  have  occaflon  to  go  up  in-
to the  hofpital,  juft  about  a  month  from  the  time  of  his  coming  into  it,  and
being  afk'd  to  feel  the  man's  belly,  I  fcarcely  perceiv'd  any  particular  tu-
mour elsewhere  than  in  the  fcrobiculus  cordis,  the  abdominal  cavity  being  fa
greatly  diftended  with  water.

This  tumour  was  very  hard,  and  very  unequal,  but  free  from  pain,  even
■when  you  prefs'd  upon  it.  I  inquir'd  whether  it  was  troublefome  by  its
weight .''  whether  there  was  any  pain  which  was  produc'd  quite  to  the  throat .''
and  whether  he  was  ever  troubled  with  a  cough  .''  To  all  which  queries  the
patient  anfwer'd  in  the  negative.  But  when  I  aflc'd  him  whether  the  tumour
increas'd  at  that  time?  He  not  only  anfwer'd  negatively,  but  even  aiferted
that  it  had  fubfided,  and  was  grown  much  lefs  -,  I  fuppofe  becaufe  it  was  in
great  meafureobicur'd  by  the  increafing  water :  and  indeed,  thofe  who  had
felt  it  at  other  times  could  not  perceive  it  to  be  diminifli'd.  The  face  of  the
man  was  fomewhat  pale,  but  not  yellow,  nor  of  a  cineritious  colour -,  and
even  the  white  parts  of  the  eyes,  though  I  examin'd  them  very  attentively,
did  not  appear  to  me  to  hav«  the  leaft  yellownefs.

He  lay,  for  the  mofl:  part,  on  his  back  :  though  he  could  lie  upon  either
fide.  He  was  thirfty,  but  not  to  any  great  degree.  He  drew  his  breath
not  quite  freely,  yet  not  with  any  great  difficulty.  Which  circumfrances  I
remark'd  with  the  more  nicety,  as  1  forefaw  that  the  patient  would  die  in  a  very
•fhort  time,  and  give  us  the  opportunity  of  examining  into  the  ftate  of  his  vif-
cera,  for  which  reafon  Ileft  him  with  an  uncertain,  and,  in  part,  a  fufpended
opinion,  in  regard  to  the  univerfal  feat  of  the  tumour  :  and  the  patient,  hav-
ing his  pulie,  at  length,  become  very  fmall,  but  preferving  his  fenfes  per-
fe6tly  to  the  very  laft,  died  in  a  very  placid  manner,  as  he  was  fpeaking  to
fome  perfons  around  him,  in  the  beginning  of  April,  in  the  year  1745,  about
fourteen  days  after  I  had  feen  him.

But  when  the  body  was  diffedled,  as  it  was  on  the  following  day,  I  was  fo
much  taken  up  with  bufinefs  of  importance,  that  I  could  not  attend.  How-
ever,  our  Mediavia  prefided  at  the  diffedion,  in  my  room  :  from  whom  I
receiv'd  this  account  on  the  fame  day.

The  body  was  lean,  and  no  where,  unlefs  flightly  in  the  fcrotum,  and  ftill
more  flightly  in  the  feet,  affeded  with  an  cedematous  tumour.  The  belly
contain'd  a  great  quantity  of  extravafated  water,  not  of  a  difagreeable  fmell,
not  thick,  nor  turbid  from  a  kind  of  thin  membranes,  as  it  were,  fwimming
in  it,  but  pellucid,  yet  inclining  to  that  colour  which  we  fee  in  oil  of  almonds.
The  omentum  being  drawn  up  into  the  left  hypochondriym,  was  found  in-
deed, but  of  a  greenifh  colour  inclining  to  brown.  The  ftomach  was  fmall  and
contrafted.  The  fpleen  was  twice  as  big  as' it  naturally  is,  externally  whitifli,
and  internally  had  fome  white  fubftances,  which,  however,  were  not  hard.
But  the  liver  was  by  far  the  mofl:  enlarg'd,  fo  that  fome  of  thofe  who  were
prefent  judg'd  it  to  weigh  about  fourteen  pounds.  At  leafl;  it  occupied  the
whole  upper  region  of  the  belly,  and  the  part  which  lay  next  thereto  ante-
riorly.


Letter  XXXVI. Article  26.  207

riorly,  although  it  did  not  extend  itfelf  much  below  the  ribs :  and  it  had
grown  out  fo  much  towards  the  left  fide,  that  the  ligamentum  fufpenforium,
which  was  in  other  refpefts  pretty  thick,  being  curv'd  very  much  towards
that  part,  the  umbilical  fifTure  was  at  the  left  fide  of  the  carcilago  enfiformis.
The  whole  liver  was  hard,  and  diftinguifh'd,  in  feveral  places,  with  protube-
rating  fpots,  not  narrower  than  a  thumb's  breadth,  and  thefe  of  a  yellow  co-
lour;  but  in  other  refpedls  this  vifcus  was  pallid.;  Thefe  were  the  appearances
externally.  And  internally,  if  you  except  a  few  portions  of  the  hepatic  fub-
ftance  intermix'd  here  and  there,  the  whole  vifcus  confifted  of  a  fubftance,
which  could  not  more  eafily  be  cut  afunder,  than  the  mammary  gland:  this
fubftance  was  of  a  white  colour,  degenerating  into  yellow,  and  being  prefs'd
feem'd  to  emit  a  kind  of  purulent  ichor.  Finally,  the  gall-bladder  was  ex-
ceedingly fmall.

26.  When  a  black  fmith,  and,  in  like  manner,  a  woman  of  whom  the
celebrated  Schmidius  fpeaks  fy^),  perceiv'd  that  fomething  was  broken  within
them,  not  without  a  great,  or  a  burning  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver,
from  exerting  themfelves  in  lifting  up  great  burdens,  it  appear'd  that  nei-
ther of  them  was  deceiv'd  from  what  was  found  in  the  body  of  the  fmith,
and  from  the  circumftances  which  happen'd  to  the  woman.  But  what  our
porter  hurt  in  his  loins,  in  endeavouring  to  lift  that  burden,  and  what  it  was
which  had  impos'd  upon  him,  fo  as  to  appear  like  a  body  that  was  amend-
ing, although  you  may  happen  to  conjefture  properly,  yet  you  cannot  eafily
demonftrate.  This,  however,  is  certain,  that  as  the  diforder,  and  tumour,
of  the  liver  increas'd,  the  water  was  increas'd  in  the  belly,  whether  you  fup-
pofe  it  to  have  been  there  before,  in  any  preternatural  quantity,  or  not.
For  without  doubt,  the  very  fwelling,  and  weight,  of  the  liver  naturally  prefs'd
upon  the  trunks  of  the  vena-cava  and  venaportarum,  and  a  great  number  of
lymph£edu6ts,  at  the  fame  time,  while  the  patient  lay  continually  in  a  fupine
pofture  of  body,  fo  that  out  of  fome  of  thefe  being  ruptur'd,  or  if  they
were  found,  from  the  mere  ftagnation  of  the  blood,  more  water  would  be
pour'd  out  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly.

A  caufe  was  alfo  added,  which  made  the  blood  inert  and  fluggifh,  I  mean
the  very  great  diforder  which  there  was  in  the  liver  that  was  Scirrhous-,  fo
that  a  bile  was  fecreted,  which  was  not  fit  for  the  purpofes  to  which  nature
intended  it-,  and  this  bile  was  in  fmall  quantity  alfo,  as  the  fmallnefs  of  the
cyft  confirm'd :  for  which  reafon  neither  good  chyle,  nor  good  blood,  was
prepar'd.  To  this  add,  that  the  fpleen  was  preternaturally  increas'd  in  its
bulk,  and  difeas'd  in  its  internal  conftitution  :  for  although  we  cannot  well
determine,  what  is  the  office  of  this  vifcus  in  particular,  yet  we  do  not
doubt  but  it  is,  in  general,  of  ufe  in  preparing  one  or  both  of  thefe
humours.  But  why  in  this  and  the  former  man,  and  in  fo  many  other  ex-
amples, among  which  I  could  reckon  not  only  that  infant  fpoken  of  by
PreulTius  (/),  but  alfo  the  woman  whofe  hiftory  is  given  by  Fortius  (»z),  if
the  fame  thing  were  not  fo  often  feen  in-  difleftions  ;  why,  I  fay,  the  fpleen,
and  the  liver,  were  found  tumid,  I  do  not  fuppofe,  you  will  enquire,  as  you
very well remember  from  whence both thefe  vifcera  receive  their  blood.

{k)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1734.  hebd.  34.  (?«)  Aft.  erud.  LIpf.  a. 1704.  m.  Septembr.

CI  J  Obf.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  18.  in  relat,  ejus  opufcuior.

•  '-  4  For


2o'B  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

For  as  both  of  them  have  their  arterial  blood  from  the  fame  celiac  artery,
which  ever  of  the  two  fhall  firft  become  tumid,  and,  for  that  reaibn,  admit
a  lefs  quantity  of  blood,  muft,  of  confequence,  force  a  greater  influx  into
the  other.  And  as  the  liver  receives  its  venous  blood,  in  part,  from  the
fpleen,  which  we  fuppofe  to  be  intended  for  the  purpofes  of  fecreting  the
bile,  there  is  no  doubt  but,  if  the  liver  is  tumid,  a  greater  quantity  of  blood
will  remain  in  the  fpleen  :  but  if  the  fpleen  be  tumid,  a  blood  of  fuch  a  kind
•will  be  fent  therefrom,  as  is  very  unfit  for  going  through  the  narrow  paffages
of  the  liver,  and  at  the  fame  time,  very  improper  for  the  fecretion  of  a  well-
condition'd  bile;  fo  that  if  this  be  fecreted  in  a  very  vifcid,  and  thick,  ftate,
it  will  be  in  part  obftrufted  in  the  liver,  and  will  itfelf,  confequently,  increafe
the  bulk  thereof.

27.  Theie  things,  however,  and  fome  others,  which  I  have  advanc'd,  in
almoft  the  fame  manner,  in  this  letter,  I  would  have  you  admit  with  fuch  li-
mitations, as  to  fuppofe  that  the  efFefts  I  have  mention'd,  may  be  the  con-
fequences,  if  a  proper  time  be  given  for  thefe  caufes  to  ad,  and  there  be  no
Impediment  to  their  aftion  -,  for  they  do  often  follow,  as  I  have  faid  juft  now,
but  not  always.  Thus,  to  illuftrate  our  fuppofition  by  examples :  Jacobus
Sylvius  (n)  diflefted  a  ftone-cutter,  who  had  an  enlarg'd  liver,  which  was
tender,  and  pale,  like  a  liver  that  had  been  boil'd  •,  but  his  fpleen  was  of  a
cineritious  colour,  had  two  fmall  fcirrhi  externally,  and  internally  appear'd
as  if  it  had  been  boil'd.  Why  was  it  not  alfo  enlarg'd?  Left  you  fiiould
happen  to  fuppofe  this  to  have  been  owing  merely  to  the  tendernefs,
which,  counteratting  the  effefts  of  the  increas'd  weight  of  the  liver,  ftill
prelcrv'd  an  eafy  pafiage  for  the  blood,  through  this  vifcus  ;  know  that  there
were  in  this  man,  which  is  an  extraordinary  inftance,  "  three  large  branches,
"  that  went  from  the  left  emulgent  vein,  to  the  fpleen,"  through  which,
as  xht  circulation  of  the  blood  now  teaches,  a  great  part  of  the  blood,
that  otherwife  muft  have  pafs'd  with  difficulty  through  the  liver,  and  have
diftended  the  fpleen,  by  remaining  there,  was  diverted  into  the  emulgent
vein.  But  whether  the  fame  three  branches,  by  carrying  away  the  blood
from  the  fpleen,  Iboner  than  the  nature  of  that  vifcus  requires,  and  by  de-
priving the  liver  of  a  part  of  that  affiftance,  which  it  receives  from  the  fpleen,
and  which  is  neceflary  to  the  full  performance  of  its  funftions,  contributed
any  thing,  in  a  long  courfe  of  time,  to  thofe  diforders  which  were  obferv'd  in
both  the  vifcera,  you  yourfelf  will  judge.

According  to  thofe  things,  which  I  have  juft  now  faid,  or  thefe  that  I  have
now  hinted  at,  it  will  be  eafy  for  you  to  explain  other  examples,  as  that  of
Riohnus  {0),  and  of  Fantonus  the  father  C^) ;  in  which  cafes,  the  hver  being
indurated,  and  increas'd  in  its  fize,  the  fpleen  was  not  only  not  larger  than  it
generally  is,  but  was  found  to  be  fo  extremely  fmall,  that  it  fcarcely  weigh'd
an  ounce,  or  that  the  traces  of  it  alone  remain'd.  For  fuppofe  that  the
fpleen  was  diminifh'd,  whatever  the  caufe  of  this  might  be  ;  and  ydu  already
perceive,  how  much  more  arterial  blood  muft,  of  courie,  have  been  fent  to
tlie  liver,  and  how  little  affiftance,  therefore,  there  muft  have  been  given  to
the  fecretion  of  good  bile.

(k)  Obferv.  adjeft.  Ifagogi  anat.  (/*)  Obf.  med.  anat.  24.

(0)  Anthropogr.  1.  2.  c.  16.

5  *  Or


Letter  XXXVI. Article 28.  209

Or  fuppofe,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  liver  is  increas'd  in  its  bulk,  fronx
fome  caule  or  other,  lb  as  to  occupy  the  whole  epigaftrium,  as  in  the  exam-
ple of  Fantonus,  and  to  thruft  the  llomach  down  into  the  umbilical  region  :
you  will  then  eafily  conceive,  how  both  the  Ipleen,  v/hich  is  a  foft  and  lax
vifcus,  and  the  fplenic  artery,  from  whence  it  receives  the  blood  by  which  it  is
nourifli'd,.  preferv'd,  extended,  and  dilated  to  a  proper  degree,  may  bo  at
the  fame  time  comprefs'd  :  and  as  this  artery  paffes  under  the  pancreas,
being  affix'd  to  it  longitudinally,  you  fee  evidently,  how  much  it  mud  have
been  prefs'd  upon,  in  the  example  given  by  Riolanus,  in  which  the  pancreas
was  univerfally  fcirrhous,  and  in  its  bulk,  and  weight,  was  equal  to  the
liver  itfelf.  For  as  to  his  finding  remains  of  the  fpleen,  in  another  body,  of
the  breadth  of  a  finger-nail,  this  might,  perhaps,  have  been  owing  to  a
greater,  and  more  long-continu'd,  compreffion  of  the  fplenic  artery,  as  he
there  found  the  pancreas  to  be  not  only  fcirrhous  likewife,  but  even  in^
durated  like  a  cartilage.

28.  However,  to  fay  nothing  of  the  pancreas,  and  return  to  the  fpleen,.
and  liver,  I  confefs  there  is  fo  much  mutual  commerce,  and  connetfion,  be-
twixt both  thefe  vifccra,  that  if  one  be  diieas'd,  in  confequence  of  the  other
being  difeas'd,  there  is  no  reafon  for  furprize :  but  on  the  contrary  there  is
reafon  to  wonder,  if  a  diforder  be  found  in  either  of  them  only,  as  when  you.
read  in  the  Sepulchretum  (q)  :  "  the  liver  was  large,  and  in  many  places
"■  hard  ;  ....  the  remaining  vifcera  of  the  belly  being  in  a  natural  ftate :""
or  (r)  "  the  liver  was  alm.cft  without  m.oifture,  and  pallid  -,  ....  but  the
"  fpleen,.  and  kidnies,  had  a  natural  appearance."  Neverthelefs,  even  in  a
.long  diforder,  where  a  greater  injury  is  found  in  the  other  vifcera,  than  ia
the  liver,  it  by  no  means  follows,  that  in  this  alfo  the  difeafe  m.uft  have.
been  of  long  {landing  :  which  I  would  have  to  be  underftood  chiefly  of
the  fecond  of  the  obfervations,  juft  now  pointed  out.

We  muft  take  care,  moreover,  that  we  do  not,  now  and  then,  take,
fome  appearances  which  have  exifted  from  the  original  formation  of  the  body,,
for  the  caufes,  or  effefts,  ofdifeafes:  of  which  kind  I  fliould  fuppofe  thofe-
"  feveral  incifions "  of  the  fpleen  to  have  been,  that  are  mention'd  in  this
feventtenth  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  under  obfervation  the  nineteenth,,
and  which  feem  to  be  reckon'd  among  the  morbid  appearances,  juft  as  Ibe--
lieve  of  thofe  "  chinks  or  fiffures  of  the  liver,"  which  are  fometimcs  pro-
duc'd,  in  the  preceding  feventeenih  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  as  the
caiifcs  of  a  pain  in  the  right  hypochondrium."  Blunders  of  this  kind  are
eafily  refuted,  by  a  frequent  and  attentive  obfervation  of  the  fiffures  of  both,
or  of  one,  or  other,  of  the  vifcera,  which  moft  frequently  occur  in  bodies
of  every  kind,  and  not  without  fome  utility,  as  I  have  faid  in  a  former
work  (.5).

But,  although  a  reafon  could  not  be  given  for  all  the  cafes,  in  which  we
read  of  the  found  ftate  of  one  of  thefe  vifcera,  being  join'd  with  the  diforder
of  the  other,  thefe  would  not  be  the  only  infcances,  which  feeni  to  happen
fometimcs  contrary  to  expectation. For,,  not  to  quit  the  hiftory  of  the  por-

(^)  L.  3.f.  14.  obf.  36.  §.  4.  (sj  Ephh  anat.  i.  n.^^^.

(r) Ibic.  cbf.  20..

YoL>  II.  F.  c  ssr^


2IO  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ter,  it  certainly  does  not  very-well:  appear,  why  the  patientdid  not  feel  any  un-
eafinefs  from  the  weight  of  the  liver  being  fo  much  increas'd  :  nor  yet  why,
among  the  lymptoms  which  I  obferv'd  to  be  abfent,  fome,  in  particular,
could  be  abfent,  in  fo  great  a  depravity  of  the  liver.  And  without  doubt,
we  ought  to  take  warning  from  hence,  not  to  be  too  rafli  and  haily  in
pronouncing  any  thing  for  certain,  by  denying  or  affirming  in  fome  cafes.
And  indeed  fome  things  occur  in  medicine,  which  are  ftill  more  extraordinary,
and  furprizing,  than  thofe  I  have  juft  now  hinted  at-,  and  which  ought,
therefore,  to  render  the  phyfician  more  cautious,  in  forming  a  diagnofis,
and  confequently  in  afling.

Two  cafes  of  that  kind  1  will,  in  this  place,  communicate  to  you,  as  I  have
receiv'd  them  from  others,  fince  they  will  not  be  foreign  to  the  prefent  pur-
pofe ;  for  they  relate  to  a  morbid  ftate  of  the  two  vifcera,  which  lie  in  the  left-
hypochondrium,  the  fpleen,  and  the  ilomach.  Of  the  fpleen  our  Mediavia
obferv'd  as  follows,  in  the  living  body  firft,  and  after  that  in  the  dead  body,
about  the  end  of  the  year  1735.

29.  A  man  of  a  lean  habic,  among  other  diforders  on  account  of  which  he
lay  in  this  hofpital,  had  a  tumour  alio  in  the  left  loin,  where  this  begins  to
terminate  in  the  outer  fide  of  the  body,  under  the  loweft  rib.  This  tumour
fometimes  appear'd  Icfs,  and  fometimes  bigger,  to  the  eye  that  examin'd  it,
yet  never  was  very  apparent  at  any  time-,  but  it  yielded  to  the  hand  that
prefs'd  it,  as  if  it  contain'd  a  fluid.  At  length  the  man  funk  under  his  dif-
eafes.

The  belly  being  open'd,  it  appear'd  evidently  from  v/hence  this  tumour
arofe.  For  the  lower  part  of  the  tumid,  and  very  foft,  fpleen  reaching  to
that  place  I  have  mention'd,  and  being,  at  one  time  more,  and  at  another
time  Icfs,  forc'd  thither  by  the  flatus  of  the  fl:omach,  and  inteftines,  caus'd
fuch  an  appearance  in  this  body,  which,  as  I  have  faid,  was  very  thin,  as
might  eafily  have  impos'd  upon  fome  rafli  and  inconfiderate  furgeon,  to  the
great  detriment  of  the  patient.

30.  In  the  fecond  book  of  the  predidions  (i),  after  many  things  that  are
faid  of  thofe  wlio  have  large  fpleens,  the  tollov^ing  words  are  immediately
fubjoin'd  :  "  but  if  tumours  fhould  alfo  come  on  in  the  feet,  they  will  even
"  feem  to  have  water.  Yet  it  is  neceffary  to  examine  the  belly  and  the
"  loins  likewife."  I  Vv'ould  have  you  fee,  therefore,  among  thofe  who  have
interpreted  the  oracles  of  Hippocrates,  whether  there  is  any  one,  by  whom
the  infpeclion  of  the  loins  is  refer'd  to  thefe  enlarg'd  fpleens,  the  other  fymp-
toms  of  v/hich  immediately  precede.

But  Peter  de  Marchettis,  whom  I  have  already  commended,  read  to  me  a
cafe  in  the  year  1730  (from  a  letter  of  a  neighbouring  phyfician,  who  was
very  much  efteem'd  by  each  of  us)  which  relates  to  the  ftomach  :  the  cafe
was  as  follov/s,  the  circumftances  having  been  all  very  well-known  to  the  phy-
fician who  wrote,  as  they  happen'd  in  the  place  vi'here  he  refided.

31.  A  woman  had  a  tumour  form'd  at  the  region  of  the  ftomach,  which
being  examin'd  bv  the  furgeon,  feem'd  to  him  to  be  coming  forwards  to  fup-

(0  N.  42. .

puration  ;


Letter  XXXVI. Article  32.  211

puration ;  yet  after  having  applied  many  things  proper  to  haften  the  llippur-
arion ;  he,  neverthekfs,  could  not  bring  it  thereto.  Finally,  this  was  the
iffue  of  the  cafe,  that  the  tumour  dlfappear'd,  the  fkin  remaining  contraded,
where  the  tumour  had  been  in  the  form  of  a  cicatrix,  notwithftanding  it  had
not  difcharg'd  any  moifture.  After  this  the  woman  conceiv'd,  and  the  time
of  utero-geftation,  of  delivery,  and  child-bed,  being  happily  pafs'd  over,
fhe  being  in  good  health  and  her  milk  flowing  properly,  as  in  a  woman  v/ho
gave  luck,  and  having  nov/  reach'd  beyond  the  third  month  from  the  time
of  her  delivery,  flie  of  a  fudden  perceiv'd  that  a  little  moifture  diftill'd  from
that  cicatricula.  And  on  examining  the  moifture,  found  that  it  was  the
wine  which  Ihe  had  juft  drank.  She  could  alfo,  if  fhe  endeavour'd  to  do  it,
force  out  by  this  way  fome  of  the  pudding  fhe  had  taken  in.  Yet  the  final
event  of  the  diforder  was  that  the  wound  was  perfe£tly  heal'd  up,  and  the
woman  continu'd  to  be  in  good  health,  as  the  phyfician  who  was  interro-
gated by  other  letters  from  Marchetti,  which  he  wrote  with  great  friendlinefs,
in  order  to  fatisfy  me  in  regard  to  the  cafe,  alTur'd  me.

32.  You  may  alfo  read  many  examples  of  the  ftomach  being  perforated,
the  foramen  either  lying  hid  within  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  or  being  open'd
externally,  in  the  hiftory  of  a  virgin  who  labour'd  under  this  difeafe,  for
feven  and  twenty  years,  publifh'd  by  the  celebrated  Chriftian  Wencker  {u) ;
and  thefe  may  be  added  to  the  Sepulchretum  :  for  although  it  was  not  pof-
fible  to  cure  any  of  thefe  patients,  it  was  poffible,  however,  to  difledt  them
all  after  death.  But  you  will  find  a  fuccefsful  cafe,  and  not  unlike  that
which  I  defcrib'd  to  you  juft  now,  in  the  programma  which  Etmuller  the
fon  added  to  his  diflertation,  intitled  "  de  pragrandi  pedis  inflammatione'*
And  as  in  this  programma  you  may,  at  the  fame  time,  fee  every  thing  that
relates  to  the  perfeft  cure  of  a  ftomach  thus  injur'd,  fo  that  nothing  fliall  fall
out  from  thence  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  I  will  add  nothing  farther  to-
this  letter,  which  is  already  very  long,  except  to  entreat  you  to  preferve  your
ufual  afFedion  for  me,  and  take  care  of  your  health.

(«)  Argentorati  a.  1743.


Ee2-  LETTER


212  Book  ni. of  Dlfeafes  of  the  Belly.

LETTER the THIRTY-SEVENTH

Treats  of  the  Jaundice, and  of  bilious  Calculi.


THE  morbus  regius,  or  jaundice,  fo  is  frequently  join'd  with  the  dif-
orders  of  the  liver,  of  which  I  particularly  wrote  to  you  in  the  laft
letter,  that  in  the  Sepulchretum,  the  eighteenth  feftion,  which  profelTedly
treats  of  this  difeafe,  is  with  great  propriety  immediately  fubjoin'd  to  the  two
feftions  which  treat  of  thofe  diforders.  To  the  jaundice  relates  this  obferva-
tion  of  our  Valfalva.

2.  A  young  prieft  was  feiz'd  with  the  jaundice,  a  little  after  a  kind  of
perturbation  of  mind :  this  dilorder  was  alfo  attended  with  a  pain  at  the
region  of  the  ftomach,  and  a  vomiting,  by  means  of  which  he  threw  up  both
his  food,  and  his  medicines,  frequently.  After  a  day  or  two,  the  patient
was  obferv'd  to  be  unquiet,  and  in  fome  meafure  ttupid,  fo  as  to  forget
every-thing  that  was  related  to  him.  The  phyfician  did  not  obferve  any
fever,  till  the  clofe  of  the  third  day:  at  which  time  it  difcover'd  itfelf  with
great  violence,  with  a  delirium,  and  convulfions  of  fuch  a  nature,  that  the
patient  was  -oblig'd  to  gnav/  every  thing  with  his  teeth,  and  by  his  great
ftrugglings  almoft  overcame  the  ftrength  of  thofe  who  were  about  him  :  be-
fides  thefe,  he  was  troubled  with  a  vomiting  of  a  darkiili- colon  red  m.atter.  In
the  morning  a  vein  was  open'd,  from  whence  the  blood  rufh'd  forth  with
impetus :  the  ierum  of  which,  when  it  receded  from  the  coagulating  part,
ling'd  a  linen  rag,  that  was  dip'd  into  it,  of  a  yellow  colour.  The  convul-
fion  ceas'd  :  but  the  patient  lay  to  all  appearance  afleep,  fcarcely  mov'd  him-
felf,  and  did  but  juft  fhow  that  he  felt  the  cupping-glalfes  v/hich  were  ap-
plied to  him.  His  refpiration  was  almoft  natural,  except  that  it  was  fome-
times  fufpirious. He  died  on  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  day.

The  belly  being  open'd,  the  liver  was  found  to  be  flaccid,  and  inclining
to  a  palifh  colour :  in  the  gall-bladder  was  a  darkiili  bile.  In  the  ftomach
was  matter  of  the  fame  kind  with  what  he  had  thrown  up,  on  the  laft  days  of
hisdiforder:  on  its  internal  coat,  about  the  left  oriiice,  were  a  kind  of  red
points,  at  Ibme  little  diftance  from  each  other.  And  there  were  many  very
fmall  glands,  in  feveral  places  throughout  the  belly,  which  were  inflam'd  by
ifagnating  blood.

The  thorax  being  open'd,  the  lungs  were  tumid  with  air,  and  free  from
connexion  with  the  pleura,  if  you  except fome  fmall  membranous  bands,

which


Letter  XXXVII. Article  3,  4.  213

whrch  had  tied  the  left  lobe  to  the  pleura.  In  the  pericardium  was  a  little  wa-
ter. In  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  was  concreted  blood.

The  lliull  being  cut  open,  and  the  dura  mater  being  incis'd,  a  little  quantity
of  ferum  ilTued  forth:  in  the  interftices  of  the  fanguiferous  veflels,  which
creep  through  the  dura  mater,  a  kind  of  gelatinous  concretion  was  obferv'd,
but  in  a  very  flight  degree  :  the  cerebrum  was  very  lax,  nor  altogether  of  its
natural  colour,  which  perhaps  had  been  deprav'd  by  the  tindure  of  the  bile.
While  the  fpinal  marrow  was  cut  through,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  verte-
bral tube,  in  order  to  take  out  the  brain,  from  the  external  paries  .of  this
medulla,  a  ierous  matter  flow'd  for  a  confiderable  time,  as  if  from  a  lymphse-
duft  being  cut  through.

3-.  What  effeft  paffions  of  the  mind  may  have  in  bringing  on  a  jaundice,
is  not  only  demonftrated  by  frequent  obiervations,  in  the  praftice  of  me-
dicine, but  evidently  confirm'd  by  the  prefent.  Nor  will  this  be  furprifing,  to
thofe  who  confider  how  much  the  nerves  confent  with  the  paffions,  and  how
much  power  the  fame  nerves  have,  in  afFefting  the  fanguiferous,  and  excre-
tory veffels,  and  in  affefting  the  internal  fecretory  organ,  whatever  that  may
be,  and  confequently  in  impeding,  and  vitiating,  the  fecretions,  and  excre-
tions, of  the  humours.  Suppofe,  that  in  fome  bodies  the  hepatic  nerves
confent  moft,  or  if  other  nerves  confent  alfo,  vet  that  the  veflels  of  the  liver,
and  the  fecretory  organ,  yield  more  eafily  to  the  aftion  of  the  nerves ;  and
you  will  immediately  underftand  why  a  jaundice  arifes  in  them,  from  the
paffions  of  the  mind.

Thus  in  Hoffmann  {a),  you  will  read  of  a  woman,  in  whom,  "  as  often
"  as  ever  from  a  preceeding  commotion  of  mind  ....  new  febrile  pa-
"  roxyfms  came  on,  the  jaundice  immediately  recurn'd  with  all  its  fymp-
"  toms."  And  if  you  take  into  the  account,  certain  difpofitions  of  the
blood,  or  of  the  matter  of  the  bile,  which  is  to  be  fecreted  therefrom,  or  of
the  other  vifcera,  you  will  fo  much  the  more  eafily  underftand  the  affair,  and
conceive  of  the  origin  of  thofe  very  violent  fymptoms,  which  are  fometimes
added  to  a  jaundice,  and  bring  on  death  much  fooner  than  expected.  All
which  circumftances  may  not  only  be  perceiv'd,  in  the  obfervation  that  I
have  given  you  of  the  prieft,  but  may  alfo  be  illufcrated,  by  examples  that
are  in  great  meafure  fimilar.  The  firft  of  which  was  related  to  me,  when  I  I'c-
fided  at  Bologna,  for  there  it  had  happen'd,  and  that  not  many  years  before,
by  grave  and  learned  m,en,  and  confirm'd  by  Valfalva  himfelf,  who  had  been  '
preient  at  the  diffeftion.

4.  A  very  ingenious  young  man  who  was  fet  apart  for  learning,  and  the
priefts  office,  was  greatly  terrified  by  a  fierce  and  violent  man,  who  heM  a
mufket  to  his  breall,  unexpeftedly,  and  threaten'd  to  flioot  him.  The  day
after  he  became  ifteric,  and  foon  after  that  delirious  fo  as  to  know  none  of
his  acquaintance,  but  cried  out  every  now  and  then,  oh  vile  man  !  ,and  then
being  feiz'd  with  very  great  convulfive  agitations,  lb  that  he  could  fcarcely
be  held  by  the  hands  of  many  perfons,  he  died  within  four  and  twenty  hours
from  the  beginning  of  his  delirium.

The  difftction  of  his  body  fhow'd  nothing  that  was  worthy  of  remark,,  except

(aj  Medic,  rat.  t.  4.  p.  4.  c,  12.  obf.  5.

ll.at


214 Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

that  the  fanguiferous  veflels,  which  creep  through  the  pia  mater,  were,  for
the  molt  part,  diftended  with  black  blood,

5.  This  hiftory  we  n-iight  have  put  in  the  number  of  thofe  which  relate  to
deliria,  or  even  to  convulfions.  But  becaufe  the  jaundice  appear'd  firft  of
all  the  diforders  which  came  on,  in  confcquence  of  the  fright,  I  chofe  ra-
ther to  give  it  you  under  this  head.  The  jaundice  feems  to  have  been
brought  on  by  a  contraftion  of  the  hepatic  nerves  :  and  the  matter  of  the
bile  being,  in  great  meafure,  retain'd  in  the  blood,  becoming  acrid,  and.
greatly  affefting  the  brain,  as  in  a  young  man,  and  a  man  given  to  letters,
feems  to  have  brought  on  all  the  other  fymptoms.

6.  We  will  not  fearch  after  other  examples,  among  medical  writers,
which  are  to  be  compar'd,  in  many  things,  with  the  example  of  Valfalva
{b),  as  we  have  two  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  (c),  one  of  Ballonius,  in  a
young  man,  fon  of  the  Count  de  Chaulney,  and  another  of  Guarinoni  in  the
Cardinal  Sforza.  This  latter  idleric  patient  had  at  firft  no  fever,  but  what
was  latent,  fo  that  the  phyficians  did  not  attend  to  it,  till  after  it  became
more  violent,  when  being  ieiz'd  with  a  flight  delirium,  and  afterwards  with  a
frefh  increafe  of  fever,  with  a  very  great  tofling  of  body,  and  not  long  after
with  two  fudden  epileptic  paroxyfms,  and,  finally,  three  days  before  death,
being  attack'd  with  various  convulfions,  he  was  neverthelefs  carried  off
gradually,  and  gently ;  the  liver,  and  almoft  all  the  other  parts  of  the  body,
being  ting'd  of  a  yellow  colour,  to  a  very  great  degree,  and  the  lungs  being
in  the  fame  ftate,  in  which  they  are  generally  found,  in  thofe  who  have  been
long  excruciated  with  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  at  the  time  of  their  death.

But  the  young  man,  from  a  lively  and  good-natur'd  difpofition,  being
made  morofe,  and  melancholic,  and  being  fuddenly  feiz'd  with  the  jaundice,
after  fifteen  days,  when  no  fuch  thing  was  thought  of,  gnafh'd  with  his
teeth,  and  was  convuls'd  in  the  night;  was  in  an  extafy  as  it  were,  and  after
great  howlings  and  convulfions  died  :  the  brain  being  found  in  fuch  a  ftate,,
that  the  caufe  of  death  did  not  feem  to  have  been  there,  the  lungs  being  very
much  difeas'd,  but  the  liver  ftill  more,  fo  that  it  was  u7ro;;^;;Xcopov  as  it  were  v-
for  thus  the  word  ought  to  be  written,  and  thus  it  is  written  by  Ballonius,
as  you  will  fee  by  looking  into  his  fecond  book  of  the  Epidemics,  which  is
quoted  {d),  not  in  page  two  hundred  and  forty  four  that  is  pointed. out,  but
in  page  two  hundred  and  fifty  eight  •,  and  as  this  word  fignifies  greenifti,  or
palifh,  you  plainly  fee  that  this  young  man  agreed  with  the  prieft  of  Valfalva,
in  this  colour  of  his  liver  alfo.  And  they  all  agreed  in  that  ftupor  of  mind,
which  Ballonius  calls  a  kind  of  extafy,  or  trance,  Guarinoni  kvis  dejipientia
or  a  flight  fuppreflion  of  the  fenfes,  and  Hippocrates,  or  at  leaft  the  authors
of  the  praedidiiones  {e),  and  coacze  przenotiones  (f),  juwpMo-ir,  and  have
taught  to  be  bad  "  from  a  jaundice :"  interpreters  render  it  by  the  word
fatuitas,  which  fignifies  a  Cupidity,  or  dullnefs,  of  the  internal  fenfes,  who
are  follow'd  by  Zachias,  in  an  obfervation  that  confirms  this,  and  is  trai>-
fer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  {g).  :

{b)  Supra  n.  2.  {e)  L.  2.  n.  4.

(0  Obf.  6.  &  in  additam.  obf.  5.  (f)  N.  2.

(d)  Edition  qua;  una  tunc  erat,  &  diu.  fuit,  (gj  Obf.  7,
parifienf,.


Letter  XXXVII. Article  7.  215

But  if  you  enquire,  why  there  was  not  a  furious  delirium  in  all  thefe  pa-
tients, though  there  were  convulfions,  there  is  no  doubt  but  this  may  be  ac-
counted for,  and  in  fome  meafure  from  the  different  age  of  the  patients,  the
different  temperature  and  difpofition  of  the  blood,  bile,  and  vifcera.  Thus
in  the  cardinal,  the  blood  was  fluid,  and  found  without  any  coagulum  in  any
part,  of  which  kind  Boerhaave  {h)  affirms  it  to  be,  in  ifleric  bodies,  fo  that
*'  when  talcen  from  a  vein  it  does  not  coagulate :"  but  in  the  priefl  of  Val-
falva,  it  had  not  only  been  concreted,  when  taken  away  from  the  vein  in  a
proper  veflTel.  but  was  alfo  found  to  be  concreted  in  the  ventricles  of  the
heart;  for  which  reaibn,  the  ftagnating  blood  appear'd  about  the  flomach,
in  the  form  of  redifli  points,  and  here  and  there  throughout  the  belly,  like
many  fmall  glands  which  were  inflam'd  :  and  that  blood  of  this  nature  has
been  fometimes  found  by  anatomifts,  in  the  heart  of  other  ifteric  patients,
the  obfervation  of  Zachias,  which  I  liave  already  pointed  out,  and  another
likewife  of  Bartholin,  which  you  have  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  alfo  {i)^
fufficiently  demonftrate  -,  not  to  mention  here  my  obfervation  upon  the  pot-
ter, who  was  in  great  meafure  idleric,  and  whom  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  on
a  former  occafion  (/I),  or  another  of  Valfalva,  on  that  ifteric  girl  (/),  which
ftill  more  deferves  our  attention,  becaufe,  though,  except  the  mucous  con-
cretion in  the  heart,  the  remaining  part  of  the  blood  was  fluid,  yet  when
cxpos'd  to  the  air  it  coagulated.

But  to  this  difpofition  in  the  blood  to  concrete,  other  caufes  mult  be
added,  both  in  this  fluid  itfelf,  and  in  the  brain,  in  order  to  bring  on  a  de-
lirium. And  yet  it  is  of  no  great  importance,  if  the  brain,  not  even  at  this
time,  nor  when  there  were  the  moll  violent  convulfions,  appears  to  be  in-
jur'd.  For  that  which  was  the  caufe  of  delirium  therein,  may  efcape  the
penetration  of  the  eyes  :  and  from  the  nerves  being  irritated,  even  on  the
outfide  of  the  brain,  or  from  an  irritation  on  the  fpinal  marrow,  which  we
muft  fuppofe  to  have  had  this  effeft  in  that  prieft,  horrible  convulfions  may
arife.

7.  However,  the  brain  was  not  found  to  be  altogether  uninjur'd,  in  that
body,  whether  you  attend  to  that  which  was  obferv'd  in  the  dilleftion  of  the
meninges,  or  even  the  very  colour  of  the  brain,  which  v\?as  not  entirely  na-
tural, and  was  readily  fuppos'd,  by  Valfalva,  to  have  receiv'd  a  tindlure
from  the  bile.  For  notwichftanding  the  fubftance  of  the  brain  is  itftlf  found
to  be  yellow,  fometimes  in  this  difcafe,  I  do  not,  however,  remember  to  have
read  many  obfervations,  wherein  it  was  fo  found,  perhaps  by  reafon  of  the
extreme  fmallnefs  of  the  vefTels,  which  go  to  the  internal  fubftance  of  the
brain,  in  the  firfl  place,  and  in  the  fecond  place,  perhaps  on  account  of  their
rarity.  And  this  at  leaft  I  can  fay,  that  Ibme  time  ago,  when  I  had,  ac-
cording to  cuftom,  a  great  number  of  heads  in  the  theatre,  in  order  to  give
the  anatomical  defcription  and  demonftration  of  the  brain,  obferving  a  yel-
lowneis  of  the  face,  of  the  fkin  in  other  parts,  and  of  the  membrana  con-
junftiva  of  the  eyes,  in  one.  of  them,  I  inquir'd  to  whom  it  had  belong'd,
and  found  that  it  was  the  head  of  a  man  who  had  been  aflhmatic,  and  jaun-


{h)  Prseleft.  in  inliit.  §.  773.  (/J)  Epift.  7.11.  11.

U)  Obf.  24.  ■  {1)  Epift.  ic.  n.  7.


dic'd.


2i6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

dic'd,  and  had  died  the  day  before :  through  the  external  furface  of  the  pia
mater,  I  law,  in  feveral  parts,  confiderable  fpaces  of  a  yellow  colour,  in-
clining to  greenifb  ;  yet  foon  after,  when  the  brain  was  differed,  I  found  the
colour  therein  to  be  the  fame  as  it  naturally  is.

Again,  when  a  like  occafion  was  offer'd  afterwards,  notwithftanding  I
found  the  fmall  quantity  of  water,  in  the  lateral  ventricles  of  the  brain,  to
be  of  a  yellowifli  colour,  and  the  plexus  choroides  fomewhat  inclin'd  to  that
colour,  and  the  pineal  gland  itfelf,  in  other  refpefts  very  fhort,  and  pretty
hard  in  its  body,  and  having  a  fmall  fubftance  adhering  to  its  bafis  anteriorly,
not  fandy,  nor  yellow,  but  white,  and  towards  its  upper  part  having  fome-
thing  in  it  like  blood,  or  a  fanguiferous  vefTel  •,  I  fay,  notwithftanding  I  faw
this  gland  inclining  from  its  ufual  cineritious  colour,  to  an  obfcure  kind  of
yellow  ;  yet  all  the  remaining  parts,  for  I  differed  them,  preferv'd  their  na-
tive colour,  fo  that  whatever  was  medullary,  I  found  to  be  extremely  white.
So  alio  iiere  in  the  Sepulchretum  (;»),  after  a  long-continu'd  jaundice,  you
v/ill  ice  that  the  fubftance  of  the  brain  was  very  white  •,  although  not  only
the  meninges,  and  particularly  the  dura  mater,  but  the  cranium  alfo,  exter-
nally, and,  in  part,  internally  likewile,  was  yellow.

For  this  difeafe  fometimes  tinges  the  very  bones  with  a  yellownefs,  which,
as  fome  affure  us,  can  never  be  wafh'd  out  from  the  fceleton.  How  yellow
the  bones  were  in  an  iileric  foetus,  the  obfervation  of  Kerckringius  fliows,
which  you  will  alfo  read  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  (»)  :  nor  is  it  to  be  won-
der'd  at;  as,  inftead  of  blood,  he  found  a  yellow  humour  like  gall,  of  the
fame  kind  with  that  which  was  found  by  Vefalius,  in  like  manner,  in  Mar-
teilus  a  nobleman  of  Florence,  as  you  would  learn  from  this  fame  fedlion  of
the  Sepulchretum,  if  his  diffeftion,  which  is  given  imperfeftly  twice  over
(o),  were  once  fully  defcrib'd,  as  it  is  in  another  place  (p).

However  in  all  thefe  places  you  fnould  read  Martellus,  inftead  of  Mar-
cellus,  which  is  falily  tranfcrib'd  :  and  fuppofe  that  Van  Helmont  (j),  him-
felf,  had  lit  on  obfervations  not  unlike  thefe,  when  in  the  meienteric  veins
of  two  ifteric  patients,  he  faw  that  appearance,  from  whence  he  fuppos'd
"  an  excremental  virus,  or  a  yellow  and  ftercoreous  cruor,  or  a  yellow  liquid
"  excrement,  the  confequence  of  a  i'econd  digeftion,  which  was  preternatu-
"  rally  taken  up  into  the  veins,  and  difpers'd  through  the  v/hole  body,"  to
be  the  occafion  of  the  jaundice  ;  whereas  it  was  a  bile,  which,  by  reafon  of
its  having  not  been  fecreted  from  the  blood,  in  a  proper  proportion,  either  on
account  of  its  great  plenty,  or  on  account  of  the  difeafe  of  the  liver,  as  in
Martellus,  abounds  at  length,  therein,  to  fo  great  a  degree  fometimes,  that
the  blood  which  is  taken  away,  and  the  urine  which  is  then  difcharg'd,  ap-
pear to  be  perfeclly  like  each  other  {r)  ;  and  that  not  only  in  perfons  where
the  diicafe  is  to  prove  fatal,  but  even  frequently  in  thofe  v^ho  are  to.efcape  (j),.
vi^hich  happen'd  to  them,  or,  at  leaft,  to  that  ifteric  patient  in  v/ho.m,  as
Baglivi  (I)  relates,  "  inftead  of  blood,  yellow  water  only,  flov/'d  out  from
"  the  noftrils,  and  from  the  cupping-glaffes,  which  were  applied  to  the  fca-

(«;)  Obf.  3.  (r)  Yid  apud  Hofimaiin.  fupra  ad  n.  3.  cit.^

(n)  Obf.  3A.  cap.  12.  §.  4.

(0)  Obf.  8.  §.  4.  &obf.  zo,  (.<)  Ibid.

(p)  L.  2.  f.  II.  obf.  36.  §.  I.  {t)  De  experim.  .circa  bilem.

(j)  Vid.  in  hac  Sepukhi-.  18.  fed,  oBf.  z6.

5  "  rifications,""


Letter  XXXVII. Article  8.  217

"  rifications,"  jiift  as  we  read  in  Lower  {u)  of  the  recovery  of  that  young
man,  who,  having  had  a  large  effufion  of  blood  from  his  noftrils,  and  being
well-fupported,  in  the  mean  while,  with  broths,  began  at  length  to  have  a
fluid  difcharg'd  from  the  ruptur'd  veflels,  which  was  more  like  broth  than
blood.

8.  But  among  thefe  parts  which  are  obferv'd  to  be  the  moft  eafily,  and
moft  frequently,  ting'd  with  a  yellow  blood,  are  the  adipofe  membranes  in
particular,  and  thofe  which  are  call'd  conjun£liv£  in  the  eyes.  Valfalva
fuppos'd  the  fat  to  be  the  moft  prone  of  all  the  parts  to  contrafi:  the  fafFron-
like  colour,  where  the  ferum  of  the  blood  is  only  a  little  yellow.  For  he  had
found  the  fat  to  be  of  this  colour,  in  many  who  were  not  affe£led  with  the
regius  morbus,  and  efpecially  in  three  bodies,  which  he  dilTected  almoft  at
the  fame  time,  that  is  to  fay  in  a  hydrocephalous  patient,  in  a  man  who  had
been  wounded,  and  in  another  who  had  been  carried  off  by  an  ardent  fever.

But  this  yellownefs  is  fo  obvious  in  the  white  of  the  eye,  in  patients  la-
bouring under  that  difeafe,  that  the  ancients  feem  to  have  been  perfuaded,
thereby,  to  fuppofe  that  all  objefts  appear  yellow  to  thofe  who  have  the
jaundice,  which  Hoffmann  {x)  fays,  is  call'd  into  queftion,  by  our  Mer-
curialis  in  his  PrakSiones  Bononienfes,  by  which  he  meant  perhaps  to  fay  in  his
Prak£liones  Patavina  {y),  or  rather,  in  his  LeSiones  varia  (z).  For  in
thefe  writings,  having  brought  the  teftimonies  of  Varro,  Lucretius,  Sextus
Empiricus,  Cafllus  the  phyfician,  and  even  of  Galen  himfelf,  all  of  which
affirm  this  circumftance,  he  put  in  oppofition  thereto  the  tacit  teftimony  of
other  medical  writers,  who  are  filent  upon  the  fubjeft,  and  his  own  repug-
nant obfervation,  in  a  great  number  of  ifteric  patients.  And  he  might  have
join'd  with  his  own  obfervation,  a  great  number  of  others,  without  doubt-
ing but  he  would  have  of  thofe  who  Ihould  fucceed,  by  much  the  greateft
part,  aflenting  to  his  doftrine.

At  leaft,  even  lately,  although  after  Sydenham  (12),  Boerhaave  alfo  (b)^
had  written  the  fame  as  thofe  ancients,  that  very  learned  man,  Haller  (c),  has
confefs'd  "  that  he  did  not  find  evident  experiments  to  prove  this  obfervation,"
nor  had  he  read,  "  that  the  cornea  had  been  found  yellow,"  in  i£teric  bo-
dies ;  and  that  not  only  a  flight  change  of  colour,  in  the  humours  of  the
eye,  but  a  very  great  one,  was  requir'd,  in  order  to  produce  this  effeft :  as,
for  inftance,  when  from  blood  being  extravafated  into  the  aqueous  humour,
according  to  the  obfervation  of  St.  Yves,  the  light  appear'd  to  be  red.  And,
indeed,  Boerhaave  feems  to  me,  when  he  aflerted  this  a  fecond  time  {d)^  and
produc'd  another  obfervation  of  his  own  very  much  fimilar  to  that  of  St.
Yves,  to  have  thought  "  that  a  little  bile  mixing  itfelf  with  the  aqueous
"  humour,"  might  be  compar'd  with  blood  being  extravafated  therein.  But
it  probably  happens,  from  the  extreme  fmallnels  of  the  veffels,  going  to  the
humours  of  the  eye,  as  has  alfo  been  faid  of  the  internal  part  of  the  cere-
brum (f),  that  a  tinfture  of  the  bile  does  not  often  reach  thereto.

(a)  Traift.  decordec.  2.  {b)  Prsledl.  ad  inftit.  §.  544.

Ipc)  §.  4.  modo  cit.  (c)  Adnot.  ad  eum  locum.

{y)  L.  I.e.  32.  \d)  Praleft.  modo  git.  §.  840.

(2;)  L.  6.C.  12.  (f)  N.  7.
(<2)  Procefs  in  morb.  curand.  ubi  de  idero.

Vol.  II.  , F  f  to


2 1 8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

To  mCj  at  leaft,  when  I  formerly  difTefted  the  eyes  of  an  idteric  woman,
no  appearance  of  yellownefs  appear'd  in  any  of  the  three  humours:  nor  yet
in  the  tunica  cornea :  which  coat  in  this  body,  as  in  other  ifterical  bodies,
and  particularly  in  that  potter  alfo,  of  whom  I  fpoke  above  (f),  though  I
examin'd  it  accurately,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  when  there  was  a  great  yel-
lownefs in  the  neighbouring  tunica  adnata,  I  could  never  find  to  have  any
yellownefs  in  it.  Yet  it  may  fometimes  happen,  though  very  rarely,  that
objefts  appear  yellow  in  this  diieafe,  that  is  to  fay,  if  the  tunica  cornea  be
univerfally  faturated  with  bile,  and  not  "  then  only,  which  even  Mercuria-
"  lis  grants,  but  alfo  if  the  humours  of  the  eyes  are,  at  any  time,  ting'd
with  a  very  great  yellownefs  -,"  one  or  the  other  of  which,  or,  if  you
pleafe,  both,  you  may  fuppofe  to  have  taken  place,  in  the  two  examples,
that  Hoffmann  (g)  teftifies  his  having  feen,  in  favour  of  the  opinion  of  the
ancients  •,  and  in  a  third,  in  like  manner  (for  I  do  not  remember  to  have
read  any  more)  which  is  added  by  the  celebrated  Scardona  (h).

9.  And  there  may  be  in  the  eyes  of  fome  perfons  either  a  greater  num-
ber, or  a  greater  diameter,  of  the  fmall  veflels  going  to  the  tunica  cornea,
and  to  the  humours,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  in  the  blood  of  thefe  perfons,
a  matter  of  the  bile  which  is  more  fit  to  pervade  and  tinge  thefe  fmall  vefTels,
whether  this  depends  upon  the  nature,  and  properties  of  that  matter,  or  on
its  quantity.  For  we  fee  after  it  is  fecreted,  and  depofited  in  its  veficle,  that
it  paffes  more  eafily  through  the  membranes  of  this  refervoir  in  fome  bodies
than  in  others,  and,  in  like  manner,  that  it  tinges  the  contiguous  parts  in
fome  bodies  with  a  very  deep  and  faturated  colour,  and  in  others  with  a  very
flight  one,  or  with  none  at  all.

That  is  to  fay,  the  blood,  from  whence  it  proceeds,  if  you  choofe  to
exprefs  yourfelf  in  the  words  of  Willis,  which  you  fee  produc'd  here  in  the
Sepulchretum  (z),  "  is  too  much  inclin'd  to  a  fulphureo-faline  dyfcrafia,"  in
*'  fome,  and  in  other  has  "  the  fulphur  too  much  deprefs'd :"  for  which  rea-
fon  alfo,  as  the  former  are  very  prone  to  the  jaundice,  fo  the  latter,  fays
he,  "  are  perfeftly  free  from  this  difeafe,"  as  he  faw  in  many  cacheftic  and
phlegmatic  habits,  although  "  labouring  under  an  obftruftion,  and  indu-
"  rauon  of  the  liver,  in  refpeft  to  moft  of  its  dufts."  "Which  hypothefes,
however,  we  muft  admit  with  caution,  or  wait  to  diftinguifh  the  times,  and
the  changes,  which  the  jaundice  itfelf  brings  on,  left  you  fhould  be  after-
wards furpriz'd,  when  you  read,  in  the  fame  place,  the  obfervations  of
Hildanus  \k),  or  de  Graaf  (I).  For  the  former  aflerts  "  that  a  pituitous
"  and  cacochymic  patient  had,  at  times,  labour'd  under  the  jaundice
*'  for  fome  years  together  j"  and  de  Graaf,  that  the  bile  of  an  ifteric  body
was  "  entirely  ferous,  and  ting'd  with  fo  flight  a  yellownefs,  that  the  linen
"  rags,  which  were  dip'd  into  it,  receiv'd  fcarcely  any  yellow  colour  there-
"  from."

But  in  regard  to  the  quantity  of  that  matter,  the  nature  of  which  I  have
fpoken  of,  it  is  furprizing  how  great  an  abundance  thereof  may  be  in  fome

(f)  N.  6.  (/)  Schol.  ad  obf.  i.

(g)  §.  4.  cit.  ■ {i)  Obf.  8.  §.  13.
(«)  Aphor.  de  cognofc.  &  cur.  morb.  I.  3.  c. (/)  Obf.  10.

10.  comm.  ad  n.  8.

4  bodies.


Letter  XXXVII. Article lo.  219

bodies,  If  to  that  which  the  native  conftitution  of  the  body,  the  time  of
the  year,  foods,  and  drinks,  and  other  things  of  that  kind,  which  happen  to
agree  in  one  effecSt,  have  accumulated,  another  be  moreover  added ;  as,  for
inftance,  if  a  fever,  if  immoderate  exerciJe  in  the  fun,  if  poifon,  even  that
which  is  introduc'd  into  the  blood  by  the  bite  of  a  venomous  animal,  and,
finally,  if  any  thing  elfe  of  that  kind,  fuddenly  let  loofe  thofe  particles  of
fulphur  alfo,  which  had  been  more  conftridted,  and  deprefs'd,  in  the  blood,
and  carry  them  away  to  the  liver,  fo  that  there  are,  now,  more  bilious  par-
ticles, than  it  is  poffible  for  this  organ  to  fecrete.

There  is,  befides,  another  method  ftill  more  known,  by  which  the  matter
of  the  bile  may  be  increas'd  in  the  blood  ;  as,  for  inftance,  when  little,  or
none  of  that  matter,  which  is  in  the  blood,  is  feparated  therefrom,  either  on
account  of  fome  diforder  of  the  blood  itfelf,  or  of  the  internal  fecreting  organ,
or  on  account  of  the  pafTage  of  many  branches  of  the  hepatic  du6b,  or  of  the
trunk  itfelf,  or  of  the  dudlus  communis  being  obftrufted.  For  this  belno-
obftrufted,  although  what  is  already  fecreted  does  not  return  into  the  blood,
as  many  go  on  to  think,  yet  frefh  bile  cannot  be  fent  into  the  full  and  dif-
tended  dudts ;  and,  therefore,  as  the  matter  of  the  bile  is  not  carried  away  from
the  blood,  in  the  fame  proportion  as  it  is  increas'd  therein,  by  the  concocfted
aliments,  it  muft,  of  courfe,  be  augmented  more  and  more  every  day,  and
abound.

10.  And  in  this  way  that  I  have  fpoken  of,  it  may  be  obftrufted  by  more
rare  or  more  frequent  caufes.  In  the  number  of  the  more  rare  are  thofe
which  you  read  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  ;  as,  for  inftance,  the  dudtus  com-
munis reduc'd  to  the  narrownefs  of  a  capillary  vefiel  (m),  or  contrafted  into
itfelf,  like  a  folid  chord  (k),  and  indurated  (o),  or  altogether  folid  and  bony  (p),
or  comprefs'd  by  fome  glands  which  lie  round  about  it  {g).  And  to  the  more
frequent  caufes,  in  the  firft  place  belong  convulfions,  and  the  crifpaiures  ari-
fing  from  hence,  which  are  propagated  quite  to  the  beginnings  of  the  fmall
branches  of  the  hepatic  du6t,  conftringing  and  ftiutting  them  up,  as  they
are  the  narroweft.  And  though  this  effeft  thereof  cannot,  from  the  very  na-
ture of  the  caufe,  fall  under  the  notice  of  the  fenfes,  yet  it  is  fo  confentaneous
to  reafon,  that  we  may,  without  any  fcruple,  make  ufe  of  this  hypothefis,  to
explain  thofe  jaundices,  which  have  their  origin,  either  from  violent  afFeftions
of  the  mind,  or  from  pains.

There  are,  alfo,  very  learned  men,  who  thus  explain  the  jaundice  that  is
brought  on  by  the  bite  of  the  viper,  from  whom  I  fliould  not  diflent,  if  the
inteftinal  fseces  are  but  white  at  that  time,  as  the  ftrong  conftriftion  of  the
orifice  of  the  duftus  communis,  from  convulfion,  which  they  fuppofe,  re-
quires :  but  if  they  continue  to  be  yellow,  and  even  yellower  than  ufual,  I
fhall  then  go  on  to  underftand  and  explain  the  cafe,  in  the  fame  manner  that
I  juft  now  told  you  (r),  before  any  obftruftion  of  the  pafTages  was  fpo-
ken of.

Moreover,  among  the  more  frequent  caufes,  are  to  be  number'd  the  ob-
ftruftions  happening  in  the  other  veflels,  as  well  as  in  the  biliary  veffels,

(ot)  Obf.  \A.  {p)  Obf.  16.

(«)  Obf.  17.  (5,)  Obf.  II.

io)  Obf.  25.  §.7.  {,■)  N.  g.

-  F  f  2  though


2  20  Book  IIL Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

though  it  is  my  intention,  chiefly,  to  confider  the  latter  in  this  place,  whe-
ther the  obftruftion  of  the'fe  tubes  is  made  by  fome  particles  being  fecreted
■(vith  the  bile,  which  are  groffer  and  more  vifcid  than  they  ought  to  be  ;  or
is  owing  to  calculi  generated  from  thefe,  and  from  the  bile,  by  which  the
branches  of  the  hepatic  duft,  or  the  trunk  itfelf,  or  the  dudlus  communis,
are  ftuff'd  up.  And  I  do  not  fay,  the  cyftic  duft,  for  this  reafon,  becaufe
the  obftrudion  of  this  paflage  is  not  able,  of  itfelf,  to  impede  the  pafTlige  of
the  bile  from  the  liver  to  the  inteftines  -,  although  there  have  been  many  in
-former  times,  and  are  fome  even  in  ours,  who,  in  fpite  of  the  admonition  of
Wepfer  (j),  "  that  a  jaundice  did  not  follow  the  obftruction  of  the  neck  of
"  the  gall-bladder,  unlefs  the  duftus  communis,  alfo,  is  obfbrufted,"  have
themfelves  fuppos'd  that  men  became  jaundic'd,  not  only  from  a  calculus
flicking  in  the  cyftic  du£t,  but  alfo  from  a  calculus  in  the  cyft.

In  regard  to  which  opinion,  that  youimay  plainly  perceive  what  is  to  be
thought  thereof,  whatever  remains  of  this  letter  (and  a  great  part  of  it  does
remain)  will  turn  upon  the  confideration  of  bilious  calculi ;  fince  thofe  things
which  I  have  hitherto  hinted  at  may  be  fufficient  for  you  to  attain  to  moft
of  the  other  caufes  of  the  morbus  regius,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  open  a
way  to  thofe  things  which  remain  to  be  faid  on  the  fubjeft  of  bilious  calculi,
either  when  within,  or  on  the  outfide  of,  the  liver.

II.  Thefe  calculi  are  generated  in  the  liver,  "  very  frequently,"  and  found
in  difleftions,  according  to  what  Platerus  afferts  in  the  Sepulchretum  (t),  and
Henenius  {u),  who  fays  they  are  "  often  fo  large  as  would  fcarcely  be  cre-
"  dible."  To  both  of  whom  I  will  not  deny  but  it  might  have  happen'd
fo.  But  as  to  what  Matthiolus  has  fuppos'd,  in  dependance  upon  certain
reafons  (x),  that  ftones  are  generated  "  in  the  liver  very  frequently,  .as  they
"  are  in  the  kidnies,"  I  confefs  if  I  attend  to  the  almoft  innumerable  dif-
feftions  of  the  human  liver,  made  by  Valfalva,  and  by  me,  I  cannot  readily
aflent  to  his  opinion.  For  although  both  of  us  have  found  calculi  in  ma-
ny kidnies,  it  never  happen'd  to  me  to  find  more  than  one  in  the  liver
formerly  :  and  Valfalva  never  found  one,  in  all  his  difledlions,  that  I  know  of.

But  when  I  fay  thefe  things,  I  mean  no  more  than  to  confider  that  com-
parifon  betwixt  the  calculi  of  the  kidnies,  and  the  liver,  as  I  am  by  no  means
ignorant,  even  from  the  Sepulchretum  itfelf,  by  how  many  eminent  men  they
have  been  found,  or  taken  notice  of,  in  the  liver.  For  befides  thofe  three
whomi  have  mention'd,  I  fee  that  the  names  of  ourFallopiusC^),  Scaligerus  (2),
Trincavellius  (a)^  Dodon?Eus  (i),  Camenicenus  (c),  Peucerus  (i),  Blafius  (0,
Heerius  ("/},  Dobrzenflcyus  (^),  for  fo  his  name  ought  to  be  written,  are  pro-
duc'd  :  to  which  I  could  add  others,  and  among  thefe  Columbus  {h),  Fo-
reflus  (z),  and  Reverhorftius  {k) :  none  of  whom,  however,  has  fuppos'd  ob-

{$)  In  additam.  ad  hanc 18.  Sepulchr.  feft.  (c)  Ibid.  obf.  8.  §.  12.

obf.  4.  _  (rf)  CJt.  obr.  13.  §.  3  &  8..

(/)  Seft.  17.  1.  hujus3.  fchol.  ad  §.  I.  obf.  13.  {e)  9-

(a)  Obf.  cit.  §.  2.  Cf) 10.

{x)  Sea.  hac  sS.  fchol.  ad  §.  12.  obf.  8.  (g)  Seft.  16.  obf.  5.

(y)  Obf.  13.  cit.  §.  6.  \h)  De  re  anat.  1.  ult

(x)  §.  4.  ,  (2)  L.  19.  obf.  med.  14.

(aj  §.  7.  It)  Differt.  de  mot.  bills  §.,  52.
\b)  Sea.  18.  cit.  obf.  4.

fervations.


Letter  XXXVil. Article 12.  221

fervations  of  this  kind  to  be  frequent.  If  you  examine  each  of  thefe  au-
thors feparately,  you  will,  perhaps,  be  furpriz'd,  that  except  Dodonsus,^
Camenicenus,  and  Dobrzenfliyus,  there  is  not  one  who  makes  mention  of  the
jaundice  in  thefe  patients,  or  even  defcribes  the  duilus  communis  as  ihut  up
with  a  calculus,  or  the  liver  full  of  fmall  ftones.

But  you  will  ceafe  to  wonder,  when  you  attend  to  this  circumftance,  that  it
is  not  fufficienr,  in  order  to  fliut  up  all  the  paffage  of  the  bile,  that  a  few
and  fmall  calculi  have  been  form'd  in  the  liver,  nor  even  that  large  calculi
have  been  form'd  there,  unlefs  they  are  lodg'd  in  fuch  a  part  as  to  befet  the
larger  branches  of  the  hepatic  duct,  and  entirely  fhut  them  up,  either  by
comprefling  or  obftrudting  them,  which  may  be  alfo  brought  about  by  fmall
and  innumerable  calculi,  "  filling"  the  whole  liver  "  on  every  fide,"  as  Do-
doniEUs  fays,  not  lying  at  a  diftance  from  each  other,  "  in  a  fcatter'd  way,"
as  was  feen  by  Foreftus ;  for  when  they  adhere  in  all  the  fmaller  branches  of
this  duft,  they  produce  the  fame  efFeft  as  if  they  ftop'd  up  the  trunk  itfelf.

12.  But  I  have  faid  that  the  paffage  of  the  bile  is  prevented  from  calculi,
either  by  means  of  compreffion,  or  obftruftion.  For  if  any  one  Ihould  fay
that  calculi  are  fometimes  form'd  in  the  little  glandular  bodies  of  the  liver
themfelves,  and  that  to  this  clafs,  without  doubt,  belong'd  thofe  lelier  cal-
culi, which  Riedlinus  (/)  faw  "  on  the  external  furface  of  the  liver,"  I  fliould
not  conteft  his  opinion,  although  I  believe  they  are  more  frequently  generat-
ed in  the  very  branches  of  the  hepatic  du6t,  as  thofe  who  have  very  mi-
nutely trac'd  them,  have  found.  And  as,  certainly,  nothing  had  happen^'d
more  frequently  to  Ruyfch  (;»),  in  oxen  and  fheep,  than  to  find  calculi  in
the  pori  biliarii,  fo  nothing  happen'd  "  more  rarely,"  than  to  find  thefe  con
cretions  in  the  "parenchymatous  fubftance  of  the  liver  itfelf;"  fo  that,  al-
though he  very  attentively  "  differed  away  all  the  flefhy  part,"  in  more  than
a  hundred  livers^yet  he  found  in  one  only,  a  calculus  "  buried  in  the  paren-
"  chymatous  fubftance,  and  not  at  all  affix'd  to  the  porus  biliarius."

Nor  can  I  fuppofe,  that  the  ancient  obfervations  of  Platerus  (n),  of  hepatic
calculi  refembling  "  a  tophaceous  concretion,  ramified  in  the  manner  of  coral,
"  and  hollow  internally,"  are  to  be  I'efer'd  to  any  other  part,  than  to  the
fame  biliary  branches,  efpecially  as  I  read  Gliffon  (o)  exprefsly  afferting,  that
fimilar  obfervations  "  of  tubuli  of  fo  great  a  length,  that  if  they  could
"  but  have  been  taken  out  in  their  perfeft  ftate,  they  would,  like  coral,,
"  have  refembled  a  great  number  of  the  ramifications  of  the  porus  biliarius,
"  in  one  continu'd  ilony  feries,"  were  made  by  him  on  the  livers  of  oxen,
and  even  within  the  fame  pore  or  duft.  The  branches  of  which  Reverhorli,
alfo  (/)),  found  to  be  internally  befet  with  a  calculous  cruft,  in  the  body  of
a  man.

Nor  have  I  found  calculi,  in  the  human  liver,  in  any  other  place  than
in  thefe  branches  (^).  Nor  do  I  fuppofe  that  thofe  ftones,  which  by  Co-
lumbus (r),  and  Camenicenus  (s), were  fuppos'd  to  be  found  in  the  vena;

(/)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3.  obf.  45.  (/)  §.  52.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  1 1.

{m)  Obf. edit, cum dilucid.  valvular, in ^^^  Epift.  anat.  I.  n.  43.
lymphat.  24.  (r)

(«)  Schol.  cit.  ad  obf.  ij.  (.-)  Locis  cit.  adn.  lu

(j)]  Aijat.  hep.  c.  7,

portauirai.


2  22  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

portai'um,  had  any  different  fituation  :  yet  my  reafons  for  thinking  thus,  al-
though not  fuflkiently  attended  to  by  fome  authors  of  eminence,  as  I  have
ahxady  given  them  on  a  former  occafion  (/),  I  fhall  not  repeat  here.  Thefe
calcuh,  therefore,  when  at  length  from  tubular  bodies,  by  continual  and
frefli  accretions  of  fimilar  matter,  they  are  made  perfeftly  folid,  as  happens  in
aqusdufts,  muft,  without  any  doubt  whatever,  occupy  the  whole  paffages
whereof  I  have  fpoken,  and  prevent  the  tranfit  of  the  bile.

13.  I  have  alfo  faid  this  ;  that  calculi  of  the  liver,  though  large,  do  not
bring  on  a  jaundice,  is  not  to  be  wonder'd  at,  unlefs  they  are  in  liich  fitua-
tions  as  neceflarily  to  obftrud  thefe  paffages.  And  I  believe  that  this  difeafe
was  prefent,  for  I  cannot  now  pofitively  affirm  it,  in  a  certain  man,  whofe
liver  had  a  ftone  in  the  center  of  the  concave  furface,  of  the  form  and  mag-
nitude of  a  pigeon's  egg,  as  an  anatomical  friend  of  mine,  who  had  dil-
fefted  the  body,  inform'd  me  by  letter,  many  years  ago.  But  I  do  not  won-
der that  this  diforder  had  not  been  obferv'd  in  three  women,  who,  although
they  had  a  much  larger  ftone,  or  a  greater  number  of  concretions,  and  more
heavy  ones,  within  the  membrane  of  the  liver,  neverthelefs,  had  them  in
fuch  a  fituation,  that  they  feem'd  to  be  rather  on  the  outfide  of  the  liver,  than
within  its  fubftance  :  and  this  was  the  reafon  I  did  not  make  mention  of  them
above.  For  that  membrane  being  drawn  away  from  this  vifciis,  by  the  in-
cluded weight,  and  being  extended  downwards,  had  form'd  a  facculus  in  two
of  them  of  the  length  of  a  fpan ;  for  in  the  third  it  was  defcrib'd  only  as  a
follicle,  pendulous  downwards.

This  laft  obfervation  is  from  Benivenius  (k),  and  is  totally  different,  as  you
will  eafily  perceive  by  comparing  them,  from  the  fecond,  which  is  given  in
the  Sepulchretum  (x),  from  the  third  chapter  of  his  book.  And  a  fimilar
obfervation  to  his ;  except  that  in  the  facculus  not  many  calculi  were  con-
tain'd,  but  one  large  calculus,  only,  was  included,  together  with  a  great
quantity  of  glutinous  humour,  and  that  the  woman  never  complain'd  of  any
thing  but  of  a  heat  in  her  liver  ;  the  obfervation  of  Georgius  Greifelius  (y),
is  fubjoin'd.  And  it  was  in  confequence  of  bearing  thefe  examples  in  my
mind,  and  obferving  therefrom,  that  befides  the  gall-bladder  itfelf  being  en-
larg'd,  another  kind  of  cyft,  diftended  likewife  with  a  fluid,  might  fometimes
hang  below  the  liver,  which,  although  it  was  entirely  preternatural,  would,
neverthelefs  refemble  this  natural  cyft-,  it  was  in  confequence,  I  fay,  ofrea-
foning  from  thefe  examples,  that  in  the  cafe  of  Laurence  Bacchetti,  formerly
a  phyfician  at  Padua,  the  hiftory  of  whofe  difeafe,  and  diffeftion,  two  other
learned  men  have  publifh'd,  fince  Dominic  Militia  (a),  I  carried  myfelf  with
fo  much  caution,  as  not  to  affirm  any  thing  for  certain,  though  I  made  no
fcruple  to  declare  my  opinion.

This  gentleman  had  a  tumour  hanging  below  the  liver,  which  you  imme-
diately felt  by  applying  your  hand  to  the  abdomen  :  it  was  globular,  and
moveable,  fo  that  you  could  eafily  bring  it  towards  the  right  fide,  or
towards  the  left,  by  means  of  the  hand  with  which  you  laid  hold  of  it.
When  different  phyficians  feem'd  to  have  different  opinions,  as  you  will  read

CtJ  Epift.  I.  cit.  n.  49.  fyj  Ibid.  §.  11.

(«)  Dc  abdit.  nonnull.  &c.  c.  94.  {a)  De  morb.  exitial.  nob.  virgin.

Ix)  Sea.  17.  obf.  13.  §.  I.


Letter  XXXVII. Article  13.  223

in  Militia,  who  declares  the  feveral  opinions  of  all ;  to  me,  who  faw  him  once
after  others,  this  tumour  feem'd  to  be  the  gall-bJadder,  enlarg'd  by  an  im-
moderate diftenfion  of  fluid,  and  produc'd  downwards,  which  I  declar'd  to
Dominic  Stephanelli,  a  phyfician,  and  friend  of  the  patient,  who  with  great
politenels  attended  me  home,  and  very  earneftly  defir'd  my  opinion  ;  yet  I
made  this  declaration  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  affirm  nothing  for  certain.  What
I  had  thus  declar'd  was  fo  evidently  confirm'd  by  the  diflecStion,  that  al-
though the  declaration. might  be  pafs'd  over  by  fome,  yet  the  appearance  it-
felf  could  be  conceal'd  by  no  body.

I  had  feen  the  fame  thing  before,  and  particularly  in  an  old  man,  from
whom  I  had  already  defcrib'd  it,  in  the  firft  of  the  Epiftote  Anatomies  (b).
And  I  remember'd  to  have  read  of  it  very  frequently,  and  not  only  amono-
the  ancients,  as  when  Vefalius  (c)  found,  in  Martellus,  the  famecyft,  "of  the
"  bignefs  of  two  fills,"  or  when  Fernelius  (d)  faid  that  it  is  fometimes  diftended
by  exuberant  bile,  "  into  a  very  large  fize  ■"  but  among  the  more  modern  au-
thors alfo,  as,  for  inflance,  in  Zwingerus  (e),  who  faw  it  "  about  fix  times
"  larger  than  is  natural,"  but  particularly  the  younger  du  Verney  C/)and  Yun--
gius,  whofe  obfervation  of  one  of  a  ftill  more  monftrous  fize,  is  taken  notice  of
by  Abraham  Vaterus  (g) ;  fo  that  after  this  I  do  not  think  it  worth  while  to
point  out  thofe  which  have  been  fince  produc'd,  nor  yet  to  inquire  how  great  a
cyft  was  found  by  Lancifi,  which,  by  reafon  of  its  very  remarkable  length, .
Pacchioni  intended  to  defcribe,  as  he  expreffes  himfelf  in  a  letter  which  he
wrote  to  me  in  the  year  1710.  Although  two  obfervations,  which  I  lately
read  in  the  writings  of  the  very  illuftrious  Van  Swieten  (h),  are  by  no  means
to  be  neglefted  :  the  firft  from  thofe  of  the  illuftrious  fociety  at  Edinburg,
who  found  this  cyft  to  contain  eight  pounds  of  bile,  and  that  in  a  boy  not
more  than  twelve  years  of  age ;  the  fecond  made  by  himfelf,  who,  in  the
body  of  a  woman,  found  the  fame  cyft  to  be  fo  diftended,  as  to  reach  quite  to
the  right  os  ilium,  and  this  cyft  had  protuberated,  by  its  own  bulk,  betwixt
this  bone,  and  the  lower  ribs,  even  before  her  very  lean  carcafe  was  cut
into.

But  it  was  alfo  found  to  be  extended,  in  a  Polonian  fenator  (/),  "  to  fo
"  furprizing  a  degree,"  that  in  the  living  body,  "  it  could  be  felt  by  the
"  hands."  To  return,  however,  to  thofe  things  which  were  publifh'd  at
that  time,  which  was  in  the  year  1732,  although  I  very  well  remember'd
them,  yet  not  unmindful  of  thofe  three  obfervations,  that  I  pointed  out  in
the  firft  place,  of  a  facculus  hanging  down  from  the  liver,  nor  yet  of  the  ad-
monition, in  the  latter  end  of  thefixth  book  de  morhis  popularibus,  that  even
good  phyficians,  "  not  to  mention  others,"  are  often  deceiv'd  by  "  appear-
"  ances,"  I  was  not  willing  to  imitate  Baglivi,  who,  if  he  were  living  at  pre-
fent,  and  ftiould  read  what  is  written  by  our  Vallifneri  (k),  and  Scheffe-
lius  (I).,  would  certainly  repent  of  having  written  too  haftily,  and  in  confe-

(3)  N.  43.  {h)  Comment,  in  Boerhaav.  aph.  §.  950.  &

{c)  Epift.  de  rad.  chin.  935.

(d)  Pathol.  1.  6.  c.  5.  (?)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1733.  hebd.  11.  n,  2,

(e)  Aa.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf.  78.  {k)  Opere  t.  3.  p.  6.  lett.  37.  annot.  i.

(f)  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  1701.  (/)  Diflert.  de  lithiafi  fell.  §.  28.
(g)-  Difiert.  qua  calculi  in vafic.  fell.  &c.

the!',  5.

quence


2  24  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

quence  of  attending  to  fome  obfervations,  but  not  to  all  that  it  was  in  his
power  to  attend  to  (m),  "  when  you  lee  obftinate  jaundices,  or  thofe  that
"  have  been  cur'd,  return  afrefh,  you  may  take  it  for  granted,  that  thefe
"  are  produc'd  by  a  calculus  of  the  gall-bladder,  and  for  this  reafon  you  may
*'  pronounce  them  incurable."

14.  But  in  order  to  treat  of  thefe  calculi  of  the  gall-bladder,  according  to
my  promlfe,  inafmuch  as  their  licuation  certainly  is  on  the  outfide  of  the  li-
ver, let  me  firft  obferve,  that  there  is  fo  great  a  number  of  obfervations,  of
thefe  concretions  being  found  in  the  human  body,  that  the  lift  of  thofe  which
relate  to  the  calculi  of  the  liver,  admits  no  idea  of  comparifon  therewith.
And  if  you  inquire  after  the  reafon  of  this  difference,  you  will  find  more  than
one,  when  you  attend  to  the  caufes  which  are  advanc'd,  for  the  generation
of  calculi  in  the  cyfl  being  fo  frequent.

OurVeQingius  («)  has  fuppos'd  the  thicknefs  of  the  cyftic  bile,  and  its  ve-
ry long  ftagnation  in  that  cavity,  by  which  the  meatus  cyftici,  and  valvule,
_are  much  ftreighten'd,  and  lefs  paflable.  And  thele  caufes  you  will  findfo  pe-
culiar to  the  cyft,  that  the  greater  part  of  them  are  not,  by  any  means,
transferable  to  the  hepatic  dufts,  and  it  is  fuprizing  that  a  very  eminent  phy-
fician,  among  the  more  modern,  who  has  acknowledg'd  thefe  very  caufes  of
the  difference  we  are  fpeaking  of,  has  not  equally  obferv'd  that  they  are  alfo
common  to  the  cow  fpecies  •,  in  which,  as  he  there  confefTes,  that  hepatic  calculi
are  more  frequent,  fo  he  ought,  at  the  fame  time,  to  have  afllgn'd  fome  caufe
of  this  difference  betwixt  the  human  fpecies,  and  this  fpecies  of  animals.

But  thofe  things,  which  Veflingius  had  previoufly  demonftrated,  were,  in
the  mean  while,  illuftrated,  and  en.arg'd,  by  others ;  either  by  remarking  a
greater  thicknefs  of  the  bile  in  fome  men,  and  a  greater  difpofition  to  concre-
tion ;  or  by  acknowledging  a  longer  retention  than  is  natural,  by  reafon  of
the  fpafmodic  crilpatures,  and  conftri£tions  of  the  cyftic  du£l  •,  or  by  reafon
of  the  power  of  felf-contra£tion  being  deprav'd,  and  weaken'd,  in  the  re-
lax'd  coats  of  the  veficle.  And  this  weaknefs  of  the  coats  becomes  fo  much
the  greater  afterwards,  in  proportion  as  a  greater  quantity  of  bile  is  retain'd,
juft  as  it  happens  in  the  urinary  bladder,  when  from  the  quantity  of  retain'd
urine  its  power  of  contraftion  is  weaken'd,  and  overcome  :  which  is  a  fimile
that  was  not  only  us'd  formerly  by  Galen  (<?),  but  has  even  been  us'd  by  the
younger  du  Verney  (p)  in  the  prefent  age  :  and  from  hence  you  underftand
•what  is,  in  general,  the  principal  caufe  of  thofe  vaft  enlargements  of  the  cyfl:
being  brought  on,  which  I  fpoke  of  juft  now.

To  thefe  caufes  others  were,  moreover,  added  by  Abraham  Vater  (q),
■whofe  name  ought  not  to  have  been  fupprefs'd  by  thofe  who  wrote  the  fame
things  afterwards.  For  he,  having  remark'd  how  difficult  it  is  for  the  bile  to
afcend,  oaaccount  of  the  declivity  of  the  fund  of  the  cyft,  and  obferv'd  the
necelTarily  flow  pafTage  thereof,  on  account  of  the  obliquity  of  the  duft,
judg'd,  from  confidering  both  thefe  caufes,  that  the  cyft  being  comprefs'd  by
the  ftomach,  none  but  the  thinneft,  and  moft  fluid,  part  of  the  bile  was
Jqueez'd  out,  and  that  the  thickeft  was  always  left  behind,  in  healthy  bodies,

[k)  De  expcrim.  circa  bilem.  (/)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  13.

(/;)  Synt.  anat.  c.  4.  ['/)  Obf.  rariiT,  calcul.  3,  §.  l.

(c)  Deloc.  aft",  f.  5.  c.  7.  hand  Ita  proculafine,

which


Letter  XXXVII. Article  15.  225

which  would  eafiiy  concrete,  unlefs  it  was  prefently  diluted  by  a  new  a,fBux
of  hepatic  bile,  and  reftor'd  to  its  former  confiftence.

But  when  this  frefli  afflux  is  either  kfs  than  it  ought  to  be,  or  the  bile  is
fecreted  in  a  more  vifcid  ftate  than  ufual,  it  does  not  fully  anfwer  the  pur-
pofes  of  dilution,  and  renovation  5  for  which  reafon  the  infpiflated  bile  of  the
cyft  more  eafiiy  degenerates  into  calculi.  And  Fernelius  (r)  had  trac'd  out  thefc
■caufes  to  Vaterius,  and,  infome  meafure,  even  to  Veflingius,  when  he  aflert-
ed  that  thefe  calculi  "  had  their  origin  from  yellow  bile,  which  having  been
"  long  retain'd  in  its  proper  receptacle,  and  not  timely  evacuted,  nor  dilu-
"  ted,  and  renovated,  by  a  new  influx,  grows  hard  in  a  furprizing  man-
"ner."

15.  Since,  therefore,  in  this  great  infirmity,  and  intemperance,  of  human
life,  fo  many  caufes,  which  muft  be  readily  granted,  are  at  hand  to  favour
the  produftion  of  cyftic  calculi,  there  is  not  the  leaffc  reafon  to  wonder  that
they  have  been  fo  often  found,  both  by  the  ancients,  and  by  moderns.  For
after  Gentilis  {s\  and  Nicolus  (/),  had  teftified  their  having  feen  concretions
of  this  kind,  the  latter  in  the  gall-bladder,  and  the  former  in  the  meatus
thereof,  Benivenius  (ti),  Vefalius  (x),  Curtius  (jy),  Falloppius  (2),  Fernelius  (*),
Stephanus  (a),  Columbus  (^),  and  Coiterus(c),  to  take  no  notice  of  authors
of  lefs  note,  produc'd  their  obfervations  to  the  fame  efFe<5t :  and  from  the
time  that  human  bodies  began  to  be  more  frequently  diffedted,  even  to  this
very  day,  no  writer  in  anatomical,  or  medical,  matters  has  had  occafion  to
fpeak  pretty  fully  of  that  veficle,  but  he  has  made  mention  of  calculi  being
feen  by  him  there;  fo-that  it  is  with  juftice  the  celebrated  profeffor  Fabri-
cius  (d)  fays,  that  calculi  of  the  gall-bladder  have,  in  general,  been  more
frequently  obierv'd  than  thofe  of  the  urinary  bladder ;  and  it  is  fhown  by  the
illuftrious  Haller  (e),  that  they  are  even  to  be  met  with  more  frequently  in
fome  countries.

Wherefore  I  would  not  have  you  be  furpriz'd,  if  I  fay,  that  while  I  write
this  prefent  letter,  I  have  before  my  eyes,  at  leaft  two  hundred  obfervations
.of  this  kind,  nineteen  of  which  are  my  own  ;  but  I  would  rather  have  you
wonder  that  I  have  not  read,  or  do  not  remember,  a  great  many  more.  Yet
thofe,  of  which  I  have  fpoken,  are  not  fo  few  in  number,  but  that  I  may
from  them  venture  to  anfwer  your  inquiry,  as  to  what  occurs  more  frequent-
Jy,  or  more  rarely,  in  cyllic  calculi,  and  that  without  feeming  to  anfwer  too
haftily,  orraflily.  You  may  make  this,  inquiry  firft  of  all,  in  what  kind  of
bodies  they  are  moft  frequently  found  ?  For  Carolus  Stephanus  (f)  has  af-
ferted,  that  they  have  been  feen  by  him,  "  chiefly,  in  women,  who  were
*'  pretty  far  advanc'd  in  life :"  and,  in  this  age,  Frederick  Hoffmann  (g)  has
faid,  "  that  they  are  found  very  rarely  in  men,  who  are  in  the  flourifhing  time

{r)  C.  cit.  adn.  13.  (*)  Cit.  ad  n.  14.

(s)  {a)  De  diiledl.  part.  corp.  hum.  1.  3.  c.  42.

ft)  Apud  Donat.  de  med.  hift.  mii-ab.  1.  4. {i)  De  re  anat.  1.  ult.

c.  30.  ("cj  Obf.  anat.

(/i)  {/)  Propempt.  ad  differt.  Jo.  Barth.  Hoff-

(.v)  Cit.  fupraadn.  13.  mann.

(jy)  Comment,  in  mnndin.  anat.  ubi  de  he- {e)  Opufc.  pathoj.  obf.  33.

•pate  in  fin.  f/J  C.  42.  modo  cit.

(z)  Obf.  anat.  CgJ  Med.  rat.  t.  4.  n.  2.  f.  2.  c.  3.  §.  12.

Vol.  II.  G  e  "  of


2^6  Book  nr. Of  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  of  life,  but  more  frequently  in  old  men,  and  ftill  more  frequently  in  women'
"  than  in  men."  The  firft  thing  pronounc'd  by  Hoffmann,  therefore,  iS
much  more  true  than  the  laft.  For  Ifee  in  the  obfervations- fpoken  of,  that
the  number  of  males  and  females  is  nearly  equal.  But  although  1  find  old
people,  promifcuoufly,  of  both  fexes,  to  the  number  of  fixty-one,  whofe  ages
are  particularly  pointed  out  by  the  obfervators,  I  find  no  more  than  eight
who  are  laid  to  be  young:  and  among  thefe  there  is  no  infant,  and  but  one
child  ;  and  the  leait  age,  amongft  thefe  eight,  is  that  of  twelve  years,  and
the  greatetl:  nine  and  twenty.

Without  doubt,  in  a  flourifhing  time  of  lifb  the  juices  are  thinner,  more
brifkly  agitated,  and  lefs  prone  to  concretion,  than  in  the  decline  of  life,  er-
as Hoffmann  particularly  faw,  than  in  the  lefs  laborious  life  of  very  old  men,,
elpecially,  and  women. For  which  reafonHaller,  whom  I  have  already  com-
inended,  accovints  for  "  the  frequent  calculi  of  the  gall-bladder,  which  he
*'  found  in  criminals,  who  had  been  long  confin'd  to  prifon,"  from  the  want
■of  mufcular  aftion  (h). And  to  the  fame  caufe,  you  muft  refer  what  the  il—
luftrious  Van  Swieten  (if)  found  to  happen  in  bile,  which  was  not  agitated^
For,  "  having  left  it  to  putrify  in  a  pure  glafs  veflel,  he  found  calculous
*'  coagula  in  the  bottom  of  the  vefTel."' Yet  the  middle  age,,  although  it  is
an  adbive  feafon  of  life,  Has  not  juices  to  be  compar'd  with  the  flourifhing'
prime  of  our  age,  for  which  reafonit  happens,  that  this  time  of  life  cannot
equally  refifl  the  injuries  of  intemperance,  and  of  the  pafTionSjto  both  of  which
it  is  ftill  more  liable  than  old  age. If  you  add  to  this,  that  a  great  part  of
the  women  in  the  lower  clalTes  of  the  people,  do  not  lead  a  very  fedentary
life  :  and  if  you  compare  all  thefe  things  with  thofe  which  are  faid  above  (^),
upon  the  caufes  that  produce  calculi  of  the  gall-bladder  -,  you  will,  of  courfe,
cafily  perceive  that  the  obfervations  are  confonant  to  reafon.

16.  But  if  you  now  inquire,  whether  Reverhorft  (/)  has  written  truly  or
n-ot,  when  he  has  admonilh'd  us,  that  we  might  remark,  in  regard  to  thefe
calculi,  "that  the  younger  the  body  is  from  whence  they  are  taken,  the-
"  more  pale  are  they  in  their  colour,  that  in  a  middle  age  they  are  of  a  yel'
"  low  colour,  but  in  a  more  advanc'd  time  of  life  of  a  darker  yellow,  or  even  1
*'  almoft  black,"  it  will  be  much  more  eafy  to  give  you  an  anfwer  to  this
queftion. For  it  is  not  the  queftion,  here,  what  is  more  frequent,  but  what
is  perpetual ;  fo  that  I  can  readily  afErm,  even  from  infpefting  my  own  ob-
fervations, that  this  is  too  haftily  pronounc'd. For  I  have  found  not  only
blackifh,  but  very  black  calculi,  in  many  of  a  middle  age  likewife;  in  a  young
man  of  five  and  twenty,  and  in  an  old  woman  of  feventy-five  (the  former  of
which  is  the  youngeft,  and  the  latter  the  oldeft,  from  whole  gall-bladder  li
have  hitherto  taken  calculi)  they  were  not  very  different  in  colour  from  each
other,  fo  that  they  were  neither  black  in  the  old  woman,  nor  very  pale  in  the  :
young  man,  efpecially  if  you  compare  them  with  one  of  a  cineritious  colour,.j
which  I  found  in  a  woman  of  fixty  years  of  age  within  one.

But  that  you  may  not  depend  upon  my  obfervations  alone,  I  have,  cer,*  ■
tainly,  not  read  of  calculi  being  found  in  a  younger  woman,  than  that  virgia>

{i)  Experitn.  anat.  de  fang.  mot.  c.  6.  (/f)  N.  14.

V)  -CoxRflient.  in  Boerhaav.  aph.  §.  950,  (/J  Diflert.  de  motu  bills  §.  57,


Letter  XXXVII. Article  17.  227

X)f  nineteen,  who  is  defcrib'd  by  Bonetus,  in  the  former  book  (m).  Yet  in
iier  all  the  ftones  were  "  yellow,  and  refembled  bile  in  their  colour."  On
the  contrary,  that  woman,  whofe  hiftory  is  accurately  defcrib'd  by  Cajetanus
Tacconus  (n),  was  of  an  advanc'd  age,  that  is  of  fixty-three  years,  and  af-
fefted  with  ablack  jaundice  befides.  Neverthelefs,  all  the  calculi  from  her
body,  "  not  only  inclin'd  to  a  whitlfli  colour,  or  dilute  faffron  hue ;"  but,
jiotwithftanding  they  were  internally  yellow,  were  furnifli'd  with  coats  that
were  "  white,  and  ihining,  and  relembled  the  internal  filver  furface  of  mo-
■"  ther  of  pearl."

And,  without  doubt,  the  age  is  not  to  be  fo  much  confider'd,  as  the  mat-
ter of  which  they  are,  or  have  been,  made,  for  they  do  not  always  bear  the
colour  of  the  bile  in  which  they  are  found  ;  and  this  colour,  according  to  the
various  difpofition  of  the  blood,  or  of  the  organs,  may  fometimes  be,  or
.have  been,  of  a  different  nature,  or  the  bile  may  have  even  hid,  under  the
Xame  colour,  particles  of  a  different  kind,  though  at  the  fame  time  of  life,  and
equally  proper  to  form  calculous  concretions.  Thus  Abraham  Yater  (o),  thus,
the  celebrated  Trew  (p),  to  pafs  over  other  obfervations  of  my  own,  and  thofe
of  different  authors,  met  with  them  in  the  manner  I  am  fpeaking  of;  for  the
former  "  found  a  calculus,  in  a  very  thick  and  black  bile,  which  was  of  a  co-
"  lour  inclining  to  white,"  and  the  latter,  in  bile  which  was  of  a  bright  yel-
low, found  a  calculus  that  was,  externally,  "  in  great  meafure  white,  and
"  brown  in  other  parts,  but  became  very  white,  by  means  even  of  the
*'  flighteft  friftion,"  yet  internally,  if  you  excepted  "  a  kind  of  redifh  fpor,
"  it  was  pale,"  and  the  former  of  thefe  appearances  was  in  a  man,  and  the
latter  in  an  old  man,  not  in  any  young  man.

17.  Nor  do  they  more  favour  the  opinion  of  Reverhorflr,  who  have,  in
general,  affirm'd  that  thefe  calculi  "  are  found  to  be  black,  blackifh,  or
"  brown,  for  the  moft  part :"  although,  as  I  know  that  the  calculi  found  by
our  anceftors,  and  by  others,  have  been  frequently  of  a  colour  of  this  kind,  fo
myfelf  alfo  confefs,  that  I  have  more  frequently  found  them  in  the  former
years  .of  my  obfervations,  than  in  the  latter  ;  yet  a  great  number  of  mine,  and
ftill  a  greater  number  of  the  obfervations  of  others,  muft  of  courfe  flip  my
jnemory,  before  I  can  eafily  believe  that  thefe  concretions  are  "  for  the  moft
"  part "  found  to  be  of  that  colour.  Kentmann,  ,as  you  read  in  Schenck  (^),
writing  of  thefe  calculi  in  general,  fays  that  they  are  "  all  of  a  colour  ap-
"  proaching  to  yellow,  which  is,  by  degrees,  chang'd  into  a  deep  yellow,  or
"  faffron  colour,  as  they  increafe  in  their  fize,"  and  indeed  he  foon  after  pro-
duces examples  "  of  a  kind  of  yellowifli  calculi,"  and  "  of  a  yellow  one"  be-
ing found  here  by  our  Falloppius.

But  a  much  greater  number  of  inftances  are  added,  in  the  writings  of  the
fame  Schenck,  of  concretions  of  a  different  colour.  And  this  muft  be  grant-
ed :  but  then  other  obfervations  are  to  be  fet  in  oppofition  thereto,  as  of  Jo»
annes  Francus  (r),  who  faw  calculi  "  of  a  faffron  colour,"  as  of  C^alpi.

(m)  Sepulch.  !.  2.  f.  4.  obf.  35.  (f)  Obf.  med.  1.  3.  ubi  de  Veiic.  feU.  lapidi

in)  De  raris  quibufd.  hspat.  affeft.  obferv. obf.  i.
Co  J  DifTert.  qua  calculi,  &c.  thef,  4  &  5.  (r)  Ibid.

Ip)  Cotnmerc.  litter,  a.  1743.  hebd.  32.  n.
3.  &  hebd.  36.  n,4.


2  28  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

nus  (s),  who  faw  them  of  the  fame  colour,  as  of  Bofchus  (t),  who  found
them  "  of  a  citron  colour,"  ds  of  Panarolus  (u),  and  Dobrzenfl<y  (x),  who
found  them  "  of  a  yellow  colour."  Nor  indeed  are  Hoechftetter  (y),  Schel-
hammer.  (z),  Steinius  (a),  and  Bierlingius  (b),  to  be  pafs'd  over,  by  whom
"  yellow,  yellowifli,  and  faffron  colour'd  calculi"  have  been  feen  ;  nor  yet
Horftius  (c),  nor  Helwigius,  (d),  by  both  of  whom  a  great  number  was
found  •,  thofe  being  all  of  a  "  yellowifli  colour"  which  were  feen  by  the  lat-
ter, and,  in  part,  by  the  former.

To  thefe  you  may  add  Platner  (e),  and  Bezoldus  (/),  one  of  whom  found
them  "  of  a  golden  yellow  colour,"  and  the  other  "  of  a  yellow  colour  in-
"  dining  to  white,"  and  not  only  thefe  but  even  many  more,  among  whom
are  the  members  of  the  laudable  fociety  at  Edinburgh  (g),  who  found
"  yellowifli  calculi,"  in  a  boy  of  twelve  years  of  age,  and  the  celebrated
Trew  (h);  who  faw  them  "  flightly  yellow  externally,"  even  in  the  body  of
a  perfon  who  had  liv'd  more  than  feventy-four  years,  and  fl:ill  more  the  ce-
lebrated Haller  (i),  as  he  faw,  even  in  a  woman  who  was  faid  to  be  more
than  a  hundred  years  of  age,  perhaps  all  the  calculi,  but,  at  leafl:,  one  of
them  in  particular,  of  a  yellow  colour."  The  fame  author  having  found
fixteen  in  another  old  woman  (k),  fays  that  thirteen  of  them  were  "  yellow:"
and  that  in  a  man  who  had  been  hang'd  (/),  they  were  of  a  yellow  colour
"inclining  to  white."  But  Weitbrecht  {m)  even  found  them  to  be  "  yellow,"
in  an  old  man.

Other  obfervations,  befides  thefe,  I  have  either  jufl:  now  taken  notice  of,  or
fliall  take  notice  of  hereafter  :  and  ftill  others,  and  thofe  not  few  in  number,  I
Ihall  purpofely  pafs  over ;  for  it  is  not  my  intention  to  point  out  them  all,  but
only  as  many  as  are  fufiicient  to  fliow,  that  thefe  gall-fl:ones  are  not  found,
"  for  the  mofl;  part,"  of  a  black  or  brown  colour.  And  even  Vater  (n),  Hoff-
mann (o),  and  Bezoldus  (p),  when  they  treated  of  the  colours  of  thefe  cal-
culi, in  general,  put  among  the  number  of  thofe,  which  are  "  commonly,"
or  "  more  frequently,"  obferv'd,  "  the  concretions  of  a  yellowifli  hue,"  as  is
the  expreflion  of  the  two  firfl: ;  and  Bezoldus  has  particularly  faid  "  that  they
'',  moft  frequently  incline  to  yellownefs."

1 8.  And  although  a  great  number  of  thofe  who  have  mention'd  cyfliic
calculi,  have  been  filent  in  regard  to  their  colour,  yet  there  are  fo  many
who  have  not  been  filent  upon  this  head,  that  it  fufficiently  appears  they  ge-
nerally are  found  to  be  either  of  a  yellow,  or  a  black  colour.  I  fay  gene-
ral-ly,  becaufe  blue  concretions  have  alfo  been  feen,  as  by  Coiterus  (q),  Ne-

(j)  Quaeft.  med.  1.  2.  in  ipfo  fine.  (g)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  1 3.

(?)  De  facult.  anat.  left.  2.  {i)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1734.  hebd.  6.  n.  5.

(«)  Jatrol.  pent.  5.  obf.  22.  in  fin.

(x)  Eph.  n.  c.  a.  I.  obf.  129.  (/)  Opufc.  pathol.  obf.  33.  hift,  4.

QJ  Obf.  med.  dec.  10.  caf.  9.  [i)  Ibid.  hift.  11.

CzJ _  CO  Ibid.  hift.  13.

faj  Apud  SchefFel.  diff.  de  lit.  fell.  §.  10;  (_m)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  mode  cit.  hebd,  9,  .

(i)  Sepulchr.  1. 4.  f.  i.  in  additam.  obf.  12.  n.  2.

(f)  Jbid.  1.  2.  f.  7.  obf.  125.  (h)  Differt.  fupra  ad  n.  13.  cit.  thef.  3.

(d)  Ibid.  1,  3.  f.  7.  in  addit.  obf.  l.  (0)  C.  3.  fupra  ad  n.  15.  cit.  §.  2.

CeJ  Progr.  edit.  17.  mart.  a.  1746.  (p)  Differt.  modo  cit.  §.  5..

^^  Differt.  de  cholelitho  caf.  I.  ^j^^  Obf.  anat.

4  retius


Letter  XXXVII. Article  i8.  229

retius  (r),  and  Goritzius  (s),  who  alfo  obferv'd  "  fmall  red  points,"  per-
haps from  the  particles  of  the  adhering  cyft  being  lacerated  here  and  there  :
for  this  calculus  was  fo  ftreightly  confin'd  in  the  cyft,  that  there  was  a  ne-
ceflity  of  extra6ting  it  by  force :  and  they  have  been  feen  of  a  red  colour,
as  by  Camenicenus  ((),  and  by  Bartholin  (u)  :  of  a  cineritious,  as  by  our
Fabricius  (x)  and  Bofcus  (y)  :  of  a  whitifh  colour,  as  by  Reverhorft  (z),  by
Vater  (a),  by  Haller  (I?)  by  Van  Swieten  (c);  and  even  of  a  filver  colour,  as  by
Platerus  (d)  :  of  a  golden  colour,  as  by  the  fame  {e),  and  in  part  by  others ;
for  I  have  not  undertaken  to  mention  every  one  in  this  place :  and  finally,
of  a  green  or  greenifh  colour,  which  is  much  more  frequent  than  thofe  laft
ipoken  of,  or  others  which  for  the  fake  of  brevity  are  omitted,  fo  that  I  have
very  often  feen  the  fame,  the  cineritious  fometimes,  the  golden-colour  in  part
now  and  then,  but  the  others  I  have  never  yet  feen.

Neverthelefs  I  have  alio  feen  calculi  of  a  variegated  colour,  in  the  manner
I  have  defcrib'd  them  in  the  epiftle  fent  to  Schrockius  (f) ;  and  Gerbezius
(g)  faw  them  of  a  brown  colour  mix'd  with  white ;  Baeumlinus  (h)  of  a
white  and  yellow,  inclining  to  green  •,  and  many  others,  that  were  contain'd
even  in  the  fame  cyft,  diftinguifti'd  with  fpots  of  bright  red,  or  fcarlet
hue,  and  with  others  of  pale  or  a  grifly  colour.  Out  of  which  colours,  and
others  that  are  juft  now  mention'd,  you  cannot  properly  call  any  one  black.
And  to  thefe  you  may,  moreover,  add  the  calculi  which  are  without,  or  al-
moft  without,  any  colour  :  of  which  kind  was  that  large  one  found  by  Scul-
tetus  (/),  which  not  only  fiU'd  the  cyft,  but  even  diftended  it,  and  was  "  pel-
"  lucid  like  chryftal ;"  or  thofe  that  the  royal  furgeon  Tamponettius  C^j,
and  Manchius  (I),  formerly  found,  the  latter  "  tranfparent,  though  friable,
"  and  of  the  bignefs  of  a  filbert,"  and  the  former  "  ftiining  and  foft  like  a
"  concreted  gum,  and  of  the  bignefs  of  a  pigeon's  egg,"  (fo  that  it  brings
to  my  mind  one  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated  Heifter  (m),  which,  beneath  a
rugous  furface,  "  had  a  fubftance,  and,  in  general,  a  colour,  not  far  unlike
"  a  gum,  which  is  fomewhat  more  folid  than  gum  arabic)  or  that  which  is
"  reprefented,  in  a  plate,  by  Bezoldus  («),  of  the  form  of  a  chryftal,  and
"  perfeftly  pellucid,"  found  by  Henricus  Albertus  Nicolai,  and  pointed  out
in  the  fifth  obfervation  (o).

That  whitifti  calculus,  alfo,  which  I  have  more  than  once  mention'd  from
Vaterus  (p),  was  pellucid  and  tranfparent :"  to  which,  if  you  attend  lefs  to
the  colour,  you  may  add  from  the  Sepulchretum  (*),  thofe  thirty  found  by

(rj  4pud  Schenck.  obf.  cit.  fupra  adn.  17. (/)  In  aft.  n.  c.  torn.  2.  obf.  147.

fsj  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  8.  obf,  20.  Q)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.^  i.  obf.  57.

Y/^  Epift.  ad  Matthiol.  (;6)  Cpmmerc.  litter,  a.  1743.  hebd.  28.  n.  2,

("uj  Cent.  3.  epift.  med.  86.  (/)  Armatachir.  obf.  61.

fxj  Apud  Schenck.  obf.  cit.  {k)  Zodiac,  med.  gall,  a.  i .  April,  obf.  7,

(y)  De  facultat.  aaat.  left.  z.  (/)  Ibid,  mai  obf  S.

CzJ  §.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  16.  fmj  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf  181.

CaJ  DifT.  ibid.  cit.  thef.  4.  fn)  Differt.  de  cholelitho  §.  5.  fig.  4.

CiJ  Obf  cit.  ad  n.  17.  hilt,  i  &  6.  CoJ  Dec.  obf  illuft.

CcJ  Comment,  cit.  fupra  ad  n,  15.  §.  935.  C/iJ  Thef.  4.  hie  cit.  &  5.

ad  2.  ("'J  h.  3.  f.  17.  in  addit.  append,  ad  obf  2.
ftij  Obf  I.  3.ubidetereft.  excret, §.  i.
(€)  Ibid.

Scharpius,


2  3©  Book  III. Of  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

Scharpius,  which  were  "  pellucid  like  a  carbuncle  •,"  and  perhaps,  likewifc,
eighty  more,  which  were  found  by  our  Sandtorius  (j),  "  fimilar  to  the  ftones
"  call'd  chryfolites,"  I  fuppofe  like  the  chryfolites  which  are  defcrib'd  by
Pliny  (r),  "  tranfparent,  and  of  a  golden  colour."

But  if  you  would  confider  nothing  befides  a  fhining  property,  in  cyttic
calculi,  others  ought  to  be  taken  notice  of  here,  as  from  Grifehus  (s)  that
which  was  a  little  Icfs  than  a  hen's  egg,  and  when  broken,  "  fhone  as  if
"  it  had  been  full  of  nitre  ■"  or  from  Jo.  Theodore  Schenck  (i),  and  Jo.
Rhodius  (u),  thofe  wliich  were  many  degrees  lefs  than  the  laft-mention'd,
but  being  broken,  in  like  manner,  {hone  like  chryftals  "of  tartar"  or  talc,
as  that  alfo  did  like  "  talc,"  which  I  firft  took  notice  of  from  Trew  (x) :
and  even  to  myfelf  (y),  the  nucleus  of  fome  has  appear'd  to  be  diftinguifla'd
here  and  there,  with  a  kind  of  fhining  points.  But  that  thofe  "  blue  con-
*'  cretions"  of  Neretius  (z),  or  Platerus  (a),  were  Ihining,  the  former,  at
*'  onetime,  of  a  bright  filver  colour,  and  at  another  tim.e,  of  a  bright  golden
*■'  hue,"  that  is  externally  only ;  for  I  do  not  read  that  they  were  broken  j
has  but  little  reference,  I  think,  to  thofe  of  which  I  juft  now  fpoke.  To
which  I  fuppofe,  thefe  that  are  deicrib'd  by  Baglivi  (l>),  may  be  with  more
juftice  fuppos'd  to  relate-,  for  he  fays  that  they  "  almoft  emitted  Iparkles,  as
"  if  they  had  been  a  congeries  of  black  fait  chryftalliz'd."

However,  to  that  clafs  certainly  belong,  chiefly,  thofe  two  which  were  not
long  ago  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated  Morand  (c),  one  from  the  obfervation  of
the  famous  Geoffroy,  and  the  other  from  his  own,  the  former  internally  in
part,  but  the  latter  externally,  and  internally,  for  the  moft  part,  Ihining,
and  almoft  quite  pellucid  :  and  to  that  clafs  belong  other  calculi  defcrib'd  by
other  authors,  and  particularly  by  the  very  excellent  HaWev  (d),  which  I  (hall
more  properly  tal-ce  notice  of  below  (e),  when  I  fpeak  of  the  ftrudture  of
gall-ftones,  not  without  that  "  chryftalline"  calculus,  if  I  am  able  in  the
mean  time  to  find  it  any  where  in  Hildanus,

J  9.  For  now  it  is  neceflary,  previoufly,  .to  touch  upon  a  few  things  in
regard  to  the  various  magnitude,  number,  figure,  and  fituation,  of  thefe
ftones.  There  was  a  time  then,  when  one  of  thefe  concretions  was  not  only
found  to  fill,  but  alfo  to  diftend,  the  cyft,  as  I  faid  juft  now,  and  even  to
diftend  it  "  very  greatly,"  as  you  will  fee  in  the  Sepulchretum  (f).  A  cal-
culus has  alfo  been  found  equal  to  the  fize  of  this  cyft,  of  which  you  will
have  more  than  one  inftance,  in  the  fame  place  (gj.  At  one  time  it  has  been
."  half  as  big  as  an  hen's  egg,"  as  our  Falloppius  found  it  (h);  and  at  another,
as  big  as  a  pigeon's  egg  [for  I  pafs  over  the  intermediate  degrees  of  mag-
nitude in  the  fecond  and  third,  as  I  do  in  the  firft  and  fecond)  of  which  fize
they  have  been  feen  by  many  after  Coiterus  (z) ;  and  amongft  thefe  by  our

CfJ  Comment,  in  I.  Fen.  I.  can.  avic.  qu.  ^6.  (i)  Be  experim.  circii  bilem.

CrJ  Nat.  bift.  1.37.  c.  9.  (<•)  Mem.  de  I'acad.  R.  des  fc.  a,  1741.

('i^  Vid,  in  modocit.  fed.  17.  obf.  13.  §.  II.  (a')  Opufc.  pathol.  obf.  33.

(tj Vid.  ad  Sachlii Gammarolog. epift.  (e)  N.  23,  &  24.

addit.  7.  ad  c.  14.  //J  L.  3.  f.  10.  in  addit.  obf.  i.

/uj  Cent^  J.  obf.  med.  45,.  CgJ  Ibid.  f. 13.  obf. 12.  §.  7.  &  f.  iS.  obf.

CxJ  Supra  n.  16.  8.  §.  14.

CyJ  Obf.  cit.  147.  C^)  Apud  Schenck. obf.  I.  fit  fupraadn.  17.

(k)  {i)  Obf.  anat,
ie)  Locis  Paulo  ante  cijt.

¥allifnerj


Letter  XXXVII. Artick  19.  231-

Tallifheri  (k),  in  the  laft  of  the  Gonzaga  family  that  was  duke  of  Mantua^
tvho  fuppos'd  it  to  be  an  hereditary  difeafe,  for  this  reafon,  that  Bartoletus
(f/J  had  likewife  found  a  calculus  at  the  orifice  of  the  cyft,  in  Ferdinand
Gonzaga,  who  was  alfo  a  Mantuan  nobleman  :  which  would  not  have  been
an  improbable  argument,  if  this  laft  duke  had  defcended  from  Ferdinand,-
who,  however,  left  no  fons.  But  they  are  generally  found  to  be  of  a  mucK
lefs  fize  thati  thefe :  and  indeed  are,  ibmetiraes,  fo  very  fmall,  that  Vefalius
(m)  compar'd  thofe  which  he  found  in  Martellus,  to  "  millet  feeds."

And  as  the  gall-bladder,  in  this  body,  was  certainly  equal  to  the  fize  of
two  fifts,  as  I  have  even  laid  above  (k),  and  fill'd  with  ftones  of-  that  kind-j.
you  may  eafily  imagine,  from  hence,  how  great  a  number  of  them  is  fome-
times  met  with.  They  who  have  aftually  number'd  them  after  Falloppius  (o),
who,  with  that  pretty  large  one,  found  "  a  hundred  and  twenty-three,"  have
reckon'd  not  only  "  three  hundred,"  as  Bartoletus  (p),  or  "  three  hundred  and
*'  fix,"  as  the  brother  of  Platerus  (j),  more  than  which  I  have  even  found;  •
but  above  "  feven  hundred,"'  as  Mentzelius  (r^,  and  even  "  above  a  thou-
*•  fand,"'  as  Grafeccius  (s)  did  formerly;  fo  that  it  is  furprizing,  that  fome,-
fpeaking  in  general  of  the  number  of  cyftic  calculi,  fliould  have  ftop'd  at
the  number  of  Joach.  Camerarius  (/),  that' is  at  a  hundred  and  forty-three.-
And  what  will  you  fay  to  an  inftance,  which  is  already  publifh'd  by  the  ce-
lebrated Storchius  (u),  of  an  ancient  nobleman,  in  whom  "  more  than  two-
"  thoufand  of  thefe  calculi  were  reckon'd  up;"  and  another,  in' like  man-
ner, by  Fafchius  (x),  who,  in  the  eniarg'd  cyft  of  a  certain  man,  "  found
"  three  thoufand  fix"  hundred  and  forty-fix  granules  of  concreted  bile,  which-
*'  he  even  ufed  to  fiiow  as  a  curiofity."  And  although  fometimes  there  are
no  more  than  one  calculus,  as  was  demonftrated  juft  now,  yet  it  is  much-
more  common  to  find  a  greater  number.

And  as  to  what  relates  to  the  figure,  moreover,  fome  of  them,-  indeed,-
are  nearly  fpherical,  fome  almoft  oval,  or  of  fome  other  figure,  that  is  not  at
all  angular,  as  even  the  lik«nefl"es,  which  are  made  ufe  of  by  obfervators  to'
defcribe  them,  demonftrate  ;  as,  for  inftance,  that  of  fome  fpecies  of  nut,  an
olive,  an  egg,  or  other  things  of  a  fimilar  kind :  but  they  are  for  the  moft
part  angular.  And  thefe  Ipherical  calculi  receive  their  form  from  the
figure  of  the  veficle  itfelf,  whether  this  be  natural  or  contrafted,  or  eniarg'd,.
and  made  more  globular;  by  difeafe,  efpecially  when  they  fill  it,  and  thac-
whether  there  are  no  more  than  one,  or  more  than  one,  provided  they  are  ■
as  yet  fo  foft  (for  even  thofe  that  are  pretty  large,  fometimes  (y)  preferve  the
foftnefs  of  new  cheefe)  as  to  allow  of  their  being  all  fqueez'd  together  into  a
form  of  that  kind  ;  as  you  fee  in  the  Sepulchretum  (z),  that  inftead  of  bile,,
"  there  was  one  orbicular  ftone,  confifting  of  nine  other  triangular  ftones,

{i)  Epift.  fapra  cit.  adl  n.  13.  adnot.  2.  (s)  Apud  Schenck.  in  fine  obf.  i.  modo  cit.

{IJ  Vid.  Rhod.  cent.  3.  obf.  med.  2.-  (?)  In  eadem  i.  ohf.

(mj  Epift.  de  rad.  chin.  {u)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1735  hebd.  59.  n.  4.  •

(nj  N.  13.  (ix)  Vid.  in  obf.  68.  torn.  5.  adl.  n.  c.

(oj  Obf.  I.  modo  cit.  apud  Schenck.  (yj  Eorund.  t.  3.  append,  n.  viii.  append.

{p)  Obf.  2.  Rhod.  modo  cit.  1 .  ad  obf.  10.


{q)  L.  3.  cit.  fupra  ad.  n.  17.  (g,^  L.  3.  f.  17.  obf.  14.  §.  5.

(»;)  Eph.  n,  c.  dec.  j.  a.  9,  obf.  181.


"'  ly.ins


232  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

*'  lying  mutually  upon  each  other,  and  eafily  ftparable  by  the  band."  A
fimilar  obiervation  to  which  is  extant  (a),  (except  that  it  is  much  more  fur-
.prifing,  on  account  of  the  exadlly  equal  partition  of  weight,  and,  for  that
reaibn,  almoft  incredible)  "  of  a  calculous  globe  weighing  two  ounces  and
"  a  half,"  which,  being  taken  out  of  a  cyft  thatcontain'd  nothing  elfe,  "  fe^
"  parated  into  fixty  leffer  calculi,  obfcurely  yellow,  and  friable,  each  of
*'  them  having  five  furfaces,  and  being  equal  to  the  weight  of  one  fcruple
*'  exadlly."  But  other  examples  of  cyftic  calculi  are  alfo  extant,  which,  re-
fembling  a  pigeon's  egg  (h),  "  feem'd  to  be  made  up  of  leffer  calculi,"  or
were  even  "  compared,"  (c)  or  "  compounded,  of  mere  granules  (d)."

Shall  we  then  fay  that  granules  of  this  kind  are  the  firft  beginnings  of
cyftic  calculi  ?  They  are  certainly  often  found  in  the  veficle,  for  to  thofe
which  I  have  here  produc'd,  you  may  add  many  and  many  other  obferva^
tions,  of  the  fame  bodies,  as  in  a  virgin  fpoken  of  by  the  younger  du  Ver-
n^y  (^)t  ^i^d  in  a  man  mention'd  by  the  celebrated  Jo.  Sebaft.  Albrechtusf/J;
as,  in  the  former,  the  bile  was  concreted  into  fo  many  little  grumous  cor-
pufcles,  and  in  the  latter,  was  "  like  granulated  fugar,  or  hacl  the  form  of
"  blanch'd  millet  feeds:"  and  not  to  be  too prolix,[as  in  fo  many  other  bodies
(g),  in  which  there  being  calculi  "  of  a  granulated  furface,"  or  "  full  of
"  tubercles,  in  the  form  of  a  mulberry,"  the  granules  feem  to  have  adher'd.
to  the  furface,  and  been  form'd  into  one  fubftance  ^herewith.  It  is  not  to  be
doubted  therefore,  but  thefe  are  the  beginnings  of  thofe  calculi,  which  con-
fift  of  granules  of  concreted  bile.  But  in  the  cyft,  together  with  the  calculi,
a  great  quantity  of  "  fandy  and  mucous  matter  (h),  and  a  large  quantity
•"  of  fand,"  has  been,  more  than  once,  found,  fo  that  the  fame  perfon,  to
whom  this  occur'd,  judg'd  "  that  it  was  to  be  confider'd,  without  any
"  doubt,  as  the  matrix  of  the  calculi :"  and  this  perfon  was  Bergenius  (i).
Therefore,  if  the  bile  be  accreted  to  a  grain  of  fand,  as  to  a  nucleus,  you
fee  that  this  is  to  be  look'd  upon  as  another  beginning  of  thefe  calculi.  To
thefe  add  others,  which  have  been  obferv'd  by  me,  at  other  times,  and  which
I  fhall  take  notice  of  with  more  propriety  below  (k)  ;  and  you  will,  at  once,
conceive  that  granules  of  concreted  bile,  cannot  poffibly  -be  the  beginning
of  every  calculus.

But  as  I  have  faid  that  thefe  calculi  are,  for  the  moft  part,  angular,  perhaps
you  will  afl<,  from  whence  I  derive  the  origin  of  thefe  angles  ?  If  many  cal-
culi which  are  as  yet  foft,  and  round,  are  compared  into  one,  either  oval,  or
fpherical,  body,  in  the  manner  I  have  defcrib'd,  in  two  inftances  juft  now
produc'd,  fo  that  from  the  compreffion  of  one  againft  the  other,  they  ac-
quire thefe  new  forms,  and  after  that,  from  any  •  caufe  whatever,  are  fe-
parated,  it  is  very  eafy  to  conceive  of  the  origin  of  thefe  angles. Yet  be-

\a)  Aft.  modo  cit.  t.  5.  obf.  129.  fig.  3  &.4..  &  eph. cent.  ;  tab.  I.  fig.  3.  4.  5

(b)  Commerc.  litt.  a.  1741;.  hebd.  24.  n.  I. Si  6.  Si  Haller.  obf.  cit.  hift.  5.

(c)  Eph  n.  c.  cent.  8.  obf.  20.  (/?>)  Commerc.  litt.  a.  1733.  hebd,  45.  poll.
(J)  Haller.  opufc.  pathol.  obf.  33.  hift.  13. n.  6.

(e)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  13.  (;')  Eta.  1739.  hebd.  39.  n.  i.

(yi)  Aft.  n c.  tom.  4.  obf.  49.  (/■)  N.  22.


ClJ  Eorund,  aft.  t.  i.  obf.  20.  cum  tab.  3.


caufe


Letter  XXXVII. Article 20.  233-

caufe  examples  of  this  kind  very  rarely  occur,  we  generally  account  for  thefe
angles,  from  the  fridtion  of  the  round  calculi,  againil:  each  other.

jror  who  can  deny  the  exiftence  of  this  fridicm,  that  obferves  the  fmooth-
nefs  of  their  furfaces,  or  who  looks  upon  thole  two  cyftic  calculi,  which  are
delineated  in  the  works  of  Hildanus  (I)  ?  For  one  of  them  "  is  fo  greatly
"  hoilow'd  out,  that  it  can  admit  almoft  a  third  part  of  the  other,"  which,
fays  he,  muft  have  been  done,  "  without  doubt,  by  the  continual  friftion  of
one  againft  the  other-,  and  fimilar  appearances  to  this,  he  might  have  fome-
times  feen,  in  calculi  of  the  urinary  bladder  likewiie,  from  a  iimi!ar  caufe.

Confider  alfo  that  large  one,  which  is  defcrib'd  and  delineated  by  the  ce-
lebrated Bechmann  (fn),  and  which,  confifting  of  three  parrs,  had  extended
the  cyft.  When  you  lee  how  much  the  middle  .part,  in  particular,  enter'd
into  the  lower  part,  and  attend  to  the  exadt  poliili  of  the  furfaces,  which
were  contiguous  to  each  other,  you  will,  beyond  a  doubt,  affirm  that  this
was  owing  to  fridlion.

20.  But  with  how  many  angles  thefe  calculi  have  been  furnilh'd,  of  what
kind  thefe  angles  were,  or  in  what  manner  they  were  plac'd,  or  what  figure
they,  for  the  moft  part,  have  put  on,  it  is  not  eafy  to  <letermine  from  the  ob-
fervations  of  others,  not  only  on  account  of  the  great  variety,  that  there,
frequently,  is  even  in  thofe  which  are  contain'd  in  one  and  the -fame  veficle,
but  ftill  more,  by  reafon  of  the  proper  fignincation,  and  ftridl  fenfe,  of  words
being  frequently  neglected,  in  pointing  out  the  figures,  by  thofe  who  oughtby
no  means  to  have  been  thus  carelefs,  or  by  the  defcription  of  thofe  figures  be-
ing negleded,  which  were  proper  to  give  an  idea  of  their  form.  Indeed  when
I  read  Vefalius  defcribing  \n)  eighteen  calculi,  which  he  had  'found  in  the
cyft  of  a  man,  "  as  form'd  in  the  manner  of  a  triangle,  with  the  fides  and
"  furfaces  every  where  equal;"  I  feem  to  myfelf  to  have  an  idea  of  a  tetrae-
drum  properly  fo  call'd.

But  on  the  other  hand,  when  many  others  call  them  "  triquetri,"  or  "  trian-
"  gles,"  or  "triangular,".]  neither  know  whether  they  faw  them  in-the  form  of
a  prifm,  or  a  pyramid,  nor,  whichever  form-they  faw  them-in,  whether  compre-
hended under  equal  or  imequal  planes.  On  the  contrary,  however,  when  Grei-
felius(o)  fays  that  he  had  found  four  pretty  large  "  cubic  "ftones,  together
with  an  almofi:  innumerable  quantity  of  other  fmaller  itones,  all  which,  as'  far  as
he  could  diftinguifh,  "  refembled  a  cube;"  I  have  no  doubt  of  his  idea:
but  I  am  much  in  doubt,  when  many  others  fay  that  they  were  "  fquare,"
or  "quadrangles,"  or  "  quadrangular-,"  for  you  fee  Jiow  many  different
fpecies  of  parallelopipeds may  be  fignified  by  thefe  .words.

However  when  I  examine,  attentively,  all  the  calculi  which  I  have
in  my  poffeffion,  and  I  have  a  great  number,  I  perceive,  in  the  fiift  place,
that  it  is  very  difficult  to  find  any  perfect  regular  -figure  at  all,  in  angular
calculi,  and  I  cannot  help  believing  that  Vefalius  himfelf,  and  Greifelius,
rather  meant  to  be  underftood  a  figure,  which  approach'd  very  near  to  that
of  a  teti-aedra,  and  to  that  of  a  cube  :  and  in  the  fecond  place,  I  think  that

(/)  Cent..4.  obf.  41.  (»)  Epift.  de  rad.  chin.

(to)  Coramerc.  litter,  a,  174.2.  hebd.  32.11.  i. (s)  Eph.  n.  c.dec.  i.  a.  3.  obf.  45.
cum  tab.  2.  fig.  10.

Vol.  II.  H  h  thofe


2  34  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

thofe  who  have  call'd  them  triangular,  or  quadrangulai",  meant  to  point  out;
a  figure  which  comes  near  in  fome  meafure  to  that  of  a  tetraedra,  or  a  cube  :
and,  finally,  I  fuppofe  that  as  both  of  thefe  forms,  in  confequence  of  not
being  perfeft,  if  you  fo  conceive  of  them,  for  the  moil  part  offer  fome  fur-
faces  to  the  eye,  which,  at  firft  fight,  feem  more  like  the  one,  or  more  like
the  other,  many  have  refer'd  them  to  one  clafs,  and  many  alfo  to  the  other ;
but  if  the  calculi  are  examin'd  accurately,  in  every  part,  I  imagine  that  they
will  generally  be  found  of  that  figure,  v/hich  was  formerly  pointed  out  by.
me,  in  the  firft  of  the  Epijlola  Anatomka  {f).  And  that  they  have  very
often  more  angles  than  either  of  thefe  figures  requires,  that  which  I  there
defcrib'd  fufficiently  demonftrates :  and  Kentmannus  (5)  has  formerly  taught,
that  they  have  many  more,  and  the  more  in  proportion,  as  there  are  more
calculi  contain'd  in  a  cyfl  -,  however,  though  I  confefs  that  the  firft  fuppofi^
tion  does  fometimes  take  place,  yet  whether  the  fecond  does  I  am  greatly  in
doubt ;  and  even  if  I  attend  to  fome  obfervations  of  Greifelius,  and  of  my
own,  I  know  that  it  is  not  always  true.

But  let  us  fuppofe  what  number  of  angles  we  pleafe ;  wherever  there  are
fome  very  acute,  or  the  furface  of  the  calculi  is  very  rough,  they  may,  if  ai
confiderable weight  is  at  the  fame  time  added,  not  only  irritate  the  cyft,
but  fometimes  alio  burft  through  it. A  very  extraordinary  inftance  of  which
rupture  you  have  in  the  Sepulchretum  (r).

But  irritation  may  excite  inflammations,  ulcers,  and  excrefcences,  which
have  been  feen  even  by  me  (s),  and,  if  with  Wepfer  (/),  we  compare  the
urinary  and  gall-bladder  to  each  other,  may  at  leaft  bring  on  a  preternatural:
thicknefs  of  the  coats.  For  the  urinary  bladder  "  often  becomes  four  times  as
"  thick  as  it  naturally  is,  by  the  continual  fridion  of  the  calculi  upon  it,"
as  he  fays,  and  as  we  lliall  fee,  in  its  proper  place  {u).  And  he  alfo  found
the  coats  of  the  biliary  cylt  "  preternaturally  thicken'd,"  and,  as  he  thinks^
from  the  fame  caufe,  as  others  alfo  have  fometim.es,  among  whom  are  not
only  fome  of  my  difciples  {x)^  but  likewife  the  very  learned  Trew  fj),  who
did  not  find  it  without  a  purulent  matter,  but,  ia  particular,  the  celebrated
Bezoldus  (z),  who  defcribes  thefe  coats  as  being  "  harden'd,  thicken'd,  and,
in  a  manner,  cartilagineous,"  although  he  enquires  after  a  different  caufe
from  the  calculi,  which  the  cyft,  in  his  example,  and  thofe  juft  now  pointed
out,  contain'd  ;  and  certainly  a  different  caufe  may,  at  other  times,  with  fome
juftice  be  affign'd  f^a).  But  the  furface  of  thefe  concretions  is  frequently
fmooth,  as  Vefalius  faw  in  that  lav/yer,  efpecially  if  they  are  in  the  num.-
ber  of  thofe  that  are  yellowifh,  which  we  perceive,  even  when  dried,
to  have  a  kind  of  greafy  fmoothnefs,  as  if  they  had  been  fmear'd  over  with.
.  foap,  an  undtuous  fmoothnefs  of  which  kind,  I  have,  fometimes,  obferv'd  to
be  ftill  more  confiderable,  in  thofe  that  are  of  a  greenifh  colour  {b)..

(p)  N.  44.  in  fin.  («)  Epid.  42.

(q)  Apud  Schenck.  obf.  i.  cit.  fupra  ad.  n. \x)  Epift.  ad  Schrock.  de  quae  fupra  n.  18.  .

17.  ()•)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  obf.  140.

(r)  L.  3.  f.  14.  obf.  5.  §.  4.  («)  Difp.  de  cholelitho  §.  6.

(s)  Epift.  anat.  1.  n.  43.  \cC)  Vid.  Sepulchret.  1.  3.  f.  21.  obf.  4.  §,  11.

(i)  laauftar.  ad  obf.  de  apopl,  hift,  13.  in \b)  Epift.  modo  cit.  ad.  Schrock.
fchol.  n.  5,

2 But


Letter  XXXVII. Article  21.  235

21.  But  as  to  what  I  have  faid  of  irritation,  there  is  no  doubt  but  this
miift  take  place  then  alfo,  when  the  calculi  are  form'd  within  the  coats  of
the  cyft,  provided  they  are  rough,  or  large.  And  thus  I  fuppofe  that  the
obfervation  of  Gendrotfius  (c),  that  is  of  a  dyfentery,  from  a  continual  dif-
charge  of  bile  into  the  inteftinum  duodenum,  may  be  explain'd,  whereas
there  were  two  pretty  large,  and  unequal,  calculi  in  the  cyft,  involv'd  in  a
peculiar  membrane.  And  you  will  fuppofe  them  to  have  been  generated  in
the  glands  of  the  cyft,  and  that  being  increas'd  therein,  they  had  extended
their  fituation  between  the  coats,  in  which  fituation  thofe  glands,  alfo,  na-
turally lie.  For  you  will  remember  that  fmall  biliary  calculi  were  formerly
found,  and  demonftrated,  by  me  (d),  in  thofe  glands  which  open'd  by  very
evident  orifices,  and  were,  for  that  reafon,  lefs  to  be  call'd  into  queftion.
And  that  thefe  had  been  very  ingenioufly  found  out,  and  acknowledg'd,  by
the  celebrated  Galeati  alfo,  in  an  obfervation  very  fimilar  to  mine,  except
that  thofe  orifices  did  not  appear,  I  learn'd  afterwards  with  pleafure,  when
the  firft  volume  of  the  commentaries  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Bologna
was  publifli'd  (e).  And  I  fhall  tell  you  below  (f),  that  another  very  fmall
calculus  has  been  obferv'd  by  me,  betwixt  the  coats  of  the  cyft.

For  it  is  your  bufinefs,  now,  to  confider,  whether  in  that  obfervation  of
Greifelius,  which  I  took  notice  of  above  (g),  "  the  other  coat  that  grew  to
"  the  fund  of  the  cyft,  and  contain'd  a  ftone  in  the  form  of  a  cube,  that
"  was  bigger  than  any  of  the  others,"  is  to  be  accounted  for  in  the  fame
manner.  However,  1  have  very  little  doubt,  but  the  obfervation  of  the  ce-
lebrated Ellerus  may  be  thus  explain'd,  which,  if  I  remember  rightly  I
read  fome  years  ago,  in  the  fourth  volume  of  the  Berlin  mifcellanies.

For  I  Ihould  readily  fuppofe  that  the  fmall,  round,  and  yellowifh  calculus,
which  he  found  concreted  in  the  fundus  of  the  cyft,  and  furrounded  with  a
membrane  p)roduc'd  from  the  pellicles  of  that  bladder,  had  been  form'd  in
fome  one  of  its  glands.  And,  indeed,  I  am  alfo  inclin'd  to  think  it  probable,
that  a  calculus,  which,  from  all  its  appearances,  was  biliary,  had  been  form'd
in  ho  other  place,  as  the  thicker  part  of  it  lay  hid  in  a  certain  facculus,  be-
twixt tlie  coats  of  the  cyft,  and  the  other  part  ftop'd  up  the  neck  of  the
cyft  (h)  :  fo  far  am  I  from  believing  it  to  be  prov'd  by  this  obfervation,  that
the  gall-bladder  is  not  furnifii'd  with  any  glands.  And,  indeed,  the  cervix
of  this  cyft  cannot  be  ftop'd  up  by  a  hard  and  thick  body  of  that  kind,  but
other  parts  muft  certainly  be  prefs'd  upon,  which  are  neceftary  to  the  adtions
of  the  cyft,  or  the  cyft  itfelf  muft  be  contradted,  and  crifp'd  up,  by  the  ir-
ritation ;  fo  that  we  need  not  be  furpriz'd  after  this,  if  the  fecretion  of  its
glands  be  either  obftrudled,  or  injur'd.

You  may  imagiiie  me  to  have  faid  nearly  the  fame  things,  in  regard  to
the  experiments  of  thofe  gentlemen  alfo,  who  have  tied  up  the  meatus  of
the  cyft,  in  the  living  animal.  Thefe  glands,  therefore,  are  not  taken  notice
of  by  anatomifts,  but  are  known  from  certain  obfervations,  many  of  which

(c)  Zodiac,  med.  gall,  a.  i.  maj.  obf.  6,  {g)  N.  19.  20.

(fi')  Epift.  anat.  i.n.  56.  {h)  Hift.  de  i'acad.  r.  d«s  fc.  a. 173J.  obC

(c)  Vid.  in  opufc.  anat.  I.

CfJ  N.  29.  in  fin.

H  h  2  Uin^


236  Book  III. Of  Difcafes  of  the  Belly.

kind  are  mention'd  by  me,  in  the  firft  of  the  Efijlol^  Anatomk<e  (i).  In
■which,  however,  1  have  not,  taken  notice  of  "  fonie  glands  that  lie  very
''  near  to  the  cervix"  only;  unlefs,  perliaps,  the  learned  man  fuppos'd,
at  the  time  of  writing,  by  a  failure  of  memory,  as  frequently  happens,  that
what  I  have  there  faid  of  the  urinary  bladder,  not  under  number  ninety-
fix,  but  under  number  llxty-three,  was  faid  in  relation  to  the  gall-bladder.

22.  Now  fince  I  have  faid,  more  than  I  intended  of  the  magnitude  of
cyftic  calculi,  their  number,  figure,  and  fituation,  although  many  things,
among  others,  that  I  have  faid  may  be  ufeful  in  order  todiilinguifh  thefe  con-
cretions when  they  are  difcharg'd  by  ftool  ;  lec  us,  at  prefent,  go  on  to
confider  the  remaining  marks,  which  are  fuppos'd  to  be  more  conducive
to  this  purpofe,  I  mean  their  ftrudture,  lightnefs,  and  propenfity  to  take
ilame.

As  to  what  relates  to  the  ftrudure,  from  the  time  in  which  Kentmannus
(jk)  aiTerted  that  thefe  calculi,  if  you  broke  them,  appear'd,  internally,  to  be
"  full  of  narrow  circles  furrounding  each  other  mutually,  fo  that  any  one
"  may  obferve,  or,  at  leaft,  any  one  who  takes  the  flightefl;  notice,  in  what
•'  mariner  the  vifcid,  and  fluggifh  bile,  had,  by  degrees,  concreted,  and
"  become  ^adhefive,  from  the  center  quite  to  the  furface,"  fcarcely  any  one
has  rifen  up,  who,  fpeaking  of  their  fcrufture,  and  mode  of  accretion,  did
not  agfee  with  Kentmannus.  Yet  were  there  fome  things,  which  frequently,
and  in  various  calculi,  ought,  in  part,  to  be  correfted,  by  the  help  of  re-
peated obfervations,  and  in  part  have  others  added  to  them.

For  as  to  concentric  circles  appearing  in  feftions,  that  may  be  true  in
round  calculi,  whether  they  are  fpherical,  cylindrical,  or  oval,  fo  that  the
feiStion,  in  each  of  thefe  figures,  be  made  according  to  the  perpendicular  of
tlie  axis,  as  in  the  parts  of  the  calculus,  alio,  which  are  hemifpherical,
conic,  or  cylindrical,  in  their  form,  as  you  fee,  for  inftance,  in  the  larger  of
thofe  two  reprefented  by  Hildanus  (/).  But  if  you  divide  angular  calculi
into  feftions,  the  external  ftrata,  of  which  they  are  compared,  muft  of
courfe  be  far  diflerent  from  the  circular  form,  and  the  internal  ftrata,  like-
v/ife,  as  far  as  1  have  feen,  will  be  nearly  of  the  fame  kind  :  and  this  you
may  fee  in  the  figure  vyhich  is  given  you  by  the  celebrated  Trew  (;»),  whom
I  have  often  recommended.

For  thefe  reafons  I  imagine  they  have  fpoken  v/ith  more  propriety,  who,-
omitting  the  figure,  have  only  mark'd  out  ftrata  lying  upon  ftrata,  as  Bofcus.
(h),  who  has  faid  that,  out  of  nine  calculi,  "  layers  had  been  concreted  to
"  each  other,  in  every  one  of  them,  as  they  are  in  an  onion  ;"  as  Hildanus
((j),  who  ha^  faid  that  his  "  were  concreted  in  laminae ;"  and,  not  to  be  too
prolix,  as  Malpighi  (■p),  who  has  faid  "  that  they  are  made  up  of  a  number
"  of  involucra,  mutually  enwrapping  each  other  ;"  I  fay,  they  have  fpoken
with  more  propriety,  than  thofe  who,  vv'hen  fpeaking  of  angular  calculi,  have
mention'd  circles  to  us,  v/hich  you  v^'ill  find  from  the  Sepulchretum  (g),  was

(?)  N.  eod.  56.  («)  De  facult.  anat.  left.  z.

{k)  Apud.  Schenck.  obf.  I.  feplus  cit.  \o)  Obf.  modo  cit.

(/)  Obf.  44.  cit.  fupra  ad  n. 19.  \p)  Op.  pollh.

\m)  Commerc.  liiter.  a.  1754.  tab.  i.  fig.  5.  (^)  L.  2.  f.  i.  obf.  74.

done


Letter  XXX VIL Article  2^.  237

flone  by  Otto  fi,eurnius,  where  defcvibing  a  calculus  "  of  a  triangular  figure,
*'  extended  into  a  pyramidal  top,  he  fays  that  cortical  circles  appeared  tliere-
"  in,  lying  upon  each  other."

Nor  is  it  fufficient  to  correft  thefe  ,things  in  Kentmannus.  For  among  the
Jblack  calculi,  both  fpherical,  and  angular,  which  I  have  by  me,  the  greater-
part  of  them,  now,  fhow  no  ftrata  at  all ;  only  fome  few  of  the  angular,  than
are  the  moft  firm,  have  an  external  ftratum,  but  fbmewhat  obfcuie  in  its  ap-
pearance :  the  remaining  fubftance  is  of  fuch  a  kind,  that  we  muft  pardon,
the  ancient  authors,  whoever  lit  upon  them,  and  particularly  Picolhominus
(r),  for  afferting,  that  "  the  bile  being  burnt  in  the  cyft,  like  a  coal,  was-
"  converted  into  blackifh  calculi,"  and  he  even  might  have  faid  extremely
black,  with  juftice,  if  he  had  feen  thefe  of  mine.  And  I  heartily  wlfli  the
fame  indulgence  could  be  given  to  men,  in  other  refpefcs  very  learned,  who,
in  the  great  light  of  this  prefent  age,  forgetting  that,  after  fo  many  difeafes,
.  join'd  with  very  great  heat,  no  ilones  arc,  generally,  found  in  the  gall-
bladder, have  imagin'd  that  fome  of  thefe,  which  happenM  to  be  found
without  any  bile,  were  to  be  afcrib'd  to  a  violent  fever  that  had  preceded,
which,  having  confumM  all  the  aqueous  part  of  the  bile,  had  converted  the
remainder  into  ftones.

But  it  is  not  fufficient  to  except  thefe  black  calculi,  in  order  to  reconcile
with  truth,  the  other  things  that  Kentmannus  has  faid,  I  mean- that  the  others,
are,  at  leaft,  full  either  of  circles,  or  ilrata  of  a  different  kind,  "  from  thc-
"  center  quite  to  the  circun>ferenGe,"  or  as  others,  in  general,  fay,  of  all
the  calculi  hitherto  known,  that  they  are  made  up  of  concentric  ftrata,  which
defcend  even  to  the  fmalleft  nucleus.  For  I  would  have  you  fee  what  ob-
lervatlons  have  been  made  by  me  in  the  Adverfaria  (s),  in  the  firft  Epiftola
Anatomica  (i),  and  in  the  letter  lent  to  Schrockius  (u),  on  the  nature  of  the:
nucleus,  its  f;  ftnefs,  and  its  magnitude  in  particular,  in  fo  many  and  fo  various
calculi,  as  I  am  not  willing  to  repeat  them  here.  You  will,  at  leaft,  per-
ceive that  I  have  found  no  fmall  quantity  of  medituilium,  in  proportion  to
their  bulk,  and  fo  much  the  greater,  in  proportion  a5  they  were  more  increas'd,
and  that  full  of  a  foft,  and  moift  bile,  and  confequently,  that  no  fmall
part  of  each  of  them,  internally,  is  fo  far  from  confifting  of  thefe  ftrata,.
that  it  is  neceflary  to  enquire,  by  what  means  the  bile  can  penetrate  inwards,,
through  thele  ftrata  v.'hich  are  already  firm.

You  will  alfo  perceive  other  things,,  that  are  purpofely  pafs'd  over  here,^
as,  for  inftance,  that  the  cuboidal  calculi,  which  I  have  cut  into,  do  not
confift  of  fmaller  calculi  of  th>e  fame  figure,  but,  like  the  others  of  which
I  have  fpoken,  of  bile  invofted  round  about  v/ith  ftrata :  that  thefe  are  of
different  colours  from  each  other,  and  fometimes  alternately  fo  :  and,  finally,
that  they  are,  not  uncommonly,  feen  to  confiP:  of  a  great  number  of  fmall
lines,  going  towards  the  centre.

23.  This  diredion  of  the  lines  puts  me  in  minctof  a  certain  ftru<Shire  of  thefe
calculi,  differing  from  that  which  Kentmannus  has  advanc'd.  Nor  has  thisi
great  number  of  fmall  lines  only,  which  I  juft  now  mention'd, as  being  ob-

CrJ  L.  2.  anat.  pra:le£l.  zcx,  ■  C'J  N.  47.

('sj  III.  animad.  28.  (ji)  Vid,  dipra  sd.n.  zo.

ferv'(f


238  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ferv'd  in  eacli  of  the  ftrata  (and  which  have  certainly  been  taken  notice  of  by
others  alfo  before  me,  as,  for  inftance,  by  Maurice  Hoffniann  («■),  when  he
defcrib'd  calculi  "  made  up,  of  ftriated  laminae,  as  it  v/ere)  been  fometimes
feen,  but  even  ftill  more  evident  lines,  or  fuch  as  went  from  the  center  itfelf,
in  one  continued  courfe,  to  the  circumference,  as  by  Baeumlinus  (;)>),  who
law,  in  calculi,  which,  in  regard  to  the  order  of  the  colours,  agree,  in  great
meafure,  as  he  fays,  with  fome  defcrib'd  by  me,  "  faline  fpicute,  as  it  were,"
running  from  the  center  to  the  circumference,  "  in  the  manner  of  ftris,"  or
lines,  fo  that  they  feem'd  to  be  made  up  "  not  fo  much  of  lamellas,"  as  of
ftriae.

So  Trew  (z),  in  like  manner,  aflerts  that  in  another  calculus,  "  no  la-
"  mellated  ftrudture  could  be  found,  but  it  rather  feem'd  that  radii  were
*■'  running  out  from  the  centre,  to  the  circumference,  though  in  an  obfcure,
*'  and  confus'd  manner,"  which  the  delineation,  that  is  added,  confirms  (a).
But  Maurice  ReverhorftX/-'^  ;  not  to  omit  thofe  who  wrote  before  ;  when  he
delineates  the  ieftions  of  one,  or  two  calculi,  out  of  a  great  numbei",  that  he
had  extrafted  from  the  gall-bladder  of  an  old  man,  in  one,  indeed,  fnadows
out  a  kind  of  cortex,  in  the  form  of  a  circle,  but  in  both  reprefents  lines,  of
no  inconfiderable  thicknefs,  going,  in  the  manner  of  radii,  from  the  center,
to  the  periphery.  And  John  Baptift  Contulus  (c),  having  given  figures  of
Itones,  (fuch  as  they  are,  and  Hke  the  reft  ef  his  performances)  found  in  this
cyft,  and  among  them,  of  one  found  by  him,  "  which  was  diaphanous  at  its  ex-
"  tremities,"  gives  a  feftion,  as  it  feems,  of  another,  alfo,  taken  from
I  know  not  where,  in  which,  indeed,  are  feen  many  circular  ftrata,  but  a
much  greater  number  of  lines,  going  from  the  center,  to  the  circumference.

Moreover,  I  remember  a  pecuhar  fpecies  of  calculi  defcrib'd  by  Malpighi
(d),  which  he  fuppos'd  to  have  been  formi'd  by  concretion,  "  from  a  kind  of
"  mucous  fubftance,  that  very  much  refembled  foap,  or,  rather,  refembled
"  camphor,"  he  fays,  therefore,  "  that  they  are  of  a  furprizing  ftrufture,
"  for  that  they  reiemble  the  lapis  judaicus,  and' are  made  up,  internally,
"  of  elegant  lamellae,  drawn  from  the  circumference  to  the  center,  vv^hich
"  lamellse  are  eafily  fepal'ated  one  from  another."  And  although  he  fup-
pos'd it  to  have  been  generated  "  in  the  liver,  and  in  the  porus  biliarius,"
I  believe  becaufe  he  had  heard  that  a  fione,  which  his  friend  Bonfiliokis
preferv'd,  was  found  "  in  the  liver"  of  a  nobleman  in  Germany,  yet  he  could
not,  for  a  certainty,  know  that  another  of  this  kind,  which  he  fays  he  had
feen,  "  and  which  was  difcharg'd,  together  with  the  inteftinal  fasces,  after  great
"  pains,  and  a  long  jaundice,"  by  a  matron  with  whom  he  was  acquainted,  had
been  generated  in  the  fame  place.  For  that  fome  calculi,  which  have  come
from  the  gall-bladder,  have  been,  without  doubt,  difcharg'd  by  ftool,  will
be  fhown  below  (e),  and  that  in  this  cyft  alfo,  concretions  are  fometimes
fonti'd,  of  a  ftrudure  very  Hmilar  to  that- whereof  we  fpeak,  may  not  only

(.v)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9  &  10.  append,  i.  obf.  («)  Tab.  i.  fig.  26.

35.  -  (i)  Difl".  de  niotu  bills  tab.  2.  fig.  3..

fjj  Commerc. litter,  a. 1743-  hebd. 28.  (r)  De  lapidib.  &c.  c.  n.

11.  2.  (^)  Op.  pofth.

CzJ  Ibid.  hebd.  36.  n.  4.  (^)  N.  46.

2  "  be


Letter  XXXVII. Article  24.  239

Be  Gonjeftur'd  from  what  has  been  already  faid,  but  will  be  confirm'd  imme-
diately;,, by  other  obfervations.

For  that  tranfparent  calculus  of  Vater,  which  is  taken  notice  of  above  by
me  (/),  had  not  only  very  (lender,  faline,  and  (hining,  ftris  on  its  furface,
but  was  alfo  "  concreted  in  the  manner  of  ftriEe :"  or  if  there  fiiould  be  any
doubt  about  this,  there  certainly  will  be  none  in  the  delcription,  and  figures,  of
thofe  two  which  I  have  pointed  out  from  Morand  (g).  For  both  of  thefe  has
fplendid,.  and  pellucid  lamellEe,  the  one  indeed  with  ftrata  lying  round  them,
but  the  other  without  any,  and  going,  in  the  manner  of  radii,  from  the
centre  to.  the  circumference.  And,  lately,  the  illuftrious  Haller  (h)  has  pro-
pos'd  others  "  which  were  fhining  like  chryftal,  and  femipellucid,"  the  fub-
llance  of  one  of  which  calculi,  that  was  fpontaneoufly  broken,  "being  al-
"  moft  like  felenites,  fliining,  and  ftretch'd  out  from  a  yellow  center,  in  the
"  manner  of  radii,  to  the  invefting  cortex,  was  made  into  crufts,  and  fmall
*'  laminse."  The  other  calculi,  which  "  were  fmaller,  were,  likev/ife,  in-
"  ternally  laminated,  in  the  manner  of  felenites,  and  Ihining."

24.  All  thefe  obfervations,  join'd  with  the  others,  which  I  have  before
mention'd,  of  fhining  and  pellucid  gall-ftones  (?'),  will  certainly  induce  you  to
fiifpeft  that  many  of  thefe  calculi,  which  are  difcharg'd  by  ftool,  have  been
too  haftily  fuppos'd  not  to  have  been  generated  in  the  cyft,  but  in  the  fto-
naach,  and  inteftines,  and  for  this  reafon,  becaufe  they  feem'd  to  be  too  far
diftant  from  the  more  general  nature,  and  fhrudlurc,  of  cyftic  calculi.  And
one  in  particular  which  occurs  to  my  mind,  on  this  occafion,  is  that  defcrib'd
by  Donatus (/^),  from  Cornelius  Gemma,  and  which  fhow'd,  "  internally,  a'
"  fubftance  like  the  pureft  glafs,  or  tranfparentchryftal,  with  many. ftrise,  and
"  radii,  jointly  running  into  one  center,"

It  feems,  indeed,  to  bean  objedlion  to  our  fufpicion,  that  this  concretion
was  "  very  large."  But  befides  that  it  will  be  fliown  below  ('/),  how  much
the  biliary  dudls  may  be  dilated,  and  even  how  much  they  have  been  found
to  be  dilated,  I  would  have  you  believe,  with  Gemma,  from  the  feat  of  long-
xontinvi'd  pain,  and  tenfion,  in  the  right  ilimn,  under  the  falfe  ribs,  not  that  -
it  had  been  concreted  in  the  inteftinum  cfecum,  as  he  imagines,  but  that  be-
ing delay'd  there,  in  its  paflage  downwards,  it  had  gain'd  a  frefh  addition  of
fubftance,  on  its  external  furface,  which  was  partly  of  a  brown,  and  partly
of  a  black  colour,  and  by  this  means  had  grown  into  that  confiderable  ■
bulk.

So  I  would  have  you  fuppofe,  that  another  large  calculus^  which  is  de-
fcrib'd,  and  delineated,  by  Bezoldus  (m),  had  receiv'd  additional  ftrata  in
its  pafiage,  that  were  much  fewer  in  number,  where  "  an  almoft  chryftalline
"  nucleus,"  had  been  form'd,  which  feems  to  be  very  properly  reprefented
in  the  plates,  not  without  fome  ftrise  being  drawn  from  the  center,  to  the  cir-  -
cumference  thereof.  And  the  difcharge  of  this  calculus,  had  been  preceded-
by  pains  of  the  right  hypochondrium,  of  a  much  longer  continuance  :  nor
does  Bezoldus, -himfelf  ('«),  fail  to  imagine  it  poflible,  that  it  might  have
come  from  the  gall-bladder.

("/J  N.  iS.  (i)  Cap.  30.  cit.  fupra  ad  n,  15.

(}).  Ibid.  (/)  N.  46.

(/5>)  Opufc.  pathol.  obf.  33,  hift.  7.,  (?«)  Difp.  de  choklitho  caf.  2.  &  fig.  2  &  '3.

(0-N.  18.  (».)  Ibid.  n.  7.-

Iri-'


240  Book  III. OF  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

In  reoard  to  the  two  obfervations,  of  ftones  difcharg'd  from  the  intellines,
which  he  immediately  fubioins,  the  one  large,  the  other  fmaller,  you  will  de-
termine as  you  think  moft  proper.  For  the  firft,  certainly,  points  out  no
feat  of  the  long-continu'd  pain  in  the  belly,  and  the  fecond  fays  riot  a  word
of  pain.  Yet  when  you  read  that  a  calculus  is  fpoken  of  in  the  fot-meT,
whofe  "  internal  fliiningfubftance  (liow'd  mere  circles,  interfered  wit'i  ftriae,"
'and  have  examin'd  the"^ figures  of  Schroeckius  the  father,  who  was  the  ob-
lerver  (o},  which  agree  very  well  with  this  ddcription  ;  perhaps  you  will  n'^t
fuffer  even  this  calculus  to  eleape  your  fufpicion.  But  in  regard  to  the  lefle'r
concretion,  of  which  you  will  find  no  more  lard  by  the  author,  Breclitfeld  (p),
than  by  Bezoldi^s,  if  you  enquire  whether,  as  this  calculus,  like  the  three
former,  and  that,  moreover,  which  was  ken  by  Malpighi  {q),  was  difcharg'd
by  a  woman,  it  happen'd  to  be  difcharg'd  by  an  'old  woman,  as  we  kriow
was  the  cafe  in  the  three  former  obfervations ;  in  regard  to  this  Icffer  concre-
tion, I  fay,  it  will  perhaps  be  fufficient  for  you,  that  it  was  "  in'terftally
"  whitifli,  and  fhining,  like  chi7fl:al,"  fuppofing,  that  in  a  very  fuccinft,  'and
dole  defcription,  the  ftrufture  miglit  eafily  be  omitted,  which,  as  in  other
pellucid  concretions,  alio,  taken  notice  of  above  (r),  would,  if  the  ftones
had  been  broken  afunder,  probably  have  appear'd  to  be  of  the  fame  kind,
with  that  defcrib'd  iji  the  laft.

-  But  left  you  fhould,  perhaps,  be  liable  to  indulge  your  fufpicions  with  too
much  freedom,  call  to  mind,  by  way  of  contraft,  the  obfervation  of  the  cele-
brated Chomel  (5) :  who  found  a  facculus,  in  a  decrepid  matron,  into  which
the  coats  of  the  inteftinum  duodenum  had  relax'd  themfelves,  containing  a  Con-
fiderable  number  of  calculi,  of  which  if  you  read  the  defcription,  When  ex-
amin'd  externally,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  know  that  they  Were  made  up,  in-
ternally, of  ftrata  lying  round  each  other,  and,  pretty  near  to  the  center,  of
ftris  difpos'd  in  the  manner  of  radii,  betwixt  which,  white  and  fliining  parti-
cles were  interpos'd,  you  may  very  eafily  confider  them  as  biliary  concretions.
And  yet  you  muft  of  necelTity  acknowledge,  with  Chomel,  that  they  were
generated  in  the  fame  inteftine,  unlefs  you  would  rather  chofe  to  admit  one
of  the  hypothefes,  which  I  fhall  mention  :  I  mean,  either  that  this  faccUlus
had  communicated  v/ith  the  du61:us  communis  choledocus,  where  it  pafles  ob-
liquely betwixt  the  membranes  of  that  inteftine,  and  had  receiv'd  from'this
meatus,  firft  one  calculus,  and  then  others,  which  had  relax'd  the  illCmbranes
by  their  additional  v/eight  •,  or  that  the  firft  calculus,  immjcdiately  upon  its  de-
trufion  from  the  du6l,  and  its  entrance  into  the  inteftine,  had,  from  fome
cauie  or  other,  been  detain'd  there,  and  by  overloading  the  coats,  and  by
forcing  them  outwards,  and  downwards,  had  prepar'd  a  facculus  for  itfelf,  and
the  other  calcuH,  which  v/ere  to  come  after.

But  although  you  might,  perhaps,  confirm  both  explications,  the  former
by  the  example  of  the  facculus  wherein  were  the  fame  kind  of  ftones  as  in  the
gall-bladder,  which  facculus  feem'd,  to  the  very  expericnc'd  Galeati  (/),  to

{0)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec. 1.  a.  9..  obf.  90.  fig.  3 {;)  Hift.  del'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1710.  obf.

fc  4.  anac.

(p)  In  aft.  ihed.  Hafn,  vol,  i,  obf,  100.  {/■)  Comment,  de  bonon.  fc.  Inft.  r,  3.  inter

(y)  Supra  n.  33.  medic.
(r)  N.  18.

be


Letter  XXX VII. Article  25,  241

be  in  that  part,  where  the  dudlns  communis  choledocus  had,  now,  come
near  to  its  termination  :  and  the  latter  by  the  authority  of  no  other  perfon  than
Chomel  himfclf,  inafmuch  as  he  accounts  for  the  formation  of  the  facculus,
from  a  calculus  generated  in  the  inteftinum  duodenum,  nearly  in  the  fame
manner  as  you  account  for  it,  from  a  calculus  which  had  fallen  therein :  al-
though, I  fay,  you  might,  perhaps,  make  ufe  of  thefe  arguments,  yet  I  would
not  have  you  feem  to  be  too  fufpicious.

25.  And  I  could  wifli  that  thofe  marks,  which  Reverhorft  («j  has  fup-
pos'd  to  be  quite  fufficient,  to  diftinguifli  cyftic  calculi,  from  calculi  of  the
inteftines,  were,  at  all  times,  in  effeft,  as  fufBcient  for  this  purpofe,  as  they
are,  at  fometimes,  really  ufeful.  His  words  are  :  "  the  proofs  of  thefe  cal-
"  culi,  that  is,  whether  they  really  come  from  the  gall-bladder,  or  not,  is
"  that  thofe  which  are  biliary,  not  only  take  flame  themfelves,  when  applied
"  to  the  flame,  but,  alfo,  when  thrown  into  water,  by  no  means  fink  to  the
"  bottom,  and  even  fwim  upon  the  furface,  by  reafon  of  tlie  oily  particles
"  of  the  bile,  of  which  thefe  ftones  are  compos'd."

However,  not  to  inquire  here  in  regard  to  other  biliary  calculi,  whether
they  are  to  be  thus  diftinguifli'd  from  cyfliic  concretions  -,  Bidloo  («■),  at  leafb,
when  writing  a  few  years  after,  "  that  calculi,  arifing  from  bile,  fwim-
*'  on  the  furface  of  water,  and  are  inflammable  by  being  applied  to  the  fire,.
"  of  whatever  colour,  figure,  or  magnitvide,  they  may  be,"  has  immediately-
added  thefe  words,  utplurimum  autem :  which  muft  be  fuppos'd  to  fignify  that
thefe  marks,  though  general,  are  not  univerfal,  and  without  exceptions ;.
though,  whether  this  addition  has  been  taken  notice  of,  by  any  one  of  all  that
number,  by  whom  thefe  words  of  his  are  either  quoted,  or  refer'd  to,  I  do  not
very  well  know ;  1  confels,  however,  that  I  myfelf  have  not  attended  to  them,,
before  this  time.

Befides,  to  fpeak  firft  of  their  lightnefs,  as  I  fhall  fpeak  hereafter  of  their
"  inflammability  i"  Scheff^elius  (y)  admoniflies  us,  that  Reverhorft  "  is  re-
*'  futed"  by  Valentine,  "  not  only  by  a  fimilar  calculus  not  fwimming  upon
"  water,  but  alio  by  cegagropoli,  or  globular  concretions,  found  in  the  in-
•'  teflines  of  wild-goats,  fwimming  in  water,  although  they  are  not  generated
"  in  the  gall-bladder."  But  I  even  find  that  Otto  Heurnius  has  aflerted,,
many  years  before  all  thefe  (2),  that  three  calculi,  found  by  him  in  the  gall-
bladder, "  had  not  fwam  upon  the  furface  of  water,  when  thrown  upon  it,,
"  as  many  affirm  they  will,  but  had  fubfided."  There  is  no  doubt  but  he
had  thofe  authors  in  his  eye,  whom  I  have  before  mention'd  (a),  as  Fernelius,
Riolanus,  and  others,  among  whom  was,  alfo,  Hollerius  {b).  Neverthelefs,
men  of  the  moft  confiderable  reputation  fl:ill  continu'd  to  follew  thefe  au-
thors, and  Reverhorft,  for  a  long  time,  out  of  whom  it  is  fufficient  to  'have
mention'd  Ruyfch  (£■),  and  Bergerus(^):  nor  are  fome  perfons  wanting  ftilt
to  follow  them,  as  they  aflTert,  without  any  exception,  that  thefe  calculi  all;
fwim  in  water.

(a)  Diff.  de  motu  bil.  §.  57.  («)  Animadv.  ibid,  indicata.

(x)  Vindic.  contra  Ruyfch.  \h)  De  morb.  intern.  1.  i.  fchol.  ad  c.  48.

ij)  Differt.  de  Lithiafi  fell.  §.  14,  \c)  Thefaur.  anat.  5.  n.  32.

{z)  Obf.  cit.  fupraadn,  23.  \ii)  Phyfiolog.  med,  1.  1.  c.  J4,

Vol.  II.  I  i  AfltL"


242 Book  III. Of  the  DIfeafes.  of  the  Belly.

And,  indeed,  fuch  was  the  fuccefs  of  the  experiments  with  them  :  as  it  was
with  others,  likewife,  either  at  that  time,  or  afterwards,  as  with  Cunradus  (^),
•Tremelius  (/),  Trew  (g),  the  Edinburghers  {h),  and  others.  But  with  fome
-the  experiments  did  not  at  all  anfwer,  as  with  Jo.  Conrad.  Fabricius  (/),  or
did  not  anlwer  wholly,  though  m  part  they  did  anfwer,  as  with  Lancifi  (k),
who  faw  ten  of  them  "  fubfide  in  wine  and  water,"  which  very  calculi,  ne-
verthelefs,  "  fwam  in  vinegar,"  as  with  Weithrecht  (/),  who,  in  making  the
■experiment  upon  the  fame  number,  found,  "  that  if  thrown  into  water,  imme-
*'  diately  upon  their  being  taken  out  from  the  cyft,  they  were  ipecifically
"  heavier  than  water,  but  that  when  they  were  dried,  they  became  lighter."

I,  however,  having  firfl;  ©bferv'd  fome  (»2),  and  afterwards  a  great  number,
to  fink  down  in  water,  refolv'd  to  inquire  whether  thefe  exceptions  could  be
reduc'd  to  any  certain  heads.  And  I  foon  perceiv'd  (n),  that  no  exception
could  be  drawn  from  the  colour.  I  inquired  therefore,  whether  they  could
be  taken  from  any  other  property,  But  it  will  be  eafy  for  you  to  fee,  from
thofe  obfei-vations  which  I  have  communicated  to  Schroeckius  (<?),  how  diffi-
cult it  muft  be  to  determine  any  thing  of  this  nature,  in  fo  great  a  variety,  not
only  betwixt  different  calculi,  but  aUo  betwixt  the  fame,  if  you  only  change
the  time,  or  any  other  circumftance.  Yet  when  you  have  read  what  I  have
written  on  this  fubjeft,  upon  more  than  one  occafion,  you  will  learn  fome
hints,  that  are  ufeful  to  prevent  us  from  forming  too  hafty  a  judgment  of  the
fituation,  in  which  calculi,  that  occur  to  us,  have  been  generated ;  you  will
alfo  find  fome  obfervations,  which  have  been  fince  given  almoft  in  the  fame
manner,  even  by  an  illuftrious  .phyfician,  whether  he  had  read  them  in  my
works  or  not.

But  when  you  inquire  from  whence  it  happens,  that  fome  of  thefe  calculi
fwim,  and  others  fubfide,  whether  becaufe  in  the  former  is  a  greater  quanti-
ty, and  in  the  latter,  a  iefs  quantity,  of  the  oleofe  particles,  which,  either  by
reafon  of  their  certain  figure,  leaving  a  great  number  of  fpaces  betwixt  each
other,  or  from  fome  different  caufe,  are  wont  to  fwim  upon  water,  as  we  fee
oils  and  refins  in  general  do,  or  becaufe  the  firft  mention'd  kind  of  concre-
tions, of  whatever  matter  they  confift,  have  more  intervals  of  this  kind  inter-
fpers'd  betwixt  their  component  parts,  that  is,  intervals  fill'd  up  with  air,  a
very  great  quantity  of  which,  the  celebrated  Haller  (p)  makes  no  fcruple  to
fuppofe,  from  the  obfervations  of  Hales,  is  aftually  contain'd  in  bilious  calculi  j
I  fay,  when  you  inquire  into  this  circumftance,  then  you  will,  perhaps,  not
be  difpleas'd  with  the  obfervations,  that  I  have  made  upon  the  bubbles  which
are  difcharg'd  from,  or  adhere  to,  them  in  water,  if  they  Ihould  happen  to
have  any  tendency  to  explain  the  return,  in  particular,  of  thofe  which,  hav-
ing firft  fallen  down,  reftore  themfelves  again  to  the  furface,  or,  at  leaft,  en-
deavour to  reftore  themfelves.

(?)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  9  &  10.  obf.  171.  (i)  De  fubit.  mort.  I.  1.  c.  20.  n.  4.

ad  n.  7.  (/)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  17.

ffj  Aft.  n.  c.tom.  8.  obf.  10.  ad  d.  (/»)  Epift.  anat.  i.  n.  43.

{g)  Loco  indicato  fupra  ad  n.  23.  («)  Ibid.  n.  45.  46.

(p)  Cit.  fupra  ad.  n.  13.  (e)  Obf.  indie,  fupra  ad  n.  20.

(i)  Propemptic.  cit.  fupra  ad  b,  15.  (/>)  Ad  Boer,  praleft.  5.  250.  not.  r.


Letter  XXXVII. Article 26.  245

It  will  alfo  be  of  ufe  in  your  inquiry,  to  compare  my  obfervatlons  with
thofe  things,  which  my  friend  Stancario  (^)  has  formerly  hinted,  of  bubbles-
adhering  to  other  immers'd  bodies,  and  of  their  power  in  raifing  them  up  in
the  circumambient  fluid,  and  which  Petit,  the  phyfician  (r),  has  much  more
copioufly  profecuted.  In  reading  of  whom,  you  will  likewife  learn  the  ef-
fe6t»  which  heat,  added  to  the  water,  will  have  in  caufing  thofe  bodies,  that
would  otherwife  fwim,  to  defcend:  and  this  circumftance  being  transferr'd  to
bilious  calculi,  fhows  another  caufe,  moreover,  from  whence  the  experiments
may  vary,  and  would  even  render  thefe  experiments,  which  I,  in  general,
made  in  the  cold  feafons  of  the  year,  after  the  publication  of  the  firft  Epiftola
Anatomica,  liable  to  fufpicion  with  me,  if  I  had  not  made  them  with  water
juft  warm,  but  not  hot.

26,  But  the  reafon  of  their  inflammability  is  too  obvious  to  need  our  prefent
inquiry.  Yet  I  do  not  remember  that  any  mention  was  made  of  this  proper-
ty, before  the  times  of  Cortefius  (j),  who  fays,  "  it  is  found  by  experi-
"  ence,  that  flones  generated  in  the  gall-bladder  burn  like  fat."  Who  after
him  has  aifirm'd  that  this  property  is  common  to  them  all,  which  fome  even
ffiU  fecm  to  believe ;  and  who  has  admonifti'd  us  that  this  is  true  of  them  "  in'
"  general"  only,  was  fliown  you  a  little  while  ago  (t).  And  what  various  ob-
fervations  I  have  made  upon  the  burning  of  different  calculi,  and  what  kind  I
have  feen  take,  cherifli,  and  preferve  the  flame,  and  what  I  have  feen  do  the
contrary,  is  not  only  faid  in  the  Adverfaria  (a),  and  in  that  Epiftola  Anato-
mica («•),  but  alfo  in  the  latter  part  of  the  other  letter  which  Ifent  to  Schroec-
kius  (y).

From  thefe  writings  you  will  learn  many  things,  but  this  in  particular,  thatr
thofe  remarks,  which  are  delivered  by  a  certain  celebrated  writer  in  medicine,
in  regard  to  "  all'*^  bilious  calculi,  even  all  that  are  in  appearance  of  a  certain-
nature,  are  not  to  be  underflood  to  relate  to  all,  upon  which  I,  and  others,
have  made  experiments,  but  to  ally  upon  which  he,  himfelf,  has  made  them.
There  is  no  doubt  but  under  the  fame  external  appearance,  a  different  na-
ture, and  number,  of  component  particles  may  lie  hid,  in  different  calculi :
nay  they  fometimes  do  not  lie  hid,  if  you  examine  them  with  great  accuracy.
Tothat  illuftrious  man  Haller('z),  who  chofe  to  apply  a  great  number  of
different  calculi  to  the  fire,  inftead  of  throwing  them  into  water,  it  happen'd,
that  except  thofe  which  he  calls  calcarious,  all  the  others  took  flame,  and;
among  thofe  the  black  ones  likewife.

But  were  thefe  internally  black  alfo  ?  At  leaft:  in  defcribing  them  to  be
black,  in  the  fecond,  tenth,  and  eleventh  hiftories,  in  the  latter,  and,  in  like
manner,  in  the  tenth,  he  mentions,  nothing  but  an  "  external  cruft,"  or  no-
thing but  a  "  fhell,"  which  were  "  black ;"  and  in  che  fecond,  he  fays  "  that
"  when  the  outer  fhell  was  taken  off,  which  was  black,  and  thin,  a  biliouS'
**  yellownefs  fucceeded."  You  find,  therefore,  from  an  accurate  defcription,
that  the  nature  of  thofe  which  were  inflammable  in  his  experiments,  was  dif-
ferent from  the  nature  of  others  which,  being  black,  not  only  externally,,
but  internally  alfo,  or  internally,  in  particular,  very  black,  I  have  faid  did;

fjj  Vid.  Vallifner.  oper.  t.  i.p.  6,-  (a)  ILL  animad.  28..

(r)  Mem.  del'acad.  r.  desfc.  a.  1731.  (x)  N.  49.

{j)  Mifcell.  med.  dec.  z.  C.  9.  iy)  Obf.  indicata  fupra  ad  n.  20.

{t)  N.  25.  {z)  Opufc.  pathol.  obf.  33.

1 1  2.  nosf


244  Book  in. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

not  take  the  flame,  or  when  taken,  did  not  preferve  it,  by  which  experi-
ments, chiefly,  it  is  made  commonly  known,  that  there  are  fome  calculi  which
are  not  inflammable.  And  to  thele  I  afterwards  added  others,  though  not
black  ones,  which,  in  like  manner,  had  not  any  inflammable  principles;  but
of  thefe  there  is  no  necefllty  to  take  notice  here.

27.  After  making  fo  long  a  dilcourfe  upon  thefe  calculi,  particularly  that
they  may  be  diilinguifli'd  from  other  concretions,  when  difcharg'd  from  the-
body,  it  becomes  proper  now,  to  fay  fometliing  of  afcertaining  their  exiftence,
ifpofilble,  when  they  lie  latent  within  their  veficle,  lefb  you  fhould  fuppofe
that  I  have  forgotten  what  it  was  that  drew  me  into  this  long  treatife.  For
it  was  the  reprehenfion  of  him,  who  had  pronounc'd  that  an  obflinate,  or  re-
turning, jaundice  was  a  "  certain"  fign  of  the  exifl:ence  of  thefe  calculi,  which
gave  rife  to  my  difcourfe.  But  with  how  much  more  caution  does  Fernelius
give  his  opinion  (n),  who  only  fays,  that  we  "  ought  in  this  cafe  to  be  fulpicious
*'  of  thefe  calculi;"  and  yet  he  laid  this  down,  in  particular,  if  both  the
cyftic  dufts,  that  is  the  hepaticus,  and  communis  ('Z'),  were  obfl:ru£ted.

But,  if  even  a  jaundice  of  that  kind,  is  no  certain  fign  of  gall-ftones,  it  is
not  eafy  to  fay  how  much  thofe  gentlemen  have  been  deceived,  who  have
imagin'd  that  they  could  not  exifl:  without  a  jaundice.  And,  in  order  to  root
out  this  notion  entirely,  from  the  minds  of  fome  phyficians,  where  it  yet
remains,  I  can  with  the  greatefl:  certainty  afiirm,  that  notwithftanding  the
whole  number  of  bodies,  in  whofe  gall-bladders  I  have  found  calculi,  is
nineteen,  and  the  number  in  which  Valfalva  found  them  four,  yet  not  one  of
all  thefe  had  been  affefted  with  a  jaundice.  But  as  three  of  Valfalva's  obfer-
vations,  and  as  many  of  mine,  relate  to  letters  which  I  fhall  hereafter  write  to
you  ((f),  you  may,  in  the  mean  while,  turn  again  to  thofe  fourteen  which  i
have  already  fent  you,  in  different  letters  (d),  and  join  them  with  thefe  three
that  I  (hall  immediately  fubjoin.

28.  A  poor  old  woman  had  receiv'd  a  violent  blow  upon  her  head,  by  a
fall :  of  which  alone  were  all  her  complaints  as  long  as  flie  liv'd  ;  and  flie  liv'd
not  a  few  days,  till  at  length  fhe  gradually  Rmk  away  and  died.  This  patient
had  no  inequality  of  the  pulfe,  no  traces  of  a  jaundice.  And  the  reafon  of
my  making  this  remark  will  appear,  when  I  tell  you  what  I  obferv'd  in  the
heart,  and  the  gall-bladder,  while  I  Vv'as  bufied  in  purfuits  of  quite  a  difi^erent
nature.  For  I  did  not  even  diflrfl:  the  body,  that  I  might  know  what  detri-
ment fhe  had  receiv'd  from  her  fall.

The  body  was  fat,  and  yet  the  fl<in  very  hard.  In  the  thorax  nothing  oc-
cur'd  to  me  that  was  worthy  of  remark ;  for  to  fome  of  thofe  who  were  pre-
fent,  it  feem'd  otherv/ife,  in  regard  to  a  polypous  concretion,  that  we  found
in  the  right  auricle  of  the  heart,  which  was  whitifli,  and  if  you  attempted  to
■diflblve  it  with  your  hand,  gave  confiderable  refifl:ance,  as  if  we  did  not  fre-
quently fee  acruftof  this  kind  lying  on  the  furface  of  blood,  which  has  been
taken  from  a  vein,  and  coagulated,  or,  as  if  this  woman  had  been  fubjeft  to

CaJ  Patholog.  1.  6.  c.  5.  [d)  Vid,  ep.  3.  n.  4.  ep.  4.  n.  13.  ep.  5.  n.

{6)  Vid. ejufd. phyfiolog.  I.  1.  c.  7.  vid. 6.  &  19.  ep.  21.  n.  2.  30  &  36. ep.  24.  n.  16.

■etiam  infra'n.  33.  ep.  26 n.  21.  ep.  27.  n.  z.  ep. 30.  n. 14.  ep,

(f)  Vid.  epift.  38.  n.  20.  epift.  49,  n.  z. 34.  n.  15.  ep.  35 a.  16,  ep.  ^6.  a.  4.
iepift.  56.  u.  7.  9.  3J.  epift.  57.  10.

an


Letter  XXXVII. Article 29.  245

an  inequality  of  pulfe,  which  they  are  fo  fond  of  attributing  to  polypi  of  the
heart.

In  the  belly,  the  flomach  appear'd  to  be  almoft  double,  fo  fuddenly  was
that  cavity  contrafted,  before  it  came  to  the  antrum  pylori.

The  gall-bladder  was  half-full  of  bile,  and,  being  of  a  bright  yellow  like
orpiment,  had  ting'd  all  the  neighbouring  parts  with  the  fame  colour.  In  this
bile  were  ten  calculi,  of  an  unequal  magnitude,  among  themfelves,  but  none
ofthemfmall.  Other  circumftances  which  relate  to  them,  you  will  read  in
the  letter  to  Schroeckius  (e)  ;  for  this  is  that  womjan  of  whom  I  there  ipokc
in  the  third  place,  fhowing  where,  and  at  what  time,  I  diflecSted  her.

And  from  thence  you  may  alfo  learn,  in  like  manner,  what  relates  to  an*
other  woman,  the  remaining  part  of  whofe  hiftory  I  fliall  immediately  add  :
for  it  is  fhe  who  is  fpoken  of,  in  the  firft  place,  in that  letter.

29.  A  woman  fomewh^t  younger  than  the  former,  yet  almoft  fixty  ycars-
of  age,  who  was  not  only  far  from  having  an  i6teric  colour,  but  endow'd  with
a  very  good  complexion,  was  much  given  to  drinking,  and  had  been  feven
times  married  :  this  woman  having  complain'd  of  no  other  diforder,  but  of
an  inflammation  of  the  thorax,  of  which  fhe  died,  was  difiefted  by  me,  not
on  account  of  her  difeafe,  but  in  order  to  examine  into  the  abdominal  vif-
cera,  and  had  fome  appearances  in  the  genitals,  but  ftill  more  in  the  gall-
bladder, which  are  not  vinworthy  of  being  tranfcrib'd  here.

The  uterus  had  a  tubercle  externally,  on  the  upper  part  of  its  fundus,  of
the  figure,  and  magnitude,  of  a  fmall  filbert,  partly  prominent,  and  partly-
latent  within  the  fubftance  of  the  uterus,  of  a  fcirrhous  hardnefs,  of  a  white
colour,  both  internally,  and  externally,  and  confifting  of  many  different:
fmall  parts  which,  in  fome  meafure,  refembled  cells  contrafted  into  them-
felves. And  within  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  from  the  middle  and  anterior
part  of  the  fundus,  rofe  up  a  foft,  and  almoft  gelatinous  excrefcence.  But
although  the  teftes,  as  was  to  be  fuppos'd  from  her  age,  were  much
fhrivell'd,  and  very  narrow,  yet  the  cervix  uteri,  and  vagina,  appear'd  diffe-
rently from  what  you  would  have  expedled  in  the  wife  of  feven  men.  For  in
the  latter  part,  were  ftill  a  great  number  of  rugze,  prominent,  even  to  half
the  extent  of  it,  longitudinally  -,  and  in  the  former,  the  figure  approaching  to
that  of  a  virgin-cervix,  and  the  valves,  which  were  prcferv'd  on  one  fide,  made
me  fuppofe,  that  flie  had  been  the  mother  of  very  few  children,  which  was
alfo  confirm'd  by  the  (lender  rugae,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen.

But  as  to  the  gall-bladder,  although  it  was  much  fhorter  than  in  proportion
to  the  magnitude  of  the  liver  (which  was,  in  other  refpedbs,  of  its  ufual  found
appearance)  for  it  did  not  reach,  with  its  fundus,  fo  low  as  the  edge  of  the  li-
ver, but  was  diftant  therefrom  by  almoft  two  inches  ;  it  neverthelefs  contain'd,
together  with  a  fmall  quantity  of  bile,  at  leaft  three  hundred  and  thirty  cal-
culi, which  were  chiefly  very  fmall,  as  the  fhortnefs  of  the  cyft,  that  I  have
defcfib'd,  would  of  itfelf  argue.  As  to  the  other  remarks  I  made  upon  thefe
-calculi,  I:ha\H:  -faid  juft  now  (f),  where  they  may  be  met  with:  although  in
.that  letter,  not  only  mainy  typographical  errors  are  admitted,  but  in  the  part,
in  particular,  to  which  I  refer,  more  than  one  whole  line  is  omitted. Befides

{()  Vid,  in  ad,  n.  c.  torn,  2.  ob,  167.  (y)  N.  28.

the


246  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  great  number  of  calculi  which  I  have  mention'd,  and  which  occupied  the-
cavity  of  the  cyft,  I  difcover'd  one  with  the  knife  that  lay  hid  between  the
coats  of  this  veficle,  which,  in  the  blacknefs  of  its  colour,  and  the  fmallntfs
of  its  fize,  was  very  much  like  thofe  that  I  took  notice  of  above  (g),  as  hav-
ing been  found  in  the  glands  of  the  cyft,  at  other  times  ;  yet  the  orifice  of  the-
gland  was  not  fo  evidently  laid  open  here.

30.  The  body  of  a  very  old  man,  who  had  been  by  trade  a  fhoemaker,  and
who,  by  reafon  of  his  great  age,  was  almoft  toothJefs,  and  had  died  partly  of
old  age,  and  partly  of  a  catarrh,  within  the  fpace  of  three  days,  but  without
a  fever,  as  was  faid,  and  certainly  withtjut  a  jaundice,  as  was  manifeft  from
the  whitenefs  of  his  fkin,  was  brought  into  the  college  about  the  end  of  Ja-
nuary, in  the  year  1744,  when  I  was  teaching  anatomy.  As  the  whole  of  his
body  therefore,  was  carefully  difleded,  I  will  here  relate  all  the  prsterna-
t-ural  appearances  which  I  faw,  beginning  with  th&k  that  were  obferv'd  laft.
of  all.

The  upper  part  of  the  cranium  being  taken  away  with  difficulty,  by  rea-
fon of  the  very  clofe  adhefion  of  the  dura  mater,  lb  that  the  external  la-
mina of  this  membrane  remain'd  fix'd  to  the  os  frontis,  the  cerebrum  and
cerebellum  were  both  of  them  found  to  be  pretty  foft,  and  Ibmewhat  brown
in  the  medullary  fubftance :  the  three  ventricles  of  the  cerebrum  were  full
of  pellucid  and  pure  water :  the  plexus  choroides  were  pale  :  the  pineal  gland
was  diftended  into  the  form  and  magnitude  of  a  middle-fiz'd  grape,  by  a
watry  humour,  as  it  feem^d  :  but  the  glandula  pituitaria,  if  you  look'd  down
upon  it  from  above,  was  contrafted,  and  funk  in  its  fituation.  The  arteries
that  run  upon  the  bafis  of  the  cerebrum,  though  they  were  not  diftended  with
blood,  like  the  fanguiferous  veflels  within  the  ventricles,  but  were  even
empty,  appear'd  neverthelefs,  both  in  their  trunks  and  branches,  to  be  wider
than  they  naturally  are.

In  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  was  a  fmall  quantity  of  turbid  and  brown  wa-
ter. The  lungs  were  coUaps'd,  and  fallen  down  to  the  back,  in  confequence
of  their  being  almoft  quite  disjoin'^d  from  the  pleura.  As  the  heart  was
larger  than  it  naturally  is,  fo  the  trunk  of  the  aorta  was  alfo  wider.  And
the  valves  prefixed  to  this  veflel,  at  the  aggeres,  as  Vali'alva  call'd  them,
were  become  bony ;  and  even  one  fide  of  one  of  them  confifted  of  a  bony
fcale.  But  although  through  the  whole  trunk  of  the  aorta,  on  its  internal
furface,  and  even  the  iliac  branches  of  it,  a  whitenefs  was  much  more  fre-
tjuently  propagated,  here  and  there,  than  bony  fcales,  yet  I  faw  one  of  thefe
in  the  curvature,  and  another  near  the  third  pair  of  kimbar  nerves,  neither
of  them  very  fmall,  and  boih  intercepted,  by  the  internal  membrane  of
the  artery  on  one  fide,  and  on  the  other,  by  the  flelhy  annular  fibres:  and
indeed  there  was  a  perfeft  offification  at  the  divifion  of  one  iliac  artery,  inta
the  external,  and  internal.  '  <"

Befides,  as  the  trunk  of  the  aorta  itfelf  began  to  bend  its  courfe  towards
the  left  fide,  below  the  emulgents,  and  return  again  to  the  right  fide,  be-
fore it  gave  off  the  iliacs,  fo  the  fame  kind  of  diforder,  or  unufual  appear-
amce,  was  continu'd  into  the  iliac  veflels,  to  fuch  a  degree,  that, by  their

W  N.  21.

frequent


Letter  XXXVII. Article  30.  247

frequent  flexions,  they  nearly  refembled  the  fplenic  artery.  Nor  were  the
carotids,  and  vertebrals,  entirely  free  from  this  irregular  difpofition.  And
thefe  flexions  of  the  branches  prevented  me  from  attributing  the  incurvation
of  the  trunk,  jufl:  now  defcrib'd,  altogether  to  the  contiguous  exoftofes  of
the  lumbar  vertebras,  the  appearance  of  which  was  as  follows.

Thofe  thick  ligaments,  that  are  interpos'd  betwixt  the  bodies  of  all  thefe
vertebras,  except  the  lower,  were  fo  prominent  on  their  anterior  furface,
and  efpecially  on  each  fide,  like  an  air-bubble,  that  thefe  prominences,  on .
the  right,  and  on  the  left  fide,  were  almofl:  equal  to  the  breadth  of  my  little
finger.  All  the  prominences  on  the  left  fide,  whether  becaufe  they  had  be-
gun to  be  form'd  before  the  others,  or  from  what  other  caufe  foever,
were  bony.  But  of  the  right,  that  only  feem'd  to  be  bony,  which  cor-
refponded  to  the  interval  betwixt  the  third  and  fourth  vertebr£E-,  yet  ic
was  not  fo ;  but  a  bony  lamina,  that  form'd  the  furface  of  the  body  of  the
fourth  vertebra,  lifted  itfelf  above  the  level  of  the  vertebrae,  and  in  its  ele-
vation was  alfo  produc'd  upwards,  by  which  means  it  cover'd  that  promi-
nence over  with  a  bony  crult :  under  which  crufl:  the  nature  of  the  prominent
ligament  was  preferv'd.  When  I  cut  afunder  one  of  the  prominences  on  the
left  fide,  with  a  chifel,  and  the  ligament,  that  was  continued  therefrom,  with
a  knife  tranfverfly,  thofe  concentric  lines  it  is  true  appear'd  as  ufual ;  but
every  thing  was  ting'd  of  a  pale  and  almoft  cineritious  colour.

At  length,  the  other  contents  of  the  belly  offer'd  the  following  things
that  were  worthy  of  obfervation.  The  omentum  was  annex'd,  on  the  right
fide,  not  only  to  that  part  of  the  intefl:inum  colon,  which  is  nearefl:  to  the
beginning  of  it,  but  alfo  to  the  fmall  inteftines,  that  lie  in  the  neighbour-
Jiood  of  that  part,  and  to  the  peritonaeum.  The  {lomach  was  not  only  more
narrow  than  ufual,  but  even  was  not  a  good  figure.  And  the  ring  of  the
pylorus  was  fomewhat  fwell'd  in  two  places.  Near  to  the  other  orifice,  a  cer-
tain roundifli,  and  fmall  kind  of  gland,  was  internally  prominent,  into  the
ravity  of  the  ftomach,  which,  when  cut  into,  was  found  to  be  an  encyfl:ed'
tumour ;  inafmuch  as  it  was  made  up  of  a  fubfl:ance  that  was  white,  firm,  and
compafted  into  one  body,  of  the  fame  figure-,  but  this  body  could  be  very
eafily  disjoin'd  from  the  thin  membrane,  in  which  it  was  contain'd.

The  orifice  of  the  ftomach  which  was  neareft  to  this  tumour,  that  is  the
Jlomachus,  as  the  ancients  call'd  it,  was  extremely  large,  as  the  gula  which
is  continued  therefrom  was  alfo,  to  the  height  of,  at  leaft,  four  inches  above
the  ftomach,  in  the  whole  of  which  tra6l  it  was  more  red,  internally,  than
the  other  parts.  And  indeed  I  faw  that  the  foramen,  which  is  open'd  in
the  feptum  tranfverfum,  in  order  to  tranfmit  the  osfophagus,  was  much
bigger  than  ufual,  particularly  in  its  breadth,  and  that  it  terminated,  at  its
upper  extremity,  by  a  right  line  tranfverfly,  inftead  of  an  angle.

When  I  examin'd  that  part  of  the  omentum,  which  adheres  to  the  ftomach,
with  diligence,  I  obferv'd,  on  the  left  fide,  not  far  from  the  fundus  of  this
vifcu?,  a  kind  of  very  fmall  fpleen,  like  a  gland,  receiving  its  fanguiferou.s
yefiels  from  the  omentum,  in  which  it  was,  and  very  much  fimilar  to  t\vt
fpleen  in  its  colour,  its  coat,  and  the  modification  of  its,  fubftance,  unleh
that  this  laft  was  fomewhat  more  moift  than  that  of  the  fpleen,  and  of  fuch
a  figure,  and  magnitude,  that  it  might  be  compar'd  with  the.  fpleen  of  a  mid-
dle-G?'d  hen. Befides  this, another  fpleen  was  not  wanting, which was

foun^d.


248  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

found,  and  correfponded  with  the  fize  of  the  liver,  that  was,  likevvife,  found,,
and  of  its  ufual  magnitude,  or  perhaps  a  little  lefs.

In  the  gall-bladder,  together  with  a  fmall  quantity  of  vifcid  bile,  were  fix
or  feven  calculi  of  no  very  fmall  fize,  the  largeft  of  which  was  not  lefs  than
a  middle  fiz'd  grape,  pretty  nearly  round  in  its  figure,  yet  of  an  unequal
furface,  as  if  from  other  very  fmall  calculi  adhering  to  it.  If  you  except
fome  very  fmall  points  of  a  ycllowilh  colour,  that  were  fcatter'd  up  and
down,  through  this  furface,  they  were  all,  both  internally,  and  externally,
extremely  black,  and  refemblcd  a  char-coal,  not  only  in  their  colour,  but
even  in  their  very  fubfcance.  Mod  of  thefe,  after  they  were  dried,  fell  into
fragments  fpontaneoufly.  "And  although  they,  before,  feem'd  to  be  light,
yet  thofe  which  were  thrown  into  water,  immediately  fank  to  the  bottom  -,
and  thofe  which  were  applied  to  the  flame,  could  neither  by  any  means  be
made  to  partake  of  that  flame,  nor  yet  be  diflxilv'd  in  any  part  of  them.  One
of  the  lefl"er  of  thei'e  calculi  was  in  that  part,  where  the  veficle  begins  to
contraft  itlelf  into  the  duft  •,  yet  it  had  not  prevented  the  difcharge  of  the
bile,  as  we  obferv'd  by  compreffing  the  cyft  before  we  cut  into  it.

Finally,  there  being  nothing  in  the  kidnies  worthy  of  attention,  we  open'd
the  urinary  bladder,  on  the  pofl;erior  furface  of  which,  above  the  orifice,  ap-
pear'd  a  kind  of  white  protuberance,  like  a  fmall  inverted  pylorus,  fomewhat
larger,  in  its  fize,  than  the  feminal  caruncle  was,  to  which  it  extended  itfelf ;
yet  the  lower  part  of  that  protuberance,  being  contrafted  into  a  low  and  fien-
der  line,  was  prominent  into  the  beginning  of  the  urethra,  and  continu'd  ta
the  proftate  gland  ;  fo  that  as  it  was  of  the  fame  fubftance  of  which  this  gland,
confifted,  it  feem'd,  beyond  a  doubt,  to  every  one  who  was  there  prefent,  and
very  much  praftis'd  in  the  diflTedtions  of  thefe  parts,  that  it  was  an  excref-
cence  of  the  proftate  glands.

31.  I  heartily  wifh,  as  I  have  remark'd  all  the  preternatural  appearances,
which  were  in  the  body  of  that  old  man,  (for  this  reafon,  at  leaft,  that  no-
thing fhould  efcape  you,  which,  fometimes,  may  happen  to  be  the  occult
caufe  of  a  confiderable  diforder)  that  we  were  not  in  the  dark  as  to  the  effefts
of  them,  or  the  greater  part  of  them,  which  had  preceded  in  the  living  body.
But  it  is  fufficient,  at  prefent,  to  have  known  this,  that  although  the  gall-
bladder contain'd  thefe  calculi,  the  man  had,  neverthelefs,  not  been  ifleric,
any  more  than  the  women  I  have  before  defcrib'd,  and  fo  many  others  pointed
out  above  (h).  Which,  if  it  had  happen'd  to  me  only  to  obferve  it,  I  could
the  more  eafily  forgive  thofe  who  flill  hold  a  contrary  opinion,  for  negledling,
or  afitfting  not  to  know.

But  befides  the  obfervations  of  men  of  gravity,  and  authority,  which  I
have  produc'd  in  a  former  work  (i),  and  thofe  of  Valfalva,  that  I  have  re-
fer'd  to  {k),  there  are  fo  many  others  over  and  above,  that  I  believe  it  is
fcarcely  poffible  for  me  to  enumerate  them  all.  Let  it  be  fufficient  there-
fore, to  have  added  fome  to  thofe  formerly  taken  notice  of.  Lselius  a  Fonte
(I)  fays,  that  in  the  body  of  a  bifhop,  who  was  an  old  man,  "  the  gall-blad-
"  der  was  found  full  of  light ftonts,  and  yet  that  he  had  never  been  at-

{h)  N.  27.  {k)  Supra  n.  27.

(/)  Epift.  anat.  i.  n.  50.  51-  (IJ  Conlultmed.  139.111  fin.

"  tack'd.


Letter  XXXVII. Article  32.  249

"  tack'd  with  a  jaundice."  Pechlinus  (m)  teftifies  the  very  fame  thing  of  an
old  woman,  and  of  a  woman  who  was  pubUcly  executed  at  Leipfic,  Etmuller
(k),  as  fhe  had  "  in  her  gall-bladder,  great  plenty  of  large,  and  fmall
"  ftones,"  and  our  Vallifneri  {o\,  aflerts  that  he  had,  at  one  time,  found
many  bilious  calculi,  and,  at  another,  one  large  calculus,  in  the  carcafes  of
many  perfons  who  had  "  never"  been  afFefted  with  a  iaundice.

How  many  cyftic  calculi  Baeumlinus  {p)  found  in  that  woman,  in  whom
*'  any  thing  idteric"  had  not  appear'd;  how  many  Fabricius  (5)3  in  a  woman
who  "  in  all  appearance  was  healthy ;"  and,  finally,  how  many  Haller  (r)
found  in  another,  who  feem'd  to  be  "very  healthy,"  and,  likewife,  in  an
old  woman,  in  whom  were  "  no  figns  of  jaundice,"  you  may  yourfelf  fee  :  nor
indeed  will  you  fufpedt,  I  fuppofe,  that  in  a  great  number  of  other  hiftories,
given  by  this  author,  wherein  there  is  no  mention  of  the  jaundice,  this  difor-
der,  probably,  might  not  have  been  wanting,  when  you  obferve  that,  where
he  coUedts  the  fubftance  of  them  together,  he  fays,  thefe  calculi  "  were,  for
*'  the  moft  part,  unattended  with  a  jaundice,  as  was  certain  from  his  own
*'  experience  (s)."

Others,  and  among  thefe  Vaterus  (t)^  I  purpofely  pafs  over,  fince  to  the
authors  that  I  have  nam'd,  it  is  neceflary  not  only  to  add  thofe  whom  I
fhall  prefently  (aj  bring  to  be'ar  witnefs,  that  they  had  feen  no  kind  of  dif-
order  whatever,  join'd  with  thefe  calculi,  but  thofe  alfo  who,  in  defcribing,
or  making  mention  of,  other  fymptoms,  or  diforders,  of  perfons  in  whom
were  cyftic  calculi,  have  pafs'd  over  the  jaundice  entirely,  though  a  diforder
that  muft  have  occur'd  to  their  eyes,  even  in  fpite  of  themfelves  :  and  in  the
number  of  thefe  do  not  imagine  there  are  only  Reverhorft  {x),  Contulus  (y),
Riedlinus  (z),  Hoffmann  (a),  Baffius  (b),  and  others  of  the  more  modern.
Do  but  turn  to  the  Sepulchretum.  You  will  find  Bonetus  (f),  Morton  {d),
Greifelius  (^),  Kentmannus  (f),  H"ldedreichius  (g-),  Cnoffelius  {h),  and
others  ;  for  I  have  not  time  to  refer  you  to  every  one  of  them,  in  particular,
in  reading  of  whofe  hiftories  I  could  not  fuffer  myfelf  to  fuppofe,  that  they
would  fo  readily  have  pafs'd  over  the  jaundice,  if  their  patients  had  been  af-
fedted  therewith.

32.  How  is  it  then,  you  will  fay,  that  there  are  fo  many  witnefies  on  the
other  hand,  and  produc'd  even  in  the  Sepulchretum  itfelf,  that  have  feen  this
diforder  join'd  with  cyftic  calculi  ?  Not  for  this  reafon,  certainly,  that  if  thefe
are  fuppos'd  to  exift,  the  other  muft  neceffarily  be  fuppos'd  to  exift  alfo.
For  if  fo,-  this  diforder  muft  have  been  feen  attending  upon  thofe  calculi  by
all. It  muft  therefore  be  for  fome  other  reafon. Thus,  for  the  fake  of  ex-

(mj  Apud  ScheiFel.  diff.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  13.  (y)  Loc.  fupra  ad  n.  23.  cit.  c.  25.

§.  16.  (xj  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3.  obf.  45.

fn)  Prax.  1.  i.  f.  17.  c.  3.  art.  4.  {a)  Cap.  fupra  ad  n.  15.  cit.  obf.  i.

(oj  Adnot.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  13.  \b)  Dec.  4.  obf.  anat.  g.

ip)  (c)  L.  2.  f.  4.  obf.  35.

(y)  Loc  indie,  fupra  ad  n.  23.  (d)  S.  7.  obf.  43.

(>•)  Opufc.  pathol.  obf.  33.  hift.  7.  &  11. {e)  S.  1 1.  obf.  46.

(4  Ibid.  hift.  10.  (fj  L.  3.  f.  7.  obf.  33.

{t)  Di/r.  fupra  ad  n.  16.  cit.  thef.  9.  (g)  S.  14.  obf  36.

(«)  N.  38&feq.  (h)  S.  17.  obf.  14.  §.  j.
{x)  Dilf.  fupra  cit.  ad  n.  i6.

Vol.  II.  K  k  ample,


2^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ample,  and  not  to  depart  from  the  Sepulchretum,  you  have  in  the  obferva-
tion  of  Helwigius  (i),  a  jaundice  with  thefe  calculi,  and  with  a  liver,  at  the
fame  time,  lank,  fhrivel'd  and  putreicent :  you  have  them  alfo  in  the  ob-
fervations  of  Vefalius  {k),  and  Verzafcha  (I)  ;  but  then  you  have  alio,  at  the
fame  time,  a  liver  that  was  enlarg'd,  hard  and  green,  or  fcirrhous,  yellow,
and  pallid.

There  is,  at  one  time,  inftead  of  this  kind  of  difeaies  another  difeafe,  as
when  Beckerus  (m)  defcribes  calculi,  found  not  only  in  the  gall-bladder,  but
in  the  pori  choledoci,  in  like  manner.  And  at  other  times  there  are  both  of
them.  Thus  Deodatus  (n),  and  Dobrzenflcius  (o),  relate  that  there  was  an
indurated  liver,  at  the  fame  time  that  there  were  calculi,  both  in  the  cyft,
and  in  thofe  dufts.  And  it  is  not  furprizing,  that  the  matter  of  the  bile
fhould  remain  in  the  blood,  and  produce  the  regius  morbus,  when  the  Mver
can  neither  fecrete  it,  nor  difcharge,  from  its  own  fubftance,  that  which  is
fecreted,  without  preventing  the  fecretion  of  the  reft.  And  that  to  this  clafs
alfo,  the  old  obfervation  (p)  ought  to  be  refer'd,  which  was  taken  from  the
mother  of  a  profefTor  at  Bologna,  you  would  readily  perceive,  if  the  whole
of  it  were  produc'd.

You  however  muft  read  this,  as  you  will  that  of  Vefalius  which  I  juft  now
pointed  out,  twice  over  in  one  and  the  fame  fedion  ;  for  it  is  that  very  ob-
fervation (who  would  at  firft  believe  it)  which  is  produc'd  even  below  (q) :
as  you  will  eafily  find  out  by  comparing  one  with  another,  and  by  comparing
them  both  with  that  which  had  been  given  in  another  feftion  (r),  or  rather
with  the  paflages  of  Coiterus  (s)  relative  to  this  fubjeft,  who  is  the  author
that  took  the  obfervation  ;  for  although  it  is  fo  many  times  repeated  in  the
Sepulchretum,  yet  the  doubt  of  the  author  is  always  neglefted,  which  for
many  reafons  ought  not  to  have  been  omitted ;  for  he  did  not  fay  "  fhe  had
"  labour'd  under  the  jaundice"  but  "fhe  had,  if  I  am  not  miftaken,  la-
"  bour'd  under  thejaundice."

You  fee,  therefore,  that  the  teftimonies  produc'd  are  weaken'd,  if  any  one
attends  to  them  rightly,  and  that  their  number  is,  at  the  fame  time,  diminifh'd,
when  it  is  demonftrated  that  one  fingle  teftimony  is  produc'd  twice  over,  as
if  it  had  been  a  double  atteftation.  Thus  you  will  alfo  find  the  obfervation
of  Timseus  (/)  repeated,  juft  as  you  will  that  of  Guarinoni  («),  and  others
perhaps  :  but  in  none  will  you  ^  be  more  furpriz'd,  than  in  that  of  Fontanus
(x),  which,  having  been  juft  before  given  under  number  twenty-two,  is  im-
mediately given  over  again  in  every  fenfe,  and  effeft,  and  indeed  almoft  in
the  fame  words,  under  number  twenty-three.

Yet  the  two  laft  obfervations  relate  to  quite  another  clafs,  than  that  of
cyftic  calculi  being  join'd  with  the  jaundice  indeed,  but,  at  the  fame  time»
with  either  a  confiderable  diforder  of  the  liver,  or  an  obftrudtion  of  the  bi^

(»■)  Ibid.  f.  7.  inadditam.  obf.  i.  CjJ  Ibid.  obf.  25.  §.  6.

{ij  S.  18.  obf.  8.  §.  4.  cumebf.  20.  C>-J  S.  8.  obf.  36.

(IJ  Ibid,  in  addit.  obf.  &.  (s)  Obf.  anat.

(ot)  Sea.  ead.  obf.  8.  §.  1.  (t)  S.  18.  obf.  8.  §.  11.  &obf.  25.  §.  4.

\n)  Ibid.  §.  10.  (u)  Ibid.  obf.  33.  &  inadditam.  obf.  5.

(0)  S.  16.  obf  5.  (x)  Seft.  ead.


(/)  S.  18.  obf.  8.  §.  s-


liary


Letter  XXXVII. Article  32.  251

liary  canals,  to  which  the  two  former,  and  feme  others  much  more  recently
publifh'd,  belong.  And  one  of  thefe,  if  it  be  produc'd,  may  eafily  have  its
teftimony  reffen'd  in  a  different  manner  ;  as  when  Vaterus  (y)  fays  that  a
matron,  in  whofe  cyft  he  found  thirty  calculi,  had  labour'd  under  the  jaun-
dice. For  this  we  confefs ;  but  we  at  the  lame  time  attend  to  what  he  im-
mediately fubjoins,  that  being  freed  from  the  jaundice,  flie  had  liv'd  about
three  and  twenty  years  in  a  ftate  of  perfedt  health,  and  was  at  length  carried
off  by  an  apoplexy.  For  if  fhe  had  been  attack'd  with  the  jaundice,  merely  as
the  effedt  of  calculi,  lying  hid  in  the  gall-bladder  at  that  time,  fhe  would
not  have  pafs'd  fo  long  a  fpace  of  time  as  three  and  twenty  years,  during
which  the  calculi  not  only  exifted,  but  w£re  even  increas'd,  without  being
troubled  with  the  jaundice.

And  an  anfwer  of  the  fame  kind  you  will  naturally  give  to  them  alfo,  who
would  objed:  the  obfervations  of  Weitbrecht  (z),  and  Galeati  {a).  For  both
of  them  found  calculi  in  the  gall-bladder  after  a  jaundice  which  had  long
preceded :  although  you  may  alfo  give  this  anfwer,  that  by  the  firft  the  liver
was  found  to  be  fomewhat  hard,  at  the  fame  time  ;  that  by  the  fecond  it
was  found  to  be  confiderably  hard,  and  crowded  with  a  great  number  of  tu-
bercles ;  to  fay  nothing  of  thofe  things  that  I  hinted  at  above  {b),  from
whence  you  may  perceive,  that  different  calculi  may  have  been  formerly  in
different  fituations,  fo  as  eafily  to  prevent  the  bile  from  flowing  into  the  in-
teftines  at  that  time.

But  if  any  one  (hould  oppofe  to  thefe  examples,  others,  in  which  not  only
a  preceding  jaundice,  but  a  prefent  one,  was  join'd  with  cyflic  calculi,  as
thofe  of  Lanzonus  (c),  du  Verney  (i).  Van  Swieten  {e),  Haller  (/),  and  other
celebrated  men,  you  have  wherewithal  fufJiciently  to  reply,  from  what  has
been  jufl  now  faid.  For  the  firft  faw  the  liver,  at  the  fame  time,  "  befet
"  with  a  great  number  of  hydatids ;"  the  fecond  fo  dried  up,  in  one  half  of
its  fubflance,  that  it  did  not  equal  the  thicknefsof  a  thumb,  the  third,  "  pal-

"  lid,  hard,  without  moifture, and  rough  with  fcirrhous  tumours  •"

and  the  fourth,  finally,  although  in  fo  many  hiftories  he  only  exhibits  two
of  ifteric  bodies,  the  fecond,  and  the  ninth,  yet  in  the  former  defcribes  the
fame  vifcus  as  being  "  difeas'd,  and  ulcerous,"  and  in  the  latter,  as  being  "  in
"  great  meafure  putrid,  the  gall-bladder  being  wholly  confum'd,  fo  that  the
"  calculus  was  found  in  the  midft  of  a  putrid  jelly  as  it  were."  And  I
fuipeft  that  if  other  obfervations,  of  fome  authors,  that  are  produc'd,  had
not  been  made  haftily,  and  by-the-by  as  it  were,  but  had  been  taken,  and
communicated  to  the  public,  with  great  accuracy,  it  would  have  happen'd
frequently,  that  we  fhould  read  of  other  marks  of  difeafe  being  found  in  the
neighbouring  parts,  and  particularly  in  the  liver,  within  which,  unlefs  you
fearch  after  th-em,  they  may  even  lie  hid.

Obfervations  that  are  ftill  lefs  recent,  are  fometimes.produc'd  likewife  •,  but
to  confefs  the  truth,  to  very  little  effeft,  as,  for  inftance,  that  of  our  Domi-

(y)  Thef.  g.  cit.  fupra  ad  n,  31.  (f)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  3.  obf.  36.

Iz)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  17.  (;/)  Cit.  fupraadn.  13.

(a)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n,  24.  («)  Ad  §.  950.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  15.

{h)  Ibid.  (fj  Opufc.  pathol.  obf.  ",3.


K  k


nic


252  Book  III. Of  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

nic  de  Marchettis  (g),  as  if  he  had  faid  that  he  hadfeen  a  jaundice  from  cyftic
calculi.  But  he,  when  he  fays  "  the  veficle  being  obftrufted  by  any  matter,
*'  or  by  a  ftone,  (ibr  I  have  fometimes  found  in  this  veficle,  three  or  four
"  ftones  of  the  bignefs  of  a  vetch)  a  yellow  jaundice  is  brought  on  ;"  fays,
indeed,  that  ftones  had  been  found  there  by  him  ;  but  that  he  had  found
them  in  fuch  a  fituation  as  to  obftruft  the  meatus  of  the  veficle,  and  for
that  realbn  bring  on  jaundice,  he  certainly  does  not  fay.

33.  But  fetting  afide  all  thefe,  and  other  fimilar  obfervations,  on  account  of
thole  animadverfions  which  I  have  hitherto  hinted  at,  as  fome  ftill  remain  te
which  none  of  thefe  objeftions  can,  perhaps,  be  made,  you  will  enquire  of  me,  in
what  manner  calculi  of  the  gall-bladder  may,  fometimes,  bring  on  a  jaundice
in  human  bodies,  and  whether  in  that  manner  which  Marchettus  and  others
have  imagin'd,  if  they  obftruft  the  veficle,  or  rather  the  duft  which  is  pro-
per to  it,  that  is  the  cyftic  duft.

For  that  the  cyft  has  been  obftrufted  without  a  jaundice,  is  certain  even
from  the  obfervations  which  I  took  notice  of  above  (h)  for  inftance,  when  it
was  full  of  ftones.  And  altho'  when  it  is  full  of  thefe  it  can  difcharge  no  bile,,
and  confequently  it  comes  juft  to  the  fame  thing,  as  if  the  meatus  were
really  Ihut  up  ;  yet  to  fatisfy  you  I  will  produce,  below  (i),  obfervations  of  that
meatus  being  ftop'd  up,  without  a  jaundice ;  but  here  I  will  only  call  to
mind  what  is  demonftrated  above  (k),  that  it  is  not  through  the  duftus  cyfti-
cus,  but  through  the  hepaticus,  and  communis,  that  bile  is  fent  from  the
liver  to  the  inteftines ;  fo  that  unlefs  thefe  paflages  be  obftrufted,  either  by
an  excrefcence,  or  by  fome  conftriftion,  or  by  a  vifcid,  and  thick  matter,  or  by
calculi,  generated  either  in  thefe  paffages,  or  in  the  liver,  or  even  in  the  cyft,
but  pulh'd  down  into  thefe  paffages,  the  bile  cannot  be  retain'd  in  the  liver,
on  account  of  the  biliary  paffages ;  and  therefore  the  matter,  by  which  this
fluid  is  conftantly  fupplied,  cannot  be  retain'd  in  the  fanguiferous  veffels,  in
order  to  bring  on  a  jaundice.

Yet  we  muft  be  cautious,  left  at  any  time  we  fall  into  errors,  in  regard  to
the  words  which  are  us'd  by  ancient  obfervers,  to  fignify  the  duftus  hepati-
cus, or  communis,  and  fuppofe  them  to  mean  the  cyftic  du£t  inttead  of  the
other.  For  they,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the  opinions  of  their  times,  took
either  one  or  the  other  of  thefe  dudts  for  the  meatus  of  the  cyft,  as  I  have
even  ftiown  before  (/),  in  explaining  a  paffage  of  Fernelius ;  and  the  cyftic
du6t,  as  you  may  fee  in  Mundinus  (m),  they  call'd  by  the  name  of  collum
veficula  or  neck  of  the  gall-bladder,  and  not  by  the  name  of  pore,  meatus,
or  du6t.

Therefore,  when  you  read  in  Donatus  (k),  of  Albucafis  having  taught,  and
Nicolus  having  confirm'd,  "  that  a  flefhy  excrefcence  arifes  in  the  meatus  of
"  the  gall-bladder,  which,  by  ftopping  it  up,  is  the  caufe  of  an  incurable
"  jaundice,"  although  I  have  faid  (o)  that  this  has  even  been  found  by  me
formerly,  in  the  veficle  itfelf,  yet  do  not  be  hafty  to  believe  that  the  excref-
cence, of  which  they  fpeak,  was  fuppos'd,  by  them,  to  be  form'd  in  this

(g)  Anat.  c.  4.  (/)  N.  27.

(/&)  N.  3 1 .  \m)  Anat.  ubi  de  kylll  fell.

(i)  N.  39.  ,  («)  De  med.  hill,  mirab.  1.  5.  c.  3.

[k)  N.  10.  (")  Supra  n.  20.

veficle.


Letter  XXXVII. Article  34.  253

vefTcle,  or  in  the  cyftic  dudl,  inafmuch  as  it  muft  have  ftopp'd  up  fome  other
paffage  befides  this,  in  order  to  have  been  the  real  caufe  of  a  jaundice.

Thus  when  Gentilis,  as  is  hinted  at  above  (p)^  has  aflerted  that  he  had
found  a  ftone  "  in  the  pore,  or  meatus,  of  the  gall-bladder;"  you  muft  con-
fider  what  you  are  to  underftand  thereby.  The  very  reading  of  the  Sepul-
chretum  will  render  you  cautious  in  this  rcfpect,,  where  Camenicenus  {q)
writes  thus  to  Mathiolus  :  "  the  meatus  which  goes  from  the  gall-bladder,,  •
"  into  the  liver,  was  quite  free  and  open,"  that  is  the  hepatic  dudt.  And
he  had  faid  a  little  before,  ,"  the  meatus  going  from  the  gall-bladder,  and
"  terminating  in  the  inteftine,  was  obftruAed  by  a  ftone  :"  and  that  this  was
not  the  duftus  cyfticus,  but  the  communis,  you  may  be  aflur'd  not  only
from  what  has  been  faid,  but  alfo  from  this  circumftance,  that  in  the  idterie
body  in  queftion,  "  the  gall-bladder  was  extremely  full  of  bile."

Nor  will  you  underftand  differently,  thefe  words  in  the  obfervation  of
Coiterus  (r),  "  in  the  paffage  from  the  gall-bladder,  to  the  duodendum,
*'  was  a  large  calculus,  which  totally  obftru<5ted  that  paffage,  on  all  fides,"
efpecially  when  you  obferve  that  the  folliculus  fellis  is  fo  defcrib'd  by  him-
felf  {s),  in  another  place,  that  without  making  any  mention  of  the  cyftic
duft,  he  fays  "  it  is  provided  with  two  pores,  or  paffages,  one  by  which
*'  it  draws  bile  from  the  liver,  the  other  by  which  it  tranfmits  the  bile,
*'  from  itfelf,  into  the  inteftinum  duodendum."  For  there  is  no  doubt  but
he  has  foUow'd  the  dogmas  of  his  preceptor  Falloppius  (t),  in  that  point,  fo
as  to  confider  the  duftus  cyfticus  in  the  manner  the  ancients  did,  that  is  as
the  neck  of  the  bladder  ^  yet  not  fo  far  as  to  acknowledge,  that  the  bile  was
carried  from  the  liver,  to  the  inteftine,  by  one  meatus,  and  that  a  ftrait  one,
*'  on  which  meatus,  about  the  middle  of  its  courfe,  nature  has  planted  a .
"  bladder  with  its  neck."

34.  It  is  not  the  cyftic  dudt,  therefore,  but  the  hepatic,  which  (for  thougli
we  acknowledge  it  to  be  one,  yet  for  the  fake  of  cuftom,  and  more  clear
doftrine  only,  we  divide  it  into  the  hepaticus  and  communis)  I  fay  it  is  not  the
cyftic,  but  the  hepatic,  which  we  require  to  be  obftrufted,  either  by  an  ex-
crefcence,  or  by  a  calculus,  which  has  even  been  frequently  obferv'd  there  by
Falloppius  (u),  or  by  a  thick  and  vifcid  matter,  in  fome  other  manner,  in  order
to  make  us  confefs,  that  the  jaundice  has  arifen  from  the  diforder  of  the
more  confiderable  paffages  of  the  bile.  For  that  they  may  be  obftrufted,  not
only  by  vifcid,  or  thick  matter,  but  even  by  the  bile  itfelf,  I  do  not  doubt,
as  I  formerly  found,  in  a  dog  that  had  been  much  diforder'd,  the  extremity
not  only  of  the  pancreatic  dudt,  but,  alfo,  of  the  dudlus  communis,  fhut  up
by  means  of  a  kind  of  gypfeous,  and  ycllowifli  matter,  concreted  there  ^  and  we
read  EtmuUer  (x)  defcribing,  in  an  idleric  body  at  Leipfic,  "  the  lower  pore,
*'  or  meatus,  entirely  obftrudled  by  a  vifcid  pituita,  fo  that  after  cutting  away
"  this  biliary  meatus,  not  fo  much  as  a  drop  of  bile  flow'd  out,  becaufe  the
"  bile,  which  was  conrain'd  there,  was  very  thick,  and  tenacious.

Cp)  N.  15.  (t)  Obf.  anat.

(q)  L.  3.  f.  18.  obn  8.  §.  12.  (a)  Ibid.

(rj  Ibid.  f.  8.  obf.  36.  \x)  Art.  fupra  cit.  ad  n.  31.

(sj  Tab.  intern,  hum.  corp.  part,

c  But


254  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

But  I  know  that  you  may  take  OGcafion  to  interrupt  me  here,  and  enquke
why  then  the  noble  Frenchman,  whom  Scultetus  (y)  differed,  as  he  had
"  the  porus  biliarius,  in  that  part  where  it  is  inferted  into  the  duodenum,  fo
far  obftruded  with  a  ftone,  equal  to  a  large  pea  in  its  fize,  that  not  the  lead
"  quantity  of  bile  could  be  thrown  out  thereby,"  had  not,  neverthelefs,  been
affefted  with  a  jaundice  ?  And  in  fo  Angular  a  cafe,  unlefs  I  fhould  choofe
to  have  recourfe  to  thofe  conftitutions  of  the  blood  (z),  in  which  the  matter
that  fupplies  the  bile,  and  even  the  bile  itfelf,  can  fcarcely  give  any  tinge  of
yellownefs,  I  am  under  a  neceflity  of  fuppofing  that  there  was  fome  peculiar
difpofition  of  the  biliary  palTages :  fuch,  for  inftance,  as  Falloppius  {a)  af-
ferts  had  been  feen  by  him,  two  or  three  times,  that  is  to  fay,  the  dudus
communis  "  divided  into  a  double  canal,"  a  little  above  the  inteftinum  duo-
denum :  which  divifion,  but  betwixt  the  coats  of  the  fame  inteftine,  "  into
"  two  confiderable  branches,  that  open'd  by  feparate  orifices,  within  the  in-
"  teftine,"  was  once  feen,  likewife,  by  Abraham  Vater  (b).

For  fuppofing  one  of  thefe  orifices  to  be  obftruded,  a  paflage  ftill  remains
open  through  the  other,  for  the  bile  to  go  to  the  inteftines.  There  alio
might  be  fome  other  more  uncommon  dud,  like  that  which  Veflingius
found,  and  was  examin'd  by  Bartholin  (cj,  in  a  woman  "  of  a  good  habit,
"  fat,  and  pretty  healthy,"  when  the  cyft  was  ftufi'd  up,  and  obftruded,
by  calculi,  and  which  "  went  from  the  liver,  in  the  neighbourhood  even  of
"  the  porus  biliarius,  that  was  fill'd  up  with  calculi,  and  terminated  in  the
"  inteftinum  jejunum,"  or  that  which  Bezoldus  defcribes,  as  being  feen
by  him  {d),  and  which,  according  to  the  figure  he  gives  of  it,  is  very  fi-
milar  to  that  of  VeQingius,  provided  it  did  not  go  to  the  dudus  communis,
b^it  to  the  inteftines,  or  thofe  that  the  fame  author  takes  notice  of  {e)
as  having  been  demonftrated  by  Diemerbroeck,  which  were  produc'd,  fe-
parately  from  the  dudus  communis,  betwixt  the  veficle  and  the  inteftines  j^
fo  that  a  great  part  of  the  bile  might  either  be  carried  immediately  to  the
inteftines,  in  a  dired  paffage,  or  through  the  more  general  paflagc  of  the
dudus  communis.

But  as  to  the  obfervations  of  Andreas  a  Lacuna,  which  he  immediately
fubjoins,  and  which,  in  part,  relate  to  thofe  obfervations  that  I  have  refer'd
to  above  (f),  of  ftones  being  form'd,  by  concretion,  in  the  cyft,  without  a
jaundice,  and,  on  that  account,  produc'd  in  the  firft  of  the  Epiftolas  Ana-
tomicae  [g),  if  he  could  have  read  them  rather  in  the  words  of  the  author
himfelf,  than  in  thofe  of  Riolanus,  he  would  have  chofen  to  make  ufe  of
the  words  of  the  former,  in  preference  to  thofe  of  the  latter,  inafmuch  as
Riolanus,  by  a  fiip  of  his  memory,  has  related  three  things  in  three  lines,
that  by  no  means  agree  v/ith  thofe  which  Andreas  had  faid.  But  let  us  omit
thefe  confiderations,  and  go  on  to  others.

35.  As  I  advanc'd  four  kinds  of  cauies  above  (h),  by  which  the  common,  or

(y)  Obf.  cit.  fupraad  n.  18.  {d)  Diff.  de  cholelitho  §.  6.  &  fig.  i.  litt.  f.

(z)  Vid.  fupra  n.  9.  ,  {e)  §.  cit.

{«)  Obf.  cit.  _ _  r/)  N.  31.

lb) Diifert.  qua  nonujn  bilis  diverticulum  fj-)  N.  50.

&c.  thef.  7.  (i)  N.  3J.
(f)  Cent,  z.hift.  anat.  54.

hepatic,


Letter  XXXVII.- Article  35.  255

hepatic,  canal  may  be  obftrudled,  but  produc'd  examples  of  three  only,  you
may  perhaps  wonder  why  I  have  produc'd  no  obfervation  of  the  fourth,  that  is
of  conftridtion.  But  you  will  ceafe  to  wonder,  when,  in  reading  over  again  the
prefent  very  prolix  letter,  you  obferve  this  to  have  been  done  already  (i),  as
far  as  was  poflible,  by  examples  pointed  out  from  the  Sepulchretum.  But  if
you  inquire  after  other  inftances,  from  different  authors,  they  are  by  no
means  wanting.  That  is  a  very  famous  one,  by  reafon  of  the  eminence  of
the  patient,  which  was  taken  from  Andrew  Mauroceni,  a  noble  Venetian,
who  was  illuftrious  both  as  a  fenator,  and  as  an  hiftorian,  and  which  is  given
us  by  his  learned  phyfician  Aurelio  Palazzoli  (k).  For  the  caufe  of  the
jaundice,  of  which  Mauroceni  died,  v/as  an  infuperable  conftriftion  of  the
paflages;  inafmuch  as  "  the  dudl  by  which  the  bile  is,  chiefly,  carried  to  the
■"  inteftines,  had  become  callous."

Mead  (I),  alfo  in  a  body  that  had  been  troubled  with  an  obftinate  jaun-
dice, faw  the  fame  meatus,  where  it  makes  a  coalition  with  the  cyftic  du<5t,
fo  contraded,  as  if  a  ligature  had  been  made  upon  it,  that  "  it  would  not
"  admit  a  probe ;"  nor  could  any  portion  of  the  bile,  with  which  the  gall-
bladder and  liver  were  diftended,  pafs  on,  by  this  way,  to  the  inteftines : :
and  this  contradtion  feem'd  to  have  been  brought  on  by  a  fcirrhous,  and  even
a  cancerous,  tumour  of  the  neighbouring  pancreas.  And  in  the  adts  of  the
Casfarean  Academy  (m),  an  obfervation  is  extant  of  an  ifteric  body,  in  which^
by  reafon  of  a  fcirrhous  pancreas,  the  fame  common  canal  was  fhut  up  at
its  termination,  not  without  "  a  firm  concretion."

Examples  of  the  more  rare  caufes  therefore,  which,  either  by  condenfing
the  tube  into  a  folid  body,  or  by  preffing  upon  it  externally,  conftringe  the
common  dudb  of  the  bile,  I  have  neither  been  backward  to  produce  above,
nor  in  this  place,  and  fhould  do  the  fame  in  regard  to  the  more  frequent
caufes  of  conftriftion,  if  the  effefts  of  thefe  were  as  eafily  obferv'd  by  the
fenfes,  after  death,  as  they  are  probable  from  reafon,  and  agreeable  there-
with. I  fpeak  of  fpafmodic  crifpaiures,  by  which,  at  leaft,  the  orifice  of  the
common  dud,  or  the  greater  part  of  the  fmall  branches  of  the  hepatic,  ara
conftring'd  :  unlefs  we  fhould  fuppofe  that  the  obfervation  of  the  celebrated
Jo.  George  Maurerus  {n)  relates  to  this  fubjeft.

An  illuftrious  man,  after  a  wound  receiv'd  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  which  .
did  not  penetrate,  being  feiz'd  with  a  bilious  tertian  fever,  and  a  jaundice,  and
after  that  with  other  diforders,  yet  giving  hopes  of  recovery,  and  in  regard  to
the  jaundice  itfelf,  being  almoft  quite  recover'd,  but  having  a  violent,  repeated,
and  long  uneafinefs  of  mind  come  on,  which  a  fudden  inflammation  of  the
fauces  and  lungs  fucceeded,  not  without  "  fears,  and  anxieties,  about  ap-
*'  proaching  death,"  really  underwent  this  change,  in  the  fpace  of  three
days.  And  he  had,  to  omit  other  things,  within  the  cyft,  three  calculi  of
a  confiderable  fize,  but  "  the  orifice  of  the  dudus  choledocus,  and  the  whole  •
"  of  this  canal,  was  fo  far  obliterated,  or  conftrided,  that  it  would  not  al-
"  low  the  leaft  probe,  or  bodkin,  to  pafs,  and  much  lefs  any  drops  of  bile."

(»')  N.  io._  (I)  Monk.  med.  c.  9.  f.  i.

(kj  Vid.  in  adnot.  a  Cathar.  Zeno  addltis {m)  Tom.  8.  obf.  3s.
vitam  hujus  Mauroceni  ab  Nic.  Craffofcriptam. (?;)  Ibid.  obf.  70.

4  There


256  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

There  is  no  doubt  but  the  cavity  of  this  dudt  was  fo  conftridled,  when  the
fkin  was  yellow,'and  the  inteftinal  feces  "  were  white,"  and  difcharg'd  "  flow-
"  ly  and  difficultly."  But  it  certainly  was  no  longer  in  that  conftridted  ftate,
at  the  time  when  the  fkin  was  reftor'd  ''  to  a  quite  natural  and  florid  colour,"
and  the  feces  were  difcharg'd  "  in  a  great  quantity,  and  ting'd  as  they  natu-
"  rally  are.  It  may,  therefore,  feem  not  abfurd  to  fuppofe  that  a  fpafmodic
conftriftion,  which  a  quiet  ftate  of  the  mind,  and  a  proper  regimen  of  cure,
had  lately  relaX'd,  return'd,  within  thole  three  days,  from  new,  commotions
of  that  kind,  together  with  the  whole  train  of  deadly  fymptoms.

But  be  this  as  it  will,  if  you,  in  the  mean  time,  acknowledge  what  I  have
faid  of  crifpatures,  which  are  brought  on  by  a  fpafm,  in  confequence  of  cer-
tain paffions  of  the  mind,  or  excited  by  irritations,  and  pains,  of  various
parts  (0),  but  particularly  of  thofe  that  are  the  moft  near  to  the  liver  ;  I
fay,  if  you  acknowledge  thefe  things  to  agree  with  probability,  and  attend  a
little  to  what  relates  to  irritations,  you  will,  doubtlefs,  find  out  the  reafon
which  you  afk'd  of  me  (p),  why,  fuppofing  calculi  in  the  gall-bladder,  the
jaundice  may  fometimes  arife,  although  there  be  no  other  caufe,  at  the  fame
time,  of  all  thofe  which  I  mention'd  above,  from  whence  this  diforder  could
be  accounted  for.

This  was  formerly  allow'd  by  me,  when  I  faid  (q)  "  whether  the  calculi
^'  found  by  me,  were  not  yet  of  that  magnitude,  or  weight,  or  figure,  by
"  which  the  cyft  could  be  much  injur'd,  or  whether  they  were  never  driven
"  into  fuch  a  fituation,  as  to  have  in  their  power  to  obftruft  the  bile,"  it
might  have  been  for  thefe  reafons,  that  in  thofe  bodies,  wherein  I  found
them,  "  they  had  brought  on  no  peculiar  diforder,  or,  at  leail,  none  that  was
*'  evident,  and  indeed  not  fo  much  as  an  ifteric  colour."

For  I  did  not  doubt,  but  if  the  cyft  were  irritated,  either  by  the  magni-
tude, or  the  weight,  or,  in  particular,  by  the  figure  of  the  calculi,  and  chiefly
when  they  are  forc'd  into  the  ftreights  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  by  the
bile  which  they  thus  retain  therein  ;  and  at  the  time  when  this  cyft  is  com-
prefs'd  by  the  ftomach,  and  inteftines,  forc'd  on  ftill  farther  and  farther,  that
a  fpafm  may  then  arife,  with  contraftions,  and  crifpatures,  which  are  propa-
gated through  the  larger  and  continu'd  duifts  of  the  bile,  on  the  one  hand,  to
the  inteftinum  duodenum,  and  on  the  other,  to  the  liver  :  and  I  did  not  doubt
but  that  the  paflfages  being  thus  contra6ted,  a  jaundice  might  fee  form'd,  in
the  manner  afterwards  particularly  explain'd  by  Hoffmann  (r).  Therefore
the  jaundice,  as  it  can  then  fonly  be  the  confequence  of  gall-ftones,  and  as
what  thefe  then  do  by  irritating,  may  be  done,  at  other  times,  by  different
caufes  in  different  fituations,  and  even  by  thepaffions  of  the  mind  themfelves,
this  will,  therefore,  not  be  the  conftant,  and  proper,  fign  of  thefe  cyftic
concretions.

36.  And  if  the  jaundice  is  not  a  conftant  fign,  is  there  any  other  that  is
perpetual,  and  peculiar  ?  I  very  much  fear  left  that,  which  was  the  cafe  in
the  time  of  Fernelius  (i),  is  alfo  the  cafe  at  prefent,  and  will  be  fo,  for  the
future ;  I  mean  that  "  no  manifeft  marks,  by  which  the  exiftence  of  thefe
"  ftones  may,  certainly,  and  eafily  be  known,"  can  be  found  out,  but  that

(0)  Supra  n.  10.  (rj  C.  3.  fupra  ad  n.  15.  cit,  §.  19.  &p.  4.

(/>)  N.  33.  f.  12.  c.  12.  §.  10.

(ij  Epift.  anat.  I.  n.  50.  (/)  C.  5.  fupra  ad  n.  13  &  27.  cit.

we


Letter  XXX VIT. Article  zi-  257

-we  muft  dwell  upon  "  fufpicions  "  only,  as  we  have  feen  of  the  jaundice.  It
does  not,  however,  efcape  me,  that  there  have  been  celebrated  men,  both
among  the  ancients,  and  moderns,  who  have  attended  to  thefe  marks  with  a
very  laudable  induftry,  and  have  endeavour'd  to  approve  them  to  eve-
ry one.

For,  in  the  firft  place,  I  fee  that  Coiterus  (t\  has  publifh'd  fome  obfer-
vations  of  his  own,  of  thefe  calculi,  with  an  intention  "  that  therefrom  might
"  be  learn'd  the  fymptoms,  which  are  the  confequences  of  this  diforder."
But  thefe  are  reduc'd  to  a  long-continu'd  jaundice,  and  in  one,  wherein  even
the  comm.on  canal  was  obftruded,  to  a  continual  vomiting  of  food.  In  re-
gard to  the  firft  of  which  I  have  faid  enough  already.  And  in  regard  to  the
fecond,  which  is  likewife  taken  notice  of  by  others,  how  often  it  is  abfent,  and
by  how  many,  and  how  various  caufes,  befides  this,  it  may  be  brought  on,
is  certainly  manifeftto  every  one.

Others  have  fince  added  different  fymptoms,  the  confideration  of  which  I
fhall  not  particularly  profecute,  as  it  naturally  appears,  that  the  fame  thing
muft  be  faid  of  colic  pains,  and  other  fymptoms  of  that  kind,  which  I  have
already  faid  of  vomiting.  And  what  Ihall  we  fay,  when  we  fee  fuch  lymp-
toms  advanc'd,  as  are  diametrically  oppofite  to  each  other,  as  for  in-
ftance,  thofe  of  coftivenefs,  and  laxity  of  the  inteftines  ?  Nor  does  it  affeft  me,
to  find  it  aflerted  in  the  Sepulchretum  [u),  that  "  it  is  fcarcely  poffible  to  con- .
ceive"  of  this  latter  fymptom  taking  place:  for  it  is  very  clear  to  me,  that
when  the  veficle  is  entirely  fiU'd  up  by  a  calculus,  all  the  bile  muft,  ofcourfe,
flow  continually  to  the  inteftines,  and  if  it  be  acrid  in  any  confiderable  de^
gree,  muft,  of  courfe,  ftimulate  them  pretty  ftrongly.  But  I  only  remark  this
circumftance,  that  if  fometimes  one,  and  fometimes  the  other,  is  true,  which
I  do  not  doubt,  neither  of  them,  confequently,  can  be  the  perpetual,  and
peculiar  fymptom,  of  thefe  calculi.

37.  But  if  we  omit  thefe  fymptoms  which  are  common  to  other  diforders,
and  enquire  what  the  calculus  can  of  itfelf  effeft,  we  ftiall  come  back  nearly
to  thofe  things,  which,  as  I  have  juft  now  taken  notice  («■),  have  been  already
faid  by  me  in  the  firft  anatomical  epiftle.  "  The  calculus,  of  itfelf,"  as  Boer-
haave  alfo  fays  (j),  "  while  it  remains  quiet,  produces  no  difagreeable  fymp-
"  torn,  except  a  fenfe  of  weight,  but  irritates  by  its  bulk,  its  weight,  and
"  its  roughnefs."  If  we  transfer  thefe  things,  which  he  fays  of  the  urinary
bladder,  to  the  gall-bladder,  do  you  fuppofe  that  this  calculus,  which  is
lighter  than  that  of  the  urinary  bladder,  and  is  gradually  increas'd,  will  dif-"
cover  itfelf  to  exift  by  a  fenfe  of  weight  ?  We  muft  wait  a  long  time  then,'
till  it,  at  length,  acquires  a  greater  weight.  But  will  the  fign,  which  we
fhall  be  in  want  of  fo  long,  and  in  moft  cafes  always,  be  then,  at  length,  fen-
fibk  at  leaft,  and  plac'd  beyond  a  doubt.  It  was  certainly  fenfible  in  the
noble  count  of  whom  Hildanus  fpeaks  (z),  fince,  "  for  many  years,  as  often  as
"  he  turn'd  himfelf  from  one  fide  to  the  other  in  bed,  he  could  perceive  a
"  great,  and  troublefome  weight,  oppofite  to  the  liver,  that  fell  from  one
"  fide  to  the  other,*

(t)  Obf.  anar.  (j)  Prslefl.  ad  inftit.  %.  790.

(u)  L.  3.  f.  10.  additam.  in  fcliol.  ad  obi",  i. (%)  OW.  fupra  cit.  ad  n.  22.

r^;  N.  3?.

Vol.  II.  LI  • But


258  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

But  the  calculi,  contain'd  in  his  gall-bladder,  were  fo  large  as  to  weigh
eighteen  drachms  and  a  half,  and  that  when  in  a  dried  ftate,  for  when  recent
from  the  body,  they  were  much  heavier.  But  do  you  fuppofe  thefe  to
have  been  heavier  than  that  great  number  of  calculi,  which  were  found,  atone
time,  by  Greifelius  fa),  all  of  which,  taken  together,  weigh'd  thirty  drachms?
For  he  has  not  remark'd  that  the  man,  in  whofe  body  he  found  them,  had
ever  perceiv'd  any  weight  therefrom.

Yet  perhaps  you  will  fay,  that  the  vaft  quantity  of  fat,  which  was  found
in  his  belly,  might  poffibly  obtund  this  fenfation.  Were  all  the  bodies  ex-
tremely iat  then,  in  which  thefe  calculi  have  been  found  to  a  confiderable
weight  ?  At  leaft  the  woman  (/>},  in  whom  the  calculi  were  equal  to  the  weight
of  twenty-four  drachms,  does  not  feem  to  have  been  very  fat,  nor  yet  the
prieft  (c),  whofe  calculi  weigh'd  twenty  drachms,  nor  the  illuftrious  man  (d),
in  whom  they  weigh'd  almoft  as  much.  Yet  we  read  of  none  of  thefe,  what
Hildanus  aflerts  of  the  count,  when  he  turn'd  himfelf  in  bed,  nor  do  I  ever
remember  to  have  read  the  fame  of  any  perfon,  whofe  gall-bladder  was  loaded
with  calculi.  To  this  cafe  of  the  count,  I  fhould  fuppofe,  from  comparing
the  times  together,  Stieberus  {e)  refer'd,  when  to  an  obfervation  of  that  kind,
he  objefted  another  "  of  more  than  two  hundred  ftones,"  in  the  gall-blad-
der of  a  man,  "  who  had  never  made  any  complaint  of  an  oppreflive  pain
"  in  the  right  fide."

But  fuppofe  that  many  have  complain'd  of  that  fame  fenfation,  of  which  the
count  above-mention'd  complain'd.  Yet  at  the  fame  time  call  to  mind  thole  fac-
culi,  which  hung  from  the  liver,  and  were  loaded  with  calculi  (/),  or  call  to  mind
even  the  gall-bladder  itfelf,  which  has  been  found  more  than  once  to  be  di-
ilended  with  a  large  quantity  of  thick  bile,  to  a  furprizing  degree.  You  will,
l?y  this  reflexion,  clearly  perceive,  that  the  fame  fenfation  may  fometimes  arife
from  other  caufes,  befides  calculi,  or  if  it  arifes  from  calculi,  not  only  from
thofe  which  the  gall-bladder  contains.  And  it  is  manifeft  from  thefe,  and
other  examples,  that  even  the  diftention,  which  not  only  the  patient,  but  the
phyfician,  alfo,  by  applying  his  hand  to  the  part,  perceives,  and,  confe-
quently,  the  effeft  of  the  bulk  of  calcuh,  affords  but  an  ambiguous  mark  of
their  exiftence.

The  roughnefs  remains.  Of  which  I  fay  firft,  as  I  have  already  faid  of  the
weight,  and  might  have  faid  of  the  bulk,  that  it  is  not  always  fuch  as  can
irritate,  and  difcover  itfelf  by  irritation.  And,  in  the  fecond  place,  I  fay,  that
even  when  it  is  of  fuch  a  kind,  the  veficle  is,  at  one  time,  defended  by  the
quantity,  and  at  another  time  by  the  thicknefs  of  the  bile,  from  the  irritation
it  has  a  tendency  to  create  -,  for  that  happens  very  rarely  here,  which  hap-
pens almofl  always  in  the  urinary  bladder,  that  all  the  contain'd  humour  be-
ing difcharg'd,  nothing  remains  but  the  calculus,  by  which  the  bladder  is
prick'd,  and  ftimulated,  efpecially  as  the  gall-bladder  cannot  contraft  itfelf
like  the  other,  and  clofely  embrace  the  ftone  :  and  although  this  could  hap-

faj  Obf.  fupracit.  ad  n.  19.  (?)  Sepulchr.  1.  3.  f.  17.  obf.  14.  §.  3.  cum

("6 J  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a  7  &  8.  obf.  123.  fchol.


CcJ  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  5.  obf.  129.  (/)  Vid,  fupra  n.  13.

(J)  Commerc.  litter,  a. 1742.  hebd.  28.


pen.


Letter  XXXVII. Article  38.  259

pen,  yet  the  fenfe  of  both  bladders  docs  not  feem  equally  exquifite  ;  and  this
I  fay,  left  you  fhould  have  recourfe  to  the  turgefcency  of  the  ftomach,  and
jnteftines,  which,  however,  does  not  always  fubfift,  in  order  to  make  us
conceive  how  the  cyft  may  be  prefs'd  clofe  upon  the  calculus.

Finally,  I  fay  that  in  t'hefe  very  vifcera,  in  the  part  where  they  can  prefs
upon  the  contiguous  veficle,  that  fame  fenfe  of  pricking  may  happen  to  exift
from  another  caufe,  which  would  be,  in  the  gall-bladder,  from  a  calculus ;
and  even  that  it  may  be  in  this  veficle  itfelf,  from  the  very  acrid  quality  of
retained  bile,  or  from  fome  fpafm ;  fo  that  irritations  may  be  either  fuppos'd
to  exift  in  this  receptacle,  which  are  not  there,  or  thofe  which  are  there,  may
arife  from  a  caufe  quite  different  from  calculi.

38.  What  I  have  faid  on  both  fides  of  the  queftion  then,  hitherto,  goes  fo
far  as  to  give  you  to  underftand,  that  there  is  no  perpetual,  no  peculiar,  fign
of  thefe  calculi.  But  left  you  ftiould  chance  to  fufpedt,  that  there  may  be
fome  fallacy  in  reafoning,  as  there  often  is,  let  us  confine  ourfelves  to  expe-
rience, I  fet  afide  all  my  own  obfervations,  and  thofe  of  Valfalva  (g\  in
none  of  which  there  was  any  fign  of  thofe  calculi,  that  we,  neverthelefs,  found
in  the  gall-bladder.  I  alfo  fet  afide  thofe  which  I  have  produc'd  in  a  former
work  (h),  from  Gerbefius,  and  Lofpicklerus,  who  affert  of  men  troubled
with  calculi  of  the  gall-bladder,  "  that  they  had  liv'd  a  long  time  in  health,
"  and  had  been  free  from  complaints."

But  if  others  teftify  the  fame  thing  befides,  is  it  but  juft  that  you  fhould
call  to  mind,  all  thofe  obfervations  which  we  now  fet  afide.  Rolfinc  (i),  there-
fore, a  phyfician  of  great  eminence  in  his  times,  when  he  defcribes  what  kind
of  calculi  he  found  in  the  cyft,  fays,  in  general,  "  that  ftones  of  the  gall-
"  bladder  very  often  lie  latent  in  that  cyft,  for  fome  years,  without  doing  any
"  injury,  fometimes  bringing  on  pain,  and  fometimes  being  without.  L'E-
mery  the  father  (k),  afBrms  it  to  be  well  known,  that  thefe  ftones  not  only  do
not  caufe  death,  but  even  "  frequently  caufe  no  inconvenience  whatever."
And  I  have  already  faid  above  (/),  that  Vaterus  had  obierv'd  in  a  woman,
who  had  thirty  of  them  in  the  gall-bladder,  a  long-continu'd,  and  "  perfeft
"  health,'"  even  to  the  end  of  her  life.

Galeati  (m),  in  like  manner,  affirms,  that  in  a  woman,  whofe  body  he  dif-
fered, "  nothing  had  happen'd,  either  in  the  difeafe  whereof  flie  died,"
(which  was  a  dropfy)  "  nor  before  that  time,  as  far  as  he  could  learn,  that
"  fhow'd  the  gall-bladder  to  be  affefted  •,"  yet  in  this  veficle,  neverthelefs,
were  four  calculi,  the  largeft  of  which  "  being  angular,  had  obftrudled  the  ori-
"  fice  of  the  cyftic  canal."  Themelius  (k),  alfo,  when  he  takes  notice  of"  fome
"  biliary  calculi,  worthy  of  remark,"  that  were  found  by  him,  in  the  cyft  of
a  ftrumpet,  exprefsly  fays,  "  that  they  had  not  been  attended  with  any  injury
"  to  health."

Finally,  Roncallus  (o),  for  I  am  not  willing  to  mention  any  more  here,
than  naturally  occur  to  me  as  I  write  ;  gives  an  account  of  feven  calculi,  of

(f)  Vid.  fupra  n.  27.  ("IJ  N.  32.

(i)  Epift.  anat.  i.  n.  51.  (m)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  21.

(?)  Differt.  de  gutta  fer.  corollar.  4.  («)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  5.  obf.  10.  prop,  fin,

{i)  Hift.  de  I'acad,  r. des  fc. a.  J 703.  obf. CoJ  In  epift.  addit.  ad  hid.  morbor.
anat.  i.

L  1  2  the


26o  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  fize  of  a  fmall  walnut,  being  found,  by  him,  in  the  gall-bladder  of  a  wo-
man, who  died  in  the  eighth  month  of  her  pregnancy,  and  who,  in  tlw  whole
of  that  time,  and  long  before,  "  had  been  endow'd  with  a  very  good  habit
"  of  body,  was  well  nouriili'd,  and  had  a  good  colour  ;"  fo  that  it  was  ma-
nifeft,  unlefs  thefe  concretions  had  been  form'd  in  an  inftant  of  time,  which
cannot  be  fuppos'd,  "  that  health  may  continue,"  even  when  thefe  are  pre-
fent.

If  am  not  by  any  means  decelv'd  then,  it  is  fufRciently  demonftrated,  that
there  is  no  perpetual  fign  of  cyftic  calculi,  and,  confequently,  that  there  is
rone  proper,  and  peculiar.

39.  How  is  it  then,  you  will  fay,  that  Wepfer  (p),  a  very  experienc'd
phyfician,  has  written  thefe  things  to  Verzafcha :  "  I  do  not  think  that  the
"  neck  of  the  gall-bladder  is  ftop'd  up,  becaufe  there  is  not  the  leall
"  complaint  of  a  cardialgia,  or  pain  with  tenfion,  near  to  the  cartilago  enfifotr
"  mis,  the  feat  of  which  n^tight  be  cover'd  with  a  fllver  penny  ?"  Did  not  he,
at  leaft,  think  this  an  infeparable  fign,  where  the  calculus  had  ftop'd  up  the
neck  of  the  gall-bladder  ?

But  I  would  have  you  attend  to  this,  that  he  has  not  made  mention  of
calculi  in  particular,  and  that  there  are  other  caufes  befidcs  a  calculus  Cf),
which  are  capable  of  obftrufting  the  cyftic  duft,  as  well  as  the  other  biliary
dufts.  And  in  the  fecond  place,  even  when  a  calculus  obftrudted  this  du6b,
Galeati,  as  was  juft  now  faid,  did  not  only  not  obferve  a  jaundice,  which
alone  was  found  to  be  abfent,  at  that  time,  by  Bezoldus(rj,  and  wasprov'd  t9
be  fo,  in  many  cafes,  by  Pechlinus  (j),  but  even  remark'd  that  nothing  was
the  confequence  of  it  which  could  fhow  the  cyft  to  be  affeded :  and  the  fame
remarks,  nearly,  were  made  by  Reverhorft  (/) :  and  by  Phil.  Jac.  Hart-
mann  (u),  in  two  bodies  :  nor  has  Haller  (x)  any  thing  contradiftory  thereto,
in  the  diffeftion  of  three  bodies:  nor,  finally,  he  who  could  have  related  with
accuracy  all  the  fymptoms  of  a  patient,  I  mean  the  celebrated  Trew  (y).

And  although  Tacconus  (z)  fays,  that  very  great  pains,  in  the  hypogaftric
region,  had  been  join'd  with  a  quartan  fever,  yet  he  not  only  fays,  that  the
jaundice  had  not  attended,  at  the  fame  time,  but  even  that  there  had  not
been  thofe  pains  which  reach  to  the  cartilago  enfiformis,  as  he  had  exprefsly
fignified,  in  another  woman,  a  little  before,  where  he  fuppos'd  the  exiftence
of  calculi,  in  the  duftus  communis.  You  fee  therefore,  that  not  even  when
the  meatus  cyfticus  is  obftruiSled  by  a  calculus,  as  it  was  in  all  the  bodies  I
have  refer'd  to,  is  that  pain,  which  has  been  defcrib'd.  by  Wepfer,  a  conftant
and  perpetual  fign  of  its  exiftence.

40.  And  although  our  original  enquiry,  here,  v/as  after  the  fymptoms  of  a
calculus,  not  only  when  thruft  down  into  thatpaffage,  but,  in  general,  when
exifting  in  the  gall-bladder,  yet  it  will  not  repent  me,  that  I  have  examin'd
whether  the  fign  defcrib'd  by  Wepfer,  be  proper  to  a  calculus,  that  is  fallen

fjij  Sepulchr.  1.  3.  f.  17.  in  fchol.  ad  obf.  6.  ft)  Dili,  de  mot.  bil.  §.  57.

in  additam.  («)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  2.  a.  5.  obf.  72  &  77.

(f)  Vid.  fapra  n.  33  &  34.  {x)  Opufc.  pathol.  obf.  33.  hift.  4.  13.  14.

(r)  Diff.  de  colelitho  caf.  1.  n.  6.  (y)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1743.  hebd.  32.  n.  3.

(4  Vid.  aft.  erud.  Lipf.  a.  1691,  m.  maj.  in  \z)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  i5,
recenf.  1,  ejus  I.  obf.  55.

down


Letter  XXX VII. Article  41.  261

down  into  the  diiftus  communis,  fmce  It  cannot  be  proper  to  that  which  re-
mains in  the  veficle,  as  was.  fufficiently  demonftrated  above  (a),  when  I  treat-
ed flightly  of  the  fenfe  of  diftention.  For  as  to  an  oblervation  occurring  in
the  Sepulchretum  (l?),  to  which  this  title  is  prefix'd,  "  a  pain  about  the  car-
"  tilago  enfiformis,  from  calculi  in  the  ftomach,  and  gall-bladder  -,"  take  care
how  you  fuppofe  that  the  obfervation  correfponds  with  the  title  :  for  in  read-
ing over  the  cafe,  you  will  find,  indeed,  that  many  calculi  adher'd  very
clofely  to  the  fundus,  and  fubftance,  of  the  ftomach  -,  but  that  there  was  any
calculus  in  the  gall-bladder,  or  in  any  other  part,  you  will  not  find..

From  this  oblervation,  therefore,  you  will  rather  learn,  that  it  was  not  a.
proper  fymptom  of  calculi  exifting  in  the  duftus  communis,  which  fiiow'd
calculi  to  be  adhering  to  the  ftomach.  And,  indeed,  if  befides  theie,  others
had  alfo  exifted  in  the  dudlus  communis,  yet  there  would  be  room  fordoubr,.
to  which  of  thefe  two  kinds,  this  pain  ought  to  be  afcrib'd,  juft  as  when  in
a  hiftory  of  the  fame  kind  of  pain,  calculi  are  defcrib'd  in  that  dud,  and  the  h-
ver  is  laid,  at  the  lame  time,  to  be  almoft  full  of  deprav'd  matter,  and  to
have  very  confiderable  diforders,  and  in  another,  many  tumours  are  laid  to
have  exifted  throughout  the  liver,  and  this  meatus  to  have  been  much  com-
prefs'd  by  one  of  them  :  although,  if  the  comprefllon,  or  obftruftion,  of  the
duiflus  communis  be  fuppos'd,  of  itfelf,  to  bring  on  the  caufe  of  that  pain^
whereof  I  fpeak  ;  it,  of  courfe,  cannot  be  confider'd  as  the  peculiar  mark
of  ftones  flicking  therein,  as  it  is  fufficiently  ftiewn  above  (c),  that  this  canal
may  be  both  comprefs'd,  and  obftrufted,  without  calculi,  and  as  nothing  for-
bids us  to  imagine,  that  bile  may  be  fometimes  confin'd  therein,  in  a  very  great
quantity,  and  that  it  is  fometimes  naturally  fo  acrid,  or  becomes  fo  by  flag-
nation,  that  it  has  a  power  to  diftend,  and  to  ftimulate,  the  canal  in  the  fame
manner  with  calculi.

Do  not  imagine,  however,  that  the  induftry  and  fkill  of  thofe  who  en-:
quire  after  truth,  and  endeavour  to  increafe  medical  knowledge,  are  lefs
efteem'd  by  m.e,  than  by  the  celebrated  man,  who  proves  the  explication  of
the  pain  in  queftion,  by  the  firm  connexion  of  the  ligamentum  fufpenforium
of  the  liver,  to  the  perltonseum,  where  it  covers  the  enfitorm  cartilage  :
but  influenc'd  by  the  fame  love  of,  and  defire  after,  truth,  that  influence  m.e
at  prefent,  he  foon  after  fubjoins  the  following  words :  "  and  not  in  calculous
"  affeclions  of  the  liver  only,  but  in  inflammations,  or  other  tumours  of  the
"  fame  vifcus,  which  have  their  feats  not  far  from  the  roots  of  this  ligament;,
"  thefe  things  are  proper  to  explain  the  various  fymptoms  of  this  kind,  that
"  arife  from  thence,  and,  particularly,  the  pain  of  the  cartilago  mucronata,
•"  of  which  we  fpeak,  and  which,  in  fimilar  circumftances,  is  frequently
"  found  to  attend  inflammations  of  the  liver."

41.  And  this  fymptom  is  not  only  common  to  other  diforders  that  are
taken  notice  of,  whether  they  be  feat:ed  on  the  outfide  of  the  liver,  or  within
the  liver,  or  in  the  du6tus  communis  itfelf,  but  does  not  always  occur,  even
at  the  time  when  there  arc  fcones  in  this  duft.  For  all  biliary  calculi,  what-
ever, ihat  are  difcharg'd  from  the  inteftines,  muft,  of  necefllty,  have  pafs'd
through  the  ftreights  of  this  dud  to  the  inteftines  :  and  yet,  notwithftanding

(a)  N.  37.  .  (0  N.  10  &  3-^,

(6J  L.  3.  f.  7.  obf.  32.


262  Book  III. Of  Dileafes  of  the  Belly.

ib  many  obfervations  are  extant,  of  ftones  of  this  kind  being  difcharg'd  with
the  ftools,  how  few  are  therein  which  we  read,  that  a  pain  at  the  cartilago
eniiformis  had  preceded  the  diii:harge  ?

It  does  nor,  however,  efcape  me,  that  all  the  ftones,  thus  difcharg'd,  are
not  to  be  fuppos'd  to  have  come  from  the  liver.  And,  indeed,  I  readily  con-
fefs,  that  although  from  the  time  in  which  they  firft  began  to  be  obferv'd,
which  was  before  Galen  (d),  to  this  very  time,  almoft  innumerable  obferva-
tions of  thefe  concretions  have  been  colleded  by  Donatus(^),  by  SchenckC/j,
by  Rhodius  (_§•),  by  Schrockius  the  father  (^),  and  by  others,  itfeems  to  me
that  many  of  them  have  been  generated  in  the  inteftines,  or  the  ftomach,
itfelf.

For  that  they  may,  alfo,  be  generated  in  the  ftomach,  ancient  examples
prove,  the  firft  of  which  is  related  by  Donatus  (z),  when  my  fellow-citizen.
"  Mr.  Jo.  Juliani,  of  Forli,  fent  a  ftone  to  Gentilis,  which  was  thrown  up
"  by  vomiting,  equal  to  the  fize  of  a  nut,  after  a  pain  of  the  ftomach,  which
*'  in  its  hardnefs  exceeded  that  of  gypfum,  and  was,  in  itsfliape,  like  that  of
"  an  egg:"  and  one  fimilar  to  this,  except  that  it  did  not  exceed  the  fizeof
a  jubeb,  was  of  a  whitifh  colour,  and  not  furnifh'd  with  evident  ftrata,  I
formerly  faw  in  the  place  of  my  nativity,  v/hich  a  woman  had  thrown  up  by
vomiting,  in  like  manner,  after  long-continu'd  pains  of  the  ftomach.

But  though  others  have  lately  thought  that  they  have  prov'd  them  to  be
generated  in  the  inteft'ines,  by  examples  which,  perhaps,  are  not  very  pro-
per for  the  purpofe,  to  me  that  feems  more  fuitable  to  the  prefent  occaiion,
which  you  will  find  in  Ballonius  (k),  "  of  a  ftone  in  the  inteftines,  which  was
"  perforated  fo  as  to  fuffer  the  more  liquid  matter  to  pafs  through  it ;"  for  it
feems  to  have  been  form'd,  by  degrees,  of  earthy,  and  vifcid,  particles  adher-
ing, round  about,  to  the  inteftines  :  the  other  particles  pafting  through  the
middle  of  it,  and  keeping  the  pafTage  open.

Who  will  venture  to  deny,  that  ftones  which  are  the  largeft  of  all,  and
univerfally  made  up  of  one,  and  the  fame,  matter  of  this  kind,  had  not  their
firft  beginning  in  the  inteftines,  as  they  certainly  had  their  increafe  ?  And
indeed  although  I  read  that  fome  were  of  fuch  a  kind,  cither  in  their  mag-
nitude, or  colour,  or  their  figure,  that  any  one  might  eafily  refer  them  to
the  clafs  of  cyftic  conci-etions,  as,  for  inftance  (/),  thofe  which  were  "  at  one
*'  time  fmaller,  and  at  another  time  larger,  than  peas,"  or  "  than  filberts,
"  thofe  which  were  of  a  yellow  colour,"  or  "  in  great  part  yellow,"  thofe
■which  were  "  triangular,"  or  otherwife  "  angular  •,"  and,  finally,  to  comprehend
many  examples  in  one,  "  thofe  which  in  their  fhape,  colour,  and  magnitude,
"  were  like  to  the  feeds  of  melons  •,"  yet  I  will  readily  omit  all  thefe,  efpe-
cially  as  the  fymptoms  which  had  preceded,  are  either  not  related  with  the
necelTary  accuracy,  or  not  related  at  all.

I  will  go  on  to  thofe  which  the  authors  who  defcribe  them,  or  other  men
of  eminence,  have  confider'd, and  not  without  reafon,  as  cyftic,  or,  at  leaft,

{J)  Vid.  apud  Schenck.  obf.  med.  1.  ^.  ubi (i)  Obf.  fupra  ad  n.  24.  cit.
de  inteftin.  lapid.  obf.  1.  '  (/)  Cap.  modo  cit.

(e)  Cap.  fupra  ad  n.  15.  cit.  (i)  L.  2.  confil.  med.  24.

(yj  Obf.  1.  modo  cit.  (1)  Vid.  apud  Schenck.  obf.  1.  modo  cit.

fgj  Cent.  2.  obf.  med.  74.

biliary


Letter  XXXVII. Article  42.  263

biliary  concretions.  But  Fernelius,  whom  I  have  mention'd  in  a  former
work(/B),  fays  no  more  than  that  he  had  found  "  after  a  long  jaundice,  fuc-
"  ceeded  by  a  diarrhoea,  innumerable  calculi  of  this  nature,  like  peas,  or
"  barley-corns,  to  be  difcharg'd  by  moft  perfons."  Coiterus,  in  like  man-
mer  («j,  fays  that  he  knew  a  woman,  "  who  was  freed  from  a  very  trouble-
"  fome,  and  long-continu'd  jaundice,  by  a  diicharge  of  a  calculus  v/ith  her
"  flools,"  That  Solomon  Alberti,  "  had  often  obferv'd  calculi  to  be  dif-
"  charg'd  with  the  fsces,  after  a  very  long  jaundice,"  I  know  very  well  from
the  celebrated  Haller  {o) :  but  whether  he  faid  more  than  this  I  know  not,
inafmuch  as  I  have  not  his  iecond  "  oration,"  which  he  there  quotes;  not  that
which  is  among  the  three  publifh'd  in  the  year  1585,  but  that  which  is  with
the  four  publifh'd  in  1590,  for  that  that  is  what  he  refers  to,  I  do  not  doubt,
as  I  fee  it  is  entitled  in  Linden  {p),  de  felle  ad  intejtina  reftagnante,  &c.

I  have  faid  above  (*),  that  Malpighi  has  aflerted  a  ftone  to  be  difcharg'd  by
a  matron,  "  after  great  pains  and  a  long  jaundice."  That  Ruyfchf^)  pre-
ferv'd  "  a  calculus,  which  came  from  the  gall-bladder,  and  was  difcharg^d
"  per  anmn"  I  have  read,  but  not  what  fymptoms  had  preceded  the  dif-
charge.  And  others  I  purpofely  omit,  who  have  either  faid  no  more  than
Ruyfch,  of  what  had  preceded,  or  have  not  mention'd  fo  many  fymptoms  as
Malpighi.

42.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  pafs  over  to  thofe  who  have  made  mention  of  ■
the  feat  of  the  pain  which  preceded.  Hoffmann  the  father,  as  the  fon  re-
lates (r),  has  faid  that  there  had  been  "  very  acute  pains  of  the  right  hypo-
"  chondrium."  Dillenius  (j),  that  after  pains  which  had,  "  for  a  very  long
"  time,"  occupied  the  fame  hypochondrium,  "  colico-nephritic  pains  had
"  fucceeded."  Bartholin  (/),  from  the  obfervation  of  Tinftorius,  "  that
"  there  had  been  many  complaints  of  a  pain  in  the  right  fide,  which  ex-
"  tended  to  the  inteftines."  Lentilius  {u),  "  a  very  great  pain  about  the  re-
"  gion  of  the  liver,  with  a  tumour  ;  of  which  pain,  however,  the  patient  had
"  already  complain'd,  for  the  fpace  of  ten  years."  Wolfstrigelius  {x),  who
has  fpoken  more  fully  on  the  fubjed  than  the  others,  that  pains  had,  at  feve-
veral  times,  preceded,  "  which  refembled  colico-nephritic  pains,  and  v^^hich,
"  though  they  frequently  grew  milder,  yet  as  often  return'd  with  violence :"
that  upon  a  relapfe  into  this  difeafe,  as  frequently  happens,  "  there  was  a  pain
"  of  the  loins,  and  a  rending  pain  about  the  right  hypochondrium,  at  the
*'  place  where  the  du6tus  choledocus  is  inferted  into  the  duodenum  :"  that  the  ■
difeafe  returning  again,  "  there  was  a  pain  which,  indeed,  rather  refembled
"  a  colic  pain,  as  it  was  not  felt  about  the  loins,  and  right  hypochondrium,  ,
"  but  chiefly  towards  the  navel." '

In  fine,  our  Valifneri  (jy),  who  profecuted  every  inquiry,  himfelf,  with  ac-
curacy, having  obferv'd  fimilar  cafes,  firft  in  the  place  of  his  nativity,  and
after  that  here  at  Padua  alfo,  has  faid  nothing  [more  in  regard  to  pains, than,  ■

(m)  Adverf.  3.  animad.  28.  (;■)  Medic,  rat.  t.  4.  p.  2.  f.  2.  c.  3.  in  fin,

(nj  Obf.  anat.  (sj  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  g.  obf.  246.

(0)  Ad  Boerhaav.  prseledl.  §.  348.  not.  (m).  {t)  Cent.  4.  hift.  anat.  49.

(/)  Renovat.  de  fcript.  med,  1.  i.  {u)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  2.  a.  7.  obf.  136.

(*)  N.  23.  (*•)  Earund.  dec.  i.  a.  2.  obf.  8g.

(j)  Prsef,  ad  thef.  animal,  i.  (^)  Epift.  fupraad  n.  13.  cit.

" -that'


264  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

"  that  they  had  been  very  violent  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  and  had  ex-
"  tended  rhemfelves  towards  the  navel."  The  cafes  propos'dby  Vaterus  (s),
and  ftill  more  by  Bezoldus  (a),  I  piirpofely  pafs  over,  on  account  of  the  mag-
nitude of  the  calculi,  which,  though  they  certainly  had  their  beginning  in  the
gall-bladder,  yet,  as  they  might  feem  to  have  receiv'd  their  increafe  in  the
inteftines,  fliould  have  been  then  faid  to  have  come  from  thence,  rather  than
from  the  common  biliary  canal.  And  Vaterus  fays  that  there  had  been  "  ve-
"  ry  violent,  and  excruciating  pains  of  the  belly,  which  firft  occupied  the
"  region  of  the  navel,  and  at  length  fettled  in  the  lumbar  region."  And
Bezoldus,  that  after  the  patients  "  having  been  furprizingly  harrafs'd  for  fix
"  years  and  more,  with  pains  of  the  right  hypochondrium,"  a  ftone  was
at  length  difcharg'd  by  the  inteftines,  but  "  not  without  griping  pains."  You
fee  then,  that  in  al!  thefe  obfervations,  no  pain  is  taken  notice  of,  which  had
its  feat  about  the  enfiform  cartilage.

Nor  is  any  thing  hinted  in  regard  to  fuch  a  pain,  by  the  two  Hoffmanns,
Maurice,  and  Frederic.  For  the  former  (<J),  though  it  is  true  he  mentions
"  the  anterior  parts,"  yet  mentions  them  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  fay  that
there  had  been  "  a  long-continu'd  vellicating  pain,  with  tenfion,  under  the  right
*'  hypochondrium,  which  was  troublefome  towards  the  anterior  parts."  And
although  the  latter  (c),  befides  "  an  intolerable  pain  in  the  right  fide,  and  un-
"  der  the  falfe  ribs,"  adds  the  following  words ;  "  about  the  fcrobiculus  cor-
"  dis  was  a  violent  opprefllve  pain,  which  even  extended  itfelf  into  the  um-
"  bilical  region  •"  yet  the  fcrobiculus  cordis  does  not  comprehend  the  enfi-
form cartilage,  or  if  you  would  have  it  comprehended  in  thefe  words,  you
muft  then  call  to  mind,  that  in  this  obfervation,  the  queftion  is  not  of  a
"  calculus,"  but  of  "  bilious  fordes  ftopping  up  the  ductus  choledocus;"  fo
that  by  this  means  thofe  things  might  rather  be  confirm'd,  which  I  have  ad-
vanc'd  above  (d),  in  regard  to  the  ambiguity  that  muft  be  the  confequence
of  this  fymptom,  which  is  certainly,  alfo,  the  confequence  of  other  fymp-
toms,  in  the  next  obfervation  of  Hoffmann  (e).

However,  in  the  laft  (f),  where  the  queftion  is  of  calculi  obftructing  that
duft,  he  mentions  "  an  acute,  and  almoft  intolerable  pain,  deeply  fix'd  in  the
"  region  of  the  liver,  with  pains  of  the  inteftines,  which  were  troublefome
"  now  and  then,  and  remitted  at  intervals."  Finally,  turn  to  thofe  things
that  are  written  by  the  very  fkilful  archiater  Van  Swieten  (g),  where  he  tells
us  what  he  has  obferv'd  to  happen  at  this  time  -,  you  will  find  not  a  word  of
pain  at  the  enfiform  cartilage.  And  as  upon  duly  confidering  all  the  obfer-
vations that  I  have  produc'd,  you  will  oblerve  that  the  pain  was  never  ex-
tended to  that  cartilage,  but  to  the  navel,  or  the  umbilical  region,  more
than  once,  if  you  fliould  happen  to  prefer  taking  the  explication,  not  from
the  inteftinum  jejunum,  into  which  the  duodenum  is  continu'd,  but  from
that  part  of  the  ligamentum  fufpenforium  of  the  liver  which  is  better  known
to  Euftachius  {h),  than to  Reverhorft  (i),  and  accompanies  the  umbilical

('zj  Diflert.  qua  obf.  rariff.  calcul.  obf.  3.  CeJ  C.  eod.  3.  obf.  5.

(a)  Diff.  de  colelitho  caf.  2.  f/J  Ibid.  obf.  6.

(5)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  2.  a.  7.  obfer.  24^.  (g)  Comment,  fupraad  n.  15.  cit.  §.  950.

Ic)  Paulo  ante  cit.  capite  3.  obf.  4.  (h)  Tab.  anat.  2.  fig.  3  &  4.

{d)  N.  40.  (0  Diff.  demotu  bilis.  fig.  i.

4  ligament,


Letter  XXXVIJ. Article  43.  265

ligament,  or  even  from  this  ligament  itfclf,  you  are  at  the  fame  freedom  to
do  it  for  me,  as  from  the  other  part  of  the  ligamentum  fufpenforium,  when
the  pain  fliall,  at  any  time,Ttextend  itfelf  to  the  enfiform  cartilage,  as  has  been
obfcrv'd  by  others.

43.  If,  therefore,  biliary  calculi,  as  has  been  demonftrated  hitherto,  and
will  be  confirm'd  prefently  (k),  do  not  difcover  themfelves,  by  any  conftant,
and  peculiar  fymptoms,  even  when  they  are  fo  far  from  being  in  a  fta  t  e  f
reft,  that  they  are  endeavouring  to  procure  a  difcharge  for  themfelves,  how
much  lefs  -will  they  be  able  to  do  that,  when  they  are  in  a  perfedt  ftate  of
reft,  in  their  veficle  ?

But  you  will  fay  that  the  fymptoms  of  calculi,  inherent  in  the  kidnies,  and
urinary  bladder,  alfo,  are  very  frequently  ambiguous,  and  yet  not  held  in
contempt  by  phyficians,  info  great  an  obfcurity  of  things.  Nor  do  I  de-
fpife  the  fymptoms  that  have  been  advanc'd,  as  marks  of  the  exiftence  of  cy-
ftic  calculi  •,  but  I  tomplain  (/)  that  they  are  more  proper  to  make  us  fufpedt
their  exiftence,  than  to  convince  us  that  they  adtually  do  exift.  Yet  if  we  are
to  infift  upon  fufpicions,  I  not  only  commend  thofe  who  endeavour  to  add
fome  weight  to  thefe  fufpicions,  by  increafing  the  number  of  the  fymptoms,
but,  amongft  them,  I  alfo  take  the  liberty  to  mention  myfelf.

Therefore,  although  I  know  that  ftones  of  thecyft  are  not  always  join'd  with
bile,  which  refembles  fordes,  nor  always  with  urinary  calculi,  yet  I  believe  that
the  fufpicion  of  Sylvius,  which  you  even  have  in  the  Sepulchretum  (??/),  is
not  altogether  to  be  defpis'd,  who  fears  left  thofe  that  vomit  bile  of  this  kind,
fhouldhave  concretions  in  the  gall-bladder;  and  that  another  fufpicion  of  my
own  ought  not  to  be  concealed.  For  I  having,  befides  thofe  that  I  formerly
mention'd  («),  as  feen  by  me,  feen  others  alfo,  and  read  of  others,  that  have
been  fubje£t  to  bilious,  and  urinary  calculi,  at  the  fame  time  :  and  as  in  turn-
ing over  the  obfervations,  which  I  have  in  part  made  ufe  of  in  this  letter,  I
met  with  a  great  number  likewife ;  I  eafily  perceiv'd  that  thefe  things  did
not  happen  by  chance.  Of  thofe  who  I  have  read  were  thus  affeffted,  I  will
not  omit  one,  who  deferves  to  be  taken  notice  of,  in  preference  to  the  reft,
on  account  of  his  merits  in  the  medical  faculty,  I  mean  Michael  Mercati  {o).
This  gentleman  having  died  of  nephritic  tortures,  and  having  two  ftones,  of
a  confiderable  fize,  fticking  in  his  ureters,  and  in  his  kidnies  fixty-three,
which  were  all  pretty  fmall,  or  fome  of  them  only,  as  his  preceptor  Csefal-
pinus  has  written,  large,  had,  alfo,  in  his  gall-bladder  (although,  as  they
take  notice,  he  had  never  been  attack'd  with  the  jaundice)  fix  and  thirty  of
an  obfcure  colour,  angular  in  their  figure,  and  of  the  bignefs  of  a  vetch.

And  who  is  there,  that  -,  reading  thefe  things  of  Mercati,  and  in  that
great  number  of  oblervations  moreover,  that  the  bifiiop,  mention'd  by  Lk-
lius  a  Fonte  (/>),  was  wont  frequently  to  labour  under  the  ftone  of  the
kidnies,  that  the  count  of  Hoechftetter  {([)  had  a  ftone,  and  fabulous
formations therein, that the cooper of  Wepfer (r j had a fmall  ftone,

(k)  N.  44.  &  feq.  (0)  Vid.  ejus  vitam &  teftimonia,  metallo-

(IJ  Vid.  n.  36.  thecffi  ejufd.  Vaticans  praefixa.

(m)  L.  3.  f.  18.  obf.  9.  [p)  Conf.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  31.

{n)  Epift.  anat.  l.  n.  48.  (y)  Caf.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  17.

(;■)  Hilt.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  20.

Vol.  II.  Mm  in


266  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

m  a  papillary  caruncle  of  one  kidney,  that  the  woman  of  Borrichius  (s)  had
difcharg'd  calculi  fronn.  both  bladders,  that  another  of  Morton  (t)  had  one
kidney  fill'd  therewith,  that  the  old  man  of  Refcrhorft  {u)  had  the  fame
in  his  kidnies,  and  urinary  bladder ;  will  not  fufpeft  the  caufes  to  be  fimilar  ?

And  left  you  fliould  be  inclin'd  to  fuppofe  that  this  happen'd  only  in  old
perfons,  take  norice,  I  beg  of  you,  that  a  virgin  of  eighteen  years  of  age,
fpoken  of  by  Bonetus  (.v))  had  a  ftone  taken  from  her  by  the  lithotomift,  of
the  bio-nefs  of  a  goofe's  egg:  add  to  this  that  Bergerus  (y)  had  found  calculi
iiT  both  the  bladders  of  a  cotinfellor  at  law  ;  Lancifi  (z),  alfo,  in  the  kidney
of  that  excellent  man  Horatio  Albani,  both  a  large  ftone,  and  many  fmall  ones ;
and,  finally,  that  Hoffmann  (a)  found' one,  which  was  not  foiall  in  its  fize,  in
the  kidney  of  a- gentleman,  and  one  much  larger  in  the  urinary  bladder.

For  I  ftiall,  defignedly,  take  no  notice  of  a  great  number  of  other  authors^
and  among  thefe  Jo.  Bapt.  Contulus  {b),  Chriftophor.  Cunradus  (c),  Vitus
Riedlinus  (i),  Tob.  Ferd.  Paulif^,  Jo.  Cafpar.  GrimmiusC/),  Jo.  Sebaftian
Albrechtus  Cg),  Jo.  Jacob.  Trelyngius  (h),  Chriftoph.  Jac.  Trew  (i),  who
obferv'd  the  fame  in  two  bodies,  Jo.  Storck  (k),  and  Ifr.  Cregutus  (/)  :  thefe,
1  fay,  and  others  (»z),  1  fhall  omit ;  fince  befides  Baglivi  C«),  who  fo  far  confi-
ders  this  as  what  generally  happens,  that  he  has  enquir''d  into  the  reafor>,
"  why,  when  there  are  calculi  in  the  gall-bladder,  they  alfo  are  generated  in
"  the  urinary  bladder,  and  vice  verfa,"  the  teftimony  of  Abraham  Vater
alone  (o)  may  pafs  for  many,  who  exprefsly  affirms,  "  that  calculi  have^
"  beyond  a  doubt,  been  very  frequently  obferv'd  in  the  gall-bladder,  in  thofe
"  who  have,  at  the  fame  time,  labour'd  under  a  calculus  of  the  urinary
"  paffages."

Who  then  can  read  fuch  teftimonies,  and  attend  to  fo  many  fimilar  cafes,
without  immediately  conceiving  with  Vaterus,  "  that  the  caufes"  of  both  fpe-
ties  of  calculi  are,  in  a  great  meafure,  "  evidently  common  to  each  other  ?"
And  if  you  take  this  for  granted,  you  will,  doubtlefs,  begin  to  think  with
me,  that  when  to  the  other  marks  of  bilious  calculi,  this  alfo  fliall  be  added,
that  the  patient  i's  fubject  to  calculi  of  the  urinary  paflages,  fome  weight  will
be  given  to  the  other  fufpicions ;  efpecially  if,  according  to  what  has  been  ob-
ferv'd above  (p),  this  patient  is  neither  an  infant,  nor  a  child,  but  is  already
in  a  middle  age,  ox  advanc'd  in  life  :  which  remark,  drawn  from  the  age  of
the  patient,  may,  if  join'd  v/ith  othti-s,  help  us  to  diftinguifh  inteftinal  calculi,.,
that  have  been  difcharg'd  by  ftool,  from  fuch  as  are  generated  in  the  liver.

Thus  the  celebrated  Carlius  {q),  when  he  had  not  believ'd that  a  certain .

(j)  Vid.  Bartholin,  aft. Ham.  vol.  5.  obf.  ("gj  Earund.  t.  4.  obf.  49,

6r.  {/j)  Eorund.  t.  5.  obf.  129.

(/)  Phthifiolog..  1.  3.  c.  14.  hid.  5.  (/) Commerc.  litter,  a.  1734.  hebd.  6.  n.  5.

(;()  Diff.  fupra  ad  n.  42.  cit.  §..56.  &  a.  1743.  hebd.  32.  n.  3.

(at) Sepulchr.  1.  2.  f.  4.  obf.  35.  (i)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1735.  hebd.  52.  n  4. ,

(y)  Phyfiolog.  1.  i.e.  14.  (/)  Difflert.  de  calc.  in  corp.  hum.  general.

(z) Oper.  torn.  2.  diff.  10.  &c.  §.  3i#in  fin.

(a.)  Cap.  3.  fupra  ad  n.  42.  cit.  obf.  I.  (m)  Vid.  epift.  57.  n.  iz.

lb)  De  lapid.  c.  25.  («)  De  experim.  circa  bilera,

(fj  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  9  &  10.  in  obf.  171.  (0) Diff.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  16.  thef.  8.

fJJ  Earund.  cent.  3.  obf.  45.  (p)  N. 15.

(t)  Earund.  cent.  9.  obf.  76.  (y)  Cemmerc.  Utter,  a,  1731.  Ipecimen.  51.


f/J  Aft.  n,  c.  torn.  1.  obf.  20.


calculus^


Letter  XXXVII. Article  44.  267

'calculus,  "which  was  reckon'd  among  cyllic  calculi,  and  which  had  been  dif-
-charg'd  among  the  fasces,  by  a  boy  of  eighteen  years  of  age,  did  really  be-
long to  that  clafs,  for  this  reafon  "  in  particular,  becaufe  fuch  an  age  does
"  not  naturally  bring  on  a  difpoficion  of  that  kind"  (and  it  certainly  does  not,
except  very  rarely,  which  is  one  point,  wherein  bilious,  and  urinary,  calculi  do
not  agree  with  each  other)  knew  afterwards,  that  the  liver  of  this  young  man,
v/ho  had  died  of  a  dyfentery,  was  found  to  be  as  found  as  that  of  tb.e  moft
"  healthy  young  animal  can  be  :"  whereas  the  calculus  "  of  two  ounces
"  and  a  half  in  weight,"^  for  fuch  it  was,  though  it  might  have  receiv'd  the
greater  part  of  its  increafe  in  the  inteftines,  would,  at  leaft,  have  left  fome  trace
of  its  former  refidence,  and  pafTage,  in  the  gall-bladder,  and  the  du6ts  affix'd
to  the  liver.

44.  But  although  the  marks  of  bilious  calculi,  which  I  have  taken  notice  of,
are,  as  appears  from  thofe  things  that  I  have  hitherto  faid,  as  Hoffmann  ad-
monilhes  (r},  "  to  be  taken  and  confider'dcolleftively  :"  and  as  allthefe  marks
cannot  exift  in  all  perfons,  the  greater  part  of  them,  at  leaft,  and  among  thtfe
the  principal  are  to  be  attended  to  (by  the  principal,  I  mean  thofe  which  are
wont  to  be  the  more  frequently  obferv'd,  as,  for  inftance,  when  ftones  de-
fcend  into  the  -duftus  communis,  there  is  certainly  a  pain  feated  on  the
right  fide,  a  jaundice,  vomiting,  anxiety,  relapfe;  for  fo  I  have  in  general  ob-
ferv'd, in  many  of  thofe  obfervations  that  are  pointed  out  above  (^) )  although,
I  fay,  we  muft  proceed  in  the  manner  I  have  laid,  yet  we  ought  never  -to  for-
get, how  eafily  a  deception  may  happen.

For  if  you  compare  with  the  greater  part,  or  the  principal  of  thefe  marks,
thefe  two  obfervations  of  Hoffmann,  which  I  even  refer'd  to  before  (/),  you
will  find  that  my  furmifes  are  not  without  foundation.  And  you  will  per-
ceive the  fame  thing,  when,  after  having  faid  (u)  "  that  there  are  fome  fymp-
"  toms  which  prove  the  exiftence  of  calculi,  in  the  biliary  dufts,  that  are
"  by  no  means  fallacious,"  and  enumerated  the  chief  of  them,  he  prefent-
ly  (x)  produces  the  figns  of  a  very  large  calculus,  flicking  in  the  gall-
bladder;  but  efpecially,  vi^hen  he  deicribes  the  fymptoms  (y)  of  a  jaundice,
which  was  not  brought  on  by  any  calculus,  but  only  by  a  fpafmodic
"  ftridure."

Yet  it  not  uncommonly  happens,  that  as  in  urinary  calculi,  fo  in  biliary
alfo,  we  have  a  mark  of  their  exiftence  which  is  much  more  to  be  depended
upon  than  the  others ;  I  mean  when  any  one  of  thefe  concretions,  or  fome  frag-
ment of  them,  at  leaft,  is  difcharg'd.  And  as  this  very  fign,  which  is  evi-
dent even  from  the  natural  light  of  reafon,  was  mention'd  by  others  before,  -
and  among  thefe  by  Vaterus  (2),  but  particularly,  and  fully,  by  Vallifneri
(i?),  it  may  feem  very  furprifing  to  any  one,  why  it  is  omitted  by  Hoff-
mann, among  thofe  figns  that  are  "  by  no  means  fallacious ;"  efpecially
as,  five  years  before,  this  very  author  had  taught  the  following  things  (l>),

((■)  Cap.  3.  fupra  ad,  n.  43.  cit.  §.  15,  (yj  Obf.  i,

(s)  N.  42. _  CzJ  Diff  fupra  ad  n.  16.  ctt.  thef.  iz.

(?)  N.  eod.  id.  eft.  obf.  4  &  ;.  (^)  Epift.  fupra  ad  n.  13.  cit.  adnot  i.

(a)  Ejufd.  torn.  4.  p.  4.  c,  12.  §.  i.i.  .(^)  Tofli.  4.  paulo  aute  cit.  p.  2.  c.  3.  §.  18.

W  §•  17-

M  ma "  but


268  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  but  among  all  thefe  figns,  which  1  have  already  admonifh'd  you  of,  there
"  is  none  more  certain,  whereby  to  judge  of  violent  affeftions  proceedinCT
*'  from  the  biliary  calculi,  than  the  difcharge  thereof,  together  with  the  in-
"  teftinal  faeces;  and  then,  iuft  as  it  happens,  in  the  cafe  of  renal  calculi,
"  when  they  have  been  carried  down  from  the  ureters,  into  the  bladder,  all
"  the  pains,  together  with  the  other  violent  affeftions,  inftantly  and  totally
"  ceafe,  and  expire,  at  lead  if  you  except  the  jaundice,  which  does  not  im-
"  mediately,  but  gradually  difappear."

When,  therefore,  the  figns  of  calculi  having  intruded  themfelves  into
the  biliary  duifls,  and  endeavouring  to  procure  an  exit  for  themfelves  into
the  inteftinum  duodenum,  have  preceded  ;  if  among  the  fsces  difcharg'd  from
the  inteftines,  which  ought  then  to  be  carefully  v/alli'd  by  fervants,  and,  ac-
cording to  the  admonition  of  Vallifneri,  pafs'd  through  a  kind  of  fieve,  any
biliary  calculus  be  found,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  this  fign  muft  throw
fuch  a  light  upon  the  cafe,  as  could  not  be  hop'd  from  fo  many  other  marks,
that  are,  at  beft,  but  uncertain,  and,  in  fome  meafure,  obfcure.

45.  But  there  is  need  of  caution,  left  we  fliould  happen,  at  any  time,  to
take  an  inteftinal  calculus  for  a  biliary  one,  or,  that  all  the  ambiguity  of  words
may  be  avoided  here,  for  an  hepatic  calculus,  that  is  a  ftone  which  is  gene-
rated in  the  canals  of  the  liver,  or  its  appendage  the  gall-bladder.

There  is  a  certain  obfervation  in  Hoffmann  (c),  of  twenty  ftones  being  dif-
charg'd by  vomiting  ;  in  regard  to  which,  although  he  did  not  think  it  alto-
gether incredible,  that  they  fhould  have  proceeded  from  the  biliary  dufts,  he,
neverthelefs,  rather  fuppos'd  them  "  to  have  been  generated  from  the  fuccef-
five,  and  alternate,  concretions  of  very  vifcid,  and  earthy  bile,  in  the  flexure
"  of  the  inteftinum  duodenum  itfelf:"  for  they  were  angular,  and  of  a  yel-
low colour  inclining  to  green  -,  and  of  fuch  a  magnitude,  that  without  ex-
cruciating pains  in  the  right  fide  of  the  belly,  none  of  which  had  preceded^
it  did  not  feem  poffible  for  them  to  have  pafs'd  through  the  dudtus  com-
munis.

Yet  a  jaundice  had  preceded  the  difcharge  of  thefe  ftones,  and  "  immedi-
"  acely"  after  this  difcharge,  which  ought  to  feem  very  aftonifhing  to  thofe  who
attend  to  the  exception  of  Hoffmann,  juft  now  mention'd  (d),  "  was  remov'd.''
If,  therefore,  as  they  prevented  the  pafliage  of  the  bile  into  the  duodenum
by  their  obftruftion,  lb  the  bile  either  naturally,  or  by  ftagnation,  was  made
acrid,  or  thefe  calculi  had  very  acute  angles,  you  readily  perceive,  that  not
only  a  jaundice,  but  pains  in  the  right  fide  alfo,  and  other  fymptoms  that  are
the  confequences  of  them,  might  have  been  previoufty  caus'd  by  them,  and
even  have  been  remov'd  by  their  difcharge.

But  it  is  rather  poffible  that  thefe  fymptoms  may  be  join'd  together,  than
frequent :  and  no  pains  of  the  right  fide  having  preceded,  in  the  obfervation'
in  queftion,  might  have  render'd  the  phyfician  fufficiently  cautious.  The
abfence  of  which,  or  of  the  jaundice,  and  ftill  more  of  both,  ought  in  like
manner  to  render  him  cautious,  when  calculi,  which  might  otherwife  feem
to  be  cyftic,  are  difcharg'd  from  the  inteftines,  as  in  thofe  examples  that
will  be  immediately  pointed  out. And  firft,  three  calculi  occur  to  my  mind

:^ Ibid.  Obf. 3.  W N.  44.


Letter  XXXVII. Article  45.  " 269

(e)  (f)  (g),  that  were  difcharg'd  in  the  manner  I  have  mention'd  ;  of  which,
whether  you  attend  to  tlie  globular,  or  oval  figure,  to  the  external,  or  in-
ternal colour,  and  fome  other  circumftances,  you  certainly  will  not  be  for-
ward to  deny  that  they  might  be  cyftic  calculi,  particularly  if  you  call  to
mind  that  fome  very  fimilar  have  been,  at  times,  found  in  the  gall-bladder:
yet  when  you  read  that  there  had  been  gripings  and  pains  of  the  belly,  but
none  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  and  even  that,  in  one  inftance,  there
were  oppreflive  pains  in  the  iliac  region,  you  v/ill  believe  that  they  were  in-
teftinal  calculi,  and  that  fo  much  the  more  readily,  as  you  will  fee  that  not
a  jaundice,  but  a  volvulus,  is  taken  notice  of,  in  each  of  thefe  three  cafes-.

Three  other  inftances  fucceed.  In  regard  to  the  firft  of  which  (h),  if  it-
made  any  mention  of  the  jaundice,  and  did  not  fay  that  the  ftones  were  dif-
charg'd "  without  any  pains,"  their  defcription  would  fo-  much  the  more  in-
cline us  to  take  them  for  cyftic  calculi  ;  as,  in  their  fize,  they  were  by  no
means  to  be  compar'd  with  thofe  that  are  mention'd  in  the  three  former,  and
in  as  many  fubfequent,  examples.  The  fecond  of  thefe  (i)  mentions  colic
pains  indeed  •,  but  not  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  nor  join'd  v/ith  a  jaun-
dice. For  which  reafon  I  Ifiould  more  readily  fuppofe,  with  the  obferver
of  this  inftance,  that  the  calculus,  although  furnifh'd  with  concentric  fhells,
as  the  figure  fliows,  and  internally,  and  externally,  yellow,  had  been  gene-
rated in  fome  inteftine,  pretty  near  to  the  entrance  of  the  bile.

So  in  the  third  example  (^),  I  agree  with  the  celebrated  Albrechtus,  who
fuppofes  the  calculi  to  have  been  form'd  in  the  inteftinum  colon  ;  which  cal-
culi he,  neverthelefs,  defcribes,  of  a  triangular  figure,  fwimming  in  water,
and  inflammable :  I  agree,  I  fay,  not  fo  rnuch  becaufe  they  contain'd,  under
an  obfcure  external  yellownefs,.  a  very  white  matter  which  was,  however,  folid,
"  like  pretty  hard  foap,"  as  becaufe  a  violent  pain  was  not  wantino-  in  the
right  hypochondrium.  But,  to  take  no  notice  of"  the  odour  of  impure  lard,"
which  proceeded  from  them  in  burning,  and  other  circumftances,  I  do  not
fee  that  any  thing  is  any  where  obferv'd  in  relation  to  the  jaundice.

Finally,  out  of  the  four  examples  which  I,  at  prelent,  chufe  to  add,  if  the
calculus  which  is  fo  flightly  mention'd  by  the  celebrated  God.  Guil.  MuUer
(I),  as  to  call  it  "  bilious"  and  to  reprefent  it  as  being  form'd  of  ftrata,
which  inclos'd  each  other,  could  have  been  defcrib'd  more  fully,  and  v/e
could  have  known  with  what  previous,  or  concomitant,  fymptoms  it  had
been  difcharg'd,  perliaps  I  fliould  admit  it  without  any  doubt  :  as  F  do  cer-
tainly admit  thofe,  that  the  celebrated  Jo.  Phil.  Burggrave  {m)  defcribes,  as
being  difcharg'd  after  violent,  and  thofe  returning,  pains  of  the  right  hypo-
chondrium, not  without  an  i6leric  colour,  both  in  the  face  and  in  the  urine.
And  fome  that  were  feen  by  the  celebrated  Brunnerus  //zj,  although  they
were  without  a  jaundice,  we  muft,  of  courfe,  admit  for  this  reafon,  becaufe
by  diffeftion,  he  found  them  already  begun  in  the  liver.

That  is  to  fay,  a  man  having  been  troubled,  almoft  ten  years,  with  a  con-

(e)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1740.  hebd.  19,11.  2.  {k)  Eorund,  t.  3.  obf.  57.

(f)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec- 3.  a.  3.  obf.  21.  (1)  Eorund.  t.  6.  obf.  69.  circa  medium.
{g)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  7.  obf.  100.  {m)  Eorund.  t.  ;.  obf  78.

{h)  Eorund.  t.  3.  obf  82.  (li)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1738.  hebd.  18.  n.  i. .

(()  Eorund.  t.  8.  obf  121.  -^

ftant' ,
4


270  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

■fVant  pain  of  the  belly,  and  particularly  of  the  right  hypochondrium,  which
at  firft  was  heavy,  and  obtufe,  though  attended  with  tenfion,  but  afterwards,
at  times,  became  acute,  and,  at  length,  very  fevcre,  nor  chang'd  its  fituation
from  the  right  hypochondrium,  fo  as  to  be  at  laft  intolerable,  difcharg'd
light,  and  yellow  calculi,  which  were  of  a  lamellated  ftruclure,  and  angular
in  their  figure.  This  man  dying  after  three  days,  had  in  his  gall-bladder,  which
■was  enlarg'd,  a  mafsof  a  dark  red  colour,  inclining  to  blue,  and  green,  and
foft  in  its  confiftence;  and  in  the  middle  of  the  cyltic  duft,  and  in  the  com-
mon du£l,  where  it  opens  obliquely  into  the  inteftinum  duodenum,  a  matter
adher'd,  which  was  fomewhat  lefs  foft  indeed,  but,  neverthelefs,  form'd  by
thofe  dufts,  into  two  "  oblong  and  rounded"  globules  :  finally,  in  the  colon
were  found  fifteen  calculi  compared  into  one  globe,  but  eafily  feparable,  and
not  yet  fo  hard  as  thofe  which  had  been  difcharg'd  by  ftool.

It  could  not,  therefore,  be  denied  that  thefe  had  been  begun  in  the  biliary
dudts  ;  and  that  having  become,  by  degrees,  lefs  foft,  they  were,  at  length,
harden'd  by  their  abode  in  the  inteftines.  And  if  "  through  the  whole  of
*'  the  difeafe,  no  fign  of  a  jaundice  manifefted  itfelf,"  either  fuppofe  that
the  matter  was  certainly  more  foft  in  the  living  body,  than  on  the  third  day
after  death,  when  it  was  found  in  the  dufts ;  and  that  therefore  it  not  al-
together obftruded  the  difcharge  of  the  bile,  and  had,  perhaps,  created
pains  by  its  acrimony,  more  than  by  its  obftruftion  :  or  call  to  mind  thofe
things  which  I  have  hinted  above  (_o)^  in  a  finguL.r  cafe  of  this  kind,  in  order
to  conceive,  that  even  when  the  common  du(5l  is  obftruded,  a  jaundice  may
fometimes  be  abfent.  And  in  confideration  of  this  it  was,  I  juft  now  faid
that  the  abfence  of  the  jaundice,  but  ftill  more  the  abfence  of  both  jaundice,
and  pain,  on  the  right  fide,  ought  to  render  the  phyfician  cautious,  and
make  him  attend  to  all  the  other  fymptoms,  united,  before  he  pronounces
any  thing.

Wherefore,  to  fubjolnthe  fourth  example,  I  fhall  not  very  readily  exclude
from  the  number  of  hepatic  calculi,  thofe  which  Fr.  Slare  (/>)  faw,  and  which
were  difcharg'd  by  a  noble  woman,  "  who  had  been  very  much  excruciated  with
*'  hepatic  pains,"  at  two  different  times,  and  in  a  few  hours  after  the  pain  :
for  although  in  writing  the  cafe  with  brevity,  as  frequently  happens,  he  has,
perhaps,  omitted  what  related  to  the  jaundice,  yet  he  has  not  omitted  the
odour  of  the  calculi  (that  is  when  burnt)  their  colour,  their  tafte,  agreeing
with  that  of  bile,  and  befides  thefe  their  lightnefs  in  water,  and  their  inflam-
mability. And  I  could  wifh  that  thefe  two  laft-mention'd  marks  were  either
never  at  all  obferv'd  in  inteftinal  calculi,  or  at  leaft  always  in  hepatic  ;  it
would  certainly  be  much  more  eafy  for  phyficians  to  take  care,  lefb  the~one,
as  Matthiolus  formerly  fear'd  (j),  fhould  be  taken  for  the  other.'

But  it  has  been  Ihown,  that  thofe  two  figns,  which  moft  phyficians  made
life  of,  with  Reverhorft  (rj,  are  frequently  fallacious.  And  if  Vallifneri
admonidi'd  us  to  beware  (j),  left  any  calculi  fhould  be  haftily  thrown  out
from  the  number  of  hepatic  calculi, for  this  reafon,  becaufe  they  neither


(0)  N.  34.  (?)  L.  5.  epift.  med.  3.

\p)  Vid.  commerc.  litt.  a.  1735.  hebd.  5.  ia (r)  Vid,  fupra  n.  25.  26.
adnot,  ad  n.  z.  (O  Adnot.  \.  cit.  fupra  ad  n,  44.


fwam


Letter  XXXVII. Article  46.  271

fwam  in  water,  nor  were  inflammable  ■,  and  this  at  a  time  when  we  had  begun
to  weaken  the  credit  of  thefe  iigns,  by  a  very  few  experiments  only  ;  how
much  more  does  it  behove  us  to  beware  at  prefent,  when  the  experiments
have  niultipUed  upon  us,  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  it  does  not  ieem  poffible  to
reduce  the  exceptions  to  any  certain  heads  {t).

And  how  much  cyftic  calcuh  may  vary,  not  only  in  colour,  and  form,  but
even  in  the  very  external,  and  internal  itrufture,  and  in  the  mode  of  their
fubftance  likcwife,  fo  as  to  be  even  fometimes  pellucid,  has  been  accurately
rernark'd  above  {u)  ;  left  if  any  fhould,  at  times,  occur,  which  differ  in  fome
refpe£ls,  or  even  confiderably,  from  the  common  appearance  of  biliary  cal.-
culi,  you  immediately  pronounce  that  they  are  not  hepatic;  and  that  you  may
previoufly,  and  particularly,  confider  the  other  properties,  and  well  weigh  all
the  fymptoms,  which  have  preceded,  accompanied,  or  been  the  confequents
of  their  excretion.

46.  Nor  indeed  need  the  magnitude  itfelf,  to  fay  nothing  of  the  immenfe
number,  always  deter  you  from  fuppofing  them  to  be  hepatic.  That  tht;
calculus  was,  without  doubt,  "  of  a  furprizing  magnitude,"  which  a  certain
woman  had  difcharg'd  by  ftool,  Vaterus  («■)  teftifies  :  and  yet  the  woman  dy-
ing a  little  after  its  difcharge,  five  others,  of  a  leffer  fize,  were  found  in  her
gall-bladder,  being  "  of  luch  a.  figure  that  it  might  be  feen  how  they  had
"  adher'd  to  that  larger  one,"  which  refembled  a  little  heart.  You  fee,
therefore,  that  this  had  all  been  in  the  cyft  with  them  ;  and  that  its  magni-
tude was  no  hindrance  to  its  being  difcharg'd  from  thence,  and  coming  down:
into  the  cavity  of  the  inteftines.

That  alfo  was  large,  inafm.uch  as  it  "  equall'd  the  joint  of  a  man's  thumb,'"
which  the  mother-in-law  of  the  celebrated  Van  Swieten  (y),  who  was  liable
to  periodical  paroxylms  of  the  jaundice,  difcharg'd  from  the  inteftines,  at  the-
^nd  of  two  days,  after  very  fevere,  and  excruciating,  pains  in  the  feat  of '
the  duodenum  itfelf;  and  which  was  hollow'd  out  into  two  cavities  on  its
furface,  that  ftiow'd  two  calculi  ftill  to  remain,  which  were,  them.felves,.
alfo  difcharg'd  afterwards,  being  not  much  lefs  in  fize  than  the  former.  And
yet  the  great  bulk  of  this  calculus  had  not  prevented  it  from  ftruggling
through  the  narrow  pafl"ages  of  the  du£bs.

Nor  is  it  to  be  wonder'd  at :  for  although  the  du6tus  choledocus  is  narrow,,
although  the  cyftic  is  ftill  more  narrow,  and  the  paffage  of  it  impeded  by
valves,  they  are  neverthelefs  membranous,  and,  for  that  reafon,  can  bear
almoft  incredible  dilatation.  And  from  this  caufe  it  was  that  Bezoldus  (z),.
found  the  cyftic  duft  "  eight  times  larger  than  it  generally  is,  fo  as  to  equal
"  the  thicknefs  of  a  man's  thumb  ;  and  in  the  middle  of  its  length,  a  cal-
"  cuius  of  a  remarkable  fize."  And  I  myfelf,  as  is  faid  elfewhere  {a)^  have
feen,  "  the  common  and  cyftic  duds,  and  the  hepatic  quite  within  the  liver,
"  fo  dilated  as  to  have  a  circumference  equal  to  two  Inches,"  in  an  old  man,
in  whofe  cyft,  but  particularly  in  the  branches  of  the  hepatic  du6t,  I. found
calculi.


(t.)  N.  25.  26.  (_)<)  Comment,  fupraad-n.  15.  cit.  §.  g^o.

(u)  N.  \b.&  feq.  (e)  Diff.  de  cholelitho  caf.  i.  n.  5.

{x)  DifT,  fupra  ad  n,  16.  cIt.  thef.  3, .  \a\  Epiil.  anat,  i.  n.  43.


B.UE-


2  72  Book  III. Of  Difeafcs  of  the  Belly.

But  in  a  woman  whofe  gaU-bladder  contain'd  a  large  calculus,  although
not  yet  quite  indurated,  the  orifice  of  tiie  common  canal,  where  it  opens
into  the  duodenum,  which  is,  at  other  times,  very  narrow,  was  feen,  by  Hei-
fter  {b),  to  be  to  dilated,  "  that  it  could  with  eafe  admit  the  little  finger  of  a
"  man."  And  Hen.  Albertus  Nicolai  (c),  having  found  the  fame  canal  ex-
panded quite  to  the  gall-bladder,  "  in  a  very  extraordinary  manner,"  found
the  orifice  no  lefs  open  than  it  was  found  by  Heifter.  But  the  younger  du
Verney  (d)  had  even  feen  it  larger.  And  Trew  (e)  had  feen  it  very  lax  in  a
body,  wherein  the  biliary  du6ts  were  equally  dilated  :  the  diameter  of  which,
was  found  to  be  three  times  larger  than  it  naturally  is,  by  Kniphofius  (f).

Other  obfervations  of  this  kind,  which  were  at  hand,  I  omit  to  mention  5
for  thefe  that  I  have  mention'd,  are  not  only  fufEcient,  but  I  (liall  produce
fome  prefently  (g),  among  which  there  will  be  one  inftance  of  a  much  greater
dilatation.  Since,  therefore,  thefc  canals  may  be  fo  dilated,  and  are  found  to
be  fo  dilated,  there  is  no  reafon  why  we  lliould  doubt  that  gall-ftones,  even
when  they  are  of  a  confiderable  fize,  may  pafs  through  them  -,  except  when
thole  pains  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  which  are  the  natural  effects  of  fuch
a  dilatation,  have  not  preceded.  Wherefore  as  I  commend  Hoffmann,  when
fpeaking  of  thole  twenty  ftones  of  a  remarkable  fize  (h),  for  not  fup-
pofing  it  altogether  incredible,  that  in  the  dufts  whereof  I  fpeak,  "  very
"  fmall  bilious  calculi  might  firft  adhere,  and,  by  degrees,  get  an  increafe
"  from  the  bile  which  flow'd  by  them,  and  a  great  dilatation  of  thefe  dudfts
"  being  fucceflively  made,  be  obftrufted  there,  for  a  long  time-,"  fo  again
I  commend  the  fame  author,  even  ftill  more,  becaufe  he  has  fhown  him-
felf  to  be  doubtful,  and  even  more  inclin'd  to  the  contrary  opinion,  for  this
reafon,  becaufe  thefe  ftones  had  been  difcharg'd,  "  without  any  violent  pains
"  of  the  right  fide  having  preceded."

I  alfo  fet  down  as  commendable  in  Bezoldus  (i),  that  though  pains  of  the
.right  hypochondrium  had,  for  the  fpace  of  fix  years  and  more,  preceded  the
difcharge  of  a  gall-ftone  •,  and  although  he,  himfelf,  and  not  without  reafon,
judg'd  it  to  have  proceeded  from  the  biliary  dufts ;  yet  he  profefs'd  that  he
v/ould  "  not  obftinately  adhere  to  the  opinion,"  I  fuppofe  becaufe  there
had  not  been  an  unufual  feverity  of  pain  in  that  part,  and  greater  than  at  any
other  time,  when  the  ftone,  having,  at  length,  overcome  the  narrow  pafi^es
of  the  orifice  of  the  dudus  communis,  fuddenly  burft  forth  into  the  inteftine  ;
or,  at  leaft,  becaufe  there  had  been  no  exacerbation  of  pain,  in  proportion
to  the  great  bulk  of  the  ftone  :  and  if  it  had  been  confin'd  in  thefe  du6ts  fo
long  a  time,  it  certainly  could  not  but  have  brought  on  a  jaundice,  unlefs
fome  extraordinary  difpofition  of  the  duds  be  fuppos'd ;  yet  there  is  not  a
word  faid  of  either  of  thefe  appearances.

I  wilh  I  could  fpeak  equally  in  commendation  of  Abraham  Vater(y^),  in
other  refpefts  a  learned,  and  fagacious  phyfician,  who  does  not  doubt  but
two  calculi  "  of  a  confiderable  magnitude,"  that  were  difcharg'd  by  ftool,

(1^)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf.  181.  (f)  Eorund.  t.  8.  obf.  30.

(f)  Commerc.  litt.  a.  1732.  hebd.  33.  n.  11. (g)  N.  47.
Alb.  4.  C^')  Ob'^'  fupra  ad  n.  46.  cit.

(d)  Loco  indicat.  fupra  ad  n.  13.  (i)  Diff.  modo  cit.  caf.  2  &  §.  7.

{e)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  4.  obf.  140.  (k)  Obf.  3.  fupra  ad  n.  42.  cit.  §.  z.  &  feq.

"  came


Letter  XXXVII. Article  47.  273

'■'  came  quite  from  the  gall-bladder,  although  "  neither  pain,  nor  any  other
"  troublefome  fymptom,  had  been  previoufly  perceiv'd  from  them,"  and
though,  even  at  the  time,  the  excruciating  pains  of  the  belly  were  not  feated
in  the  right  hypochondrium,  but  "  had  firft  occupied  the  umbilical  region,
"  and,  at  length,  fallen  upon  the  region  of  the  loins."  Yet  he  is  not  with-
out his  weight  of  realbns.  But  while  among  thefe,  he  produces  examples  of
the  very  great  dilatation  of  the  very  narrow  ofculum  uteri  in  child-birth,  and
of  the  great  diftention  of  the  (lender  ureters  in  calculous  patients,  it  is  fur-
prizing,  it  never  occur'd  to  him,  that  neither  the  one,  nor  the  other,  is  ever
dilated,  without  fevere  pains.

47.  However,  let  us  fee  what  may  be  faid  for  Vaterus.  An  obfervation
of  Traffelmann  is  extant  in  Schenck  f/j,  in  which  he  defcribes  "  the  nie-
"  atus  of  the  bile,  where  it  is  inferted  into  the  duodenum,"  as  he  himlejf
had  found  it,  "  wide,  inflated  like  a  ftomach,  and  fill'd  on  every  fide  wirh
"  calculi,"  fome  larger,  and  fome  fmaller.  If  youafk  what  was-  the  proxi-
mate caufe  of  the  patient's  death  (who  was  a  man  of  princely  rank)  •,  it  was
a  coma  vigil,  degenerating  into  an  apoplexy.  If  with  what  fymptoms  he
was  previoufly  troubled,  you  will  find  nothing  at  all,  befide  an  incredible
thirft,  wherewith  he  had  been  tortur'd  all  his  life-time.  And  can  you  fup-
pofe,  that  the  phyfician  who  made  this  obfervation,  and  who  appears  to  have
been  a  diligent  man,  would,  if  a  jaundice,  or  any  pain  in  the  right  hypo-
chondrium, or  if  any  other  fymptom,  which  related  to  the  meatus  of  the  bile
being  fo  diftended  with  calculi,  had  afflidted  his  own  prince,  either  have
been  ignorant  of  it,  or  have  pafs'd  it  over,  in  an  obfervation  which  was  not
very  fliort  ?  But  if  you  do  not  believe  this,  you  muft  of  courfe  acknovv'ledge,
that  befides  another  du(5t  by  which  bile  might  be  carried  to  the  intefxines,  and
a_  jaundice  prevented,  it  is  poflible  that  the  meatus  choledocus  may,  by
means  of  calculi,  which  were  before  very  few,  being  gradually  increas'd
therein,  both  in  number,  and  magnitude,  be  immoderately  diftended  in-
deed, but  fo  flowly,  and  gently,  that  the  patient  may  not  at  all  complain
of  it.

Yet  whatever  you  may  think  of  this  cafe,  you  will  always  be  of  opinion
with  me,  that  thefe  things  are  very  rare,  and  will,  at  the  fame  time,  obfervc,
that  quite  a  different  judgment  is  to  be  form'd  of  quiefcent  calculi,  and  of  thole
which  have  pafs'd  through  the  ftreights  of  the  whole  cyftic,  and  common
duft,  even  to  its  termination,  by  force.  I  do  not,  however,  require,  that
as  in  the  obfervation  of  Tinftorius  (m),  after  a  pain  of  the  right  fide,  which
was  extended  to  the  inteftines,  there  be  difcharg'd,  together  with  the  cal-
culi, "  a  bloody  and  purulent  matter  -,"  it  is  fufficient  for  me,  as  it  was
for  Bartholin  (n),  "  that  the  dudlus  choledocus  alone  was  dilated,"  which
was  feen  by  him,  on  a  fimilar  occafion ;  and  as,  fometimes,  during  this  dila-
tation, when  the  calculi  are  confin'd  in  the  narrow  parts  of  the  dudts,  and  beoin
to  be  mov'd  from  thence,  the  duds  are  hurt  by  the  angles  of  the  calculi,  and
the  difcharge,  at  length,  happens  not  without  the  rupture  of  an  abfcefs,  which
was  thus  brought  on,  and  an  excretion  of  blood  and  pus  by  ftool,  fo,  for  the

(/)  Obf.  med.I.  3,  ubi  cc  cholidocho  meatu (?«)  Vid.  fupra  n.  42.
ohf.  3.  Ill)  In  ead.  ohf. '

5^0L.  IL  .N  n  moJi


2  74  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

moft  part,  this  dilatation  happens  with  much  lefs  violence,  but  fcarcely  eve
without  pain.

I  have  already  defcrib'd  in  a  former  work  (o),  and  taken  notice  of,  even  in
the  preceding  letter  f/)),  an  obfervation  of  Valfalva,  in  which  the  upper  part  of
the  duftus  choledocus  communicated  with  the  large  cavity  of  an  hepatic  ab-
fcefs,  and  the  other  part  of  it  was  enlarg'd  fo  as  to  admit  the  finger,  and,  by
this  means,  Ihow  how  in  a  living  body,  it  could  tranfmit  more  than  two
hundred  veficles,  with  which  even  then  that  abfcefs  abounded,  to  the  in-
tefline.  Of  the  many  which  had  formerly  been  difcharg'd  by  that  meatus,
it  is  probable  that  fome  had  been  obftrufted  in  the  narrow  part  of  the  duft,
by  coagula  of  blood,  and  that  the  bile,  the  paiTage  of  which  was  reftrain'd,
had  by  forcing  from  above  downwards,  together  with  the  blood,  dilated  the
canal.

This,  however,  is  certain,  that  the  morbus  regius,  vomitings,  and  pains,
in  particular,  had  preceded,  which  pains  were  fo  violent  in  the  right  hypo-
chondrium,  as  frequently  to  excite  the  moft  fevere  diftentions  of  the  nerves.
Which  fymptoms,  and  others  there  advanc'd,  though  you  may  ^in  great  mea-
fure  refer  to  fo  very  confiderable  a  difeafe  of  the  liver,  yet  if  any  one  (hould
choofe  to  refer  fome  part  of  them  to  the  dilatation  of  the  meatus  choledocus,
you  certainly  cannot  deny  the  plaufibility  of  his  opinion.  And  if  you  do
not  deny  that  this  may  happen  without  pain,  in  a  duel  which  is  not  irritated
by  angular,  rough,  and  large  ftones,  but  even  relax'd  by  blood,  and  ichorous
matter,  often  flowing  through  it,  confider  whether  you  can  poffibly  fuppofe,
that  the  fame  can  happen  without  pains  when  the  lower  ftreights  of  this  duft
have  not  been  previoufly  relax'd,  but  even  contraded,  from  the  irritations  of
the  calculi  ?

48.  Do  not  expe(fl  that  I  fliould  make  this  letter,  which  is  already  too  long,
ftiU  longer,  by  adding  many  things  in  regard  to  the  cure  of  this  difeafe.  Of
which  it  will  be  fufficient  to  hint  a  few  things.  I  have  already  faid  (q)  that
this  diforder  often  recurs,  nor  is  certainly  known,  unlefs  when  fome  calculus
has  been  difcharg'd,  which  previous  pains  about  the  region  of  the  liver,  had
prov'd  to  have  proceeded  from  thence.  Therefore,  one  part  of  the  cure
will  be  to  endeavour,  when  very  fharp  pains  of  this  kind  fhall  return,  that  the
calculus  may  be  diQodg'd  from  thefe  ftreights.  A  fecond  part,  that  if  any
other  calculus  remains,  after  this  has  been  diflodg'd,  it  may,  if  poffible,  be
diflblv'd.  A  third,  to  prevent  the  generation  of  new  calculi.  And  each  of
thefe  parts  of  the  cure  are  to  be  attended  to  feparately,  and  diftinguifti'd  ac-
cording to  our  pofition,  nor  ought  the  times,  which  belong  to  every  one  of
them,  berafhly  confounded,  as  fome  feem  to  do,  who  heap  up  remedies  promif-
cuoufly  upon  their  patients ;  but  the  nature  of  the  cafe,  and  the  analogous
cure  of  the  urinary  calculus,  which  is  diftinft  in  like  manner,  ought  to  be
fet  before  our  eyes.

49.  When  the  patient,  then,  is  attack'd  with  thefe  violent  pains,  we  muft
do  all  in  our  power  to  appeafe  them,  not  only  to  prevent  his  being  rack'd,
and  falling  into  danger  of  inflammation,  or  diftention  of  the  nerves,  but  alio

foj  Epift.  3,  anat.  n.  10.  (?)  N.  42  &  44.

0>)  N.  10.

2  that


Letter  XXXVIL Article  50.  275

that  the  calculus  may  get  through  the  narrow  paflages.  For  the  more  this
concretion,  like  a  heterogenous  body,  irritates  the  dufts,  the  more  the  dufts
are  contrafted  upon  the  calculus,  for  which  reafon  they  both  increafe  their
own  tortures,  and  prevent  the  paffage  of  the  ftone.  For  this  reafoa  it  is  ne-
ceflary  to  relax  again  and  again  :  and  to  thofe  things  which  are,  of  themfelves,
relaxing,  and  emollient,  mufh  be  added,  for  the  ^me  end,  diluters,  demul-
cents, anoydnes,  and  the  moft  temperate  antilpafmodics,  and,  if  intolerable,
pain  compels  you,  even  opiates.

Nor  is  it  neceflary  to  relax,  only  by  internal  remedies,  but  alfo  by  reme-
dies externally  applied,  as  far  as  it  is  in  our  power ;  i  mean  by  the  ufe  of
clyfters,  un6tions,  fomentations,  and  baths.  To  all  which,  where  there  is  a
fulnels  of  blood,  I  do  not  fee  why  vensfeftlon  (hould  not  be  premis'd,
not  only  to  prevent  the  chance  of  an  inflammation  being  brought  on,  but
alfo  to  prevent  the  paflages  from  being  Itreighten'd,  by  the  turgefcency  of
the  fmall  veflels.  Moreover,  as  I  recommend  every  thing  that  may  relax,
fo  I  violently  fufpect  every  thing  that  can  irritate.  For  the  detriment  which
they  bring,  by  forcing  the  dufts  to  contrail:  themfelves,  and  become  fl:ill
narrower,  is  certain  •,  and  the  advantage  which  many  expeft  from  the  impul-
fion,  and  extrufion,  of  the  calculus,  uncertain.

Yet  there  are,  you  will  fay,  inflrances  of  calculi  reported,  which  powerful
impellents,  or  ftrong  emetics,  and  purgatives,  have  diflodg'd.  I  grant  it.
But  who  dares,  purpofely,  to  imitate  the  happy  rafhnefs  of  a  cafe,  without
knowing  (and  who  can  for  certain  know  ?)  that  the  paflages  are,  already,
fufEciently  relax'd,  fo  that  nothing  but  the  laft  impulfion,  and  agitation,  is
•wanting ;  and  that  the  cafe,  at  prefent,  is  not  quite  the  reverfe,  fo  that  by
this  rafli  and  hafl:y  method,  the  calculus  mufl:  be  thrown  into  ftreights,  from
whence  nothing  can  diflodge  it ;  by  which,  not  only  the  pains  become  more
excruciating,  but  the  danger  is  greatly  increas'd.

And  indeed  I  fee  Hoffmann  aflerting  (r),  that  emetics  "  are  often  found  to

"  be  highly  pernicious, if  a  calculus,  inherent  in  the  duftus  cyfl:icus,

"  produces  very  grievous  anxieties  about  the  prascordia ;"  and  Reverhorfl:
(s),  "  readily  confefiing,"  that  emetics  "  are  a  doubtful  kind  of  remedy,"
whatever  du6t  is  obfl:rufl:ed  by  the  calculus ;  and,  finally,  Scheffelius  (/),  pur-
pofely to  omit  others,  for  the  fake  of  brevity,  exprefly  fays,  in  regard  to
purging  medicines:  "  this  I  certainly  would  not  imitate,  as  I  fliould  fear  left
"  the  calculi  were  lb  fituated,  at  the  fame  time,  that  they  could  not  be
"  expell'd,  but  might  be  difturb'd  in  their  fituation,  and  the  pains  from
"  thence,  exafperated,"  wliich  even  anger  alone,  as  he  immediately  fhows,
and  not  only  the  fcimukis  of  purging  medicines,  eafily  excites.

50.  You  perceive  that  he  fpeaks  of  purging  medicines,  at  the  time,  alfo,
v/hen  the  pains  have  ceas'd,  by  reafon  of  the  calculus  being  difcharg'd  :  which
;s  the  fecond  part  of  the  cure.  And  I  would,  even  then,  abftain  from  pur-
gatives, for  the  reafons  juft  now  mention'd,  and  would  rather  cleanfe  the
inteftines,  by  more  mild  remedies,  lefl;  the  calculus  that  has  been  thrown  in-
to their  canal,  fliould  happen  to  be  obfl:ru£ted  there,  and  get  fuch  an  in-

{rj  C.  12.  fupraad  n.  44.  cit.  in  cautel.  §.  i. CtJ  Diff.  fnpra  adn.  13,  cit.  §.  30.
f^  Difot,  fupra  ad  n.  16.  cit.  §.66.

N  n  2  creafe


276  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

creafe  of  bulk,  as  would  make  ir,  fome  time  or  other,  hurtful  to  tlie  patient.
And  I  would  have  you  beware  of  calling  me  a  too  timid  praftioncr,  for  this
rcufon,  or  if  you  choofc  it,  even  call  me  fo  -,  for  I  am  lefs  afraid  of  this,  than
of  being  call'd  a  very  bold' one,  or,  at  leaft,  in  this  fpecies  of  diforder,  in
particular,  wherein,  as  is  demonftrated  above  (z^),  frequently  no  kind  of  in-
convenience is  perceiv'd,  when  the  calculi  are  in  a  ftate  of  reft.  For  which
reafon  I  would  have  you  ceafe  to  wonder,  that  in  this  fecond  part  of  the  cure,
I  have  omitted  the  confideration  of  impellents,  and  have  only  propos'd  this
one  thing  to  be  done,  I  mean  that  if  any  calculus  fhould  happen  to  remain,
it  may  be  difiblv'd,  provided  it  be  poffible  to  diffolve  it.

It  does  not,  however,  efcape  me,  how  little  the  remedies,  recommended
for  this  purpofe,  generally  anfwer  the  expedlations  of  the  patient,  or  the
promifes  of  the  praftitioner,  whether  they  are  of  a  mild  kind,  which  I  would
willingly  admit,''  or  of  a  very  acrid  nature,  or  in  any  meafure  irritating,
which  I  would  fhun.  Nor  is  it  to  be  wonder'd  at -,  fince  even  out  of  the
body,  the  calculi  which  are  long  preferv'd  in  thofe  fluids,  by  which,  with-
in the  body,  they  are  fuppos'd  to  be  dilTolv'd,  are  by  no  means  difiblv'd,  un-
lefs  tlrey  happen  to  be  of  the  fofter  kind,  fuch  as  Borrichius  (x)  faw  "  almoil
"  wholly  difiblv'd  in  warm  water,"  and  after  him  Hoff^mann  (y) ;  and  I,  even
in  water  which  was  not  warm,  have  feen  them  contraft  fifures,  and  burfl:  into
iragments,  as  I  have  written  to  Schroeckius  (z).  And  they  even  fometime?,
of  themlelves,  break  afunder  into  fmall  pieces,  as  I  have  obferv'd  in  fome
black  ones ;  or  even  melt  into  a  moifture,  as  that  which  Lanzonus  (a)  ob-
ferv'd "  to  be  fpontaneoufly  dififolv'd,  into  a  green  liqour."

For  although,  in  order  to  defcribe  this  calculus,  he  fays  that  "  he  had
"  found  the  whole  of  the  bilious  juice  to  be  ftony,"  he  has  either  abus'd  the
word  "  ftony,"  in  order  to  fay  that  the  bile  was  converted  into  a  calculus,
or  the  cruft  feem'd  in  great  part  to  be  ftony,  whereas  the  internal  fub-
ftance  was  very  foft.  On  the  contrary,  the  jun6ture  may  be  very  foft,  and
the  fubftance,  neverthelefs,  extremely  compaft.  Thus  Platner  (l>)  faw  that
the  fragments  of  a  calculus,  which,  not  being  very  cldfe,  "  had  foon  fallen
"  into  pieces,  could  neither  be  difiblv'd  by  warm  water,  nor  by  fpirit  of
"  wine,  although  they  were  fteep'd  in  thefe  liquors,  for  feveral  days  together,
"  in  a  warm  place."  So  alfo  Bezoldus  (c),  having  left  little  pieces  of  cal-
culi, both  in  warm  water,  and  fpirit  of  wine,  even  reftiHed  for  fome  time,
did  not  fee  that  they  were  "  entirely  difilblv'd."  Nor  did  Hoffmann  (d)  fee
"  that  gall-ftones,  v/hich  were  of  a  more  folid  texture,  and  faturated  colour,"'
were  dilTolv'd  in  this  manner.

Vallifncri  (e),  on  the  other  hand,  has  experienc'd  that  they  are  difl"olv*d
by  no  liquor  more  eafily,  than  by  reftified  fpirits  of  wine  made  hot,  and  the
fpirit  of  turpentine.  And  in  regard  to  the  fpirit  of  wine,  he  has  the  author
of  whom  hIMer  (f)  fpcaks  agreeing  with  him  •,  but  fome  diflent  from  hini
in  regard  to  the  other  fpirit,  and  amongft  thefe  Tacconus  (g),  who  entirely

(«)  N.  37.  33.  (r)  DifT.  de  cholelitho  §.  5.

(.v)  Apud  Bartholin,  cent.  3.  epiPc.  med.  85. fiiV  §.  6.  paulo  ante  cit.

(j)  Cap.  3.  fupra  ad  n.  4^.  cit.  §,^6.  (e)  Kpift.  fnpra  ad  n.  13.  eit..

(z)  Obf.  fupra  indie,  ad  n.  20.  C/J  Nota  "  r"  fupra  ad  n..  25,.  cit..


(aj  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3.  obf.  62.  CgJ  Supra  ad  n.  16.  cit

(1^)  Progr,  fupra  adji.  17.  cit.

5


differs-.


Letter  XXXVII. Article  50.  277

difFers  In  refpefl  to  them  both.  The  fame  author ;  not  to  be  too  prolix*
fince  you  may,  of  yourfelf,  -fee  in  the  authors,  whofe  names  I  have  men-
tion'd,  and  in  others  alfo,  fuch  experiments  made  with  thefe  and  other  li-
quors ;  the  fame  author,  I  fay,  although  he  had  feen  one  of  thofe  calculi,  of
■which  he  has  firft  fpoken,  that  he  had  thrown  into  fpirit  of  nitre,  "  be-
"  come  very  tender,"  neverthekfs  affirms  of  thofe  which  he  fpeaks  of  laft,
that  they  "  were  not  at  all  chang'd"  by  that  fpirit,  which  botk  Vallifneri  (^),,
and  Bezoldus  (i),  had,  in  like  manner,  obferv'd.

From  thefe  varieties  you  will,  moreover,  learn  this  circutBftance,  that  we
Ihould  nor  know  what  lithontriptic  we  ought  to  ufe,  in  this,  or  in  that  par-
ticular cafe,  if  it  were  certain,  that  thefe  calculi,  as  they  are,  for  the  moft
parr,  lefs  hard,  and  more  friable,  than  the  urinary  calculi,  fo  they  are  more
cafily  difiblv'd  by  their  peculiar  lithontriptics :  although  in  comparing  both
together,  not  only  the  fubftance,  and  the  adhefion,  or  joining,  of  the  parts.
are  to  be  confider'd,  but  alfo  how  much  fooner  the  difTolvent  liquor,,
and  how  much  greater  a  quantity  of  it,  is  carried  to  the  urinary  palfages
than  to  the  biliary.

And  on  account  of  this  anrmadverfion  it  was,  that,  although  in  the  firft.
part  of  this  cure,  very  large  draughts  of  warm  water  are  propos'd  by
many,  I  faid  nothing  thereof,  which  is  a  fubjefh  I  (hould  not  have  been  filent.
upon,  if  the  fame  were  propos'd,  when  a  calculus  was  confin'd  in  the  kid-
nies,  or  ureters.  Yet  if  you  aflc  which  I  would  feleft  in  particular,  out  of
fuch  a  number  of  different  remedies,  that  are  promifcuoufly  recom.mended
by  many,  in  this  fecond  part  of  the  cure ;  no  others  more  readily,  I  fliall  an-
fwer,  than  thofe  v/hich  are  the  moft  incapable  of  doing  harm  ;  as,  for  ii>-
ftance,  the  juice  of  taraxacum,  fince  with  this  Boerhaave  is  faid,  by  his
difciple  Scheffelius  (k),  "  to  have  often  cur'd  the  calculus  of  the  liver  fuc-r
"  cefsfuUy,"  or  of  frefli  grafs,  which  has  been  celebrated  by  every  body,,
fince  Glifibn  (/),  and  Sylvius  (;»),  for  this  purpofe.  And  certainly  the  il-
luftrious  Van  Swieten  {72),  has  ftiown  what  may  be  done  in  fuch  a  cafe,  by
this  one  herb  alone,  from  the  example  of  a  certain  pauper.

This  author,  alfo,  having  overcome  this  diforder  in  others,  likewife,  by
decodlions  of  grafs,  and  taraxacum,  and  by  other  things  taken  conftantly,.
for  a  long  time  together,  fays,  "  that  he  had  then  always  found  calculi,
"-  or,  at  leaft,  calculous  coagula,  in  a  very  confiderable  quantity,  in  the
"  ftools."  And  akhough  he  confefl^es,  that  he  was  not,  for  this  reafon,
certain  that  thefe  were  "  the  parts  of  comminuted  calculi,"  rather  than  the
fmall  beginnings  of  new  calculi,  fuch  as  I  have  niore  than,  once  demon-
ftrated,  above  (c),  to  be  found  in  the  cyil ;  yet  the  obfervations  of  GliiTon,
which  he  himfelf  alfo  allows  of,  fufficiently  ftiovv  that  thofe  calculous  tubu-
li  {p)  which  are  form'd  in  the  biliary  pafiages,  of  oxen,  in  the  winter,  are
difiblv'd  by  feeding  on  frefli  grafs;  for  otherwife,  he  would  not  have  found
thefe  tubuli  frequently  "  about  the  time  of  Lent,  or  Eafter  only,  or  before,,'*'
but  afterwards  equally.

{h)  Epift.  cit.  fm)  Prax.  med.  1.  i.  c.  4;.-n.  13.

(/■)  Di(r.  cit.  §.  6.  '  (n)  §.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  46.

{k)  Differt.  fupraad  n.,  13.  cit,  §.  31.  (0)  N.  ig.

(/)  Anat.  liepat,  c.  7.  (/)  Tid iupra,  n.  is;

51,.  Fina%,


278  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

51.  Finally,  the  third  part  of  the  cure  will  prevent  new  calculi  being  gc
nerated,  in  the  firft  place,  if  itlhall  be  able  to  amend  whatever  diforders  there
may  be  in  the  liver,  and,  in  like  manner,  in  the  blood,  upon  which  the  pro-
duction of  calculi  depends:  in  the  fecond  place,  if  it  remove  thofe  things  by
which  thefe  diforders  are  us'd  to  be  brought  on.  Thefe  diforders  in  the  liver,
are  a  weaknefs,  laxity,  obftruftion,  and  other  things  of  the  like  kind  -,  and
in  the  blood  a  quantity  of  vifcid  and  earthy  particles,  and  a  flow  propulfion
thereof,  efpecially  through  the  liver.  Moreover,  thefe  diforders  are  brought
on  by  the  too  frequent  ufe  of  unwholefome  meats,  and  drinks ;  by  the  bad
digeftion  of  the  fame  •,  by  the  quantity  of  diluting  liquors  not  anfwering  to
the  quantity  of  food  taken  in  -,  by  too  much  fleep ;  by  a  fedentary  life  ;  efpe-
cially by  bending  the  body  too  much  forwards  ;  by  violent  pafTions  of  the
mind,  and  any  other  caufes  which  you  fee  plainly,  of  yourlelf,  ought  to  be  re-
mov'd  by  the  phyfician.

But,  without  doubt,  this  part  of  the  cure  is  fufficiently  treated  of  by  many.
Yet  as  it  very  often  happens,  either  by  the  conformity  of  the  patient  not  be-
ing fufficiently  continu'd,  or  by  the  difficulty  of  bringing  back  the  liver  to  its
perfedl  found  ftate,  juft  as  we  fee  in  the  cafe  of  urinary  calculi,  that  new
ones  are  generated  -,  neverthelefs,  it  will,  at  lead,  be  worth  while  to  endea-
vour, that,  as  far  as  is  poffible,  the  canals  of  the  bile  may  be  preferved  foft,
and  lax,  that  they  may  not  give  great  refiftance  to  the  new  calculi  which  are
to  pafs  through  them,  but  may  eafily  yield  •,  and  this  will  be  brought  about,
by  means  of  a  continual,  but  moderate,  ufe  of  diluters.

52.  As  to  the  lithotomy  which  has  alfo  lately  been  thought  of,  in  the  gall-
bladder, do  not  be  furpriz'd  that  I  made  no  mention  of  it  above.  For,  in
the  firft  place,  the  pains  which  are  excited  by  gall-ftones,  that  are  endea-
vouring to  difcharge  themfelves,  are  not  only  bi'ought  on  by  thofe  which  come
from  the  cyft,  but  alfo  by  thofe  that  come  from  the  hepatic  dudl.  In  the
fecond  place,  thofe  cyftic  ftones  which  are  the  largeft,  and  on  account  of
which  this  lithotomy  feems,  to  fome  perfons,  to  be  chiefly  defirable,  neither
endeavour  to  difengage  themfelves,  nor  create  any  great  uneafmefs  •,  or,  at
leaft,  for  the  moft  part.  And  to  thefe  we  may  add,  that  unlefs  fome  acci-
dent has  united  the  gall-bladder  with  the  peritoneum,  the  cutting  of  it  is
deftruftive ;  and  although  this,  connexion  has  taken  place,  in  fome  bodies,
from  the  effeft  of  difeafe,  in  which  chance  gave  occafion  to  fuggeft  this  new
fpecies  of  lithotomy,  as  it  often  has  fuggefted  other  things,  yet  how  feldom
fuch  a  connexion  is  met  with,  even  in  a  morbid  ftate  of  thefe  parts,  is  well
known  to  anatomifts  :  and  furgeons  know  very  well,  how  difficult  it  is  to  be
certain  when  it  does  really  exift.

Laftof  all,  although  there  were  no  danger  in  cutting,  can  you  fuppofe
there  would  be  no  great  difficulty  in  healing  the  wound  ?  We  have,  before
our  eyes,  examples  of  three  women,  one  of  Bologna  (q),  of  Francfort  (r),
and  of  Gottingen  (i),  in  whom  a  tumour,  having  arifen  in  the  epigaftrium,  and
being  open'd,  either  by  art,  or  fpontaneoufly,  difcharg'd  cyftic  calculi  at  its
aperture.  I  read  that  the  firft  was  cur'd  :  that  the  fecond  had  a  fiftula  left,
by  which  a  thin  and  chylous  kind  of  liquor,  but  of  a  yellow  colour,  diftili'd  :

(y)  Vid.  Taccon.  fupra  ad  n.  16.  cit.  Q-J  Aft.  n.  c,  tom.  6.  obf.  69.

and


Letter  XXXVII. Article  53. ^  279

and  the  third  had  an  ulcer  remain,  which,  with  itsfanies,  difcharg'd  "  bilious
*'  calculi  at  times."  And  this  laft  hiftory  may,  perhaps,  lead  the  furgeons  in-
to hefitation,  whether  the  wound  fhould  be  fliut  up  afterwards,  or  kept  open,
in  fome  meafure,  for  fear  of  new  calculi.

It  does  not  efcape  me,  however,  that  before  the  fwelling  occupies  all  the
mulcles  which  lie  before  the  cyft,  caufes  a  confiderable  fuppuration  on  all
fides,  and  the  pus  forms  winding  finuflfes  for  itfelf,  which  require  fo  much
diligence,  and  application,  in  the  cure,  as  in  the  Franckfort  woman  -,  it  does
not,  I  fay,  efcape  me,  that  the  cafe  muft,  of  courfe,  turn  out  more  fuccefs-
fully,  with  thofe  who  open,  by  incifion,  the  cyft  which  has  now  clofely  coa-
lefc'd  with  the  peritonseum  :  and  that  the  figns  of  fuch  a  coalition  have  been
pointed  out  by  a  fkilful  furgeon.  Neverthelefs,  as  it  is  a  thing  that  is  entire-
ly new,  notwithftanding  it  may  fometimes  have  great  utility,  I  thought  it  ra-
ther became  me  to  wait  till  time  fliall  confirm  its  advantage,  and  remove  all
doubts,  dangers,  and  difficulties,  by  many  repeated  experiments,  than  to
be  in  hafte  to  propofe  the  operation,  juft  as  if  it  were  altogether  perfeft.

53.  Thus  you  have  a  treatife  on  biliary  calculi ;  not  that,  indeed,  which
Vallifneri  wilh'd  for  (/) ;  but  as  much  as  it  was  in  my  power  curforily  to  add
to  thefe  things  of  which  I  had  written,  lefs  at  large,  before,  once,  twice,
gnd  even  three  times.  And  if  Sofigenes,  as  you  have  it  in  Pliny  («),  "  in  his
"  three  meditations,  although  he  was  more  accurate  than  others,  did  not
"  ceafe  to  have  doubts,  and  frequently  to  correft  himfelf ;"  do  not  wonder
that  I,  though  not  a  negligent  man  indeed,  but  yet  by  no  means  to  be  com-
par'd  with  thofe  who  have  hitherto  written  of  thefe  calculi,  fhould  have  added
this  fourth  meditation  to  the  three  former. Farewell.

(j)  Haller  opufc.  pathol.  obf.  33.  hift.  8.  (u)  Nat.  hift.  1.  i8.  c.  2£.

(/)  Epift.  fupraad  n.  13.  cit.  adnot.  2.


L  E  T  T  E


sBo  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.


LETTER the THIRTY-EIGHTH

Treats  of  the  Hydrops  Afcites,  Tympanites,  of  the  Dropfy
of  the  Peritonseum,  and  of  others  that  are  call'd  en-
cyfted  Dropfies.

I  Am  afraid  that  the  very  long  letter  which  was  lately  fent  you  from  me,
wHl  be  fucceeded  by  one  flill  longer,  as  I  fee  that  the  twenty-firft  fedlion  in
the  Sepulchretum,  the  argument  of  which  I  muft  now  purfue,  that  is  de
Ventris  Tumore  Hydrope,  is  fo  prolix.  For  in  regard  to  the  nineteenth  feftion,
which  is  entitled  de  Scorhiito^  or  the  twentieth,  entitled  de  Cachexia  Anafarca,
Lecuophlegmatia,  I  have  no  reafon  to  dwell  upon  either,  fince  in  thofe  cities,
wherein  1  have  fpent  my  life,  it  happens  very  rarely,  if  ever,  that  any  one
is  carried  off  by  the  fcurvy  -,  and  you  will  find  difleftions  of  thofe  who  have
died  of  this  diieafe,  up  and  down  among  other  authors,  and  fome  particular
diffeftions  in  the  writings  of  Poupart  (a)  and  Mead  (b)  ;  and  the  three  other
diforders,  cachexy,  anfaraca,  and  leucophlegmatia,  are  of  fuch  a  kind,  that
they  may,  with  much  more  propriety,  or  at  leaft  with  much  more  convenience,
be  refer'd  to  other  heads.

Wherefore,  the  feftion  that  is  dedicated  to  them  ;  when  you  take  away  the
Schoha,  and  the  obfervations,  which,  as  we  are  exprefsly  admonifh'd,  relate
to  fevers,  phthifis,  pains,  or  tumours,  of  the  belly,  melancholy,  paralyfis,  dy-
fpnoea,  fyncope,  or  other  diforders,  and  one  of  which  is,  in  the  mean  time,
repeated  ('<:j ;  is  reduc'd  to  but  a  fmall  number:  and  many  of  thefe  relate
•equally  to  other  fubjefts,  and  particularly  to  dropfies  of  the  abdomen.  And
if  the  afcites  and  tympanites,  of  which  I  am  to  treat,  were  the  only  fubjefft-
matter  of  the  twenty-firft  fedion,  perhaps  this  letter  would  not  be  longer  than
the  former.  But,  as  befides  thofe,  the  greater  of  the  other  tumours,  with
which  the  belly  is  fubjeft  to  be  aftedled,  are  fpokenof  in  that  fedion,  I  have
refolv'd  to  defer  the  confideration  of  thefe  to  the  next  letter,  and  not  to  treat
of  any  other  diforders  here  befides  both  the  dropfies  of  this  cavity,  and  of  the
peritonaeum,  and  of  thofe  that  are  call'd  encyfted.

Yet  you  will  not  expedl  to  have  over  again,  in  this  place,  thofe  obferva-
tions which  I  have  given  in  other  places,  and  particularly,  when  writing  of
the  dropfy  of  the  thorax ;  for  I  iliall  only  give  you  fuch  as  have  not  been  yet


{a)  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  dfs  fc.  a,  1699.  {^J  Vid.  obf.  IL  ^.  6  &  9.

{b)  Mojiit.  .Tied.  c.  16,


related.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  2,  3,  4, 5, i8r

related,  either  from  Valfalva's  papers,  or  my  own. And  thefe  are  Valfalva's
which  immediately  follow.

2.  A  man  of  fixty  years  of  age,  and  troubled  with  a  hernia,  was  feiz'd  with
a  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  thirft.  His  belly  and  feet  became  tumid.  At
length,  his  thirft  remitting,  he  died.  The  adipofe  m.embrane  of  the  abdo-
men, and  the  mufcles  when  cut  into,  were  found  to  contain  a  ferous  matter
in  their  interftices :  a  fluid  of  which  kind  was  alfo  found  in  the  cavity  of  the
belly.  With  the  lower  part  of  this  cavity,  on  the  left  fide,  a  facculus  made
out  of  the  peritoneum,  and  containing  a  portion  of  the  inteftines,  communi-
cated. In  the  thorax,  the  pericardium  abounded  with  ferum.  The  blood  in
the  ventricles  of  the  heart  was  fluid.

3.  Whatever  was  the  caufe  of  the  dropfy,  in  this  man ;  for  although  it
cannot  be  denied,  that  when  the  inteftines  fall  down,  and  form  a  hernia,  a
lymphasduft  may  fometimes  be  burft  in  the  mefentery,  which  is  drag'd  down
with  violence,  yet  that  this  happens  very  feldom,  and  when  it  does  happen,
that  the  chyle  flows  out  together  with  t;he  lymph,  we  are  not  ignorant  •,  what-
ever then  was  the  caufe,  you  fee  that  to  the  afcites,  two  other  dropfies,  that
is  the  anafarca,  and  the  hydrops  pericardii,  were  added.  For  it  rarely  hap-
pens, that  this  difeafe  is  fimple  :  which  almoft  all  the  following  hiftories  will
join  to  confirm.

4.  Julia  Bonetti,  a  woman  of  fifty-five  years  of  age,  flender,  and,  on  both
fides,  gibbous,  having  begun,  a  few  months  before,  to  complain  of  her  re-
fpiration  being  fomewhat  difficult,  was,  at  length,  brought,  on  the  twenty-
ninth  of  November,  in  the  year  1688,  into  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de
Morte  at  Bologna,  as  a  patient  of  the  houfe.  She  breath'd  laborioufly,  and
that  more  when  flie  lay  on  her  left  fide  than  on  her  right.  But  if  flie  fat  up  in
bed,  then  the  difficulty  of  breathing  was  fo  much  increas'd,  that  fhe  was'  al-
moft fuffbcated  thereby.  All  remedies  being  of  no  effeft,  and  the  difiiculty
of  breathing  increafing  daily,  her  pulle  became  weak,  and  languid:  Ihe  was
attack'd  with  frequent  fwoonings  ;  her  face  was  tumid,  and,  in  fome  meafure,
inclin'd  to  a  livid  colour ;  and  thus  fhe  died  in  the  beginning  of  December.
The  cavity  of  the  belly  was  fill'd  with  a  limpid  water.  The  omentum,  being
without  fat,  was  fiU'd  with  certain  veficles.  The  cavity  of  the  thorax,  on
the  right  fide,  contain'd  about  four  ounces  of  water,  and  the  left  as  much  as
it  could  poflibly  hold,  fo  that  it  flow'd  out  as  the  fternum  was  cut  away.  In
this  cavity  the  lungs  were  fomewhat  tumified,  and  of  a  purple  colour,  as  if
they  had  been  feiz'd  with  inflammation;  but  in  the  other,  they  differ'd  little
from  their  natural  ftate.  The  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  together  with  a
great  quantity  of  concreted  blood,  had,  alio,  a  polypous  concretion,  of  the
thicknefs  of  a  finger,  which  was  produc'd  both  into  the  vena  cava,  and  the
pulmonary  artery.  In  the  left,  only  the  beginning  of  a  concretion  of
this  kind  appear'd.

5.  Which  of  the  dropfies  preceded  the  other,  whether  that  of  the  thorax,
or  belly,  is  not  eafy  to  pronounce,  in  hiftories  of  this  kind.  However,  if
on  account  of  the  deprav'd  ftru6lure  of  the  thorax,  you  would,  alfo,  have  it
that  this  cavity  muft  firft  have  colleded  the  water,  I  fhall  not  conteft  the
opinion.  Be  this  as  it  will,  I  fhould  fuppofe  that  on  account  of  the  fame
ftrufbure,  thofe  circurnftances  had  happen'd,  v/hich  are  taken  notice  of  in  this

Vol.  II.  O  o  woman's


^82  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

woman's  hiftory,  and  which  are  fo  contrary  to  what  generally  happens  ;  I
mean,  that  flie  breath'd  with  more  difficulty  when  lying  on  that  iide,  in  which
the  lungs  were  tumid,  and  there  was  a  great  quantity  of  water;  and  that
when  fitting  up  in  bed  flie  was  almoft  fuffocated.

6.  An  old  woman  began  to  have  her  whole  body  iwell'd,  in  the  autumn,
to  have  her  refpiration  become  difficult,  and  her  third  troublefome.  To
thefe  fymptoms  was  added,  (though  indeed  the  thirft  left  her  before  the  end"
of  her  life)  a  cough,  attended  with  a  fpitting  of  catarrhous  matter,  and  a
difficulty  of  lying  down  on  the  left  fide,  fo  that,  for  this  reafon,  fhe  almoft
always  lay  on  her  right  fide  :  and  in  this  pofture  fhe  died,  when  her  pulfe
had  become  fo  contra6led,  that  it  could  fcarcely  any  longer  be perceiv'd.

While  the  Ikin  and  mufcles  of  the  body  were  cut  into,  a  great  quantity  of
ferum  was  difcharg'd.  The  belly  was  alfo  fiU'd  with  ferum,  which  had  prcc-
ruberated  v^ith  a  very  large,  but  foft  tumour.  I'his  ferum,  being  receiv'd
in  a  glafs  velle!,  refembled  the  colour  of  urine,  and  after  {landing  one  or  two
days,  ihow'd  a  concretion  fwimming  upon  it,  of  fo  firm  a  nature,  that  it
was  not  broken  into  pieces,  even  by  the  agitation  of  the  veflel.  The  re-
maining fluid  part,  being  put  on  the  fire,  became  prefently  turbid,  and  grew
pretty  thick,  and,  foon  after,  began  to  fhow  a  flight  concretion,  on  the  fides
of  the  veffel :  but  as  the  evaporation  proceeded,  it  form'd  a  pellicle  on  its
furface  :  and  after  having  decreas'd,  thus,  to  lefs  than  half  its  quantity,  be-
came perfedlly  fimilar  to  barley-cream.  The  liver  was  diftinguifli'd,  here
and  there,  with  whitifh  fpots,  which  were  externally  larger,  and  internally
fmaller,  and  was  in  general  of  a  pale  colour.  The  fplecn  was  very  hard.
The  lymphatic  veflels  occur'd,  pretty  evidently,  of  themfclves,  about  the
loins,  and  below,  through  the  internal  parts  of  the  belly.

In  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax,  the  lungs  were  on  all  fides  free  ;  but  in
the  right,  were  tied  to  the  pleura,  in  the  whole  circumference,  by  many
membranous  connexions,  and  thofe  entangled  with  each  other :  and  if  you
handled  thefe  membranes,  a  great  quantity  of  ferum,  which  had  been  llaue
up  in  their  interftices,  ifilied  forth.  In  the  finufies  of  the  heart,  was  con-
tain'd  a  great  quantity  of  blood,  fluid  in  its  confiftence,  and  of  a  dilute  red  in
its  colour,  as  in  all  the  vefiels  likewife  :  and  the  heart  was  furrounded  with
ferum,  wherewith  the  pericardium  was  not  only  fiU'd,  but  had  even  been
extremely  dilated.  This  ferum  of  the  pericardium,  although,  in  its  colour,
and  the  firm  concretion  that  was  fpontaneoufly  produc'd  in  it,  very  fimilar  to
that  which  had  been  contain'd  in  the  belly,  yet  did  not  coagulate,  when  ap-
plied to  the  fire,  but  being  perpetually  fl.uid,  and  flying  off  by  degrees,  left
only  a  flight  cruft  in  the  bottom  of  the  veflTel.  The  faline  particles,  of  both
thefe  kinds  of  ferum,  were  examin'd,  but  were  not  found  to  be  of  any  cer-
tain fio-ure  :  yet  the  figures  of  the  particles  of  the  former  kind  of  ferum,  dif-
fer'd  fomething  from  the  figures  of  the  particles  of  the  latter.  The  concre-
tion, which  fwam  in  the  ferum  of  the  pericardium,  was  nearly  of  a  fpherlcal
form,  and  feem'd  to  be  made  upof  fmall  veficles,  as  it  were,  colledted  'oge-
ther  into  one  body.

7.  It  was  a  cuftom  with  Valfalva,  when  he  had  found  water  ex'  avafated
into  the  cavities  of  the  body,  not  only  to  attend  to  the  nature  of  u,  but  alfo
to  enquire  thereinto,  by  experiments,  of  different  kinds ;  often  making  ufe  of

5  ^^i'^'


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  8. ,,  283-

fire,  and  fometimes  mixing  ingredients  with  the  ferum.  He  was  wont  to
examine  the  fituations  of  the  lymplisedufts  likewife,  and  to  remark  whether
they  were  turgid,  or  did  not  at  all  difcover  themfelves.  Both  thefe  cuftoms  of
his,  you  will  remark  in  moft  of  rhe  obfervations  of  this  kind,  that  he  has
left,  but  particularly  in  that  which  I  have  juft  defcrib'd.  He  meant  to  in-
quire, I  fuppofe,  by  both  thefe  methods,  from  whence  the  water  had  pro-
ceeded, whether  from  the  rupture  of  thofe  vefTels,  or  from  any  other  caufe,
that  he  might,  perhaps,  after  a  long  feries  of  obfervations,  attain  fo  far,  as,
from  a  portion  of  water,  taken  from  a  dropOcal  perfon  when  living,  to  be
able  to  diftinguifh  that  this  had  flow'd  out  of  thofe  vefTels,  and,  confequent-
ly,  to  pronounce  the  diforder  incurable.

For  fiippofing  this  diagnofis,  as,  for  inftance,  in  an  example  I  have  al-
ready taken  notice  of  to  you  [d'),  this  prognofis  follows,  which  was  equally
unknown  to  the  ancients,  as  thofe  vefiels  themfelves:  by  the  difcovery  of
which,  fome,  who  have  rebuk'd  thofe  that  apply  very  diligently  to  anatomy,
imprudently  contended  that  the  prognofis,  in  this  diforder,  was  not  at  all
chang'd  ;  and  this  being  thus  chang'd,  it  is  evident  that  the  method  of  cure  is
alfo  chang'd,  which  the  fame  gentlemen  denied;  for  why  Ihould  the  phyfi-
<;ian  trouble,  with  very  ftrong,  and  violent  remedies,  thofe  in  regard  to  wiiom
he  ought  to  think,  only  how  to  preferve  their  lives,  as  long  as  poffible,  in-
ftead  of  attempting  to  cure  their  diforder  ?

But  I  faid  that  Valfalva  had  need  of  a  long  feries  of  obfervations  of  that
kind,  for  this  reafon,  becaufe  the  lymph  itfelf  is  different,  in  different  bodies,
and  at  different  times.  And  indeed  Reverhorft  {e),  moreover,  added  the
difference  of  the  place  from  whence  it  proceeded,  faying  that  the  afcites,
wherein  a  yellow,  and  bitter,  water  is  drav/n  off,  arifes  from  the  lymphatic
veffels  of  the  liver  being  injur'd.  But  as  I  do  not  think  it  neceffary  to  de-
pend upon  his  authority,  i'o  I  do  not  think  it  fufficiently  fafe,  to  agree  with
thofe  who  aflert  with  Bonetus  (f),  that  the  water  of  dropfical  perfons,  which
is  "  limpid,  colourlefs,  or  but  flightly  ting'd,"  is  from  the  lymph^dudls,  but
that  the  water  which  is  like  "  ferum,  fometimes  pure,  fometimes  mix'd  with
"  other  humours,  and  refembling  the  colour  of  urine,"  proceeds  from  the
veins.  For  although  in  the  patient  of  whom  he  fpeaks,  whofe  urine  feem'd
to  be  a  lixivium  of  a  quite  black  colour,  rather  than  of  a  colour  almoft  black,
that  limpid  water,  which  he  defcribes,  could  have  flow'd  from  no  other  parr,
but  from  the  lymph-ccducts,  into  the  belly,  yet  in  others,  whofe  urine  is  of
2.  different  kind,  it  may  have  come  from  fome  other  part.

8.  And  again,  if  the  lylnph,  which  was  at  firft  limpid,  be  chang'd  by
ftagnation,  and  mix'd  with  the  putrid  eluvies  of  the  vifcera,  which  even  itfelf
does  at  length  corrupt,  muft  we,  for  that  reafon,  fuppofe  it  not  to  have  come
from  the  lymphsdufts  ?  To  this  add  the  feveral  fallacies,  which,  without  a
very  clofe,  and  accurate  attention,  may  often  impofe  upon  us,  in  the  diffec-
tion  of  bodies.  For  the  water,  which  firfl  flows  out,  will  be  fometimes  lim-
pid, not  that  it  was  fo  in  the  patient  when  living,  but  becaufe  the  grofier
particles  having  fubfided,  in  the  dead  body,  the  water,  which  lies  uppcrmoft,

<-./)  Epift.  16.  n.  5.  (f)  Sea,  hac2i,  fcliol.  ad  obf  18.

{e)  Difl".  de  mot.  bills  §.21.

O  0  2  be-


284  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

becomes  very  pure. On  the  other  hand,  fometimes,  when  it  was  pure  in  the
jiving  body,  it  is  made  impure  from  the  very  difledtion.

Thus  I  formerly  obferv'd,  when  I  had  begun  to  divide  the  ribs  from  the
flernum,  in  a  certain  dropfical  woman,  that  the  water  burft  forth  in  a  ftate
of  perfeft  limpidnefs :  but  when  I  had  divided  alJ-  the  ribs,  and  taken  away
thefternum,  that  the  water  appear'd  to  be  redifli :  finally,  when  I  had  hand-
led the  vifcera,  andjuft  begun  to  cut  into  them,  that  all  the  remaining  water
had  contrafted  a  red  colour.  And  thefe  circumftances  ought  to  be  the  more
attended  to,  in  proportion  as  there  is  lels  water  originally,  or  lefs  remain-
ing, lb  that  a  little  blood  being  gradually,  and  almoft  clandeftinely,  mix'd
with  it,  the  whole  may  be  ting'd.  There  are  hydropic  waters  alfo,  which
have  impurities  mix'd  with  them,  even  before  diffeftion,  from  a  difeafe  in
fome  vifcus  or  other,  as  I  have  already  hinted,  which  is  lefs  likely  to  deceive
us,  where  the  difeafe  of  the  vifcus  is  confiderable,  and  where  there  is  a  great
quantity  of  water.

Thus  in  the  diflertation  of  Schacherus  (g),  as  to  the  afcites  was  join'd  an
increas'd  and  difeas'd  ftate  of  the  ovary,  it  was  not  furprizing,  that  the  wa-
ter, which  was,  in  other  refpefts,  pretty  limpid  in  appearance,  fhould,  by
means  of  evaporation,  "  have  foon  coagulated  into  a  fat  fubftance,  in  fuch  a  -^
"  manner,  that  one  fourth  part  of  it  only,  had  confifted  of  water,  which
"  was  evaporated,  and  the  other  three  were  made  up  of  the  febaceous  por-
"  tion,  which  remain'd  behind."  So  I  alfo  remember  to  have  heard  Alber-
tini  fay,  that  the  waters  of  fome  hydropic  perfons,  by  being  expos'd  to  eva-
poration, had  flown  off  in  a  very  fmall  degree,  but  had  in  great  meafure,  I
fuppofe  from  fome  caufe  of  this  kind,  coagulated  ;  whereas  the  waters  of  others-
had,  on  the  contrary,  chiefly  flown  off,  by  applying  the  fame  degree  of
heat,  and  a  very  fmall  part,  only,  concreted.

But  we  muft  be  extremely  cautious,  when  the  difeafe  of  the  vifcus  is  fo  ^
fmall,  that  it  may  eafily  efcape  the  eyes  of  the  diflefter,  left  if  any  part  of
the  water  coagulate,  by  the  force  of  the  fire,  it  Ihould  not  be  refer'd  to  its
true  origin.  From  thefe  things,  and  others,  which  I  purpofely  pafs  over,
I  would  have  you  underftand  why  I  faid  it  was  necelTary,  that  Valfalva  ftiould
have  made  a  great  number  of  thefe  obfervations,  which  I  do  not  defpife,  but
only  require  to  be  made  with  the  moft  cautious,  and  exadt  diligence ;  fc^
that  thole  in  which  there  might  be  any  fallacy,  being  fet  afide,  he  might
apply  the  others,  compar'd  with  fimilar  experiments  on  the  lymph,  and  on
the  ferum  of  the  blood,  to  thofe  purpofes  which  he  had  propos'd  to  him-
felf,  whatever  thefe  might  be,  with  advantage.  To  this  kind  of  comparifon
we  are  exhorted  by  the  celebrated  Phil.  Frid,  Gmelinus  {h),  when  he  propofes
his  experiments  upon  the  water  of  an  afcites,  taken  from  a  certain  woman.
Others  you  will  read  upon  the  fluid,  which  the  veficles  of  an  encyfted  dropfy
contain'd,  made  by  the  celebrated  Jo.  Chriftop.  Fohlius  (i).  And  fome
more  fimple  experiments,  as  evaporation  was  alone  made  ufe  of,  you  will
find  in  the  writings  of  the  illuftrious  Senac  (k).  You  will  find  fome  peculiar
ones,  that  is  to  fay,  fome  which  relate  to  a  milky  dropfy,  that  arofe,  as  it;

{g)  Diff.  de  virgine  afcit.  [k)  Traite  du  Coeur.  ].  4.  ch.  3.  n.  4.  &  ch.

(Z-) Commerc.  litt.  a.  1745.  hebd.  52.  n.  3. 5.  n.  z.
(/■)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  8.  obf.  iii.

4  feem-s,


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  9,  lO,  ii. 285

feems,  not  only  from  chyle  pour'd  out  of  the  chyliferous  veffels  when  rup-
tur'd,  as  in  the  obfervation  of  Littre  (I),  but  alfo  from  this  fluid  being  mix'd
with  a  great  quantity  of  that  water,  which  is  common  to  patients  troubled
with  an  afcites  ;  you  will  find  them,  I  fay,  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Royal  Aca-
demy of  Sciences  at  Paris  (m).  But  what  kinds  of  water  are,  for  the  moft
part,  drawn  off  from  dropfical  patients,  and  how  various  thefe  are,  the
younger  du  Verney  has  taught  in  another  part  of  the  memoirs  of  the  fame
Academy  (n)  ;  and  that  in  a  more  fimple  way  certainly,  as,  without  making
ufe  of  any  external  affiftance,  he  depends  upon  his  fenfes  only  -,  but  in  a
much  more  commodious  manner,  and  one  that  tends  to  be  of  more  extenfive
ufe,  in  forming  a  prognofis.

9.  But  left  we  ihould  feem  to  be  forgetful  of  the  old  woman,  whofe  hif-
tory I  have  given  you  {o),  if  you  compare  it  with  that  which  immediately
precedes,  of  the  gibbous  woman  (p),  and  with  the  firft  of  the  man  (^),  you
will  perceive  that  the  old  woman's  lying-down  was  juft  fuch  as  the  fide  of
the  thorax,  that  was  moft  affeded,  required.  And  in  regard  to  the  thirft
which  remitted  before  death  in  the  man,  and  was  remov'd  in  the  old  woman,
you  may  conceive  of  it  in  this  manner ;  that  either  the  power  of  feeling  was
grown  very  obtufe,  near  the  time  of  death,  or  that  when  the  belly  was  quite
diftended,  the  moifture,  which  remain'd  in  the  blood,  went  in  part  to  moif-
ten  the  fauces,  as  the  catarrhous  matter,  which  the  old  woman  fpat  up,  demon-
ftrated.  For  it  is  not  neceflary  to  fuppofe  that  the  ferum  of  the  blood  is  un-
fit to  remove  thirft,  in  all  dropfical  bodies,  I  mean  that  it  is  more  like  brine,-
as  has  been  found  by  fome  who  have  tafted  it,  than  water.

10.  The  belly  of  a  man  of  fifty  years  of  age,  who  had  labour'd  under  an
univerfal  dropfy,  notwithftanding  there  appear'd  no  tenfion  externally,  was
full  of  water.  The  liver  was  of  a  black  colour,  the  fpleen  was  fomewhat  in-
creased, the  other  vifcera  of  the  belly  were  found.  The  lymphsdufts  were
extremely  turgid :  and  as  there  were  many  glands  below  the  emulgent  vef-
fels, near  to  the  vena  cava,  and  round  the  great  artery,  thofe  dudts  were
carried  from  the  mefentery  to  thefe  glands,  and  from  thence  into  the  thoracic
duft.

In  the  thorax  was  a  watry  humour,  and  the  lungs  were  variegated  with
black  fpots.  The  pericardium  was  fo  far  expanded  with  its  proper  dropfy,
that  it  refembled  the  urinary  bladder  of  an  ox,  when  diftended  with  air.  As
all  the  vefiels  of  this  body  were  large  in  proportion,  fo  the  heart  was  alfo
large  i  and  the  left  auricle  thereof  fo  dilated,  that  it  almoft  equall'd  one  half
of  the  heart,  when  of  its  natural  fize.  And  the  heart  had  thefe  remarkable
appearances,  that  the  external  membrane  was  eroded  on  the  left  fide,  and  the
veflTels  had  varicous  contorfions ;  but  in  the  ventricles  it  contain'd  a  fluid
blood,  without  any  fign  of  concretion.

11.  It  is  not  eafy  to  fuppofe  that  Valfalva ;  as  he  had  found  the  pericar-
dium to  be  fo  greatly  diftended  with  water,  and  the  left  auricle  to  be  foen-


larg'd,,


(/)  Hift.  del'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1710.  obf.

{0)  N.  6.

anat.  7.

{m)  A.  1700.
(«)  A.  1703.

CPJ  N.  4.
(?)  N.  2.

.286  Book  HI. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

larg'd,  that  from  h^nce,  in  all  probability,  as  the  motion  of  the  blood  muft
be  on  all  fides  retarded,  fo  an  univerfal  dropfy  was  in  great  meafure  the  con-
fequence  ;  it  is  not  eafy,  I  fay,  to  fuppofe  that  he  had  not  enquir'd,  minute-
ly, into  all  the  fymptoms  with  which  the. patient  had  been  troubled,  or  that
if  he  had  heard  of  any  thing  peculiar,  he  would  not  have  remark'd  it.  Yet
in  regard  to  the  dropfy  of  the  pericardium,  as  the  old  woman,  alfo,  of  whom
I  fpoke  above  (r),  had  her  pericardium  very  nuich  dilated  with  water,  you
might  have  feen  among  the  fymptoms  related  in  that  hiftory,  whether  there
was  any  thing  peculiar  to  the  dropfy  of  the  pericardium,  rather  than  the
other  preternatural  appearances,  which  were  found  at  the  fame  time.

At  leaft,  it  was  not,  in  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  very  difficult  for  the
patient  to  lie  dov/n,  nor  neceffiiry  in  the  latter  part  of  it  -,  nor  is  it  faid  to
have  been  with  the  head  declin'd  :  which  things  you  will  compare  with  thofe
that  are  made  mention  of  by  me,  where  I  have  examin'd,  with  a  fludious
defire  after  truth  (s),  other  fymptoms  of  that  dropfy  which  have  been  pro-
posal by  other  writers.  But  left  you  fhould  begin  to  iufpecl,  froni  the  next
obfervation  which  I  fhall  fubjoin,  that  the  peculiar  fymptom  thereof,  is  a
neceflity  of  lying  in  a  lupine  pofture,  you  muft  attend  to  many  other  hiftories
in  which  the  diforder  was  without  this  fymptom,  but,  in  particular,  to  that
which  will  immediately  follow  the  next.

12.  An  old  woman  of  feventy  years  of  age  breath'd  with  difficulty,  was
very  thirfty,  troubled  with  a  dry  cough,  and  could  lie  only  in  a  fupine  pof- ,
ture. After  thefe  fymptoms  had  lafted  for  a  long  time,  and  the  feet  began
to  be  oedematous,  fhe  died.

The  belly  was  full  of  water.  The  lymphasdufts  about  the  great  artery,
where  it  gives  off"  the  emulgents,  were  iiurgid  ;  in  the  mefentery,  and  elfe-
where,  they  fcarcely  appear'd.  The  kidnies  were  fmall,  and  without  hyda-
tids. In  the  thorax  the  lungs  were  found  :  and  a  fmall  quantity  of  ierum
was  contain'd  there.  But  tlie  pericardium  was  full  of  it :  in  which  the  heart,
being  twice  as  big  as  it  naturally  is,  contain'd  a  flaccid  polypous  concretion  :
and  the  auricles  contain'd  blood,  with  which  they  were  very  turgid.  How-
ever the  blood,  in  this  body,  preferv'd  its  natural  fluidity,  and  colour.

13.  An  old  man  of  feventy  was  troubled  with  an  oedematous  fwelling  of
the  feet,  and  a  great  thirft,  and  was  feiz'd  with  a  cough  that  was,  at  times,
fo  painful,  and  vehement,  as  to  make  him  feem  on  the  point  of  fuffocation.
He  fpat  up  a  catarrhous  matter  :  he  breath'd  with  difficulty  :  he  could  lie
down  in  a  fupine  pofture  only  :  his  pulfe  was  low  and  weak. He  died.

In  the  belly  water  was  extravafated :  and  the  lymphzedufts,  about  the
divifion  of  the  em.ulgent  veflTels,  were  fo  tumid,  that  three  or  four  were,  each
of  them,  feparately  taken,  equal  in  thicknefs  to  a  goofe  quil.  The  fpleen
was  very  large,  and  fhow'd  fome  fmall  bodies  on  its  external  furface,  like  the
grains  of  millet  feed.

Jn  the  thorax,  both  lobes  of  the  lungs  adher'd  to  the  back,  the  fides,  and
the  fternum,  leaving  interftices  betwixt  themfelves,  and  the  pleura,  which
containM  water.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  pericardium  was  no  moifture  :
and  this  part,  itfelf,  began  already  to  be  connected  to  the heart,  by  many

ir)  N.  6.  fs)  EpUl.  i6.  n.  45.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  14,  15,  16.  287

membraneous  fibres. In  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  was  a  coagulated  blood-,,
and  in  the  right  auricle  alfo, in  which,  at  firft  fight,  it  refembkd  a  portion  .
of  the  uterine  placenta. In  the  left  ventricle was  a  polypous  concretion,
which  was  univerfally  unconnefted.

14.  You  fee,  therefore,  by  comparing  both,  thefe  obfervations  together,
that  although  a  fupine  pofture  of  lying  down  was,  in  both  cafes,  neceffary^
the  pericardium,  neverthelefs,  was  not  in  bath  cafes  full  of  ferum,  and  even
that  in  the  old  man,  it  contain'd  no  moifture  at  all.  And  if  you  compare  the
diforders  of  the  vifcera  one  with  another,  you  will  find,  indeed,  that  they
were  confiderable  in  both  the  hiftories,  but  not  the  fame.  Nor  had  both  of
them  the  fame  ftate  of  blood  ;  -but  even,  which  you  might  alfo  have  obferv'd
in  the  hydropic  perfons  Ipoken  of  above,  that  it  was  quite  different  in  the  two-
For  in  the  old  woman  it  was  fluid ;  in  the  old  man  coagulated  :  and  what
polypous  concretion  it  had,  was  in  her  flaccid  and  lax,  in  him  pretty  com-
paft,  and,  v/hat  was  rarely  obferv'd  by  Valfalva,  in  the  left  ventricles,  not  in
the  right.  The  caufes,  therefore,  of  making  ufe  of  one  and  the  fame  potturci
in  lying  down,  are  various,  and  are  frequently  difficult  to  be  accounted  for,
as  I  have  fiiown  already  (/)  ■,,  and  as  will  be  fliown  by  comparing  the  two  fol-
lowing obfervations  with  each  other,  and  with  the  laft  foregoing. ~

15.  A  woman  of  a  flender  habit,  and  in  the  twenty-feventh  year  of  her-
age,  having,,  four  months  before,  receiv'd  a  wound  at  the  navel,  breath'd
with  difficulty,  was  very  thirfty,  expectorated  a  little,  and  complain'd  of  a.
pain  in  the  left  part  of  her  thorax,  on  which  fide,  as  well  as  her  back,  ffie
could  not  lie  down. All  thefe  fymptoms  growing  very  violent,  fhe  ditd..

In  the  belly,  all  the  vifcera  were  found  ;  fo  that  even  in  the  inteftines,.
where  they  correfponded  to  the  navel,  not  the  leaft  mark  of  difeafe  could  be-
diftinguifli'd,  befides  a  colour  inclining  to  blacknefs.  Yet  the  cavity  of  tha
belly  contain'd  three  or  four  pints  of  yellowifli  water.

The  cavity  of  the  thorax,  alfo,  on  the  left  fide,  was  full  of  water,  per^
feftly  fimilar  to  that  of  the  abdomen,  this  circumftance  excepted,  that  cer-
tain concretions,  like  pellicles,  fwam  therein.  In  this  water  was. contain'd  the
lobe  of  the  lungs,  in  a  very  found  ftate,.  and. free  from  all  adiiefion;  Bu£
the  right  lobe  of  the  lungs  exaftly  fill'd  its  cavity,  inafmuch  as  it  adher'd  to-
the  pleura,  every  where,  fo  clofely,  that  it  could  fcarcely  be  feparated  :  and
it  was  a  litde  indurated,  fo  that  it  feem.'d  to  have  been,  in  fome  meafure,  at-
tack'd  with  a  phlegmon.  Eoth-  ventricles  of  the  heart  contain'd  a  lax  poly^
pous  concretion  ;  yet  the  right  a  larger  than  the  left.  But  in  this  body  the
lymphtedufts  v/ere  not  at  all  turgid.

16.  A  young  man,  of  about  feventeen  years  of  age,  was  feiz'd  with  a
difficult  refpiration,  with  a  dry  cough,  and  a  very  great  thirft.  He  dif-
charg'd  but  a  fmall  quantity  of  urine.  He  had  a  little  pain  on  his  rio-ht  fide>,
and  lay  continually  upon  it. At  length  he  died.

The  belly  was  full  of  water:  the  inteftines,  and  ftomach,  were  whitifli r-

the  whole  liver  was  hard  : but  the  fpleen,  except  that  it  was  fomewhat  en^

larg'd,  was,  in  other  refpefts,  found. The  lymphffidufts  v/ere  not  turgid,

as  is  fometimes  obferv'd  in  dropfical  bodies,  when  the  vifcera  are  found.

The  cavity  of  the  thorax,  on  the.  right  fide,  overflow'd  with  watei-.  There-

(0.  Epift.  20.  n.  2 J.  &  alibL

In,,


288  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

in,  alio,  the  lungs  had  grown  hard  :  and  on  the  whole  of  the  furfaces,  by
which  this  lobe  was  turn'd  to  the  diaphragm,  and  mediaftinum,  did  it  adhere
to  thefe  parts.  In  the  pericardium  was  little  or  no  ferum.  In  all  the  vel-
fels,  even  in  thofe  of  the  vifcera,  the  blood  was  fluid.

1 7.  Why  this  patient  fhould  lie  on  his  right  fide,  you  immediately  per-
ceive, as  foon  as  you  confider  that  the  quantity  of  water,  which  was  in  the
fame  fide,  muft  ofcourfe  have  opprefs'd,  and  fuffocated,  the  other  lobe  of
the  lungs  that  was  found,  had  he  chang'd  his  pofture.  But  how  did  it  hap-
pen that  the  woman  (a),  who  had  water  in  the  left  cavity  of  her  thorax,  could
not  lie  down  on  her  left  fide  .''  Without  doubt  it  is  neceflary  for  you  to  con-
fider the  ftate  of  the  lungs,  the  left  lobe  of  which  was  found  in  the  woman  ;
and  the  right  in  the  young  man,  difeas'd.  Yet  how  was  it  that  the  woman
could  not  lie  on  her  back  ?  For  in  this  pofture,  neither  fide  would  have  in-
jur'd  the  other,  either  by  its  weight  of  water,  or  by  the  bulk  of  the  lungs,
which  had  been  attack'd  with  the  phlegmon.  The  old  man  (x),  at  leaft,
though  he  had  both  lobes  of  the  lungs  fo  connefted  all  round,  and,  at  the
fame  time,  prefs'd  upon  in  the  whole  of  their  circumference,  by  water  col-
ledted  in  the  furrounding  interftices,  not  only  was  able  to  lie  on  his  back,  but
was  vnder  a  neceffity  of  lying  in  that  pofture.

You  fee,  then,  why  I  faid  that  thefe  circumfbances,  of  lying  in  different
poftures,  are  fometimes  not  eafily  to  be  accounted  for.  But  it  is  better  not
to  fay  any  more  of  this  fubject,  at  prefent,  and  to  fubjoin  the  other  obferva-
tions  of  Valfalva,  wherein  he  did  not  fee  the  turgid  fl:ate  of  the  lymphsdudls,
join'd  with  the  dropfy,  which  you'  might  have,  alfo,  remark'd,  in  the  two
hifl.ories  jufh  now  defcrib'd  :  although  I  fuppole  it  did  not  appear  very  plain
to  you,  or  to  me,  why  he  faid,  in  the  laft,  that  this  turgefcency  is  fometimes
obferv'd  in  hydropic  bodies,  when  the  vifcera  are  found:  which  he  certainly
could  not  refer  to  the  old  woman  (j),  to  the  man  (z),  to  the  other  old  wo-
man {a),  or  to  the  old  man  (^),  in  whofe  bodies,  although  there  was  this
turgefcency,  yet  the  vifcera  were  not  found  neverthelefs.

He  muft,  of  courfe,  then,  have  had  an  eye  to  other  obfervations  of  his,
as,  for  inftance,  that  which  I  have  already  defcrib'd  to  you  (c),  in  which,
when  all  the  abdominal  vifcera  of  an  hydropic  body  were  in  a  healthy  con-
dition, the  lymphatic  veflfels  were  turgid  at  the  fame  time  :  and  perhaps  he
meant  nothing  elfe  here,  than  that  thefe  vefl*els  were,  fometimes,  found  to  be
turgid,  even  in  thofe  dropfical  bodies,  whofe  abdominal  vifcera  are  found.

18.  A  young  man  of  about  eight  and  twenty  years  of  age,  being  much
given  to  eating  and  drinking,  and  having  labour'd,  for  fome  years,  under  3
difficulty  of  refpiration,  fell,  at  length,  into  a  univerfal  dropfy.  To  this
was  added,  about  feven  days  before  death,  a  very  confiderable  difficulty  of
breathing,  with  a  cough,  {pitting,  and  pain  in  the  thorax.

In  the  carcafe,  the  belly,  and  thorax,  were  found  to  be  full  of  a  brownidi
ferum,  and  all  the  vifcera,  except  the  inteftines  and  the  ftomach,  ting'd  of  the
fame  colour. This  laft  mention'^d  vifcus  vaftly  exceeded  the  bounds  of  its

(u)  N.  15.  (a)  N.  iz.

(x)  N.  13.  (b)  N.  13.

(y)  N.  6.  (f)  Epift.  16.  n.  4.

(x)  N.  10.

natural


Letter  XXX VIII. Article 19'.  289

-natural  magnitude.  The  fpleen  alfo  was  enlarg'd,  three  times  more  than  it
ought  to  be.  The  bile  was  of  a  pale  colour.  None  of  the  lymphsdufts
came  into  view.

The  left  lobe  of  the  lungs  was  very  much  inEam'd ;  from  whence  death
was  juftly  fuppos'd  to  have  been  'accelerated  ;  and  was  found  to  be  con-
nefted  to  the  pleura  by  membranes,  in  the  interftices  of  which  the  ferum,
that  I  have  deicrib'd,  was  confin'd.

19.  That  by  the  force  of  hypothefis^  rather  than  by  the  authority  of  Hip-
pocrates, or  the  difTedion  of  dropfical  bodies,  moil  phyficians  were  formerly
induc'd  to  believe  the  liver  firft,  and  after  that  the  fpleen,  to  be  the  caufe  of
dropfy,  you  will  learn  even  from  the  Sepulchretum ;  either  in  the  place  where
it  is  fiiown  {d),  that  in  the  books  of  Hippocrates,  not  any  one,  or  two,  vif-
cera  are  fuppos'd  to  be  in  fault,  but  many,  or  where  {e)  many  examinations
of  the  vifcera  of  dropfical  bodies  being  produc'd,  both  of  thefe  vifcera  are,
demonftratively,  clear'd  from  the  charge.  And,  certainly,  whatever  part,  or
whatever  caufe,  can,  for  a  confiderable  time,  retard  the  motion  of  the  blood,
or  lymph,  or  immoderately  increafe  the  fecretionof  the  moifture,  with  which
all  the  cavities  of  the  body  are  furnifh'd  -,  or,  in  fhort,  prevent,  or  dimi-
ni(h,  by  any  means,  its  abforption,  may  give  origin  to  this  diforder.

But  the  belly,  befides  thefe  vifcera,  has  peculiar  parts,  from  which  a  hu-
mour is  fometimes  pour'd  out,  into  its  cavity.  There  was,  fays  Piccolhomi-
nus  (f),  a  man  who  drinking  a  great  quantity,  and  difcharging  no  urine,
even  by  the  introdudtion  of  the  catheter,  had  his  belly  fwell'd  to  a  furprizing
degree,  and  having  at  length  died,  (how'd  his  kidnies  to  be  entirely  lacer-
ated with  calculi,  fo  that  it  was  manifeft  the  urine  had  flow'd  out  of  thefe
vifcera,  into  the  belly,  and  had  diftended  it.

In  the  Sepulchretum,  where  I  have  look'd  for  this  obfervation  of  Piccol-
Jiominus  to  no  purpofe,  you  have  others  of  Platerus  {g),  and  Dodonxus  (i>),
of  an  afcites,  that  did  not  owe  its  origin  to  the  liver,  or  fpleen,  which  were
found,  but  to  the  urine  having  flow'd  out  of  the  kidney,  or  the  bladder,
which  had  been  perforated  by  exulceration.  And  as  to  what  is  hinted,  be-
fides, by  Dodonseus  (z),  it  is  by  no  means  doubtful,  but  the  fame  thing  mud
happen,  if  the  ureters  fhould  chance  to  be  burft,  or  eroded ;  and  it  is  even
hinted  by  Galen  (^),  and  confirm'd,  among  others,  by  Euftachius  (/),  that
if  thefe  tubes  are  cut  into,  in  a  living  beaft,  and  the  abdomen  few'd  up
again,  the  cavity  of  the  belly  would  be  found  "  entirely  full  of  urine,  as  if
"  the  animal  labour'd  under  a  dropfy  :"  and  that  the  fame  thing  had  hap-
pen'd  in  two  men,  from  the  rupture  of  thefe  canals,  the  hiftories  of  Abraham
Vater  {m),  and  Winhart  (n),  teach  us.

To  this  clafs  of  obfervations,  that  of  the  celebrated  Berncrus  {o)  muft  be
refer'd,  which  was  made  upon  a  boy  of  fix  years  old,  whofe  urine,  not  being
able  to  get  out  from  the  kidnies,  had  fo  diftended  them,  that  having  open'd

{d)  Seft.  hac  21.  Schol.  ad  §.  4.  o'bf.  7.  (k)  De  natural,  facult.  1.  i.  c.  ij.

(e)  Sea.  ead.  obf.  i.  &:  feq.  (IJ  Traft.  de  ren.  c.  ult.

(fj  L.  2.  anat.  pra;I.  23.  («) In  progr. edito  Witemberg.  Januar.  a.

i^)  Seft.  cit.  obf.  8.  §.  2.  1720.

{h)  Ibid,  obf,  25.  §.  23.  («)  In  append,  torn.  2.  aft.  n.  c.  fub.  n.  iii,

(/)  Ibid.  (ft)  Eorund.  aflor.  t.  1.  obf.  219.

Vol.  IL  '  P  p  a  way


290 Book  III. Of  the  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

a  way  for  itfelf,  through  their  furfaces,  it  diftill'd  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,
and  furroLinded  the  inteflines.  And,  indeed,  to  this  clafs  alfo,  belono-
ulcers  perforating  the  ftomach,  in  fuch  a  part,  that  by  affording  an  exit  for
liquids,  rather  than  for  Iblids,  they  may  either  generate  or  increafe  an  afcites.
Thus  it  happen'd  in  the  obfervations  of  ti'e  learned  men  Samuel  Gratfius  {f).
Ad.  Chrift.  Thebefius  (j),  Rud.  Jac.  Camerarius  (r),  and  Jo.  Georg.  Hoye-
rus  {$).

Moreov^er,  to  thofe  examples  which  are  pointed  out  from  the  Sepukhre-
tum,  of  the  liver,  and  fpleen,  being  without  dilbrder,  in  dropfical  bodies,
new  examples  that  might  be  added  are  not  wanting.  Turn,  for  inftance,
as  you  may  to  others,  and  among  them,  to  that  which  I  juft  now  mention'd
ofVaterusj  for  it  relates  to  this  queftion  alfo,  and  indeed  chiefly ;  turn,  I
fay,  to  thofe  which  are  fupplied  by  the  Cselarean  Academy  (/),  among  which
is  one  in  particular  {ti),  wherein  every  body  would,  the  more  naturally,  have
fuppos'd  the  liver  to  be  affefted  with  a  very  confiderable  difeafe,  becaufe
the  patient  had  complain'd  of  nothing  more  than  of  a  pain  in  that  vifcus.
Yet  in  this  vifcus,  and  in  the  gall-bladder,  was  no  mark  of  difeafe  -,  but  in
the  neighbouring  part  of  the  mefentery  v/as  found  an  erofion,  fo  confiderable
as  to  equal  the  breadth  of  a  fpan.

However,  notwithftanding  the  truth  of  all  thefe  things,  there  was  no  rea-
fon,  wjiy  fome  perfons  fhould  run  fo  much  to  the  contrary  fide  of  the  argu-
ment, as  to  contend  that  the  liver,  and  fpleen,  were  very  rarely,  if  ever,  to  bb
blam'd.  You  will  read,  for  example's  fake,  in  one  of  the  kit  foregoing  fec-
tions  of  the  Sepulchretum  (x),  "  that  nothing  is  more  common,  among  the
"  generality  of  phyficians,  than  to  heap  up  reproaches  upon  the  fpleen,  as
"  if  it  were  zhs  pancrene^  or  unlverfal  fountain,  of  almoft  all  difeafes."  And
that  they  err'd  in  this  we  muft  certainly  confefs.  Yet  when  it  is  immediately
added,  "  that  nothing  is  more  rare  than  for  thofe  who  examiine  the  vifcera
"  after  death,  to  detedt  any  diforder  in  the  fpleen ;"  if  this  be  underftood
by  any  one,  in  a  general  lenfe,  or  in  particular,  as  in  an  afcites,  hov;  diftant  it
is  from  truth,  will  be  fcown,  not  only  by  the  great  number  of  obfervations
in  the  Sepulchretum  itfclt  (y),  but  alfo  by  five  (z),  out  of  the  nine,  which  I
produc'd  irom  Val fa! va,  wherein  it  was  found  either  to  be  very  hard,  or
larger  than  its  natural  fize,  or  even,  as  in  the  laft,  from  whence  I  took  occa-
fion  to  write  thele  things,  three  times  as  large  as  its  natural  magnitude.  But
if  the  qut-llion  be  of  the  liver,  you  will  lee  that,  in  four  of  them,  it  was
either  pale,  or  fpotced,  or  black,  or  quite  hard,  or  that  it  was  pallid,  to-
gether with  the  bile.  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondcr'd  at,  if  the  difeafe,  which,  as
I  have  already  faid,  arifes  from  a  retarded  motion  of  the  blood,  fhould,  not
uncommonly,  {-roveed  from  a  diforder  of  the  vifcera,  through  which  the
blood  is  carried  ftowly,  and  gently,  by  the  intention  of  nature  itfelf  ^  fo  that
if  any  new  retarding  caiiie  be  added,  it  cannot  be  mov'd  but  with  the  greateft

(p)  Eph..  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  3.  obf.  40.  (;<)  Oof.  ead.  186.

{^)  &cent.  3  &  4.  obf.  120.  \x)  Sed.  18.  obf.  3.

\r)  &  cent.  5.  obf.  43.  \y)  Vid.  quot fub obf.  6  &  7.  &  alibicon-

\s) &  aftor.  t.  4.  obf.  124.  gerantur.

(tj  Dec.  3.  a.  5  &  6.  obf.  13.  &  168.  &  a.  (x)  N.  6.  10.  13.  i6.  iS.
6  &  8.  obf.  186.

fiownefs.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  21.  291

flownefs.  Therefore,  many  obfervations  are  to  be  met  with,  in  different:
authors,  which  you  may  join  to  thofe  of  Valfalva,  and  thole  extant  in  the
Sepulchretum ;  and  fo  many  they  are,  that  when  I  fnall  h?ve  pointed  out  to
.  you  a  confiderable  number,  you  may  take  it  for  granted  that  many  are  ftill
remaining,  in  other  places.  See,  for  example's  fake,  what  the  younger  du
Verhey  {a)  found  by  diffeftion,  in  two  virgins  that  had  an  afcites,  and,  in
like  manner,  in  a  great  number  of  bodies  a&etled  with  the  fame  difeale,  by
the  Natuvie  Curiofi  (b)  :  nor  pafs  by  the  appearances  found  by  Bechmann  (c)^
in  an  illuftrious  man.

Out  of  all  thefe  diflefbions,  of  bodies  that  had  labour'd  under  an  afcites,
you  will  not  read  fo  much  as  one,  but  you  will  find  that  the  liver  was  difeas'd.
And  you  will,  at  the  fame  time,  find  it  particularly  remark'd,  in  fome  of
them,  that  the  fpleen  was,  alfo,  preternaturally  affefted.  Nor  are  others
wanting,  from  which  you  may  perceive,  that,  although  in  this  diforder  "  the
"  liver  was  not  much  alter'd  from  its  natural  ftate,  the  fpleen  was,  never-
"  thelefs,  enlarg'd,  and  fomewhat  hard,"  or  that  when  the  liver  was  "  quite
"  in  a  natural  ftate,  the  fpleen  was  larger  than  ufual,  univerfally  fcirrhous,
"  and  fo  hard,  that  it  could  not  be  cut  into,  and  divided,  by  the  help  of  a
"  razor,  v/ithout  difficulty."  One  of  which  examples  is  from  Lentilius  (i),
and  the  other  from  the  celebrated  Cohaufenius  (e).

Yet  I  do  not  doubt  but  the  diforders,  which  were  not  in  thcfe  vifcera,  or
in  the  pancreas,  mefentery,  or  other  parts  fhut  up  in  the  belly,  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  afcites,  may,  fometimes,  be  brought  on,  by  the  dropfy  being
long  protraded.  But  there  are,  frequently,  marks  that  thefe  diforders  had
preceded,  whether  we  confiderall  the  bad  fymptoms,  with  which  the  patient
was  aftefted,  before  the  dropfy  •,  or  fome  things  are  attended  to,  which  occur
in  the  diileftion  of  bodies,  as  the  next  hiftory  will  dem.onftrate.

20.  A  woman  had  labour'd  under  an  afcites.  During  the  difledhion  of  the
body,  none  of  the  cavities  was  found  full  of  water,  but  that  of  the  abdomen.
The  inteftines  were  not  diftended  with  air.  The  liver  was  hard,  and  the
gall-bladder  contain'd  a  ftone,  which  occupied  the  whole  of  its  cavity.  The
lymphsdufts  did  not at  all  appear.

21.  This  is  one  of  the  other  obfervations  of  Valfalva,  which  I  promis'd  you
in  the  former  letter  (f),  in  order,  the  more  fully,  to  convince  you,  that  the
jaundice  had  no  more  been  obferv'd  by  him,  than  by  me,  to  be  join'd  with
cyftic  calculi.  Moreover,  it  is  but  little  probable,  that  fo  large  a  ftone  had  not
been  begun  a  long  time  before,  fo  as  to  arrive  at  fuch  a  magnitude,  as  to
fill  the  whole  cavity  of  the  cyft :  and,  confequently,  that  the  liver,  in  which
bile  had  been  for  fo  long  a  time  fecreted,  that  was  proper  for  the  generation
of  fuch  a  calculus,  had  not  been  without  difeafe.  But  as  to  its  being  ex-
prefly  faid  that  the  inteftines  were  not  diftended  with  air,  that  was  done  for

{a)  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1701  &  ("cj Commerc. litter,  a. J742.  hebd.  33.

1703.  n.  I.

CiJ  Dec.  3.  a.  ;.  &  6.  obf.  176.  &  a.  7  &  8.  {JJ  Eph.  n.  c.  cent,  i  &  2,  obf.  168.

obf.  153.  &  a.  9  &  10.  obf.  239.  241.  248.  &  {e)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1743.  hebd.  25.  n.  2.

cent.  I.  obf.  3.  in  coroll.  3.  &  cent.  3.  obf. iz.  caf.  3.

&  cent.  8.  obf.  27.  &  cent.  9.  obf  64.  &  cent.  f/J  N.  25.
10.  obf.  86.  &  aft.  torn.  6.  obf.  15.

P  p  2  this


292  Book  III. Of  Dileafes  of  the  Belly.

this  purpofe,  I  mean  to  fhow  that,  although  the  afcites  and  tympanites  may.
be  join'd  together,  this  does  not,  neverthelefs,  always  happen,  as  Ibme  feem
to  believe.  And,  indeed,  as  it  more  rarely  happens  that  an  afcites,  as  in  the
woman  at  prefent  fpoken  of,  has  no  dropfy  of  any  other  cavity  join'd  with.
it,  fo  it  happens  lefs  often,  that  the  ftomach.  and  inteflines  are  diftended.
with  a  great  quantity  of  air,  in  an  afcites  ;  and  that  in  tympanitic  bodies,  a.
great  deal  of  water,  in  particular,  efpecially  when  the  difeafe  is  not  yet  in-
veterate, is  found  to  be  extravafated  into  the  belly.  And  you  will  fee  that
there  was  very  little  in  the  woman  of  whom  I  ihall  immediately  fpeak.

22.  A  woman  about  thirty  years  of  age,  was  feiz'd  with  a  great  and  moift'
fcabies,  after  longcontinu'd  pains  of  the  limbs.  In  order  to  drive  this
away,  Ihe,  by  the  advice  of  an  empiric,  made  ufe  of  a  certain  ointment.
And  by  this  means  her  Icabies  was  dried  up  in  a  very  fhort  time  indeed  :
but  an  acute  fever  arole,  attended  with  a  great  heat,  and  thirft,  and  very  fe-
vere  pains  of  the  head.  To  thefe  fymptoms  were  afterwards  added  a  deli-
rium, a  confiderable  difficulty  of  breathing,  a  flight  tumour  of  the  whole
body,  but  not  a  flight  one  of  the  belly,  great  uneaiinefs,  and,  finally,  death
on  the  fixth  day  from  her  having  taken  to  her  bed.

In  the  diflieftion  of  the  body,  it  was  obferv'd  that  when  an  incifion  was
made  into  the  fl<in,  and  mufcular flefli,  no  watry  humour  ifTued  forth,  fo
that  it  was  evident  the  univerfal  tumour  of  which  I  have  fpoI<en,  was  not  of
the  cedematous,  or  anafarcous  kind  :  and  this  was  alfo  confirm'd  by  prefTing.
the  feet  with  the  finger,  which  left  no  traces  of  imprefllon  behind  it.

The  belly,  alfo,  was  tumid,  and  very  tenfe :  yet  when  it  was  open'd,  not ;
water,  but  the  inteftines,  and  ftbmach,  burft  forth,  which  contain'd  nothing
but  air-,  wherewith  they  were  diftended  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  the  ftomach
fili'd  more  than  half  of  the  cavity  of  the  belly. Yet  into  this  cavity,  a  limpid
ferum  was  found  to  be  extravafated,  to  the  quantity  of  a  pint  or  two  :  which,',
at  firft,  feem'd  to  concrete  flightly  from  the  application  of  fire  -,  but  after-  -
wards,  almoft  like  the  water  of  the  pericardium,,  evaporated  wholly,  except,
that  in  the  bottom  of  the  veflel,  it  left  a  kind  of  yellow  pellicle.

In  the  thorax,  the  lungs  were  found  to  be  annexed  to  the  pleura,  by  a :
kind  of  membranes  as  it  were,  that  refembled  a  gelatinous  body  :  and  thefc-
were  fo  many  in  number,  that  it  appear'd  as  if  the  lungs  could  not  have,
dilated  themfelves,  fo  freely  as  is  natural.  If  you  cut  into  them,  a  pellucid:
humour  ilTued  forth.  The  heart,  on  the  right  fide,  was  connefled  to  the-
pericardium,  by  fome  membranous  fibres  :  in  the  ventricles  was  a  fluid .
blood  ;  yet  in  the  right,  was  obferv'd  the  beginning  of  a  thin  polypous  con--
cretion. The  head  it  was  not  in  our  power  to  open.

23.  The  very  great  and  humid  fcabies,  which  had  freed  this  woman  from
long-continu'd  pains  in  her  limbs,  being  improperly  repell'd,  brought  on
death.  That  is  to  fay,  the  acrid  particles  which  had  been  accuftom'd,  be--
fore,  to  prick  and  vellicate  the  membranes  of  the  limbs,  were  now  falu-
brioufly  thrown  out,  by  means  of  little  ulcers  produc'd  on  the  fkin.  But.
when  thefe  ulcers  were  dried  up,  thofe  particles,  of  courfe,  remain'd  in  the
blood,  and  irritated  the  internal  parts  •,  and  thus  brought  on  the  acute  fever,,
and  the  other  very  violent  diforders  which  accompanied  it,  and  among  thefe
the  tympanites.  Which  fpecies  of  dropfy,  for  fo  the  ancients  call'd  it,  al-
though


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  23.  293

though  it  generally  fucceeds  to  long  difeafes,  as  Littre  fays  (g),  is  neverthelefs
fometimes  brought  on  in  an  acute  dilbrder,  as  this  was ;  and  even  in  thole  that
are  ftill  more~'acute,  as  I  myfelf  have  feen,  and  (hall»  relate  to  you  on  a  future
occafion.

After  very  violent  and  long-con tinu'd  diforders,  it  is  natural  to  conceive
with  him,  that  from  an  effete  and  impoverifli'd  blood,  fo  great  a  number  of
fpirits  cannot  be  produc'd,  nor  of  fuch  a  kind,  as  are  necelTary  to  keep  up
that  fpring  and  tenfion  of  fibre,  requir'd  in  the  ftomach  and  inteftines,  in
order  to  refift,  fufRciently,  the  force  of  the  air,  in  both  of  their  cavities -,
efpecially  if  it  be  much  rarefied,  and  in  great  quantity ;  and  prevent  the
parietes  of  thefe  vifcera  from  being  diftended,  in  an  incredible  manner.  But
in  this  acute  difeafe,  the  air  was  certainly  prone  to  rarefaction  ;  fo  that  even'
in  the  veffels,  which  were  under  the  fldn,  and  through  which  it,  perhaps,
pafs'd  with  lefs  freedom,  it  feem'd,  in  fome  meafure,  to  expand  itfelf,  and'
bring  on  a  kind  of  flight  emphyfema.

Yet  (liall  we  fuppofe  that  the  blood  might  be  render'd  effete,  and,  con-
fequently,  that  the  coats  of  thefe  vifcera  were  render'd  weak,  if  not  by  the-
long-continuance,  at  leaft  by  the  vehemence,  of  the  dilbrder  ?  Although,  as;
it  was,  in  this  cafe,  attended  with  very  fevere  pains  of  the  head,  with  anxie-
ty, and  delirium,  a  fcarcity,  and  languor,  of  fpirits  were  not  fo  much  to
be  argu'd  from  thence,  as  plenty,  and  irregular  motions,  thereof.  Nor-
lliall  I,  for  this  reafon,  go  over  to  the  opinion  of  Willis,  related  at  large  even  ■
in  the  Sepulchretum  (h),  who,  in  diametrical  oppofition  to  the  fucceeding
judgment  of  Littre,  accounted  for  the  diftention  of  the  coats  of  thefe  vif-
cera, in  a  tympany,  from  a  copious  and  irregular  influx  of  fpirits  into  their
fibres ;  as  if  the  fibres,  that  are  difpos'd  around  membranous  tubes,  when
they  are  inflated,  would  not  rather  confbringe  the  tubular  cavities,  and  refifl::
diftention.

I  confefs,  I  think  it  will  be  better  to  follow  a  third  opinion,  in  this  cafe,,
which  is  made  up,  as  it  were,  of  the  two  others,  and  fuppofe  that  the  fibres, ,
being  contraded  here  and  there,  by  an  irregular  influx  of  fpirits,  and  con-
ftrifted  by  a  convulfion,  had  intercepted  the  natural  motions  of  thefe  tubes;
and  confequently  prevented  the  expulfion  of  the  copious  and  much-rarefied
air :  and  that  the  air,  for  this  reafon, ^  urging  the  other  fibres,  in  thofe  trafts
wherein  it  was  confin'd,  fo  much  the  more  in  proportion,  as  it  was  the  more
increas'd  in  quantity,  and  in  power,  firft  overcame  the  refiftance  of  thefe
fibres,  and  aftewards  of  thofe  whofe  ftrength  had  been  left  broken,  and  di-
minifli'd,  by  the  force  of  the  convulfion  ;  and  by  this  means,  at  length,  weak-
ening and  relaxing  all  the  fibres,  univerfally  dilated  thefe  tubes.  And  that  the
flefliy  fibres  of  the  inteftines  may  be  fo  convuls'd,  as  to  prevent  all  exit  to  the.
intercepted  air,  the  very  clofe  contra6lions  of  the  inteftines,.  which  are  fre-
quently met  with,  here  and  there,  in  diflTeftions,  plainly  demonftrate.

Many  obfervators  tell  us,  "  fays  the  celebrated  Corn.  Henr.  Velfe  fz),"
and  I  have  frequently  feen,  in  bodies  after  death,  "  that  when  the  inteftine.
"  is  in  one  part  lax,  foft, diftendible,  and  flaccid,  it  is  in  another  place,

Cg)  Mem.  del'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1713.  (;)  Difp.  de  mut'.io inteft.  jngreff.  p.  i.  §.

(i-)  Seft.  hac  2j.  in  fchol,  ad  obf. 22.^  14..

"  hard,..


294  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

hard,  contrafted,  and  rugous,  fo  that  it  could  not  be  more  clofely  fliut
up,  and  ftreighten'd  by  the  compreffion  of  the  hand,  and  would  not  ad-
mit any  fluids  to  pafs  through  it,  but  nearly  refembled  a  iblid  mats  of
flelTi."  And  after  having  faid  that  thefe  coarftations  "  were  fomecimes
alternate,  through  the  v/hole  tra6t  of  the  inteftinal  canal,"  as  he  faw  in
the  body  of  an  infant,  he  proves  by  his  own  obfcrvation  {k),  which  is  as  fol-
lows, what  elaftic  air,  when  Ihut  up,  and  more  and  more  expanded,  by  rea-
fon  of  the  heat  of  the  place  wherein  it  is  confin'd,  can  effedt.  His  words
are,  "  I  faw  in  the  body  of  a  girl  of  two  years  old,  a  portion  of  the  intef-
*'  tinum  colon  fo  exceedingly  enlarg'd,  by  the  included  air,  that  it  refembled
"  a  bladder  confiding  of  coats,  which,  on  account  of  their  great  elongation,
"  and  diftention,  were  extremely  pellucid,  the  remaining  .trad  of  the  fame
"  intefline,  both  above  and  below  this  tumour,  being  externally  furrow'd  by
"  this  very  great  contraftion,  and  altogether  impervious."

To  this  1  would  likewife  have  you  add  the  equally  impervious  contra£lion,
which  was  feen  by  the  excellent  Bafius  (/),  between  the  upper  and  lower  parts
of  the  colon,  in  the  body  of  a  man,  which  parts  were  greatly  diftended  with
air.  And  that  when  conftriftions  of  this  kind  are  relax'd,  as  of  courfe  hap-
pens in  thofe  who  are  to  recover  from  their  difeafes,  the  fibres  are  now  con-
sequently become  very  weak,  under  fo  great  a  preiTure,  I  have  no  need  to
inculcate  upon  you  :  nor  yet  that  thofe  certain  trafts,  in  which  there  had  been
either  conflriftion  or  air,  would  be  inftantly  expanded  with  the  whole  force,
and  fpring,  of  this  elaftic  fluid ;  and  thatfo  much  the  more,  in  proportion  as
thefe  conftridtions  have  been  llronger,  or  continu'd  for  a  greater  length  of
time.

You,  therefore,  will  not  wonder,  if  in  the  obfervation  of  Laubius  (m),  the
flomach  was  corrugated,  but  the  colon  diftended  to  fuch  a  degree,  "  that  a
"  very  robuft  and  mufcular  man  could  eafily  have  thruft  in  his  whole  arm,"
or  that  Littre  (ri)  often  faw  the  ceecum,  and  the  colon,  of  the  thicknefs  of  a
man's  tliigh,  and  that  Platerus  fo),  even  in  a  boy,  faw  inteftines  which  feem'd,
"  in  fome  places,  to  be  equal  to "  the  fame  thicknefs.  On  the  contrary,
there  is,  at  other  times  f^),  fo  very  great  a  diftention  of  the  ftomach,  be-
yond that  of  the  inteftines,  as  not  only  to  be  fuppos'd  to  have  forc'd  the
contiguous  part  of  the  liver,  and  the  diaphragm,  much  higher  than  their
natural  fituation,  but  alfo  to  have  prevented  the  defcent  of  the  latter  ;  and
iometimes  to  have  thrown  the  patient  into  fuch  imminent  danger,  for  thisrea-
Ion,  as  to  require  an  inft-antaneous,  and  hitherto  unchought  of,  remedy  :  fo
that  an  exit  might  be  immediately  contriv'd  for  the  air,  by  means  of  thrufting
down  an  oblong  needle,  through  the  left  hypochondrium,  into  the  fto-
mach. But  of  this  below  {q).

However  you  might  have  obferv''d,  in  refpeft  to  the  woman  defcrlb'd  by
Valfalva  (r),  how  much  the  ftomach  was  diftended.  From  whence  I  have
taken  occafion  to  explain  the  tympanites  in  certain  cafes,  not  without  pre-
vious convulfive  conftridions. But  if  you  (hould  choofe  rather  to  make  ufe

{k) Ibid.  §.  15.  (c) Sea.  hac  Sepulchr.  ^l.  obf.  22. §.  4.

.  (I)  Dec.  3.  obf.  anat.  9.  (/>)  Ail.  cit.  torn.  1.  obf.  49.  cum  fchol.

{m)  Ad.  n.  c.  torn.  2.  obf.  20.  [q]  N.  25.

(/;)  Mem.  cit.  ('■)  N.  22.

of


Letter  XXXVIII. Article 24.  295

of  the  explication  of  Littre,  in  all  thefe  cafes,  I  iTiall  be  the  lefs  repugnant  to
your  determination,  as  in  the  progrefs  of  all  we  muft,  neverthelefs,  return  to
this,  if  what  I  juft  now  faid  be  really  juft  and  true.

24.  And  thus  the  caufes  of  a  tympanites,  both  after  a  chronic,  and  in  an
acute  difeafe,  will  be  underftood,  when  the  quantity  of  rarefied  air,  and  its
expanfive  force,  fhall  diftend  the  inteftines,  and  ftomach,  and  confequently
the  abdomen,  which  lies  in  appofuion  therewith.  But  there  is,  alio,  an-
other fpecies  of  tympany,  when  the  fame  air,  being  rarefied,  on  the  outfide
of  the  cavity  of  thele  vifcera,  extends  the  abdomen  itfelf  only.  And  the
mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  which  were  even  created  for  this  purpofe,  among
others  ;  that  while  every  thing  is  in  a  natural  ftate,  thefe  vifcera  might  not  be
diftended  beyond  meafure  ;  are  fo  far  from,  refilling  their  diftention,  when  they
are  more  lax  than  they  ought  to  be,  from  any  caufe  whatever,  that  it  even
appears  reafonable  to  number  them  among  the  caufes  of  this  diftention  be-
ing very  confiderable,  and  happening  very  eafily.  But  when  the  air,  on  the
outfide  of  thefe  viicera,  fhall  urge  the  lax  abdomen,  this  will  be  fo  much  the
fooner,  and  lb  much  the  more,  extended  in  proportion,  as  it  will  have  no
refiftance  to  its  force,  from  the  parietes  of  the  inteftines  and  ftomach,  but
only  from  the  parietes  of  the  abdomen  itfelf.

Yet  this  fpecies  of  tymipany  is  not  frequent,  either  when  alone,  or  join'd
with  the  former ;  but  is  even  fo  rare,  that  neither  Willis  (s),  nor  Littre  (i),
have  feen  it :  and  the  firft  has  even  faid  that  he  could  not  conceive  of  it,  and
the  other  that  it  was  entirely  refuted  by  his  experiments.  I,  however,  would
neither  deny  the  truth  of  any  thing,  becaufe  it  could  not  be  properly  con-
ceiv'd  of,  nor  would  fuppofe  that  what  does  not  happen  in  many,  cannot
happen  in  fome  :  and  perhaps  the  opinion  of  thefe  excellent  men  was  nearly
the  fame,  only  not  fufiiciently  explain'd.  Yet  others  do  not  doubt,  that
from  humours  extravafated  in  the  belly,  and  there  corrupted,  air  may  difen-
gage  itfelf,  efpecially  in  thofe  bodies  wherein,  from  the  efFedt  of  difeafe,  it
is  not  well  "  and  intimately  mix'd  with  the  humours,"  or,  in  like  manner,
from  any  corrupted  vifcus  ;  or  finally  (which  is  the  moft  eafy  of  all)  that  it
may  ifilie  from  the  inteftines,  *?hich  are  perforated  in  fome  part  or  other  of
their  tube.

And  I  faid  that  this  method  was  the  moft  eafy,  becaufe  the  celebrated
Haller  (u)  obferv'd  in  inteftines,  extremely  diftended  by  the  force  of  this
difeafe,  that  the  air  had  made  a  paflfage  for  itfelf  through  their  parietes,  quite
into  the  cells  which  are  fituated  under  the  external  coat:  and,  indeed,  I  re-
mem.ber  that  the  celebrated  Spoeringius,  in  the  commentaries  of  the  Royal
Academy  of  Sciences  in  Sweden,  I  think,  in  the  year  1742  (for  when  I  wrote
this  letter  the  book  was  not  in  my  hands)  has  faid,  that  in  a  man,  whofe  in-
teftine  colon  was  full  of  excrements,  the  air  had  fo  far  expanded  the  cavity,
above  this  obllacle,  that  by  the  force  exerted  upon  its  membranes,  it  was  no
longer  contain'd  in.  any  of  them,  but  the  external ;  fo  that  it  is  eafy  to  con-
ceive, how  little  yet  remain'd,  to  prevent  it  from  burfting  forth  quite  into
the  cavity  of  the  belly,  from  that  of  the  inteftine.


fjj ...  {")  Opufc,  pathol.  obf.  26.

(/)  Locis  indicatis  n.  23.


Yet


296  Book  III. Ot'  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Yet  not  only  the  air,  but  erofion  alfo,  or  gangrene,  by  perforating  the  in-
teRines,  may  give  an  exit  to  the  flatus,  as  they  have  more  than  once  done,
irom  the  ftomach.  Thus  in  the  two  obfervations,  which  are  mention'd
above  (x),  of  Camerarius,  and  Hoyerus,  it  is  not  at  all  furprizing  that,  as  the
ttomach  had  been  perforated,  no  fooner  was  a  flight  incifion  made  upon  the
tumid  abdomen,  but  firft  of  all  the  flatus  burft  forth  with  an  explofion,  and
putrid  fmell.  Yet  that  the  fame  thing  may  happen,  even  when  the  intef-
tines  are  not  pierc'd  through,  other  obfervations  fliow  ;  whether  they  are
affefted  with  a  gangrene,  as  in  the  writings  of  Mead  (y) ;  or  whether  they
incline  to  a  gangrenous  fl:ate,  and  at  the  fame  time  are  externally  cover'd
over  v/ith  a  deprav'd  humour,  and  internally  turgid  with  flatus,  as  in  the
writings  of  the  celebrated  Gullman  (z)  -,  or  whether  there  be  nothing  of  this
kind,  except  that  they,  and  the  ftomach,  are  both  of  them  inflated  to  a  very
violent  degree,  as  obferv'd  by  Mercklinus  (a)  ;  or,  finally,  not  even  this  is
the  cafe,  but  the  inteflines  "  are  juft  in  the  fame  flate  as  thofe  of  a  healthy
"  perfon,"  as  is  remark'd  by  the  celebrated  Heifler  (/^).

But  in  thefe  two  cafes,  and  in  other  cafes  of  the  fame  kind,  if  any
Gther  chance  to  occur,  by  what  pafTages  fl:iall  w£  fay  that  the  air  came  into
the  cavity  of  the  belly  ?  It  mufl  be  confefs'd,  that  there  may  be  forne  other
different  pafTages,  at  different  times,  which  we  are  not,  at  prefent,  acquainted
with.  But  yet,  as  we,  fometimes,  fee  certain  flatulent  tumours  in  the  vif-
qera,  why  cannot  the  air  be  colledted  together,  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly  as
it  is  elfewhere  ?  The  gall-bladder,  for  inflance,  was  found  very  turgid  with
air  by  Jo.  Bapt.  Fantonus  (c),  in  confequence  of  that  fluid  being  (hut  up  un-
der the  external  coat ;  and  his  celebrated  fon  (d)  has,  more  than  once,  feen,  as
others  have  alfo,  almofl  innumerable  little  veficles  of  different  fizes,  under
the  external  membranes  of  the  liver,  fpleen,  and,  in  particular,  of  the  me-
fentery :  and  he  conjedtur'd  that,  as  water  continuing  to  diftill  from  ruptur'd
hydatids,  into  the  belly,  make  an  afcites,  fo  air  burfting  forth  from  thefe  rup-
tur'd bubbles,  if  it  does  not  ceafe  to  rufli  into  the  abdominal  cavity,  upon
its  feparation  from  the  blood,  will  bring  on  a  tympanites.

Yet  if  we  even  could  not  underftand  the  -caufes  of  this  effecSt,  the  effeft
itfelf  certainly  could  not  be  denied.  For  he  affirms  that  he  had  feen  juft  the
fame  thing  in  a  young  woman,  as  Ballonius  faw  in  a  girl  (e),  I  mean  that  the
tumefied  abdomen  being  prick'd  after  death,  had  entirely  fubfided  with  an
explofion.  And  that  the  fame  thing  as  happen'd  to  Ballonius,  had  happen'd
to  others  alfo,  and  among  thefe  to  Vallefius,  you  will  learn  from  the  Sepul-
chretum  itfelf  f/j  •,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  who  found  air  in  the  cavity  of  the
abdomen,  when  the  inteftines  were  diftended  therewith  (g),  or  when  water  was
effus'd  into  the  belly :  and  whom  you  may  add  to  thefe  you  fufHciently
perceive,  from  the  later  obfervations  that  I  have  juft  now  mention'd.

(x)  N.  1^.  {J)  In  fch&l.  ad  earn,  ult.  edit.

fyj  Monit.  med.  c.  8.  {e)  Hie  in  Sepulchr.  obf.  23.  §.  z,

{z)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  7.  obf.  8g.  (/)  Ibid.  §.  i.

('aj  Earund.  dec  3.  a.  3.  obf.  142.  CgJ  Ibid.  obf.  22.  §.  4.  &  in  additam.  obf.

CiJ  Earund,  cent.  5.  obf.  84.  75.

CeJ  Obf.  med.  18,.

4  25.  And


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  25.  297

25.  And  left  you  fhould  fufped  thefe  things  to  have  happen'd,  becaufe
fome  inteftine  was  prick'd,  together  with  the  peritonaeum,  as  by  their  diften-
tion  they  were  quite  in  contaft  therewith,  and  become  very  thin  in  their  pa-
rietes,  attend  to  thefe  circumftances  -,  that  where  there  was  an  afcites  at  the
fame  time,  water  was,  of  courfe,  interpos'd  betwixt  the  peritonfeum,  and  in-
teftines  ;  and  that  where  there  was  no  afcites,  it  would  be  difRcult  to  be  done,
without  fome  marks  of  a  perforation  in  the  inteftine  being  difcover'd  then,  or
afterwards;  none  of  which,  when  it  happen'd  to  me,  at  any  time,  to  obferve
the  fame  thing,  I  could  find  out,  by  the  moft  accurate  attention.  To  this
add,  that  many  of  the  obfervations,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (i),  will  teach  us,
and  reafon  itfelf  will  confirm,  that  upon  flightly  perforating  an  inteftine,  the
air,  indeed,  which  is  neareft  to  the  foramen,  burfts  out,  but  that  the  air  which
is  at  a  diftance,  and  diftends  the  remainder  of  the  inteftines,  either  does  not
immediately  come  out,  or  if  it  does  foon  iffue  forth,  does  not,  however,  el-
cape  with  fuch  celerity,  that  the  fubfiding  of  the  whole  belly  fhould  feem
to  be  the  conlequence,  in  one  inftant  of  time,  in  the  fame  manner  as  hap-
pens in  the  explofion  of  a  bladder  ;  and  as,  from  the  due  confideration  of  the
words  of  thofe  great  men,  whom  I  juft  now  commended  {k),  you  will  rea-
dily acknowledge  that  it  was  feen  to  do  by  them.

Or  if  you  do  not  grant  this,  and  will,  abfolutely,  contend  that  at  the  very
point  of  time,  in  which  any  inteftine  is  (lightly  punftur'd,  all  the  air  ruflies
out  of  the  inteftines  ;  tell  me  then,  I  befeech  you,  how  it  could  happen,  that
Gullmannus  (/)  faw  them,  foon  after,  turgid  with  flatus,  or  how  that  JMerck-
linus  (m)  (after  the  air  had  burft  forth  from  the  abdomen,  when  but  flightly
pundlur'd,  and  this  "  had  immediately  fubfided)  faw,  on  examining  the
"  vifcera,  the  ftomach,  together  with  all  the  inteftines,  immenfely  diftended
"  with  air,  like  the  moft  inflated  bladder."

To  this  add  the  obfervation  given  by  Heifter(«),  in  order  "  to  decide  this
controverfy.  In  a  woman  who  "  had  the  abdomen  extremely  diftended,  and
*'  who  died  fuddenly,"  the  fame  thing  happen'd  which  I  have  faid  was  feen
by  Mercklin,  "  as  foon  as  ever  a  very  fmall  wound  had  perforated  the
"  peritonEeum ;"  but  the  inteftines  were  not  found  to  be  expanded  with  air ;
and  this  was  even  the  body,  in  which  "  the  inteftines  were  juft  in  the  fame
"  ftate,  as  thofe  of  a  healthy  perfon.  I  will  not  here  fay,  that  if  they  had
been  previoufly  diftended,  to  fuch  a  degree,  by  the  included  flatus,  fome  of
them  would  certainly  have  retain'd  the  marks  of  this  diftention,  whether  you
confider'd  their  thicknefs  or  their  fituation.  But  this  one  thing  I  will  fay,
that  as  fo  many  phyficians,  and  furgcons,  of  Amfterdani  were  prefent,  and
amongft  them  that  very  great  anatomift  Ruyfch,  befides  Heifter  himfelf,
who  was  a  young  man  indeed,  but  even  then  excellent  in  the  fame  art,  I  can-
not be  perfuaded  to  believe,  that  if  any  thing,  beyond  the  peritoneum,  had
been  cut  into,  fome  one  or  other  of  them  would  not  have  immediately  found
it  out.

I  fuppofe  you  fcarcely  expeft  here,  that  in  thefe,  and  other  obfervations  of
this  kind,  made  by  the  moft  ce4cbrated  authors,  another  fufpicion  fhould  be

(/)  Obf.  75.  cit.  &  obf.  22,  §.  2.  &  est.  (0

(kj  N.  24.  ad  ijn.  \m)  N.  eod.

(«)  Ibid.
Vol.  II,  Q^q  <h-


^98  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

obviated,  I  mean  that  the  air  with  which  the  abdomen  was  diftended,  had,
at  length,  been  extravaiated  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  after  death  ;  for  the
tumour  of  the  belly,  in  thofe  we  fpeak  of,  had  exifted  long  before,  v/hile
they  were  living.  And  that  thofe  veficles  fill'd  with  air,  which  I  have  taken
■notice  of  with  Fantonus  {o),  might  even  exift  in  the  living  bodies,  the  flatulent
.external  tumours,  which  are  acknowledg'd  by  mod  furgeons,  in  the  fcrotum
of  difeas'd  bodies,  while  living,  and  in  other  parts,  and  were  formerly  num-
■ber'd  by  Gorgeas,  among  umbilical  hernia;,  as  you  will  read  in  Celfus  (/»),
will  fufficiently  teach  us.

It  does  not  efcape  me,  what  doubt  there  may  be  in  the  laft  place.  But  I
do  not  at  all  doubt,  that  from  a  fmall  quantity  of  humour,  ftagnating  be-
twixt coats,  a  great  quantity  of  rarefied  air  may  Ibmetimes  extricate  itfelf :
and  when  I  refided  at  Venice,  either  every  thing  deceiv'd  me,  and  not  only
me,  but  the  moft  experienc'd  furgeons,  and  phyficians,  or  a  tumour,  which
was  not  narrow  in  its  circular  circumference,  and  had  form'd  itfelf  under  the
common  integuments  of  the  abdomen,  in  a  certain  barber,  and  which  I  after-
wards faw  perfeftlv  heal'd,  was  made  by  included  air.  Nor  do  I  eafily  fee
how  I  could  explain  thofe  tumours,  which  that  celebrated  man,  Daniel  Hoff-
man (i^J,  obferv'd,  in  the  day  time,  in  a  certain  lying-in-woman,  running  about
under  the  very  furface  of  the  abdomen,  of  various  fizes,  and  dilating  them-
felves  with  a  noife,  but  difappearing  about  evening,  and  that  for  fome  weeks
together.  But  I  knov/  for  a  certainty,  that  the  inflation  which  the  younger
du  Verney  (r)  faw  in  the  lafl:  diforder  of  a  girl,  increafing  with  an  undu-
lating appearance,  till  it  at  length  occupied  the  whole  trunk  of  the  bo-
dy, and,  as  you  prefs'd  it,  giving  the  fenfation  of  air,  as  it  were,  under  the
finger,  moving  av/ay  with  a  kind  of  crackling-,  this,  I  fay,  I  know,  for  a  cer-
tainty, to  have  been  from  air  expanding  itfelf  under  the  fkin  ;  for  fcarcely  was
the  ikin  of  the  abdomen  cut  into,  but  an  intolerable  ftench  burft;  forth,  and
thus  the  whole  tumour  vanifli'd.

Yet  I  would  have  you,  a3  to  what  relates  to  windy  tumours,  read  over
thofe  things  that  are  publifli'd  on  their  produdion,  by  Littre,  in  the  hiftory
of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (s).  And  in  the  commentaries
of  the  fame  academy  (^),  you  will  find  fome  things  propos'd  by  the  younger
du  Verney,  in  order  to  diftinguilli  the  fecond  fpccies  of  tympany,  which  is
ibmetimes  join'd  with  an  afcites ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  prevent  vis  either
from  pronouncing  a  tumour  of  the  abdomen  to  be  an  afcites,  rather  than  the
firfb  fpecies  of  tympany,  on  account  of  fome  fimilitude  of  flu£luation  ;  or,  on
the  other  hand,  from  denying  it  to  be  an  afcites,  becaufe  there  is  no  fenfe  of
fluctuation  :  and  fome  of  our  obfervations  may,  alio,  ferve  to  make  you  cau-
tious in  this  refped  (u).  And  that  very  excellent  phyfician  Werlhofius  (x)
has  given  fome  ufeful  hints  on  thefe  fubjefts,  fhowing  how  the  tympanites,
efpecially  when  it  has  become  inveterate,  does  not  exclude  a  fenfe  of  weight.

But  in  regard  to  the  method  of  cure,  when  you  read  that  a  tympaniticai
inflation  of  the  abdomen,  which  had  already  continu'd  eight  years,  was  re-

('oj  Ibid.  CsJ  A.  17 14.

[p)  De  medic.  I.  7.  c.  14,  CO  A.  1703.

("^J  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1737.  hebd.  11.  C"J  N.  30.

(r)  M.ein.de  I'acad.  r.  des  ic,  a.  1704.  (v)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1735.  hebd.  36.  n.  4..

mov'd,..


Letter  XXXVIIL Article  25.  2t)g

mOv'd,  merely  by  taking  away  a  large  quantity  of  blood,  from  the  foot,  by
the  celebrated  Michael  Adolphus  (y),  who  confefTes  "  that  it  was  not  from
"  flatus,"  you  will  judge,  from  what  then,  it  did  arife.  And  how  difficult
ic  is  to  cure  either  fpecies  of  the  tympanites,  that  is  really  flatulent,  npthincr
more  clearly  fhows  than  the  remedy,  which  men  of  eminence  have  been  un-
der a  neceflity  of  devifing,  I  mean  the  paracentefis.  But  not  one  of  the  more
cautious  furgeons  has  yet  been  found,  that  I  know  of,  who  was  willing  to
thrufl:  a  perforating  inftru men t  into  the  abdomen,  without  knowing  what
parts  he  might  wound.  In  the  number  of  thefe  cautious  furgeons  he  certainly
was  not,  who,  having  formerly  miftaken  a  tympany  for  an  afcites,  and  having
under  the  infpe£tion  of  Van  Helmont  (z),  who  was  then  a  young  man,  per-
forated the  abdomen,  in  vain  expefted  the  exit  of  the  waters.  For  "  having
"  withdrawn  the  trocar,  the  abdomen  immediately  fubfided,  and  the  patient
"  perilh'd  foon  after:  and  the  flatus,  v/hich  was  difcharg'd,  was  exceedingly
"  offtnfive,  and  of  a  cadaverous  fmell."  And  although  the  body  of  tlie-
patient  was  not  diflefled  after  death,  yet  nothing  can  more  eafily  happen,
than  that  upon  drawing  out  the  needle,  the  air  rufliing  forth,  may  fome-,
times  bring  on  a  flight  alleviation ;  but  then  nothing  can  more  eafily  hap-
pen, likewife,  than  that,  foon  after,  other  things,  alfo,  may  come  out  of  the
intefl:ines,  and  flowing  down  into  the  belly,  fpeedily  bring  on  a  fatal  dilbrder
in  the  vifcera.

And  what  will  you  fay  to  this  ?  That  the  needle  might  be  fix'd  into  that
pact  of  the  inteftine,  wherein,  though  there  v/as  fuppos'd  to  be  the  greatefl:
quantity  of  air,  on  account  of  the  very  great  diftention,  yet  there  was,  in
fadt,  the  leafl: ;  for  a  great  quantity  of  air  is  not  always  in  the  inteftines  of
tympanitic  patients,  and  but  little  matter,  and  this  for  the  moft  part  vifcid,
as  it  happen'd  to  Littre  («)  to  obferve.  For  the  younger  du  Verney  (b),  on
the  other  hand,  found  the  intefbines  half  full  of  matter :  and  the  celebrated
Leonhardus  Hurterus  (c),  having  wonder'd  that  in  a  tyrripanitic  boy,  the
large  intefl:ines,  in  particular,  were  fo  diftended,  that  the  colon  had  diflodg'd
the  liver,  in  fomemeafure,  from  its  ufual  fituation,  and  driven  it  to  the  left
fide,  found,  within  the  cavity,  a  fufficient  quantity  of  matter,  to  produce  "
thiseffedl;  this  matter  being  very  thick,  fpumefcent,  and  of  a  white  co-
lour, degenerating  to  yellow:  which  is  a  circumflance  chiefly  to  be  con-
ieflur'd,  in  a  diforder  that  is  attended  with  a  cofl:ivenefs,  when  the  patients
have  either  taken  in  a-  great  quantity  of  food,  before  the  diforder  began,  or
have  gone  on  to  take  it  in  a  confiderable  quantity,  after  it  has  begun.

But  what  danger  there  might  be  in  perforating  the  abdomen,  in  order  to
cure  the  other  fpecies  of  tympany,  if  the  firfl:  fpecies  fliould  happen  to  be
ioin'd  with  it,  or  the  firft  iliould  be  taken  for  the  fecond ;  and  it  is  very  dif-
ficult to  difl:inguifh  one  from  the  other;  you  underftand  from  thofe  thincrs
which  have  been  jufl:  now  faid.

Yet  of  this,  and  of  the  general  method  of  cure,  in  a  tympany,  and  of  dif-

{y)  Aft.  n.  G.  torn,  i.obf.  244.  fij  A.  1703.

(zj  Ignot.  hydrop.  n.  44.  {c)  Eph,  n.  C.  cent.  I  &  2.  obf.  184.

{a)  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fg.  a.  1713.

Q^q  2  tinguiih-


30O  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

tmguii'hing  one  Ipecies  from  the  other,  as  far  as  it  is  in  the  power  of  con-
jeftures  to  do,  and  of  the  nature,  and  caufes  of  this  difeafe,  I  would  have
you  read  what  the  celebrated  Zeviani  (d)  has  learnedly,  ingenioufly,  and
Ilcilfully  written  ;  for  if,  from  his  very  great  regard,  and  friendfliip,  to  me,
he  would  have  thele  writings  appear  in  my  name,  fuch  as  it  is,  he  had  been
able  to  fend  them  to  me,  before  this  letter  was  difpatch'd  to  you,  fome  things
would  not  have  been  wanting  herein,  which,  in  the  prefent  cafe,  have  efcaped
me.  You  will,  therefore,  turn  to  them  in  his  writings.  For  1  now  go  on
to  add  to  the  many  obfervations  of  dropfy,  .which  I  have  defcrib'd  from  Val-
falva,  fome  of  my  own,  but  not  a  great  number,  left  this  letter  fliould  grow
out  into  an  enormous  length.

26.  A  certain  man  labour'd  under  an  afcltes,  but  ftill  more  under  an  ana-
farca  ;  and  this  feem'd  to  be  the  more  confiderable,  becaufe,  as  it  did  not  oc-
cupy the  face,  which  was  emaciated,  and  the  remainder  of  the  head,  the
other  limbs,  efpecially  the  lower,  feem'd  to  have,  when  compar'd  with  the
head,  a  moft  monftrous  magnitude.  This  m.an  dying  in  the  hofpital  of  incu-
rables at  Bologna,  in  the  year  1704,  if  I  rightly  remember,  I  diffedted  him
rather  in  order  to  enquire  into  the  nature  of  the  anafarca,  than  of  the  afcites.
And  I  made  my  enquiries  in  the  thighs,  and  the  fcrotum,  for  the  legs  began
to  be  putrefied.  The  cuticle  of  the  thighs  was  here  and  there  rais'd  up
into  bladders,  by  the  water  which  lay  underneath  it :  one  of  them  was  of  the
bignefs  of  my  fift.  Having  cut  quite  down  to  the  bone,  I  examin'd  the  fec-
rions,  and  found  that  the  adipofe  membrane  was  much  thicken'd ;  and  that,
the  cellute  malpighians  thereof,  were  fill'd  with  a  watery  fat,  or  rather  with,
■water,  in  the  chief  part  of  them,  which,  by  reafon  of  the  great  number  of
{mail  membranes  of  the  cells  lying  betwixt,  refenibled  a  jelly,  as  I  have  faid,
in  the  Adverfaria  {e).  And  as  the  adipofe  membrane  is  propagated,  not  only,
betwixt  the  mufcles,  but  alfo  betwixt  the  fafciculi  of  fibres  of  which  the
mufcles  are  made  up,  fo  in  all  thefe  places  was  the  water  likewife  propagated,
having  the  fame  gelatinous  appearance.  Nor  did  I  meet  with  any  other  ap-
pearance upon  cutting  into  the  fcrotum,  which  was  extremely  tumid.  For
the  cells,  in  particular,  of  which  the  dartos  is  compos'd,  as  they  are  con-
t-inu'd  from  the  adipofe  membrane,  were  diftended  with  water.  The  water
therefore  iflued  from  thefe,  and  all  thofe  other  feftions,  and  if  you  pleas'd
might  even  be  eafily  prefs'd  out-,  but  not  entirely,  for  fome  confiderable-
quantity  remain'd  betwixt  the  little  membranes  of  the  cells.

Wherefore,  transferring  the  knife  to  the  abdomen,  although  I  found  fcarcely
any  v/ater  between  the  integuments  thereof,  yet  I  did  not  believe  that  it  had
fo  foon  flow'd  down  through  the  fe<5tions  of  the  fcrotum,  and  thighs^  but  L
rather  thought  that  by  the  large  quantity  of  waters  which  fill'd  the  belly,  and;
diftended  the  abdomen,  the  water  was  forc'd  out  of  the  integuments  of  this.
cavity,  which  would  otherwife  have  ftagnated  there,  and  carried  down  into,
the  lower  limbs  -,  and  this  while  the  patient  was  liviftg  :  or  if  you  choofe  ra-
ther to  confider  it  fo,  when  it  was  about  to  afcend  from  thefe  limbs,  it  was-
not  admitted  betwixt  thofe  integuments  by  reafon  of  the  fame  preffure.  there-

{^)  Del  flato,  &c.  L.2.  c,  28.  &  1.  1.  c.  27. («)  II.  animad.  16.


Letter  XXXVIIT. Article 27, 28, 29. 30F

on  from  the  waters  beneath,  that  I  mention'd  juil  now.  But  in  what  ftate.
the  vifcera  of  the  belly  v/ere,  I  did  not  accurately  remark ;,  for,  as  I  faid  be-
fore,' I  did  not  at  that  time  propofe  making  this  enquiry.

27.  You  fee  then,  that  the  feat  and  caufe  of  the  tumour,  which  is  made
by  the  anafarca,  are  not  only  under  the  fK.in  in  the  adipofe  membrane,  but
aUb  in  all  the  appendages  of  that  membrane,  efpecially  where  the  fwelling
is  confiderable  ;  fo  that  as,  befides  this  membrane  itfelf,  thefe  appendages  are.
likewife  diftended,  and  that  not  only  betwixt  the  external,  mufcles,  and  thofe
that  lie  beneath  them,  but  even  betwixt  the  fafciculi  of  the  fibres  of  thefe
mufcles,  a  large  tumour  is  confequently  generated.  You  fee,  at  the  fame
time,  what  it  is  that  frequently  impofes  upon  obfervers,  by  the  appearance  .of
a  jelly  ;  for  the  fame  little  membranes,  lying  betwixt  the  portions  of  pinguc-
dinous  oil,  are  the  reafon  of  its  appearing  lefs  fluid,  in  found  and  healthy,'
bodies,  than  it  really  is  in  the  living  body.

Yet  I  would  not  deny  that,  either  by  reafon  of  the  remains  of  this  oil  be-
ing interpos'd,  or  becaufe  the  confin'd  water  is  very  vifcid,  or  becaufe  by
llagnation,  and  the  feafoa  of  the  year,  it  becomes  pretty  thick,  there  is,,
fometimes,  fomething  befides  thefe  membranes  whichoffers  that  appearance  tOi
our  eyes.  That  the  laft  fuppofition  was  the  only  one  approv'd  by  Glaferus,  you,
■will  learn  even  from  the  Sepulchretum  (f)  ;  though  others  feem  rather  to  have-
prefer'd  that  which  I  prefer,  and  among  thefe  Peyerus  {g)  and  Wepfer  {h).

28.  In  dlflefting  an  old  woman  who  had  died  of  an  afcites,  though  not  ai
very  confiderable  one,  in  the  hofpital  at  Padua,  about  the  end  of  the  year-
1716,  I  obferv'd  thefe  things.

The  belly,  when  the  water  was  all  exhaufled  from  its  cavity,  fhow'd  the
liver  to  be  befet,  inwardly  and  outwardly,  with  many  white,  but  not  very,
hard,  tumours;  and  in  the  pancreas  was  one  fimilar  tumour,  but  harder,  and;
much  more  large,  as  it  occupied  all  that  part  of  this  vifcus,  by  which  it  is,
connedted  to  theinteftinum  duodenum.  The  proper  membrane  of  one  of  the,
kidnies  (for  I  did  not  examine  the  other)  was  become  much  thicken'd,  and,
was  eafily  drawn,  off  by  the  hand :,  the  little  tubuli,,  or  fmall  canals,  were,,
alfo,  much  thicker-  than  ufual,  and  for  that  reafon  much  more  evident.

The  uterus  was  notdifeafed  internally.  But  externally,  itihow'd,  in  one  fide,,
a  eonfpicuous  cicatrix,  as  if  from  a  wound,  whereas  there  was  none  in  the.
fldn  6f  the  belly  :  and  on  the  oppofite  fide,  not  far  from  the  cervix,  it  protube-  '
rated  into  a  roundifh  tumour ;  which  being  cut  afunder,  together  with  the  pa-
ries of  the  fundus,  that  lay  beneath,  it,  and  in  great  meafure  inclos'd  it,  ex--
hibited  a  fubftance  of  a  red  colour,  inclining  to  livid,  and  yet  not  harder  than;
the  other  part  of  the  uterus.  In  the  tefles  were  thick,  white  bladders,  which,
cpntain'd  nothing  in.  their  cavity:  but  one,  which  was  much  larger,  contain'di
a  watery  humour.

The  thorax  was.  found,  except  that  it  had  fome  water  extravafa ted  in  it,,
but  not  in  great  quantity.  The  brain  was  in  a  natural  ftate,  firm,  and  had,
not  the  leaft  water  contain'd  therein.

29.  There  was  fufficient  caufe,  not  to  fpeak  of  other  things  at  prefent,  in;
the  pancreas,  aqd  liver,  not  only  that  the  c{iy.le  and  blood  fhould  not  be  pre--

^f)  Sea.  hac  21.  obf.  2i.  &  fchoU  {h)  Ibid,,obf.  17.  §.  5..

(^X  Ibii  obf,  3.  §..  !.,&  fcMl;


30  2  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

par'd,  agreeably  to  the  intention  of  nature,  but  alfo  that  the  motion  of  the
lymph  and  blood  fhould  be  retarded  in  the  belly.

It  once  happen'd  to  me,  that  when  I  walk'd  into  the  country  for  the  fake
of  refrefhing  air,  and  meditation,  I  met  with  a- flock  of  flieep,  out  of  which,
the  butchers  were  buying  fome  at  a  very  equitable,  and  others  at  a  very  low
price.  When  I  enquired  into  the  reafon  of  this  difference,  thefe,  faid  they,
for  which  we  give  the  higher  price,  are  found,  but  the  others  have  a  hard
liver,  and  water  in  the  belly.  As  the  belly  was  not  more  tumid  in  the  one
than  in  the  other,  and  no  other  mark  of  difeafe  apj^ear'd,  that  I  could  ob-
ferve,  I  fnould  havefuppofed  that  they  had  not  fpokenfrom  real  knowledge,  if  I
had  not  been  convinc'd,  foon  after,  from  feeing  fome  of  thefe  unfoundfheep
kill'd  andapen'd.  And  they  had  made  ufe  of  this  mark  to  judge  by.  Lift-
ing up  the  upper  eye-lid  of  the  fheep,  and  attending  to  the  colour  of  the
parts,  that  lie  about  the  eye,  they  dillinguifh'd  the  found  fheep  by  the  red
colour,  and  the  morbid  by  the  white  :  thus,  as  the  other  part  of  the  body  is
cover'd  with  hairs,  they  examin'd  the  parts  which  were  not  cloth'd  therewith,
jull  as  phyficians  do  the  face  •,  and  that  with  fo  much  the  more  advantage,  as
a  greater  number  of  vefTels,  and  thofe  which  are  very  confpicuous,  lying  in
that  part,  more  clearly  fhow  what  the  nature  of  the  blood  is.

I  fhould  not  have  related  thefe  things  to  you,  if  I  had  not  lately  feen  that
Boerhaave  (/)  refers  to  the  very  fame  mark,  and  exprefsly  transfers  it  from
the  brute  creature  to  the  human  ;  fo  as  to  aflert,  that  by  the  pallid  colour  of
the  tunica  adnata,  and  the  caruncle  of  the  eye,  "  a  watery  cacochymia  is  fig-
nified  •,"  and  as  we  know  from  this  flgn,  "  that  there  js  a  deficiency  of  red
*'  blood,  that  all  the  dilbrders  are  prefent  which  are  the  confequents  of  fuch  a
"  defeft."  At  leaft  many  of  thefe  may  be  prefent,  or  follow  not  long
after.

So  among  the  fheep,  that  I  have  faid  were  infpedled  by  me,  at  that  time,
there  was  one,  which,  although  it  had  no  better  a  liver  than  the  reft,  nor
was  lefs  dropfical,  was  neverthelefs  very  fat,  the  fat  being  white  and  folid,
and  the  omentum  very  fine.  That  is  to  lay,  the  diforder  in  this  fheep  was
very  recent :  but  if  it  had  liv'd  fo  long  as  the  others  had  done,  under  the  in-
fluence of  this  diforder,  it  would  nothave  been  furnifli'd  with  fo  fine  an  omen-
tum, and  fo  good  an  appearance  of  fat.  For  in  fuch  a  habit  of  body,  frefh
diforders  are  continually  added  to  the  firft ;  as  you  may  fee  even  in  the  bo-
dies of  men,  to  which  I  return :  for  in  the  dilfeftion  of  fuch  bodies,  the  vif-
cera,  for  the  moft  part,  are  lb  much  the  more  difeas'd,  in  proportion  as  they
have  been  longer  macerated  by  the  dropfy,  or  by  the  diforders  that  precede
the  dropfy. I  will  give  an  inftance  of  each  cafe  :  and  firft  of  the  fecond.

30.  Caipar  Lombria,  a  Venetian  nobleman  ;  of  a  bilious  temperament,  as
the  manner  of  Ipeaking  is,  of  a  large  and  robuft  body,  and,  for  that  reafon,
fo  much  the  more  carelefs  of  all  medical  precepts,  in  every  m^ethod  of  life ;  af-
ter having  pafs'd  his  fortieth  year,  was  feiz'd  with  a  long  diforder  which  ap-
pear'd  in  different  fhapes,  and  having  made  ufe  of  cooling  liquors,  during
this  difeafe,  to  an  immoderate  degree,  efcaped  from  it  indeed,  but  with  his
belly  fomewhat  more  tumid  than  natural. Yet  this  being  remov'd  by  the

(0  Prdeft.  ad  inftit.  5-  868.

help


Letter  XXXVII. Article  30.  303^

help  of  remedies,  he  had  no  fymptom  that  deferv'd  any  great  attention,  till  a:
kind  of  diarrhoea  began  to  affedl  him,  and  return  at  intervals,  fometimes  with
confiderable  violence.

By  thefe  difcharges  the  thirft,.  which  was,  at  other  times,  almoft  natural
to  him,  was  increas'd ;  and  his  urine,  which  he  us'd  to  make  in  large  quanti-
ties, grew  very  faturated  in  its  colour,  and  very  much  diminifh'd  in  its  quan-
tity. Yet  his  ftrength  was  not  at  all  injur'd  hereby,  till  aboutthe  latter  end
of  the  winter  of  the  year  1722,  which  was  the  forcy-feventh  year  of  his  age,
when  he  was  troubled  with  the  diarrhcra  for  almoft  a  whole  month  together  ;
a  matter  of  various  colours  being  dilcharg'd,  and  for  the  moft  part  crude,
ferous,  and  frothy  :  whereas  it  us'd,  before,  only  to  hold  him  for  eight  or
ten  days,  in  which  time  he  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity  of  yellow  and
fluid  matter.

This  diarrhoea  being  overcome  by  the  help  of  proper  remedies,  return'd,
foon  after,  even  more  violently,  by  the  negleft  of  regularity  in  living.  Again
was  this  diforder  remov'd ;  when  a  tremor,  with  which  he  had  been  {lightly
affefted  from  his  infancy,  and  which  after  that  firft  illnefs  became  very  mani-
feft  through  his  whole  body,  and  was  now  and  then  made  more  violent  from
the  inteftinal  fluxes,  began  to  be  attended  with  Ibme  new  diforders  of  the  head.

The  phyficians  having,  for  a  long  time,  forbid  the  ufe  of  generous  wines,.
on  account  of  this  tremor ;  though  their  orders  ought  to  have  been  more
punilually  obey'd  ;  and  having  permitted  him  to  lofe  a  fmall  quantity  of
blood,  on  account  of  thefe  new  diforders,  they  faw,  on  the  upper  part  of  it,,
after  concretion,  a  cruft,  which  was,  in  one  half  of  it,  of  a  green  colour.  Yet
by  making  ufe  of  a  proper  method  of  cure,  his  ftrength,  colour,  and  appetite
for  food,  feem'd  to  be  reftor'd,  and  he  made  water  in  a  very  proper  quantity,,
when  the  patient  began  to  be  tir'd  of  the  medical  regimen,  which  had  beea
of  fo  much  advantage  to  him,  and  would  make  no  farther  ufe  of  it  after  the
thirtieth  day.  Nor  was  it  that  he  omitted  thefe  remedies  only,  but  he  had
violent  commotions  of  mind,  and  great  exercifes  of  body.  And  thefe  were
iucceeded,  within  fifteen  days  after  the  omiffion  of  his  medicines,  by  the  be-
ginning of  a  fatal  difeafe.  His  abdomen,  v/hich,  before,  us'd  often  to  fwell
with  a  great  quantity  of  flatus,  but  to  be  reduc'd  foon  after,  began  now  to  be
tenfq,  v/ith  a  continual,  and  very  uneafy  tumour ;  and  when  ftruck  with  the
hand,  to  refound  like  a  drum  :  his  feet  were  alfo  a  little  fvv'ollen  :  his  urine
was  of  a  very  high  colour,  and  in  very  fmall  quantity :  his  thirft  was  very^
troublefome.

Thefe  things  being  obferv'd  in  the  latter  end  of  May,  and  Michelotti,.  who,
had  begun  to  ufe  all  his  art  againft  this  tympanites  in  vain,  being  oblig'd
to  fet  out  for  France,  before  the  middle  of  June,  with  the  Venetian  ambaSa-
dors,  earneftly  recomunended  the  patient  to  m.e,  as  he  was  coming  to  Pa-
dua at  the  fame  time  ;  fo  that  if  I  could  not  conftantly  fee  him,  together  with
his  phyfician,  I  m.ight,  atleaft,  when  other  occupations  fufFer'd  me,  frequently-
affilt  him  by  my  advice.  1  however,  not  yet  having  feen  the  patient,  only-
from  attentively  reading  thofe  fym^ptoms  that  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  briefly,
conjefturing  that  there  was  a  difeafe  in  fome  of  the  vifcera,  in  others  aweak--
nefs,  defpair'd  of  curing  him  :  nor  did  I  conceal  this  from  his  relations,  wha
very  well  knew  that  for  the  fpace  of  feven  years  paft,  he  had  fcarcely  evec

beea


304  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

been  without  a  difeafe  -,  and  upon  my  enquiry  confirm'd  that  which  is  faid  in
the  latter  end  of  the  books  de  MorMs,  "  that  he  had  fallen  into  this  difeafe,
*'  when  his  body  had  been  melted  down  by  another."

Therefore,  I  faid  exprefsly  the  fame  thing  to  them,  that  is  immediately
added  there  :  "  if  then  the  patient  has  been  fuddcnly  feiz'd  with  this  difeafe,
"  there  is  no  doubt  but  he  will  die  in  confequence  of  his  having  been  fo
"  long  afflicted  with  another."  Nor  was  my  opinion  at  all  different,  after  hav-
ing feen  the  patient :  and  into  this  opinion,  after  that,  came  all  the  phyfi-
cians  who  were  the  moil  eminent,  at  this  time,  in  Padua.  For  although  flatus
having  been  fometimes  difcharg'd  both  above  and  below,  the  abdomen  re-
founded  no  more  if  you  flruck  it  with  your  hand,  yet  the  fwelling  thereof,  and
the  other  iymptoms  that  have  been  mention'd,  werefo  far  from  decreafing,  that
they  were  even  increas'd  every  day,  whatever  method  of  cure  he  was  put  into  -,
fo  that  the  patient  did  not  feem,  now,  to  have  brought  hither  a  tympany,
but  a  fpeedily-increafing  afcites,  to  which  a  dropfy  of  the  thorax,  and,  final-
ly, a  dropiy  of  the  brain  was  added,  as  you  will  know  from  thofe  fymptom*
that  I  fhall  fubjoin.

In  the  firft  place,  if  laying  your  left  hand  on  the  fide  of  the  abdomen,  you
flruck  the  oppofite  fide  with  fmall,  but  repeated,  ftrokes  of  your  right  hand,
you  perceiv'd  the  fludfuation  of  the  water  flriking  againfl  the  left  hand.  Yet
after  a  few  days,  the  belly  was  not  only  full  of  water,  but  immoderately  tumid,
and  by  its  dilientioTi  gave  refiftance  to  the  hand  which  endeavour'd  to  make
an  impreffion  upon  it:  and,  at  the  fame  time,  not  only  the  feet,  and  legs,  had
an  oedemarous  fwelling,  but  the  thighs,  alfo,  were  very  turgid,  the  face,  and
the  upper  limbs,  becoming  quite  emaciated.  In  the  beginning  he  had  a
kind  of  cough,  and  afterwards  none :  but  although  the  patient  could  at  firfl
lie  on  which  fide  he  pleas'd,  he  could  lie,  afterwards,  only  on  the  right:  and
although  he  could  lie  down  in  his  bed,  through  the  whole  courfe  of  the  dif-
eafe, yet  twice,  before  the  laft  weeks,  he  was  compell'd  to  leap  out  of  bed,
by  a  fenfe  of  fuffocation  coming  on,  which  went  away  as  fuddenly  as  it  had
come.

At  length,  on  the  laft  ten  days  he  was,  for  the  moft  part,  affefted  with  a
kind  of  fleep,  and  frequently  with  a  little  delirium,  but  only  fuch  as  was  very
flight.  Then,  alfo,  the  force  of  the  heart,  which  had  for  a'long  time  been
very  ftrong,  began  to  be  very  weak,  at  times  :  but  the  ftrength  of  the  other
mufcles  did  not  fail,  even  almoft  to  the  laft.  If  you  except  two  fevers,  which
had  attack'd  him  many  days  before  death  ;  the  firft  not  without  long  (hiverings
and  tremblings,  which  however  ended  within  two  days ;  and  the  fecond  more
flight,  and  more  fhort  •,  I  fay,  if  you  except  the  time  of  thofe  fevers,  the
pulfe  difcover'd  nothing  preternatural,  except  that  frequently,  and,  parti-
cularly, about  the  evening,  it  was  found  to  be  pretty  quick,  and  his  flelh
pretty  hot.

In  the  beginning,  there  was  a  very  troublefome  fenfation  in  the  epigaftri-
um,  and  even  a  pain  betwixt  the  enfiform  cartilage,  and  the  navel  -,  which,
afterwards,  was  not  perceiv'd  in  that  part,  but  here  and  there  throughout  the
belly  :  and  a  fehfe  of  pricking  remain'd  in  the  region  of  the  liver.  His  fleep,
and  appetite  for  food,  which  in  the  beginning  had  been  moderate,  were  often
deficient  in  the  progrefs  of  the  difeafe  :  and  his  thirft  was  ftill  more  and  more

violent.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  30.  305

violent.  The  inteftines,  fpontaneoufly,  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity  of  mat-
ter, which  was,  for  the  mod  part,  fluid  and  yellow  ;  and  fometimes  the
ftools  were  of  a  different  colour,  and  vifcid.  On  the  other  hand,  the  urine
was  always  in  very  fmall  quantity,  of  a  flame-colour,  and  faturated.  As
the  patient,  the  relations,  and  the  phyficians,  defir'd  nothing  more  ear-
neftly,  than  that  the  urine  fhould  be  difcharg'd  more  freely,  I  can  hardly
fay  how  many  different  remedies  he  took  for  this  purpofe.  I  believe  there
was  no  medicine  whatever,  whether  weak,  or  powerful,  fimple,  or  com-
pound, which  comes  from  any  of  the  three  kingdoms,  to  fpeak  in  the  man-
ner of  naturahfts,  that  was  fuppos'd  to  have  any  tendency  of  this  kind,  but
was  propos'd  by  one  or  other  phyfician  out  of  fuch  a  number,  and  taken  by
the  patient.

But  all  were  of  no  effeft,  as  generally  happens  where  nature,  itfelf,  does
not  co-operate  with  the  phyfician  ;  for  his  urine  was  never,  in  the  leaft,  in-
creas'd  in  its  quantity,  or  chang'd  in  its  appearance,  except  that  about  fif-
teen days  before  death,  and  again,  on  the  lad  days  of  his  life,  it  depofited
a  little  quantity  of  fomething,  of  a  tobacco  colour,  in  the  bottom  of  the
veffel  -,  which,  upon  diligent  examination,  I  found  to  be  blood  mix'd  with
ichor,  and  this  I  demonftrated  to  thofe  whom  it  concern'd,  that  they  might,
at  length,  put  fome  ftop  to  the  ufe  of  diuretics.  Some  of  thefe,  but  at  a
time  that  was  lefs  inconvenient,  and  fuch  as  were  lefs  to  be  fufpefted,  I  had
alfo  recommended,  not  with  the  hope  of  curing,  but  left  the  patient  fhould
perceive  that  I  defpair'd  of  his  cafe,  and  among  thefe  fome  of  the  turpentine
kind.

But  as  I  obferv'd  that  the  urine  had  not  gain'd  even  that  violet  odour,
which  it  generally  does  from  the  uie  of  thefe  remedies,  I  diftrufted  them,
and  even  the  paflage  of  the  kidnies  ftill  more  than  before  ;  and  thought  it
was  better  to  return  to  the  inteftinal  paffages,  efpecially  as  the  medicine
call'd  purified  tartar,  which  we  us'd  at  intervals,  caus'd  a  confiderable  dif-
charge,  and  often  a  very  watery  one,  without  any  inconvenience,  and  always
brought  on  an  alleviation  of  fome  hours,  from  a  troublefome  kind  of  fenfa-
tion,  which  was  perceiv'd  at  the  region  of  the  ftomach.  Yet  ev^n  this  me*
thod  was  of  no  advantage.

The  patient  had  heard,  from  Michellotti,  that  the  urine  of  a  heifer  had
fucceeded  with  him,  more  than  once,  in  the  cure  of  an  anafarca.  As  he
was,  therefore,  defirous  of  trying,  though  neither  the  time  of  the  year,  nor
fome  other  circumftances  of  this  kind,  were  fuch  as  L'emery  (k)  would
have  prefer'd,  yet  I  indulg'd  him  in  the  ufe  of  a  remedy,  of  the  fame  kind
as  "  the  urine  of  Iheep,  or  the  urine  of  afles ;"  which,  as  I  had  read  in  Avi-
cenna  (/),  were  formerly  recommended,  by  fome  phyficians,  againft  this  dif-
eafe  -,  and  which,  finally,  not  only  difcharges  the  water  of  patients  in  an
afcites,  by  the  kidnies,  but  alfo  by  the  inteftines,  as  the  obfervations  of
L'emery  inform  us :  I  indulg'd  him,  however,  with  this  reftriftion,  that  he
fhould  not  drink  more  than  feven  ounces  on  the  firft  day,  and  fhould  add  two
ounces  every  day  afterwards.  And  on  the  firft  day,  he  felt  an  effeft  v/hich
L'emery  has  not  taken  notice  of,  in  the  recital  of  others.

{h)  Mem.  del'Acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1707.  (I)  Canon.  1.  3.  Fen,  14.  tr.  4.  c.  13.

Vol.  If.  R  r  For


3o6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Beliy.

For  a  little  after  he  had  taken  it,  his  head  was  afteded  with  a  kind  d£
dr.unkennefs,  which,  however,  went  off  foon  afterwards,  and  did  not  return
on  the  following  days,  although  a  greater  quantity  was  taken.  On  the  fifth
day,  the  patient  went  lb  far  as  thirteen  ounces,  yet  did  not  make  more  water,
but  difcharg'd  a  greater  quantity  by  ftool,  fo  that,  on  this  very  day,  he  dif-
charg'd  water  to  the  quantity  of  four  or  five  pints,  without  any  lofs  of
ftrength  :  yet  was  no  other  kind  of  relief  obferv'd  therefrom,  than  what  had
been  obferv'd  from  the  tartar ;  the  belly  not  being  at  all  jefs  fwell'd,  and  the
lower  limbs  even  becoming  more  tumid.  For  which  reafon  this  remedy
was  then  intermitted.  Some  time  after,  the  patient  would  return  to  the  fame.
He  drank  every  day,  fucceffively,  for  five  days  together,  eight  ounces..
But  found  it  of  no  more  fervice  than  before  :  and  indeed,  upon  being  at-
tack'd  by  the  fecond  fever,  which  I  fpoke  of  above,  was  oblig'd  entirely  to
omit  it.

In  vain  alio  ;  and  I  wifh  I  could  fay  without  injury,  in  a  difeafe,  which  it
was  much  more  eafy  to  increafe,  than  diminilh  ;  in  vain,  I  fay,  did  he  ufe
other  remedies  of  the  fame  kind,  whether  they  were  taken  in  by  the  mouth,
or  in  the  form  of  glyfters,  or  lay'd  upon  the  abdomen.  For  when  a  certain
fenior  phyfician  had  order'd  the  juices  of  dwarf-elder,  and  wormwood,  to-
be  applied  to  the  belly,  it  had  no  effe£t,  but  to  bring  on  a  fruitlefs  defire
of  going  to  ftool,  and  an  itching  of  the  fkin  about  the  region  of  the  liver, ,
where  the  fmall  veins  appear'd  livid.  He  therefore  gave  up  the  ufe  of
thefe  juices,  nor  did  he  find  any  application  to  the  abdomen  of  ufe,  if  the
pains  of  the  belly  at  any  time  required  to  be  afiwag'd,  but  the  omentum  of  a
weather-fheep  Imear'd  over  with  the  oils  of  violets,  wormwood,  and  almonds.
5ut  this  was  more  early  in  the  difeafe.  Now  let  us  go  on  to  the  end  of  the
diforder  and  the  difleftion.  He  died  like  a  fufFocated  perfon,  with  his  face
and  flioulders  very  livid  :  but  water  and  blood  came  out  of  the  mouth  and
noftrils  of  the  body  after  death.

The  body  was  diflcftcd  the  day  after,  which  was  on  the  third  of  Auguft,,
in  the  year  before  mention\i,  in  order  to  be  embalm'd.  The  upper  limbs
were  mark'd  with  a  kind  of  livid  petechia.  And  from  the  lower  limbs,  aa.
Gedematous  tumour  was  produc'd  through  the  back,  quite  to  the  foapulae.

The  belly  contain'd  a  quantity  of  foetid  water,  of  a  green  colour  inclining
to  yellow,  with  which  the  parietes  were  diftended  to  their  utmoft  capacity..
In  this  water,  fwam  fome  pieces  of  purulent  lubftance,  which  I  fuppos'd  ta.
have  come  from  the  omentum,  though  they  feem'd  to  be  mucilaginous.  The
ftomach,  and  the  inteftines,  which  were  fcarcely  at  all  turgid,  were  of  a  black
colour,  as  the  mefentery  v/as  alfo.  The  liver  was  hard,  internally,  and  ex--
ternally  confifting  of  tubercles,  that  is  of  glandular  lobules,  which  v/ere
very  evident,  and  evidently  diftinft  from  each  ot-her  :  yet  it  was  not,  larger;-
than  its  natural  fize.  But  the  fpleen  was  large,  and  of  a  compaft  fubftance,...
ard,  when  cut  into,  difcharg'd  not  the  leaft.  blood.  One  of  the  kidnies  con-
tain'd ichor  in  its  pelvis.

In  the  thorax,  and  particularly  on  the  right  fide,  was  a  great  qiiantity  of.
water,  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  in  the  belly.  So  in  the  pericardium  alfo,.,
in  which,  however,  there  was  no  great  quantity. The  lungs-  were  turgid

and.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  31,  307

and  blackifli  in  their  colour. The  heart  was  without  blood,  not  to  fay  with-
out polypous  concretions.

The  head,  as  the  body  was  embalm'd,  in  order  to  be  carried  no  farther
than  Venice,  to  be  laid  in  the  family  vault,  it  was  not  neceflary  for  us  to
open  ;  nor,  indeed,  were  we  at  liberty  to  do  it.

31.  Since  the  time  that  Joannes  Pofthius,  as  you  have  it  here  in  the  Sepu!-
chretum  (m),,  found  the  fubftance  of  the  liver,  in  an  afcites,  "  univerlally
"  granulated  internally,  the  granules  appearing  every  where  like  peas,
*'  both  as  to  figure,  and  number,"  many  other  fimilar  obfervations  have
been  made  upon  the  fame  difeafe.  Four  others  are  extant  in  the  fame  place,
one  of  Wepfer's  (n),  to  whom  the  liver  "  appear'd  like  a  body  conglome-
'v''  rated  of  a  great  number  of  glands,"  a  fecond  of  Ruyfch's  (o),  a  third  of
Brown's  (p),  a  fourth  of  Hartmann's  (q),  to  whom  the  fame  vifcus  feem'd
to  confift,  in  the  whole  of  it,  merely  of  large  glands^,"  or  "  of  glands,'''  or
"  of  lobules."  And  the  fmalleft  parts  of  the  liver  cannot  be  fo  enlarg'd,  but
they  mud  be  injurious  to  the  funftion  of  this  viicus,  and  much  retard  the
motion  of  the  blood  through  the  belly  -,  either  by  compreffing  the  other
parts  which  lie  between  them,  or,  at  leaft,  by  compreffing  the  languiferous
veflels.

Wherefore  Pofthius,  and  Brown,  in  vain  drew  off  the  water,  which  would
be  frequently  refupplied,  when  "  the  liver  was  difeas'd,"  as  Erafifrratus  ad-
monifh'd  in  the  works  of  Celfus  (r).  For  as  to  what  Celfus  replies  thereto,
"  that  when  the  water  was  drav/n  off  there  was  room  made  for  remedies,"
to  bring  back  the  liver  to  a  found  ftate,  this  difeafe  of  the  liver  is  certainly
notof  fuch  a  nature,  as  to  admit  of  medicine.  And  although  this  appears
only  by  difleftion,  yet  there  are  fo  many  difeafes,  both  of  this  and  the  other
vifcera,  which  do  not  admit  of  a  cure,  that  when  there  are  fymptoms  of  the
vifcera  being  injur'd,  we  muft  not  run,  heedlefly,  to  prefcribe  the  evacuation
of  the  waters.  For  which  reafon,  in  the  cafe  of  this  noble  patient,  of  whom
I  have  been  fpeaking,  no  one,  out  of  fuch  a  number  of  phyficians,  ever
propos'd  it.

But  as  to  what  many,  in  conjun£lion  with  Ballonius  (s),  and  cur  Sanfto-
rius  (0,  are  afraid  of,  left  the  inflammation  of  the  peritoneum,  inteftines,
and  a  gangrene,  fhouid  be  the  confequence  of  evacuating  the  Vvfaters,  they
may  feem  to  fear  it  with  great  juftice,  to  thofe  v/ho  read  over  the  examples
-of  cafes,  wherein  the  water  was  drawn  off,  many  of  which  are  related  in  tt>e
Sepulchretum  (z/).  And  to  thefe  you  will,  in  the  firft  place,  add  that  fa-
mous inftance,  which  the  celebrated  Scherbius  {x)  has  defcrib'd,  of  a  man,
in  whom  a  calculus  form'd  in  the  receptaculum  chyli,  and  oppofing  itfelf  to
the  quick  afcent  of  the  chyle,  and  of  the  lymph,  into  thedufius  thoracicus,
had  brought  on  an  afcites  of  fuch  a  kind,  that  the  water  was  drawn  off  by

{m)  S.  2i.obf.  4.  §.21..  {/)  Ibid.

(«)  Obf.  32.  («)  Obf.  x:it.  &  z.  &.4.  4.  i  ;  &  6. §. i.  &

{0) In  additam.  obf.  34.  1 1,;  &  1 1.  §.  I.  &  in  additam.  obf.  49.  &  64.

{p)  Obf.  49.  &  76.  &  86.

{q)  Obf.  50.  {x)  De  cakulo  receptac.  chyli.  hydr.  caufa.

()•)  De  medic.  1.  3.  c.  21.
(j)  In  fchol.  ad.§.  i.  obf.  5.  hujus  kSi.  Se-
jjulclir.

R  r  2  the


3o8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  furgeon  levf  n  different  times ;  as  frefli  fluids  were  always  colleded,  till,
fixteen  hours  after  the  laft  evacuation,  the  patient  ceas'd  to  live.  And  al-
though this  dropfy,  as  you  plainly  fee,  had  not  its  origin  from  any  taint  of
the  vifcera,  yet  the  "  omentum  was  found  to  be  almoft  univerfally  con-
"  fum'd  ;  and  the  other  vifcera  were  befet  with  a  gangrene:  nor  is  it  to  be
"  wonder'd  at,"  fays  Scherbius,  "  fince,  in  procefs  of  time,  the  fame  is  to  be
"  feen  in  all  dropfical  bodies."

But  the  love  of  truth  does  not  fuffer  me  to  conceal  what  may,  on  the
other  hand,  be  faid  in  favour  of  the  paracentefis  •,  as  thefe  lafl  words,  them-
felves,  do  not  altogether  run  counter  to  its  ufe,  but  even,  if  you  rightly  at-
tend to  them,  recommend  it.  Not  to  enquire,  therefore,  whether  that  is
always  the  efteft  of  the  water  being  difcharg'd,  and  of  the  air  getting  in  at
the  orifice,  with  what  inftrument  foever,  in  whatever  manner,  or  how  many
times  foever,  this  operation  may  be  perform'd;  which  the  difleftion  of  drop-
fical bodies  frequently  fhows  to  be  the  effcdt  of  the  diforder  itfelf,  as  in  thefe
bodies  the  intell:ines  are  often  found  to  be  of  a  black  colour,  as  they  were  in
the  patient  here  fpoken  of,  though  the  waters  had  never  been  drawn  off  by
paracentefis ;  certainly  a  great  number  of  cures,  that  have  been  fuccefsfully
perform'd  in  this  method,  will  fpeak  in  its  defence,  and  difledions  will  alfo
argue  for  its  ufe,  as  they  have  frequently  made  it  evident,  in  patients  who
have  died  from  other  caufes,  that  "  the  intellines  were  in  a  very  good  con-
dition, and  that  in  the  abdomen,  not  to  fay  in  the  peritonaeum,  where  it  had
been  perforated,  "  there  was  no  trace  of  inflammation,  and  much  lefs  of
"  fphacelated  corruption,  to  ufe  the  words  of  Polycarp  Schacherus  (y),  who
gives  us  the  difleftion  of  a  virgin,  that  had  been  long  troubled  with  an
afcites,  and  had  died  "  on  the  eighth  day  after  the  operation"  of  the  para-
centefis, which  had  been  many  times  perform'd  upon  her.

32.  But  the  inftances  of  this  method  of  cure  being  fuccefsful,  are  fo  rare
among  us,  or,  at  leaft,  were  fo  rare,  that  during  all  the  time  I  ftaid  at  Bo-
logna, I  never  heard  one  phyfician  fay  that  he  had  feen  it  fo ;  at  which  time,
likewife,  I  faw  there,  and  heard  from  every  body,  that  the  operations  o£
this  kind,  which  were  perform'd  by  foreign  furgeons,  and  thefe  men  of  emi-
nence, were  unfuccefsful.  And  indeed  I  remember  that  Albertini,  on  com-
paring the  phthifis,  and  the  dropfy,  with  each  other,  faid  that  the  former  had"
been  three  times  cur'd  by  him,  though  in  a  confirm'd  ftate ;  but  that  the  dropfy
of  the  abdomen,  when  confirm'd,  he  had,  to  that  very  day,  never  cur'd.

For  if  the  water,  faid  he,  is  evacuated  by  the  furgeon,  I  fee  that  the  pa-
tient dies:  and  if  it  be  ftrongly  urg'd,  by  the  phyfician,  to  the  renal,  or
inteftinal  paflages,  the  medicines  which  force  it  to  thefe  paffages,  do  not  fo
much  difcharge  that  which  is  extravafated  in  the  belly,  as  the  ferum  which
ftill  remains  in  the  blood  ;  and  do  not  force  it  more  into  thofe  paffages,  thart=
into  the  belly,  where  an  entrance  is  already  made  for  it.  Thus  he  told  me,
it  had  lately  happen'd  to  a  man  of  eminence,  in  particular,  who  having  taken
remedies  of  this  kind  from  an  empiric,  had  his  urine  indeed  increas'd  there-
by, but  had  the  fwelling  of  the  abdomen  fo  much  increas'd  at  the  fame
tim,e,  that  fcarcely  any  blood  could  be  found  in  the  blood-veffels  after
death.

CyJ  DifT.  fupra  ad  n,  8.  cit.

Yet


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  33.  309

Yet  he  did  not  conceal  the  furprizing  cures  of  patients  labouring  under
an  afcites,  "whereof  he  had  heard,  or  read  -,  five  of  which  were  even  reported.
£o  have  happen'd  at  Bologna,  from  apunfture  of  thefcrotum.  But  as  hefup-
pos'd  that  fome  had  labour'd  under  an  anafarca,  rather  than  an  afcites,  others
under  an  afcites,  but  one  that  was  not  yet  confirm'd,  and  fome  under  a.
dropfy  of  the  peritoneum,  he  did  not,  in  fa£t,.  leave  many  behind  j.  and  the
cure  of  thefe  was  owing  to  nature  rather,  as  he  thought,  than  to  art.  And^_
indeed,  the  power  of  nature  in  curing  this,  and  other  diforders,  is  fome-
times  very  confiderable.

It  happen'd  in  the  place  of  my  nativity,  that  a  noble  youth  being  feiz*d5,
once  and  again,  with  an  ardent  fever,  and  drinking  a  great  quantity  of  wa-
ter, both  in  his  firft  and  fecond  illnefs,  they  were  each  of  them  fucceeded  by  a.
very  confiderable  afcites,  which  was  carried  off,  both  times,  by  a  fpontaneous
difcharge  of  a  great  quantity  of  water;,  fpontaneous,  I  fay,  for  this  was  com-
monly knov/n,  and  the  phyfician  of  the  patient  afErm'd  it  to  me,  who  cer-
tainly would  not  have,  unjuftly,  detracted  from  the  honour  of  his  own  cures.

"Without  doubt,  nature  had  iiifficiently  unlock'd,  for  herfelf,  the  paflTages
by  which  fhe  might  reabforb  the  fluid  ftagnating  in  the  belly,  and  fend  it  to
another  part  of  the  body ;  and  thefe  were  the  fame  which  fhe  made  ufe  of,
in  that  merchant  fpoken  of  by  Mead  (z),  when  fhe  took  up  again  into  the
vefTels,  and  retain'd  there,  all  the  waters  which  were  extravafated  in  the  belly :
and  that  in  one  night  only,  and  in  the  very  night  which  preceded  the  day,
intended  for  drawing  them  off,  by  perforating  the  abdomen.  But  when  the
fame  nature,  neither  of  herfelf,  nor  when  excited  by  gentle  invitations,  or.
fomewhat  more  acrid  ftimuli,  attempts  any  thing  for  her  own  relief,  mufl  we
attempt  any  thing  violent,  and  dangerous,  and  contrary  to  her  difpofitions  ?:
Or  muft  w:e  rather  make  ufe  of  the  paracentefis,  where  all  circumflances
permit  it,  which  is  a  remedy,  as  we  may  ilippofe,  firft  pointed  out  by  the.
fame  nature  herfelf?

33.  For  as  to  the  navel  being  open'd  by  the  great  force,  and  diflention,  of
the  water,  and  the  afcites  being  cur'd  by  the  difcharge  thereof,  I  do  not  fup-
pofe  this  to  have  been  firfl  feen  by  Benivenius,  and  others  whom  Donatus
(a),  and  Gabelchoverus  (^^,  quote,  but  by  men  of  antiquity  formerly;  and
thefe  perfons,  alfo,  have  remark'd  that  they,  in  whom  the  water  was  dif-
charg'd  altogether,  died  ;  but  that  fome  of  thofe,  in  whom  it  came  out
gradually,  and  at  different  times,  recover'd.  Phyficians,  therefore,  might,
according  to  their  general  rule,  imitate  nature,  when  flie  operates  rightly :  and-
Hippocrates  {c),  and  after  him  Celfus  (i),  advis'd  not  to  let  all  the  water  be
difcharg'd  at  one  time ;  for  that  this  was  fatal  :  the  caufes  of  which  have
been  explain'd  by  many  learned  men,  in  our  prelent  age,  and  among  thefe.
by  the  younger  du  Verney  (e),  by  Werlhofius  (f),  and  Mead  {g)  ;  but  more
copioufly  by  the  illuflrious  Senac  {h).

(z)  Monit.  med.  c.  8.  in  fin.  (ilj  De  medic,  I.  2.  c.  8.

(a)  De  med.  hift.  mirab.  1.  4.  c.  21.  {e)  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a. 1703.

(bj  Seft.  hac  Sepulchr.  in  fchol.  ad  §.  i.  (^9  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1735.  hebd.  37.  n.  2,
obf.  6.  (gj  C.  8.  fupra  ad  n.  32.  cit.

(c)  SeiS.  6.  aph.  27.  (/.)  Traite  du  coeur  1.  4.  ch.  12.  n.  3.

The.


310  Book  III, Of  Difeafes  oF  the  Belly.

The  explications  of  thefe  gentlemen  feem  alfo  to  be  confirm'd  by  that  ob-
fervation  {i),  in  which  all  the  matter  was  drawn  out  without  any  fwooning
being  the  confequencci  but  fo  flowly,  and  gradually,  by  reaibn  of  its  tenacity,
that  almoft  three  hours  were  fpent  in  the  operation :  and  this  v/ill  feem  lefs
furprizing  to  you,  when  you  have  learn'd  from  the  celebrated  Targioni  (k),
that  there  was  a  dropfical  perfon,  who  had  his  belly  fiU'd  with  fo  denfe  a
jelly,  that  it  could  not  be  drawn  out  by  any  art  of  the  moft  cxperienc'd  fur-
geon.  But  nothing  has  more  confirm'd  thefe  explications,  than  the  method
which  was  happily  thought  of,  in  conformity  thereto,  of  drawing  off  all  the
water  at  one  time,  without  any  injury  -,  that  is  to  fay,  by  binding  the  abdo-
men with  rollers,  not  only  after  the  water  was  difcharg'd,  which  du  Verney
(/),  whom  I  juft  now  quoted,  order'd  after  a  plentiful  difcharge,  but  alfo
while  it  is  ftill  more  and  more  drawn  off,  and  then  in  parncular.

By  this  method,  he  who  firft  invented,  and  applied  it,  I  mean  that  ex-
cellent phyfician  Mead  (ct),  mentions  that  many  perfons,  but  a  woman,  in
particular,  was  cur'd  under  his  care,  who  had  all  the  water  difcharg'd  "  at
"  once,"  to  the  quantity  of  "  fixty"  pounds  weight;  and  that  another  had
her  life  perfcrv'd,  for  the  fpace  of  fix  years  and  feven  months,  from  whom,
through  the  whole  progrefs  of  her  difeafe,  water  was  taken  away  in  fuch  a
quantity  as,  if  the  hiftory  were  not  well  known  to  every  body  at  London,
would  be  incredible,  that  is  "  a  thoufand  nine  hundred  and  twenty  pints."
But  with  how  much  caution  thefe  operations  are  to  be  tindertaken,  and  per-
form'd,  thofe  eminent  furgeons  among  the  Englifli,  that  he  mentions,  have
Ihown  :  although  he  even  knew  a  dropfical  woman,  who  furviv'd  after  the
abdomen  had  burft  of  itfelf,  and  difcharg'd  a  great 'quantity  of  water;  a
fimilar  cafe  to  which  you  will  read  the  defcription  of  by  Nebelius  {n).  In
^both  of  thefe  inftances  the  abdomen  being  over  diftended  had  crack'd  near
the  navel.

Other  obfervations  are,  moreover,  extant  of  waters  fpontaneoufly  burfting
out  at  the  navel  itfelf,  with  a  happy  event ;  but  fcarcely  ever  of  all  burfting
out  together:  and  thefe,  not  only  produc'd  by  thofe  whom  I  mention'd  above,
but  by  others  (o)  alfo.  Yet  phyficians  have  not  gone  on  to  open  the  navel,
in  order  to  cure  the  afcites,  as  fome  of  them  were  influenc'd  by  contrary  ob-
fervations, and  moft  of  them  taught  by  experience,  that  in  proportion  as  the
abdomen  is  more  eafily  extenuated  there,  by  the  diftention  of  the  .water,
with  fo  much  the  more  difficulty  does  the  wound  heal  up  afterwards,  which
frequently  happens ;  and  that  it  is  ftop'd  up  with  lefs  convenience  at  prefent,
in  order  to  prevent  more  water  being  difcharg'd,  than  the  llrength  of  the  pa-
tient could  bear  ;  and,  finally,  that  all  of  it  could  not  poffibly  be  drawn
■oft,  without  the  patient  being  oblig'd  to  lie  on  his  belly,  which  is  a  pofture
very  inconvenient  in  fuch  cafes.

For  as  to  its  being  better  to  difcharge  the  water  by  the  navel,  becaufe,
by  thefe  means,  the  umbilical  vein  being  open'd,  the  watery  humour  would
not  be  pour'd  out  from the  liver  thereby, into  the  belly,  but  would  be

(;)  Comjr.erc.  litter,  a  1745.  hebd.  52,  n.  3. fmj  C.  8.  cit.

(«)  Prima  raccolta  di  oflerv.  med.  "  (»)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.3,  9.&  10.  obf.  122.

{/)  Mqn,  cit.  fej  .Aft.  n.c.  torn.  8.  obf.  79.

thrown


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  34.  31  r

thrown  out  of  the  body ;  this  was  an  opinion  which,  having  taken  its  rife
lately  from  hypothefes,  and  from  the  opinion  of  fome  perfons  that  Avicenna
makes  mention  of  (p),  has  feem'd,  at  laft,  to  be  confirm'd  by  fome  obferva-
tions.  For  there  have  been,  as  you  fee  here  in  the  Sepulchretum  (^),  thofe
■who  have  faid  that  this  vein,  which  had  been  already  long  contrafted  into  a
ligament,  being  foften'd  by  the  continual  maceration  of  the  waters,  was
again  open'd,  and  that  it  then  difcharg'd  the  fuperfluous  water  from  the
liver,  by  the  navel ;  and  that  they  had  found  it  fo  dilated,  at  this  time,  as  to
admit  a  catheter,  and  a  goofe-quil :  and  that  it  was  very  full  of  water,  and.
contain'd  a  confiderable  quantity.

I,  however,  although  1  fhould  be  willing  to  grant,  that  it  may  be  kept
open  in  fome,  as  it  is  from  the  original  formation,  rather  than  fuppofe  it.
could  be  eafily  open'd  again,  after  being  condens'd  into  a  ligament ;  and
though  I  cannot  agree  with  Schultzius  (r),  who  has  afiertcd  that  after  the
birth  it  is  drawn  up  to  the  liver,  from  the  navel,  fo  as  not  to  go  thither  any
more ;  yet  it  would  not  then,  by  any  means,  appear,  hov/  it  fhould  take  up-
ferum  only,  from  the  finus  of  the  vena  portarum,  and  leave  the  blood  be-
hind. And  this  I  do  not  fay,  fo  much  on  account  of  Platerus,  and  Hilda-
nus,  as  on  account  of  Rolfinc,  who  is  more  modern  than  either  of  them.

Yet  I  do  not  deny  their  obfervations ;  and  only  fufpeft  that  they  did  not.
find  the  umbilical  vein,  but  merely  the  theca,.  to  be  open  and  full  of  water  -,
with  which  theca,  from  the  duplicature  of  the  periton£e:um,  this  vein  is  in-
creas'd  in  its  bulk.  For  in  dropfical  bodies  the  membranes  are  eafily  relax'd  :-
and  the  vacuity  betwixt  them  is  fiU'd  with  the  redundant  water.  Andl
this  fufpicion  of  mine  is  ftrengthen'd  by  an  obfervation,  which  is  not;
Riolan's,  as  Rolfinc  thought,  but  is  neverthelefs  extant  in  his  works  (s).
The  umbilical  vein,  fays  he,  "  was  found  to  be  fiftular  in  a  certain  dropfical!
"  woman,  and  through  that,  water  was-  pour'd  out  betwixt  the  peritoneum,,
"  and  the  abdominal  mufcles."

But  now  let  us  fubjoin  the  cafe  of  a  very  long  dropfy,  as  I  have  pro^
mis'd  {t),

34.  A  virgin  of  twenty  years  of  age,  having  had  no  appearance  of  the-
menftrual  dilcharges,  for  two years  before,  was  firft  attack'd  with  pains  in
the  hypochondria  ;  after  which  her  belly  began to  be  tumid. She  had  been
afflidted  with  this  tumour  for  about  a  year,  and  had  us'd  various  reinedies.
to  no  purpofe,  when  Ihe  was  receiv'd  into  this  hofpital  of  Padua. The  bulk
of  the  fwelling  was  extremely  large  :  yet  this  patient  could  lie  down  in  bed
for  the  whole  month  ihe  was  there,  even  to  the  laft  ;  but  ftie  lay,  for  the  moft
part,  on  her  left  fide. She  was  thirfty,  but  not  to  a  great  degree ;  unicfs
when  a  fiight  fever,  with  which  (lie  v/as  conftantly  troubled,  increas'd. S^.c
difcharg'd  but  a  fmall  quantity  of  urine  :  yet  it  was  not  very  high-colour'd.
She  now  and  then  complain'd of  thofe  pains in the  hypochondria,  that  I.
have  already  fpoken  of,  v.'hich  feem'd  to  be  convuifive,  but  not  very  vio-
lent. Many  remedies  were  made  ufe  of,  but  without  the  leaft  advantage:
the  quantity  of  her  urine  was  never  increas'd.. Among  thefe  remedies  were

Q)  Traft.  fupra  ad  n.  30,  cit.  c,  5,. •  (j)  Anthropogr.  1,  2.  r.,.12.

{q)  Obf.  13.  cum  fchol.  Scohi.  14.  (r)  N.  zq.\n  fitr,

(j)  Difl".  de  vafis  umbilic,  nator.  k  adultor.


31  J  Book  ill. OF  Difcafes  of  the  Belly.

fome  things  which  created  an  uneafinefs,  as  gum  ammonicum,  and  turpentine !
lor  which  rcafon  they  were  omitted.

At  length,  when  the  belly,  from  being  coftive,  was  become  pretty  lax,
foetid,  and  liquid,  ftools  began  to  be  difcharg'd,  but  not  purulent.  As  the
difcharge  of  this  matter  continu'd,'  the  belly  did  not  decreaie,  and  her
ftrength  was  every  day  broken  more  and  more,  that  happen'd  which  is  fore-
told of  a  dropfical  pcrfon,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  fourth  book  de  morbis  :
*'  but  where  the  inteftines  are  alfo  very  lax  he  dies  very  foon,  with  the
■"  power  of  his  fenies  and  his  fpeech  quite  perfeft,"  Her  fenfes,  therefore,
continuing  to  the  laft,  fhe  died  about  the  middle  of  December,  in  the  year
1744.  Having  this  relation  made  to  me  on  the  following  day,  and  having
made  it  known  to  a  very  crowded  audience,  and  foretelling  fome  of  the
appearances  v/hich  were  foon  after  found  under  their  eyes,-  the  difleftion  was
immediately  begun  in  their  prefence.

The  body  was  emaciated,  particularly  in  its  upper  limbs,  but  not  to  a
great  degree.  The  inferior  limbs  wfcre  affected  with  fo  flight  an  cedematous
tumour,  that  you  could  fcarcely  dillinguifn  it,  but  by  preffing  them  with
your  finger  :  and  this  did  not  reach  quite  to  the  top  of  the  thighs.  The
belly  was  very  large,  but  not  tenfe  •,  nor  yet  the  navel,  although  it  was  pro-
minent.

The  abdomen  being  perforated  at  one  fide,  a  great  (Quantity  of  water  was
gradually  difcharg'd,  which  left  the  fame  fenfation  upon  the  hands,  as  a  lixi-
vium pour'd  upon  them  would  have  done.  That  which  firfl  flow'd  out  was
yellowifh,  and  thin  ;  the  other  lefs  thin,  and  almoft  white.  But  when  I  ex-
amin'd  both  of  them,  after  being  left,'  for  twenty-four  hours,  in  a  very  large
velTel,  the  whole  of  it  feem'd  to  be  whitifh -,  yet  when  it  was  poured  out,
by  degrees,  from  one  vefTcl  to  another,  it  appear'd  to  be  rather  yellowifh  :
nor  had  much  whitifh  humour,  fubfided  to  the  bottom,  in  proportion  to  the
quantity  of  water.  What  had  fubfided,  however,  was  pretty  thick,  from  little
pieces  of  the  omentum  being  mix'd  with  it,  and  other  things  of  which  Illiali
ipeak  hereafter.

HawevGi:,  neither  the  water,  nor  the  body,  had  a  putrid  fmell,  notwith-
ftanding  the  fm.all  inteftines  had  begun  to  grow  black  in  three  places,  though
not  beyond  the  breadth  of  an  inch  in  each  place.  The  greater  part  of  thole
inteftines  were  tumiid  with  air,  but  in  not  great  quantity.  The  large  in-
teftines, as  well  as  the  ftomach,  were  altogether  empty,  and  coUaps'd.  The
whole  of  the  omentum  (if  you  except  a  fmall  part  of  it  which  remain'd,  and
adher'd  to  the  ftomach)  was  torn  into  pieces,  as  it  were-,  and  not  only  entirely
feparated  from  the  remaining  part  of  its  fubftance,  but  from  each  other  alio  :
one  of  which  had  form'd  itfelf  into  a  round,  red,  and  foft  body,  nearly  of
the  length  of  a  man's  forearm.

The  liver,  on  its  whole  convex  furface,  and  even  at  its  anterior  border,
coher'd  with  the  diaphragram  :  and  when  divided  from  thence,  feem'd  to
have  that  furface  more  protuberating,  than  was  agreeable  to  the  liver  itfelf,
and  to  the  ftature  of  the  virgin,  which  was  rather  inclin'd  to  irnallnefs.  When
.  cut  into,  I  found  it  every  where,  except  in  the  lobulus  Spigelii,  fomewhat
more  pallid,  and  harder,  than  was  natural: -and  the  bile,  which  was  in  its

veficle,
4


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  34.  313

Veficle,  in  fmall  quantity,  of  a  yellow  colour  inclin'd  to  brownifh,  turbid
and  vifcid.

The  fpleen,  except  that  its  fize  was  preternaturally  increas'd,  was  inter-
nally found  :  as  a  fecond  fpleen  alfo  was,  which  was  lefs  by  many  degrees
than  the  former  (its  diameter  being  only  an  inch  in  extent)  of  a  roundifh
figure,  and  adher'd  among  the  veffels,  being  conne£led  to  the  larger  fpleen,
by  mem.branes,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  it,  but  entirely  disjoin'd  in  its
fubftance,  though  exaftly  of  the  fame  ftrudlure  internally,  and  of  the  fame  co-
lour. But  in  the  coat  of  the  larger  ipleen,  befide  fome  hydatids,  little
bodies  of  a  roundifh  figure,  white,  hard,  and  of  different  fizes,  were  pro-
minent :  yet  moft  of  them  were  fomewhat  bigger  than  millet  feeds.

The  fame  appearances  were  obferv'd,  here  and  there,  on  the  interior  fur-
face  of  the  peritonsEum,  and  on  the  exterior  of  the  inteftines,  efpccially  of
the  fmall  ones,  in  which,  likewife,  were  hydatids.  The  largeft  of  thefe  was
equal  to  the  fize  of  a  fmall  apple,  and  of  two  inches  in  diameter ;  the  fan-
guiferous  veiTels  from  the  inteftine,  producing  themfelves  through  the
membrane  thereof,  and  dividing  into  branches.  In  it  was  contain'd  water
almoft  colourlefs,  but  in  part  mucous.  The  pancreas  was  hardifh.  And
the  mefenteric  glands,  which  were  fo  increas'd  beyond  their  natural  fize,  as
almoft  to  fill  the  whole  mefentery,  were  perfeftly  fcirrhous ;  as  their  hardnefs
and  whitenefs  demonftrated.

Yet  I  met  with  the  chief  and  peculiar  dilbrder  in  the  teftes,  the  tubes,  and
the  uterus  itfelf :  which  was  not  difcover'd  in  the  uterus,  without  difleftion  ;
but  in  the  teftes,  and  the  tubes,  came  fpontaneoufly  into  view.  For  thtfe
parts  had,  equally  on  both  fides,  together  with  the  alse  vefpertilionum,  lb
coalefc'd  one  with  another,  and,  being  much  thicken'd,  had  fo  grov/n  into
a  kind  of  tuberous,  and  ftiapelefs  mafs,  of  a  confiderable  fize,  that  one
could  not,  by  any  means,  be  known  from  the  other,  and  much  lefs  fe-
parated.  The  furface  of  each  of  thefe  mafles  was  lacerated,  for  a  confi-
derable fpace,  and  was  found  to  be  fpontaneoufly  open,  juft  as  if  a  large
fteatoma  had  burft  itfelf.  And  to  this  I  compar'd  it,  becaufe  it  confifted  of
a  matter,  which  refembled  nothing  more  than  half-dried  fuet :  fo  white  was
it;  of  fo  unduous  a  nature  if  you  handled  it;  and  fo  eafily  yielding  to  the
probe  when  puPn'd  into  it.  If  you  pull'd  it  afunder,  you  perceiv'd  that  it
confifted  of  fo  many  fmall  pieces,  as  it  were. And  it  was  quite  inodorous.

As  the  parts,  which  I  have  mention'd,  feem'd  to  be  converted  into  a
kind  of  fuet,  fo  when  I  cut  pretty  deeply  into  the  fundus  of  the  uterus,  which
was  found  externally,  and  in  the  greater  part  of  its  parietes,  I  faw  that  the
remaining  internal  part  of  the  fubftance,  of  thefe  parietes,  was  converted
into  a  matter  which  was  fimilar  to  that  juft  now  defcrib'd  ;  except  that,  in
its  colour,  it  inclin'd  fomewhat  to  the  cineritious  hue.  And  with  the  fame
matter  the  cavity  of  the  fundus  was  fill'd  ;  and  from  that  the  part  vv'hich  was
leaft  folid,  feem'd  to  have  been  accuftom'd  to  fall  through  the  cervix,  into
the  vagina,  which  was  even  now  whitifti,  from  the  remains  of  this  very
matter,  that  could  eafily  be  wip'd  off.  However,  the  cervix,  both  internal-
ly, and  externally,  was  perfedlly  found :  and  the  magnitude  of  it,  and  of
the  fundus,  alfo,  was  not  greater  than  was  to  be  expefled,  in  a  virgin  of
fuch  an  age  ;  except  that  the  internal  orifice  of  the  -uterus  feem'd  to  be  fome-
what larger  than  ufual.

Vol.  II.  ;S  f  T!ie


314  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

The  other  parts  of  the  belly,  and  the  kidnies  in  particular,  were  found.  Yet
the  trunk  of  the  great  artery  appear'd  to  be  of  a  lefs  latitude  than  it  ought  to
fee.  And  the  diaphragm  afcended  pretty  high  into  the  thorax,  but  much  the
moft  on  the  right  fide  •,  whither  it  was  forc'd,  as  I  have  faid,  by  the  protube-
rance of  the  liver.  "When  we  took  this  vifcus  away  from  the  diaphragm^
by  cutting  through  the  vena  cava,  fome  confiderable  quantity  of  blood  flow'd
from  it,  of  a  black  colour,  and  not  coagulated.

The  lungs  were  every  where,  very  clofely,  connected  to  all  the  parietes  of
the  thorax,  that  is  to  the  inferior  parietes  alfo.  The  upper  part  or  the  left
lobe  was,  in  one  place,  fomewhat  harder  than  is  natural,  yet  not  evidently
difeas'd.  In  the  pericardium  was  a  great  quantity  of  water,  of  the  fame
kind  with  that  in  the  belly.  The  heart  was  lax  ;  and  in  this,  and  the  great
veflels,  was  only  little  blood,  which  was  black  indeed,  but  lefs  fluid  than  that
in  the  inferior  vena  cava,  although  without  any  polypous  concretion.

While  the  head  was  cut  off  from  the  neck,  a  little  water  flow'd  down,,
both  from  the  cavity  of  the  vertebrae,  and  of  the  cranium.  And  the  lateral
ventricles  of  the  brain  contain'd  water  in  no  very  fmall  quantity,  of  a  brown-
ifh  colour  and  turbid  :  the  plexus  'choroides  were  in  great  meafure  pallid.
Yet  the  cerebrum  was  pretty  firm,  notwithftanding  the  cerebellum  was  very
ioft.

35.  There  are  many  things  in  the  obfervation  in  queftion,  which,  if  I
were  to  confider  them  feparately,  would  make  this  letter  far  more  prolix,
than  the  preceding.  You  will  perceive  this  from  what  I  fhall  fay  of  hydatids
only.  For  although  that  rare  diforder  of  the  uterus  very  well  deferves  to  be
treated  of,  yet  1  fhall  have  a  mare  convenient  opportunity  of  fpeaking  of  it,  in
©ther  letters,  and  perhaps  in  the  next  («)•,  for,  certainly,  this  was  not  the
proximate  caufe  of  the  dropfy  of  which  we  ai-e  to  treat  at  prefent,  as  the  rup-
tur'd  hydatids  feem  to  me  to  have  been.  For,  as  on  the  external  furfaceof  the-
Miteftines,  and  the  fpleen,  fome  hydatids  were  prominent,  which  had  not
yet  burfi  afunder;  fo  I  fuppofe  that  there  had  been  almoft  innumerable
others,  both  in  thefe,  and  in  other  parts,  wliich  having  been  ruptur'd  long
before,  had  pour'd  out  their  fluid  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly.  And,  not  ta
detain  you  with  many  words,  the  obfervations  which  I  have  very  frequently,
made  upon  the  tunica-  albuginea,  and  vaginalis  of  the  tefticles  (x),  induce
me  to  "believe  that  the  membranous  laminje  of  the  hydatids,  or  of  the  coats-
in  which  they  are  form'd,  after  they  have  by  rupture  pour'd  out  the  fluid,
that  they  contain'd,  firfl:  contrail  themfelves,  and  their  veflels,  into  the  form.
of  a  caruncle  ;  and  unlefs  a  frefli  fluid  continue  to  flow  thither,  are  finally  fo
mdurated,  and  dried  up,  as  to  reprefent  thofe  white  and  hard  tubercles  of  a
roundifh  figure,  fome  larger  in  their  fize,  and  fome  lefs,  as  the  hydatids  had
been,  vv'ith  which  the  internal  furface  of  the  peritoneum,  in  the  virgin  de-
fcrib'd,  and  the  produiftion  of  it  through  the  external  furface  of  the  fpleen,
and  intefliines,  were  befet.

You  may  read,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (y),  an  obfervation  of  Jacobus  Wolf--
fius,  where  he  fays,  that  in  the  body  of  a  woman,  who  had  labour'd  under

(zi)  Epift.  39.  n.  36.  {y)  In additam. ad  banc- feftion.  21.  obf.

(.t)  Vid.  epift.  43.  n.  16.  &  fecf*  6^^.


Lettbr  XXXVIII. Article  35.  315

an  afcites,  "  caru-ncles,  which,  when  open'd,  difcharg'd  an  ichor,  adher'dj
*'  in  feveral  places,  to  the  inteftines."  Read  what  is  produc'd  from  Bil-
gerus  (z),  of  another  woman,  who  had  an  afcites,  "  that  the  whole  of  the
"  inteftines,  on  all  fides,  and  the  peritonaeum,  on  both  fides,  about  the
"  diaphragm,  were  fiU'd  with  many  tlioufand  little  granules,  in  the  fame
manner  that  fometimes  happens  to  hogs.  Join  to  thefe  the  obfervations  af-
terwards publifh'd,  which  were  taken  from  other  dropfical  bodies ;  as,  for
inftance,  that  of  the  celebrated  Anhornius  (^),  who  faw  the  peritoneum,  in
a  young  man,  "  befet  with  glandular  knots,  which  wept  a  limpid  water,  if
"  prefs'd,"  and,  in  a  womart,  having,  "  here  and  there,  many  glandular
"  tubercles,  protuberant  in  the  (hape  of  a  bean,  fome  larger,  and  fome
"  fmaller,  in  their  fize,  which,  when  prefs'd,  wept  a  lympid  v/ater  •,"  and,
in  like  manner,  thofeof  the  celebrated  Stegmannus  (Z"),  and  Goetzius  (c),  the
firft  of  whom  obferv'd  the  pancreas,  in  a  man,  to  be  fprinkled  with  millet-feed,
"  as  it  were,"  and  the  latter,  in  a  virgin,  various  tubercles  of  different
"  magnitudes,  growing  here  and  there"  (to  a  fac  in  which  a  fluid  had  been
contain'd)  "  varying  from  the  fize  of  a  large  pea  to  that  of  the  fmalleft
"  hemp-feed,  fometimes  folitary,  fometimes  in  clufters,  but  always  fcirrhous,
*'  and  hard,  and,  when  cut  afunder,  difcharging  no  fluid,  or  gelatinous
•'  matter."

Finally,  read  over  again  what  I  have  formerly  written  to  you  (i),  of  hard
granules,  or  tubercles,  being  prominent  on  the  internal  furface  of  the  peri-
toneum, or  pleura ;  as  water  was  even  then  extravafated  in  the  great  cavities,
which  thofe  membranes  furround :  you  will  certainly  find  the  feries  of
fucceffive  changes  that  I  Jiave  defcrib'd.  It  happen'd,  fome  years  ago,  that
>in  a  woman,  who  had  been  taken  off  by  an  aicites,  the  external  coat  of  the
inteftines  was  found  to  be  diftinguifh'd  with  very  frequent  tubercles.  Pare
of  the  fmall  inteftines  was  brought  me,  that  I  might  judge  what  thefe
tubercles  were.'  When  I  firft  examin'd  them  they  refembled  frhall  turgid  lenti-
cular glands :  but  they  were  without  an  orifice,  and  folid,  and  feem'd  to  be
made  up  neither  of  glandular,  nor  of  a  flediy  fubftance,  but  to  be  of  a  mid'
die  nature,  as  it  were,  betwixt  both,  I  judg'd  that  I  could  determine  upon
nothing  more  probable,  in  regard  to  them,  than  to  fuppofe  that  they  were
the  remains  of  ruptur'd  hydatids,  contrafted  into  themfelves,  but  not  to  fa
great  a  degree,  at  prcfent,  as  to  be  dry  and  hard.

Nor  was  I  deter'd  by  fo  very  great  a  number  of  hydatids,  as  there  muft
neceflarily  have  been  to  agree  with  this  fuppofition  ;  fince  I  very  well  re-
member'd  the  almoft  innumerable  quantity,  which  Coiterus  (e)  formerly
found  in  a  profefTor  at  Bologna.  His  words  are,  "  to  the  mefentery,  peri-
"  tonseum,  inteftines,  fpleen,  liver,  and,  finally,  to  all  the  vifcera,  veficles
"  of  an  unequal  m^agnitude,  and  thefe  full  of  limpid  water,  adher'd."  And
not  to  lead  you  too  far  from  tlie  obfervations  of  other  ancient  authors,  and
even  not  to  lead  you  from  the  Sepulchretum,  wherein  that  of  Coiterus  is  not
entirely  omitted  (f),  confider  that  Philippus  Perfius  (g)  found,  in  a  woman,

(z)  Sedl.  ead.  obf.  20.  §.  16.  CJJ  Epift.  16.  n. 30.  &  epift.  22.  n.  18.

(g)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  100.  n.  2.  &  7,  (f)  Obf.  anat.

li)  Earund.  dec.  3.  a.  5  &  6.  obf.  i68.  C/J  Seft.  hac  21.  obf.  21.  §.  8.

i'cj  A&.  n.  c.  torn.  2.  obf.  208.  CgJ  Ibid.  §.  6.

5  1  2  "wi.a


3i6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

who  like  our  virgin  had  fallen  into  a  dropfy  from  a  fuppreffion  of  the  men-
fes,  "  the  kidnies,.  uterus,  ftomach,  inteftines,  heart,  pericardium,  liver,
*'  and  fpleen,  abounding  (for  the  number  of  them  exceeded  nine  hundred)"'
with  pendulous  veficles  of  this  kind  :  and,  in  like  manner,  that  Mauritius
Cordseus  (A)  found  in  another  woman,  all  the  parts  internally,  and  others,
"  cover'd,  and  loaded,  on  their  external  furfaces,  with  thefe  pendulous  cyfts,"'
of  diiferenx  fizes,  and  forms,  "  being  fiU'd  with  a  citron-colour'd  fluid,  and,
at  leatl,  exceeding  the  number  of  eight-hundred  ;  not  to  fpeak  of  a  third,  as
the  fluid  was  not  yet  extravafated  into  the  belly,  who  being  fuppos'd  to  be
pregnant,  had  "  the  whole  body  internally,  the  epiploon,  mefentery,  liver,
ipleen,  lungs,  the  heart  itfelf  alfo,  and  the  peritonseum,  befet  with  veficles,
full  of  the  moft  limpid  water,"  from  the  obfervation  of  Ballonius  {i).

36.  You  fee,  therefore,  that  the  parts  which,  in  the  virgin  whofe  hiftory
I  have  given,  were  rough  with  tubercles,  have  been,  in  other  dropfical
bodies,  befet  very  thickly  with  hydatids-,  as  the  inteftines,  the  fpleen,  and  the
peritoncTum.  And  indeed  the  laft-mention'd  part  is  fometimes  cover'd  with
fo  great  a  number,  that  it  "  fcarcely  comes  into  view,"  as  Ruyfch  (k)  found
it,  "and  reprefented  in  a  figure ;  or  is  refolv'd  into  filaments,  and  veficles  full
of  water,  as  Paawius  (/)  found  it  to  be  refolv'd,  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly,
together  with  the  omentum,  both  of  them  being  wanting,  in  their  natural
fituations.

But  the  omentum,  although  it  is  a  produ<a:ion  of  the  peritonjeum,  juft  in-
the  fame  manner  as  the  external  coat  of  the  fpleen,  and  the  inteftines,  and
hydatids  are  frequently  form'd  therein  alfo,  and  that  not  uncommonly,  as
many  obfervations  fhow,  among  thefe  that  of  Bofchius  (m),  Malpighi  (k),
Valfalva  (0),  Goekelius  (p),  yet  it  is  of  fo  tender  a  ftrudure,  that  it  cannot
often  confine  them,  for  a  longtime,  within  its  laminas :  wherefore  they  ge-
nerally fooner  burft  afunder  on  their  increafe,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  tear
alunder,  and  deftroy  it :  and  this  I  confider  as  one  of  the  principal  caufes,
why,  in  patients  who  have  an  afcites,  the  omentum,  for  the  moft  part,  as
happen'd  to  the  virgin  in  queftion,  by  no  means  remains  found.  And  from-
hence  Hippocrates,  I  fuppofe,  took  occafion  to  fay  (q),  "  that  they,  whofe
"  liver,  being  full  of  water,  has  difcharg'd  itfelf  upon  the  omentum,  have
"  their  belly  fill'd  with  water."

For  he  who,  in  brute  animals,  faw  hydatids,  of  the  lungs,  as  I  have  taken,
notice  of  to  you  on  a  former  occafion  {r),  obferv'd  thofe  appearances,  alfo,
in  them  which  I  juft  now  fpoke  of,  that  is  to  fay,  fomecimes,  hydatids  of  the
omentum,  but  more  frequently  that  ero/wn  which  Galen  requir'd  (/)  ;  and
brought  the  water  down  from  the  neighbouring  liver,  into  the  omentum,  as
from  the  vifcus,  "  moft  apt,"  as  Galen  fays,  "  to  generate  hydatids,  in  the
"  membrane  that  furrounds  it  externally  ;"  inafmuch  as  "the  liver  feems,
"  ibmetimes,  even  in  animals  that  are  kill'd  without  difeafe,  to  be  full  of

{h)  Ibid.  §.  14.  (")  Supra  n.  4.

(/■)  Sepulchr.  1.  3.  f.  37.  obf.  3.  i  12.  {p)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  6.  obf.  94.

(A)  Thef.  7.  n.  37.  &  tab.  2.  f.  3.  (?)  S.  7.  aph.  55.

(/)  Sepulchr.  f.  hac.  21.  obf.  3. §.  8,  {_rj  Epift. 16.  n.  33.

CmJ  Ibid.  obf.  21.  §.  z.  OJ  Comment,  in  aphor.  cit.

Cn)  Exerc.  de  omento.

"  them."


Letter  XXXVlIf. Article ^-j.  317

"  them."  And  phyficians,  fincc  it  has  been  cuftomary  to  diirciSl  human
bodies,  have  not  only  confirm'd  the  obfervations  of  the  ancient  preceptors  in
medicine,  taken  from  beafts,  by  the  infpe£lion  of  human  bodies ;  but  liave  alfo
retain'd  their  hypothefes  of  the  caufe  of  the  dropfy,  often  to  be  deduc'd  from
water  being  pour'd  out  of  ruptur'd  veficulse,  in  whatever  viicus  thefe
may  be  fuppos'd  to  exift :  although  even  afterwards,  they  have,  every  now
and  then,  return'd  to  brute  animals,  if  they  might  happen  to  fee  fome  things
which  relate  to  the  examination  of  hydatids  more  clearly  :  and  that  this  has
not  even  been  negledled  by  me,  as  far  as  was  in  my  power,  you  will  perceive
from  what  I  fhall  fubjoin.

37.  Among  the  numberof  the  largeft  hydatids,  that  certainly  was  one,, which
Caldeli  (/)  faw  in  the  liver  of  an  ox  :  for  the  whole  weigh'd  nine  pounds  j  and
the  coats,  by  themfelves,  fixteen  ounces.  And  as  thefe  coats  were  three  ia
number,  each  of  them,  in  general,  confifted  of  many  other  laminse,  were  robuft,.
and  flefhy  ;  but  the  external  coat,  in  particular,  more  than  the  others,  firm,
rntifcular,  and  confiiling  of  fibres  very  much  entangl'd  with  each  other  :.
whereas  the  internal  was  very  v/eak  and  thin:  and  the  middle  coat,  which,
was  of  a  golden  colour,  and  rugous,  had  fome  pieces  of  gypfeous,  or  ratlier
of  bony  matter,  affix'd  to  it.  The  water  which  was  comprehended  within;
thefe  coats,  being  of  a  limpid  appearance,  and  faltifli  in  its  tafte,  was  not  in;
the  leail  chang'd,  by  the  mixture  of  different  liquors  with  it :  nor  yet  did.
it  coagulate  by  boiling,  any  more  than  the  liquor  of  other  hydatids,  on- which:
he  had  made  this  ex{>eriment  in  vain.

If  with  this  fbrufture  which  I  have  defcrib'd,  you  compare that  which,
CordsEus  [u]  obferv'd,  in  fo  many  bladders  feen  by  him,  (for  Perfius  (x)  has.
nothing  in  regard  to  the  ftrufture,  nor  yet  Ballonius  (y),  except  that  he  re-
mark'd "  a  triple  coat"  on  each  of  them)  you  will  eafily  perceive;  of  how
much  advantage  to  Caldefi,  the  magnitude  of  his  hydatid  was. For  Cordsus,
only  faw  the  following  things,  "  that  they  were  made  up  of  two  membranes,,
"  the  internal  very  white  in  its  colour.,  the  other  very  fimilar  to  the  coat  of'
"  the  ftomach,  yet  fomewhat thinner,  but perfeftly of  the  fame  colour
"■  therewith." To  me  however,  although  it  cannot  be  doubted, but  that
fome  of  the  appearances  which  Caldefi  faw,  were  peculiar  to  that  hydatid ;.
it  has  never  yet  happen'd  to  light  on  any  fo  large  as  I  would  have  wifh'd :
and when I have  lit  on  any, I have not been  able to examine them,
otherwife  thanexternaUy. Yet,  even  in  this  manner,  have  I  remark'd  fome
things,  which,  perhaps,  are  not  unworthy  of  our  diligent  inquiry,  in  others
of  the  fame  nature.

I  formerly  faw  one  in  a  calf  of  fifteen  days  old^  which  was  round  in  its
figure,  of  fix  or  feven  inches  in  diameter,  hanging  from  the  flat,  and  upper,
part  of  the  liver,  into  which,  in  fome  meafure,  it  lubfided  ;  being  clofely
fix'd  thereto,  to  the  extent  of  two  or  three  inches :  and  from  this  part  to
which  it  was  fix'd,  did  it  receive  its  blood-veffels,  but  moll  of  them  in  fuch
a  manner,  that,  as  I  retain  it  firmly  in  my  memory,  I  fhall  relate  it  to  you.
For  as  I  could  fee,  through  the  membrane  of  that  hydatid  (which,  in  other-
refpedts,  as  1  perceiv'd  by taking  hold  of  it,  betwixt  my  fingers,  was  not.

(t)  Qfferva?,,  int.  alle  Tavtarughe.  {x)

(a)  5  (y)  Supra  ad  n.  3;.


3 1 8  Book  III. Of  IDifeafes  of  the  Belly.

very  thin)  not  only  the  water  that  it  contain'd,  which  was  of  a  greeniOi  co-
lour, nightly  inclining  to  yellow,  but  even  (as  this  water  was  pellucid)  what-
ever fwam  therein  •,  fo  fome  fmall  trunks  of  veffels  feem'd  to  be  carried  from
the  liver,  through  the  middle  of  the  cavity  of  the  veficle,  which,  after  hav-
ing reach'd  to  the  oppofne  part  thereof,  were  refiefted  upon  the  external  fur-
face  of  it,  and  being  divided  into  lafger,  and  fmaller  ramifications,  made  a
kind  of  beautiful  net-work.

But,  although  I  faw  this  net-work,  and  thofe  ramifications  of  blood-vefiels
very  plainly,  and  undoubtedly,  and  very  flender  fbrife  of  fat,  as  it  were,  at-
tending upon  them  ;  yet  as  1  faw  thofe  included,  and  floating  trunks,  which
ftris  of  the  fame  kind  feem'd  to  accompany,  only  through  the  i'ubftance  of
the  tranfparent  membrane,  I  beg'd  of  thofe  who  fliow'd  me  this  hydatid,
that  they  would  fuffer  me  to  open  it ;  but  in  vain,  as  they  faid  they  were
willing  to  (how  it  to  fome  other  perfons,  to  whom  they  had  juft  before  pro^
mis'd  the  infpeftion.  And  from  them,  (who  either  did  not  properly  attend
to  the  included  trunks,  or  did  not  well  obferve  what  would  follow  from  that
paffage  thereof  through  the  cavity  of  the  veficle)  I  could  get  no  other  in-
formation, than  that  the  water  was  of  a  faltifh  tafte,  and  did  not  at  all  coagu^
late  on  the  fire.

Not  long  after  this  in  the  calf,  I  faw  another  hydatid,  lefs  indeed  than
that,  for  it  was  not  bigger  than  a  hen's  egg,  yet  confidering  the  proportion  of
the  animal  wherein  I  found  it,  much  larger.  This  animal  was  an  old  hen-
pigeon,  which  even  at  this  time  lay'd  eggs,  and,  though  feemingly  very
healthy,  was  found  fuddenly  dead  in  her  neft.  As  no  caufe  of  this  unex-
pe£led  death  appear'd  externally,  upon  examining  internally,  I  found  the
brain,  the  lungs,  and  the  heart,  to  be  found,  and  without  any  mark  of
difeafe  ;  «xccpt  that  the  ventricles  of  the  brain  were  entirely  empty,  and  the
heart  itfelf  without  blood;  when,  at  length,  going  on  to  the  liver,  I  perceiv'd
the  caufe  of  this  laft  appearance,  and  of  the  fudden  death.

For  the  hver  was  fomewhat  livid  in  general,  and,  on  the  upper  part,  al-
moft  black,  and  fofter  than  natural  •,  and  a  large  blood-vefiel  having  been
ruptur'd  there,  a  great  quantity  of  blood  Iiad  been  extravafated  about  this
vifcus  itfelf,  and  the  inteftines,  and  had  coagulated.  I  llippos'd  the  rupture
of  this  veffel  to  have  been  accelerated  by  the  preffure  of  the  large  hydatid,
of  which \I  have  already  begun  to  fpeak.  This  hydatid  had  one  of  its  extre-
mities fix'd  into  the  internal  fubftance  of  the  ovarium' ;  as  other  lefTcr  hydatids
had  alfo,  of  which  I  Hiall  fpeak  prefently :  and  through  its  furface  fanguife-
rous  veflels  were  fcatter'd  ;  a  yellowifh  water  being  contain'd  within,  not
comprehended  in  one  cavity,  as  far  as  I  could  judge  externally,  but  divided
into  many  cells,  which  were  tranfparent.  To  the  membrane  itfelf,  of  which
the  hydatid  was  compos'd,  at  the  extremity  that  I  have  fpoken  of,  fome
very  fmall  vitelli  were  inherent,  very  fimilar  to  the  others,  with  which  the
ovarium  abounded  :  yet  they  were  fomewhat  harder  than  thefe,  and  inclin'd
more  to  v/hitenefs.

From  the  ovarium,  befide  one  pretty  large  egg,  which  was  almoft  ready
to  fall  off,  fome  other  hydatids  were  pendulous,  perfedly  fimilar  to  the  one
I  have  already  defcrib'd,  except  that  they  were  about  three  times  lefs,  and
nol  conneded  immediately  to  the  ovarium,  but  by  means  of  an  intervening

peduncle.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  38.  5191

peduncle,  or  ftalk,  of  a  confiderable  length.  Finally,  there  were  Tome  others,
not  larger  than  a  very  fmall  bean,  fjtuated  among  thefe  vitelli ;  but  thele
much  more  white  than  the  others,  and  full  of  a  limpid  water.  Yet  by  boiling,
neither  this  water,  nor  the  yellowifli  water  of  the  others,  coagulated  :  and  the
eggs,  which  adher'd  to  the  extremity  of  that  largeft  hydatid,  as  they  had  been
lefs  ioft  before  boiling,  were,  alfo,  more  harden'd  than  the  others,  afterwards.
I  intended  to  have  examin'd  internally,  the  cells  which  I  had  feen  through
the  coats  of  the  larger  hydatids,  but  being  call'd  away  on  fome  occafion,  a
fervant  unfeafonably  diligent,  who  fuppos-'d  that  I  had  examin'd  every  appear-
ance to  my  fatisfadiion,  threw  them  all  away,  in  the  mean  while,  to  a  place,
from  whence,  though  I  was  greatly  chagrin'd  at  the  accident,  it  was  im-
poflible  for  me  to  recover  them.

38.  Do  not  be  furpriz'd  that  I  was  fo  much  difpleas'd,  at  not  having  it  in
my  power  to  examine  clofely,  into  thofe  appearances  I  had  feen,  in  the  calf„
and  the  pigeon,  through  the  coats  of  the  hydatids.  For  the  hydatids  which
fhow  fanguiferous  veffels  pafling  through  the  middle  of  their  cavity,  or  this
cavity  divided  into  feveral  cells,  you  cannot  eafily  account  for,  as  to  their
origin  ;  either  from  a  fimple  glandular  veficle,  the  orifice  of  which  has  been
ftop'd  up,  or  from  fome  one  interftice  of  a  lymphatic  veffel,  that  lies  betwixt
two  pair  of  valves,  being  Ihut  up  on  both  fides.

Frorn  the  time  that  Wharton  made  ufe  of  thofe  interftices  of  the  lymphse-
dufts,  to  explain  the  formation  of  hydatids,  in  that  manner  which  has  been
transfer'd,  not  once  only,  but  twice,  into  this  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (s),
he  has,  probably,  had  not  fewer  followers,  than  they  who  have  made  ufe  of
the  fimple  gland  :  and  there  have  even  been  fome,  who,  by  making  additions-
to  the  hypothefis,  have  endeavour'd  to  render  it  more  probable.  The  induftry
of  all  which  authors  I  commend  :  and  I  even  believe,  that  the  great  number  of
veficles  which  Ferfius  (a)  hadleen  "  doubled,  as  they  are  taken  out  in  trouts,"'
argue  for  the  opinion  of  Wharton  -,  fince  they  refembled  two  interftices  not  yet
disjoin'd,  as  thofe  "  pellucid  littl?  cords,  confifting  of  thin  veficles,  chain'd.
"  together,  as  it  were,"  many  of  wliich  have  been  fometiines  feen  in  the  wa^
ters  of  patients  in  an  afcites,  by  Mead  {I?),  alfo  do.

But,  although  I  do  not  deny,  that  hydatids  may  have  their  origin,  in  fome
certain  way  or  other,  at  one  time,  from  a  fimple  gland,  and,  at  another  time,,
from  interftices  of  this  kind ;  yet  I  do  not  fee  how  they  can  all  be  accounted,
for  from  thence.  For  it  is  long  ago  that  Ruyfch  (c)  admonifti'd  us,  of  a
great  number  of  hydatids  being  found  in  the  placenta  viteri  fometimes,  as  t
have  alfo  leen,  and  in  other  parts,  in  like  manner,  wherein  no  lymphsedufts
are  found.  He  therefore  fuppos'd  "  that  hydatids  were  the  extremiiies  of
"  fanguiferous  veflels,  which  had  chang'd  their  former  nature,  and  had  dege-
"  nerated  into  a  difeas'd  ftru6ture."  There  are  fome,  alfo,  who  imagine,  that
if  a  watery  humour  flow,  not  only  from  the  injur'd  parietes  of  the  lymphs-
du(5ls,  but  from  any  part  whatever,  among  the  furrounding  membranes,  they
are  confequently  elevated,  and  form'd  into  hydatids.  And  if  any  one  fhould
choofe  to  illuftrate  their  opinion  with a  little accuracy,  he might,  perhaps,,

(z)  Schol.  ad  §.  8.  obf,  lo.  &  ad  §^.  2.  obf. {i)  Mbnit.  med.  c.  8.
2!.  (<■)  Adverf.  dec.  i.  c.  2.  vid.  &  thef.-6.  tabiv

(ej  Ibid.  §,  6.  J,  %.  3,  &  feq,.

scadcr:


.3  2D Book  "^11. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

render  it  proper  to  explain,  and  account  for,  the  greater  part  of  hydatids-,  and
would  underftand,  without  difficulty,  from  the  cellular  ftrudure  which  lies
betwixt  the  membranes,  and  the  fanguiferous  veffels,  which  pafs  through
tliat  ftrudure,  from  whence  it  is,  that  fome  hydatids  (d)  appear  to  be  divided
into  cells,  and  why  {e)  veffels  are  carried  through  the  middle  of  the  cavity
of  others:  to  which  veffels  if  he  Ihould  refer  thole  "  two  (lender  fibres"  that
Tyfonius  (f)  obferv'd  info  many  hydatids,  "proceeding"  from  one  extremity
'thereof,  "  and  fluduating  within  their  liquor,"  he  would  probably  come  much
nearer  to  the  truth,  than  this  autlwr,  when  he  conjedtur'd  hydatids  of  that
kind  to  be  infeds  -,  which  iucking  out  a  nourifhment  for  themfelves,  tranf-
-mitted  it  into  their  belly,  by  thofe  two  little  tubes  as  it  were.

And  if  hydatids,  that  are  pendulous  by  a  long  and  flender  ftalk,  fhould
chance  to  require  an  explication,  I  mean  fuch  hydatids  as  Ruyfch  (g)  (who  has
given  a  figure  of  them  (h) )  and  others,  and  I  myfelf,  have  often  leen,  parti-
cularly from  the  ovaria,  and  the  neighbouring  parts,  of  women;  and  not  only
thofe  that  were  pendulous  from  the  ovarium  ot  that  pigeon  ;  the  fame  perfon
Avill  be  at  liberty  to  fufpe£l  that  the  other  cells  of  any  hydatid,  being  broken
off  from  the  fmall  fanguiferous  trunk,  or  being  collaps'd,  in  confequence  of
having  pour'd  out  the  humour  they  contain'd,  one  of  the  extreme  cells  ftill
remains  connefted,  and  ilill  retains  its  fluid.  And,  indeed,  I  have,  fome-
times,  very  evidently  feen  a  fmall  fanguiferous  veffel,  paffing  along  with  the
filament,  by  which  an  hydatid  of  this  kind  was  pendulous  (/).

39.  But  there  are  ftill  others  to  be  attended  to  :  and  thefe  of  greater  impor-
tance likewife,  not  only  on  account  of  the  difeafe  in  the  vifcera,  wherein  they
are  generated  ■,  but  on  account  of  the  more  eafy  produftion  of  that  difeafe,
which  I  am  at  prefent  fpeaking  of.  Hitherto  1  have,  in  general,  fpoken  of
thofe  that  are  prominent  on  the  furface  of  the  vifcera,  or  pendulous  there-
from. Yet  there  are  others  which  lie  latent  underneath,  or  are,  at  leafl,  not
very  prominent,  for  the  moft  part ;  as  in  the  kidnies  in  particular.  I  de-
fcrib'd  them  formerly  in  the  Adverfaria  {k),  under  the  title  of  large  cells  ;  and
have  often  told  you,  in  the  courfe  of  thefe  letters  (/),  that  they  have  been  feen
both  by  Valfalva  and  me.

But  I  have  feen  this  appearance  at  other  times :  and  not  only  one  of  them  in
a  fow,  which  was  almoft  as  large  as  a  nut,  but  alfo  in  human  bodies,  and  thefe
pretty  large.  Yet  none  of  thefe,  if  you  except  one  which  I  have  refer'd  to  in  a
certain  oilier  or  ftable-keeper  (m),  was  rais'd  up  beyond  the  furface  of  the  kid-
ney ;  not  even  that  which  was  feen  by  Valfalva,  in  the  body  of  an  old  man  (n),
and  which  occupied  one  half  of  the  kidney.  And  yet  I  have  feen  others  that
were  prominent,  particularly  in  two  old  women  ;  the  hiftory  of  one  of  whom
I  v/ill  here  relate  to  you,  on  this  account  merely,  but  in  a  very  b.nef
manner.

{4J  {i)  Vid.  ejpift.  43.  n.  19.

{ej  N.  37.  (i)  III.  animad.  33.

f/J  In  addltam.  ad  Iianc  Sepu'ichr.  fed.  ap-  ('/J  Epift.  4.  n.  19.  ep.  10.  n,  ig.  ep.  17.  n,

pend.  ad  obf.  49.  14.  ep.  21.  n.  ij.  ep.  24.  n.  6.  &  ep.  25.  n.  4.

fgj  C.  2.  cit.  («)  Epift.  4.  n.  cit.

(h)  Obf,  anat.  chir,  fig.  63.  ('/)  Epiil.  17.  n.  cit.

40.  An


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  40,  41.  321

40.  An  old  woman  who  had  an  incurvation  of  the  fpine,  and  was  lame,
died  in  the  hofpital  at  Padua,  after  the  middle  of  March,  in  the  year  1747.
She  had  been  lately  brought  thither,  on  account  of  a  diforder  of  the  apo-
pleftickind,  which  did  not  appear  to  have  injur'd  any  other  faculty,  but  that
of  her  fpeech.  Wherefore,  as  the  other  diforders  of  the  woman  could  not  be
properly  known,  and  as  I  was  then  taken  up  in  other  obfervations,  relative
to  parts  which  were  in  their  natural  ftate ;  and  even  continu'd  my  inquiries
in  reference  thereto,  in  the  body  of  this  woman,  I  had  but  juft  opportunity
to  remark  the  following  preternatural  appearances.

In  the  belly,  the  trunk  of  the  great  artery  began,  almoft  immediately,  af-
ter giving  off  the  emulgents,  to  dilate  itfelf  gradually  more  and  more,  the
more  it  defcended ;  till,  a  little  above  the  divifion,  it  expanded  itfelf  wholly
•into  an  aneurifm,  which  was  of  two  inches  diameter,  in  every  direftion.  From
thence  it  was  again  gradually  contradted  ;  yetin  fuch  a  manner  that  the  iliacs
themfelves  appear'd  to  be  much  wider  than  they  naturally  are,  to  a  confider-
able  extent.  The  internal  furface  of  thefe  veffels  was  unequal :  but  the  in-
ternal furface  of  the  aneurifm  ftill  more  fo  ;  where  not  only  polypous  concre-
tions were  found,  but  in  one  part  of  the  coats,  bony  concretions  alfo.  Ifhould
be  inclin'd  to  fuppofe,  that  the  caufe  of  thefe  diforders  of  the  aorta,  had,  in
great  meafure,  confided  in  the  diftorted  figure  of  the  fpine ;  v/hich,  having  a
convexity  in  the  thorax,  on  the  right  fide,  had  another  on  the  left  fide,  in
the  loins,  which  carried  away  the  aorta  along  with  it.  And  for  this  reafon  1
was  lefs  furpriz'd  to  find,  in  the  left  kidney,  thofe  diforders  on  account  of
which  I  defcribe  to  you  this  diffeftion.

For  from  the  lower  extremity  of  that  kidney,  an  hydatid,  of  the  bignefs
of  a  fmall  apple,  protuberated.  It  was  full  of  a  redifh  water,  although,  when
look'd  at  through  the  furrounding  coats,  it  feem'd  to  be  blackifh.  Thefe
coats  were  two  in  number  externally,  the  outermoft  of  which  was  nothing  elfe
but  the  adjpofe  membrane  of  the  kidney,  deprived  of  its  fat,  by  the  very
emaciated  ftate  of  the  parts :  the  other  was  the  proper  membrane  of  the  kid-
ney, which,  not  only  the  quantity,  but  alfo  the  v/eight  of  the  included  v/ater,
in  confequence  of  preffing  from  above  downwards,  in  that  fituation,  had  dif-
tended.  Wherefore,  although  there  were  two  other  lefs  hydatids,  in  other
parts  of  the  fame  kidney,  they  had  not  rais'd  up  that  membrane  beyond  the
furface  of  the  kidney  ;  that  is  to  fay,  they  were  confin'd  under  it,  like  the  other
more  frequent  cells,  and  had  hoUow'd  out  a  kind  of  bed  for  themfelves,  in
the  fubftance  of  the  kidney.  And  a  larger  hydatid  had,  alfo,  hoUow'd  out
a  feat  for  itfelf,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  fubftance  of  this  vifcus,  almoft  in  the
fiiape  of  a  hemifphere;  fo  that  you  might  perceive  it  to  be  of  the  fame  kind
with  the  others  :  the  diamieter  of  this  hemifphere  was  equal  to  the  breadth
of  a  man's  thumb.

41.  The  difieftion  of  another  old  woman  you  will  have  on  another  occa-
fion  {0),  in  whom  the  left  kidney,  in  like  manner,  but  at  its  upper  extremity,
was  greatly  extended  into  an  hydatid  which  had  form'd  itfelf  thereon  ;  as  this
hydatid  contain'd  watei',  of  a  flight  yellow  colour,  to  the  quantity  of  four
ounces.

(0)  Epift.  60.  11.  6.
Vol.  II.  T  t  To


322  Book  III. Of  Diieafes  of  the  Belly.

To  the  larger  veficles  of  this  kind  you  will,  without  doubt,  refer  that
"  large  watry  abfcefs,"  as  Harvey  (/>)  call'd  it,  "  like  a  hen's  egg,  and  fiJl'd
''  with  yellow  water,  which  had  imprefs'd  an  orbicular  cavity"  on  one  of  the
kidnies;  as  there  were  alfo  other  kfler  appearances,  of  this  kind,  on  the  ante-
rior furface  of  both  the  kidnies,  of  a  very  old  man,  who  had  died  with  a  fup-
preflion  of  urine.  Or,  at  leait,  you  will  refer  to  this  clafs,  "  a  bladder  like
"  a  large  walnut,  diftended  with  the  moft  limpid  water,  and  inherent  to- half
*'  its  diameter,  in  the  fubftance  of  the  kidney",  which  Doringius  (q)  found
in  Bucretius ;  whofe  fame  kidney  contain'd  a  great  quantity  of  fand,  at  the
fame  time  that  the  other  contain'd  a  calculus.

Two  veficles  equal  to  that,  and  fill'd  with  a  kind  of  watry  humour,  refem-
bling  urine  in  colour,  I  remember  to  have  found,  formerly,  in  the  body  of  a
man  which  I  diffedled  at  Bologna,  in  the  anatomical  theatre,  as  a  fubftitute
for  Valfalva,  in  his  abfence :  and  the  pelvis  of  the  fame  kidney,  in  which
were  thefe  veficles,  and  three  whitifh  calculi,  of  the  bignefs  of  vetches,  was
dilated.  I  alfo  remember  that  the  man  died  with  a  fupprcffion  of  urine,  in
his  bladder  indeed  :  but  this  was  not  the  caufe  of  his  death ;  as  tliere  were
other  more  confiderable  difeafes,  which  it  is  not  neceflary  to  take  notice  of
here  (r^.  Thele  two  hydatids,  however,  were  confin'd,  as  moft  of  them  are,
tinder  the  proper  membrane  of  the  kidney.  Nor  do  they  feem  to  have  ap-
pear'd  differeatly,  which  Willis  {s)  aflerts  "  had  been  frequently  found  by
"  him,  in  hydropical  bodies,"  where  he  tells  us,  that  in  the  body  of  an  illuf-
trious  man,  there  was  "  a  large  cavity  in  the  middle  of  the  right  kidney,  dil-
tinft  from  the  pelvis,  much  larger  than  that,  and  fill'd  with  limpid  water,"
and  that  the  left  kidney  "  contain'd  many  hydatids,  and  cavities  fill'd
"  with  a  very  limpid  v/ater."

He  conjedlures  that  very  fmall  cavities  had  been  firft  form'd  in  the  fubilance
of  the  kidnies,  by  ferum  fl:agnating  in  fome  part  of  it ;  which  cavities  were
more  and  more  dilated,  by  the  gradual  increafe  of  this  fluid  :  and  doubtlefs
you  fee  that  "  limpid,  very  hmpid,  redifh"  water  was  found  in  thofe  cavi-
ties. Nor  indeed  have  I  been  without  doubts,  at  feveral  times  (i),  although
from  the  colour,  and  the  odour,  it  more  frequently  fcem'd  to  be  urine,  wlie-
ther  it  was  not,  rather,  "  a  fluid  very  fimilar  to  urine ;"  as  I  was  not  ignorant,
that  the  ferum  of  the  blood  is  either  very  often,  naturally,  of  a  yellowilh  colour,
or  becomes  fo,  by  its  remora  in  the  vifcera:  and  that  the  humour,  found  in
hydatids,  is  generally  fo,  from  what  caufe  foever  it  may  ariie  (ii) ;  and  as  I
obierv'd,  at  the  fame  time,  that  it  was  poffible  it  might  contra<5t  its  urinous
odour  from  the  kidnies,  v/herein  it  is  fo  long  retain'd  :  and  that  cavities  of
this  kind  were  every  where  furrounded  by  an  internal  and  uniform  coat  j  -&
that  it  was  never  in  my  power,  or  the  power  of  any  other  perfon,  that  I
know  of,  to  find  a  manifeft  communication  with  the  pelvis,  or  tubuli,  of
the  kidney.

Therefore,  as  to  the  cafe  being  quite  diflferent  in  the  obfervation  of  Plate-
rus(a;)j  where,  on  cutting  afunder  bladders  full  of  water,  which  had  form'd


(/)  Sepulehr.  I.  2.  f.  r.  obf.  17,
l<l)  Ibid.l.  3.  f.  14.  obf.  48.
(r)  Vid.  epift.  41.  n.  10.
ff)  Sepukbr.  1.  i.L  ly  obf.  i.


(/■)  Vid.  animad.  fupra  .id  n.  39.  indicat.

(a)  Vid.  fupra  n.  3J.  37.

Ix)  Sepukhr.  f.  liac  21.  obf.  8.  ^.  2.


them-


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  42.  323

themfelves  upon  the  body  of  the  kidney,  "  the  water  flow'd  out,  and  the
"  foramina  remain'd  open  ;"  fo  that  this  is  not  to  be  attributed  to  thofe  blad-
ders, but  to  the  many  ulcers,  which,  as  he  fays,  had  perforated  the  kidnies,
from  the  internal  quite  to  the  external  parts  •,  fo  nothing  forbids  us  to
fuppofe,  that  fome  of  the  ulcers,  bad  open'd  foramina  for  themfelves,  quite
to  the  cavity  of  the  veficles.  And  by  this  obfervation,  we  may  be  led  to  fup-
pofe another  manner,  in  which  thofe  hydatids  of  the  kidnies  may  muchfooner,
and  much  more  certainly,  bring  on  an  afcites,  where  there  are  ulcers  com-
municating with  the  pelvis ;  for  thcfe  will  reach  fooner  to  the  large  cavities
of  thofe  hydatids,  than  to  the  furface  of  the  kidnies :  and  by  carrying  thither
an  acrid  ichor,  and  a  great  quantity  of  urine,  will  burft  them,  and  pour  out
this  fluid  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  ;  juft  as  they  muft,  of  themfelves,  have
pour'd  out  their  contain'd  liquor,  in  another  obfervation  of  Platerus  (y),  and
had  pour'd  it  out  in  that  which  I  have  refer'd  to  above  (z),  from  Picolhomi-
jius,  in  conjundlion  with  the  former  of  Platerus.

JHowever,  even  when  there  are  no  ulcers,  if  thefe  hydatids  are  fo  many  in
number,  or  fo  large  in  their  fize,  as  to  have  deftroy'd,  or  condens'd,  a  great
part  of  the  fubftance  of  both  kidnies ;  there  is  not  the  leaft  doubt  but  a  dropfy
may  eafily  happen,  by  the  fecretion  of  urine  being  greatly  diminifh'd.  But
if  they,  moreover,  burft  afunder;  difcharge  their  contents;  and  go  on  ftill  to
generate  a  frelli  fluid  ;  it  is  evident  that  an  afcites  muft  happen  from
thence.

42.  Yet  if  they  do  not  continue  to  fecrete  a  fluid,  butcoalefce,  in  confe-
quence  of  a  new  fubftance  of  the  kidney  growing  up  around  them,  when
■emptied,  a  dropfy  does  not  arife-,  the  little  quantity  of  fluid,  which  they  had
difcharg'd,  being  taken  up  by  the  mouths  of  the  ablbrbent  vefl!els,  in  the  fame
manner  that  the  fluid,  with  which  the  interior  furfaces  of  the  belly  are  moif-
ten''.d,  is  abforb'd  :  yet  in  the  kidney  a  cicatrix  remains,  various  in  its  mag-
nitude, and  its  depth,  in  proportion  as  the  ruptur'd  hydatid  had  hollow'd  out
more  or  lefs  of  the  fubftance  of  the  kidney.  Read  over  again  the  twenty-
ninth  letter  (a),  in  that  part  where  I  defcrib'd,  in  the  kidney  of  a  woman,  a
long,  whitifli,  and  almoft  tendinous  line ;  drawn,  not  only  on  the  furface,
but  alfo  deeply  within  the  very  body  of  the  kidney  -,  fo  fimilar  to  the  cicatrix
of  an  old  wound,  that  I  look'd  for  the  traces  of  it  in  the  neighbouring  paries
of  the  belly,  but  in  vain.  And  I  fhall  defcribeto  you,  in  other  letters,  other
cicatrices  of  the  kidnies,  lefs  deep,  but  deprefs'd ;  and  thefe  comprehended
in  the  circumference  of  a  circle  :  of  which  kind  that  was,  v;hich  follow'd  the
coalition  of  the  larger  hydatid,  taken  notice  of  in  the  old  woman,  whofe
hiftory  I  gave  you  juft  now  (i^).

From  hence  you  perceive,  by  what  method  we  may  explain,  froni  the  ob-
fervation of  hydatids,  the  cicatrices  which  are  pretty  frequently  met  with,  on
the  furface  of  the  kidnies.  And  fuppofe  that  the  cicatrices  of  other  vifcera
may,  alfo,  be  explain'd  in  the  fame  manner,  when  they  are  external,  and  nei-
ther wounds,  nor  figns  of  ulcers,  have  preceded;  as  that  was,  which  is  taken
notice  of  in  this  very  letter  (c),  as  being  found  in  the  fide  of  the  uterus,  of

(_>)■  ihli.  obf.  n.  ■§.  4..  {/>)  N.  40.  in  fin.

r-;  N.  19.  fc/li.  28.

{a)  N.  12.

T  t  2 .  an


324  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

an  old  woman,  who  had  labour'd  under  an  afcites.  For  the  uterus  has  alfo
its  hydatids,  fometimes,  in  iuch  a  nunnber  as  is  fufficiently  fliown  by  the  ob-
fervations  of  Adolphus  Occo(ii),  and  the  celebrated  Adam  Chriftian  Thebe-
fius  (e)  ;  and  fo  large  in  their  fize,  that,  as  I  have  hinted  to  you  on  a  former
occafion  (f),  Coiterus  (g)  law  one  "  hanging  from  the  fide  of  thecollum  uteri,
"  bigger,  to  appearance,  than  the  natural  bladder,  and  very  full  of  urine  :"
or,  as  he  fays,  with  more  juftice,  below,  "  full  of  thin,  and  tranfparent  water,
"  and  furnifli'd,  like  the  natural  bladder,  with  two  coats,  but  without  any
"  meatus  whereby  to  coUeft,  or  difcharge,  its  contents."

But  even  cicatrices  of  this  kind,  both  of  the  liver,  and  fpleen,  as,  for  in-
ftance,  that  which  Hschftetterus  (h)  has  defcrib'd,  in  a  noble  virgin  (for
we  muft  take  care  we  are  not  deceiv'd  by  certain  fifflires,  which  often  exift
from  the  original  formation)  fuch  cicatrices,  I  fay,  may  be  explain'd  in  a
fimilar  manner.  For  hydatids  of  both  thefe  vifcera  occur  ftill  more  frequent-
ly, whether  they  are  fituated  quite  externally,  fuch  as  Coiterus  (f)  found  in  a
hang'd  man,  "  under  the  fpleen,  of  the  magnitude  of  two  fifts,  very  full  of
"  water,  and  feparated  from  the  neighbouring  parts,  without  any  injury,"
or  entirely  hid  deep  in  the  fubftance,  like  thofe  which  are  fpoken  of  as  exift-
ing  in  the  liver,  by  GlafTerus  (k),  Diemerbroeck  (/),  and  others.

To  which  clafs,  you  will  certainly  refer  the  obfervation  of  Lyferus  (m),  "  of
*  citron-coluur'd  water,  which  buril  forth  in  the  quantity  of  more  than  three
"  pints,"  from  the  liver  of  a  living  jewefs,  when  pierc'd  deep  in  its  fub-
ftance  ;  and  that  obferv'd  by  IMauchartus,  which  I  have  already  defcrib'd  (n),
and  which  he  call'd  "  a  dropfy  of  the  fpleen  :"  and  thus  you  will  obferve,
where  it  happens  that  the  vifcera  are,  at  length,  broken  through,  by  a  quan-
tity of  humour  internally  coUefted,  how  much  they  increafe  that  dropfy,
which  exifled  before  ;  and  how  much  thefe  vifcera  may  feem  to  be  corrupted,
by  the  ftagnant  water  around  them,  when  they  have  been  thus  afte6led,  by
the  fluid  they  contain'd.  Whether,  therefore,  hydatids  are  of  this  fecond
Ipecies,  or  of  the  firft,  or,  finally,  of  a  middle  nature  betwixt  both,  fuch  as
we  chiefly  attend  to  here ;  that  is,  foform'd  in  a  vifcus,  as  to  fhew  themfeives,
in  fome  meafure,  upon  the  furface  alfo,  they  are,  as  I  faid,  flill  more  fre-
quent in  the  liver,  or  the  fpleen.

So  I  faw  two  of  this  lall  kind,  lately,  in  the  liver  of  a  certain  old  woman,
■which  was,  in  other  refpefts,  found,  but  had  its  anterior  border  of  a  figure
which  was  never  feen  by  me  before,  in  this  part,  that  is  falciform,  about  the
middle  of  it ;  and  the  left  lobe  produc'd  almoft  as  far  downwards  as  the  right.
Under  the  membrane,  which  cover'd  the  convex  furface,  both  the  hydatids,
in  fome  meafure,  appear'd;  the  remainder  of  them  being  hid  within  the  liver,
one  fmall,  the  other  pretty  large  ('cj.  Thus  I  obferv'd  a  great  number  In  the.
fpleen  of  a  fow,  full  of  an  infipid,  or  flightly-fweetifh  water.  And  thus  in
the  liver  of  a  fecond,  one  of  the  bignefs  of  a  clierry,  not  far  from  its  edge,

{tl)  Sepulch.  f.  hac  zi.  obf.  55.  §.  9.  (k)  Sepulch.  f.  cit.  obf.  4.  §.  11.

{e)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3  &  4.  obf.  J17,  (/)  Ibid.  obf.  19.

ff)  Epift.  16.  n.  33.  (//;)  Apud  Bartholin,  cent.  2.  epiil.  med.  73'.

\g)  Obf.  anat.  (»)  Epift.  36.  n.  18.

(/>)  Sepulchr.  f.  cit.  obf.  12.  §.  2.  (oj  Vid.  epift.  65.  a.  8.  in  fin,

(0  Obf,  anat.  cit,

Yec


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  43.  325

Yet  in  another,  I  found  them  of  different  fizes,  and  in  great  number-,  and
not  only,  as  in  the  former,  half  buried,  but  many  of  them  even  altogether
hid,  within  the  fubftance  :  and  the  water  of  them  all  was  comprehended  in  a
very  thick,  and  white  follicle.

This  liver  was  extremely  enlarg'd,  and  had  the  whitifn  net-work,  by  v/hich
the  lobules  are  intercepted,  very  thick  ;  and,  for  that  reafon,  i3:rikingeven  the
inattentive  eye  more  than  ufual ;  whether  you  examin'd  it  internally,  or  ex-
ternally. Thefe  lobules  were  found,  as  the  other  vifcera  feem'd  to  be :  but
the  gall-bladder  was  extremely  contrafted,  and  inftead  of  bile  contain'd  not
many  drops  of  a  certain  mucus,  which  was  fcarcely  ting'd  with  any  colour  -,
fo  as  to  bring  back  to  my  mind,  that  "  almoft  white  colour"  of  the  bile,
which  Vefalius  (p)  aflerts  lie  had  feen,  before  Diemerbroeck,  and  after  him
others,  who  are  likev/ife  quoted  in  the  Sepulchretum :  and  others  fince  then,,
had  feen  inftead  of  bile,  a  humour  which  was  "  white,  laftefcent,  milky."

But  not  to  digrefs  from  thofe  hydatids  of  the  fpleen,  and  the  liver,  of
•which  I  was  fpeaking ;  perhaps  you  will  fuppofe  thofe  to  belong  to  that  fpe-
eies,  which  Hunerwolffius  (q)  defcribes,  in  human  bodies,  "  as  being  innatte,.
"  or  form'd  within  the  liver,  and  fpleen,"  befides  others  which  he  calls  '■'■  ad-
"  Kfi/^,  or  form'd  upon  thefe  vifcera,"  or  thofe  which  toHorftius  ('r)appear'd
"  to  be  cavities  full  of  water,  in  the  liver,  and  fpleen,  of  a  little  boy."  And  if
you  defire  to  know  what  fymptoms  had  preceded  in  the  living  body,  you  will
read  them  in  another  obfervation  of  the  Sepulchretum  (j),  in  which  the  fame
dilTedion  is  repeated  :  and  in  fo  long  a  feftion,  as  this  twenty-firft,  it  is  lefs  to
be  wonder'd  at,  than  in  moll  others,  that  it  Ihould  have  happen'd  more  than
onct  ft):  for  which  reafon,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  on  account  of  the  frau-
dulent defcriptions  of  Blancardus,  it  might  have  been  forgiven,  that  in  the
Additamenta  thofe  are  fet  down  again,  as  if  they  were  nev/  obfervations  of
this  author  (a),  which  Bonetus  had  produc'd  before  in  this  very  fedion  (x),.
and  had  afcrib'd  to  their  true  authors  Jodonus  and  Parey  (y)  ;  if,  which  even
Blancardus  himfelf  had  not  done  (2),  one  obfervation  of  Jodonus  were  not
feparated  into  two,  the  twenty-ninth,  and  the  thirtieth ;  or  rather  if  from  the
Scholium  of  Blancardus  on  the  firfl,  the  fecond  obfervation  were  not  made.
But  the  oblervation  of  Eggerdefus(<2),  which  relates  entirely  to  the  thorax,
ought  not  to  have  been  introduc'd  here  by  any  means,  where  the  queilion^
is  of  diforders  of  the  belly  only  ;  or,  at  leaft,  what  is  done  in  regard  ta
two  obfervations  (Z-),  that,  like  the  former,  do  not  refer  to  the  prefent  fub-
je£t,  ought  not  to  have  been  omitted  ;  I  mean  that  notice  was  taken  of  the
obfervations  being  produc'd,  "  out  of  their  proper  place."

43.  I,  however,  have  a  very  different  reafon  for  faying  a  few  things  here,,
of  the  thoracic  vifcera. For  the  vifcera  of  the  belly  are  not  the  only  vifcera

(p)  Exam.  obf.  Fallop.  §.  7.  obf.  55. §.  2.  cum  §.  17  ;  &  §. 13.  cum

{ij)  Sepulch.  obf.  4.  cit.  §.  14.  §.  16.  et  cat.

(>■)  In  additam.  ad  eand.  21.  fep.  fe£l.  obf. (a-)  Obf.  29.  32.  &  fortaffe  alias.
S2.  (_>■)  Obf.  48  &  38.

(s)  Seft.  ead.  obf.  3. §.  12.  (z)  Anat.  praft.  rat.  obf.  84.

\t)  Ibid.  obf.  6.  §.  7.  {a)  In  addit.  ad  banc  feft.  21.  obf.  61.

(uj  Confer,  obf.  4.  §.  8.  cum  obf.  6.  §.  12. \b)  Ibid.  obf.  76  &  79.
©bf.  20.  §.  12.  cum  §.  17.  obf.  21.  §,  2,  cum

that


326  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

that  are  liable  to  hydatids  of  this  kind  ;  and  what  teems  to  me  to  follow  nc-
cefiarily,  to  cicatrices :  that  thefe  hydatids  are  form'd  upon  the  lungs,  and
even  upon  the  heart,  I  have  already  fliewn,  from  the  obfervations  of  the  an-
cients, the  moderns,  and  even  my  own  alfo  (c).  If,  therefore,  any  one
of  thofe  cicatrices  which  I  have  defin'd,  occur  in  either  of  thefe  vifcera,  as
one  certainly  did  occur  to  me,  on  tlte  external  furface  of  the  heart  -of  .a
hare  (and  how  frequently  this  fpecies  of  animals  is  attack'd  with  hydatids,
fufficiently  appears  even  from  the  reading  of  Rhed\{d)  alone.)  What  for-
bids me  to  account  for  a  cicatrix,  from  the  inanition,  and  coalition,  of  an
hydatid,  in  the  fame  part  wherein  I  have  feen  an  hydatid  half-buried  in  the
fubftance  ?  Wherefore,  you  will,  likewife,  deduce  the  origin  of  cicatrices  in
the  thoracic  vifcera,  from  hydatids  j  as  I  faid  in  regard  to  the  vifcera  of  the
belly.

And  that  the  fecond  fpecies  of  thefe  (e)  is,  probably,  to  be  acknowledg'd
to  exift  in  the  lungs,  you  will  conjeftvire  from  the-  water  collefted  within
them,  in  a  kind  of  facs,  as  it  were  ;  which  was  twice  feen  even  by  the  illuftri-
ous  Senac  (f).

44.  But  here  you  certainly  expeft  from  me  another  explication  of  the  ori-
gin, not  of  cicatrices,  but  of  certain  hydatids  ;  fuch,  for  inftance,  as  were
ieen  by  Redi  (g),  in  hares,  not  only  buried,  in  clufters,  within  the  fubftance
of  the  liver,  and  tied  one  to  another,  but  alfo  under  the  external  coat  there-
of, and  of  the  whole  alimentary  canal ;  and  between  the  membranes  of  the
mefentery,  without  any  cohefion  therewith  •,  and  even  many  that  were  free,
and  quite  unconnetted,  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  like  animalcules,  which
could  move  themfelves  to  and  fro  :  fo  that  tt  came  into  his  mind,  as  it  did
into  rhc  mind  of  Tyfonius  afterwards,  as  I  faid  above  (h),  to  enquire  whe-
ther they  were  certain  infefts,  or  rather  embryoes  of  infcfts ;  the  latter  of
j^hich  conjeftures  I  fee  is  juftly  rejected  by  Tyfonius  -,  and  the  firft,  to  omit
other  confiderations,  does  not  very  well  agree  with  the  experiments,  which
have  fliewn  that  the  very  limpid  water,  whereof  they  are  full,  never  coagu-
lated by  the  application  of  fire.  But  Tyfonius  •,  although  very  fond  of  that
firtl  conjefcure,  not  only  for  other  reafons,  but  becaufe  the  internal  coat  of
his  hydatids,  which  were  taken  from  other  animals,  had  no  cohefion  with
the  external,  by  which  it  was  every  where  furrounded;  has,  neverthelefs,  c-o-n-
fefs'd  that  this  external  coat  "  was  furnifh'd  with  blood  veffels :"  and  that  all
hydatids  are  not  of  this  kind,  particularly  thofe  which  are  found  in  the  ovaria
of  dropfical  women,  as  they  are  made  of  enlarged  veficles  (or,  according  to
his  hypothefis,  of  ovula)  which  are  natura]  to  thefe  parts-,  and,  in  like  man-
ner, thofe  which  he  faw  burft  forth  from  the  right  fide  of  a  woman  (who
was  then  labouring  under  diforder,  but  afterwards  perfedlly  cur'd)  when
open'd  a  litde  below  the  fpurious  ribs  ;  burft  forth,  I  fay,  together  with  a
great -quantity  of  limpid  water,  to  the  number  of  five  hundred;  they  beifig
alfo  turgid  with  a  water  of  the  fame  kind.

(c)  Epifl.  16.  n.  33  &  44.  c/J  Traite  du  cceur,  1.  4.  ch.  3.  n.  4.

fiij  Offervaz.  kt.-agli  anim.  vivent.  &c.  (^)  Oflervaz.  cit.

W  N.  43.  (/,)  N.  3>8.

2  Hydatids


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  45.  327

Hydatids  were  after  this  found  by  Hunerwolffius  (/),  and  Hartmann  (k),
by  the  former  in  a  woman,  fuch  as,  "  befides  a  white,  gummy  liqviamen,  con-
"  tain'd,  in  themfelves,  other  more  {lender  bladders  full  of  lymph  ■,"  but  by
the  latter,  in  a  dog,  within  one  and  the  fame  membrane,  which  was  that  of
the  omentum,  many  were  found  to  be  comprehended  together,  fo  that  this
membrane  being  puU'd  away,  the  hydatids  "  rufh'd  forth  with  a  flight  pref-
"  fure,"  the  hquor  of  which  did  not  coagulate  by  boiling,  yet  had  with  it
*'  a  kind  of  coagulum  ■"  and  the  coat  which  was  proper  to  each,  being  made
up  of  many  other  membranes,  was  fo  denfe,  that,  wlien  cut  afunder,  it  did
not  collapfe  ;  and  even  felt  as  if  it  were  fomewhat  fat,  when  touch'd  by  the
fingers :  of  this  fatty  matter  the  hydatids,  "  when  boil'd,"  exuded  a  great
quantity.

Neither  were  thofe,  by  any  means,  connefted  with  each  other,  which  thast
celebrated  man,  Alexander  Camerarius  (/),  found  in  a  confiderable  number,
containing  a  limpid  water,  and  comprehended  in  a  membranous  fac,  wherein,
the  fteatoma  of  a  man's  liver  was,  at  the  fame  time,  included.  As  I  have  never
yet  happen'd  to  light  on  hydatids  of  this  kind,  I  have  chofen  rather  to  point
out  to  you,  here,  the  obfervations  of  others  ;  which  you  majreafily  compare
together ;  than  attempt  an  explanation  of  thofe  things,  which  I  had  it  not  m
my  power  to  examine  myfelf.  This  has  been  attempted  by  Hartmann,  in
regard  to  his,  in  the  Schohum  which  he  has  added  (m)  ;  but  whether  his  hy--
pothefis  will  pleafe  you,  I  am  very  much  in  doubt.  You  will  rather  alk,
whether  there  are  any  things  in  the  writings  of  other  very  learned  men,  that
you  can  better  approve ;  and  efpecially  among  thofe,  who  have  written  of
the  inorganic  formation  of  cyftic  tumours,  or  thofe  who  have  often  Ipolien^^
in  thefe  times,  of  veficles  fwimming  in  the  fluid  of  thefe  tumours.

However,  although  in  fome  hydatids  I  have  feen,  through  their  coats,  what
I  have  faid  above  {n),  and  even,  in  a  woman  whom  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you
in  a  former  letter  (o),  have  feen  the  thin,  internal  coat  of  the  hydatids  fur-
nilh'd  with  whitifh  little  veflels,  and,  in  a  fow,  form'd  into  a  kind  of  cells,  as  it
were ;  yet  I  think  that  the  veficles  which  are  met  with  by  anatomifts,  and  are  full
of  water,  are  not  all  of  the  fame  kind,  and,  therefore,  that  the  origin  of  diffe-
rent hydatids  are  to  be  differently  explain'd  :  and  the  origin  of  fome  not,  per-
haps, in  one  way  only,  but  in  many  join'd  together.  And  I  would  have  you,
in  particular,  read  over  what  the  celebrated  Morand  {p}  has  feen,  and  con<-
jeftur'd,  on  the  fubjedi:  of  thofe  veficles,  which  are  found  in  great  number,,
under  one  coat;  either  connefted  together,  or  unconnected,  and  fwim-
ming in  a  fluid  fimilar  to  that  which  they  contain,  or  pour'd  out  into  the
cavity  of  the  belly.

45.  And  of  this  kind,  in  particular,  I  would  have  you  fuppofe  thofe  vefi-
cles to  be,,  from  which  Aretteus  (q)  has  faid  that  a  peculiar  dropfy  is  form'd-.
That  is  to  fay,  "  certain  very  fmall  veficles,  in  great  number,  full  of  a  fluid,

(;')  Iiiadditam.  ad  hanc  Sepulchr.  feiS.  obf.  («)  Epift.  zi.n.-47..

82.  (^)  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  desfc.  a.  1722.  &hlft.

(i)  Ibid.  obf.  83.  a.  1723.

CO  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  3.  obf.  112c.  (y)  De  cauf.  &  iign.  morb.  diut.  1.  2.  c,  j.


(?«)  Ad  cit.  obf.  83.  in  fin.

V}  N.  37.


2nd


328  Book  III. Of  tlie  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  and  proceeding  from  the  place,  where  an  afcitesis  generally  form'd,"  whick
he  might  even  fee  in  the  human  body,  when  the  parietes  of  the  belly  were
pierc'd  through,  in  order  to  draw  off  water  •,  juft  as  Tyfonius,  as  I  have  faid  (r),
faw  them  come  forth,  in  great  nun-)ber,  from  another  part,  and  as  you  will
read  that  it  happen'd,  in  fome  meafure,  to  Morand  (s).  For  as  to  Aretasus
adding,  that  there  were  fome,  who  "  affirm'd  bubbles  of  this  kind  to  have
"  pafs'd  through  the  inteftines,"  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  this  is  the  very
cafe,  if  I  am  not  deceiv'd,  which  he  denies  his  ever  having  feen ;  and  not
this  dropfy  of  which  he  gives  the  fign,  as  Peter  Petit  (/)  believed  (in  con-
junflion  with  others)  who  thought,  becaufe  he  had  not  feen  it  himfelf,  that
AretJEus alfo  could  not  have  feen  it.

But  they  who  afFirm'd  thofe  veficles  to  have  pafs'd  from  the  inteftines,  into
the  cavity  of  the  belly,  had,  probably,  found  thofe  appearances,  in  fome  brute
animal,  which  I  have  faid  to  be  leen  by  Redi  (u) ;  the  relation  of  which  being
underftood  in  a  manner  fomewhat  different,  as  frequently  happens  by  thofe
who  had  heard  it,  fo  that  thefe  veficles  were  fuppos'd  to  have  come  from
the  cavity  of  the  inteftines,  AretJeus  might  be  induc'd  to  add  immediately
Inch  things  as  had  a  tendency  to  Ihow  that  the  narration,  thus  underftood,
was  improbable.  However,  the  fign  which  he  has  produc'd  of  this  dropfy,
that  is  to  fay,  when  he  writes  thus,  "  if  you  perforate  the  abdomen,  you
"  will  draw  off  very  little  water ;  for  the  veficle  on  the  infide,  prevents  the
"  eftufion,  by  ftopping  up  the  orifice  :  but  if  you  force  your  inftrument  into
"  the  veficle,  the  fluid  will  again  flow  out  •,  fhows  the  infupportable  diffi-
culty there  is  to  the  removal  of  a  diforder  of  this  kind,  unlefs  the  veficles
fliould  happen  to  be  fituated  in  one  place,  or  to  be  fo  difpos'd  as  they  were
in  the  woman  fpoken  of  by  Tyfonius  (x) ;  and,  in  like  manner,  in  the  drop-
fical  ruftic  mention'd  by  Riverius  (y)  :  although,  in  general,  where  there  is
a  dropfy  from  hydatids,  or  with  hydatids,  of  whatfoever  kind  they  may  be,  fo
that  they  are  in  great  number,  or  large  in  their  fize,  the  abdomen  is  perfo-
rated in  vain.

For  befides  that  thofe  which  have  already  burft  afunder,  may  go  on  to  pour
out  a  fluid,  "  the  opening  of  one  veficle,"  as  in  purfuance  of  the  hint  of  Tul-
pius  (z),  Thomas  Bartholin  (a)  has  rightly  admonifn'd,  "  does  not  evacuate
"  the  reft,  although  they  cohere,  in  the  manner  of  bunches  of  grapes;  and
not  only  if  they  are  disjoin'd  one  from  another.  Therefore,  to  the  other
caufes  why  this  chirurgical  operation  does  not  always  anfwer,  even  at  the  time
when  all  other  circumftances  feem  to  be  favourable,  add  this  alfo,  becaufe,  to
ufe  the  words  of  Ruyfch  (I/),  "  as  it  very  often  happens  that  there  are  hyda-
"  tids  in  dropfical  perfons,  they  feldom  or  ever  recover,  it  the  paracentefis  of
"  the  abdomen  is  perform'd."  This  he  faid  on  occafion  of  a  dropfical  woman,
whofe  peritoneum,  and  mefentery,  were  both  of  them  fili'd  v/ith  hydatids.
And  that  this  happens,  very  frequently,  in  the  mefentery  of  perfons  labour-
ing under  an  afcites,  is  demonftrated,  not  only  by  other  more  ancient  ob-
fervations,  but  alfo  by  thofe  more  modern  ones,  contained  in  the  volumes  of

frj  N.  44.  (_ji)  Obf.  hinc  ind.  decerpt.  15.

fsj  Mem.  cit.  (z)  L.  2.  obf.  med.  c.  34.

ftj  Comment,  in  cit.  locum.  {a)  AA.  Hafn.  vol.  1.  obf.  8.

(i/.)  N.  44.  .  fij  Thef.  anat.  7.  n.  37.

Ix)  Ibid.

2  the


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  46.  329

the  Ctefarean  Academy  (f).  But  in  regard  to  the  hydatids  of  other  parts
which  are  in  the  belly,  as  I  have  produc'd  quite  a  fufficient  quantity  of  examples
already,  1  will  add  one  of  the  ftomach,  from  Jacobus  Yongius  {d),  in  that  wo-
man whofe  wonderful  cafe  you  cannot  explain,  unlefs  you  fliould  have  your
eye  to  that  caufe  which  we  generally  have  an  eye  to,  in  the  diabetes.  For  as,
through  the  whole  courfe  of  the  difeafe,  (he  made  almofl:  as  much  water  as
jlie  drank  of  fluids,  it  does  not  well  appear  from  whence  the  water  could
proceed,  two  hundred  and  fourteen  quarts  whereof  were  difcharg'd  within
eight  months,  by  the  operation  of  the  paracentefis,  which  was  repeated  to
the  nine  and  twentieth  time,  in  that  Ipace.  This  woman,  therefore,  had  a
great  number  of  hydatids  on  the  ftomach,  and  inteftines.

46.  As  the  obfervations  which  I  have,  relative  to  the  tympanites,  will
come  in  more  conveniently  on  a  future  occafion,  by  reafon  of  the  difor-
ders  complicated  therewith,  I  fhall  choofe  to  fubjoin,  in  their  ftead,  two
which  relate  to  the  dropfy  of  the  peritoneum  ;  a  difeafe  (to  premife  a  few
things  upon  that  head)  which  has,  in  fadl,  not  been  defcrib'd  by  the  moft  an-
cient authors,  nor  yet  was  firft  fpoken  of  by  Tulpius  (1?),  nor  Bogdanus  (f)^
as  they  themfelves  feem'd  to  believe,  and  moft  authors  have  fuppos'd.  I  do
not  fay  this,  becaufe  Stratenus  had  faid  to  Tulpius,  tlut  he  had  feen  fome-
thing  very  fimilar  to  it,  as  Tulpius  himfelf  readily  confefies ;  nor  becaufe
Stalpart  [g)  affirms  that  fomething  of  this  kind  was  faid  by  Marcellus  Do-
natus.

For  Marcellus  {h),  although  he  fhows,  in  oppofition  to  Fernelius,  that  the
waters,  of  hydropic  patients,  are  brought  by  invifible  paffages  into  the  cavity
of  the  belly  ;  and  fays  that,  although  this  cavity  is  the  more  proper  recepta-
cle of  thefe  waters,  "  it  is  neverthelefs  prov'd,  by  difiedtion,  that  betwixt
"  the  peritoneum,  and  the  other  parts  which  conftitute  the  lower  belly,  a
"  portion  of  water  is  very  often  found."  And  that  you  may  be  in  no  doubt
what  thefe  other  parts  are,  he  immediately  adds  this  which  is  very  impro-
perly omitted  by  Stalpart :  "  fo  that  fome  of  the  followers  of  the  Arabians
"  contend,  that  the  general  fituation  of  the  water,  in  an  afcites,  is  betwixt
■"  the  fiphac  and  the  mirach"  (that  is  betwixt  the  peritoneum,  and  the
parts  that  lie  in  contaft  with  it  externally)  "  and  we  even  fee,  that  in
"  thofe  who  are  troubled  with  this  diforder,  the  water  reaches  to  the  hips,
"  the  legs,  y  c^t."  From  this  inftance  then,  you  fee  what  portion  of
water  he  fuppofes  to  have  been  found  even  in  thofe  parts  ;  that  is  to  fay,  the
water  which  naturally  reaches  thither,  when  an  anafarca  is  join'd  with  an
afcites.

For  in  regard  to  that  opinion  of  fome,  who  differ,  very  widely,  from  their
teachers,  Haly  {i),  and  Avicenna  (k)  \  neither  is  this  obfervation  proper  to
prove  it,  nor  is  any  other  produc'd  by  Donatus:  although  Stalpart  fays  that
Donatus,  after  having  aflTerted  a  dropfy  to  be  fometimes  brought  on  by
drinking  plentifully  of  cold  water,  if  "  it  be  carried  into  the  humid  perito-

(<■)  Dec.  3.  a.  9.  &  10.  obf.  239.  &  cent.  3  &  {g)  Part.  i.  cent.  c.  obf.  rar.  28.  in  fchol.

4  obC  1 17.  &  aft.  torn.  2.  obf.  34.  &  cast.  {b)  De  med.  hift.  mirab.  1.  4.  c.  21.

{d)  Vdd.  in  atl-erud.  Lipf.  a.  17 13.  m.  juL  (z)  Theor*.  med.  I.  9.  c.  31.

(f)  L.  4.  obf.  med.  c.  44.  (k)  C.  5.  fupra  ad  n.  33.  cit.
Cf)  Obf.  anat.  chir.  u.

Vol.  II.  U  u  «  naeum,"


330  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  nteum,"  that  Donatus,  I  fay,  continues  to  fpeak,  as  follows :  "  Jacobtis
"  Camcnicenus  in  his  letter  written  to  Andr.  Matthiolus,  in  the  fifth  book
"  of  his  epiftles,  tells  us  of  a  certain  perfon,  in  whom  water  had  been  col-
"  le6led  betwixt  the  coats  of  the  peritonaeum,  and  of  the  inteftines."  For
Donatus  (I),  after  having  copied  from  Aretseus  [m),  who  is  exprefly  quoted,
thofe  words  that  relate  to  a  fluid  being  then  carried  into  the  peritonasum,
not  to  be  coUefted  there,  but  that  from  thence  "  the  drops  may  be  efFus'd
"  into  the  ilia,"  to  produce  an  afcites;  which  drops  were  before  converted  into
"  vapour,  and  carried  off  by  tranfpiration  ;"  after  having  copied  thefe  words
then,  likewife,  and  having  added  many  other  things,  which  by  no  means
relate  to  the  peritongeum,  but  to  the  imbecility  of  the  vifcera,  in  perfons
who  labour  under  an  afcites,  and  to  the  obftruftion  of  the  veins  of  the
liver  •,  in  order  to  prove  this  he  at  length  makes  ufe  of  that  obfervation,  of
Camenicenus,  of  ftones  obftrufting  thofe  veins,  in  a  dropfical  man,"  in
"  whom  water  had  been  coUefted,  between  the  peritonseum,  and  inteftines."

For  thus  Donatus'himfelf,  with  juftice,  writes,  as  Matthiolus  does  alfo,  when,
in  his  anfwer  to  Camenicenus,  he  interprets  thefe  words  of  his,  "  when  we
"  had  gone  through  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  we  found  that  kind  of
"  water,  which  is  call'd  citron-colour'd,  betwixt  the  peritonseum,  and  in-
"  teftines  :  which  however  I  fee  is  doubted  of  by  fome  ■"  that  is  by  the  fol-
lowers of  the  Arabians,  who  were  juft  now  fpoken  of,  and  who  thought  that
the  water,  of  patients  in  an  afcites,  was  not'  betvVixt  the  peritonseum.,  and
the  inteftines,  but  betwixt  the  peritonaeum,  and  Uie  external  parts.  And
thefe  inquiries  I  have  profecuted  the  vaoxe  fully,  becaufe  I  find  that  many
have  afcrib'd  the  obfervation  of  the  dropfy  of  the  peritonseum,  to  Cameni-
cenus, and  Donatus  -,  without  turning  to  thefe  authors ;  and  in  conjunftion
•with  Stalpart,  whom  they  have  follow'd  without  mentioning  his  name;  among
whom  is  Nuck  («),  and  he  who  has  faid  that  he  had  compar'd  his  own  ob-
fervation of  this  difeafe  vv'ith  that  of  Donatus,  which  is  no  obfervation  at  all.i

47.  Who  then,  do  you  fay,  found  this  appearance  before  Nicolaus  Tul-
pius  ?  Joannes  Acholzius,  a  phyfician,  and  primary  profeflbr,  at  Vienna.
For  this  gentleman,  in  the  year  158 1,  having  prefided  at  the  diffeftion  of  a.
dropfical  woman,  in  the  prefence  of  the  imperial  phyficians,  and  furgeons,
found  a  great  quantity  of  water,  like  a  lixivium,  not  in  the  cavity  of  the
belly,  but  betwixt  the  peritonseum,  and  the  integuments  of  the  belly;
the  mufcles,  that  is  to  fay,  being  fo  far  extenuated  by  the  difliention  of  the
water  beneath,  that,  as  is  often  the  cafe,  "  they  feem'd  to  be  almoft  anni-
"  hilaied  ;"  or  being  even,  in  fome  meafure,  chang'dinto  a  certain  continued
body,  made  up  of  veficles,  nll'd  with  water,  mucus,  and  glandular  mat-
ter, which  compos'd  the  anterior  paries  of  that  very  large  fac  :  whereas  the
internal  was  made  up  of  a  membrane,  with  which  all  the  vifcera  were  cover'd,
in  fuch  a  manner,  that  before  this  was  cut  into,  there  feem'd  to  be  no  vifcera
at  all.  •

Read,  I  beg  of  you,  the  obfervation  more  fully  d^efcrib'd.  in  this  feftion
of  the  Sepulchretum  (c),  although  confus'd  with  circumftances  relating  to
other  fubjedts,  and  you  will  very  plainly  perceive,,  that  this  was  a  dropfy  of

(I)  C.  21.  cit.  in)  Ade.  cur.  c.  9/

\m)  C.  1.  ad  n.  45.  fupra  citi.  /cj  Sea..2  i.  obi".  21.  §.16.,

the


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  4S.  331

the  peritonseum,  from  water  flowing  out  of  thefe  glandular  tumours-,  to  the
diforder  of  which,  and 'of  this  membrane,  thofe  miferable  pains,  wherewith,
upon  the  great  increafe  of  the  difeafe,  the  woman  had  been  continually  tor-
tur'd,  are  certainly  to  be  afcrib'd.  Nor  was  this  hiftory  firft  publifh'd  in  the
Sepulchretum,  but  was  extant  from  the  year  1598  among  the  Confdia  Medico^
publifh'd  by  Scholzius  {p) ;  that  is  in  a  book,  which  went  through  more  than
one  edition,  and  which  was  in  the  hands  of  almofl  every  one:  particularly
in  the  laft  age.

But  I  have  even  obferv'd  other  obfervations  in  the  Sepulchretum,  which
were  made  before  that  of  Tulpius  ;  and  which  may,  or  ought  to  be,  refer'd
to  the  fame  difeafe  :  although  iiobody  has  ever  yet  taken  notice  of  them,  as
far  as  I  know,  at  leaft,  when  he  was  mentioning  the  others.  That  of  our  Spi-
gelius  perhaps  may,  who,  when  he  was  in  Moravia,  remark'd  "  a  fpurious
"  dropfy,"  in  a  woman,  "  betwixt  the  abdomen  properly  fo  call'd,  and  the
"  mufcles  which  are  curv'd  inwards  as  it  were."  (Should  he  have  faid  were
curv'd  inwards  ?  Or  was  the  cafe  as  it  is  in  the  obfervation  of  Acholzius  ?)
From  thence  (which  circumftance  is  omitted  in  the  Sepulchretum)  "  ten
"  pints  of  a  black  fluid  flow'd."  This  was  done  in  the  year  1614,  altho'
it  was  publifli'd  by  Rhodius  (r)  forty-three  years  after.

But,  unlefs  I  am  greatly  deceiv'd,  that  which  Hoechftetter  (j)  had  ob-
ferv'd in  a  noble  virgin,  belongs  entirely  to  the  clafs  I  fpeak  of:  this  obfer-
vation was  made  in  the  year  1628,  although  publifl:i'd  many  years  after  by  his
grandfon  -,  and  although  the  author  fuppos'd  the  anterior  part  of  the  fac,
wherein  a  great  quantity  of  thick  and  foetid  humour  was  contain'd,  to  be  the
peritonaeum,  and  the  other  part,  wherein  he  found  many  glandular  tumours,
among  which  four  of  the  largeft  were  purulent,  to  be  the  omentum.  For  as
he  fays  that  this  internal  part  of  the  fac  was  "  a  membranous  expanded
"  body,  wherewith  all  the  vifcera  and  the  inteflines  were  cover'd,"  I  beheve
that  it  was  the  periton£um,  hotwithftanding  it  might  pofiibly  have  the
omentum  agglutinated  to  it.  But  this  you  will  better  judge  of  yourfelf,  for
you  have  both  an  obfervation,  and  a  fcholium,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (t)^  in
which  fome  parts  of  this  hiftory  are  contain'd.

48.  And  I  would  moreover  have  you  read,  very  attentively,  in  the  fame
book,  two  obfervations  of  Paawius  {ii)^  and  one  of  Dodonsus  (x):  and  when
you  read  them  I  would  have  you  obferve,  whether  any  fufpicion  begins  to
arife  in  your  mind,  that  any  one  thereof  relates,  in  fome  meafure,  to  the
diibrder  whereof  I  treat  at  prefent.  For  Paawius,  in  two  hydropic  wornen,
one  difl"ecled  in  the  year  1,601,  and  the  ether  in  the  year  following,  found
"  not  the  leaft  traces"  of  the  fpleen,  kidneys,  and  liver  itfelf;  except  that,' in
one  of  them  "  the  venous  du6ts  only,"  of  this  laft-mention'd  vifcus,  "  re*
^'  main'd,  and  they  but  very  few  in  number."

How  much  lefs  furprizing  is  it,  if  we  fufpeft  that  the  peritonseum  was
diftended  by  a  great  quantity  of  water ;  and  that,  inwardly,  in  thefe  places

{f)  Conf.  339.  (i)  Obf.  cit.  12.  §,  2.

(q)  Seft.  cit.  obf.  12.  §.  6.  C")  Sea.  cit.  obf.  70,  &  71.

(r)  Cent.  3.  obf.  med.  6.  {x)  Ibid.  obf.  20.  §.  iq,
(')  Obf.  med,  dec.  lo.caf.  7.  cum  fchol.

U  u  2  where


332  Book  III. Of  Dikafes  of  the  Belly.

where  it  happen'd  to  be  moft  attenuated,  and  lefs  conneded  with  Tome  of
the  vifcera,  it  had  buril:  -,  and  that  where  it  was  not  thus  attenuated  it  had
remain'd  ;  and  that  therefore  fome.of  the  vifcera  appear'd,  in  fome  meaiure,  but
others  were  entirely  hid  ;  and  that  thefe  few  veins  belong'd  to  the  peritonseum
itfelffj):  and  that  Paav/ius,  in  a  very  hafty  "  opening  of  the  belly,"  as  he
himfelf  fa^'s  it  Was,  the  bodies  being  in  a  very  bad  ftate,  had  not  inquir'd  ac-
curately into  the  cafe.  And  Dodon^eus,  in  regard  to  a  woman  who  had
been  troubled  for  two  years,  with  a  very  confiderable  tumour  in  her  belly,
which  when  open'd  did  not  difcharge  water,  but  black  inteftinal  fordes,  like
thofe  which  have  lain  in  dunghils ;  and  thefe  in  the  quantity  of  more  than
fixty  pounds ;  readily  confcffes,  that,  in  fuch  a  confufion  of  filthinefs,  it  was
not  pofTible  to  find  out  from  what  injur'd  inteftine  they  had  proceeded;  yet
that  all  the  vifcera,  except  the  omentum,  which  had  been  diiTolv'd  into  putrid
fragments,  were  entirely  found  :  but  that  the  peritoneum  was  fifllir'd,  in
fome  places,  from  the  fuperior  to  the  inferior  parts.

Here,  I  confefs,  it  is  not  at  all  to  be  wonder'd  at,  that  the  feces  had
fiow'd  out  of  the  inteftine,  which  was  at  length  injur'd,  and  had  polluted
the  waters  of  a  dropfical  woman,  which  had  been  long-colledted.  But  it  is
very  furprizing,  that  ib  large  a  tumour  of  the  belly  had  afflifled  the  patient
for  fo  long  a  time,  "  with  a  healthy-colour'd  countenance,  without  any
"  marks  of  difeafe  appearing  in  the  urine,"  and  without  any  fwelling  of  the
feet.  Thefe  are  marks,  as  we  fhall  fee  below  (z),  of  the  dropfy  of  the  peri-
tonaeum, wherewith  this  alfo  agrees  much  more  eafily,  that  the  vifcera  fhould
preferve  their  foundnefs  for  fo  long  a  time.  Moreover,  that  the  peritoneum,
being  driven  inwards,  may  adhere  to  fome  inteftine,  and  communicate  its
difeafe  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  fuffer  the  feces  to  pafs  over  into  the  fluid
■with  which  the  peritoneum  is  diftended,  the  obfervation  of  the  celebrated
Chomel  (a) ;  which  was  taken  from  a  woman  alfo,  whofe  belly,  like  the
other  woman's  in  queftion,  had  begun  to  fwell  after  child-birth ;  demon-
ftrates.

I  fhould  fuppofe,  therefore,  that  you  may  eafily  fufpeft  the  peritoneum
to  have  been,  at  length,  burft  afunder,  as  they  faw  it ;  and  an  afcites  to  have
been  fuddenly  brought  on,  from  a  long  dropfy  of  this  membrane  {l^} ;  and
that  the  injury  of  the  inteftine  being  increas'd  at  the  time  of  this  rupture,
the  feces  had,  during  the  latter  days  of  the  difeafe,  fiow'd  in  great  quantity
into  the  cavity  of  the  belly.  And  this  obfervation  of  Dodoneus  was  pub-
lifh'd  by  him,  together  with  others,  in  the  fame  year  in  which  Achglzius
made  his-,  that  is  in  158 1:  for  it  is  very  evidently  a  typographical  error,
■where,  m  Lindenius  Renovatus,  his  obfervations  are  faid  to  have  been  publilh'd
in  the  year  151 8,  as  it  is  acknowledg'd  that  the  author  was  born  in  the  year
1517:  which  is  a  circuraftance  I  ftiould  have  taken  no  notice  of  here,  if  I
had  not  obferv'd  that  the  fame  error  had  alfo  pafs'd  into  the  Bibliotheca  Scrip-
ionim  Medicorum.

An  obfervation  was  alfo  extant  in  Riolanus  (c),  and  not  only  in  the  laft;
editions  of  his  Anthropographia,  "  of  water  being  extravafated  betwixt  thepe-

(j)  "Vid.  infra,  n.  56.  ia  fin.  (bj  Vid.  infra  n.  52.

(z)  N.  58.  -  (cj  Vid,  fupra  n.  33,  in  fin.

(fl)  Mem.  de  I'acad,  r.  des  fc.  a.  jyzS.

"  ritonaeum.


Letter  XXXVJII. Article  49.  ^^3

^*  ritonsum,  and  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen."  But  left  you  fhoiild  fay  that
k  ought  to  be  explain'd,  in  the  fame  manner  as  I  have  explain'd  thofe  words
of  Donatus  (d),  I  chofe  rather  to  pafs  over  it  in  this  place.

49.  Finally,  in  the  year  1651,  the  difeafe  we  arc  fpeaking  of,  was  feen  by
Tulpius,  and  foon  after  communicated  to  the  public,  under  the  new  name
of  Hydrops  Peritonei  {e)  ;  in  which  publication  it  is  exprefly  affirm'd,  "  that
"  all  the  congeries  of  waters  had  lain  betwixt  the  two  coats  of  the  peri-
"  tonseum,  which  had  put  on  the  thicknefs  of  the  ring-finger."  The  fame
hiftory,  left  you  fhould,  like  a  certain  perfon,.  believe  it  to  be  another,  was
publilh'd  afterwards  by  him  who  diftecled  the  body,  Job  Meekren  (f)  ;  but
he  publifti'd  it  more  at  large,  and  told  us  that  VValseus  was  the  only  one,
out  of  fo  great  a  number  of  phyficians,  who  had  conjeftur'd  the  true  fitua-
tion  of  this  dropfy,  while  the  patient  was  yet  living.  Neverthelefs,  Tulpius
has  fomething  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  that  more  full  defcription :  for
which  reafon  his  defcription  might  alfo  have  been  transfer'd  into  the  Sepul-
chretum,  and  that  diftinftly  from  the  other  ;  rather  than  that  one  fliould
have  been  made  of  them  both,  as  you  will  fee  is  done  by  Stalpart  (g),  in
fuch  a  manner,  that  you  are  often  ignorant  Vv'hat  Tulpius,  and  what  Mce-
krenius,  has  faid.

Bogdanus  {h)  alfo,  in  a  woman  diflefted  by  him,  obferv'd  the  peritonseum'
to  be  "  of  the  thicknefs  of  a  man's  thumb,  rugous  and  rigid;"  which  circum-
ftance,  together  with  the  remarks  that  are  immediately  added  of  the  vifcera,
are  very  improperly  omitted  in  the  Sepulchretum  (i).  But  he  has  aflerted
that  there  was  a  fluid  like  lees  of  oil,  not  contain'd  betwixt  the  coats  of  the
peritonaeum,  but  "  contain'd  betwixt  the  coat  of  the  mufcles  of  the  abdo-
"  men,,  and  the  peritoneum."  That  is  to  fay,  what  Tulpius,  and  moft
others  after  him,  took  for  the  exterior  lamina  of  the  pcritonjeum,  he  took  for
the  coat  of  the  mufcles,  with  Berengarius  (k),  who  taught  formerly  thus  :.
"  It  is  true  that,  as  far  as  appears  to  the  fenfes,  there  is  one  very  thin  pel-
"  licle,  betwixt  the  true  fiphac"  (that  is  the  peritonseum)  "  and  the  broad.
"  mufcles  of  the  belly  -,  particularly  in  the  flefhy  part  of  the  mufcles :  which,
"  pellicle  is  the  panniculus  that  Involves  the  mufcles,  and  other  parts  round
"  about."

And  I  fee  that  this  pellicle  is  now  fuppos'd,  by  many,  to  eonftitute,  in*
part,  the  cellular  contexture  of  the  peritonaeum;  which  cells  being  ruptur'd
by  the  diftending  water,  a  cavity  is  made  "  betwixt  the  peritonseum,  and
"  the  tendons  of  the  tranfverfe  mufcles,"  or,  as  others  more  properly  fay,..
"  and  the  tranverfe  mufcles."  But  whether  the  peritonaeum  has  no  exterior
lamina,  befides  this  contexture ;  or  whether  this  contexture,  itfelf,  may  not
be  call'd  a  lamina,  it  is  not  a  proper  occafion  now  to  enquire.  It  is  fufficient
to  have  fhown,  that,  before  thefe  latter  times,  there  were  not  wanting  fucb
as  plac'd  the  feat  of  this  dropfy  betwixt  the  peritonaeum,  and  the  mufcles.
It  is  true,  in  what  year  Bogdanus  wrote  thefe  things  1  do  not  know :.  but  they
were,  however,  publifh'd  by  Bartholin  (/),  in  the  year 1665. Yet  eveii'

((^)  Supra  n.  46.  {h)  Obf.  ibid.  cit.

(e)  Obf.  fupra  ad  n.  46.  cit.  {i)  Seft.  hac  21.  obf.'  12.  §'.  4.

(/■)  Obf.  med.  chir.  c.  52.  fAJ  Comment.  5.  in  Mundin.  anat.-

fgj  Infchol,  fupra  ad  n.  46.  cit.  flj  In  z.  edit,  cultri  anat.  LyferL

2  -  twelVe


334-  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

twelve  years  before,  it  was  not  doubted  by  Olaus  Rudbeck  (m),  but  a  drop-
fical  tumour  might  be  generated  "  betwixt  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,
"  and  the  peritoneum."  And  in  the  year  1667  Gerard  Blafius  (n)  found
water  in  the  body  of  a  virgin,  "  betwixt  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  and
"  the  peritonasum."

Yet  this  author  thought  that  the  fame  thing  might  alfo  happen,  betwixt
the  two  laminse  of  the  peritoneum.  And  this  would  be  faid  to  have  hap-
pen'd  in  moft  of  the  obfervations,  if  they  who  fay  that  the  cellular  contexture
is  broken  afunder,  had  not  in  their  power  to  anfwer,  that  the  external  part
of  this  texture,  which  adheres  to  the  mufcles,  is  frequently,  at  that  time,  be-
come fo  thick,  and  fo  denfe,  as  to  be  taken  for  another  lamina  of  the  peri-
toneum, and  even  fometimes  for  the  whole  peritonaeum  :  which  feems  to
have  happen'd  to  Hoechftetter  (o),'and  others,  among  whom  is  Paulus  Mothius,
■whofe  obfervation  on  a  matron  is  fo  propos'd  by  Bartholin  (p),  as  if  a  great
<iuantity  of  water  had  been  coUefted  betwixt  the  peritonasum,  and  a  pretty
denfe  membrane  covering  all  the  vifcera,  and  filled  with  copious  and  large
veins  ;  in  which  membrane,  a  large  abfcefs  had  been  form'd  about  the
region  of  the  liver  :  whereas  three  lefler  abfcelTes  occupied  the  lower  part  of
the  membrane,  near  to  the  groins.

This  obfervation  was  publifli'd  in  the  year  1657.  And  I  have  pointed  out
the  vear  in  which  every  one  of  the  obfervations,  that  I  have  mention'd,  was
made  public  :  in  order  to  convince  you,  that  the  greater  part  of  them  were
in  the  hands  of  all  perfons,  before  the  year  1688  :  in  which  year  Drelincurt
was  created  public  profeflbr,  in  that  place,  where  one  of  his  difciples,  when
he  wrote  at  large,  that  hiftory  of  the  dropfy  of  the  peritoneum,  received  from
Drelincurt,  which  is  added,  in  the  additamenta,  to  this  feftion  of  the  Sepul-
chretum  (q),  has  faid  what  is  quite  unworthy  of  his  very  learned  preceptor,
*'  that  not  the  leaft  fhadow  of  a  fimilar  event  is  extant,  either  among  the  an-
"  cients,  or  among  the  moderns,  the  celebrated  Tulpius  only  excepted." '

50.  But  now  it  will  be  fufficient  to  point  out  the  obfervations  of  this
dropfy,  which  were  publifh'd  from  that  year  1688,  quite  down  to  the  year
1692,  in  which  Nuck(r),  the  fucceflbr  of  Drelincurt,  publifli'd  his  own-,  which
had  been  before  communicated  to  Stalpart,  and  publifli'd  by  him  (s).  And
there  were,  befides  thofe  of  Hoechftetter,  and  Blafius,  which  I  have  fpoken
of  above  (/),  the  three  which  you  will  fee  are,  as  moft  of  the  others  are,
transfer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  («),  from  Scultctus,  Helwigius,  and  Spo-
nius  :  to  thefe  you  will  add  one  of  Knifelius  (x),  which  you  will  not  be  furpriz'd
to  find  omitted  in  the  Sepulchretum,  when  you  obferve  that  the  obfervation
of  Nuck  is  wanting  alfo  !  and  from  the  time  that  Nuck  (y),  by  his  fkili,  and
induftry,  illuftrated  this  difeafe,  there  came  out,  in  the  firft  place,  three  ob-
fervations v/hich  are  copied  in  the  Sepulchretum,  one  of  Gahrliepius  (z),  a

(»;)  Exerc.  anat.  exhib.  duft.  hep.  aquof. {t)  N.  47.  &49.
c,  9.  («)  Seft.  haC2i.  obf.  12.  §.  i.  &  in  addit.

(«)  P.  I.  obf.  med.  i8.  obf.  25  &48.

(0)  Vid.  fupra  n.  47.  (x)  Apud  Zeller.  diff.  de  vaf.  lymph,  admin.

If)  Cent.  4.  hift.  anat.  25,  c.  1.  n.  13.
(y) Obf.  41.  (jij  C.  fupra  ad  n.  46.  cit.

{r)  (z)  In  cit.  addit.  obf.  8 1 .

{s)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  46.

fecon4


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  50.  23 S

fecond  of  Drelinciirtr,  which  I  mention'd  juft  now(^),  and  a  third  of  Simon
Zylii-is,  which  isjoin'd  with  the  1  aft.

But  the  other  oblcrvations  could  have  no  place  in  the  Sepulchretum,  in
confequence  of  their  being  publiih'd  after  the  fecond  edition  thereof;  that  is  to
fay,  thofe  which  were  given  by  feveral  authors,  one  by  each  :  as  by  Littre
(^)  in  the  firft  place,  who  added  an  explanation  of  the  difeafe,  its  figns,  prog-
nofis,  and  cure,  with  more  accuracy  than  others  to  that  time  -,  and  after-
wards by  Hieronymus  Laubius  (c),  Lucas  Schrockius  (d),  John  Palfin  {e),,
from  the  communication  of  Favelct,  and  by  other  celebrated  men,  as  Jo.
Georg.  Hoyerus  (f),  Jo.  Hermann  Furftenau  (g),  Jo.  Chriftoph.  Pohlius  {b),.
and,  finally,  by  jo.  Henr.  Refpingerus  {i).  The  obfervations,  therefore,  of
thefe  authors,  and  of  all  thofe  who  are  mention'd  above,  were  in  my  hands,
when  I  laid  to  you,  and  did  not  in  the  leaft  doubt,  but  others  might  exift
befides,  both  of  the  antients  and  the  moderns.

Among  the  reft,  neverthelefs,  do  not  imagine  that  I  here  forget  to  re-
count the  obfervation  which  Chomel  (k)  has  given,  greatly  to  the  praife  of
his  fkilfulnefs  and  dexterity,  where  he  alfo  adds  a  fecond  ;  but  both  of  them,
^taken  from  the  living  body  only.  I,  however,  in  this  recital,  according  to.
the  order  of  time,  have  purpofely  omitted  to  number  them  amongft  the-
others,  as  I  alfo  have,  two  in  particular,  which  were  produc'd  by  Nuck  (/) ;
one  from  Bartholin,  as  if  it  had  been  his,  and  not  Brechtfeld's  •,  and  another
from  a  phyfician  who  was  his  friend  ;  not  becaufe  I  judge  thern  to  be  without
their  ufefulnefs  to  thofe  who  treat  of  this  difeafb  (for  I  mylelf  have  made  ufe:
of  one  of  them,  as  far  as  was  proper,  above,  and  fhall  perhaps  make  ufe  of
one  below)  but  becaufe  neither  of  them  is  confirm'd  by  anatomical  infpec-
tion.

But  thefe  four  laft-mention'd  obfervations,  and  others  of  the  fame  kind,,
which  will  be  produc'd  below,  were  taken  from  women,  as  the  others  were
alio;  not  only  thofe  that  are  pointed  out  by  Rudolphus  Jacobus  Camerarius.
(m),  who  had  taken  notice  of  the  very  fame  thing,  but  all  the  others,  more-
over, that  have  hitherto  been  mention'd  by  nie,  or  will  be  mention'd  here-
after :  infomuch  that  as  yet,  if  you  except  juft  one  example  (n),  a  dropfy
of  the  peritoneum  has  not  been  obferv'd,  except  in  the  female  fex.  Of
which  circumftance,  and  of  others,  that  I  have  peculiarly  obferv'd,  in  com--
paring  fo  great  a  number  of  hiftories  with  each  other,  I  iliall  fay  fomething;
prefently,  after  I  have  firft,  of  all  the  Italians,  as  far  as  I  know,  added  the  two.
hiftories  which  1  promis'd  you  -,  left  you  ftiould  fuppofe,  tliat,  as  out  of  all
thefe  women  there  was  no  Italian,  our  women  are  not  fubjefl  to  this  diforder;
which  is  pretty  rare  indeed,  fo  that  neither  Valfalva,  nor  I,  have  hitherto  lit  on^
it  in  difleftion  ;  yet  not  fo  rare,  but  that  our  Mediavia  has  feen  it  twice  in:
this  hofpital,  and  communicated  both  of  the  obfervations  to  me,  in  the  fol-
lowing  manner.

('a j  N.. 49.  in  fin.  (^)  Earund.  t.  8.  in  obf.  78.

(HJ^  Mem.,  de  l'acad..r.  des  Cc.  a.  1707-  (/;>)  Ibid.  obf.  in.

C<r)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  4.  obf.  162.  (/)  Aft.  Helvet.  vol.  i.,

{d)  Earund.  cent.  5.  obf.  23.  (vf)  Me:.n.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  17:8,

fs)  Anat.  du  corps  hum.  p.  i.  tr.  z.  ch.4.  (/)  C.  cit.

C/J  Ad.,  n.  c,  tom,.4.  obf.  32.  &  torn,  5,  in  CmJ  Bigaobf.  med,  c.  i.

obf.  6S.  («)  Yid.  n.  59.

5U  A


336  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

51.  A  woman  not  yet  advanc'd  in  age,  and  of  a  good  complexion,  had  3.
tumour  of  the  whole  belly.  She  faid  that  before  this  happen'd  to  her,  a  kind
of  tumour  might  have  been  felt  at  the  left  fide  ot  the  navel,  unequal  in  its
furtace,  and  of  fuch  a  magnitude,  that  it  equall'd  almofh  the  breadth  of  her
hand,  when  laid  upon  it.  When  flie  was  fuppos'd  by  fome  to  have  an
afcites,  for  this  very  reafon,  which  was  doubted  of  by  others  on  account  of
the  natural  colour  of  her  face,  fhe  died.

The  tranfverfe  mufcles  of  the  abdomen  being  cut  into,  a  great  quantity  of
veryftinking  water  burftforth,which  was  feparated,  from  the  cavity  of  the  belly,
by  the  peritonseum.  This  being  exhaufted,  the  tumour  of  which  the  woman
had  fpoken  came  into  view  -,  having  been  generated  in  the  peritoneum,  and
confifting  of  two  or  three  large  bladders,  as  it  were :  the  parietes  of  which
were  fo  thick,  that  upon  d-rawing  out  the  water  they  contain'd,  they  did  not
at  all  fubfide,  or  coUapfe.

52.  Another  woman,  about  twelve  years  after  the  former,  that  is  in  the
year  1725,  came  into  the  hofpital  in  confequence  of  her  being  troubled  with
a  difeafe  no  lefs  inveterate,  but  even  more  fo.  For  flie  faid  that  when  fhe
was  forty  years  old,  and  fhe  was  at  this  time  in  her  fiftieth  year,  fhe.  was
troubled  with  certain  tumours  in  the  upper  part  of  her  belly,  which  lay  at  a
diftance  from  each  other,  and  were  not  free  from  pain,  if  they  were  touch'd:
and  that  thefe  tumours,  notwithflanding  a  great  number  of  different  remedies
were  applied,  both  externally,  and  internally,  had  increas'd;  and  flie  had  con-
tinually grown  worfe.  Even  then,  although  the  whole  abdomen  was  dif-
tended,  it  was  eafy  to  diftinguifh  the  tumour  with  .the  eye,  as  well  as  with
the  hand  ;  for  the  tumours  that  had  been  before  dicjoin'd,  had  coalefc'd  into"
one  unequal  tumour,  which,  when  touch'd,  gave  pain,  and  was  plac'd  betwixt
the  cartilage  enfiformis,  and  the  navel  :  yet  fo  as  to  touch  neither  of  them.
The  colour  of  the  fkin,  in  that  part,  was  the  fame  as  in  others ::  and  if  you
attempted  to  lay  hold  of  it  with  your  finger,  and  raife  it  up,  you  could  not
do  it;  fo  that,  for  this  reafon,  fome  fuppos'd  the  tumour  to  be  in  the  mufcles
of  the  abdomen  themfelvcs.  But  others ;  confidering  the  colour  of  the
countenance,  which  inclin'd  to  yellow,  and  the  very  great  difficulty  of  refpi-
ration  of  which  the  woman,  in  particular,  complain'd  •,  fuppos'd  it  to  relate  to
fome  diforder  of  the  vifcera.  Yet  there  was  no  mark  of  the  ftomach  or
inteflines  being  injur'd.  In  the  mean  while,  black  vomitings  being  added
to  the  flight  fever  with  which  fhe  was  troubled,  death  put  an  end  to  her  mi-
ierable  life.

The  integuments,  and  mufcles  of  the  belly,  which  was  obferv'd  to  be  lefs
tumid  than  it  had  been  in  the  living  body,  being  accurately  feparated ;  and
with  thefe  even  the  tendon  of  the  tranfverfe  mufcles  ;  a  thin  membrane  ap-  -
pear'd  to  lie  under  the  tendon,  and  flefh,  of  thefe  mufcles,  between  which,
and  another,  that  in  thicknefs  was  equal  to  one  line  of  the  inch  of  Bologna,
was  comprehended  a  cavity  containing  a  tumour,  not  only  form'd  on  the  ex-
ternal membrane,  but  alfo  extending  itfelf  downwards,  and  to  both  fides  ;  fo
as"  to  contain  a  great  deal  of  water,  in  colour  like  to  that  wherein  frefh  meat
Jias  been  walhi'd,  of  a  very  filthy  fmell,  and  of  a  purulent  thicknefs,  in  the
part  where  it  had  fubfided :  the  quantity  of  this  water  migkt  be  computad

at


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  53.  337

at  about  thirty  pints,  not  fo  much  from  that  which  was  found  in  this  cavity,
as  from  what  had  been  extravafated  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  ;  the  lower
membrane,  of  this  morbid  cavity,  being  eroded  over  againft  the  fVomach  :  and
this  I  fuppofe  to  have  happen'd  about  the  latter  end  of  the  difeafe,  from
whence  the  abdomen  appear'd  to  be  lefs  tumid.

However,  this  peculiar  tumour  of  the  epigaftrium  was  made  up  of  a  firm,
and  hard  fubllance,  of  a  white  colour  inclining  to  yellovv',  wherein -a  few  cells
were,  in  fome  places,  obferv'd.  And  the  membranes,  furrounding  the  cavi-
ty, had  already  begun  to  be  eroded  in  more  places  than  one,  and  to  grow
black  on  the  furfaces,  by  which  they  were  turn'd  towards  each  other  ;  and
on  the  fame  furfaces  they  were  rough,  and  unequal.  But  on  the  furface,  by
which  the  lower  membrane  was  turn'd  towards  the  belly,  it  was  fmooth,
unlefs  where  any  part  of  the  omentum,  and  the  large  inteftine,  was  connirdled
to  it;  which  connexion,  however,  was  not  very  firm.  There  was,  alio,  a
kind  of  fmall  rope,  as  it  were,  connefted,  on  one  hand,  with  the  fame
membrane,  and  on  the  other,  with  the  lower  vertebra  of  the  loins ;  which,
when  differed,  pour'd  out  blood.  Moreover,  the  inteftines  were  in  fome
meafure  infiam'd  :  but  the  omentum,  and  the  other  parts  of  the  belly,  were
found;  if  you  except  the  liver  being  of  a  pallid  colour,  and  grating,  as  it
were,  under  the  knife,  as  if  fandy  particles  had  been  mix'd  with  its  fub-
llance.

53.  Now  fince  we  have  a  fufficient  number  of  obfervations  on  the  droply
of  the  peritoneum  (to  let  afide  thofe  which  leave  fome  room  for  doubt)  to
compare  one  with  another ;  it  is  fomewhat  lefs  difficult  to  add  a  few  things  ia
relation  to  the  caufes,  nature,  fymptoms  and  cure  thereof.

In  relation  to  the  caufes  therefore  ;  where  Nuck  (o)  has  faid  that  the
branches  of  the  lymphsedufts  creep  betwixt  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  and
theperitonseum,  as  Rudbeck  (p)  had  alfo  laid  ;  and  even  has  clearly  demon-
ftrated,  that  they  run  betwixt  the  two  laminse  of  the  peritoneum  ;  and  purfued
his  invention,  by  fuppofing  that  thefe  branches,  being  obftrufted,  from  any
caufe  whatever,  are  form'd  into  hydatids,  from  which,  when  ruptur'd,  a
dropfy  of  the  peritoneum  arifes  ;  he  has  immediately,  alfo,  added  this,  that
gluttons,  and  women  who  bear  children,  are  particularly  liable  to  this
danger  of  obftruction.

For  that,  in  both  of  thefe  clafTes,  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  being  im-
moderately diftended,  give  a  refiftance,  on  one  hand  ;  and,  on  the  other,
the  ftomach,  and-  inteftines,  or  the  uterus,  by  its  fullnefs,  force  outwards  ;
fp  that  the  lymphatic  vefTels  being  intercepted  betwixt  this  prefllire,  and  that
refiftance,  it  is  eafy  for  us  to  conceive,  that  fome  of  the  neareft  branches,  of
thefe  canals,  may  be  fometimes  fo  diftended,  by  the  retarded  lymph,  as  to
be  burft  afunder.  And  indeed  in  many  of  the  obfervations  juft  now  quoted,
we  read  that  this  dropfy  had  happen'd  to  thofe  women,  who  had  been  mo-
thers of  many  children  ;  and  even  to  fome  a  little  after  abortion,  or  a  diffi-
cult birth,  as  in  the  oblervation  of  Knifelius  (q)  ;  and  indeed  immediately,
or  ahr.oft  immediately,  after  birth,  as  in  the  obfervations  of  Dodoneus  (r),

(0)  C.  9.  fupra  ad  n.  46.  ck.  (y)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  5c.

(p)  C.  9.  fupra  ad  n.  49.  cit,  (/•)  Cit.  ad  n.  4S.

Vol.  II.  X  X  and


33.8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

and  Chomei(*)i if  you  think  that  they  really  and  ftridlly  belong  to  this
clafs.

Yet,  although  I  readily  admit  uterogeftation  among  the  caufes  of  this
dropfy,  1  cannot,  however,  underftand  why  this  diforder  has  been  but  once
obierv'd  in  any  other  bodies,  but  thole  of  women.  Nor  were  all  thele  pa-
tients child-bearing  women  :  and  fhe,  of  whom,  Furfhenavius  (s)  gives  the
hiftory,  was  certainly  barren  -,  as  many  of  them  were  virgins,  which  is  de-
monftrated  by  the  hiftories  of  Hoechftetter  (0,  Stratenus  (u),  Drelincurt
(x),  Schrockius  (y),  Palfin  (2),  Hoyer,  (a),  and  even  Tulpius  {l>)  :  for
the  woman  defcrib'd  by  him  had  always,  even  before  llie  married,  had,
*•'  from  her  early  years,  a  very  tumid  (tate  of  the  belly,"  as  is  related  by
Meekrenius  (c).  Shall  we  therefore  return  back  to  that  other  caufe,  and
fuppofe  all  thefe  virgins  to  have  been  great  gluttons  ?  But  this  is  not  even
a  vice  that  happens  among  women,  except  very  rarely ;  and  as  to  the  males
among  whom  it  frequently  happens,  we  know  of  no  more  than  one  hitherto,,
who  has  been  found  to  be  affeited  with  tliis  diforder.

54.  You  will  conjefture,  perhaps,  that  another  caufe  ought  to  be  added,
which  is  peculiar  to  women ;  efpecially  that  which  Camerarius  hints  at  (i),  when
he  fays  that  he  had  read  "  in  almoft  all"  the  hiftories  of  this  difeafe,  that  the
bag,  in  which  the  water  was  contain'd,  had  been  connedled  with  the  fide  of
the  uterus  in  particular,  or  its  appendages  ;  therefore  that  he,  in  the  woman  de-
fcrib'd by  him,  had  deriv'd  from  thence,  the  origin  of  the  bag,  which  was
DOt  fo  much  connefted  in  any  other  part,  as  in  the  feat  of  one  of  the  ovaria,
and  of  the  tube,  which  two  parts  were  likewife  wanting.  Thus  his  ion,  alfo,
after  that  (f),  defcrib'd  the  beginning  of  another  bag  connefted  with  the
right  ligaments  of  the  uterus,  and  the  right  ovarium ;  or  rather  with  their
fituation,  or  remains,  as  they  themfelves  were  obliterated.

But  I  fee  that  Meekrenius  (fj  had,  before,  obferv'd  the  fame  ovary  to  be
deficient ;  and  even  its  tube  producing  itfelf  into  the  peritonjeum,  of  which
the  bag  confifted,  and  degenerating  into  it ;  as  he  has  reprefented  by  a  figure  :
and  that  Gahrliepius  (g)  had  made  uie  of  this  very  fame  word,  when  he  fig-
nified  that  the  fame  parts,  and  the  ligament  which  lies  betwixt  the  ovary,  and
the  tube,  were  carried  away  into  the  peritonseum,  which  was  continued  from
thence,  and  in  which  many  bags  were  comprehended.  I  omit  others,  and
among  thefe  Laubius  (h),  by  whom  the  fac  of  the  peritoneum,  which  he
defcribes,  is  faid  to  have  a  very  firm  connexion  about  the  fundus  uteri,
though  eafily  feparable  in  other  parts,  by  the  fingers  alone  :.and  even  Littre
(i),  the  interior  membrane  of  whofe  fac  was  connedied  with  no  other  vifcus,
but  with  the  extremity  of  the  left  Falloppian  tube-,  which  being  firmly  fix'd
to  it,  had  been  fo  ftretch'd  as  to  become  twice  as  long  as  it  naturally  is.

But  I  cannot  help  taking  notice  of  Sponius  (^),  as  the  obfervation  he  has
communicated  fpealis  of  a  fac,  that  could  not  only  be  feparated  from  all  the-

(*)  Cit.  ad  n.  48.  (,i) (f)  Ad  n.  46..

Is) Ad  n.  50.  C^J  Ad  n.  50.

I^tj  Ad  n.  47.  (e)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  i..  obf.  160,

(,a) Ad  n.  46.  (fJ  Cit.  ad  11.  46.

(at)  Ad  n.  49.  fgj  [h)  A  J  n.  50.

(yj (5:) (aj  Ad  n.  so.  (/) {k)  Ibid.

c  vlfcera


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  55.  339

vjfcera  without  laceration,  except  from  the  fame  tube  from  which  it  was
continued,  but  even  communicated  with  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  fo  that  the
patient  had  a  continual  dripping,  from  her  genital  parts,  of  a  ferum  of  the
fame  kind  with  that  which  the  fac  icfelf  contain'd,  in  the  quantity  of  a  hun-
dred and  forty  pints ;  the  communication  being  alfo  confirm'd  by  the  probe,
it  feem'd  probable  that  the  tube  had  produc'd  its  parietes  into  the  parietes
of  the  fac.  And  Camerarius  the  father,  who  had  mention'd  moft  of  thefe
alfo,  hinted  at  a  method,  after  fome  one  of  our  countrymen,  by  which,  if
the  return  of  the  blood,  from  the  ovary,  is  obftrufted  in  the  fpermatic  vein,
the  ferum  may,  by  its  feceffion  from  hence,  in  confequence  of  its  creeping
betwixt  the  two  laminse  of  the  peritonseum,  infinuate  itfelf  between  thefe'
two  laminze,  according  to  the  experiment  of  Lower  (/) ;  and  thus,  by  disjoin-
ing them,  begin  to  form  the  fac.

But  notwithftanding  I  acknowledge  thefe  obfervations  to  be  true ;  and  even
confefs  the  caufe,  if  explain'd  a  little  more  fully,  and  accurately,  than  I  have
done  here,  to  be  probable  alfo ;  and  ^e  that  it  may  be,  likewife,  farther
transfer'd  to  other  veins,  fometimes,  tfmt  run  in  this  fituation  ;  yet  we  either
conceive,  or  know,  that  the  ovaria,  the  tubes,  and  the  uterus,  were  quite
xinaffedted  in  this  dropfy,  according  to  the  obi'ervations  of  Helwigius  (?«),
Kniielius  (n),  Pohlius  (o),  and  Mediavia  (p) :  and  what  relates  ftill  more  to  the
fubjeft  in  queftion,  it  is  not  certain  that  they  were  difeas'd  in  any  of  the  virgins
who  have  been  fpoken  of,  if  you  except  one:  and  even  it  fufficiently  appears
that  they  were  not  affefted  in  moft  of  thefe  patients,  as  all  the  vifcera  of  the
belly  are  faid  to  have  been  found.  Since  thefe  then  were  not  child-bearing
women,  nor  had  any  thing  in  the  uterus,  or  its  appendages,  which  could
give  an  origin  to  this  difeafe,  that  was  peculiar  to  women  ;  it  is  evident  that
it  is  neceflary  to  add  fome  other  caufes,  to  thofe  two  which  I  have  mention'd,
that  are  either  proper  to  the  female  lex,  or  are  more  common  among  that
fex  than  ours.

§§.  But  while  you  are  inquiring  after  others,  I  will  reckon  up  a  few  ;  aa,
for  inftance,  the  conflux  of  the  blood,  every  month,  into  the  inferior  parts
of  the  belly ;  their  fedentary  life,  which  is  not  quite  fo  proper  to  promote  its
return  ;  the  more  weak  refiftance  of  the  female  body,  againft  caufes  of  difeafe,
whether  external  or  internal  •,  and,  in  conjunction  with  this,  that  moft  vile  and
deteftable  cuftom  of  confining  the  belly  with  ftays,  efpecially  when  they  are
hard  and  ftiff  i  vile  and  deteftable  cuftom,  I  fay,  becauii  no  difapprobation
can  be  more  fevere  than  the  extreme  mifchief  of  them  requires.

For  to  add,  to  the  other  inftances  of  detriment  caus'd  by  ftays,  that  are
taken  notice  of  by  the  celebrated  Winflov/ (f),  this  over  and  above  i  while
the  lower  part  thereof  continually,  and  clofely,  comprelTes  whatever  part  of
the  abdomen  lies  betwixt  the  terminations  of  the  thorax,  and  the  upper  edges
of  the  ofla  ilia,  it  is  eafy  to  conceive,  what  an  obftrudion  is  throv/n  in  the
way  both  of  tlie  lymph's,  and  the  blood's  motion,  in  thofe  veflels  alfo,  which
are  betwixt  the  mufcles,  and  the  peritonseum ;  efpecially  where  the  fto-
,  mach  and  inteftines ;  being  diftended  with  flatus,  at  leaft,  if  not  with 'meat

(/)  Trafl.  decorde  c.  2>  (/)  Supra  n.  52.  in  fin.

{'") (.")  (o)  Cit.  ad  n.  50.  ^^J  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc,  a.  1741'.

X  X  2  and


340  Book  III.. OfDifeafes  of  the  Bell/.

and  drink  ;  force  out  the-  abdomen  from  within,  and  prefs  it  againft  thefs
ftays.

But  if  the  lymph  or  the  ferum  be  not,  for  this  reafon,  extravafated  into
that  interftice,  in-  the  manner  I  have  mention'd  (r)  ;  pariicularly  in  thofe,
whole  fluid  or  firm  parts  are  difpos'd  to  it  more  than  they  are  in  other  per-
Ions ;  yet  it  may  happen  to  the  fame  perfons,  that  fome  part  of  the  retarded
lymph,  or  blood,  may  form  the.  beginnings  of  tumours  in  thofe  parts,
which,  being  incrcas'd  after  a  long  time,  may  divide  the  peritoneum  from  the
mufcks,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  branches  of  the  lymphatic  veflTels,  being
pull'd  away,  or  ruptur'd,  may  bring  on  that  dropfy,  which  the  conftridion,
and  preflure,  had  not,  of  themfelves,  brought  on  :  and  the  fame  branches
being,  at  length,  brought  to  fuppuration,  may  increafe  the  droply  by  pu-
rulent ichors.  I  perceiv'd  tumours  of  this  kind,  by  examining  the  epiga--
ftrium  with  my  hand,  in  a  matron  of  rank,  who  had  been  compell'd  to
wear  ftiff  ftays,  from  the  time  of  her  being  quite  a  little  girl  -,  and  thofe  fa
much  the  ftiffer,  and  more  tightly  Wd,  in  proportion  as  her  relations  were
more  afraid  of  her  being  diftorted  :  tncfe  tumours  were  as  yet  fmall  and  at  a
diftance  from  each  other  ;  and  1  immediately  perfuaded  her  to  wear  ftays  that
were  lefs  ftiff,  and  in  a  different  manner.

You  yourfelf  might  fee,  in  what  region  of  the  abdomen,  the  fame  tumours,
now  grown  large,  had  been  form'd,  in  the  two  women  whofe  hiftories  I
lafl  gave  you  (s).  Nor,  indeed,  were  the  tumours,  or  abfceflfes,  in  any  other
region,  which  Laubius  (t)  found  to  the  number  of  fix  -,  nor  the  larger  of  thofe
four  which  Mothius,  as  is  faid  above  (u),  found  growing  to  the  fac.  But
you  will  not  be  at  a  lols  to  conceive,  how  thofe  which  occupied  the  inferior
parts  of  the  iac,  in  the  fame  obfervation  of  Mothius,  or  in  the  obfervations
of  Nuck  (*),  and  Littre  (x),  might  pofTibly  derive  their  origin  from  thefe
ftays  ;  when  you  call  to  mind  the  lower  parts  of  them,  and  the  ftiff-pointed
part,  which  is  added  to  the  middle  of  them  before,  in  a  longitudinal  direc-
tioa :  for  by  thefe  the  region  of  the  abdomen  is  comprefs'd,  and  all  the  vef-v
fels  that  lie  there,  whether  lymphatic,  or  fanguiferous  ;  and  particularly  when
the  woman  is  in  a  fitting  pofture.

1)6.  As  among  the  caufes  of  this  dropfy,  we  have  admitted  tumours
form'd  in  the  peritoneum,  which  not  merely  by  pulling  afunder  the  parts,
as  I  faid  in  purfuance  of  the  opinion  of  others  only,  or  by  laying  an  obftacle  to-
the  motionof  the  lymph,  and  blood,  may  bring  on  this  difeafe  •,  but  alfo  may,,
v/hen  they  are  fuppurated,  increafe  it  by  the  addition  of  deprav'd.  ichors  ;
we  may  eafily  underftaad  this  to  be  a  corollary  taken  from  thence,  that,  in
order  to  explain  the  putrefaftion,  ftench,  power  of  eroding,  and  creating
pains,  which  are  often  found  to  exift  in  the  coUefted  water,  it  is  not  always
necefiary  to  accufe  the  long  ftagnation  of  that  water ;  on  account  of  which
the  faiine,  and  fulphureous,  particles  may  be  feparated  from  the  others,  and
occafion  thefe  effcfts.  But  if  ftagnation  coiild  always  do  this,  it  would  cer-
tainly have  done  it  in  a  great  degree,  after  four  years,  after  ten,  after  many
more,  as  in  the  obfervations  of  Camerarius  the  father  (y),  of  Schrockius  (z%.

(r)  N.  54.. ■  ■  .  («)  N.  49.

(s)  N.-5I.&5:z.  (*) (at) Cit.  n.50.

(/)  Cit.  n.  ,a.  00  (~)  Ibid.

and,


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  t^j,  341

and  of  Meekrenius  {a) :  yet  in  thefe  obfervations  were  none,  or  fcarcely  any,,
of  thefe  fymptoms  obferv'd.  And  there  had  even  been  neither  tumour,  nor
abfcefs.

However,  tumours  do-  more  frequently  appear,  either  form'd  of  a  glan-
dular matter,  or  difpos'd  in  the  manner  of  cells,  bladders,  or  globules,  as
you  will  fee  remark'd  by  Acholzius  (^),  Hoechftetter  (c),  Bogdanus,  (d),
Knifelius  (e)^  Mothius  (f),  Littre  (g),  Refpinger  (gg),  and  Mediavia  (b);
and  thefe  either  in  great  number,  as  by  the  firft  four,  or  even,  in  fome  places,
fo  gather'd  together  into  a  heap,  that,  according  to  the  obfervation  of
Acholzius,  "  they  were  equal  i-n  thicknefs  to  the  breadth  of  a  man's  hand."
And  Malphigi  (/),  where  he,  in  fome  meafure,  led  the  way  to  the  explica-
tion of  Littre  ;  auertcd  it  to  be  owing  to  the  glandular  nature  of  the  mem-
brane of  the  peritonseum,  that,  in  this  difeafe,  "  notwithftanding  the  dilata-
"  tion,  it  becomes  more  thick  than  is  natural  :"  for  he  fays  that  this  is  "  the
"  property  of  glandular  follicles,  when  affefted  by  difeafe:"  and,  indeed,  if
you  read  Schrockius  (k),  Laubius  (i),  Sponius  (m),  Drelincurt,  (n),  Nuck
(0),  and  Littre  (p),  you  will  fee  how  much  it  has  been  found  to  be  thicken'd;,
and  ftill  more  if  you  read  Knifelius  (q),  who,  in  one  place,  faw  it,  "  of
"  the  thicknefs  of  half  an  inch  ;"  but  lliil  much  more,  if  you  call  to  mind
th^  things  that  I  related  to  you  from  Tulpius  (r),  and  Bogdanus  (s)..

Wierefore,  if  you  fliould  choofe  rather  to  account  for  this,  increafe  in
thicknefs,  in  the  way  of  Malpighi,  you  will  eafily  conceive  how  much  the
fecretion  of  the  included  humour  is  increas'd,  in  confequence  of  an  increafe  ia
the  fecreting  organs ;  efpecially  when  you  attend  ta  the  great  dilatation  of  the
vefiels,  which  belong  thereto.  For  Bogdanus  faw,  very  plainly,  the  internal
epigaftric  veins,  and  their  "  extrem.ities,  to  have  tubercles  like  a  filbert,  as.
"  if  they  had  been  papilla,  and  even  notch'd  ;"  and  Knifelius  (i)  "  the  veins;
"  very  much  extended,  and  terminating  in  globules."  And  the  fame  dila-
tation, befide  the  hiftory  of  Mothius  given  above  (ti),  is  prov'd  from  what
Palfin  (x)  aflerts  of  the  mammary,  and  hypogaftric  veins  (though  perhaps.
he  meant  to  fay  epigaftric)  being  enlarg'd  to  the  thicknefs  of  the  little  finger.
And  how  much  the  blood-veflels,  betwixt  the  peritoneum,  and  the  abdo-
minal mufcles,  may  dilate  themfelves,  nothing  more  clearly  Ihows,  than  the
circumftance  related  by  Anthony  de  Pozzis  (y),  of  very  black  blood  beino-
tound  betwixt  them,  to  the  quantity  of  eighty  pounds,  in  a  plethoric  and,
at  the  fame  time,  dropfical  virgin.

Sy.  Thefe  fountains,  or  origins  of  the  fluid,  being  thus  added,  and  ex-
plain'd,  there  will  be  lefs  reafon  to  wonder  at  the  vaft  quantity  of  water,
which  has  been  found,  by  m,any  perfons,  in  a  dropfy  of  the  peritonsum  :  the
greateft  quantity  of  which  I  do  not  mention  here,  as  I  am  afraid  of  being  led;
into  fome  error,  by  the  meafures  being  different  among  different  nations..

(a)  N.  49.  (1)  Refp.  ad  epift.  de  recent,  medic,  ft.

(^)  W  N-47-  W  CO  W  W  roj  (/) (?)  Cit.adn..5o..

(4  N.  49.  (^;  CsJ  Ad  n.  49..

W  N.  ijo.  (_,j  Ad  n.  50.

ffj  N.  49.  cuj  Ad  n.  49.

CgJ  ffg)  N,  ;o..  (.A-) Ad.  n.  50.

(J;),  N.  51.  52.,  Q:j  Eph.  n,  c.  dec,  i a.  4.  obf.  4!-.


34-2  Book  III. Of  the  Dlfeafes  of  the  Belly.

But  the  difpofuions  of  the  fecerning  organs,  in  confequence  of  their  being
preternaturally  affefted,  join'd  with  the  various  conftitution  of  the  blood,
v/ill  diminifh  our  admiration,  when  we  read  that  a  different  tiind  of  humour,
or  fluid,  was  found  in  different  cafes,  inflead  of  a  limpid,  or  fluid  ferum  ;  lb
that  even  in  fome,  as  by  Gahrlicpius  (z),  and  Camerarius  the  Ton  (a),  it  was
found  to  be  like  jelly,  or  gluten  :  or  if  in  fome  it  has  been  found  lefs  de-
prav'd,  yet  in  others,  humours  of  the  moll  vitiated  kind  have  been
found,  and  ichor  proper  to  produce  ulcerations,  or  even  to  confum.e  the  very
parts  themfelves  ■,  if,  however,  in  the  woman  fpoken  of  by  Acholzius  (l^j,
the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen  were  really  almoft  annihilated,  and  not  rather
chang'd  into  any  other  form,  or  extenuated  by  their  emaciated  ftate,  as  in
the  cafe  given  by  Nuck  (c) ;  or  even  by  too  great  diftention,.  as  in  the  rela-
tion of  Gahrliepius  (d),  and,  as  it  m  part  feems  to  have  been,  in  the  obferva-
tion  of  Littre  (e).

58.  To  thefe  things  that  I  have  curforily  hinted,  in  regard  to  the  caufes,
and  nature,  of  this  difeafe,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  add  fomething  in  regard
to  the  figns.  You  will  know  it  from  the  afcites  by  thefe  marks :  fiirft,  be-
caule  it  increafes,  for  the  mofl  part,  more  flowly  than  that,  and  particularly
in  the  beginning,  as  almoll  all  the  examples  fhow;  among  which  I  know  not
why  fome  have  here  had  an  eye  to  the  obfervation  of  Blafius  (f),  vvhereiaMot
a  word  is  faid  of  the  time :  and  I  faid,  for  the  mofl  part,  that  I  may^ot
feem  to  you  to  be  in  an  error,  if  you  fhould  fuppofe  that  the  hifbories  of
Nuck  (g)  and  Chomel  (h)  belong  to  this  clafs  •,  the  firft  of  whom  faw  the  tu-
mour ot  the  belly  increas'd  to  a  very  great  fize,  "  in  the  fpace  of  a  month,"
and  the  latter  even  in  a  much  fhortcr  time.

In  the  fecond  place,  the  face,  in  the  difeafe  I  am  treating  of,  continues  to
have  its  natural  colour  ;  as  the  obfcrvations  of  Drelincurt  (i),  and  Littre  (k),
teach  us,  and  one  of  Chomel's  (I)  feems  to  hint:  and,  indeed,  Nuck  (m)
firft  exprefly  advanc'd  this,  as  one  of  the  figns  -,  although  I  fee  that  a  virgin
had  been  formerly  defcrib'd  by  Dodonieus  (n),  who,  through  the  whole  time
that  Ihe  was  troubled  with  a  tumour  of  the  abdomen,.  "  had  a  continually
"  elegant  and  lively  colour  of  her  face,  juft  as  in  health  j"  yet  the  tumour
was  from  urine,  which  the  bladder,  being  pierc'd  through  with  ulcers,  had
pour'd  out  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly.

'  In  the  third  place,  the  ftrength,  and  aftion  of  the  body,  agree  with  the
complexion,  as  is  telfified  by  the  fame  Nuck,  and  prov'd  by  examples ;  not
only  thofe  three  which  I  juft  now  fpoke  of,  but  alio  by  many  others,  and,
in  particular,  by  that  of  Meekrenius  (0),  who  remark'd  an  almoft  incredible
agility  with  that  weight,  and  even  utero-geftation,  and  regular  child-birth  ;
wliich  are  related  by  Laubius  (p),  fo  that  the  infant  liv'd  :  and  the  woman
fpoken  of  by  Scultetus  (q),  bore  a  child  three  tim.es,  and  "  always  with  a  pro-
"  per  evacuation."

(k)  Cit.  ad.  n.  je.  *  {'gj  {h)  Ad  n.  50.

(/>.) Ad  n.  54.  (ij l^k)  (I) (jn)  Ibid.

(b)  Ad  n.  47.  (»)  Medicinal,  obf.  c.  34.

v)  (^)  (^)  -Ad  n.  50.  (oj  Cit.  ad  n.  49.

if  J  Ad;  n,  49.  (/>)  {<})  Cit.  adn.  50.

The


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  58.  343

.  "tht  obfervation  of  the  menftriial  evacuations  being  duly  preferv'd  was  ftill
more  frequent,  as  in  thofe  three  authors  whom  I  quoted  in  the  firft  place,  in
regard  to  colour :  to  whom  you  may  add  Camerarius  the  father  {r),  and
Schrockius  (s)  -,  but  others  have  either  fallen  into  this  dropfy,  after  that  pur-
gation has  ceas'd  from  age,  or,  which  is  more  frequent,  after  its  being  fup-
prefs'd,  or  not  properly  regulated :  fo  that  married  women  have  thought
themfelves  pregnant,  and  virgins  have  had  their  reputation  fufpeded.  As  to
thirft,  and  the  quantity  of  urine  difcharg'd,  although  I  read  of  the  wo-
man defcfib'd  by  Nuck  (/),  "  that  notwithftanding  fhe  was  troubled  with  a
"  thirft,  and  drank  a  great  quantity  of  liquids,  for  the  moft  part,  fhe  made
"  neverthelefs  but  little  water  •,"  yet  in  others,  I  either  obierve  nothing  at
all  to  be  iaid  about  it,  or  it  is  faid,  in  general,  that  the  patient  had  liv'd
pretty  comfortably,  or,  at  leaft,  without  any  particular  uneafinefs,  that  great
load  of  belly  excepted  ;  or  It  is  even  exprefsly  faid,  "  that  the  urine  had  con-
"  tinu'd  unchang'd  at  the  time  of  its  difcharge,  in  its  confiftence,  colour,  and
"  fediment,"  as  by  Drelincurt  (a)  ;  and  in  the  fecond  obfervation  of  Chomel,
that  the  matron  had  no  thirft,  and  difcharg'd  her  urine  naturally  as  ufual :
and  I  fee,  befides,  that  in  the  woman  fpoken  of  by  Nuck,  the  urine  was
"  fomewhat  pale,"  and  not  faturated,  as  it  is  in  thofe  who  have  an  afcites ;
but  that  a  fmall  quantity  of  this  difcharge,  and  a  thirft,  have  been  remark'd,
in  the  difeafe,  after  having  made  a  confiderable  progrefs,  and  being  compli-
cated with  other  diforders,  particularly  with  calculi  of  the  kidnies.

For  when  the  difeafe  has  continu'd  a  long  time  ;  and  it  may  be  carried  on;
to  a  very  great  length,  even  to  the  fpace  of  many  years  (which  is  a  circum-
ftance,  of  itfelf,  fufficient  to  diftinguifh  this  diforder  from  the  afcites)  and  not
only  to  the  fpace  of  four  years,  as  Littre  (x),  and  others,  to  fix  or  leven  as-
Laubius  (y),  to  eight  as  Bogdanus  (z)  and  Knifelius  (a),  to  nine  as  Sculte-
tus{l^),  to  ten  as  Nuck  (c),  and  others,  have  feen  it;  but  it  is  even  certain^
as  is  fhown  above  (d),  that  it  may  be  born  for  more  years  than  thefe :  when,
the  difeafe,  therefore,  has  continu'd  a  long  time,  it  is  not  to  be  expefted  that
the  greater  part  of  the  good  fymptoms  fhould  remain.  But  it  is  fufEcient
that  there  have  been  moft  of  thefe  good  figns,  in  order  to  diftinguifh  the
one  from  the  other :  which  is  alfo  true  of  the  other  fymptoms  that  I  am  going
to  add.

For,  in  the  fourth  place,  there  was  no  fwelling  of  the  feet,  except  in  the
cafe  of  Gahrliepius  (e),  in  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe  ;  none,  except  near  the
clofe  of  it,  and  not  even  then  in  all :  no  wafting  of  the  other  parts,  and
of  the  body  in  general-,  no  difficulty  of  breathing;  no  (light  fever;  no  pain.
Yet  when  the  difeafe  is  far  advanc'd,^  all  thefe  fymptoms  are,  for  the  moft
part,  accuftom'd  to  come  on  ;  and  efpecially  if  with  the  water  there  are  in-
ternal tumours,  which  come  to  fuppuration,  and  the  fac  becomes  ulcerated  :
although  we  have  the  defcription  of  an  highly  emaciated  ftate  of  body  coming
on,  even without  thefe  fuppuratio-ns,  from  Drelincurt  (f) ; and  of  a  conci-

CrJ  OJ  (O  {u)  Ad  n.  50.  (i)  N.  56.

(.v) fj)  Ibid.  le)  Cit.adn.  5&.

(e) Ad  n.  49.  (hAAxi.  40,,
ia),  (b)  (c)  Ad  n.  50V  ^

.iifefal,^


344-  S(^ok  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

nual,  and intolerable pain, particularly  in the night-time, from Achol-
ziusf^;.

In  the  fifth  place,  medicines  are  of  no  advantage  :  and  whether  you  ftrive
to  increafe  the  difcharges  by  the  bladder,  or  inteftines,  the  tumour  of  the
belly  is  not  diminifh'd ;  but  the  ftrength  of  the  patient  is  rather  diminilli'd,
efpecially  if  any  violent  remedy  be  made  ufe  of;  and  her  miferies  are  en-
creas'd :  fo  that  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  an  inftance  of  any  one,
who  has  been  in  the  leaft  reliev'd,  for  any  fhort  time,  in  this  dropfy  (which
is  a  circumftance  that  happens  frequently  in  an  afcites)  not  to  fay  that  has  ever
been  perfeftly  cur'd.

59.  But  although  thefe  figns  may  be  of  ufe  to  diftinguifh  thofe  dropfies
one  from  the  other,  yet  I  do  not  know  of  how  much  advantage  they  may
be  in  diftinguilliing  this  of  which  I  am  treating,  from  another  peculiar  kind
of  dropfy.  For  I  have  obferv'd  that  the  fame  Nuck,  when  he  propofes  the
greater  part  of  the  figns  which  I  have  enumerated  •,  fo  that  if  they  are  ftill
good,  the  water  may  be  drawn  off  from  the  periton^Eum  •,  does  not  feem  very
well  to  have  remember'd  what  he  had  alTerted  in  the  chapter  preceding  (h).
I,  fays  he,  "  have  learn'd,  by  experience,  that  thole  women  whofe  face  is  of
"  an  agreeable  rofy  colour,  who  have  a  pretty  good  appetite  for  food,  drink,
■"  go  to  ftool,  and  make  water  without  any  confiderable  uneafinefs,  whofe
"  bodies  are  not  much  affefted  by  purgatives,  by  diuretics,  nor  by  diapho-
•"  retics ;  I  have  learn'd,  I  fay,  that  thele  women  generally  labour  under  a
"  dropfical  diforder  of  the  uterus,  the  Falloppian  tubes,  or  the  ovaries  •,  and
"  that  the  lymph  which  is  included  in  a  peculiar  fac,  can  be  carried  off  by  no
"  art:"  by  which  he  underftands  I'urgery  as  well  as  medicine.  And  as  to  the
other  figns  which  he  has  not  touch'd  upon,  you  eafily  fee,  by  the  light  of
xealbn  itfelf,  that  thefe,  alfo,  may  be  common  to  the  dropfy  of  thefe  parts,  and
of  the  peritoneum.

Let  us  fee,  therefore,  what  the  remaining  figns  of  the  dropfy  of  the  peri-
tonfEum  are.  For  they  are  thofe  which  are  taken  from  the  infpeftion  of  the
abdomen,  and  the  examination  thereof  with  the  hand.  And  that  certainly
would  have  been  the  moft  eafy,  and  natural,  which  1  remember  to  read  pro-
pos'd  by  a  certain  very  famous  man  -,  I  mean,  that  in  this  dropfy  there  is  al-
ways the  fmallefl  prominence  about  the  navel  :  becaufe  in  that  part  the
peritonjeum  cannot  be  feparated  from  the  tendons  of  the  mufcles.  But  the
cafe  feems  to  have  been  quite  different,  as  it  appear'd  to  Hoechftetter  fz^,  to
Drelincurt  (k),  and  to  Nuck  (I),  the  firft  of  whom  faw  the  navel,  in  this  dif-
eafe,  "  expanded,  and  altogether  dilated ;"  the  fecond  "  projefting  ;"  the
third  "  prominent,"  to  iuch  a  degree,  as  confiderably  to  exceed  the  fize  of  a
"  fift."  And  what  will  you  fay  to  this,  that  a  countrywoman  defcrib'd  by
the  celebrated  Brehmius  (in),  had  not  only  her  navel  promiinent  to  the  fize  of
a  goofe's  egg;  but  even  that  the  tumour,  being  fpontaneoufly  ruptur'd,  al-
ways pour'd  out,  on  every  other  day,  Iuch  a  quantity  of  limpid  and  inodo-

rgj  Ad  n.  47.  (i)

fb)  8.  Adenogr.  -  (/)  Ad  n.  ;o.

(i)  Cit.  ad.  n.  47.  .(«)  Ad,  n.  c.  toni.  8.  obf.  79.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  59.  345

rous  fernm,  that  the  large  tumour  of  the  belly  being  entirely  got  rid  of,  the
patient  recover'd.

But,  as  it  only  feems  "  moft  probable"  to  the  author,  that  this  was  a  dropfy
of  the  peritonseum,  it  is  proper  that  I  produce  a  more  certain  example,  and
one  that  is  confirm'd  by  anatomy,  as  I  generally  do,  and  that  from  the  cele-
brated Anhornius  (n).  A  young  man,  who  was  the  more  readily  fuppos'd  to
be  troubled  with  an  afcites,  becaule  he  had,  more  than  once  before,  labour'd
under  an  anafarca,  having  his  navel  grown  out  to  the  bignefs  of  a  fill,  and  in
confequence  thereof,  fpontaneoudy  ruptur'd,  had  a  great  quantity  of  ferum
difcharg'd  from  the  filTure,  fo  that  health  feem'd  to  be  reftor'd  ;  but  after
two  months,  the  navel  ftarted  out  again,  with  a  frefh-colle6i:ed  fluid,  which
was  a  fecond  time  difcharg'd :  finally,  a  third  time  the  tumour,  which  had
twice  vanilh'd,  diftended  the  abdomen  -,  but  as  he  was  now  become  tabid,  the
fluid,  which  was  again  difcharg'd  in  the  fame  manner,  was  of  no  effedl  in
preventing  the  fatal  period  of  the  difeafe.

By  difleclion,  no  ferum  was  difcover'd  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  but  what-
ever of  this  fluid  remain'd  was  found  "  betwixt  the  duplicature  of  the  peri-
*'  tonasum;"  where  the  fountains,  or  origins  of  it,  that  is  to  fay,  "  many  lym-
"  phatic  tubuli,  or  little  glandular  knots,  which,  when  prefs'd,  wept  a  limpid
"  water,"  were  alfo  found.  And  thefe  things  I  have  related  the  more  at  large
for  this  reafon,  becaufe  this  is  the  only  example  of  the  dropfy  of  the  perito-
njeum,  which  I  have  hitherto  been  able  to  meet  with  in  the  male  fex.  For  as
to  your  being,  perhaps,  ready  to  fuppofe,  on  reading  the  cafe  of  a  great
man  (o),  whofe  belly  fwell'd  in  the  decline  of  a  fever,  which  had  been  join'd
with  a  grievous  colic,  and  decreas'd  in  its  fize,  by  reafon  of  the  navel,  which
had  been  a  long-time  prominent,  being  fpontaneoufly  ruptur'd,  and  pouring
out  "  thirty  pints  and  more  of  true  and  very  foetid  pus,"  and  afterwards  a
confiderable  quantity  alfo  ;  a  fiftula  of  the  navel  remaining  behind,  with  two
fcirrhous  glands,  as  it  were,  at  the  fide  thereof;  as  to  your  being  ready  to
fufped  then,  that  this  cafe  ought  to  be  referr'd  to  the  clafs  of  dropfies  of  the
peritoneum,  I  would  have  you  firft  confider,  how  different  from  your  fufpi-
cion,  was  the  opinion  of  the  phyfician  who  was  far  the  moft  fldlful,  although
he  propos'd  the  matter  by  way  of  problem  ;  and  in  the  fecond  place,  that  al-
though the  morbid  matter  was  translated  into  the  fame  fituation,  wherein  that
dropfy  is  generated,  or,  if  you  pleafe,  coUeded  there,  yet  that  this  was  not
ferum  by  any  means,  but  real  and  true  pus.

And  I  have  not  prefum'd  even  to  enumerate  the  fingular  obfervation  of
GabbrielHus  (p)  on  a  woman,  among  the  examples  of  dropfies  of  the  perico--
neum,  notwithftanding  he  found  that  the  almoft  incredible  quantity  of  wa-
ter, had  not  been  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  but  "  betwixt  the  peritonseum
"  and  the  mufcles."  For  that  water  did  not  feem  to  me  to  have  been  fecreted
there,  which  could  be  carried  off^in  the  fpace  of  three  days,  by  the  ufe  of
feme  hydragogue  medicines,  in  fo  great  a  quantity,  that  the  vaft  tumour  of  the
belly  quite  fubfided,  which  I  have  faid  above  (q)  does  not  happen  in  this
Ipecies  of  dropfy. And  indeed  as  this  woman  had  her  dropfy  come  on  after

(a)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf. 100.  n.  z,  (p)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  5  &  6.  obf.  279.

(0)  Commerc,  litter,  a.  i735.hebd.  37.n.  2. (</)  N.  58,  in  fin.

Vol..  II.  Y  y  an


34^ Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

an  inflammation  of  the  fpleen,  that  vifcus  was  found  to  be  the  only  oner
which  was  difeas'd  ;  "  feme  ulcerous  rinuffes"  therein,  by  means  of  mem-
branes that  lay  between,  "  conftituting  a  kind  of  fmall  canal  •,  whereby  a  ferofity
"  was  tranfmitted  from  the  fpleen,  betwixt  the  peritoneum,  and  the  mufcles
"  of  the  abdomen."

But,  to  return  to  the  fign  taken  from  the  navel,  and  the  part  which
lies  neareft  to  it  round  about,  fubfiding ;  I  fliould,  rather,  in  conjundtion
with  Refpingerus  (r),  whom  I  have  already  quoted,  and  whofe  obferva-
tion,  alfo,  is  an  argimient  againft  this  fign  -,  I  fhould  rather,  I  fay,  believe,
that  fome  particular  cafes  had  been  conlider'd,  in  which  either  the  diforder
was  not  yet  far  advanc'd,  or,  at  leaft,  wherein  there  was  but  a  fmall  quantity  of
water.  From  whence  you  may  gather,  that  if  thofe  objections,  which  were
juft  now  made  to  this  fign,  could  not  be  of  any  force,  yet  that  it  would  be
of  no  advantage,  when  the  dropfy  of  the  peritoneum  did  not  extend  itfelf  to
the  region  of  the  navel  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  of  no  ufe  at  that  time,  in  or-
der to  diftinguifh  thofe  other  included  dropfies  (as  they  are  by  no  means
feated  betwixt  the  mufcles,  and  the  peritoneum)  from  this  of  which  I  am
fpeaking.  And  I  fear  the  fame  thing  of  other  figns  of  the  fame  difeafe,
which  are  propos'd  by  men,  in  other  refpefts,  very  learned.  They  are
thefe.

If  the  belly  preferves  nearly  the  fame  figure,  although  the  fituation  of  the
body  be  chang'd.  If  the  tumour  has  any  peculiar  circumfcription.  If  there
be  any  place  of  the  belly,  wherein  if  it  be  ftruck  on  one  fide,  no  ftroke,  no
fluftuation  are  perceiv'd  on  the  oppofite  fide.  But  to  begin  with  the  laft,
and  to  take  no  notice  that  Nuck  (s)  has  plac'd  among  the  figns,  or,  at  leaft,
among  the  good  figns  of  this  difeafe,  "  if  the  patient  feels  fcarcely  any  fluflu-
"  ation."  Hoechftetter  (()  has  remark'd  of  his  patient,  in  the  latter  part  of
his  Scholium,  that  the  great  tumour  of  the  belly,  when  ftricken  with  the
hand,  gave  forth  a  found  like  a  drum  -,  but  that  "  a  fluftuation  of  water"  had
been  "  never*'  perceiv'd :  and  Camerarius  the  father  (a)  has  faid,  that  not
even  in  the  body  of  a  woman  after  death,  that  is  when  we  are  at  liberty  to
handle  the  belly  more  freely,  and  to  ftrike  it  with  more  force,  did  it  feem  to
contain  any  thing  fluid,  rather  than  folid ;  or,  in  other  words,  "  no  fluftua-
"  tion  was  perceiv'd."  This  third  fign,  therefore,  will  be  of  no  advantage,
except  where  we  can  obferve  a  fluftuation.  And  the  fecond,  which  is  taken
from  the  peculiar  circumfcription  of  the  tumour,  will  not  be  of  any  advan-
tage, when  this  dropfy  fliall  diftend  the  whole  abdomen  to  fuch  a  degree,  that
"  the  belly  is  pretty  equally  tumid,  as  the  fame  Camerarius  obferves  ;  or
as  Drelincurt  faw  («■)  it,  "  equal,  not  acuminated,  or  tending  to  a  point,  ia
"  any  part,  or  protuberating  here  and  there  with,  little  rifings.'"

But,  when  the  tumour  ftiall  appear  to  be  bounded  within  a  certain  region,
it  will  not,  for  that  reafon,  be  altogether  plain,  whether  this  tumour  is  from
a  dropfy  ;  or,  if  from  a  dropfy,  whether  from  a  dropfy  of  the  peritoneum,.
or  of  thofe  pans,  of  which  Nuck  faid  it  was,  when  the  tumour  occupied  the

(>-) (s)  Cit.  ad  n.  50-.  {uj  [x]  Ad  n.  50.

(/)  Ad  n.  47.

lower


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  60, 6i.  347

lower  region  of  the  belly  :  although  hov/  high,  and  to  how  great  a  breadth,
the  dropfy  of  one  tube  may  extend  itfelf  fometimes,  that  obfervation  of  Mun-
-nickius,  which  is  publilh'd  in  the  Blhliotheca  Anatomica  (y),  fufficiently  fhows.
Lad  of  all,  in  regard  to  that  firft  fign,  it  will  be,  perhaps,  of  ufc,  when
the  water  confin'd  in  the  peritonaeum,  fhall  be  as  yet  in  very  fmall  quantity.
But  when  it  has  increas'd  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  the  belly,  as  you  fee  in  the
plate  of  Meekrenius  fz),  hangs  down  to  the  middle  of  the  thighs,  or  almoll
to  the  knees,  as  Helwigius  {a)  defcribes  it ;  and  even,  on  one  hand,  covers  the
•whole  breaft,  and,  on  the  other,  the  legs,  as  Palfin  reprefents  {b) ;  it  is  then
certainly  not  to  be  fuppos'd,  that  the  figure  of  the  belly  is  not  chang'd,  if  the
fituation  of  the  body  is  chang'd.  And  as  to  the  other  figns  which  are  added,
and  are  to  be  collefled,  after  the  water  is  drawn  off  by  the  furgeon,  by  the
probe,  by  examining  the  parts  with  the  hand,  and  by  injeftion  ;  befides  their
being  too  late,  they  are  alfo  of  fuch  a  nature,  that  they  may  indeed  ferve  to
diftinguifh  this  difeafe  from  the  afcites,  but  not  from  thofe  other  kinds  of
dropfy.

60.  Be  cautious,  however,  of  fuppofing  that  thefe  figns,  which  I  have  hi-
therto examin'd,  are  difapprov'd  by  me.  For  I  have  only  excepted  the  cafes
in  which  moft  of  them  may  be  of  no  effeft.  But  it  can  fcarcely  happen,
diat  all  of  them  are  ufelefs  in  moft  cafes  ;  efpecially  if  we  attend  clofely  to  the
firft  beginnings  of  the  difeafe,  and  accurately  confider  what  was  the  face  of
affairs  at  that  time  :  as,  for  inftance,  if  the  tumour  fhall  begin  from  the  epigaf-
trium ;  or  if  from  the  hypogaftrium,  fhall  neverthelefs  be  immoveable  while  the
woman  lies  down,  and  turns  herfclf  from  one  fide  to  the  other,  nor  fliall  give  any
fenfe  of  internal  weight  at  the  pubes,  when  fhe  ftands  upright,  nor  caufe  any
difficulty  in  making  water  :  although  when  the  difeafe  is  advanc'd,  there  may
be  marks,  from  whence  we  may  judge  certain  parts,  fay  the  uterus,  for  inftance,
not  to  be  affeded  •,  that  is  to  fay,  if  the  menfes  continue  to  be  properly  dif-
charg'd,  we  may  conje6ture  that  this  vifcus,  the  tubes,  and  theovaria,  are  not
opprefs'd  with  a  dropfical,  or  other  kind  of  tumour:  or  if  the  woman  feel  none
of  thofe  fymptoms  which  I  mention'd  juft  now.  In  fine,  the  intention,  and
ingenuity,  of  thofe  perfons  who  firft  deliver'd,  down  to  us,  the  figns  of  dif-
eafes,  are  highly  to  be  commended.  Yet,  at  the  fame  time,  it  is  our  bufinefs
to  compare  together,  a  greater  number  of  hiftories,  both  of  difeafes,  and  dif-
feftions,  than  they  had  it  in  their  power  to  compare  ;  that  from  thence  we
Eiay  learn  which  of  thefe  figns  may  be  us'd  the  moft  fafely,  and  when:  and,  on
the  contrary,  which  is  lefs  to  be  depended  upon,  and  apt  to  lead  us  into
error.

61.  Thus  even  in  the  cure  of  this  dropfy,  that  is,  the  dropfy  of  the  peri-
tonaeum ;  in  order  to  fay  fomething  on  this  head,  alfo,  as  I  have  promis'd ;
what  could  be  done  by  Tulpius  (c),  and  Meekrenius  (^),  better  than  to  extol
the  paracentefis  alone,  which  had  been  recommended  by  Walseus  and  Cofte-
rus,  in  a  living  woman,  againft  the  dropfy  of  the  peritoneum ;  after  having

(_)•)  Tom.  I.  in  adnot.  ad  Graaf.  de  muller. [a)  {/>)  Ad  n.  50.
organ,  ubi  de  ovidufl:.  ('cj  {d)  Cit.  ad  n.  49.

fzj  Ck.  ad  n.  49.

Y  y  2  examin'd


348  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

cxamin'd  the  nature  and  feat  of  this  diforder,  by  diffeftion.  For  without
doubt,  on  one  hand,  they  faw  that  other  remedies  were  of  noefFeft  ;  and,  on
the  other,  that  this  operation  might  be  perform'd  with  the  greateft  expedi-
tion and  fafety,  as  the  vifcera  were  entirely  feparated  from  the  water ;  and,
for  that  reafon,  found  :  from  whence  there  is  no  doubt  but  the  long  preferva-
tion  of  the  vigour  of  the  body,  together  with  its  capacity  for  adion,  is  to  be
accounted  for,  as  I  have  faid  already  (e).

Other  phyficians,  and  furgeons,  influenc'd  by  the  fame  kind  of  reafoning,
came  into  this  opinion  -,  Nuck  (f),  in  particular,  not  doubting,  but  the  rup-
tur'd  lymphasduds  may  be  clos'd  again,  in  coniequence  of  their  being  com-
prefs'd,  betwixt  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  which  contrad  themfelves,  and
the  laminae  of  the  peritonaeum  ;  which  in  an  afcites,  that  has  its  origin  from
the  rupture  of  lymphatic  veflels,  can  by  no  means  take  place ;  and  produc-
ing two  cures  of  the  dropfy  of  the  peritonaeum,  which  were  brought  about
in  this  way,  one  of  Amicus,  and  the  other,  which  he  fuppos'd  to  belong  to
this  clafs,  from  Thomas  Bartholin  :  to  which  he  would,  moreover,  have  added
others,  if  they  had  then  exifted;  as  that  which  the  celebrated  Degnerus  (g)
has  given  the  hiftory  of,  where  the  diforder  was  in  the  lower  part  of  the  ab-
domen, on  the  right  fide :  and  flill  more,  that  which  Brehmius,  whom  I
have  already  commended  {h),  relates-,  when  the  dropfy  was  in  the  whole  ab-
domen, and  which  nature  herfelf  perform'd,  by  a  great  difcharge  of  clear  wa-
ter in  the"  former  cafe  ;  and,  in  the  latter,  by  a  great  difcharge  of  limpid,  and
inodorous  ferum.

But  after  it  was  obferv'd,  that  the  peritonasal  fac  was  not  always  fo  dif-
pos'd,  as  it  was  feen  to  be  by  Tulpius,  and  Meekrenius,  but  was,  fome-
times,  fo  affefted  with  tumours,  abfcefles,  and  ulcers,  that  though  the  wa-
ter might  indeed  be  drawn  off,  the  fources  of  this  fluid,  neverthelefs,  and  the
pus,  could  not  be  fo  eafily  dried  up  ;  and  that,  for  this  reafon,  a  matron  of
whom  Littre  (i),  and  a  woman  of  whom  Laubius  fpeaks  (k),  could  not  be
fav'd,  although  the  former  had  the  water  drawn  off  thirteen  times  within
two  years,  and  the  latter  fixteen  times  within  ten  months  -,  fo  that  the  whole
quantity  of  fluid,  difcharg'd  by  this  laft  woman,  amounted  to  more  than
feven  hundred  and  twenty  pints :  then  this  method  of  cure  did  not  feem  to
be,  always,  fo  expeditious,  and  fecure,  as  it  had  at  firft  feem'd  ;  nor  was  it
without  reafon,  and  juftice,  that  they  chang'd  their  opinion.  And  that  this
will  appear  the  more  realbnable  to  you,  I  do  not  doubt,  as  there  are  fo
many  of  the  obfervations  I  have  produc'd  above  •,  and  thofe  even  from  for-
mer times,  wherein  thefe  diforders  of  the  peritonaeum  were  not  wanting.

Therefore,  befides  thofe  women,  whofe  ftrength  is  already  broken  down,
who  were  the  only  fubjedls  excepted  by  Tulpius,  and  thofe  whom  Nuck  had
excluded  afterwards,  for  various  reafons,  indeed,  but  all  referable  to  the  fame
head  nearly  -,  Littre  has  moreover  prudently  added  others,  admonifhing  us
with  how  much  danger  of  an  unfuccefsful  event,  we  undertake  the  cure  of
thofe  women,  in  whom  not  only  the  difeafe  is  very  inveterate,  and  very  much


(f)  N.  58.  •  W  Vid.fnpra.  n.  59.

(7)  Cit.  ad  n.  50.  (0  W  Cit.  ad.  n.  50.

(^)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  5.  obf.  2.


extended.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  62.  349

extended,  but  thofe  alfo  in  whom  the  water  which  is  dri'Wn  off  is  thick,  of  a
bad  fmell,  and  a  deprav'd  colour ;  and  in  whom  any  tumour,  or  hardnefs,
that  is  when  the  water  is  evacuated,  is  perceiv'd  in  any  part  of  the  peritonzeal
fac.  And  this  fign  was  afterwards  manifefl:  in  the  woman  of  Laubius,  and
another  alfo,  which  ought  to  be  added  here ;  I  mean  that  the  right  fide  being
prick'd,  nothing  but  pus  was  difcharg'd,  while  from  the  other,  which  was
prick'd  at  the  fame  time,  water  flow'd  out.  However,  thefe  two  laft  men-
tion'd  figns  relate  to  fore-knowing  the  event  of  the  cafe,  when  the  cure  has
been  already  undertaken,  and  not  to  the  propriety  of  attempting  it.

62.  But  before  you  even  undertake  to  attempt  a  cure,  I  would  have  you
enquire,  accurately,  whether  there  was  any  hardnefs,  or  tumour,  before,
which  the  great  diftention  of  the  abdom.en  now  hides ;  and  befides,  whether  the
patient  is  troubled  with  any  confiderable  pain  (I  do  not  mean  that  which  the
diftention  itfelf  produces,  but  that  which  arifes  from  an  ulcerous  erofion  of
the  teftis)  or,  at  leaft,  whether  pain  is  excited  in  any  part  of  the  abdomen,
when  you  prefs  it  pretty  clofely  with  your  fingers.  It  does  not,  hov/ever,
efcape  me,  how  happily  every  thing  fucceeded  with  Chomel  (I),  even  in  a
great  fuppuration,  and  a  certain  erofion  ;  but  both  of  them  recent :  nor  what  ~
Littre  (?«)  propofes  againft  thefe  ulcers,  firft  by  injeftions,  and  after  that  by
flcilful  comprelllons,  and  bandages ;  and  even  againft  tumours,  by  cuttino-
into  them  from  above,  and  applying  certain  methods  of  cure.  I  know,  alfo,
that  the  water  was  drawn  off  by  Laubius  (k),  not  with  a  view  of  curing,  but
of  eafing  the  patient,  where  there  were  purulent  tumours.

But  I  am  not  fpeaking,  here,  of  profecuting  cures  which  are  begun  by  na-
ture, or  by  art,  but  of  attempting  them  at  large  ;  and  without  a  proper  hope
of  bringing  them  to  perfedtion.  You,  therefore,  will  avoid  thofe  patients,
alfo,  which  I  juft  now  added,  when  it  is  in  your  power.  Yet  there  are,  be-
fides, thofe  in  whom  the  tumours  are  not  altogether  hid  by  the  diftention  of
the  abdomen;  either  becaufe  there  is  as  yet  a  lefs  quantity  of  water,  as  in
the  fecond  of  the  obfervations  that  I  have  produc'd  (o) ;  or  even  becaufe  the
water,  or  any  other  matter  of  a  thicker  nature,  is  not  contain'd  in  one  con-
tinu'd  fac,  but  is  divided  into  many  cavities ;  fo  that  fome  are  more  tur&id,
and  others  lefs  fo  :  fuch  as  were  found  in  the  diffedion  of  a  midwife  after  death,
by  Camerarius  the  younger  (p),  who  very  prudently  objefted  to  performing  the
operation  of  paracentefis,  which  had  been  recommended  by  another;  becaufe
he  had  obferv'd  "  the  bulk  of  the  abdominal  tumour  to  be  unequal,  and  to  •
"  give  a  different  degree  of  refiftance  in  different  regions."  And  what
could  the  parancentefis  have  done  in  this  cafe,  or  even  in  that  which  Gahrli-
epius  {q)  had  defcrib'd  ?

For  the  matter,  whether  fmiilar  to  gluten,  or  to  the  fpawn  of  frogs,  does
not  evacuate  itfelf  by  the  inflidion  of  a  pretty  large  wound  ;  not  to  fay  by  the
ufual  foramen  :  and  if  it  be  thin,  even  very  thin,  where  it  is  feparated  by .
many  partitions,  as  it  was  in  both  of  thofe  obfervations,  although  it  fhould
be  difcharg'd  from  one  cavity,  which  you  have  perforated,  it  does  not,  for
that  reafon,  come  out  of  the  others ;  and  therefore  the  fame  thing  muft  of

CO  {m)  in)  Ad  n.  50,  (/.)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn,  i.obf.  i6o.

(0)  N.  52.  (ji)  Cit.  ad  n.  50.

4  courfe


350  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

courfe  "happen  here,  that  I  faid  happens  in  an  afcites  {r),  when  that  is
made  up  of  hydatids,  which  are,  alfo,  connefted  with  each  other.  And  as  I
fee  that  this  cafe  is  reckon'd  among  the  various  kinds  of  afcites,  I  was  not
willing  to  pals  over  this  "  encyfted  dropfy,"  as  it  is  call'd  by  obfervators,
on  the  prefcnt  occafion.  For  although  it  differs  in  its  matter,  and  in  its
partitions,  from  the  more  frequent  dropfy  of  the  peritonseum,  yet  it  is  ge-
nerated in  this  membrane :  nor  ought  we  to  omit  the  mention  of  it,  becaufe
it  is  only  a  rare  cafe,  but  rather  take  particular  notice  of  it,  for  that  reafon;
left  when  it  is  at  any  time  met  with,  it  fhould  be  again  improperly  con-
founded with  the  afcites,  or  with  the  other  more  known  dropfy  of  the  peri-
tonasum.

63.  And  indeed  I  cannot  help  thinking  it  very  proper  to  take  notice  of
other  dropfies,  that  are  encyfted  in  like  manner,  before  I  make  an  end  of
writing.  There  are  fome  thus  call'd  by  thofe  who  give  the  hiftories  of  them,
which,  neverthelels,  belong  to  the  more  frequent  dropfy  of  the  peritonseum  ^
as  that  on  which  the  celebrated  Schefflerus  (j)publifti'd  a  differtation,  in  which
he  is  of  the  fame  opinion  with  me(/) ;  I  mean  that  a  great  quantity  of  ferum
had  been  collefted  "  within  the  duplicature  of  the  peritonseum,"  and  had,  by
this  means,  form'd  a  fac,  upon  which  a  large  fteatoma  was  generated.  But
others  are  of  a  different  kind,  as  that  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated  Anhornius
(ji)  ;  an  almoft  incredible  quantity  of  fluid  being  confin'd  betwixt  the  perito-
neum, and  the  omentum,  which  was  become  very  hard,  in  a  woman  whofe
"  face,  confidering  her  emaciated  ftate  of  body,  was  of  a  pretty  good  colour,
"  and  whofe  feet  free  from  fwelling  :"  which  kind  of  figns,  and  others  like-
wife,  I  (liall  not  om.it  to  mention  from  time  to  time,  that  you  may  compare
them  with  my  former  doubts  and  hefitations  {x).

So,  alfo,  the  younger  du  Verney  (y)  relates,  that  a  woman,  of  thirty  years
of  age  ;  who  had  begun  to  have  a  tumour  in  her  belly  feven  years  before,
was  of  a  good  complexion,  had  a  good  appetite,  and  flept  well,  and  was  as
yet  very  ready  and  alert  in  her  aftions  -,  had,  on  opening  the  abdomen  after
death,  a  large  fac  therein  containing  many  cells,  not  at  all  communicating
one  with  the  other,  each  of  which  was  filled  with  a  peculiar  matter,  quite
different  from  the  reft :  which  agrees  very  well  with  his  account,  that  a  fe-
rum of  a  different  nature  had  been  drawn  off  at  different  times.  And  the
fame  author  difTefted  a  woman  with  an  afcites,  in  whofe  belly  he  found,  be-
fides,  a  large  ,cyft  full  of  redifh  ferum.  There  are  alfo  encyfted  dropfies,  in
regard  to  which  it  does  not  well  appear,  from  the  anatomical  defcription,'
whether  they  belong  to  the  firft  or  fecond  clafs ;  as  you  will  eafily  believe,
from  reading  what  is  written  of  the  fac,  which  was  feen  in  a  certain  virgin
(z),  who  had  been  taken  off  by  a  very  fudden  death,  after  the  difcharge
of  the  water.

64.  And  although  1  fliall  write  fome  things,  in  the  next  letter  upon  the
dropfy  of  the  ovaria ;  yet,  as  this,  alfo,  is  enumerated  among  the  encyfted
dropfies,  I  will  rather  here  hint at  fuch remarks,  as  you  may  readily  join

(r)  N.  45.  W  N.  57.

(j)  Hift.  hydr.  faccat.  (j)  Mem.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1703.

(/)  §.  4.  (x)  Eph.  n.c.  cent.  7.obf.  17.

(«)  Eph,  n.  c.  cent.  g.  obf.  100.  n.  7.

with


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  64.  25^

■with  thofe  which  I  had  occafion  to  make  before  (a),  upon  the  fame  difeafe:
left  in  the  next  letter  I  fhould  be  more  prolix,  or  lefs  dear,  than  is  ne-
cefTary.

Some  obfervations  of  this  diforder,  likewife,  are  certain,  and  others  doubt-
ful. I  will  produce  examples  of  each  kind,  which  you  may  add  to  the  Sepul-
chretum.  Among  the  certain  obfervations  of  this  diforder,  either  in  its  be-
ginning, or  when  it  had  made  but  little  progrefs,  are  thofe  made  by  Came-
rarius  the  fon  (Z-),  by  Goetzius  (c),  by  Maggi  and  Dodi  (d).  The  firft  of
thefe  gentlemen  found  a  humour  in  the  ovarium,  to  the  quantity  of  four
ounces ;  the  fecond  to  the  quantity  of  three  pints  •,  and  the  two  laft  to  the
quantity  of  three  pints  and  a  half:  and  the  fame  obfervers  (for  the  two  firft
had  heard  nothing  of  the  figns  relating  to  the  diforder  that  they  could  remark)
found  our,  by  inquiry,  that  the  woman  had  often  complain'd  of  a  weight,
which  fhe  perceiv'd  in  the  lower  part  of  hel-  belly,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that
on  whichever  fide  fhe  lay,  on  that  fide  the  weight  lay  ;  and  when  (he  turn'd
herfelf  to  the  oppofite  fide,  the  weight  was  transfer'd  thither  likewife.

But  thofe  of  whom  Riedlinus  (e),  Vacher  (/),  and  Schacherus  (^),  have
written,  after  that  in  each  of  them  the  ovarium,  and  the  belly,  had  already
grown  out  into  a  furprizing  tumour,  gave  thefe  relations  neverthelefs  ;  the
firfl:  of  them,  that  her  belly  had  begun  to  fwell  on  the  left  fide ;  at  which
time  (he  had  conceiv'd,  notwithftanding  this  affedtion,  and  was  happily  de-
liver'd,  being  alert,  fprightly,  and  robuft,  even  in  the  latter  part  of  her  dif-
eafe ;  inafmuch  as,  except  the  tumour  of  her  belly,  which  was  troublefome
to  her,  fhe  had  nothing  that  gave  her  the  lead  uneafinefs  :  the  fecond,  that
fix  or  feven  years  before,  fhe  had  firft  of  all  felt  a  pain  in  the  hypogaftrium,
on  the  left  fide :  the  third,  that  fome  years  before,  a  pain  in  the  belly,
which  fhe  did  not  know  how  to  explain,  had  been  the  beginning  of  her
evils ;  that  after  this,  a  tumour  being  form'd  by  degrees,  the  weight  of  it  was
us'd  to  fall  on  that  fide,  to  which  the  fituation  of  the  body  inclin'd  it.

Thefe  two,  as  well  as  the  firft,  had  found  no  advantage,  or  alleviation,  from
medicines  of  any  kind  whatever  :  but  they  had  not,  like  the  firft,  fufFer'd
very  little  inconvenience,  particularly  in  the  latter  part  of  the  difeafe,  when
they  were  unable  to  reft  in  their  beds,  except  they  fupported  themfelves  on
their  bended  knees,  and,  inclining  their  bodies  forwards,  laid  their  heads
upon  the  bed  that  was  under  them  :  which  kind  of  pofture  was  oblerv'd  by
SchefHerus  (h),  to  be  neceffary,  in  fome  meafure,  to  the  woman  he  fpoke
of,  in  order  to  incline  her  to  fleep :  but  this  woman  labour'd  under  a  dropfy
of  the  peritoneum ;  and  the  three,  of  whom  I  am  at  prefent  fpeaking,  under
a  dropfy  of  the  left  ovarium  ;  which  being  ruptur'd,  here  and  there,  in  the
third  woman,  had  join'd  an  afcites  to  itfelf  over  and  above,  juft  as  it  hap-
pen'd  in  that  widow  who  is  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated  Baffius  (z),  and  in  an-
other woman,  who  is  fpoken  of  by  the  celebrated  Guttermann  (k).

(a)  N.  58.  59. _  CfJ  Hill,  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1739.  6hL

(i>)  In  obf.  160.  cir.  fupra  ad  n.  62,  anat.  3.

(c)  A£i.  n.  c.  tcm.  2.  obf.  207.  (g)  DiiT.  de  virgine  afcitica  §.  10.  13.  &ca;t.

fdj  Apud  Vallifner.  iftor. della  genejaz.  {f>)  Cit.  n.  63,

p.  3.  c.  5.  Si  tab.  12.  {/•)  Dec.  4..  obf.  anat.  8.

(f)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  7.  obf.  56.  (kj  Adt.  n.  c.  torn.  3.  obf.  1105.

Others


352  Book  III. Of  DiTeafes  of  the  Belly.

Others  have  been  more  happy  under  this  tumour  of  the  ovarium,  though
increas'd  to  the  higheft  degree;  as  the  virgin  of  whom  Gulhnann  {1}  relates
that  fhe  had,  nevcrtheleis,  for  fifteen  years,  "  enjoy'd  perfetl  health  ;  for  her
"  menfes  were  regular-,  "  flie  had  a  good  appetite,  (lept  well,  &c;"  except
that,  in  the  two  laft  years,  fiie  was  frequently  feiz'd  with  fwoonings :  and,
•in  like  manner,  as  two  women  who  were  difleded  by  Jo.  David  Mauchartus
(w).  In  what  ftate  thefe  patients  were,  for  more  than  feven  years,  durino-
which  time,  if  you  except  almoft  the  laft  weeks,  they  were  never  under  a  ne-
ceflity  of  confining  themfelves  to  their  beds,  you  may  conjefture  from  the
words  which  he  premifes  to  the  obfervation  :  thofe  dropfical  women  who
"  are  neither  pale,  but  rather  preferve  a  rofy  colour  in  their  cheeks,  nor  have
"  a  tumour  of  the  feet,  lb  that  they  rather  grow  lean,  and  flender,  in  their
"  limbs,  and  the  other  part  of  their  body,  notwithftanding  the  abdomen  is
■"  increas'd  every  day  ;  thefe  women,  I  fay,  if  they  carry  this  load  about
"  them  for  a  long  time,  without  any  confiderable  injury  to  the  actions  of
"  the  body  •,  if  they  have  a  good  appetite,  are  not  very  thirfty,  nor  have  a
"  cough,  but  theinteftines  perform  their  office  properly,  the  urine  is  of  a  na-
"  rural  colour,  and  the  tumour  of  the  abdomen  neither  gives  way  to  purging
*'  nor  diuretic  medicines  ;  and  efpecially  if  the  diforder  takes  its  origin  from
"  a  difficult  birth,  or  an  unfortunate  time  of  child-bearing,  from  a  falfe  con-
"  ception,  or  abortion,  without  other  concurring  figns  of  a  cachexy ;  are
"  always  afiefted  with  a  dropfy  of  the  ovarium,  or  that  which  is  call'd  an
"  encyfted  dropfy."

But  thefe  words  of  this  very  eminent  man,  if  we  underftand  them  fo  as
to  fuppofe  them  referable  to  no  other  dropfy  but  that  of  the  ovarium,  are
contradiftory,  you  fee,  to  thofe  things  which  are  fhown  above  (n),  in  regard
to  fome  other  patients,  and  will  be  fhown  below.  Moreover,  as  to  the  figns
of  that  dropfy,  the  celebrated  Trew  (o),  when  he  propofes  his  obfervation
thereof,  fays  there  were,  among  thofe  that  examin'd  the  abdomen  of  a  liv-
ing woman,  fome  who  "  pronounc'd  that  there  was  an  encyfted  dropfy  ;"
and  others  who,  "  becaufe  no  fluftuation  could  evidently  be  perceiv'd,  upon
"  ftriking  the  belly,  call'd  it  into  queftion  :"  and  then  enquires,  "  whether
"  when  the  abdomen  is  expanded  into  a  preternatural  bulk,  iSj  at  the  fame
*'  time,  ponderous  and  heavy,  but  a  fludtuation  cannot  be  very  accurately
"  perceiv'd,  by  a  percuffion  of  the  belly  ;"  he  inquires,  I  fay,  "  whether
"  we  may  reafonably  conclude  from  thence,  that  the  difeafe  ought  to  be
"  call'd  a  dropfy  of  the  ovarium,  rather  than  an  afcites  ?"  The  celebrated
Targioni  (p)  however  ;  who  faw  a  very  great  dropfy  of  the  ovarium,  if  any
other  man  did,  and  has  written  accurately,  and  learnedly,  upon  this  difeafe;
when  he  gives  the  hiftory  of  a  matron,  who  was  afflicted  with  this  diforder
four  and  thirty  years,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  being  troubled  with
an  exceffive  difcharge  of  the  menftrua,  as  long  as  her  time  of  life  permitted  ;
and,  finally,  with  frequent  vomitings,  and  fome  difficulty  of  breathing,  in
going  up  ftairs,  and  being  extenuated  in  the  upper  part  of  her  body,  but

(/)  Eorund.  t.  2.  obf.  80.  («)  Comerc.  litter,  a.  1734.  hebd.  44.

(ot)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  8.  obf.  14.  U>)  Prima  raccolt.  d'offerv.  med.

(«}N.  58.59.

having


Letter  XXXVIIL Article  65.  '253

having  a  good  appetite,  and  being  able  to  ftand,  even  to  the  very  laft  week
of  her  life,  and  to  move  herfelf  as  fhe  pleas'd  -,  and,  what  is  ftiil  more  fur-
prizing,  to  lie  down  on  either  fide,  or  in  a  fiipine  poftiire,  and  with  her
head  low,  without  any  inconvenience ;  relates  that  the  fame  woman,  both
while  Ihe  was  living,  and  after  death,  was  known  to  have  her  belly  full
of  water  by  the  touch  :  as  a  fludluation  was  very  evidently  perceiv'd,  even
by  ftriking  it  gently  with  one  hand,  while  the  other  was  applied  to  the
oppofite  fide,  juft  as  it  happens  in  patients  who  have  an  afcites. ■

Neverthelefs,  the  fac  fiU'd  the  whole  (Cavity  of  the  belly :  and  the  water,  which
was  computed  to  be  in  the  quantity  of  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  pints,  fill'd
the  whole  cavity  of  the  fac  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  upon  making  the  (lightefl:
punfture  into  it  with  the  knife,  the  fluid  burft  forth  with  the  greateft  im-
petus. Is  this  difference  to  be  accounted  for  from  hence,  that  in  the  wo-
man fpoken  of  by  Trew,  the  water  was  divided  into  many  cells ;  blit,  in  the
matron  fpoken  of  by  Targioni,  was  contain'd  in  one  cavity,  fo  that  nothing
prevented  the  fluftuation  being  communicated  ?  I  fliould  perhaps  have  made
this  conclufion,  and  not  without  fome  advantage  in  the  cure  of  the  diforder,
as  will  be  fhown  hereafter  (q),  if  Camerarius  the  father,  when  he  could  per-
ceive no  fluctuation,  as  is  faid  above  (r),  had  made  any  mention  of  cells  be-
ing found  in  his  large  fac.  You  will  inquire  more  accurately  into  thefe
things,  not  only  in  the  writings  of  the  authors  whom  I  have  niention'd  by
name,  but  alfo  in  the  writings  of  thofe  whom  I  have  without  doubt  omitted
(s) ;  among  whom  the  celebrated  Benevolus  (t)  ought  to  have  been  parti-
cularly confuJted  by  you,  if  he  could  have  delcrib'd  the  other  circumftances,
with  the  fame  accuracy,  wherewith  he  defcrib'd  that  large  fac,  into  which  the
ovarium  had  expanded  itfelf.

6^.  Hitherto  I  have  taken  notice  of  thofe  obfervations,  which  are,  be-
yond a  doubt,  to  be  refer'd  to  the  dropfy  of  the  ovarium.  I  will  now  fub-
join  fome,  according  to  my  promife,  in  regard  to  which  you  may  be  in  doubt,
whether  to  clafs  them  with  the  others.  You  will  read  two  of  the  celebrated
Jo.  Mart.  Brehmius  («),  in  the  firft  of  which  a  great  fac,  full  of  water,  that
the  patient  had  been  troubled  with  for  fourteen  years,  was  "  very  clofely
"  connefted"  to  the  urinary  bladder-,  and  in  the  fecond  a  fac  of  the  fame
kind  which  had  troubled  the  woman  for  two  years  "  was  grown  into  one  fub-
"  fliance  with  the  fundus  uteri,  towards  the  left  fide ;  where  it  feem'd  to  have
"  taken  its  origin,  by  the  means  of  various  dufls  and  canals."  As  no  men-
tion is  made  of  the  ovaries,  or  tubes,  no  more  than  in  a  certain  hiftory  which
was  publifh'd  five  and  thirty  years  ago,  in  the  two  cities  next  to  this,  as  if
of  a  dropfy  included  in  the  uterus,  whereas  the  uterus  did  not  contain  the
water,  as  it  ought  to  have  done ;  and  as  you  may  fee,  in  particular,  in  the
obfervation  of  Henricus  Alb.  Nicolai  (.v),  wherein  a  large  cyft,  diftended
with  water,  rais'd  itfelf  up  from  the  left  fide  of  the  fundus  uteri,  quite  to  the
diaphragm ;  I  lie  under  a  necefllty  of  doubting  in  this  cafe,  although  I  am
not  ignorant  that  Riedlinus  (y)  has,  with  good  reafon,  fuppos'd  "  a  dropfy

(j)  N.  70.  ftij  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  6.  obf.  94.

(/•)  N.  59.  (.v)  Dec.  obf.  illuftr.  anat.  obf.  9.

OJ  Vid.  epift.  6j.  n.  17.  [y)  Obf.  56.  cit.  ad  n.  64.
CO  Offervaz.  9.

Vol.  II.  Z  "  which


354  Sook  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  which  is  faid  to  be  uterine,  to  have  its  origin  and  feat,  for  the  mofl  part,
"  in  the  teftes  ;  from  whence  thofe  facs,  which  are  frequently  fo  large,  and
"  contain  fo  large  a  quantity  of  water,  and  cover  all  the  inteftines  ....  are
"  deriv'd."

But  the  younger  du  Verney  (z)  found  two  large  cyfts  of  that  kind,  rifing
from  the  left  fide  of  the  uterus,  and  embracing  the  ovary ;  but,  in  one  of
the  women,  not  dilated,  as  he  fays,  and  fliut  vip  within  another  cyfl  of  a
larger  fize  :  in  the  other,  dilated,  but  not  at  all  in  proportion  to  the  magni-
tude of  the  cyft  in  which  it  was  comprehended.  I  fhould,  perhaps,  have  con-
jeftur'd  that  the  external  coat  of  the  ovaries,  expanded  by  water,  had  made
thefe  large  cyfts,  if  he  had  not  faid  that  they  rofe  from  the  fide  of  the  uterus.
66.  There  are,  alfo,  inftances  of  a  dropfy  that  relates  to  the  tuba  Fal-
loppii ;  fome  of  them,  like  the  former-,  certain,  and  others  doubtful.  In  the
number  of  the  certain  ones  I  reckon  that  which  was  lent  from  Munnickius,
a'nd  publifli'd  by  the  compilers  of  the  Bibliotheca  Anatomica  {a).  For  it  is
fufficient  to  look  at  the  figure,  in  order  to  be  convinc'd  that  the  right  Fal-
loppian  tube  had  dilated  itlelf,  fo  as  to  contain  a  hundred  and  twelve  pints  of
water,  under  which  difeafe  the  unhappy  virgin  labour'd  eighteen  years.
Nearly  equal  to  this,  was  that  dropfy  of  the  tubes  which  Siboldus  has  de-
fcrib'd-,  but  that  defcrib'd  by  Cyprianus  ftill  larger,  as  far  as  I  can  judge  from
the  A5la  Erudilorum  Lipfienfia  {b)  ;  for  neither  of  thefe  authors  was  in  my
hands  when  I  wrote  thefe  things.  Nor  do  I  doubt  but  the  dropfy  of  the
cornua  uteri  was  really  in  the  tubes,  when  1  examine  the  figure  given  by
Tulpius  (f),  who  defcribes  it ;  which,  as  well  as  that  of  Munnickius,  and
others  alfo,  is  wanting  in  the  Sepulchretum.  And  I  wi(h,  with  all  my  heart,
that  Sponius,  whofe  obfervation  I  have  quoted  above  {d),  had  join'd  a  de-
lineation therewith;  for  he  would,  by  that  means,  have  taken  away  a  fcruple
from  me,  which  a  defcription  cannot  remove.

He  looks  upon  his  fac  as  a  dilatation  of  the  tube,  and  he  defcribes  the
tube  as  embracing  the  ovarium,  and  carried  upwards  from  thence,  "  to  the
"•  extent  of  half  a  foot  higher  than  the  natural  fituation  thereof  requir'd  j"  as
the  fac  reach'd  quite  to  the  enfiform  cartilage.  But  the  tube  is  generally  pro-
duc'd,  on  the  furface  of  the  fac,  beyond  its  natural  extent  •,  not  when  the
tube  itfelf,  but  when  fome  other  neighbouring  part,  as,  for  inftance,  the
ovarium,  is  dropfical :  as  du  Verney  {e),  and  Targioni  (/j,  have  fufficiently
feen ;  and  as  Schacherus  (g),  and  Maggi  and  Dodi  (h)  have  even  deli-
neated. Therefore,  fince  Sponius  does  not  at  all  reprefent  the  ovarium  as
being  dropfical  •,  and  complains  that  the  incautious  furgeon,  by  a  hafty  dif-
feftion,  had  cut  into  the  peritonaeum,  together  with  the  mufcles ;  I  fuppos'd
that  this  dropfy  might  be  numbcr'd  among  the  other  examples  of  a  dropfy  of
the  peritoneum {t).

But  if  it  feem  otherwife  to  you,  and  you  choofe  to  take  away  this,  or  any
other  example,  from  thence,  which  I  have  no  objection  to  your  doing,  a  fuf-
ficient number  will ftill  remain there. But  to  what  clafs  fliall  I  refer  th&

(z)  Mesn.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  fc.  a.  1703.  {d)  N.  50.

(a)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  59.  (s)  (f)  (^)  {h)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  64.

(b)  A.  1085.  m.  April  &  a.  1701.  m.  Febr.  (/)  N.  50.
(f)  Obf.  med,  1.  4.  c.  45.

4  obfervation


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  67.  355,

obfervation  of  Rolfinc  (k),  who  found  the  left  ligament  of  the  uterus  dif-
tended  with  water,  to  fuch  a  degree,  "  in  the  upper  part,"  as  to  "  occupy
"  the  whole  cavity"  of  the  belly  ?  Can  we  fuppole  that  one  fo  well  flcill'd  in
anatomy  as  he  was,  if  he  had  ken  a  dilatation  of  the  ovarium  which  was
annex'd  to  this  ligament,  or  of  the  tube,  would  not  have  taken  notice  of  it  ?
Or  rtiall  we  take  for  granted,  that  there  is  a  peculiar  dropfy  of  this  ligament,
owing  to  water  being  colledled  betwixt  its  two  membranes,  befides  the  other
dropSes  in  the  parts  that  lie  near  thereto  ?  This  appearance  he  faw  in  ■&  wo-
man, who,  notwithftanding  her  abdomen  had  grown  out  into  a  great  bulk,
and  Ihe  had  been  without  any  menftrual  difcharges,  for  the  whole  fpace  of
three  years,  had,  nevertheleis,  a  good  appetite,  and  went  about  her  houfliold
affairs  as  ufual,  though  with  fome  difficulty,  till  fhe  was  carried  off  fuddenly ;
as  another  vv'oman,  fpoken  of  by  Brehniius,  was  alfo  (/)  -,  who,  however,  had
her  heart  increas'd  very  much  in  its  fize  ;  and  the  matron  mention'd  by  Tar-
gioni :  for  I  do  not  remember,  at  prefent,  out  of  all  the  examples  of  difeafes
of  this  kind,  that  I  have  taken  notice  of,  any  others  befides  thefe  three,  who
have  died  unexpedledly.

6j.  Now  if  you  attentively  colled,  in  your  mind,  the  figns  that  I  have
mention'd  from  time  to  time,  as  I  reckon'd  up  the  obfervations  of  almoft
every  one  of  thefe  dropfies,  you  will  certainly  obferve,  how  much  they  agree
one  with  another,  and  with  the  dropfy  of  the  peritonseum  ;  and  will  under^
ftand,  that  if  the  great  bulk  of  the  belly  has, already  continued  a  long  time
(du  Verney  the  younger  {m)  requir'd  more  than  the  fpace  of  two  years  from
the  firft  beginning:)  if  the  tumour  has  increas'd,  by  degrees,  as  in  gravid
women,  without  much  inconvenience,  and  without  any,  or,  at  leaft,  without
a  great  change  of  colour  in  the  flcin  :  if  purging  and  diuretic  medicines  have
afforded  no  alleviation  :  if  the  lower  limbs  have  not  become  tumid,  till  the
latter  part  of  the  difeafe  :  if  there  are  thefe  figns,  I  fay,  you  will  underftand
that  the  woman  does  not  labour  under  an  afcites,  but,  generally,  under  fome
other  confin'd  dropfy:  and  yet  it  does  not,  of  courfe,  follow,  that  flie  does
not  then  labour  under  an  ericyfted  dropfy,  though  any  one  of  thefe  marks
may  be  wanting.

For  there  have  ever  been  fome,  v/ho  complain'd  of  internal  pains  of  the
belly  for  mftance,  that  is,  in  confequence  of  the  vifcera,  and  particularly  the
inteftines,  being  comprefs'd  by  the  neighbouring  weight,  and  diftention  of
the  fac  ;  this  fac  being  more  fix'd,  or  prominent,  in  a  certain  place  ;  which
you  eafiiy  perceive  muft  happen  more  frequently,  in  the  dropfy  of  the  ova-
rium, or  any  fimilar  part,  than  in  that  of  the  peritonseum.  And  there  may
be  fome,  though  this  is  much  more  extraordinary,  to  whom  the  medicines
that  are  adminifler'd  may  give  a  little  relief,  if  they  happen  to  difcharge
water  ;  not  that  which  is  included  in  the  cyfl,  but  that  which  is  extravafated
into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  :  for  that  this  was,  fometimes,  the  cafe  alfo,
though  the  water  was  generally  in  a  fmill  quantity  only,  has  been  remark'cl
by  du  Verney,  whom  I  have  already  quoted  ;  and  he  obferves  that  it  happens,
at  the  time  when  the  cyft  can  admit  of  no  more  water :  from  whence  he  fays

{k)  Sepulchr,  ki\..h?.z  21.  obf.  61.  & 55. (/)  Cit.  fupra  n,  65.
V  24.  (m)  Cit.  ibid.

Z Z 2  it


356  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ic  is,  that  the  lower  limbs  do  not  fwell,  till  very  late  in the  difcafe,  as I
have  already  laid.

But  in  regard  to  the  figns.  By  which  you  may  diftinguiHi  the  dropfies  in
-queftion,  from  each  other,  you  yourfelf  muft  perceive  that  there  is  nothing
which  you  can  expect  from  me ;  for  there  is  fuch  a  propinquity  betwixt  the
ovaria,  the  tubes,  and  the  ligaments,  by  which  they  are  connefted  together,
and  fuch  a  neceffity  for  the  functions  of  them  all,  in  the  worl^  of  generation,
that  it  is  out  of  our  power  to  gather  any  certain  inferences  either  from  the  fitua-
tion  of  the  tumour,  or  from  the  taculty  of  generation  in  the  woman  being  im-
pair'd,  v/hich  of  thefe  parts  is  dropfical.  And  indeed  if  the  woman  fhould  con-
ceive, in  the  mean  time,  you  cannot  from  thence  argue,  that  thefe  parts  are  not
affefted  •,  for  you  very  well  know  it  to  be  fufficient  for  this  purpoie,  that  they
are  found  on  either  fide.  Yet  however,  you  will  naturally  fuppofe  that  fome
one  of  them,  and  particularly  the  ovarium,  as  «Jiis  is  moft  frequently  the
part  affefted,  may  be  fweil'd,  when  the  beginning  of  the  tumour  fhall  dif-
cover  itfelf  in  the  feat  thereof.  You  will  fuppofe  that  it  may  be  fweil'd,  I
fay  ;  for  the  tumour  may  even  be  there,  and  yet  not  feated  in  thefe  parts.

We  muft,  then,  alfo,  confider  whether  the  tumour  may  not  be  of  ano-
ther kind ;  as,  for  inftance,  when  Gandolphius  (n)  found  each  ovary  equal  in
magnitude  to  a  man's  head,  and  more  than  five  pounds  in  weight,  but  of
one  and  the  fame  compadt  fubftance  every  where  ;  or  when  he  faw  the  fame
kind  of  diforder,  in  one  of  the  ovaries  of  another  woman,  which  weigh'd
about  fifteen  pounds :  but  even  tumours  of  another  kind  occur,  not  very
rarely,  in  the  fame  fituation,  in  particular  the  fteatoma  (which  kind  has  been
found  by  me  (e)  )  •,  and  this,  as  Schacherus  (p)  has  admonifh'd  us,  fometimes
may  be  taken  for  a  droply  of  the  ovarium.  You,  however,  by  diligently
weighing  all  the  fymptoms  that  have  preceded,  and  accompany  the  difeafe,
will  more  readily  fufpeft  the  tumour  to  be  of  a  dropfical  kind,  when  the
temperature  of  the  body,  the  diet,  and  difeafes  have  been,  or  are,  of  fuch  a
kind,  as  to  difpofe  women  to  dropfies.  And  by  what  reafonings  you  ought
rather  to  fuppofe  the  water  to  be  collefted  betwixt  the  mufcles,  and  the  peri-
tonsEum,  than  within  this  membrane,  I  have  endeavour'd  to  fhow  you  above
(q),  as  far  as  is  pofTible  in  diforders  of  this  kind  :  and  if  any  thing  fhall  occur
to  my  mind,  in  the  mean  time,  either  by  reading,  or  thinking,  that  may
tend  to  diftinguifh  other  dropfies,  even  by  the  flighteft  conjefture,  I  will  not
omit  it  in  the  next  letter  (r).

68.  But  if  it  is  difficult  to  determine  the  nature  of  thefe  dropfies,  of  which
I  have  fpoken,  it  is  flill  more  difficult  to  cure  them.  Nor  would  I  have
you  fay  that  nature  itfelf  has  lliown  in  what  way  this  may  be  done,  when  fhe
reftor'd  to  health  the  woman  of  whom  Brehmius  (j)  writes,  by  difcharging
a  fluid  through  a  very  fmall  foramen,  every  other  day,  as  I  have  already  faid.
For  that  dropfy  feems  to  have  been  in  the  peritonaeum,  as  it  really  was  when,
according  to  the  relation  of  Anhorruus  (f),  nature  attempted  the  fame  way
three  times ;  and,  at  firft,  with  advantage,  yet  afterwards  unfuccefsfully.  But

(»)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  k.  a.  1707.  obf.  (y)  N.  60. ,

anat.  4.  (r)  N.  40.

foj  Supra  n.  34.  {s)  (/)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  59.
fp)  Diff.  fupra  ad  n.  64.  cit.  §.  13.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  68.  357

as  I  have  fpoken  above  of  the  cure  of  the  dropfy  in  the  peritoneum,  I  in-
quire, here,  after  the  method  of  cure  in  thofe  dropfies,  which  are  included  in
a  fac  or  cyft,  and  contain'd  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly.  The  younger  du
Verney  {u),  who  was  a  furgeon  as  well-experienc'd  in  the  operation  of  para-
centefis  as  any  one  whatever,  exprefsly  denies  his  having  ever  feen  any  one
cur'd,  who  was  afflifted  with  an  encyfted  dropfy  ;  and,  what  is  more,  afferts
that  he  had  feen  many  women,  who  being  troubled  with  no  other  difagree-
able  fymptom,  but  that  of  a  cumberous  belly,  and  being  defirous  to  get  rid
thereof,  by  having  the  water  taken  away,  had  been  carried  off  in  a  fhort
time;  whereas  they  might,  otherwife,  have  liv'd  long,  and  fometimes  very
long,  as  the  examples  frequently  pointed  out  demonftrate.  And  feveral  others
have  likewife  feen  that  fpeedy  death  has  often  been  the  confequence  of  para-
centefis  in  thefe  difeafes.

Nor  is  it  to  be  wonder'd  at :  for  nothing  more  frequently  happens,  than
that  the  air,  being  admitted  to  the  water,  which  is  of  itfelf,  already,  of  no
good  nature,  as  its  brown  colour,  for  the  mod  part,  fhows,  or  to  the  parts
of  the  fac  which  are  already  lax,  vitiated,  and  ulcerous,  foon  brings  on  fatal,
changes.  For  from  hence  it  chiefly  happens,  that  although,  at  firft,  the
patients  feem  to  themfelves,  and  to  others,  to  have  receiv'd  much  alleviation
from  the  operation,  yet  infbead  of  that  kind  of  water  which  was  firft  drawn
off,  and  was  not  of  a  very  deprav'd  nature,  that  which  was  taken  away  the  fe-
cond,  and  the  third  time,  or  flows  out  afterwards,  may  be  green,  or  black,
or  turbid,  fseculent,  and  fomewhat  bloody,  or  of  a  very  bad  fmell ;  and,
finally,  not  without  purulent  matter,  as  you  will  eafily  learn  from  reading
over  the  obfervation  of  the  furgeon  lafl-quoted,  made  on  a  woman  of  thirty
years  of  age,  and  on  a  virgin  of  fixty,  one  of  Riedlinus  {x),  and  one,  and  ano-
ther, of  Anhornius  (y),  made  upon  three  women.  And  what  do  you  fuppofe
inuft  happen,  when  the  water  is  either  already,  of  itfelf,  purulent,  or  foetid  ?

Tulpius  (z)  faw  nine  pints  of  water,  and  pus,  in  the  tubes. In  the  ova-
rium, Maggi  and Dodi  (c)  found  a  foetid  humour. And  what  will  you .
fuppofe  muft  be the  confequence,  when the  internal  furface  of  the  fac is
full  of  abfcefles,  as  du  Verney  found  it. Moreover,  even  though  the  water
may  neither  be  purulent,  nor  foetid,  and  the  fac  without  abfcelTes,  it  certainly
has,  very  often,  either  hydatids  fix'd  to  it  internally,  or  water,  or  fome  other
matter,  divided  into  many  lefler  facs :  from  which  circumftance  it  happens,,
that  the  water  being  drawn  off^  from  one  fide,  the  fwelling  of  the  abdomen.,
is  not  remov'd  on  the  other,  or  the  flowing  out  of  it  foon  ceafes ;  and  if  the
furgeon  then  forces  on  the  cannula,  he  feels  an  obftacle  to  its  pafTage  :  what
is  to  be  done  then  I  would  be  glad  to  know? Are  all  the  feparate  facs  to*
be  open'd  ? Trew  (l/)  found  it  necefl^ary  to  open  the  membranous  intercep-
tions of  the  lefTer  facs,  "  more  than  ten  times,"  in  order  to  draw  out  all  the-
water  from  the  larger  fac,  which  contain'd  all  the  others.

But  muft  we  make  ufe  of  the  fame  method  to  obtain  a  cure  in  the  living
body,  as  we  do  to  examine  into  the  diforder  after  death  ?  Or  if  it  were  pro-
per fo  to  do,  would  it  be  in  the  power  of  any  furgeon  to  fee  the  lefTer  facculi, ,


(e)  Cit.  ad  n.  6;.  (2) Cit.  ad  n.  66.

(x)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  5.  obf.  67.  fa)  Ad  n.  64.

iy)  Eorund.  cent.  9.  obf.  100.  n,  3  &  4.  (i)  Ibid.


which


558  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

which  lie  hid  within  the  deep  cavity  of  the  belly,  and  pierce  through  each  of
them  feparately,  without  wounding  any  inteftine,  or  other  neighbouring
part,  at  the  fame  time  ?  Befides,  what  if  there  fliould  be  innumerable  hyda-
tids, as  I  faid  there  frequently  are  ?  What?  If  all  the  ceils  fluould  not  con-
tain water,  but  fome  a  matter  like  cheefe,  or  like  a  pultice,  as  in  the  obfer-
vation  of  Miegius  (c) :  What  ?  If  a  large  fcirrhus  were  ieated  there,  over
and  above,  fuch  as  was  feen  by  du  Verney.  Other  confiderations  I  omit ;  for
trom  thefe  you  already  fee,  with  fufficient  clearnefs,  why  this  paracentefis
muft  happen  to  be  not  only  ulirlefs,  but  even  hurtful,  to  the  miferable  woman.

69.  But  fuppole  even  that  there  is  only  one  fac,  and  that  this  fac  is  not  di-
vided by  any  partitions,  as,  befides  Maggi  and  Dodi  (d),  Vacher  (e),  Bene-
volus  (f),  and  Targioni  (g),  have  found  it,  and  not  vitiated  with  abfcefles,
and  tumours ;  (for  Benevolus  obferv'd  globular  bodies  prominent  inwardly,
fome  of  which  were  even  larger  than  eggs,  and  Targioni  a  farcoma  of  the
bignefs  of  a  kidney,  which  hid  fmall  abfcefles  in  itfelf ) :  finally,  fuppofe  that
there  are  no  cells,  which  contain  a  different  kind  of  matter-,  and  that  the
v/ater  which  is  contain'd  is  not  of  a  very  deprav'd  nature.  What  follows
from  hence  ?  Do  you  think  that  the  cafe  would  be  then  a  fair  fubjedt  for
the  operation  ?  Targioni  fays  not.  As  he  fears,  not  only  lell  the  omentum,
which  is  interpos'd,  or  the  intefline,  or  ibme  other  vifcus,  fliould  be  wound-
ed, and  left  a  part  of  the  water  fhould  be  pour'd  out  from  the  perforated
fac,  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly ;  the  latter  of  which  he  fays  may,  however,
be  avoided,  if  the  woman  lie  in  a  prone  pofture -,  but  he  is  particularly  afraid
of  thofe  confequences,  which  SchorkopfBus  (b)  was  formerly  afraid  of,  left
the  membrane  of  the  evacuated  fac  contrad  a  gangrene  ;  or,  at  leaft,  a  fup-
puration  ;  chiefly  on  account  of  the  air  being  admitted  ;  or  if  it  does  not  con-
tracSt  either  of  thefe  difeafes,  left,  like  other  folliculated  tumours,  it  be  again
iill'd  with  its  proper  humour,  that  is  with  v/ater.

To  me  it  certainly  happen'd  that,  v/hile  I  was  revifing  thefe  things,  I  was
confulted  by  a  barren  woman  ;  who  having  had  a  diftention  of  the  abdomen,
for  a  year  before,  not  without  a  very  great  refillance,  on  the  left  fide  thereof,;
and  having  us'd  the  aflifl:ance  of  phyficians  in  vain;  found,  all  of  a  fudden,
about  the  ipring  of  this  year,  that  v/hile  fhe  happen'd  to  laugh,  and  fhake
her  belly  with  great  vehemence,  fomething  burfl;  afunder  therein,  with
a  kind  of  a  crack  j  and  it  immediately  became  fofter,  at  the  fame  time  that
ihe  felt  an  unulual  weight,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  v/nh  a  fen-
fation  (which  had  never  been  before)  of  fludtuation,  and  of  a  certain  weight
falling  down  to  that  fide,  on  which  (he  turn'd  herfelf.  And  thefe  fymptoms
having  difappear'd,  by  the  help  of  remedies  v/hich  difcharg'd  a  great  quan-
tity of  ferum,  by  the  kidnies,  and  inteftines,  the  woman  feem'd,  to  herfelf,  to
be  in  very  good  health  for  fifteen  days,  but  no  longer.

For  after  that  time,  the  abdomen  return'd  again  to  its  former  bulk,  and
tenfion-,  (he  being  of  a  good  colour  in  her  face,  as  (he  always  was  before  •,  her
feet  not  being  tumid :  and,  except  certain  pains  of  the  belly,  which  were
troublefome  at  intervals,  the  large  bulk  thereof,  and  the  diminution  of  her

(c)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf.  8;.  (h)  DiiTert.  de  hydr.  ovar.  th.  25.

(''■)  (^)  (/)  rgJ  Cit.  ad  n.  64.

menftrua.


Letter  XXXVIII. Article  70.  359

menftrua,  all  which  circumftanceshad  alfo  been  obfcrv'd  before,  fhe  was  agile
in  her  body,  robuft,  and  in  extreme  g«od  health.  That  the  cyft,  therefore,
after  difcharging  its  original  fluid,  fhould  not  be  again  diftended  with  a
frefh  one,  it  would  be  neceffary,  if  poffible,  to  confume,  or  extirpate  it  en-
tirely ;  as  is  done  in  external  follicles.  But  who  could  propofe,  or  even  bear,
the  firft  of  thefe  operations  on  a  large  fac  that  is  hidden  among  the  vifcera  ?
The  fecond,  indeed,  I  know  has  been  propos'd  by  fome,  who  were  en-
courag'd  thereto,  by  that  well-known,  but  very  rare,  cure  of  Abr.  Cypria-
nus :  yet  whether  any  one  has  made  the  trial  within  thefe  thirty  years,  or
more,  fince  it  was  propos'd,  I  cannot  determine.

What  might  be  the  caufes  to  prevent  them,  it  is  not  difficult  for  you  to
conceive  :  to  omit  the  greater  part  of  which,  if  the  cyft  were  always  fupported
by  one  root  alone,  on  which  a  ligature  might  eafily  be  made;  as  in  the  ob-
fervation  of  Mauchartus  (z),  or  in  that  of  Schrockius  (k) ;  you  would,  per-
haps, begin  to  give  ear  to  the  propofition.  But  What  ?  If  there  were  more
roots  than  one,  or  if  there  was  one  very  broad,  and  not,  as  it  was  with  them,
"  very  narrow,"  or  "  of  the  thicknefs  of  a  man's  thumb  :"  what  .''  If  the
cyft  fhould  be  connefted  to  one  part,  and  to  another,  and  even  at  a  great
diftance  from  that  part  of  the  abdomen,  which,  in  imitation  of  Cyprianus,
you  would  cut  into.  Yet  this  author  had  learn'd  from  an  ulcer,  through
which  he  could  feel  the  carcafe  of  a  foetus,  which  had  lain  there  twelve
months,  in  what  part  it  was  to  be  cut  into  •,  juft  as  Degnerus  (I),  if  a  large
dropfical  tumour,  by  burfting  afunder  betwixt  the  peritoneum,  and  the
muicles,  had  left  not  a  large,  but  a  narrow  paflage,  could,  likewife,  very
well  know,  by  introducing  a  probe^vhich  way  it  might  be  laid  more  open
with  the  knife ;  \b  that  a  cyft  bi^er  than  an  ox's  bladder,  which  came
away  of  itfclf,  might  be  extirpated  by  the  furgeon.

70.  Muft  we  have  no  hopes  then,  vou  will  fay,  of  a  cure  in  an  internal  in-
cyfted  dropfy,  becaufe  it  is  not  poffible,  either  to  confume,  or  extirpate,  the
cyft  ?  The  younger  du  Verney  (;«),  neverthelefs,  hop'd  for  either  a  perfe£t
cure,  or  a  great  alleviation,  if  at  any  time  after  the  water  was  drawn  off,  the
parietes  of  the  cyft,  when  coUaps'd,  ftiould  coalefce  with  each  other  -,  and  by
this  m.eans  ftiut  up  the  extremities  of  the  vefiels,  by  which  the  water  was
carried  thither :  and  this  he  fuppos'd  to  have  happen'd,  in  a  virgin  of
twenty  years  of  age,  whofe  belly  had  begun  to  fwell  almoft  two  years
before,  without  any  change  in  the  colour  of  the  fkin  :  and,  in  like  manner,
in  a  widow-matron,  who,  being  now  advanc'd  in  age,  had  been  afflided  with
a  furprizing  tumour  of  the  belly  for  fix  or  feven  years  :  from  both  of  whom
having  taken  away  the  water,  he  fo  perfe6lly  cur'd  the  firft,  that  flie  married,
and  brought  forth  children  ;  and  gave  great  eafe  to  the  other,  and  long  free-
dom from  the  diforder,  as  ftie  perceiv*d  nothing  of  it  for  more  than  two
years' together,  till,  by  degrees,  the  belly  return'd  to  its  former  magnitude.
But  he  thought  it  neceffary,  that  the  cyft  ftiould  be  loofe,  and  unconne6ted,
even  at  that  time,  as  the  uterus  is  in  pregnant  women  ;  without  doubt,  fear-
ing, left,  if  it  was  connected  here  and  there,  the  parietes  ftiould  be,  fo  much  the

(?)  Cit.  ad  n.  64.  '  flj  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  61.

(ij  Eph.  n,  c.  dec.  2.  a.  8.  obf.  233.  (mj  Cit.  ad  n.  65.

roore.


360  B6ok  in. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

more,  prevented  from  approaching  one  to  another,  and  coalefcing.  He  alfo
thought  it  necellary,  as  I  luppofc,  that  there  fliould  not  be  more  than  one
cavity  in  the  cyft ;  which  otherwile  muft  be  an  obftacje  to  the  coalition.  But
I  could  wiih  he  had  exprefly  requir'd  it :  for,  perhaps,  as  he  certainly  ilippos'd,
that  the  cyll  might  be  conceiv'd,  by  every  body,  to  be  unconneiSled,  if  it
chang'd  its  fuuation,  in  confequence  of  every  change  of  fituation  in  the  body  ;
fo  he  would  have  lliown  us  from  whence  we  might  conje£lure  that  the  cyft
had  but  one  cavity.  It'came  into  my  mind,  from  whence  this  might  be  con-
jedur'd,  as  I  have  foid  above  («)  :  but  we  muft  inquire  ftill  farther  into  that
fubjedl-,  and  into  this  moreover,  how  we  may  know,  that  the  parietes  of  the
cyft  are  not  vitiated  with  tumours,  or  abfcefles.  And  he  had  thought  it  ne-
ceflary,  in  the  firft  place,  that  there  fliould  not  be  fo  great  a  quantity  of  wa-
ter, as  that  the  vifcera,  being  forc'd  up  very  high,  muft  be  liable  to  a  very
great  compreffion,  betwixt  the  cyft,  and  the  diaphragm :  but  it  is  furprizing
that  this  never  had  happen'd  in  the  widow  he  fpeaks  of.  However,  it  is
difficult  to  find  women  who  are  willing  to  fubmit  to  the  operation  of  pa-
racentefis,  before  they  are  loaded  with  a  great  quantity  of  water :  and,  in-
deed, it  generally  happens  that  they  do  not  fubmit  to  it,  till  their  ftrength  is
greatly  impair'd,  and  their  vifcera  injur'd  •,  or,  at  leaft,  aftefted  with  difeafe  :
and  then  they  cry  out  for  any  kind  of  affiftance  whatever.

Yet  there  is,  you  will  fay,  an  example  of  a  woman  {0),  who,  having,  at
length,  fuffer'd  the  water  to  be  drawn  off",  when  the  cafe  was  fo  far  advanc'd,
that  "  the  fkin  fcarcely  adher'd  to  her  bones,"  was  perfettly  cur'd  by  this
means ;  notwithftanding  on  the  firft,  and  the  following  days,  bad  figns  ap-
pear'd ;  except  that  a  fiftula  of  the  bel^  remain'd :  cur'd,  I  fay,  fo  that  fhc
conceiv'd,  and  brought  forth  children,^nd  liv'd  in  a  corpulent  and  flourifti-
ing  ftate  of  health  fome  years ;  till,  at  length,  ftie  was  taken  off  by  an  epi-
demical fever.  I  ftiall  not  fay,  here,  that  the  woman  was  young :  nor  fhall
I  fay  that  while  fiie  had  a  tumour  of  her  belly,  a  very  great  difficulty  of
breathing,  a  cough,  and  tumour  of  the  feet,  did  not  attend  it.  I  ftiall  obferve
this  one  thing,  that  thefe  figns  are  common  both  to  the  internal  encyfted
dropfy,  and  the  dropfy  of  the  peritonaeum  ;  and  that  it  does  not  certainly  ap-
pear, from  the  hiftory,  that  the  woman  had  labour'd  under  the  one,  rather
than  the  other;  efpecially  as  another  woman  •,  who  had  been,  likewife,  fup-
pos'd  to  be  afflidted  with  a  dropfy  of  the  tube,  from  the  fame  figns  (/>),  and
who,  having  been  extremely  well  on  the  firft  day  from  the  drawing  off  of  the
water,  was  foon  after  attack'd  with  unkindly  fymptoms,  and  died  on  the
feventh  day  from  the  difcharge  of  the  water  ;  fhow'd  that  water,  to  thofe
who  difiedled  the  body,  to  have  been  collected  betwixt  the  peritonasum,  and
the  indurated  omentum  :  and  this  is  openly  declar'd  with  a  candour  that  de-
ferves  every  kind  of  commendation.

And,  indeed,  that,  agreeably  to  the  fame  defire  after  truth,  I  may  conceal
nothing  from  you,  take  this  for  granted  :  if  any  one  contend  that  thefe  two
cures  of  du  Verney,  related  rather  to  the  dropfy  of  the  peritoneum,  I  have
nothing  to  reply  in  objedion  to  his  opinion  ;  efpecially,  as  it  was  not  in  his

(»)  N.  64.  in  fin.  (j,)  Ibid.  n.  7.

("oj  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  100.  n.  5.

4  power


Letter  XXXVIII. Article 71.  361

power  to  examine  by  difleftion,  that  virgin  who  was  cury,  and  as  the  wi-
dow, whom  perhaps  he  might  have  examin'd,  he  did  not  examine  :  and  even
in  the  place  where  he  firft  related  both  thefe  cures,  there,  as  I  have  faid  above
(q),  he  has  exprefly  aflerted,  that  he  had  {een  none  of  them  cur'd,  who  were
troubled  with  an  internal  encyfted  dropfy.

71.  In  the  mean  time,  till  others  can  teach  more  certain  methods  of  cure,
I  Ihould  fuppofe  it  would  be  better  to  imitate  that  cautious  phyfician  Tar-
gioni  (r),  and  to  be  content  to  make  ufe  of  the  palliative  cure  in  the  in-
ternal encyfted  dropfy;  which Schorkopffius  (s)  had,  alfo,  "  principally"  re-
commended. Targioni  has  many  admonitions  to  this  efFe6t,  which  you  may
feledt,  and  prudently  follow;  not  neglefting  even  this  laft,  that  when  drop-
fies  of  that  kind  are  already  large,  thofe  poftures,  motions,  and  exertions,
of  body  ought  to  be  avoided,  from  whence  the  cyft  may  prefs  too  much
upon  the  vifcera,  or  the  vifcera  upon  the  cyfb.  For  with  how  much  eale
cyfts,  which  are  not  very  large,  are  fometimes  rupcur'd,  the  hiftory  that  I
related  to  you  above  (t)  fufficiently  demonftrates.  And  a  violent  fit  of
laughter,  in  that  woman,  did  the  fame  thing  which  it  had  done  in  a  man,  of
whom  Hoffmann  (k)  has  left  us  an  obfervation.  For  he  very  properly  argues,
that  from  too  violent  laughing,  the  fac  in  the  thorax,  which  had  contain'd  a
great  quantity  of  water,  was  ruptur'd  ;  becaufe  the  difficulty  of  breathing,
which  had  exifted  before,  together  with  a  fix'd  pain  of  the  left  fide,  was
immediately  chang'd  into  fuffbcation :  and  as  this  carried  the  patient  off  in  a
fhort  time,  in  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax  was  found,  not  only  a  great  quan-
tity of  water,  but  in  the  fame  place,  alfo,  many  "  lacerated  membranes,  and
"  veficles,  feparated  from  the  vertebrae,  and  ribs,  which  pretty  plainly  Ihow'd"
a  rupture  of  a  fac,  and  perhaps  a  fudden  effufion  of  very  acrid  water.
For  it  is  not  always  fo  eafy  to  discharge  the  extravafated  water  by  the  urinary
pafTages,  as  it  happen'd  theji  in  that  woman  :  for  in  the  man  even  time  was
wanting.  From  whence  you  will,  alfo,  more  eafily  underfland,  how  greatly
they  err,  who  ufe  the  more  violent  remedies,  againft  dropfies  of  this  kind  in
particular ;  I  mean  fuch  as  emetics,  and  purgatives.  And,  indeed,  Wepfer
(x),  having  found,  in  a  woman  who  had  an  afcites  come  on  after  an  enor-
mous vomiting,  the  ovarium  enlarg'd  in  its  bulk,  and  lacerated  to  a  furpriz-
ing  degree,  fuppos'd  the  water  to  have  flow'd  out  from  hence,  into  the  ca-
vity of  the  belly.  And  you  yourfelf  will  form  the  fame  judgment  of  thofe
two  women  whom  I  have  taken  notice  of  (y)  from  Schacherus,  and  Gutter-
mann,  as  being  found  to  have  an  afcites,  at  the  fame  time  that  there  was  a
rupture  in  the  dropfical  ovarium  ;  if,  in  reading  over  the  hiftory  of  each  wo-
man (z),  you  obferve  what  kind  of  medicines  they  had  taken,  and  what  ef-
fedls  they  had  fuffer'd  from  thence.

But  while  I  am  defirous  of  gratifying  your  wifhes,  I  have  carried  my  dif-
courfe  out  to  fuch  a  length,  as  I  did  not  at  all  intend  from  the  firft  ;  and  that
almoft  without  perceiving  it.  I  therefore  make  an  end  of  writing  at  prefent.
Farewell.

(f)  N.  68.  '  (k)  Med.  rat.  t.  4.  p.  4.  c.  14.  obf.  7.

(r)  Git.  fupra  ad  n.  64.  (x)  Apud  Scorkopffinm  modo  cit.  th.  23.

(s)  Thef.  25.  fupra  ad  n.  69.  cit.  CyJ  N.  64.

■(tj  N.  69.  [z)  Schacheri  vid.  §,  16.  in  fin.

Vol.  ir.  Aaa  LETTER


362  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly,


LETTER the THIRTY-NINTH,

In  which  the internal preternatural  Tumours of  the
Belly  that  remain  are  fpoken  of.


AS  I  have  treated  fufficiently  of  the  afcites,  and  other  univerfal  tumours
of  the  belly,  in  the  preceding  letter ;  it  now  follows  to  fpeak  of  thofe
which  diftend  fome  particular  parts  thereof;  fome  of^the  upper  and  lower,
however,  excepted :  as  the  tumours,  with  which  they  are  affefted,  are  al-
ready written  of  in  other  letters  (a).  Valfalva  then  has  left  thefe  five  ob-
fervations,  relative  to  thofe  which  occupy  the  middle  and  the  lower  parts  of
the  belly.

2.  George  Marchefi,  a  nobleman  of  Forli,  who  labour'd  under  a  large  in-
ternal tumour  of  the  belly,  had  a  pain  in  his  back,  and  in  his  loins  on  the
left  fide.  His  urine  he  difcharg'd  frequently,  but  the  inteftinal  excrements
not  without  the  greatefl:  {trainings.  He  had  an  appetite  for  food.  Yet  all
the  parts  of  the  body  being,  at  length,  quite  emaciated,  and  extenuated  ;
except  that  the  left  fide  of  the  fcrotum  had  been  long  affedled  with  a  hard
tuberofity ;  and  on  the  laft  fifteen  days  of  his  life  his  feet  having  a  very  con-
fiderable  cedematous  tumour ;  his  left  foot  was  feiz'd  with  an  eryfipelas,  and
this  noble  youth  died  on  the  day  following.

The  belly  being  open'd,  in  its  center  a  large  bulk  of  tumour  appear'd,
which  fo  comprefs'd  the  vifcera  every  where,  that  if  they  were  not  forc'd
quite  out  of  their  natural  fituation,  they  were,  at  leaft,  very  much  contrafted,
and,  in  many  places,  of  a  livid  hue  ;  although,  in  other  refpefts,  as  far  as
could  be  perceiv'd  by  the  eye,  found.  This  tumour  hung  from  the  mefen-
tery  ;  being  cover'd,  on  its  whole  anterior  furface,  with  the  omentum,  which
was  extenuated,  and  in  many  places  lacerated.  The  omentum  being  fepa-
rated,  and  taken  away  from  thence,  the  figure  of  the  tumour  came  fomewhat
better  into  view.  This  figure  was  very  irregular :  and,  on  the  upper  part,
two  protuberances  were  extended  towards  the  hypochondria,  one  on  each
fide  •,  fo  that  one  of  them  not  only  cover'd  the  liver,  and  the  other  the  fpleen,
but  thefe  vifcera  were  even  confiderably  forc'd  upwards  thereby.  And  the
llomach  itfelf  was  not  quite  free  from  preflure  •,  being  fomewhat  confin'd  by
the  middle  body  of  the  tumour,  from  which  the  tv/o  protuberances  were
fent  off.  And  the  weight  of  the  whole  tumour  feem'd  to  be  about  five  and
twenty  pounds.

(aj  Epift.  36  &  38  ex  parte.

4  But


Letter  XXXIX. Article  3,  4.  363

But  even  in  other  parts,  on  the  outfide  of  the  tumour,  the  whole  mefen-
tery  was  turgid  v^ith  the  fame  kind  of  fiibftance,  whereof  the  tumour  con-
fifted  •,  and  with  this  tumour  another  tumour  was  alfo  join'd,  of  the  fame  na-
ture with  that  which  was  in  the  left  tefticle.  That  is  to  fay,  the  nature  of
both  thofe  tumours  was,  in  great  meafure,  fimilar  to  that  of  cancerous  tu-
mours-,  and,  in  particular,  of  fome  which  are  obferv'd  in  the  breafts.  The
bodies  whereof  they  confifted,  mod  of  them,  approach'd  to  a  glandular  fub-
ftance,  and  refembled  puff-balls  in  their  figure,  or  as  they  are  call'd  in  our
language  tartuffi.  They  were  of  a  different  magnitude  :  fome  of  them  were
whitifh  like  fat,  but  others  red  like  flefh  ;  and  many  were  even  blackifh,
as  if  from  concreted  blood.  In  fome  of  the  interftices  of  the  body  pus,  but
in  others  ichor,  and  in  fome  a  yellow  ferum,  ftagnated.  Yet  in  no  part  of
the  tumours  was  there  more  ferum,  than  in  that  which  was  in  the  tefticle.

3.  We  have,  now,  all  the  circumftances  that  relate  to  this  hiftory,  a  part
of  which  I  have  already  produc'd  {b).  having  promis'd  the  remainder,  with  the
obfervations  of  Valfalva ;  fome  feleft  ones  of  which  I  then  intended  to  pub-
lilh  in  the  latter  end  of  his  difiertations.  And  indeed  this  is  not  one  of  the
moft  inconfiderable,  if  we  attend  to  the  extenfion,  and  weight,  of  the  tu-
mour, at  the  fame  time.  For  in  regard  to  the  former  property,  it  does  not
efcape  me,  that  other  large  tumours  of  the  mefentery  have,  fometimes,  fo
extended  themfelves,  in  their  upper  part,  to  the  liver,  or  fpleen,  as  to  have
made  phyficians  fuppofe,  upon  examining  the  abdomen  of  the  patient,  that
one,  or  other,  of  thefe  vifcera,  was  converted  into  a  fcirrhous  mafs.  But,
here,  befides  that  it  cover'd,  with  its  upper  appendages,  both  the  liver,  and
the  fpleen,  it  produc'd  its  lower  appendage  downwards,  in  fo  extraordinary
manner,  as  to  join  it  with  the  tumour  of  the  left  tefticle.

You  will  read,  indeed,  the  defcription  of  a  fteatoma,  by  thofe  celebrated
men  Hebenftreit  (c),  and  Matthia  {d),  which  being  in  the  mefentery,  had
drawn  up  one  tefticle  within  the  belly  toitfelf,  inftead  of  being  extended  down-
wards thereto ;  and  although,  in  the  fecond  obfervation,  it  was  produc'd  to
the  femur,  and  furrounded  the  crural  vefTels,  yet  in  neither  did  it  afcend  to
the  liver  and  fpleen.  But  the  weight  of  the  tumour,  in  both  of  thefe  obferva-
tions,  and  ftill  more  in  that  which  will  be  taken  notice  of  below  (^),  was  in-
deed greater  thafi  in  that  made  by  Vallalva.  Yet  who  can  deny  that  the  tu-
mour defcrib'd  by  him,  was  one  of  the  large  ones  that  are  found  in  the  me-
fentery, even  when  we  confider  its  weight  ?  Since  Wharton  (f),  who  men-
tions many  of  them,  gives  account  of  no  more  than  two  confiderable  tu-
mours •,  one  of  which,  having  been  obferv'd  by  him,  weigh'd  about  feven
pounds,  and  the  other  that  had  been  obferv'd  by  Parey,  weigh'd  ten  pounds
and  a  half,  though  its  fize  is  faid  to  be  "  wonderful,  and  almoft  incre-
"  dible."

4.  As  to  the  fymptoms  remark'd  in  the  living  patient,  you  will  certainly
not  expeft  me  to  fay  why,  although  he  had  an  appetite  for  food,  he  became
emaciated  in  his  whole  body,  if  you  confider  by  which  way  the  chyle  is  to
be  carried  into  the  blood  ; nor  yet  why  the  feet  fwell'd  to  fuch  a  degree,  if

(bj  Epift.  anat.  2.  n.  67.  (?)  N.  8.

(c)  DifFert.  de  part,  coalef.  morb.  §.  17.  (fj  Adenogr.  c.  11.

(d)  Commerc.  licter.  a.  1739.  hebd.  48.

A  a  a  2  vou


364  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

you  confider  through  what  parts  the  iliac  veins,  and  the  cava  inferior,  pafs.
Moreover,  the  weight,  and  bulk,  of  the  tumour  did  not  only  prefs  upon  the
chyliferous,  or  fanguiferous  velfels,  but  alfo  the  bladder,  and  inteftines.  For
which  reaibn,  as  the  one  could  not  eafily  be  diftended,  and  the  other  not  eafiiy
dilated,  the  patient  was  under  a  neceffity  of  making  water  frequently,  and  of
difcharging  his  excrements  with  great  ftrainings.

The  laft  of  thefe  circumftances  is  fhewn,  by  Fernelius  (g),  to  happen  often
in  this  difeafe,  and  for  the  fame  reafon  ;  and  both  of  them,  or,  atleaft,  acoftive-
nefs,  and  a  difficulty  in  difcharging  the  urine,  you  will  fee  obferv'd  by  Parey,
and  explain'd  In  the  fame  manner,  in  the  cafe  I  took  notice  of  juft  now  (^),
which  is  alfo  transfer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  (/).  In  that  cafe  a  pain  is,  at  the
fame  time,  fpoken  of,  which,  as  in  our  cafe,  was  very  troublefome  in  the  back,
and  the  loins  ;  and  you  know  to  which  of  the  vertebras  the  mefentery  is  con-
nefled.  This  pain,  and  difficulty  of  making  water,  are  not  wanting,  like-
wife,  in  the  next  hiftory  of  Valfalva.

5.  A  woman  of  fixty  years  of  age,  having  complain'd,  for  many  months,
of  a  certain  tumour  in  the  umbilical  region,  began  to  be  troubled  with  a
heavy  and  oppreffive  pain,  towards  the  back,  which  was  fometimes  attended
with  a  difficulty  in  making  water.  The  tumour  was  every  day  increas'd,
though  it  was  already  as  large  as  the  uterus  in  a  pregnant  woman  can  be  j
and,  in  confequence  thereof,  the  pain  I  have  defcrib'd  increas'd  alfo :  efpeci-
ally  when  the  woman,  being  in  a  recumbent  pofture,  turn'd  herfelf  from
one  fide  to  the  other.

Upon  opening  the  belly  after  death,  a  great  bulk  of  tumour  appear'd.
This  tumour  had  its  bafis  in  the  center  of  the  mefentery,  and  was  conneded
with  the  adipofe  membrane  of  the  right  kidney  ;  butadher'd  to  the  termina.-
tion  of  the  inteftinum  colon,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  they  could  not  be  divided
without  laceration.  The  fubflance  of  the  tumour  was  in  fome  places  firm,,
but  in  others  foft,  fo  as  to  referable  a  fleatomatous  matter.  The  right  kid-
ney abounded  with  particles  of  fand,  and  had  its  pelvis  very  much  dilated..
But  the  remaining  vifcera  were  found.

6.  Although  i^  is  not  to  be  doubted,^  but  that  difficulty  in  making  watery
and  the  pain  which  lay  towards  the  back,  related,  in  fome  meafure,  to  the
kidney  alfo  ;  as  this  had  fandy  concretions  form'd  in  it,  and  could  not  but  have
its  proper  membrane  fomewhat  pull'd  away,  at  the  fame  time  that  its  com-
mon, that  is  the  adipofe,  membrane  fuffer'd  diftraftion,;  yet  this  diftradlion
was  brought  on  by  the  weight  of  the  annex'd  tumour,  and  the  frequent  dif-.
ficulty  of  making  water,  in  the  latter  part  of  pregnancy,  happens  from
rhe  bulk  of  the  greatly-enlarg'd  uterus,  with  which  this  bulk  of  tumour,  as
1  have  faid,  might  have  been  compar'd :  and  if  we  fuppofe  it.  to  have  been
more  protuberant  on  the  right  fide,  near  to  the  kidney,  as  that  connexion
feems  to  prove,  it  may  from  hence,  alfo,  be  eafily  underftood,  how  the  dila-
tation of  the  pelvis  had  been  brought  on  -,  that  is,  by  the  ureter  being  fre^
quently  comprefs'd,  and  the  defcent  of  the  urine  being  obftruded.

But  be  this  as  it  will,  you  will,  perhaps,,  be  furpriz'd  at  one  thing,  in  both
of  thefe  hiftories,  which  I  have  given  you  ;  I  mean,  that  befides  the  pain  in

(g)  Pathol.  1.  6.  c  7.  (/)  Sea.  hac  Zi.  obf.  38.

W  N.  3.  ■

th.gr


Letter  XXXXIX. Article  7.  365

the  loins  and  back,  which  was  a  neceflary  confequence  from  the  weight  of
the  diftrafting  tumour,  no  particular  pain  is  fpoken  of,  that  belong'd  imme-
diately to  the  tumour  itfelf-,  or,  atleaft,  to  thofe  membranes  of  the  mefencery,
betwixt  which  it  lay.  But  you  will  ceafe  to  wonder,  when  I  fhall  have  fhown
that  the  obfervations,  and  writings,  both  of  the  ancients,  and  moderns,  agree
with  the  hiftories  of  Valfalva.  Under  the  name  of  ancients,  I  do  not  under-
ftand  here,  any  more  ancient  than  Benivenius,  who  flourifh'd  about  the  be-
ginning of  the  fixteenth  century.  Yet  I  do  not  think  that  thefe  difeafes  of
the  mefentery  were  unknown  to  thofe  who  wrote  long  before  his  time.  For
although  they  were  not  accuftom'd  to  difle<5t  human  bodies,  yet  they  fre-
quently us'd  todiffedlthe  bodies  of  brute  animals,  in  fome  of  which  it  can-
4}ot  be  fuppos'd  but  they  muft  have  met  with  this  appearance,  that  I  even
met  with  in  a  little  hen-chicken.

This  chicken  was  greatly  emaciated,  and  greatly  voracious ;  yet  her  belly
was  equally  tumid,  as  if  Ihe  was  about  to  lay  an  egg,  which  as  yet  flie
was  too  young  to  do.  This  tumour  was  made  up  of  roundifh  and  fcirrhous
bodies,  many  of  the  fize  of  a  bean,  and  fome  of  the  bignefs  of  a  chefnut,  lying
betwixt  the  folds  of  the  inteftines,  and  fome  of  them  even  fix'd  thereto  ;  all
of  them  of  a  granulated  furface,  and  even  granulated  in  their  ftrufture  ;  ex-
cept that  one  of  the  largeft  contain'd  a  great  fubftance,  every  where  fur-
rounded  by  thofe  very  hard  granules,  and  refembling  a  white,  and  tender,  but
juicelefs,  and  almoft  friable  fuet :  fuch  as,  in  the  preceding  letter  {k),  I  de-
fcrib'd  in  the  uterus,  and  the  ovaria,  of  a  certain  woman.  But  here  the  ovarium
was  found,  together  with  its  very  fmall  eggs,  as  both  of  the  pancreas  were;  and,
if  you  except  the  increas'd  magnitude,  the  liver  alfo,  and  fpleen,  and  indeed,
the  inteftines  themfelves,  were  found.

It  therefore  does  not  feem  probable  to  me,  that  no  tumour  had  ever  been
obferv'd  in  the  mefentery,  by  cooks,  by  butchers,  by  thofe  who  facrific'd  beafts,  -
and  fhown  to  phyficians ;  fince  Galen,  as  I  have  taken  notice  to  you  alrea-
dy (/^,  hadfcen  a  fcirrhous  tumour  round  the  heart,  in  a  cock,  and  transfer'd.
the  difeafe  to  human  bodies.  I  fhould  rather  fuppofe,  that  what  the  ancient
phyficians  might  have  lijnted,  in  regard  to  this  fubjed,  had  been  loft  by
length  of  time,  as  fo  many  other  things  have.  For  if  Julius  Pollux,  as  I
have  read  in  Ingraffia  (?»),  "  aflerted,  that  ftrumous  tumours  are  form'd
"  even  about  the  mefentery,"  certainly  either  the  grammarian  himfelf  took
the  hint  from  fome  phyfician  ;  or,  if  it  happen'd  that  he  faw  it  himfelf,  it  is
difficult  to  fuppofe  that  the  phyficians  who  wrote  from  the  latter  end  of  the
fecond  century,  to  the  beginning  of  the  fixteenth  (for  they  fay  that  Pollux,,
as  well  as  Galen,  liv'd  in  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Commodus)  being  admo-
nifh'd  by  a  grammarian,  fliould  none  of  them  have  laid  a  word  about  difor-
ders  of  the  mefentery  of  this  kind.

7.  Benivenius  (22)  then  found  "  a  callus"  (by  which  I  underftand  a  hard
tumour)  among  the  mefenteric  veins  of  a  boy,  that  obftrufted  thofe  veins  by
its  prefflire.  And  Ingrafllas  {0)  found,  in  the  mefentery  of  a  black,  who,
was  publicly  hang'd,  about  feventy  ftrums,  befides  almoft  as  many  tumoursj

(i)  N.  34.  (»)  Deabdit.  niorb.  cauf.  &c.  c.  ^7.

(I J  Epiih  16.  n.  zo>,  \o)  Qomm.cit.

\tn)  De  tumor,  tr.  i.e.  i ,  comm.  2,

adherina.


366  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

adhereing  to  the  external  coat  of  the  inteftines  •,  in  both  which  kinds  of  tu-
mours ;  though  fome  were  of  the  imallnefs  of  a  vetch,  others  of  a  hen's  egg,
and  many  of  a  middle  fize  betwixt  thele  two  •,  was  univerlally  contain'd  either  a
liquid,  and  a  mucous  matter,  or  a  gypfeous,  and  ftony  matter.  Yet  Benive-
iiius,  when  he  mentions  the  other  diibrders  of  the  boy,  fays  not  a  word  of
pain.  And  all  who  knew  the  black  of  Ingraflias,  have,  with  a  common,  and
full  confent,  aflerted,  "  that  he  had  been  extremely  healthy,  till  he  was
"  hang'd,"  which  is  a  circumflance  really  furprizing.

Nor,  indeed,  do  I  believe  that  Fernelius  fj)),  when  he,  in  general,  aflerted,
that  a  tumour  of  the  mefentery  "  gave  no  pain,"  had  faid  it  without  having
made  fome  obfervations,  from  whence  to  make  fuch  a  conclufion ;  notvi'ith-
ftanding  he  immediately  adds  this  reafon  for  his  aflertion,  "  that  the  part  it-
"  felf  is  incapable  of  pain."  And  this  I  believe  dill  more  of  Arantius  (jj ;  as
he  feems  to  have  obferv'd  tumours,  in  that  part,  fo  large,  as  "  fometimes  to
"  exceed  the  fize  of  a  pine-nut,  and  the  head  of  a  child  :"  and  he  certainly
gives  the  figns  of  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  feem  to  have  had  before  his  eyes
a  ftrufture  fimilar  to  that  which  is  defcrib'd  by  Valfalva  (r),  in  Marchefi.  For
it  is,  fays  he,  "  a  tuberous  and  unequal  tumour,  by  reafon  of  its  being  made
"  up  of  many  glandular  bodies,  connefted  together ;  which  being  furpri-
*'  zingly  increas'd  in  their  magnitude,  cohere  with  each  other,  and  form  un-
"  equal  tumours,  refembling  mufhrooms,  and  fuch-like  vegetations.

But  he  gives  this  as  the  firft  fign  of  all,  "  that  the  tumour  is  indolent."  Per-:
haps  you  will  here  fay,  that  hard  and  cold  tumours,  as  they  call'd  them,  were
obferv'd  by  Benivenius,  and  Ingraflias  ;  and  that  Fernelius,  and  Arantius,
certainly  did  not  intend  to  refer  to  any  other.  But  certainly  Benivenius  (j),
when  he  found  a  tumour  of  a  different  kind,  which  had  already  degenerated
into  a  large  abfcefs  of  the  mefentery,  remark'd  that  there  had  been  tormina  of
the  belly,  which  increas'd  every  day-,  and,  being  grown  intolerable,  kill'd
the  patient.  And  I  do  not  doubt,  but  you  have  likewife  read,  even  in  the
Sepulchretum,  that  colic  pains,  or  pains  fimilar  thereto,  have  been  obferv'd
to  be  the  confequents  of  abfceffes,  and  apoftems,  in  the  mefentery  -,  according
to  the  teflimony  of  Mermannus  (/),  Folius  C«j,  Wepfer  {x),  and  Senner-
tU8  (y).

It  does  not,  however,  efcape  me,  that  thefe  objeflions  may  be  made :  part  of
which  did  not  efcape  IMarcellus  Donatus  (z),  who  I  fee  had  read  moft  of
thofe  things,  that  1  have  hitherto  faid,  of  tumours  of  the  mefentery,  whereof
mention  was  made  in  books,  even  in  his  time.  And  as  he  openly  contended,
as  much  as  any  one,  that  the  mefentery  was  affefted  with  no  pain  worth
fpeaking  of-,  becaufe,  among  its  conftituent  parts,  he  acknowledg'd  none  to
be  endow'd  with  fenfation,  befides  the  nerves,  and  the  membranes ;  the  fenfe
of  which  parts  he  did  nor,  however,  doubt,  was  made  very  dull  and  ob-
tufe,  by  the  great  quantity  of  fat  that  lay  round  them  •,  he  judg'd  that  the
pain  remark'd  by  Benivenius,  was  not  a  pain  of  the  meientery,  but  of  the
inteftines. That  is  to  fay,  he  fuppos'd  the  pain  to  have  been  excited  in  that

(/)  C.  fupra  adn.  4.  cit.  (/)  (k)  [x)  {y)  L.  3.  f.  14.  obf.  30.  §.  10.

(^)  L.  de  tumor,  p.  n.  c.  44.  &  §.  13.  &  feq.

(r)  Supra  n.  2.  (z)  De  med.  hift.  mirab,  1.  4.  c.  7.

14  L.  cit.  c.  33.

trafb


Letter  XXXXIX. Article  8.  367

tra£t  of  the  inteftines,  in  particular,  wherewith  the  difeas'd  portion  of  the
mefentery  was  join'd,  by  the  weight  of  a  great  quantity  of  matter,  which
created  the  abfceffes,  either  compreffing,  or  dragging  it  downwards ;  to  fay
nothing  of  the  acrid  exhalation  of  this  matter.

8.  Though  it  is  by  no  means  incumbent  upon  me,  to  approve  of  every  thing
that  Marcellus,  as  I  have  faid,  fuppos'd  -,  yet  it  does  not  feem  poffible  to  deny
this,  that  alvi  tormina ;  for  thefe  are  the  words  us'd  by  Benivenius ;  fignify
pains  of  the  inteilines,  rather  than  pains  of  the  mefentery:  or,  if  this  fhould
be  doubtful  to  any  one,  becaufe  thefe  words  are  prefently  added,  "  all  the
"  vifcera  appear'd  to  be  found,  the  liver,  fpleen,  and  all  the  inteftines,  fhowing
"  no  mark  of  pain  •,"  it  is  certain,  that  in  other  hiftories,  at  leaft,  which  I
have  taken  notice  of,  "  a  colic,"  or  "  pains,  like  to  colic  pains,"  are  ex-
prefsly  mention'd.  And  left  you  fhould  imagine  that  thefe  only  happen
when  there  is  an  abfcefs,  read  Platerus  (a),  and  Wharton  (b),  who  obferv'd
"  colic  pains,"  in  thofe  perfons,  in  whofe  mefentery  the  former  found  "  hard
"  and  glandular  tumours,"  fo  grown  into  one  fubftance  with  the  inteftines,
that,  by  ftreightning  their  canal,  they  hinder'd  the  defcent  of  the  excre-
ments ;  and  the  latter,  a  fingle  tumour,  but  fo  large  as  to  thruft  the  inteftines
to  one  fide :  and  that  "  a  glandular,  and  flefhy,  more  than  an  humoral,  tu-
"  mour."

But  if  in  the  obfervations  of  Valfalva  (c),  and  others,  that  I  have  quoted  above
{d),  thefe  pains  are  not  faid  to  have  been  brought  on,  by  tumours  of  this  kind,
it  is  to  be  fuppos'd,  that  in  fome  the  inteftines  were  not  equally  comprefs'd;
and  in  others,  that  they  had  not  an  equal  quantity  of  fa:ces,  or  that  the  faeces
were  not  equally  acrid :  which  firft  circumftance  you  will  particularly  fuppofe
of  the  woman,  whofe  mefentery,  as  you  will  fee  in  Coiterus  {e),  was  "  made
"  up  of  many,  and  thofe  pretty  large,  fcirrhi ;"  but  fhe  could  fcarcely  fwal-
low  any  thing,  even  that  was  liquid.  So  you  will  fay  that  there  were  fome
other  caufes,  if  not  the  fame,  even  in  particular  abfceffes  of  the  liver ;  for
we  do  not  read  of  them  all  being  attended  with  pains.  Excruciating  tor-
tures are  indeed  taken  notice  of  by  the  fame  author  (/),  in  the  defcription
of  a  large  abfcefs ;  but  they  were  fuch  as  may  be  refer'd  to  the  difficulty  of
making  water,  and  the  other  inconveniences  that  are  related :  fince  not  the
leaft  mention  is  made  of  pains  of  the  belly,  or  inteftines.  And,  indeed,  Do-
natus  {g)  gives  an  obfervation  made  by  him,  of  a  large  abfcefs  ;  as  a  great
quantity  of  bloody  and  purulent  matter,  which  was  difcharg'd  by  ftool,  and  a
fordid  ulcer  of  the  length  of  a  fpan,  which  remain'd  in  the  mefentery,  de-
monftrated  :  whereas,  in  a  very  long  ficknefs,  no  complaint  v/as  ever  heard
of  pain,  unlefs  on  the  Lift  day  of  her  life,  and  difeafe.

But  mAich  more  furprizing  than  others  is  the  hiftory  of  Hearnius,  which  you
have  in  this  twency-firft  fection  of  the  Sepulchretum  {h).  For  in  this  hiftory,
though  other  fymptoms  are  defcrib'd,  there  is  not  a  word  of  pain  in  the  belly.
"Which  circumftance  is  not  fo  furprizing,  on  account  of  twelve,  or  more  pints,
of  fluid  matter,  that  was  in  the  triple  tumour,  as  on  account  of  the  weight

{a)  Sepnlch.  obf.  30.  cit.  §.  11.  {e)  Obf.  anat.

(i)  AJenogr.  c.  u.  (fj  Ibid.

\c)  N.  2.  &  5.  (g)  C.  7.  paulo  anteeit,

(«')  N.  7.  i^h)  Obf.  36.  §.  1.

of


368  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

of  the  whole  tumour,  which  was  equal  to  fifty  Swedifh  pounds  •,  and  its  fitu-
ation,  which  was  almoft  the  whole  fpace  of  the  mefentery.  To  this  may  be
added,  that  the  tumour  was  clofely  connefted  to  the  inteftines,  from  the  duo-
denum to  the  middle  of  the  ileum,  as  if  it  had  coalefc'd  into  one  fubftance
with  them,  fo  that  it  could  not  be  feparated  without  rupture  ;  and  that  the
quantity  of  food  which  was  taken  in,  was  fcarcely  fufficient  to  fatisfy  the  de-
fire  of  the  patient  •,  as  his  appetite  was  continual,  and  almoft  canine  :  fo  that
we  are  not  at  liberty,  here,  to  fuppoie  either  a  fmall  quantity  of  excrements,
or  that  the  inteftines  were  not  comprefs'd  ;  but  a  far  different  reafon  muft  be
thought  of  by  any  one  who  would  endeavour  to  account  for  the  abfence  of
pains,  which  I  fhall  endeavour  to  do  below  (/).  For  at  prefent,  it  is  necef-
i'ary  to  point  out  other  obfervations,  in  which  thefe  pains  were  not  abfent,  that
you  may  add  them  to  the  Sepulchretum.

There  is  one  of  Dolseus  (/:),  wherein  a  tumour,  fomething  lefs  than  that
defcrib'd  by  Valfalva  (/),  but  of  a  ftrufture  not  unlike  it,  was  attended  with
dreadful  tenfions,  and  a  troublefome  fenfation,  as  if  living  whelps  were  nou-
rifti'd  in  the  belly  ;  but  the  tumour  arofe  from  the  mefentery :  however,  "  it
*'  was  fix'd  to  the  fmall  inteftines,  in  feveral  places  :  and  the  inteftines  even
*'  pafs'd  through  its  fubftance."  The  fecond  obfervation  is  that  of  Verdrie-
fius  (m),  who  defcribes  the  whole  mefentery  as  being  "  fteatomatous,"  after
tormina  of  the  belly,  and  not  without  a  large  abfcefs  •,  but,  at  the  fame  time,
defcribes  the  inteftines  as  "  cohering  clofely  to  one  another."  The  third  ob-
fervation is  that  of  Laubius  («)  on  a  man,  who,  being  afflifted  with  very
troublefome  pains  of  the  belly,  had  tubercles  in  the  mefentery  indeed ;  but
his  inteftines  were  alfo  fiU'd  with  a  great  number  of  "  fteatomatous"  abfcefles
of  the  fame  kind.  On  the  contrary  Goekelius  (o)  remark'd  the  whole  me-
lentery,  in  a  moft  noble  count,  to  be  befet  with  a  great  quantity  of  fcirrhous
and  febaceous  fat  •,  and  yet  "  there  had  been  no  tormina."

To  conclude  therefore  •,  in  the  obfervations  produc'd  both  by  the  ancients,
and  moderns,  either  pain  is  not  faid  to  be  join'd  with  a  tumour  of  the  me-
fentery ;  or  if  we  do  read  of  it  as  join'd  therewith,  it  does  not  appear  to  have
been  in  the  mefentery  itfelf,  rather  than  in  the  inteftines.  And  much  lefs
does  it  appear  in  the  hiftory  of  Jo.  Scultetus,  which  is  extant,  likewife,  in
the  Sepulchretum  (/));  for  it  does  not  fufEciently  appear,  that  the  excruciat-
ing pains  of  the  belly  were  on  the  outfide  of  the  inteftines  :  and  if  it  did  ap-
pear ;  as  the  very  acrid  matter,  which  was  contain'd  in  the  fix  tumours  of
the  mefentery,  is  faid  to  have  corroded,  to  a  great  degree,  all  the  vertebras  of
the  loins  -,  thofe  who  attended  to  the  other  obfervations,  would  not  be  at  a
lofs  to  conjedture  a  different  feat  of  the  pains,  or  of  the  origin  of  pains,  on
the  outfide  of  the  mefentery  :  as  they  certainly  would  not,  in  that  example
which  follows :

9.  A  woman,  of  eight  and  twenty  years  of  age,  had  been  troubled,  for  the
fpace  of  four  years,  with  pains  of  her  belly,  which  were  fometimes  attended
with  a  flight  fever :  at  length,  being  grown  more  violent,  they  carried  her  off.

(i)  N.  II.  (k)  Eorund.  torn.  2.  obf.  108.  partic.  3.

(ij  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  5  &  6.  obf.  258.  (0)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  6.  obf.  94.

(J)  N.  2.  CfJ  L.  3.  f.  14.  obf.  30.  §.  12.
(at)  A£l.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf.  87.

The


Letter  XXXIX. Article lo, ii.  369

The  abdomen  of  the  carcafe  did  not  appear  to  have  any  of  that  external
tenfion,  which  had  been  about  the  umbihcal  region,  in  the  living  body.
Yet  in  the  center  of  the  mefentery  v/ere  two  tumours.  One  of  which,  be-
ing of  the  bignefs  of  a  goofe's  egg,  lay  towards  the  right  kidney,  and  was
internally  ulcerated  ;  yet  without  containing  any  thing  purulent :  but  the
other  was  much  larger.  For  it  was  continu'd  to  the  right  kidney,  infinuat-
ing  itfelf,  in  fuch  a  manner,  betwixt  the  internal,  and  external,  coat  thereof,
as  to  cover  the  whole  kidney,  and  could  not  be  puU'd  away  from  it  without
the  greateft  difficulty  ;  and  it  extended  itfelf  quite  to  the  os  pubis  of  the  fame
fide,  being  equal  in  thicknefs,  in  fome  places,  to  two  fingers,  and,  in  others,
to  three.  This  tumour  at  firft  fight  refembled  coagulated  blood.  But  the
whole  of  it  was  invefted  with  firm  membranes,  that  were  given  off  from  the
peritoneum :  and  it  confifted,  in  many  places,  of  a  llibftance  extremely  fim.i-
lar  to  flefhy  fibres,  except  that  they  were  here  ting'd  with  a  black  colour,  and,
in  fome  places,  were  fo  lax,  that  they  feem'd  to  be  nothing  more  than  con-
creted blood.

10.  Tf  I  were  certain  that  Valfalva  perform'd  this  diflection  while  he  was
as  yet  a  very  young  man,  as  I  fufpedt  he  did,  I  fliould  certainly  believe  that
fome  aneurifm  was  defcrib'd  in  this  fecond  tumour.  But  although  it  was  no-
thing more  than  what  it  then  feem'd  to  him  to  be  -,  that  is,  one  of  thofe  tu-
mours of  the  mefentery,  of  which  the  queftion  is  here;  it  certainly  could
not  extend  itfelf  quite  to  the  pubes,  and  to  the  right  kidney,  fo  as  to  cover  it,
without  forcing,  and  compreffing,  the  inteftines ;  nor  infinuate  itfelf  betwixt  the
coats  of  that  kidney,  and  affix  itfelf  fo  clofely  to  the  proper  membrane  of  thefe
two  coats,  and  the  kidney  itfelf,  without  creating  long  and  grievous  uneafi-
nefies  ;  although  they  have  their  origin  in  that  part,  yet  very  often  extend
themfelves  to  the  inteftines,  and  very  often  feem  to  be  pains  of  the  inteftines,
rather  than  of  the  kidney,  as  you  are  by  no  means  ignorant.  In  the  mean
while,  I  would  not  have  you  believe  it  t-o  be  my  opinion,  that  there  can  be
no  tumour  of  the  mefentery,  which  is  itfelf  the  feat  of  pain:  I  only  would
have  you  underftand  all  the  remarks  that  I  have  hitherto  made,  and  produc'd,
in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  perceive,  that  there  is  hone  of  all  thele-  obfervations,
from  whence  it  plainly  appears  that  the  pain  was  in  the  tumour  itfelf.

11.  And  this  is  really  furprizing -,  whether  you  confider  the  quantity  of
nerves  in  the  m'efentery,  or  the  office  of  its  glands.  For  in  the  breafts  is  a
far  lefs  number  of  nerves  in  proportion  ;  fo  that  if  the  glandular  tumours  of
thefe  parts  brought  on  the  moft  excruciating  pain  for  this  reafon,  becaufA
"  the  crude  chyle  being  apt  to  contraft  an  acrimony,  or  fliarpnefs,  cannot  be
"  fent  into  other  parts  in  fo  crude  a  ftate,  and  in  fo  great  a  quantity,"  as  in-
to the  breafts;  there  v/ould  certainly  be  a  more  fevere  pain  in- the  tumours
of  the  mefentery  (the  glands  whereof  the  learned  gentleman  does  not  feeni
to  have  attended  to,  when  he  wrote  thefe  things)  as  into  this  part  the  v/hole
of  the  chyle  flows  ;  and,  what  is  more,  in  a  ftiil  cruder  ftate.  You  would
fay  that  in  the  mefentery  it  is  diluted  vvith  the  lymph,  and  that  it  goes  on
therein,  in  order  to  arrive  at  a  farther  ftage,  inftead  of  ftagnating,  as  it  does
in  the  breaft ;  unlefs  the  incipient  tumour  itfelf  fhould  caufe  a  remora,  both
to  the  lymph,  and  to  the  chyle,  and  foon  after  fuffer  the  lymph,  as  the  thin-
ner fluid,  to  flip  by,  and  retain  the  chyle.

Vol.  II.  B  b  b  Does


370  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Does  the  pain,  then,  which  is  aftually  feated  in  the  mefentery,  feem  to  be
in  the  inteftines,  the  nerves  that  go  thither  being  prick'd,  jtift  as  happens  in
the  foot  which  is  already  amputated  ?  Is  there  not  a  humour  in  all  tum.ours
of  the  mefentery,  which  may  thus  prick  the  nerves  ?  Or  is'  there  a  humour
in  fome  which  may  blunt  the  fenfation  of  the  nerves  by  relaxing  them  ?  Or
are  the  nerves,  in  confequence  of  their  being  intercepted  by  the  hardnefs  of
thefe  tumours,  fometimes  made  incapable  of  the  office  of  fenfation,  juft  as
they  would  be  by  having  a  ligature  made  upon  them  ?  But  if  we  fuppofe
this,  you  v/ill  not  be  able  to  conceive  afterwards,  how  it  happcn'd  that  Lau-
bius  {q)  remark'd  "  tormina,  about  the  navel,"  when  "  a  hard  and  compad:
,  "  fteatomatous  abfcefs,  which  exceeded  the  fize  of  a  man's  fift,  was  feated  in
"  the  pofterior  part  of  the  mefentery,  where  it  is  connefted  to  the  lumbar
"  vertebrse,  furrounding  the  larger  vefTels  of  that  part."

For,  according  to  this  hypothefis,  it  feems  that  the  nerves  lying  upon  thefc
veffels,  and  going  to  the  mefentery,  and  inteftines,  muft  have  been  intercept-
ed, and  comprefs'd.  See  then  that  you  think  of  fome  other  hypothefis  to
add  thereto,  and  confider  of  the  other  explanations,  which  I  juft  now  hinted
at,  and  accommodate  the  other  hypothefis  to  other  obfervations.  None  of
which,  or  at  leaft  none  of  thofe  that  we  have  attended  to,  you  can  fuppofe
explicable  by  you,  in  the  manner  Bierlingius  {r)  has  hinted  -,  as  he  thought
"  that  through  fo  many  ages,  fb  many  authors  were  deceiv'd-,"  if  not  always,
yet  "  many  times ;"  while  being  ignorant  of  the  real  ufe  of  that  large  gland
in  the  center  of  the  mefentery,  and  of  the  receptaculum  chyli,  they  had,  af-
ter death,  from  this  which  was  even  then  full  of  chyle  when  cut  afunder,
"  generally  made  an  abfcefs  of  the  mefentery  :"  as  if  either  the  abfceffes
which  moft  authors  have  given  the  relation  of,  were  not  defcrib'd  to  be  full
of  a  fluid  quite  diflJerent  from  chyle;  or  as  if  that  large  gland  was  the  fame
in  the  human  body,  as  it  is  in  that  of  the  quadruped  fpecies.

I  omit  the  different  fituation  of  fome  abfceffes  and  tumours,  and  the  num-
ber, or  the  magnitude,  of  the  greater  part  of  them  v/hich  have  been  obferv'd,
even  in  the  living  body.  Nor  fhall  I  deny  what  the  celebrated  Haller  (s)
thinks  J  I  mean  that  the  mefenteric  glands,  "  which  are  fometimes  very  large
"  indeed,  in  younger  animals  (but  agreeably  to  the  received  law  of  nature
"  in  conglobated  glands)  have  been  taken  for  difeas'd  glands,  when  they
"  were  very  found."  But  when  there  are  either  many  more  than  this  law
requires,  or  they  are  harder  than  is  natural,  there  certainly  is  no  room  for  this
fufpicion  ;  as,  for  inftance,  in  that  diffeftion  of  the  boy  which  I  have  quoted
(t)  from  Benivenius.  For  he  would  not  have  called  the  tumour  "  a  callus ;"
nor  have  faid  that  "  all"  the  meferaic  veins  were  obftru6ted  thereby,  if  he  had
not  found  a  tumour  amongft  thofe  veins,  which  was  not  only  large,  buc
very  hard.

However,  in  regard  to  the  hardnefs,  both  the  different  nature,  and  the
■  different  age,  is  to  be  confider'^d  in  thefe  tumours. And  how  often  their  na-
ture approaches  to  that  of  a  fteatoma,  you  might  have  obferv'd  from  moft  of
the  obfervations  which  have  been  produc'd. And  yet  it  is  very  different  at

{q)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  2.  obf.  108.  (sj  Not.  2.  ad  §.  128.  pr3;le(fl.  Boej-haav.  in.

ir)  Eph.  n,  c.  dec.  i.  a,  2.  obf.  152.  inftit.

djf-


Letter  ^XXIX. Article  12.  371

different  times.  See,  for  inftance,  thofe  medical  themes  of  that  excellent
anatomift  Solomon  Aiberti,  which  are  publifh'd,  together  with  his  three
orations,  and  relate  to  the  difeafes  of  the  mefentery,  and  pancreas.  Yon  will
find  many  things  therein,  by  which  fome  of  the  reinarks  I  have  made  above
(«J  are  confirm'd  ;  but  the  following  words  in  particular:  that  the  humours
putrefying  in  the  mefentery,  "  fometimes  raife  it  up  into  a  tumour,  which  is
"  atfirftlax  and  foft;  but  in  procefs  of  time,  the  humours  gradually  drying
"  away,  becomes  fo  hard,  and  gives  fo  much  refiftance  to  the  touch,  that  in
"  the  parts  about  the  navel,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  belly,  you  would  think
*'  either  a  bone  or  a  calculus  had  been  form'd."  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it
happens,  at  different  times,  that  thofe  parts  which  were  hard  grow  fofc  by
putrefaftion.  And  to  this  clafs,  among  others,  belongs  that  observation  alio
of  Andreas  Veftphalus  (x),  who  having  found  in  the  belly  of  a  woman,  but
principally  about  the  navel,  "  many  hard  tumours,  which  at  length  grew
"  foft  again  in  a  courfe  of  time,"  faw  in  her  body,  after  death,  the  mefen-
teric  glands  "  for  the  moft  part  ulcerated,  but  fome  ftill  indurated."

Now,  however,  let  us  fee  about  thofe  tumours  that  belong  to  the  lower
part  of  the  belly.

12.  A  woman,  of  forty  years  of  age,  began  formerly,  after  the  abortion
of  a  foetus  of  almoft  five  months  old,  to  oblerve  a  certain  hardnefs  about  the
uterus,  and  to  be  attack'd  with  a  pricking  pain,  in  the  fame  part,  which  was
flight  indeed,  but  continual.  Sometimes  fhe  was  feverifh.  The  tumour,
in  the  mean  while,  increas'd  outwardly  ;  yet  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  be  move-
able :  for  it  was  fometimes  perceiv'd  in  the  middle,  and  fometimes  at  the
fides.  She  had  a  confiderable  pain  in  her  head  :  fhe  went  to  ftool  with  wrear
difficulty  :  a  vomiting  was  at  times  troublefome  :  and  the  pain  in  the  tu-
mour was,  at  certain  times,  fo  excruciating,  and  particularly  when  it  was  in-
creas'd by  uneafinefs  of  mind,  as  to  excite  an  ardent  fever,  and  to  be  almoft
intolerable.  Thefe  circumftances  which  I  have  mention'd  happen'd  within
ten  years :  in  which  time  fhe  never  conceiv'd.  Finally,  the  tumour  being
become  immoveable,  and  the  pain,  and  the  acute  fever,  being  very  violent,
Ihe  was  no  longer  number'd  with  the  living.

The  belly  being  open'd,  a  very  great  bulk  of  tumour  was  found  by  Val-
falva,  fo  as  to  be  equal  to  the  fize  of  a  very  large  human  head.  This  tumour
was  feated  in  the  pofterior  paries  of  the  uterus,  vehemently  comprelling  the
inteftinum  redtum,  and  being  clofely  connedled  to  the  furrounding  parts.  Ex*
ternally,  indeed,  it  feem'd  of  a  flefhy  colour;  but  in  its  fubftance.it  was
more  firm  than  flefti :  and  within  this  fubftance  contain'd  two  finous  cavities,
the  parietes  of  which  refembled  putrid  flefti.  One  of  thefe  cavities  was
empty ;  but  in  the  other  was  contain'd  a  ferous  matter.  This  tumour  alfb
occupied  the  feat  of  the  ovaries.  For  which  reafon  no  traces  of  thefe  parts
remain'd  :  except  that  at  the  fides  of  the  tumour  were  feen  veficles  turgid
with  ferum  ;  fome  of  which  were  equal,  in  their  magnitude,  to  that  of  a  pi-
geon's egg.  Part  of  the  ferum  collecSted  therefrom  was  put  on  the  fire,  and
part  of  it  mix'd  with  acid  juices.  Yet  neither  of  thefe  portions  did  in  theleaft'
coagulate.

CuJ  N.  4  &  7.  f..:J  Didei-t,  de  parte  Inteft.  jejuni  &  est.  c,

B  b  b  2  33.  This


372  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

13.  This  cafe  needs  no  exj^lanation  :  fo  exaftly  do  the  appearances,  found
in  the  dead  body,  aniwer  to  what  had  been  obierv'd  in  the  living.  That  is
to  fay,  the  hardnefs  coming  on  after  abortion,  the  pain,  the  tumour  when
at  length  grown  tnanifeft,  the  feat  thereof,  and  the  defcft  of  conception  for
the  fpace  of  ten  years,  though  in  a  flourifliing  time  of  life,  fufficiently  argued
a  tumour  of  the  uterus  :  nor  did  the  pain  of  the  head,  the  vomitings,  and
the  violent  incrcafe  of  pain  in  the  tumid  parr,  and  particularly  from  the  mind
being  difagreeably  affeCled,  argue  differently  from  the  preceding  fymptoms :
but  the  feverity  of  the  tortures,  and  the  fevers,  demonftrated  the  malignant
nature  of  the  tumour  -,  as  the  difficulty  of  going  to  ftool,  rather  than  making
water,  did  alfo  demonftrate  to  which  part  of  the  uterus  it  chiefly  adher'd.

There  was  one  thing,  which,  if  you  attend  to  Arantius  (y),  may  not  feem
to  be  very  compatible  therewith.  For  this  author,  in  fpeaking  of  the  marks
whereby  we  may  diftinguifh  tumours  of  the  uterus  from  thofe  of  the  mefen-
tery,  fays,  that  thofe  of  the  uterus  "  are  painful,  equal,  endow'd  with  an
"  oval  form  •,-  and  are  not  entirely  mov'd  from  their  places."  Yet  the  tu-
mour in  our  cafe  was  moveable  for  a  long  time  •,  and  would,  perhaps,  have
continued  fo  for  a  very  long  time,  nay  perhaps  always,  if  it  had  not  at  length,
fix'd  itfelf  to  the  neighbouring  parts  very  clofely.  Had  Arantius,  therefore,
lit  only  on  fuch  tumours  of  the  uterus,  that  were  already  become  very  large,
and  connedled  to  the  parts  about  ?  Or  has  he  made  ufe  of  words,  which  feem
to  fignify  that  thefe  tumours  are  more  immoveable  than  he  meant  to  aCTert  ?
Be  this  as  it  will,  it  was  much  more  eafy  in  the  preceding  hiftory,  than  in
that  which  follovv's  next,  to  conceive,  before  dilTedtion,  in  what  part  the  tu-
mour of  the  lower  belly  confifted :  nor  did  this  efcape  the  fagacity  of  Val-
falva,  as  you  vv'ill  immediately  learn.

14.  A  flender  woman,  of  about  forty  years  of  age,  being  much  fubjed:  to
the  hyfterlcal  paffion,  and  particularly  to  violent  paroxyfms  thereof,  which
fhook  her  whole  body,  but  principally  the  vifcera  of  the  belly,  with  convulfive
motions ;  and  having,  at  length,  undergone  fome  that  were  more  violent  than
the  reft,  began  to  obferve  a  manifeft  kind  of  deprefTion  in  the  epigaftric  re-
gion, and  a  manifeft  fulnefs  in  the  hypogaftric  region.  The  former  was
riever  chang'd  ;  but  the  latter  frequently  within  the  fpace  of  one  day.  For
although  it  ftiow'd  a  pretty  large  and  very  hard  tumour,  yet  this  very  often
iubfided  of  a  fudden.  In  like  manner,  when  aliment  was  taken  in,  the  wo-
man perceiv'd  it  to  be  carried  down  quite  to  this  tumour ;  that  part  being
from  thence  more  elevated  :  and  the  fenfe  of  weight,  which  was  always  in
that  place,  becaroe  more  burdenfome :  and  four  or  five  hours  after,  very
ievere  pains,  tormina,  and  fwoonings,  were  brought  on.  The  patient  often
Gom.plain'd  that  all  her  entrails  ;  for  this  v/as  her  very  eXpreflion  •,  were  fallen
down  from  their  fituations.  Her  digeftion  was  manifeftly  deprav'd  r  flie  was
feverifli  :  and  very  much  emaciated.  Having  liv'd  in  the  m^anner  I  have  de-.
fcrib'd  for  three  months,  ftie  died.

In  the  carcafe  v-'as  found  what  Valfalva  had  predifled  in  his  opinion  •,  that
is,  the  ftomach  fallen  down  to  the  hypogaftriura  ■,  fo  that  fcarcely  four  fingers
breadth  lay  betwixt  this  vifcus  and  the  pubes. But  it  had  a  different  pofitoa

(_}>)  C.  44..  fupra  ad  a.  7.  cit.


Letter  XXXIX. Article  15.  373

from  that,  which  the  editors  of  the  BMiotheca.  Anatomka  (z)  have  reprefentcd,
from  a  certain  virgin.  For  the  part  of  the'ftomach  which  correfponds  to  the
gula,  was  here  extended,  in  length,  to  fuch^a  degree,  that  the  whole  of  the
fundus  lay  in  the  hypogaftrium.

15.  This  diagnofis  of  Valfalva  was  indeed  very  extraordinary,  and  the  ob-
fervation  no  lets  rare.  To  begin  with  the  latter  ;  I  would  have  you  ob-
ferve  that  the  ftate  of  the  ftomach,  in  the  hypogaftrium,  may  be  very  dirFe-
rent.  For  fometimes  it  is  fo  very  large,  that  in  a  woman  whom  I  diffefted,
in  the  holpital,  about  the  middle  of  December  in  the  year  1717,  I  law  the
fundus  of  the  ftomach  to  be  no  farther  diftant  from  the  os  pubis,  than  in
the  woman  in  queftion  ;  and  demonftrated  it  to  thofe  who  were  preient  :  to
whom  it  feem'd  fo  much  the  more  furprizing,  on  account  of  its  being  empty.
For  that  it  may  defcend  fofar  when  it  is  immoderately  diftended,  either  with
flatus,  or  included  humours,  that  women  may  be  fuppos'd  to  be  far  advanc'd
in  their  pregnancy,  or  to  labour  under  an  afcites,  is  known  from  the  obfer-
vations  of  Moinichenius  (a)  in  particular,  and  Jodonius  (i^) ;  the  latter  of
whom  faw  the  ftomach,  "  when  cut  through  the  middle,  to  be  longer  than  a
"  Parifian  ell ;"  and  the  former,  in  this  very  theatre  of  our  college,  faw  "  tlie
"  whole  abdominal  region  occupied,  and  the  inteftines  cover'd,  therewith."
And  to  what  a  degree  the  celebrated  Widmannus  (c)  found  it  extended,  in
a  man  who  us'd  to  fill  himfelf  every  day  with  an  almjoft  incredible  quantity
of  bread,  and  beer,  the  defcription  of  it  ftiows.

But  the  ftomach  fometimes  occupies  the  hypogaftrium  alfo  v/ith  fome  part
of  its  bulk,  as  it  does  other  regions  of  the  belly  ;  not  on  account  of  its  mag-
nitude being  increas'd  •,  but,  having  its  ufual  and  proper  fize,  either  at
ene  extremity,  for  inftance  the  right,  as  in  the  example  already  refer'd  to
(J)  in  the  Bihliotheca  Anatovnca  ;  to  v^hich  you  may  add  another  of  Mery  le)  ;
or  in  the  whole  of  it,  falls  downwards.  And  it  may  fall  down  to  the  lower
parts  of  the  belly,  either  in  confequence  of  being  drag'd  downwards,  or  forc'd
from  above.

In  the  patient  of  Vefalius  (f),  it  was  drawn  "  downwards  from  itsfitua-.
"  tion,  in  fuch  a  manner,"  that  the  very  funftion  of  the  ftomach  was  deficient  ;
and  a  fingultus  coming  on,  death  was  the  confequence  thereof.  It  has  alfo
been  drawn  down,  by  almoft  all  the  inteftines  having  fallen  into  the  fcrotum  j.
as  in  that  obiervation  of  Mery,  or  into  a  very  long  fac,  as  in  another
obfervation  made  by  the  celebrated  Henry  Papen  (g).  And  it  has  been
driven  downwards  in  other  bodies  difiefted  by  Valfalva  (h),  or  by  me
(i),  by  the  diaphragm  forcing  it  from  above ;  or  being  deprefs'd  :  or  by  tiie
liver  being  greatly  increas'd  in  its  fize  ;  of  which  laft  kind,  in  particular,  are
two  obfervations  of  Fantonus  the  father  ("^J  :  and  I  take  notice  of  all  thefe
examples  here,  that  I  may,  in  general,  point  out  the  caufes  of  the  deprefiion^
and  not  becaufe  the  ftomach  was  really  thruft  down  a^uite  into  the  hypoga--
ftrium.

(zj  Part.  I.  ad  Gliffon.  traft.  de  ventric.  &  ff)  Decorp.  hum.  fabr.  1.  5.  c.  4..

inteft.  c 2.  (g)  Epill.  de  hern,  dorfal.

{a)  {P)  Sepulchr.  feft:.  hac.  21.  obf.  42.  &  48.  (h)  Epift.  17.  n.  25/

(c)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  6.  obf.  149.  (/),  Ep.  21..  n.  24.

{li)  N.  14.  in  fin.  {k)  ObC.  med.  anat..  5.  k  24.


ie)  Mem.  de  I'Acad. R.  dcs  fc,  a.  170X.
1.


obf.  J


u


374 Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

In  the  Iiypogaftrium,  however,  it  was  feen  by  Ruyfch  (I),  when  he  dif-
fered the  body  of  a  woman  who  had  died  of  an  afthma.  But  neither  is  the
cauie  fhown,  why  "  this  vifcus,  together  with  the  inteftines,  left  its  natural
"  fituation,  and  occupied  the  hypogaftrium  ;"  nor  what  inconveniences  had
been  the  confequences  of  this  unulual  fituation,  in  the  living  body  :  for
which  reafons  1  purpofely  omit  other  obfervations  of  its  deicent';  efpecially
v;hen  in  a  lefs  degree.  But  thofe  things  which  have  been  lately  obferv'd  by
that  celebrated  man  Molinelli  (jn),  related  rather,  as  I  fuppofc,  to  another
diforder  that  was  join'd  therewith  ;  I  mean  to  a  very  large  and  hard  tumour
intirely  fhutting  up  the  beginning  of  the  inteftinum  duodenum  i  from  whence,
not  only  the  very  difficult  and  long-continued  vomiting  of  all  the  ingefta,
the  very  great  wafting,  and  the  i£teric  colour,  may  be  accounted  for,  but
alfo  that  "  very  great  magnitude  of  the  ftomach,  which  deicended  quite
"  to  the  region  of  the  pubes,  and  occupied  almoft  the  whole  hypoga-
"  ftrium ;"  as  the  preternatural  increafe  of  length  in  the  oefophagus,  and,
confequently,  the  prolapfus  veniriculi,  may  be  likewife.  For  as  the  annex'd
pylorus  was  more  deprels'd,  on  account  of  the  weight  of  that  tumour,  fo
by  reafon  of  the  pafTage,  from  thence  to  the  inteftines,  being  fhut  up,  the
the  feveral  ingefta  had  not  only  enlarg'd  the  ftomach,  by  being  confin'd
there  for  a  long  time  -,  but,  finally,  by  frequently  irritating  them,  and  by
forcing  them  into  violent  contradlions,  which  the  very  difficult  vomiting  was
a  proof  of,  had  drawn  down  the  oefophagus,  that  is  connefted  with  the  other
orifice,  and  made  it  longer:  fo  that  in  this  cafe  a  prolapfus  of  the  ftomach
was  added  to  its  increale  of  fize  :  and  that  not  from  caufes  which  forc'd  it
downv/ards  from  above,  but  drew  it  downwards  from  below.

Now  if  the  obfervation  of  Valfalva  be  compar'd  with  all  thefe,  it  will  ap-
pear of  how  extraordinary  a  nature  it  is.

1 6.  Valfalva  then  did  not  find  a  part  of  the  ftomach  (either  on  account  of
its  magnitude  being  increas'd,  or  of  the  fituation  of  one  extremity  being
chang'd)  but  the  whole  fundus,  in  the  hypogaftrium,  and  not  in  the  um.bili-
cal  region.  The  convulfions  of  the  vifcera,  that  are  contain'd  in  the  belly,
had  drawn  this  vifcus  down  in  fo  violent  a  degree,  by  extenuating  that  pare
Vi/hich  is  continued  into  the  gula,  and  by  this  means  rendering  it  longer.  For
although  Molinelli  (n)  faw  the  gula  itfelf  become  longer;  and  Fantonus  the
father,  in  the  firft  of  the  two  obfervations  (o)  which  I  have  fpoken  of,  has
remark'd  that  frequent  complaints  were  made  by  the  patient,  of  the  tongue
feeming  to  be  drawn  back  towards  its  bafis  •,  which  was  no  inconfiderable  argu-
ment, as  the  very  learned  fon  has  interpreted  it  {p),  of  the  oefophagus  being
drawn,  and  extended  downwards ;  (nor,  indeed,  is  it  to  be  denied  that  fome
part  of  the  great  length  which  Valfalva  faw,  was  a  confequence  of  the  oefo-
phagus being  carried  downwards)  yet  as  he  himfelf  has  acknowledg'd,  that
It  was  the  ftomach  chiefly  which  was  diftended,  it  does  not  become  me  to  deny,
that  the  length  is  chiefly  to  be  attributed  thereto.

And  if  the  obfervation  of  Valfalva  were  not  very  fingular,  among  others,

(/)  Obf.  anat.  chir.  ;6.  (»)  N.  ij.iniin.

(m)  Comment,  de  Bonon.  fc.  acad.  torn.  z. (oj  Obf.  5.
p.  I.  in  medic,  (f)  ScJiol.  ad  eand.  obf.

5  en


Letter  XXXIX. Article 17.  375

on  account  of  thefe  peculiarities  which  I  joft  now  obferv'd,  it  certainly  would
be  fo,  on  account  of  this  difference-,  I  mean,  that  although  in  the  other  ob-
fervations,  fome  of  the  remaining  parts  of  the  belly  were  much  alrefted  with
difeafe,  at  the  fame  time,  as  the  omentum,  the  liver,  one  of  the  kidnies,  the
pancreas,  the  duodenum,  or  fome  other  inceftine-,  and  not  to  omii:  other  in-
juries of  the  ftomach  itfelf,  either  the  pylorus  almoft  obftrucled,  or  all  the
parietes  greatly  relax'd  ;  in  the  obfervation  of  Valfalva  was  nothing  of  this
kind:  but  taking  away  that  produ6tion  of  the  upper  part  of  the  ftomach,
whatever  dilbrder  there  was,  confifted  in  the  prolapfus  of  this  vifcus :  fo  that
it  feems  to  have  been  made  in  order  to  learn  the  peculiar  figns  of  this  difor-
der ;  v/hich  are  in  fad  fo  exprefs  and  clear  therein,  that  the  difficulty,  which
I  have  afierted  to  be  greater  in  diftinguifhing  this  tumour,  than  that  of  the,
uterus,  (f ),  is  not  to  be  eftimated  from  the  obfcure  fignification  of  the  figns,
but  from  the  rarenefs  of  the  diforder  refer'd  to.

However,  even  the  rarenefs  of  the  difeafe,  itfelf,  is  not  fufficient  to  baffle
the  fagacity  ofthofewho  know  how  to  inquire  (kilfully  into  the  fymptoms,
and  confider  them  duly  •,  that  is  to  fay,  in  other  words,  the  fagacity  of  a
man  "  praftis'd  in  diffedions,"  as  Valfalva  was,  "  and  in  finding  out  the
"  operations  and  ufes,"  of  the  internal  parts:  which  two  circumftances
Galen  (r)  abfolutely  infifted  upon  as  indifpenfable,  in  thofe  phyficians  who
"  defir'd  to  obtain  the  capacity  of  diftinguifhing  difeafes  of  this  kind  from
"  one  another ;"  after  having  fhown  in  what  manner  he  himfelf  had  found
out  the  ftomach  of  a  certain  man  to  be  fmall  and  round  ;  and  the  bladder  of
another  to  be  fmall  and  prominent ;  and  other  things  which  were  ftill  more
obfcure  than  thefe.

17.  The  fame  author  had  taught,  a  little  before  (5),  "  that  all  things
"  which  are  within  the  body  cannot  be  certainly  known'^;"  and  (t)  that  thofe
which  do  not  fall  under  the  notice  of  the  fenfes,  "  we  muft  endeavour  to  at-
"  tain  to  by  the  moft  artful  conjedure,  if  not  by  the  moft  certain  fcience  :"
and  having  faid  all  thefe  things  that  1  have  related,  of  thofe  internal  confti-
tutions  that  are  deriv'd  from  nature ;  he  has  prefently  after  fhown  {11)  that
fuch  ftates  of  thefe  parts,  as  are  the  effects  of  difeafe,  are  to  be  diftinguifh'd
"  from  their  operations  being  injur'd,  or  deprav'd  ;  or  from  the  various  ex-
"  cretions  ;  or  from  pains,  or  preternatural  tumours  -,  or  from  fome  or  all  of
thefe  united."  And  learnedly,  as  it  became  fo  great  a  mafter,  has  he,  in
this  manner,  fhown  us  the  feats,  and,  as  it  were,  the  fources  of  difeafes.

But  there  is  often  fuch  a  complication  of  diforders,  fuch  a  confent  and  vi-
cinity of  parts,  that  this  "  moft  certain  fcience,"  of  which  he  fpeaks,  is  rarely
to  be  expeded :  more  generally  "  an  artful  conjedure  "  muft  be  attempted,
and  modcftiy  and  diffidently  propos'd.  And  as  I  have  been  wont  to  do  this
upon  other  occafions,  fo  I  thought  it  behov'd  me  to  do  it  in  fome  cafes,
which  are  not  very  commonly  known  ;  '  and  which  will  be  in  the  number  of
thofe  that  I  fliall  now  fubjoin,  in  fuch  an  order,  that  if  they  do  not  correfpond
■with  thole  which  I  have  given  you  from  Valfalva,  in  the  nature  and  feat  of
the  tumours,  they  may,  at  leaft, correfpond  with  them  in  the  tumours  hav-

(?)  JM.  13.  in  fin.  (?)  C.  72.

{r)  Art.  med.  c.  74.  (a)  C.  75.

WC.7..


37^  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ing  occupied  the  middle,  or  lower  region  of  the  belly  :  although  that  tumour,
■with  which  I  fhall  begin,  was  in  part  fix'd  to  a  higher  fituation,  and  did  not
much  differ  in  its  nature  from  one  of  thofe  (a)  that  are  defcrib'd  above,  if
we' do  but  allow  of  an  aneurifm  in  that  obfervation,  and  this  of  mine;  in  the
former  of  which,  by  reafon  of  the  brevity  in  the  hifhory  of  the  fymptoms,
and  in  the  latter,  by  reafon  of  no  diffeftion  having  foUow'd,  we  cannot  affirm
the  thing  for  a  certainty.

1 8.  A  chafte  and  pious  virgin,  of  four  and  forty  years  of  age,  who  had
as  yet  had  a  plentiful  and  regular  evacuation  of  blood  from  the  uterus  every
month,  having  this  difcharge  entirely  obltrufted  for  one  or  two  months,  be-
gan to  complain  of  an  itching  of  the  eye  brows  and  eyes,  and  of  palpitations
of  the  heart,  as  fhe  herfelf  faid  •,  which  were  fliort  indeed,  but  frequently  recur'd.
Thefe  palpitations  being  grown  more  violent  of  a  fuddcn,  and  continual,  I
was  call'd  in.  The  patient,  then,  in  order  to  point  out  the  feat  of  the  diibrder
to  me,  did  not  lay  her  hand  upon  her  bread,  but  upon  the  epigaftriumj^
Laying  my  hand  upon  this  part,  I  perceiv'd  a  certain  hard  and  large  body
to  be  vibrating,  and  ftriking  the  hand  with  a  great  impetus.  You  would
have  faid  that  there  was  a  large  aneurifmal  tumour  beneath  the  hand,  v/hich
every  now  and  then  doubled  its  pulfations,  and  occupied  no  fmall  fpace  in
the  middle  of  the  upper  and  neighbouring  regions  of  the  belly.  And  in  this
light  it  appear'd  to  others.

My  opinion,  indeed,  agreed  with  theirs  in  this ;  that  thefe  pulfations  had
no  relation  to  the  heart :  inalmuch  as  there  was  no  vibration  in  the  breaft,  and
the  pulie,  when  felt  in  both  wrifts,  fhow'd  nothing  different  from  the  natural
Hate,  except  that  it  was  a  little  more  frequent.  But  in  regard  to  the  aneu-
rifm,  I  could  not  affent  to  their  opinion  ;  not  only  for  other  reafons,  bur,
particularly,  becaufe  the  times  of  thefe  pulfations  did  not  at  all  agree  with
the  times  of  the  pulfes  in  the  wrifts.  For  their  intervals  were  very  unequal,
as  their  force  was  alfo ;  as  ibmetimes  the  hand  was  ftricken  with  a  very
ftrong,  and,  at  other  times,  with  a  lefs  ftrong  impetus ;  when,  at  the  fame
time,  not  the  leaft  change  was  obferv'd  in  the  pulfe  at  the  wrifts.

Yet  it  was  much  more  eafy  to  fay,  what  this  tumour  did  not  feem  to  be,
than  what  it  did  feem  to  be;  being  large  and  hard,  as  I  have  faid  before,  and
comprehended  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  as  if  it  were  raifing  itfelf  up,
every  now  and  then,  from  the  vertebrse  of  the  loins,  to  ftrike  againft  the
hand;  but  immediately  withdrawing  itfelf  in  luch  a  manner,  that,  even  in  a
llender  virgin,  it  was  not  eafy  to  find  out  whither  it  had  receded,  till  it  again
jais'd  itfelf  up,  and  ftruck  againft  the  hand.  And  although  it  came  readily
to  my  mind,  that  a  globular  kind  of  tumours  are  frequently  perceiv'd  in  the
bellies  of  hyfterical  women,  which  afcending  upwards  from  the  lov/er  part,
are  very  troublefome  to  them  ;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  equally  obvious,
that  thefe  tumours  are  not  attended  with  pulfations  of  this  kind,  fo  as  to  re-
femble  aneurifms.

Neverthelefs,  confidering  this,  and  other  things  that  might  be  faid  againft
it,  and  weighing  them  in  my  mind ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  attending
to  thofe  things  of  an  extraordinary  nature,  which  are  often  met  with  in  wo-
men, contrary  to expedation  ; I  found  myfelf  inclin'd  to  conjefture  thatt

W  N.  9.

whatever


Letter  XXXIX. Article  19.  377

whatever  this  diforder  was,  it  might  certainly  be  refer'd  to  the  clafs  of  con-
vulfive  aiidhyftefic  affedlions.

Yet  this  conjecture  of  mine  I  did  but  juft  hint  •,  and  omitting  all  contro-
verfy  ;  as  my  cuftom  is,  at  the  bed-fide  of  patients,  when  we  agree,  in  other
refpe<5ts,  as  to  the  remedy  •,  I  immediately  aflented  to  her  lofing  blood,  as  the
evident  foregoing  caufe  requir'd.  Which  being  done,  the  patient  immediately
began  to  be  fo  much  better,  that  on  the  day  following  no  palpitation  any  longer
remain'd.  Andlhe,  certainly,  did  not  complain  of  it  again  ;  at  leaft  for  the
four  or  five  months  that  I  remain'd  in  the  place  of  my  nativity  ■,  till,  in  the
year  171 1,  I  came  here  to  take  upon  me  the  profeflTorlhip  of  medicine.  But
by  what  diforder  fhe  was  carried  ofi^,  for  flie  died  fome  years  after,  I  could
not  learn  for  a  certainty,  as  I  was  then  here,  and  her  body  was  not  difiTeded.

19.  The  arteries  which,  if  they  are  dilated  into  an  aneurifm,  may  produce
a  very  great  pulfation  in  that  part  of  the  belly  which  is  pointed  out,  in  the
hiftory  in  queftion,  are  the  eceliaca  with  the  largeft  of  its  branches,  the  mefen-
terica  fuperior,  the  right  emulgent,  and  the  great  artery:  but  the  latter  of
thele  much  the  moft  frequently  of  them  all ;  and  the  others  very  rarely,  if
you  except  the  coeliac.  For  to  the  caufes  which  are  common  to  the  others  ;
as,  for  infiance,  erofion,  conftridlion,  and  thofe  of  a  fimilar  kind,  you
•will,  moreover,  add,  with  me,  this  which  is  peculiar  to  the  coeliac,  when
you  attend  to  thofe  frequent  tortuous  flexures ;  whereby,  as  the  courie  of
the  blood  to  the  fpleen  is  retarded  in  the  fplenic  branch  of  that  artery  •,  fo  a
great  part  of  the  blood,  and  the  impetus  of  it,  is  refledted  into  the  branches
which  arife  therefrom,  before  thefe  obitacles  are  come  to ;  fo  that  if  any  of
thofe  caufes  be  added,  which  continues  to  ad  very  violently,  and  for  a  long
time  together,  an  aneurifm  may  be  eafily  produc'd.

But  although  there  are  fo  many  arteries  in  that  part,  and  more  than  one
caufe  whereby  they  may  be  dilated,  there  are  alio  many  things  which  ought
to  render  us  cautious,  left  v/e,  at  any  time,  heedlefly  take  a  pulfation  for  the
mark  of  an  aneurifm  being  already  begun.  The  firll  is  great  leannefs  and
thinnefs  of  body,  as  we  even  gather  from  what  Berengarius  (y)  formerly
admonilb'd  us  of,  in  order  to  refute  a  miftaken  opinion  to  the  contrary,  of
certain  phyficians,  in  the  cafe  of  an  emaciated  woman.  His  admonition  is
as  follows ;  "  by  means  of  the  great  artery,  a  great  pulfation  is  frequently
"  perceiv'd  in  the  region  of  the  ftomach,  and  inteftines,  and  efpecially  in  ex-
*'  tenuated  bodies."

Nor  did  Profper  Martianus  (z)  hefitate  to  explain  from  this  caufe,  even
that  very  great  pulfation  which  is  faid  to  have  been  juft  in  the  very  fame
fituation  in  the  fon  of  Eratolaus,  in  the  feventh  book  of  Epidemics  (a),  that
it  was  in  the  virgin  I  am  fpeaking  of;  the  words  run  thus :  "  in  the  middle
*'  fituation  betwixt  the  navel,  and  the  os  pedtoris,  was  perceiv'd,  by  apply-
"  ing  the  hand  to  this  region,  fuch  a  palpitation  as  could  not  be  generated
"  about  the  heart,  either  by  running,  or  by  fear."  Yet  this,  according  to
the  opinion  of  Martianus, "  was  nothing  elfe  but  the  motion  of  the  great

CyJ  Comment.  9.  fuper  anat.  Mundini.  Ca)  N.  3.

(z)  Adnot.  ad  verf.  55 .  feci.  2.  coacar.  prae-
4aoc.

Vol.  II.  C  c  c  "  artery


378  Bookm. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  arteiy,  which  is  iir  others  obfcur'd,  and  ftifled,  by  the  flefli  that  lies  be--
"  twixt  this  velTel,  and  the  hand  i"  for  in  that  patient,  in  confequence  of
his  being  wafted  away  to  the  greateft  degree  conceivable,  the  thicknefs  of
thefe  parts,  interpos'd  betwixt  the  artery,  and  the  hand,  was  fo  diminifh'd,
that  the  artery  "  might  not  only  be  more  eafily  elevated,  but  more  eafily
"  perceiv'd :  and  although  this  is  common  to  all  the  arteries,  of  the  body-;
"  yet  it  is,  neverthelefs,  obferv'd  moft  frequently,"  fays  he,  "  in  the  middle
"  fituation  betwixt  the  navel,  and  the  os  peftoris ;"  the  reafon  of  which  is,
that  there  is  no  other  part  where  a  very  large  trunlc  of  an  artery  is  fubjecled
to  the  hand,  without  the  interpofition  of  any  bone :  and  that  in  the  fame
place,  other  arteries,  which  I  have  juft  now  taken  notice  of,  exert  their  pul-
fations.

The  fecond  circumftance,  whereby  phyficians  may  be  deceiv'd  from  pul-
fation,  is  very  complicated :  but,  by  the  fame  author  IVIartianus  (h),  is  re-
duc'd  to  the  fingle  article  of  plenitude;  whether  this  be  in  the  arteries,  or  in
the  veins,  or  in  the  flelh  ;  which  lying  upon  the  arteries,  and  "  compreffing "
them,  caufe  their  parietes  to  be  elevated  "  with  a  greater  impetus ;"  inftances
of  which  he  produces  in  great  inflammations,  and  thofe  tumours  that  tend  to
fuppuration.  Yet  Vallefius  {c)  had  led  the  way  to  this  doflrine,  in  the
narration  of  the  hiftory  of  that  patient,  of  whom  I  fpoke  juft  now.  "  A  re-
"  markable  puliation  happens  in  many  patients,"  fays  he,  "  in  that  part  of
*'  the  belly,  from  the  artery  which  goes  down  upon  the  fpine,  by  reafon  of
"  an  inflammatory  affedion  of  that  part;  which  pulfation  Ibnietimes  happens

"  in  acute  diieafes  alfo  ; and  fometimes  even  remains  after  acute  dif-

"  eafes and  a  cancerous  affeftion  happens  in  that  place,"

But  that  even  vi'here  any  hard  body  preflTes  upon  the  arteries,  their  pulfation
is  perceiv'd,  he  had  aflerted  above  {d\  when  he  explain'd  that  "  pulfation  and
"  weight,"  which  were  obierv'd  in  the  belly  of  the  wife  of  Gorgias  (who  had
labour'd  under  a  fupprefTion  of  the  menfes  much  longer  than  our  virgin)
*'  which  way  foever  Ihe  was  turn'd."  For  the  uterus,  fays  he,  "  being  in-
*'  durated,  is  carried,  like  a  foreign  weight,  to  which-ever  fide  the  body  is
"  turn'd  to  ;  and  the  arteries  which  are  compreis'd,  endeavouring  to  Ires
"  themfelves  from  that  compreffion,  are  perceiv'd  to  pulfate."  In  confe-
quence of  which  do6lrine  phyficians  have  fince  obferv'd,  as  you  even  iee  in
the  Sepulchretum  {e)y  that  the  cceUac  artery,  or  the  aorta,  being  comprefs'd  .
by  a  very  great  obftruftion  and  turgefcency  of  the  pancreas,  or  the  mefenteric
glands,  a  violent  pulfation  is  perceiv'd,  as  often  happens  in  hypochondriac
patients,  or  others.

20.  If  you  transfer  thefe  confiderations,  and  others  analagous  thereto,  to
■the  virgin  of  whom  I  have  fpoken,.  you  will  learn,  in  the  firft  place,  that  the
pulfation  defcrib'd  in  her  was  not  owing  to  an  emaciated  ftate  ;  for  though
her  body  was  flender  it  was  not  extenuated.  In  the  iecond  place,  although
there  was  fome  plenitude,  from  the  retention  of  the  menftruous  blood,  yet
that  it  was  not  only  from  thence,  for  it  v/as  not  in  that  place  :  nor  yet  from
inflammation,  nor  a  tumour  which  verg'd  to  iuppuration  ; nor,  in  fine,  from.

{h)  Annot.  modo  cit.  (<^)  In  1.  5.  n.  1 1.

If]  Comment,  in  1.  7.  epidem.  n.  4.  (e)  L.  i.  f.  9.  in  fchol.  ad  obf.  38.

any


Letter  XXXIX. Article  20,  379

any  confiderable  obftrudlion  of  the  pancreas,  or  the  mefenteric  glands  ;  as  of
all  thefe  difeafes  there  were  not  the  leaft  figns.  It  remains,  therefore,  that,
as  thefe  and  other  fimilar  caufes  of  compreflion  wereabfent,  the  puUation  was
either  from  fome  different  caufe,  or  from  an  aneurifm.

What  gave  colour  t-o  the  fuppofition  of  an  aneurifm  at  firft  fight,  was  the
great  bulk  of  body  which  ftruck  againft  the  hand.  And  if,  as  Albertini  (f)
has  aflerted,  he  "  has  many  times  demonftrated,  from  his  not  perceiving
"  the  diameter  of  the  veffel  to  be  increas'd,  that  the  ftrong  and  continual
"  pulfations  of  the  coeliac  artery,  or  of  the  aorta,  in  the  abdomen,  were
"  without  dilatation  -,  nor  was  the  opinion  invalidated  by  the  event ;"  here,
on  the  contrary,  a  dilatation  did  not  feem  to  be  wanting,  fince  the  pulfating
body  was  perceiv'd  to  have  fo  great  a  diameter.

However,  it  muft  be  confeis'd  that  it  is  not  equally  eafy  to  avoid  being
deceiv'd,  fometimes,  in  this  fecond  judgment"-,  that  is  to  fay,  when  a  body
of  fome  extent,  which  ftrikes  againft  the  hand,  may  either  be  a  dilated  artery,
or  a  tumour  lying  upon  an  artery  which  is  not  dilated.

For  if  the  artery  is  pretty  large,  and  is  compell'd,  by  the  compreffing  tu-
mour, to  pulfate  very  vehemently,  it  will  lift  up  the  tumour  with  it;  which
we  fuppofe  to  be  not  too  heavy  •,  and  will  force  it  againft  the  hand  of  the  phy-
fician.  This  circumftance,  which  every  body  fees  fo  plainly,  that  nobody
can  deny  it,  happening  fometimes  even  in  the  external  parts,  holds  furgeons
in  fufpence  whether  the  diforder  be  an  aneurifm  or  not ;  as  it  did  here  in  the
neck  of  a  certain  girl,  who  had  a  tumour  fo  contiguous  to  the  left  carotid
artery,  that  it  not  only  caus'd  ftronger  pulfations  of  this  artery,  which  it
comprefs'd,  but  even  pullated  therewith.  Yet  the  whole  tumour,  as  a  more
accurate  examination,  and  a  perfedl  cure  demonftrated,  confifted  in  one  of
the  jugular  glands  being  tumid,  and  already  fill'd  with  pus  internally.

So  alio,  on  account  of  the  puliation  which  was  perceiv'd  under  a  broncho-
cele,  many  had  fuppos'd  that  tumour  to  be  an  aneurifm,  which  Severinus
(g)  (as  he  believ'd  it  to  pulfate,  on  account  of  its  compreffing  the  carotid  ar-
teries) fays  he  had,  by  diflefting  it  after  death,  demonftrated  to  be  adtually
of  fuch  a  nature  as  his  opinion  had  predicted.  i\.nd  if  we  are  in  danger  of
falling  into  an  error  even  externally,  how  much  more  danger  muft  there  be
of  being  deceiv'd,  in  thole  parts  which  lie  deep  among  the  vifcera  ?  See,  with
what  ingenuoufnefs,  never  fufficiently  to  be  commended,  thofe  celebrated
men  Jo.  Phil.  Burggrafius  {h),  and  Peter  Tabarranus  (i),  have  deliver'd  down
to  pofterity  what  happen'd  to  them.  The  former,  in  a  cafe  wherein  a  pul-
fation  was  obferv'd  from  the  navel,  quite  to  the  fcrobiculus  cordis ;  and  that
to  fo  great  a  degree,  as  to  be  frequently  heard  by  thofe  who  ftood  near  -,  and
which  had  continued  for  four  and  thirty  years  ;  fufpeding  it  not  to  be  from
a  true  dilatation  of  the  large  artery  in  the  mefentery,  as  the  diameter  thereof
was  not  much  enlarg'd ;  but  that  it  might  be  from  a  fpurious  aneurifm,  as
Lancifi  call'd  them  ;  and  fuppofing  it  to  be  incurable,  by  reafon  of  having
continu'd  fo  long,  law  the  puliation,  contrary  to  all  expedation,  remov'd

(f)  Comment,  de  Bonon.  fc.  acad.  torn.  i.  (h)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  6.  obf.  131.

in  opufc.  (/■)  Obf.  anat,  edit.  2.  n.  ix.

{g)  De  recofld,  abfceff,  nat.  I,  4.  c.  6-

C  c  c  2  within


380 Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

within  a  little  time,  by  giving  fome  remedies,  in  the  mean  while,  which
might,  at  leaft,  fcrve  to  corretSt  the  crudity  of  the  humours  •,  and  this  after
a  great  number  of  remedies  had  been  made  ufe  of  by  others,  to  no  pur-
pole.

But  Tabarranus,  having  found  not  only  a  pulfation  under  the  epigaftric
region,  but  alfo  a  tumour  of  the  bignefs  of  a  fift,  and  thofe  join'd  with  the
other  marks  of  a  true  aneurifm,  was  kirpriz'd,  afterwards,  to  find,  inilead  of
an  aneurifm,  only  a  fcirrhous  tumour  in  the  center  of  the  mefentery,  adher-
ing fo  clofely  to  the  large  veflels,  that  it  could  not  avoid  compreffing  the
aorta,  and  being  rais'd  up  by  the  pulfations  thereof.  Thefe  obfervations  may
be  of  fervice  to  you  -,  to  me,  at  the  time  when  I  had  the  cafe  of  this  virgin
before  me,  they  could  be  of  none,  not  only  becaufe  they  were  publifh'd  fo
many  years  after ;  bur,  alfo,  becaufe  the  pulfations,  in  both  of  the  obferva-
tions, were  made  exaflly  at  the  fame  time  that  they  were  made  in  the  reft  of
the  arteries.  Being  induc'd  therefore,  by  other  doubts  which  I  hinted  at  juft
now,  to  inquire  into  the  remaining  circumftances,  I  concluded  that  fo  large
an  aneurifm,  -as  this  muft  have  been,  could  not  be  form'd  in  lb  fhort  a  time,
and  without  more  violent  fymptoms  preceding  or  following  it ;  and  that  the
pulfations  of  an  aneurifm  could  not  but  correfpond  with  the  motion  of  the
arteries.

I  therefore  rather  fuppos'd  the  tumour  to  be  of  fome  other  kind.  That  is  to
fay,  as  I  have  hinted  briefly  above,  1  fuppos'd  it  to  be  the  effeft  of  internal  hy-
fterical  convulfions  ;  which  conftringing  fome  of  the  inteftines  here  and  there,
and  the  mefenteric  branches  of  the  aorta,  at  unequal  intervals  of  time,  with  a
very  confiderable  force,  form'd,  from  thofe  inteftines,  a  kind  of  globe,  as  it  were  j
which  was  diftended  with  a  confin'ri  and  rarefy'd  air ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,
Gompell'd  the  aorta  to  pulfate  more  vehemently,  every  now  and  then  (in-
afmuch  as  the  efflux  of  the  blood  from  thence,  into  the  mefenteric  branches,
was  prevented)  and  impel  the  globe  which  lay  upon  it.  But  as  I  had  it  not
in  my  power,  as  I  have  faid  before,  to  demonftrate  that  no  dilatation  of  the
arteries  was  conceal'd  beneath  that  tumour,  by  difteftion  of  the  body,  I  will
go  on  to  another  tumour  which  was  plac'd  in  the  fame  fituation,  and  this  a
permanent  one  too,  and  examin'd  by  difleftion.  And  as  this  was  one  of
the  very  rare  tumours  ;  as  the  patient  was  a  perfon  of  fo  much  confequence  ;
and  as  the  cafe  gave  occafion  to  fuch  controverfies  of  opinion,  that  the  hif-
tory  thereof  cannot,  nor  indeed  ought  to  be,  comprehended  in  a  few  words ;
you  will  not  be  furpriz'd  if  I  give  it  you  more  at  large  than  I  generally  do
others,  and  in  an  accurate  and  diftinft  manner.

21.  Fortunate  Mauroceni,  whom  the  love  of  a  religious  life  had  drawn
away  from  his  illuftrious  employments  in  the  republic  of  Venice ;  and  from
his  very  noble  family  (for  he  was  nephew,  by  the  father's  fide,  of  the  Duke
Francefco,  v/ho  took  his  furname  from  the  conqueft  of  the  Morea)  into  the
venerable  family  of  the  Cafinian  mionks,  and  vv'hofe  merits  had  remov'd  him
from  thence  to  the  bifhopric  of  Trevifo ;  and  after  that  -to  the  bilhopric  of
Brefcia  ;  having  from  the  very  time  he  took  upon  him  this  new  courfe  of  life,,
come  out  very  feldom  in  public,  and  us'd  himfelf  quite  to  a  fedentary  life,  as
he  was  generally  employ'd  in  the  reading  of  facred  books  •,  became,  by  degrees,
fubjed  to  the  hypocondriacal  affedionj  and  a  flux  of  blood  from  the  hsemorr-

hoidal


Letter  XXXIX. Article  21.  38r

fioidaf  veins :  yet,  while  this  difcharge  was  in  a  proper  proportion,  he  enjov'd
a  ftate  of  healthy  which  was  even  more  fiourifhing  than  he  v.'ifh'd  :  that  is'  to
lay,  a  very  fat  habit  of  body,  and  particularly  a  fat  belly  -,  till,  at  lenpth,  as
he  grew  in  years,  the  hjemorrhoidal  flux  at  firft  began  to  be  diminifh'd  -,  and
after  that  to  be  entirely  obftrufled.

For  when  this  difcharge  was  diminifli'd,.  he  was  troubled  with  certain  pains
of  the  belly,  which  he  fupposM  to  be  from  flatus ;  and  were  frequently  fud-
den  and  momentary;  but  fometimes  of  pretty  long  continuance.  And  whea
he  had  now  completed  his  fixtieth  year,  and  no  more  blood  was  difcharg'd  by
the  hemorrhoids,  thefe  pains  began  to  be  more  troublefome,  particularly  in.
the  autumn  of  the  year  1726,  which  was  the  laft  he  faw ;  at  which  time  he
alfo  labour'd  under  frequent  fevers.  Of  thefe  he  got  rid  by  means  of  the
Peruvian  bark  ;  and  the  pains  were  alleviated  by,  the  opportune  return  of
the  hsemorrhoidal  flux.  In  the  following  winter,  having  his  fever  and  pain
return  a  fecond,  and  even  a  third  time,  he  was  always  reliev'd  by  the  fame-
flux  coming  on  again  -,  but  never  perfeftly  cur'd :  and,  indeed,  at  this  time
a  certain  hardneis  firfl:  began  to  be  perceiv'd  in  the  belly,  and  a  tumour.

On  account  of  thefe  dilbrders  he  came  from  Brefcia  to  Padua  in  the  fol-
lowing fpring.  With  the  other  difagrteable  circumftances  was  join'd  a  coftive-
nefs.  To  counteraft  this  inconvenience,  in  a:s  mild  a  manner  as  poffible,  a.
fenior  phyfician  prefcrib'd  rhubarb  to  be  chew'd  now  and  then,  mix'd  with  cur-
rants, from  which  the  patient  feem'd  to  be  a  little  better :  but  fome  ftronger
purgatives  being  added,  by  another  fenior  phyfician,  he  was  much  worfe ;  as.
he  was  alfo  by  other  things  f(rhich  were  given  him  to  procure  flools ;  the  pa-
tient being  averfe  to  glyfters.

But  even  whatever  remedy  was  given  him,  with  a  view  to  obviate  other
fymptoms,  he  fcarcely  had  taken  it  more  than  once  or  twice,  but  he  threw
it  up  again  ;  that  i^  to  fay,  in  confequence  of  its  not  being  born  on  the  flo-
mach  •,  which,  in  the  mean  v/hile,  being  now  frequently  troubled  with  the-
moft;  obftinate  vomitings,  that  yielded  to  no  kind  of  remedy,  threw  up,  very
foon,  the  food  and  the  drink,  that  it  took  in  ;  or  if  it  did  retain  any  part  of
them  for  a  confiderable  time,  brought  it  up  at  length,  neverthelefs,  without
its  having  undergone  any  change  -,  as  was  the  cafe  with  a  boii'd  apple  which-
he  had  rerajn'd  for  eight  and  forty  hours.

Befides  his  food,  he  alfo  brought  up  a  great  quantity  of  water,  fo  as  even;
to  exceed  the  quantity  of  what  was  taken  in  •,  but  this  water  had  neither  tafl:e,.
nor  colour  :  nor  during  the  whole  courfe  of  thefe  vomitings,  which  were  lb.'
frequent,  was  any  thing  ever  perceiv'd  to  be  either  bitter,  or  colour'd,  if  you
except  the  food.  As  thefe  things,  and  others,  but  particularly  the  tumour^,
(which  I  fiiall  fpeak  of  prefently)  terrified  the  phyficians,  that  very  eminent
man  IMichael  Mauroceni  the  brother  of  the  billiop,  knight,  and  very  illuf-
trious  fenator,  came  hither  from  Venice,  and  order'd  three  other  phyficians,,
in  the  number  of  whom  I  was,  to  be  fent  for,  in  order  to.  examine,  the  pa-
tient, and  confult  with  his  phyficians  upon  the  cafe.

We  found  him  confin'd  to  his  bed,  as  he  had  been  for  fome  days,  extenuatedi

in  his  face  and  limbs,  his  flefh  being  warm  like  that  of  a  healthy  perfon  ;  but

his  pulfe  rather  more  frequent : which  two  circumfl;ance3  v/e  were  afl"ur'd:

by  his  phyficians  had  always  been  fo ;  except  that  the  frequency  of  the  pulfc

5  ^^s-


382  Book  IIL Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

was  Ibinewhat  increas'd  towards  the  evening,  and  in  the  night.  It  was  par-
ticularly begg'd  of  us  that  we  would  examine  the  tumour  with  accuracy.
This  was,  as  far  as  we  could  judge  from  feeling  it,  and  even  from  feeing  itj
for  it  was  obvious  to  the  eye  alio,  nearly  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  the
diameter  of  which  was  eight  inches  in  extent,  being  plac'd  in  the  midway
betwixt  the  cartilago  enfiformis,  and  the  navel  -,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  be
diftant  from  both  of  them  by  feme  little  fpace  (fuch  was  the  prominence  of
his  belly  by  reafon  of  fatnefs)  rifing  up  from  the  circumference  of  it  gently
towards  the  middle  ■,  and  having  the  fliin,  wherewith  it  was  cover'd,  juft  of
the  fame  colour  that  it  was  of  in  other  places.

If  you  handled  it,  you  perceiv'd  it  to  be  an  unequally  tuberous  tumour  in  its
whole  furface,  and  even  in  the  very  circumference  of  it,  juft  as  if  it  had  been
made  up  of  glandular  bodies ;  which  feem'd  alfoto  be  confirm'd  by  the  refiftance
it  gave  when  you  prels'd  it.  When  it  was  prefs'd  upon,  and,  in  like  manner,
when  the  patient  was  troubled  with  flatus,  a  fenfe  of  pain,  but  not  very  vio-
lent, arofe  in  the  tumour:  befides  which  accident,  there  was  no  complaint  of
it,  except  of  a  fix'd,  but  flight,  uneafinefs,  as  if  from  any  little  impediment.
By  laying  hold  of  the  tumour  with  both  hands',  I  eafily  drew  it  to  one  fide  or
other.  That  it  did  not  occupy  the  parietes  of  the  belly  it  was  eafy  to  fee;
and,  at  the  fame  time,  that  it  was,  neverthelefs,  very  near  thereto.

When  I  examin'd  accurately  with  my  hand  what  was  above,  below,  and
at  the  fides  of,  the  tumour,  except  that  I  did  not  go  on  to  examine  below
the  navel,  (the  phyficians,  and  the  patient,  afl'erting  that  nothing  preternatural
was  there)  nothing  hard  or  refifting  was  perceiv'd  •,  as  far  as  the  fat  of  the
belly,  which  lay  between,  would  fuffer  me  to  diftinguifli  ;  nothing  unequal,
nothing  which  created  any  uneafinefs  upon  being  prefs'd.  Having  made
thefe  enquiries,  and  examin'd  the  urine,  in  which  was  nothing  at  all  to  be
found  fault  with,  and  the  water  that  was,  as  I  have  faid,  thrown  up  by-
vomiting,  and  made  every  other  inquiry,  or  examination,  we  thought  ne-
cefl"ary,  we  retir'd,  in  order  to  compare  our  opinions  with  each  other,  before
that  very  illuftrious  fenator,  and  a  great  number  of  other  perfons,  who  were
eminent  either  for  their  dignity,  or  their  learning,  as  well  as  thofe  who  were
ftudents  in  medicine  -,  the  phyficians,  and  even  the  prelate  himfelf,  having
heard  what  I  have  already  related  to  you.

22.  When  we  were  withdrawn  from  the  patient,  one  of  the  phyficians,
under  whofe  care  he  had  been,  gave  us  a  long  difl"ertation  upon  the  nature
and  feat  of  the  tumour,  the  fum  of  which  was  this ;  that  he  believ'd  the  tu-
mour to  be  fcirrhous  •,  but  a  Ipurious  one,  becaufe  it  was  painful  when  com-
prefs'd  :  and  that  it  had  its  feat  in  the  omentum,  becaufe  it  was  moveable
and  external ;  or  perhaps  in  the  mefentery,  if  any  one  fliould  choofe  rather  to
fuppofe  thus ;  for  that  this  was  moveable,  and  furnilh'd  with  that  large  gland
which  is  call'd  the  pancreas  afellii,  the  tumour  of  which  might  grow  outwards
in  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  come  to  the  anterior  parts  of  the  belly,  as  he  faid  he
had  feen  in  a  certain  carcafe  (as  if  that  pancreas  either  were  found  in  the  hu-
man fubjeft,  or  as  if  it  were  polTible  to  draw  the  whole  tumour  of  a  gland,
plac'd  in  the  immoveable  center  of  the  mefentery,  as  this  pancreas  is,  to  one
or  the  other  fide,  with  the  hand):  as  to  the  obftinate  vomitings,  it  feem'd  to
him  that  there  was  fome  excrefcence  in  the  ring  of  the  pylorus,  which  pre-
vented the  aliments  paffing  through  it  i  and  that  thefe,  when  retain'd,  irritated

the


Letter  XXXIX. Article  23.  2^ 2

the  ftomach  ;  or  at  lead  that  the  caufe  of  this  vomiting  was,  certainly,  not
beyond  the  ring  of  the  pylorus,  becaufe  there  never  appear'd  any  mark  of
bile  in  the  matter  that  was  difcharg'd.

He,  therefore,  afferted  that,  by  reafon  of  the  vomitings,  the  moft  extreme
•wafting  of  body,  and  a  flow  lingring  death,  covild  not  be  avoided  in  the  end  ;.
but  that  on  account  of  the  tumour  it  might  happen  to  be  fpeedy,  in  confe-
quence  of  a  purulent  matter,  together  with  blood,  being  effus'd  from  thence
into  the  cavity  of  the  belly.  However,  if  any  thing  ftill  remain'd  foraphy-
fician  to  do,  that  this  ought  to  be  attempted  by  internal  medicines,  and  not
by  external  applications.  For  as  to  letting  blood  from  the  hsemorrhoidal
veins  before  the  ftrength  was  broken  down,  that  the  patient  had  refus'd  to
comply  therewith  when  he  had  defir'd  it ;  and  that  now,  in  this  ftate  of  weak-
nefs,  there  was  no  more  room  to  think  of  it.  That  the  patient  had  rejedled
every  thing  which  had  been  previoufly  applied  to  the  tumour ;  not  only  as.
ufelefs,  but  as  heavy,  and  troublefome  :  wherefore  avoiding  every  thing  thas
might  have  the  power  of  promoting  fuppuration,  the  Ceratum  Noribergenfs
was  thought  by  him  to  be  the  moft  convenient  application ;  but  that  we
ought  to  depend  entirely  upon  internal  applications  •,  that  is  to  fay,  upon  fucli
as  were  ftrongly  attenuating  and  diflblvent ;  fuch  as  would  open  the  belly
more  than  rhubarb  •,  and  ftill  more,  fuch  as  increas'd  the  quantity  of  the  urine..

In  order  to  produce  theie  effefts,  having  recommended  a  great  number  of
remedies,  and  thofe  of  the  more  powerful  kind,  as  his  cuftom  was-,  he  alib>
faid  that  mercurials  and  chalybeates  feem'd  to  hirii  proper  for  the  purpofe,
if  they  could  be  born  by  the  patient,  and  were  not  difapprov'd  by  us,  to>
whom  he  propos'd  them.

After  he  had  finifti'd  fpeaking,  the  phyfician,  who  had  attended  with  him,,
faid  a  few  words  on  the  fubjecl,  paffing  by  other  circumftances  of  the  cafe^
and  only  adding  that  he  believ'd  the  liver  and  fpleen  to  be  obftrufted  be-
fides ;  but  in  regard  to  the  medicines,  he  difFer'd  far  from  the  other  ;  fayino-
that  he  could  not,  in  his  confcience,  propofe  any  thing  but  rhubarb  as  a  pur-
gative; as  this  was  the  only  one  which  he  had  before  made  ufe  of  without  any-
inconvenience :  whereas  he  had  feen  all  the  others  which  were  added  have
the  moft  difagreeable  effefts  -,  not  o.nly  by  creating  confiderable  uneafineffes-
for  the  prefent-,  but  by  injuring  the  health  of  the  patient.  Then  one  of  thofe-
who  had  come  with  me,  having  fpoken  fomewhat  more  at  large  upon  the  na-
ture of  the  tumour,  and  its  feat  in  the  omentum,  and  upon  the  cxcrefcence
in  the  ring  of  the  pylorus  •,,  which  the  former  had  fpoken  of  and  threaten'd  j,
particularly  approv'd  of  this  opinion  :  but  in  regard  to  remedies,,  he  differ'd
from  both  of  them.  For  he  rejefted  every  thing  that  is  call'd  purgative,  and-
even  rhubarb  itfejf :  but  propos'd  a  decodtion  of  the  woods,  as  it  is  call'd^
with  a  fmall  portion  of  the  viper  -,  unlefs  this  fliould  feem  to  be  too  heatino-
on  account  of  any  feverifti  difpofition.

23.  I,  however,  akho'  I  faid  that  there  were  four  things  which  ought  to  be
chiefly  attended  to  by  us,  the  tumour,  vomiting,  wafting  of  flefh,  and'  fever  ;
Beverchelefs  commended  thofe  who  had  fpoken  before  me,  for  haviftg  had  a^
particular  regard  to  the  tumour,  which,  as  it  had  been  antecedent  to  the  other
diforders,  might  alfo  feem  to  be  the  caufe  of  them.  I  likewife  faid  that  the
caufe  of  the  tumour  might,  certainly,  be  fuppos'd  to  confifl:  inthclefs  quick
5  mmioiij


384  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  -of  the  Belljr.

motion  of  the  blood  thro*  the  vena  portarum  •,  which  the  patient's  fedentary
ilate  of  life,  the  hypochondriacal  affeftion,  and  the  flux  of  blood  by  the  hae-
morrhoids ;  that  was  of  ufe  at  the  time  of  its  flowing,  or  returning,  but  hurtful
when  it  decreas'd,  or  quite  fell  away  ;  pretty  clearly  prov'd.

prom  this  retarded  motion  therefore,  that  irritations,  crifpatures,  and
pains  had  arifen^  and,  finally,  the  beginning  of  a  tumour,  in  fome  one  of
thefe  parts,  from  whence  the  returning  blood  is  to  be  receiv'd,  into  that  vein.
That  there  were  other  parts  which  tranfmitted  their  blood  to  the  vena  porta-
rum, befides  the  omentum,  and  mefentery,  but  particularly  the  inteftines ;
■which  were,  in  fad:,  more  near  to  the  hands  of  any  perfon  who  touch'd  the
abdomen,  than  the  melentery  itfelf -,  and  not  lefs  moveable  to  one  fide  and
the  other,  than  the  parts  of  the  mefentery  annex'd  thereto ;  and  even  much
more  lb  than  thofe,  in  particular,  that  are  neareft  to  its  tenter.

To  this,  I  faid,  we  may  might  add  that,  on  fuch  a  fuppofition,  we  could  more
eafily  account  for,  not  only  the  long  coftivenefs  of  the  bowels,  but  perhaps,
even  the  vomiting,  which  had  fo  frequently  been  brought  on.  For  that  thofe-
fmall  inteftines,  which  lie  in  this  region  of  the  belly,  being  conftriAed,  the
diameter  of  the  pafiage  was  not  only  diminifh'd,  and  the  periftaltic  motion,
in  fome  meafure,  obftrufted  ;  but  even  that  fome  part  of  the  irritation  would
be  propagated,  without  any  difficulty,  to  the  neighbouring  ftomach,  into
which  they  were  continued.  And  indeed,  that  the  pain  which  arofe  in  that  part,
from  prefling  with  the  hand,  or  even  from  the  inconvenience  of  flatus,
•would  be  much  more  clearly  underftood,  if  we  fliguld  fuppofe  the  tumour  to
belong  to  the  inteftines  themfelves.

Neverthelefs  I  defir'd  I  might  not  be  underftood,  as  if,  by  faying  thefe
things,  I  meant  to  prefer  my  opinion  to  that  qf  others,  as  T  would  fubmit  it
to  the  confideration  of  all  -,  fince  I  would  not  pretend  abfolutely  to  determine
on  any  thing,  in  an  affair  fo  difficult,  and  obfcure :  and  therefore  did  not  de-
fpife  the  opinion  of  others.  For  although  I  remeraber'd  frequently  to  have
read  of  large  tumours  in  the  omentum,  without  the  mention  of  any  pain
(k)  ;  and  had  even  determin'd,  with  the  confent  of  others,  a  tumour  to  be  of
this  kind  which  I  met  with  in  the  wife  of  a  phyfician,  who  was  of  a  full
habit,  and  of  a  good  colour,  and  felt  no  inconvenience  therefrom,  not  even
pain  when  it  was  prefs'd  ;  yet  that  there  may  be,  fometimes,  a  tumour  in  the
omentum  of  fuch  a  nature,  hardnefs,  and  fhape,  that  by  preffing  it,  either
in  that  part,  or  in  the  parts  contiguous,  a  pain  may  be  excited  :  of  which
circumftance  I  knew  that  fome  learned  men  had  not  doubted  (/).

But  as  to  large  tumours  of  the  mefentery,  that  they,  by  pufliing  the  in-
teftines, and  the  omentum  to  the  fides,  lie  immediately  under  the  anterior
parietes  of  the  belly,  and  are  contiguous  to  them,  m.ay  be  confirm'd  by  more
than  one  obfervation  (m)  of  phyficians,  and  anatomifts.  Moreover,  that  the
difficulty  of  diftinguifhing  the  true  fituation  of  a  tumour,  was  increas'd  in

(i)  Wharton  adenogr.  c.  12.  vid.  etiam  fuis («)  Vid. River,  prax.  med.  I. 13. c. 5.
Ipcisplerafqueobferv.  indicatasinhacSepulchr. Wharton.  1.  cit.  c.  u;  Scultet.  armam.  chir.
fed.  21.  fub  cbf.  33.  itemque  in  additam.  obf. obf.  6z.  &  cxu
73.30,85.  S8.

CiJ  Vid.  feft.  modo  cit.  fchol.  ad  obf.  54.  &
ia  addit.  obf.^o.  verf.  fin.

bellies


Letter  XXXIX. Article  23.  "385

bellies  of  this  kind,  which  are  fat,  large,  and  fubjeft  to  flatus  and  tormina  of  the
bowels.  For  befides  that  a  great  quantity  of  fat,  lying  betwixt  the  hand  and
the  vifcera,  is  an  obftruftion  to  our  examination,  there  are,  frequently,  in  fuch
bellies  as  thefe,  vifcera;  and,  particularly,  fome  of  the  inteftines-,  drawn,  or
forc'd,  out  of  their  fituations.  But  as  there  may  be  more  than  one  feat  of
pain,  fo  that  there  may  be  more  than  one  caufe  of  a  very  obftinate  vo-
miting.

Nor  indeed  did  it  efcape  me,  that  from  ^he  ring  of  the  pylorus  itfelf,  a
kind  of  excrefcence  fometimes  arofe,  fuch  i^'s  I  had  often  feen  •,  which,  if  it
be  pretty  large  in  its  fize,  as  a  certain  fteatoma  was  in  a  phyfician  well-known
to  fome  of  my  friends,  may  prevent  the  paffage  of  the  aliments  :  yet  that,
at  the  fame  time,  I  was  by  no  means  ignorant  how  many  caufes  there  may  be
in  that  place,  or  near  to  that  place,  both  internally,  and  externally,  pro-
ducing the  fame  effefts;  fo  that  if  we  even  reckon  up  a  great  number,  we
fhall  perhaps  not  hit  upon  the  true  one.  For,  to  mention  one  cafe  by  way  of
example;  the  coats  of  the  flomach  being,  everywhere  about  this  paffage,
grown  hard,  and  thick,  that  the  palTage  becomes  much  narrower  than  it  na-
turally is,  and  the  aliments  are  not  propell'd  ;  which  kind  of  diforder  had
been  found  at  Padua,  in  a  prieft ;  and  not  only  in  others  of  whom  I  had,
read  in  other  places  (n),  as  well  as  in  the  Sepulchretum  foj.

And  not  to  fay  that  juft  the  fame  effefl;  would  be  produc'd,  if  any  one  of
the  diforders  fpoken  of,  fhould  befet  a  part  of  the  duodenum,  that  was  neareit
to  the  ftomach  (p)  :  there  certainly  was  an  obfervation  extant  in  the  Sepul-
chretum  (q),  of  a  cafe  not  very  much  unhke  this,  if  I  remember'd  rightly,
whereof  we  were  fpeaking;  fo  that  the  queftion  about  the  tumour  of  the
omentum  had  recall'd  it  to  my  memory  :  for  as  the  omentum  had  a  large  tu-
mour in  the  epigaftrium,  of  the  hardeft  fat,  the  pylorus  was  fo  conftrifled
by  a  fimilar  matter,  which  lay  around  it,  that  from  hence  an  incurable  vomit-
ing, an  obftinate  coftivenefs,  and  a  wafting  of  flefh  had  been  brought  on.

Of  this  laft  mention'd  fymptom  there  was  no  occafion  to  fay  much,  in  re-
gard to  a  patient,  who  not  only  threw  up  his  aliments,  but  even  a  greater
quantity  of  fluid  than  he  took  in :  whether  this  water  was  from  faliva,  which
often  defcended  in  great  quantities  into  an  empty  fliomach;  or  even  was  prefs'd
out  from  the  coats  of  the  ftomach  itfelf,  by  the  frequent  ftrainings  to  vomit:
although  fome  part  of  the  chyle,  which  was  prepar'd  from  the  very  few  in-
gefta  that  pals'd  into  the  inteftines,  might,  moreover,  be  intercepted  by  the
tumour,  which  belong'd  either  to  the  inteftines,  or  to  the  mefentery.

From  this  tumour,  or  at  leaft  on  the  account  of  this  tumour,  fome  parti-
cles that  have  ftagnated  long  in  the  belly,  and  have,  for  that  reafon,  become
deprav'd,  may,  upon  their  return  into  the  blood,  have  fo  irritated  the  heart,
and  arteries ;  that,  finally,  I  was  at  liberty  to  conjefture  the  origin  of  the
fever,  in  this,  or  fome  other  fimilar  manner.

From  what  I  had  hitherto  faid  of  the  four  articles  propos'd  to  be  con-
fider'd,  in  the  beginning ;  although  it  appear'd  wherein  I  differ'd  from  the
others ;  it  was,  neverthelefs,  eafy  to  conceive  that  I  could  not  but  agree  with

(«)  Vid.  epift.  30.  n.  13.  (j>)  Vid.  confirmatum  epift.  30,  tl.  J  2.

foj  L.  3.  f.  8.  obf.  17.  &  feq.  (?)  L.  cit.  f.  21.  obf.  80.

Vol.  11,  D  d  d  ' them.


386  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

them,  in  determining  the  diforder  to  be  incurable.  And  this  I  readily
confefs'd  :  I  only  added  this  one  thing,  in  particular ;  that  I  was  afraid
left  the  tumour  might  bring  on  death  in  fome  other  way,  rather  than  by
an  efFufion  of  pus-,  the  figns  of  which  were  not,  at  prefent,  very  near  at
hand.

That  it  became  us,  therefore,  in  an  incurable  difeafe,  to  ufe  all  our  ef-
forts, that  life  might  be  prolong'd  to  as  great  an  extent  as  poffible  ;  by  refift-
ing,  as  much  as  it  was  in  our  power,  the  caufes  that  might  accelerate  death.
That  in  the  number  of  thefe  caufes  vomiting  was  to  be  confider'd,  in  more
refpefts  than  one;  by  bringing  on  a  wafting,  by  diminifliing  the  ftrength,  by
giving  concuflions  to  the  tumour.  And  if  the  chief  caufe  of  vomiting  could
not  be  remov'd,  yet  that  another  might,  at  leaft,  be  diminifh'd  ;  which,  in  fome
meafure,  perhaps  exafperated  the  former,  as  it  generally  does  ;  that  is  the  coftive-
nefs  of  the  inteftines.  That  the  bifliop  was  by  all  means  to  be  entreated  to
fuffer  clyfters  to  be  miade  ufe  of,  which  would  have  this  efFeft ;  or  if  they
were  adminifter'd  without  the  defir'd  effeft,  would,  at  leaft,  ferve  for  nou-
rilhment.  But  if  he  perfifted  in  refufing  to  admit  of  them,  and  if  rhubarb,
in  the  method  prefcrib'd  above,  had  really  fufficiently  obviated  the  coftive-
nefs,  without  any  inconvenience,  that  I  had  no  objeflion  to  the  ufe  of  it ;  not
fo  much  becaufe  I  approv'd  of  it,  as  becaufe  other  purgatives  were  pirtly  not
fuitable  to  the  cafe,  and  partly  were  evidently  hurtful ;  and  that  I  was  there-
fore induc'd,  and  compell'd,  by  the  neceffity  of  the  cafe,  to  admit  of  it.

However,  that  all  irritating  and  unpleafant  medicines  v/ere  to  be  avoided  :
and  therefore  I  did  not  difapprove  of  a  fmall  portion  of  the  viper  ;  which
might,  vnthout  the  knowledge  of  the  patient,  be  boil'd  in  broths,  and  admi-
nifter'd by  way  of  nouriftiment ;  unlefs  they  ftiould  rather  choofe  to  diftblve
fome  of  the  jelly  of  the  viper  therein  :  for  that  the  heat  of  the  viper  could
not  poflibly  be  of  any  dillervice,  in  fo  fmall  a  quantity  of  either  one,  or  the
other,  while  the  fever  was  thus  flight ;  nor  even  if  it  were  fo  great  as  moft  of
them  feem'd  to  imagine.  And  that  I  faid  nearly  the  fame  things,  of  a  pro-
portionable quantity  of  farfapariila,  or  rather  of  china-root.

As  to  the  propofal  of  giving  mercury;  I  faid,  in  the  firft  place,  that  the  patient
had  not  ftrength  enough  to  fuffer  us  even  to  think  of  it :  and  if  he  had,  that  I
fliould  much  more  readily  approve  of  a  fmall  blood-letting  from  the  hemor-
rhoidal veins,  as  moft  agreeable  to  wh^t  I  had  faid  of  the  tumour:  and  in  the  fe-
cond  place,  that  if  the  nature  of  the  tumour  was  fuch  as  they  judg'd  it  to  be^
which  I  could  not  take  upon  me  to  deny;  I  mean  that  it  feem'd,  to  the  touch,
to  be  evidently  made  up  of  fcirrhous,  and  ftrumous  glands  ;  certainly  mer--
cury  was  lefs  proper  than  millepedes :  and  that  thefe  were  more  proper,  like-
wife,  on  account  of  its  being  probable  that  they  would  prove  diuretic  at  the
fame  time,  if  this  effeft  were  really  of  the  importance  that  had  been  fup-
pos'd.  But  that  nothing  was  of  more  importance  than  to  lengthen  out  life,
as  I  had  already  faid  ;  and  that  this  might  be  brought  about  by  omitting
every  thing  that  was  diftafteful,  and  giving  fucli  things  as  were  more  grate-
ful, and  nourifhing.  And  that  we  ought  diligently  to  attend  to  the  manner
in  which  the  ftomach  is  affefted  by  theie  different  things,  in  order  to  make
the  chief  ufe  of  thofe  v/hich  have  been  retain'd  the  iongeft,  or  not  wholly
thrown  up.

5

24.  Al-


Letter  XXXIX. Article  24, 25.  387

'  24.  Although  I  could  not  be  fo  fhort  in  this  cafe,  as  I  generally  am  in  me-
dical confukations;  yet  the  phyfician  who  fpoke  laft  made  a  ftill  much  longer
harangue  :  he  was  an  elderly  man,  and  a  celebrated  profefTor.  The  amount
of  his  fpeech  was  this  ;  that  he  acknowledg'd  the  nature  of  the  tumour  to
be  the  fame  as  the  others  thought  it :  but  he  fuppos'd  it  could  have  no  other
fituation  than  that  of  the  niefentery,  the  omentum  (for  of  the  inteftines  he
did  not  fay  a  fingle  word)  being  put  out  of  the  queftion,  chiefly  for  this  rea-
fon,  becaufe  it  was  without  fenfation,  and  could  be  cut  into  without  pain.
'  However,  he  confirm'd  the  opinion  of  the  diforder  being  incurable  :  ap-
prov'd  of  medical  aliments,  and  among  thefe  the  viper  in  particular:  he  con-
demn'd  purgatives,  and  all  violent  remedies :  but  not  fo  millepedes  -,  as  he
rcmember'd  a  poor  girl  to  have  been  cur'd  of  a  ftruma,  by  the  ufe  of
them.

You  have  now,  then,  the  fummary  of  whatever  pafs'd  in  the  confultation.
But  do  not  wonder  that,  although  1  have  given,  briefly,  the  opinions  of  four
phyficians,  who  flourifli'd  here,  and  were  more  eminent  than  others,  at  that
time;  I  have,  neverthelefs,  been  more  difiule  in  explaining  my  own:  for
this  I  have  done  that  I  might  be  lefs  prolix,  in  accounting  for  thofe  appear-
ances which  were  found  in  the  body  of  the  bifliop,  after  death  -,  which  hap-
pen'd  about  the  twenty-eighth  day  after  our  confultation.  But  let  us  finifli  the
hiftory  of  the  difeafe  that  I  had  begun.

25.  What  the  two  phyficians,  to  whom  the  cure  had  been  committed,
did  afterwards,  I  never,  in  the  leaflr,  inquir'd ;  nor  indeed  is  it  my  cuftom,
after  I  have  given  my  opinion.  Yet  I  heard,  as  did  every  one  at  Padua,
that  they  had  given  rhubarb  on  the  day  following  ;  but  not  within  the  former
bounds;  and,  therefore,  not  without  great  uneaOnefs  to  the  patient:  and  that,
at  length,  they  had  perfuaded  the  patient  to  admit  of  clyfters  fometimes  ;
and,  by  this  means,  had  procur'd  ftools  with  fome  advantage.  Laft  of  all,
when  it  had  happen'd  that  two  days  were  pafs'd  over  without  any  vomiting,  I
heard  that  expettations  had  been  fpread  abroad  among  the  populace,  of  the
recovery  of  the  patient ;  which  I  could  wifli  had  been  accomplifli'd  ;  but  from
■what  fource  this  prevailing  hope  arofe,  I  cannot  tell.

Soon  after,  however,  I  heard  that  the  vomitings  had  return'd,  and  even  in
a  more  violent  manner  than  before.  In  the  mean  while  a  foreign  phyfician
came  hither,  who  was,  in  the  opinion  of  the  people,  very  excellent :  and
he,  they  faid,  had  here  pronounc'd  this  cafe  to  be  defperate  -,  but  had  added,
in  fome  other  place,  that  he  could  have  overcome  the  diforder  by  means  of
mercury,  if  he  had  come  fooner.  Nor  indeed  was  one  wanting,  when  he
was  gone  away,  who  promis'd,  without  the  leaft  hefitation,  to  cure  the  patient
by  a  certain  remedy  of  his.  This  was  an  infufion  of  what  is  cail'd  the  lignum
nephriticum  -,  wherewith  he,  perhaps,  might  have  difcufs'd  fome  hardnefles
of  the  belly,  at  Venice.  He  gave  it  feveral  times  to  the  bifhop,  but  in  vain.
And  now  his  wafting  of  fielh  being  increas'd  every  day,  and  his  ftrength  pro-
portionably  decreafing,  the  diforder  haften'd  to  its  end:

At  a  certain  hour  the  patient  cail'd  out  for  more  bed-clothes,  as  if  he
were  cold  ;  whereas,  at  other  times,  he  could  bear  only  the  lighteft  cover-
ings ;  that  is  by  reafon  of  the  heat,  but  an  internal  heat:  for  externally,  no
perlbn  ever  perceiv'd  his  body  to  be  cold,  or  hot,  but  always  gently  warm.

D  d  d  2  His


388  Book  II!. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

His  refpiration  was  never  bad.  His  pulfe  was  neitlier  hard,  nor  intermit-
ting ;  nor  ever,  in  any  meafure,  unequal  ;  but  had  become  very  frequent,  on
the  laft  days  of  his  life,  and  fo  low,  that  by  one  of  the  phyficians  it
was  fuppos'd  to  be  quite  loft.  To  this  was  added  convulfive  ftartings  of  the
tendons,  and  fometimes  a  very  flight  delirium.  On  the  fame  laft  days,  the
vomitings  ftill  continu'd -,  but  the  matter  difcharg'd  was  bitter,  and  fmelt  very
Itrong  ;  and  was  fo  very  black  that  fome  thought  it  to  be  blood  :  but  a  piece
of  paper,  that  had  been  dip'd  into  it,  appear'd,  after  drying,  to  be  of  a  dilute
yellow  colour,  inclining  to  green  ;  which  ft^.ow'd  the  humour  difcharg'd  to  be
bile.  In  this  manner  the  patient  ftruggled  on  to  the  twenty-thiid  day  of
June  ;  on  which  day,  in  the  afternoon,  he  was  attack'd  with  fo  very  violent
a  paroxyfm,  that  it  was  fuppos'd  he  would  have  inftantly  died.  Ne-
verthelefs  he  efcap'd.  But  the  fame  paroxyfm  returning,  on  the  following
day,  at  the  fame  hour,  this  excellent  prelate ;  being  perfectly  in  his  fenfes,
and  every  now  and  then  pronouncing  fome  pious  words,  with  a  low  voice  ;
having  turn'd  himfelf  to  one  fide,  without  any  affiftance,  which  on  the
former  days  he  could  not  have  done ;  foon  after  departed  this  life  in  a  placid
and  ferene  manner.

26.  As  the  body  was  to  be  embalm'd  in  the  evening,  in  order  that  the  fu-
neral rites  might  be  perform'd  on  the  third  day  after,  all  of  us,  who  had
given  our  opinion  on  the  cafe,  were  call'd  to  the  operation.  And  there,  af-
ter having  heard  from  the  phyficians  of  the  biftiop,  and  his  houfliold-priefts,
thofe  things  that  I  have  related  to  you  as  undoubted  fads,  concerning  the
latter  part  of  the  difeafe,  I  prefently  after  prefided  at  the  difiedion,  while  I
was  lurrounded  by  my  fellow-phyficians,  and  a  great  num.ber  of  ftudents..
The  abdomen,  although  the  limbs  and  the  face  had  been  much  more  exte-
nuated, than  this  part  •,  had,  neverthelefs,  fo  far  fubfided,  that,  even  from-
this  caufe,  it  might  be  fuppos'd  the  tumour  had  rifen  up,  and  become  pro-
tuberant, outwards,  more  than  we  had  feen  it  before.  Neverthelefs,  under  the
fkin  of  the  abdomen  the  fat  was,  univerfally,  two  inches  thick.

The  cavity  of  the  belly  being  laid  open,  into  which  a  bloody  ferurn  had
been  extravafated,  to  the  quantity  nearly  of  three  pints,  two  circum.ftances
drew  the  eyes  of  every  one  upon  them  at  once.  For,  on  one  hand,  appear'd
the  tumour,  of  which  there  had  been  fo  much  controverfy,  in  the  form  of  a  large
globe  ;  or  rather  like  a  large  hemifphere  -,  having  the  refemblance,  if  you  at-
tended to  the  colour,  the  fcetid  fmell,  and  the  inequality  of  furface,  of  a  moft
foul  cancer.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  which  was  a  very  ftrange,  and  unufual
fpeftacle,  the  whole  of  the  fpace  contain'd  within  the  belly,  from  the  navel
downwards,  was,  univerfally  ;  if  you  except  the  left  and  inferior  part  of  the
colon,  and  the  reftum,  with  that  part  of  the  mefocolon  belonging  thereto,
and  the  urinary  bladder  •,  entirely  free  fro.m  vifcera,  and  empty.  And  from
hence  it  came  immediately  into  my  mind  what  the  tumour  was :  and  this  fuf-
picion  was  confirm'd,  firft,  by  my  own  infpeclion  ;  and  then  by  the  infpefliicn
of  every  one.  That  is  to  fay,  the  whole  inteftinum  ileum,  and  fome  part  of
the  neighbouring  jejunum,  having  left  their  fituations,  which  are,  naturally,
below  the  navel  ;  and  being  drawn  upwards,  andjoin'd  together  very  clofely,
had,  of  themfelves,  compos'd  this  large  and  prominent  tumour,  without  the
kaft  addition  of  any  fcrophulous,  fcirrhous,  or  cancerous  fubftance.

Foe


Letter  XXXIX. Article  26.  ^^89

For  the  Inequality  of  the  furface  arofe  from  thofe  frequent  flexures  of  the
inteftines,  and  their  unequal  pofition,  and  conftriclion  -,  fo  that  they  protube-
rated  more  in  one  part,  and  lefs  in  another  :  but  the  blackifh  colour,  which
was  almoft  univerfal  -,  I  mean  which  had  only  fome  leffer  fpaces  interpos'd  that
were  ftill  red  ;  was  manifeftly  owing  to  the  inflammation  of  the  inteftines,
which  had  already  degenerated,  in  great  meafure,  into  a  gangrene  ;  doubt-
lefs  from  the  return  of  the  blood  into  the  vena  portarum  being,  at  length,
intercepted  •,  the  retardation  of  which  I  have  fpoken  of  above  (r)  :  and,  final-
ly, the  ill  fmell  was  the  confequence  of  the  gangrene,  as  it  naturally  is.  The
inteftines  of  Vv^hich  the  tumour  was  made  up,  were  almoft  full  of  matter,  like
the  ftercoraceous  matter  generally  contain'd  in  the  large  inteftines,  and  not  very
foft,  as  we  found  by  laying  one  of  them  open .  afterwards  ;  fo  as  to  make  it
evident  that  the  matter  which  naturally  defcends  fpeedily  into  the  large  in--
teftines,  being  obftruded,  and  having  flatus  join'd  to  it,  the  tumour  might
give  that  refiftance  to  the  touch,  which  we  had  perceiv'd  in  the  living  body.

And,  although  by  reafon  of  the  clofe  connexion  of  the  inteftines  one  with
another;  which  I  mention'd  before  •,  there  was  occafion  to  take  a  very  long
time  to  feparate  them  by  means  of  the  fcalpel  (for  drawing  them  on  one  fide,
and  on  the  other,  with  the  hands,  was  of  no  effeft)  yet  about  the  middle,  and
almoft  the  upper  part,  of  the  tumour,  the  feparation  being  lefs'difficult,  it  was
brought  about  in  this  part,  at  leaft,  and  the  interiors  of  the  tumour  brought
to  view  ;  which  were,  in  like  manner,  made  up  of  inteftines  heap'd  together
beneath,  and,  in  fome  part  of  the  mefentery,  which  was  neither  grown  hard,
nor  thick,  nor  of  a  black  colour,  that  any  of  us  could  diftinguifh  •,  but  per-
fectly found,  and  fill'd  with  fat ;  which  was,  as  it  naturally  is,  of  a  white  co-
lour, inclining  to  yellow.

As  the  omentum  had  not  appear'd,  in  any  degree,  hitherto,  I  turn'd  my
eyes  to  the  upper  region  of  the  belly  ;  where  the  ftomach  was  funk  down  be-
twixt the  defcrib'd  tumour,  and  the  diaphragm  :  and  as  it  did  not  very  well
appear,  even  by  thefe  means,  but  feem'd  to  be  a  kind  of  hard,  thick,  andl
heavy  band,  fixing  itfelf  clofely  to  the  fundus  of  the  ftomach,  and  the  inte-
ftinum  colon,  that  lay  beneath  the  ftomach;  pafling  tranfverfely  from  one  hy-
pochondrium  to  the  other  ;  and  deprelTrng  both  the  ftomach,  and  this  large
inteftine,  by  its  weight,  and  thick nefs  ;  I  was,  at  length,  fcarcely  certain  that
it  was  really  the  omentum,  till  it  had  been  confirm'd  by  the  others,  as  well
as  by  m.yfelf,  from  the  due  confideration  of  all  circumftances.

For  the  fmall  inteftines,  rifing  into  a  turiiour,  had  long  ago  driven  the
omentum  up  into  that  part  •,  and  there,  being  folded  up  together,  it  had
coalefc'd  into  one  hard  body,  like  a  fafcia,  or  band,  of  an  equal  furface,  but
not  of  an  equal  thicknefs.  For,  in  fome  places,  it  was  of  the  thicknefs  of
one  inch,  in  others  of  two,  and  in  fome  again  of  three  •,  as  was  clearly  per-
ceiv'd by  the  feftions :  but  the  greateft  thicknefs  was  obferv'd  to  be  near  the
fpleen  in  particular,  as  a  rigid  hardnefs  was  alfo ;  fo  that  when  it  was  cut
into,  the  fubftance  thereof  grated  under  the  knife  :  however,  to  the  fight  the
fubftance  was  every  where  uniform  ;  but  the  hardnefs  was,  in  fome  places,  ot
the  ligamentous  kind  as  it  were,  and,  in  others,  almoft  cartilaginous,

{r\  N,  23.


390  .  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

In  this  ftate  then  was  the  omentum  ;  which  did  not  fall  under  the  notice  of
the  touch  in  the  living  body  :  inafmuch  as  lying  betwixt  the  great  quantity  of
fat  of  the  abdomen,  and  the  yielding  vifcera,  the  flomach,  and  the  intefti-
num  colony  and  by  reafon  of  its  deprefs'd  fituation,  and  its  very  firm  con-
nexions ;  it  could  neither  be  laid  hold  of  betwixt  the  hands,  as  that  promi-
nent tumour  of  the  inteilines  could  be,  nor  mov'd  to  which-ever  fide  you
pleas'd.  The  ftomach  was  then  examin'd.  And  after  having  exhaufted  all
the  contain'd  fluid  ;  which  was  in  great  quantity,  of  a  blackilh  colour,  had  a
very  filthy  imell,  and  was,  in  every  refpeft,  fuch  as  had  been  thrown  up  in
the  laft  vomitings  ;  the  internal  furface  of  it  appear'd  of  a  reddifh  colour,  in-
clining to  brown ;  which,  perhaps,  might  be  the  confequence  of  being  ting'd
with  the  humour  I  have  defcrib'd ;  or  might  poflibly  be  the  effeft  of  inflam-
mation.

But  in  the  antrum  pylori,  it  feem*d,  here  and  there,  difl:ingui{h'd  with  cer-
tain fmall  coagula  of  blood,  as  it  were ;  which,  when  more  accurately  exa-
min'd, were  found  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  fmall  and  deprefs'd  tubercles,  inter-
nally, indeed,  firm  and  v/hite,  yet,  on  the  furface,  affeded  with  a  gangrene :
fome  of  them  v/ere  of  an  oval  figure,  and  others  had  different  figures  and  po-
fitions ;  but  the  greater  part  were  made  up  of  many,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to
refemble  branching  afl:erifls:s,  as  it  were,  or  afterifks  furnifli'd  with  inflefted.
and  bifurcated  radii.  Yet  the  more  near  they  approach'd  to  the  pylorus,  from
the  beginning  of  the  antrum,  the  fmaller  and  lefs  frequent  did  they  become,
fo  as  at  length  to  be  quite  folitary.  That  which  was  the  largeft  of  all  fcarccly
reach'd  the  magnitude  of  a  bean.

In  the  pylorus  itfelf,  neither  thefe  tubercles,  nor  any  excrefcences,  were
oblerv'd  :  and,  indeed,  the  pafiTage  through  this  part  was  not  fo  much  con-
trafted,  as  to  prevent  a  finger  being  introduc'd  into  it,  according  to  my  de-
fire.  Yet  there  were  in  this  part,  and  in  almofl  the  v/hole  antrum  of  the  py-
lorus ;  and,  in  like  manner,  in  the  firft  part  of  the  inteftinum  duodenum,
which  was  neareft  thereto,  fo  very  thick  and  hard  coats,  that,  as  they  equali'd
the  point  of  the  finger  in  thicknefs,  fo  they  did  not  yield  much,  in  rigid
hardnefs,  fo  the  omentum  that  I  have  defcrib'd;  to  v/hich  they  were  likewife-
fimilar  in  their  hard  and  compa6l  fubftance :  and  from  this  very  fubftance,
rifingup  into  little  prominences,  in  fome  places,  thofe  tubercles  were  form'd,
which  1  fpoke  of  before.

The  liver  was  internally  and  externally  pallid,  and  fomewhat  hard,  but  of
its  natural  figure  and  fize.  The  gall-bladder  contain'd  a  bile  like  a  blackifli
mud.  The  fpleen,  and  the  other  vifcera, 'were  found,  as  thofe  of  the  thorax
alfo  were  -,  vv  here  the  pericardium  and  the  heart  were  feen  to  be  cover'd  over
with  fat.  One  vifcus  of  the  belly,  however,  mull  be  excepted  ;  and  that  is
th&  pancreas :  but  as  I  was  about  to  proceed  in  my  inquiry  into  the  ftate  of
this  vifcus,  my  collegues  began  to  be  tir'd  •,  and  to  think,  as  the  night  was
now  far  fpent,  and  the  fmell  extremely  offenfive,  and  as  thefe  very  firm  con-
nexions of  the  omentum  could  not  very  foon  be  diflblv'd,  in  order  to  lay  bare
the  pancreas,  that  the  difleftion  had  been  fufficiently  profecuted.

27.,  And,  indeed,  if  you  attended  to  what  had  preceeded,  efpecially  to  the
tumour ;  on  the  particular  nature  and  fituation  of  which  the  controverfy  had
been  agitated  during  the  life  of  the  patient;  the  inquiry  feem'd  to  be  carried

fufficiently


Letter  XXXIX. Article  27.  '391

fufEciently  far.  And  as  I  was  returning  from  the  difleftion,  together  with-
my  companions,  being  aflc'd  by  a  very  grave  man,  what  appearance  had,  at
length,  been  found  ;  I  immediately  anfwer'd,  for  all  of  us,  nothing  but  what
had  been  previoufly  hinted,  in  fome  meafure,  in  our  confukation,  and  juftly
pronounc'd  incurable.  Nor  did  I  conclude  the  narration  in  any  different
manner,  when  I  wrote  to  that  eminent  fenator,  fpoken  of  above  (s),  brother
to  the  bifhop  •,  when,  on  the  day  following,  I  fent  the  fummary,  of  what  had
been  obferv'd,  to  him,  as  my  duty  and  refpedl  oblig'd  me  :  and  this,  as  it  was-
acceptable  to  him,  he  kept  by  him.

Nor,  indeed,  although  I  afterwards  heard  that  one,  and  another  fummary,
of  thefe  things,  was  in  the  hands  of  every  one,  would  I,  for  that  reaibn,
give  out  mine  ;  as  well  becaufe  they  were  much  more  different  from  one  an-
other, than  they  were  from  mine,  as  becaufe  I  was  never  willing  to  begin  un-
neceffary  controverfies.  And  v/hat  could  be  lefs  neceffary,  than  fuch  as  could,
be  determin'd  by  the  teftimony  of  the  furgeons  who  had  perform'd  the  dif-
feftion  .''  And  this  I  took  care  to  procure  when  the  fubjedt  was  quite  recent ;
not  in  order  to  produce  it  then,  but  only  to  have  it  at  hand,  as  I  aftually
have,  if,  at  any  time,  I  fliould  produce  the  v/hole  obfervation  -,  and  any  one
iliould  be  in  doubt  about  the  ftricl  juftnefs  of  my  narration,  from  having  pe-
rus'd  any  part  of  their  fummaries,  v/hich  was  fomewhat  different.

But  I  fhall  not  now  fay  what  was  wanting  in  thefe  fummaries,  or  what  was.
fuperfluous  •,  or,  finally,  what  was  different  from  the  truth  :  nor,  indeed,,
fnould  I  have  made  any  mention  of  them,  if  I  had  not  fuppos'd  that  they
had,  probably,  been  feen  by  you,  fomiC  time  or  other ;  and  that  you  would,
wonder  at  my  taking  no  notice  of  them.  I  fhall  only  tell  you  this  that  v/as
then  faid  by  all  the  others,  who  were  prefent  at  the  diffeftion  :  that  one  phy-
fician  very  properly  confefs'd  the  tumour,  upon  which  there  had  been  fo  much,
eontroveriy,  to  confiftof  thefmall  inteftines  join'd  and  heap'd  up  together  into^
a  large  globe ;  but  this  was  faid  without  juftice,  that  it  had  alfo  confided  of
"  the  mefentery,  which  was  become  very  hard,  and  of  the  fame  colour"  (that
is  to  fay,  "  black  and  gangrenous")  with  which  the  inteftines  were  ting'd  ;;
♦  nd,  finally,  that  it  v/as  "  tumid."

So  alfo,  on  the  contrary,  I  will  fay  that  another  of  them,  with  iuftice,  af-
firm'd  the  mefentery  to  be  "  white,  and  without  any  tumour,  or  hardnefs  ;"'
but  thofe  things  were  not  faid  with  propriety  -,  when  forgetting  that  he  him-
felf  had,  in  the  confukation,  conjeflur'd  a  fcirrhus  of  the  mefentery,  as  well
as  of  the  omentum  (t),  hecarp'd,  not  without  fome  feverity,  at  him  whohad
fuppos'd  a  fcirrhus  in  the  mefentery  -,  and,  in  like  manner,  where  he  dif-
cours'd  upon  the  coalition  of  the  inteftines,  and  the  fcirrhus  of  the  omen-
tum, with  fuch  artifice,  that  any  one,  who  was  ignorant  of  the  affair,  would
not  fo  much  as  fufpedt  the  inteftines  to  have  been  heap'd  up  into  one  globe,
and  to  have  rifen  up  into  a  tumour  ;  but  would  fufpefi:,  for  this  reafon,  that
the  tumour  in  queftion  had  been  made  up,  chiefly,  by  the  fcirrhus  of  the
omentum  •,  nay,  would  eyen  certainly  fuppofe,  that  this  tumour  was  nothing-
clfe  but  the  fcirrhus  of  the  omentum  •,  which  did  not,  however,  begin  "  in.
"  the  upper  part  of  the  navel,"  but  much  higher  ;  nor  was  in  the  Icaft  ele-
Icvated,  but  lay  quite  fmooth  and  deprefs'd.

(j.)  N.  21.  {tj  Suj;ira  n,  zz.

How


392  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

How  much  more  would  it  have  become  thofe  two  fcnior  phyficians,  to  have
given  up  all  controveriy  upon  the  fituation  of  the  tumour  ;  which  could  now
exifl:  no  longer  with  any  propriety ;  and  imitate  the  illuftrious  example  of
Hippocrates  (//),  and  Galen  (.v),  by  candidly  confeffing  that  they  had  been
deceiv'd  in  their  conjeftures,  on  the  nature  thereof;  fince  it  was  not  very  pleaf-
ingto  me,  who  was  the  only  one  that  had  hinted  at  the  real  feat  thereof,  not
to  have  been  able  entirely  to  avoid  a  tacit  fufpicion  of  having  been  deceiv'd,
■  in  regard  to  its  nature,  in  common  with  the  reft;  but  ftill  lefs  fo,  to  have  had
this  iufpicion  fpread  openly  among  the  people.

28.  It  is  of  great  importance  for  thofe  who  are  given  to  the  fludy  of  medi-
cine ;  and  of  a  great  importance  to  you,  on  whofe  account  I  have  undertaken
this  long  difcourfe  ;  not  to  be  ignorant  that  a  tumour  once  exifted  in  the  belly,
which  ;  although  it  was  made  up  of  the  inteftines  themfelves  ;  being,  never-
thelefs,  of  an  unequal  and  tuberous  furface,  and  giving  confidcrable  refift-
ance  to  the  touch,  had  impos'd  upon  five  phyficians ;  and  thofe,  if  you  ex-
cept me  alone,  very  fagacious,  and  experienc'd  men-,  under  the  appearance
of  afcirrhus.  And  who  can  inquire  into  the  marks  by  which  this  diibrder  may
be  diftinguifii'd,  unlefs  the  diforder  be  made  known  by  our  ingenuous  con-
feffion  ?  Nor,  indeed,  will  thefe  figns  be  eafily  found  among  our  authors  ;
fince  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  a  hiftory  any  where  that  was  perfedly
like  this.

I  have  read,  indeed,  in  the  afls  of  the  Csefarean  academy  (y),  "  that  all
"  the  inteftines  were  found  to  be  clofely  cohering  to  each  other ;"  or  "  the
"  fmall  inteftines  in  particular,  fo  very  clofely  grown  together  with  one  an-
"  other,  and  with  the  mefentery,  every  where,  that"  they  made  up  "onemafs,
"  or  one  conglomerated  heap,"  therewith :  and  indeed  I  have  read  that,  in
a  young  woman,  who  had  been  frequently  fubjeft  to  pains  of  the  belly,  the
celebrated  Fantonus  found  (z)  "  almoft  all  the  inteftines  gathered  up  into  one
"  conglobated  body,  as  it  were,  and  very  clofely  conglutinated  with  each
"  other :  and  you  may  read  in  this  twenty-firft  fedion  of  the  Sepulchre-
turn  {a),  "  that  all  the  inteftines  were  conglomerated,  and  form'd  into  a  kind
"  of  globe  :"  and,  in  like  manner  {b).,  "  that  the  inteftines  were  fo  drawn  up
*'  to  the  fuperior  parts,  as  fcarcely  to  fill  half  the  capacity  of  the  abdomen."

But  in  none  of  thofe  obfervations  will  you  find  that  they  were  fo  drawn
up,  and  conglobated,  as  to  be  externally  prominent  in  the  form  of  a  circum-
fcrib'd  and  particular  tumour  :  and  in  the  two  laft  this  even  could  not  have
happen'd,  as  the  bodies  were  in  a  dropfical  ftate,  and  a  great  quantity  of  wa-
ter was  interpos'd,  fo  as  to  diftend  the  whole  abdomen  :  as  it  likewife  could
not  happen  in  another  dropfical  woman,  in  whofe  body  Thomas  Bartholin  {c)
faw  "  all  the  inteftines  thruft  afide  to  the  right  hypochondrium  ;  fo  that,  at
"  firft,  they  feem'd  to  have  been  wanting ;"  or  in  a  foldier,  who,  alfo,  had  '
labour'd  under  an  afcites  •,  whofe  inteftines  Laubius  (d)  found  "  furprizingly
"  intwin'd,  and  coUefted  together,  into  one  globe,  as  it  were,  towards  the
"  navel."


(uj  Epidem.  I.  5.  n.  14.  [a)  Obf.  3.  5-  8.

(r)  De  Loc.  afF.  1.  2.  c.  5.  (bj  Obf.  20.  §.  6.

{y)  Tom.  1.  obf.  87.  &  torn.  6.  obf.  134,  ('c)  Cent.  i.  hift.  anat.  2.

{z)  De  obferv.  med.  &  anat.  epift.  4.  (d)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  64.


And


Letter  XXXIX. Article  28.  393

And  this,  perhaps,  might  have  been  the  cafe ;  though  it  Is  not  exprefljr
faid  to  have  been  fo ;  in  Cardinal  Campegio,  in  whofe  body  "  all  the  in-
"  teftines"  (part  of  the  colon  and  the  reftum  ought  to  have  been  excepted)
"  were  forc'd  together  into  the  hypochondria  ;  for  which  reafon  the  inferior
"  cavity  of  the  abdomen  was  deftitute  of  inteftines,  and  the  fpine  un-
"  cover'd,"  as  Columbus  faw  [e) ;  "  the  novelty  of  which  circumftance,"
that  was  alfo  feenby  us  in  the  bifhop,  "  could  not,"  fays  he,  "  be  fufficiently
"  admir'd  by  the  excellent  Auguftino  Ricci  of  Lucca."

A  ftill  more  furprizing  novelty  of  this  kind,  I  afterwards  met  with  in  a
female  foetus.  For  upon  opening  the  belly,  and  wiping  away  the  blood  that
was  extravafated  therein,  no  inteftine,  befide  thofe  that  I  juft  now  excepted,
was  any  where  to  be  feen ;  as  all  the  others,  with  almoft  the  whole  of  the
mefentcry,  lay  hid  under  the  concave  furface  of  the  liver;  and  were  confin'd  in
fuch  a  manner,  as  I  fhall,  perhaps,  explain  to-^^you  on  a  more  convenient  oc-
cafion  {f).  But  this  nobody  could  have  fufpefted  before  diffedlion  ;  becaufe,
by  reafon  of  that  quantity  of  blood  being  extravafated,  the  abdomen  did  not
fubfide,  below  the  navel :  and  if  it  had  fubfided,  who  would  not  have  ima-
gin'd  that  it  was  to  be  imputed  to  the  liver,  which  is  always  large  in  a  fcetus,
being,  perhaps,  much  enlarg'd  here,  rather  than  to  the  inteftines  being
drawn  up  behind  the  liver  ?

For  Philip  Jacob  Hartmann  {g)  had,  indeed,  alfo  feen  a  large  tumour,  in
a  girl  of  three  years  old,  ftretch'd  out  from  the  left  fpurious  ribs,  to  the  con-
fines of  the  pubes ;  nor  could  he  poflibly  have  fuppos'd  it  to  be  made  up  of
"  the  inteftines  coalefc'd  into  one  body,  with  the  greater  part  of  all  the  me-
fentery  ;"  fo  that  "  the  back  was  the  only  part  which  lay  confpicuous  to
"  the  fight :"  yet  he  has  not  added  any  thing,  whereby,  if  the  fame  fhould
happen  again,  the  nature  thereof  might  be  known.  Columbus,  however
{h),  had  intermix'd  fome  things,  from  whence  we  might  colledl  a  few  marks
to  diftinguifli  it  by.  "  Wherefore,"  fays  he,  the  phyfician,  when  examining
*'  the  belly  of  the  cardinal  with  his  hand,  might  plainly  feel  the  motion  of
"  the  great  artery;  and  together  with  that,  perceive  a  hardnefs;  which  hard-
"  nefs  was  nothing  elfe  but  the  bodies  of  the  vertebrae."

Thefe  marks  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  make  tife  of  in  the  biftiop,  as  I
did  not  examine  his  belly  below  the  navel ;  for  the  reafon  I  have  given  you
above  (z) :  and  even  if  I  had  made  this  examination,  I  fuppofe  I  ftiould  have
percerv'd  neither  of  thefe  marks-,  by  reafon  of  fo  great  a  quantity  of  fat  being
interpos'd  ;  or,  at  leaft,  not  the  motion  of  the  great  artery  ;  or  of  the  begin-
ning of  the  iliacs  ;  as  thepulfe  was  neither  ftrong,  nor  large  :  for  which  rea-
fons  neither  the  phyficians,  nor  the  patient,  feem  to  have  obferv'd  it ;  as  they,
otherwife,  would  not  have  denied  that  any  thing  preternatural  was  perceiv'd
below  the  navel.

Eut  in  thofe  wherein  the  abdomen  has  lefs  fat,  thefe  marks  will  not  be
without  their  advantage ;  provided  there  is  fome  fat,  and  no  fufpicion  of  the
great  artery  being  dilated  in  that  part,  or  pulfating  immoderately,  from  any
other  caufe  :  for  in  theie  cafes,  not  only  the  pulfation  of  this  artery  is  per-
ceiv'd, even  when  the  inteftines  lie  betwixt,  as  is  fhown  in  this  letter  {k) ;

(e)  De  re  anat.  1.  15.  (-6)  Loc.  citat.

(/)  Vid.  epift.  67.  n.  17.  (?)  N.  21.

(o-)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a  9.  &  10.  obf.  105.  {k)  N.  ig.

Vol.  II.  E  e  e  but


3^4  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

but  the  hardnefs  of  the  vertebra  alfo  -,  as  I  have  faid  in  another  (I).  In  a
•body,  therefore,  that  is  neither  fat,  nor  very  thin,  nor  liable  to  thefe  fufpl-
cions,  if  a  pulfation  be  perceiv'd ;  and  ftill  more,  if  that  hardnefs  be  per-
ceiv'd  at  the  fame  time  ;  we  fhall  conjefture  the  inteftines  to  be  drawn  up-
wards :  and  it  will  add  no  fmall  weight  to  the  conjefture,  to  find  that  the
abdomen  is  more  deprefs'd  below  the  navel,  than  it  ought  naturally  to  be;
and  more  turgid  above  at  the  fame  time.

But  if,  together  with  thefe  figns,  a  peculiar  and  moveable  tumour  arifes
in  the  upper  region  of  the  abdomen  ;  fuch  as  has  been  defcrib'd  in  the
bifliop  while  living  {m) ;  we  muft  not  only  take  care,  left,  by  reafon  of  the  refift-
ance,  and  inequality,  or  tuberofity,  of  furface,  we  readily  refer  it  to  the  clafs
of  fcirrhous,  or  ftrumous  tumours ;  but  we  muft,  moreover,  inquire  by  what
fymptoms  we  may  rather  be  induc'd  to  fuppofe  that  it  is  made  up  of  the  in-
teftines. Thefe  fymptoms  will  be,  if  we  find  that  the  patient  had  been  fre-
quently fubjed  to  pains  of  the  fmall  inteftines,  and  to  a  flux  af  blood  frorrt
the  hasmorrhoidal  veins ;  although  it  has  been  afterwards  dimintfti'd,  or  fup-
prefs'd  ;  if  the  tumour  be  affefted  with  pain,  when  the  inteftines  are  troubled
with  flatus;  if  the  bowels  have  become  more  and  more  coftive,  from  the
time  the  tumour  began  ;  and  other  things  of  the.fame  kind  ;  which  are  either
read  in  the  hiftory  I  have  given  you,  or  may  come  into  your  mind  from'
reading  it.

Yet  thefe  would  be  more  peculiar  marks,  if  the  tumour  fhould  be  obferv'd'
by  the  patient,  or  by  the  phyficians,  to  be  fometimes  more  confiderable;  and,
at  other  times,  more  flight ;  harder  or  larger ;  fofter  or  lefs ;  as  happens  in
inteftinal  hernias.  And  though  it  feems  that  this  could  happen  very  feldom,
in  fuch  a  tumour  as  the  biftiop's,  by  reafon  of  the  very  frequent  flexures,  the
confiderable  conftriftion,  and  the  very  clofe  coalition,  in  particular,  of  one
inteftine  with  the  other,  being  injurious  to  their  periftaltic  motion  ;  which
caufes,  for  inftance,  obftrudl  and  retain  in  them,  as  I  have  feen,  the  matter
from  whence  the  refiftance  arifes ;  yet  it  is  natural  to  fuppofe,  that  if  the  en-
quiry be  made  accurately,  and  at  repeated  times ;  and,  particularly,  when
either  no  excrements  have  been  difcharg'd  for  fome  time,  or  a  great  quantity
has  been  lately  difcharg'd  ;  or  when  the  patient  is  troubled  with  a  large  or
fmall  quantity  of  flatus ;  it  is  natural  to  fuppofe,  I  fay,  that  fome  one  of
thefe  figns  may  be  in  fome  part  found.

Thefe  then  are,  in  general,  the  remarks  that  came  into  my  mind  when  I
was  thinking  of  this  tumour.  Others  will  add  different  figns ;  and  you,  in
confequence  of  your  ingenuity,  which  is  well-known  to  me,  will  add  better.
And  that  you  may  do  this  the  more  eafily,  I  will  fubjoin  another  obfervation
(although  complicated  with  various  dilbrders ;  and  perhaps  not  very  ac-
curately defcrib'd,  as  I  did  not  fee  the  patient  myfelf )  which  in  fome  mea-
fure  relates  to  tumours  of  this  kind  ;  but,  at  leaft,  relates  to  the  fubjeft  of
this  letter,  and  to  the  lower  region  of  the  belly;  which,  as  the  order  I  pro-
pos'd  to  myfelf  requires,  comes  now  to  be  confider'd.

29.  A  monk  of  the  monaftery  of  St.  Francefco,  which  is  in  the  place  of
my  nativity,  having  fymptoms  of  a  flight  afcites, feem'd  to  have  been  fud-

{/)  EpLft.  10.  n.  12.  {m)  Supra,  n.  19.

4  denly


Letter  XXXIX. Article  30.  395

denly  emptied  in  the  abdomen,  by  copious  vomitings  ;  except  that  in  the  hy-
pogaftrium,  a  tumour  appear'd  of  fuch  a  hardnefs,  as  to  make  thofe  who  at-
tended him  fuppofe  it  to  be  fcirrhous.  When  this  tumour  was  comprefs'd
with  the  hands,  flatus  was  forc'd  out  from  below.  The  vomiting  continued ;
to  which  a  conftant  and  incredible  naufea  being  added,  and  an  infuper3.ble
coftivenefs,  at  length  the  inteftinal  faeces,  or,  at  leafb,  a  matter  very  fimilar
thereto,  began  to  be  thrown  up.  Therefore,  although  no  pain  in  the  belly,
no  figns  of  inflammation  had  come  on,  the  patient  was,  neverthelefs,  carried
off  by  the  difeafe.

While  he  was  at  the  point  of  death,  his  phyfician,  who  was  a  man  of  emi-
nence, coming  to  me  to  beg  of  me  to  prefide  at  the  difledlion,  on  the  day
following,  if  it  were  convenient  for  me  ;  and  having  related  to  me  (who  was
then  confin'd  to  my  bed  with  a  flight  fever)  what  I  juft  now  told  you,  I  faid
to  him,  I  beg  of  you  yourfelf  to  prefide;  for  you  can  do  it  extremely  well  ;
and  as  you  have  inform'd  me  of  the  fymptoms  which  had  preceded,  I  fliould
be  glad  to  be  inform'd,  likewifc,  of  the  appearances  you  find :  for  what  L
have  heard  from  you  of  the  afcites,  the  tumour,  and  the  flatus  being  forc'd
out  when  it  was  prefs'd ;  and,  finally,  of  the  ileos  ;  feem  to  me  to  argue  a
cohefion,  and  fome  entangled  ftate,  of  the  inteftines.  And  on  the  following
day,  which  was  the  fixth  of  November  in  the  year  1709,  having  very
obligingly  return'd  to  jne,  he  faid,  in  the  following  manner  did  we  find  the
appearances.

When  the  belly  was  open'd  the  inteftines  were  found  to  be  very  livid,  but
not  .putrified.  The  fmall  inteftines,  in  a  certain  part  of  them,  being  fur-
prizingly  entangled  with  each  other,  and  join'd  together  by  connexions
made  up  of  a  firm  and  denfe  fubftance  fimilar  to  a  tendinous,  and,  indeed,
almoft  fimilar  to  a  cartilaginous  fubftance,  compos'd  that  tumour  •,  which  was
render'd  lb  hard,  not  only  on  account  of  this  interpos'd  and  connefting  fub-
ftance, but  alio  on  account  of  the  fseces,  with  which  they  were  fiU'd,  being
form'd  into  a  kind  of  fmall  globular  bodies.  Globules  of  this  kind  were  not
only  in  that  part,  but  alfo  in  the  neighbouring  inteftine  colon  ;  till  at  len£fth
it  became  impervious  for  fome  extent,  not  long  before  it  terminated  in  the
redtum  ;  in  which  tratl,  when  we  cut  into  it,  we  found  it  to  be  made  up,  not
of  whiti-fli,  but  entirely  of  fleftiy  fibres.  The  ftomach  was  internally  livid  to
a fmall  degree,  and  full  of  a  fluid  of  the  fame  colour.

30.  You  ice  that  another  phyfician,  and  an  eminent  man  likewife,  was
deceiv'd  in  the  fame  manner,  and  for  the  fame  reafon.  And  his  obfervation,
if  it  iiad  beeji  in  my  mind  eighteen  years  after,  as  it  was  then  remark'd,
might  Jiave  been  ufeful,  without  doubt ;  not  only  to  determine  the  fitua-
tion  of  that  tumour,  which  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  at  large  (k),  with  fome-
what  more  confidence  ;  but  alfo  to  conjedlure  the  nature  of  it  with  mucli
greater  juftice :  although  in  the  monk  it  was  much  lefs,  and  not  fo  promi-
nent, nor  moveable,  as  far  as  I  know,  nor  attended  with  any  pain  ;  and  the
difcharge  of  flatus  from  below  had  follow'd  the  preffure  of  it  in  the  be-
ginning ;  whether  the  inteftine  colon  had  not  yet  entirely  coalefc'd,  or  whe-
ther the  extreme  circular  part  of  it,  which  was  kept  open,  lay  under  the  tu-

(tz)  Supra  n.  ig,

E  e  e  2  mour


396 Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

mour  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  when  the  tumour  was  comprefs'd  this  part  was
comprefs'd  alfo.

To  thele  were  added  other  different  circumftances  ;  in  particular  the  hard-
nefs  which  lay  betwixt  the  inteftines,  and  the  foregoing  dropfy  of  the  afcites
kind  :  and  from  hence  it  was,  join'd  together  with  other  tokens,  that  I  fuf-
pefted  fome  cohefion,  as  I  have  faid  (o),  of  the  inteftines.  For,  in  the  firft
place,  I  had  feen,  in  the  year  1699  ;  when  Valfalva  open'd  the  abdomen  of
a  woman,  who  died  of  an  afcites,  in  the  hofpital  of  incurables  at  Bologna ;
the  inteftines  adhering,  almoft  every  where,  with  theperitonasum  ;  but  par-
ticularly to  one  another,  in  a  very  great  degree  ;  fo  as  to  be  almoft  grown
into  one  fubftance  ■,  being  connected,  in  the  greater  part  of  them,  by  a  kind
of  cartilaginous  fubftance  -,  which,  in  fome  places,  but  chiefly  about  the  colon,
was  equal  to  an  inch  in  thicknefs.

In  the  fecond  place,  I  had  read  Ruyfch  (p)  taking  notice  of  the  inteftines^
in  another  woman,  who  died  of  the  fame  difeafe  ;  "  not  only  as  being  grown,
"  every  where,  to  the  peritonaeum,  but  to  each  other  alfo."  And  I  had
heard  from  Valfalva,  that,  in  one  who,  like. this  monk,  had  labour'd  under
a  foregoing  dropfy,  the  inteftines  were  conneded  one  with  another  -,  as  you
have  it  in  the  hiftory  of  a  peribn  that  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  on  a  former  oc-
cafion  (q).  And  you  will,  likewife,  find  in  another  letter  which  I  have  fent
you  (r),  that  in  a  man  whofe  belly  contain'd  a  great  quantity  of  water,  1  had
feen  the  inteftines  already  join'd  to  one  another,  by  a  kind  of  flaccid  mem-
branes, as  it  were:  and  thefe,  probably,  were  the  firft  beginnings  of  the  co-
hefions ;  which,  when  the  water  is  difcharg'd,  become  more  firm  •,  and  con-
tinue afterwards,  even  when  the  water,  as  frequently  happens,  is  collefted
again :  and  I  think  I  have  fufficiently  fhown  you  already  {s),  what  the  mat-
ter is,  from  whence  membranes  of  this  kind  have  their  origin.

In  regard  to  this  connexion  of  the  inteftines  ;  although  I  fee  that  men  of
great  eminence  have  the  fame  opinion  which  I  have  -,  I  do  not,  however,  think»
that  they  always  cohere  together  in  this  manner  ;  but  in  different  ways  alfo  ;
which  I  took  notice  of,  when  I  wrote  to  you  (/)  upon  the  adhefion  of  the
lungs  to  the  pleura,  or  of  the  heart  to  the  pericardium.  And,  indeed,  where
the  coalition  is  brought  about  in  confequence  of  inflammation  only  ;  by  which,
to  ufe  the  words  of  Ruyfch  (u),  "  we  fee  that  the  vifcera  are  often  drawn
"  together,  and  united  to  one  another  •,"  there  are  different  modes  of  ex-
plaining, and  accounting  for,  the  union  ;  that  is  to  fay,  whether  you  follow,
-with  moft  others,  thofe  who  confider  the  drynefs  of  the  furfaces  that  are  con-
tiguous to  each  other ;  or  thofe  who  attribute  it  chiefly  to  the  vifcidity  of
thefe  furfaces,  from  an  increas'd  perfpiration  of  humours ;  which,  as  they
might  have  added, the  retarded  motion  of  the  blood  renders  more  vifcid. .

But  as  Crellius  (x),  that  author  whom  we  loft  by  an  untimely  death,  ha&
receded  from  the  firft,  and  even  the  fecond,  mode  of  explication,  not  with-
out afligning  a  reafon  for  his  diCTention  ;  it  is  neceffary  to  attempt  the  ex-

CcJ  N.  29.  ft)  Epift.  16.  n. 15  ;  epift. 18.  n. 15,  ep,

{p)  Obf.  anat.  chir.  45^  23,  n.  17.

fqj  Epift.  17.  n.  17.  (a)  Obf.  cit.  83.

(r)  Epift.  10.  n.  13.  (xj  Differt.  de  vifcer.  nexib.  infolit.  n.  14.

{})  Epift.  zo.  n.  37.

4  planation


Letter  XXXIX. Article  31.  397

planation  of  this  appearance  in  a  different  manner.  But  not  to  quit  the  fub-
jeft  of  the  dropfy,  it  is  alfo  very  eafy  to  conceive ;  as  the  fame  author  has
acknowledg'd  (y);  how  a  coalition  of  the  vifcera  may  happen  in  that  difeafe,
if  the  water,  in  which  they  are  macerated,  be  of  a  more  acrid  nature  than
ufual,  fo  as  (lightly  to  erode  the  furface  of  them.  And  what  muft  be  the
confequence  where  it  is  purulent,  as  it  was  in  one  of  the  two  obfervations,
which  I  took  notice  of  above  (z),  from  the  Sepulchretum,  wherein  the  in-
teftines  were  found  to  be  drawn  up  to  the  upper  parts?  And  figns  of  erofion
were  not  wanting  even  in  the  other,  in  which  the  inteftines  of  a  dropfical  wo-
man were  feen  to  be  roll'd  up  into  one  heap,  and  made  into  a  kind  of  glo-
bular figure.  You  fee  then,  by  how  many  obfervations  I  was  induc'd  to
fufped:,  that  there  might  be  fome  cohefion  of  the  inteftines ;  when  I  heard
that,  befides  the  other  marks,  there  had  been  an  afcites.

31.  But  as  the  inteftines  may  cohere  with  one  another,  and,  without
leaving  the  fituations  in  which  they  are  naturally  plac'd,  be,  heap'd  up
together ;  fo  that,  lying  one  over  another,  they  may  form  a  tumour,  or
a  kind  of  globe ;  if  you  enquire  after  the  caufes  of  this  conglomerated
ftatc;  I  do  not  know  whether  any  one  more  probable  can  be  thought  of  than
pains :  by  the  force  of  which,  the  feats  of  the  inteftines  may  be  chang'd,
as  well  as  cohefions  be  brought  on.  And  that  the  fituations  are  fre-
quently chang'd,  in  thofe  who  are  fubjeft  to  pains  of  the  inteftines,  is  fhown,
in  a  former  letter,  from  obfervations  of  bodies  of  this  kind  {a)  :  as  when
the  included  flatus  forces  the  diftended  colon  to  fome  other  part  of  the  ab-
domen, or  difturbs  it  in  its  natural  fituation  :  which  caufe,  if  transfer'd  to  the
fmall  inteftines,  will  help  you  to  conceive,  in  what  manner  fome  trafts  thereof,
which  are  dilated,  may  raife  themfelves  up  into  that  part,  where  they  were
not  before,  and  thruft  to  one  fide,  and  even  force  beneath  themfelves,  thofe
trafts  which  naturally  lay  in  that  fituation.

Add  to  this  the  motions  of  thofe  parts  of  the  inteftines,  which  are  tortur'd
with  convulfive  contradlions,  in  confequence  of  pains :  add  the  contradions
of  this  kind  in  the  mefentery  ;  by  which  being  criip'd  up,  it  may  either  draw
to  itfelf  fome  of  the  anngx'd  inteftines,  or  moft,  or  all  of  them  ;  and  it  will
appear  much  more  clearly,  how  they  may  be  forc'd  together,  into  globes  of
a  fmaller  or  of  a  larger  fize.  And  if  they  be  retain'd  in  their  new  fituation,
for  a  confiderable  time,  by  thefe  caufes  that  are  mentioned,  and  are  prefs'd
one  againft  another  ;  it  will  appear,  at  the  fame  time,  why  they  there  beo-in
to  cohere  with  each  other,  on  account  of  the  painsj  efpecially  if  you  confider
that  many,  and  very  vifcid,  particles  of  humours,  which  ftagnate  there,  are
prefs'd  out  from  their  furfaces  by  the  fame  contradions :  by  means  of  which
particles  ;  particularly  in  bodies  that  abound  with  vifcidity ;  the  fame  furfaces
"may  be  join'd  together,  as  if  by  a  kind  of  gluten.

Nor,  indeed,  is  it  any  new  thing  that  tlae  inteftines  ftiould  be  conne6ledv
and  conglutinated,  in  confequence  of  pains.  For  thus,  not  to  lead  you  too
far  from  the  Sepulchretum,  in  a  woman  who  had  been  carried  off  by  long-
continu'd  tortures  of  thefe  vifcera  (h),  they  were  found  to  be  "  connefted


(j)  Ibid.  n.  12.  {a)  Epift.  34.  n.  4.

(s;)  N.  28.  (hj  L.  3.  fea.  14.  obf.  16.  §.  4.


to-


398  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  to  each  other,  in  many  placesV  and  in  another,  who  had  died  after  "  very
"  great,  and  incredible "  pains  of  the  belly  (c),  the  obfervator  found  "  all
"  the  fmall  inteftines,  which  protuberated,  connefted  very  clofely  with  each
"  other."

And  if  you  underftand  this  word  protuberated  in  fuch  a  fenfe,  as  to  fignify
that  they  were  heap'd  up  together,  into  one  prominent  globe-,  and  in  the
fame  manner  that  I  have  related  above  (ij,  from  the  obfervation  of  Fantonus ;
■•'  roll'd  up  as  it  were  into  one  globular  body  •,"  you  will  perceive  that  they
were  found  to  be  connedted,  and  heap'd  up  together,  at  the  fame  time,  in
Confequence  of  pain,  juft  as  they  were  found  to  be,  by  us,  in  the  bifhop  {e):
although  in  thefe  other  obfervations,  a  peculiar,  and  externally  circumfcrib'd,
tumour  is  not  fpoken  of-,  and  in  one  of  them,  could  not  have  exifted  ;  as  in
that  cafe  a  large  quantity  of  bloody  ferum,  that  had  been  extravafated,  diftend-
ed  the  whole  abdomen.  And  although  the  monk  was  not  fo  excruciated  with
pains  (f),  as  the  bifhop  was ;  yet  I  do  not,  for  a  certainty,  know  that  he  had
been  free  therefrom  before.

32.  But  as  to' his  not  only  having,  like  the  bifhop,  the  inteftines  conglu-
tinated,  but  conneded,  to  one  another  by  a  kind  of  cartilaginous  fubftance;
this  is  neither  furprizing  to  me,  who  have  likewife  feen  the  fame  thing,  in
conjunftion  with  Valfalva,  after  an  afcites -,  as  I  have  already  faid  (_g-J  :  nor
am  I  ignorant  that  the  peritonseum  itfelf -,  the  produftlon  of  which  compofes
the  external  coat  of  the  inteftines ;  may  become  very  thick  in  dropfical  bodies  ;
and  even  "  in  procefs  of  time  acquire  a  cartilaginous  hardnefs;"  according
to  the  obfervation  of  Paul  Barbette  {h)  -,  who  puts  us  in  mind  of  this,  as
"  neceifary  to  be  known  in  the  paracentelis  of  the  abdomen."

But  that  the  inteftines  are  fometimes  connefted,  by  hard  bands  of  this
kind,  even  without  an  afcitts,  we  learn  from  the  obfervation  of  Saporiti  in
Valifneri  {i).  "  We  found,"  fays  he,  "  the  large  inteftines,  particular-
"  ly  where  they  are  reflefted,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  duodenum,
"  confolidated,  by  means  of  callous  protuberances,  with  each  other,  and
"  with  the  adjacent  inteftines ;  fo  that  it  was  difficult  to  diftinguifh  the  one
"  from  the  other  •,  and  what  was  worfe,  their  fubftance  fo  concreted,  like  a
"  hardifh  cartilage,  and  thicken'd,  that  fcarcely  any  cavity  remain'd."  A
fubftance,  and  contraction,  of  which  kind,  Ruyfch  {k)  found  in  the  intef-
tinum  reftum  -,  when  he  was  oblig'd  to  divide  it  from  the  os  facrum,  with  an
iron  wedge,  and  a  wooden  mallet.

But  Benivenius  (/)  appears  to  have  found  the  fame  diforderof  the  inteftines,
after  death,  formerly,  which  he  had  been  before  fenfible  of  in  the  living
-body  ;  when  a  kind  of  hard  fubftance  made  a  refiftance  to  his  prefTure  upon
the  belly.  And  Donatus  {m)  produces  another  obfervation  from  Hollerius,
andStalpart  (n)  different  ones  from  different  a-uthors.  And  as  in  this  author
(«>),  examples  are  pointed  out  of  the  fame  kind  of  coalition  alfo .;  and  fuch  as

(c)  Seft.  21.  obf.  4L.  (J)  Opera  torn.  3.  p.  3.

(dJU.  28.  {h)  Obf  anat.  chir.  95.

{/)  Supra  n.  26.  il)  De  abdit.  morbor.  &c.  caufis  c.  34.

(fj  N.  29.  (jw)  De  medic,  hift.  1.  4.  c.  10.

(g)  N.  30.  \ji)  Cent.  1.  obf.  56.  &  infchol.

(I)  Anat.  praft.  1.  4.  c.  2.  j['o)  In  eod.  fchol.

might


Letter  XXXIX. Article  31.  399

jTilghtbe  refer'd  to  that  which  I  have  faid  was  found  at  the  extremity  of  the
colon  in  our  monk ;  and  as  other  inftances  are,  moreover,  extant  in  the  Se-
pulchretum  (/>)  •,  I  will  add  nothing  elfe,  unlefs,  that  there  was  this  peculia-
rity in  the  monk ;  I  mean  that,  in  the  part  juft  now  mention'd,  the  colon
feem'd  to  be  made  up  entirely  of  flefhy  fibres :  which  might  be  fuppos'd  to
be  the  effedt  of  rednefs  from  a  preceding  ulcer.  And  if  this  fuppofition  is
juft,  then  he  could  not  have  been  without  previous  pains  of  the  inteftines,
according  to  my  conjedture.

But  now  let  us  come  to  tumours  of  the  vifcera  of  a  different  kind.

33.  A  woman,  feemingly,  not  maich  lefs  than  forty  years  of  age,  had  al-
ready labour'd,  a  year  before,  under  a  uterine  hemorrhage.  This  was  fuc-
ceeded  by  a  uterine  fluor  ;  but  of  what  colour,  or  fmell,  is  uncertain  :  this,
however,  i'  certain,  that  it  was  attended  with  very  fevere  pains  of  the  hy-
pogaftrium,  and  of  the  parts  that  lie  beneath;  particularly  in  the  night  time;
and  with  a  tumour,  into  which  alone  (he  faid  fome  tubercles,  that  could
formerly  be  perceiv'd  to  be  fcatter'd  in  the  middle  of  the  hypogaftrium,  had
Goalefc'd.  This  tumour  was  now  in  that  very  fituation  •,  yet  afcended  fo  high
as  to  be  fcarcely  diftant  from  the  navel  by  the  breadth  of  two  fingers  ;  beings
wide  in  proportion,  and  fo  prominent  externally,  that  it  was  very  apparent .
to  the  eye,  even  at  a  diftance ;  was  roundifli  in  its  figure  ;  equal  in  its  furfacej
and,  if  you  touch'd  it,  gave  refiftanoe.

A  conftant  dripping  of  urine  had  come  on,  a  fpafmodic  pain  in  the  throat, .
a  naufea,  and  fometimes'  a  vomiting ;  a  wafting  of  fiefti,  and  a  fever. With
all  which  diforders  ftie  was  fo  weaken'd,  and  broken  down,  about  the  begin-
ning of  the  year  1741;  when  fhe  came  into  the  hofpital  at  Padua;  that  fhe  died?
within  fix  or  feven  days :  nobody  doubting  but  fhe  died  of  a  cancerous  tu-
mour of  the  uterus. And,  indeed,  a. cancer  had  in  part  eroded  the  uterus;  .
but  the  tumour  did  not  belong  to  that,  as  I  found  by  diffection, and  demon-
ftrated  to  a  great  circle  of  do6lors  and  ftudents.

For  when  the  belly  was  open'd,  it  immediately  app&ar'd,  that  the  bladder,  -
diftended  with  urine,  had  made  up  that  great  tumour;  a  circumftance  which  •
nobody  would  have  thought  of;  her  urine  having  continually  run  from  her,
as  I  have  faid. This  receptacle  had  coalefc'd,  on  its  anterior  iurface,  high  ^
above  the  pubes,  with  the  parietes  of  the  belly  :  and,  if  you  except  a  confi-
derable  fpace  of  the  fame  anterior  furface,  and  of  the  upper  part  of  the  fun-
dus, it  had  all  its  remaining  parietes  compos'd  of  a  hard  and  white  fubftance,
of  the  thicknefs  of  a  finger:  as  we  faw  plainly,  after  drawing  out  the  urine;
a  great  quantity  of  which  it  contain'd  ;  not  in  a  lixivious  ftate  ;  not  thick ;  not
of  a  difagreeable  fmell  ;  but  almoft  watry.

The  internal  furface  of  the  bladder  was  found,  only  diftinguifh'd,  in  fome
places,  with  fmall  fanguiferous  veflTels,  which  were  fcatter'd  here  and  there;
ib  that  the  orifice  of  the  bladder,  at  which  part  they  are  frequently  very
thick,  was  entirely  without  thefe  veffels.  On  each  fide  of  this  orifice,  within
the  bladder,  a  white  body  was  prominent,  of  an  irregular  figure ;  equal  in
fize  to  a  man's  thumb,  and  produc'd  from  the  fubftance  which  furrounded
the  urethra  J  which  fubftance  was  here  univerfally  become  thicker,  hard,  and

r>;  L,  3.fea.  13.

white .'


400  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

white :  and  of  this  colour  the  urethra  itfelf  alfo  was  internally.  Moreover,
the  whole  of  that  part  of  the  ureter,  which  is  carried  betwixt  the  membranes
^-of  the  bladder,  was  more  prominent  than  natural  within  the  bladder,  till  it
terminated  in  an  orifice  much  larger  than  the  ufual  one :  this  appearance
was  on  both  fides,  and  both  the  ureters  were  univerfally  dilated ;  one  of  them
being  full  of  urine,  and  the  other  almoft  full  of  air.  But  even  the  tubuli  of
the  kidnies,  and  the  pelvis  on  both  fides,  were  dilated,  though  the  kidnies
were  in  other  refpeds  found.

.  Having  examin'd  the  urinary  organs,  we  look'd  over  the  genital  parts.
And,  in  the  firfl:  place,  we  found  both  the  teftes,  very  clofely  connefted  to  the
parietes  of  the  pelvis  ;  and  both  of  them  of  a  white  colour :  the  left  of  which
was  equal  to  the  fize  of  a  large  chefnut,  and  the  right  to  that  of  a  fmall  nut.
The  latter  of  thefe  contain'd  a  fmall  quantity  of  water,  perhaps  vithin  fome
kind  of  veficle  ;  being  in  other  refpeds  white,  as  externally,  and  hard  :  but
the  left  had  nothing  under  its  coat",  except  a  foft  and  white  matter  like
fuet.

The  uterus,  however,  if  you  confider'd  the  fundus  of  it,  was  externally
white,  and  fmooth  •,  and  internally  found  in  its  parietes ;  except  that  thefe
were  more  foft  than  they  are  naturally.  But  the  external  furface  of  the  cer-
vix was  unequally  turgid  on  the  back-part :  and  the  cervix  itfelf,  and  the
vagina,  from  the  upper  part  almoft  to  the  lower,  were  made  up  of  very
thick,  v/hite,  and  hard  parietes ;  tKe  internal  furface  of  which,  and  the  ofcu-
lum  uteri  itfelf,  were  eroded,  and  deftroy'd  with  deep,  and  difcolour'd  ulcers.
For  they  were  white  in  fome  places  ^  of  a  black  bloody  colour  in  others,  and
in  fome  cineritious.  And  from  all  of  them  a  putrid  matter,  ting'd  with  thefe
colours,  was  eafily  rub'd  off  with  the  handle  of  the  knife;  till  we  came  to
the  hard  and  white  fubftance  whereof  I  faid  that  the  parietes  confifted  ;  into
which  kind  of  fubftance,  alfo,  whatever  is  wont  to  be  of  a  pinguedinous  and
membranous  nature,  at  the  fides  of  the  vagina,  was  converted.

But,  althoug'h  both  the  bladder,  and  the  fubftance  furrounding  the
urethra,  had  been  fo  chang'd,  as  I  have  faid,  on  the  anterior  furface  of  the
cervix,  and  vagina ;  yet  the  inteftinum  reftum  could  be  feparated  from
the  vagina  -,  which  was,  in  other  refpefts,  much  more  ulcerated  than  the
cervix  uteri ;  without  being  injur'd.  And  in  the  whole  of  this  difiedtion,  no
very  difagreeable  fmell  was  perceiv'd>  To  infped  the  other  vifcera  was  not
fieceflary  •,  nor,  indeed,  had  we  leifure.  However,  in  the  abdomen  nothing,-
befides  thefe  parts,  appear'd  to  be  evidently  morbid  ;  though  I  obferv'd  the
ftomach  to  be  very  much  contraded  ;  and  all  the  inteftines  to  be  more  con-
trafted  than  ufual  alfo  :  neither  of  which  appearances  is  to  be  wonder'd  at
here,  in  a  woman  who  fcarcely  took  in  any  food  by  reafon  of  her  naufea ;  and
fornetimes  threw  it  up  again,  as  1  have  faid,  when  it  was  taken  in.

34.  This  obfervation  may,  in  many  refpefts,  be  very  ufeful  by  rendering
phyficians  cautious.  For  who,  after  having  heard  that  one  tumour  was  made
up  of  tubercles  which  formerly  lay  at  a  diftance  from  each  other ;  and  that
this  tumour  was  join'd  with  marks  of  a  uterine  cancer  -,  whether  he  attended
to  the  prefent,  or  the  foregoing  fymptoms  ;  would  not  have  thought  that  it
was  a  tumour  of  the  uterus  itfelf?  Yet  this  tumour  did  not  relate  to  the  ute-
rus, but  to  the  diftended  bladder;  which,  by  forcing  the  neighbouring  in-
teftines


%


Letter  XXXIX. Article  2 5-  401

teftines  upwards,  while  it  began  to  raife  itfelf  higher,  and,  by compreffing
Ibme  parts  of  them,  perhaps  gave  that  appearance  of  divided  tubercles.

Who,  in  like  manner,  that  had  been  inform'd  of  the  urine  drippino-  away
from  her  conftantly,  inllead  of  being  retain'd,  would  have  lufpefted  what
was  really  the  cafe,  that  a  great  part  of  the  urine,  neverthelefs,  ftill  remain'd
in  the  bladder  -,  and,  by  the  dextrous  introdu6lion  of  the  catheter,  might  have
been  drawn  off,  at  leaft,  in  part,  to  the  great  alleviation  of  the  miierable
patient  ?  For  as  to  Ruyfch  finding  (q)  that  fullnefs  of  bladder,  at  length,  in
a  lying-in  woman,  who  likewife  believ'd  that  fhe  had  no  urine  in  her  bladder,
notwithftanding  it  was  diftended  with  a  great  quantity,  in  confequence  of
being  deceiv'd  by  a  fimiiar  ftillicidium,  as  it  feems ;  it  is  very  certain  that
there  was  not  the  lealtfign  in  that  woman,  of  a  difeas'd  uterus,  to  which  the
tumour  of  the  belly  could  be  refer'd.  And,  indeed,  in  another  woman  (?■),
who  had  fome  fymptoms  of  the  uterus  being  pregnant  with  a  foetus,  no-
body refer'd  the  tumour  of  the  belly  to  any  other  part  but  the  uterus,  thouah
it  was,  in  fad,  made  up  of  a  large  abfcefs,  form'd  betwixt  the  anterior  coots
of  the  bladder.

When,  therefore,  there  is  a  tumour  of  the  hypogaftrium  in  women,  al-
|iough  marks  of  a  difeas'd  uterus  may  not  be  wanting,  a  fufpicion  of  the
iladder,  which  is  fituated  before  the  uterus,  ought  not,  by  any  means,  to  be
intirely  pafs'd  by :  nor  are  we  to  take  for  granted,  becaufe  they  fay  that  their
urine  is  continually  running  from  thenr,  that  no  part  of  it,  for  that  reafon,
remains :  nor,  finally,  although  it  is  certain,  that  the  vagina  is  ulcerated,  to-
gether with  the  uterus,  are  we  always  to  conclude,  that  the  ftillicidium  of
the  urine  is  to  be  accounted  for  from  the  ulceration  of  fhe  annex'd  urethra
and  bladder.  For  neither  of  them  was  ulcerated  in  this  cafe.  But,  what  is
an  extraordinary  inftance  of  caufe  and  efFeft,  a  fcirrhous  hardnefs,  of  both  of
them,  brought  on  an  incontinency  of  urine,  and  a  retention  at  the  fame
time.

For  the  hard  parietes  of  the  urethra  could  not  be  fo  conftring'd,  as  pro-
perly to  fhut  up  the  orifice  of  the  bladder.  And  the  hard  parietes  of  the
bladder,  or,  at  leaft,  the  chief  part  of  them,  could  not.be  fo  contrafted,  as
the  extrufion  of  the  urine  requires:  nor  could  the  remaining  part  of  them,
which  was  not  hard,  fufficiently  help  forward  this  difcharge,  in  confequence
of  its  having  coalefc'd  with  the  anterior  paries  of  the  belly,  almoft  univer-
fally  :  and  the  difcharge  was  fomewhat  impeded  by  thofe  two  thick  bodies,
which  were  prominent  at  the  fides  of  the  orifice.  On  all  of  which  accounts
it  is  not  to  be  wonder'd  at,  if  fo  much  urine  was  retain'd,  as  not  only  to  fill
the  enlarg'd  bladder,  but  even  to  dilate  the  ureters,  and  the  pelvis  of  both
kidnies,  with  their  tubuli.

35.  And  having  made  nearly  thefe  remarks  upon  the  urinary  parts,  to  thoie
who  were  prefenc,  I  then  immediately  added  fome  of  thofe  things,  in  reo-ard
to  the  genitals,  which  I  fliall  here  fubjoin  :  that  the  uterus,  together  with  its
appendages,  was  extremely  fubjeft  to  fcirrhi ;  a  difeaie  that  is  extremely  dif-
ficult of  cure,  unlefs  you  foon  find  it  out ;  and  incurable  if  it  has  degenerated
into  a  cancer. That  I  had  heard  one  of  my  preceptors,  I  mean  Albertini,

(y)  Adverf.  anat.  dec.  2.  c.  9.  (;■)  Vid.  Sepulchr.  fe£l.  hac  21.  obf,  33.  in  additam.  '

Vol.  II.  F  f  f  fay


40  2  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fay  that  he  had,  with  great  fucceis,  difcuis'd  a  tumour  oi^the  uterus,  which
leem'd  to  him,  wlien  he  examin'd  it  with  his  hand,  to  be  fcirrhous,  by  the
ufe  of  ground-pine  alone,  and  without  any  excretion  being  the  conlcquence
thereof :  that  another  of  my  preceptors,  I  mean  Valfalva,  was  us'd  to  aflert
in  his  medical  opinions,  that  either  for  canceroU'S  tumours  of  the  uterus,  or
of  the  breafts,  he  had  found  the  practice  of  bleeding,  four  times  a  year,  to
be  the  moft  advantageous  remedy  to  prevent  their  increafe  ;  that  is  to  fay,
bleeding  twice  in  the  fpring,  and  twice  in  the  autumn.  But  he  faid  it  was
manifeft  that,  in  the  latter  cales,  the  ftrength  was  to  be  attended  to-,  and
agreeable  to  reafon,  that,  iu  tlie  former,  the  caufes  of  the  fcirrhus  fhould
be  confider'd.

For  although  the  ground-pine,  by  its  attenuating  and  abfterfive  quality,
takes  away  obftruftions  of  the  vifcera,  and  hardnefles  of  the  breaft,  accord-
ing to  the  obfervations  of  the  ancients  ;  yen  that  I  fhould  not  be  v/illing  to
give  it  to  thofe  women  who  had  been  iubje61:  to  uterine  fluxes,  as  the  v/oman
■was,  whofe  hiftory  I  have  given  -,  but  would  very  readily  give  it  to  thofe,
who,  by  having  matter  tranOated  to  the  uterus,  from  the  joints  which  were
affe6led  with  arthritic  pains,  had  lately  fallen  into  a  flight  obftruction  there
of-,  for  it  will  excite  the  menftrual  difcharges,  but  is  oppofite  to  the  caul|
of  the  gout,  as  you  know.

Moreover,  that  the  extenfions,  the  fpecies,  the  feats,  and  the  origins,
of  uterine  fchirri  differ  much  from  one  another.  That  this  had  been  ex-
tended widely  to  the  vagina  alfo,  and  the  parts  annex'd  to  it ;  and  not  only
kterally,  but  even  on  the  anterior  part ;  that  is  in  the  urethra,  and  bladder,
on  the  furface  by  which  it  was  turn'd  towards  the  uterus.  That  the  whole
of  it  had  confifted  of  a  uniform  and  hard  fubftance  -,  and  this  of  fuch  a  kind
that,  even  when  turn'd  into  an  ulcerated  cancer,  the  odour  of  which  is  ge-
nerally extremely  offenfive,  it  had  no  difagreeable  fmelL  That  the  fituation.
of  this,  in  regard  to  the  uterus  itfelf,  had  been  the  whole  cervix  ;  whereas,
there  are  thofe,  to  which  part  of  the  cervix,  or  part  of  the  fundus,  or  the
whole  fundus,  afford  a  fituation.  Finally,  that  the  origins  of  fome  s.fe  in-
ternal, and  of  others  external.  And  having  faid  thefe  things  in  a  brief  man-
ner, and  hinted  n.ightly  at  thofe  which  relate  to  the  fuet-hke  matter,  found
in  one  of  the  teftes,  I  made  an  end  of  fpeaking.

36.  But  to  you  I  will  now  explain,  fomewhat  more  at  large,  the  lafl:  of
thofe  remarks,  which  1  then  made  with  fo  nuich  brevity.  I  believe  that  I
have  feen  the  origins,  or  firft  principles  of  uterine  fcirrhi,  more  than  once,
both  internally,  and  externally.  As  to  the  internal,  however,  I  fhall  have  a
more  convenienl  opportuni-ty  of  fpeaking  thereof  hereafter  (s);.  I  fhall  here
only  mention  the  external.

On  the  external  furface  of  the  uterus,,  then,  I  have  feen  tubercles  promi-
nent, being  fix'd  in  die  neareft  part  of  its  fubftance  -,  at  one  time  of  a  red  co-
lour degenerating  into  livid,  and  at  another  time  of  a  white  colour,  and  a^
fcirrhous  hardnefs  ;  as  by  reading  over  again  my  letters  (/),  or  by  examining,
fome  of  them  that I,  am  to  fend  you  hereafter  (u),  you will  clearly  per-

(s)  Epift.  47.  n.  26.  &  feq.  fuj  EP..56.  n.  20..

(/)  Ep.  38.  n,  zS.  &ep.  3.7.  n.  29.


Letter  XXXIX. Article  36,  403

ceive.  And  I  fuppofe  thefe  tubercles  to  be  enlarg'd,  and  grow  out  into
fcirrhous  tumours.  For  as  to  the  puftule  v/hich  I  have  delcrib'd  to  you  ost
another  occafion  (x),  as  being  feen  by  me  in  the  fame  fituacion,  and  the
little  bodies  which  Valfalva  Taw  fcatter'd  about  (y),  and  the  tubercle  feen  by
Santorini  (2) ;  I  do  not  doubt  but  they  belong  quite  to  another  clafs  ;  inafmuch
as  the  laft-mention'd  was  of  the  fpecies  of  encyfted  tumours,  and  the  others
either  had  pus  in  them  already,  or  becaufe,  as  they  had  a  fimilar  appearance
in  other  places,  they  would  have  had  a  pus  afterwards,  or  a  pultaceous  matter.

For  the  uterus  has,  fometimes,  ulcers  alio  externally,  and  not  thefe  only,
but  excrefcences  likewife ;  and  in  regard  to  thefe,  you  will  read  the  defcrip-
tions  of  two  very  large  ones  in  the  Sepulchretum  («) ;  one  of  which  confifled.
of  a  coat  that  was  "  like  lard,  or  fuet  •,"  and  the  other  was  even  "  fiU'd
"  with  fat."  And  thefe  two  I  particularly  point  out-,  becaule,  in  the  fame
place  (^),  a  palfage  of  Severinus  is  quoted,  wherein  he  confcffes,  "  that  on
"  the  external  habit  of  the  uterus,  he  had  very  often  happen'd  to  meet  with
"  melicerides,  and  atheromata:"  but  at  the  fame  time  does  not  call  to  mind,
if  I  underftand  him  rightly,  whether  he  had  ever  happen'd  to  fee  "  any"  of
the  fteatomatous  kind  in  that  part.

But,  at  leaft,  in  the  fame  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  to  omit  the  exam-
ple (c)  of  the  greatly -enlarg'd  uterus,  which  "  univerfally  refembled  a  kind
"  of  cartilaginous  fat  -,"  for  this  certainly  belongs  more  to  fcirrhi  than  to
fteatomata  ;  at  leaft,  I  fay,  "  an  abfcefs  in  the  coUum  uteri,  reiembling  the
"  nature  of  a  fteatoma,"  is  mention'd  from  Ballonius  (d) ;  and  Rhodius  (e)
has  exprefly  mention'd  "  a  fteatoma  adhering  to  the  fundus  uteri;"  and
Goetzius  (f)  defcribes  another:  and  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you,  in  the  preceding
letter  f^j,  the  very  fubftance  of  the  fundus  uteri,  as  well  as  the  teftes  and
tubes,  converted  into  a  fuet-like  matter ;  and  it  is  not  at  all  furprizing,  that
what  happens  internally,  ftiould  alio  take  place  externally ;  provided  the
febaceous  particles,  wherewith  the  blood  abounds,  be  carried  to  the  external
parts  of  the  parietes  uteri,  as  well  as  to  the  internal:  although  we  have  lefs
frequent  examples  of  the  uterus  being  affefced  with  a  fteatoma,  than  of  the
teftes.

Omitting,  therefore,  fuch  as  I  do  not  fuppofe  to  relate  to  fcirrhi,  I  confider
the  other  difeafes,  which  I  have  taken  notice  of  above,  as  their  primordia,
and  others  of  the  fame  kind,  likewife,  as,  for  inftance,  that  which  is  de-
fcrib'd by  Paavvius  (h),  as  "  a  white  excrefcence  of  the  bignefs  of  a  wart ;
which,  when  cut  into,  contain'd  nothing  within,  but  wasfolid  in  every  part :"
and  ftill  more  thofe  defcrib'd  by  Ruyfch  (i),  under  the  appearance  of  "  fmall
"  round  tumours,  in  a  very  fcirrhous  ftate,  or  rather  fcirrhi,  not  only  grow-
"  ing  to  the  uterus,  by  the  intervention  of  a  peduncle,  but  even  without  it;"
which  uterus  v?as  every-where  befet  with  the  fame  kind  of  tumours,  and
others  of  different  magnitudes.

Thefe  tvvo  examples  you  will  add  to  as  many  others ;  for  Crellius  has  not

(*■)  Ep.  35.  n.  16.  {d) Ibid.  §.  ii.

(yj  Ep.  22.  n.  18.  (t) Cent.  3.  ohf.  46.

Iz)  Ep.  19.  n.  51.  C/J  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  2.  obf.  207.

(-a)  Sea,  hac  21.  obf.  54.  ^.  i.  &  18.  r^  N.  ^,4.

it)  Ibid,  fchol.  ad  obf."  37.  (2.)  SepJlchr.  feft.  cit.  obf.  4.  §.  32.

(0  Obf.  cit.  54.  §.15.  ^ (i)  Tkef.  6. 11.  30.

F  f  f  2  produc'd


4C4  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Beli)-.

procluc'ci  any  more,  of  this  kind,  in  that  Programma  (k) ;  wherein  he,  alfo,
has  unckrtaken  to  deicribe  a  hard  and  folid  "  tumour,"  of  the  bignefs  of  a
mulberry,  "  which  adher'd,  externally,  to  the  fundus  uteri."  And  I  faid,  of
this  kind,  for  he  has  alfo  made  remarks  on  another  kind  •,  as  you  may  fee  in
his  works :  and  indeed  bony  tumours,  or  tumours  in  a  manner  bony,  are
ipoken  of  in  the  Comnicrcium  LiUerai'ium  (I).

Nor  would  obfervations  be  wanting,  if  the  queftion  were  of  them  in  this
place,  of  the  uterus ;  which  either  feem'd  to  be  affecSted  with  a  fcirrhous  tu-
mour, on  account  of  many  ftones  v/herevvith  its  fubflance  was  ftuff'd  up  (m)  ;
or  was  really  fcirrhous,  in  one  half  of  it  («)  -,  or  in  the  whole  (o) ;  fo  as  to  be
equal  to  the  weight  of  four  and  forty  pounds:  and  hiftories  of  tumours
would  be  at  hand,  the  fituacions  of  which  might  eafily  impofe  upon  the  phy-
£cian  who  examin'd  them  with  his  hand,  fo  as  to  make  him  take  them  for
fcirrhi  of  the  uterus  ;  whereas  they  in  fad:  had  not  the  leaft  reference  to  this  ;
but  either  belong'd  to  the  fundus  of  the  bladder  (/>),  or  to  fome  other  neigh-
bouring part  (q).

But  not  to  digrefs  from  the  difcourfe  which  I  had  begun,  upon  external
fcirrhous  tubercles,  and  even  to  linifh  it ;  if  you  fhould  enquire,  how  it  hap-
pens that  fcirrhous  tubercles  may  be,  fometimes,  found  hanging,  by  a  very
narrow  peduncle,  from  the  uterus,  as  I  have  faid  was  feen  by  Ruyfch,  or
from  the  other  vifcera-,  although  this  may  be  conceiv'd  of  in  more  ways  than-
one  ;  yet  it  will  here  be  fufficient  for  me  to  recal  to  your  mind  that  method
by  which  I  have  explain'd  hydatids  (that  hang  in  the  fame  manner,  and  the-
transformation  of  thefe  into  hard  tubercles,  after  difcharging  their  fluid)  in.
the  preceding  letter  (r)  ■,  for  that  the  uterus  has  its  hydatids  alfo,  is  fufficient-
]y  demonftrated  in  the  fame  place  (s).

For  I  muft,  here,  pafs  over,  from  tumours  of  the  uterus,  to  tumours  of
tJie  ovaria :  of  which,  however,  I  fhall  fay  fo  much  the  lefs  at  prefent,  as  I
was  under  neceffity  of  faying  fo  mvich  in  the  preceding  letter :  and  to  what
was  there  faid  you  may  add  what  follows.

37.  A  woman,  who  feem'd  to  be  about  forty  years  of  age,  being  opprefs'd
with  a  violent  diforder  within  the  thorax,  was  brought  into  the  hofpital  of  St..
Mary  de  Morte  at  Bologna,  about  the  end  of  April,  in  the  year  1 706 ;  but
fo  late  in  the  dileafe,  that,  dying  foon  after,  Ihe  could  not  even  tell  any  one,,
under  what  difagreeable  lymptoms  flie  had  labour'd,  through  the  courfe  of
her  difeafe.

Being  about^  therefore,  to  open  her  body,  in  order  to  examine,  with  ac-
curacy,  into  the  fl;ru£lure  of  fome  of  the  vifcera  of  the  belly,  and  having,
obferv'd  tv;o  things  ;  that  in  a  pretty  laudable  habit  there  was  no  appearance
of  the  breafts,  befides  the  areolse,  and  the  nipples  •,  and  that  the  abdomen
was  mark'd  with,  no  furrows,  or  rugje,  fo  that  it  appear'd  fhe  had  never,
born  any  children  ;  I  obferv'd,  at  the  fame  time,  a  certain  tumour,  not  ac-.

(i)  VitembergK.  a.  1739.  (s)  Hift.  del'Acad.  R.  des.fc.  a.  1748.

(/) A.  1735.  hebd. 51.  n.  2.  in  fin. &  a. (p)  Cit.  eph.  cent.  i&2.obf.  186.
1742.  hebd.  45.  in  fin.  (y)  Eph.  earund.  Dec.  3.  a.  7.  &  8.  obf.  123...

Im)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent,  i,  &  2.  obf,  77.  ("''J  ^.  38.  in  fin.  &n.  35.

(«)  Cent.  9,  obf.  31.  (i)  N.42..

5,  cuminated


Letter  XXXIX. Article  38.  405

eliminated,  but  flat ;  which,  in  foine  meafure,  rais'd  up  the  hypogaflrium,  and
that  part  of  the  umbilical  region,  which  was  neareft  thereto.

-The  belly,  therefore,  being  open'd,  I  faw  that  the  caufe  of  the  abdomca
being  tumid  in  that  part,  was  a  certain  body,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  very  large
fift;  by  wliich  the  inteftines,  that  lay  thereon,  were  driven  upwards  and  out-
wards. This  body  was  in  the  middle  of  the  pelvis-,  ofaroundifh  figure,  and
of  a  tuberous  furface  ;  but  in  fome  places  fmooth  and  even  •,  fo  as  to  make  ic
appear,  at  firft,  that  it  could  be  nothing  elfe  but  the  uterus  tumefied.  Yet  k
was,  in  fa£t,  the  left  teftis,  that  had  grown  out  into  this-  bulk.  The  denie
coat  whereof  was,  here  and  there,  unequal,  with  certain  fmall  abfceffes  ;  foma
of  which  being  fpontaneoufly  open'd,  difcharg'd  a  v/hite  pus ;  fuch  as  many  of
them  contain'd.

^  From  the  body  of  the  teftis  itfelf,  a  thin  bloody  ichor  was  exprefs'd,  mix'4
with  pus  ;  yet  not  in  great  quantity.  But  when  1  had  quite  laid  it  open  ;  and
had  agitated  it  for  fome  time  in  water  •,  I  plainly  perceiv'd,  befides  fome  fibres,,
and  veffels,  and  one  or  two  cells,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  fmall  grape,  which  com-
prehended, within  a  black  coat,  fomething  very  fimilar  to  coagulated  blood  5  I
plainly  perceiv'd,  I  fay,  that  the  remaining,  and  much  greater  part,  that  is,,,
almoft  the  whole  folid  part  of  this  body,  was  nothing  elfe  but  a  congeries  of
reddifh  veficles,  crouded  clofely  together,  fo  as  to  be  of  an  incredible  num-
ber, by  reafon  of  their  fmallnefs ;  and  all  of  them  diftended  with  a  dirty-co-
lour'd  ferum.

Yet  the  fostidnefs  of  the  fmell  was  not  very  confiderable  :  nor  was  the
neighbouring  tube  injur'd,  although  externally,  as  well  as  the  other,  it  had  hy-
datids :  nor  had  the  uterus  itfelf,  to  the  fide  of  which  the  defcrib'd  body  was
annex'd,  contrafted  any  ditbrder  therefrom,  except  in  its  external  membrane.
For  I  cut  through  it ;  and  obferv'd  only  this  one  thing,  which  did  not  at  all
relate  to  the  tumour ;  that,  at  the  fides  of  this  cavity,  the  anterior  paries  was
connefted  to  the  pofterior,  by  fmall  membranes  paffing  betwixt.  The  other
teftis  was  fmall,  unequal  in  its  furface,  and  had  only  one  veficle  contiguous
to  it,  which  was  pretty  large  ;  and  contain'd  a  fmall  quanuty  of  fluid  under
its  thick  white  coat :  in  the  other  parts  it  was  white  and  hard :  yet  from  one
very  fmall  part  of  it,  was  difcharg'd  a  little  quantity  of  white  pus.

38.  Diforders  of  the  teftes  happen  fo  frequently  to  women,  compar'd  with,
the  females  of  other  animals ;  and  efpeciaily  tumours,  either  of  a  dropfical  na-
ture, or  of  other  kinds  ;  that  it  is  very  natural  to  conjefture  moft  of  thefe
things  to  happen,  not  without  the  pafiions  of  the  mind  being,  in  fome  mea-
fure, the  caufe  of  them.  For  what  efFefc  thefe  pafiions  may  have,  in  retard-
ing, or  difturbirig,  the  courfe  of  the  humours,  is  by  no.  means  unknown.
Yet  to  this  we  may  add  the  monthly  afflux  of  blood  into  the  uterus,  and  the
parts  that  lie  about  it  i  which  v.'e  know  frequently  deviates  from  the  original,
intention  of  nature,  in  many  different  ways.  Add  to  thefe  caufes.  alfo,  the
bulk  and  weight  of  the  uterus,  when  impregnated  ;,  'by  which,  when  tiie  wo-
man ftands,  or  fits  down,  the  teftes  are  prefs'd  clofely  againft  the  bones  of  the
pelvis;  and  ftill  more  when  it  contrafcs  fo  very  ftrongly  in  a  difficult  birth;
Or  unfeafonably,  in  one  which  would  certainly  be  eaiy,  and  natural,  if  not
accelerated  by  the  improper  hafle  of  midwives ;  who  are,  for  the  moft  part,
unskilful.. For  thefe,  therefore,  and  other  reafons,  it  is  not  furprizing  if  the.

teftejs.


4o6  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

teftes  of  women  are  frequentl)' difeas'd,  become  tumid,  and  increas'd  to  fucli
a  degree,  rhat  they  very  often  refemble  even  an  afcites  ;  as  in  that  obferva-
tion,  which  was  made  in  the  fiame  hofpital  at  Bologna,  by  a  very  learned  and
diligent  man-,  I  mean  Heraclito  Manfredi -,  who  was  with  me,  when  I  made
the  former,  and  many  others.  I  will  communicate  it  to  you,  in  the  fame
manner  that  he  communicated  it  to  me,  when  I  rcfided  at  Venice.

39,  A  woman,  who  had  been  fuppos'd  to  have  an  afcites,  died.  The  belly
was  not  found  to  be  fill'd  with  extravafatcd  water ;  but  with  a  tumour  of  the
left  tefticle.  This  tumour  weigh'd  four  and  twenty  pounds;  being  fill'd,  in
great  meafure,  with  a  vifcid  and  black  humour  ;  which  you  might  very  well
compare  with  the  dirty  water,  that  flows  through  the  channels,  in  the  ilreets
of  a  city.  The  other  contents  of  the  tumour  were  lliut  up  in  veficles  of  un-
equal magnitudes,  which  communicated  one  with  another  ;  fome  of  rhem
being  fill'd  v/ith  a  yellov/,  fome' with  a  vifcid  matter,  and  others  with  a  lymph,
which,  v/hen  put  on  the  fire,  did  not  coagulate.  Although  it  was  connected
to  no  part,  except  the  left  fide  of  the  uterus,  yet  it  was  quite  immoveable,  to
which-ever  fide  the  body  was  turn'd;  becaufe,  as  it  fix'd  down  a  kind  of  lower
appendage  of  itfelf,  which  confifted  of  many  hydatids,  betwixt  the  uterus
and  the  inteftine,  it  fo  exaftly  fill'd  the  inferior  part  of  the  pelvis,  that  while
it  was  drawn  out  from  thence  by  force,  a  found  v/as  heard,  fimilar  to  that
which  is  made  by  pulling  away  a  cupping-glafs  from  the  fkin.

40.  In  gueffing  at  the  nature  of  other  hidden  difeafes,  and  particularly  of
this,  we  muft  join  together  many  marks,  even  for  this  reafon,  that  fome  one
of  them  may  happen  to  be  abfent  fometimes,  as  here.  For  among  the  figns
of  this  difeafe,  fome  mobility  of  the  tumour  is  plac'd  by  Schorkopffius,  in
the  difiertation  which  he  publifli'd  at  Bafil,  in  the  year  1685,  de  Hydrcpe  Ova-
rii Midiebris  {t);  a  difiTertation  that  merits  more  than  ordinary  praife;  efpeci-
ally  wiien  we  confider  the  time  wherein  it  was  written  ;  even  on  account  of  the
obfervations  of  this  difeafe,  which  he  had  receiv'd  from  that  very  great  phyfi-
cian  and  anatomill,  Wepfer  (u)  ;  which  I  am  not  fo  much  furpnz'd  fliould  be
unknown  to  Nuck  {x),  as  that  they  were  omitted  in  thole  additamenta  to  the
Sepulchretum  ;  wherein  (^f)  the  words  of  Harderus,  in  which  he  exprcfsly
commends  this  difiertation,  and  thofe  obfervations,  are  copied.

However,  in  the  firft  times  of  the  difeafe,  perhaps,  (which,  as  I  faid  in  the
preceding  letter  ('z),  ought,  for  this  reafon,  to  be  attended  to)  there  might,
probably,  have  been  a  mobility  of  the  tumour,  in  the  woman  in  quellion:  as
there  may,  at  the  fame  early  times,  alfo,  be  "  a  femicircular  figure  of  the  tu-
"  mour,"  in  the  dropfy  of  the  tube,  according  to  the  conjefture  of  Brecht-
feld  {a),  which  Schorkopffius  {b)  has  follow'd  -,  in  order  to  teach  us  by  what
mark  we  may  diftinguifh  the  dropfy  of  the  ovarium,  and  the  dropfy  of  the
tube,  from  each  other  :  yet  wh-rn  the  difeafe  is  advanc'd,  I  do  not  doubt  but
the  tumour  of  a  dropfy  in  the  tube,  no  lefs  than  that  of  an  aneurifm  in  the
artery,  comes  near  to  the  oval,  or  fpherical  figure-,  which  is  connrm'd  from

(t)  Thef.  21.  (s)  N.  60.

' (ft)  Thef.  16.  17.  23.  {a)  Bartholin,  afl.  Hafn.  vol.  i. p.  i.  obf.

- {x)  Adenogr.  c.  8.  103.

(y)  Schol.  ad  obf.  47.  fl,J  Thef.  22.

I  the


Letter  XXXIX. Article  40.  407

the  delineation  given  by  Munnickius,  of  a  dropfical  tube,  to  illuftrate  that  ob-
fcrvation,  which  is  fpoken  of  by  me  in  the  fame  letter  (f).

But  while  I  was  attending  to  a  number  of  hiftories  of  tumours,  of  what-
ever kind,  in  the  teftes  of  women,  it  happen'd  to  come  into  my  mind,  that
this  might,  perhaps,  be  axided  to  other  marks  thereof:  I  mean  that  it  be-
gins in  the  left  part  of  the  hypogaPcrium.  For  I  obferv'd  that  the  tumour
was  in  the  left  tefhis,  and  not  in  the  right,  which  was  feen  by  Manfredi  (d)  ;
and  that  which  was  i'een  by  me  alfo  (e)  ;  and  not  only  thefe,  butthofe  likewife
which  were  feen  by  Kerckringius  (f),  Wepfer  (g),  Harderus  (h),  Nuck  (i),
Drelincurt  f/^),  Reifelius  C/j,  Gahrliepius  C»;j,  the  younger  du  Verney  C»),
and  this  laft  author  in  two  cafes  ;  Rud.  Jac.  Camerarius  (o),  Maggi  and  Do-
di  (p),  Riedlinus  fjj,  Schachcrus  (rj,  Alexander  Camerarius  ("jj,  Gullman-
nus  (/),  Gutcermannus  fw)?  BaiTius  (x),  Vacherius  (jyj,  Benevolus  Czj,  Tar-
gioni  (a).  And,  indeed,  where  there  was  a  tumour  of  both  the  teftes,  the
iargefc  was  found,  by  Flunerwolffius  (b),  in  the  left :  nor  do  I  forget  that  I
have  defcrib'd  to  you  hydatids,  as  being  feen  by  me,  within  the  left  only(c);
or  much  larger  in  this  (J),  than  the  other.

As  I  was  attending  to  this  very  great  confent,  in  fuch  a  number  of  obfer-
vations  ;  and  was  already  fo  far  fettled  in  the  opinion,  as  to  be  much  difpos'd  to
account  for  the  caufe  of  the  difference,  from  the  lels  expeditious  return  of  the
blood,  from  the  left  teftis,  to  the  vena  cava  ;  as  from  thence  it  muft  be  brought
through  a  much  longer  pafiage,  than  from  the  right ;  I  recollefted  that  I  had,,
however,  read  not  a  few  examples  of  tumours,  which  belong'd  to  the  right
teftis.  For  Vefalius  {e)  had  feen  the  right  grown  out  into  nine  or  ten  large  hy-
tids.  And  in  the  fame  alfo  fince  that,  when  it  was  diftended  with  ferum  to
the  quantity  of  nine  pints ;  an  example  "  of  the  dropfy  of  the  teftes "  is  pro-
pos'd  by  CafperBauhin('/}  .•  who  (?),  with  Hildanus  (i&),  at  another  time,  like-
wife,  faw  the  right  teftis  of  the  magnitude  of  a  gooie's  egg,  full  of  oblong
hairs,  and  a  mucous  matter.

Thefe  hairs  were  alio  found  by  Blafius  (/),  together  with  other  things,  in-
the  teftis  of  the  fame  fide  ;  which  was  increas'd  into  a  very  great  bulk.  And
as  there  were  others  befides,  whom  I  ftiall  mention  below  C^j,  that  found  hairs
in  tumours  of  the  teftes  ;  there  were  fome,  as  I  ftiall  then  fay,  who  faw-
them  in  the  left ;  and  yet  as  many  who  faw  them  in  the  right.

(r)  N.  59.  CO  Eorund.  t.  2.  obf.  3o.

(d)  N.  3g.  (a) Eorund.  t.  3.  obf.  105.

(f)  N.  37.  (x)  Dec.  4.  obf.  anat.  8.

f/J  Spicileg.  anat.  obf.  10.  fyj  Hill,  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a. 1739.  obf..

fgj  Apud  ScorkopfF.  th.  17.  anat.  3.

(/&)  Ibid.  thef.  15.  (2)  OfTervaz.  9.

fij  C.  cit.  (a)  Prima  Raccolta  di  offervaz  med.

(i)  Ibid.  fij  Eph,  n.  c.  dec.  2,  a.  9.  obf.  99.

CO  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  2.  a.  10.  obf.  27.  {c)  Epift.  15.  n.  8.

{m)  Earund.  dec.  3.  a.  2.  obf.  61.  C'^J  Ep.  21.  n.  47.

(n)  Hift.  de  I'acad.  r.  des  fc.  a.  1703..  {s)  De  corp.  hum.  fabr.  1.  5.  c.  9..

Co  J  Biga.  obf  med.  c.  1.  iyj  Theatr.  anat.  1.  i.  c.  35,
(/.)  Apud  Vallifner.  iftor. deila  generaz.  p. {g)  Ibid.

3.C.  5.£itab 12.  (i)  Cent.  5.  obf.  48.
(y)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  7.  obf  56. ~ (i)  Part  i.  obf.  med.  9.

(>-J  Differt.  de  virg.  afcitica.  (i)  N.  41.
u)  Ad.  n.  c.  torn.  1.  obt  160.  verf.  fin.

A  ni-


4o8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

A  tumour  of  the  fame  teftis  (not  to  detain  you  with  a  long  detail)  you  will
find  to  h-ave  been  feen  by  Chriftopher  Harderus  (/J-,  by  Theodorus  Zwin-
ger  (m);  by  Lebenwaldius  (h)  •,  by  Gandolphius  (o)  t,  by  Klaunigius  (p)  ;  by
Jo.  Dav.  Mauchartus  (q)  ;  by  Miegius  (r) ;  by  Alexander  Camerarius  (s)  ;  by
'I'rew  (/) ;  and  even  by  our  Mediavia  ;  as  I  have  written  to  you  in  a  former
letter  (ii).

Nor,  indeed,  do  I  find  any  difference  betwixt  the  tumours  of  the  right,
and  the  left  teftis,  in  one  and  the  fame  woman  -,  whether  defcrib'd  by  Heint-
zius  formerly  (x)  •,  or,  afterwards,  by  Nabothus  (y),  and  by  Laubius  (2)  ;
nor  have  I  feen  any  in  thofe  which  I  have  given  the  hiftories  of,  in  the  pre-
ceding letter  (a) :  or,  if  I  find  any  difterence,  it  is  in  the  greater  magnitude
of  the  right  •,  as  in  the  obfervations  of  Bauhin  {l>},  of  Gandolphius  (r),  and  of
Goetzius  (d).

In  the  laft  place :  If  the  queftion  be  of  hydatids,  growing  to  the  fubftance
of  the  teftis,  Kerckringius  {e)  has  obferv'd,  that  thofe  which  he  found,  in  an
infant,  ''  of  the  bignefs  of  a  pigeon's  egg,"  were  not  at  the  left,  but  upon
the  right  teftis.  There  were,  without  doubt,  many  more  obfervations  on
both  fides :  for  I  have  only  taken  notice  of  thofe  which  I  at  prefent  call'd  to
mind  ;  not  fo  much  as  you  might  perceive  it  to  be  the  effeft  of  meer  chance,
that  fo  many  obfervations  occur'd  to  me  at  firft,  and  all  of  them  taken  from
the  left  fide,  as  that  you  might  have  a  great  number  in  readinefs,  if,  by  com-
paring them  one  with  another,  you  might  be  able  to  draw  ufeful  hints  from
ibme,  in  order  to  conjefture  at  a  hidden,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  frequent
difeafe.

41.  Nor  is  what  I  faid  of  hairs  being  found,  within  the  teftes  of  women,
by  Bauhin,  and  Blafius,  very  extraordinary.  For  Bauhin  (f)  has  propos'd
that  obfervation  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  hint  that  it  was  not  the  only  one,  nor
the  firfl :  and,  afterwards,  both  Blafius,  as  I  have  faid,  and  others,  among
whom  is  Wepfer  (g),  and  Andreas  Veronicus  {h),  found  the  fame  appear-
ance ;  but  thefe  two  on  the  left  fide  ;  yet,  on  the  right,  were  they  found  by
Stalpart  (i),  and  the  celebrated  Haller  (k) :  and  not  to  add  more,  fome  learned
men  of  Bologna  obferv'd  them  once  and  again  in  the  fame  city,  and  in  my
memory  -,  and  Menghinus,  and  Bonzius  (/),  lately,  in  the  left  teftis  ;  and
three  and  fifty  years  ago,  he  whom  I  fpoke  of  above  (m),  Manfredi,  in  the
right.

(/)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  i.  a.  3.  obf.  180.  {z)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  5.  obf.  21.

(m)  Earund.  dec.  2.  a.  9.  obf.  136.  fa  J  N.  34.

(»)  Earund.  dec.  3.  a.  i.  obf.  92.  (i)  Cit.  c.  35.pnmo  loco.

(0)  Hift.  del' Acad.  R.  des.  fc.  a.  1707.  obf. (<r)  Cit.  hlft.  prime  loco,

anat.  4.  {li)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf.  207.

(/)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  7.  obf.  64.  (e)  Obf. cit.  10.

CyJ  Earund.  cent.  8.  obf.  14.  f/J  C.  cit.  35.

(r)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  1.  obf.  85.  {gj  Vid.  thef  17.  Schorkopffii  cit.  n.  40.

(s)  Ibid.  obf.  160.  (/?>)  Apud  Targioni  cit.  ibid.

(?)  Commerc.  litter,  a.  1734.  hebd.  44.  (;)  Cent.  2.  p.  i.  obf.  37.

(a)  Epift.  29.  n.  14.  (i)  Opufc. pathol.  obf.  42.

CxJ  Apud  Schenclj.  obf.  med.  1.  3.  ubi  de-  (/)  Comment,  de  Bonon.  fc.  acad.  t.  2.  p.  1.
Jiydrope  obf  6.  inter  medica.

{jj  Difput.  de  fterilit.  mulier.  n.  11.  (w)  N.  38.

For


Letter  XXXIX. Article  42.  409

For  he  wrote  to  me  that  a  globe  of  the  bignefs  of  a  very  large  egg,  com-
prehended in  a  white,  and  almoft  cartilaginous,  coat,  yet  in  fome  places
pretty  fliin,  and  of  a  blackifli  colour,  was  grown  to  the  fubflance  of  the  right
teftis :  that  within  this  globe  had  lain  hid  a  quantity  of  hairs,  in  a  conglo-
merated ftate,  quite  disjoin'd  from  that  coat,  and  daub'd  over  with  a  kind  of
fuet,  as  it  were  :  that  within  the  conglomerated  hairs  was  a  certain  nucleus,
from  which  fome  veiTels  went  into  the  continued  fubflance  of  the  teftis.  Which
vefTels  and  nucleus  I  do  not  remember  to  have  been  obferv'd  by  others ;  nor
yet  the  two  circumftances  which  Bauhin  had  remark'd,  that  is  to  fay,
white  hairs  fix'd  into  the  furrounding  coat,  but  none  at  all  on  the  pubes  of
that  woman  ;  although  fhe  was  by  no  means  a  girl,  and  had  even  brought
forth  a  child.

But  while  I  was  revifing  this  letter,  I  lit  on  a  programma,  entitled,  de
Ovarii  Ttitncre  Pilofo,  publifh'd  at  Leipfic,  in  the  year  1735,  by  Polyc.  Gottl.
Schacherus ;  who  not  only  mentions  other  obfervers  of  hairs,  and  of  a  fat
matter,  in  the  teftes  of  women,  and  efpecially  on  the  right  fide-,  but  defcribes
the  fame  things,  alfo,  as  being  found  by  him  in  the  left  teftis,  which  was
very  confiderably  enlarg'd  :  and,  in  particular,  fays  much  on  the  fubjeft  of
thefe  hairs  -,  and  confirms,  not  only  by  words,  but  even  by  figures,  that  they
had  come  forth  "  from  the  internal  furface  of  the  incraffated  coat,  which,  for
that  reafon,  he  does  not  fcruple  to  compare  with  the  external  hairy  fkin  of  the
head.  And  indeed  I  have  remark'd  that  hairs  had  been  alfo  feen  by  the  cele-
brated Targioni  (n),  inherent,  by  one  of  their  heads,  in  the  thick  and  tena-
cious coat,  juft  as  they  generally  are  in  the  Ikin.  But  from  whatcaufe  hairs
are  form'd  within  the  teftes,  if  they  are  really  hairs,  it  is  difficult  to  fay  :  and
yet  not  more  than  within  other  parts.  For  even  Cornelius  Celfus  {0),  has
faid,  that  in  tumours  of  the  thyroid  gland,  "  hairs  mix'd  with  fmall  bones,'*
.are  fometimes  included :  and  others,  quoted  by  the  celebrated  Heifter  (p),
have  feen  them  in  different  places  -,  as  I  myfelf  alfo  have  (q^)  within  the  tranf-
verfe  procefs  .of  the  dura  mater.

But  this  letter  is  already  very  long  ;  fo  that  it  rather  becomes  me,  now,  to
fee  how  I  may  conclude  it  with  fome  obfervation  that  fhall  anfwer  to  that  laft
'Of  Vallalva's  {r).  This  will  be  an  obfervation,  if  not  of  the  ftomach  being
prolaps'd,  at  leaft  of  the  fpleen  ;  and  will  be  taken  from  the  very  friendly
.letter  of  the  fame  Manfredi,  whereby,  in  the  year  1718,  he  communicated
this,  as  he  did,  in  like  manner,  two  others,  which  were  by  no  means  com-
mon obfervations.

42.  There  was  a  man,  who  had  a  fwelling  of  his  belly,  in  the  region  of
•^ach  groin.  But  the  left  tumour,  which  was  well-known  to  be  a  hernia,  as
it  had  brought  on  death  by  caufing  an  ileos,  gave  us  occafion  to  know  what
ihe  right  was.

For  the  belly  being  open'd,  the  fpleen  was  found  at  the  right  groin,  from
whence  it  could  not  be  remov'd,  although  the  body  was  much  fhaken  by  taking
it  out  of  the  grave.  This  fpleen  was  about  the  weight  of  three  pounds,  of
the  thicknefs-of  five  inches,  twelve  in  breadth,  and  as  many  in  length. It  v/as

<n)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  40.  -{q)  Epift.  anat.  zo.  n.  58.

(0)  De  med.  l.y.  c.  13.  (;■)  Supra  n.  14.

.{p)  tpirt.  de  pilis,  &c.  ad  Paverum.

yoL.  II.  G  g  g  com-


41  o  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

conneiSted  to  the  ftomach,  by  a  kind  of  rope  which  lay  hid  under  a  part
t)f  the  iiueftines,  being  two  inches  in  thicknefs,  made  up  of  fangui-
ferous  vcffels,  and  contain'd  in  a  thickifh  coat  like  a  capfula ;  fo  that  in  co-
lour, and  a  certain  contorfion  of  velfel?,  it  was  like  the  funis  umbilicalis  ;
although,  externally,  it  had  certain  appendages,  the  remains  perhaps  of  the
lacerated  membranes,  which,  at  firft  fight,  rel'embled  thofe  adipofe  appendi-
culffi,  wherewith  the  large  intcftines  arc  furniih'd.  The  branches  of  the  veins
that  go  to  the  fpleen  were  extremely  dilated  :  and  that  which  is  call'd  the  vas
breve  eafily  admitted  the  fore-finger.

43.  Although  Blafius  (s),  when  he  publiili'd  the  fame  obfervation  of  a
prolaps'd  fpleen,  which  Ruylch  (/)  publifli'd  afterwards,  faid  fomething
more  than  the  other,  of  what  had  been  obferv'd,  both  in  the  living  body,
and  after  death  ;  and  among  thefe  things,  of  "  the  fplenic  ve0els  being  in-
"  creas'd  to  a  furprizing  degree,  both  in  length,  and  capacity  ■"  yet  I  do
not  remember  to  have  read  any  author,  who  has  defcrib'd  the  funis  of  the
fplenic  veffels,  in  cafes  of  that  kind,  with more  accuracy  than  Manfredi.

But,  as  to  what  relates  to  the  caufes  of  this  difeafe,  I  acknowledge,  in-
deed, that  the  weight  of  the  fpleen  being  increas'd,  rnuft  have  had  great
effeft  in  relaxing,  or  breaking  through,  the  membranous  bands,  which  con-
Jieft  it  to  the  feptum  tranfverfum ;  and,  indeed,  moft  of  the  obfervers  have
either  mention'd,  or  hinted  at,  an  increas'd  weight,  together  with  the  pro-
lapfus.  However,  when  I  call  to  mind  thofe  enlarg'd  fpleens,  which  had  by
no  means  fallen  down  ;  fuch  as  I  have  more  than  once  defcrib'd  to  you  («),
or  fuch  as  you  will  read  of  in  the  Sepulchretum  (x) ;  I  readily  perceive  that
fome  other  caufes  ought  to  be  added  to  that  of  weight,  as,  for  inftance,  the
greater  laxity,  or  weaknefs,  of  thofe  ligaments,  a  fall  from  a  high  place,
or  other  things  of  a  fimilar  kind  ;  among  which  confider  whether  you  choofe
to  place  that  which  Riolanus  (y)  fuppos'd  of  the  kidney.  His  words  are
thefe,  "  the  caufe  of  a  laxation  of  the  kidney  may  be  a  violent,  and  long-con-
"  tinu'd  cough,  which,  perpetually  agitating  the  diaphragm,  may  remove
"  one  or  other  of  them  from  their  fituation;"  that  is,  one  or  other  of  the
kidnies,  which  lie  upon  the  diaphragm.

44.  But  by  what  figns  this  diforder  may  be  known,  and  diftinguilh'd  from
others,  is  to  be  enquir'd  from  the  hiftories  thereof:  although  not  all  thofe
who  found  it  in  the  dead  body,  could  inform  us  how  the  patients  had  been
particularly  affected,  when  living.  For  certainly  thefe  fymptoms  are  not  pe-
culiar to  a  prolapfus  of  the  fpleen,  that  we  have  in  Ballonius  (2),  in  an  ex-
ample which  is  of  ancient  date,  when  compar'd  with  the  others.  Nor  from
the  obfervation  of  Cabrolius  (a),  which,  perhaps,  was  not  made  long  after
the  former,  can  we  gather  any  thing  elfe,  except  that  the  fpleen  could  eafily
be  perceiv'd,  in  the  living,  as  well  as  in  the  dead  body,  "  to  fwim  through
"  the  whole  cavity  of  the  belly." Which  is  a  fign  that,  I  believe,  may  not

(-0  P.  I.  obf.  med.  14.  {y)  Anthropogr.  1.  2.  c.  26.

(tj  Obf.  anat.  chir.  62.  (z)  Epidem.  1.  2.  vere  a.  1578.

('0  Vid.  prsfertim  epift.  36.  n.  11.  &  17.  (a)  6.  in  obf.  var.

{x)  L.  3.  feft. i6.  obf.  g.  &  fecj.  plurib.  &
kd.  21.  obf.  34.  §■  I.  2.  3.

be


Letter  XXXIX. Article  44.  411

be  altogether  without  its  advantage,  but  ought  to  be  attended  to,  as  I  have
faid  of  others  morethan  once,  in  the  earlieft  times  of  the  difeafe.

For  in  procefs  of  time  it  may  eafily  be  wanting,  in  confequence  of  the
fpleen  being  become  immoveable,  as  you  have  feen  in  the  obfervacion  I  have
given  you  from  the  letter  of  Manfredi  j  and  as  you  will  fee  in  Bailonius :  for
tlie  fpleen  lying  upon  the  bladder,  "  adher'd  thereto  very  clofely."  This  is
confirm'd  by  Riolanus,  where  he  fays,  in  his  Encheiridion  {b) ;  that  this  dif-
order  had  been  "  four  times  feen  "  by  him :  and,  certainly,  in  his  An-
thropographia  {c),  he  does  produce  two  examples,  in  both  of  which  the
fpleen  had  connedled  itfelf  to  the  uterus,  and  the  neighbouring  parts,  fo
firmly,  that  in  one  of  them,  it  could  no  more  be  replaced  in  its  fituation  as
before,  while  the  woman  was  living  •,  and  in  the  other  it  long  impos'd  upon
the  phyficians  by  the  appearance  of  a  mola.

The  fame  author  gives  us  thefe  marks  [d),  whereby  to  diftinguifli  it  from  a
prolaps'd  kidney,  "  an  oblong  tumour,  and  an  emptinefs  of  the  lefc  hypo-
"  chondrium  ;"  the  laft  of  which  we  muft  enquire  after  in  the  patient,  when
failing  •,  and  if  we  perceive  it  (which  is  eafy  to  do,  in  a  patient  in  whom  the
fpleen  has  been  perceiv'd  to  be  tumid  before  its  prolapfus)  v/e  fhall  have  a
much  better  mark  to  diftinguifh  this  prolaps'd  ftate  of  the  fpleen,  from  any
other  hard  tumour  of  the  epigaftrium,  than  its  figure  ;  which,  in  diieas'd
parts,  and  particularly  in  this,  as  even  Riolanus  (e)  hirafelf  teaches,  we  are
not  ignorant  may  frequently  and  confiderably  vary.

But  from  the  example  of  Blafius  (f)  we  may  gather  two  things ;  one,  that  if
we  fhould  chance  to  meet  with  what  happen'd  to  him,  as  I  fuppofe,  for  this
reafon  •,  becaufe  the  fpleen  had  fallen  downwards  gradually,  the  ligaments
being  by  degrees  relax'd,  and  not  fpeedily  ruptur'd  ;  that  is  if  we  fliould  hap-
pen, firft,  to  perceive  a  confiderable  tumour  occupying  the  left  hypochon-
drium,  with  Ibme  part  of  the  epigaftrium;  and,  after  fome  fpace  of  time,
find  that  it  occupies  the  hypogaftrium,  more  than  thofe  parts  ;  we  may  then
be  confirm'd  in  our  conjefture  :  for  otherwife,  to  attend  to  the  place  only,  in
which  we  fhall  at  length  perceive  it,  although  it  may  be  fometimes  of  ufe  in
our  determination,  that  we  feel  it  on  the  left  fide  ;  yet  in  this  method  of
judging  we  may  Ibmetimes  be  deceiv'd,  as  the  obfervation  of  IManfredi  (g),
who  found  it  at  the  right  groin,  demonftrates.

The  lecond  conclufion  which  we  may  gather  is,  that,  if  the  other  figns-
fliow  the  tumour  to  arife  from  the  prolaps'd  fpleen,  we  are  not,  becaufe  the  tu-
mour fometimes  retains  its  mobility,  "  beyond  the  fpace  of  fix  months,"  v/hich
Riolanus  (/;)  had  fix'd,  fo  as  to  change  its  fituation,  on  a  change  of  fituation
in  the  body;  we  are  not,  I  iay,  for  this  reafon  to  imagine,  that  the  tumour
cannot  be  from  a  prolapfus  of  the  fpleen.  For  although  it  is  wont,  at  other  ,
times,  to  adhere  very  eafily,  as  I  have  faid  ;  yet  in  the  cafe  of  Blafius  it  was
pendulous  even  then,  though  the  tumour  had  exifted  "  more  than  three
"  years  and  a  half-,"  and  could  even  be  varioufly  mov'd,  according  to- the
various  agitation  of  the  body. And  from  the  fime  cafr  v,'e  learn,  as  it  is  re-

(b)  L.  2.  c.  z6.  (f)  Obf.  fijpra  ad  n.  43,  cit.

(c)  L.  2.  c.  23.  {g) Supra,  eod.

(d)  Encheir.  c.  cit.  (h)  Encheir.  c.  cit.
{<-)  Ibid.

G  g  e  2  Uitcd.


412  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

lated  by  Ruyfch  (/),  that  this  dileafe  happens,  fometimes,  after  a  difficult
birth,  and  not  without  the  moft  violent  pain:  the  former  of  Which  coriSrms-
what  we  have  added  in  regard  to  the  caufes  of  the  difeafe  (k) ;  and  by  the
latter  we  are  admonifli'd  that  we  muft  not  fuppoie  pain  to  be  wanting  in  all'
thefe  difeafes,  and  at  every  time  of  the  difeafe,  becaufe-  the-  other  hiftories  ■
do  not  make  mention  of  it.

The  hiftory  of  Anthony  dePozzis  (/)  teaches  us,  that,  notwithftanding  an-"
enlarg'd  fpken,  having  chang'd  its  fituation  by  reafon  of  its  weight,  had  oc--
cupied  the  hypogaftrium,  for  four-and-twenty  years,  the  woman  had  liv'd '
neverthelefs,  had  been  three  times  pregnant  in  that  fpace,  and  had  brought-
forth  children  that  were  healthy,  and  likely  to  live  •,  fo  that  we  have  lefs  oc—
cafion  to  wonder  that  the  other  woman,  fpoken  of  by  Ballonius  (»?),  did
once  retain  her  fcetus  quite  till  the  proper  time  of  delivery ;  though  fl:ie,-
at  length,  died  in  the  birth.  The  obfervation  of  Drelincurr,  given  us  by
Schorkopffius  (k),  confirms  nothing  at  all,  but  that  phyficians  may  eafily  be '
deceiv'd  in  this  difeafe, by  taking  it  for  a  utero-geftation.

Finally, the example  of  Bonetus (o) might  go  pretty  far  in  proving'
whatl  juft  now  faid  of  excruciating  pains  in  the  belly,  if  there  had  not  been-;
another  diforder  befides,  in  the  abdomen  of  that  virgin. Nor  do  I  remem-
ber, at  prefent,  to  have  heard,  or  read,  more  than  thefe  ten  obfervations  of'
the  fpleen  being  prolaps'd  ;  fo  that  Ruyfch  (p)  might,  with  reafon  and  juftice, ,.
reckon  "  aprolapfus  of  the  fpleen  into  the  pelvis,"  among  the.  cafes  which-.
he  had  remark'd  as  the  moft  rare. Six  of  thefe  obfervations  relate  to  women,  .
two  to  men  : but  the  remaining  ones might  relate  to  ■  either  one  or the
other  ;  as  Riolanus  (q)  has  only  hinted  at,  and  not related,  them,  by  faying--
that  unfldlful  and  incautious  phyficians  are  deceiv'd  in  this  manner, "  by
"  the  appearance  of  a  mole,  or  a  fcirrhous  uterus,  in  women  ;  and  in  men  by
"  the  appearance  of  a  glandular  tumour,  like  a-fteatoma,  lying  hid  in  the-
*'  mefentery."

It  has  never  yet  happen'd  to  me,  to  meet  with  this  appearance  in  dilTedlion,'
though  I  have  been  very  defirous,  on  feveral  accounts,  to  enquire  with  ac-
curacy into  many  circumftances ;  but  particularly  to  enquire  what  then  hap-
pens to  the  annex'd  pancreas,  ftomach,  and  the  entire  trunks  of  the  fplenic
veflels.  And  there  are  indeed,  in  the  obfervations  which  have  been  quoted,,
efpecially  in  that  of  Ballonius>  and  Cabrolius,  fome  things  which  relate  to
the  ftomach.  But  as  they  might  be  from  fome  other  caufe,  and  do- not  pro--
perly  correfpond,  in  this  part,  with  the  hiftories  of  Pozzi,  and  Bonetus,  1
have  purpofely  pafs'd  them  over.

45.  I  have,  likewife,  purpofely  faid  nothing  of  what  was  found  by  Hil-
danus  (;'),  in  the  body  of  a  woman  ;  as  I  read  that  the  fpleen  was  very  much
enlarg'd,  and  extended  to  the  hypogaftrium  indeed,  but  not  prolaps'd  thi-
ther ;  as  it  has  feem'd  to  men  in  other  refpe£ts  very  learn'd,  in  the  mention
(i)  made  by  Hildanus  of  the  fame  example,  which  they  have  fuppos'd  to  be

(/)  Obf.  62.  cit.  ad  n.  43.  (0)  Sepukhr.  1.  3.  feft.  14..  obf.  37.

{k)  Eod.  n.  CpJ  Refp.  ad  Bidl,  vindic.

(IJ  Eph.  n.  c.  Dec.  i.  a,  4.  obf.  30.  C^J  Encheir.  c.  cit,

{m)  Loc.  cit.  CrJ  Cent.  2.  obf.  45,

(a)  Differt.  fupran.40.  cit.  thef,  22.  (i)  Epift.  55.

another


Letter  XXXIX. Article  46.  413

another  obfervation.  So  I  have  confider'd,  as  a  reference  to,  or  commemora-
tion of,  an  obfervation  formerly  publilh'd  (^),  what  Ruyfch  has  faid  in  his
Adverfaria  {ti)  :  for  it  is  not  furprizing  if  he,  being  a  very  old  man,  fhould
have  written  Ibme  things  in  this  reference,  which  do  not  altogether  agree  with
what  he  had  faid  thirty  years  before ;  fmce  even  thofe  things  that  he  had  then
written,  that  is  twenty  years  after  he  had  obferv'd  them,  do  not  fufficiently
agree  with  what  Blafius  has  recorded  (x),  at  the  diftance  of  no  more  than  fe-
ven  years,  from  the  time  of  making  that  obfervation  ;  Blafius,  I  fay,  who
was  both  confulted  by  the  woman  v^/hen  living,  and  prefent  at  the  diffeftion,
which  he  fays  was  perform'd  by  Ruyfch  on  the  tv/enty-fourth  day  of  January
in  the  year  1670.

Ruyfch  gives  us  the  fame  year,  and  fufficiently  determines  the  time  of
the  year  alfo,  when  he  fays  that  this  very  hiftory  of  his  is  related  in  the  third
decade  of  Juftus  Schraderus,  obfervation  the  fourth;  who  fays,  in  this  part  of
his  work,  that  Ruyfch  had  told  him,  on  the  thirty-firft  of  March,  in  the  year
1670,  that  he  had  "  lately"  perform'd  the  difleftion. But  if  an  obfervation
of  this  kind  were  in  the  number of  thofe,  which  might  eafily  happen  twice,
to  one  anatomift,  within  two  months,  how  came  it  to  be  rank'd  among  the
moft  rare  obfervations  by  Ruyfch  (y)  ?  Yet  Riolanus  (2)  faw  it  four  times ;  and
"  twice,"  as  I  read  while  I  am  revifmg  this  letter,  the  illuftrious  Van  Swieten  -
(a)  faw,  in  dead  bodies,  "  the  fpleen  in  a  fcirrhous  and  enlarg'd  ftate,  and  "•
"  fallen  down  quite  to  the  pelvis,"  who  I  could  wifli  had  been  at  leifure  to  ■
add  the  other  circumftances  that  attended.

You  will,  however,  take  notice  of  thefe  things  :  though  it  does  not  feem  ^
improbable  to  me,  that  any  one  perfon  may  have  met  with  a  prolaps'd  fpleen
more  than  once ;  it  does  not,  neverthelefs,  feem  very  probable  that  any  one
fhould  have  met  with  it  twice,  within  the  fpace  of  two  months.  Yet  if  you
fhould  think  that  this  word"  lately"  is  takerr,  by  me,  in  too  fti-idl  and  con-
fin'd  a  fenfe  ;  although  not  by  reafon  of  this  circumftance  alone,  that  firfl  ob-
fervation of  Ruyfch  has  feem'd  to  me,  by  no  means  to  a^gree  very  well  with
the  defcriptions  of  others,  that  were  publidi'd  before  •,  I  am  not  averfe  to  your
confidering  the  fecond  as  another,  and  ntrmbering  it  with  the  reft,  which,  i
are  taken  notice  of  above  {h).

4.6.  Finally,  what  Riolanus  (c)  thought  of  the  cure,  in  the  firft  times  of  the
difeafe,  and  what  he  did  with  this  view  ;  and  what  he  propos'd,  or  what  he
forbad,  in  cafe  of  the  fpleen  being  fix'd  to  the  parts  of  the  hypogaftrium  ;  you
■will  learn  from  himfelf.  For  I  am. not  willing  to  make  ftill  longer,  a  letter
which  is  already  too  long ;  the  prolixity  of  which,  though  not  to  be  compar'd
with  that  of  the  former  letter,  you  will  bear  with  the  greater  patience,  when
you  obferve,  that  I  have,  as  I  hate  repetitions,  almoft  finifli'd  therein,  not
only  whatever  relates  to  the  fedlion  de  Ventris  Tumore,  but  alfo  whatever  be-
longs to  the  other  de  Hypogafim  Dolor e. Farev/el.

{i)  Cit,  fupraad  n.-43.::  (a)  Comment,  in  Boerh.  aph,  §.  958'.

(a)  Dec.  2.  n.  9.  (^)  N.  44.

{*■)  Cit.  fupra  ad  n.  43,  {c)  Encheir.  &  Antrop,  capitib*  ad  n.-44.  cu,  -

(_jr)  Vid.  fupra  n.  43.  fupra.

(z)  Supra  n.  44.

3  LETTER


414  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.


LETTER the FORTIETH
Treats  of  Pain  in  the  Loins.


'E  are  now  come  to  diforders,  the  peculiar  fituacion  and  caufe  of  which
are  frequently  very  obfcure  •,  that  is  to  fay,  to  thofe  which  relate  to
the  urine,  and  urinary  paflages.  And  this  will  appear  even  from  the  fub-
jeft  with  which  I  begin  •,  I  mean  "  the  pain  of  the  loins."  For  this  fre-
quently relates  to  the  kidnies  being  afFefted  with  fandy  particles,  or  cal-
culi :  although  that  it  does  not  lefs  often,  either  relate  to  fome  other  parr,  or
even  to  the  kidnies  themfelves,  when  atfetted  from  other  caufes,  you  n-utonly
very  well  know  yourfelf,  but  will  very  clearly  perceive  alfo,  from  thoie  ob-
fervations  which  I  fhall  immediately  defcribe  to  you,  both  from  the  papers  of
Valfalva,  and  my  own.  For  the  firft  of  both  of  them  will  relate  to  the  kid-
nies, and  calculi ;  and  the  latter  to  other  diforders  of  the  kidnies,  or  of  other
parts.  I  will  begin  according  to  cuftom,  as  it  is  proper  I  fliould,  with  thoie-
of  Valfalva  that  belong  to  the  firft  clafs.

2.  A  prieft  of  fifty  years  of  age,  having  been  many  years  fubjeft  to  arthri-
tic pains,  efpecially  of  the  fingers,  was,  at  length,  feiz'd  with  a  nephritic  pain.
There  was  not  only  a  frequent  vomiting  of  bilious  matter,  but  once  alio  of
blood,  which  had  often  been  difcharg'd  by  the  noftrils  likewife.  After  that
his  urine,  from  being  in  fmall  quantity,  and  watery,  began  to  be  difcharg'd
in  a  larger  quantity,  together  with  a  mucilaginous  and  opaque  matter  :  con-
vulfive  motions  of  the  whole  body  fuddenly  came  on ;  and  thefe  returning
again,  but  in  a  more  violent  manner,  carried  him  olF.

The  belly  being  open'd,  all  the  inteftines  were  found  to  be  of  a  colour  in-
clining to  livid.  But  the  ftomach  was  found,  and  no  traces  appear'd  of  the  place
from  whence  the  blood  had  proceeded.  In  the  kidnies  lay  feveral  very  fmall
calculi,  fome  black,  others  of  a  white  colour  -,  and  befides  thefe  there  were
finuous  cavities  full  of  urine,  but  particularly  in  the  right :  the  urine,  alfo,
by  its  quantity,  had  dilated  the  pelvis,  and  the  ureter,  which  was  continu'd
therefrom.

In  the  head,  the  internal  fubftance  of  the  brain  was,"  in  fome  meafure,  preg-
nant with  ferum  •,  but  the  ventricles  of  the  brain  particularly  abounded  there-
with.

Finally,  at  the  joints  of  the  fingers,  when  the  cutis  was  taken  off,  a  tarta-
reous  matter  was  immediately  found,  in  the  membrane  involving  the  tendons ;
and  this  matter  was  of  a  white  colour  inclining  to  yellow.

3.  We  may  not  only  make  many  dedu6lions  from  this  obfervation  (a  me-
thod v/hich  will  be  often  foUov/'d  in  this  letter  and  others)  but  we  may, in

I  '  parti-


Letter  XL. Article  4.  415

particular,  confirm  that  which  often  occurs  in  the  pradlice  of  medicine ;  I,
mean,  that  to  pains  of  the  joints,  are  often  added  pains  of  the  kidnies ;  and
at  length  to  the  latter,  very  violent  diforders  of  the  brain.  That  is  to  fay,
they  who  are  fubjeft  to  the  gout,  as  they  can  ufe  motion  of  the  body  lefs  in
proportion,  fo  they  proportionably  lefs  agitate  thofe  mufcles,  by  whofe  mo-
tions the  contiguous  kidnies  m.ay  alio  be  agitated;  foas  to  prevent  the  urine
from  ftagnating  therein,  and  depofiting  the  landy  particles,  wherewith  it  is
loaded.  Turn  to  Boerhaave  (<3  j,  and  his  illuftrious  pupil  Ha'ler(^),  who
rightly  interprets  the  ideas  of  his  mafter,  and  illuftrates  them.  See,  alfa,
the  obfervation  of  Littre  (c)  on  a  boy,  who  having  a  phimofis  that  prevented
his  urine  from  being  properly  difcharg'd,  this  fluid,  for  that  realbn,  ftagnated
betwixt  the  glands  and  the  prepuce,  and  produc'd  an  incredible  number  of
fmall  ftones ;  none  of  which  was  any  more  produc'd,  after  the  phimofis  was
remov'd.

But  as,  when  a  calculus  is  already  forn-j'd  in  the  kidnies,  an  obflacle  fre-
quently happens,  from  thence,  to  the  urine,  and  lels  fuperfluous  ferum  is,  for
that  reafon,  difcharg'd  from  the  conftitution  ;  fo  this  ferum  may  be  re-
dundant in  the  brain  :  or  even  the  roughnefs  of  the  calculus,  by  very  vehe-
mently irritating  the  kidnies,  may  fometimes  excite  convulfions  in  the  whole
body  ;  and,  therefore,  in  the  brain,  as  well  as  in  other  parts.  However,  by
which  method  you  chooie  to  explain  the  convulfive  motions,  in  the  prieft  in
queftion,  or  even  death  itfelf,  I  leave  entirely  to  your  own  difcretion  :  al-
though the  difcharge  of  a  mucilaginous  matter,  from  the  urinary  paflTages,-
which  was  fucceeded  by  the  convulfions  and  death,  feems  to  give  great
countenance  to  the  fecond  fuppofition.

That  is  to  fay,  this  mucilaginous  humour,  with  which  the  pelvis,  and  the
tubuli  belonging  thereto,  that  receive  the  papillse  of  the  kidnies,  are,  like
the  bladder  and  ureters  (inafmuch  as  they  are  made  up  of  the  fame  continu'd
coat)  fmear'd  over  internally,  in  order  to  defend  them  againft  the  acrimony
of  the  urine ;  this  humour  then  being  increas'd,  and  become  thicker,  froni'
the  irritation  of  the  calculus,  diminiflies  the  force  of  that  irritation,  as  long
as  it  adheres  to  the  calculus,  and  interpofes  itfelf  betwixt  the  rough  furfaces
thereof,  and  this  internal  irritable  coat.  But  when  this  mucilaginous  hu-
mour has  left  the  coat  without  defence,  in  confequence  of  being  forc'd-
down,  by  medicines  improperly  given  to  increafe  the  urinary  difcharges  •,  or
from  any  other  caufe  whatever  -,  it  mull  then,  of  courfe,  follow,  that  the  ir-
ritations are  more  violent.  But  you  will,  ia  my  opinion,  choofe  rather
to  make  ufe  of  the  firft  explication,  in  the  hiftory  which  I  fliall  next  fub-
join.

4.  A  man  about  fixty  years  of  age,  of  a  very  fat  habit  of  body,  who,
while  he  was  a  young  man,  had  been  troubled  with  great  difficulty  in  mak-
ing water  ;  fo  as  to  be  oblig'd  to  ftand  on  tip-toe,  fometimes,  to  difcharge  it ,
had  his  urine  wholly  fupprefs'd,  together  with  a  very  violent  pain  in  the  loins,
but  without  any  vomiting.  He  had,  every  day,  a  very  confiderable  fever,,
the  rigor  and  coldnefs  lalling  for  two  hours. When  the  catheter  was  intro-

(fl)  Praska.  ad  §,  352.  inftit.  &  ad  §.  365.  (c)  Hlft.  ad  I'Acad,  R,  des  k.  a.  1706. obf.

(i)  Not. e  ad primum.  &  d  ad  alter,  cit.-anat,  6.
Boerhaav.  locum.

duc'd


4i6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  oF  the  Belly.

duc'd  he  difcharg'd  a  bloody  matter,  and  with  it  a  calculus  of  the  bignefs  6£
a  fmall  almond.  This  was  fucceeded  by  bloody  urine.  But  afterwards,  the
urine  grew  clear,  and  became  like  that  of  healthy  perfons  -,  yet  was  not  with-
out a  foetid  fmell :  and  the  pain  in- the  loins  always  continu'd.  The  difeafe
having  apparently  remitted,  as  I  have  faid,  the  patient  was  feiz'd,  on  the
night  of  the  fifth  day,  with  a  kind  of  epileptic  concuffion,  as  it  were,  of  the
whole  body,  attended  with  a  bloody  foam  at  the  mouth ;  and  in  this  man-
ner departed  out  of  life.

The  belly  being  laid  open,  the  bladder  appear'd  to  be  full  of  urine,  which
was  in  a  natural  ftate,  except  that  it  had  a  very  ill  fmell.  The  flefliy  fibres
of  the  bladder  were  become  much  thicken'd,  fo  as  to  refemble  the  bundles
of  mulcular  fibres  in  the  heart.  About  the  cervix  thereof,  were  found  fomc
grains  of  fand.  .  However,  there  was  no  obftacle  found  in  the  bladder,  where-
by the  difcharge  of  the  urine  could  be  prevented. The  ureters  and  the  kid-

:  tiies  were  perfeftly  found.

In  the  thorax,  the  lungs  vsrere  turgid,  and  ting'd  of  a  black  colour:  but
the  left  lobe  adher'd.  clofely  to  the  diaphragm. The  right  ventricle  of  the

,  heart  contain'd  a  polypous  concretion  •,  the  left  was  full  of  a  fluid  blood.

5!  Whatever  had  been,  formerly,  the  caufe  of  that  difficulty  in  making
water,  from  whence  it  is  probable,  as  will  be  demonftrated  on  a  future  occa-
fion  (i),  that  the  thickneis  of  the  fibres  of  the  bladder  was  brought  on  ;  the
lafl:  difeafe,  that  relates  to  the  urinary  parts,  feems  to  have  been  the  effefl  of

.the  calculus.  For  this  might  be  fo  niuch  the  more  eafily  generated,  in  one
or  other  of  the  kidnies,  as  the  weight  of  fat,  in  a  very  bulky  man,  render'd
exercife  of  body  lefs  eafy  {e).  To  this  method,  by  which  Boerhaave  (f)  fup-
pos'd  a  ftone  to  have  beenform'd,  in  one  of  the  kidnies  of  a  very  fat  man
likewife  (for  both  of  theie  vifcera  are  not  always  equally  dilpos'd  to  this  con-

.cretion)  you  may  alfo  add  another;  which,  with  the  fame  author  (^),  you  will

.attribute  to  a  quantity  of  fat,  preffing  upon  the  kidney,  and  the  ureter;  and,
for  that  reafon,  retarding  the  courfe  of  the  urine,  juft  as  the  want  of  exercife

.  retards  it.

Indeed,  in  thoTe  perforts  who  eat  very  plentifully, and  very  often,  and

■  have  their  fbomachs,  and  inteftines,  for  that  reafon,  generally  diftended  with
too  great  a  quantity  of  ingefta,;  to  the  other  caufes,  whereby  they  become
fubjedl  to  calculi  of  the  kidnies, -add  this  in  cenjunftion  with  me,  that  the
kidnies,  and  particularly  the  left,  and  both  the  ureters.;  inafmuch  as  dieyare
fnuated  betwixt  the  pofterior  paries  of  the  belly,  and  thofe  vifca-a;  are  more
than  properly  comprefs'd.  And  this  caufe  being  added  to  thofe  other  caufes,  in
the  gentleman  whom  Scroeckius  (/&)  defcribes,  it  is  fo  much  the  lefs  to  be
wonder'd  at,  that  in  one  ureter  was  found  a  calculus  of  a  confiderable  fize ;
and  in  the  oppofite  ureter,  a  very  large  one,  with  fo  many  fmaller  calculi.  But
the  compreffion,  either  from  a  quantity  of  far,  or  ingefta,  is  fo  much  the
more  noxious  in  very  bulky  conftitutions,  becaufe  they  generally  lie  on  their
backs:  which  fituation  of  body  lays  both  the  kidnies,  and  the  ureters,  under
a  -neceffity  of  being more comprefs'd, by  the  incumbent  weight  of  vif-

r^/J  Epift.  42.  n.  33.  0  Ad  §.387.

fe) Vid.  fupra  n.  3.  "(*)  ■^^'  "•  ^-  ^'^'  '•  '^^^-  '^M-

(fj  Ad  §.  365.  ibid.  cit.


Letter  XL. Article  5.  417

cera ;  and  the  more  frequent,  and  long-continued,  this  pofture  of  body  is,
fo  much  the  more  is  the  defcent  of  the  urine  prevented.

Thus  likewife,  when  you  read  a  certain  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Fan-
tonus  (i),  on  a  man  fubjedl  to  nephritic  pains,  efpecially  in  the  left  fide,  and
whofe  left  kidney,  which  was  twice  as  thick  as  it  naturally  is,  and  contain'd  two
calculi,  was  cover'd  over  "  with  a  certain  concreted  matter,  fimilar  to  lard,  in
"  one  part  as  thick  as  ones  little  finger  is  broad,  and,  in  another,  thicker
"  than  a  man's  thumb ;"  which,  however,  did  not  cover  the  other  kidney  j
you  will,  without  doubt,  readily  fuppofe  the  fat  to  have  been  injurious  in
that  cafe.  In  our  man  therefore,  to  whom  I  now  return,  the  calculus,  v/hich
"was  already  generated,  might  bring  on  both  the  pain  of  the  loins,  and  the
fupprelTion  of  urine ;  either  by  fhutting  up  the  upper  part  of  the  ureter,  or
the  beginning  of  the  urethra.

For  although  it  does  not  always  happen,  yet  frequently  it  does  at  lead,
that  when  one  kidney  is  affefted,  the  other  is  alfo  drawn  into  confent.  And
when  the  calculus  was  remov'd,  by  the  force  of  the  incumbent  urine,  and
thruft  down  into  the  lower  orifice  of  the  bladder,  the  pain  of  the  loins  might
continue,  neverthelefs,,  in  the  fame  manner  that  the  pain  of  the  kidnies  is,
fometimes,  wont  to  be  extended  towards  the  bladder  ;  that  is  to  fay,  by
means  of  the  ureters,  which  are,  on  one  hand,  continued  to  the  kidnies,  and,
on  the  other,  to  the  bladder  :  and,  when  the  bladder  can  admit  no  more
urine,  are  themfelves  diftended  therewith.  And  though  this  urine  fhould
be  drawn  off,  by  the  introduftion  of  a  catheter,  yet  how  foon  it  would  fill
the  bladder  again,  the  infpeftion  of  this  bladder,  after  the  death  of  the  pa-
tient, demonftrates.

But  if  you  imagine  that,  becaufe  the  ureters  feem'd  found,  no  calculus,
except  a  very  fmall  one,  had  pervaded  them,  and  they  had  not  been  diftended
■with  urine  •,  although  not  only  the  calculus  was  Imall,  but  the  diftention  of
Ihort  continuance ;  yet  you  may  eafiiy  conceive  of  their  being  afFefted,  by  the
calculus  fo  far  irritating  the  upper  part  of  the  urethra,  into  which  it  had  been
thruft,  that  the  blood,  in  the  firft  place,  afterwards  pus,  and,  laft  of  all
the  ill  fmell,  with  which  the  urine  was  infedled,  feem  to  have  been  owing
thereto ;  fince  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  fuppofe  the  blood,  or  the  pus,  to  have
been  difcharg'd  from  any  other  part  but  the  urethra,  though  we  do  not  read
of  its  having  been  laid  open.

Nor  do  we  read  that  the  brain  was  examin'd,  into  which  it  is  to  be  fup-
pos'd  that,  upon  the  fupprelTion  of  urine,  the  impure  ferum  had  been  dif-
charg'd from  the  blood ;  and,  being  grown  acrid  by  a  ftiorn  delay,  had
brought  on  that  epileptic  concufiion  and  death,  juft  as  it  did,  in  my  opinion,
in  the  two  perfons,  whofe  hiftories  you  have  in  the  twenty  fecond  feftion  of
the  Sepulchretum  (k) ;  which  you  fee  I  here  follow  ;  and  who  died,  in  like
manner,  from  ftones  of  the  kidnies,  and  a  fuppreflion  of  urine,  not  with-
out convulfions ;  to  omit  many  other  examples  of  an  apoplexy  itfelf  beino-
brought  on  by  a  fuppreflion  of  urine,  and  particularly  that  of  Koenigius  (/},
in  a  fenator  whofe  ureters  were  obftruded  with  calculi,  and  whofe  kidnies,

(?)  De  obf.  med.  &  anat.  epift.  8.  n.  14.  ("IJ  Lithogenef.  haman.  fpecim.  epill.  2.

(i)  L.  3.  obf.  2.  &obf.  13.  §. I.

Vol.  II.  H  h  h  but


41 8 '  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

bot  the  right  in  particular,  were  much  enkrg'd  beyond  their  natural  fize,
and  contain'd  a  great  quantity  of  finall  ftones  adhering  to  feveral  parts;  their
coats  being  dilated,  and  tumid  with  a  great  quantity  of  ferum.

6.  As  it  has  been  juft  fhown  that  a  pain  may  be  propagated  from  the  blad-
der to  the  loins,  it  would  be  proper  to  add,  on  this  occafion,  other  obferva-
tions  of  Valfalva's,  which  jointly  demonftrate  the  fame  thing  to  have  proceed-
ed from  fome  other  caufe  •,  if  it  did  not  feem  neceflary  to  ihow,  before  we
quit  the  fubjeft  of  the  kidnies,  that  the  pain  of  thefe  parts,  and  confequently
of  the  loins,  is  fometimes  to  be  imputed  to  a  caufe  which  lies  in  the  kidnies,
indeed,  but  is  not  a  calculus.  A  very  extraordinary,  but  not  incredible  caufe,
is  that  of  worms,  which  have  been  found,  not  only  in  the  kidnies  of  dogs,  but
in  thofe  of  men  alfo,  by  many  whom  Dominicus  de  Marinis  (m)  fpeaks  of  by
name_;  to  whom,  being  in  great  part  taken  notice  of  in  the  Sepulchretum
alfo  (n),  you  may  add  lome  others  refer'd  to  in  the  fame  book  (o)  ;  and  thofe,
befides,  that  are  written  of  by  Vallifneri  (p),  or  by  Alghifi  (q)  to  Vallifneri,
but  particularly  after  Redi,  Vallifneri  himfelf,  and  Charles  Drelincurt  (r). ^

Yet,  out  of  all  the  obfervers,  you  will  read  of  very  few,  and  thefe  fuch  as
were  not,  generally,  very  cautious  in  obferving,  who  afiert  that  they  had
feen  them  within  the  kidnies  even  of  human  bodies;  fo  that  if  we  did  not
know  that  they  have  certainly  been  found  in  dogs,  and  ferrets  or  weafels,
we  fhould,  perhaps,  in  part  call  their  obfervations  into  queftion,  and  in  part
explain  them  differently  -,  upon  calling  to  mind  that  oblong  and  round  poly-
pus, which  was  difcharg'd  from  the  urethra,  after  nephritic  pains,  and  had,
at  firft,  impos'd  upon  Sponius  (s),  by  the  appearance  of  a  worm.  In  pro-
portion, therefore,  as  the  number  of  certain  obfervations  is  more  increas'd  in
dogs,  it  becomes  ftill  fo  much  the  more  credible,  that  the  fame  thing  may
happen  in  men  alfo.  "With  this  view  I  fhall  defcribe  what  was  feen  by  Val-
falva,  much  in  the  fame  manner  as  happen'd  to  the  illuftrious  Van  Swieten
(0  alfo.

7.  Valfalva  had  open'd  a  dog,  for  the  fake  of  anatomical  experiment,
when  inftead  of  the  right  kidney,  he  found  a  body  which,  externally  indeed,
was  very  much  fimilar  to  the  kidney,  but  had  a  thin  glandular  cortex  be-
neath the  external  membrane ;  to  which  fome  fanguiferous  veflels  were
carried ;  and  under  this  cortex  a  cavity,  invefted  with  a  very  fmooth  mem-
brane, pierc'd  through  with  many  foramina,  which  went  to  this  cortex ;  fo
that  the  urine  feem'd  to  flow  from  thence,  through  thefe  foramina,  into  th§
cavity.  In  this  cavity  lay  a  worm  about  three  ells  long,  and  of  the  thicknefs
of  one  of  the  largeft  quills  which  we  ufe  for  writing.

8.  Redi  (u),  indeed,  found  worms  in  the  kidney,  that  were  thicker  than
this,  but  not  equally  long.  Kerckringius  (x)  and  I  have  found  them  of  an
ell  in  length,  Vallifneri  (y)  four  fpans,  and  Drelincurt  longer  than  tv/o  icQZ ;
fo  that  for  the  length  of  an  animal,  which  was  not  very  thick,  to  be  equal

{mj  Diflert.  de  re  monftr.  a  Capuc.  &  cast.  (.r)  Aft.  erud.  Lipf.  a.  1684.  m.  jun.

(«) Seft.  hac22.  obf.  23.  §.  5.  &  in  fchol.  ("/)  Com.  in  Boerhaav.  aph.  §.  11 34.

('oj  Ibid.  &in  additam.  ad  eand.  fed.  obf.  2.  (?i) Offervaz.  int.  agli  anim.  viv.  &  C2;t.

(/)  Confideraz.  int.  alia  generaz.  de'Vermi.  CxJ  Spicileg.  anat.  obf.  59.

CjJ  Opera  del  Vallifn.  torn.  i.  p.  5.  (j)  Confider.  cit.
()•)  Experim.  anat.  canicid.  3,  n*  10.  &  16.
&  canicid.  11.  n,  36,

to


Letter  XL. Article  8.  419

to  about  three  ells,  may  feem  very  furprizing,  unlefs  it  be  much  increas'd
after  death ;  as  I  have  abferv'd  to  happen  in  another  fpecies  of  worms  (a)  -,
and  as  Redi  has  obferv'd  may  eafily  happen  in  this ;  or  unlefs,  as  you  have  it
in  Drelincurt  {b),  there  were  two,  and  one  had  its  roftrum  or  fnout  very
clofely  fix'd  about  the  tail  of  the  other.

For  there  are  two  in  one  kidney,  fometimes,  of  unequal  length  indeed
Cc),  as  Redi  has  aifo  obferv'd  (i) ;  but  they  are  reprefented  of  an  equal  length
by  Blafius  (e),  and  thefe  from  an  emaciated  man  :  of  which  kind  we  read  in
Zacutus  (f)  that  another  was,  in  whofe  kidnics  worms,  of  a  white  colour,
are  faid  to  have  been,  but  very  confiderably  fhorter ;  whereas  they  were  red
in  the  obfer%'ation  of  Blafius ;  which  is  the  fame  colour  that  they  have  been
always  feen  to  be  of  in  dogs,  both  by  Redi,  and  Drelincurt :  the  former  of
whom  fometimes  found  them  alive,  the  latter  always  dead  ;  the  one  only  in
males,  and  on  the  right  fide,  the  other  in  a  woman  alfo,  and  on  the  left
fide.  Zacutus  has  faid  that  there  were  very  fevere  pains  in  the  loins :  which
Kerckringius,  and  Boirelius  (g)  teftify  even  to  have  been  fignified  in  dogs,
by  a  perpetual  howling ;  whereas  the  others,  whom  I  have  mention'd  by
name,  fay  nothing  of  it.

As  to  what  remains  in  refpefl  to  the  origin  of  thefe  worms  •,  as,  for  Inftancc,
whether  thofe  in  dogs  are  of  that  redifli  kind  which  I  have  defcrib'd  formerly
(i),  as  being  fometimes  found  in  certain  tubercles,  not  far  from  the  kidnies,
and  which  have  fometimes  pafs'd  over  into  the  kidnies,  after  the  tubercles
were  eroded  ;  in  fo  great  an  inequality  of  length  it  is  not  eafy  for  me  to  de-
termine, unlefs  1  were,  previoufly,  more  certainly  inform'd  of  the  ftru£burc
of  each.  Blafius,  indeed,  has  defcrib'd,  and  reprefented  in  a  figure,  the
renal  worms  found  by  him,  as  confifting  "  of  a  great  number  of  fmall  rings,
"  curioufly  join'd  together ;"  but  I  fliould  fuppofe  that  the  engraver  had
added  a  double  head,  and  eyes,  to  that  pidture,  from  his  own  imagination.
Vallilneri  obferves  that  the  one  he  faw  was  not  of  the  broad-worm  fpecies,
as  it  was  rather  round  ;  but  yet  that  it  was  not  of  any  different  kind,  which
other  authors,  as  far  as  he  knew,  had  ever  found  to  be  contain'd  within  the
inteftines.

This  remark  of  Vallifneri  renders  the  account  of  their  ftrufture,  given  us
by  Redi,  very  doubtful  •,  inafmuch  as  he  reprefents  it  to  be  almoft  in  com-
mon with  the  round  worms  of  the  inteftines,  as  defcrib'd  by  this  very  author
himfelf ;  to  pais  by  thofe  circumftances,  which  Vallifneri  (i)  has  remark'd  to
differ  entirely  from  this  defcription.  But  though  all  the  circumftances,  re-
lating to  renal  worms,  fhould  be  pretty  certain  and  conftant,  yet  the  fmall-
nefs  of  thofe  which  are  in  thefe  tubercles  of  dogs,  would  render  the  necef-
fary  comparifon  of  their  internal  ftrufture  very  difficult.  Leaving  this  la-
bour, however,  to  others  who  have  more  leifure  upon  their  hands  than  I  have,
I  go  on,  in  the  mean  while,  as  I  have  promis'd,  to  other  hiftories  of  Valfalva,

(c)  Epift.  anat.  14.  n.  47.  C/J  Sepulchr.  feft.  hac.  23.  obf.  23.  §.  5.

CiJ  Canicid.  cit.  3.  n.  16.  CgJ  In  additam.  ad  eand.  feft.  obf.  2.

("cj  Ibid.  n.  II.  (/:>)  Epift.  anat.  9.  n.  44.  &  feq.

('dj  Oflervaz,.  cit.  (/) Miglioramenti d'akune ojrervaz. del.

{e)  P.  6.  obf.  med.  12.  tab.  9.  fig.  6  &  7.  Redin.  13.

H  h  h  2  wJierein


420  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

wherein  he  has  obfcrv'd  the  pain  of  the  loins  from  caul'cs  fuuated  on  the  out-
fide  of  the  kidnies.

9.  A  virgin,  of  about  four  and  twenty  years  of  age,  falling  from  a  high
place,  was  feiz'd  with  an  oppreffive  pain  in  her  loins,  and  a  fever.  Both  of
thefe  fympcoms  grew  fomewhat  mild.  But  both  of  them  grew  violent  again
after  fome  days  ;  a  fenfe  of  weight  in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  being  alio
added  •,  together  with  a  vomiting  of  a  matter  fon'jetimes  green,  and  fometimes
blackifli ;  the  fame  being  difcharg'd  downwards  by  ftool ;  and  in  this  manner
Ihe  died.

While  the  belly  was  open'd  a  fanies  immediately  fiow'd  out,  which  being-
collc(5led  in  fponges,  weigh'd,  when  put  all  together,  about  eight  pounds.
The  inteftines  were  connedted,  one  to  another,  by  the  external  coat,  yet  in
fuch  a  manner  that  a  pretty  thick  fanies  lay  hid  in  their  interftices.  How-
ever, the  inteftines  themfelves,  and  the  ftomach,  fhow'd  no  diforder  inter-
nally. The  liver  was  whitifh,  and  had  a  very  thick  fanious  matter  adhering
to  it  externally.  But  the  omentum  being  annex'd  to  the  peritonseum  on  the
left  fide,  towards  the  iliac  region,  difcover'd  an  ulcer  in  that  part.

10.  Whatever  the  reafon  was,  why  the  internal  paries  of  the  belly,  to-
wards the  iliac  region,  was  hurt  by  that  fall,  there,  without  doubt,  fo  large
an  abfcefs  was  generated,  as  to  difcharge  this  great  quantity  of  fanies.  When
pus  is  form'd,  that  happens  which  we  learn  from  the  aphorifm  of  Hippo-
crates (k) ;  I  mean  that  "pains  and  fevers"  naturally  become  fomewhat
milder.  But  the  frefh  exacerbation  of  thefe  fymptoms  fignified  the  rupture
of  the  abfcefs ;  as  the  effufion  of  pus  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  was  fhown
by  the  fenfe  of  weight  in  that  cavity.  But  you  will  not  enquire  after  the
caufe  of  pain  in  the  loins,  when  you  call  to  mind  the  feat  of  the  abfcefs  -,  as
it  was  in  that  part  of  the  abdomen,  which  verg'd  to  the  iliac  region  ;  for  the
fibres  of  the  tranfverfe  mufcles,  which  are  in  this  very  part,  take  their  origin,
as  you  very  well  know,  from  the  vertebrse  of  the  loins  :  and  that  pains
ihould  be  felt  at  the  extremities  of  the  mufcles  (efpecially  when  they  are  tied
very  ftrongly  to  the  bone)  when  their  fibres  fufFer  diftradlion,  and  erofion,
need  not  be  any  great  matter  of  furprize.

11.  Being  about  to  add,  in  this  place,  other  obfervations  of  Valfalva,  of
pains  raging  in  the  fame  place,  even  from  a  caufe  plac'd  on  the  outfid?  of  the
belly  and  abdomen,  it  comes  into  my  mind,  that  I  have  already  defcrib'd
them  to  you,  in  a  former  letter  (I)  ;  and  that  from  the  connexion  of  the  ap*
pendages  of  the  diaphragm,  the  aftion  of  a  caufe,  which  lay  hid  in  the
thorax,  I  mean  its  aftion  upon  thefe  appendages,  was  explain'd  :  to  which
clafs  alfo,  perhaps  the  obfervation  of  Jacotius,  that  is  to  be  met  with  in  one
of  the  following  feclions  of  the  Sepulchretum  («),  belongs.  And  if  a  caufe
that  lies  on  the  outfide  of  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  is  able  to  do  this;  how
much  more  will  thofe,  which  lie  either  in  the  loins  themfelves,  or  in  fome
part  of  the  belly  that  lies  near  to  the  loins,  or  is  connefted  to  them,  be  able
to  efifedt  the  fame  ?

You  will  fee  thefe  caufes  particularly  and  fully  recounted,  in  the  Encheiri-
dion  of  Riolanus,  in  that  chapter  from  whence  they  are  transfer'd  into  this.

- {i)  47.  fed.  n,  (/)  Epift,  16,  n.  40  &  41.  (ot)  25  obf.  14.

twenty-


Letter  XL. Article 12.  42 r

twenty-fecond  fe6lion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  in  the  fcholia  to  the  firft  obfer-
vation  which  is  mark'd  with  the  number  thirty-eight ;  for  the  fame  number-
is  through  carelefTnefs  repeated  :  and  you  will  fee  moft  of  them  confirm'd,  in
the  fame  fedtion,  by  examples  •,  as  from  a  rheumatifm  of  the  loins,,  in  obfer^-
vation  the  tv/enty-ninth  ;  from  ferum  in  the  tube  of  the  lumbar  vcrtebrs,,
in  obfervation  the  thirty-third:  from  the  erofion  of  thefe  vertebrs,  in  obfer-
vation  the  thirty-fifth,  and  fortieth  :  from  fmall  ftones,  or  if  you  choofe  ra-
ther to  have  it  fo,  from  fmall  bones  in  the  lumbar  arteries,  in  obfervation  the
thirty-firft:  from  diforders  of  the  mefentery,  in  the  fecond  thirty-eighth  ob-
fervation, the  thirty-ninth^  and  forty-firft,  article  the  firft,  fecond,  fifth,
fixth,  and  ninth,  and  obfervation  the  firft  in  the  additamenta:  from  diforders
■  of  the  uterus,  in  obfervation  the  forty-firft,  article  the  fourth :  from  an  ul-
cerated fcirrhus  of  the  inteftinum  ileum,  in  obfervation  the  thirty-fecorld  r
and,  to  omit  others  at  prefent,  from  diforders  of  the  pancreas,  in  obfervatioa
the  twenty-fifth,  and  the  fecond  thirty-eighth,  and  in  the  forty-firft,  article
the  third  :  and  I  ftiould  likewife  add  article  the  feventh,  if  it  were  not  the
fame  ;  as  article  the  fixth  and  eighth  are  the  fame  with  thofe  obfervations  that.
are  juft  now  refer'd  to  ;  the  twenty-fifth,  and  thirty-eighth  ;  which  are  here
repeated  through  forgetfulnefs.  And  the  pancreas  not  only  affedls  the  neigh-
bouring vertebrse,  even  of  itfelf,  but  more  frequently  than  many  phyficians.
imagine  ;  as  is  rightly  obferv'd  by  Francifcus  Sylvius  («)  •,  by  the  juice  which  it
then  fends,  in  a  preternatural  ftate,  as  the  liver  does  alio,  into  the  duodenum^
that  lies  in  contadt  with,  and  connefted  to,  the  fame  vertebras,  and  the  right
kidney,  from  whence  arifes  a  various  fenfe  of  pain  in  many  of  thefe  vertebrae,,
but  particularly  a  fenfe  of  burning  pain ;  which  is  frequently  imputed  to  the
kidnies,  without  any  caufe.

But  we  muft  now  return  to  the  kidnies  themfelves,  and  firft  as  being  af-
fefted  with  calculi,  if  you  are  willing  I  fliould  communicate  to  you.  my  own,
obfervations,  in  the  fame  order  I  have  communicated  Valfalva's,  according  tO'
my  promife :  altho'  as  thofe  which  are  more  remarkable,  are  to  be  defer'd  to.
other  letters,  for  certain  reafons,  as  you  will  then  fee,  I  ftiall  here  fubjoin  one
only ;  which,  though  deficient  in  the  hiftory  of  the  peculiar  fymptoms  that
had  preceded,  is  not  altogether  without  its  utility  neverthelefs.

12.  A  woman  had  died  in  the  hofpital  at  Padua,  when  ftie  was  already
in  the  feventh  month  of  her  pregnancy  ;.  it  being  then  the  month  of  March  in
the  year  1708.

The  belly  therefore,  and  the  uterus,  v/ere  immediately  open'd  after  death,,
and  the  fbetus  taken  out  alive,  though  it  died  foon  after,  at  which  time,.
happening  to  be  at  Padua,  1  took  the  cervix  of  the  uterus,  which  was  even
then  found,  and  the  kidnies,  in  order  to  make  fome  accurate  obfervations
upon  them.  It  is  to  little  purpofe  to  take  notice  here  at  large,  of  a  quantity
of  mucus  within  the  cervix  uteri,  and  of  veficles  which,  were  pregnant  there-
with, very  confpicuous  both  in  number  and  magnitude,  that  cover'd  the  fur-
face  of  the  OS  uteri. But  the  kidnies  deferve  to  be  defcrib'd.

For  the  left,  being  larger  than  the  magnitude  of  body  requir'd,  fhow  its
fmall canals  to  be  thicker  than  they generally  are ;  and,  for  that  reafon,,

PiJ  Yid.  extrema  fcholia  ad  cit..  obf.  38.  primam.

5  ver;^^


4-2  2  Book  III. OfDifeaies  of  the  Belly.

very  evident  to  all  thofe  who  happea'd  to  be  prcfent :  on  the  other  hand,  the
right  was  lb  much  diniinifli'd  in  its  (ize,  as  not  to  exceed  the  bigncfs  and
thicknels  of  the  rcn  Ibccenturiatus  ;  and  to  the  fmallnefs  of  this  kidney,  the
ureter,  and  the  emulgent  veflels,  correfponded.  And  that  you  may  not  fup-
pofe  it  to  have  been  thus  from  the  original  formation  of  the  body,  it  was
of  a  colour  which  ihow'd  it  to  be  morbid  ;  and  had  ftiil  the  tubuli  which  are
wont  to  receive  the  papillce,  but  contrafted  in  their  diameter,  and  the  re-
maining fubftance  reduc'd  almoft  to  nothing  :  fo  that  if  you  took  away  a
calculus,  which  was  not  at  all  red,  and  not  at  all  of  a  faffron  colour,  and
which  lay  in  the  kidney,  and  a  calculous  matter  here  and  there,  fcarcely  any
thing  would  remain.

13.  As  to  what  I  have  faid,  that  this  obfervation  could  not  be  without  its
utility  •,  I  would  have  you  underftand  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  fuppofe  t  hat
it  gives  us  occafion  of  examining  many  things  which  have  been  afferted  by
phyficians,  when  tliey  have  treated  of  calculi,  and  other  diforders  of  the
kidney  ;  as  appears  even  from  that  twenty-fecond  feclion  of  the  Sepulchre-
turn.

.  And  firft,  although  it  happen'd  to  Coitcrus  (o)  to  find  "  the  right  kidney
"  more  liable  to  ulceration  than  the  left,"  and  tho'  it  happen'd  fo  in  our  wo-
man alfo,  yet  if  you  run  over  this  whole  feftion,  you  will  find  that  out  of  the
kidnies,  the  fubilances  of  which  had  been  ulcerated,  orconfum'd,  the  num-
ber is  greater  on  the  left  fide,  than  on  the  right :  and  indeed  if  the  more  fre-
quent caufe  of  ulceration  is  to  be  fought  after  in  calculi,  thefe  are,  in  the
opinion  of  Boerhaave  (p)^  lefs  frequent  in  the  right :  nor  have  learned  men
fail'd  to  affign  a  reafon  for  this  difference  {q)  •,  I  mean,  becaufe  the  blood  is
carried  back,  from  the  right  kidney,  much  the  moft  eafily,  on  account  of  the
emulgent  vein  being  fliorter,  and  more  at  liberty.

And  though  difi^erent  authors  have  accounted  for  it  differently,  yet  in  the
fact  itfelf  all  agree ;  as  Frederic  Hoffmann  ("r),  and  ftill  more  Carolus  Piib
(jj,  whom  he  quotes,  and  who  fays,  in  exprels  words,  that  "  out  of  a  hun-
dred who  labour  under  a  nephritis  from  calculi,  more  "  than  eighty  are
"  affedled  in  the  left  kidney,  as  is  prov'd  by  experience  •,"  or  indeed  "  in  al-
"  moft  all  nephritic  patients  •,....  which  is,"  fays  he,  (/)  "  an  obfervation
"  made  by  Dodonfeus,  as  well  as  by  mylelf."

Therefore,  although  in  turning  over  thofe  of  the  volumes  of  the  Casfarean
Academy,  from  which  I  am  wont  chiefly  to  take  examples  in  thefe  letters,
you  will  light  on  fome  obfervations,  that  either  defcribe  (u)  both  of  the
kidnies,  as  equally  confum'd,  internally,  from  calculi ;  or  (xj  the  right  only
as  being  opprefs'd  with  them  ;  or  {y)  if  both  of  them,  the  right  by  far  the
molt;  yet  you  will  have  fo  many  of  the  others,  that  are  proper  to  be  oppos'd
to  thefe,  and  indeed  fome  out  of  the  fame  volumes ;  as,  for  inftance,  where
(z)  they  defcribe  calculi  in  the  left  kidney  only,  or,  if  in  both  of  them,  ei-

(0)  Obf.  23.  §.  3.  (/)  Inpraf.  paulo  ante  theor.  4.

{f)  Prxleft.  ad  inftit.  §.  352.  \u)  Dec.  3.  a.  5.  obf.  33.

\q']  Via.  Haller.  not.  g  ad  eund.  loc.  (x) Aft.  t.  i.  obf.  20.  &  247.

^r)  Medic,  rat.  t.  4.  p.  2.  f.  2.  c.  6, in  thef. \y)  Cent.  i.  obf.  27.  &  cent.  5.  obf  45.
pathoI.  §.  6.  (a)  Ibid  in  appen.  n.  i.

(s)  Obf.  de  morbis  a  fer.  colluv, f.  4.  c.  2.
poft.  obf.  100.

4  ther


Letter  XL. Article  14.  423

ther  (a)  more,  or  (I>)  larger,  and  fuch  as  more  confiderably  affefted  the  left
kidney  than  the  right ;  in  one  of  which  obfervations  you  will,  by  the  way,
remark  this,  that  Ibme  parts  of  thofe  calculi  were  "  of  a  chryftalline  hard-
nefs,  and  a  fhining  fmoothnefs,"  or  "  pellucid."

From  the  fame  books  you  will  have  examples  (c)  of  the  left  kidney  only
being  much  increas'd  in  its  fize,  though  internally  eroded,  or  affected  with
fome  other  diforder,  or  of  the  left  much  more  than  the  right  :  and  thefe
things  will  be,  in  like  manner,  confirm'd  by  two  obfervations  of  purulent
kidnies,  propos'd  by  the  celebrated  Cofchwitz  (d).  But  enough  of  examples
at  prefenc :  I  therefore  purpofely  pafs  over  others  (among  which  is  even  that
refer'd  to  above  (e),  from  the  celebrated  Fantonus)  except  one  which  that
author  has  mention'd  (/)  from  the  obfervation  of  du  Verney  •,  as  it  ought
not  to  be  pafs'd  over,  in  order  that  a  rare  caufe  of  a  purulent  difcharge,  by
ftool,  may  be  underftood.  That  is  to  fay,  pus  proceeded  from  the  inteftinum
colon,  which  was  eroded  by  an  ulcer  of  a  neighbouring  part.  And  this  part
was  the  left  kidney.

From  thefe  things  that  have  been  faid,  you  fee,  fome  advantage  may  be
drawn,  when  dubious  fymptoms  of  a  renal  diiorder  difcover  themfelves,  as
frequently  happens.  For  if  to  others,  this  alfo  be  added,  that  they  are  on
the  left  fide,  they  will  become  lefs  dubious,  than  if  they  were  on  the  right
fide,

14.  Euftachius  (g),  moreover,  having  found,  in  Bonifacio  Corneo,  one  of
the  kidnies  to  be  fcarcely  equal  to  a  fmall  chefnut  in  magnitude,  and  the
other  large ;  but  the  former  found,  and  the  latter  purulent,  as  well  as  turgid
with  calculi,  and  fanious  matter  ;  fuppos'd  that  the  finallnefs  of  the  former
was  owing  to  a  deficiency  of  blood :  inafmuch  as  this  fluid  was  carried  in  the
greateft  quantity  into  the  other,  where  it  was  drawn  by  the  force,  and  ftimu-
lus,  of  the  difeafe.  If  the  fmall  kidney  was  really  found,  and  the  fmallnefs
of  it  did  not  hide  the  traces  of  old  difeafes,  it  is  not  to  be  wonder'd  at,  that
this  great  man  was  oblig'd  to  have  recourie  to  that  explication.

But  others  are  better  fatisfied  with  a  contrary  explication,  where  the  leffer
kidney  is  morbid,  as  I  am  alfo,  in  the  cafe  of  the  woman  in  queftion.  The
kidney  being  contrafted,  the  veflels  of  it  are  contradled  alfo,  as  we  have  feen
in  the  prefent  cafe.  What  blood,  therefore,  cannot  now  be  carried  into  this
kidney,  is  diverted  into  the  other  by  the  oppofite  artery  •,  and,  by  this  unufual
flow  of  blood,  the  oppofite  kidney  is  diftended.  And  I  believe  that  the  con^
tradlion  of  the  one,  and  its  veflels,  and  the  diftention  of  the  other,  may  be,,
fometimes,  fo  far  increas'd,  that  the  latter  may  grow  out  into  a  very  great
bulk,  and  the  former  may  feem  never  to  have  exifted.

That  is  to  fay,  the  found  kidney,  if  it  be  firm,  is  not  more  increas'd  than
the  influx  of  blood  requires  ;  which  mufl:  depofit  the  fame  quantity  of  fluid  in'
one  kidney,  that  was  before  depofited  in  both.  But  if  it  be  pretty  lax  in  its
nature,  and  a  difeafe  is  added  to  that  laxity, it  is  fcarcely  to  be  conceiv'd  how

{a)  Dec.  3.  a.  3.  obf.  122.  (J)  Diflert.  de  Viilvulis  in  ureterih.  §.  5&7.

{i)  Ibid.  a.  7.  &  8.  obf.  122.  cum  figuris.  (e)  Vid.  fupra  n.  j.

fcj  Cent/  8.  obf.  100.  &  cent.  9.  obi".  64.  &  ('fj  Anat.  corp.  hum.  diff.  4.

aft.  torn.  7/append.  n.  10.  &  eorund.  torn.  8.  [g)  Sefl.  hac  22.  obf.  16.
•bf.  89. *

great


424  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

great  an  increafe  it  may  fometimes  acquire.  This  is  fliown  by  that  kidney,
which  the  celebrated  Valcarenghus  (!>)  found  to  be  ten  times  larger  than
its  natural  fize,  and  ftill  more  by  that  v/hich  is  taken  notice  of  in  the  hiftory
of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (i),  and  which  weigh'd  thirty-
five  pounds  ;  to  fay  nothing  here  of  another,  which  was  twice  as  heavy  as  the
Lift,  and  indeed  more  than  twice,  and  which  the  celebrated  Fantonus  (k)  has
taken  notice  of,  from  the  obfervation  of  Monginotius.  On  the  other  hand,
I  have  a  fufpicion  that  the  kidney  has  been  contrafted  by  difeafe,  and  even  fo
attenuated,  and  confum'd  ;  in  thofe  who  have  labour'd  under  pains  of  the
kidney,  from  calculi,  and  other  dilbrders  -,  as  to  make  learned  men  think  that
they  were  originally  deficient :  as,  for  inftance,  in  a  woman,  a  man,  and  a
girl,  v/hofe  hillories  you  may  fee  in  the  Sepulchretum  (I).  For;  to  omit  the
man,  1  mean  that  merchant,  the  obfervation  of  whom  is  once  and  again  refer'd
to  in  this  feftion,  through  carelelTnefs  •,  in  the  girl,  although  not  the  leaft
appearance  of  filaments,  or  membranes,  occupied  the  place  of  the  right  kid-
ney •,  yet  that  place  was  taken  up  by  the  ureter,  which  ftill  went  down  to  the
bladder,  from  the  trunk  of  the  vena  cava,  to  which  it  feem'd  to  have  been  ag-
glutinated, after  the  kidney  was  confum'd :  and  in  the  woman,  inftead  of
the  right  kidney,  was  feen  "  a  certain  kind  of  involucrum,"  the  membrane,
as  1  fuppofe,  which,  when  the  fubftance  of  the  kidney  is  already  confum'd,  is
taken  notice  of  as  remaining  behind  in  the  fhape  of  a  purfe,  or  bag,  by
fuch  a  number  of  obfervers  (n).

But  I  ftiould  fuppofe  the  kidney  to  have  been  deficient  from  the  original
formation,  as  Ariftode  obferv'd  even  formerly  (o)^  in  thofe  perfons  where  no
diforders  of  the  kidnies  have  preceded  •,  and  no  veftige  or  traces,  either  of  its
emulgent  veflels,  or  the  ureter,  exifts  •,  as  was  the  cafe  in  the  little  girl  dif-
fered by  Poupart  (p),  and  in  the  prieft,  and  woman,  differed  by  Valfalva,
each  of  whofe  hiftories  I  have  already  given  you  (q)  :  or  if  any  trace  did  exifts,
fome  other  particular  things  were  not  wanting,  which  fhow'd  that  the  kidney
never  had  exifted  -,  as  in  that  woman,  the  kidney  of  the  other  fide  was  not
only,  as  in  that  little  girl,  larger  than  it  ufually  is,  but  twice  as  large  as  its
natural  fize :  and  befides  this,  furnifli'd  with  a  double  pelvis,  and  double
ureter  •,  fo  that  it  feem'd  to  have  been  form'd  from  the  beginning,  with  an  in-
tention to  fupply  the  funflions  of  its  abfent  fellow.

In  a  whelp  which  I  diiledted  at  Bologna,  in  the  month  of  February,  in  the
year  1702,  I  obferv'd  another  thing-,  from  whence,  although  neither  the
ureter,  nor  the  emulgent  vefiels  were  wanting,  I  fliould,  neverthelefs,  con-
jecture the  kidney  to  have  besri  wanting  from  the  original  formation.  For
when,  inftead  of  the  right  kidney,  I  had  found  nothing  but  fat,  which,  in  fome
meafure,  refembled  it,  both  in  bulk,  and  figure  ■,  and  the  ureter,  indeed,
join'd  with  the  bladder,  but  folid  like  a  ligament ;  and,  a  little  before  it
reach'd  to  that  fat,  fuddenly  feparated  into  flender  and  pinguedinous  ftrise,

(h)  Diflert.  de  faxis,  acub.  &  ca;t,  («)  Vid. ex.  grat. fe£l.  hac  22.  omnes  §.

(/■)  A.  1732.  obf.  ana:.  7.  obf.  5.

(/•)  De  obf.  med.  &  anat.  epift.  8.  in  fin.  (0)  De  general,  animal.  1.  4.  c.  4.  art.  2.

(/)  Sea.  cit.  obf.  23.  §.  4.  fed.  27.  obf.  I. }f)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  fc.  a.  1700.  obf.

feft.  28.  in  additam.  obf.  2.  anat.  1. ^

(ot)  Obf.  23.  §.  12.  &  obf.  27.  §.  6.  (j)  Epift.  25.  n.  4.  &  epift.  31.  n.  25.

which


'  Letter  XL. Article  15.  425

which  accompanied  the  fanguiferous  veffels ;  and  had  feen  that  the  emul-
gent  artery,  in  like  manner,  was  not  wanting  on  that  fide,  but  much
more  fmall  than  it  commonly  is ;  and  when  it  had  fent  out  a  branch  of  no  in-
■confiderable  fize,  going  away  into  fmall  ramifications,  which  only  crept
through  the  furface  of  the  defcrib'd  fat :  when,  therefore,  I  had  feen  thefe
things,  I  obferv'd  that  the  emulgent  vein,  on  the  fame  fide,  although  in
thicknefs  it  fomewhat  exceeded  the  oppofite,  did  not,  however,  receive  any
ramifications  coming  from  that  fat,  or  at  leaft  any  that  were  obvious  to  the
fenfes ;  as  I  examin'd  the  whole  of  this  pinguedinous  body  with  great  care ;
but  that  it  received  a  branch  from  the  neareft  lobe  of  the  liver,  fo  thick  in  its
fize,  that  even  the  left  emulgent  icfelf  feem'd  to  be  thinner  than  this.

From  this  circumftance  it  was  natural  to  conjedture,  that  the  right  emul-
gent vein  had  not  been  created  for  the  fake  of  the  kidney,  in  this  whelp,  but
for  the  fake  of  the  liver ;  efpecially  as  it  was  in  a  creature  who  was  very
found,  and  healthy,  and  in  whom  every  thing  elfe  was  agreeable  to  the  ufual
courfe  of  nature ;  except  that  the  left  kidney  was  larger  than  in  proportion  to
the  fize  of  the  body,  inafmuch  as  this  was  under  a  neceffity  of  fecfeting  the
whole  of  the  urine-,  for  which  reafon  the  fmall  canals  thereof  were  alfo  much
thicker,  and  more  evident,  as  I  defcrib'd  in  the  woman.

15.  To  return  therefore  from  the  conftitution  of  thefe  parts,  which  is  the
efFeft  of  original  formation,  to  that  which  is  from  difeafe,  and  to  the  difcourfe
I  had  begun ;  I  fliould  fuppofe  that  the  magnitude  of  the  found  kidney  is
increas'd  by  the  wafl;ing  of  the  other,  in  much  the  fame  manner  as  I  juftnow
advanc'd  ;  for  in  the  obfervations  of  Kerckringius,  for  example  fake,  or
Drelincurt,  already  taken  notice  of  {r)  \  as  one  kidney  was  deftroy'd  by  a
worm,  and  the  other  larger  than  it  ought  to  be ;  there  cannot  be  room  for
the  explication  of  Euftachius.

But  as  we  fee  it  fo  often  happen,  that  one  kidney  not  fecreting,  or  not  emit-
ting, urine,  by  reafon  of  its  being  corrupted,  or  on  account  of  obftrudling
calculi,  is  fupplied  by  the  other,  and  that  this  is  confirm'd  by  the  very  in-
creafe  of  it ;  it  is  evident  that  Guy  Patin  had  with  reafon  aflerted,  as  you
will  read  in  the  Sepulchretum  (j),  the  frequent  fallibility  of  this  fuppofition,
that  when  one  kidney  is  obftrudled  the  other  immediately  ceafes  from  its
office:  which  he  has  alfo  prov'd  by  his  own  obfervations,  and  it  is  eafy  like-
wife  to  conceive,  from  the  obfervations  of  fcveral  authors ;  and  among  thefe,
to  omit  a  great  number  of  others,  thofe  of  Gregory  Horftius  (t)^  and  Tho-
mas Bartholin  (n).

If  in  reading  over  the  hiftories  of  Guy  Patin,  and  Bartholin,  you  Ihould
be  furpriz'd  that,  although  there  was  a  large  and  angular  calculus  in  the
kidney,  no  pain  had  been  wont  to  be  perceiv'd  there ;  you  will  be  furpriz'd
ftill  more,  if  you  look  into  other  obfervations,  from  which  it  appears,  that
there  neither  had  been  this  pain,  nor  any  other  of  the  great  number  of  fymp-
toms  attending  renal  calculi,  through  the  whole  courle  of  life,  in  fome  per-
fonswho  had  thefe  calculi;  fome  of  which  obfervations  are  in  the  fame  part  of
the  Sepulchretum  (;;;),  where  thole  are  that  I  refer'd  to  from  Bartholin  \  but

(r)  Supra,  n.  8.  (r/)  Ibid.  obf.  24.  §.  2.

(j)  Seft.  hac.  22.  in  fchol.  ad  obf.  14.  (x)  Obf.  ead.  §.  i.  ■%.  4.

(/)  Ibid,  obf  19.  '

Vol.  II.  1  i  i  others


426  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

others  may  be  added  befides ;  as,  for  in  [lance,  that  which  is  extant  in  the
hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (y)  ;  although  in  this
man,  neverthelefs,  vomitings  were  not  wanting,  wherewith  he  was  attack'd
at  intervals  ;  and  that,  in  hke  manner,  which  I  am  furpriz'd  has  not  been
already  added,  inafmuch  as  it  was  pubhfli'd  in  the  pofthumous  work  of  Mal-
pighi  {z).

But  the  caufe  why  fome  one  fymptom  only,  and  fometimes  none  appears,
may  indeed  be  manifold  ;  as,  for  inftance,  when  ftones,  although  of  a  con-
fiderable  magnitude,  are  naturally,  or  by  chance,  "  pierc'd  through  in  the
middle  like  a  ring"  (for  thus  we  ought  to  read  the  words  of  Euflachius,
\vhich  are  transfer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  (a),  in  an  improper  manner,
where  they  are  confirm'd  by  an  excellen-t  obfervation  of  the  fame  author's)  a
fuppreffion  of  urine  does  not  happen,  as  it  will  not  happen  likewife,  if  a  paf-
fage  for  the  urine,  through  fmall  canals,  as  it  were,  in  the  fides  of  the  calculi
themfelves,  be  left  open;  as  appears  in  the  next  hiftory  of  Salmuthus  {b),  and
flill  more  c]early,,-as  the  defcription  is  illuftrated  by  a  figure,  in  that  which
Lancifi  communicated  to  Alghifi  {c).  Nor  will  there  be  a  troublefome  fenfa-
tion  in  the  loins,  not  even  of  heavinefs,  if  the  calculi  increafe  gradually  and
flowly,  and  have  not  fliarp  angles  ;  or  if  they  adhere  fo  clofely,  and  are  fo
wedg'd  in,  to  the  fubftance  of  the  kidney,  that  they  cannot  be  mov'd ;'  efpe-
cially  if  that  fubftance  be  hard  and  callous,  as  I  fhall  tell  you,  hereafter  (d%
that  it  was  in  the  cardinal  Cornell;  and  as  it  was  alio  in  that  man  of  whom  I
made  mention  juft  now,  from  the  hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences,
Jn  whom  it  was  found  to  be  cartilaginous.

But  it  was  alfo  hard,  in  another  whofe  defcription  I  have  faid  is  extant  in
Malpighi.  And  in  thefe  there  are,  in  general,  no  other  marks  of  that  difeafe.
And  what  was  the  caufe  of  this  circumftance  in  him  whofe  obfervation  is
given  by  Guarinoni  {e),  does  not  fufficiently  appear  from  the  difledion  ;  as  it
likewife  does  not  in  two  others  (/),  and  in  the  firft,  in  particular ;  both  of
■which,  nevertheleis,  fhow  each  of  the  kidnies  to  have  been  ftuff'd  up  with
calculi,  and  particularly  the  left.  Yet  what,  and  of  what  kind,  thofe  marks
are,  for  the  moft  part,  wont  to  be,  from  the  prefence  of  which,  calculi  of  the
kidnies  are  properly  diftinguifh'd,  although  you  know  very  well  of  yourfelf
already  ;  it  will,  neverthelefs,  be  of  ufe  to  enquire,  over  again,  in  the  writ-
ings of  the  celebrated  Scharfchmidius  [g);  for  he  fubjoins  examples  by  which
he  confirms,  that  moft  of  them,  or  even  all  of  them,  may  be  abfent  fome^
times,  fo  that  the  phyficians  may  have  an  eye  to  another  difeafe,  and  may  by
no  means  fufpe6l  that  calculi  are  in  the  kidnies.

Moreover,  it  is  needlefs  to  admonifh,  that  caufes  may  arife,  on  account  of
which,  the  pain  that  was  before  even  very  fharp,  in  the  kidney,  may  ceafe  :
that  is  in  confequence  of  the  fmall  nervous  branches  being  either  become  in-
capable of  feeling  acutely,  or  being  confum'd  •,  as  is  underftood  from  the
fixth  obfervation  of  this  feftion. And  as  this  is  the  ftate  of  the  queftion,

(y)  A.  1730.  obf.  anat.  3.  {d)  Epift.  57.  n.  10.

(z)  Ubi  de  renib.  \e)  Sepulcnr.  1.  2.  f.  1.  in  additam.  obf.  10.

(a)  Eeit.  cit.  obf.  12.  §.  i.  (f)  Afl.  n.  c.  torn.  2.  in  append,  n. 3.  &

{b)  Ibid.  §.  2.  Commerc.  Litter,  a.  1745-  hebd.  11.  n.  I.

(f)  Lithotom.  e.  4.  &  tab.  4.  (g)  Ibid.  a.  1739-  hebd  31.  n.  i.

5  it


Letter  XL. Article  i6.  427

k  appears  of  how  much  importance  it  is  to  enquire  what  fymptoms  have
preceded  in  patients  ;  and  if,  at  any  time,  no  peculiar  fymptom  of  a  renal
calculus  exifts,  not  for  that  reafon  to  defpil'e  the  (lighter  fymptoms,  or  thofe
which  are  alfo  common  to  other  diforders.  But  my  obfervations  of  this  dii-
eafe  being  found  in  dead  bodies,  will  better  teach  us  this,  though  they  are
defer'd  to  other  letters  for  this  reafon;  becaufe  it  does  not  feem  fo  proper  to
give  them  here,  v/here  the  queftion  is  of  pain  in  the  loins ;  as,  in  theie  patients,
no  pain  of  the  loins  had  difcover'd  itfelf

16.  But  as  to  what  I  have  faid,  that,  in  the  kidney  of  the  woman  defcrib'd
by  me,  the  calculus  was  neither  of  a  faffron  colour,  nor  red  •,  and  as  to  my
having  taken  notice  to  you,  in  another  letter  (b),  that  three  white  ones  were
found  by  me;  it  is,  without  doubt,  contradi£tory  to  that  diftinftion,  which
was  formerly  receiv'd  by  every-one  •,  fuppofing  that  ftones  generated  in  the
kidnies,  were  to  be  known  from  thofe  generated  in  the  bladder  by  one  or
other  of  thefe  two  colours.  To  whom,  you  fee  in  the  Sepulchrctum  (/),  that
Eullachius  has  objefted  this  obfervation  :  and  from  the  Sepulchrctum,  al(b,
you  will  add  others ;  as  out  of  thofe  which  are  at  hand,  another  next  to  that
of  Euftachius  {k),  wherein  they  are  defcrib'd  as  being  of  the  colour  of  white
marble;  and  another  (/),  wherein  calculi,  found  in  the  kidnies,  are  faid  to
be  of  a  fnowy  whitenefs :  where  fome  have  been  feen  by  Valfalva,  of  a  white
colour  (as  they  were  alfo  by  Schroeckius  (m)  )  which  1  have  taken  notice  of  in
another  letter;  and  fome  of  a  black  colour,  as  I  have  taken  notice  in  this  very
letter  (n).

It  appears,  therefore,  that  this  diftinftion  has  either  been  taken  from  too
fmall  a  number  of  obfervations,  or  from  fome  prejudg'd  opinion.  And,  cer-
tainly, that  ftony  matter  by  which  it  is  ting'd  with  a  red,  yellow,  black,  or
any  other  colour,  may  be  mix'd  with  it  when  it  is  in  the  bladder.  From  which
variety  of  mixture,  it  is  to  be  fuppos'd  that  the  different  facility,  or  difficulty,
of  folution,  in  different  ftones,  happens  ;  and  that,  for  this  reafon,  all  hope  is
taken  away  from  thofe  perfons  who  enquire  after  a  remedy,  by  which  they
may  be  all  equally  dilTolv'd.  And  we  ought,  for  this  reafon,  to  take  the
greater  pains  to  prevent  a  calculus  being  generated,  by  avoiding  thofe  things
which  1  have  faid  (o)  tend  to  retard  the  urine  in  the  kidnies,  and  by  making
ufe  of  the  contrary,  efpecially  if  there  be  any  fufpicion  of  a  calculus  being
begun.  In  order  to  remove  which,  while  it  is  pofTible,  I  would  rather  ufe
the  more  mild  diuretics,  and  fuch  as  have  fomething  of  an  anodyne  nature,
than  the  more  acrid  ones  ;  as  on  the  one  hand,  I  remember,  that  before  the
Monita  of  Boerhaave  (p)  came  forth,  a  certain  gentleman,  a  fellow  citizen  of
mine,  who  had  had  a  ftone  cutout  from  his  bladder,  and  who  was  fubjeft  to
nephritic  pains,  began  to  be  lefs  frequently  attack'd  therewith,  from  the
time  that  he  determin'd  to  drink,  on  every  third  or  fourth  day  in  the  morn-
ing, fome  ounces  of  warm  water,  with  the  addition  of  a  fpoonful  of  fyrup
made  from  the  juice  of  violets  ;  and  as,  on  the  other  hand,  I  know  that
diuretics,  properly  fo  call'd,  have  really  freed  fome  perfons  from  the  coni-

(i)  Epift.  38.  n.  41.  '(m)  Aft.  n.  -c.  torn.  i.  cbf.  247.

(j)  Sea.  hac  22.  in  Schol.  ad  §.  !.&§.  2.  («)N.  2.

(i)  -Ibid.  §.  6.  foj  Supra,  n.  5.  &  5.

{/)  L.  i.feft.  10.  inadditam.  obf.  8.  ad  fin.  Cj>)  Prsled.  ad.  inltit.  §.365  &  3P7.

1 i  2  plaints ;


428  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

plaints ;  but  have  very  much  hurt  others :  nor  will  this  be  furprizing,  to  thofe
who  either  attend  to  what  I  have  hinted  above  (q),  of  the  mucilaginous  hu-
mour, wherewith  the  parietes  of  the  tubuli,  and  the  pelvis,  are  fmear'd  over ;
and  how  cautious  we  ought  to  be  in  removing  it;  or  to  the  contraftions  of  the
fame  parietes,  which,  as  they  naturally  follow  the  irritation  of  acrid  medicines,
it  is  evident  muft  not  only  aftringe  the  paflages  to  an  improper  degree,  but
greatly  increafe  the  pains.

I  could  wifh  the  anodyne  virtue  of  the  fquil,  and  its  power  in  appeafing
convulfions,  hinted  at  by  Hoffmann,  and  aflerted  by  the  celebrated  Jo.  Ge^
rard  Wagner  (r),  in  the  nephritis  itfelf;  even  when  proceeding  from  fmaller
calculi ;  were  confirm'd  by  a  great  number  of  other  fuccefsful  experiments ;  fo
as  to  be  not  lefs  known  among  phyficians,  than  the  diuretic  property  thereof:
for  certainly  our  Italians  alfo,  notwithftanding  they  are,  in  general,  averfe  to
the  ufe  of  emetic  medicines,  fuch  as  the  pulvis  fcilliticus  is,  would  not  be  in
doubt  to  make  a  proper  ufe  of  it,  in  order  to  prevent  a  calculus  from  increaf-
ing  in  its  fize,  in  a  part  from  whence  it  could  not  afterwards  be  difcharg'd.
For  by  remaining  there  long,  it  is  fo  increas'd,  as  not  only  to  be  too  large
for  being  diflodg'd,  and  got  rid  of,  but  even,  fometimes,  ib  as  to  equal  the
kidney  itfelf  in  fize ;  and  it  has  been  known,  more  than  once,  to  have  been
of  the  weight  of  five  pounds,  as  it  is  faid  to  have  be€n  in  a  woman  of  princely
rank  (s).  But  as,  in  other  diforders,  the  fame  remedy  has  not  the  fame
effeft,  at  all  times,  fo  in  this  does  it  happen  thus  in  particular.  At  leaft,  I
remember  Valfalva  to  have  complain'd  of  this  more  than  once  ;  and  to  affirm
that,  in  the  cafe  of  a  noble  virgin,  who  had  been  troubled,  for  the  fpace  of  two
years,  with  pains  of  the  kidnies,  he  was  oblig'd  to  change  his  remedies  in
every  paroxifm  •,  fince  thofe  which  had  given  her  immediate  relief  before,
were  applied  to  again  without  efitdt.

17.  Among  the  other  mifchiefs,  which  nephritic  tortures  bring  to  women,
i  do  not  doubt  but  abortion,  or  even  the  death  both  of  mother  and  child,
ought  frequently  to  be  reckon'd.  For  as  the  increafing  uterus,  by  preffing
the  ureters,  renders  the  defiux  of  the  urine  through  them  lefs  eafy,  and  con-
fequently  fomewhat  delays  it  in  the  kidnies ;  if  it  happen  that  any  woman  has
a  diforder  in  thefe  parts,  which  makes  her  fubjeft  to  pains  thereof;  it  is
without  doubt  very  natural  to  fuppofe,  that  their  internal  m.embranes  are,
from  thence  more  irritated,  and  that  tortures  are  excited ;  as  it  is  likewife  to  con-
ceive that  the  whole  body,  and  particularly  thofe  parts  which  lie  in  the  belly,
being  drawn  into  confent  therewith,  by  means  of  the  nerves,  the  foetus  may
eafily  be  extruded  from  the  uterus,  by  the  contractions  thereof,  before  its
proper  time  :  or  at  leaft  the  foetus  itfelf,  or  the  mother,  who  are  very  fre-
quently unequal  to  the  conflift  with  violent  diforders,  may  fuffer  very  much
therefrom  ;  lb  as  frequently  to  make  it  impoITible  for  either  of  them  to  efcape
death.

In  regard  to  abortion,  you  have,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (/),  the  hiftory  of
the  matron  defcrib'd  by  Platerus.  She  "  having  been  fourteen  times  preg-
*'  nant,  had  as  often  mifcarried,  in  the  eighth  or  ninth  month  of  her  preg-
"  nancy." The  fame  woman  had  been  fubjeft,  for  many  years,  to  the  mofb

("i^J  N.  modo  indicate  3.  (/)  Vid.  apud.  Pohl.  de  proftat.  calcul.  §.  7.

(r)  Obferv.  Clinic,  fed,  2.  n.  2.  9  &  10.  (0  Seft.hac  2Z.obf.  4.

violent


Letter  XL. Article  1 8, ig.  429

violent  pains  of  the  kidnies.  And  Platerus  found  "  the  caufe  of  her  pains,
"  and  abortion,"  in  the  kidnies ;  one  of  which  was  reduc'd  into  the  form  of
a  purfe,  by  a  wafting  of  its  fubftance,  and  the  other  was  very  tumid  with  a
large  calculus.

And  the  woman,  from  whofe  hiftory  I  have  had  occafion  to  obferve  this,
as  well  as  other  things,  that  Ihe,  herfelf,  firft  died  in  the  fevench  month  of
her  pregnancy,  and  her  foetus  alfo  foon  after,  and  have  already  fhown  you
(li)  what  appearance  her  right  kidney  had;  gives  me  at  prefent,  occafion  to
iufpefl ;  though,  being  then  bufy  about  other  things,  I  did  not  enquire  into
the  nature  of  her  death ;  that  the  pain  of  her  kidney  had  been  one  of  the
preceding  or  proximate  caufes  thereof.  And  this  I  alio  fufpeft  of  another
woman,  the  account  of  whofe  difieftion  was  communicated,  by  Santorini,  to
me  and  the  reft  of  his  friends  •,  whofe  obfervation  I  fhall  the  more  readily
give  you  here,  becaufe  it  alfo  contains  fome  other  things,  which  will  not,
perhaps,  be  at  all  difpleafing  to  you,  when  you  enquire  into  the  ttrudure  of
the  kidnies.

18.  A  woman,  who  had  labour'd  under  diforders  of  the  kidnies,  being
pregnant,  at  length  died  in  the  fifth  month  of  her  pregnancy.

One  of  the  kidnies  was  wrinkled,  and  contra6led  ;  inafmuch  as,  notwith-
ftanding  the  cavity  of  the  pelvis  was  dilated  confiderably,  the  fubftance  of
the  kidney,  itfelf,  was  much  diminifn'd  in  thicknefs.  The  fubftance  of  the
other  likewife,  although  increas'd  in  length,  and  breadth,  had  a  very  incon-
fiderable  thicknefs  in  fome  parts,  though  the  pelvis  v/as  extremely  cnlarg'd.
But  this  pelvis  terminated  in  a  ureter,  of  fo  narrow  a  dimenfion,  that  it  was
fcarcely  pofiible  to  force  any  air  through  it.  And  where  the  pelvis  coher'd
with  the  internal  part  of  the  kidney,  it  was  pierc'd  through  with  wide  orifices,
which  communicated  with  large  cells.  One  of  thefe  cells,  alfo,  had  its
parietes  perforated  with  other  orifices  ;  into  which  the  air  being  driven,  dif-
tended  a  great  number  of  the  fmall  canals,  and  the  emulgent  artery  at  the
fame  time.  And  thefe  fmall  canals  were  plac'd  upon  the  arterial  branches
tranfverfly.  However,  thefe  cells  were  fill'd  with  urine ;  but  the  furface  of
the  kidney  was  made  up  of  fanguiferous  veftels,  compared,  as  it  were,  into  a
kind  of  thickifti  ftratum.

19.  They  who  do  not  entirely  defpife  making  ufe  of  morbid  conftitutions
of  the  vifcera,  and  the  kidnies  among  others,  to  difcover  the  ftru<5lure  there-
of, will  not,  perhaps,  make  light  of  this ;  from  whence  they  will,  probably,
fuppofe  it  to  be  prov'd  that  the  fmall  canals,  or  tubuli,  of  the  kidney  com-
municate immediately  with  the  artery  -,  whether  with  juftice,  or  not,  it  is
not  the  propef  place  for  inquiring  here,  nor  for  confirming  an  experiment
which  I  formerly  thought  of  {x),  in  order  to  difcover  the  ftrudure  of  the
kidnies.

From  this  hiftory,  and  others,  taken  notice  of  above,  I  rather  recal  ano-
ther to  mind,  which  you  will  find  in  the  Sepulchretum  (y),  being  transfer'd
thither  from  Willis.  In  this  obfervation  a  matron  is  defcrib'd  to  us,  who  had
been  trouWed  for  many  years  paft,  but  particularly  when  fiie  had  conceiv'd,
with  fpafmodic  affedtions ;  in  confequence  whereof  fhe  always  mifcarried  about

{«)  N.  12.  CjJ  L.  I.  feft.  13.  obf.  7.

. fxj  Afiverf.  anat.  3.  animad. 33.  vid, et
epiit.  anat.  3.  n,  15,


430  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  end  of  the  third  month,  which  had  happen'd  lately  alfo  •,  that  is  to  fay,  by
reafon  of  acute  pains  frequently  returning,  efpecially  in  the  loins,  and  theie
troubling  her  afterwards,  alfo,  in  a  violent  manner,  and  being  attended  with
a  vomiting,  even  almoft  to  the  very  laft  day  of  her  life,  which  was  the  thirty-
fifth  day  after  mifcarriage.  When  the  body  was  diffefted,  and  examin'd,
Willis  did  not  doubt  but  the  caufe  of  the  pains  had  confifted  in  water  found
within  the  cranium,  which  had  fallen  down  from  thence,  through  the  nerves,
into  the  center  of  the  melentery,  and  torn  afunder  the  membranes,  which
he  found  to  be  feparated  from  each  other,  in  that  part,  by  interpos'd  air,  juft
as  if  they  had  been  blown  up  by  a  butcher.

I  confefs  I  am  not  one  of  thofe  who  deny  that  water,  overflowing  the  brain,
may  excite  fpafmodic  pains.  Yet  it  is,  neverthelefs,  more  natural  to  conceive
that  in  a  body,  which  he  fays  had  very  foon  putrefied,  this  air  that  was  interpos'd
betwixt  the  membranes,  had  rather  been  recently  extricated  by  putrefadlion,
than  that  it  had  exifted  in  the  living  body.  What  are  we  then  to  fuppofe  ?
Perhaps  another  caufe  might  have  been  found  in  the  kidnies,  that  you  might
have  added  to  this  water.  For  he  fays  that  the  kidnies  were  pretty  found  j
but  that  one  of  them  "  was  of  an  unufual  figure,"  inafmuch  as  "  it  was  di-
vided into  many  lobes,  like  the  kidney  of  a  calf."  For  call  to  mind  what
Ruyfch  (z)  fays  he  had  met  with  more  than  once.

After  intolerable  pains  of  the  loins,  he  found,  inftead  of  calculi,  which  he
and  every  one  expcdted,  only  an  unequal  furface  of  the  kidnies,  as  in  human
foetufles,  in  calves,  an  in  oxen.  And  he  confefles  that,  as  the  circumftance
itfelf  wasnew  and  unheard  of  to  him,  fo  alfo  he  had  not  found  out,  by  what
means  fo  violent  a  pain,  and  a  frequent  dijcharge  of  bloody  water,  could
arife  from  a  ftrufture  of  this  kind.  For  although  this  difcharge  of  bloody
water  is  not  mention'd  by  Willis,  yet  that  internal  diforder  of  the  kidney,
■which  would  either  be  the  efFeft,  or  the  caufe,  of  this  inequality  of  furface,
might  not  as  yet  have  reach'd  to  fuch  a  height,  as  to  caufe  a  difcharge  of
blood,  together  with  the  urine.  We  are  exhorted  by  Ruyfch  to  enquire
•what  kind  of  diforder  this  is,  but  of  what  nature  it  is  it  will  not  be  eafy  for
any  one  to  conjcfture,  before  he  knows  whether  all  adults,  who  have  this
inequality  of  their  kidnies,  are  troubled  with  pains  of  thefe  parts.

20.  Therefore,  if  the  things  which  have  been  faid  by  the  more  ancient
writers  are  attended  to,  any  one  will  think,  at  firft,  that  this  is  not  true.
For  as  Ariftorle  (a)  has  afferted,  "  that  the  kidnies  of  men  are  like  to  thofe
"  of  oxen,  inafmuch  as  they  confift  of  a  compofition  of  many  very  fmall  kid-
*'  nies,  and  are  not  equable ;"  it  may  feem  that  they  were  found  fo  in  the
greater  part  of  bodies  at  leaft  :  yet  that  the  greater  part  of  men  were,  at  that
time,  troubled  with  pains  of  the  kidnies,  cannot,  I  think,  feem  probable  to
any  one.

But  if  we  fufpeft  that  he  was  induc'd  to  make  this  affertion,  from  the  in-
fpedion  of  fcetulTcs,  and  young  children;  which  fufpicion  is  hinted  at  in  the
annotations  to  Euftachio's  book  of  the  kidnies  (l^)  ;  we  mqfl:  fet  afide  Ariftotle,
and  enquire  how  often  the  fame  has  been  feen  by  others,  in  what  fubjeds


Cz)  Adv.  anat.  Dec.  I.  n.  9.  {i)  Ad  c,  3.  in  Ra.

(a)  De  partib.  -anim.  1.  j.  c,  g.


they


Letter  XL. Article, 20.  431:

they  were  feen,  and  by  whom.  Euftachius  (c),  who  examin'd  as  many  kid-
nies  as  any  one  whatever,  has  told  us,  that  he  had  met  with  this  appearance
in  one  or  two  only  ^  and  although  he  does  not  fay  that  they  had  labour'd  unr
der  any  renal  diforder;  he  feems,  nevertheleis,  to  hint  it  in  fome  meafure,
when  he  fays  that  the  kidnies  of  one  "  were  of  a  very  remarkable  magnitude
"  alfo,  and  one  which  far  exceeded  others  ;"  and  when  he,  in  another  place  (J),
denies  that  this  appearance  would  be  found,  "  unlefs  we  have  either  got  a  body
"  whofe  kidnies  abound  with  tubercles,  or  nature  has  deviated  from  her  own
"  laws  in  forming  them."

And  as  this  is  faid  to  happen  "  very  feldom,"  by  fo  fldlful  an  anatomift,
rt  would  be  very  furprizing  it  fhould  have  been,  afterwards,  aflcrted  by  Vef-
Jingius  (e),  that  the  kidnies,  "  however,  frequently  retain,  in  adults,  that
"  inequality  of  furface,  as  if  made  up  of  a  number  of  glands  ccmpadled  to-
"  gether,  which  they  exhibit  in  the  foetus  ;"  if  it  were  not  more  juft  to
interpret  him  thus  ;  that  is,  by  fuppofing  him  to  have  faid  fapius,  not  fo.
much  to  flgnify  frequently,  as  by  way  of  comparifon  with  what  he  had  faid
before,  which  is  certainly  more  rare  ;  I  mean,  that  one  kidney  is  fometimes
found  inftead  of  two  ;  more  juft,  I  fay,  than  to  blame  him,  as  Riolanus  (f)  does.
Againft  whom,  when  denying  that  he  "  had  ever  feen  it,"  Dominico  de  Mar-
ehettis  {g)  fo  defends  Veflingius,  as  to  affirm,  that  he  had  demonftrated  it:
"  two  or  three  times,"  in  this  theatre.  But  neither  of  them  has  mention'd
a  word,  whereby  we  may  underftand  whether  the  patients,  in  whom  they
were  found,  had  been  healthy  or  difeas'd.  Nor,  indeed,  has  Diemerbroeck.
(h),  who  once  faw  the  fame  appearance,  mention'd  any  thing  to  this  purpofe :;
nor  others,  whom  I  delignedly  omit ;  efpecially  thofe  who  are  more  modern
than  he,  if  you  except  two,  one  of  whofe  obfervations  you  have  in  the  Sepul-
chretum  (z),  and  the  other  in  the  Bibliotheca  Anatomica  (k).

The  latter  affirms,  "  that  he  had  once  had  an  opportunity  of  feeing  this  lo-
"  bulated  ftate  of  the  kidnies,  in  a  young  man  of  nine  years  of  age,  where  it
"  was  very  evident,  and  manifeft ;  this  vifcus  being,  in  the  mean  while,  af-
"  fedted  with  no  difeai'e  whatever."  And  the  former,  "  in  a  girl  of  ten
*'  years  of  age,"  who  was  troubled  with  very  fevere  pains  of  the  belly,  which
brought  on  convulfions  and  vomitings,  whereby  fhe  was  at  length  carried  off;
although  he  obferv'd  feveral  morbid  caufes  in  other  parts,  nevcrthelefs  found
the  kidnies  to  be  very  hard,  and  one  of  them  "  of  an  unufuaV  figure,  that
*'  is  to  fay,  fiffiir'd  into  feveral  lobes."  But  if  you  fet  afide  this  l!ift  on;
account  of  thefe  feveral  caufes,  and  both  of  them  on  account  of  their  age,,
not  being  quite  adult ;  for  it  would  not  be  very  furprizing  if,  in  fome  bo-
dies, both  the  kidnies,  or  one  of  them  at  leaft,  fhould  lofe  that  inequality
which  is  natural  to  children,  fomewhat  later  than  ui'ual  in  life;  out  of  the-
other  obfervations  that  I  at  prefent  remember  to  have  read,  there  are  no  more
than  four  of  this  kind,  one  of  Ruyfch's,  another  of  Petruccio's,  a  third  of
Mauchart's,  and  the  laft  of  Trew's. And  from  the  two  firft  obfervations,  if,

(f)  C.  cit.  {h)  Anat  1.  i.e.  i8.

Cd)  C.  42.  {z)  L.  I.  feet.  13.  obf.  3.  in  additam.

(4  Syntagm.  anat.  c.  5^  (/f)  Tom.  i.  p,  i.in  adnot.  adc.  1.  Malpigh.,

(f)  Animadv.  in  cit.  Veflingii  locnm.  de.  Renib.

(g)  Anat.  c 5..


432  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

we  attend  to  fome  circumftances  that  were  join'd  with  them,  we  fhall  con-
jeflure,  that  they,  in  whom  kidnies  of  this  kind  were  found,  had  labour'd
under  diforders  of  the  urinary  paflages.

For  Ruyfch,  formerly,  before  he  gave  us  thofe  two  cafes  which  furnifh'd
n";e  with  an  occafion  of  confidering  theie  things,  having  found  the  fame  ftruc-
ture  of  kidney  in  an  adult ;  although  he  has  Jiinted  nothing  in  regard  to  hi«
difeafes,  in  the  delineation  of  that  kidney .(/);  neverthelefs  reprefented  the  up-
per traft  of  the  ureter  to  us,  as  being  wider  than  it  generally  is  in  its  natu-
ral ftate,  in  thofe  who  never  have  been  afFefted  with  renal  diforders  :  and  Pe-
truccio,  when  in  the  fecond  table  of  his  Spicilegium  (m),  he  reprefents  mon-
ftrous  kidnies ;  that  is,  kidnies  "  confiding  of  a  great  number  of  glands,
"  vvrap'd  up  together  like  a  clufter  of  eggs ;"  reprefents  the  pelvis  of  the
rio-ht  kidney  as  being  more  wide,  and  more  protuberant,  than  is  natural ;  and
the  ureter  of  the  left,  according  to  what  himfelf  fays,  as  being  "  monftrous, ,
"  both  in  refpe£t  to  thicknefs,  and  to  largenefs."  And  in  the  obfervation
of  Mauchartus  (7t),  there  is  no  need  of  conjefture  to  make  us  fuppofe  that
the  old  man,  who  had  his  kidnies  "  very  large,  and  unequal,  like  the  kidnies
♦'  of  oxen,"  had  labour'd  under  many  and  confiderable  diforders  of  the  urine,
and  the  parts  deftin'd  thereto.  For  it  is  certain  that  he  had  been  nephritic
for  fome  years ;  that  after  this  an  almoft  perpetual  ifchury  had  fucceeded,  and
then,  an  incontinency  of  urine  at  intervals :  and  that  within  the  ureters,
which  were  diftended  like  the  inteftinum  ileum»  urine  was  found  like  "  but-
"  termilk ;"  whereas  the  pelvis,  on  both'  fides,  from  whence  they  proceed-
ed, was  equal  to  the  capacity  of  an  egg :  and,  finally,  that  within  the  blad-
der, which  was  contrafled,  thick,  and,  in  a  manner,  callous,  two  ftones,  one
of  which  was  large,  had  been  contain'd  ;  not  to  mention  that  many  had  been
formerly  difcharg'd.

So,  alio,  another  old  man  ;  in  whom  both  the  kidnies  were  feen,  by  the
celebrated  Trew  (o),  to  be  "  remarkable  on  account  of  their  manifeft  divifi-
*'  ons  into  lobules,  as,  at  other  times,  generally  happens  in  children  only  ;"
had  been  for  a  long  time,  when  living,  fubjeft  to  calculi  of  the  kidnies^
which  he  fometimes  difcharg'd,  in  conjunftion  with  bloody  urine,  till  by  a
fecond  fuppreffion  of  urine  in  the  bladder,  he  was  carried  off.  Now  if  you
fhould  aflc  me  what  I  have  obferv'd  -,  although  as  often  as  ever  I  have  hap-
pen'd  to  light  on  kidnies  of  this  kind,  it  was  in  poor  people,  and  thofe,  for  the
mcfl  part,  unknown ;  and  though,  for  this  realbn,  it  was  either  impoffible
to  know  at  all,  or  at  leaft  fatisfaftorily,  to  what  diforders  they  had  been  fub-
jefl:  while  living  ;  yet  this  I  will  fay,  that  from  fome  marks  it  is  allowable  to
conjedlure,  juft  as  in  the  obfervations  of  Ruyfch,  and  Petruccio,  that  none  of
them  had  been  totally  free  from  diforders,  in  which  the  urinary  organs  were
concern'd.  Which  you  yourfelf,  alfo,  will,  I  hope,  eafily  underftand,  when
you  have  confider'd  thefe  hiftories  which  I  fubjoin,  but  confider'd  them  in
general ;  for  I  (liall  fo  difpofe  them,  that  you  will  fee  thefe  marks,  or  tokens,
to  be  more  and  more  increas'd,  as  you  proceed ;  and,  from  more  flight,  to  be-
come gradually  more  violent.

(/)  Obf.  anat.  chir.  80.  fig.  64.  fo)  Coramerc.  Litter, a.  1743.  hebd. 33.

\m)  De  ftruft.  capfular.  renal.  n.  3.

(nj  Eph.  n,  c.  cent.  8.  obf.  26.

2  1.  Some


Letter  XL. Article 2r,  22^  23.  433

21.  Someof  the  vifcera,  and  the  head,  of  a  woman  who  died  in  this  hof-
pital,  were  brought  to  the  college,  at  the  time  I  was  teaching  anatomy,  in
the  year  1726.

The  medullary  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum  was  brown,  and  mark'd  with
frequent  bloody  points :  the  lateral  ventricles  were  not  free  from  water  extra-
vafated  within  them  :  the  cerebellum  was  very  foft.

Both  in  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  and  of  the  belly,  was  there  fome  water,
which  was  very  foul.  The  tubes  of  the  uterus  had  their  larger  orifice  fhur
up,  in  confequence  of  being  firmly  agglutinated  to  the  ovarium,  at  that
extremity.  Both  of  the  kidnies  were  unequal  in  their  furface,  and  variegated
with  white  fpots,  where  the  furface  fubfided ;  fo  that  you  might  eafily  per-
ceive this  inequality  not  to  have  been  natural.  And  the  urinary  bladder  was
internally  red.

22.  I  demonftrated  the  parts  of  a  certain  old  man,  and  particularly  tiiofe
of  the  belly,  to  our  ftudents,  in  the  fame  hofpital,  about  the  end  of  the
year  1742  ;  when  among  them,  I  remark'd  thefe  to  deviate  from  the  ufual
appearance  of  nature.

The  tunica  vaginalis  of  one  of  the  tefles  contain'd  a  pretty  large  quantity
of  water,  and  that  turbid :  and  from  the  albuginea,  which  invefted  the  te-
fticle,  near  to  the  fuperior  globe  of  the  epididymis,  was  prominent  a  round-
ifh  body,  of  the  fame  colour  with  the  albuginea.  The  great  artery,  where  it
divided  itfelf  into  the  iliacs,  contain'd  little  bones  within  its  coats.  But  this
was  nothing  when  compar'd  with  the  fplenic  artery,  which,  from  its  begin-
ning quite  to  its  entrance  into  the  fpleen,  confifled,  almoft  univerfally,  of
bones ;  and  was  befides  this,  much  more  wide  than  is  ufual.  Yet  the  fpleea
was,  as  far  as  appear'd  to  the  fenfes,  in  a  found  ftate.  The  gall-bladder  was
lefs  than  it  naturally  is.  The  kidnies  were  fmall  in  proportion  to  the  ftature
of  the  man  :  and  although  they  feem'd  to  be  found  internally  ;  yet  externally
their  furface  was  unequal.  The  urinary  bladder  was  large,  and  had  very
thick  parietes,  fuch  as  there  generally  are  in  thofe  who  have  labour'd  under
2l  difficulty  in  their  urine,  from  a  calculus,  or  from  any  other  caufe.

23.  Another  old  man,  to  appearance  of  fixty  years  of  age  ;  and  fo  very  beg-
garly and  poor,  that  he  even  pick'd  up  a  forry  fuftenance  from  the  outfide-
rinds  of  melons,  which  were  thrown  out  into  the  ftreets,  or  any  thing  elfe
of  that  kind  ;  had  come,  once  before,  into  this  hofpital,  on  account  of  a  fe-
ver, and  a  fenfe  of  oppreffion  in  the  thorax,  which  were  accompanied  with
a  difficult  refpiration,  a  weak  pulfe,  and  a  continual  cough  ;  whereby  what  is
commonly  call'd  a  catarrhous  matter  was  difcharg'd.  When  he  feem'd  to
himfelf  to  be  fomewhat  reliev'd,  he  went  out  again  into  the  ftreets,  and  not
long  after  came  to  the  hofpital  again.  Laft  of  all,  about  the  middle  of  Ja-
nuary in  the  year  1747,  he  return'd  fo  emaciated,  and  fo  broken  down,  by
difeafe,  cold,  and  hunger,  that  he  died  a  little  after  com.ing  in.

1  made  ufe  of  this  man's  body,  in  my  public  demonftrations,  till  I  could
fupply  myfelf  with  a  better.  I  therefore  examin'd  the  vifcera  of  the  thorax
and  belly.  To  fpeak  then  firft  of  the  thoracic,  from  whence  you  may  judge
of  the  caufe  of  the  principal  diforders,  in  this  man  •,  the  thorax,  as  well  as
the  pericardium,  had  a  fmall  quantity  of  water  extravafated  in  it.  But  the
lungs  were  ftrongly  connefled  .to  the  fides,  and  the  back  :  and,  indeed,  the
,  Vol.  II.  K  k  k  right


434  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

right  lobe,  when  it  was  drawn  away,  left  a  kind  of  opaque,  thick,  firm,  and
equal  coat  behind ;  adhering  to  the  parietes  of  the  thorax-,  extended  quite
from  the  lower  part  beyond  half  its  length  ;  and  from  the  fpine  almoft  to  the
fternum  ;  which  being  pnll'd  away  at  one  extremity,  and  after  that  from  the
flernum,  follow'd  all  together:  this  membrane  neither  belong'd  to  the  pleura,
nor  to  the  membrane  of  the  lungs,  for  both  of  thefe  ftill  remain'd  in  their
fituations  •,  I  therefore  fuppos'd  it  to  be  of  that  kind  which  I  have  already  {p)
explain'd  to  you.  The  lungs  themfelves  were  not  extremely  found  ;  and
fomething  hard  was  even  perceiv'd  within  the  upper  part  of  one  of  the
lobes.

But  there  was  much  greater  mifchiefin  the  heart.  This  vifcus  was  twice  as
large  as  it  ought  to  have  been  :  yet  it  did  not  contain  blood,  but  polypous
concretions  only,  'and  thefe  fmall  and  few.  But  as  both  the  ventricles  were
dilated  ;  the  parietes  of  the  right  were  very  thin,  as  thofe  of  the  auricle,  o.^
the  fame  fide,  were  alfo  ;  on  the  other  hand,  thofe  of  the  left  ventricle  were
all  thicker,  and  harder,  than  is  natural.  The  valvule  mitrales  themfelves
were  enlarg'd  alfo,  very  thick,  and  tuberous,  on  their  lower  edges.  And
the  figmoid  were  lefs  foft  than  is  natural ;  but  the  femilunar  were  ftill  lefs
flexible  than  them  :  and,  indeed,  one  of  thefe,  in  a  part  of  its  lower  cir-
cumference, was  already  bony.

The  great  artery  was  wider  than  natural  before  its  curvature ;  and,  on  the
whole  of  its  internal  furface,  was  diftinguifh'd,  here  and  there,  with  white
Jpots,  as  the  internal  furface  of  the  iliacs  was  alio.  Some  of  thefe  fpots  were
prominent  on  the  internal  furface  :  and  thefe  were  very  hard  and  bony  ;  efpe-
cially  where  one  of  the  inferior  intercoftals  took  its  origin,  whofe  orifice,  hap-
pening to  lie  in  the  center  of  the  fpot,  which  protuberated  in  a  circular  cir-
cumference, had  been  fo  ftreighten'd  on  this  account,  that  together  with  the
fpot,  it  at  firft  fight  refembled  a  kind  of  lenticular  gland,  of  a  large  fize.
And  fince  I  have  made  mention  of  the  iliacs ;  before  I  add  the  other  circum-
ftances  which  related  to  the  belly ;  I  will  not  conceal  this,  that  all  the  iliac  arte-
ries were  tortuous,  juft  as  we  fee  the  fplenic  to  be :  but  that  the  iliac  veins,
the  firft  only,  that  is  quite  to  their  partition,  were  affefted  with  a  kind  of  cor-
rugation, as  it  were,  fo  that  it  was  with  difiiculty  you  could  extend  them.

The  vifcera  of  the  belly  fhow'd  thefe  marks  of  difeafe.  The  ftomach
was  large,  although  it  contain'd  but  little;  and  being  without  rugas,  was  in-
ternally of  a  brown  colour,  in  feveral  parts,  to  a  confiderable  extent,  from
the  middle  towards  the  left  fide  :  and  ftill  more  towards  the  oefophagus  ;  and
there  fomewhat  more  deeply.  The  whole  convex  furface  of  the  liver,  except
a  little  fpace  on  the  right  fide,  and  at  the  lower  part,  coher'd  firmly  with  the
feptum  tranfverfum  :  but  in  that  upper  iurface,  the  fubftance  of  the  liver  was
hollowed  out  with  an  hydatid,  the  diameter  of  which  was  equal  to  a  finger's
breadth.  And  the  convex  furface  had- its  membrane  of  a  whicifli  colour  in
one  place,  and  in  the  midft  of  that  whitenefs  it  was  become  bony  for  a  little
fpace.  The  fpleen  itfelf  was  fomewhat  lax,  and  larger  than  natural  in  its
thicknefs,  rather  than  its  length,  or  breadth  ;  whereas  the  fplenic  artery,  ne-
verthelefs,  feem'd  to  be  fomewhat  wider  than  even  this  increas'd  thicknefs  re  -

quir'd.

{py  Epift.  20.  n.  37.

T'-


Letter  XL. Article  24.  435

The  glands  of  the  mefentery  occiir'd  here  and  there,  though  in  a  man  of  that
age  ;  and  nnany  of  them  were  of  the  bignefs  of  a  bean:  yet  if  you  touch'd  them,
or  exatnin'd  them,  after  being  cut  into,  you  could  not  be  in  doubt  that  they
were  free  from  difeafe.

But  the  magnitude  of  the  kidnies,  which  was  lefs  than  that  of  the  body  in
proportion,  and  ftill  more  the  furface  of  them,  differ'd  from  what  I  have  been
generally  wont  to  fee.  For  on  their  pofterior  furface,  they  were,  equally  con-
vex, as  on  their  anterior ;  both  of  them  being  unequal,  and,  in  fome  mea-  ■
fure,  tuberous ;  but  efpecially  in  the  left  kidney.  In  the  left,  alfo,  were  cer-
tain depreffions,  as  if  from  cicatrices.  And  the  orifices  of  the  ureters  were
feen  to  be  fomewhat  larger  within  the  bladder,  than  they  naturally  are ;  the
bladder  itfelf  was  internally  reddifh,  and  diftinguifh'd  with  fanguiferous  vef-
fels,  running  here  and  there,  as  if  the  veflels  had  been  fiU'd  with  a  colour'd
wax ;  and  externally  it  was  furnifh'd  with  redder  fibres  than  it  gene-
rally is.

24.  A  ruftic  old  woman,  who  was  of  a  fmall  ftature,  and  immoderately
lean,  died  in  the  fpace  of  two  days,  as  was  faid,  of  old  age ;  but  (he  had
labour'd  under  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  although  without  a  cough,  or  any
■expeftoration  whatever :  which  remark  I  make,  that  you  may  know  this  to
be  all  it  was  pofTible  for  me  to  learn  of  her  difeafes  •,  not  becaule  I  examin'd.
any  other  vifcera,  but  thofe  of  the  belly.  For,  although  the  body  of  this
woman  was  alfo  brought  from  the  city,  into  the  theatre,  when  I  was  teaching
anatomy  in  the  year  1740  ;  yet,  when  I  came  to  the  thorax,  I  was  furnifh'd
with  a  better,  or  at  lead  with  a  larger  body ;  the  difiedtion  of  which  more  ef-
feftually  anfwer'd  my  purpofes.

The  abdomen,  therefore,  of  this  old  woman  being  open'd,  all  the  other
parts  ■V'/ere  found,  and  thefe  only  were  found  to  ipe  preter-natural  in  their
appearance.  The  large  artery,  from  the  diaphragm,  quite  to  all  the  iliacs,
was  univerfally  unequal  from  yellow  bony  lamellae  -,  and  disfigur'd,  befides,
from  a  thickifli  humour -,  which  was  brown,  and  of  a  bloody  colour,  and  ad-
her'd,  here  and  there,  to  the  internal  coat  ■,  from  whence,  when  broken
through,  and  ulcerated,  it  had  diftill'd  betwixt  thofe  lamellee  that  lay  round
about,  A  diforder  of  this  kind  being  alio  propagated  into  the  very  fliort
trunk  of  the  celiac  artery,  had,  without  hurting  the  other  branches  of  it,
fo  far  extended  itfelf  into  the  fplenic  artery,  that,  although  it  was  univer-
fally wider  than  it  naturally  is,  and  had  its  coats  thicken'd  •,  and  had,  in  par^
ticular,  fo  m.any  and  ib  confiderable  flexures,  that  I  do  not  remember  to  have
feen  more,  or  larger,  therein,  at  any  time  ;  and,  for  that  reafon,  feem'd  to
be,  at  firft  fight,  what  it  really  was  not ;  it  was,  moreover,  Hard  at  the  places
of  its  flexure,  and  not  v/ithout  ofiification.  The  fpleen,  to  which  it  went,
v/as  found,  and,  though  but  fmall,  correiponded  very  well,  in  proportion,
to  the  fize  of  the  liver,  and  the  other  viicera  ;  and  even  to  the  whole  body.
However,  the  trunk  of  the  hepatic  duft  was  larger  than  it  generally  is.  The
uterus,  on  the  other  hand,  v>?hich  we  found  very  much  inclin'd  to  the  right
fide,  had  fo  narrow  a  cavity,  that  I  certainly  never  faw  it  narrower  in  an
adult;  yet  the  vagina  was  not  fmall,  and  the  fl-cin,  being  ruguous  above  the
-pubes,  fhow'd  that  the  v/oman  had  brought  forth  children.

K  k  k  2  Both


43^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Both  of  the  kldnies  were  of  an  unequd  furface,  ahnoft  as  they  are  in  the
fetus ;  and  not  only  the  pelvis,  and  two  pretty  large  tubes  which  join'd  to
it,  were  prominent  on  the  outfide  of  the  kidney^  but  many  tubes  alfo  of  a
fmaller  fize,  which  went  to  one  or  the  other  of  thefe  large  ones.  Ail  which
were  fo  me  what  wider  than  they  naturally  arc,  as  the  ureters  were  alfo,  and
efpecially  on  the  right  fide.  But  the  right  kidney  was  much  lefs  than  "the  left ;.
and  although" internally,  as  far  as  T  could  jadge  by  my  fenfes,  it  was  not  mor-
bid, yet  when  difledted  it  had  a  very  ill  fmell.  And  the  right  ureter  open'd
into  the  bladder  with  a  much  wider  orifice  than  it  generally  does,  and  with  zj
much  wider  orifice  than  the  left  •,  fo  that  the  woman  feem'd  to  have  labour'd
under  diforders,  of  the  urinary  pafiage,  more  on  the  right  fide,  than  the  left..
Then,  alfo,  it  was  perceiv'd  why  the  bladder  could  not  well  have  been  difi:ended,
by  blowing  in  air  through  the  urethra,  inafmuch  as  a  part  of  it  was  diverted
by  that  large  orifice,  into  the  ureter,  and  even  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney  (as
I  plainly  faw)  and  went  out  where  the  pelvis  had  been  cut  into.

However, the  internal  furface of  the  bladder  was, aLmoft univerlully,
mark'd  with  fanguiferous  vefith,  and  the  fmall  tumid  branches  thereof,  which  i
were  of  a  blackifli  colour  ;  and,  indeed,  the  whole  lower  part  of  the  bladder,
was  univerfally  black,  to  a  confiderable  degree.

25.  To  thefe  I  would  have  you  add  the  obfervation  upon  the  ftable -keeper,:
which  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  already  (q).  For  from  hence  you  will  fee  whac
were  the  diibrders  of  the  bladder,  and  ureters;  and  from' the  others,  that  the
furface  of  the  kidnies  was  unequal.  Nor  is  it  of  any  importance,  nay,  per-
Jiaps,  rather  furthers  my  purptafe,  that  I.  obferv'd  certain- difarders  in  thofe
kidnies  befides.  For  I  do  not  think  we  are  to  inquire  here,  whether  th&
injury  of  this  furface  alone,  brought  on  thofe  very  violent  diforders  that  are
ipoken  of  by  Ruyfch  (r).  rfliould  perhaps  believe,  if  I  could  admit  of  what
was  fuppos'd  by  Riolanus  (s),  that  the  furface  of  the  kidnies  ;  inftead  of  be-
ing unequal,  as  it  is  in  infants ;  is,  after  feven  years  of  age,  or  fooner,  form'd
into  an  equality  ;  becauft  a  flefhy  cortex  is  thrown  around  it  by  an  afpei-fion  of
blood:  a  cortex  which  is  fomewhat  livid,  as  thick  as  a  manV  little  finger,
and  furrounds  all  thofe  tuberofities  which,  of  themfelves,  make  up  the
fubftance  of  the  kidney  in  a  child.  For  in  the  foetus,  alfo,  the  cortex  exifts
in  the  fame  proportion,  and  compofes  the  furface  of  the  kidnies  ;  and  ber
fides,  all  the  kidnies  of  adult  perfons,  whofe  furface  was  tuberous,  would  be
fmall,  which  is  what  I  have  not  always  feen  :  and  that  delineation  of  Ruyfch,
which  is  refer'd  to  above  (I),  is  diametrically  repugnant  to  the  fuppofition.

Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  not  here  to  fuppofe,  that  the  kidnies  were
fo  much  difeas'd,  as  in  fome  of  the  obfervations  of  Euftachius  (u),  and
Littre  (.v):  in  which,  not  only^the  kidney  was  externally  full  of  tubercles,  but
had  its  fubftance,  alfo,  greatly  decreas'd,  or  quite  confum'd  -,  the  place  thereof
being  occupied  by  a  fandy  matter,  and  the  pelvis  being  fiU'd  with  innume-
rable httle  itones,  or  a  matter  of  that  kind  ;  and  the  beginning  of  the  ureter,
in  fine,  being  quite  ftop'd  up  by  a  calculus  of  no  fmall  magnitude. For  if

(?)  Epift.  4.  n.  19.  CtJ  N.  20.

('rj  Supra  n.  19.  («)  De  Ren.  c.  45.

(j)  Animad.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  20.  &  Atithro-  {x)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  fca.  1701.  obf.
pogr.  1.  2.  c.  26.  ana:.  5.

2  iOi


Letter  XL. Article 26.  437-

m  one  or  the  other  of  thefe  cafes,  thofe  fymptoms  had  preceded,  which  are
fpoken  of  by  Ruyfch ;  for  in  neither  of  them  was  there  any  thing  of  this
kind,  not  even  in  tlie  time  immediately  preceding  death,  v/hich  is  very  fur-
prizing  ;  certainly  nobody  would  have  been  at  a  ioCs  to  affign  a  reafon  why
they  fhould  happen,  as  they,  on  the  contrary,  did  in  the  obfervations  of
Riiyfch.

Now  if  befides  the  external  tuberofities  you  fuppofe  any  thing  on  the  fur-
face,  or  internally,  which  we  may  remark  by  attentive  infpettion  and  ob-
fervation  -,  as  in  almoft  all  our  hiltories  •,  from  whence  it  may  be  c^jeflur'd
what  caufe  of  inequality  had  preceded,  and  what  caufev/as  capable  ot  bring-
ing on  the  appearances  of  this  kind  ;  as  well  as  the  pains,  and  the  difcharge
of  bloody  urine;  perhaps  fomething  will  feem  to  be  pointed  out,  v/hich  is  not
immediately  contradictory  to  probability.

Suppofe  then,  that  many  of  thofe  cavities  fiU'd  with  ferum  •,  which  I  have
defcrib'd  to  you,  in  a  former  letter  at  large  ('_)'),  and  one  of  which  was  even'
then  remaining  in  the  ftable-keeper ;  had  previoufly  exiflied  in  the  furface  of
the  kidney.  By  reafon  of  this  ferum,  being  fometimes  very  acrid  in  its  na-
ture, the  kidney  might  not  only  be  ftimulated,  but  fome  fanguiferous  veffel-
eroded,  from  whence  a  difcharge  of  bloody  water,  and  pain  would  arife  •,  and
this  pain  might  alfo  happen  to  be  increas'd  from  a  quantity  of  ferum,  which
both  diftended  and  overloaded  the  part.  And  when  this  ferum  is  diffipated,
I,  have  fhewn  that  cicatriz'd  fpots  and  depreflions  remain  behind  ;  and  thefe
in  one  of  the  hiftories  produc'd  (z),  not  altogether  obfcure  :.  between  which
frequent  depreflions,  the  uninjur'd  fubftance  of  the  kidney  being,  here  and
there,  prominent,  will  render  the  furface  unequal,  and  refcmble  a  kind  of
tuberofuy.  Here  then  you  have  what  came  into  my  mind,  upon  an  obfcure  •
and  very  difficult  queftion.  But  I  would  have  you  fuppofe  it  to  be  advanc'd
only  for  the  fake  of  example,  and  by  way  of  ftirring  you  up  to  invent  a  bet-
ter hypothefis  :  nor  indeed  am  I  fufficiently  pleas'd  with  it  on  many.accounts, ,
but  particularly  becaufe  I  am  afraid,  left  that  inequality,  which  was  feen  by
Ruyfch,  was  different  from  what  has  been  feen  by  me,  and  explain'd  in  the
bell  manner  I  was  able.  Since,  then,  we  have  confider'd  the  caufe  of  pain  in  *
the  loins,  as  the  effeft  of  a  difeafe  in  the  Iddnies;  firft  from  calculi,  and,
after  that,  from  other  caufes  ;  let  us  now  confider  it  as  arifing  from  the
diforder  of  other  parts  alio  ;  and  that  by  propofing  an  obfervation  or  two.

26.  A  carman  of  Padua,  betwixt  thirty  and  forty  years  of  age,  who  was
before  healthy  and  robuft ;  except  that  he  had  labour'd  under  the  lues  ve-
nerea ;  having  by  chance  fallen  down,  fo  that  the  wheel  ran  acrofs  his  belly
as  he  lay,  was  feiz'd  with  fuch.  fevere  pains  in  his  loins,  and  back,  that  he
was  oblig'd  to  confine  himfelf  to  bed,  for  eight  months  together;  the  phyfl-
cians,  whom  he  had  fent  for  in  pretty  great  number,  not  being  able  to  be
of  any  fervice  to  him  for  thefe  pains.  At  length  when  the  celebrated  Val-
lifnerihad  come  to  him,  and  had  obferv'd  the  patient-  to  complain  of  vio-
lent pains  of  the  loins  on  the  left  fide  in  particular  ;  by  applying  his  hand  to
the  fide  of  this  very  part,  he  perceiv'd  a  pulfation  as  from  an  aneurifm;  and,

(jj  Epift.  38.  n.  39.  &  feq.  (z)  N.  21  &  23.

for


43  8  ^Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

for  that  reafon,  prefcrib'd  fuch  things,  as  would  have  tended,  perhaps,  to
prelerve  the  patient  for  a  very  long  time,  though  not  to  cure  him.

After  that  this  place  IvveU'd  :  the  tumour  extending  itfelf  pretty  wide,  and
raifing  up  even  the  ribs  that  lay  neareft  to  it.  An  cedematous  tumour,  in
the  mean  while,  had  occupied  the  whole  leg  and  thigh  of  that  fide.  As  the
patient,  however,  had  a  good  appetite,  and  ate  very  plentifully,  and  the  tu-
mour confequently  increas'd,  a  very  unfldlful  furgeon  took  upon  him  to  be
of  a  quite  different  opinion  from  Vallifneri;  and  not  only  to  apply  fuch  things
as  tende(i>to  bring  on  a  fuppuration,  but  even,  when,  from  the  ufe  of  thefe
things,  vefications  and  chops  had  appear'd  in  the  ikin  of  the  loins,  to  make
an  incifion  therein.  This  incifion  was  follow'd,  on  the  fucceeding  night,  by
a  rupture  of  the  tumour,  which  brought  on  an  immediate  profufion  of  blood
to  a  very  great  degree  •,  the  confequence  of  which  was  a  lofs  of  ftrength  and
voice  :  fo  that  within  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  rupture,  he  departed  this
life.  On  the  day  following,  which  was  the  fifth  of  November,  in  the  year
1720,  Vallifneri  related  thefe  things  to  me,  and  beg'd  of  me  that  I  would  be
prefent  at  the  dilTciftion,  together  with  him,  which  was  perform'd  by  our
Vulpius.

The  abdomen  being  open'd,  the  aneurifm  came  into  fight,  a  larger  than
which  I  never  law.  It  almoft  occupied  the  half  of  the  abdominal  cavity,  be-
ing plac'd  longitudinally.  For  extending  itfelf  from  the  diaphragm  to  the
pelvis,  it  took  up  all  the  fpace  that  there  is  from  the  right  fide  of  the  vertebrae,
to  the  left  fide  of  the  diftended  abdomen  ;  the  fpleen,  the  ftomach,  the  in-
teftines,  the  mefentery,  the  vena  cava,  and  the  left  kidney,  being  fo  far
driven  towards  the  right  fide,  that  even  this  kidney  lay  in  the  umbilical  re-
gion. The  aneurifm  was  then  of  an  oval  figure  :  when  fill'd  with  blood  it
had,  without  doubt,  been  of  a  fpheroidal  figure  :  yet  it  was,  even  then,
ftuff'd  up  with  a  very  great  quantity  of  blood,  which  had  concreted  round  about
into  polypous  lamina; ;  but  was  fo  far  ftill  grumous  in  the  middle,  as  to  re-
lemble  the  confiftence  of  a  pultice.  And  after  all  this  was  taken  away,  we
then  obferv'd  the  following  things.

The  aorta,  where  it  firft  came  down  into  the  belly  ;  as  it  began,  in  that
part,  to  be  immediately  dilated  in  an  anterior  direftion  in  a  fma!)  degree,
and  towards  the  right  fide  -,  not  more  than  fo  as  to  admit  of  a  clench'd  fill  of  a
moderate  fize  -,  expanded  itfelf  fo  much  to  the  left  fide,  that  itfeem'd  to  make
up  the  anterior  and  lateral  parietes  of  the  defcrib'd  aneurifmi:  which,  in  that
part,  communicated  largely  v/ith  the  cavity  of  the  aorta,  betwixt  the  ap-
pendices of  the  diaphragm.

The  lateral  parietes,  when  they  had  come  to  the  poflierior  parts,  immedi-
ately terminated  there  ;  and  their  termination  was  very  clofely  agglutinated  to
the  parts  which  the  aneurifm  had  not  remov'd  from  thence  :  for  v/hich  reafon
there  was  no  peculiar  pofterior  paries  to  the  aneurifm  •,  but  the  very  parts
themfelves  flood  in  the  ftead  of  a  paries.  And  of  thefe  parts,  thofe  which,  by
reafon  of  their  bony  nature,  could  lefs  yield  to  the  ftrokes  of  the  in-ruihing
blood,  were  themlelves,  alio,  afiefled  witli  a  caries,  the  periofteum  being
eroded  ;  that  is  to  fay,  the  lower  rib,  and  the  hollow  furface  of  the  os  ilium  :
and  the  vertebrs  were  in  a  frill  worie  ftate.

For  the  tranfverfe  proceffes  of  the  lum.bar  vertebra,  on  the  fame  left  fide,
were  either  already  broken  through by  caries,  or  could  be  cafily  broken  by

4  a  flight


Letter  XL. Article 27.  439

a  flight  prefllire  of  the  finger  alone  :  and  the  bodies  of  the  lowermofl:  ver-
tebra of  the  thorax,  and  the  two  lumbar  which  lie  neareft  to  that,  were  hol-
low'd  out  to  a  very  great  depth,  and  in  great  meafure  confum'd;  which  cir-
cumftance  the  more  readily  occur'd  to  the  eye,  becaufe  thofe  thick  cartilaginous
ligaments  that  lie  betwixt  the  bodies  of  the  vertebra  were,  even  then,  all  in
their  proper  fituation,  prominent,  untouch'd  by  difeafe,  and  of  a  beautiful
v/hitenefs :  and  the  deprefilon  made  by  the  deftruftion  of  the  vertebras,  ren-
der'd  their  prominences  more  ftriking ;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  their  promi-
nences better  fhow'd  us  how  much  the  vertebra  had  been  confum'd.  All
thefe  things,  therefore,  which  came  immediately  into  view,  upon  taking  away
the  blood,  being  fufficiently  examin'd  ■,  we  turn'd  our  eyes  to  the  viicera  of
the  belly,  and  Vv'ere  furpriz'd  to  find  them  all  found,  in  fpite  of  fo  great  an
inverfion  of  their  order.

In  the  thorax  alfo,  we  found  nothing  preternatural,  except  that  the  peri-
cardium contain'd  a  little  more  water  than  it  generally  does.  For  as  to  the
lungs  appearing  to  be  very  white,  juft  as  if  the  blood  had  been  wafh'd  out
of  their  vefTels,  by  frequent  inje6lions  of  water  ;  this  we  did  not  doubt  was  ow-
ing to  the  blood  flowing  into  the  ruptur'd  aneurifm,  where  there  was  norefift-
ance,  in  the  latter  part  of  life.

27.  Many  things  which  I  might  have  obferv'd,  in  regard  to  this  very  large
aneurifm,  I  purpofely  omit ;  and  thofe  things,  in  particular,  that  I  hinted  at
before,  when  I  was  fpeaking  of  other  aneuriims.  I  choofe  rather  to  obferve
two  things  here,  one  of  which  you  will  have  in  the  latter  part  of  this  let-
ter (a) ;  and  the  other  relates  to  the  fufpicions  of  aneurifms,  after  pains  of
the  back  and  loins  ;  which  have  been  equally  troublefome,  and  long-conti-
nu'd  ;  that  were  not  found  out  in  the  living  body,  at  one  time;  and,  at  an-
other time,  what  is  fl;ill  more  furprizing,  even  in  the  diflTedion  of  the  body
after  death.

To  fpeak  firft  of  the  latter :  read  over  again,  very  attentively,  fome  hifto-
ries  that  are  transfer'd  into  the  Sepukhretum,  in  more  than  one  feflion ;  and
even  into  this  twenty-fecond  :  that  is,  under  obfervations  the  thirty-fifth  and
fortieth.  You  will  fee  that  after  pains  of  this  kind,  which  were,  at  length,
iucceeded  by  a  fudden  death,  in  one  of  them  "  two  vertebrae  of  the  loins  were
"  found  to  be  corroded  ;  one  with  a  rupture  of  the  aorta,  and  vena  cava,
"  under  which  they  lay  ;  and  that,  by  this  means,  a  great  efTufion  of  blood
"  had  been  made  into  the  belly,  from  both  of  thefe  vefl^els :"  and  in  the
other,  you  will  read  that  there  was  found  "  a  kind  of  putrid,  blackifh,  and
"  corrupt  flefli,"  which  had  fo  eroded  the  fpine,  in  the  abdomen,  "  to  the
"  length  of  two  fpans,  and  to  the  breadth  of  two  hands,  as  to  make  it  con-
"  tain  an  ulcer  of  a  cancerous  nature,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  man's  fifl: ;  and
"  that  the  whole  of  the  fpina  dorfi  could  be  eafily  broken  by  a  flight  ftroke :
"  and,  finally,  that  it  had,  at  laft,  alfo,  corroded  the  vena  cava  itfelf,  where
"  it  ran  down  upon  the  fpine ;  the  blood  of  which,  by  getting  through  the
"  diaphragm,  that  had  been  perforated  by  the  fame  putrid  flefli,  had  ob-
"  ftruded  the  motion  of  the  lungs,  and  brought  on  death."

{a)  N.  30.

The


440  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

The  firll  of  thefe  diforders  is  fiippos'd  to  have  been  the  tales  ff'tnea^
dtlcrib'd  by  Hippocrates  :  the  lecond,  a  very  large  and  putrid  tumour  of  the
pancreas.  And  although  I  do  not  deny  this,  I  neverthelefs  fufpeft  the  moft
confiderablepart  of  the  tumour  to  have  been  from  a  dilatation  of  the  large  vef-
fels.  Nor  am  I  altogether  without  a  fufpicion  of  this  kind,  when  I,  foon  af-
ter, read  in  the  fccond  forty-fecond  obfervation  •,  for  the  number  is  repeated
through  careleffneis  •,  when  I  read,  I  fay,  that  after  a  conftant  and  long-con-
tinu'd  pain,  about  the  region  of  the  os  factum,  there  was  found,  "  about
"  that  region,  in  the  part  where  the  vena  cava  is  bifurcated,  a  large  abfcefs,
"  in  which  was  contain'd  a  foetid  matter,  and  a  coagulated  blood."  And
alfo,  "  that  the  OS  factum  was  fo  corroded,  and  deftroy'd,  in  this  part,  that  it
"  could  be  very  eafily  drawn  out,  and  rub'd  into  pieces,  with  the  fingers."

But  I  lliould  fuppofe  there  was  ftill  lefs  danger  of  my  being  deceiv'd,  in  my
fufpicion  of  the  obfervation,  which  is  the  firfl  in  the  Additamenta  to  the  twelfth
fcdion  of  the  fourth  book.  For  therein  we  read  of  a  man,  who  had  been
long  afflided  with  -vioknt  pains  of  the  whole  fpina  dorfi,  and  who  was  found,
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  having  din'd  with  his  family,  lying  upon  the
ground,  and  dead  •,  the  fpina  dorfi  being  broken  afunder,  which  they  fup-
pos'd  to  have,  f.robably,  happen'd  to  him,  while  he  ftoop'd  down  to  lay  hold
of  the  chamber-pot.  From  the  belly,  when  open'd,  a  great  quantity  of  blood
immediately  buril  forth,  wherewith  the  whole  cavity  of  the  thorax,  on  the  left
fide,  was  fiU'd.  And  there  was,  likewife,  a  very  large  tumour,  which  reach'd
from  the  fixth  vertebra  of  the  back,  quite  to  the  firil  of  the  loins,  and  which
"  appear'd  to  be  fili'd  wi'Sh  a  very  great  quantity  of  flefh,  of  a  cancerous  na-
"  ture,  macerated  in  its  fubflance,  and  cover'd  over  with  a  fmall  quantity  of
"  pus,  and  coagulated  blood."  The  tumour  was  contain'd  in  "a  very
"  ftrong  membrane,  that  had  obtain'd  the  thicknefs  of  a  crown-piece,  but
"  was  torn  near  to  the  firft  vertebra  of  the  loins  -,  which  was,  in  part,  defti-
"  tute  of  its  perioftium  :  fo  that  the  two  lafl  fpurious  ribs  no  more  coher'd
."  to  the  fpine."  Moreover,  "  the  fix  inferior  vertebrge  of  the  back,  and  the
"  firft  of  the  loins,  were  entirely  deftroy'-d  by  a  caries,  as  if  eroded  by
"  worms  ;  fo  that,  in  this  place,  the  fpine  was  without  any  folidity,  or
*'  ftrength,"  and,  for  that  reafon,  eafily  broken  through.  "  The  diaphragm
"  itielf  was  perforated  fo  as  to  admit  of  two  fingers  join'd  together.  The
"  emulgent  vein  of  the  left  fide  was  alfo  torn  afunder."

I  could  wifh  any  mention  had  been  made  of  the  great  artery,  as  is  made  of
this  vein-,  as  that  artery  muft  have  adher'd  to  all  thefe  rotten  vertebras:  for
from  thence  I  might  either  have  confirm'd  or  rejefted  my  fufpicion.  You
have  feen  that,  in  my  obfervation  (^),  the  vertebrze  were  very  deeply  hol-
low'd  out  -,  and,  in  one  of  the  obfervations  refer'd  to,  fo  corroded,  that  the
fpine  might  be  broken  with  a  flight  ftroke  :  and  in  this  laft  you  fee  that  it
was  really  broken  after  erofion.  And  you  perceive  what  I  may  fufpeft  froni
mine.  But  this  is  beyond  fufpicion,  that  from  a  large  aneurifm  adhering  to
vXhe  fpinf^,  this  mifchief  may,  befides  others,  be  brought  on;  I  mean  that  the
fpine  may  be  broken  ;  for  there  was  not  much  wanting  to  compleat  this  .acci-
..dcnt,  even  in  our  carman.

(^)  N.  z6.


Letter  XL. Article  27.  44.1

However,  left  you  ftiould  fuppofe  all  my  fufpicions  to  relate  to  thofe  ob-
fervations  only,  that  are  extant  in  the  Sepulchretum  -,  at  leaft  turn  to  that
which  being  publifh'd,  amongft  others,  by  a  very  eminent  man,  many  years
after  the  fecond  edition  of  this  book  -,  or  rather,  which  being  (as  far  as  I  can
underftand  from  the  Ada  Helvetica  (c),  wherein  the  fame  hiftory  is)  newly
form'd  by  him ;  tells  you  that  there  had  been  a  very  confiderable  tumour  iii
the  fide  of  the  loins,  and  the  left  hypochondrium,  "  from  a  very  large  glo-
*'  bular,  and  tenfe  body,  occupying  almoft  the  whole  fide  of  the  abdomen  ■"
•which,  when  cut  out,  and  ruptur'd,  "  pour'd  out  a  great  quantity  of  brown
"  cruor,  wherewith  it  was  fili'd,  of  a  yellowifh  fubftance,  ipongy,  and  form'd
"  into  lamellse,  that  lay  one  upon  another."

But  as  the  left  kidney  adher'd  externally  to  this  body,  which  was  itfelf  ficuated
behind  the  left  traft  of  the  inteftinum  colon,  within  the  duplicature  of  the  pe-
ritoneum, and  even,  in  fome  part  of  it,  "  penetrated  into  that  bulbous  body ;"
it  feem'd  that  this  fame  body  was  a  part  of  the  kidney ;  that  is  to  fay,  a  part
enlarg'd  to  an  incredible  degree.  I,  however;  which  I  take  the  liberty  to  fay,
with  a  defire  of  finding  out  truth,  and  not  with  a  defire  of  difiencinfr
from  others  •,  fufpeft  it  to  have  been  an  aneurifm,  not  only  from  its  fitua-
tion,  or  from  the  concretion  of  the  blood  therein,  in  fo  large  a  quantity,
and  the  formation  thereof  into  lamella,  lying  one  upon  another;  but,  final-
ly, from  this  circumftance  alfo,  "  that  a  living  animal  was  fuppos'd  to  exift"
in  the  man's  belly,  while  living ;  which  feems  to  argue  that  fome  pulfation
was  perceiv'd  :  and  I  fuppofe  that  the  aneurifm  had,  by  its  increafe,  vitiated
a  part  of  the  neighbouring  kidney.

Not  much  unlike  this  fufpicion  of  mine,  was  the  judgment  of  the  cele-
brated Nebelius  (d),  in  regard  to  a  roundifli  tumour  ;  which,  being  annex'd
to  the  left  kidney,  had  been  faid  "  to  confift,  internally,  of  a  great  number
"  of  coats,  and  to  be  fili'd  with  blood  and  tartareous  matter :  for  he  thereby
knew  it  to  be  an  aneurifm  of  the  emulgent  artery.  And,  indeed,  he  has  ad-
ded the  cafe  of  a  celebrated  phyflcian,  which  may,  in  great  meafure,  be  com-
par'd  with  that  which  was  juftnow  confider'd  by  me.  For  the  fame  left  fide
being  affedted  with  pain,  atfirft  of  the  nephritic  kind,  and  after  that  of  the
rheumatic,  as  was  fuppos'd;  and  the  phyfician  being  fuddenly  carried  off,  up-
on the  pain  having  become  more  violent  all  at  once ;  it  was  found,  that  the
blood,  which  had  been  diicharg'd  into  the  belly  in  great  quantity,  had  pro-
ceeded from  the  ruptur'd  aneurifm,  which  protuberated  in  the  fame  fide  of
the  belly,  under  the  annex'd  inteftinum  colon  ;  being  equal  in  magnitude  to
the  head  of  a  child  of  three  years  old.  And  "  in  this  hollow  tumour,  when
"cut  into,  which  was  diftinguifti'd  with  internal  membranes,  and  fili'd
"  with  coagulated  blood,  adher'd  the  left  kidney  in  a  putrid  and  flaccid
•'  ftate."

But  while  I  take  notice  of  thefe  things,  I  would  not  have  you  fuppofe
from  hence,  that  I  am  quite  a  ftranger  to  thofe  internal  abfcefles,  whereby
not  only  a  pain  of  the  loins,  os  facrum,  or  jpina  dorfi,  may  be  excited,  buc  a
caries  of  the  vertebrae  alfo  may  be  brought  on.  For  I  know,  to  refer  to  thofe
I  have  read  of  in  the  more  modern  books,  that  abfcefles  have  been  found  in  that

(f)  Tom.  I.  [J)  Eph.  n.  c,  gent.  9.  obf.  59.

Vol.  II.  L  1  I  part


442  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

part  of  the  melbcolon,  which  many  call  the  meforcftum  (a  wotd  that  is  tin-
learnedly  compounded)  in  thofe  whole  fymptoms  •,  and  among  thefe  "  pains
"  within  the  os  facrunv,"  are  accurately  defcrib'd  in  the  Commercium  Litte-
rarium.  I  know,  likewile,  from  the  Ads  of  the  Csefarean  Academy  (e),  that
they  have  been  attended  with  pains  of  the  loins,  and  back  ;  in  whom,  after
death,  large  internal  abiceiTes  were  found,  together  with  a  blackncfs,  either
of  the  lower  lumbar  vertebrae,  and  a  caries,  which  had  broken  down  one
half  of  the  os  facrum  into  little  pieces ;  or  a  fimilar  diforder  of  the  firft  lum-
bar, and  the  laft  thoracic  vertebra.

Yet  I  cannot  forget  either  the  merchant,  who  having  labour'd  a  whole  year,
under  a  very  great  pain  of  the  fpina  dorfi,  had  an  aneuriim,  as  Ballonius  (f)  has
alTerted,  in  the  aorta,  where,  lying  upon  the  vertebrs  of  the  loins,  it  is  di-
vided into  the  ilacs  ;  or  that  nobleman  who  had  been  afflifted  with  a  very
violent  pain  of  the  back,  in  whofe  aorta  was,  likewife,  found  an  aneurifm,
agreeably  to  the  diagnofis  of  Vefalius,  which  I  have  already  commended  (g),
and  which  was  really  furprizing  at  that  time,  though  eafily  imitable  now  ;
and  that  not  without  a  caries  of  the  neighbouring  vertebrse,  and  a  diforder  of
the  ribs.  And  as  long  as  I  fhall  call  to  mind  thefe,  and  other  examples  like
thefe,  which  have  frequently  ofFer'd  themfelves  to  others,  and  to  me  alfo,  I
cannot  help  fearing  (where  defcriptions  of  abfcefies  of  this  kind,  found  in
thofe  places  occur,  fo  as  to  leave  the  mind  in  fufpenfe)  left  an  aneurifm  ftiould
have  lain  hid  under  the  nam.e  of  an abfcefs.

Thus  far  of  fufpicions  in  diflefted  bodies  after  death,

2S.  And  in  regard  to  thofe  which  have  happen'd  to  me  in  living  bodies ;  to
omit  others  •,  I  will  mention  two  patients,  to  whom  I  myfelf  had  alfo  given  ad-
vice, when  I  was  in  the  place  of  my  nativity,  againft  violent  and  obftinate
pains  of  the  loins  and  back.  The  one  was  a  brazier,  by  name  Peregrini.
And  this  man  (as  I  heard  after  coming  here  to  take  upon  me  the  profefTor-
fn'ip)  had  ftill  continu'd  to  be  afflifted  with  his  pains,  till  he,  at  length,  died
fuddenly,  which  was  an  event  but  little  expefted  by  the  phyficians :  fo  that
my  fufpicion  was  confirm'd,  of  thefe  violent  pains  having  their  origin  from
an  aneurifm  of  the  aorta,  where  it  defcends  in  the  courfe  of  the  fpine ;  and
there  is  no  doubt  but  his  fudden  death  was  from  the  rupture  of  the  aneurifm.

But  the  other  was  a  nobleman,  by  name  John  Anthony  Corbiceo,  who
was  fnatch'd  away  by  a  fimilar  fate,  when  it  happen'd  unluckily  that  I  was
abfent-,  otherwife  I  might  have  had  the  liberty  of  dilTefting  the  body,  which
1  fliould  much  have  wifh'd.  For  I  fufpefted  an  aneurifm  in  him,  fo  as,  at  the
fame  time,  to  fear  left  a  vomica  might  He  hid  in  the  liver,  of  which,  when
ruptur'd,  a  fpeedy  death  would  be  the  confequence.  And,  indeed,  there
were  many  marks,  and  thofe  not  obfcure  ones  neither,  of  the  liver  being  af-
fefted ;  but  with  thefe,  neverthelefs,  were  prefent,  and  even  had  preceded  a
great  part  of  them,  and  perhaps  all,  fuch  pains  of  the  loins,  as  are  not
v/ont  to  be  join'd  with  a  vomica  of  the  liver.  It  is,  perhaps,  worth  while  to
relate  the  whole  hiftory  to  you  here  with  accuracy,  efpecially  as  I  have  pro-
nns'd  it  to  you  before  {h).

{e)  A.  i74?.hebd.  20.  n,  3..  {g)  Epift.  17.  n.  3.

{f)  Paradigm.  13.  C-^)  Epift.  36.  n.  6.

This,


Letter  XL. Article  28.  443

This  gentleman  was  fixty  years  of  age,  tail  in  ftature,  of  a  large  mufcular
body,  his  face  being  red  from  fmall  fubcutaneous  veins,  which  were  here  and
there  confpicuous  ;  but  particularly  at  the  lower  part  of  the  nofe.  The  flux
of  blood  from  the  hsemorrhoidal  veins ;  which  us'd  to  return  at  intervals,  and
without  any  injury  to  the  conftitution  ;  having  been  diminifli'd  now  for  a
twelvemonth,  and  uneafy  affeftions  of  the  mind  coming  on,  his  body  began  to
befomewhat  emaciated,  before  the  beginning  of  the  fpring,  in  the  year  lyip.
And  foon  after,  as  he  was  riding  in  his  chariot,  as  his  cuftom  was  then,  a
pain  difcovcr'd  itfelf  in  each  of  his  loins,  and  that  part  of  thefpine  which  lies  be-
twixt them  :  in  which  parrs  it  had  been  before  obfcure  only,  and  not  conftantlv,
but  fometimes.  Now,  however,  it  not  only  continu'd,  but,  being  increas'd
about  the  beginning  of  April,  and  grown  much  more  fevere  before  iVlay,  was
very  troublefome  to  the  patient,  efpecially  when  he  was  fitting,  or  lying  down  ;
and  ftill  more  when  he  endeavour'd  to  turn  himfelf  in  the  flighteft  manner  ;
or  upon  bending  his  body,  and  raifing  it  again ;  or  when  he  rofe  from
his  bed.

It  was  thought  proper,  on  account  of  thofe  things  which  I  have  faid  of
the  hasmorrhoidal  flux,  and,  in  like  manner,  on  account  of  the  blood,  which,
in  the  preceding  months,  had  flow'd,  more  than  once,  ipontaneouQy  from  the
noftrils,  that  blood  fhould  be  taken  away,  firft  from  the  arm,  and  after  that
from  the  piles ;  care  being  previoudy  taken  that  the  belly,  which  was  then
coftive,  fhould  be  relax'd.  Opening  the  belly  was  of  great  ufe  to  the  patient,
as  the  firft  bleeding  was  alfo  ;  lb  that  the  pain  now  leem'd  to  be  quite  re-
mov'd.  But  the  furgeon,  neverthelefs,  having,  without  confuking  any  phy-
fician,  applied  leeches  to  the  piles,  which  he  found  to  be  very  turgid,  fo
great  a  quantity  of  blood  was  fuddenly  difcharg'd,  that,  not  long  after,  there
appear'd  marks  of  the  habit  being  much  weaken'd  and  deprav'd.  Being,
therefore,  fent  for  again,  after  the  middle  of  June,  I  not  only  heard  what  I
have  already  related  to  you,  but  other  circumftances  alfo.  For  it  was  now
more  than  twenty  days  from  the  time  that  a  jaundice  had  appear'd,  with  an
oedematous  fwelling  of  the  feet :  at  firft  he  could  get  no  fleep  ;  his  appetite
for  food  was  loft  •,  and  he  had  a  languid  fenfation  of  the  ftomach  after  din-
ner :  but  now  this  ienfation  was  quite  remov'd,  and  his  fleep  and  appetite
alfo,  though  the  latter  in  part  only,  had  return'd  fince  the  time  in  v/hich  he
firft  began  to  take  the  remedies  that  were  given  him  againft  the  jaundice:
and  among  thefe  rem^edies  it  had  been  obferv'd  that  rhubarb,  though  very
fparingly  given  with  currants,  had  increas'd  the  lafiitude ;  not  fo  much  be-
caufe  it  purg'd  much  by  ftool,  as  becaufe  it  exacerbated  the  pain  in  the  laft
lumbar  vertebra,  and  the  bafis  of  the  neighbouring  os  facrum.  For  the  patient
complain'd  much  of  this  pain  being  a  great  fatigue  to  him;  and  afferted-,  that
it  was  much  more  troublefome,  if  he,  at  any  time,  walk'd  through  his
chamber.

It  chagrin'd  me  very  much,  that  the  pain,  which  had  been  fuppos'd  to
be  entirely  remov'd,  fhould  have  not  only  return'd,  foon  after  it  feem'dto
have  ceas'd,  but  ftiould  become  more  violent  every  day.  Yet  T  was  ftill
more  difpleas'd  with  other  fymptoms.  For  I  obferv'd  that  the  pulfe  of  the
patient  was  frequent,  and  fomewhat  hard  ;  his  refpiration  now  and  then  deep,
and  difficult,  as  it  were-,  his  feet,  and  the  lower  parts  of  his  legs,  but  parti-

L  i  1  2  cularlv


44-4  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

cularly  the  foot  and  leg  of  the  right  fide,  were  fomewhat  fwell'd,  and  pre-
ferv'd  the  marks  of  prefflire,  after  the  finger  was  applied  to  them  :  his  fl<in
and  his  eyes  were  yellowifh  ;  his  urine,  and  his  eyes  alio,  were  obferv'd  to
be  more  yellow  in  the  day-time,  and  what  was  the  worft  of  all,  when  I  ap-
plied rny  hand  to  his  belly,  I  found,  on  the  right-fide,  vinder  the  very  arch
pf  the  lower  ribs,  the  liver  fwell'd  to  the  fize  of  a  kid's  head,  and  hard  be-
fides ;  but  without  pain.  While  1  was  feeling  this  tumour,  the  patient  faid
that  he  had  obferv'd  it  for  the  fpace  of  three  years,  though  not  to  be  fo  large,
as  he  had,  alio,  fome  yellownefs  in  his  eyes ;  and  yet,  fays  he,  you  all  very
well  know  that  I  have  always  had  good  health  till  this  year.

Having  very  cautioufly  determin'd,  in  conjunction  with  his  phyfician,  up-
on fuch  remedies  as  feem'd  moft  proper  at  that  time,  I  went  to  fee  the  pa-
tient again  a  third  time,  before  the  middle  of  July,  in  order  to  confult  with
the  fame  phyfician,  and  with  Albertini,  who  had  been  fent  for  from  Bologna.
At  this  time,  however,  the  oedematous  fwelling  of  the  lower  limbs  was  en-
tirely vanilh'd,  I  fuppofe  becaufe  the  patient  lay  in  bed  for  the  moft  part :  he
had  a  good  appetite  for  food,  and  his  ftomach  feem'd  to  perform  its  office
very  well.  But  he  was  troubled  with  watchings  in  the  night :  his  pulfe  was
more  frequent  in  the  evening,  though  it  was  pretty  much  lb  in  the  morning;
it  was  much  larger  than  it  had  been  before,  and  not  witliout  fome  impetus :
he  had  a  thirft  :  his  tongue  was  very  dry,  and  ting'd  with  a  red  colour,  In-
cHning  to  blacknefs :  the  fkin  was  not  yet  without  yellownefs,  although  the
ftools  were  not,  nor  had  before  been,  of  a  white  colour  :  his  urine  was  even
then  of  a  faturated  colour,  but  thin  :  the  tumour  of  the  liver,  in  which  there
had  been  pain,  fometimes,  fince  my  having  feen  the  patient,  though  it  had
been  readily  appeas'd,  might  at  that  time  be  felt  without  pain,  unlefs  any
one  handled  it  for  a  long  time,  and  fomewhat  roughly  ;  for  then  fome  pain
arofe  in  the  lower  edge  of  the  liver.

Albertini,  while  he  was  examining  this  tumour  with  his  hand,  thought  he
could  obferve  fome  inequality,  juft  as  if  the  furface  of  that  vifcus  was  made
rough,  with  a  kind  of  pretty  large  granules ;  and  from  hence  he  conjedtur'd
that  the  tiunour  was  inclin'd  to  a  fcirrhous  nature,  in  confequence  of  the
glandular  bodies,  as  it  v/ere,  of  the  liver  being  diftended  by  the  concreted
bile  :  yet,  by  reafon  of  the  pain,  he  was  afraid  left  the  nature  of  the  tumour
fliould  be  different  in  fome  other  part.  When  he  had,  in  conjundion  with.
us,  approv'd  of  fuch  things  as  it  became  a  very  cautious  phyfician  to  approve
of,  and  had  return'd  to  Bologna ;  and  I  was  gone  to  a  diftant  place  to  attend
the  cure  of  a  patient  there  •,  it  fuddenly  happen'd  that  this  patient ;  who  had
not  only  feem'd  to  be  no  worfe  in  thofe  days,  but  on  the  fourth  from  our  con-
fulting  together,  feem'd  to  thofe  about  him,  and  in  particular  to  himfelf,  to
be  much  better-,  having  got  up  to  take  his  fupper,  at  the  firft  hour  of  the
.night,  was  feiz'd  with  a  kind  of  troublefome  feniation  of  his  ftomach,  and  of
die  affctFted  part ;  his  face  being,  at  the  fame  time,  cover'd  all  over  with  a.
cold  fweat,  his  lower  limbs  very  cold,  and  his  belly  very  tumid.

He  was  already  laid  in  bed  again,  when  the  phyfician,  who  had  been  fent

for  in  hafte  on  this  occafion,  found,  befide  the  other circumft'ances, a  pain

of  the  whole  epigaftrium,  a  reaching  to  vomit,  a  low  and  languid  pulfe  ;  his

voice  and  his  fenfes  being  weak,  and  his  face  like  that  of  a  carcafe. Thcre-

5  fore,.


Letter  XL. Article  29.  445

fore,  at  the  eighth  hoar  from  the  beginning  of  thefe  fymptoms,  death  came
on.  Muft  we  fuppofe  this  to  have  happen'd  from  an  abfcefs  of  the  liver  beino-
rUptur'd,  as  molt  of  the  fymptoms,  but  not  all  of  them,  leem  to  fliow  ?  Or
muft  we  fuppofe  it  to  have  been  owing  to  the  rupture  of  a  fanguiferous  vef-
fel  ?

Albertini  himfelf ;  who  had  lately  obfcrv'd  all  the  circumftances  which  fell
under  his  examination,  with  great  accuracy,  according  to  his  cuftom,  and  had.
enquir'd  into  the  others,  and  did  not  know  of  any  more  befides  thofe  which.
I  wrote  to  you  of  juft  now  ;  having  receiv'd  an  account,  in  a  letter  from  me,
of  the  death  of  this  man  -,  though  he  naturally  conjecVur'd  that  fomething
had  been  ruptur'd,  by  the  motion  of  the  patient  in  rifing,  and  that  a  great
quantity  of  fluid  was  extravafated  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  ;  yet  he  declar'd
that  he  could  not  fo  well  conjedlure  what  it  was  that  had  been  ruptur'd.  Bur
if  fome  marks  of  a  fuppurated  tumour,  and  among  thefe,  what  he  chiefly
requir'd,  rigors,  and  fhiverings,  had  preceded  -,  none  of  which  certainly  had
ever  happen'd ;  he  then  confefs'd,  that  he  .(hould,  without  hefitation,  have
accounted  for  the  circumftance  from  a  ruptur'd  vomica  of  the  liver.  There-
fore, if,  in  any  part  of  the  liver,  any  tumour  had  happen'd  ro  come  flowly
and  latently  to  fuppuration,  that  he  fufpeifled  the  fudden  death  vras  not  fo-
much  to  be  imputed  to  the  rupture  of  that  fmall  part,  as  to  the  rupture  of
fome  contiguous  blood-vefllel,  which  had  been  injur'd  by  the  pus.  Yet  by
this  fufpicion,  that  old  and  obftinate  pain  in  the  vertebrjE  was  not  explain'd,
mention  of  which  I  do  not  remember  to  have  feen  made,  in  the  great  num-
ber of  hiftories  of  abfcefles  of  the  liver,  that  I  have^confider'd  ;  and  befides,  that
tumour,  which  we  had  touch'd,  with  our  hands,  was  far  diftant  from  the
vertebrs  :  and  the  lower  edge  of  the  liver,  where  I  have  faid  the  pain  had
been  for  the  moft  part,  of  late,  was  ftill  more  fo.

Nor  is  there  any  colour  for  our  fuppofing  the  pain,  which  was  extended  to
the  lower  vertebrse,  in  particular,  and  the  bafis  of  the  os  factum,  to  have
been  owing  to  the  trunk  of  the  hemorrhoidal  vein  ;  the  roots  of  which  we  have
faid  were  fo  turgid ;  for  after  that  great  quantity  of  blood  being  difcharg'd
thereby,  they  were  certainly  no  longer  turgid  :  and  when  they  were  the  mofl
turgid,  it  had,  even  then,  happen'd  that  the  pain  feem'd  to  have  been  re-
mov'd,  though  for  a  fhort  time.  But  if  an  aneurifm  of  the  aorta,  where  it
goes  down  upon  the  vertebrse  •,  of  which  I  have  fome  fufpicion,  befides  the
tumour  of  the  liver ;  does  not  feem  to  you  to  be  fuch  a  difeafe,  that  the  ef-
fedts  of  it  could  be  fo  far  obfcur'd,  even  for  a  fhort  time  ;  and  that  cannot  be
conceiv'd  to  exiffc  v/ithout  many  other,  and  confiderable  fymptoms ;  I  beg  of
you  to  determine  nothing  on  the  -queftion,  before  you  have  read  the  obferva-
tion  which  is  here  fubjoin'd.

29.  An  old  man,  who  was  formerly  fuppos'd  to  have  been  diforder'd  from
the  lues  venerea,  had  already  lain  many  days  in  this  hofpital,  complaining
of  every  thing,  but  what  could  refer  to  that  lues,  or  to  a  large  internal  an-
eurifm ;  and  certainly,  for  I  enquir'd  with  the  greateft  care,  was  neither
troubled  with  pain,  nor  a  fenfe  of  weight,  nor  a  difficulty  of  breathing.  He
died  a  little  after  dinner,  and  that  fuddenly,  about  the  middle  of  December
in  the  year  171 8.

The  belly  being  open'd,  and the  urinary  bladder  taken  away,  together
with  the  penis;  for  I  was  at  that  time  bufy  in  obferving  fome  things  that  re-
late


446  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

late  to  thofe  parts ;  the  urethra  confirm'd  the  opinion  of  that  old  lues.  For
it  was,  in  I'everal  places,  full  of  fears,  and  the  leniinal  caruncle  itfelf  was
not  in  its  natural  ftate  of  conformation  ;  fo  that  it  was  not  eafy  to  demonftrate
the  two  very  fmall  orifices,  into  which  it  is  perforated  laterally,  nor  the  orifice
of  the  finus,  which  lies  betwixt  them.  To  thcfe  were  added  fibres,  diftin£t
from  each  other,  and  prominent  •,  from  which  fomething  like  a  fmall  triangle
was  form'd,  the  bafis  whereof  was  very  near  to  the  bladder,  while  the  ver-
tex touch'd  the  caruncle.

The  vifcera  being  then  remov'd,  a  large  aneurifm  of  t-he  great  artery  came
into  view  -,  refembling  a  crefcent  in  its  figure,  the  back  of  which  was  plae'd
tranfverfiy  under  the  annex'd  diaphragm,  while  the  horns  were  turn'd  down-
wards, and  were  hid  behind  the  pfos  mufcles  on  each  fide  ;  the  left  horn
lo  far  as  to  reach  to  the  lower  third  part  of  the  mufcle  ;  but  the  right  did  not
come  down  lb  far.  This  aneurifm,  likewife,  had  no  pofterior  paries  •,  where-
fore, taking  away  the  blood  with  which  it  was  fiU'd  ;  and  which  had  been,
in  great  meafure,  form'd  into  polypous  lamins,  lying  one  upon  another  ;  the
bodies  of  two  or  three  vertebrse,  that  belong'd  to  the  lower  part  of  the  thorax,
and  the  upper  part  of  the  loins,  immediately  appear'd  :  thefe  vertebrse  were
naked,  but  deeply  eroded  ;  the  white  and  cartilaginous  ligaments  being  here,
alfo,  protuberant  betwixt  body  and  body,  and,  to  appearance,  untouch'd  by
difeafe.  But  this  aneurifm  had  been  ruptur'd,  in  its  upper  part,  on  the  left
fide  ;  fo  that  the  blood,  where  the  diaphragm  had  given  way,  burft  forth,  from
the  fame  fide,  into  the  cavitv  of  the  thorax,  which  it  had  almoft  univerfally

mi'd.

30.  You  fee,  then,  how  obfcure  the  figns  of  fo  large  an  aneurifm  were  in
this  cafe  •,  though  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  fome  muft  formerly  have  pre-
ceded, and  particularly  pains  of  the  loins.

But  if  you  compare  this  obfervation,  and  that  made  upon  the  carman  (/),
with  other  obfervations  of  aneurifms  in  the  aorta,  whereby  the  neighbouring
vertebrjE  were  corroded  ;  you  will,  perhaps,  be  furpriz'd  at  one  thing,  I
mean,  that  the  ligaments  lying  betwixt  thefe  vertebra  had  appear'd  to  us  to
be  untouch'd :  which  other  writers  of  thefe  obfervations,  as  tar  as  I  can  at
prelent  remember,  have  not  taken  notice  of.  And  indeed  fome  of  them
have  exprefiy  laid  that  thofe  ligaments  were  found  to  be  hoUow'd  out,  and
confum'd,  no  lefs  than  the  bodies  of  the  vertebrje  ;  as,  for  inftance,  the  cele-
brated Vernojus  (k),  and  the  author  of  the  laft  figure  but  one,  in  the  memoirs
of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris,  for  the  year  1714,  whereby  this
is  clearly  fhown.

And  indeed  that  cartilages  are  then  liable  to  confumption  -,  whether  this
happens  from  the  frequently  repeated  ftrokes  of  the  blood,  rulhing  into  the
aneurifm,  or  from  the  eroding  particles,  as  I  have  already  explain'd  (I) ;  is
fhown  by  the  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Maloet,  given  us  in  the  fame  me-
moirs, for  the  year  1733  ;  wherein  fome  cartilaginous  fegments  of  the  afpera
arteria,  which  ferv'd  in  the  ftead  of  a  pofterior  paries  to  the  aneurifm,  were
found  to  be  become  already  very  weak,  and  lefs  convex  than  natural;  and  two
of  them,  in  fome  meafure,  confum'd. And  as  I  have  fpoken  to  you  of  this

{^i)  Supra,  n.  26. (i)  Comment.  Acad.  Sc-  Imp.  Petropolit.  torn.  6. (/)  Epifl.  18.  n.  27.

obfsr-


Letter  XLI. Article i.  44.7-

obfervation  before  (m);  I  alfo  there  faid,  at  the  fame  time,  that  the  fofter
parts  were  lefs  worn  down  than  the  more  firm  and  folid,  as  they  gave
lefs  refiftance  to  the  ftroke  ;  but  here  I  do  not  fee  that  the  fame  exphcat'ioa
can  be  admitted  of.

For  if  1  fay  that  the  ligaments,  which  lie  betwixt  the  vertebra,  give  lefs
refiftance  than  the  vertebrae,  and  for  that  reafon  fuffer  lefs  attrition  alfo ;  you
will  immediately  afk,  why  then  were  they  not  found  in  the  fame  ftate  in
others,  as  they  were  in  thofe  two  men  whom  I  defcrib'd  •,  but  in  the  one  con-
fum'd,  in  the  other  untouch'd  ?  If  thefe,  in  whom  they  were  untouch'd,  h^d
been  both  of  them  young  men,  and  the  other  old,  it  might  perhaps  have
been  anfwer'd,  that  in  the  former  thefe  ligaments  gave  lefs  refiftance,  and  in
the  latter  more.  But  not  to  infift  upon  the  other  examples;  as  I  certainly
may  upon  that  given  by  Vernojus,  which  is  from  a  young  man  ;  even  the
firft  of  mine  is  from  a  young  man  :  fo  that  it  does  not  appear  why  they
fhould  be  deftroy'd  in  the  former,  and  not  in  the  latter  •,  nor  yet  why  they
Ihould  not  be  deftroy'd  in  the  old  man  whofe  hiftory  I  have  given.  The  ob-
fcure  caufe,  therefore,  of  this  difference  ;  whether  to  be  accounted  for  from
the  different  nature  of  the  eroding  humour,  in  different  bodies,  or  from  any
other  caufe;  I  leave  for  you  to  inveftigace  :  for  this  letter  is  already  fuffi-
ciently  long.  Some  days  hence  I  Ihall  fend  you  another ;  but  in  the  mean,
time  I  wifh  you  much  health.

(«)  Epill.  21.  n.  48^


LETTER the FORTY-FIRS

Treats  of  the  Suppreflion  of  Urine»


LTHOUGH  the  total  defeft  of  a  urinary  difcharge  happens  either
_  ^^  from  a  diforder  of  the  kidnies  and  ureters,  or  of  the  bladder  itfelf,  and
urethra ;  yet  it  has  never  happen'd  either  to  Valfalva,  or  to  m.e,  to  diffed
the  bodies  of  thofe  who  died  from  the  former  caufe  only.  Nor  is  it  to  be
wonder'd  at,  fince  the  kidnies  and  ureters  are  double  ;  fo  that  if  their  oiHce
ftiould  happen  to  be  fufpended  in  one  fide,  the  defe£t  is  fupplied  by  the  other.
For  what  is  believed  by  many  is  not  always  true,  that  when  either  of  the
kidnies  is  inactive,  the  other  is  inadive^  alfo,  at  the  fame  time :  which  opi-
S,  nion.


448 Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

nion  is  rejedled  in  the  foregoing  letter  (a) :  and  you  will  even  find  fuch  a
number  of  obfervations,  in  the  twenty-fourth  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum
(l>)  (whereto  this  letter  relates)  which  may  be  added  to  the  obfervations  I
have  pointed  out  in  the  preceding ;  that,  if  you  compare  them  with  thofe  of
the  urine  being  fupprefs'd  from  a  diforder  of  one  fide  only,  you  will  be  very
clearly  convinc'd  that  theie  latter  obfervations  are  much  more  rare  than  the
former.

For  thofe  of  the  firft  kind  will  be  met  with  in  feveral  places  ;  not  to  men-
tion where  Gerard  Blafius  (c),  Ifbrandus  Diemerbroeck  (d),  Ludovicus  Me*-
catus  (e),  infill  upon  this  kind  as  being  the  moft  frequent :  and  if  you  would
choofe  to  add  thofe  which  have  fince  come  out,  in  the  volumes  of  "the  Cse-
farean  Academy  (f),  you  would  certainly  find  none  which  did  not  relate  to
the  fame  kind  ;  that  is  to  fay,  both  the  kidnies  being  either  feiz'd  with  a
fphacelus,  or,  even,  as  Rudolphus  Jacobus  Camerarius  faw  (g),  being  af-
feiSted  with  an  unufual  lofs  of  tone,  and  flaccidity,  or  fl;ufF'd  up  with  cal-
culi:  or  if  one  of  them  did  not  labour  under  the  fame  diforder,  at  leaft  con-
fum'd,  and  inaftive;  or  its  ureter  obftrufted  with  land  and  calculi.

But  the  obfervations  of  the  other  kind,  that  is  of  the  urine  being  fupprefs'd
on  account  of  the  diforder  of  one  fide  only,  in  the  cited  feftion  of  the  Sepul-
chretum, amount  but  to  few  •,  and  fo  much  the  fewer,  becaufe  one  of  them,
as  that  which  is  read  under  the  nineteenth  article  of  the  firft  obfervation,  does
not  belong  to  this  clafs,  as  it,  at  firft  fight,  feems  to  do  :  and  this  we  may
clearly  gather  from  the  fame  hiftory,  when  more  fully  given,  not  only  in  the
twenty-fecond  fe£lion,  under  article  the  firft  of  the  thirteenth  obfervation,
but  even  in  this  very  feftion,  under  the  fourth  article  of  the  firft  obfervation  ;
lb  that  there  was  no  occafion  to  repeat  mutilated  obfervations  in  particular,
not  to  fay,  to  repeat  them  a  third,  and  even  a  fourth  time  :  for  what  we  have
under  the  twentieth  and  twenty-fecond  articles,  of  the  fame  firft  obfervation,
although  they  may  feem  to  be  different,  by  reafon  of  the  name,  and  number
of  days,  being  chang'd  through  negledt  •,  yet  that  it  is  the  very  fame,  appears
from  infpeding  the  third  fe£tion  of  the  firft  book,  under  article  the  firft  of
the  fifteenth  obfervation  •,  and  in  like  manner  under  article  the  firft  of  the
thirteenth  obfervation,  of  the  twenty-fecond  fe£lion  which  Ijuftnow  quoted,
of  the  third  book.  And  I  could  wifh  this  hiftory  was  the  only  one  that  is  re-
peated in  that  twenty-fourth  feftion,  of  which  I  have  begun  to  fpeak.

But  you,  by  comparing  article  the  eleventh  of  the  fecond  obfervation,
with  article  the  ninth  of  the  fourth  ;  and,  in  hke  manner,  the  eighth  obfer-
vation with  article  the  fourth  of  the  tenth  (h) ;  and  article  the  feventh  of  this
laft,  with  the  eleventh  obfervation  ;  and  to  return  to  the  firft,  and  fecond  ob-
fervation, by  comparing  article  the  fecond  of  the  former,  with  article  the
twenty-firft ;  or  article  the  third,  which  is  improperly  mark'd  the  firft,  with

{a)  N.  15.  obf.  55.  &  56  ;  &  acl.  torn.  2.  append,  n.  3.  &

('6J  L.  3.  torn.  3.  in  obf.  6.

(c)  Obf.  I.  §  9.  {g)  Specim.  experim. circa  general,  part.

{/)  Ibid.  §.  10.  therap.  in  refolut.  hift.  3.
{e)  Obf.  z.  §.  I.  {i>)  Primam  de  duabus  intellege  eodemn.  X.

(y")Dec.  3.  a.  4.  obf.  60  ;  a.  7  &  8.  obf.  147  ;  defignatis,
a.  9.  &  10.  obf.  95;  &  cent.  5.  obf.  zz.  cent.  6.

article


Letter  XLI. Article  2.  449

article  the  twenty-feventh  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  with  article  the  fecond  of  the
fecond  obfervation  -,  you  will  immediately  perceive  how  much  better  it  would
have  been  to  have  given  them  only  once'-,  or,  if  the  authors  themfelves  had
written  their  own  obl'ervations  more  than  once,  and,  for  that  reafon,  not  always
in  the  fame  words,  to  have  added  the  fecond  manner  of  writing  it  immediately
under  the  other,  if  it  feem'd  a  thing  of  importance  to  do  it.

There  are,  however,  in  this  feftion  fome  hiftories  of  the  fecond  clafs  alfo,  as
under  obfervation  the  firft,  article  the  fourteenth,  and  under  obfervation  the
third,  article  the  fiift,  fecond  and  third  ;  and  if  you  pleafe,  moreover,  under  ob-
fervation the  fourth,  article  the  fecond.  But  what  are  thefe  to  the  far  greater
mimberof  the  firft  kind?  Which  is  increas'd  by  fome  others,  that  you  meet  with
in  the  additamenta  to  the  twenty  fourth  fedtion  :  for  the  obfervations,  given  in
this  fedtion,  ought  to  have  been  added,  in  the  greater  part  of  them,  to  the
preceding  fedion,  and  befides  this,  others  are  omitted,  even  thofe  that  are
moft  obvious ;  as,  for  inftance,  that  which  had  been  given  us  in  the  Centuria
of  Ruyfch  (/■_}.  It  is  certain  therefore,  it  happens  much  more  rarely  that  a
fuppreffion  of  urine  is  brought  on  by  a  diforder  of  the  kidnies  and  ureters,
which  are  double,  than  by  a  diforder  of  the  bladder  and  urethra,  which  are
imduplicated  parts  :  and  for  this  reafon  it  is  the  lefs  a  matter  of  furprize,  that
I  have  not  yet  had  it  in  my  power  to  difleft  the  bodies  of  thofe  who  have
perifh'd  from  an  obftruftion  of  thefe  firft- mention'd  parts.

2.  And  I  have  been  ftill  the  more  defirous  of  difTedlions  of  this  kind,  that  I
might  have  an  opportunity  to  examine  thofe  parts,  in  thefe  bodies,  from
whence,  through  which,  and  to  which,  different  authors  take  notice  of  diffe-
rent peculiar  paflages  of  the  urine.  For  although  I  have  propos'd  an  argu-
ment againft  thefe  paffages,  in  the  adverfaria  (^),  taken  from  thofe  circum-
ftances  which,  it  is  very  certain,  have  been  obferv'd  in  fuppreflions  of  urine
happening  from  a  diforder  of  the  kidnies ;  which  argument  has  feem'd  to
me  of  fo  much  the  more  weight,  fince  I  have  obferv'd,  that  it  was  very  plea-
fing,  not  only  toothers,  afterwards,  but  even  to  Boerhaave  (/)  himfelf:  yet  I
wifh'd  more  fully  to  fatisfy  a. certain  celebrated  man,  who  thought  that  thefe
peculiar  paffages  terminated  in  the  pelves  of  the  kidnies,  and  that  neighbour-
hood, as  many  believ'd  even  before  :  fo  that,  although  the  kidnies  only  are-
feen  to  be  obftrufted  by  calculi,  or  any  other  impediment  of  this  kind,  yet,
for  tliat  very  reafon,  the  mouths  of  thefe  paffages  may,  at  tlie  fame  time,  be
comprefs'd,  and  tranfmit  nothing,  at  that  time  into  ihe  pelves,  or  the  neigh-
bouring ureters.

You  therefore,  when  you  fliall  be  furnifti'd  with  an  opportunity  of  differ-
ing bodies  of  this  kind,  will,  I  hope,  do  what  I  intended  to  have  done  ;
that  is  to  examine,  with  the  greateft  accuracy,  all  the  membranes  which  are
bordering  upon,  or  connefted  to,  thofe  parts  ;  for  if  the  mouths  of  theie
paffages  are  comprefs'd,  it  cannot  be  but  the  remaining  traft  of  them  muft
be  fo  much  the  more  diftended  with  the  ftagnating  fluid,  in  proportion  as  the
orifices,  which  emit  this  fluid,  are  more  fhut  up  ;  efpecially  as  the  offices
which  they  afcribe  to  thefe  parts  require,  and  even  they  themfelves  readily
allow,  thefe  paffages  no:  to  be  very  fmall :  although  it  feems,  from  one  cir-

(0  Obf.  15.  clj  Pra;lca.  adinftit.  §.  385.

(ij ill.  Animad.  36.

Vol..  II.  M  m  m  cumftance.


450  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

cumftance,  as  if  your  labour  would  be  in  vain ;  I  mean  from  this,  that  we
never  read  of  thefe  paflages  having  appear'd  to  any  one  in  cafes  of  this  kind,
notwithftanding  a  great  number  of  bodies  had  been  taken  in  by  fuch  perfons,
which  muft,  of  courfe,  have  diftended  thefe,  or  any  other  pallages,  that  have
been  fuppos'd,  by  others,  to  lead  to  the  bladder  -,  and  notwithftanding  very
accurate  and  cxperienc'd  difledters  examin'd  the  bodies  after  death.

For  Francifcus  Plazzonus ;  to  ufe  the  example  of  that  hiftory  which  I  have
fliown  to  be  three  times  repeated,  in  this  fedtion  of  the  Sepulchretum  {m) ;
either  difleded  himfelf,  or  was  prefent  at  the  difledlion  of,  that  monk,  to
whom,  among  other  diuretics,  even  cantharides  had  been  given  ;  which  had
ulcerated  the  bladder,  although  empty  :  fo  as  to  convince  us  that  the  virase
thereof  had  reach'd  thither  by  means  of  the  fanguiferous  vefTels,  and  not  by
any  peculiar  unknown  paflages ;  which,  together  with  this  virtue,  would  have
tranfmitted  the  diuretic  potions,  at  the  fame  time,  either  into  the  pelves  of  the
kidnies,  or  ureters,  or  immediately  from  the  ftomach  into  the  bladder.  For
this  fecond  opinion  was  embrac'd  by  many,  either,  perhaps,  on  account  of  thefe
words  of  Hippocrates  (ji)  ;  or  at  leaft,  of  a  very  ancient  author ;  "  if  a  child
"  fhall  have  veins  going  from  the  ftomach  to  the  bladder  which  are  large,
"  and  have  a  power  of  attraftion,"  or  rather  on  account  of  thefe  things
which  they  had  heard  of,  as  happening  in  a  true  diabetes,  very  extraordinary
examples  of  which  you  may  read  in  Marcellus  Donatus  {o) ;  I  mean  "  that
"  what  is  drunk  fhould  be  difcharg'd  by  the  urinary  paflTages,  without  the
"  leaft  change  whatever,  preferving  the  fame  colour,  confiftence,  tafte  and
"  fmell,"  as  when  taken  in.

But  if  it  is  necefl"ary,  for  that  reafon,  to  fuppofe  dufts  going  from  the  fto-
mach to  the  bladder ;  it  would  be  necefl!ary  to  fuppofe  others  going  to  the
ikin,  as  to  thefe  examples,  Donatus  has  mads  no  fcruple  to  fubjoin  this,  alfo,.
of  a  very  handfome  girl,  who  had  been  for  a  long  time  afflided  with  fevers,  in
whom  "  the  fluids,  that  flie  drank  down,  were  difcharg'd  from  the  precordia
"  by  fweat,  before  the  cup  was  well  taken  from  her  mouth  ;  and  that  in  the
"  fame  quantity  in  which  they  had  been  taken  in,  and  without  any  altera-
"  tion  ;  fo  that  from  red  wine,  the  linen,  with  which  ft^e  was  cover'd,  was
"  ting'd  with  a  red  colour ;"  and  "  from  white  broth,  in  like  manner,  with
"  a  white  colour  •,"  and  that  this  had  been  obferv'd  "  for  the  fpace  of  two
"  weeks."  Yet  in  regard  to  thefe  unknown  du£ts ;  by  what  way  foever  they
may  be  fuppos'd  to  pafs  from  the  ftomach  to  the  bladder,  or  urinary  paflTages  j
I  remember  that  the  celebrated  Pafta  very  juftly  obferv'd  to  me,  formerly,  in
a  letter,  that  if  there  really  were  fuch  paflages,  it  muft,  of  courfe,  have  hap-
pen'd  to  thofe  who  abufe  quickfilver,  in  our  country  as  well  as  others,  fo  as.
to  take  near  an  ounce  every  morning,  that  fome  part  of  it,  at  leaft,  would
have  been  difcharg'd  with  the  urine ;  which,  however,  had  by  no  means  been .
obferv'd,  by  our  phyfieians, in  anyone  of  thefe  perfons.

But  if  you  fliould  fay,  that  thefe  du(5ts  are  fcarcely  open  in  a  natural  ftate  ;-
though  they  are  dilated  in  fevers,  from  which  the  chief  of  thofe  examples-
of  Donatus  are  taken  ;  you  would  neither  anfwer  the  objeftion  of  Pafta,  nor
obviate  the  other  phoenomena,  on  account  of  which  thefe  dud^s  have  been
fuppos'd to  exift : and, certainly, in  the firft  of  Donatus, from Trin-

(mj  Supra  n.  i, (k)  De  Morbis.  1.  4.  n.  28.  (0)  De  Med.  Hift.  Mirab.  1.  4.  c.  27.

2  cavelliusv


Letter  XLI. Article  3,  4.  451

cavellius,  the  liqnor  that  was  drunk  ought  rather  to  have  conftring'd  the
orifices  of  thofe  du£ls,  as  the  patient  rpfus'd  to  drink  any  thing  "  that  was
"  not  almoft  cold."

But  what  fliall  we  fay,  you  will  afk,  to  a  more  late  obfervation  (p)  ?  I  mean
of  that  virgin  who  had  an  afcites,  and  in  whom  "  the  left  kidney,  as  well

"  as  the  right was  univerfally fcirrhous, and  indurated  •,  and  had

"  coalefc'd  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  even  no  pelvis  could  be  difcover'd ;"  not-
withftanding  this  patient  had  difcharg'd  urine,  though  indeed  "  in  a  ven,-
*'  fmall  quantity,  and  lim.pid  like  fountain-water,"  inftead  of  being  "  red,  and
"  thick,"  as  in  the  beginning :  but  ftill,  however,  fhe  had  difcharg'd
urine.

Was  it  becaufe  a  little  quantity  of  the  fluid  ftagnating  in  the  belly,  had
pafs'd  "  through  the  pores  of  the  bladder,  which  went  from  without  in-
"  wards  ?"  Or,  rather,  becaufe  fome  fmall  part  of  one,  or  other,  of  the
kidnies,  had  not  been  as  yet,  entirely  indurated,  and  conftrifted,  when  (he
laft  made  water,  as  it  appear'd  to  be  after  death  -,  for  which  reafon  urine  had
ilill  been  fecreted  through  the  narrow  paflages,  as  the  unufual  limpidity  of  it
feems  to  demonftrate  ?

Certainly,  it  did  not  pafs  through  dudts  opening  into  the  ureters,  or  blad-
der ;  inafmuch  as  they  would  have  brought  a  much  greater  quantity  of  fluid,
from  the  ftomach.

3.  But  be  this  as  it  will  -,  I  fhall  here  give  you  what  Valfalva  and  I  have
feen  in  the  dead  bodies  of  thofe,  who,  while  living,  had  labour'd  under  a
fuppreffion  of  urine,  from  a  diforder  of  the  bladder  or  urethra ;  yet  what  I  fliall
now  give  you  is  not  the  whole.  For  you  have  had  in  the  lafb  letter  fj),  and,
in  lil^e  manner,  in  the  twenty-fourth  (r),  fome  of  the  appearances  which  he
had  obferv'd  ;  and  fome  of  thofe  that  I  have  obferv'd,  in  the  fourth  letter  (j),
and  tenth  (t)  :  and  in  others  you  will  have  other  remarks.  What  I  fuppos'd,
then,  to  relate  principally  to  this  fubjeA,  among  the  papers  of  Valfalva,  are
the  following.

4.  A  young  hufbandman-,  whofe  two  brothers,  and  they  young  men  alfo,
had  died  of  acute  difeafes,  about  the  vernal  equinox,  in  the  preceding  years  ;
died  in  this  manner,  at  the  fame  time  of  year.  Having  repell'd  a  fcabies  by
I  know  not  what  kind  of  ointment,  his  urine  was  foon  after  fupprefs'd,  not
without  a  vomiting,  and  pain,  fometimes,  in  the  loins  on  the  left  fide.  How-
ever, he  did  diicharge  urine  after  this  feveral  times ;  but  in  fmall  quantity,
like  a  faturated  lixivium  in  colour,  and  with  pain :  it  was  in  vain  attempted
to  increafe  the  difcharge  by  introducing  the  catheter.

At  length  the  whole  body  fwell'd:  and  a  large  and  laborious  refpiration
coming  on,  he  died  on  the  day  following  ;  which  was  about  the  twenty-firfl:
day  from  the  beginning  of  the  fupprefl"ion.

The  bladder  and  the  kidnies  were  found  ;  except  that  thefe  laft-mention'd
parts  were  fomewhat  larger  than  their  natural  fize  :  and  the  bladder  contain'd
about  two  pints  of  urine,  fuch  as  I  have  faid  was  difcharg'd.  And  in  the  cavity


of


{p)  Commerc.  Litter,  a.
:id  3.
(j)  N.  4.

1743.  Hebd.  25.  n. (>•)  N.  7.
CsJ  N.  19.
(0  N.  .3.

M  m  m  2

45  2  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

of  the  belly  was  a  ftagnating  fluid,  that  fmelt  like  urine,  though  finiilar  to
limpid  water.  This  fluid,  being  preierv'd  in  a  glafs  veflel,  feparated  into
many  broken  parts,  like  what  are  generally  contain'd  in  urine.

But  when  put  upon  the  fire,  it  at  firfl;  became  turbid,  and  fimilar  to  the
whey  of  cow's  milk,  and  foon  after  like  milk  itl'elf-,  and,  finally,  concreted  to
luch  a  degree,  as  perfetbly  to  refemble  the  white  of  an  egg  :  a  concretion  of
wliich  kind  had  been  never  before  feen  by  Valfalva,  in  any  morbid  humour
of  the  body.

In  the  thorax,  the  lungs  were  much  diflrended  with  air,  and  connefted  to
the  pleura  at  the  back  ;  they  were  found  ncverthelefs.  The  right  ventricle  of
the  heart  contain'd  a  polypous  concretion  of  a  moderate  fize,  the  left  con-
tain'd one  of  very  fmall  dimenfions.

5.  What  violent  diforders  have  been  brought  on,  by  the  repulfion  of  the
acrid  particles  of  a  fcabies,  into  the  blood,  has-been  already  fliown  by  mefz/j,
in  the  cafes  of  two  women.  But  in  thofe  patients,  thefe  repeli'd  particles  fell-
on  difi'erent  parts  :  in  this  young  man  they  mix'd  with  the  urine,  and  fell
upon  the  kidnies  and  bladder :  and  by  pricking  and  vellicating  the  internal
membranes  of  thefe  vifcera,  occafion'd  a  pain  in  both  of  them  ;  by  which  thefe
thin  membranes  were  crifp'd  up,  and  a  refiftance,  for  that  reafon,  almoft
conflantly  made  to  the  efflux  of  urine :  from  whence  the  kidnies  became
larger,  by  this  fluid  being  confin'd  internally  ;  and  the  bladder ;  either  be-^
caufe  it  frequently  contain'd  ica^cely  any  urine,  or  becaufe  it  could  not  con-
tra£t  itfelf  properly,  or  rather,  becaufe  it  did  not  admit  the  catheter,  when-
this  was  introduc'd,  into  the  urethra;  difcharg'd  nothing:  and  when  the
catheter  was.  withdrawn,  it  difcharg'd  nothing,  but  feldom,  and  that  with,
pain.

The  matter  of  urine,  then,  being  detain'd  in  great  meafure,  in  the  fangui-
ferbus  veflTels,  wasj  at  length,  the  caufe  of  death  :  although  it  overflow'dinto-
other  parts,  and  particularly  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  ;  as  was  prov'd  by
the  odour  of  the  fluid  which  ftagnated  there.  For  this  excrementitious
fluid  readily  mixes  itfelf  with  the  humours,  that  are  then  fecreted  from  the
blood.

Therefore ;  to  produce  an  example  which  has  not,  for  I  know  not  what
reafon,  been  added  to  the  Sepulchretum  ;  Malpighi  (x),  in  his  preceptor  Na-
tali ;  whofe  ureter  and  kidney  he  found  to  be  furprizingly  dilated,  from  the
tirine  being  intercepted  by  an  obftruded  calculus,  the  fuppreflion,  which  in
the  end  prov'd  mortal,  lafl:ing  for  many  days;  obferv'd  that  his  faliva  carried
in  it  the  tafl:e  and  fmell  of  urine,  and  that  the  halitus,  tranfpir'd  through  his.
fkin,  had  been  of  the  fame  urinous  kind.

And  Albertini  related  to  me,  that  the  noble  youth  ;  the  flrrudlure  of  whofe
kidnies  we  fee  defcrib'd  by  Malphigi,  in  the  letter  to  Sponius,;  had  not  only
fpat  up  a  faliva,  in  the  fame  difeafe,  which  had  the  tafte  and  fmell  of  urine,
but  even  almoft  urine  itfelf  inftead  of  faliva  ;  as  the  colour,  added  to  the  fmell
and  tafte  alfo,  tefl:ified  ;  the  matter  of  the  urine  flowing  to  the  falivary  glands.
in  fuch  a  quantity,  that  the  cheeks  and  the  parotid  glands  were  tumid.

{«)  Epift.  1.6.  n.  34.  &  Ep.  38.  n.  22.  {x)  Op.  Pofth.


Letter  XLI. Article  5.  4^3-

Byreafon  of  this  difcharge,  perhaps,  it  was  that  he  Ilv'd  fo  long; ;  till,  the
fuppreffion  being  overcome,  he  made  a  great  quantity  of  water :  akhoup-h  it,
neverthelefs,  happen'd  to  him,  as  it  has  frequently  happen'd  to  others,  when
they  have  at  length  difcharg'd  urine,  after  a  very  long  retention  ;  I  mean  that
the  humours,  and  the  vifcera,  being  injur'd,  and  deprav'd,  lie  died  not  lono-
after.

Thomas  Bartholin  (y) ;  when  he  mentions  other  excretions,  by  meaijig  of
which  patients  who  have  the  urine  fuppreis'd,  drag  on,  or  preferve  life  for
a  long  time  •,  omits  that  of  the  faliva  which  I  have  taken  notice  of,  and  enu-
merates ftools,  vomitings,  and  fweats.  He  produces  an  example  of  ftools
in  his  colleague  {%).  And  inftances  of  vomitings,  and  fweats,  though  he  has
not  exprefly  produc'd  any,  it  is  eafy  to  fupply  from  the  obfervations  o£
others.

Thus  our  Vallifneri  (a)  faw  vomiting  of  ferum  come  on,  ^fter  the  tenth
day  of  the  fuppreffion;  which  ferum  refembled  urine  in  its  colour,  tafte  and
odour  :  and  the  virgin,  who  was  the  fubje£l  of  this  diforder,  liv'd  till,  many
remedies  having  been  made  ufe  of  to  no  purpofe,  both  internally  and  exter-
nally, he  at  length  open'd  the  pafiages  of  the  kidnies  by  giving  mercury  in-
ternally, and  applying  it  outwardly.

Thus  a  phyfician  of  Mantua  (b)  faw  another  virgin  troubled  with  the  fame.
difeafe,  and  a  vomiting,  at  firfl:,  more  than  forty  days  ;  and,  not  long  afcer^
at  leaft  for  two  and  thirty  days.  Thus  another  (c)  faw  a  third  labour  un-
der this  fuppreffion,  and  vomiting,  for  fifteen  months  ;  fo  that  flie  could,
fcarcely  be  fupported  by  any  other  means,  than  that  of  nourifhing  glyfters  :-
till  the  calculus  being  difcharg'd,  the  ilchuria,  and  the  vomiting  of  urine,.
went  off.

But  where  the  calculi,  which  obftruft  the  kidnies,  and  the  ureters,  can-
not be  remov'd  ;  in  vain,  as  Gulielrainus  {i.)  has  obferv'd-  in  two  cafes,  do>
vomitings  of  urine  come  on  :  and  this  is  to  be  underftood  both  of  other  infu-
perable  caufes  of  difeafe,  and  of  other  dilcharges :  in  a  woman,  therefore  {e)^
who  already  perceiv'd  the  tafte  and  fmell  of  urine  in  her  mouth,  the  vomiting
of  blood  itfelf,  and  the  difcharge  thereof  by  the  noftrils,  if  it  was  at  all  of
ufe,  was  fo  far  of  ufe,  that  fhe  drag'd  on  life  quite  to  the  thirtieth  day  of  the-
difeafe.

To  return,  however,  to  the  excretions  fpoken  of  by  Bartholin  •,  he  has  par-
ticularly pointed  out  the  obfervation  ofCarolus  Pifo  (/),  as  worthy  of  remark,
in  relation  to  fweats  •,  for  they  were  conftant,  copious,  of  long  continuance,,
and  fo  foetid,  that  the  fmell  of  them  could  hardly  be  endur'd :  a  difcharge
by  the  urinary  paflagesy  therefore,  coming  on  again,  the  patient  was  freed.
from  his  difeafe.  Not  thus  fortunately  did  it  happen  to  the  virgin  of  whom,
Petrus  Nannius  has  given  the  hiftory.

In  her  the  urine  had  alfo  been  long  fupprefs'd  by  reafon  of  calculi,  fo  that.
he  now  thought  her  quite  loft;  when  a  fweat  burft  forth  in  an  immenfe  quan-

(y)  Cent.  4.  Epift.  Med.  i8.  (c)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  3.  obf.  6.

(z)  Ibid.  &  Epift.  21.  (rf)  Exerc.  de  Sang.  Nat.  n.  68.

(a)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  50.  (e)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  6.  obf.  56.

Xb)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  So.  A.  1715.  obf.  (f)  De  Morb.  ab  Aqua  S.  4..  c.  6.  obf.  127-


Anat.  3


City,


454  Book  in. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly,

tity,  that  had  a  urinous  odour.  As  long  as  this  fweat  lafted,  and  it  lafted
many  days,  the  virgin  was  much  better.  But  when  this  ceas'd,  fhe  was  car-
ried off  within  a  few  days,  by  a  dropfy  of  the  thorax.

But  more  happy,  for  a  time,  than  this  was  another  virgin  of  Padua  for-
merly, of  whom  Marcelkis  Donatus  (g)  gives  the  hiftory,  from  a  phyfician
of  undoubted  credit.  In  her,  not  from  the  whole  body,  but  only-  "  from  the
"  region  of  the  ftomach,  a  humour  was  tranfpir'd  to  the  weight  of  many
*'  pounds,  refembling  urine  both  in  colour  and  fmell ;"  whereas  not  only  the
natural  difcharges  of  the  kidnies  were  fupprefs'd,  but  the  natural  difcharges
of  the  inteftines  alio.  And  thefe  difcharges  were  fuppos'd  to  have  fupplied
the  defeft  of  urine  (which  for  fix  months  before  had  been  wholly  fupprefs'd)
that  is  to  fay,  in  confequence  of  the  inteftines  being  then  "  relax'd."

And  even  infenfible  perfpiration  feems  to  have  fupplied  this  defedl:,  in  a
young  woman,  who  ;  which  is  a  very  extraordinary  inftance,  though  well-
known  at  Verona^  had  not  excreted  a  drop  of  urine  for  two  and  twenty
months,  when  the  celebrated  Zeviani  (h)  mention'd  it.  For  in  the  bed-
chamber of  this  woman  an  odour  of  urine  was  perceiv'd,  which  the  bed-
clothes alfo  feem'd  to  exhale.  In  the  mean  while  fhe  was  afflifiied  with  many
difeafes  though  with  none  of  the  brain.  But  that  virgin  of  Padua  at  length
fell  into  a  marafmus.

Thefe  obfervations  I  have  quoted,  although  they  in  general  relate  to  thofe
perfons,  in  whom  the  urine  is  retain'd,  by  the  diforder  of  the  kidnies ;  which
xaufe  had  alfo  partly  exifted  in  that  man  whom  I  have  fpoken  of  from  Val-
falva:  neverthelefs  they  fufficiently  fhow  from  whence  they  alfo  perifli,  in
whom  it  is  long  retain'd,  only  from  a  diforder  of  the  bladder,  or  urethra  ;
and  yet  there  is  not  that  inflammation  of  the  bladder  at  the  fame  time,  to
■which,  or  the  fubfequent  gangrene,  we  may  afcribe  the  death  of  the  patient.
To  that  kind  I  fhould  fuppofe  this  fecond  obfervation  of  Valialva  to  be-
long.

6.  A  man,  of  feventy  years  of  age,  having  labour'd  under  a  long  difficulty
of  making  water;  fo  that  he  difcharg'd  no  urine  but  by  the  help  of  the  ca-
theter; finding  his  diforder  increafe  every  day,  was  oblig'd  to  come  into  the
hofpical  of  St.  Mary  de  Vita  at  Bologna.  There,  while  the  lithotomift  was
endeavouring  to  procure  an  exit  for  the  urine,  by  means  of  the  catheter,
without  effeft,  he  died  with  a  laborious  refpiration  and  a  ftertor.

The  fibres  of  the  urinary  bladder  had  fo  increas'd,  as  to  refemble  the
ftrong  bundles  of  fibres  in  the  heart ;  and  that  both  in  figure  and  magnitude.
An  excrefcence  of  the  proftate  gland,  in  the  form  of  a  pear,  and  fcarcely
leaving  any  paflage,  had  been  affefted  with  an  inflammation  in  the  lower  part ;
from  the  continual  impetus  of  the  catheter.

The  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  fhow'd  the  beginning  of  a  polypous  con-
cretion.

7.  It  is  evident  that  an  inflammation,  of  that  kind,  could  not  be  the  caufe  of
death  in  this  man.  However,  to  what  a  pitch  the  blood  might  be,  by  de-
grees, deprav'd,  in  a  body  thus  weaken'd  by  old  age,  and  by  a  very  frequent
xetention  of  urine,  fo  as  to  be  confin'd  to  bed,  it  is  not  difficult  to  conjefture^

is) C-  27-  cit-  f"P''^  ^^  "'  2.  ('-&)  Del  flaw,  1.  2.  c.  1 1.

It


Letter  XLI. Article  8.^  455

It  is  not  furprizing  therefore,  that  a  retention  coming  on,  which  could  not
be  remov'd  by  the  catheter,  fuch  fymptoms  Ihould  begin  during  the  time
of  the  fruitlefs  irritations  from  that  inftrument,  as  at  length  carried  off  the
patient  in  a  fliort  time.

Even  without  thefe  irritations,  he  would  have  died  neverthelefs :  but  per-
haps a  little  later,  as  fo  many  others  have  done ;  and  among  thefe  a  man,
alfo,  whofe  hiftory  I  Ihall  add  at  prefent,  juft  as  I  receiv'd  it  from  the-fame
phyfician,  whom  I  have  commended  to  you  on  a  former  occafion  {i),  I  mean
Marifati.

8.  A  man,  who  lay  in  this  hofpitalfora  fuppreflion  of  urine,  had  already
had  it  drawn  off  twice,  by  means  of  the  catheter,  and  always  in  great  quan-
tity. As  either  the  patient,  or  others,  fear'd  left  the  neck  of  the  bladder
Uiould  be  too  much  irritated  by  this  introduction,  and,  for  that  reafon,  ab-
ftain'd  from  it,  death  came  on  not  without  convulfive  fymptoms.

When  the  body  was  open'd,  all  the  vifcera,  and  even  tlie  bladder  itfelf,
were  found  to  be,  as  far  as  we  could  judge  by  the  fenfcs,  perfeftly  found  ;
for  the  bladder  was  only  diftended,  without  any  beginning  of  inflammation,.
fo  as  readily  to  contain  fuch  a  quantity  of  urine,  as  three  glafs  veflels,  of  the-
fize  with  thofe  that  we  ufe  to  receive  blood  from  a  vein  when  open'd,  or  even;
to  receive  urine  in  this  country,  would  fcarcely  have  contained.

9.  To  what  a  degree  I  have,  more  than  once,  found  the  bladder  diftend-
ed, and  yet  not  inflam'd,  not  only  obfervations  already  written  to  you  {k)  de-
monftrate,  but  will  alfo  be  ftiown  by  one,  in  particular,  which  I  ftiall  give
you  when  I  treat  on  the  fubjeft  of  lamenefs  (/).  Now  that  you  may  conceive-
how- much  the  bladder  may  fometimes  be  extended  without  any  ill  confe-
quence,  I  will  fubjoin  what  happen'd  here  to  a  woman  of  character,  whom  t
very  well  know,  and  who  is  now  in  very  good  health.

She  was  in  labour  of  her  firft  child,  and  more  than  two  and  forty  years  of
age.  As  the  bones  of  the  pelvis  did  not,  for  this  reafon,  at  all  give  way,
and  the  lower  part  of  that  cavity  was  narrow,  the  large  head  of  the  child
ftuck  there;  and  the  urethra,  and  the  neareft  part  of  the  bladder,  being  com-
prefs'd  thereby,  the  urine  was  abfolutely  confined.  The  ftiort  kind  of  cathe-
ter, which  is  made  ufe  of  for  women,  was  at  length  introduc'd  after  great.
difficulty,  but  to  no  purpofe.

There  was  a  neceffity,  then,  of  introducing  one  of  the  longeft  which  are
us'd  for  men ;  but  lefs  eurv'd  than  in  general :  and  now  it  had  enter'd to
the  length  of  a  fpan,  yet  no  urine  came  forth. It  was  neeefTary  therefore,..
to  thruft  the  catheter  up  higher,  in  order  to  difcharge  tltat  fluid  ;  and  by
this  means  the  urine  came  forth  to  the  quantity  of  about  four  pints.

She  was  a  very  fmall  woman  :  from  whence  you  will  better  perceive  ho\v
much  (which  was  alfo  ftiown  by  the  very  high  and  peculiar  fwelling  of  her
abdomen)  how  much,  I  fay,  the  bladder  muft  have  extended  itfelf;  and  even'
the  fuperioF  part  of  the  bladder,  lince  the  inferior  part  was  fo  comprefs'd  as  I
have  faid,  as  to  be  prevented  from  extenfion.  However,  the  child,  which
was  not  only  dead,  but  had  even  a  very  putrid  fmell,  being  foon  after  taken
away,  no. injury  or  danger  from  the  bladder  remain'd.

(»■)  Epift.  27.  n.  4.  (/)  Epift.  56.  n,  iz,

\k)  Epift.  4.  n.  19,  &  Ep.  39.  n.  3^.

DtlE


45 6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

But  if  you  inquire  after  examples  of  this  cavity  being  greatly  diftended,
and  attend  to  the  event  which  the  greater  part  of  them  have  had  ;  to  fet  afide
rupture,  which  has  been  found  from  the  diftention,  even  in  the  bladder  of
an  ox  (;«) ;  you  will  certainly  find,  that,  according  to  the  different  difpofiti-
-on,  and  nature,  either  of  the  parts,  or  of  the  blood,  or  of  the  urine  itfelf,
it  has  happen'd  far  otherwife  to  many,  than  it  did  to  the  woman  in  queflion.

It  is  generally  known  that  the  bladder,  when  diflended  to  a  very  great  de-
gree, has  frequently  loft  the  power  of  contra6ting  itfelf;  and  this,  as  you  will
gather  from  the  observation  of  Mauchartus  («),  may  fometimes  happen  in  a
lliort  time  :  for  this  author,  after  an  ifchuria  of  the  bladder,  which  had  be-
gun four  days  before  •,  although  after  the  two  firft  days  he  had  taken  care
that  the  water  fhould  be  drawn  off  more  than  once,  and  found  the  bladder  to
be  quite  empty  in  the  body  after  death  ;  neverthelefs  obferv'd  that  refervoir
to  be  "  very  large,  and  not  contrafted  as  it  generally  is."

Nor  is  it  lels  commonly  known,  that  the  bladder  is  eafily  afFefted  with  in-
flammation ;  th«  beginnings  of  which  only  exifted  even  in  this  body:  fo  that
the  inflammation  itfelf  in  many  others  is  found  to  be  much  more  confiderable.
"What  is  the  very  natural  confequence  of  this  inflammation,  you  will  learn
from  the  authors  who  are  quoted,  as  witnefTes  of  a  very  great  diflention,  by
Henricus  Meibomius  {o) ;  who,  neverthelefs,  1  know  not  how,  produces  ore
obfervation  of  Hildanus  as  two,

ForHildanus  has  defcrib'd  the  fame  obfervation,  which  he  has  mention'd,
in  a  night  manner,  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  book  De  hithotomia^  more  at
large  in  the  fecond  Centuria,  obfervation  fixty-five  j  and  tells  us  there  that  he
Jiad  found  in  the  body  of  an  old  man  after  death  an  ulcer  of  the  bladder  which
penetrated  quite  to  the  inteflinum  reftum.  But  that  is  a  much  more  fre-
quent confequence  of  inflammation,  which  you  will  find  to  have  been  three
limes  obl'erv'd  by  another  of  the  authors  quoted  by  Meibomius,  I  mean  Pa-
narolus  {p) ;  that  is  to  fay  a  gangrene  degenerating  into  a  mortal  fpha-
celus.

I  never  remember  to  have  feen  a  more  confiderable  gangrene,  after  an  in-
flammation which  had  feiz'd  upon  the  bladder,  when  it  had  been,  for  a  long
time,  diftended,  than  in  the  body  of  a  ruftic  which  fome  unexperienc'd  young
men  had  improperly  taken  care  fhould  be  carried  into  the  anatomical  theatre
at  Bologna,  in  the  year  1706,  without  any  previous  examination.

10.  This  man,  as  was  found  out  afterwards,  having  been  fubjeft  to  difbr-
ders  of  the  kidnies,  bladder,  and  inteftinum  ileum,  had  now  been,  for  fbme
days,  incapable  of  difcharging  his  urine.  Wherefore,  his  belly  being  become
tumid  and  black,  he  died.

The  lower  parts  of  the  belly,  particularly  the  vifcera,  and  among  thefe  the
bladder,  were  of  a  blackifh  colour  ;  as  the  fcrotum  was  alio  :  and  in  this  was
an  intercepted  portion  of  the  inteftine  I  have  mention'd -,  the  blacknefs  ex-
tending itfelf  not  only  into  all  the  neighbouring  parts,  but  even  half  way
down  the  thighs  :  to  that  we  were  obliged  to  iend  almoll  the  whole  body
away,  very  foon,  left  the  violent  putridnefs  of  the  fmell fhould  infed the

(,'«)  Aa.  n.  c.  torn.  8.  in  obf.  2.  (0)  Exercit.  de  Catheretifmo  thef.  17.

(«j,  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  41.  (/')  Jatrologifm.  Pentec.  i.  obf.  27.

whole


Letter  XLI. Article  ii.  457

whole  college.  I  did  ju ft  take  notice  of  fome  things  in  the  kidnies,  in  a  cur-
fory  manner,  which,  as  I  have  deliver'd  them  in  another  place  (j )  I  fhall  not
repeat  at  prefent.

II.  Whether  the  interception  of  the  ileum  preceded  the  fupprefiion  of
.  urine,  or  this  preceded  the  interception  of  the  ileum,  I  could  not  learn  for  a
certainty. This  however  I  know,  which  I  have  alfo  afferted  in  a  former  let-
ter (r),  that  to  an inflammation  of  the  ileum  was  join'd  a  fuppreffion  of
urine.

But  there  are  alfo  many  other  caufes,  fituated  on  the  outfide  of  the  blad-
der, which  obftrutt  the  urine  therein.  I  have  juft  now  (s)  fpoken  of  the
foetus  preffing  upon  the  cervix  of  this  refervoir,  in  a  difficult  birth  :  and  even
in  vitero-geftation,  particularly  in  the  latter  part  of  the  time,  there  are  wo-
men, fome  of  whom  I  have  very  well  known,  who  cannot  make  water^  but  m
a  fupine  pofture.

Add  to  thefe  things :  to  pafs  over  thofe  which  happen  very  rarely  -,  for  we
know  that  a  glandular  body  has  been  found  growing  to  the  female  urethra,
externally,  "  of  more  than  the  fize  of  a  man's  fift(/);"  we  know  that  very
acrid  medicines  applied  to  the  pudendum,  in  order  to  conftringe  it  more
clofely,  the  firit  by  preffing  upon  the  urethra,  the  latter  by  exciting  a  very
violent  inflammation,  have  brought  on  a  mortal  fuppreffion  of  urine  ;  which
we  are  not  ignorant  has  even  been  caus'd  by  the  blood  diftilling,  by  degrees,
from  aveflel  of  the  wounded  omentum,  coagulating  in  the  pelvis,  and  greatly
compreffing  the  neck  of  the  bladder  (u)  :  add  to  thefe,  I  fay,  a  great  quan-
tity of  very  hard  excrements,  or  very  tumid  hzemorrhoids,  which  may  prcfs
the  neck  of  the  bladder  againft  the  bones  of  the  pubes,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as
to  prevent  any  of  the  urine  being  difcharg'd.

To  this  cafe  of  the  piles,  relates  what  Giovanni  Amatorio,  a  very  old  and
fuccefsful  furgeon,  in  the  place  of  my  nativity,  afferted  to  me,  when  I  was
a  young  man;  I  mean,  that  when  the  fibres  about  the  lower  part  of  the  blad-
der are  turgid  with  flragnating  blood,  or  humour,  it  is  of  very  great  advan-
tage to  apply  leaches  to  the  hsemorrhoidal  veins.

Thus  in  the  grandfather,  who  was  even  then  alive,  of  Peter  Scanelli ;  a  gen-
tleman of  rank,  and  one  with  whom,  by  reafon  of  his  fondnefs  for  polite  learn-
ing, I  was  very  familiar  ;  when  Amatorio  himielf  had  been  oblig'd  to  draw
off  the  urine,  by  the  introdudlion  of  a  catheter,  ninetytim.es,  he  affirm'd  that
this  very  obftinate  fuppreffion  had  been  at  length  remov'd  by  that  remedy,
after  many  other  remedies  had  been  adminifter'd  in  vain.

And  as  to  hard  excrements,  the  obfervation  of  Wepfer  (x)  is  very  well
known  :  to  which ;  as  it  is  alfo  transfer'd  into  this  fe£lion  of  the  Sepulchre-
turn  (y),  but  not  without  fuch  typographical  errors  as  render  it  quite  unin-
telligible ;  you  may  add  another  that  you  read  in  the  Additamenta  to  the  next
fedtion,  that  is  the  twenty-fifth  {z).

(q)  Epift.  38.  n.  41.  [U)  Vid.  Hoffin.  Med.  Rat.  torn.  4.  p.  2.  L

(r)  Epift.  34.  n.  8,  2.  c,  7.  in  ipfo  fine.

(j)  N.  9.  fxj  Auftar.  Hift.  Apoplex.  13.  Schol.  8.

(/)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf.  201.  (j)  In  append,  i.  ad  obf.  ig.

,(«)  Obf.  5.

Vol.  II.  ■ •  N  n  n  .The


458  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

The  fame  happy  fuccefs  which  the  firft  relates  from  the  injeflion  of  a  gly-
fter,  not  only  many  have  experienc'd  in  other  places,  but  was  in  particular  ex-
perienc'd  here  by  a  Jew,  to  whom  no  other  remedies  had  been  of  fervice.  It
is  then,  however,  fufficient  to  injeft  fuch  things  as  are  emollient ;  efpecially
if  there  be  the  leaft  danger  of  an  inflammation  of  the  bladder,  or  a  fufpicion
of  any  convulfive  ftrifture  of  the  fphindter  thereof.

Neither  of  thele  circumftances,  a  fenior  phyfician,  who  related  to  me  two
or  three  of  his  fuccefsful  cures,  feem'd,  to  me,  to  attend  to  fufficiently  -,  for
by  giving  fuch  things  as  purg'd  the  inteftines  pretty  brifkly,  he  faid  he  had
caus'd  the  fupprefs'd  urine  to  be  dilcharg'd,  at  the  fame  time  with  the
ftools.

By  this  means,  faid  he,  if  I  had  not  caus'd  any  real  difcharge  of  urine,  yet
at  leaft  the  more  fluid  I  had  drawn  out  from  the  intettinal  pallage,  fo  much
lefs  would,  of  courle,  have  flow'd  down  by  the  kidnies,  in  order  to  diftend
the  bladder  more  and  more :  and  the  fluid,  with  which  the  bladder  was  di-
ftended,  was  excited  at  the  fame  time  •,  as  by  ftimulating  the  inteftinum  rec-
tum, I  could  not  avoid  ftimulating  the  fibres  of  the  neighbouring  bladder  to
contradlion  in  like  manner ;  and  in  great  meafure  reftoring  to  them  their  loft
power.

But  he  did  not  fufficiently  obferve,  that  no  part  of  the  bladder  was  more
clofely  join'd  with  the  inteftinum  reflum,  than  the  lower  part ;  or  if  you
pleafe  the  beginning  of  the  urethra :  nor  did  it  occur  to  him  what  muft
therefore  be  the  confequence,  if  this  part  ftiould  be,  at  that  time,  affected
with  any  beginning  of  inflammation,  or  convulfion.

It  is  true,  I  do  not  difallow  that  the  bladder,  at  one  time,  lofes  its  power
of  contradtion  from  a  paralyfis  •,  and,  at  other  times,  from  the  diftention
itfclf.  But  I  fay  this,  that  the  caufes  of  a  fuppreflion  of  urine  in  the  bladder
ought  to  be  very  carefully  diftinguifli'd :  nor  are  we  to  imagine  that  the  power
of  contradlion,  inherent  in  the  mufcles  of  the  bladder,  is  always  fo  eafily  and
fo  foon  taken  away  by  diftention  ;  as  we  have  gathered  above  (a)  from  tlie
example  of  Mauchartus.

This  is  demonftrated  ;  to  take  no  notice  of  other  things ;  by  the  dog
which  Boerhaave  diflTeded  {b)  :  for  in  this  animal ;  although  the  bladder  was
extremely  full  of  urine,  that  had  been  retain'd  already,  for  the  fpace  of  three
days-,  when  the  bladder  was  punftur'd  with  a  flight  wound,  "  the  urine  ne-
"  verthelefs  fprang  forth  to  a  great  height:  and  the  bladder  contrafted  itfelf
"  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  fcarcely  any  cavity  remain'd.

12.  There  are  alfo  many  other  caufes,  which,  as  they  have  it  intheirpower
to  retain  the  urine  in  the  bladder,  fo  they  alfo  forbid  theufe  ofthofe  ftimuli,
whereof  I  have  fpoken  ;  as,  for  inftance,  that  which  I  know  to  be  in  the  place
of  a  domeftic  remedy  with  fome  :  I  mean  the  application  of  a  tile,  or  brick,
which  has  been  previoufly  immers'd  in  cold  water,  to  the  foles  of  the  feet  of
a  perfon  who  has  a  retention  of  urine:  and  this  remedy  a  phyfician,  that  was
a  friend  of  mine,  imitated  with  a  happy  boldnefs,  when  he  was  a  young  man,
by  applying  ice  itfelf  to  the  feet  for  a  little  time.

(a)  N.  9,  {b)  Praka.  ad  InftJt.  §.  366.

4.  For


Letter  XLI. Article  12.  459

For,  although  thefe  things  may  poffibly  excite  the  ftupified  power  of  the
bladder,  by  flimulating  the  extremities  of  the  crural  nerves;  you,  without
doubt,  are  aware  how  noxious  thefe  irritations  may  be,  where  the  retention
of  the  urine  has  begun  from  the  acrimony  thereof:  or  where;  according
to  the  conjeftures  of  the  very  diligent  Piijati  {c),  and  the  obfervations  of.
the  very  experienc'd  Benevoli  [d)  \  the  bladder  is  depriv'd  of  that  mucus,
wherewith  it  is  fmear'd  over  to  defend  it  againft  the  too  great  ftimula  of  the
urine.

I  fay  nothing  of  the  bladder  itfelf  falling  down  into  the  fcrotum,  although
I  have  learn'd,  from  the  time  that  my  friend  Georgio  Georgi ;  a  phyfician  of
great  eminence,  at  prefent,  among  the  inhabitants  of  Pefaro ;  wrote  to  me,
that  this  is  not  fo  rare  as  was  fuppos'd  by  iyiery(^) ;  who,  when  he  defcribes  it
as  having  been  feen  twice  by  him,  confefs'd  that  he  did  not  know  of  any
author  who  had  made  mention  of  it.

For  I  have  certainly  feen  it  taken  notice  of,  from  Platerus,  in  this  fedlion
of  the  Sepukhretum  {f)  ;  and  in  the  lafl;  foregoing  feftion,  that  is  the  twenty-
third  (^),  from  Bartholin  :  and  I  have  alio  read  of  it  in  Ruyfch  {}d)^  who  faw
it  more  than  once  it) ;  as  is  juftly  refer'd  to  by  Chriftian  Andreas  Kochius  {k)^
where  he  alio  mentions  another  ohfervation  of  a  cafe  of  this  kind,  of  Boer-
haave's :  to  which,  and  the  others,  to  omit  here  the  analogous  prolapfus  of
the  bladder  in  women  (I) ;  of  which,  and  the  figns  thereof,  you  may,  in  the
mean  while,  confult  Mery  himfelf  [m)  and  the  celebrated  Baffius  (w) ;  you
will  alfo  add  that  which  the  very  learned  Valcarenghus  [o)  made  upon  a
nobleman.

But  if  this  cafe  be  rare ;  in  which,  when  it  happens,  it  is  in  our  power
(and  this  is  the  proper  and  pathognomonic  fign  of  the  difeafe)  to  difcharge  the
urine  from  the  bladder,  which  the  patient  raifes  up  with  his  hand,  together
with  the  fcrotum,  or  comprefles;  there  are  others  that  are  frequent,  as  thofe
from  a  pretty  large  calculus :  and  if  we  attend  to  Hoffmann  (p) ;  who  ex-
plains one  of  his  obfervations  (j),  and  diffeftions,  in  this  manner  in  particu-
lar, from  a  fpafm  of  the  bladder  itfelf-,  others  that  are  lefs  frequent;  as  from
the  external  coats  of  the  bladder,  as  was  feen  by  the  fame  author  fr),  being
eroded,  and  very  much  lacerated,  by  a  foetid  pus,  which  had  fallen  down
into  the  pelvis  from  the  left  kidney,  that  was  entirely  confum'd  and  deftroy'd
by  an  ulcer,  or  even  as  from  tubercles ;  there  are,  I  fay,  other  fuppreffions
of  urine  in  the  bladder,  wherein,  not  only  no  affiftance  is  given  by  the  ap-
plication of  ftimuli,  but  much  detriment  muft  be  the  confequence.

And  there  are  tubercles  fometimes  in  the  bladder,  or  at  its  neck ;  although,
as  is  clearly  demonftrated  by  Benevoli  fi),  whom  I  have  quoted,  even  excel-
lent phyficians  have  been  deceiv'd  in  fuppofing  them. There  are,  I  fay  :  for

(c)  Dec.  obf.  3.  n.  ;.  (7)  Vid.  tamen  &  Epift.  43.  n.  14.

(d)  Diflert.  2.  {m)  Mem.  cit.

W  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sea.  1713.  («)  Dec.  3.  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  2.

(f)  Obf.  17.  §.  4,  in  Schol.  (q)  Diflert.  d«  Saxis,  Acub.  &  ca,>t.

(g)  Obf.  4.  §.  4.  (p)  C.  7.  fupra  ad  n.  i  u  cit.  Epicr.  obf.  i,
(i)  Cent.  obf.  9S.  (7)  Ibid.

(?)  Adverf.  Anat.  dec.  2.  n  9.  (r)  Ibid,  obf  8.

_  (k)  AfFea.  inlifar.  ii  ca;t.  rar.  Defer,  in  Ra- (.<)  Dill.  2,  cit.
tkicin.

N  n  n  2  al-


4-6o  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Bellj.

although  Ruyfch  (l)  reprefents  only  one  example;  yet  that  many  are  to  be
met  with,  he  Ibfficiently  fhows  in  the  fubjoin'd  obfervation  (u).

What  tubercles  were  ieen  by  Drelincurt  {x),  what  an  excrelcence  was  found
by  Sylvius  (y),  what  a  caruncle  by  Tulpius  (z),  by  Smetius  («),  by  Hilda-
nus  ('/'),  you  have,  not  to  lead  you  too  far,  in  the  Sepulchretum  itfeif,  where
you  will  alfo  certainly  find  other  things  relating  to  the  fame  fubjefl:.  And
perhaps  you  will  ftill  remember  that  which  I  formerly  defcrib'd  in  the  firft
Efiftola  Anattmica  (c),  as  being  found  by  me,  as  well  in  the  urinary,  as  in  the
biliary  bladder.

And  although  it  Is  fuperfluous  to  produce  examples  of  tubercles,  which
arife  in  the  meatus  urinarius,  fince  mention  is  made  of  them  in  the  very
aphorifms  of  Hippocrates  (d),  and  of  the  fuppuration  whereby  they  are  re-
mov'd  ;  yet  I  fuppofe  it  will  not  be  unpleafing  to  you,  if  to  the  hiftory  of
that  nun,  who  was  preferv'd  for  the  fpace  of  fixty-fix  days,  by  the  help  of  nou-
rifliing  glyfters,  under  the  attendance  and  care  of  Rammazzini  (e) ;  I  add  this
alio,  which  I  receiv'd  from  him  :  I  mean  that  the  fame  virgin  ;  when  flie  was,
afterwards,  feiz'd  with  afuppreffion  of  urine,  and  refus'd  the  affiftance  of  the
catheter-,  after  the  cafe  had  gone  on  to  an  extremity,  by  the  delay  of  fome
days ;  had  begun  to  difcharge  her  urine,  together  with  a  fmall  quantity  of
pus,  without  any  pain,  except  of  the  urethra  :  and  by  this  had  fhewn  the
caufe  of  the  diforder  to  be  a  tubercle  form'd  in  the  urethra.  And  as  the
well-tim'd  fuppuration,  of  this  tubercle,  took  away  the  difeafe,  fo  the  irri-
tating powers,  of  the  remedies  fpoken  of  above,  would  have  increas'd  it.

But  tubercles  of  this  kind  may,  however,  eafily  be  chang'd  into  pus,  and
leave  the  pafTage  free  and  open.  But  who  can  have  any  reafonable  hope,
that  fcirrhous  tumours,  or  tumours  verging  to  the  hardnefs  of  a  fcirrhus ;
fuch  as  are  often  found  in  the  proftate  gland,  or  frequently  grow  out  there-
from •,  may be eafily  remov'd  by nature herfelf,  not  to fay  by  arc  ?  And

fuch  I  believe  that  excrefcence  of  this  gland  to  have  been  which  is  defcrib'd

above  (f),  from  the  obfervation  of  Valfalva  :  and  of  the  fame  kind,  without

doubt,  was  the  tumour  of  the  whole  proftate,  in  the  following  obfervation'

of  mine.

13.  A  fellow-citizen  of  m.ine,  of  noble  birth;  who  was more  than  fixty

years  of  age,  of  a  fquare  and  robuft  body,  had  a  red  face,  a  habit  inclining  to.

fatnefs,  and  was  troubled  with  a  hernia;  had  labour'd,  when  a  young  man,

under  a  virulent  gonorrhoea,  and  had  always  drunk  very  freely,  and  often

even  of  pure  wine.

Though  he  alio  made  a  great  quantity  of  water,  and  very  frequently  ;.  yet

the  year  before  he  had  been  attack'd  with  a  kind  of  flight  retention  of  urine.

And  in  the  year 1710,  on  the  fourth of  March,,  it  was almoft:  fuddenl^v

fnpprcfs'd.


(?)  Cent.  obf.  fig.  62.

{u)  78.

(x)  Seft.  hac  24.  obf.  13,  §.  2,

ly)  Ibid.  obf.  10.  §.  6.

(z)  Ibid.  obf.  8.

faj  Sert.25.  obf.  I.  §.  4-


{i)  Ibid,  in  Schol.  ad  §\  Zi

r-v  N.  43.

(d)  82.  feft.  4;  &  59.  fea.  7.
(f)  Ccnftitut.  Epidem  Urb.  a.
CO  N.  6.


ApKy-


Letter  XLI. Article 13.  461

A  phyfician,  who  was  his  kinfman,  took  great  pains  to  adminifirer  relief
by  glyfters,  baths,  and  blood-letting  from  the  hasmorrhoidal  veins ;  and  even
by  fuch  remedies  as  increas'd  the  inteftinal  difcharges,  which  were  at  the  iame-
time  diminifh'd  :  but  to  no  purpofe.  He  therefore,  at  length,  order'd  the
catheter  to  be  introduc'd  :  which  was  done  without  great  difficulty,  both
then,  and  afterwards.  And  at  each  time  of  introducing  it,  almoft  feven  pints
of  urine  were  drawn  off,  on  the  firft  days  from  the  time  it  began  firft  to  be
introduc'd  ;  notwithftanding he  had  but  little  given  him  to  drink.

On  the  intermediate  days,  for  he  liv'd,  in  all,  about  fifteen,  the  quantity
was  Ibmewhat  lefs :  and  on  the  laft  days  the  quantity  again  amounted  to  feven>
pints.  _  And  on  the  firft  days,  indeed,  he  perceiv'd  fome  inclination  to  make
water;  as  he  alfo  did  on  the  latter  days  :  but  none  at  all  in  the  interme-
diate days.  A  little  blood  was  fometimes  feen  in  the  urine  ;  and  fometimes,
fome  fmall  pieces  of  membranes  as  it  were ;  on  the  laft  days  a  pain  of  one
fhoulder  came  on  :  a  fever  on  the  laft  but  one  :  and  on  the  laft,  in  the  morn-
ing, when  the  catheter  was  withdrawn,  after  taking  away  the  urine,  it  was
obferv'd  to  be  ting'd ;  which  was  a  circumftance  that  had  never  happen'd
before  ;  juft  as  if  it  had  been  dipp'd  in  a  vitriolic  fluid.

On  that  day,  when  the  evening  began  to  draw  on,  behold  a  rigor,  and  a
tremor  came  on  ;  though  the  fkin  continu'd  warm  -,  and  from  hence  the  pulfe
was  obfcur'd  :  and  as  foon  as  it  began  to  be  difcover'd  again,  not  without  in-
termiffions ;  another  tremor  came  on. :  and  at  the  fifth  kour  of  the  night  the
patient  died.

Being  afk'd  to  attend  the  difTedion  of  the  body,  I  attended,,  together  witJi
other  phyficians,  about  the  beginning  of  the  night  of  the  following  day  :
at  which  time  I  receiv'd  the  account  I  have  given  you,  from  the  phyfician
who  had  attended  the  patient  while  living ;  and  from  the  furgeon.  and  others ;
all  of  whom  confirm'd  the  relation.

We  found  the  peritoneum  to  be  livid  ;  particularly  in  the  hypogaftrium  ;
and  the  inteftines,  in  general,  to  be  of  a  livid  hue :  in  the  extreme  part  of
the  fundi?s  of  the  diftended  bladder,  the  blood-veflels  were  externally  tur-
gid with  blood ;  and  the  internal  coat  was  redifh  in  feveral  places :  bat  ail
the  coats  v/ere  much  thicker  than  they  naturally  are  ;  for  which  reafon  the
bladder,  even  v/hen  emptied  of  its  urine,  retain'd  an  unufual  magnitude.

Before  the  whole  of  the  urine  was  difcharg'd  from  that  cavity,  we  obferv'd
a  coagulum,  of  no  very  fmall  fize,  to  be  fwimming  freely  about,  and  to  re-
femble  nothing  more  than  a  femi-lacerated  hydatid;  but  when  I  examin'd
it  more  attentively,  it  feem'd  to  be  a  (lender polypous  concretion,  which  refem-
bled  fmall  m.embranes  involv'd  one  in  another,  and  collaps'd  :  and  thofe  who
faw  it  affirm'd  that  it  was  of  the  fame  kind  with  thole  fmall  fragments,  which.
had  fometimes  appear'd  in  the  urine,  after  being  drawn  away.

When,  therefore,  we  came  to  inquire  into  the  caufe  of  this  fuppreffion,
it  appear'd  to  be  at  the  lower  part  of  the  bladder.  That  is  to  fay,  the  pro-
ftate  gland  was  univerfally  fwollen  out  in  a  preternatural  manner,  and  had  at-
tain'd  to  fuch  a  ftate  of  hardnefs,  as  to  feera  to  thofe  who  cut  into  it,  to  coni-
aft  of  the  fubftance  of  cartilage  and  ligament  mix'd  tog^ether  as  it  were.

This


462  Book  III. Of  Diieafes  of  the  Belly.

This  tumefied  gland  was  of  a  white  colour;  except  that,  in  Ibme  places,
but  particularly  on  both  furfaces,  it  was  blackifh,  from  blood  ftagnating
in  the  veflels ;  and  that  moft  on  the  right  fide,  where  the  fcrotum  was,  in
part,  diftended  with  a  large  enterocele.

14.  In  this  caufe  of  fuppreflion,  which  has  been  juft  defcrib'd,  all  of  us,
who  were  prefent,  eafily  agreed  :  not  only  becaufe  we  were  not  ignorant  that
the  fame  had  been  met  with,  at  other  times  alfo,  by  eminent  men,  and  ac-
knowledg'd  •,  as  will  be  faid  afterwards  (g)  •,  but  alfo  becaufe  it  was  eafy  to
conceive,  that  when  the  patient  began  to  be  afFe£led  with  a  tumour,  and  hard-
nefs,  of  the  proftate,  he  began  alfo  to  be  attack'd  with  the  beginning,  as  it
were,  of  a  retention  of  urine  :  and  that  when  the  tumour  was,  at  length,  in-
creas'd  to  fuch  a  great  degree,  an  unufual  flownefs  of  circulation,  through
this  gland,  and  round  about  this  gland,  coming  fuddenly  on,  the  canal  which
pafs'd  through  it,  could  not  be  fufficiently  open'd  for  the  difcharge  of  the
urine  ;  unlefs  by  introducing  the  c'atheter  which  was  a  folid  body.

Nor  would  I  have  you  fay,  that  the  blood,  which  was  difcharg'd  by  the
application  of  leaches  to  the  neighbouring  veins  •,  a  remedy  that  I  have  fpo-
ken  much  in  praife  of  above  {h)  ;  ought  to  have  recover'd  the  former  cele-
rity of  motion ;  and  by  this  means  have  diminifh'd  the  tumour.  For  in  a
full  habit  of  this  kind,  blood  not  having  been  previoufly  taken  away  from
the  arm,  a  greater  quantity  of  this  fluid  eafily  flovv'd  to  that  part,  from
whence  it  ought  to  have  been  repell'd  ;  by  reafon  of  lefs  refiftance  being  made
to  its  influx.

I  omit  inquiring  whether,  on  account  of  the  baths  alfo,  which  had  been
then  made  ufe  of,  this  might  happen  ;  or  even,  whether  a  fbimulus  was  added
by  thofe  medicines,  in  particular,  that  were  given  to  increafe  the  inteflii-
nal  difcharges.  I  alfo  omit  this  inquiry  ;  whether  the  urine  began  to  be  drawrj
off  later  than  it  ought  to  have  been:  which  was  an  objeftion  I  heard  com-
monly made  •,  at  that  time  more  than  any  other ;  though  I  faid  nothing  about
it  myfelf,  according  to  my  ufual  cuftom  ;  as  every  reflexion  of  this  kind  is  fu-
perfluous,  and  ufelefs  to  a  patient  who  was  already  dead.

■  The  caufe  of  this  objedtion,  however,  does  not  feem  to  be  unworthy  of  our
notice.  It  had  happen'd  in  thofe  days,  that  four  other  citizens,  befides  him
of  whom  I  have  fpoken,  were  fuddenly  feiz'd  with  the  fame  diforder;  and
that  what  the  celebrated  Baffius  (i)  obferv'd  afterwards,  at  Hall  in  the  dutchy
of  Magdebourg,  in  the  fpring  of  the  year  1730,  "  to  be  quite  unheard  of;"
I  mean  that  a  true  gonorrhoea  fpread  about  epidemically ;  as  he  teftifies,  by
producing  four  obfervations;  we  obferv'd  in  the  fpring  of  the  year  17 10,  at
Fork  (a.  city  not  abounding  with  inhabitants,  in  proportion  to  the  advantages
it  enjoys,  nor  as  it  formerly  did)  in  regard  to  an  ifchuria  veficalis  as  it  is  call'd;
five  obfervations  of  which  I  could  produce  that  were  made  within  a  few  days,
by-way  of  an  uncommon  infl:ance,  which  perhaps  might  be  explain'd  nearly
in  the  fame  manner  that  he  has  explain'd  his,  or,  at  leaft,  in  great  mea-
fure.

The  city  therefore,  feeing  that  out  of  our  five  citizens,  one  of  whom  I  at-
tended myfelf,  four  had  recover'd ;  and  he  only,  whofe  difledlion  you  have

(g)  N,  17.  (A)  N.  II.  (0  Dec.  4.  obf.  anat.  chir.  5.

read.


Letter  XLI. Article  15.  463

read,  had  died ;  commended  the  forefighc,  and  prudence,  of  the  others,  in
the  early  introduftion  of  the  catheter,  and  blam'd  the  delay  of  this  phyfician
in  queftion  :  but  whether  juftly  or  unjuftly,  1  leave  to  you  to  determine.

Yet  as  there  are  different  caules  of  difeafes  in  different  perfons,  and  diffe-
rent ftates  of  body,  of  the  parts,  and  of  the  urine ;  fo  there  may  be  different
reafons,  in  different  patients,  why  a  phyfician  fhould  take  any  ftep  inftantly,
or  delay  to  take  it  for  fome  time.  1  confefs  I  was  not  forry  for  having  made
ufe  of  the  catheter  fo  early,  in  my  patient,  after  more  eafy  remedies  being
tried  to  no  purpofe ;  although  to  the  furgeon  it  feem'd  fo  premature,  that,
by  reafon  ot  the  very  ffnall  tenfion  of  the  hypogaftrium,  he  afferted  that  there
was  no  urine  in  the  bladder.

But  he  was  immediately  refuted:  though  not  fo  much  by  the  figns  of  a
renal  ifchuria  being  abfent,  and  by  the  other  figns  of  a  very  troublefome
vefical  ifchuria,  being  prefent,  as  by  the  thing  itfelf.

For  no  fooner  was  the  catheter  introduc'd,  but  it  brought  off  three  pints
of  urine,  to  the  great  eafe  of  the  patient ;  who  was  forpriz'd  how  it  could
happen,  that  he,  who  drank  fo  little,  fhould  have  fuch  a  quantity  of  urine
in  his  bladder:  being  ignorant,  that,  with  this  fuppreffion,  an  affcftion  of  the
diabetes  kind,  as  it  were,  is  frequently  join'd  ;  which  confideration  has  fome-
times  led  me  to  doubt,  whether  this  diforder  of  the  diabetes  kind,  were  not
the  caufe  of  the  fuppreiTion  :  I  mean  by  fo  haftily,  and  furprizingly,  diftending
the  bladder,  while  the  patient  fleeps,  that  when  he  awakes,  the  mufcular  coat
thereof  is  no  more  able  to  contraft  itfelf.

But  whether  the  patient;  into  whofe  bladder  our  Fabricius  ab  Aquapen-
dente  {k)  fays  that  fo  great  a  quantity  of  urine  had  flow'd  (while  nature
was  bringing  about  a  crifis)  that,  he  not  being  able  to  difcharge  it,  there
•was  a  neceffity  of  drawing  it  off  by  the  catheter  ;  whether  this  patient,  I  fay,
flept  like  mine ;  or  whether,  as  he  lay  ill  of  a  continual  and  dangerous  fever,
his  fenfations  were  become  obtufe  ;  as  we  do  not  certainly  know,  fo  we  are  at
liberty  to  fufpedl  either  the  one  or  the  other  :  for  it  does  not,  otherwife,  ap-
pear, why  he  did  not  difcharge  his  urine  from  the  time  it  began  to  flow,
pretty  plentifully,  into  the  bladder ;  and  why,  by  continuing  this  difcharge,
he  did  not  take  care  to  prevent  the  whole  quantity,  that  was  fecreted,  from
being  retain'd  in  the  bladder.

15.  That  you  may  not  inquire  after  examples  of  the  conjunction  of  both
thefe  diforders,  which  I  fpoke  of  juft  now  among  other  authors ;  that  is  to
fay,  of  the  diabetes  and  the  ifchuria,  of  which  kind  in  particular  was  that  of
Hildanus  in  the  Sepulchretum,  which  having  fome  reference  to  the  cafe  of
the  old  man  mention'd  above  (/),  is  transfer'd  into  this  feftion  under  article
the  eighth  of  the  tenth  obfervation,  but  of  that  which  Hands  firft  in  order
(for  another  obfervation  im.mediately  fucceeds,  which  is,  through  careleffnefs,
mark'd  out  by  the  fame  number)  and  that  I  may  not  add  other  more  recent
examples  which  have  come  to  m^y  knowledge;  it  is  fufficient  to  read  over
again  the  hiflory  in  queftion  (m).

You  will  fee,  notwithftanding  the  patien-t  then  drank  but  little,  how  great
a  quantity  of  urine  flow'd  down  into  the  bladder. I  am  forry  we  did  not  ex-

(/f)  De  Chirur,  Operat.  ubi  ds  urin,  Supreff.  (!)ti.<).  («)  N.  13.


464  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

amine  his  kidnies  and  liver.  Yet  I  am  not  forry,  for  this  reafon ;  becaufe  I
■fliould  have  hop'd  that  I  could  learn  out  the  caufe  of  thofe  circumftances
which  happen  in  the  diabetes.

For  to  iet  alide  the  more  wonderful  things  that  are  related  of  the  true  dia-
betes (n),  fome  of  which,  I  think,  ought  not  to  be  admitted  without  a  cau-
tious examination  -,  it  is  certainly  notlefs  furprizing  to  confider  what  has,  be-
yond a  doubt,  happen'd  in  two  virgins  in  the  fpurious  diabetes,  as  it  is
call'd  ;  and  that  even  in  our  age,  and  neighbourhood,  at  Venice  fo),  and
Bologna  (p)  -,  fo  that  one  of  them,  within  ninety-four  days,  difcharg'd  three
thoufand  fix  hundred  and  feventy-four  pints  of  urine:  and  the  other,  within
ninety-feven  days,  difcharg'd  four  thoufand  one  hundred  and  feventy  one
pints  of  the  fame  fluid;  whereas  both  of  them  not  only  drank  little,  or  no-
thing, but  even,  almoft  like  thofe  who  labour  under  a  hydrophobia,  were
■extremely  thirlty,  and  abhor'd  the  fight  of  any  kind  of  liquor  whatever.

You  certainly  perceive,  that,  whatever  morbid  appearances  may  be  found
an  the  kidnies,  or  liver  ;  for  Mead  {q)  afl"erts  that  "  fomething  fteatomatous"
had  been  "  always"  found,  by  him,  in  this  laft-mention'd  vifcus,  by  dif-
fering the  bodies  of  thofe  who  had  died  of  a  diabetes  •,  you  certainly,  I  fay,
perceive,  that  it  cannot  for  that  reafon  appear,  from  whence,  I  do  not  fay  lb
great  a  quantity  of  fluid,  but  even  a  quantity  lefs  by  one  half,  is  to  be  ac-
counted for.

For  which  reafon,  they  who  have  undertaken  to  explain  the  cafes  of  thefe
virgins,  have  been  oblig'd  to  do  the  fame  thing  that  Mead  has,  at  length,
exprefiy  done  {r)  ;  and  that  phyficians  had  already  begun  to  do  (j)  in  the
fifteenth  century;  I  mean  to  have  recourfe  to  the  air,  and,  with  greater  pro-
priety than  thofe  ancient  authors,  to  deduce  this  immenfe  quantity  of  urine,
not  from  the  air  itfelf,  but  from  the  aqueous  particles  fwimming  therein.

It  therefore  chagrines  me,  that  I  did  not  examine  into  the  ftate  of  thofe
vifcera  which  I  have  mention'd  :  not  becaufe  I  might  have  had  an  opportunity
of  obferving  the  cauie  of  the  furprizing  cafes  of  this  kind,  but  becaufe  I
might  have,  in  parr,  obferv'd  fome  traces  of  the  caufe  of  a  diabetes  notfo  im-
moderate ;  or,  perhaps,  rather  fome  traces  of  the  effefts.  And  I  am  fo  much
the  more  difpleas'd  with  myfelf,  as  there  are  very  few  diflTedtions  of  perfons
who  died  after  that  difeafe.

This  circumftance  appears  from  the  Ihortnefs  of  that  fedtion  of  the  Sepul-
chretum,  which  profeffedly  treats  of  the  diabetes  ;  I  mean  the  twenty-fixth.
Of  the  obfervations,  however,  contain'd  therein;  which  are,  in  number,  no
more  than  five ;  there  are  three  which  either  reprefent  both  the  kidnies  as
being  very  flaccid;  or  one  of  them,  at  leaft,  as  collaps'd  into  itfelf,  or  almoft
confum'd.

With  thefe  agree  the  two  obfervations  of  Ruyfch  (t),  which  I  wonder  were
not  added ;  for  Hoffmann  (u)  had  not  publifli'd  his  at  that  time. Which

(fi)  Vid.  fupra,  n.  z.  (rj  Monit.  Med.  c.  9.  feft.  2.

(0)  Cafo  propolto  da  Bartol.  Barat:  &  Lodo- {s)  Vid.  Marc,  donat.  c.  27.  fupra  ad  n.  2.

vico  Tefti  con  la  Rifpofta  di  quefto.  cit.

(pj  Comment.  deBonon.  Sc.Inftit.  t.  I.  fub.  (/) Obf.  addit.  ad  Dilucid.  Valvular  13.  &

rit.  Medic  cent.  obf.  13.

(2J  Expof.  Mechan.  Venen.  Tent,  i.  (?<)  Confult,  Med.  cent.  z.  caf.  85.

likewife  %


Letter  XLI. Article i5,  465

likewife;  although  ic  alfofuppofes  the  diabetes  to  proceed  from  a  previous  re-
tention of  urine  in  the  kidnies,  and  ureters,  from  whence  a  great  quantity
thereof  returns  back  into  the  blood,  and  muft  of  courfe  be  again  fecreted,
in  a  great  quantity,  when  the  caufe  of  the  retention  is  remov'd  -;  neverthe-
lefs  brings  us  back  to  this  fuppofition,  that  the  pores  of  tJie  kidney  were
relax'd,  by  this  very  retention,  and  return  of  the  urine  ;  as  in  a  certain
Count,  who  had  labour'd  under  a  diabetes,  not  only  the  kidney  On  the  right
fide  was  enlarg'd  to  more  than  double  the  fize  of  that  on  the  lel't,  but  the
ureter  appear'd  to  be  extremely  dilated,  almoft  to  the  fize  of  a  common  iau-
lage.  ^  •

And  I  myfelf  alfo;  though  I  would  by  no  means  follow  this  explication  in
^U  cafes ;  as  in  all  a  retention  of  urine  does  not  precede,  and  the  quantity,  in
which  many  difcharge  it,  far  exceeds  whatever  might  be  retain'd  and  re-
turn'd  into  the  blood  ;  in  the  cafe  of  the  man,  neverchelefs,  whofe  hiftory  I
have  given,  and  other  cafes  fimilar  thereto,  fliall  follow  it  without  any  dif-
ficulty :  as  they  not  only  fecrete  a  much  lefs  quantity  of  urine,  and  fecrete  ic
after  retention;  but,  in  this  man  in  particular :  becaufc;  as  he  was  always
us'd  to  drink  a  great  quantity,  and  make  a  great  quantity  of  urine,  before.
his  ifchuria  came  on  ;  the  kidnies  fecm  to  have  been  lax  to  a  confiderable
degree,  even  before  the  attack  of  the  dilbrder.

But  what  mifchief  had  been  added  by  the  fluid ;  v/hich,  when  he  at  laft
drank  but  little,  the  kidnies  tranfmitted  in  fo  large  a  quantity  ;  1  could  per-
haps better  conjecture,  if  I  had  examin'd  all  the  different  urines.

For  as  to  their  bringing  on  fome  ftimulus  to  difcharge  the  bladder  of  its
contents,  on  the  firft  and  the  laft  days  of  the  difeafe,  and  none  in  the  inter-
mediate days ;  this  might  much  more  eafily  happen  from  their  quantity,  than
from  their  nature  •,  fince  the  fluid  was  fecreted  in  much  lefs  quantity,  in  the
intermediate  days,  and  in  a  greater  quantity  on  the  firft,  and  the  laft :  unlefs
you  Ihould  rather  choofe  to  fuppofe,  that  the  fenfation  of  the  bladder  had
been  blunted,  by  the  frequent  diftention  -,  fo  that  in  the  intermediate  days  it
was  no  more  affefted,  till,  by  reaibn  of  the  patient's  drinking  but  a  fmall
quantity,  and  by  reaibn  of  a  large  quantity  of  fluid  being  fecreted  from  the
blood,  the  urine,  at  length,  became  lb  much  more  acrid,  as  even  to  excite
in  fom.e  meafure  the  obtufe  fenfations  of  the  bladder  :  at  which  time  it  alfo
began  to  excite  fome  inflammation, here  and  there,  in  that  vifcus.

1 6.  But  if  I  had  feen  any  erofion,  as  well  as  inflammation,  on  the  internal
furface  of  the  bladder,  I  Ihould  perhaps  have  examin'd  lefs  into  the  nature  of
that  coagulum,  which  had  the  form  of  a  membrane  :  and  which,  being  found
in  the  urine,  contain'd  in  the  bladder  after  death,  I  fuppos'd  to  be  a  poly-
pous concretion  -,  as  I  might  then  have  fuppos'd  it  to  be  made  up  of  lamells,
that  had  fallen  oft" from  the  internal  membrane  :  for  the  controverfy  which,  as  I
have  heard,  did  at  length,  avife  fome  years  ago,  was  not  agitated  at  that  time;
I  mean  whether  this  circumftance  could  poflibly  take  place  without  a  haemorr-
hage that  could  not  be  appeas'd.

But  certainly,  a  haemorrhage  of  this  kind  had  not  happen'd  in  the  matron
fnention'd  by  Willis  {x),  who  having,  long  before  death,  difcharg'd  from  her

{x)  DifT.  deUrin.c.  5.

Vol.  JI.  O  o  o  urethra.


466  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

urethra,  "  a  thick  and  broad  membrane,  fill'd  with  fandy  matter ;"  it  ap-
pear'd  from  the  difledlion  of  the  body,  that  this  membrane  "  was  a  part  of  the
"  internal  coat  of  the  bladder :"  nor  did  it  afterwards  happen  in  two  v>'omen»
each  of  whom  difcharg'd,  from  the  urinary  meatus,  a  large  membrane  that
was  examin'd  by  Ruyfch  (y)  and  Boerhaave  (z) ;  and  one  of  them  "  fprink-
"  led  over,  as  it  were,  with  fmall  calculi."

And  it  is  not  to  be  fuppos'd,  that  fuch  men  had  taken  pfeudo-membraniey
or  falfe  membranes,  for  true  ones  -,  efpecially  as  Ruyfch  had  taught  (a),
many  years  before,  the  manner  in  which  not  only  nature,  but  even  art,  might
make  falfe  membranes :  and  had  himfelf  made  them.

Be  this  as  it  will,  however  ;  that  certainly  was  not  a  falfe  membrane,  which
Rohault  (l>)  had  before  ken  difcharg'd  from  the  fame  paifage,  in  a  man  ;  as
he  found  three  portions  of  it  only,  to  be  of  fuch  a  large  fize,  that  he  did  not
doubt  but  they  had  made  up  two  third  parts  of  the  internal  membrane  of  the
bladder :  for  it  was  furnilh'd  with  regular  blood-veffels  :  and  fo  far  was  there
from  being  any  hemorrhage  join'd  with  it,  which  could  not  be  reftrain'd,  that
the  urine  never  appear'd  to  be  fo  much  as  tindlur'd  with  blood.

It  is  true,  I  do  not  contend  that  whatever  comes  out  of  the  bladder  in
the  form  of  a  membrane,  is  really  a  membrane-,  as  I  did  not  judge  it  to  befo
in  my  fellow-citizen.  But  this  I  contend  for;  that  the  marks  of  membranes
are  neverthelefs  fometimes  fo  manifeft,  that  we  cannot  argue  againft  the  opi-
nion of  thole  very  experienc'd  men  who  examin'd  them,  and  took  them  for  .
real  m.embranes  :  nor  are  we  immediately,  and  upon  every  occafion,  to  go  fo
far  as  to  deny  the  fafts,  becaufe  we  cannot  conceive  how  fome  things  can  hap-
pen without  the  moft  violent,  and  even  the  moft  fatal  fymptoms.  I  would
therefore  have  you  fuppofe  what  I  have  faid  on  a  former  occafion  in  a  fimilar
controverfy,  upon  any  internal  membrane  abfceding  (c),  in  great  meafure  to,
take  place  here  alfo.

17. 1  now  come  to  the  caufeof  the  fuppreflion  •,  which  was  found  to  confift  in-,
the  proftate  gland  being  very  tumid,  and  hard.  I  had  learn'd  that  this  caufe
was  not  uncommon,  from  the  obfervations  of  thofe  who  are  quoted  in  the
Sepulchretum  ;  that  is  to  fay  of  Riolanus  (d)  Muraltus  (e),  Dolsevs  (/),  and
even,  as  I  underftand  it,  of  Reifelius  alfo  (g) :  I  have  not  faid  from  thofe  of
others  likewife  and  among  thefe,  of  him  who  ought  to  have  been  nam'd  in.,
preference  to  the  reft,  that  is  of  Parey  (i>),  becaufe  we  do  not  here  confider  the
magnitude  only,  but  the  fcirrhous  hardnefs  alfo.

And  I  have  fince  been  confirm'd  in  the  opinion,  both  by  obfervations  of
this  kind,  that  I  have  heard,  and  read,  and  fuch  as  have  been  made  fince  the
others.  I  have  heard  of  it  in  two  men  of  note  here  at  Padua,  who  were  very,
■well  known  to  me.  And  I  have  read  of  it,  not  only  in  other  authors,  but
particularly  in  the  celebrated  Heifter  (i)  :  and  if  you  attend  to  the  increas'd-

(_y)  Adverf.  Anat.Dec.  2.  n  9,  (e)  Se£l.  25.  in  additam.  obf.  16.

(z)  Vid  Kochii  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  12.  defcript. (/J  Ibid,  obf.17.
in  hiftoria.  {g)  Ibid,  obf;  18.

(«)  Thef.  Anat.  7.  n.  39.  {h)  Seft.  ead.  obf.  1.  §.  6.

{&)  Hill,  de  I'Acad^R.  desSc.  A.  1714.  obf. (/)  Inftit.  Chirurg.  p.  2.  f.  5.  c.  44.  n.i.Je

Anat. I.  Difl".  de  Anat.  Maj.  in  chir.  necefl.  c.  i.  f.  4.

(c)  Epift.  31.  n.  20.  i.  3.  an.  4..


f/ij  Se£t,  hac  24.  obf.  17.  §.  ;^


bulk


Letter  XLI. Article 18.  467

bulk  of  the  gland  only,  I  read  of  it,  likewife,  in  the  works  of  two  of  my
moft  reipeftable  friends,  Vallifneri  (k),  and  Benevoli  (/);  to  whom  you  may
join  Riedlinus  (m).

But  the  whole  proftate  gland  is  not  always  tumid.  For  frequently,  only
the  fuperior  circumference  of  it  either  grows  out  on  every  fide,  or  on  a  par-
ticular part ;  and  fwells  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  prevent  the  exclufion  of  the
urine.  I  think  I  can  point  out  examples  from  the  Sepulchretum,  of  its  being
fo  tumid  as  to  have  this  effeft  :  and  I  have  many  obfervations  of  its  beginning
to  grow  out :  and  thefe,  that  you  may  know  what  are  the  fmall  beginnings  of
great  diforders,  I  will  take  the  trouble  to  fubjoin  here,  in  order,  after  the
former.

Rhodius  («)  defcribes  an  old  man,  in  this  feflion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  in
whom  the  difcharge  of  his  urine  had  been  render'd  very  difficult  by  degrees  ;
and  finally,  mucus  being  added,  was  entirely  obftrufted ;  by  "  a  callous
"  appendage  growing  internally  to  the  orifice  of  the  bladder  alone :  and  ftill
"  more  by  the  internal  membranous  circumference  of  the  orifice  growing
"  out  into  the  fize  of  a  joint."  He  certainly  might  have  defcrib'd  the  cafe
more  clearly  ;  as  another  likewife,  might  have  done,  by  whom  you  will  read
the  fame  ojrifice  of  Cafaubon,  who  was  fo  much  troubled  with  diforders  of  the
bladder,  defcrib'd  in  the  next  fedlion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (o) ;  which  defcrip-
tion  is  moreover  render'd  obfcure  by  typographical  errors.

But  if  I  rightly  conceive  of  what  both  of  them  have  feen  •,  the  circum-
ference of  that  orifice,  which  is  made  by  the  upper  part  of  the  proftate,  was
rais'd  up  by  too  great  a  protuberance  of  the  gland.  And  I  have  feen  that
upper  circumference,  of  the  fame  gland,  beginning  to  grow  out  on  all  fides  ;
in  an  old  man  whofe  hiftory  I  fhall  fend  you  when  I  treat  of  fevers  (p).  And
I  believe  that  which  is  given  in  this  fedtion  (q),  from  Gaflendus,  of  "  a  ca-
"  runcle,  or  callous  fubftance,  at  the  fphinfter  of  the  bladder,  that,  being
*'  lunatedjn  its  lower  part,  and  almoft  as  thick  as  the  third  of  an  inch,  ob-
"  ftrufted  the  orifice  of  the  meatus,"  to  relate  to  a  part  of  this  circumference.

And  although  you  have  already  had  an  example,  from  me,  of  this  incipient
caruncle,  in  the  thirty-feventh  letter  (r)  •,  and  are  to  have  another  alfo,  in  one
of  the  following  letters  (j) ;  yet  I  have  a  mind  to  add  a  third  here,  in  confe-
quence  of  its  being  fliort,  and  relating,  in  general,  only  to  this  circumftance.

18.  A  hufbandman,  of  feveaty-five  years  of  age,  had  died  in  this  holpital
of  an  afcites,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1741  ;  which  was  the  time  when
I  was  demonftrating,  anatomically,  to  the  ftudents,  the  organs  deftin'd  to  the
fecretion  of  the  urine  and  femen.

Thefe  organs,  therefore,  were  talcen  out  from  the  body,  and  were  the  only
parts  I  examin'd.  And  therein  I  not  only  met  with  fome  other  appearances
that  are  not  very  frequent,  though  not  morbid,  which  will  be  taken  notice  of
elfewhere-,  but  I  obferv'd  the  following  things  in  particular,  which  had  are-
lation  to  difeafe.

As  the  fcrotum  was  fwell'd,  as  it  frequently  is  in  an  afcites,  there  was  a
great  quantity  of  water  in  the  cells  of  tlie  dai'tos,  and  but  little  within  either

fij  Opere  t.  3.  f.  3.  off.  21.  22.  •  CoJ  Obf.  ;.

-(/)  Diirert.  2.  -  (/)  Epilt.  49.  n.  18.

im)  Eph.  n.  C.Dec.  3.  A.  9.  &  10  obf.  14^. f<jj  Obf.  12,  4.  10.

^'/)  Obf,  12.  •§.  3.  (/•)  N.  30. ■ (i)  Epill.  43- n- 24'

O  0  0  2  tunica,


468  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

tunica  vaginalis  :  notwithftanding  from  the  albuginea,  where  it  invelts  the
tcfticle,  fuch  fmall  bodies  were  protuberant,  as  are  generally  look'd  upon,  by
me,  to  be  the  remains  of  ruptur'd  hydatids.

And  when  the  anterior  paries  of  the  bladder  was  cut  afunder  longitudinally ;
in  that  part  of  the  oppofue  paries,  which  is  neareft  to  the  orifice,  and  in  the
very  middle  of  this  part,  a  roundifli  protuberance  appear'd  :  being  of  the
bignefs  of  a  fmall  grape,  cover'd  over  with  the  internal  coat  of  the  bladder.
What  this  protuberance  was  I  readily  fuppos'd  ;  and  by  forcing  the  knife  into
it,  I  cut  through  this  and  the  contiguous  proftate  gland,  at  the  fame  time,
lengthways,  and  fliowM  that  it  was  of  the  fame  nature  with  that  gland  :  that
it  was  very  evidently  continued  from  it-,  and  that  there  was  no  doubt,  but,
if  it  had  grown  out  to  a  greater  degree,  it  muft  have  been  a  very  confidera-
ble  impediment  to  the  dilcharge  of  the  urine.

19.  If  you  attentively  examine  thofe  examples  which  1  have  pointed  out
from  the  Sepulchretum  (/),  and  that  which  I  have  produc'd  above  {u),  from
Valfalva,  and  mine ;  you  will  obferve  that  they  were  all  from  old  men  :  and,,
in  like  manner,  if  you  examine  all  my  oblervations  in  which  there  was  the
beginning  of  a  caruncle,  you  will  find  that  this  was  found  to  grow  out  in  the
very  middle  of  the  internal,  and  upper,  circumference  of  the  gland,  pofte-
riorly  ;  but  whether  all  thefe  things  happen'd  by  chance,  or  otherwife,  fu-
ture oblervations  will  iliovv.

In  the  mean  while,  you  may  add,  to  thefe  other  examples,  that  old  phy-
fician,  whom  one  of  the  obfervations,  refer'd  to  in  Vallifneri  fjcj,  fhows  to-
have  had  the  whole  proftate  gland  tumid  indeed,  but  increas'd  with  a  parti-
cular lobe,  as  it  were,  from  its  glandular  fubilance  •,  which  role  up  within  the
bladder,  in  the  flaapc,  and  fize,  of  a  walnut:  not  on  the  anterior  part,  but
©n  that  which  lies  adjacent  to  the  inteftinum  redlum.

Yet  that  roundifh  protuberance  of  the  fame  gland,  which  is  taken  notice
of  in  the  Adverlaria  (y)  ;  except  that  it  rais'd  itfelf  up  from  the  external  cir-
cumference, and  feem'd  as  yet  to  be  in  a  natural  ftate  ;  that  protuberance,  I
fay,  occupied,  in  like  manner,  the  middle  and  upper  part  pofteriorly.

However,  thofe  internal  excrefcences  of  this  gland  that  are  preternatural,
are  not  always  fimple,  but  fometimes  even  in  a  double  ftate  ;  of  which  kind
were  thofe  found  by  Thomas  Bartholin,  at  Padua,  that  he  defcribes  under  the
appearance  of  "  two  tubercles,  confifting  of  a  white  and  glandular  fubftance,
"  of  the  figure  and  fize  of  the  teftes  •,  rifing  up  equally  above  the  foramen,
"  within  the  bladder;  yielding  to  a  fyringe  when  introduc'd,  but  falling  im-
"  mediately  back  into  their  former  fnuation  when  that  was  withdrawn  ;"  as-
you  have  it  in  this  twenty-fourth  feflion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (z).

Thefe  two  tubercles  Terraneus  {a)  would  never  have  taken  for  Cowper's
glands  (which  he  fuppos'd  to  be  difcover'd  by  him)  fwell'd  to  a  confiderable
degree,  if,  v^hen  reading  Bartholin,  he  had  taken  notice  that  they  were  found
"  in  the  bladder."^  But  it  is  probable  that  he  did  read  the  paflage  :  and  I  widi
this  was  the  only  thing  I  could  accufe  him  of-,  fince  being  defirous  of  col-
lefting  obfervations  from  any  author,  and  tranfcribing  them,  he has  told  us

{/)  N.  17.  (y)  IV.  Animad.  14.

(«)  N.  6.  (z)  Obf.  12.  §.  9.

(xj  Supra,  ad  n.  17,  («)  De  Glandul.  c.  5,.

that


Letter  XLII. Article  i,  2.  469

hat  this  obfervation  of  Bartholin  is  to  be  found  "  in  century  the  firft,  hiftory
*  the  twenty-third ;"  whereas  it  is  really  to  be  met  with  in  the  fecond  century,
hiftory  the  fifty-fecond.

But  if  thefe  tubercles  had  grown  out  from  the  proftate  gland,  as  their  na-
ture, colour,  and  fituation,  demonftrate ;  and,  as  the  two  others,  which  I
have  already  defcrib'd  to  you  (b),  in  fome  meafure  Ihow ;  I  have  alfo  a  recent
example  of  this  gland  beginning  to  fhoot  out,  into  two  caruncles,  within  the
bladder.  But  this  example,  as  for  another  reafon  it  belongs  to  the  next  let-
ter {c),  I  will  delay  to  produce  till  then.  And  that  letter  will  be  long,  in  the
fame  proportion  as  this  is  fhort. Farewell.

[b)  Epill.  39.  n.  33.  (c)  Vid.  n.  ii.^


LETTER the FORTY-SECOND

Treats  of  the  difficulty  of  making  Water,  the  Ardor-
uringe  and  other  Diforders  in  which  the  , Urine  is  con-
cern'd..


Am  going  now  to  gi^€  you  a  long  letter-,  as  I  intend  to  comprize  therein,,
every  thing  that  remains  among  the  obfervations  relative  to  diforders-
wherein  the  urine  is  concern'd,  made  by  Valfalva  or  by  me.  What  follows,
is  from  Valfalva.

2.  A  knight  of  fix  and  forty  years  of  age,  who  had  been  formerly  fat,  but
was  nov;  flender,  and  of  a  yellow  complexion  inclining  to  palenefs  ;  had  be-
gun to  be  troubled,  eight  years  before,  with  many  and  various  difagreeable
lymptoms,  on  account  of  many  and  various  errors  in  his  diet,  exercife,  at-
tention of  mind,  watching,  and  veneiy.

Firft  of  all,  being  infefted  with  the  lues  venerea,  from  lying  with  an  in-
fefted  woman,  he  was  feiz'd  with  a  gonorrhoea;  v/hich  being  cur'd  by  a  pro-
per medical  regimen,  was  fucceeded  by  another  more  violent  one,  from  the
fame  caufe.

For  befides  the  pain  in  making  water ;  an  involuntary  difcharge  of  the
urine,  a  purulent  fediment  thereof,  a  painrof  the  ftoraach  in  like  manner,  and
vomitings;  by  means  of  which  he  fometimes  threw  up  veal,  that  had  been
eaten  five  days  before,  withgut  any  change ;  were  exceedingly  troublefome.

Being


470 Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Being  freed  from  all  thefe  complaints  by  the  help  of  remedies,  he  was  at-
tack'd  a  third  time,  with  the  fame  kind  of  gonorrhoea,  and  from  the  fame
caufe  ;  the  diforder  being  attended  with  fpafmodic  pains  in  making  water,  and
continual  watchings.  Befides  thefe  fymptoms,  he  had  certain  tumours  of  the
condylomatous  kind,  within  the  extremity  of  the  inteftinum  reftum ;  from
which,  for  fome  weeks,  and  even  for  fome  months,  blood  was  difcharg'd
every  day,  to  the  quantity  of  five  or  fix  ounces :  fo  that  the  patient  was  al-
ready reduc'd.to  fuch  a  ftate  of  weaknefs,  as  to  fall  into  fwoonings  whenever
he  attempted. to  walk.

To  this  flux  of  blood  was  join'd  a  diarrhoea  •,  by  which  a  yellow  matter,
and,  fometimes,  a  matter  of  a  different  colour,  was  difcharg'd.  This  diarrhoea
continu'd  quite  to  the  day  of  his  death:  being  at  one  time  more  mild,  and  at
another  time  more  violent ;  as  the  purulent  fediment  of  his  urine  did  alfo  ;
and  the  frequent  difcharge  of  his  urine  attended  with  pain,  which  difcharge
was  likewife  almoftalways  involuafiary :  but  if  the  urine  flagnated  a  little
time  in  the  bladder,  by  reafon  of  the  tenacious  ftate  of  the  matter,  it  excited
a  moft  fev ere  pain  •,  efpecially  while  the  difcharge  thereof  was  attempted.

With  all  thefe  different  fymptoms  was  he  troubled  for  many  years :  his
pulfe  being  always  quick,  frequent,  and  turgid  ;  though  the  other  figns,
which  confirm  the  prefence  of  a  fever,  were  wanting.  About  fifteen  days,
only,  before  his  death,  having  fat  up  very  late,  and  indulg'd  himfelf  in  play-
ing at  dice*,  whereby  he  loft  a  confiderable  fum  of  money,  he  was  fo  af-
fefted  therefrom,  both  in  body  and  mind,  that  he  went  to  bed  with  a  vo-
miting and  a  fever,  which  began  with  a  flight  fhivering  and  a  heavy  pain  in
bis  head.

In  the  mean  while,  the  fediment  of  his  urine  was  increas'd :  and  the  pains
in  making  water  were  increas'd :  and  thefe  pains  becoming  ftill  more  and
more  violent,  excited  a  fingultus.  Yet  even  this  was  appeas'd  after  many
days :  puftules,  in  the  mean  while,  breaking  out  about  the  lips,  and  probably
about  the  fauces  alfo  -,  as  a  pungent  pain  therein,  a  difficulty  of  fwallowing,
and  a  vifcid  and  tenacious  fpitting,  feem'd  to  fhow.

An  itching,  moreover,  in  the  llcin  of  the  loins,  which  had  been  flight  for
about  two  years,  exceedingly  tormented  the  patient  at  times,  for  fome  weeks
before  his  death.  Finally,  the  fingultus  returning,  and  the  flrength  of  the
patient  failing  every  day,  he  died  convuls'd.

The  thorax  being  open'd  ;  in  confequence  of  his  having  had  a  difiiculty  in
lying  down  on  one  fide  on  the  lafb  day  of  his  life  •,  the  lungs  were  found  to  be
ffound :  iif^you  except  fome  very  fmall  ftony  concretions  that  fcarcely  deferv'd
notice.

But  when  the  belly  was  open'd,  the  kidnles  appear'd  to  be  lefs  than  their
■catuml  fize,  of  an-unufual  kind  of  figure,  and  to  have  many  protuberances
liere  and  there  externally.  Thefe  tubercles,  when  cut  into,  fliow'd  a  fanious
humour  for  which  a  palTage  was  open'd  into  the  pelvis.  But  in  the  urinary
bladder  -,  in  which,  particularly  about  its  neck,  the  root  of  the  difeafe  was
foppos'd  to  exift,  by  the  unanimous  confent  of  many  learned  men  -,  nothing
appear'd  in  any  part  that  was  worthy  of  remark,  except  a  kind  of  flight  ero-
£on  about  the  orifices  .of  the  airexers.

2.  Vailfalva


Letter  XLII. Article 3,  4,  5.  471

3.  Va^falva  fuppos'd,  and  with  very  good  rcafon,  that  this  dilTeftion  might
l^e  a  leiTcn  of  feme  importance  -,  as  it  might  make  us  cautious  in  determining
the  feats  of  difeafes,  when  they  relate  to  the  urinary  parts :  the  diagnofis  of
which,  even  when  enquir'd  into  with  the  greatelT:  fkill,  and  accuracy,  is  very
frequently  deceitful;  as  it  was  in  this  cafe,  and  Tn  another  aUb,  whereof  I  re-
member him  to  have  given  me  the  relation  in  this  manner.

4.  That  a  certain  perfon  labour'd  under  a  diforder  of  his  urine,  and  the
parts  ferving  to  the  fecretion  thereof;  was  evident  to  every  body.  Yet  he  ■
complain'd  very  little  of  the  kidnies,  or  of  the  region, of  thefe  vifcera ;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  was  tormented  with  fuch  pains  in  the  bladder,  that  five
or  fix  phyficians,  not  of  the  meaneft  clafs,  did  not  doubt  but  the  feat  of  the
difeafe  was  in  the  bladder.

When  his  body  was  diflTeded  after  death,  not  the  leaft  diforder  appear'd
in  the  bladder;  but  there  were  large  and  ramifying  calculi  in  the  kidnies.

5.  I  faw  thefe  calculi,  which  Valfalva  kept  by  him.

And  both  of  thefe  hiftories  brought  to  memory  a  third,,  which  you  will  find
transfer'd,  from  Harderus,  into  the  feclion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  which  re-
lates to  the  fubjedl  in  queftion  ;  that  is  into  the  twenty-fifth  (a).  The  cafe  is
of  a  boy  of  three  years  old  ;  but,  although  he  difcover'd,  by  his  geftures,.
the  moft  violent  pain  in  making  water ;.  he  notwithftanding  did  not  ever  fhow
any  figns  of  pain  in  the  kidnies  that  I  read  of.

I  omit  to  take  notice  that  this  boy  a]fo,'as  well  as  that  knight  f^j,  had  a
perpetual  diarrhoea ;  puftules  not  long  before  death,  and  even  convulfions  in
death:  for  fome  of  thefe  may  be  from  different  caufes  in  different  perfons.
This  circumftance,  however,  I  attend  to,  "  that  nothing  preternatura;!
."  could  be  obferv'd  in  the  bladder:"  but  that  in  one  of  the  kidnies  there  had
been  not  only  plenty  of  fmall  fandy  particles,  included  in  the  carunculas  pa-
pillares;  and  particularly,  that  before  the  mouth  of  the  ureter,  there  had  been
"  an  oblong  acuminated  calculus,  of  the  hardnefs  of  a  flint,  and  tenacioufly
"  wrap'd  up  in  membranes ;"  or,  as  Harderus  himfelf  explains  it  in  the  fcho-
lium,  "  intangled  in  very  thin  membranes  of  the  kidney  ;"  which  "  he  was
*'  oblig'd  to  feparate  with  a  lancet."

Whether,  therefore,  an  irritation  be  propagated  from  the  kidnies  to  the
bladder,  by  the  continued  membranes  of  the  ureter  ;  as  I  have  already  faid  on
a  former  occafion  {c) ;  which  is  the  moft  fenfible  where  it  terminates ;  or-rather,
whether  in  thefe  cafes,  fmall  particles  of  (and,  or  as  the  firfl  hiftory,  by  a
flight  erofion  about  the  orifices  of  the  ureters,  feems  to  {how,  acrid  particles
of  matter  defcend  into  the  bladder ;  they  fo  vellicate  this  vifcus  by  ftagnatino-
there,  that  themoftfevere  pains  arife  :  and  particularly  while  it  is-conftrifted,
in  order  to  difcharge  its  contents.

At  leaft  a  very  a  rid  (natter,  flowing  down  from  tHe  corroded  kidnies  into
the  bladder,  had  fo  afl'eded  this  refervoir,  and  the  neighbouring  parts,  in  a
certain  man,  that  the  pain  in  the  loins^  not  continuing  conftantly  as  it  did  in
the  bladder,  and  bringing  on  "  all  the  fymptoms  of  a  calculus  confin'd  there--
"  in,  there  remain'd  no  doubt  of  the  adual  exiftence  of  this  calculus  "  in  the

{a)  Obf.  10.  (cj  Epift.  40.  n.  5.  .

{b)  Supra,  n.  2.

3  breaii


472  Book  in. Of  Dlfeafes  of  the  Belly.

bread  of  his  phyfician,  whowas  the  celebrated  Hottinger  (d).  Yet  of  fuch
a  calculus  was  not  the  leafl  trace  found  after  death.

And  that  you  may  the  more  and  more  underftand,  how  eafily  we  may  fall
into  errors,  in  determining  upon  the  caule  of  a  dyfuria;  turn  to  the  hif-
tories  of  two  matrons :  the*  one  given  by  Schrockius  (e),  the  other  by  Bon-
figlius  (f).

The  firft  was  tormented  with  a  tenefmus,  with  pains  in  the  pubes,  and  a
kind  of  milky  urine  -,  the  fecond  had  been  afflifted  with  a  dyfuria  from  her
■very  infancy,  with  urine  fometimes  of  the  fame  kind;  to  which,  at  laft  j
many  fmall  foliated  membranes,  as  it  were,  "  were  added  :"  which  had  not
been  difcharg'd  without  the  fenfationof  a  very  heavy  weight,  a  pain,  and  an
ardor.

Yet  in  neither  of  them  was  found  any  difeafe  of  the  bladder ;  but  in  the
fecond,  one  of  the  kidnies  was  internally  difeas'd,  and  prolaps'd  from  its
feat,  in  confequence  of  its  bulk  being  increas'd:  and  in  the  firft  was  a  large
fcirrhus,  which,  occupying  almoft  the  whole  pelvis,  and  growing  to  the
fundus  of  the  bladder,  fo  comprefs'd  this  refervoir,  that  the  acrimony  of  the
■urine,  retain'd  thereby,  gave  the  moft  excruciating  pain.

6.  Valfalva  very  folicitoufly  enquir'd  after  another  caufe, whefeby the

bladder  may  ib'metimes  be  vellicated  :  but  he  could  never  confirm  the  exill-

ence  of  it  by  diileftion  ;  I  mean  of  worms  refiding in  this  cavity. I  know

however,  that  worms,  difcharg'd  together  with  the  urine,  as  the  patients  and

,  their  domeftics  imagin'J,  have  been  more  than  once  offer'd  to  his  infpeiStion.

For  I  was  at  Bologna,  when  a  gentleman  ;  who,  after  pains  of  the  kid-
nies, and  a  fucceeding  fenfe  of  pricking  in  the  bladder,  finding,  at  length,
that  his  urethra  was  prick'd  in  the  fame  manner,  at  the  time  of  making  water;
faw  a  kind  of  {lender  animalcule  fall  from  the  urethra,  together  with  his
urine :  and  foon  after,  examining  the  urine  he  had  difcharg'd,  he  not  only
faw  this  one  in  the  chamber-pot,  but  even  many  other  animalcules  of  the
fam.fi  kind,  together  with  fandy  concretions ;  which  appearances  he  iliow'd
to  Valfalva,  who  was  his  phyfician.

Valfalva  had  happen'd,  at  that  time,  to  give  the  patient  liquor  in  which
the  root  of  faxifrage  had  been  boil'd  :  he  therefore  order'd  them  to  be  taken
out  of  the  urine,  living  as  they  were,  and  thrown  into  a  glafs  of  this  decoc-
tion ;  from  whence  they  loft  their  vivacity,  became  ftupid,  andfeem'd  almoft
dead,  yet,  after  two  days,  having  fhaken  off  this  ftupor,  they  were  thrown
into  feveral  different  waters,  for  the  fake  of  experiment;  in  each  of  which
\va:ers,  different  ingredients,  fuppos'd  to  be  inimical  to  worms,  were  boil'd,
and  agitated  ;  but  none  of  thefe  waters  was  obferv'd  to  affeft  them  fo  much
as  the  former,  except  one,  in  which  not  only  fuch  things  as  are  fuppos'd  to
expel  fand,  and  gravel,  had  been  boil'd,  but  even  quick-filver  had  been
agitated.

Thefe  animalcules  were  black ;  and,  in  fome  meafure,  fimilar  to  thofe
worms  that  we  fee  in  dry  v/ood  :  which  circumflance,  at  length,  put  Valfalva
upon  inquiring  whether  others  of  the  fame  kind  could  not  be  found  in  the
patient's  bed-chamber,  or  where  the  cham.ber-pot  was  at  any  time  kept.

(J)  Eph. c.  c. Dec.  3.  A.  0.  &  10.  obf. (<?)  Eanind.  cent.  i.  Sc  2.  obf.  186.
sp. *  •  (/)  Earund.  cent.  9.  obf.  4.

j;  And


Letter  XLII. Article  6.  473

And  thefe  animalcules  being  adtually  found,  there  was  an  end  to  all  his
experiments  :  yet  he  did  not  feem  entirely  to  have  laid  down  his  former  fuf-
picion  ;  efpecially  as  other  animalcules  were  brought  to  him,  which  were
faid  to  have  been  difcharg'd  in  the  urine  of  another  patient,  together  with  a
fabulous  matter.

One  of  thefe  Valfalva  fhow'd  to  me;  and  took  care  that  it  fliould  be  drawn
to  the  life,  even  by  the  help  of  a  microfcope :  yet  I  fhall  fay  nothing  upon
-thefubjedt;  fince  Alghifi,  in  his  letter  to  Vallifneri  (^),  has  told  us  what  ap-
pear'd  to  him  from  hence:  and  has,  at  the  fame  time,  given  a  figure  of  the
animalcules :  and  Valiifneri  has  fuppos'd  he  might  fiifpedt  from  hence,  that
they  were  die  off-fpring  of  thofe  black  flies,  or  worms,  which  make  their
nidufles  in  timber ;  and  that  they  had  happen'd  to  fall  from  the  cielings  into
the  chamber-pot :  for  thus  he  wrote  to  me  on  the  fourth  day  of  April  in
the  year  1 7 1 1 .

But  the  fame  Valiifneri  feems,  fince  that,  in  an  annotation  (h)  to  the  letter
of  Alghifi,  to  be  almoft  inclin'd  to  believe,  or,  at  leafl:,  fufpeft,  that  fome
very  fmall,  and  almoft,  invifible  worms ;  which  he  at  that  time  faw  in  the
urine  of  a  man,  who  was  his  patient ;  might  have  been  generated  within  his
body.  •-•

This  therefore  being,  at  prefent,  the  ftate  of  the  queftion  •,  fince  Valiifneri
did  not,  as  far  as  I  know,  determine  any  thing,  afterwards,  for  certain,  in
regard  to  thefe  worms  •,  it  is  proper  that  we  alfo  fliould  withold  our  afient  in
the  mean  while  ;  either  till  chance  prefents  us  with  more  certain  appearances,
or  the  flcilfulnefs  of  fome  gentleman,  extremely  well  vers'd  in  the  hiftory  of
infeds,  fuch  as  the  celebrated  Reaumur  is  at  this  time,  fliall  make  deeper  re-
fearches  into  the  fubjeft.

Por  as  the  ftudy  of  natural  hiftory,  and  that  of  infefts  in  particular,  is
carried  to  fuch  a  height  of  improvement  in  our  age,  phyficians  have  been
thereby  render'd  the  more  cautious  in  giving  credit  to  obfervations  of  this
kind.  See,  for  inftance,  the  great  number  of  hiftories  which  are  related  by
Johannes  Rhodius  (i),  and  Dominicus  de  Marinis  (k).

Out  of  fo  great  a  number  of  worms,  which  were  formerly  faid  to  be  dif-
charg'd by  the  urethra,  we  fliould,  at  this  time,  immediately  know  that  fome
were  nothing  elfe  but  polypous  concretions  in  the  fliape  of  worms;  that
others  were  real  worms  indeed,  yet  had  not  fallen  from  the  urethra,  but,
externally,  from  fome  other  place,  into  the  chamber  pots  •,  inafmu.ch  as  they
were  of  that  kind  which  cannot  be  generated  within  the  body,  nor  live
therein :  or  if  they  did  really  come  from  the  urethra,  it  would  appear  that
they  were  not  generated  in  the  urinary  parts,  but  in  the  inteftines  which  had
been  perforated  ;  from  whence  they  had  crept  into  the  bladder,  or  urethra  :
the  paflages  being  open'd  by  abfceflTes,  and  by  fiftulas  in  particular.

An  example  of  this  laft  kind  is  pointed  out  by  Valiifneri  (/)  :  and  Alghifi
C?»j  relates  another  of  his  own,  that  he  was  afterwards  better  acquainted  with,

{g)  Qiiam  vid.  torn.  1.  hujus  Operum,  p.  5. (i)  Diflert.  de  remonftr.  a  Capuce.  &  cast.
(h)  Ibid.  (/)  Adnotcit.

(;•)  Cent.  3,Obf.  Med.  35  &  36.  CmJ  Loc.  cit,^

Vol.  IL  -P  P  P  fr<"»


474  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

from  difTetStion  ;  which  .conlirm'd  him  in  his  opinion  of  the  cafe  («)•  You
have,  alio,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (o),  more  than  one  example  of  perforations
of  this  kind:  and  if,  in  thefe  patients,  roundworms,  or  afcarides,  came  forth
by  the  urethra-,  there  was  nothing  therein  which  could  greatly  excite  our
wonder.

But  when,  in  this  twenty-fifth  fedion  (p),  you  read  of  the  difledion  of  a
man,  who  had,  while  living,  difcharg'd  two  afcarides  in  his  urine-,  and  that,
in  his  bladder  which  was  ulcerated,  one  worm  was  found,  "  like  thofe  that
"  are  found  in  putrid  flefli  ;"  you  muft  hefitate,  and  doubt  whether  there
was  not  fome  finus,  which  had  been  unobferv'd,  going  from  that  ulcer,  and
reachino-  to  the  inteftinum  reftum:  and  whether  the  afcarides  had  not  pafs'd
over,  from  thence  into  the  bladder -^  or  rather  whether  thofe  afcarides-,  altho'
they  had  been  found  by  the  patient,  himfelf,  "  in  a  living  and  adlive  ftate,
and  creeping  upon  the  glans  penis,  itfelf ;"  had  neverthelefs  not  come  from
the  urethra,  but  from,  the  anus,  together  with  fome  part  of  the  excrementltious.
matter  -,  and  by  this  means  had  crept  on  to  the  penis.

But  in  regard  to  that  worm  which  was  quite  of  another  fpecies,  and  which
was  found  in  an  ulcer  of  the  bladder ;  if  however  it  was  a  real  worm  ;  and
taking  this  for  granted,  if  not  carried  thither  by  fponges;'  or  fome  other  acci-
dent ;  you  may  fuppofe  that  it  was  brought  forth  by  its  mother-fly,  near  the
external  orifice  of  the  urethra,  which  was  infeded  with  a  putrid  ichor  :  and
that  it  had  crept  through  this  canal  quite  into  the  bladder:  but  that  this
had  happen'd  after  the  patient's  death,  and  not  while  he  was  yet  living.

For  neither  would  the  fphinfter  of  the  bladder,  unlefs  quite  relax'd,  have
fuffer'd  any  thing  to  have  accefs  to  the  cavity  thereof-,  nor  would  the  man
have  fail'd  to  feel  the  motion  of  this  infedl  creeping  through  the  urethra ;.
unlefs  quite  deftitute  of  fenfation  ;  and  in  confequence  thereof  would  have  had
aftimulus  to  make  water  :  and  by  this  means,  the  animalcule  muft  have  been
thrown  out,  together  with  the  urine,  immediately,  as  foon  as  ever  it  had  en-
ter'd  the  urethra  :  and  I  am  iurpriz'd  that  Ruyfch  did  not  fufficiently  attend
to  this  (^),  when  he  fuppos'd  that  worms  might  creep,  from  their  lurking-
places,  through  the  urethra,  quite  to  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  and  remain
there  till  they  put  on  the  form  of  nymphs  ;  on  which  fuppofition  another
very  great  difficulty,  in  the  opinion  of  Vallifneri  (r),  offers  itfelf  ta  our  con-
fideration.

7.  "What  then  ?  you  will  fay,  among  all  the  many  examples  that  Georgius
Francus  (i),,Rofinus  Lentilius  (/),  Mich.  Fr.  Lochnerus  (?/),  have  reckon'd
up,  do  not  fome,  at  leaft,  occur,  that  are  plac'd  beyond  all  poflibility  of.
doubt?

I  am  not  at  leifure  to  examine  them  all.  But  this  I  can  fay ;  that  many  of
them  are  of  the  fame  kind  with  thofe  fpoken  of  before  :  and  as  they  were  all
read  over  by  Vallifneri ;  for  thofe  volumes,  wherein  thefe  enumerations  are
contain'd,  were  publifh'd  many  years  before  his  death,  and  perus'd  by  him  ;

(«)  Vid  Benevoli  Offerv.  8.  CsJ  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  4.  obf,  z.

(o)  Sed.  27.1.  3.  obf.  I.  CtJ  Earund. cent,  i  &  2.  Append,  n. 11.

Ip)  In  Additaro.  obf.  zo.  ad  obf.  14.

(jj  Thef.  Anat.  1.  in  fine.  (a)  Earund.. cent.  8.  obf.  99.

(jt)  Adnot.  cit.

2 .  ke. .


Letter  XLIL Article  7.  475

he,  neverthelefs,  found  no  inftance  whatever,  among  them,  as  far  as  I  know,
from  which  he  thought  it  neceffary  to  change  his  opinion  entirely.

He  did  not  call  into  queftion  the  credit  of  the  authors  who  had  written ;
but,  in  fome  he  wifh'd  for  a  greater  fhare  of  fagacity,  in  fome  more  diligence,
and  in  others  a  prudent  method  of  fufpefting  and  doubting  -,  fo  that,  unlefs
they  had  confider'd  all  the  fymptoms  which  had  preceded,  all  which  attended^
and  fucceeded,  they  fhould  not  fuppofe  themfelves  to  have  made  a  fufEcienc
enquiry.  After  his  death  other  examples  came  forth  ;  one  of  which  it  ap-
pears had  been  communicated  to  him.

But  he  certainly  could  not  have  read  thofe  that  are  extant  in  the  Commer-
cium  Litterarium  (xj.  And  if  he  could  have  read  them  ;  he,  indeed,  without
doubt,  would  have  paid  great  deference  to  the  illuftrious  and  every  way  re-
ipeclable  obfervers,  as  I  myfelf  do ;  he  would,  neverthelefs,  probably  have
wifli'd,  that  almoft  all  of  them,  in  general,  had  not  happen'd  in  that  fex
which  is  fo  prone  to  deceive ;  a  circumftance  that  is  taken  notice  of  by
one  of  the  obfervers  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  that  the  worms  had  been
defcrib'd  in  fome ;  in  fome  that  they  had  been  really  feen  alive ;  and  in  others
that  both  the  defcription,  and  the  reprefentation,  had  not  naturaljy  giv.en  us  a
fufpicion  of  polypous  concretions.

For  you  know  how  fufpicious  he  was  in  making  his  own  obfervations  -,  and,
if  you  pleafe,  even  difficult.  However,  in  judging  of  the  obfervations  of
others,  he  has  had  Daniel  le  Clerc  ( j),  for  a  follower  of  his  morofe  cautiouf-
nefs ;  and  even  Lochner  (z)  himfqlf,  and  his  friend  Godfrey  Thomafius  {a).
But  thefe  authors,  you  will  fay,  except  to  fome  only,  of  the  many  obferva-
tions, wherein  worms  are  faid  to  have  been  difcharg'd  from  the  urethra.  Nor
do  I  obftinately  deny  them  all.  I  only  wait  for  fome  perfon  to  confirm,  by
his  more  clear,  and  lefs  exceptionable  examples,  fome  obfervations  on  whichi
I  have  lefs  hefitation.

But  if  thefe  obfervations  feem,  to  you,  to  be  plac'd  beyond  all  doubt,  you  are
at  liberty  to  admit  them  for  mej  fo  you  do  but  confefs,  that  thefe  appearances,
which  were  then  fo  frequent,  and  almoft  innumerable,  according  to  this  fup-
pofition,  are  now  reduc'd  to  a  few,  and  happen  but  feldom.  And  this  will
appear  fo  much  the  more  ftriking,  if  we  confider  thofe  which  have  hitherto
been  examin'd  by  diffedlion.  What  was  more  fimilar  to  a  worm,  than  that
which  the  celebrated  Kneller  {b)  has  defcrib'd,  as  being  thrown  out  of  the
urethra,  after  very  violent  pains  of  the  urinary  pafTages  ?  But  when  a  more
accurate  examination  was  made,  he  himfelf  found  that  what  he  had  taken
for  a  worm,  was  nothing  elfe  but  coagulated  blood,  furrounded  with  a  kind
of  fiender  coat.

And  even  thofe  which  were  difcharg'd  in  a  very  great  number,  by  a  man
of  diftindion,  through  the  fame  paflTage,  "  were  fully  and  perfectly  like  "  the
round  worms  of  the  inteftines ;  as  the  accurate  defcription  of  Thomafius  (c)
Ihows  : fo  that  "  the  rumour,  of  fo  unufual  a thing,  was  fpread  abroad

{x)  A.  1731. Spec.  27.11. 5 ;  &  a.  1734.  (z)  Obf.  99.01.

hebd.  39.  poll.  n.  4;  &  a.  1735.  hebd.  36. n.  (a)  Obf.  100.  feq.

3.  &  a.  1743.  hebd. 49.  n.  3.  ut  ojnittatur  a.  {b)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn,  5. obf.  75.

174;.  hebd.  4.  n.  2.  &  est.  {<)  Obf.  cit.  100.

(y)  Hii>.  lat.  Lumbric.  c,  i5.ubi.  deVermib.
cum  Urina  Excret.

P  p  p  2  "  through


476  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  through  the  city,  quick  ahiioft  as  thought."  The  nidus  of  v/hich  worms',
being  inquirM  after  in  the  dead  body,  in  the  other  parts  deftin'd  to  the  offices-
of  excreting  the  urine;  it  was  at  length  found,  from  the  ftate  of  the  left  kid-
ney, and  its  ureter,  that  they  had  been  nothing  more  than  inanimate  con-
cretions of  fasculent  and  vifcid  blood,  collefted  together  in  thefe  paflages,
and  difpos'd  into  that  form.

And  when  true  worms had  been  difcharg'd  from  the  bladdfer, Alghifi
learn'd  from  difledtions  •,  as  I  have  faid  above  {d) ;  and  another  author  refer'd  >
to  by  Vallifneri,  that  is  the  celebrated  Reinholdus  Wagner  (e),  learn'd  alfo
by difledtion  ;  through  what  pafTages  they  had  come  thither  from  the  in-
ttrftines.

But  now  let  us,  at  length,  go  on  from  a  doubtful,  or  at  leaft,  very  rare
eaufe  of  a  dyfuria  -,  I  mean  v/orms  generated  in  the  urinary  organs ;  to  a  ma-
nifeft  and  very  frequent  caufe  -,  that  is  to  a  ftone  of  the  bladder :  although
out  of  two  difledlions  which  I  find,  and  no  more,  in  the  papers  of  Valfalva,
of  thofe  that  were  affefled  with  this  difeafe  -,  as  I  have  given  one  of  them  al-
ready, in  confequence  of  its  having  a  more  immediate  relation  to  the  apo-
plexy (f) ;  one  only  remains,  which  relates  to  calculi-of  the  bladder,  and  to
their  unfuccefsful  excifion  at  the  fame  time.

8.  A  boy,  of  nine  years  of  age,  had  already  labour'd  for  fix  years,  under
a  calculus  of  the  bladder.  He  was  much  troubled  with  it  at  intervals.  He
frequently  difcharg'd  his  urine  involuntarily,  and  mix'd  with  certain  filaments  j
yet  that  fluid  was  of  a  natural"  colour  :  unlefs  when  it  fometimcs  became
bloody  from  too  great  motion.  The  calculus  fometimes  could  be  felt  by  the.
finger,  when  introduc'd  per  anum,  and  at  other  times  could  not»

And  a  lithotomift  having  undertaken  to  extraft  this  calculus ;  after  having
troubled  the  boy  for  a  long  time,  drew  forth  a  fmall  ftone  with  great  force.
And  when  he  perceiv'd  that  another  ftone  was  contain'd  in  the  bladder,  he
again  tortur'd  the  boy  to  fuch  a  violent  degree,  that  he  faid  his  pain  was  fo  ex-
cruciating as  to  fuffocate  him:  at  length  he  extrafted  a  portion  of  the  fradlur'd
ftone.

Scarcely  half  an  hour  was  elaps\l,  when  the  boy  began  to  vomit ;  com-
plaining continually  of  a  very  great  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  his  belly.  To
thefe  fymptoms  was  added  a  flight  tumour  of  the  abdomen  :  and  a  fever  at-
tended by  a  great  thirft ;  together  with  fome  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  a
toffing  of  the  whole  body.  He  therefore  died  one  and  twenty  hours  after  the
extradlion  of  the  calculi-.

His  belly  being  open'd,  the  bladder,  with  its  furrounding  membranes,
was  found  to  be  inflam'd  -,  and  about  the  cervix,  on  the  anterior  part,  lace-
rated. In  the  cavity  of  it  remain'd  one  half  of  the  fecond  calculus.

9.  The  unfkilfulnefs,  or  raftinefs,  of  the  lithotomift,  in  this  cafe,  certainly
cannot  be  excus'd.  Nor  do  I  fay  this,  becauie,  when  his  finger  was  intro-
duc'd into  the  anus,  he  fometimes  could,  and  fometimes  could  not,  perceive
the  calculi :  for,  in  regard  to  this  circumftance,  we  ftiall  confider  it  pre-
fently  (g).

{d)  N.  6.  Cf)  Epift.  4.  n.  3.

\e)  Epb.  n,  c.  cent.  1  &  2.  obf.  170.  {g)  N.  10.

Etlt


Letter  JXLII. Article  lo.  477

But  I  fay  it  for  this  reafon,  that  it  is  certain  he  muft  not  have  made  a  fuf-
ficient  opening  for  extradting  the  calculus ;  as  he  extrafted  a  fmall  ftone
with  a  very  great  force  :  for  which  realbn  the  very  circumftance  Celfus  (h)
has  warn'd  us  of,  happen'd  with  very  ill  cor^fequences -,  I  mean  that  "the
"  calculus,  when  taken  away  with  force,  makes  a  paffage  for  icfelf,  if  a  paf-
"  fage  be  not  already  made :"  and  thus ;  although,  in  children,  the  parts
more  eafily  yield  to  dilatation,  which  is  one  of  the  reafons  why  lithotomy  is,
for  the  moft  part,  more  fuccefsful  in  this  age,  than  any  other;  in  this  cafe  the
bladder  was,  neverthelefs,  lacerated  about  its  cervix.

Add  to  this  the  tedioufnefs,  and  great  painfulnefs,  of  the  operation  -,  and
the  breaking  afunder  of  one  of  the  ftones ;  though  we  do  not  read  of  its  being
large ;  which  probably  would  have  have  been  by  no  means  neceflary,  if  the
paffage  had  been  made  fufiiciently  wide;  and  which  ought  always  to  be
avoided  if  there  be  no  neceflity :  left  either  the  forceps  fhould  hurt  the  in-
ternal coat  of  the  bladder,  by  intercepting  it,  or  the  parts  of  the  ftone,  by
flying  afunder,  fhould  injure  this  thin  membrane  :  or  left,  while  they  are
fought  after  by  a  long  examination,  and  drawn  forth,  they  give  occafion  of
injuring  the  parts  :  or  finally  left  any  fragment  of  them,  being  left  behind,
Ihould  afford  a  new  beginning  to  a  calculus  of  the  bladder.

If  Hippocrates  had  forbid  fuch  a  lithotomift  as  this,  and  others  like  him,
from  "  cutting  perfons  who  labour  under  the  ftone  ;"  this  paffage  of  his  from
the  little  book  intitled  Jujfurandum-^  or  the  oath,  would  not  have,  been  fo
tortur'd.

But  he  forbad  his  difciples  this,  and  commanded  that  "  they  fhould  give
"  place  to  men  who  were  employ'd  in  furgery  in  the  performance  of  this
"  operation  ;"  could  he  mean  becaufe  he  thought  that  the  praftice  of  fur-
gery did  not  become  a  phyfician  ?  As  if  he  himfelf  were  not  very  much
vers'd  in  the  pradlice  of  it ;  or  was  it  for  fear  he  fhould  expofe  his  difciples
to  the  flander,  and  contempt,  of  thofe  who  were  only  exercis'd  in  the  cure  of
diforders  of  particular  parts  ?

I  fhould  fuppofe  fo  if,  befides  this  one  difeafe,  he  had  likewife  order'd  the
fame  thing  to  be  done  in  other  diforders  of  fome  certain  parts.  Why  then  did
he  except  this  one  cafe  only  ?  I  am  rather  inclin'd  to  be  of  opinion  with  thofe
who  fuppofe  it  to  be  excepted,  as  being  liable  to  the  moft  confiderable  danger
among  the  others  •,  and  particularly  at  that  time,  when  fo  many  admonitions,
precepts,  and  inftruments,  whereby  the  operation  might  be  brought  very
near  to  its  perfeflion^  as  it  is  in  our  days,  had  not  yet  been  added.  But  let
us  return  10  the  lithotomift  of  whom  I  had  begun  to  fpeak.

10.  As  to  his  fometimes  feeling,  and  fometimes  not  feeling,  the  calculi  by
introducing  his  finger  into  the  anus,  the  caufe  of  this  circumftance  may  be
manifold:  nor  does  this  happen  lei's  frequently  to  fkilful,  than  to  unfkilful
examiners.

The  celebrated  Jo.  Anthony  Galli  certainly  was,  and  is,  a.  very  flcillful
phyfician  and  furgeon ;  in  which  laft  capacity  he  was  particularly  famous :
fome  years  ago,  this  gentleman  had  been  fent  for  from  Bologna  to  Faenza,
at  the  fame  time  that  I  was  alfo  fent  for  from  Forli,  where  I  then  happen'd  to

(b)  De  Medic.  1.  7.  c.  z6.  f.  2,


47^  Book  III. Of  Difeafcs  of  the  Belly.

be,  to  fee  a  man  of  Ibme  eminence,  who  was  affetled  with  moft  of  thofe  fymp-
toms  that  generally  attend  a  ftone  of  the  bladder.

This  experienc'd  fiirgeon,  by  introducing  his  finger  at  that  time,  could  by
no  means  perceive  the  ftone,  which  he  had  perceiv'd  before;  yet  we  did  not
conclude  that  there  was  no  ftone,  for  this  reafon,  as  the  fymptoms  ftill  coit-
tinued.  And  we  did  not  even  conclude  fo  afterwards,  when  they  feem'd  to
have  vanilli'd.

For  I  was  inform'd  by  the  patient ;  about  a  month  after  that  day,  when
the  gout,  (to  which  he  had  formerly  been  fubjedl,  and  after  that  had  not
been  any  more  troubled  with,  for  a  long  time)  had  return'd  upon  him  fud-
denly,  and  all  the  difagreeable  fymptoms  of  his  bladder  had  gone  away  at  the
fame  time  -,  that  he  therefore  did  not  doubt  but  I  fliould  come  over  to  his  opi-
nion as  he  wifh'd :  I  mean  that  all  the  fymptoms  of  which  he  had  complain'd
to  fo  great  a  degree,  wht'n  I  was  prefent,  had  not  been  owing  to  a  calculus,
but  to  a  gouty  matter  irritating  the  bladder.

I  anfwer'd  him,  however,  ftill  in  this  manner ;  that  as  I  had  not  pronounc'd,
from  the  fymptoms  whereof  he  complain'd  before,  that  he  certainly  labour'd
■under  a  calculus,  becaufe  he  had  not  been  willing  to  admit  of  the  catheter;
from  whence,  perhaps,  an  undoubted  fign  of  its  exiftence,  would  have  otFer'd
itfelf  in  the  founding  of  the  ftone  againft  the  catheter ;  fo  neither  could  I,
from  the  obfcurity  of  thofe  fymptoms ;  which  perhaps  was  owing  to  the  urine
being  become  lefs  acrid,  by  reafon  of  the  irritating  particles  being  then  car-
ried tofome  other  part ;  .for  a  certainty  deny  that  there  was  a  ftone  :  not  even
if  the  catheter  were  introduc'd,  and  no  found  could  be  perceiv'd.

For  I  was  not  ignorant  that  fome  lithotomifts,  while  I  ftood  by  them,  and
.even  that  Cheflelden  himfelf  (;')  as  well  as  others,  have  not  been  able  to  per-
ceive the  ftone ;  even  aft^T  three  times  introducing  the  catheter:  notwith-
ftanding  one  was  really  in  the  bladder.

And  in  fafb,  when  I  had  return'd  to  Padua,  it  was  fignified  to  me,  in  the
name  of  the  patient,  that  as  he  was  not  able  any  longer  to  endure  the  former
;fymptoms,  which  were  now  return'd ;  he  had  taken  care  to  have  the  calculus,
•which  was  perceiv'd  with  the  catheter,  fuccefsfully  extrafted  by  incifion.

And  indeed  that  very  experienc'd  man  Morand  (k)  has  hinted,  that  pains
of  the  bladder,  from  a  calculus,  fometimes  lie  dormant  for  many  months
together ;  and  even  for  years :  and  you  have  in  the  preceding  feftions  of  the
Sepulchretum,  from  Tulpius  (I),  and  Nafius  (m),  examples  of  thofe  perfons  j
one  of  whom,  "  for  the  fpace  of  five  years  together,"  and  the  other  "  from
*'  childhood,  quite  to  the  age  of  five  and  thirty,"  had  little,  or  nothing,  of
thefe  very  troubiefome  fymptoms,  of  a  ftone  in  the  bladder  remaining:  not-
.withftanding  they  had  been  before  afflifted  therewith,  and  had,  even  then,
large  calculi  in  their  bladders ;  fo  that  the  firft  of  them,  like  our  Faventinus,
believ'd  that  he  never  had  a  calculus.

I  take  no  notice  of  others,  who,  never  having  made  any  complaint  of  this
dheafe,  had,  after  dying  in  a  decrepit  old  age,  either  large  calculi,  or  a  great
number  of  them,  in  the  bladder ;  to  the  aftonifliment  of  every  one:  to  whole


(0  Vid.  Morand.  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des flj  Seft.  24.  obf.  8.
£c.  A.  1740.  (m)  Sed.  2.3.  obf.  7.  §.  4.

fij  Ibid.


three


Letter  XLIl. Article lo.  479

three  hittories,  that  are  in  like  manner  defcrlb'd  in  the  Sepulchretiim  (;;),  I
might  add  others;  and  in  particular  two  from  Alghifi  (o);  one  of  which,  by
reafon  of  the  perforation  in  the  middle  of  the  ftone,  is  fimiiar  to  the  third  of
the  former  hittories,  which  has  Loffius  for  its  author.

And  in  the  year  1752,  when  I  was  teaching  anatomy  in  the  college,  a  per-
forated ftone  was  brought  to  me,  in  the  preience  of  many  perfons,  by  an
eminent  apothecary,  whole  fliop  is  under  the  college  •,  v/hich  ftone  was  fimi-
iar to  that  reprefented  by  Alghifi  (p),  except  that  the' foramen  was  fomewhat
more  narrow.  He  told  us  that  it  had  been  difcharg'd,  fome  days  before,  with-
out any  other  affiftance  than  that  of  nature,  and  the  hand  of  the  woman  her-
felf,  in  whofe  bladder  it  had  been  form'd.

And  1  fuppos'd  that  this  calculus,  and  every  other  of  the  fame  kind,  if  there
have  been  any  befide  that  of  Alghifi,  had  been  form'd  in  the  fhape  of  a  ring,
in  the  lower  part  of  the  bladder,  about  the  orifice  of  the  urethra-,  where  the
upper  part  of  the  proftate,  or,  in  the  female  fex,  the  corpus  glandofum,  as
it  is  call'd,  is  fometimes  fo  prominent  on  the  infide  of  the  bladder  all  round,
that  the  neighbouring  parietes  of  this  receptacle  fubfide  thereabout.  Which
prominence,  and  fubfiding  -,  though  in  the  moft  healthy  bodies,  as  I  have
faid  in  a  former  work  (q),  they  are  generally  found  to  be  inconfiderable,  or
fcarcely  obfervable ;  may  nevertheleis,  at  other  times,  be  fomewhat  larger  in
difl'crent  bodies.

The  fabulous  and  vifcid  particles,  therefore,  remaining  behind  after  the  ■
laft  drops  of  urine,  may  fometimes,  in  thofe  who  abound  therewith,  concrete,
by  degrees  in  this  fubfiding  part ;  and' receive  an  annular  form  therefrom,  as  if
eaft  in  a  mould  •,  be  there  increas'd,  and  ftagnate ;  till  an  unufual  fituationj
or  motion,  of  body,  or  fome  othgrcaufe,  may  diflodge  it  from  thence,  and
raife  it  up  :  and  fo  by  accident  pufh  it  into  the  urethra,  which  in  women  is
generally  pretty  wide  and  dilatable,  as  happen'd  to  this  woman  -^  and  that
with  fo  much  the  more  eafe,  as  the  circumference  of  the  ftone  approach'd,
in  fome  meafure,  to  an  elliptical  figure  ;  one  extremity  of  which  w-as  a  little
narrower  than  the  other.

The  patient,  by  whom  this  ftone  had  been  voided,  was  a  virgin  of  eighty.
two  years  of  age :  and  fhe  had  never  been  admonifti'd  by  any  pain,  or  trouble-
fome  fenfation,  that  ftie  labour.*d  under  a  calculus  of  the  bladder  ;  except  that
fhe  had  remark'd  her  urine  to  have  been  difcharg'd  in; a  more  (lender,  or
thread-like  ftream,  than  ufual  ;  till  the  calculu.s,  having  fallen  into  the  ure-
thra, excited  pains  of  a  fudden,  and  thefe  brought  on  efforts  of  expulfion  :
fo  that  within  half  an  hour's  time  it  was  already  prominent,  and  could  be  laid
hold  of  with  the  fingers  and  taken  out :  no  inconvenience  whatever,  as  the
patient  herftlf,  who  had  related  all  thefe  circumftances,  affirm'd,  being  left
behind..

Yet  the  foramen,  although  it  tranfmits  the  urine,  does  not  always  prevent
the  uneafy  fymproms  ;  a.s  it  certainly  did  not  prevent  them,  in  the  cafe  of  a
light  and  round  ftone  ;  and  one  of  the  fame  weight  with  that  of  Loffius  ;  in  a
merchant  whofc  hiilory  (which  is  altogether  worthy  of  being  transfer'd  into  >

(«;  Ibid,  f  5.  &  7.  &  fea.  24.  obf.  9.,  (/)  Tab.  3.  ng.  9.  _

(0)  Litotonv,  c.  4.  .  fqj  Adverf.  3.  Animad,  41,


48o  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  Sepulchretum)  Charles  Patin  (r)  took  care  fhould  be  publiih'd,  almoft
at  the  lame  time,  both  at  Padua,  and  Noremberg.

And  left  you  fliould  fuppofe  this  to  have  happen'd,  becaufe  the  canal  was
not  hollow'd  out  in  the  middle,  but  through  the  anterior  part  of  the  ftone ;
firft  turn  to  the  account  of  that  very  great  Itone,  in  the  J^a  Eruditorum  Lip'
fienfta  (j),  from  which,  "  befides  a  certain  heavy  pain  in  the  inguinal  region,
"  the  old  man,  though  eighty  years  of  age,  had  fcarcely  perceiv'd  any  dif-
"  order  ;  as  the  urine,  which  was  carried  to  the  bladder,  flow'd  through  a
"  canal,  form'd  on  the  furface  of  the  ftone,  from  the  ureters  immediately  to
"  the  cervix  of  the  bladder."

And,  on  the  other  hand,  fee  in  the  a£ls  of  the  Caefarean  Academy  (/),
what  another  patient  fuffer'd  ;  notwithftanding  on  the  furface  of  the  calculus,
which  ftuck  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  "  certain  finuffes  were  hollow'd  out,"
that  "  the  urine  had  kept  open,  like  natural  pafTages,"  through  which  to  dif-
charge  itfelf.

And  indeed,  that  you  rhay  not  afcribe  fo  great  an  efEcacy  to  the  paflage  left
through  the  middle  of  the  calculi ;  read,  in  Contulus  («),  the  dilTedtion  of
the  Cardinal  Franzofi,  who,  by  a  very  regular  method  of  living,  was  pre-
ferv'd  almoft  for  t-lie  fpace  of  thirty  years,  fo  as  to  reach  his  eighty-fixth  year  :
but  "  many  times  was  he  troubled  with  calculous,  and  urinary  diforders ;"
although  the  calculi  of  the  bladder  "  reprefented  a  circle,  when  combin'd
"  tog-ether :"  that  is  left  a  chink  in  the  midft  of  them,  as  the  figure  fhows,
"  through  which  the  urine  pafs'd  down."

Then,  finally,  attend  to  what  I  heard  from  Vallifneri.  There  was  a  gen-
tleman at  Padua,  of  the  noble  family  of  Mantua,  an  intimate  acquaintance
ef  Vallilheri's,  who  had  been  troubled  with  moft  of  the  fymptoms,  of  the  dif-
eafe  I  am  fpeaking  of,  to  fuch  a  degree,  and  for  fo  long  a  time;  that  if,  be-
fides thefe  fymptoms,  any  imipediment  to  the  difcharge  of  the  urine  had  at
any  time  come  on,  every  phyfician  would  have  agreed  in  their  opinion  of  his
cale  ;  and  pronounc'd  that  he  was  affliiled  with  a  ftone  qf  the  bladder.

But  many  were  of  a  different  opinion,  for  this  reafon,  that  he  always  dif-
charg'-d  -his  urine  without  any  difficulty,  even  when  in  a  ftanding  pofture.
His  bladder  being  examin'd  after  death  ;  as  he  had  order'd  when  living;  in
it  were  found  three  fmooth  calculi,  of  a  roundifh  figure  ;  and  for  this  very
reafon,  leaving  a  triangular  foramen  between  their  fides,  when  plac'd  near  to
each  other :  wherefore,  although  the  urine  pafs'd  through  the  middle,  and
the  calculi  were  of  fuch  a  figure,  and  fuch  a  fmoothnefs,  as  I  fee  made  ufe  of
to  account  for  other  patients  not  being  troubled  with  difagreeable  fymptoms
of  a  calculus  •,  yet  in  this  gentleman,  certainly,  they  were  the  caufe  of  many
and  very  confiderable  inconveniencies ;  as  they  were  alfo  to  the  merchant  of
Patinus.

But  thefe  cafes  which  I  have  refer'd.to  fince  thofe  two  firft  of  Tulpius,  and
Nafius,  I  have  mention'd  only  for  the  fake  of  comparifon  :  becaufe,  whether
■they  were,  or  were  not,  attended  with  any  uneafinefs  to  the  patient,  in  almoft

(r)  Vid.  in  Lyceo  Patav.  ejus  Vitam.  &  Eph. (t)  Tom.  4.  obf.  49.
n.  c.  dec.  2.  a.  i.  obf.  19.  (z()  J)e  Lapid.  c.  23.  &  in  cake  ILbri.

(j)  A.  1685.  Tab.  5.


Letter  XLII. Article  ii.  481

air  of  thefe  the  calculi  could  be  perceiv'd  neverthelefs,  upon  the  introdtic-
tion  of  the  catheter  •,  but  not  in  the  two  firfl: :  as  they  were  not  obvious,  but
hidden  in  a  diverticulum  of  the  bladder,  which  was  form'd  upon  the  fides  of
it  :  of  the  origin  of  which  diverticulum  I  fhall  have  a  better  opportunity  of
fpeaking  below  (x).

But  it  is  fufficient  to  have  hinted  at  it  here  •,  that  you  may,  even  from
hence,  underftand  what  deceptions  may  arife  to  patients  themielves,  and  to
lithotomifts ;  if  the  calculi,  which  were  before  in  the  bladder,  happen  to  re-
cede into  a  facculus  of  that  kind,  from  whence  they  may,  according  to  the
various  pofition,  and  motion,  of  the  patient,  return  back  again  into  the  blad-
der.

For  it  will  happen,  not  only  that  out  of  many  lithotomifts,  one  may  per-
ceive the  ftone,  and  another  may  not ;  but  that  the  fame  lithotomift  may
perceive  it  at  one  time,  and  not  at  another :  and  the  patient,  who  before
complain'd  of  a  tenefmus,  from  the  weight  of  the  ftone  forcing  againft  the
reflum  that  lies  beneath  it,  like  a  quantity  of  harden'd  excrement ;  and  who
felt,  at  the  time  when  the  bladder  conftridied  itfelf,  in  order  to  difcharge  the
urine,  great  pains  from  the  roughnefs  of  the  ftone  irritating  the  bladder ;
and  from  thence,  likewife,  a  troublefome  obftruftion,  which  oppos'd  itfelf
to  the  courfe  of  the  urine  j  will,  when  the  ftone  has  been  diverted  into  a  la-
teral facculus  of  the  bladder,  feem  now  to  himfelf  to  be  quite  free  from  all
thefe  fymptoms  and  every  thing  elfe  of  the  kind :  and  even  quite  releas'd.
from  the  difeafe.

But  of  calculi  more  hereafter.  For  if  I  am  to  go  on  from  hence,  to  fub-
join  my  obfervations,  in  the  fame  order  that  I  have  related  thole  of  Valfalva ;
I  muft,  of  courfe,  begin  with  that  which  relates  to  the  dyfuria,  when  brought
on  by  a  diforder  of  the  kidnies  in  particular :  of  which  kind  is  that  I  promis'd
you  in  the  latter  part  of  the  former  letter  (y).

II.  A  man  of  fixty  years  of  age,  had  lain  forfome  months,  in  this  hofpi-
tal,  on  account  of  aferous  infarftion  of  the  thigh,-  and  left  knee  :  nor  did  he
return  home  after  this  tumour  was  diicufs'd ;  being  detain'd,  at  firft,  with  a
dyfentery,  and  after  this  with  a  flight  inflammation  of  one  eye:  and  finally,
when  this  reafon,  for  his  ftay,  was  remov'd  alfo,  he  neverthelefs  ftill  remain'd
on  account  of  his  indigence  •,  which  was  fo  much  the  greater  becaufe  he  was  a
great  eater,  fo  as  not  to  be  content  with  the  food  given  to  perfons  on  their
recovery,  but  to  be  perpetually  afking  for  more.

This  man  was  therefore  carried  off",  in  the  hofpital,  as  he  was  eating,  by  a
very  fudden  death ;  there  being  not  the  leaft  fign  of  any  fyncope,  or  fuffbca-
tion.  Nor  had  he  in  his  long  ftay  in  the  hofpital,  ever  given  the  leaft  fign  of
the  thorax,  or  brain,  being  never  fo  flightly  affedted :  and  all  I  heard  when
I  inquir'd  from  the  perfons  who  had  been  about  him,  was  that  he  had  been
fometimes  heard  to  complain  of  a  ftiarpnefs  of  urine.

And  as  I  found  the  origin  of  this  acrimony  fo  much  the  more  evidtmt  in  the
body  after  death,  than  I  did  the  caufe  of  that  fudden  death  which  was  obfcurc;
I  tor  that  reafon' thought  proper  to  relate,  in  this  place,  rather  than  in  any
other,  what  appearances  prefented  themfelves  to  me,  about  the  fixth  day

/:()  N.  30.  [j]  N.  ig.

.  Vol.  IL  0,4  1  ^^'•^^


483  feook  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

after  death  :  for  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  make  any  obfervation  on  them
fooner,  for  reafons  that  there  is  no  neceffity  of  hinting  at  here  :  yet  the  body
was  fo  well  prelerv'd,  by  means  of  the  cold,  (for  it  was  now  the  middle  of
December  in  the  year  1749)  that  although  the  inteftines  and  mefentery  were
taken  out,  the  day  before  I  went  to  examine  the  body,  they  not  only  fliow'd
fiodiforder  at  all,  but  even  did  not  fmell  ftrongly.  What  other  appearances
I  met  with,  take  as  they  follow,  beginning  firft  with  the  head.

The  left  hemifphere  of  the  brain,  not  only  had  many  of  the  trunks  of
thofe  veflels,  which  creep  through  the  dura  niater,  turgid  with  blood,  but
alio  {liow'd,  in  the  ventricle  that  lay  beneath  it,  a  water  fomewhat  turbid  ;
not  in  any  great  quantity  indeed,  but  in  much  greater  quantity  than  in  the
right:  in  both  ventricles, the  plexus  choroides  were  pale.  And  although  the
medullary  .fubftance  of  the  cerebrum  was  fomewhat  hard,  yet  the  cerebellum
was  very  lax.

In  the  thorax,  the  pofterior  furface  of  the  left  lobe  of  the  lungs  coher'd
elofely  with  the  pleura:  and  the  edges,  both  of  this,  and  the  right  lobe,
Ihow'd  their  veficles  to  be  diftended  with  air,  to  a  confiderable  extent.  How-
ever, neither  the  afpera  arteria,  nor  the  larynx  (which  were  alfo  examin'd  in-
ternally) had  any  mark  of  diforder  :  nor  yet  the  great  veffels,  nor  the  heart
itfelf ;  in  which  was  nothing  polypous.  Within  the  pericardium  was  a  turbid
water ;  but  in  no  great  quantity  :  and  in  both  the  cavities  of  the  thorax,  as
in  the  belly  alfo,  was  fo  fmall  a  quantity,  that  it  did  not  exceed,  in  all,  more
than  a  few  ounces.

Finally,  the  belly  when  open'd  ;  if  you  except  fome  of  the  genital  parts,,
particularly  the  urinary  palfages,  and  a  few  of  the  arteries  •,  fliow'd  all  its  con-
tain'd  vifcera  to  be  nearly  in  a  natural  condition  :  nearly,  I  fay,  for  the  liver,,
and  the  ftomach,  which  was  half-full  of  ingefta,  partly  folid  and  partly  fluid,
appear'd  fomewhat  larger  than  they  generally  do.

But  the  trunk  of  the  great  artery,  where  it  lay  on  the  vertebrse  of  the
loins,  had,  in  fome  places,  white  beginnings  of  offification,  which  the  rami-
fications of  it  alfo  had  :  and  indeed  it  had  true  bone  already  form'd  ;  as  I'
found  in  that  part,  in  particular,  where  the  right  iliac  divided  itfelf  into  two
branrhes.

As  to  what  relates  to  the  genital  parts,  the  right  tefticle  was  three  times
larger  than  the  left.  But  this  was  perhaps  natural ;  for  both  of  them,  wher>:
cut  into,  were  found  to  be  found.  This  appearance,  however,  was  from  dif-
€afe ;  I  mean  that  from  the  tunica  albuginea  of  both  of  them,  and  from  the
feme  part  in  both,  hung  a  fomev/hat  round  and  very  fmall  body  ;  which,  al-
though the  coat  itfelf  was  white,  was  of  a  redifli  colour;  the  remains,  I  fup-
pofe,  of  a  foregoing  hydatid :  yet  there  was  no  water  within  the  tunica  vaginalis.

At  length  the  internal  ftrufture  of  both  kidnies  appear'd  to  be  confus'd :
nor  were  fmall  cells  wanting,  full  of  fluid,  one  of  which  ;  for  the  others  lay
hid  fomewhat  more  internally ;  lliow'd  itfelf  partly  on  the  furface.  Each
pelvis,  after  it  had  defcended  from  the  kidney,  in  a  preternatural  fl:ate  of
diilention  v  fo  as  to  be  equal,  in  width,  to  two  inches  -,  contradled  itfelf  in-
to the  ureter.  And  the  ureters,  when  they  had  run  almoft  half  their  length,
became  wider  than  they  generally  are ;  and  particularly  the  left,  which  was
alfo  increas'd  in  its  length,  by  reafon  of  its  flexures.

5  "^


Letter  XLII. Article  12.  483

In  both  of  them,  you  would  fuppofe,  if  you  handled  them  externally,  that
calculi  were  contain'd  in  fome  places,  though  only  here  and  there.  But
when  we  came  to  open  them,  we  found,  in  every  one  of  thefe  places,  an  hy-
datid ;  fome  of  them  round,  others  oval;  hanging  from  the  internal  coat  into
the  cavity  of  the  ureter,  and  yet  not  by  a  fmall  ftalk.  The  round  ones  were
equal  in  fize  to  fmall  grapes ;  and  the  oval  ones  were  twice  as  large  as  they
longitudinally.

The  ureters  confided  of  pretty  thick  coats,  the  internal  of  which  was  ting'd
with  a  continual  rednefs  :  and  they  open'd  by  more  oblong  orifices  than  was
natural,  into  the  bladder.  This  refervoir  contain'd  fo  great  a  quantity  of  urine,
that  in  the  fupine  pollute  of  the  body,  it  extended  itfelf  to  the  loweft  vertebriE
of  the  loins.  And  indeed  when,  after  the  urine  wasfqueez'd  out,  it  was  dif-
tended  with  air  blown  in  ;  although  it  came  near  to  that  fhape  which  was
mention'd,  by  me,  in  a  former  work  (z) ;  it  was  ncverthelefs  confiderably
longer  than  it  generally  is :  however,  the  coats  thereof  were  not  thicken'd,
nor  were  internally  red  in  any  part ;  with  which  colour  not  even  the  urethra
was  ting'd.

Finally,  that  which  I  promis'd  in  the  preceding  letter  (a),  ought  not  to  be
omitted.  From  the  pofterior  border  of  that  orifice,  from  whence  the  ufethra
begins,  two  white,  hard,  hemifpherical,  prominences,  fmall  in  their  fize,  but
of  equal  magnitude,  and  contiguous  to  each  other,  protubcrated  within  the
bladder;  in  cutting  which  longitudinally,  together  with  the  proftate  gland,
I  found  them  to  be  continu'd  thereto,  and  to  be  made  up  of  the  fame  fub-
iiance :  and  although  one  part  of  the  proftate  gland  was  not  of  that  white-
nefs  and  hardnefs ;  yet  the  remaining  fubflance  thereof,  and  efpecially  that
■which  rofe  up  on  the  fides  of  the  feminal  caruncle,  was  perfeftly  like  that  of
the  double  prominence,  into  which  it  was  produc'd  ;  fo  that  if  thefe  promi-
nences were  fcirrhous,  the  largeft  part  of  the  proftaje  might  feem  to  be  no
lefs  fcirrhous  alio.

12.  The  other  appearances  that  I  demonftrated  in  the  brain,  the  heart,
and  the  other  vifcera  of  the  fame  body,  which  v/ere  accurately  difledled,
-do  not  relate  to  the  prefent  fubjedl,  nor  are  proper  for  the  prefent  occafion  ;
becaufe  they  were  not  preternatural.

And  this  being  the  ftate  of  matters,  I  could  not  fuppofe  the .  caufe,  of  fo
fudden  a  death,  to  have  confifted  in  any  thing  elfe,  but  a  certain  very  violent
convulfion  of  the  pia  mater  ;  and  this  in  confequence  of  the  ferum  ;  which  a
long  ftagnation  in  the  thigh  had,  perhaps,  render'd  very  acrid ;  not  being
fufficiently  carried  off  by  ftool ;  and  having,  therefore,  fallen,  at  laft,  upon
the  membranes  of  the  brain,  to  the  utter  deftruftion  of  the  patient.

But  the  complaints  of  the  acrimony  of  the  \irine,  had  been  of  much  longer
-ftanding,  in  my  opinion,  than  the  infarflion  of  the  thigh  :  at  leaft  the  origin
-bf  them  will,  certainly,  feem  to  be  of  a  very  ancient  date,  if  you  confider  the
ftate  of  the  kidnies,  ureters,  and  bladder.

Thefe  parts  had,  in  all  probability,  been  formerly  affefled,  univerfally,
•with  calculi :  that  is  to  fay,  the  kidnies,  by  tkeir  formation,  and  increafe  ;  the
ureters,  and  bladder,  by  their  various  delay  in  thefe  parts ;  w^hich,  by  fym-

(s)  Epift.  anat.  i.  n.  6i.  .  faj  N.  if.

Q  q  q  2  .  pathy.


484  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

pathy,  again  injur'd  the  kidnies,  the  pelves,  and  the  other  parts  juft  nov/  men-
tion'd :  the  greater  part  of  them  being  enlarg'd,  by  the  retention  of  urine;
and  the  ureters,  moreover,  being  injur'd  in  a  peculiar  manner  •,  fo  as  I  do  not
remember  to  have  feen  them  in  any  other  fubjeft ;  I  mean  by  having  internal
hydatids  brought  on  them,  which,  even  of  themfelves,  might  have  retarded
the  urine,  and,  without  any  calculi,  have  been  the  caufe  of  the  greater  part
of  thofe  fymptoms  which  I  juft  now  accounted  for  from  calculi ;  or,  to  fay
the  leaft,  might  have  increas'd  every  fymptom  that  the  calculi  gave  ori-
gin to.

But  whatever  was  the  caufe  that  brought  on  thefe  difeas'd  appearances,  it
certainly  is  not  furprizing,  that  an  urine  more  acrid  than  ufual,  fhould  have
diftill'd  from  kidnies  of  this  kind  :  or  that,  from  the  glands  of  ureters  of  this
kind ;  inftead  of  a  humour  fit  to  fmear  over  and  defend  them  againft  the  fa-
line  particles  of  the  urine;  an  acrid  humour,  or  none  at  all,  fliould  be
fecreted.

For,  from  either  of  thofe  caufes,  you  may  account  for  thefe  paflages  be-
ing internally  red,  inftead  of  having  their  natural  whitenefs  ;  and  fending
down  to  the  bladder  urine  that  either  was  become  more  acrid  than  ufual  with-
in themfelves,  or  was  at  leaft  untemper'd  with  that  addition  of  an  emollient
and  demulcent  nature.

And  what  I  have  touch'd  upon  but  flightly  here,  you  will  the  more  ap-
prove of,  if  you  read  thofe  writings  of  our  friends  Pujati  and  Benevoli ;
and  transfer  hither  what  I  have  pointed  out  in  the  preceding  letter  (b).  For
I  muft  now  go  on,  in  purfuance  of  the  order  I  profefs'd  to  obferve,  to  that
dyfuria  which  is  from  calculi  of  the  bladder.

13.  Andrew  Cortini ;  a  fellow-citizen  of  mine,  father  of  the  very  reverend
inquifitor  of  that  name  at  Ferrara,  and  the  grandfather  of  Anthony  Cortini,
"who  is  very  expert  in  the  chirurgical  and  pharmaceutical  art,  and  one  for  whom
I  have  a  great  regard  ;  being  of  a  fattifti  habit  of  body,  and  but  little  us'd  to
exercife,  began,  after  he  had  advanc'd  beyond  fixty  years  of  age,  to  make  wa-
ter of  a  white  colour,  and  of  a  vifcid  nature.

From  hence  arofe  a  fufpicion  that  he  had  a  calculus  in  his  bladder;  which
fufpicion  the  furgeon,  by  introducing  the  catheter,  confirm'd  himfelf  in,  but
not  the  patient :  for  when  the  furgeon  faid  he  touch'd  the  calculus  with  the
catheter,  he,  on  the  other  hand,  being  deceiv'd  by  the  impulfe  of  the  cal-
culus, afferted  that  it  was  not  a  calculus  he  touch'd,  but  the  bladder.  And
this  opinion  he  was  the  more  confirm'd  in,  becaufe,  from  the  time  of  intro-
ducing the  catheter,  he  had  found  it  much  eafier  to  difcharge  his  urine.

Now  therefore  he  did  not  complain  of  this  fo  much,  as  of  a  certain  pain  in
the  fcrobiculus  cordis,  which,  if  he  walk'd  a  little  more  quick  than  ufual,
oblig'd  him  to  ftop.  To  this  was  added  turgid  and  vibrating  pulfations  of
the  arteries  -,  fuch  as  frequently  happen  from  an  aneurifm.  Nor  indeed  did
thefe  ceafe,  when,  after  a  long  interval  of  time,  the  difficulty  of  making  wa-
ter return'd,  with  a  fenfe  of  heat  about  the  pubes.  And  indeed  the  complaints
of  that  pain  in  the  fcrobiculus  cordis,  were  almoft  continual :  the  pulfe  con-
tinu'd  the  fame.

4

(^)  N.  rz.

Three


Letter  XLII. Article  13.

Three  or  four  years  had  pafs'd  from  the  firft  beginning  of  the  dyfuria ;  and
from  the  beginning  of  the  other  difagreeablefymptoms,  at  leaft  two  and  twenty
months,  when  I  was  alfo  call'd  to  the  patient,  before  the  end  of  February,
in  the  year  171 1,  to  comfort  him,  as  I  immediately  faid  to  his  domeftics,  ra-
ther than  to  cure  him.

He  made  a  much  greater  quantity  of  water  than  he  drank:  and  hi"s  urine
was  of  a  yellowifh  colour,  inclining  to  white ;  like  the  whey  wherewith  a  portion
ef  milk  flill  remains  mix'd ;  a  white  matter  afterwards  fubfiding  -,  fometimes
in  fmall  quantity  and  thin,  at  other  times  in  large  quantity  and  thick;  and  of
an  ill  fmell :  and  this  was  difcharg'd  with  a  greater  degree  of  pain  and  difficul-
ty ;  as  was  wont  to  happen,  chiefly,  about  the  morning.

The  pain  in  the  fcrobiculus  cordis  was  become  fo  very  violent,  that  the-
patient  faid,  when  it  attack'd  him  the  mod  feverely,  as  it  did  at  intervals,
that  it  feem'd  to  him  juft  as  if  he  were  torn  by  dogs :  at  which  time  he  alfo
faid  that  the  fternum,  and  the  neighbouring  parts,  on  both  fides,  were  painful ;
but  that  the  upper  limb,  on  the  left  fide,  became  ftupid,  and  without  fenfa-
tion :  and  finally,  that  the  heart,  efpecially  if  he  lay  on  the  left  fide,  palpi-
tated to  a  very  troublefome  degree.

Thefe  fymptoms  became  more  violent  every  day,  fo  that  the  face  was  no
longer  red,  in  thofe  exacerbations  of  pain,  as  it  before  us'd  to  be  in  general  j
and  even  the  nofe,  hands,  and  feet,  were  cokl :  and  the  intcftines,  which  it
had  been  hitherto  necefiTary  to  relax  every  third  day,  by  means  of  a  clyfter,,
now  difcharg'd  a  bilious  matter  after  each  of  thefe  exacerbations.

But,  left  any  one  fliould  fufpeft  that  thefe  arofe  from  an  irritation  of  the
bladder  ;  in  proportion  as  thefe  were  m.ore  heighten'd  and  fevere,  fo  much  the
more  flight  was  every  fymptom  about  the  bladder ;  and  the  urine  was  dif-
charg'd with  the  more  eafe.  Yet  you  did  not,  on  applying  your  hand  to  the
breaft,  or  the  belly,  perceive  any  thing  that  was  preternatural :  and  even  the
belly  had  no  where  any  hardnefs,  nor  the  leaft  tenfion  whatever.

In  the  mean  while,  his  fleep  being  broken  with  his  pains,  .his  appetite  for
food  being  deprav'd,  and  a  thirft  troubhng  him,  his  ftrength  was  more  and
more  worn  out :  the  internal  fenfes  began  to  be  torpid  as  it  were  ;  and
the  pulfe  itfelf  had  fo  declin'd  from  that  firft  magnitude,  and  impetus,  as  to
become  fmall  and  weak  (efpecially  on  the  left  fide)  and  frequently  unequal,
and  this  alfo  particularly  on  the  left  fide  :  but  in  the  laft  exacerbations  there
was  no  pulfe  at  all  perceiv'd.

In  this  deplorable  ftate  of  things  then,  I  did  not  omit  to  give  all  the  eafe
in  my  power,  though  I  could  do  nothing  by  way  of  radically  curing  the  dif-
orders.  But  all  the  remedies  I  could  try,  though  they  had  no  bad  effefts,
had  no  good  ones  neverthelefs.  On  the  eighth  of  March  therefore,  two  or
three  drops  of  blood  having  fallen  from  his  noftrils  fpontaneoufly ;  and  he
having  fpent  the  following  night  worfe  than  ever,  from  the  fr-equent  attacks
of  pain  in  the  fcrobiculus  cordis ;  and  having,  neverthelefs,  rais'd  himfelf  to^
fit  up  in  bed  in  the  morning,  when  the  pain  was  gone  off ;  the  fame  pain  re-
turn'd  about  an  hour  after :  and  raging  very  violently  carried  off  the  unhappy-
patient,  I  had  almoft  faid,  fuddenly.

The  thorax  of  this  body,  which  was,  even  then,,  furnifh'd  with  a  pretty-
large  quantity  of  fat,  being  firft  difledted ;  we  found  the  lungs,  the  heart,

and:


4*86 Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

and  the  large  veflels,  to  be  quite  free  from  diforder. The  belly  contain'd  a
liver  which  was  not  of  a  natural  colour  :  the  gall-bladder  was  contrafted  and-
iiaccid ;  in  confequence  of  the pains,  of  which  I  have fpoken,  having  lb
many  times  prefs'd  out  the  bile. The  fundus  of  the  ftomach,  which  was  in
oth^r  refpefts  found,  fhow'd  a  (light  appearance  of  blacknefs.

The  left  kidney  •,  being  almoft  univerfally  confum'd  in  its  internal  fub-
ftance,  and  extremely  flaccid  •,  contain'd  an  unequal  calculus,  and  urine  like
that  which  the  patient  had  difcharg'd.  This  kind  of  urine  was  alfo  found  in
the  right  kidney  :  the  external  furface  of  which  was  divided  into  a  great  num-
ber of  rifing  globules,  as  it  were,  of  an  unequal  magnitude  among  them-
felves ,

The  bladder  contain'd  three  ftones,  which  were  neither  rough  nor  large.
The  internal  furface  of  this  cavity  feem'd  to  be  made  up  of  a  kind  q( iomen-
turn,  or  tov/,  and  grew  out  at  the  fide  of  the  cervix,  into  a  hard  tubercle,
not  larger  than  a  bean  -,  and  of  the  fame  colour  with  the  bladder,  both  inter-
nally and  externally.  Finally,  in  the  proftate  gland  was  a  finus,  wherein  a
matter  fimilar  to  tartar,  and  already  almoft  calculous,  was  contain'd.

14.  In  this  patient,  the  caufes  of  the  dyfuria,  which  is  the  fubjeft  of  our
prefent  letter,  vi^ere  contain'd  in  the  proftate  gland,  the  bladder,  andthekid-
nies  :  but  the  caufes  of  thofe  very  violent  pains,  whereby  he  was  tortur'd  to
fuch  a  degree,  and  at  length  deftroy'd,  lay,  as  far  as  I  can  conceive  of  the
cafe,  in  the  kidnies.  For  it  is  not  probable  that  thefe  pains  were  excited  from
the  lower  parts  of  the  belly  •,  efpecially  as  there  were  very  great  diforders  in
the  kidnies,  with  which  no  body  can  be  ignorant  to  what  a  great  degree  the
omach  confents,  the  right  fide  of  which  anfwers  to  the  Icrobiculus  cordis.

And  to  this  confent  are  we  to  impute  the  vomitings  that  are,  generally,
join'd  with  dilbrders  of  the  kidnies.  You  will  therefore  i-emember  that,  in  a
very  obfcure  cafe  (c),  I  fufpefted  thefe  diforders  to  exift  from  the  adlual  exift-
ence  of  thefe  vomitings.

There  had  alfo  been  very  great  vomitings,  in  a  virgin,  who  was  kill'd
within  the  fpace  of  two  days,  by  an  excruciating  pain  under  the  left  ribs  •,  ow-
ing to  an  occult  diforder  of  the  kidney,  as  I  have  defcrib'd  in  the  thirty-fixth
letter  {d).  Yet  it  has  fometimes  happen'd,  that  confiderable  diforders  of  the
kidnies  have  lain  hid  (e),  without  any  vomiting,  and  without  any,  or,  at  leaft,
with  very  flight  marks,  of  the  kidnies  being  difeas'd  ;  or  that  they  have  im-
pos'd  upon  phyficians,  for  diforders  of  the  bladder,  which  was  entirely  un-
affeclred  (f).

Finally,  it  is  certain,  that  v.'ith  diforders  of  the  kidnies,  a  pain  of  the  fto-
mach is  fometimes  join'd  ;  but  not  one  that  is  mortal,  or  disjoin'd  from  a  pain
of  the  loins  ;  which  every  one  knows  to  attend,  in  general,  upon  diforders
of  the  kidnies,  that  are  affix'd  thereto  :  and  thefe  either  not  fevere,  or  fome-
limes  violent,  as  I  have  related  in  another  letter  (g)  from  Ruyfch,  when  he
faw  the  furface  of  the  kidnies  divided  into  globules,  juft  as  I  obferv'd  it  to
he  in  the  right  kidney  of  this  patient.

However,  in  this  cafe  of  ours  there  was  no  complaint  of  the  loins ;  no  ve-
vj  fevere  pain  in  the  bladder  ;  no.  excruciating  tortures  of  the  hypochondria  ;

(c)  Epift.  30.  n.  22.  ff)  Vid.  fupra,  n.  4&  5.

i^d)  N.  20.  '  (g)  Epiil.  40.  n,  19.

\i)  Epilt.  4.0.  n.  15.

no


Letter  XLII. Article 15, 16.  487

no  vomitings  ;  bnt  intolerable  pains  at  the  fcrobiculus  cordis,  were  the  only
figns  of  the  kidnies  being  affeded  with  difeafe.

You  will  perhaps  afk,  whether  this  circumftance  has  been  obferv'd  by  other
authors :  it  certainly  fo  much  the  more  deferves  to  be  notic'd,  as  it  may  the
more  caufe  a  fufpicion  of  other  difeafes ;  efpecially  if,  as  in  the  hiftory  pro-
pos'd,  it  follow  after  large  and  vibrating  pulies ;  -and  bring  on  the  trouble-
fome  palpitation  of  the  heart,  a  ftupor,  and  torpor,  of  the  upper  limbs,  and
at  length  death  itfelf :  and  that  even  almoft  fuddenly,  when  the  patient  feems
to  be  lomewhat  refrelh'd.

For  I  have  already  admonifh'd  {h),  that  this  is  to  be  fear'd,  when  violent  in-
ternal convulfions  recur  at  intervals.  To  which  kind  of  diforder,  1  fuppofe  the-
exacerbations  of  pain  I  have  defcrib'd  to  belong  :  and  I  account  for  them  from
the  very  great  irritation  of  the  nerves  in  the  kidnies  -,  fo  that  being  propa-
gated by  means  of  the  other  nerves  communicating  therewith,  to  thofe  parts
which  I  juft  now  mcntion'd,  it  produces,  in  each  of  thefe  parts,  the  effedts
I  have  fpoken  of.

This  Angular  circumftance  attended  our  cafe,  that  the  ftomach,  which  is,  as
I  have  already  taken  notice,  generally  attack'd  by  exacerbations,  proceeding
from  the  kidnies,  was  not,  as  ufually  happens,  excited  to  vomiting ;  not-
withftanding  that  part  of  it,  which  anfwers  to  the  fcrobiculus  cordis,  was.
very  feverely  tortur'd.

15.  A  young  man,  who  had  pafs'd  his  twentieth  year,  had  been  tortur^^
for  a  long  time,  with  fuch  pains  of  the  bladder,  efpecially  when  he  made  wa-
ter, that  he  could  not  difcharge  his  urine  without  ciying  out.  His  urine  was
purulent.  An  emaciated  ftate  of  body,  a  fever,  and  other  diforders,  which*
generally  accompany  a  ftone  of  the  bladder,  had  come  on  ;  and  by  thefe
he  was,  at  length,  carried  off  in  this  hofpital,  before  the  end  of  the  year
1742.

The  bladder,  which  was  thicken'd  in  its  coats,  ulcerated,  and,  in  part^
fcirrhous,  aftually  contain'd  a  ftone  which  was  fomewhat  rough  on  the  out-
fide,  and  three  inches  in  length  ;  being  two  inches  and  a  half  broad,  in  the
broadeft  part  of  it :  it  was  alfo  nearly  of  an  oval  figure,  and  deprefs'd  on
both  fides ;  and  in  fome  places  a  great  quantity  of  tough  and  bloody  mucus
adher'd  round  about  it.  The  kidnies,  and  the  ureters,  were  full  of  pus,  and
virine ;  and  the  ureters  were  even  diftended  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  equal  the
diameter  of  the  inteftinum  ileum.

16.  The  mucus,  which  we  faw  adhering  to  the  calculus  of  this  young-
man,  is  fometimes  gather'd  around  it  in  fo  great  a  quantity,  that  the  ftone
cannot  be  diftinguifh^d,  even  by  introducing  the  catheter ;  a  circumftance-
which  happens  to  the  moft  experienc'd  men  ;  and  which,  as  IVIarcclLus  Dona-
tus  teftifies  (?'),  happen'd  to  Falloppius  himfelf.

By  this  mucus,  when  gathered  round  the  calculus,  betwixt  that  and  the
bladder  •,  though  it  does  not  tend  to  remove  the  other  fymptoms,  and  even,
increafes  fome ;  the  pains,  neverthelefs,  which  are  created  by  the  roughnefs.
of  the  calculi,  are  diminifh'd  :  and  particularly  if  the  mucus  is  very  thick^
and  in  great  quantity.

C-^)  Epift.  jQ.  n.  L3.  (y)  De  Med.  Hift.  Mirab.  1.  4.,  c.  30.

Hence


488 Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Hence  it  is  that  the  pains  are  increas'd  by  diuretic  medicines  (which  I  f.iid.
alio  of  nephritic  cafes)  as  our  Sanftorius  confirm'd  by  a  very  clear  example,
that  is  transfer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum,  in  tlie  preceding  twenty-third  lec-
tion {k)  ;  where  you  will  alio  read  that  of  Donatus  (I).

Wherefore,  in  opinions  which  I  have  read,  Valfalva  prefcrib'd,  in  cafes  of
ftone  in  the  bladder,  demulcents,  emollients  and  anodynes-,  and  applied  them
in  the  form  of  fomentations,  fteams,  and  fmall  glyftcrs;  and  to  women  even
in  peflaries  and  injedions  :  but  as  he,  in  conjunction  with  Albettini,  difap-
prov'd  of  narcotics;  becaufe  they  did  not  "aft  with  any  advantage,  in  very
imall  dofes,  againft  pains  of  this  kind,  and  very  large  dofes  were  dangerous  :
fo  alfo  they  dilapprov'd  of  the  drinking  of  bath-waters,  or  any  other  waters  in
large  quantity  ;  which  has  been' propos'd  by  others ;  fearing  left  the  mucus
we  have  fpoken  of  fliould  be  walh'd  away.  On  which  fubjefts  I  remember  to
have  heard  them  both  fpeak,  many  times,  to  the  fame  purpofe ;  but  parti-
cularly when  the  mafter  of  the  horfe  drank  the  water  of  Nocera,  in  pretty
large  quantity,  every  morning.

That  this  gentleman  had  an  ulcer  in  his  bladder,  no  body  doubted,  and
Valfalva  ftill  lefs  than  others ;  as  he  did  not  believe  it  was  always  necelTary
that  blood  fliould  have  appear'd  in  the  urine,  in  order  to  induce  him  to  pro-
nounce that  there  was  an  ulcer  in  the  urinary  palTages.  One  thing  however
was  a  matter  of  controverfy  •,  I  mean  whether,  befides  an  ulcer,  there  was  a
calculus  in  the  bladder.  This  was  affirm'd  by  fomc,  on  account  of  the  pain
which  had  already  been  long  perceiv'd  in  the  end  of  making  water.

But  Valfalva  and  Albertini  withheld  their  affent  -,  well  knowing  that  an
ulcerated  bladder  could  not,  more  than  an  ulcerated  hand,  be  contrafted,  and
conftring'd,  without  pain  :  and  this  they  knew  to  be  the  reafon  why  the
bladder,  when  thus  ulcerated,  like  other  hollow  parts,  which  are  under  a
neceffity  of  being  dilated  at  one  time,  and  contrafted  at  another,  are  with
great  difficulty  brought  back  to  a  found  ftate.

Yet  they  did  not  contend  that  no  calculus  was  in  the  bladder ;  although
the  patient,  either  in  dancing,  or  riding  in  a  coach,  experienc'd  no  fymp-
toms  of  it ;  nor  yet,  while  he  difcharg'd  his  urine,  perceiv'd  a  very  fevere
pain  at  the  end-,  but  fuch  a  one  as  he  again  began  to  perceive,  when  he  had
at  length  difcharg'd  as  much  as  he  had  drunk.

However,  although  they  neither  affirm'd,  nor  denied  one  or  the  other,  yet
Albertini  I'eem'd  to  me,  in  fome  meafure,  inclin'd  to  believe  that  there  was
no  calculus  -,  fince,  by  fo  plentiful  a  drinking  of  water,  the  mucus  muft  have
been  taken  away  from  the  ftone,  and  the  troublefome  fymptoms,  confe-
quently,  daily  increas'd  by  this  means :  and,  on  the  other  hand,  he  conceiv'd
that  while  the  water  was  paffing,  the  ulcer  and  pains  might  be  mollified,  and
affwag'd  thereby ;  and  that  thefe  pains  did  not  return  to  their  former  feverity,
before  the  urine  began  to  recover  its  former  acrimony,  after  the  dilcharge  of
all  the  water.

But  left  you  lliould  think  this  hefitation  in  affirming,  or  denying,  the  exift-
cnce  of  a  ftone  in  the  bladder,  was  too  cautious  in  fuch  nien  as  thefe  •,  or
thofe  of  equal  eminence  with  themfelves;  I  beg  of  you  to  read  what  has  been

(/t)  Obf.  4.  §. II.  (/)  Ibid.  §  4.

excel-


Letter  XLII: Article  17.  489

excellently  well  colleded,  and  confider'd,  by  Helwich  (m),  among  others  of
the  very  great  difficulty  of  properly  determining  fuch  a  queftion  :  the  more
you  fhali  be  difpleas'd  by  the  head-long  radmefs  of  fome  others,  the  more
will  you  commend  the  prudent  cautioufnefs  of  thefe  gentlemen.

1 7.  That  I  do  not  here  add  other  diffedtions,  of  thofe  perfons  in  whom  a
ftone  has  been  form'd  in  the  bladder,  without  any  external  caufe,  will  not  be
furprizing  to  you  ;  as  you  know,  that  the  greateft  part  of  my  life  has  been
fpent  in  this  country,  that  is,  like  fome  others  ;  among  which  thofe  of  Schaf-
haufen  (kJ,  and  Gottingen  (o),  are  commended  ;  very  little  liable  to  that  dit-
order :  and  this  circumftance  fomiC  think  is  owing  to  the  wines,  fome  to  the
waters,  and  others  to  both  of  them.

Certainly,  the  wines  in  this  place  are  not  tartareous,  to  fpeak  in  the  lan-
guage of  phyficians :  that  is  to  fay,  they  do  not  cover  over  the  caflcs,  inter-
nally, with  ftony  crufts  •,  as  I  have  feen  in  fome  other  places  where  they  make
white  wines :  fo  that  a  caik  of  ftone  feem'd  to  have  been  form'd  within  the
wooden  caflc.

But  the  wines  that  we  make  ufe  of  here  are  red :  which  wines  Brunne-
rus  (p),  indeed,  thought  "  affefted  the  head,  and  the  upper  parts,  more  than
"  the  white ;"  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  his  father-in-law,  Wepfer  (q),  whofe
opinion  is  commended  by  Hoffmann  (?■),  afcrib'd  it  chiefly  to  the  falutary  ef-
fedls  of  their  red  wine,  that  calculous  diforders  were  very  rare  among  his  fel-
low-inhabitants of  Schaf  haufen.

And  that  red  wines  are  produc'd,  in  fome  places,  which  not  only  preferve
from  the  ftone,  but  even  diflx)lve  it  when  begun  ;  inafmuch  as  they  even  dif-
folve  the  tartar,  wherewith  other  wines  have  incrufted  the  caflc,  into  which
they  are  put ;  you  will  learn  from  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (s).

Moreover,  in  regard  to  the  waters  -,  the  water  of  the  rivers  in  this  coun-
try-, with  an  equal  part,  or  fomewhat  more,  and  even  fometimes  a  much
larger  quantity,  of  which  the  muft  (from  whence  the  wines  generally  us'd  in
this  country  are  made)  is  preferv'd  ;  contains,  perhaps,  lefs  earth,  as  is  gene-
rally faid  ;  or  at  leaft  lefs  of  the  matter  fit  for  the  generation  of  calculi.

And  I  fpeak  thus  generally,  becaufe  it  is  neceflary  to  attend  to  a  great  num-
ber of  different  circumftances,  and  make  many  minute  examinations,  before
any  thing  certain  be  pronounc'd  of  every  one  river  in  particular :  although,
for  the  moft  part,  lefs  earth  is  found  to  be  contain'd  in  river-water,  than  in
well-water  ;  from  whence  it  happens  that  we  fee  the  former  fit  for  many  do-
meftic  purpofes,  for  which  the  others  are  not,  or  at  leaft  not  equally  •,  as,  for
inftance,  that  of  diflfolving  foap,  and  boiling  beans  or  peas:  and  as  to  the
queftion  of  wholefomenefs,  who  can  doubt  but  that  the  water  of  rivers,  and
fountains ;  which  the  will  of  almighty  God  has  caus'd  to  offer  themfelves
fpontaneoufly  to  us  for  drink  •,  are,  in  general,  more  falubrious  than  thofe
waters,  which  neceflity  has  oblig'd  men,  who  live  at  a  diftance  from  rivers,
and  fprings,  to  procure  for  themfelves,  by  digging  deep  pits  in  the  earth  ?

(wi)  A&.  n.  c.  torn.  2.  obf.  60.  (y)  Obf.  39.  paulo  ante  cit.

(«)  Vid.  Eph.  n c.  dec.  i.  a.  2.  obf.  39,  {>■)  Med.  Rat.  torn.  4.  p.  2.  f.  2.  c.  n.  §.  20.

(ff)  Vid.  Haller.  Opufc.  Pathol,  obf.  33.  (s)  A.  1735.  hebd.  6.  n.  3.  &  hebd.  17.  n.

(/)  Eph.  cit.  cent.  9.  obf,  3.  in  not.  4.  &  prxfat.  in  not,  ad  pag,  4J,  &  132.

Vol.  II.  R  r  r  And


490 Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

And  if  the  opinion  of  the  moll  learned  men  is  alfo  to  be  attended  to,  fee
what  Mead  (/),  and  Platner  (tt),  think  of  well-waters :  if  you  fuffer  yourfelf
to  be  perfuaded  by  their  judgment,  which  is  certainly  fupported  by  many  dif-
ferent reafons,  you  will  not  hefitate  greatly  to  prefer  river-waters  to  thofe  of
wells  ;  fpeaking  of  them  in  general.

But  if  the  queftion  be  of  particular  waters  -,  there  certainly  are  rivers  to
which  you  would  prefer  a  very  good  well  -,  and  ftill  more  another  river.  For
you  know,  that  the  waters  of  certain  fountains,  from  whence  rivers,  at  length,
have  their  origin,  are  thole  that  incruft  their  canals,  feme  with  very  thick  and
hard  earthy  laminae,  and  others  with  thin  and  fofter  laminse.

And  thefe  few  things  I  have  hinted  at  here,  that  you  may  refute  the  vulgar
error  of  thofe  who  imagine  that  all  calculi  are  owing  to  the  cuftom  of  drinking
wine,  or  fuch  like  liquors :  as  if  there  were  not,  even  in  water,  a  matter  of
that  kind  -,  and  they  who  had  never  drunk  wine  never  generated  calculi.  At
Icaft  he  who  is  fpoken  of  in  the  preceding  twenty-third  feftion  of  the  Sepul-
ehretum  {x),  "  had  made  ufe  of  water-drinking  only,  through  the  whole
**-  courie  of  hi-s  life  •,  yet  his  "  bladder  contain'd  two  and  thirty  ftones."

But  why  do  we  inquire  after  examples  of  this  faft  in  human  creatures;  fmce
many  of  the  like  kind  are  to  be  met  with  in  animals  who  never  drink  wine.
For  to  omit  the  more  fpecious  examples ;  either  on  account  of  their  weight ;,
as  that  ftone,  for  inftance,  which  weigh'd  almofl:  two  pounds,  and  which  be-
ing taken  from  the  bladder  of  a  man,  Lemery  brought  to  the  Royal  Academy
of  Sciences  at  Paris  (y)  ;  or  on  accountof  their  colour ;  as  feven  or  eight  very
fmall  ones  which  Valfalva  formerly  fhow'd  me,  and  which  were  taken  from  the
bladder  of  a  cow,  having  the  form  of  pills,  and  being  of  a  furfacc  that  was
roucrh  with  very  fmall  granules,,  and  of  a  brafs  colour;  fo  that  any  who  did.
not  know  them  to  be  light,  would  have  taken  them  for  metallic  bodies,  as  he
would  have  done  for  golden  ones,  thofe  greater  numbers  of  calculi,  that  were
ting'd,  both  internally  and  externally,  with  a  golden  colour,  and  all  of  them
fmall,  wrhich  others  {z),  in  like  manner,  found  ia  the  bladders  of  oxen  ;  to  omit
thofe  therefore,^  and  thofe  found  in  a  fow  (a),  and  others,  and  to  take  notice
of  them  only  in  dogs  ;  and,  in  the  firft  place,  thofe  feen  by  me  in  a  bitch,,
that  Fdiflefted  when  I  was  a  very  young  man»  for  the  fake  of  exercifing  my-
felf  in  anatomy  •,  I  not  only  found  calculi  in  both  kidnies,  but  I  alfo  found
that  the  right  kidney  did  not  retain  even  a  third  part  ofits  fubftance  :  whereas-
there  was  a  purulent  matter  among  the  calculi.

And  in  another  bitch,  of  a  confiderablc  age,  that  I  formerly  open'd  at  Pa-
dua, for  the  fake  of  experiment,  I  found  a  calculus,  within  one  of,  the  kid-
nies, of  an  irregular  and  deprefs'd  figure ;  hard  in  its-  fubftance,  and  not
fmall  in  its  fize.  And  to  return  to  the  bladder;  the  third  bitch  (for  it  acci-
dentally happen'd  that  thefe  five  creatures,  the  calculi  of  each  of  which  I  have
mention'd  in  particular,  werje  all.  of  the  female  fex)  had  two  ftones  in  its  gan-

{i)  Expof.  Mechan.  Venen.  tent.  6. in  fin.  marolog. c.  14.  §.8.  vid.  &  apud  Haller. ad

(a)  Progr. quo aquam font,  falubrior. &  Boerh. Meth.  Stud.  Med.  p.  1.3.  c.  2.  ad  an.

cat..  1665.  n.  101.

Cx.J  Obf.  4.  §..2..  CaJ  Sachs  c.  cit.  14.  §.  6.  &  eph.  Ji.  c.  cent,

(_)■)  Hift.  a.  1700.  obf.  anat.  14.  7.  obf  7.
(z)  A&.  n.  c.  torn.  8.  ohf.  z.  &  Sachs  Gam--

o-renous


Letter  XLII, Article  17.  4gr

grenous  bladder ;  a  larger  and  a  fraaller ;  both  of  them  of  an  oval  figure,
but  very  much  deprefs'd  on  both  fides :  and  even  one  furface  of  the  leflfer  was
fomewhat  excavated  fo  as  to  receive  the  larger.

This  bitch  was  eleven  years  of  age,  and  had,  for  -a  lo^ig  time,  difcharg'd
a  very  ill-fmelling  urine ;  yet  without  bowlings,  I  fuppofe  on  account  of  the
imooth  furface  of  the  calculi,  which,  for  that  reafon,  did  not  prick  the  blad-
der at  leaift  -,  till,  at  length,  Ihe  was  carried  off  by  conyulfive  motions,  where-
with fhe  had  been  feiz'd.  This  relation  I  receiv'd  from  the  mafter  of  the
dog  (who  was  one  of  the  philofophers  of  this  facred  college)  at  the  fame  time
that  he  fhow'd  me  the  recent  calculi.

And  calculi  have  been  met  with  in  fo  great  a  number  of  dogs,  by  others,
that  unlefs  I  feleft  thofe  only,  which,  either  their  number,  their  ftrufture,
weight,  or  fituation,  make  more  worthy  of  being  notic'd ;  I  Ihall  not  foon
come  to  a  conclufion.  In  a  dog,  which  had  long  labour'd  under  a  dripping
of  urine  (^),  "  fome  thoufands  "  of  fmall  calculi  were  found  "  in  the  dif-
"  tended  bladder."  The  bladder  of  another  (c)  contain'd  one,  which,  by
reafon  of  a  lefler  that  was  included  within  it,  refembled  an  atites,  and  was  a
pound  and  a  half  in  weight.

But  the  bladder  of  a  third  (d) ;  which  often  difcharg'd  its  urine  with  pains,
and  a  vehement  howling  ;  contain'd  a  calculus  of  a  rough  furface  ;  and  not
fmooth  as  in  the  bitch  I  open'd  at  Padua  -,  and  although  it  was  fomewhat  lefs
in  weight  than  three  ounces,  yet  you  will  wonder  more  at  this  than  at  that
which  weigh'd  a  pound  and  half:  for  this  dog  was  very  fmall  in  its  fpe-
cies.

-  Finally,  to  defcribe  the  fituation,  rather  than  the  calculus  ;  that  ought  not
to  be  pafs'd  by,  which  a  worthy  young  gentleman,  who  was  a  pupil  of  mine,
told  me,  fome  years  ago,  he  had  found  in  a  dog  which  he  differed  for  the
fake  of  exercifing  himfelf  in  anatomy.  The  ureters,  a  little  above  the  place
-where  they  open  into  the  bladder,  both  of  them  join'd  together  into  one  ca-
nal ;  which  was  not  wider  than  either  of  them  when  feparate  :  this  one  canal,
which  is  a  very  extraordinary  inftance,  perforated  the  bladder  in  the  middle  of
it,  and  at  the  lower  part ;  and  thus  ferv'd  inftead  of  the  two  ureters,  which
ufually  carry  the  urine  into  this  cavity.

At  the  beginning,  then,  of  this  canal ;  where  the  ureters,  as  I  have  already
faid,  join'd  together  ;  he  found  a  calculus  flicking,  which  was  not  very  hard.
Yet  all  thefe  examples,  and  much  more  the  other  inftances  which  Donatus
(e)  has  collefted  -,  of  calculi  found  in  the  liver  alfo,  or  the  gall-bladder,  as
well  as  in  the  ftomach,  and  inteftines,  of  brute  animals  •,  are  not  to  be  ob-
jefted,  in  the  manner  Donatus  has  done,  to  Ariftotle ;  when  he  fays  (f)  "  that
"  no  animal  but  man  can  become  calculous ;"  for  he  has  immediately  ex-
plain'd  this,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  fliow  plainly,  that  he  meant  to  fpeak  there
only  of  calculi  in  the  urinary  bladder.

And  in  another  pafTage  (g),  which  it  is  furprizing  fliould  efcape  Donatus,
he  has  exprefly  faid,  that,  in  vidlims,  "  the  kidnies"  were  fcen  "  very  fre-

(i)  Earund.  dec.  3.  a.  i;  &  6.  obf.  z6o.  (e)  C.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  16.

(^cj  Ibid,  in  append,  fub  n.  6.  ad  obf.  23.  (/)  Seft.  10.  probl.  42.

(_/)  Dec.  ead,  a.  9  &  10.  obf.  170.  {g)  De  Partib.  Animal.  1.  3.  c.  4.

R  r  r  2  "  quently


492  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  quently  to  be  fiU'd  with  calculi,  with  lacerated  membranes  and  tubercles,
"  and  even  the  liver  and  other  parts.

1 8.  And  from  what  Ariftotle  has  faid  in  another  place  (h) ;  "  that  not  on-
"  ly  a  humour  deicends  into  the  bladder,  but  fome  dry  concretions  alfo,  from
*'  which  calculi  may  be  form'd  -,"  we  underftand  the  moft  ancient  origin  of
the  opinon  of  thofe,  who  alTerted  that  the  beginnings  of  all  calculi,  of  the  blad-
der, come  from  the  kidnies ;  and  that  in  thefe  calculi,  for  that  reafon,  a  pe-
culiar nucleus  is  always  found  in  the  center.

And  although  I  do  not  deny  but  both  of  thefe  circumftances  are  true  in
many  perfons,  yet  I  fhall  fometimes  be  more  ready  to  join  with  the  opinion
of  Hippocrates  (i),  who  has  taught  us  that  this  happens  from  the  urine  being
very  long  confin'd ;  whereby  that  which  is  the  moft  thin  part  of  it,  is  dil-
charg'd  :  "  but  that  which  is  moft  thick,  and  turbid,  is  heap'd  up  together,
"  and  concretes ;  and  at  firft,  indeed,  is  fmall,  but  afterwards  becomes
"  larger :  for  while  it  is  roU'd  about  by  the  urine,  whatever  is  thick  and
"  compafted  together,  adapts  itfelf  thereto,  and  by  this  means  increafes  it,
"  and  forms  one  general  concretion."

And  that  this  may  happen  very  foon,  appears  from  the  obfervation  of
Joannes  Dolasus  (k),  who  aflerts  that  a  white  mucilaginous  matter,  dif-
charg'd  from  the  bladder  of  a  certain  knight,  "  had  been  fuddenly  harden'd
"  into  a  yellowifh  calculus ;  from  being  expos'd  to  the  external  air."

But  that  the  urine,  by  ftagnating  within,  may  become  putrid,  even  with-
out the  contaft  of  the  external  air,  appears  from  the  experiments  of  the  cele-
brated Brendelius  (I)  ;  who  deduces,  from  the  putrefaftion  thereof,  the  origin
of  calculi :  as  he  fees  (m)  that  it  produces  both  hard  crufts,  and  a  mucous
pultaceous  matter,  diftinguilh'd  with  hardifli  granules ;  which  itfelf  alfo  grows
hard  foon  after.

And  that  there  are  urines  which  depofit  thefe  particles  fooner,  and  more
readily,  he  does  not  at  all  doubt  (k),  where  he  mentions  the  cafes  of  two  in-
fants-, one  but  juft  two  days  old,  and  the  other  about  eight-,  who  not
only  dlfcharg'd  calculi  before  death,  but  had  calculi  found  within  them  when
dead.

And  what  kind  of  calculous  matter  Mead  favv  (o),  in  the  carcafe  of  a  boy
of  five  years  old,  and  by  what  degrees  heobferv'd  it  degenerate  into  a  ftony
hardnefs,  you  may  learn  from  himfelf :  as  you  may  alfo,  from  the  celebrated
Haller  (p),  what  he  fuppofes  to  be  the  firft  beginnings  of  calculi  in  the  kid-
nies.

But  whether  the  incipient  calculus,  or  the  matter  of  the  calculus,  defcend
from  the  kidnies  into  the  bladder,  or  be  generated  in  the  bladder  itfelf;
there  is  no  doubt  but  the  calculus  has  its  increafe  from  the  fame  matter :
nor  do  they  feem  to  advance  any  thing  contradidlory  to  truth,  who  fay
that  the  particles  of  this  matter  will  be  more  firmly  adapted  to  each  other»
in  proportion  as  the  increafe  is  more  flow ;  and  lefs  firmly,  in  proportion  as
the  increafe  is  more  fpeedy  : and  they  feem  to  be  nearly  in  the  right,  wha

(h)  Hift.  Animal.  1.  3.  c.  15.  (m)  N.  I.


(/)  De  Aere,  Aquis  &c.  n.  22.  23.  («)  N.

(k)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  4.  obf.  64.  ("aj  De  Imp.  Sol.  &  Lun.  c.  z.

(I)  Progr.  de  calculi  vefica;  &  est.  Natalib. (pj  Opuf.  Pathol,  obf.  34.


fuppofe


Letter  XLII. Article  19.  493

fuppofethat  this  increafe  will  be  greater  in  fummer,  than  in  winter;  as
in  fummer  the  calculous  matter  is  much  lefs  diluted  by  the  watry  mat-
ter, which  then  goes  off,  through  the  Ikin,  in  a  very  confiderable  portion :
and  this  feems  to  me  another  reafon  why,  if  it  is  in  our  power  to  choofe,  the
excifion  of  the  calculus  fliould  be  put  off  from  autumn  to  fpring,  rather  than
from  fpring  to  autumn.

Yet  befides  the  beginning  of  the  calculus,  form'd  either  in  the  kidnies,  or
in  the  bladder,  the  fame  matter  adheres  round  about  other  things  alfo,  that
are  introduc'd  into  the  bladder  from  without.  But  as  many  examples  of  this
kind  have  been  written  and  collected  by  many  authors,  I  fhall  infill:  chiefly  on
thofe  which  I  myfelf,  or  my  friends  have  feen ;  and  yet  fhall  not  defcribe
them  all  neverthelefs.

19.  For  the  firftthat  offer'd  itfelf  to  me,  is  that  which  was  publifh'd  three
and  forty  years  ago,  in  the  Ephemerides  Cafare^e  N.  C.  Academics  {q).  And  in-
deed, befides  that  of  mine,  another  defcription  is  alfo  extant  of  the  very  fame
cafe  ;  by  one  who  did  not  know  that  mine  was  publifh'd :  this  fecond  defcrip-
tion was  publifh'd  fixteen  years  after,  in  a  certain  annotation  join'd  to  the
works  of  the  celebrated  Vallifneri  {r)  ;  who  had  been  prefent,  together  with
me,  while  the  furgeon  perform'd  the  difleftion.

Both  the  defcriptions,  indeed,  agree  pretty  well  together  in  the  principal
matters :  and  if  they  differ  a  little  in  fome  things,  confider  that  I  certainly
committed  my  obfervations  to  writing  on  the  very  day  of  thedifleftion,  as  my
cuftom  is.  And  the  calculus,  which  I  ftill  preferve  by  me  ;  together  with  the
needle  about  which  it  had  been  accreted  ;  is  certainly  not  "  very  hard :"
and  this  the  magnitude  of  it,  compar'd  with  the  weight,  at  firll  fight  teftifies.

For  although  it  confifts  of  two  parts,  each  of  which  approaches  to  the  oval
figure  ;  and  the  larger  parr,  within  which  the  point  of  the  needle ;  and  al-
mofl  a  third  part  of  it,  as  it  is  natural  to  fuppofe;  lies  hid,  is  three  inches
long,  two  broad,  and  one  and  a  half  thick :  and  the  lefTer  part,  which  fill'd
the  urethra,  in  the  fame  manner  as  you  will  read  in  the  cafe  of  another  vir-
gin (s),  is  continued  to  one  extremity  of  the  former  part  of  the  calculus,  in
fuch  a  manner,  as  to  fhoot  out  at  the  fide  of  it,  and  form  a  right  angle  there-
with, and  equal  the  third  joint  of  the  middle  finger  in  magnitude;  yet  both
of  them,  together  with  the  needle,  are  below  the  weight  of  a  phillipic  filver
coin.

And  that  the  fubftance  of  the  calculus  is,  in  great  meafure,  friable  (or  at
leaft,  externally)  and  its  texture  fpongy,  is  confirmed  even  by  looking  at  it.
For  certain  thin  lamella;  have  fallen  off,  in  fome  places,  fpontaneoufly,  and
have  laid  open  the  fmall  caverns  that  lie  beneath :  and  a  pulveriz'd  matter,,
of  a  white  colour  like  the  calculus,  fimilar  to  that  which  falls  from  rotten
willow  or  withy  branches,  naturally  moulders  from  the  ftone.

And  this  I  was  willing  to  add  to  the  defcription  at  prefent,  as  a  eircumftance
that  I  could  not  obierve  in  the  recent  calculus ;  and  indeed  not  till  it  had  lain
by  fome  time.

This  calculus  is,  therefore,  furnifh'd  with  fuch  cortices,  or  fhells,  as,  if

iq)  Cent.  5.  obr.  26.  [s)  Sepulchret.  fefl.  hac  25.  obf.  5.

(r)  Tora.  3.  p.  3.  Off.  12.  -  •


494  -Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

there  had  been  other  harder  ftones  in  the  bladder,  at  the  fame  time,  might
eafily  have  been  broken  by  the  dafliing  of  thefe  againft  them  ;  and  being
fhatter'd  into  fragments  come  forth,  with  the  urine,  by  the  fame  paflage  :  as
happen'd  in  the  old  man,  whofe  hiftory  is  given  in  the  Sepulchretum  (t),
from  the  obfervation  of  Tulpius.

Nor  will  you  fuppofe  the  calculus  to  have  been  of  a  nruch  harder  nature,
which  that  very  experienc'd  man  Heifter  («),  having  previoufly  perceiv'd  it
■by  the  help  of  the  catheter,  foon  after,  by  means  of  Tome  common  remedies,
that  he  fubjoins,  got  rid  of:  for  by  the  ufe  of  thefe  medicines,  a  great  quan-
tity of  matter,  in  the  form  of  a  calx,  was  difcharg'd  with  the  urine ;  and
within  three  weeks,  all  the  difagreeable  fymptoms,  wherewith  he  had  been
troubled  for  the  fpace  of  four  years,  were  remov'd  :  and  this  cafe  he  gave  the
relation  of,  when  it  was  now  the  third  year  after  that  fuccefsful  cure.  And
I  could  wi(h  that  all  the  calculi,  which  are  form'd  within  the  bladder,  were
■of  that  kind.

But  you  fee  from  the  Sepulchretum  itfelf,  how  many  are  faid  to  have  been
of  a  flinty  hardnefs :  you  even  fee,  in  the  fame  place  (x),  that  a  very  large  one
is  fpoken  of,  from  Heers,  as  being  "  harder  than  any  flint  •"  and  from  Bra-
favolus  (y)  ten,  that  were  found  in  Albertus  Savonarola,  which,  if  they  were
thrown  upon  the  ground,  rebounded  like  a  ball :  and  finally,  you  will  find
in  Linden  {z),  that  one  which  can  be  exceeded  by  very  few  in  point  of
weight,  was  feen  by  many  perfons;  that  is  to  fay,  one  which  weigh'd  thirty-
two  ounces,  and  was  "  very  hard,  compaft,  triangular,  and  of  the  colour  of
*'  a  flint :  and  from  hence,  by  means  of  fteel,  fire  was  drawn  as  from  a  flint."

And  Panarolus,  in  like  manner,  fpeaks  of  calculi  (a),  which  were  "  fo  hard
"  as  to  refemble  the  lapis  pyrites ;  for  when  ftricken  with  fteel,  they  dif-
charg'd fire :"  but  thefe  I  purpofely  omit  to  take  notice  of,  left,  as  he  fays
they  were  difcharg'd  by  a  woman,  you  Ihould  fufped:  that  he  was  impos'd
upon,-,  f7nce  Bartholin  {I?)  fays  that  many  had  conjedur'd  a  noble  patient,
and  his  friends,  who  were  prefent,  to  have  been  impos'd  upon,  even  in  li-
thotomy itfelf,  by  a  crafty  juggler ;  becaufe  fparks  of  fire  were  ftruck  out  of
the  falfe  ftcne  ;  "  and  it  is  impolTible  that  fuch  a  ftone  fhould  be  generated  in
"  a  man  ;"  for  which  reafon  he  could  fcarcely  forbear  doubting  the  hiftory
of  another  of  like  hardnefs,  which  had  been  given  to  him,  as  having  been  cut
out  of  the  human  bladder.

But  all  thofe  that  I  have  taken  notice  of,  from  the  Sepulchretum,  are  faid
to  have  been  found  in  the  bladder  of  bodies  after  death  :  and  left  you  fliould
doubt  whether  there  had  been  any  caufe  of  fraud,  the  firft,  at  leaft,  was
found  in  an  old  man,  who  had  never  complain'd  of  a  calculus  in  the  bladder-,
as  another  old  man  never  had  of  his  kidnies,  who,  neverthelefs,  had  a  ftone
in  his  right  kidney,  of  an  unufual  magnitude,  and  figure  ;  and  "  in  hardnefs
_"  equal  to  any  flint  whatever:"  as  that  celebrated  man  Chriftoph.  Guil.  Ba-
jerus  (c),  v/ho  was  prefent  at  the  diflTedion,  afltrts.

{ij  Sea,  prox.  24..  obf.  10.  (a)  Jatrologifm.  pent.  2.  obf.  34.

(«)  Differt.  de  Medico  nimis  dm.  n.  36,  {6)  Cent.  4.  Epift.  Medic.  100.

{xj  Sea.  23.  obf.  7.  §.  5.  Ct'j  Commerc.  Litter,  a. 1745.  Hebd.  40.

Cy)  Ibid.  obf.  2.  §.  4.  n.  2.
(sj  ibid.  obf.  1.  §.  J.  &  feft.  24.  obf,  10.
f  3-

To


Letter  XLII. Article  19.  49^

To  me,  however,  it  has  never  yet  happen'd  to  have  a  calculus  fliown  me,
that  could  be  compar'd  with  thefe ;  unlefs  by  the  fraud  of  women,  and  the
credulity  of  one  or  two  phyficians,  who  had  been  too  eafily  deceiv'd  by
their  artifices.

For  here  I  firft  faw  one,  which  not  only  ;  to  ufe  the  words  of  Ferrandus
(d);  "  ftiould  be  call'd  a  river- ftone,  rather  than  a  calculus  of  the  bladder  ;"
but,  though  it  was  really  a  river-ftone,  was  daub'd  over  with  blood,  and  ob-
truded upon  the  incautious  for  a  real  calculus  of  the  bladder.

And  after  that  I  had  a  letter  fent  me  from  Venice,  by  a  phyfician-  in  other
refpeds  not  unlearned  -,  in  which  he  told  me  of  a  certain  woman,  who  dif-
charg'd,  almofl;  every  day,  a  great  number  of  calculi,  and  thofe  not  very
fmall  neither :  and,  in  order  to  gain  credit  from  one  who  did  not  eafily  believe,
with  the  letter  he  fent  a  great  number  of  the  calculi ;  on  the  fight  of  which  I-
was  immediately  aftonifh'd,  that  there  could  be  any  one  in  the  world,  who-
did  not  know  them  to  be  large,  and  rough,  fragments  of  the  common  flinty
which  is  made  ufe  of  to  ftrike  fire  :  however,  I  wrote  back  nothing  elfe,  but
that  I  defir'd  him  to  fubjedl  them  to  a  chymical  diftillation,  and  the  conle-
quence  thereof  would  Ihow  the  nature  of  the  ftone  ;  I  therefore  receiv'd  na
more  letters  from  him.

Yet  I  do  not  fay  thefe  things,  as  if  others  may  not  have  feen,  in  other
places,  what  I  have  not  feen  wherever  I  have  been.  And  indeed  I  perfuaded.
one  of  my  own  countrymen,  who  denied  that  a  calculus  could  have  been  ge-
nerated in  the  human  body ;  for  this  reafon  only,  that  it  refilled  the  hammer  j,
to  attend  to"  the  other  properties  in  like  manner,  and  make  a  diligent  in-
quiry ;  fince  we  lee  that  Steinius  is  quoted'  by  learned  men,,  as  having  de-
fcrib'd  human  calculi  which  refifted  the  ftrokes  of  the  hammer,  in  his  Litho-
graphia.

And  we  muft,  beyond  a  doubt,  give  credit  to  the  very  experienc'd  Morand
(e),  when  he  afl"erts  that  the  calculi,  which  he  calls  murales,  take  the  fame  polifli
as  marble :  for  which  reafon  he  thought  them  unconquerable,  even  by  that
lithontriptic  remedy,  which  had  been,  not  very  long  before,  made  public
among  the  Englifn  •,  by  meanswhereof  it  has  been  found  that  feveral  other  cal-
culi have  been  either  diminifh'd,  or  confum'd ;  and  that  by  the  teftimony
even  of  the  catheter  alfo  in  feven  r  at  which  Francifcus  Sylvius,  and  Boer-
haave,  would  have  been  furpriz'd,  had  they  been  living,  that  this  could
be  brought  about  by  means  of  alcaline  falts,  and  even  could  be  brought
about  by  no  other  ;  for  one  of  them  (f)  had  faid,  that  this  might  be  effetted
"  by  rock  fait,  or  the  acid  fpirit  of  nitre:"  and  the  other  f^j,  that  it  could  ber
"  done  by  fcarcely  any  other  fluid  than  the  fpirit  of  nitre."

But  I  wifli  they  could  be  aftonifli'd  that  the  ufe  of  this  Engiifii  remedy  had
produc'd  fuch  effefts  in  every  one,  or  at  leaft  in  the  greater  part,  of  the  pa-
tients who  had  taken  it :  and,  indeed,  I  wifh  that  it  had  not  been  "hurtful.
But  if  you  confider  thofe  great  number  of  exceptions,  which  were  afterwards
added  ;  among  which  are  thofe,  alio, that  the  celebrated  Hazonius  {b)  has


(d)  Sepulehr.  fedl.  cit.  23.  obf.  2.  f.  5.  (g)  Praleft.  ad  Inftit  §.  79K

(«J  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  1740.  {h)  Quell,  de  hisEdita  r.  4.

(/)  Eiax.  Med.l.  i.  c.  55.  n»  50.


SiOWi


496  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fliown  us  are  to  be  taken  fiom  the  nature  of  the  calcolus,  from  the  age,  and
from  the  temperament,  of  the  patient;  it  will  appear  pretty  clearly,  how
often  this  remedy  miglit  be  either  ufelefs  or  hurttul:  and  if  you  read  the  hif-
tories  and  diiTeftions,  which  the  Commercium  Litterarium  fets  forth  (/)  ;  you
will  eafily  underftand,  how  much  damage  arifes  from  thence  to  the  internal
parts,  and  particularly  to  the  urinary  paffages  :  and  at  the  fame  time  you
will  find  that  there  was  no  erofion  of  the  calculus,  or  of  the  calculi,  Vv-hich
would  have  appear'd  from  the  fediments  in  the  urine.

But  while  I  fpeak  this,  do  not  fuppofe  either  that  this  erofion,  or  defqua-
mation,  of  the  calculi  -,  if  we  confider  every  kind  of  calculi,  and  every  kind
of  lithontriptics  in  general ;  is  always  to  be  defir'd.  You  may  learn  this,  not
to  turn  over  other  books,  from  the  Commercium  already  quoted.  And  where
{k)  the  examples,  and  the  diireClions,of  two  calculous  bodies  are  defcrib'd,
the  calculus  of  the  former,  "  which  was  widely  and  deeply  eroded  in  feveral
"  parts,"  deferves  to  be  attended  to  ;  for  fome  lithontriptic  liquor  being
given,  to  which  that  effeft  was  probably  to  be  imputed,  all  the  fymptoms  had
been  exacerbated  :  and  the  bladder,  though  not  eroded  indeed,  had  been
inflam'd,  round  the  orifice,  to  a  confiderable  extent.

In  another  place  (/),  the  cafe  of  an  illuftrious  man  is  taken  notice  of  by
the  celebrated  Goetzius :  wherein  he  fays  that  the  patient ;  having,  by  the
means  of  fome  remedy  or  other,  difcharg'd  in  his  urine  "  a  very  large  quan-
tity of  fmall  fandy  particles,  and  fcales,  which  feem'd  to  be  the  fhell  of  the
calculus  broken  down  into  pieces ;"  had  his  pains  increas'd  to  fuch  a  degree
thereby,  that  he  was  carried  of  in  confequence  of  the  exacerbation.

And  in  the  body  after  death,  was  found  a  calculus,  "  depriv'd  of  its  vifcous
"  and  fmooth  furface  (which  had  lain  in  contaft  with  the  fides  of  the  bladder
"  without  any  injury)  and  forc'd,  with  its  very  hard,  rough,  and  unequal
"  furface,  againft  the  neck  of  the  bladder  j"  fo  that  this  change,  in  the  ftone,
feems  to  have  excited  the  violence  fii  the  pains :  efpecially  when  we  call  to
mind  thofe  things  that  are  faid  above  {in).

Yet  this  very  phyfician  has  aflerted,  that  a  medicated  water,  "  properly
"  prepar'd  from  the  fhells  of  oyfters,  or  other  fhell-fifh,"  fucceeds  more
happily  than  that  Englifii  lithontriptic,  which  has  been  difapprov'd  by  more
than  one  very  learned  phyfician  among  the  Enghfli,  and  particularly  by
Mead  (n)  ;  for  by  the  ufe  of  this  water,  he  fays,  "  fmall  pieces"  of  noe
very  hard  calculi,  "  fometimes  of  land,  and  at  other  times  of  very  fmall
*'  nuclei,  as  it  were,  are  difcharg'd  together  with  the  urine."

He  commends  the  diflertation  of  that  celebrated  author  Robert  Whytt,
upon  this  water.  And  you  will  read  of  experiments  made  at  Helmftad,  in
another  diflertation  which  was  pubhfh'd  in  the  fame  place,  under  the  patro-
nage of  the  celebrated  Krugerus  {o) ;  by  which  experiments  it  appears,  that
this  water  is  of  an  alkalino-fulphureous  nature. =

(i)  A.  1740.  hebd.  41.  n.  2.  &  a,  1745.  hebd. {m)  N,  16.
3.  n.  2.  («)  Monit.  Med.  c.  10.  in  fin.

(k)  A.  i733.1iebd.  21.  (0)  Diflert.  qua  exhibentur  Experim.  cum

(/)  A.  i73i.hebd.  23.  aqua  Oftrocod«ni).  inftituta.

4.  There


Letter  XLII. Article  20.  497

There  have  been  fome  alfo,  who  mix'd  acids  with  the  alcalies ;  and
found,  that  into  the  fluid,  while  thus  efFervefcing,  if  calculi  were  thrown,
they  were  either  entirely,  or  in  fome  meafure,  diffolv'd  :  for  which  reafon
they  injeded  an  efFervefcing  fluid,  of  this  kind,  into  the  bladder  of  dogs;  in
order  to  make  an  experiment  how  far  the  bladder  could  bear  it.

Yet  although  it  was  born  by  a  found  bladder,  could  it  alfo  be  born  by  one
which  is  irritated,  and  ulcerated  by  calculi  ?  Certainly  not  ■,  flnce  it  is  found
by  the  experiments  of  Morand  (p),  that,  in  an  ulcerated  bladder,  the  dif-
order  is  increas'd  by  that  former  Englifli  remedy ;  although  not  in  an  efFer-
vefcing flrate,  and  diluted  by  the  quantity  of  urine,  wherewith  it  defcends  to
th,e  bladder.

But  let  us  return  to  calculi  which-  are  form'd  upon  needles.

20.  A  country-girl,  altnoft  of  the  fame  age  with  that  formerly  fpoken  of,
by  me,  in  the  Ephemerides  {q)  -,  for  fhe  died  in  her  fourteenth  year  -,  hav-
ing done  the  fame  thing  as  the  former,  fixteen  months  before,  defervedly
fufFer'd  the  fame  misfortune.  For  having  introduc'd  a  brafs  hair-bodkin,
notwithftanding  it  was  bent  in  the  middle,  very  high  into  the  urethra,  fhe
perceiv'd  that  it  was  fuddenly  fnatch'd  out  of  her  fingers,  and  entirely  hid
within  the  bladder.

Being  reflrrain'd  by  fhame,  Ihe,  not  only  then,  but  even  almofl  quite  to
the  time  of  her  death,  was  filent  as  to  the  true  caufe  of  the  pains,  and  un-
eafinefFes,  which  fhe  felt,  and  particularly  in  making  water;  which  were  fo
many,  and  fo  great,  that  a  tumour  having,  at  length,  arifen  in  the  hypoga-
ftrium,  and  the  nearefl  part  of  the  ileum,  a  pus  was  difcharg'd  by  tv/o  fora-
mina that  it  had  made  for  itfelf -,  one  larger  and  one  fmaller  ;  the  former  of
which  was  in  the  left  ilium,  and  the  latter  on  the  right  fide;  in  that  part
which  is  properly  call'd,  with  Laurentius  (r),  the  fines  hypogafirii.

Being  thus  afifedted,  fhe  was  receiv'd  into  the  hofpital  at  Padua,  a  month'
or  two  before  death. It  was  there  eafily  obferv'd,  that,  together  with  pus,
urine  was pour'd  out  through each  of  the  foramina,  but  more  through  the
left ;  under  which  was  a  cavity  of  a  pretty  confiderable  fize,  wherewith  the
right  foramen,  alio,  communicated.

As,  in  this  cavity,  the  probe  met  with  fomething  hard ;  I  was  aflc'd  what
I  ilippos'd  this  could  be.  I  immediately  call'd  to  mind  what  had  refifted  the
probe,  when  it  was  introduc'd  through  the  fiftula,  which  had  open'd  itfelf  ia
one  of  the  ilia,  and  had  difcharg'd  urine  with  the  pus,  in  the  former  girl.  And
when  I  heard  that  this  girl  was  alfo  tortur'd  with  pains  of  the  bladder,  in
making  water,  and  that  ilie  difcharg'd  only  a  fmall  quantity  of  urine,  and
that  purulent ;  I  anfwer'd  that  it  v/as  necefFary  to  inquire,  whether  flie  bad
introduc'd  a  needle,  or  any  thing  elfe  of  the  like  kind,  into  the  urethra.

The  girl  denied  it  •,  till  the  left  foramen  being  enlarg'd,  by  a  flight  feiStion
of  the  common  integuments,  the  point  of  the  bodkin,  and  the  greater
part  of  its  length,  were  evidently  leen,  within  the  cavity,  by  every  body .
Then  what  fhe  could  no  longer  hide,  fhe  too  late  confefs'd.  For  even  the
bodkin  could  not  be  extraded,  by  reafon  of  a  calculus  that  was  form'd  upon
-  it ;  which  calculus,  though  it  was  eafy  to  perceive  it  by  introducing  the  probe

{})  Mem.  cit.  {>■)  HLli  .'Inat,  fium.  Corp.  1,  6.  c.  2.

(q)  Vid.  fupra  ad  initinm  c,  19.

Vol.  II.  S  f  f  ■  ^  throue-K


493"  Book  III. Of  Bifeafes  of  the  Belfj.

through  the  pafTage  of  the  urethra,  or  through  that  cavity,  yet  it  was  im-
poffible  to  move,  even  the  moft  (lightly,  without  great  pains.

And  the  fame  calculus  prevented  their  injefting  any  thing  into  the  urethra,
to  affwage  the  pains,  by  blocking  up  the  pafTage.  To  thefe  iymptoms  were
added  a  very  great  wafting  of  flefh  •,  the  quantity  of  pus  was  increas'd  every
day;  and  the  putrid  imeli,  and  the  fever,  became  very  violent.

Thefe  fymptoms  v/ere  foUow'd  by  a  loathing  of  all  food;  a  vomiting,  and
difcharge  by  ftool,  of  a  yellow  liquid  matter  ;  a  dejeftion  of  ftrength,  and
vveaknefs  of  pulfe ;  till  death  ?.t  length  put  the  wiili'd-for  end  to  To  many
xniferies  and  complaints  :  among  which  none  had  ever  been  heard  of  a  pain  irt
her  loins,  by  thole  who  examin'd  her  upon  that  head.

The  carcafe,  which  leem'd  to  be  a  fceleton  cover'd  with  fkin,  was  diffecled.
in  the  open  air,  and  in  a  very  large  place,  on  account  of  the  time  of  the  year-
being  very  hot;  for  it  was  the  beginning  of  July  in  the  year  1-738.

I,  firft  of  all,  ordered  the  probe  to  be  pafs'd  through  the  right  foramen  into,
the  cavity  of  the  ulcer ;  and  the  whole  finus  to  be  laid  open.  This  was  be-
twixt the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen  and  the  integuments ;  nor  had  any  com-
munication, in  any  part,  but  with  that  cavity.

The  cavity  was  in  length,  and  in  breadth,  three  inches ;  extending  itfelf
from  the  left  ilium  towards  the  linea  alba,  having  a  thin  potterior  paries,,
■which  the  remains  of  the  mufcles,  and  the  peritonaeum  made  up,  and  by
which  it  was  feparated  from  the  cavity  of  the  belly  ;  but  in  the  fame  paries,
which  was  open  on  the  right  fide,  it  communicated  with  the  fundus  of  the
bladder :  and  there  a  great  part  of  the  bodkin  was  prominent  into  the  cavity
of  the  bladder.

The  abdomen  was  then  cut  into,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  incifion  did-
not  reach  to  the  bladder  :  which,  although  the  cavity  was  fmall,  had  coalefc'd
pretty  high,  that  is  above  the  os  pubis,  with  the  internal  furface  of  the  ab-
domen, in  that  part  only  where  it  lay  open  into  the  cavity  of  the  ulcer;  i'a-
that  nothing  could  be  difcharg'd  into  the  general  cavity  of  the  abdomen,,
wherein  there  really  was  not  the  leaft  extravafated  fluid.

And  even  the  lower  border  of  the  omentum,  which  had  fcarcely  any  re-
maining far,  in  moft  places,  was  clofely  connefted  to  the  neighbouring  peri-
tonaeum of  the  bladder.

Thefe  appearances  being  feen,  and  the  bones  of  the  pubes  being  drawn^
afunder,  the  whole  bladder  was  difclos'd  to  view;  and  itfelf,  together  with
the  urethra,  which  was  found,,  laid  open  :  the  coats  of  thefe  cavities  were
found  to  be  thicken'd,  but  fo  contrafted,  that  befides  the  calculus  they  could
fcarcely  contain  any  thing.

The  internal  coats  of  thefe  parts,  -v/hich  were  unequal,  and  ulcerated,  in-
many  places,  adher'd  to  the  ftone  here  and  there :  and  were,  like  the  cavity,
of  the  ulcer,  in  many  places  gangrenous  alfo.

The  calculus  v/as  a  little  more  than  two  inches  long,  being  fomewhat
thicker  than  a  man's  thumb,  and,  in  its  Ihape,  refembling  an  egg,  the  vertex;
of  which,  was  turn'd  upwards  ;  as  the  point  of  the  needle  was  alfo  ;  with
all  that  part  which  went  to  the  angle  whereof  I  fpoke  in  the  beginning;
being  almoft  parallel  to  the  calculus,  and  disjoin'd  from  it  by  the  interval  of
an  inch  :  the  remaining  part  of  the  needle  was,  alfo,  on  the  outfide  of  the
calculus,  as  far  as  could  be  conjeclur'd,  almoft  univerfally -,.  the  head  only^

5  with


^ tetter  XLIL Article  21.  499

with  Corns  of  the  neighbouringjportion  of  it,  being  very  firmly  infix'd  to  the
middle  and  left  fide  of  the  calculus ;  that  is,  cover'd  over  with  the  calculous
concretion  ;  which  portion  is,  on  that  furface,and  at  both  of  its  extremities,  very
unequal ;  on  the  oppofite  furface  almoft  fmooth  and  fomewhat  white ;  except
where  it  was  ting'd  of  a  yellowifh  colour,  as  the  whole  left  part  is ;  which
circumftanccs  I  defcribe  as  I  now  fee  them  ;  for  at  that  time  it  was  bloody  in
fome  places,  and  in  others  of  a  dirty  brown  colour.

At  that  time  alfo,  the  calculus  being  examin'd,  as  it  is  connefled  with  the
needle,  by  medical  weights,  was  found  to  be  a  few  grains  lighter  than  feven
drams;  but  now  it  is  a  few  grains  heavier  than  five  drams  and  two  fcruples,

Moft  of  the  other  parts  of  the  belly  were  in  a  preternatural  ftate :  their
appearances  were  as  follows.  Some  of  the  inteftines  were  a  littlejivid,  and
fomewhat  turgid  with  that  yellow  humour  which  was  laft  of  all  difcharg'd':
Xhe  liver  was  whitifh :  the  fpleen  was  pretty  livid,  and  a  little  larger  than  it
generally  is.

But  the  ureters,  .and  the  kidnies  themfelves,  were  in  a  very  bad  condition
indeed  :  for  thefe  canals  were  dilated,  and  full  of  pus ;  of  the  fame  kind  with
that  which  was  found  in  the  cavity  of  the  ulcer  in  confiderable  quantity;  for
it  was  very  liquid,  and  of  a  yellowifh  colour,  inclining  to  white;  or,  in
other  words,  it  was  a  pus  mix'd  with  urine.

And  the  kidnies  were  preternaturally  inlarg'd,  efpecially  the  right  ■,  which
was  alfo  very  hard,  and  internally  hollow'd  into  fmall  cells,  that  were  in  great
■number,  and  fo  diftended  with  the  fame  kind  of  pus,  as  the  pelvis  was  alfo,
that  it  rufh'd  out,  to  a  confiderable  height,  upon  difiedion.  The  adipofe
and  proper  coats  of  the  left  kidney  ;  being  join'd  to  each  other,  thicken'd,
and  indurated  •,  confin'd  the  fam.e  kind  of  pus  betwixt  themfelves,  with  which
the  furface  of  the  kidney,  that  was  eroded  in  fome  places,  overflovv'd  ;  as  the
internal  parts  did  alfo  in  feveral  places.

But  the  very  filthy  odour,  which  exhal'd  from  the  kidnies,  and  the  blad-
■der,  forbad  us  going  on  to  open  the  thorax ;  no  mark  ofdifeafe  in  that  part
having  appear'd.

2 1 .  The  difletlion  being  thus  finifli'd,  you  will  readily  conceive,  from  what
I  fliall  here  fubjoin,  fomev/hat  more  at  large,  what  I  then  immediately  faid,
according  to  my  cuftom,  to  the  many  men  of  eminence,  and  others  both  me-
dical and  chirurgical  pradlitioners,  and  fludents,  who  heard  me.

What  reafon  co-jld  induce  this  girl,  and  fo  many  others,  to  thrull  the  heads
of  needles,  or  bodkins,  into  the  urethra,  is  not  fo  much  to  be  inquir'd  after
in  the  lacuna  of  the  falacious  humour  ;  inafmuch  as  they  open  in  other  parts,
•and  even  on  the  outfide  of  the  urethra,  unlefs  you,  perhaps,  fuppofe  that
thofe  canals  alfo,  which  I  defcrib'd  (s)  within  the  urethra  of  women,  belong
to  this  clafs  alfo  ;  as  in  the  exquifite  fenfe  of  the  membrane  wherewith  it
is  internally  invefted.

For  unlefs  they  applied  the  friftion  very  high  up  in  the  urethra,  itxould
not  happen,  that,  by  a  fudden  and  ftrong  contraction  of  the  lower  part  of  the
bladder,  the  needle  fhould  be  fnatch'd  out  of  their  fingers,  and  be  quite  bu-
,ried  in  that  cavity  j efpecially  when  the  needle  is  pretty  long.

,fsj  Adverf.i.  n.  lo.  &.  iv.  Animad.  24.

S  f  f  2  For


500  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

F"or  from  the  bladder,  and  its  fphinfter,  I  account  for  this  misfortune',
agreeably  to  the  opinion  of  Molinetti  (/)  •,  and,  not  from  a  certain  power  of
the  uterus,  as  they  fay,  which,  even  if  it  had  this  power  of  drawing  towards
itlelf,  would  not,  however,  draw  what  was  thus  afted  upon,  into  the  blad-
der. -

In  fome  cafes  the  needles  have  fallen  out,  of  themfelves,  after  having  been
taken  in ;  as  happen'd  to  two  girls  that  are  fpoken  of  by  Vallifneri  {u) :  to  one
when  fhe  was  afleep,  and  to  the  other  when  (he  was  making  water  :  I  fup-
pofe,  becaufe  in  thefe  they  had  only  enter'd  the  bladder  in  part ;  that  is  to
fay,  the  crooked  needle  eafily  remaining  v^fith  one  part  in  the  urethra,  while
the  other  was  retain'd  within  the  bladder  for  a  month.

On  this  part,  however,  no  calculous  matter  had  been  form'd  •,  as  is  alfo  faid
not  to  have  happen'd  to  a  needle  that  was  thruft  in  by  a  fourth  (x),  and  dif-
charg'd  after  fifteen  days,  at  the  time  of  making  water ;  which  needle  it  is
probable  had  been  obftrufted,  in  its  paffage  through  the  urethra,  at  its  loweft
and  acute  part,  from  this  fymptom  •,  that  fhe  complain'd  only  of  a  fenfe  of"'
pricking  about  the  neck  of  the  bladder.

But  although  thefe  things  that  I  have  faid  about  the  point  of  the  needle,
or  bodkin,  being  fix'd  in  the  urethra,  will  be  more  illuftrated  by  what  will
be  hinted  afterwards  (y)  ;  yet  I  fliall  not  deny  that  needles,  which  have
been  receiv'd  quite  into  the  cavity  of  the  bladder,  may  neverthelefs  be  fo
turn'd  therein,  as,  in  like  manner,  to  be  difcharg'd  by  the  meatus  urinarius.

But  that  to  thofe  two,  whereof  I  fpoke  laft,  no  calculous  matter  adher'd,
within  fifteen  days,  and  even  within  the  fpace  of  a  whole  month,  there  muft
liave  been  more  than  one  reafon,  as  we  have  known  this  matter  to  adhere  to
others  in  a  much  lefs  fpace  of  time.

For  the  urine,  in  all  perfons,  is  not  equally  impregnated  with  particles  fit
to  recede  therefrom,  and  generate  a  calculus :  and  fome  retain  their  urine
longer  than  others  do;  and  the  matter,  or  furface,  of  different  needles  is  dif-
ferent. Thus  Vallifneri  (z)  has  fuppos'd  that  a  filver  needle,  or  bodkin,  was
taken  out  from  the  bladder,  without  the  addition  of  any  calculous  concre-
tion, merely  for  this  reafon  ,  that  it  was  filver :  which  conjedure,  however,
will  be  much  more  credible,  if  it  fhall,  at  any  time,  be  confirm'd  by  other
experiments.

Thus  a  concretion  feems  more  likely  to  adhere  to  a  pretty  rough  furface,
than  to  a  very  polifh'd  one:  and  hence,  perhaps,  we  are  to  account  for  this
circumftance,  that  one  part  of  the  needle  is,  for  the  moft  part,  cover'd  with
calculous  matter ;  while  the  other  is  left  quite  naked  :  of  the  two  girls,  there-
fore, whofe  bodies  I  exainin'd  after  death,  in  the  former  the  head  of  the
needle,  or  pin,  had  perforated  the  bladder  ;  and  in  this  other  the  point;  be-
caufe, in  the  former,  the  concretion  more  eafily  gather'd  round  the  lower,
and  perhaps  rougher  part ;  and  in  the  latter  more  eafily  about  the  oppofite  ex-
tremity.

But  out  of  thofe  women  who  have  had  a  needle,  which  had  been  thruft  into
the  bladder  ; and  a  calculus,  of  a  confiderable  fize,  form'd  upon  it ; none,,

(/)  Diflert.  Anat.  Pathol.l.  6.  c.  8,  Cy)  N.  25.  &  feq.

(»)  Adnot.  ad  obf.  fupr-e  ad  a.  ig,  cit.  (x)  Obf.  cit..

^)  Itid.

thaC


Letter  XLII. Article 22.  501

that  I  remember  to  have  read  of,  carried  it  for  a,  very  long  time,  yet  had  the
needle  extracled  afterwards,  and  was  fav'd  ;  except  that  Venetian  v/oman,
whofe  cafe  is  publifh'd  by  Molinetti  {a)  (under  whom  fhe  was  cur'd  in  the
year  1649)  with  a  figure  of  the  needle,  and  the  calculus,  added  thereto,
•which  he  us'd  to  fhow  in  this  anatomical  theatre,  where  Moinlchenius,  in  his
epiftle  to  Thomas  Bartholin  {b),  aflerts  that  it  was  feen  by  him  ;  for  Bartholin
himfelf,  as  an  author  in  other  refpedls  very  learned,  has  through  careleflhefs
afierted-,  could  not  be  witnefs  to  the  calculus,  which  was  extradted  after  he
had  departed  from  Padua,  and  even  from  Italy  (c).

And  this  calculus  is  the  fame  which  is  fpoken  of  by  the  fame  Moinlchenius,
in  his  obfervations  {d)  :  and  this  I  have  hinted  at,  becaufe,  in  the  latter  part  of
the  annotation  to  the  obfervation  of  Valllfneri,  both  of  which  I  have  often  refer'd
to,  it  does  not  feem  to  be  acknowledg'd  for  the  fame,  which  Valllfneri  had
faid  was  wont  to  be  fhown  in  this  theatre,  and  is  now  preferv'd  in  his  mufeum :
for  as  to  his  faying,  that  it  was  taken  from  a  Paduan,  inftead  of  a  Venetian
woman,  that  I  fuppofe  was  the  caufe  of  the  error,  v/hich  would  have  been
eafily  avoided,  if  Molinetti  had  been  read,  in  whofe  book  he  feems  not  to
know  that  it  is  defcrib'd ;  and  I  alfo  fay  that  Lanzonus  feems  to  have  been
ignorant  of  it,  as  he  would,  otherwlfe,  in  his  fcholium  to  that  obfervation  of
Moinlchenius,  have  been  lefs  furpriz'd  "  that  a  bodkin  of  bone  fhould
"  have  lain  buried  fo  long  in  the  bladder,  without  any  Injury  to  the  bladder
"  itfelf :  and  even  without  any  inconvenience  to  the  girl."

This  the  words  even  or  Moinlchenius,  and  much  more  thofe  of  Molinet-
ti, did  not  fuffer  him  to  fuppofe  -,  not  only  when  fpeaklng  of  what  fhe  fuf-
fer'd  in  the  extradion,  but  alfo  when  defcribing  what  fhe  endur'd,  both  be-
fore, and  afterwards.

Yet  if  the  bladder  of  this  girl  was  much  lefs  hurt  by  the  needle,  than  the
bladders  of  thofe  whom  I  have  written  of;  this  probably  happen'd  becaufe
the  point  of  the  needle  fluck  longer  in  the  urethra  than  in  the  bladder;  and
■was,  at  length,  pulh'd  out  of  this  pafiage,  by  the  weight  of  the  calculus  for-
cing downwards  from  above,  as  Molinetti  found  it.

22.  Thefe  calamities,  and  even  death  itfelf,  may  be  prevented,  by  the
perfon,  who,  being  timely  warn'd  of  the  cafe,  can  extraft  the  needle,  be-
fore the  accretion  of  any  calculous  matter ;  and  this  with  fuch  dexte-
rity, that  the  bladder,  as  far  as  it  is  pofiible  to  avoid  it,  may  not  be  injur'd.
And  this  has  been  done  with  fuccefs,  not  only  by  others  fpoken  of  in  the
works  of  Valllfneri  (e),  but  alfo  by  two  of  my  friends  in  particular,  whom  I
have  commended  to  you  already,  I  mean  Marlanus  and  Vulpius.

The  former  of  thefe  gentlemen  ;  as  he  told  me  in  a  letter- fent  to  me  in
the  beginning  of  December,  in  the  year  1720  ;  took  out  a  needle  from  the
bladder  of  a  country-girl,  who  already  made  bloody  urine,  after  having  in-
duftrloufly  brought  it  from  a  tranfverfe  to  a  diredl  pofition.  And  it  was  a
hair  bodkin  made  of  bone.

But that  which  I  faw  extradled  by  Vulpius,  from  a  certain  girl  of  this


{a)  C.  fupracit.  (d)  Med.  Chir.  22.

{h)  87.  in  hujus  epiil.  cent.  2.  (?)  Obf.  &  Adnotvfupra  ad  n.  zi.  cit..

If)  Vid.  cent.  i.  epift,  73  &  feq.


City,


502  Book  ni. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

city,  was  made  of  brals.  And  he  had  extrafted  it,  a  few  weeks  before  I  re-
ceiv'd  the  letter  from  Mariani,  with  the  ufe  of  no  other  inftrument,  than
a  very  fmooth  iron  wire  •,  one  extremity  of  which  he  had  fo  incurvated,  into
th.e  fliape  of  a  fmall  hook,  and  almoft  into  the  fliape  of  a  ring,  that  it  could
not  hurt  the  bladder,  and  yet  could  lay  hold  of  the  pin ;  and  would  not  fufFer
the  head  of  it  to  flip,  when  once  laid  hold  of.

However,  if  the  cafe  is  not  known  till  much  later,  and  a  calculus  is  already
gather'd  around  the  needle  -,  and  this  calculus  is  not  of  fuch  a  kind,  as  to  al-
low of  its  being  eafily  drawn  our,  through  the  urethra ;  it  will  be  neceffary,
before  the  woman  be  fubjefted  to  the  tortures  of  a  very  difficult  extraftion,
to  make  diligent  inquiry,  not  only  whether  the  bladder,  which  it  is  natural
to  all  to  fufpeiSt,  but  whether  the  ureters  alfo,  and  particularly  the  kidnies
themfelves  (which  fufpicion  arifes  from  our  diffedtions)  have  already  con-
trafted  fo  much  diforder,  that  if  even  the  needle  and  the  calculus  are  taken
av/ay,  the  woman  muft  die  neverthelefs.

And  the  conjedture  of  the  kidnies  being  diforder'd,  will  not  be  taken  fo
much  from  the  pains  of  the  loins,  (which  we  have  ken  may  be  abfent  (f)  ^
or,  as  it  probably  happen'd  in  the  girl  now  in  queftion  {g),  may  be  obfcur'd
by  the  much  more  cruel  tortures  of  the  bladder,  according  to  the  aphorifm  of
Hippocrates  (h),  as  from  the  fuppreffion  of  urine  in  the  bladder,  which  has
fomecimes  preceded,  continued  for  a  long  time,  and  been  more  than  once
repeated  :  or  from  the  very  frequent  retention  to  avoid  thofe  fevere  pains ;  or
from  too  fmall  a  difcharge ;  in  eftimating  which,  however,  we  muft  take
care,  left  we  are  at  any  time  deceiv'd  by  the  continual  dripping  of  urine  ;  call-
ing to  mind  that,  with  this  ftillicidium,  a  retention  thereof  may  be  join'd  i
and  that  in  a  very  great  quantity,  as  I  ftiall  fhow  when  I  fpeak  on  the  fubjedt
of  lamenefs  (z)  :  although  this  has,  already,  been  fufficiently  fliown,  even  by
-other  letters  (k).  And  indeed,  the  Sepulchretum  will  prefent  us  with  a
hiftory  (/j,  in  which  you  will  read  that  the  neck  of  the  bladder  was  found  fo
lax  from  paralyfis,  as  "  eafily  to  admit  the  finger  ;  for  which  reafon  the  urine
•"  came  away,  before  death,  without  the  patients  feeling  it :  yet  the  bladder,
"  though  almoft  twice  as  large  as  it  naturally  is,  was  entirely  fiU'd  neverthe-
*'  lefs."  And  how  much  the  retain'd  urine  had  inlarg'd  the  ureters,  you
have  learn'd  from  thofe  letters  ;  and  how  much  it  had,  alfo,  dilated  the  cavity
of  the  kidnies,  and  had  injur'd  the  fubftance  thereof:  or  in  one  of  them  ac
leaft.

23.  And  if  thefe  things  happen  from  a  part  of  the  urine  being  retain'd-,
how  much  more  will  they  happen  from  a  long,  and  repeated,  fuppreffion  of  the
Vv-hole  of  it,  within  the  bladder  ?  Or  from  a  frequent  retention  both  of  urine
and  of  pus  ?  At  leaft  you  have  many  examples  of  this  kind,  in  the  Sepul-
chretum, from  a  fuppreffion-,  among  which  are  thofe  of  Rumlerus  (m),  and
Ballonius  («)  •,  the  latter  of  whom  faw  a  very  inlarg'd  ttate  of  the  ureters  ;  and
the  former  thefe  canals  full  of  urine,  and  the  kidnies  of  ib  large  a  fize,  in  a
child,  as  they  could  fcarcely  have  had  in  an  adult.

f/J  Supra,  ji.  2.  Si  feq.  &  n.  13.  &feq.  (kj  Epift.  4.  n.  ig.  &  Epift.  39.  n.  33.

{g)  N.  20.  ('IJ  Sert.  hujus  3.  1.  27.  obf.  2.  §.  j.

(■/4  46.  feft.  2.  (m)  Seft.  24.  obf.  iz.  §.  6.

(0  Ejiift.  56.  n.  iz.  l>0  ibid.  §.  7.

And


Letter  XLII. ArticTe  23.  503

And  for  this  reafon  the  celebrated  Fantonus  (0),  with  juftice,  fuppos'd,
that,  where  more  urine  is  then  drawn  off  by  the  catheter,  than  the  bladder
feems  to  contain,  "  it  may  partly  flow  down  from  the  diftended  ureters  alfo,
and  fometimes  even  partly  from  the  inlarg'd  kidnies.

That  is  to  fay,:When  the  bladder  can  now  contain  no  more  ;  whatever  urine-
is  continually  fecreted  in  the  kidnies,  firft  diftends  the  ureters,  and  after  that
the  kidnies  themfelves  alfo.  Nor  did  this  efcape  Aretaeus  (p).  "  Where-
*'  the  urine  is  fupprefs'd,"  fays  he  (meaning  in  the  bladder)  "  the  fuperior
"  parts  alfo,  that  is  the  kidnies,  are  fill'd :  and  the  urinary  du£ts,  which  the
*'  Greeks  call  ureters,  are  diftended."  And  as  thefe  circumftances  happen,,
where  there  is  not  faid  to  have  been  any  calculus,  before,  in  the  bladder,,
and  where  there  is  none  at  prefent ;  as  may  be  read  in  the  examples  propos'd,
and  in  like  manner  in  that  which  is  related  by  the  authors  of  the  Commercium
Literarium  (q),  or  in  the  afls  of  the  Casfarean  Academy  (r),  or  in  the  J£^a
Helvetica  (s) ;  for  the  difcharge  of  the  urine,  from  the  bladder,  being  hin-^
der'd  by  the  abfcefs  thereof,  or  by  the  coarctation  of  the  paflage  through  the
proftate  ;  or  the  influx  into  the  bladder  being  prevented,  by  the  very  great-
diminution  of  its  capacity;  "  an  inlarg'd  ftate  of  the  kidnies,  and  of  the  ure-
"  ters,"  or,  at  leaft,  a  dilatation  of  them  fo  as  to  "  exceed  the  thicknefs
^  of  the  little  finger,  or  even  equal  that  of  the  largeft,"  immediately  occur'd
to  the  eye  •,  as  thefe  things,  therefore,  happen,  even  without  calculi ;  they
certainly  ought  not  to  have  been  imputed  only  to  the  obftrudtion  of  calculi
•in  the  ureters,  which  refifts  the  defcent  of  the  urine,  by  a  man  in  other  re-
fpe6ts  very  cxperienc'd :  nor  ought  it  to  have  been  argued,  from  the  circum-
ftance  of  a  certain  perfon  having  only  one  calculus  in  the  bladder  bur  both
his  ureters  dilated,  that  this  calculus  had  neceffarily  been  made  up  by  the
coalition  of  two  •,  one  of  which  had  been  obftruded  in  one  ureter,  and  the
other  in  the  other.

But  as  thofe  things,  that  I  have  mention'd,  happen  even  where  the  bladder
may  be  extended  to  a  very  great  capacity  ;  you,  without  doubt,  perceive,  how
much  more  eafily  they  mvift  of  courfe  happen,  if  the  bladder  is  either  con-
tradted  into  itfelf,  as  in  one  of  the  examples  refer'd  to,  or  has  its  cavity  oc-
cupied by  fome  foreign  body  internally,  and  leaves  but  little  fpace  for  the
urine  within  ;  and  fometimes  fcarcely  any  ;  whether  an  ifchuria,  or  a  ftran-
gury  only,  be  the  confequence.

Thus  you  have,  in  the  Sepulchretum  ("/),  an  obfervation  of  Silvius,  after
an  ifchuria,  of  the  ureters  "  frequently.,admitting  a  man's  thumb,  and  con-
taining "  urine  within  them,  quite  to  the  kidnies  themfelves ;"  as  he  fays^
not  in  the  fecond,  but  in  the  firft  book,  of  his  Praxis  Medica,  chapter  the
fifty-fixth :  and  you  have,  alfo,  that  v/hich  is  defcrib'd  as  communicated  ta
Riolanus  (?•<),  of  the  kidnies  being  "  larger  than  ufual,  by  one  half;  fill'd  and
"  turgid  with  ferum  :"  and  "  of  the  ureters  being  very  large,  andfo  diftend-
"■  ed  as  to  be  capable  of  admitting  the  little  finger,  with  eafe.

And  you  will  read  in  the  fame  place  {x),  that  Cattierus  found,  after  tlic


(0)  Differt.  Anat.  Renov.  7.  {sj  Tom.  i.

(/)  De  Cauf.  &  Sign.  Acut.  Morb.  1.  2.  c.  10.  (/)  -  Seft.  24.  cit.  obf.  6.  §.  S'.

(q)  A.  1738.  Hebd.  32.  n.  i.  (u)  Ibid.  obf.  16.

{/■) Tom.  I-  obf,  164.  {x)  Seft.  hac  25=.  obf.  8.  §.  7.


ftrangury.


504  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ftrangury,  "  the  kidnies  diftended,  and  turgid  with  urine  (from  which  parts
"  when  cut  into,  it  flow'd  out  copioufly)  and  the  ureters  very  wide  :"  and
thefewere  found  to  be  "  very  large"  by  Fantonus  (j),  whom  I  have  already-
quoted,  even  after  a  dyfuria,  from  a  caufe  of  the  fame  kind  ;  and  in  proportion
as  the  dyfuria,  like  that,  is  more  fevere,  it  generally  has  the  more  violent
ftrangury  join'd  therewith.

As  therefore,  in  the  two  girls,  whofe  bodies  were  examin'd  by  me,  there
had  been  a  very  fevere  dyfuria,  and  the  bladder  was  very  much  contracted,
and  almoft  wholly  occupied  with  the  calculus ;  it  is  not  furprizing  that  the
v-rine,  before  it  could  pafs  out  a  little  more  freely  from  thence,  through  a
paflage  made  by  the  needle,  fhould  ftagnate  in  fuch  a  quantity  in  the  ureters,
and  kidnies,  as  to  dilate,  and  even  to  vitiate  them  ■,  efpecially  when  mix'd
with  the  pus,  which  flow'd  from the  ulcerated  coats  of  the bladder.

For  Euftachius  (z),  although  he  affirm'd,  that  when  every  thing  was  in  a
natural  ftate,  "  nothing  could  go  out  from  the  bladder,  through  the  meatus
"  urinarii,"  neverthelefs  faid,  "  that  he  had  fometimes  obferv'd  the  contrary
"  to  happen  in  many  patients,  in  a  great  and  long  fupprefiion  of  urine."

For  the  orifices  of  the  ureters  being  very  much  mlarg'd  alfo,  together
with  the  ureters  themfelves,  where  they  open  into  the  bladder ;  no  part  of
them  now  remains  to  pafs  obliquely  betwixt  the  coats  of  the  bladder :  there-
fore, not  only  a  portion  of  the  urine  may  then  return  that  way  •,  but  even,
after  the  fuppreffion  begins  to  yield,  or  is  alread^,,rg(nov'd,  the  bladder,  when
contracting  itfelf  to  difcharge  the  urine,  forces  fo  much  the  more  of  that
fluid  upwards,  through  thofe  enlarg'd  orifices,  in  proportion  as  it  can  expel
the  lefs  downwards,  through  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  of  which  the  calculus
now  and  then  obftrufts  the  paflage.

But  if  it  happens  that  the  calculus  has  made  only  a  flight  obftrudtion
juft  before,  and  a  greater  quantity  of  urine  is,  for  that  reafon,  difcharg'd  thro'
the  urethra,  fo  that  but  a  fmall  quantity  now  remains  in  the  dilated  ureters  ;
you  certainly  conceive,  that,  if  the  calculus  again  oppofe  itfelf  to  the  urethra,
foon  after,  the  .urine,  and  therewith  pus,  if  it  happen  to  be  in  the  bladder,
may  eafily  be  driven  up  through  the  ureters  quite  to  the  kidnies ;  efpecially
if  the  patient  lies  down  while  attempting  to  make  water.

24.  And  thefe  circumftances  are,  as  you  fee,  equally  common  to  males,
as  to  females ;  and  may,  at  length,  be  expedted  from  thefe  fl:ones  alfo,  which
do  not  form  themfelves  by  accretion  round  a  needle,  in  the  bladder;  as
befides  that  hiflrory,  of  a  young  man,  which  I  defcrib'd  above  (*),  a  great
number  of  others,  fome  of  which  I  choofe  to  take  notice  of  here  that  you
may  add  them  to  the  Sepulchretum,  demonflrrate.

Henricus  Henrici,  in  his  dilfertation  de  Abfcejfu  Mefenterii{a),  fpeaks  of
a  girl  of  five  years  of  age,  whofe  ureter,  by  reafon  of  the  urine  flowing  back
into  it,  on  account  of  a  calculus  of  the  bladder,  "  refembled  an  inteftine-,"
and  the  kidney  on  that  fide  was  three  times  the  fize  of  the  other.

In  the  A£la  Eruditorum  Lipfienfia  {b),  an  obfervation  is  extant,  made  by


{y)  DeObferv.  Med.  &  Anat.  epift.  8.  n. (*)  N.  15.

15.  (a) §.  5.

fzj  Traa.  de  Renib.  c.  ultimo.  {i)  A.  1685.  M.  Mart,


Grocnvelt


Letter  XLII. Article  24.  505

Groenvelt  on  a  calculous  girl,  whofe  ureters  refembled  one  of  the  fmall  in-
teftines,  by  their  capacity  being  enlarg'd.  And  Mauchartus  (c)  faw  the  fame
canals  (in  an  old  man  who  had  often  been  afflifted  with  a  ftrangury,  from
a  calculus  of  the  bladder)  "  inflated  like  the  inteftinum  ileum,"  from  urine
like  butter-milk,  which  they  contain'd  ;  at  the  fame  time  that  the  kidnies
were  very  large  and  unequal,  and  had  their  pelves  diftended  to  the  magni-
tude of  an  egg.

Laubius  (d)  not  only  faw  the  ureters  very  much  dilated,  together  with  the
pelves,  from  the  fame  difeafe,  join'd  with  the  fame  fymptom,  but  alfo  with
the  kidnies  difeas'd  ;  the  one  labouring  under  an  atrophy,  and  the  other  be-
ing large,  and  ulcerous.  After  the  fame  difordcrs,  Lofpichlerus  (e)  found
the  ureters,  in  a  merchant,  fo  diftended  with  the  ftagnating  urine,  as  eafily  to  .
admit  "  the  entrance  of  a  pretty  large  thumb :"  and  Brunnerus  (f)  relates,
that,  in  a  man  of  princely  dignity,  they  were  lefs  turgid  •,  but  that,  the
back  part  of  the  kidnies  being  cut  into,  "  the  urine  had  rufli'd  forth  in  a  full
"  ftream."

You  will  perhaps  fay,  that  the  diforders,  which  are  fpoken  of,  in  the  kid-
nies, and  ureters,  of  thofe  who  are  afflidted  with  a  calculus  of  the  bladder,
ought  not  to  be  imputed  to  this  calculus,  when  it  is  already  in  the  bladder,
but  when  it  ftuck  in  the  kidnies,  or  the  ureters ;  and  that  Butzmann  had
judg'd  in  this  manner  (g),  when,  in  a  child,  who  had  been  long  tortur'd  with
the  diforders  we  fpeak  of,  he  found  a  facculus  full  of  pus,  inftead  of  the
kidney.

And  you  will  likewife  fay,  perhaps,||tat  it  feem'd  to  Rudolphus  Jac.  Ca-
Tnerarius  {h),  in  a  little  boy,  who  was^i^fted  in  the  fame  way,  that  the  caufe
of  a  purulent  kidney,  and  of  a  dilated,  and  eroded  ureter,  fhould  be  ac-
counted for  in  the  fame  manner.

And  indeed,  that  two  obfervations  of  Cofchwitz  (;),  and  one  of  Schul-
zius  (k),  are  extant,  in  none  of  which  mention  is  made  of  a  calculus  in  the
bladder  ;  but  in  all  of  calculous  pains  :  in  the  two  firft,  it  is  alfo  faid  that  the
kidnies  were  purulent,  and  that  the  ureters  had  been  furprizingly  dilated  :
in  the  third,  it  is  not  only  faid  that  they  were  dilated,  but  they  are  even
defcrib'd,  as  "  writh'd  into  feveral  folds,"  almoft  like  the  fmall  inteftines,
as  in  the  ftable-keeper  (I)  \  fo  great  an  effeft  had  the  urine  produc'd,  as  even
to  enlarge  the  ureters  longitudinally.

Yet  that  the  urine  had  not  flow'd  back  upwards,  from  the  bladder,  was
demonftrated  by  the  orifices  of  the  ureters:  as  both  of  them  in  this  third  ob-
fervation,  and  one  of  them  in  the  firft,  were  fhut  up  by  angular  ftones  ftick-
ing  therein,  or  fmall  teftaceous  concretions,  as  it  were,  bringing  on  a  fpafmodic
conftridlion  by  their  (harp  points.

I,  however,  have  never  denied  but  that  the  kidnies  may,  fometimes,  and,
if  you  pleafe,  often,  be  vitiated,  and  the  ureters  diftended,  in  that  other
manner  alfo. And  I  even  fay,  that  if  this  has  preceded,  and  the  calculi  then

(c)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  8.  obf.  15.  {h)  Specim. Experim.  circa  General,  f.  2.  c.

{d)  Ibid.  obf.  22.  3.  hill.  3.

(1?)  Cent.  1.  obf.  58.  (i)  Diflert.  de  Valvul.  in  ureterib.  §.  5  &  7.

{/)  Cent.  9.  obf.  2.  {i)  Differt.  deVaff.  umbilical.  ^6.

(_§)  Dec.  3.  a.  7  &  8.  obf.  27.  (/)  Epift.  4.  a.  19,

Vol.  II.  T  t  t  at


5o6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

at  length  falling  into  the  bladder,  and  obftruding,  or  pricking  it,  the  fe-
cond  (hall  of  courfe  fucceed  ;  the  diforder  of  the  kidnies,  and  of  the  ureters,
will  be  lb  much  the  more  increas'dby  the  regurgitation  of  the  purulent  urine,
in  proportion  as  they  have  been  more  afFefted  or  weaken'd  by  the  firft  mode
of  diieafe.

You  plainly  fee  then,  what  a  prudent  lithotomift  ought  to  attend  to,  when
fentfor  to  extrad  a  calculus,  from  a  patient  who  has  fuffer'd  many  and  grie-
vous diforders  therefrom  ;  and  how  cautious  he  ought  to  be  of  undertaking
the  operation  :  or  if  he  is,  at  any  time,  compell'd,  by  the  impatience  of  the
patient,  to  perform  the  extraftion,  at  leaft  what  he  ought  to  predift,  in  re-
gard to  the  danger  and  diforder  which  may  remain  even  after  the  fuccefsful
cxcraftion  of  the  ftone.

"  If  ulcers  of  the  kidnies,"  fays  Aretsus  (»?),  "  are  brought  on  by  cal-
*'  culi,  incurable  diforders  arife  therefrom :  and  a  fpeedy  coUiquation,  and
*'  death,  come  on  :"  in  which  opinion  he  was  preceded  by  Hippocrates  ()i),
who  even  pronounc'd  in  general,  of  fuppurated  kidnies,  "  that  this  difeafe
"  was  very  violent ;  and  that  many  were,  thereby,  brought  to  a  tabes  rena-
*'  lis  :"  and  if  the  patient  is  much  advanc'd  in  age,  not  only  (o)  "  that  dif-
*'  orders  of  the  kidnies,  and  bladder,  are  with  difficulty  cur'd,"  but  alfo  (p),
"  that  he  had  not  feen  diforders  of  the  kidnies  cur'd  when  the  patient  was
*'  above  fifty  years  of  age."

I  am  not  ignorant,  indeed,  how  much  is  to  be  attributed  to  fortune  in  thefe
thino-s,  as  well  as  in  moft  others  :  for  I  remember  that  the  cure  of  a  Venetian
nobleman,  of  more  than  fixty  years jg^  age,  which  had  been  defpair'd  of  by
Alghifi,  for  more  than  one  reafon,  Sr thefe  not  flight  neither;  was  foon  af-
ter undertaken,  and  very  happily  perform'd,  by  that  friar  Jaques  Beaulieu,  as
I  formerly  declar'd  at  large,  by  letter,  to  the  celebrated  Morand,  who  re-
quefted  it  of  me  :  and  I  have  read  of  another  cure  in  the  Sepulchretum  (q),
which  was  more  hazardous  in  the  beginning,  but  had  not  an  unfuccefsful
event.

And  in  the  Sepulchretum  (r)  is  alfo  extant  the  hiftory  of  a  princefs,  who  ;
having  been  before  tortur'd  with  very  violent  pains  of  the  loins,  together
with  a  difcharge  of  blood,  and  pus,  in  the  urine ;  and  being  afterwards  freed
from  them,  and  at  length  carried  off  by  another  difeafe ;  had  a  fmall  calculus
in  the  kidney  "  around  which  a  beautiful  cicatrix,  found,  and  clean,  and  of  the
"  length  of  half  an  inch,"  had  been  form'd.

And  indeed,  read  over  the  obfervation  of  Brunnerus,  which  I  juft  now
quoted,  on  the  prince.  You  will  not  only  perceive,  that  the  fame  palliative
method  of  cure,  which  I  faid  above  (.f)  Valfalva  had  been  wont  to  recur  to,
had  been  of  fo  much  advantage  to  this  princely  patient,  that  Brunnerus  has
iuftly  faid,  which  1  wifh  lithotomifts  would  remember  in  hazardous  cafes,
"  therefore  lithotomy  will  not  always  be  abfolutely  necefiary  in  the  calculus
"  of  the  bladder ;"  but  moreover,  "  what  almoft  exceeds  belief,  that  the
"  diffefter  had  found  cicatrices  in  the  bladder,"  of  the  ulcers  which  the  cal-


(mj  Design.  &  Cauf.  Diuturn.  Morb.  1.  2.  (/>)  DeMorb.  Popular.  I.  6.  feft.  7.

c.  3.  in  fin.  Cq)  Seft.  fuper  23.  obf.  4.  §,  13.

(«)  De  Intern.  A.<ie<a;.  n.  16.  ('•)  Sefl.  22.  obf.  26.  §.  8.

(oj  Sea.  6.  aph.  6.  (0  N.  16.

4


cuius.


Letter  XLII. Article  25, 26.  507

cuius,  and  a  contrary  method  of  treatment,  had  before  produc'd :  although
the  patient  was  more  than  fixty  years  of  age.

But,  without  doubt,  it  is  a  very  different  thing  to  confider  what  rarely  hap-
pens, and  what  happens  the  moft  frequently :  and,  to  return  to  the  cafes  of  the
girls  we  were  fpeaking  of,  it  is^one  thing  to  be  fent  for  in  time,  and  another
when  the  difeafe  is  very  far  advanc'd  :  this  will  appear  from  an  obfervation  that
was  written  to  me,  in  the  fame  letter,  which  I  mention'd  above  (/) ;  that  is  by
the  very  experienc'd  phyfician  Laurence  Mariani.

25.  A  young  country-girl,  having  had  a  bone  bodkin,  which  fhe  us'd  for  her
hair,  drawn  into  the  bladdef,  in  the  fame  manner  as  in  thofe  already  fpoken
of;  although  it  created  pains,  and  many  uneafinefles,  they  did  not,  neverthe-
lefs,  extort  a  confeffion  of  the  fadt,  before  that  a  calculus,  having  form'd  it-
felf  around  the  needle,  Ihe  was  affedted  with  intolerable  tortures.

Then,  at  length,  the  fituation  thereof  being  examin'd,  the  point  of  the
needle  was  found  to  be  prominent  within  the  cavity  of  the  vagina ;  the  ure?
thra  being  perforated  near  to  the  lower  part  of  that  cavity.

Itfeem'd  to  Mariani,  that,  if  the  urethra  were  cut  into  a  little,  in  a  longi-
tudinal direftion,  this  point  might  be  drawn  into  the  urethra ;  and,  by  this
means,  the  needle  and  the  calculus  being  plac'd  in  a  direct  fituation,  it  might
be  tried  whether  by  fcaling  away  this  calculus,  which  was,  perhaps,  of  a  fra-
gile nature,  gradually  and  dexteroufly,  it  were  polTible  to  reduce  it  to  fuch  a
ilate  of  thinnefs,  as  to  fuffer  it  to  be  taken  away  with  the  needle.

But  as  others  were  of  a  contrary  opinion,  it  happen'd  that  nothing  at  all
•was  attempted  ;  but  that  the  girl  was  deferted,  and  given  up  to  her  miferable
lot.  In  procefs  of  time  the  calculus,  and  the  pain  alfo,  were  increas'd  ;  and
the  whole  orifice  of  the  bladder  being  now  almofl:  fl:op'd  up,  but  a  fmall  quan-
tity of  urine,  and  that  very  ill-fmelling,  was  difcharg'd.  And  a  fever  alfo
coming,  on  an  end  was,  at  length,  put  to  her  miferable  life.

The  belly  being  open'd,  pus  was  feen  in  the  pelvis  thereof,  and  was  fup-
pos'd  to  have  been  pour'd  out  from  the  kidnies,  which  were  fuppurated.  In
the  bladder,  which  was  corrupted  with  a  fphacelus,  was  a  calculus  of  the  fi-
gure of  a  pear ;  for  the  more  it  defcended  from  the  head,  and  the  upper  pare
of  the  needle,  the  more  was  it  extenuated.

When  it  was  taken  away  from  the  bladder,  to  which  it  adher'd  in  fome  part,
it  left  fcales  agglutinated  to  that  part :  and  yet  when  put  in  the  fcale,  toge-
ther with  the  needle,  was  then  equal  to  eighteen  drachms  -,  but  afterwards,
when  this  account  was  fent  to  me,  it  weigh'd  no  more  than  fourteen.

26.  The  perfon  who,  as  I  have  faid  above  (k),  had  fuccefsfully  extracted
the  needle  from  another  girl,  before  a  (lone  had  been  form'd  upon  it,  did
not  defpair  but  this  alfo  might  be  taken  out;  even  when  the  calculus  was
begun,  and  increas'd  to  a  confiderable  fize ;  if,  the  point  of  the  needle  be-
ing reduc'd  into  the  urethra,  and  held  fall  with  a  forceps,  he  endeavour'd,
previoufly,  to  extenuate  the  calculus,  if  it  were  poffible,  before  he  drew  it
out ;  in  imitation  of  Benivenius  (x),  who  diminifli'd  it  in  the  urethra  of  a  vir-
gin, in  fome  meafure,  previoufly  to  its  extradtion  ;  or  if  this  did  not  fucceed

CO  N.  22.  (.v)  De  Abditis  Moibor.  Caiifis  c.  So.

{'t)  N.  eod.  22.

T  t  t  2  accord'


568  Book  III. Of  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

according  to  his  wifh,  then  to  imitate  Molinetti  (jy),  who  had  taken  care  to
have  it  extrafted  by  force,  at  all  events ;  and  it  is  probable  that  fomething
might  even  then  have  been  of  fervice.

But  after  the  calculus  had  been  fo  much  augmented  in  its  fize,  and  with  this
every  diforder  had  increas'd,  who  is  there  that  could  hope  for  any  advantage  ?
And  if  the  calculus  had  been  fo  much  thinner,  and  the  paflage,  through
which  the  cavity  of  the  urethra,  communicated  with  the  cavity  of  the  vagina,
had  been  fo  much  larger,  as  they  muft  both  of  them  have  been  in  a  cafe  or
this  kind,  which,  being  fent  from  Italy,  you  read  of  in  the  hiftory  of  the
Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (z),  perhaps  this  alfo  would  have  fallen
out  into  the  vagina,  in  the  fame  manner  as  that  did.

But  I  fliould  believe,  even  in  that  cafe  alfo,  that  the  paflage  had  been
from  the  upper  part  of  the  urethra,  rather  than  from  the  bladder,  into  the
vagina;  fince  we  read  that  an  afflux  of  urine,  through  the  vagina,  did  not
fucceed,  but  only  an  incontinence  of  urine.

For  whether  the  needle  is  not  wholly  fnatch'd  away  from  the  fingers,  into
the  bladder,  in  many  perfons,  as  I  conjedtur'd  above  (a) ;  or,  if  you  pleafe,
whether,  after  it  is  wholly  carried  into  the  bladder,  it  is  again  pufh'd  back  into
the  urethra,  by  the  contraftion  of  the  bladder  ;  although  the  former  of  thefa
fuppofitions  feems  to  me  the  more  probable,  fince  the  point  that  was  held  in
the  fingers,  and  not  the  head,  or,  at  leaft,  in  the  examples  of  Molinetti,  and
Mariani,  and  in  as  many  that  I  fhall  immediately  produce,  was  certainly
turn'd  towards  the  urethra ;  nothing  can  more  eafily  happen,  than  that,  the
head  being  pufh'd  forwards,  by  the  pofterior  part  of  the  bladder,  in  confe^
quence  of  the  annex'd  vagina,  then  libidinoufly  turgid,  being,  in  like  manner,
forc'd  forwards,  the  point  of  the  crooked  needle  is  driven  backwards ;  and
by  this  means  fixes  itfelf  into  the  pofterior  part  of  the  urethra,  efpecially  if
it  be  very  fharp  :  and  at  length,  being  driven  by  the  frequent  contraflions  of
the  bladder,  perforates  that  part.

And  as  this  happen'd  in  a  young  country-girl,  who  applied  to  oar  fur-
geons  at  the  time  of  my  writing  this  letter,  fo  it  would  alfo  have  happen'd  in
a  young  virgin  of  fourteen  years  of  age,  the  cafe  of  whom  was  related  to  me
by  a  furgeon,  whofe  preceptor  in  anatomy  I  had  been  -,  not  long  after  the
death  of  the  other,  whofe  diffedtion  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  {b).

This  girl  was  in  a  fitting  pofture  when  flie  did  the  fame  thing  as  the  other,
and  had  thruft  the  head  of  the  bodkin,  which  was  almoft  as  thick  as  the  ure-
thra itfelf,  very  high  into  this  meatus;  and  being  terrified  by  the  fudden  ap-
pearance of  her  mother,  at  once  let  go  the  bodkin,  and  found  it  drawn  up
very  high,  at  the  fame  time.

Almoft  four  days  fhe  bore  the  pains  and  uneafinefles  in  filence ;  on  the
fifth  fhe  told  her  mother  the  affair,  and  her  mother  told  it  to  the  furgeon,  of
whom  I  have  fpoken.  Who  fuppofing,  from  the  feat  of  the  pricking,  of
which  the  patient  chiefly  complain'd,  that  the  lower  part  of  the  needle  ftucic
fix'd  about  the  middle  of  the  urethra ;  and  fearing  left,  if  any  inftrument  were
introduc'd  into  the  urethra,  to  extrad  this  inherent  body,  it  fhould  be  entirely

(j;)  C.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  21..  (a)  N. 21.  -

(z)  A.  1735.  obf.  anat.  1.0.  {b)  N.  20.

^  ■  pufh'd


Letter  XLII. Article  27,  509

puih'd  on  into  the  bladder;  he  with  the  confent,  and  even  at  the  requeft^
both  of 'the  mother  and  daughter,  introduc'd  firil  one  finger,  and  then  an-
other, into  the  vagina,  and  by  this  means  fo  far  mov'd  the  needle  downwards,
with  no  lefs  induftry  than  fuccefs,  that  the  point  began  to  appear  at  the  orifice
of  the  urethra,  and  could  be  laid  hold  of  with  the  forceps.

Thus,  with  the  lofs  of  two  drops  of  blood  only,  and  without  any  inconve-
nience remaining  behind,  the  needle,  which  he  brought  to  me,  was  taken
out.  This  needle,  or  bodkin,  was,  or,  at  leaft,  feem'd  to  be,  of  tin,  and
was  of  that  kind  which  women  ufe  for  their  hair,  being  four  inches  long,  and
having  a  very  Iharp  point :  and  the  furgeon  had  obferv'd  that  a  little  tarta-
rous  matter  had  already  begun  to  adhere  to  it,  in  feveral  places ;  which  mat-^
ter  was,  afterwards,  very  improperly  rub'd  off.

27. 1  would  not  have  you  be  chagrin'd  to  find  that  what  has  been  aflerted  by
fome  perfons,  feems  to  be  confirm'd  by  the  number  of  examples  I  have  add-
ed ;  I  mean  that  the  women,  to  whom  thefe  things  happen,  "  are  the
"  greateft  part  of  them  Italians."  I  could  wifh  all  otir  country-women  knev/^
how  many  of  their  fex  have  been  untimely  carried  off,  by  the  moft  excruciat-
ing tortures  from  this  caufe.

But  how  can  country-girls,  or  girls  of  the  lower  clafs,  and  fuch  as  even
their  tender  years  render  unexpericnc'd,  be  acquainted  with  thefe  things  ?
Yet  fuch  inftances  ought  not  to  be  pafs'd  over  in  filence,  that  phyficians,  be-
ing admonilh'd  by  the  frequency  of  them,  may,  if  any  girl  begin  to  com-
plain of  a  difficulty  of  making  water,  inquire  very  narrowly  into  every  cir-
cumftance  ;  and,  by  a  cautious  dexterity,  force  out  the  truth,  while  it  is  as
yet  poffible  to  adminifter  relief.

However,  neither  thefe  inftances  are  common  to  all  parts  of  Italy,  (or,  at
leaft,  not  to  fome  of  them,  where  I  have  been  for  a  confiderable  time)  nor
are  all  foreign  countries  free  therefrom ;  which  examples  it  is  by  no  means
neceflary  for  me  to  take  notice  of  here,  with  an  odious  diligence  :  fome  of
them  you  will  learn,  if  you  afk  me  how,  from  reading  Vallifneri  (c),  others
from  Flatner  (d)  ;  and,  finally,  fome  you  will  meet  with  in  the  reading  of
other  authors.

Nor  do  I  doubt  but  more  examples  v/ould  be  extant,  if  as  many  bodies  v^^ere
difledted  in  every  other  place  as  there  are  in  Italy  ;  or  if  ftiame  did  not  oblige
moft  women  to  conceal  the  true  caufe  of  their  difeafe.  For  others ;  as  even
among  the  women  of  this  region  a  country-girl  was  about  to  do  (e)  -,  and  as
fome,  according  to  Alghifi  (f),  and  Vallifneri  (g),  have  done ;  conceal  the
whole  affair  with  the  moft  obftinate  filence :  it  therefore  happens,,  that  the
needle,  of  which  no  body  has  any  fufpicion,  is  buried  together  with. them.

And  fome  girls  pretend  to  have  fwallow'd  it ;  in  order  that  phyficians,  not-
withftanding  they  find  it  either  in  the  living,  or  the  dead  body,  may  ba
deceiv'd  by  fuch  an  affertion.

There  was  a  time  when  fuch  deceptions  took  place  even  in  Italy  ;  as  bjs
that  Venetian  virgin  fpoken  of  by  Alexander  Benedidtus  (h),  about  the  lat^

('fy'  Obf.  fupra  ad  n.  19.  cit.  (^^  Litotom.  c.  3.

Cc/J  Dif.  de  Calc.  ad  Vefic.  adh»r,  §.  10. \g)  Adnot.  ad  cit.  obf,
aot.  &p.  \h)  Hill.  Corp.  Hum.  1.  2.  c.  o,

U),  N.  zo*


5IO Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ter  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  who  had  a  large  calculus  form'd  upon  a  very-
long  bodkin,  fuchas  women  ufein  their  hair  :  fornotwithllanding  this  author
has  rejefted  the  opinions  of  thofe  (i),  who  fuppos'd  the  needle  to  have  pafs'd
through  the  veins,  from  the  ftomach  to  the  liver,  from  thence  to  the  heart,
and  from  this  vifcus  to  the  kidnies,  and  fo  on  to  the  bladder  •,  yet  he  himfelf
thought,  "  that  by  its  point,  it  had,  gradually,  and  in  a  long  courfe  of  time,
"  penetrated  through  the  inteftines,  and  made  a  paflage  for  itfelf  to  the  blad-
*'  der :"  although  he  is  much  to  be  commended  for  having  difcarded  the  opinion,
which,  to  my  great  aftonifhment,  was  embrac'd  by  others,  even  a  longtime
after,  and  is  not  eafily  to  be  imitated  in  propofing  another,  which  had  a  much
greater  num.ber  of  followers.

Nor  is  the  queftion,  here,  of  any  {lender  needle,  but  of  thick  ones  ;  and
very  often  of  thofe  which  have  a  large  head  at  one  extremity,  and,  at  the
other,  not  a  very  (harp  point ;  and  always  (I  mean  in  thofe  fhame-fac'd  vir-
gins, who  fay  that  they  had  been  fwallow'd  by  them)  purpofely,  as  it  were,
going  to  the  bladder ;  and  not  attended  with  thofe  previous,  and  conco-
mitant fymptoms,  and  pains,  which  a  circumftance  and  pafiage  of  this  kind
requir'd.

Wherefore  this  kind  of  credulity  is  now  more  rare  j  or,  at  leaft,  among
the  more  learn'd  Italians  -,  the  retention  of  which,  in  fome  other  countries,  I
fee  pretty  clear  marks  of,  even  in  fome  excellent  books.  It  remain'd  to  take
notice  not  only  of  the  needle,  but  of  the  cafe  wherein  they  are  kept,  havino-
pafs'd  tli£  fame  way  ;  fince  that  excellent  man,  Benevoli,  fays,  that  he  had  ex-
tradred  one  from^the  bladder  of  a  Tufcan  girl  (k).

Here  again,  you  will  perhaps  be  difpleas'd,  that  a  vice  almoft  incredible
fhould  be  imputed  to  an  Italian  girl.  But  read,  I  beg  of  you,  the  annotations
that  are  made  to  article  one  thoufand  three  hundred  and  fifty-nine  (/)  of
Platner's  Inftitutiones  Chirurgue,  and  you  will  fee  whether  {he  was  the  firft  that
shad  attempted  this  thing.

Yet  if  they  had  made  ufe  of  that  way  of  Alexander  Benedift,  to  explain  the
palTage  of  any  needle,  not  into  the  female  bladder;  into  which  a  very  fhorr,
and  quick  opening,  lies  from  without ;  but  into  the  male  bladder,  the  palTage
into  which  is  much  longer,  and  more  winding ;  I  fhould  more  readily,  as  I
have  faid  in  a  former  work  (m)y  and  particularly  in  fome  cafes,  fall  in  with
their  opinion.

And  I  wilh  it  was  in  my  power  to  falHn  with  their  opinion  in  this  cafe  that
I  fhall  immediately  defcribe  to  you  :  I  fhould  then  have  complain'd  lefs  at  that
.time,  and  even  now,  that,  in  proportion  as  a  thing  is  more  certain,  it  is  fo
much  the  more  difficult  to  be  conceiv'd  of.

28.  A  country-man,  of  forty  years  of  age,  had  labour'd,  for  a  long  time,
under  a  very  great  difficulty  of  making  water:  nor  on  this  account  only,  did
he  come  into  this  hofpital,  a  month  before  he  died,  but  on  account  of  an  ul-
ceration of  the  icrotum,  and  a  fever  likewife.  To  his  fever  was  firft  added  a
diarrhea,  and  after  that  a  coftivenefs :  and  a  greater  wa{ling  of  {ie{h  came  on
£very  day ;  which  being  carried  to  its  greatefl  po{fible  extent,  and  his  face


<;)  L.  5.  c.  13.  (/)  Not.  h.

{k)  Ollerv,  42.  "" (raj  Adverf.  3.  animad.  ^6.


being


Letter  XLII. Article  28.  ^n

being  become  cachectic,  he  was,  at  length,  taken  off  by  the  old  pains  in  his
bladder.

"When  he  was  very  near  death,  he  feem'd  to  be  defirous  of  what  few  men
of  his  condition  in  life  are ;  I  mean  that  the  caufe  of  this  very  long,  and  trou-
blefome  dyfuria,  fhould  be  inquir'd  into  by  diffedtion.  He  therefore  call'd
the  furgeon  to  him,  and  told  him  that,  two  years  before,  he  had  introduc'd  a
hair-bodkin  made  of  brafs,  into  the  urethra ;  but  whether  it  had  fallen  out,
or  ftill  remain'd  there,  he  fcarcely  then  knew,  and  was  ignorant  even  to  the
prefent  moment.

But  in  what  manner,  and  for  what  purpofe,  he  had  introduc'd  it,  he  did
not  fay,  nor  did  the  furgeon  inquire ;  as  the  man  was  now  dying,  and  had
declar'd  even  thus  far,  with  fome  degree  of  ihame.  The  furgeon  having
made  this  relation  to  me,  and  I  being  at  that  time  accidentally  engag'd  ia
demonflrating  fome  things,  in  the  hofpital ;  both  natural  and  preternatural  j.
I  immediately  order'd  the  carcafe  to  be  brought,  in  order  to  add  this  inquiry,
which  I  fuppos'd  to  be  fhort,  to  the  others.

And  as  1  fuppos'd  that  the  needle  had  ftuck  at  the  flexure  of  the  urethra  ^
or  if  it  had  accidentally  fallen  out,  that  it  muft,  at  leaft,  have  left  fome  great
marks  of  injury  there ;  I  thought  proper  that  the  urethra  fhould  firft  of  all  be
laid  open,  longitudinally,  to  that  part.

The  fcrotum  therefore,  which  was  ftill  ulcerated  from  the  dripping  of  the
urine,  as  I  fuppofe,  being  cut  into,  the  teftes  feem'd  to  be  larger  than  they
naturally  are,  and  quite  tumid  ;  but  it  eafily  appear'd  that  this  was  owing  ta
the  coats  being  become  very  thick  and  white :  and  not  to  their  proper  fub-
ftance  being  diftended.  For  this,  notwithftanding  the  tunica  vaginalis  ad-
her'd,  in  feveral  places,  to  the  tunica  albuginea,  was  pretty  found ;  except
where  it  is  connefted  with  the  inferior  globe  of  the  epididymis :  for  thefe
parts  were  purulent,  and  blackifh  in  their  colour.

The  urethra  being  then  open'd  ;  from  its  external  orifice,  through  the
whole  inferior  furface  of  the  penis,  and  the  perinseum;  I  found  the  internal
furface  of  this  meatus  to  be  neither  ulcerated,  nor  cicatriz'd,  nor  red  :  and  I
even  found  it  to  be  every  where  whitifli  and  fmooth;  but  become  pretty  much-
thicken'd.

Thus  when  I  perceiv'd  that  I  muft  carry  on  my  refearches  ftill  farther,  I
immediately  order'd  all  the  other  parts,  that  belong  to  the  urinary  fecretion
and  excretion,  to  be  taken  out.  The  bladder  was  without  urine,  and  con-
tradted  into  itfelf,  but  of  an  irregular  figure.  For  at  the  upper  and  right
fide,  it  grew  out  into  a  kind  of  fmall  bag,  of  a  fquare  figure,  that  was  already
blackifti  in  its  colour,

"What  this  fac  was,  asd  what  it  contain'd,  appear'd  plainly  to  all ;  after  firft
cutting  into  the  upper  part  of  the  urethra,  which  ftill  remain'd  to  be  exa-
min'd  on  the  anterior  furface,  and  after  that  the  bladder  itfelf.  And  in  this
part  of  the  urethra,  quite  to  the  whole  feminal  caruncle ;  which  was  ftrigofe
and  flirivel'd,  yet  furnifn'd  with  a  finus  according  to  its  natural  ftate ;  we
found  no  more  traces  of  diforder,  than  in  the  other  part  of  the  urethra,  that
we  had  before  diffedted.

But  immediately  above  the  caruncle,  the  whole  internal  furface,  not  only
of  the  proftate  gland,  but  of  the  bladder  alfo,  was  found  to  be  ulcerated ;

and


512  Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

and  cover'd  over  with  a  kind  of  whitifh  efchar,  as  it  were,  or  cruft.  And  the
coats  of  the  bladder,  as  was  obferv'd  by  cutting  into  them,  had  become
thick  •,  being  partly  livid,  and  black,  partly  white,  and  almoft  fcirrhous.  Nor
did  the  lac,  of  which  I  have  fpoken,  put  on  any  different  appearance :  for  it
not  only  communicated  with  the  bladder,  by  an  orifice  of  equal  extent  with
itfelf,  but  was  even  made  by  a  produftion  of  all  the  coats  of  this  refervoir.

Within  this  bag  was  a  calculus,  of  the  bignefs  of  a  middle-fiz'd,  or  ra-
ther of  a  fmall  walnut  -,  being  fomewhat  like  this  nut  even  in  its  figure,
and  fmear'd  over  with  a  humour  that  refembled  the  white  of  an  egg,
but  not  in  great  quantity  :  from  the  fide  of  this  calculus,  pretty  near  to  one
extremity,  came  out  that  needle,  and  was  prominent  to  the  extent  of  two
fingers  breadths  -,  the  remaining  part  of  it,  which  belong'd  to  the  head,  be-
ing buried  deeply,  or,  at  leaft,  very  firmly,  within  the  calculus ;  fo  that  it
might  feem  to  be  equal  to,  or  even  perhaps  to  exceed,  another  finger's
breadth.

But  the  other  part,  which  belong'd  to  the  point,  that  was  very  fharp,  and  was
itfelf  perfeftly  ftrait  -,  in  confequence  of  its  being  a  part  of  one  of  thofe  needles,
which  is  pretty  ftrong,  and  not  thin  ;  only  pafs'd  obliquely  downwards  be-
yond the  orifice  of  the  fac,  fo  as  to  fix  its  point  into  the  lower,  and  left  fide,
of  the  contrafted  bladder  ;  from  whence  it  was  drawn  out  with  great  eafe.

What  weight  the  calculus  was  then  of,  I  did  not  inquire :  but,  on  inquir-
ing, feven  years  after  it  had  been  found,  it  exceeded,  together  with  the
needle,  two  drachms  and  as  many  fcruples,  by  ten  grains ;  or,  if  you  pleafe,
according  to  the  ufe  of  medical  weights  here,  by  half  a  fcruple.  In  the  place
where  I  kept  it,  was  a  yellowifh  powder  depofited  •,  for  it  is  of  a  furface  not
fmooth,  and,  for  the  moft  part,  inclining  to  that  colour.

In  the  bladder,  however,  the  orifices  of  the  ureters  were  much  larger  than
they  generally  are :  the  ureters  were  very  wide,  and  diftended  with  pus  to
fuch  a  degree,  as,  in  fome  places,  to  equal  the  thicknefs  of  a  man's  thumb.
The  kidnies  alfo  were  turgid,  and  much  enlarg'd  beyond  their  natural  fize  :
being  externally  pallid  ;  but  internally  femiputrid,  and  abounding  with  a  ci-
neritious  pus.  To  examine  the  other-  parts  of  this  body  I  thought  unnecef-
fary  ;  and  indeed  had  not  leifure  to  do  it.

29.  This  rare,  and  if  you  weigh  all  the  circumftances  properly,  this  perhaps
fino-ularobfervation,!  made  on  the  twenty-ninth  of  December,  in  the  year  1742,
before  a  very  crouded  circle  of  ftudents  and  dodors  ;  and  thefummary  there-
of I  fent,  in  a  letter,  to  the  celebrated  Morand,  in  July  of  the  following
year :  this  eminent  man  wrote  back  to  me,  that  he  had  communicated  it  to
the  Royal  Academy  of  Surgeons,  and  nothing  more  on  this  fubjeft  that  ever
came  to  my  hands.

But  my  reafon  for  fending  him  the  account,  was  that,  if  any  thing  of  the
like  kind  had  happen'd  at  Paris  (a  city  very  famous  for  the  number  of  its  in-
habitants, and  befides  other  fciences,  particularly  for  that  of  lithotomy)  I
might  be  inform'd  thereof;  and  might  not  be  ignorant  in  what  manner  they
fuppos'd  this  to  have  happen'd.  When  I  fpeak  thus  I  mean  to  fpeak  of  a
needle  of  the  fame  length,  firmnefs  and  ftraitnefs,  as  ours  is ;  for  that  a  fhort-
er,  or  flexile  needle  fhould  have  reach'd  to  the  bladder,  through  the  paflage
of  the  male  urethra,  would  not  be  equally  furprizing.

I  had


Letter  XL  1 1. Article  29^  513

.  I  had  read,  indeed,  in  Parey  (k),  of  a  calculus  taken  out  of  the  male  blad-
der, "  of  the  thicknefs  of  a  walnut,  in  the  middle  of  which  a  needle,  per-
*'  feftly  like  thofe  commonly  usM  by  fempftreffes,  was  found  to  be  fiK'd."
But  if  it  was  buried  within  the  calculus,  it  v/as  of  courfe  fliorter  than  ours:
if  it  was  prominent  from  the  calculus,  v/e  are,  neverthelefs,  ignorant  what
length  it  was  of.

And  in  what  form  it  appear'd  ;  whether  it  was  a  little  bent,  or  flrait ;  but
in  particular,  whether  it  had  come  in  by  way  of  the  urethra,  or  not  -,  we  are
quite  ignorant.  For  there  might  be  different  ways  whereby  a  needle,  eipe-
cially  one  that  had  no  head,  might  come  into  the  bladder.

Thus  that  very  learned  man  Mead  fuppos'd  a  fimilar  needle  ;  which  Che-
felden  {o)  gives  a  figure  of,  if  I  rightly  recolleft,  in  the  thirtieth  plate  ;  and
which,  having  a  calculus  form'd  around  it,  had  been  taken  out  from  the  blad-
der of  a  boy,  by  incifion  ;  to  have  enter'd  in  by  the  perinaeum  :  and  Vallif-
neri  {p)  fufpefted  that  a  fmall  branch  of  a  certain  plant,  which  he  had  found
within  a  calculus  of  the  bladder  of  a  boar,  had  come  thither  through  a  wound
that  had  been  inflifted  on  the  belly  of  this  animal,  by  fome  hard  and  fharp
branch  of  the  thick  foreft,  through  which  he  had  ran  :  but  whether  another
*'  kind  of  woody  little  body,"  which  is  faid  to  have  been  found  in  the  blad-
der of  a  domeftic  fow  (q),  might  have  come  thither  in  the  fame  way,  you
yourfelf  will  determine.

Moreover,  there  might  be  another  pafTage  for  a  needle  •,  I  mean  that  v-?hich
is  propos'd  by  Benedict,  from  th€  inteftines  into  the  bladder  ;  for  although  I
faid  above  (r),  that  this  was  not  readily  to  be  admitted,  yetl  do  not  think  it
is  always  to  be  rejeded  ;  efpecially  when  what  I  have  there  objedted  can  have
no  place.

I  will  endeavour  to  illuftrate  what  I  mean,  by  an  example  which  I  do  not
remember  to  have  been  refer'd  to,  by  thofe  who  have  taken  notice  of  others
of  this  kind.  You  have  it  among  the  Refpovfiones  Medkinales  of  Claudinus  {$),
A  boy  had  fwallow'd  a  needle,  which  he  himfelf,  after  fome  years,  took  out
of  his  urethra,  where  it  was  driven  by  a  very  great  effort  in  making  water  •,
having  a  thin  ftone  form'd  upon  it.

By  what  paflage  this  needle  had  come  into  the  bladder,  or  at  leaft  into  the
urethra,  was  demonftrated  by  long,  round,  and  living  worms  •,  fome  of  which
he  difcharg'd,  in  his  urine,  in  the  firft  years  after  having  fwallow'd  the  nee-
dle :  and  after  pains  of  the  urinary  parts,  and  even  after  the  needle  was
taken  away,  another  living  worm  of  a  confiderable  length  was  difcharg'd,  and
not  without  foetid  matter,  which  was  of  a  black  colour.

And  as  you  fee  that  this  example  may  be  added  to  thofe  which  I  have
taken  notice  of  above  (/),  when  fpeaking  of  worms  difcharg'd  by  the  ure-
thra ;  fo  you  alfo  perceive,  that,  although  the  needle,  in  the  cafe  of  this  boy,
exceeded  two  inches  in  length,  and  was  not  without  a  head,  yet  it  cannot  be
transfer'd  to  thofe  girls,  who  fay  that  their  hair-bodkins  have  come  down  from
their  mouths  into  their  bladders ;  if  it  be  certain  that  they  have  fuffer'd  none

(n)  Oper.  I.  24.  c.  19.  (q)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent,  7.  obf,  7.  cum  Schol.'o.

(a)  The  Anat.  of  the  Human  Body.  (r)  N.  27.

(p)  Opere  torn.  i.p.  6.  nella  lettera  al  Gi-  {s)  Refp.  40.

orgi.  (V)  N.  6.

Vol.  II.  U  u  u  of


514  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

of  thofe  fymptoms,  which  demonftrate  that  a  palTage,  from  the  inteftlnes  t<3>
the  bladder,  was  laid  open :  yet  as  this  is  not  certain  in  regard  to  the  man
Ipoken  of  by  Parey,  nothing  forbids  us  to  fufpeft  that  the  needle  might  have
made  the  fame  kind  of  pafiage  for  itfelf,  formerly,  in  him.

But  there  are  others,  in  whom  there  is  no  room  for  thefe  fufpicions,  as
they,  like  ours,  confefs  the  contrary  j  one,  that  he  had  thruft  into  the  bladder,
thro'  the  urethra,  an  ear  of  barley  -,  the  other,  if  I  underftand  rightly,  the
thin  extremity  of  a  fmall  iron  fpatula  or  fpoon.  And  I  confefs  it,  becaufe  I
have  read  of  the  latter  in  Dionis  {ti),  and  of  the  other  in  Plainer  {x).  But
of  what  length  the  extremity  of  that  fpoon  was,  and  whether  it  was  at  all  iri-
fiefted,  I  do  not  yet  know ;  how  flexible  the  ear  of  barley  is,  there  is  nobody
who  is  ignorant.

Befides  both  of  them,  as  It  feems  to  me,  or  at  leaft  one  of  them,  has  con-
fefs'd  that  what  he  had  begun  to  thruft  in,  he  had  forc'd  on  farther,  and
even  quite  into  the  bladder.  But  our  man  was  fo  far  from  pulliing  forwards
the  needle,  which  he  had  introduc'd  into  the  beginning  of  the  urethra,  that
he  was,  as  I  have  faid  (jy),  quite  ignorant  whether  it  had  fallen  out,  or  re-
niain'd.

Let  us  fuppofe,  however,  that  he  did  pu(h  it  forwards  ;  yet  when  he  had
brought  it  on  to  that  flexure,  which  is  in  the  perineum,  how,  I  befeech  you,
could  he,  at  length,  get  over  that  obftrudion  ?  and  how  could  a  needle  of
fuch  a  length,  and  fo  ftrait,  be  turn'^d  upwards  ?  Why  did  it  not  ftick  there  .?
Why  with  fo  fharp  a  point,  if  this  went  foremoft,  did  it  not  fix  itfelf  there  ?
Or  if,  as  is  moft  probable,  the  point  did  twt  precede,  why  did  it  not  injure
that  part,  while  the  needle  was  turn'd  ?  For  there  was,  as  I  have  faid,  no  ci-
catrix there.

Thefe  therefore,  are  things  which  I  confefs  I  cannot  yet  attain  to  the  com-
pleat  knowledge  of:  and  all  very  fldlfnl  men  have  confefs'd  the  fame;  in
particular  Cocchi  and  Benevoli,  who  each  of  them  vifited  me  with  very  great
politenefs,  as  they  pafs'd  this  way  ;  and  faw,  and  confider'd,  the  fubjedt  very
attentively.

It  is  true,  that,  in  regard  to  very  fmall,  and  for  that  reafon  flexible,
needles,  I  fhould  not  be  in  any  doubt  •,  much  lefs  in  refpeft  to  very  flender
wax  candles :  of  which  if  you  read  the  cafe,  that  in  all  appearance  is  the
fame,  although  it  is  repeated,  in  other  words,  twenty-five  years  after  (z) ;
you  will  be  lefs  furpriz'd,  even  if  you  admit  only  of  fome  part,  that  the  fe-
male bladder  fliould  fuddenly  draw  a  needle  into  its  cavity  •,  when  you  alfo
find  that  the  male  bladder  "  had  fuddenly  drawn  in  a  candle."

30.  As  to  the  kidnies  and  the  ureters,  being  both  of  them  enlarg'd,  in  our
ruftic  ;  and  both  of  them  being  fiU'd  with  pus ;  thefe  circumftances  doubtlefs
agree  with  thofe  things  which  are  laid  down  and  explain'd  above  {a).  And
from  the  fame  caufe,  that  is  from  the  urine  being  very  frequently  retain'd,
on  account  of  the  very  violent  dyfuria ;  and  for  that  reafon  forcing  fome  pare

(ji)  Cours  d'Operat.  de  Chirurg.  3,  De-  (z)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent,  i  &  2.  obf.  152.  &
TOonftr.  aft.  torn.  4.  obf.  24,

(x)  Difp.  fupra  ad  n.  27,  cit.  §.  n.  U)  N,  Z2,  23.

O)  N.  28._

9:-  -  of


Letter  XLII. Article  30.  515

of  the  bladder  outwards,  where  it  was  weakeft  ;  I  think  that  the  facculqs,  in
which  the  ftone  lay,  is  to  be  accounted  for.

And  that  this  was  my  opinion,  even  at  the  time  when  I  firft  wrote,  in  the
Adverfaria  {b)^  what  I  had  obferV'd  of  thefe  facculi,  you  very  well  know,
from  what  is  there  faid.  But  that  this  was  afterwards  confirm'd  by  others,  I
am  not  ignorant ;  as  they  produc'd  the  examples  of  gravid  women,  whofe
bladder  had  been,  in  fome  meafure,  relax'd,  from  a  violent  ifchuria,  into  fac-
culi of  this  kind  ;  or  hernis  ;  by  which  name  I  had  alfo  call'd  them  :  yet  I
do  not  very  well  fee,  why,  among  thefe  examples,  is  reckon'd  that  which  is
extant  in  Ruyfch  ;  in  his  eighth  Thefaurus,  number  one  hundred  and  two  -,
unlefs,  perhaps,  that,  which  is  there  defcrib'd,  is  not  intended,  but  the  other
which  is  repeated  in  the  fame  place,  on  occafion  of  the  foremention'd  in-
ftance  -,  that  is  to  fay  the  firft  obfervation  of  the  Centuria  of  Ruyfch  :  with
which  obfervation  you  will  compare  another  given  us,  in  the  afts  of  the
Csfarean  Academy  (c)  ;  and  you  will  eafily  underftand,  what  the  tumour
was,  in  a  very  noble  matron,  which  hung  down  from  the  genitals ;  upon  the
incifion  of  which  a  large  calculus  was  difcharg'd,  together  with  the  urine :
and  an  incontinence  of  this  fluid,  or  rather  a  ftillicidium,  or  continual  drip-
ping, fucceeded,  in  confequence  of  the  wound  that  had  been  made,  not  being
heal'd.

Yet  thefe  two  obfervations,  and  fome  others,  that  may  feem  to  be  of  the
fame  kind,  of  Rembertus  Dodonaeus  {d),  fhOw  that  the  fac  was  not  form'd
more  by  the  impulfe  of  the  urine,  than  by  the  weight  of  the  calculi,  or  at
leaft  not  more  increas'd  ;  and  that  in  the  lower  part  of  the  bladder :  where
Riolanus  had  alfo  feen  it  formerly  (e),  and  from  calculi  indeed  (/),  but  at
the  fides  of  the  bladder,  and  fometimes  only.

Yet  now  I  fee,  that  they  are  fuppos'd  at  the  fides,  and  particularly  the
left,  in  moft  perfons ;  and  that  by  fome,  at  leaft,  as  if  the  appearance  were
natural.  What  I  have  feen  of  the  figure  of  the  human  bladder,  in  a  natural
ftate,  I  have  already  declar'd  in  a  former  work  {g).  Whether  it  has  thefe
fmuffes,  or  appendages,  as  they  call  them,  befides,  I  fhall  not  willingly  difpute
here.

It  would  be  fufficient  for  me,  if  all  the  circumftances,  which  I  advanc'd
in  regard  to  this  figure,  before  Weitbrecht,  were  related  in  fuch  a  manner,
by  fome  perfons,  that  I  might  not  feem,  with  divine  permiffion,  to  have
propos'd  them  after  him  :  although  nobody  can  have  read  that  diflertation  of
his,  without  being  put  in  mind  of  the  time,  in  which  each  of  us  publifh'd
our  remarks  ;  I  mean  by  that  very  annotation,  which  the  no  lefs  juft,  than
learned,  imperial  academy  at  Peterfburgh  [h)  has,  of  its  own  accord,  added
to  that  diflfertation.

Nor  have  there  been  fome  wanting,  who  have  confounded  thofe  finuflcs
feen  by  Riolanus,  and  others,  promifcuoufly  with  thofe,  which  I  had  obferv'd,
from  the  urine  being  too  long  retain'd  in  the  bladder,  and  not  from  calculi,
of  which  firft  kind  thofe  two  appendages,  probably,  might  be,  that  Berger

{V)  III.  Animad.  36.  (/)  Encheirid.  anat.  1.  2.  c.  30.

(c)  Tom.  4.  obf.  95.  in  fine.  \g)  Epift.  anat.  i.  n.  61.

(/f)  Medic,  obf.  c.  45.  \h)  Commem.  torn.  5.
(<■)  Anthropogr.  1,  2.  c.  28.

U  u  u  2  (0  found


5 1 6 Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

(i)  found  in  the  bladder,  like  facculi  •,  for  they  were  full  of  urine,  and  were
in  an  old  man  who  had  died  of  a  fuppreffion  of  urine  :  and  that  they  were  of
this  kind,  we  Ihould  more  certainly  know,  if  he  had  obferv'd  the  places  from
which  they  were  prominent.

But  there  had  been  perfons  before,  who  explain'd  the  origin  of  facculi
of  the  bladder  in  a  different  manner  (k)  ;  fome  accounting  for  them  even
from  a  primeval  conformation ;  and  others  from  a  calculus,  which,  growing
by  degrees,  betwixt  the  coats  of  the  bladder,  forms  to  itfelf  a  fac,  hanging
frcmi  the  bladder  by  the  feparation  of  thefe  coats  :  and  the  internal  coat  being
at  length  ruptur'd,  or  corroded,  the  calculus  communicates  with  the  cavity
of  the  bladder;  which  explanation  of  the  communication,  a  certain  perfon
not  long  ago  made  his  own  ;  although  in  the  whole  of  that  difputation,  ia
which  he  has  canvafs'd  the  various  modes,  wherein  calculi  adhere  to  the  blad-
der, he  has  no  where  exprefly  taken  notice  of  thofe  facculi  that  are  prominent
on  the  outfide  of  the  bladder.

However,  I  am  not  altogether  repugnant  to  thefe  two  origins  of  facculi
being  fuppos'd,  in  fome  certain  cafes ;  though  that  they  fhould  be  fuppos'd.
in  all  we  cannot  allow:  as  not  only  other  obfervations  of  ours,  which  have
been  defcrib'd  in  other  places,  but  as  that  alfo,  in  particular,  which  was  juft
now  defcrib'd  (m),  are  openly  repugnant  thereto.

For  you  fee  from  the  Adverfaria  {n),  when,  in  a  great  drinker,  fome  fac--
culi  were  already  form'd,  and  others  began  to  be  form'd,  that  the  begin-
nings of  them  had  appear'd  only  in  thole  places,  where,  by  reafon  of  the
fpaces,  which  the  mufcular  fibres  of  the  bladder  leave  betwixt  each  other,
the  coats  could  be  urg'd  outwards:  and  who  can  imagine,  that  the  facculus
of  the  country-man  had  exifted  from  the  original  formation,  rather  than  that
it  had  fucceeded  to  the  very  frequent  retention  of  urine,  from  the  needle,  ot?
calculus.

Nor  indeed  could  a  calculus,  which  was  form'd  upon  a  needle,  that  was:
thruft  into  the  cavity  of  the  bladder,  have  been  form'd  betwixt  coat  and  coat ;
nor  confequently,  could  it  have  burft  through  the  internal  coat,  to  open  a,
pafTage  for  itfelf  into  the  bladder.  And  there  has  not  even  been  one,  out  of  all
thofe  in  whom  I  have  found  thefe  facs,  wherein  that  coat  was  ruptur'd  :  whereas
in  all,  as  well  as  the  other  coats,  it  was  relax'd,  and  had  expanded  itfelf,  in
order  to  form  the  facculus  •,  as  you  will  learn  from  reading  over  again  the  dif-
feftions  of  the  countryman,  and  of  a  certain  old  man  of  whom  I  wrote  to
you  formerly  (o).

Mor  did  I  fee  calculi  within  thofe  facculi,  if  you  except  the  country-man  ^
nor  yet  did  I  underftand  that  there  had  been  any  before :  nor  did  it  happen
to  me  to  meet  with  thefe  facculi,  at  the  very  mouths  of  the  ureters,  or  be-
neath ■,  but  above  them  and  even  much  above-,  as  you  will  clearly  perceive
from  thofe  obfervations  of  mine,  which  I  have  refer'd  to.

31.  Thefe  facculi,  then,  are  different  from  thofe  which  are  form'd  by
ftones  fbicking  at  the  narrow  orifices  of  the  ureters,  and  increafing  there  ;  as


(0  Hid.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  1704.  obf.  (/)  Ibid,  in  Schol.  ad  §.  7.  obf.  8,

anat.  22.  CmJ  N.  28.

(i) Seft. hac  Sepulchr.  25.  in Schol.  ad  (»)  Animad.  cit.

ol)f.  3.  (oj  Epift.  2i.n.  15,


Petrus-'


Letter  XLII. Article  31.  517

Petrus  Francus  (p)  formerly  knew,  although  he  has  neither  been  quoted  by
Riolanus  (jj,  nor  by  "Willis  (r\  nor  by  any  of  the  great  number  of  other
authors,  that  I  know  of,  who  have  been  of  the  fame  opinion,  even  to  this
time,  Platner  only  excepted  (j) ;  who  has  alfo  given  a  copy  of  that  fmall  part
of  his  very  rare  book,  which  relates  to  this  fubjeft.

But  as  to  Platner's  having  foUow'd  Littre  ("/),  and  Abraham  Vater  (a),  fo
far  as  to  add,  that,  unlefs  the  calculi  fall  out  from  thence,  "  they  feem  to
"  make  a  new  paflage  for  themfelves  ;  while,  the  bladder  being  now  and
*'  then  very  ftrongly  contradted,  they  are  propell'd,  within  the  coats  of  it,
"  towards  the  cervix:  and  that  this  is  the  reafon  why  they  are  often  foundl
"  in  places  that  are  very  remote  from  the  mouths  of  the  ureters ;"  I  fhould
readily  fall  in  with  his  aiTertion,  when  paflages  lie  open  from  the  loweft  parr
of  the  ureter  (as  were  feen  by  Littre)  to  thofe  places  ;  which,  when  once
open'd  by  calculi,  it  is  moft  probable  mufl  be  kept  open  afterwards,  by  the
urine  that  is  continually  following  them  :  and  I  do  not  doubt,  but  that  the
places  very  remote  from  the  mouths  of  the  ureters,  are  always  to  be  under-
ftood  as  being  downwards  only  -,  even  from  confidering  the  words  that  I  juft
now  copied;  to  which  part  not  only  the  weight  of  the  urine,  defcending
through  the  ureters,  urges,  but  the  contradlion  of  the  bladder  forces,  the
calculi.

In  what  manner,  then,  fhall  we  explain  the  many  other  obfervations,  o£
calculi  of  the  bladder,  included  in  a  membrane,  v/hich  Platner  himlblf  takes^
notice  of  in  the  fame  place  ?  Were  all  thefe  at  the  mouths  of  the  ureters,  or
below  them  ?  And  were  they  thus  alfo,  in  the  other  obfervations  bcfides
thefe,  that  may  be  read  in  the  Sepulchretum  {x)  ?  In  one  of  Tulpius  (y)  m
particular  (for  although  there  are  many  there  from  Tulpius,  Platner  did  not
refer  to  them  all,  but  only  to  fome  one  of  them)  in  which  nine  and  thirty
calculi  are  defcrib'd  in  the  bladder ;  "  every  one  of  which  lay  wrap'd  up  in
*'^  its  proper  receptacle,  and  indeed  fo  clofely,  that  in  the  beginning,  the-
"  furgeon  was  led  to  fuppofe  no  calculi  to  be  contain'd  therein  ?"

To  this  obfervation  join  another  of  Holtzappellius  fz),  which  fpeaks  of
two  and  thirty  calculi,  "  all  included  in  their  proper  coats,  and  contiguous
"  to  each  other ;  fo  that  thefe  calculi,  each  in  its  little  cavity,  fill'd  up  the
"  whole  concavity  of  the  bladder;  juft  as  bees,  in  their  fmall  caverns,  fill
"  up  the  honey-comb  -,  only  a  very  fmall  paflage  for  the  urine  remaining."

Were  all  thefe,  then,  wrap'd  up,  in  this  manner,  belov/  the  orifices  of
the  ureters  ?  And  indeed  it  has  fometimes  come  into  my  mind,  as  I  have
found  {a)  calculi  within  the  biliary  glands  of  the  gall-bladder,  to  confider
from  thence,  whether  it  is  poffible,  that,  through  the  orifices  of  the  glands
of  the  bladder,  which,  as  I  have  fometimes  found  them  open  in  the  ureters,
fo  alfo  nothing  forbids  us  fuppofing  to  be  fometimes  open  in  the  bladder,
which  is  but  a  continuation,  as  it  were,  of  thefe  canals  •,  whether,  I  fay,  it  is

(p)  Traite  des  Hernies  c.  31.  («)  DuTert.  quaobf.  rar.  Cakul.  Src.  §.  4-

(f)  Anthropogr.  1.  2.  c.  28.  (x)  Setl. hac.  25.  obf. 8. ^,  7.  13. 14.  &'

(r)  DifT.  de  Urin.  c.  5.  feft.  24..  obf.  10.  §.  i.

(j)  Difp. fupraad  n.  27.  cit.  §.  13,  &  not.  (_)>,:)  Seft.  23.  obf.  7.  §.  i,

ibid.  n.  (2)  Ibid.  obf.  4.  §.  2.

(/)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc,  a.  1702.  \a)  Epift,  37.  n.  rg.

poffibb


5i8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

pofllble  that  through  the  orifices  of  thefe  glands,  very  fmall  pieces  of  fand
may  creep  into  the  cavities  of  the  glands,  and  there  increafe  into  calculi,
which  will  be  inherent  in  their  alveoli.

But  till  I  happen  to  light  on  a  bladder,  which  has  a  calculus  Ihut  up,  be-
twixt the  coats,  in  fuch  a  place,  as  it  could  not  poffibly  have  come  to,  from
the  ureters ;  and  have  an  opportunity  of  examining  it  very  attentively;  I
fhall  choofe  rather  to  withold  my  aflent  from  this  hypothefis  of  mine  -,  and  as
I  have  learned  from  my  obfervations,  refer'd  to  above  (l^),  that  the  orifices  of
the  facculi  are  often  much  lefs  than  the  facculi  themfelves,  I  fhall  alfo  give
fome  room  for  another  conjeflure  •,  as,  for  inftance,  if  a  very  fmall  calculus
having  encer'd  in,  the  orifice  fhould  from  any  caufe  whatever,  be  more
itreighten'd,  and  almoft,  or  altogether,  fhut  up.

But  there  are  many  facculi,  fometimes,  in  one  bladder;  and  amongft  thefe
even  fmall  ones,  which  not  only  occupies  the  inferior,  and  middle  parts,  of
the  bladder,  but  the  upper  parts  alfo :  and  this  you  will  underftand  from
thole  obfervations  of  mine  ;  and  ftill  more  clearly  from  two  figures,  which,
as  I  have  faid  in  another  place,  the  celebrated  Heifter  has  added  to  his  Latin
chirurgical  inftitutions  {c) ;  and  that  with  fo  much  the  more  propriety,  as  it
was  a  circumftance  greatly  to  be  wifh'd,  that  they  might  not  be  altogether
omitted,  by  any  one  of  thofe  who  have  written  of  Lithotomy,  after  frequent
mention  having  been  made  of  thefe  facculi.

32.  For  it  is  of  great  importance  to  the  lithotomift,  to  have  them  always
in  his  eye;  as  by  thefe  he  may  very  eafily  be  deceiv'd.  And  if  Riolanus  (d)
has  taught  us,  that  the  calculi,  which  have  their  nidufles  in  thofe  lower
finuffes  of  the  bladder,  "  are  not  met  with  on  the  introdudtion  of  the  cathe-
"  ter ;  and  if  the  cafe  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated  Jo.  Chriftoph.  Mayo  (^),
fhows  the  difficulty  of  taking  out  a  calculus  from  thofe  finufies ;  it  will  na-
turally come  into  his  mind,  when  confidering  a  great  number  of  facculi,  as
exifting  in  different  parts  of  the  bladder,  how  many  cafes  may  happen  to
him,  in  which;  to  omit  the  difficulties  of  the  cure;  he  may  be  deceiv'd,
even  in  the  very  article  of  fearching  for  the  ftone.

And  indeed  from  thence,  as  I  fee  in  the  celebrated  Schreiberus  (/j,  the
error  has  arifen  of  fuppofing  a  man  to  be  cur'd  of  calculi,  in  whofe  bladder
no  longer  any  one  offer'd  itfelf  to  the  catheter  -^  whereas  in  the  body  of  the
fame  man,  after  death,  were  found  nine  calculi,  which  fix  facculi  of  the  blad-
der contain'd.  But  bcfides  the  deceptions  of  the  lithotomift,  in  fearching  for
the  ftone  while  this  is,  at  one  rime,  in  the  bladder,  and  at  another  time
withdraws  itfelf  into  a  facculus ;  which  is  a  circumftance  whereof  I  fpoke
pretty  fufficiently  above  (g) ;  it  may  moreover  fometimes  happen,  to  the
great  detriment  of  the  patient,  and  of  the  reputation  of  the  lithotomift,  that
the  calculus,  which  was  very  evidently  perceiv'd  in  the  bladder,  fome  days
before,  may  in  vain  be  fought  after  in  the  bladder  now,  that  a  feftion  is  made
into  that  cavity.

(i)  N.  30.  f/J  Epift.  ad  Haller  de  Medicamento  Ste-

lae} Tab.  ^2.  fig.  I  &  2.  phens.

('dj  Loco  indicat  fupra  ad  n.  30.  {g)  N.  10.

{e)  Commerc.  Litter. 3. 1736. Hebd. 5.
n.  2.

Wherefore  -


Letter  XLIL Article  32.  519

"Wherefore  in  patients  of  this  kind,  in  whom  a  calculus  is  fometimes  felt
by  the  catheter,  and  fometimes  not  felt,  he  who  felt  it  before  ought  to  pre-
fcribe  many  various  kinds  of  motions,  and  poftures,  to  the  patient,  if  another
Kthotomift  does  not  feel  it  at  any  time:  and  much  more  ought  he  himfelf
to  take  care  not  to  cut  without  feeUng  it,  in  the  cavity  of  the  bladder,  at  the
very  time  of  cutting.  Thefe  circumftances  however  happen  when  the  ori-
fice of  the  facculus  is  pretty  large  in  proportion  to  the  bulk  of  the  calculus,
as  it  was  in  our  ruftic.

But  the  orifice  and  fac  both  grow  large,  from  the  quantity  and  weight  of
the  urine,  to  which  the  weight  of  the  calculus  muft  likewife  be  added;  as
this  has  the  more  matter  to  concrete  round  it,  and  increafe  it,  in  proportion
to  the  quantity  of  urine  that  ftagnates  about  it :  and  the  more  urine  remains
in  the  fac,  in  proportion  as  the  calculus  is  increased  ;  for  by  this  increafe  the
coats  that  compofe  the  facculus  are  more  diftrafled  :  and  their  elaftic,  as  well
as  mufcular,  force,  whereby  the  expulfion  of  the  urine  would  be  help'd  for-
wards, are  greatly  broken,  and  diminifh'd.

"Wherefore  the  fac  may  be,  fometimes,  increas'd  to  fuch  a  degree,  in  its
magnitude,  as  to  be  miftaken  for  another  bladder.  But  I  do  not  fay  this,
becaufe  I  am  ignorant  that  the  bladder  has  been,  fometimes,  really  double
from  its  original  formatipn  ;  as  I  know  that  it  has  not  only  been  three-fold,
but  even  five-fold.

For  it  is  certain,  that  Molinetti  {h)  has  publicly  demonftrated  five  in  a  wo-
man, who  was  likewife  fupplied  with  as  many  kidnies,  and  fix  ureters ;  two
of  which  were  inferted  into  the  larger  bladder,  and  the  four  others  into  the
four  lefier  bladders,  into  each  one :  which  bladders  difcharg'd  their  urine  into
the  larger  bladder  by  peculiar  tubuli ;  a  very  rare  inftance  certainly,  and
perhaps  the  only  one  of  the  kind  -,  and  fo  much  the  more  worthy  to  be  taken
notice  of  by  me,^  in  particular,  as  out  of  all  thofe  who  refer  to  obfervations
of  a  double,  or  triple  bladder,  that  I  remember  to  have  read,  the  celebrated
Fantonus  (z)  is  the  only  one  by  whom  the  leafl:  mention  is  made,  from  Moli-
netti, of  this  quintuple,  or  five-fold  bladder.

Nor  does  it  efcape  me,  that,  from  the  firft  formation  of  the  animal  like-
wife,  the  cavity  of  the  bladder  is  fometimes  divided  into  two,  by  a  kind  of
feptum;  whether  that  feptum  be  plac'd  longitudinally,  or  tranfverfely  :  tranf-
verfely  Ruyfch  (k)  faw  it  in  fome  flieep  and  calves,  as  Blafius  {1}  had  feen  it  in
the  fame  animals,  and,  as  I  fuppofe,  in  the  lame  manner:  although  the  fe-
cond  cavity  feems  rather  to  belong  to  the  dilated  urachus  than  to  the  bladder;
wherefore,  as  he  himfelf  hints  (m),  it  is  generally  met  with  in  quadrupeds
only  ;  and  that  which  Blafius  {n)  once  found  in  the  human  body,  was  very
fmall :  but  longitudinally,  as  the  fame  Blafius  (o)  faw  in  another  man,  in
whom,  however,  he  found,  by  an  accurate  difleftion,  that  it  was  rather  two
bladders  conglutinated  into  one,  by  the  junftion  of  their  fides,  than  one  di-
vided by  a  feptum.

Yet  what  kind  of  a  feptum  that  was,  and  how  fituated,  which  Bauhin  (p)


{h)  Differt.  anat.  Pathol.  1.  6.  c.  7,  in  fine.  {m)  Obf.  8'.  modo  cit.

(i)  Anat.  Corp.  Hum.  Differt.  7.  («)  Part.  4.  obf.  Med.  18.

{k)  Cent,  obf  anat.  Chir.  8.  &  Muf^iTIieca  (0)  Ibid.  obf.  19.

J^.  Repof.  2.  n.  I.  (;>)  Tlieatr.  anat,  1.  i.c.  31.  not.  /J.
Q)  Comment,  in  Synt.  Vefling.  c.  5.


fays.


520  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fays  was  found  in  the  body  of  a  prince,  does  not  appear  clearly  to  me.  This,
however,  appears,  that  what  fo  many  authors  alTert  to  have  been  found  by
Coiterus  in  the  body  of  a  virgin ;  whom  I  have  had  occafion  to  fpeak  of  al-
ready ;  none  of  them  would  have  aflerted,  if  they  had  read  Coiterus  a  little
more  attentively.

For  this  author  (q),  without  making  the  leaft  mention  of  a  feptum,  has,
indeed,  firft  faid,  that  in  this  virgin,  "  he  had  found  two  urinary  bladders;
^'  the  one  natural,  and  plac'd  in  its  ufual  fituation,  the  other  proceeding  from
•"  the  neck  of  the  matrix,  on  the  right  fide;  being  almofl:  twice  as  big  as
"  the  natural  bladder,  very  full  of  urine,  and  like  the  natural  bladder
"  furnifh'd  with  two  coats  :  yet  that  here  no  meatus  was  ken,  either  to
"  bring  in,  or  carry  out  tlie  contain'd  water."

But  below;  where  he  fays  it  may  be  inquir'd,  "how  this  preternatural  blad-
"  der  was  generated,  and  by  what  paffages  the  urine  enter'd  into  this  appen-
■"  diculated  bladder ;"  he  anfwers,  "  it  was  not  furprizing,  that  in  this  vir-
"  gin,  who  labour'd  under  a  diforder  of  the  uterus,  and  had  her  menftrual
"  purgations,  in  a  difeas'd  and  irregular  manner,  this  thin  and  tranfparenc
"  water  fhould  be  collefted  betwixt  the  membranes,  which  are  found  in  great
•"  number,  in  the  lower  belly ;  and  that  this  water,  by  expanding  thefe  mem-
•'  branes,  as  happens  in  other  places,  fliould  have  form'd  to  itfelf  fuch  a  bladder,
"  or  refervoir ;"  fo  that  it  muft  be  clear  to  every  one,  that  he  has  not,  in
faft,  defcrib'd  a  fecond  urinary  bladder;  which  had  exifted  as  congenial  to
the  firft  formation  of  the  animal ;  but  a  large  hydatid,  which  had  been,  at
length,  generated  by  the  force  of  difeafe.

How  could  it  happen  then,  that  Riolanus  (r)  fhould  afiert,  that  Coiterus
had  found  a  double  bladder,  in  that  virgin,  "  both  of  them  being  full  of
"  urine,  but  one  only  furnifli'd  with  ureters,  which  difcharg'd  its  portion  of
"  urine  into  the  other  ?"  Or  even  that  Thomas  Bartholin  (s)  fliould  fay,
"  that  the  bladder  has  now  and  then  two  cavities,  diftinguifh'd  from  each
*'  other,  by  a  membrane  or  feptum  ;  fuch  as  Volcherus  Coiter  found  in  a
*'  p-irl  of  five  and  thirty  years  of  age."

And  if  Tulpius  (/)  had  not,  foon  after,  follow'd  him  in  repeating  the  ftory
of  this  fuppos'd  feptum  of  Coiterus ;  and  Blafius  (u)  likewife,  who  expredy
mentions  Bartholin  ;  the  fame  miftake  would  not  have  run  through  fuch  a
number  of  other  books,  and  thofe  even  the  moft  modern,  which  it  is  by  no
means  neceflTary  to  particularize  here :  and  the  defire  of  removing  this  error,
has  oblig'd  me  to  be  fomewhat  more  full  on  the  fubje6t,  than  I  intended.  But
I  return  to  the  matter  in  hand.

Where  two  or  more  urinary  bladders,  which  communicate  with  one  another,
are  met  with,  and  yet,  from  the  particular  mode  of  fbrufture,  all  of  them  do
not  feem  to  have  exifted  from  the  original  formation  ;  as,  for  inftance,  if  in-
to any  one  of  them  no  ureter  opens,  nor  this  one  feems,  in  brute  animals  in
particular,  to  be  made  up  of  the  dilated  urachus ;  this  bladder,  I  fay  ;  efpe-
cially  if  there  is  a  calculus  in  it,  or  if  a  ftrangury,  a  dyfury,  or  a  frequent

CqJ  Obf.  anat.  .  (/)  L.  3.  obf.  Med.c.  5.

(r)  Anthropogr.  1.  2.  c  28.  («)  Comment,  cit.  in  Veflin^.

(sj  In  Additis  ad  Patris  Inftit.  anat,  h i.e.

retention


Letter  XLII. Article  2Z'  521

tetention  of  a  great  quantity  of  urine,  as  frequently  happens  in  drinkers,  has
preceded  ;  is  not  to  be  confider'd  as  another  bladder,  but  rather  as  a  hernia
of  the  natural  bladder-,  that  is  a  facculus  produc'd  by  the  force  of  difeafe  :
f-jch  a  one,  for  inftance,  as  I  fuppofe  that  to  have  been,  which  Bartliolin  afierts
(x)  had  been  feen  in  this  theatre  of  ours,  not  by  himfelf  indeed,  but  by
Moinichenius  ;  being  fmall,  growing  to  the  larger,  and  communicating  there-
with.

Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  I  fliall  fomewhat  more  readily  confider  in  the  light
of  a  double  bladder;  as  one  ureter,  at  leaft,  open'd  into  each  cavity;  that
which  Stegmannus  (y)  defcribes  in  a  young  man,  although  labouring  under
a  dyfuria,  an  ifchuria,  and  a  calculus.  And  finally,  before  I  make  an  end  of
fpeaking  of  thefe  facculi,  I  will  alfo  fay,  that  thofe  are  to  be  attended  to,  which
appear  before  the  bladder  is  inflated  ;  or  which,  if  it  is  already  inflated,  can-
not be  imputed  to  a  hiatus  of  the  external  coats  of  the  bladder,  that  the
knife  has  accidentally  injur'd  ;  through  which  hiatus,  the  internal  coats,  being
forc'd  outwardly,  by  the  air  that  was  blown  in,  refemble  a  facculus  ;  which
however  had  no  exillence  in  the  living  body  -,  and  impofe  upon  the  incautious,
or  unexperienc'd  anatomifls :  and  this  is  a  circumftance  that  we  have  fome-
times  obferv'd  to  happen.

33.  As  to  the  remaining  circumftance,  that  the  coats  of  the  bladder  were
become  thicken'd,  as  we  found  them  in  the  countryman  (z)  of  whom  I  have
hitherto  fpoken  -,  fo  you  might  alfo  have  obferv'd  them  to  be  in  that  coun-
,try-girl  (a),  and  in  the  young  man  (^),  each  of  whom  had  been  troubled
with  a  very  violent,  obftinate,  and  long-continued  difficulty  of  making
water.

To  thefe  add  the  bladder,  which  the  celebrated  Dethardingius  (c)  took  care
to  have  reprefented  in  a  plate  ;  and  even  thofe  which  you  will  fee  in  Ruyfch
(d)^  and  which  you  will  read,  had  their  parietes  thicken'd,  from  the  fame
caufe,  to  the  extent  of  an  inch ;  fo  that,  in  confequence  of  this  thicknefs,  in
one  of  them,  betwixt  the  parietes,  and  a  large  calculus,  room  was  left  only  for
a  few  drops  of  urine.

And  this  was  alfo  known  to  Riverius  (e),  who  fays,  that  in  carcafes  of  this
kind,  the  thicknefs  of  thefe  parietes  has  been  found  to  be  "  equal  to  that  of
"  a  finger,  or  thumb  ;  fo  as  fometimes  to  fill  the  whole  cavity  of  the  bladder,
"  and  be  almoft  immediately  in  contaft  with  the  calculus  itfelf."  And  not
to  lead  you  away  from  the  Sepulchretum  -,  although  in  that  book  (/)  I  alio
find  thefe  words  taken  from  Riverius  -,  you  will  even  read  that  in  a  child  (g)
"  they  had  been  equal  to  the  thicknefs  of  a  finger's  breadth ;"  and  that,  in
another  calculous  patient  (*),  the  bladder  "  had  become  externally  flefliy:"
which  circumftance  was  likewlfe  not  unknown  to  Riverius,  who  {h)^  had  re-
mark'd  the  bladder  to  have  become  "  a  flefhy  body."

(x)  Anat.  quart.  Renovat.  1.  i.  C-  20.  {c)  Prax.  Med.  1.  14.  c.  i.

Ij)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a,  4.  obf.  1 10.  ffj  Sea.  28.  hujus  1.  3.  obf.  19.  &  Ce£i.  23,
(=;)  N.  z8. . in  ichol.  ad  obf.  i.  §.  8.

CaJ  N.  zo.  C^J  ^.  cod.

(/;) N.  .15.  (')  Ibid.  §.  3,

(c)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3,  a.  9.  obf.  31.  (/')  Obf.  iq.  cit.
C^J  Cent.  obf.  Anat.  Chir.  Sg.  &  Thef.
Aioat.  2.  Aff.  3,  n.  ;.

Vol,  II.  X  X  X  Sitt


522  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly,

But  thefe  circnmftances  do  not  happen  only  when  the  dyfuria  is  from  a  calcu-
lus. For,  not  to  fay,  that,  in  reading  over  one  of  the  firft  obfervations  of  Hoff-
mann, refer'd  to  in  the  preceding  letter  (i),  you  will  alfo  find  it  to  relate  to  the
prefent  fubjeft  ;  you  have,  at  leaft,  feen  in  the  fame  letter  (k),  that  when  there  was
a  dyfuria  from  an  excrefcence  of  the  proftate  gland,  the  fibres  of  the  bladder
were  fo  increas'd  in  their  thicknefs,  as  to  refemble  the  ftrong  fafciculi  of  the
heart ;  when  examin'd  by  Valfalva ;  both  in  figure  and  magnitude  :  not  to
take  notice,  here,  of  the  obfervation  of  Picolhominus  (/),  which  I  am  fur-
priz'd  not  to  find  transfer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  •,  I  mean  that  of  a  girl,
who  was  afflidted  with  a  continual  fever,  and  very  great  pains,  on  account  of
an  erofion  and  acrimony  of  humours ;  which,  having  depriv'd  the  bladder  of
its  internal  coat,  had  left  "  the  flefhy  fibres  of  the  external  fo  afi^edled  with
*'  inflammation,  that  you  would  have  fuppos'd  the  whole  of  it  to  be  flefhy  ;"'
fo  far  thefe  fibres,  fays  he,  "  are  fometimes  inlarg'd,  and  render'd  confpi-
"  cuous."

And  with  this  you  will  join  the  obfervation  of  Rud.  Jac.  Camerarius  (m),  of
a  bladder  "  like  to  a  flefhy  mafs,"  the  parietes  whereof  being  "  of  the  thick-
*'  nefs  of  two  inches,  the  cavity  was  fcarcely  larger  than  a  nutmeg,"  for  that
re^fon  :  and  this  you  will  be  lefs  furpriz'd  at,  when,  in  reading  the  hiflory  which
I  refer'd  to  above  (n),  from  the  y^Sa  Helvetica,  you  fhall  obferve  that  the  coats  of
the  bladder  were  of  fuch  an  immenfe  thicknefs,  that,  although  the  bladder  itfelf
was  almofl  equal  to  the  head  of  an  infant,  the  cavity  of  it,  neverthelefs,  was
fcarcely  capable  of  admitting  a  nut.

And  as  I  have  juft  now  faid  that  the  fibres  of  thefe  coats  are  fometimes  like
the  lacerti,  or  fafciculi,  of  the  heart,  I  would  not  have  you  be  ignorant  that
the  fame  comparifon  was  chofen  by  Valfalva ;  and  not  by  him  only,  but  by
other  obfervers  after  him  alfo  {o),  who  have  lit  on  the  like  appearances.

Nor  could  you  yourfelf,  if  you  happen'd  to  light  on  a  bladder  fuch  as  the
celebrated  Trew  (p)  defcribes,  and  gives  a  figure  of-,  which,  having  its  internal
coat  confum'd,  fhow'd,  inftead  of  "  the  fibres  of  the  mufcular  coat,  various
"  fafciculi  colleAed  together,  in  a  furprizing  manner,  and  diflinguifh'd
"  from  each  other,  by  the  intercefTion  of  large  lacunas ;"  you  could,  not,  I
fay,  make  ufe  of  any  other  comparifon.  And  yet  the  bladder,  whofe  fub-
itance  was  become  thus  thick,  contain'd  large  and  rough  calculi.

But  without  calculi,  as  thofe  of  which  I  jufl  now  fpoke,  it  was  found  by
Hottinger  (5),  to  be  as  thick  as  the  little  finger,  when  meafur'd  tranfverfely  ;
and  to  have  fibres  "  very  confpicuous,  in  confequence  of  their  being  in-
"  larg'd  to  the  fize  of  a  pretty  thick  cord :"  and  that  on  account  of  fo  great
an  acrimony  of  urine,  that  it  excited  "  a  very  troublefome  itching,  in  the
"  hands "  of  the  perfon  who  difl"e(5led  the  body :  by  Genfelius  alfo  {r),  it
was  found  "  thick  "  by  reafon  of  ulcers,  and  an  excrefcence  in  the  proftate,
confining  the  purulent  urine  :  and  finally  by  Bajerus  {s) ;  not  to  add  others

(?)  N.  12.  (p)  Commerc.  Litter,  a.  1734.  hebd.  6.  n.  5.

(k)  N.  6.  vid  etiam.  epift.  40.  n.  4.  {q)  Eph.  n.  c.  deq.  3.  a.  9.  & 10.  obf.  232.

(/)  L.  2.  Anat.  Pra;left.  24.  (r)  Eorund.  cent.  6.  obf. 84.

{m)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3.  obf.  10.  \s)  Eorund,  Aft,  torn.  3.  obf,  JZ2.

{")  N-  23-

(0)  Vid.  apud  Brendelium  n,  2.  Programm,

fupra  ad  n.  18.  cit.  v  here;


Letter  XLII. Article  34.  523

^ere  5  "  of  the  thicknefs  of  a  man's  thumb,"  becaufe  it  was  internally  ulce-
rous, and  fo  irritated  from  hence,  that,  by  its  frequent  contraftion,  son-
•ftringing  the  mouths  of  the  ureters,  and  caufing  the  urine  to  ftagnate  therein  at
the  fame  time,  it  dilated  all  the  remaining  part  of  them  to  the  fize  of  a  man's
thumb  •,  and  the  pelves  of  the  kidnies  likewife,  to  an  unufual  fize.

And  that  we,  alfo,  have  more  than  once  feen  a  thicknefs  of  coats  in  a
bladder  which  was  not  affedled  with  any  calculus,  you  have  not  only  been  -
inform'd  by  the  laft  latter  (t),  but  from  others  alfo  (a).  For  without  doubt,
■whether,  as  in  perfons  too  much  given  to  drinking,  the  urine  very  frequently
folicits  the  bladder  to  difcharge  it ;  or  any  other  caufe,  whatever,  afts  the
part  of  a  ftimulus  thereto ;  in  fo  much  the  greater  quantity  does  the  blood
flow  to  the  bladder,  and  increafe  the  thicknefs  of  the  coats.

From  other  caufes  alfo,  then,  the  coats  of  the  bladder  become  thick :  al-
tho*  much  more  frequently  from  a  difficulty  in  making  water.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  I  fuppofe  this  difficulty  to  be  increas'd  by  fuch  a  thicknefs  ;  and
fometimes  to  be  produc'd,  or  preferv'd,  as  I  ftiall  fliow  in  a  few  words,
after  having  fubjoin'd  an  obfervation,  which,  if  it  could  have  been  made
perfeft,  would  have  been  introduc'd  in  another  letter,  rather  than  in  the  pre-
fcnt.

34.  A  lailor,  who  was  fifty  years  of  age,  of  a  habit  inclining  to  fatnefs,
given  to  drinking,  and  accuftom'd  to  make  water  with  difficulty  ;  and  for  that
reafon,  perhaps,  fubjedl  to  a  fcrotal  hernia ;  came  into  this  hofpital,  on  account
of  neither  of  thefe  diforders;  but  on  account  of  pain  of  the  fauces,  which,
however,  was  not  of  fuch  a  kind  as  to  prevent  him  from  rifing  out  of  bed
fometimes.

Having  walk'd  in  the  morning,  therefore,  through  the  hofpital,  and  foon
after  gone  to  bed  again,  he  was  found  dead  therein  ;  his  face  being  black,
though  afterwards  pale.  The  day  after,  the  body,  being  ftill  warm,  was
brought  into  the  college,  where  I  had  begun  to  teach  anatomy ;  it  being
about  the  end  of  January  in  the  year  1733.

The  belly  being  open'd  in  the  manner  I  thought  proper,  the  omentum  was
found  to  be  drawn  up  above  the  ftomach,  and  the  neighbouring  inteftine
colon  :  the  liver  was  variegated,  like  a  fine  marble,  with  redifli  and  whitifh
ftreaks  ;  and  was  rather  large  :  but  the  fpleen  was  ftill  larger  in  proportion,
and  yet  not  very  large.

The  kidnies  and  ureters  were  in  a  natural  ftate ;  yet  the  bladder  was  in-
■larg'd,  and  had  its  coats  much  thicken'd.  The  urethra  was  quite  free  from
marks  of  diforder  in  every  part,  although  the  corona  glandis  feem'd  to  have
been  formerly  affedled  with  little  ulcers,  at  the  termination  of  that  and  the
jpreputium,  from  feme  cicatrices  which  remain'd.  The  hernial  fac  was  feen
in  the  fcrotum,  but  was  empty.

The  trunk  of  the  great  artery  was,  in  fome  meafure,  tortuous  where  it  lay
iipon  the  vertebras  of  the  loins  ;  as  the  trunk  of  its  iliac  branch,  which  had
a  bony  hardnefs  in  fome  places,  and  whitifh  fpots  internally,  was  alfo :  but
the  aorta  had  the  fpots  only.

{i)  N.  13.  (»)  Epift.  4.  n.  19.  &  eplil.  10.  n.  tq.

X  X  X  2  In


524  Book  III. Of  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

In  the  thorax  we  found  a  heart  very  much  inlarg'd.  Therein  the  femr-
lunar  valves  were  in  feme  places  very  hard;  and  the  fide  of  the  anterior  mir
tral  was  not  without  bone.  And  although  from  the  vena  cava,  when  cut  in-
to at  the  feptum  tranfverfum,  a  great  quantity  of  black  and  fluid  blood  had
been  difcharg'd  ;  yet  in  both  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  were  polypous  con-
cretions, of  a  pretty  firm  compages,  and  of  a  white  colour,  internally,  in-
clin'd  to  cineritious,  of  which,  that  on  the  right  fide,  being  the  thickelly
was  produc'd  far  into  the  pulmonary  artery ;  and  the  other  into  the  aorta  tO'
ao  inconfiderable  extent.

And  the  great  artery ;  whofe  trunk  feem'd  to  be  univerfally  wider  than  ia
natural,  being  difl:inguifh'd  here  and  there,  on  its  internal  furface,  with'
whicilh  ipots  (fuch  as  I  have  fpoken  of)  from  the  diaphragm  quite  to  the
heart  •,  appear'd  to  be  the  more  frequently  fprinkled  with  thefe  fpots,  the
rearer  it  approach'd  to  the  heart :  fo  that  where  it  is  hoUow'd  out  with  the
three  lefier  finufl!es  of  Valfalva,  it  offer'd,  to  the  view,  fpots  that  were  much
more  evident,  and  would  have  been  foon  chang'd  into  bone.

Befides  certain  parts  betwixt  the  heart  and  the  curvature ;  which  part  ex-
tended more  than  three  inches  in  length,  and  two  in  breadth  ;  it  was,
likewife,  internally  unequal  with  thick,  and  almoft  tortuous,  ruga2 :  nor  were
flight  marks  of  erofion  wanting.  However,  through  the  carotids  the  fpots
were  not  propagated  ;  and  much  lefs  the  other  diforders  :  fo  that  I  was  the
lefs  difpleas'd  to  find,  that,  while  the  accurate  anatomical  examination  of
thefe  parts  I  have  fpoken  of,  as  well  as  of  the  others,  took  up  the  fpace  of
fome  weeks,  as  they  generally  do  -,  and  while  other  parts  were,  in  the  inter-
mediate time,  brought  in  from  other  bodies ;  the  head  of  this  was  buried
without  my  knowledge  :  fo  that  I  could  not  inquire  after  the  caufe  of  the
fudden  death  therein.

The  pharynx,  which  had  been  taken  off,  and  left  behind,  together  with
the  larynx,  I  did  however  examine.  And  the  larynx,  as  well  as  the  whole
afpera  arteria,  and  the  lungs,  were  found.  I  found  the  fides  of  the  pharynx,,
of  which  I  faid  the  man  had  complain'd,  to  be  thicker  than  natural :  and  by
cutting  into  this  thicknefs,  I  faw  that  it  was  owing  to  the  fubfliance  of  the
pharynx  itfelf ;  which  being  more  difliended,  feem'd  to  referable  fomewhat  of
a  middle  nature,  as  it  were,  betwixt  glandular  and  vifcid.

2^.  If  you  diligently  attend  to  thofe  circumftances  that  relate  to  theurinary^
parts,  which  are  the  only  objefts  of  our  prefent  confideration  •,  you  will  cer-
tainly perceive  that  there  was  nothing,  to  which  the  difficulty  of  making  water,
could  be  imputed,  but  the  extreme  thicknefs  of  the  coats  of  the  bladder.
That,  hov/ever,  which  is  produc'd  in  the  Sepulchretum,.from  Guarinoni,  and.
in  the  additamenta  to  this  twenty-fifth  fedlion  (x),  has  not  efcap'd  my  notice:-
for  its  intention  is  to  fhow  that  the  thicknefs,  of  which  we  are  fpeakingj.
"  does  not  always  prevent  the  difcharge  of  the  urine  ;"  as  is  laid  dowain
the  argument  prefix'd  to  that  obfervation.

But  befides  that  Guarinoni,  if  I  rightly  conceive  of  his  opinion  from  a  very
few  words,  is  not  to  be  underftood  to  refer  to  a.  dyfuria,  but  an  ifchuria ;
which  at  length  happens,  when  this  thicknefs  and  hardnefs  have  come  to  their

(x)  Qbf.  19.
4.  highefte


Letter  XLIl. Article  35.  525.

highefl  pitch ;  I  would  alfo  have  you  attend  to  this,  that  I  do  not  fuppofe
even  a  dyfuria  to  be  owing  to  every  kind  of  hardnefs  -,  as,  for  inftance,  whea
this  arifes  only  from  the  fubftance  of  the  flefliy  fibres  being  naturally  enlarg'd,
which  renders  them  ftill  more  proper  for  contraftion  -,  but  from  that  which
not  only  enervates  thefe  fibres,  by  the  interpoficion  of  foreign  juices,  but
caufes  an  infardlion  of  all  the  remaining  coats  of  the  bladder  to  fuch  a.
degree,  as  to  render  them  lefs  flexible  ;  and,  for  that  reafon,  makes  them
obftrud:  the  contradlion  of  the  bladder.

And  indeed,  if  you  read  over,  out  of  the  obfervations  which  are  taken
notice  of  above  (j),  thofe  in  particular,  which  I  pointed  out  from  Camera-
rius,  and  the  A5la  Helvetica;  you  will  clearly  perceive  that  thofe  very  thick
bladders,  were  either  of  a  fubftance  which  was  "fibrous"  indeed,  buc.
"  fcirrhous ;"  or  atleaft  hard  and  callous :  fo  that  notwithftanding  they  were
not  all  "  every  where  agglutinated  to  the  pelvis ;"  as  that  of  Hottinger's
was  -,  yet  they  had  much  difficulty  in  contrafting  themfelves :  from  whence,
finally  thofe  {trainings,  and  endeavours  in  making  water.

And  thefe  we  may  fee  from  the  fame  caufe,  frequently,  even  in  calculous
perfons  alfo  ;  unlefs  by  reafon  of  the  weaknefs  of  the  fphinfter,  the  urine  fome-
times  flows  down  fpontaneoufly.  So  the  bladder  of  the  man  whom  Mauchar-r
tus  (z)  has  delJcrib'd,  was  "  thick  and  almofl:  callous."  Thus,  in  a  nobleman
of  Piftoia,  the  celebrated  Targioni  {a)  faw  the  coats  of  the  bladder  an  inch  in
thicknefs,  callous,  and  full  of  fteatomata ;  fo  that,  as  they  could  not  be  dif-
tended,  they  could  contain  only  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  urine,  betwixt  them--
felves  and  a  large  calculus.

And  as  a  narrownefs,  and  coardation,  of  the  bladder,  are  generally  join'd
with  a  thicknefs  of  the  coats;  as  appears  alfo  from  the  example  of  Fantonus-
(^),  taken  from  a  man,  who,  after  a  long  dyfuria,  from  a  calculus  of  the
bladder,  appear'd,  upon  difleftion,  to  have  the  ureters  very  much-  enlarg'd
indeed  v  but  of  the  bladder  itfelf,  "  by  reafon  of  the  very  great  contraction,  to
"  have  a  vei7  fmall  capacity  "  hence  it  is,  that,  if  they  attempt  to  obtain  a.
cure,  they  are  often  fubje(5l  to  more  confiderable  uneafineffes,,  and  dangers.

For  the  necefiary  motion  of  the  catheter,  when  introduc'd,  being  by  this-
means  prevented  •,  either  the  calculi  cannot  be  properly  inquir'd  after  (as  is
faid  by  Laubius  (c),  in  a  man  whofe  bladder  was  "  very  much  conftrided,
*'  and  thicken'd") ;  or  if  the  furgeon  make  ufe  of  violence,  the  patient  can
by  no  means  bear  it ;  as  we  read  in  the  work  of  the  celebrated  Schreiberus
{d),  in  the  cafe  of  another  perfon,  whofe  bladder,  being  "  extremely  con-
*'  traflted,  had  juft  accommodated  itfelf  to  the  fize  of  the  contain'd  calculus,..
"  and  was  much  incraflated,"  fo  as  to  leave  "  no  room"  for  the  catheter  to.
"  turn  itfelf  in,  when  introduc'd.

And  when  the  bladder  is  cut  into,  that  may  fometimes  happen,  which.
Schrockius  faw  {^e\  even  in  a  dead  body  %  I  mean  that  "  the  bladder  being-..
"  very  thick,  and.  conftridted  about  the  calculus,  the  calculus  could  fcarcely-
*'  be  mov'd  from  that  place,  and  extradted  from  the  pelvis."  To  this  add,,
that  if  the  bladder  "  has  been  rendered  extremely  narrow,  from  a  calculus,"

(y)  N,  33.  (f)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent,  8.,obf.  22.

yz)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  7.  obf.  15-.  frt'^Epift.  fupra  ad  n.  32 cit.

Ca)  Prima  Raccolra  di  Offervaz.  Med.  («■)  Eph,  n,  c.  cent.  10.  obf.  100.

(;*)  De.Obfcr.v.  Med.  &  Anat.  ep.  8.  n.  15.

there:


526  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

there  is  no  room  for  the-  method  of  cure  us'd  by  Foubert,  without  danger
of  a  very  confiderable  error,  as  the  celebrated  Keflelringi us  (/J  has  aflertcd  ;
and  as  Aug.  Fred.  Pallas  (g)  has  very  well  confirm'd;:  even  when  this  method
is  aflifted  by  a  certain  circumftance.

And  this  he  alfo  obferves  of  Rau's  method,  even  with  the  addition  of  a
new  inftrument  (h),  and  in  the  high  apparatus,  as  they  call  it,  he  has  ex-
■prefly  admonifh'd  us  (i),  that  it  is  requifite  the  bladder  fhould  be  ^'  found
*'  and  large."

But  what  we  have  hitherto  faid  of  the  great  diminution,  for  the  mofl:  part,
of  the  capacity  of  the  bladder ;  join'd  with  a  thicknefs  of  the  coats,  and  a
difficulty  of  extenfion ;  is  not  only  of  importance  to  the  lithotomift  to  con-
fider,  but  greatly  to  the  phyfician.

For,  by  way  of  example,  if  a  perfon,  fubje£t  to  a  dyfuria,  is  feiz'd  with  a
fuppreffion  of  urine  in  the  bladder ;  he  will  not  eafily  fufFer  himfelf  to  be
impos'd  upon  by  the  appearance  of  a  fmall  tenfion  of  the  hypogaftrium  ;  as
a  furgeon  I  have  already  taken  notice  of  did  (k) ;  fo  as  to  believe  that  it  is
not  yet  time  to  draw  off  the  water  by  the  catheter.

For  from  a  flight,  but  very  troublefome  tenfion,  in  that  part,  he  will  con-
jefture  that  there  is  already  as  much  urine  in  the  bladder,  as  a  narrow,  and
but  little  extendible,  bladder  of  this  kind  can  contain  ;  efpecially  if  the  pa-
tient be  pretty  far  advanc'd  in  years,  fo  that  it  may  feem  very  probable  for  a
liardnefs  and  rigidity,  from  old  age,  to  be  over  and  above  added  5,  and  if,  be-
fore the  fuppreffion,  he  had  been  accuftom'd  to  make  water  very  often,  and
but  little  at  a  time.  I  never  repented  of  having  been  induc'd,  by  the  confi-
deration  of  thefe  things,  to  accelerate  the  drawing  off  of  the  fupprefs'd  urine  in
time.

36.  Although  this  letter  is  already  carried  out  to  a  great  length,  yet  if  we,
would  comprife  the  other  diforders,  which  relate  to  difficulty  in  difcharging
the  .urine,  in  the  fame  letter  •,  as  I  have  promis'd  in  the  beginning ;  we  muft,
of  courfe,  touch  upon  many  things  in  a  curfory  manner.

Firft  then,  to  the  other  caufes  of  this  difficulty,  whereof  I  have  hitherto
treated,  thofe  alfo  muft  be  added,  which  are  to  be  met  with  in  the  urethra.
That  the  proftate  gland,  v/hich  comprizes  the  beginning  of  this  canal,  may,
by  being  indurated,  and  growing  out  into  a  preternatural  fize,  not  only  ren-
der the  difcharge  of  the  urine  difficult,  but  totally  obftruft  it,  has  been  fhown
,in  the  preceding  letter  (I).

But  when,  from  an  ulcer  and  confin'd  pus,  this  gland  at  the  fame  time
grows  callous,  and  fwells ;  it  may  fometimes  happen,  that,  by  the  effufion
of  the  pus,  the  internal  furface  may  be  decreas'd  in  its  fubftance,  and  the
fwelling  fubfide  -,  and  even  that  being  eroded  with  ulcers,  it  may  leave  fo
much  the  more  open  a  paffage  for  the  urine,  becaufe  a  callus,  in  the  fame
manner  as  the  fcirrhus  of  the  proftate,  remark'd  by  the  very  excellent  Hal-
ler  (m),  prevents  the  a6tion  of  the  fphindfcer  in  conftringing  the  orifice  of  iie
bladder,

f/J  DI/Tert.  de  Hift.  &Meth  Foubert.  n.  57.  (;)  Ibid.  ^  iS.

Cg)  Differt.  de  variis  calculi, fecandi  Me-  fij  Epilt.  41.  n.  14,

tiiodis  §.  59.  cO  N.  13.  14.  17.  &  feq.

-Ci>)  Ibid.  §.  29.  {m)  Opufc.  Pathol,  obf.  35.

4  At


Letter  XLII. Article  2^-  527

At  tfiis  time  therefore,  a  ftillicidium  of  urine  will  be  brought  on  ;  as  in  the
©bfervation  of  the  celebrated  Fantonus  /wy,  which  I  think  may  be  thus  ex-
plain'd.  But  when  the  cafe  is  at  one  time  as  I  have  juftdefcrib'd,  and  at  an-
ther time,  the  difcharge  of  the  new  pus,  from  the  proftate,  is  prevented ;
and  from  hence  the  internal  furface  of  the  gland  again  becomes  tumid,  be-
low that  upper  callus  ;  fometimes'a  ftillicidium  of  urine  will  be  the  confe-
quence,  and  fometimes  a  difficulty  of  difcharging  it :  and  this  latter,  fre-
quently, will  be  fo  confiderable,  as  to  degenerate  into  a  fuppreffion  full  of
danger  ;  which  danger  will  be  the  greater,  if  either  the  inflammation,  or  the
hardnefs,  and  tumour,  of  this  gland,  forbid  the  ufe  of  the  catheter.

Thefe  circumftances  have  not  only  occur'd  to  others,  and  fometimes  to-
tnyfelf,  in  the  praftice  of  medicine ;  but  had  occur'd  alfo  to  Valfalva,  I  fee.
In  the  cafe  of  a  certain  knight,  for  whom  writing  an  opinion  in  the  year
1714,  he  anlwer'd,  that,  if  a  fuppreffion  of  this  kind  happen  to  be  brought
on  ;  and  it  is  not  poffible  to  open  the  natural  pafTage  for  the  urine ;  what  hadi
heen  propos'd  by  others  was  alfo  approv'd  by  him  :  I  mean  that  they  fhould
open  a  new  palTage,  by  forcing  a  proper  inftrument  through  the  perinseum
with  dexterity.

And  indeed,  he  moreover  added,  that  if  any  thing  fhould  happen  to  for-
bid the  performance  of  this  operation  ;  neceffity  then  obliging  us  to  attempt
fomething-,  we  might  draw  out  the  urine,  by  plunging  in  the  trocar,  us'd  in
the  paracentelis  of  dropfical  perfons,  immediately  above  the  ofla  pubis  ;  and
paffing  it  obliquely  downwards  to  the  bladder:  and  this  I  was  willing  to  ob-
ferve,  that  you  might  alfo  know,  what  he  thought  of  both  thefe  methods  of
relief;  if  the  urine  cannot  be  drawn  out  in  any  other  manner  •,  fo  that  the  life
of  the  patient  may  be,  in  the  mean  while,  preferv'd,  till  art,  or  nature,  fliall
open  again  the  natural  paflage  of  the  urine.

For  as  to  the  punfture  in  the  hypogaftrium  ;  Weitbrecht  (<?)  wrote  to  Goet-
zius,  that  it  was  "  commended  by  fome  and  blam'd  by  others,"  when  per-
form'd  in  a  certain  fold'ier  at  Peterfburg ;  and  that  he  left  it  to  be  determin'd
by  the  furgeons,  "  whether  this  method  deferves  blame,  or  praife  and  imi-
*'  tation:"  but  certainly,  for  ten  days  this  operation  had  been  of  much  ad-
"\iantage,  till  the  other  parts,  and,  among  thefe,  thofe  alfo  which  had  been  the
eaufe  of  the  fuppreffion  of  urine,  were  likewife  the  caufe  of  death ;  the
diffedlion  fliowing  the  diforders  of  thefe  parts,  but  not  the  leaft  injury  of
thole  through  which  the  inftrument  had  pafs'd  ;  and  confequently  confirming
the  opinion  of  thofe  excellent  authors,  who  had  before  recommended  it ;
though  perhaps,  at  that  time,  they  were  not  fo  well  known  in  general.

But  as  to  the  puncture  in  perinaeo  ;  I  fuppofe  Valfalva  was  not  ignorant^
that  his  college,  of  Bologna,  furnift»'d  him  with  an  authority  which  he  might
follow;  I  mean  Zecchius ;  who  was  formerly  a  very  eminent  phyfician,  and
who  wrote  upon  the  fubjeft  to  Rota  (p),  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  ftiow  that
he  bcliev'd  himfelf  to  be  the  inventor  of  that  happy  remedy.

And  although  Riolanus  (q),  where  he  commends  that  upper  punfture,  and
this  inferior  fedtion  likewife ;  and  this  if  there  be  neceffity  even  at  the  fide  of

{>ij  Epift.  fupra  ad  n.  35.  cit.  8.  n.  18.  (/>)  Confult.  Med.  58.

(0)  Commerc.  Litter,  a.  1733.  hebd,  2-  n.  1. /  (y)  Encheirid.  anat.  1.  2,  c  jo.

the


52-8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  perineum  -,  in  which  he  has  his  followers  even  now,  who  make  ufe  of  t1i3
fame  inftrument  there,  that  they  ufe  in  the  hypogaftrium  ;  although,  I  fay,
-he  objefts  to  Zecchius,  that  this  remedy  had  been  made  ufe  of  "  by  the  Pari-
"  fian  phyficians,  already,  for  a  hundred  years ;"  yet  Zecchius,  though  he
was  a  verv  young  man  a  hundred  years  before,  was  neverthelefs  of  fuch  an
age,  that  he  might  have  learn'd  it  from  nature  herfelf  •,  and  by  nature  he  fays
he  was  "  taught  -,"  when,  "  an  abfcefs  being  ruptur'd  "  in  the  perinseum,
in  calculous  perfons,  v/hich  abfcefs  "  had  been  fpontaneoufly  form'd  there,"
he  had  feen  "  that  all  the  pains,  and  difagreeble  fymptoms,  in  making  water
"  were  remov'd."

37.  That  anfwer  of  Valfalva,  of  which  I  fpoke  juft  now,  is  to  a  furgeon  of
•Lombardy,  who,  confulting  him  in  the  patient's  name,  had  alfo,  among
other  things,  inform'd  him  of  this  circumftance  -,  which  deferves  to  be  taken
■notice  of  here  ;  "  that  he  remember'd  to  have  found  a  ftone  in  the  proftatc
"  o-land,  when  he  diffedted  the  body  of  his  eminence  the  cardinal  Morigi."

-For  this  is  thedifeafe  of  which  Chriftopher  Pohlius  treated,  when  hepub-
lifh'd  a  diflertation,  at  Leipfic,  in  the  year  1737,  De projiatis  calculo  affeSlis;
examinino^  the  difeafe  with  a  laudable  defign  certainly  •,  from  which,  befides
a  dyfuria,  and  a  frequent  ftimulus  to  make  water,  other  inconveniences  may
arife,  and  among  thefe  pains  either  in  the  affedted  part,  or  even  in  the  whole
■urethra  i  in  confequence  of  its  not  being  fufficiently  guarded  againft  the  acri-
mony of  the  urine,  by  reafon  of  the  quantity  of  invifcating  humour  in  the
proftate  being  much  diminifli'd,  or  the  nature  thereof  vitiated.

It  were  to  be  wifh'd  that  the  old  man  (who  had  been  a  porter  in  his  life-
time) in  whom  Pohlius  found  thofe  calculi,  had  had  none  in  the  kidnies ;
and  even  had  had  thefe  parts  perfedly  found  :  and  that  there  had  been  no  con-
fiderable  marks  of  inflammation  -,  even  in  the  lower  part  of  the  bladder  itfelf,
above  the  proftate  gland  •,  but  particulariy  that  no  tumour,  arifing  from  the
gland  itfelf,  had  been  internally  prominent  about  that  part,  to  the  bignefs  of
a  cherry  •,  and  fimilar  to  a  fcirrhus,  except  that  it  abounded  with  pus.

That  is  to  fay,  we  are  at  liberty  to  doubt,  whether  all  the  figns  of  the  difeafe,
which  Pohlius  coliefted  from  the  friends  of  the  deceas'd,  with  great  care  and
prudence,  were  the  effefts  principally  of  thofe  calculi :  as  you  might,  with
very  good  reafon,  doubt,  whether  fome  of  the  fymptoms  defcrib'd  above,
by  me,  in  Cortini  (r),  fbould  be  refer'd  to  that  tartareous,  and  almoft  calcu-
lous matter,  which  was  contain'd  in  a  certain  finus  within  this  gland.

And  in  another  man  -,  of  whom  mention  will  be  made  by  me,  on  account
of  the  peculiar  and  original  conftitution  of  the  preputium  and  glans ;  when  I
found  certain  yellow,  and  fmall  calculi,  fix'd  up  pretty  high  in  the  proftate  -,
I  could  not  poffibly  leairn,  what  inconveniences  had  been  occafion'd  to  him
therefrom:  and  that  by  reafon  of  his  being  a  foreigner,  who  had  been  taken
into  this  hofpital,  on  account  of  a  very  acute  and  fatal  inflammation  of  the
thorax.

This  however  I  perceiv'd ;  that  there  could  be  no  emiilion  of  femen  by
any  means  :  as  the  calculi  were  fituated,  and  fix'd,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  in-
iirely  to  prevent  its  difcharge. And  this  obfervation  brought  to  mind  others

HN.  ,;,.


Letter  XLII. Artkle  37.  529

that  I  had  read.  For  Marcellus  Donatus  (s)  has  faid,  that  a  man,  in  whofe
proftate  he  found  a  ftone  infix'd,  "  could  not  difcharge  femen,  in  coitu,  ex-
*'  cept  in  a  very  fmall  quantity,  and  very  watery."

And  Frederic  Loffius  (/)  tells  us,  that  the  caufe  of  fterility,  or  impotence,
fometimes  is  "  a  calculus  very  clofely  fliutting  up  that  meatus,  which  opens
"  from  the  proflatse  into  the  urethra."  And  among  thefe  authors  it  feems
proper  that  we  fliould  reckon  Nicolaus  de  Blegny  (k)  ;  who  relates  that  the
ejaculation  of  the  femen  had  been,  in  like  manner,  prevented,  in  another
man,  on  account  of  the  feminal  caruncle  being  become  tumid  and  hard  -,  be-
caufe  the  femen  "  had  been  there  harden'd  into  a  ftone,  and  the  vafa  ejacula-
"  toria  were  full  of  very  hard  ftones,"  moft  of  which  were  of  the  (hape  and
fize  of  a  pea.

And  Fabriclus  Bartholetus,  who  ought  to  have  been  mention'd  be-
fore, obferv'd,  according  to  the  relation  of  Rhodius  (x),  that,  in  the  pro-
ftate, "  a  calculus  had  been  generated  from  retain'd  femen ;  and  the  orifice
*'  of  the  bladder  being  comprefs'd  thereby,  the  urine  was  prevented  from
"  flowing  down."  But  I  wonder  that  Rhodius,  and  Bartholin  (^ij,  when
taking  notice  of  this  obfervation,  ftiould,  contrary  to  the  cuftom  of  both  of
them,  omit  to  mention  that  which  I  have,  in  the  firft  place,  pointed  out
from  Donatus ;  not  to  fay  that  I  am  furpriz'd  they  fhould  omit  another,  which
is  in  the  fame  author  Donatus  (z),  "  of  a  very  fmall  ftone,"  found  in  the
proftate  of  a  phyfician  of  Mantua.

And  Terraneus  (a)  even  relates,  that  he  had  obferv'd,  in  an  old  man ;
"  who  was  calculous  in  his  kidnies,  his  fpleen,  and  his  lungs  ;  fmall  and  un-
"  equal  calculi  in  the  tubuli  of  the  proftate,  and  in  thofe  of  the  vafa  defe-  ■
>*  rentia  which  ejaculate  the  femen  at  the  beginning  of  the  urethra-,  which
"  calculi  caus'd  uneafinefs,  and  obftruftion,  both  in  refpedl  of  the  urine,
*'  which  was  to  fall  from  above,  and  of  the  femen  when  about  to  be  dif-
"  charg'd."

And  before  him  James  Douglafs  (b)  has  aflerted,  that  he  had  found,  in
another  old  man,  "  fome  fmall  hard  bodies,  fimilar  to  white  peas  -,  as  to
"  confiftence  correfponding  with  the  body  before  mention'd"  (that  is  to  fay,
with  one  found  in  the  tumour  of  a  woman,  which  whether  it  was  bony,  or
rather  ftony,  or  tartareous,  he  left  undetermin'd)  "  but  more  polifh'd,  as
"  to  the  external  furface  ;  fome  of  which  lay  upon  the  very  body  of  thtfe
"  glands"  (that  is  the  proftatae)  "  while  fome  adher'd,  by  fmall  roots,  to
*'  the  membrane  which  cover'd  thefe  glands."

On  thefe  obfervations  then,  I  was  willing  to  take  nodce  of  to  you  here,  not
becaufe  they  are  not  commonly  enough  known  ;  for  many  of  them  are  trans-
fer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  (c),  although  fome  in  one  place,  and  fome  in
another ;  but  that  you  may  add  them  to  the  obfervations  of  Pohlius,  and
ours :  although  from  none  of  them,  a  fufficiently  peculiar  fign  can  be  drawn,
in  order  to  diftinguifh  calculi  of  the  proftate.

(s)  De  Medica  Hifl.  Mirab.  1.  4.  c.  30.  (a)  De  Gland,  c.  5.

Ct)  L.  I.  Obf.  Med.  33,  (i)  Vid.  Aft.  Eradit.  Lipf.  a.  1707.  m.  Fe-

(a)  Zodiac.  Med.  Gall.  a.  2.  Mart.  obf.  4.  bruar.

^xj  Cent.  3.  Obf.  Med.  27. ,  {c)  L.  3.  feft.  24.  obf.  17.  §.  4-  &  ft<S-  34-

CyJ  Cent.  4.  Epift,  Med.  6.  obf.5.  §.  4.  &  obf,  6.  §.  i .  &  in  additam  obf.  3.

(z)  C.  30.  cit.

Vol.  If.  y  y  y  For


530  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

For,  although  in  moft  of  thofe  which  I  have  quoted,  the  ejaculation  of  the-
femen  was  prevented  j  yet  this  does  not  happen  from  every  calculus  of  the
proftate,  nor  from  theie  alone  :  for  neither  are  all  of  them  in  fuch  a  fitua-
tion  as  to  be  able  to  obftruft,  or  comprefs,  both  the  feminal  duds,  nor  does
the  obftrudtion,  or  compreffion,  of  thefe  dufts,  fail  to  be  brought  on,  fome-
times,  by  other  caufes.

But  may  we  fuppofe  thefe  fame  calculi  to  be  fometimes  generated,  among
other  matters,  from  that  alfo  which  we  very  frequently  meet  with,  under  the
appearance  of  granules  of  tobacco,  within,  or  about,  this  gland,  when  we
cannot  fufpedl  them  to  have  been  form'd  of  the  feminal  matter  ?  You  will  be
able  to  judge,  of  yourfelf,  when  I  fhall  fpeak  both  of  that  matter,  and  of  the
finufles  that  fometimes  contain  it,  and  of  the  other  diforders  of  the  proftate,
in  treating  of  the  gonorrhoea  (d),

38.  In  touching  flightly,  at  prefent,  upon  fome  of  the  diforders,  which  are
ialfo  common  to  the  other  parts  of  the  urethra ;  I  fhall  by  no  means  repeat
what  has  been  faid  of  calculi,  which  I  have  already  {e)  defcrib'd,  as  found
under  the  internal  membrane  of  this  canal,  in  the  body  of  a  woman.

We  fhall  rather  fay,  what  appearances  have  ofFer'd  themfelves  to  us,  in  the
whole  of  the  urethra  (in  fo  great  a  number  of  bodies,  that  we  have  difledted)
which  may  relate  to  the  controverfy  concerning  the  nature  of  caruncles ;  for
fo  they  are  call'd  •,  which  almoft  every  body  formerly  fuppos'd  to  be  gene-
rated therein,  efpecially  if  a  virulent  gonorrhcea  had  preceded;  though  now
this  opinion  is  embrac'd  by  very  few  -,  and  the  difficulty  of  making  water,  as
well  as  the  obftrudlions  the  catheter  meets  with,  and  which  they  attributed  to
caruncles,  have  different  caufes  affign'd  for  them  at  prefent  by  different  per-
fons ;  and  among  others  cicatrices  in  particular,  or  turgid  and  varicofe  blood
veflels,  that  caule  a  coarftation  in  fome  parts  of  the  urethra ;  to  which  laft-
kind  the  twenty-fecond  of  thofe  obfervations,  which  are  added  to  this  twen-
ty-fifth feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  likewife  relates.

And  even  the  corpus  fpongiofum  urethra  itfelf,  is  faid  to  protuberate
within  the  cavity  of  this  canal  in  that  part ;  where  the  gonorrhcea  has  pretty-
much  weaken'dfome  parts  of  the  internal  coat.

And  as  this  coat  is  lb  thin,  you  will,  I  apprehend,  be  lefs  furpriz'd,  if  it
does,  at  any  time,  give  way  to  the  force  of  the-  blood,  which  diftends  the-
cells  of  that  body  j  as  the  parietes  of  the  corpora  fpongiofa  penis,  which,
are  fo  much  more  thick  and  ftrong,  are  fometimes  alfo  rais'd  up  into  a  knot
of  that  kind  ;  as  -was  formerly  hinted  even  by  Arantius  (f).

The  very  experienc'd  Goulard  (g)  thinks,  that  this  kind  of  obftruflion  is
more  frequent  in  the  urethra,  than  others  •,  the  exiftence  of  which  however  he
does  not  deny  ;  as  it  is  more  fitted,  (which  he  demonftrates)  to  account  for
the  phenomena;  and  among  thefe,  this  likewife :  how  it  happens,  that,  fre-
quently, no  obfhacle  occurs  in  the  bodies  of  fome  perfons  after  death,  who
have  complain'd  of  them  when  living,  even  to  the  very  day  of  their  death.

That  is  to  fay,  the  caufe  which  had  forc'd  thefe  cells,  ceafing  in  death ;
.together  with  the  power  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  ;  they  are  by  degrees


{d)  Epift.  44.  n.  20.  &  feq.  (f)  De  Tumor,  p.  n.  c.  50.

\e)  Epift,  33.  n,  34,  {g)  Traite  des  Maladies  de  I'Urethra.


depleted.


Letter  XLIl. Article  38,  531

depleted,  fubfide,  and  leave  no  traces  behind,  or  at  leaft  none,  that  can
ftrike  the  eyes  of  the  anatomical  inquirer.

Nevertheleis,  I  believe  that  when  they  really  did  exift  in  the  living  body,
they  may  be  fubjefted  to  the  eyes  after  death,  if  the  fpongy  body  of  the
urethra  be  diftended  by  blowing-in  air  ;  in  the  fame  proportion  as  it  had  been
djftended  in  the  living  body  by  blood;  and  if  the  urethra  be  dried  in  this
manner,  and  cut  into  :  for  then,  without  doubt,  tlie  place,  within  this  canal,
will  come  into  view,  where  the  obftacle  us'd  to  be  perceiv'd.

However,  fome  are  not  wanting  who  ftill  contend  for  the  exiftence  of  ca-
runcles, in  the  feveral  parts  of  the  urethra;  but  particularly  would  have  them
allow'd  of  in  the  feminal  caruncles  itfelf,  when  tumid  :  among  whom  alfo
was  Lancifi  himfelf,  in  his  letters  to  Genfelius  {h) ;  but  no  body  has  treated
the  fubjecl  more  accurately,  and  at  large,  than  Benevoli  (i),  who  has
taught ;  not  only  by  referring  to  (as  the  former  author  has  done)  but  even  by
producing,  the  whole  of  his  own  obfervations  ^  that  this  difeafe  was  in  that
fame  exulcerated  caruncle.

Yet  this  author  has  not  denied  ;  which  I  would  wifh  to  have  remark'd,  by
one  and  another  very  learned  author,  confider'd  in  other  views  ;  nay  has  even
-cxprefsly  confefs'd  (k),  that  there  may  be  other  obftacles  in  the  urethra  be-
sides ;  fome  of  which  he  alfo  found  from  narrownefTes,  corrugations,  and  c-
-catrices ;  and  even  fometimes  from  a  kind  of  flefhy  excrefcence :  and  he
contends  only  for  this  one  thing,  that  all  thofe  peculiar  figns,  by  which  he
diftinguifh'd  the  difeafe  whereof  he  was  fpeaking,  from  other  obftacles ;  which
he  was  very  well  acquainted  with,  and  which  oppofe  themfelves  to  the  urine
and  the  catheter ;  could  not  arife  from  thefe,  as  they  did  from  the  feminal
caruncle  when  ulcerated.

And  if  others  take  pains  to  fliow  that  thefe  may  be  better  diftinguifh'd  from
iCach  other,  by  certain  marks ;  as  he  has  done  in  regard  to  his  ;  it  is  not  to  be
doubted  but  this  muft  be  of  great  importance  to  the  phyfician :  as  it  is  of
great  importance  to  make  different  prediftions  in  different  kinds  of  obftacles ;
and  at  the  fame  time  ufe  a  different  kind  of  treatment ;  or  at  leaft  to  avoid  im-
proper methods.

You  fee  that  I,  in  a  controverfy  which  is  in  other  refpefts  abftrufe,  by  rea-
fon  of  the  obfervations  being  fo  very  different ;  rejedt  none  of  thefe,  in  con-
formity to  the  equity  of  Celfus,  and  the  judgment  of  the  moft  excellent  men.
"  It  is  to  be  fuppos'd,"  fays  Celfus  (l) ;  although  fpeaking  of  another  fub-
jedl ;  "  that  every  perfon  has  omitted  what  has  not  come  under  his  know-
"  ledge,  and  that  no  one  has  pretended  to  fee  what  he  has  not  feen."

And  Aftruc  {m),  Heifter  (»),  and  Platner  (o),  to  whom  you  may  alfo  add
Waltherus  (p)^  do  not  doubt  but  there  are  different  kinds  of  obftacles  in  dif-
ferent perfons ;  nor  do  they  fuppofe  it  oT  importance,  whether  every  one  has

(h)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  6.  obf.  84.  («)  Inftit.  Chir.  p.  2.  §.  9.  c.  38.  n.  i,

(i)  Nudva  Propofiz.  int.  alia  Carunc,  I'oJ  Inftit.  Chir.  §.  1^36.

(/f)  C.  2.  &  c.  3.  (p)  Diflert.  de  ColloViril.  Vefic.  &  est.  §.

(.')  De  Medic.  1.  7.  c.  14. ^  15.  &  feq.
(mj  De  Mori).  Vener.  I.  3.  c.  4.  §.  4.  &a-
])bi.

Y  y  y  2  feen


532  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ken  all  thefe  kinds :  for  it  is  enough  that  each  of  them  is  confirm'd  by  ob-
fervations  upon  which  we  may  depend.

Thus  we  readily  admit  of  the  caruncle  which  Genfelius  himfelf  found  (^) ;
and  not  with  lefs  readinefs  than  we  do  of  the  ftridures,  and  coardlacions  of
the  urethra,  feen  by  Brunnerus  (r),  and  others.  But  I  do  not  with  equal
readinefs  allow  of  all  thofc,  which  each  of  thefe  authors  has  added.  Nor
are  they  all  of  them  obfervations,  relating  to  this  fubjeft,  but  conjeftures -,  I
fay  even  thofe  which  are  fubjoin'd,  as  obfervations,  by Genfelius.

For  what  reference  to  this  difeafe,  have  thofe  tpy/aola  of  the  urethra,
fpoken  of  by  Hippocrates  C^),  or  "  very  fmall  abfceflTes",  as  Celfus  fpeaks  (t);
which  being  fuppurated  foon,  as  generally  happens,  "  health  is  reftor'd,"
immediately,  upon  the  difcharge  of  the  pus  ?  Others,  indeed,  do  relate  there-
to. But  has  not  every  one,  who  fuppofes  himfelf  to  have  cur'd  a  caruncle,
at  lead  brought  the  fame  proof  of  his  opinion,  that  Galen  (u)  produces  j
who  having  broken,  with  the  catheter,  a  caruncle  which  "  had  arifen  from
"  an  ulcer,  faw  not  only  fome  blood  follow  the  excretion  of  the  urine,  but
"  alfo  fragments  of  fiefh."

Thofe  who  have  found  caruncles  exifting  in  the  body  after  death,  which
is  the  moft  certain  method  of  obferving  them,  are,  when  all  taken  together,
much  fewer  in  number,  than  Genfelius  feems  to  believe  ;  if  you  fet  afidc
thofe,  who,  though  they  have  feen  flefhy  excrefcences  in  the  urethra,  yet
have  not  feen  them  as  form'd  therein ;  which  is  the  fpecies  we  inquire  after
here  -,  but  have  obferv'd  them  to  be  hanging  down  from  the  bladder,  from
whence  they  arofe,  into  the  urethra.

And  this  being  the  ftate  of  the  queftion,  you  will,  I  fuppofe,  be  lefs  fur-
priz'd  if  I  fay,  that,  notwithftanding  the  great  number  of  urethras,  which  I
have  attentively  examin'd,  fince  the  time  I  firfl:  gave  myfelf  tothe  ftudy  of  ana-
tomy ;  and  the  number  I  ftill  infpedt  every  year;  I  have  made  but  one  certain
obfervation  of  a  flefhy  excrefcence ;  whereas  I  have  many  of  cicatrices,  and  co-
arftations ;  and  this  one  of  excrefcence  was  not  without  thefe  other  fpecies  of
difeafe.

39.  A  young  man  died  of  a  wound  in  the  head,  in  this  hofpital,  about
the  middle  of  December  in  the  year 1717.

The  vifcera  of  the  belly,  the  great  artery,  and  the  larynx  •,  in  the  exami-
nation of  which  parts  I  was  then  wholly  taken  up  ;  being  firfl:  accurately  in-
fpefted,  and  demonfl:rated  to  thofe  who  were  prefent ;  I  found  thefe  preter-
natural appearances.

The  fl:omaCh  was  enlarg'd,  and  had  fcarcely  any  rugse.  The  liver  was
bigger  than  it  naturally  is  ;  as  the  hepatic  artery  alfo  was.  The  kidnies  had.
many  cicatrices  :  but  the  glans  penis  ftill  more  ;  as  it  was  become  very  much
deform'd,  and  very  fmall,  by  reafon  of  large  cicatrices.

From  thence,  the  urethra  was  very  evidently  much  fl:reighten*d,  quite  to  a^
third  part  of  its  length:  nor  did  any  of  thofe  larger  canals,  that  l  have  defcrib'd
in  a  former  work  {x),  appear  any  where ;  but  their  place  was,  in  general,.

CgJ  Vid.  obf.  84.  cit.  (/)  L.  3.  c.  8.

(r)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  I.  obf.  71.  &  97.  (a)  De  Loc.  Aff.  1.  I.  C.  I.

(s)  Sea.  4.  aph.  82.  fxj  Adverf,  I.  n,  10.

tnkem


Letter  XLII. Article  40, 41.  533

taken  up  by  an  interrupted  line,  which  a  thin  excrefcence  of  luxuriant  flefh
compos'd.

The  other  part  of  the  canal ;  being  cut  open,  quite  to  the  bladder,  and  exa-
min'd  very  attentively  ;  iliow^  no  mark  of  difeale  :  as  the  larynx  did  not  in
like  manner;  if  you  except  the  epiglottis,  which  was  not  quite  found.  Buc
the  great  artery  was  internally  unequal,  and  had  marks  of  beginning  ofiifi-
cation,  and  corrofion  ;  though  fomewhat  obfcure :  befides,  a  little  above  the
heart,  it  was  become  much  wider  than  is  natural.

40.  I  diflefled  the  carcafe  of  an  old  man  -,  who  was  a  foreigner,  in  the
fame  place,  and  almoft  about  the  fame  time  ;  the  other  of  whofe  diforders  I
have  not  remark'd  in  my  papers.  That  he  had  been  infefted  with  the  ve-
nereal difeafe,  as  well  as  the  young  man  of  whom  I  fpoke  juft  now,  the  ap-
pearances, which  I  fhall  give  you  an  account  of,  will  fufficiently  demon-
ftrate.

For  when  the  belly  was  open'd,  and  I  had  found  one  of  the  kidnies  very
large,  the  other  more  contrafted  than  natural,  and  the  ureter  of  this  laft  al-
moft univerfally  dilated  ;  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  admit  the  point  of  my  little
finger ;  and  befides  thefe,  the  bladder  large,  having  its  parietes  thicken'd;
and  purulent  -,  I  turn'd  my  eyes  to  the  urethra,  and  the  penis.  The  glans
penis  was  hollow'd  out  with  many  deep  cicatrifes :  and  the  urethra  was  very
much  contrafted,  fo  that  I  was  fcarcely  able  to  demc^nftrate,  therein,  one  of
thofe  fmall  canals,  which  are  fpoken  of  above.

The  other  parts  did  not  feem  to  be  pret^rnaturally  affefted  -,  except  that
the  epiglottis  was  not  perfetlly  found,  and  the  neareft  part  of  the  tongue,,
which  is  cover'd  vflth  glands,  was  here  and  there  disfigur'd  with  little
ulcers.

41.  As  to  the  appearances  which  I  obferv'd  in  the  urethra' of  both  thefe
perfons ;  though  it  was  eafy  to  perceive  from  what  caufe  they  had  arifen,
yet  it  was  not  in  our  power  to  know  what  effefts  they  had  produc'd  :  that  is,-
what  inconveniences  they  had  occafion'd  in  making  water ;  as  it  likewife  hap-
pen'd  in  regard  to  other  appearances,  which,  being  found  by  me  in  other  ure-
thras, by  difledlion,  I  have  either  given  you  the  defcription  of  already,  or
Ihall  give  hereafter.

For  I  fhall  tell  you  (y),  when  I  treat  of  the  gonorrhoea  (z),  that,  in  a
young  man  who  died  of  a  wound  in  the  neck,  I  had  met  with  an  oblong
whitifh  line,  a  little  protuberant,  going  obliquely  from  the  middle  of  the
urethra,  towards  the  farther  part  of  that  canal ;  as  I  alfo  met  with  fome
other  little  chords  in  an  afthmatie  m&n{a),  not  without  a  contraftion  of  the
urethra.

And  I  faid  in  the  fortieth  letter  (b),  that  in  an  old  manj  who  had  been
taken  off  by  the  rupture  of  an  aneurifm,  I  found  the  urethra  cicatriz'd  in  fe-
veral  places ;  and  fibres,  befides,  obliquely  prominent,  betwixt  the  feminal
caruncle,  and  the  bladder :  and  in  like  manner  in  the  fourth  letter  (c),  that  in-
the  ftable-keeper,  who  died  apopleftic,  I  met  with  oblong  whitifh  lines,  ob-
liquely prominent,  in  two  places  of  the  urethra;  and  in  one,  ac  leaft,  op,po&

(ji)  Vid.  etiamepift.  63.11. 13.  '  (^)  N.  29.

fzj  Epift.  44.  n.  7.  fcj  N.  190

(^)  Ibidi  n,  10.  ■

ins.


534  Book  i^I- ^f  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ino-  themfelves  to  the  probe  when  introduc'd :  and  finally,  in  the  tenth  let-
ter I  have  faid  {d),  that  in  the  body  of  a  paralytic  man,  who  had  been  taken
off  by  convulfions,  I  likewife  found  certain  oblique,  and  almoft  flefhy,  fibril-
Is,  in  that  part  of  the  urethra,  where  fome  objiacle  ufed  to  lie  in  the  way  of
the  catheter.

Now  if  with  that  line,  which  I  faid,  juft  now  (f),  was  made  up  of  a  thin  ex-
crefcence  of  luxuriant  flefh,  you  compare  thefe  almoft  flelhy  fibrilte,  and
thofe  fibres ;  and  with  both  of  thefe,  in  like  manner,  compare  the  oblique  and
prominent  lines ;  you  will  perhaps  fufpedl,  with  me,  that  a  kind  of  thin  ex-
crefcences  do  now  and  then  fucceed  to  fome  certain  erofions  of  the  urethra,
which  excrefcences,  when  contrafted,  firft  refemble  fibres,  or  fiefliy  fibrills  j
but  when  more  and  more  dried,  do,  at  length,  put  on  the  appearance  of
whitilh  and  fomewhat  prominent  lines :  and  therefore  it  muft  have  happen'd
to  me,  to  have  feen  excrefcences  of  this  kind  frequently,  if  I  could  have  in-
fpefted  thefe  urethras,  while  the  diibrder  was  more  recent.  Yet,  on  the
other  hand,  it  is  not  abfurd,  to  fuppofe,  that  as  I  have  more  than  once  feen
the  urethr.i  cicatriz'd,  and  very  manifeftly  ftreighten'd  •,  fo  thefe  lines  may
be,  in  Ibme  meafure,  the  confequence  of  thofe  appearances,

42.  I  have  frequently  differed,  and  accurately  examin'd,  the  urethras  of
women  alfo  •,  though  not  fo  frequently  as  thofe  of  men.  But  hitherto  I  have
not  lit  on  any  one  (unlefs  you  would  perhaps  except  one,  whereof  I  fhall
fpeak  prefently)  which  had  cicatrices,  and  much  lefs  excrefcences  :  nor  is  it
to  be  wonder'd  at,  in  a  very  fhort,  and  not  very  narrow  canal,  into  which
neither  fo  many  humours,  that  have  the  power  of  eroding,  are  difcharg'd,
nor  does  any  flexure  happen  therein,  and  Hill  lefs  fo  much  as  is  obferv'd  in
the  male  urethra.  Yet  that  in  the  female  urethra,  both  ulcers  and  excref-
cence,  or  at  leaft  fome  long-continu'd  obftacles,  may  arife,  I  have  learn'd
from  Aftruc  and  Alghifi  ;  the  former  of  whom  (f)  has  more  than  once  feen
the  body,  with  which  the  female  urethra  is  furrounded,  fuppurated,  and
fiflulous,  opening  within  the  urethra,  and  difcharging  pus ;  and,  at  other
times,  that  the  urethra  was  immoderately  ftreighten'd  by  the  fame  tumid  and
callous  body  •,  and  .Alghifi  (g)  mentions  a  virgin,  in  whom  a  thin  medicated
candle,  that  had  been  left  within  the  urethra  •,  in  order  to  deftroy  "  a  carnofity  "
of  that  canal ;  had  enter'd  into  the  bladder.

Add  to  thefe  the  "  flefliy  excrefcence,"  which  will  be  fpoken  of  prefently,
dcfcrib'd  in  a  certain  widow,  by  MuUerus  (h).

And  it  happen'd  once  to  me,  when  I  examin'd  the  body  of  an  old  wo-
man, about  the  beginning  of-the  year  1751,  that  I  met  with  a  fmall  triangu-
lar excrefcence,  within  the  external  orifice  of  the  urethra,  yet  not  protube-
rant therefrom :  and  very  often,  but  particularly  after  acute  fevers,  I  have
obferv'd  fanguiferous  vefiels ;  which  being  in  great  number,  and  almoft  pa-
rallel, creep  through  the  internal  coat  of  the  urethra ;  and  thefe  fo  turgid,
^nd  crowded  together,  that  almoft  the  whole  of  this  canal  was  black  there-
.from :  and  it  happen'd  once  in  a  young  virgin,  and,  in  like  manner,  in  an
old  woman,  of  whom  I  ftiall  perhaps  have  occafion  to  fpeak  hereafter  {i),

(d)  N.  13.  {£)  Litotom.  c,  3.

(e)  N.  39.  (//)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  8.  obf.  38.

(/)  §.  4.  fupra  ad  n.  38.  cit.  (i)  Vid.  epift.  50.  n.  51.  &  epift.  56-  n.  21.

that


Letter  XLII. 'Article  42.  535

that  I  faw  a  portion  of  this  fame  coat  prolaps'd  on  the  outfide  of  the  orifice
of  this  meatus.

But  what  inconvenience  thefe  laft-mention'd  females,  or  the  former,  fuf-
fer'd  in  the  difcharge  of  their  urine,  I  could  conjedture  indeed,  but  not  for  a
certainty  know.

In  regard  to  the  caufe  likewife,  why  fome  part  of  that  membrane  was  fo
prominent,  from  the  orifice  of  the  urethra;  in  the  two  laft  fpoken  of ;  we
were  only  at  liberty  to  conjefture  it.

And  as  I  was  not  willing  to  make  ufe  of  that  conjedture,  which  might  have
been  drawn  from  this  orifice,  and  that  membrane,  having  been  frequently  ir-
ritated by  the  head  of  a  needle  {k),  or  bodkin  ;  another  perhaps  remain'd  to
be  drawn  from  a  foregoing  ftrangury.

For  that  this  membrane  is  urg'd  downwards,  by  very  violent  flrainings  to
expel  the  urine,  is  not  only  hinted  by  reafon,  but  confirm'd  hj  the  obfer-
vation  of  MuHerus,  that  I  have  already  quoted.  For  the  excrefcence,  which,,
coming  forth  out  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  had  ftop'd  it  up,  being  in
great  meafure  confum'd ;  the  remaining  internal  part  became  "  confpicuous
"  only  by  that  kind  of  ftraining,  which  we  ufe  in  unloading  the  bladder."

Which  obfervation  of  an  excrefcence,  that  was  "  flefhy,  red,  and  fun-
"  gous ;  and  had  come  forth  to  the  fize  of  a  bean,"  from  that  orifice;  if  it
be  join'd,  by  you,  with  another  inftance,  which  the  celebrated  Goulardus  (/)  r
mentions,  of  a  "  carnofity  in  the  urethra"  of  a  certain  man,  which  grew  out^
to  fuch  a  degree  at  fome  times,  that  it  came  forth  from  the  orifice  thereof, ,
and  was  there  to  be  taken  off;  you  will  fo  much  the  more  readily  join  in
opinion  with  thofe,  who  ftill  acknowledge  caruncles,  among  the  other  ob-
llacles,  that  occur  in  the  meatus  urinariust

But  not  to  depart  from  the  confideration  of  the  female  urethra  ;  what  fhall
we  fay  of  that  very  rare  obfervation  of  Corn.  Solingen,  which  Salzmannus  (»^  .-
takes  notice  of;  I  mean  "of  the  meatus  urinarius  being  inverted,  and  hang-
"  ing  downwards,  to  the  length  of  a  little  finger?"

Shall  we  fay  that  the  membrane  of  the  meatus  was  relax'd,  and  extended,
to  fuch  a  degree  .''  Gr  that  the  neck,  or  lower  part,  of  the  bladder,  was  fal-
len down  thither,  as  Salzmannus  (?z)  feems  to  believe  ?  Who  neverthelefs  ■
propofes  the  following  doubt  {o)  :  "  if  fome  other  part,  which  ofi^er'd  itfelf :
"  to  the  eyes,  did  really  not  impofe  upon  Solingen-,  under  the  appearance  of
"  the  bladder."

There  is  alio  another  difeafe,  to  fhow  the  Tarity  of  which  in  the  female
urethra,  I  fhall  hint  at  a  few  things  concerning  this  canal ;  and  calculi  dif-
charg'd  thereby.  The  urethra  of  females,  as  Celfus  fpj  fays,  and,  asljuft
now  laid  down,  "  is  both  fhorter,  and  more  lax,  than  in  males ;"  and,  as  he
had  faid  above  (jj,  is,  at  the  fame  time,  more  dire£t  in  its  paffage."

A  calculus  therefore,  as  the  fame  author  very  properly  fubjoins,  "  when  •
"  it  is  very  fmall,  frequently  falls  out  of  itfelf."  And  fometimes  ftones, ,
that  are  by  no  means  fmall,  are  fpontaneoufly  extruded  this  way;  of  which'

i^k)  Supra  n.  19.  &  feq.  (o)  Thef.  19.

(IJ  Traa.  fupra  aa  n.  38:  cit.  (p)  De  Medic.  1.  7,  c.  26,  114.

(w)  Differt.  deHern.  Vefic.  Urin,  thef,  18.  {q)  Eod.  c.  n,  i.

(»)  Thef.  26.

2-:  ■  'kln^d;'


536 Book  III. Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Bell^r.

kind  was  that  I  faw  here,  as  I  have  already  written  (r) ;  and  ftill  more  thofc
that  I  faw  at  Bologna.  Of  which,  or  others  -,  that  Langelottus  (s),  Jaeger-
fchmidius  (/),  Dillenius  (u),  Schmiederus  {x),  Trew  (y),  and  others,  have
fpoken  of,  as  being  extruded  from  the  female  urethra,  without  the  affiftance
of  furgery  ;  it  is  of  no  importance  to  fay  more  :  fince  it  is  certain  that  Sen-
nertus  (2),  and  Tulpius  (a),  have  feen  larger  than  thofe  ;  that  is,  the  former
one  "  almoft  of  the  bignefs  of  a  hen's  egg,"  and  the  latter  one,  as  the  figure
"  which  is  added  fhows,  very  thicl^,  and  weighing  three  ounces,  and  two
"  drachms."

And  this  I  believe  to  have  been  the  largeft,  among  all  of  which  I  remem-
ber to  Iiave  read  :  I  fay  among  all,  not  only  that  have  been  difcharg'd  by
women,  but  even  generated  in  their  bladders  -,  whereas  I  know,  that,  in  the
male  bladder,  they  hav€  grown  to  an  immenfe  weight.

For  I  omit  that  which  "  weigh'd  an  Englifh  pound,  and  two  drachms  be-
"  fides,  the  like  to  which"  Van  Helmont  "  did  not  remember  ever  to  have
"  feen  ;"  fince  in  the  fame  fedtion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (Ip),  wherein  thofe
words  are  related,'calculi  of  thirty-two  (c),  and  thirty-four  ounces,  in  weight,  are
defcrib'd  (d)  :  and  the  celebrated  Targioni  (e)  aflerts,  that  there  is  one  at  Flo-
rence, .which  weighs  thirty-nine  ounces;  and  this  is,  likewife,  the  more  remark-
able, becaufe  it  was  found  in  a  man,  who  was  carried  off  by  a  difeafe;  after
a  healthy  and  flourifhing  old  age  •,  in  which  there  were  flight  fufpicions  of  a
calculous  diforder,  rather  than  any  real  or  true  fymptoms.

And  I  fee  that  another  of  the  fame  weight  is  taken  notice  of  by  Verduci-
us  (f),  and  from  Launayus  (g)  another  of  fifty-one  ounces  :  finally,  that
your  wonder  may  be  carried  quite  to  its  height,  confider  that  which  Kefiel-
ringius  {i>)  fays  he  had  feen  in  the  pofieflion  of  the  celebrated  IVTorand,  "  equal
"  in  weight  -to  fix  pounds  and  three  ounces :"  which  very  weight ;  left  you
Ihould  fufped  me  of  having  made  a  miftake  in  the  defcription  ;  you  will  al-
fo  find  in  the  reviewal  of  that  diflfertation,  publifh'd  in  the  Commercium  Litte-
rarium  (i).

But  from  what  caufe  do  you  fuppofe  it  to  happen,  that  we  read  of  no  fuch
large  ftones  being  found  in  the  female  bladder  ?  Doubtlefs,  I  either  am  de-
ceiv'd,  or  the  more  direft,  and  Qiorter  paflage,  of  the  urine  in  the  female
fex,  as  I  have  already  faid,  and  particularly  the  wider  paflage,  eafily  receives
and  emits  the  much  greater  part  of  that  vifcid,  and  tartareous  matter;  which,
by  reafon  of  contrary  caufes,  ftagnates  in  the  bladder  of  the  males,  and  is
continually  added  to  the  matter  already  concreted  into  a  calculus ;  whereby
its  bulk  is  greatly  increas'd :  and  this  happens  particularly  in  fome  bodies,
who  are  moft  difpos'd  thereto.

(r)  N.  10.  (i) 23.  obf.  I.  §.9.

(*)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  i.  a.  6  &  7.  obf.  7.  {c)  Obf.  ead.  §.  1.

It)  Dec.  3.  a.  3.  obf.  101.  (</)  Ibid.  §.  z.

{«)  Dec.  ead.  a.  9  &  10.  obf.  242.  (e)  Prima  Raccolta  di  Offervaz.  Med.

Ix)  Cent.  3&4.  obf.  161.  ff)  Vid.  apud  Boretium  de  operat.  aiti  ad-

{yj  Commerc.  Litter, a.  1733.  hebd.  39. parat.

n.  4.  (g)  Vid  apud  Pall,  differt.  fupra  ad  n.  ^^.

(z)  Med.  praft.  1.  3.  p.  8.  f.  u  C.  2.  verf. cit.  inadnot.  ad  §.  ig.

fin.  (h)  Differt.  ibid,  lupracit.  n.  53.

{aj  Obf.  Med.  1,  3.  c.  7.  (/)  A.  1739.  hebd.  9.

2  For


Letter  XLII. Article  43.  ^^7

For  which  reafon  we  ought  to  confider  as  the  more  extraordinary,  the  cafe
pubHfh'd  by  the  celebrated  Adolphus  (/^),  "  of  an  oblong  calculus  form'd  in
"  the  urethra  "  of  an  old  woman,  "  and  firmly  adhering  thereto."

For  by  what  means  could  the  particles,  of  which  this  calculus  confided,
remain  in  a  canal  of  that  kind,  and  not  be  carried  away  by  the  impetus  of
the  urine  ?

Certainly,  either  the  impelling  force,  by  which  the  urine  is  driven,  was
grown  very  languid,  in  a  woman  of  threefcore  and  fixteen  years  of  age,  or
the  membrane  of  the  urethra  was,  in  Ibme  places,  ulcerous  •,  and  for  that
reafon  retain'd  thofe  particles  within  its  winding  finufles,  and  inequalities :  or,
finally,  the  calculus  which  was  firft  generated  in  the  bladder,  and  had,  in
fome.part,  enter'd  into  the  urethra,  having  been  obftrufted  there,  had  frefii
and  frefh  additions  continually  made  to  it,  of  the  fame  kind  of  particles  flow-
ing that  way  gently,  and  almoft  drop  by  drop,  as  is  generally  the  cafe ;  thefe
things,  I  fay,  either  all,  or  fome,  might  be  fufficient  to  produce  that  which
is  the  objedt  of  our  furprize,  though  the  produftion  is  neverthelefs  very  extra-
ordinary.

And  what  favours  this  explication,  befides  the  age  of  the  woman,  is  the
preceding  "  obftruftion  of  urine,  for  many  years,  at  times  at  leaft ;  but
*'  particularly  the  calculus  itfelf  bent  back  quite  into  the  bladder.  For  fee
my  firft  obfervation  (/),  of  the  calculus  which  had  been  form'd  upon  a
needle,  within  the  bladder  of  the  virgin.

This  calcul.us,  as  it  had  a  part  of  itfelf  bent  back  within  the  meatus  url-'
rarius,  certainly  had  not  begun  from  that  part ;  but  on  the  needle,  which
was  at  fome  diftance  from  thence  :  and  this  very  part  had  been  gradually
form'd,  within  the  contiguous  meatus,  as  an  appendix  and  additamentum  of
tTie  calculus  ;  fo  that  it  was  evidently  to  be  confider'd  as  the  end,  and  not  the
beginning,  of  the  calculus.

43.  It  would  remain  now,  that  I  Ihould  write  of  the  Diabetes,  of  the  in-
continence of  urine,  of  its  excretion  through  an  indecent  place,  and  of
urines  that  are  not  in  their  natural  ftate  -,  each  of  which  fubjeds  has  a  pe-
culiar feftion  allotted  to  it  in  the  Sepulchretum.

However,  I  fhall  not  do  this  for  two  reafons.  The  firft  is,  that  neither  Val-
falva,  nor  I,  have  dilfefted  any  one  who  died  of  a  diabetes ;  as  you  may,  of
yourfelf,  eafily  conjecture,  from  what  I  hinted  of  this  difeafe,  in  the  former'
letter  (m).  The  fecond  is,  becaufe  I  have  already  dcfcrib'd  all  the  appear-
ances I  have  met  with,  in  thofe  who  died  after  the  other  diforders,  which
are  juft  now  fpoken  of-,  and  that  at  the  fame  time  I  treated  of  different  dif-
eafes,  on  which  they  depended :  as  you  may  have  obferv'd  even  in  this  very
letter. And  it  is  not  our  cuftom  to.  repeat  any  thing.

But  if  this  were  not  done  in  the  Sepulchretum,  thofe  feftions,  that  I
have  fpoken  of,  would  be  reduc'd  fo  as  to  contain  much  lei's  ;  notwithftand-
ing  the  two  firft  are  fo  fhort,  that  both  of  them,  together  with  the  Scholia,
fcarcely  fill  fix  pages.  Befides,  in  almoft  every  one  which  relates  to  the  urine,
or  the  parts  fubfcrvient  thereto,  not  only  the  obfervations  which  had  been

{i)  Adl.  n.  c.  torn,  i,  obf.  239.  {/;;)  N.  14.  15.

U)  Supra  ad  n.  19.

Vol.  II.  Z  z  z  given


538  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

given  in  other  leftions,  are  repeated,  but  they  are  fet  down  twice  even  in  the
fame  feftion.

You  have  learn'd  ah-eady,  from  the  beginning  of  the  preceding  letter  (n)y
how  many  were  repeated  in  the  twenty-fourth  fedion.  See  then,  I  befeech
you,  whether  in  the  twenty-third  feftion,  which  precedes  that,  the  things
whereof  we  read  in  the  firft  article  of  the  eighth  oblervation,  are  not  the
fame  that  we  read  partly  in  the  ninth  obfervation,  and  partly  in  the  Scholia
which  are  fubjoin'd  to  it :  and  in  the  fedion,  on  the  fubjed  of  which  I  am
ftill  employ'd,  that  is  the  twenty-fifth,  whether  what  had  been  given  under
article  the  fecond,  and  tenth,  of  the  eighth  obfervation,  are  not  fet  down
again  under  article  the  nineteenth,  and  article  the  feventeenth,  of  the  fame  ob-
fervation.

But  even  in  one  of  thofe  very  fhort  fedions,  that  is  in  the  twerrty-feventh,
is  not  what  is  faid  under  article  the  third  of  the  firft  obfervation,  the  fame
that  is  faid  under  article  the  ninth  of  the  fecond  ?  And  in  this  very  fecond  ob-
fervation, is  not  article  the  fourth  the  fame  with  article  the  eleventh  which
follows  ?  If  you  are  inclin'd  to  doubt  it,  only  examine  the  hiftories,  as  they
are  related  at  large,  in  the  twenty-fourth  fedion,  obfervation  the  tenth,
article  the  eighth,  and  obfervation  the  fecond,  article  the  fourth-,  on  reading
of  which  all  your  doubts  will  be  remov'd.

Finally  ;  not  to  take  up  your  time  with  too  many  ftridures ;  if  you  turn
over  the  twenty-feventh  fedion,  you  will  find,  not  without  great  furprize,-
that  the  very  lame  things  which  have  been  faid  a  little  above,  are  twice  re-
peated below,  in  one  and  the  fame  page  -,  that  is  to  fay,  firft  the  greateft  pare
of  the  Scholia  to  the  fixth  and  feventh  obfervations ;  and  after  that,  under
the  twelfth  obfervation,  the  hiftory  of  the  illuftrious  dutchefs,  article  the
fecond  and  fourth.

44.  Yet,  left  we  fhould  feem  to  pafs  by  thefe  fedions,  without  taking  any
notice  of  them,  I  will  remark  a  few  things,  in  regard  to  that  laft,  which  re-
lates to  urine  in  a  preternatural  ftate  •,  and  not  much  more,  in  regard  to  the
laft  but  one  ;  which  I  have  faid  relates  to  the  excretion  of  urine  through  an
indecent  place.  For  both  thefe  kinds  of  remarks  may  not  be  without  their
utility ;  though  they  will  have  no  difledion  join'd  with  them.

I  have  fometimes  lit  on  urine  which  feem'd  to  have  chyle  mix'd  with  it,
and  fometimes  on  that  which  feem'd  to  have  blood ;  fo  that  fome  phyficians
contended  that  the  circumftance  was  to  be  confider'd  juft  as  it  appear'd ;  but
others  that  it  was  to  be  underftood  very  differently.

That  firft  controverfy  was  agitated  here  about  forty  years  ago,  to  a  very,
great  degree  ;  when  the  laft  of  the  noble  family  of  the  Difcalcis;  in  that  long-
difeafe  of  which  he  at  length  died  ;  continu'd  to  difcharge  urine,  for  a  long-
time, the  greater  part  of  which  feem'd  to  be  perfedly  like  milk.

One  of  his  phyficians ;  a  very  eminent  man,  who  was  join'd  with  me  ia
the  office  of  profefibrfhip  in  the  college,  and  was  my  intimate  friend ;  hav-
ing obferv'd  that  fediment  to  be  quite  free  from  fmell  and  vifcidity,  alferted
it  to  be  chyle. The  other  denied  this,  and  contended  for  its  being  pus.

In  order  to  fettle  this  long  and  obftinate  difpute,  every  one,  at  Padua,

(«)  Epill,  41.  a.  I.

of  ~  who


Letter  XLII. Article  44.  539

who  had  then  any  name  in  phyfic,  was  fent  for,  at  different  times.  As  there
is  nothing  that  I  choofe  more  to  avoid  than  to  be  engag'd  in  controverfy,  I  had
long  evaded  it,  by  many  and  divers  excufes :  but  I  was,  at  length,  periuaded
to  give  my  opinion,  by  the  patient's  wife's  brother,  Alexander  Guarini,  in
whom  that  ancient  family,  made  illuftrious  by  the  eminent  poet  of  his  name,
likewife  became  extindl,  after  fome  years.

When  I  had  heard  the  reafonings  of  the  contending  parties,  had  examin'd
the  urine,  and  had  diligently  examin'd  the  patient  -,  I  anfwer'd  in  fuch  a  man-
ner, as  to  Ihow  to  every  body,  that  I  did  not  fet  light  by  either  of  the  difpu-
tants ;  but  gave  to  each  his  merits  :  yet  as  I  ow'd  more  to  the  love  of  truth
than  to  friendfhip,  I  was  under  a  neceffity  of  inclining  to  the  fecond  opinion.

For  that  chyle  might,  indeed,  be  difcharg'd  by  the  kidnies,  I  faid  I  was
not  ignorant;  provided  the  fecretory  paflfages,  through  thefe  vifcera,  are  very
lax  (and  we  muft  of  courfe  explain  fome  of  thofe  examples  which  are  pointed
out  even  in  this  twenty-feventh  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (0)  in  this
manner.)

However,  in  our  patient,  from  the  fymptoms  of  an  injury  in  one  kidney ;
which  had  long  preceded  (and  thefe  pretty  confiderable)  and  even  then  at-
tended the  difcharge  •,  it  feem'd  that  pus  could  not  be  excluded,  though  a
part  of  the  chyle  may  join  itfelf  thereto.  Nor  did  it  efcape  me,  how  foetid
a  pus  is,  fometimes,  difcharg'd  from  difeas'd  kidnies ;  yet  there  are  examples
of  pus  without  any  fmell,  not  only  from  other  parts;  as  when  Celfus  has  faid
(p)  "  that  pus  is  beft  when  it  has  no  fmell ;"  but  even  from  the  kidnies  them-
felves,  and  for  that  reafon  to  be  taken  notice  of  juft  now.

For  as  to  the  fediment  not  being  vifcid,  that  very  vifcid  fubftances  are
fometimes  found  in  the  kidnies  alfo  (as  in  the  fame  feftion  of  the  Sepulchre-
tum (q) ).  Neverthelefs  that  all  pus  was  not  vifcid ;  and  the  pus  which  is
difcharg'd  with  the  urine,  in  a  glutinous  and  thin  ftate,  I  have  read  that  the
moft  experienc'd  phyficians  (r),  attribute  to  the  bladder,  and  not  to  the  kid-
nies :  and  that  Valfalva  alfo,  taught  by  diffeftion,  had  been  accuftom'd  to
deduce  this  much  more  feldom  from  the  kidnies,  than  from  the  parts  be-
neath.

And  though  we  (hould  pay  no  regard  to  thefe  arguments,  yet  I  could  not
forget  either  that  man,  or  the  bifhop,  whofe  hiftories ;  that  have  been  left  us
by  Benediftus  SilvaticusCj)  and  Lselius  a  Fonte  (t)  ;  are  as  fimilartoours,  as
•we  can  fuppoie  (fo  that,  for  tliis  reafon,  I  could  fcarcely  believe,  that  thefe
hiftories,  in  a  controverfy  fo  warmly  agitated,  had  been  taken  notice  of  by
no  body,  before  me  ;  as  I  was  afterwards  certainly  inform'd.

For  in  both  of  thefe  patients,  figns  of  a  difeafe  in  one  kidney  had  pre-
ceded ;  and  even  had  been  attended,  as  in  ours,  with  a  flow  fever,  and  a
wafting  of  flefh.  By  both  of  thefe  patients  urine  was  difcharg'd,  the  fedi-
ment of  which  was  not  foetid,  nor  vifcid,  but  inodorous  and  fluid  ;  and  much
like  milk.  That  this  was  pus  flowing  down  from  the  kidnies,  both  of  thefe  phy-
ficians affirm'd. Others  denied  it  -,  and  particularly  in  the  cafe  of  the  bifhop.

(«)  Schol.  2.  ad  obf.  14.  (c)  Vid.  ibid.  Schol.  ad  obf.  10  &  i  ;.

</  ),De  Medic.  1.  5.  c.  20^  n.  20.  (j)  (/)  Vid.  ibid.  cit.  obf.  10.  cum  Schol.  &

<^y)  Obf.  9.  5.  i,  &  obf.  2z.  §.  I,  obf.  14.  cum  Schol.

Z Z  Z 2  But


540  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

But  the  difleiflions  which  fliow'd  the  fubftance  of  his  kidney  to  be  con—
fum'd,  or  perforated,  by  an  abfcefs,  flood  as  a  teftimony  of  the  cafe.  From .
thefe  things ;  though  I  faid  them  more  like  a  perfon  who  was  making  remarks,
than  like  one  who  pronounc'd  upon  a  difeafe ;  although  I  inculcated  the  diffi-
culty of  judgment  in  determining  the  hidden  feats  and  nature  of  difeafes  ;  and
though  I  did  not  profefs  to  be  more  learned  andfagacious  than  the  many  others,
who  had  been  confulted  on  the  former  days ;  yet  it  was  no  fecret  to  any  one
of  the  noble  and  learned  men,  who  were  prefent  in  great  aumber,  to  which
fide  my  opinion  was  inclin'd.

Nor  was  the  diffeftion  of  the  body  refus'd,  foon  after,  when  the  patient  died  5
by  which;  although  it  was  perform'd,  alnioft  clandeftinely,  by  a  furgeon  of
no  note  or  eminence  ;  it  was  pretty  well  known,  neverthelefs,  afterwards,  in
fpite  of  this  caution,  that  the  kidney,  of  the  affeded  fide,  was  found  to  be
half  putrid,  and  reduc'd  to  a  very  fmall  bulk.

And  although  this  report  was  confirm'd  by  the  filence  of  thofe,  to  whofe
credit  it  was  to  have  it  believ'd  otherwife  •,  yet  as  neither  I,  nor  any  one  of  my
friends,  was  prefent  at  the  difledtion,  I  did  not  think  proper  to  lay  it  down
here  as  certain.

45.  This  controverfy  was  at  Padua.  But  at  Venice  there  was  formerly  an-
other controverfy,  in  which  fewer  perfons  were  concern'd  :  the  difpute  was
whether  the  urine  of  a  certain  abbot  had  blood  really  mix'd  with  it,  as  it
feem'd  to  have,  or  not.  The  affair  was  almoft  like  that  which  is  defcrib'd  In
the  fame  twenty-eighth  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (u)  ;  for  the  blood  did  :
not  fubfide  in  the  urine,  even  after  being  long  kept.

When  I  was  confulted,  I  perfuaded  them  to  make  the  experiment  by  apr  ■
plying  fire  ;  for  by  this  means  the  blood  might  eafily  coalefce,  and  fhow  it-
felf,  if  it  was  really  therein. Wherefore, by  making  this,  experiment,  the
controverfy  was  at  once  put  an  end  to.

However,  in  what  manner,  the  celebrated  Burgmann  (x)  made  the  fame  in-
quiry, by  immerfing  a  white  linen  rag  into  the  urine  of  this  kind  ;  and  what
Schelhamer  (y)  found  inftead  of  blood,  and  by  what  means  he  found  it;  and  •
how  in  fome  perfons  blood  is  to  be  accounted  for,  from  the  hsemorrhoids  of
the  bladder,  according  to  Cselius  Aurelianus  (z)  -,  although  I  gave  an  an.-
fwer,  at  large,  upon  this  fubjeft,  to  the  celebrated  Serao,  who  confulted  me
for  a  noble  Neapolitan  patient,  in  regard  to  whofe  cafe  there  was  a  great  dif-
fention  of  phyficians  ;  yet  1  will  not  take  up  your  time  now  in  difcufTing
thefe  things  :  but  will  rather  exhort  you  to  examine  the  authors  I  have  com-
mended ;  and  to  read  the  very  learned  Helwichius  (*)  upon  the  fubjedl  of
thefe  hjemorrhoids.

But  when  you  fliall  read,  in  the  fame  fedlion  I  juft  now  pointed  out  (**),
that  round,  vermiform,  and  bloody  bodies  had  been  difcharg'd,  together  with  ,
the  urine,  by  a  certain  widow  who  fufFer'd  a  moft  excruciating  pain  in  the  loins;
you  will  require  a  more  accurate  examination  of  their  fubftance,  by  which  it
might  appear  that  they  were  polypous  concretions,  thus  form'd  in  the  ureter,

{u)  Obf.  9.  (z)  Morbor.  Chron.  1.  5.  c.  4.

(x)  Commerc.  Litter,  a.  1733.  hebd.  36.  (*)  Eph.  n.  c.  torn,  modo  cit.  obf.  iig.

[y]  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  9.  obf.  81.  (**)  Obf.  26.

rather


Letter  XLII.  -  Article  46.  54.1

father  than  round  particles  of  the  kidney,  which  had  been  corroded  by  a
cancer.

For  that  they  were  not  true  worms  even  the  author  of  the  obfervation  has
acknowledged  :  which  certainly  cannot  be  difcharg'd  together  with  the  urine,
unlefs  a  pafiage  be  open'd  betwixt  the  bladder,  or  the  urethra,  and  the  intef-
tines ;  as  I  have  already  fhovvn  above  (a).

Wherefore,  when  you  come  to  the  thirtieth  obfervation  of  the  fame  fedion,
in  which  it  is  faid  that  grapes,  pieces  of  lettice,  and  other  kinds  of  food,  were
difcharg'd  together  with  the  urine  ;  you  v/ill  partly  wifh  for  a  greater  cau-
tion, and  a  more  accurate  examination  :  and,  as  in  one,  the  whole  bladder  is-
faid  to  have  been  ulcerated,  you  will  alfo  partly  fufpefl,  that  an  ulcer  had
reach'd  from  thence  into  fome  one,  or  other,  of  the  inteftines.

For  it  might  eafily  happen,  that  a  bladder,  in  this  ftate,  fhould  coalefce
with  one  of  the  nearefb  inteftines-,  and  that  thus  a  winding  finus  mio-ht  be  ■
form'd,  by  means  of  a  kind  of  ulcerous  corrofion,  from  the  one  to  the  other.
And  in  this  manner,  we  may  perhaps  conceive  how  the  man  of  whom  Young  ('^J
writes,  difcharg'd,  together  with  a  fosculent  urine,  very  fmall  grapes,  and
particles  of  leaves,  and  roots,  and  other  things  which  he  had  eaten  ;  and  with  ■
thefe  two  pills  drawn  out  into  a  confiderable  length.

It  is  certain  that  very  fevcre  colic  pains  had  preceded  in  the  former  months-;
fo  as  to  make  it  not  altogether  improbable,  that  fome  inflam'd  intefti'ne  had
coalefc'd  with  the  bladder,  and  a  fmall  abfcefs  being  made,  that  pus  had
been  difcharg'd  into  the  cavity  of  both  thefe  vifcera,  by  which  a  fiftula  of
communication  might  have  been  left  open  betwixt  them.

For  as  to  the  urine  having  no  difagreeable  fmell,  when  Young  was  call'd  to
the  patient-,  and  as  to  neither  blood,  nor  pus,  being  difcharg'd  in  theftools;
as  to  there  being  no  tencfmus ;  and  as  to  the  unfluous  fluid,  given  in  the  form
of  a  glyfter,  not  having  ting'd  the  urine  with  its  colour ;  it  is  true  that
thefe  circumftances  might,  with-  good  reafon,  render  it  lefs  fuppofable,  with  ■
him,  that  there  was  a  communication  betwixt  the  bladder  and  the  rectum,  .
or  betwixt  the  bladder  and  the  colon.

Yet  he  would,  perhaps,  have  thought  it  more  probable,  if  he  had  conceiv'd
of  this  communication,  betwixt  the  bladder,  and  fome  part  of  the  inteftine
ileum,  contiguous  thereto  :  for  thofe  very  fevere  pains  which  had  preceded^.^
although  they  w<ere  call'd  Colic,  might  pollibly  have  been  Iliac.

46.  But  a  preternatural  foramen  -,  which  goes  from  the  bladder  to  the  con-
tiguous inteftinum  reftum  -,  as  it  renders  the  explication  of  urine  difcharo-'d
by  the  anus  very  obvious ;  fo  it  is  fometimes  either  fo  obfcure  in  dead  bodies
or  fo  difficult  to  be  believ'd  in  the  living,  that  it  is  but  juft  poffible,  and  in-
deed fcarcely  at  all  pofllble,  to  explain  this  cafe,  (which  relates,  as  you  fee,
to  the  laft  but  one  of  the  feftions  enumerated  (c) )  in  the  fam.e  manner,  with'
any  degree  of  probability.

All  thefe  things  that- 1  fay  I  fhall  illuftrate  by  examples.  The  moft  ancient
of  which  is  from  Praxagoras,  who  relates,  "  that  he  faw  a  certain  man,  who
"-had  excreted  his  urine  per  anum,  and  had  furviv'd  twelve  years :  but  whe-

CaJN.eSizg.  _  f<-;  Supra  n.  4j.

{6)  Vid. apud  Th.  Dereham  Saggio  delle
Tranfaz.  com.  3.  p,  2. 0,4.  §.  29.

"  thes-r


542  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  ther  more  years  or  not  (as  he  himfelf  had  at  that  time  departed,  and  had
"  not  heard  any  thing  of  him  afterwards)  he  was  quite  uninform'd."

This  paflage  I  have  copied  from  the  Httle  book  of  Ruffus  Ephefius,  de  Ve-
fiCce  Renumqiie  Aff(^ihus{d),  in  the  fame  manner  as  we  read  it  in  the  edition  of
Henricus  Steplianus,  oi Medico  Artis  Principes  \  which  little  book  Linden,  and
Mercklin  (e),  do  not  feem  to  have  obferv'd  to  be  extant  in  a  Latin  tran-
flation.

And  thefe  things  I  was  willing  you  fhould  know,  left  you  fliould,  per-
haps, wonder  why  I  have  not  faid,  as  Schenck  (/),  and  thofe  who  copy  him,
have  done,  that  Praxagoras  had  feen  a  certain  perfon  "  in  whom  the  urine
*'  was  diicharg'd  per  anum  for  twelve  years  together."

Yet  if  he  had  really  averted  this,  as  exprefsly  as  he  has  faid  that  the  man
furvived  twelve  years,  there  would  be  no  great  caufe  for  wonder ;  fince  even
in  this  twenty-feventh  fe<51ion  {g),  we  have  the  hiftory  of  a  man,  who,  from
his  childhood  to  his  fortieth,  and  even  quite  to  his  fiftieth  year,  "  always"
diicharg'd  his  urine  by  the  anus  :  for  a  lithocomift,  having  cut  out  a  calculus
from  him,  when  a  boy,  had  lb  far  injur'd  the  bladder  and  inteftinum  redum,
that  after  death  a  paflage  was  found  to  go  down  from  the  bladder,  into  this
inteftine,  "  of  the  width  of  an  inch."

And  what  the  unfldlfulnefs  of  the  operator  had  given  rife  to  in  this  man,
feems  in  the  man  oblerv'd  by  Praxagoras,  to  have  been  the  effeft  of  difeafe ;
for,  after  thofe  things,  Ruffus  fubjoins  his  obfervation,  that  "  fometimes  an
*'  abfcefs  burfts  into  the  inteftine  ;"  although,  to  dilTemble  nothing,  he  fpeaks
of  an  abfcefs  of  the  kidnies  :  but  you  know  that  Pechlinus  {h),  when  urine
was  excreted  from  the  inteftines,  five  or  fix  times  everyday,  in  a  man  la-
bouring under  an  ifchuria  of  the  kidnies,  and  a  calculus  of  the  bladder ;  left
it  quite  undetermin'd,  whether  this  urine  "  was  brought,  from  the  bladder,
"  by  new,  and  tubulated  paflages,  into  the  inteftinum  reftum,  which  lies
■"  immediately  under  it ;  or  from  the  kidnies  to  the  inteftines."

However,  Fcrnelius  (j)  fpeaks  of  an  abfcefs  of  the  bladder,  and  of  the  in-
teftinum reftum ;  when  he  fays  that  this  abfcefs  has  been  "  fometimes  feen
"  to  penetrate,  even  to  the  anus ;  and  the  urine  to  flow  out  that  way."
And  Hildanus  {k)  ;  when,  after  a  long  ifchuria  of  the  bladder,  and  purulent
urines,  he  had  at  length  feen  this  fluid,  on  the  laft  twenty  days  of  the  pati-
ent's life,  no  more  diicharg'd  by  the  penis,  but  by  the  anus-,  "  at  one  time
*'  by  itfeLf,  and  at  another  time  mix'd  with  excrements  ;"  foundthat  a  fmall,
and  round,  ulcer  was  carried,  from  the  cavity  of  the  bladder,  into  the  in-
teftinum,reftum.

Wherefore,  when  Horftius  had  related  to  him,  that  a  woman ;  who,  in  falling
from  a  tree,  had  got  a  laceration  of  the  genital  parts,  and  imprudently  heal'd
up  the  external  wound  foon  after,  "  had  now  difcharg'd  no  urine  for  more  than
''  the  fpace  of  a  fortnight,"  except  that  "  a  ferous  humidity  flow'd  every  day
"  from  the  inteftines,  not  together  with  the  inteftinal  excrements,  but  fepa-

(d,  C.  8.  {g)  Obf.  1.

{e)  Linden.  Renov.  vide  RufFus.  {h)  Vid.  Aft.  Erud.  Lipf.  a.  1691.  M.  Maj.

(/)  Obf.  Med.  1.  3.  ubi  de  Urina  alien,  loc.  (/)  Pathol.  1.  6.  c.  13.

.excreta,  obf.  13.  [k)  Cent.  2.  obf.  65.

"  xately ;


Letter  XLII. Article  46.  543

"  rately  ;"  he  made  no  doubt  to  pronounce  (/),  "  that  he  was  firmly  perfuad-
"  ed,  not  only  that  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  and  uterus,  but  even  the  in-
"  ftftinum  redlum  itfelf,  had  been  injur'd,  and  perforated,  by  the  tree.

And  thus  far,  indeed,  the  explication  is  eafy  and  clear  ;  as  it  had  alio  been
in  a  nobleman,  if  the  blood  which  he  difcharg'd  from  his  inteftines,  had  not,
without  doubt,  conceal'd  the  urine  that  was  mix'd  therewith  :  for  in  him  the
celebrated  Morafchius  (?«)  found  a  calculus  of  the  bladder,  adhering  to  a
fungous  flefh,  which  calculus  had,  at  length,  perforated  the  bladder,  toge-
ther with  the  inteftinum  reftum.

But,  on  the  contrary,  there  are  obfervations,  in  regard  to  which  you  may
hefitate;  as  that,  for  inftance,  which  is  pointed  out  from  the  A£ta  Helvetica
(n),  more  than  once,  above ;  though  with  a  different  view.  For  although,
to  a  difcharge  of  bloody  urine,  and  a  dyfuria,  this  fymptom  of  making  v/ater
per  anum  was  added,  a  little  before  the  end  of  life  ;  yet  the  bladder  fliow'd
no  ulcer,  and  no  pafTage  which  led  to  the  inteftine.

Add  to  this,  an  obfervation  from  the  Sepulchretum  (o),  of  a  much  longer
time.  For  a  boy ;  in  whom,  "  through  the  whole  fpace  of  ten  years,  the
"  urine  was  intirely  fupprefs'd,  fome  drops  of  which,  though  not  very  lim-
"  pid,  came  forth  per  anum  ;"  had  his  kidnies,  and  ureters,  render'd  ufelefs,
by  the  force  of  difeafe :  but  the  bladder  "  not  at  all  preternaturally  per-
"  forated."

And  indeed,  where  there  was  a  great  quantity  of  urine  in  the  bladder  (as
in  himofv/hom  Rhodius(^)  fpeaks)  being  fupprefs'd  by  a  caruncle  of  the
urethra ;  this  urine  "  flow'd,  in  its  clear  ftate,  through  the  inteftinum  rec-
"  tum :"  but  only  "  till,  the  obftruftion  being  removed,  nature  return'd
"  to  her  ufual  paflfage;"  fo  that  we  do  not  at  all  conceive,  how  it  had  quite
ceas'd  to  flow  by  the  inteftine,  if  a  pafTage  were  really  opea'd  in  a  preter-
natural manner,  from  the  bladder  to  that  inteftine.

There  was,  likewife,  a  great  quantity  of  urine,  in  the  bladder  of  a  child,
whom  many  take  notice  of  from the  obfervation  of  Benivenius  {q) ;  for  he
had  difcharg'd  none  for  feven  days  -,  when  he  at  length  evacuated  it  by  the
anus. But  left  you  ihould  fuppofe,  that  fome  remaining  mark  of  preternatural ;
perforation, might  pofiibly  be  overlook'd  by  Rhodius,  and by  Benivenius  J^,
read  over  the  obfervation  of  the  celebrated  Reufnerus  (r),  on  another  child.

You  will,  at  leaft,  fee  that  there  was  no  urine  in  the  bladder,  which  could
make  its  way,  by  force,  from  thence  into  the  inteftine  :  and  yet  that,  on  the
feventhday  of  the  ifchuria  renalis,  "  urine,  which  was  fimilar  to  what  is  na-
"  turally  excreted,  in  colour,  fmell,  and  quantity,  was  difcharg'd  from  the
"  inteftines,  without  any  difcharge  of  the  inteftinal  fsces  at  the  fame  time  ;
"  without  any  pain,  or  alteration  :"  and  that  three  or  four  times  a  day,  for
fome  days  together  ;  till  all  of  a  fudden  it  was  again  difcharg'd  by  the  penis,
"  without  the  leaft  pain,  or  troublefome  fymptom  :"  and  that  in  this  manner^
the  urine  continued  to  be  evacuated,  in  the  following  years.


(l)  Cent.  5.  obf.  4.7.

(f»)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  10.  obf.  56.

(»)  Tom.  I.

(e)  Se6l.  24.  obf.  6.  §.  i»


{p)  Cent.  2.  obf.  Med.  90.
(j)  De  abdit.  morb.  caufis  c.  7.
(r)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  5.  obf.  3.


We--


544  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  die  Belly.

We  are  not  at  liberty,  therefore,  to  explain  every  excretion  of  urine  per
anum,  in  that  firft  manner  ;  but  where  on  account  of  a  renal,  or  vefical  ifchu-
ria,  the  blood  is  overloaded  with  the  urinous  particles  -,  and  there  is  no  fign
of  any  morbid  paffage  being  open'd  from  the  kidnies  or  from  the  bladder,  to
the  inteftine  ;  the  cafe  is  rather  to  be  explairi'd  in  the  following  manner  :  .1
mean  that  as  the  urine  may  be  thrown  up  by  vomiting ;  which  1  have  already
faid  (s)  ;  fo  it  alfo  may  be  difcharg'd  from  the  intellines,  in  confequenceof  the
inteftinal  glands  preternaturally  fecreting  it.

Ncverthelefs,  even  taking  this  method  for  granted,  we  do  not  eafily  con-
ceive, how  the  urine,  when  effus'd  into  the  inteftinal  tube,  lliould  be  excret-
ed without  any  mixture  of  the  inteftinal  faeces,  as  I  jnft  n^iw  related  :  which
(lifficuky  is  not  even  wholly  remov'd,  by  fuppofing  that  method,  firft  fpoken
of-,  as  when  the  woman,  raention'd  by  Horftius,  did  not  emit  the  urine  from
the  anus,  together  with  the  inteftinal  excrements,  but  "  feparately ;"  for
Hildanus  had  obferv'd,  in  his  old  tiian,  that  the  urine  fometimes  flow'd  "fe-
"  parately,  and.at  other  times  in  conjunflion  with  the  faeces."

1  happened,  fome  years  ago,  to  light  on  a  cafe,  in  endeavouring  to  under-
ftand  which  ;  its  caufe,  and  the  manner  wherein  this  caufe  operated  ;  that
difficulty,  which  I  juft  now  prbpos'd,  feem'd  no  more  to  be  one  of  the  moft
confiderable.

A  young  prieft,  who,  at  his  death,  by  reafon  of  his  excellent  natural  dif-
pofition,  his  probity  worthy  of  his  office,  and  his  manners  which  were  always
exemplary,  left  all  his  acquaintance  inconfolable  for  his  lofs ;  having  related
to  me,  that  he  had  obferv'd,  a  few  days  before,  his  urine  to  be  difcharg'd  per
anum  ;  I,  who  knew  him  to  be  hypochondriac,  as  many  are  who  are  given
to  the  ftudy  of  letters,  at  firft  did  not  believe  him  :  but,  the  day  following,
v,'hen  he  had  taken  care  that  the  urine,  which  had  been  juft  before  difcharg'd
in  this  manner,  fliould  be  brought  to  me,  I  then  at  length  very  clofely  in-
quir'd  of  him,  whether  he  had  been  ever  afFedled  with  any  diforder  of  the
urinary  parts,  or  of  the  lower  inteftine,  with  any  pain,  or  uneafinefs  what-
ever? And  if  not  long  before,  yet,  at  leaft,  whether  he  had  been  troubled
with  any  inconveniences  in  making  water,  or  going  to  ftool,  at  any  time
lately  ?  Or  was  at  that  time  troubled  with  any  ?  Whether  any  thing  bloody,  or
purulent,  had  been  difcharg'd  by  either  pafTage  ?  Or  was  now  difcharg'd .''
And  other  things  of  the  like  kind.

But  he  anfwer'd  each  of  thefe  queftions  in  the  negative:  fo  that  of  courfe
he  denied  them  all  j  and  that  in  fuch  terms,  as  would  have  gain'd  credit  to  a
Jefs  ingenuous  man  than  him.

There  had  been  none  here,  as  you  fee,  of  the  caufes  which  I  juft  now  took
notice  of;  no  exfeftion  of  a  calculus,  no  abfcefs,  no  fall,  no  blow,  no  cal-
culus of  the  kidnies  or  bladder,  no  fuppreffion  of  urine  in  the  one  or
the  other  -,  and  yet  the  urine  was  difcharg'd,  very  often,  every  day,  from
the  bladder,  and  the  anus,  at  the  fame  time  ;  and  this  very  fluid,  which
generally  fiow'd,  from  the  inteftine,  without  any  of  the  excrements  being
mix'd  with  it,  continued  to  flow  from  thence  even  to  the  day  of  has  death,
which  was  brought  on  by  quite  a  different  difeafe;  that  is,  continued  to  flow
-for,0iany  months,  without  the  leaft  pain  or  uneafinefs  to  him.

{s)  Epift,  41.  n.  5..
2  When


Letter  XLIII. Article  2,  3.  545

When  this  young  gentleman  died,  it  happen'd  that  I  was  at  a  diftance,  in
the  place  of  my  nativity ;  fo  that  it  was  not  pofTible  for  me  even  to  afk  for  the
liberty  of  infpefting  his  body,  and,  perhaps,  have  the  opportunity  of  learn-
ing from  the  dead  body,  what  I  could  not  fufBciently  underftand  in  the  liv-
ing. But  thus  far  at  prefent.  The  next  letter  you  may  expeft  to  be  fome-
what  ihorter :  in  the  mean  while,  farewell.


LETTER the FORTY-THIRD

Treats  of  Herniasi


HERNIAS,  of  which  I  am  now  about  to  treat,  are  divided  by  the  moft
learned  men  at  this  time  (as  you  very  well  know)  into  the  legitimate
and  Ipurious  ;  legitimate  they  call  thofe  in  which  fome  vifcus  of  the  belly  is
prolaps'd,  and  the  others  fpurious.  I  fhall  follow  this  order.  Of  thofe  her-
nias, therefore,  the  obfervations  of  which  ftill  remain  in  the  papers  of  Val-
falva,  thefe  belong  to  the  clafs  of  legitimates.

2.  A  man  of  thirty  years  of  age,  dying  of  a  wound  in  his  head,  and  hav-
ing feem'd,  when .  living,  to  have  three  tefticles,  the  fcrotum  and  inguina
were,  for  this  reafon,  diffe^^led :  and  therein  we  had  the  following  appear-
ances.

The  teftes  were  only  two  in  number :  and  thefe  were  in  their  natural  ftatc'
But  that  which  feem'd  to  be  the  third,  and  lay  on  the  left  fide, ,  was  a  portion
of  the  omentum ;  which  had  defcended  into  the  fcrotum,  wrap'd  up  in  its
proper  facculus,  made  up  of  the  peritoneum.  On  the  right  fide  alfo  was  a
tumour,  but  of  alefs  fize:  and  this  was  made  up  by  the  appendicula  vermi-
formis  prolaps'd  into  a  fimilar  fac.

3.  We  have,  here,  an  example  of  an  epiplocele,  and  enterocele,  at  the  fame
time  ;  and  fomething  peculiar  in  both.  The  portion  of  the  omentum,  which,
in  the  living  body,  had  refembled  a  tefticle,  muft  be  added  to  the  other  in-
fhances,  which  may  impofe  vipon  us  in  like  manner;  and  which  formerly
created  a  fufpicion  in  me  (a) ;  in  reading  fuch  a  number  of  obfervations  of
three  tefticles,  taken  notice  of  by  De  Graaf  (*),  and  others ;  that  there  was
fome  deception  in  many  of  thofe  which  were  not  confirm'd,  by  difieftion,
after  death.

{a)  Adverf.  4.  Animad.  i.  j;^)  De  Virof .  Organ,  generat.  Infervkntib,

Vol.  II.  4  A  And


546  Book  Iir. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

And  indeed,  this  man  would  certainly  have  increas'd  their  number,  if  the-
miftake  had  not  been  correfted  by  diffedion ;  as  it  was  corredlcd  in  another,,
whofe  third  tefticle,  as  it  feem'd  to  be,  was  nothing  elfe,  in  faft,  but  an  hy-
datid of  the  bighefs  of  the  true  tefticle,  and  very  fimilar  to  it  in  figure  ;.
as  is  aflerted  by  the  celebrated  Schreiberus  (c).

However,  a  portion  of  the  omentum  found  in  the  fcrotum,  would  former--
ly  have  excited  admiration,  in  thofe  whom  the  celebrated  Heifter  (d)  points
out,  and  confutes,  by  his  obfervation  of  a  double  epiplocele  being  found
in  one  man,  and  in  the  fame  part.

But  if  the  appendicula  vermiformis  had  fallen  down  into  the  fcrotum,  to-
gether with  the  inteftinum  csecum,  or  even  with  the  neighbouring  part  of  the
colon  -,  although  I  know  that  this  does  not  fall  down  fo  eafily  as  the  left  part
of  the  colon  ;  yet  if  the  ligaments  of  the  colon,  on  the  right  fide,  being  re-
lax'd,  or  broken  through,  as  in  the  obfervation  of  Waltherus  (r),  the  ap-
pendicula haddcfcended  together  with  this,  and  the  cascum,  into  the  fcrotum;
the  weight  of  thefe  parts  forcing  the  peritonjeum  downwards  •,  it  would  be
more  eafy  to  conceive  how  that  could  happen,  than  how  this  appendicle  alone,,
which  is  fo  flexible  and  light,  fhould  have  come  thither:  unlefs  it  was,  per--
haps,  at  that  time  gready  diftended,  which  it  feldom  is,  with  excrements  j;
or  rather,  unlefs  it  had  enter'd  into  a  facculus  form'd  by  the  inteftinum
ileum,  after  the  return  of  that  inteftine  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly ;  its
kngth  being  of  great  afliftance  thereto.

This  difficulty  was  acknowledged  by  Lavaterus  (f),  who,  however,  did
not  fee  this  appendtele  in  the  fcrotum,  though  he  faw  the  inteftine  colon
therein,  and  on  the  right  fide  too,  "  to  the  bignefs  of  more  than  a  man's
"  fift :"  and  this  I  have  faid  happens  with  more  difficulty  than  on  the  left
fide-,  unlefs  the  hernia  fhould  be  the  confequence  of  a  violent  blow,  or  a  fall
from  a  high  place  :  an  example  of  which  kind  you  have  in  Tacconus  {g).

But  Mauchartus  (^h)  affirms,  "  that  a  part  of  the  colon,  and  even  the
whole  arch  of  this  inteftine,  fometimes  falls  down  into  the  fcrotum;"  on  the
left  fide  ;  where  he  fays  he  had  feen  it  three  times  on  that  fide;  and  "  that
*'  a  hernia  of  the  colon  was  found,"  on  the  fame  fide,  by  a  celebrated  furgeon
of  Paris,  "  where  the  csecum,  together  with  its  vermiform  appendix,  had-
fallen  direilly  into  the  fcrotum."

And  even  the  celebrated  Henfingius  (/),  likewife,  faw  an  ofcheocele,  on
the  left  fide,  "  which  contain'd  eight  ells  of  the  fmall  inteftines,  the  inteftine
"  c£ecum  with  the  vermiform  procefs,  and  half  an  ell  of  the  inteftine  colon."

And  thefe  things  I  take  notice  of,  that  you  may  know  how  far  the  liga-
ments, of  the  colon,  may  be  relax'd,  in  large  hernias  ;  fo  as  to  fuffer  this
inteftine  to  follow  the  fmall  ones,  when  dragging  downwards  by  their
weight;  and  even  the  appendicula  itfelf  to  be  prolapsed,  into  the  left  part
of  the  fcrotum,  though  together  with  the  csecum.

(cj  Nov.  Comment.  Acad.  Sc.  Imp.  Petro-  (f)  Differt.  de  Ihtellinor.  compref.  thef.  5.

pol.  torn. 3.  inter  phyfica  obf.  6,  & tab.  12.  (g)  Diflert.  de  raris  Herniis  quibufdam,

iig.  2.  {h)  Diflert.de  Hern,  incarcer.  c.  2.

(dj  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  5.  obf.  85.  ^  (/)  Diflert.  de  Periton.  ad  \.  8.

(.f)  Aa.  Erud,  Lipf,  a.  1738.  M.  Jan.

But


Letter  XLIII. Article  4,  5.  547

But  we  fhall  have  an  opportunity  below  (k),  Itlcewife,  to  fpeak  of  large
cnteroceles.  At  prefent,  as  I  have  already  defcrib'd  to  you  obfervations,  both
of  the  epiplocele,  and  enterocele,  in  other  places,  from  Valfalva  ;  I  {hall  fub-
join,  here,  the  two  of  this  kft  kind  that  remain  ;  though  they  were  but
fmall.

4.  A  poor  man,  of  fixty  years  of  age,  of  a  very  bad  habit,  and  afflifbed
with  a  rupture,  being  expos'd  to  the  cold  air,  and  perhaps-  his  ftrength  fail-
ing him,  fell  down ;  broke  the  os  humeri  in  the  middle,^  and  (lightly
bruis'd  his  face. Not  long  after  this  he  died.

The  belly  being  open'd  ;  if  you  except  the  vafa  laflea  turgid  v/lth  chyle,
that  arofe  from  a  large  traft  of  the  inteftines,  without  the  interpofition  of  any
lymphasdufts,  which  were  fcen  in  other  places  through  the  mefentery ;  and
other  appearances  of  the  fame  kind  (which  we  referve  to  another  place)  no-
thing occur'd  that  was  worthy  of  admiration ;  befides  a  part  of  the  inteftinesj
■which,  having  fallen  down  from  the  belly,  into  a  facculus  form'd  of  the
peritonaeum,  was  buried  in  the  ufual  way  in  the  fcrotum.

When  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax  was  laid  open,  the  lungs  immediately
'Colaps'd  upon  the  entrance  of  the  external  air ;  juft  as  they  do  in  living  ani-
mals:  but  this  eould  not  be  obferv'd  on  the  right  fide.  However  both  lobes
•of  the  lungs  were  found.

In  the  brain  was  contain'd  a  little  water ;  and  in  fome  places  a  gelatinous
•  concretion  was  obferv'd.

The  mufcular  parts  of  this  carcafe  were  foft  and  flaccid :  the  blood  was  al-
moft  ferous ;  and  had  very  little  of  its  red  part.  But  what  red  it  had  fhow'd
fome  folid  bodies  fwimming  in  the  ferum :  yet  in  it  were  no  fibres ;  for  when
■this  blood  was  thrown  into  water,  there  appear'd  no  fibrous  concretion.

5.  Another  poor  man,  of  about  five  and  thirty  years  of  age,  being  in  like
manner  expos'd  to  the  injuries  of  the  cold,  was  brought  into  the  hofpital,  on
the  evening  of  January  the  fifth,  in  the  year  1 690,  when  he  was  already  with-
out pulfe.  He  complain'd,  with  a  faultering  voice,  of  a  violent  pain  in  his
belly  :  and  as  this  was  fuppos'd  to  be  from  the  prolapfus  of  the  inteftines  into
the  fcrotum,  to  which  he  was  fubjedt ;  they  endeavour'd  to  replace  them.  In
the  morning  the  man  died.

While  the  body  was  cut  open,  the  flefny  parts  difcharg'd  a  great  quantity
of  fluid.

In  the  belly,  every  thing  was  natural ;  except  that  a  part  of  the  inteftines
was  even  prolaps'd  on  the  right  fide  :  the  perironseum  being  relax'd  in  the
groin  and  expanded,  within  the  fcrotum,  into  an  oblong  fac,  with  a  very
narrow  orifice.

When  the  thorax  was  laid  open,  the  lungs  appear'd  to  be  variegated  with
black  fpots,  and  black  blood  ;  and  on  the  pofterior  part,  where  they  adher'd
by  membranes  to  the  ribs,  were  in  fome  meafure  inflam'd.  In  the  right  ven-
tricle of  the  heart  was  a  pretty  large,  and  in  the  left  a  fmall  polypous  con-
cretion, together  with  grumous  blood.

But  as  to  lymphatic  veflels  being  obvious  throughout  the  furface  of  this
iheart,  and  of  almoft  all  the  remaining  vifcera ;  how  diftended  they  were  in

{.<)  N.  7.

4  A  2  the


548  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  mefentery,  and  repreiented  a  feries  of  globules,  as  it  were  ;  and  other  things
of  the  like  kind  ;  I  iliall  have  a  more  convenient  opportunity  of  fpeaking  on
thefe  iubjeds  hereafter.

6.  If  you  afk  the  reaibn,  why  I  did  not  give  you  thefe  two  obfervations  of
A'alfalva  in  other  places,  rather  than  here  ;  I  fhall  fay,  I  have  not  given  them
in  other  places,  becaufe  the  laft  fymptoms  of  the  former  patient  are  not  put
down  ;  and  the  difleftion  of  the  head  of  the  latter.  And  I  have  copied  them
here  ;  to  fhow  you  that  the  vifcera,  which  Valfalva  had  feen  to  be  prolaps'd,
did  not  fall  down  through  a  rupture  of  the  peritonaeum,  but  through  a  re-
laxation of  this  membrane  •,  nor  within  a  procefs  of  it ;  but  within  a  facculus
made  up  of  this  membrane  rclax'd.

Nor  has  he  above  (I),  nor  in  five  other  obfervations,  made  by.  him,  upon
hernias,  which  I  have  formerly  defcrib'd  to  you  {in),  laid  down  any  thing
repugnant  thereto  •,  but  has  even,  fometimes,  faid  what  agreed  perfedtly
therewith.  And  if  you  read,  over  again,  eleven  other  obfervations  already
given  by  me  (n),  you  will  find  nothing  repugnant  to  this  dodtrine;  but  a
confirmation  of  it.

Nor  will  you  be  furpriz'd,  when  you  attend,  not  fo  much  to  thatperfuafion
which  had  formerly  poffefs'd  the  minds  of  moft  perfons,  as  to  the  obferva-
rions  of  thofe,  who,  fetting  afide  this  perfuafion,  chofe  rather  to  be  deter-
min'd  by  accurate  infpedions.

Thus  Arantius  (<?),  even  in  very  large  ruptures,  fav/  "  no  folution  of  con-
tinuity in  the  peritonjeum."  Thus,  in  that  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum,
which  relates  to  the  prefent  fubject,  that  is  in  the  twenty-ninth ;  in  which  I
find  nothing  faid  of  Arantius;  you  will  read  that  Hildanus C^J,  Riolanus  {q)^
Barbette  (r),  to  whom  you  may  add  Ruyfch  (j),  and  Benevoli  (/),  confirm-
the  fame  thing.

And,  indeed,  though  this  laft  author  had  occafion  to  inveftigate  thefe
things  more  than  a  hundred  times,  and  Ruyfch  not  lefs  often ;  yet  both  of
them  aflert  that  the  peritonaeum  had  never  been  ruptur'd  in  hernias.  But  you
will  fay  Arantius  does  not  deny  the  pofiibihty  of  its  being  ruptur'd ;  and
Barbette,  if  you  read  him  a  little  below  (a;?  fpeaks  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to
lead  us  to  fuppofe  that  he  had  feen  it  ruptur'd,  in  that  kind  of  hernia  which
they  now  call  crural.

Yet  he  does  not  expredy  fay  that  he  had  feen  it.  And  others,  befides  thofe-
1  have  mention'd,  deny  their  having  ever  feen  it ;  particularly  Mauchartus
{>:),  who  affirms  that  in  five  bodies  which  had  hernia,  he  found  the  perito-
naeum "  only  dilated ;  though  the  bodies  were  very  cautioufly  difleded  by
"  him  for  this  purpofe ;  that  he  had  never  found  it  ruptur'd,  and  even  that
"  it  had  certainly  never  happen'd  to  the  celebrated  Parifian  furgeons,  whom
•  "  he  had  confulted '  upon  this  rupture  -,  notwithftanding  they  have  a  very
"  ample  and  frequent  opportunity  of  inquiring  into  ruptures."

(/)  N.  2.  (p)  (q^)  Sdiol.ad  obf.  19.  verf.  fin..

(m)  Epift.  n.  n.  20..  V.n.  2.  XXXIV.  n.  7.  (r)  Obf.  i.

&  5.  XXXVIII.  n.  2.  (i)  Adverf.  Anat.  dec.  2.  n.  9.

(«)  Ep.  V.  n.  19.  XXI.  n.  15  &  19.  XXIV.  (0  Diflertaz.  i.

s.  16.  XXVI.  n. 37.  XXXIV.  n.  9.  11. 15.  &  («) Chirurg.  p.  i.  c.  7.

i8.  XLI.  n.  10.  XLII.  n.  34,  (x)  Differt.  fupra  ad  n.  3.  cit.  c.  2.

(0)  DeTimvor.  c,  48.


Letter  XLIII. Article  6.  549

And  left  5^00  fliould  be  in  doubt,  whether  he  confulted  them  only  in  re-
gard to  finall  hernite,  and  not  of  large  likewife  ;  he  had,  a  little  before,  men-
tion'd  letters  fent  to  him  from  one  of  them,  in  which  he  fays  that  he  had  juft
then  found  three  ells  of  the  fmall  inteftines,  together  with  a  portion  of  the
colon,  in  an  "  enormous"  rupture.

And  if  you  ftill  require  larger  •,  Henfingius,  befides  that  which  is  men-
tion'd  above,  will  give  you  another  (jy),  containing  eight  ells  of  the  inteftines
and  more,  which  hereceiv'dfrom  the  celebrated  Hommelius  (z)  ;  who,  in  an
infant  of  two  years  old,  faw  "  all  the  chylopoietic  vifcera"  to  have  fallen  out
from  the  navel :  "  the  peritonaeum  not  being  ruptur'd,  but  only  extended
and  relax'd  ■"  as  Henfingius  had  alfo  feen  in  his  obfervation.

And  before  them  Mery  {a),  in  the  left  fide  of  the  fcrotum,  of  a  certain  old
man,  which  was  enlarg'd  to  a  monftrous  fize,  found  the  csecum,  together  with
the  beginning  of  the  colon,  drag'd  down  thither  by  the  fmall  inteftines,
which  were  all  of  them  prolaps'd  in  that  place ;  except  the  upper  part  to  the
length  of  half  a  foot,  by  which  the  ftomach  was  likewife  fo  drawn  down,,
from  its  fituation,  as  to  defcend,  in  a  right  line,  from  the  diaphragm  towards
the  lower  parts  of  the  belly :  yet  a  purfe  or  fac,  made  of  the  peritonaeum,
clofely  embrac'd  all  this  very  large  tumour.

Nor  would  I  have  you  fay  that  Mery,  when  he  before  {b)  gave  us  the
obfervation  of  that  not  fmall  hernia ;  from  a  virgin  ;  which,  befides  two  cir-
cumvolutions of  the  inteftine  colon,  contain'd  a  traft  of  the  fmall  inteftines
to  the  length  of  four  feet  at  leaft,  and  had  this  Angularity ;  on  account  of
which  it  is  furprizing,  that  it  Ibould  be  fcarcely  taken  notice  of,  by  any  of
_  the  authors,  who  have  written  of  ruptures  fince  that  time  •,  I  mean  that  it  ex-
'  tended  from  the  left  groin,  quite  to  the  middle  of  the  thigh  -,  do  not  fiy  then,
that  Mery,  in  giving  this  obfervation,  has  not  made  the  leaft  mention  of  ^.
containing  peritonasum.

For  it  is  natural  to  anfwer,  that,  in  a  hernia,  the  involucra  of  which,  as:
well  as  the  fmall  inteftines  contain'd  therein,  had  been  putrefied  by  a  gan-
grene, there  was  no  opportunity  for  the  furgeon  to  examine,  whether  the
periton£Bum  had  comprehended  thefe  parts ;  as  this  membrane  muft  have  been,
already  deftroy'd  by  that  putrefaftion,  rather  than  ruptur'd.  _

And  fuppoiethe'fame  thing  to  be  faid,  in  refpeft  to  the  obfervation  of  Tac-
conus  (c)  on  another  virgin  ;  in  whom,  not  below  the  ligamentum  Poupartii,,
as  it  is  call'd,  but  from  the  fame  place  as  in  the  former,  the  inteftines  having
been  prolaps'd  for  many  years,  at  length  fell  down  fuddenly  without  the  her-
nia :  not  fo  much  becaufe  the  peritonaeum,  that  lay  in  contact  with  them,
was  ruptur'd,  as  half-corrupted ;  and  moft  probably,  from  the  lame  caufe,
that  had  ulcerated  the  lower  integuments  of  the  hernia.

For  you  will  fee,  that,  in  a  much  larger  rupture,  fpoken  of  by  the  fame
author,' whatever  part  of  the  colon  and  mefocolon  was  therein,  as  the  de-
lineated figure  clearly  fliows  {d),  "  had  been,  invefted  round  about" by  the-

(y) N.  3.  {b) Ibid.obf.4.

(2)  Ad  §.  ibid.  cit.  (cj  Diflert.  fupra  ad  b.  3.  cit.

\a}  Mem,  de  I'Acad.  R.  ^es  Sc.  a.  1701. (dj  Tab.  3.  fig.  i.
obf.  5.

pentonaeiina..


550  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

peritonjeum.  Other  large  hernias  I  have  both  read  ©f,  and  feen  :  as  that
which  Teichmeyrus  (e)  reprefented  as  hanging  down  "  quite  to  the  knees ;"
and  thofe  which  Schacherus  (f),  and  Meekrenius  (g),  have  faid  were  "  ex-
"  tended  beyond  the  knees  ;"  and  not  to  be  too  prolix,  that  which  the  cele-
brated Brebifius  {b)  has  reprefented,  as  "  hanging  down  quite  to  the  calves
"  of  the  legs."

But  the  firft  has  only  faid  (i),  that  a  large  portion  of  the  fmall  inteftines,
of  the  large  inteftines,  of  the  mefentery,  and  omentum,  had  been  contain'd
therein  :  whether  the  fecond  diffedted  his  hernia,  I  do  not  know  :  the  two
others  cretainly  did  not  ;  nor  did  I  diffed  that  which  I  faw  in  a  bifliop  of  a
noble  family  •,  I  mean  an  ofcheocele  alone,  which  was  unequal  in  length,  in-
deed, to  that  reprefented  by  Meekrenius,  but  not  in  thicknefs  ;  nor  in  this,
that  the  vifcera,  which  it  contain'd,  could  very  eafily  be  forc'd  back  into  the
■belly:  but  they  could  be  retaln'd  there  by  no  means  whatever.

7.  Is  there  no  obfervation  then,  you  will  fay,  of  the  peritonseum  being
Tuptur'd  in  hernise  ?  I  do  not  contend  for  this;  but  only  that  they  are  much
more  rare  than  was  formerly  fuppos'd.  And  although  Dionis  (k)  aflerts  j
that  an  omphalocele  happens  only  if  the  peritonaeum  be  ruptur'd  ;  and
•that 'he,  although  he  had  open'd  many  omphaloceles,  both  in  the  liv-
ing, and  dead  body,  could  never  difcover  that  they  v?ere  invefted  in-
ternally by  the  peritonaeum ;  and  even  that  by  cutting  into  the  fkin,  he  had
found  no  membrane  befides  -,  yet  you  have  feen  juft  now  (_l),  how  large  an
omphalocele  Hommelius  faw  comprehended  in  the  relaxed,  not  ruptur'd,  perito-
Jiseum  :  and  you  may  fee,  that  Paul  Barbette  (m)  had  fometimes  demonftrated,
in  dead  bodies,  that  although  the  navel,  together  with  the  fubfequent  in-
teftines, protuberated  fo  as  to  equal  the  fize  of  a  man's  head,  the  peritonzeum
was  neverthelefs  "  expanded  only,  and  not  ruptur'd  •,"  and,  in  like  manner,
that  Hottinger  («) ;  in  the  omphalocele  of  a  v/oman,  wliich  was  a  foot  in  its^
■diameter,  or  more ;  having  taken  off  the  fkin,  "  open'd  the  peritonseum,
"  which  in  thicknefs,  and  denfity,  refembled  the  external  fl<:in,  and  was
"  difficult  to  be  cut  through  •,  having  the  inteftines  firmly  annex'd  to  it,"  as,
jn  a  girl  difledted  by  Schulzius  (0),  it  had  the  omentum  connefted  to  it,
■in  moft  places.

To  thefe  add  the  obfervation  of  the  illuftrious  Haller  (p)^  who  found  the
peritonjeal  fac  whole  in  the  exomphalos,  as  well  as  in  other  hernise.  In  con-
fequence  of  thefe  obfervations  you  will  perhaps  fufpeft,  that,  in  fome  of  the
difleftions  of  Dionis,  at  leaft,  his  eyes  had  been  deceiv'd,  by  the  great  ex-
tenuation of  the  peritonaeum,  and  its  clofe  connexion  with  the  common  in-
leguments.

I  alfo  read,  that,  in  a  crural  hernia,  a  man  of  eminence  ($)  found  a  portion

(e)  Differt.  de  Exomphalo  inflamm.  ^.  ii.  (/)  N.  6.

ffj  Differt.  de  Morb.  a  fitu.  inteft.  p.  n.  c.  (m)  Seft.  hac  Sepulchr.  29.  &  obf.  i.

g.  §.  3.  («)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec. 3.  a.  9.  &  10.  obf.  231.

{g)  Obf.  Med.  Chir.  Pofth.  c.  5.  (o)  Art.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf.  226.

(/&)  Adl.  n.  c.  torn.  4.  obf.  25.  (/.)  Opufc.  Pathol,  obf.  2g.&feq.

(/)  Differt.  cit.  §.  18.  [q)  Commerc.  Litter,  a.  1745.  Jiebd.  24.  n.  I.
(X)  Cours  d'Operat.  de  Chir.  demonftr.  2.

©)f


Letter  XLIII. Article  7.  551

®f '  the  omentum,  colon,  and  ileum,  "  in  a  cavity  of  the  ruptur'd  perito^
"  nasum."

Verheyen  (r)  neverthelefs  ;  who  was  one  of  the  firft  that  defcrib'd  this  kind
of  hernia,  and  the  manner  in  which  patients  die  from  an  interception  of  it  v.
has  afferted,  that  it  was  made  by  the  peritonaeum  being  "  gradually  dilated
*'  in  that  part ;  or,  what  very  rarely  happens,  by  the  peritonseum  being
"  ruptur'd :"  and  I  myfelf,  as  I  have  already  told  you  (s),  have  certainly
feen  the  facculus  of  it  in  that  part ;  as  others  have  likewife ;  and  among  thefe
Mauchartus  (t)  -,  and  if  you  require  a  larger  fac,  Wernerus,  as  you  read  in
the  fame  Mauchartus  (u) ;  who  dilated  a  fac  in  the  fame,  part,  which  con-
tain'd,  befide  a  long  portion  of  the  omentum,  a  part  of  the  inteftinum  ileum,,
"  almoft  of  the  length  of  two  feet  and  a  half."

But  if  we  are  to  confider  the  ofcheocele  chiefly,  which  is  not  only  the
more  frequent  hernia,  but  gave  me  occafion  to  enter  into  this  difcuffion  ;  we
muft  not  diflemble,  that,  in  the  very  fe<5tion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (x),  which^
treats  of  this  fubjeft,  two  obfervations  are  extant ;  the  one  of  John  Rudolph
Salzmann  (y),  the  other  of  Frederic  Hoffmann  the  father  (z) ;:  the  former,
of  whom  fays,  that,  in  this  hernia,  he  had  demonftrated  "  the  peritonaeum
"  to  be  ruptur'd ;"  and  the  latter,  that  he  had  feen,  "  with  a  dilatation  o£
"  the  external  coat  of  the  peritoneum,  the  internal  ruptur'd,  and  lace-
"  rated."

It  may  be  wifh'd,  in  regard  to  thefe  obfervations ;  which  if  they  are  com-
par'd  with  the  others,  that  are  almoft  innumerable ;  are  very  rare ;  that  what
had  been  the  caufe  of  the  hernia  in  both  of  them,  was  not  unknown  to  us.
For  to  open  myfelf  to  you  ingenuoufly,  as  my  cuftom  is,  I  am,  in  fome  mea-
fure,  a  follower  of  our  Fabricius  (a),  and  even  of  Paulus  Eginetta  (i>)j
"whofe  fedary  he  is.

That  is  to  fay,.  I  follow  them  in  this  do6lrine  which  they  have  taught  us ;
that  the  rupture,  whereof  we  are  fpeaking,  is  brought  about,  either  by  a
dilatation,  relaxation,  or  rupture  of  the  peritonasum ;  and  in  this  likewife ;
that  when  it  happens  from  a  rupture,  "  the  inteftine  is  fuddenly,  and  at  once,
"  pulh'd  down  in  the  beginning ;  and  that  from  violent  caufes  only  :  and
*'  there  is  a  very  large  tumour ;"  or,  as  others  tranflate  the  words  of  Paulus  %,
"  it  is  of  an  immenfe  magnitude."

Yet  in  this  I  cannot  follow  them,  that  a  rupture  is  always  to  be  acknow-
ledg'd,  even  where  all  thefe  figns  have  come  together.

For  my  affent  to  this  doftrine  is  witheld,  not  only  by  the  obfervations  be-
fore advanc'd,  of  large  ruptures*  and  thofe  which  violent  caufes  (fuch  as  a
fall  from  a  high  place,  or  the  like)  had  produc'd,  or  increas'd,  without  a
rupture  of  the  peritonaeum ;  but  alfo  by  reafon  j  which,  as  Mauchartus  (c)
fhows,  by  no  means  forbids  us  to  fuppofe  what  caufes  there  might  be,  either
from  the  original  formation,  or  afterwards,  of  fo  great  a  propenfity  to  dila-

(>■)  Anat.  Corp.  hum.  1.  i.  tr.  z.  c.  7.  ("zj  Obf.  14.  §.  3.

(1)  Epift„34.  n.  15.  {a)  Pentateuch.  1. i.e.  24.  &  de  Chirurg.

(t)  DilTert.  fupra ad n.  3.  cit.  c.  4.  in  fin.  Gperat.  ubi  de  Inteft.  Hernia.

(a)  Differt.  de  Epiplo-Enterocele  Crurali.  (i)  De  Re  Medica  1.  6.  c.  65.

fxj  29.  1.  3.  (f).Diirert.  fupra  ad  n.  3,  cit.  c.  2,

(j)  Obf.  3.

tation.


552  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

tation,  in  this  membrane  -,  that  the  circumftance,  to  which  there  was  a  pre-
vious difpofition  long  before,  might  feem  to  be  brought  about  of  a  fudden.

And  this  being  the  ftate  of  the  matter;  I  commend  Fabricius  fo  much  the
more  ;  for  afferting  that  this  membrane  {d)  "  was  either  dilated,  or  ruptur'd  :
"  but  that,  for  the  moft  part,  it  was  dilated  ;"  the  more  I  perceive  there  may-
be room  for  his  affertion  :  not  only  when  herni^e  are  form'd  "  gradually  and,
*'  flowly,"  as  he  fuppos'd  ;  but  even  when  they  are  form'd  of  a  fudden.

Yet  if  you  now  produce  the  obfervation  of  Saltzmann  (e),  on  the  ftable-
keeper,  who  labour'd  under  a  bubonocele  before,  and  in  whom,  by  the  kick
of  a  horfe  in  his  belly,  "  the  whole  bulk  of  the  inteftines  fell  down  into  the
"  fcrotum  in  one  moment  as  it  were  ;"  fo  that  this  part  feem'd  almoft  like
another  belly  in  magnitude  (the  abdomen  being,  in  the  mean  time,  extreme-
ly colkps'd)  and  confirm  it  by  another  obfervation  which  he  takes  notice  of
from  Petit  •,  who,  in  a  fimilar  cafe,  which  happen'd  from  the  fame  caufe,
found  the  peritoneal  fac  open'd;  I  fhall  without  difficulty  allow,  that,  in
both  of  the  examples,  the  peritonseum  had  been  ruptur'd :  nor  did  I  ever
perfuade  myfelf  that  this  membrane  had  fo  much  ftrength,  and  firmnefs,  as
not  to  allow  of  its  being  broken  through  by  blows  of  this  kind,  or  other  vio-
lent caules  •,  which,  for  that  reafon,  I  was  willing  to  fuppofe  had  been  ap-
plied, in  thofe  two  obfervations  of  Saltzmann,  and  Hoffmann,  which  I  faid
are  extant  in  the  Sepulchretum.

I  do  not,  however,  fuppofe  this  to  happen  from  every  caufe  that  is  call'd
violent,  nor  at  all  times ;  and  I  even  fuppofe  it  to  happen  but  feldom.  A-
mong  thele  caufes,  for  inftance,  I  fee  that  riding  on  horfeback  is  now  rec-
kon'd  by  many :  nor  do  I  deny,  if  it  be  too  frequently  us'd,  that  it  may^
caufe,  and  increafe,  hernias,  from  an  extenfion  of  the  peritonaeum ;  as  I  bear
in  mind  the  example  of  Marcus  Servilius,  of  whom  Livy  (f)  relates,  that
while  he  was  haranguing  the  people ;  and  fhowing  the  fears  of  wounds,  which
he  had  receiv'd  in  the  forepart  of  his  body,  in  the  caufe  of  his  country ;  "  the
"  parts,  which  fliould  have  been  conceal'd,  being  accidentally  uncover'd,  a
"  tumour  of  the  groin  had  rais'd  a  laugh  in  thofe  who  flood  near  him  ;"  and
that  he  then  went  on  to  fay,  "  and  this  tumour  alio,  which  is  the  objeft  of
"  your  laughter,  I  have  got  by  fitting,  night  and  day,  on  horfeback  :  nor  am
"  I  more  afliam'd,  or  lorry,  for  this  tumour,  than  I  am  for  thefe  fears  •,  fince
"  it  was  never  any  impediment  to  me,  in  the  adminiflration  of  the  common-
"  wealth,  either  at  home  or  abroad."

And  he  had  been  conful,  and  mafter  of  the  horfe,  and  had  fought  three  and
twenty  times  with  the  enemy,  in  pitch'd  battles.  His  rupture  therefore,
whether  it  was  a  bubonocele,  or ;  as  the  Latins  made  ufe  of  the  word
inguina ;  an  ofcheocele  •,  that  is,  whether  it  was  an  inguinal,  or  a  fcrotal  hernia;
it  was  not,  I  fay,  one  of  thefe  large  ones,  which  are  accounted  for  from  a
rupture  of  the  peritoneum :  for  it  muft,  on  this  fuppofition,  have  been  a
hindrance  to  him,  in  performing  thofe  offices  which  he  had  perform'd ;  as
befides  that  one,  whom  I  took  notice  of  above  (g),  from  Meekrenius,  I  have


{d)  De  Operat  loco  indicate.  (f)  Hift.  1.  45.

U)  Differt.  de  Hern.  Vefic.  thef.  21.  (g)  N.  6.


read


Letter  XLIII. Article  8.  553

read  of  no  perfon,  whofe  alertnefs  of  adion  was  not,  for  the  moft  part,  much
cbftru(5ted  by  an  obftacle  and  burden  of  this  nature.

Riding  for  a  long  time  together  therefore  ;  and  that  at  the  fuUeft  fpeed  the
liorfe  can  be  rous'd  to  by  fpurring  •,  if  repeated  very  frequently,  may,  I  be-
lieve, be  fometimcs  capable  of  rupturing  the  peritonasum  :  and  at  the  fame
time,  I  cannot  help  fuppofing,  that  every  exertion  of  the  body,  in  leaping,
or  dancing  ;  that  every  fall  from  a  high  place  •,  that  every  blow  ;  that  every
ftrong  exertion  of  the  voice ;  finally,  that  every  {training,  and  holding  of  the
breath ;  which  may  relax  the  peritonfeum  •,  is  not  equal  to  the  tafk  of  break-
ing through  this  membrane.

And  thus  far  of  this  controverfy.  Now  let  us  go  on  to  the  hernial  fac-
c-ulus  itfelf

8.  It  was  formerly  believ'd  that  the  hernial  facculus  was  the  procefs  of  the
peritonaeum  dilated  -,  I  mean  that  procefs  which  they  fuppos'd  to  receive  the
fpermatic  vefTels,  from  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  ;  and,  after  having  accom-
panied them,  to  expand  itfelf,  at  length,  into  the  tunica  vaginalis  :  and  this
they  continued  to  believe  even  after  Fernelius  (h)  had  fo  clearly  fhown  that
the  peritonaeum  was  not  perforated  for  the  egrefs  of  thefe  vefTels.

But  truth  was  at  length  fuperior  to  error,  by  the  confent  and  diligence  of
more  accurate  difTedters :  with  whom  you  will  plainly  perceive  Valfalva's  ob-
fervations,  upon  herniae,  and  mine,  to  agree  -,  by  reading  over  again  thofe
which  are  defcrib'd  pretty  much  at  large.

For  fee  in  the  thirty-fourth  letter  (i),  how  exprefly  he  denies  the  facculus
to  be  made  up  of  the  procefs  of  the  peritonseum,  which  accompanies  the
ipermatic  vefTels ;  as  they  formerly  believ'd  :  and  he  even  fays  that  it  lay  up-
on this  procefs,  at  the  fuperior  part.

Wherefore,  in  the  firft  of  the  three  obfervations,  which  I  have  defcrib'd
to  you  above  (k) ;  when  he  fays  that  the  omentum  was  contain'd  within  its
"  proper  "  fac,  made  up  of  the  peritonjeum,  without  doubt  he  made  ufe  of
tliis  word  proper,  that  we  might  immediately  diftinguifh  it  from  that  procefs,
which  was  alfo  common  to  the  vefTels.

And  I  have  often  plac'd  the  matter  in  fo  clear  a  light,  as  to  make  an  in-
terpretation needlels.  Thus  in  the  fifth  letter  (/),  I  have  faid  that  the  facculus
was  very  near  to  the  vagina,  or  fheath,  of  the  fpermatic  vefTels ;  of  whatever
nature  this  vagina  may  be  fuppos'd.

Thus  I  have  faid  in  the  twenty-firft  letter  (?»),  that  the  facculus  was  in  the
beginning,  and  progrefs,  of  it,  on  the  internal  fide  of  thefe  vefTels ;  betwixt
the  membrane  that  covers  thefe  vefTels,  and  that  coat  which  is  join'd  to  the
cremafter  mufcle.  Thus  in  the  tvy^enty-fourth  letter,  I  have  laid  (n),  that
the  facculus  defcended  under  this  very  coat,  and  on  the  fame  internal  fide  of
the  veflels ;  and  that  near  the  orifice  of  this  fac,  thefe  veflels  went  to,  not  the
cavity  of  the  belly,  but  the  peritoneum  :  but  in  another  (o)  you  will  find
that  it  was  near  to  the  external  fide  of  thefe  veflTels.

(/;.)  Phyfiol.  1.  I.e.  7.  (m)  N.  15.

r^j  N.  s-  r»;  N.  9.

(i)  N.  ,z.  (0)  N.  iS.

(/)  N.  19.

Vol.  II.  4-  B  There


554  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

There  are,  indeed,  fome  differences,  betwixt  my  obfervations,  and  thofe
of  others,  and  even  thofe  of  Valfalva  himfelf.  For  he,  as  I  have  faid,  faw
the  facculus  lying  upon  the  veffels,  in  a  dead,  body,  on  the  fuperior  part;
that  is,  if  you  fiippofe  the  body  ered,  at  the  anterior  part ;  which  fome  very
learned  men  fay  to  be  "  perpetually"  obferv'd.

But  I  have  met  with  it,  fometimes,  on  the  internal,  and  fometimes  on  the
external,  fide  of  thofe  veflels.  And  there  is  one  perfon,  if  I  rightly  conceive,
who  has  feen  the  cremafter  mufcle  lying  betwixt  the  facculus,  and  the  vef-
fels ;  which  I  fuppofe  to  be  much  more  rare  :  at  leaft  I  have  found  it  other-
wife,  as  I  have  already  faid.

Thefe  differences  of  fituation,  however,  although  very  necefiary  for  fur-
geons  to  attend  to  ;  do  not,  by  any  means,  prevent  me  from  agreeing  with  Val-
falva, and  both  of  us  with  the  moft  accurate  obfervers ;  in  that  which  is  its
principal  circumftance  :  I  mean  that  the  hernial  facculus  is  one  thing,  and  the
procefs  of  the  peritonaeum  another:  although,  at  this  time,  there  is  no  fmall
Gontroverfy  amongft  anatomifts,  in  regard  to  acknowledging  this  procefs.

For  as  to  Fernelius  denying  that  it  was  made  up  of  the  internal  coat  of  the
peritonECum,  and  afferting  it  to  confift,  at  leaft,  of  the  other  external  coat ;  how
can  they  admit  of  this  fuppofition,  who  do  not  acknowledge  any  fuch  exter-
nal coat?  In  which  number  however,  I  do  not  fufficiently  know,  why  this
learned  man  feems  to  place  Swammerdam,  from  his  notes  on  the  Prodromus
Hornii;  Ruyfch  from  the  ninety-eighth  obfervation  ;  and  Juftus  Schraderus
from  the  fifth  obfervation  of  the  fecond  Decuria,

But  they  who,  in  fadt,  confider  the  cellular  membrane  as  forming  this
coat ;  as  they  do  not  deny  that  this  at  leaft  defcends  into  the  fcrotum  with  the
fpermatic  veffels,  grant  us  enough,  in  the  mean  time,  to  fet  afide  the  con-
troverfy,  and,  at  leaft,  to  mark  out  this  involucrum,  in  which  thefe  veffels
are  contain'd,  and  which  proceeds  from  the  peritonseum,  under  the  term  va-
gina, in  refpedt  of  thefe  veffels,  and  under  the  term  procefs,  in  relpedt  to
the  peritonzeum.

Nor  was  "Valfalva  himfelf,  in  my  opinion,  very  diftant  from  an  explication
of  this  kind  ;  when  he  us'd  the  expreffion  procefs  of  the  peritonaeum  (p).  For
although  he  did  not  always  teach  me  the  fame  thing,  upon  this  fubjedt,  when
I  was  a  young  man  ;  yet  I  very  well  remember,  when  he,  finally,  deliver'd
himfelf  thus :  that  neither  the  tendon  of  the  external  oblique  mufcle,  nor  the
peritonasum,  in  that  part  through  which  the  fpermatic  veffels  defcend  from
the  abdomen,  properly  fo  call'd,  towards  the  fcrotum  ;  I  fay,  that  neither
this  tendon  is  perforated,  into  the  form  of  a  real  ring,  nor  the  peritonasum  is
hoUow'd  out  into  a  fheath  ;  both  of  which  circumftances  were  generally  be-
liev'd  ;  but  only  fome  filaments  were  fent  down,  here  and  there,  over  thofe
veffels :  nor  was  there  any  other  connexion  betwixt  the  peritonasum,  and  the
tunica  vaginalis.

From  whence  you  alfo  underftand,  that  he  did  not  confider  that  procefs
as  a  kind  of  continued  canal  ;  which,  having  firft  clofely  embrac'd  thofe  vef-
fels, at  leno-th  expanded  itfelf  into  the  tunica  vaginalis.  Nor  indeed  could
he  be  ifnorant  that  the  cavity  of  this  coat  does  not  raife  itfelf  up  much
above  the  tefticle;  as  this  not  only  appears  from  infpedtion  of  the  parts  ana-

Q\  E^ift,  34.  n.  5.  .

tomically,.


Letter  XLIII. Article  9.  555

tomically,  but  even  Swamtnerdam  in  his  Miraculum  Natuy<e  exprefly  ad-
monifhes  us,  that  this  coat  "  does  not  extend  itfelf-  much  beyond  the  tef-
"  tides."

And  Blafius,  having- follow'd  this  opinion  (q),  has  made,  from  thence,
fuch  dedu6i:ions  as  I  fhall  take  notice  of  below  (r),  when  I  treat  of  the  hydro-
cele :  in  the  mean  while  you  may  fee  them  in  the  Sepulchretum  {s).  And
as  thefe  deduftions  are  transfer'd  thither,  fo  it  would  have  been  alfo  proper,
to  transfer  what  has  been  obferv'd  by  Swammerdam,  in  the  place  refer'd  to  ;
and  what  Juflus  Schraderus  (/)  has  obferv'd  together  with  him,  of  the  pro-
cefs  of  the  peritonaeum  ■,  if  there  be  fuch  a  one  ;  and  the  hernial  facculus,
being  quite  different  things.

What  is  it  then,  you  will  fay,  thatBofcus  relates  in  the  Sepulchretum  («) ;
*'  that  the  vagina  of  the  tefticle,  made  by  the  periton£eum,"  was  demon-
Ilrated,  by  him,  in  a  child  labouring  under  an  enterocele,  "  to  be  fo  dilated
*'  in  its  origin,  and  quite  to  the  fundus,  and  termination  of  it,  that  two
"  fingers  eafily  were  introduc'd  into  it  ?"

I  Ihould  fuppofe  it  probable,  that  by  fome  very  rare  accident  the  lower
part  of  the  hernial  fac  was  burft  through  on  one  hand  j  and  on  the  other,
that  the  upper  part  of  the  tunica  vaginalis  was  ruptur'd  alfo;  by  which
means  they  had  coalefc'd  into  one  tube  :  or  that,  as  Mery  {a)  fufpefted  in  a
certain  Angular  obfervation  of  his,  fimilar  to  the  prefent,  in  this  boy  the  tunica
vaginalis,  as  is  the  cafe  in  moft  quadrupeds,  had  happen'd  to  be  quite  per-
vious, from  the  cavity  of  the  belly  to  the  tefticle  ;  I  fhould  fuppofe  it  pro-
bable, I  fay,  if  Bofcus  did  not  affirm  that  he  had  feen  the  fame  thing  "  fre-
quently," and  did  not  think  "  it  was  eafily  to  be  feen  by  all."

Since  therefore,  it  has  -not  only  not  happen'd  to  others,  to  find  it  thus,
but  to  me  likewife  ;  and  fince  it  has  even  been  found  quite  otherwife  ;  it  re-
mains to  fufpeft  that  this  author,  and  thofe  who  were  prefent,  were  led  into
an  error ;  perhaps  by  the  extenuation,  and  adhefion,  of  both  the  coats  to
each  other,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  the  tefticle,  in  fo  great  a  degree,  that
this  might  feem  to  be  quite  protuberating  within  the  hernial  fac,  in  the
body  in  queftlon.

9.  But  it  becomes  us,  ftill  more,  to  beware  of  other  blunders  in  the  living
body  ;  left  we  imagine  an  inteftine,  or  the  omentum,  to  be  prolaps'd  out  of
the  cavity  of  the  belly,  without  reafon.

There  are  many  things  which  render  incautious  perfons  bable  to  this  error-,
as,  for  inftance,  the  tefticle,  when  about  to  defcend  into  the  fcrotum  very
late,  as  fometimes  happens  ;  for  it  raifes  up  the  groin,  yet  cannot  eafily  be
miftaken  for  a  bubonocele  ;  except  by  thofe  who,  not  imitating  Brechtfeld  (y),
negle£l  previoudy  to  examine  the  fcrotum,  efpecially  in  children,  and  obferve
the  tefticle  to  be  deficient  therein  :  as  for  inftance  alfo,  one  of  the  inguinal
glands,  increas'd  into  that  form  which  I  defcrib'd  in  the  thirty-firft  let-
ter (2),  in  the  butcher ;  or  many  of  them  together  with  coagulated  ferum,

(y)  Obf.  Anat.  in  Horn,  ubide  Telle.  (x)  Mem. de  I'Acad. R.  des  Sc.  a.  1701.

(r)  N.  32.  obf.  3.

{s)  Sea.  hac.  29.  obf.  2.  (j)  Vid.  apud  Bartholin.  A&.  Med.  Hafn.

.  (/)  Dec.  2.  Obf.  Anat.  Med.  5.  vol.  i.  obf.  106.

{u)  Sea.  cit.  obf.  5.  (k)  N.  19.

4  B  2  fuch  ,


556  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fuch  as  Reifelius  found  (a)  :  and  finally,  as  other  appearances ;  in  ordfer  to
prevent  being  impos'd  upon  by  which,  all  the  other  circumftances  muft  be
accurately  inquir'd  after,  and  confider'd.

I  was  at  Venice,  when  a  woman  fent  for  fnrgeons,  and  phyficians-,  and
among  thefe  Santorini ;  in  order  to  afcertain  the  nature  of  the  tvimour,  which
was  prominent  in  one  of  her  groins ;  as  fhe  fcar'd  left  it  fliould  be  a  bubono-
cele, for  this  reafon,  that  it  had  appear'd  iliddenly,  as  fhe  was  ftraining  to
difcharge  the  harden'd  excrements  from  the  inteftines.

All  figns  of  a  hernia  were  abfent;  except  that  immediately  upon  applying
their  hands  to  that  part,  the  woman  difcharg'd  wind  by  eruftation.

Santorini,  obferving  the  phyficians  to  be  in  doubt,  merely  on  this  account,
fmil'd  ;  and  faid  to  them,  and  whatever  part  of  my  body  you  touch,  you  will
hear  erudtations  immediately  come  on.  They  infl:antly  made  the  experi-
ment, and  found  ic  to  be  as  he  had  faid.

When  Santorini  related  thefe  things  to  me,  and  to  fome  more  friends,
others  wonder'd  at  it  as  an  unheard  of  circumftance-,  but  I  faid,  it  is  extra-
ordinary indeed,  yet  not  unheard  of.  For  I  remember  to  have  read,  in  Etmul-
ler  {!>),  "  that  what  Bartholin  in  the  Jffa  Medica  Hafnknfia^  page  one  hundred
"  and  ninety-nine,  and  Rhodius  in  the  fifty-fecond  obfervation  of  the  fecond
"  chapter,  have  obferv'd,  of  continual  eruftations  being  excited,  by  external
*'  fridion,  in  any  part  of  the  body  whatever,  is  very  extraordinary,"

Yet  left  the  fame  thing  happen  to  you,  which  happen'dto  my  friends ;  if  you
fhould  choofe,  in  fo  very  rare  a  cafe,  to  turn  to  the  authors  themfelves,  point-
ed out  by  EtmuUer  •,  in  Rhodius  you  will  certainly  wifti  for  a  more  happy
memory  in  the  reference ;  but  in  Bartholin  you  will  fee  there  is  a  typogra-
phical error ;  page  one  hundred  and  ninety-nine  being  put  for  a  hundred  and
ninety-four  -,  and  will  really  find  the  obfervation  of  a  man,  "  who  from  a
"  flight  friction  of  any  part  of  the  body,  immediately  fell  into  fo  enormous
"  an  eruftation,  that  he  did  not  ceafe  to  eruflrate  before  the  friftion  ceas'd."
But  that  obfervation  is  the  hundred  and  fecond  of  the  firft  part,  of  the  firft"
volume,  of  the  ads  already  quoted  ;  Brechtfeld,  phyfician  to  the  king's  mo^
ther,  being  the  author.

10.  There  are  other  appearances  alfo,  which  are  not  equally  rare  to  be  met
with,  nor  yet  very  frequent  -,  and  thefe  not  only  in  the  groins,  but  alfo  at  the
navel,  and  the  fcrotum  ;  which  may  fometimes  create  a  difficulty,  to  phy-
ficians, in  diftinguifhing  ruptures,  and  fometimes  deceive  them.

Thus  I  remember,  that,  in  regard  to  a  certain  moft  ferene  prince ;  who,^
among  other  things,  was  alfo  fubjecl  to  flatus,  and  hypochondriac  diftentions
of  the  belly,  it  was  related  to  me  by  his  phyficians,  who  were  in  other  re-
fpe£ls  excellent  men,  that  a  little  above  the  navel  of  this  great  perfonage,  and
on  the  left  fide,  an  epiplocele  had  appear'd  :  in  examining  of  which  place,
although  I  perceiv'd  a  kind  of  lax  and  flight  prominence,  of  a  circular  cir-
cumference, the  diameter  of  which  was  equal  to  three  inches  at  leaft  ;  yet  as
I  perceiv'd  nothing  unequal  to  be  under  it,  and  the  prince  himfelf  did  not
give  fuch  anfwers  to  my  interrogations  as  confirm'd  the  judgment  of  the
phyficians  •,  I  chofe  rather  to  withold  my  affent :  nor  was  I  lorry  for  it,  when,

(a)  Eph.  n.  C.  dec.  2.  a.  7.  obf.  12.  {b)  Prax,  1.  i,  f.  4.  c.  2.  in  Prognof.

4  after


Letter  XLIII. Article lo.  ^^y

after  fbme  months,  the  patient  having  died  from  quite  a  different  caufe,  I  was
inform'd,  by  the  account  of  the  difTeftion  being  fent  to  me,  that  the  deception
refer'd  to, by  the  celebrated  Heifter  (c)  had  happen'd  ;  I  mean  that  there  was
nothing  under  the  iTcin,  befides  fat  diftending  the  cells  of  the  membrana  adi-
poia,  that  was  pulh'd  outwards,  not  by  the  peritoneum,  which  was  by  no
means  lax,  but  only  by  reafon  of  the  very  great  quantity  of  fat,  which  was
prominent  in  that  part:  of  which  kind  of  tumours  I  lliall  write  to  you  here-
after (d).

But  that  this  kind  of  tumour  fometimes  refembles  bubonoceles,  appears-
from  the  obfervation  of  Schulzius  {e),  in  a  man,  in  whom  it  was  fo  much'
the  more  eafy  to  be  deceiv'd,  becaufe,  as  he  was  of  a  very  lean  habit,  nobody
would  have  thought  of  fo  great  a  quantity  of  fat  being  join'd  to  the  fper-
matic  velTels.

And  although  another  whom  Petfchius  (f)  difiedled  was  very  fat  •,  yet  the
deception  was  very  natural  for  this  reafon ;  becaufe  the  fat,  coUefled  in  the
cellular  fubftance  of  the  peritonseum,  was  carried  out  "  through  the  rings  to
"  the  fcrotum  ;"  not  on  both  fides,  but  in  the  right  fide  only  •,  in  fuch-a  quan-
tity, that  there  feem'd  to  be  an  ofcheocele  in  that  part.

Moreover,  in  the  fcrotum ;  where,  in  other  refpefts,  frequently,  when
there  is  a  complex  kind  of  hernia,  the  one  is  obicur'd  by  the  other,  as  when
a  great  quantity  of  water,  lying  round  about,  prevents  us  from  diftinguifli-
irrg  the  included  omentum,  or  inteftine,  or  both,  with  our  fingers ;  it  may
befides  fometimes  happen,  that  vre  may  fuppofe  a  firaple  kind  to  be  complex  ;
or  at  leaft  fuppofe  it  to  be  what  it  is  not.

For  who; in  that  obfervation  of  Vefalius,  for  inftance  (which  you  find'
copied  in  the  Sepulchretum  alfo  (g) )  when  he  had  obferv'd  the  fcrotum  to  be
fo  large  and  heavy  ;  who,  I  fay,  would  have  thought  it  to  have  arifen  from
a  part  of  the  omentum  only,  which  had  fallen  down  thitherj  increas'd  tO'
fuch  a  magnitude,  as  "to  weigh  four  or  five  pounds  ?"

Or  how  few ;  to  come  to  a  more  recent  example ;  would  have  been  able
readily  to  avoid  the  deception  (into  which  Gunzius  himfelf  (^)  confefTes,  with
a  very  commendable  ingenuoufhefs,  that  he  had  fallen)  fo  as  to  think  ;  whea-
they  faw  a  tumour  narrow,  and  conftrifted  at  the  groin,  but  in  the  fcrotum
large,  and  extenfive,  with  a  rotundity  of  figure  ;  that  no  part  of  the  inteftines-
was  there  :  but  only  that  the  omentum,  which  was  found  to  be  grown  very-
thick,  and  folded  back  at  its  lower  part,  was  contain'd  therein  ?

Gr  who,  finally,  is  there ;  to  whom  the  obfervations  (that  are  not  often  tO'
be  met  with)  of  thofe  excellent  men,  whom  I  commended  to  you  in  the  thirty-
fourth  letter  (i),  are  unknown  ;  that,  when  he  fees  this  fymptom  to  be  want-
ing, and  not  to  be  added  to  moft  of  the  others,  of  an  intercepted  inteftine;-
I  mean  that  the  pafifage  of  the  inteftines  is  obftru6led  ;  dare  affirm  that  fome-
part  of  thefe  is  intercepted,  either  at  the  navel,  or  at  the  groin,  or  in  the-
fcrotum  ■,  as  others  have  found,  or  at  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh,  as  I  have-
found  {k) :  and  on  the  other  hand,  although  no  excrements  pafs,  that,  never=-

(c)  Inft.  Chir.  p.  2.  f.  5.  c.  120.  n.  I.  (g) Se£t.  hac  29.  obf.  15.  §.  3.

CJJ  Epift.  50.  n.  24.  (^i)  Proluf.  de  Entero-Epiplocel.

{e)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  i,r  obf.  225,  (i)  N.  16.  17.

C/J  Syllog,  anat.  obf.  §.  8;.  [ij  Ibid,  n,  15.

thelefs.


558  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

thelefs,  nothing  but  fome  part  of  the  paries  of  the  inteftine  is  intercepted,  as
I  have  formerly  feen  in  the  groiu  (/)  -,  and  very  lately,  even  below  this,  that
very  experienc'd  furgeon  Anthony  Benevoli  (?»).

But  perhaps  I  fhall  alfo  have  occafion,  hereafter,  to  point  out  blunders,
which  may  eafily  happen,  in  the  diagnofis  of  hernias.

II.  For  now  fomewhat  muft  be  faid,  of  thofe  things  that  relate  to  the  re-
placing of  the  inteftine  prolaps'd  into  the  fcrotum  >  in  order  to  fatisfy  you  in
your  enquiry,  whether  Valfalva  was  then  averfe  to  the  ufe  of  glyfters  ?  This
gentleman  took  the  utmoft  care,  as  his  duty  was,  and  as  you  may  perceive
even  from  the  opinion  which  he  wrote,  that  nothing  fliould  obftrudt  the  re-
placing of  the  inteftine  ;  and  even  that  every  thing  fhould,  as  far  as  poffible,
give  way  to  their  return  into  the  belly.

Therefore,  when  the  hernia  was  become  fomewhat  foften'd ;  which  he
brought  about  by  the  application  of  balls  of  raw  filk,  moiften'd  in  hot  water,
in  which  chamomile  flowers,  melilot  flowers,  linfeed,  and  fasnugreekfeed,
had  been  boil'd,  and  renewing  them  every  fourth  hour  (for  this  was  then  the
cuftom  at  Bologna,  though  the  balls  of  raw-filk  were  more  frequently  moif-
ten'd  with  the  hxivium;  here  they  ufe  fponges  dip'd  into  the  dregs  of  olive
oil  made  hot)  he  then  endeavour'd,  with  a  gentle  hand,  to  replace  the  intef-
tines ;  and  this  at  a  tkne  when  the  ftomach  had  been  empty  as  long  as  pof-
iible,  without  any  other  fituation  of  body  being  requir'd  in  the  patient,  than
that  which,  as  it  is  cuftomary,  he  prefcrib'd  from  the  very  beginning :  and
obferving  that  inftant  of  time  in  particular,  in  impelling  the  inteftine,  when
the  patient,  by  his  orders,  produc'd  his  expiration  to  a  confiderable  length.

Butprevioufly  to  this  he  had  ordcr'd  blood-lettings :  efpecially  where  there  •
was  too  great  a  quantity  of  blood  •,  at  which  time  he  alfo  recommended  the  other
ufual  rem.edies ;  among  vi^hich  I  underftand  even  glyfters ;  and  at  the  fame  time
he  always  prefcrib'd  great  fparingnefs,  in  the  ufe  of  food  and  drink,  and  the
avoiding  of  every  thing  that  could  generate  flatus :  and  befides  thefe  things
he  ordered  an  emollient  broth  morning  and  evening ;  and  oil,  frefli-drawn
from  fweet-almonds,  to  be  taken  through  the  day,  in  the  quantity  of  a  fpoon-
ful  at  a  time,  fo  as  not  to  confume  more  than  two  ounces  every  day.

After  he  had  replac'd  the  inteftines,  he  took  care  the  patient  fliould  keep
the  fame  pofture  of  body  •,  and  that  the  return  of  the  hernia  ftiould  be  pre-
vented by  a  proper  bandage ;  to  which  a  piece  of  foft  fponge,  three  inches
long,  as  many  broad,  and  one  thick,  was  faften'd.  But  when,  after  having
often  attempted  to  replace  the  prolaps'd  parts,  at  proper  intervals,  he  did  not
fucceed  in  the  attempt  •,  and,  in  the  mean  while,  no  other  violent  fymptoms
oblig'd  him  to  change  his  defign  ;  rather  than  create  an  inflammation,  by
teazing  the  part  to  no  purpofe,  he  then  order'd  the  patient  to  avoid  all
thefe  things  which  I  have  mention'd  above,  and  to  keep  up  to  the  fame  mol-
lifying regimen,  which  I  faid  may  be  made  ufe  of  both  internally  and  ex-
ternally-, but  with  thofe  particularly  the  pofture  of  lying  down  fo  often  in-
culcated ;  I  mean  that  the  pubes  fliould  be  higher  than  the  other  part  of  the
belly  :  for  by  this  means  he  faid  that  nature  often  perform'd"  the  cure  of
herlelf.

flj  Ibid.  n.  i3.  (w)  DueRelaz.  Chirurg.  Relaz.  2.

Thus


Letter  XLIII. Article  12.  559

Thus  I  have  contraded  the  whole  of  his  Con/ilium  into  a  fhort  compafs  for
you ;  riot  becaufe  the  greater  part  of  the  methods  prefcrib'd,  are  not  com-
mon to  all  pra6titioners  -,  but  even  for  this  very  reafon,  that  they  are  fo:  and
this  in  order  to  convince  you,  that ;  as  they  all  agree  in  this  one  intention,
which  is  indicated  by  reafon  itfelf,  that  there  may  be  nothing  in  the  belly  to
refift  the  return  of  the  inteftincs,  but  that  every  thing  may  give  way  •,  it  does
not  appear,  why  formerly,  and  even  in  our  time,  fome  were  fo  averle  to  the
ufe  of  glyfters  :  by  means  of  which  whatever  can  be  brought  down  this  way,
may  be" evacuated  from  the  inteftines,  without  any  irritation.

For  as  to  their  faying  that  glyfters  go  down  to  the  fcrotum,  and,  by  rea-
fon of  their  weight,  deprefs  "  the  inteftines  more,  and  increafe  the  hernia;''
this  perhaps  would  have  place,  where  the  part  of  the  colon,  neareft  to  the
redlum,  had  fallen  into  the  fcrotum ;  or  where,  by  the  periftaltic  motion  be-
ing already  inverted,  every  thing  was  hurried  away,  from  the  redtum,  into  the
other  inteftines.

And  neither  of  thefe  circumftances  can  be  aflerted  by  them  :  that  is,  the
firft  cannot,  becaufe  they  confefs  "  that  the  colon  feldom  goes  out"  into  the
fcrotum  ;  nor  the  fecond,  becaufe  when  "  the  moft  violent  fymptoms  have
"  already  come  on ;"  then,  at  length,  even  they  themfelves  permit  us  to  have
recourfe  to  glyfters.

12.  But  when  there  is  a  neceffity  of  making  ufe  of  the  knife,  as  Valfalva,
whofe  method  in  'particular  you  defire  to  know,  has  left  nothing  in  writing,
relative  to  the  manner  in  which  it  ought  to  be  us'd  ;  there  is  no  reafon  why  T
ftiould  detain  you,  on  fuch  fubjeds  as  are  fufRciently  treated  of,  by  other,
authors.

I  will,  however,  juft  touch  upon  a  few  things,  which  may  be  confirm'd  by
his  difleftions,  or  mine.  And  firft,  in  regard  to  thofe  things  which  moft  ob-
ftruft  the  return  of  the  inteftines ;  a  narrow  nefs  at  the  orifice  of  the  facculus,
a  hardnefs  of  it,  and  a  connexion  of  the  prolaps'd  parts  to  the  facculus,  or
to  one  another;  that  thefe  appearances  have  occur'd  to  us  fometimes,  certaia
paflages  of  the  fifth  («),  twenty-firft  (c),  and  twenty-fourth  letters  (p),  and
even  of  this  very  letter  (j),  will  ftiow.

You  will,  afterwards,  attend  to  the  changes  which  we  find  in  the  parts ;.
either  the  parts  within  the  facculus,  or  thofe  that  lye  near  it.  Among  thofe,
in  particular,  that  is  moft  worthy  of  obfervation  which  Valfalva  law,  as  you
have  it  in  the  fecond  letter  (r) ;  that  is  to  fay  the  teftis;  feemingly  from  the
effedt  of  an  old  epiplocele,  in  a  young  man,  who  had,  in  other  refpedls,  en-
joy'd  firm  health,  and  was  about  two  and  twenty  years  of  age  ;  chang'd  uni-
verfally  into  a  membranous  body.

You  will  read,  in  the  Sepulchretum  {s),  of  "  very  fmall,  comprefs'd,  and'
"  yellowifl],  teftes,  fcarcely  equal  to  the  bignefs  of  a  nutmeg,"  being  found
•with  a  hernia;  but  a  large  hernia,  and  not  made  up  of  the  omentum  only,
but  alfo  of  no  fmall  portion  of  the  mefentery,  and  the  inteftinum  ileum  ;  and;
that  of  twenty  years  ftanding,  and  in  an  old  man  of  feventy.

W  N.  ij.  (r)  N.  20.

QJ  N.  5.9.  18.  (j)  Sedl.  hac  29.  obf.  13.

a:  He


560  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

He  likewife  was  an  old  man,  whofe  tefticle  neareft  to  the  hernia,  I
found  to  be  lels  than  the  other,  and  that  in  a  confiderable  degree,  beino',  at
the  fame  time,  of  a  brown  colour  internally,  inclining  to  red ;  as  I  faid  in
the  twenty-fourth  letter  (/).  Yet  that  hernia  was  an  enterocele  ;  and  by  rea-
fon  of  inflammation  fatal  :  fo  that  it  is  evident,  to  what  caufe  this  colour,  of
the  teftis,  is  to  be  referr'd.

Thefe  two  obfervations  then,  Oiow  that  the  magnitude  of  the  tefticles  is
fometimes  diminiih'd,  by  reafon  of  the  parts  being  prolaps'd  into  the  fcro-
tum  :  and  the  firft  demonftrates  that  the  very  ftrufture  is  fometimes  .univer-
fally  chang'd.

From  which,  as  you  may  perceive  that  what  fome  have  pronounc'd,  is  not
always  true  -,  I  mean,  "that  to  be  afraid  of  fterility,  or  impotency,  from  rup-
"  tures,  is  futile  and  abfurd  •"  fo  you  may  alfo  conjefture,  that  men  afBided
with  lierniEB,  fometimes,  become  impotent ;  not  only  becaufe  "  the  vefTels,"
as  Boerhaave  (u)  has  taught,  "  grow  to  the  fac ;"  but  alfo  becaufe,  befides
the  velTels,  the  teftes  themfelves  are  prefs'd  upon  by  the  weight,  not  only  of
the  prolaps'd  inteftine,  but  of  the  mefentery  likewife  ;  and  fometimes  by  that
of  the  omentum  alone  :  and  this  for  a  long  time  together.
"  13.  And  what  changes  fometimes  happen,  to  the  parts  which  fall  into  the
hernial  fac;  and  how  eafily  many,  and  confiderable,  en^ors,  in  the  art  of
healing,  may  be  produc'd  by  the  negleft  of  this  animadverfion  ;  Gunzius  (x)
has  very  learnedly  admonifh'd,  where  he  confefTes  his  own  deception,  in
refpeft  of  the  omentum.  To  whofe  obfervation  of  the  omentum  being  be-
come very  thick,  and  fat,  you  will  join  the  obfervations  that  Were  made  be-
fore, of  Sprogelius  (j),  in  a  living  man,  and  of  Mauchartus  (z),  in  a  body
after  death.

And  that  you  may  not  fuppofe  the  omentum  alone  to  be  chang'd  ;  you
will  alfo  add  that  which  is  related  by  Lavaterus  {a),  "  of  the  intcfdnes  being
*'  foft  like  wet  paper ;"  lb  that  there  is  lefs  occafion  to  be  furpriz'd,  if  a
fuppuration  in  particular,  or  a  gangrene,  coming  on,  they  are  broken
through,  and  pour  out  what  liquid  fseces  they  contain,  into  the  cavity  of  the
hernia:  and  fo  this  'hernia  either  refemble  another  fpecies  of  hernias,  or  an
abfcefs  •,  as  the  obfervations  of  the  celebrated  Heifter  {b)  in  living,  and  in
dead  bodies,  jointly  demonftrate.

But  to  infill  upon  the  changes  which  Valfalva,  and  I,  have  feen  to  hap-
pen in  the  prolaps'd  parts ;  you  will  learn  them  from  the  twenty-fourth
letter.

Nor  do  I  fpeak  only  of  changes  in  the  inteftines  ;  which  you  will  find,  in
feveral  places,  to  have  been  either  inflam'd,  or  black  and  gangrenous,  in
confequence  of  the  interception  ;  but  in  the  omentum  likev/ife,  and  mefen-
tery. For  you  will  read  that  the  omentum  was  doubled  up,  and  form'd  into
a  round  body  (c),  which  I  could  not  learn  the  nature  of,  but  by  cutting  into
its  fubftance.

(/)  N.  16.  {a)  Differt.  ad  eund.  n.  3.  cit.  n.  23.

\u)  Prsleft.  adinftit.  §.  641.  (bj  Differt. de  Hernia  Incarcer. §.  10  &


{x)  Proluf.  fupra  ad  n.  10.  cit.  15.

fy)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  7.  obf.  70.  (cj  N.  9.

j^ji)  Differt.  fupra  .ad  n.  3.  cit.  e. 2..  in  fine.


And


Letter  XLIIi. 'Articie  13.  561

And  that  a  portion  of  the  mefentery  appear'd,  to  Valfalva,  to  be  (d)  al-
moft  flefhy,  you  will  learn  in  the  fame  place.  That  portion,  I  fay,  which,  if
the  double  inteftine  defcends  pretty  low,  muft,  ofcourfe,  follow  it  within
the  facculus ;  for  by  reafon  of  the  fat,  with  which  it  is  furnifh'd  in  great
quantity,  it  can  be  much  more  eafily  relax'd,  than  ruptur'd.  And  it  is  fup-
pos'd  never  to  be  more  relax'd  than  in  hernise.

"  This  foftnefs,  and  laxity,  of  the  mefentei^,"  fays  Wharton  (e),  "  is  fre-
"  quently  found  in  an  inteftinal  hernia.  For  it  is  fometimes  fo  far  relax'd,
"  as  to  permit  the  inteftine  attach'd  to  it ;  which  it  ought  naturally  to  con-
"  fine  within  its  own  circumference  ;  to  fall  down  into  the  fcrotum."

But  he  whom  I  frequently,  and  defervedly,  commend  to  you,  Benevoli
(/),  has  undertaken  to  fhow,  in  a  diffcrtation  which  certainly  well  deferves
to  be  read,  that  a  laxity  of  the  mefentery  takes  place  always,  not  to  fay
frequently,  in  thefe  hernia  -,  and  that  even  from  thence  they  firft  have  their
origin.  To  which  fuppofition  relates  the  obfervation,  that  is  given  in  this
feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (g),  from  Hoffmann  the  father  •,  who  cries  up
the  virtues  of  his  magnetic  plaifter,  in  drawing  up  the  inteftines  from  her-
nise,  when  applied  to  the  loins.

But  if  the  virtues,  and  efficacies,. of  this  plaifter  are  really  fo  great,  as  to
penetrate  through  the  thicknefs  of  the  loins ;  which  it  is  very  difficult  to  con-
ceive; and  even  as  they  muft,  of  coiJrfc,  be,  to  pervade  the  lumbar  verte-
brje,  and  corroborate  the  mefentery  •,  I  am  furpriz'd  that  his  fon  has  made
no  mention ;  which,  as  far  as  I  remember,  he  has  not  done  ;  of  this  plaifter,
in  any  one  of  the  feveral  places,  where  he  treats  of  hernis,  and  their  cure.

However,  as  Etmuller  affirms  (/;),  "  that  he  had  feen  furprizing  effefts "  from
this  plaifter,  I  will,  if  you  pleafe,  leave  the  merits  of  it  entirely  underermin'd
in  this  place  ;  elpecially  as,  if  a  perfon,  affiifted  with  a  rupture,  fhould  be
willing  to  apply  corroborants,  and  aftringents,  to  the  loins ;  in  that  part
where  the  mefentery  is  connefted  thereto ;  Benevoli  has  no  objedlion  to  fuch
an  application.

But  I  do  not  believe  that  Benevoli  had  feen  what  was  written,  many  years
ago,  by  the  celebrated  Roftius  (i)  •,  when  in  a  man,  afflifted  with  a  rupture,
he  had  found  the  mefentery  lax ;  "  I  mean,  that  it  was  moft  probable  intef-
"  tinal  hernis  particularly  requir'd  this  laxity ;  fince  the  inteftines  are  firmly
"  connedled  to  the  mefentery,  and  therefore  cannot  be  remov'd  from  their
"  fituation,  unlefs  the  mefentery,  from  fome  violent  caufe  or  other,  firft
*'  give  way;"  nor  do  I  believe,  that  the  diffcrtation  of  Benevoli  had  come
to  the  hands  of  the  celebrated  Brendelius  (k)^  when  he,  ftill  more  confirm'd
the  fame  opinion.

For  to  the  obfervation  of  Roftius,  and  the  others  of  Benevoli ;  and  that
particularly  which  was  made  on  the  taylor,  the  greater  part  of  whofe  large
enterocele  was  not  now  made  up  of  the  inteftines,  but  of  an  expanfion  of  the
mefentery  •,  you  have  fome  from  Brendelius,  principally,  that  may  be  added  :
fince  he  afferts,  that,  as  often  as  ever  he  inquir'd  into  this  circumftance,  he

(d)  -N.  5.  fh)  Prax.  1.  I.  f.  12.  c.  i.

(e)  Adenogr.  c.  1 1.  (;)  Aft.  n.  c.  tom.  2.  obf.  178.

(f)  DifTertazion  \ .  (kj  Progr,  de  Herniar.  Natalibus.

r^;  Obf.  14.  §.3.

Noh.  II,  4  C  hzA


562  Book  in. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

had  found  the  mefentery  to  have  been,  from  the  very  original,  "  always  im-
"  moderately  relax'd,  and,  in  a  manner,  diftended  ;"  and  even  in  a  porter,
that  the  peritonseum  itfelf  was  there  disjoin'd  from  the  large  veflels,  and  that
the  mefentery  in  him,  and  in  another,  "  was  diftended  incredibly  :"  fo  that  in
the  fecond,  at  leaft,  in  the  places,  where  it  generally  is  very  fmall  "  it  was  of
"  the  extent  of  three  or  four  fpans."

And  left  you  ftiould  imagine  thefe  things  to  happen  from  the  weight  of
the  prolaps'd  inteftines,  as  well  as  the  pains  of  the  loins  •,  Roftius  admo-
nifties  us,  that  thofe  who  contrail  hernias,  from  the  motion  of  riding  on  horfe-
back,  "  generally  feel  a  painful  tenfion,  firft  of  all,  about  the  loins;  a  pretty
clear  proof,"  fays  he,^  of  the  mefentery,  which  is  fix'd  there,  "  being  affedted
"  with  a  tcnfion,  or  diftra6i:ion,  of  the  fibres."

And  indeed,  I  have  obferv'd  that  the  attentive  phyfician  Riedlinus  (*),.
though  he  did  not  find,  among  authors,  the  figns  of  an  enterocele  coming
on,  had  given  hints  long  before,  from  a  certain  obfervation  of  his  own,  from
what  fymptoms  we  may  fufpeifl  it:  and,  in  the  number  of  thefe,  had,  in
the  firft  place,  fet  down  pains  of  the  loins.

But  it  is  certain,  you  will  fay,  that  in  an  ofcheocele,  a  very  eminent  ana-
tomift  found  the  mefentery,  which  being,  "  like  a  fmall  rope,  tenfe,  and
"  hard,  had  defcended  together  with  the  inteftines."  Shall  we  fay  then,  that
there  was  any  thing  lax,  or  weak,  in  a  mefentery  of  that  kind,  and  impute
the  origin  of  the  hernia  thereto  ?

I  will  afl<:  of  you,  however,  whether  you  fuppofe  it  to  have  been  fo  tenfe,
and  hard,  at  the  time  of  its  coming  down  ;  and  that  it  was  not  polTible,  for
the  fame  thing  to  have  happen'd  to  it  afterwards,  which  I  faid  I  had  feen^
even  in  the  omentum  itfelf,  when  intercepted  ;  or  that  which  Mauchartus,
and  Sprogelius,  have  remark'd  in  the  fame  part,  in  their  obfervations  "  of
"  its  being  very  hard  and  almoft  fcirrhous,"  as  already  quoted  .?

And  I  will  moreover  afk  you,  if  it  could,  poflibly,  have  defcended,  with
fome  ells  of  the  fmall  inteftines,  into  a  very  large  hernia,  unlefs  it  had  been
extremely  lax  ?  For  it  is  certain  that,  when  it  is  in  a  natural  ftate,  it  cannot
reach  fo  low  downwards.

But  do  not  be  forward  to  fuppofe,  that  I  fay  thefe  things  for  the  fake  of
defending  the  opinion  of  Bcnevoli,  rather  than  what  appears  to  me  to  be
truth-,  efpecially  as  I  attribute  fome  of  thefe  effedls,  as  he  himfelf  likewife
did,  to  the  laxity  of  the  perkonseum  alfo,  and  the  rings;  in  conjunftion  with
Roftius  and  Brendelius ;  and  not  all  of  them,  to  the  laxity  of  the  me-
fentery.

14.  From  what  I  have  hinted,  and  even  ftill  more  from  thofe  parts  of  the  let-
ter, to  which  I  have  referr'd,  you  will  call  to  mind  what  you  have  heard  from
me,  at  other  times,  in  regard  to  obfervations  made  by  us,  on  the  bubonocele,
ofcheocele,  omphalocele,  and  merocele  ;  and  of  the  parts  that  have  been  con-
tain'd  in  thefe  fevcral  ruptures :  fo  that  there  is  no  occafion  to  repeat  them
here.

I  am  rather  difpos'd  to  add  fcmething,  in  relation  to  thefe  two  herniselaft-
mention'd.

In  the  omphalocele,  though  the  omentum  feems,  as  it  has  been  found
by  us,  and  by  others,  .to  be  necefiarily  included  from its  fituation ; yet.

(*)  Eph,  n.  c,  dec.  3.  a.  9  &  10.  obf.  150.

Ro-


Letter  XLIII. Article  14.  563

Roftius  (**)  fliows,  by  his  own  obfervatlon,  and  by  thofe  of  Arnauld,  and
Petit,  that  it  is  frequently  not  included  ;  but  that  a  part  of  the  inteltine
jejunum,  or  colon,  occurs  without  it  •,  where  he  alfo  obferves  other  things,
in  regard  to  vomiting  coming  on  fooner,  or  later,  according  to  the  different
inteftine  that  is  intercepted  ;  and  not  always  difcharging  the  fame  kind  of
matter ;  which  remarks  will  afford  you  plcafure  as  well  as  profit  in  pe-
rufing.

But  if  you  fhould  happen  to  wifh  for  dilTedions  of  thofe  who  were  affeded
with  the  merocele,  to  add  to  the  Sepulchretum,  you  will  find  them  in  the
obfervations  which  I  have  pointed  out  above  (/)  •,  and  in  the  papers  of  Gen-
{elius(m)  befides ;  l^ut  particularly  in  the  work  of  that  author  who  publifh'd
a  differtation  upon  this  diforder,  which  is  commonly  call'd  the  hernia  femora-
lis,  or  cruralis ;  I  mean  the  celebrated  Daniel  Koch  («).

And  perhaps  in  looking  over  thefe  authors,  and  thofe  obfervations,  and
remarking  that  the  greater  part  of  the  hernise  of  this  kind,  was  found  to  be
in  men  ;  it  may  difpleafe  you  to  find  it  afferted,  by  a  phyfician  in  other  re-
fpedts  learned,  "  that  men  do  not  readily  become  fubjedl"  to  this  diforder:
although,  to  confefs  the  truth,  it  has  never  yet  happen'd  to  me  to  fee  it,  ex-
cept in  women.

Some  hernis;,  that  are  very  rare;  whether  you  conflder  the  place  in  which
they  are  form'd,  or  the  parts  that  fall  down  •,  neither  Valfalva,  nor  I  havefeen.

Among  thefe,  is  that  which  happens  where  the  obturator  nerve,  as  they
call  it,  comes  forth,  together  with  the  veiTels  of  the  fame  name  ■,  \yhich  nerve,
the  fame  learned  phyfician,  to  whom  I  juft  nov/  refer'd,  has  call'd,  for  I  know
not  what  reafon,  "  the  pofterior  crural  ■"  under  which  term  others  fignify  the
nerve  that  is  the  thickefi;  of  all.  Of  this  hernia,  however,  confuk  thofe  au-
thors that  are  quoted  in  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (o),  and  by  Plat-
ner  (p).

Much  more  rare  than  this,  is  that  which  is  accurately  defcrib'd  by  Chrif-
topher  Henry  Papen  (q)  ;  as  he  had  found  it  in  a  body  after  death  :  for  it  was
very  fimilar  to  a  large  oblong  bladder,  beginning  from  the  right  fide  of  the
anus,  and  including  within  it  a  fac  continued  from  the  peritonseum,  the  fmall
inteftines,  with  the  mefentery  extremely  elongated,  and  the  beginning  of  the
colon  :  and  as  thefe  vifcera  had  fallen  down  through  the  filTure  call'd  Incifura
Jfchiadico-facra ;  as  he  to  whom  the  obfervation  was  fent,  that  is  the  cele-
brated Haller,  rightly  judges  •,  we  will  rather  referve  the  name  of  Hernia
Dorfalis  for  that  other,  if  it  does  at  any  time  appear,  which  Paul  Barbette  (r),
as  the  author  very  well  knew,  and  as  you  alfo  have  it  in  the  Sepulchretum  (j),
had  referr'd  to  in  thefe  words :  "  experience  has  taught  me,  that  the  peri-
*'  tonsum  may  be  ruptur'd  even  in  the  pofterior  part,  towards  the  back,  and
"  there  produce  a  hernia."

But  in  the  number  of  thofe  herniae  that  are  rare,  when  confider'd  in  re-
fpeft  to  the  parts  which  prolapfe,  is  the  cyftocele.

(**)  Obf.  fapra  ad  n.  13.  cit.  (0)  A.  1743.  hebd.  47.  n.  r.

(I)  N.  7.  [p)  Differt.  de  Hydiocel.  §.  2.  not.  r.

(m)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent. 7  &  8. in  Append,  ubi ^gj  Epift.  de  ftupenda  Hernia  Doriali.
Conft.  Epid.  Hungar.  a,  17 13.  in  Septembr.  {>)  Chirurg.  p.  :.  c.  8.  verf.  fin.

(«)  C.  2.  §.  5.  {s)  Seft.  hac  29.  obf.  8.

4  C  2  And


564 Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

And  as  in  writing  to  you  upon  this  hernia,  in  a  former  letter  (/),  I  made
mention  of  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  fhow  that  it  happen'd  to  women  in
fome  analogous  manner ;  that  is  to  fay,  the  bladder  not  falling  out  through
the  groin  -^  I  wDl  now  add,  that  in  thefe  patients,  it  does  alfo  fometimes  pro-
lapfe  at  the  groin  :  as  two  obfervations  of  Benevoli  («),  whom  I  have  often
quoted,  teach  us.

And  as  in  one  of  thefe  he  fhows,  how  many  years  before  this  diforder  had
begun  ;  it  appears  from  hence,  that  this  hernia  is  not  the  effeft  of  the  original
conformation,  as  Mery  (x)  thought :  efpecially,  fince  of  fo  many  others,
which  I  then  pointed  out  from  men,  there  was  not  one  (as  far  as  I  remem-
ber) the  beginning  of  which  leems  to  have  appear'd  from  the  original  confti-
tution  of  the  body.

How  can  it  happen  then,  you  v/ill  fay,  that  the  connexions,  and  ligaments,
of  the  bladder,  the  peritonasum,  and  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  fuffer  it
to  be  pufh'd  out  tlirough  one  or  other  of  the  groins  .''

Read,  I  befeech  you,  the  dilTertation  of  that  ingenious  man  Jo.  Salzmann
(y),  where  to  thofe  things  which  Petit  (z)  ;  he  himfclf  alfo  being  an  obfcrver
of  an  hernia  of  this  kind  ;  had  produc'd,  in  order  to  diminifli  thefe  difficul-
ties, he  moreover  adds  other  things  which  tend  to  make  you  think  lefs  of
them  ;  and  of  that  one  in  particular  which  was  drawn  from  the  refiftance  of
the  peritonseum,  that  ismention'd  on  this  occafion  by  many,  who  do  not  at-
tend to  this  circumftance ;  that  the  bladder  is  not  in  the  peritoneum,  but
under  it.

Yet  if  it  fhould  not  be  poffible  to  remove  all  thefe  difficulties,  this  hernia,
neverthelefs,  cannot,  for  that  reafon,  be  denied  to  exift ;  as  not  only  the  fign
that  has  been  already  pointed  out,  and  is  very  evidently  pathognomonic,  has
confirm'd  its  exiftence,  but  even  infpe£lions  of  bodies  after  death,  then
pointed  out  in  like  manner-,  as  thofe  of  our  Jo.  Dominic  Sala  in  Bartholin,
and  of  Ruyfch  himfelf :  fo  that  it  is  furprizing  there  fhould  have  been  any
one,  fo  late  as  in  the  year  1713,  who  look'd  upon  this  diforder  as  new;  and
though  fome  faid  it  was  firft  obferv'd  by  one,  and  fome  by  another,  yet  all
contended  that  it  was  firft  obferv'd  about  that  time  :  although,  even  former-
ly, Platerus,  who  is  mention'd  by  me  in  the  fame  place,  as  foon  as  ever  the
urine  flow'd  from  the  diftended,  and  wounded  fcrotum,  in  an  ifchuria  of  the
bladdtr,  knew  the  diforder  to  be  this  hernia  of  which  we  are  fpeaking,  artd
particularly  defcrib'd  it.

And  left  you  fhould  be  inclined  to  believe,  that  this  contention  had  relat-
ed, in  part  at  leaft,  to'  the  hernia  of  the  female  bladder,  when  prolaps'd  to-
gether with  the  vaginse  -,  call  to  mind  that  an  obfervation  of  this  kind  had
been  publifh'd  by  Pyerus  fd),  fome  years  before  that  of  Ruyfch,  and  con-
firm'd by  a  diffedbion,  which  you  have  even  in  the  Sepulchretum  (1^).

This  was  afterv.'ards  follov/'d  by  other  obfervations  taken  from  the  dea,d
bodies;  and  particularly by  thofe  of  the  very celebrated  Baffius  (c),  and

(t)  Epid;.  4i.n,  12.  ('zj  Hiftoir.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  3.1717.

(a)  OiTervaz.  25.  26.  {a)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  2.  a.  i.  obf.  84.

f'A-^Mem.del'Acad.R.  desSc.a.  1713. obf.  3.  {i)  L.  3.  f.  31.  in  additam,  obf.  5.

(j)  De  Hernia  Yefics  Urinar.  thef.  22.  &  (cj  Dec.  3.  Gbf;  Anat.  Chir.  2.
feo.

Bur--


Letter  XLIIL Article  14.  565

Burgrafius  (i).  Mery,  who  had  very  clearly  confirm'd  the  defcent  of  the
male  bladder,  into  the  fcrotum,  by  difleftion  in  the  dead  body  {e),  found  a
hernia  of  the  female  bladder  in  a  living  wonfian  only,  in  the  perineum  (f)-.
a  very  rare  inftance  indeed.

Thefe  things,  however,  I  do  not  fay  with  a  view  to  repeat  any  thino-,  but
to  illuftrate,  in  a  brief  manner,  what  has  been  hinted  at  eUewhere ;  and  to
compleat  whatever  belongs  to  the  hiftory  of  hernia  of  the  bladder.

One  ftill  more  rare  than  the  cyftocele  is  the  hyfterocele,  when  laid  open
by  difleftion.  Yet  befides  that  obfervation  of  it,  which  is  transferred  into
the  Sepulchretum  (g),  two  were  publifh'd  in  the  epiftle  of  Doringius  to  Hilda-
nus ;  in  reading  the  former  of  which,  that  is  taken  from  the  inftitutions  of
Senertus,  you  will  obferve  this  alfo ;  th^t  in  fo  large  a  hernia,  and  one  that
had  its  origin  from  a  blow,  the  peritonseum,  as  far  as  Senertus  could  judge
by  the  fight,  had  remain'd  entire.

But  who  could  doubt,  even  without  diffeftion,  that  the  uterus  was  really
contain'd  in  three  other  hernise ;  two  of  which  are  mention'd  as  "  hanging
"  down  beyond  the  middle  of  the  thighs,"  and  a  third  "  quite  to  the  knees;""
by  Carolus  Sponius  {i),  and  Frederic  Ruyfch  (i) ;  when  he  reads  that  the
fostufles  were  happily  brought  forth,  the  hernia  being  "  lifted  up  "  by  the
midwife,  which  Ruyfch  himfelf  faw  ;  or  fuppofes  that  after  the  foetus  was
brought  forth,  the  hernia  fubfided  very  much,  .and  ren:5ain'd  without  its  for-
mer internal  motions:  which  marks,  or  others  of  that  kind,  Sponius  muft,.
of  courfe,  have  attended  to.

Add  to  thefe,  the  hernis  which  are  form'd  by  the  prolapfus  of  other
vifcera  •,  as  for  inftance,  by  the  fpleen,  which  was  found  by  the  fame  Ruyfch
(k),  in  the  dilated  peritoneum;  and  by  the  ftomach -,  two  obfervations  of
which  kind,  although  not  confirm'd  by  diffeftion,  yet  by  no  means  obfcure,,
are  given  us  by  Peter  Kirfchbaum  (/) :  and  finally  by  the  liver  ;  which  was  ■
found  in  a  hernia,  on  difleftion,  by  Solomon  Reifelius  (m).

Thefe,  and  other  hernias  of  this  kind,  if  you  confider  the  vifcus  that  they
contain,  you  will  name  from  thence;  as  Reifelius  does  his  hepatocele.  But
if  you  have  a  view  to  that  part  of  the  abdomen,  in  which  they  happen,  you.
will  name  them  from  thence.

For  if  you  fhould  call  any  one  hernia  ventris,  or  ventraHs,  as  many  do  now^ ,
you  would  rightly  call  it  to  be  fure  : but  as  you would point  out  nothing
more  than  a  genus,  which  is  too  extenfive  in  its  fignincation,  you  might  tlili
be  afl<'d  about  the  particular fituation  ;  which  you  couid  not  have  been,  if
you  had  at  firft  convey'd  this  idea.

And,  in  determining  the  feat  of  ruptures,,  do  not  imagine  that  you  fhould
do  wrong,  if  you  were  to  call  that  umbilical,  which  is  not  in  the  very  ring
of  the  navel ;  in  which  place  I  fcarcely  remember  to  have  feen  the  prolaps'd
part,  in  any  other  patients  than  in  one  very  tender  male  infant.

{J)  AQ..  n.  c.  torn.  4.  obf.  126..  Ci) Adverf.  Dec.  2.  n.  9.

(f)  Mem.  cit.  obf.  i.  '  (/5)  Ibid.

CfJ  Obf.  2.  (/)'  Differt.  de  Hernia  Ventrlc.  §.  3.  Hift.  i.

CgJ  L.  3.  f.  38.  in  Append,  obf.  2.  &  2,.

(/?>)  Apud  Lavater.  Differt.  de  Inteft.  Com-  (m)  Eph,  n.  c,  dec.  3.  a,  7.  obf.  6.
pjsiL  Thef.  13.

tet


566  Book  III. Of  DIfeafes  of  the  Belly.

Let  ic  be  fufficient  for  you  that  it  is  near  the  navel ;  for  you  will  have  com-
panions, and  thole  not  defpicable  ones  neither,  who  will  even  underftand  it
in  the  lame  light;  and  do  at  prefent  ufe  it  in  this  fenfe:  but  there  may  be
as  many  different  fituations,  as  there  are  regions  of  the  abdomen.

Thus,  for  inftance,  Lavaterus  (n)  faw  a  hernia  in  the  right  hypochon-
drium,  under  the  fpurious  ribs,  which  intercepted  a  part  of  the  inteftinum
jejunum.  Thus  other  hernias  happen  in  other  regions  -,  all  which  he  fuccef-
fively  names,  or  refers  to  in  order ;  fo  that  I  cannot  help  being  furpriz'd  at
Rolfinc  (o),  for  denying  that  hernias  happen  in  the  hypochondria,  or  the
pubes ;  his  words  are,  "  for  I  know  of  no  example  that  can  be  given,  where-
"  in  thefe  parts  were  ever  feen  to  be  thus  afFedted."

For,  although  other  examples,  probably,  did  not  occur  to  his  memory  at
that  time  ;  notwithftanding  they  are  now  fo  frequently  to  be  met  with,  that
even  I  myfelf  have  twice  examin'd  (p)  hernia  at  the  pubes,  by  difledtion ;
yet,  at  leaft,  he  ought  not  to  have  forgotten  the  paiTage  of  Hippocrates  (j),
which  his  Interpreter,  Francifcus  Vallefius  (r),  and  Hieronymus  Mercurialis
(i),  had  confider'd  ;  I  could  w*(h  with  fufficient  fuccefs,  and  in  every  part :
"  Ruptures  which  happen  about  the  pubes,  are,  for  the  moft  part,  without
"  any  immediate  danger,  but  thofe  which  are  a  little  above  the  navel,  in  the
"  right  fide,  are  painful,  are  attended  with  anxiety,  and  produce  a  ftercora-
"  ceous  vomiting  -,  as  happen'd  even  to  Pfitaccus."

This  pailage  you  will  fee  produc'd,  in  a  diflertation  (i)  which  has  been
learnedly  and  lliilfully  written,  by  that  celebrated  man  B.  Ignat.  le  Chauffe.

15.  It  now  follows,  that,  as  we  have  treated  of  true  hernise,  we  fhould  go
on  to  fpeak  of  the  fpurious  likewife;  that  is,  of  thofe  in  which  there  is  no
prolapiiis  of  any  part  from  the  belly.

Thefe  are  the  hydrocele,  the  pneumatocele,  h^ematocele,  cirfocele,  fteato-
cele,  farcocele,  and  fpermatocele.  But  although  thefe  are  many  in  number,
I  neverthelefs  fhall  not  dwell  long  upon  them  all.  For  you  have  already  had
all  the  obfervations  relative  thereto,  when  examin'd  by  diffedtion,  from  Val-
falva ;  and  moft  of  them  from  me.

16.  A  hydrocele  I  have  twice  defcrib'd,  from  the  obfervation  of  Valfal-
va,  in  the  twentieth  letter  (u).  In  reading  of  which  over  again,  you  will
readily  perceive  him  to  be  the  imitator  of  Malpighi  {x).  For  both  of  them
fearch  into  the  nature  of  the  fluid  in  the  hydrocele,  by  the  help  of  evapora-
tion. Both  of  them  prefs'd  out  fome  fmall  drops  from  the  tunica  vaginalis  ;
and  Valfalva  moreover  from  the  albuginea.  From  which,  as  he  has  left  in
writing  on  another  occafion,  even  when  every  thing  was  in  a  very  natural
ilate,  he  faw  little  drops  buriling  forth,  in  a  parallel  order,  upon  compreffing
the  tefticle.

So  alio  Malpighi  had  feen  drops  "  burft  forth  from  regular  orifices,"  in  the
tunica  vaginalis :  "  by  repeating  the  compreffions  frequently,  others  were

(n)  DilTert.  cit.  thcf.  5.  {s)  Adnot.  in  eum  libr.  n.  6.

foj  Diatrib.de  Enterocele,  c.  3.  §.  4.  CtJ  De  Hernia  Ventrali  ad  §.  10.

Cp)  Epift.  5.  n.  19.  &  epift.  3/].  n.  11.  f^uj  N.  24  &  26.

\^J  DeMorb.  Popul.  1.  2.  f.  1.  verf.  fin.  CxJ  Epift.  de  Struft.  Gland.

(r)  Comment  in  earn  fed.  n.  19.

"  fqueez'd


Letter  XLIII. Article  17.  567

"  fqueez'd  out;  and  among  thefe  almoft  innumerable  drops,  feme  were  very
"  large."

Wherefore,  it  was  the  opinion  of  both  thefe  authors,  that  a'  little  moifture
is  fecreted  by  the  tunica  vaginalis,  in  a  natural  ftate ;  and  that  this  moifture
ferves  to  lubricate  the  furfaces  of  that  membrane,  and  the  albuginea,  by  ly-
ing betwixt  them  like  a  kind  of  dew,  and  preventing  their  coalition;  fo
that  by  this  means  the  tefticle  may  be  kept  foft,  and -fit  for  performing  its
oiEce  :  and  if  this  humour  is  coUefted  together  by  difeafe,  that  the  hydro-
cele is  then  formed.

Yet  there  are  fome  perfons  at  this  time,  who  fay  that  there  is  no  ca-
vity here,  and  no  water  in  a  natural  ftate  ;  notwithftanding  they  are  r^ot  ig-
norant of  Vefalius  having  neverthelefs  taught  us  (y),  that  the  tunica  vaginalis
is  internally  "  cover'd  over  with  a  kind  of  aqueous  humour  •"  which,  after
him,  was  alfo  feen  by  others  at  different  times ;  and  of  Boerhaave  (z)  having
added,  that  "  having  cut  open  the  tunica  vaginalis  in  a  horfe,  a  great  deal
*'  of  water  could  be  prefs'd  out."

But  thefe  things  I  do  not  hint  at  for  this  reafon,  that  I  think  this  the  only
way,  in  which  the  origin  of  a  hydrocele  may  be  explain'd.  And  even  when  I
refleilupon  all  my  obfervations  with  attention,  I  find  none  which  does  not
Ihow,  that  thofe  hydroceles  of  the  tunica  vaginalis,  which  I  have  examin'd,,
had  deriv'd  their  origin  from  hydatids  being  ruptur'd  there.

And  this  will  appear  to  you  in  the  fame  light,  I  believe,  when  you  obferve
that  in  each  of  them,  fome  hydatids  were  ftill  remaining  ;  either  in  a  per-
feft  and  entire  ftate,  or  half-lacerated  -,  or  that  fome  traces  of  them  were
vifible.

But  before  I  begin  to  give,  or  take  notice  of,  thefe  obfervations,  it  may
be  of  ufe  to  know,  that  hydatids  are  fometimes  found  within  this  cavity ;  even;
when  no  hydrocele  was  yet  begun  :  and  if  thefe  hydatids  burft  afunder,  and
firft  pour  out  the  water  they  contain;  and  after  that  go  on  to  fecrcte  ftill  more
and  more;  there  is  not  the  leaft  doubt  but  they  muft  produce  a  hydrocele.

And  in  the  fourth  letter  to  you  {a).,  I  have  made  mention  of  two  hyda-
tids in  that  part;  both  of  which  were  lying  upon  the  teftes,  one  upon  each  ;.
both  of  them  large ;  yet  in  fuch  proportion  that  the  left  was  the  largeft  i,
being  loofe  and  free  on  every  fide,  and  containing  fuch  a  humour,  as  I  did
not  fee  concrete  when  put  upon  the  fire  ;  but  leaving  a  certain  thin  pellicle
behind  it,  evaporate  away;  juft  as  it  has  fometimes  happen 'd  to  Malpighi  (b),,
and  to  Valfalva  (c),  in  examining  the  water  of  the  hydrocele  in  the  fame  man-
ner. But  let  us  go  on  to  thofe  obfervations.

17.  An  old  fold ier,  who  was  gibbous,  being  brought  into '  this  hofpital,
and  dying  there  very  foon  after ;  it  was  impofiible  to  learn  what  diforders  he
had  been  afBiftedwith,  and  what  had  been  the  occafion  of  his  death,  fo  much
from  the  relation  of  the  man  himfelf  vi'hile  living  ;  or  from  the  obfervatioD:
of  the  phyficians  ;  as  from  his  diffeftion  after  death.

The  body,  fuch  as  it  was,  was  carried  to  the  college,  v/here  I  was  teach-

fy)  De  Corp.  Hum.  Fabr.  1.  5.  c.  13.  {a)  N.  ^o.

{z)  Praeleft.  ad  Inllit.  §.  641.  {b)  {c)  Loeis  pv^ulo  ante  indicatis- .


568  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ing  anatomy,  in  that  very  cold  feafon  which  I  have  fpoken  of  already  (d) ;
that  is  in  the  month  of  February  of  the  year  1 740.

The  belly  fhow'd  ho  preternatural  appearance,  if  you  except  what  relates
to  the  fcrotum  -,  of  which  I  fhall  fpeak  hereafter ;  and  fomething  bony  in
the  iliac  arteries.

In  both  cavities  of  the  thorax  was  a  confiderable  quantity  of  water  j  in
the  pericardium  not  a  little  -,  being  every  where  concreted  by  the  froft.  Yet
the  lungs ;  except  that  one  lobe  was  connected  with  the  pleura,  for  a  confi-
derable extent,  and,  at  the  firft  divifion  of  the  bronchia,  they  had  one
bronchial  gland,  amongft  a  great  number,  of  a  very  confiderable  fize ;  fhow'd
no  great  marks  of  difeafe  :  nor  did  the  legs  and  feet  Ihow  even  any  (light  be-
ginning of  an  oedematous  tumour.

To  the  internal  furface  of  the  pericardium,  which  was  thicken'd,  and  to  the
external  furface  of  the  heart,  adher'd,  here  and  there,  a  kind  of  thick  and
almoft  puriform  matter :  and  this  I  fuppos'd  to  be  the  more  vifcid  and  poly-
pous part  of  that  water,  which,  as  I  have  already  laid,  had  been  frozen  within
the  pericardium.

When  this  matter  was  pull'd  away  from  the  heart,  the  fat,  with  which  it  was
cover'd,  every  where,  in  great  quantity,  feem'd  to  be  lefs  eroded,  as  it  were,
in  feveral  places.  But  I  did  not  fuffer  myfelf  to  be  deceiv'd  by  this  appear-
ance, as  I  bore  in  mind  thofe  things  which  I  had  formerly  obferv'd  ;  as  I  have
fufEciently  demonftrated  to  you,  when  I  wrote  the  twenty-firft  (e),  and
twenty -fifth  (f)  letter  to  you  :  where  I  take  notice,  in  a  curfory  manner,  even
of  this  Ibldier.

The  heart  itfelf  feem'd  to  be  larger  than  it  naturally  is,  and  the  branches
of  veffels  to  be  wider  •,  particularly  thofe  branches  of  the  great  artery  that
are  call'd  fubclavians  and  carotids.  But  the  valves  of  the  aorta  were  evidently
enlarg'd,  and  the  trunk  itfelf,  in  that  part  which  lies  neareft  to  the  heart.

Nor  were  beginning  offifications  wanting  here  and  there,  in  that  part;  and
betwixt  the  internal  coats  were  even  fmall  bony  fcales ;  which  occur'd  ftill .
more  frequently  beyond this  traft, and  particularly  within  the  orifices  of
the  left  carotids ;  that  is  to  fay,  of  the  internal,  and  external ;  and  in  the
brachial  artery  alfo,  at  the  flexure  of  the  elbow,  and  beneath  it.

The  feven  or  eight  upper  vertebrae,  of  the  thorax,  were  h  plac'd,  that  the
fpine  being  there  curv'd,  and  inflefted  to  one  fide,  as  many  of  the  ribs,  of  the
fame  fide,  were  prominent  backwards,  and  made  a  gibbofity.

The  cranium,  as  better  heads  were  ^rocur'd  in  the  mean  while,  was  not
-open'd.

It  remains  that  I  now  fubjoin  what  appearances  I  found  by  cutting  into  the
fcrotum  a  few  days  after.  This  part  was  found  on  the  right  fide,  both  inter-
nally and  externally ;  on  the  left  fide  it  vvas  tumid.  Under  the  thicken'd
coats  therefore,  I  mean  the  erythroides  and  vaginalis,  and  within  the  enlarg'd
cavity  of  this  latter  coat,  I  found  water  of  a  brown  colour  inclining  to  yellow;
-half-concreted  by  the  froft ;  in  fome  confiderable,  but  not  very  great,  quan-
tity.

When  I  examin'd  the  tefl:i§,  which  feem'd  rather  to  be  extended  in  its  length,

(./)  Epift.  13.  n.  5  (,;  N,  2.  C/J  N,  24.

5  than


Letter  XLIII. Article  i8,  .19,  20,  21. 569

than  to  be  thicken'd ;  and  the  epididymis,  which  certainly  was  longer  than
natural ;  I  obferv'd  a  kind  of  fmall  fimbria  to  be  hanging  from  the  albu-
ginea,  where  it  invefted  the  tefticle,  very  near  to  the  larger  globe  of  the  epi-
didymis :  and  this  fimbria  I  judg'd  was  to  be  confider'd  as  the  relics  of  a
ruptur'd  hydatid  ;  efpecially  as,  not  far  from  this,  I  perceiv'd  an  entire  hy-
datid protuberating  from  -the  fame  coat.

18.  One  of  thoie  male  bodies,  the  principal  parts  of  which  I  diflefted  at
Padua,  in  the  latter  end  of  November  of  the  year  171 8,  had  one  fide  of
the  fcrotum  fomewhat  tumid.

Betwixt  the  tunica  vaginalis  and  albuginea,  of  that  fide,  I  found  a  water
of  the  colour  of  urine;  but  not  in  great  quantity  :  the  albuginea  was  unequal
with  very  fmall  tubercles  :  and  I  was  led  to  fuppole  thefe  to  have  been  the
remains  of  hydatids ;  which  had  burft  afunder,  and  difcharg'd  their  water ;
by  feeing  fome  hydatids,  in  the  fame  coat,  which  were  not  yet  quite  burft
afunder:  and  thefe  hydatids  I  demonftrated  to  thofe  who  were  prefent.

19.  There  was  another  male  body,  among  thofe  that  I  diflefted  at  Bo-
logna, in  the  fpring  of  the  year  1703,  which  had  a  hydrocele  of  a  moderate
fize,  on  one  fide  in  like  manner.

Thofe  two  fame  coats  contain'd,  betwixt  them,  a  fluid  fimilar  to  water  in
which  frelh  meat  has  been  wafh'd.  And  from  the  larger  globe  of  the  epi-
didymis, a  fmall  hydatid  was  pendulous,  by  means  of  a  flender  and  lliorc
filament.  Through  this  filament  pafs'd  a  fanguiferous  vefl"el  of  a  much
Smaller  fize.

20.  That  in  thefe  three  examples  there  was  no  great  quantity  of  water,  we
may  conjefture  is  to  be,  perhaps,  accounted  for  from  hence  ;  that  neither  all
the  hydatids  had  burft  afunder  intirely  -,  and  they  which  had  burft  were
fmall ;  nor  had  they  continued  to  difcharge  a  fluid  long  after  their  rupture.

But  the  laft  example  will  bring  to  your  mind  thofe  things  which  I  hinted
in  the  thirty-eighth  letter  (g),  of  the  origin  of  hydatids,  pendulous,  in  like
manner,  from  the  teftes  of  women.  And  as  many  things,  that  I  have  there
faid  upon  hydatids  (h),  are  illuftrated  by  thofe  that  I  fay  here  -,  fo,  on  the  other
hand,  thofe,  if  you  read  them  over  again,  will  contribute  to  the  illuPcration
of  thefe.

Wherefore  1  Ihall  here  fuperfede  the  examples  of  thofe  things  which  hap-
pen to  hydatids,  in  other  parts  in  like  manner,  as  well  as  in  the  tefticles  of
men.  In  which  you  may  now,  with  me,  obferve  the  very  fame  feries  of
changes,  from  the  obfervations  before  given.

21.  And  firft  I  would  have  you  call  to  mind,  that,  in  the  butcher  (whofc
diflTeftion  I  gave  you  in  the  twenty-firft  letter  (i) )  when  within  both  the
tunide  vaginaks  was  a  yellowifh  water -,  the  hydatids,  which,  I  fuppofe,  had
pour'd  out  this  fluid  not  long  before,  appear'd  to  me  like  veficles  made  up
of  thick  parietes ;  as  if  contrafted  into  themfelves,  and  therefore,  almoft
folid,  and  of  a  flefhy  colour :  each  of  them  being  pendulous  from  the  albu-
ginea, near  to  the  larger  globe  of  the  epididymis,  by  means  of  a  peduncle  ;
and  juft  in  the  fame  place,  on  the  right  and  on  the  left  fide.

And  from  hence  ; which  I  obferve  by  the  way  ;  you  will  naturally  con-

{g)  N.  38,  in  fin,  {h)  N.  35.  &  feq.  (0  N.  19.

Vol.  II.  4  D  ceive.


570  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ceive,  what  was  that  flefhy  gland,  as  it  were,  which  Vallifneri  (k)  has  taken-
notice  of,  as  hanging  by  its  proper  ftalk,  from  the  female  ovary  :  and  from
fo  frequent  an  obfervation  of  hydatids,  either  in  a  fix'd  or  a  pendulous  ftate  j,
both  in  the  ovaries  of  women,  and  the  tefticles  of  men  -,  you  will  take  a  new
argument  of  the  fimilitude  that  there  is  betwixt  both  thefe  parts,  if  we  con  •
fider  the  fubjedt  in  this  general  way.  But  from  a  veficle  that  was  almoft
folid,  let  us  now  go  on  to  a  tubercle,  or  corpufcle,  which  was  already  quite
folid.

22.  A  herdfman  died  in  this  hofpital,  after  the  middle  of  January  in  the
year  1743.  As  I  cannot  certainly  fay  what  diforders  he  had  been  chiefly  fub-
je<ft  to,  and  by  what  diforders  he  was  carried  off,  you  will  yourfelf  conjetlure
them  from  the  preternatural  appearances  that  I  found  ;  when  the  parts  which
belong  to  the  belly,  and  the  thorax,  were  difTefted  in  the  college.

The  thorax  ;  for  with  this  cavity  I  choofe  at  prefent  to  begin-,  had  the
Jungs  clolely  connccSted  to  the  pleura,  though  in  other  refpedls  found:  the-
heart  was  enlarg'd  :  and  the  great  artery  was  not  without  a  fmall  bony  fcale,
where  it  began  to  defcend  :  the  carotids  were  much  thicker  than  ufual,  and
the  internal  jugular  veins  were  extremely  wide-,  efpecially  that  on  the  right
fjde ;  which,  to  appearance,  being  fiU'd  more  with  air  than  with  blood,  was
equal  to  the  thicknefs  of  a  man's  thumb.

When  the  belly  was  open'd,  our  eyes  were  attrafted  by  the  lower  part  of
the  intcftine  colon,  on  the  left  fide,  which  was  dilated  with  flatus ;  and,  for
that  reafon,  fo  forc'd  out  of  its  ufual  fituation,  that  the  curv'd  part  of
this  inteftine  was,  in  almofl  its  whole  extent,  plac'd  tranfverny  in  the  um-
bilical region  ;  thereby  laying  great  room  for  errors,  if  any  fliould,  from  the
feat  of  pains  in  that  part,  have  fuppos'd  that  not  the  colon,  but  the  intef-
tine jejunum,  was  the  part  affefted  thereby.

The  fl:omach  was  very  large,  and  very  lax.  In  this  cavity  were  contained
many  worms :  the  internal  coat  was  wanting,  for  fome  fpace,  on  the  left  fide,
and  on  the  pofl:erior  furface  of  the  fundus ;  and  in  that  part  which  is  very
near  to  the  pylorus,  the  beginning  of  a  gangrene  appear'd.

Where  the  omentum  adher'd  to  the  ftomaeh  ;  in  which  place,,  in  general,
you  certainly  fee  very  fmall  glands  of  the  lymphatic  kind,  if  you  fee  any  at
all;  occur'd  fome  of  the  magnitude  of  a  fmall  bean.  The  ipleen  was  fix
inches  in  width,  two  or  three  inches  thick,  a  fpan  and  a  half  long,  and  of  a
very  lax  and  foft  fubftance.

Yet  the  liver  was  not  bigger  than  it  naturally  is,  and  internally,  in  one
half  of  it,  was  coldurlefs ;  whereas  the  other  half  was  of  a  dilute  yeJlow  :  and
from  this  vifcus,  were  fent  forth  three  or  four  biliary  duds,  than  which  I
never  remember  to  have  feen  any  wider ;  and  in  particular  than  one  which
would  almoft  have  admitted  the  point  of  my  little  finger.  ,

No  caufe  of  this  dilatation  appear'd  at  that  time:  but  I  fhould,  perhaps,
have  conjeflur'd  that  a  calculus  had  formerly  ftuck  in  the  trunk,  in  which  all
thefe  branches,  according  to  cuftom,  join'd -,  if  this  trunk,  which  was  in
other  refpefts  large,,  had  been,,  itfelf,  alfo,  of  that  width,  which  was  requir'4
in  proportion.

In  the  cyft  was  a  bile  of  a  brown  colour ;  but  this  bile,  neverthelefs,  gave

{i)  Iftor.  della  Geneiaz.  p.  2.  c.  5.  n.  21.  .
r  atino;e


Letter  XLIIL Article  23,  24.  571

a  tinge  of  a  deep  yellow :  notwithftanding  a  great  quantity  flow'd  out  of  it,
when  cut  afunder,  a  kind  of  tough  fsces  ftill  remain'd,  funilar  to  thofe>which
fublide  at  the  bottom  of  wine.

One  of  the  iliac  arteries  was,  in  fome  places,  tortuous,  in  the  fame  man-
ner that  we  fee  the  fplenie  to  be  :  and  the  furfaces  of  both  thefe  veflels,  inter-
nally, were  almoft  rugous,  and  of  a  brown  colour  •,  except  where  one  of
thefe  furfaces  ihow'd  in  one  particular  part,  a  little  whitifh  fubftance,  of  the
hardnefs  of  a  ligament,  not  yet  bony.

The  bulb  of  the  corpus  fpongiofum  urethras,  which  is  generally  black
internally,  and  externally,  from  the  ftagnation  of  blood  therein,  contain'd
none  at  all  in  this  fubjeft;  which  I  do  not  remember  to  have  feen  elfewhere;
fo  that  the  cellules  of  it,  which  were  open  enough  in  other  refpedls,  were  onlv
half-red,  and  of  a  flefhy  colour.

One  of  the  teftes  was  in  its  natural  ftate,  except  that,  betwixt  itfelf  and
the  epididymis,  it  had  a  thin  flap  of  fat  interpos'd  ;  whereas  the  man  was
not  at  all  fat  in  other  refpefts.

But  the  other  was  furrounded  with  fuch  a  quantity  of  water,  of  a  very  yel-
low colour,  that  no  fibres  any  more  appear'd  through  the  tunica  ery-
throides ;  that  is,  in  confequence  of  this  being  diftended  by  the  tunica  vao-i-
nalis  ;  which  was  not  only  diftended  itfelf  alio,  but  exrended  its  cavity  to  the
height  of  three  inches  above  the  upper  part  of  the  tefticie  •,  though  always
decreafing  in  its  width,  the  higher  it  reach'd  :  the  teftis  v/as  indeed  found  ;  but
fo  produc'd  in  length,  that  it  ieem'd  to  have  caus'd  a  diftraction  in  the  fibres
of  the  epididymis,  which  was  connetled  thereto.  «

Near  to  the  larger  globe  of  this  epididymis,  a  roundifli  corpufcle  was.
prominent  from  the  albuginea,  that  feem'd  to  be  made  up  of  the  fubftance
of  this  coat.  The  fafciculus  of  the  fpermatic  veflels  was  much  thicken'd  in-
deed ;  but  was  made  up,  in  the  greater  part  of  it,  of  a  yellowiih  Fat.

23.  In  this,  and  other  obfervations,  which  I  am  about  to  point  out,  oi'
produce,  do  not  be  furpriz'd,  that,  tho'  there  was  a  great  quantity  of  water,
or  at  leaft  not  a  little,  within  the  tunica  vaginalis  •,  yet  there  was  often  but
one  corpufcle,  and  that  not  large.

For  it  might  be  the  remains  of  a  large  hydatid,  one  which  had,  for  a
confiderable  time,  difcharg'd  water ;  although  it  had  at  length,  for  a  long
time  paft,  contradled  itfelf  into  that  ftate  of  fmallnefs :  and  if  there  had  been
any  fimilar  corpufcles  befides,  they  might,  fometimes,  have  intireiy  vanifh'd
•away.

Having  given  you  this  admonition,  I  will  not  only  call  back  to  your  ma-
mory,  the  old  man  of  whom  I  wrote  in  the  fortieth  letter  (/j  ;  in  whofe  tunica
vaginalis,  on  one  fide,  was  a  turbid  water,  in  confiderable  quantity,  and  a
roundifh  corpufcle,  of  the  fame  colour  with  the  albuginea,  was  prominent,
near  to  the  larger  globe  of  the  epididymis  -,  but  I  will  furthermore  add,  on
this  occafion,  two  other  hiftories ;  one  of  which  confirms  that  there  may  be,
at  the  fame  time,  many  corpufcles,  and  the  other  ihows,  by  what  means  they
may  fometimes  efcape  the  eyes  of  the  difleder.

24.  An  old  man,  whofe  occupation  had  been  that  of  huft)andry,  wa«  car-
ried off,  in  this  hofpital,  by  a  dropfy  of  the  thorax,  at  the  time  I  was  about  to

{/)  N.  22.  vid.  &epift.  64.  n.  7.

4  D  2  begin


572  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

begin  the  buHnefs  of  teaching  anatomy  publicly  ;  that  is  in  the  month  of  Ja-
nuary, in  the  year  1 73 1.  His  body  was  therefore  brought  into  the  theatre,  and
difleded  in  the  proper  order;  notwithftanding  I  fhall  here  alfo,  as  I  did  in
the  herdfman,  defcribe  thole  parts  in  the  laft  place,  that  were  firfl;  examin'd.
After  the  water  was  exhaufted  from  the  thorax,  the  lungs  were  found  to  be
flaccid,  and  much  difeas'd. But  not  to  the  heart.

When  the  abdomen  was  laid  open,  befides  thofe  things  relating  to  the  appcn-
dicula  vermiformis,  the  valvula  Bauhini,  the  liver,  and  the  fpleen  ;  which  are
fufficiently  explain'd  in  the  fourteenth  anatomical  epiftle(OTj,  and  v/hich  there
is  no  occafion  to  repeat  here  ;  the  trunk  of  the  great  artery  was  found  to  be
unequal  here  and  there,  in  feveral  parts  of  its  internal  furface ;  being  either
become  quite  bony,  or  inclining  thereto.

And  of  the  branches  of  the  cseliac,  that  which  runs  up  on  the  fundus  of  the
ftomach,  was  univerially  diftorted  in  a  furprizing  manner  (which  I  never  faw
before)  as  if  into  the  form  of  crifp'd,  or  frizzled  hair,  frequently  inflefting
iti'elf  backwards.

The  urinary  bladder  being  contradted  greatly  into  itfelf,  thicken'd,  and
indurated,  gave  a  refiftance  to  the  air  which  was  blown  into  it ;  and  could
not  be  dilated  thereby.  Internally  it  was  ting'd,  round  about,  with  a  bloody-
rednefs ;  as  if  from  inflammation  ;  but  principally  at  the  lower  part :  where,,
from  the  middle  of  the  very  circumference  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  from
the  internal,  and  at  the  fame  time,  pofterior  furface,  a  protuberance  was.
prominent  within  the  bladder,  of  the  rfiape  and  magnitude  of  a  middle-fiz'd
grape.

And  this  protuberance,  although  itfelf  was  there  red,  from  the  diftention;
of  the  fanguiferous  veflels,  was  neverthelefs  made  up,  internally,  of  a
wfiite  and  compaft  fubftance,  into  v/hich  the  proftate  gland  was  evidently
produc'd.

Finally,  one  of  the  teftes  was  fmall,  and  contain'd  within  a  great  quantity'
of  water;  which  had.^  in  part,  concreted  into  icy  lamellae,  by  the  force  of
the  cold.  This  water  was  contain'd  within  the  tunica  vaginalis.  And  from
the  albuginea ;  both  where  it  invefted  the  tefl:icle,  near  to  the  larger  globe
of  the  epididymus,  and  where,  producing  itfelf,  it  cover'd  this  very  globe  ;
from  each  place,  I  fay,  a  corpufcle  was  prominent  ^  fo  that  the  two  were  very
near  to  each  other :  and  thefe  were  made  up  of  a  denfe  and  hard  fubfl:ance..

25.  A  man,  who  had  fallen  from  a  high  place,  about  tlie  beginning  of
April  in  the  year  1740,  broke  the  bones  of  his  head  and  thorax  ;  as  I  fliali
write  in  a  future  letter  («).  But  at  prefent,  as  he  labour'd  under  a  hydro--
cele  on  both  fides  of  the  fcrotum,  I  will  take  this  occafion,  to  tell  you.  what  I
faw  in  both  places.

The  tunica  vaginaks  contain'd  a  limpid  water:  but  not  both  in  an  equal,
quantity.  For  the  cavity  of  one  was  either  nothing,  or  but  little,  extended,
beyond  its  natural  bounds :  yet  the  cavity  of  the  other  was  produc'd  quite  ta
the  upper  part  of  the  os  pubis ;  being  gradually  more  contrafted  indeed^
but  ftill  pretty  wide,  and  interrupted  with  no  cells,  or  fibres  whatever.
Both  the  teflicles  were  found :  although  that  which  was  contain'd  in  the;

(?«)  r^.  62.  t")  Epift.  52.  n..34..

«  l^.rgCK-


Letter  XLIII. Article  26,27.  573

krger  cavity,  was  confiderably  larger  than  the  other.  The  finaller  had  a  fmal!
tubercle,  of  the  fame  colour  with  the  albuginea,  and  fix'd  to  it,  as  if  made
up  thereof,  but  not  hard.  The  larger  fliow'd  nothing  of  this  kind.  But  as  L
happen'd  to  obferve  that,  while  the  water  which  had  furrounded  it,  was  dif-
charg'd,  a  little  body,  of  fome  kind  or  other,  had  come  out  therewith,  I
found,  by  looking  into  this  water,,  a  corpufcle  of  the  bignefs  of  a  Imall  grape,
and  of  the  Ihape  alfo  :  except  that  this  little  body,  inclining  fomewhat  to  the
oval  figure,  had,  in  the  middle  of  one  extremity,  a  fhort  and  flender  neck
as  it  were  ;  fo  as  to  refemble  a  very  fmall  bottle,  or  if  you  pVeaie  a  grape  ftill
furnifh'd  with  a  ftalk  :  and  that  of  the  fame  fubftance  with  the  grape.

And  indeed  this  corpufcle  feem'd  to  have  adher'd,  to  fome  part,  by  this-
its  neck,  or  ftalk  ;  and  being  fhaken  off,  from  ibme  caufe  or  other,  to  have
fallen  into  the  water,  where  it  might  eafily  have  eicap'd  obfervation.  The
fubftance  whereof  it  confifted,  internally,  and  externally,  was  white,  denie  and:
compadl  ;  if  you  except  a  very  fmall  part  of  an  irregular  figure,  which  oc-
cupied the  middle  place,  and  feem'd  to  be  x  kind  of  nucleus.  For  this  part
was  yellowifli,  and  almoft  of  a  bony  hardnefs  -,  whereas  every  other  part,  when-
prefs'd  betwixt  the  fingers,  gave  way  in  fome  meafure.

26.  It  does  not  efcape  me,  what  you  may  principally  objeft  againft  thofe
things,  which  I  feem  to  myfelf  to  be  at  liberty  to  conjecture,  from  the  ob-
liervations  that  I  have  given  you  ;  and  this  even  in  dependance  upon  fome  of
my  own  obfervations,  which  you  have  receiv'd  at  other  times.  For  I  very-
well  remember,  that  in  the  twenty-fourth  fo),  the  forty-firft  C^),  and  the  for-
ty-fecond  {q),  letters,  I  have  defcrib'd  tefticles,  wherefrom  a  roundifh  cor-
pufcle was  prominent,  or  even  pendulous,  which  to  me  was  a  proof  of  an-
hydatid  having  been  ruptur'd ;  whereas  the  tunica  vaginalis,  neverthelefs,
fometimes  contain'd  a  little  water  only,  fcarcely  any  at  other  times-,  and  even,
none  at  all  at  fome  times.

And  againft  thefe  obfervations,  I  am  fo  far  from  being  willing  to  make
\ife  of  any  fubterfuge,  that  I  am,  moreover,  willing  to  add  others  of  the  fame
kind  to  them  -,  and  then,  at  length,  declare,  why  none  of  them  is  any  infu-
perable  objedlion  to  my  conjedlures.

27.  Another  man  died,  in  the  hofpital,  a  few  days  after  we  had  diffefted.
that  body,  of  which  I  fpokelaft:  he  had  been  brought  thither,  under  the
moft  violent  fymptoms  of  an  incarcerated  hernia,,  as  it  is  call'd;  and  too  late
for  any  affiftance  to  be  given  him.

As  1  was  abfent,  our  IVfediavia  diftecfled  the  body  :  who,,  on  the  very  fame,
day,  and  foon  after,  related  what  he  had  feen  -,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  took,
care  that  fome  parts,  which  I  defir'd  to  examine  myfelf,  ftiould  be  brought
to  me.  Take  firft  then  what  he  related  to  me,  that  you  may  add  it  to  what
has  been  faid  above  of  the  enterocele ;  and  after  that  I  will  tell  you  what  I  ob-
fcrv'd  in  refpeft  of  the  hydrocele.

The  facculus  of  the  hernia,  being  confin'd  beneath  the  cremafter  mufcle,,
and  the  tunica  erythroides,  annex'd  thereto,  had  the  fpermatic  vefTels,  and
the  tefticle,  behind  it.  In  the  facculus,  the  duplicated  portion  of  the  inteftine
iJeum  was  flightly  conneded  thereto  ;  in  fuch  a  manner  that  it  could  be  fe-

(e),  N.  1.6..  (;>)  N.  18.  C?)  N.  II.

garated;


574  Book  in. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

parated  with  the  fingers  :  yet  could  it  not  be  thruft  back  into  the  belly,  by
reafon  of  the  narrownefs  of  the  ring,  and  the  dilatation  of  the  inteiline,  from
the  included  matter.

The  ring  was  of  a  blackifh  colour,  as  the  inteftine  was  alfo ;  and  not  only
within  the  lacculus,  but  even  within  the  beHy  likewife,  to  the  extent  of  half
an  ell.  The  reft  of  the  inteftines  were  not  turgid,  although  the  abdomen  had
been  fomewhat  tumid  in  the  living  body.  He  was  prevented,'  by  the  very
filthy  fmell  of  the  body,  from  touching  any  other  parts  of  ir,  befides  what  he
.knew  were  e.xpefled  by  me.

The  cranium  being  open'd,  he  obferv'd  the  veffels  of  the  meninges  to  be
muchdiftended  with  blood,  and  an  extra vafation  of  ferum.  What  I  obferv'd
.in  the  m^eninges,  it  is  not  the  place  to  Ipeak  of  here.

It  is  proper  only  to  fpeak  of  fome  things,  which  I  faw  In  one  of  the  tefticles
that  was  brought  to  me,  and  in  its  proper  membranes,  wherein  it  was  evert
■  then  included.

Within  the  tunica  vaginalis,  was  contaia'd  a  water  of  a  flight  yellow  co-
loirr,  but  in  fo  fmall  a  quantity,  as  not  to  exceed  a  third  part  of  a  fpoonful,
Neverthelefs,  from  the  tunica  albuginea,  where  it  invefted  almoft  the  upper
part  of  the  tefticle,  which  was  in  other  refpefts  found ;  as  the  other  parts
that  I  examin'd  likewife  were-,  a  roundilh  corpufcle  was  prominent,  which
•was  of  the  fame  colour  with  the  coat  itfelf,  and  feem'd  to  be  made  up  of  the
ifame  fubftance.

28.  A  man  who  was  a  native  of  Trent,  of  a  tall  ftature,  but  not  large  in  his
bulk,  died  of  a  difeafe,  which  I  have  already  given  you  an  account  of  in  a  for-
mer letter  (r)  ;  as  I  alfo  have  of  a  fmall  bone  being  found  in  his  heart ;  and  of
frequent  bony  laminae  in  the  great  artery,  (although  in  a  curlbry  manner)  for
•which  reafon  I  fliall  not  repeat  the  relation  here.  I  will  rather  add  two  things
that  I  obferv'd  befidcs,  in  difiefting  his  body  ;  in  the  month  of  March  of  the  '
year  1717  ;  that  you  may  have  his  hiftory  as  perfedt  as  poffible.

The  ventricles  of  the  heart,  and  the  large  veflels,  were  not  without  poly-
pous concretions ;  and  thofe  large,  and  denfe  bodies,  and  fuch  as,  if  you  at-
tempted to  draw  them  afunder,  gave  a  confiderable  refiftance  :  and  yetfo  great
a  quantity  of  fluid  and  black  blood,  overflow'd  in  every  part  of  the  body,
that  it  was  often  the  occafion  of  great  hindrance,  and  trouble,  in  the  dif-
fedion.

In  one  part  of  the  fcrotum  the  tunica  vaginalis  did  not  contain  a  great
quantity  of  water.  But  the  furface  of  the  albuginea,  which  was  much
thicken'd,  was  befet,  here  and  there,  with  corpufcles  of  the  fame  colour  with
that  coat ;  of  the  fliape  of  very  fmall  glands  ;  hardifli  in  their  fubftance,  and,
in  fome  places,  difpos'd  almoft  into  the  form  of  a  quincunx.

29.  The  body  of  a  man,  who  was  faid  to  have  died  of  a  kind  of  pleurify.j
was  brought  into  the  college,  when  I  was  teaching  anatomy  there,  about  the
end  of  January,  in  the  year  1750.

The  thorax  being  open'd,  a  real  complication  of  difeafes  was  found  therein.
For  there  was  a  great  quantity  of  water  both  in  the  cavities  of  the  thorax,  and
of  the  pericardium  :  the  lungs,  and  particularly  on  the  left  fide,  were  in  great

.('■)  Epift'  3-  «•  2^.

.meafuEC


Letter  XLIIL- Article  30.  575

meafure  affixed  to  the  pleura  -,  and  in  fome  places  a  little  hard:  among  thofe
elands  which  are  at  the  firft  divifion  of  the  bronchia,  was  one  of  more  than
an  inch  in  length.  I  purpofely  omit  here,  what  I  fhall  fay  with  more  pro-
priety on  another  occafion  ;  I  mean  that  the  triangular  miifcles  of  the  breail
were  almoft  wholly  deficient;  and  this  from  the  original  formation:  and
that,  from  the  fide  of  one  of  the  fibulas  internally,  at  its  upper  part,  a  bony
procefs,  very  fimilar  to  the  ftyloid,  had  been  prominent.

But  I  will  not  omit  thefe  things,  for  the  fake  of  which  I  began,  principally, ,
to  write  this  obfervation.  The  common  coats  of  the  teftes  being  taken  off,
under  that  coat  which  is  properly  call'd  the  fcrotum,  1  faw  more  fat,  and
even  at  the  lower  part,  than  I  Ihould  have  expedtcd ;  particularly  in  a  man
who  was  not  very  fat  in  general :  and  when  I  cut  into  the  other  coats  on  one
fide,  I  did  not  obferve  any  moifture  to  flow  from  the  cavity  of  the  tunica  va-
ginalis :  yet  the  included  tefliicle  had,  near  its  upper  extremity,  a  fmall  redifh.
excrefcence,  prominent  from  the  tunica  albuginea.

30.  After  what  I  have  already  faid,  it  is  to  no  purpofe  to  add  the  circum-
ftance  of  the  young  man,  of  whom  I  fliall  fpeak,  in  treating  of  the  wounds  of
the  thorax  (*) ;  and  much  lefs  of  the  man  whofe  hiftory  lihall  give,  when  upon-
the  fubjeft  of  the  gonorrhoea  (s) ;  although  the  former  of  thefe  had  in  one:
tefliis,  near  to  one  of  the  globes  of  the  epididymis,  a  fmall,  redifh,  and  foft,.
excrefcence  of  the  albuginea,  as  it  were  ;  and  the  latter  a  roundifh  tubercle,,
at  the  upper  part  of  the  epididymis  -,  yet  neither  of  them  had  any  laVger.-
quantity  of  moifture  within  the  tunica  vaginalis,,  than  may  be  feen  even  in^
the  moft  healthy  man.

For  now  it  fufficiently  appears,  from  the  preceding  hiftories,  that  not  only-
when  one  corpufcle  Vv'as  prefent,  and  even  when  many  were  obferv'd,  there-
was  no  great  quantity  of  water  in  the  tunica  vaginalis ;  but  alfo  that  there.-
v/as  none  when  a  redilh  excrefcence  was  ftiil  prominent :  though  this  excref-
cence, not  long  ago,  was  confider'd,  by  me,  as  the  token  of  an  hydacidi
being  ruptur'd.

Notwithftanding  this  is  the  ftate  of  the  queftion,  as  there  is  nothing  whichi
forbids  us  to  conceive,  that  the  hydatid  lately  ruptur'd  was  very  fmaU,  and,*
that  fome,  or  many  corpufcles,  are  the  traces,  of  old  hydatids;  and  finally,
that  the  onfices  of  the  abforbent  veficls  ;  as  in  the  tunica  vaginahs  of.  fome-
perfons,  they  are  very  few  in  number  or  obftrufted,  for  v/hich  reafon  the
extravaiated  water  is  long  preferv'd  in  them ;  may  on  the  contrary,  exift  in ,
iother  bodies  in  a  very  great  number,  and  be  more  open ;  fince  therefore  we.
are  at  liberty  to  conceive  thefe  things-,  I  do  not  iee  that  there  isfuificient
reafon  to  oblige  us  intirely  to  let  afide  thofe  former  conjeilurcs.

But  be  this  as  it  will ;  from  reading  the  obfervations  that  I  have  now  pro-
pos'd,  and  from  turning  back  to  thofe  which  I  have  refer'd  you  to,  you  will
gather  that  hydatids,  excrefcences,  and  corpufcles,.  have  occur'd  tome,  for
the  moft  part,  at  the  upper  extremity  of  the  teftis  -,  and  even  near  the  larger-
globe  of  the  epididymis:  and  that  when  they  were  prominent  in  both  the
tefticles,  they  occupied  the  fame  plac^  in  both  very  frequently;  and  indcfd
that  the  hydatid,  of  which  I  have  taken  notice  above  (/),  as  refembling  .the

(*)  Epifl.  5 3 .  n.  40.  (i)  Ei«ft.  4<^.  n ,  5.  (*)_  N.  3 .

teSik.


576  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

teftis  in  figure  and  magnitude,  was  even  form'd  thereupon,  or  at  leafl  very
■near  to  it ;  as  far  as  the  delineation  feems  to  fliow  :  which  things  are,  perhaps,
not  unworthy  of  obfervation,  as  their  caufes  may  probably  be  inquir'd  after,
in  the  very  near  infertion  of  the  fafciculus  of  the  fpermatic  veflTels.

But  I  fuppofe  you  will  rather  inquire  of  me,  whether  I  never  found  the
hydrocele  any  where  elfe,  but  betwixt  the  tunic^i  vaginalis  and  albuginea.
And  I  will  immediately  explain  to  you,  how  it  appears  to  me,  that  1  law  it
once,  in  the  tunica  albuginea  itfelf.

31.  An  old  man,  who  had  fallen  from  a  high  place,  in  the  month  of
March  in  the  year  1706,  died  of  a  blow  on  his  head  receiv'd  by  the  fall;
for  which  reafon  you  will  have  the  remaining  part  of  his  hiftory,  when  I  treat
of  thofe  blows  (n)  ;  at  prefent  I  fhall  only  give  you  an  account  of  what  re-
lates to  the  double  hernia,  under  which  he  labour'd  in  one  fide  of  the  fcro-
tum  only,  and  in  the  right.

The  omentum,  which  was  drawn  towards  the  right  fide,  even  in  the  cavity
of  the  belly,  defcended  from  thence  into  a  facculus,  which  was  carried  down
at  the  fide  of  the  fafciculus  of  the  fpermatic  veflels ;  but  not  extended  beyond
the  upper  pan:  of  the  tefticle.  Internally  it  was  fmooth  •,  and  from  thence
the  omentum  was  very  eafily  brought  back  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly.

The  other  hernia  appear'd  in  the  following  manner.  There  was  another
facculus  much  lefs  than  the  former-,  that  is  to  fay  not  longer  than  the  tefticle,
yet  fufficiently  wide  •,  confifting  of  a  fnnooth  and  feparable  membrane,  and
containing  a  yellowifh  water.  This  fac  furrounded  much  the  greater  part  of
the  tefticle,  in  confequence  of  having  its  fides  clofely  join'd,  on  one  hand,
and  on  the  other,  with  that  part  of  the  back  of  the  tefticle,  which  was  on
tach  fide,  plac'd  neareft  to  the  epididymis  longitudinally  ;  fo  that  this  fmali
part  was  wholly  on  the  outfide  of  the  fac.

32.  As  I  have,  more  than  once,  feparated  the  tunica  albuginea  into  two
membranes,  by  an  eary,and  equable  divifion  («•)-,  and  as  I  fee,  that  the  cele-
brated Teichmeyrus  (y)  very  freely  increafes  this  feparation,  and  affirms
"  that  it  may  be  divided  into  three  evident  coats  •,"  I  ftiould  fuppofe  that
thislefler  facculus  was  made  up  of  two  of  them,  by  the  interpofition  of  wa-
ter :  which  kind  of  hydrocele  is,  as  far  as  1  know,  not  obferv'd  by  any  other
author ;  unlefs  you,  perhaps,  fuppofe  it  to  have  been  hinted  at  by  our  Fa-
bricius  (2).

But  that  fpecies  of  this  diforder,  which  men,  in  other  refpedts  learned,  af-
fert  to  be  very  frequent  •,  and  which  I  acknowledge,  not  without  a  method  of
cure,-  in  that  introdu£tion  (a),  which  is  fo  ancient,  as  to  be  afcrib'd  to  Galen;
that  fpecies,  I  fay,  has  not  ever  occur'd  to  Valfalva,  nor  to  me,  nor  to  the
very  experienc'd  Heifter  (b).

Yet  I  would  not,  for  this  reafon,  deny,  that  it  has  even  been  feen  very  fre-
quently by  others,  who,  without  doubt,  much  more  frequently  defcribe  water  as
fhut  up  within  the  membranous  cells,  that  are  above  the  tunica  vaginalis,
than  as  extravafated  within  this  cavity.

(«)  Epift.  52.  n.  8.  {a) C.  iS.

{x)  Adverf.  4.  animad.  i.  {6)  Differt.  de  Hydroc.  n.  28.  &  Inftit.  Ghir.

(y)  Vindic.  quorund.  invent,  in  fine.  p.  2.  f.  5.  c.  I2Z.  not.  3  adn.  1.

Iz)  Pentateach.  Chir.  I.  i.  c.  27;

It


Letter  XLIIl. Article  22'  577

It  is  long  ago,  that  others,  and  among  thefe  Gerard  Blafius  (c),  have  ad-
monifh'd  us,  that  this  coat  "  does  not  extend  itfelf  beyond  the  teftis ;  and
"  that  the  fpermatic  veffels  are  not  cover'd  with  any  loofe  tunica  vaginalis :

" but  that,  inftead  of  this,  a  great  number  of  membranes  are  given,

"  which  are  condens'd  together,  and  by  this  means  conncft  thefe  velTels :"
when  the  peritonEeum,  therefore,,  is  ruptur'd  in  the  groins,  there  is,  fays  he,
"  no  palfage  allow'd,  for  any  thing  to  flow  down  from  the  belly,  to  this
"  fpace;  that  is  into  the  cavity  of  the  tunica  vaginalis;  but,  in  fa6t,  be-
*'  twixt  this  coat,  and  the  fcrotum  itfelf:"  that  is  into  the  cells  which  lie
betwixt  the  two,  and  communicate  with  thofe  fuperior  cells,  either  naturally,
or  from  the  effeft  of  difeafe.

All  thefe  opinions  are  follow'd  by  many  now,  nor  do  I  deny  them  ;  nor  yet
what  they  add,  I  mean  that  by  the  weight,  or  acrimony,  of  the  humour  col-
ledted  in  thofe  fuperior  cells,  that  kind  of  membranous  feptum,  which  is  in-
terpos'd  between  the  cavity  of  the  tunica  vaginalis,  and  thofe  cells,  may
fometimes  be  ruptur'd,  or  eroded  -,  and  the  humour,  by  this  means,  be  pour'd
out,  at  length,  into  that  coat :  and  thus  one  continued  cavity  will  be  pro-
duc'd ;  that  is  to  fay,  of  the  tunica  vaginalis,  and  the  fpace  which  thofe  upper
and  diftended  cells  occupied.

In  this  manner  they  will  probably  explain  that  obfervation  of  mine(i),  of
the  vaginal  cavity  being  produc'd  quite  to  the  os  pubis ;  and  indeed  I  fhall
not  be  very  obftinately  repugnant  to  fuch  an  explication  :  although  I  do  not
very  well  underftand,  how  it  agrees  with  that,  which  not  only  is  allow'd  by
others,  but  by  themfelves  alfo;  I  mean  that  the  hydroceles,  like  other  fpu-
rious  hernias,  "  feem  to  increafe,  as  they  afcend  upwards  towards  the  groins  ;'*
contrary  to  what  the  true  hernias  do,  which  "  increafe  as  they  defcend  towards
"  the  teftis."

But  if  they  alfo  explain,  after  the  fame  mode,  another  obfervation  of  mine

(e)  on  the  herdfman  -,  the  cavity  of  whole  tunica  vaginalis  afcended  three  in-
ches above  the  tefticles  ;  or  even  fome  of  that  great  number,  wherein  this
cavity  being  not  more  produc'd  upwards  than  ufual,  contain'd  more  or  lefs
fluid  •,  it  will  be  furprizing  that  not  any  one  cell  was  ever  left  above  the  tu-
nica vaginalis,  that  I  have  feen  to  be  diftended  with  a  fluid :  and  even  that
when  this  feptum  is  not  ruptur'd,  the  humour  has  neverthelefs  pafs'd  into
the  tunica  vaginalis  -,  of  which  they  deny  the  poffibility.

Wherefore,  if  I  am  to  relate,  with  faithfulnefs,  only  thofe  things  that  I
have  feen  (according  to  my  ufual  cuftom)  in  this  place  alfo ;  I  have  no  where
feen  a  fluid  collefted  in  the  fcrotum,  except  in  the  cavity  of  the  tunica  va^  -
ginalis  -,  if,  befides  the  old  man  of  whom  we  laft  fpoke,  you  except  the  afci-
tic  patients,  in  whom,  however,  it  was  feparated  into  thofe  fmall  cells  that
are  immediately  under  the  fliin,  as  has  been  explain'd  in  the  thirty-eighth

(f)  and  forty-firft  letters  (g).

33.  This  hydrocele  of  afcitic  patients,  which  they  rather  call  a  dropfy  of
the  fcrotum,  it  is  by  no  means  neceffary  to  account  for,  with  the  vulgar,
from  that  water  wherewith  their  belly  is  diftended  ;  as  the  fame  caufes,  from
whence  the  water  then  very  often  ftufl^s  up  the  reft  of  the  cells  that  lie  under

(f)  In  Obfervatis,  fupra  ad  n.  8.  citatls.  (/)  N.  26.

(a)  Supra  n.  25.  - {g)  N.  l8.

(c)  Supra  n.  22.

Vol.  II.  4  E  the


578  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  fkin,  may  very  eafily  caufe  them  to  be  fiU'd  in  the  fcrotum  likewife;  and
that  lb  much  the  more  eafily,  as  this  part  is  pendulous,  and  endow'd  with  but
little  mufcular  ftrength.

Yet  I  fliall  not  deny  that,  fometimes,  by  the  great  quantity  of  water,
which  forces  againft  the  peritonaeum,  this  membrane  may  be  fo  impell'd
within  the  fcrotum,  that  if  you  perforate  this  part,  the  water,  defcending
thither  from  the  belly,  may  burft  forth  with  great  impetus  ;  as  that  very  in-
genuous man  Benevoli  (h)  relates  that  he  had  feen.

And  as  he  fays  that  the  ring  of  the  abdomen  was  then  fo  dilated,  as  to  be
able  to  admit  a  fifl ;  it  affords  me  a  handle  for  putting  you  in  mind,  that  it
is  not  allowable  to  make  ufe,  or  at  leaft  always,  of  a  certain  ingenious  explica-
tion of  the  origin  of  the  true  hydrocele,  in  patients  who  have  an  afcites,
*'  from  the  oblique  mufcle  being  too  much  ftretch'd,"  on  account  of  the  tu-
mour in  the  belly  ;  "  and  its  orifice  being  by  this  means  made  narrower ;"
that  is  to  fay,  the  oblong  filTure  which  is  generally  call'd  the  ring,  from
whence  the  fpermatic  veins,  which  pafs  that  way,  are  comprefs'd.

34.  However,  the  prefllire  of  thofe  veins  is,  fometimes,  to  be  eafily
accounted  for,  rather  from  the  very  great  weight  of  the  incumbent  waters,
while  they  pafs  under  the  peritonsum  •,  and  how  much  effed  this  prefTure
may  have,  in  producing  a  hydrocele,  I  would  fhow,  if  there  were  occafion,
by  the  example,  in  particular,  which  you  will  read  in  the  writings  of  the  ce-
lebrated Baflius  (i),  I  mean  an  example  of  a  large  hydrocele,  which  foUow'd
the  ufe  of  a  bandage,  that  very  clofely  and  ftrongly  comprefs'd  the  groin  j
and  that  in  a  (liort  time  after.

Yet  I  knew  an  old  phyfician,  who,  in  order  to  intercept  a  defluxion  of  hu-
mours, as  he  call'd  it,  to  a  tumour  of  the  tefticle,  which  was  already  confi-
derable,  had  ordcr'd  aftringent  medicines  to  be  applied  to  the  groin  •,  as  if
it  were  in  the  power  of  thefe  applications  to  aftringe  the  artery,  that  carried  in
the  blood,  and  yet  this  without  aftringing  the  veins,  and  the  lymphas-dudtSjfo
much  the  more  in  proportion,  as  their  coats  are  more  infirm.

When  the  apothecary  who  confulted  me  had  heard  thefe  things  from  me  ;
for  the  patient  I  fpeak  of  was  an  apothecary  •,  he  immediately  remov'd  thefe
applications  :  and  the  other  remedies  made  ufe  of  were  of  more  advantage  af-
terwards. And  to  omit  the  other  caufes  here,  let  us  confider  only  the  fper-
matic veins  in  an  hydrocele,  and  mod  other  fpurious  hernis  ;  for  thefe  are,
of  themfelves,  fufficiently  prone  to  generate,  and  increafe,  thefe  diforders,
whether  you  attend  to  their  pofition,  or  their  very  great  length,  frc^m  their
beginning  quite  to  their  end ;  or  the  more  inert  blood  which  they  bring
back,  in  confequence  of  its  being  depriv'd  of  its  more  thin,  and  aftive,  par-
ticles in  the  teftes ;  or  the  remarkable  fmallnefs  of  their  fellow-artery,  and  its
very  long  courfe ;  or  the  weaknefs  of  the  cremafter  mufcle  that  lies  upon'
them ;  or,  finally,  the  valves  in  the  veins  themfelves  being  few,  or  none  at
all  •,  or  perhaps  unequal  to  their  offices  ;  as  appears  from  injeftions  made  to-
wards  the  teftes  :  particularly  in  thofe  who  have  dilated  thefe  veins,  by  being,
too  intent  upon  venery,  or  venereal  ideas.

(/;-)  Differtaz.  i.  (i)  Dec.  i.  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  9.

2  From.


Letter  XLIII. Article  34.  ^yg

From  thefc  caufes  then,  which  are  fufficiendy  allow'd  of  by  learned  men,
and  yet  which  are  requir'd  for  a  proper  fecretion  of  the  femen,  thefe  veins
are  fo  far  fitted  to  bring  on  thofe  diforders  that  I  have  refer'd  to,  or  increafe
them;  that  if  an  intemperance  of  venery  be  added,  if  a  compreffion,  or  a
blow,  or  any  thing  elfe  take  place,  from  whence  the  motion  of  the  blood,
through  thefe  veflels,  may  be  more  retarded,  thefe  diforders  may  eafily  be
the  confequence ;  not  to  fay  that  if  thefe  circumftances  are  not  avoided,  they
may  be  increas'd.

And  I  even  fee,  that,  from  this  retardation,  the  explication  of  an  obfer-
vation,  of  Dodonasus,  is  deduc'd  by  a  very  learned  writer ;  which  obferva-
tion  is  even  related  in  the  Sepulchretum,*in  the  next  {e&ion{k),  and  quoted
in  this  (/) ;  that  is  to  fay,  of  a  hydrocele,  when  it  is  from  an  internal  caufe,
Mways  occurring  in  the  left  part  of  the  fcrotum ;  or,  at  leaft,  as  Hildanus  {m)
has  contradled  that  obfervation,  "  for  the  moft  part."

.for  as  to  what  they  took  notice  of,  in  regard  to  the  left  fpermatic  vein  ;
as  if  it  could  carry  the  ferum  into  the  fcrotum,  from  the  neighbouring  kid-
ney ;  thougJi  it  has  no  place  in  our  confideration  at  this  time,  yet  this  is  very
well  fubftituted  in  its  room  :  that  the  blood  is  not  carried  back  with  eafe  and
expedition,  from  that  vein,  into  the  emulgent.

But  as  to  the  example  which  is  J)roduc'd  to  explain  the  impediment ;  as,
for  inftance,  if  the  neighbouring  kidney  labours  under  calculi,  fand,  and
ulcer ;  and  a  very  fmall  calculus  be  carried  from  the  ulcer,  with  the  blood,
into  the  emulgent  veins,  and  from  this  fall  into  the  fpermatic,  and  difturb
the  reflux  of  the  blood  from  the  teftes ;  this  example,  I  fay,  is  fo  rare  in  an
hydrocele,  that  he  who  propofes  it  does  not  difavow,  and  even  requires  from
others,  a  more  probable  caufe  of  this  very  frequent  circumftance  •,  I  mean
of  that  which  appears  from  his  obfervation,  at  leaft,  that  this  diforder,  oc-
curs "  far  more  frequently"  in  the  left,  than  in  the  right  fide  of  the  fcro-
tum.

But  to  me  it  feems  that  no  other  caufe  need  be  inquir'd  after  here,  than
that  which  has  been  already  acknowledg'd  ;  agreeably  to  the  opinion  of  fome
of  the  moft  learned  men  («) ;  from  whence  the  left  kidney  is  more  fubjeft
to  calculi,  than  the  right.

For  as  the  blood  is  not  carried  fo  fpeedily,  and  expeditioufly,  into  the
vena  cava,  through  the  left  emulgent  vein ;  in  confequence  of  its  being  lon-
ger, and  lying  tranfverfly  over  the  great  artery  ;  as  it  is  through  the  right ;
and  the  left  fpermatic  vein  does  not,  like  the  right,  open  into  the  cava  it-
fclf,  but  into  that  left  emulgent;  it  appears  pretty  clearly,  that  where  the
blood  is  equally  prone  to  ftagnation,  in  both  the  fpermatic  veins,  it  will  ne-
verthelefs  more  eafily  happen  that  it  ftagnates  in  the  left ;  or  at  leaft  afcends
more  flowly  -,  than  in  the  right.

Nor  fliould  I  affign  any  other  reafon,  why  the  cirfocele  "  almoft  always  af-
"  fefts  the  left  fide,"  according  to  the  obfervations  of  Arantius  (o) :  though,
at  the  fame  time,  I  leave  it  entirely  undetermin*d  of  thefe,  as  I  do  alfo  of
thofe  that  I  mention'd  above  of  the  hydrocele,  whether- they  anfwer  equally
with  other  obfervators. For  it  would  be  neceflary  that  a  greater  number  of

{&)  Seft.  30.  in  Schol.  ad  obf.  i. /  («)  Epift.  40.  n.  12.

CO  In  Schol.  ad  §.  3.  obf.  21.  CoJ  De  Tumor,  p.  n.  c.  51.

(«)  Cent.  4.  Obf.  Chir.  66.

4  E  2  obfer-


580  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

obfervations,  of  moft  of  tbefe  obfcrvers,  fhould  be  collefted,  in  regard  to
this  circumftance,  in  both  the  difeafes  ;  and  in  thofe  that  Valfalva  and  I  have
made,  it  unfortunately  happens  to  have  been  but  very  feldom  remark'd,  oa
which  fide  the  obfervations  were  made.

35.  But  before  I  add  a  few  things  of  the  cirfocele,  I  {hall  hint  flill  fewer
things  of  the  pneumatocele,  and  of  the  hematocele,  as  the  order  propos'd
(p)  requires.  For  this  lafl  I  have  never  feen,  as  it  is  feldom  of  long  continu-
ance like  the  reft.

For  when  blood,  either  from  a  wound  receiv'd,  or  from  any  curative  me-
thod, has  fiow'd  down  into  the  fcrotum,  furgeons  immediately  open  a  paf-
fafe  for  its  removal ;  following,  therein,  not  only  the  precept  of  Celfus  {q)^
but  of  reafon  itfelf.  Yet  fometimes  from  the  erofion  of  the  membranes  of  the
tefticle,  "  a  remarkable  quantity  of  bloody  ichor"  diftends  the  tunica  vagi-
nalis ;  fo  that  when  this  membrane  is  incis'd,  "  it  burfts  forth  with  impe-r
*'  tus,"  as  I  find  in  Juftus  Schraderus  (r).

But  if  we  take  the  word  pneumatocele  in  fuch  a  fenfe,  as  to  fuppofe  it  ow-
ing to  air  being  included  in  fome  inteftine,  which  has  defcended  into  the
fcrotum-,  a  remarkable  example  of  which  kind  has  been  produc'd  by  the  ce-
lebrated Haller  (j)  in  particular ;  I  have  perhaps  in  fome  meafure  feen  it :
but  if  from  air  diftending  the  cells  of  the  fcrotum,  in  which  manner  moft  au-
thors underftand  it,  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  that  any  one  has  feen
this,  without  an  emphyfema,  of  all  the  other  parts,  or  moft  of  them ;  or,  at
leaft,  as  you  have  it  in  Palfin  (/),  of  the  parts  neareft  to  the  fcrotum.  How  it
appear'd  to  me  in  the  fcrotum  alone,  in  a  body  already  dead,  you  have  in  the
fifth  letter  ("aj.

36.  The  cirfocele  is  the  only  one  of  all  the  different  fpecies  of  hernias,  that
Cornelius  Celfus  has  given  the  name  of  ramex,  or  ramices,  to  •,  whether  it  oc-
cupies the  fcrotum  ;  and  that  either  externally  or  internally  ;  or,  at  length,
whether  it  only  fill  the  groin  :  and  as  he  propofes  this  order  not  in  the  feven-
teenth,  but  the  eighteenth  chapter,  of  the  feventh  book ;  fo  he  follows  it,
by  treating  of  the  cure,  in  chapter  the  twenty-fecond,  and  twenty-fourth.

And  this  remark  I  was  willing  to  make,  left,  like  a  man  in  other  refpeds
very  ingenious,  you  fhould  be  in  fome  doubt  about  the  term  ramex  in  Cel-
fus •,  and  this  his  laft  chapter  fliould  feem  obfcure  to  you :  in  which  it  is.
true  he  gives  us  the  method  of  cure  in  the  bubonocele,  as  the  conclufion  of
the  eighteenth  chapter  teaches  j  but  of  a  bubonocele  which  has  its  origin  only
from  varicous  veins.

Juftus  Schraderus  is  obfcure ;  whom  I  the  more  readily  mention  to  you,
becaufe  I  fee  that  his  obfervations  are  omitted  in  the  Sepulchretum.  For  in
that  very  obfervation  which  is  pointed  out  a  little  above  (x),  wherein  he  fpeaks
of  a  certain  hydrocele,  he  aflerts  that  there  were  alfo  "  innumerable  flexures
"  of  creeping  vefTels  immoderately  turgid;"  but  whether  "  on  the  furface"
of  the  tefticle,  or  the  tunica  vaginalis,  is  uncertain  from  what  he  fays:  for

(/))  N.  15.  (t)  Anat.  du  Corps  Hum.  p.  i.  tr,  2.  ch.  i8»

(o)  De  Medic.  1.  7.C.  19.  (a)  N.  19.

{r)  Dec.  2.  Obf.  Anat.  Med.  i.  (x)  N.  35.

(s)  Ad  Prslea.  Boerh.  §.641,  not.  «.

that


Letter  XLIII. Article  -TtJ-  581

that  thefe  appearances  may  be  in  either  place,  Celfus  has  taught  us  in  the
eighteenth,  and  twenty-fecond  chapters,  already  quoted.

JMoreover,  as  in  the  obfervation  of  Schraderiis,  fo  I  obferve,  that  it  has
frequently  happen'd  in  others  likewife,  that  hernias  of  different  kinds  were
join'd  with  the  cirfocele.  Turn  to  Horftius  whom  you  have  here  in  the  Se-
pulchretum  (y).  And  even  read  over  again  the  paffages  of  my  letters,  where-
in this  hernia  is  defcrib'd,  as  it  was  feen  by  Valfalva,  or  by  me.

The  firft-mention'd  author  (z),  having  feen,  according  to  the  firft  mode  of
Celfus  (a)  "  the  varicous  veins  \o  entangl'd  with  each  other,  upon  the  fcro-
"  tum  itfelf,"  as  to  refemble  a  chain  ;  found  a  hydrocele  at  the  fame  time.
And  I  having,  according  to  the  laft  mode  of  the  firft  divifion  of  Celfus  (^),
found  an  incipient  cirfocele  in  the  butcher  {c)^  or  a  compleat  one  in- the  pot-
ter {d)  ;  I,  at  the  fame  time,  found  in  this  laft,  the  beginning  of  a  hydrocele  ;
and  in  the  former  a  compleat  hydrocele.

Befides,  the  fubftance  of  the  teftis  was  fo  compact  in  the  potter,  that  it
feem'd,  as  Celfus  fays  upon  that  mode  of  difeafe  (e),  "  to  have  loft  its  nou-
"  rifhment ;"  and  had  a  very  fmall  bony  body  lying  beneath  it :  and  this
brings  back  to  my  mind,  another  particular  obfervation  of  Valfalva,  which
was  made  on  I  know  not  what  man.

For  in  the  right  fafciculus  of  the  fpermatic  veflels,  he  found  a  bony  body
within  peculiar  little  membranes :  which,  when  he  prefs'd  it  betwixt  his  fin-
gers ftrongly,  he  faw  to  be  made  up  of  two  bones.  Both  of  thefe  were  of  a
globular  figure ;  but  one  of  tlie  bignefs  of  a  grain  of  millet-feed,  the  other
of  the  bignefs  of  a  vetch  j  the  latter  in  part  roughilh,  but  the  other  elegantly
fmooth,  or  polifh'd,  like  pearl.

However,  Arantius  (/)  obferv'd  thefe  things  of  a  cirfocele,  defcribing  a
very  large  one  I  fuppofe :  "the  vefTels  offer  themfelves  to  the  touch  in  fo
"  turgid  a  ftate,  as  to  equal  a  finger  in  thicknefs  -,  being  wrap'd  up  in  cir-
"  cles,  and  folds  (after  the  manner  of  the  inteftines)  which  in  part  difappear
*'  when  the  patients  lie  down,  are  diminifh'd  and  become  lefs  troublefome,
"  in  the  winter-feafon,  when  the  fcrotum  is  contrafled  ;  but  are  exceedingly
"  fo  in  the  fummer."

37.  The  fteatocele  is,  with  the  fame  author  (^),  "  where  a  certain  adipous
"  humour  concretes  in  the  fcrotum,  and  about  the  teftis."  And  he  has  fol-
low'd  the  ancient  writer  of  that  introdudlion,  which  is  preferv'd  among  the
books  of  Galen  ;  which  writer  having,  in  the  feventeenth  and  eighteenth
chapters,  mention'd  the  fteatocele  among  other  herniae,  fpeaking  of  the  cure,
in  the  laft-mention'd  chapter,  fays  that  "  the  fat  muft  be  remov'd."

But  whether  we  choofe  to  call  it  a  febaceous  matter,  or  fat ;  whatever  of
an  unftuous  nature  is  fometimes  form'd  within  the  fcrotum,  and  diftends  it,
that  is  certainly  either  coUefted  under  the  fkin  itfelf,  or  in  the  internal  cells.

To  the  firft  kind  belongs  that  of  which  I  have  faid  above  ("/&),  that  I  had
feen,  under  the  fcrotum  properly  fo  call'd,  more  fat,  and  even  at  the  lower

(y)  L.  3.  feft.  2,9.  obf.  17.  (d)  Epift.  7.  n.  11.

(z)  Epift.  20.  n.  24.  (e) Cit.  c.  18.

{a)  L.  7.  c.  18  &  22.  (f)  C.  fupra  ad  n.  34.  cit.

(,h)  Ibid.  (g)  Ibid.

(c)  Epift.  21.  n.  13,  (h)  N.  29.

part.


582  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

part,  than  I  fhould  have  expe£ted  -,  particularly  in  a  man  not  very  fat :  for
there  is  no  fat  in  that  part,  or  at  leaft  but  very  little  ;  and  this  only  fome-
times.

But  that  was  a  kind  of  beginning  only  of  this  diforder  •,  which  you  fee
compleated  in  this  twenty-ninth  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (z),  from  de
Graaf:  and  to  the  fame  clafs,  probably,  is  to  be  referr'd  that  which  is
to  be  read  of,  in  the  fame  place  (k),  in  the  obfervation  of  Horftius  alreatly
taken  notice  of:  "  an  adipofe  fiefh  in  the  right  part  of  the  fcrotum."

And  to  the  internal  cells  belongs  that  which,  as  was  faid  above  (I)  for  an-
other reafon,  was  found  by  the  celebrated  Petfchius  (m)  in  a  body  that  was
very  fat ;  when  that  which  feem'd  to  be  an  enterocele,  or  epiplocele,  in  one
fide  of  the  fcrotum,  was  nothing  but  "  fat  collefted  in  the  cellular  fubflance
"  of  the  peritoneum,  and  pafllng  down  through  the  rings  to  the  fcro-
"  tum."

Thus,  in  Boerhaave  («),  you  will  read  that  a  very  large  tumour  was  feen
by  him  in  the  fcrotum  ;  for  in  a  fat  man  "  the  luxuriant  fat  had  pafs'd  through
"  the  ring  into  the  fcrotum,  with  the  fpermatic  veflels ;  the  tefticle  being
"  quite  found  and  free."

And  Schulzius  (o)  feems  to  have  found  "  a  large  quantity  of  fat"  not  be-
low the  groin,  and  on  the  right  fide,  a  much  lei's  quantity  being  on  the  left,
and  "  clofely  interwoven"  with  thefe  veflels ;  fo  that,  at  firft  fight,  it  re-
fembl'd  an  inteftine,  or  the  omentum,  prolaps'd  thither:  and  that  in  a  car-
cafe  rather  lank  and  thin,  as  you  will  remember  to  have  been  related  by
me  before  (p),  in  order  to  illuftrate  a  different  circumftance.

To  me,  however,  who  know  that  I  have  fometimes  feen  fat  interpos'd,
here  and  there,  betwixt  thefe  veffels,  even  in  a  lean  body,  from  the  upper
part  of  the  tunica  vaginalis  quite  to  the  ring  ;  for  I  particularly  obferv'd  this
traft  at  the  time ;  and  that  in  a  very  brawny  man,  by  no  means  fat,  who
was  kill'd  when  in  perfeft  health,  I  not  only  found  fat  in  the  lower  part  of
the  fame  veflels,  but  alfo  betwixt  the  epididymis,  and  the  teftis  -,  and  finally,
that  in  the  herdfman,  fpoken  of  in  this  letter  (q)  (who  was  not  fat  likewife)
where  the  thicker  fafciculus  of  them,  which  belong'd  to  one  teftis,  was  made
up  of  fat  in  its  greater  part,  fat  was  not  wanting  betwixt  the  other  tefl:icle
and  its  epididymis  (which  circumftance,  although,  as  far  as  I  remember,  not
taken  notice  of  by  anatomifts,  is  perhaps  not  uncommon) ;  to  me,  I  fay,  it
does  not  feem  fo  furprizing,  that  fat  has  been,  more  than  once,  found  immo-
derately increas'd  in  the  fafciculus  of  thofe  veflels,  as  that  it  has  never  been
found  betwixt  the  epididymis  and  the  tefticle  ;  unlefs,  perhaps,  fat  has  been,
at  any  time,  taken  for  flefh,  in  any  kind  of  farcocele.

38.  For  the  author  of  the  "  Introduftion  frj  "  juft  now  quoted,  takes
notice  not  only  of  red  flefli,  but  even  of  flefli  "-of  a  whitifli  colour-,"  as
compofing  a  iircocele ;  and  I  myfelf,  as  I  have  faid  in  a  former  work  (j),

(?)  Obf.  14.  §.  2.  (0)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf.  22;.

(/•)  Obf.  17.  (/)  N.  10.

(/)  N.  10.  C^J  N.  22.

fm)  Syllog.  anat.  obf.  §.  89.  (r)  C. 18.

(n)  Praleft  ad  Inftit.  §.  712.  (4  Adverf.  Anat.  2.  Animad.  6.

have


Letter  XLIII. Article  38.  s^3

tave  feen  facculi  of  fat,  which,  as  this  fat  was  tlng'd  by  ftagiiating  blood  be-
ing intermix'd  with  it,  refembled  flefli.

Moreover,  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  this  hernia,  and  its  fituation,  diffe-
rent phyficians  have  entertain'd  different  opinions  -,  and thofe  immediately
repugnant  to  each  other. For  Vefalius,  as  you  will  learn  from  the  Sepul-
chretum  (t),  had  perfuaded  himfelf  that  it  confifted  of  the  omentum  pro-
■  laps'd  into  the  fcrotum.

Some  have  thought  that  it  did  not  differ  from  the  tumefaftion,  and  indu-
ration, of  the  tefticle.  But  the  others ;  although  they  do  not  deny  that  lefs
cautious  obfervers  may  fometimes  be  impos'd  upon  by  the  firft  of  thofe  dif-
Grders,  fo  as  to  take  it  for  a  farcocele  -,  by  this  name,  neverthelefs,  under-
ftand  a  flelh  really  growing  out  about  the  tefticle,  and  its  veffels,  or  fome
other  fubftance  of  that  kind.

Yet  this  feems  to  happen  "  very  feldom,"  as  Celfus  {u}  has  admonifh'd
us ;  or  at  leaft  lefs  often  than  is  generally  firppos'd ;  if  we  look  for  obferva-
tions  which  are  not  liable  to  doubt :  and  perhaps  Olaus  Borrichius  does  not
feem  to  have  wander'd  far  from  the  truth,  when  he  remark'd,  upon  his  own
obfervation,  as  you  have  it  in  the  Sepulchretum  (x),  "  that  a  farcocele  is
"  not  fo  frequently  form'd  upon  the  teftes,  as  in  them  :"  where  he  has  alfo
ihown  how  a  hydrocelele  may  fometimes  refemble  a  farcocele  -,  fo  that,  per-
haps, it  was  the  former,  and  not  the  latter,  which  they  believe  to  have  been
talcen  away  by  the  powder  of  the  root  of  ononis  or  reft-harrow ;  which  cer-
tainly increafes  the  quantity  of  urine.

He  has,  therefore,  prudently  attributed  fo  much  to  that  opinion,  which  I
mention'd  in  the  fecond  place,  as,  neverthelefs,  exprefly  to  leave  room  for
the  third  alfo,  for  which  he  fhows,  that  the  examples,  in  Lotichius,  and  Hil-
danus,  argue.  Looking  for  thefe  examples,  I  eafily  found  them  in  the  fixth
of  the  Confilia  of  the  firft-mention'd  author  (y),  and  in  the  fourth  Centuria
of  the  obfervations  of  the  latter ;  and  wonder'd  that  nothing  was  transfer'd'
into  this  feflion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  from  the  lixty-fifth  obfervation  of  this
author.

But  if  thofe  things  which  were  thoroughly  examin'd  by  anatomy  were  fought
after;  there  was  an  obfervation  of  Blafius  (2),  that  might  be  refer'd  to  this
clafs  ;  in  which,  not  as  in  that  of  Borrichius,  the  whole  flefhy  mafs  was  no-
thing but  the  tefticle  itfelf ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  tefticle  was  contain'd,
like  a  nucleus,  in  a  thick  cortex  as  it  were,  which  feem'd  to  be  made  up
of  pretty  hard  glands.

I  however,  though  I  do  not  at  all  doubt,  but  a  morbid  flefh  may  grow  out
from  the  coats  of  the  teftes,  when  eroded,  from  whatever  caufe  it  may  be  ;
as  well  as  from  the  coats  of  other  parts ;  have  never  yet  lit  on  an  appearance
of  this  kind  in  diffcttions.

But  the  celebrated  Pohlius  (a)  has  lit  on  fuch  an  appearance,  and  has  faid
that  a  farcocele  is,  "  according  to  his  own  obfervation,  a  fibrous  and  fleftiy
"  tumour  of  the  tefticles ;  more  or  lefs  hard  and  painful,  and  form'd  by  de-
*'  grees  ;  which  either  increafes  the  whole  fubftance  of  the  tefticle,  and  con-

(0  Seft.  hac  29.  obf.  15.  §.  3.  (2)  15.  Partis  i.

(u)  L.  7.  c.  18.  CaJ  Progr.  de  Hern.  &  Speciatim  de  Sarco-

(x)  Seft.  cit.  Schol.  ad  obf.  22.  §.  1.  cde.

O)  C.  3.  obf..  9.

" vert  s


58+  Book  in. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"  verts  it  into  a  mais  like  flelli ;  or,  at  leaft,  growing  to  a  part  of  It,  forms  a
"  kind  of  flefhy  excrelcence  as  it  were."

Nevertiielefs  you  fee,  that  he  acknowledges  it  to  be  principally  in  the
whole  of  the  tefticle  :  and  he  produces  an  example  of  a  farcocele  differed
by  him,  in  which  the  fubftance  of  the  teftis,  "  had  been  univerfally  chang'd
''  into  a  purulent  matter."

And  if  you  read  thofe  obfervations,  of  that  very  experienc'd  man  Dieteri-
cus  Sproegclius  (^),  wherein  the  hydrocele  is  join'd  with  the  farcocele-,  as
a  caufe,  or  as  an  effeft  j  you  will  fee  that  the  tefticle  was  found  to  be  "  livid
"  and  black,  putrid,"  or  "  extended,  hard,  and,  on  the  outfide,  together
"  with  the  epididymis,  corroded  and  callous-,"  or  "  partly  friable  by  means
"  of  putrefaction  ;  but  in  part  perfeftly  cartilaginous,  and  having  the  tunica
albuginea  alfo,  together  with  the  epididymis,  univerfally  cartilaginous ;"  or
finally  "  tumid,"  and  having,  when  it  was  diflefted,  "  a  true  yellowifli  thick
*'  pus  in  the  middle,  with  an  erofion  and  incipient  callofity  of  the  parictes."

In  no  more  than  one  obfervation  (c),  is  it  faid  that  "  tumid  and  fcirrhous
"  glands"  were  found  ■"  but  not  in  the  fubftance  of  the  tefticle:  were  they
then  upon  the  furface  of  the  tefticle  ?  Or  in  the  fpermatic  rope  ?  For  in  this
they  alfo  acknowledge  a  farcocele,  and  do  not  at  all  treat  of  it,  if  it  has  en-
ter'd  into  the  belly,  like  that  which  I  have  defcrib'd,  as  feen  by  Valfalva,  be-
ginning in  the  teftis  (d),  and  afcending  thither,  like  a  hard  tuberofity,  as  if  of  a
glandular  nature,  where  it  was  join'd  with  a  very  large  and  fimilar  tumour  of
the  mefentery.

But  not  to  digrefs  from  the  fubjecft  of  farcocele,  when  enquir'd  after  in  the
teftes  themfelves,  the  obfervations  of  that  illuftrious  man  Heifter  (e)  are  ex-
cellent. This  author  found  four  tefticles  fuch  as  he  delineates  (f),  all  of
them  fo  immoderately  enlarg'd,  that  he,  with  juftice,  refuted  the  opinion  of
thofe  (g),  who  have  afierted  that  a  farcocele  "  never  exceeds  a  hen's  egg  in
"  its  fize."

He  alfo  found  them  all  fcirrhous,  and  of  an  equal  furface  -,  fo  that  it  was
not  without  reafon  he  affirm'd  (b)  "  fcirrhous  tefticles  to  be  far  more  frequent,
"  than  excrefcences  from  the  tefticles."

The  remaining  circumftances  you  will  fee  in  this  author  himfelf;  and
among  others,  that  one  of  thofe  teftes  (?)  was  "  corrupted,  and,  in  a  manner,
"  cancerous."  In  the  mean  while,  let  us  go  on  to  the  laft  of  the  hernise
enumerated  by  us.

39.  By  the  name  of  fperm.atocele,  the  author  of  the  twentieth  obfervation,
in  this  twenty-ninth  fedtion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  has  underftood  a  hernia,
which  is  made  by  "  the  vas  deferens  being  "  corrugated,  and  going  down
"  into  the  fcrotum ;"  but  very  eafily  returning  within  the  belly,  either  by
the  help  of  the  hands,  or  afupine  pofture  of  body.

Who  this  author  was,  I  enquir'd,  by  looking  under  the  obfervation,  to
no  purpofe  ;  though  I  much  wifh'd  it,  that  I  might  better  be  able  to  con-
ceive his  meaning, For  under  it  is  written  idem  ibidem  ;  that  is  to  fay,  either

{h)  Obferv.  quasdam  feled.  §.  50.  &  feq.  (f)  Fig.  i.  &  feq.  cum.  explic.

(c)  §.  5t.  \g)  In  Proemio.

{dj  Epift.  39.  n.  2.  {h)  §.  37.

{e)  Difietl.  de  Sarcocele.  (;)  §.  34.

Rolfinck'


Letter  XLIII. Article  39.  585

kolfinck,  or  Riolanus,  or  Hildanus,  or  Rofcius  ;  for  thefe  had  all  been  men-
tion'd  in  the  preceding  feholia,  and  obfervation.

I  knew,  however,  that  thole  were  not  the  words  of  any  of  thefe  authors  t
and  it  happen'd,  by  mere  accident,  at  laft,  that,  turning  over  Barbette's
. furgery  {k),  I  lit  upon  thefe  very  words;  and  did  not  find  any  thing  more
than  what  is  copied  in  the  Sepulchretum.

It  is  certainly  difficult  to  be  underftood,  by  thofe  who  are  not  ignorant
how  the  vas  deferens  is  connefted,  by  adhering  to  the  bladder,  and  lying  up-
on the  ureter  in  its  paffage  (from  whence  Rutty  (/)  accounted  for  the  draw-
ing up  of  the  teftis  in  nephritic  pains)  and  finally,  how  it  is  tied  down,  by  very
frequent  cellular  membranes,  to  the  neighbouring  parts,  not  only  above  the
ring  of  the  abdomen,  but  beneath  that  alfo,  quite  to  its  origin  -,  it  is  difficult,
I  fay,  to  be  underftood,  by  thofe  who  know  thefe  circumftances,  how  this  vas
-deferens  can  poffibly  defcend  fo  far  into  the  fcrotum,  as  to  produce  a  hernia,
by  its  being  wrap'd  up  together  there.

And  as  1  do  not  remember  that  this  has  been  feen  by  any  one  'lO  difTeftion  5
and  as  Barbette  does  not  fay  that  he  faw  it  by  thefe  means ;  I  think  there  is
room  to  fufpedt  that  what  he  fays  he  had  more  than  once  feen,  was  quite  a
different  thing  from  that  which  he  has  fuppos'd  it  to  be.

The  fpermatocele  therefore;  which,  if  it  fignified  to  me  what  it  did  to
Barbette,  ought  to  have  been  confider'd  above,  in  the  number  of  the  true
hernias ;  is  retain'd  among  the  fpurious  hernise ;  and  fo  underftood,  as  to  fig-
nify  "  a  colleftion  of  femen  in  the  tefticles,"  which  fometimes  "  raifes  them
"  up  to  a  very  great  bulk :"  and  I  ufe  the  words  in  which  the  compilers  of
the  "  Bibliotheca  Anatomica  (m),  have  propos'd  this  fubjedl ;  requefting  that
they  might  be  allow'd  to  call  hernise  of  this  kind,  "  fpermatoceles :"  for
this  Cgnification,  and  ftill  lefs  this  word,  was  not  lately  made  common
among  phyficians,  as  a  man,  in  other  refpefts  very  learned,  feems  to  ima-
gine.

And  indeed  thefe  compilers  have  affirm'd,  that  the  cafe  has  been  "  more
**  than  once"  remark'd  by  them,  in  men  of  a  very  falacious  difpofition,  when
there  was  "  an  obftruflion  form'd  in  fome  part  cf  the  epididymis,  from  the
"  particles  of  the  femen  that  are  capable  of  concretion  ;"  and  that  they  had
once  feen  the  cafe,  beyond  all  poffibility  of  doubt,  when,  after  the  efixifion  of
the  femen,  thus  confin'd,  into  the  fcrotum,  an  abfcefs  having  arifen  from
thence,  which  was  under  a  neceffity  of  being  open'd  with  the  knife,  this  ab-
fcefs, when  cleans'd,  did  no  more  difcharge  pus ;  but  from  that  part  of  the
epididymis,  which  is  in  the  middle  betwixt  the  globes  thereof,  the  femen,
which  had  burft  through  that  part,  by  diftending  it,  very  evidently  came
forth.

But  if  you  choofe  rather  to  attribute  this  foramen,  of  the  epididymis,  to
the  eroding  matter  of  the  abfcefs,  than  to  the  diftending  femen;  you  never-
thelefs  cannot  deny  what  is  diftated  by  reafon  itfelf,  if  the  paflage  of  the  fe-
men, into  its  veficles,  be  intercepted  from  any  caufe  whatever  ;  or  if  the  return

{k)  Part.  I.  c.  7.  {m)  Tom.  i.  in  adnot.  ad  Graaf.  Tradl.  de

(/)  Treatife  of  the  urinary  paflages,  feft.  3. Viror.  Organ.  &  est.
p.  I.

Vol.  II.  4  F  ot


586  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

of  it,  by  the  abforbent  vefTels,  into  the  blood,  from  the  veficles  that  are  al-
ready diftended,  be  prevented  •,  I  mean  that  the  tefticles  themfelves,  the  epi-
didymis, and  the  other  receptacles  of  that  fluid,  will  be  fo  fiU'd  by  the  new
femen  which  is  continually  fecretcd  in  the  teftes,  that  at  firft  they  become
fwell'd^  at  which  time  I  will  fay  that  there  is  a  fpermatocele  ;  then  after  this,
that  the  very  tender  and  loft  ftruclure,  which  is  peculiarly  obfervable  in  the
tefticles,  will  be,  by  degrees,  vitiated  :  and  the  velfels  which  carry  the  femen,
blood,  and  lymph,  being  ruptur'd,  at  length  tumours  of  a  mix'd  kind  will
be  generated  in  the  telles.

Now  I  will  give  proofs  of  thefe  things  from  examples,
40.  Some  perlbns,  whole  ilia  were  diftended  with  flatus,  have  complain'd
to  me,  not  fo  much  of  a  tenfion,  and  pain,  as  of  one,  or  of  both  tefticles
being  for  the  moft  part  tumid,  in  particular,  when  the  flatus  was  moft
troubleibme ;  not  the  leaft  inconvenience  remaining  when  the  flatus  was  dif-
lodg'd.

I  fuppos'd  therefore  that  the  paflagc  for  the  femen  was  fliut  up  by  the
diftention  of  the  inteftines ;  the  velTels  that  carry  this  to  the  ve/tcul^e  being
comprefs'd,  and  even  the  veficles  themfelves  fometimes ;  fo  as  not  to  admit
what  was  brought  down  to  them.

Thus  I  alfo  remember,  that,  thirty  years  ago,  when  one  Rhodigi,  a  man  of
credit  and  reputation,  came  to  me  (being  fubje£t  to  a  certain  tumour,  which  had
return'd  more  than  once,  betwixt  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  in  the  right
epicolic  region)  and  faid,  that  as  often  as  the  tumour  was  prefent.  the  teftes
below  that  became  very  difagreeably  heavy,  fo  that  he  was  oblig'd  to  receive
the  fcrotum  in  a  bag,  and  fuftain  it  thereby ;  I  remember,  I  fay,  to  have  ex-
piain'd  the  cafe  to  the  patient,  and  the  phyficians,  (who  were  prefent  with
me  in  coniultation)  even  at  that  time,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  fay,  that  whea
the  oblique  mufcle,  on  the  right  fide,  was  ftretch'd  in  confequence  of  the  tu-
mour, with  which  it  was  afi^efted,  and  the  oblong  fiflure  thereof,  which  is
call'd  a  ring,  of  courfe  conftring'd  -,  it  was  not  to  be  wonder'd  at,  if  the  tube
which  carries  the  femen,  and  pafl"es  through  this  fiflure,  being  in  fome  mea-
fure  aftricled,  the  afcent  of  the  femen  be,  in  fome  meafure  alfo,  prevented.

Yet  in  this  man,  and  in  the  former  likewife,  it  may  perhaps  be;  notwith-
ftanding  there  were  no  proofs  of  the  blood  ftagnating ;  that  the  fpermatic
vein  being  equally  comprefs'd,  or  ftreighten'd,  thefe  fymptoms  which  I  have
fpoken  of,  were  no  lefs  to  be  attributed  to  the  obftruded  blood,  than  to  the
obftru6led  femen.

And  there  is,  among  the  letters  of  Valfalva,  one  which  was  written  to  a
certain  prince,  one  of  whofe  teftes  had,  after  marriage,  grown  out  to  the  big-
nefs  of  a  hen's  egg.

Valfalva  imagined  that  this  tumour  might  be  from  the  ftagnating  femen,
and  not  without  reafon ;  becaufe  the  patient  was  not  wont  to  emit  his  femen
with  eafe,  though  in  other  refpedls  he  abounded  therewith  :  fo  that  fometimes
he  was  oblig'd  to  defift  from  the  venereal  congrefs,  without  having  made  ijC
compleat.

In  like  manner,  in  a  youth  of  whom  Hildanus  gives  the  hiftory  (n)  ;.  the
fummary  of  which  is  in  the  fcholium  on  that  obfcrvation  of  Barbette,  to

(«)  Cent.  4.  obf.  64.  Exempl.  i,
5  whicb


Letter  XLIII. Article  41.  587

which  I  have  refer'd  (0),  in  the  Sepulchretum ;  who  would  account  for  the
pain  of  the  groins,  and  the  tumour  of  the  tefticles,  not  from  femen,  but
from  blood ;  as  they  had  been  the  confequents  of  the  ejaculation  of  femen
being  fupprefs'd,  after  having  been  about  to  be  thrown  out  ?

Both  of  thefe  tumours  vanifh'd  on  the  left  fide  indeed :  on  the  right,  how-
ever, the  tumour  not  only  continued,  but,  in  procefs  of  time,  grew  out  into
a  very  large  flefhy  hernia.  The  fame  thing  would  have  happen'd  to  another
man,  from  the  fame  caufe,  if  the  celebrated  Craufe  (p)  had  not,  by  a  very
extraordinary  fuccefs,  relblv'd  a  tumour,  which  had  already  increas'd  to  the
fize  of  a  large  human  fift,  within  two  years.

But  what  was  the  event  of  a  tumour  of  the  fame  kind,  and  arifing  from
the  fame  origin,  which  I  faw  in  a  man  of  noble  birth,  I  cannot  learn  :  for  I
have  heard  nothing  of  him  fince  he  jufl:  confulted  me  upon  it ;  at  which  time
he  was  only  paffing  this  way,  and  immediately  continued  his  journey.

He,  certainly,  might  have  made  trial  of  every  kind  of  remedy,  but  the
furgeon's  knife,  to  no  purpofe  ;  if  the  rumour  was  of  that  nature  of  which  it
was  in  a  young  man  (j),  who  had  a  mafs  of  very  v/hite,  and  folid,  flefh,
arifing  from  a  caufe  nearly  fimilar,  cut  out  from  his  fcrotum,  in  the  center
of  which  flefh  was  contain'd  a  bony  body  of  a  globular  figure.

But  why  in  thefe  four  perfons,  either  one  of  the  teftes  only  fwell'd,  or
continu'd  to  fwell ;  and  not  both  of  them  ;  fince  the  femen  muft  be  obftrudl-
ed  in  both  of  the  teftes  equally,  by  having  its  eflux  prevented  in  the  very
middle  of  the  venereal  congrefs,  it  is  not  very  eafy  to  fay  ;  unlefs  we  perhaps
conjefture,  that  the  quantity  of  femen,  on  both  fides,  was  not  equal ;  or  that
the  fluxility  of  the  femen,  or  the  force  of  the  coats,  and  the  cremafter  mufcle
was  not  the  fame  ;  or  that  the  abforbent  veflels  on  one  fide,  were  more  open
than  on  the  other;  or  fomething  elfe  of  a  fimilar  nature.

41.  Tumours,  however,  of  the  teftes  ;  from  whatever  caufe  they  have  their
origin ;  feem  to  confift  of  different  matter  in  different  perfons ;  as,  for  in-
ftance  (befide  the  examples  hitherto  propos'd)  of  a  flefhy  and  nervous  fub-
ftance,  in  Borrichius  {r) ;  of  a  glandular  fubftance,  and  veficles  full  of  blood,
in  Bartholin  (s)  ;  of  a  "  ligamentuous,"  and  in  part  approaching  to  the  na-
ture of  a  cartilage,  in  Schraderus  (/) ;  and  of  a  cartilaginous  fubftance  in
Ruyfch  (u).

And  I  myfelf  having,  in  a  man  of  whom  I  fliall  take  notice,  when  on  the
fubjedl  of  the  gonorrhoea  (x).,  feen  the  right  teftlcle,  in  particular,  larger
than  it  naturally  is ;  found,  upon  difleftion,  a  little  fat  lying  betwixt  the  in-
nermoft  fubftance  of  it,  which  was  in  other  refpefts  not  much  difeas'd.

From  hence  I-conjeftur'd  it  might  happen,  that  fome  tumours  of  the  teftes
may  be,  now  and  then,  found  to  have  their  origin  from  fat  preternaturally  ge-
nerated, and  increas'd.  And  if  I  had  feen,  and  been  at  liberty  to  difl^eft,  in
the  dead  bodies,  thofe  very  large tumours  that  I  have  fometimes  feen in

(0)  N.  39.  W  Ibid.  §.  2.

(fj  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  &  6.  obf.  282.  {t)  Obf.  fupra  ad  n.  35.  cit.

(qj  Hiil.  de  I'Acad.  R. des  Sc.  a. 1700.'  {n)  Thef.  Anat.  9.  n.  51,

obf.  anat.  4.  (x)  Epift.  44.  n.  5.
(r)  Sepulchret,  f.  hac.  29,  obf.  22,  §.  i.

4  F  2  the


588  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  living  body  j  I  do  not  doubt  but  I  muft  have  obferv'd  fomething  Angu-
lar, if  the  ftrufture  had  correfponded  to  the  bulk.

Forfirft,  I  faw  at  Bologna  formerly,  one  fo  large  as  to  be  almoft  equal  to
that  which  Ruyfch  (y)  faid  was  of  a  "prodigious,  magnitude;"  or,  if  he
fpeaks  of  the  fame  in  his  curcepofiericres  (z),  as  he  feems  to  do,  "  the  largefb  ever
"  {ten  in  the  human  body."  But  though  it  was  of  a  fmaller  fize,  I  heard,  ne-
verthelefs,  that  it  was  not  taken  out  with  fo  good  luccefs, as  that  larger  one.

After  this  I  faw,  at  Padua,  a  teftis  of  fuch  a  magnitude,  that  unlefs  you
very  well  knew  how  far  I  may  be  depended  upon,  I  durfh  not  write  it  to  you ;
fearing  leaft  you  fliould  fufpeft  me  of  falfhood.  For  if  that  of  Ruyfch  ex*
ceeded  "  the  head  of  a  human  foetus ;  this,  whereof  I  am  fpeaking,  certainly
exceeded  the  heads  of  two  men  join'd  into  one.

Wherefore,  that  I  might  examine  fo  very  extraordinary  an  appearance  ;  m
the  month  of  May,  in  the  year  1730,  when  the  man  was  paffing  this  way,  ia
order  to  go  to  Efte,  where  his  habitation  was  •,  Anthony  Mocenici,  that  illu-
ftrious  chevalier,  and  very  worthy  of  his  brother  Aloyfi,  at  that  time  Doge  of
Venice,  would  have  him  come  to  my  houfe.

Where,  upon  firft  feeing  the  man,  being  ignorant  who  he  was,  and  why
he  came  to  me,  I  fhould  have  fuppos'd  him  to  labour  under  a  very  great  afcites^
if  I  had  not  obferv'd  his  belly,  as  it  was  ftill  cover'd  with  his  garments,  ta
be  tumid  only  on  the  right  fide.

But  when  all  the  coverings  were  taken  off,  and  the  bandages,  by  means,
of  which  he  kept  the  tumour  drawn  up  to  the  abdomen  as  far  as  the  hypochon-
drium,  where  it  naturally  tended  of  itfelf,  remov'd  5  being  furpriz'd  at  that
bignefs  which  I  have  mention'd,  I  began  to  handle  it ;  for  it  bore  the  touch
very  well,  being  always  without  pain  ;  and  I  feem'd  to  myfelf  to  touch  a  kind
of  farcoma  of  the  form  of  a  fpheroid,  and  every  where  cover'd  over  with  its^
fkin.

Upon  my  afking  how,  and  from  what  caufe,  it  had  begun,  the  patient
anfwer'd,  that  notwithftanding  he  had  receiv'd  the  blow  when  a  child,  th&
tefticle  neverthelefs  did  not  begin  to  grow  out  into  a  tumour  till  he  was  at
man's  eftate  -,  but  that  it  had  at  length  grown  out  into  this  bulk  in  the  fpace
of  a  few  years.

42.  But  it  is  neceffary,  here,  to  put  you  in  mind  of  one  thing;  1  meats,
that  Valfalva,  as  it  ftands  in  his  papers,  had  feen  the  increas'd  magnitude  of
the  teftes  to  be,  for  the  moft  part,  owing  to  the  diforder  of  the  coats  that  in--
vefted  them.

Nor  is  it  difficult  for  me  to  believe  this,  efpecially  in  fome  particular  cafes  -^
fince,  as  I  have  faid  in  the  preceding  letter  {a),  having  found  the  tefticles
to  be  bigger  than  they  naturally  are,  and  confiderably  tumid,  I  perceiv'd  this,
not  to  arife  from  a  dilfention  of  their  fubftance,  but  from  the  coats  being:
much  thicken'd :  and,  indeed,  in  hernise,  both  true  and  fpurious,  I  have
obferv'd  the  thicknefs  of  the  membranes,  wherein  they  were  contain'd,  to  be
much  increas'd.

So  in  the  hydrocele,  which  I  defcrib'd  above  in  the  foldier  {b)f.l  remark 'd
that  the  tunica  erythroides,  and  vaginalis,  were  thicken'd  ;  as  I  did  elfewhere

(y)  N.  51.  cit,  &  tab.  ibid.  3.  fig.  i.  (a)  N.  28.

<«)  N.  2S.  (k)  N-  17.

Mi


Letter  XLIII. Article  42.  589

in  a  butcher  (c),  who  was  afFefted  with  hernias  of  the  fame  kind,  that  both
the -vaginal  coats  were  very  denfe.  Thus  in  the  cpiplocele  of  an  old  man  (d),
I  found  the  peritonEeum,  which  compos'd  the  facculus,  to  be  dilated,  and
at  the  fame  time  become  much  thicker ;  and  in  the  entero-epiplocele  (e)  of  a
young  man,  the  coat  of  the  facculus  was  not  lefs  thick,  and  firm,  than  that
of  the  pulmonary  artery  ;  and  in  the  crural  hernia  of  a  woman  (f)  it  was  fo
thick,  that  it  could  be  divided  into  many  different  lamins,  as  it  were,  with-
out any  great  difficulty.

Yet  it  may  happen,  where  the  orifice  of  the  facculus  is  much  more  large
than  the  ring,  as  is  the  cafe  in  very  great  hernias ;  or  where  hernias  hap  ■
pen  in  thofe  places,  in  which  the  tendons  of  the  mufcles  are,,  in  their  na-
natural  ftate,  quite  unperforated ;  as  is  the  cafe  betwixt  the  refti  and  the
obliqui,  or  above  and  below  the  navel,  betwixt  redtum  and  redluro  ;  it  may^
I  fay,  happen,  that  the  thicknefs  of  the  facculus  is  not  only  from  the  perito-
nseum,  but,  in  general,  from  the  tendons  alfo^  which  are  driven  outwards;
together  with  the  peritOEasum.

Mery  {g\  therefore,  in  that  hernia  which  was  made  up  of  almoft  all  the
finall  inteftines,  faw  not  only  the  peritonseum  produce  itfelf  into  the  fac,  but
alfo  the  feveral  tendons  of  both  the  oblique,  and  of  both  the  tranfverfe  muf-
cles, and  that  very  evidently  :  and  how  far  Waltherus  faw  thefe  three  ten-
dons alfo  extending  themfelves  in  a  hernia,  and  fuftaining  a  great  weight  of
the  inteftines  •,  though  not  to  be  compar'd  with  that  of  Mery  ;  and  refilling,,
as  far  as  poffible,  the  farther  growth  of  the  hernia  (which  ufe  he  likewife
thinks  theytperform  in  other  hernise,  and  that  not  unfrequently)  you  will  learn>
from  the  Afta  Eruditorum  that  are  publifh'd  atLeipfic  (i;).

But,  although  Mauchartus  {i)  not  only  delineates  a  laming,  arifing  from
the  tendinous  fibres  of  the  external  oblique  mufcle  (i),  but  alfo  propofes  it:
among  the  other  coats  of  the  hernia,  by  the  name  of  tunica  aponeurotica  ;  yet
you  may  eafily  call  to  mind,  how  far  I  have  faid  thefe  are  allow'd  of  by
me.

Nor  does  it  efcape  me,  that  there  are  very  excellent  anatomifts  who  deny
that  thefe  appearances  could  be  feen  in  hernise  difiefted  by  them.

And  as  1  very  readily  give  credit  to  them,  fo  I  fhould  not  be  ready  to  fup-
pofe  that  Mery,  and  Waltherus,  thofe  excellent  difiefters  in  other  hernia  ;•
for  they  did  not  fpeak  of  all ;  could  not,  as  they  made  ufe  of  fo  much  dili-
gence in  that  inquiry,  have  feen  what  they  fay  they  had  feen.

However  ;  to  lay  afide  this  controverfy  in  the  mean  time  -,  there  are  fufE-
eient  examples  Vv^hich  relate  to  thofe  coats,  that  are  univerfally  acknowledg'd.
in  hernias,  to  make  it  appear,  how  the  tefticle  ;  which  has  not  of  itfelf  be-
come fo  tumid  ;  may  feem  to  have  attain'd  to  a  very  confiderable  bulk,  chiefly
from  the  thicknefs  of  thefe  coats  being  increas'd.

There  is  a  fecond  obfervation  of  the  fame  Waltherus,  propos'd  in  the  fame-
adis  (/),  in  which  the  fcrotum,  and  the  penis,  are  defcrib'd  to  be  fo  tumid,,

(0  Epift.  21.  n.  19.  {h)  A.  1738.  M.  Jun.  p.  2.

\j)  Ibid.  n.  15.  (z)  Differt.  &  cat.  fupra  ad  n.  3.  cit.

{e)  Epift.  34.  n.  9.  {k)  Fig.  2.  ad  DD.

(/;  Ibid.  n.  15.  ^/)  A.  1725  M.  Novembr,  cumtab.  5.fig.  I..
(g)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  i70l.obf.
anat.  5.  that.

3


590  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

that  the  latter  extended  itlelf  to  the  knees,  and  the  former  below  them  ;  the
thicknefs  of  each  of  thefe  parts  correfponding  to  this  length.

And  I  do  not  remember  any  obfervation  to  have  been  more  fimilar  here-
to, than  that  which  was  lent  to  me,  in  print,  in  the  year  1755,  from  Syra-
cufa,  and  confirm'd  by  the  public  teftimony  of  the  city.  But  this  was  from
a  living  man ;  and  that  of  Waltherus  was  made  even  on  the  dead  body.

In  this  laft  therefore,  upon  examination,  the  flcin  of  the  fcrotum  was  found
to  be  three  times  as  thick  as  is  natural ;  and  the  cells  that  lay  beneath,  and
went  betwixt  the  tcfticles,  vv-ere  fo  diftended  with  a  tenacious  humour,  as  to
refemble  a  heap  of  inert  flefh;  to  which  the  weight  of  the  whole  tumour,
that  is  to  fay,  of  almoft  fifty  pounds,  feem'd  to  be  principally  owing.

The  teflicles  indeed,  were  much  larger  than  their  natural  fize;  as  the
thicken'd  albuginea  contain'd  a  fluid,  and  tophaceous  concretions,  fo  that
but  a  very  fmall  part,  and  that  in  one  fide  only,  was  left  free  for  the  {lender
tubuli,  which  compofe  the  fubftance  of  the  tellis,  to  occupy.

But  how  very  little  a  part  of  the  general  tumour,  then,  was  form'd  by
thefe  tubuli,  you  very  well  conceive.  That  very  excellent  man  Heifter  (m)
has  therefore  fuppos'd,  with  great  fagacity,  as  he  generally  does,  that  this
was  a  tumour  rather  of  the  Icrotum  than  of  the  tefticle:  nor  did  he  judge
differently  of  fome  others,  the  difleftion  whereof  we  have  not ;  among  which
is  that  of  fixty  pounds  weight,  fpoken  of  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy
of  Sciences  at  Paris  {n).

For  this  very  experienc'd  man  (0)  knew,  that,  even  in  a  hydrocele,  and
efpecially  one  of  long  ftanding,  the  coats  of  the  tefticles,  and  particularly
"  the  dartos,  and  vaginalis,  were  often  very  much  thicken'd  ;"  fo  that  he
had  feen  them  equal  to  the  thicknefs  "  of  five  or  fix  lines,  and  more:"  for
which  reafon  he  has  admonilh'd  us,  that  it  was,  for  the  mofl:  part,  very
difficult  to  perforate  them,"  with  the  point  of  a  triangular  infl:rument ;  and
that  on  this  account  (p),  the  point  of  fuch  an  infl:rument  "  ought  not  to  be
*'  too  haftily  withdrawn,  becaufe  otherwife  the  coats  would  not  be  pierc'd
"  through."

And  indeed,  how  much  the  tunica  albuginea  may  be  thicken'd  in  a  farco-
cele,  he  has,  doubtlefs,  left  us  to  conjedure  •,  when,  after  cutting  into  that
coat,  with  the  expeftation  of  feeing  the  feminal  vefl'els  large,  and  very  much
diftended,  he  found  them  "  equally  fmall  as  they  generally  are  in  a  found
"  and  natural  tefticle,  which,"  fays  he,  "  is  greatly  to  be  wonder'd  at,  in
"  fo  confiderable  a  diftention  of  the  tefticle."

And  that  you  may  have  another  example  of  this  coat  being  thicken'd,  ex-
amine that  figure  of  a  human  tefticle  become  bony,  which  is  given  us  by  the
celebrated  Reinholdus  Wagnerus  (q).  When  you  have  feen  how  much  larger
this  was  than  the  natural  tefticle,  then  obferve  that  the  "  furface"  of  it  only,
"  of  the  thicknefs  of  a  pidgeon's  quill,  had  been  chang'd  into  a  very  hard
"  bone;"  that  externally  it  was  rough  with  bony  tubercles,  of  the  bignefs
of  a  pea-,  but  internally  fmooth -,  where  it  comprehended  a  fmall  cavity,  in
which  "  the  gelatinous  matter  of  the  corrupted  femen  lay  hid."

{m)  DifTert  de  Sarcoele,  §.36.  Cp)  N.  36.

(«)  A.  171 1,  obi",  anat.  I.  CjJ  Eph.  n.  c.  cent,  I.  obf.  30.

("o)  DiiTert.  de  Hydrocele  n.  32.

That


Letter  XLIII. Article  43.  591

That  is  to  fay,  the  fubftance  of  the  teftis,  formerly  included,  was  now  an-
nihilated ;  and  the  bony  furface  was  owing  to  the  tunica  albuginea  being
made  thick.

43.  However,  although  this  letter  is  really  fhortcr  than  the  former,  as-  I
promis'd  you,  I  omit  to  add  other  things  at  prelent,  on  the  fubjeft  of  hernije
and  tefticles  :  and  fliall  not  even  fubjoin  any  thing  in  regard  to  the  pain  of
thefe  parts,  unlefs  that  you  may  read  the  obfervations,  which  I  pointed  out
above  (r),  from  celebrated  authors ;  and  that,  in  thofe  wherein  you  wi!i  find
there  was  pain  ;  and  you  will  find  this  in  many  •,  you  will  attend  to  the  ftate
in  which  the  tefticle  was.

At  the  fame  time,  you  will  readily  learn  from  one  of  them,  which  is  Hei-
fter  (j),  in  what  manner,  not  only  in  that  patient,  but  in  another  alfo,,
whom  Sproegelius  defcribes  (/),  pains  may  be  propagated  from  the  tefticle
to  the  loins.  Nor  do  I  add  any  thing  farther,  though  the  next  fedion,  of
the  Sepulchretum,  is  entitled  de  Tejiiculorum  Dolore.

For  the  whole  of  it,  when  taken  together  with  the  Scholia,  fcarcely  fills
up  two  pages  :  and  therein  ;  to  fay  nothing  of  the  fourth  obfervation,  which
perhaps  may  be  an  abftraft  of  the  firft ;  at  leaft  the  fifth,  as  Bonetus  himfelf
confefies,  is  taken  from  the  fecond  article  of  the  twenty-fecond  obfervation,
of  the  preceding  feftion :  and  of  the  Scholia,  which  he  does  not  confefs,
one  part,  fubjoin'd  to  that  firft  obfervation,  had  already  been  adopted  by
him;  even  where  it  is  moft  openly  contradictory  to  the  circulation  of  the
blood;  and  applied  to  article  the  third,  under  obfervation  the  twenty-firft  of
the  fame  preceding  feftion ;  as  he  alio  here  fubjoins  to  obfervation  the  fe-
cond, a  part  of  the  Scholium  which  he  had  there  fubjoin'd  to  the  twentieth
obfervation.

But  there  alfo,  it  is  not  fo  much  to  be  wonder'd  at,  that  what  had  been
already  plac'd  under  the  fecond  article  of  the  fifteenth  obfervation,  fhould  be
again  repeated  in  obfervation  the  twenty-third,  as  that,  in  one  and  the  fame
page,  what  had  been  juft  faid  in  the  fecond  part  of  the  Scholium,  to  article
the  firft  of  the  twenty-fecond  obfervation,  fliould  be  repeated  in  the  firft
part  of  the  Scholium  to  the  fecond  obfervation.

Nor  would  I  have  you  fay  that  many  things  have,  likewife,  been  repeat-
ed, by  me,  in  this  letter,  which  I  had  already  given  in  others,  when  relate
ing  my  obfervations,  or  thofe  of  Valfalva.  For  it  is  one  thing  to  repeat  what
has  been  already  fufficiently  faid ;  and  another  thing  lightly  to  touch  upon,
in  a  brief  manner,  what  has  been  already  deliver'd  in  other  places ;  in  order
to  prevent  obfervations  from  being  torn  piece-meal,  and  to  make  them  com-
pleat ;  that  the  circumftances  may  be  confider'd  in  a  more  convenient  place,
as  had  often  been  promis'd  there.

This  method,  as  I  hope  you  will  approve  of  it,  I  fhall  preferve ;  and  the
former,  which  I  have  no  doubt  but  you  will  equally  difapprove,  I  fliallj,
without  hefitation,  rejeft. Farewell.

(r)  N.  38.  {t)  Obf,  ibid.  cit.  §.  51.

(4  Differt..  ibi  cit.  §.  30^


L  E  T  T  E


592  Book  IIL Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly,


LETTER the FORT  Y-F  O  U  R  T  H,

'Treats  of  the  Gonorrhoea.


LTHOUGH  there  are,  perhaps,  few  anatomifts  by  whom  fo  many
male  urethrte  have  been  diflefted,  and  accurately  examin'd,  as  by  me  j
yet  it  is  either  much  more  feldom  than  is  commonly  fuppos'd,  that  very
evident  marks  appear,  in  that  canal,  of  difeafes  having  accompanied  the  con-
tao-ious  gonorrhcea ;  or  it  has  happen'd,  by  I  know  not  what  fatality,  that
notwithftanding  fo  great  a  number  of  men  is  infedted  with  this  gonorrhoea^
I  never,  or  fcarcely  ever,  faw  thofe  evident  marks  of  difeafe.

What  happen'd  to  Valfalva  in  this  refpeft  I  do  not  know ;  for  he  did  not
commit  his  remarks  to  writing,  if  he  did  chance  to  find  any  thing  of  this
kind,  in  thofe  who  had  died  while  they  labour'd  under  this  diforder.  What
has  happen'd  to  others  I  have  read.

But  what  I  have  feen  myfelf,  or  not  feen,  I  will  now  write  to  you,  in  fuch
order,  that,  beginning  from  the  external  orifice  of  the  urethra,  I  fhall  go  on
to  the  internal  orifice  which  is  at  the  bladder.

2.  When,  in  the  Adverfaria  (a),  I  gave  my  reafons  why  the  firft  feat  of
the  virulent  gonorrhoea  feem'd,  to  me,  to  confift  chiefly  in  thofe  larger  canali-
culi  of  the  urethra,  which  I  had  difcover'd,  I  did  not  omit  this  among
others,  that  from  thefe  fmall  canals,  for  the  moft  part,  when  irritated  by  the
acquifition  of  any  malignant  habit,  that  humour,  which  generally  diftils  from
the  urethra,  in  the  firft  ftage  of  this  difeafe,  might  proceed.

For  this  humour  is  not  true  femen,  as  a  comparifon  of  it  therewith,  has
fometimes  taught  even  thofe  very  perfons,  who,  led  afide  by  a  falfe  opinion,
often  made  ufe  of  venery,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  difeafe :  and  as  I  have
been  thus  inform'd,  even  by  the  perfons  themfelves,  fo  I  have  often  been  af-
fur'd  by  others,  that  in  this  firft  ftage  of  the  difeafe,  there  is  nor,  as  yet,
any  troublefome  fenfation  in  the  perineum,  which  fhows  the  diforder  to  have
delcended  any  deeper.

Nor  again,  is  that  which  is  difcharg'd  true  pus :  as  the  pain  is  not  yet  of
that  kind  which  argues  an  erofion  -,  nor  has  any  even  the  (lighteft  tinfture,
nor  the  leaft  drop,  of  blood  ever  yet  appear'd.

To  thefe  things  I  think  it  would  be  now  proper,  to  add  the  obfervations
of  that  very  great  man  Senac  {i>),  according  to  which  the  globules  of  matter,

(a)  IV.  Animad.  9.  (ij  Traite  du  Cceur  Supplcm.  c.  8.  n,  5.

that


Letter  XLIV. Article  2.  593

tliat  is  difcharg'd  in  a  gonorrhoea,  are  very  large  -,  but  the  globules  which
compofe  the  pus  of  ulcers,  are  very  fmall  and  unequal  •,  it'  they  are  look'd  at
with  both  the  eyes,  when  furnilli'd  with  the  mofl:  exquifite  glafles,  and  are
Gompar'd  with  the  globules  of  the  blood.

Following  Rondelet  therefore  in  particular-,  who  cautioufly  and  prudently,
as  you  have  it  in  the  Sepukhretum  (c),  has  faid  that  this  matter  "  bore  a  re-
"  femblance  to  pus,"  or  "  was  fimilar  to  pus  •,"  I  have  alfo  call'd  it  "  puri-
"  form."

This  fituation  of  the  gonorrhoea  in  the  canaliculi  pleas'd  feveral  authors,  I
do  not  fay  CockburnC^) ;  for  this  author,  though  in  other  refpefts  a  learned
man,  was  even  immoderately  pleas'd  with  it-,  but  I  fay  the  great  Boerhaave
(e),  and  the  illuftrious  Haller  (f),  who  acknowledge  "  the  Teat  of  the  firfl:
"  fpecies  of  the  gonorrhoea"  to  be  in  thefe  parts ;  and  that,  by  irritation  being
at  length  chang'd  into  erofion  of  the  corpus  fpongiofum  urethrse,  which  is
divided  from  thefe  canaliculi  only  by  a  membrane,  blood  itfelf  frequently
flows  out.

It  has  alfo  pleas'd  other  very  learned  men,  who  mark  out  thefe  fmaH  ca-
nals by  the  name  of  cellule  multiplices :  with  which,  however,  I  do  not  very
well  underfland,  how  they  alfo  comprehend  the  gland  of  Litrre;  or  how  they
can  afcribe  to  him,  who  never  mention'd  any  thing  of  canaliculi,  the  ob-
servation of  thefe  being  affefted  in  a  gonorrhoea  ;  as  if  this  were  read  in  the
Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris,  for  the  year  171 1.

But,  in  regard  to  the  canaliculi  of  the  urethra  in  women,  which  were  dc-
fcrib'd  by  me  (g),  in  the  fame  manner  as  thofe  in  the  urethra  of  men  ;  and
in  regard  to  the  febaceous  glands,  which  I,  in  like  manner,  found  in  the
nymphs,  and  the  neighbouring  labia  {h) ;  the  laft  of  which  go  under  the  very
name  of  glands,  and  the  former  under  the  appellation  of  cells ;  I  will  not
fpeak  of  them  here  for  this  reafon  ;  that  as  I  have  never  happen'd  to  light  on
women,  who  labour'd  under  a  kind  of  external  gonorrhcea,  or  were  troubled
with  an  internal,  when  they  died ;  I  cannot  determine  whether  this  latter
has  its  fituation  fometimes  in  thefe  canals,  or  the  former  in  thofe  glands.

Nor  have  I  been  more  happy  in  men-,  fo  as  to  meet  with  thofe  who  were
infeded  with  the  fame  external  gonorrhoea,  which  the  phyf.cians  of  Mont-
pelier  are  faid  to  have  formerly  call'd  "  fpurious  ;"  that  I  might  inquire  whe-
ther the  matter  of  this  external  gonorrhoea  came  from  the  furface  of  the
glans,  without  being  affefted  with  any  ulcer,  or  from  the  glands  of  the  coro-
na of  this  glans-,  that  the  opinion  of  Lictre  might  be  confirm'd,  who  takes
thofe  granules  of  the  corona  for  glands,  and  not  for  papillse,  as  Ruyfch
did  (0.

I  fay  the  opinion  of  Littre ;  nor  was  it  ever  mine :  for  when  I  took  notice
of  that,  I  witheld  my  affent  from^both,  in  order  to  malvc  a  more  ftrift  inqui-
ry -,  fo  that  I  cannot  help  wondering  there  fliould  be  any  one,  who,  after  hav-
ing read  my  firfl  (k)  and  fourth  Adverfaria  (/},  fliould  afcribe  the  former  opi-

(c)  Seft.  hac  31.  1.  3.  in  Schol.  ad  obf.  i.  (h)  Adverfi.  n.  ii.  &  12.

(dj  The  Symptoms,  &c.  of  a  Gonorrhcea,  (0  Hill,  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  1722.  obf.

ch.  4.  anat.  4.

(?)  Prffilea.  .ad  Inftit.  §.  654.  (kj  N. 11.

(f)  Not.  i  ad  eum  locupi,  &  nota  a',§.  657.  (/)  Animad  14.  in  fin.

{g)  Adverf.  4,  animad.  24.

Vol.  II.  4  G  nion


594-  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

nion  to  me ; and even  fhould  affert,  that  a  "  celebrated  controverfy  had
" arifen,  betwixt  Ruyfch  and  Morgagni,"  upon  this  fubjed.

For  though  it  is  true  indeed,  that  this  fell  from  Ruyfch  (»«),  that  thefe
granules  "  had  been  defcrib'd,  and  delineated,  as  glands,"  by  me ;  yet  as  I
hop'd  that  every  one  would  eafily  perceive,  from  my  Adverfaria,  that  this
excellent  old  man  had  been  fo  much  taken  up  with  other  things,  as  not  fuf-
nciently  to  comprehend  my  opinion,  I  thought  it  quite  fuperfluous  to  an-
fwer  him,  even  by  a  line.  And  this  is  the  whole  of  that  "  celebrated  con-
"  troverfy."

Much  more  rare  than  thefe  external  gonorrhoeas,  is  that  which  the  cele-
brated Wolff  (k)  favv  and  cur'd.  For  a  humour  diftill'd  from  the  urethra  that
■was  "  analogous  to  femen  •,"  being  at  firft  white,  and  after  that  green ;  with
very  great  pains  in  making  water,  and  an  incurvation  of  the  penis  ;  and  yet
was  not  the  confequence  of  impure  venery,  nor  of  any  venery  at  all  -,  but
this  gonorrhoea  proceeded  from  other  cauies  that  he  enumerates  :  and  this  is
nor  only  afierted  by  him,  but  is  fhown  by  the  cure  itfelf,  as  Hippocrates  (o)
fays :  that  is  to  fay,  by  the  cure  being  brought  on  eafily,  and  fpeedily,  by
the  adminiftration  of  fuch  remedies,  as  were  oppofite  to  thefe  caufes.

But  to  pafs  over  this  gonorrhoea,  and  that  which  is  caWed Jicca  or  dry;  or
as  it  ought  properly  to  be  call'd,  according  to  the  monitum  of  the  celebrated
Aftruc  (p),  the  dry  venereal  dyfuria;  I  muft  contract  my  difcourfe,  and  come
to  that  which  is  the  moft  frequent,  whereof  I  had  begun  to  treat.

Wherefore,  what  1  had  in  my  power  to  fee  by  diffeftions,  you  will  learn
from  the  obfervations  that  I  fhall  immediately  fubjoin  -,  beginning  with  a
pretty  long  hiftory,  but  fuch  a  one  as  will  be  the  more  pleafing  to  you,  be-
caufe,  when  I  made  fome  flight  mention  of  the  angina,  on  a  former  occafion
(q),  I  greatly  complain'd,  that,  in  a  very  violent  diforder  of  this  kind,  dif-
fedtions  of  fuch  perfons  who  died  of  it,  were  ilill  wanting.

Therefore,  that  which  was,  even  then  wanting  with  me,  you  will  here  have
in  the  firft  place  •,  and  laft  of  all,  thofe  things  that  relate  to  the  fubjeft  of
this  letter  will  not  be  omitted  from  the  fame  hiftory.

3.  A  carpenter,  about  three  and  thirty  years  of  age,  tall,  large  in  body,  and
of  a  pretty  fat  habit ;  having  been,  as  far  as  could  be  learn'd,  in  good  health
before  ;  being  immoderately  heated  by  wine,  and  by  the  fire,  went  home  in-
the  night,  in  a  very  cold  feafon.

Being  there  feiz'd  with  a  violent  fever,  and  an  angina,  a  phyfician  was  fent.
for,  on the  very  fame  night,  and  blood  was  taken  from his arm. As  the
diicafe  did  not  at  all  remit,  he  was  brought  into  the  hofpital  in  the  morning  :
where  the  fame  remedy  was  repealed,  but  with  fo  little  effeft,  that  in  the  af-
ternoon blood  was  taken  from  his  foot.

On  the  next  day,  when  the  other  remedies ;  which  had  been  before  given,
internally,  to  be  fwallow'^d  (lowly  as  well  as  he  could-,  and  thofe  which  were
then  made  ufe  of,  both  internally  and  externally,  had  been  equally  of  no  ef-
feft  ;  blood  was  again  taken  from  his  arm  in  the  morning,  and  at  noon  from


{m)  Thef.  anat.  lo.  n.  98.  fo)  SeSt.  2.  aph.  17.

C/iJ  Commerc,  Litter,  a. 1742.  hebd.  47. CpJ  De  Morb.  Vener.  1.  3.  c.  3.
R.  2.  (£)  Epift.  14.  n.  39,


the


Letter  XLIV. Article  3.  595

the  veins  under  the  tongue  :  for  the  jugular  could  not  be  open'd,  thouo-h
the  phyficians  wifh'd  to  have  it  done,  the  patient  not  being  able  to  bear  the
fituation  requir'd.

After  all  thefe  remedies,  the  fever  and  anxiety  were  not  only  not  decreas'd,
but  even  greatly  increas'd ;  and  with  thefe  the  difficulty  of  fwallowing,  fpeak-
ing,  and  breathing,  at  the  fame  time;  when,  on  the  third  day  of  the  dif-
eale,  the  patient  faying  that  he  had  labour'd  under  a  virulent  gonorrhoea,  for
fifteen,  or,  at  leaft,  not  many  more  days,  the  vein  of  his  foot  ^vas  ao-ain
open'd.

The  blood  which  had  been  taken  away  fo  many  times  never  had  any  cruft
on  the  topv  but  was  always  fomewhat  hard,  and  had  very  little  ferum.  His
neck  was  tumid  in  fome  meafure  -,  but  not  his  face,  which  was  not  even  red.

About  two  hours  after  the  laft  ven^feftion  in  the  foot,  although  the  pulfe
ftill  remain'd  ftrong,  yet  the  patient  himfelf  perceiv'd  death  to  be  at  hand.
And  this  did  really  attack  him  on  the  fame  third  day,  about  noon;  yet  in
fuch  a  manner,  that  it  might  feem  to  have  come  on  accidentally.

For  having  afl-c'd  for  the  gargle  which  he  made  ufe  of,  and,  perhaps,  in-
cautioufly  taken  more,  into  his  fauces,  than  he  intended,  he  immediately
died,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  they  vi'ho  ftood  by  him,  thought  him  fufFocated
from  thence.

As  the  day  was  at  hand,  on  which  I  was  to  begin  teaching  anatomy  in  the
theatre  ;  that  is,  the  nineteeth  of  January,  in  the  year  1 748  ;  the  body,  though
kept  two  or  three  days,  was,  neverthelefs,  exceedingly  proper  for  demon-
flrations ;  as  the  feafon  of  the  year  was  fo  extremely  cold,  that  I  could  even
make  ufe  of  fome  parts  of  iron  the  twenty-fixth  day  after  death.

The  whole,  therefore,  being  diffedled  accurately,  and  in  order,  offer'd
fome  things  to  our  obfervation,  which  do  not  belong  to  this  place  ;  and  thefe
in  particular  which  I  fhail  give  you  here,  beginning  from  the  parts  lall  dif-
fered, and  going  on  to  the  firft.

The  veffels  of  the  cerebrum,  both  external  and  internal,  and  not  only
within  the  ventricles,  but  alfo  here  and  there,  through  the  medullary  fub-
ftance,  were  diftended  with  blood  ;  but  ftill  m^ore  they  that  creep  through
the  left  fide  of  the  pia  mater.  This  membrane,  like  all  the  other  membranes
of  this  body,  whether  you  endeavour'd  to  cut  into  it,  or  cut  it  afunder,
gave  more  refiftance  than  ufual.  In  the  lateral  ventricles  was  a  fmall  quan-
tity of  fomewhat-bloody  water.

The  tongue  feem'd  to  be  thicker  than  is  natural :  and,  at  leaft,  (howM
the  veflels  that  go  upon  its  upper  furface,  from  the  bafis  towards  the  apex,
to  be  fomewhat  thicken'd  from  the  ftagnating  blood,  hot  to  fay  manifeft.  The
uvula  and  the  palatum  mobile  were  found.

The  tonfils,  however,  not  only  had  the  membrane,  with  which  they  are
cover'd,  become  very  thick,  from  a  ftagnation  of  yellow  ferum  therein ;  fo
as  to  referable  a  kind  of  yellowifh  jelly ;  but  they  alfo  were  fwell'd,  and  the
left  ftill  more  than  the  right,  as  it  was  very  hard,  and,  if  you  prefs'd,  or  cut
it, difcharg'd  pus.

As  to  the  neighbouring  larynx,  not  only  the  cartilages  thereof,  but  alfo
the  proper  mufcles,  each  of  which  I  examin'd  feparatcly,  were  without  any
.difcale  or  inflammation. But  there  was  a  diibrder  in  the  membrane,  with

4  G  2  which


59^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

which  the  larynx  is  invefled,  both  internally  and  externally  :  internally  the
diforder  was  flight,  but  externally  very  con fiderable.

For  internally  it  was  fomewhat  redder  than  ufual ;  as  in  the  neighbouring
part  of  the  afpera  arteria  alfo  •,  and  fomewhat  fwell'd,  but  flightly ;  fo  that  the
chinck  of  the  glottis  did  not  feem  to  be  made  narrower  thereby.  But  where
the  fame  membrane  clos'd  the  epiglottis,  both  on  its  hollow,  and  convex,
furface,  and  even  on  its  fides  alfo,  it  was  tumid  -,  being  in  feme  places  of  a
bright  red  colour,  and  in  other  places  of  a  bright  red  degenerating  into  brown;
yet  lefs  on  the  hollow  furface,  than  elfewhere  -,  nor  on  the  whole  of  that,  but
only  on  the  upper  third  part  of  it.

By  cutting  into  this  part,  it  was  plain  that  this  tumour,  and  colour,  were
owing  to  blood  and  ferum  which  diftended  nothing  but  the  membrane,  and
the  glandular  bodies  that  were  join'd  to  it ;  a  part  of  which  fluids  already  be-
gan to  be  converted  into  pus  on  the  convex  furface.  Moreover,  where  the
fame  membrane  covers  the  larynx,  externally,  on  the  back-part,  that  mem-
brane, and  the  glandular  bodies,  which  it  envelopes,  were  aftefted  with  a.
very  confiderable  inflammation,  efpecially  on  the  fides.

For  on  each  fide  it  rais'd  itfelf  up  into  a  protuberance,  nearly  of  the  thick-
ncfsofa  man's  little  finger.  Thefe  protuberances,  proceeding  from  the  re-
gion of  the  bafis  of  the  cartilagp  cricoides,  at  its  lower  parts,  and  converg-
ing, as  they  afcended,  came  fo  far,  as  fomewhat  to  exceed  the  height  of  the
arytenoid  cartilages ;  being  however  entirely  unconnedled  with  thefe  cartilages,
and  that  upper  part  of  the  larynx,  though  they  adher'd  to  the  remaining
and  inferior  part.

You  would  have  faid  that  they  were  two  inflam'd  condylomata,  confidering
their  fliape  and  colour,  which  was  the  fame  with  that  I  have  defcrib'd  in  the
glottis;  except  that,  in  thefe  protuberances,  it  was  more  of  the  bright  red,,
and  lefs  of  the  brown.

But  in  diflfeding  them,  I  faw  that  they  confifl:ed  of  the  membrane,  with
its  glandular  l»odies,  tumid  from  ftagnating  blood  and  ferum  ;  and  that  mofl:
on  the  left  fide  :  which  fide  was  moft  afi"e(5ted,  as  I  have  faid  was  the  cafe  in
the  tonfils  alfo,  and  the  pia  mater.  Thus  you  have  the  befl;  account  1  can
give  you,  of  the  feat,  and  nature,  of  this  angina.

In  the  thorax  the  lungs  were  neither  turgid  nor  inflam'd  -,  but  quite  found':
although,  as  I  faid  of  the  other  membranes,  thofe  of  which  thefe  vifcera  are
c-onilruded,  refifted  more  than  ufual,  when  cut  into,  or  drawn  afunder -,  and
the  left  lobe  had  been  very  clofely  connected  with  the  pleura:  whereas  the
right  was  quite  free  andunconnefted.

In  the  pericardium  was  a  little  redifli  water  •,  which,  certainly,  had  not  been
thus  ting'd  by  blood  being  m.ix'd  with  it  in  the  dilTeftion  :  for  this  water  was
concreted,  by  the  force  of  cold,  into  lamellas,  which  were  internally  red.

In  the  heart,  which  was  preternaturally  enlarged,  or  at  leaft  feem'd  to  be
very  large,  in  proportion  to  the  body-,  which  was  itfelf  large;  nothingpoly-
pouswasfeen: nor  was  any  appearance  of  this  kind  found  elfewhere,  but  a,
fmall  quantity  of  black  blood,  and  this  neither  too  fluid,  nor  concreted.

The  large  artery  had  many  marks  of  difeafe,  from  the  valves  that  are  pre-

fix'd  to  it,  which  like  the  other  parts  of  the  heart  were  found  almofl:  quite

to  the  celiac  artery; and  thofe  very  evident. For  it,  was  white  here  and

5  there  J


Letter  XLIV. Artide  4.  597

diere,  internally,  with  certain  fpots,  though  not  very  frequent,  nor  yet  verg-
ing to  a  bony  hardnefs.

Internally  alfo,  if  you  except  the  places  of  the  fpots,  its  furface  was
fcarcely  any  where  white,  but  of  a  red  colour  inclining  to  brown  -,  and  not
fhining,  and  fmooth,  as  it  generally,  and  naturally  is,  but  unequal  with  cer-
tain fmall,  and  low  excrefcences,  of  the  colour  that  I  have  already  faid,  both
internally  and  externally  ;  but  of  a  different  form  and  magnitude  ;  yet  fo  that
you  might  cover  the  largeft  of  them  with  a  lupin,  the  figure  of  which  they
nearly  refembl'd.

When  you  look'd  on  them,  you  would  fuppofe  them  to  be  foft;  but  when
you  cut  into  them,  you  would  find  them  to  be  no  lefs  hard  than  the  parietes
of  the  artery.  This  diforder  was  fo  much  the  greater  in  proportion,  the  lefs
the  artery  receded  from  the  heart ;  yet  did  not  extend  itfclf  into  the  carotids,
and  fubclavians,  nor  below  the  cseliac  :  below  which,  even  that  firft-men-
tion'd  difeafe  of  the  white  fpots  became  much  lefs  and  lefs.

Befides  thefe  appearances,  all  the  parietes  of  the  artery  were  harder  than
they  naturally  are.  Finally,  the  fourth  finus  of  Valfalva  was  clearly,  though
not  in  any  great  degree,  larger  than  is  natural.

And  this  I  alfo  obferv'd  in  the  feptum  of  thevenous  finuffes  of  the  heart  ;
or,  if  you  pleafe, in  the  feptum  of  the  auricles  of  the  heart:  on the  furface.-
which  is  turn'd  towards  the  pulmonary  vein,  and  comes  forwards,  it  was  hol-
low'd  out  with  parallel  furrows,  which  were  not  very  fmall.

In  the  belly  ;  the  vifcera  of  which  had  grown  hard  from  the  froft,  the  bile
itfelf  having,  in  fome  meafure,  freez'd  within  its  veficle,  and  the  blood  itfelf
within  the  fpleen  ;  I  found  nothing  that  was  contrary  to  the  common  ap-
pearances of  nature,  if  you  except  a  globule  in  the  mefentery,  near  to  its
edge,  that  refembl'd  nothing  more  in  its  form,  colour,  and  magnitude,  than:
a  pretty  large  boil'd  egg  :  I  mean  one.  of  thofe  which  are  protuberant  in  the
ovarium  of  a- hen.

This  was  nothing  but  fat,  yet  of  a  more  yellov/  colour  than  the  reft,  and
comprehended  within  one  membrane  only,  form'd  into  the  lliape  of  a  fpheri-
cal  bladder ;  without  any  membranous  lamella, that  could  be  obferv'd  to-
run  in  betwixt.

By  reafon  of  the  patient's  fpontaneous  confelTion,  in  relation  to  the  gonor--
rhcEa,  I  examin'd  the  whole  of  the  urethra  very  accurately. The  proftatc
gland  might  have  feem'd  to  be  larger  than  it  ought  to  be,  if  it  had  no: been
join'd,  as  in  a  large  body,,  with  a  large  penis  alfo.

This  gland  was, found,  the  caruncle  was  found,  the  veficulas.feminale3,  the
femen,  and  the  orifices,  through  which  this  fluid  is  exprefs'd  from  the  vefi-
cles,  were  in  a- natural  fbate.  And  even  our  canaliculi  fiiow'd  no  peculiar.
appearances-,  except  that  the  internal  furface  of  the  urethra  feem'd  to  be.
fomewhat  moifter,  and  more  red,  than  ufual.

One  of  Cowper's glands  was  wanting,  which  is  a  circunjftance  not  very
rare;  and  the  fubftance  of,  the  other  was  chang'd  into  a.hard  and  firm  bodvj.
fo  as  to  refemble  a  ligament.

4.  Not  to  digrefs,  then,  too  far  from  the  fubjeft  of  this  letter;  I  omit
thofe  circumftances  relative  to  the  angina,  and  the  peculiar appearances  ob-
ferv'd in  the  aorta:  I  fay  I  omit  the  confideration  of  thefe  and  other  circum-
ftances j-.


59^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

ftances ; and attend only to thofe  which  have  a  reference to the go-
norrhoea.

If  you  fet  afide  the  confideration  of  Cowper's  gland  being  become  hard,
■which  is  a  circumftance,  that,  if  it  relates  to  the  gonorrhoea  at  all,  certainly
does  not  relate  to  a  recent  one,  and  therefore,  of  courfe,  not  to  a  prefent  go-
norrhoea •,  you  plainly  fee  that  nothing  can  be  refer'd  to  this,  befides  the  in-
creas'd  fecretion  of  humour  in  the  canals:  from  whence  the  furface  of  the
turethra  was  very  moift,  and,  from  the  ilrongly  irritating  nature  of  the  fame
humour,  redder  than  natural.  To  this  fubjeft  may  be  refer'd  what  I  faw  in
another  man,  when  profecuting  a  different  inquiry.

5.  About  the  end  of  JVlarch,  in  the  year  1741,  I  diflefled,  carefully,  in
the  hofpital,  the  body  of  a  man,  who,  having  been  carried  off  by  an  inflam-
mation of  the  thorax,  was  a  very  proper  fubjedt  for  mufcular  demonftrations,
and  the  examination  of  other  parts  of  that  kind.

I  made  it  my  bufinefs,  then,  to  inquire  into  natural,  and  not  preternatural
appearances ;  when,  being  about  to  infpeft  the  tefticles,  in  one  of  which  I
found  what  has  been  taken  notice  of  in  the  preceding  letter  (r),  I  happen'd  to
obferve,  that,  by  comprefling  the  glans  penis,  a  little  matter  came  forth  from
the  orifice  of  the  urethra.

I  immediately  open'd  this  canal,  in  that  part  which  hung  on  the  outfide  of
the  body,  together  with  the  penis ;  fufpefting  that  the  man  had  labour'd  un-
der a  gonorrhoea.  Yet  except  a  dilute  red  colour  with  which  the  internal  fur-
face  of  that  canal  was  ting'd,  and  a  kind  ofmoifture,  greater  than  natural,  I
could  not  fee  any  thing  that  related  to  this  fufpicion.

As  I  defer'd  the  difleftion  of  the  remaining  part  of  the  urethra  to  another
day,  I  was  fo  taken  up  with  other  obfcrvations,  as  frequently  happens,  that
I  forgot  to  profecute  the  prefent,  in  order  to  render  it  compleat.

6.  Yet  here  there  had  been  nothing  more  than  a  fufpicion.  Attend  now
then  to  what  I  found  when  there  certainly  was  a  gonorrhoea,  though  not  a
recent  one.

7.  A  young  man,  of  five  and  twenty  years  of  age,  whofe  face  was  of  a
yellow  colour,  had  renew'd  a  virulent  gonorrhoea  of  a  long  ftanding,  by  a
more  recent  one,  within  fix  m.onths.  And  while  this  condnued,  he  loft  fo
much  blood,  and  fo  frequently,  from  a  deep  wound  infiifted  on  the  left  fide
of  the  neck,  that  he  fell  an  inevitable  facrifice  to  death,  in  the  beginning  of
the  year  1740.

The  body  being  almoft  bloodlefs,  by  reafon  of  the  foregoing  hsemorrhages  ;
and,  on  that  account,  very  fit  for  anatomical  inquiries  j  it  was  diffeded  in
the  fame  place  as  the  former,  in  the  prefence  of  many  auditors,  with  fo
much  the  more  accuracy,  as  it  had  but  very  few  things  differing  from  the
natut;al  ftrudlure  :  and  thefe  I  will  give  you  the  relation  of,  before  I  fpeak  of
the  urethra.

In  the  lateral  ventricles  of  the  brain,  together  with  the  plexus  choroides,
which,  for  the  reafon  I  faid  before,  were  pallid,  was  a  little  not  very  limpid
water.  The  wound  of  the  neck  reach'd,  in  its  utmoft  bounds,  to  fome  con-
iiderable  branches  of  blood-vefi:els,  not  far  from  the  middle  vertebras  of  the

jieck.

()■)  Epift.  4v  n.  30.  S:4i.

'.X  The


Letter  XLIV. Article  8.  599

The  belly  contain'd  an  indurated  liver;  the  lobules  being  very  evidently
confpicuous  j  and  a  large  fpleen.

When  we  came  to  the  genitals ;  on  infpeftlng  the  preputium,  the  glans,
and  the  whole  of  the  urethra,  very  attentively,  I  found  no  mark  of  ulcer,^  >
erofion,  or  rednefs  in  any  part  •,  nor  any  thing  elfe  that  related  to  the  prefent
gonorrhoea,  if  you  except  a  greater  moifture  than  ufual,  reaching  from  the
middle  of  the  urethra,  quite  to  the  glans.

But  to  that  old,  and  long-continu'd  gonorrhoea,  I  fuppos'd  thefe  things  to
relate ;  firflr,  that,  almoft  from  the  place  where  the  moifture  began,  an  ob-
long whitifh  line  was  prominent,  tending,  obliquely,  towards  the  farther
parts  of  the  urethra  :  which  line  I  have  already  taken  notice  of  in  the  forty-
fecond  letter  (s),  and  confider'd  as  the  remains  of  an  excrefcence  of  flefh,  that
had  been  formerly  luxuriant :  in  the  fecond  place,  although  I  obferv'd  no-
thing preternatural  in  the  colour,  and  fubftance,  of  the  proftrate  gland,  and
the  caruncle  itfelf;  yet  of  the  orifices,  whereby  the  femen  is  thrown  out  into
the  urethra,  the  left  was  deftroy'd,  or  at  leaft  choak'd  up  and  become  blind-,
and  the  right  [o  narrow,  that  I  could  fcarcely  fee  it,  and  with  difficulty  in-
tToduc'd  a  briftle:  I  alfo  found  the  veficuls  feminales  fo  contrafted  and>
Ihrivel'd,  that  you  might  fuppofe  them  to  contain  nothing ;  and  this  did,  in
faft,  appear  to  every-body,  whereas,  by  even  preffing  them  very  frequently,.
nothing  was  difcharg'd  through  that  right  orifice  of  which  I  fpoke  juft  now  ;,
yet  in  the  tefticles  was  found  no  diforder  that  was  obvious  to  the  fenfes :  final-
ly, to  omit  that  there  was  fcarcely  any  trace  of  Cowper's  glands ;  for  they
may,  as  I  have  already  faid  (/j,  be  wanting  from  the  original  formation;
none  of  my  fmall  canals,  except  one  that  was  narrow  and  fhort,  did  at  all
appear  ;  fo  that  I  was  under  a  neceffity  of  accounting  for  this  moifture  (which
I  have  been  wont  to  deduce  from  thefe  chiefly,  but  not  wholly)  principally
from  thofe  very  fmall  ones,  which  were  known  before  I  difcover'd  mine :
neither  of  which,  however,  "  were  formerly  well  known  to  Euftachius,'*  al-
though an  excellent,  and  humane  young  man  affirms  it,  and  fays  that  the-
"  tables  of  this  author  fhow  it:"  but  I  take  for  granted  that  you  will  believe
the  contrary  for'ia  long  time,  if  you  continue  to  give  credit  to  me,  till  the
numbers  of  thofe  tables,  which  fhow  it,  are  pointed  out.

8.  You  will  perhaps  be  furpriz'd,  that,  in  the  obfervations  in  queftion,,
wherein  a  gonorrhoea  was  prefent,  no  other  mark  had  occur'd  to  me,  that
could  be  refer'd  to  the  prefent  diforder,  but  a  moifture  of  the  urethra,  fome-
timesjoin'd  with  a  rednefs ;  fince,  to  omit  the  obfervation  of  Terraneus  (a)
of  a  urethra  "  being  entirely  livid  from  inflammation,  and  of  the  clifgregatcd"
"  glands"  therein,  which  with  us  are  the  very  fmall  canals,  "  being  immo-
'^  derately  fwell'd ;"  even  in  this  firft  part  of  the  urethra,  whereof  we  fpcak,
Vefalius  (x)  has  aflTerted  that  the  foflTula,  or  lacuna,  which  is  within  the  glans,
"  is  very  much  infefted  with  ulcers"  in  this  difeafe  ;  v/hich  is  confirm'd  by
others  alfo,  and  particularly  by  the  celebrated  Aftruc  (y),  who  fays,  that  iir
this  fofi"ula  "  it  is  found,  that  very  confiderable  ulcerations,  for  the  mdft  part,
"  are  latent."

(j)  N.  41.  (x)  De  Corp.  Hum.  Fabr.  f.  5.  c.  14.

CtJ  Aderf.  anat.  4.  animad.  15;  (/j  De  Mori*.  Vener.  1.  3.  c,  i.  §.  2.

(uj  De  Glandul.  poft.  c.  5.  obf.  5.

For


v6oo  ^ook  III. Of  Difeafes  af  tKe  Belly.

For  this  very  thing  was  one  of  thofe  appearances,  which  I  wonder'd  had
never  occur'd  to  me-,  particularly,  as  I  had  fo  many  times  heard  the  com-
plaints, inpatients  of  this  kind,  of  a  very  fevere  pain  affedting  them,  in  that
part,  "  to  a  remarl<able  degree,  while  they  difcharge  their  urine,"  to  ufe  the
words  of  Vefalius ;  fince  Terraneus  (z)  does  not,  as  others,  and  among  thefe
Aftruc  (rt),  make  mention  of  a  Iharp,  and  burning  pain,  "  at  the  time  of
"  making  water,"  but  even  fays,  "  that  it  is,  for  the  moft  part,  fcarcely  per-
"  ceiv'd"  at  this  time:  yet  that,  "when  the  patient  has  finifh'd  to  dif-
*'  charge  his  urine,  there  is  a  violent  burning  through'  all  the  tradl  of
"  the  urethra,  and  particularly  where  it  terminates  in  the  gians."

Which  pain,  that  follows  making  water,  I  do  not  for  this  reafon  diminifh ;
but  I  fay  that  I  have  heard  the  greateft  complaints  of  that  pain  which  accom-
panies the  difcharge,  fo  as  to  have  lit  on  fome  perfons,  who  affirm'd  that  they
vrould  not  difcharge  their  urine  ;  unlefs  I  could,  by  fome  opportune  remedy,
-alleviate  the  torture,  wherewith  they  were,  at  that  time,  affedted.

And  I  fatisfied  the  defires  of  thefe  perfons,  not  only  by  diminifliing  the  ac-
rimony of  the  urine,  as  far  as  poffible,  but,  particularly,  by  a  method  not  far
unlike  that  of  Arantius  {b) ;  who  taught  thofe  that  were  affefled  with  a  vio-
lent pain,  and  forenefs,  from  the  haemorrhoids,  how  to  difcharge  their  excre-
ments with  lefs  torture  of  the  inteftines,  by  fitting  upon  a  clofeflool  full  of
a  hot,  oily,  and  watry  fluid  •,  by  the  fomentation  of  which,  the  anus,  not  only
when  (hut,  would  be  foften'd  and  relax'd,  but  foon  after,  alfo,  when  open'd
to  emit  the  contents  of  the  inteftines.

That  is  to  fay,  I  have  taught  them  to  let  the  penis  down  into  a  glafs
chamber-pot,  half-full  of  warm  milk ;  and,  after  having,  by  degrees,  miti-
gated the  pain  in  fome  meafure,  by  that  fomentation,  to  let  their  urine  come
from  them  gradually,  and  without  impetus ;  ftill  keeping  the  penis  immers'd
in  the  milk.

There  have  been  fome,  who,  when  inftead  of  milk  (the  ufe  of  which  in  this
-manner  I  afterwards  faw  was  taken  notice  of  even  by  Riolanus  {c),  as  alfo  the
introduction  of  a  fliort  leaden  or  filver  pipe,  which  our  Fabricius  {d)  had  in-
vented) ;  there  have  been  fome,  I  fay,  who,  when  inftead  of  milk,  oil  recently
exprefs'd  from  linfeed  was  at  at  hand,  have  chofen  to  make  ufe  of  this.

And  on  both  fides  it  is  affirm'd,  that  great  advantage  has  been  receiv'd
from  thefe  applications :  thefe  laft  having  added  this  circumftance  alfo,  that
when  the  preputium  was  tumid  and  painful,*' the  pain,  and  tumour,  of  that
part  had  been  diflipated  in  the  courfe  of  one  fingle  day,  by  keeping  it  in  this
kind  of  fomentation.

But  this  by  the  way ;  which  you  may  render  ftill  more  ufeful,  by  diftin-
guiftiing  cafes,  and  boiling  ingredients  in  the  milk,  fuitable  to  the  particular
cafe. Let  us  return  then  to  our  fubjeft.

Although  Vcfalius,  and  others,  have  faid  what  is  true  -,  yet  not  all  gonorr-
:hoeas,  nor  at  all  times,  have  the  fame  acrimony.  It  has  indeed  happen'd,
which  is  a  very  furprizing  thing,  that  none  have  ever  been  met  with  by  me,

4i)  Loc.  cit.  ,  (c)  Anthropogr.  1.  2.  c.  30.

iVO  C.  cit.  §.  3.  y)  De  Chirurg.  oper.iiljide Penis  Cbir.

[b)  De  Tumor,  p.  n.  c.  6c.


Letter  XLIV. Article  9.  601

in  difledion,  but  flight  ones ;  or  that  I  have  met  with  them  only  at  their
milder  ftage.  Yet  I  have  often  lit  on  I'uch  traces,  as  fufficiently  fhow'd  v/hat
injuries  I  Ihould  have  found,  even  in  this  firft  part  of  the  urethra  •,  if  I  had
diiiefted  thefe  canals  when  they  were  moil  affefted  thereby.

9.  For  you  read  jull  now  (e),  that  in  the  young  man  who  had  been  af<-
feded  with  an  inveterate  gonorrhoea,  no  more  than  one  of  my  canaliculi  was
left,  and  that  this  was  narrow  and  fliort.  No  more  than  one,  iikewife,  ap-
pear'd  in  a  certain  porter ;  whofe  cafe  (as  he  fell  from  a  great  height,  and
died  in  confequence  of  this  fall)  I  fhall  defcribe  to  you  when  I  come  to  treat
of  wounds  and  blows  (f)  :  and  in  his  urethra,  where  it  correfponded  to  one
fide  of  the  corona  glandis,  remain'd  fome  mark  of  an  old  injury.

And  you  have  I'een,  from  the  forty-fecond  letter  (g),  that  no  more  than
one  canal  was  remaining  in  an  old  man,  who  was  a  foreigner  -,  whereas  the
cicatriz'd  ftate  of  the  glans,  and  the  contrafted  ftate  of  the  urethra,  plainly
fhow'd  what  diforder  had  formerly  preceded  :  and  you  even  know  from  the
fame  place  [h),  that  in  a  young  man,  in  whom  thofe  fame  tokens  were  not
wanting,  not  fo  much  as  one  of  them  remain'd  ;  to  fay  nothing  of  a  man,
whom  I  fliall  defcribe  hereafter  (i).

And  nothing  is  more  probable,  than  that,  in  confequence  of  inflamma-
tion, and  exulceration,  which  had,  at  length,  arifen  in  the  fmall  canals,  the
thin  mem.branous  parietes  thereof  had  adher'd  to  each  other;  and  that  the
cavity  had,  by  this  means,  been  intercepted  and  lofl :  for  that  there  had  been
ulcerations,  in  that  very  part  of  the  urethra,  the  coardlation  of  this  part,
and  even  the  excrefcence,  of  luxuriant,  flefli,  in  the  very  feat  of  the  canali-
culi, jointly  demonftrated.

But  if  thefe  diforders  have  been  violent  -,  provided  they  have  not  been
extremely  violent,  or  not  common  to  all  the  canals ;  either  all  or  fome  of  them
may  remain.

Thus  in  a  certain  man,  whom  I  difl'efted  in  the  hofpital,  about  the  end  of
November,  in  the  year  171 8,  having  found  marks  in  the  beginning  of  the
urinary  paflage,  of  aforegoing  lues ;  I  faw  that  fome  canals,  though  but  few,
ftill  remain'd  ;  juft  as  you  have  read,  that,  in  the  butcher  (who,  as  I  have
related  to  you  in  the  eighth  letter  f^),  had  fmall  ulcers  in  the  preputium,
and  cicatrices  in  the  urethra)  they  were  but  very  few  in  number  :  nor  have
I  mention'd  more  than  one  or  two  in  a  gentleman,  who  had  been,  more  than
once,  afFefted  with  a  lues  venerea,  as  fpoken  of  in  the  twenty-eighth  let-

But  I  remember,  that  they  w-ere  all  ftill  remaining,  in  the  ftable-keeper  (m\
■whofe  urethra  I,  neverthelefs,  found  unequal  with  two  whitifli  lines,  at  about
the  diftance  of  three  fingers  breadths  from  the  outermoft  orifice ;  which;,  I
take  for  granted,  were  the  traces  of  cicatrices  and  excrefcences.

Yet  when  they  are  very  attentively  examin'd,  by  any  one  who  is  well
vers'd  in  the  flru6ture,  and  appearance,  of  thefe  parts,  when  in  their  na-
tural ftate ;  I  knov/  not  what  is  then  fometimes  perceiv'd,  from  whence  it

{ej  Supra,  n.  7.  (/)  Epift.  50.  n.  30.

C/J  Epift.  53.  n.  37.  (i)  N.  28.

(g)  N.  A.O.  (/)  N.  6.

(/.)  N.  39.  (,vO  Epift.  4.  n.  19.  /

■ Vol.  II.  4  H  may


6o2  Book  III. Of  t)ifeafes  of  the  Belly.

may  be  fuppos'd  that  they  had  been,  in  fome  way  or  other,  affefted ;  as  1
know  that  it  happen'd  to  me,  in  the  body  which  I  fhall  ipeak  of  juft  now.

And  as,  in  thofe  perfons,  in  whom  all  thefe  larger  canals  are  obliterated^
it  is  certain  that  fo  much  of  the  lubricating  humour,  which  ferves  to  defend
the  urethra  againfl  the  acrimony  of  the  urine,  as  they  have  been  the  inftru-
ments  of  its  fecretion,  muft  be  wanting  ;  fo  it  is  agreeable  to  reafon,  that  they
mufb  be,  afterwards,  more  liable  than  others  to  a  fenfe  of  ardor,  from  the
flimulus  of  the  urine,  when  in  a  more  acrid  Itate  than  ufual ;  and  even  to
erofion,  unlefs  the  whole  urethra  has  grown  callous :  and  that  the  others,  in
proportion  to  the  number  of  the  canals  that  have  been  loft,  or  in  proportion
to  the  injury  brought  upon  thefe  canals,  are  attack'd  with  uneafinefles  of  the
fame  kind,  though  fomewhat  (lighter  indeed.  But  let  it  be  fufficient  to
have  hinted  at  this. And  let  us  go  on  to  what  I  juft  now  fpoke  of.

lo.  Certain  parts  of  an  afthmatic  man,  who  had  died  in  the  hofpital,
were  brought  into  the  college,  when  I  was  teaching  anatomy  from  the  body
of  another  man,  in  the  year  1746.  For  I  like  to  fhow  the  fame  parts,  from
more  than  one  body,  when  it  is  in  my  power ;  and  to  fhow  them  differently
difiefted  from  each  other :  and  this  1  was  then  inclin'd  to  do  in  the  veficulje
feminales,  and  the  penis.

Thefe  veficles,  although  their  cells  were  internally  moift,  neverthelefs  con-
tain'd  no  femen.  The  caruncle,  and  whatever  related  to  the  upper  part  of
the  urethra,  was  in  a  proper  ftate.

But  when  we  were  about  to  cut  through  the  lower  part,  and  had  intro-
duc'd  a  pretty  thick  probe,  through  the  lower  orifice,  and  open'd  the  part  of
that  canal,  which  is  furrounded  by  the  glans  ;  the  furface  of  which  part  was
fomewhat  unequal ;  on  attempting  to  pufii  the  probe  higher  up,  we  found
that  it  would  not  pafs  for  more  than  an  inch  and  a  half.

Then  having  attempted  the  fame  thing,  at  the  upper  part  which  was
open,  we  found  the  fame  obftacle,  when  we  came  to  that  part  which  I  have
refer'd  to.  Opening  it  therefore,  by  degrees,  on  that  furface  (according  to
my  cuftom)  which  is  oppofite  to  my  canaliculi,  I  at  length  obferv'd  thefe
things.

There  was  a  traft  of  three  inches  breadth,  or  more,  from  which  it  is  was-
eafy  to  fee  that  the  urethra  had  formerly  been  ulcerated.  For  on  that  fur-
face, in  which  thefe  canals  are,  were  obferv'd  three  or  four  whitifh,  and  al-
moft  tendinous,  little  chords,  that  pafs  tranfverfly,  or  rather  bands,  not  very
prominent,  nor  ever  feparating  themfelves  from  the  internal  membrane  of
the  urethra.

Betwixt  chord  and  chord,  there  was  an  interftice  •,  and  then,  almoft  in  the
middle  fpace  betwixt  the  firft  and  laft,  the  urethra  contrafted  itfelf  for  about
as  great  a  length,  as  two  fingers  breadth  would  have  taken  up  ;  fo  that,  in-
this  part,  it  was  narrower,  by  almoft  one  half,  than  it  was  either  above  or
below.

Though  all  thefe  things  fell  within  the  region  of  thofe  Imall  catials,  where-
of I  am  fpeaking,  yet  they  themfelves,  and  their  orifices,  feem'd,  at  firft
fight,  not  to  be  in  a  preternatural  ftate.

But  when  I  fix'd  my eyes  very  attentively  thereon,  and confider'd  them

accurately,  I  was  very  certain  that  they  did differ  from  their  natural  ap-

4  pearaace


Letter  XLIV. Article  ii,  12.  603

pearance,  in  a  certain  manner,  which  I  can  better  conceive  of,  than  explain
in  words  ;  fo  that  it  was  clear  they  had  formerly  fuffer'd  feme  injury,  though
lefs  than  that  with  which  the  neighbouring  part  of  the  urethra  had  been  af-
fefted.

And  this  the  fituation  of  the  chords,  that  is  of  the  cicatrices,  in  that  furface
of  the  urethra  only  ;  I  mean  betwixt  the  orifices  of  the  canaliculi  -,  feem'd  to
confirm  :  as  it  fliow'd  from  whence  the  irritating,  and  at  length  ulcerating,
virus  had  diftill'd.

ir.  But  now  let  us  pafs  on  to  the  farther  part  of  the  urethra,  as  I  have
promis'd.  We  alfo  meet  with  the  feat  of  a  gonorrhoea  here,  the  fecond  with
us,  the  firft  with  Littre ;  that  is  to  fay,  as  he  himfelf  has  determin'd,  Cow-
per's  glands :  for  fo  I  fhall  continue  to  call  them,  fince  Mery,  for  I  know  not
what  reafon,  feems  to  have  given  up  his  claim,  as  he  filently  fuffers  they
Ihould  have  been  fo  call'd  more  than  once  by  Littre,  and  Ihown  in  the  Royal
Academy  of  Sciences  (h)  under  that  name  ;  and  moreover,  that  in  the  hiftory
of  this  Academy  (o),  the  firft  difcovery  of  them  fhould  have  been  exprefly
afcrib'd  to  Cowper.

But  how  feldom  thefe  glands  are  the  feat  of  the  gonorrhoea,  appears  very
clearly  from  hence,  that  Littre  (p)  having  diifefted  about  forty  bodies  of
perfons  who  had  been  affefted  with  a  gonorrhoea,  found  only  one  in  which
any  diforders  of  thefe  glands  appear'd :  and  thefe  he  defcribes  accurately,
and  feparately,  with  all  the  circumftances  which  relate  to  this  fpecies  of  go-
norrhoea ;  not  even  being  filent  as  to  the  caufe  why  it  is  fo  rare.

I  am  lefs  furpriz'd,  therefore,  that  I  have  not  lit  on  the  body  of  a  man  af-
fefted  in  this  manner.

Yet  I  fuppofe  that  I  have  feen  marks  of  this  difeafe  having  formerly  pre-
ceded ;  either  when  I  have  found  both  thefe  glands,  or  one  of  them  (as  in
a  carpenter  of  whom  I  have  fpoken  above  {q) )  chang'd  into  a  hard  fubftance;
for,  after  inflammation,  glands  frequently  grow  hard ;  or  when  I  have  mec
with  traces  in  their  dufts,  not  of  inflammation  only,  but  alfo  of  ulceration  ;
as  in  that  cafe  of  which  I  fliall  immediately  fpeak.

12.  A  young  man  having  died  in  the  hofpital,  about  the  middle  of  April,
in  the  year  171 8,  in  confequence  of  a  blow  on  his  head  ;  I  difledted  the  parts
of  generation,  on  the  anatomy  of  which  I  was  then  very  frequently  employ'd,
with  accuracy.  And  I  found  the  other  parts,  of  which  I  am  not  about  to  fpeak,
in  a  regular  and  natural  ftate.

That  the  urethra  was  not  in  its  natural  ftate,  I  immediately  apprehended,
when,  upon  uncovering  the  glans,  I  obferv'd  a  hollow  cicatrix  thereon.  Yet
the  proftate  gland,  Littre's  gland,  and  the  femilunar  caruncle,  fliow'd  no
appearance  of  diforder.

But  when  I  had  open'd  the  remaining  part  of  the  urethra,  and  had  feen  fome
of  the  firft  of  my  canaliculi  deftroy'd  ;  for  none  of  their  orifices  began  to  ap-
pear, till  at  about  the  diftance  of  four  fingers  breadth  from  the  extreme  part
of  the  urethra  •,  examining  every  thing  very  attentively,  I  was  ftruck  by  the
appearance  of  the  dufts  of  Cowper's  gland ;  the  right  of  which  was  thinner

(»)  Mem.  a.  1700.  &  i-jii,  (f)  Memor.  a.  i/n.

(0)  Aniior.  eorund^  (y)  N.  3.

4-  H  2  than


6o4  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belfy.

than  natural,  and  the  left  thicker  :  as  was  feen  through  the  internal  coat  of
the  urethra.

Into  the  thinner  dud  I  in  vain  attempted  to  introduce  any  thing ;  fo  that  I
^uppos'd  the  parietes  either  to  have  coalelc'd  from  inflammation,  or  to  have
been  contraiSted  to  the  narrowefl;  degree  poiTible.  The  left,  on  the  contrary,
was  diftended  with  a  yellowifli  and  mucous  humour  ;  and  feem'd  as  if  it  would
readily  admit  a  pretty  large  probe:  and  did  in  faft  admit  it,'  but  from  the
part  of  the  gland  -,  for  the  oppofite  extremity,  that  open'd  in  tiie  urethra,  had
a  very  narrow,  and  even  fo  obfcure  a  termination,  that  I  judg'd  it  to  arife
from  this  caufe,  that  the  duct  was  fofull  of  moitture,  and  the  gland  belong-
ing thereto  thick  ;  whereas  the  other  was  thin,  flender,  and  contraded.

13.  You  v/ill  here  a(k,  why  I  conjeftur'd  that  the  narrow  part  of  this  ex-
tremity might  have  become  thus  narrow,  from  a  preceding  ulcer.  Why  i
call'd  to  mind,  ti.at  Littre,  in  the  body,  in  which  alone  it  is  laid  (r)  he  had
found  this  fpecies  of  gonorrhoea,  had  never  remark'd  any  ulceration,  but
at  the  edges,  and  about  the  edges,  of  one  of  the  orifices  of  thofe  duds ;  and
that  Cowper  himfelf,  in  the  explic^ation  of  that  figure  (s),  wherein  he  has
delineated  both  thofe  duds,  had  taken  notice  that  the  orifice  of  one  of  them
was  very  large,  "  in  that  fubjed,  from  an  ulcer."

And  indeed  both  of  them  have  feen  an  ulcer  at  the  orifice  of  the  dud;  but
they,  or,  at  leaft,  the  fecond  of  them,  an  ulcer  ftill  eroding  ;  whereas  I,  un-
lefs  deceiv'd  in  my  conjedure,  faw  one  brought  to  a  cicatrix ;  wherefore  they
might  fee  the  orifice  very  open ;  and  I  fuppofe  it  to  have  been  conftrided
from  a  cicatrix.

And  indeed  Terraneus  (0  found  the  orifice  quite  obftruded,  and  the
dud  furprizingly  dilated  from  thence  ;  and  that  on  the  left  fide :  in  which,
fide  it  happen'd  that  thole  three  obfervators,  and  I,  found  the  diforders  of
the  orifice.

14.  But  going,  from  thofe  orifices,  farther  into  the  urethra,  we  come  to
the  fecond  of  the  two  parts  in  this  canal,  in  which  Vefalius  (u)  has  not  only
remark'd,  that  all,  who  are  alfeded  with  a  gonorrhoea,  "  feel  excruciating
"  pain,"  but  has  alfo  given  us  the  reafon  why  they  feel  a  pain  in  this  fecond
part,  when  the  penis  is  ered.

This  place  anfwers  to  the  lower  part  of  the  perinseum.  For  there,  as  by
,  xeafon  of  the  flexure  of  the  canal,  its  fteep.and  very  low  fituation,  the  corrod-
ing humour  ftagnates  ;  it  there  alfo  erodes  (or  at  leafl;  irritates)  "  more  than
"  in  any  other  part  of  the  canal ;  and  when  the  eroded  meatus  is  ftretch'd
*'  too-ether  with  the  penis,  it  cannot  be  but  a  folution  of  continuity  muft  be
"  perceiv'd  in  that  part."

And  thefe  patients  are  not  only  heard  to  complain,  at  that  time,  of  an  un-
eafy  fenfation  in  this  part  -,  but  even  when,  in  attempting  to  expel  the  lall
drops  of  urine  upwards  from  thence,  they  comprefs  this  part  of  the  meatus,.
by  means  of  the  mufcles  that  lie  wrap'd  around  it.

The  gland  of  Littre  furrounds  this  place  :  and  in  that  place  I  fuppofe  the
urethra  to  be  ulcerated  •,  fince  I  have,  in  that  part  alfo,  fometimes  feen  thofe.

(r)  Sunra,  n.  it.  (/)  De  Gland,  obf.  6.  &  iig.  l.  ad  D.

(j)  Vid.  in  Aa.  Erud.  Lipf.  a.  lyoz.  m. {iij  C.  14.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  8.
Novsmbr.  ad  tab.  8.  fig.  I.  litt-  H.

4  extuberant


Letter  XLIV. Article  15.  605

extuberant  lines,  which  I  confider  as  cicatrices  ;  and  as  Terraneus  (x)  found
ulcers  there  from  a  long-continu'd  gonorrhoea.

But  thefe  things  happen  only  fometimes.  For  more  generally,  I  believe
that  the  irritation,  and  inflammation,  of  that  part,  are  iufficient  to  explain,
what  Vefalios  fays. Now  attend  to  what  I  myfelf  have  feen  of  this  fpecies.

15.  A  decrepid  old  man,  who  had  been  feverely  afflifted,  for  matiy  years,,
with  a  lues  venerea  ;  fo  that  you  could  fcarcely  underftand  what  he  faid ;  and
finally  had  labour'd  under  a  difficulty  of  making  water,  and  a  gonorrhrea,
for  twelve  years;  was  gradually  wafted  away  by  thefe  diforders,  and  by  old
age  itfelf;  and  died  before  the  middle  of  January,  in  the  year  171 7.

As  I  diffeded  fome  parts  of  this  body  in  the  hofpital,  I  obferv'd  the  follow--
ingthings,  which  related  to  the  diforders  in  queftion.

The  uvula,  a  part  of  which  was  wanting,  the  upper  and  mofl  pofterior  fur-
face  of  the  tongue,  and  the  cartiiago  epiglottis,  which  had  been  formerly  con-
ne£l:ed  by  ligaments,  were  fo  full  of  cicatrices,  that  nothing  could  be  more
fo.

Wherefore,  that  cartilage  being  unequally  contrafted,  terminated  almofl
in  a  triangular  vertex  ;  being  much  more  fimilar  to  that  of  a  dog  than  of
a  human  creature.

And  indeed  the  diforder  propagated  itfelf  into  the  remaining  part  of  the
larynx,  and  the  trunk  of  the  afpera  arteria,  at  that  part  which  was  neareft  to
it :  one  of  the  arytenoid  cartillages  was  luxated  as  it  were  •,  not  being  parallel
to  its  fellow:  but  within  that  artery,  large  and  unequal  fafciculi  of  fibres,  as
it  were  protuberated  :  and  on  its  external  furface,  at  the  fpace  of  two  fingers^
breadth  below  the  cricoid  cartilage,  at  one  fide  of  the  membranous,  and  muf-
cular  interftice,  a  gland  was  prominent  of  the  bignefs,  and  fhape,  of  a  vetch,
and  of  a  cineritious  colour;  being  internally  of  a  red  inclining  to  brown  ;  that
is  to  fay,  in  a  round  cavity,  which  was  furrounded  by  white,  and  not  lax.
parietes.

This  gland  I  took  for  one  of  that  great  number,  there  delineated  by  me
(j)  :  which,  by  reafon  of  the  foramen,  going  to  the  cavity  of  the  afpera  arteria,
being  Ihut  up  on  account  of  internal  diforders,  had  grown  out  in  this  man-
ner, and  perhaps  more  fo  formerly.

Before  we  open'd  the  belly-,  for  there  was  no  time  to  open  the  cranium,
and  thorax;  we  obferv'd  the  moft  evident  cicatrices  from  buboes  of  the
groins.  Then  letting  alone  the  other  vifcera,  which  feem'd  to  be  in  a  pretty
natural  ftate,  we  particularly  attended  to  the  urinary  parts.

The  kidnies  were  very  fmall ;  and,  by  reafon  of  hemifpherical  protu-
berances, unequal  in  their  furfaces :  yet  the  fubftance  thereof  fhow'd  no  dif-
order, except  that  it  was  more  firm  and  compadl  than  ufual:  although  in  the'
pelvis  of  one  of  the  kidnies,  was  a  little  quantity  of  whitifli  and  turbid  fe-
rum.

The  ureters  were  much  dilated,  and  were  feen  to  be  internally  red,  almofl
quite  to  the  kidnies :  but  both  thefe  marks  of  difeafe  decreas'd,  in  proportion
as  they  afcended.  In  the  right  ureter,  I  faw  the  internal  coat  protuberating,
about  the  middle  of  the  tube,  and  doubling  itfelf  fo  as  to  make  an  annular

(x)  De  Glandul.  c,  5.  &  obf.  3.  (j)  Adverf.  I.  tab.  2.  %.  li

kind


•6o6  Book  III. Of  Dlfeafes  of  the  Belly.

Jiind  of  valve,  of  a  moderate  height,  which  v?as  turn'd  againft  the  courfe  of
the  urine.

As  both  of  them  were  half-full  of  a  mucous  matter;  on  their  internal  fur-
face,  from  the  middle  upwards,  were  prominent,  here  and  there,  drops  ('as
they  were  to  appearance)  of  a  fpherical  figure  -,  fome  larger  and  fome  fmaller ;
and  having  attempted  to  wipe  them  away,  with  the  fponge,  to  no  purpofe,
by  applying  the  knife  thereto,  and  compreffing  them  betwixt  my  fingers,  I
faw  them  immediately  refolv'd  into  a  kind  of  vilcid  humour,  which  was  ting'd,
as  it  were,  with  a  very  dilute  colour  of  tobacco  ;  fo  that  after  I  found  hydatids
hanging  from  the  fame  coat,  as  I  have  already  written  to  you  (z),  I  fuppofs'd
thefe  drops,  that  I  am  fpeaking  of,  to  have  been  of  the  fame  kind.

Moreover,  the  bladder,  confifting  of  very  thick  coats,  through  the  inter-
nal furface  of  which  a  kind  of  thick  fafciculi  of  fibres  were  feen,  join'd  to-
gether by  a  various  kind  of  intanglement,  overflow'd  with  a  white  and  tur-
bid humour.  Then,  beginning  the  incifion  of  the  urethra,  from  the  glans  j
one  fide  of  the  corona  whereof  had  been  formerly  corroded  by  an  ulcer;  I
fcarcely  found  any  thing  worthy  of  remark,  till  I  came  to  Littre's  gland.

This  part  was,  internally,  cover'd  over  with  very  thick  fanguiferous  veflels,
fo  as  to  be  far  more  red,  than  black,  as  it  ufually  is.  And  the  proftate  gland
ofFer'd  no  appearance  that  deferv'd  great  attention,  befides  three  very  fhort
and  fuperficial  finuffes,  which  contrafted  themfelves,  from  a  pretty  large
orifice,  into  the  form  of  a  cone ;  and  were  fituated  betwixt  the  feminal  ca-
runcle, which  was  in  its  natural  ftate,  and  the  orifice  of  the  bladder,  accord-
ing to  the  length  of  the  urethra.

16.  In  this  body  alone,  do  I  remember  to  have  feen  the  urethra  thus  af-
fefted,  in  the  perineum  :  to  which  affeftion,  however,  fome  caufe  might  be
afforded,  even  by  a  part  of  the  urine  ftagnating  there ;  efpecially  in  a  de-
crepid  old  age,  and  when  the  urine  itfelf  was  not  in  a  natural  ftate.

At  leaft  this  kind  of  affedtion  was  not  found  in  the  many  others,  whom  I
have  defcrib'd,  as  having  been  affefted  with  a  gonorrhoea ;  and  not  only  in
this  letter,  but  in  others  alfo  ;  and  particularly  in  a  certain  fervant  (a)  of  a
miller,  who  dying  at  the  time  of  being  afflicted  with  a  gonorrhoea ;  muft  have
had  fome  mark  of  difeafe,  in  the  pendulous  part  of  the  urethra,  which  was
not  allow'd  to  be  differed  ;  fince  in  the  upper  part  of  this  canal  he  had  no
more  than  the  m.any  others,  any  mark  of  difeafe  in  any  part.

How  did  it  happen  then,  you  will  fay,  to  be  afferted,  with  one  common
voice  as  it  were,  that  there  was  a  diforder  in  the  proftate  gland,  and  the  fe-
minal caruncle.

Without  doubt  becaufe,  as  they  did  not  doubt,  at  that  time,  but  the  hu-
mour which  drips  down  in  a  gonorrhoea,  if  legitimate,  is  uninfefted  femen,
fo  they  did  not  doubt,  if  the  gonorrhoea  was  a  fpurious  one,  but  the  dif-
charge  was  of  femen  contaminated  with  the  venereal  miafmata.

But  afterwards,  fome  of  the  phyficians  began  to  fufped,  that  what  flows
from  the  urethra,  in  a  legitimate  gonorrhoea,  is  not  always  real  femen  ;  as
,they  faw  that  many  did  not  grow  fo  thin,  and  become  -enervated,  as  they
imift  in  courfe  have  done,  from  fo  great  a  quantity  of  humour  being  dif-

(z)  Epift.  42.  n.  II.  («)  Epift.  24.  n,  18.

charg'd.


Letter  XLIV. Article  17.  607

c'harg*d,  and  for  fo  many  years  together,,  as  frequently  happens,  if  it  were
real  Temen.

And  indeed,  we  fee  into  what  an  emaciated  ftate,  and  dejedlionof  ftreno-th,
they  fally  who  difcharge  the  femen,  in  cOnfequence  of  lafcivious  dreams,  very
often,  and  for  a  long  time  together.  Some  of  thefe  perfons  I  have  known,  who
having  receiv'd  no  advantage  from  remedies,  and  fearing  left  they  fiiould  be
hurried  into  a  fatal  atrophy,  determin'd,  by  a  kind  of  happy  thought,  to  tie
the  penis  round  about  with  a  band  of  foft  leather,  under  the  very  maro-in  of
the  corona  glandis  •,  fo  that,  as  long  as  the  penis  did  not  become  rigid,  they
fhould  feel  no  inconvenience  from  it;  but  when  it  began  to  grow  rigid,  that
it  fhould  immediately  create  an  uneafinefs,  and  the  danger  of  emitting  the
femen  be  remov'd,  by  being  rous'd  from  their  fleep.

Moreover,  Boerhaave  proceeded  much  farther  than  the  fufpicions  of  thefe
phyficians  led  him,  as  he  exprefly  denied  {b)  that  he  had  ever  known  true  fe-
men to  be  difcharg'd  without  a  venereal  tentigo,  either  fleeping  or  waking  j-
fo  that  it  muft  be  a  very  extraordinary  difeafe  indeed,  wherein  this  fluid  is.
fpontaneoufly  difcharg'd,  and  without  any  fenfation.

He  therefore  judg'd  the  difcharge  to  proceed  from  the  proftate  gland.
However,  I  do  not  fay  thefe  things,  becaufel  believe  that  true  femen  is
never  difcharg'd  without  venereal  cogitations.  For  I  believe,  that,  where  the.
edges  of  the  fmall  foramina,  through  which  the  femen  defcends  into  the  ure-
thra, are  eroded,  or  very  lax  ;  or  where  the  femen  itfelf  is  very  watry  ;  it  may
flow  down  without  any  lafcivious  idea  ;  as  happens  to  fome  from  the  injedlion
of  a  pretty  warm  glyfter,  or  from  difcharging  the  inteftinal  faeces  when  very
hard :  except,  in  the  former,  that  which  is  difcharg'd  is  always  in  fuch  a
frnall  quantity  and  of  fuch  a  kind  that  it  is  not  abfurd  to  account  for  it  from-
the  proftate  gland,  by  reafon  of  its  peculiar  nature,  and  being  always  in  fmal!
quantity  ;  and  in  the  latter  it  can  never  be  from  the  veficulae  feminales.

But  as  I  know  that  this  does  not  happen  on  every  occafion,  as  was  formerly
fuppos'd,  fo  that  it  does  happen  fometimes,  is  out  of  my  power  to  deny.

17.  We  are  come,  as  you  fee,  to  the  laft  feat  of  the  gonorrhoea  in  the  ure-
thra-, I  mean  the  proftate  gland,  and  the  feminal  caruncle.  And  if  the  latter
of  thofe  parts  always  fliow'd  the  feminal  foramina  to  be  very  open,  at  that
time,  either  by  means  of  laxity  or  erofion  ;  or  if  the  form.er  were  fo  ulcerated'
in  all  perfons,  that  the  ulcer  reach'd  to  the  feminal  canals,  which  pafs  thro'
that  gland  •,  there  would  be  no  reafon  why  we  fhould  deny,  that  a  flux  of  real
femen  muft  of  courfe  happen.

But  in  many  there  is  nothing  of  this  kind';-  as  not  only  what  I  have  hitherto
written,  in  this  letter,  fufficiently  ftiows,  almoft  in  general,  but  the  obferva-
tions  of  others,  amongft  whom  is  Terraneus  {c\  and  Blancardus,  whom  he
quotes,  confirm  ;  but  in  particular  Littre  (d)^  who,  from  his  own  infpeftions,
has  determin'd  the  three  feats  of  the  gonorrhoea,  in  each  of  which  the  diforder-
fometimes  is,  without  afFefting  the  two  others  :  and  of  the  three  he  holds  one-
to  be  the  proftace  gland :  after  this  he  fliows  that  when  the  feat  of  it  was  in
Cowper's  glands,  the  proftate  was  not  affeded  ;  and  demonftrates  with  what

{h)  Prjflea.  ad  Inftitut.  §.  776.  {d)  Mem,  de  l'.4cad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  171 1.

(cj  De  Giand.  c.  5.  obf.  3.  &  feq.

difEcvilty


6o8  Eook  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belty.

diflicuky  the  virus  can  be  propagated  into  this  gland,  or  into  the  cariincls
from  thence.

But  notwithftanding  the  truth  of  thefe  things  ;  it  cannot  however  be  de-
nied, that,  in  others,  nevertheleis,  (as,  for  inftance,  in  moft  of  thofe  per-
fons  who  are  troubled  with  a  very  virulent,  and  obftinate  gonorrhoea)  a  dif-
ordcr  has  been  found  in  the  proftate,  and  the  caruncle.

For  to  take  no  notice  of  what  is  laid  by  Wharton  (e),  that  the  fmall  excre-
tory foramina  of  the  proftate  gland,  which  in  healthy  perfons  are  not  confpi-
cuous,  "  are  very  evidently  diftinguifh'd  in  them  ;"  obfervations  are  pub-
lifh'd,  and  even  extant  in  the  Sepulchretum  (f),  by  Bartholin,  Severinus,
and  "Wirfungius,  of  the  fame  gland  being  ulcerated,  or  affefted  with  an  ab-
fcefs  in  a  gonorrhcea  ;  and  after  a  gonorrhoea,  of  its  being  cicatris'd  :  and  you
likewife  read  there  (g),  that  Guenotius  defpair'd  of  a  cure  in  that  difeafe,
when,  by  introducing  his  finger  into  the  anus,  he  perceiv'd  a  refilling  tumour
-of  this  gland.

Nor  are  more  recent  obfervations  wanting,  of  this  gland  being  vitiated
from  a  gonorrhoea.  Two  of  which,  in  particular,  it  may  be  proper  to  pro-
duce, tlie  one  of  Brunnerus  (h),  and  the  other  of  Genfelius  [4).

For  thefe  authors,  although  they  difi-er'd  from  each  other  fo  much,  in  re-
gard to  caruncles  growing  out  in  the  urethra,  that  the  firft  of  them  faid
thefe  weve  nothing  more  than  the  figment  of  the  furgeons  •,  as  he  had  ob-
ferv'd  in  a  certain  perfon,  that  the  impediment  to  the  catheter's  introduction,
had  not  been  from  a  caruncle,  which  did  not  exift,  but  from  "  a  remarkable
"  ftrifture,  and  coarctation,  or  rather  aduftion,"  of  the  urethra ;  almoil  as  I
have  defcrib'd  above  (k)  in  the  afthmatic  man  ;  and  Genfelius,  who,  in  an-
other body,  had  (een  a  caruncle  of  this  kind,  but  no  coarftation,  contended
for  thefe  caruncles  :  at  the  fame  time  then,  that  they  diiagreed  about  thefe
points,  they  perfedlly  agreed  in  this,  that  the  fecond,  in  his  patient  who  had
been  affctted  with  a  recent  gonorrhoea,  after  labouring  under  a  virulent  one
for  fome  time  before,  had  found  "  feveral  little  ulcers  about  the  proftate  •,"
and  the  firft  in  his,  befides  "  a  very  great  ftridture  of  the  meatus,"  in  that
part  alio,  had  feen  "  the  furface  thereof,  about  th€  proftates,  very  evidently
"  mark'd  with  cicatrices,  from  old  and  inveterate  ulcers,  which  were  then
"  heal'd."

But  as  to  what  relates  to  the  feminal  caruncle  itfelf,  you  have  it,  not  only
in  the  Sepulchretum  (I),  that  Vefalius,  in  this  city,  found  both  the  extremi-
ties of  the  veffels,  that  carry  down  the  femen,  and  lie  on  the  fides  of  the  ca-
runcle, fo  as  in  fome  meafure  to  efcape  the  fight  in  other  bodies,  to  be
"  open  and  lax,"  in  a  certain  man  vho  had  labour'd  under  this  difeafe ;  but
you  read  alfo  in  the  celebrated  Benevoli  -(m),  both  an  obfervation  of  iiis  own,
on  a  man,  who  had  been  afflifted  with  the  fame  difeafe,  almoft  two  and
twenty  years,  in  whom  was  a  large  and  callous  ulcer,  lying  hid  in  the  proftate
gland  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  it  only  emitted  the  pus  by  the  caruncle  ;  which

(e?)  Adenogr.  c.  31.  (/)  Earund.  cent.  6,  obf.  8j..

(/)  Seft.  hac  31.  obf.  5.  §.  1  &  2.  (X-)  N.  10.

(g)  In  Schol.  ad  obf.  4.  - //;  Sea.  cit.  obf.  2.

-.(A)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent,  1.  obf.  97.  ('//)  Piopofiz.  int.  allaCarunc.  c.  3.

was


Letter  XLIV. Article  18, 19.  609

was  likewife  eroded  internally  by  the  ulcer;  and  other  obfervations  (n)  of  the
fame  caruncle  being  ulcerated  in  a  gonorrhoea,  that  are  taken  notice  of  from
Genga.

And  the  caruncle  you  know  is  fo  fmall,  that  there  can  fcarcely  be  an  ulcer
in  it,  but  it  muft  corrode  the  extremity  of  both,  or  at  leaft  of  one  of  the  fe-
minal  canals ;  and  by  this  means  open  a  pafTage,  for  that  fluid  to  be  continu-
ally diftilling  down,  even  more  than  when  the  orifices  of  the  fame  canals  are
too  lax,  and  open.

However,  the  ulcers  that  are  in  the  proftate  gland  do  not  all  do  this ;  but
only  thofe  which  are  in  that  part  of  it,  through  which  one,  or  both,  of  thefe
canals  are  carried  ;  and  this  part  is  the  highefl:  behind  the  urethra:  but  when
ulcerous  finufles  are  brought  on  from  thence,  they  open  a  paflage  for  them-
felves,  for  pus,  and  for  femen,  into  the  internal  furface  of  the  urethra ;  or,
on  the  contrary,  by  winding,  and  creeping,  they  reach  from  this  internal  fur-
face,  quite  to  thofe  canals-
Other  ulcers  of  this  gland  difcharge  their  pus,  mix'd  together  with  the  hu-
mour fecreted  therein  ;  either  through  the  proper  orifices  of  the  ulcers  them-
ielves,  which  may  lie  open  within  the  urethra,  or  through  the  natural  orifices
of  the  fame  gland  :  through  which,  when  they  are  only  very  lax,  and  not  af-
feded  by  an  ulcer,  this  humour  alone,  and  not  either  pus,  or  femen,  is  dif-
charg'd.

And  thefe  things  I  have  hinted,  that  it  might  be  underftood,  to  what  clafs
thofe  traces  of  old  difeafes,  which  I  have  happen'd  to  fee,  either  in  that  gland,
or  in  the  caruncle,  or  in  both  of  them,  are  to  be  referr'd  ;  and  this  even
though  I  fhould  be  filent  upon  the  fubjeft,

18.  And  in  the  firft  place,  I  have  found  fuperficial  traces ;  as,  for  inftance,
thofe  whitifh  and  protuberant  lines,  the  remains,  as  I  fuppofe,  ofexcrefcen-
ces ;  or  thoie  three  very  iliort  finufl^es,  which  I  defcrib'd  above  (c),  in  the  de-
crepid  old  man  :  but  others  I  have  met  with  that  were  deep,  and  quite  hid-
den ;  as  you  will  learn  from  the  following  hiftory.

19.  In  the  year  1742,  when  I  began  the  public  demonftrations  of  anatomy,
I  made  ufe  of  the  body  of  an  old  man,  whofe  diforders  I  could  not  get  any  _
certain  information  of  -,  for  which  reafon  I  fhall  tell  you  the  more  briefly,
what  preternatural  appearances  I  met  with.

The  thorax  contain'd  a  heart  which  was  enlarg'd,  and  had  the  parietes
thicken'd  :  the  beginning  of  the  large  artery  was  wider  than  it  naturally  is,
and  internally  difl;inguifli'd  with  very  frequent  white  fpots,  of  a  tendinous-
nature  as  it  were,  not  to  fay  bony.

And  the  belly,  which  had  been  previoufly  examin'd,  exhibited  the  fame
kind  of  fpots  in  the  fame  artery,  as  it  pafs'd  through  that  cavity  •,  though  lefs
confiderable  than  in  the  thorax ;  if  you  except  one  very  hard  fpot,  which  was
at  the  orifice  of  the  arteria  facra,  and  feem'd  to  have  render'd  this  orifice
more  contrafted  than  the  trunk  was  in  proportion.

But  as  I  have  already  taken  occafion  to  tell  you,  in  the  twenty-ninth  let-
ter (/)),  what  preternatural  bodies  were  feated  upon  the  ring  of  the  pylorus,

(«)  C.  5.  u)  N.  17.

CoJ  N.  ,5.

Vol.  II.  4  I  er


6 10  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

or  what  glands  were  prominent  in  the  antrum  pylori,  there  is  no  reafon  why  I
fliould  repeat  the  relation  here.

The  liver,  upon  its  convex  furface,  was  almoft  univerfally  become  united
to  the  diaphragm.  The  fpleen  was  thicker  than  ullial,  and  wider-,  being  in-
ternally of  a  dilute  icarlet  colour :  the  arterial  branches,  which  enter'd  it,
were  themfelves  tortuous  indeed,  but  the  trunk  of  the  fplenic  artery,  from
whence  they  came,  v/as,  contrary  to  the  ufual  cuftom  of  nature,  not  at  all
reflefted,  or  tortuous,  in  the  whole  of  its  courfe.

The  kidnies  were  longer,  in  proportion  to  their  breadth,  than  they  natu-
rally are. The  coats  of  the  bladder  were  much  thicken'd.

Finally,  the  proftate  gland,  where  it  poffefies  the  anterior  part  of  the  ure-
thra, had  a  cavity,  entirely  included  within  its  fubflance,  of  the  figure  and
magnitude  of  a  middle-fiz'd  grape  ;  the  parietes  of  which,  being  of  the  fame
colour  with  the  reft  of  the  gland,  feem'd  to  be  inverted  with  a  kind  of  thin
membrane,  as  if  it  were  the  follicle  of  the  tumour  :  but  within  thefe  parietes
nothing  was  contain'd.

20.  As  it  was  not  at  all  clear,  what  had  been  formerly  comprehended  in
this  cavity,  and  how  it  had  afterwards  been  remov'd ;  it  brought  to  my  mind
what  I  had  feen,  a  year  before,  in  another  old  man,  of  whom  I  fhall  fpeak
of  to  you  (q),  when  on  the  fubjeft  of  fevers.

That  is  to  fay,  in  the  proftate  gland,  which  was  enlarg'd,  and,  in  its  ex-
ternal circumference,  of  a  red  colour  inclining  to  brown,  I  found  within  the
remaining  part  of  its  fubftance  -,  which  was  in  other  refpefts  in  a  natural  ftate ;
granules  of  tobacco  as  it  were,  of  a  yellowifti  colour  inclining  to  blacknefs  j
and  thofe  in  feveral  places.

Thefe  appearances  were  not  far  from  the  internal  furface  of  the  urethra;
fome  lying  fcatter'd  up  and  down  at  a  confiderable  diftance  from  each  other,
and  fome  being  crowded  together  into  one  cavity,  much  lefs  than  that  where-
of I  juft  now  fpoke.

Shall  we  then  fuppofe  this  larger  cavity  alfo,  to  have  been,  at  one  time  or
other,  fiU'd  with,  granules  of  this  kind  ?  But  of  what  nature  are  thefe  gra-
nules ?  For  I  have  found  them  in  many  bodies,  and  not  ther\  for  the  firft
time.

In  the  Adverfaria  (r),  I  confider'd  them  as  a  humour  which  is  fecreted  in
the  proftate,  and  coagulated  into  that  form  :  nor  do  1  at  prefent  fee  any  rea-
fon why  I  iliould  not  confider  them  in  the  fame  point  of  view  alfo.

Yet  what  can  be  the  caufe,  from  whence  this  humour  changes  its  form
and  colour  in  fuch  a  manner,  whether  from  the  lues  venerea  having  formerly
preceded,  or  any  other  kind  of  diforder,  I  leave  quite  undetermin'd ;  as  I
iikewife  do  that  fufpicion,  whereof  I  gave  a  hint  in  a  former  letter  (j),  I  mean
whether  thefe  granules  may  not  fometimes  be  the  matter  of  the  calculi,  that
are  found  in  this  gland.

Yet  I  never  met  with  a  larger  quantity  of  thofe  granules  within  this  gland,
than  in  the  potter ;  as  you  will  readily  perceive  by  reading  over  again  my
feventh  letter  (/) :  and,  in  regard  to  him,  you  will  confider  whether  you  may

{q)  Epift.  49-  n. i8.  O)  Epift.  42.  n.  37.  in  fine,

(r)  IV.  Animad.  14.  CO  N.  11.

afcribe


Letter  XLIV. Article  21, 22.  611

afcribe  them  to  an  old  lues  venerea,  that  had  preceded,  by  reafon  of  no  fr£e-
nulum  remaining  at  the  glans,  nor  any  traces  of  it;  as  you  alfo  will,  in  re-
gard to  the  old  man,  whofe  hiftory  is  given  in  the  twenty-fourth  letter  (u),
in  whom  no  more  than  one  of  the  larger  canaliculi  of  the  urethra  remain'd ;
and  that  in  a  flender  ftate ;  at  the  fame  time  that  thefe  granules  were  not
wanting  at  the  fides  of  the  feminal  caruncles.

I  am  inclin'd  to  add  two  other  examples,  in  this  place,  from  the  bodies  of
men  :  and  though  I  am  almoft  altogether  ignorant  what  diforders  they  had
been  affefted  with,  yet  I  lliall  not  fcruple  to  relate  what  preternatural  appear-
ances they  had  in  the  other  parts  of  the  body  alfo;  for  I  do  not  think  it  quite
without  its  utility,  as  you  have  feen  elfewhere  alfo,  to  take  notice  of  preter-
natural appearances  ;  that  by  comparing  them  together  with  accuracy,  it
may,  at  leaft,  be  known,  what  marks  of  difeafe  occur  more  frequently,  or
more  rarely,  in  certain  ages  and  habits  of  body.

21.  The  body  of  a  man,  of  four  and  fifty  years  of  age,  who  had  been
gradually  carried  off  by  an  apopledlic  diforder,  was  given  to  the  college  in
the  year  1728  -,  to  begin  the  public  demonftrations  from  ;  till  an  opportunity
of  getting  better  bodies  fhould  offer  itfelf.  For  which  reafon  the  head  was  not
touch'd.  "What  was  found  in  the  belly,  and  in  the  thorax  in  part  alfo,  that
deferv'd  notice,  I  fhall  obferve  at  prefent.

The  inteftines  were  lax,  and  in  a  manner  inflam'd  :  yet  neither  thefe,  nor
the  ftomach,  had  any  mark  of  erofion  ;  fo  that  fome  recent  caufe  might  be
fuppos'd  to  have  occafion'd  that  appearance  which  I  fhall  defcribe  in  the  duo-
denum -,  efpecially  as  pus,  putrid  fmell,  a  thicknefs  and  inequality  of  the
lips,  and  all  other  marks  of  ulceration,  were  wanting.

At  the  diftance  of  two  fingers  breadths  below  the  pylorus,  was  a  place,  in
which  the  internal  coats  of  the  inteftines  were  wanting ;  and  thus  an  orifice
capable  of  admitting  a  finger  was  form'd  :  and  a  finger  being  introduc'd  into
this  orifice,  the  moft  external  coat  of  all,  which  eafily  gave  way  in  the  out-
ward direftion,  was  form'd  into  a  kind  of  diverticulum  as  it  were.

The  fpleen  was  found  ;  but  much  lefs  than  it  ought  to  be,  and  in  every
refpefl:  very  fmall.  The  trunk  of  the  great  artery  had,  internally,  in  that
part  where  it  adher'd  to  the  vertebrte  of  the  loins,  fome  confiderable  bony
fcales  :  yet  the  fame  veffel  was  very  found  within  the  thorax ;  as  the  heart
was  alfo.

The  urinary  bladder  was  lefs  than  it  ought  to  have  been,  in  proportion
to  the  fize  of  the  body.  In  the  urethra  was  nothing  particular  obferv'd  ;
except  granules  of  tobacco  as  it  were,  at  the  orifices  of  the  proftate  gland.

22.  As  to  the  other  man,  who  was  fomewhat  younger  than  the  former,  I
have  already  faid,  by  the  way,  what  his  habit  of  body  was  -,  and  of  what  dilbr-
der  he  died  ;  when  I  was  fpeaking  of  his  hsemorrhoids,  in  the  thirty-fecond
letter  {x) :  fo  that  it  will  be  fufEcient  to  add  here,  what  I  faw  in  the  upper
part  of  the  urethra.

The  feminal  caruncle  had,  at  the  fides  of  it,  granules  of  the  kind  I  am
fpeaking  of;  from  fom.e  of  which,  that  were  dilTolv'd,  as  I  fuppofe,  by  the

(a)  N.  6.  {x)  N.  10.  in  fine.

4  I  2  moifturc


6 1 2  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

moifture  of  the  place,  not  only  the  other  parts,  which  lay  near,  but  even  the
orifices  of  the  fcminal  diidts,  were  yellow.

I  obferv'd  at  the  fame  time,  that  thefe  orifices  were  much  larger  than  they
us'd  to  be ;  and  of  an  ellyptical  figure.  And  one  of  them  was  a  little  larger
than  the  other.

23.  Now  as  we  hav^e  begun  to  treat  of  the  diforders  of  the  caruncle  itfelf,
I  might;  if  I  had  not  had  occafion  already  of  doing  it  above  (y),  or  in  a  for-
mer letter  (z) ;  give  you  the  relation  of  other  diforders,  of  the  two  orifices
that  are  therein,  of  a  contrary  nature  to  thofe  which  are  juft  now  fpoken  of;
I  niean  that  I  faw  one  of  them  much  narrower  than  it  generally  is,  and  the
other  quite  Ihut  up :  and  even  that  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  diftinguilh,
and  demonftrace,  either  of  them  ;  nor  even  that  larger  orifice  of  the  finus
v/hich  lies  betwixt  them,  by  reafon  of  the  caruncles  being  defac'd  by  an  old
lues  venerea.

Now  then  you  have  my  obfervations,  from  one  extremity  of  the  urethra  to
the  other,  according  to  my  promife  in  the  beginning  :  and  fuch  as  they  are,
you  are  at  liberty  to  make  what  ufe  you  pleafe  of  them  ;  as  they  not  only
relate  to  thofe  who  a6tually  labour'd  under  a  gonorrhoea  at  that  time,  or  had
formerly  been  afflifled  with  it,  but  even  to  thofe  who  might  feem  to  have  been
affefted  therewith  (*),

24.  It  does  not  efcape  me,  that  other  feats  have  been  aflign'd  to  this  dif-
order,  even  on  the  outfide  of  the  urethra,  and  the  glands  that  lie  very  near
thereto  ;  that  is  to  fay,  in  the  veficulse  feminales,  in  the  teftes,  and  even  in
the  urinary  bladder  and  kidnies.  Each  of  which  fuppofitions  I  (hall  touch
upon  {lightly,  and  then  put  the  finifliing  hand  to  this  letter.

25.  In  regard  to  the  veficuls  feminales,  befides  the  opinion  of  the  older
authors  ;  and  among  thefe  of  Riolanus,  who  is  quoted  in  the  Sepulchretum
(a)  ;  we  fhould  have  obfervations  of  Littre,  if  he  had  executed  what  he  pro-
mis'd  (b),  when  he  treated  of  the  gonorrhoea  of  Cowper's  glands.

However,  it  is  eafy  to  conceive,  that,  when  the  feminal  canals,  which  go
through  the  proftate  gland,  and  open  in  the  caruncle,  are  eroded,  the  difor-
der  may  be  eafily  communicated  to  the  veficles.

A  proof  of  this  circumftance  was  perhaps  offer'd  to  me,  at  the  time,  when,
in  a  young  man  of  five  and  twenty  years  of  age  (c),  I  found  the  veficles  fo
contrafled,  and  without  moifture,  contrary  to  the  general  habit  of  that  fea-
fon  of  life ;  for  the  fame  virulent  inflammation,  which  had  formerly  con-
trafted  the  extremity  of  one  of  the  feminal  ducSts,  and  had  fliut  iip  the  other,
might  be  propagated  into  the  veficles,  and  deftroy  them.

Yet  I  would  not  have  you  fuppofe,  as  often  as  ever  it  happens,  to  any
perfon  labouring  under  a  long,  and  terrible  gonorrhoea,  to  emit  a  bloody
femen  in  confequence  of  lafcivious  dreams,  or  a  femen  that  is  foetid  and  con-
taminated with  fordes  and  pus  ;  I  would  not  have  you,  I  fay,  fuppofe  in  thefe
cafes,  that  the  diforder  is  neceflarily  propagated  to  the  veficles  :  for  it  is  pof-
fible  that  purulent,  and  foetid  fordes,  and  a  fmall  quantity  of  blood,  may  be


iy) N.J.

(sr)  EpilL  40.  n.  29.

(*)  Vid.  etiam  Epift.  60.  n,  12.


{a)  Se£l.  hac  in  Schol.  ad  obf.  4.

CiJ  Mem.  del' Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  171 1.

(1)  Supra  n,  7.

fwept


Letter  XLIV. Article  26.  613

Iwept  away,  and  carried  down,  from  ulcers  that  occupy  the  urethra,  the
proftate  gland,  and  feminal  caruncle,  by  the  ejaculated  femen,  which  is  in
other  refpefts  found.

For  it  does  not  always,  and  of  courfe,  follow,  that  the  diforder  is  com-
municated to  the  veficles,  even  from  the  ulcers  of  thofe  neighbouring  and
laft-mention'd  parts ;  notwithftanding  I  have  faid  that  it  may  be  communi-
cated without  difficulty.

26.  But  is  the  tranfition  of  this  difeafe,  from  the  veficles  into  the  teftes,
equally  eafy  ?

That  the  virulent  matter  regurgitates  fron  the  veficles  into  the  tefl:icles,  that
thefe  glands  become  tumid  thereby,  and  are  in  part  the  feat  of  the  gonorrhoea,
when  the  difcharge  of  the  matter  is  prevented  by  the  force  of  aftringent
remedies,  Wharton  has  taught  us  (d)  ;  for  the  words  of  this  author  are,  al-
though this  is  not  very  clearly  fhown  in  the  Sepulchretum  (e),  nearly  what
de  Graaf  (f)  has  not  only  foUow'd,  but  copied;  even  at  the  time,  when,  to
confirm  this,  he  fays  that  the  gonorrhoea  of  women,  "  without  doubt,  pro-
"  ceeds  from  their  teftes,"  as  they  have  no  proftates.

Yet  de  Graaf  mufl,  of  courfe,  have  reiefted  this  confirmation  afterwards  C^),
when  he  aflerted  that  women  not  only  have  profl:ates,  but  are  without  anv
fluid  femen  in  their  tefticles.

But  if  Wharton,  or  de  Graaf,  at  the  time  when  hefollow'd  the  opinion  of
Wharton,  had  call'd  to  mind  the  obfervation  of  Panarolus  (h) ;  who  fays  that  in
a  woman,  who  died  after  a  continual  gonorrhoea,  "  a  vomica  was  alfo  found
"  in  one  of  the  teftes  ;"  they  would,  perhaps,  have  drawn  an  argument  from
hence,  in  favour  of  this  their  opinion  ;  but  a  very  weak  one  ;  fince  Panarolus
has  not  entitled  that  obfervation  (z),  which  is  not  accurately  copied,  as  Bo-
netus  has  done,  by  prefixing  thefe  words,  "  a  gonorrhoea  generated  in  a  wo-
"  man  by  a  vomica  in  one  of  her  tefl-es ;"  but  has  given  quite  a  diff'erent  view-
of  it,  by  faying,  "  a  vomica  in  the  teftes  of  a  woman,  from  an  old  go-
norrhoea."

For  there  is  no  doubt,  but  the  venereal  virus  may  be  carried,  from  the
feat  of  an  old,  and  long-continued  gonorrhoea,  into  the  ovaria  alfo  ;  as  well
as  into  other  parts  ■,  after  it  has  been  abforb'd  by  the  lymphse-dufts,  or
by  the  fanguiferous  veffels,  ,-and  has  infefted  the  whole  mafs  of  blood  :  nor
does  that  pafTage  'from  the  vagina,  through  the  hypogaftric  arteries,  to  the
ovaria,  which  has  been  thought  of  by  Vercelloni  [k),  pleafe  me  any  better
than  many  other  things  which  we  read  in  his  work  ;  as  if  the  arteries  receiv'd
any  thing,  from  the  parts  near  to  which  they  pafs,  to  tranfmit  to  fome  dif-
tant  parts.

The  feat  of  the  gonorrhoea,  then,  is  not  to  be  fuppos'd  in  the  tefticles  of
women,  from  the  obfervation  of  Panarolus.

But  muft we not,  at  leaft, allow  it  to have  a  feat  in  the  tefticles  of


(J)  Adenogr.  c,  31.  , (/.)  Pentec  1.  obf.  14.

{/)  Seft.  hac  Schol.  2.  ad  obf.  5,  (/)  6.  in  fefl.  hac.

(/)  Ibid.  Schol.  ult.  ad  obf.  i.  {i)  De  Morb.  Pudend.  c.  3.  §.-3.

(^)  De  Mulier,  Organ. General,  c.  6,  in
fine.


We


6 14  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

We  may  allow  of  it  with  fomewhat  lefs  difficulty ;  fuppofmg  it  be  con^
firm'd  however,  by  other  obfervations,  befides  that  of  the  tumour  of  thefe
parts,  when  the  difcharge  of  a  gonoithosa  is  fupprefs'd  by  allringents.

For  it  is  by  no  means  neceflary,  if  the  tumour  of  a  part  follow  the  violent
and  fudden  fuppreffion  of  any  difcharge,  to  have  immediate  recourfe  to  this
fuppofition  ;  that  the  matter  had  before  jBow'd  from  the  now  tumid  part,  or
has,  at  prefent,  regurgitated  into  it.

Yet  that,  by  the  improper  ufe  of  aftringents,  the  irritation  and  inflam-
mation may  be  increas'd,  and  propagated  from  the  upper  part  of  the  urethra,
and  the  adjoining  veficles,  by  the  vafa  deferentia,  to  the  tefbicles,  and  that
this  may  be  lb  much  the  more  eafily,  and  fpeedily  produc'd,  alio,  to  iuch  a
degree,  as  the  paffage  of  the  femen  betwixt  thefe  veflels,  and  the  tefticles,  is
almoft  intercepted,  and  by  this  fluid,  which  is,  confequently,  retarded  in  its
courfe,  the  tefticles  are  diftended  ;  and  finally,  that  the  matter,  which  was
difcharg'd  by  the  urethra,  may  enter  the  general  channel  of  the  blood,  and
be  carried  therewith,  into  the  tefticles  •,  we  do  not  deny.

But  you  fee  that  there  is  one  of  thefe  methods,  I  mean  the  fecond,  by
which  you  may  conceive  of  the  tefticles  being  tumid,  and  yet  not  infefted
with  a  venereal  contagion  ;  and  confequently  not  become  the  feat  of  the  vi-
rulent gonorrhoea.

27.  And  the  pafllige  from  the  urethra  to  the  kidnies,  is  not  a  little  longer
than  to  the  tefticles:  and  yet,  that  the  diforder,  if  it  is  continued  for  a  very
long  time,  may  creep  to  a  diftance  from  the  urethra,  "  and  inl'eft  the  bladder
"  and  ureters,  and  at  length  even  the  kidnies  themfelves,"  is  affirm'd  by  Do-
don^us  [1).

For  I  have  obferv'd,  that  they  are  the  words  of  this  author,  which  you  will
read  in  the  firft  part  of  the  Scholium,  to  the  fourth  obfervacion,  of  this  thirty-
firft  fedlion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  which  is  taken  from  Dodonsus  himfelf ;
but  neither  there,  nor  in  the  title  to  which  we  are  refer'd,  Ds  Hypognflrii  Do-
loribiis,  that  is  in  the  twenty-third  feiStion,  where  it  is  given  under  obfervation
the  fixth,  article  the  fourth,  is  it  wholly  copied :  fince  neither  in  one  place,
nor  the  other,  mention  is  made  of  the  whole  urethra  being  ulcerated,}  asi^
fiU'd  with  coagulated  blood.  >' '-'^'  •^'-nJo -oiTii ^

But  that  the  diforder  ftiould  creep  fo  far  as  t<i  the  kidnies,  "  a  long  con-
*'  tinuance"  is,  as  you  fee,  requir'd  by  Dodonaeus-,  and  the  gonorrhoea,
which  is  fpoken  of  in  that  obfervation,  had  lafted  eighteen  years.

However,  in  what  manner,  where  the  bladder  is  ulcerated,  the  diforder
may  be  communicated  ftill  much  fooner,  by  the  urine,  to  the  ureters,  and
kidnies  -,  I  have  already  fnown  in  a  former  letter  (;»)  :  from  which  place  yoa
might  prudently  fele6t  fome  things  as  joint  caufes,  if  there  were  any  occafion,
and  accommodate  them  to  this  obfervation  of  Dodonasus  -,  not  to  mention
three  of  mine  which  are  not  far  unlike  it.

For,  in  fo  long-continued,  and  fo  fevere  a  gonorrhoea,  what  a  dyfuria,  and
what  a  ftrangury,  there  muft  have  been  fometimes,  is  fufficiently  apparent ;
and  the  bladder  being  plane  iigida,  quite  rigid  {not  plane  fri^ida,  quite  cold,

(ly  Medic.  Obfervat.  c,  41.  (»)  Supra,  n. 15. &  EpiJl.  IV.  n.  19. &

}m)  42.  n.  23.  XLII.  n.  40.

as,


Letter  XLV. Article i.  615

as,  by  a  typographical  error,  it  is  moft  ftupidly  perverted  in  the  Sepulchre-
turn)  "  could  neither  be  diftended  nor  contratled."

But  that  the  kidnies  may  be  vitiated  from  long  and  repeated  gonorrhoeas,
without  the  bladder's  being  affedled,  appears  very  clearly,  and  evidently  ;
even  from  that  hiftory  of  Valfalva,  which  I  gave  you  in  the  beginning  of  the
fame  letter  (o) ;  the  diforder,  confequently,  not  creeping  on  from  the  ure-
thra, but  entering  into  the  paflages  of  the  blood,  and  paffing  on,  through
thofe,  to  the  kidnies.

However,  be  this  as  it  will;  I  Ihall  not  fuppofe  the  bladder,  the  ureters,
and  the  kidnies,  to  be  the  feat  of  the  gonorrhoea  for  that  reafon ;  not  only
becaufe  no  femen,  nor  fluid  relating  thereto,  flows  down  from  thofe  parts ;
but  alfo  becaufe  an  ichor  diflilling  therefrom,  cannot,  unlefs  the  fphindler  of
the  bladder  happens  to  be  injur'd,  come,  at  any  time,  into  the  urethra,  by
drops,  without  urine,  and  bely  a  gonorrhoea.  But  it  is  time  to  conclude.
Farewell.

(0)  N.  2.


LETTER the FORTY-FIFTH

Treats  of  the  Defcent  of  the  Uterus, and  likewife  of
the  Afcent,  as  Women  call  it.


WHAT  Hippocrates  has  faid  {a);  that  "the  uterus,  when  mov'd
"  out  of  its  natural  fituation,  to  any  other  part,  brings  on  difeafes,
"  whether  it  proceed  outwards,  or  be  retrafted  internally  ;"  will  be  the  fub-
jeft  of  this  letter,  which  will  anfwer  to  the  two  next  fedtions  of  the  Sepul-
chretum  ;  that  is,  to  the  thirty-fecond,  De  Uteri  Procidentia  Defcenfu  £5?  ciet.
and  the  thirty-third,  De  Hyftericis  Affeoiibus,  Suffocatiom  &  cat.

For  I  thought  it  proper,  to  comprife  thefe  two  fpecies  of  diforder  in  this
one  letcer,  lefl:  it  fhould,  perhaps,  be  too  fhort  \  fince  Valfalva  has  left  no
difiedlions,  which  relate  to  thefe  diforders,  and  I  have  very  few :  I  hope,
however,  you  will  receive  thefe,  fuch  as  they  are,  with  a  willing  and  atten-
tive mind,  as  you  have  receiv'd  thofe  that  I  have  fent  you  hitherto.

2.  Firfl:  then,  in  refpeft  to  the  prolapfus,  or  defcent,  of  the  uterus,  you
know  very  well  that,  with  Fernelius  (^),  there  was  then  a  defcent  of  the  ute-

[a]  De  loc.  in  horn.  n.  59.  {b)  Pathol,  1.  6.  c,  16,

ruSj
2


6i6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

rus,  when  it  had  fallen  downwards,  though  it  had  :not  yet  fallen  outwards;
and  a  prolapfus,  when  it  is  inverted  and  thrown  out  of  the  body ;  which  can
happen  only  from  the  great  violence  of  labour-pains :  except  that  it  may
fometimes,  alio,  happen,  from  the  rafhnefs  of  an  imprudent  midwife,  who
takes  away  the  feciindines  with  violence.

And  he  would  have  treated  of  the  fubjeft  fully,  if  he  had  not  omitted  an-
other kind  of  prolapfus  -,  I  mean  that  kind  in  which  the  uterus  does  not  in-
vert itfelf,  but  being  fhut  up  within  the  inverted  vagina,  is  prolaps'd  out-
•wards.

For  in  the  defcent  of  the  uterus  alfo,  the  vagina  muft  of  courfe  invert  it-
felf, in  the  fame  proportion  as  the  uterus  defcends.  And  this  part  inverts
itfelf,  from  the  fame  external,  or  internal  caufes,  that  give  occafion  to  the
defcent  of  the  uterus ;  that  is  to  fay,  thofe  which  at  the  fame  time  diftend,
or  relax  the  ligaments  of  both  thefe  parts,  and  among  thefe  caufes,  how  we
may  reckon  the  uterus  itfelf,  and  the  vagina,  I  fhall  ihow  you  below  (c).

Befides  thefe  true  defcents,  or  prolapfes,  of  the  uterus,  there  is  alfo  a  pro-
lapfus of  the  vagina  -,  not  only  the  more  flight,  but  fometimes  fo  great  a
one,  and  of  fuch  a  kind,  that  it  may  be  taken  for  the  prolapfus  uteri,  which
I  took  notice  of  in  the  fecond  place  •,  one  of  which  kind  you  will  fee  defcrib'd,
and  reprefented  in  a  plate,  by  Jo.  Gulielmus  Widmannus  {d);  who  found  it
to  be  made  up  only  of  the  internal  coat  of  the  vagina.

3.  All  thefe  fpecies  of  diforder  we,  alfo,  allow  to  have  been  taken  notice
of  by  the  ancient  phyficians ;  and  even  by  their  moft  ancient  mafter  Hippo-
crates.j  if  you  except  that  kind  of  prolapfus,  in  which  the  uterus  inverts  it-
felf.

Yet  that  this  was  hinted  at  by  Celfus  (e),  I  think  I  have  fufficiently  fhown
in  my  fourth  epiftle  upon  him.  And  that,  in  the  books  of  Hippocrates,  not
only  the  prolapfus  vagina  is  taken  notice  of,  under  the  title  of  "  the  uterus
"  falling  outwards  (/),"  the  cure  itfelf  fhows  ;  but  alfo,  that  the  true  defcent
of  the  uterus,  and  the  fecond  kind  of  prolapfe,  are  taken  notice  of,  the  fol-
lowing words  fhow  :  "  but  if  the  uterus  is  very  near  to  the  external  parts"
{g),  and  "  if  the  uterus  falls  quite  out  of  the  pudendum  ;  it  hangs  down  like
"  a  fcrotum  (h) :  but  if  the  os  uteri  fall  down  on  the  outfide  of  the  puden-
"  dum,  &  cset. "  (/).

As  almoft  all  thefe  things  were  juftly,  and  defervedly,  preferv'd  by  their
defcendants,  without  any  doubt,  down  fo  low  as  the  remembrance  of  our
fi^thers ;  and  as  even  many  perfons,  fome  at  one  time  and  fome  at  another,
had  not  doubted  that  the  uterus,  when  prolaps'd,  has  been  extirpated,  with-
out deftroying  the  woman  •,  and  that  not  very  feldom  neither,  though,  to  con-
fefs  the  truth,  with  too  great  a  credulity;  not  to  fay  any  thing  of  thofe  who
had  gone  fo  far,  as  to  contend,  that  children,  by  the  fpecial  grace  of  God,
had  been  procreated  by  thefe  women  afterwards  -,  there  arofe  at  length,  as
you  will  learn  from  the  Sepulchretum,  fome  men  fkilful  in  anatomy,  and
lurgery  ;  who,  although  they,  with  great  juftice,  argued  againft  the  exceffive

CcJ  N.  12.  i^gj  DeMorb.  Mullebr.  1  2.  n.  37.

C^J  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  8.  obf.  98.  (k)  Ibid.  n.  38.

{e)  De  Medic,  in  Pra;fat.  (0  lb.  n.  39.

^/J  De  Exfeft.  fost.  n.  4.

credulity


Letter  XL V. Article  4.  617

credulity  of  others,  yet  did  not  run  counter  to  it  with  the  greateft  propriety  :
as  they  not  only  granted  fome  things,  which  they  ought  not  to  have  granted,
but,  moreover,  even  denied  thofe  very  ancient,  and  found  doo-mata,  relative
to  the  prolapfus  uteri  -,  and  what  is  ilill  more  furprizing,  made  fome  cele-
brated mafters  in  both  thefe  faculties,  and  in  medicine,  their  followers  and
feftaries.

4.  For  that  the  uterus  has  been,  fometimcs,  really  cut  out,  "  in  an  extra-
"  ordinary  and  very  rare  cafe,"  yet  that  the  woman  lias  iurviv'd,  why  fhould
we  not  rather  fay  with  Georgius  Wolffg,  Wedelius  {k),  than  that  it  never  has
been,  with  Jo.  Guilielmus  Pauli  (/),  who  treats  of  this  fubjedl,  in  other  re-
fpefts,  learnedly  ?

For  it  is  too  hard  to  pronounce,  that,  out  of  fo  many  who  have  aflerted  this
to  have  been  donCj  or  feen,  by  them,  there  could  not  be  any  one  that  was
not  dcceiv'd  ?

And  certainly  if  the  obfervation  of  Slevogtius  (m),  had  been  then  ptblifh'd,
or  had  come  to  his  hands ;  he  would  at  leall,  as  well  as  Abraham  Vater  (»),
have  acknowledg'd  this  to  have  been  free  from  all  deceit.

For  Slevogtius,  upon  cleanfing,  from  its  ibrdes,  a  large  body,  that  was  cut
out  from  the  pudendum  of  a  woman ;  which  he  fuppos'd  to  be  an  excrefcence ; '
contrary  to  his  expeftation  found  it  to  contain  the  uterus,  like  a  thick  bag,
together  with  the  remains  of  its  tubes,  and  in  a  natural  ftate  :  and  this  was
feen  by  the  profeflbrs  at  the  univerfity  of  Jena,  by  moft,  other  phyficians,
and  by  a  hundred  ftudents  :  yet  this  v/oman  v/as  very  happily  reftor'd.

But  if  you  interrupt  me  by  inquiring,  why  neither  this  woman,  nor  any-
other,  was  immediately  carried  off;  either  by  a  confiderable  hsemorrhap-e,
from  fome  of  the  larger  vefTels  of  the  uterus  being  cut  through,  or,  foon
after,  by  the  large  wound,  which,  when  the  bladder  hangs  dov/nwards,  toge-
ther with  the  uterus,  mull  neceffarily  be  inflifted  thereon,  as  is  remark'd  by
Ruyfch  fo);  to  the  firft,  I  fhall,  perhaps,  anfwer,  that  the  veflels  being  lono-
diftrafted,  and  therefore  contrafted,  and  a  corruption  moreover  gradually
helping  the  feparation,  as  is  the  cafe  in  the  flefli,  that  is  dead  from  a  fphace-
lus,  no  great  quantity  of  blood  could  be  pour'd  out :  and  to  the  fecond,
either  that  the  vagina  was  inverted  only  in  its  upper  part,  or  v/as  not  inver-
ted in  the  external  coat,  whereby  it  is  join'd  to  the  bladder-,  but  only  in  its
internal  coat ;  fo  that  it  could  not  draw  the  bladder  down  v/ith  it.

But  if  you  cannot  approve  of  thefe  replies,  and  fuppofe  the  circumftances
to  have  happen'd;  for  I  am  not  univerfally  pleas'd  v/ith  them  myfelfj  you
will,  of  yourfelf,  endeavour  to  find  out  better  hypothefes :  for  we  muft  take
care  that  we  do  not  feem  to  diftruft  Slevogtius,  or  any  other  author  of  emi-
nence and  credit,  who  afferts  that  he  had  examin'd  the  cafe,  either  in  the
body  that  had  been  extirpated,  or  in  the  carcafe  after  death.

I  could  wilh  Molinetti  had  made  this  examination  (which  he  could  have
done  eafily  and  well)  as  he  fays  (/>), that  "  he  had  always  experienc'd "  the

(i)  Differt.  de  Procid.  Uteri,  c.  4.  (»)  DifT.  de  Sarcom.  e  Pundend.  Muliebr.  &

ClJ  Progr.  addit.  Diff.  Schacheri  de Placents  cat.  thef.  7.
Morbis.  (0)  Thef.  Anat.  8.  n.  102.

CmJ  Vid.  in  cake  obf.  Van  Sanden  de  Pro- (/)  Differt.  Anat.  Pathol.  1.  6.  c.  12-
lapfu  Uteri.

Vol.  IL  4  K  method


6i8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

method  of  amputating  the  uterus,  "  to  be  very  fafe  -,  and  that  he  had
"  made  ule  of  it  many  times,  efpecially  in  old  women  :"  in  whom,  as  the  in-
verfion  of  the  uterus,  whereof  he  fays  thefe  things,  is  more  rare,  fo  ouo-ht
the  examination  to  be  made  with  the  more  accuracy  after  amputation  •,  left
any  error  fhould  have  crept  in:  the  fufpicion  of  which,  that  perpetual  felicity
of  cure  leems  to  increafe.

There  is  even  another  much  more  recent  obfervation  ;  of  the  uterus  being
inverted,  an^d  fuccefsfully  cut  out ;  in  which  you  would  wifh  that  the  exami-
nation, after exfedion,  had  not  been  omitted;  as  before  this,  the  cafe  is  faid  to
have  been  fimilartothat  related  from  Wepfer,  in  the  Ephemerides  of  the  famous
AcdAemy Natura  Curioforum  Dec.  2.  A.  5.  Obf.  50 ;  where  you  not  only  do  not
find  the  uterus  inverted,  but  even  an  excrefcence,  which  Wepfer  himfelf  had
fhown  (3)  might  belong  rather  to  the  vagina,  than  to  the  uterus  :  and  he  even
affirm'd  it  to  have  belong'd  thereto,  from  what  happen'd  to  the  woman,  in
the  fpace  of  two  years  afterwards  (r).

Nor  indeed  ought  we  to  require  an  accurate  examination  of  the  uterus,  when
inverted,  only,  but  alfo  when  prolaps'd  outwardly,  with  the  vagina,  in  the
living  and  dead  body  ;  efpecially  after  it  is  certain  from  the  obfervation  of
Widmannus,  which  has  been  quoted  (i),  that  the  prolapfus  of  the  inverted
vagina  alone,  may  fometimes  fo  impofe  upon  the  obferver,  as  to  make  hini
believe  that  the  uterus  was  prolaps'd  within  it,  at  the  fame  time.

For  if  you  compare  the  figures  of  Ruyfch  (t),  which  exprefs  this  fecond
cafe,  with  the  figure  of  Widmannus,  which  reprefents  the  firft,  you  will  find
nodifi^erence  ;  to  omit  other  things-,  in  that  which  v/as  confider'd  as  the  chief
fign  to  diftinguifli  one  from  the  other.

That  is  to  fay,  as  the  os  internum  uteri,  is  in  the  middle  and  lower  part,
of  the  prolaps'd  body,  in  the  figures  of  Ruyfch ;  fo  you  would  alfo  fup-
pofe  that  you  perceive  it  in  that  of  Widmann :  whereas  the  difleftion  will
fhow,  that  it  was  only  an  appearance,  made  up  of  the  vagina ;  as  by  this  the
internal  coat  of  the  vagina,  being  much  thicken'd,  v;as  itfelf  found  to  be  pro-
laps'd ;  but  the  uterus  was  found  in  its  natural  fituation.

By  what  means  then,  you  will  fay,  fliali  v/e  diftinguifh  the  cafe  in  a  living
woman  ?  A  thing  of  the  laft  moment,  certainly,  where  the  queftion  is  of
amputating  the  tumour !

I'he  fame  enquiry  has  been  made  by  Abraham  Vaterfz/),  as  by  you.  But
he  has  determin'd  nothing  :  and  has  even  declar'd,  that  any  obvious  fign  is
ufelefs,  depending  upon  that  very  difieftion  of  Widmann.

To  me  hovvever,  from  another  certain  circumftance,  which,  being  obferv'd
before  the  difieftion,  by  Widmann,  made  him  begin  to  doubt  whether  thac
which  feem'd  to  be  the  uterus  was  really  fo  or  not ;  to  me,  I  fay,  a  thought
arofe,  of  taking  a  fign  from  this  very  circumftance,  whereby  we  may  know
whether  fuch  a  tumour  be  made  up  of  the  uterus  or  not.

For  without  doubt,  if  a  long  probe  be  introduc'd  through  the  orifice,:
which  appears  to  be  that  of  the  uterus,  and  the  fame  thing  happens  to  the
introducer,  that happen'd  to  Widmann  ; I  mean  that  the  probe  may  be

In)  In  Schol.  ad  n.  4.  W  Obf.  Atiat.  Chir.  fig.,  2.  8.  1 1.

(r)  Dec.  ead.  2.  a.  7.  obf.  54.  («)  Differt.  de  Polypoex  Utero  cgrefTp  theC

(i)  Supra,  n,  2.  iO-

pufh'da


Letter  XLV. Article  5.  619

puih'd,  without  any  obftacle,  far  beyond  the  natural  length  of  the  uterine  cavi-
ty, and  yet  not  come  to'the  full  extent  of  the  prolaps'd  body ;  and  the  tumour
is,  at  the  fame  time,  not  eroded  by  an  internal  putrefaftion  ;  a  proof,  in  my
opinion,  will  be  given,  that  this  orifice  does  not  belong  to  the  uterus,  but
only  to  the  vagina  -,  and  fuch  a  proof  as,  to  my  apprehenfion,  ought  not,  in
an  ambiguous,  and  very  difficult  cafe,  to  be  defpis'd  :  but  if  the  contrary
happens,  to  the  contrary  conclufion  may  we  fairly  be  biafs'd.

And  if  they  who  have  contended  that  the  uterus  never  defcends,  nor  is
prolaps'd,  had  examin'd  the  cafe  very  frequently  in  dead  bodies  by  difleftion  ;
they  would  have  thought,  that  we  were  not  under  a  necefllty  of  refering  all
the  obfervations,  of  others,  to  the  prolapfes  of  the  vagina  alone,  or  to  the
excrefcences  of  that,  and  the  os  uterinum :  as  if,  in  faft,  it  were  impoffible,
that  what  they  themfelves  had  not  feen  fhould  ever  have  been  feen  by  any
other  perfon.

5.  Indeed  we  very  readily,  and  without  any  reluflance,  grant  thefe  gen-
tlemen, that  they  who  affert  their  having  cut  away  the  uterus,  have  been,
almoft  all  of  them,  deceiv'd  by  excrefcences  of  that  kind  ;  or  by  prolapfes
of  the  vagina :  and  this  alfo  muft  be  confeis'd,  whether  they  are  willing  or  nor,
by  thofe  who  have  told  us  that  the  women  have  brought  forth  children  after
the  excifion  ;  unlefs  they  fhould  perhaps  contend,  that  two  of  the  moil  extra-
ordinary things  imaginable,  had  happen'd  in  one  and  the  fame  woman ;  firft,
that  fhe  fhould  furvive  the  excifion  of  the  uterus  ;  and  fccondly,  that  fiie
fliould  have  a  double  uterus  from  the  original  formation.

But,  as  I  had  begun  to  fay,  does  it  follow  from  this  >  that  fo  many  furgeons-
have  been  deceiv'd  in  taking  excrefcences,  and  prolapfes  of  the  vagina,  for
the  uterus;  does  it  follow,  I  fay,  from  hence,  that  all  have  been  equally  de-
ceiv'd, who  have  aflerted  that  they  have  feen  a  defcent  of  the  uterus,  or  a  pro-
lapfus  thereof?

That  this  certainly  does  not  follow,  not  only  reafon  itfelf  evidently  fhows ;
but  alfo  a  great  number  of  obfervations,  which  may  be  added  to  forae  that
are  producM  in  the  Sepulchretum,  demonftrate.

Slevogtius  (x)  will  point  out  thefe  obfervations,  though  I  am  filcnt ;  and
Van  Sanden  (jy)  likewife ;  who  is  very  full  in  colle6ting  thofe  obfervations,
which  belong  to  this  fedlion  of  the  Sepulchretum  ;  that  is  the  thirty-fecond  :
in  the  additamenta  of  which  feftion,  it  is  furprizing,  in  the  firft  place,  that
thofe  obfervations  fhould  be  wanting,  which  might,  at  that  time,  have  been,
taken  from  the  Centuria  of  Ruyfch ;  and  in  the  fecond  place,  that  we  do  not
meet  even  with  the  obfervation  which  we  find  in  that  well  known  book  of
Bohn,  and  which  I  fhall  take  iiotice  of  prefently.

To  thefe  you  will  add  thofe  that  were  not  then  extant  •,  part  of  which  have
been  already  refer'd  to,  and  part  of  which  will  be  refer'd  to  below ;  and
others  befides  thefe,  either  of  the  defcent  of  the  uterus,  or  of  the  prolapfus
of  it ;  to  which  belong  one  of  Vater's  (z),  and  one  of  the  celebrated  Phila-
dolphus  Boehmerus(aj  :  both  of  which,  as  well  as  the  others,  are  very  cleady
confirm'd  by  difleftion.

(x)  Differt.  de  Muliere  gravida  lapfu  Vag.  (zj  Differt.  de  Polypo  &  cset.  ibid.  crt.
XJteri,  &  CEt.  §.  1-2.  '  thef.  8.  in  fine.

Xy)  Obf.  fupra  ad  n.  4.  cit.  (a)  Differt.  de  Pjolapf.  &  Inverf.  Uteri,  ia

Prafat.

4  K  2  6.  How-


620  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

6.  Flowever,  although  "  the  fight  of  an  inverted  uterus,  is  too  rare  "to
phyficians,  and  furgeons,  as  I  have  written  in  that  epiftle  upon  Celfus  {b) ;
and  although  de  Graaf  has  laid  (cj,  that  "  this  happens  very  rarely  -,"  yet  that
this  is  not  very  rare  to  midwives,  and  elpecially  to  the  unfkilful,  and  happens
■very  often  in  the  child-bearing  women  of  Ibme  countries,  I  underftand  from
books ;  and  in  particular  from  the  fecond  Decade  {d)  of  Ruyfch's  Adver-
faria.

For  it  appears  plainly  from  thence,  that  the  uterus  is  not  always  forc'd
down,  and  inverted,  by  the  unflcilfulnefs  of  midwives-,  nor  from  the  violence
of  pains,  at  the  time  of  child-bearing ;  but  alfo  from  the  attempts  made
*'  to  unload  the  uterus,  after  birth."

There  is  another  caufe  befides,  but,  in  regard  to  this  effedt,  far  more  rare";
I  mean  when  a  very  large  excrefcence,  that  had  form'd  itfelf  upon  the  fundus
uteri,  inverts  the  uterus  by  its  weight  •,  and  draws  it  downwards,  in  the  man-
ner that  Sandenius  has  propos'd  {e).

And  it  is  certain  that  anatomy  fhows  the  uterus  to  have  been  inverted  j
for  within  its  cavity,  form'd  by  that  furface,  which  had  been  before  exter^
nal,  the  ligaments  of  the  uterus,  the  Falloppian  tubes,  and  the  ovaries,  have
been  found  to  be  contain'd.

And  in  this  way  you  will  very  eafily  conceive  how  it  could  happen  ;  in  the
obfervation  transferr'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  (f),  from  Henricus  ab  Heer,
upon  a  uterus  cut  out  by  a  mountebank  ;  that  a  confiderable  part  of  the  in-
teftine  colon  was  prolaps'd,  and  was  amputated  together  with  it ;  in  confe-
quence  of  being  contain'd  within  its  cavity,  when  inverted.

You  will  alfo  gather  from  an  obfervation  of  Sandenius  (g),  that  a  womant
may  fometimes  live  many  weeks  with  the  uterus  inverted,  and  not  replac'd  j
and  even  from  the  cure  of  Genfelius  (h),  that  the  woman  has  been  fav'd  by
reftoring  the  uterus,  at  length,  to  its  fituation,  after  having  been  difplac'd
for  many  days.

But  thefe  things  are  rare,  if  you  compare  them  with  fo  many  other  cafes
that  were  fpeedily  fatal  •,  to  which  we  mufh  add  that  produc'd  by  Bohn  (i),  of
a  woman,  who  had  brought  forth  her  firft  child,  dying  within  lefs  than  an
hour  after  the  uterus  had  been  violently  drawn  down  from  its  feat,  which
was  found  to  be  empty  ;  and  that  alfo  related,  from  Chapman,  by  Boehme-
rus  {k)  already  quoted  -,  in  which,  if  I  rightly  underftand  it,  the  woman  died
ftill  fooner  from  the  like  accident.

The  other  prolapfus  of  the  uterus  likewife,  that  is  without  inverfion,  is
neither  fo  frequent,  that  "  Blafius,  in  his  commentaries  upon  Veflingius,  related
"  a  whole  catalogue  of  the  obfervers  of  it,"  as  de  Graaf  has  blunderingly
written  (/)  -,  nor  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  fo  rare,  that  "  nobody  befides
"  Ruyfch"  has  ever  feen  it ;  which  would  never  have  efcap'd  Widmann  («»),

(^)  IV. ,  ('z?.)  Aft.  Erudit.  Lipf.  A.  1716.  M.  Maj.

(c)  De  Mulier.  Organ,  c.  10.  (0  De  Renunc.  Vulner.  feft.  z.  c.  4.  verC

\d)  C.  10.  finem.

uS  Obf.  fupra  ad  n.  4.  cit.  (k)  Diflert.  fupra  ad  n.  5.  cit.  §.  13.

(f)  Sea.  hac  obf.  6.  (/)  C.  cit.  10.

is)  5"  27'  ^"'^  '^^^'  ^"P""^  Si^Ti.  2.  cit.

if


Letter  XL V. Article  7,  8,  9, 10,  11. 621

if  he  had  not  forgotten,  as  frequently  happens  in  fuch  cafes,  the  obferva-
tions  of  Platerus  («),  and  Peyerus  (o).

The  defcent  of  the  uterus  rather,  and  the  prolapfus  of  the  vagina  chiefly,
occurs  pretty  frequently.  It  has  therefore  happen'd,  that  I  have  never  heard
of  the  prolapfus  uteri,  when  inverted,  more  than  once,  in  this  country  j
and  of  the  uterus,  without  inverfion,  not  fo  much  as  once.

But  the  defcent  of  the  uterus,  and  the  prolapius  of  the  vagina,  I  have
ibmetimes  feen,  not  only  in  the  living  body,  but  made  obfervations  upon,  in
the  dead.

7.  Being  afk'd  to  examine  the  genitals  of  a  woman  of  reputation,
about  five  and  twenty  years  of  age,  in  order  to  determine  the  nature
of  a  certain  body,  of  a  round  figure,  like  a  penis,  which  hung  down  within
the  vagina ;  I  immediately  perceiv'd  it  to  be  the  cervix  uteri,  which  had
fallen  down  below  the  middle  of  the  vagina.

The  ofculum  uteri,  as,  though  the  woman  was  married,  (he  had  never
born  children,  was  narrow,  and  almoft  in  the  fhape  of  a  circle  :  and  from
thence  I  faw  a  little  blood  proceed  ;  for  the  woman  had  lately  menftruated  ;.
fo  that  if  any  one  fhould  doubt  whether  the  menftrual  blood  comes  from  the
uterus,  or  not,  he  might  have  been  convinc'd  by  this  infpedlion.

But  now  I  will  tell  you  what  we  have  obferv'd  in  dead  bodies  ;  firfl:  in
beads,  and  after  that  in  women ;  for  by  this  means  it  will  be  clear  and  evi-
dent, that  thefe  diforders  are  brought  on,  not  only  by  weight,  but  by  other
caufes  alfo,  which  zSt  on  our  bodies,  according  to  the  mechanifm  thereof.

What  I  fhall  firft  relate  I  formerly  receiv'd  from  Valfalva.

8.  When  he  was  diffedling  a  bitch,  which  died  pregnant,  he  found  the  va-
gina inverted  ;  and  the  adjoining  uterus  confidcrably  nearer  to  the  orifice  of
the  vagina  than  ufual.  And  this  change  in  the  fituation  of  the  uterus  was
alfo  confirmed  by  the  cornua,  and  efpecially  the  right  •,  in  which  were  three
young  whelps.  For  they  had  follow'd  the  uterus  tov/ards  the  vagina,  and  not
at  any  great  diftance.

9.  A  cow,  which  had  been  fubjefb  to  a  prolapfus  of  the  vagina,  the  ma-
fter  of  her  would  have  to  be  kill'd  for  this  very  reafon,  when  flie  was  ad-
vanc'd  feven  months  in  her  pregnancy ;  fearing  left  fhe  fhould  die  in  bring-
ing forth  her  young ;  fo  that  her  vifcera,  and  flefli,  would  be  fold  at  a  very
low  price.

Having  got  the  vagina,  together  with  the  uterus,  I  found  the  former  in-
verted to  fome  confiderable  extent;  where  it  is  connedled  with  the  extremity
of  the  cervix  uteri.  But  in  that  part  it  was  not  without  ulceration.  What
I  obferv'd  in  the  uterus  and  the  foetus,  was  agreeable  to  their  nature ;  for
which  reafon  it  does  not  belong  to  this  place.

ID.  But  as,  in  thefe  brute  animals,  the  difeafe  could  not  be  imputed  to  the
weight  forcing  or  drawing  downwards ;  fo  in  women  I  believe  that  it  fre-
quently may  be :  as  it  might  in  her  of  whom  I  fhall  fpeak  immediately.

II.  An  old  woman  of  Bologna  had  already  been  hemipleftic  many  years,
fo  as  not  to  be  able  to  move  one  fide  of  her  body ;  when  at  length  fhe
loll  the  power  of  motion  in  the  other  alfo. The  fame  woman  was  faid  to

(»)  L,  3.  (0)  lijAdditam.  adhanc  Sepulchr.  feft.  obf.  5.

3  have


62  2  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Bell/.

have  a  certain  round  body  prominent  from  her  genitals.  Lail:  of  all  fbe  was
leiz'd  with  an  inflammation  of  the  thorax,  and  died  in  this  hofpitaU  where
we  diffcded  her  body  about  the  year  1704.

The  thorax  we  did  not  meddle  with^  being  taken  up  with  other  dif-
feftions.

The  head,  which  was  open'd  by  fome  of  my  friends,,  fliow'd  nothing
v/orthy  of  notice ;  except  ferum  betwixt  the  dura  and  pia  macer.

I  myfelf  examin'd,  with  fome  accuracy,  the  thyroid  gland  ;  as  it  was  tu-.
mid,  and  very  hard  ;  and  the  belly  likewife,  as  to  what  related  to  the  ute-
rus, and  the  other  genitals.  What  I  found  in  that  gland  is  fufficiently  Hiown
ellewhere  (p).

But  in  the  belly,  I  obferv'd  that  the  fundus  uteri  had  a  fomewhat  lower
fituation  than  it  generally  has ;  yet  not  fo  much  as  to  make  me  fufpeft,  that
the  orifice  thereof  could  come  where  it  really  did,  as  I  fhall  tell  you  pre-
lently.

On  the  outfide  of  the  labia  of  the  pudendum,  which  was  much  dilated,
a  body  of  the  length  of  three  or  four  inches  was  prominent :  this  body  was
of  a  cylindrical  form,  very  thick,  made  up  of  a  fubftance,  fimilar  to  a  liga-
ment, and  fmooth ;  unlefs  where  it  was  ulcerated  at  the  bottom.

That  it  was  the  vagina  inverted  I  readily  perceiv'd.  Wherefore,  at  the
upper  anterior  part  of  this  body,  was  the  orifice  of  the  urethra;  and  under
this,  on  each  fide  one,  were  foramina  of  lacunas  confiderably  dilated.

And  in  the  middle  of  the  lower  part  was  an  orifice,  that  foon  led  to  the
ofculum  uteri,  through  which  I  pafs'd  a  probe,  without  any  diiEculty,.  quite
to  the  upper  parietes  of  the  cavity  of  the  uterus.

;  Being  furpriz'd  at  this  unufual  length,  I  cut  into  the  vagina  -,  and  within
it  I  foiind  the  cervix  uteri  contain'd,  having  become  very  much  longer  than
it  naturally  is  :  nor  was  this  to  be  wonder'd  at ;  fince  the  parietes  of  the  cer-
vix itfelf,  and  the  fundus  uteri,  were  not  firm,  as  they  are  in  their  natural
ftate,  but  extremely  lax,  and  flaccid  :  as  all  the  other  parts,  that  had  their
feat  in  the  pelvis,  and  belong'd  to  the  uterus,  were  likewife,

12.  It  is  evident  that  the  uteriTS,  whofe  fundus  v/as  fomewhat  lower  than
ufual,  had  been  drawn  downwards  by  the  weight  of  the  vagina  thus  thicken'd;
unlefs  the  cervix,  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  diforder,  fuppofe,  was  of
fuch  a  laxity,  as  to  fuffer  itfelf  to  be  drawn  downwards  more  than  the  other
parts,  and  be  diftended  into  that  extraordinary  length :  for  I  do  not  imagine
that  length  of  it,  which  Vaterus  (q)  tells  us  was  feen  by  him\  when,  on  one
hand,  the  prolaps'd  vagina  drew  the  uterus  downwards,  and  on  the  other  the
enormous  fize  of  the  ovarium  prevented  it  from  defcending  any  farther ;
to  have  been  comparable  with  this.

But  in  another  woman,  whom  I  defcrib'd  to  you  in  the  thirty-fourth  let-
ter (r),  the  increas'd  thicknefs,  and,  confequently,  increas'd  weight,  of  the
corpus  glandofum  urethra,  had  indeed  drav;n  the  uterus  fomewhat  down-
wards :  but  becaufc  the  cervix  was  not  of  fuch  a  laxity,  the  orifiee  had  not  de-
icended  fo  far ;  for  which  reafon  this  very  corpus  glandofum,  being  perforated,

ff)  Epift.  Anat.  9.  n.  39.  (r)  N.  i.i.

(^J  DiiT.  de  Sarcom.  &  est.  fupra  ad  n.  4.
dt.  tbef.  3-


Letter  XLV. Article 13.  623

In  rhe  middle  of  its  lower  part,  with  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  refembled
the  orifice  of  the  uterus.  Nor,  indeed,  could  the  weight  of  the  uterus  bs
there  accus'd  ;  as  it  was  but  fmall,  and  the  parts  of  it  but  thin.

Yet  in  faying  this,  I  do  not  neceflarily  deny,  that  a  uterus,  overloaded  by
a  weight  which  is  preternatural,  does,  in  other  women,  invert  the  vagina ;
and  hurry  it  downwards  together  with  it ;  a  very  clear  inftance  of  which  you
have  in  the  obfervation  of  Hartmann,  that  is  related  among  the  Additamenta
to  the  twenty-firft  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  (s).

You  fee  then,  that  not  only  the  weight  of  the  vagina,  by  diftradling  the  liga--
ments  of  the  uterus,  fometimes  draws  this  downwards  to  the  lower  parts ;
but  alfo  that  the  weight  of  the  uterus,  at  other  times,  by  diftending  the
parts  which  conneifl  the  vagina,  inverts  this  cavity,  and  draws  it  downwards
with  itfelf.

For  both  the  ligaments  of  the  uterus,  and  the  connedling  parts  of  the  va^-
gina,  do  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  diftrafted  ;  as  they  are  membranous,  and
frequently  very  lax  from  internal  caufes ;  and  this  diftrattion,  whereof  we
fpeak,  is  often  known  to  be  coming  on  gradually,  and  for  a  long  time  to-
gether.

That  prolapfiis  uteri,  which  Peyerus  (/)  has  defcrib'd,  was  certainly  large-,,
as  the  uterus  was  pufh'd  out  at  the  pudendum,  and  hung  within  the  inverted-
vagina.  "  Neverthelefs,"  fays  this  excellent  anatomift,  "■  the  ligaments  of
*'  the  uterus,  and  bladder,  were  not  ruptur'd,  but  only  relax'd."

And  he  faid,  "  the  ligaments  of  the  bladder,  becaufe  the  urinary  bladdec
*'  had  fallen  down,  .together  with  the  uterus,  and  chang'd  its  fituation ;"  as^
he  found  by  difledlion ;  which  circumftance,  though  it  then  feem'd  to  him
*'  wonderful,  and  altogether  new,"  Ruyfch  (u)  has  fince  admonifli'd  will  al-
ways necellarily  happen,  in  prolapfes  of  this  kind.

13.  And  if  thefe  cafes  feem  to  be  very  furprizing,  which  are,  neverthe-
lefs, generally  brought  on  by  degrees,  as  I  have  faid,  and  in  a  long  courfe  of
time;  that  certainly  deferves  our  admiration,  which,  though  it  is  much  lefs,
is  brought  about  very  fpeedily,  and  in  a  fhort  time,  by  nature  itfelf.

For  in  the  birth  ;  to  ufe  the  words  of  Slevogtius  (.v)  -,  "  the  ofculum  uteri
"  comes  very  near  to  the  orifice  of  the  vagina,  and  diftends  it,  from  a  long
"  pliable  canal,  into  a  large  circle;,  correfponding  to  the  fize  of  the  embryo
"  which  is  to  pafs  through  it."

And,  indeed,  where,  by  reafon  of  the  thicknefs-of  the  fcstus,  and  the  nar-
rownefs  of  the  paiTages,  the  birth  is  brought  on  but  flowly,  and  with  con—
fiderahle  difficulty;  "  it  then  frequently  happens,  that,  by  the  continued  ex-
"  ertions,  of  the  woman,  to  bring  on  the  delivery,  the  opening  of  the  ma-
"  trix  is  evidently  propell'd  by  the  head  of  the  infant,  and  carried  to  more
"  than  the  length  of  an  inch,  or  two,  on  the  outfide  of  the  vulva:"  for  phis-
appearance,  which  Munnickius  had  fuppos'd  to  be  very  rare  ;  Slevogtius  tefti-
fics  "  had  frequently  occurd  to  hlmfelf ;.  and  had  not  porteaded.  any,  mif.-
"  chief."-

(i)  L^  3.  obf.  54.  {li)  Loco  fupra  indicat.  ad  n,  4,

\t)  Scdt.  hac  32.  Sepulchr.  obf.  j.  (ri)  D.ifleit.  fupra  ad  n.  4.

5


624  Book  IJI- Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

But  this  is  ftill  more  lurprizing  -,  tliat,  though  a  gravid  uterus  hashung  down
within  the  inverted  vagina,  beyond  the  lower  part«  of  the  pudendum,  the
foetus  has,  neverthelefs,  been  brought  forth.

And  that  obfervation  of  Harvey  (y)  himfelf,  which  is,  as  far  as  I  know,
the  firft  of  the  kind,  you  will  add  to  the  others  that  are  collected  by  San-
denius  (z) :  whereto  that  alio  belongs,  vvhicli  was  afterwards  propos'd  by  that
excellent  profefibr  at  Helmftad,  Fabricius  (c).

And  although  fuch  a  number  of  obfervations  may  ferve  to  convince  thofe,
by  whom  the  prolapfus  uteri,  within  the  inverted  vagina,  was  denied  \  in  the
lame  manner  as  that  obfervation  may,  which  the  celebrated  Friedius  commu-
nicated to  Widdmann  {h)  -,  yet  here  I  would  have  you  attend  only  to  thofe
of  them,  that  reprefent  the  uterus  to  be  thus  prolaps'd  in  the  very  birth.

For  you  will  be  lefs  furpriz'd  after  this,  that  thofe  diftra£tions  of  the  li-
gaments I  was  fpeaking  of  (f),  which  come  on  gradually,  and  in  a  long
Ipace  of  time,  may  happen;  efpecially  as  women  thus  afFeded,  are  not  with-
out a  troublefome  fenfation,  that  correfponds  to  thefe  diftradlions,  and  either
do  not  dilcharge  the  contents  of  the  redum,  or  bladder,  or  both  of  them,
with  their  ufual  facility  :  which  difficulty,  in  a  certain  woman  whofe  vagina
was  prolaps'd  outwardly  •,  as  it  was  reliev'd  by  raifing  up  this  prolapfus ;
Slevogtius  (d)  accounted  for,  not  fo  much  from  the  compreffion  of  thofe
meatuffes,  as  from  the  diftortion  thereof,  on  account  of  tlie  annex'd  fibres
of  the  pendulous  vagina,  drawing  them  in  an  oblique  direflion  ;  and  by  this
means  conftringing,  and  making  narrow,  their  cavity.

However,  he  made  the  connexion  of  the  vagina  m.uch  larger  than  it  really
is ;  as  he  thought  [e)  "  that  the  vagina  was  very  clofely  connefted,  in  its
"  whole  length,  to  the  fubjacent  inteftine."

14.  It  is  true,  I  do  not  deny  that  the  doubts,  which  have  been  already
advanc'd  by  me  C/j,  cannot  be  entirely  remov'd  from  my  breaft ;  except  by
a  previous  and  very  accurate  examination,  of  the  bodies,  of  thofe  who  la-
bour'd  under  thefe  difeafes  :  an  opportunity  of  which  examination  I  have  not
had  for  a  long  time.

Among  thefe  I,  without  doubt,  confefs  the  prolapfus  vaginse  to  be  the
moft  frequent  -,  and  grant  that  it  has  impos'd  upon  many,  for  a  prolapfus
of  the  uterus.

But  does  the  internal  membrane  of  the  vagina,  relax'd,  and  extended,  by
an  afflux  of  humours,  fall  down  of  itfelf  only  ?  Or  do  both  of  them  fall
down  ?

That  the  former  "  happens  very  frequently,"  not  only  many  authors,
among  whom  is  Wedelius  (g),  affert  •,  but  even,  according  to  the  aflertion  of
Widmannus  (/&),  "  all  agree."

And  indeed,  where  you  put  the  cafe  in  this  point  of  view,  you  make  fomc

(j)  In  Addit.  ad  Exercit.  de  Generat.  ubi  (c)  N.  12.

de  Partu.  (d)  Differt.  modo  indicat.  §.  16.

(2)  Obf.  fupra  ad  n.  4.  cit.  §.  6.  &  feq.  (e)  Ibid.  §.  11.

(a) Program,  quo  facil.  Extraft.  Feet, in  (f)  Epift.  33.  n.  15.

Procid.  Uter.  \g)  Differt.  fupra  ad  n.  4.  cit.  c.  i  &  2.

ih)  Obf.  fupra  ad  n.  2.  cit.  \h)  Obf.  fupra  ad  n.  %.  cit.

of


Letter  XLV. Article  15.  625

of  the  difficult  circumftances  eafy  to  be  underftood ;  one  of  which  I  have
hinted  at  above  (i)  ;  and  another  is  pointed  out  by  Wedelius  (k).

But  in  the  mean  while  ;  efpecially  if  the  prolapfus  is  of  a  great  length,
and  ftill  more,  if,  as  Widmannus  (/)  propofes  it,  the  internal  membrane,  being
torn  away,  from  the  upper  part  to  the  lower,  and  reflefted  downwards,  oc-
cafions  the  prolapfus ;  you  muft,  of  courfe,  fall  into  fome  of  thefe  doubts,
which  I  have  faid  are  already  pointed  out  by  me.

Yet  the  inverfion  of  all  the  parietes  of  the  vagina,  at  one  time,  is  not  very
eafy  to  be  explain'd.

Befides,  fuppofe  which  you  will  of  thefe  two  circumftances,  it  is  not  fo  clear
how  thefe  parts,  by  the  affiftance  of  remedies,  can,  fometimes  at  leaft,  reco-
ver their  former  fituation,  and  remain  therein;  after  fuch  diftradtions  of  the
ligaments,  and  connedling  parts.

15.  One  remedy  made  ufe  of  by  art;  befides  others,  both  externally  and
internally  applied  ;  is  that  of  peflaries  conftrufted  in  the  form  of  a  ring,  or
any  other  fhape,  which  has  a  foramen  to  it.  And  we  muft  not  omit  to  make
ufe  of  this  kind  of  remedy  here  alfo  ;  as  we  frequently  muft  in  the  prolapfus
of  the  inteftinum  redtum.

For  there  are  two  circumftances,  in  this  cafe,  which  render  the  cure  more
difficult  than  in  the  other  ;  firft,  the  inevitable  weight  of  the  uterus,  when  it
has  fallen  down  before,  again  inverting  the  replaced  vagina ;  and  fecondly,
the  fpinfter  muicle  keeping  the  orifice,  of  the  vagina,  ffiut  up  neither  fo
ftrongly,  nor  fo  clofely,  as  the  fphindler  ani  does  the  orifice  of  the  inteftine.

And  for  thefe  reafons,  then,  the  vagina  is  again  pufti'd  outwards,  refem-
bling  either  an  inteftine,  or  fome  other  body  ;  as,  for  inftance,  from  what  we
have  feen  in  Hippocrates  (m),  "  the  fcrotum  ;"  which  it  alfo  refembled  in  the
obfervation  of  Harvey  (n).

That  a  diforder  which  is  indecent,  or,  certainly,  inconvenient,  may  be  re-
mov'd,  or  at  leaft  conceal'd,  thefe  peflaries  have  been  invented.  And  if  all
the  inftruments  of  this  kind  ;  of  whatever  form,  or  ftrufture ;  that  have  been
yet  known,  "  were  fo  far  from  curing"  a  prolapfus  uteri,  "  that  they  ge-
"  nerally  made  it  worfe  ;"  as  I  lately  read  in  the  works  of  a  learned  man ;
they  would  have  been  long  ago  rejected  by  phyficians,  and  furgeons,  and
even  by  women  themfelves.

I,  however,  obferv'd  this  inftrument  to  be  rather  ufeful,  when  I  diflefled
a  woman  who  had  been  fubjeCt  to  this  difeafe ;  as  I  have  already  written
to  you  (0).

Yet  I  do  not  deny  that  where  they  are  introduc'd  with  violence,  or  impro-
perly, and  fooliffily  conftrudled,  they  may  either  bring  on  death,  as  was
leen  to  happen  by  Benevoli  C^),  or  fome  detriment  at  leaft  ;  efpecially  if  the
women,  neverthelefs,  perfevere  a  very  long  time  in  the  ufe  of  them :  and
do  not  ever  take  them  away,  even  for  the  fake  of  wiping  and  cleaning  them.

(i)  N.  4.  (n)  Loco  fupra  ad  n.  13.  indicate,

(/f)  Diff.  mode  indicata  c,  4.  (<;)  Epift.  22.  n.  22.  in  fine.

(/)  Obf.  indicata.  fj,J  Oflei-vaz.  3.
(?«)  Supra  n.  3.

Vol.  II.  4  L  You


626  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

You  may  fee,  in  the  Commercium  Litterarium  (j),  what  happen'd  to  two
women  for  the  fame  kind  of  reafons.

You  will  find  that  one  of  them  ;  having  introduc'd  a  ball  of  thread,  or
worftedj  wound  up  together,  had  a  tartareous  matter,  as  it  were,  concreted
upon  it,  to  fuch  a  height,  as  every  where  to  equal  three  fourth  parts  of  an
inch  ;  and  of  fuch  a  hardnefs,  that  it  could  not  be  chipp'd  off  without  an  in-
ftrument  for  that  purpofe  ;  and,  finally,  that  it  gave  fuch  uneafinefs  as  already
to  have  brought  on  a  very  fevere  ilrangury  :  and  that  the  other  had  an
ulcer  of  the  vagina,  and  the  neighbouring  inteftine,  in  confequence  of  an
iron  peflary  ;  notwithftanding  it  was  cover'd  over  with  wax,  as  that  ball  of
worfted  had  alfo  been.

To  thefe  I  will  add  an  obfervation  of  my  own,  which  although  I  Ihould
more  willingly  have  related,  among  other  diforders  whereto  it  more  peculLr
arly  belongs ;  if  I  had  made  it  before  I  treated  of  them  ;  yet  I  did  not  think
proper  that  it  fliould  be  omitted  in  this  place,  as  it  relates  to  the  prefent  fub-
jedt,  in  the  latter  part  of  it  at  leaft,

16.  A  woman,  of  a  middle  age,  and  ftature,  and  of  a  pretty  good  habit
of  body,  labour'd  under  no  other  diforder,  but  a  catarrh,  from  the  injuries
of  the  cold  air,  when  a  fever  was  added  to  it ;  on  account  of  which  llie  was
immediately  brought  into  the  hofpital.

For  this  fever  was  acute,  and  join'd  with  a  great  difficulty  of  breathing,  a
rednefs  of  the  cheeks,  and  a  very  troublefome  fenfe  of  weight  in  the  thorax  j,
together  with  a  fomewhat  hard  pulfe.

Every  thing  that  was  neceflary  was  done  -,  but  without  any  effeft.  To  ex-
pedorate  was  the  only  thing  flie  defir'd  •,  yet  fhe  never  could.

At  length  her  pulfe  became  very  low,  and  intermittent  •,  and  her  rcfpira-
tion  fo  difficult,  that  fhe  could  not  lie  down  in  the  latter  part  of  her  difeafe.
Wherefore  fhe  died,  on  the  fifth  day  from  the  time  fhe  began  to  be  feverifh;.
which  was  about  the  middle  of  March  in  the  year  1748.

The  carcafe  was  diffefted  in  the  hofpital  (for  the  fake  of  the  ftudents)  ac-
curately and  in  order.  But  I  will  here  firfl  declare  to  you,  what  I  found  pre-
ternatural in  the  thorax  and  head.

Although  the  lungs  were  turgid,  and  almofl  every  where  clofely  connefted
to  the  pleura,  that  lin'd  the  ribs ;  and  efpecially  on  the  left  fide ;  yet  from
the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax,  a  ferum  ;  which  you  v/ould  very  readily  have
fuppos'd  to  be  white  from  a  mixture  of  pus,  if  there  had  been  the  leaft  token
of  pus  in  that  part  •,  flow'd  out  in  fuch  a  quantity,  as  the  ftate  of  the  left  fide
of  the  diaphragm,  which  was  not  vaulted,  but  rather  deprefs'd  (when  we
look'd  upon  it  from  the  cavity  of  the  belly)  had  before  argued.

Part  of  that  kind  of  ferum  was  particularly  confin'd  betwixt  the  left  lobe,
and  the  pleura,  where  it  invefted  the  ribs,  pretty  near  to  the  middle  vertebras
of  the  thorax  •,  and  that  for  a  confiderable  trad ;  in  which  tra6t,  both  the
lungs,  and  the  pleura,  had  white  concretions  adhering  to  them,  like  very-
thick  membranes :  and  in  that  part  only  the  lobe  was  found  to  be  grown-

ewh  a  hard,  and  denfer  than  ufual.

Yet  the  patient  had  not  complain'd  of  any  peculiar  uneafinefs  in  her  back  j

fqj  A.  1733>  hebd.  10,  n.  5.  & a.  3738,  hebd.  32.  n,  i»  ad  part  7.

jior


Letter  XLV. Article  i6.  627

nor  yet  of  any  pungent  pain  ;  although  the  pleura  was,  in  both  fides,  of  a
rofy  rednefs  for  a  confiderable  fpace :  nor,  finally,  had  ftie  at  any  time  com-
plain'd ;  for  I  inquir'd  particularly  into  all  thefe  circumftances ;  of  a  tremor
of  the  heart,  or  fwoonings,  either  in  the  hofpital,  or  at  home ;  notwithftand-
ing  I  found  thofe  appearances  in  the  pericardium,  that  I  am  about  to  de-
fcribe.

The  pericardium  was  large,  and  full  of  a  ferum,  of  that  kind  which  was
found  in  the  left  cavity  of  the  thorax  -,  fo  that,  at  firft  fight,  you  would
have  imagin'd  it  was  fome  large  abfcefs,  and  not  the  pericardium,  which
was  open'd.

This  ferum  being  exhaufted,  all  the  interior  furface  of  the  pericardium,
and  the  external  of  the  heart,  auricles,  and  large  veflTels,  appear'd  of  a  pale
colour :  being  all  cover'd  over  with  a  kind  of  matter  which  was  of  a  white
colour,  inclining  to  cineritious,  and  refembling  nothing  more  than  lime,
juft  laid  upon  a  wall  in  the  form  of  a  plaifter  ;  fo  that  it  immediately  brought
to  my  mind  Guarinoni,  who,  as  I  have  already  told  you  (r),  found  in  this
kind  of  inflarnmatory  diforders  of  the  lungs,  and  pleura,  the  heart  "  co-
"  ver'd  over,  as  it  were,  with  lime ;"  that  is  with  polypous  concretions  (as  I
there  explain'd  it,  and  here  again  faw  it)  refembling  a  thick,  but  lax  mem-
brane, which  was  very  eafily  taken  off,  and  very  eafily  torn  afunder.

And  when  thefe  fordes  were  remov'd,  all  the  parts  that  they  had  cover'd
came  into  view,  and  were  of  their  natural  colour,  and  conftitution  ;  except
that  the  pericardium  was  thicken'd,  and  reddilh  :  that  is,  not  afi'edted  with
an  inflammation  indeed,  but  with  a  kind  of  phlogofis  neverthelefs.

The  heart  feem'd  to  be  larger  than  natural  -,  and  contain'd  black  blood,
on  both  fides,  fuch  as  was  met  with  in  feveral  parts  of  this  body  :  and  in
the  right  ventricle,  and  its  annex'd  auricle,  were  round  polypous  concre-
tions, likewife,  contain'd.

The  medullary  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum,  wherever  you  cut  into  it,  and
the  furface  of  the  lateral  ventricles  alfo,  fhow'd  fmall  veflels  turgid  with
blood :  and  in  the  fame  ventricles  was  a  ferum  of  a  colour  inclining  to  a  dirty
yellow.

In  the  belly  I  had  obferv'd  thefe  things.  The  fpleen  was  large ;  the  liver
very  large  ;  fo  that  filling  up  the  left  hypochondrium  alfo,  as  well  as  the
right,  it  prefs'd  down  the  fl:omach  :  a  portion,  therefore,  of  the  gula,  termi-
nating in  the  ftomach,  appear'd  at  two  fingers  breadths  below  the  dia-
phragm. But  befides  this  magnitude  no  difeafe  was  perceiv'd  in  thefe
vifcera.

In  the  trunk  of  the  inferior  vena  cava,  was  an  oblong  and  thick  polypous
concretion.

At  length,  in  regard  to  the  genitals,  the  uterus  was  fomewhat  nearer  to
the  left  fide,  than  to  the  right  -,  and  fell  forwards.  The  ovaries  were  very
long,  but  very  flender,  white  and  hard  ;  and  were  join'd  to  the  uterus  by
ligaments  that  were  confiderably  more  thick  than  ufual.  The  veflels  which
run  through  the  broad  Ugaments  of  the  uterus,  were  very  turgid  with  black
blood  ;  and  here  and  there  varicous.

{r)  Epift.  20.  n.  37.

4  L  2  When


62  8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

When  I  had  carried  on  the  dilTeftion  from  the  upper  part  of  the  uterus,
to  the  lower  orifice  of  the  vagina,  I  fliw  the  cavity  of  the  uterine  fundus,
and  the  continued  cervix,  full  of  mucus ;  which  was  almoft  tranfparent  like  a
jelly,  ting'd  with  no  colour,  and  thinner  than  that  which  is  wont  to  be  at
the  orifice  of  the  uterus,  and  was  not  wanting  here;

When  the  upper  mucus  was  taken  away,  a  very  fm all  excrefcence,  almofi:
of  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  and  of  a  red  colour  inclining  to  brown,
was  feen  to  be  flighcly  prominent  from  the  internal  iurface  of  the  fundus.

And  when  the  inferior  and  thicker  mucus  was  taken  away,  the  lowed  part
of  the  cervix  appear'd  to  be  unequal  with  a  kind  of  unufual,  fhort,  and
red  lines,  lying  in  a  longitudinal  direftion,  and  being  fomewhat  prominent.

The  vagina  -,  although  it  was  not  without  rugas,  from  the  middle  of  it
downwards ;  was,  in  proportion  to  the  ftature  of  the  woman,  who  I  have
faid  had  been  of  a  middle  fize,  longer  and  wider  than  is  natural  -,  and  corr-
tain'd,  in  its  cavity,  a  wooden  ring  (the  proof  of  a  prolapfus)  fituated  in  fuch
a  manner  as  I  never  remember  to  have  feen  it  before.

For  as  it  was  of  an  elyptical  form,  it  had  its  longer  axis  plac'd  according
to  the  longitudinal  diredion  of  the  vagina  ;  and  the  Ihorter  axis,  which  how-
ever was  ft)  long  as  to  diftend  both  fides  of  the  vagina  confiderably,  plac'd
according  to  the  breadth  of  that  cavity.

Both  of  thofe  fides  therefore,  in  that  part  where  they  were  prefs'd  by  the
ring,  fhot  forth  into  an  excrefcence,  of  the  (hape  and  fize  of  a  large  decor-
ticated almond  ;  of  a  cartilaginous  hardnefs,  and  white,  except  that  one
of  them  was  livid  in  the  middle;  fo  that  an  approaching  change,  from  a
•fcirrhous  nature,  into  that  of  a  cancer,  feem'd  to  have  been  at  hand.

ly.  Thus  far  then  of  the  uterus  "  when  prolaps'd  outwardly;  now,  as  i
have  promis'd  you  (j),  of  the  uterus  "  when  retradted  inwardly."

But  I  do  not  fuppofe  that  you  expedt,  in  this  great  light  of  a^natomy,  that
I  fhould  relapfe  into  the  old  exploded,  and  long  reje61:ed  error;  and  believe,
in  concert  with  old  women,  that  the  uterus  fometimes  afcends  to  the  feptum
tranfverfum,  and  even,  by  permiffion  of  the  almighty  God,  to  the  fauces
themfelves.  Whether  fome  of  the  ancients,  following  Galen  (/) ;  who  was  a
ftranger  to  this  kind  of  errors  ;  following  him,  I  fay,  more  in  words  than  in
reality,  have  afcrib'd  a  power  of  afcenfion  to  the  uterus  •,  or  others  deceiv'd,
like  Fernelius  («),  by  flatus  diftending  fome  lax  part  of  the  convuls'd  intef-
tine,  into  the  form  of  a  globe,  have  affirm'd  that  they  have,  with  their  own
hands,  aftually  found  the  uterus  to  be  carried  up  into  the  ftomach;  we  how-
ever underftand  by  the  words  of  Hippocrates,  which  we  fhill  retain,  utera-
rum  introcedentium,  "  of  the  uterus  being  retracted  inwards,"  not  the  uterus
afcending  upwards,  but  only  an  irritation  from  the  uterus;  under  which
name  I  here  comprehend  the  tubes  alfo,  and  the  ovaries ;  afcending  by
means  of  nerves,  and  membranes,  to  the  fuperior  parts.

And  although  by  the  term  oihyjlerical  affe£iion,  we  believe  that  this  diforder
only,  which  I  have  juft  now  mention'd,  can  with  propriety  be  intended ;  yet  I
am  not  fo  obftinately  refraiftory  to  the  common  cullom,  as  to  be  willing  to  dif-
pute  with  thofe,  who  comprife  under  this  fame  appellation,  the  various,  and

(/)  N.  I.  (;/)  Patholog.  1.  6.  c.  6.

(j)  De  loc.  aff,  1,  6,  c,  £. .

aaulti-


Letter  XLV. Article  18.  '  629

multiform  diforders  of  women,  which  often  arife  from  other  caufes  :  as  I  like-
wife  fhall  not  difpute  with  thofe  perfons,  who  choofe  rather  to  call  thefe  diforders
hypochondriacal ;  although,  very  frequently,  the  hypochondria  are  no  more
in  fault  in  patients  of  either  fex,  that  they  call  hypochondriacal,  than  the  ute-
rus is  in  thefe  women  whom  others  call  hyfterical.

If  there  be  any  thing  common  to  both,  the  chief  diforder  is  in  the  ner-
vous fyftem  as  it  is  call'd  :  and  I  think  the  celebrated  Flemyng  (x)  has  afted
with  great  propriety,  in  comprifing  the  diforders  of  one,  and  of  the  other,
fpecies,  under  one  general  title  of  Neuropaihia.

We  are  not  furpriz'd  therefore,  when  attacks  of  this  kind  arife  fuddenly  ;
not  from  the  uterus,  nor  from  the  hypochondria  •,  but  from  terror,  or  indig-
nation :  or  even  from  fome  peculiar  odour.  Thus  likewife  we  underftand^
how  we  have  frequently,  and  happily  prevented,  or  overcome,  thefe  attacks,
by  the  opportune  giving  of  opium.

For,  although  the  origin  of  thefe  attacks,  or  paroxyfms,  might  feem  to  be
from  the  lower  belly  ;  and  even  from  the  hypochondria  themfelves,  and  the
uterus ;  yet  the  propagation  of  the  noxious  motion  was,  without  doubt,  made
by  the  nerves  and  the  membranes.

You  have  already  had  an  example,  from  me,  of  a  recurrent  epilepfy  be-
ing prevented  in  its  paroxyfms,  by  the  ufe  of  opium  (j).  I  will  now  tell
you,  in  a  brief  manner,  how  I  prevented,  by  means  of  the  fame  remedy,
ihefe  hyfterical  paroxyfms,  as  they  are  call'd,  in  two  women.

18.  There  was  a  matron  of  a  genteel  family,  who  was  afflided  with  want,
and  the  abfence  of  her  hufband ;  to  whom  fhe  had  born  many  children  in  her
more  flourifhing  time  of  life.

This  woman  was  feiz'd  with  an  intermitting  fever-,  the  beginning  of  which
became  more  and  more  troublefome  every  day,  by  reafon  of  the  cold  increaf-
ing.  And  behold,  during  this  cold  fit,  fhe  was  feiz'd  with  fo  great  a  diffi-
culty of  breathing,  that  fhe  could  not  perform  this  fundtion,  without  her
neck  being  ereft  ;  nor  without  a  ftertor,  and  fuch  a  conftriftion  of  the  cheflr,
that,  tolling  and  writhing  herfelf  about,  in  the  utmoft  anguifli,  fhe  cried  our
fhe  was  jufl  going  to  die.

The  patient  herfelf,  and  thofe  who  were  about  her,  then  believ'd,  that
the  cold  fhe  felt,  as  well  as  the  other  fymptoms,  were  to  be  charg'd  to  the
account  of  the  beginning  fever.

But  as  the  fame  fymptoms,  and  indeed  more  violent  ones,  often  recurr'd
at  other  times,  and  were  even  attended  with  very  frequent,  and  fpeedy  con-
cufTions  of  the  whole  body  ;  and  moreover  with  fuch  a  conftridtion  at  the
throat,  that,  though  fhe  felt  excruciating  anguilh,  fhe  could  not  cry  out ;  it
appear'd  clearly  to  every  one  of  what  nature  the  complaint  was.

It  cofl  me  a  great  deal  of  time,  and  a  great  deal  of  difficulty,  to  cure  thefe
hyfterical  paroxyfms,  firft;  and  after  that  the  febrile  paroxyfms.

About  a  year  after  this,  as  I  remember,  when  other  intermitting  fevers,
and,  after  fome  days,  thofe  very  violent  attacks  began  to  return  again ;  but
at  the  fame  hour  every  day,  I  refolv'd  to  prevent  them  from  returning  if
poffible.  Wherefore,  one  hour,  or  fomewhat  lefs,  before  the  fit  was  toco-me
on,  I  gave  her  half  a  grain  of  purified  opium.

(^)  In  Neuropathia.  (yj  Epift,  9.  n.  7,

She


630  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

She  had  no  attack  on  that  day,  none  on  the  two  foUowings  days,  on  which
the  fame  remedy  was  repeated.  On  the  fourth  day  however  ;  to  be  faithful
and  conceal  nothing ;  the  difeafe  was  more  powerful  than  the  remedy  :  per-
haps becaufe  nature  was  accuftom'd  to  it.  But  as  this  attack  was  much  fliorter
than  the  former,  and  did  not  return  any  more ;  nor  the  ftrength  of  the  pa-
tient was  fo  much  diminifh'd  as  it  had  been  ;  I  got  rid  of  the  fever  much
fooner,  and  more  eafily,  than  in  the  preceding  year.

19.  What  led  me  to  fay  that  perhaps  nature  was  accuftom'd  to  this  remedy,
another  example  will  fhow.  A  virgin,  of  a  flender  habit,  labouring  under
an  obftinate  hardnefs  of  the  liver,  and  fuch  a  number  of  different,  and  long-
continued,  fymptoms  of  difeafe,  that  nobody  could  have  believ'd  {he  would
live  to  be  of  woman's  eftate ;  and  much  lefs  that  fhe  would  arrive  to  a  de-
crepid  old  age  ;  for  fome  little  time  ago  fhe  was  ftill  living ;  was  vifited  al-
moft  every  day  by  me,  nearly  about  the  fame  time  that  I  attended  the  matron
I  have  been  fpeaking  of:  which  was  when  I  was  a  very  young  man,  and
praftis'd  phyfic  in  the  place  of  my  nativity.

For  to  the  other  diforders,  among  which  I  remember  that  there  were  much
more  fevere  pains  of  the  head,  and  a  greater  irregularity  in  the  uterine  dif-
charges,  than  in  the  matron,  a  fever  was  added ;  which  returned  every  day  at
evening,  with  a  coldnefs.  With  this  coldnefs,  a  fenfe  of  compreffion,  and
flreightnefs,  at  the  cheft,  and  a  difficulty  of  refpiration,  began  to  attack  the
patient.

And  this  was  fb  much  increas'd  within  a  very  few  days,  as  to  oblige  the
patient  to  fit  down,  difhort  herfelf,  and  throw  her  arms  about,  and  complain
in  a  miferable  manner,  when  flie  could ;  for  fometimes  it  was  not  in  her
power  to  complain.

All  remedies  were  in  vain  ;  firft  to  prevent  the  increafe  of  the  attack,  and
fecondly,  to  pre"ent  its  return  ;  till  I  had  recourfe  to  purified  opium,  by
means  of  which  I  every  day  prevented  the  paroxyfm  :  and,  after  fbme  days,
found  that  it  did  not  recur,  although  the  opium  was  omitted.

On  the,  four-and-twentieth  day  after  this,  when  the  attack  had  return'd
again,  and  I  had  endeavour'd  to  overcome  it  by  the  fame  method,  but  not
Y^ith  the  fame  fuccefs ;  it  came  into  my  mind  not  to  change  the  remedy,  but
the  form  of  it.

For  this  reafon  therefore,  having  given  •,  at  the  fame  diftance  of  time  from
that  in  v/hich  the  fit  was  expefted  ;  as  many  drops  of  Sydenham's  liquid  lau-
danum, as  anfwer'd  to  the  half-grain  of  the  former  folid  laudanum,  I  fo  far
obtain'd  my  wifhes,  that  I  had  no  more  to  combat  with  this  paroxyfm  after-
wards as  before  ;  but  only  with  the  other  diforders.

But  it  was  lefs  furprizing  that,  in  this  virgin,  opium  Ihould  have  put  to
flight  paroxyfms  which  were  evidently  convulfive,  than  that,  in  another  hy-
fterical  virgin,  fpoken  of  by  Riverius  (z),  it  (hould  have  overcome  the  fame
paroxyfms,  join'd  with  a  very  oppreffive  foporific  diforder ;  and  even  then
in  another  where  the  paroxyfm  made  its  attacks  not  only  with  a  foporific
diforder,  but  alfo  with  a  fhort  continued  paralyfis  of  the  limbs.  For  thefe
diforders  were  remov'd  by  my  friend  Guliermi,  an  ingenious  phyfician,  at

(zj  Cent.  2.  obf.  26.

Feltri,


Letter  XLV. Article  20r  631


Fekri,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  others  were  by  Riverius  when  remedies  of
a  different  nature  had  been  of  no  effeft.

However,  in  the  patient  of  Riverius  convulfive  fymptoms  were  not  want-
ing i  and  in  the  laft  there  was  a  periodical  coldnefs  of  the  whole  body.  Which
one  very  fympcom,  that  experienc'd  man  Berryat  (a)  did  not  hefitate  to  confi-
der  as  a  convulfive  fymptom,  in  thofe  intermittent  fevers  ;  and  to  look  upon  it
as  the  caufe  of  thefe  different  fymptoms,  that  foUow'd  in  different  cafes :  fo
that  if  he  could  prevent  that,  he  would  alfo  prevent  thefe  :  and  this  he  afferted
he  had  obtain'd,  by  giving  a  medicine  with  opium  in  it,  one  hour  before  the
beginning  of  the  cold  fit.

And  you  will  perceive,  that  the  four  cures  of  women  I  have  fpoken  of,
v/hich  were  brought  about  in  the  fame  manner,  even  before  he  wrote,  agree
with  his  opinion  ;  if  you  attend  to  this,  that  the  violent  fymptoms,  in  each
of  them,  generally  recur'd  at  a  certain  hour  of  the  day ;  either  with  the  cold
that  preceded  the  fever,  or  continued  to  return  every  day  inftead  of  the  fever,
as  in  the  laft.

20.  What  has  fucceeded,  with  me,  in  preventing  hyfterical  affedtions,  I
have  already  fhown  you.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  by  what  thefe  paroxyfms
have  been  fometimes  brought  on,  according  to  the  obfervation  of  Hippolyto
Francefco  Albertini,  and  John  Jerom  Zanichelli,  as  I  have  heard  it  from  them,
I  will  not  conceal  from  you.

The  firft  related,  that,  from  the  infufion  of  Sena,  he  had  feen  hyfterical
convulfions  arife,  more  than  once :  and  this  you  will  readily  believe  might
happen,  from  the  vellication  of  the  inteftines,  and  tlie  tormina  that  were  ex-
cited in  confequence  thereof.

The  other  affirm'd,  that  he  had  certainly  known  Balfam  de  Copaibe  excite
violent  uterine  diforders ;  which,  unlefs  you  refer  this  effefl;  to  the  fmell,  that
is  not  very  acute, nor  very  fweet,  it  will  be  lefs  eafy  for  you  to  conceive  of.

Here  perhaps  you  will  interrupt  me,  by  inquiring  whether  this  has  likewife
been  obferv'd  in  hypochondriacal  men  ?  And  if  not,  why  then  do  moft  per-
fons  at  this  time  contend  that  the  hyfteric  and  hypochondriac  diforders  are  one
and  the  fame  difeafe  ?

But  foftly,  I  beg  of  you.  For  the  fame  things  are  not  always  found  to  be
ufeful  or  injurious  even  in  hyfterical  patients :  nor  do  the  fam.e  fymptoms
occur  in  all ;  any  more  than  they  do  in  hypocondriacal  men.

For  which  reafon  it  fhould  have  been  lefs  infifted  upon  j  by  fome  in  other
refpe£i:s  very  learned  men,  who  contend  for  the  oppofite  opinion  %  that  there
are  fo  many  differences  betwixt  the  two  difeafes  •,  as  if  all  thefe  circumftances,
that  they  take  notice  of,  were  always  obie^v'd  in  hyfterical  women,  and  moft
of  them  never  in  hypochondriacal  men  ;  or  as  if  thofe  things  vs^hich  happert
much  more  frequently,  and  violently,  in  women,  than  in  men,  either  were
not  of  the  fame  kind,  and  different  only  in  degree  ;  or,  to  thofe  who  com-
pare the  nervous  fyftem  of  women,  their  bodies,  and  method  of  living,  with-
thole  of  men,  it  did  not  plainly  appear,  why  the  fame  caufes  fhould  aft  mucb
more  eafily,  frequently,  and  fharply,  upon  the  nerves  of  the  formerj  than  on'
thofe  of  the  latter.

(a)  Mem.  prefentes  a  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  torn.  2.

2  5fer


632  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Nor  have  I  hinted  at  thefe  things,  becaufe  I  have  a  mind  to  enter  into  an
altercation  with  any  perlbn  ;  but  rather  to  prevent  others  from  entering  into
difputes  among  themlelves.

And  indeed  if  you  read  over  again  what  I  have  written  above  (h)  ;  you  will
clearly  fee  what  fide  in  this  controverfy  I  ftand  upon  :  and  ahhough  I  very
well  know,  that,  in  ail  women  who  are  cali'd  hyfterical,  the  uterus,  its  tubes,
or  teftes,  do  not  betray  any  diforder  to  the  inquiring  anatomift  -,  yet  yon  will
fee  that  thofe  women,  in  whom  the  irritations  begin  from  thefe  parts,  are  by
us  properly  cali'd  hyfterical.

"Wherefore,  if  you  fliould  fay  that  there  was  fomething  hyfterical,  in  that
widow  whom  I  defcrib'd  in  the  thirty-fifth  letter  (c),  who  had  been  without
her  menfes  for  eight  months  already,  was  not  without  a  fenfe  of  fomething
afcending  to  the  throat,  and  had  a  purulent  puftule  in  the  upper  paries  of
the  uterus,  and  a  matter,  within  the  tubes,  of  a  fleftiy  colour  inclining  to
yellow  ;  in  this  cafe,  though  perhaps  I  might,  I  Ihall  not  conteft  it  with
you.

And  I  will  even  add  to  this,  two  hiftories  of  women,  who,  as  they  them-
felves  and  others  fuppos'd  it,  I  will  alfo,  agree  were  hyfterical ;  if  you  will
firft  give  me  leave  to  take  notice  of  as  many,  that  you  may  add  to  the  Sepul-
chretum.

One  is  that  of  the  celebrated  Mayerus  (d),  of  a  woman  whofe  uterus  be-
ing large ;  and  which  is  a  very  extraordinary  inftance,  univerfally  chang'd
into  bone,  fo  that  it  was  necefiary  to  break  it  afunder  with  a  hammer,  in  order
to  examine  its  internal  fubftance  •,  contain'd  within  its  cavity,  which  v/as  very
clofely  {hut  up  at  the  os  internum,  a  milk-like  pus  :  but  fomewhat  thicker
than  milk,  not  foetid,  yet,  in  its  center,  inclining  to  a  green  colour.

This  woman,  from  the  time  that  flie  began  to  obferve  the  tumour  of  her
uterus,  was  free  from  the  hyfterical  paffion  ;  fo  that  you  may  fufpe£b  this
paffion  to  have  ceas'd,  becaufe  the  uterus  could  no  more  be  irritated.

The  other  hiftory  is  from  the  celebrated  Helwich  (e),  who  found  four  hol-
low excrefcences  annex'd  to  the  uterus  of  a  woman  externally,  as  if  by  a  fmall
ftalk  or  ftem,  of  the  fam.e  texture  with  the  uterus  itfelf ;  and  a  facculus  pro-
minent from  one  of  the  ovaries :  which  facculus,  when  cut  into,  difcharg'd
a  gelatinous  and  blackifti  matter,  to  the  quantity  of  half  an  ounce,  with  im-
petus.

This  woman,  as  the  fame  author  had  declar'd  in  another  place  (f),  was
evidently  one  of  thofe,  who,  "  it  is  agreed  among  all  phyficians,"  are  fub-
jed:  to  affeftions  of  the  uterus  ;  whether,  to  ufe  the  words  of  Galen  (g)  "  any
"  one  choofes  to  call  them  apncffas  or  fuffbcations,  or  even  a  kind  of  con-
"  traftions  Ihall  happen."

For,  being  feparated  from  her  huft)and,  Ihe  had  fallen  into  fuch  a  prurigo
of  the  genital  parts,  as  to  be  but  at  little  diftance  from  a  furor  uterinus :  fo
as  to  render  it  not  at  all  furprizing,  that  horrible  fpafms  ftiould  be  brought
on  ;  by  which  the  fauces  were  fhut  up,  and  fuch  a  difficulty  of  breathing  occa-


Ci)  N.  17.  (^)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3.  &  4  obf.  142

(rj  N.  16.  CfJ  Earund.  cent.  i.  &  2.  obf.  148.

('^)  Commerc. Litter,  a.  1731.  fpec,  30.  poll.  (g)  Deloc.  aff.  I.  6.  c.  5.
n.4.


fion'd,


Letter  XL V. Article  21,  22.  633

fion'd,  that  there  was  frequently  great  danger  of  a  fuffocation  ;  by  v/hich
flie  was,  at  length,  fuddenly  carried  off;  bur  that  the  polypi  found  in  the
heart  of  this  woman,  were  rather  the  effefts  than  the  caufes  of  this  fuffocation,
you  will  naturally  believe,  if  you  aflent  to  what  I  have  written  to  you  on  this
iubjedl:,  on  a  former  occafion  {h).  But  now  let  us  go  on  to  the  two  obferva-
tions  that  I  promis'd  you  juft  now.

21.  A  young  woman  who  was  a  public  ftrumpet,  of  a  fat  habit  of  body,
and  much  given  to  drinking,  having  formerly  born  children  ;  began,  after
having  been  without  her  menftrual  evacuations  for  four  months,  to  be  fubjedt
to  hyfterical  affedions :  and  after  that  labour'd  even  under  a  mania,  and  at
length  died  of  univerfal  convulfions  in  this  hofpital,  where  I  diflefted  her
body,  about  the  end  of  February,  in  the  year  171 7.

The  belly  contain'd  a  liver  of  fuch  a  colour  as  a  liver  is  when  boil'd  :  yet
the  bile,  which  had  exfuded  from  the  gall-bladder,  had  ting'd  the  inteftines
that  lay  near  it  with  a  very  lively  faffron-colour.

The  teftes  were  white,  hard,  fcirrhous,  enlarg'd  beyond  the  natural  fize,
and  drawn  behind  the  uterus,  by  their  own  weight  as  it  were.  The  internal
furface  of  the  uterine  fundus  feem'd  to  be  fmear'd  over  with  a  kind  of  bloody
mucus,  juft  as  if  the  menftrua  were  about  to  flow,  or  had  very  lately  flow'd  :
befides,  on  that  very  furface,  a  few  fmallifti  tubercles,  like  warts,  were  pro-
minent.

The  urethra,  which  was  perforated  with  frequent  orifices  of  its  canaliculi,
being  open'd,  gave  out  from  fome  of  thefe  orifices,  upon  gentle  prefiTure,  a
white  and  vifcid  matter  j  which,  if  every  thing  had  not  been  found  in  this
part,  might  have  feem'd  to  be  pus,  and  given  us  a  fufpicion  of  a  virulent  go-
norrhoea.

The  thorax  I  did  not  open,  as  I  was  taken  up  with  many  obfervations,
which  it  is  not  neceflary  to  mention  here.

The  cranium  had  been  faw'd  open ;  but  the  brain  was  difleded  by  fome
perfons  who  did  not  think  I  intended  to  do  it  myfelf  •,  and  that  when  I  was
abfent :  which  very  mvich  difappointed  me,  as,  upon  the  fcore  of  the  mania,
and  the  convulfions,  I  fliould  have  inquir'd  diligently  into  the  ftate  of  this
part.

It  was,  however,  related  to  me,  that  nothing  worthy  of  remark  appear'd,
befides  polypous  concretions  in  the  fanguiferous  vefiels ;  which  I  myfelf  alfo
faw,  in  thofe  that  happen'd  to  remain.

22.  That  the  liver  has  been  obfervM  to  be  like  one  that  is  boil'd  in  drop-
fical  perfons,  you  have  in  this  third  book  of  the  Sepulchretum,  feilion  the
nineteenth  {i) ;  and,  in  like  manner,  in  the  additamenta  to  the  twenty-third
fedbion  {k) :  but  in  cachedtical  patients  only  in  the  twentieth  (/).

To  thefe  add  thofe  in  whom  a  cachexy  would  very  foon  have  appear'd ;  to
which  clafs  I  think  may  be  refer'd  the  ftonecuttcr,  and  the  porter :  the  for-
mer of  whom  I  have  taken  notice  of  formerly  from  Jacobus  Sylvius,  and
the  latter,  as  being  difleded  by  me,  in  the  thirty-fixth  letter  (m),  and  in  the

(^)  Epift.  24..  rO  Obf.  2.  §.  I.

fi)  Obr.  3.  §i  12,  obf.  4.  §.  21.  (m)  N.  27.

[i]  Obf.  86.

Vol.  II.  4  M  third


634 Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

third  (n). And what  this ftrumpet  was  threaten'd  with, was  clearly  per-
ceiv'd  by  the  fupprefiion  of  her  menfes.

But  not  to  digrefs  far  from  my  piirpofe;  to  this  related  thofe  verrucse  as  it
were  of  the  uterus,  and  that  ftate  of  the  teftes,  which  ihow'd  dilbrders  of
thefe  parts  to  have  preceded,  as  you  may  of  yourfclf  conjedture.  In  the  nexE
woman,  however,  the  difeafes  of  the  fame  parts  were  more  manifell.

2:5.  There  was  a  woman,  at  Venice,  of  forty  years  of  age,  of  the  lower
fortj  of  ill  fame  ;  given  to  wine,  of  a  proper  ftature,  healthy,  and  of  a  fat
habit  of  body.

This  woman  was  fubjed  to  fear,  even  from  a  flight  caufe,  from  which  fhe
trembled,  and  almofl:  fwoon'd  away.  She  vomited  often,  lb  as  to  retain  no-
thing of  fohd  food ;  and  could  not  talle  of  fifh  by  any  means.  When  we
inquir'd,  of  her  acquaintance,  in  regard  to  the  reft  of  her  diforders  in  parti-
cular, they  conftantly  anfwer'd  that  ihe  had  never  complain'd  of  her  head,
nor  heart  •,  as  for  inftance,  of  any  violent  pulfation,  palpitation,  or  any  other
diforder  thereof-,  nor  had  ever,  that  they  knew  of,  been  attack'd  with  in-
flammations of  the  thorax :  and  why  I  remark  thefe  diforders  not  to  have
preceded,  you  will  eafily  underftand,  by  reading  over  the  account  of  the  dif-
feftion.

The  only  difeafe  of  which  Ihe  comrplain'd,  they  faid  was  afFedlions  of  the
uterus,  which  flie  afferted  to  be  mov'd,  here  and  there,  through  her  belly,  at
that  time,  and  fometimes  to  afcend  to  her  fauces,  with  a  fenfe  of  fuffocation  ;
from  which  fenfe  however,  fhe  was  foon  freed.

On  the -very  firft  day  of  January  in  the  year  1709,  fhe  complain'd  about
evening  that  her  ribs  had  fallen  in  as  it  were  ;  and  order'd  an  old  woman  to
be  fent  for,  who  as  the  opinion  of  the  common  people  was,  knew  how  to
raife  them  up  again.

Early  one  morning,  when  fhe  faid  that  fhe  was  feiz'd  with  a  very  violent
hyfterical  affeflion,  and  that  the  uterus,  moving  about  here  and  there,  had
already  afcended  to  her  fauces,  fo  that  flie  was  fuftocated  thereby  •,  ihe  died
within  an  hour,  or  at  moft  within  two :  having  no  foam  at  her  mouth,  nor
being  agitated  with  any  convulfive  motions,  that  any  of  the  by-ftanders  could
perceive.

As  it  v/as  the  bufinefs  of  Santorini  to  diffeft  the  body, and  he,  for  certain  rea-
fons,  tho'  he  would  have  chofen  it,  could  not  defer  it ;  he  beg'd  of  me  alone  ;
who  always  avoided  difTefting  bodies  of  this  kind,  till  they  had  lain  for  a
proper  length  of  time ;  and  even  prefs'd  me  over  and  over  again,  by  the
friendfhip  I  had  for  him,  that  I  would  be  prefent  at  the  difTeftioa  with  him  ;
and  beg'd  of  me  with  this  intent,  that  we  might  give  the  more  time  to  the
inquiry,  whether  the  woman  was  really  dead,  than  to  determine  the  feat  of
the  diforder  from  whence  fhe  died.

The  form.er  of  thefe  inquiries  we  made  with  the  greater  diligence,  as  we
found  the  eyes  not  very  turbid,  and  the  body  fcarcely  at  all  rigid  ;  and,  at
the  tenth  hour  after  death,  the  thorax  even  ftill  warm  at  that  time  of  year.

Wherefore,  bearing  in  mind  thofe  things  that  Galen  (0)  had  taken  notice  of
from  Heraclides  Ponticus,  and  other  ancient  phyficians ;  we  omitted  nothing

()i)  No  4.  &  5.  («)  C.  5,  fupra  adn,  20.  cit.

-  '  which


Letter  XLV. Article  23.  635

which  us'd  to  be  done  at  that  time,  or  fince,  in  inquiries  of  thTs  kind:  that
is  to  fay,  a  little  lock  of  comb'd  wool,  the  flame  of  a  thin  wax  candle,  and  a
polifh'd  glafs  applied  to  the  mouth  and  noftrils :  to  place  a  cup  full  of  water
on  the  fcrobiculus  cordis  as  it  is  call'd,  and  to  more  than  one  part  of  the
thorax,  as  if  we  had  divin'd  the  admonitions  of  Window C^j  :  to  apply  the
fingers,  and  the  hand,  not  only  to  the  region  of  the  heart,  but  alfo  to  the
carotid  arteries  in  the  neck,  and  to  the  iliacs  where  they  defcend  on  the
anterior  part  of  the  ofla  pubis  to  the  thighs  -,  the  former  of  which  v/as  after-
wards confirm'd  by  the  illuftrious  Senac  (q),  and  the  latter  had  been  formerly
hinted  at  by  Riolanus  (r)  -,  and  to  apply  them  repeatedly  and  attentively,  if  it
were  poffible  to  perceive  any  pulfe  :  at  length,  by  blowing  powders  high  up
into  the  noftrils,  fucL  I  mean  as  had  a  tendency  to  excite  fneezing,  upon
which  Hollerius  (s)  greatly  depended  in  inquiries  of  this  kind.
.  Not  content  with  all  thefe  experiments,  and  others  of  the  like  kind,  hav-
ing perceiv'd,  upon  making  a  flight  incifion  into  the  fkin  of  one  thigh,  a
little  blood  to  come  forth,  tho'  flowly,  and  continue  to  flow ;  we  open'd  the
vein  of  the  cubit  with  a  lancet,  in  the  fame  manner,  as  if  blood  were  to
be  taken  away.

And  then  ineeed,  a  very  little  blood  was  difcharg'd:  but  ferum  feparated
from  the  red  part  was  difcharg'd  alfo  ;  fo  that  we  perceiv'd  by  this,  that  a
dilTolution  of  the  parts  of  the  blood  was  made  in  that  vein  at  leafl.

At  this  time,  however,  we  were  willing  to  make  ufe  of  other  experiments
likewife ;  which,  if  the  woman  fhould  have  happen'd  to  be  opprefs'd  with
any  kind  of  pernicious  fleep,  might  aft  by  way  of  a  very  powerful  ftimulus,
to  awake  her.

For  we  gradually  fix'd  the  point  of  a  very  fliarp  inftrument  under  the  nails,
after  the  manner  of  Fortunatus  Fidelis  (l) :  but,  in  particular,  we  applied  a
hot  iron  to  the  foles  of  the  feet ;  as  Miftichelli  (u)  us'd  to  do,  in  order  to
roufe  apopledtic  patients.

But  all  thefe  things  being  in  vain,  and  that  heat  which  we  had  perceiv'd
about  the  thorax  in  the  beginning  havino-  vanifli'd  ;  we  determin'd  to  put  an
end  CO  our  mquiries,  as  being  quite  fuiiicient :  neverthelefs  we  cut  mto  the  fkm,
firft,  leifurely  and  by  degrees  ;  ahvays  waiting  fome  confiderable  fpace  of  rime,
betwixt  one  and  another  fhort  and  fimple  incifion ;  after  that  the  adipofe
membrane,  which  was  very  thick,  and  finally  the  mufcles  themfelves.

While  we  were  making  all  thefe  different  trials  that  I  have  related,  we  had
leifure  to  obferve  that  the  limbs  were  not  lean,  nor  yet  the  head  ;  but  that
they  by  no  means  correfponded  to  the  very  fat  abdomen  and  thorax  :  weob-
■ferv'd  befides,  that  the  pofterior  furface  of  the  body,  on  which  fhe  had  lain
at  the  time  of  her  death,  was  of  a  red  colour  inclining  to  livid  ;  but  that  the
anterior  part,  neither  in  the  head,  nor  at  the  neck,  nor  in  any  other  place,  if
you  except  the  upper  parts  of  the  thigh,  had  any  rednefs  or  livor.

Now  I  will  relate  to  you  what  we  found  in  the  belly 'firft,  and  after  that  in

(/)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R  des  Sc.  a.  1738.  {u)  Apud  Lancif.  de  Subit  Mort.  1.  2.  c.  j.

(y)  Traite  du  Coeur  1.  3.  ch.  7.  n.  5.  n.  12.  quodpofteaMiftichellius  ipfe  confinnavit

(r)  Encheirid.  1.  5.C.  46.  verf.  finem.  Tratt. dell'  Apoplefi". 1. 2,  f.  I.  C.  6.  &  f.  3.

(j)  De  morb.  intern.  1.  i.  c.  59.  c.  3.  caf,  8.  &  feq.
;(/)  De  Relat.  Medic.  1.  4.  c,  1.

4  M  2  -  the


636  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  thorax  ;  for  the  head  (and  perhaps  this  was  not  neceflary)  we  had  it  not  in
our  power  to  difledt :  but  I  will  communicate  the  appearances,  to  you,  in
fuch  order,  as  to  begin  with  the  thora'x.

When  we  had  remov'd  the  integuments  of  this  part,  and  the  mufcles,  from
the  bones,  and  cartilages,  that  lay  beneath,  a  great  diforder  appear'd  in
the  latter ;  which  the  very  large  breafls,  and  the  fat,  that  lay  upon  them,  fo
far  hid  before  difleflion,  that  no  mark  of  it  appear'd.

That  is  to  fay,  the  fternum  being  outwardly  prominent,  at  about  half-way
of  its  length,  rais'd  up  the  adjoining  ribs,  with  it,  on  both  fides:  but  the
ribs  which  lay  next  under  thele,  fubfided  very  much  :  and  finally,  the  laft
of  the  ribs ;  I  mean  of  thole  that  are  join'd  with  the  fternum  either  by  their
own  cartilages  or  the  intervention  of  others ;  were  again  prominent,  as  the
natural  ftrudure  of  the  cheft  requires :  wherefore,  at  each  fide  of  the  fternum
were  large  depreffions  of  the  ribs,  which  the  breafts,  and  the  fat,  made  to  ap-
pear equal  and  fmooth  on  the  outfide ;  as  I  have  already  faid.

Upon  opening  the  thorax,  the  left  lobe  of  the  lungs  was  found  to  adhere
to  the  pleura  in  one  part,  though  very  fiightly  :  and  the  right  lobe  was  found
to  adhere  very  clofely  thereto,  in  almoft  every  part,  by  a  kind  of  membrane
which  was  form'd  preternaturally,  upon  the  external  coat  of  the  lungs.

Both  the  lobes,  when  we  cut  into  them,  we  found  to  be  hard,  and  ten-
dinous, as  it  were,  in  many  places ;  and  abounding  with  a  frothy  humour
befides,  as  if  with  a  kind  of  faliva.

The  pericardium  contain'd  a  confiderable  quantity  of  water,  of  a  brown
colour,  and  inclining  to  be  turbid.  And  both  fides  of  the  heart  contain'd  a
black  fluid  blood,  fuch  as  was  found  almoft  every  where  in  this  body:  the
right  ventricle,  moreover,  contain'd  a  fmall  polypous  concretion,  of  a  white
colour,  but  foft ;  a  fimilar  one  to  which  was  found  in  the  pulmonary  artery,
with  a  great  quantity  of  blood.

"With  this  fluid  the  right  auricle  was  very  turgid ;  but  the  left  was  con-
trafted.  However,  the  ventricle  annex'd  to  this  auricle,  being  larger  than
its  natural  fize,  ofi^er'd  to  us  more  than  one  circumftance  worthy  of  obfer-
vation.

For,  to  omit  that  the  tendinous  fibrilte,  which  pafs  betwixt  the  valvulse
mitrales,  and  the  columnae,  feem'd  to  be  in  greater  number  than  ufual ;
thefe  columns  were  certainly  thicker  than  they  naturally  are,  and  more  hard  :
lb  that  they  feem'd  to  be  much  more  of  a  tendinous  than  of  a  flefhy  nature ;
whether  you  confider'd  the  colour,  which  was  white,  or  attended  to  the  re-
fiftance  they  gave  to  the  knife,  in  incifion.

Befides,  in  the  parietcs  of  the  fame  ventricle,  fome  places  occur'd,  here
and  there,  in  which  the  fleftiy  fubftance  of  the  heart  was  either  white,  or  of  a
red  colour  inclining  to  whitenefs ;  fo  as  at  firft  to  impofe  upon  us  under  the
appearance,  as  it  were,  of  glands :  but  it  (how'd  itfelf  to  be  fimilar  to  the
columns,  by  that  fame  peculiar  refiftance  when  cut  into.

This  difeafe,  of  the  flelhy  fibres  of  the  heart  degenerating  into  a  tendinous
nature,  became  the  more  evident,  the  more  it  went  from  the  internal  fur-
face  of  the  ventricle,  to  the  external  furface,  and  it  alfo  reach'd,  externally,
to  that  place  with  which  the  feptum  cordis  correfponds.

And  indeed  the  fat  itfelf  which  lay  upon  this  vifcus,  was  not  quite  in  a  na-

3  tural


Letter  XLV. Article  23.  637

turalftate.  For  onthe  pofteriorfurface  of  the  heart,  it  was' unequal,  for  two
fmall  traits,  in  a  longitudinal  diredion  ;  and  in  the  fame  place  was  of  a  brown
colour  inclining  to  red.

The  large  artery,  from  the  heart  almofl:  quite  to  the  whole  of  the  curva-
ture, was  very  evidently  dilated,  though  not  in  any  great  degree ;  and  near
to  the  feptum  tranfverfum  it  feem'd  to  be  narrower  than  it  naturally  is.

Having  laid  it  open  ;  and  difcharg'd  the  blood,  which  it  contain'd  in  fome
confiderable  quantity  ;  it  fhow'd,  on  the  whole  of  its  internal  furface,  from
the  heart  at  leaft  to  the  emulgent  branches,  fome  whitifh  particles,  and  fome
lines  that  were  a  little  protuberant :  befides,  not  only  in  that  tradt  which
I  juft  now  fpoke  of,  but  in  other  parts  alfo,  as  I  found  from  diffeftino-
fome  of  its  fuperior  branches,  the  internal  coat  of  this  veflel  was  fo  eafily
to  be  disjoin'd  from  the  next,  that  large  pieces  of  it  foUow'd  the  flio-hteft
friction  of  the  fcalpel.

In  the  belly  were  the  following  appearances.  The  omentum  was  drawn
up  towards  the  fpleen.  The  fituations  of  the  inteftines  were  difturb'd.  And
thefe  vifcera,  but  particularly  the  colon  and  the  re£tum,  were  much  diftended
with  air.  The  mefentery  indeed,  the  ftomach,  the  fpleen,  and  the  liver,  the
bladder  annex'd  to  which  was  full  of  bile,  were  found.

But  the  pancreas,  which,  like  fome  of  the  fmall  inteftines,  was  of  a  red  co-
lour; efpecially  in  its  more  defcending  part  •,  had  its  glandular  bodies  firmer
than  they  generally  are,  and  more  diftind:  from  one  another.

Finally,  in  examining  the  uterus,  the  tubes,  and  a  confiderable  part  of
the  vagina,  with  accuracy ;  not  only  at  that  time,  but  on  the  day  followino-,
when  they  were  taken  out  of  the  body,  in  order  to  give  us  more  time,  and
day-light;  we  obferv'd  thefe  things.,^

To  the  pofterior  part  of  the  fundus  uteri,  externally,  about  the  middle,  was
hanging,  by  a  fhort  peduncle,  a  globular  body,  refembling  nothing  more  in
whitenefs,  form,  and  magnitude,  than  a  fmall  unripe  cherry  :  in  cutting  of
which,  we  found  it  made  up  of  a  fibrous,  but  callous  fubftance  ;  the  orders
of  the  fibres  being  confus'd  :  another  globe  of  this  kind  was  buried  within
the  very  thicknefs  of  the  parietes  uteri.

The  fundus  uteri  being  open'd  foon  after,  it  appear'd  to  be  fmear'd  over
with  a  great  quantity  of  mucus  which  was  fomewhat  bloody  :  which  beincr
wip'd  off,  and  I  having  fhown,  by  prefling  my  fingers  underneath,  that
bloody  drops  came  out  every  where  from  the  fundus,  but  not  from  the  cer-
vix, and  ftill  lefs  from  the  vagina,  with  a  very  gentle  prelTure ;  it  did  not
fo  much  difpleafe  Santorini,  that  we  could  not  learn,  for  a  certainty,  whether
the  woman  had  menftruated  lately,  as  that  he  had  before  fuppos'd  {x)  the
fource  of  this  difcharge  to  be  in  the  vagina,  rather  than  in  the  uterus.

The  upper  part  of  the  cervix  excepted,  the  remainder  was  ting'd  with  a
far  different  rednefs ;  that  is  to  fay,  as  if  from  inflammation,  which  on  one
fide  inclin'd  more  to  a  brown,  and  yet  did  not  any  where  pervade  the  fubflance
of  the  cervix  to  any  depth.

In  the  tubes  alfo  was  a  mucous  humour,  but  white. Both  of  thefe  canals

(x)  Opufc.  Medic.  4.  n.  3.

were


638  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

were  pervious  into  the  uterus,  for  air  blown  in  by  the  larger  orifice :  nor
were  hydatids  wanting  near  to  that  orifice.

Both  of  the  teftes  were  tumid  from  included  cells :  but  one  of  them  more
than  the  other ;  as  befides  one  large  cell,  it  alfo  contain'd  many  fmaller  ones,
all  full  of  ferum,  except  one  which  was  fill'd  with  a  white  pus.

In  the  other,  together  with  the  cells,  and  the  veficles,  containing  ferum,
we  faw  other  cells  of  a  black  colour  internally.  And  on  the  furface  of  both
we  obferv'd  orifices,  which  admitted  a  {lender  probe  :  but  particularly  in  the
membranes  by  which  the  tubes  are  connefted  with  the  teftes ;  they  are  call'd.
jilci  Vefpertikomm,  or  bats  wings ;  we  faw  the  plexuffes,  and  nerves  running
in  an  elegant  manner.

And  as  thefe  were  fome  of  the  thicker  ones  which  I  had  feen  before  ;  fee,
faid  I,  this  is  the  "  plexus,"  and  thefe  the  "  nerves,"  which  I  have  fpoken
of  in  the  Adverfaria  (jy),  and  promis'd  to  defcribe  more  fully  on  fome  other
occafion  :  this  defcription  was  afterwards  given  by  Santorini  (z)  himfelf,  but
he  muft  have  totally  forgotten  this  pafTage  of  mine  in  the  Adverfaria,  when
he  faid,  that  this  plexus  was  either  not  clearly  "  known,  or  indeed  not  hi-
"'  therto  obferv'd."

24.  I  am  not  willing  to  add  long  annotations  to  a  long  hiftory.  Let  it  be
fufiicient  to  fubjoin  a  few  things,  and  thefe  in  a  brief  manner.

In  regard  to  the  fternum,  therefore,  being  prominent  in  a  certain  place,
and  the  ribs,  together  with  their  cartilages,  being  deprefs'd  inwards  to  fuch
a  degree,  on  both  fides,  where  they  fuftain'd  laige  breafts,  and  a  thick  fat ;
a  paflage  of  Riolanus  {a)  is  extant,  which  refers  to  the  fame  thing :  "  in  wo-
"  men  that  have  large  breafts,  and  are  fat,  I  found,  upon  removing  the  bulk
"  of  the  breaft,  the  fternum  accuminated,  and  the  cheft  narrow-,  which
"  in  them  was  the  caufe  of  a  dyfpncea  :  this  narrownefs  had  been  caus'd
"  by  the  weight  of  the  breafts."

This  laft  circumftance  is  a  doubt  with  me.  For  unlefs  women  lie,  the
greater  part  of  their  time,  in  a  fupine  pofture ;  which  is  not  fo  convenient
to  thofe  who  are  fat,  and  have  large  breafts  ;  the  weight  of  the  breafcs  rather
draws. the  ribs  outwards,  than  forces  them  inwards.

Neither  can  you  impute  it  to  the  hard,  and  tight  ftays,  which  women
wear;  for  how  can  they  hurt  the  ribs,  without  hurting  the  breafts  ?  Where-
fore, I  ftiould  rather  choofe  to  account  for  this  vitiated  ftrufture,  from  the
original  formation  :  for  it  does  not  appear  in  thofe  who  are  fat,  and  have  full
breafts,  but  by  diffedion,  wherein  it  ftrikes  the  eye,  and  the  attention,  of
the  anacomift,  much  more  than  in  lean  perfons,  (in  whom  if  it  be  at  all,  it  is
obvious  before  diftedlion)  as  it  is  an  appearance  which  he  does  not  expeft.

But  be  this  from  what  caufe  it  will,  there  is  no  doubt,  but,  by  ftreighten-
ing  a  part  of  the  lungs,  it  may  render  the  circulation  of  the  blood  through
them,  fo  much  the  lefs  eafy,  and  refpiration  lefs  free ;  efpecially  where  from
convulfion,  or  any  other  caufe,  either  of  thefe  offices  is  made  more  dif-
ficult.

And  although  it  is  very  difficult  in  very  fat  and  fuU-breafted  women  of  that
kind,  to  diftinguifli  this  diforder ;  unlefs,  perhaps,  by  preffing  your  fingers,

(  v)  I-  n-  H-  i"  ^^°-  ('^)  Encheirid.  Anatonr.  1.  6.  c.  14.

(s)  Obf.  Anat.  c.  11.  §.  17.

very


Letter  XLV. Article  25, 26.  639

very  ftrongly,  againft  the  cheft,  at  the  fides  of  the  breafts ;  yet  if  they  are
affedted  with  a  much  more  difficult  refpiration,  than  others  of  the  fame  make,
without  any  apparent  caufe  ;  you  may  then  fufpe(5l  whether  fuch  a  difeas'd
ftrufture  is  not  the  caufe,  in  confequence  of  my  obfervation,  and  thofe  of
Riolanus.

And  to  tiiefe  you  may  readily  add  an  example,  taken  from  the  Commer-
cium  Litterarium((J),  of  a  noble  woman  afflifted  with  an  afthma-,  among  the
caufes  of  which,  you  will  fee  that  a  male  conformation  of  the  cheft  is,  with
juftice,  recounted  :  for  "  the  ribs,  of  the  left  fide,  being  curv'd  like  the
"  Greek  letter  figma,"  made  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  narrow  in  a  furprizing
manner;  and  deprefs'd  the  heart,  which  was  longer  than  the  heart  of  an  ox,
into  the  right  fide.

But  as  this  woman  "  was  very  fat,  and  flefliy,"  it  is  moft  probable  that
this  diforder,  of  the  ribs,  had  lain  hid  under  a  great  quantity  of  fat.

25.  But,  in  regard  to  that  fenfation  of  the  ribs  falling  down,  as  it  were,.
to  raife  up  which  the  old  women  often  fend  for  their  Ihe-phyficians,  efpe^
cially  in  fome  particular  cities ;  as  I  remember  formerly  to  have  feen  in  mine  ;
I  confefs  I  have  nothing  certain  to  fay  upon  the  fubjeft.

Yet  I  neverthelefs  fufpedt,  that  fome  injuries,  and  uneafinefles,  of  that
kind  which  the  cartilago  xiphoides  is  wont  to  occafion,  when  verging  in-
wards, are  confounded  with  this  fenfe  :  of  which  injuries,  after  Codronchius
(c),  and  Septalius  (d),  you  may  fee  what  is  transfer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum
from  Diemerbroeck  {e),  from  Barbette  (f),  and  Bonetus  himfelf  (g) :  al-
though that  even  the  cartilages  of  fome  of  the  fpurious  ribs,  may  now  and
then  be  deprefs'd,  and  bring  on  confiderable  inconveniences,  which  are,  ne-
verthelefs, immediately  remov'd  by  reftoring  them  to  their  former  feat,  and
that  by  the  hands  of  an  old  woman,  you  will  learn  from  the  fame  Sepul-
chretum (h).

But  whether  thefe  cartilages  belong'd  to  thofe  "  two  laft"  ribs,  or  to  the
"  lafl:  of  all;"  and  not  rather  to  fome  one  of  them,  that  are  next  above  the
two  laft,  the  well-known  {hortnefs  of  thofe  lower  cartilages  makes  me
doubt :  and  ftill  more,  when  1  read  that  the  "  lower  of  them  lay  upon  the
"  upper."

However,  in  the  woman  in  queftion,  whether  the  fenfe,  whereof  we  fpeak,,
belong'd  to  fome  caufe  of  this  kind;  or  to  another  which  I  have  explain'd
to  you  in  the  cafe  of  a  woman  formerly  fpoken  of  (i)  ;  it  is  better  to  leave
quite  undetermin'd,  than  to  make  any  unadvis'd  conclufion  in  this  place,

26.  But  as  to  what  relates  to  the  fieftiy  fubftance,  of  the  heart,  dege-
nerating into  a  tendinous  nature,  you  will,  in  the  firft  place,  conceive  from
thence,  that  it  was  not  without  propriety  I  formerly  (k)  fuppos'd  this  might
happen  ■,  I  mean  when  I  was  upon  the  fubie(5l  of  explaining,  in  what  manner
this  fubftance  is  fometimes  chang'd  into  that  of  bone.

{i)  A.  1733.  hebd.  37.  n.  2.  f^J  In  eod.  Schol.

('cj  De  Prolapfu  Mucron.  Cartilag.  {I)  L.  2.  f.  i.  in  Scho],  ad  obf.  116,.

(d)  De  Morbis  ex  Mucron.  Cartilag.  (/)  Epift.  z6.  n.  25.

(f)  Sepulchr.  I.  2.  f.  I.  in  additam.  obf.  11,  [i]  Epift,  27.  n.  Ij,

if)  Ibid.  1.  3.  f.  7.  in  Schol.  ad  obf.  19.

And


640  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

And  that  the  force  of  the  heart  decreafes  fo  much  the  more,  in  proportion
as  the  greater  number  of  its  parts  become  tendinous,  inftead  of  being  flefliy  j
it  is  natural  to  gather  even  from  thofe  things,  which  are  faid  in  the  fame
place  (/j.

Moreover,  this  force  had  decreas'd,  in  that  ventricle  which  has  need  of  the
greatcft  force,  that  is  in  the  left ;  which,  like  the  neareft  part  of  the  great
arterial  trunk,  had  another  diforder  of  dilatation.

Yet  the  woman  had  not  complain'd  of  any  violent  pulfation  of  the  heart }
for  Albertini  (7/2),  even  in  aneurifmatic  diforders,  found  the  pulfation,  "  ei-
*'  ther  quite  inconfiderable,  or  much  lefs  than  ufual,  where  the  fubftance  of
"  the  heart  had  become,  quite  from  its  bafis  to  more  than  one  half  its  extent,
*'  either  tendinous,  as  it  were,  in  its  confiftence  and  colour,  or  too  flaccid  in  its
"  nature;"  for  there  is  no  doubt,  but  the  natural  force  of  the  heart  muft
be  debilitated,  from  either  of  thefe  ftates.

However,  in  regard  to  all  thefe  diforders,  and  others,  which  I  have  de-
fcrib'd  in  the  great  artery,  and  the  fubftance  of  the  lungs  being  become  ten-
dinous, as  it  were,  in  many  places,  and  the  coardlation  of  thefe  vifcera,  and
of  the  heart,  by  the  depreflion  of  the  ribs ;  in  regard  to  all  thefe  diforders,
I  fay,  you  very  clearly  fee,  that  they  might  produce  a  fatal  interception,  both
of  refpiration,  and  of  the  blood's  circulation  ;  where  a  more  violent  convul-
fion,  than  ufual,  of  the  nerves  that  go  to  thefe  parts  has  come  on.

27.  That  this  convulfion  had  ;  as  well  as  other  more  flight  diforders,  to
•which  the  woman  had  been  fubjedt ;  its  origin  from  the  uterus,  and  teftes  j
the  preternatural  appearances  which  we  faw  both  in  the  former,  and  the  latter,
and  the  fenfe  of  the  uterus  afcending,  as  it  were,  which  began  from  thence,
feem  to  argue.

For,  although  we  did  not  find  the  uterus  to  have  proceeded  Upwards,  from
its  natural  fituation  ;  which  indeed  cannot  happen  -,  yet  we  faw  the  inteftines,
which  might  be  taken  for  the  uterus,  not  only  diitended  with  flatus,  but
alfo  remov'd  from  their  natural  fituations.  And  to  thefe  parts  a  convulfion
is  eafily  propagated,  by  the  nerves  communicating  with  thofe,  that,  being
fubfervient  to  the  funftions  of  the  tubes,  and  the  teftes,  were  feen  by  us  in
the  als  vefpertilionum  in  a  thick  ftate  •,  inafmuch  as  they  are  frequently  dif-
turb'd  by  irritations  ariflng  from  the  teftes.

Here  you  will  perhaps  fay  :  but  much  more  confiderable  difeafes,  both  of
the  uterus,  and  teftes,  are  frequently  found  in  other  women ;  who  had  not,
neverthelefs,  been  afflifted  with  violent  afi^edtions  of  this  kind.

I  grant  it.  Yet  there  is  not  in  all  a  matter  equally  acrid,  and  irritating  ;
nor  are  the  nerves  equally  prone  to  receive  an  irritation  in  all,  as  they  were
in  this  woman,  who  trembled  from  the  flighteft  occafion  of  fear:  nor,  final^
ly,  are  there  in  all,  as  in  this  woman,  thofe  diforders  of  particular  vifcera ;
fo  that  if  a  violent  convulfion  make  an  impetus  upon  them,  they  have  it  not
in  their  power  to  refift.

For  v/hich  reafon,  we  liave  the  more  to  fear  for  thofe  hyfterical,  or  hy-
pochondriac  perfons,  in  whom  we  either  know,  or  may  with  good  reafon

(/)  N,  18.  (tii)  DeBonon.  Sc.  Inilit.  in  opufc.  torn.  i.

*  fufped,


Letter  XL VI. Article  i.  641

fufped,  that  there  is  either  a  very  great  acrimony  of  the  humours,  or  a  taint
of  the  principal  vifcera,  at  the  fame  time.

And  as  feme  phyficians,  otherwife  not  unlearned,  did  not  attend  fuffici-
ently  to  this ;  I  remember  that  a  young  man,  who  was  hypochondriac,  and
who  had  been  accuftom'd,  for  a  long  time,  to  harafs  their  ears  with  excef-
five,  and  continual  complaints;  though  for  the  moft  part  to  very  little  pur-
pofe  •,  being  feiz'd  with  a  fever,  which  they,  as  ufual,  paid  but  little  regard
to,  and  made  light  of,  was  overcome  by  the  infidious  difeafe,  and  carried
off,  before  they,  I  do  not  fay  foretold,  but  were  fenfible  of  the  danger.

You  therefore,  even  in  querulous  perfons  of  this  kind,  will  preferve,  ac-
cording to  your  cuftom,  a  cautious,  and  accurate  diligence.  For  diligence
■was  never  injurious,  but  negligence  often  is :  and  to  this,  if  I  may  fay  the-
truth,  it  is  to  be  imputed,  for  the  moft  part,  that  "  any  perfon  dies,  of  whom
**  the  phylician  was  fecure  (n)." Farewell.

(«)  Celf.  de  Medic.  1.  2.  c.  6.


LETTER tke F  O  R  T  Y-S  IX  TH

Treats  of  the Impediments to  Venery,  and  of  Sterility
in  both  Sexes.


ALTHOUGH  that  fedlion  of  the  Sepulchretum,  which  immediately
fucceeds,  I  mean  the  thirty-fourth,  comprifes  not  only  what  relates  to
Iterility,  but  alfo  what  relates  to  falacity  ;  yet  it  is  my  intention  to  imitate
Bonetus  in  the  former  only,  for  in  the  latter  I  have  nothing  at  hand  to  pro-
duce :  and  indeed  I  think  that  fome  things  produc'd  by  him  might  have  been
better  omitted.

For  what  does  it  contribute  to  falacity,  that  the  right  fpermatic  vein,  ancf
the  left,  both  open'd  into  the  emulgent3(a)?  or  at  leaft  that  there  were  more
than  two  (b)  ?  Efpecially  as  a  lefs  aptitude  to  venery  is  afterwards  accounted
for,  from  their  number  being  increas'd  {c)  ;  and  the  generation  of  a  cold,
and  watery  femen,  is  deduc'd  from  the  influx  of  thefe  veins  into  the  emul-
gents  (d).

(a)  Obf.  I.  §.  I.  &  3.  {r)  In  Schol.  ibid.

{i)  Ibid.  §.  8.  [d]  Obf.  5.  §.3.

Vol.  IL  4  N  . S©


64.2  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

So,  in  like  manner,  what  has  the  increas'd  fize  of  the  kidnies  to  do  there-
witli  (e)  ?  Or  the  diminidi'd  fize  on  the  other  hand  (f)  ?

It  is  true,  I  am  not  ignorant  what  was  formerly  faid  of  the  office  of
tiiefe  veins  •,  and  what  has  been  contended  for,  in  regard  to  the  kidnies,  even
by  Bartholin  himfelf  f^).  But  as  the  former  things  have  been  already  fct
afide,  by  the  knowledge  of  the  blood's  circulation  -,  and  as  what  relates  to
t!ie  kidnies  is  exprefsly  call'd  "  a  paradox  "  by  Bonetus  (b) ;  they  fhould  ra-
ther have  been  hinted  at  in  fome  of  the  Scholia,  than  recited  among  folid
obfervations.

But  I,  moreover,  think  that  in  regard  to  fterility,  or  foecundity,  fome
things  might  have  been  left  out  with  very  great  propriety.  I  will  give  you
two  inftances.

A  man  who  had  forc'd  a  virgin,  was  entirely  deftitute  of  teftes,  both  ia-
ternally  and  externally  {i) ;  the  teftes  therefore  do  not  ferve  for  the  genera-
tion of  the  feed.

Formerly,  indeed,  there  might  have  been  room  for  thefe  things,  when
that  very  opinion  of  Ariftotle,  for  inftance,  which  is  there  quoted,  was  em-
brac'd  even  by  learned  feftaries :  among  thefe  I  do  not  doubt  to  place  Catul-
lus, whom  the  fucceeding  poets  have  with  juftice,  call'd  "  learned,"  when
he  writes  thus  of  Atys  (k).

Devohil  ilia  acuta  ftbi  pondera  filice.

"  He  difencumbers  himfelf  of  thefe  weights  by  means  of  a  fharp  flint.'*

And  now  what  has  this  comparifon,  of  tefticlcs  with  weights,  to  do  with
th;  prefent  fubjedt  ?  Or  what  has  this  aflertion  to  do,  "  that  none  of  the
*'  fpermatic  velfels  any  where  enter  the  teftes  ?"

Or,  finally,  what  affinity  is  there  betwixt  a  virgin  being  forc'd,  which  may
be  done  by  an  eunuch,  and  impregnation,  of  which  an  eunuch  is  certainly  not
capable  ?

It  is  alfo  worth  while  to  pay  attention  to  this  circumftance,  that,  in  a  wo-
man (/),  who  "  died  from  the  exceffive  ufe  of  venery,  the  round  ligaments,
"  in  the  part  of  them  neareft  to  the  uterus,  were  found  full  of  femen."

There  is  no  doubt  but  thefe  things  might  have  met  with  approbation  for-
merly ;  but  they  cannot  meet  with  it  now  :  no  more  than  thofe  things
that  are  advanc'd  in  the  preceding  fedion  (m)^  of  the  female  femen  being
found  corrupted  in  the  tubes,  or  in  the  uterus,  and  vafa  deferential

But  give  me  leave  now  to  omit  thefe  things,  and  produce  thofe  that  are
more  probable,  in  regard  to  the  fterility  of  both  fexes,  and  firft  from  Val-
falva.

2.  There  was  a  certain  man  who  was  dumb,  yet  not  becaufe  he  was  de-
ficient in  his  hearing;  for  he  heard  very  well :  the  fame  perfon  had  no  hairs,
cither  on  his  face,  or  his  breaft,  under  his  arm-pits,  or  on  the  fcrotum ;  a.

(^)  Obf.  I.  §.  5  &6.  (i)  Obf.  I.  §.  2.  &  $choL

(f)  Obf.  z.%.\.  {k)  Carra.  62.  v.  5.

(^)  Vid.  Adverf.  Anat.  3.  animad.  33.  ad (/)  Obf.  6.  §.  6.
£ft.  \m)  Obf.  4.  §.  ji  &  12.

(h\  Schol.  ad  obf.  I.  §.  5.

few


Letter  XLVI. Article  3,  4, 5. ' 643

few  fcatter'd  ones  being  feen  on  the  pubes  only,  at  the  very  root  of  the  penis.
This  man  was  carried  off  by  an  accute  fever,  at  the  age  of  five  and  thiny,
his  fever  being  attended  with  worms.

All  the  organs  of  generation  being  accurately  examin'd,  they  fhow'd  no
mark  of  difeaie.

3.  Whether  this  man  had  a  generative  faculty,  or  not,  Valfalva  has  not
added  ;  nor  yet  whether  he  was  without  hairs  quite  from  his  birth  :  for  the
celebrated  Heifter  (n)  faw  a  man,  who,  without  any  foregoing  diforder  that
deferv'd  notice,  had  loft  all  the  hairs  in  his  body,  and  did  not  recover  them
•within  ten  years.

Yet  it  is  to  be  fuppos'd,  that  he,  of  whom  Valfalva  left  this  account,  v/as
not  only  naturally  without  hairs,  but  incapable  of  procreation  ;  fo  that  both  the
circumftances  led  him  to  undertake  an  accurate  examination  of  all  the  parts
of  generation.

And  as  there  appear'd  to  be  no  diforder  in  thofe  parts ;  this  obfervation
feems  to  hint,  that  the  caufe,  whatever  it  is,  by  which  the  femen  is  render'd
fertile,  and  the  body  becomes  hairy,  muft  exift  in  the  invifible  ftrufture  of
the  parts  which  fecrete,  or  perfeft,  the  femen.

And  we,  certainly,  fee  both  of  thefe  circumftances  happen  together,  at
the  time  of  puberty,  that  is  when  thefe  internal  ftruftures  have  now  begun
to  be  fufficiently  develop'd.

And  indeed,  fome  very  flight  appearance,  in  the  cutis  of  women,  has
fometimes  been  a  proof  to  me  of  their  fterility  -,  when  this  was  from  the
birth,  and  perpetual.  For  I  have  feen  that  two  women,  in  whom  there  was
nothing  at  all  that  did  not  promife  foecundity,  have  been  married  to  men  of
excellent  health,  and  yet  been  barren.

When  I  confider'd  every  thing  very  attentively  ;  I  found  the  cutis,  in  one,
contrary  to  what  we  fl:iould  have  fuppos'd,  from  her  kind  of  life,  age,  and
habit  of  body,  to  be  by  no  means  fmooth,  and  foft,  if  you  touch'd  it :  and
in  the  other  I  found  the  fldn  cover'd  with  a  cuticle,  which  was  continually
coming  off  in  little  fcales,  and  fcurf,  even  in  the  face.  And  I  faw  a  third
barren  woman  fimilar  to  the  laft  when  I  was  copying  this  letter.

And  to  me  thefe  things  feem'd  to  admit  of  being  accounted  for,  fi-om  the
febaceous  glands  of  the  Ikin  fecreting  a  matter,  which  is  either  lefs  in  quan-
tity than  it  ought  to  be,  or  not  of  the  nature  requir'd.

But  how  this  matter,  when  retain'd  within  the  body,  or  being  lefs  fit  for
its  office,  ftiould  prevent  conception,  is  uncertain.  At  prefent,  however,
let  us  come  to  evident  diforders,  in  the  organs  of  generation  themfelves.

4.  Valfalva  made  obfervations  upon  two  women  who  were  barren  ;  though
in  the  prime  of  their  life  •,  the  one  from  having  fcarcely  any  veficles  in  the
ovaries;  and  the  other  from  the  humour  of  thefe  parts  being  quite  con-
creted-, juft  as  if  they  had  been  boil'd  upon  the  fire.  But  as  I  have  given
you  the  hiftory  of  thefe,  already,  in  other  places  (o),  there  is  no  need  to
repeat  them  here. I  go  on  therefore  to  my  own.

5.  I  dilTefted  moft  of  the  parts  of  a  man,  who  died  in  this  hofpital,  about
the  latter  end  of  November  in  the  year  171 7,  with  a  view to  anatomical

{n)  Eph,  n.  c.  cent,  i  &  z.  obf,  197.  (0)  Epift,  36.  n.  17.  &  Epift.  20.  n.  7.

4  N  2  in  qui-


644  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

inquiries  ;  when  I  obfcrv'd  that  fome  parts  were  in  a  preternatural  ftate.
The  ureters  were  wider  than  natural  in  fome  places.  And  on  one  fide,
both  the  veficula  feminalis,  and  that  part  of  the  vas  deferens,  which  is  next
to  this  veficle,  had  fcirrhous  parietes  •,  the  membranous  fubftance  being  al-
moft  chang'd  into  a  cartilaginous  nature.

6.  From  this  obfervation  it  appears,  how  much  was  wanting  for  the  per-
fedlion  and  ejaculation  of  the  femen.  For  neither  that  which  is  wont  to  be
added,  by  means  of  Harderus's  glands,  or  carried  away  by  the  lymphsdufts,
could  be  here  added,  or  carried  away  -,  nor  could  the  force,  which  the  con-
traifting  coats  of  the  veiicles,  and  of  the  lower  parts  of  the  vafa  deferentia,
previoufly  diftended  with  femen,  exert  on  this  fluid,  where  it  is  thrawn  out,,
be  at  all  expeded  here.

But  en  the  other  fide,  you  will  fay,  nothing  of  this  kind  was  wanting.

Yet  the  quantity  of  inert,  and  watery  femen,  as  it  were,  which  muft  flow
from  the  oppofite  fide,  was  of  great  detriment  to  that  very  good  femen  to
which  it  was  join'd.

And  indeed  the  hardnefs,  and  thicknefs,  of  the  feminal  duft,  at  its  ter-
mination on  one  fide,  may  increafe  fo  gradually,  as  to  prefs  upon  the  extre-
mity of  the  other,  and  obftrudt  it.

And  thus  it  was  I  remember,  that  I  anfwer'd  to  Laurence  Mariani,  a  gen-
tleman whom  I  have  fpoken  of  before,  when  in  the  clofe  of  the  year  17363.
he  wrote  me  the  cafe  ot  a  noble  youth.

This  young  gentleman  having  never  had  knowledge  of  any  woman,  his
wife  only  excepted ;  by  whom  he  had  one  daughter ;  had  a  fwelling  of  the
left  fpermatic  veiTels,  attended  with  pain,  together  vi'ith  a  fwelling  of  the
epididymis,  and  the  vas  deferens  •,  which  was  perceiv'd  to  be  hard,  together
■with  the  epididymis  y  while  the  tcfticle  preferv'd  its  ufual  foftnefs.

By  means  of  fome  remedies,  which  w^ere  applied,  the  pain  was,  aftep  {&m&-
months,  greatly  diminifh'd  ;  but  the  tumour  and  hardnefs  not  greatly.

Notwithftanding  every  thing  on  the  right  fide  was,  as  far  as  we  could
judge,  in  a  found  ftate  •,  and  therefore  very  proper  for  the  generation,  and
conveyance  of  th^  femen  ;  the  patient,  neverthelefs,  emitted  none  of  thjs-
fluid  in  coitu,  to  the  great  furprize  of  the  phyfi.cians.

However,  you  will  have  obfervations  of  a  coalition  of  one  of  the  veHelSy
that  carries  down  the  femen  to  the  veficle,  and  in  like  manner  of  a  calcu-
lus concreted  in  one  of  the  veficles,  to  add  to  the  others-,  of  the  former  cafe
from  Brunnerus  (p)  and  Waltherus  (q)  ;  but  of  the  latter  from  Valenti-
nus  (r).

7.  And  I  might  here  add  what  I  have  remark'd,  in  the  diffiftion  of  bo-
dies, of  the  feminal  veficles  being  dry,  and  wrinkled,  even  in  a  young  man;
and  of  the  pafl"age  of  the  femen,  into  the  urethra,  being  become  blind  y.
which  WaltherusY^J  alfofaw-,  if  L  had  not  already  communicated  thefe  things,
to  you,  when  treating  of  other  diforders,  and  particularly  of  the  virulent
gonorrhoea  ('/). And  for  the fame  reafon  I  omit  what  relates  to calculi


[p]  De  Gland.  Duod.  ubi  de  ear.  in  Horn. (;-)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  2.  a,  6.  obf.  68.
Demonllr.  ('sj  Loco  modo  indie.

{^)  Ad.  Erud.  Lipf.  a.  1725.  M.  Novembr. (/)  Epift.  44..  n.  7.  &  Epift..  49.  n.  29,


of


Letter  XLVI. Article  8.  645

of  the  proftate  gland,  that  prevent  the  exit  of  the  femen. For  this  you  have
already  had  in  the  forty-fecond  letter  ('aj.

8.  I  fhoLild  alfo  fiave  written  at  large,  in  this  place,  of  the  great  diforder
of  the  urethra,  which  I  examin'd.  in  a  ruftic  young  man,  together  with  my
celebrated  coUegue  Vallifneri ;  if  he  himfelf  had  not  publifh'd  the  cafe  three
years  after  (x),  and  the  editors  of  all  his  works  over  again  (y).  "Wherefore  I
fhall  only  add  fome  few  things.

As  the  fcrotum  was  not  entirely  divided  into  two  parts ;  but  only  anterior-
ly ;  betwixt  the  upper  parts  of  both  thefe  divifions  was  the  orifice  of  the
canal  of  the  urethra:  and  from  thence  quite  to  the  apex  of  the  glans,  through
the'  whole  inferior  furface  of  the  penis,  which  was  much  fliorter  than  is  re-
prefented  in  the  figure  (2),  not  a  canal,  but  a  femicanal,  v/as  now  continued  •,
that  is  the  upper  paries  of  the  urethra  only  and  this  fmooth  and  fhining  -,  fo-
that  you  would  find  fomewhat  lefs  difficulty  in  giving  credit  to  the  young
man,  and  to  a  woman,  who  faid  that  fhe  had  been  with  child  by  him  :  for
the  former  afferted  that  v/hen  he  made  water  with  the  penis  a  little  rais'd,  the
urine  ran  out  through  the  femicanal ;  and  the  latter  that  the  femen,  ejaculated;
by  him,  enter'd  the  vagina,  and  was  not  loft.

At  leaft  the  urine,  when  he  difcharg'd  it  againfl:  the  wall,  we  faw  toafcend
higher  than  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.  Nor  did  it  efcape  us  what  the  ftruc-
ture  of  the  penis  caa  bear ;  and  what  de  Graaf  (a),  and  Harvey,  whom  he-
quotes,  had  feen  on  this  account;.  I  mean  that  a  penis  "which  appear'd;
"  very  fmall,  at  firft  fight,"  when  it  was  inflated,  "  had  ftretch'd  itfelf  out
*'  into  a  large  body,  from  being  almoft  hid  :  and  that  fometimes,  "  except
"  when  it  v/as  excited  by  a.  tentigo,  it  had  not  been  at  all  prominent  in  the
"  corrugated  fcrotum,  except  in  the  extreme  apex  of  the  glans."

We  therefore  conceived,  that  when  this  fmall  indeed,  but  not  very  fmall^
penis  extended  itfelf;  the  young  man  at  the  fame  time  affirming  it ;  that  part
t.hereofin  which  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  was  feen,  was  ftretch'd  in  its  length,
and  by  this  means  fufficiently  enter'd  the  vagina ;  and  that,  by  the  inferior
paries- of  this  cavity,  applying  itfelf  to  the  remaining  part  of  the  open  ure-
thra, the  femicanal  was  chang'd  into  a  perfedl  canal :  juft  as  happens  to  the
femicanals  which  I  have  defcrib'd  in  the  Adverfaria  {i>),  in  the  penis  of  the
tortoife,  and  the  viper,  when  receiv'd  in  the  genitals  of  their  females.

Indeed  I  do  not  know,  whether,  in  the  infant  of  three  months  old,  who;
Palfin  (,c)  has  told  us  was  {een  by  him,  as  the  canal  of  the  urethra  terminated
in  the  fame  part  that  it  did  in  our  young  man,  fo  a  femicanal  was  continued
quite  on  to  the  glans :  but  this  I  know,  that  if  the  conformation  of  that
child  was  the  fame  as  the  conformation  of  this  young  man,  the  predidioh  that
this  difeas'd  ftrufture  "  would  render  him  incapable  of  procreation,  and
"  caufe  great  inconvenience  in  the  difcharge  of  his  urine,  is  but  little  to  be-
"  depended  upon."

Yet  I  am  not  ignorant,  that  the  ancient  phyficians,  and  furgeons,  even  inn
thole  men,  in  whom  the  canal  of  the  urethra  is  produc'd  quite  to  the  glans,

(a)  N.  27-  (a)  De  Viror.  Organ,  ubi  de  Nervof.  Peni&

\x)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  72..  Gorporib.

{y)  Tom.  3.  p.  3.  n.  28..  {h)  IV.  Animad.  4,

(^)  Cent.  cit.  tab.  z,  fig.  i-  (c)  Anat.  du  Corps  hum.  p.  i,.tr.  2...cli.  J7.,

n  but:


646  Book  m. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

but  opens  beneath  it  •,  who  are  for  that  reafon  call'd  hypofpadi^ei ;  have  pro-
noiinc'd  the  fame  thing,  in  regard  to  the  faculty  of  generation  :  and  this
opinion  is  confirm'd  by  the  more  modern  authors,  and  particularly  by  Dionis
{d),  where  he  points  out  fome  caufes  of  this  diforder,  even  after  birth.

But  I  wonder  neverthelefs,  that,  as  they  have  read  our  Fabricius  -,  which
appears  from  their  writings;  they  have  made  no  exceptions  to  fuch  a  predic-
tion ;  but  have  afferted  that  the  work  of  a  furgeon  is  quite  neceflary  here  -,  as
he  has  exprefly  admonifh'd  us  {e),  "  that  he  had  neverthelefs  feen  children,
"  which  had  been  begotten"  by  thofe,  who  were  affefted  with  this  diforder;
which  others  (f)  alio  have  confirm'd.

Wherefore,  I  the  more  commend  Ruyfch,  who  -,  having  formerly  fuppos'd.
{g)  that  a  diforder,  nor  unlike  that,  for  inftance,  which  I  have  delcrib'd,
"  brought  on  an  incapacity  of  procreation  •"  has  fo  moderated  his  afiertion
afterwards  (/^),  as  to  fay,  "  that  thofe  who  labour  under  this  diforder  rarely
"  impregnate  their  wives."

But  to  return  to  thofe  in  whom  the  urethra  happens  to  be  open  in  a  great
part  of  it,  and  form'd  into  a  long  femicanal ;  in  the  year  1756,  before  I  re-
vis'd  this  letter,  another  ruftic  young  man,  of  two  and  twenty  years  of  age,
was  brought  to  me,  vv'ho  had  the  fame  kind  of  formation  as  the  other  ;  except
that  the  femicanal,  at  its  beginning,  was  a  little  diftant  from  the  upper  part
of  the  fcrotum,  which  was  cover'd  with  hairs,  and  had  a  confiderable  divifion
into  two  parts.

In  this  young  man,  alio,  the  urine  did  not  fall  down  at  his  feet,  but  was
thrown  againft  the  wall  :  and  the  penis,  when  diftended  by  a  tentigo,  became
from  a  fhort  one,  confiderably  longer;  as  he  himfelf  affirm'd.

And  as  this  was  confonant  to  reafon,  fo  the  appearances ;  and  in  particular
the  length  of  the  femicanal,  which  was  but  little  lefs ;  render'd  it  not  at  all
improbable,  that  this  young  man  had,  likewife,  impregnated  a  woman ;  as
both  of  them  confefs'd.

Thofe  who  law,  at  Peterfburg ;  many  years  after  the  publication  of  Vallif-
neri's  obfervation  and  mine  {i) ;  the  urethra  lying  open  after  the  manner  of
a  fulcus,  or  femicanal ;  being  fohcitous  about  determining  the  fex  (which
was  an  inquiry  we  had  not  the  lead  occafion  to  make)  did  not  once  inquire,
whether  this  ftru6lure  could  intirely  take  away  the  power  of  procreation.

And  the  celebrated  Abraham  Kaau  Boerhaave,  when  he  produc'd  their  ob-
fervadons,  ftood  up  for  our  opinion  ;  which  he  feems  not  to  have  feen :  for
which  you  will  alfo  fuppofe  the  celebrated  Haller  (k)  to  argue,  where  he
fpeaks  of  it  in  a  curfory  manner  ;  and  fuppofe  that  he  would  have  argued  for
it  in  a  boy  alfo ;  in  whom  he  faw  a  like  deformity  ;  if  he  had  feen  him  in  an
advanc'd  age  :  for  the  boy  was  no  more  than  three  years  of  age,  at  the  time
he  examinM  him.

I  do  not  refer  to  this  clafs  the  obfervation  of  Salzmann  (/),  on  a  ruftic  young
man,  whofe  urethra  pafs'd  not  below,  but  above  and  betwixt  the  nervous

Cd)  Cours  d'Operat.  de  Chir.  Demonftr.  3.  (h)  Thef.  Anat.  8.  n.  30.

(?)  De  Chir.  Operat.  ubi  de  glande  non  per-  (/')  Nov.  Comment.  Acad.  Sc.  Imp.  Petropol.
for.  torn.  I.  in  Phyiic.

Cf)  Eph.  n c.  dec.  i.  a.  3.  obf.  91.  {k)  Comment.  Sec.  R.  Sc.  Getting,  torn.  i.

\g)  Muf.  Anat.  the*,  c.  Repof.  1.  n.  1.  (/)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  4.  obf.  65.

and


Letter  XLVI. Article  9.  647

and  fpongy  bodies,  in  an  open  (late,  on  the  back  of  the  penis  ;  becaufe  here,  •
as  the  figures  Ihow  (»?),  the  penis  was  fo  much  the  fhorter  in  proportion  to  its
thicknefs,  nor  increas'd  much  from  venereal  ideas ;  and  alio  becaufe  it  was-
a  little  curv'd  downwards ;  and  lafl  of  all  becaufe  the  urine  did  not  flow  out
with  impetus  through  the  urethra.  On  account  of  all  which  circumftances,
it  was  with  juftice  fuppos'd,  that  the  young  man  was  not  fit  for  the  propo-
gation  of  his  fpecies.

9.  And  I  jiidg'd  in  the  fame  manner  of  another  young  man,  who  was
thirty  years  of  age,  although  he  neither  had  the  urethra  on  the  back  of  the
penis,  not  the  whole  of  it  open.  This  man  I  carefully  examin'd,  as  I  was
requefted  to  do,  and  as  the  cafe  itfelf  requir'd,  in  the  year  1738.

He  was  lels  robuft  than  the  other  two,  that  I  infpefted  ;  yet  was  pretty
healthy  and  well,  except  his  eyes  and  his  penis;  the  former  of  which  were
blind  from  an  old  and  conftant  inflammation,  and  the  latter  was  in  the  ftate-
I  fhall  prefently  defcribe.

He  himfelf  readily  acknowledg'd,  that  his  wife  was  in  the  fame  ftate  of
virginity,  in  which  he  had  married  her  three  years  before.  He  fuppos'd  the-
caufe  to  be,  that  the  glans  was  curv'd  towards  the  inferior  part,  and  not  per-
forated at  the  apex,  but  below  ;  and  for  that  reafon  obftrufting  both  the  ea-
trance  of  the  penis,  and  the  ejaculation  of  the  femen.

After  hearing  thefe  things,  I  examin'd  the  genital  parts,  and  found  them!
in  the  following  ftate.  The  teftes  were  large  :  the  fcrotum  was  not  pale  in-
deed, but  very  lax:  the  penis  was  of  a  proper  proportion,  both  in  length,  and
thicknefs :  the  preputium  was  of  the  fame  kind  that  I  have  defcrib'd  in  the-
two  other  young  men,  fimilar  to  the  prseputium  clitoridis  :  for  it  fufficiently
cover'd  the  upper  furface  and  fides  of  the  glans ;  but  was  deficient  on  the  in-
ferior furface.

And  on  the  whole  of  the  fame  furface  of  the  glans,  arid  for  a  little  fpace
below  the  glans,  the  inferior  paries  of  the  urethra  was  alfo  wanting-,  fo  that,-
like  a  femicanal,  only  the  upper  paries  continued  to  the  extremity  of  the
glans;  being  fmooth  and  of  a  flightly  red  colour,  and  in  the  middle,  in  a  loa-
gitudinal  direftion,  fhowing  very  clearly  three  orifices  of  the  larger  canals,
which  I  have  fpoken  of  in  the  Adverfaria  (n) ;  being  in  the  form  of  an
ellypfe;  orifices  of  which  kind,  and  more  indeed,  and  thofe  fomewhat  larger,
we  had  feen  in  the  firft  young  man  in  particular ;  whereas  in  none  of  thefe
did  any  fmall  foramina  of  the  leflTer  canals  appear,  though  fought  after  with
attention  :  for  I  do  not  doubt  but  the  figure,  which  I  have  reier'd  to  above
(0),  was  defcrib'd  from  memory ;  as,,  befides  orifices  that  pafs  in  one  right
line  through  the  middlej  it  reprefents  fo  many  other  foramina,  here  and
there,  at  the  fides.

Moreover,  the  orifice  of  the  canal  of  the  urethra,  in  this  young  man  of
whom  I  have  begun  to  fpeak,  was  in  that  part,  from  whence  I  have  faid  that
the  femicanal  began :  and  a  very  little  below  that,  the  inferior  paries  of  the
urethra  was  perforated  with  another  leflfer  orifice :  and  the  young  man  faid
that  urine  came  from  both  of  them  ;  and  that  he  had  heard  from  his  mother-,,
that  he  was  born  with  this  conformation.,

(ra)  Tab,  6.  fig.  uSf  2.  (n)  I,  n.  10.  {oj  Ad  n.  8.

5  Then:.


648  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly,

Then  inquiring  into  the  caufe  of  curvature  in  the  glands,  when  I  faw  that
rhe  ikin  was  pretty  lax,  which  adher'd  to  that  part  near  to  the  orifices  where-
of 1  have  fpoken  -,  and  not  tenfe  and  contrafted  fo  as  to  curve  the  glans ;  I
inquir'd  whether,  when  the  penis  was  turgid,  the  glans  was  turgid  alfo;
and  wiiether,  at  that  tinie  at  leaft,  any  troublefome  fenfe  of  tenfion  was  per-
ceiv'd  ;  and  particularly  at  the  place  of  the  fkin's  adhefionjuft  now  pointed
our. To  both  of  which  he  anfwer'd  in  the  negative.

He  only  added  this,  that  in  his  early  puberty,  when  the  penis  was  tumid,
this  troublefome  fenfe  had  been  perceiv'd  in  that  part  •,  but  after  a  few  years
having  pafs'd  was  perceiv'd  no  more :  and  although,  when  he  married  his
wife,  tlie  glans  fometimes  fwell'd  together  with  the  penis,  yet  from  the  time,
that,  in  making  vain  endeavours  to  enter  the  vagina,  a  great  quantity  of
femen  had  been  pour'd  out  with  great  quicknefs  -,  from  whence  he  faid
that  his  opthalmia  became  more  flight,  and  his  fight  lefs  dull ;  the  penis  only
became  tumid,  and  the  glans  hung  down  flaccid,  and  without  any  voluptuous
inclination.

It  was  evident  that  what  he  could  not  perform  with  a  tumid  glans,  it  was
impoffible  for  him  to  do  with  it  flaccid.  And  the  reafon  why  it  had  formerly
been  flaccid  in  general,  and  was  always  fo  now,  I  fuppos'd  to  be  that  male
conformation  of  the  urethra,  which  I  have  now  defcrib'd.

For,  as  the  inferior  paries  of  this  canal  was  wanting  in  that  part,  where  it
is  wont  to  be  increas'd  by  a  pretty  thick  corpus  fpcngiofum  dilating  it-
felf  to  make  up  a  confiderable  part  of  the  exteriors  of  the  glans ;  it  is  to  be
fuppos'd  that  the  blood,  which  is  protruded  upwards  for  the  proper  difl:en-
tion  of  the  glans,  muft  have  had  a  lefs  quick  paflage  thither:  and  this  con-
jefture  was  confirm'd  to  me,  by  the  feme  fpongy  body  of  the  urethra ;  a3
from  thofe  two  orifices,  quite  to  the  root  of  the  penis,  I  obferv'd  it  to  be
thicker  than  ufual  in  this  young  man  j  without  doubt  from  the  blood  not
having  a  free  pafiage  into  the  glans,  and  therefore  being  colle6i:ed  below  it:
fo  that,  in  proportion  as  it  added  thicknefs  to  this  fpongy  body,  fo  much
did  it  detraft  from  the  length,  and  by  this  means  curve  the  adjoining  glans
downwards.

But  none  of  thefe  circumfliances  took  place,  in  the  other  young  men  whom
I  examin'd  ;  becaufe  that  body  extended  its  inferior  paries,  not  at  all,  or  but
juft  above  the  fcrotum;  and  the  fuperior  paries,  or  that  which  is  receiv'd  be-
twixt the  nerveo-fpongious  bodies  of  the  penis,  was  certainly  very  thick,  as
happens  in  fome  perfons,  fo  that  it  could  fufHciently  communicate  with  the
glans.

You  will  perceive  this,  in  fome  meafure,  from  the  figure  given  by  Ruyfch,
which,  in  his  century  of  obfervations,  is  mark'd  feventy-fix:  and  thofe  things
that  I  conjetlur'a  in  the  young  man  laft  defcrib'd,  you  will  conceive  of  far
more  clearly,  from  the  eighty-firft,  and  eighty-fecond  figures,  of  the  fame
century,  when  compar'd  with  the  feventy-fifth.

10.  By  the  fcveral  things  which  have  been  juft  now  faid,  you  fee  that  what
the  more  modern  phyficians,  and  Boerhaave,  in  particular  (p),  have  taught
very  clearly  •,  from  confidering  the  ftrufture  of  the  penis  with  great  accuracy  ;
are  confirm'd  :  I  mean  that  the  corpus  fpongiofum  urethras,  and  the  glans,

(/)  Pra;lea.  ad  Inilit,  §.  654.

may


Letter  XLVI. Article  ii.  649

may  be  tenfe  and  tumid,  while  the  corpora  penis  remain  flaccid,  or  are  even
abfent ;  for  fo  our  Plazzonus  {q)  faw  it  i  and  on  the  contrary  it  may  happen,
that  the  glans  may  remain  flaccid,  while  thefe  bodies  of  the  penis  are  dif-
tended:  for  in  either  the  one  or  the  other  way,  the  bufinefs  of  generation  may
be  injur'd.

Moreover,  there  are  many  and  various  impediments  to  diflention -,  jufl:  as
there  are  many  and  various  caufes  of  this  diftention.  Among  which  caufes,
not  only  the  real,  but  the  apparent,  plenitude  of  the  veficuls  feminales,  feems
proper  to  be  plac'd.

I  call  it  apparent  at  that  time,  fince  there  is  not  fo  much  femen  in  the  vefi-
cles,  as  they  can  really  contain  at  another  time ;  but  as  much  as  they  can  con-
tain at  that  time.

Thus,  upon  waking  in  a  morning,  even  fome  old  men  are  fenfible  of  a  len-
tigo, which  they  immediately  get  rid  of  by  difcharging  their  urine.  For
the  urine  diftended  the  bladder,  and  this  comprefs'd  the  fubjefted  veficles  j
but  particularly  by  that  bafis  of  it  which  extuberates  on  the  back-part,  and
which  I  have  fpoken  of;  fo  that,  by  this  means,  their  capacity  being  dimi-
nifli'd,  they  were  jufl:  as  much  diftiended,  even  with  a  fmall  quantity  of  fe-
men, as  they  would  have  been  with  a  great  quantity  when  not  comprefs'd.

And  indeed  the  mofl:  experienc'd  phyficians,  and  among  thefe  Gulielmus
Ballonius  (rj,  have  taken  a  very  ufeful  hint  from  this  phasnomenon.  Let
him  who  is  not  very  potent  in  his  generative  faculties,  fays  he,  "  perform
"  copulation  after  much  titillation,  with  his  urine  retain'd,  and  having  a
"  great  defire  to  difcharge  it."

So  what  the  fame  perfons  have  obferv'd  after  Galen  (j)  -,  that  among  the
rnarks  of  a  fl:one  in  the  bladder,  the  penis  fometimes  "  is  immoderately
"  tenfe  ;"  we  fliall  account  for  in  the  fame  way :  and  efpecially  where  there  is
a  very  large  calculus.

And  I  have  faid  in  the  fame  way,  without  being  ignorant  that  thefe  phse-
nomena  may  be  explain'd  in  other  ways  alfo.  Yet  there  are  cafes  in  which
one  explication  may  be  preferable  to  another :  and,  indeed,  it  may  even
fometimes  happen,  that  many  caufes,  of  the  fame  kind,  may  confpire  to  pro-
duce the  fame  effeft.

II.  But  of  men  I  have  fpoken  fufliciently.  Now  let  us  pafs  on  to  women;
beginning  with  two,  whofe  genital  parts  I  was  reqiieft:ed  to  examine  with  ac-
curacy, in  the  fame  manner  as  thofe  of  the  three  young  men  mention'd
above.

One  was  a  rufl:ic  woman,  whofe  pudendum  was  in  a  perfeft  and  natural
fl:ate.  But  that  canal^  as  they  call'd  it  in  the  time  of  Celfus  (t),  into  which
it  opens,  and  which  we  now  call  the  vagina,  had  fcarcely  run  on  more  than
a  third  part  of  its  proper  length,  when  it  fuddenly  terminated  in  that  part.

There  was  no  cicatrix  at  that  place,  nor  below  it :  the  woman  herfelf,  or
her  parents,  could  none  of  them  call  to  mind  any  ulcer,  or  any  other  preceding
diforder,  in  confequence  of  which  the  fides  of  the  vagina  might  have  coalefc'd  ;
for  if  thefe  parts  are  ulcerated,  either  from  the  lues  venerea,  from  a  difficult
birth,  or  from  any  other  caufe  whatever,  where  the  careleflhefs  of  the  fur-

(f)  De  Partib.  General.  1.  i.  c.  21.  (-f)  De  loc.  afF,  1.  i.e.  i.

fr)  L.  2.  Confil.  Med.  26.  \t)  De  Medic.  1.  4.  c.  i.  ad  fin.

Vol.  II.  4  O  geon.


650  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

geon,  or  the  midwife  has  co-operared  with  the  diforder,  how  eafily  the  fides
of  this  canal  may  grow  together  we  are  taught  by  many  examples ;  fome  of
which  will  be  pointed  out  to  you  by  Marcellus  Donatus  (u) :  and  others  I
Iliall  take  notice  of  below.

However,  not  only  nothing  of  that  kind  had  preceded  in  this  woman  ;
but  every  part  moreover ;  being  fmooth,  fhining  and  equal,  when  you  had
open'd,  and  dilated,  that  part  of  the  vagina  which  there  was ;  appear'd  in
fuch  a  manner,  that  you  might  plainly  perceive  not  only  the  fides  of  this  canal
to  be  in  their  original  ftate  -,  but  that  the  part  by  which  they  were  bounded,
was  a  kind  of  roof,  or  ceiling,  form'd  by  the  firft  inftitution  of  nature-,  being
of  the  fame  ftrufture,  and  made  up  of  the  fame  fubftance.  Nor  indeed  did  this
roof  or  ceiling  in  the  leaft  give  way,  either  to  the  finger  when  prefs'd  againft
it,  or  to  the  penis  of  the  hufband ;  which  had  now,  for  three  years  fpace,  been
frequently  forc'd  againft  -it.  For  it  was  not  like  a  membrane  which  was
drawn  tranfverfly  ;  but  refifted  like  a  very  folid  and  thick  paries.

Having  remark'd  thefe  things,  I  inquir'd  of  the  woman  •,  who  was  as  yet
in  the  flower  of  her  life,  and  enjoy'd  perfeft  health  ;  whether  Ihe,  like  other
women,  did  not  perceive  blood  to  flow  from  thence  fometimes,  if  not  every
month  ;  or,  at  leaft,  if,  at  certain  intervals,  pains  did  not  arife  about  the
loins,  and  the  pubes  •,  but  Ihe  anfwer'd  to  all  thefe  things  in  the  negative  :
fo  that  I  began  to  fufpect  the  fame  thing  as  in  the  fecond  :  and  after  defcrib-
ing  to  you  her  cafe,  I  will  communicate  my  fufpicion  to  you.

12.  This  fecond  woman  related,  that  Ihe  was  not  indeed  imperforate,  but
had  fo  very  narrow  an  aperture,  that  an  eminent  phyfician  in  a  city  of  great
learning,  who  was  at  the  fame  time  a  furgeon,  having  examin'd  her  in  early
puberty,  advis'd  that  this  aperture  fhould  be  gradually  dilated,  by  introducing
fuch  things  as  were  proper  for  that  purpofe  ;  but  that  every  thing  elfe  a  more
mature  age,  and  a  hufband,  if  (he  fhould  marry,  would  accomplifti.

She  likewife  faid  that  ihe  had  introduc'd  fomething  of  the  kind  recom-
mended at  fometimes,  and  in  fome  meafure-,  and  had  by  this  means  a  litde
dilated  the  orifice  of  the  foramen  ;  but  could  bear  no  farther  dilatation  :  that
her  huft^and  alfo,  to  whom  ftie  had  been  married  three  years,  had  by  fre-
quent attempts  fomewhat  more  inlarg'd  the  fame  orifice  ;  but  never  could
enter  it.  .

After  hearing  this  relation,  I  infpefted  the  parts  with  this  intention,  that
if  a  pretty  thick  hymen,  or  one  that  open'd  by  a  very  fmall  foramen,  were
the  obfta'cle,  I  would  perfuade  het  to  undergo  the  incifion,  as  other  prafti-
tioners  have  done,  and  among  thefe  Blafius  (x)  -,  but  if  the  ftridture  went  very
high  up  into  the  vagina,  that  I  would  confider  what,  and  how  far  any  thing,
was  neceflary  to  be  done ;  for  the  celebrated  Benevoli  had  not  as  yet  given
his  example  of  an  equally  eafy  and  fuccefsful  cure  (y),  to  ferve  as  a  pattern
for  our  imitation  -,  as  his  obfervations  did  not  come  out  till  many  years  after.
For  the  method  of  cure  which  is  given  us  by  Blafius  (z),  as  perform'd  on
a  certain  woman,  to  whom  this  had  happen'd  from  child-bearing,  was  too
fevere  ;  not  to  fay,  that,  on  account  of  the  inteftinum  reftum  being  wounded,
it  was  very  long  in  being  compleated.

(a)  De  med.  hift.  mirab.  1.  6.  C.  2.  fyJ  Oflervaz.  2.

(;«■)  Part.  2.  obf.med.  6.  (z)  Part.  2.  cit»obf.  7.

2  And


Letter  XL VI. Article  12.  651

And  that  the  woman  being  at  length  made  pregnant,  as  happen'd  to  her
whofe  hiftory  is  given  by  Antonius  {a),  the  vagina  might  be  dilated  even  by
utero-geftation  itfelf,  I  was  rather  cautious  of  fuppofing ;  as  I  confider'd  this
in  the  number  of  very  extraordinary  inftances.

And  you  will,  at  leaft,  fee  that  the  fame  thing  did  not  happen  to  another
woman,  who  is  fpoken  of  in  the  fame  books  (b) ;  and  you  will  alfo  fee  with
how  much  labour,  and  if  you  attend  to  what  foUow'd,  with  how  much  dan-
ger likewife,  Benevoli  (c),  together  with  Qiierci,  was  oblig'd,  during  the
pains  of  child-bearing,  to  dilate  the  vagina,  which  was  contrafted  for  half  its
length,  by  reafon  of  a  wound  which  had  been  receiv'd  in  childhood  ;  whereas
thofe  two  may  feem  to  have  been  born  thus.

Thefe  five  women,  however,  had,  all  of  them,  a  fmall  foramen,  through
which  there  was  fome  paflage  to  the  uterus  :  fuch  as  I  alfo  fufpedled  there  was
in  her  whofe  hiftory  I  have  begun  to  defcribe.

But  when  I  law  the  foramen,  of  which  the  woman  had  fpoken,  I  imme-
diately knew  that  it  was  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  out  of  its  fituation ;  and  that
thanks  ought  to  be  given  to  God,  that  the  woman  could  not  fuffer  any  far-
ther dilatation  of  that  paflage ;  as,  if  fhe  had,  the  confequence,  without  doubt,
would  have  been,  that  Ihe  could  never  have  retain'd  her  urine.

From  whence  you  perceive,  that  fo  great  a  want  of  anatomical  knowledge,
as  not  to  diftinguifli  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  to  the  great  detriment,  or  at
leaft  to  the  danger,  of  the  patient,  is  not  only  found  in  vulgar  furgeons
and  barbers ;  of  whom  fome  fimilar  inftances  are  related  by  Platerus  {d),  and
Peter  de  Marchettis  {e) ;  but  alfo  in  phyficians  of  eminence  :  unlefs  it  is  more
proper,  in  this  cafe,  to  accufe  either  the  hafte  of  the  examiner,  or  the  pre-
judg'd  opinion  that  he  had  form'd  to  himfelf,  from  what  had  been  improperly-
related  to  him  of  a  narrow  foramen.

Then  turning  my  eyes  to  that  part  of  the  genitals,  which  follows  next  be-
hind this  orifice  ;  that  is  to  fay,  in  which  the  orifice  of  the  vagina  is  wont
to  open ;  not  the  fmalleft  foramen,  nor  perforation,  appear'd  any  where  to
the  inquiring  eye,  though  never  fo  attentively  applied  :  this  place  was  in-
tirely  ftiut  up,  not  with  a  membrane  which  would  yield  to  preflure,  but
with  a  very  firm  and  folid  paries.

As  I  was  in  doubt  what  advice  in  particular  to  give  ;  for  the  queftion  was
not  here  of  "  the  genital  part  being  concreted,"  as  in  Cornelia  the  mother
of  the  Gracchi  (/J,  that  is,  of  the  edges  of  it  "  being  agglutinated  to  one
"  another,"  as  Celfus  fays  {g),  or  of  "  a  membrane  plac'd  at  the  opening  of
"  the  vulva"  which  the  fame  author  takes  notice  oi  (h)  (the  methods  of  cure
in  which  cafes  are  neither  unknown  nor  difficult)  but  of  a  cafe  which  call'd
to  mind  one  that  I  had  read  in  Nabothus  (z),  of  a  phyfician  endeavouring  to
remove,  with  the  knife,  a  coalition  of  the  vagina,  which  had  likewife  been
from'  the  birth,  but  being  oblig'd  to  defift  from  his  attempt,  when  he  faw
that  the  coalition  was  continued  up  very  high,  and  that  the  large  fanguife-

{a)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  1712  obf.  {e)  Obf.  Med.  Chir.  60.

anat.  2.  (^9  Apud.  Plin.  Hift.Nat.  1.  7.  c.  16.

(b)  Hift.  a.  1748.  obr.  anat.  (gj  De  Medic.  1.  7.  c.  28.

(cj  Oflervaz.  5.  {h)  Ibid.

(dj  Obf.  1.  3.  ubi  de  part.  Procid.  (/)  Difput.  de  Sterilit.  Mulier.  n.  7.

/  4  O  2  reus


652  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

rous  veflels  appear'd  •,  and  alfo  brought  to  my  thoughts  the  opinion  of  Na-
bothus  {k),  that  "  if  there  be  a  flefhy  interftice,"  by  which  we  muft  under-
ftand  a  pretty  thick  one,  "  it  is  better  to  abftain  from  the  incifion  of  it,
"  partly  on  account  of  the  very  great  hemorrhage,  and  partly  on  account  of
"  the  inflammation  that  would  follow :"  as  I  was  turning  over  thefe  things
in  my  thoughts  then,  it  very  properly  came  into  my  mind,  to  aflc  the  fame
queftions  that  I  had  afk'd  of  the  former  woman  (/),  whether  any  menftrual
blood  had  ever  been  excreted  ?  Whether  fhe  had  any  uneafinelTes  at  inter-
vals in  the  loins,  or  the  pubes  ?

For,  from  the  time  of  Ariftotle's  having  faid  (m),  "  that  in  fome  womea
"  the  OS  uteri,  being  comprefs'd,  and  incorporated  with  the  other  parts,  had
"  continu'd  in  this  ftate  from  their  earlieft  time  of  life,  quite  to  the  time  of
"  their  catamenia  •,  but  that,  foon  after,  the  menftrua  coming  upon  them,  and
"  they  being  troubled  with  pain,  this  coalition  was  fpontaneoufly  ruptur'd  in
"  fome,  and  in  others  cut  ailinder  by  the  hands  of  the  phyficians ;"  I  well
remember'd  how  many,  and  what  kind  of,  evils,  a  number  of  women  had
fufftr'd  from  the  menftruous  blood  being  colledted  in  the  vagina,  and  the
uterus ;  till  the  furgeons  before  and  after  our  Fabricius  ab  Aquapendente  (k),
reliev'd  thefe  diforders  by  cutting  the  impervious  membrane,  at  the  orifice  of
the  vagina  :  for  that  Fabricius  fhould  have  doubted  (0),  whether  this  was
what  Ariftotle  meant  by  the  os  uteri  in  that  paffage,  I  am  greatly  furpriz'd  ;
as  if  the  occlufion  of  the  orifice,  of  the  vagina,  might  not  be  fo  great  fome-
times,  that,  whether  the  obftruding  membrane  be  "  violently  ruptur'd,"  as
Ariftotle  fays,  or  as  Fabricius  fays,  cut  afunder  "  in  fome  women,'"'  as  the
former  had  immediately  written,  death  might  be  the  confequence  of  it ;  for
that  this  may  be  the  confequence,  you  even  fufficiently  conceive,  froni  what
I  have  juft  now  hinted  on  the  fubjeft.

And  how  many,  and  various,  diforders  thefe  women  had  fufFer'd  before
their  cure,  we  may  learn,  by  examples,  from  Donatus  (p),  from  Severinus
(q),  from  the  two  Fabricit,  both  ours  (r),  and  Hildanus  (j),  from  Ruyfch  (/),
and  from  Nabothus  («).  To  which  you  wiil  moreover  add  thofe  that  other
authors,  and  among  thefe  the  celebrated  Fantonus  (x),  and  Kannegiefl"erus
(y),  have  defcrib'd.

For  Benevoli,  who  had  cur'd  three  patients  of  this  kind,  by  reafon  of  his
mentioning  the  cafes  in  a  curfory  manner  (z)  only,  has  omitted  to  add,  with
what  diforders  they  had  been  previoufly  affe(3;ed.

Nor  indeed,  have  thofe  women  only,  who  were  born  with  an  occlufion  of
their  vagina,  been  fubjeft  to  thefe  diforders;  but  thofe  alfo  in  whom  the  ori-
fice of  the  vagina  had  grown  together,  after  a  difficult  birth.:  to  which  kind

{i)  Ibid.  n.  23..  (r)  Loc.  cit.

CO  N.  II.  (4  Cent.. 2.  Obf.  Chir.  60.  exempl.  3,,

{m)  De  Geuerat.  Animal,  1.  4. c.  4.  fub.  (/)  Cent.  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  32.

fin.  («)  Difp.  cit.  n.  4.

(»)  De  Chirurg.  Oper.  ubi  de  Hymene  im-  fx)  Opufc.  Med.  in  Schol. ad  Patris,  obC

perfor.  30.  n.  3.

(0)  C.  feq-.  OJ  ^^-  "•  <:•  torn.  6.  obf.  88^

(fj  C.  fupraad  n.  11.  cit. .  (zj  Offervaz,.  u

fq^J  Chirurg.  Effic.  P.  2.  ubi  de  Seftion.  c,

2:  ©£


Letter  XLVt. Article  13.  653

of  hiftories  you  will  add  that  which  you  find  taken  notice  of  in  the  Com-
mercium  Litterarium  {a).

For  when  there  is  no  perforation  at  all  (from  what  caufe  foever  this  may
be)  through  which  the  blood  flowing  together  within  the  uterus  may  be  dil-
charg'di  this  retain'd  fluid  muft,  of  courfe,  produce  confiderable  diforders.

But  if  there  be  any  foramen,  fuch  women  are  not  to  be  confiderM  as  quite
imperforate ;  nor  is  it  to  be  wonder'd  at  if  fome  of  them  become  impreg-
nated :  as  of  thofe  five,  whofe  very  great  narrownefs  of  vagina  I  fpoke-of
juft  now,  three  adlually  were  -,  as  another  was  alfo,  whofe  caie  is  defcrib'd  by
Hildanus  (l>)  ;  whereas,  in  the  membrane  that  fhut  up  the  vagina,  there  were
fome  very  fmall  foramina.

Wherefore,  in  all  thefe  women,  the  menftruous  purgations  were  difcharg'd
by  the  natural  pafl^ages,  though  thefe  paflTages  were  very  fmall :  and  if  this
circumfbance  were  inquir'd  into  by  fome  perfons,  who  had  it  not  in  their
power  to  infpedt  thefe  pafTages,  but  only  to  learn  from  the  hufbands
of  the  women,  that  their  wives  were  impervious  to  them;  it  would  be
a  fufficient  tefl:imony,  to  prevent  them  fuppofing,  that,  when  thefe  women
became  pregnant,  this  muft  have  happen'd  without  the  admifTion  of  the  fe-
men  virile:  and  we  fhould,  perhaps,  have  fewer  examples,  in  books,  of  wo-
men being  quite  imperforated,  than  we  have  at  prefent.  But  as  thefe  women
were  not  without  their  menftrual  purgations,  fo  they  were  free  from  the  dif-
orders which  we  have  faid  that  blood  colledted  in  the  vagina  and  uterus  muff
of  courfe  bring  on.

Having  then  confider'd  all  thefe  things,  and  hearing,  not  only  that  nei-
ther of  thefe  women,  whom  I  examin'd,  had  ever  had  any  menftrual  purga-
tion, but  not  any  uneafinefs  or  pain  tending  thereto,  nor  even  the  fiighteft  be-
ginning of  them  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  feeing  that  both  of  them  were
endow'd  with  very  good  health,  colour,  and  ftrength ;  as  every  healthy  wo-
man is  at  that  time  of  life  which  may  yet  be  confider'd  as  the  prime ;  I  be-
gan to  fufpeft,  that,  as  they  were  without  a  continued  and  open  canal,  or
orifice  of  the  vagina,  they  might,  perhaps,  alfo,  be  without  a  uterus,  from
the  original  formation:  fothat  if  the  obftacle  could  even  be  remov'^d  by  the
furgeon's  knife,  there  would,  neverthelefs,  be  danger,  left  the  bladder,  or
fome  one  of  the  inteftines,  lying  in  contact  therev;ith,  in  confequence  of  the
uterus  being  abfent,  Ihould  be  pierc'd  through  at  the  fame  time;  in  the  fame
manner  as  there  was  a  very  confiderable  danger,  of  this  kind,  in  infants  (of
whom  I  have  already  fpoken  (c) )  who  had  the  anus  imperforate,  and,  at  the
fame  time,  a  total  deficiency  of  the  inteftinv^m  redtum.

I  therefore  perfuaded  both  thefe  women  placidly  to  fuffer  a  marriage,  which
was  improperly  contrafted,  to  be  diflblv'd  -,  rather  than  imprudently  fubmit
themfelves  to  the  incifion.

13.  Nor  would  I  have  you  objeft  to  me  that  there  have  not  been  want-
ing, nor  are  at  prefent  wanting,  women  who  live  in  very  good  health  with-
out any  menftrual  purgations  :  for  I  confefs  it,  and  even  know  fome  fnch

('aj  A.  1754-  hebd.  25.  ad  finem.  (c)  Epill.  32.  n.  3.

{i>)  Obf.  6q_.  cit.  exempl.  2^

liiyfelfi;


654  Book  III. Of  Dlfeafes  of  the  Belly.

myfelf ;  but  I  have  often  had  the  fame  doubts  in  regard  to  them,  that  I  have
had  in  regard  to  the  two  whofe  hiftories  I  have  defcrib'd.

Yet  you  will  fay  ;  there  are  many  who  have  born  children,  and,  neverche-
lefs,  been  without  thefe  purgations.  But  take  away,  from  the  number  of
them,  all  thole  that  live  in  a  climate  far  different  from  ours :  take  away  thofe
that  they  call  viragos :  take  away  even  thofe  who  do  not  enjoy  perfect  health ;
and  you  will  find  that  thefe  many  will  be  reduc'd  to  a  very  few.

Yet  even  upon  this  fuppofition,  you  will  fay,  there  are  more  in  number,
than  of  thofe  who  are  born  without  a  uterus.  And  I  would  confefs  this
comparifon  to  be  properly  made,  if  it  were  as  eafy  for  phyficians  to  obferve
the  number  of  the  latter,  as  it  is  to  obferve  the  number  of  the  former.

For  the  former,  of  themfelves,  fpontaneoufly  declare  it,  inafmuch  as  it  is
a  circumftante;  if  you  confider  the  fex  in  general,  and  the  regions  of  the
world,  in  general,  that  are  not  very  remote ;  which  is  certainly  very  rare  and
furprizing.

And  out  of  all  the  others,  who,  compar'd  with  thofe  very  few,  are  fo
many  the  more  in  proportion ;  I  mean  out  of  all  thofe  who  live  in  good
health,'  without  thefe  purgations,  but  never  bear  children,  how  many  of  their
bodies  have  been  differed  after  death  ?  And  unlefs  you  difleft  them,  certaijily
neither  they  themfelves,  nor  any  one  elfe,  can  inform  us,  whether  they  are
furnifh'd  with  a  uterus,  or  not.

Since,  therefore,  it  is  impoffible  to  know  either  cafe  for  a  certainty-,  who,
that  is  a  prudent  man,  would  be  fo  bold  as  to  undertake  to  remove  an  ob-
ftruftion  of  this  kind,  that  he  may  happen  to  meet  with,  in  like  manner  as
he  would,  if  he  were  certain  that  there  was  an  uterus  within ;  when,  at  the
fame  time,  the  operation  is  neither  neceflary  to  preferve  life,  nor  to  remove
any  difeafe ;  and  perhaps  not  only  without  any  advantage,  but  even  dange-
rous;  efpecially  if  the  obllruftion  be  fuch,  that  either' its  fituation,  or  its
thicknefs,  and  hardnefs,  fhow  it  not  eafy  to  be  remov'd,  and  not  without
great  danger?

I  know  of  two  women  (for  I  have  not  the  book,  by  me,  in  which  the  third
is  fpoken  of,  who  is  refer'd  to  by  the  celebrated  Cafpar  Bofe  ("lij  ;  but  I  read
of  a  fourth  {e)  who  was  imperforate,  and  without  any  traces  of  a  vagina,  yet
not  without  fome  flight,  though  ufelefs,  appearance  of  the  uterus)  •,  I  fay  I
know  of  two  women,  whom  anatomy  has  fhown  to  have  been  born  without
•a  uterus ;  the  one  difiefted  by  our  Columbus  (f),  the  other  by  his  celebrated
fellow-citizen  Fromondus  {g) ;  fo  that  this  very  circumftance  is  a  proof  to
me,  that  many  more  of  thofe  who  never  have  had  any  menflrual  difcharge,
might  have  been  found,  by  anatomifts,  to  be  without  any  uterus :  for  though
this  may  feem  to  be  very  extraordinary,  yet  it  muft  feem  much  more  extraor-
dinary, that  if  there  had  been  no  other  inftance  of  the  kind,  both  of  thefe
fliould  have  happen'd  to  be  met  with  by  anatomifts  of  Cremona.

As  in  both  of  thefe  women  the  uterus  was  wanting,  fo  alio  an  open  paf-
fage,  that  led  to  the  feat  of  the  uterus,  was  wanting  ;  lb  that  you  may  com-
pare the  firft,  in  whom  diere  was  only  a  portion  of  the  vagina,  with  the  for-

(J)  Difp.  de  Obftetnc.  Errorib.  &:  ca:t.  §.  7.  (fj  De  Re  Anat.  I.  15.  in  ipfo  fine.

in  fin.  (gj  Imperfor.  Mulier.  &  cast.  Obfervat.

(e)  Difp.  Anat.  ab  Haller.  colleft.  torn.  5.
p.  227.


Letter  XL VI. Article  14.  65^

mer  of  the  two  that  I  examin'd  ;  and  the  other,  who  had  the  orifice  of  the
vagina  imperforate,  with  the  latter  of  thofe  that  I  infpefted.

If  any  furgeon  had  attempted  to  open  the  pafiage,  in  that  body  feen  by
Columbus  ;  he  would,  at  the  fame  time,  have  cut  into  fome  vifcus,  that  was
contiguous  to  the  fund  of  that  vagina-,  from  the  compreffion  of  which  vifcus,
it,  perhaps,  was,  that  the  woman  "  complain'd  in  afurprizing  manner,  when-
"  ever  fhe  copulated  with  her  hufband."

If  any  perfons  had  undertaken  to  cure  with  a  knife,  that  woman  feen  by
Fromondus;  they  would,  firft  indeed,  have  met  with  a  feptum  which  was
ftrong  and  firm,  "  and  fo  interwoven  with  folid  fibres,  as  to  approach  nearly
"  to  the  nature  of  a  cartilage."

And  while  this  was  cut  through,  which  would  neceffarily  require  fome
force,  nothing  could  more  eafily  have  happen'd,  than  that,  while  they  fup-
pps'd  themfelves  at  the  entrance  of  the  cavity  of  the  vagina,  they  ihouid
wound  the  parietes  of  that  cavity,  which  had  coalefc'd  with  each  other;  and
perhaps  even  the  redtum  inteftinum,  which  lies  in  contad  with  them,  or  the
urinary  bladder.

Finally,  thefe  parietes  rauft  have  been  feparated.  And  who  can  take  upon
him  to  fay,  that  none  of  thefe  circumftances  were  to  be  apprehended,  in
the  women  infpefted  by  me  ?  Nobody  certainly ;  nor  yet  that  the  uterus  was
not  wanting  in  thefe,  as  it  had  been  in  thofe  who  were  difiefted.

Befides,  the  uterus  is  fometimes  fo  fmall,  even  in  adult  women,  as  to  have
the  fame  effedl  that  the  abfence  of  the  uterus  would  have  :  which  I  fhail
confirm  below  by  my  own  obfervation  {h) ;  if,  as  I  have  already  fpoken  of
the  external  orifice  thereof,  that  is  the  orifice  of  the  vagina,  being  fhut  up,
you  will  firfl:  give  me  leave  to  add  a  few  things,  in  regard  to  its  os  inter-
num being  obftrufted.

14.  Mention  is  made  of  the  os  uteri  being  fhut  up,  in  more  than  one  of
the  books  of  Hippocrates  (i).  The  caufes  of  this  occlufion  may  be  niany
and  various  :  the  greater  part  of  which  have  been  examin'd  by  Vallifne-
ri  (k),  who  divides  them  into  the  external  and  internal.  Let  us  confider
fome  of  them.

Among  thefe  they  plac'd  formerly,  with  Hippocrates  (/),  "  the  omentum
"  comprefling  the  os  uteri,"  in  very  fat  women.  And  in  what  manner  Ve-
falius  explain'd  this,  you  will  learn,  fomewhat  more  at  large,  from  the  Se-
pulchretum  {m) ;  for  Vefalius  himfelf  contraded  that  pafiage  («)  in  his  later
editions.

Without  doubt  this  excellent  anatomift  faw,  on  the  one  hand,  how  foft
the  omentum  is,  and,  on  the  other,  how  thick,  and  capable  of  refiftance,
the  parietes  of  the  ofculum  uterinum  are.

He  therefore  conceiv'd  the  omentum  to  defcend  fo  far  betwixt  the  bladder
and  this  orifice,  that,  by  preffing  the  foft  parietes  of  the  vagina,  at  its  upper
part,  one  againft  another,  it  might  fhut  up  the  pafiage,  for  the  femen,  to

(,?>)  N.  20.  (/)  Seft.  5.  aph.  46.

(ij  De  Nat.  Muliebr.  n.  33  ;  de  Morb.  Mu- (m)  Sedt.  hac  34.  obf.  4.  in  Schol.  ad  §.  4,
jiebr.  1.  2.  n.  50  ;  de  Sterilib.  n.  i.  &  caet.  (»)  De  Corp.  Hum.  Fabr.  1.  5,  c.  4»

{i)  Ift,  della  Generaz.  p. 3.  c.  i.  n.  5.  &
feq.


656  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  neighbouring  os  internum,  by  its  bulk,  and  weight;  fo  that  the  penis
when  introduc'd,  efpecially  if  pretty  fhort,  or  languid,  could  not  reach  to  the
upper  part  of  the  vagina,  nor  be  able  to  diftend  it.

Which  explication  of  Vefalius,  I  can  with  lefs  difficulty  admit,  than  fuffer
that  fome  of  the  more  modern  anatomifts  (liould  follow  the  naked  dogma  of
Hippocrates  :  although  I  cannot  conceive  of  the  omentum,  as  lying  betwixt
the  upper  part  of  the  vagina  and  bladder,  unlefs  we  fuppofe  the  cellular  con-
nexions, which  ufually  are  feen  betwixt  one  and  the  other,  in  that  part ;  and
even  fometimes  a  little  higher  •,  to  be  torn  through  :  which  connexions,  as,
in  very  fat  women,  they  are  themfelves  ftufF'd  up  with  fat  alfo,  may  not,
perhaps,  yield  fo  eafily,  and  give  place  to  the  weight  of  the  omentum.

And  as,  in  women  of  this  kind,  all  the  cellular  membranes  are  diftended
■with  fat ;  it  is  natural  to  conceive,  that,  from  the  neighbouring  inteftines  be-
ino-  very  fat,  or  from  fat  being  accumulated  in  the  membranes  of  the  Fallop-
pian  tubes,  in  their  fimbrije,  or,  at  leafb,  in  the  membranous  ligament  which
they  call  the  alee  vefpertilionum,  all  thefe  parts,  or  fome  of  them,  may  be
obftrudled  in  their  motions  necefiary  to  generation  ;  for  thus  I  choofe  to  in-
terpret Vallifneri  (0),  oratleaft  to  add  fomething  to  his  explication.

15.  And  among  the  caufes  which  obftrudt  the  os  uteri,  the  fame  author
fuppofes,  together  with  others,  excrefcences  form'd  in  the  cervix  uteri  (p)  ;
and  with  Hippocrates  himfelf,  ftones  alfo(^J.  The  obfervations  that  I  have
made  upon  excrefcences  I  defer  to  the  next  letter.

Calculi  I  have  never  yet  found  in  the  uterus  :  which,  however,  I  know
have  not  only  been  feen  formerly  in  that  place,  by  others,  but  even  in  my
own  memory  •,  and  thefe  hiftories  are  refer'd  to  by  Vallifneri.

But  1  could  wiih  that  he  had  read  many,  and  even  all,  of  thofe  that  are
coUefted  by  Schenck  (r) ;  as,  in  another  place  {s),  he  has  with  difficulty
granted  this :  "  that  it  is  not  improbable,  but  even  ftones  may  be,  alfo,  ge-
nerated in  the  uterus."

For  by  reading  over  thefe  hiftories,  and  by  adding  others  moreover ;  as,
for  inftance,  that  you  meet  with  in  Bartholin  {t),  and  in  like  manner  that
■which  you  have  in  the  Sepulchretum  {u)  ;  he  would  have  underftood  very
clearly,  that  ftones  had  been  adtually  found,  in  the  very  uterus  of  women,
after  death,  fo  many  times,  and  by  fuch  men,  that  it  was  not  at  all  ne-
ceiTary  to  fufped,  that  if  any  calculi  were  laid  to  have  fallen,  or  been  taken
•cut,  from  the  uterus  of  living  women  (as,  for  inftance,  in  that  fervant-
maid  Lariflasa  fpoken  of  in  Hippocrates  (;;) ),  they  had  been  difcharg'd  from
the  bladder-,  notwithftanding  no  particular  fymptoms  of  a  ftone  form'd  in
the  bladder,  did  now  exift,  or  had  preceded ;  rather  than  from  the  uterus.

16.  Moreover,  among  the  internal  caufes  that  fliut  up  the  os  uteri,  is  the
conftriftion,  or  conglutination,  of  that  orifice,  examples  of  which  you  will
fifldproduc'd  by  tjie  celebrated  Haller  (y)  ^  whereto  you  may  alfo  add  others :


(oj  N.  5.  cit.

(p)  Ibid.  n.  6.

\q)  Ibid.  n.  7.  &.C.  2.  n.  42.

(r)  Obf.  Med.  1.  4.  prope  fin.

(/)  Opere  t.  3-  p.  3.  n.  12.


(/;  Cent.  4.  Hill.  64.
(a)  L 3.  f.  24.  obf.  18.  §.  10.
,(<<■)  Epidem.  1.  5.  n.  iz.
Cy)  Ad  Praleft.  Boerhaav.  ad  Inflit.  §.  675.


Letter  XLVI. Article  17.  657

as  thofe  of  our  Fabricius  ab  Aquapendente  (z),  and  the  very  experienc'd  Be-
nevoli  (a);  from  whofe obfervation  you  may  fufped,  that,  befides  the  conftric-
tion,  there  was,  perhaps,  feme  membrane,  which  fhut  up  the  os  uteri,  even
from  the  original  formation.

And  indeed  the  fame  Fabricius  {b)  fays,  that  he,  by  introducing  his  fin-
gers into  the  vagina  in  the  living  body,  had  obferv'd  "  the  membrane  which
"  forms  the  vagina,  to  be  continued  through  the  whole,  and  conceal  the  ori-
"  fice  of  the  uterus :"  and  Littre  (c)  faw,  in  the  diffedion  of  a  barren  wo-
man, the  membrane  that  invefts  the  vagina,  internally,  adhering  to  the  os
uteri  in  the  fame  manner  as  it  did  to  the  furface  of  the  vagina  j  by  which
rneans  that  orifice  was  fhut  up.

But  Hippocrates  did  not  doubt  {d)  that  a  membrane  might  "  grow  out
"  over  this  orifice,"  even  after  birth.  "  When  a  woman  cannot  admit  the
"  male  femen,  it  cannot  be,"  fays  he,  "  but  that  a  membrane  mull  have
"  grown  out  over  the  ofculum  uteri."  What  I  have  feen  of  this  membrane,
the  following  obfervation  will  fhow  you.

17.  A  woman  of  fifty  years  of  age  ;  who  was  fo  lame  that  the  lower  limb,
on  th^  right  fide,  was  Ihorter  by  four  fingers  breadths,  than  the  left;  died
of  an  afthma  in  the  hofpital,  about  the  latter  end  of  January  in  the  year  1747  :
at  which  time  I  was  teaching  anatomy,  as  ufual,  in  the  college.

The  cheft  was  very  narrow,  and  when  open'd  fhow'd  water  to  be  contain'd
therein  :  other  circumftances  they  did  not  inquire  into,  as  they  were  in  hafte,
and  folicitous  about  nothing  elfe,  but  to  take  out,  with  accuracy,  the  parts
which  are  form'd  for  the  fake  of  the  urine,  and  for  generation,  and  to  bring
them  to  the  college.

I  examin'd  the  parts  deftin'd  to  both  thefe  offices  with  attention.  In  the
former,^  after  having  feen  the  arteries  which  go  ofi"  from  the  annex'd  large
trunks,  and  the  iliac  veins,  to  be  more  flender  on  the  right  fide,  than  on  the
left ;  I  obferv'd  the  kidnies  to  be  not  fmall,  when  compar'd  with  the  ftature
of  the  woman  which  was  of  the  loweft :  thefe  kidnies  were  found  neverthe-
lefs,  as  far  as  I  could  judge  :  fo  alfo  in  the  bladder,  the  lower  part  of  which
appear'd  to  be  afiidted  with  a  phlogofis,  I  remark'd  that  the  orifices  of  the
ureters  werefomewhat  larger  than  ufual.

In  regard  to  the  genital  parts ;  to  pafs  over  what  does  not  belong  to  this
place,  and  in  particular  the  hymen,  and  other  things,  which  fliow'd  the  woman
to  have  been  a  very  perfedl  virgin,  contrary  toourexpeftation  ;  firft,  out  of  thefe
things  which  I  had  it  in  my  power  to  obferve  without  dilfeftion,  there  was
the  fame  phlogofis  in  the  hymen  only,  and  the  neareft  external  furface  of  the  pu-
dendum ;  and  from  this  furface,  likewife,  arofe  very  fmall  preternatural  tuber-
cles, which  were  in  like  manner  red :  and  there  was  a  phlogofis  alfo  in  the
Falloppian  tubes,  and  the  ate  vefpertilionum  :  but  the  teftes  were  fcirrhous,
and  of  a  furface  that  was  divided  into  a  kind  of  fquares,  or  chequer-
work.

(z)  De  Chir.  Oper.  ubi  de  Vitus  qaor.  cauT. \c)  Hift.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  1704.  ob-

Foeminse  concubit.  non  admit.  ferv.  anat.  13.
.(a)  Gflervaz.  !.  (d)  De  Sicrilib.  n,  13,

(b)  Loco  modo  cit.

Vol.  n.  4r  P  "^^^


658  Book  III. Of  Diieafes  of  the  Belly.

Then  opening  the  fundus  uteri,  and  the  upper  part  of  the  neighbouring
cervix,  I  obferv'd  the  furrace  of  the  former  to  be  of  a  bright  red  colour  •,
but  the  furface  of  the  latter  not  to  be  lb  much  as  inclin'd  to  rednefs.

In  the  fundus,  whether  you  look'd  upon  its  anterior,  or  pofterior  parts,
were  very  low  excrefcences,  of  no  inconfiderable  circumference  however  ;
being  ftnoorh,  and  Icarccly  funk  lower  than  the  furface  ;  which  were  of  a
red  colour,  and  more  inclining  to  brown  than  t!ie  reft  of  the  furface.

Moreover,  in  order  to  examine  the  remaining  part  or  the  cervix,  before  I.
cut  into  it,  i  pafs'd  a  thin  probe  from  the  limdus  uteri  towards  the  orifice ;,.
but  found that  the  paflage  to  this  orifice  was  not  open.

Wherefore  cutting  into  the  vagina,  and  bringing  this  orifice  to  view,  I  en-
deavour'd  to  pais  up  a  probe  from  the  lower  opening,  but  in  vain  ;  where-
upon 1  cxamin'd  the  part  with  attention,  and  law  that  the  orifice,  and  its
prominent  corona,  were  in  a  natural  ftate,  except  that,  at  a  little  fpace  be-
low the  orifice,  it  Iliow'd  jbme  fmall  corrugation  as  it  v/ere.

The  orifice  itfelf  was  very  narrow,  and  quite  in  the  form  of  a  circle.  When
I  examin'd  it  internally  •,  at  a  very  little  diitance  from  thence,  a  fmall  whitifli
memb.''ane  came  to  view,  which  perhaps  ftreighten'd  the  pafTage,  but  cer-
tainly (hut  it  up  :  and  this  made  an  obllruflion  to  the  probe,  either  in  paf-
fing  upwards,  or  downwards.

Nor  indeed  was  this  to  be  reckon'd  among  the  valves  which  I  have  deli-
neated {e),  in  a  former  work,  in  the  cervix  of  the  virgin  uterus ;  for  none  of
thefe  (hut  up  the  pafTage  of  the  cervix  except  in  part,  and  are  all  of  them  (b  '
fituated,  as  to  refHl  the  afcending  probe  indeed,  but  to  give  way  to  the  de-
fcending.

Yet  1  will  not  deny  but  this  little  membrane,  which  I  juft  now  defcrib'd,
might  be  perforated  with  fome  fmall  foramen,  as  Littre  (f)  faw  in  his ;  or
had  at  leaft  left  a  very  fmall  interval  in  fome  part  of  its  circumference,,
betwixt  itfelf  and  the  parietes  of  the  cervix  ;  fince  I  found  no  fluid  collefted
in  the  uterus  :  unlefs  we  fuppofe  it  to  be  a  membrane  not  of  long  ftanding,
and  that  the  fluid  might  have  been  taken  up  by  the  abforbent  vefTels.

18.  And  I  fhould  rather  fuppofe,  that  Nabothus  C_§^)  had  refer'd  to  fome-
thing  of  this  kind,  or  a  fomewhat  more  interior  appearance,  when  he  faid, "  that
"  an  extraordinary  narrownefs  of  the  internal  orifice,  of  the  uterus,  could  no.'
"  more  be  known"  in  the  living  body,  "  than  a  folitary  difeas'd  conforma-
"  tion  of  the  ovula."  For  this  learned  man  could  not  be  ignorant,  that  it
had  been  more  than  once  afl"erted,  to  this  eff^ed,  by  Hippocrates  {h) :  if  the
*■'  OS  uteri  is  (hut  up -,  it  becomes  thick,  as  if  the  woman  were  pregnant:
"  and  if  you  touch  it  with  your  finger,  you  v;ill  find  it  hard  and  convoluted,,
"  nor  does  it  adir^it  the  finger  "  and  that  experienc'd  furgeons  do  every  day,,
by  introducing  their  finger,  for  examination,  reach  quite  to  the  os  uteri,  ef-
pecially  when  the  v/oman  is  in  a  (landing  pofture.

And  indeed  the  fame  orifice,  in  a  different  poflure  of  the  woman  -,  that,,
for  inftance,  in  which  they  introduce  what  is  call'd  the  fpeculum  uteri ;  may
be  brought  into  view,  evea  without  that  fpeculum,  as  I  have  more  than.

(e)  Adverf.  Anat.  i.  tab 3.  {h) De  Morb.  Muliebr.  1.  2. n.  50.  &  de

f/J  Supra  ad  n.  16.  cit.  loco.  Nat.  Muliebr.  n.  33.

[£)  N.  20.  Diip.  fupra  ad  n.,  1.2.  c.\i,.

i  once


Letter  XLVI. Article  19, 20.  659

once  feen  :  efpecially  if  the  vagina  be  pretty  fliort ;  by  introducing,  for  ex-
ample, inftead  of  the  fpeculum,  an  ivory  or  chryftal  funnel,  of  a  proper
length  and  breadth  ;  and  a  light  at  the  fame  time,  if  it  be  necefiary ;  ih
the  manner  which  was  formerly  pointed  out  by  me,  on  another  occa-
fion  (t).

19.  The  obliquity  of  the  os  uteri,  alfo,  may  refill:  the  entrance  of  the  fe-
men.  And  this  obliquity  of  the  os  uteri,  is  the  natural  confequcnce  of  the
obhquity  of  the  uterus ;  as  Hippocrates  (k)  has  taught  us,  by  laying,  "  if
"  the  uterus  becomes  oblique,  the  os  uteri  becomes  oblique  alfo."  But  as  I
am  to  treat  of  the  oblique  uterus  in  another  letter  (I),  I  go  on,  at  pre-
fent,  to  fubjoin  my  obfervation,  of  the  very  fmall  uterus,  which  I  have  pro-
mis'd  you.

20.  A  little  woman  •,  of  about  fixty-fix  years  of  age,  of  a  ftature  much
below  the  middle  fize,  yet  much  larger  than  to  be  clafs'd  with  the  fpecies  of
dwarfs  -,  who,  having  been  for  many  years  the  wife  of  a  porter,  that  was  now
dead,  a  robuft  man,  but  weak  in  his  mental  abilities ;  had  never  born  any
children;  laft  of  all,  before  the  middle  of  December  1749,  came  into  the
hofpital  in  a  very  weak  ftate,  but  complaining  of  nothing  befides  hunger  (for
fhe  was  a  beggar)  and  of  the  injuries  of  the  cold  feafon.  While  (he  lay  in  the
hofpital  therefore,  to  repair  her  ftrength,  behold  Ihe  was  feiz'd  with  a  fudderi
deliquium  animi,  and  within  an  hour  was  carried  off.

On  opening  the  belly,  they  immediately  found  the  caufe  of  her  fud-
den  death,  that  is,  an  abfcefs  ruptur'd  in  the  mefentery ;  whereby  a  great
quantity  of  ftinking  matter  was  difcharg'd  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  :
which  circumftance  brought  on  the  fatal  event,  in  this  old  woman,  fo  much
the  fooner,  than  in  the  carman  defcrib'd  by  the  illuftrious  Heifter  {m),  as  her
ftrength  was  fo  much  the  more  puU'd  down,  as  I  fuppofe,  and  her  time  of
life  fo  much  the  more  advanc'd.

And  when  this  matter  was  exhaufted,  and  wip'd  away,  and  the  mefentery,
together  with  the  inteftines,  remov'd,  they  immediately  went  on  to  take  out  the
urinary,  and  genital,  parts  from  their  fituation,  agreeably  to  my  orders ;  as
both  of  them  were  to  be  demonftrated  there,  to  the  ftudents  in  anatomy,  in
the  fame  m.anner  that  I  had,  the  day  before,  demonftrated  thefe  urinary  and
genital  parts  from  a  male.

And  this  I  did,  not  to  fhow  them  the  natural  ftate  of  the  parts,  as  at  other
times  •,  but  that  they  might  fee  their  preternatural  ftate,  when  it  fo  happen'd,
and  in  part  the  more  rare  conftitution  thereof.

And  in  the  kidnies  indeed,  there  was  fuch  a  diforder,  as  to  ftiow  thofe  ve-
ficles  fuUof  ferum,  partly  prominent  on  the  furface,  and  partly  half-buried
in  the  fubftance  ;  eipecially  the  right,  which  had  a  large  one  at  its  lower
extremity,  and  the  furface  befides,  if  you  look'd  upon  it  attentively,  un-
equal.

Yet  the  ureters  were  not  dilated,  but  even  open'd  by  very  fmall  orifices  in
r1ie  bladder,  which  v/as  found  ;  except  that,  notwithftanding  the  reft  of  the
x;oats  were contradted  into  themfelves,  the  external  was,  neverthelefs,  not

(?)  Epill. 14. n.  13.  (/)  Epiil.  42.  n.  31.  &  feq.

iA)  Libro  novifiime  cit.  n.  34.  («)  DilT.  de  Hern.  Carnof.  ^>  28.

4  P  2  only


66o  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

only  very  lax,  but  even  eafily  feparable  from  the  other :  fo  as  to  follow  the
hand  upon  being  flightly  drawn.

Finally,  if  you  look'd  upon  the  internal  furface  of  the  urethra,  which  was
of  a  proper  length,  you  might  fee  fome  very  fmall  veficles  here  and
there.

But;  in  the  genitals  were  a  great  number  of  deviations,  from  the  ufual
order  of  nature.  For  to  fay  nothing  of  the  fmallnefs  of  the  pudendum  in  a
woman  of  that  age,  and  the  wife  of  a  porter,  and  the  very  remarkable  dimi-
nutive flate  of  the  nymphas,  fo  that  only  the  beginning  of  them,  and  that
very  (hort,  and  flight,  appear'd  ;  the  glans  and  prseputium  clitoridis  were  no
where  at  all  to  be  met  with  :  but  in  the  place  of  both  thefe  parts,  was  a
round  and  but  little  prominent  tubercle,  cover'd  over  with  the  fame  fkin  as
the  pudendum  itfelf.

Upon  cutting  into  this  tubercle,  I  found  a  quantity  of  matter,  entirely  of
the  fame  nature  with  that  which  is  collefted  under  the  prseputium  of  the  clito-
ris, and  of  the  penis ;  being  whitifli,  and  half-dried,  and,  for  that  reafon,
difpos'd  into  pellicles,  as  it  were,  v/hich  lay  one  upon  another,  as  it  gene-
rally does  in  a  dried  flate  :  and  under  almoft  the  lower  part  of  that  matter,
I  found  the  glans  clitoridis,  and  its  prasputium  •,  both  of  them  flender  and
fmall ;  fo  that  the  much  greater  part  of  this  protuberance  was  made  up  of
that  matter.

.  And  thefe  things  I  have  here  defcrib'd  the  more  at  large,  becaufe,  by  this
obfervation,  a  certain  doubt  (which  Santorini  (n)  had  weaken'd)  of  Boec-
haave's  (o),  who  was  in  other  refpefts  a  very  great  man,  is  remov'd.

For  certainly,  as  the  fkin,  when  cut  into  by  me,  fliow'd  neither  any  figa
of  a  foramen,  nor  had  the  lead  trace  of  any  cicatrix  ;  the  matter  could  ne-
ver have  been  collefted  there,  that  had  come  from  the  fmall  canals  of  the
urethra  ;  nor  yet  from  the  other  neighbouring  glands  •,  fo  that  it  is  now  very
evident  this  matter  muft  be  deriv'd  from  the  fources  which  are  in  the  glans»
or  prseputium,  of  women  ;  and  confequently,  of  men  alio.

However,  neither  the  body  of  the  clitoris,  nor  the  crura,  nor  any  of  thofe
mufcles  v/hich  are  generally  afcrib'd  thereto,  were  wanting  :  but  the  plexus
rctiformis  was  of  a  very  flender  thicknefs.

And  although  but  jufl:  a  flight  trace  or  two  of  the  hymen  remain'd,  yet
the  orifice  of  the  vagina  was  fo  narrow  in  its  dimenfion,  that  it  feem'd  never
to  have  admitted  a  man :  it  certainly  did  not  equal  the  dimenfions  of  my
middle  finger  in  any  diredlion,  nor  would  have  admitted  it.

The  breadth  of  the  vagina,  when  open'd  longitudinally,  and  difplay'd,  was
fcarcely  more  than  two  fingers  breadths,  at  the  fame  time  that  the  length  was
not  equal  to  four.  There  were  no  caruncles  within,  no  rugse-,  if  you  ex-
cepted a  very  Ihort  and  narrow  corrugation,  as  it  were,  behind  the  other  fide
of  the  orifice  of  the  vagina.

The  OS  uteri  was  furrounded  with  no  protuberating  corona,  and  was  al-
mofl  of  the  form  of  a  circle  ;  but  fo  fmall  as  not  to  admit  the  head  of  a
little  probe.

(»)  Obf.  Anat.  c.  lo.  §.  12.  (0)  Epift.  ds  Fabr.  Gland..

I  From


Letter  XL VI. Article  21.  661

From  thence,  to  the  upper  and  outer  part  of  the  fundus  uteri,  there  was
not  fo  much  dillance  as  to  be  equal  to  the  largeft  breadth  of  my  thumb.
Nor  was  the  upper  part,  that  is  the  wideft  part,  of  the  uterus,  wider  than  the
length  I  have  mention'd  ;  for  the  other  part  did  not  equal  even  the  width
of  the  point  of  my  little  finger;  even  if  look'd  upon  before  it  was  cut  into.

In  catting  into  it,  I  found  the  thicknefs  of  the  parietes,  both  of  the  fun-
dus, and  of  the  cervix,  to  be  confiderably  lefs  than  in  that  figure  of  de
Graaf,  where  (p)  he  reprefents  the  uterus  of  an  infant,  who  died  on  the
twenty-third  day  after  (he  was  born  -,  and  where  they  are  reprefented  to  be
extremely  thin.

From  this  figure,  when  compar'd,  in  length,  with  that  which  I  refer'd  to
juft  now,  you  will  eafily  conceive,  that  the  uterus  of  this  woman,  of  whom
I  fpeak,  does  not  feem  to  have  increas'd  fince  the  time  of  her  birth  ;  or  if
it  grew  in  length  in  its  upper  part,  at  leaft  that  it  had  grown  far  lefs,  in
proportion,  than  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  though  in  a  httle  woman  j
and  certainly,  that  it  had  never  difcharg'd  any  menftrual  blood.

However,  as  you  fee  in  that  figure,  fo  in  this  woman  alfo,  the  cavity  of  the
cervix  was  twice  the  length  of  the  fundus  uteri ;  but  in  the  cavity  ot  the  cer-
vix fome  fibres  only  could  be  very  obfcurely  feen,  and  thefe  in  a  longitudinal
diretlion  :  and  the  internal  furface  of  this  cavity  was  white ;  whereas  that  of
the  fundus  was  of  a  redifn  colour  inclining  to  b.'own.

Neverthelefs,  the  Falloppian  tubes  were  much  longer  than  fuch  a  fmallnefs
of  the  uterus  feem'd  to  promife  ;  and  the  orifice  betwixt  the  fimbrise  was
open  :  although  I  found  the  fimbrige  of  one  of  them  externally  rough  with
whitiih,  and  roundifh  bony  bodies,  or  at  leaft  fuch  as  were  very  hard  in  their
confiftence.

In  the  alse  refpertilionum  was  no  plexus ;  yet  many  nerves  ran  upon  them
in  the  longitudinal  direction.  The  round  ligaments  of  this  uterus  were  very
flender.  But  the  broad  ligaments  were  very  large :  which  was  the  confe--
quence  of  the  uterus  being  fo  very  contracted  in  its  breadth.

I  look'd  upon  the  upper  edges  of  thefe  ligaments,  to  fee  what  kind  of
Jeftes  this  woman  had  been  furnifh'd  with  -,  but  look'd  to  no  purpofe.  Then
purfuing  the  fpermatic  vefiels  with  great  accuracy,  Vv'hich  feem'd  to  be  not
much  fmaller  in  this  body  than  ufual  ;  particularly  where  they  went  to  the
broad  ligaments  of  the  uterus,  with  the  neighbouring  portion  of  the  perito-
njeum  (from  whence  thefe  ligaments  begin)  which  was  ftill  annex'd  to  them  j
I  very  clearly  perceiv'd  that  fhe  had  never  had  any  teftes,  nor  even  the  moft
obfcure  beginning  of  them.

21.  From  theie  appearances,  which  I  demonftrated  in  a  very  crowded
circle  of  ftudents,  you  muft,  in  my  opinion,  be  abundantly  convinc'd,  that
it  was  juft  the  fame  thing  to  this  woman,  to  be  furnifh'd  with  fuch  a  very
fmall  uterus,  as  if  flie  had  been  entirely  without.  And  how  rare  this  fmall-
nefs defcrib'd  by  me  is,  you  yourfelf  Will  be  able  to  judge,  from  all  the  ex-
amples of  a  fmall  uterus  that  are  colle£ted  together  in  the  Sepulciiretum.

Amatus  indeed  fays  (q),  "  that  a  uterus  of  this  kind,"  that  is  to  fay,  a

f^)  De  Mulier.  Organ>  tab.  24.  fig.  4.  con- (^^J  In  additam,  ad  (eSi.  banc  34.  obf.  2.
tra  Utteiaia  G  finilltam.


662  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

contrafted  and  fmall  uterus;  "  is  every  now  and  then  feen  in  fome  women-,
"  particularly  in  barren  women,  and  thofe  that  have  born  no  children  :  and
"  in  thele  women  the  breafts  are  alfo  fmall  and  contrafted,  fo  that  from
"  them  even  the  fmalhiefs,  and  contrafted  ftate,  of  the  uterus  may  be  ar-
"  gued."

And  indeed  I  have  known  fome  barren  women,  who  had  fcarcely  any  ap-
pearance of  breafts ;  or  indeed  none  at  all,  befides  the  nipple  and  the  areola.
But  what  kind  of  uterus  is  it  that  Amatus  refers  to  ?  Why  one  that  he  had
feen  "  betwixt  the  inteftinum  reftum,  and  the  bladder,  in  a  contrafted  ftate,
"  fo  as  to  be  taken,  by  unfkilful  obfervers,  for  another  bladder."

But  can  you  fuppofe  that  any  perfon  whatever,  even  the  mcft  unfkilful,
could  have  taken  that  which  I  faw  for  a  fecond  bladder  ;  fo  very  fhort  and
narrow  as  it  was,  and  almoft  of  no  thicknefs  at  all  ?

And  the  fame  reply  may  be  made,  in  refpect  to  the  obfervation  of  Judecius
(r),  on  another  barren  woman,  which  reprefents  the  uterus  as  being  "  con-
"  trafted  to  the  fize  of  a  fmall  apple."  Which  obfervation  is  taken  no
notice  of  in  this  feclion,  as  according  to  the  intent  of  the  fedtion  it  certainly
ought.

But  it  is  taken  notice  of  in  another  (i),  wherein  the  uterus  is  faid  to  have
been  "  very  fmall  and  contra6led,  like  that  of  a  girl  of  ten  or  twelve  years  of
"  age."  Which,  for  this  reafon,  was  nothing  in  comparifon  to  the  fmallnefs
of  that  obferv'd  by  me;  although  that,  befides,  could  not  be  faid  to  be
comprefs'd  by  the  bag,  which  took  its  beginning  from  thence,  and  fill'd  the
capacity  of  the  belly,  even  from  fix  years  ot  age.

Finally,  two  obfervations  are  defcrib'd  from  Riolanus  (/),  which,  if  you  read
them  fomewhat  attentively,  you  will  find  to  be  one  and  the  fame.  Nor  in-
deed is  there  any  other  difference,  except  that,  in  the  former  editions  of  the
Anthropographia  (u),  from  whence  the  firft  obfervation  is  copied,  the  name
of  the  matron  is  mention'd  •,  and  in  the  later  editions,  from  whence  the  fe-
cond is  taken,  is  omitted ;  for  as  to  the  number  of  the  chapter  correfpond-
ing  in  neither  place,  probably  this  may  be  owing  to  the  careleffnefs  of  the
printers  :  but  the  tubercle,  which  is  taken  notice  of  in  the  cervix,  and  is  con-
fider'd,  in  the  Sepulchretum  (j),  as  the  caufe  of  barrennefs,  Riolanus  feems,  if
you  attend  to  what  he  has  premis'd,  to  have  confider'd  as  the  caufe  of  fecun-
dity -,  efpecially  as  this  matron  had  not  been  barren,  but  had  even  brought
forth  three  children.

But  be  thefe  things  as  they  will  •,  what  concerns  our  prefent  fubjeft  is,
that,  although  "  ftie  died  at  the  age  of  fifty-five,  fhe  had  her  uterus  very
"  fmall,  very  hard,  and  almoft  cartilaginous.

You  fee  however,  that  the  degree  of  fnallnefs  remains  undetermined  by  the
author  •,  and  although  this  might  have  been  very  confiderable,  yet  it  had
not  been  fo  from  the'birth,  as  it  was  in  a  woman  who  had  brought  forth  three
times  ;  but  you  fee  that  it  was  from  a  difeafe,  which,  as  it  had  made  the  uterus
fo  hard  afterwards  by  degrees,  might  alfo  have  been  the  caufe  of  its  contrattion.


(r)  Qu3J  I.  eft  in  additam.  ad  fed.  lo.  1.  2.  {«)  Ut  in  ilia  a.  1626.  1.  .1.  c.  34.

{s)  Sett,  hac  34.  obf.  4 §.  17.  (x)  Ut  in  ilia  a.  1649.  cod.  c.

i^t)  Ibid.  §.  3.  &  5.  '  CjJ  Vid.  inter  titulos  obf.  4.  poft  n.  4.


And


Letter  XLVI. Article 22,  23,  24.  663

And  I  would  have  you  call  this  to  mind,  wlien  you  light  on  other  obfer-
vations  of  this  kind,  and  particularly  on  one  in  which  (z)  you  will  read,  that
the  uterus  of  a  woman,  who  had  been  carried  off  by  a  long-continu'd  en-
cyftcd  dropfy  "  did  not  exceed  the  magnitude  of  a  nutmeg  ;  yet  was  in-
"  durated  like  a  cartilage."  And  another  obfervation  (a),  wherein  they
found  the  uterus  "  fmall  like  a  pidgeon's  egg,"  you  will  have  opportunity  of
explaining  in  the  next  letter  {b).

22.  But  in  my  obfervation  there  was,  moreover,  this  extraordinary  cir-
cumftance,  that  the  tefces  were  wanting :  which  were  not  wanting  even  in
both  of  thole  women,  in  whom  we  have  faid  that  there  was  no  uterus  at  all
(c) ;  but  only  in  the  firif.  And  if  I  were  determin'd  to  give  you  a  particular
account,  in  this  letter,  of  all  the  difeas'd  appearances  that  I  have  feen  in  the
teftes,  and  the  tubes,  by  difledlion ;  this  letter  would  grow  out  to  a  more
enormous  fize  than  any  other.

But  without  doubt  I  Ifiould  be  only  giving  myfelf  needlefs  trouble,  fince  I
have  either  given  accounts  of  them  in  letters  already  paft,  or  fhall  here-
after give  them.  I  will  therefore  hint  at  ibme  things  here,  which  otherwife  I
fhould  not  find  a  proper  occafion  to  introduce ;  firft  of  the  tubes  and  then  of
the  teftes.

23.  In  diflcfling  the  genitals  of  a  woman,  about  fifty  years  of  age,  and
demonftrating  them  in  the  holpital,  in  the  beginning  of  April  in  the  year
1 743  ;  I  obferv'd  the  following  things.

The  corona  of  the  os  uteri,  which  was  very  thick,  had,  moreover,  a
roundifh  prominence  from  one  part  -,  which,  on  cutting  into  it,  I  found  to
be  white  internally,  and,  to  appearance,  fcirrhous.  And  neither  of  the
tubes  admitted  a  very  thin  probe,  v/hich  was  already  introduc'd  through  the?
larger  orifice  to  fome  extent,  beyond  that  place  :  and,  in  faft,  I  found  both
of  them  to  be  quite  impervious.

24.  I  diffefted  the  brain,  and  genital  parts,  of  another  woman,  who  had
been  taken  off  by  an  acute  difeafe  of  the  thorax,  fucceeding  to  a  chronic,
before  fhe  was  forty  years  of  age  •,  but  the  brain  it  is  not  our  bufinefs  to  fpeak
of  here :  as  to  the  parts  of  generation  -,  which  I  demonftrated  in  the  fame
place  and  the  fame  year,  and  about  the  middle  of  December ;  I  found  fome
appearances  in  them,  that  well  deferve  to  be  related  here.

To  begin  with  tiie  pudendum,  in  which  the  hymen,  being  unlnjur'd,
fhow'd  this  woman  to  have  been  a  virgin  -,  the  redifh  horns  of  the  femilunar,
and,  in  other  refpefts  white,  hymen,  terminated  in  a  kind  of  redifh  ring  ;
with  which  the  tumid  extremity  of  the  urethra  v>'as  furrounded.

And  the  other  orifice  of  the  urethra,  which  opens  towards  the  bladder,  and
the  internal  furface  of  the  urethra  that  was  neareft  to  it,  was  diftinguifh'd
with  parallel,  thick,  and  protuberant  lines  drawn  longitudinally  j  which  lines
were  vefTels  diftended  with  blood.

The  vagina,  the  ofculum,  and  the  cervix  uteri  itfelf,  I  found  to  be  in  that
ftate  in  which  they  generally  are.


(z)  Commerc.  Litter,  a. 1731. Spec. 19. (i)  N.  26.
.  z.  (f)  Supra,  n.  13,

(^a)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  1.  &  2.obf.  105.


Bot


664-  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

But  the  fundus  uteri  protuberated  fomewhat  more  than  it  generally  does ;
nor  could  I  find  the  caufe  of  this  protuberance  in  the  parietes,  which  were  in
a  natural  llace:  but  I  found  it  to  be  in  the  cavity,  upon  the  furface  of  which
three  excrefcences  were  form'd.

The  largell:  of  thefe  was  fomewhat  lefs,  in  its  circumference,  than  the  nail
of  a  man's  thumb;  not  very  thick,  and  loofe  on  every  fide:  unlefs  where  it
was  join'd,  by  no  very  (lender  peduncle,  with  the  upper  fide  of  the  left  part
of  the  cavity  :  internally  and  externally  it  was  in  great  part  fo  full  of  blood
as  to  be  quite  black :  and  it  was  fomewhat  lefs  hard  than  the  fubftance  of
the  parietes  of  the  uterus.

At  the  upper  part  of  the  oppofite  fide  was  an  equal  blacknefs  likewife ;
but  no  excrefcence  in  that  part.

The  fecond  excrefcence  was  at  a  little  diftance  below  that  place,  beina
fomewhat  round  in  its  figure,  rather  fmall  in  its  fize,  and  nearly  of  the  fame
nature  with  the  firft.

The  third  which  was  very  fmall,  was  fituated  a  little  below  the  firfl;  and,
when  prick'd  with  the  point  of  the  knife,  difcharg'd  a  water,  as  if  it  con-
tain'd  an  hydatid  within  its  outer  fhell  -,  which  was  of  a  black  colour  inclin-
ing to  that  of  blood.

Having  examin'd  thefe  parts  fufBciently,  and  turn'd  my  eyes  to  the  als
vefpertilionum  ;  in  each  of  them,  betwixt  the  teftis  itfelf  and  the  tube,  I
obferv'd  three  or  four  globules  of  a  larger  or  lefler  fize ;  hard  in  their  con-
fiftence,  and  of  a  red  colour  inclining  to  brown;  fo  that  at  firft  fight,  1  fup-
pos'd  them  to  be  fcirrhous  conglobated  glands.

But,  upon  applying  the  fcalpel,  under  the  membranous  cortex,  which  was
of  the  colour  I  have  mention'd,  I  found  a  nucleus  of  a  white  colour,  fmooth,
and  eafily  falling  out ;  fo  hard  that  you  would  have  doubted  whether  it  was
of  a  bony,  or  a  ftony  nature  :  and  in  its  figure  and  magnitude,  if  you  con-
fidcr'd  it  when  taken  out  of  the  larger  globule,  it  refembled  a  middle-fiz'd
pea.

The  lefler  globules  each  contain'd  a  nucleus  fimilar  to  this,  but  lefs  in  its
fize;  except  that,  in  one  of  the  fmalleft,  inftead  of  a  nucleus,  was  a  white
but  foftifh  matter  :  fo  that  you  would  naturally  have  fuppos'd  the  hard  nu-
clei to  have  been  form'd  by  the  concretion  of  this  matter.

You  plainly  fee  what  impediment  there  muft  have  been  to  the  motion  of
the  tubes,  and  their  nearer  approach  to  the  teftes,  by  the  weight  and  inter-
pofition  of  this  kind  of  globules.  But  the  teftes  moreover  were  dry,  con-
tracted, and  ftrigofe.  And  the  tubes  were  impervious,  in  the  fam.e  manner
as  I  have  related  of  the  former  woman  •,  except  that  they,  neverthelefs,  ad-
mitted a  very  thin  probe  fomewhat  nearer  to  the  uterus.

25.  Although  I  have,  in  fadt,  fometimes  found  the  fame  kind  of  occlu-
fion  in  the  Falloppian  tubes,  of  other  women  Hkewife,  as  well  as  in  thefe  two ;
wjiich  you  learn  from  other  letters  ;  yet  I  at  the  fame  time  confels,  that  there
have  been  ftill  more,  in  whom,  though  I  thought  them  to  be  fhut  up  at  the
firft  trial,  I  neverthelefs  found,  by  a  more  accurate  examination,  that  they
were  really  pervious :  and  what  I  had  written  in  the  firft  of  the  Adverfaria  (d),
formerly,  I  have  fince  confirm'd  at  different  times.

(i)  N.  30.

^^nd


Letter  XLVI. Article  26, 27.  665

And  that  the  fame  has  likewife  been  obferv'd  by  others,  is  prov'd  by  the
teftimony  of  the  very  experienc'd  Haller  (e)  ;  who  lays  that  "  Moru-ao-ni,
"  in  the  lirft  of  his  Adverfaria,  jiiftly  argues  againft  Ruyfch,  that  the  tubes
"  are  not  fo  very  frequently  obilrufted."  But  as  Ruyfch,  in  the  obferva-
tion  (f)  which  it  is  furprizing  to  find  not  added  to  the  Sepulchretum,  had
very  clearly  propos'd  two  modes  "of  obfl:ru6lion  of  thefe  tubes ;  one  of  which
is  when  they  are  very  clofely  coalefc'd,  at  one  extremity,  with  the  teftis,  the
fecond  when  they  are  obftrufted  in  a  different  manner ;  it  might  have  been
evident  to  every  one,  who  read  thefe  Adverfaria  of  mine  with  attention,  that
I  had  not  fpoken  at  all  of  the  firft  mode  ;  as  this  is  fo  evident,  that  it  does
not  require  any  ftricl  examination,  to  bring  the  obftrudtion  to  the  cleareft
view.

And  this  being  the  ftate  of  the  queftion,  I  confefs,  that,  when  I  read  what
Ruyfch  replied  in  his  own  behalf  f^)-,  notwithftanding  I  thought  myfelfmuch
oblig'd,  by  the  very  great  humanity  which  that  excellent  anatomift  exer-
cis'd  to^vards  me,  I  was,  neverthelels,  equally  furpriz'd  that  I  fbould  have
"  feem'd"  to  him,  "  never  to  have  feen,  in  my  own  anatomical  inquiries,'*
that  coalition  of  the  tube  with  the  teftis.

For  I  had  feen  it,  and  have  even  feen  it  fince,  as  my  letters  to  you  demon-
flrate;  and  not  only  in  old  women  (h),  but  in  young  women  alfo  (z) :  and
fometimes  in  both  of  them  on  both  fides  (k) ;  at  other  times  on  one  fide  only
(I).  But  I  have  other  obfervations  ftill  remaining,  two  of  which  I  will  take
the  trouble  to  tranfcribe  here.

26.  An  old  woman  having  died  from  a  blow  on  the  head,  her  genitals,
together  with  the  urinary  parts,  were  brought  to  me,  when  I  was  deliverino-
my  public  lectures  in  the  college,  about  the  end  of  January  in  the  yea?
1743-

The  trunk  of  the  aorta,  where  it  defcended  betwixt  the  kidnies,  had  its  in-
ternal furface  very  unequal  on  every  fide ;  from  the  upper  part  quite  to  the
termination  ;  and  in  a  manner  corroded,  by  reafon  of  bony  fcales,  which  were
fo  thickly  ftrown,  that  the  orifices  of  the  lumbar  arteries  could  not  be  known
without  difficulty.

And  the  tubes  of  the  uterus  were  fo  grown  to,  and  confounded  with,  the
teftes;  which  in  other  refpeds  were  not  tumid  ;  that  one  of  them  in  partic-u-
lar,  which  was  intirely  without  the  fimbria,  could  not  at  all  be  diftinguilL'd
from  the  teftis.

27.  About  the  fame  time  of  the  year,  but  in  the  year  1746,  the  c^enitals
of  a  woman  -,  who  died,  within  about  the  thirtieth  day  after  her  delivery,  of
a  flow  fever  •,  were  brought  to  me  to  the  fame  place,  in  as  perfeft  a  ftate  as
they  could  be  procur'd.

For  the  teftis,  and  tube,  on  the  right  fide,  were  agglutinated  to  each
other,  and  to  the  neighbouring  inteftinum  colon,  and,  in  parr,  already  de-
ftroy'd  by  an  abfcefs  ;  which  I  fuppofe  to  have  been  the  principal  caufe  of
her  fever  and  death.

(?)  Hift.  Diffeft.  Foem.  gravid.  §.  2.  not.^,  &  (h)  Epift.  iz.  n.  z. '

ad  Praeleft.  Boerhaav.  ad  liiftit.  §.  668  not.  e.  (i)  Epift.  38,  n.  34.

(f)  Cent.  Obf.  Anat.  Chir.  83.  (^)  Ibid.  &  Epift.  21.  n.  47.

(g)  Adverf.  Anat.  dec.  i.  c.  z.  (I)  Epift.  29.  n,  14..  &  Epift.  26.  n.  13.

Vol.  ir.  4  Q^  The


666  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

The  ftate  of  the  uterus,  fuch  as  was  to  be  expefted  in  a  woman  who  had
lately  born  a  child,  I  {hall  defcribe  in  another  place  :  it  will  be  lufficient  ta
remark,  in  this  place,  what  feem'd  to  be  morbid.

That  is  to  fay,  fome  part  of  the  corona  of  the  os  uteri,  looking  on  it  an-
teriorly, was  of  a  violet-colour,  inclining  to  blacknefs :  but  by  cutting  into
it  alfo,  I  obferv'd,  within  the  fubftance  of  its  parietes,  a  blacknefs,  as  if  from
blood  ftao-nating  within  the  dilated  veffels ;  from  the  orifice  quite  to  one  half
the  extent  of  the  cervix.

Finally,  the  left  teftis  did  not  dtffer  in  its  colour,  and  magnitude,  from
any  found  teflis.  Yet  its  fubftance  was  fofter  than  ufual,  and  when  cut  into
more  moift  •,  fo  that  it  might  feem  to  be  made  up  of  a  kind  of  jelly  as  it  were,
rather  than  of  any  other  fubftance.

There  was  no  where  any  appearance  of  the  corpora  lutea,  nor  any  veficle  ;
if  you  except  a  fpherical  little  cell  of  the  bignefs  of  a  fmall  grape,  empty,
and  made  up  of  a  thickifh  and  whitifti  coat.  Which  cell,  being  fituated  un-
der the  very  membrane  of  the  teftis,  had  given  marks  of  its  exiftcnce  before
the  teftis  was  cut  into.  For  under  an  obfcure  kind  of  cicatrix,  correfpond-
ing  to  that  cell,  fomething  of  a  yellowifti  colour  was  feen  to  ftiine  through.

28.  I  do  not  think  that  you  will  take  an  argument  from  this  ftate  of  both
the  teftes,  and  one  of  the  tubes,  in  order  to  refute  the  opinion  which  is  now
embrac'd  by  moft  learned  men  -,  or  at  leaft  a  great  number  of  them.

For  you  not  only  know,  how  eafily  arguments  of  this  kind,  which  were
formerly  inculcated  by  Nabothus  (m),  and  others  alfo,  are  invalidated ;  but
even  others  which  are  more  difficult  to  appearance  ;  as,  for  inftance,  when
they  objeft  the  cafe  of  a  certain  woman  ;  who  having  been  pregnant  only  for
fo  ftiort  a  time,  that  the  fcetus  was  fcarcely  equal  to  the  length  of  a  little
finger  •,  had,  neverthelefs,  both  of  her  teftes  in  a  fcirrhous  ftate.

For  it  is  fufficient,  that,  when  a  woman  conceives,  no  lefs  a  part  of  either
teftis  is  found,  than  belongs  to  one  mature  veficle,  or  rather  to  one  mature
corpus  luteum.  And  when  this  has  perform'd  its  office,  if  itfelf  alfo  is  vi-
tiated by  the  extenfion  of  the  difeafe,  and  degenerates  into  the  nature  of  a
fcirrhus,  as  well  as  the  other  parts  ;  it  is  no  obje£i:ion  at  all  to  the  opinion  in
queftion.

And  what  forbids  us  to  aflert,  that  it  may  be  vitiated  within  a  few  weeks,
not  to  fay  within  thofe  nine  months  of  utero-geftation  ?

For  which  reafon  it  is  the  more  furprizing,  that  there  ftiould  have  been  any
one,  within  this  little  time,  who  made  objeftions  to  that  opinion,  from  the
tubes  being  found,  by  him, , to  be  without  fimbriae,  and  the  orifice,  that  is
between  thefe  fimbrias,  to  be  quite  Ihut  up,  in  a  woman  who  had  born  a
child  eight  years  before  :  as  if  it  were  neceffary  to  believe,  that  the  child  was
born  while  the  woman  was  in  this  ftate  ;  and  not  that  ftie  had  rather  been  in-
jur'd,  in  thofe  parts,  by  a  difeafe  which  was  not  of  long  ftanding :  efpecially
as  "  a  certain  pyriform  bulb,  turgid  with  whitilh  and  fluid  matter,"  which  it
is  moft  probable  was  pus,  occupied  the  place  of  the  fimbriae.

But  "  fidtions  help  the  underftanding,"  fays  he,  "  though  they  do  not  de-
monftrate  the  truth  of  the  matter."

(m)  Diiput.  de  Sterilit.  Mulier.  n.  1 1.  &  12.

Yet


Letter  XLVI. Article  29,  30.  667

Yet  where  there  is  no  room  for  demonftrations,  and  the  opinion,  which  is
attack'd  by  arguments  of  that  kind,  is  already  very  well  fupported  by  rea-
fons,  and  obfervations ;  we  muft  fee  what  is  the  moft  probable,  and  agrees
the  beft  with  thefe  reafons  and  arguments,  in  order  to  reply  to  the  objeftions.

And  that  you  may  perceive,  how  differently  the  thing  appears  to  me  from
what  it  does  to  him  ;  he  thinks  that  not  even  eight  years  are  fufficient  to  bring
on  diforders  of  this  kind  :  but  to  me  it  feems  that  even  the  very  time  of  a
difficult  birth  is  fometimes  fufficient ;  provided  the  time  of  lying-in  is  not
very  happy  afterwards.

For,  in  fuch  a  birth,  the  vehement  and  frequent  ftrainings  urge  the  gravid
uterus  (as  I  have  already  («)  hinted)  againft  the  teftes,  and  the  fubjedted
tubes ;  which  parts  are  prefs'd  againft  the  bones  of  the  pelvis,  and  contradl
the  beginning  of  an  inflammation,  which  is  foon  after  increas'd  by  the  lochia,
for  inftance,  when  they  flow  but  very  fparingly.

And  I  fuppofe  thefe  things  to  happen  fo  much  the  more  eafily,  in  pro-
portion as  violent  and  frequent  vomitings,  during  the  courfe  of  the  foregoing
utero-geftation,  have  prefs'd  upon,  and  fliaken  thefe  parts ;  or  fome  other
caufes  have  begun  to  injure  them,  and  difpos'd  them  to  contraft  the  difeafe.

But  omitting  thefe  things,  let  us  return  to  the  hiftories  ;  and  as  I  have
hinted  at  fome  things,  in  regard  to  the  peculiar  diforders  of  the  tubes,  and  in
regard  to  thofe  which  are  common  to  the  tubes  and  the  teftes ;  let  us  now
alfo  fay  fome  things  briefly,  in  refpedt  to  the  peculiar  diforders  of  the  teftes.

29.  A  woman,  of  about  forty  years  of  age,  had  been  formerly  attack'd
with  an  apoplexy  -,  which  returning,  at  length  carried  her  off^.  I  was  at  this
time  giving  the  public  demonftrations  of  anatomy,  in  the  year  1725  :  but  no
other  parts  were  brought  into  the  college,  befide  thofe  which  are  fubfervient
to  the  offices  of  generation,  and  the  fecretion  of  urine.

The  trunk  of  the  great  artery,  where  it  lay  betwixt  the  kidnies,  fliow'd,
internally,  fome  very  flight  beginnings  of  bony  fcales.  The  kidnies  them-
felves,  which  were  not  furnifli'd  with  a  very  great  quantity  of  fat  on  their
external  furface,  were  neverthelefs  ftuff''d  up  therewith,  to  fuch  a  degree,
betwixt  the  papillae,  that  I  never  remember  to  have  feen  more.

Both  the  teftes  were  contrafbed  and  lank  ;  but  the  right  by  far  the  moft
fo :  and  from  thence  an  hydatid  was  prominent  of  the  figure  and  magnitude
of  a  chefnut,  containing  a  brownifli  water  within  thicken'd  coats ;  which
were,  on  their  internal  furface,  fmooth  and  equal.

In  the  left  teftis  a  round  cell  was  quite  buried,  not  larger  than  a  very  fmall
grape ;  being  made  up  of  white  and  thickifli  parietes,  that  were  internally
unequal,  and  contain'd  a  fmall  quantity  of  humour.

However,  in  neither  of  them  was  there  any  of  the  natural  veficles.

30.  As  thefe  veficles  are  necefi^ary  to  generation,  whether  they,  as  moft  per-
fons  believ'd,  are  eggs,  or  rather  are  chang'd  into  the  corpus  luteum  ;  it  is
juft  the  fame  thing,  you  fee,  whether  they  are  perfedlly  wanting,  or  do  not
contain  that  fluid  which  they  ought  to  contain.

Wherefore,  it  is  not  to  be  wonder'd  at,  if  a  woman  -,  who  was  in  other  re-
fpedls  healthy,  and  young ;  and  married  to  a  young  man  of  a  robiift  conftitu-

(«)  Epift.  39,n.  38.
4  Q_  2  tion  -,


668  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

tion  ;  in  whom  Vallifneri  (o-)  found  all  the  veficles  foil  of  a  tnrbid,  and  ftili-*
ginous  matter,  which  had  but  little  fitiidity,  was  barrept.

And  there  was  great  reafon  to  fear,  that  another  young  woman  ;  who  died
within  an  hour  after  her  firft:  delivery,  in  both  of  whofe  teftes  Alexander  Bonis
wrote  to  me  that  he  had  feen,  with  Santorini,  a  great  number  of  veficles  of
various  magnitudes,  containing  a  pellucid  humour  indeed,  but  in  which  a
fmall  white  corpufcle  was  feen,  which  veficle  foever  you  examin'd  ;  there  was,
I  fay,  great  reafon  to  fear,  left  this  woman  would  have  been  barren,  if  flie  had
liv'd.

And  this  obfcrvation  of  my  moft  refpeftable  friends,  I  have  the  more  rea-
dily taken  notice  of  to  you  •,  that  you  may  perceive  this  to  be  the  effedt  of
dilcafe,  which  fome  authors  of  note  have  confider'd  as  a  proof  of  the  veficle
being  become  fascundated.

■^i.  How  many  obfervations  of  my  own,  of  diforders  in  the  teftes  of  wo-
men, I  might  add  to  thefe  befides ;  if  I  were  not  cautious  of  being  too  pro-
lix •,  you  will  conjedlure  even  from  thofe  things  which  I  have  formerly
•thrown  cut  in  the  firft  of  the  Adverfaria  (.p),  in  regard  to  the  diforders  of
thofe  parts  •,  fome  of  which  1  had  found  very  rarely,  and  others  very  fre-
quently.

And  as  many,  in  confirming  the  fame  things,  have  taken  notice  of  this
pafiage  -,  fo  I  do  not  know  why  but  very  few  (among  whom  in  particular  was
the  celebrated  Paitoni  (q) )  have  ftiown  that  they  had  read  the  other  paflage,
.Where,  in  the  fourth  Adverfaria  (r),  I  have  faid  what  I  thought  of  the  nature
of  thefe  veficuls,  and  the  corpora  lutea,  and  their  ufe,  together  with  my  rea-
fons  for  my  opinions;  whereas  many  authors,  neverthelefs,  fince  the  year
1719,  in  which  thofe  things  were  publifti'd,  muft  have  repeated  the  fame
things  in  their  writings.

But  to  return  tO'  the  firft  paflage  ;  they  who  have  abus'd  thofe  obfervations
of  mine,  or  fimilar  ones  of  other  authors,  fo  as  to  contend  either  that  the
•  teftes  are  ufelefs,  or  that  women  would  for  the  moft  part  be  barren  ;  either
have  not  obferv'd,  that  thefe  diforders  are  not  generally  met  with  in  the  dif-
fedlion  of  young  and  found  women,  or  that  it  is  not  neceffary  for  conception,
that  every  part  of  both  teftes  fliould  be  found  •,  nor  finally  although  befides
the  teftes,  there  are  fo  many  other  parts  in  women,  which  are  themfelves
liable  to  difeafes,  and  yet  are  neceflfary  for  the  procreation  of  children,  that  it
neverthelefs  does  not  happen  very  feldom,  nor  yet  for  the  moft  part,  nor  ypt
from  the  fame  caufe,  that  women  either  are  aftually  barren,  or  become  fo;
and  that  Hippocrates  (s)  had  formerly  faid  with  great  propriety  :  "  and  fo
many  and  various  kinds  of  diforders  happen  to  women,  on  account  of  which
"  they  do  not  bring  forth,  before  they  are  cur'd  of  them,  and  many  by  which
"  they  become  quite  barren  -,  that  women  need  not  be  furpriz'd  they  cb  not
"  bear  children,  though  they  have  frequent  commerce  with  man."  Farewell.

(0)  Ift.  della  Generaz.  p.  2.  c.  5.  n.  14,  frj  Animad.  28.

Cj,J  tJ.-^o.  (j)  DeSterilibus  n.  5.

^o)  Delia  Generaz.  dell'  Uomo  Difc-.  3-.

LETTER


Letter  XL VI I. Article  i.  669


LETTER the FORTY-SEVENTH

Treats  of  Diforders  in  the  menftrual  Flux,  and  of  the
Fluor  Muliebris.


L THOUGH  Bonetus  has  given  a  particular  feftion  to  each  of  thefe

fubjefts  i that  is  the  thirty-fifth,  and  thirty-fixth ;  yet  I  have  more

than  one  reafon  for  comprifing  both  thefe  fubjefts  in  a  fingle  letter.

For  in  the  firft  place,  I  have  obferv'd  this  circumftance,  that  if  you  take
away  the  long  and  frequent  fcholia-,  and  thofe  frequently  fuch  as  are  quite
ufelefs,  fmce  more  confiftent  doftrines  have  been  taught  in  the  medical;
fthools  ;  you  will  find  that  not  many  obfervations  remain  in  thofe  otherwife
fhort  fedtions.

In  the  fecond  place,  I  have  obferv'd  that  there  are  fome  of  thefe,  as  Bone-
tus himfelf  confefles,  which  have  been  propos'd  by  him  in  other  places ;  and
even  that  there  are  fome,  which  are  repeated  in  one  and  the  fame  fe<51:ion,
without  his  being  aware  of  it ;  as,  for  inftance,  in  the  thirty-fifth,  the  fourth,
obfervation  is  repeated,  in  the  laft  article  under  the  feventh  obfervation,  that
is  in  article  the  tenth  ;  and  in  the  thirty-fixth  fecbion,  you  will  find  what  is
read  under  the  firft  article  of  the  firft  obfervation,  repeated  under  the  fecond
article.

And  thefe  repetitions  are  fo  much  the  lefs  tolerable,  becaufe  either  the
hiftory  is.imperfeiEt  in  the  fecond  place,  as  in  the  fecond  example  ;  or  even.
in  both  places,  as  in  the  firft.  Nor  would  I  have  you  fay  that  the  readers
are,  in  both  cafes,  refer'd  to  the  feftion  intitled  de  ventris  imnore,  book  the
third.  For  we  muft  turn  overa  hundred  and  eighty-fix  large  pages,  in  order  to
light  on  that  hiftory  at  length  i  which  begins  in  far  diff^erent  words,  and  is  for
that  reafon  lefs  eafy  to  be  found,  under  the  fifty-fifth  obfervation,  in  article
the  twenty-third  :  but  even  there  it  is  not  accurately  copied,  nor  amended  by
any  needful  animadverfions.

For  the  author  of  the  hiftory,  I  mean  Dodonsus,  in  that  very  thirty-fourth
chapter  which  is  refer'd  to,  had  faid,  that  no  excrementitious  matter  had  been
difcharg'd  from  the  uterus  of  this  virgin,  through  the  whole  of  the  difeafe,
notwithftanding  the  uterus  was  ulcerated;  and  that  becaufe  "the  hymen,
"  which  nature  has  granted  to  virgins,  prevented  the  difcharge."

But  in  the  Sepulchretum,  inftcjad  oiquod  natura  virginibus  conceffit,  we  read
5;  aid.


670  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

^ui  natura  virginibiis  concrefcit. That  is,  if  it  convey  any  idea  at  all,  which
naturally  grows  together  in  "  virgins."

Yet  read  it  which  way  you  will,  how  do  the  menfes  flow  out  in  other  vir-
gins ?  And  even  in  this  very  woman  who  was  "  fifty-five  or  fifty-fix  years  of
"  age,"  if  they  had  not  flow'd  out  before  the  difeafe  ;  how  could  Dodonasus
have  omitted  that  circumftance  ?

Wherefore  neither  quod  natura  conceffit  nor  qui  natura  concrefcit  can  be  ad-
mitted of.

Laft  of  all,  I  wonder  that  fome  obfervations,  together  with  their  fcholia;
as  that  for  inftance  which  we  have  in  the  thirty-fifth  fedtion  under  obfervation
thefirft  ;  do  not,  as  the  intention  of  the  fedtion  requir'd,  relate  to  the  caufes
of  difeafes;  but  to  the  natural  fources  of  the  menftruous  blood:  and  that
thefe,  if  you  attend  to  the  obfervations  produc'd,  are  determin'd  to  be  in  the
vagina :  which  indeed  I  have  never  denied ;  although  it  has  never  yet  hap-
pen'd  to  me,  to  fee  them  elfewhere  than  in  the  fundus  uteri :  nor  can
I  lay  any  great  ftrefs  upon  fome  reafons  they  make  ufe  of  to  confirm  this
circumftance  ;  as  that,  for  example,  which  is  fubjoin'd  in  the  fcholium  to
article  the  fecond  of  the  firft  obfervation ;  I  mean  that  "  fometimes  cancers
"  or  fchirri  of  the  vagina  come  on  :  and  that  fo  much  the  more  if  the  men-
"  ftrua  are  deficient ;  becaufe  the  blood  which  was  wont  to  be  purg'd  ofi^,  is
"  delay'd  there  for  a  very  long  time,  ftagnates  and  becomes  of  a  hot  nature:
*'  whereas  thofe  malignant  ulcers  and  tumours  more  rarely  are  form'd  in  the
'*'  fundus  and  cavity  of  the  uterus  itfelf."

For  whether  this,  to  take  no  notice  of  other  things,  does  happen  "  more
"  rarely,"  the  greater  part  of  the  obfervations  in  the  next  fedion  will  Ihow
you.

But  let  us  omit  the  confideration  of  tliefe  things,  and  of  the  third  obferva-
tion which  relates  to  the  natural  caufe  of  the  menftrual  purgation ;  with  the
very  prolix  fcholia  that  are  the  confequence  of  it  •,  and  bearing  in  mind  the
intention  of  this  letter,  firft,  in  regard  to  the  menftrua,  let  us  copy  from  the
obfervations  of  Valfalva,  thofe  things  which  relate  to  the  morbid  ftate
■thereof.

2.  A  virgin  who  feem'd  of  a  falacious  difpofition,  or  was  at  leaft  very
lively,  had  never  yet  had  any  menftrual  difcharges,  when  ftie  died  in  the
•nineteenth  year  of  her  age.  The  uterus  was  very  fmall :  yet  the  length  of
■the  fundus  was  not  lefs  than  that  of  the  cervix.

3.  This  is  fufficient  to  fhow  you,  that  the  uterus  had  neverthelefs  increas'd
more  in  this  virgin,  than  in  that  woman  whom  I  defcrib'd  in  the  former  letter
{a) ;  notwithftanding  it  was  very  fmall  indeed,  and  fmall  for  that  age  :  and
this  obfervation  will  confirm  the  conjedure  I  made  in  regard  to  the  former
'Woman,  that  flie  had  never  been  menftrually  purg'd.

"  For  it  may  excite  a  fi-ifpicion  in  us,  whether  the  appearance  of  the  men-
ftrua, in  fome  virgins,  who  are  in  other  refpeds  healthy,  full  of  alacrity,
and  have  attain'd  to  a  proper  proportion  of  body ;  when  it  happens  fome
years  later  than  it  does  in  general  -,  whether,  I  fay,  this  appearance  fhould
not  be  afcrib'd,  fometimes,  to  the  very  flow  increafe  of  the  uterus.

Fori  knew  a  noble  virgin  ;  that  is  to  be  number'd  in  the  clafs  of  thofe  of

{a)  N.  20.

whom


Letter  XL VII. Article  4, 5.  671

whom  I  have  been  fpeaking ;  who,  being  married  before  her  menfes,  which
had  been  expedted  for  fome  years,  appear'd,  was  neverthelefs  very  fruitful  :
and  that  we  may  the  lefs  be  furpriz'd  thereat,  the  very  fame  thino-  had  like-
wife  happeii'd  to  her  mother.

And  without  doubt,  it  is  much  better,  where  the  young  women  are  in
-good  health,  to  wait  and  do  nothing ;  as  I  did  in  that  cafe ;  left  by  our  in-
opportune remedies,  we  perhaps  caufe  a  delay  in  the  work  of  nature,  which
Ihe  performs  later  in  fome  than  in  others.

4.  Another  virgin,  who  had  now  been  without  any  menftrual  puro-ation
for  many  years,  and  had  been  long  troubled  with  ulcers  in  the  tibia,  died  in
a  tabid  ftate.

In  the  thorax,  and  belly,  was  a  ftagnant  water.  The  teftes  were  without  any
veficles,  and  confifted  of  a  fubftance  of  a  whitifh  colour-,  which  bore  a  re-
lemblance  to  the  pancreas,  but  was  of  a  fofter  nature.  Qn  the  internal  fur-
face  of  the  uterus  v/ere  a  great  number  of  glandular  bodies  protuberant ;  ex-
cept that  in  the  upper  part  of  the  fundus  there  were  but  few  obferv'd.

5.  This,  you  fee,  is  another  example,  that  may  be  objefted  to  fome  phy-
ficians,  who  are  too  bufy  in  bringing  on  an  appearance  of  the  menfes.  For
they  do  not  confider  how  various,  and  different  from  one  another,  the  caufes
of  their  not  flowing  may  be-,  and  immediately  have  recourfe  to  fuch  things
as  excite  them  :  as  if  the  uterus  itfelf  were  always  fuiEciently  prepar'd  to
tranfmit  the  flux  which  they  provoke.

Therefore  they  frequently  increafe  the  caufe  of  the  diforder,  inftead  of  re-
moving it.

Thefe  remedies  fucceed  very  well,  in  moft  of  thofe  perfons  where  the  blood
is  vifcid,  or  inert  from  too  great  a  quantity  of  ferum  ;  as  I  have,  for  the  moft
part,  feen  this  to  abound  in  blood  that  has  been  taken  away  by  vensfedlion ;
the  remaining  part  being  generally  contrafted  into  a  cylinder,  of  a  more  -
flcnder  fliape  and  confiftence  than  ufual  •,  when  this  purgation  was  wantino-
either  wholly,  or  in  great  part :  and  indeed  I  have  obferv'd  the  fame,  even  in
a  certain  woman  whofe  menftruahad  been  accidentally  fupprefs'd,  in  the  mid-
dle of  their  courfe,  by  a  fright ;  though  this  had  happen'd  only  five  or  fix  .
days  before.

But  how  can  thefe  remedies  have  a  good  effeft,  not  only  when  the  blood
is,  on  the  contrary,  of  a  more  hot  difpofition,  or  in  greater  plenty  in  the  con-
ftitution  ;  but  when  the  blood  itfelf  is  in  a  proper  quantity  and  ftate,  and
the  uterus  is,  neverthelefs,  very  dry,  and  contrafted ;  or,  which  you  may
fufpedl  from  certain  long-continued  diforders,  as  in  the  virgin  in  queftion,
affected  with  fome  organical  difeafe  ?

Without  doubt  it  is  more  proper  fometimes,  to  moiften  and  relax  ;  and  at
other  times  to  refolve  difeafes,  as  far  as  this  can  be  done.

I  knew  a  phyfician  of  eminence,  who  was  accuftom'd  to  ufe  the  filings  of
fteel,  mix'd  into  a  pillular  mafs  with  aloes,  ammoniacum,  and  the  concreted
juice  of  fuccory  ;  adding  moreover,  when  he  thought  the  force  of  the  medi-
cine needed  to  be  increas'd,  a  little  dittany  of  crete,  myrrh,  and  faffron  :  and
of  the  pills  made  of  this  mafs,  he,  in  general,  gave  two  before  a  fparing
fupper;  but  in  the  morning  he  gave  broth,  medicated  with  herbs,  and  roots,
that  might  have  the  power  of  foftening  and  opening  :  and  by  thefe  remedies

he


672  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

he  faid  he  always  faw  the  wifli'd-for  efFedt ;  provided  a  proper  regimen  of
living  was  obfcrv'd  at  the  fame  time.

There  is  no  doubt  but  this  phyfician  ;  whofe  remedies  I  have  taken  notice
■of,  not  bccaufe  they  are  not  in  the  number  of  the  moft  common,  but  becaufe
fome  are  endow'd  with  different  virtues  from  thofe  of  others  •,  might  often
brino-  about  what  he  had  undertaken;  yet  he  would  better  have  effetled  his
intention,  if  it  had  been  in  his  power  to  know,  what  it  was  neceflary  to  do
in  the  caies  of  particular  \vomen.

For  one  remedy  alone,  if  more  fuitable  than  the  others,  has  the  defir'c!
effeft  fooner,  and  more  to  the  purpofe.

Thus  1  likewifc  know  another  phyfician,  who,  when  he  fees  that  there  is
room  for  aloetics,  gives  every  day  nothing  more  than  a  few  grains  of  aloes,
-wrap'd  up  in  any  thing  that  can  obtund  the  fenfation  of  bitternefs ;  and  fays
that  with  thefe  alone  he  more  fuccefsfully  recalls  the  menfes,  than  by  giving
many  more  grains,  or  other  remedies  at  the  fame  time  with  them.

And  in  regard  to  a  proper  method  of  living,  which,  as  I  have  faid,  is  not
to  be  neglected ;  this  is  fo  much  the  more  certain,  as  it  is  more  evident,  that
the  menftrual  purgation  is  very  much  diminifti'd,  and  fometimes  fupprefs'd,
by  errors  in  the  diet,  exercife,  and  the  like.

Thus,  to  illuftrate  the  modern  errors  of  fome  women,  by  an  ancient  ex-
ample ;  Galen  (Z-)  has  deliver'd  down  in  his  writings  that,  at  Rome  in  his
rime,  "it  had  happen'd  that,  as  women  in  common  drank  the  coldcft  water
"  from  diflblv'd  fnow,  they  either  had  no  menftrual  purgations  at  all,  or  at
"  leaft  had  them  only  in  a  fmall  degree."

6.  But  to  return  to  thofe  remedies  which  excite  the  menfes ;  it  fometimes
happens  that  there  is  no  room  for  them,  either  at  prefent,  or  in  future;  as,
for  inftance,  when  the  uterus  is  affeded  with  a  diforder  of  fuch  a  kind,  that
it  cannot  be  remov'd.

Let  us  take  an  example  of  this  kind  from  the  very  expcrienc'd  Bene-

voli(0-

He  difcharg'd,  in  four  virgins,  by  means  of  chirurgical  remedies,  the
menftrual  blood  which  had  been  retairi'd  in  the  cavity  of  the  uterus.  The
three  .firft  of  them  had  blood  difcharg'd  from  the  uterus,  every  month  after-
wards, according  to  the  ordinary  courfe  of  nature.

But  the  fourth  had  no  difcharge  of  the  kind,  even  eight  or  ten  years  after;
all  the  endeavours  of  phyficians  to  procure  them  being  in  vain.  Why  fo  ?
Without  doubt  becaufe  this  laft  had  not  had  the  blood  confin'd,  for  only  a
fhort  fpace  of  time  as  the  others  had,  but  for  the  whole  fpace  of  three  years;
fo  a^  to  be  now  increas'd  to  the  quantity  of  two  and  thirty  pounds,  and  to
have  much  purulent  matter  mix'd  with  it.

It  was  probable  therefore  that  the  internal  furface  of  the  cavity  of  the
uterus ;  being  injur'd,  and  cover'd  over  with  a  cicatrix;  had  no  longer  the
orifices  open,  by'^which  the  blood  is,  at  ftated  times,  difcharg'd.

What,  then,  can  we  expeft,  in  this,  or  any  other  fimilar  cafe,  from  fuch
remedies  as  provoke  thefe  difcharges,  but  to  add  diforder  to  diforder  ?  Let

f^)  L.  de  vena  f«ft.  adverf.  Erafiftratseos  c.  3.  (f)  Offervaz.  i.

fuch


Letter  XL VII. Article  7,  8.  673

fiich  women  as  thefe  ufe  a  fparing  diet,  and  lofe  blood,  by  venae-fedion  in
the  arm,  when  there  is  occafion.

7.  But  now,  as  I  have  enter'd  into  a  difcourfe,  which  I  know  to  be  very
pleafing  to  you,  relating  to  the  methods  of  curing,  by  medicine,  fuppref-
fions,  or  obftruftions,  of  the  menftrual  blood  ;  before  I  go  on  the  anatomical
hiftories  of  the  contrary  diforder,  I  will  take  ihe  trouble  to  fubjoin  the  me-
thod to  which  that  induftrious,  and  experienc'd  man,  Zanichelli,  trufted
greatly  in  counterafting  this  fecond  difeafe.

He  order'd  fnails,  of  that  fmall  and  whitilh  kind,  which  are  found  upon
the  carduus  ftellatus,  to  be  bruis'd  in  a  mortar,  together  with  their  fhells ;
adding  a  little  quantity  of  the  conferve  of  violets  as  it  is  call'd ;  after  which
they  were  hung  up  in  a  linen  cloth,  and-  the  defcending  liquor  receiv'd  even
by  the  help  of  compreffion.

Of  this  liquor,  when  frefh-made,  he  ordered  three  ounces  to  be  drunk
every  morning  •,  and  the  fame  quantity  at  noon  before  dinner ;  and  in  an
evening  likewife  before  fupper  ;  when  he  fuppos'd  this  too  great  difchargeof
blood,  from  the  uterus,  to  proceed  from  that  fluid  being  in  a  diflblv'd  ftate  j
and  impregnated  with  irritating  particles.

And  he  affirm'd  that  this  liquor  had  anfwer'd  fo  well  with  him  ;  and  had
produc'd  fo  good  effects  ;  that  he  had  even  transferr'd  it  to  the  reftraining
of  bloody  difcharges  from  the  cheft,  if  thefe  happen'd  from  the  fame  caufes ;
nor  would  he  commit  this  fecret  to  me,  on  any  other  condition,  than  upon
promifing  that  I  would  reveal  it  to  no  perfon,  as  long  as  he  was  living  ;  and
this  I  have  perform'd.

The  following  relation  I  alfo  receiv'd  from  him  :  a  woman  having  labour'd
feven  years  under  an  uterine  hsemorrhage,  and  all  other  remedies  being  in
vain  ;  Ihe  was  perfedly  and  happily  cur'd  by  him,  by  means  of  giving  the
juice  of  lemons,  and  an  equal  weight  of  fpirit  of  fait.  And  he  had  been  in-
duc'd  to  give  thefe  remedies,  becaufe  he  had  conjecStur'd  that  there  was  a  kind
of  fcorbutic  ftate  of  blood  in  this  woman  •,  and  becaufe  he  had  before  expe-
rienc'd how  much  it  had  been  of  advantage  to  others,  to  hold  this  liquor  in
their  mouths,  when  it  was  confiderably  eroded  by  the  fcurvy.

From  thefe  cafes  then  -,  which  I  relate  to  you,  juft  as  he  related  them  to
me ;  it  appears  that  in  this  difeafe,  ^s  well  as  in  others,  the  conje6ture  of
caufes  is  of  great  importance  :  nor  can  the  fame  remedy  be  proper  for^all.

But  fometimes  there  is  no  room  for  any  remedy,  except  in  the  beginning  ;
as  you  will  underftand  from  that  hiftory,  which  I  fliall  here  annex,  from  Val-
falva.

8.  A  woman,  of  one  and  fifty  years  of  age,  had  begun,  five  or  fix  years
before,  to  be  troubled  with  a  confiderable  profluvium  of  blood  from  the  ge-
nitals :  fo  that  coagula  of  blood  were  difcharg'd  which  weigh'd  half  a
pound  ;  other  lefler. coagula  following  them.

A  ferous  colluvies  was  alfo  difcharg'd  fometimes,  and,  at  others,  a  humour
like  water  in  which  frefh  meat  had  been  wafh'd.

If  this  flux  was  at  any  time  fupprefs'd,  flie  was  troubled  greatly,  above
other  fymptoms,  with  a  violent  pain,  and  fenfe  of  weight  in  the  hypoga-
ftrium  ;  till  fhe  was  reliev'd  by  the  returning  flux.

Vol.  II.  4.  R  To


674  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

To  thefe  diforders  was  fometimes  added  a  difficulty  of  making  water  j
which  fluid  was  at  length  difcharg'd,  after  feme  confiderable  efforts,  toge-
ther with  a  foetid  blood, and  putrid  filaments.

Moreover,  the  woman  was  feiz'd,  on  both  fides,  with  an  ifchiadic  pain ;
which  was  fo  raging,  in  the  night  time  in  particular,  that  fhe  could  fcarcely
get  a  fhort  fleep.  Then  hyfterical  convulfions  attack'd  her  with  fo  much
violence,  that  Ihe  feem'd,  more  than  once,  to  be  at  the  point  of  death.

To  thefe  fucceeded  a  tumour  of  the  whole  belly,  with  a  very  great  dry-
nefs  of  the  fauces,  a  frequent  eruftation  of  flatus,  and  an  averfion  to  food
for  this  reafon  ;  becaufe  even  when  (he  had  taken  a  little,  a  tenfion  was  im-
mediately perceiv'd  at  the  region  of  the  ftomach,  which  gave  her  great  un-
eafinefs.

Thefe  fymptoms,  and  vomitings,  never  left  the  woman  even  when  the  other
difagreeable  fymptoms  were  at  length  appeas'd.  And  indeed  about  two
months  before  her  death,  the  vomiting,  which  us'd  to  trouble  her  but  fel-
dom,  became  frequent ;  but  in  fuch  a  manner  at  firft,  as  to  oblige  her  to
throw  up  nothing  but  eggs,  which  were  her  ufual  food  ;  the  other  things,
that  fhe  took  with  them,  being  perfeftly  retain'd  -,  and  after  this  fo,  that,
for  the  laft  twenty  days,  fhe  fcarcely  retain'd  any  thing  of  aliment  that  fhe
took  ;  let  it  be  what  kind  foever :  wherefore  her  flrength  decreafing  every
day,  fhe  departed  this  life.

In  her  carcafe ;  which  was  fo  emaciated,  that  even  the  mufcles  were  al-
moft  without  flefh,  as  it  were  ;  fcarcely  any  traces  of  blood  remain'd.

The  whole  belly  was  fiU'd  with  a  fait  ferum,  in  which  fome  portions  of  the
omentum,  and  a  great  number  of  filaments  of  other  kinds,  were  floating.
The  internal  furface  of  the  peritonseum  every  where  fhow'd  little  bodies,
that  bore  a  confiderable  refemblance  to  the  indurated  glands  of  the  pan-
creas. The  ftomach  was  fmall  and  univerfally  contrafted.

The  kidnies,  as  far  as  relates  to  their  fubftance,  were  found.  But  the  right
contain'd  very  fmall  calculi,  of  different  forms;  none  of  which  were  in  the
left.  Both  the  ureters  contain'd  urine  ;  the  left  a  little  only  :  but  the  right
being  dilated  to  the  thicknefs  of  my  little  finger,  was  univerfally  full  of
urine.

Finally,  there  was  a  fordid  and  foetid  ulcer  in  the  collum  uteri ;  though
the uterus  was,  in  the  reft  of  its  parts,  in  a  natural  flate.

9.  Whether  the  ulcer  was  the  effeft  of  the  profiuvium  of  very  acrid  blood,
or  whet-her  it  was  the  caufe  of  it,  from  the  very  beginning,  by  corroding
fome  of  the  more  confiderable  vefTels;  the  diforders  that  were  afterwards  added
to  the  ulcer,  and  profiuvium,  may  be  eafily  accounted  for  from  the  nerves
being  drawn  into  confent,  by  reafon  of  the  fituation  of  the  ulcer  ;  and  from
the  blood,  by  reafon  of  the  great  and  frequent  lofs  thereof,  being  ill  repair'd,
and  therefore  render'd  ferous.

For  from  the  one  would  arife  pains,  hyfleric  convulfions,  and  vomitings ;
and  from  the  other,  or  rather  from  both  the  caufes  when  join'd  together,  an
afcites ;  the  veffels,  for  inflance,  being  frequently  conftrifted  by  the  convul-
fion,  and  the  blood  for  that  reafon  flowly  circulated  through  them ;  and  the
ferum,  vi'ith  v/hich  the  blood  abounded,  being  more  eafily  effus'd.

But


Letter  XL VII. Article  lo, ii.  675

But  the  difficulty  of  making  water,  and  the  difcharge  thereof  not  till  after
many  attempts,  we  may  account  for,  from  the  pain  in  the  neio-hbourino-  ul-
cerated part,  and  the  ftate  of  that  part  ;  the  retention  of  urine  in  the  uterus,
and  the  dilatation  of  the  right  in  particular,  from  one  of  thofe  ftones  which
had  been  in  the  kidney  of  the  fame  fide,  and  perhaps  a  pretty  large  one,
having  fallen  into  it,  and  been  confin'd  there ;  and  yet,  among  fo  many  other
pains,  and  uneafinefles,  not  obferv'd  when  difcharg'd,  nor  taken  notice  of
■afterwards  in  the  urine,  which  was  foul  with  the  fame  kind  of  putrid  and
bloody  fordes,  that  cover'd  the  whole  pudendum.

10.  If  after  the  obfervations  of  Valfalva  you  alfo  defire  to  have  mine;
read  over  again  what  I  have  defcrib'd  (d),  in  the  uterus  of  thofe  women  who
had  died  with  their  menftrua  either  diminifli'd,  or  flowing  in  their  full  vi-
gour. For  I  will  not  repeat  them  here.

But  I  will  rather  pafs  over  from  the  laft  propos'd  obfervation  ;  of  a  proflu-
vium  not  only  of  blood,  but  of  a  ferous  coUuvies  alfo  ;  to  the  fluor  mulie-
bris,  which  was  a  fecond  fubjeft  of  this  letter.

To  which  difeafe  although  I  have  no  obfervations  of  Valfalva's  peculiarly
Telative  •,  yet  there  are  fo  many  of  mine  remaining ;  efpecially  if  I  Ihould
be  willing  to  purfue  the  beginnings  of  fome  of  the  caufes  of  this  fluor,  ob-
ferv'd by  difTeftion ;  that  I  am  under  a  greater  danger  of  exceeding,  unlefs  I
am  cautious,  than  of  not  filling  up,  the  bounds  which  I  generally  prefcribe
to  my  letters.

11.  The  fources  of  the  fluor  muliebris  are,  for  the  mofl  part,  in  the  ute-
rus. For  that  which  we  read  in  the  hifl:ory  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences
at  Paris  (e)  -,  that  from  a  large  abfcefs  of  one  of  the  ovaria,  with  which  the
tube  communicated,  a  purulent  ferum  had  flow'd  down  into  this  tube  ;  from
thence  into  the  uterus  ;  and  at  length  from  the  uterus  into  the  vagina ;  is
rare.

But  the  uterus  itfelf  is  the  fource,  either  of  a  various-colour'd,  a  fimple,
or  a  purulent  ferum.  And  the  latter  flows  from  the  uterus,  or  the  vagina,
when  ulcerated.

Yet  the  former  is  generally  from  the  uterus,  the  internal  membrane  of
which,  like  that  of  the  noftrils  in  a  coryza,  may  be  affedled  with  a  kind  of
rheum  -,  or  the  mouths  of  the  fmall  veflels  may  fo  far  contradt  themfelves,
after  having  difcharg'd  the  menftrual  blood,  as  to  prevent  any  farther  dif-
charge of  this  fluid,  indeed,  but  not  of  the  ferum  ;  in  regard  to  which,  as  it  is
ting'd  with  a  different  colour,  in  differentperibns,  fo  it  does  not  make  a  fluor
of  the  fame  colour  in  all.

And  thefe  things  I  have  hinted  at  in  the  Adverfaria  (f).

Of  this  rheum  of  the  uterus,  eminent  phyficians  have  exprefsly  fpoken,
before  the  more  modern;  and  among  thefe  Gulielmus  Ballonius (^),  who
call'd  it  a  "  catarrh  ;"  and  Lselius  a  Fonte  (h),  who  call'd  it  "  a  diftillation
*'  of  the  uterus,"  and  faid  that  it  was  "  a  kind  of  rheumatifm  ;  and  before
them  Galen  (i)  formerly,  who  has  taught  us,  that  thefe  fluors  are  produc'd
"  by  rheums  of  the  uterus."

(</)  Ep.  19.  n.  II. Ep.  21.  n.  zg.  Ep.  31. (g)  L.  i.Confil.  Med.  56.  fub.  fin.
■p..  16. Ep.  38.  n.  34. Ep.  45.  11.  2j.  {6)  Confult,  Med.  117.

fe)  A.  1700.  obf.  anat.  5,  (/)  De  Svmptom.  Cauf.  1.  3.  C.  4.

C/J  IV,  Animad.  27.

4  R  2  I  how-


676  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

I,  however,  will  firft  propofe  the  obfervations,  that  are  to  be  refer'd  to
thofe  which  are  brought  on  in  the  firft,  or  fecond  method  ;  or  a  third  which
I  fhall  add  (k);  and  confiftof  a  fimple  ferum:  and  then  I  fhall  give  the  ob-
fervations that  relate  to  fliiors,  which  have  their  origin  from  a  purulent
ferum.

12.  A  virgin  about  fixteen  years  of  age  was  brought  into  the  hofpital  of
St.  Mary  de  Morte  at  Bologna,  after  having  been  afflidted  for  fifteen  days
•with  a  fever  at  home.  She  was  no  fooner  brought  in,  but  fhe  vomited  worms ;
one  of  which  was  of  a  red  colour,  longer  than  a  fpan,  and  almoft  of  the
thipknefs  of  a  common  writing  quill.

Thefe  animals  fhe  had  alfo  brought  up  at  home ;  the  difcharge  being  pre-
ceded by  a  guftiing  of  tears,  but  not  by  an  itching  of  the  noftrils.  Shecom-
plain'd  of  a  pain,  the  feat  of  which  fhe  pointed  out,  by  applying  her  hand  t®
the  left  hypochondrium,  and  the  neighbourhood  thereof;  in  fuch  a  manner
that  it  could  not  well  be  afcertain'd,  whether  (lie  meant  to  mark  out  her  belly
or  her  breaft.

Her  pulfe  was  frequent,  fmall,  and  weak.  She  often  flept  in  the  day-
time. In  this  manner  fhe  pafs'd  three  days.  At  which  time,  befides  the
other  fymptoms,  the  women  who  were  about  her,  obferv'd  that  there  was  a
fluor  albus  alfo.

On  the  fourth  day  fhe  feem'd  to  be  frequently  delirious.  The  pulfe  was
become  weaker,  and  fmaller.  The  tongue  was  red  and  dry.  She  complain'd
of  a  pain  in  the  head.

On  the  fifth  day  fhe  was  very  prone  to  fleep ;  but  on  the  following  night
fhe  cried  out  very  much.

On  the  fixth  and  feventh  day  the  fame  fymptoms  continu'd:  and  fhe  then  dif-
charg'd  her  urine,  which  fhe  had  always  difcharg'd  pretty  freely,  and  in  a  large
quantity,  involuntarily,  and  in  a  very  great  quantity.

On  the  eighth  day  after  her  firft  coming  into  the  hofpital,  being  overcome
with  fleep,  fhe  died.

We  diflefted  her  body  on  the  fecond  day  after  her  death  ;  which  day  was
the  thirtieth  of  March  in  the  year  1706.

When  the  cranium  was  open'd ;  for  from  thence  I  choofe  to  begin  the
narration  of  thofe  things  which  we  faw  ;  whatever  is  contained  in  the  menin-
ges was  of  a  very  foft  nature.  Betwixt  the  pia  mater,  and  the  whole  bafis
of  the  medulla  oblongata,  was  a  confiderable  quantity  of  water :  and  within
the  ventricles  water  was  alfo  found,  which  was  of  a  reddilh  colour.

The  pkxus  ehoroides  were  of  a  pale  colour :  but  the  vefTels  which  crept
through  the  whole  pia  mater,  and  thofe  alfo  that  went  through  the  furfaces
of  the  lateral  ventricles,  were  turgid  with  blood  :  and  from  the  fame  ven-
tricles, thefe  vefTels  were  very  eafily  puU'd  away,  together  with  that  mem-
brane ;  which  was  foUow'd  by  a  lamella  of  the  white,  or  cineritious  fubftance,
that  compos'd  their  parietes :  and  this  lamella  was,  in  every  part,  nearly  of
an  equal  thicknefs.

The  thorax  had  both  lobes  of  the  lungs,  but  efpecially  the  left,  adhering

(i)  Infra,  n.  19.  &  feq.

to>


Letter  XL VII. Article  12.  677

to  the  pleura  in  fome  places  ;  both  at  the  middle  and  at  the  lower  part ;  and
that  by  means  of  membranes  interpos'd.

Looking  upon  the  furface  of  the  right  lobe,  at  the  upper  part,  and  feeino-,
through  the  invefting  membrane,  certain  globular  bodies  lying  very  thick,
and  not  larger  than  millet-feeds,  I  cut  into  thefe  lungs  which  were  in  other
refpefts  found  •,  and  found  the  fame  globular  bodies  lying  every  where  very
thickly  indeed,  but  disjoin'd  from  each  other  by  intervals  •,  being  hard  in
their  fubftance,  and,  to  appearance,  of  a  tartareous  nature  as  it  were.

In  the  heart  was  nothing  worthy  of  remark  ;  although,  in  the  right  auricle,
a  polypous  cortex  of  grumous  blood  cover'd  the  fide  thereof.

In  opening  the  abdomen  ;  which  had  appear'd  livid,  externally,  towards
the  ilia ;  we  had  feen  the  liver  to  be  ting'd,  at  the  middle  of  the  lower  con-
vex furface,  with  a  fpot  of  no  very  large  fize,  comprehended  in  the  circum-
ference of  a  circle;  being  of  a  cineritious  colour  inclining  to  white:  which
colour  defcended  into  the  fubftance  of  the  vifcus.  In  the  veficlc  the  bile  was
inclin'd  to  a  black  colour.

The  flat  furface  of  the  fpleen  was  alfo  of  a  livid  colour  inclining  to  black-
nefs  ;  tho'  this  blacknefs  was  fcarcely  produc'd  farther  than  the  coat  of  it.  The
pancreas  feem'd  to  be  fomewhat  hard.  The  ftomach,  as  far  as  I  could  judge
externally,  was  found.  We  perceiv'd  round  worms  to  be  harbouring  them-
felves  in  the  fmall  inteftines,  by  feeling  them  with  our  hands.

Then  turning  our  eyes  to  the  appearances  in  the  pelvis,  we  obferv'd  a  fmall
quantity  of  water  there.  But  upon  taking  out  the  bladder  (which  was  dif-
tended  with  urine)  together  with  the  annexed  genitals ;  we  faw,  on  the  inter-
nal furface  of  this  cavity,  the  fmall  veffels  tumid  with  blood  for  a  confiderable
tracl ;  fo  that  beginning  above  the  orifices  of  the  ureters,  through  which  they
were  continu'd,  they  exhibited  this  appearance  quite  to  the  beginning  of  the
urethra  :  and  indeed  betwixt  thefe  veflels,  in  fome  places,  we  faw  drops  of
extravafated  blood  through  the  internal  coat-,  and  in  the  urethra  itfelf,  beneath
the  internal  membrane,  which  was  fprinkled  with  its  fmall  veffels,  were
others  much  larger  than  thefe,  and  very  much  diftended  with  blood.

The  left  of  the  nymphse,  which  was  broader  than  that  on  the  right  fide,
was  likewife  longer  than  that,  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  reach  to  the  frsnum  of
the  labia  -,  having  a  water  contain'd  within  its  fubftance.

Moreover,  the  orifice  of  the  vagina,  and  the  hymen,  were  of  ared  colour
degenerating  into  blacknefs;  and  fmelt  very  ftrong:  and  the  neighbouring
part  of  the  vagina,  being  here  and  there  of  a  livid  colour  inclining  to  yellow,
gave  pretty  confiderable  marks  of  a  gangrene.

Turning  from  thefe  lower  parts  to  the  upper,  I  obferv'd  the  wider  ex-
tremity of  the  left  tube  to  be  drawn  downwards  by  an  hydatid  ;  equal  in  fize
to  a  large  grape ;  which  had  been  form'd  in  the  contiguous  part  of  the  ala  vef-
pertilionis.

But  that  a  larger  hydatid  than  this,  had  been  pendulous  from  the  mem-
brane of  one  of  the  teftes,  I  perceiv'd  from  a  roundifti  corpufcis ;  which,  al-
though it  was  contradled  into  itfelf,  yet  even  then  preferv'd  a  fmall  cavity  be-
twixt the  thicken'd  coats,  and  hung  from  this  teftis.

And  in  this  teftis  were  two  roundifh  bodies  buried ;  the  one  bigger  than
the  other,  but  both  of  them  made  up  of  a  black  coat,  and  of  a  kind  of  co-

agulum


678  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

SCTulum  of  blood  fliut  up  therein  ;  which,  however,  was  of  a  red  colour.  The
other  tcftis  likewife  contain'd  two  unequal  cells,  form'd  of  a  black  coat,  bu
■empty.

The  uterus  was  fmall,  and  confifted  of  parietes  of  an  inconfiderable  thick-
nefs.  The  upper  part  of  its  fundus  was  univerfally  red  with  confpicuous
blood-veficls,  on  its  internal  furface.  When  I  had  wip'd  off  the  mucus,
v/hich  we  fee  there  in  a  natural  ftate,  from  the  ofculum  uteri,  and  the  neigh-
bouring part  of  the  cervix  •,  by  compreffing  the  inferior  part  of  the  fundus,
the  cervix,  and  the  corona  of  the  os  uteri,  I  faw  a  thickifh,  and  pretty
white,  matter  proceed  from  all  thefe  places  -,  and  that  in  a  regular  manner ;
which  pretty  clearly  (how'd  from  whence  the  fluor  albus  had  been  difcharg'd.

13.  The  other  parts  of  this  hiftory  you  will,  of  yourfelf,  refer  to  the
clafies  whereto  they  belong ;  for  I  am  not  willing  to  fpeak  over  again  here,
of  the  diforders  whereof  I  have  fufficiently  treated  already.

It  will  be  enough  for  us  to  attend  to  the  laft  part:  nor  would  I  have
you  believe,  becaufe  I  have  faid  that  a  white  and  thickifh  matter  was
prefs'd  our,  that  this  was  any  thing  elfe  but  ferum ;  which,  having  loft  its
other,  and  more  watry,  particles,  by  ftagnation,  and  by  being  taken  back  into
the  blood,  the  remaining  particles  become  endow'd  with  that  colour,  and
thicknefs,  which  we  fee  in  the  evaporation  of  the  ferum.

14.  A  virgin,  of  fourteen  years  of  age,  having  died  in  the  hofpital  at
Padua,  about  the  beginning  of  February  in  the  year  1719  ;  after  labouring
under  pains  of  the  belly  -,  I  order'd  the  genital  parts  to  be  brought  to  me,
for  the  fake  of  anatomical  refearches  •,  and  as  I  found  fome  morbid  appear-
ances therein,  contrary  to  my  expectation,  I  will  relate  them  to  you ;  after
having  firft  pointed  out  two  things  that  were  obferv'd  in  the  belly,  while  thefe
parts  were  taken  out.

The  vifcera  of  that  cavity  were  here  and  there  unequal  with  tubercles.  The
omentum  was  thicken'd,  and  adher'd  to  the  fundus  uteri.  This  laft-men-
tion'd  part  was  ftill  very  fmall  •,  being  fuch  a  one,  for  inftance,  as  was  proper
for  a  girl,  whom,  if  you  confider'd  the  pubes  as  yet  fcarcely  furnifh'd  with
any  hairs,  you  could  fcarcely  fuppofe  to  be  at  the  age  of  puberty.

When  I  had  cut  into  it,  I  found  the  cavity  full  of  a  humid  matter,  of  a
white  colour  -,  but  inclining  to  a  yellow  and  greenifli  hue.  And  this  being
wip"'d  off,  the  internal  furface  of  the  uterus  appear'd  to  be  growing  out,  in
feveral  places,  into  fmall  whitifh  tubercles.

Moreover,  there  was  no  protuberating  corona  to  the  os  uteri :  and  this  ori-
fice, and  the  neighbouring  part  of  the  vagina,  and  the  lower  part  of  it  like-
wife,  and  the  hymen,  were  occupied  by  a  phlogofis  ;  fo  as  to  make  it  natural
to  conjefture,  that  thefe  inferior  parts  had  been  irritated,  by  the  flowing
down  of  the  more  fluid,  and  acrid  part,  of  that  matter  •,  while  the  more  thick
part,  ftagnating  in  the  uterus  of  the  virgin,  when  in  a  recumbent  poilure,  ad-
her'd to  thofe  fmall  tubercles,  which  either  this  matter  had  produc'd,  or  from
which,  perhaps,  this  matter  had  proceeded.

15.  Call  to  mind  another  young  woman,  the  internal  furface  of  whofe  fun-
dus uteri  I  likewife  have  defcrib'd  (/),  as  unequal  with  certain  tubercles,  like
Avarrs  ;  and  you  will  readily  conceive  that  this  furface  is  prone  to  diforders  of

(/)  Eplft.  45.  n.  21.

that


Letter  XL VIL Article  16,  17.  ^^^^

that  kind:  and  the  fame  will  be  confirm'd  by  the  excrefcences  of  which  I'
Ihall  fpeak  hereafter.

But  do  not  be  furpriz'd,  that  there  fhould  be  a  fluor  muliebris  in  a  o-irl  of
this  age.  For  in  many  it  has  begun  about  the  firft  dawnings  of  puberty;
and  in  fome  even  much  fooner,  though  rarely ;  in  the  fame  manner  as  the
menftrual  flux  is  obferv'd  rarely,  but  in  faft  much  fooner.

Read  in  Terraneus  {ni) ;  to  take  no  notice  of  others  ;  the  obfervation  taken
from  a  girl  of  nine  years  of  age,  of  a  noble  family,  who  was  cur'd  of  a  fluor
muliebris ;  and  even  an  obfervation  of  another,  who  being  younger  than  the
laft  by  two  years,  was  afFefted  with  the  fame  difeafe,  and  "  difcharg'd,  in
"  great  quantity,  a  humour  like  whey  not  yet. clarified :  and  this  with  fome
"  ardor,  and  pruritus."

iS.  As  I  was  demonflirating  fome  of  the  parts  of  an  old  woman,  who  had
died  in  this  hofpital  of  I  know  not  what  difeafe,  before  the  middle  of  Decem-
ber in  the  year  1744,  to  the  ftudents  therein  ;  I  happen'd  to  light  on  fome.
appearances  which  were  preternatural.

The  valvulfe  tricufpides  of  the  heart  were  pretty  hard  here  and  there ;  nor
were  the  femilunares  without  fome  hardnefs.  And  indeed  the  great  artery
had  bony  fcales  internally,  in  feveral  parts.

To  the  teftes  fome  hydatids  adher'd.  When  I  had  brought  the  os  uteri  to
view,  by  laying  open  the  vagina ;  the  border  of  it  appear'd  to  be  divided  into
two  parts  as  it  were,  from  the  anterior  to  the  pofterior  view.

That  is  to  fay,  from  each  fide  of  that  border,  a  fmall  excrefcence  was  pro-
tuberant; in  which,  as  in  the  neighbouring  parietes  of  the  cervix  alfo,  lay  hid
fome  cells,  or  if  you  pleafe,  veficles  ;  and  among  thefe,  one  pretty  large  ;  all  of
them  being  full  of  that  very  mucus,  which  is  naturally  wont  to  be  found  at
the  orifice  of  the  uterus  ;  except  that  this  was  of  a  yellow  colour.

While  I  went  on  in  cutting  into  the  cervix,  and  proceeded  upwards,  be<-
hold  from  the  very  fundus  uteri  fuddenly  ifiued  a  yellovvifh  ferum ;  a.nd  this
in  fuch  a  quantity,  that  you  could  fcarcely  have  held  it  in  a  fpoon  :  but  how
this  ferum  was  retain'd  in  the  fundus,  even  when  the  uterus  was  taken  out,
and  roU'd  here  and  there,  it  was  not  very  eafy  to  conjefture.

For  in  another  woman,  when  the  fame  thing  occur'd,  I  could  fuppofe,
that  the  internal  fafciculi  of  the  cervix ;  which  I  faw  to  be  thicken'd,  and
plac'd  in  a  confus'd  order;  had  obftrufted  the  deflux  of  the  ferum.

But  this  circumftance  did  not  take  place  here  :  and  the  upper  part  of  the
fundus,  almoft  univerfally,  efpecially  on  its  pofterior  part,  being  ting'd  of  a  filthy
colour  internally,  was,  externally,  of  a  black  colour  inclining  to  red  ;  yet  this
penetrated  but  to  a  little  depth  if  you  cut  it,  and  was  without  any  ill  fmell.

17.  To  this  clafs  you  may  alfo  refer  the  obfervation  on  the  woman,  which
I  have  given  you  in  the  forty-fifth  letter  {n).  For  in  that  the  cavity  both  of
the  fundus,  and  of  the  continued  cervix,  was  full  of  mucus  of  a  thinner  na-
ture than  that  which  generally  is  at  the  orifice ;  and  even  was  in  this  wo-
man.

That  is  to  fiiy,  as  from  the  fundus  uteri;  in  the  virgin,  and  old  woman^
whom  I  have  defcrib'd  ;  a  matter  of  a  white  colour  degenerating  into  yellow,


[m]  De  Glandulls  pofl.  c,  s.cbf.  2.  («)  N.  16.


4


and


68o  Book  III. Of  Dlfeafes  of  the  Belly.

and  a  yellowifh  ferum  was  difcharg'd  ;  fo  likewife  in  that  woman,  the  thin
mucus  feems  to  have  been  difcharg'd  from  the  fame  place  :  for  it  did  not  come
from  the  tubes,  which  I  examin'd  in  all  of  them  to  no  purpofe.

But  in  the  virgin  •,  whom  I  put  down  in  the  firft  place  (o),  for  this  rea-
fon,  beaufe  a  fluor  had  really  been  obferv'd  in  her  while  fhe  was  living ;  a
white  matter  was  prefs'd  out,  not  from  the  fundus  uteri,  but  from  the  lower
part  of  it;  from  the  cervix,  and  from  the  orifice.

And  from  thefe  inferior  places,  I  fuppofe  the  matter,  and  humour,  to
have  flow'd  down  in  thofe  women  alfo  ;  one  of  whofe  hiftories  I  fhall  imme-
diately fubjoin,  and  take  notice  of  the  others.

1 8.  I  examin'd  the  vifcera  of  the  abdomen  of  a  certain  woman,  after  the
middle  of  March  in  the  year  1741,  in  the  hofpital,  and  that  for  the  fake  of  the
anatomy  of  the  parts :  for  which  reafon,  I  have  not  made  any  remark,  in
regard  to  the  diforder  of  which  fhe  died.  Among  the  natural  appearances  I
obferv'd  the  following  preternatural  ones.

The  flomach  extended  itfelf  quite  to  the  navel.  The  inteftinum  duode-
num was  very  wide.  The  whole  of  the  uterus  was  fo  drawn  to  the  left  fide,
that  it  could  not  be  drawn  back  into  the  middle  with  the  hand,  on  account
of  the  refiflance  given  thereto,  by  the  ligamentum  latum  •,  which  was  much
more  fhort  betwixt  the  left  fide  of  the  uterus  and  the  pelvis,  than  betwixt
the  pelvis  and  the  right  fide.

The  internal  furface  of  the  fundus  was  ting'd  almofl  of  a  bloody  colour,
as  the  corona  ofculi  was  alfo ;  except  that  it  here  inclin'd  more  to  blacknefs.
Befides,  this  corona  was  divided  into  two  fmall  prommences  as  it  were.  From
the  OS  uteri,  and  from  the  cervix,  came  forth  a  mucus ;  not  of  the  fame
kind  which  we  generally  fee,  but  thick,  and  almofl  puriform.

19.  To  this  clafs,  in  my  opinion,  are  to  be  refer'd  thofe  things,  which,  as
I  have  written  to  you  on  other  occafions,  were  obferv'd  by  me  in  other  women
(p)  ;  and  alfo  in  a  certain  virgin  (q).  For  in  the  ftrumpet,  I  faw  the  ofcu-
lum  uteri  daub'd  over  with  a  certain  white  and  thickilh  humour  -,  not  only
unlike  that  which  was  in  the  tubes,  but  alio  much  unlike  the  femen  virile.

And  in  another  woman,  in  whom  the  corona  ofculi,  and  the  vagina,  were
daub'd  over  with  a  whitifh  matter;  this  could  not  have  any  higher  origin
than  from  the  ofculum  uteri :  for  the  matter  which  I  obferv'd  above  the  oicu-
lum,  was  quite  of  a  different  nature.

But  in  a  virgin,  whofe  vagina  was  more  moifl  with  a  whitifh  and  thickifh
humour,  the  diffeftion  of  the  upper  parts  fhows  it  to  have  come  either  from
the  fame  corona,  or  even  from  the  vagina  itfelt :  nor  does  it  feem  that  it  could
be  accounted  for  from  any  other  part,  in  another  woman  of  whom  I  fhall
write  on  a  future  occafion  (r).

Moreover,  in  the  corona,  ofculum,  and  neighbouring  cervix,  that  veficles
are  Ibmetimes  prominent,  and  fometimes  lie  hid  ;  which  veficles  naturally
contain  nothing  elfe  but  a  limpid  mucus,  that  may  be  drawn  out  into  threads,
fuch  as  is  i^etn  to  be  pour'd  out  at  thofe  places  •,  you  very  well  know  from
thofe  things  which  I  formerly  advanc'd  in  the  Adverfaria  (s),  and  at  the  fame

(oj  Supra,  n.  12.  (r)  Epift.  50.  n.  ;i.

Cp)  Epift.  z6.  n.  13.  &  Epift.  zi.  n.  47.  {s)  L  n.  32.  &  IV.  Animad.  39.  &  40.

(i)  Epift.  34.  n.  33.

2  time


Letter  XLVII. Article  20,  21,  22.  681

time  confirm'd :  of  the  fortuitous  formation  of  which  veficles,  there  is  no
occafion  here  to  refute  the  figment  of  a  modern  anatomift;  as  it  has  already
been  refuted  by  others.

But  what  forbids  us  to  fuppofe,  that,  as  we  fee  in  other  glands,  fo  in  thefe,
alfo,  by  the  force  of  difeafe,  inftead  of  that  mucus  a  different  matter  may  be
feparated  ;  fometimes  whitilh,  and  thickifh,  and  fometimes  even  watery  ?

And  indeed,  when  you  read  the  writings  of  thofe  who  had  feen  veficles,
in  thefe  fituations,  before  me  •,  you  will  find  that  the  greater  part  of  the  ob-
fervers,  as  I  have  faid  in  the  firft  of  the  Adverfaria  (/j,  had  taken  them  for  hy-
datids, from  that  water  which  they  happen'd  to  find  preternaturally  contain'd
in  the  veficles.  And  that  this  water  has  been  fometimes  found  by  me  alfo,
for  the  fame  reafon,  in  thofe  veficles ;  you  fufiiciently  learn  from  the  fourth
of  the  Adverfaria  (ii).

Therefore,  as  they  naturally  pour  out  that  mucus ;  fo  when  the  fecretion.
they  perform  is  become  vitiated  and  preternatural,  they  may  pour  out  both  a
whitifh  and  thick  matter,  and  a  watery  matter.

20.  But  as  not  only  in  the  lower  part  of  the  uterus,  but  even  in  the  fundus
itfelf,  we  have  feen  veficles ;  though  more  rarely  ;  having  the  fame  mucus  in
them  as  at  the  os  uteri ;  a  fluor  of  a  watery,  or  thick  and  white  matter,  or  finally
a  fluor  of  any  other  colour,  may  have  that  fource  in  the  fundus  alfo.

And  it  behoves  us  here  to  confirm,  by  obiervations,  what  I  fay  I  have
more  rarely  feen;  efpecially  as  thefe  relate  to  the  excrefcences  of  the  uterus,
of  which  it  follows  next  in  order  to  treat.

To  the  obfervation  therefore,  which  you  have  had  in  the  thirty-fourth  let-
ter (x)  ;  of  an  excrefcence  that  was  cover'd  with  veficles  of  this  kind,  near
the  upper  part  of  the  fundus  •,  and  to  another  which  you  will  have  when  1
treat  of  lamenefs  (y)  ;  of  a  tubercle  in  the  upper  part  of  the  fundus,  which
confifted  of  a  congeries  of  thofe  veficles ;  add  thefe  that  follow.

21.  The  urinary  and  genital  parts,  of  an  old  woman,  were  brought  to  me,
when  I  was  teaching  anatomy  in  the  coUege,  in  the  month  of  February  and
the  year  1740.

While  I  examin'd  thefe  parts,  I  obferv'd  that  the  trunk  of  the  aorta  was
not  without  the  beginning  of  bony  fcales  internally ;  although  they  were  very
few,  and  appear'd  like  fpots.

The  fundus  uteri  being  open'd ;  not  only  where  it  was  neareft  to  the  cervix
did  I  fee  veficles,  but  a  little  higher,  alfo,  from  one  fide  of  it,  I  law  a  fmall
cluflier,  as  it  were,  of  thefe  veficles  hanging  dov/n  ;  which  veficles  were  con-
nefted  one  to  another  by  a  whitifii  fubftance  being  interpos'd  :  from  whence
a  ftalkalfo  was  form'd,  not  very  fliort  nor  flender;  whereby  the  clufter  was
connefled  to  the  internal  membrane  of  the  uterus,  which  was  found,  and  con-
fifted of  the  fame  whitifii  fubfl:ance.

22.  But  as  thefe  veficles  thcmfelves  -,  except  that  they  had  formerly  been
torn  from  the  membrane  of  the  uterus,  by  I  know  not  what  accident ;  and
theu-  mucus  were  quite  in  a  natural  ftate ;  in  order  to  convince  you  from
obfervations,  that  the  mucus  which  they  contain  may  fometimes  dj2genera:e
from  its  natural  ttate  (as  I  have  hinted  above)  either  in  colour  or  confidence  ;

{tj  N.  32.  modoindicato.  (-v)  N.  33.

(a)  Animad.  40.  indicata.  frj  Epiif.  56.  n.  20.

Vol.  II.  4  S  fi^T:


6'82  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  ot^  the  Belly.

firft  call  to  mind,  that,  when  from  the  ofculum  uteri,  two  excrefcences,  as
I  have  related  a  little  above  (2),  made  up  of  thefe  veficles  were  prominent,
the  mucus  in  thefe  very  veficles  was  of  a  yellow  colour;  and  then  read  the
two  next  obfervations.

23.  I  diffeded  with  accuracy,  after  the  middle  of  March  in  the  year  171 7,
the  genitals  of  a  virgin  of  three  and  thirty  years  of  age.

The  uterus,  like  moft  of  the  other  parts,  preferv'd  its  natural  ftate.  For
although  the  veflels  about  it  were  very  tumid,  and  the  internal  fubftance  of  it
likewife  turgid  with  blood  ;  yet  that  thefe  appearances  were  owing  to  the
menftrual  flux  having  been  at  hand,  when  the  woman  died,  was  plain  from
the  internal  furface  of  the  fundus  uteri  ;  which,  when  the  fingers  were
prefs'd  underneath,  emitted  drops  of  blood,  whereto,  when  wip'd  off,  others
fucceeded  :  but  this  was  attempted  in  the  cervix  and  vagina  to  no  purpofe.

At  the  fame  time  that  I  was  making  thefe  experiments,  and  demonftrating
the  event  thereof  to  thofe  who  were  prefent,  I  obferv'd  two  excrefcences;
the  one  in  the  right  fide  of  the  fundus  neareft  to  the  neck,  the  other  a  little
below,  in  the  fame  fide  of  the  cervix.

Both  of  them  were  fmall,  and  made  up  of  fimilar  veficles.  But  upon  cut-
ting into  them,  thofe  which  compos'd  the  inferior,  gave  out  a  natural  mucus.;
and  thofe  that  compos'd  the  fuperior,  a  limpid  water.

24.  A  woman,  of  feventy-five  years  of  age,  was  feiz'd  with  an  apoplexy
when  fhe  feem'd  to  be  very  well  in  health;  and  by  that  was  carried  off  within
three  days.  The  abdominal  vifcera  were  the  only  parts  which  were  brought
into  the  college,  when  I  was  teaching  anatomy  in  February  of  the  year  1735.

There  were  fome  glands  of  the  mefentery  (not  only  far  from  the  annex'd  in-
teftines,  but  particularly  more  near,  where  three  or  four  were  nigh  to  each
other,  but  not  contiguous)  which  being  of  a  natural  colour  and  appear-
ance, did  not  each  of  them  equal  the  fize  of  a  fmall  bean  :  this  appearance,
in  a  woman  of  that  age,  will  perhaps  feem  furprizing  to  fome  perfons,  and.
perhaps  alfo  preternatural.

That  the  appendicula  vermiformis  was  hollow  only  for  a  third  part  of  its
length,  and  fcarcely  that,  I  have  fufficiently  fhown  in  the  Epiftolje  Anato-
niicse  (a).  ^

This  one  circumftance  I  ought  not  to  omit  here ;  I  mean  that,  from  the
corona  of  the  ofculum  uterinum,  an  excrefcence  hung  into  the  vagina,  of
the  bignefs  of  a  very  fmall  cherry  ;  being  blackilh  and  tuberous  on  its  exter-
nal part :  in  cutting  into  which  I  found  it  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  a  congeries
of  veficles,  of  a  fomewhat  larger  fize  ;  fome  of  which  contain'd  that  mucus
whereof  I  have  frequently  fpoken,  in  a  natural  ftate,  and  fome  contain'd
water.

25.  You  fee  that  the  fame  veficles  may  fecrete  that  mucus,  when  in  their
natural  ftate,  and  may  alfo  fecrete  different  matters ;  and  among  thefe  water ;
if  they  happen  to  be  vitiated  :  and  that  either  in  the  fundus  uteri,  where  they
are  more  rarely  feen,  or  in  the  cervix,  and  ofculum,  where  they  are  feen  much
more  frequently.

And  to  the  corona  of  this  ofculum ;  from  whence  T  faw  that  cxcrf-
fcence  confifting  of  veficles  to  hang ;  perhaps  belong'd  that  large  tumour

(z)  N.  16.  (a)  Epift.  14.  n.  62.

c  ^ '■ ^  «.  fiilU


Letter  XLVII. Article  25.  683

"  fill'd  with  watry  cells  in  feveral  places,"  which  Ruyfch  (i>)  defcribes  as
being  cut  out  from  the  genitals  of  a  woman ;  as  it  was  a  tumour  which
"  had  its  origin  from  the  confines  of  the  os  uteri,  or  about  the  os  internum
"  uteri."

But  the  fluors,  of  which  I  have  hitherto  fpoken,  all  confift  of  fimple  ferum.
And  fome  of  thefe  I  have  known  to  be  got  rid  of  by  different  methods ;  and
that  not  very  feldom ;  or  at  leaft  to  be  vallly  diminifh'd :  and  I  have  known
one,  which  from  white  became  yellow,  and  obftinate  to  be  remov'd,  car-
ried off,  by  a  drink  in  which  the  herb  fopewort  was  frefh  boil'd,  being  given
for  many  days ;  together  with  the  ufe  of  white  amber  alfo,  and  the  drinkino-
of  wine  in  which  a  fmall  quantity  of  farfaparilla  root  had  been  infus'd.

We  muft  now  go  on  to  thofe  fluors,  in  which  a  purulent  ferum  is  dif-
charg'd.  In  regard  to  which,  if,  as  is  generally  the  cafe,  they  are  the  effeftof
an  ulceratedcancerof  the  uterus,  they  are  incurable  even  from  the  beginning.
And  indeed  I  remember  that  when  I,  and  a  fenior  phyfician  of  no  inconfide-
rable  fame,  cpnfulted  together  on  account  of  a  noble  young  matron  who  was
his  patient,  and  afflifted  with  this  diforder  ;  with  which  flie  had  been  feiz'd  no
more  than  two  months  before,  tho'  it  was  now  exceedingly  violent ;  the  fenior
phyfician  made  this  conclufion  to  his  fpeech  :  that  the  diforder  indeed  was  vio-
lent ;  but  yet  as  it  was  recent  fomething  might  be  expefted  from  remedies :
yet  I  immediately  fpoke  to  this  effed,  after  faying  fomething  of  the  nature
of  the  diforder,  that  the  very  circumftance  which  left  him  fome  hope,  intirely
took  it  away  from  me  :  for  a  diforder  of  this  kind,  which  had  made  fuch  a
very  great  progrefs  in  fo  fhort  a  time,  fhow'd  by  that  very  circumftance,  if  it
were  not  certain  that  it  was  incurable  even  from  other  fymptoms,  that  it
would  prove  unconquerable  by  all  kinds  of  remedies.

Nor  was  I  deceiv'd  in  my  opinion;  the  woman  being  foon  after  carried
off  by  her  very  fevere  and  excruciating  pains,  by  continual  watchings,  and  a
continual  deflux  of  a  fanies,  ferous  in  its  confiftence,  and  brown  in  its  co-
lour; and  of  a  very  intolerable  fmell;  and  by  other  fevere  fymptoms,  which
Aetius'(<:)  formerly  deliver'd  at  large  from  Archigenes :  and  before  him  Pau-
lus  (d).

In  copying  of  whofe  prolix  paffage  upon  thefe  fymptoms,  Frederic  Hoff-
mann (e)  forgetting,  which  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  in  thofe  who  write  a
great  many  things,  that  it  was  from  Areta3us,  has  faid  in  the  fecond  book
and  the  fixty-feventh  chapter ;  which  chapter  is  no  where  in  all  Aretsus :
who  gives  you  the  marks  of  this  diforder,  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  fq.-
cond  book,  of  the  figns  and  caufes  of  chronic  difeafes.

Hoffmann  fays  in  the  fame  place,  "  that  the  more  modern  phyficians  have
"  not  much  obferv'd  this  affeftion  of  the  uterus ;  but  that  he  had  obferv'd
"  it  fometimes,  juft  in  the  fame  manner  and  with  the  fame  fymptoms  as "
are  produc'd  in  that  paffage,  which  I  have  refer'd  to  in  Paulus.

Whether  they  have  obferv'd  it  litck,  or  not,  you  will  judge  by  their  writ-
ings. To  me  however,  it  has  been  frequently  feen  •,  more  frequently  than  I
could  wifh  j  not  only  becaufe  it  is  incurable,  but  becaufe  in  fome  patients  it

{!>)  Thef.  Anat.  8.  n.  102.  {e)  Medic. Rational,  torn.  4.  p.  i,  f.  2.  c.  10..

(f)  Tetrab.  4.  ferm.  4.  c.  94.  in  Thef,  Patholog.  §.  8.

ft/ J  De  re  med.  1,  3.  c.  67.

4  S  2  fcarcelv


684  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fcarcely  admits  of  any  alleviation ;  in  whom  I  fuppofe  it  affcifled  the  vao-Ina-
moft  :  for  thefe  women  having  a  few  ounces  of  new  milk,  in  which  a  little
of  any  compofition  of  opium  was  diffolv'd,  thrown  up  into  the  inteftinum
rectum  in  the  evening,  obtain'd  a  very  fhort,  indeed,  but  a  very  defirable  repofe.

Yet  there  was  one  of  thefe  to  whom  it  was  of  no  fervice  in  the  beginning  of
the  night,  but  the  next  morning  ;  and  that  conllantiy.  If  to  the  fame  patient
opium  were  given,  (lie  obtain'd  a  remiflion  of  her  pains  indeed,  and  got  feme
lleep ;  but  this  was  fucceeded  by  fuch  a  ftupor  of  the  Icnfes,  that  the  patient
greatly  complain'd  thereof.

The  fymptoms  however,  in  refpeft  to  the  fluor,  which  we  chiefly  pay  re-
gard to  here,  are  fometimes  in  part  various.  Read  the  obfervation  of  de
Graaf  f/j  join'd  with  a  difledlion,  which  I  am  very  much  furpriz'd  to  find
omitted  in  this  thirty-fixth  feftlon  of  the  Scpulchretum.

You  will  fee  that  a  very  acrid  matter  •,  but  of  the  colour  of  the  wliite  of
an  egg,  when  "  coagulated,"  had  defcended  into  the  vagina  from  the  uterus,
which  was,  "  every  where,  either  ulcerated  or  fcirrhous."

Or  read  over  again  the  hiftory  that  I  have  defcrib'd  to  you  in  the  thirty-
ninth  letter  (g).  You  will  find  that  a  very  large  fcirrhus,  in  the  cervix
uteri,  and  almoft  the  whole  vagina,  was  ulcerated  in  fuch  a  manner,  that,
from  certain  parts  of  the  ulcer,  a  white  matter  might  flow  down  ;  but
that  no  difagreeable  fmell  was  perceiv'd  from  ulcers  of  that  kind,  even  the
largeft  and  moft  deep.

26.  I  fhould  gladly  have  defer'd  that  hiftory,  wherein  we  treat  of  thefe
things  which  I  juft  now  took  notice  of,  after  a  profluvium  of  blood  •,  the
fluor  muliebris,  and  the  marks  of  an  ulcerated  cancer  in  the  uterus  ;  if  I  had
not  been  under  a  neceffity  of  producing  it  among  thofe  of  internal  tumours
of  the  belly.

Other  obfervations  of  mine,  of  erofions  in  the  genitals  of  women,  would
have  place  here  alfo  ;  if  it  were  not  more  proper  to  referve  them  to  another
occafion  (h).

In  the  mean  while,  I  will  point  out  to  you  fome  obfervations  of  others,
which,  if  you  pleafe  you  may  add  to  the  Sepulchretum.  In  reading  over
thefe,  you  will  find,  that,  in  all  of  them,  after  uterine  hasmorrhages,  and-
purulent  profluvia,  fuppurated  tumours,  or  ulcers,  were  found  in  the  uterus.

Thus  Maximilianus  Freufiius  (z),  among  the  cyfts  which  fiU'd  the  uterus
of  his  wife,  defcribes  fuch  as  "  refcmbled  abfcefies  fiU'd  wifh  a  purulent
"  ichor,  of  a  green  colour  mix'd  v^ith  white,  and  extremely  foetid  ;"  and  in.
them  one  which  "  had,  in  feveral  places,  perforated  the  urinary  bladder,
"  that  was  coalefc'd  into  one  vifcus,  as  it  were,  with  the  uterus  all  round
"  about ;  and,  together  with  th-*  urine,  had  frequently  difcharg'd  a  fimilar
"  pus  from  the  body ;"  wherefore  the  pus  did  not  flow  out  of  the  uterus
only,  but  from  both  places,  though  generated  in  the  uterus.

So  Jo.  Maurice  Hoffmann  (k)  faw  "  the  internal  cavity  of  the  uterus
"  mark'd  out  into  a  great  number  of  fmall  caverns,  andloculi  ;"  after  wiping
off  the  pus  wherewith  the  cavity  was  turgid.  So  Godofredus  Klaunigius  (l),  in
particular  found  "  a  cancerous  ulcer"  of  the  fame  kind,  "  in  the  coUum

f/J  De  Mu'iier.  Or^an.  c.  9.  (/)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  5.  Sc  6.  obf.  126.

(g)  N.  33-  C^J  Earund.  cent.  8.  obf.  27.

(/?.)  Epift.  52.  n.  2.  &  6.  (/)  Earund.  cent.  3,  obf.  65.

"  Uteri ;


Letter  XLVII. Article  27.  685

"  uteri ;  Co  that  this  very  coUum  fliow'd  nothing  of  its  own  fubftance  re-
•*  maining,  but  the  external  coat  or  membrane  :  the  other  parts  beino-  in-
'"  tirely  confum'd."

This  lb  very  confiderable  confumption  of  the  fubftance  of  the  uterus,  with-
in only  a  fhort  time,  has  often  induc'd  me  to  wifh,  that,  in  the  obfervation
which  I  took  notice  of  in  the  foregoing  letter  (w),  wherein  "  the  uterus
"  was  very  fmall  like  a  pigeon's  egg,  and  in  a  manner  corrugated  ;"  in  a
woman  of  about  eight  and  thirty  years  of  age  ;  to  widi,  I  fay,  that  the  fame
had  been  differed.

For  as  the  patient  "  had  labour'd,  through  the  whole  of  her  life,  under  a
"  fluor  albus;"  it  is,  perhaps,  not  very  contrary  to  probability,  to  fuppofe  that
the  fubftance  of  the  uterus  had  been  confum'd  gradually,  though  not  from
an  ulcer  of  that  kind  ;  but  that  the  fubftance  had  been  fo  injur'd  neverthelefs, .
and  fo  wafted  away,  that  not  fo  much  the  uterus  itfelf,  as  the  external  mem-
brane of  it,  being  corrugated,' and  fubfiding,  it  was  at  length  reduc'd  to
that  ftate  of  fmallnefs.

27.  After  having  refer'd  you  to  thefe  obfervations,  I  muft  now  do  what  L""
promis'd  you:  that  is,  I  muft  go  on  to  confider  the  fmall  beginnino-s  of" the
caufes  of  great  difordcrs  of  this  kind-,  and  confequently  of  the  caufes  of  the
fluor;  I  mean  excrefcences  of  the  uterus,  or  tumours,  that  I  have  obferv'd  by
means  of  difledion  :  not  all  of  them  however,  but  thofe  which  I  fuppofe  to
relate  moft  to  the  prefent  fubjedt. For  they  are  either  external  or  internal.

Obfervations  of  the  firft  kind,  which  do  not  fo  much  relate  to  the  fubje£t
in  queftion,  I  have  taken  notice  of,  briefly,  in  the  thirty-ninth  letter  («). .
But  I  ftiall  here  make  mention  of  the  internal  ones,  vt'hich  are  defcrib'd  elfe-
■where  ;  and  fhall  add  fome,  for  which  I  fhould  not  eafily  find  another  place.

Thofe  tumours  however,  which  grow  within  the  very  fubftance  of  the
parietes  uteri  itfelf;  one  of  which  I  have  defcrib'd  in  the  forty-fourth  letter
(0)  ;  will  be  here  omitted  for  this  reafon  ;  that  they  do  not  always  reach  to
-the  cavity  of  the  uterus,,  though  they  are  greatly  Increas'd :  as  appears  from
that  very  large  tumour,  whereof  you  will  read  in  the  preceding  twenty-third
feftion  of  the  SepuJchretum  (p).

To  the  internal  then  belong;  befides  thofe  minute  tubercles  which  I  de-
fcrib'd above  (j),  and  thofe  fmall  verrucas  v^hich  I  took  notice  of  on  that  oc-
cafion  (r) ;  certain  fmall  excrefcences,  of  different  forms,  obferv'd  in  feveral-:
uteri  (s),  one  in  each  ;  and  others  alfo,  very  low  andfmooth;  but  more  in
nurhber,  and  of  a  confiderable  circumference  (/) ;  and  in  like  mjanner  out  of
three,  two  at  leaft,  which  were  alEx'd  to  the  uterus,  by  a  peduncle  of  no
flender  fize;  and  were  lefs  hard  in  their  fubftance  than  the  uterus  itfelf;  the
fubftance,  both  internally  and  externally,  being  fo  full  of  blood  as  to  be  quite
black  (u) :  finally,  a  fcirrhous  tubercle  in  the  corona  of  the  os  uteri  (x).
But  thefe  I  have  written  of  to  you  already. Now  let  us  add  the  others,

{m)  N.  21.  (s)  Epiil.  12.  n.  2.  &  ep.-23.  n.  Ji  ;  &  ep.

(;;)  N.  36.  45. n.  i6.^

(0)  N.  23.  (/•)  Epi;i.  ead.  n.  17,

Ip)  Obf.  n.  §.  2. (//)  Ibid.  n.  24.

{})  N.  14.  (.r)  Ibid.  a.  23.

OJ  N.  }s-

ye^-


686  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Yet  if  you  defire  to  Icnow  of  other  appearances,  of  the  fame  kind,  feen  by
other  perfons,  you  will  find,  among  the  reft  obferv'd  by  Gvolfg.  Hannib.
Langius  (y) ;  after  the  uterus  had  been  greatly  injur'd  by  a  midwife  ;  a  certain
Icirrhous  tubercle,  flopping  up  the  orifice  thereof  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  there
was  no  paflage  for  the  difcharge  of  flatus  -,  nor  any  admiiTion  for  the  probe :
and  you  will  alfo  find,  that,  by  the  younger  du  Verney  (z),  a  glandular  body
of  the  bignefs  of  a  nutmeg  was  found  within  the  uterus  of  a  dropfical  virgin.

Others  I  purpofely  pafs  over:  and  immediately  go  on  to  my  obfervations
that  ftill  remain.

28.  A  woman  of  a  middle  age,  had  died  in  the  hofpital  of  St.  Mary  de
Morte  at  Bologna,  of  a  diforder  of  the  thorax,  in  the  latter  end  of  April  of
the  year  1706.  As  I  examin'd  the  vifcera  of  the  belly  in  this  woman,  I  ob-
ferv'd the  following  preternatural  appearances  in  the  genitals.

The  lower  part  of  the  vagina,  where  it  lay  neareft  to  the  orifice  of  the
urethra,  retain'd  fome  traces  of  an  ulcer:  and  thefe  were  ftill  more  ma-
nifeft  in  one  of  the  labia  pudendi.  Thefe  appearances  gave  me  a  fufpicion
of  a  lues  venerea  having  preceded,  as  an  excrefcence  at  the  anus  alfo  did ;
which  confifted  of  a  kind  of  white  fubftance.

Turning  my  eyes  from  thence  to  the  ovaria,  and  tubes,  I  faw  the  former
to  be  of  a  whitifti  colour,  and  corrugated  ;  the  furface  being  hoUow'd  out,  in
fome  places,  with  furrows  drawn  in  a  ferpentine  form.

When  I  cut  into  them,  I  found  them  to  be  fomewhat  hard :  and  in  one  of
them  was  an  empty  cell,  which  was  comprehended  in  two  coats  ;  the  one  inter-
jial  and  black,  the  other  external  and  cineritious  :  in  the  other,  befides  fmaller
veficles  full  of  moifture,  were  two  pretty  large  cells,  in  an  empty  ftate,  one  of
which  had  a  coat  that  was  become  in  part  bony  ;  but  the  other  had  a  coat
that  was  become  perfectly  bony,  and  fo  furrow'd  as  to  refemble  fome  of  the
folds  of  the  fmall  inteftines  as  it  were.

To  one  of  the  tubes,  a  corpufcle,  in  its  flaape  and  confiftence  fimilar  to
the  chryftalline  humour  of  a  fmall  fifh,  when  boil'd,  adher'd  externally  -,  and
to  the  other,  a  congeries  of  the  fame  kind  of  bodies,  though  far  more  fmall,
adher'd.  The  uterus  was  large,  and  had  thick  parietes  -,  but  in  particular  the
fundus.

The  cavity  of  this  vifcus  was  much  more  large  tranfverfly,  about  the  mid-
dle of  its  length,  than  it  generally  is ;  and  in  that  part,  or  rather  a  little  more
pofteriorly,  the  anterior  furface  of  the  uterus  on  one  fide,  and  the  pofterior
furface,  were  connefted  together  by  the  interpofition  of  a  thin  membrane  ;
but  from  the  oppofite  fide  an  excrefcence  began,  which  being  fix'd  to  that
one  place,  and  unconnected  in  other  parts  extended  itfelf  in  the  form  of  a
circle,  the  diameter  of  which  was  fomewhat  larger  than  the  breadth  of  a  man's
thumb.

The  thicknefs  of  this  excrefcence  was  inconfiderable ;  the  furface  being
diftinguifh'd  here  and  there  with  red  fpots  :  and  as  to  the  fubftance,  it  was
almoft  the  fame  as  that  of  the  uterus  itfelf,  except  that  fomething  of  a  mu-
cous fubftance  feem'd  to  be  intermix'd  with  it ;  which  made  it  more  eafily
.admit  of  diftradlion.

(yj  Comm.  Litter,  a.  1735.  hebd.  29. (2)  Mem.  del'Asad.  R.  des  Sc  a.  1703.

The


Letter  XLVII. Article  29,  30.  6Sj

The  cavity  of  the  cervix,  both  at  its  beginning,  and  termination,  was
n-uch  more  ftreight  than  it  us'd  to  be.  But  from  the  beginning  of  this  ca-
vity, and  on  the  oppofite  fide  to  the  excrefcence  I  have  defcrib'd,  hung  an-
other very  fmall  excrefcence ;  of  the  fame  fubftance  as  the  other  ;  but  in  the
whole  of  its  furface  of  a  red  faturated  colour,  and  of  the  figure  of  a  pear
hanging  by  its  ftalk;  except  that,  on  its  anterior  and  pofterior  furface,  it  was
flat.

29.  This  lecond  excrefcence,  by  reafon  of  its  form,  brought  into  my  mind
thofe  uterine  polypi,  which  Ruyfch  (a)  delineated;  as  growing  out  from  the
lower  part  of  the  cervix,  and  pendulous  therefrom  ;  after  that  obfervation,
which  you  will  be  furpriz'd  to  find  not  transfer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  5,
•when  you  call  to  mind  the  great  quantity  of  acrid  fluor  that  was  join'd  with
thefe  appearances.

And  as  excrefcences  of  this  kind,  juft  like  polypi  of  the  noftrils,  may  be-
come cancerous  and  malignant,  and  have  a  malignant  ulcer  join'd  with  them  ;._
that  obfervation  fufiiciently  teaches  and  demonftrates,  that  it  is  not  without
juftice  we  here  confider  excrefcences  of  the  uterus,  as  being  capable  of  giving
origin  to  thofe  very  bad  diforders.

And  with  that  view  I  fhall  add  four  other  examples  to  this  ;  all  feen  by
me  when  I  was  giving  public  lectures  in  anatomy  :  the  firft  of  which  will  be-
long to  the  fame  clafs  with  this  lower,  and  fmall  one,  and  the  others  to  that
upper  and  larger  excrefcence.

30.  In  the  year  172.8,  I  difl^efled  a  woman,  in  whom  was  a  peculiar
venous  trunks  but  not  very  fmall ;  parallel  to  the  trunk  of  the  vena  cava
on  the  left  fide ;  communicating  on  one  hand  with  that  trunk,  where  it
receives  the  iliac  vein,  and  on  the  other  with  the  emulgent  vein  ;  which  vef-
fel  I  fhall  perhaps  defcribe  at  another  time  and  in  a  more  convenient  place  ^
as  I  fiiall  alfo  fpeak  of  the  parts  that  lie  neareft  to  thofe  veins,  among  which
was  the  trunk  of  the  great  artery,  that  fhow'd  flight  beginnings  of  bony
fcales,  on  its  internal  furface  ;  for  I  mean  now  to  fpeak  of  the  genitals  only,,
in  which  I  found  the  following  appearances.

The  ovaries,  or,  if  you  pleafe,  the  teftes,  were  fmall :  one  of  them  was
very  much  contrafted^  and  the  other  indeed  contain'd  no  veficles,  and  but
a  very  few  cells ;  the  lefler  of  which,  except  that  they  had  nothing  in  them
worthy  of  remark,  were  fimilar  to  that  larger  one,  which  feem'd  to  compre-
hend, within  a  thick  coat,  of  a  yellowifh  colour  inclining  to  white,  a  finus  ia
the  form  of  a  pretty  long.ducSt,  which  fent  out  very  fmall  ramifications  tranf-
verfly :  although  I  was  afraid,  left  the  coat,  which  formerly,  perhaps,  had
contain'd  a  fpherical  cavity,  being  afterwards  collaps'd,  and  contrafted  into-
itfelf,  might,  by  the  interception  of  its  own  rugae,  have  given  the  appearance
of  that  dutt,  and  of  thefe  ramifications.

Looking  at  the  al^e  vefpertilionum,  in  order  to  demonflrate  the  nervous
plexufl"es  therein,  in  one  of  them  I  met  with  the  flighteft  and  moft  fmall  be-
ginning of  the  plexus  as  it  were  -,  but  in  the  other  there  was  not  even  this.

At  the  ofculum  uteri  was  a  kind  of  prominence  of  a  green  colour.  A  little
above,  from  the  paries  of  the  loweft  part  of  the  cervix,  hung,  by  a  Ihort  and

(a)  Cent.  Obf.  Anat..  Chir.  Fig.  6.  adobf,  6.

■whitifhi


688  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

whuin-)  ilalk,  a  imall  excrefcence  fmooth  in  its  fvirface,  and  of  a  red  colour
inclining  to  brown  ;  lefs  oblong  indeed  in  its  figure,  but,  in  other  refpedts,
very  fimilar  to  that  imaller  excrefcence,  which  was  lall  defcrib'd  in  the  woman
above.

31.  A  woman,  of  fifty  years  of  age,  or  upwards,  having  receiv'd  a  wound
upon  her  head,  died  on  the  thirtieth  day  after  that  -,  which  was  in  the  begin-
Jiing  of  February  in  the  year  1738.  I  could  fcarceiy  examine  any  other  part
but  the  genitals. In  which  I  oblerv'd  the  following  things.

The  teftes  were  confiderably  hard,  dry,  and  without  veficles.  Although
they  were  not  at  all  different  from  each  other,  in  any  refpedl,  yet  the  nervous
plexus  was  much  lefs  in  the  right  ala  vefpertilionis,  than  in  the  other.  The
fundus  uteri,  when  open'd,  fhow'd  upon  Its  lower,  and  poflerior  furface,  a
-fmall  excrefcence,  nearly  of  the  form  of  a  circle,  deprefs'd,  and,  in  its  fupe-
rior  part  only,  disjoin'd  from  the  internal  membrane  of  the  uterus.  And  of
this  very  membrane  it  feem'd  to  be  an  excrefcence,  rather  than  of  the  fub-
flance  of  the  uterus.

For  cutting  through  this  excrefcence,  the  fubjefted  paries  of  the  uterus,
and  that  membrane;  and  comparing  one  with  another;  I  found  the  excre-
fcence to  be  made  up  of  the  fame  more  compa6b  fubftance  that  the  membrane
•was :  befides,  I  found  it  of  the  famie  fmoothnefs  externally,  and  of  the  fame
colour  as  that  membrane ;  if  you  except  only  the  upper  edge,  by  which  I  have
faid  it  was  disjoin'd,  for  this  alone  was  red,

32.  As  I  was  looking  upon,  and  confidering,  thefe  appearances,  a  fufpicion
came  into  my  mind,  that  this  excrefcence,  and  others  of  the  fame  kind,  were,
perhaps,  nothing  elfe  but  the  internal  membrane  of  the  uterus,  rifing  up  in  a
certain  place,  from  a  nine  months  adhefion  of  the  placenta ;  and  particularly
in  thofe,  from  whofe  uterus  it  had  been  pull'd  away  with  any  kind  of  vio-
lence.

For  in  this  manner  It  may  be  conceiv'd,  why  thefe  excrefcences  are  of  a
circular  form ;  and  why  not  equally  manifeft  in  all  women  that  have  born
children.

And  I  remember'd  to  have  read  in  Ruyfch  (b),  thataltho'  the  protuberances,
"  which  are  found  In  cows  that  are  pregnant ;"  and  which  are  "  nothing  but
"  a  uterine  efflorefcence,  that.  In  the  time  of  gravidation,  is  rais'd  up  into  a
"  tumour.  In  that  place  where  the  fcx-tus  Is  connefted  to  Its  placentuls;"  are
jiot  feen  in  women,  "  while  they  are  In  a  ftateof  pregnancy  ;  yet  in  that  place
"  where  the  placenta  applies  Itfeif  to  the  uterus,  that  the  Internal  coat  of  the
*'  uterus  fometlmes,  alfo,  ralfes  itfeif  up  into  a  tumour,  in  fome  meafure.'"

But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  obferv'd  that  Ruyfch  does  not  feem  to  have  at-
tended to  this  clrcumftance,  that  In  cows  thefe  protuberances  exlfl:  from  the
very  birth,  and  are  only  inlarg'd  In  pregnancy  like  the  other  parts  of  the
uterus ;  nor  do  they  vanlfn  away  afterwards,  when  the  empty  uterus  con-
ftringcs  itfeif:  whereas  this  flight  tumour  of  the  internal  uterus  in  women  (in
regard  to  which,  we  fliall  confider,  on  another  occafion,  of  what  nature  it  is,
and  whetiier  it  be  from  that  coat  of  the  uterus)  does  not  appear  to  us,  before
the  placenta  has  applied  itfeif  to  the  uterus  in  a  very  clofc  manner ;  nor  after

[b)  Thef.  Anat.  5.  in  fin.  Arcula  3.  n.  i.

A  the


Letter  XLVII. Article  33, 34.  689

the  uierus  has  properly  contracted  itfelf  on  exclufion  of  the  foetus ;  nor  in-
deed does  pAiylrh  fay  that  it  then  appears  to  him.

Bit  I  remember'd  in  particular,  trnr  excrefcences  of  the  fame  form  had  alfo
been  found  by  me  in  virgin  uteri;  o:  at  leaft  in  the  uteri  of  thofe  who  had
never  born  children  :  as  m  this  h'itory  which  I  fhall  immediar  ly  lulijoin.

^^.  An  old  woman  -,  who  had  been  taken  into  the  hofpitai,  on  sccount  of
an  ulcer  of  the  leg  ■,  flaying  the  s  very  contentedly,  had  the  fame  thing  hap-
pen to  her,  which  frequently  hrppens  to  others  likewife  :  that  is,  fhe  was,  in
confequence  of  the  impure  halicus,  feiz'd  with  a  fever;  which  was  at  lirft,
as  feem'd  -by  the  previous  cc:d,  of  an  intermitting  kind  :  but  foon  after,
■when  it  could  not  be  reftrain'd  by  the  Peruvian  bark,  it  becamx  continual  and
acute,  and  was  attended  witn  fome  delirium.  The  woman  was  therefore  car-
ried off  by  it.

And,  in  examining  almoil  all  the  vifcera  of  this  body,  about  the  middle  of
^February  in  the  year  1736,  I  remark'd  thefe  few  things  which  feem'd  to  be
morbid.

The  pia  mater  of  the  brain  had  its  veflels  diftended  with  blood,  and  could
be  very  eafily  drawn  out  of  the  deep  furrows,  which  are  upon  the  furface  of
that  vifcus.

The  great  artery,  after  going  cut  of  the  heart,  both  above  the  valves,
and  in  other  places ;  as,  for  inftance,  where  it  ran  down  through  the  belly ;
flMw'd,  internally,  the  white  beginnings  of  future  fmall  bones.

That  the  uterus  had  never  been  pregnant,  appear'd  from  the  infpeftion  oi
the  hymen ;  which  though  it  was  low,  was  entire  ;  or,  at  leaft,  had  never
been  lacerated.  And  the  fame  thing  was  confirm'd  by  the  internal  ftrudlure
of  the  uterus,  when  laid  open ;  being,  in  a  great  part  of  it,  juft  as  it  is  in
thofe  who  have  not  born  children.

Yet  the  internal  and  pofterior  furface  of  the  fundus,  which  was  tranfverdy
dilated,  was  cover'd  over,  at  its  upper  part,  with  an  excrefcence  of  a  circular
figure  :  which,  beginning  from  the  right  fide  itfelf,  terminated  at  no  great
diftance  from  the  left ;  fo  that  the  diameter  of  it  was  not  much  lefs  than  that
in  the  woman  of  Bologna,  who  was  defcrib'd  above  (c).

But  it  was  not,  like  that,  free  and  unconnefted,  if  you  except  a  fmall  part
which  belong'd  to  the  left  and  lower  border :  the  remainder  of  it  adher'd  to
that  furface  of  the  uterus  which  was  juft  now  fpoken  of.  The  thicknefs  of
this  excrefcence  was  inconfiderable  •,  the  furface  of  it  was  fmooth,  and  its  cor-
lour  externally  bloody :  internally  it  confifted.  of  a  whitifh,  compadt,  and  firm
fubftance.

34.  I  examin'd  the  urinary  parts,  and  the  parts  of  generation,  of  a  cache-
tic, and  almoft  dropfical,  woman,  about  the  end  of  January  in  the  year  1749  ;
when  I  found  the  following  appearances  in  particular.

The  left  kidney  had  its  furface  unequal,  here  and  there,  with  many  cells
which  were  full  of  ferum  -,  or  rather  with  middle-fiz'd,  or  very  fmall,  hy-
datids.

For  although  they  were,  in  great  part,  buried  within  that  vifcus,  fo  that
none  of  them  reach'd  to  the  pelvis;  yet  they  were  alfo  prominent  outwards :

(c)  N.  7.
Vol.  IL  4  T  fo


690  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fo  that  ibme  of  them,  which  had  burft  afundcr,  might,  by  pourino-  out  their
ferum,  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  add  feme  new  materials  to  the  incipiens
afcites.

The  other  kidney  had  none  that  was  confpicuous  on  its  furface  ;  for  one  ;
which  was  of  a  middle  fize,  and  within  the  iubfcance-,  was  contain'd  betwixt
the  furface  and  the  pelvis,  without  reaching  to  either.  The  urinary  bladder ;
at  leaft  at  its  lower  part  •,  was  univerfally  red,  andinflam'd,  from  a  great  num-
ber of  fmall  vefTels  being  crowded  together.'

But  as  to  the  genitals,  a  tumour  of  a  fpherical  figure  had  form'd  itfelf  upon
the  uterus ;  the  diameter  of  which  tumour  was  equal  to  an  inch  and  half.
The  greater  part  of  the  tumour  ^vas  prominent  on  the  outfide  of  the  ute-
rus :  the  lefler  part  was  fo  buried  in  the  anterior  paries  thereof,  on  one  fide,
as  not  to  reach  to  the  cavity  of  that  vifcus.

It  was  univerfally  hard,  and  internally  white ;  the  whitenefs,  however,
being  variegated  in  feveral  places  with  fpots,  that  were  lefs  white.  The  in-
ternal furface  of  the  cervix  was  v/hite,  and  unequally  tuberous  -,  if  I  may  be
allow'd  to  fpeak  thus  ;  but  that  of  the  fundus  was  red,  and  rifing  up  into
two  flight  prominences,  neither  of  which  was  red,  except  on  the  furface.

35.  To  thefe  four  obfervations ;  which,  as  I  faid,  were  made  in  the  col-
lege ;  I  choofe  to  add  another  which  I  made  in  the  hofpital,  about  the  mid-
dle of  December  in  the  year  1748.

36.  A  middle-ag'd  woman  had  died  there,  who  was  faid  to  have  laboured
under  a  melancholic  delirium,  and  a  flight  fever,  at  her  own  houfe,  for  a
long  time  :  nor  yet  could  we  know  this  for  certain  •,  nor  from  what  caufe  fhe
was,  at  length,  at  the  point  of  death,  when  flie  was  brought  into  the  hofpi-
tal. It  will  be  your  bufinefs  then  to  conjedlure,  from  the  preternatural  apr
pearances  which  I  obferv'd,  in  examining  almoft  all  the  vifcera,  by  what  diC-
orders  flie  was  carried  off.

The  body  had  a  pretty  good  appearance.  The  cerebrum  ;.  to  begin  with
that ;  had  no  peculiar  hardnefs :  but  I  found  the  cerebellum  to  be  lax.  With-
in the  cranium  I  no  where  found  any  water.

Nor  did  I  obferve  any  thing  very  confiderable  in  the  thorax.  Even  the
lungs  were  not,  in  any  part,  connefted  to  the  pleura,  by  the  flighteft  attach-
ment. In  the  heart  was  fcarcely  any  coagulated  blood ;  and  in  the  great  veflJels
none  at  all :  but  I  faw  a  fmall  quantity  of  blood  come  forth  from  the  aorta,
where  it  begins  to  defcend.

In  the  belly.,  however,  were  many  things  that  I  obferv'd.  And  firfl:,  when
the  abdomen  was  laid  open,  blood  was  found  in  the  hypogafl:rium,  betwixt
the  mufcles  •,  being  coagulated  and  grumous,  as  if  it  had  been  the  confequence
of  a  contufion  :  the  caufe  of  this  appearance  was  unknown  ;  nor  did  any
recent  injury,  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  correfpond  to  that  place.

The  fpleen  was  of  fiich  a  length,  that  beginning  from  its  ufual  fituation,
k  reach'd  quite  to  the  os  ilium  ;  with  which  very  great  length  the  other  di-
menfions  did  not  agree.  It  was  lax,  and  not  livid,  but  red  in  great  part ;
at  leafl  on  its  anterior  furface.

The  gall-bladder  was  difhcnded  with  a  great  quantity  of  bile. There  was

ibme  water  in  the  lower  part  of  the  pelvis. The  bladder  internally,  at  the

2.  orificg


Letter  XLVIII. Article  i.  691

erifice  of  the  urethra,  and  a  little  above  this  fpace,  was  diftinguifh'd  with
languiferous  veffels.

The  uterus  was  a  little  inclin'd  to-the  left  fide ;  and  yet  the  orifice  of  its
ofculum,  upon  laying  open  the  vagina ;  which  was  almoft  univerfally  livid,
and  fmelt  very  ftrongj  was  more  on  the  right  fide,  than  this  inclination
feem'd.to  account  for.  And  the  caufe  of  this  was,  that  the  corona  of  the  ofcu-
lum, which  was  harder  than  is  natural,  was  increas'd  on  the  left  fide  by  a  kind
of  tumour.

37.  But  of  excrelcences,  and  internal  tumours,  of  the  uterus,  enough  at
prefent;  left  thefe  letters  fliould  be  increas'd  to  an  immoderate  fize,  as  I
have  faid  is  to  be  fear'd.

You  eafily  perceive,  however,  that  it  is  not  furprizing,  if  from  diforders  of
this  kind,  which  are  fo  frequently  found,  the  worft  of  tumours,  by  the  addition
offome  other  accidental  caufe,  are  fometimes  form'd  ;  and  from  thefe,  when
ulcerated,  if  incurable  fluors  are  brought  on.  In  the  next  letter  I  Ihall  treat
of  the  remainder  of  womens  diforders. Farewell.


LETTER the FORTY-EIGHTH

Treats of  falfe Pregnancy, Abortion, and unhappy-
Delivery.


F  you  fliould  happen  to  be  furpriz'd,  that  I  give  no  more  than  this  one
letter  to  fo  many  arguments  of  that  kind  ;  you  will  be  ftill  more  fur-
priz'd, when  you  find  that  no  more  than  two,  and  thefe  not  very  lono-  fec-
tions,  that  is  the  thirty-feventh,  and  thirty-eighth,  are  allow'd  in  the  Se-
pulchretum  ;  not  to  thefe  fubjefts  only,  but  to  many  others  at  the  fame  time  ;
among  which  are  the  origin  of  twins,  hermaphrodites,  and  the  marks  of
virginity.

Thefe  fubjeds  I  think  are  not  proper  to  be  treated  of  here ;  where  the  in-
tention of  profecuting  the  plan  of  the  Sepulchretum  requires  it ;  left  I  Ihould
treat  of  other  things  befides  the  hidden  caufes  of  dileafes,  inveftigated  by
anatomy  :  and  if  .1  were  to  treat  of  them,  the  greater  part  of  thofe  things
which  are  faid,  in  the  Sepulchretum,  thereon,  would  have  very  little,  or  no
weight  with  me.

But  left  you  Ihould  fuppofe  me  to  fay  this  without  good  reafon,  I  will  give
you  fome  inftances  of  what  I  aflert.

4  T  2  For


692  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

For  what  has  that  obfervation  of  Gerard  Blafius  (a)  to  do  with  the  origin
of  twins  •,  I  mean  that  in  which  he  makes  no  hefitation  to  confider  the  vefi-
cles  of  the  teftes,  not  to  fay,  probably  a  kind  of  hydatid  that  adher'd  on
the  outfide  of  one  of  them,  as  eggs  ?

Or  what  has  the  fubjoin'd  appendix  to  do  with  this  fame  origin  ?  For  in
this  ;  to  omit  other  things  that  do  not  differ  from  the  opinion  of  Blafius ;
"  the  aura  feminalis  is  carried  through  the  vas  deferens,  or  dudtus  brevis,"  that
is  the  round  ligament  of  the  teftes,  as  I  fuppofe,  quite  to  the  teftis  itfelf ;
as  if  the  females  of  quadrupeds  were  not  without  this  ligament :  "  the
"  ovidufts  of  hens"  are  faid  to  be  "  ftrait  and  pretty  lax  ;  but  in  man  nar-
"  row,  and  very  tortuous  ■,"  as  if,  although  they  are  confiderably  lax  in  hens,
they  were  not,  at  the  fame  time,  fo  much  the  more  tortuous,  in  proportion
as  they  are  longer  than  the  tubes  in  women  ;  that  is  in  a  proportion  which  ad-
mits of  no  comparifon.

And  thefe  things  are  added  ;  the  connexion  of  the  tubes  with  the  teftes
ought  to  be  more  nicely  inquir'd  into,  left  thofe  appearances  which  we  call
jagged  edges,  fimbria,  or  morfus  diaboli,  may  be  the  effects  of  rupture ;
that  is  to  fay,  left  the  tubes,  having,  perhaps,  previoufly  adher'd  to  the
teftes,  in  a  natural  ftate,  "  fliould  have  been  torn  away  therefrom,  by  care-
*'  leffnefs,  during  the  extra&ion  of  the  teftes  •,"  as  if  the  tubes  confifted  of
a  membrane  extremely  thin,  and  their  fimbriae  were  of  fuch  a  ftrudture,  and
figure,  as  to  be  capable  of  being  produc'd  in  that  manner  :  there  is  betwixt
the  cervix  uteri,  and  the  teftis,  another  du6t  that  carries  the  femen,  "  which
•'  might  not  improperly  be  call'd  cervicalis ;"  as  if  h  were  not  certain  that
a  dufit  of  this  kind  was  nothing  more  than  fome  fanguiferous  vefTel :  finally,
not  to  take  up  too  much  time;  through  the  round  ligaments  of  the  uterus,
"  the  feminal  matter,  and  other  excrementitious  matters  alfo,  that  are  col-
"  leded  in  the  uterus,  are  expell'd  to  the  groins  -,"  as  if  it  were  not  mani-
feft,  that  thefe  ligaments  do  not  communicate  with  the  cavity  of  the  uterus.
And  thus  far  upon  the  origin  and  generation  of  twins.

And  pray  what  relation  to  hermaphrodites  have  thofe  three  difieftions  (^)  ?
fince  with  a  female  pudendum,  was  join'd  a  penis  which  was  neither  furnifh'd
with  any  urethral  orifice,  nor  emitted  urine  ;  fo  that,  even  v^ichout  any  dif-
feftion,  it  was  certain  that  this  penis  was  nothing  nore  than  a  clitoris  of  a
monftrous  magnitude.

Finally,  in  refpeft  to  the  marks  of  virginity,  i"  vvould  have  been  better  to
fay  nothing  at  all  than  to  propofe  thofe  two,  or  i.hree,  obfervatlons  (c),  in  the
latter  part  of  the  thirty-eighth  fedlion  -,  from  svhich  the  reader  'a  part  fcarcely
knov/s,  what  is  not  to  be  reckon'd  among  diofe  marks,  and  parcly  believes,
that  even  the  hymen  itfelf  (which  howevrr  is  the  principal  of  all  the  marks  of
virginity)  is  not  to  be  number'd  in  ihuc  clafs;  efpecially  as  in  the  adjoin'd
Scholium  it  is  faid  that  the  caruncles  i^one  may  be  confidev'd  as  that  principal
mark,  and  the  reader  is  refer'd  no  lefs  to  Pinseus  the  alfertcr  of  this  opinion,
than to  others.

But  what  is  my  opinion  on  thefe  points,  I  think  I  have  the  lefs  occafion  to

(«)  4.  in  fea.  37.  (<r)  Obf,  7  &  8.

{i)  Ibid.  obf.  6.


Letter  XLVIII. Article  2.  693

take  any  notice  here,  becaufe  I  have  fufficiently  fald,  heretofore,  in  the  Ad-
verfaria  (d),  what  I  had  obferv'd  ;  and  what  is  my  judgment  on  the  fubjedt
of  virginity  appears  in  that  refponfe  entitled  fupra  Judicio  Objleiricum  de  Mulie-
ris  Virginitate.

2.  And  even  m  the  thirty-eighth  feftion,  there  are  not  a.few  things  which
either  ought  not  to  have  been  introduc'd  in  that  place,  or,  if  added,  ought
to  have  been  entirely  amended  by  fome  animadverfion.

Nor  indeed  can  we  make  the  fame  apology  for  thefe  things,  that  may  per-
haps be  made  for  the  greater  part  of  thofe  we  have  made  remarks  upon
above  -,  I  mean  that  at  the  time  they  were  publifh'd,  no  better  things  had
been  as  yet  advanc'd :  although  even  then  much  better  things  had  been  pub-
lifh'd •,  and  ftill  more  fo,  at  the  time  in  which  the  Sepulchretum  was  re-
printed, and  increas'd.

For  without  doubt,  there  was  no  need  of  recent  obfervations,  that  thefe
things,  fome  of  which  I  fhall  point  out  immediately,  might  not  be  produc'd
without  emendation.

In  the  firft  obfervation,  for  inftance  ;  to  omit  that  fome  things,  in  the  dif-
feflion  of  a  certain  foetus  {e),  are  fo  propos'd,  that,  although  they  are  natural
appearances,  they  may  be  fuppos'd,  by  the  greateft  part  of  readers,  to  have
been  the  effeft  of  a  vitiated  ftrudture;  who  can  bear  (f)  that  the  funiculus
umbilicalis  of  foetuffes,  "  is  wont  to  be  generally,  and  in  all,  of  the  length
"  of  fome  ells  ?"  Or  who  can  think  it  "  wonderful  (g)"  that  a  woman,  who
had  mifcarried  feven  times,  fhould  have  produc'd  "  all  her  abortive  foetuffes
"  juft  of  the  fame  magnitude ;  that  is  nearly  equal  to  a  joint  of  a  thumb  i
"  though  fometimes  at  a  longer,  and  fometimes  at  a  fhorter,  diftance  from
"  the  time  of  conception ,"  who,  I  fay,  can  fuppofe  this  to  be  "  wonder-
"  ful,"  unlefs  any  one  who  does  not  underftand  that  the  abortions  were  dif-
charg'd  at  different  times  indeed,  but  all  died  at  the  fame  time  ?

For  that  a  dead  foetus  may  be  retain'd  even  many  months  in  the  uterus,
and  without  any  corruption,  or  bad  fmell,  is  fufficiently  Ihown  •,  befides  other
obfervations,  and  particularly  thofe  that  are  to  be  met  with  in  Ruyfch  (h);
by  that  which  immediately  follows  (i).

And  in  the  fecond  obfervation  {k),  when  a  certain  foetus,  whofe  egrefs  had
been  prevented  by  a  tumour  of  the  paffages,  was  found  to  have  his  cranium
comprefs'd  on  one  fide;  this  inference  is  drawn  from  it:  "  from  w'iich  ic
*'  clearly  appears,  not  only  that  the  expulfive  force  of  the  uterus  has  an  effedt
"  towards  the  protrufion  of  the  foetus,  but  alfc  that  the  infant  endeavours
"  A.0  free  itfelf  from  the  confinement  of  its  prifon  :"  is  this  deduftion  of  a
matter,  which,  of  itfelf,  is  in  other  refpedls  not  falfe,  clearly  prov'd  to  you  :
fince  the  mother  is  faid,  "  to  have  had  labour  pains  for  five  or  fix  days,"  and
the  infant  to  have  given  no  figns  of  life  after  the  firft  days  of  thofe  pains  ;
fo  that  it  is  by  no  means  certain  whether  that  compreffion  of  the  cranium  is  to
be  afcrib'd  to  the  efforts  of  both  mother  and  infant,  or  to  the  efforts  of  the
mother  alone.

(J)  I.  n.  39.  &  IV.  animad.  23  &  34.  {h)  Thef.  Max.  n.  40. 158.  zio.

(e)  §■  3-  (0  7-

(fJ  §.  7.  {k)  3.
is)  §.  6.

But


^94  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

But  let  what  I  have  faid  be  fufEcient.  For  you  yourfelf,  in  reading  over
the  fourteen  examples  •,  which  are  produc'd  in  the  firft  obfervation,  in  luch
a  manner,  as  if  all  of  them  related  to  abortion  •,  will  be  at  no  lofs  to  deter-
mine whether  the  fecond,  which  relates  to  mature  delivery,  ought  to  have
had  a  place  among  the  reft ;  and  ftill  lefs,  whether  all  the  obfervations  that  are
col!e£ted  under  number  nine  relate  to  the  prefent  purpofe  •,  as  the  greater  part  of
them,  at  leaft,  have  no  reference  to  the  preternatural,  but  to  the  natural,  ftate
of  the  uterus,  both  in  gravid  women,  and  thofe  who  have  lately  born
children.

But  this  is  a  fubjeft  on  which  you  muft  expeft  nothing  from  me  here.  For
thofe  things  which  I  alio  have  obferv'd,  in  refpeft  to  that  ftate,  more
than  once,  and  with  fome  accuracy,  belong  to  a  work  quite  different
from  this.

However,  though  I  have,  with  ingenuoufnefs,  and  in  order  to  be  of  ufe
to  your  ftudies,  made  thefe  ftridlures  on  the  feftions  of  the  Sepulchretum  I
have  fpecifted  ;  I  neverthelefs  very  readily  confef;,  that  there  are  many  things
in  thefe  feftions,  which  deferve  approbation.

And  the  heads  of  thefe  I  Ihall  follow  in  this  letter ;  at  the  fame  time
however,  interpofing,  or  adding  others,  which  I  fhall  fuppofe  to  be  necef-
fary,  and  to  relate  to  the  prefent  fubjeds.

3.  And  firft  in  regard  to  falfe  pregnancy ;  it  is  too  well  known  that  phyfi-
cians  are  not  uncommonly  deceiv'd,  either  in  taking  the  true  for  the  falfe,
or  the  falfe  for  the  true.  But  I  could  wilh  that  certain  figns  always  exifted  ;
for  in  reliance  upon  thefe,  learned  and  attentive  phyficians,  at  leaft,  would
r.ot  be  in  danger  of  falling  into  either  of  the  errors.

The  fign  of  true  pregnancy,  that  is  the  motion  of  the  foetus  in  utero,  is
certain,  a'ind  obvious,  to  the  hands,  and  fometimes  even  to  the  eyes :  and  any
one  who  has  once  properly  perceiv'd  this,  by  the  application  of  his  hand  to
the  abdomen,  efpecially  when  cold ;  for  by  this  means  the  motion  is  ge-
nerally excited  -,  will  never  fufFer  himfelf  to  be  impos'd  upon  by  flatus  of  the
inteftines,  nor  any  other  motion  whatever  ;  fo  peculiar  is  that  motion,  and
of  fuch  a  nature,  that  it  cannot  be  produc'd  except  by  the  body  of  a  living
foetus.

Yet,  in  the  firft  months  we  not  only  want  this  fign  ;  but  the  others  alfo
fometimes;  and  now  and  then  even  in  the  laft  months,  by  reafon  of  the  weak-
nefs  of  the  foetus  ;  or  from  other  caufes.

i  remember  that  I  was  formerly  afl<.'d  to  go  and  fee  a  young  woman,
who,  from  the  time  that  a  furgeon  had  taken  away  a  cancerous  tumour,  as
they  faid,  from  her  breaft,  had  her  belly  begin  to  fwcll  •,  which  was  now
nine  months.  The  lefs  reafon  I  found,  upon  examining  her,  to  fear,  from
any  of  her  fymptoms,  that  a  cancerous  tumour  was  reviv'd  in  the  uterus ;
as  was  then  fuppos'd  -,  with  fo  much  the  more  time  and  care  did  I  examine,
with  my  hand,  the  tumid  uterus.

As  the  uterus  feem'd  to  be  impregnated,  but  I  felt  no  motion  there;  and
as  the  prefence  of  her  relations  did  not  fuffer  me  to  a(k  for  cold  water,  to  dip
my  hot  hand  in-,  for  the  weather  was  extremely  hqt ;  I  cali'd  afide  the  phy-
fician  of  this  young  woman,  and  although  he  afferted  that  he  had  never  felt
any  motion  in  the  belly,  I  advifed  him  neverthelefs,  that  notwithftanding

every


Letter  XL VIII. Article  3.  695

every  one  fuppos'd  the  patient  to  be  an  untouch'd  virgin,  he  (liovild  a€t  with
caution,  £:^J  circumfpetlion  ;  and  not  to  forget  what  had  happen'd  in  othens
like  :ie^-,  a  few  years  before,  to  the  great  reproach  of  the  phyficians  who
att.M-ided.

Dj  you  defire  to  know  the  event  ?  This  untouch'd  virgin  foon  after
brought  forth  a  child.  Tlie  fign  that  I  have  fpoken  of  therefore  is  a  certain
fign  when  it  is  prefent;  and  yet  the  woman  may  be  impregnated  when  it  is
not  obferv'd.

Another  fsgn  I  have  read  of  as  propos'd  by  men  in  other  refpedts  learned,
and  experienc'd,  for  a  certain  one  -,  and  one  that  occurs  in  all  gravid  women  j
I  mean  the  navel  protuberating,  on  the  contrary  to  what  happens  in  a  drop-
fy,  and  all  other  tumours  of  the  belly.

But  does  it  never  protuberate  in  an  afcites,  though  fome  perforate  it,
v/hen  protuberant,  in  order  to  draw  off  the  waters?  And  in  like  manner  is
not  the  caufe  that  they  aflign,  of  the  navel  being  prominent  in  pregnancyy
common  to  other  tumours  whereby  the  inteflines  are  forc'd  upwards  ?

But  it  is  needlefs  to  make  thefe  and  other  inquiries,  as  they  themfelves
confefs,  that  this  fign  does  not  exift  before  the  end  of  the  third  month  -,  and
as  it  fometimes  moreover  happens,  that  utero-geftation  is  i.oin'd  with  a
dropfy.

Not  to  take  notice  here  of  the  matron  mention'd  by  Platerus  ('/j,  who  was
wont,  "  as  often  as  fhe  was  pregnant,  to  fall  into  a  dropfy  ■"  there  are  fev/
phyficians  who  have  not  feen  both  of  them  join'd  together  fometimes ;  or
who,  at  leafb  if  they  are  prudent  and  cautious,  not  being  ignorant  of  the  er-
rors of  others,  have  doubted  whether  they  might  be  join'd  together.

F"or  which  reafon  I  was  the  more  furpriz'd  fome  years  ago,  that  a  phyfi-
cian,  in  other  refpedts  learned,  and  a  man  of  great  experience,  being  in  con-
fultation  with  me  for  an  illuftrious  matron  ;  who  had  come  hither  when  la-
bouring under  an  afcites  and  anafarca ;  fhould  have  fpoken  fo  as  to  be  foli-
citous  about  nothing  elfe,  but  about  immediately  prefcribing  the  moft  effec-
tual remedies  againfl:  both  thefe  dropfies.

I,  however,  feeing  that  the  matron  had  young  children,  and  was  herfelf
ftill  in  the  prime  of  life  ;  and  not  being  able  to  inform  myfelf,  for  a  cer-
tainty, whether  fhe  v/as  then  pregnant  or  not;  thefe  medicines,  faid  I,  I  uni-
verfally  approve,  provided,,  however,  that  they  are  not  begun  to-  be  made
ufe  of,  before  it  is  quite  clear  as  to  this  circumflance  whereof  I  am  inquire
ing ;  and  in  the  mean  while  let  fome  more  gentle  remedies,  and  fuch  as  are
fafe  on  both  fides,  be  made  ufe  of;  and  in  particular  a.  proper  method  o£
living.

The  woman  was  wife,  and  liften'd  to  me  •,  and  after  having  return'd  home^
fent,  at  a  proper  time,  to  return  me  thanks,  and  to  inform  me,  that,  hav-
ing brought  forth  a  fon,  fhe  was  at  the  fame  time  freed  from  both  thofe-
difeafes  ;.  and  that  nothing  thereof  remain'd  but  a  tumour  of  the  legs.

There  are,  I  fee,  many  likewife  who  depend  upon  a  very  ancient  fign  •,  5
mean  one  that  is  propos'd  in  the  aphorifms  of  Hippocrates  (m)  -,  "  thole  who
"  are  pregnant  have  the  os  uteri  comprefs'd :"  a  mark  certainly  that  is  not  to  be-

(/)  Obf,  1.  j.-ubi  de  Extuberantia.  ^  (ct)  Sed.  5.  Aph.  52,-

defpis'dy


696  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

defpis'c],  and  is  very  ufeful  in  thofe  firft  months,  in  which  there  is  'no  room,
as  I  have  faid  above,  for  the  former.  ,  '

Wherefore  I  have  made  ufe  of  this  fign  with  fuccefs,  when  it  was  in  my
power  -,  but  I  had  it  in  my  power  very  feldom ;  the  women  of  our  country  be*
~  ing,  for  the  moft  part,  repugnant  to  an  examination  of  that  kind.  Yet  I
have  not  made  ufe  of  it  without  caution,  not  being  ignorant  that  there  are
diforders  of  the  uterus,  wherein,  as  Hippocrates  in  part  teaches  (n),  the  os
uteri  is  clos'd.

And  for  the  fame  reafon  I  did  not  believe  it  to  be  fufficient,  if  a  fkilful
examiner  perceiv'd,  that,  to  fome  conftriftion  of  this  orifice,  fome  increafe
of  the  corona  was  likewife  added ;  or  if,  having  forc'd  this  corona  upwards
with  his  finger,  and  foon  after  drawn  it  away  gradually,  while  the  woman  was
in  a  ftanding  pofture,  he  obferv'd,  on  fuffering  the  corona  to  flip  down  again,
the  uterus  to  be  pretty  heavy ;  or,  finally,  if  he  perceiv'd  the  fame  orifice
to  be  inclin'd  towards  the  pofterior  parts.

For  although  thefe  things,  with  the  addition  of  the  fign  of  Hippocrates,
certainly  increafe  the  force  of  that  -,  yet  I  judg'd  that  there  was  no  great  de-
pendance  to  be  plac'd  upon  them ;  unlefs  when  that  corona,  as  Galen  (0)
formerly  admonifh'd,  was  not  harder  than  is  natural,  and  all  fymptoms  of
difeafes,  and  affedtions  of  the  uterus ;  in  fome  of  which,  at  leaft,  there
is  an  inclination  forwards,  whereby  the  ofculum  is  turn'd  backwards ;  were
wanting.

4.  That  we  may  not,  therefore,  take  a  true  pregnancy,  for  a  falfe  one,  we
muft  have  a  peculiar  regard  to  the  figns  that  are  not  prefent,  as  well  as  to
thofe  that  are ;  and  above  all,  if  the  woman  has  been  pregnant  before,  we
muft  confider  whether  the  figns,  from  which  fhe  judges  herfelf  to  be  preg-
nant now,  are  the  fame  that  had  preceded  in  the  beginning,  at  other
times.

For  by  reafon  of  this  circumftance  being  defpis'd  -,  which  is  fbmetimes
fallacious  indeed,  but  not  to  be  neglefled  for  that  reafon  ;  I  have  fcen  phyfi-
cians  fall  into  an  error,  as  you  will  clearly  conceive,  from  three  obfervations
at  leaft,  which  I  choofe  to  fubjoin.  All  thefe  obfervations  relate  to  women
of  rank  ;  the  firft  to  one  of  this  city,  and  the  others  to  women  of  my  native
city.

5.  A  foetus  had  been  concelv'd  fix  months  and  fome  days  ;  for  from  that
time  the  woman  had  not  convers'd  any  more  with  her  huft)and ;  the  mother
not  doubting,  by  reafon  of  the  uneafy  fymptoms  which  Ihe  had  ufually  fuf-
fer'd,  after  other  conceptions,  but  that  flie  was  really  with  child.

And  now  the  uterus  had  begun  to  fwell  in  the  third  month,  when,  a  great
quantity  of  blood  being  difcharg'd  from  the  hsemorrhoids,  the  fwelling  was
xonfiderably  abated  ;  ib  that  it  was  in  general  fuppos'd  the  woman  had  been
deceiv'd.

Wherefore,  although  flie  afterwards  found  her  belly  fwell  again,  as  foon  as
fhe  had  gather'd  her  ftrengdi  after  the  ceafing  of  this  flux  •,  fine  was  not  for
that  reafon  fuppos'd  to  be  pregnant.  At  length  the  fame  flux  return'd,  and
-a  fever  came  on  befides.

(h)  Ibid.  Aph.  55.  (0)  De  Loc.  Affeft.  1.  6,  c.  5.

And


Letter  XL VIII. Article  6,  7.  697

And  then  neither  fhe  herfelf,  nor  her  phyficians,  fufpefting  any  thing  of
pregnancy  ;  blood  was  taken  away  from  her  arm,  and  afterwards  even  from
her  foot :  after  which  a  medicine  was,  alfo,  given  to  open  her  bowels.

A  few  hours  after  this  had  been  given,  behold  !  contrary  to  the  expedla-
tion  of  every  one,  a  dead  foetus  was  difcharg'd  ;  and  feven  hours  after  that
the  fecundines.  And  thefe,  together  with  the  foetus,  were  brought  to  me
on  the  following  day  in  the  morning;  which  was  the  twenty-ninth  day  of
Auguft,  in  the  year  1727  ;  when  I  alio  had  the  cafe  related  to  me.

The  foetus,  from  the  crown  of  the  head  to  the  Ibles  of  the  feet,  was  of  a^
length  equal  to  the  breadth  of  fix  fingers:  the  funiculus  umbilicalis  was
nine ;  but  of  a  furprizing  flendernefs,  fo  as  to  refemble  a  thread  of  a  mo-
derate thicknefs ;  being  without  any  intorfion,  and  every  where  equal. .

The  body  of  the  foetus,  which  was  of  the  male  lex,  was  well-form'd  both
internally  and  externally  ;  except  that  the  whole  head  was  of.  fuch  a  figure,
that  it  feem'd  to  have  been  comprefs'd  on  the  fides.

It  had  been  of  a  white  colour  at  the  time  of  its  difcharge,  butwas  now
become  brown.  Almoft  all  the  vifcera  were  pallid,  and  nearly  deftitute  of:
colour ;  and  in  particular  the  liver,  which  was  of  a  flight  yellow^ .degenerating
into  a  great  palenefs.  The  urinary  bladder  was  empty;  and  not  only  this
but  the  inteftine  colon  and  thereftum.

Although  nothing  of  blood,  and  indeed  nothing  of  a  bloody  colour,  ap-
pear'd  in  any  part  of  the  foetus,  wherever  you  cut  into  it,  or  of  its  funiculus ; .
which  was  brought  to  me  in  an  entire  ftate,  being  connected  on  one  fide  to
the  navel,  and  on  the  other  to  the  placenta;  and  although  the  firft  branches,,
atleaft,  from  this  rope  into  the  placenta,  were  flender;  certain  large  globes
as  it  were  extending  themfelves  fornewhat  in  length,  of  a  blackidi  colour,
and  diftended  with  almoft  fluid  blood,  were,  neverthelefs,  feen  through  the
membranous  furface  of  the  fecundines,  where  it  lay  under  the  placenta;
which  in  this  fubjeft  was  really  very  large  in  proportion  to  the  fmallnefs  of
the  foetus.

However,  although  the  body  of  the  foetus  was  neither  externally  flaccid,
nor  cover'd  with  rugous  integuments ;  nor  any  difagreeable  imell  proceeded
therefrom,  or  from  its  fecundines  ;  I  neverthelefs  did  not  doubt  but  it  had
either  lain  a  confiderable  time  dead  in  the  uterus,  before  the  dilatation  of  its
orifice ;  or,  at  leaft,  that  it  had  lain  in  a  very  v/eak  ftate,  and  like  a  dead
foetus,  before  it  was  quite  dead.

6.  The  fudden  efllux  of  a  great  quantity  of  blood  had,  as  appear'd  from
the  difleftion,  render'd  the  foetus,  and  its  funiculus,  bloodlefs  ;  and  the  lat-
ter likewife  fo  exceedingly  flender.  However,  as  there  was  fuppos'd  to  be
no  foetus  at  all  in  this  cafe,  the  error  of  the  phyficians  becomes  fornewhat  more
excufable,  than  in  the  nexthiftory.

7.  A  foetus  that  was,  in  like  manner,  immature,  and  dead,  had  been
ejedled  by  another  matron,  in  the  month  of  Auguft,  in  the  year  1716.  This
woman  fuppofing  herfelf  pregnant  from  her  ufual  fymptoms,  the  phyfician,
in  order  to  diminifh  the  blood,  which,  as  he  thought,  abounded,  took  away
the  weight  of  a  pound  from  her  arm.

As  her  belly  was  not  afterwards  inlarg'd,  in  proportion  to  the  time  of  her

pregnancy  ;  and  the  woman  did  not  perceive  the  motion  of  the  child,  at  the

Vol.  11.  4  U  time


698  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  oJT  the  Belly.

time  that  fhe  had  been  iifed  to  perceive  it  •,  both  the  midwife,  and  the'phyfidatt
himfelf,  otherwifea  learned  man,  but  not  eafily  giving  up  an  opinion  which  he
had  once  imbib'd,  pronounc'd  that  it  was  not  a  foetus  which  fhe  bore  in  her
■uterus,  but  a  mola,  or  falfe  conception.

The  mind  of  the  woman  being  alarm'd  at  this  prbnunciation,  and  afflidled
with  very  great  fadncfs,  it  happen'd  accidentally,  that  I  withdrew,  during  the
fummer,  into  my  native  place  :  and  being  ignorant  of  thefe  things,  I  was
brought  to  her  by  feme  noblemen  who  were  her  relations,  and  very  intimate
friends  of  mine:  and  this  at  her  requeft.

When  I  faw  her  to  have  a  good  colour,  as  flie  ufually  had,  and,  except  the
fadnefs  of  her  countenance,  to  be  in  good  health  •,  what  need,  faid  I  to  her,
have  you  of  a  phyfician  ?  Why,  faid  flie,  that  he  may  inform  me  whether
-lam  with  child-or  not.

Then  al"king  the  proper  queftions  of  her,  and  examining  her  belly  with  my
hand,  and  hearing  and  feeling  nothing,  from  whence  I  might  not  fuppofe  her
to  be  with  child  •,  and  learning  from  her,  and  even  from  her  waiting-maid,
who  had  ahvays  attended  her  chamber,  that  every  thing  was  now,  and  had
been,  the  fame  as  in  her  former  pregnancies,  if  you  except  thofe  two  things
that  I  mention'd  jufl-  now  ;  you  are  with  child,  faid  I ;  nor  do  I  think  thofe  two
circumftances  would  have  been  wanting,  if  you  had  not  done  what  you  did
not  in  former  pregnancies,  when  you  was  much  younger ;  I  mean  if  by  let-
ting blood  in  fuch  a  quantity,  you  had  not  diminifti'd  the  ftrength  of  the
foetus,  and  retarded  its  increafe.

After  this  at  length  I  heard  who  had  orderd  this  bleeding,  and  the  opi-
nion that  had  been  pronounc'd  in  regard  to  the  falfe  conception.  Then  faid
I)  what  reafons  this  gentleman  may  have  for  his  opinion  I  do  not  know :  but
I  have  not  One  that  inclines  me  to  fufpedt  a  mola,  or  falfe- conception  ;  yet  I
affirm  that  you  are  pregnant  with  a  foetus,  which  is  in  a  weak  and  languid
ftate,  and  v/hich,  -uniefs  you  recruit  yourfelf,  and  it,  by  a  proper  method  of
Jiving,  and  by  chearfulnefs  of  mind,  you  are  in  great  danger  of  not  carrying
till  the  proper  time  of  your  delivery.

Thefe  things  were  true,  but  inculcated  when  it  was  too  late.  For  I  hav-
ing gone  into  the  country  for  fome  time;  it  happen'd  not  many  days  after,
that  the  woman,  without  expefting  it,  hadfomewhatof  a  bloody  difcharge  from
her  genitals.  And  the  phyfician,  in  confequence  of  his  prejudice  in  favour
•of  his  own  opinion,  order'd  her  to  ride  in  a  coach  pretty  fwiftly,  and  over  rug-
ged and  uneven  places.

From  thence  arofe  pains.  The  patient  return'd  home.  Somebody  was  im-
mediately difpatch'd  to  the  phyfician,  to  confult  him  what  fhould  be  done.
The  phyfician  prefcribes  a  clyfter,  and  fays  that  he  will  come  by  the  time  this
has  had  its  effecc.  While  the  clyfter  was  difcharg'd,  a  dead  foetus  is  dif-
charg'd  at  the  fame  time,  together  with  the  fecundines  -,  but  without  any  falfe
conception.

Not  long  after  comes  the  phyfician.  The  maid,  of  whom  I  fpoke  before,
runs  to  meet,  and  accofts,  him,  almoft  in  the  fame  words  which  were  us'd
■on  an  almoft  fimilar  occafion,  formerly,  to  her  phyficians,  as  you  have  it  in
'tlie  Sepulchretum  (p)^  by  that  noble  Venetian  matron  Helena  de  Mocenicis.

CpJ  L.  3.  f.  21.  in  fchol.  penult,  ad  obf.  58.

For


Letter  XL VIII. Article  8,  9.  699

ITor  the  maid  fliowinghim  the  fcetus,  faid,  Look  here,  this  is  the  falfe  concep-
tion that  my  miftrefs  bore.

The  foetus  it  was  out  of  my  power  to  difleft ;  being  abfent,  as  I  have  al-
ready faid.  But  I  heard,  from  thofe  who  faw  it,  that  it  was  flender,  and  had
no  ill  fmell.

8.  Yet  phyficians  deferve  to  be  forgiven,  if  they  do  not  join  obftinacy  with
a  falfe  opinion.  I  found  one  to  be  nuich  more  docile  in  the  fame  city,  as
you  wilUmmediately  perceive,  from  the  hiftory  of  the  cafe  which  happen'd  in
the  year  1721.

5.  Now  take  a  third  hiftory  of  a  foetus,  that  was  difcharg'd  by  the  mother
in  an  immature  and  lifelefs  ftate  ;  which  hiftory  deferves  to  be  written  with  fo
much  the  more  accuracy,  becaufe  a  mola  was  difcharg'd  at  the  fame  time,
and  thofe  things  had  preceded,  which ;  as  in  a  certain  obfervation  of  Scha-
cherus  (j),  that  in  fome  meafure  agrees  with  this ;  ,almoft  remov'd  the  opinion
of.true  pregnancy.

A  matron  of  a  (lender  habit,  and  fmall  ftature  ;  but  than  whom  I, never  re^
member  any  one  to  have  generated'more  blood  ;  and  the  happy  mother  of  many
children,  yet  fonietimes  alfo  fubjedt  to  abortions  -,  having,  after  her  laft  de-
livery, which  was  foUow'd  by  a  very  great  difcharge  of  the  lochia,  pafs'd
the  winter  in  a  dejefted  and  gloomy  ftate  ;  in  the  month  of  April  fuppos'd, .
from,  the  tokens  which  fhe  had  been  accuftom'd  to  perceive,  join'd  with  a  re-^
tention  of  the  menfes,  that  ftie  had  conceiv'd  again.

Thefe  fymptoms  were  foUow'd  by  fo  great  a  lofs  of  appetite,  that  fhe  only
ate  in,  the  evening  in  general,  and  that  with  difficulty  ;  and  whatever  ftie  took  -
in  the  morning  was  thrown  up  by  vomiting.

To, this  was  added,  about  the  thirteenth  of  June,  a  flux  of  blood  from  the
uterus;  againft  which  diforders  ;  not  altogether  new  or  unufualtothe  patient;
notwithftanding  the  ufe  of.  the  waters  of  Nocera  had  been  of  advantage,
at  other  times,  .after  trying  many  things  in  vain,  it  was  of  no  advantage  now.

For  thefe  reafons  then,  I  was  call'd  to  the  patient  about  the  middle  of  July,  .
As  ftie  had  the  moft  unfpeakable  averfion  to  blood-letting,  I  therefore  rcr
commended  fuch  things  as  ftie  would  not  obftinately  refufe  ;  as  for  inftance
the  ufe  of  jellies  of  calves  feet,  coral  reduc'd  into  a  fine  powder,  cydonites,
and  a  few  other  things  of  the  like  kind,  .which  might  counteradt  both  the  dif-
orders; yet  in  fuch  a  manner  as  not  to  reftrain  the  flux  of  blood  with  vio-
lence.

Inthe  mean  while,  both  the  diforders  continued  ;  yet  fo  as  to  be  born  with-
out difficulty.  For  every  day  in  the  morning  ftie  rofe  from  bed,  fat,  walk'd,
and  even,  when  flie  pleas'd,  was  carried  through  the  city  in  a  coach  (though
this  was  what  I .  did  not  much  approve)  and  fcarcely  any  blood  was  dif-.
charg'd. ,

In  the  night  only,  when  ftie  lay  either  fupine,  or  on. her  left  fide;  for  on
her  right  fide  ftie  could  not  lie,;  was  it  difcharg'd  ;  whether  the  heat  of  the
bed  excited  the  difcharge,  or  whether,  when  ftie  was  not  in  a  recumbent  pof-
ture,  any  thing  oppos'd  itfelf  to  the  ofculum  uteri  v/hich  cover'd  it,  or  in  a
.manner  ftop'd  it  up.

Be.fides  that,  which  had  been,  difcharg'd,  in.  the.  night,  there  was  a  larga.

(f)  Progr.  deHasmorrhag.  Gravidar.

,  4  U  2  quantity:


700  Book  HI. Of  Difeafes  of,  the  Belly.

quantity  of;coagulated  blood,  which  came  away  when  fhe  firft  rofe.  In  fti;,
mean  while,  to  her  other  cauies  of  grief  was  added  one  very  violent,  join'd
with  fudden  terror,  on  account  of  an  unexpe&ed  misfortune  of  her  hufband.;
which,  as  the  whole  city  heard  it  with  comraiferation,  fo  his  wife  heard  with
tears  and  wringing  of  hands.

On  the  firft  night,  indeed,  after  this  calamity,  the  flux  of  blood  was  almoft
intirely  ftop'd.  But  during  the  following  nights,  it  flow'd  more  plentifully
■.than  before.  There  was  now  no  perfon  who,  confidering  lb  great,  and  fo
frequent,  an  effufion  of  blood,  could  believe  it  poflible  for  the  woman  to
be  with  child  -,  and  even  fhe  herfelf  believ'd  it  no  more.

The  phyfician  however,  although  my  fenior,  liften'd  to  me,  who  frequently
■uro^'d  that  we  muft  for  a  while  withold  our  opinion,  in  the  cafe  of  a  woman
who  abounded,  to  fuch  a  degree,  with  blood  :  that  all  the  ufual  figns  of  preg-
nancy had  preceded  -,  that  no  traces  of  abortion  had  ever  yet  appear'd  in  the
effus'd  blood,  though  it  had  been  always  accurately  infpefted :  that  the  uterus
fwcU'd  flowly  indeed;  but  if  the  blood  fhould  at  length  flow  more  fparingly,
it  then  would  probably  be  elevated  in  a  very  little  time.

We  muft  endeavour  therefore  to  render  the  difcharge  more  moderate  ;  for
■that  bv  this  means  the  ftrength  of  the  patient  might  aUb  be  more  eafily  pre-
ferv'd,'  the  decreafe  of  which  was  already  to  be  argued  from  the  patients  legs
not  beincr  fo  ftrong  as  they  had  hitherto  been,  and  from  the  roiy  colour  of  her
countenance  being  diminifli'd.

As  other  things,  which  he  had  adminfter'd  with  this  intention,  did  not  an-
fwer  very  well ;  he  began  to  give  the  old  conferve  of  rofes,  as  it  is  call'd,
vitriolated,  with  which  and  the  confedlio  alkermes  •,  for  fo  it  is  call'd  -,  with-
out perfumes,  he  involv'd  citron-ieeds  bruis'd,  and  reduc'd  them  into  the
form  of  a  bolus.

With  this  bolus  not  only  her  appetite  began  to  be  fomething  better,  but  a
much  lefs  quantity  of  blood  was  difcharg'd.  And  then  ;  for  a  third  part  of
the  month  of  Auguft  was  now  pafs'd  -,  not  only  the  breafts  began  to  fwell,  as
in  former  pregnancies,  but  even  to  be  rais'd  up  very  high.

Here  then,  the  patient  herfelf,  and  others,  began  to  return  to  the  opinion
of  pregnancy,  which  they  had  given  up.  Yet  there  was  fomething  unufual
that  made  the  patient  and  me  both  uneafy  ;  that  i-s  a  frequent  lenfe  of  prick-
ino-  in  the  uterus.  And  -  on  this  account  I  was  inclin'd  to  examine  her  belly
accurately  with  my  hand.

In  doing  of  which  I  became  ftill  more  uneafy,  as  I  perceiv'd  the  uterus
not  to  be  accuminated  towards  the  navel,  but  more  extended  in  a  traniverfe
diredtion  on  both  fides,  and  not  bearing  the  touch  without  pain,  if  it  were
prefs'd  upon  pretty  ftrongly  •,  efpecially  at  the  right  iliac  region.  P  not  only
diflTembled  my  fufpicion  with  the  patient  by  words,  but  even  by  my  coun-
tenance, as  1  thought  it  my  duty  to  do.

I  open'd  it  however  to  the  phyfician,  and  to  her  hufband,  by  faying  that
I  fear'd  left  there  Ihould  be  a  falie  conception  befides  the  foetus  ;  and  yet  that
there  need  be  no  alteration  for  this  reafon,  in  the  method  of  treatment :  for
that  where  there  was  a  fufpicion  of  a  falfe  conception,  and  the  increafe  of  the
uterus  was  larger  every  day,  in  proportion  as  the  lefs  blood  was  difcharg'd,
there  was  not  any  room  for  fuch  things  as  aftringM  violently  -,  efpeciaily  as
A.  the


letter  XLVIII. Article  9.  701

"#ie  blood,  in  fdme  nights,  did  not  flow  very  fparingly,  yet  for  the  moft  part
of  them  with  fufEcimt  moderation  at  prefent  •  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  where
the  very  great  difcharge  might  eafily  return,  and  there  was  fuppos'd  to  be  a
foetus  together  with  the  falfe  conception,  muft  we  have  recourfe  to  forcing,
and  ftimulating,  medicines,  which  are  not  always  fafe,  even  wliere  there  are
falfe  conceptions  only  ■,  but  that  the  ftrength  of  the  woman  muft  be  preferv'd,
by  obferving  the  ftate  of  the  flux,  and  moderating  it  according  to  occafion  j
and,  at  the  fame  time,  by  keeping  the  patient  quiet  both  in  body  and  mind,
and  nouriihing  her  with  aliments  fuitable  to  her  condition.

While  thele  things  then  were  obferv'd  with  attention,  not  many  days
after,  when  the  patient  happen'd  to  be  ftanding  (which  was  on  the  eighteenth
of  Auguft)  the  waters  fuddenly  broke  forth  from  the  uterus,  not  differing  in
their  fmell,  nor  in  any  other  circumftance,  from  thofe  which  generally  are  dif-
charg'd  by  women  in  labour ;  except  perhaps  that  they  were  difcharg'd  in
fomewhat  larger  quantity.

The  midwife  being  immediately  call'd,  and  finding  no  figns  of  an  ap-
proaching birth,  befides  this  eruption ;  and  even  perceiving,  with  her  finger,
the  OS  uteri  to  be  fhut ;  took  care  we  fhould  be  inform'd  of  thefe  things :
and  we  anfwer'd  that  unlefs  any  thing  new  fhould  arife,  we  muflrin  the  meari
time  lie  ftill  and  do  nothing.

One,  two,  even  three,  days  v/ere  pafs'd  over  in  this  manner.  I  not  being
greatly  furpriz'd  at  it,  as  I  remember'd  not  only  to  have  read  the  fame  in
Harvey  (r),  and  many  other  authors,  but  alfo  to  have  feen  in  another  noble-
woman, and  fellow-citizen  of  mine,  the  difcharge  of  the  waters  long  before
the  latter  part  of  utero-geftation ;  the  birth  not  fucceeding,  neverthelefs,
till  the  proper  time,  and  being  happy  ;  yet  I  was  fomewhat  difpleas'd  with  the
•accident  in  this  cafe,  where  I  fuppos'd  the  foetus  to  be  neither  robuft,  nor
folitary.

But  on  the  fourth  day,  when  the  belly,  which  had  been  much  funk  by  the
-difcharge  of  the  waters,  was  again  fomewhat  more  elevated,  labour-pains
came  on :  the  mola  was  firft  excluded,  and.  after  that  the  foetus  in  a  lifelefs
ftate;  andlaftofall,  after  the  interval  of  three  hours,  the  fee  undines  came
away  not  without  difficulty,  and  a  great  profufion  of  blood.

The  mother  was  preferv'd,  and  died  nine  and  tv/enty  years  after,  of  a  ma-
lignant ulcer,  as  I  have  heard,  in  the  uterus  or  vagina ;  but  one  which  had
begun  in  thefe  later  years.

At  leaft,  at  the  time  fhe  was  pregnant  with  this  foetus,  and  even  in  the
time  that  fucceeded  her  delivery,  and  for  a  confiderable  length  of  time  after-
wards, there  was  no  fymptom  from  whence  you  could  juftly  fufped  any  ul-
ceration of  the  uterus,  or  vagina  •,  and  from  thence  account  for  thofe  effufions
of  blood ;  as  you  might  in  a  woman  defcrib'd  by  Raygerus  (j),  fince  Ihe  la-
bour'd  under  a  very  great  uterine  haemorrhage  firft,  together  with  very  fevere
pains  of  the  loins,  and  groins,  fix  or  feven  weeks  before  her  delivery ;  and
after  her  delivery,  and  time  of  child-bed,  was  afflided  with  a  profluvium  of


(>•)  In  additam.  ad  exercit.  de  general,  ubi {s)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  3.  obf.  135.
ie  uter.  humor.


very


702  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

very  foetid  and  black  matter,  by  which  fhe  was  wafted  away  within  a  very
few  months.  <

But  if  you  choofe  to  compare  our  cafe  with  thofe  propos'd  by  Phil.  Jacob
Hartmann  (/),  and  by  the  celebrated  Guttermann  {u)  ;  you  will  eafily  conceive
that  abortions,  which  are,  in  like  manner,  join'd  with  a  falfe  conception,  have
been  preceded  by  a  very  great,  and  very  long,  profufion  of  blood ;  and  yet
that  this  is  not,  and  could  not,  with  propriety,  be  attributed  to  a  blood-vef-
fel  being  open'd  in  the  vagina,  and  much  lefs  to  the  ulceration  of  the  uterus,,
or  vagina.

But  let  us  go  OR  to  confider  the  other  circumftances  relative  to  the  abortion
I  have  defcrib'd.

The  mola  being  wafh'd  from  the  blood  which  adher'd  to  it,  was  found  to
be  no  thicker  than  two  fingers  breadths  -,  but  fomewhat  longer  ;  and  when  cut
into,  appear'd  to  be  a  little  fpongy,  and  in  a  manner  flefhy.

The  fecondines  (how'd  no  diforder  at  all. The  foetus,  which  was  of  the

,  female iex,  was  not equal  in its length  to nine inches. The  whole of

the  head  and  neck  was  blackifh,  as  if  from  a  large  contufion  ;  but  without

any  ni  ur.cU. The  other  parts,  even  internally, had  no  pieternatural  ap,-

pearance,  as  far  as  I  could  fee.

For,  by  reafon  of  the  foolifh  morofenefs  of  the  women,  I  was  but  juft  al-
low'd  to  open  the  belly,  in  which  I  obferv'd  the  ftomach,  and  fome  of  the
inteftines,  to  be  not  empty,  from  what  they  naturally  contain'd  of  a  blackifh
colour.

But  they  would  not  even  have  permitted  this,  except  for  the  fake  of  con>-
forting  the  parents;  who,  being  deceiv'd  by  the  appearance  of  the  fex,  were.,
greatly  chagrin'd  at  their  having  loft  a  boy  •,  for  1 fhow'd  them  the  uterus, .
which  was  very  fmall  indeed,  but  very  evidently  communicating  with  the
rimula  of  the  pudendum  ;  as  I  demonftrated  to  thefe  curious  parents  ;  ac--
cording  to  my  promife,  by  introducing  a  flender  probe  through  the  external  -.
paflage  •,  for  the  pretty  prominent  magnitude  of  the  clitoris,  covering  over
the  rimula,  as  is  ufual  in  foetufles  of  this  kind,  had  impos'd  upon  them  for
a  penis:  nor  is  this  furprizing,  fince  it  has  often  impos'd  upon  furgeons,  and-;
even  phyficians,  in  the  fame  manner.

lo.  And  you  will  know  that  this  is  not  faid  without  reafon  by  me,  ,  whenn
you  obferve  that  the  author  of  both  the  fpeculations  upon  viviparous  gene-?
ration,  defcribes  a  fcEtus  in  one  of  them,  which,  "  having  fcarcely  attain'd.^
"  to  the  length  of  a  third  part  of  the  little  finger,  was  neverthelefs  compleat,  .^
"  and  diftinft  in  all  its  parts ;  fo  that  even  the  mafculine  fex  was  extremely.
"  well  diftinguifti'd."

For  he  would  not  have  fallen  into  this  error ;  which  thefe  words  extremely,
well,  without  any  mention  of  doubt,  or  of  a  more  accurate  examination,,
plainly  fliow  •,  if  he  had  been  more  ftudious  of  exercifing  himfelf  in  anatomy, .
than  of  oppofing  it  •,  and  had  obferv'd  the  fame  things  that  fkilful  anatomifts,
and  particularly  Ruyfch  (x),  have  taken  notice  of,  in  regard  to  the  deception,
in  diftinguilhing  the  fex  being  more  eafy,  for  the  reafons  Fhave  faid,  in  pro-
portion as  the  foetus  is  lefs.

(/)  Dec.  ead.  a.  4.  obf.  84.  (x)  Thef.  Anat.  6.  n.  48.  51.  54,  59,

\u)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  3.  obf.  78.

It


Letter  XLVIIf. Article lo.  703

It  concerns  parents  to  have  this  vulgar  error  extirpated,  as  they  very  often
fufFer  the  more  chagrine  on  account  of  an  abortion,  becaufe'  they  think
thofe  to  be  the  abortions  of  males  alfo,  which  are  in  faft  the  abortions  of
females.

But  to  return  to  the  hiftory  in  queftion,  whether  that  blacknefs  of  the  head,
as  if  from  a  contufion,  was  owing  to  this,  that  the  waters  being  altogether,
or  in  the  chief  part,  effus'd,  the  membranes  were  not  diftended  thereby ;
and  therefore  not  pufh'd  downwards  in  order  to  dilate  the  paflage  for  the
foetus ;  but  the  foetus  being  propell'd  by  the  efforts  of  the  mother,  was
oblig'd  to  open  a  paflage  for  itfelf  through  the  ftreights  of  the  os  uteri ;  or
rather  whether,  if  the  foetus  is  fuppos'd  to  have  been  previoufly  dead,  which
was  certainly  the  cafe,  it  might  have  contradled  an  injury  of  that  kind,  (to
which  only  living  bodies,  or  recent  carcafes,  are  liable)  long  before  -,  what-
ever the  caufe  of  this  might  be;  or  immediately  after,  death,  the  head  being
probably  turn'd  downwards  before-,  and,  in  like  manner,  whether  the  mola
is  to  be  accus'd,  which,  as  it  preceded  the  fcetus,  might  have  been  interpos'd
betwixt  the  head  of  it  and  the  os  uteri,  and  have  made  the  way  more  narrow ;
and  might  likewife  be  the  obftacle  which,  when  the  woman  was  in  a  ftand-
ing  pofture,  prevented  the  difcharge  of  blood  from  the  uterus,  as  it  feem'd  to
be  then  prefs'd  upon  the  orifice  from  above  •,  I  leave  quite  undetermin'd.

And  I  do  not  doubt,  but  the  waters  which  were  effus'd,  came  from  the
amnios  of  the  fame  foetus,  which  was  not  excluded  till  the  fourth  day  after
for  feveral  reafons ;  but  particularly  becaufe  they  feem'd  to  be  in  fomewhat
greater  quantity,  than  they  ought  naturally  to  be.

Nor  am  I  ignorant  of  its  having  been  ingenioufly  fuppos'd,  that  the  waters
which  are  difcharg'd  before  their  proper  time,  do  not  belong  to  that  foetus
which  is,  at  length,  protruded  ;  but  to  another  :  which  having  been  con-
ceiv'd  together  with  this  indeed  -,  but  extinguifh'd  in  the  firft  dawnings  of
life,  and  afterwards  colliquated  ;  has  left  the  waters  that  anticipate  the  dif-
charge, within  its  own  proper  amnios,  till,  by  their  continual  increafe,  this
membrane  is  fo  diftended,  that  it  can  no  longer  refift  the  pretty  vehement
motions  of  the  other  foetus ;  which  is  ftrong,  and  almoft  arriv'd  at  a  ftate  of
maturity.

But  not  to  difpute  here,  upon  that  increafe  of  the  waters,  and  moreover,
to  grant  that  there  may,  perhaps,  be  fome  room  for  this  hypothefis  in  fome
cafes ;  at  leaft  there  certainly  was  not  in  our  cafe  ;  inafmuch  as  the  foetus  was
imperfedt  and  weak  ;  nor  yet  in  thofe  propos'd  by  Peterfonius  (y)  and  De-
thardingius  (2) ;  for  the  foetus  which  is  faid  to  havedrawn  back,  into  the  ute-
rus, its  head  which  was  already  thruft  out,  and  to  have  remain'd  there ,  the
one  two  weeks,  and  the  other  feven  ;  till  they  were  intirely  excluded  at  the
time  of  birth,  had  certainly  open'd  a  paffage  for  their  own  waters,  and  not  for  •
thofe  of  others  :  or  if  thefe  inftances  requir'd  more  firm  proofs,  which  I  readily
confefs;  yet  others  more  eafy  to  be  believ'd,  and  relative  to  the  fame  fubjed,
will  not  be  wanting,  if  you  ftiould  have  leifure  to  inquire  after  them.

However,  I  am  wont,  for  the  moft  part,  to  account  for  that  difcharge  of

(y)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec,  i.  a.  i.obf.  62.  (z)  Earund.  dec.  3.  a.  5.  in  append.  11.  8.

ad  cit,  obf.  63.

waters.


yo4  Book  IIL Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

waters,  which  is  premature,  and  generally  harmlefs,  from  the  rupture  of  the-
chorion  alone  ;  which  by  this'  means  fufFers  the  water,  that  was,  perhaps,  co!-
lefted  betwixt  itfelf  and  the  amnios,  in  greater  or  lefs  quantity,  according  to
the  obfervations  of  Ruyfch  (a),  and  of  others  {i>\  to  fiow  out ;  although  thefe
psribns  have,  from  thence,  feign'd  to  themfelves  I  iinow  not  what  kind  of
allantois  in  the  human  fpecies.

But  that  the  eruption  of  waters,  before  their  proper  time,  which  Hippo-
crates (c)  with  reafon  pronounc'd  "  bad,"  is  from  the  am-ni'-.s  itfelf,  I  do  not
in  the  leaft  doubt. Although  the  birth  is  not  always  unhappy  after  this :  yef
it  is  generally  lefs  happy  than  it  would  otherwife  have  been,  whether  we  con-
fider  this  as  a  caufe,  or  as  an  effed:.

For  confidering  it  as  a  caufe,  the  water,  being  efFus'd,  does  neither  then'
properly  dilate  the  paflage  for  the  foetus,  nor  lubricate  it.  And  as  an  efFe£t;.
whether  it  be  from  the  niembranes  of  the  fecundines  being  not  quite  firm,
or  from  the  too  great  quantity  of  water,  or  finally,  from  the  acrimony  of  it
(in  which  light  Martianus  (d)  choofes  rather,  and  not  without  juftice,  to  con-
sider it,  when  he  teaches  us  how  to  diftinguifla  thefe  two  laft  from  each
other)  it  certainly  does  not  foretell  any  thing  good,  in  refpedl  to  the  confti-
tution  either  of  the  foetus,  or  of  the  mother,  or  both,  in  their  folids,  or
fluids,  or  both  ;  contrary  to  what  is  requifite  to  the  defir'd  happinefs  in  child-
birth, and  in  child-bed.

From  thefe  confiderations  it  will  be  eafy  for  you  to  explain  fome  things  re-
lating to  the  eruption  of  the  water,  and  to  the  other  circumftances,  in  the
cafe  of  the  matron  in  queftion  ;  in  her  delivery,  and  in  the  foetus.

And  as  to  the  figns  which  induc'd  me  to  fufpeft  a  falfe  conception,  you-
gather  thefe  from  the  hiftory,  where,  fuch  as  they  are,  I  have  taken  notice
of  them.  It  certainly  is  not  fo  eafy  to  know  that  it  is  prefent,  as  to  allow  us
to  affirm  it  with  boldnefs  :  yet  from  the  known  figns  which  our  anceftors  have
left  us,  we  may  fufpedt  it  with  prudence.

The  greater  part  of  thefe  •,  though  it  is  not  neceflary  that  all  of  them  fhould
occur  together  ;  you  will  fee  colleiled  by  Lamzwerdius  (e),  from  whofe  book,
otherwife  in  the  greateft  part  of  it  quite  barren,  I  have  obferv'd  them  to  be
defcrib'd  by  fonie  authors,  in  this  age,  without  mentioning  his  name.

Yet  I  did  not  fuppofe  that  mola,  either  before  delivery,  or  after  difleftion,
to  be  one  of  thofc  that  are  call'd  the  true-,  and  even  always  confider'd  it  as  a
polypous  concretion  of  the  uterus,  particularly  in  a  woman  (and  this  circum-
ftance  induc'd  me  flill  more  to  fufpedt  its  exiftence)  from  whofe  uterus  I  faw
fo  great  a  quantity  of  blood  was  difcharg'd  ;  and  found  that  this  blood  was  fo
prone  to  concretion.

II.  Without  doubt,  though  fome  of  the  mote  are  true,  and  others  that
are  fo  call'd  are  fpurious  •,  yet  fome  of  both  thefe  kinds  may  be  either  join'd
with  a  fcstus,  and  often  caufe  abortion  ;  whether  by  irritating  the  uterus,  or

{a)  Thef.  Anat.  5.  n.  56.  prope  fin.  &  thef.  {cj  Coac.  prasnot.  fe£l.  3.  verf.  187.

10.  n.  155.  fdj  Annot.  ad  eund.  verf.

C5J  "Vid.  Littre  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  (e)  Hift.  Nat.  Molar,  uter.  c.  16.
a.  1701.  Sc  Commerc.  Littr,  a.  1732.  hebd.

36.  B.  3.

by


Letter  XL VIII. Article  12.  70^

by  occupying  a  very  confiderable  part  of  its  cavity ;  or  increafe  to  fuch  a  de-
gree, without  a  foetus,  as  to  refemble  pregnancy.

But  the  illegitimate,  or  fpurious,  may  be  produc'd  even  in  untouch'd  vir-
gins, and  chafte  widows;  the  legitimate,  or  true,  cannot,  unlefs  among
thofe,  who,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  others,  fuppofe  ova  fubventanea^  or
unimpregnated  eggs,  in  women.

The  fpurious  ;  to  fpeak  of  thefe  firfl: ;  are  form'd  either  of  blood  ftagnat-
ing  in  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  or  of  fome  internal  excrefcence  thereof.  You
will  know  thefe  latter  by  a  certain  bafis,  or  peduncle,  by  which,  as  Ruyfch
(f)  has  advanc'd,  they  are  continued  from  the  uterus,  qr  at  leaft  come  off  from
the  fanguiferous  vefTels  thereof,  which  are  produc'd  into  them.

But  the  former,  which  occur  much  the  moll  frequently,  and  to  which  you
will,  without  difficulty,  refer  many  that  are  extant  in  the  Sepulchretum,  are
compos'd  merely  of  blood ;  in  the  fame  manner  as  other  polypous  concre-
tions are  form'd  in  the  veflels,  and  in  the  heart  itfelf :  and  I  do  not  fee  fuffi-
cient  reafon,  why  we  may  not  allow  it  poffible,  as  Lancifi  (g)  has  taught,
that  thefe  may  be  form'd  even  in  the  uteri  of  virgins,  contrary  to  the  opi-
nion of  Hoffmann  {h) ;  elpecially  in  the  uteri  of  thofe  whofe  menftrua  flow
in  great  plenty,  or  to  whom  a  uterine  hsmmorrhage  is  not  unufual ;  for  in
this,  or  fome  fimilar  manner,  do  I  think  that  the  celebrated  Abraham  Vater
(/)  is  to  be  interpreted  ;  as  he  allow'd  of  them  In  fome  virgins  at  leaft.

Ruyfch  (k)  has  taught  us,  by  what  means  concretions  of  this  kind  may  be
diftinguifh'd  from  certain  molas,  which  have,  by  others,  been  reckon'd  among
the  true  ones  •,  and  this  notwithftanding  they  have  fomethingjoin'd  with  them
that  has  a  refemblance  to  membranes.  But  before  I  begin  to  expatiate  a  little
upon  mols,  I  muft  not  conceal  from  you,  an  obfervation  of  mine  of  a  cer-
tain lingular  conformation  of  polypous  concretions  of  the  uterus.

12.  In  the  place  of  my  nativity  was  a  noble  matron,  of  a  tall  ftature,  en-
dow'd  with  a  good  colour,  and  a  laudable  habit  of  body,  who  had  fuffer'd
feveral  mifcarriages  in  the  firfl:  months  of  her  pregnancy  ;  but  in  the  inter-
vals of  thefe  abortions,  however,  flie  had  frequently  completed  her  period  of
utero-gefl:ation,  and  brought  forth  very  large  living  children,  and  even  fome-
times  twins ;  thought  not  without  great  difficulty,  and  troublefome  times  of
child-bed.

Betwixt  thefe  difficult  births  flie  had,  for  the  mofl:  part,  been  fubjett  to  a
fluor  albus  of  an  innocent  nature ;  and,  fometimes,  in  the  midway  betwixt
her  menftrual  purgations,  to  a  flight  flrillicidium  of  blood  alfo,  which  the  em-
braces of  her  hufl3and,  efpecially  when  rather  more  violent,  renew'd :  and
not  without  fome  confiderable  pain.

This  woman  then,  when  flie  had  pafs'd  about  her  thirty-fourth  year,  being
intirely  rid  of  her  fluor  albus ;  began  to  labour  under  a  new  kind  of  diieafe
at  intervals,  which  recur'd  frequently,  within  the  fpace  of  two  years :  birt
in  the  three  lafl:  months  of  the  year  1723,  and  the  firfl:  of  the  following  year,
in  which  month  I  was  confulted  by  letter,  it  return'd  at  a  certain  time  ;  that
is  at  the  time  of  the  menftrua.

CfJ  Cent.  obf.  anat.  chir.  58.  (i)  Diff.  qua  mola  pregnans  &c.  thef.  12.

CgX  Epift.  ad  Mulebancher.  (i)  Cent,  citats  obf.  29.

{h)  Diflert.  de  ignor,  uteri  ftruft.  §.  19.

Vol.  II.  4  X  For


7o6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

For  at  that  time  pains,  like  thole  of  child-birth,  coming  on;  and  the  flux
of  blood  beginning  on  the  firft  or  fecond  day,  and  flowing  even  more  plenti-
fully than  uilial ;  in  almoft  the  middle  of  its  courfe  a  membranous  body,  as  it
appear'd,  was  difcharg'd  from  the  uterus  :  and  that  in  fuch  a  form,  and  of  fuch
a  magnitude,  as  perfeftly  correfponded  to  the  triangular  cavity  of  the  uterus;
being  moderately  convex  externally  ;  on  which  furface  it  was  unequal,  and
not  without  many  filaments  that  Icem'd  to  have  been  broken  ofl^  from  the
parts  to  which  they  had  adher'd  ;  but  internally  hollow  ;  on  which  furface  it  was
fmooth,  and  moift,  as  if  from  an  aqueous  humour,  which  it  had  before  con-
tain'd,  but  had  difcharg'd,  at  its  own  exit,  by  an  ample  foramen,  which  was
in  one  of  its  angles,  that  had  been  readily  open'd  by  rupture.

The  exclufion  of  this  body  was  foUow'd  by  a  great  quantity  of  the  lochia  •,.
and  thofe  were  often  interrupted  according  to  the  cuftom,  of  women.  And  if
this  body  came  away  fometimes,  not  in  an  entire  flate,  but  divided  into  little
■pieces,  and  at  different  times ;  then  the  pains,  and  the  flux  of  the  lochia,  were-
in  like  manner  renew'd  at  thefe  times.

As  the  patient  therefore,  in  each  of  thefe  four  months,  in  which  (he  had'
abftain'd  from  the  embraces  of  her  hufband,  had  fuffer'd  one  of  thefe  very
troublefome  kind  of  abortions ;  and  the  remedies  which  had  been  prefcrib'd
by  many  excellent  phyficians,  who  had  been  confulted,  had  been  of  no  ufe-
ac  all ;  fhe  began  to  think  that  it  would  be  much  more  advantageous  to  her,
if  fhe  could  be  free  from  the  pains  for  nine  months  at  leaft ;  and  determin'd
to  lie  alone  no  longer:  wherefore  in  the  month  of  March  1724,  fhe  became
pregnant. Yet  (he  did  not  carry  her  foetus  beyond  June.

But  this  was  the  confequence  of  it ;  that  in  July,  and  the  two  following
months,  her  menftrua  flow'd  properly,  and  without  any  uneafinefs.

However,  as  none  had  appear'd  in  the  month  of  Oflober,  the  pains  re-
turn'd  again  about  the  beginning  of  November,  with  the  difcharge  of  fuch.
a  body  as  I  have  defcrib'd  ;  and  with  the  other  circumftances  I  have  fpoken
of  above.

And  the  fame  fymptoms  continued  to  return  a  long  while,  at  dated  inter-
vals ;  fo  that  when  I  was  at  Forli,  in  one  of  the  following  years,  I  faw  a  body
that  had  been  difcharg'd,  which,  as  I  had  written  to  them  when  abfent,  was
made  up  of  a  polypous  concretion  refembling  a  membrane,  and  difpos'd  into^
the  form  of  a  fmall  triangular  purfe  :  fo  that  it  was  eafy  to  conceive,  that  the
vifcid  particles  of  the  ferum  of  the  blood,  iflxiing  forth  from  the  uterine  ori-
fices of  the  veflTels,  which  had  been  formerly  difcharg'd  in  the  form  of  a  fluor
albus,  were  now  iaecome  more  vifcid,  and  adher'd  to  all  the  internal  parietes
of  the  uterus,  and  by  this  means  were  concreted  into  a  polypous  membrane ;
and  being  moulded  to  the  figure  of  that  cavity  (which,  in  the  Adverfaria  (/},.
I  have  affirm'd  to  be  almoft  of  the  figure  of  a  triangle)  as  if  taken  from  a
real  mould,  refembled  a  purfe,  into  which  the  watry  part  of  the  ferum,  that
had  been  betwixt  thofe  more  vifcid  particles,  being  exprefs'd,  wasretain'd;
preferving  the  purfe  hollow,  and  rendering  it  internally  fmooth  :  and  that
they  were  retain'd  with  eafe,  becaufe,  either  on  account  of  the  fafciculi  of
fibres  that  protuberated  within  the  cervix,  or  on  account  of  the  narrownefs

(IJ  I.  tab.  3  &  IV.  animad.  42.

of


Letter  XLVIII. Article  12.  707

of  this  part,  if  compar'd  with  the  fundus,  or  by  reafon  of  the  impediment
of  the  orifice,  which  was  almoft  clofe,  the  vifcid  particles  ftagnating,  and
being  every  where  contiguous  to  one  another,  fliut  up  the  purfe  from  the
very  beginning :  and  finally,  that  this,  at  firft,  by  oppofing  an  obftacle  to
the  blood  which  was  about  to  burft  out  every  month,  caus'd  the  veflels  of
the  uterus  to  be  diftended,  and  pains  by  this  means  to  be  excited ;  but  after
that,  when  by  the  force  of  the  impelling  blood,  it  was  drawn  away  from  the
parietes  of  the  uterus,  it  increas'd  the  pains  and  made  them  violent  ■,  and  laft
of  all  that  being  torn  quite  away  on  all  fides,  it  was  thrown  out  of  the  uterus,
not  without  a  great  quantity  of  blood  preceding,  accompanying  and  follow-
ing it,  on  account  of  that  great  diftention  of  the  veffels.

Thus  you  have  the  opinion  that  I  had  of  this  difeafe,  in  the  beginning,
and  afterwards :  which  difeafe,  to  me  who  remember'd  the  obfervations  of
Platerus  (w),  and  of  others,  and  thofe  which  were  not  unknov/n  even  formerly
to  Aetius  (k),  feem'd  by  no  means  new,  in  this  circumftance,  that,  at  the
ftated  time  of  the  menftrua,  fome  concretion  fhould  be  difcharg'd,  and  that
for  a  long  time  together  ;  but  in  this,  that  the  concretion  was  of  fuch  a  pecu-
liar form,  which  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  of  in  other  authors :  and
indeed  I  remember  Platerus  to  have  exprefly  afferted,  that  he  could  find
"  no  cavity"  in  his  concretion.

To  fome  of  thofe  who  were  confulted,  this  of  ours  feem'd  to  be  an  excre-
fcence  of  the  uterus ;  to  others  a  polypous  concretion  indeed ;  but  from  blood
diftilling  through  fom.e  eroded  veffel,  in  the  uterus  itfelf.

But  if  they  had  either  infpefted  it,  as  I  did,  or  had  read  the  defcription
thereof,  in  the  letters  written  to  me  by  this  lady's  hufband  ;  which  were  much
more  accurate  than  thofe  of  the  phyfician ;  I  doubt  not  but  they  would  readily
have  laid  down  thofe  opinions,  which  time,  alfo,  fhow'd  to  be  foreign  to  the
truth.

For  although  the  difeafe  lafted  a  long  while  afterwards ;  yet  it  at  length
ended  of  itfelf,  and  through  the  efFefts  of  age.

That  is  to  fay,  when  the  time  was  come,  in  which  the  menftrual  purga-
tions generally  leave  women,  it  now  firfl  began  to  return,  not  every  month,
but  only  twice,  or  thrice,  every  year  :  and  when  the  menftrua  entirely  ceas'd,
it  ceas'd  alfo :  nor  did  any  fign  of  even  the  moft  flight  erofion  in  the  uterus,
or  any  inconvenience  therefrom,  exift  during  the  whole  life  of  the  woman ;
and  {he  Uv'd  until  a  cancer,  which  arofe  in  one  breafl  afterwards,  carried  her
off  when  on  the  verge  of  feventy  years  of  age.

Moreover,  the  opinion  of  the  phyfician,  whom  this  patient  made  ufe  of,
was  that  thefe  concretions  were  unimpregnated  eggs ;  copfidering,  I  fuppofe
the  fame  thing  that  they  did,  who  have  taught  us  to  diflinguifh  polypous
molse,  from  thofe  which  are  from  fuch  eggs,  by  the  cavity  which  would  be
within  thefe  latter,  and  not  within  the  former.

But  if  we  were  even  to  allow  of  fuch  eggs  in  women  ;  it  would  neverthe-
lefs  be  diihcult  to  fay,  why,  in  this  woman,  they  fhould  always  be  drawn

(m)  Obf.  1.  3.  ubide  inanimat.  excret.  («)  Medic,  Tetrabi.  4.  ferm.  4.  c.  80.

4X2  out


70 8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

out  into  the  form  of  a  triangle,  and  why  in  each  month,  one  fhould  be  ready
to  defcend  into  the  uterus  at  a  ftated  time.

But  thus  far  on  this  fubjedt.  Now  let  us  add  a  few  things  upon  true
mote,  as  I  have  promis'd.

13.  The  moft  learned  men  of  our  age  only  call  thofe  molas  true,  or  legir
timate,  which  are  not  produc'd  without  a  previous  conception.  But  fome
believe  that  they  may  be  form'd  of  the  foetus,  and  fecundines ;  others  of  the
placenta  only  -,  if  from  any  caufe  whatever,  the  appearance  of  thefe  parts  are
chang'd,  fo  that  they  cannot  be  readily  known  to  be  thofe,  which  from  the
original  formation  they  had  been  ;  whether  they  reprefent  a  kind  of  flefhy
mafs,  or  even  a  mafs  much  harder  than  flefh ;  or  a  congeries  of  veficles ;
as  that  which  Mercatus  (0)  faw  formerly.

You  have  Ruyfch  in  your  hands,  who  has  fliown,  even  in  the  placenta
alone,  both  thefe  kinds  of  changes ;  and  that  in  feveral  places,  but  particu-
larly in  his  obfervations :  and  as  thefe  were  publifli'd  in  the  year  1 690,  I  do
not  fee  why  none  of  them,  that  I  have  refer'd  to  here  or  above  (p),  are  trans-
fer'd  into  the  Sepulchretum  ;  at  leafl  to  increafe  the  fcholia  of  this  feftion.

For  he  has  taught  us  (q),  that  the  placentuls,  of  very  fmall  foetufles,
frequently  remain  in  the  uterus ;  and  being  comprefs'd  by  the  uterus  con-
ftringing  itfelf  more  and  more,  feem  to  be  very  different  from  what  they
were  ;  and  not  only  in  figure,  but  alfo  in  their  fubftance,  which  is  very  fimi-
lar  to  the  moft  hard  flefli.

And  that  the  placentae  of  pretty  large  foetufles,  remaining  in  the  fame  ca-
vity, fometimes  degenerate  into  veficles  full  of  a  watry  humour,  the  fame
author,  if  any  other,  very  clearly  fhows ;  fince  he  found  one  and  the  fame
placenta  in  part  found  (r)j  and  in  part  already  chang'd  into  veficles  of  this
kind.

But  notwithftanding  thefe  obfervations  are  true,  three  or  four  things,  how-
ever, ought  to  be  added.

Firft,  that  the  placentulae  of  the  fmaller  foetufles  do  not,  however,  fail  to
degenerate  fometimes  into  veficles ;  as  the  fame  author  Ruyfch  demonftrated
the  beginnings  of  this  change  in  the  placentula  of  a  foetus  "  of  almoft  three
"  months  •,"  and  in  another  "  placentula  fliow'd  the  fame  change  ftill  more
"  clearly"  (s).

In  the  fecond  place,  that  this  change  does  not  agree  with  the  placenta
alone  ;  fince  it  is  certain,  not  only  from  the  later  obfervations  of  Ruyfch,  that
he  had  feen  a  veficle  "  many  times  "  in  the  funiculus  umbilicalis  (t)  ;  but  it
is  even  manifeft,  from  his  more  early  obfervations  (u),  that  the  fame  funicu-
lus had  fometimes  occur'd  to  him  in  a  flate  fo  full  of  "  veficles,  that  the
*'  whole  of  it  feem'd  a  concatenation  of  veficles  fiU'd  with  a  watery  humour  :"
and  it  is  even  certain  from  the  obfervation  of  our  Vallifneri  (x),  that  a  placenta
was  difcharg'd  from  the  uterus,  after  a  very  great  number  of  veficles,  fo  that;

(0)  Seft.  hac  Sepulchr.  37.  obf.  i.  §.  4.  {tj  Ibid.  n.  45.  &  tat>.  2.  fig.  3,

(f)  N.  II.  («)  Obf.  14.  &  fig.  15.

(j)  Obf.  28.  29.  58..  {x)  Operetom.  a.,  p.  i.  ubi  de  Pwtu  Vefi-

(r)  Obf.  33.  cular».

(j)  Thef.  anat.  6.  n.  102.  103.  &  tab.  3.  fig.

yntefs.


Letter  XL VIII. Article  13.  709

unlefs  you  fuppofe  this  to  have  belong'd  to  another  foetus ;  it  would  appear
that  thefe  veficles,  therefore,  had  not  been  from  the  change  of  the  placenta  ;
which  you  may  alfo  infer  from  the  obfervations  of  others :  as,  for  inftance,
from  thofe  of  the  celebrated  Guttermann  (y).

In  the  third  place,  that  it  may  perhaps  be  doubted  with  the  fame  Vallift
neri,  who  I  fee  has  obferv'd  nearly  all  the  things  that  I  have  obferv'd,  whe-
ther that  degeneracy,  of  the  placenta  into  veficles,  is  brought  about  at  the
time  when  it  remains  in  the  uterus,  after  the  exclufion  of  the  foetus ;  or  whe-
ther it  is  brought  about  before  this  exclufion.

At  leaft,  in  the  placenta  of  a  foetus  of  four  months,  which  had  been  ex-
cluded together  with  the  foetus,  I  have  feen  a  veficle  full  of  water.  Yet  on
this  fuppofition,  fuch  a  change  would  be  feen  more  frequently  in  the  pla,-
centas,  which  are  difcharg'd  with  the  fcetufles.

Finally,  in  the  fourth  place,  as  it  is  faid  above,  that  neither  of  thefe  kinds
of  mols£  are  produc'd  without  a  preceding  conception,  and  neither  of  them,
certainly,  by  untouch'd  and  pure  virgins  ;  that  I  remember  to  have  read ;
there  is,  beyond  a  doubt,  need  of  the  greateft  fkilfulnefs,  and  diligence  in
examining  j  nor  lefs  prudence  in  pronouncing ;  if  at  any  time  a  woman  who  is
faid  to  have  abftain'd  herfelf  from  man,  fhould  difcharge  a  body  from  the  uterus,
■which,  at  firft  fight,  might  feem  to  belong  to  one  or  the  other  kind  j  left  it
fhould  perhaps  not  be  a  placenta,  but  a  mere  concretion  of  blood,  or  fome
excrefcence  which  bore  a  refemblance  to  flelh>  or  the  veficles,  whereof  I  have
fpoken.

For  that  excrefcences,  which  refemble  flefii,  or  are  really  flelh,  have  been
met  with  at  times  is  very  well  known  :  and  what  they  are  which  bear  a  refem-
blance to  thefe  veficles,  has  been  faid  in  the  preceding  letter  (z).

And  indeed,  as  there  is  fometimes  a  dropfy  in  the  cavity  of  the  belly  from
hydatids ;  as,  for  inftance,  fuch  as  Ruyfch  (a)  has  reprefented  to  have  been
included  in  a  peculiar  fac;  fo  it  is  not  repugnant  to  probability,  that  a
dropfy  of  the  uterus  is  fometimes  produc'd  in  the  fame  manner  :  efpecially
as  Aetius  (l>)  has  defcrib'd  this ;  unlefi  it  is  to  be  confider'd  as  a  mola  made
up  of  veficles,  a.s  others  have  chofen  to  confider  it  •,  in  his  chapter  De  Uteri
Hydrops :  his  words  are,  "  a  quantity  of  moifture  is  coUedled  in  the  womb,
"  and  fometimes  certain  corpufcles,  very  fimilar  to  the  gall-bladder,  are  ge-
"  nerated  therein,  and  in  thefe  corpufcles  a  humour  is  colledled  :"  and  thefe
corpufcles  he  calls  below  "  bladders  compos'd  of  pelUcles,  and  fill'd  with
"  water."

Nor  are  examples  wanting,  of  a  long-continu'd  droply  being  fblv^d  by  a  very
great  number  of  hydatids  difcharg'd  from  the  uterus  ;  one  of  which  kind
you  will  read  propos'd  by  the  celebrated  KannegieflTerus  (c),  in  an  old  wo-
man who  was  about  feventy  years  of  age :  although  there  may  be  fome  who
fufpeft,  that,  in  this  cafe  alfo,  thefe  hydatids  belong'd  to  a  true  mola;  that
is  to  fay  from  the  placenta  of  the  foetus,  conceiv'd.  while  the  age  of  the  wo-
man as  yet  allow'd  of  it,  and  carried  in  the  uterus  many  years  after  the  death
of  the  foetus.

[y)  A£l.  n.  c.  torn.  3.  obf.  78..  fij  Med.  Tetrabibl.  4.  Serm.  4.  c.  74.

fzj  N.  20.  &  feq.  {f)  Aft.  a.  c.  torn.  6.  obf.  8g,.

(aj  Obf.  cit.  iig.  24,  .

Whicbi


7IQ  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

"Which  I  take  notice  of  for  this  reafon,  becaufe  the  celebrated  Rideux  (d),
in  regard  to  the  mola  of  another  kind  indeed  ;  but  of  the  legitimate  kind,  as
he  does  not  doubt ;  which  was  difcharg'd  by  a  widow  in  the  feventy-feventh
year  of  her  age;  although  of  fuch  a  magnitude  and  weight,  that  it  is  fur-
prizing,  no  figns  of  its  exiftence  had  ever  been  given  •,  thinks,  neverthelefs,
for  thofe  reafons  which  he  gives,  that  it  had  its  origin  from  a  conception  of
the  woman,  when  fhe  was  in  her  fifty-fourth  year :  that  is  in  the  year  when
her  menftrual  purgations,  being  not  at  all  diminifh'd  quite  to  that  time,  ceas'd
of  a  fudden  :  and  ihe  had  brought  forth  her  ninth  child  in  the  fifty-firft  year
of  her  life.

And  thefe  things  being  fuppos'd,  you  may  gather  two  ufeful  inferences
from  thence.  One,  that  we  may  confider,  whether  you  can  from  hence  ex-
plain, or  at  leaft  in  fome  meafure,  how  the  woman  of  whom  you  read  in
"Vallifneri  {e) ;  who  was  herfelf  alfo  the  mother  of  many  children  ;  the  laft  of
which  fhe  was  fuppos'd  to  have  brought  forth  almoft  in  her  fiftieth  year-,  in
the  feventy-fecond  year  of  her  life  at  length  difcharg'd  a  placenta  from  the
uterus,  and,  annex'd  thereto,  a  mafs,  weighing  a  pound,  of  rude,  and  un-
form'd  flefh  •,  if  you  except  a  kind  of  fimilitude  to  an  eye  in  the  upper  part ;
and  certain  involutions  within,  as  if  of  the  inteltines  of  a  foetus  :  and,  in
like  manner,  how  another  woman  (f),  older  by  a  year  than  the  laft ;  who
had  formerly  had  her  menftrua  return,  and  been  impregnated,  and  had  them
return  now  again  for  one  month  or  two ;  difcharg'd  "  veins ;"  if  they  were
really  veins,  and  could  preferve  their  form  fo  long ;  together  with  a  much
larger  mafs  of  flefh.

And  the  other  ufeful  inference  is,  that  if  any  thing  of  this  kind  fhould
come  from  any  widow,  even  long  after  the  death  of  her  hufband,  which
comes  near  to  the  nature  of  a  true  mola,  and  even  is  a  true  mola ;  we  muft
not  immediately  doubt  of  her  chaftity :  fince,  as  has  been  faid  above,  the
p!acentula  might  have  remain'd  in  the  uterus  formerly,  in  an  abortion  that
had  not  been  much  taken  notice  of.

And  though  thefe  things  by  no  means  take  place  in  virgins ;  yet  even  in
them,  as  I  faid,  we  muft  confider  again  and  again  with  accuracy,  and  take
care  that  no  deception  may  happen.

And  that  this  may  be  avoided  as  far  as  poiTible  ;  it  will  be  proper  to  at-
tend to  thofe  things,  in  flefhy  excrefcences,  and  in  polypous  concretions  of
blood,  which  arc  taken  notice  of  above  (g),  and  to  read  over  the  places  of
Ruyfch  that  are  referr'd  to  ;  and  indeed  to  add  the  obfervation  of  the  cele-
brated Schlierbachius  (h),  who ;  although  he  faw  a  mola  "  in  fome  meafure
"  vafcular,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  fill'd  with  copious  hydatids,  that  feem'd
"  interlarded  with  a  great  quantity  of  fat ;"  did  not  for  this  reafon  deny  that
it  came  from  a  virgin  -,  I  fuppofe  becaufe  even  in  polypous  concretions  there
is  often  an  appearance  that  in  fome  meafure  refembles  fat ;  and  we  feme-
times  fee  thofe  appearances  that  reiemble  vefTels  :  as  to  hydatids,  I  fpoke  of
them  juft  now.


(<^)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  1735.  fg)  N.  11.

(e)  Tom.  z.  cit.  p.  2.  c.  uk.  (/:.)  Aft.  n.  C.  torn.  7.  obf.  61.

(/)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  6.  obf.  74.


Thus


Letter  XLVIII. Article  14.  71 1

Thus  Phil.  Jac.  Hartmann  alio  (0,  did  not  fufFer  himfelf  to  be  deceiv'd,
either  by  the  appearance  "  of  a  fat  cuticle,"  or  by  "  many  coats  intermix'd
"  with  fibres,  and  vefTels,  of  a  white  colour  ;"  or,  finally,  by  "  a  veficle
"  inherent  internally,  and  containing  a  jelly  ;"  but  acknowledg'd  it  to  be  no-
thing more  than  "  a  coagulum  of  blood  :"  notwithftanding  it  was  in  a  wo-
man, in  regard  to  whom,  if  he  had  faid  that  it  was  a  true  mola,  he  would,
from  thence,  have  brought  no  reproach  upon  her  honcft  fame  ;  as  (he  was
a  married  woman.

"We  muft  therefore  inquire,  not  what  appears,  but  what  really  is,  and  that
with  accuracy ;  for  true  fibres,  true  veffels,  true  coats,  and  a  bladder  made
up  of  thefe,  cannot  exift  without  the  interpofition  of  a  man.

Nay,  even  a  bladder  of  this  kind,  would  be  the  moft  legitimate  among  all
molse  •,  as  it  is  the  involucrum  of  the  beginning  of  an  embryo,  and  of  the
humour  in  which  the  embryo  fwims ;  if  a  thing  of  this  kind  were  compre-
hended under  the  name  of  a  mola,  as  it  is  now  underftood  by  moft  perfons:
although  the  fame  Hartmann  {k\  and  the  celebrated  Gotwaldt "(/),  in  imita-
tion of  him  ;  the  laft  of  which  authors  has  illuftrated  his  obfervation  by  a
figure,  very  fimilar  to  thofe  that  were  publifh'd  afterwards  by  Ruyfch  {m) ;.
have  call'd  this  very  appearance  "  a  mola  veficularis,"  or  bladder-like
mola.

This,  therefore,  cannot  exift  in  virgins,  nor,  as  far  as  I  know,  that  in  like
manner,  which  might  with  more  propriety  be  call'd  a  "  mola  veficularis ;"
I  mean  a  congeries  of  veficles  difpos'd  after  the  manner  of  a  clufter  of
grapes.

And  left  any  deception  fhould  happen  in  judging  of  this,  it  will  not,  I  be-
lieve, be  ufelefs  to  infpeft  the  moft  accurate  defcriptions,  and  reprefenta-
tions  by  figures,  of  thofe  which  have  been  difcharg'd  after  conception  ;  and
to  attend  to  the  branches,  or  ramifications  therein,  to  which  they  have  often
hung  when  difcharg'd.

Defcriptions  and  figures  of  this  kind,  you  will  not  find  in  fo  perfeft  a  ftate  in
Ruyfch  («) ;  although  he  has  reprefented  the  veficles  more  than  once,  and
has  mention'd  them  many  times;  as  in  Malpighi  (o),  and  Vallifneri(/»).

And  certainly,  thofe  fmall  excrefcences  which  are  made  up  of  veficles,  and
which  I  have  happen'd  to  fee  within  the  uterus,  had  no  appearance  of
branches,  to  which  the  veficles  were  hung ;  but  were  crouded  clofely  to  each
ether,  and  coher'd  either  by  their  own  fubftance,  or  by  means  of  an  inter-
pofing  fubftance,  which  was  neither  flender,  nor  ramifying.

14.  However,  there  are  fo  many  obfervations  publilh'd,  of  bladders  being
ejedted  from  the  uterus ;  and  fo  many  colledlions  of  thofe  referr'd  to  by  men
of  erudition  ;  that  I  fhould  feem  to  be  undertaking  a  very  ufelefs  labour,  if
1  fhould  add,  at  large,  any  others  that  have  come  to  my  knowledge.

For  I  know  that  a  matron  of  Forli,  about  forty  years  ago,  difcharg'd  vefi-
cles, fome  of  which  were  larger,  others  fmaller,  and  fome  very  fmall ;  and
that  here  likewife,  the  wife  of  one  of  the  governor's  fervants  difcharg'd,  in

(/)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  5  &  6.  obf.  206.  (a)  Adverf.  Anat.  dec.  2.  c.  ult.

(k)  Earund.  dec.  2.  a.  10.  obf.  157.  (0)  Op.  Pofth.

(/)  Earund.  dec.  3.  a.  9  &  10.  obf,  159.  (p)  Opere  loc.  cit.  &Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.

(w)  TJief.  Anat.  6.  tab.  2. .  73.

the.


712  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  year  1727,  a  great  number,  inftead  of  a  foetus  that  was  expected;  and
that  Albertini,  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  1724,  had,  once  and  again^
at  the  diftance  of  a  month,  feen  a  congeries  of  veficles  difcharg'd  from  a
certain  woman  (not  without  fome  fever  and  fevere  pains)  which  refembled
the  larger  branches  of  the  red  currants  in  their  figure  and  difpofition  ;  ex-
cept that  they  were  of  a  colour  fomewhat  more  dilute  :  nor  indeed  does  the
colour  fliow  that  thofe  veficles  were  different  from  others  which  we  fpeak  of  j
fince  not  only  Tulpius  (q)  has  not  doubted  that  fome,  which  were  diftended
v/ith  "  a  yellow  water,"  but  Lancifi  (r)  alfo,  that  others,  which  were  on  one
and  the  fame  branch,  among  the  reft  that  were  full  of  a  limpid,  or  yellow-
ifli  fluid,  and  were  diftended  "  with  a  kind  of  redilh  cruor,"  belong'd  to
this  clafs ;  nor  yet  thofe  celebrated  men  Magnenius  (s),  Dechiappa^O?  and
Guttermann  (u)  ;  the  latter  of  whom  in  fome  of  the  largeft,  and  the  fecond
in  all;  for  they  were  all  pretty  large -,  faw  "a  bloody"  or  "  redifhfpot'*
internally :  but  Magnenius,  in  another  mola,  faw  fome  "  of  a  yellowifh  co-
"•  lour ;"  and  two  only  or  three  externally  "  redilh ;"  and  in  another,  of  the
fame  woman,  found  all  them ;  which  were  innumerable  and  very  fmall ;
*'  of  a  very  red  colour."

To  thefe  obfervers  you  will  finally  add  the  illuftrious  Haller,  where  (x)  ;
defcribing  white  veficulse,  which  adhered  to  ftalks  going  out  from  the  pla-
centa •,  he  fays  that  in  the  placenta  itfelf  alfo,  "  there  had  been  more  red
*'  veficles,  which  were  connected  to  each  other  in  the  fame  manner."

I  omit  others,  in  which  nothing  is  remark'd  that  has  any  reference  to  a  red
colour ;  whether  the  bladders  have  been  difcharg'd  from  the  uterus,  in  a
loofe  and  unconnedled  ftate ;  as  thofe  probably  were,  that  are  mention'd  in
the  Commercium  Litterarium  in  the  year  1745  (y),  and  certainly,  if  I  am
not  miftaken,  thofe  that  are  taken  notice  of  by  the  celebrated  Phil.  Conrad.
Fabricius  (z)  ;  or  not  in  this  free  and  unconnefted  ftate,  but  difpos'd  in  a
confus'd  order ;  as  thofe  which  are  defcrib'd  by  the  celebrated  Wogan  (a) ;
or,  at  length,  whether  they  are  "  coUeded  like  clufters  of  grapes  -,"  as  thofe
which  were  feen  by  the  celebrated  men  Jo.  Sebaft.  Albracht  (l>),  and  Jo.  Jac.
Treyling  {c) :  to  which  clafs  almoft  all  thofe  belong'd  that  I  fpoke  of  juft  now.

A  great  number  of  the  fame  kind  have  alfo  been  brought  to  me  fome-
times;  efpecially,  in  the  year  1716,  thofe  which  a  woman  of  Verona  had
difcharg'd,  after  the  exclufion  of  a  foetus,  by  a  violent  abortion.

Thefe  I  examin'd  together  with  him  that  had  fent  them,  Vallifneri.  But  as
for  the  fame  reafon,  I  fuppofe,  that  has  been  mention'd  -,  I  mean  the  very
great  number  of  hiftories  of  that  kind  already  given ;  he  did  not,  as  far  as
I  know,  publifti  this  obfervation,  I  ftiall  likewife  pafs  it  over.

I  fii.all  rather  add  what  a  kind  of  incipient  mola  veficularis,  I  found  in  the
uterus  of  a  bitch,  in  the  year  1723  ;  for  there  are  not  fo  many  hiftories  ex-

i

(j)  Obf.  Med.  1.  3.  c.  32.  CyJ  Hebd.  33.  in  fine,
(r)  Epift.  fupra  cit.  ad  n.  ii.  quae  prima  ell (2)  Propempt. ad  DilT. I.  B.  Hoffmann!,

apud  Vallifner.  Ift. della  Generaz.  p.  3,  c.  3. not.  c.

(s)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  i.  obf.  166.  (a)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  85.

(/)  Ibid.  obf.  ead.  {i)  Commerc.  Litter,  a.  1738.  hebd.  28.  n.

fuj  Obf.  cit.  fupra  ad  n.  9.  1.  in  fine.

(xj  Opufc.  Pathol.  ob£  40.  (cj  Ad.  n.  c.  torn,  5.  obf.  134.

tant,


Letter  XL VIII. Article  15.  713

tant,  of  a  mola  of  this  kind  feen  in  the  utertis,  as  when  difcharg'd  there-
irom:  and  it  muft  be  that  molae  are  more  rare  in  brute  animals,  than  in  wo-
men ;  fince  not  only  Ariftotle  (d)  has  faid  that  they  "  are  either  o-enerated  in
"  women  alone,  or  in  women  chiefly;"  but  alfo,  among  the  more  modern  wri-
ters, Harderus  (e)  denies  his  "  having  feen  any  thing  of  this  kind,  that  was
"  difcharg'd  from  the  uterus  of  a  brute;"  and  requefts  of  others,  "  that  if
"  they  have  found  any  appearances  of  this  kind  at  any  time,  they  do  not
"  withold  the  relation  thereof  from  him  and  the  public."

It  does  not  efcape  me,  that  in  the  eggs  of  hens,  whether  excluded,  or
inherent  in  the  ovaria,  molse  have  been  found  ;  as  by  Vallifneri  (f),  and  by
Gotwaldtf^).

And  in  thofe  brute  animals  that  they  call  perfed,  of  which  Harderus  feems
to  fpeak,  I  do  not  deny,  that  there  may  perhaps  be  examples  which  are
more  clear,  in  the  beginning,  than  this  that  I  am  about  to  produce  :  at  pre-
fent  however,  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  them  :  and  although  a  very
learned  man  fays,  "  that  Vallifneri  had  defcrib'd  a  mola  veficularis,  even  in
"  a  cow  ;"  he  perhaps  meant  to  fay  in  a  bitch,  in  which  animal  he  did  really
defcribe  (h)  one  •,  but  one  of  fuch  a  kind  that  he  himfelf  has  confefs'd  it
"  difficult  to  judge,  whether  it  was  not  fome  preternatural  produftion  from
"  the  fubftance  of  the  uterus."

15,  A  little  bitch  which  had  brought  forth  young  feveral  times,  but  not
more  than  two  at  each  birth;  having,  a  month  before,  copulated  with  a  dog,
was  fuppos'd  to  have  become  impregnated  :  at  laft  having  feem'd  to  be  fad,
and  melancholy,  for  fome  days,  fhe  was  fuddenly  feiz'd  with  convulfive  mo-
tions, and  died  without  any  howling.  The  mailer  of  the  bitch ;  who  was  a
learned  man,  and  an  intimate  friend  of  mine  ;  came  to  me  on  the  day  foUov/-
ing,  and  beg'd  of  me,  that  if  it  was  convenient  I  would  inquire  into  the
caufe  of  the  creature's  death  :  which  I  immediately  did,  in  the  prefence  of
him,  who  had  order'd  the  carcafe  to  be  brought,  and  others  who  were  fldll'd
in  difledtion.

The  lateral  ventricles  of  the  brain,  and  efpecially  the  left,  contain'd  a  great
quantity  of  water ;  which  the  rednefs  of  the  choroid  plexulTes  Ihow'd  to  have
been  effus'd  there  not  long  before  death.

The  cavities  of  the  heart  were  full  of  blood  almoft  coagulated,  and  very
black.

The  membranes  of  the  belly  in  particular ;  for  they  were  fat  in  other
places  ;  were  loaded  with  fo  great  a  quantity  of  far,  and  chiefly  about
the  uterus,  that  I  could  not  demonftratc  the  whole  flender  tract  of  both
tubes.

The  teftes,  although  near  to  one  of  them  hydatids  were  feen,  had  no  ve-
flcle  fuch  as  they  generally  have  in  a  natural  fl:ate  :  nor  was  it  to  be  wonder'd
at,  fince  the  whole  of  them  feem'd  to  be  in  a  manner  flefliy  :  that  is  to  fay,
from  the  bodies  which  we  call  corpora  lutea,  in  cows  and  in  women,  being
contradted.

{d)  De  General.  Animal.  1.  4.  c.  7.  (g)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  9  &  10.  obf.  157.

(e)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  z.  a.  2.  obf.  185.  fA)  Opere  torn.  2.  p.  2.  verf.  finem.

C/J  Opere  torn.  i.  p.  -5.  pag.  126. &  torn.
2.  p.  212.  n.  j6.  &  pag.  -2^0.  n.  9.

Vol.  II.  4  Y  Yet


714  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Yet  the  cornua  were  both  of  them  tortuous  in  their  pafiage  :  and  in  feveral
places  more  or  lefs  protuberant ;  although  not  fo  much  dilated  into  diftinft
cells  in  any  part  as  I  have  been  us'd  to  lee  in  bitches,  that  had  been  preg-
nant for  fome  time.

The  whole  internal  furface  thereof  was  tender  to  the  touch,  and  red.
But  in  thole  places  where  larger  protuberances,  than  the  reft,  appear'd  ex-
ternally, a  thick  humour  was  contain'd,  of  a  mucous  nature,  and  of  a  white
colour  mix'd  with  green  -,  ib  as  to  refemble  pus ;  being  inodorous,  and  fhow-
ing  no  primordia  of  the  foetus.

This  humour  was  furrounded  by  a  kind  of  foft  and  redilh  fubftance,  where-
in veficles  full  of  water  difcover'd  themfelves;  thefe  veficles  being  of  a  different
magnitude,  but  all  fmall  in  their  fize,  and  not  very  numerous  in  their
quantity.

1 6.  Among  the  other  caufes  of  falfe  pregnancy,  I  fee  that,  in  the  Sepulchre-
turn,  after  mote,  other  tumours  of  the  uterus  are  with  propriety  reckon'd ;
and  not  only  of  the  uterus,  but  of  fome  other  parts  of  the  belly  alio.

Of  the  uterus,  whether  they  be  from  internal  or  external  excrefcences,  or
from  humours  in  the  parietes  of  that  vifcus  -,  or  even  ftagnating  in  the  ca-
vity thereof-,  when  the  palTage  of  the  ofculum  outwards  is  Ihut  up  by  any
caufe  that  either  conftringes,  or  obftrufts,  it.  And  of  fome  other  vifcera,
and  of  the  mefentery  in  particular.  Upon  all  which  fubjedls  as  I  have  in  ge-
^  neral  written  more,  or  lefs,  on  former  occafions  -,  it  is  not  neceflary  to  repeat
the  fame  here.

But  I  will  rather  difpatch  that  queftion,  which  I  remember  you  aflc'd  of  me ;
I  mean  when,  and  how,  by  reafon  of  one  kidney  only  being  created  in  fuch
a  manner,  from  the  firft  original  of  the  body,  the  belly  may  be  prominent,
fo  that  even  an  anatomift  may  be  deceiv'd  ;  and  take  this  prominence  for  an
utero-gellation  ?  For  that  this  has  been  advanc'd,  among  the  other  caufes
"  which  refemble  pregnancy,"  in  this  fe£l;ion  of  the  Sepulchretuni  (*).

Although  I  forefee,  that  I  muft  enter  into  fo  much  more  prolix  a  difcourfe
than  you  imagine,  that  I  may  feem,  to  you,  to  have  digrefs'd  from  the  inten-
tion of  this  letter  ;  yet  I  fhall  do  it  willingly  :  and  that  not  only  becaufe  if  I
mifs  this  opportunity,  I  fliall  have  no  other  proper  occafion  offatisfying  your
requeft,  but  becaufe  I  fhall  endeavour  to  reduce  into  fome  order,  almofb  in-
numerable obfervations  of  the  kidney  alone;  which  reduction  I  fhall  endea-
vour to  make  as  ufeful  as  pofTible.

But  it  would  certainly  have  been  much  more  eafy  for  me  to  have  fatisfy'd
you  now,  if  thofe  who  coUedted  examples,  after  Pinus  (**),  of  one  kidney
alone  being  found,  Schenk  f/J,  Bauhin  (^^,  Riolanus  (■/),  Panarol us  ('?»),
Rhodius  («),  Hornius  (e),  BlafiusCp),  Francus(j;,  Hilfcherus  fr),  and  others
after  them,  had,  every  one  of  them,  given  thoie  that  were  already  publifh'd.

(*)  XXXVII.  Vid.  tuulum.  obf.  3.  prefix.  (/)  Anthropogr.  1.  2.  c.  26.

ad  n.  6.  qui  pro  n.  7.  ibid,  ponitur.  (?«)  Jatrologifm.  Pentec.  i,  obf.  j.

(**)  Aunot.  ad  pag. 51.  8.  Opufc.  Anat,  (nj  Mantiil".  Anat.  obf.  32.

Euftach.  (0)  Annot.  g.  ad  Botalli.  obf.  anat.

(;')  Obf.  Med.  Rar.  1.  3.  ubi  deRenib.  obf.  {p)  Append,  ad  Bellin.  de  Renibus.

2  &  3.  (q)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  5  &  6.  obf.  176^

(ij  In  Notulis  ad  Theatr.  Anat.  1,  i .  c.  22.  (rj  Proluf,  de  unico  reperto  Rene.


Letter  XLVIII. Article  i6.  715

in  their  times ;  as  they  might  eafily  have  done  ;  and  had  diftributed  them  into
certain  claJFes.

But  they  have  omitted  fome  even  in  books  that  are  in  every  one's  hands :
and  thofe  they  have  produc'd,  they  have  generally  made  a  praftice  of  pointing
out  almoft  promifcuoufly  ;  whereas  itv/ould  not  have  been  difficult  to  divide
them  into  thofe  wherein  one  kidney  only  was  form'd ;  and  into  thofe  where  one
kidney,  to  appearance,  was  made  up  of  two  ;  and  the  firft  of  thefe  again,
into  thofe  wlierein  the  kidney  occupies  the  fide  as  ufual ;  and  into  thofe
wherein,  being  laid  upon  the  fpine,  it  holds  a  middle  fituation.

To  thofe  firft,  wherein  the  kidney  lies  on  the  fide ;  befides  the  antient
examples  from  Ariftode  (s)  5  belong  thofe  which  fo  many  after  him,  and
among  thefe  Sphjererius  f/),  and  Solenander(M),  from  Mat.  Stoicus,  Plazzonus,
(x),  with  Sylvaticus,  in  whom  it  will  be  better  to  read  them,  Haller  (jy),  and
Petfchius  (z)  have  propos'd  ;  and  if  you  choofe  rather  to  fet  afide,  on  this  oc-
cafion,  my  doubt  that  has  been  hinted  in  the  fortieth  letter  (a),  even  Tul-
pius  {I?),  and  Meekrenius  (c).

Which  doubt  you  may  fet  afide  in  the  obfervation  of  Hilfcherus  (d) :  al-
though this  may  be  added,  by  you,  to  thofe  that  are  in  the  Sepulchretum,
on  the  fubjeft  of  renal  ifchuriae,  from  calculi ;  yet  to  omit  other  things,  fuf-
ficient  teftimonies  are  collected  by  the  ingenious  inquirer,  to  convince  us  that
one  kidney  had  been  wanting  from  the  original  formation  :  juft  as  it  was  in
that  profefTor  of  Cabrolius  (e),  and  in  the  young  man  of  Manfredi,  the  little
bitch  of  mine,  and  the  rabbet,  all"of  which  were  taken  notice  of  by  me  on
former  occaflons  (f)  ;  and  even  in  the  prieft,  and  the  woman  of  Valfalva,  and
the  girl  of  Poupart.

And  there  was  this  proof  alfo,  in  that  woman,  of  there  having  been  but
one  kidney  from  the  original  formation ;  I  mean  that  the  kidney  was  furnilh'd
with  two  pelves,  and  two  ureters :  and  we  not  only  read  that  there  was  the
fame  number  in  the  young  man  of  Panarolus  {g),  and  in  the  foldier  of  Lau-
bius  {b) ;  but  befides,  that  one  of  the  ureters  had  inferted  itfelf  into  that  part
of  the  bladder,  to  which  no  kidney  correfponded.

To  the  examples  hitherto  mention'd,  all  of  which  belong  to  the  firft  clafs,  it
is  probable  that  many  others  may  be  added  -,  either  fuch  as  do  not  occur  to
me  at  prefent  (for  I  never  take  upon  me  to  imagine  that  I  have  either  read
or  remember'd  all)  or  fuch  as  the  writers  themfelves  have  fo  exprefs'd,  as  to
fay  that  there  was  one  kidney  only ;  as  Columbus  (i),  Fernelius  (k),  Cafpar
Wolphius  (/),  Laurentius  {m),  Bofcus  (?z),  and  Jo.  Scultetus  {0) ;  who  points
out  both  his  father's  obfervation  and  his  own  ;  and  Salzmann  (p)  :  and  out

(f)  Apud  Schenck.  obf.  cit.  2.  (f)  Adverf.  Anat.  3.  Anlmad.  32.  &  Epilt.

(t)  Ibid.  40.  n.  14.

f?;j  Ibid.  obf.  3.  (^)  Obf.  3.  cit.

(x)  Apud  Rhod.  cit.  obf.  32.  Qj)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  9.  obf.  16.

(y),  Opufc.  Pathol,  obf  60.  (z)  De  Re  Anat.  1.  15,

■x)  Syllog.  Anat.  Seleft.  obf.  §.  77.  78.  (k)  Phyfiol.  1,  i.  c.  7.

ia)  N.  14.  (/)  Apud  Schenck.  obf  cit.  2.

\h)  L.  4.  obf.  med.  c.  38.  [ni)  Hill.  Anat.  Hum.  Corp.  1.  6.  c.  23.

(f)  Obf.  Med.  Chir.  c.  40.  («)  De  Facultat.  Anat.  left.  z.

(d)  Proluf  cit.  (0)  Trichiaf  Admin  pag.  %().

is)  Obf.  var.  14.  \f)  Apud  Stehelin.  in  Tentam.  Med.Th.  i.  '

4Y 2  of


7i6  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

of  the  obfervers  who  are  quoted  by  thofe  very  learned  men,  Rhodius  (q),  and
Hallcr  (r)  -,  Lopez,  Ronfeus,  Duretus,  Handwigius,  and  Hunielius  •,  fome
have  perhaps  given  examples  that  belong  to  this  clafs  :  I  fay  "  perhaps"  for
this  reafon,  becaufe  fome  of  the  books  referr'd  to  are  not  in  my  hands ;  and
others,  as  far  as  I  could  inquire,  do  not  contain  thofej  things  that  are  fpoken
of-,  juft  as  I  turn'd  over  the  Commentaries  of  Carpus  on  Mundinus  in  vain  ;
for  that  "  other  example,"  as  Riolanus  (s)  fays,  I  did  not  find  where  it  princi-
pally ought  to  have  been.

And  although  moftof  thefe  authors,  of  both  clafles,  have  faid,  that  this
one  kidney  was  large;  and  even  fome  of  them,  as  Columbus,  that  it  was
"  very  large  •,  as  Fernelius,  "  of  a  fuprizing  bulk  and  magnitude ;"  as  Bof-
cus  "  of  an  almoft  incredible  magnitude  and  breadth;"  you  are  not  immedi-
ately, for  this  reafon,  to  fuppofe  that  they  have  fpoken  of  the  kidney,  which
did  not  belong  to  the  firft  divifion  of  the  firft  clafs.

For  you  very  well  remember,  how  much  either  of  the  kidnies  may
grow  out  (/) :  why  then  may  not  the  kidney,  when  there  is  only  one,  be
large  in  the  fide  ?  It  may  even  be  very  large,  if  the  effeft  of  a  difeafe  happen
to  be  added ;  and  calculi,  pus,  and  urine,  are  retain'd  fo  as  to  diftend  its
fubftance,  as  is  the  cafe  in  more  than  one  of  the  examples  produc'd  above.

However,  do  not  imagine,  that,  in  faying  thefe  things,  I  approve  of  what
has  been  afferted  by  a  learned  man  ;  that  when  there  was  only  one  kidney,
"  it  had  always  much  exceeded  the  natural  magnitude  of  the  kidney,  by  the
"  teftimony  of  all  obfervations."

For  I  do  not  fee  this  remark'd  in  all  the  obfervations :  and,  indeed,  I  fee
that  Panarolus  (ii)  exprefsly  admonilhes  us,  "  that  it  had  not  exceeded  its
"  proper  proportion"  in  his ;  and  Valfalva  («■),  in  one  of  his,  that  it  was
"  of  its  natural  magnitude."

Wherefore,  Riolanus  (y)  was  lefs  wide  from  truth,  when  he  afferted  that
"  if  one  folitary  kidney  be  found,  it  generally  equals  the  magnitude  of
"  both."  I  wifh  I  could  approve  of  what  he  immediately  adds,  "  and  that
*'  it  lies  upon  the  back  ;  the  canals  of  the  aorta,  and  vena  cava,  being  a  little
"  remov'd,  in  order  to  afford  a  fituation  for  the  folitary  kidney."

But  v/hac  a  number  of  examples  there  are,  of  a  folitary  kidney  retaining
its  ufual  fituation,  is  evident  from  what  has  been  faid  above.  And  as  to  its
lying  upon  the  back,  and  removing  the  large  vefiels  (which  circumftance  has
not  always  been  obferv'd  even  then)  if  all  the  obfervers  of  a  folitary  kidney
had,  in  general,  feen  thefe  appearances ;  they  would,  without  doubt,  have
noted  them  down,  as  not  lefs  rare  to  themfelves,  than  the  unity  of  the  kid-
ney which  they  law  at  the  fame  time  :  but  as  this  ]?as  not  been  done,  by  thofe
who  have  taken  notice  of  nothing  elfe  but  the  folitary  ftate  of  the  kidney,  I
have  therefore  faid  above,  that  it  is  probable  their  obfervations  related  to  the
firft  part  of  the  firft  clafs,  and  not  to  the  fecond  ;  which,  though  it  is  much
more  rare,  Riolanus  fuppos'd  to  be  the  only  one :  as  if  it  contain'd  all  the
examples  of  a  folitary  kidney.

(?)  Obf.  32.  cit.  (/)  Vid.  Epift.  40.  n.  14.

(rj  In  Acceff.  ad  Boerh.  Meth.  Stud.  Med.  («)  Obf.  3.  cit.

p.  7.  fea.  4.  c.  14.  (x)  Epill.  25.  n.  4.

(s)  C.  z6.  cit.  OJ  Encheix.  Anat.  1.  2.  c.  28.

But


Letter  XL VIII. Article 16.  717

But  before  I  fpeak  of  this  part,  it  will  be  more  convenient  to  difpatch  the
fecond  clafs ;  to  which  I  referr'd  not  fo  much  the  kidney  made  inftead  of
two,  as  made  of  two.

And  this  I  would  have  you  underftand,  not  as  if  I  denied,  that,  in  fome
of  the  examples  produced  above,  one  kidney  feem'd  to  be  made  up  of  two  -,
fo  that  it  was  furnifli'd  both  with  a  double  pelvis,  and  double  ureter ;  or
as  if  I  contended,  that,  of  two  kidnies,  which  were  firft  created  in  a  ftate  of
diftance,  and  divifion,  one  had  afterwards  coalefc'd  with  the  other,  upon  the
increafe  of  the  embrio.

For  I  mean  nothing  elfe  here,  but  what  appears  to  the  firft  judgment  of
the  fight.  Jacobus  Berengarius  (2)  faw  this  the  firft,  as  far  as  I  remember.
In  a  certain  man,  fays  he,  "  the  kidnies  were  continued  into  each  other,  as
"  if  it  had  been  one  kidney  :  and  it  had  two  emulgent  arteries,  two  emulgent
"  veins,  and  two  ureters,  with  only  one  involving  panniculus :  this  occupied
"  the  uftial  places  of  the  kidnies,  and  even  the  middle  of  the  back,  which
"  is  in  the  part  betwixt  the  fpleen  and  the  liver,  a  little  below  them."

And  to  the  fame  clafs  belongs  that  folitary  kidney  feen  by  Rondelet  (a),
"  which  was  of  the  fliape  of  a  moon ;  both  the  kidnies,  without  doubt,  be^
"  ing  in  conjunction  •,"  and  that  which  Blafius  (b)  fpeaks  of  from  Doldius  ;
and  that  which  Riolanus  (c)  defcribes  as  being  found  by  him  and  "  plac'd

"  above  the  fplne the  cone  being  inclin'd  downwards, and  the  horns

"  rais'd  upwards."

Nor  do  I  fuppofe  that  feen  by  Piccolhominus  (d)  to  be  of  a  different  kind  ;
except  that  the  conjundtion  was  made  betwixt  the  fuperior  parts  of  the  kid-
nies ;  as,  when  "  it  lay  tranfverfly  upon  the  vena  cava,  and  the  great  artery,
"  its  flat  and  finuous  furface  was  turn'd  downwards,  but  the  gibbous  and
"  convex  farface  turn'd  upwards ;"  fuch  as  in  figure  and  pofition,  the  illuf-
trious  Winflow  (e)  faw  in  a  monfter^

In  the  other  examples,  the  horns  were  turned  upwards,  as  in  the  former
inftances ;  and  in  thofe  of  Thomas  Bartholin  (f),  and  Stalpart  (g)  ;  who  alfo
fav/  fomething  fimilar  with  Nuck  (b) ;  the  celebrated  Haller  {i),  Vernoius  (k),.
and  Petichius  (I),  to  fay  no  more  of  Grafteckius  and  Bschius,  than  what  I
know  from  Haller  {m)  ;  I  mean,  that  one  of  them  "  had  feen  a  kidney  made
"  by  a  coalition  of  two,"  and  that  the  other  "  had  mention'd  a  kidney  con-
"  fitting  of  the  two  grown  together,  from  the  original  formation  :"  and  to
return  to  the  Italians  •,  Jo.  Orontio  Azzaritti,  a  native  of  la  Puglia,  for-
merly my  pupil,  fent  tome,  in  the  year  172  i,  a  defcription,  and  delineation,
of  a  folitary  kidney ;  on  which  he  had  lit  in  difiefting  a  human  body  at  Ve-
nice, and  which  may  be  compar'd  with  that  of  Bartholin,  whereto  it  was  very
fimilar :  for  befides  other  things,  I  believe  it  may  ftiow  from  whence  the  fper-
matic  arteries,  which  Bartholin  has  faid  did  not  exift  at  all,  might  arife.

(z)  Ifag.  de  Anat.  Ventr.  Inf.  ubi  de  Re- (g)  Cent.  i.  Obf.  Rar.  Med.  50.

Jiib.  Ci?)  Ibid.

(a)  ApudSchenek.  obf.  cit.  z.  (i)  Opufc.  Anat.  p.  5.  tab.  6.  fig.  9*

{b)  Cit.  Append,  fig.  13.  {k)  Comment.  Acad.  Sc.  Imper. Petropol.

(c)  Anthrop.  c.  cit.  26.  torn.  3.

(d)  L,  2.  Prsleft.  Anat.  22.  (/)  Syllog.  cit.  §.  79.

(e)  Mem.  de  ] 'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  1740.  {m)  Acceffion.  ad  cit.  c.  14.  Meth.  Stud.
(/)  Cent.  2.  Hift.  Anat,  77.  ' Med.

Ai:d


71 8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

And  in  the  year  1732,  Bonazoli  {n);  who  was,  while  living,  my  friend,
and  whom  I  have  fpoken  in  commendation  of  on  former  occafions  alfo ;  de-
fcrib'd  a  kidney  of  the  fame  kind.

Finally,  I  myfelf  inthe  year  1740,  found,  about  the  middle  of  December,
in  a  girl  of  fix  years  old,  and  demonftrated  in  the  hofpital,  to  all  who  were
prefent;  both  men  advanc'd  in  knowledge,  and  ftudents  •,  a  folitary  kidney:
which  you  may  fee  not  inaccurately  trac'd  out,  and  drawn  at  my  houfe,  and
differing  from  moft  others  in  this  circumftance,  in  particular,  that  the  right
lobe  was  diftant  from  the  left  by  no  very  great  interval ;  the  former  being
laid  upon  the  latter  in  the  lower  part,  and  divided  with  a  fulcus  as  it  were,
which  was  not  very  deep  however,  and  only  on  its  anterior  furface :  lb  that
an  ifthmus  was  form'd,  which  was  not  lefs  flender  than  either  lobe.

Francus  (0)  is  the  only  one,  as  far  as  I  know,  who  faw,  and  gave  a  deli-
neation of,  an  ifthmus  "  of  very  great  vaftnefs  and  amplitude"  as  his  exprefs
words  are.

But  as  he  fays  nothing  of  the  thicknefs,  and  even  fays  that  each  lobe  was
in  that  fituation  the  kidnies  are  wont  to  occupy  ;  as  I  underftand  it  to  have
been  in  the  obfervations  of  others,  in  which,  although  the  whole  kidney  was
very  large,  it,  neverthelefs,  lay  upon  the  fpine  only  with  a  very  (lender  ifth-
mus •,  I  was  not  willing  to  confound  thefe  examples,  with  thofe  that  belong
to  the  fecond  part  of  my  divifion,  to  which  I  now  pafs  on  -,  and  which  com-
prehends thofe  examples,  wherein  the  whole  body  of  the  kidney  was  laid  upon
the  fpine.

And  to  this  part  of  the  divifion  I  fliall  fuppofe  that  to  belong,  which  Caro-
lus  Stephanus  (p)  faw,  together  with  Jo.  VafTeus ;  that  is  to  fay,  "  one  kid-
"  ney  alone,  fituated  exadly  on  the  middle  of  the  fpine  ;  and  this  very  large:"
and  we  may  likewife  add  what  Andernacus  had  faid  (q),  "  that  fometimes
"  one  kidney  only  appear'd  to  be  conneded  to  the  middle  of  the  fpine."

And  that  which  is  defcrib'd,  and  reprefented  in  a  plate,  by  Botallus  (r^,
and  was  fo  large  as  to  feem  to  be  made  up  of  four,  is  extremely  well
known.

Nor  is  that  unknown,  which  Cabrolius  (s)  found,  in  the  fervant  of  the
profefTor,  who  has  been  mention'd ;  "  a  folitary  kidney,  but  of  an  in-
"  credible  bulk,  lying  upon  the  vertebrse  of  the  loins  :"  to  which  the  cele-
brated Fantonus  (t),  in  like  manner,  faw  "  a  folitary,  and  very  large,  kid-
"  ney,  adhereing."

To  the  fame  clafs  you  will  refer  that  which  the  frequently-commended  Hal-
ler  (a)  found  in  a  girl  of  a  year  old.

And  to  return  to  the  more  ancient  writers,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  come
nearer  to  that  point,  for  the  fake  of  which  I  enter'd  into  this  long  difcourfe ;
Vefalius  {x)  had  written,  that  fometimes,  in  thofe  who  "  have  the  belly  ex-
"  ceedingly  prominent,  and  the  order  of  the  ribs  vitiated,  he  had  feen  a  foli-

(«)  Comment,  de  Bonon.  Sc.  Acad.  torn.  2.  (r)  Obf.  Anat.  i.

p.  1.  (s)  Obf.  cit.  14.

(0)  Obf.  cit.  176.  \t)  Differt.  Anat.  Renov.  7.

Cp)  De  Diffeft. Part. Corp. Hum. 1.  2,  («)  Opufc.  Pathol,  obf.  59.

c.  15.  (x)  De  Corp.  Hum.  Fabr.  1.  5.  c.  10.

(qj  Anat.  Inftit.  1.  i.

2  "  tary,


Letter  XL VIII. Article i6.  719

"  tary  kidney ;  and  that  a  very  large  one  ;  plac'd  upon  the  vena  cava,  and
"  the  large  artery."

Euftachius  (y)  has  aflferted,  that  he  had  formerly  once  feen  an  unufual
fituation  of  a  folitary  kidney  of  this  kind ;  but  "  that  he  remember'd  only
"  this  circumftance  very  well ;  that  it  lay  fupported  on  the  middle  of  the
"  fpine,  and  fupplied  the  deficiency  of  the  other  kidney  by  the  increafe  of  its
"  own  bulk  :"  and  he  fubjoin'd  the  following  words  :  "  but  whether  nature
"  has  given  one  kidney  alone,  to  thofe,  in  particular,  who  have  the  belly  very
"  prominent,  and  the  order  of  the  ribs  vitiated,  I  confefs  I  am  ignorant  :
"  and  I  exhort  thofe  who  ftudy  anatomy,  to  obfcrve,  with  diligence,  whe-
"  ther  this  be  true  or  not."

From  that  time  I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  any  author,  who  attend-
ed to  this  exhortation  of  Euftachius,  when  he  lit  on  a  large  kidney  lying  on
the  fpine  •,  nor  yet  when  he  found  the  ifthmus  of  two  lobes  lying  tranfverfly
thereto.

And  even  in  both  cafes,  I  have  either  found  nothing  remark'd  in  the  ex-
amples hitherto  produc'd ;  or  only,  that  the  man  being  in  very  good  health,
he  was  taken  off  by  the  fword,  the  halter,  or  a  malignant  fever ;  if  you
except  the  obfervations  of  Piccolhominus  and  Azzaritti :  the  former  of
whom  has  hinted,  that  there  was  a  bad  conftitution  of  body ;  perhaps  from
the  ifthmus  preffing  upon  the  vena  cava  and  great  artery,  and,  for  that  rea-
fon,  injuring  the  fundtion  of  both  ;  and  the  latter  accounted  for  an  aneurifm
of  that  arteryjk  from  the  fame  caufe  ;  that  is  an  aneurifm  which  had  arifen  be-
twixt the  appendages  of  the  diaphragm,  eroded  the  vertebra,  and  at  length
put  an  end  to  life,  by  pouring  out  a  great  quantity  of  blood  into  the  left
cavity  of  the  thorax.

The  ifthmus  however,  for  the  moft  part,  being  but  flender,  unlefs  it  hap-
pen to  grow  thick  gradually,  or  the  blood,  being  immoderately  increas'd
in  its  quantity,  diftend  the  fubjefted  large  veflels,  does  not  generally  do  fo
much  harm.

I,  when  in  the  body  of  a  girl,  I  found  an  ifthmus  not  lefs  flender  than
either  lobe-,  as  I  have  already  laid  •,  and  the  lobes  not  very  far  diftant  from
each  other;  as  they  did  not  occupy  the  ufual  feats  of  the  kidnies;  but  lay
upon  the  very  fides  of  the  vertebras ;  did  not  think  that  I  ought  to  negledb
the  exhortation  of  Euftachius.

Hov;ever,  the  abdomen  of  the  girl  was  not  prominent  -,  nor' did  the  courfe
of  the  ribs  vary  from  its  ufual  order  ;  fo  that  if  any  perfon  ftiould  have  been
willing,  with  Vefalius,  to  deduce  the  caufe  of  the  lobes  having  been  ex-
cluded from  their  fituation  by  the  unufual  flexure  of  the  ribs  forwards ;  \z
would  have  been  quite  out  of  his  power.

Neverthelefs,  that  the  belly  was,  in  this  cafe,  but  little  prominent,  was  lefs
to  be  wonder'd  at  here ;  as  the  whole  kidney  was  neither  one  of  the  largeft,  nor'
had  any  confiderable  part  of  itfelf  laid  upon  the  anterior  part  of  the  vertebra.
But  I  can  fcarcely  believe,  that,  when  a  very  great  bulk  of  one  folitary  kid-
ney is  fuperadded  to  this  part,,  which  is  of  itfelf  fo  prominent,  the  belly  is
not  prominent.

(yj  De  Renibua  c.  !o.

Aod'


720  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

And  indeed  I  read  that  our  Plazzonus  (z)  "  had  fuppos'd"  that  woman,
in  whom  there  was  a  folitary  kidney,  "  to  be  pregnant  at  firft  •"  that  is  be-
fore he  open'd  the  abdomen  :  and  I  fuppofe  that  our  Spigelius  would  have
thought,  or  rather  fufpefted,  the  fame  thing  alfo  -,  if  it  had  been  a  woman,
inftead  of  a  man,  in  whom  (a)  "  he  found  a  kidney  very  fimilar  to  that  wo-
man's kidney."

And  now  you,  of  yourfelf,  plainly  fee,  although  what  I  faid  when  I  was
fpeaking  of  Plazzonus,  is  related  in  this  very  thirty-feventh  feftion  of  the
Sepulchretum  (I^),  among  the  examples  of  falfe  pregnancy  ;  that  it  is  not  to
be  underftood  as  being  extended  any  farther  than  to  the  fufpicion  of  the  ana-
tomift,  who  is  about  to  difleft  the  body.  For  while  the  woman  is  living,
and  interrogated  upon  the  point,  the  tumour  cannot  impofe  upon  us  for  a
pregnancy,  which  did  not  begin  a  few  months  before ;  but  exifted  quite
from  the  original  formation.

But  we  may  be  impos'd  upon,  by  one  or  other  of  the  kidneys  being  grown
very  large  from  difeafe  •,  not  naturally  -,  and  fallen  down  into  the  hypoga-
ftrium.

Thus,  in  a  matron  of  whom  you  will  read  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Royal  Aca-
demy of  Sciences  at  Paris  (c),  it  might  have  been  taken  for  a  pregnancy  of
the  uterus,  which  had  been  of  three  or  four  months  ftanding;  efpecially  as
the  menftrua  were  obftruded  -,  if  the  age  of  the  woman,  her  health,  and  fome
other  things,  that  foUow'd,  had  not  caus'd  a  different  perfuafion.

Thus  far  of  falfe  pregnancy.  ^

17.  It  comes  in  courfe  now,  to  fpeak  of  abortion-,  but  of  this  only  with
■brevity.  For  I  have  already  produc'd  three  obfervations  thereof  above  (d),
when  I  was  fpeaking  of  true  pregnancy  being  miftaken  for  the  falfe :  and  it
were  almoft  endlefs  to  recount  all  the  caufes  of  this  diforder  -,  whether  they
exift  in  the  foetus,  or  the  fecundines,  or  have  their  origin  from  the  difeafes  of
the  mother.

Examples  of  many  of  thefe  latter,  that  pafs  from  the  mother  into  the
fcetus,  are  collefted  by  Frederic  Hoffmann ;  in  that  diflertation,  which,  altho'
it  is,  in  general,  intitled  "  of  the  diforders  of  the  foetus  in  the  uterus  of  its
"  mother,"  turns,  neverthelefs,  for  the  moft  part,  upon  thofe  that  are  com-
municated by  the  mother.

We,  on  the  contrary,  will  fpeak  of  thofe  former  ones ;  and  yet  not  of  all.
But  as  1  have  written  above  of  fome  of  the  diforders  of  the  placenta  ;  I  will
now  touch  upon  fome  that  are  either  caufes  of  abortion  ;  or  make  that  abor-
tion dangerous.

That  the  placenta,  when  thicken'd  and  become  hard,  may  be  the  caufe  of
abortion,  T  do  not  doubt  •,  for  at  firft,  by  its  increas'd  bulk,  it  renders  the
the  fpace  of  the  uterus  too  narrow  for  the  foetus ;  as  has  alfo  been  obferv'd
•by  Cortcfius  (f),  where  he  taught  that  the  placenta  "  fometimes  become?
"  very  thick  and  hard."  And  the  hardnefs  renders  it  unfit  for  its  office;
wherefore  the  fcetus,  being  depriv'd  of  its  nourifhment,  perifhes  •,  whicji  A-
braham  Vater  (f)  confirms  by  the  obfervation  of  a  fcirrhous  placenta.

(~)  Apud  Rhod.  obf.  cit.  32.  (t/)  N.  5.  7.  9.

(a)  Ibid.  (<■)  Mifcellan.  Medic,  dec.  9.  epift.  3.

(i)  Obf.  3.  §.  7.  (/)  Diff.  fupra  ad.  11.  ii.  cit.  thef.  10.
(.)  A.  1732.  obf.  Anat.  7.

Ihc


Letter  thVilt Afticle  i8,  19.  721

The  fame  author  thinks,  that,  when  the  foetus  is  dead,  if  the  placenta  re-
fnain  in  the  uterus,  and  fix'd  thereto,  it  may  itfelf  receive  the  nourilhment
from  the  uterus,  and  by  this  means  become  ftill  thicker  than  it  was  before  :
hor  is  he  the  only  one  who  entertains  this  opinion.

But  there  is,  on  the  other  hand,  a  cafci  in  which,  by  rcafon  of  the  intercep-
tion of  the  nutriment,  both  the  placenta,  and  foetus,  are  extenuated  in  a  fur-
prizing  degree  :  arid  although  this  appears,  in  part,  from  the  obfervations,
bf  thoie  very  celebrated  men  Hoyerus  (g),  Moekringius  (h),  of  a  foetus  be-
ing difcharg'd  "  in  a  very  emaciated  ftate,  and  with  its  bulk  exceedino^ly
"  diminilh'd,"  after  great  difcharges  of  blood  from  the  uterus  ;  the  funicu-
lus umbilicalis,  at  the  fame  time,-  being  almoft  deftrtute  of  moifture,"  or
"  the  placenta  fmall  and  almoft  juicelefs,  and  furnifh'd  with  little  blood;
"  as  their  own  words  are  -,"  yet  this  is  more  clearly  fhown,  by  the  hiftory
which  was  communicated  to  me,  by  a  phyfician  who  was  my  friend.

iB.  A  certain  woman  was  now  in  the  fourth  month  of  her  pregnancy,  and
juft  entering  upon  the  fifth,  when  news  v)&s  fuddenly  brought  to  her  of  the
inftant  death  of  her  abfent  hufband.  Being  ftruck  with  grief  and  fear  at  the
fame  moment,  fhe,  from  that  very  time,  at  firft  oblerv'd  the  motion  of  the
foetus  to  be  made  more  languid  -,  and  after  that  to  ceafe  intirely.  And  at
the  end  of  the  eighth  day  after  flie  ceais'd  to  feel  the  child's  motion,  flie  mif-
carried.

The  placenta,  the  desd  foetus,  and  the  funiculus  umbilicalis  were  all  fur-
-  prizingly  thin  and  flender.  The  foetus  was  quite  white:  and  in  the  funiculus
was  fome  appearance  of  veflels,  but  thefe  were  almoft  deftitute  of  moifture.

19.  That  abortion,  which  is  produc'd  by  other  caufes  alfo,  often  returns  ;
and  this  at  the  fame  interval  of  time,  from  conception,  that  the  former  had
happen'd  ;  as,  for  inftance,  at  the  fourth,  third,  or  fecond  month,  from  that
time ;  and  yet  that  its  return  has  been  prevented  by  proper  remedies,  youf
tvill  learn  from  Stahl  («).

I,  however,  remember  none  to  have  return'd  more  frequently,  than  that,
Nvhich  ;  being  firft  brought  on  by  a  great,  and  fudden,  affedbion  of  the  mind,
as  I  have  read  in  Schul2!ius  (k) ;  return'd  three  and  twenty  times,  always  at
the  fame  diftance  of  time  from  conception  at  which  it  had  firft  happen'd  ;
that  is  at  the  third  month ;  notwithftanding  no  remedies,  that  could  be  fup-
pos'd,  by  the  moft  celebrated  phyficians,  to  have  efFeft  in  preventing  it,  were
ilegleded.

You  fee  thi^n,  what  power  paflions  of  this  kind  have,  in  producing  thefe
effefts.

But  in  the  cafe  propos'd  by  me,  I  fliould  believe  it  had  happen'd  to  the
uterus,  and  confequently  to  the  radicles  of  the  placenta,  that  thofe  fluids
which  were  carried  back  frbm  the  foetus,  and  the  placenta,  to  the  mother,
pafs'd  on  with  eafe  ;  but  that  thofe  which  were  carried  from  the  mother,  to
the  placenta  and  foetus,  were  not  carried  without  difficulty ;  as  the  mother,
being  lb  affected  in  her  mind,  could neither  fend  fufficient  nourifhment,

(^)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  i.  obf.  51.  (i)  Difput.  qua  eorp.  hum."  momentan.  al-

{ir)  Comerc.  Litter,  a.  J736.  hfebd,  zi.  n.  3. terat.  fpecim.  expend.  §.  34.
(i)  Differt.  de  Abortu,  c.  i ,

l^'OL.  II.  4-  Z  nor


722  Book  III. " Of  Difeafes  of  the  Bdly.

nor  nourifhtnent  fufficiently  prepar'd,  nor  driven  towards  the  uterus  with
fufficient  force,  at  the  time  when  it  was  neceflary,  according  to  the  uiuai
courfe  of  nature,  that  every  thing  in  the  uterus  fliould  be  more  and  more  in-
creas'd  every  day.

There  has  been,  on  the  other  hand,  when  I  fufpefted,  that  the  extreme
tubuli  of  the  little  placenta,  together  with  the  uterus  of  the  mother,  being-
contratled  by  the  fiidden  cold  of  death,  the  blood  was  obftrufted  in  its  re-
turn from  fcetufTes,  that  were,  in  other  refpefts,  very  healthy  •,  and  this  blood
being  coUefted  together  in  the  liver ;  which  was  then  greatly  diltended  and
tender ;  had  made  an  impetus  thereon,  and  burft  forth  into  the  cavity  of  the
belly.

I  will  here  add  the  obfervations :  you  will  explain  them  as  you  pleafe.

20.  A  cow  had  been  pregnant  with  a  fcetus  for  a  little  time  only,  as  will-
appear  prefently,  when  Ihe  was  fold  by  her  mailer  who  was  ignorant  of  this^
and  kill'd.

The  uterus,  and  the  foetus,  I  difTedcd  with  care  •,  the  latter  not  being
longer  than  a  fpan,  from  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  to  the  beginning  of  the
tail.  Every  thing  was  in  a  natural  ftate  ;  except  that  blood  was  extravafated
and  coagulated  about  the  liver :  and  that  in  a  confiderable  quantity  too.

21.  Another  cow  was  likewife  advanc'd  two  months  in  her  pregnancy,,
when  Ihe  was  kill'd  by  the  butcher.

Upon  catting  open  the  uterus,  and  examining  whatever  was  contain'd
therein,  I  found  all  to  be  found  ;  except  that  the  belly  of  the  fo2tus  was  dif-
tended  with  fuch  a  quantity  of  extravafated  blood,  that  before  I  open'd  it,  I'
conjeftur'd  what  would  be  the  appearance,  from  the  blacknefs  that  was  ken
through  the  extenuated  abdomen  :  and  the  very  tender  ftate  of  the  liver,  to-
gether with  a  laceration  which  it  had  at  one  part,  plainly  fhow'd  from  whence
this  blood  had  been  difcharg'd.

22.  But  whether  the  fame  thing  happens  in  fcetuffes  more  advanced,  I  do
not  know.

Certain  it  is  that  thofe  injuries,  which,  I  have  faid  above  (/),  come  to  the
fcetus,  from  the  hardnefs  of  the  placenta,  are  obferv'd  only  in  the  firft
months  of  utero-geftation.

And  that  fcetuffes,  which  are  now  ftrong,  and  approaching  to  the  time  of
birth,  fhould  perifh  for  that  reafon  ;  thofe  in  particular,  who  do  not  doubt
but  a  great  quantity  of  aliment  is  then  taken  in  by  the  mouth,  will  not  eafily
believe ;  unlefs  the  placenta  fhould  happen  to  be  made  univerfally  hard,  or
otherwife  unfit  for  its  ofKce.

For  I  think  there  is  no  reafon  to  doubt,  that'the  fame  caufe,  from  whence  I
have  feen  it  vitiated  in  any  part  more  than  once,  may  give  occafion  to  a  much
greater  part  being  vitiated.  "What  I  have  feen  the  fubjoin'd  obfervations  will
fhow.

23.  A  foetus  that  was  mature  for  the  birth  -,  whofe  motion  the  mother
had  perceiv'd  two  days  before,  but  fince  that  had  not  perceiv'd ;  was  born
dead.

The  fecundines,  together  with  the  foetus,  were  brought  to  me  about  the
beginning  of  June  in  the  year  173 1.  In  them  I  found  this  one  thing  which
was  preternatural.

(/)  N.  17.

When


Letter  XL VIII. Article  24,  25.  723

"When  I  infpefted  the  hollow  furface  of  the  placenta,  within  the  fubftance
of  it,  at  the  diftance  of  two  inches  from  the  infertion  of  the  funiculus,  I  faw,
through  the  upper  part  of  its  fubftance,  a  body  of  a  yellowifh  colour  mix'd
with  white.  And  cutting  into  this,  I  faw  it  compafted  of  thick  membranes
as  it  were,  fome  of  which  were  lying  upon  the  others.

As  this  body  was  not  larger  than  the  laft  joint  of  my  little  finger,  there
did  not  feem  fufficient  reafon,  why  I  fhould  impute  the  death  of  the  foetus
thereto ;  or  even  that  foftnefs  which  I  obferv'd  in  mofl  of  the  vifcera,  to  fuch
■  a  degree,  that  not  only  the  liver  became  fluid  at  the  very  touch ;  but  the
coat  of  the  kidnies  alfo  being  incis'd,  the  fubftance  thereof  was  effus'd  under
"the  appearance  of  a  red  pultice.

24.  Twins,  that  were  equally  healthy  and  lively,  were  born  at  the  proper
time  of  delivery,  in  the  beginning  of  June  likewife,  but  in  the  year  1742.

In  examining  the  fecundines  (which  our  Mediavia  had  taken  care  to  have
brought  to  me)  with  accuracy,  I  obferv'd  other  things  that  do  not  relate  to  the
prefent  fubjeft ;  and  the  following  that  do.  One  of  the  placentas  (for  each  ^
foetus  had  been  furnifti'd  with  one,  and  what  happens  more  rarely  they  were
entirely  disjoin'd  from  each  other ;  and  not  only  the  clauftrum  of  the  mem-
branes was  in  like  manner  perfeftly  divided,  as  ufual,  by  a  membranous
mediaftinum)  one  of  the  placents  then,  not  far  from  the  edge  of  it,  had  a
body,  of  the  diameter  of  my  thumb,  going  from  the  convex  to  the  concave
furface ;  fo  that  it  might  be  equally  feen  from  both  furfaces.

The  whole  of  this  body  confifted  of  a  white  fubftance,  every  where  fimilar
to  itfelf,  and  not  more  hard  than  the  placenta  -,  and  in  the  other  placenta,
alfo,  was  a  body  confifting  of  the  fame  white  fubftance ;  but  only  on  its  con-
vex furface,  and  not  larger  than  a  fmall  vetch.

25.  However  both  of  thefe  twins  were  equally  healthy,  as  I  have  already
.Taid  ;  fo  that  you  would  not,  certainly,  conceive  the  leaft  injury  to  have  hap-

pen'd  to  them  even  by  the  large  white  body.

Let  us  fuppofe  that  thefe  twins  had  been  oblig'd  to  remain  longer  in  the
nterus ;  and  yet  whether  it  was  poITible  then,  that  thefe  bodies  might  have
been  inlarg'd,  or  have  degenerated  into  that  ftru6lure,  which  I  have  defcrib'd
m  the  placenta  of  that  other  foetus ;  and,  in  like  manner,  whether  it  was  the
Tame  kind  of  diforder  •,  lefs  advanc'd  here,  and  more  advanc'd  there ;  or  a
different  one,  I  confefs  I  am  quite  ignorant.

A  diforder  it  certainly  was,  which  if  you  fhould  choofe  to  add  to  that  I
made  mention  of  above  (m),  in  defcribing  a  certain  foetus  •,  you  will  confefs
that  the  placenta  is  liable  to  more  than  one  diforder,  befides  thofe  that  are,'
more  known  among  the  common  people.

And  if  this  diforder  extend  itfelf  to  a  confiderable  degree  ;  there  feems  no
room  to  doubt,  but  it  may  be  a  caufe  of  abortion,  and  of  the  death  of  the
fcetus.  This  is  generally  the  effeft  of  fcirrhous  placentse,  into  which  the  dif-
orders  obferv'd  by  me,  would,  perhaps,  in  courfe  of  time,  have  degenerated.

For  thofe  celebrated  men,  Jo.  Sebaft,  Albrechtus  (k),  and  Jo.  Juftus
'Fickius  (-(?),  have  feen  abortion  from  then'-g :  both  of  them  of  monftrous  foetuf-

(w)  N.  5.  (5)  Commerc.  Litter,  a.  1732.  hebd.  20.

(/;)  A(ft.  n.  c.  torn.  4.  obf.  104,

Z 2  (eSy


724  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fes,  or  far  lefs  than  the  beginning  of  ingravidation  requir'd  ;  as  Fickius  faw
the  fubftance  of  the  placenta  fo  fcirrhous,  that  it  could,  by  no  means,  be
now  capable  of  performing  its  fiinQiion,  and  the  funiculus  umbilicalis  corrup-
ted, and  in  a  manner  dried;  and  Aibrechtus  faw  fmall  tumours  lyingatadif-
tance  from  each  other,  thro'  the  placenta,  internally  of  a  whitilh  colour,  very
fimilar  to  fcirrhous  glands;  and  betwixt  them,  about  the  origin  of  the  funi-
cuhs,  an  hydatid  full  of  a  yellowifh  humour.

At  which  place,  the  celebrated  Roederer  (p)  alfo  faw  a  bladder,  wherein  a
humour  of  the  fame  kind  was  contain'd  ;  but  a  much  larger  bladder,  the
fundus  of  which  was  conftituted  by  the  very  fubftance  of  the  placenta  itfelf,
and  was  full  of  a  pretty  foft  fcirrhus.

But  becaufe  abortion,  as  I  faid  juft  now,  is  alfo  accounted  for  from  the
corruption  of  the  funiculus  umbilicalis ;  we  muft  not  omit  to  take  notice,  that
it  may  alfo  be  deduc'd,  either  from  the  too  great  thicknefs,  or  thinnefs,
fhortnefs,  or  length  thereof.

An  example  of  the  firft,  and  fecond  caufe,  you  will  fee  taken  notice  of  hj
Ruyfch  (q) ;  who  had  even  reprefented  the  firft  in  a  figure,  as  "  not  being
"  unfrequent"  (r).

And  you  perceive,  that,  as  too  great,  or  too  little,  a  quantity  of  fluid  being
carried  to  the  embryo,  or  being  carried  back  from  it,  may  be  fatal  thereto ;
fo  the  veflels  of  the  funiculus,  being  either  more  capacious,  or  more  flender,
than  they  ought  to  be,  may  make  the  rope  either  more  thick,  or  more  thin
than  is  natural;  nor  is  that  which  Ruyfch  alone  (j),  as  far  as  I  know,  faw,  and
that  once  only,  to  be  confider'd  in  any  other  view  than  that  of  being  very
rare,  and  wonderful ;  I  mean  that  a  child  was  born,  healthy,  in  whofe  funi-
culus umbilicalis  was  a  tumour  form'd,  "  hard  in  its  confiftence,  and  of  a
"  lubftance  partly  flefhy,  and  partly  heterogeneous,  mix'd  with  a  fmall
"  quantity  of  fluid  ;"  unlefs,  perhaps,  it  was  external  in  its  fituation,  fo  that
by  prefling  upon  the  veflTels  it  could  not  make  them  more  flender;  or  had  not
begun  to  take  a  fufficient  increafe,  before  the  latter  part  of  utei-o-geftation.

And  when  the  funiculus  is  very  fliort,  being  drawn  down  by  the  agitations
of  the  foetus,  it  makes  an  impetus  upon  the  placenta ;  or  at  leaft  does  fome
injury  thereto;  obfervations  of  which  kind  are  extant  in  this  feftion  of  the
Sepulchretum,  that  is  in  the  thirty-feventh  {()■  To  which  you  may  add  that
propos'd  by  Littre  («),  of  a  funiculus  being  fo  contorted,  that  it  not  only  be-
came more  thin  by  one  half  than  before,  but  alfo  fliorter  by  one  half.

But  one  that  is  very  long  is  liable  to  be  convoluted  in  the  form  of  a  halter,
or  to  be  difpos'd  into  knots ;  fo  as  to  ftrangle  the  foetus  («■),  or  vehemently
conftringc  its  own  veflTels.  For  the  celebrated  Gutterman  (y)  found  the  vef-
fels  obftrufted  by  the  force  of  a  double  and  clofe  knot,  which  could  not  be
drawn  afunder,  but  with  a  very  flow  and  cautious  hand ;  making  an  excellent
conjefture  at  the  fame  time,  that  the  firft  formation  of  the  knot  was  indi-
cated by  the  diminution  of  motion  in  the  foetus  ;  and  after  this  more  and  ftill
more ;  and  that  when,  at  length,  none  at  all  of  thefe  motions  are  pcrceiv'd,

if)  Diflert.  de  Fcetu  perf.  §.15. '  (t)  Obf.  1.  §.  y.Sig.

(j)  Adverf.  Anat.  dec.  2.  n.  lo.  (a)  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  Sc.  a.  1701.

(r)  Thef.  6.  tab.  2.  fig. 5.  &  tab.  3.  fig.  2. (x)  Sepulchr.  obf.  1.  cit.  §.  8.

(ij  Thef.  9.  n.  3.  (j/J  Commerc.  Litter,  a.  1731.  fpecim.  20.


Letter  XLVJIL Article  26,  27. 28. 725

we  may  gather,  from  hence,  that  the  clofeft  conftridion  of  the  knot  is  brought
on.

But  that  the  fame  fucceffive  decreafe  of  motion,  which  is  finally  foUow'd  by
an  abolition,  may  happen  alfo  in  the  injury  of  the  placenta,  when  increas'd
every  day;  as  for  inftance,  by  reafon  of  the  fliortnefs  of  the  funiculus,  or
from  a  fcirrhus,  or  any  other  diforder  which  increafes  therein  more  or  lefs ;
is  not  only  hinted  by  reafon,  but  particularly  confirm'd  by  obfervations,  one
of  which  you  will  find  in  the  Sepulchretum  (z) :  and  others  you  m.ay  colleft
from  the  diflertation  {a)  of  the  celebrated  Peter  Stuart,  who  confefles  that  he
had  receiv'd  the  dogmas  advanc'd  by  him,  from  the  mouth  of  the  very  ex-
perienc'd  Friedius  (b),

26.  Now  I  will  fpeak  (lightly  of  fome  other  diforders,  from  whence  women,
who  mifcarry,  are  in  danger.  Ruyfch  (c)  knew  that  there  were  many  phy-
ficians,  who,  being  ignorant  that  in  the  firft  months  of  utero-geftation,  the
placentse  are  of  themfclves  very  fmall ;  but  finding  that,  by  reafon  of  a  great
quantity  of  blood  for  the  moft  part  adhering  to  them,  clofely,  on  every  fide,
they  feem  larger,  having  feen  thefe  placentae  after  being  expell'd  by  mifcarry-
ing  women,  and  expefting  in  vain  a  foetus  correfponding  to  that  placenta  in
'fize,  whereas  that  which  there  had  really  been,  had  either  efcap'd  without
being  perceiv'd.  by  reafon  of  its  diminutive  fize,  or  had  been  diffolv'd  into
nothing ;  or  a  kind  of  fluid ;  had  given  medicines  to  expel  the  foetus,  to  the
great  detriment  of  the  mother.

He  therefore  thought  that  phyficians  ought  to  be  admonifh'd  of  this  eafy
deception.  And  this  admonition  I  think  ought  to  be  the  more  infifted  upon  by
us,  becaufe,  befides  that  blood  adhering  to  the  placenta,  and  increafing  it,
I  have  hinted  above,  according  to  the  opinion  of  Vaterus  (d),  that  the  pla-
centa itfelf  may  actually  increafe  to  an  unnatural  fize;  when  the  little  foetus
is  already  dead,  and  for  that  reafon  more  likely  to  efcape  notice,  with  great
cafe.

17.  But  there  is  another  diforder  much  more  dangerous.  For,  as  the  pla-
centa of  an  immature  foetus ;  or  at  leaft  of  one  that  would  not  have  been
excluded  at  that  time,  if  no  violence  had  taken  place  ;  is,  for  the  moft  part,
affix'd  to  the  uterus  clofely,  as  four  and  unripe  apples  are  to  their  ftalks ;
it  fometimes  happens  that  it  is  fix'd  extremely  clofe  :  and  that  with  the  danger
which  this  obfervation  of  Valfalva  fufficiently  demonftrates.

28.  A  woman  of  three  and  thirty  years  of  age,  having,  while  pregnant,
once  and  again  lifted  a  certain  heavy  weight,  from  one  place  to  the  other ;
fhe  brought  forth  a  foetus  of  feven  or  eight  months  :  but  the  fecundines  did
not  follow.  The  day  after  ihe  was  feiz'd  with  a  fever  and  rigor :  and  this
fever  growing  ftronger  and  ftronger,  a  few  days  after  a  difficulty  of  refpira-
tion  was  added.

In  the  mean  while  a  foetid  matter  was  difcharg'd  from  the  genitals,  with
fome  pieces  of  the  fecundines.  Finally,  convulfive  motions,  and  hiccups,
attack'd  the  patient :  her  belly  became  very  tumid :  and  fhe  died  on  the
eleventh  day  after  delivery.

fxj  §.  cit.  7.  (e)  Thef.  Anat.  6.  n.  8i.

.  (a)  Be  Secundin.  Salutif.  &  CKt.  C.  2.  §.  8.  C^J  N.  17.

Li)  In  Proem,

Hot


j2h  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Her  belly  being  open'd,  the  inteftines  and  ftomach  were  found  to  be  fo
full  of  flatus,  that  the  ftomach  occupied  four  times  as  much  fpace,  as  it  ge-
nerally does  in  a  natural  flate.

Upon  opening  the  uterus,  a  great  portion  of  the  placenta  ofFer'd  itfelf,  to
■the  view  ;  part  of  which  hung  down  through  the  os  uteri :  and  a  part  was
fo  clofely  affix'd  to  the  uterus,  that  it  could  fcarcely  be  feparated  even  by  the
help  of  the  knife,  and  this  portion  was  condens'd  into  a  hard  and  very  foetid
body ;  the  natural  ftrudture  of  it  being  obfcur'd.  And  that  part  of  the
uterus,  to  which  it  had  adher'd,  was  occupied  by  a  pretty  deep  inflamma-
.tion ;  which  was  alfo  extended  through  the  remainder  of  that  lurface,  but
flightly.

29.  -Whether  you  refer  this  obfervation  to  the  clafs  of  unfuccefsful  births  ;
of  which  I  am  now  to  fpeak  ^  or  by  reafon  of  the  violent  caufe  by  which  the
-foetus  was  difcharg'd,  before  the  full  time  of  its  delivery,  you  refer  it  to  the
clafs  of  abortions  ;  it  is  evident  that  a  part  of  the  placenta,  being  fix'd  to  the
uterus,  had  caus'd  the  death  of  this  woman.

And  this  part  muft  have  remain'd  fix'd  after  the  feparation  of  the  refb,  ei-
ther by  reafon  of  a  diforder  of  the  placenta,  fixing  very  thick,  very  long,  or
very  numerous,  radicles  into  the  uterus  at  that  part  -,  or,  what  comes  to  the
lime  thing,  by  reafon  of  the  diforder  of  the  uterus,  which  receiv'd  thofe  ra-
dicles in  that  place,  into  more  clofe,  more  deep,  or  more  frequent  pores ;  or
from  fome  other  diforder  peculiar  either  to  the  uterus  or  placenta;  or  even
common  to  both.

But,  whatever  this  diforder  might  be,  which  fome  otlier  caufe ;  that  was
the  confequence  of  thofe  exertions  in  carrying  a  weight,  and  prov'd  by  the
acceleration  of  delivery  ;  feems  to  have  increas'd  ;  at  lead  this  obfervation,
at  it  increafes  the  number  of  thofe  upon  which  they  ground  their  reafonings,
vvho  contend  that  the  placenta  fliould  never  be  left  in  the  uterus  ■,  fo  it  alfa
gives  a  handle  to  the  followers  of  Ruyfch,  as  three  oblervations  that  you  have
in  this  thirty-eighth  feftion  of  the  Sepulchretum  do  alfo  {e) ;  gives  a  handle  I
fay  to  reply,  that  at  leaft  the  extradion  of  the  placenta  is  not  to  be  haften'd,
when  it  is  fo  firmly  and  clofely  annex'd  to  the  uterus,  that  it  can  fcarcely  be
feparated  with  the  knife,  as  was  the  cafe  in  this  woman  :  for  that  Ruyfch  (f)
meant  this,  when  he  admonifh'd  us  that  we  ought  not  to  be  in  a  hurry  to  ex-
tra6l  the  placenta,  if  "  it  adhere  fo  firmly  to  the  uterus,  as  no  body  would
"  fuppofe,  but  he  who  had  experienc'd  it;"  that  is  to  fay,  if  "  it  be  at-
"  tach'd  to  the  uterus,  as  if  it  had  become  one  fubftance  therev/ith  :"  nor
indeed  did  he,  and  his  followers,  on  the  other  hand,  want  obfervations  of
very  confiderablc  mifchief,  and  even  death,  having  follow'd  the  violence
of  a  hafty  extraftion.

I  confefs,  however,  I  do  not  take  upon  me  fo  far  as  to  fettle  thefe  contro-
verfies,  which  are  of  fome  ftanding,  and  were  agitated  among  our  country-
men, before  they  were  by  much  later  authors  ;  and  carried  on  to  fome  con-
fjdcrable  length  of  time  :  many  writings  being  publifh'd  on  both  fides  (*) 4
on  one  hand  by  Monilia,  and  on  the  other  by  Ramazzini.

{e)  Obf.  10.  §.  I.  2.  3.  _  (*)  De  his  vide  cpift.  8.  n.  29.

(fj  Adverf,  Anat  dec,  2,  n.  ultimo,

I  will


Letter  XLVIII. Article  30.  727-

r  will  only  fay,  that  there  is  great  need  here  of  experience,  and  prudence,
according  to  the  exigency  of  the  cafe,  to  prevent  us  (which  is  very  difficult)
from  violating  either  of  the  precepts  of  Celfus  (g)  :  "  that  it  is  better  to  try
"  a  doubtful  remedy  than  none  at  all  :  (h)  yet  we  muft  take  care  not  to  let:
"  this  remedy  fall  under  the  reproach  of  having  kill'd  the  patient,  whom  her
"  own  fevere  fortune  had  fubdued."

And  indeed,  the  moft  grave  and  confiderate  men  are  afraid  of  violence  y
as,  after  well  weighing  the  arguments  on  both  fides,  they  agree  that  there  is
no  better  remedy,  either  in  art  or  nature,  than  to  wait  prudently  for  fome
little  time.

And  this  I  have  feen  rnorc  than  once,  when  the  woman  lately  delivered
has  been  carried  from  her  chair  to  bed  ;  the  uterus  gradually  contradling  aS'
fhe  lay  quiet  and  unmolefted,  and  throwing  off  the  fecundines  at  the  fams;
time.

You  will  read  that  Hoyerus  (i)  had  ken  the  fame  thing  from  the  mere  re-
moval of  the  woman  from  one  place  to  another.  And  if  you  turn  over  what
has  been  lately  written,  upon  this  controverly,  by  that  very  experienc'd  phy-
fician  Andreas  Pafta  (k) ;  you  will  not  only  fee,  that  every  thing  is  treated  of
with  great  erudition,  and  judgment,  but  in  particular  will  commend  his  pru?
dent  counfels,  and  admonitions;  and  this  among  the  reft  (/) -,  I  mean  that
the  woman  be  remov'd  from  the  obftetrical  chair ;  wherein  fhe  is  now  wearied
and  languid,  and  endeavours  in  vain  to  difcharge  the  placenta ;  into  bed  ;
that  in  a  recumbent  pofture,  the  heart  and  the  uterus  may  be  able  to  do  in  a
little  time,  what  they  could  not  do  in  a  fitting  pofture.

But  phyficians  are  frequently  brought  into  thefe  ever  terrible,  dilemmas-
that  I  was  fpeaking  of,  by  the  improper  hafte  of  the  midwives-,  I  mean  of
thofe  who,  as  foon  as  ever  flight  pains  have  arifen,  oblige  the  women  to  ex--
pel  their  foetus  by  too  hafty  endeavours.

For,  nature  difpofing  all  things  gradually  and  flowly,  for  an  eafy  delivery,
makes  the  connexions  of  the  uterus  with  the  placenta  alfo,  if  time  be  given^
more  prone  to  feparation  ;  and  even  feparates  it  in  the  fame  m,anner  fhe  had
join'd  it :  but  if  time  is  not  given  ;  the  quantity  of  blood  that  is  added  round
about  aftringes  it  ftill  more.  ,

And  with  what  impetus  nature  impels  the  blood,  not  only  to  this  part  at
that  time,  but  ellewhere,  is  fufficiently  fhown  by  the  example  of  that  woman
(;«),  in  whom  the  plexus' choroides  were  ruptur'd,  "  from  a  very  ftrong,  and
"  untimely,  exertion,  during  the  pains  of  labour-,"  whereby  fo  great  a
quantity  of  blood  was  extravafated,  that,  "  the  brain  being  comprefs'd  into  a
"  very  narrov/  fpace,"  a  fatal  apoplexy  was  unavoidably  brought  on.

30.  The  fame  midwives,  alfo,  deferve  great  blame,  when  they  are  fo
much  in  a  hurry,  as,  of  themfelves,  to  rupture  the  membranous  fecun-
dines, which  it  is  evident  ought  not  to  be  done,  unlefs  fome  neceffity  obliges
them  ;  as,  for  inftance,  if  they  are  of  fuch  a  thicknefs  or  hardnefs,  as  to  de*

fg)  De  Medicina  ].  2.  c.  10.  (/)  N.  185.

(/})  Ibid.  1.  5.  c.  26.  n.  I.  [m]  AQ..  n,  C.  torn.  1..  obf.  24!^

(ij  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  1.  obf.  51.
(/^)  Ragicnamento  aggiur.to  al  Difc.  int.  al
fluffo  di  fangue  &  ca;t.  confider.  13.


7  2  8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly*

lay,  for  a  confiderable  time,  and  not  without  danger^  the  birth  which  wOuld
otherwife  have  already  naturally  come  on.

For  frequently,  by  an  untimely  effufion  of  the  waters^  the  birth,  for  many
reafons,  from  an  ealy  and  natural  one, becomes  difficult.

What  ?  when,  of  a  difficult  labour,  they  make  a  fatal  one,  and  the  birth
impoffible  ;  as  when  the  pafTages  not  being  fufficiently  dilated,  either  becaufe
it  is  the  firft  time  the  woman  has  been  in  labour,  and  flie  is  pretty  far  ad-
vanc'd  in  life,  or  becaufe  the  circumference  of  the  pelvis  is  pretty  narrow,  or
fome  tumour  is  the  caufe  of  obftruftion  j  or  when  the  foetus  not  being  pro-
perly turn'd  for  its  own  exit,  they  oblige  the  woman  to  exert  herlelf,  and
ftrain  exceffively  -,  or  make  no  fcruple  to  give  fuch  things  as  they  have  heard
do  ftrongly  expel  the  foetus,  by  exciting  the  uterus  to  more  vehement  con-
traftions ;  or  at  leaft  by  exciting  the  blood  and  fpirits.

From  whence  nothing  can  more  eafily  happen,  than,  as  on  one  hand  the
foetus  is  ftrong,  and  robuft;  and  on  the  other  the  mother  exerts  herfelf  with
all  her  power ;  as  the  foetus  cannot  be  propell'd  through  the  natural  pafiage ;
that  the  uterus  is  at  length  ruptur'd,  and  affords  it  an  opening  by  which  it
makes  its  way  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  ;  either  with  its  head  its  feet  or  its
whole  body  •,  and  kills  itfelf  and  its  mother.

I  wifh  this  cafe  of  the  uterus  being  ruptur'd  was  very  rare :  for  it  is  not
only  not  rare,  but  more  frequent  than  many  imagine.  At  leaft:  you  have,  in
this  one  fedlion  of  the  Sepulchretum  («),  nine  inftances  thereof.  To  which
there  are  many  that  might  have  been  and  may  be  added.

For  I  have  now,  in  my  hands^  four  or  five  difTertations,  in  which  "  the
*'  uterus  ruptur'd  in  child-birth,"  is  treated  of  Each  of  thefe  advances  new
examples ;  and  not  only  that,  but  one  of  them^  as  for  initance  that  which  is
publiffi'd  by  the  celebrated  Behlingius  ((?},  points  out  other  not  very  recent
examples  at  the  fame  time.

The  frequency  of  thefe  cafes  may  be  cofrcdv'd  of,  eten  from  the  writings
of  our  Veflingius  (p)-,  and  it  is  furprizing  to  me,  that,  as  many  learned  men,
certainly,  have  coUefted  examples  of  the  uierus  being  ruptur'd  by  the  fcetuSj
none  of  them  fhould  have  mention'^d  him.

For  Veflingius  having  written  of  one  of  thefe  cafes,  which  had  occur'd  tb'
him  in  the  year  1640,  laid  afterwards,  ih  the  year  1647,  the  following  words:
*'  the  uterus  itfelf  is  ruptur'd,  which  happens  more  frequently  than  is  com-
♦'  monly  fappos'd  ;  and  has  been  found  by  me  four  times  already,  in  the  dif-
**  fedtioHs  of  gravid  women."

And  the  aflTertion  of  Veflingius,  befides  thofe  three  inftances  that  were  met
with  by  Santorini  (q),  is  not  only  fufficiently  confirm'd  by  the  teftimony  of
one  furgeon,  who  affirm'd  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (r),
that  he  had  feen  fixteen  inftances  within  thirty  years  ;  but  is  alfo  ftill  more
confirm'd  by  that  of  the  celebrated  Haller  (s),  who  faw  the  fame  cafe  *'  three
"  times,  within  fifteen  months."

It  is  true  thaCthefe  are  not  all  of  them  inftances  of  the  uterus  being  rup-


(»)  Obf.  2.  §.  4.  &  obf.  3.  §. 3.  2.  3.  4.  9.  CfJ  Epift.  Med.  25.  &45.

ro.  1 1 .  &  obf.  7.  §•.  3.  &  obf.  !  z.  §.  2.  (y)  Illoria  d'un  Feto  &  est.  n.  15.

{gj  Med.  fuperCafu  rupt.  in  partu  uteri,  §.  CrJ  Hift.  a.  1724.  obf.  anat.  4.

5.  &  1 1 .  CsJ  De  Rupt.  in  part.  Utero  obf.  n.  r.


tur'd,


Letter  XL Vlir. Article  31.  729

tur'd,  fo  that  the  foetus  burft  forth  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly ;  and  could
not  be  difcharg'd  by  the  mother,  or  extrafted  by  the  furgeon.  Yet  moft  of
them  are:  asd  the  others  fufficiently  fhow,  how  fatal  either  an  incipient,  or
a  perfeft,  rupture  of  the  uterus  muft  be.

As  thefe  misfortunes  then  are  fo  frequent,  it  is  not  without  reafon,  that
fome  fufpe(5t  this  ought  to  be  plac'd  among  the  other  caufes  of  the  unex-
pefted  death  of  a  woman,  when  coming  on  foon  after  delivery ;  efpecially
if  death  itfelf  come  on  with  thofe  fymptoms,  which  Celfus  (J)  has  given  as
the  figns  of  the  heart  being  wounded  :  for  thofe  who  die  of  a  wound  in  the
uterus,  fays  he,  "  have  the  fame  fymptoms  as  thofe  who  die  of  a  wound  in
"  the  heart  (u)."

And  if  they  die  without  bringing  forth  the  foetus,  and  confiderable  and
ftrong  motions  thereof  have  been  previoufly  perceiv'd,  but  upon  thofe  errors  I
have  mention'd  being  committed  by  the  midwife,  both  the  efforts  of  the  foe-
tus, and  of  the  uterus,  have  been  fupprefs'd ;  and  foon  after  the  fymptoms,  I
have  referr'd  to,  fhow  themfelves  in  the  woman  ;  there  is  much  more  room
for  the  fufpicion  :  although  we  are  feldom  at  liberty  to  confirm  it  by  difTec-
tion,  where  even  the  moft  certain  marks  of  the  infant  being  dead  with  the
mother,  do  not  offer  themfelves ;  as,  for  inflance,  the  coldnefs  of  the  arm,
which  moft  of  them,  who  do  not  burft  forth,  with  their  whole  body,  into
the  cavity  of  the  belly,  after  the  rupture  of  the  uterus,  are  wont  to  thruft
out  by  the  vagina ;  the  coldnefs,  I  fay,  of  the  arm,  an  incipient  kind  of
putrefadtion,  and  other  appearances  of  this  kind ;  for  the  relations  and
friends,  and  particularly  the  hufbands,  being  averfe  to  the  diffeftions  of  their
wives,  do  not  fend  for  the  dilTefters,  but  undertakers;  and  deliver  both
mother  and  infant  up  to  them  ;  fuppofing  them  both  to  be  dead  already.

31.  But  as  the  caufe  of  the  uterus  being  ruptur'd,  is  frequently  the  ob-
lique pofture  of  the  infant,  when  he  endeavours  to  extricate  himfelf  from  his
confinement ;  and  as  this  obliquity  generally  happens  from  the  obliquity  of
the  uterus  itfelf;  I  cannot  help  wondering,  with  Reimannus  (x),  how  it  hap-
pen'd,  that,  as  the  ancient  phyficians  were  folicitous  about  diftinguifhing,
and  curing,  this  diforder  of  the  uterus,  it  fhould  have  been  negledled  in  the
latter  times  by  moft  phyficians.

He  muft  have  been  very  little  converfant  with  Hippocrates,  who  is  igno-
rant that  he  has  fpoken  of  "  uteri  being  turn'd  towards  the  groins,  or  the
"  pubes,"  or,  on  the  other  hand,  backwards  "  towards  the  facrum  (y)"  or,
"  to  the  right,  or  left  fide,"  or  "  inclin'd  to  the  hip(z),"  or  "  having  a
"  tranfverfe  and  oblique  fituation  {a)  •"  and,  in  like  manner,  that  "  the  ori-
"  fices  of  thefe  uteri"  are  made  oblique  at  the  fame  time  (^)  •,  and,  as  wc
have  hinted  already  on  a  former  occafion,  that  -it  is  exprefsly  faid,  "  if  the
"  uteri  become  oblique,  their  orifices  become  oblique  alfo  {c)  •"  to  omit  many
other  palTages  of  the  fame  author.

And  not  only  in  the  age  of  Galen  (d)  ;  but  purpofely  to  pafs  over  many
ages,  and  many  phyficians,  who  follow'd  him ;  when  Joannes  Mathteus  de

(/)  De  Medic.  I.  5.  c.  26.  n.  8.  (a)  N.  36.

(a)  Ibid.  n.  13.  (i)  Ibid.

{x)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  g.  obf.  79 in  Schol.  (c[)  De  Nat.  Muliebr.  n.  34,

{y)  De  Morb.  Mulier.  1.  2.  n.  33.  (dj  De  Loc.  Aff.  1.  6.  c.  5-

(k)  N.  3;.

Vol.  11.  ;:  A  Gradi


730  Book  Hi. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Gradi  (e%  our  Hercules  Saxonia  (f),  Rodericus  a  Caftro  (g)^  and  many  others
after  them,  flourifh'd,  midwives,  and  medical  women,  were  order'd  to  in-
quire into  the  pofition  of  the  os  wteri,  by  the  infertion  of  the  finger ;  tliat
from  thence  they  might  diftinguifh  to  which  fide  the  uterus  was  inclin'd.

But  if  you  compare  Sennertus  (h)  with  thefe  authors,  you  will  readily  un-
derftand  to  how  little  the  whole  affair  was  already  reduc'd  ;  and  how  flightly
k  began  to  be  touch'd  upon.  And  if  you  look  into  Riverius,  you  will  find
that  the  treating  of  this  diforder  was  wholly  omitted.

In  our  memory,  this  almoft  obfolete  opinion  was  reviv'd  by  Deventer  (z)
in  particular  ;  and  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  fliow  (which  I  do  not  remember  to
have  been  done  by  the  ancients)  of  how  much  importance  it  is  to  diftinguifh
the  fituation  of  the  uterus  in  women  in  labour,  from  the  fituation  of  the  os
uteri ;  for  that  difficult  births  -  often  happen  from  the  obliquity  of  the
«terus.

To  this  opinion  I  fee  that  many  eminent  men  have  alTented,  and  do  afTent :
although  fome  difagree  as  to  the  caufe  of  that  obliquity.  Thus  in  two  dif--
fertations  publifh'd  by  two  difciples  of  the  celebrated  Friedius ;  one  in-the
year  1736,  the  other  eight  or  nine  years  after;  I  remember  that  this  caufe
is  plac'd  in  one  fide  of  the  matrix  being  made  heavier,  on  account  of  the
placenta  being  fix'd  to  it ;  which  does  not  happen  frequently  ;  and  the  foetus
being  annex'd  to  that-,  jufl  as  Gradius  {k)  formerly,  among  the  caufes  pro-
dudlive  of  obliquity  in  the  uterus,  plac'd  this,  if  "  by  reafon  of  the  quantity
of  matter"  in  one  part  of  it,  "  or  by  reafon  of  an  acquir'd  gravity,  a  drag~.
*'  ging  of  the  other  part,  towards  this,  was  brought  on."

And  even  the  obfervation  which  is  the  laft  of  all  added  to  this  feftion  of
the  Sepuiehretum,  feems  to  be  confonant  to  their  opinion.

Yet  the  ancients  fuppos'd  the  chief  caufe  to  confift  in  the  contradtion  of
the  ligaments  of  one  fide;  or  even  in  the  relaxation  thereof:  fo  that  the
found  part  was  drawn  to  the  contraftcd,  or  the  relax'd  part  to  the  found.

And  this  opinion  I  am  at  liberty  to  transfer,  from  the  adventitious  difor-
ders  of  thefe  ligaments,  to  thofe  which  may  alfo  exifl:  from  the  original  for-
mation ;  and  this  in  confequence  of  what  I.  have  feen  in  dilTeflions.  For,  in
the  autumn  of  the  year  1706,  I  found  the  ligaments  of  the  left  fide  fliorter
than  thofe  on  the  right,  in  a.  young  virgin  of  Bologna ;  from  whence  the
uterus  inclin'd  to  the  left  fide.

And  nothing  forbids  us  to  fuppofe,  that,  if  the  uterus,  from  an  original,  or
adventitious  caufe,  be  iuclin'd  to  one  fide,  in  unimpregnated  women,  when
they  become  pregnant  it  mull:  hang  to  the  fame  fide  ;  if  nothing  happens  to
prevent  it.  At  leaft  it  mufl,  of  eourfe,  hang  to  the  fame  fide  for  the  firfl,
months  of  pregnancy.

And  as  it  has  increas'd  with  that  inclination;  although  afterwards  itraifes-
itfelf  up  above  the  ligaments ;  it  is  moll  probable  it  will  continue  to  be  iq-
clin'd  to  the  fame  fide,  whereto  it-  was  before  inclin'd. You  therefore  have

(«)  Praft.  tr.  4.  c.  Z2.  (0  Obf. Chir. novum  lumen  Ejihih.  Ob-

(fj  Prsleft.  Praa.  p.  3.  c.  11.  '  ftetric.

CfrJ  De.Morb.  Mulier.  1.  z.  c.  17.  {i)  C.  22.  cit,.

{h)  Med. Praa.  l.,4. p-.  I. f.  2. C  15.  in


prsnc'p.  &  c.  16.  in  fine,


many


Letter  XL VIII. Article  32,  33.  731

■many  caufes to  which  you  may  afcribe  the  obliquity  of  the  uterus, and

tO£tUS.

Nor  would  I  have  you  fuppofe  that  to  be  very  rare,  which  I  laid  down
-in  the  laft  place  •,  although  you  fee  that,  as  yet,  there  are  not  wanting  thofe
who  agree  with  de  Graaf  (/),  when  he  aflerts  that  the  oblique  uterus  had  been
met  with  by  him  "  fometimes,  though  but  rarely."

That  this  appearance  has,  at  leaft,  not  happen'd  rarely  to  me,  you  will
underftand  from  my  oblervations ;  eight  of  which  I  have  already  written  to
you  (m),  befides  that  whereof  1  fpoke  juft  now,  as  taken  from  the  young
virgin  :  two  or  three  I  will  give  you  at  another  time,  as  relating  more  to
another  fubjeft :  but  I  will  here  moreover  add  five  ;  which  I  fhall  not  readily
find  opportunity  to  introduce  eliewhere.

32.  A  ftrumpet,  who  was  lame,  of  a  fmall  ftature,  and  aged  forty  years,
was  taken  off  within  a  few  days,  in  this  hofpital,  and  in  the  beginning  of
March  1717,  by  an  inflammation  of  the  thorax.  At  this  time  I  was  wholly
taken  up  in  the  anatomical  examination  of  the  parts  of  the  belly  •,  for  whicii
reafon  I  infpeded  only  this  cavity.

The  abdomen,  before  I  began  the  diffeftion,  fhow'd  many  cicatrices  from
buboes.  And  when  the  cavity  was  open'd,  the  inteftines  were  turgid  with
flatus;  and,  for  that  reafon,  appear'd  remov'd  from  their  more  frequent
fituation.

That  part  of  the  fmall  inteftines  which  lay  neareft  to  the  thorax,  had  be^
gun  to  be  a  partaker  of  this  inflammation,  as  frequently  happens :  nor  was
the  liver  quite  free  from  the  fame  diforder.  The  kidnies  were  enlarg'd,  and
in  the  pelvis  of  them  was  a  kind  of  purulent  urine.  But  the  coats  of  the
bladder  were  thick  ;  and  their  internal  furface  unequal  ;  perhaps  from  the
lues  venerea  having  infefted  the  urinary  organs,  as  is  often  the  cafe.

One  of  the  tubes  of  the  uterus  was  agglutinated  to  the  neighbouring  tefticle;
yet  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  correfpond  with  its  free  and  unconnecled  orifice,
to  the  part  of  that  teftis  in  which  a  large  veficle  was  included.  The  other
part  was  not  very  found  -,  fo  that  for  this  reafon,  perhaps,  that,  otherwife
very  flender,  ligament,  by  which  it  was  connected  to  the  uterus,  had  be-
come thick.

The  uterus,  which  was  in  other  refpefts  in  a  natural  ftate,  inclin'd  to  one
fide-,  but  whether  to  the  left,  or  to  the  right,  I  have  not  committed  to
paper.

33.  Notwithftanding  I  have  faid  that  this  woman  was  lame,  and  one  of
them  was  lame  in  whom  I  fhall  hereafter  defcribe  (nj  an  inclination  of  the
uterus :  although  Galen  (0)  feems  to  hint  that  thofe  women,  in  whom  is  this
inclination,  have  fometimes  "  a  pain  that  goes  into  the  hip :  and  that  the  op-
*'  pofite  leg  is  fometimes  lame  in  walking  :"  and  Sennertus  (p)  tells  us  of  a
certain  woman  from  PhilaltEeus,  who  was  fuppos'd  "  to  labour  under  a  fcia-
"  tica"  for  that  reafon;  and  Saxonia  (q)  confider'd  limping  as  a  mark  to-
which  fide  the  uterus  inclines;  and  adds,  that  not  only  the  lame  limb,  but

(/)  De  Muller.  Organ,  c.  8.  («)  E'p.  56.  n.  26.

(m)  Epift.  29. n.  12  &  20 ;  Ep. 35. n.  12  (0)  C,  5.  fupra  ad  n.  31.  cit.

&  16;  Ep.  40.  n;  Z4J  Ep.  45.  n.  16;  Ep.  47.  {/>)  C.  16.  ibid.  cit.

n.  18  &  36.  (5.)  C.  II.  ibid.  cit.

5  A  2  the


732  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  upper  limb  alfo,  on  the  fame  fide,  is,  from  his  own  obfervation,  afFe6led
with  a  tremor  and  ftupor  ;  yet  they  either  mean  a  much  greater  inclination
than  I  found  ;  or  a  tumour  and  pain  of  the  uterus,  which  Galen  (r)  probably
refer'd  to,  is  join'd  to  the  inclination  -,  ib  that  by  thefe  means  there  might  be
a  prelTure  and  tenfion  of  the  nerves  which  go  to  the  leg,  through  the  fame
fide  of  the  pelvis,  and  are  connedled  with  the  nerves  of  the  upper  limb,  by
the  intercoftal.  I  at  lealt,  in  the  greateft  part  of  thofe  women  in  whom  I
have  feen  the  uterus  inclin'd  to  one  fide,  have  not  even  obferv'd  a  lamenefs
in  any,  and  ftill  lefs  have  obferv'd  the  other  fymptoms  that  are  mention'^d.

And  as  to  Hippocrates  (s)  having  faid,  "  if  the  leg  be  made  lame  from
"  the  uterus  after  delivery,"  that  is,  as  he  explains  it  himfelf,  in  another
place  f/j,  "  from  the  uterus  being  inclin'd  towards  the  hipj"  Reimannus  («)
will  fhow  you  how  you  may  underltand  this,  where  he  produces  two  inftances
of  lamenefs  feen  by  him  after  delivery.

I  would  alfo  have  you  read  the  conjefture  of  Schoenmezlerus  (x)  ;  who,
having  frequently  heard  lying-in  women  "  complain  of  a  violent  pain  in  the
*'  region  of  the  larger  trochanter,  and  in  like  manner  a  fenfible  drawing  of
"  the  fame,  towards  the  exterior,  or  pofterior  parts ;"  and  having  obferv'd
that  a  virgin,  who  labour'd  under  a  cancerous  excrefcence  of  the  vagina
uteri,  was  troubled  "  with  fimilar,  and  even  greater,  inconveniences ;"  con-
jedur'd  that  the  mufcle,  which  lies  next  to  the  uterus,  on  the  internal  furface
of  the  pelvis ;  I  mean  the  obturator  internus ;  may  in  violent  pains,  and
throes,  of  child-bearing,  "  be  bruis'd,  inflam'd,  ulcerated,  or  in  any  other
"  way  injur'd  ;"  and  by  this  means  occafion  that  pain,  and  drawing,  in  con-
fequence  of  its  being  terminated  "  in  the  notch  of  the  great  trochanter."

And,  as  you  confider  thefe  things  in  your  mind,  you  will  naturally  con-
ceive, that  in  the  throes  of  a  difficult  birth,  other  mufcles,  alfo,  that  lie  near
to  the  difl:ended  uterus  in  the  pelvis,  and  particularly  the  iliacus  internus,
and  that  which  is  call'd  the  pfoas,  may  receive  fome  injury;  and  that,  as
thefe  mufcles  go  to  the  other  trochanter,  and  raife  the  thigh,  they  may  caufe
not  only  a  pain,  like  that  obturator  in  lying-in  women,  but  alfo  a  difficulty
ofraifing  the  thigh;  which  according  to  the  different  degree  of  injury  is
greater  or  lefs,  or  fhorter,  or  of  longer,  continuance :  for  fometimes  it  is
even  perpetual;  as  I  have  feen  in  a  noble  matron,  who  was  my  wife's  mo-
ther ;  which  lamenefs  flie  faid  had  been  left  after  a  difficult  birth  of  that
kind.

But  whether  this  had  taken  its  origin  from  the  fame  caufe,  in  any  of  thofe
we  diflTedted,  I  cannot  now  certainly  remember.  However  ;  to  return  to
the  fubjeft  ;  I  have  alfo  found  the  uterus  inclin'd  in  fome  gibbous  women  :
_yet  not  fo  that  the  gibbofity  was  brought  on  by  the  inclination  of  the  ute-
rus, but  on  the  contrary  the  inclination  of  the  uterus  by  the  diftortion  of
the  fpine ;  as  certainly  happen'd  in  thofe  two  of  whom  I  (hall  immediately
fpeak.

34.  A  gibbous  old  woman  was  brought  into  the  hofpital,  when  her  dif-
eafe  was  fo  far  advanc'd  in  its  progrefs,  that  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  learn

(r)  C.  cit.  (a)  Schol.  fupra  ad  n.  31.  cit.

(s)  De  Morb.  Mulier.  1.  i.n.  16.  (xj  Commerc.  Liuer, a. 1736.  hebd,  43,

(/)  L.  2.  n.  35.  n.  2.

■who


Letter- XL VIII. Article  35, 36.  733

who  (hs  was  ;  for  no  fooner  was  fhe  brought  in  but  flie  died.  Wherefore  I
demonftrated  but  very  few  things,  from  her  body,  to  the  pupils;  and  in-
deed fo  much  the  fewer,  as  I  was  furnifh'd  with  a  very  good  male  body  at
that  time-,  from  which  I  was  teaching,  in  the  theatre,  about  the  latter  end
of  January  in  the  year  1748.

In  the  thorax  I  infpe£ted  nothing  elfe  but  the  heart,  which  was  in  a  na-
tural ftate ;  although  it  was  furniih'd  with  four  coronary  arteries,  as  I  fhall
defcribe  on  a  future  occafion.

And  in  the  belly,  the  kidnies  had  not  a  very  found  furface  ;  fo  that  I
was  lefs  furpriz'd  to  find  the  bladder,  in  v/hich  there  was  a  great  quantity  of.
urine,  having  its  cervix  well  diftinguilh'd  with  fanguiferous  vefiels.

The  right  teftis  was  fomewhat  turgid,  juft  as  if  it  had  been  the  teftis  of  a
young  woman  ;  but  it  was  diftended  by  an  hydatid  of  a  confiderable  fize,
that  was  included  in  its  body.  And  finally,  the  fpine  was  diftorted  to  fuch
a  degree,  that  the  uterus  inclin'd  to  the  right  fide ;  and  the  left  iliac  vein
was  t.vice  as  long  as  the  right.

35.  The  kidnies,  and  genital  parts,  of  another  gibbous  old  woman,  v/ho
had  died  in  the  hoipital  of  a  long-continued  and  very  violent  ulcer  of  the
leg,  were  brought  to  me  into  the  college;  almoft  at  the  fame  time  of  year,  ,
but  two  years  before.

The  right  kidney  was  of  a  natural  form  and  magnitude.  But  the  left,
although  it  equall'd  that  in  length,  was  fo  much  lefs  in  width,  that  the  ap-
pearance naturally  occur'd  to  the  eyes  of  every  one  immediately.

Whether  this  was  owing  to  the  fpine  being  diftorted  towards  the  left  fide,
at  the  upper  vertebrse  of  the  loins,  I  cannot  determine,  as  I  did  not  fee  the
body  myfelf  Below,  however,  it  was  certainly  fo  inflefted  to  the  right
fide,  that  the  uterus  hung  towards  the  fame  fide :  and  this  appear'd  from
the  round  ligament  of  the  uterus  on  the  right  fide,  being  much  fhorter  than
the  left :  for  that  I  might  be  convinc'd  of  this  fhortnefs,  thofe  who  had
taken  the  parts  out  of  the  body,  had  left  the  fmall  part  of  the  abdomen,
through  which  it  came  out  from  the  belly,  connedted  thereto.

g6.  Yet  I  have  feen  the  uterus  drawn  to  that  fide;  by  reafon  of  one. of
the  round  ligaments  being  very  fhort;  in  three  other  women,  whofe  hifto-
ries  you  have  formerly  receiv'd  (y).  And  that  I  take  notice  of  for  this  rea-
fon ;  becaufe,  after  Rioianus  (z) ;  who  mentions  only  the  broad  ligament,
v/hich  alone  was  probably  fhorter  than  ufual,  in  his  obfcrvation  of  this  kind  ;
I  fee  that  others  are  not  wanting,  and  among  thofe  Weitbrecht  (a),  who  fup-
pofe  it  to  happen  always  from  one  of  the  ligamenta  lata.

However,  as  I  think  that  it  fometimes  happens  from  the  fhortnefs  of  both
ligaments,  in  one  and  the  fame  fide,  or  from  the  laxity  of  them  in  the  other
fide  ;  fo  I  imagine  that  the  fame  circumftance  may,  at  other  times,  be  owing
to  the  ligamentum  latum  only  being  fliorter,  if  its  fellow  round  ligament
be  very  lax;  or  to  the  round  ligament  only,  if  the  broad  ligament  be
very  lax.

But  to  the  laxity  of -both  the  broad  ligaments  I  attribute  the  falling  back-

CyJ  Epift. 29.  n.  12  &  20;  Epill.  35.  n. CzJ  Anthropogr.  1.  2.  c.  35.
16.  (a)  Syndefmolog.  fe£t.  6.  §.  41.

wards


734-  Boo^  m* ^f  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

wards,  or  forwards,  of  the  uterus ;  as  in  the  woman  of  whom  I  wrote  to
you  in  the  forty-fourth  letter  (^b)  ;  although  in  her  the  left  muft  have  been
fonnewhat  lefs  lax,  or  lefs  fhort,  as  the  uterus  was  fomewhat  nearer  to  the  left
fide  than  to  the  right. Now  take  the  remaining  obfervations.

37.  A  woman,  of  about  five  and  thirty  years  of  age,  had,  not  long  be-
fore, had  a  vomica  ruptur'd  in  the  lungs,  when  flie  gave  fuck.  As  lono-  as
Ihe  could  expectorate  (he  liv'd.  But  at  length ;  her  expettoration  havino-
ftop'd  for  the  fpace  of  two  days ;  fhe  died  in  the  hofpital,  in  the  beginning
of  December  in  the  year  1740.

As  the  body  was  not  emaciated,  and  very  proper  for  anatomical  inquiries,
moft  of  the  parts  were  diflefled  and  examin'd  ;  except  the  thorax,  which  I
purpofely  omitted  opening  ;  but  none  with  fo  much  care  as  the  belly.
■  In  this  cavity  then,  fome  appearances  were  obferv'd,  that  do  not  relate  to
the  prefent  fubjefl  •,  but  among  others  were  the  following.  The  flomach,
which  was  very  long,  before  it  rcach'd  to  the  antrum  pylori,  contraded  it-
felf  to  the  extent  of  fome  inches ;  and  foon  after  expanded  itfelf  into  that
antrum.

The  inteftinum  colon  was  alio  contradted,  in  its  beginning,  to  fuch  a  de-
gree as  fcarcely  to  exceed  the  thicknels  of  a  man's  thumb.  The  fmall  in-
teftines  feem'd  to  be  infiam'd  as  it  were,  in  fome  places,  on  the  left  fide  ;
unlefs  this  might  happen  to  be  fo  from  round  worms,  one  of  which  was  in
the  flomach.

The  fpleen  was  of  a  flefhy  colour  internally,  not  black  ;  and  almofl  of  its
natural  magnitude.

But  the  liver  was  large-,  extending  itfelf  into  the  left  hypochondrium  ;  and
had  its  right  lobe  divided  almoft  into  two  lelTer  lobes,  on  its  concave  fur-
face,  by  a  deep  and  not  fhort  fifiure.  I  found  the  roots  of  the  hepatic  du6t
within  the  liver,  which  was,  in  other  refpeds,  found,  much  thicker  than  the
thicknefs  of  thofe  that  lay  on  the  outfide  of  the  liver,  feem'd  to  reqiiire  in
proportion.

The  furface  of  the  kidnies  was  unequal  in  fome  places  ;  yet  they  were  found
in  their  internal  fubftance.  In  the  cavity  of  the  pelvis  of  the  abdomen  was
a  fmall  quantity  of  water.

The  uterus  was  very  much  inclin'd  to  the  right  fide ;  fo  that  the  tube,  and
the  teftis,  being  forc'd  into  a  narrow  compafs  in  that  part,  had  a  much  more
extenfive  fituation  in  the  other.  Finally,  the  trunk  of  the  vena  cava  be-
ing cut  acrofs  at  the  diaphragm,  fom.e  black  and  coagulated  blood  flow'd
down.

38.  An  old  woman  had  her  right  leg  bitten  by  a  dog  -,  after  which  an  in-
teftinal  fiuxhad  come  on,  and  a  flight  fever.

After  many  days  the  former  ceas'd  -,  but  the  latter  continued.  She  was
then  feiz'd  with  a  vomiting,  by  which  (he  threw  up  fome  worms.  And  at
length  her  vomiting  ceafing,  llie  fank  by  degrees,  and  died,  in  the  hofpital,
about  the  beginning  of  March  1741.

This  patient  never  had  her  pulle  ftrong  ;  yet  fhe  had  intermifTions  now  and
tiv^n  : there  was  fometimcs  a  cough  alfo,  but  this  was  flight. And  why I

fh)  No.  jd.
K  '  added


Letter  XLVIir. Article  38.  735

added  .thefe  two  remarks,  you  will  conceive  naturally  of  yourielf,  when  I  tell
you  prefently  what  I  obferv'd  in  the  heart,  and  about  the  lungs.  For  I  not
only  examin'd  the  internal  parts  of  the  belly,  but  of  the  thorax  and  head
likewife  -,  and  other  parts  befides,  of  this  very  lean  body,  within  a  few
days  :  and  that  very  accurately.

When  we  were  about  to  diffeft  the  brain,  we  obferv'd  air-bubbles  in  the
veflels  of  the  pia  mater:  and  under  this  membrane  was  water;  as  there  was
alfo  in  the  ventricles,  but  not  in  great  quantity,  nor  fo  as  to  make  the  cho-
roid plexufles  pale.

On  opening  the  thorax,  we  found  the  lungs  to  be  turgid  with  air;  and
about  them  were  many  bronchial  glands,  fome  of  which  were  much  enlarg'd,
and  contain'd  a  tartareous  matter  within  them.

Both  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  were  ftuff'd  up  with  polypous  concreti-
ons, among  which  was  a  black  blood;  being  themfelves  of  a  white  colour
inclining  to  yellow ;  and  fome  of  them,  thick,  and  not  eafily  to  be  puU'd.
afunder.

The  valvulze  mitrales  were  made  up,  at  their  lower  parr,  of  a  compaft
and  white  fubftancc  internally ;  and  particularly  in  that  part  which  is  neareft
to  the  great  artery.

None  of  the  valves  of  this  artery  were  quite  free  from  beginning  oflifica-
tions  :  and  one  of  them,  on  the  furface  that  wasturn'd  to  the  paries  of  the  ar-
tery, was  almoft  univerfally  bony ;  and  for  that  reafon  rough,  and  unequal,  with
particles  which  you  would  have  faid  were  real  bones;  being  here  and  there
protuberant  like  grains  of  fand,  and  fome  of  them  lying  upon  each  other.

On  the  other  furface,  the  corpufcle  which  was  reftor'd  by  me,  being  pull'd
away  at  the  upper  part,  had  degenerated  into  a  flefhy  excrefcence,  fomewhac
larger  than  itlelf.

In  the  belly,  which  we  open'd  firft  of  all,,  the  ftomach  appear'd  to  be
fomewhat  tumid  with  air ;  being  large  of  itfelf,  and  coming  down  fo  low,
that  the  inteftine  colon,  which  lies  beneath  it,  was  below  the  navel.  And
the  whole  of  this  inteftine  ;.  as  in  the  woman  laft  fpoken  of  (c) ;  except  at  its
beginning,  which  together  with  the  csecum  was  turgid  with  air,  had  fo  con-
tradted  itfelf,  that  it  feem'd  to  be  one  of  the  fmall  inteftines.  On  the  other
hand,  the  duodenum  was  much  larger  than  it  generally  is ;  and  moreover
pafs'd  downwards,  over  a  very  long  traft  of  vertebrse,  on  the  right  fide.  The
other  fmall  inteftines  were  of  a  pale  and  livid  colour.

The  glands  of  the  mefentery  were  not  very  fmall,  but  of  a  middle  fize  i,
being  fenfible  both  to  the  fight,  and  touch,  under  a  fmall  quantity  of  fat..

The  liver  was  large  :  and  in  it  two  furrows,  as  if  made  by  a  ftrong  impref-
fion  of  the  fingers,  defcended  in  a  fituatlon  almoft  parallel  to  each  other:
and  that  from  the  upper  part  of  the  convex  furface,  to  a  confiderable  traft  in
the  anterior  direction.

The  fpleen  was  thicker  than  is  natural;  and  on  its  gibbous  furface  fome-
what rough,  with  a  kind  of  whitifti  granules,  and  of  a  pallid  colour  in-
ternally..

(ON.  37.

Finally,,


736  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Finally,  the  uterus  was  inclin'd  to  the  left  fide,  and  had  its  whole  internal
furface  rough  ;  but  not  ulcerated,  although  cover'd  over  with  black  blood  ;
the  whole  internal  iurface,  I  fay,  of  the  fundus,  but  not  of  the  cervix-,
although  the  corona  of  the  ofculum  uteri  was  fomewhat  thicken'd.

g^.  Nor  am  I  wanting  in  other  obfervations,  befides  thofe  that  I  have
promis'd,  of  the  the  uterus  being  inclin'd  to  one  fide-,  but  from  a  tumour
in  the  oppofite  fide.

Thefe,  however,  are  fufEcient,  at  prefent,  which  I  have  added  to  the
eight  already  given  you  in  former  letters ;  firft  to  fhow  you  that  the  obli-
quity of  the  uterus  is  not  very  rare  -,  and  in  the  fecond  place,  that  by  com-
paring them  all,  one  with  another,  you  may  know  whether  this,  as  fome
feem  to  believe,  happens  more  frequently  on  the  right  fide,  or  not  lefs  fre-
quently on  the  left.

I  have  not  leifure  here  to  examine  the  obfervations  of  others.  But  out
of  the  two,  however,  which  I  remember  to  have  read  in  the  Sepulchretum ;
the  one  of  Joannes  Riolanus  (d),  the  other  of  Francifcus  Sylvius  (e)  -,  the
former  defcribes  it  as  being  towards  the  right  fide,  and  the  latter  towards
the  left.

And  finally,  by  comparing  all  our  obfervations  together,  you  will  natu-
rally colleft  this  remark  :  that  the  women,  in  whom  this  diforder  of  the  ute-
rus was  found  by  me,  had  not  complain'd  of  thofe  violent  fymptoms,  which
Ruyfch  (f)  fuppos'd  to  be  the  efFed  of  a  lateral  inclination  of  the  uterus  ;  I
mean  a  pain  of  the  hypogaftrium,  a  very  frequent  efibrt  of  expulfion,  a  conti-
nual defire  of  making  water,  oratlfafl  not  a  very  quick  and  eafy  xlifcharge  of
the  urine-,  notwithftanding  in  fome  of  them  this  inclination  was  far  from
being  inconfiderable,  and  the  frequent  interrogation  of  phyficians  was  not
■wanting,  in  order  to  difcover  every  complaint  wherewith  they  were  troubled.

And  indeed  the  figure  of  Ruyfch's  (g)  -,  in  which  the  inclin'd  uterus  is
reprefented -,  does  not  fliow  that  part  of  the  vagina  which  is  annex'd  to  it.;
and  to  which  we  know  that  the  beginning  of  the  urethra  clofely  coheres  ;  to
be  fo  inclin'd,  as  would  be  necefl"ary  in  order  to  account  for  thofe  difagree-
ble  fymptoms  in  difcharging  the  urine,  that  Ruyfch  has  attributed  thereto.
But  of  the  obliquity  of  the  uterus  enough.

There  is  a  rare  obfervatipn  of  contorfion  being  added  to  obliquity,  which
may  be  read  among  the  hiftories  that  are  in  the  latter  part  of  the  excellent
differtation  of  Rudolphus  Jacobus  Camerarius  (b).  For  the  uterus  was
found  "  fo  inclin'd  to  the  left  fide,  that  the  anterior  part  of  the  fundus
"  feem'd  to  be  difl:orted,  towards  that  fide,  at  the  fame  time."

And  this  contorfion  was,  as  is  faid  foon  after  (i),  "  confpicuous ;  and  by
"  contrading  the  orifice  of  the  uterus,  perhaps  impeded  the  birth  at  the  fame
■"  time  ;"  particularly  of  the  fcetus,  which  was  not  properly  plac'd,  was
larger  than  the  ufual  fize,  and  in  a  mother  who  was  fmall,  and  in  like  man-
ner fat.

{J)  Seft.  hac^S.  obf.  9.  §.  8.  {h)  Specimen.  Experimen. circa  Generat,

(.')  Sea.  10.  librihujus  3.  obf.  28.  Hift.  1.


V/J  Cent.  obf.  Anat.  Chir.  88.  (i)  In  Schol.

ig)  Ibid.  fig.  69.  *


You


Letter  XL VIII. Article  40.  737

You  fee  how  many  caufes  of  unfuccefsful  birth,  may  fometimes  come  to-
gether, at  one  time.  But  there  are  ftill  others;  as  when  the  cervix  uteri  is
fhut  up  by  fome  excrefcence  :  which  was  the  cafe  in  the  woman  whofe  dif-
fedtion  we  have  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  (k):
or  when  the  os  uteri  is  almoft  of  a  cartilaginous  hardnefs,  fuch  as  it  was  found
to  be  in  a  woman  not  yet  forty  years  of  age,  by  the  celebrated  Helmftad
profeffor,  Fabricius  (/)  -,  nor  did  he  think  it  was  without  reafon  that  he  rec-
kon'd  it  among  the  other  caufes  of  a  difficult  and  preternatural  birth,  as  giv-
ing very  great  refiftance  to  the  dilatation  neceflary  for  delivery :  or  when  the
funiculus  umbilicalis  is  much  ihorter  than  it  generally  is,  and  is  an  obftacle
to  the  efforts  of  the  foetus,  in  endeavouring  to  extricate  itfelf ;  or  if  thefe
efforts  are  very  ftrong,  is  apt  to  produce  an  untimely  feparation  of  the  pla-
centa ;  and  even  is  apt  itfelf  to  be  broken  afunder.

Thus  you  will  fee,  in  how  much  danger  both  mother  and  foetus  were,
when  a  funiculus  "  fcarcely  fix  inches  long,"  was  feen  by  the  celebrated
Stegmannus  (m).

But  out  of  the  other  caufes  of  difficult  birth ;  fince  they  are  almoft  innu-
merable, and  we  have  a  great  number  of  different  caufes  ftill  remaining ;  it
will  be  proper  to  fpeak  of  one,  which  is  a  very  common  one  among  the  prin-
cipal of  thefe  caufes.

40.  This  is  the  foetus  when  dead  in  the  uterus:  which  firft  creates  this
difficulty ;  to  make  it  very  doubtful,  whether  it  be  really  dead.

There  were,  formerly,  fome  who  acquiefc'd  too  eafily,  as  melancholy  ex-
amples have  taught  us,  in  certain  figns  of  the  death  of  the  foetus;  and  if  the
meconium,  for  inftance,  flow'd  down  through  the  pudenda  of  the  woman  in
labour,  they  did  not  hefitate  to  pronounce  that  the  foetus  was  already  dead.
The  fallacy  of  which  fign,  not  only  others,  in  other  places,  but  I  niyfelf  have
very  evidently  found  here,  in  the  year  1730.

The  wife  of  a  tradefman,  who  was  about  nine  and  twenty  years  of  age,
having  drunk  water  inftead  of  wine,  almoft  in  general  for  the  fpace  of  three
years ;  and  having  come  to  the  regular  period  of  her  fifth  or  fixth  pregnancy
with  good  omens;  difcharg'd  fo  great  a  quantity  of  waters,  at  one  and  the
fame  time,  from  her  genitals,  that  every  one  was  furpriz'd  at  it ;  but  not  fhe
herfelf

For  ftie  knew  that  fhe  had  drunk  much  more  water  in  this  pregnancy  than
ufual ;  and  that  lefs  had  been  difcharg'd  by  the  urinary  paffages  for  the  laft
month  than  ufual.

She  was  furpriz'd  however,  as  the  infants  had  always  hitherto  immediately
follow'd  the  effufion  of  the  waters,  together  with  their  fecundines,  and  the
births  had  been  very  happy ;  notwithftanding  the  children  had  all  ceas'd  to
live  within  fifteen  day  ;  ifhe  was  furpriz'd,  I  fay,  that  her  waters  having  be.^n
difcharg'd  on  the  preceding  day  in  the  morning,  which  was  the  eighteenth
of  February,  another  day  had  now  come  on,  and  nothing  had  been  difcharg'd
befides  a  watery  humour,  which  ftill  continu'd  to  flow  ;  when  behold  !  on  the
fame  morning,  the  meconium  began  to  flow  together  with  that  fluid.

(i)  A.  1705.  obr.  anat.  7.  {tn)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  4.  obf.  113.

(/)  Progr.  Acad.  edit.  a.  1750.  m.  Januar.

Vol.  II.  5  B  Where-


73 8  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

Wherefore,  in  the  afternoon  I  was  fent  to,  and  defired  to  go  and  fee  herj^
and  confult  with  her  phyfician  upon  the  cafe.

Upon  hearing  that  this  gentleman  intended  to  do,  and  to  give,  fuch  things,
as  he  hop'd  would  bring  back  the  pains,  and  efforts,  of  the  uterus,  that  were
gone  off;  I  told  him,  that  I  thought  the  firft  inquiry  to  be  made,  was,  whe^
ther  the  foetus  was  difpos'd  in  fuch  a  figure,  as  is  requir'd  in  a  natural  ftate  ;
from  which,  I  fear'd,  if  it  were  living,  it  was  far  diftant :  and  what  made  me
fear  this  was  the  difcharge  of  the  meconium.

I  inquir'd  what  was  the  report  of  the  midwife.  And  v/as  anfwer'd  that
fhe,  as  far  as  could  be  judg'd  from  the  examination  of  the  abdomen  of  the
mother,  fuppos'd  the  foetus  to  be  plac'd  tranfverfly.  But  that  it  was  alive
the  mother  did  not  doubt,  as  fhe  thought  flae  had  heard  it  cry.  But  let  us,_
faid  I,  pafs  by  this  notion  of  the  child's  crying,  which  is  an  uncertain  fign.

Yet  why  was  not  the  former  which  confirm'd  my  opinion  (for  the  anus  of
the  infant  being  turn'd  towards  the  vagina,  and  the  parts  adjacent  to  the  anus
being  probably  comprefs'd,  the  inteftinal  excrements  might  be  forc'd  out,
even  before  the  infant  breath'd)  afcertain'd  to  the  midwife  by  the  introduc-
tion of  her  fingers .''  The  mother,  fay  they,  refufes  to  fubmit  to  it.

But  what,  faid  I,  if  it  fhould  be  neceflary  to  introduce  the  hand  into  the
uterus,  and  extradl  the  foetus ;  after  having  firft  turn'd  it  to  a  more  proper
pofition,  if  that  fhould  be  neceflary.  And  if  her  mind  cannot  be  now  in-
fiuenc'd  ;  you  may  take  it  for  granted,  that  unlefs  the  midwife  is  deceiv'd,
or  the  figure,  which  fhe  has  fpoken  of,  is  chang'd  to  a  better,  the  infant  will
not  be  born,  at  laft,  without  the  afliftance  of  a  furgeon,  which  may  perhaps
be  too  late.

One  or  other  of  thefe  fuppofitions  muft  have  taken  place.  But  whichfo-
ever  was  the  cafe  ;  they  faid  that  the  pofition  was  afterwards  chang'd,.  and
that  the  pains  of  labour  coming  on,  the  infant  was,  at  length,  born  in  its  na-
tural figure;  though  not  without  great  difficulty  on  account  of  its  mag-
nitude.

This  however  is  certain,  and  what  relates  chiefly  to  the  point  in  queftion ;
that  the  child  was  not  born  before  the  eighth  hour  of  the  following  day,  and
was  ftill  alive  :  that  is  at  leaft  fifteen  hours  from  the  time  in  which,  being  in
the  uterus,  it  had  begun  to  difcharge  its  fasces :  and  it  even  liv'd  a  little  while
after  the  birth ;  fo  as  to  make  it  very  evidently  appear,  that  this  difcharge  is
a  deceitful  mark  of  the  foetus  being  dead.

And  I  have  given  you  this  relation,  becaufe  it  is  only  by  inculcating  ftill
other  and  other  obfervations,  from  time  to  time,  that  thefe  errors,  and  pre-
judices, can  be  rooted  out  from  the  minds  of  weak  women  and  common
people.

For  it  does  not  efcape  me,  as  I  faid  above,  how  often  the  fame  thing  has
been  before:  and  indeed  ;  to  omit  other  examples;  one  of  the  hiftoriesjuft
now  mention'd  (n),  when  I  took  notice  of  the  diftortion  of  the  uterus,  will
plainly  fliow  you,  that  a  girl  was  born  living,  healthy,  and  brifk  on  the  fifth
day  after  the  meconium  was  difcharg'd.

Nor  is  it  only  that  fome  compreffion  ;  efpecially  of  the  belly,  which  eafily

(«)  N.  39.

happens


Letter  XLVIII. Article  41.  739

^lappens  when  the  body  of  the  foetus  is  not  folded  into  the  moft  fuitable  pof-
ture;  but  that  either  the  greater  quantity  of  fasces,  which  are  then  ahnoft
fiuid,  or  the  acrimony  of  them,  by  irritating  the  inteftines  ;  may  overcome  the
power  and  refiftance  of  the  circumjacent  fphindter,  which  at  that  time  are  but
fmdl.

And  muft  it  not  happen,  that  this  power  of  the  fphinfler  is  fometimes  al-
moft  nothing  at  all  -,  and  not  only  by  reafon  of  the  great  infirmity  and  weak-
iiefs  of  the  foetus,  but  by  reafon  of  a  paralyfis  ?  And  it  concerns  phyficians  v
who  are  not  willing  to  be  deceiv'd,  even  by  many  other  figns  that  are  gene-
rally fuppofed  to  argue  the  death  of  the  foetus ;  to  remember  with  careful-
nefs,  that  the  ftrength,  and  retention,  of  the  foetus,  may  be  foon  after  re-
ftored  ;  as  after  a  fyncope,  by  cheering  and  comforting  the  foetus  together
with  the  mother ;  or  if  not  wholly  reftor'd,  at  leafb  in  great  meafure.

Suppofe,  by  way  of  another  example,  that  there  is  no  pulfation  in  the  um-
bilical rope,  and  even  none  in  the  arteries  of  the  foetus.  It  is,  without  doubt,
certain  that  the  foetus  is  alive,  if  a  pulfe  is  really  perceiv'd.  I  faid  really  ;  for
what  Lancifi  (o)  relates  to  have  happen'd  in  refpeft  to  a  man  of  the  firft  rank  ;
that,  in  his  wrift  after  death,  I  know  not  who  contended  there  was  a  pulfe,
which  in  fadt  was  no  where  except  in  his  own  fingers ;  I  fear  may  much  more
eafily  happen  to  a  furgeon,  who,  in  order  to  inquire  into  this  circumftance,
has  introduc'd  his  fingers,  after  being  heated  within  the  warm  parts  of  the
woman,  and  by  the  operation  itfelf.

And  I  commend  thofe,  who,  in  order  to  avoid  this  fallacy,  have  ad-
monifh'd  the  furgeon,  that  he,  at  the  fame  time,  compare  the  number  of
pulfes  perceiv'd  by  him,  with  thofe  of  his  own  at  the  wrift-,  which  flie  muft
take  care  to  have  obferv'd  by  fome  other  perfon ;  fo  that  if  the  numbers
exaftly  coincide,  he  may  be  fure  he  is  deceiv'd  :  but  if  on  the  contrary,  that
he  is  not  deceiv'd.

Yet  although  that  which  we  have  faid  is  certain ;  it  does  not  immediately
follow,  that  the  foetus  is  dead,  if  there  is  no  pulfe :  for  the  ftrength  of  the
foetus  may  then  be  very  languid,  but  foon  after  return.

And  neither  the  fatal  deficiency  of  pulfe,  nor  the  coldnefs,  nor  lividnefs,
of  the  funiculus,  nor  of  a  limb  of  the  foetus  hanging  out  of  the  uterus,  give
a  fufficient  proof  of  the  child's  being  extinft  :  for  they  may  be  fo  conftrifted
v/ithin  the  narrow  pafl^age  of  the  contracted  os  uteri,  that  if  a  gangrene  even
begins  to  afi^eft  the  limb,  and  the  cuticle  begins  to  be  feparated  from  it ;
though  it  is  very  evident  that  the  life  of  the  infant  is  in  very  great  danger,
yet  that  life  is  entirely  extinguifii'd,  is  by  no  means  certain  and  evident.

And  indeed  at  Breflau,  although  the  arm  of  the  infant  was  hanging  out
"  in  a  livid  and  cold  ftate,"  fo  that  it  was  judg'd  proper  to  amputate  it,  as
if  the  foetus  were  without  doubt  dead;  yet  this  foetus  was  born  (p)  "on
"  the  third  day  and  living."

41.  However,  where,  either  the  very  feries  of  evident  caufes,  and  circum-
ftances,  or  the  greater  part  of  the  figns,  and  thofe  fuch  as  are  to  be  depended
upon,  or  at  leaft  of  the  moft  importance ;  of  which  kind  are  the  very  eafy  fe-
paration  of  the  cuticle  from  the  head,  a  humour  of  a  cadaverous  fmeli  dif-

.fej  De  fubit,  mort.  ],  i.  c.  16.  n.  8.  Cj>)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3.  obH  57.  in  fin.

5  B  2  tilling


740  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

tiUing  from  the  uterus,  and  other  figns  of  the  like  kind  -,  where  thefe  fymp-
toms,  I  fay,  have  induc'd  the  more  flcilfiil  phyficians,  and  furgeons,  to  fup--
pofe,  with  unanimous  confent,  that  the  infant  is  dead  within  the  uterus ;  an-
other difficulty  naturally  arifes :  that  is,  whether  it  is  better  immediately  to
excradl  it  with  the  hands,  or  to  make  ufe  of  other  remedies  previoufly
thereto.

I  remember,  that,  when  I  applied  to  the  ftudy  of  phyfic  at  Bologna,  ithap-
pen'd  to  two  illuftrious  matrons,  in  one  and  the  fame  year,  that  they  could
not  bring  forth  their  children;  and  as  the  fcetus  of  each  of  them  was  fup-
pos'd  to  be  dead,  that  in  one  it  was  taken  away  by  the  hands  of  the  furgeon  ;
but  in  the  other,  that,  by  patience,  and  waiting,  and  particularly  by  the  ufe
of  a  clyfter,  that  was  emollient  and  ftimulant  at  the  fame  time,  the  foetus
was  difcharg'd ;  the  former  mother  dying  foon  after,  but  the  latter  being
fav'd.

Although  the  gentleman  who  had  been  phyfician  to  both  of  them,  a  very
Jearned  man,  gave  his  reafons,  why,  in  the  former  cafe,  he  thought  it  ne-
cefTary  to  haften  the  event,  and  why  in  the  latter  there  was  room  to  wait ;
yet  he  did  not  get  praife,  from  the  recovery  of  the  one,  equal  to  the  re-
proach he  got  by  the  lofs  of  the  other :  reproach  that  was  in  my  opinion
unjufb,  but  prevail'd  even  among  phyficians  and  furgeons  of  eminence.

And  although  it  is  not  at  all  to  be  doubted,  but  it  becomes  phyficians  to
aft  differently  according  to  different  circumftances ;  yet  it  is  fcarcely  pofTible
to  avoid  cenfure,  unlefs  you  aft  in  confequence  of  the  unanimous  opinion  of
the  moft  celebrated  phyficians,  in  the  ufe  of  every  doubtful  remedy :  and
efpecially  if  it  happen,  as  in  this  cafe,  that  the  afTiflance  of  a  flcilful  and  ex-
perienc'd  furgeon  is  wanting.

Nor  is  it  fufficient  to  fave  the  patient,  we  muft  alfo  fee  that  no  injury  is
done  to  the  uterus.

I  was  confulted  fome  years  ago,  for  a  gentlewoman,  who,  after  four  very
fuccefsful  births,  had  had  occafion,  in  the  fifth,  for  the  affiftance  of  a  fur-
geon ;  who  having  it  in  his  power  to  extraft  the  infant  eafily  by  the  feet,
(which  he  ought  to  have  done)  as  it  prefented  with  them,  pulh'd  them  back
neverthelefs ;  and  while  he  was  endeavouring  to  turn  the  head  to  the  orifice
of  the  uterus.^  and  extraft  the  foetus  by  laying  hold  of  it,  he  teaz'd  the  wo-
man, who  was,  in  other  refpefts,  of  a  delicate  habit,  fo  long  and  fo  violently,
that  not  only  an  inflammatory  fever,  which  brought  her  almoft  to  death's
door,  was  excited  ;  but  alfo,  in  the  three  following  times  of  child-birth,  the
infants  never  prefented  themfelves  with  the  head,  but  always  thruft  out  the
hand :  and  it  is  very  fuppofabl-^  that  this  was  owing  to  an  injury  being  done
to  a  certain  part  of  the  uteru.  which  prevented  it  from  fuftaining,  or  ex-
pelling, them  equally,  on  all  parts;  and  was  thereby  the  caufe  of  a  preter-
natural pofition.

For  which  reafon,  if  there  is  nothing  that  requires  hafte,  and  the  pofition
of  the  dead  foetus  is  not  bad,  the  greater  time  is,  in  my  opinion,  to  be  given
to  the  woman,  and  to  nature  ;  that  the  latter  may  excite  the  efforts,  and  pains,
of  child-bearing,  and  the  former,  by  collefting  her  flrength  together,  may
contend,  with  all  her  might,  to  deliver  herfelf  of  her  burden :  and  it  is  fome-
2  times


Letter  XL VIII. Article  41.  741

times  of  ufe,  to  aflift  the  endeavours  of  the  mother  a  little,  by  applying  cau-
tious and  fkilful  hands  to  the  belly.

But  becaufe  nature  is  fometimes  very  flow  in  promoting  thofe  pains,  or
does  not  excite  fuch  as  we  would  wifli  •,  but  rather  convulfive  pains,  which
are  diametrically  oppofite  to  our  purpofe  •,  it  will  be  our  bufinefs  to  appeafe
the  latter  in  time,  and  to  promote  the  former,  if  that  is  really  in  our  power.

I  remember  I  was  call'd  to  a  woman  in  labour,  who ;  having  been  now
troubled  with  this  bad  kind  of  pains,  that  I  have  fpoken  of,  for  the  fpace
of  tv/o  days ;  could  neither  get  any  fleep,  nor  retain  any  aliment ;  but  was
oblig'd  to  throw  every  thing  up  by  vomiting.

Having,  therefore,  given  this  woman  half  a  grain  of  opium,  before  her
ftrength  was  quite  exhaufted ;  (he  began  at  once  to  retain  her  aliment,  and
thefe  convulfive  pains  were  at  the  fame  time  appeas'd :  fo  that  the  true  la-
bour-pains coming  on  foon  after,  and  the  orifice  of  the  uterus,  which  had
been  kept  in  a  conftrifted  ftate  by  the  former,  being  open'd,  the  child  was
happily  brought  forth.

And  in  fo  doing,  I  rejoice  not  only  that  I  follow'd  the  method  of  Deven-
ter  (q),  which  I  then  knew,  but  alfo  the  praftife  of  that  excellent  phyfician
Richard  Mead  (r),  as  I  now  fee.

But  in  the  other  cafe  of  which  I  fpoke,  wherein  nature  is  very  flow  in  ex-
citing proper  pains,  flie  is  firft  to  be  aflifled  by  clyflers,  contriv'd  for  that  pur-
pofe, and  undlions  applied  to  the  abdomen  •,  as  far  as  it  is  pofllble  to  do  it
thereby  :  then,  if  thefe  are  not  fufficient  to  anfwer  the  purpofe,  by  giving
fomething  of  the  fame  kind  internally,  which  may  invite  rather  than  ftimulate
nature  ;  avoiding  every  thing  that  can  agitate  and  create  danger.

You  will  perhaps  laugh  at  me,  if  I  tell  you  what  I  know,  from  the  mofE
authentic  informations,  to  have  happen'd  in  the  country  about  Padua,  fome
years  ago.

'A  woman  could  not  bring  forth.  A  furgeon  in  the  village  where  flie  liv'd,
fent  four  ounces  of  the  oil  of  leucoion  luteum  vulgare,  wherewith  to  anoint
the  belly  as  ufual.  The  ruftic  and  ignorant  women,  who  were  about  her,^
fuppos'd  it  to  be  fent  in  order  to  be  taken  inwardly  ;  and  immediately  gave  it
her  to  drink. And  by  this  means  ftie  was  deliver'd.

The  furgeon,  taught  by  this  cafe,  gave  the  fame  quantity  of  the  fame
oleum  cheyrinum  •,  as  they  call  it  in  the  fhops  •,  to  three  or  four  other  women  ;
who  were  in  a  like  difficulty  ;  and  with  a  fimilar  fuccefs.

After  this  it  was  given  to  a  woman  at  Padua  in  ray  knowledge,  who  could
not  bring  forth  her  dead  fcetus ;  and  by  this  means  the  head  of  the  infant
defcended  fomewhat  lower :  although,  by  reafon  of  the  great  magnitude
thereof;  to  which  the  lower  circumference  of  the  pelvis  was  not  equal ;  it
could  not  be  deliver'd  without  the  affiftance  of  a  furgeon.

That  th6  flowers  of  the  leucoion  are  given,  by  phyficians,  to  promote  the
difcharge  of  the  menfes,  the  fcetus,  and  the  fecundines,  is  extremely  well
known.  But  that  the  oil,  in  which  thefe  flowers  have  been  macerated,  had
been  given,  I  do  not  remember :  nor  is  it  to  be  wonder'd  at ;  as  fo  many
things  lefs  unpleafant  are  fuppos'd  to  anfwer  the  fame  purpofe.

C^J  I.  fupra  adn.  31.  cit.  c.  17.  26.  50.  {r)  Monit.  medic,  c.  19.  feft.  y.

However,


742  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

However,  it  will  not  be  altogether  ufelefs,  to  have  taken  notice  of  this  alfo
if  any  one  fhould  happen  to  fuppofe,  either  that  the  force  of  the  leueoion,
whatever  it  may  be,  is  temper'd  by  the  oil ;  or  rather,  that,  when  this  force
is  in  aflion,  it  is  properly  mitigated  at  the  fame  time  ■,  if  any  thing  requires
mitigation,  as  1  juft  now  fhow'd  in  the  convulfive  pains.

42.  As  to  what  I  have  faid  above  (s) ;  that  we  may  wait,  if  no  occafion
preffes ;  I  would  have  you  underftand  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  fuppofe  it
allowable,  if  no  figns  of  a  putrefcent  foetus  begin  to  appear  -,  which  figns
come  on  the  fooner,  where  the  waters  are  difcharg'd :  for  the  air  enters,  thro*
the  ruptur'd  membranes,  to  the  dead  body,  and  brings  on  fuch  a  corruption  ;
which,  although  it  even  attacks  thofe  carcafes  of  the  foetufles,  that  are  not
expos'd  to  the  contadl  of  the  air,  yet  attacks  them,  for  the  moft  part,  much
later,  and  without  any  acute  fever  of  the  mother :  and  this  you  will  under-
ftand, from  the  hiftories  which  give  you  the  relation  of  the  bones  of  fcetulTes,
conceiv'd  long  before,  being  difcharg'd,  either  by  abfceffes  of  the  abdomen,
or  by  the  anus ;  the  mother  for  the  moft  part  being  fav'd.

And  thefe  hiftories  have  grown  out  to  fuch  a  number,  from  the  time  in
which  Albucafis  produc'd  his  {()■>  that  although  they  are  coUefted  by  more
than  one  author,  there  are  fome  which  we  could  wifti  had  been  added  ;  and
many  are  wanting  which  were  not  extant  at  that  time.

One  of  thefe,  in  my  opinion,  is  that  which  Dominicus  de  Marinis  («)  pub-
iifti'd,  from  his  own  obfervation,  in  the  year  1667  ;  the  cranium  of  whofe
foetus,  as  well  as  the  other  bones  -,  that  had  been  excreted  by  the  anus  of
the  mother  ■,  were  preferv'd  by  Guilielmus  Riva.

And  there  are  not  a  very  few  of  thefe,  which  even  Italy  alone  has  offer'd
in  our  mem.ory.  For  •,  to  omit  the  fcetus,  which  was  extracted  from  the
redum  inteftinum  or  a  woman,  by  that  induftrious  furgeon,  at  Venice,  Ni-
colas Patuna,  and  fent  to  me  by  him,  in  order  to  be  examin'd  ;  concerning
which  both  he  himfelf  («•)  and  Santorini  have  written  (y);  the  fame  Sancorini
(z)  has  made  mention  of  a  woman  -,  in  the  territories  of  Padua,  and  perhaps
•livifig  at  this  time  ;  who  had  difcharg'd  the  bones  of  a  foetus  by  the  fame  v/ay  :
and  that  celebrated  man  Francefco  Serao  inform'd  me,  by  letters  dated  at
Naples,  about  the  end  of  the  year  1739,  that  the  bones  of  an  infant  had
been  difcharg'd  by  another  woman,  not  long  before,  from  the  fame  place.

And  that  at  Brefcia,  and  Vercelli,  the  bones  of  other  foetuffes  have  been,
in  this  our  age,  taken  out  from  abfceffes  of  the  abdomen,  our  Vallifneri  (a),
and  the  celebrated  Fantonus  (Z*),  have  afferted.

And,  without  doubt,  there  are  other  obfervations  of  this  kind,  among
my  countrymen  in  this  age-,  the  knowledge  of  which  has  not  come  to  me  :  or
if  it  has  come, I  do  not  at  prefent  remember  them.

But  as  there  is  fcarcely  any  thing  in  the  medical  art,  which  is  not  liable  to
exceptions;  therefore  I  have  fuppos'd,  that  what  I  faid  juft  now,  of  putre-
faftion  coming  on  very  late,  if  the  air  does  not  enter-,  and  very  foon  if  the
air  does enter,  and  in  a very  dangerous manner  •,  was  for  the  moft  part,

(s)  N.  41.  fy)  Inft.  d'un  Feto  &c.

{fj  Chirurg.  1.  2.  c.  76.  fzj  lb.  n.  31.

(a)  DLffert.  de  re  monftrofa  per  un'nam  ex-  (a)  Iftoria  &c!]a  generaz.  p.  2.  c.  17.  n.  17,

creta.  (1^)  Be  cbf.  ired.  &  anat.  epift,  7.
/x)  -Relaz.  int.  al  cadav.  d'un  Feto  &  est.

4  but


Letter  XL VIII. Article  43.  743

but  not  always  true  ;  being  induc'd  to  be  of  this  opinion  by  many  obferva-
tions,  but  particularly  by  two  that  were  publifh'd  in  one  and  the  fame  year
(c),  by  thofe  celebrated  men  Reufnerus,  and  Nebelius.

For  one  of  them  fpeaks  of  a  fcetus,  of  five  months,  being  dead  in  the
uterus ;  the  fame  being  difcharg'd  after  no  more  than  twenty  weeks,  "  with
"^  a  moft  filthy  odour-,"  notwithftanding,  by  reafon  of  the  fecundines,  and
the  waters,  being  retain'd  at  the  fame  time,  no  accefs  was  given  to  the  air.

And  the  other  gives  the  relation  of  a  mature  foetus,  which  was  endeavour-
ing to  procure  its  own  difcharge  at  the  proper  time  ;  but,  after  the  efflux  of
the  waters,  gave  the  more  certain  figns  of  its  death,  as,  in  the  following;
weeks,  "  a  foetid  and  bloody  ichor,  with  little  pieces  of  membranes,  and
"  flefhy  fibres,  flow'd  out  from  the  pudenda:"  and  finally,  this  foetus  was
reduc'd  to  a  fceleton  ;  fo  that  the  crackling  of  the  bones  was  heard,  as  often
a's  ever  the  woman  bent  her  body  backwards,  or  forwards  :  yet  fhe,  being
afflicted  with  no  fever  that  is  mention'd,  nor  any  other  confiderable  inconve-
nience, had  even  carried  thofe  bones  in  the  uterus,  "  for  three  years  together, ,
'*  without  any  lofs  of  health."

And  I  could  with,  that,  as  many  dead  fcetufles,  befides  thofe  Ihave  men-
tion'd, have  long  made  their  fepulchres  within  the  belly  of  the  mother ;  fo, .
many  living  infants  might  not  be  buried  together  with  the  dead  mother  ;  but
were  taken  out  in  proper  time  from  her  carcafe.

For  while  the  furgeon  is  fought  after  to  open  the  body,  while  he  is  caird
and  coming,  the  foetufies  that  were  living,  and  efpecially  the  more  weakly,
frequently  die ;  the  women,  and  even  many  men,  equally  rude,  and  full  of
ignorance  with  themfelves,  taking  care  to  keep  the  mouth  of  the  mother
open:  whereas,  they  fhould  rather  take  pains,  with  fome  hope  of  utility,  that
the  body  of  the  mother,  and  particularly  the  belly,  may  be  kept  warm ;
which  not  only  reafon  itfelf  fufficiently  argues  for,  but  is  likewife  confirm'd
by  the  experiment  of  Stalpart  the  fon  (d),  on  the  foetufles  of  dogs.

For  having  put  them  into  warm  water,  wrap'd  up  in  their  membranes,  lie
found  a  pulfe  in  them  even  after  fome  hours.

And  indeed,  upon  opening  the  belly,  and  uterus,  of  an  illuftrious  matron
of  Silefia  (?)  ;  who  had  been  dead  four  hours  before  the  furgeon  came ;  a
living  child  was  found :  the  perfons  who  were  about  the  deceas'd  mother,
not  having  omitted  to  foment  her  abdomen  continually,  till  he  came,  "with
"  fpirituous  fomentations,  with  the  balfamum  embryonum,  with  generous
"  aromatic  wine,  with  warm  flannels,  and  the  likej"  without  being  in  the
kaft  deter'd  therefrom,  as  I  fuppofe,  becaufe  they  perceiv'd  no  motion  in
the  uterus.

For  otherwife,  the  writer  of  the  obfervation  would  fcarcely  have  fubjoin'd
the  following  words,  which  are  frequently  true  :  "  for  the  foetus  is  moft  ge-
*'  nerally  alive ;  notwithftanding  there  is  no  evident  motion."

43.  But  in  regard  to  women  in  labour,  I  have  fpoken  fufficiently.  Let  us
now  add  a  few  things,  alfo,  in  regard  to  women  after  delivery.  And  to  this
fubjedt  relates  the  obfervation  which  I  made,  on  the  twelfth  of  Auguft,  in

(f)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  5.  obf.  11.  &  cent.  6.  CJJ  Exercit.  de  nutrit.  foetus  §.  41.10  fine.  .
ob/.  52.  {e)  Eph.  n.  c.  cent.  3.  obf.  57.


744  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

the  year  1707,  together  with  my  very  learned  Venetian  friends;  and  in  par-
ticular Santorini  ;  and  which  I  have  I'poken  of,  more  than  once,  in  the
fourth  of  the  Adverfaria  (f). Now  take  the  whole  of  the  obfervation.

44.  A  woman,  who  was  fubjefh  to  hyfterical  diibrders,  and  had  a  bad  co-
lour in  her  face,  being  already  the  mother  of  fome  children,  and  again  in  a
ftate  of  pregnancy  ;  had  an  apprehenfion  that  the  next  birth  would  be  fatal
to  her.

And,  at  the  time  of  her  labour,  fhe  adually  began  to  fwell  in  her  fingers
and  abdomen  :  and  foon  after,  having  brought  forth  a  girl  inftead  of  a  boy,
which  fhe  had  hop'd  for;  and  by  reafon  of  a  kind  of  wager,  fhe  would  much
rather  have  prefer'd ;  and  this  circumftance  of  the  fex,  though  cautioufly
conceal'd  from  her  by  the  women  who  attended,  being  imprudently  reveal'd
to  her  by  her  hufband ;  fhe  was  feiz'd  with  fuch  an  anxiety  of  mind,  that  her
pulle  immediately  fank,  and  her  body  became  cold.

It  was  then  fcarcely  an  hour,  from  the  time  the  girl  had  been  born  ;  and
except  fome  part  of  the  membranes,  which  the  healthy  and  lively  girl  had
drawn  with  her,  nothing  of  the  fecundines  had  been  difcharg'd :  either  be-
caufe  the  placenta  adher'd  very  clofely,  or  becaufe  the  midwife  had  judg'd
that  fhe  ought  t6  wait  for  the  afllflance  of  nature  ;  as  fhe  remember'd  that  her
ovvh  grand -daughter  had  formerly  difcharg'd  the  retain'd  placenta,  on  the
tenth  day  after  the  delivery  of  the  child.

As,  therefore,  neither  pulfe,  nor  heat  return'd ;  within  an  hour  and  a  half
from  the  time  that  they  began  to  be  deficient,  death  fucceeded :  the  flux  of
blood  from  the  uterus ;  which  you  will  be  furpriz'd  at  in  this  defedl  of  pulfe  ;
continuing  in  its  ufual  ftate  till  the  very  laft  extremity  of  life.

We  open'd  the  body  at  the  twenty-fourth  hour  after  death.  From  the
mouth,  and  noftrils,  of  the  carcafe,  a  great  quantity  of  ill-fmelling  water  was
difcharg'd.  The  tumour  of  the  belly  was  fo  great,  that  I  do  not  remember
to  have  feen  a  larger,  even  in  patients  with  an  afcites.

And  this  tumour  did  not  fubfide  very  much,  when  the  peritonseum  was
open'd ;  for  it  was  then  found  to  be  chiefly  owing  to  the  ftomach,  and  in-
teftines,  being  diftended  with  air,  in  a  furprizing  manner ;  and  to  the  uterus
that  lay  beneath  them,  which  not  only  occupied  the  whole  pelvis  by  its  ro-
tundity of  bulk,  but  even  exceeded  that  dimenfion.

Before  we  cut  into  the  uterus,  together  with  all  the  appendages  conneded
to  it,  we  obferv'd  a  bloody  water  to  be  effus'd  into  the  cavity  of  the  abdomi-
nal pelvis.  And  we  had  before  obferv'd  the  veflfels,  which  are  under  the  ficin
of  the  thighs,  near  to  the  pudendum,  to  be  fiU'd  with  blood  :  and  the  bones
of  the  pubes,  where  they  are  join'd  to  each  other ;  having  been  examin'd,  be-
fore dilTedion,  with  the  finger,  and  having  feem'd  to  gape,  or  at  leaft  to  be
very  laxly  join'd  together ;  had  their  commifTure  fcarcely  touch'd  with  the
knife,  before  they  were  feparated  from  each  other ;  fome  fluid  being,  at  the
fame  time,  difcharg'd.

And  nearly  the  fame  things  appear'd  to  us  foon  after,  when  we  examin'd
the  jundure  of  the  ilium  with  the  facrum  ;  fo  that  we  believ'd  thofe  not  to
have  been  far  wide  of  the  truth,  who  have  afferted,  that,  not  only  in  women

(/)  Animadv.  26.  27.  39.  43.  45.


Letter  XL VIII. Article  4.4.  74.^

in  their  firft  time  of  child-bearing,  as  Hippocrates  has  taught  us  (*),  but
fometimes,  alfo,  in  a  birth  which  is  not  very  laborious,  "  the  coxendices  are
"  ieparated."

Lifting  up  the  uterus,  after  taking  it  out,  we  faw  that  a  very  lar^e  mafs  of
concreted  blood  was  difcharg'd  through  the  orifice  of  the  vagina.  Scarcely
any  thing  of  the  nymphs  appear'd  ■,  probably  in  coniequence  of  their  havino-
given  way,  and  been  extenuated,  in  the  birth,  in  order  to  prevent  the  neio-h-
bouring  liiin  from  being  lacerated;  fo  that  they  would  foon  after  appear  in
their  former  fliape.

Thus  our  Fabriciusab  Aq«apendente(^^);  before  he  cut  into  the  membrane
which  (hut  up  the  orifice  of  the  vagina  in  a  virgin,  and  was  diftended  with
a  very  great  quantity  of  blood,  which  lay  upon  it  •,  remark'd  that  there  was
no  appearance  of  the  nymphas  :  yet  thefe  he  prefently  faw  form'd,  when
the  membrane  was  incis'd,  and  the  tenfion  taken  off.

From  hence  •,  if  things  are  always  in  the  fame  ftate  after  delivery,  as  Dio-
nis  (hX  hints ;  you  may  conjecture  at  one  of  the  ufes  of  the  nymphse.

"While  we  were  looking  at  the  external  parts,  I  fhov/d  to  my  friends,  the
lacuna  which  I  had  fpoken  of  in  the  firft  of  the  Adverfaria  (i)  in  the  for-
mer year ;  preiTing  out,  at  the  fame  time,  a  whitifli  humour,  and  a  confi-
derable  quantity  of  it,  wherewith,  in  this  woman,  they  abounded.

Soon  after  I  alfo  obferv'd,  and  demonftrated,  the  lymphseduflis  of  the
uterus ;  as  I  likewife  did  the  ftrufture  of  the  corpus  luteum,  in  one  of  the
teftes.

But  of  thefe,  and,  in  regard  to  the  round  ligaments  of  the  uterus,  how
great  a  thicknefs  they  had,  on  account  of  the  vefTels,  whereof  they  are  in
great  part  made  up,  being  diftended  with  blood  ;  and,  in  regard  to  the  ute-
rus itfelf,  of  what  fibres  and  finufl"es  it  confifted,  and  how  large  thele  were,
together  with  the  external  blood-veffels ;  and  alfo,  of  the  largenefs  of  the
ofculum  uteri,  and  of  the  dilatation  of  the  cervix  uteri,  not  being  lefs  than
that  oi  the  fundus  itfelf;  and  finally,  of  the  very  frequent  orifices  in  that
ofculum,  and  the  mucous  glands  in  the  lower  part  of  the  cervix;  of  all
thefe,  I  lay,  I  have  already  written  what  is  fufficient,  in  the  fourth  of  the
Adverfaria  (k).

Now,  if  there  be  any  thing  which  had  no  place  there,  it  muft  be  added,
that  you  may  have  the  whole  of  the  obfervation  as  I  promis'd.

Both  of  the  reftes  had  a  kind  of  fmall  foramen  on  the  furface,  through
which  a  flcnder  probe  was  admitted  into  the  internal  parts.  And  in  that
fame  teftis,  wherein  was  the  corpus  luteum,  was  aroundifh  bony  cell;  and  in
the  cavity  of  it  a  bloody  humour.  The  tubes  were  longer  than  they  gene-
rally are.

The  parietes  of  the  vagina  were  extenuated,  and  itfelf  was  become  much
wider  than  its  natural  dimenfions  allow  ;  but  not  at  all  fhorter  :  fome  rugs
only  correfponding  with  the  corpus  glandofum  urethrje.

The  ofculum uteri  was  of  a  red  colour,  degenerating  into  black  ;  and

(*)  De  Nat.  Pueri  n.  43.  {h)  L'Anat.del'Homir.eDemonftr.4.  fedt.z.

CgJ  De  Chir.  Operat.  ubi  de  Hymene  Im-' [i)  Tab.  3.

iperfor.  (k)  Animadv.  fupra  ad  n.  43.  indicatis.

Vol.  1L  5  C ia


746  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

in  fome  places  lacerated.  Within  the  cervix  were  no  little  chords  promi-
nent, nor  fmall  membranes.

It  was  evident  that  the  placenta  had  adher'd  to  the  upper  part  of  the  fun-
dus uteri,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  cover  the  orifices  of  both  tubes.  And
the  fame  adher'd  in  fome  meafure  even  then.  But  where  it  had  adher'd,
there  the  orifices  of  the  uterus  were  extremely  contradcd  ;  where  it  did  nov/
adhere,  there  they  were  large  •,  as  was  with  great  truth  faid  in  thofe  Adver-
faria,  as  the  other  circumftances  were  :  which  I  here  confirm  for  this  reafon,
left,  to  thofe  who  have  not  yet  happen'd  to  light  on  any  fuch  things,  they
may  feem  to  be  paradoxes  in  a  different  fenfe  from  that  in  which  the  Greeks
had  been  us'd  to  underftand  this  word.  In  the  finufTes,  with  which  thofe
orifices  communicated,  was  no  blood.

Finally,  in  the  thorax  -,  for  we  never  touch'd  the  head  -,  both  lobes  of
the  lunos  were  univerfally  of  a  white  colour  degenerating  into  livid,  if  you
except  the  pofterior  parts  where  the  blood  had  iubfided  in  the  fupine  pofture
of  body.  The  heart  was  flaccid  beyond  defcription,  and  contain'd  fcarcely
any  blood  in  the  auricles  and  the  right  ventricle  ;  and  in  the  left  ventricle
none  at  all.

45.  That  a  great  quantity  of  blood  had  flow'd  out  from  the  uterus,  by
reafon  of  the  placenta  being  loofen'd  in  part,  I  would  not  deny  •,  but  whe-
ther it  was  difcharg'd  in  fo  great  a  quantity  as  to  kill  the  woman,  may  per-
haps with  reafon  be  doubted.

for,  on  inquiry  from  the  women  who  were  about  her,  we  could  not  learn
that  a  very  great  quantity  had  been  difcharg'd  •,  and  fome  of  the  veflels  were
diftended  with  blood  even  after  death,  as  I  have  told  you  above :  fo  far  were
they  from  being  "  almoft  void  of  blood,"  as  the  celebrated  Tabarranus  (/J
found  them,  in  women  who  died  of  floodings,  a  few  hours  after  delivery  :  then
the  pulfe  and  the  heat  did  not  decreafe  gradually  before,  but  fuddenly,  and
altogether,  at  that  very  inftant  of  time,  when  this  difagreeable  circumftancc
was  related  to  her;  for  nothing  of  this  kind  is  proper  to  be  told  ro  women
in  thefe  circumftances,  and  leaft  of  all  to  thofe,  who,  being  fubjedl  to  hyfte-
ric  affeftions,  have  their  nerves  prone  to  convulfions;  which,  if  they  feize  up-
on the  noble  vifcera,  eafily  deftroy  the  weaker  and  more  delicate  kind  of  wo-
men :  and  this  you  will  find  to  have  happen'd  to  a  woman,  who,  being
l^tio-ued  by  preceding  labours,  and  wearied  by  a  difficult  birth,  was,  foon
after  this,  and  at  the  very  time  (lie  was  fpeaking,  contrary  to  all  expedtation,
fuddenly  feiz'd  with  a  convulfion  and  death ;  whereas  the  celebrated  Jo.
Sebaft.  Albrechtus  {m)  could  fufped  no  other  caufe  for  this  change,  but  dif-
agreeable news,  which  was  heard  by  the  patient  at  tha.t  time.

Nor  did  it  feem  to  all  thofe  learned  phyficians ;  who  not  only  heard,  with
me,  the  relation  I  have  given  you,  but  were  alfo  prefent  at  the  difledlion  ;:
that  the  death  of  this  woman  had  been  owing  to  any  other  caufe.

But  before  you  judge,  I  would  have  you  attend  to  this  circumftancc  alfo  ;,
I  mean  into  how  great  a  tumiour,  and  that  a  flatulent  one,  the  belly  of  the
woman  had  increased.

(/)  Obf..  Anat.  n,  36.  (wi)  Aft.  n.  c.  torn.  4.  ohf.  50.

And


Letter  XLVIII. Article  45.  747

And  you  have,  even  in  this  fedion  of  the  Sepulchretum  -,  that  Is  in  the
thirty-eighth  ;  feme  obfervations  wherewith  you  may  compare  this  of  mine.
In  the  firft  place  the  fifth,  which,  through  carelelTnefs,  is  repeated  under
number  thirteen,  of  a  woman,  who,  having  died  ten  hours  after  delivery,  had
her  whole  belly  tumid  with  flatus,  is  fomewhat  fimilar.  But  as  it  is  faid  that
her  uterus  was  full  of  coagula,  and  many  evacuations  are  mention'd ;  jufl  as
it  is  faid,  by  Euftachius  (n),  that  in  the  Roman  matron,  in  whom  the  proper
membrane  of  the  kidnies  was  fo  diftended  with  included  flatus  as  at  firft  to
have  the  appearance  of  a  large  tumour,  a  great  quantity  of  blood  was  dif-
charg'd  after  delivery;  at  leaft  turn  to  the  fourth,  and  ninth,  of  thofe  obfer-
vations,  that  are  added  in  the  appendix.

Neither  of  thefe  mention  a  heemorrhage ;  but  both  of  them  defcribe  the
belly  as  having  been  diftended  within  a  very  little  time  after  death,  with
flatus,  above  what  can  eafily  be  imagin'd.

Yet  if  you  fay  that  thefe  women  died  in  labour,  and  not  after  they  had
brought  forth  ;  and  that  the  firft  of  them  had  already  carried  a  putrid  foetus
in  utero;  fee,  I  befeech  you,  how  Floftlnann  (o);  notwithftanding  he  confi-
ders  too  great  efFufions  of  blood,  among  the  preceding  caufes  of  inflations  of
the  abdomen,  and  that  even  in  the  time  of  child-bearing  -,  neverthelefs  foon
after  makes  women  fubjedl  to  the  fame  inflations  from  a  contrary  caufe  :  as,
for  inftance,  if  the  flux  of  the  lochia  has  not  fucceeded  in  a  proper  manner,
or  has  been  altogether  reftrain'd.  Which  I  only  hint,  that  you  may  remem-
ber, how  many  caufes,  and  how  different  from  each  other,  there  may  be  of
this  fame  kind  of  tumour  in  the  belly.

And  whichfoever  of  thefe  caufes  it  was  produc'd  by  in  our  woman,  you
will  find,  if  you  read  the  hiftory  over  again,  that  it  was  form'd  before  the
cfFufion  of  blood  came  on;  for  the  woman  had  begun  to  fwell  in  her  abdo-
men, and  her  fingers,  before  flie  was  deli ver'd.

And  in  the  cafe  of  that  woman,  of  whom  Phil.  Jac.  Hartmann  {p)  has
written,  the  inteftines  were  tumid  with  flatus,  on  the  laft  days  before  deli-
very ;  and  this  tumour  increas'd  fo  much  after  birth  ;  notwithftanding  there
was  no  profluvium  of  blood,  and  even  the  lochia  were  obftrufted ;  that  the
fuperior  and  inferior  trails  of  the  inteftine  colon,  in  particular,  could  fcarcely
be  comprehended  "  in  a  thread  that  was  three  parts  of  an  ell  long:"  the
lower  part  of  it  therefore,  being  feiz'd  with  a  fphacelus,  and  ruptur'd,  fill'd
the  belly  with  the  moft  foetid  ibrdes,  and  carried  off  the  woman  on  the  fecond
day  after  delivery  :  and  to  the  uterus  of  this  woman,  "  the  remains  of  the
"  placenta  adher'd  internally,  to  the  whole  furface  ;  and  were  eafily  feparable
with  the  finger:  but  in  the  cervix  itfelf  "  coagulated  blood  adher'd."

However,  not  tofpeak  only  of  thofe  preternatural  appearances,  which  oc-
cur'd  in  the  body  we  have  been  fpeaking  of;  but  even  to  touch,  at  the  fame
time,  upon  others  a  little,  which,  that  you  might  have  the  whole  of  the  hiftory,
are  not  omitted  here  ;  I  could  wifli  that  learned  men  had  read,  not  in  the
patch-work  of  a  mere  compiler,  who  wanted  many  books  that  were  necefiTary
for  his  purpofe,  but  in  Antonius  Sidobre  f^j,  all  thole  things  which  Chy-
r.ac  had  communicated  to  him,  in  regard  to  the  laifteal  duels  of  the  uterus ;

{■n)  Trad,  de  Renib.  c.  4;.  {p)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  9  &  10.  ohf.  loz.

(0)  Medic.  Rat.  torn.  4.  p.  4. c.  15. Thef. (q)  Trad,  de  Variol.  c.  7, ■
Pathol og.  5.8  &  IJ-

A  C  2  for


748  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

for  they  certainly  would  not  have  fuppos'd  that  thefe  were  the  "  fame,"  as
thofe  lymphasdudls  that  I  faw  in  this  woman.

I  could  wilh  likewife,  that  thofe  who  have  faid  thefe  were  feen  by  Ruyfch,
and  others,  had  exprefsly  pointed  out  the  paflTage  of  that  author,  and  the
year  in  which  others  faw  them  ;  as  I  did  not  fcruple  to  declare  {r)  at  what
time  1  had  feen  them,  and  to  whom  I  fliow'd  them.

Who  have  feen  them  after  me,  I  know  ;  amongft  whom  1  would  have  you
obferve,  that  the  learned  Stehelinus  {s)  had  alfo  feen  them  in  a  diftended  ute-
rus :  that  is  in  the  uterus  "  of  a  gravid  woman."

But  who  have  given  figures  of  them,  as  appendages  to  the  uterus  of  wo-
men, from  the  human  fubjed,  and  not  from  the  anatomy  of  brutes ;  I  do
not  as  yet  certainly  know :  fo  that  I  am  not  furpriz'd,  if,  to  that  illuftrious
man  Heifter  (t),  thefe  vefTels,  I  fay  thefe  veflels  "  as  they  are  hitherto  added
"  to  the  human  uterus  in  figures,  fhould  feem  to  be  taken  from  fancy."

But  in  regard  to  the  bones  of  the  pubes,  and  the  ileum  ;  I  do  not  fuppofe
you  are  in  the  number  of  thofe  who  contend,  that  it  very  rarely  happens  in-
child-bearing,  for  the  commiffures,  or  junftures,  of  thefe  bones,  to  be  found
fb  lax  as  they  were  feen  by  us  in  this  cafe  -,  and  that,  when  this  does  happen,,
it  is  to  be  imputed  rather  to  the  ricketts,  the  lues  venerea,  or  to  a  cachexy  :.
and  this  lalt,  in  a  very  confiderable  degree.

The  woman,  however,  of  whom  we  are  fpeaking,  although  fhe  had  not
a  good  colour  in  her  face  -,  yet  certainly  was  neither  affefted  with  a  cachexy,
particularly  in  any  great  degree,  nor  with  any  of  thofe  other  difbrders :  nor
had  a  matron  to  whom  I  was  related,  labour'd,  in  the  leaft,  under  any  of
thefe  complaints ;  although,  as  fhe  complaini'd  of  a  pain  at  the  jundure  of
the  bones  of  the  pubes,  after  her  time  of  delivery,  and  her  hufband  would,
for  that  reafon,  have  me  examine  this  part  with  my  hand,  fhe  had  one  of  the
bones  manifeftly  diftant  from  the  other  at  that  time ;  but  at  other  times,
had  nor.

And  notwithflanding  almoft  innumerable  obfervations  of  this  kind  are
extant,  which  many  have  coUefted  ;  they  have  neverthelefs  omitted  fome,  if
1  rightly  remember,  and  particularly  one  of  Veflingius  (u)  :  fince  he,  in  a,
woman  in  labour,  "  perceiv'd  that  the  pelvis  yielded,  and  fhook,  with  a
"  flight  impulfe  ;  the  bones,  both  under  the  pubes,  and  at  the  fides  of  the
"  OS  facrum,  being  feparated  from  each  other  by  the  fpace  of  an  inch  at
"  leaft :"  and  Santorini  {x)  found  it  eafy  alfo,  to  lay  his  thumb  betwixt  the
bones  of  the  pu-bes,  in  fome  women  who  had  been  lately  deliver'd  :  fince
therefore  fo  many  obfervations  are  extant;  is  it  more  proper  to  fuppofe,  that,,
in  all  of  them,  thofe  diforders  were  to  be  accus'd,  efpecially  as  the  writers  of
the  obfervations  make  no  mention  of  them  ?  Or  muft  we  fuppofe,  that,  as  a
greater  or  lefs  feparation,  is  not  only  not  very  rare,  but  frequent,  it  is  not
•  preternatural?  And  even,  that,  in  thofe  where  it  does  happen,  it  happens
from  nature  itfclf  •,  for  it  comes  on  by  degrees,  is  by  degrees  remov'd,  and
is  of  affiflance  to  the  birth,  as  far  as  it  is  poffible  for  it  to  contribute  thereto.

("r)  Adverf.  Anat.  IV.  Animad.  43.  in  fine. («)  Epift.  25.

(/)  Tentam.  Med.  p.  i.  Thef.  6.  {xl  Qbf.  Aaat.  c.  u.  §.  4.

{t)  Comp.  Ana  t  n.  2j6.

For


Letter  XL VIII. Article  46.  749-

For  do  not  imagine,  that  whatever  enlarges  the  diameters  of  the  pelvis,  is
ufelefs  in  the  promotion  of  delivery  •,  and  as  to  what  is  faid  of  the  dimenfions
of  the  pelvis ;  as  if  they  were  fufficient  to  admit  of  the  pafTage  of  the  fcetus,
without  any  reparation  of  the  bones  ;  it  feems  to  have  been  taken  from  the
ikeleton,  when  no  mention  is  made  of  fuch  a  number  of  parts,  that  are  inter-
pos'd  betwixt  the  naked  bones  and  the  head  of-  the  infant,  that  is  paffino-
through  them  •,  and  indeed,  nothing  of  the  uterus  ^  the  orifice  of  which  is
then  pufh'd  down  to  the  orifice  of  the  vagina  :  which  parts,  though  they  may
not  fufficiently  diminifh  thofe  dimenfions  in  many ;  yet  in  many,  on  the  other
hand,  may  diminifh  them  very  much.

And  that  thefe  junftures  are  gradually  difpos'd  to  laxity  ;  as  I  have  hinted
in  the  Adverfaria  (y),  in  conjunftion  with  Pinseus ;  I  have  not  only  had  oc-
cafion  of  knowing  by  examining  the  junfture  of  the  ofla  pubis  with  my  fin-
ger, but  during  the  revifal  of  this  letter,  have  feen  confirm'd  by  difiedtion,
by  the  celebrated  Exup.  Jofephus  Bertinitis  (z) ;  and  by  the  example  of  two
v/omen,  the  one  pregnant  with  a  fcetus  of  five  months,  and  the  other  with  a
foetus  of  feven  months :  for  the  cartilage  betwixt  the  ofla  pubis  was  not  only
found  to  be  "  thicker  than  ufual,  and  impregnated  with  an  unftuous  hu-
"  mour"  in  both  of  them,  but  particularly  in  the  fecond  -,  in  whom  even
"  without  a  knife,"  and  only  by  a  flight  afljftance  of  the  hand,  one  of  the-
ofTa  ilii  "  was  pull'd  afunder,"  perfedtly,  from  the  os  facrum.'

And  if  authors  of  weight  and  eminence  had  attended  to  this  flate,  in  the
junftures  of 'the  bones  of  the  pelvis;  which  is  begun  in  gravid  women,  in-
creas'd  at  the  time  of  child-birth,  and  confequently  often  obferv'd  in  women
after  delivery ;  they  would  not,  in  my  opinion,  eafily  have  obje£led  to  thofe
who  fuppofe  fuch  a  feparation,  "  that  they  cannot  be  broken  afunder  by  the
"  butchers  bur-with  difficulty  :"  or  that  two  ftrong  men,  pulling  one  on  eacb
fide,  were  not  "  able  to  draw  afunder"  the  bones  of  the  pubes.

Nor  indeed  is  that  lo  be  wonder'd  at  •,  for  they  were  not  previoufly  dif-
pos'd, as  in  women  after  child-birth.  And  indeed  I  commend  the  ingenuity
©f  thofe,  who,  in  dependance  on  a  great  number  of  arguments,  have  opposed
the  opinion  of  thefe  feparations  as  "  impoITible."

But  it  is  to  very  little  purpofe,  to  endeavour  to  prove  that  to  be  impof-
fible,  by  reafonings,  which  has  been  fo  many  times  feen  :  for  it  is  eafy  to  any
one  to  fet  afide  fuch  reafonings ;  as  it  is  more  than  fufficient  immediately  to?
refute  them  by  the  undoubted  teftimonies,  of  all  thofe  who  have  feen  the  cir-
cumftance,  and  demonftrated  it  to  thofe  who  were  prefent.

46.  But  women  after  delivery  are  not  only  carried  off  by  diforders  that  are-
quick  in  their  progrefs  ;  as  that  of  which  I  fpoke  laft,  or  that  which  v/e  read
©f  in  Henricus  Sandenius  (a),  from  the  thicknefs  of  the  uterus  being  in-
creas'^d  to  half  a  fpan,  or  rather  from  that  which  is  not  a  very  rare,  but  even-
a  frequent  caufe  •,  I  mean  a  fphacelus  of  the  uterus,  which  you  will  fee  de-
icrib'd  in  one,  and  another  woman,  by  the  celebrated  Jofeph  Henry  Fuch-
■fius  (b)  ;  I  fay,  women  after  delivery  are  not  only  carried  off  by  diforders-
that  are  quick  in  their  progrefs,  but  by  flow  diforders  likewif;  t  for  the7  are

(y)  in.  Aaimad.  15.  (a)  Obferv. de Prolapf. Uter. •§. 14. in.

{z)  Qu<Eil:.  de  hoc  argum.  progofita  prsefide fine.
Bouvart.  n.  5.  (b)  Acl.  n.  c,  toni.  2,  obf,  J46.

foine-


750  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

fometimes  in  an  ill  ftate  of  health  along  time  after  delivery,  and  even  as  long
as  they  live.

In  what  manner  a  flow  fever,  from  an  abfcefs  of  the  teftis  and  tube,  carried
off  a  woman  after  delivery,  I  have  already  faid  in  a  former  letter  {c);  and  I
have  fliewn,  at  the  fame  time,  how  it  fometimes  happens,  that  from  a  labo-
rius  utero  geilation,  and  a  difficult  time  of  child-bearing,  thefe  parts  contra£t
great  injury.

And  that  at  the  fiune  time  of  pregnancy,  the  omentum,  being  comprefs'd
by  the  uterus,  and  the  other  vifcera  ;  and  for  that  reafon  fometimes  inflam'd  ;
may  be  form'd  into  an  oblong  and  almoft  fcirrhous  tumour,  which  remains
in  fome  after  delivery,  as  has  even  been  obferv'd  by  me  ;  and  affefls  them
fometimes  with  pain,  but  always  with  fome  inconvenience  or  other  •,  Ruyfch
(d)  has  taught  us,  and  before  him  Bauhin  (e)  hinted,  when  he  aflcrted,  "  that
"  the  omentum  remains  collefted  about  the  middle  of  the  belly,  after  de-
*'  livery,  in  fome  women  •,  fo  as  to  excite  confiderable  pains ;  which  how-
ever, as  I  have  already  faid,  are  not  perpetual  fymptomiS.

And  thefe  pains  were  the  moft  fevere,  and  obftinate,  after  delivery,  in
that  woman,  who  having  been  afflided  with  them  a  long  time,  and  at  length
carried  off  thereby  (/),  had  the  omentum  contraded  into  the  form  of  a
rope.

But  it  had  grown  to  the  bladder,  and  fundus  uteri,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that
■with  the  pains  were  join'd  thofe  fymptoms,  which  made  her  appear  to  fome
to  be  hyfterical  -,  and  to  others  to  be  troubled  with  calculi.

Add  to  this  other  diforders  that  are  not  painful,  but  very  troublefome ;
•which  remain  after  a  rather  unhappy  time  of  child-bearing  -,  lamcnefs,  pro-
lapfus  uteri,  and  incontinence  of  urine,  which  have  been  fpoken  of  in  former
letters ;  and  have  been  partly  fpoken  of  in  this  (g).

Finally ;  for  it  is  not  my  intention  to  enumerate  every  thing  that  relates
to  this  queftion ;  "  the  hsemorrhoids  in  the  orifice  of  the  matrix  ;"  that  is  at
the  orifice  of  the  vagina;  mention'd  by  Celfus  formerly  [h),  and  by  the
author  of  the  book  which  they  formerly  attributed  to  Gakn  ;  that  is  the
book  de  Gyneceis  ;  Arantius  has,  with  great  reafon  andjuftice,  afierted,  "  ge-
"  nerally,  to  have  their  origin  from  a  difficult  birth,"  in  that  chapter  (/)
which  he  has  written  upon  the  ill  effects  of  thofe  hsemorrhoids,  their  caufes,
figns,  and  cure.

And  Paul  Barbette  (k)  has  added,  by  what  marks  the  blood  flowing  from
them,  may  be  known  from  menftruous  blood.

47.  Laft  of  all,  the  caufe  of  unfuccefsful  births  is  not  to  be  confider'd  as
exiiling  in  the  mother  only,  but  alfo  in  the  fcetus  that  is  brought  forth  ;
whether  this  is  born  dead,  which  circumftance  I  have  fpoken  of  before,  or
moreover  whether  it  be  born  in  a  monftrous  ftate  befides  being  dead  •,  or,
finally,  whether  it  be  living  indeed,  but  is  born  in  a  monftrous  ftaie,  or
affefted  with  fome  other  confiderable  diforder.

(<:)  Epift.  46.  n.  27  &  z8.  (g)  N.  33.

(</)  Cent.  obf.  Anat.  Chir.  63.  fi,)  De  Medic.  1.  6.  c.  18.  n.  9,

(ej  Theatr.  Anat.  I.  1.  c.  12.  Ci)  56.  in  1.  de  Tumor,  p.  n.

(/)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  4.  obf,  7.  (i)  Anat.  Prafl.  1.  4.  ad  fin.

I  Firft


Letter  XLVIII. Article  48.  751

Firft  then,  in  regard  to  monfters,  whether  born  alive  or  dead ;  but  what  I
fhall  fay  here,  will  be  rather  what  relates  to  the  obfervations  themfelves,  than
to  the  controverfy  which  is  agitated  in  this  age,  among  very  learned  men,  in
regard  to  the  origin  of  thefe  monfters  :  and  I  fhall  begin  with  this  obfervation
of  Valfalva.

48.  The  mother  of  a  monfter,  which,  as  appear'd  to  the  common  people,
was  like  a  toad,  had  often  brought  forth  children  before,  both  of  the  male
and  female  fpecies  promifcuoufly  ;  the  former  being  all  of  them  found  in
every  refpeft,  but  the  latter,  which  were  two,  one  of  whom  was  then  in  her
thirteenth  year,  and  the  other  fome  years  younger,  both  deaf,  and  confe-
quently  dumb.

At  laft,  having  conceiv'd  about  eight  months  before ;  and  having  lain,
during  the  whole  time  of  this  pregnancy,  always  fad  and  melancholy,  and
accuftom'd  herfelf  to  weep  often  by  reafon  of  this  fi:ate  of  mind  •,  and  when
fhe  compar'd  the  motion  of  this  foetus  with  that  of  the  others,  which  fhe  had
brought  forth  before,  finding  it fo  languid  that  (ix  fometimes  almoft  believ'd  it
dead ;  fhe  brought  forth,  at  the  time  1  have  mention'd,  a  female  foetus,  which
was  furnifh'd  with  fecundines  indeed,  that  were  in  a  natural  ftate,  but  was  fo-
monftrous  in  its  afped,  that  it  feem'd  rather  like  a  toad,  than  a  girl ;  if  you
except  the  lower  limbs,  and  the  inferior  part  of  the  belly.

In  the  firft  place,  it  was  fmall,,  fo  as  not  to  equal  a  fpan  in  length  ;  but
was  fo  much  fhorter  than  this,  as  to  be  deficient,  in  that  extent,  by  the
breadth  of  a  man's  thumb.

In  the  fecond  place,  the  neck  was  entirely  wanting ;  fo  that  the  chin  was-
contiguous  to  the  middle  of  the  breaft,  and  even  was  fcafcely  diftant  by  the
extent  of  an  inch,  from  the  cartilago  enfiformis.

The  eyes  indeed  were  perfeft  •,  but  the  external  ears  were  plac''d  m.uch
lower  than  they  generally  are,  and  touch'd  the  upper  parts  of  the  fhoulders ::
the  mouth  was  gaping  :  the  nofe  was  imperfedl  at  the  upper  part ;  for  the
root  of  it,  and  the  forehead,  were  entirely  deficient.

Add  to  thefe  horrid  appearances,  that  the  abdomen  protuberated  in  the-
manner  of  a  kind  of  purfe  hanging  downwards  ;  into  the  middle  of  which-
purfe  the  funiculus  umbilicalis  was  inferred,  and  was  in  its  natural  ftate.

Finally,  the  upper  limbs  were  fo  connefted  to  the  fternum,  that  they  could
not  be  extended.  And  on  the  pofterior  furface  of  the  body,,  tiie  fpinc  ap-
pear'd to  be  diftinguifh'd  into  three  gibbofities  as  it  were;  the  upper  of
which  correfponded  to  the  head»  the  middle  to  the  thorax,  and  the  lower  to.
the  belly.

Thefe  were  the  appearances  externally.

And  by  the  diffeftion  of  the  belly,  it  was  found  that  the  purfe,  into  which,
the  abdomen  protuberated,  was  owing  not  only  to  the  relaxation  of  the  inte-
guments of  the  belly,  but  alfo  to  the  mufcles  thereof;  and  that  in  this  re-
lax'd  cavity,  as  in  a  kind  of  fac,  the  liver,  the  fpleen,  the  ftomach,  and  all
the  inteftines  were  contained  :  yet  thefe  vifcera,  as  well  as  thofe  that  were
contain'd  in  the  thorax,  were,  in  other  refpefts,  in  a  natural  ftate.

When  we  came  to  the  head,  a  confus'd  heap  offer'd  icfelf  to  our  view..
For  there  were  neither  the  bones  that  are  wont  to  form  the  roof  of  the  cra-
-aiuirij  nor  indeed  could  we  find  any  cavity  of  the  cranium  ;  but  there  were

onl^


752  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  tlie  Belly.

only  bones  of  an  irregular  figure,  fome  fmall,  and  fome  a  little  larger,  con^
■nefted  to  each  other  by  an  intricate  net-work  of  mufcles.

IVot  the  leaft  traces  of  the  brain  were  found,  except  that  certain  bodies
appear'd,  which  had  a  very  fine  refemblance  to  the  nates  and  teftes  of  the
cerebrum  ;  but  only  in  their  figure  ;  for  externally  they  were  every  where
made  firm  with  membranous  connexions,  and  internally  were  not,  by  any
means,  fimilar  to  the  fubftance  of  the  cerebrum  -,  but  rather  to  a  certain  body
of  a  middle  nature  betwixt  glandular  and  fpongy.

And  even  if  the  brain  had  not  been  deficient,  and  this  girl  could  have
liv'd  ;  yet  (lie  muil  have  been  deaf  as  well  as  her  fillers :  becaufe  both  the
foramina,  through  which  the  nerves  are  lent  from  the  brain  to  the  ears,  were
fliut  up  with  a  very  firm  membrane  ;  fo  that  no  pafl^age  was  left  even  for  the
moft  (lender  nervous  filament.

Nor  indeed  could  we  find  the  medulla  fpinalis  any  more  than  the  brain,
nor  any  beginning  from  whence  the  nerves  took  their  origin  ;  notwithftand-
ing  they  were  carried  through  the  belly,  the  thorax,  and  the  limbs,  natu-
rally enough  in  other  refpefts.

For  in  tracing  even  the  largeft  nerves  •,  as,  for  inftance,  the  crural ;  when
you  came  near  to  the  fpine,  you  faw  that  they  gradually  became  more  (len-
der, and  were  fix'd  into  the  fpine  indeed ;  but  in  the  whole  courfe  of  this
fpine  there  was  not  only  no  medulla  fpinalis,  but  even  no  cavity  for  the  me-
dulla fpinalis  to  be  comprehended  in.

49.  Although  Valfalva  has  omitted  to  fay  whether  this  foetus  was  born  dead
or  alive;  and  likewife,  in  what  ftate  the  kidnies,  the  bladder,  the  uterus,  and  the
nerves  that  run  through  the  head  were ;  yet  he  has  written  what  is  fufficient  to
make  us  very  clearly  underftand,  that  the  principal  diforder  of  the  fame  foetus,
relates  to  the  clafs  of  thofe  which  I  treated  of  in  my  twelfth  letter  to  you  (/) ;
when  I  affirm'd  that  the  cranium  was  frequently  in  great  part,  and  the  brain
wholly,  conlum'd  by  a  hydrocephalus,  in  fcetulfes  of  this  kind  (which  are  in-
deed not  uncommonly  confider'd  as  toads  (»z)-,)  and  gave  you  examples  of
thofe  (k),  in  which  not  only  the  medulla  fpinalis  could  not  be  found,  but
what  is  much  more  rare,  the  tube,  wherein  it  is  naturally  contain'd,  was
entirely  deficient.

And  I  did  not  relate  this  hiftory  of  Valfalva's  among  the  others  in  that  let-
ter, as,  befides  thofe  particulars,  it  contains  others ;  whether  you  confider
the  chin,  or  the  fpine/  or  the  upper  limbs,  or  in  fine  the  abdomen,  and  the
greater  part  of  the  vifceh.  of  this  cavity  ;  on  account  of  which  I  thought  it
rather  more  proper  to  put  it  off  till  the  prefent  occafion.

'To  which  I  fhould  certainly  have  defer'd,  for  fimilar  reafons,  if  I  had  then
had  them,  the  obfervation  of  Baronius,  which  will  be  fubjoin'd  a  little  be-
low (0),  and  perhaps  another  of  mine,  which  is  the  third  of  the  girls  I  dif-
fered wherein  the  brain  is  deficient;  for  all  of  them,  as  well  as  this  of
Valfalva,  and  that  of  Baroni,  were  of  foetulTes  of  the  female  lex  :  which  you
will  add  to  what  I  obferv'd,  in  a  tranfitory  manner,  in  that  letter  {p).

(/)  N.  5.  &  feq.  («)  Epift.  12.  n.  8.

{m)  Vide  Haller  deFcetu  Hum.  fine  cerebro  (o)  N.  52.

not.  2.  CJ>J  N.  6.
I

But


Letter  XL VIII. Article  50.  753

But  now  take  this  third  obfervation  of  mine :  a  fimilar  one  to  which,  ef-
f  ecially  on  account  of  the  fpine  being  bifid  at  the  fame  time,  was  made
two  years  after  at  Copenhagen  (q).

50.  A  monfter ;  for  fo  it  was  call'd  ;  which  had  been  born  two  or  three
days  before  in  this  place,  was  fhown  to  me  by  a  furgeon  in  the  month  of
February,  of  the  year  1 746.

Upon  feeing  it,  I  immediately  faid  that  it  was  without  any  brain.  To
confirm  therefore  what  I  faid  by  dilTeaion,  I  defir'd  it  might  be  brought  to
my  houfe ;  where  he  inform'd  me,  that  the  woman,  having  been  the  happy
mother  of  many  children  before,  had  likewife  had  a  very  happy  time  of
pregnancy  with  this  laft.

But  that  when  fhe  thought  herfelf  come  to  the  end,  or  near  to  the  end,  of
her  pregnancy  ;  fhe  had  not  got  rid  of  this  dead  girl,  but  by  a  very  ifficult
birth,  that  was  quite  unexpeded  ;  the  foetus  being  at  length  taken  away,  by
the  midwife,  by  the  feet.

Yet  in  efFed;,  I  found  it  to  be  confiderably  lefs  than  a  full  grown  foetus
fhould  be  :  for  it  was  not  equal  to  the  length  of  a  foetus  of  feven  months  ;
and  Valfalva,  as  I  have  already  faid  (r),  found  his  likewife  to  be  very  fmall :  and
this,  if  we  conceive  the  head  to  have  been  previoufly  diftended,  and  enlarged,
by  the  included  water,  may  be  underftood  pretty  eafily ;  as  I  have  written  to
you  on  a  former  occafion  (s).

However,  this  little  body  would  have  been  fair,  beautiful,  and  well  fed,  hav-
ing no  ill  fmell,  and  the  cuticle  having  not  yet  abfceded ;  as  it  was  very  well
form'd  in  the  reft  of  its  parts ;  if  thefe  deformities  had  not  been  added,  that
there  appear'd  to  be  no  neck :  and  above  the  eyes  there  was  fcarce  any  fore-
Jiead.  And  from  that  place,  inftead  of  the  common  integuments  of  the
body,  was  one  reddifh  membrane  :  and  this  going  over  the  upper  part  of  the
head  ;  which  was  not  at  all  protuberant  in  that  part,  and  even  had  a  decli-
vity on  the  pofterior  parts  -,  pafs'd  through  the  middle  of  the  back  to  almoft
the  lower  part  of  the  thorax  ;  being  the  lefs  broad  in  proportion  as  it  de-
fcended  the  more.

Under  this  pofterior  part  of  the  membrane,  rofe  up  two  bony  protube-
rances, as  they  feem'd  to  be  ;  one  of  which  proceeding  from  each  fide  of
the  head,  and  being  lefs  elevated  in  proportion  as  they  receded  therefrom,
and  more  near  to  each  other,  fhow'd  that  a  bifid  fpine  was  beneath  the  in-
teguments.

At  the  fides  of  this  membrane  the  common  integuments  were  not  defi-
cient :  and  with  thefe  the  lower  part  of  the  head,  as  well  as  all  the  reft  of
the  body,  was  cover'd  on  both  fides;  being  not  only  furnifti'd  with  external
ears,  in  that  part,  which  were  contiguous  to  the  fhoulders,  but  alfo  with
hair  ;  as  if  that  part  of  the  cutis,  which  lay  neareft,  being  puU'd  away  from
the  upper  part  and  lacerated,  that  part  of  the  hairy  fcalp  which  remain'd,
had  contracted  itfelf  downwards  to  this  place.

Thefe  were  the  appearances  externally.

(?)  Vid. Rob. Steph. H«nnci Defcript. [r)  N.  48.
•Omenti  not.  ad  §.  11.  {s)  Epift.  iz.  n.  7.

Vol.  II.  5  D  And


754, Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

And  upon  cutting  into  the  abdomen,  a  great  quantity  of  fat  firft  came  into>
fio-ht ;  a  great  quantity  of  which  was  everywhere  under  the  {kin,  likewife,^
wherever  there  was  a  fkin  :  and  when  the  remaining  parietes  of  the  belly
were  open'd,  all  the  vifccra  appear'd  to  be  in  a  natural  ftate,  as  thofe  of
the  thorax  did  alfo.

At  length  coming  to  the  head,  under  that  red  membrane  (which  was  thin)
when  cut  through,  there  appear'd  nothing  which  I  could  poflibly  confider  as
the  remains  of  the  cerebrum,  cerebellum,  or  medulla  oblongata,  except  two
litde  horns  as  it  were,  which  being  thick,  foft,  and  of  a  red  colour,  but  de-
oeneratin"  into  brown,  were  prominent  in  the  anterior  fides  of  the  cranium,
one  in  each ;  for  when  cut  into,  they  fhow'd,  befides  concreted  blood,  a-
kind  of  mucous  matter.

Under  thefe  horn-like  prominences,  was  that  part  of  the  os  frontis,  which
makes  the  pofterior  roof  of  the  orbit.  For  the  anterior  roof  was  wanting;
the  bones  of  the  finciput  were  wanting  •,  and  all  the  part  of  the  occipitis,
that  is  not  before  the  foramen  magnum  of  this  bone,  which  for  that  reafoa^
was  none  at  all  in  this  cafe,  was  wanting.

Bones  of  the  temples  there  in  fadt  were  ;  but  thefe  were  extended  down-
wards, laterally,  and  backwards.  And  at  the  foramina  of  thefe  bones,  which
the  auditory  nerves  enter,  I  in  vain  fought  for  the  beginnings  of  thefe
nerves ;  as  I  did  likewile  for  the  others  in  this  bafis  of  the  cranium.

And  this  made  me  be  the  lefs  furpriz'd,  when  I  examin'd  the  eyes  foon  af-
ter ;  which  as  well  as  the  eye-brows  were  well  form'd ;  to  find  the  optic
nerves  more  flender  than  ufual,  and  terminating  to  appearance  within  the
orbits.

I  then  faw  that  the  tongue  was  very  long,  but  not  equally  wide  in  propor-
tion to  its  length.  And  this  correfponded  to  the  lower  jaw,  which  was  of
fuch  a  length,  as  to  to  extend  itfelf  beyond  the  upper  anteriorly ;  though  the
tipper  was  here  greadyflretch'd  out  forwards,  as  it  defcended  :  and  yet  the
right,  and  left,  parts  of  the  lower  jaw,  were  at  a  greater  diftance  from  each
other,  the  more  they  receded  from  the  chin ;  as  they  naturally  are.

Wherefore  the  interval  betwixt  the  two,  was  longer  indeed  than  ufual,
but  much  more  narrow,  and  was  moreover  ftill  render'd  narrower,  by  a  pe-
culiar thicknefs  in  both  of  them.  And  at  the  lower  part  of  the  chin,  both  of
them  had  coalefc'd  into  one  bone  ;  without  any  line  being  interpos'd,  as  ge-
nerally happens  in  children. '

And  now  to  fpeak  of  the  fpine  ;  all  the  vertebrae  of  the  neck  were  not
really  wanting,  but  only  three  :  yet  the  reft  were  fo  crowded  upon  each
other,  that  certain  parts  of  fome  of  them  were  concreted  into  one  fubftance
with  the  contiguous  parts  of  the  next.  And  the  fame  was  feen  in  the  two
or  three  uppermoft  vertebrse  of  the  thorax;  the  very  bodies  of  which  were
even  join'd  into  one  fubftance.

From  thefe  the  fpine  began  to  proceed  backwards,  and  at  the  fame  time  to
be  curv'd  towards  the  left  fide  :  which  incurvation,  when  it  had  reach'd  al-
moft  to  the  vertebrse  of  the  loins,  was  chang'd  into  a  contrary  diredlion  ;  and
thus  was  continued  even  through  the  os  factum.

But  the  firft  incurvation  was  much  more  confiderable  than  the  fecond :
wherefore  the  latter  only  lifted  up  the  left  os  ilium  a  little;  but  the  former

rais'd


Letter  XL VIII. Article  51, 52.  755

rais'd  up  the  right  fcapula  confiderably,  and  made  the  whole  feries  of  the
ribs  ftand  out  differently  in  that  fide,  from  what  they  did  in  the  oppofite
fide.

And  there  were  on  the  right  fide  eleven  ribs  only  ■,  whereas  on  the  left
there  were  twelve ,  yet  the  thoracic  vertebrae  were  in  all  only  eleven,  and  the
lumbar  fix.

But  what  was  more  worthy  of  remark,  the  fpine  was  really  bifid.  For  the
upper  vertebra  of  the  neck,  and  all  the  others  after  that  •,  if  you  except  thofe
that  are  below  the  laft  but  one  of  the  loins ;  had  all  that  bony  matter,  which
is  added  to  their  bodies,  in  order  to  form  a  tube  for  the  fpinal  marrow,
collefted  on  both  fides,  and  expanded,  in  order  to  compofe  thofe  two  protu-
~  berances  externally,  of  which  I  fpoke  above.  Wherefore,  as  in  the  cele-
brated obfervation  of  Littre  (t),  there  was  no  tube,  and  no  fpinal  marrow  in
this  fubjeft.

If  at  any  time  you  come  to  Padua,  you  fliall  fee  the  whole  fkeleton  curi-
oufiy  prepar'd  by  our  Mediavia ;  whereby  every  thing  that  I  have  defcrib'd
in  the  bones,  is  clearly  (hown.

But  it  would  have  been  much  more  beautiful  to  look  at,  if  the  bones
could  all  have  been  brought  to  that  whitenefs,  which  they  have  in  the  (kele-
tons  of  other  foetuflTes,  that  I  have  by  me  in  great  number.  Yet,  althouo-h
the  bones  are  hard,  and  no  care  was  omitted  to  procure  this  whitenefs ;
what  I  did  not  think  ought  to  be  omitted  in  compleating  this  obfervation  ;  a
certain  brown  and  blackifh  colour  could  not  be  entirely  remov'd  from  fomc
of  the  bones  in  particular :  and  efpecially  from  moft  of  che  longer  bones  in
the  limbs.

And  in  regard  to  thefe  longer  bones,  I  think  it  ought  not  to  be  conceal'd,
that  they  were  of  lefs  thicknefs  than  they  generally  are  in  fxEtufles  of  a  height
equal  to  this ;  but  of  greater  length.

51.  In  the  fame  year  1746,  when  I  happen'd  to  pafs  the  month  of  Sep-
tember in  my  native  place,  Philip  Baroni ;  the  great  grandfon  of  him  who
■wrote  upon  the  pleuropneumonia,  formerly  my  agreeable  auditor,  and  at
that  time  a  very  experienc'd  phyfician  among  his  native  Meldulenfes,  who
loft  him  by  an  untimely  death  -,  fent  to  me  an  obfervation,  together  with
figures,  which  he  had  made  about  that  time ;  and  which  is  fimilar  to  that
propos'd  juft  now  (u)  from  Valfalva  ;  and  therefore  will  not  be  omitted  in
this  place.

52.  A  monftrous  girl  was  brought  forth  in  the  beginning  of  the  fixth
month  after  conception,  by  a  woman  who  was  in  the  thirty-fixth  year  of  her
age  •,  but  of  a  bad  colour,  thin,  and  much  extenuated  from  great  labours,
which  fhe  had  undergone  beyond  her  ftrength ;  and  from  bad  food.

And  befides  that  flie  herfelf  had  very  infirm  health,  flie  was  likewife  mar-
ried to  a  man  who  was  notrobuft,  but  even  of  a  dull  and  heavy  nature  ;  and
fhe  aflerted,  that,  in  the  months  preceding  this  abortion,  (he  had  been  ter-
rified in  her  dreams,  by  a  face  very  much  like  that  which  the  girl  had.

For,  beyond  the  eye-brows  there  was  no  forehead  or  head :  the  nofe  was
deprefs'd,  the  mouth  gaping,  the  external  ears  contiguous  to  the  flioulders  ;

CtJ  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R,  des  Sc.  a.  1701.  ("uj  N.  48.

5  D  2  and


75^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

and  that  on  the  right  fide  was  very  much  inclin'd  downwards  :  there  was  na
neck,  and  no  chin  :  for  the  face  below  the  ears  and  the  mouth,  terminated
immediately  in  the  breaft ;  fo  that,  as  it  was  deficient  in  its  fuperior  part,  it
was  alfo  deficient  in  its  inferior  part.

The  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  and  the  common  integuments  of  the  body,
that  lay  upon  them,  did  not  inveft  the  much  greateft  part  of  the  anteriors  of
te  ely ;  but  a  membrane  that  was  lax,  and  extended  into  the  form  of  a
very  large  purfe,  cover'd  this  part :  and  into  this  membrane  thofe  mufcles,
and  integum.ents,  being  gradually  extenuated,  feem'd  at  length  to  dege-
nerate.

Within  this  membrane,  which  was  pellucid  by  reafon  of  its  thinnefs,  the
liver  and  inteftines  were  feen  to  be  hanging  outwards.

The  thumb  was  wanting  on  the  right  fide :  and  this  hand  was  fo  bent  up-
wards, that  betwixt  that  and  the  arm  was  comprehended  almoft  a  regular
angle. Thefe  were  the  appearances  anteriorly.

On  the  back  part,  you  might  fee  the  regio  dorfalis  cover'd  with  hairs :  and
at  the  upper  part  of  this  region,  in  the  middle  place  betwixt  the  fcapulze,.
was  a  large  and  deep  chink  gaping  like  another  mouth  j  which  was  form'd
by  the  vertebras  being  open  in  that  part.

And  not  much  above  this  chink,  arofe  from  the  occiput,  by  a  broad  bafis,,
a  kind  of  flat  mufcle,  which  being  unconnected  with  other  parts,  if  it  were
extended  forwards,  cover'd  the  eyes,  and  the  nofe,  in  part :  but  if  it  were
carried  to  the  pofterior  parts,  cover'd  the  back  quite  to  the  loins.

And  this  mufcle  was  fimilar  to  the  tongue  of  an  adult  man,  both  in  figure,
and  magnitude.  From  which  you  may  eafily  conceive  hpw  fmall  this  girl  was^

Although  fome  things  are  wanting  in  this  defcription,  and  thofe  in  parti-
cular which  ought  to  have  been  inquir'd  into  by  difleftion  ;  if  that  had  been
permitted  •,  yet  from  the  defeat  of  the  forehead,  and  the  remaining  part  of
the  fornix  of  the  cranium ;  as  I  gather  from  the  adjoin'd  figures  ;  and  in
like  manner  from  the  foramen,  or  rather  if  you  pleafe  from  the  chink,  which
was  form'd  by  the  gaping  of  the  upper  vertebrae ;  I  feem  to  myfelf  to  be
fufEciently  clear,  that  in  this  foetus,  as  well  as  in  that  of  Forli  (,v),  with
which  you  will  compare  the  prefent  obfervation,  the  cerebrum  was  wanting.

And  indeed  I  had  an  opportunity  of  examining,,  but  not  of  differing,  a
foetus,  at  Padua,  in  the  year  1735,  whofe  hiftory,  which  I  then  colledted
with  accuracy,  I  will  fubjoin  here  •,  not  only  for  feveral  reafons  relating  to
the  mother  herfelf,  but  alfo  becaufe  in  that  which  relates  to  the  abdomen
at  leaft,  and  could  be  feen  without  difiedion,  it  comes  very  near  to  thofe  of
Valfalva,  and  Baroni.

53.  A  matron  of  one  and  forty  years  of  age,  yet  in  pretty  good  health,
and  the  mother  of  many  children  at  leaft  -,  whom  fhe  had  brought  forth  very
happily,  and  all  of  them  very  well  form'd  ;  brought  forth  a  monftrous
infant.

This  woman  had  had  no  appearance  of  her  menftrua  in  the  Odtober  laft
paft,  nor  in the  months  after  that,  to the twenty-firft  day  of  June  :  the

(xj  Vid,  Epift.  Anat.  20.  n.  56.  &  feq.

belly,


Letter  XL VIII. Article  ^2-  7 S7

belly,  and  the  breafts,  fwell'd  in  their  proper  time  ;  together  with  a  good
colour  of  the  face,  there  had  been  a  pretty  good  ftate  of  health.

Yet  (he  did  not  think  herfelf  pregnant,  becaufe  many  fymptoms  of  her
former  pregnancies  were  wanting ;  in  particular  the  tumour  of  the  belly  in
fo  great  a  degree  as  it  us'd  to  be  before  ;  and  the  motion  of  the  infant,  which
had  hitherto  been  very  great  and  continual,  but  was  now  none  at  all.  To
thefe  circumiiances  was  added,  that,  in  the  laft  months  a  hard  and  circurn-
fcrib'd  tumour,  like  a  diftended  bladder,  was  perceiv'd,  for  the  moft  part,  in
the  hypogaftrium  :  but  foon  after  feem'd  to  vanifli  away  fuddenly.

This  then  being  the  ftate  of  the  cafe  ;  and,  in  the  laft  week  before  the  day
juft  nowmention'd,  a  frequent  and  unufual  neceffity  of  making  water,  and  a
fenfe  of  weight  about  the  pudenda  coming  on ;  and  her  breafts  decreafing  in
their  tumour  three  days  before ;  and  finally,  on  the  day  before,  a  few  drops
of  a  brown  and  thick  humour,  and  in  the  morning  of  the  following  day,  the-
fame  quantity  of  bloody  matter,  having  diftill'd  from  the  genitals ;  labour
pains  came  on  after  dinner :  and  ftie  brought  forth  with  very  great  eafe,
and  without  the  affiftance  of  any  jnidwife,  the  membrane  amnios  in  an  entire
ftate  ;  for  the  chorion  was  turn'd  upv/ards ;  with  the  annex'd  placenta.

As  ftie  had  us'd  to  be  troubled  with  very  long-continued  pains  for  the
moft  part,  and  with  a  flow  and  difficult  exclufion  of  the  placenta,  ftie  was
fo  much  the  more  furpriz'd  at  this  new  and  very  great  facility  ;  becaufe,
though  fhe  had  been  accuftom'd  to  difcharge  a  great  quantity  of  blood,  both
at  the  time  of  menftruation  and  delivery,  but  a  litde  was  difcharg'd  at  pre-
fent ;  and  but  little  on  the  following  days  likewife,  except  one.

And  to  finifli  the  whole  hiftory  of  the  mother ;  ihe  rofe  up  to  her  ufual
domeftic  employments,  not  on  the  thirtieth  day,  as  at  other  times,  but  on
the  third,  or  fourth  ;  and  even  foon  after  went  from  home :  nor  was  this
Gondudl  of  any  injury  to  a  woman  who  was  in  other  refpefts  not  very  robuft  :
nay  ftie  was  even  as  well  as  ftie  had  ever  been,  became  impregnated  after-
wards, and  brought  forth  a  living  and  well-form'd  child.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  let  me  tell  you  how  deform'd  her  prefent  off"-
fpring  was.

The  fecundines,  as  far  as  I  could  judge,  did  not  differ  from  the  ufual  ap-
pearance of  nature  ■,  except  that  the  placenta  feem'd  to  be  fomewhat  fmall,
in  proportion  to  that  bulk,  of  the  entire  amnios,  which  was  defcrib'd  to  me :
for  it  was  of  the  diameter  of  three  inches  and  a  half.  In  the  amnios  was  a
yellowifti  and  turbid  water,  but  not  foetid  ;  and  the  dead  infant  feem'd,  to
me,  not  to  be  lefs  long  than  thofe  generally  are,  that  are  brought  forth  be-
twixt the  fifth  and  fixth  month.

The  face  of  it  was  very  long,  and  therein  a  flefhy  globe,  in  appearance,  was
prominent  from  the  middle  of  the  lower  part  of  the  forehead.  Under  this
lay  the  eyes  contiguous  to  each  other ;  for  there  was  no  nofe  ;  not  cover'd
with  eye-lids,  but  with  a  tranfparent  membrane  through  which  they  were
feen.

The  mouth  was  in  its  proper  place;  but  gap'd  fo  as  to  ftiov/  the  incifor
teeth. The  abdomen  was  open  in  the  middle ;  and  the  inteftines  were  pufti'd .
out  from  thence. The  common  integuments  of  the  body  were  alio  open  at
the  loins ;  but  the  hiatus  did  not  defcend  much  lower.

All:


75^  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

All  the  limbs  were  in  a  very  bad  ftate  :  the  upper  limbs  from  tlie  elbows
downwards  -,  for  to  the  arms,  which  were  very  fhort  and  diftorted,  diftorted
hands  were  likewife  added.  And  the  inferior  limbs  terminated  likewife  in
diftorted  feet:  but  the  left  leg  was  either  broken,  from  the  funiculus  umbi-
licalis  having  been  wrap'd  very  clofely  round  it ;  or  was  more  diftorted  than
the  other  parts,

54.  What  if  the  mother  had  been  prefent  at  fome  horrible  fpeftacle,  or
had  feen  fomething  of  the  like  kind  in  a  pifture  •,  or,  at  leaft,  like  the  wo-
man fpoken  of  above  (y).,  had  dream'd  of  luch  an  appearance  ?

But  this  mother  denied  that  flie  had  ever  feen  any  thing  of  the  kind,  or
had  even  ever  thought  of  it,  waking  or  afleep  ;  or  that  any  conliderable  force
had  been  applied  to  her  belly,  during  the  pregnancy,  either  by  falling,  or
conftringing,  or  comprefling  it  •,  or,  finally,  by  fliaking  it  violently  :  for  we
have  an  example  of  this  caufe  alfo  in  a  very  violent  convullive  cough  (z) :
this  only  fhe  confefs'd,  that  during  the  whole  of  this  pregnancy,  fhe  had
been  very  gloomy  and  down-caft  in  her  mind;  fo  that  if  we  compare  the  gef-
tations  of  thefe  four  monftrous  foetuflt-s,  and  that  alio  of  Forli  {a)  one  with
another,  it  is  wonderful,  that  the  geftation  of  that  which  we  defcrib'd  in  the
fecond  place  (b),  was  fo  happy.

But  as  to  what  I  faid  juft  now,  as  if  in  oppofition  to  the  powers  of  the
mother's  imagination ;  I  would  have  you  underftand  it  as  coming  from  a
man,  who  is  by  no  means  difpos'd,  immediately  to  account  for  every  mon-
ftrous appearance  in  fcetufles,  from  this  power.

For  many  relations  are  extant  of  diforders  of  this  kind,  and  particularly
of  that  we  are  fpeaking  of;  and  not  only  in  the  colleftions  of  patch-work
compilers,  but  even  in  the  writings  of  illuftrious  men,  who  have  firft  pub-
lifh'd  ari  example  of  thefe  diforders ;  or  fome  one  of  that  kind  ;  as  feen  by
themfelves,  and  others  (c).

But  if  you  examine  the  greater  part  of  thofe  authors,  from  whom  thefe
examples  are  produc'd,  you  will  fee  how  readily  they  are  accounted  for  from
the  imagination  of  pregnant  women  ;  and  that  when  even  they  could  be  very
fairly  deduc'd  from  fome  external  violence,  a  part  is  neverthelefs  alEgn'd  to
the  imagination  likewife.

Though  I  cannot  approve  thefe  things ;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are
cafes  wherein  it  feenis  to  me  to  be  very  hard  to  depart  from  that  opinion,
which  is  common  to  the  greateft  men,  totally  and  altogether.  What  Boer-
haave  {d),  what  Van  Swieten  (e),  what  other  grave  authors  of  undoubted
credit  aflert  to  have  been  feen  by  them  that  relates  to  this  queftion,  no  one
will  doubt  the  truth  of.

(y)  N.  52.  obf.  88  :  Stalpart.  cent.  2.  p.  i. Schol  ad  obf.

(z)  Commerc. Litter, a.  1735. hebd. 9. 36:  aliofque  ;  fed  pra  ceteris  Haller,  not.  <- c.

B, 2.  &  feq-  ad  Prjeledt.  Boerhaav.  §.  604.  &  Opufc.

(a)  Vid.  n.  52.  ad  finem.  Anat.  VI.  §.  16.  not.  III. &  feq.  &  Opufc.  IX.

(b)  N.  50.  not.  2.  &  feq.  ad  §.  3.

{c)  Vid. Sachs  Eph.  n. c. dec. 1. a. i.  {d)  Praleft.  ad  Inftit.  §.  694.

Schol. ad  obf.  135. Schroeck.  dec.  ead. a.  6 (^)  Comment,  in  Boerhaav.  Aph.  §.  1075,

&  7.  obf.  232  :  Goth.  Ben.  PreufT.  in  Append,  ad  2.
ad  earund.  cent.  7  &  8.  Ritter.  Aft,  n.  c.  torn.  8.

If


Letter  XL VIII. Article  54.  759

If  any  one  contends  that  each  of  them  might  be  produc'd,  at  other  times,
from  feme  internal  diforder  ;  I  fhall  not  greatly  conteft  it  with  him.  But  that
they  were,  at  that  time,  produc'd  from  the  fame  place,  I  cannot  readily
allow.

A  mulberry  falls  upon  the  globular  part  of  the  nofe  of  a  pregnant  wo-
man ;  and  this  woman  brings  forth  an  infant,  on  the  globular  part  of  whole
nofe  a  mulberry  protuberates  -,  "  perfeftly  exprefs'd  "  in  its  magnitude,  co-
lour, its  roundifli  prominences,  its  roughnefs,  and  its  very  Imall  hairs.

A  caterpillar  falls  from  a  tree  upon  the  neck  of  another  woman,  and  can-
not be  taken  away  but  with  difficulty ;  and  a  girl  is  born,  on  the  fkin  of
whofe  neck,  the  form  of  a  caterpillar  is  prominent ;  being  of  various  colours,
and  having  upright  hairs  •,  and,  in  a  word,  being  fo  fimilar  to  a  true  cater-
pillar, that  even  "  no  egg  could  be  more  like  another."

Another  woman  fees  a  beggar  that  has  a  hair-lip,  is  terrified  at  it,  and
brings  forth  a  child  that  has  its  lips  deform'd  with  fiffures,  of  the  fame  kind
that  were  feen  in  the  beggar ;  and  even  perfectly  fimilar  as  to  their  dimen-
fions  (f).

Another  {g)  heard  of  a  little  girl,  whofe  right  hand  was  entirely  without
fingers  ;  the  thumb  only  being  in  its  proper  place,  and  the  places  of  the
fingers  being  occupied  by  nails  prefix'd  to  the  metacarpus  :  thefe  things  fhc
thought  of  in  herfelf  "  very  much,  and  for  a  long  time  ;"  and  fhe  at  length
brought  forth  a  foetus  whofe  right  hand  was  juft  in  the  fame  figure.

Nor  muft  we  conceal  the  cafe  of  her  (^),  who  brought  forth  a  boy  without
a  cranium ;  the  place  of  the  brain  being  occupied  by  a  kind  of  red  flefhy
mafs ;  and  who,  having  underftood  that  two  children  were  taken  out  of  the
water,  in  which  they  had  been  drown'd,  without  any  fkull,  and  without  any
brain,  had  excruciated  herfelf  "  with  that  fix'd  and  obftinate  imagination,
"  and  with  a  perpetual  rumination  on  the  pall:  evil :"  nor  ought  fhe  to  be
forgotten  who  C?),  having  brought  forth  a  girl  affefted  with  thefiydro-rachitis
in  the  loins,  "  and  having  the  fame  idea  continually,  and  repeatedly,  reviv'd
"  in  her  imagination  ;"  at  the  next  time  of  child-bearing  brought  forth  an-
other girl;  "  disfigur'd  with  the  fame  kind  of  deformity  as  the  firft,  and  eXf
"  adlly  in  the  fame  place."

Finally ;  to  omit  other  obfervations  which  might  be  produc'd,  and  fome
which  I  very  well  know  in  confequence  of  having  feen  them,  and  to  fpeak
of  one  which  in  Ibme  meafure  relates  to  the  three  that  I  laft  defcrib'd  to
you  ;  there  was  a  woman  (k)  who  brought  forth  a  f<3etus  which  had  its  hands
and  feet  incurvated  upwards,  and  was  deform'd  with  two  tumours  in  partis
cular,  the  one  at  the  os  facrum,  and  the  other  under  the  navel,  where  the
inteftines,  and  the  other  vifcera,  coming  our  through  the  hiatus  of  the  ab-
domen, greatly  rais'd  up  the  peritonaeum,  in  which  alone  they  were  con-
tain'd.

As  the  midwife  was  prudently  determin'd  neither  to  fhow,  nor  defcribe,
to  the  mother  a  birth  of  this  kind  ;  the  woman  herfelf  of  her  ov^n  accord  de-
fcrib'd it,  faying,  that  fhe,  in  the  middle  of  her  pregnancy,  had  dream'd  of.

(fj  Vid.  afl.  n  c.  torn.  6.  obf.  lo.  (;)  Salzmann.  differt.  de  quibufdam  tumor.

{g]  Commerc.  Litter,  a.  1632.  hebd.  20.  tunic,  ext.  §.3.  -

{h)  Eph.  n.  c.  dec.  3.  a.  9.  &  10.  obf.  106. (-4)  Schol.  ad  Preuff.  cbf.  cit.


760  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

an  infant  rufliing  violently  againfther  belly,  which  had  its  limbs  incurvated  in
this  manner,  and  was  deform'dwith  two  tumours  ;  one  anterior  and  onepof-
terior  -,  in  the  fame  manner  as  her  foetus  really  was  :  wherefore,  wakino-  out
of  her  fleep  in  a  fright,  fiie  had  ever  after  retain'd  the  melancholy  id°  a  of
her  dream.

You  will  perhaps  then  fay,  if  you  deny  that  this  can be  afcrib'd  to  the
^ .imagination  of  the  mother ;  tell  me,  I  beg  of  you,  by  -what  means  thefe  ap-
pearances can  be  produc'd.

But  there  would  be  too  many  things  in  phyfics  that  I  muft  deny  ;  if  they
were  to  be  denied,  becaufe  I  do  not  underftand  the  manner  in  which  they  arc
brought  about.

And  certainly,  even  you  ;  if  you  are  v/illing  to  confefs  the  truth,  according
to  your  cuftom ;  do  not  fufficiently  underftand,  how  it  has  happen'd,  that,
.after  thofe  particular  imaginations,  a  difeafe  was  at  hand  which  deform'd  the
ifoetus,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  imagination  had  fuppos'd ;  fo  that  the
mulberry  we  have  fpoken  of,  the  caterpillar,  the  fiirures  of  the  lips,  the  mu-
tilation of  the  fingers,  and  the  unufual  fituation  of  the  nails,  that  defect  of
the  cranium  and  cerebrum,  that  diforder  of  the  fpine,  that  incurvation,  and
thole  tumours,  not  only  anfwer'd  perfeftly  to  the  imagination  in  their  figurq,
and  other  conditions ;  but  they  even  exifted  in  the  globular  part  of  the  nofe,
on  the  neck,  on  the  right  hand,  on  the  lips,  in  the  head,  in  the  loins,  in  the
limbs,  on  the  pofterior  and  anterior  furface  of  the  body,  in  fuch  a  manner  as
the  foregoing  imagination  requir'd.

Perhaps  you  will  fay  this  happen'd  by  accident.  And  I  Ihall  readily  aflent
to  you  where  a  certain  imagination  has  not  preceded ;  and  the  diforder  does
not  correfpond  fo  exaftly,  both  in  figure  and  circumftances.

But  where  this  has  preceded,  and  the  diforder  correfponds  thereto,  in  the
manner  I  have  faid  ;  not  even  you  yourfelf,  if  you  confider  all  things  ac-
<curately,  can  entirely  acquiefce  in  the  accufation  of  chance ;  efpecially,  if
you  have  an  eye  not  only  to  one  example,  but  to  a  great  number,  as  there
are:  for  you  will  not  eafily  fuppofe  that  chance  could  have  been  fo  ingenious,
if  I  may  be  allow'd  to  fpeak  thus,  and  fo  exafl:  an  imitator.

What  is  then  the  cafe  ?  In  refpefh  to  myfelf,  in  many,  and  even  in  very
many,  inftances,  I  fhali  readily  accufe  chance  if  you  pleafe;  but  in  fome  of
•the  examples  I  fhall  rather  accufe  fomething  elfe,  which  I  confefs  I  do  not
underftand.

Now  to  return  to  the  foetus  which  I  laft  defcrib'd  ;  the  death  of  it  was
brought  on  either  by  the  circulation  of  the  blood  being  impeded  through  the
funiculus  umbilicalis  itfelf ;  in  confequence  of  its  being  bound  clofely  round
the  leg ;  or  by  fome  very  bad  conformation  of  the  internal  parts,  like  that  of
the  external ;  v/hich  naturally  depriv'd  it  of  the  power  of  growing,  and  mov-
ing itfelf.

And  the  exit  of  the  inteftines  from  the  abdomen ;  the  blame  of  which  is
often  thrown  upon  the  rough  and  violent  handling,  and  preflure  of  the  mid-
wives,  when  they  deliver  the  infants;  in  this  cafe,  where  there  could  be  no-
, thing  of  that  kind,  certainly  muft  be  attributed  to  the  abdomen  itfelf  of  the
fcEtus  never  having  been  (hut  up ;  or  at  leaft  not  fufficiently  fhut  up.

Per


Letter  XL Vlir. Article  55.  761

For  from  the  original  formation ';  as  Harvey  (/).  has  alfo  feen  in  the  embryos
of  perfect  animals,  as  they  call  them,  and  as  I  have  certainly  feen  in  thofe  of
dogs  ;  it  is  open.

And  afterwards,  unlefs  the  peritonfeum,  the  mufcles,  and  the  common  in-
teguments firmly  and  clofely  fhut  it  up,  it  muft,  v/ithout  doubt,  either  re-
main open,  as  many  have  found  it,  and  among  thefe  formerly,  more  than
once,  Bofcus  (m)  (whom  I  do  not  remem.ber  ever  to  have  feen  quoted  in  col-
leflions  of  obfervations  of  this  kind)  ;  or  muft  be  relax'd  into  a  purfe  of  the
fame  kind  with  that  feen  by  Valfalva  (»),  and  Baroni  {o)  :  and  if  the  covering
is  very  thin  and  (lender,  it  may  eafily  be  broken  through  by  the  very  weight
of  the  vifcera.

For  when  it  is  made  up  of  the  peritoneum  only,  it  is  fo  thin,  as-even  to
fuffer  the  periftaltic  motion  of  the  inteftines  to  be  feen  through  it;  as  Rtiyfch,
(p),  who  lias  three  obfervations  relating  to  diforders  of  this  kind  (§),  has  af-
ferted.

In  reading  of  which  obfervations  attentively,  and  comparing  them  one  with
another,  and  with  thofe  which  he  gave  afterwards,  in  his  anfwer  to  Bidloo
(r) ;  where  he  contends  that  thefe  obfervations  are  rare  -,  you  will  perhaps
wi(h  he  had  not  previoufly  faid,  without  any  kind  of  repugnance,  that  this
diforder  had  been  feen  by  him  "  many  times,"  and  "  frequently."

But  left  you  fhould  fay,  that  all  the  obfervations  of  monftrous  foetuiTes
whatever,  which  I  have  produc'd  above,  relate  to  the  defedt  of  parts,  I  will
add  fome  which  fhow  an  increas'd  number  of  fome  parts ;  and  that  either
with  a  defedl  of  others,  or  without  a  defedt  of  any.

One  that  w^as  formerly  fent  to  me  by  that  very  eminent  phyfician,  while
living,  Sebaftian  Trombelli,  which  defcribes,  befide  that,  diforder  of  the  abdo-
men, of  which  I  fpoke  juft  now,  a  great  part  of  one  infant  growing  to  ano-
ther; and  that  not  only  externally,  but  mix'd  internally  in  their  fubftances  ;
I  fhould  very  gladly  have  produc'd  here,  if  I  had  not  given  it  to  our  Vallifneri,  ■
by  whom  it  was  publifli'd,  in  the  latter  end  of  his  elaborate  volume  on  ge-
neration (j).  1  will  give  you  another  however,  in  which  my  friend  Mediavia
obferv'd  both  the  diforders  in  fome  meafure.

S5-  An  infant  was  born  at  Padua,  about  the  beginning  of  July,  in  the  year
1736,  of  a  mother  who  had  before  brought  forth  other  healthy  and  living
children,  and  brought  forth  others  afterwards.

This  child,  if  you  look'd  at  it,  had  one  diforder,  which  was  a  tumour  equal
to  the  fize  of  a  man's  fift,  in  that  part  of  the  abdominal  region,  on  the  right
fide,  which  is  call'd  umbilical,  and  a  little  above  the  navel  itfelf.

The  tumour  was  deftitute  of  fkin,  which,  being  elevated  round  about
into  a  kind  of  border,  terminated  in  a  little  prominence  :  Bofcus  (/),  who
had  taken  it  into  his  head  to  fuppofe  that  this  was  caus'd  by  an  ulcer,  v»'0uld
have  call'd  it  a  cicatrix  ;  as  you  alfo  may  call  it,  where  you  fuppofe  the  hiatus
of  the  abdomen,  to  have  been  produc'd  by  fome  violence  ;  and  the  parts  in

(!)  De  general,  animal,  exerc.  69..  .  (y)  Ibid.  obf.  71.  &  72.

(,>/;)  De  facult.  anat.  left.  1.  in  fine.  (r)  Refponf.  ad  Bidl.  vind.

[li)  Supra,  n.  48.  \s)  P.  3.  c.  5.  &t3b.  3.  4  &  5.

(0)  N.  52.  \t)  Left.  I.  Paulo  ante  cit.

(p)  Cent.  obf.  anat.  chir.  73.

Vol.  II.  5  E  which


762  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

which  the  hiatus  is  produc'd,  to  be  retraced  on  one  fide  and  on  the  other  5
and  explain  the  cafe  nearly  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  celebrated  Preuffius  («)
explains  it.

The  tumour  was  unequal,  and  yielded  to  the  touch ;  fo  that  it  feem'd  to
be  made  up  of  the  intellines.  The  infant  at  firfl  neither  difcharg'd  any  thino-
from  the  inteftines,  nor  fuck'd  the  bread.  Yet  foon  after  it  began  to  do  both.

But  what  it  difcharg'd  from  the  inteftines  was  green  :  and  the  clothes  were
thereby  ftain'd  with  fpots,  which  could  not  be  wafli'd  out  but  with  great  diffi-
culty; and  indeed,  frequently  not  at  all.  And  the  tumour  which  had  been
fomewhat  livid  before,  began  in  the  mean  time  to  be  more  livid,  and  at  length
to  be  feiz'd  with  a  gangrene.  Part  of  the  redtimufcles,  that  lay  under  the
fkin,  abfceeding,  together  with  the  furface  of  the  tumour,  the  infant  died  on
the  five  and  thirtieth  day  after  its  birth.

The  diffedion  of  the  belly  lliow'd  that  this  child  had  a  double  liver ;  one
of  them  being  in  the  ufual  fituation,  and  rather  fmall,  though  divided  into
very  long  lobes  ;  the  other  larger,  but  fhapelefs  :  and  this  being  join'd  with
the  former,  by  the  interpofition  of  a  thick  membrane ;  annex'd  to  the  trunk
of  the  vena  portarum,  but  fending  its  veins  into  the  cava,  below  that  other
liver ;  extended  itfelf  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  force  the  peritoneum,  which
adher'd  to  it,  and  the  tendons  added  thereto,  outwards,  and  make  up  the
tumour  of  which  I  have  been  fpeaking.

And  this  tumour  yielded  to  the  touch,  from  the  yielding  of  the  inteftines  ;.
upon  which  this  liver  in  part  lay.  But  although  there  was  a  double  liver,  no
gall-bladder  appear'd  any  where.  However  the  fmall  inteftines  were  in  a  na-
tural ftate  •,  but  the  colon  was  very  much  contrafted.

56.  Shall  we  fuppofe,  that  as  two  fpleens  are  fometimes  found  in  one  body ;,
and  that  even  not  very  feldom  ;  for  I  have  feen  it  three  times  {x) ;  fo  alfo  two
livers  were  given  to  this  one  infant  ?  Or  muft  we  fuppofe  the  larger  liver,
which  was  prominent  outwards,  to  have  belong'd  to  another  foetus,  the  other
parts  of  whom  had  perifh'd  in  the  uterus  ?

For  in  that  double-bodied  foetus  which  Zambeccari  had  diflefted,  and  Val-
lifneri  has  produc'd  (jy),  the  livers  of  both  bodies  feem  to  be  join'd  together
by  a  kind  of  thick  membrane  that  was  interpos'd  (2).

But  ihall  we  fuppofe  it  to  have  happen'd  by  mere  accident,  that  the  veins
of  the  preternatural  liver,  Ihould  come  into  the  fame  trunks,  into  which  the
veins  from  the  liver  proper  to  this  infant  open'd  ?

Without  doubt  this  difficulty,  which  is  much  greater  in  moft  of  the  vifcera
of  that  double-bodied  foetus,  is  one  of  thofe  which  have  given  rife  to  the
late  controverfy  upon  the  origin  of  monfters.

Nor  were  the  fame  circumftances  wanting  in  a  calf,  which  was  with  great
kindnefs  fent  to  me,  in  the  beginning  of  March  in  the  year  1745,  by  that
very  refpeftable  and  learned  man  Jo.  Dominic  Lavarini,  counfellorat  Verona.

Jn  this  calf  I  ftiould  probably  have  obferv'd  many  more  things ;  and  fuch^.,
perhaps,  as  would  be  more  worthy  of  being  written  to  you  •,  if  it  had  not
been  brought  firft  from  the  mountains  to  Verona,  and  from  thence  to  Padua ;

(a)  In  append,  fupra  adn.  54.  cit.  ("yj  C.  5.  ad  n.  54.  cit.  &  tab.  7.  &  feq^

{xj  Epift.  37.  n.  30;  epift.  38.  n.  34;  & (»)  Tab.  10.  fig.  3  &  4.
ejpifl,  64.  n,  2.

2  aftet-


Letter  XLVIII. Article  57.  763

after  it  had  been  born  dead,  and  had  the  belly  open'd ;  moft  of  the  vifcera
being  taken  out  in  order  to  preferve  it  the  longer :  and  not  only  this  but  the
diaphragm  being  cut  into,  and  the  pericardium  laid  open ;  fo  that,  at  fuch  a
diftance  of  time,  it  was  become  lefs  fit  for  difle<5tion  and  accurate  obfervation.
Yet  the  few  things  I  had  it  in  my  power  to  obferve,  I  will  fet  down  here.

P)'].  A  two-headed  calf,  whofe  heads  and  necks,  if  you  compar'd  them
one  with  another ;  and  the  remaining  parts  of  the  body,  if  you  compar'd
them  with  other  calves  naturally  born  ;  fhow'd  fcarcely  any  difference,  when
look'd  upon  externally-,  gave  the  following  appearances  after  the  thorax  was
open'd  and  examin'd.

The  fpines,  as  they  came  from  two  necks,  continued  to  be  two  in  the
thorax  likewife  ;  being  disjoin'd  by  fome  diftance  :  but  this  diftance  decreas'd
fo  much  the  more,  in  proportion  as  they  defcended  the  lower ;  fo  that,  at
length,  below  the  thorax  there  were  no  longer  two  fpines  but  one  only.

And  the  tranfverfe  bones  became  fhorter  in  the^  fame  order ;  and  corre-
fponding  to  the  ribs  in  thicknefs,  in  breadth,  and  in  fituation,  were  each  of
them  plac'd  in  that  interval  of  the  fpines.

In  the  courfe  of  this  interval  pafs'd  the  defcending  trunk  of  the  great  artery,
which  was  very  large  in  confequence  of  being  made  up  of  two  joining  into
one,  and  did  not  fend  off  two  intercoftal  arteries  only,  but  three  and  three
in  order,  as  far  as  this  interval  continued  :  for  one  of  thefe  arteries  went  to
this  interval  itfelf.

Each  fide  of  the  thorax  was  occupied  by  two  large  lobes  of  lungs,  of  which
I  have  written  to  you  on  a  former  occafion  [a) ;  for  each  afpera  arteria  was
divided  into  double  bronchia,  defcending  on  each  fide  from  their  proper
neck.

There  were  two  thymi  alfo  ;  although  at  firft  they  feem'd  to  be  join'd  into
one.  There  was,  however,  but  one  pericardium,  though  in  it  two  hearts,
quite  disjoin'd  from  each  other,  were  contain'd.

Thefe  hearts  were  equal  to  each  other  in  fize,  and  of  the  fame  ftrudure
both  internally  and  externally :  but  they  differ'd  in  thefe  things ;  firft,  that
as  one  of  them  was  very  near  to  the  fide  of  the  other,  the  furface  of  the  Itix.,
which  was  contiguous  to  the  right,  was  fo  confiderably  hollow'd  out,  as  to
receive  the  natural  convexity  of  the  right,  to  which  it  perfeftly  correfponded :
and  in  the  fecond  place,  that  both  of  them  did  not  turn  the  fame  furface  to
the  fpine  ;  but  the  right  that  which  it  naturally  ought :  and  the  left  had  that
furface,  which  is  ufually  turn'd  to  the  fpine,  turn'd  to  the  right  heart:  and
that  was  the  furface  which  was  hollow'd  out  in  the  manner  I  have  faid.

And  left  you  fhould  fufpedt  this  excavation  to  have  been  brought  on  by
the  right  heart ;  which  perhaps  might  have  lain  on  the  other  for  a  long  time
after  death  ;  remember  that  this  hollownefs  was  confiderable ;  as  has  been
faid ;  and  know  that  there  was  fuch  a  firmnefs,  and  thicknefs,  in  the  parietes
of  both  hearts,  in  this  calf;  which  was  already  at  its  full  growth,  and  had
been  perfedtly  well-nourifti'd  in  the  uterus;  that  it  is  impoffible  to  account
for  that  excavation  from  thence.

And  if  not  only  the  hearts,  but  other  parts  alfo,  had  been  very  firm  at  that
time  ;  and  a  moft  putrid  fmell  had  not  been  more  and  more  troublefome  ;  not

[a)  Epift.  19.  n.  48.

5  E  2  only


764  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

only  to  me  who  difieded,  but  even  to  thofe  who  were  near  me ;  I  fliould
have  gone  on,  with  pleafure,  ftill  to  inquire  into  other  circui-nftances  of  this
monftrous  formation.

Plowever,  of  all  the  vifcera  which  remain'd  in  the  abdomen,  I  did  not  fee
that  any  was  doubled  contrary  to  the  ufual  courfe  of  nature.

58.  As  the  infelicity  of  birth,  which  is  feen  in  the  off-fpring  produc'd,  does
not  only  happen  when  it  is  born  in  a  monftrous  ftate;  but  alfo,  as  I  have
hid  down  above  {b),  when  it  is  affefted  with  fome  very  confiderable  dif-
ordcr-,  I  will  alfo  hint  a  few  things  on  the  fubjeft  of  this  infelicity:  I  fay  a
few  things  only  -,  not  becaufe  the  dignity  of  the  fubjeft,  and  even  necefiity
itl'elf,  would  not  require  more,  but  becaufe  this  letter  has  already  run  out
to  a  great  length.

For  there  are  few  diforders  of  infants,  which  really  fall  under  the  notice
of  the  fenfes  •,  if  you  compare  them  with  the  very  great  number  of  internal  dif-
orders :  and  thefe  are  they  which  deftroy  a  great  part  of  the  human  race,  foon
after  they  are  born :  and  that  fo  much  the  more  eafily,  in  proportion  as  all
the  veflels  and  vifcera,  by  reafon  of  their  tender  and  foft  ftate,  are  lefs  fit  to
proteft  themfelves  againfl:  preternatural  diftentions  and  attritions  •,  and  ftill
lefs  to  corredl:  the  diforder  of  any  other  vifcus,  or  veffel,  from  whence  thofe,
or  any  other  injuries,  are  communicated  to  them.

And  to  thefe  difadvantages  another  very  confiderable  one  is  added  :  I  mean
thatphyficians  cannot  receive  narrations,  or  anfwers,  from  infants  •,  fo  as  to  make
them  underftand,  in  what  part  of  the  body,  and  with  what  uneafinefs,  they
are  affefted  ;  and  confequently  cannot  know  what  kind  of  remedy  it  is  ne^
cefl^ary  to  ufe,  in  order  to  afl^vage,  and  diminidi,  this  uneafinefs  at  leaft^  if  it
cannot  be  cur'd.  Wherefore,  Ballonius  in  particular,  who  excell'd  in  his
profeffion,  pitying  the  lots  of  infants,  and  tender  children,  has,  in  more  than
one  place,  admonifti'd  us  (c),  that  as  we  muft  then  deal  with  children,  "  as
"  if  with  dumb  patients"  (who however,  when  adult,  fignify  many  things  by
nods  and  geftures)  we  ought  to  be  the  more  diligent  to  obferve  all  the  marks
of  difeafes  that  we  can  in  them,  and  to  profecute  them  by  the  moft  prudent:
conjeftures  :  and  he  has  taught  us,  by  his  examples,  both  in  the  pleurify,
and  the  ftone  of  the  kidnies,  not  only  v/hat  figns  he  had  obferv'd  in  living
children,  but  alfo  what  he  had  found  by  difleftion  in  the  bodies  of  thofe  that}'
died  of  thefe  diforders.

And  I,  in  purfuance  of  his  plan,  have  formerly  recommended  the  fame
method  in  the  idea  of  medical  inftitutions ;  that  art,  like  a  convenient  and
friendly  interpreter,  may  not  be  wanting  to  affift  thofe,  to  whom  nature  haa-
denied  the  power  of  making  known  their  own  diforders.

And  if  thefe  things  are  neceflary,  even  in  thofe  diforders  of  infants,  which,
in  confequence  of  being  common  to  adults,  have  fymptoms  that  are  well-
known  to  phyficians,  how  much  more  necefTary  will  they  be,  in  thofe  difeafes-
that  are  peculiar  to  infants  !

59.  I  call  thofe  difeafes  of  infants  peculiar,  which  are  from  the  peculiar  in-
tention of  nature,  in  them,  being  difturb'd  ;  as,  for  inftance,  a  change  of  the

{J>)  N.  47.  2.  conftit.  autumn,  a.  1557-  ad  8.  &  in  annot.  &

(c)  Vid.  1.  i.confil.  76.  in  fine,  &  epidem.  1. coaftit.  kH.  a.  1558.  antemed.

circulation


Letter  XLVIII. Article  60.  765

drculation  in  the  blood,  from  that  which  was  requir'd  in  a  foetus,  into  that
which  is  requir'd  in  a  child  that  is  born.

In  the  former,  as  you  very  well  know,  the  blood  was  carried,  from  the
placenta,  through  the  umbilical  vein,  into  the  vena  portarum  ;  and  from
thence  part  of  the  blood,  through  the  canaliculus  venofus,  into  the  vena
cava  :  and  from  this  a  part  goes  through  the  foramen,  which  they  call  ovale,
into  the  finus  of  the  pulmonary  vein  ;  and  part  into  the  right  ventricle  of  the
heart ;  and  from  this  cavity  a  part  through  the  pulmonary  artery  into  the
lungs;  and  finally,  a  part  thro'  the  tubulus  arteriofus  into  the  great  artery;
from  the  iliac  branches  of  which,  a  confiderable  portion  of  the  blood  was  car-
ried, through  the  umbilical  arteries,  into  the  placenia.

But  thele  arteries,  when  the  infant  is  already  born,  are  tied  up  together
with  the  vein  of  that  name,  and  cut  off;  fo  that  no  blood  can  any  longer  be
carried  into  them,  nor  carried  back  therefrom. .

And  the  canaliculis  venofus,  and  the  tubulus  arteriofus,  are  afterwards,  by
degrees,  fliut  up ;  as  the  foramen  ovale  is  alio  at  lengtfcf,  if  not  quite  fhuc
up,  at  leaft  generally  diminifh'd.

It  therefore  happens,  that  the  blood  does  not  pafs  into  the  cava,  from  the
vena  portarum,  but  by  the  hepatic  roots  of  the  cava  :  and  as  that  which  is
carried  through  the  cava  to  the  heart  is  thruft  into  the  pulmonary  artery ;
fo  nothing  can  come  from  this  tube  into  the  great  artery,  which  is  not  carried
through  the  pulmonary  vein  into  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart.

Add  to  thefe,  the  ather  intentions  of  nature  at  this  time,  that  are  peculiar,
and  neceflary,  for  all  thofe  changes ;  as,  for  inftance,  that  the  milk  muft  be
fuck'd  from  the  breafts,  fwallow'd,  and  prepar'd  in  the  ftomach ;  the  dia-
phragm muft  be  alternately  contrafted  and  relax'd ;,  the  lungs  muft  be  open'd
and  dilated  ;  the  air  muft  be  drawn  in,  and  prefs'd  out  again  ;  and  other
things  of  this  kind  muft  take  place.

Then  imagine,  that  if  any  one  part  of  the  body  be  lefs  proper  for  thefe
new,  and  neceflary  offices  ;  or  give  too  great  a  refiii:ance  ;  or  caufe  thofe  paf-
fages  which  ought  to  be  ftiut  up,  to  be  fhut  up  much  later  than  this  new
mode  of  life  requires  :  imagine,  I  fay,  what  muft  be  the  confequence,  and
you  will  readily  conceive,  how  various,  and  manifold,  the  diforders  may  be
that  are  peculiar  to  new-born  infants.

60.  I  will  illuftrate  thefe  things,  by  the  inftance  of  a  difeafe  which  falls  un^  .
der  the  notice  of  the  fenfes.  Infants  are  fometimes  born  without  a  palate ;  or
are  born  with  a  fiflure  of  the  palate.  Whether,  in  theie  cafes,  fudtion,  c?
deglutition^,  or  both,  are  prevented,  or  made  much  more  difficult,  it  ap^
pears,  that,  by  this  means,  the  mouth  is  made  unfit,  or  at  leaft  lefs  fit,  fcF
fucking.

But  as  the  difeafe  is  not  only  evident,  but  external,  art  contrives  a  method,
cither  of  preferving  the  infants  for  many  days ;  or,  where  the  diforder  is  lefs
confiderable,  for  many  years,  and  to  a  long  life.

You  will  read  what  has  been  delivered  by  thofe  celebrated  men,  Maloet,  and
Petit  (d)  :  the  former  of  whom  relates  that  a  child,  born  without  a  palate,
had  liv-'d .fifteen  days,  by  putting  milk  into  the  mouth  with  a  fpoon  ;- and  the

(d)  Hift.  &  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  R.  des  fc.  a,  1735.

2.  latter.


766  Bodklll. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

latter,  that  fome  were  preferv'd,  who  had  been  born  wichafifflir'd  palate,  by  a
goat  giving  it  the  teat  of  a  dug  half-full  of  milk  -,  by  the  thicknefs,  length,
and  foftncfs,  of  which,  the  filFure  of  the  palate,  and  the  cavity  of  the  noftrils,
were  Ihut  up  at  the  fame  time  :  fo  that  it  was  necelTary  to  withdraw  the  teat
every  now  and  then,  to  prevent  refpiration  being  impeded.

And  this  was  done  in  thofe,  who  could  not  have  accuftom'd  themfelves,
as  many  others  that  he  faw  could  not,  to  thofe  inconveniencies  in  fucking,
and  fwallowing,  which  are  the  neceffary  confequences  of  a  fifllir'd  palate.

And  with  this  hope  of  accuftoming  the  child  to  bear  thefe  inconveniences,
or  at  leafl  prcferving  it  the  longer,  I  remember  that,  in  a  fimilar  cafe  of
an  infant,  born  at  Padua,  I  took  care,  in  the  mean  time,  to  have  nourifhing
glyfters  thrown  up.  Yet  not  only  the  difeafe  is  then  manifeft,  as  I  have  faid,
but  the  caufe  alfo.

And  there  is  another  diforder,  that  is  manifeft ;  but  the  caufe  is  uncertain;
as,  for  inftance,  when  infants  newly  born  are  affefted  with  a  very  confiderable
jaundice  :  for  with  a  kind  of  flight  jaundice,  almoft  all  of  them  are  attack'd,
a  little  after  birth.  And  if  the  caufe  of  this  flight  jaundice  were  afcertain'd  ;
there  would  be,  in  my  opinion,  for  the  moft  part,  fome  hint  to  lead  us  to  a
probable  conjecture  at  leaft  as  to  the  caufe  of  that  more  violent  diforder.

I  have  heard  fome  account  for  the  more  flight  jaundice,  from  the  mothers
milk,  which  is  yellowifh  after  birth.  And  indeed  I  myfelf  have  fometimes
feen  this  fluid  to  be  yellowifli  at  that  time.

But  fuppofing  this  to  be  the  cafe  even  at  all  times  ;  yet  how  has  it  fome-
times happen'd,  that  I  have  feen  thofe  infants  to  be  very  yellow  likewife,  who
had  fuck'd  neither  the  milk  of  the  mother,  nor  of  any  other  woman,  who  has
been  lately  deliver'd  ?  Or  how  fhould  it  happen,  that  Sylvius  (e)  obferv'd
"  many  to  have  been  born  with  a  jaundice,"  and  not  only  "  to  have  had  it
"  appear  upon  them  fome  time  after  birth  ?"

There  are  learned  men  alfo,  who  fuppofe  all  newly-born  infants  to  become
ifteric  in  confequence  of  a  coagulum  being  made  of  the  firft  milk,  which
grows  acid  in  the  flomach  ;  whereby  the  duodenum  is  difliended  foon  after,
and  the  bile  regurgitates  into  the  liver-,  and  the  blood,  in  confequence  of  its
paflage  this  way,  being  ftop'd  up :  which  caufes  are  diftinguifh'd  from  this
circumftance,  that  by  a  little  rhubarb,  or  foap,  this  jaundice  is  gradually-
carried  off.

But  in  many  of  thofe,  that  are  born  with  this  diforder,  it  is  very  clear  that
tlie  milk  had  never  been  made  acid  in  the  (tomach :  and  in  refpeft  to  fifteen
children  of  my  own,  who  all  became  yellow  foon  after  birth,  and  fome  of
them  in  a  confiderable  degree,  the  diforder  was  naturally  carried  off  in  every
one  of  them  of  itfelf,  and  without  the  leaft  affiftance  of  art.

But  that,  in  all  thefe,  the  milk,  which  fome  had  fuck'd  from  their  mother,
and  others  from  different  nurfes,  had  grown  acid  is  fcarcely  to  be  fuppos'd  :
and  indeed  i«  other  infants  indifcriminately,  who  fuck  fo  different  a  milk,
and  have  fo  differently-conftituted  a  ftomach,  we  cannot  reafonably  fuppofe
this  to  happen.

Perhaps  fome  perfons  would  be  ready  to  believe,  that  this  new  aliment

fe)  Prax.  raed.  1.  i.  c.  46.  n.  1 1.


Letter  XLVIII. Article  6i,  767

carries  more  of  the  oily  particles  into  the  blood  than  the  liver  is  equal  to  the
fecretion  of  j  if  they  did  not  then  fay,  that  the  inteftinal  foeces  were  white,
which  is  a  very  clear  argument  that  the  bile  does  not  at  all  flow  into  the
inteftine  duodenum.

How  is  it  then  ?  If  an  effedt,  which  is  common  to  all,  mufl:  have  a  com-
mon caufe,  it  is  not  repugnant  to  probability ;  that  we  ought  to  have  our
eye  to  the  vena  umbilicalis,  which ;  whether  it  be  confider'd  as  cut  afunder,
tied  up  with  a  thread,  and  neceffarily  bringing  on  fome  contradtion  in  the
vena  portarum  into  which  it  is  continued  •,  or  as  depriv'd  of  the  blood  which
returns  from  the  placenta,  and  not  aflifting,  by  this  ufeful  additamentum,
the  other  part  which  is  carried  through  itfelf,  and  is  perhaps  thicken'd  from
the  new  kind  of  aliment ;  may,  in  either  or  both  ways,  retard  the  fecretion  of
bile  in  the  liver  -,  till  this  vifcus,  upon  the  ceafing  of  that  contradion,  be-
comes, by  degrees,  accuftom'd  to  its  new  mode  of  adtion,  and  is,  again  fit  for
the  feparation  of  the  bile.

However  thefe  things,  as  you  fee  plainly,  depend  upon  conje<5lure  alone.

61.  But  there  are  other  things  which  may  be  confirm'd  by  the  diffedrion  of
infants.  I  remember  to  have  i-ead,  among  the  remarks  made  by  Cowper,
in  his  Appendix  to  the  Anatomy  of  the  Human  Body,  that  they  in  whom  he
found  thepaflages  I  have  fpoken  of  above  (f);  that  of  the  tubulus  arteriofuSj,
and  of  the  foramen  ovale  in  particular;  to  be  (hut  up  too  early  in  life,  had
been  frequently  afflifted  with  a  great  number  of  dlforders,  fuch  as  inflamma-
tions of  the  head,  neck  and  lungs.

"Wherefore,  when  thefe  diforders  attack  new-born  infants  without  any  pre-
vious manifeft  caufe,  it  will  not  be  abfur'd  and  unreafonable  to  fufped:  that
too  hafty  occlufion.

And  as  in  this  cafe  he  recommends  a  diminution  of  the  blood  ;  fo  you  may,,
at  leaft,  recommend  the  giving  of  milk  more  fparingly,  and  prefcribe  fuch;
things  to  the  nurfe,  as  will  generate  a  more  thin  and  fluxile  milk.

For,  by  thefe  means,  the  blood ;  which  is,  in  its  whole  quantity,  carried
through  the  lungs,  and  rufhes  into  the  fuperior  branches  of  the  great  artery,,
in  fo  much  a  greater  quantity  in  proportion,  as  it  is  carried  down  in  lefs
quantity  into  the  defcending  trunk  thereof;  will  pafs  moreeafily,  and  will  do
lefs  hurt  to  the  lungs,  and  the  brain :  from  the  injury  of  which  perhaps,
as  being  at  that  tim.e  very  foft,  other  diforders,  befides  thefe  inflammations,,
arife  in  the  genus  nervofum  by  which  thofe  new-born  infants  are  frequently
and  fuddenly  defl:roy'd  ;  and  in  particular  thofe,  in  whom,  befides  thofe  pre-
mature occlufions,  there  is  already  a  more  copious  or  denfe  blood  from  the
uterus  ;  and  the  veflels  of  the  brain  are  even  much  more  infirm,  than  they,
generally  are.

And  as  fome  may  be  born  with  fuch  a  vitiated  ftrudure,  that  thofe  paflages
of  the  blood,  of  which  we  have  fpoken,  may  be  fhut  up  too  foon  ;  fo,  on  the
contrary,  it  is  reafonable  to  fuppofe  that  fome  are  born,  in  whom  there  is  an'
oppofite  diforder;  and  thofe  pafl"ages,  for  that  reafon,  are  not  only  never,
wholly  fhut  up ;  which  has  been  met  with  by  me  and  others  frequently  in.
the  foramen  ovale  ;  but  are  not  even  diminifh'd  v  and  this  you  may  fuppofa
faid  of  the  fame  foramen  o/ale  alio.

(fJ N..S9,.

A'ndi


768  Book  III. Of  Difeales  of  the  Belly.

And  if  fome  bodies  are,  perhaps,  fo  form'd  that  they  can  bear  thefe  '  -
conveniences  without  falling  into  difeafe,  it  is  not,  however,  improbable,  but
there  are  many  more  which  cannot.

To  this  fubjc-a  relates  a  letter  which  was  written  to  me  on  the  eighteenth
of  May,  in  the  year  1722,  by  the  celebrated  Jano  Planci.  For  he  inquir'd
of  me  whether  1  had  ever  found  the  foramen  ovale,  in  new-born  infants,  quite
unfurnilh'd  with  any  valve.

The  reafon  of  his  inquiry  was,  that,  in  an  infant  lately  differed,  both  he,
and  a  o-entleman  whom  I  have  before  fpoken  in  commendation  of;  v/ho  t'icn
liv'd  at  Rimini,  and  who  was  afterwards  firft  phyfician  to  the  pope;  I  mean
Anthony  Leprotti,  had  fought  after  this  valve  with  accuracy,  but  in  vain.

And  the  fummary  of  his  whole  obfervation,  as  far  as  I  have  collefted  it
from  thefe,  and  the  preceding  letters  of  Planci,  deferves  well  to  have  a  place
in  this  epiftle.

62.  An  infant,  who  had  not  been  born  more  than  fifteen  days,  was  carried
otF  from  the  ftate  of  the  living ;  but  by  what  kind  of  diforder  is  not  certain.

On  examinincr  the  body,  the  ftomach  was  found  full  of  good  milk  ;  and  this
vifcus,  and  all  the  others,  appear'd  to  be  found-,  except  that  the  heart,  and
the  vefTcls  which  are  about  it,  were  diflended  with  blood  in  a  furprizing  man- .
ner.

Thofe  parts  of  the  umbilical  veffels  that  are  in  the  belly,  and  the  tubulus
arteriofus,  were  open  :  and  the  foramen  ovale  was  not  only  open,  but  v/as
entirely  without  its  valve  ;  fo  that  not  the  leaft  traces,  or  remains,  of  it  ap-
pear'd, with  v/hatever  diligence  you  fought  after  it.

6:5.  Andiis  I  wrote  back'to  Planci,  that  this  appearance  v/as  entirely  pre-
ternatural, he  naturally  fell  into  that  way  of  thinking,  wliich  I  jufc  now  fpoke
of.  And  you  certainly  perceive,  that  where  that  part  which  the  blood  urges
on  the  left  fide ;  and  impells,  if  not  to  fhut  up  the  foramen  ovale  more  and
more,  at  leaft  to  cover  it  in  fome  meafure  ;  is  wanting,  that  certain  motion  of
the  blood,  which  is  requir'd  in  breathing  animals,  muft  be  perverted  in  the
principal  organ:  and  if  this  perverfion, -or  perturbation,  be  not  diminifh'd,
but  continue  to  be  ftill  the  fame^  the  motion  of  the  heart,  and  blood,  muft,
at  length,  be  quite  fuffocated.

64.  You  fee,  how  very  wide,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  an  almoft  unbeaten
track,  lies  open  to  inveftigate  the  difeafes  of  new-born  infants,  I  mean  by  an
attentive  and  accurate  obfervation  in  difieftion  after  death,  as  well  as  while
they  are  living,  if  the  foolifa  love  of  parents  did  not  withftand.

Yet  thefe  very  parents,  having  lofl  ail  their  infants,  one  after  another,  in
the  fame  manner,  at  length  offer  to  the  phyficians,  of  their  own  accord,
what  they  had  denied  before-,  in  order  to  try  if  it  be  pofiible  to  preferve  thofe
that  may  be  born  hereafter.

However,  they  frequently  light  on  thofe  who  are  either  unfkiil'd  in  ana-
tomy, or  defpifers  of  it-,  both  of  which  inftances  I  formerly  faw  in  one  and
the  lame  cafe.  They  who  difledled  the  new-born  infants,  reported  as  their
fatal  difeafe,  that  appearance  which  is,  in  them,  quite  natural-,  I  mean  the
dura  mater  adhering  very  clofely  to  the  cranium.  They  who  were  coniuked,
fhow'd  how  much  they  had  flighted  anatomy,  by  admitting  of  this report,

and


Letter  XLVIII. Article  65.  769

and  confideTing  that  very  adhefion  as  the  foundation  of  what  they  were  to
infwer.

Yet  if  a  diligent  ftudy  of  anatomy  brought  with  it  no  utility  befides  this ;

that  from  the  internal  conftitution  of  bodies,  which  are  in  a  natural  ftate,  we

mightlearn  what  thing?  are  natural  and  what  praeternatural,  in  inquiring  after

the  caufes  of  difeafes ;  it  certainly  ought  to  be  highly  efteem'd,  inftead  of

^  being  defpis'd.

But  the  bodies  of  tender  infants  have  many  peculiarities,  befides  thofc
,  -which  I  have  taken  notice  of  above  :  fo  that  whoever  would  wifh  to  enquire
into  their  latent  difeafes,  to  deteft  thofe  appearances  that  are  really  morbid,
and  compare  them  with  the  fymptoms  which  he  obferv'd  in  the  children  while
living  ;  and  after  that,  according  to  the  nature,  and  degree,  of  both,  bring
fome  alleviation  if  not  a  cure,  or,  if  it  is  impoffible  to  do  this,  at  leaft  to  make
a  prediftion,  and  confirm  it  by  an  explanation  agreeable  to  what  anatomy
may  teach  him,  ought  to  be  exercis'd  in  difieftions  of  thefe  bodies.

Of  a  prediftion  thus  explain'd  ;  not  to  digrefs  far  from  the  cranium  which
■we  have  already  mention'd  ;  there  is  an  example  in  a  fatal  fign,  which  is,  in
ether  refpefts,  not  unknown,  in  the  writings  of  Wepfer  (g).

For,  when  the  death  of  infants  is  at  hand,  I  have  not  only  feen  evident,
and  profound,  fulci,  about  the  lambdoidal  and  fagittal  futures  -,  but  alfo  a
fubfiding  little  pit  near  to  the  conjuntlion  of  the  coronary  and  fagittal  futures.

Why  fo  ?  Becaufe  the  brain  is  then  collapsM  into  itfelf-,  and  by  fubfiding
draws  inwards,  by  means  of  the  connections  of  the  dura  mater,  whatever  of  a
membranous  nature  ftill  remains  in  the  interftices  of  the  futures;  and  con-
fequently  produces  thofc  furrows,  and  this  pit,  or  cavity.  *

6^.  But  it  will  be  proper,  before  any  diligent  man  attempts  thefe  things  in
new-born  infants,  to  coiled  all  the  more  accurate  obfervations,  and  difleftions,
that  have  been  made  by  phyficians,  and  anatomiils,  upon  infants  more  ad-
vanc'd,  and  upon  children  ;  for  they  are  not  extant  even  in  the  Sepulchretum,
unlefs  in  a  fcatter'd  ftate  -,  and  out  of  thefe,  to  attend  principally  to  thofe
which  relate  to  the  ftrutlures  proper  to  that  age ;  or  to  the  remains  of  thofe
flruftures,  which  particularly  occur  in  new-born  infants,  and  are  fometimes
larger  than  is  commonly  fuppos'd.

Then  let  him  afterwards  add  the  obfervations  which  relate  to  thefe  new-
born infants,  as  many  as  ever  he  can  colle£t  of  himfelf,  or  obtain  from
others  fimilar  to  his  own  -,  and  let  him  mais.e  one  body  of  them  all  ;  which
Ihould  begin  v/ith  the  infants  that  are  the  moft  advanc'd,  and  end  with  thofe
that  are  lately  born  :  for  the  former  may,  fometimes,  by  their  imperfedt
words,  or  their  little  hands,  make  fome  difcoveries,  which  (if  you  remark
with  v/hat  other  fymptoms,  that  naturally  offer  themfelves,  they  are  join'd)
wil!  frequently  affift  your  conjedtures,  at  the  time  when  you  happen  to  find
thefe  other  fymptoms,  in  thofe  who  have  it  not  in  their  power  to  convey  any
meaning  by  their  tongues,  or  by  their  geftures.

I  confefs  I  had  a  great  defire  to  undertake  this  part  of  medical  knowledge-,
but  the  power  was  wanting. For  although  I  might  have  been  at  liberty  to

(g)  Exercit.  de  loc.  aff.  in  apopl.

YoL.  II.  . '  5  F  obferve


770  Book  III. Of  Difeafes  of  the  Belly.

obferve  fick  infants  with  fome  accuracy  when  living,  yet  it  would  not  Ijavc
been  in  my  power  to  have  diflefted  them  after  death.  And  the  former,  with-
out the  latter,  vvould  avail  little  to  the  purpofe.

You  will  therefore  expeft  thefe  things  from  others :  and  from  me  you  may
ftill  exped  other  letters,  in  relation  to  thofe  difeafes,  where  I  had  not
only  an  opportunity  of  obferving  in  the  living  fubjeds,  but  of  difleding
them  after  death. In  the  mean  while  farewell.
