The Theory of the Gene (Thomas Hunt Morgan, 1926)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan of the 1926 first edition (Yale) (https://archive.org/details/theoryofgene00morg). Thomas Hunt Morgan (1866-1945) - the chromosome theory of heredity, from the fly room.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

V 


uo 


YALE  UNIVERSITY 
MRS.  HEPSA  ELY  SILLIMAN  MEMORIAL  LECTURES 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


VOLUMES  PUBLISHED  BY  YALE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  ON 
THE  SILLIMAN  FOUNDATION 

Electricity  and  Matter.  By  Joseph  John  Thomson,  D.Sc,  LL.D.,  Ph.D., 
F.R.S.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College  and  Cavendish  Professor  of  Experimen- 
tal Physics,  Cambridge  University.   (Fourth  printing.) 

The  Integrative  Action  of  the  Nervous  System.  By  Charles  S.  Sher- 
rington, D.Sc,  M.D.,  Hon.  LL.D.  Tor.,  F.R.S.,  Holt  Professor  of  Physi- 
ology, University  of  Liverpool.   (Seventh  printing.) 

Experimental  and  Theoretical  Applications  of  Thermodynamics  to 
Chemistry.  By  Dr.  Walter  Nernst,  Professor  and  Director  of  the  In- 
stitute of  Physical  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Berlin. 

Radioactive  Transformations.  By  Ernest  Rutherford,  D.Sc,  LL.D., 
F.R.S.,  Macdonald  Professor  of  Physics,  McGill  University.  (Second 
printing.) 

Theories  of  Solutions.  By  Svante  Arrhenius,  Ph.D.,  Sc.D.,  M.D.,  Direc- 
tor of  the  Physico-Chemical  Department  of  the  Nobel  Institute,  Stock- 
holm, Sweden.   (Fourth  printing.) 

Irritability.  A  Physiological  Analysis  of  the  General  Effect  of  Stimuli  in 
Living  Substances.  By  Max  Verworn,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  Professor  at  Bonn 
Physiological  Institute.    (Second  printing.) 

Stellar  Motions.  With  Special  Reference  to  Motions  Determined  by  Means 
of  the  Spectrograph.  By  William  Wallace  Campbell,  Sc.D.,  LL.D., 
Director  of  the  Lick  Observatory,  University  of  California.  (Second  print- 
ing-) 

Problems  of  Genetics.  By  William  Bateson,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Director  of 
the  John  Innes  Horticultural  Institution,  Merton  Park,  Surrey,  England. 
(Second  printing.) 

The  Problem  of  Volcanism.  By  Joseph  Paxson  Iddings,  Ph.B.,  Sc.D. 
(Second  printing.) 

Problems  of  American  Geology.  By  William  North  Rice,  Frank  D. 
Adams,  Arthur  P.  Coleman,  Charles  D.  Walcott,  Waldemar  Lind- 
gren,  Frederick  Leslie  Ransome,  and  William  D.  Matthew.  (Second 
printing.) 

Organism  and  Environment  as  Illustrated  by  the  Physiology  of 
Breathing.  By  J.  S.  Haldane,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Hon.  LL.D.  Birm. 
and  Edin.,  Fellow  of  New  College,  Oxford;  Honorary  Professor,  Birming- 
ham University.   (Second  printing.) 

A  Century  of  Science  in  America.  With  Special  Reference  to  the  Ameri- 
can Journal  of  Science  1818-1918.  By  Edward  Salisbury  Dana,  Charles 
Schuchert,  Herbert  E.  Gregory,  Joseph  Barrell,  George  Otis  Smith, 
Richard  Swann  Lull,  Louis  V.  Pirsson,  William  E.  Ford,  R.  B.  Sos- 
man,  Horace  L.  Wells,  Harry  W.  Foote,  Leigh  Page,  Wesley  R.  Coe, 
and  George  L.  Goodale. 

A  Treatise  on  the  Transformation  of  the  Intestinal  Flora  with  Spe- 
cial Reference  to  the  Implantation  of  Bacillus  Acidophilus.  By 
Leo  F.  Rettger,  Professor  of  Bacteriology,  Yale  University,  and  Harry 
A.  Cheplin,  Seessel  Fellow  in  Bacteriology,  Yale  University. 

The  Evolution  of  Modern  Medicine.  By  Sir  William  Osler,  Bart.,  M.D., 
F.R.S.    (Third  printing.) 

Respiration.  By  J.  S.  Haldane,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Hon.  LL.D.  Birm. 
and  Edin.,  Fellow  of  New  College,  Oxford;  Honorary  Professor,  Birming- 
ham University. 

After  Life  in  Roman  Paganism.  By  Franz  Cumont.  (Second  printing.) 

The  Anatomy  and  Physiology  of  Capillaries.  By  August  Krogh,  Ph.D., 
LL.D.,  Professor  of  Zoo-physiology,  Copenhagen  University.  (Second 
printing.) 

Lectures  on  Cauchy's  Problem  in  Linear  Partial  Differential  Equa- 
tions. By  Jacques  Hadamard,  LL.D.,  Member  of  the  French  Academy 
of  Sciences ;  Foreign  Honorary  Member  of  the  American  Academy  of 
Arts  and  Sciences. 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE 


GENE 


BY 
THOMAS  HUNT  MORGAN 

Professor  of  Zoology  in  Columbia  University. 


NEW  HAVEN 
YALE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

LONDON    •    HUMPHREY    MILFORD    •    OXFORD    UNIVERSITY    PRESS 

MDCCCCXXVI 


COPYRIGHT,  1926,  BY  YALE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America. 


THE  SILLIMAN  FOUNDATION 

In  the  year  1883  a  legacy  of  eighty  thousand  dollars  was  left  to 
the  President  and  Fellows  of  Yale  College  in  the  city  of  New 
Haven,  to  be  held  in  trust,  as  a  gift  from  her  children,  in  memory 
of  their  beloved  and  honored  mother,  Mrs.  Hepsa  Ely  Silliman. 

On  this  foundation  Yale  College  was  requested  and  directed 
to  establish  an  annual  course  of  lectures  designed  to  illustrate 
the  presence  and  providence,  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God, 
as  manifested  in  the  natural  and  moral  world.  These  were  to  be 
designated  as  the  Mrs.  Hepsa  Ely  Silliman  Memorial  Lectures. 
It  was  the  belief  of  the  testator  that  any  orderly  presentation  of 
the  facts  of  nature  or  history  contributed  to  the  end  of  this 
foundation  more  effectively  than  any  attempt  to  emphasize  the 
elements  of  doctrine  or  of  creed ;  and  he  therefore  provided  that 
lectures  on  dogmatic  or  polemical  theology  should  be  excluded 
from  the  scope  of  this  foundation,  and  that  the  subjects  should 
be  selected  rather  from  the  domains  of  natural  science  and  his- 
tory, giving  special  prominence  to  astronomy,  chemistry,  geology 
and  anatomy. 

It  was  further  directed  that  each  annual  course  should  be  made 
the  basis  of  a  volume  to  form  part  of  a  series  constituting  a 
memorial  to  Mrs.  Silliman.  The  memorial  fund  came  into  the 
possession  of  the  Corporation  of  Yale  University  in  the  year 
1901;  and  the  present  work  constitutes  the  nineteenth  volume 
published  on  this  foundation. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

List  of  Illustrations  xi 

I.  The  Fundamental  Principles  of  Genetics  1 

Mendel's  Two  Laws  1 

Linkage  10 

Crossing-Over  14 
The  Simultaneous   Interchange  of"  Man v   Genes  in 

Crossing- Over  20 

The  Linear  Order  of  the  Genes  22 

The  Theory  of  the  Gene  25 

II.  Particulate  Theories  of  Heredity  26 

III.  The  Mechanism  of  Heredity  32 

The  Mechanism  of  Mendel's  Two  Laws  33 
The  Number  of  the  Linkage  Groups  and  the  Number 

of  the  Chromosome  Pairs  36 

The  Integrity  and  Continuity  of  the  Chromosomes  37 

Mechanism  of  Crossing-Over  39 

IV.  Chromosomes  and  Genes  45 

V.  The  Origin  of  Mutant  Characters  59 

VI.  Are   Mutant   Recessive    Genes    Produced   by 

Losses  of  Genes?  72 

Recessive  Characters  and  Absences  of  Genes  74 
The  Bearing  of  Reverse  Mutation  (Atavism)  on  the 

Interpretation  of  the  Mutation  Process  85 

The  Evidence  from  Multiple  Allelomorphs  92 

Conclusions  94 

VII.  The  Location  of  Genes  in  Related  Species  95 

VIII.  The  Tetraploids,  or  Fourfold  Type  105 
Tetraploidy  as  a  Means  of  Increasing  the  Number  of 

Genes  in  a  Species  130 


viii  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

IX.  Triploids  131 

X.  Haploids  139 

XI.  Polyploid  Series  150 

The  Polyploid  Wheats  150 

The  Polyploid  Roses  158 

Other  Polyploid  Series  165 

XII.  Heteroploids  172 

XIII.  Species  Crossing  and  Changes  in  Chromo- 

some Nnmber  191 

XIV.  Sex  and  Genes  199 

The  Insect  Type  (XX-XY)  199 

The  Avian  Type  (WZ-ZZ)  206 

Sex-Chromosomes  in  Dioecious  Flowering  Plants              212 

Sex-Determination  in  Mosses  214 

XV.  Other  Methods  of  Sex-Determination  Involv- 

ing the  Sex-Chromosomes  219 

The  Attachment  of  the  X-Chromosome  to  Auto- 
somes 219 
The  Y-Chromosome  222 
Degeneration  of  Male-Producing  Sperm  228 
The  Elimination  of  one  X-Chromosome  from  a  Dip- 
loid Egg  to  Produce  a  Male  228 
Sex-Determination  through  the  Accidental  Loss  of 

a  Chromosome  in  Spermatogenesis  231 

Diploid  Females  and  Haploid  Males  233 

XVI.  Intersexes  240 

Intersexes  from  Triploid  Drosophila  240 

Intersexes  in  the  Gypsy  Moth  243 

The  Free  Martin  247 

XVII.  Sex  Reversals  250 

Environmental  Changes  251 

Changes  of  Sex  Associated  with  Age  254 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  ix 

Sex  and  Sex  Reversal  in  Frogs  256 
Transformation  of  Bidder's  Organ  of  the  Male  Toad 

into  an  Ovary  266 

Sex  Reversal  in  Miastor  269 

Sex  Reversal  in  Birds  271 

The  Effect  of  Ovariotomy  in  Birds  272 

The  Sex  of  Parabiotic  Salamander  Twins  275 

Sex  Reversal  in  Hemp  276 

XVIII.  Stability  of  the  Gene  281 

XIX.  General  Conclusions  300 

The  Effects  Produced  by  a  Change  in  Chromosome 

Number  and  by  a  Change  in  a  Gene  300 

Is  the  Mutation  Process  Due  to  a  Degradation  of  the 

Gene  ?  307 

Are  Genes  of  the  Order  of  Organic  Molecules?  309 

Bibliography  311 

Index  337 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

FIG.  PAGE 

1.  Inheritance  of  tall  versus  short  peas 2 

2.  Hybrid  pea  back-crossed  to  recessive  parent 3 

3.  Inheritance  of  brown  versus  blue  eyes 4 

4.  Back-cross  of  hybrid  to  recessive  blue-eyed  individual   .      .  5 

5.  Inheritance  of  flower  color  of  four-o'clock  (Mirabilis)    .      .  6 

6.  Distribution  of  genes  in  cross  shown  in  figure  5  .  7 

7.  Inheritance  of  yellow  round  and  green  wrinkled  peas  .      .  8 

8.  Distribution  of  genes  for  three  pairs  of  characters  ...  9 

9.  Inheritance  of  two  linked  characters  in  sweet  peas  ...  11 

10.  Inheritance  of  four  linked  characters  in  Drosophila  ...  13 

11.  Inheritance  of  two  sex-linked  characters  in  Drosophila  .      .  15 

12.  Inheritance  of  the  same  characters  as  in  figure  11  in  recipro- 
cal combination 16 

13.  Inheritance  of  white  eyes  and  miniature  wings  of  Droso- 
phila (back-cross) 18 

14.  'Inheritance  of  white  eyes  and  forked  bristles  of  Drosophila  19 

15.  The  location  of  nine  sex-linked  recessive  genes   ....  21 

16.  Crossing-over  between  garnet  and  vermilion  in  the  series  of 
genes  shown  in  figure  15 21 

17.  Crossing-over  between  echinus  and  cross-veinless  in  the  series 

of  genes  shown  in  figure  15 21 

18.  Double  crossing-over 21 

19.  Chart  of  the  linked  genes  of  Drosophila 23 

20.  The  order  of  the  genes,  yellow,  white,  bifid,  of  Drosophila  .  24 

21.  Maturation  of  sperm-cell 33 

22.  Maturation  of  the  egg 34 

23.  Independent  assortment  of  X  and  a  pair  of  autosomes  .      .  35 

24.  Haploid  chromosome  groups  of  edible  pea,  sweet  pea,  and 
Indian  corn 37 

25.  Nuclei  of  daughter  cells  of  Ascaris 39 

26.  Conjugation  of  chromosomes  of  Batrachoseps 41 

27.  Twisted  chromosomes  of  Batrachoseps 42 

28.  Conjugation  of  chromosomes  of  a  planarian,  Dendrocoelum  43 

29.  Normal  and  haplo-IV  female  of  Drosophila 47 


xii  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

FIG.  PAGE 

30.  Three  mutant  types  of  chromosome-IV  group  of  Drosophila      48 

31.  Cross  between  haplo-IV  and  diploid  eyeless  fly  .      .      ...       49 

32.  Haplo-IV  and  triplo-IV  female  of  Drosophila     ....       50 

33.  Cross  between  triplo-IV  and  diploid  eyeless  Drosophila 
(upper  half  of  diagram).  Continuation  of  last  (lower  half  of 
diagram),  mating  of  heterozygous  triplo-IV  to  diploid  eye- 
less      51 

34.  Primary  non-disjunction.  XX-egg  fertilized  by  Y-sperm  .      .       53 

35.  Non-disjunction.  White-eyed  XXY  female  fertilized  by  red- 
eyed  XY  male 54 

36.  Superfemale  of  Drosophila.  (2n  +  3X) 56 

37.  Fertilization  of  egg  with  attached  X  (double  yellow  female) 

by  sperm  of  wild-type  male 57 

38.  Sex-linked  inheritance  of  the  mutant  type,  white  eyes  of 
Drosophila 60 

39.  Sex-linked  inheritance  of  a  light-colored  mutant  type  lacti- 
color  of  Abraxas 61 

40.  Head  of  mutant  type  of  Drosophila,  Lobe2  (eye)  ....  62 

41.  Mutant  type  of  Drosophila,  Curly  wings 63 

42.  Oenothera  Lamarckiana  and  0.  gigas 69 

43.  Combs  of  domestic  races  of  fowls 73 

44.  Mutant  type — Notch  wings — of  Drosophila 78 

45.  Inheritance  of  Notch  wings 79 

46.  Notch- deficiency;  duplication  of  not-vermilion;  duplication 

of  not-yellow 80 

47.  Fertilization  of  egg-cell  of  flowering  plant,  and  develop- 
ment of  endosperm 83 

48.  Triploid  condition  of  (a)  two  floury  genes  versus  one  flinty 
gene;   (a')  two  flinty  versus  one  floury  gene 84 

49.  Types  of  bar-eye  of  Drosophila 87 

50.  Diagram  of  bar  female  heterozygous  for  forked  and  fused, 

by  forked  bar  fused  male 88 

51.  Diagram  of  crossing-over  of  bar;  of  infra-bar;  of  bar-infra- 
bar     90 

52.  Diagram  of  crossing-over  of  bar-infra-bar  heterozygous  for 
forked  and  fused;  of  infra-bar-bar  heterozygous  for  forked 

and  fused 91 

53.  Cross  between  two  species  of  tobacco 96 

54.  Cross  between  two  species  of  snapdragon 97 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS  xiii 

PIG.  PAGE 

55.  Cross  between  a  mutant  type  of  one  species  of  snapdragon 

and  a  normal  type  of  another  species 97 

56.  Different  recombination  types  resulting  from  cross  of  two 
species  of  snapdragon   (figure  55) 98 

57.  Varieties  of  two  species  of  Helix,  and  hybrid  between  them  .  99 

58.  Drosophila  melanogaster  and  D.  simulans 100 

59.  Homologous  genes  of  Drosophila  melanogaster  and  D.  simu- 
lans   101 

60.  Chart  of  chromosomes  of  Drosophila  virilis 102 

61.  Chart  of  chromosomes  of  Drosophila  obscura 103 

62.  Chromosomes  of  Metapodius  with  three  m-chromosomes  and 
their  reduction 106 

63.  First  two  divisions  of  egg  of  Ascaris 108 

64.  Polar,    metaphase   group    of    chromosomes    of    diploid    and 
tetraploid  Artemia 109 

65.  Diploid  and  tetraploid  chromosome  group  of  Oenothera  .      .  110 

66.  Maturation  of  pollen  mother  cells  of  Oenothera   ....  Ill 

67.  Grafting  of  tomato  and  nightshade,  and  a  resulting  chimaera  113 

68.  Diploid  and  tetraploid  nightshade 114 

69.  Seedlings,  flowers,  and  cells  of  diploid  and  tetraploid  night- 
shade         115 

70.  Haploid  and  diploid  cells  of  normal  nightshade;  diploid  and 
tetraploid  cells  of  tetraploid 116 

71.  Same  of  tomato 117 

72.  Normal  and  tetraploid  Datura 118 

73.  Haploid,  diploid,  triploid,  and  tetraploid  Datura  ....  119 

74.  Diploid  and  tetraploid  chromosome  groups  (second  matura- 
tion division)  of  Datura 120 

75.  Methods  of  conjugation  of  chromosomes  of  diploid,  triploid, 

and  tetraploid  Datura 121 

76.  Conjugation  of  chromosomes  of  tetraploid  Datura     .      .      .  122 

77.  Chromosome  groups  of  Euchlaena,  annual  and  perennial,  of 
Indian  corn,  and  of  hybrid 123 

78.  Diagram  of  gametophyte  and  sporophyte  generation  of  dioe- 
cious moss 125 

79.  Diagram  of  formation  of  2n  gametophyte  from  regeneration 
of  2n  sporophyte,  and  4n  gametophyte  by  regeneration  from 

4n  sporophyte 127 

80.  Triploid  chromosome-group  of  hyacinth 132 

81.  Maturation  division  of  diploid  and  triploid  Datura  .      .      .  133 


xiv  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

FIG.  PAGE 

82.  Diploid  and  triploid  Drosophila 135 

83.  Constriction  of  egg  of   Triton   isolating  one  half   with   a 
single  sperm 140 

84.  Haploid  plant  of  Datura 143 

85.  Diagram  of  two  maturation  divisions  of  egg  of  bee,  and  fer- 
tilization of  egg  by  sperm 144 

86.  Two  maturation  stages  of  the  germ-cell  of  the  honey  bee     .  146 

87.  Parthenogenetic  female,  sexual  female,  and  male,  of  Hyda- 
tina 147 

88.  Chromosomes  of  diploid,  tetraploid,  and  hexaploid  wheats  .  151 

89.  Normal  maturation  divisions  of  Einkorn,  Emmer,  and  Vul- 
gare  wheats 153 

90.  Maturation  divisions  of  hybrid  between  Emmer  and  Vulgare 
wheats 154 

91.  Same  as  last,  illustrating  a  somewhat  different  account  of 
process 155 

92.  Multiple  chromosome  groups  of  roses 159 

93.  Maturation  division  of  pollen  cells  of  a  hybrid  rose  .      .      .  161 

94.  Maturation  division  of  egg-cell  of  a  hybrid  rose  ....  162 

95.  Five  types  of  hybrid  canina  roses 164 

96.  Maturation  of  pollen  of  Hieracium 166 

97.  Chromosomes  of  chrysanthemums 167 

98.  Nuclear  sizes  of  varieties  of  chrysanthemums 168 

99.  Chromosomes  of  chrysanthemums 168 

100.  Oenothera  lata,  heterosomic  type 173 

101.  Mutant  types  of  seed  capsules  of  Datura 178 

102.  Normal  and  heterosomic  (2n  +  1  and  2n  +  2)  types  of  seed 
capsules  of  Datura 179 

103.  Tetraploid  and  heterosomic  tetraploid  types  of  Datura  .      .  183 

104.  Union  of  chromosomes  in  Primary  and  Secondary  types  of 
Datura 184 

105.  Diagram  of  hypothetical  reversal  of  conjugating  chromo- 
somes         185 

106.  Conjugation   of   chromosomes   of    Primary   and    Secondary 
heterosomic  types  of  Datura 186 

107.  Imaginary  relation  of  mutant  types  to  specific  chromosomes 

in  Oenothera 188 

108.  Diploid  and  haploid  chromosome  groups  of  Drosera  .      .      .  191 

109.  Chromosome  groups  of  Crepis  setosa  and  C.  biennis  and  that 

of  hybrid 195 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS  xv 

FIG.  PAGE 

110.  Chromosome  groups  of  perennial  and  annual  teosinte     .      .  196 

111.  Chromosome  groups  of  two  species  of  poppies  and  that  of 
hybrid 197 

112.  Male  and  female  chromosome  groups  of  Protenor     .      .      .  200 

113.  Male  and  female  chromosome  groups  of  Lygaeus  ....  200 

114.  Diagram  of  XX-XY  type  of  sex  determination  ....  201 

115.  Sex-linked  inheritance  of  white  eyes  of  Drosophila  .      .      .  202 

116.  Chromosome  groups  in  man 203 

117.  Separation  of  X-  and  Y-chromosomes  in  spermatogenesis  in 
man 204 

118.  Diagram  of  WZ-ZZ  type  of  sex-determination       ....  205 

119.  Male  and  female  chromosome  groups  in  fowl 206 

120.  Sex-linked  inheritance  in  poultry 207 

121.  Sex-linked  inheritance  in  a  moth,  Abraxas 208 

122.  Chromosomes  of  egg  of  moth,  Fumea 209 

123.  Sex-determination  in  dioecious  plants 213 

124.  Female   and   male   prothallia   of   liverwort,   with  respective 
haploid  chromosome  groups 215 

125.  Method  of  combining  male-  and  female-determining  groups 

of  mosses 217 

126.  Separation  of  X-chromosome  from  autosomes  in  Ascaris     .  219 

127.  Diagram  of  sex  determination  when  the  X-chromosomes  are 
united  to  autosomes 220 

128.  Diagram  of   paternal   inheritance   in   a   fish,   Lebistes,   with 
crossing-over  between  X  and  Y 223 

129.  Diagram  of  inheritance  of  white  versus  red  body-color  of  fish  224 

130.  Diagram  of  second  generation  from  last 225 

131.  Diagram  of  inheritance  of  white  and  red  body-color  of  fish 
with  crossing-over  between  X  and  Y 226 

132.  Diagram  of  theoretical  crossing-over  between  autosomes  to 
which  the  X-chromosomes  are  attached 227 

133.  Two  maturation  divisions  of  bearberry  aphid 229 

134.  Polar  spindle  of  male-producing  egg,  and  polar  spindle  of 
female-producing  egg  of  Phylloxera 230 

135.  Two  maturation  divisions  of  sperm-cells  of  Rhabditis   .      .  231 

136.  Two  maturation  divisions    (polar  body  formation)    of   egg 

of  Rhabditis 232 

137.  Parthenogenetic  female,  male-egg-producing  female,   sexual 
egg-producing  female,  and  male  of  Brachionus     ....  234 


xvi  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

FIG.  PAGE 

138.  Sex  formulae  of  diploid,  triploid,  tetraploid  types  of  Droso- 
phila 241 

139.  Superfemale  and  supermale  of  Drosophila 242 

140.  Normal  male  and  female  and  two  mosaics  of  gypsy  moth  .  244 

141.  Union  of  chorions  of  two  foetal  calves,  one  of  which  becomes 

a  free-martin 247 

142.  Normal  male,  normal  female,  and  parasitized  male  of  Inar- 
chus 251 

143.  Larva  of  Perla  and  ovotestis  of  same 256 

144.  Chromosome   groups   of   spermatogonia   and   oogonia,   and 
diploid  male  egg  of  Perla 257 

145.  Chromosome  groups  of  frog 261 

146.  Hermaphroditic  condition  in  frog 264 

147.  Bidder's  organs  of  toad 266 

148.  Transformation  of  Bidder's   organs,   after  castration,   into 
ovaries 267 

149.  Female  and  male  hemp  plants 277 

150.  Four  pure  lines  and  general  population  of  Princess  bean      .  284 

151.  Types  of  hooded  rat 286 

152.  Normal  and  mutant  types  of  abnormal  abdomen  of  Droso- 
phila          291 

153.  Distribution   of   pigment   cells   in   different   color  types   of 
pupae  of  cabbage  butterfly 293 

154.  Diagram  of  percentages  of  color  types  of  pupae  of  cabbage 
butterfly  after  exposure  to  different  colored  lights       .      .      .  295 

155.  Guinea  pigs  with  alcoholic  ancestry 296 

156.  Young  mice  with  hemorrhagic  areas  after  exposure  of  mother 

to  radium 298 


CHAPTER  I 

THE  FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS 

THE  modern  theory  of  heredity  is  derived  from 
numerical  data  obtained  by  crossing  two  individ- 
uals that  differ  in  one  or  more  characters.  The 
theory  is  primarily  concerned  with  the  distribution  of 
units  between  successive  generations  of  individuals.  In 
the  same  sense  in  which  the  chemist  postulates  invisible 
atoms  and  the  physicist  electrons,  the  student  of  heredity 
appeals  to  invisible  elements  called  genes.  The  essential 
point  in  this  comparison  is  that  both  the  chemist  and  the 
student  of  heredity — the  sreneticist — have  reached  their 
conclusion  from  numerical  and  quantitative  data.  The 
theories  justify  themselves  in  so  far  as  they  permit 
numerical  and  quantitative  prediction  of  a  specific  kind. 
In  this  essential  respect  the  theory  of  the  gene  differs 
from  earlier  biological  theories  that  have  also  postulated 
invisible  units  to  which  were  arbitrarily  assigned  any 
desired  properties.  The  theory  of  the  gene  reverses  this 
order  and  derives  the  properties  of  the  genes,  so  far  as  it 
assigns  properties  to  them,  from  the  numerical  data 
alone. 

Mendel's  Two  Laws. 

We  owe  to  Greffor  Mendel  the  discovery  of  two  of  the 
fundamental  laws  of  heredity  on  which  the  modern  theory 
of  heredity  is  based.  Later  work,  clone  by  others  during 
the  present  century,  has  carried  us  further  in  the  same 
direction  and  made  possible  the  elaboration  of  the  theory 
on  a  much  broader  basis.  Mendel's  discovery  may  be 
illustrated  by  a  few  familiar  examples. 


2  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

He  crossed  a  tall  variety  of  edible  pea  to  a  short  vari- 
ety. The  offspring,  or  hybrids,  Fx,  were  all  tall  (Fig.  1). 
These  were  allowed  to  self-fertilize.  Their  offspring  were 


TALL 


SHORT 


F1   TALL  (SHORT) 


Ft  Sgg. 

3  TALL 

SHORT 

Pollen 

TALL 

TALL 
TALL 

SHORT 
TALL 

SHORT 

TALL 
SHORT 

SHORT 
SHORT 

/" 


^. 


1  TALL 


2 


TALL  (SHORT)     1  SHORT 


Fig.  1. 

Tall  peas  crossed  to  short  peas  giving  in  the  first  generation  (Fa), 
tall  peas  that  are  "hybrid,"  viz.,  tall  (short).  The  recombination 
of  the  gametes  (eggs  and  pollen  grains)  are  shown  in  the  square. 
Three  tall  to  one  short  peas  result  in  the  next  or  second  (F2) 
generation. 


tall  and  short  in  the  ratio  of  three  tails  to  one  short.  If 
the  tall  variety  contains  in  its  germ-cells  something  that 
makes  the  plants  tall,  and  if  the  short  variety  carries 
something  in  its  germ-cells  that  makes  the  plants  short, 
the  hybrid  contains  both ;  and  since  the  hybrid  is  tall  it  is 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS  3 

evident  that  when  both  are  brought  together  the  tall 
dominates  the  short,  or,  conversely,  short  is  recessive  to 
tall. 

Mendel  pointed  out  that  the  3  to  1  ratio  that  appears 
in  the  second  generation  can  be  explained  by  means 
of  a  very  simple  hypothesis.  If  the  element  for  tall 
and  the  one  for  short  (that  are  both  present  in  the  hy- 
brid) separate  in  the  hybrid  when  the  eggs  and  pollen 


E^s  short      sliort 


fj   Poll  en 

tall 

short 
tall 

sliort 
tall 

short 

short 
short 

short 
short 

Fig.  2. 

A  "back-cross"  of  Fj  hybrid,  tall   (short)   peas  to  the  recessive 

type  (short),  giving  equal  numbers  of  tall  and  short  offspring. 


grains  come  to  maturity,  half  the  eggs  will  contain  the 
tall  and  half  the  short  element  (Fig.  1).  Similarly  for  the 
pollen  grains.  Chance  fertilization  of  any  egg  by  any 
pollen  grain  will  give  on  the  average  three  tails  to  one 
short ;  for,  when  tall  meets  tall  a  tall  plant  is  produced ; 
when  tall  meets  sliort  a  tall  plant  results;  when  short 
meets  tall,  a  tall  plant  is  produced ;  and  when  short  meets 
short,  a  short  plant  arises. 

Mendel  put  this  hypothesis  to  a  simple  test.  The  hybrid 
was  back-crossed  to  the  recessive  type.  If  the  germ-cells 
of  the  hybrid  are  of  two  kinds,  tall  and  short,  there  should 


4  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

be  two  kinds  of  offspring,  tall  and  short  in  equal  numbers 
(Fig.  2).  The  results  confirm  the  expectation. 

The  same  relation  shown  by  the  tall  and  the  short  peas 
can  be  illustrated  by  the  inheritance  of  eye  color  in  man. 
Blue  eyes  mated  to  blue,  give  only  blues;  brown  eyes 


F 


brbl 


_yv_ 


Germ  cells  of  Y 

Fi£  and  6  bf>       bl 


d 


Fig.  3. 
Inheritance  of  brown  eyes  (brbr)  versus  blue  (blbl)  eyes  in  man. 


bred  to  brown  give  only  brown,  provided  the  browns 
have  had  only  a  brown  ancestry.  If  a  blue  mates  with  a 
pure  brown,  the  children  are  brown  (Fig.  3).  If  two  indi- 
viduals that  have  arisen  from  such  parentage  marry, 
their  children  will  be  brown-  and  blue-eyed  in  the  ratio 
of  3  to  1. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS  5 

If  a  hybrid  brown-eyed  individual  (Fx  brown-blue) 
marries  a  blue-eyed  individual,  half  the  children  will  have 
brown,  and  half  will  have  blue  eyes  (Fig.  4). 

There  are  other  crosses  that  give,  perhaps,  a  more 
striking  illustration  of  Mendel's  first  law.  For  instance, 
when  a  red  and  a  white-flowered  four-o'clock  are  crossed, 
the  hybrid  has   pink  flowers    (Fig.   5).   If  these  pink- 


os 


bl 


ue 


bi 


ue 


Sper  m 

brown 

blue 
brown 

blue 
brown 

blue 

blue 
blue 

blue 
blue 

Fig.  4. 

A  "back-cross"  of  a  brown-eyed,  Flf  individual,  heterozygous  for 
blue  eyes,  to  the  recessive  type,  blue  eyes,  giving  equal  numbers 
brown-eyed  and  blue-eyed  offspring. 


flowered  hybrid  plants  self-fertilize,  some  of  their  off- 
spring (F2)  are  red  like  one  grandparent,  some  of  them 
pink  like  the  hybrid,  and  others  white  like  the  other 
grandparent,  in  the  ratio  of  1:2:1.  Here  one  original 
parental  color  is  restored  when  red  germ-cell  meets  red, 
the  other  color  is  restored  when  white  meets  white,  and 
the  hybrid  combinations  appear  as  often  as  red  meets 
white,  or  white  meets  red.  All  the  colored  flowered  plants 
in  the  second  generation  taken  together  are  to  the  white- 
flowered  plants  as  3 : 1. 


6 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


In  passing  it  is  important  to  note  two  facts.  The  red 
and  the  white  F,  individuals  are  expected  to  breed  true, 
because  they  contain  the  elements  for  red,  or  for  white, 


Pi 


Fig.  5. 
A  cross  between   a   red-flowered   four-o'clock    (Mirabilis   Jalapa) 
and  a  white-flowered  four-o'clock,  giving  pink  in  F1;  and  one  red, 
two  pink,  one  white  in  F2. 


twice  present  (Fig.  6),  but  the  pink  F2  individuals  should 
not  breed  true,  since  they  are  like  the  first  hybrid  genera- 
tion, and  contain  one  red  and  one  white  element  (Fig.  6). 
All  this  turns  out  to  be  true  when  these  plants  are  tested. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS  7 

So  far  the  results  tell  us  no  more  than  that  something 
derived  from  one  parent  separates,  in  the  germ-cells  of 
the  hybrid,  from  something  brought  in  by  the  other  par- 


Eggs 


o 


Pollen     #><6 


F, 


F« 


o 
o 


o 
o 


Fig.  6. 
Diagram  to  illustrate   the  history  of  the  germ-cells   in  the  cross 
between   red   and   white   four-o'clock    (Fig.   5).   The  small  black 
circles  stand  for  red-producing  genes  and  the  small  white  circles 
for  white-producing  genes. 


ent.  The  results  might  be  interpreted,  on  this  evidence 
alone,  to  mean  that  red-flowered  and  white-flowered 
plants  behave  as  wholes  or  entities  in  inheritance. 

Another  experiment,  however,  throws  further  light  on 
this  question.  Mendel  crossed  peas  whose  seeds  were 
yellow  and  round  with  peas  whose  seeds  were  green  and 
wrinkled.  Other  crosses  had  shown  that  yellow  and  green 


8  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

constitute  a  pair  of  contrasted  characters  giving  a  3  to  1 
ratio  in  the  second  generation,  and  that  round  and  wrin- 
kled constitute  another  pair. 


Yellow  Round 


green  wrinkled 


Yellow  (green)    Round(wrinkled) 


Round 
wrinkled 


or 


© 


wrinkled 
Round 


Fig.  7. 


Diagram  to  illustrate  the  inheritance  of  two  pairs  of  Mendelian 
characters,  viz.,  yellow-round  and  green-wrinkled  peas.  In  the 
lower  part  of  the  diagram  the  four  classes  of  F2  peas  are  shown, 
viz.,  the  two  original  classes,  yellow-round  and  green-wrinkled, 
and  the  two  recombination  classes,  yellow-wrinkled  and  green- 
round. 


The  offspring  were  yellow  and  round  (Fig.  7).  When 
selfed,  they  produced  four  kinds  of  individuals,  yellow 
round,  yellow  wrinkled,  green  round,  and  green  wrinkled 
in  the  ratio  of  9 :  3 :  3 : 1. 

Mendel  pointed  out  that  the  numerical  results  found 
here  can  be  explained,  if  the  separation  of  the  elements 
for  yellow  and  for  green  is  independent  of  that  for  round 
and  wrinkled.  This  would  give  four  kinds  of  germ-cells 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS  9 

in  the  hybrid,  yellow  round,  yellow  wrinkled,  green  round, 
and  green  wrinkled  (Fig.  8). 

If  the  fertilization  of  the  four  kinds  of  ovules  by  the 
four  kinds  of  pollen  grains  is  at  random,  there  will  be 


r 


_s^- 


GW 


Gw 


^N 


gW  gW1 


\jW 


f 


GV 


6 


GW 


W 


V 


gw 


I    GW  J 


V    GW  J 


Fig.  8. 
Diagram  illustrating  the  sixteen  F2  recombinations   (from  yellow- 
round  and  green-wrinkled  peas)  that  result  when  the  four  kinds  of 
eggs  and  the  four  kinds  of  pollen  grains  of  the  T?i  hybrid  come 
together. 

sixteen  combinations  possible.  Eemembering  that  yellow 
dominates  green,  and  that  round  dominates  wrinkled, 
these  sixteen  combinations  will  fall  into  four  classes,  that 
are  in  the  ratios  of  9 :  3 :  3 : 1. 

The  results  of  this  experiment  show  that  it  can  no 
longer  be  assumed  that  the  whole  parental  germ-materials 


10  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

are  separated  in  the  hybrid;  for  yellow  and  round  that 
went  in  together  have,  in  some  cases,  come  out  separated. 
Similarly  for  green  and  wrinkled. 

Mendel  also  showed  that  when  three,  and  even  four, 
pairs  of  characters  enter  a  cross  their  elements  are  inde- 
pendently assorted  in  the  germ-cells  of  the  hybrid. 

It  might,  then,  have  seemed  justifiable  to  extend  this 
conclusion  to  as  many  pairs  of  characters  as  enter  any 
particular  cross.  This  would  mean  that  there  are  as  many 
independent  pairs  of  elements  in  the  germinal  material 
as  there  are  possible  characters.  Subsequent  work  has 
shown,  however,  that  Mendel 's  second  law  of  independent 
assortment  has  a  more  restricted  application,  since  many 
pairs  of  elements  do  not  assort  freely,  but  certain  ele- 
ments that  enter  together  show  a  tendency  to  remain 
together  in  succeeding  generations.  This  is  called  linkage. 

Linkage. 

Mendel's  paper  was  recovered  in  1900.  Four  years 
later  Bateson  and  Punnett  reported  observations  that 
did  not  give  the  numerical  results  expected  for  two  inde- 
pendent pairs  of  characters.  For  instance,  when  a  sweet 
pea  having  purple  flower-color  and  long  pollen  grains  is 
crossed  to  one  with  red  flowers  and  round  pollen  grains, 
the  two  types  that  go  in  together  come  out  together  more 
frequently  than  expected  for  independent  assortment  of 
purple-red  and  round -long  (Fig.  9).  They  spoke  of  these 
results  as  due  to  repulsion  between  the  combinations 
purple  and  long  and  red  and  round,  that  went^f  rom  oppo- 
site parents.  Today  these  relations  are  called  linkage.  By 
linkage  we  mean  that  when  certain  characters  enter  a 
cross  together,  they  tend  to  remain  together  in  later 
generations,  or,  stated  in  a  negative  way,  certain  pairs 
of  characters  do  not  assort  at  random. 

It  would  seem,  then,  so  far  as  linkage  holds,  that  there 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS 


11 


are  limits  to  the  subdivision  of  the  germinal  material. 
For  example  in  the  vinegar  fly,  Drosophila  melanogaster, 
there  are  known  about  400  new  mutant  types  that  fall 
into  only  four  linkage  groups. 


583 


%% 


Fig.  9. 


Cross  between  a  sweet  pea  with  purple  flowers  and  long  pollen 
grains  and  one  with  white  flowers  and  round  pollen  grains.  In  the 
lower  line  the  four  classes  of  F2  individuals  appeared  in  the  pro- 
portions given. 


One  of  these  groups  of  characters  of  Drosophila  is  said 
to  be  sex-linked,  because  in  inheritance  the  characters 
show  certain  relations  to  sex.  There  are  about  150  of  these 
sex-linked  mutant  characters.  Several  of  them  are  modifi- 
cations of  the  color  of  the  eye,  others  relate  to  its  shape 


12  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

or  its  size,  or  to  the  regularity  of  the  distribution  of  its 
facets.  Other  characters  involve  the  body  color;  others 
the  shape  of  the  wings,  or  the  distribution  of  its  veins ; 
others  the  spines  and  hairs  that  cover  the  body. 

A  second  group  of  about  120  linked  characters  includes 
changes  in  all  parts  of  the  body.  None  of  the  effects  are 
identical  with  those  of  the  first  group. 

A  third  group  of  about  130  characters  also  involves  all 
parts  of  the  body.  None  of  these  characters  are  the  same 
as  those  of  the  other  two  groups. 

There  is  a  small  fourth  group  of  only  three  characters : 
one  involves  the  size  of  the  eyes,  leading  in  extreme  cases 
to  their  total  absence ;  one  involves  the  mode  of  carriage 
of  the  wings;  and  the  third  relates  to  the  reduction  in 
size  of  the  hairs. 

The  method  of  inheritance  of  linked  characters  is  given 
in  the  following  example.  A  male  Drosophila  with  four 
linked  characters  (belonging  to  the  second  group),  black 
body  color,  purple  eyes,  vestigial  wings,  and  a  speck  at 
the  base  of  the  wings  (Fig.  10),  is  crossed  to  a  wild  type 
female  with  the  corresponding  normal  characters,  that 
may  be  called  gray  body  color,  red  eyes,  long  wings,  and 
absence  of  speck.  The  offspring  are  wild  type.  If  one  of 
the  sons1  is  now  crossed  to  a  stock  female  having  the  four 
recessive  characters  (black,  purple,  vestigial,  speck),  the 
offspring  are  of  two  kinds  only,  half  are  like  one  grand- 
parent with  the  four  recessive  characters,  and  the  other 
half  are  wild  type  like  the  other  grandparent. 

Two  sets  of  contrasted  (or  allelomorphic)  linked 
genes  went  into  this  cross.  When  the  germ-cells  in  the 
male  hybrid  matured,  one  of  these  sets  of  linked  genes 
went  into  half  of  the  sperm-cells  and  the  corresponding 
allelomorphic  set  into  the  wild  type  half  of  the  sperm- 

i  It  is  necessary  to  make  this  reservation  as  to  the  male  Drosophila,  be- 
cause in  the  female  these  same  characters  are  not  completely  linked. 


Fig.  10. 

The  inheritance  of  four  linked,  recessive  characters,  vis.,  black 
body  color,  purple  eyes,  vestigial  wings,  and  speck,  versus  their 
normal  allelomorphs  of  the  wild  type  fly.  The  Fx  male  is  "back- 
crossed"  to  a  female  of  the  multiple  recessive  stock,  giving  in 
the  second  generation  (shown  below)  only  the  two  grand  parental 
combinations. 


14  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

cells.  This  was  revealed,  as  described  above,  by  crossing 
the  hybrid  (FJ  male  to  a  female  pure  for  the  four  reces- 
sive genes.  All  of  her  mature  eggs  contain  one  set  of  four 
recessive  genes.  Anv  egg  fertilized  by  a  sperm  with  one 
set  of  the  dominant  wild  type  genes  should  give  a  wild 
tvpe  flv.  Anv  egg  fertilized  by  a  sperm  with  the  four  re- 
cessive genes  (which  are  the  same  as  those  in  the  female 
here  used)  should  give  a  black,  purple,  vestigial,  speck 
flv.  These  are  two  kinds  of  individuals  obtained. 

Crossing-Over. 

The  members  of  a  linked  group  may  not  always  be  com- 
pletely linked  as  in  the  case  just  given.  In  fact,  in  the  Fx 
female  from  the  same  cross,  some  of  the  recessive  charac- 
ters of  one  series  may  be  interchanged  for  wild  type 
characters  from  the  other  series,  but  even  then,  since  they 
remain  united  more  often  than  thev  interchange,  thev  are 
still  said  to  be  linked  together.  This  interchange  is  called 
crossing-over,  which  means  that,  between  two  corre- 
sponding linked  series,  there  may  take  place  an  orderly 
interchange  involving  great  numbers  of  genes.  Since  an 
understanding  of  this  process  is  essential  to  what  fol- 
lows, a  few  examples  of  crossing-over  may  be  given. 

When  a  male  Drosophila  with  the  two  recessive  mutant 
characters,  yellow  wings  and  white  eyes,  is  mated  to  a 
female  with  the  wild  type  characters,  gray  wings  and  red 
eyes,  the  daughters  and  sons  have  gray  wings  and  red 
eyes  (Fig.  11 ).  If  one  of  the  daughters  is  mated  to  a  male 
with  the  two  recessive  characters,  yellow  wings  and  white 
eyes,  there  are  four  kinds  of  offspring.  Two  kinds  are 
like  the  grandparents,  that  is,  they  have  yellow  wings  and 
white  eyes,  or  gray  wings  and  red  eyes.  Together  they 
constitute  90  per  cent  of  the  offspring.  The  characters 
that  went  in  together  have  come  out  together  in  a  much 
higher  perc<-nta^e  than  expected  from  Mendel's  second 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS 


15 


law,  vis.,  the  law  of  free  assortment.  In  addition  to  the 
two  classes,  there  are  two  other  kinds  of  flies  in  the  second 
generation  (Fig.  11).  one  with  yellow  wings  and  red 
eves,  and  the  other  with  gray  wings  and  white  eyes. 
Together  thev  constitute  1  per  cent  of  this  generation. 


ftfe& 


99<*/° 


1*1 


Fig.  11. 
The  inheritance  of  two  recessive  sex-linked  characters,  vie.,  white 
eyes  and  yellow  wings  and  their  ' '  normal ' '   allelomorphs,   via., 

red  eyes  and  gray  wings. 


16 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


They  are  the  crossovers,  and  represent  interchanges  be- 
tween the  two  linkage  groups. 

A  similar  experiment  can  be  made  in  which  the  same 
characters  as  before  are  differently  combined.  If  a  male 
Drosophila  with  yellow  wings  and  red  eyes  is  mated  to  a 


Pi 


Fig.  12. 

The  inheritance  of  the  same  two  sex-linked  characters  of  Fig.  11, 
but  in  reciprocal  combinations,  vis.,  red  eyes  and  yellow  wings,  and 
white  eyes  and  gray  wings. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS  17 

female  with  gray  wings  and  white  eyes  the  daughters 
have  gray  wings  and  red  eyes  (Fig.  12).  If  one  of  the 
daughters  is  mated  to  a  male  with  the  two  recessive 
mutant  characters,  yellow  wings  and  white  eyes,  there 
are  four  kinds  of  flies  produced.  Two  of  these  are  like  the 
two  grandparents,  and  constitute  99  per  cent  of  the  out- 
put. Two  are  new  combinations,  or  crossovers,  one  with 
yellow  wings  and  white  eyes  and  the  other  with  gray 
wings  and  red  eyes.  Together  they  make  up  1  per  cent  of 
the  second  generation. 

These  results  show  that  the  same  amount  of  crossing- 
over  takes  place  irrespective  of  the  way  in  which  the 
combinations  of  the  same  characters  enter  the  cross.  If 
the  two  recessives  enter  together,  they  tend  to  hold  to- 
gether. This  relation  was  called  coupling  by  Bateson  and 
Punnett.  If  one  of  the  recessives  enters  from  one  parent 
and  the  other  recessive  from  the  other  parent,  they  tend 
to  come  out  separately  (each  in  combination  with  the 
dominant  that  went  in  with  it).  This  relation  was  called 
repulsion.  It  is  clear,  however,  from  the  two  crosses  that 
have  just  been  given,  that  these  relations  are  not  two 
phenomena,  but  expressions  of  the  same  one,  namely,  that 
the  two  linked  characters  that  enter  a  cross,  quite  irre- 
spective of  their  dominance  or  recessiveness,  tend  to  hold 
together. 

Other  characters  give  different  percentages  of  cross- 
ing-over. For  example,  when  a  male  Drosophila  with  the 
two  mutant  characters,  white  eyes  and  miniature  wings 
(Fig.  13),  is  mated  to  a  wild  type  fly  with  red  eyes  and 
long  wings  the  offspring  have  long  wings  and  red  eyes. 
If  one  of  the  daughters  is  mated  to  a  male  with  white 
eyes  and  miniature  wings  the  offspring  are  of  four  kinds. 
The  two  grandparental  types  constitute  67  per  cent  and 
the  two  cross-over  types  33  per  cent  of  this  generation. 

A  still  higher  percentage  of  crossing-over  is  given  in 


18 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


the  following  experiment.  A  male  with  white  eyes  and 
forked  bristles  is  mated  to  a  wild  type  female  (Fig.  14). 
The  offspring  have  red  eyes  and  straight  bristles.  If  one 
of  the  daughters  is  mated  to  a  male  with  white  eyes  and 
forked  bristles,  there  are  four  kinds  of  individuals  pro- 


r 


J^ 


67  o/o  33  <jo 

Fig.  13. 
The    inheritance    of    two    sex-linked    characters,    white    eyes    and 
miniature  wings,  and  red  eyes  and  long  wings. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS 


19 


duced.  The  grandparental  types  constitute  60  per  cent 
and  the  crossovers  40  per  cent  of  this  second  generation. 
A  study  of  crossing-over  has  shown  that  all  possible 
percentages  of  crossing-over  occur,  up  to  nearly  50  per 
cent.  If  exactly  50  per  cent  of  crossing-over  took  place, 


/^ 


^\_ 


-yr 


60*jo  40«jo 

Fig.  14. 

The  inheritance  of  two  sex-linked  characters,  white  eyes  and  forked 
bristles,  and  red  eyes  and  normal  bristles. 


20  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

the  numerical  result  would  be  the  same  as  when  free 
assortment  occurs.  That  is,  no  linkage  would  be  observed 
even  though  the  characters  involved  are  in  the  same  link- 
age group.  Their  relation  as  members  of  the  same  group 
could,  nevertheless,  be  shown  by  their  common  linkage 
to  some  third  member  of  the  series.  If  more  than  50  per 
cent  crossing-over  should  be  found,  a  sort  of  inverted 
linkage  would  appear,  since  the  cross-over  combinations 
would  then  be  more  frequent  than  the  grandparental 
types. 

The  fact  that  crossing-over  in  the  female  of  Drosophila 
is  always  less  than  50  per  cent,  is  due  to  another  corre- 
lated phenomenon  called  double  crossing-over.  By  double 
crossing-over  is  meant  that  interchange  takes  place  twice 
between  two  pairs  of  genes  involved  in  the  cross.  The 
result  is  to  lower  the  observed  cases  of  crossing-over, 
since  a  second  crossing-over  undoes  the  effect  of  a  single 
crossing-over.  This  will  be  explained  later. 

The  Simultaneous  Interchange  of  Many  Genes 
in  Crossing-Over. 

In  the  examples  of  crossing-over  just  given,  two  pairs 
of  characters  were  studied.  The  evidence  involved  only 
those  cases  of  crossing-over  that  took  place  once  between 
the  two  pairs  of  genes  involved  in  the  cross.  In  order  to 
obtain  information  as  to  how  frequently  crossing-over 
takes  place  elsewhere,  i.e.,  in  the  rest  of  the  linkage 
group,  it  is  necessary  to  include  pairs  of  characters  that 
cover  the  entire  group.  For  example,  if  a  female  with  the 
following  nine  characters  of  Group  I,  scute,  echinus, 
cross-veinless,  cut,  tan,  vermilion,  garnet,  forked  and 
bobbed,  is  crossed  to  a  wild  type  male,  and  if  the  Fx 
female  (Fig.  15)  is  back-crossed  to  the  same  multiple  re- 
cessive type,  the  offspring  produced  will  give  a  record  of 
every  crossing-over.   If  crossing-over  had  taken   place 


I 1 1 1 1 1 1— 1 

I— I 1 1        I 1  I 1 

Fig.  15. 
Diagram  of  two  allelomorphic  series  of  linked  genes.  In  the  upper 
line  the  approximate  location  of  nine,  sex-linked  recessive  genes 
is  indicated.  In  the  lower  line  the  normal  allelomorphic  genes  are 
indicated. 


h 


H 


2 


Fig.  16. 

Diagram  to  show  crossing-over  between  garnet  and  vermilion,  i.e., 

near  the  middle  of  the  series  shown  in  Fig.  15. 


Fig.  17. 

Diagram  to  show  crossing-over  between  echinus  and  cross -veinless 

near  the  left  end  of  the  series.  See  Fig.  15. 


Fig.  18. 
Double  crossing-over  between  the  two  series  of  genes  indicated  in 
Fig.  15.  One  crossing-over  is  between  cut  and  tan  and  the  other 
between  garnet  and  forked. 


22  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

near  the  middle  of  the  series  (between  vermilion  and 
garnet),  the  result  would  be  that  shown  in  Fig.  16.  Two 
complete  halves  have  interchanged. 

In  other  cases,  crossing-over  may  take  place  near  one 
end  (for  example,  between  echinus  and  cross-veinless). 
The  result  is  like  that  shown  in  Fig.  17.  Only  the  short 
ends  of  the  two  series  have  interchanged.  The  same 
kind  of  process  occurs  whenever  an  interchange  takes 
place.  Whole  series  of  genes  are  interchanged,  although 
as  a  rule  the  interchange  is  noticed  only  between  the 
genes  on  each  side  of  the  crossing-over. 

When  simultaneous  crossing-over  occurs  at  two  levels 
at  the  same  time  (Fig.  18)  very  many  genes  are  also  in- 
volved. For  example,  in  the  series  just  given  one  cross- 
ing-over is  supposed  to  take  place  between  cut  and  tan, 
and  another  crossing-over  between  garnet  and  forked. 
All  the  genes  in  the  middle  of  the  two  series  have  been 
interchanged.  This  would  pass  unobserved  were  there  no 
mutant  genes  in  the  region  to  indicate  the  fact  that  two 
crossings-over  had  taken  place,  since  the  two  ends  of  both 
series  remain  the  same  as  before. 

The  Linear  Order  of  the  Genes. 

It  is  self-evident  that  if  two  pairs  of  genes  should  be 
near  together,  the  chance  that  crossing-over  occurs  be- 
tween them  is  smaller  than  if  they  are  further  apart.  If 
two  other  genes  are  still  further  apart  the  chance  of  cross- 
ing-over is  correspondingly  increased.  We  may  utilize 
these  relations  to  obtain  information  as  to  the  ' '  distance ' ' 
at  which  any  two  pairs  of  elements  lie  with  respect  to 
each  other.  With  this  information  we  can  construct  charts 
of  the  series  of  elements  in  each  of  the  linkage  groups. 
This  has  been  done  for  all  the  linkage  groups  of  Droso- 
phila.  Such  a  chart  (Fig.  19)  gives  the  result  as  far  as 
carried  out. 


I  p 


-  -004.S 


~~13.7    crosay'less! 

it — 16.±    club 
^-17.+    deltex 


0.3 
0.6 
1.0 
1.5 
3.0 


^ 


5 
5.5 
6.9 
7.5 


yellow  ! 

Hairy-wing  ♦ 
scuta  ! 
lethal -7 
broad  + 
prune  + 
white  J 
facet 
Notch 
Abnormal 
echinus  ! 
bifid  ! 
ruby  ! 


n 


m 


w 


■20.0 
■21.0 


cut  ! 

singed  + 


v^-  27.5  tan  + 

^27.7  lozenge  ♦ 

^33.0  Terrailion  ! 

\~~36.1  miniature  ♦ 

0"36.2  dusky  + 

^38.±  furrowed 

.^"-43.0  sable  ♦ 

~^44.4  garnet  J 


^,  54.2  small-wing 

54,5  rudimentary 

:—  56.5  forked  [ 

■^  57.0  Bar  [ 

:S>58.5  small-eye 

.\59.0  fused  t- 

\  59.6  Beadex  ♦ 

\\62.±  Uinute-n  ♦ 

^65.0  cleft 

^70.0  bobbed  I 


0.0 

2.0  Star  • 

3.±  aristaless 

6.±  expanded 


12.1  Gull 

13.0  Truncate  ! 

14. ±  dacha ous  + 

16.0  Streak  + 


-I 0.0  roughoidl 


/ 


31.0  dacha  + 


/ 


./ 


./ 


35.0  Ski-II 

41.0  Jammed  ! 

46.±  Uinute-e 

-48.5  black  i 

-48.7  jaunty 


0.0  bent 
0.5  ±  shaven 
0.9  eyeless 


20.0  divergent  ♦ 


26.0  sepia  ! 
26.5  hairy  ! 


^/4 


-  -      54.5  purple  \ 54,6  Hairy-wing  sup.  • 


57.5  cinnabar  + 
•60.+  safranln 


-J-   64. i  pink-wing  ♦ 

67.0  vestigial  ■ 

68. t  telescope 

72.0  Lobe  \ 

74. ±  gap 

75.5  curved  '. 


83.5  fringed 


90.0  humpy 


J  99.5  are  ♦ 

L00. 5  plexus  ! 

L02.+  lethal-IIa 

105.0  brown  [ 

.'l\105.±  blistered 

/,106.i  purploid 

./l07.±  morula  + 

Ml07.0  speck  S 

M07.5  balloon 


.35.0 
/,36.5 

/,40.1 
40.2 
40.4 
/42.2 
-V44.0 
/,46.± 
^46.5 
I>47.5 

: 48.0 

^-49.7 

\|50.t 

150.0 


rose  + 
cream-III  + 
Uinute-h 
tilt 

Dichaete  ! 
thread  ! 
scarlet  ! 
warped 
ski-III 
Deformed 
pink  ! 
maroon  ♦ 
dwarf 
curled  | 


58.2 
58.5 
58.7 
59.5 
62.0 
63.1 
66.2 


Stubble  1 
spineless  \ 
bi  thorax  + 
bithorax-b 
stripe  • 
glass  ♦ 
Delta  '. 


69.5  Hairless  • 

70.7  ebony  ! 

72.0  band 

75.7  cardinal  ♦ 

76.2  white-ocelli  ♦ 


91.1  rough  ! 

93.0  crumpled 
93.8  Beaded 

94.1  Pointed  + 


100.7  claret  I 
101.0  Uinute 


-1-  106.2  Uinute-g  ! 


Fig.  19. 
Map  or  chart  of  the  four  series,  I,  II,  III,  IV,  of  linked  genes  of 
Drosophila  melanogaster.   The  "map   distance"   is   given  in  the 
numerals  to  the  left  of  each  character. 


24-  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

In  the  preceding  illustrations  of  linkage  and  crossing- 
over,  that  have  been  given,  the  genes  are  represented  as 
lying  in  a  line — like  beads  on  a  string.  The  numerical  data 
from  crossing-over  show,  in  fact,  that  this  arrangement  is 
the  only  one  that  is  consistent  with  the  results  obtained, 
as  the  following  example  will  serve  to  illustrate. 


Fig.  20. 

Diagram  illustrating  the  linear  order  of  three  sex-linked   genes, 

viz.,  yellow  wings,  white  eyes,  bifid  wings. 


Suppose  that  crossing-over  between  yellow  wings  and 
white  eyes  occurs  in  1.2  per  cent  of  cases.  If  we  then  test 
white  with  a  third  member  of  the  same  series,  such  as 
bifid  wings,  we  find  3.5  per  cent  of  crossing-over  (Fig. 
20).  If  bifid  is  in  line  and  on  one  side  of  white  it  is  ex- 
pected to  give  with  yellow  4.7  per  cent  crossing-over,  if  on 
the  other  side  of  white  it  is  expected  to  give  2.3  per  cent 
of  crossing-over  with  yellow.  In  fact,  it  gives  one  of  these 
values,  namely,  4.7.  We  place  it,  therefore,  below  white  in 
the  diagram.  This  sort  of  result  is  obtained  whenever  a 
new  character  is  compared  with  two  other  members  of 
the  same  linkage  group.  The  crossing-over  of  a  new 
character  is  found  to  give,  in  relation  to  two  other  known 
factors,  either  the  sum  or  the  difference  of  their  respec- 
tive cross-over  values.  This  is  the  known  relation  of 
points  on  a  line,  and  is  the  proof  of  the  linear  order  of  the 
genes ;  for  no  other  spatial  relation  has  yet  been  found 
that  fulfills  these  conditions. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  GENETICS  25 

The  Theory  of  the  Gene. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  formulate  the  theory  of  the 
gene.  The  theory  states  that  the  characters  of  the  indi- 
vidual are  referable  to  paired  elements  {genes)  in  the 
germinal  material  that  are  held  together  in  a  definite 
number  of  linkage  groups;  it  states  that  the  members  of 
each  pair  of  genes  separate  when  the  germ-cells  mature 
in  accordance  ivith  Mendel's  first  laiv,  and  in  consequence 
each  germ-cell  comes  to  contain  one  set  only;  it  states 
that  the  members  belonging  to  different  linkage  groups 
assort  independently  in  accordance  with  Mendel's  second 
law;  it  states  that  an  orderly  interchange — crossing-over 
— also  takes  place,  at  times,  between  the  elements  in 
corresponding  linkage  groups;  and  it  states  that  the  fre- 
quency of  crossing-over  furnishes  evidence  of  the  linear 
order  of  the  elements  in  each  linkage  group  and  of  the 
relative  position  of  the  elements  with  respect  to  each 
other. 

These  principles,  which,  taken  together,  I  have  ventured 
to  call  the  theory  of  the  gene,  enable  us  to  handle  prob- 
lems of  genetics  on  a  strictly  numerical  basis,  and  allow 
us  to  predict,  with  a  great  deal  of  precision,  what  will 
occur  in  any  given  situation.  In  these  respects  the  theory 
fulfills  the  requirements  of  a  scientific  theory  in  the  full- 
est sense. 


CHAPTER  II 
PARTICULATE  THEORIES  OF  HEREDITY 

THE  evidence  given  in  the  last  chapter  led  to  the 
conclusion  that  there  are  hereditary  units  in  the 
germinal  material  that  are,  to  a  greater  or  less 
extent,  independently  sorted  out  between  successive  gen- 
erations of  individuals.  Stated  more  accurately,  the  inde- 
pendent reappearance  in  later  generations  of  the  charac- 
ters of  two  individuals  combined  in  a  cross  can  be 
explained  by  the  theory  of  independent  units  in  the 
germinal  material. 

Between  the  characters,  that  furnish  the  data  for  the 
theory,  and  the  postulated  genes,  to  which  the  characters 
are  referred,  lies  the  whole  field  of  embryonic  develop- 
ment. The  theory  of  the  gene,  as  here  formulated,  states 
nothing  with  respect  to  the  way  in  which  the  genes  are 
connected  with  the  end-product  or  character.  The  absence 
of  information  relating  to  this  interval  does  not  mean 
that  the  process  of  embryonic  development  is  not  of  in- 
terest for  genetics.  A  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  the 
genes  produce  their  effects  on  the  developing  individual 
would,  no  doubt,  greatly  broaden  our  ideas  relating  to 
heredity,  and  probably  make  clearer  many  phenomena 
that  are  obscure  at  present,  but  the  fact  remains  that  the 
sorting  out  of  the  characters  in  successive  generations 
can  be  explained  at  present  without  reference  to  the  way 
in  which  the  gene  affects  the  developmental  process. 

There  is,  nevertheless,  a  fundamental  assumption  im- 
plied in  the  statement  just  made,  viz.,  that  the  develop- 
mental process  follows  strictly  causal  laws.  A  change  in  a 


PARTICULATE  THEORIES  OF  HEREDITY  27 

gene  produces  definite  effects  on  the  developmental  proc- 
esses. It  affects  one  or  more  of  the  characters  that  ap- 
pear at  some  later  stage  in  the  individual.  In  this  sense, 
the  theory  of  the  gene  is  justified  without  attempting  to 
explain  the  nature  of  the  causal  processes  that  connect 
the  gene  and  the  characters.  Some  needless  criticism  of 
the  theory  has  arisen  from  failure  to  clearly  understand 
this  relation. 

It  has  been  said,  for  example,  that  the  assumption  of 
invisible  units  in  the  germ-materials  really  explains  noth- 
ing, since  to  these  are  ascribed  the  very  properties  that 
the  theory  sets  out  to  explain.  In  fact,  however,  the  only 
properties  ascribed  to  the  gene  are  those  given  in  the 
numerical  data  supplied  by  the  individuals.  This  criti- 
cism, like  others  of  its  kind,  arises  from  confusing  the 
problems  of  genetics  with  those  of  development. 

Again,  the  theory  has  been  unfairly  criticised  on  the 
grounds  that  the  organism  is  a  physico-chemical  mechan- 
ism, while  the  genetic  theory  fails  to  account  for  the 
mechanism  that  is  involved.  But  the  only  assumptions 
made  by  the  theory,  the  relative  constancy  of  the  gene, 
its  property  of  multiplying  itself,  the  union  of  the  genes 
and  their  separation  when  the  germ-cells  mature,  involve 
no  assumptions  inconsistent  with  physical  principles,  and 
while  it  is  true  the  physical  and  chemical  processes  in- 
volved in  these  events  cannot  be  explicitly  stated,  they 
relate  at  least  to  phenomena  that  we  are  familiar  with  in 
living  things. 

A  part  of  the  criticism  of  Mendel's  theory  arises  from 
a  failure  to  appreciate  the  evidence  on  which  the  theory 
rests,  and  also  from  a  failure  to  realize  that  its  proce- 
dure is  different  from  that  which,  in  the  past,  has  led  to 
the  formulation  of  other  particulate  theories  of  heredity 
and  of  development.  There  have  been  a  good  many  of 
these  theories,  and  biologists  have  become,  through  ex- 


28  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

perience,  somewhat  incredulous  in  respect  to  any  and  all 
theories  that  postulate  invisible  units.  A  brief  examina- 
tion of  a  few  of  the  earlier  speculations  may  serve  to 
make  the  difference  between  the  old  and  the  new  proce- 
dure more  apparent.1 

Herbert  Spencer's  theory  of  physiological  units,  pro- 
posed in  1863,  assumes  that  each  species  of  animal  or 
plant  is  composed  of  fundamental  units  that  are  all  alike 
for  each  species.  The  elements  concerned  are  supposed 
to  be  larger  than  protein  molecules  and  more  complex  in 
structure.  One  of  the  reasons  that  led  Spencer  to  this 
view  is  that  any  part  of  the  organism  may  in  certain 
cases  reproduce  the  whole  again.  The  egg  and  the  sperm 
are  such  fragments  of  the  whole.  The  diversity  of  struc- 
ture in  each  individual  is  vaguely  ascribed  to  a  "polar- 
ity" or  some  sort  of  crystal-like  arrangement  of  the  ele- 
ments in  different  regions  of  the  body. 

Spencer's  theory  is  purely  speculative.  It  rests  on  the 
evidence  that  a  part  may  produce  a  new  whole  like  itself, 
and  infers  from  this  that  all  parts  of  the  organism  con- 
tain material  out  of  which  a  new  whole  may  develop,  but, 
while  this  is,  in  part,  true,  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
whole  must  be  made  up  of  a  single  kind  of  unit.  Our 
modern  interpretation  of  the  ability  of  a  part  to  develop 
into  a  new  whole  must  also  assume  that  each  such  part 
contains  the  elements  for  the  construction  of  a  new  whole, 
but  these  elements  may  be  different  from  each  other,  and 
to  this  difference  the  differentiation  of  the  body  is  re- 
ferred. So  long  as  a  complete  set  of  units  is  present,  the 
power  to  produce  a  new  whole  is  potentially  given. 

Darwin's  theory  of  pangenesis,  proposed  in  1868,  ap- 
pealed to  a  host  of  different  invisible  particles.  The 
theory  states  that  minute  representative  elements,  called 

i  A  full  discussion  of  earlier  theories  is  given  by  Delage  in  Eeredite  and 
by  Weismann  in  the  Germ-Plasm. 


PARTICULATE  THEORIES  OF  HEREDITY  29 

genimules,  are  being  continually  thrown  off  from  every 
part  of  the  body.  Those  that  reach  the  germ-cells  become 
incorporated  there  with  the  hereditary  units  of  the  same 
general  kind  already  present. 

The  theory  was  proposed  primarily  to  explain  how 
acquired  characters  are  transmitted.  If  specific  changes 
in  the  body  of  the  parent  are  transmitted  to  the  offspring, 
some  such  theory  is  required.  If  the  changes  in  the  body 
are  not  transmitted,  there  is  no  need  of  such  a  theory. 

Weismann  in  1883  challenged  the  entire  transport 
theory,  and  convinced  many,  but  not  all,  biologists  that 
the  evidence  for  the  transmission  of  acquired  characters 
was  inadequate.  This  led  him  to  develop  his  theory  of 
the  isolation  of  the  germ-plasm.  The  egg  produces  not 
onlv  a  new  individual,  but  other  eggs  like  itself,  carried 
by  the  new  individual.  The  egg  produces  the  individual, 
but  the  individual  has  no  subsequent  influence  on  the 
germ-plasm  of  the  eggs  contained  in  it,  except  to  protect 
and  to  nourish  them. 

From  this  beginning  Weismann  developed  a  theory  of 
particulate  inheritance  of  representative  elements.  He 
appealed  to  evidence  derived  from  variation,  and  he  ex- 
tended his  theory  to  include  a  purely  formal  explanation 
of  embryonic  development. 

We  are  concerned,  in  the  first  place,  with  Weismann 's 
views  as  to  the  nature  of  the  hereditary  elements  or  ids 
as  he  calls  them.  The  ids  he  identified  in  his  later  writings 
as  small  chromosomes  when  many  small  chromosomes 
are  present,  but  when  only  a  few  chromosomes  are  pres- 
ent he  supposed  that  each  is  made  up  of  several  or  many 
ids.  Each  id  contains  all  the  elements  that  are  essential 
to  the  development  of  a  single  individual.  Each  is  a  mi- 
crocosm. The  ids  differ  from  each  other  in  that  they  are 
the   representatives   of   ancestral   individuals   or  germ- 


30  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

plasms,  each  different  from  the  others  in  one  or  another 
way. 

The  individual  variations  shown  by  animals  are  due 
to  the  different  recombinations  of  ids.  This  is  brought 
about  by  the  union  of  eggs  and  sperms.  The  number  of 
ids  would  become  indefinitely  large  were  it  not  that,  at 
the  ripening  of  the  germ-cells,  the  number  of  ids  is  re- 
duced to  half. 

Weismann  also  formulated  an  elaborate  theory  of 
embryonic  development  based  on  the  idea  that  the  ids  are 
separated  into  their  smaller  elements  as  the  egg  divides, 
until,  finally,  each  kind  of  cell  in  the  body  comes  to  con- 
tain one  of  the  ultimate  components  of  the  ids,  i.e.,  deter- 
minants. In  the  cells  destined  to  become  germ-cells  the 
disintegration  of  the  ids  does  not  take  place.  Hence  the 
continuity  of  the  germ-plasm,  or  of  the  colony  of  ids.  The 
application  of  his  theory  to  embryonic  development  lies 
outside  the  modern  theory  of  heredity  that  either  ignores 
the  developmental  process,  or  else  postulates  a  view 
exactly  the  opposite  of  that  of  Weismann,  namely,  that 
in  every  cell  of  the  body  the  entire  heredity  complex  is 
present. 

It  will  be  seen  without  further  elaboration  that  Weis- 
mann 's  ingenious  speculation  invokes,  in  order  to  explain 
variation,  processes  that  are  akin  to  those  we  adopt 
today.  Variation,  he  believed,  is  due  to  the  recombination 
of  units  from  the  parents.  These  are  reduced  to  half  in 
the  process  of  maturation  of  the  egg  and  sperm.  The 
units  are  wholes  and  each  represents  an  ancestral  stage. 

W^e  owe  to  Weismann  largely  the  idea  of  the  isolation 
and  continuity  of  the  germinal  material.  His  challenge  of 
the  Lamarckian  theory  was  of  immense  service  to  clear 
thinking.  The  theory  of  the  inheritance  of  acquired 
characters  had  obscured  for  a  long  time  all  problems 
dealing  with  heredity.  Weismann 's  writings  were  also 


PARTICULATE  THEORIES  OF  HEREDITY  31 

unquestionably  important  in  keeping  in  the  foreground 
the  intimate  relation  between  heredity  and  cytology.  It  is 
difficult  for  us  to  estimate  to  what  extent  his  fascinating 
speculations  have  influenced  our  later  attempts  to  inter- 
pret heredity  in  terms  of  chromosome  constitution  and 
behavior. 

These  and  other  earlier  speculations  have  today  mainly 
an  historical  interest.  They  do  not  represent  the  main 
path  along  which  the  modern  theory  of  the  gene  has  de- 
veloped, which  rests  its  claims  to  recognition  on  the 
method  by  which  it  is  derived  and  on  its  ability  to  predict 
exact  numerical  results  of  a  specific  kind. 

I  venture  to  think  that,  however  similar  to  the  older 
theories  the  modern  theory  may  appear,  it  stands  apart 
from  them,  in  that  it  has  arisen  step  by  step  from  experi- 
mentally determined  genetic  evidence  that  has  been  care- 
fully  controlled  at  every  point.  The  theory  need  not  and 
does  not,  of  course,  pretend  to  be  final.  It  will,  no  doubt, 
undergo  many  changes  and  improvements  in  new  direc- 
tions, but  most  of  the  facts  concerning  heredity,  known 
to  us  at  present,  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  theory  as 
it  stands. 


CHAPTER  III 

THE  MECHANISM  OF  HEREDITY 

THE  statement  of  the  theory  of  the  gene  at  the  end 
of  the  first  chapter  is  derived  from  purely  numeri- 
cal data  without  respect  to  any  known  or  assumed 
changes  in  the  animal  or  plant  that  bring  about,  in  the 
way  postulated,  the  distribution  of  the  genes.  However 
satisfactory  the  theory  may  be  in  this  respect,  biologists 
will  seek  to  discover  in  the  organism  how  the  orderly 
redistribution  of  the  genes  takes  place. 

During  the  last  quarter  of  the  last  century,  and  con- 
tinuously through  the  first  quarter  of  the  present  century, 
the  study  of  the  changes  that  take  place  during  the  final 
stages  in  the  maturation  of  the  egg  and  sperm-cell  have 
revealed  a  remarkable  series  of  events  that  go  far  toward 
furnishing  a  mechanism  of  heredity. 

It  was  discovered  that  there  is  a  double  set  of  chromo- 
somes in  each  cell  of  the  body  and  in  the  early  stages  of 
the  germ-cells.  The  evidence  of  this  duality  came  from 
observations  on  differences  in  the  sizes  of  the  chromo- 
somes. Whenever  recognizable  differences  exist  there  are 
two  chromosomes  of  each  kind  in  the  somatic  cells  and 
one  of  each  in  the  germ  cells  after  maturation.  One  mem- 
ber of  each  kind  has  been  shown  to  come  from  the  father 
and  the  other  from  the  mother.  At  the  present  time  the 
duality  of  the  chromosome  complex  is  one  of  the  best 
established  facts  of  cytology.  The  only  striking  exception 
to  the  rule  is  sometimes  found  in  the  sex-chromosomes, 
but  even  here  the  duality  holds  for  one  sex,  and  often  for 
both. 


THE  MECHANISM  OF  HEREDITY  33 

The  Mechanism  of  Mendel's  Two  Laws. 

Toward  the  end  of  the  ripening  period  of  the  germ- 
cells,  chromosomes  of  the  same  size  come  together  in 
pairs.  This  is  followed  by  a  division  of  the  cell,  when  the 
members  of  each  pair  go  into  opposite  cells.  Each  mature 
germ-cell  comes  to  contain  only  one  set  of  chromosomes, 
(Figs.  21  and  22). 


Fig.  21. 
Diagram  of  the  two  maturation  divisions  of  sperm-cells.  Three 
pairs  of  chromosomes  are  represented;  those  from  the  father  in 
black,  those  from  the  mother  in  white  (except  in  a,  b,  c).  The 
first  maturation  division,  here  the  reduction  division,  is  shown  in 
d,  e,  f.  The  second,  or  equational  division,  in  which  each  chromo- 
some splits  lengthwise  into  two  daughter  chromosomes,  is  shown 
in  g,  h. 


34  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GEXE 

This  behavior  of  the  chromosomes  in  the  maturation 
stages  parallels  Mendel's  first  law.  A  chromosome  de- 
rived from  the  father  separates  from  a  chromosome  de- 
rived from  the  mother  for  each  pair  of  chromosomes.  The 


■  - 

a 


M 

■     -.-  b 


«. 


i)(2l_JP) 


•  '       :• 


e  ■   •     f 


Fig.  22. 
Diagram  of  two  maturation  divisions  of  the  egg.  The  first  polar 
spindle  is  shown  in  a.  The  separation  of  the  paternal  and  maternal 
chromosomes  (reduction)  is  shown  in  b.  The  first  polar  body  has 
been  given  off  in  c.  The  second  polar  spindle  is  formed  in  d;  each 
chromosome  has  split  lengthwise  into  daughter  halves  (equational 
division).  The  second  polar  body  is  being  given  off  in  e.  The  egg- 
nucleus  is  left  in  f  with  the  half  (haploid)  number  of  chromo- 
somes. 


orerm-cells  that  result  contain  one  chromosome  of  each 
kind.  Taking  the  chromosomes  in  pairs  we  may  say,  half 
of  the  germ-cells,  when  mature,  contain  one  member  of 
each  pair,  the  other  half  the  mates  of  those  chromosomes, 
pair  for  pair.  If  one  substitutes  Mendelian  units  for  chro- 
mosomes, the  statement  is  the  same. 


THE  MECHANISM  OF  HEREDITY  35 

One  member  of  each  pair  of  chromosomes  comes  from 
the  father,  its  mate  from  the  mother.  If,  when  the  con- 
jugants  come  to  lie  on  the  spindle,  all  the  paternally  de- 
rived chromosomes  were  to  go  to  one  pole,  and  all  the 
maternally  derived  to  the  other  pole,  the  two  resulting 

\/  \/ 


x* 


f       *l 

■         op  i 

I        I 


/  \  '  /  \ 


. 


Fig.  23. 
Diagram  to  illustrate  the  random  assortment  of  a  pair  of  chromo- 
somes with  respect  to  the  X-chromosome.  (After  Carothers.) 

germ-cells  would  be  like  those  of  the  father  and  of  the 
mother.  There  is  no  a  priori  reason  for  supposing  that 
the  conjugants  would  behave  in  this  way,  but  it  has  been 
extremely  difficult  to  prove  that  they  do  not  do  so,  because 
from  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  the  conjugating  chro- 
mosomes being  alike  in  shape  and  size,  it  is  not  as  a  rule 
possible  to  tell  from  observation  which  member  is  pater- 
nal, which  maternal. 

In  recent  years,  however,  a  few  cases  have  been  found 
in  grasshoppers  where  slight  differences  are  sometimes 


36  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

present  between  the  members  of  certain  pairs — differ- 
ences in  shape,  or  in  the  attachment  to  the  spindle  fibers 
(Fig.  23).  When  the  germ-cells  mature  these  chromo- 
somes conjugate  and  then  separate.  Since  they  retain 
their  individual  differences,  they  can  be  traced  to  the 
poles. 

Now  in  these  grasshoppers  there  is,  in  the  male,  an  un- 
paired chromosome  that  is  connected  with  sex  determina- 
tion (Fig.  23).  It  passes  at  the  maturation  division  to  one 
pole  or  to  the  other.  It  serves  as  a  land-mark  for  the 
other  pairs  of  chromosomes.  Miss  Carothers,  who  first 
made  these  observations,  found  that  a  marked  pair  (one 
bent,  one  straight)  separates  at  random  with  respect  to 
the  sex  chromosome. 

Carrying  the  matter  further,  other  chromosome  pairs 
were  found  to  show  at  times  constant  differences  in  some 
individuals.  A  study  of  these  chromosome  pairs  at  reduc- 
tion has  shown,  again,  a  random  distribution  of  the  mem- 
bers of  the  pairs  with  respect  to  one  another.  Here  then 
we  have  objective  evidence  of  the  independent  assort- 
ment of  the  pairs  of  chromosomes.  This  evidence  paral- 
lels Mendel 's  second  law,  which  calls  for  independent  dis- 
tribution of  the  members  of  different  linkage  groups. 

The  Number  of  the  Linkage  Groups  and  the 
Number  of  the  Chromosome  Pairs. 

Genetics  has  shown  that  the  hereditary  elements  are 
linked  in  groups,  and  in  one  case  with  certainty,  and  in 
several  other  cases  with  some  probability,  there  is  a  defi- 
nite and  fixed  number  of  these  linkage  groups.  In  Droso- 
phila  there  are  only  four  such  groups,  and  there  are  four 
pairs  of  chromosomes.  In  the  sweet  pea  there  are  seven 
chromosome  pairs  (Fig.  24),  and  probably  seven  inde- 
pendent pairs  of  Mendelian  characters  have  been  found 
by  Punnett.  In  the  edible  pea  there  are  also  seven  pairs 


THE  MECHANISM  OF  HEREDITY  37 

of  chromosomes  (Fig.  24)  and  seven  independent  pairs 
of  Mendelian  characters,  according*  to  White.  In  Indian 
corn  there  are  ten  to  twelve  (?)  pairs  of  chromosomes, 
and  several  groups  of  linked  genes  have  been  detected.  In 
the  snapdragon,  with  sixteen  pairs  of  chromosomes,  the 
number  of  independent  genes  approaches  the  number  of 
the  chromosomes.  In  other  animals  and  plants,  also, 
linked  genes  have  been  reported,  but  as  yet  this  number 
is  small  in  comparison  with  the  chromosome  numbers. 

Edible  Pea  Sweet  Pea 


Indian  Corn 

Fig.  24. 

The  reduced  number  of  chromosomes  in  the  edible   pea    (n— 7), 
sweet  pea  (n— 7),  and  Indian  corn  (n— 10  or  12?). 

The  further  fact  that,  to  date,  no  case  is  known  where 
there  are  more  independently  assorting  pairs  than  there 
are  pairs  of  chromosomes  is  further  evidence,  as  far  as  it 
goes,  in  favor  of  the  view  that  the  linkage  groups  and 
the  chromosomes  correspond  in  number. 

The  Integrity  and  Continuity  of  the  Chromosomes. 

The  integrity  of  the  chromosomes,  or  their  continuity 
from  one  cell  generation  to  the  next,  is  also  essential  for 


38  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

the  chromosome  theory.  There  is  general  agreement 
amongst  cytologists  that  when  the  chromosomes  are  set 
free  in  the  protoplasm  they  remain  intact  through  the 
entire  period  of  cell  division,  but  when  they  take  up  fluid 
and  combine  to  form  the  resting  nucleus,  it  is  no  longer 
possible  to  trace  their  history.  By  indirect  means,  how- 
ever, it  has  been  possible  to  get  some  evidence  as  to  the 
conditions  of  the  chromosomes  in  the  resting  stages. 

After  each  division  the  individual  chromosomes  be- 
come vacuolated  as  they  come  together  to  form  a  new 
resting  nucleus.  They  can  be  followed  for  some  time, 
forming  separate  compartments  of  the  single  nucleus  that 
re-forms.  They  then  lose  their  staining  quality  and  can 
no  longer  be  identified.  "When  the  chromosomes  are  again 
about  to  appear,  sac-like  bodies  are  seen.  This  suggests, 
if  it  does  not  prove,  that  the  chromosomes  have  remained 
in  place  during  the  resting  stage. 

Boveri  showed  that  when  egg-cells  of  Ascaris  divide, 
the  daughter  chromosomes  of  each  pair  are  pulled  apart 
in  the  same  way,  and  often  show  characteristic  shapes 
(Fig.  25).  At  the  next  division  of  such  cells,  when  the 
chromosomes  of  daughter  cells  are  about  to  reappear, 
they  show  similar  arrangements  of  their  threads.  The 
inference  is  clear.  The  threads  retain  in  the  resting 
nucleus  the  shapes  that  they  had  when  they  entered  the 
nucleus.  This  evidence  is  favorable  to  the  view  that  the 
chromosomes  have  not  passed  into  solution,  and  later 
reformed,  but  have  retained  their  integrity. 

Finally,  there  are  cases  where  the  chromosome  num- 
bers have  been  increased,  either  by  becoming  doubled,  or 
by  crossing  species  with  different  numbers  of  chromo- 
somes. There  may  be,  then,  three  or  four  chromosomes  of 
each  kind.  The  same  number  is  retained  as  a  rule  through 
all  successive  divisions. 

On  the  whole,  then,  while  the  cytological  evidence  does 


THE  MECHANISM  OF  HEREDITY 


39 


not  demonstrate  completely  that  the  chromosomes  remain 
intact  throughout  their  history,  the  evidence,  as  far  as  it 
goes,  is  favorable  to  this  view. 

There  is,  however,  a  very  important  limitation  that 
must  be  placed  on  this  statement.  The  genetic  evidence 
clearly  proves  that  between  the  members  of  the  same  pair 
of  chromosomes  there  is  at  times  an  orderly  interchange 
of  parts.  Does  the  cytological  evidence  show  any  indica- 
tion of  sucli  an  interchange  1  Here  we  enter  on  more  ques- 
tionable ground. 


a  b  c  d 

Fro.  25. 
The  nuclei  of  four  pairs  of  sister  cells   (above  and  below)   show- 
ing the  position  of  the  daughter  chromosomes  as  they  come  out  of 
the  resting  nuclei.   (After  Boveri.) 


Mechanism  of  Crossing-Over. 

If,  as  other  evidence  clearly  shows,  the  chromosomes 
are  the  bearers  of  genes,  and  if  the  genes  may  inter- 
change between  members  of  the  same  pair,  it  follows  that 
sooner  or  later  we  may  expect  to  find  some  kind  of  mecha- 
nism by  which  such  interchange  takes  place. 

Several  years  before  the  genetic  discovery  of  crossing- 
over,  the  process  of  conjugation  of  the  chromosomes,  and 
their  reduction  in  number  in  the  mature  germ  cells  had 
been  fully  established.  It  was  demonstrated  that  at  the 


40  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

time  of  conjugation  the  members  of  the  same  pair  of 
chromosomes  are  those  that  combine.  In  other  words, 
conjugation  is  not  at  random,  as  one  might  possibly  have 
inferred  from  the  earlier  accounts  of  the  process,  but 
conjugation  is  always  between  a  paternally  derived  and 
a  maternally  derived  specific  chromosome. 

We  may  now  add  to  this  information  the  following 
fact,  namely,  that  conjugation  takes  place  because  the 
members  of  a  pair  are  alike,  not  because  they  have  come 
from  a  male  and  a  female  respectively.  This  has  been 
shown  in  two  ways.  In  hermaphroditic  types  the  same 
union  occurs,  although,  after  self-fertilization,  both  mem- 
bers of  each  pair  have  come  from  the  same  individual. 
Secondly,  in  exceptional  cases,  the  two  members  of  a 
pair  have  come  from  the  same  egg,  yet  presumably  they 
conjugate  since  crossing-over  takes  place. 

The  cytological  evidence  of  the  conjugation  of  like 
chromosomes  supplies  the  first  steps  for  a  mechanical 
explanation  as  to  how  an  interchange  might  take  place, 
for,  obviously,  if  the  two  members  of  each  pair  come  to 
lie  side  by  side  throughout  their  length,  gene  to  gene  as 
it  were,  the  chromosomes  are  brought  into  a  position 
where  equivalent  blocks  might  be  interchanged  in  an 
orderly  way.  Of  course,  it  does  not  follow  that  in  con- 
sequence of  their  side  to  side  apposition  an  inter- 
change would  necessarily  follow;  in  fact,  a  study  of  the 
crossing-over  in  a  linkage  group,  such  as  the  sex-linked 
group  of  genes  of  Drosophila  (where  a  sufficient  number 
of  genes  is  present  to  furnish  complete  evidence  of  what 
takes  place  in  the  linkage  series),  shows  that  there  is  no 
interchange  at  all  in  about  43.5  per  cent  of  the  eggs  for 
that  pair  of  chromosomes.  The  same  evidence  shows  that 
one  interchange  takes  place  in  about  43  per  cent  of  the 
eggs;  that  two  interchanges  take  place  in  about  13  per 
cent  (double  crossing-over)  and  three  interchanges  in  0.5 


THE  MECHANISM  OF  HEREDITY 


41 


per  cent.  In  the  Drosophila  male,  no  interchange  at  all 
takes  place. 

In  1909  Janssens  published  a  detailed  account  of  a 
process  that  he  called  Chiasmatypie.  Without  entering 
here  into  the  details  of  Janssens'  work  it  may  be  stated 
that  he  brought  forward  evidence  which  he  believed  to 
show  that  there  is  an  interchange  of  blocks  or  segments 
between  the  members  of  the  conjugating  pairs  of  chromo- 
somes which  is  traceable  to  an  earlier  twisting  of  the 
two  conjugating  chromosomes  around  each  other  (Fig. 
26). 


Fig.  26. 
The  conjugation  of  the  chromosomes  in  Batrachoseps.  The  twisting 
of  the  two  thin  threads  around  each  other  is  suggested  in  one  of 
the  two  chromosomes  in  the  middle  figure.   (After  Janssens.) 


Unfortunately  there  is  scarcely  any  stage  in  the  matu- 
ration divisions  that  is  as  much  in  dispute  as  this  one 
involving  the  twisting  of  the  chromosomes.  From  the 
nature  of  the  case  it  is  practically  impossible  to  demon- 
strate, even  when  twisting  of  the  chromosomes  is  ad- 
mitted, that  it  actually  leads  to  an  interchange  of  the 
kind  demanded  by  the  genetic  evidence. 


42  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

There  are  many  published  figures  of  the  chromosomes 
twisted  about  each  other.  But  in  some  respects  this  evi- 
dence proves  too  much.  For  instance,  the  most  familiar 
and  best  ascertained  stage,  where  twisting  is  obviously 
present,  is  found  at  the  time  when  the  conjugant  pairs  are 
shortening  preparatory  to  entrance  into  the  equator  of 
the  spindle   (Fig.  27).  The  usual  interpretation  of  the 


a 


Fig.  27. 
The  late  twisting  of  the  thick  threads   (chromosomes)   just  before 
they  enter  the  spindle  of  the  first  maturation  division  of  Batracho- 
seps.   (After  Janssens.) 


twisting  at  this  stage  is  that  it  is  in  some  way  connected 
with  the  shortening  of  the  two  conjugants.  There  is  noth- 
ing in  these  figures  to  show  that  this  leads  up  to  inter- 
change. While  it  is  possible  that  some  of  the  cases  of  this 
kind  may  be  due  to  an  earlier  twisting  of  the  threads 
about  each  other,  yet  the  persistence  of  the  spiral  would 
rather  indicate  that  crossing-over  had  not  taken  place, 
for  this  would  undo  the  twist. 

If  we  turn  next  to  the  published  drawings  of  the  earlier 
stages  we  find  a  number  of  cases  in  which  the  thin  threads 
(leptotene    stage)    are   represented   as    though   twisted 


THE  MECHANISM  OF  HEREDITY  43 

about  each  other  (Fig.  28b),  but  this  interpretation  is 
often  open  to  suspicion.  It  is  extremely  difficult,  in  fact,  to 
determine  when  threads  as  delicate  as  these  come  into 
contact  with  each  other  whether  they  pass  above  or  below, 
i.e.,  above  at  one  node  and  below  at  the  next,  etc.  The 
difficulty  is  enormously  enhanced  by  the  coagulated  con- 
dition of  the  threads,  and  it  is  only  in  this  condition  that 
they  are  stained  for  microscopic  study. 


8 


o 


b  -'.a 


% 


Fig.  28. 
Conjugation  of  a  pair  of  chromosomes  of  a  planarian.  In  a,  the 
two  thin  threads  are  coming  together;  in  b,  there  are  indications, 
at  two  levels,  of  crossing-over  of  the  two  united  strands.   (After 
Gelei.) 


The  preparations  that  most  nearly  approach  a  demon- 
stration of  the  twisting  of  the  leptotene  threads  are  those 
in  which  the  conjugation  begins  at  one  end  (or  at  both 
ends  of  bent  chromosomes)  and  progresses  toward  the 
other  end  (or  toward  the  middle  of  the  bend).  The  sperm- 
cells  of  Batrachoseps  presents  perhaps  the  most  seduc- 
tive preparations  of  this  sort  (Fig.  26),  but  the  figures  of 
Tomopteris  are  almost  or  quite  as  good.  The  drawings 


44  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

of  the  eggs  of  Planaria  (Fig.  28)  are  also  quite  convinc- 
ing. Some  at  least  of  these  figures  give  the  impression 
that  as  the  threads  are  coming  together  they  overlap  one 
or  more  times,  but  this  impression  is  not  sufficient  to 
show  that  they  do  more  than  lie  across  each  other  as  seen 
from  certain  levels.  It  does  not  follow  moreover  that  they 
will  interchange  where  they  overlap.  While  it  must  be 
admitted,  then,  that  the  cytological  evidence  of  crossing- 
over  has  not  been  demonstrated,  and  from  the  nature  of 
the  conditions  it  will  be  extremely  difficult  to  actually 
prove;  nevertheless,  it  has  been  shown  in  a  number  of 
cases  that  the  chromosomes  are  brought  into  a  position 
where  such  an  interchange  might  readily  be  supposed  to 
take  place. 

The  cytologist,  then,  has  given  us  an  account  of  the 
chromosomes  that  fulfills  to  a  degree  the  requirements  of 
genetics.  When  we  recall  the  fact  that  much  of  the  evi- 
dence was  obtained  prior  to  the  rediscovery  of  Mendel's 
paper,  and  that  none  of  the  work  has  been  done  with  a 
genetic  bias,  but  quite  independently  of  what  the  students 
of  heredity  were  doing,  it  does  not  seem  probable  that 
these  relations  are  mere  coincidences,  but  rather  that 
students  of  the  cell  have  discovered  many  of  the  essential 
parts  of  the  mechanism  by  which  the  hereditary  elements 
are  sorted  out  according  to  Mendel's  two  laws  and  are 
interchanged  in  an  orderly  way  between  members  of  the 
same  pair  of  chromosomes. 


CHAPTER  IV 
CHROMOSOMES  AND  GENES 

NOT  only  do  the  chromosomes  pass  through  a 
series  of  manoeuvres  that  go  far  toward  supply- 
ing a  mechanism  for  the  theory  of  heredity,  but 
from  other  sources  evidence  has  accumulated  supporting 
the  view  that  the  chromosomes  are  the  bearers  of  the 
hereditary  elements  or  genes,  and  this  evidence  has 
steadily  grown  stronger  each  year.  The  evidence  comes 
from  several  sources.  The  earliest  indication  came  from 
the  discovery  that  the  male  transmits  equally  with  the 
female.  In  animals,  the  male  contributes,  as  a  rule,  only 
the  head  of  the  spermatozoon,  which  contains  almost  ex- 
clusivelv  the  nucleus  composed  of  the  condensed  chromo- 
somes. Although  the  egg  contributes  all  the  visible  proto- 
plasm of  the  future  embryo,  it  has  no  preponderating 
influence  on  development,  except  so  far  as  the  beginning 
stages  of  development  are  determined  by  the  egg  proto- 
plasm that  has  been  under  the  influence  of  the  maternal 
chromosomes.  Despite  this  initial  influence,  which  can  be 
entirely  ascribed  to  the  previous  influence  of  its  own 
chromosomes,  the  later  stages  of  development  and  the 
adult  show  no  preponderance  of  maternal  influence. 

This  evidence  from  the  mutual  influence  of  the  two 
parents  is  not,  however,  in  itself  convincing,  for,  dealing 
with  elements  that  are  ultramicroscopical,  it  might  be 
claimed  that  the  sperm  contributes  something  more  than 
its  chromosomes  to  the  future  embrvo.  In  fact,  in  recent 
years  it  has  been  shown  that  visible  protoplasm  elements, 
the  centrosomes,  may  possibly  be  brought  into  the  egg  by 


46  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

the  sperm.  It  has  not  been  established,  however,  that  the 
centrosomes  have  any  specific  effects  on  the  develop- 
mental process. 

From  another  quarter  the  significance  of  the  chromo- 
somes was  shown.  "When  two  (or  more)  sperms  enter  the 
egg,  the  three  sets  of  chromosomes  that  result  may  be  dis- 
tributed irregularly  at  the  first  division  of  the  egg.  Four 
instead  of  two  cells,  as  in  normal  development,  are 
formed.  It  has  been  shown  by  a  detailed  study  of  such 
eggs,  combined  with  a  study  of  the  development  of  each 
of  the  isolated  quarters,  that  normal  development  does 
not  take  place  unless  at  least  one  full  set  of  chromosomes 
is  present.  At  least  this  is  the  most  reasonable  interpreta- 
tion of  the  results.  Since  in  these  cases  the  chromosomes 
are  not  marked,  the  evidence  does  not  do  more  than  create 
a  presumption  that  at  least  one  full  set  of  chromosomes 
must  be  present. 

More  recently  still  evidence  in  favor  of  such  an  inter- 
pretation has  come  from  other  sources.  It  has  been  shown, 
for  example,  that  one  set  of  chromosomes  alone  (haploid) 
is  capable  of  producing  an  individual  which,  to  a  large 
extent,  is  a  replica  of  the  normal  form,  but  this  evidence 
also  indicates  that  these  haploid  individuals  are  not  as 
vigorous  as  the  normal  diploid  type  of  the  species.  While 
this  difference  may  depend  on  factors  other  than  the 
chromosomes,  the  presumption  remains  that  two  sets  of 
chromosomes  are  better  than  one,  as  things  stand.  On 
the  other  hand,  in  mosses,  where  there  is  a  haploid  stage 
in  the  life  cycle,  the  artificial  transformation  of  the  hap- 
loid stage  into  a  diploid  stage  does  not  appear  to  give  an 
advantage.  Furthermore,  it  remains  to  be  shown  that 
twice  the  number  of  chromosomes  present  in  artificial 
tetraploids  confers  any  advantage  over  the  normal  dip- 
loid set.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  we  must  be  cautious  as 
to  the  merits  of  one,  two,  three,  or  four  sets  of  chromo- 


47 


CHROMOSOMES  AND  GENES 

somes,  especially  when  suddenly  an  artificial  situation  is 
created  by  increasing  or  decreasing  the  normal  comple- 
ment of  chromosomes  to  which  the  machinery  of  develop- 
ment is  already  adjusted. 


>**f 


Norma 


Hapio-  r? 


Fig.  29. 
Normal    and    haplo-IV    flies    of    Drosophila    melanogaster.    Their 
respective  chromosome  groups  are  shown  above  and  to  the  right 
of  each. 


Probably  the  most  complete  and  convincing  evidence 
concerning  the  significance  of  the  chromosomes  in  hered- 
ity has  come  from  the  recent  genetic  results  that  have  to 
do  with  the  specific  effects  of  changes  in  the  number  of 
the  chromosomes  where  each  one  carries  genetic  factors 
that  enable  us  to  identify  its  presence. 

Eecent  evidence  of  this  kind  comes  from  the  loss  or 
from  the  addition  of  one  of  the  small  fourth  chromosomes 
of  Drosophila  (chromosome-IV).  It  has  been  shown  both 
by  genetic  and  cytological  methods  that  chromosome-IV 
is  sometimes  lost  from  one  of  the  germ-cells — egg  or 
sperm.  If  an  egg  lacking  this  chromosome  is  fertilized  by 


48 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


a  normal  sperm,  the  fertilized  egg  contains  only  one  of 
the  fourth  chromosomes.  It  develops  into  a  fly  ("haplo- 
IV")  that  shows  in  many  parts  of  its  body  slight  differ- 
ences from  the  normal  fly  (Fig.  29). 


Fig.  30. 
Characters  in  the  fourth  linkage  group  of  D.  melanogaster.  To  the 
left,  bent  wings;  to  the  right  (above),  four  heads  showing  "eye- 
less," one  in  dorsal,  three  in  side  view;  below,  and  to  the  right, 
shaven. 


The  result  shows  that  specific  effects  are  produced 
when  one  of  these  chromosomes  is  absent,  even  in  the 
presence  of  the  other  fourth  chromosome. 

There  are  three  mutant  elements  or  genes  in  this  chro- 
mosome, namely,  eyeless,  bent,  shaven  (Fig.  30).  All  three 
are  recessives.  If  a  haplo-IV  female  is  mated  to  a  diploid 
eyeless  male  with  two  fourth  chromosomes  (each  ripe 
sperm  with  one)  some  of  the  offspring  that  hatch  are 
eyeless,  and  if  the  pupae  that  do  not  hatch  are  removed 


CHROMOSOMES  AND  GENES 


49 


from  their  pupa-cases  and  examined,  more  eyeless  flies 
are  detected.  The  eyeless  fly  has  come  from  an  egg  that 
did  not  carry  chromosome-IV  and  was  fertilized  by  a 
sperm  with  chromosome-IV  carrying  the  eyeless  gene. 


Haplo-lV 


Eyeless 
Diplo-lV 


Germ-cells 


Normal  Diploid         Haplo-lV  Eyeless 

Fig.  31. 
Diagram  of  a  cross  between  a  normal-eyed,  haplo-IV  fly,  and  an 
eyeless  fly  with  two  fourth  chromosomes,  each  carrying  a  gene  for 
eyeless.  The  fourth  chromosome  carrying  the  eyeless  gene  is  here 
represented  by  an  open  circle,  that  for  normal  eyes  by  a  black  dot. 


As  shown  in  the  diagram  (Fig.  31),  half  of  the  flies  should 
be  eyeless,  but  most  of  these  do  not  pass  beyond  the  pupal 
stage,  which  means  that  the  eyeless  gene  itself  has  a 
weakening  effect  on  the  individual,  and  that  when  to  this 
is  added  the  effects  due  to  the  absence  of  one  of  the  fourth 


50  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

chromosomes  only  a  few  such  flies  survive.  The  occur- 
rence, however,  of  such  recessive  eyeless  flies  in  the  first 
generation  corroborates  the  interpretation  that  the  eye- 
less gene  is  carried  by  chromosome-IV. 

The  same  results  are  obtained  when  the  two  other 
mutant  genes,  bent  and  shaven,  are  used  in  a  similar 


Haplo-Ef 


Fig.  32. 


Haplo-IV  and  triplo-IV  of  D.  melanogaster.  The  chromosome 
groups  are  represented,  respectively,  above  to  the  left,  and  to  the 
right  of  the  figures. 

experiment,  but  the  proportion  of  recessive  flies  that 
hatch  in  Fj  is  still  smaller,  indicating  that  these  genes 
have  an  even  greater  weakening  effect  than  the  eyeless 
gene. 

Occasionallv  flies  arise  in  which  three  chromosome- 
IV 's  are  present.  These  are  triplo-IV 's  (Fig.  32).  They 
also  differ  from  the  wild  type  in  several,  or  many,  per- 
haps in  all  their  characters.  The  eyes  are  smaller,  the 
body  color  is  darker,  and  the  wings  are  narrower.  If  a 


CHROMOSOMES  AND  GENES 


51 


triplo-TV  is  bred  to  an  eyeless  fly  two  kinds  of  offspring 

result  (Fig.  33).  Half  are  triplo-IV 's,  and  half  have  the 

normal  number  of  chromosomes,  as  shown  in  the  diagram. 

If,  now,  one  of  these  triplo-IV  flies  is  back-crossed  to 


Triplo-H 


Gametes 


f", 


OD 


sless 


I 


F,   Triplo-D? 


FiEgg* 


Eijele&s   Sperm 


-Q-. 


•  O   • 

o    o 


IP  • 

o    o 


5  Wild  Type 


P  8 


1  Eyeless 


Fig.  33. 
Diagram  of  a  cross  between  a  triplo-IV  fly  with  normal  eyes  and 
a  normal  diploid  fly,  pure  for  eyeless.  In  the  lower  half  of  the 
diagram  an  Fj  triplo-IV  fly  (whose  gametes  are  represented  in 
"Fj  eggs")  is  crossed  to  a  diploid  eyeless  fly  (whose  "eyeless 
sperm"  is  represented  by  the  open  circle),  giving  five  kinds  of 
flies  in  the  ratio  of  five  wild  type  eyes  to  one  eyeless. 


52  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

an  eyeless  fly  (from  stock)  the  expectation  is  that  there 
will  be  five  wild-type  flies  to  one  eyeless  (Fig.  33,  lower 
half)  instead  of  equality  as  in  the  ordinary  case  when  a 
heterozygous  individual  is  back-crossed  to  its  recessive. 
The  diagram  (Fig.  33)  shows  the  recombinations  of 
germ-cells  that  are  expected  to  give  rise  to  the  5  to  1 
ratio.  The  actual  number  of  eyeless  obtained  approxi- 
mates expectation. 

These  and  other  experiments  of  the  same  kind  show 
that  the  genetic  results  check  up  at  every  point  with  the 
known  history  of  chromosome-IV.  No  one  familiar  with 
the  evidence  can  doubt  for  a  moment  that  there  is  some- 
thing in  this  chromosome  that  is  responsible  for  the 
observed  results. 

There  is  also  evidence  that  the  sex-chromosomes  are 
the  bearers  of  certain  genes.  In  Drosophila  there  are  as 
many  as  200  characters  whose  inheritance  is  said  to  be 
sex-linked.  This  term  means  only  that  they  are  carried 
by  the  sex-chromosomes.  It  does  not  mean  that  the 
characters  are  confined  to  one  or  the  other  sex.  Owing  to 
the  differential  pair  of  sex-chromosomes  in  the  male,  the 
X  and  the  Y,  the  inheritance  of  characters  whose  gene 
lies  in  the  X-chromosomes  is  somewhat  different  from 
that  of  anv  of  the  other  characters.  There  is  evidence 
that  the  Y-chromosome  does  not  contain  in  Drosophila 
any  genes  that  conceal  the  recessives  in  the  X.  It  may, 
therefore,  be  ignored  except  in  so  far  as  it  acts  as  the 
mate  of  the  X  in  the  male  at  the  reduction  division  of 
the  sperm-cells.  The  mode  of  inheritance  of  linked  charac- 
ters of  Drosophila  has  already  been  given  in  Chapter  I 
(Figs.  11,  12,  13,  14).  The  mode  of  transmission  of  the 
sex-chromosome  is  given  in  Fig.  38.  An  examination  of 
the  latter  shows  that  these  characters  follow  the  known 
distribution  of  the  chromosome. 

Occasionally  the  sex-chromosomes  "go  wrong,"  and 


CHROMOSOMES  AND  GENES 


53 


this  slip  furnishes  an  opportunity  to  study  the  changes 
that  take  place  in  sex-linked  inheritance.  The  most  com- 
mon disturbance  is  due  to  the  failure  of  the  two  X's  in 
the  female  to  disjoin  at  one  of  the  maturation  divisions. 
The  process  is  called  non-disjunction.  If  an  egg  that  has 


disjunction 


Non-disjunc+ion 


Fig.  34. 


Diagram  to  show  the  fertilization  of  an  '"*  allached  X^^-er  XX-egg 
by  a  Y-sperm,  producing  a  non-disjunctional  XXY  female. 


retained  its  two  X-chromosomes  (and  one  of  each  of  the 
other  chromosomes,  Fig.  34)  is  fertilized  by  a  Y-sperm, 
an  individual  is  produced — a  female — that  has  two  X's 
and  a  Y.  When  the  eggs  of  the  XXY  female  mature,  that 
is,  when  the  reduction  of  the  chromosomes  takes  place, 
some  irregularity  is  introduced  in  the  distribution  of  the 


POLAR 
BODY 


EGGS 


SPERM 


POLAR 
BODY 

ECCS 


SPERM 


WHITE  d 
5 


Fig.  35. 


Diagram  illustrating  the  fertilization  of  an  XXY-egg,  whose  X- 
chromosomes  carry  each  the  gene  for  white  eyes,  by  a  red-eyed 
male.  In  the  upper  half  of  the  diagram  the  fertilization  of  the 
four  possible  kinds  of  eggs  by  the  red-eyed  producing  X-chromo- 
some  of  the  male  is  shown.  In  the  lower  part  of  the  diagram  the 
fertilization  of  the  same  four  kinds  of  eggs  by  the  Y-chromosome 
of  a  male  is  shown. 


CHROMOSOMES  AND  GENES  55 

two  X's  and  the  Y,  because  the  X's  may  conjugate,  leav- 
ing the  Y  free  to  move  to  either  pole,  or  one  X  and  the  Y 
may  mate,  leaving  a  free  X.  Possibly  all  three  may  come 
together,  and  then  separate  so  that  two  go  to  one  pole  of 
the  maturation  spindle  and  one  to  the  opposite  pole.  The 
results  are  practically  the  same  in  either  case.  Four  kinds 
of  eggs  are  expected,  as  shown  in  the  diagram  (Fig.  35). 

In  order  to  follow  the  genetic  changes  it  is  necessary 
that  the  X-chromosomes  of  the  female  or  of  the  male  carry 
one  or  more  recessive  genes.  For  instance,  if  the  two  X's 
in  the  female  carry  each  the  gene  for  white  eyes,  and  the 
X  in  the  male  carries  the  allelomorphic  gene  for  red  eyes, 
and  if  the  former  are  indicated  by  open  (white)  X's  and 
the  latter  by  a  black  X  (Fig.  35),  the  combinations  that 
result  are  those  indicated  in  the  diagram  (Fig.  35).  Eight 
kinds  of  individuals  are  expected,  one  of  which  (YY),  not 
containing  even  one  X-chromosome,  is  expected  to  die.  In 
fact,  this  individual  does  not  appear.  Two  of  these  indi- 
viduals, viz.,  No.  4  and  No.  7,  never  appear  when  an  ordi- 
nary white-eyed  (XX)  female  is  fertilized  by  a  red-eyed 
male.  Their  presence  here,  however,  is  in  accord  with  the 
expectation  from  an  XXY  white-eyed  female.  They  have 
been  tested  by  genetic  evidence  and  found  to  correspond 
to  the  formula  here  given  them.  Furthermore,  the  white- 
eyed  XXY  female  has  been  also  shown,  by  cytological 
examination,  to  have  two  X's  and  a  Y  in  her  cells. 

There  is  one  additional  kind  of  female  expected  that 
has  three  X-chromosomes.  The  diagram  indicates  that 
she  dies,  and  this  happens  in  the  great  majority  of  cases ; 
but  rarely  one  comes  through.  She  has  certain  peculiari- 
ties by  which  she  can  be  easily  identified.  She  is  sluggish, 
her  wings  are  short  and  often  irregular  (Fig.  36)  and  she 
is  sterile.  A  microscopic  examination  of  her  cells  has 
shown  that  she  contains  three  X-chromosomes. 

This  evidence  points  to  the  correctness  of  the  theory 


56  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

that  the  sex-linked  genes  are  carried  by  the  X-chromo- 
somes. 

There  is  another  aberrant  condition  in  the  X-chromo- 
somes  that  also  supports  this  conclusion.  A  type  of 
female  arose  whose  genetic  behavior  could  be  explained 


Fig.  36. 

A  three-X  female,  a,  having  three  X-ehromosomes  and  two  of  each 

of  the  other  kinds  (autosomes),  as  shown  in  b  and  c. 


only  on  the  assumption  that  her  two  X-chromosomes  had 
become  attached  to  each  other.  During  the  maturation 
division  of  her  eggs  both  X's  go  together,  i.e.,  they  both 
stay  in  the  egg,  or  both  go  out  together  (Fig.  37).  A 
microscopic  examination  shows  in  fact  that  the  two  X's 
of  these  females  are  stuck  together  end  to  end,  and  it 
shows  also  that  these  females  contain  a  Y-chromo- 
some  that  acts,  presumably,  as  a  mate  of  the  two  attached 


CHROMOSOMES  AND  GENES 


57 


chromosomes.  The  diagram  gives  the  expected  results 
when  such  a  female  is  fertilized.  By  good  fortune  the 
X-chromosomes  that  became  attached  carried  each  the 
recessive  gene  for  yellow  wings.  The  presence  of  the  two 


Double-X  yellow  by 


rtl9 

Y  + 


Wild 

l%6 


Y 


Fig.  37. 
Diagram  illustrating  the  fertilization  of  the  two  kinds  of  eggs  of 
an  attached,  XX,  yellow  female  (whose  double  X-chromosome  is 
represented  here  in  solid  black)  by  wild  type  male.  There  is  a 
Y-chromosome  in  the  double-X  female.  It  is  represented  here  by 
cross-hatching.  The  Y-chromosome  in  the  male  is  indicated  in  the 
same  way.  After  reduction  two  kinds  of  eggs  are  present  (see 
above  to  left).  These  fertilized  by  the  two  kinds  of  spermatozoa 
of  the  normal  (wild  type)  male  (see  above  to  right)  give  the  four 
classes  at  the  bottom  of  the  diagram. 


58  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

genes  for  yellow  enables  us  to  follow  the  genetic  history 
of  the  attached  X's  when  such  a  female  is  bred  to  a  nor- 
mal wild  type  male  with  gray  wings.  For  example:  the 
diagram  (Fig.  37)  shows  that  two  kinds  of  eggs  are  ex- 
pected after  the  maturation  division:  one  egg  retains  the 
double  yellow  X,  the  other  egg  retains  the  Y-chromosome. 
If  these  eggs  are  fertilized  by  any  kind  of  male,  prefer- 
ably by  one  whose  X-chromosome  contains  recessive 
genes,  four  kinds  of  offspring  should  be  produced,  two  of 
which  die.  The  two  that  survive  are  a  double  XXY  female 
that  is  yellow,  like  her  mother,  and  an  XY  male  that  is 
like  his  father  with  respect  to  his  sex-linked  characters 
because  he  gets  his  X  from  his  father. 

This  result  is  exactly  the  reverse  of  what  happens 
when  a  normal  female  with  recessive  genes  is  fertilized 
by  a  different  kind  of  male,  and  the  apparent  contradic- 
tion is  understandable,  at  once,  on  the  assumption  of 
attached  X-chromosomes.  A  cytological  examination  of 
these  double  X  females  never  fails  to  show  two  X's 
attached  to  each  other. 


CHAPTER  V 
THE  ORIGIN  OF  MUTANT  CHARACTERS 

THE  modern  study  of  heredity  has  been  intimately 
bound  up  with  the  origin  of  new  characters.  In 
fact,  the  study  of  Mendelian  inheritance  is  possible 
only  when  there  are  pairs  of  contrasted  characters  that 
can  be  followed.  Mendel  found  such  contrasted  characters 
in  the  commercial  stocks  that  he  used,  tall  and  short,  yel- 
low and  green,  round  and  wrinkled  peas.  Later  work  has 
also  extensively  used  such  material,  but  some  of  the  best 
material  is  supplied  by  new  types  whose  origin,  in  pedi- 
gree cultures,  is  better  known. 

These  new  characters  arise  for  the  most  part  suddenly, 
fully  equipped,  and  maintain  their  constancy  in  the  same 
way  as  do  the  characters  in  the  original  type  from  which 
they  arose.  For  example,  the  white-eyed  mutant  of  Droso- 
phila  appeared  in  a  culture  as  a  single  male.  When  mated 
to  a  common  red-eyed  female,  all  the  offspring  had  red 
eyes  (Fig.  38).  These  were  inbred  and  produced  in  the 
next  generation  red-eyed  and  white-eyed  individuals.  All 
the  white-eved  individuals  were  males. 

These  white-eved  males  were  then  mated  to  different 
red-eved  females  of  the  same  generation.  Some  of  the 
pairs  produced  equal  numbers  of  white-eyed  and  red- 
eyed  offspring,  both  males  and  females.  When  the  white- 
eyed  individuals  were  bred  together  they  gave  rise  to 
pure  white-eyed  stock. 

We  explain  these  results  in  accordance  with  Mendel's 
first  law,  which  postulates  a  red-producing  and  a  white- 
producing  element  (or  gene)  in  the  germinal  material. 


II 


Fig.  38. 
Sex-linked  inheritance  of  white  eyes  in  D.  melanogaster.  A  white- 
eyed  male  is  bred  to  a  red-eyed  female.  The  X-chromosome  carry- 
ing the  gene  for  red  eye  is  represented  by  the  black  rod;  the  X- 
chromosome  carrying  the  gene  for  white  eyes  is  represented  by 
the  open  rod,  and  the  white  recessive  gene  carried  in  the  chromo- 
some, by  small  w.  The  Y-chromosome  is  stippled. 


ORIGIN  OF  MUTANT  CHARACTERS  61 

They  behave  as  a  pair  of  contrasted  elements,  that  are 
separated  in  the  hybrid  at  the  maturation  of  the  eggs  and 
sperm. 


LACTICOLOR   9  01 


GR0SSULAR1ATA  d  LL 


O     ©  GERM  CELLS  © 


CROSSULAR^TA  9  OL 


GR0SSULAR1ATA  d  1 L 


©     ©    CERM  CELLS .  ©     © 


O  ©' 

LACTICOLOR    9  01 


O  © 

GR0SSULARIATA90L 


©  © 

CROSSULARlATAdLl 


©  © 

CR05SULARIATA  d  LL 


Fig.  39. 
Diagram  showing  a  cross  between  the  light-colored  type  (lacti- 
color)  of  Abraxas  and  the  common  or  dark  type  (grossulariata). 
The  sex-chromosome  carrying  the  gene  for  dark  color  is  here  indi- 
cated by  the  circle  enclosing  L,  that  for  light  color  by  the  circle 
with  1.  The  open  circle  (without  an  included  letter)  stands  for 
the  W-chromosome  that  is  confined  to  the  females. 

It  is  important  to  observe  that  the  theory  does  not 
state  that  the  white-eyed  gene  alone  produces  white  eyes. 
It  states,  only,  that  a  change  took  place  in  some  part  of 
the  original  material,  and  in  consequence  of  this  single 
change,  the  material,  taken  as  a  whole,  now  gives  rise  to 


62  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

a  different  end-product.  In  fact,  the  change  not  only  af- 
fects the  eyes,  but  other  parts  of  the  body  as  well.  The 
sheath  of  the  testes  is  colorless,  while  it  is  greenish  in 
red-eyed  flies.  The  white-eyed  flies  are  more  sluggish 
than  their  red-eved  fellows,  and  have  a  shorter  life.  It 
is  probable  that  many  parts  of  the  body  are  affected  by 
the  change  that  took  place  in  some  part  of  the  germinal 
material. 

At  rare  intervals,  lighter  colored,  or  pale  individuals, 
of  the  currant  moth,  Abraxas,  appear  in  nature.  They 
are  females  as  a  rule.  A  pale,  mutant  female  bred  to  a 
dark,  wild  type  male  (Fig.  39)  gives  offspring  that  are 


Fig.  40. 
The  mutant  character  Lobe*   of  D.  melanogaster.   The  eyes  are 

small  and  protruding. 

like  the  dark  type.  These,  inbred,  give  the  old  and  the  new 
types  as  3  to  1.  Pale  F2  individuals  are  all  females.  If 
they  are  bred  to  males  of  the  same  generation,  some 
pairs  give  pale  males  and  females,  as  well  as  dark  types 
in  equal  numbers.  From  the  former  a  pale  stock  can  be 
reared. 

The  two  preceding  mutant  characters  act  as  recessives 
toward  the  corresponding  character  in  the  wild  type,  but 
other  mutants  act  as  dominants.  For  example :  lobe2  is 
characterized  by  the  peculiar  shape  and  size  of  the  eye 
(Fig.  40).  It  arose  as  a  single  individual.  Half  of  its  off- 


ORIGIN  OF  MUTANT  CHARACTERS  63 

spring  showed  the  same  character.  A  change  in  a  gene  in 
one  of  the  second  chromosomes  must  have  taken  place, 
either  in  the  mother  or  father  of  the  mutant.  The  germ- 
cell  containing  this  gene  met  a  cell  containing  a  normal 
o-ene  at  the  time  of  fertilization,  and  the  first  mutant 
arose.    The   first   individual   was,   therefore,   hybrid   or 


Fig.  41. 

The  mutant  character  Curly  of  D.  melanogaster.  The  wings  curl 

up  at  the  ends  and  are  held  somewhat  apart. 

heterozygous,  and,  as  stated  above,  produced,  when  mated 
to  a  normal  individual,  both  lobe2  and  normal  offspring 
in  equal  numbers.  From  these  heterozygous  forms  some 
pure  lobe2  flies  were  produced  by  mating  two  lobe2  indi- 
viduals. The  pure  type  (homozygous  for  lobe2)  resembles 
the  heterozygous  type,  but  the  eyes  are  often  smaller,  and 
one  or  both  may  be  absent. 

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  many  dominant  mutants  are 
lethal  in  homozygous  conditions.  Thus  curly  wing  (Fig. 
41),  a  dominant  character,  nearly  always  dies  when  homo- 


M  THE  THEORY   OF  THE  OEM 

ivgous.  Rarely,  however,  an  individual  survives.  The 
mutant,  yellow  coat  color  in  mice,  is  lethal  as  double 

dominant,  as  is  also  the  mutant  gene  for  black-eyed  white 
in  mice.  In  all  types  of  this  sort,  pure  breeding  stock  can- 
not be  produeed  (except  by  "balancing"  the  dominant 
with  another  lethal).  They  produce,  in  each  generation, 
individuals  like  themselves  and  some  other  type  (the 
normal  allelomorph)  in  equal  numbers. 

The  short  -tinkered  or  braehvdaetvl  type  in  man  is  a 
striking  dominant  character  whose  inheritance  is  well 
known.  It  will  hardly  be  questioned  that  it  arose  as  a 
dominant  mutant  that  established  itself  in  certain  fami- 
lies. 

All  the  stoeks  of  Drosophila  have  arisen  as  mutants. 
In  the  eases  that  T  have  given  the  mutant  first  appeared 
as  a  sino-lo  individual.  In  several  other  eases,  however, 
the  new  mutant  type  first  appeared  in  several  individuals. 
In  such  eases  the  mutation  must  have  appeared  early  in 
the  germ-track,  so  that  several  eggs  or  sperm-eells  came 
to  carry  the  mutated  element. 

At  other  times  a  quarter  of  all  the  offspring  from  a 
pair  are  mutants.  These  mutants  are  reeessives.  and  the 
evidence  shows,  ill  such  eases,  that  the  mutation  had 
occurred  in  an  ancestor,  and,  being  a  recessive,  it  did  not 
appear  on  the  surface  until  two  individuals  each  having 
the  mutated  gene  met.  A  quarter  of  their  offspring  are 
then  expected  to  show  the  recessive  character. 

Closely  inbred  stoeks  are  expected  to  give  this  sort  of 
result  more  often  than  outbred  stoeks.  If  outbred,  the 
recessive  gene  may  be  distributed  to  a  Large  number  of 
individuals  before  two  such  individuals  meet  by  chance. 

It  is  probable  that  there  are  many  concealed  recessive 
genes  in  the  human  germ-material,  since  some  defective 
characters  recur  oftener  than  expected  by  independent 
mutation.  When  their  pedigrees  are  traced  they  often 


ORIGIN  OF  MUTANT  CHARACTERS  65 

show  relatives  or  ancestors  with  the  same  mutant  charac- 
ter. Human  albinos  furnish,  perhaps,  the  best  example  of 
this  sort.  In  many  cases  they  come  from  stocks  both  of 
which  carry  the  recessive  gene,  but  it  is  always  possible 
thai  a  new  gene  for  albinos  may  have  been  produced  by 
mutation.  Even  then  it  cannot  come  to  expression  until 
it  meets  another  like  gene. 

Most  of  our  domesticated  animals  and  plants  show 
characters  that  behave  in  inheritance  in  the  same  way  as 
do  the  mutants  whose  origin  is  established.  There  can  be 
no  reasonable  doubt  that  many  of  the  characters  have 
arisen  by  sudden  mutations,  especially  in  cases  where  the 
domesticated  types  have  come  from  inbred  pedigree 
stocks. 

It  is  not  to  be  inferred  from  the  preceding  examples 
that  the  production  of  mutants  is  peculiar  to  domesticated 
races;  for  this  is  not  the  ease.  There  is  abundant  evi- 
dence that  the  same  kinds  of  mutations  occur  also  in 
nature.  Since  most  of  the  mutants  are  weaker  or  less  well- 
adapted  type-  than  the  wild  type,  they  disappear  before 
they  are  recognized.  In  cultivation,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  individual  is  protected,  and  tin;  weaker  types  have  a 
chance  to  survive.  Moreover,  domestic  forms,  especially 
those  reared  for  genetic  purposes,  are  carefully  scruti- 
nized, and  our  familiarity  with  them  accounts  for  the 
detection  of  many  new  types. 

A  study  of  the  occurrence  of  mutations  in  the  stocks  of 
Drosophila  has  brought  to  light  a  curious  and  unexpected 
fact.  The  mutational  change  takes  place  in  one  member 
only  of  a  pair  of  genes — not  in  both  at  the  same  time. 
It  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  kind  of  an  environmental 
effect  could  cause  one  gene  in  one  cell  to  change,  and  not 
the  other  identical  gene.  Hence  it  may  seem  that  the  cause 
of  the  change  is  internal  rather  than  external.  This  ques- 
tion will  be  further  discussed  later. 


66 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

TABLE  I 
Becurrent  Mutations  and  Allelomorphic  Series 


Distinct 

Distinct 

Total 

Mutant 

Total 

Mutant 

Locus 

Occurrences 

Types 

Locus 

Occurrences 

Types 

apterous 

3 

1 

lethal-a 

2 

1 

ascute 

4± 

1 

lethal-b 

2 

1 

Bar 

2 

2 

lethal-c 

2 

1 

bent 

2 

2 

lethal-e 

4 

1 

bifid 

3 

1 

Lobe 

6 

3 

bithorax 
black 

3 
3  + 

2 

1 

lozenge 
maroon 

10 

4 

5 

1 

bobbed 

6+ 

1 

miniature 

7 

1 

brown 

2 

2 

Notches 

25-4- 

3 

broad 
cinnabar 

6 

4 

4 
3 

pink 
purple 

11  + 
6 

5 

2 

club 

2 

2 

reduced 

2 

2 

cross-reinless 

2 

1 

rough 

2 

2 

curved 
cut 

dachs 
dachsoid 

2 

16+ 

2 

2 

2 

5+ 

2 

1 

roughoid 

ruby 

rudimentary 

sable 

2 
6 

14  + 
3 

2 
2 

5+ 
2 

Delta 

2 

2 

scarlet 

2 

1 

deltex 

2 

1 

scute 

4 

1 

Diehaete 

dusky 

ebony 

eyeless 

fat 

forked 

fringed 

furrowed 

3 

6+ 
10 
2 
2 
9 
2 
2 

3 
3 

5 
2 
2 
4 

1 
2 

sepia 

singed 

Star 

tan 

tetraploidy 

triploidy 

Truncate 

vermilion 

4 
5 
2 
3 
3 

15± 

8± 

12± 

1 
3 
1 
2 
1 
1 
5 
2 

fused 
garnet 
Haplo-IV 
inflated 

2 

5 

35=h 

2 

2 
3 
1 

1 

vestigial 

white 

yellow 

6 
25± 
15± 

4 
11 

2 

There  is  also  another  fact  that  a  study  of  the  mutation 
process  has  brought  to  our  attention.  The  same  mutation 
may  recur  again  and  again.  A  list  of  these  recurrent  mu- 
tations of  Drosophila  is  given  above.  The  reappearance 
of  the  same  mutant  indicates  that  we  are  dealing  with 
a  specific  and  orderly  process.  Its  recurrence  recalls 
Galton's  famous  analogy  of  a  polygon.  Each  change 
corresponds  to  a  new  stable  position  (here  perhaps  in  a 


ORIGIN  OF  MUTANT  CHARACTERS  67 

chemical  sense)  of  the  gene.  Tempting  as  is  this  com- 
parison, we  must  remember  that,  as  yet,  we  have  almost 
no  evidence  as  to  the  real  nature  of  the  mutation  process. 

The  mutant  types  that  are  most  often  referred  to,  or 
used  for  genetic  material,  are  as  a  rule  rather  extreme 
modifications  or  aberrations.  This  has  sometimes  given 
the  impression  that  a  mutant  change  involves  a  great 
departure  from  the  original  type.  Darwin  spoke  of  salta- 
tions, which  are  only  extreme  mutations,  and  he  rejected 
them  as  materials  for  evolution,  because,  he  said,  such 
great  alterations  in  one  part  of  the  body  would  be  likely 
to  throw  the  organism  out  of  harmony  with  its  environ- 
ment, to  which  it  is  nicely  adapted.  Today,  while  we  real- 
ize fully  the  truth  of  this  statement,  when  applied  to 
extreme  changes  producing  malformations  or  aberra- 
tions, we  have  come,  nevertheless,  to  a  realization  that 
minute  changes  are  as  characteristic  of  mutation  as  are 
the  grosser  changes.  In  fact,  it  has  been  shown  many 
times  that  small  changes  that  make  a  part  a  little  larger 
or  a  little  smaller  may  also  be  due  to  genes  in  the  germ- 
material.  Since  only  the  differences  that  are  due  to  genes 
are  inherited,  it  seems  to  follow  that  evolution  must  have 
taken  place  through  changes  in  the  genes.  It  does  not 
follow,  however,  that  these  evolutionary  changes  are 
identical  with  those  that  we  see  arising  as  mutations.  It  is 
possible  that  the  genes  of  wild  types  have  had  a  different 
origin.  In  fact,  this  view  is  often  implied  and  sometimes 
vigorously  asserted.  It  is  important,  therefore,  to  find 
out  whether  there  is  any  evidence  in  support  of  such  a 
view.  De  Vries'  earlier  formulation  of  his  famous  muta- 
tion theory  might  at  first  sight  seem  to  suggest  the  crea- 
tion of  new  genes. 

The  opening  sentence  of  the  mutation  theory  states 
"that  the  properties  of  the  organism  are  made  up  of 
units,  sharply  distinguishable  from  one  another.  These 


68  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

units  are  bound  up  in  groups,  and,  in  related  species,  the 
same  units  and  groups  of  units  recur.  Transitions,  such 
as  seen  in  the  outer  forms  of  animals  and  plants,  no  more 
exist  between  the  units  than  between  the  molecules  of  the 
chemist. 

''Species  are  not  continuously  connected,  but  arise 
through  sudden  changes  or  steps.  Each  new  unit  added 
to  those  already  present  forms  a  step,  and  separates  the 
new  type  as  an  independent  species  from  the  species  from 
which  it  arises.  The  new  species  is  'presto  change,'  there. 
It  arises  without  visible  preparation  and  without  transi- 
tions." 

It  may  appear  from  this  statement  that  a  mutation 
that  produces  a  new  elementary  species  is  due  to  the 
sudden  appearance  or  creation  of  a  new  element — a  new 
gene.  Put  in  another  way,  we  witness  at  mutation  the 
birth  of  a  new  gene  or  at  least  its  activation.  The  number 
of  active  genes  in  the  world  has  been  increased  by  one. 

De  Vries  has  further  elaborated  his  views  on  mutation 
in  the  concluding  chapters  of  The  Mutation  Theory  and 
in  his  later  lectures  on ' '  Species  and  Varieties. ' '  He  recog- 
nizes two  processes,  one  the  addition  of  a  new  element 
that  gives  rise  to  a  new  species ;  and  the  other,  the  inacti- 
vation  of  a  gene  already  present.  It  is  the  second  view 
that  interests  us  at  present,  because,  except  for  the  man- 
ner of  expression,  it  is  essentially  the  view  that  is  today 
sometimes  said  to  be  the  way  in  which  the  new  types  in 
our  cultures  arise — through  the  loss  of  a  gene.  De  Vries 
himself,  in  fact,  places  in  this  category  all  the  commonly 
observed  cases  of  loss  mutations  without  respect  to  their 
dominance  or  recessiveness,  implying,  however,  that  they 
are  recessive  because  their  gene  has  become  inactive. 
Mendelian  results,  he  thinks,  belong  solely  to  this  second 
category,  because  of  the  existence  of  contrasting  pairs  of 
genes — the  active  one  and  its  inactive  mate.  These  segre- 


ORIGIN  OF  MUTANT  CHARACTERS 


69 


gate,  giving  the  two  kinds  of  gametes  peculiar  to  Men- 
delian  inheritance. 

De  Vries  says  that  such  a  process  represents  a  step 
backward  in  evolution.  It  is  not  progressive  but  degres- 
sive and  produces  a  " retrograde  variety."  This  inter- 
pretation is,  as  I  have  said,  closely  akin  to  a  current 
interpretation  of  mutational  changes  as  due  to  a  loss  of  a 
gene — in  principle  the  two  ideas  are  the  same. 


Fig.  42. 

Several  plants  of  Oenothera   Lamarekiana    (to  the  left),  and  O. 

gigas  (to  the  right).  (After  de  Vries.) 


It  is  not  without  interest,  therefore,  to  examine  the 
evidence  that  led  de  Vries  to  develop  his  mutation  hy- 
pothesis. 

De  Vries  found  near  Amsterdam,  in  a  waste  field,  a 
colony  of  evening  primroses,  Oenothera  Lamarekiana 
(Fig.  42).  Amongst  them  were  a  few  individuals  that  dif- 
fered somewhat  from  the  common  forms.  He  brought 
some  of  these  into  his  garden  and  found  that  they  bred 
true  for  the  most  part.  He  also  bred  the  parent  form,  or 
Lamarekiana.  It  produced,  in  each  generation,  a  small 
number  of  the  same  new  types.  In  all,  about  nine  such 


70  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

types  were  recognized  at  that  time.  These  were  the  new 
mutants. 

Now  it  has  turned  out  that  one  of  these  types  is  due  to 
doubling  the  number  of  the  chromosomes.  It  is  called 
gigas  (Fig.  42).  One  is  a  triploid,  semigigas.  Several  of 
the  types  are  due  to  the  presence  of  an  extra  chromosome. 
These  are  called  lata  and  semilata  forms.  One  at  least, 
brevistylis,  is  a  point-mutant,  like  the  recessive  mutants 
of  Drosophila.  It  is,  then,  to  0.  brevistylis,  and  to  the 
residue  of  recessive  mutants,  that  de  Vries  must  appeal.1 
It  appears,  now,  highly  probable  that  this  residue  (the 
recessive  mutants)  conform  to  the  Drosophila  mutant 
types,  but  their  manner  of  reappearance  in  nearly  every 
generation  gives  a  picture  entirely  different  from  that  of 
mutation  in  Drosophila  and  other  animals  and  plants.  A 
possible  interpretation  may  be  found  in  the  presence  of 
lethal  genes  closely  linked  with  these  recessive  mutant 
genes.  Only  when  the  recessive  gene  is  released  from  its 
near-by  lethal  through  crossing-over  is  there  an  opportu- 
nity for  it  to  come  to  expression.  It  has  been  possible 
in  Drosophila  to  make  up  balanced  lethal  stocks  carrying 
recessive  genes  that  simulate  closely  Oenothera.  Only 
when  crossing-over  occurs  does  the  recessive  reappear. 
The  frequency  of  its  appearance  is  dependent  on  the 
closeness  of  the  lethal  to  the  recessive  gene. 

It  has  been  found  that  other  species  of  wild  Oenotheras 
behave  in  the  same  way  as  Lamarck's  evening  primrose, 
whose  peculiarities  in  inheritance  are,  therefore,  not  due 
to  a  hybrid  origin  (as  has  been  sometimes  surmised), 
but  due,  in  the  main,  to  the  presence  of  recessive  genes 
linked  to  lethal  factors.  The  appearance  of  the  mutant 
types  does  not  represent  the  mutation  process  that  pro- 

i  De  Vries  and  Stomps  both  thought  that  some  of  the  peculiarities  of 
O.  gigas  are  due  to  other  factors  than  chromosome  number. 


ORIGIN  OF  MUTANT  CHARACTERS  71 

duced  the  mutant  gene  but  rather  its  release  from  its 
lethal  linkage.2 

It  seems,  then,  that  the  mutation  process  in  Lamarck's 
primrose  is  probably  not  essentially  different  from  famil- 
iar processes  that  occur  in  other  plants  and  animals.  In 
other  words,  there  are  no  longer  grounds  for  interpreting 
the  mutation  process  that  it  shows  as  differing  essentially 
from  what  takes  place  in  other  animals  and  plants,  except 
that  some  of  its  recessive  mutant  genes  are  concealed, 
owing  to  the  presence  of  lethal  genes. 

These  considerations  remove,  I  think,  any  necessity  for 
assuming  that  a  new  gene  is  added,  even  when  a  new  or 
progressive  type  of  Oenothera  appears.  It  may  be  that 
such  progressive  types  as  de  Vries  had  in  mind  arise 
through  the  accidental  addition  of  a  whole  chromosome  to 
the  normal  set.  This  question  will  be  considered  in  Chap- 
ter XII,  but  it  may  be  said  here  that  there  is  very  little 
evidence  that  new  species  can  often  be  produced  in  this 
way. 

2  Shull  has  interpreted  the  appearance  of  a  number  of  the  recessive  types 
of  O.  Lamar cTciane,  on  the  lethal-linkage  hypothesis.  S.  H.  Emerson  has  re- 
cently pointed  out  that  Shull's  evidence,  so  far  published,  is  not  entirely 
cogent,  but  it  may,  nevertheless,  be  valid.  De  Vries  himself,  in  recent  pub- 
lications, seems  not  averse  to  accepting  the  lethal  interpretation  for  certain 
of  the  oft-repeated  recessive  mutants  that  he  places  in  the  "central  chromo- 
some. ' ' 


CHAPTER  VI 


ARE  MUTANT  RECESSIVE  GENES  PRODUCED 
BY  LOSSES  OF  GENES? 

MENDEL  did  not  consider  the  question  of  the 
origin  or  the  nature  of  the  genes.  He  repre- 
sented in  his  formula  the  dominant  gene  by  a 
capital  letter  and  the  recessive  gene  by  a  small  letter.  The 
pure  dominant  was  AA  and  the  recessive  was  aa  and  the 
hybrid,  or  Fj,  was  Aa.  The  question  as  to  origin  did  not 
arise,  because  the  characters  yellow  and  green,  tall  and 
short,  round  and  wrinkled,  were  already  present  in  the 
peas  selected  for  the  experiment.  Only  later,  when  the 
relation  of  the  mutants  to  the  wild  species  from  which 
thev  were  supposed  to  have  come  was  considered,  did 
their  origin  arouse  interest.  A  specific  case,  that  of  rose 
comb  and  pea  comb  in  domestic  fowls,  seems  to  have  had 
something  to  do  with  the  reasoning  that  led  to  an  inter- 
pretation of  recessive  genes  as  losses  or  absences. 

Certain  breeds  of  domestic  poultry  have  a  comb  called 
rose  (Fig.  43).  They  breed  true  to  this  type  of  comb. 
Other  races  have  a  comb  called  pea  (Fig.  43).  They  also 
breed  true  to  their  type.  If  these  breeds  are  crossed,  the 
Fx  has  a  new  form  of  comb,  called  walnut  (Fig.  43).  If 
two  Ft  fowls  with  walnut  combs  are  mated,  the  offspring 
show  9  walnut,  3  rose,  3  pea,  to  1  single.  The  numerical 
result  shows  that  two  pairs  of  genes  are  involved,  rose 
and  not-rose,  pea  and  not-pea.  The  single  comb  is  not- 
rose,  not-pea,  which  was  then  interpreted  to  mean  the 
absence  of  pea  and  of  rose  genes.  But  the  not-presence 
of  pea  and  not-presence  of  rose  genes  does  not  prove 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES? 


73 


necessarily  that  the  allelomorphs  of  these  genes  are  ab- 
sences. The  allelomorphs  may  be  only  other  genes  that  do 
not  give  rise  either  to  pea  or  to  rose  comb. 


Fig.  43. 

Combs  of  domesticated  races  of  fowls,  a,  single  comb;  b,  pea 
comb;  c,  rose  comb;  d,  walnut  comb  (the  hybrid  or  Fj  type  when 
pea  and  rose  are  crossed). 

The  result  may  be  stated  in  another  way  that  may  make 
the  situation  more  obvious.  If  we  assume  that  the  wild 
jungle  fowl,  from  which  our  domesticated  races  have 
come,  had  a  single  comb,  and  that  at  some  time  a  domi- 
nant mutation  occurred  that  gave  a  pea  comb,  and  at 


74  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

another  time,  in  another  bird,  a  dominant  mutation  oc- 
curred that  gave  a  rose  comb,  it  follows  that  in  the  cross 
described  above,  the  F2  single  comb  is  due  to  the  presence 
of  the  original  wild  type  genes.  Thus,  a  race  with  pea 
comb  (PP)  will  contain  the  wild  type  genes  (rr),  from 
which  the  rose  comb  arose  by  mutation.  Similarly  the 
race  with  rose  comb  (RR)  will  contain  the  wild  type 
genes  (pp),  from  which  the  pea  comb  arose  by  mutation. 
The  formula  for  the  pea  comb  race  is  then  PPrr  and 
for  the  rose  comb  race  RRpp.  The  germ  cells  of  these  two 
races  will  be  Pr  and  Rp  respectively,  and  the  F1  will  be 
PpRr.  The  two  dominants  produce  a  new  type,  the  wal- 
nut comb.  Since  two  pairs  of  genes  are  present  in  ¥1 
there  will  be  16  combinations  in  F2,  and  of  these  one  will 
be  pprr  or  single  comb.  The  single  comb  is  due  then  to 
the  recombination  of  the  wild  type  recessive  genes  that 
entered  the  cross. 

Recessive  Characters  and  Absences  of  Genes. 

In  the  background  of  the  presence  and  absence  theory 
there  lurks,  beyond  doubt,  the  idea  that  many  recessive 
characters  are  actual  losses  of  some  character  that  was 
once  present  in  the  original  type,  hence  by  implication  the 
gene  of  that  character  is  also  absent.  This  idea  is  a  hang- 
over of  Weismann's  theory  of  the  relation  of  determinant 
to  character. 

It  is  instructive  to  look  a  little  closer  into  the  evidence 
that  may  have  seemed  at  first  to  support  such  an  inter- 
pretation. 

An  albino  rabbit  or  rat  or  guinea  pig  may  be  inter- 
preted to  have  lost  the  pigment  characteristic  of  the  origi- 
nal type.  In  a  sense  no  one  will  deny  that  the  relation  of 
the  two  types  may  be  expressed  in  this  way,  but,  in  pass- 
ing, it  may  be  noted  that  many  albino  guinea  pigs  have  a 
few  colored  hairs  on  the  feet  or  toes.  If  the  pigment-pro- 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES?  75 

ducing  gene  is  absent  and  if  color  depends  on  the  pres- 
ence of  this  gene  it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  presence 
of  these  colored  hairs. 

A  mutant  race  of  Drosophila  is  called  vestigial  (Fig. 
10)  because  only  vestiges  of  the  wings  are  present,  but  if 
the  larvae  are  reared  at  a  temperature  of  about  31  °C.  the 
rudiments  are  quite  long  and  in  extreme  cases  may  be 
almost  as  long  as  the  wings  of  the  wild  type.  If  the  gene 
for  producing  long  wings  is  absent,  how  can  a  high  tem- 
perature bring  it  back  again? 

There  is  another  highly  selected  race  of  Drosophila  in 
which  the  eyes  are  absent  in  most  individuals,  but  small 
eyes  may  be  present  in  other  individuals  (Fig.  30).  As 
the  culture  °;ets  older  more  and  more  of  the  flies  have 
eyes  and  the  average  size  of  the  eyes  is  larger.  It  is  not 
probable  that  the  gene  changes  as  the  culture  gets  older 
and  if  it  were  absent  in  the  eyeless  flies  that  first  hatch,  it 
is  not  likely  that  the  age  of  the  culture  could  bring  back 
the  missing  gene.  Moreover,  if  this  were  the  case,  flies 
from  the  older  culture  should  produce  offspring  more  of 
which  had  eyes  or  larger  eyes  than  the  average  of  the 
race,  but  this  does  not  happen. 

In  still  other  recessive  mutant  types  the  loss  of  the 
character  itself  is  by  no  means  obvious.  A  black  rabbit 
is  recessive  to  the  gray  wild  type.  The  black  rabbit  has 
actually  more  pigment  than  has  the  gray  rabbit. 

There  are  dominant  genes  that  produce  pure  white 
individuals.  The  white  leghorn  race  of  fowls  is  due  to 
such  a  factor.  Here  the  argument  is  reversed,  and  it  is 
said  that  there  is  present  in  the  wild  type  jungle  fowl  a 
gene  that  suppresses  white  plumage.  When  this  suppress- 
ing gene  is  lost  the  bird  is  then  able  to  develop  white 
plumage.  Logical  as  this  argument  may  appear,  the  as- 
sumption of  the  presence  of  factors  of  this  sort  in  the 
wild  bird  seems  far  fetched,  and  in  the  light  of  the  occur- 


76  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

rence  of  other  dominant  characters,  the  argument  is  not 
one  that  makes  a  favorable  appeal  but  seems  rather  a 
forced  attempt  to  save  the  theory  at  all  costs. 

It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  distinction  be- 
tween recessive  and  dominant  genes  is  largely  arbitrary. 
Experience  has  shown  that  characters  are  by  no  means 
always  recessive  or  dominant.  On  the  contrary,  in  a  large 
majority  of  cases,  a  character  is  not  completely  dominant 
or  completely  recessive.  In  other  words,  the  hybrid  type, 
containing  a  dominant  and  a  recessive  gene,  lies  some- 
where between  the  parent  types — both  genes  have  some 
effect  on  the  character  produced.  When  this  relation  is 
realized,  the  theory  that  a  recessive  gene  is  an  absence 
does  not  appear  in  so  favorable  a  light.  It  is  true  that  it 
might  be  claimed  in  such  cases,  with  some  grounds  for 
justification,  perhaps,  that  the  hybrid  is  intermediate 
because  one  dominant  gene  produces  less  effect  than  two 
dominant  genes,  but  this  introduces  a  new  feature  into 
the  situation.  It  does  not  necessarilv  mean  that  the  effect 
is  really  due  to  one  absence.  It  can  be  brought  into  line 
with  this  assumption  perhaps,  but  is  not  a  necessary  in- 
ference. 

If  the  preceding  arguments  are  admitted  as  cogent  we 
might  dismiss  this  interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  the 
recessive  gene  taken  in  a  literal  sense.  But  in  recent  years 
another  interpretation  of  the  relation  between  the  effect 
of  all  the  genes  and  the  character  has  appeared  that 
makes  the  refutation  of  the  presence  and  absence  view 
much  more  difficult.  For  example,  suppose  a  gene  were 
actually  lost  from  a  chromosome  and  that  when  two  such 
chromosomes  are  brought  together,  some  character  of  the 
individual  is  modified  or  even  absent.  The  modification  or 
absence  might  be  said  to  be  the  effect  produced  by  all 
the  rest  of  the  genes.  It  is  not  the  absence,  as  such,  that 
determines  the  result,  but  the  effect  produced,  when  two 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES?  77 

genes  are  absent,  by  the  rest  of  the  genes.  Such  an  inter- 
pretation avoids  the  rather  naive  assumption  that  each 
gene  in  itself  represents  a  character  of  the  individual. 

Before  discussing  this  view  it  should  be  pointed  out 
that  in  certain  aspects  this  interpretation  is  similar  to, 
and  in  fact  derived  from,  another  more  familiar  interpre- 
tation of  the  relation  between  gene  and  character.  For 
instance,  if  the  mutation  process  is  interpreted  to  mean 
a  change  in  the  constitution  of  a  gene,  the  result  that 
follows,  when  two  recessive  mutant  genes  are  present, 
is  not  that  the  new  character  is  due  to  the  new  gene  alone, 
but  that  the  new  character  is  the  end  product  of  the 
activity  of  all  the  genes,  including  the  new  ones,  in  the 
same  sense  that  the  original  character  was  also  due  to 
the  original  gene  (that  mutated)  and  to  the  rest  of  the 
genes. 

These  last  two  interpretations  may  be  briefly  stated 
as  follows :  The  first  one  states  that  in  the  absence  of  a 
pair  of  genes  all  the  rest  of  the  genes  are  responsible  for 
the  mutant  character.  The  second  states  that  when  a  gene 
changes  its  constitution,  the  end-result,  produced  by  the 
new  genes,  and  the  rest  of  the  genes,  is  the  mutant 
character. 

There  is  a  certain  amount  of  recently  obtained  evidence 
that  has  some  bearing  on  the  question  here  at  issue 
although  it  cannot  be  said  to  furnish  a  decisive  answer 
in  favor  of  either  view.  The  evidence  is,  nevertheless, 
worth  considering  on  its  own  merits,  since  it  brings  out 
certain  possibilities  relating  to  mutation  that  have  not, 
so  far,  been  discussed. 

There  are  several  mutant  stocks  called  collectively 
notch  that  can  be  identified  by  one  or  more  incisions  at 
the  end  of  the  wings  and  by  the  thickening  of  the  third 
vein  of  the  wing  (Fig.  44).  Only  females  having  these 
characteristics  appear.  Any  male  carrying  the  gene  for 


78 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


notch  dies.  The  factor  is  carried  in  the  X-chromosome. 
The  notch  female  has  one  X  carrying  the  factor  for  notch 
and  another  X  with  its  normal  allelomorph  (Fig.  45). 
Half  of  her  ripe  eggs  retain  one  X,  half  the  other.  If  she 


Fig.  44. 

Notch-win g,  a  dominant  sex-linked,  recessive  lethal  of  Drosophila 

melanogaster. 


is  fertilized  by  a  normal  male,  an  X-sperm  uniting  with 
an  egg  carrying  the  normal  X  produces  a  normal  daugh- 
ter ;  an  X-sperm  uniting  with  an  egg  carrying  the  notch- 
bearing  X  produces  a  notch  daughter.  A  Y-sperm  uniting 
with  an  egg  carrying  a  normal  X  produces  a  normal  son; 
a  Y-sperm  uniting  with  an  egg  carrying  a  notch-bearing 
X  forms  a  combination  that  dies.  The  output  is  two 
daughters  to  one  son. 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES? 


79 


As  far  as  this  evidence  goes,  notch  might  be  interpreted 
as  a  recessive  lethal  gene  that  acts  as  a  dominant  wing 
modifier  in  the  hybrid.  It  was,  however,  later  shown  by 
Bridges  and  by  Mohr  that  a  much  greater  length  of  the 
X-chromosome  is  involved  in  the  notch  mutation  than  in 


Notch  O 

N      -n 

XX      t4 


normal  cf 

X^Y 


Gametes 


Fi 


JVotch 


Fig.  45. 
Diagram  to  illustrate  a  cross  of  a  Notch  female,  XNXn  by  a  normal 
male,  XnY.  The  X-chromosome  with  Notch  is  XN;   the  other  X, 
carries  the  normal  allelomorph,  Xn. 


an  ordinary  ' '  point  mutation ' ' ;  for  when  recessive  genes 
are  present  in  the  region  of  notch  in  one  X-chromosome, 
and  notch  in  the  other  X-chromosome,  the  recessive 
characters  appear  in  such  an  individual  as  though  a  cer- 
tain region  of  the  notch  chromosome  were  absent  or  at 
any  rate  inactive  (Fig.  46a).  The  result  is  practically  the 
same  as  though  an  absence  had  actually  arisen.  In  some 
of  the  notch  mutants  the  "lost"  region  extends  over 
about  3.8  units  (from  the  left  of  white  to  the  right  of 


80 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


abnormal)  (see  chart,  Fig.  19) ;  but  in  other  notches  the 
lost  region  extends  over  fewer  units.  In  each  case  the  test 
seems  to  mean  that  a  small  piece  (more  or  less)  of  the 
chromosome  has,  in  some  sense,  dropped  out. 


white 
facet—— 


b 


aDnor-m. 


/ 


\-not  ver 


ver  ....  v ev 


1-14  Mel 


/-not  v/el 


a 

Fig.  46. 
Diagram  a,  showing  the  location  of  the  genes  in  the  Notch-bearing 
chromosome.  In  the  right-hand  rod  the  break  in  the  chromosome 
stands  for  Notch.  In  the  left-hand  rod  the  location  of  three  reces- 
sive genes  (white,  facet,  abnormal),  that  stand  opposite  Notch,  are 
indicated.  In  b  the  translocation  of  a  piece  of  an  X-chromosome  to 
another  X  is  shown.  There  are  two  vermilion-bearing  X-chromo- 
somes  to  one  of  which  the  piece  is  attached  carrying  the  normal 
allelomorph  of  vermilion,  i.e.,  not-vermilion.  In  c  there  are  two 
yellow-bearing  X-chromosomes  to  one  of  which  is  attached  a  piece 
carrying  the  normal  allelomorph  of  yellow,  i.e.,  not-yellow. 

As  has  been  stated,  recessive  genes,  when  opposite  to 
notch,  produce  their  recessive  characters.  This  is  con- 
sistent either  with  the  view  that  these  recessives  are 
absences  and  the  effect  is  produced  by  all  the  rest  of  the 
genes,  or  with  the  view  that  the  recessive  genes  are  pres- 
ent and  produce  their  effect  in  combination  with  all  the 
rest  of  the  genes.  The  result  does  not  permit  a  decision 
between  the  two  views. 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES?  81 

There  is,  nevertheless,  a  slight  difference  between  the 
character  produced  by  two  recessive  genes  in  this  region 
and  one  recessive  and  the  notch  "absence."  This  differ- 
ence might  seem  to  be  due  to  one  real  absence  (notch)  and 
one  recessive  not  being  equivalent  to  two  recessive  genes, 
but  further  consideration  shows  that  the  two  situations 
are  not  quite  comparable  owing  to  the  absence  of  other 
genes  in  the  lost  notch  piece.  These  genes  are  present  in 
the  double  recessive  type,  and  the  slight  differences  in  the 
result  in  the  two  cases  may  be  referable  to  the  presence 
or  absence  of  these  other  genes. 

In  the  preceding  case  it  has  not  been  possible  to  show 
by  cytological  evidence  that  a  piece  of  the  X-chromosome 
is  absent  in  the  notch  mutant — its  absence  is  deduced 
from  the  genetic  evidence  alone.  In  the  next  case,  how- 
ever, an  actual  absence  has  been  demonstrated. 

Occasionally  one  of  the  small  fourth  chromosomes  is 
lost  (haplo-IV,  Fig.  29).  This  chromosome  carries,  in 
certain  mutant  stocks,  recessive  genes.  It  is  possible  to 
make  up  an  individual  that  has  a  recessive  gene — eyeless 
for  example — in  its  single  IV-chromosome.  Such  individ- 
uals show  the  characteristics  of  the  eveless  stock  but  are, 
as  a  class,  more  extreme  than  when  two  eyeless  genes  are 
present.  This  difference  may  be  due  to  the  absence  of  the 
other  genes  in  the  absent  chromosome. 

A  different  relation  arises  in  the  case  of  translocation, 
so  called  by  Bridges,  which  means  (from  genetic  evidence) 
that  a  piece  of  a  chromosome  has  become  detached  and  re- 
attached to  some  other  chromosome.  It  perpetuates  itself, 
and,  owing  to  the  genes  that  it  carries,  introduces  a  com- 
plication into  the  genetic  results.  For  example,  a  piece 
of  the  normal  X-chromosome  in  the  region  of  the  ver- 
milion locus  became  attached  to  another  X-chromosome 
(Fig.  46b).  A  female  with  vermilion  genes  in  each  of  its 
X-chromosomes  and  the  transposed  piece  attached  to  one 


82  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

of  them  (Fig.  46b)  is  vermilion  despite  the  fact  that  one 
normal  allelomorph  of  vermilion  is  present  in  the  piece. 
At  first  sight  it  may  seem,  if  the  vermilion  genes  are 
interpreted  as  absences,  that  two  absences  cannot  pos- 
sibly dominate  one  presence.  On  second  thought,  how- 
ever, another  explanation  is  possible,  for,  if  the  vermilion 
eye  color  is  due  to  the  action  of  all  the  other  genes  when 
vermilion  is  absent,  the  same  result  might  happen  even 
though  one  dominant  normal  allelomorph  is  present.  The 
situation  is  not  identical  with  one  in  which  a  vermilion 
gene  is  present  in  one  chromosome  and  its  normal  alle- 
lomorph in  the  other. 

The  relation  shown  here  between  two  recessive  genes 
and  a  dominant  gene  in  the  translocated  piece  does  not 
always  lead  to  the  development  of  the  recessive  charac- 
ter. For  example,  there  is  another  case  of  translocation 
reported  by  L.  V.  Morgan.  A  piece  of  an  X-chromosome 
of  the  region  of  the  mutant  genes  yellow  and  scute  be- 
came stuck  to  the  right  end  of  an  X-chromosome.  A 
female  that  has  the  recessive  genes  for  yellow  or  for 
scute  in  each  of  her  X-chromosomes  (Fig.  46c)  and  a 
piece  attached  to  one  of  these  X's  shows  the  wild  type 
character.  Here  the  effects  of  the  recessive  genes  are  coun- 
terbalanced by  the  dominant  allelomorphs  of  the  attached 
piece.  This  is  interpreted  to  mean  that  all  the  other  genes, 
plus  those  in  the  attached  piece,  combine  to  turn  the  scale 
toward  the  dominant  type  and  this  is  expected  on  either 
of  the  contrasted  interpretations  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
gene. 

The  relation  of  two  recessive  genes  to  one  dominant 
has  also  been  studied  in  the  triploid  endosperm  of  corn 
and  in  one  triploid  animal.  The  nuclei  of  the  endosperm 
cells  of  the  seed  of  corn  arise  from  the  union  of  one  pollen 
grain  (haploid  in  chromosome  number)  and  two  nuclei  of 
the  embryo  sac  (each  haploid).  A  triploid  or  threefold 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES? 


83 


nucleus  results  (Fig.  47),  which  by  division  gives  rise  to 
the  triploid  nuclei  of  the  endosperm  cells.  In  floury  corn 
the  endosperm  is  composed  of  soft  starch,  while  flint  corn 
has  a  large  amount  of  corneous  starch  in  the  endosperm. 
If  a  floury  corn  be  used  as  the  female  parent  (ovule)  and 


polar 
nucleus 


synergidae 


--ovum 


ego;  nucleus 
sperm  nucleus 


ertili'zed 


endosperm 
nude  « 


Fig.  47. 

Three  stages  in  the  fertilization  of  the  egg-nucleus  in  the  embryo 
sac  of  plants.  In  b  the  two  maternal  haploid  nuclei  and  the  single 
paternal  haploid  sperm  nucleus  are  shown.  By  their  union  the  trip- 
loid endosperm  is  produced  as  shown  in  c.  (After  Strasburger  and 
Guinard  from  Wilson.) 


flinty  corn  as  the  male  parent  (pollen)  the  seeds  pro- 
duced by  the  Fa  plant  have  floury  endosperm.  The  result 
shows  that  two  floury  genes  are  dominant  over  one  flinty 
gene  (Fig.  48a).  If  the  reciprocal  combination  is  made, 
flinty  female  parent  and  floury  pollen,  the  Fx  seeds  are 
flinty  (Fig.  48b).  Here  two  flinty  genes  dominate  one 
floury.  It  is  a  matter  of  choice  which  gene  is  chosen  to 
represent  the  absence  of  the  other.  If  the  absence  is  floury, 
then  two  absences  would  be  said  to  dominate  one  presence 


84 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


in  the  first  case,  and  two  presences  to  dominate  one  ab- 
sence in  the  second  case. 

The  interpretation  of  two  absences  dominating  a  pres- 
ence would  have  no  meaning  if  taken  literally,  but  as  has 
been  pointed  out  it  is  possible  to  explain  such  a  statement, 
if,  in  the  absence  of  a  gene,  the  floury  character  is  deter- 
mined by  the  rest  of  the  genes,  and,  of  course,  the  same 


(a) 


(a'j 


fl- 


fi 


ft 


f I O  UT  Y 


ft- 


-ft 


-fl 


flint 


Fig.  48. 


Diagrams  of  triploid  condition  of  endosperm  of  corn  when,  as  in  a, 
two  floury  genes  and  one  flinty  are  present  giving  floury  endo- 
sperm; and  when,  as  in  a',  two  flinty  genes  and  one  floury  gene 
are  present  giving  flinty  endosperm. 


explanation  applies  if  there  is  present  a  gene  for  floury 
(a  mutated  gene  from  flinty)  whose  effect  is  produced  by 
itself  plus  the  rest  of  the  genes.  This  evidence  from  trip- 
loid endosperm  is  no  more  decisive  than  when  a  trans- 
located piece  of  a  chromosome  introduces  a  third  element 
into  the  situation. 

There  are  several  other  cases  in  corn  where  two  reces- 
sive elements  do  not  dominate  a  single  dominant,  but 
these  have  no  further  bearing  on  the  present  question. 

If  a  triploid  female  Drosophila  has  a  vermilion  gene  in 
each  of  two  of  its  X-chromosomes  and  a  red  gene  in  the 
third,  the  resulting  eye  color  is  red.  One  dominant  gene 
here  dominates  two  recessives.  This  result  is  the  opposite 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES?  85 

of  that  where  the  wild  type  (dominant)  gene  present  in 
the  duplicated  piece  was  opposed  to  two  vermilion  genes. 
The  two  situations  are,  however,  not  identical  in  all  re- 
spects, for  the  triploid  differs  from  duplication  by  the 
occurrence  of  nearly  an  entire  X-chromosome  instead  of 
only  a  short  piece  of  this  chromosome.  The  excess  of 
genes  in  the  extra  X-chromosome  may  account  for  the 
difference  in  the  two  cases  and  this  holds  equally  whether 
the  recessive  genes  be  interpreted  as  real  absences  or 
as  mutated  genes. 

The  Bearing  of  Reverse  Mutation  (Atavism)  on  the 
Interpretation  of  the  Mutation  Process. 

If  recessive  genes  arise  by  losses,  then  there  is  little 
expectation  that  a  pure  recessive  stock  would  ever  pro- 
duce again  the  original  gene,  since  this  would  mean  ap- 
parently the  production  of  something  highly  specific  from 
nothing.  On  the  other  hand,  if  mutation  is  due  to  a  change 
in  the  constitution  of  the  gene,  it  seems  less  difficult  to 
imagine  that  the  mutated  gene  might  sometimes  return 
to  the  original  condition.  It  may  be  that  we  know  too  little 
about  the  gene  to  give  much  weight  to  such  arguments; 
nevertheless,  the  occurrence  of  return  mutants  would  ap- 
pear more  plausibly  explained  on  the  latter  view.  Unfor- 
tunately the  evidence  bearing  on  the  question  is  not  en- 
tirelv  satisfactory.  There  are,  it  is  true,  a  number  of 
instances  in  Drosophila  where  a  mutant  recessive  stock 
has  given  rise  to  an  individual  with  the  original  or  wild 
type  character;  but  an  occurrence  of  this  sort,  unless 
controlled,  cannot  be  accepted  as  sufficient  evidence,  since 
the  chance  of  contamination  of  the  stock  by  a  wild  type 
individual  is  not  to  be  ignored.  If,  however,  a  mutant 
stock  is  marked  by  several  mutant  characters,  one  only 
of  which  reverts,  the  occurrence  furnishes  the  desired 
evidence,  provided  no  other  combinations  of  these  mu- 


86  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

tants  are  present  in  the  vicinity  at  the  time.  There  are  a 
few  recorded  cases  in  our  stocks  that  fulfill  these  condi- 
tions, and  the  evidence,  as  far  as  it  goes,  shows  that 
reversal  may  take  place.  There  is  also  another  possibility 
that  has  to  be  guarded  against.  Some  of  the  mutant 
stocks  have,  after  a  time,  seemed  to  lose  more  or  less  the 
characteristics  of  that  stock,  yet  when  outbred  it  has  been 
found  that  the  mutant  character  can  be  recovered  in  its 
original  strength.  The  fourth  chromosome  character,  bent 
wings  (Fig.  30),  that  is  itself  variable,  and  subject  to 
environmental  influence,  has  shown,  when  not  selected,  a 
tendency  to  return  to  the  wild  type  in  appearance.  If  a 
fly  of  this  kind  is  outcrossed  to  wild  stock  and  the  F^s 
inbred,  the  bent  character  reappears  in  many  of  the  indi- 
viduals of  the  expected  bent  class.  A  similar  result  has 
been  found  in  another  mutant  stock  called  scute,  charac- 
terized by  the  absence  of  certain  bristles  on  the  thorax. 
Individuals  appeared  in  certain  pure  cultures  in  which 
the  " missing' '  bristles  were  present.  Apparently  the 
mutant  had  reverted  to  wild  type.  But  that  this  had  not 
occurred  was  shown  by  breeding  such  flies  to  wild  type 
stock.  In  the  second  generation,  scute  flies  reappeared. 
A  study  of  this  case  has  shown  that  the  return  to  normal 
was  due  to  the  appearance  of  a  recessive  factor  which, 
when  present  in  homozygous  condition  in  scute  stock, 
brings  about  the  development  there  of  the  missing  bris- 
tles. Aside  from  the  bearing  of  this  result  on  the  question 
under  discussion,  the  fact  of  a  new  recessive  mutation 
occurring,  that  brings  back  the  mutant  character  to  the 
original  type,  is  in  itself  an  interesting  and  important 
fact. 

Finally,  there  is  the  peculiar  reversion  to  normal  of  the 
dominant  or  semi-dominant  character,  bar-eye  (Fig.  49, 
1  and  2).  For  some  years  it  has  been  known  from  the 
observations  of  May  and  Zeleny  that  bar-eye  reverts 


Fig.  49. 

Different  types  of  bar  eyes;  1,  homozygous  bar  female;  2,  bar 
male;  3,  bar-over-round  eye  female;  4,  female  homozygous  for 
round  that  was  obtained  by  reversion;  5,  male  that  carries  the 
gene  for  round  eye  obtained  by  reversion;  6,  double-bar  male; 
7,  homozygous  infra-bar  female;  8,  infra-bar  male;  9,  infra -bar- 
over-round  female;  10,  double-infra-bar  male. 


»  88  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

to  normal  eye,  and  this  instance  has  been  cited  as  evi- 
dence that  reverse  mutation  may  take  place.  The  fre- 
quency of  the  return  mutation  varies  in  different  stocks. 
It  has  been  estimated  to  occur  about  once  in  1600  times. 
It  was  later  discovered  by  Sturtevant  and  Morgan  that 
when  the  reversion  occurs,  crossing-over  takes  place  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  bar  gene,  and  Sturtevant  has  obtained 
crucial  evidence  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  changes 
that  there  take  place. 


V 1 — i 1 l       j  \r         f     B    fu 

?x — ■    ■    ■ —    h   dx — '    ' 

y  +      B      + 

Fig.  50. 

Diagram  of  a  cross  between  a  female  bar-eyed  fly,  heterozygous  in 

forked  and  fused,  and  a  forked  bar  fused  male. 


The  demonstration  that  crossing-over  takes  place 
whenever  reversion  occurs,  was  as  follows:  To  the  left 
and  very  close  to  bar  (%  unit)  there  is  a  gene  called 
forked :  to  the  right  and  very  near  bar  (2U2  units)  a  gene 
called  fused.  A  female  is  made  up  with  bar  lying  between 
these  two  genes  in  one  X-chromosome,  and  bar  with  the 
wild  type  allelomorphs  of  forked  and  fused  in  the  other 
(Fig-.  50^.  Such  a  female  is  bred  to  a  forked  bar  fused 
male.  The  ordinary  sons  will  be  either  forked  bar  fused 

mi 

or  bar,  since  each  has  received  either  the  forked  bar 
fused  or  the  not-forked  bar  not-fused  X-chromosome  of 
the  mother.  When,  as  happens  rarely,  a  reversion  takes 
place,  i.e.,  a  male  appears  that  has  round  eyes,  it  is  ob- 
served that  crossing-over  has  taken  place  between  forked 
and  fused.  For  example,  the  reverted  male  is  either  fused 
or  else  forked ;  it  is  never  forked  and  fused,  nor  is  it  ever 
both  not-forked  and  not-fused.  Crossing-over  must  have 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES?  89 

taken  place  in  the  mother  of  the  male  between  forked  and 
fused.  The  total  cross-overs  between  forked  and  fused 
are  less  than  3  per  cent  and  yet  they  include  all  the  rever- 
sions to  full  eye. 

Only  the  reverted  sons  have  been  spoken  of  above  in 
order  to  simplify  the  situation,  but  of  course  the  reverted 
chromosome  might  have  passed  into  an  egg  that  de- 
velops into  a  female.  The  experiment  can  be  so  planned 
that  evidence  of  crossing-over  will  also  be  detected  in  the 
reverted  daughter.  The  ordinary  daughters  will  be  homo- 
zygous bar  (see  Fig.  49,  1).  The  reverted  daughters  will 
be  heterozygous  for  bar  eyes,  and  either  forked  or  fused. 
None  of  them  are  both  forked  and  fused  and  none  of  them 
are  not-forked  not-fused. 

The  crossing-over,  that  brings  about  reversion  to 
round  eye,  must  not  only  have  left  one  X-chromosome 
without  a  bar  gene,  but  must  have  put  the  other  bar  gene 
into  the  bar  chromosome  (Fig.  51a).  In  appearance  a 
male  with  two  bar  genes  (double  bar)  is  similar  to  a 
male  with  one  bar  gene,  but  its  eyes  are  smaller  and 
the  number  of  its  facets  is  reduced.  It  has  been  named 
double  bar  (Fig.  49,6).  The  presence  of  two  allelomorphic 
genes  in  the  same  linear  series  is  an  exceptional  occur- 
rence that  has  as  yet  not  been  observed  in  any  other 
mutation.  It  can  be  pictured  only  by  supposing  that  the 
bar  genes  lying  opposite  to  each  other  before  crossing- 
over  are  shifted  a  little  when  the  crossing-over  occurs. 
The  result  is  that  the  double  bar  chromosome  is  length- 
ened by  one  bar  gene  at  least,  and  conversely  that  the 
other  chromosome  has  been  shortened  by  the  ''loss"  of 
the  bar  gene. 

Sturtevant  has  put  the  theory  of  reversion  of  bar  to  a 
number  of  critical  tests.  There  is  an  allelomorph  of  bar 
(that  arose  as  a  mutation  of  bar)  called  infra-bar  (Fig. 
49,  7  and  8),  whose  eyes  are  somewhat  different  in  size 


90  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

and  in  the  number  of  facets.  In  infra-bar  stock,  reversion 
also  takes  place  (Fig.  51b),  producing  a  full  round  eye 
a^A         closely  similar  to  wild  type,  whreh-4s  a  new  type  called 
double-infra-bar  (Fig.  49,  10). 


(a) 


(b) 


B      Bar  BB     Double  Bar 

"g      Bar  Normal 


_B InfraBar      BB    Double  Infra  Bar 

d'      Infra  Bar  "  Normal 


CO 


B      Bay 
~  Jhfra  Bar 


B 


r  B  B     Bar  Infra  Bar 
Normal 

B  B      Infra  Bar  Bar 
N  ormal 


Fig.  51. 
Diagram  of  mutation  in  bar  and  infra-bar  and  bar-infra-bar. 


A  female  with  bar  in  one  chromosome  and  infra-bar 
in  the  other  (Fig.  51c)  produces,  when  reversion  takes 
place,  a  full  round  eye  (wild  type)  and  bar-infra-bar  or 
infra-bar-bar  types  (Fig.  51c). 

Sturtevant  has  also  utilized  these  two  types,  the  bar- 
infra-bar  type  and  the  infra-bar-bar,  in  order  to  prove 
that  when  crossing-over  takes  place  in  bar-infra-bar  over 
normal  (Fig.  52a),  the  result  gives  either  forked  bar  or 
else  infra-bar  fused,  and  when  crossing-over  takes  place 
in  infra-bar-bar  over  normal  (Fig.  52b)  the  result  is 
either  forked  infra-bar  or  bar  fused,  provided  the  mutant 
genes  all  lie  in  the  same  chromosome,  as  shown  in  the 
diagram  (Fig.  52a,  b). 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES?  91 

It  follows  that  in  both  types  the  genes  not  only  keep 
their  identity  but  also  their  sequence.  From  the  way  in 
which  the  two  types,  fBB'fu  and  fB'Bfu,  were  made  up, 
the  sequence  of  the  genes  is  known,  and  in  all  cases  the 
breaking  apart  of  B  and  B'  agrees  with  the  sequence  pre- 
viously determined. 


(a) 


j    B  B'-fa    BarlnfraBar        f  B  Bar 

Normal  g7  ju    InfraBar 


(b) 


f    B'B    tu.  InfraBar  Bar  f  B'  InfraBar 

Normal  B    fu    Bar 


Fig.  52. 

Diagram,  in  a,  of  a  mutation  of  forked  bar,  infra-bar  fused  and 
in  b,  a  mutation  of  forked  infra-bar,  bar  fused. 


These  results  furnish  crucial  evidence  in  favor  of  the 
correctness  of  the  theory  that  reversion  in  bar  is  due  to 
crossing-over.  This  is,  at  present,  a  unique  case.  There 
would  seem  to  be  some  peculiarity  in  the  X-chromosome 
at  the  bar  locus  that  allows  crossing-over  between  allelo- 
morphic  factors  to  occur.  Sturtevant  speaks  of  this  as 
unequal  crossing-over.1 

This  result  raises  the  question  as  to  whether  all  muta- 
tions may  not  be  due  to  crossing-over.  There  is  explicit 
evidence  in  Drosophila  that  this  is  not  the  general  expla- 

i  Several  curious  problems  concerning  the  bar  locus  are  involved  in  these 
relations.  For  instance,  when  bar  crosses  over  what  is  left  in  the  bar  locus? 
Is  it  an  absence  of  bar?  Did  the  original  bar  arise  by  mutation  in  a  wild 
type  gene,  or  was  a  new  gene  created?  These  questions  are  still  under 
investigation. 


92  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

nation  of  mutations,  because,  for  one  reason,  it  is  well 
known  that  mutation  may  occur  in  the  male  of  Drosophila 
as  well  as  in  the  female.  In  the  male  of  Drosophila  there 
is  no  crossing-over. 

The  Evidence  from  Multiple  Allelomorphs. 

It  has  been  shown  in  Drosophila,  as  well  as  in  a  few 
other  types  (in  corn,  for  example),  that  more  than  a 
single  mutation  may  occur  at  the  same  locus.  The  series 
of  allelomorphs  at  the  locus  for  white  eye  in  Drosophila 
is  the  clearest  case  of  the  sort.  No  less  than  eleven  eye 
colors,  in  addition  to  the  red  eye  of  the  wild  fly,  have  been 
recorded.  They  form  a  graded  series  from  white  to  red 
as  follows :  white,  ecru,  tinged,  buff,  ivory,  eosin,  apricot, 
cherry,  blood,  coral,  wine.  They  have  not,  however,  ap- 
peared in  this  sequence,  although  white  was  the  first 
mutation  observed  at  this  locus.  That  they  have  not 
arisen  by  the  mutation  of  a  series  of  adjacent  genes  is 
clearly  shown  by  their  origin  and  their  relation  to  each 
other.  For  example,  if  the  white  were  due  to  a  mutation 
from  the  wild  type  at  one  locus  and  cherry  by  mutation 
at  an  adjacent  locus,  then  when  white  is  crossed  to  cherry 
the  female  offspring  should  have  red  eyes,  because  white 
would,  on  this  assumption,  carry  the  wild  type  allelo- 
morph of  cherry  and  cherry  would  carry  that  of  white. 
When  white  and  cherry  are  crossed  they  do  not  give  this 
result,  but  the  daughters  have  an  intermediate  eye  color. 
The  Ft  female  gives  again  white  and  cherry  sons  in  equal 
numbers.  The  same  relation  holds  for  all  the  other  alle- 
lomorphs, any  two  of  which  can  exist  simultaneously  in 
any  one  female. 

If  the  presence  and  absence  theory  is  taken  literally 
there  cannot  be  more  than  one  absence  for  each  gene.  The 
theory  in  this  form  is  disproven  in  all  cases  where  the 
occurrence  of  multiple  allelomorphs  is  known  to  have 


ARE  RECESSIVES  LOSSES  OF  GENES?  93 

taken  place  independently  from  the  wild  type  ;2  but  it  is 
possible  to  interpret  absence  in  such  a  way  that  it  is  not 
in  contradiction  with  the  occurrence  of  multiple  allelo- 
morphs. Suppose,  for  instance,  that  different  quantities 
of  materials  are  lost  at  the  locus  in  question  for  each 
mutant  type.  The  loss  of  one  quantity  might  stand  for 
white,  another  quantity  for  cherry,  and  so  on.  The  result 
might  then  not  appear  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  facts, 
although  it  should  be  noted  that  the  assumption  calls  for 
a  somewhat  different  interpretation  of  the  gene  as  a  unit. 
The  ' '  compound ' '  formed  by  the  presence  of  two  of  these 
allelomorphs  might  then  not  be  expected  to  give  the  wild 
type  but  something  else.  To  admit  this,  however,  changes 
the  idea  of  presence  and  absence  in  such  a  way  as  to  make 
it  essentiallv  the  same  as  the  view  that  is  here  main- 
tained,  namely,  that  mutation  is  due  to  a  change  of  some 
sort  in  a  gene.  There  is  no  advantage,  that  I  can  see,  in 
urging  that  the  change  must  be  a  loss  of  part  of  the  gene 
(gene  meaning  a  quantity  of  something  at  a  given  locus). 
This  is  a  gratuitous  assumption  in  regard  to  the  nature 
of  the  change — one  that  is  not  necessary  to  explain  the 
results.  It  may  be,  of  course,  that  a  gene  may  be  lost  or  a 
part  of  a  gene  may  be  lost  and  a  new  mutant  result,  but 
it  is  theoretically  possible  that  the  constitution  of  the 
gene  may  change  in  some  other  way.  So  long  as  we  do  not 
know  anything  definite  concerning  the  kind  of  change 
that  takes  place  there  is  nothing  to  be  gained  by  limiting 
it  to  only  one  kind  of  process. 

2  If  the  multiple  allelomorphs  had  arisen  seriatim,  i.e.,  one  from  another, 
then  of  course  it  might  be  possible  that  each  one  carried  the  preceding 
mutant  gene.  If  so  the  two  when  crossed  would  not  give  the  wild  type.  But 
when,  as  in  Drosophila,  each  has  arisen  independently  from  the  wild  type 
the  situation  is  different,  as  explained  in  the  text. 


94  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Conclusions. 

An  analysis  of  the  evidence  at  hand  does  not  justify 
the  view  that  the  actual  loss  of  some  character  present  in 
the  original  type  must  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  a  cor- 
responding loss  has  taken  place  in  the  germinal  material. 

Even  by  extending  the  literal  interpretation  of  the  pres- 
ence and  absence  idea  so  that  the  postulated  connection 
between  the  loss  of  the  character  and  the  loss  of  the  gene 
means  the  effect  produced  by  other  genes,  the  assumption 
of  a  loss  still  has  no  advantage  over  the  alternative 
view  that  a  mutation  is  due  to  a  change  of  some  sort  in 
the  gene.  Furthermore,  the  occurrence  of  mutation  in  the 
reverse  direction  ( omitting  the  special  case  of  bar  rever- 
sion), while  not  sufficiently  established  as  yet,  is  in  better 
accord  with  the  view  that  genes  may  mutate  by  a  change 
in  their  constitution  without  that  change  being  neces- 
sarily a  loss  of  the  whole  gene.  And  finally,  the  evidence 
from  multiple  allelomorphs  seems  more  consistent  with 
the  view  that  each  is  due  to  a  change  in  the  same  gene. 

The  theory  of  the  gene  as  here  formulated,  regards  the 
wild  type  genes  as  specific  elements  in  the  chromosomes, 
that  are  relatively  stable  over  long  periods.  There  is  at 
present  no  evidence  that  new  genes  arise  except  by 
changes  in  the  constitution  of  the  old  genes.  The  total 
number  of  the  genes  remains  on  the  whole  constant  over 
long  periods.  Their  number  may  be  changed,  however, 
by  a  process  of  doubling  the  full  set  of  chromosomes  and 
perhaps  in  other  similar  ways.  The  effect  of  changes  of 
this  sort  will  be  considered  in  later  chapters. 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE  LOCATION  OF  GENES  IN  RELATED 

SPECIES 

DE  VRIES'  mutation  theory  quite  apart  from  its 
|  special  interpretation  discussed  in  the  la3t-chap- 
ter  postulates  that  "elementary"  species  are 
made  up  of  a  large  number  of  identical  genes ;  and  that 
their  differences  are  due  to  different  recombinations  of 
these  genes.  The  more  recent  work  on  hybridizing  re- 
lated species  has  furnished  evidence  bearing  on  this 
theory. 

The  most  obvious  way  to  study  the  problem  would  be 
to  cross  species  and  determine  in  this  way,  if  possible, 
whether  they  are  made  up  of  the  same  number  of  ho- 
mologous genes,  but  several  difficulties  stand  in  the  way. 
Many  species  cannot  be  crossed,  and  some  of  those  that 
can  be  crossed  produce  sterile  hybrids.  Nevertheless,  a 
few  species  are  fertile  inter  se,  and  some  of  them  also 
give  fertile  hybrids.  Even  then,  another  difficulty  arises, 
namely,  the  identification  in  the  two  species  of  the  char- 
acters that  behave  as  Mendelian  pairs;  for  the  differ- 
ences that  serve  to  distinguish  one  species  from  another 
species  are  dependent  on  a  multitude  of  factors  in  each 
case.  In  other  words,  it  is  rare  to  find  two  well-marked 
species  in  which  any  single  difference  is  due  to  one  dif- 
ferential factor.  Mutant  differences  of  recent  origin  in 
one  or  in  both  species  must  be  resorted  to  for  the  neces- 
sary evidence. 

There  are  several  cases  in  plants  and  two  at  least  in 
animals  where  species  having  mutant  types  have  been 


96 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


crossed  with  other  species,  and  produced  fertile  off- 
spring. These,  when  inbred,  or  back-crossed,  have  fur- 
nished the  only  crucial  evidence  concerning  the  allelo- 
morphic  relation  of  genes  in  different  species. 


Fig.  53. 
Cross  between  two  species  of  tobaeco,  Nicotiana  Langsdorffii  and 
N.  alata.  In  a  and  c  the  two  original  types  of  flowers  are  shown, 
and  in  b  the  hybrid  type.  In  d  and  e,  two  of  the  recovered  types 
in  F2  are  shown.   (After  East.) 


East  crossed  two  species  of  tobacco,  Nicotiana  Langs- 
dorffii and  N.  alata  (Fig.  53).  One  plant  with  white 
flowers  was  a  mutant  type.  Despite  the  wide  variability 
of  many  characters  in  the  second  generation,  the  white 
flowers  appeared  in  one-fourth  of  the  individuals  of  this 
generation.  The  mutant  gene  of  one  species  behaved 
toward  a  gene  of  the  other  species  in  the  same  way  as  it 
behaves  with  its  own  normal  partner. 

Correns  crossed  Mirabilis  Jalapa  with  M.  longiflora. 
A  recessive  mutant  of  Jalapa  (chlorina)  was  used.  This 


majus 


Amolle        Hybrid 

Fig.  54. 

Two  species  of  snapdragon,  Antirrhinum  molle  and  A.  majus  with 

the  hybrid  between  them.  (After  Baur.) 


A.molJ 


A.  majusf  (peloric) 


Fig.  55. 
A  bilateral  type  of  flower  of  Antirrhinum  molle  by  a  peloric  type 
of  A.  majus,  which,  when  crossed,  gives  the  hybrid  "wild"  type 
seen  below.  (After  Baur.) 


98 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


character  reappeared  in  almost  one-quarter  of  the  indi- 
viduals in  the  second  generation. 

Baur  crossed  two  species  of  snapdragon,  Antirrhinum 
majus  and  A.  molle   (Fig.  54).  He  used  at  least  five 


Fig.  56. 

Types  of  F2  flowers  from  the  cross  shown  in  Fig.  55.    (After 

Baur.) 


mutant  types  of  A.  majus  and  recovered  them  in  the  sec- 
ond generation  in  the  expected  number  of  individuals 
(Fig.  55  and  56). 

Detlefsen  crossed  two  species  of  guinea  pigs,  Cavia 
porcellus  and  C.  rufescens.  The  hybrid  females  (the  hy- 
brid males  are  sterile)  were  mated  to  C.  porcellus  males 


GENES  IN  RELATED  SPECIES  99 

with  mutant  characters,  seven  in  all.  The  mutant  charac- 
ters were  inherited  in  the  same  way  as  in  C.  porcellus. 
This  result  again  shows  that  the  two  species  carry  some 
identical  loci.  The  results  do  not  show,  however,  that 
identical  mutants  exist  in  the  two  species,  for  no  mutant 
races  with  characters  similar  to  those  of  porcellus  have 
been  studied. 


a 


c  d 

Ftg.  57. 
a,  Helix  nemoralis,  00000,  yellow,  Zurich  type;  b,  ditto  00345,  red- 
dish  (Aarburger  type);   c,  typical  H.  hortensis,  12345;   d,  ditto; 
e,  hybrid  00000.  (After  LaDg.) 


One  of  the  clearest  cases  where  the  characters  of  one 
species  behave  toward  the  characters  of  the  other  species 
in  the  dominance-recessive  relation  as  do  the  same 
character-pairs  within  the  species  is  described  by  Lang 
in  his  experiments  with  two  wild  species  of  snail,  Helix 
hortensis  and  H.  nemoralis  (Fig.  57). 

There  are  two  wild  species  of  Drosophila  that  are  so 
much  alike  externally  that  they  were  put  into  the  same 
species.  One  is  now  called  D.  melanogaster,  the  other  D. 


100         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

simulans  (Fig-.  58).  Careful  scrutiny  shows  them  to  be 
different  in  many  ways.  They  cross  with  difficulty  and  the 
hybrids  produced  are  completely  sterile. 

Forty-two  mutant  types  are  now  known  in  D.  simulans. 
These  fall  into  three  linkage  groups. 


Fig.  58. 
Drosophila  melanogaster  to  the  left,  and  D.  simulans  to  the  right; 

both  males. 


Twenty-three  of  these  recessive  mutant  genes  in  simu- 
lans are  recessive  in  the  hybrid,  and  65  recessive  mutant 
genes  of  melanogaster  have  also  been  shown  to  be  reces- 
sive in  the  hybrid.  This  result  means  that  each  species 
carries  the  standard  or  wild  type  gene  of  each  of  the 
recessive  genes  of  the  other  species. 

Sixteen  dominant  genes  have  also  been  tested.  All  but 
one  produced  nearly  the  same  effect  in  the  hybrid  that 
they  produce  within  their  own  species.  This  means  that 


GENES  IN  RELATED  SPECIES 


101 


sixteen  normal  genes  are  recessive  to  the  dominant  mu- 
tant genes  of  the  other  species. 

Mutants  of  simulans  have  been  mated  to  mutants  of 
melanogaster.  In  twenty  cases  tested,  the  mutant  charac- 
ter proved  to  be  the  same. 


10 


20         30 


40 


50 


60 


70 


80 


90       100       110       120      130      140 


H — Jr 


n 


t^v  *$  ty  3p       <ty 

KW — 1    1   ii  \ +■ 


tfi 


I'll 


da 


se 


cu 


*> 


i  !■■--. 


4t 


-*-mel 


u  lib 
i — f—  siml 


— H 

FTT&r- 

-m — 


-p*—- . 


^mel 


KP 


-*sim. 


Mg_ 


mel 


M 


sim. 


Fig.  59. 
Chart  showing,  above,  the  corresponding  loci  of  identical  mutant 
genes  of  the  first  or  X-chromosome  in  Drosophila  melanogaster  and 
in  D.  simulans,  similarly,  in  the  middle,  of  the  second  chromo- 
some; and,  at  the  bottom,  of  the  third  chromosome.  (After  Sturte- 
vant.) 


This  last  result  establishes  the  identity  of  the  mutants 
in  the  two  types,  and  enables  one  to  discover  whether  they 
lie  in  the  same  linkage  series,  and  in  the  same  relative 
position  in  each  series.  The  chart  (Fig.  59)  shows  by  the 
connecting  dotted  lines  the  relative  position  of  the  loci 
of  identical  mutants  so  far  worked  out  by  Sturtevant.  In 
chromosome-I  there  is  a  remarkable  agreement.  In  chro- 
mosome-II  only  two  identical  loci  have  been  determined. 
In  chromosome-III  the  agreement  is  not  complete.  It  can 


102         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

probably  be  explained  on  the  assumption  that  a  large 
section  of  this  chromosome  has  been  reversed,  and  the 
corresponding  loci  are  in  inverse  order. 

These  results  of  Sturtevant's  are  not  only  important 
in  themselves,  but  help  to  make  probable  the  view  that 
similar  mutants  in  different  species  that  occupy  the  same 
relative  position  in  the  linkage  series,  are  identical  mu- 
tants, but  unless  their  identity  can  be  tested  by  crossing, 


I 
0.0-f  se 

0.6- -ij 


27.0 
30.0 


450--SI 


57.0 


66.0 
70.0 

78.0 -- 


,C 
v 

vs 


m 
f 

s 
tr 


"T.g.W 

102.04-  dr 


n  m 

0.0+ cf  0.0-t-Sc 


•  d 

42.0  4-  Cc 


41.0 


62.0 --t 


.-hch 


hP 


D.  virilis 


o.o-t-Fu.ap  I 


--  1 

21.0 --Br 


Fig.  60. 

Chart  of  the  location  of  the  mutant  genes  in  the  six  chromosomes 
of  Drosophila  virilis.   (After  Metz  and  Weinstein.) 


GENES  IN  RELATED  SPECIES 


103 


as  in  the  case  of  D.  melanogaster,  and  D.  simulans,  there 
may  always  remain  some  doubt  as  to  their  identity,  be- 
cause similar  mutant  types  that  are  not  identical  are 


62.0  -j-P 
58.0  -|-  gz 


42.0  --b 


03 

o.oN. 

50 

6  0' 

14.5 
160 


:a 


V 

sn 

m 

240  -I-  r 


36  0 
420 


sc 


ro 

fu 
CO 


n 
s 

Cf 

ro 
bx 


1 

St 
Tm 
Sb 
gP 

M 


K 


V 

Ac 
Ms 


D.  obscura 


86  5  4-  as 
115  4 

10"] .0  4-  S 

Fig.  61. 

Chart  of  the  location  of  the  mutant  genes  in  the  chromosomes  of 
Drosophila  obscura.  The  loci  corresponding  with  those  of  D. 
melanogaster  are  sc=scute,  y=yellow,  No2=Notch,  wh=:white. 
(After  Lancefield.) 


104         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

known,  and  sometimes  these  lie  near  together  in  the  same 
linkage  group.1 

In  two  other  species  of  Drosophila  the  work  has  prog- 
ressed to  a  point  where  the  comparisons  are  at  least  very 
interesting.  In  Drosophila  virilis,  Metz  and  Weinstein 
have  determined  the  location  of  several  mutant  genes, 
and  Metz  has  compared  the  order  of  the  series  with  that 
of  D.  melanogaster.  The  chart  (Fig.  60)  shows  that  there 
are  five  apparently  similar  mutants  in  the  sex-chromo- 
some that  stand  in  the  same  order  as  those  of  melano- 
gaster, viz.,  yellow  (y),  cross-veinless  (c), -singed  (si), 
miniature  (m),  forked  (f). 

Another  species,  Drosophila  obscura,  has  a  genetic  sex- 
chromosome  twice  as  long  as  that  of  melanogaster  (Fig. 
61).  It  is  probably  significant  that  the  four  characteris- 
tic mutant  types,  yellow,  white  eyes,  scute,  and  notch 
wings,  that  lie  in  the  middle  of  this  long  sex-chromosome, 
are  identical  with  the  same  mutant  characters  of  D. 
melanogaster  that  lie  at  the  end  of  the  shorter  sex-chro- 
mosome of  melanogaster  and  simulans.  The  interpreta- 
tion of  this  relation  is  still  being  carefully  studied  by 
Lancefield. 

These  and  other  results  should  make  us  extremely  cau- 
tious in  drawing  phylogenetic  conclusions  from  inspec- 
tion alone  of  the  chromosome  groups ;  for,  it  follows  from 
the  Drosophila  evidence  that  very  closely  related  species 
may  have  their  genes  arranged  in  a  different  order  in  the 
same  chromosomes.  Similar  groups  of  chromosomes  may 
at  times  contain  different  assortments  of  genes.  Since  it 
is  the  genes,  and  not  the  chromosomes  as  such,  that  are 
important,  the  final  analysis  of  the  hereditary  construc- 
tion must  be  determined  by  genetics  rather  than  by 
cytology. 

i  By  taking  into  account  more  than  a  single  effect  of  each  gene  the 
identification  may  be  made  more  probable. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

THE  TETRAPLOIDS,  OR  FOURFOLD  TYPE- 

THE  chromosomes  have  been  counted  in  more  than 
a  thousand  species  of  animals  and  probably  in  as 
many  or  more  species  of  plants.  In  two  or  three 
species  only  one  pair  of  chromosomes  is  present.  At  the 
other  extreme  there  are  species  with  over  one  hundred 
chromosomes.  No  matter  how  many  or  how  few  the  chro- 
mosomes, the  number  is  found  to  be  constant  for  each 
species. 

It  is  true  that  irregularities  in  the  distribution  of  the 
chromosomes  occasionally  take  place.  Most  of  these  ir- 
regularities are,  as  a  rule,  automatically  straightened  out 
in  one  or  another  way.  It  is  also  true  that,  in  one  or  two 
cases,  a  slightly  variable  number  of  chromosomes  may 
occur,  as  in  Metapodius  where  one  or  more  small,  extra 
chromosomes,  sometimes  the  Y-chromosomes,  sometimes 
another  chromosome  called  the  M-chromosome,  mav  or 
may  not  be  present  (Fig.  62).  As  Wilson  has  shown,  these 
chromosomes  may,  perhaps,  be  looked  upon  as  indifferent 
bodies  that  have  lost  their  importance,  since  there  are  no 
corresponding  variations  in  the  characters  of  the  indi- 
viduals. 

It  is  known,  furthermore,  that  chromosomes  may  join 
together,  decreasing  the  number  by  one  or  more,  but  the 
totality  of  the  genes  is  still  preserved,  and  this  also  holds 
for  cases  where  a  chromosome  may  break,  increasing  for 
a  time  at  least  the  number  by  one.1  Finally,  there  are 

1  The  occasional  breaking  apart  of  chromosomes  in  Oenothera  has  been 
described  by  Hance.  In  the  moth  PhragmO(tobia,  and  in  other  moths  also, 
Seiler  has  described  several  cases  where  certain  chromosomes  that  are  united 


CO 


106 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


fcin  <t:v 


•v 


♦  • 


•  •    d        *  w      e 

Fig.  62. 

Chromosomes  of  Metapodius.  a,  spermatogonial  group  with  three 
small  m-chromosomes ;  b  and  c,  side  view  of  spermatocytes,  con- 
jugation of  three  m%  two  pass  to  one  pole,  one  to  the  other,  as 
seen  in  d  and  e  (anaphase  plates  of  c).  (After  Wilson.) 

species  where  the  female  has  one  or  more  chromosomes 
than  the  male,  and  there  are  other  species  where  the 

in  the  eggs  and  sperms,  are  separate  in  the  embryonic  cells.  In  the  bee  each 
chromosome  is  supposed  to  break  into  two  parts  in  all  of  the  somatic  cells. 
In  some  of  the  tissue  cells  of  flies  and  other  animals  the  chromosomes  may 
divide  without  the  cell  dividing  and  in  this  way  become  doubled  or  quad- 
rupled. 


TETRAPLOIDS  107 

reverse  may  be  true.  All  these  situations  have  been  ex- 
tensively studied,  and  are  familiar  to  every  student  of  the 
cell.  The  occurrence  of  such  cases  does  not  invalidate  the 
general  statement,  that  the  number  of  the  chromosomes 
is  constant  and  characteristic  of  each  species.2 

In  recent  years  an  ever  increasing  number  of  cases  has 
been  reported  in  which  individuals  have  suddenly  ap- 
peared that  have  double  the  number  of  chromosomes 
characteristic  of  the  species.  These  are  the  fourfold  types, 
or  tetraploids.  Other  multiple  types  have  also  been  found, 
some  arising  spontaneously,  others  derived  from  the 
tetraploids.  We  speak  of  these  collectively  as  polyploids. 
Of  these  polyploids,  the  fourfold  group  is  in  many  ways 
the  most  interesting. 

In  animals  there  are  only  three  cases  of  tetraploidy 
that  are  certainly  known.  The  parasitic  threadworm  of 
the  horse,  Ascaris,  occurs  in  two  types,  one  with  two  and 
one  with  four  chromosomes,  respectively.  These  two 
varieties  are  like  each  other,  even  as  to  the  size  of  their 
cells.  The  chromosomes  of  Ascaris  are  regarded  as  com- 
pound and  as  formed  by  the  union  of  a  number  of  smaller 
chromosomes  sometimes  called  chromomeres.  In  the  cells 
of  the  embryo  that  will  become  body-cells,  each  chromo- 
some breaks  up  into  its  constituent  elements  (Fig.  63,  a, 
b,  d).  These  are  constant  in  number  or  approximately  so, 

2  Delia  Valle  and  Hovasse  have  in  recent  years  denied  that  the  number 
of  chromosomes  is  constant  in  different  tissue  cells,  but  -since  their  conclu- 
sions are  based  on  an  examination  of  the  somatic  cells  of  amphibia  that 
have  a  large  number  of  chromosomes  difficult  to  identify  with  accuracy, 
their  results  do  not  suffice  to  overthrow  the  overwhelming  number  of  obser- 
vations on  other  forms  (and  even  on  some  Amphibia)  where  the  number 
of  the  chromosomes  can  be  accurately  determined. 

It  is  also  known  that  in  certain  tissues  the  number  of  the  chromosomes 
may  be  doubled  or  quadrupled,  either  by  failure  of  cells  to  divide  when  the 
chromosomes  divide,  or  else  by  the  chromosomes  breaking  up  into  a  con- 
stant number  of  parts.  These  are  special  cases  that  do  not  affect  the  general 
situation. 


108 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


and  there  are  in  all  about  twice  as  many  elements  in 
bivalens  as  in  univalens.  This  supports  the  view  that 
there  are  twice  as  many  chromosomes  in  one  type  as 


C 

Fig.  63. 

First  and  second  cleavages  of  the  egg  of  Ascaris  univalens  with 
two  chromosomes.  In  a  and  b  the  fragmentation  of  the  two  chro- 
mosomes in  one  of  the  cells  is  shown.  In  d,  three  cells  show  frag- 
mented chromosomes,  while  in  the  fourth  cell  the  chromosomes  are 
intact.  The  latter  gives  rise  to  the  germ-cells.  (After  Boveri.) 


in  the  other,  rather  than  that  bivalens  has  arisen  through 
the  halving  of  the  univalens  chromosomes. 

One  form  of  the  brine  shrimp,  Artemia  salina,  is,  ac- 
cording to  Artom,  a  tetraploid.  There  are  two  races,  one 
with  42  chromosomes,  the  other  with  84  chromosomes 
(Fig.   64).   The  latter  propagates  by  parthenogenesis. 


TETRAPLOIDS 


109 


Under  these  circumstances  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine 
that  the  tetraploid  originated  in  a  variety  that  was 
already  parthenogenetic,  for,  should  an  egg-cell  double 
the  number  of  its  chromosomes  by  the  retention  of  one  of 
its  polar  bodies,  or  become  double  through  the  chromo- 
somes failing  to  separate  after  the  first  division  of  a 
nucleus,  the  double  condition  might  continue  to  perpetu- 
ate itself. 


HaploJcf  21  ^Diploid  4>z) 


Fig.  64. 

The  chromosomes,  in  reduced  number,  of  the  diploid  and  tetraploid 

races  of  Artemia  salina.  (After  Artom.) 


One  of  the  first  tetraploids  in  plants  was  discovered  by 
de  Vries,  and  named  Oenothera  gigas  (Fig.  42).  It  was 
not  known,  at  first,  that  this  giant  was  a  fourfold  chromo- 
some type,  but  de  Vries  saw  that  it  was  stouter  than 
plants  of  the  parent  species  (Lamarck's  evening  prim- 
rose) and  different  in  manv  other  minor  characteristic 
details.  Its  chromosome  number  was  later  made  out. 

Lamarck's  evening  primrose  (Oenothera  Lamarcki- 
ana)  has  14  chromosomes  (haploid  7).  The  giant  form  0. 
gigas  has  28  chromosomes  (haploid  14).  The  two  chromo- 
some groups  are  drawn  in  Fig.  65. 

Gates  has  made  measurements  of  the  cells  of  differ- 
ent tissues.  The  epidermal  cells  of  the  anthers  of  gigas 


110         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

have  almost  four  times  the  volume  of  the  normal  type; 
those  of  the  stigma  three  times  the  volume ;  those  of  the 
petals  twice  the  volume  and  the  pollen  mother  cells  are 
about  one  and  a  half  times  larger.  The  nuclei  of  the  latter 
have,  in  gigas,  twice  the  volume  of  the  parent  type.  The 
cells  in  the  two  types  also  differ  sometimes  markedly  in 
their  superficial  dimensions.  Most  species  of  evening 
primroses  have  3-lobed  discoidal  pollen  grains,  some  of 
those  of  gigas  are  4-lobed. 


'it* 


a  b 

Fig.  65. 

a,  The  fourteen  diploid  chromosomes  of  Oenothera  Lamarckiana; 

6,  the  twenty-eight  diploid  chromosomes  of  O.  gigas. 


The  maturation  of  the  pollen  mother  cells  has  been 
studied  by  Gates,  Davis,  Cleland,  and  Boedjm.  Gates 
reports  that  in  0.  Lamarckiana  there  are,  as  a  rule,  14 
pairs  of  bivalent  chromosomes  (gemini)  in  the  giant.  At 
the  first  maturation  division,  half  of  each  bivalent  goes  to 
each  daughter  cell.  At  the  second  division  each  chromo- 
some  splits  lengthwise  and  gives  14  chromosomes  to  each 
pollen  grain.  A  similar  process  presumably  occurs  in 
the  ripening  of  the  ovules.  Davis  describes  the  chromo- 
somes of  0.  Lamarckiana  that  emerge  from  the  synaptic 
tangle  as  stuck  together  somewhat  irregularly  and  not 
strictly  in  side  to  side  union.  Later  they  move  toward  one 


TETRAPLOIDS 


111 


or  the  other  pole  bringing  about  reduction.  Cleland  has 
recently  described  an  end-to-end  union  of  the  chromo- 
somes  of  another  diploid  species,  Oenothera  franciscana, 
as  they  enter  the  maturation  spindle  (Fig.  66).  Some  of 


Fig.  66. 
The    maturation    of    the    pollen    cells    in    Oenothera   franciscana. 

(After  Cleland.) 


the  earlier  figures  of  Davis  had  also  to  some  extent  indi- 
cated an  end-to-end  union. 

In  other  monoecious  flowering  plants  tetraploids  have 
also  been  found  in  recent  years.  It  is  obvious  why  these 
occurrences  should  be  more  frequent  in  monoecious  spe- 
cies than  in  species  with   separate   sexes;  for,  in  the 


112         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

former,  eggs  and  pollen  are  produced  on  the  same  plant. 
Hence  if  a  plant  lias  started  as  a  tetraploid,  it  will  pro- 
duce both  egg-cells  and  pollen-cells  with  a  diploid  number 
of  chromosomes.  Self-fertilization  will  give  tetraploids 
again.  On  the  other  hand,  in  animals  or  plants  with  sepa- 
rate sexes  the  eggs  of  one  individual  must  be  fertilized  by 
sperm  from  another  individual.  Now,  if  a  tetraploid  fe- 
male should  arise,  her  ripe  eggs,  with  the  diploid  number 
of  chromosomes,  will  ordinarily  be  fertilized  by  the  hap- 
loid  sperm  from  a  normal  male,  with  the  result  that  a 
threefold  type,  or  triploid  is  formed.  From  a  triploid 
the  chance  of  recovering  a  tetraploid  again  is  very  small. 

The  tetraploids  that  have  arisen  in  pedigreed  cultures 
furnish  more  accurate  information  as  to  their  origin 
than  do  tetraploids  found  accidentally.  There  are,  in  fact, 
other  records  where  tetraploids  have  arisen  under  con- 
trolled conditions.  In  Primula  sinensis,  Gregory  has 
found  two  giant  types,  one  of  which  appeared  in  a  cross 
between  two  diploid  plants.  Since  the  parent  plants  con- 
tained known  genetic  factors,  Gregory  was  enabled  to 
study  the  inheritance  of  the  characters  in  the  fourfold 
type.  His  results  left  him  undecided  as  to  whether  they 
indicated  that  a  given  member  of  each  of  the  four  like 
chromosomes  unites  with  a  specific  mate  or  equally  with 
any  member  of  its  group.  Muller's  analysis  of  the  same 
data  indicates  the  latter  as  the  more  probable  conclusion. 

Winkler  has  obtained  a  giant  nightshade  (Solanum 
nigrum)  and  a  giant  tomato  (Solanum  lycopersicum) 
through  the  intermediate  process  of  grafting,  which  has 
in  itself,  so  far  as  known,  no  direct  relation  to  the  produc- 
tion of  the  double  forms. 

The  tetraploid  nightshade  was  obtained  in  the  follow- 
ing way.  A  piece  of  a  young  tomato  plant  was  grafted 
into  a  young  nightshade  plant  from  which  the  axial  buds 
were  then  removed.  A  cross  cut  was  made,  ten  days  later, 


TETRAPLOIDS 


113 


at  the  graft  level  (Fig.  67).  Adventitious  buds  grew  up 
from  the  callus  tissue  of  the  exposed  surface.  One  of 
these  plants  was  a  chimaera,  i.e.,  a  plant  part  of  whose 
tissue  was  nightshade  and  part  tomato.  It  was  removed 
and  propagated.  Some  of  the  axial  buds  of  the  new  plant 


J 


Fig.  67. 

To  the  left  a,  fc,  c,  methods  of  grafting  of  tomato  and  nightshade. 
To  the  right,  a  periclinal  chimaera,  S.  lycopersicum.  (After 
Winkler.) 


had  a  tomato  epidermis  and  a  nightshade  core.  These 
branches  were  then  isolated  and  planted.  The  plantlets 
differed  from  other  chimaeras  known  to  be  diploid,  which 
created  a  suspicion  that  the  new  type  might  have  a  tetra- 
ploid  core,  which  was  confirmed  by  examination.  The  tops 
of  these  chimaeras  were  cut  off,  and  the  axial  buds  of  the 
basal  half  removed.  From  the  adventitious  buds  of  the 


114 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


callus,  young  plants  were  obtained  that  were  tetraploid 
throughout.  One  of  these  gigas  nightshade  plants  is 
shown  in  Fig.  68,  to  the  right,  and  a  normal  (diploid)  or 
parent  type,  to  the  left ;  a  flower  of  gigas  is  shown  above 
to  the  right  in  Fig.  69  and  the  parent  type  to  the  left.  A 
seedling  gigas  is  shown  and  a  seedling  of  the  parent  type 
above  left,  Fig.  69. 


Fig.  68. 
Normal   diploid  parent  plant  of  solanum  to  the   left,  and  tetra- 
ploid to  the  right.   (After  Winkler.) 


The  differences  in  the  cells  of  some  of  the  tissues  are 
shown  in  Fig.  69.  The  palisade  cells  of  the  leaf  of  the 
gigas  type  and  the  corresponding  cells  of  the  parent  type 
are  shown  below  to  the  left ;  the  guard  cells  of  the  gigas 
stomata  and  those  of  the  parent  type  are  shown  below 
to  the  right ;  the  hairs  of  the  gigas  form  and  those  of  the 
parent  are  shown  at  the  bottom  to  the  right ;  the  pith  cells 
of  the  giant  are  correspondingly  larger  than  those  of  the 
normal  plant.  The  pollen  grains  of  the  giant  are  repre- 


TETRAPLOIDS 


115 


sentecl  in  the  middle  to  the  right  and  those  of  the  parent 
type  to  the  left. 

A  tetraploid  tomato  plant,  also,  was  obtained  as  follows. 
A  piece  of  a  young  tomato  plant  was  grafted  on  to  a  stock 
of  nightshade  in  the  usual  way  (Fig.  67).  After  union 


Nopmal(n)       Gi§as(g)  Nor>mal(n)    Gigas(g) 

r 


n 


Fig.  69. 
Diploid  and  tetraploid  seedling  and  flowers  of  the  nightshade  are 
shown  above,  and  tissue  cells  below.  Above  to  left,  seedlings; 
above  to  right,  flowers;  below  to  left,  palisade  cells;  in  middle, 
pollen  grains;  to  right  stomata,  above,  and  hairs  below.  (After 
Winkler. ) 


had  been  perfected,  a  cut  was  made  across  the  union  of 
the  two  plants  and  the  axial  buds  removed  from  the  stock. 
From  the  cut  surface,  young  buds  developed  in  the  callus 
tissue.  These  were  removed  and  planted.  One  of  these 
had  an  epidermis  of  nightshade  cells  and  a  core  of  tomato 
cells.  It  was  found  on  further  examination  that  the  epi- 
dermal cells  were  diploid  and  the  cells  of  the  core  were 


116 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


tetraploid.  In  order  to  obtain,  from  this  composite  plant, 
a  tetraploid  in  all  of  its  parts,  the  stem  of  a  young  plant 
was  cut  across  and  the  axial  buds  below  the  cut  were 
removed.  New  adventitious  buds  appeared  on  the  cut 
surface  which  were,  for  the  most  part,  made  up  of  the 


Giant    Haploid    24  Giant    Diploid     48 

c  d 

Fig.  70. 
a,  Haploid;  b,  diploid  cell  and  chromosomes  of  nightshade;  c,  hap- 
loid,  and   d,   diploid   cell   and  chromosomes   of  tetraploid  night- 
shade.  (After  Winkler.) 


tomato  tissues  both  within  and  without.  The  giant  tomato 
plant  differs  from  the  parent  plant  in  the  same  way  as 
does  the  giant  nightshade  from  its  parent. 

The  diploid  nightshade  has  24  chromosomes,  its  hapr 
loid  number  is  12;  the  tetraploid  has  48  chromosomes, 
and  its  haploid  number  is  24  chromosomes.  The  diploid 
tomato  has  72  chromosomes  (haploid  36).  The  tetraploid 


TETRAPLOIDS 


117 


tomato  has  144  chromosomes  (haploid  72  chromosomes). 
These  chromosomes  are  shown  in  Figs.  70  and  71. 


Giant  haploid  Giant    diploid 

12  144 

C  d 

Fig.  71. 

a,  Haploid ;  &,  diploid  cell  and  chromosomes  of  tomato ;  c,  haploid, 
and  d,  diploid  cell  and  chromosomes  of  tetraploid  tomato.  (After 
Winkler.) 

As  has  been  said,  there  is  no  obvious  relation  in  these 
cases,  as  far  as  known,  between  grafting  and  the  forma- 
tion of  tetraploid  cells  in  the  callus.  How  these  cells  arise 
is  uncertain.  It  is  possible  that  two  cells  of  the  callus  fuse 


118 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


together,  as  Winkler  at  one  time  thought  probable,  but 
it  seems  more  likely  that  the  tetraploids  arise  by  the  sup- 
pression of  the  cytoplasmic  division  of  a  dividing  cell, 
which  would  thereby  double  the  number  of  its  chromo- 
somes. Such  a  tetraploid  cell  might  form  the  whole  or 
only  the  core,  or  any  other  part  of  a  young  plant. 

A  tetraploid  of  the  common   Jimson  weed   (Datura 
stramonium)    (Fig.  72  below)  was  found  by  Blakeslee, 


c 

. 

sl«2r^  k~-  A-  * 

■Fa               9L^-/W^   '  .^i^iHA     ■"■ 

^- '^ySL*  *8JJUjX' Jfr>  ^Vf^^y        "V       f  v^/L1^     *i**fS^     "3^  '$£*&*•*'' 

Fig.  72. 
Diploid  plant  of  Datura  stramonium,  above,  and  tetraploid,  below. 

(After  Blakeslee.) 


TETRAPLOIDS 


119 


Belling,  and  Farnham.  In  appearance  it  is  described  as 
differing  in  several  respects  from  the  diploid  type.  The 
differences  in  the  capsule,  flower,  and  stamens  in  the 
diploid  (second  column)  and  tetraploid  (fourth  column) 
are  shown  in  Fig.  73. 


I 


]fl 


Haploid 

/  I   . 

_\  /_ 

/  \ 


fcu       " 


Diploid 


„ 

%  1 


Tnploid 


t\    1/ 


■JJM. 


Tetraploid 


Fig.  73. 

Capsules,  flowers,   and  stamens  of  haploid,   diploid,  triploid,  and 
tetraploid  D.  stramonium.  (After  Blakeslee.) 


120         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

The  diploid  plant  has  12  pairs  of  chromosomes  (24 
chromosomes)  which  according  to  Belling  and  Blakeslee 
can  be  arranged  in  six  sizes  (Fig.  74),  namely,  large  (L 
and  1),  medium  (M  and  m),  and  small  (S  and  s),  or 
o  (L-j-41+3M+2m+S+s).  The  formula  for  the  haploid 


1 

*  « 

»s«t  i  *        tm 


Tn 


> 


•i  «  *i 


m 


♦  ' 


a 


Fig.  74. 
o,  Second  metaphase  chromosome  group  of  diploid  Datura  stramo- 
nium with  12  chromosomes  (each  constricted) ;  and  b,  correspond- 
ing group  of  tetraploid  with  24  chromosomes.  (After  Belling  and 
Blakeslee.) 


group  is  L+4.1+3M+2ni+S+s.  These  chromosomes, 
when  about  to  enter  the  first  maturation  division  (pro- 
phase), form  pairs  of  rings  or  else  are  united  by  one  end 
(Fig.  75,  second  column).  One  conjugant  of  each  pair  then 
moves  to  one  pole  and  its  mate  to  the  opposite  pole.  Pre- 
paratory to  the  second  maturation  division,  each  chromo- 
some constricts,  producing  the  appearance  shown  in  Fig. 
74b.  One  constricted  half  passes  to  one  pole  of  the  spindle, 


TETRAPLOIDS 


121 


the  other  half  to  the  other  pole.  Each  daughter  cell  gets 
12  chromosomes. 

The  tetraploid  has  24  pairs  or  48  chromosomes.  Prior 
to  their  entrance  into  the  first  maturation  spindle  they 
come  together  in  fours  (Fig.  76  and  Fig.  75).  The  differ- 


Ot    i  2^ 


I 


Haji&tcCU)ifi£olci 


Tnift£axcL  j      Tethciji£crvct 


Fig.  75. 

Methods  of  conjugation  of  the  chromosomes  in  diploid,  triploid, 
and  tetraploid  types  of  Datura  stramonium.  (After  Belling  and 
Blakeslee.) 


ent  ways  in  which  these  chromosomes  are  combined  in 
these  quadrivalent  groups  is  shown  in  these  figures.  They 
enter  the  first  maturation  spindle  in  approximately  this 
condition.  At  the  first  maturation  division  two  members 
of  each  quadrivalent  pass  to  one  pole  and  two  to  the  op- 
posite pole  (Fig.  75).  Each  pollen  grain  has  24  chromo- 
somes. Occasionally,  however,  three  chromosomes  may 
pass  to  one  pole  and  one  to  the  other. 


122 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


The  24  chromosomes  of  the  tetraploid  at  the  second 
maturation  division  are  shown  in  Fig.  74.  They  re- 
semble those  of  the  diploid  at  the  same  stage.  Half  of 
each  passes  to  one  pole,  half  to  the  opposite  pole.  Belling 
records  that  in  68  per  cent  the  distribution  is  regular,  i.e., 
24  to  each  pole  (24+24).  In  30  per  cent  of  cases  the  dis- 


M 


**r*>   /- 


-«//#/ 


^  <? 


^i- 


Fig.  76. 
Conjugation  of  the  chromosomes  of  the  tetraploid  of  Datura  stra- 
monium.  Four   like   chromosomes   unite   to   make   up   each   group. 
(After  Belling  and  Blakeslee.) 

tribution  gives  23  at  one  pole  and  25  at  the  other  (23+ 
25).  In  2  per  cent  there  were  22  at  one  pole  and  26  at  the 
other.  In  one  case  the  distribution  was  21-27.  The  result 
shows  that  irregularities  of  distribution  are  not  uncom- 
mon in  the  tetraploid  Datura.  A  further  test  of  this  was 
made  by  self-fertilizing  a  tetraploid.  The  progeny  was 
grown  to  maturity  and  the  chromosomes  in  their  germ- 
cells  counted.  The  number  of  chromosomes  in  55  of  the 
plants  was  48 ;  in  five  plants  it  was  49 ;  in  one  plant  it  was 
47 ;  in  another  it  was  48  ( ?) .  If  the  distribution  in  the  egg- 
cells  is  like  that  in  the  pollen  cells,  it  follows  that  the 


TETRAPLOIDS  123 

germ-cells  with  24  chromosomes  are  those  most  likely  to 
survive  and  function.  Some  of  these  plants  with  more 
than  48  chromosomes  might  give  new  types  with  still 
greater  irregularities  of  distribution  of  the  chromosomes, 
owing  to  the  additional  extra  chromosomes. 


v*WW*t 


a 

i 

a 

a; 

0*«S 

•     c 

ab 

Fig.  77. 

a,  Euchlaena  perennis,  first  maturation  division,  prophase;  with 
19  bivalents  and  two  single  chromosomes,  a1,  Metaphase  of  last. 
a2,  Anaphase  of  same,  b,  Zea  mays,  first  maturation  prophase  with 
ten  bivalents.  c,  Euchlaena  mexicana,  first  maturation  division, 
prophase,  with  ten  chromosomes,  ab,  Hybrid  (Fx)  between  E. 
perennis  and  Zea  mays,  prophase  of  first  maturation  division  with 
3  trivalent,  8  bivalent,  and  5  single  chromosomes,  ab1  Same  as 
last,  late  anaphase  of  first  maturation  division.   (After  Longley.) 


124         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

A  tetraploid  Narcissus  has  been  reported  by  de  Mol. 
The  diploid  species  has  14  chromosomes  (7  pairs)  while 
two  cultivated  varieties  were  found  to  have  28  chromo- 
somes. De  Mol  points  out  that  until  1885  the  small  diploid 
varieties  were  chiefly  cultivated.  Then  the  larger  triploid 
types  appeared  and  finally  about  1899  the  first  tetraploid 
was  obtained. 

The  perennial  teosinte  of  Mexico  has  twice  as  many 
chromosomes  as  the  annual  teosinte,  according  to  Long- 
ley.  The  perennial  Fig.  77a,  has  40  chromosomes  (n=20) 
and  the  annual  20  chromosomes  (n=10)  Fig.  77c.  Longley 
crossed  both  of  these  with  corn  (maize),  that  has  20 
chromosomes  (n=10)  Fig.  77b.  The  hybrid  between  the 
annual  teosinte  and  corn  has  20  chromosomes.  At  the 
maturation  stages  of  the  pollen  mother  cells  there  are  10 
bivalents,  and  these  divide  and  pass  to  the  poles  without 
any  lagging  chromosomes.  This  means  that  the  10  chro- 
mosomes that  have  come  from  the  teosinte  conjugate  with 
the  10  that  have  come  from  the  corn.  "When  the  perennial 
teosinte  is  crossed  to  corn  the  hybrid  has  30  chromo- 
somes. At  the  ripening  of  the  pollen  mother  cells  of  the 
hybrid  the  chromosomes  are  found  to  be  united,  some  in 
threes,  others  in  twos;  the  rest  have  no  partners  (Fig. 
77ab).  This  leads  to  irregularities  in  the  division  that 
follows  (Fig.  77aV). 

In  hermaphroditic  or  monoecious  plants,  where  the 
question  of  sex  determination  is  not  involved  with  differ- 
ential sex-chromosomes,  the  tetraploid  may  be  said  to  be 
both  balanced  and  stable.  By  balanced  is  meant  that  the 
numerical  relations  of  the  genes  is  the  same  as  that  in  the 
diploid  or  normal  type.  By  stable  is  meant  that  the 
mechanism  of  maturation  is  such  that  the  type,  once 
established,  perpetuates  itself.3 

Tetraploids  in  mosses  were  produced  as  early  as  1907 

3  Blakeslee  used  the  terms  differently. 


TETRAPLOIDS 


125 


by  Elie  and  fimile  Marchal  by  artificial  means.  Each 
moss  plant  has  two  generations,  a  haploid  protonema 
stage  (gametophyte)  that  produces  eggs  and  sperm-cells 
and  a  diploid  stage  (sporophyte)  that  produces  asexually 


©      •  XlTl) 


X(Tl) 


x(m 


Xy(2Tl)  Sporophyte 


X(TD        Gametophyte 


lerna 


@  mm        ®xm) 

Fig.  78. 
Normal  life  cvele  of  dioecious  moss. 


126         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

the  spores  (Fig.  78).  Pieces  of  the  sporophyte  if  kept 
under  moist  conditions  give  rise  to  threads  whose  cells 
are  diploid.  These  become  a  true  protonema  that  gives 
rise  in  time  to  diploid  eggs  and  diploid  sperm-cells.  By 
the  union  of  these  germ-cells  tetraploid  sporophyte 
plants  are  formed  (Fig.  79).  Here  the  normal  haploids 
have  been  duplicated  by  a  diploid  protonema  and  moss 
plant,  and  the  diploid  sporophyte  has  been  duplicated  by 
a  tetraploid  sporophyte. 

The  Marchals  have  made  comparative  measurements 
of  the  size  of  the  cells  of  the  normal  plants  and  of  those 
of  the  tetraploids.  In  three  species  the  volume  of  the 
normal  perianth  cells  to  that  of  the  doubles  was  found  to 
be  as  1  to  2.3 ;  1  to  1.8 ;  and  1  to  2.  The  volumes  of  the  cells 
of  the  normal  antheridia  in  the  two  types  were  as  1  to  1.8 
and  those  of  the  nuclei  were  about  as  1  to  2.  The  egg-cells 
were  as  1  to  1.9.  Measurements  of  the  antheridial  organs 
(that  carry  the  sperm-cells)  and  of  the  archegonial 
organs  (that  carry  the  egg)  showed  in  all  cases  that 
the  double  types  are  longer  and  broader  than  are  the 
normal  types.  It  is  evident  that  the  increase  in  size  of 
the  double  types  is  due  to  larger  cells  and  these  in  turn 
have  larger  nuclei,  which,  other  evidence  has  shown, 
have  in  the  double  types  twice  as  many  chromosomes  as 
in  the  normal  type.  This  was,  of  course,  to  be  expected 
from  their  origin  by  regeneration  from  the  normal  sporo- 
phyte. 

In  the  sporophyte  generation  the  mother  cells  of  the  2n 
spores  were  to  those  of  the  4n  spores  about  as  1  to  2. 

The  two  maturation  divisions  in  mosses,  i.e.,  the  divi- 
sions following  conjugation  of  the  chromosomes,  take 
place  in  the  sporophyte  at  the  time  when  the  spores  are 
formed — four  from  each  spore  mother  cell.  If,  in  mosses, 
the  chromosomes  carrv  the  ofenes,  the  doubling:  of  the 
chromosomes  (tetraploid)  in  double  types  is  expected  to 


>A)3 


xycin) 


© 


@® 


Xlj(AU) 


7@®  @@ 


xy(An) 


XljilU) 


XljiATi) 


XljiZTl) 


©xycn) 

Fig.  79. 

Formation  of  a  diploid  protonema  (2n)  by  regeneration  from  a 
2n  sporophyte  of  a  normal,  monoecious  moss.  By  self-fertilization 
a  2n  gametophyte  gives  rise  to  a  tetraploid  or  4n  sporophyte.  By 
regeneration  from  the  latter  a  tetraploid  gametophyte  is  produced. 


128         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

give  ratios  different  from  those  in  the  normal  plants.  As 
yet  little  has  been  done  in  this  direction,  although  Wett- 
stein  has  found  clear  evidence  of  genetic  inheritance  in  a 
few  species  crosses  of  mosses,  and  Allen,  in  the  related 
group  of  liverworts,  has  genetic  evidence  for  two  charac- 
ters of  the  gametophyte. 

In  those  mosses  with  separate  sexes  and  in  certain 
liverworts  it  has  been  shown  by  the  Marchals,  by  Allen, 
by  Schmidt,  and  by  Wettstein  that  the  sex-determining 
elements  are  sorted  out  at  the  time  of  spore  formation. 
An  account  of  these  observations  and  experiments  will 
be  given  in  the  chapter  on  sex. 

There  are  many  important  questions  for  embryology 
rather  than  for  genetics  relating  to  the  size  of  the  cells 
of  tetraploids.  In  general  it  may  be  said  that  the  cells 
are  larger,  and  frequently  twice  as  large,  but  there  is  a 
good  deal  of  variation  in  the  different  tissues  in  these 
respects. 

The  size  of  the  whole  plant  as  well  as  some  of  the  other 
peculiarities  of  the  tetraploid  are  due  apparently  to  the 
increase  in  size  of  its  cells.  If  this  is  correct,  it  means 
that  these  characteristics  are  developmental  rather  than 
genetic.  The  way  in  which  tetraploids  arise  has  to  some 
extent  been  already  considered.  The  methods  that  have 
been  suggested,  as  to  how  the  increase  in  the  amount  of 
cytoplasm  in  the  cells  of  the  tetraploids  takes  place,  call 
for  further  examination. 

If  two  cells  in  the  germ-track  should  fuse,  and  their 
nuclei  then  or  later  unite,  a  tetraploid  cell  might  result. 
If  the  double  cell  continued  to  maintain  a  double  volume 
in  the  growth  period,  an  egg  of  twice  the  normal  size 
would  be  expected  to  result.  The  number  of  cells  of  the 
larger  embryo  would  also  be  expected  to  be  the  same  as 
that  characteristic  of  the  normal  embryo. 

There  is,  however,  another  possibility,  namely,  that  the 


TETRAPLOIDS  129 

double  germ-cell  might  not  be  able  to  increase  to  double 
size  in  the  germ-track  of  its  diploid  mother.  The  egg 
might  not  then  be  any  larger  than  the  normal  egg,  but 
have  twice  as  many  chromosomes.  The  embryo  develop- 
ing from  this  egg  might  not  be  able  to  get  enough  nour- 
ishment to  increase  the  size  of  its  cells  until  the  post- 
embryonic  or  larval  stages  were  reached,  when  food  is 
obtainable  from  the  outside.  Whether  at  this  late  period 
the  presence  of  a  double  set  of  chromosomes  in  each  cell 
would  bring  about  an  enlargement  of  the  cytoplasm  of 
each  cell  is  uncertain.  In  the  next  generation,  however, 
the  eggs  would  develop  from  the  beginning  with  a  four- 
fold set  of  chromosomes  in  a  tetraploid  body,  and  under 
these  circumstances  it  is  conceivable  that  the  egg  might 
grow  to  double  size  before  dividing. 

It  is  even  less  to  be  expected,  perhaps,  that  an  imme- 
diate increase  in  amount  of  the  cytoplasm  could  take 
place  if  the  doubling  of  the  chromosomes  occurred  in  a 
mature  egg  after  it  is  fertilized.  The  embryos  of  animals 
pass  through  a  rather  definite  number  of  cell-divisions 
before  organ  formation  begins.  If  an  embryo  should  start 
as  an  egg  of  normal  size  but  with  double  the  number  of 
chromosomes,  and  if,  in  consequence  of  the  double  num- 
ber present,  cleavages  should  cease  sooner  than  in  the 
normal  egg  when  organ  formation  sets  in,  such  a  tetra- 
ploid embryo  would  then  have  cells  twice  the  size  of  the 
normal  embryo  but  only  half  as  many  cells. 

In  the  flowering  plants  where  ample  space  and  food 
supply  is  present  in  the  embryo  sac,  the  development  of 
an  egg  with  a  larger  amount  of  cytoplasm  may  have  a 
more  favorable  chance  to  take  place. 


130         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Tetraploidy  as  a  Means  of  Increasing  the  Number 
of  Genes  in  a  Species. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  considerations  connected 
with  tetraploids  from  an  evolutionary  standpoint  is  the 
opportunity  they  may  seem  to  furnish  for  increasing  the 
number  of  new  genes.  If  new  and  stable  types  arise 
through  doubling  the  number  of  the  chromosomes,  and 
if,  after  doubling,  the  four  like  chromosomes  should  be- 
come different  in  the  course  of  time,  so  that  two  become 
more  like  each  other,  and  the  other  two  also  become  more 
like  each  other,  the  tetraploid  would  then  resemble  geneti- 
cally a  diploid,  except  in  so  far  as  many  of  the  genes 
remained  unchanged.  Many  like  genes  would  then  be 
present  in  four  chromosomes  of  each  set,  and  the  expec- 
tation for  the  F2,  when  an  individual  is  heterozygous  for 
only  one  pair  of  genes,  would  be  a  Mendelian  ratio  of  15 
to  1  instead  of  3  to  1.  Such  ratios  have  in  fact  been  found 
(wheat,  shepherd's  purse)  but  whether  tetraploidy  ac- 
counts for  the  result  or  whether  doubling  has  occurred  in 
some  other  way  remains  to  be  determined. 

On  the  whole,  it  seems  that  until  we  know  something 
more  as  to  the  way  in  which  new  genes  arise — if  they  do 
now  arise — it  is  rather  hazardous  to  take  advantage  of 
tetraploidy  as  a  general  explanation  to  account  for  a 
change  in  number  of  the  genes.  It  is  true  that  in  monoe- 
cious plants  new  types  may  arise  in  this  way,  yet  it  is 
improbable  that,  in  animals  with  separate  sexes,  tetra- 
ploidy could  become  established  (except  in  parthenoge- 
netic  species),  because,  as  has  been  pointed  out  above,  the 
tetraploid  is  lost  by  crossing  to  an  ordinary  or  diploid 
individual  and  not  easily  recovered  afterwards. 


CHAPTER  IX 

TRIPLOIDS 

TN  recent  work  a  number  of  threefold,  or  triploid, 
types  have  also  been  recorded.  Some  of  these  trip- 
loids  have  arisen  from  known  diploid  types ;  others 
have  been  found  in  cultivated  plants,  while  still  others 
have  been  found  in  the  wild  state. 

Stomps  and  Anne  Lutz  described  triploid  plants  of 
Oenothera  (scmi-gigas),  with  21  chromosomes.  Triploids 
of  Oenothera  have  since  been  described  by  de  Vries,  van 
Overeem,  and  others.  They  are  supposed  to  be  produced 
by  the  union  of  a  diploid  with  a  haploid  germ-cell. 

The  distribution  of  the  chromosomes  of  triploids  dur- 
ing: maturation  has  been  studied  bv  Gates  and  Geerts  and 
van  Overeem.  They  find  that  while,  in  some  cases,  the 
chromosomes  are  rather  regularly  distributed  at  reduc- 
tion, in  other  cases  some  of  the  chromosomes  are  lost  and 
degenerate.  Miss  Lutz  found  in  fact  great  variation  in  the 
kind  of  offspring  produced  by  triploids.  Gates  records 
that,  in  one  21-chromosome  plant,  the  two  cells  resulting 
from  the  first  maturation  division  contained  "almost  in- 
variably" 10  and  11  chromosomes  respectively  and  only 
occasionally  9  and  12.  Geerts  found  more  numerous  ir- 
regularities. He  describes  7  of  the  chromosomes  going 
regularly  to  each  pole,  while  the  remaining  7  that  were 
unpaired  were  irregularly  distributed  to  the  poles.  This 
account  fits  well  with  the  view  that  7  conjugate  with  7, 
leaving  the  remaining  7  without  partners.  Van  Overeem 
states  that  in  Oenothera,  when  the  triploid  serves  as  the 
mother  plant,  the  results  show  that  most  of  the  ovules  are 


132 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


functional,  regardless  of  the  distribution  of  the  unpaired 
chromosomes,  or,  in  other  words,  all  or  most  of  the  pos- 
sible different  groups  of  egg-cells  survive  and  may  be 
fertilized.  The  outcome  is  a  varied  assortment  of  forms 
with  many  different  combinations  of  chromosomes.  On 
the  other  hand,  when  the  pollen  of  a  triploid  Oenothera 


Fig.  80. 


Triploid  chromosome-group  of  the  pollen  mother  cell  of  the  Hya- 
cinth. (After  Belling.) 


is  used,  the  results  show  that  only  those  carrying  7  or  14 
chromosomes  are  functional.  The  pollen  grains  with 
intermediate  numbers  are,  for  the  most  part,  not  func- 
tional. 

Triploid  hyacinths  have  been  found  under  cultivation 
by  de  Mol.  He  states  that  they  are  replacing  the  older 
types  as  a  result  of  selection  for  commerce.  Some  of  their 
derivatives,  with  chromosome  numbers  varying  around 
the  triploid,  constitute  a  considerable  part  of  modern  cul- 


TRIPLOIDS  133 

tivated  types.  Since  hyacinths  are  usually  reproduced  by 
bulbs,  any  particular  form  can  be  perpetuated.  De  Mol 
has  studied  the  maturation  of  the  germ-cells,  both  of  the 
normal  and  the  triploid  hyacinths  (Fig.  80).  The  normal 
diploid  type  has  8  long,  4  medium,  and  4  short  chromo- 
somes. The  haploid  germ-cell  contains  4  long,  2  medium, 
and  2  short  chromosomes.  Both  de  Mol  and  Belling:  have 
pointed  out  that  the  "normal"  may  be  already  a  tetra- 
ploid,  since  in  the  reduced  group  there  are  two  chromo- 
somes of  each  size.  If  so,  the  so-called  triploid  may  pos- 
sibly be  a  double  triploid,  since  it  has  12  long,  6  medium, 
and  6  small  chromosomes. 


« 


ft     r 


S*** 


fl" 


< 

p^        m 

#V 

? 

i,   M 

yV, 

vv? 

*? 

*M 

s  M 


a  b 

Fig.  83. 
a,  Eedueed  chromosome  group  of  diploid  Datura;  b,  reduced  chro- 
mosome group  of  triploid  Datura.   (After  Belling  and  Blakeslee.) 

Belling  has  also  studied  the  maturation  divisions  of  a 
triploid  variety  of  Canna.  The  chromosomes  of  each  type 
conjugate  in  threes.  When  the  chromosomes  separate  two 
of  each  triplet  pass  as  a  rule  to  one  pole  and  one  to  the 
other  pole,  but  since  the  distribution  for  different  triplets 
is  at  random  only  rarely  will  a  diploid  and  a  haploid 
sister  cell  result. 

A  triploid  Datura  has  been  reported  by  Blakeslee, 
Belling,  and  Farnham.  It  arose  from  a  tetraploid  fertil- 
ized by  a  normal.  The  normal  diploid  type  has  24  chromo- 


134         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

somes  (n=12)  (Fig.  81a).  The  triploid  has  36  chromo- 
somes (Fig.  81b).  The  haploid  group  is  composed  of  1 
extra  large  (L),  4  large  (1),  3  large  medium  (M),  2  small 
medium  (m),  1  small  (S),  and  1  extra  small  (s)  chromo- 
somes. The  diploid  group  is  therefore  2  (L+41+3M-J- 
2m+lS+ls)  and  the  triploid  has  three  of  each  kind. 

The  maturation  divisions  have  been  studied  by  Belling 
and  Blakeslee.  The  reduced  groups  consist  of  12  sets 
of  three  each,  united  as  in  Fig.  81b.  These  trivalents  have 
the  same  size  relations  as  have  the  bivalents  in  the  dip- 
loid group,  i.e.,  they  are  formed  by  the  union  of  like 
chromosomes  only,  which  are  united  in  various  ways  as 
seen  in  the  figures.  Two  may  be  united  at  both  ends  and 
the  third  joined  on  at  one  end  only,  etc. 

At  the  first  division  two  of  each  triplo-set  pass*to  one 
pole  and  one  to  the  other  pole  of  the  spindle  (Fig.  75, 
third  column),  and  since  the  assortment  takes  place  at 
random  in  the  different  triplets  several  combinations  of 
chromosomes  are  realized.  The  numbers  found  in  one 
count  of  84  pollen  mother  cells  are  recorded  below  in 
Table  I.  The  results  are  in  close  agreement  with  the  ex- 
pectation for  random  assortment. 

table  I 

Assortment  of  Chromosomes  in  84  Pollen  Mother  Cells  of  Triploid 

Datura,  19729(1) 

Metaphase  of  Second  Division. 

Assortment  of  Chromosomes 

Nos.  of  double  groups 1 

Calculated    on     random    orienta- 
tion of  trivalents   0.04     0.5       2.7       9.0     20.3     32.5     19.0 

Rarely  the  first  division  of  the  triploid  may  be  omitted. 
This  is  favored  by  transient  cold.  At  the  second  division 


12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

24 

23 

22 

21 

20 

19 

18 

1 

1 

6 

13 

17 

26 

20 

TRIPLOIDS 


135 


an  equatorial  division  of  the  chromosomes  takes  place, 
giving  two  giant  cells  with  36  chromosomes  each. 

As  a  rule  very  few  functional  pollen  grains  are  formed 
in  the  triploid,  but  apparently  the  egg-cells  are  more 
often  functional.  For  instance,  when  a  triploid  is  polli- 
nated by  a  normal  plant,  the  number  of  normal  offspring 
(2n)  produced  is  much  beyond  expectation  on  the  as- 
sumption that  the  chromosomes  of  the  egg  are  freely 
assorted. 


Fig.  82. 

a,  Normal  or  diploid  female,  and  b,  triploid  of  Drosophila  melano- 

gaster. 


Triploid  Drosophilas  have  been  found  by  Bridges 
(Fig.  82).  They  are  females  because  they  have  three  X- 
chromosomes  balanced  against  three  of  each  kind  of  auto- 
some. This  is  the  same  balance  that  produces  the  normal 
female.  Since  genetic  factors  in  all  the  chromosomes  are 
known,  it  has  been  possible  to  study  the  behavior  of  the 


136         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

chromosomes  at  maturation  by  means  of  the  character- 
distribution  in  the  progeny.  It  has  also  been  possible  to 
study  the  crossing-over,  and  to  determine  that  the  chro- 
mosomes mate  in  threes. 

In  true  triploid  Drosophilas  there  are  three  sets  of 
ordinary  chromosomes  and  three  X-chromosomes  also. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  only  two  X-chromosomes 
present  the  individual  is  an  intersex.  If  only  one  X  is 
present  the  individual  is  a  supermale.  These  relations 
are  as  follows : 

3a+3X=triploid  female 
3a+2X=intersex 
3a+lX= supermale 

In  bisexual  animals  another  triploid  is  known  in  an 
embryonic  stage.  Females  of  the  bivalens  variety  of  the 
threadworm  Ascaris  have  been  reported  whose  ripe  eggs 
with  two  chromosomes  have  been  fertilized  each  by  a 
spermatozoon  of  a  univalens  variety  with  one  chromo- 
some. These  eggs  produce  embryos  with  three  chromo- 
somes in  each  cell.  Since  the  embryos  escape  before  their 
own  germ-cells  mature,  the  most  significant  feature  of 
their  chromosome  behavior,  namely,  union  during  con- 
jugation, has  not  been  observed,  for  as  yet  no  adult  trip- 
loids  of  Ascaris  have  been  reported. 

Triploids  have  been  produced  by  crossing  diploid  spe- 
cies and  back-crossing  the  hybrid  (that  has  diploid  germ- 
cells  owing  to  the  failure  of  conjugation  and  reduction) 
to  one  of  the  parental  stocks.  The  experiment  was  carried 
out  by  Federley  with  three  species  of  moths  with  the  fol- 
lowing chromosome  numbers. 

Diploid  Eaploid 

Pygaera  anachoreta  60  30 

Pygaera  curtula  58  29 

Pygaera  pigra  46  23 


TRIPLOIDS  137 

The  hybrid  between  the  first  two  species  has  59  chromo- 
somes (30+29).  When  the  germ-cells  of  the  hybrid 
reaches  the  maturation  stages  no  union  takes  place  be- 
tween the  chromosomes.  At  the  first  maturation  division, 
each  of  the  59  chromosomes  splits  into  daughter  halves. 
Each  daughter  cell  receives  this  number.  At  the  second 
maturation  division  many  irregularities  occur.  The  chro- 
mosomes split  again,  but  the  halves  often  fail  to  separate. 
Nevertheless,  the  male  is  partially  fertile  and,  as  the 
result  shows,  some  of  his  germ-cells  contain  the  full  num- 
ber (59)  chromosomes.  The  Fx  female  is  sterile. 

If  the  F2  male  is  back-crossed  to  a  female  of  one  of  the 
parent  species,  to  anachoreta,  for  example,  whose  ripe 
eggs  contain  30  chromosomes,  the  second  hybrid  has  89 
chromosomes  (59+30),  and  is  therefore  a  hybrid  trip- 
loid.  These  F2  hybrids  resemble  closely  the  Fx  hybrids. 
They  have  two  sets  of  anachoreta  chromosomes  and  one 
set  of  curtula  chromosomes.  They  are,  in  a  sense,  per- 
manent hybrids,  although  in  each  generation  only  half  of 
their  chromosomes  conjugate.  For  instance,  in  the  ripen- 
ing of  the  germ-cells  of  these  89  chromosome  hybrids  the 
double  set  of  anachoreta  chromosomes  (30+30)  conju- 
gates, the  29  curtula  chromosomes  remain  single.  The 
former  separate  at  the  first  division,  the  latter  divide, 
giving  59  to  each  cell.  At  the  second  division  all  59  chro- 
mosomes divide.  The  germ-cells  contain,  therefore,  59 
chromosomes  and  are  diploid.  As  long  as  back-crossing 
continues  it  should  be  possible  to  produce  triploid  indi- 
viduals. While  under  controlled  conditions  it  might  be 
possible  to  maintain  a  triploid  line  in  this  way,  it  is  not 
probable,  owing  to  the  sterility  of  the  offspring  resulting 
from  irregularities  in  the  spermatogenesis  of  the  hybrid, 
that  under  natural  conditions  a  permanent  triploid  race 
could  be  established.1 

i  The  account  in  the  text  has  been  intentionally  somewhat  simplified.  In 


138         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

The  embryonic  development  of  triploid  individuals  is 
expected  to  be  normal  because  of  the  balanced  condition 
of  the  genes.  The  only  inharmonious  factor  that  may 
enter  into  the  situation  is  the  relation  between  three  sets 
of  chromosomes  and  the  inherited  quantity  of  cytoplasm. 
How  far  auto-regulation  takes  place  is  not  definitely 
known,  but  it  may  be  surmised  that  in  plants  at  least  the 
cells  of  the  triploid  are  larger  than  those  of  the  normal 
type. 

Other  triploid  types  that  have  arisen  or  have  been  pro- 
duced by  crossing  wild  species,  one  of  which  has  twice  as 
manv  chromosomes  as  the  other,  will  be  described  in  a 
later  chapter. 

the  Fx  hybrid  one  or  more  of  the  chromosomes  appear  to  conjugate  at 
times.  Probably  reduction  follows  for  this  pair,  which  would  change  by  one 
or  more  the  actual  number  of  chromosomes  in  the  germ-cells  of  the  F2 
individuals. 


CHAPTER  X 

HAPLOIDS 

THE  genetic  evidence  indicates  that  one  complete 
set  of  chromosomes  at  least  is  required  for  normal 
development.  A  cell  with  one  set  of  chromosomes 
is  said  to  be  haploid,  and  an  individual  made  up  of  such 
cells  is  sometimes  called  a  haplont  or  frequently,  by  ex- 
tension, a  haploid.  The  embryological  evidence  also  indi- 
cates that  one  set  of  chromosomes  is  necessary  for  de- 
velopment.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  the  diploid 
set  can  be  replaced  directly  by  a  haploid  set  without  seri- 
ous consequences,  so  far  as  the  developmental  conditions 
are  involved. 

Eggs  that  have  been  incited  to  develop  by  artificial 
agents  may  develop  into  embryos  whose  cells  have  only 
one  set  of  chromosomes.  Not  infrequently,  however,  the 
eggs  double  the  number  of  the  chromosomes  (by  sup- 
pressing a  protoplasmic  division)  before  they  begin  to 
develop,  and  these  fare  better  than  the  haploids. 

By  cutting  off  a  fragment  from  a  sea  urchin  egg,  and 
fertilizing  it  with  a  single  sperm,  an  embryo  can  be  ob- 
tained with  only  one  set  of  chromosomes,  the  paternal 
set.  By  constricting  the  egg  of  triton  immediately  after 
fertilization,  Spemann  and  later  Baltzer  have  sometimes 
been  able  to  separate  a  piece  of  the  egg  that  contains  only 
a  single  sperm-nucleus  (Fig.  83),  and  one  such  embryo 
was  carried  through  by  Baltzer  to  the  time  of  metamor- 
phosis. 

If  frogs'  eggs  are  exposed  to  X-rays,  or  to  radium  for 
a  sufficient  time  to  injure  or  to  destroy  the  chromosomes, 


140 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


and  if,  as  Oscar  and  Grunther  Hertwig  have  shown,  these 
eggs  are  then  fertilized,  they  may  produce  embryos  whose 
cells  have  the  half  number  of  chromosomes.  Conversely, 
if  the  spermatozoa  of  the  frog  are  radiated  they  may 
enter  the  eggs,  but  may  fail  to  take  further  part  in  the 
development.  Under  these  circumstances  the  egg  may 
develop,  for  a  time,  with  a  haploid  set  derived  from  the 
egg  nucleus.  In  some  of  these  eggs,  on  the  other  hand, 


Fig.  83. 

Egg  of  Triton  constricted  in  two,  immediately  after  fertilization. 

In  the  right  half  the  polar  body  is  shown.  (After  Spemann.) 


the  chromosomes  of  the  egg  may  first  divide  without  the 
protoplasm  dividing,  and  in  this  way  the  full  number  of. 
chromosomes  is  restored  before  development  begins. 
These  eggs  produce  embryos  that  develop  into  normal 
tadpoles. 

Most  of  the  artificial  haploid  forms  obtained  in  these 
various  ways  are  weak.  They  die,  in  most  cases,  long 
before  the  adult  stages  are  reached.  It  is  not  evident  why 
this  should  be  true,  but  there  are  several  possibilities 
that  may  be  taken  into  account.  If  a  whole  egg  with  a 
haploid  nucleus  is  incited  by  artificial  means  to  partheno- 
genetic  development,  and  if,  before  differentiation  sets 


HAPLOIDS  141 

in,  it  divides  the  same  number  of  times  as  does  the  normal 
egg,  each  of  its  cells  will  be  in  proportion  to  its  chromo- 
some number  twice  as  large  as  the  normal  cells  in  propor- 
tion to  their  chromosome  number.  In  so  far  as  the  de- 
velopment of  the  cell  is  dependent  on  its  genes  there  may 
be  an  insufficiency  of  gene  material  to  produce  a  normal 
effect  on  a  cytoplasm  of  double  volume. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  such  an  egg  should  pass  through 
one  more  division  than  does  the  normal  egg  before  dif- 
ferentiation (organ  formation)  begins,  the  number  of 
chromosomes  (the  nuclear  size)  would  then  be  propor- 
tionate to  the  cell  size — there  would  be  twice  as  manv 
cells,  and  twice  as  many  nuclei  in  the  whole  embryo  as 
in  the  normal.  The  embryo  as  a  whole  would  then  contain 
the  same  total  number  of  chromosomes  as  does  the  nor- 
mal embrvo.  How  far  the  smaller  size  of  the  cells  in  such 
a  case  might  affect  the  developmental  process  we  do  not 
know  at  present.  Observation  of  the  cell-size  of  haplonts 
seems  to  show  that  the  cells  have  the  normal  size  and  that 
the  nuclei  are  only  half  as  large  as  the  normal  ones.  It 
appears,  then,  that  the  embryo  does  not  rectify  its  nu- 
clear cytoplasmic  relation  as  just  indicated. 

It  might  be  possible  in  another  way  to  determine 
whether  the  weakness  of  the  artificial  haplonts  is  due  to 
an  insufficiency  of  genes  for  cells  as  large  as  normal  ones. 
Half  of  an  egg,  containing  a  single  sperm  nucleus,  would, 
if  it  passed  through  the  number  of  divisions  characteris- 
tic of  the  normal  egg,  be  made  up  of  cells  and  nuclei  hav- 
ing the  normal  size-ratio  to  each  other.  Sea  urchin  em- 
bryos of  this  kind  have,  in  fact,  long  been  known.  They 
become  plutei  that  appear  to  be  normal,  but  none  have 
been  carried  beyond  the  pluteus  stage  because,  for  one 
reason,  it  is  difficult  to  carry  even  normal  embryos  fur- 
ther than  this  stage  under  artificial  conditions.  It  is  not 
certain,  therefore,  whether  these  haplonts  are  as  viable 


142         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

as  normal  embryos.  Boveri  and  others  have  studied  ex- 
tensively fragments  of  sea  urchins'  eggs,  most  of  which 
were  probably  smaller  than  half  an  egg.  Boveri  concluded 
that  these  haplonts  die,  for  the  most  part,  before  the 
gastrulation  stages  or  soon  thereafter.  It  is  possible  that 
these  "fragments"  never  entirelv  recover  from  the 
operation,  or  that  they  do  not  contain  all  the  essential 
constituents  of  the  cytoplasm. 

A  comparison  of  these  embryos  with  those  obtained  by 
isolating  blastomeres  of  normal  diploid  eggs  has  certain 
points  of  interest.  It  is  possible  by  means  of  calcium-free 
sea  water  to  isolate  the  first  two,  or  the  first  four,  or  the 
first  eight  blastomeres  of  the  segmenting  egg  of  the  sea 
urchin.  Here  there  is  no  operative  injury,  and  each  cell 
has  the  double  number  of  chromosomes.  Nevertheless, 
many  of  the  y2  blastomeres  develop  abnormally,  fewer 
still  of  the  14  blastomeres  produce  plutei,  and  probably 
none  of  the  ys  blastomeres  pass  beyond  the  gastrula 
stage.  This  evidence  shows  that,  aside  from  the  number 
of  chromosomes  and  from  the  nucleo-plasma  ratio,  small 
size  in  itself  has  a  deleterious  influence.  What  this  may 
mean  is  not  known,  but  the  surface  relations  to  the  vol- 
ume vary  with  the  size  and  may  possibly  enter  into  the 
result. 

These  experiments  do  not  hold  out  much  promise  of 
obtaining  normal  vigorous  haplonts  by  diminishing  arti- 
ficially the  amount  of  the  protoplasm  of  the  eggs  in  spe- 
cies already  adjusted  to  the  diploid  condition.  Neverthe- 
less, under  natural  conditions  there  are  several  cases 
known  where  haplonts  exist,  and  there  is  one  case  re- 
corded where  a  haplont  of  a  diploid  species  has  reached 
maturity. 

Blakeslee  discovered  a  plant,  in  his  cultures  of  Datura, 
that  was  haploid,  Fig.  84.  With  care  it  was  kept  alive  and 
by  grafting  upon  diploid  plants  it  has  been  maintained 


HAPLOIDS 


143 


for  several  years.  This  plant  resembles,  in  all  essential 
respects,  the  normal  plant,  except  that  it  produces  a  very 
small  number   of  haploid   pollen  grains.   These   pollen 


L  i^^.  ~->aC!y  ^KJJ^E  JSP  *^^  ~~^  0& 

^u^fftB^ 

™     4     ' 

K            '  '             A 

l)tZi3l3(Bfin){1 

Fig.  84. 
A  haploid  plant  of  Datura.    (After  Blakeslee.) 


grains  are  the  ones  that  have  received  one  set  of  chro- 
mosomes after  a  rather  devastating  attempt  to  pass 
through  the  maturation  stages. 

Two  haploid  tobacco  plants  have  been  reported  by 
Clausen  and  Mann  (1924)  that  appeared  in  a  cross  be- 
tween Nicotiana  Tabacum  and  A7,  sylvestris.  Each  had  24 


144- 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


chromosomes,  which  is  the  haploid  number  of  the  -tsba- 
cum  species.  One  of  these  haplonts  was  "a  reduced 
replica"  of  the  "variety"  of  the  Tabacum  parent,  but  the 
expression  of  the  characters  was  somewhat  exaggerated. 


TV 


First  polar  body 


Egg  nucleus        qz 


Division  of 
first  pol&r  tody 


8  Second  polar  body 


Sperm  (82) 


Male82(l6)or  Female  82(l6)  + 82(16)  =32 

Fig.  85. 
Diagram  illustrating  the  two  maturation  divisions  of  the  egg  of 
the  honey  bee.  The  fertilization  of  the  egg  by  the  sperm  is  indi- 
cated in  the  lower  part  of  the  diagram  with  a  subsequent  doubling 
of  the  chromosomes  by  breaking  into  two  parts. 


It  was  about  three-fourths  the  height  of  the  parent  type ; 
the  leaves  were  smaller,  the  branches  more  slender,  and 
the  flowers  distinctly  smaller.  It  was  less  vigorous  than 
the  parent  type;  it  bloomed  profusely  but  produced  no 
seeds.  Its  pollen  was  completely  defective.  The  other  hap- 
lont  showed  similar  relations  to  the  variety  of  Tabacum 


HAPLOIDS  145 

from  which  it  was  derived.  The  first  maturation  of  the 
pollen  mother  cells  of  these  haplonts  was  irregular,  few 
or  many  of  the  chromosomes  passing  to  the  poles,  the  rest 
remaining  at  the  equator  of  the  spindle.  The  second  matu- 
ration division  was  somewhat  more  regular,  but  lagging 
chromosomes  failed  to  reach  either  pole. 

Nature  seems  to  have  been  successful  in  producing  a 
few  haplonts  in  species  in  which  one  sex  is  diploid.  Male 
bees,  wasps,  and  ants  are  haplonts.  The  eggs  of  the  queen 
bee  contain  16  chromosomes,  which  become  8  bivalents 
after  conjugation  (Fig.  85).  Two  maturation  divisions 
take  place,  reducing  the  number  to  8  chromosomes.  If 
an  egg  is  fertilized  it  produces  a  female  (queen  or 
worker)  with  the  diploid  number  of  chromosomes,  but  if 
an  egg  is  not  fertilized  it  develops  parthenogenetically 
with  the  half  number  of  chromosomes. 

An  examination  of  the  nuclear  and  cell-size  of  the  dif- 
ferent tissues  of  the  female  and  male  bees  (Boveri,  Mela- 
ling,  Nachtsheim)  has  shown  that,  in  general,  there  is  no 
constant  difference  between  the  cliplont  and  the  hap- 
lont.  There  is,  however,  a  peculiar  condition  in  the  early 
embryonic  stages  both  of  the  female  and  male  bee  that 
has  somewhat  complicated  the  situation.  In  the  cells  of 
the  embryo  of  the  female,  the  chromosomes  become  twice 
as  numerous  as  at  first,  apparently  by  each  chromosome 
separating  into  two  parts.  In  the  cells  of  the  embryo  of 
the  male,  the  same  process  occurs,  and  is  there  repeated 
even  a  second  time,  so  that  there  appear  to  be  32  chromo- 
somes present.  The  evidence  seems  to  indicate  that  the 
chromosomes  do  not  actually  increase  in  number  but 
''fragment."  If  this  is  the  correct  interpretation  there  is 
no  increase  in  the  number  of  the  genes.  The  female  has 
still  twice  the  number  of  those  in  the  male.  What  relation, 
if  any,  this  fragmentation  may  have  to  nuclear  size  is  not 
clear  at  present. 


146 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


In  the  germ-track  of  the  male  and  female  the  fragmen- 
tation does  not  seem  to  take  place,  or  if  it  does  the  pieces 
rejoin  before  the  maturation  stage. 

The  best  evidence  that  the  male  bee  is  a  haplont,  or  at 
least  that  its  germ-cells  are  haploid,  is  found  in  the  be- 


a 


d  e  f  g 

Fig.  86. 
The  two  maturation  divisions  of  the  germ-cells  of  the  male  of  the 
honey  bee.   (After  Meves.) 


havior  of  the  cells  at  the  maturation  divisions.  The  first 
division  is  abortive  (Fig.  86,  a,  b).  An  imperfect  spindle 
forms  in  connection  with  8  chromosomes.  A  piece  of  the 
protoplasm  constricts  off  without  chromatin.  A  second 
spindle  develops  and  the  chromosomes  divide  (Fig.  86, 
d-g),  presumably  by  splitting  lengthwise,  and  the  daugh- 


HAPLOIDS 


147 


ter  halves  pass  to  the  poles.  A  small  cell  cuts  off  from 
a  large  one.  The  latter  becomes  the  functional  sperm. 
It  has  the  haploid  number  of  chromosomes. 

The  male  of  the  rotifer,  Hydatina  senta,  is  a  haplont 
(Fig.  87c),  and  the  females  are  diplonts.  Under  unfavor- 


Fig.  87. 
A,  parthenogenetic  female  of  Hydatina  senta;   B,  young  female 
of  same;  C,  male  of  same;  D,  parthenogenetic  egg;  E,  male-pro- 
ducing egg;  F,  winter  egg.   (After  Whitney.) 


148         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

able  conditions  of  food,  or  when  fed  on  the  protozoon 
Polytoma,  only  female  rotifers  occur.  Each  female  is 
diploid,  and  her  eggs  are  at  first  diploid.  Each  egg  gives 
off  only  one  polar  body — each  chromosome  splitting  into 
like  halves.  The  full  number  of  chromosomes  is  retained 
in  the  egg  that  develops  by  parthenogenesis  into  a  female. 
When  fed  on  other  food  (Euglena,  for  example),  a  new- 
type  of  female  appears.  If  she  is  fertilized  by  a  male  at 
the  moment  she  emerges  from  the  egg,  she  produces 
sexual  eggs  only,  which  give  off  two  polar  bodies  and 
retain  the  haploid  number  of  chromosomes.  The  sperm 
nucleus,  already  within  the  egg,  unites  with  the  egg  nu- 
cleus to  form  a  diploid  female  that  starts  once  more  a 
parthenogenetic  line.  If,  however,  the  special  type  of 
female,  just  described,  is  not  fertilized,  she  produces 
smaller  eggs.  These  eggs  also  give  off  two  polar  bodies 
and  retain  the  half  number  of  chromosomes.  They  de- 
velop by  parthenogenesis  into  male  haplonts.  The  male 
is  sexually  mature  a  few  hours  after  birth;  he  never 
grows  any  larger  and  dies  after  a  few  days. 

The  males  of  the  white  "fly,"  Trialeurodes  vaporari- 
orum,  have  been  shown  by  Schrader  to  be  haplonts.  It 
had  been  discovered  by  A.  W.  Morrill  that,  in  America, 
virgin  females  of  this  fly  give  rise  to  male  offspring  only, 
and  later  Back  found  this  holds  for  another  member  of 
the  same  family.  On  the  other  hand,  in  England,  virgin 
females  of  the  same  white  fly  give  rise  to  females  only, 
according  to  Hargreaves  and  later  to  Williams.  Schrader 
has  studied  the  chromosomes  in  the  American  form. 
There  are  22  chromosomes  in  the  female  and  11  in  the 
male.  The  mature  eggs  have  11  bivalent  chromosomes. 
Two  polar  bodies  are  given  off,  leaving  11  single  chromo- 
somes in  the  egg.  If  the  egg  is  fertilized  11  chromosomes 
are  added  by  the  sperm  nucleus.  If  the  egg  is  not  fertil- 
ized it  develops  by  parthenogenesis  with  11  chromosomes 


HAPLOIDS  149 

present  in  all  cells  of  the  embryo.  In  the  maturation 
stages  of  the  germ-cells  of  the  male,  there  is  no  evidence 
of  a  reduction  division  (not  even  a  rudimentary  process 
as  in  the  bee)  and  the  equational  division,  if  it  is  present, 
does  not  differ  from  the  earlier  or  oogonial  divisions. 

There  is  some  evidence  that  the  unfertilized  eggs  of 
lice  develop  into  males,  as  suggested  by  the  breeding 
experiments  of  Hindle.  In  one  of  the  mites,  Tetranychus 
bimaculatus,  the  unfertilized  eggs  produce  males,  the 
fertilized,  females  (Perkins,  H.  A.  Morgan,  Bank,  Ewing, 
Parker).  It  has  been  shown  by  Schrader  that  the  males 
are  haplonts  with  only  three  chromosomes,  the  females 
are  diplonts  with  six  chromosomes.  The  early  ovarian 
eggs  have  six  chromosomes  that  conjugate  to  give  three 
bivalents.  Two  polar  bodies  are  given  off,  leaving  three 
chromosomes  in  the  egg.  If  the  egg  is  fertilized  three 
chromosomes  are  added,  giving  six  in  the  female,  if  the 
egg  is  not  fertilized  it  develops  directly  into  a  male  with 
three  chromosomes  in  each  cell. 

Virgin  females  of  one  species  of  thrips,  Anthothrips 
verbasci,  examined  by  A.  F.  Shull,  produce  only  males 
from  unfertilized  eggs.  These  males  are  probably  hap- 
lonts. 

In  mosses  and  liverworts  the  protonema  and  moss 
plant  stage  (gametophyte)  are  haplonts.  Wettstein  has 
by  artificial  means  brought  about  the  doubling  of  the 
number  of  chromosomes  in  cells  of  the  protonema  and 
from  these  has  obtained  diploid  protonema  and  moss 
plants.  This  result  proves  that  the  difference  between 
this  stage  and  the  sporophyte  stage  is  not  due  to  the  num- 
ber of  chromosomes  that  each  contains  but  is  a  develop- 
mental phenomenon  in  the  sense  that  in  order  to  reach 
the  sporophyte  stage  the  spore  must  pass  through  the 
gametophyte  condition. 


CHAPTER  XI 

POLYPLOID  SERIES 

IN  recent  years  an  ever  increasing  number  of  closely 
related  wild  and  of  cultivated  types  have  been  re- 
ported whose  chromosome  numbers  are  multiples  of 
a  basal  haploid  number.  The  polyploid  series  run  in 
groups  which  suggest  that  members  of  the  series  with  the 
higher  numbers  have  come  from  the  lower  members  by  a 
continuous  process  of  additions.  Whether  taxonomists 
will  decide  to  give  such  forms  as  are  stable  specific  rank 
is  for  them  to  decide. 

It  is  probably  significant  that  the  polyploid  series  have 
been  found  in  several  groups  that  were  known  as  poly- 
morphic groups  that  had  bewildered  taxonomists  owing 
to  their  variability  and  to  their  close  resemblance  to  each 
other,  to  their  failure  in  many  cases  to  breed  true  from 
seeds,  etc.  x\ll  this  accords  with  the  cytological  findings. 
In  so  far  as  the  chromosome  groups  are  balanced,  the 
genetic  expectation  is  that  these  plants  would  be  very 
similar,  except  in  so  far  as  the  increase  in  the  size  of  the 
cells  may  introduce  physical  factors  that  affect  the  struc- 
ture of  the  plant,  and  except  in  so  far  as  the  increased 
number  of  the  genes  may  introduce  chemical  effects  in 
the  cytoplasm. 

The  Polyploid  Wheats. 

In  the  small  grains,  wheat,  oats,  rye,  and  barley,  multi- 
ple chromosome  groups  have  been  found.  The  wheat 
series  has  been  most  extensively  studied  and  the  hybrid 
types  produced  by  crossing  them  have  been  examined  in  a 


POLYPLOID  SERIES 


151 


number  of  cases.  Of  these,  T.  monococcuin,  has  the  fewest 
chromosomes,  viz.,  14  (n=7).  It  belongs  to  the  Einkorn 
group  and  can  be  traced  back,   according  to  Percival 


d 


f 


'Aiv. 


h 

Fig.  88. 

Eeduced  number  of  chromosomes  of  diploid,  tetraploid,  and  hexa- 
ploid  wheats.   (After  Kihara.) 


152         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

(1921),  to  the  Neolithic  period  in  Europe.  Another  type, 
the  Emmer  group,  with  28  chromosomes,  was  grown  in 
Europe  in  prehistoric  times,  and  in  Egypt  as  early  as 
5400  b.c.  It  was  later  supplanted  in  the  Graeco  Roman 
period  by  wheat  with  28  chromosomes,  and  by  one  with 
42  chromosomes  of  the  Vulgare  group  (Fig.  88).  The 
number  of  varieties  is  greatest  in  the  Emmer  group,  but 
there  are  more  different  "forms"  in  the  Vulgare  group. 
The  chromosomes  have  been  studied  by  several  investi- 
gators. The  most  recent  work  is  that  of  Sakamura  (1900) 
and  Kihara  (1918,  1924)  and  Sax  (1922).  The  follow- 
ing account  is  taken  largely  from  Kihara 's  monograph 
and  to  some  extent  also  from  Sax's  papers.  The  next 
table  gives  the  observed  diploid  number  of  chromosomes 
and  the  observed  or  estimated  haploid  number. 

Haploid  Diploid 

Einkorn  group,  Triticum  monococcum   7  14 

Einkorn  group,  Triticum  dicoccum   14  28 

Einkorn  group,  Triticum  polonicum   14  28 

Emmer  group,  Triticum  durum   14  28 

Emmer  group,  Triticum  turgidum 14  28 

Vulgare  group,  Triticum  Spelta  21  42 

Vulgare  group,  Triticum  compactum   21  42 

Vulgare  group,  Triticum  vulgare   21  42 

The  haploid  groups  are  represented  in  Fig.  88a  (mo- 
nococcum), Fig.  88e  (durum),  and  Fig.  88h  (vulgare). 

The  normal  maturation  of  a  member  of  each  of  these 
groups  is  shown  in  Fig.  89  from  Sax.  In  the  Einkorn 
wheat  the  seven  gemini  (conjugated  chromosomes)  divide 
at  the  first  division,  seven  going  to  each  pole.  There  are 
no  lagging  chromosomes.  At  the  second  division  of  each 
daughter  cell  the  seven  chromosomes  split  into  daughter 
halves.  Seven  go  to  each  pole.  In  the  Emmer  type  the  14 
gemini  divide  at  the  first  maturation  stage.  Fourteen 
chromosomes  go  to  each  pole.  At  the  second  division  each 


POLYPLOID  SERIES 


153 


chromosome  splits,  and  14  daughter  chromosomes  move 
to  each  pole.  In  the  Vulgare  type  the  21  gemini  divide 
at  the  first  maturation  division.  Twenty-one  go  to  each 
pole.  At  the  second  division  the  daughter  halves  split  and 
21  move  to  each  pole. 


Hqploid 


Em  Korn 


mmer 


Vul 


s 


are 


14 


21 


"&* 


,•* 


»%'/.. 
W 


<&< 


* 


* 


—  ■ 


Fig.  89. 

The  first,  or  reduction,  division  of  diploid,  tetraploid,  and  hexa- 

ploid  wheats.  (After  Sax.) 


This  series  of  types  may  be  interpreted  as  diploid, 
tetraploid,  and  hexaploid.  Each  is  balanced  and  each  is 
stable. 

Crosses  have  been  made  between  several  of  these  types 
with  different  chromosome  numbers.  Some  of  the  com- 
binations produce  slightly  fertile  hybrids,  others  com- 
pletely sterile  ones.  The  behavior  of  the  chromosomes  in 
several  of  the  combinations,  where   different  parental 


154 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


numbers  are  involved,  brings  out  some  interesting  rela- 
tions. A  few  examples  will  serve  as  illustrations. 

Kihara  examined  the  hybrid  produced  by  crosses  be- 
tween an  Eminer  with  28  chromosomes  (n=14)  and  a 
Vulgare  type  with  42  chromosomes  (n=21).  The  hybrid 


Fig.  90. 
Reduction  division  of  hybrid  wheats.   (After  Kihara.) 


has  35  chromosomes.  It  is  therefore  a  pentaploid  hybrid. 
In  the  maturation  stages  (Fig.  90a-d)  there  are  14 
gemini  and  7  single  chromosomes.  The  former  divide,  14 
going  to  each  pole;  the  latter,  the  single  chromosomes, 
are  irregularly  scattered  on  the  spindle,  where  they  lag 
for  some  time  after  the  "reduced"  chromosomes  have 
reached  the  poles  (Fig.  90d).  Later  these  single  chromo- 


POLYPLOID  SERIES 


155 


somes  split  lengthwise,  and  the  daughter  chromosomes 
move  to  the  poles,  not,  however,  with  complete  regu- 
larity. When  the  distribution  is  equal  there  will  be  21 
chromosomes  at  each  pole. 

EMMER   BY   VULGARE 


m3r 


*^4 


.  s 


* 


* 


•7  s 


# 


Fig.  91. 

Eeduction   division   of   the   hybrid   between    Emmer   and   Vulgare 

wheat.    (After  Sax.) 


In  passing  it  should  be  recorded  that  according  to 
Sax's  results  in  a  similar  cross,  the  7  single  chromo- 
somes do  not  divide  at  this  time,  but  are  distributed  un- 
equally to  the  poles,  the  more  common  distribution  being 
3  and  4  (Fig.  91). 

At  the  second  division,  according  to  Kihara,  14  chro- 
mosomes that  are  split  lengthwise  appear  and  7  chromo- 
somes that  are  not  split.  The  former  divide,  14  going  to 


156         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

each  pole,  while  the  7  singles  are  distributed  at  random — 
more  often  3  going  to  one  pole  and  4  to  the  other.  Accord- 
ing to  Sax,  the  7  single  as  well  as  the  14  reduced  chro- 
mosomes split  at  the  second  division. 

Whichever  interpretation  holds  for  the  single  chromo- 
somes (and  there  are  in  other  forms  precedents  for  either 
interpretation),  one  important  fact  is  evident,  viz.,  that 
conjugation  takes  place  only  between  14  chromosomes. 
Whether  this  union  is  between  the  14  chromosomes  de- 
rived from  the  Emmer  and  14  chromosomes  derived  from 
the  Vulgare,  or  whether  the  14  chromosomes  of  the  Emmer 
unite  to  make  7  conjugants  and  14  of  the  Vulgare  unite  to 
make  7  conjugants,  leaving  one  set  of  7  over,  is  not  clear 
from  the  cytological  evidence.  A  genetic  study  of  these  or 
similar  combinations  (this  one  gives  a  sterile  hybrid) 
may  furnish  decisive  evidence,  but  this  is  lacking  at 
present. 

Kihara  also  crossed  Einkorn,  having  14  chromosomes 
(n=7),  with  Emmer  wheat,  having  28  chromosomes  (n= 
14).  The  hybrid,  having  21  chromosomes,  is  a  triploid. 
In  the  maturation  of  the  germ-cells  of  the  hybrid  (pollen 
mother  cells)  there  is  much  more  irregularity  than  in  the 
last  case  (Fig.  90e-k).  The  number  of  the  conjugating 
chromosomes  is  variable  and  their  union,  when  it  occurs, 
is  less  complete.  The  number  of  the  gemini  varies  as 
shown  in  the  next  table. 


Somatic  nun 

iber 

Gemini 

Singles 

21 

7 

7   (Fig.  90e) 

21 

6 

9   (Fig.  90b) 

21 

5 

11   (Fig.  90g) 

21 

4 

13   (Fig.  90h) 

At  the  first  division  the  components  of  the  gemini  sepa- 
rate and  pass  to  the  poles.  The  splitting  of  the  single 
chromosomes  does  not  alwavs  take  place  before  thev  have 


POLYPLOID  SERIES  157 

moved  to  one  or  the  other  pole ;  some  reach  the  poles  un- 
divided, others  split  and  the  halves  move  to  the  poles. 
Not  infrequently  7  single  chromosomes  are  left  in  the 
middle  plane  between  the  two  polar  groups  (Fig.  90i). 
Three  counts  are  given  in  the  following  table : 


Upper  pole 

Between  the  poles 

Lower  pole 

8 

6 

7   (Fig.  90i) 

9 

4 

8   (Fig.  90 j) 

9 

3 

9   (Fig.  90k) 

At  the  second  division  11  or  12  chromosomes  are,  as  a 
rule,  present;  some  are  doubles  (split  lengthwise),  others 
singles.  The  former  divide  normally,  the  daughter  chro- 
mosomes going  to  one  or  the  other  pole;  the  singles  are 
distributed  without  division  to  one  or  the  other  pole. 

From  this  evidence  it  is  not  possible  to  determine 
which  chromosomes  conjugate  in  the  hybrids.  Since  the 
number  of  gemini  does  not  exceed  7,  these  may  be  inter- 
preted as  the  result  of  union  of  the  14  chromosomes  of 
the  Emmer  parent,  or  as  the  result  of  the  union  of  7  of 
the  Einkorn  with  7  of  the  Emmer  chromosomes. 

In  a  few  crosses  between  Emmer  and  Vulgare,  fertile 
hybrids  have  been  obtained.  Kihara  has  studied  the  chro- 
mosomes in  the  maturation  division  of  some  of  the  F3,  F4, 
and  later  generations.  The  chromosome  numbers  in  the 
plants  vary  and  there  are  irregularities  in  the  distribu- 
tion of  some  of  them  during  maturation,  leading  to  fur- 
ther irregularities,  or  to  the  reestablishment  of  a  stable 
type  like  one  of  the  original  types,  etc.  These  results, 
important  for  the  genetic  study  of  the  hybrids,  are  too 
complex  for  our  present  purpose. 

Kihara  studied  hybrids  (one  combination)  between  a 
Vulgare  wheat  and  a  race  of  rye,  the  former  having  42 
chromosomes  (n=21),  the  latter  14  chromosomes  (n= 
7).  The  hybrid  (with  28  chromosomes)  may  be  called  a 


158         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

tetraploid.  This  hybrid  between  these  two  widely  differ- 
ent species  is,  according  to  earlier  observations,  sterile, 
but  fertile  according  to  other  observers. 

In  the  maturation  stages  of  the  germ-cells,  few  or  even 
no  conjugating  chromosomes  were  observed,  as  shown  in 
the  next  table : 


Gemini 

Singles 

0 

28 

1 

26 

2 

24 

3 

22 

The  distribution  of  the  chromosomes  to  the  poles  is 
very  irregular;  few  if  any  of  the  singles  divide  before 
reaching  the  poles ;  some  of  them  are  left  scattered  in  the 
cell.  In  the  second  division  many  of  the  chromosomes 
split,  but  those  that  divided  in  the  first  division  lag  and 
pass  slowly  to  the  pole ;  the  number  that  lag  is,  however, 
much  less  than  in  the  first  division. 

The  almost  complete  absence  of  conjugating  chromo- 
somes in  the  cross  between  wheat  and  rye  is  the  most 
interesting  feature  of  the  cross.  The  resulting  irregu- 
larity in  the  distribution  of  the  chromosomes  will  prob- 
ably account  for  the  generally  observed  sterility  of  the 
hybrid.  There  is  a  possibility  that  all  the  chromosomes 
(or  most  of  them)  belonging  to  one  species  might,  as  a 
rare  event,  pass  to  one  pole.  This  might  lead  to  the  for- 
mation of  a  functional  pollen  grain. 

The  Polyploid  Roses. 

Since  the  time  of  Linnaeus  the  classification  of  many 
of  the  roses  has  baffled  the  skill  of  taxonomists.  The  re- 
cent discoveries  of  a  Swedish  botanist,  Tackholm,  and  of 
three  English  botanists,  Harrison  and  Blackburn  in 
collaboration,  and  Hurst,  a  rose  expert  and  geneticist, 


POLYPLOID  SERIES  159 

have  shown  that  certain  groups  of  roses,  especially  those 
belonging  to  the  family  of  canina  rose,  are  polyploid 
types.  Their  differences  are  not  only  due  to  polyploidy, 
but  combined  with  this  there  is  evidence  of  extensive 
hybridization. 

*7V*  C9  t(r> 

diploid  triploid  teLraploid 


jy&/t 


W 

hexaploid 

pentaploid  octoploid 

Fig.  92. 
Polyploid  series  of  roses.  (After  Tackholm.) 


Tackholm  has  recentlv  made  an  elaborate  studv  of 
these  roses.  His  account  may  first  be  followed.  The  spe- 
cies with  14  chromosomes  (n=7)  have  the  smallest  num- 
ber, and  may  be  taken  as  the  basal  type.  There  are  trip- 
loids  (3  times  7),  tetraploids  with  28  chromosomes  (4 
times  7),  pentaploids  (5  times  7),  hexaploids  with  42  (6 
times  7),  and  octoploids  with  56  (8  times  7).  See  Fig.  92. 
In  the  maturation  division  of  some  of  these  polyploids 


160         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

that  are  balanced,  all  the  chromosomes  are  united  in  pairs 
(gemini),  while  in  those  polyploids  with  odd  numbers  and 
even  in  some  of  those  with  even  numbers  (taken  to  be  hy- 
brids) only  7  (or  14)  gemini  are  present,  the  rest  of  the 
chromosomes  being  single  in  the  first  maturation  division. 
In  other  words,  when  there  are  four,  six,  or  eight  chromo- 
somes of  each  of  seven  kinds  they  conjugate  in  twos,  as 
though  these  types  were  diploid.  Whatever  their  origin 
may  have  been,  the  chromosomes  never  conjugate  in 
fours,  sixes,  or  eights.  In  these  polyploids,  the  conjugants 
separate  at  the  first  maturation  division,  half  going  to 
each  pole.  At  the  second  division  each  chromosome  di- 
vides, and  half  of  each  goes  to  one  or  the  other  pole.  The 
germ-cells,  whether  pollen  or  ovules,  thus  come  to  con- 
tain half  the  original  number  of  chromosomes.  Hence,  if 
they  propagate  sexually,  the  characteristic  number  is 
maintained. 

Another  group  of  roses  is  regarded  as  hybrid  by  Tack- 
holm,  because  the  changes  that  take  place  in  their  germ- 
cells  show  them  to  be  unstable  forms.  Some  of  these  have 
21  chromosomes,  hence  are  triploids.  In  the  early  matu- 
ration stages  of  the  pollen  mother  cells  there  are  7  biva- 
lents  (gemini)  and  7  single  chromosomes.  At  the  first 
division  the  7  bivalents  divide  and  7  go  to  each  pole; 
the  7  single  chromosomes  do  not  divide  and  are  distrib- 
uted  at  random  to  the  poles.  Hence  several  combinations 
are  possible.  The  type  is  unstable  in  this  respect.  At  the 
second  maturation  division,  all  the  single  chromosomes 
divide,  whether  they  come  from  the  earlier  bivalents  or 
from  single  chromosomes.  Many  of  the  resulting  cells 
degenerate. 

In  other  hybrids  there  are  28  chromosomes  (4  times  7), 
but  these  are  not  classified  as  true  tetraploids  by  Tack- 
holm,  because  the  behavior  of  the  chromosomes  at  the 
time  of  conjugation  indicates  that  there  are  not  four  of 


POLYPLOID  SERIES 


161 


each  kind.  Only  7  bivalents  appear  and  14  single  chromo- 
somes. At  the  first  division  the  7  bivalents  split,  the  14 
singles  do  not  divide  and  are  distributed  irregularly. 

In  other  hybrids  there  are  35  chromosomes  (7  times  5). 
At  maturation  there  are  7  bivalents  and  21  single  chro- 
mosomes (Fig.  93).  Both  behave  as  in  the  last  case. 


a  ~  c 

Fig.  93. 

First  maturation  division  of  a  thirty-five  chromosome  heterotypic 
rose.  (After  Tackholm.) 


In  a  fourth  type  of  hybrid  there  are  42  chromosomes 
(7  times  6).  At  maturation  there  are  again  only  7  biva- 
lents, and,  here,  28  single  chromosomes.  The  behavior  of 
the  chromosomes  at  maturation  is  the  same  as  before. 

These  four  types  of  "hybrid  roses"  are  classified 
below  in  tabular  form  in  regard  to  their  pollen  formation. 

7  bivalent  and  7  single  chromosomes.  Whole  number  21 
7  bivalent  and  14  single  chromosomes.  Whole  number  28 
7  bivalent  and  21  single  chromosomes.  Whole  number  35 
7  bivalent  and  28  single  chromosomes.  Whole  number  42 

The  unique  behavior  of  these  hybrids  consists  in  the 
conjugation  of  only  14  chromosomes  to  give  the  7  biva- 
lents. These  chromosomes,  we  must  suppose,  are  identi- 


162 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


cal,  or  so  nearly  alike  that  they  conjugate.  It  is  not  ob- 
vious why  the  other  sets  do  not  conjugate,  unless,  as 
Tackholm  suggests,  each  set  of  7  has  come  from  a  differ- 
ent wild  species  by  crossing.  The  additional  chromosomes 
arising  in  this  way  are  sufficiently  different  from  the 
original  set  and  from  each  other  to  interfere  with  conju- 
gation. 


Fig.  94. 

Maturation  division  of  egg-cell  of  rose.  All  the  single  chromo- 
somes move  to  one  pole  where  they  are  joined  by  half  of  the  con- 
jugants.  (After  Tackholm.) 


Two  other  hybrid  forms  may  be  mentioned;  in  both 
there  are  14  bivalents  and  7  single  chromosomes.  In  these 
there  are  twice  as  many  conjugating  chromosomes  as  in 
the  former  hybrids. 

In  only  a  few  hybrids  of  the  canina  group  is  the  history 
of  the  chromosomes  in  the  embryo  mother  sac  (where  the 
egg  develops)  described  (Fig.  94).  There  are  7  bivalents 


POLYPLOID  SERIES  163 

lying  in  the  equator  of  the  spindle,  while  all  the  single 
chromosomes  are  collected  at  one  pole.  The  bivalents 
separate,  half  of  each  going  to  one  pole,  half  to  the  other. 
One  of  the  resulting  daughter  nuclei  contains  7  chromo- 
somes (derived  from  the  bivalents)  and  all  of  the  21 
single  chromosomes,  while  its  sister  cell  contains  only  7 
chromosomes.  The  egg-cell  is  derived  from  the  former 
group.  If  the  egg  develops,  as  appears  to  be  the  case, 
from  the  (7+21)  chromosome  cell,  and  is  fertilized  by  a 
sperm  with  7  chromosomes  (the  other  pollen  grains  as- 
sumed to  be  non-functional),  the  fertilized  egg  will  con- 
tain 35  chromosomes,  the  original  number  of  such  a  type. 

The  reproductive  processes  in  these  polyploid  hybrid 
roses  has  not  been  fully  worked  out.  In  so  far  as  they 
reproduce  by  stolons  they  will  maintain  whatever  num- 
ber of  chromosomes  may  result  from  fertilization.  Those 
that  form  seeds  by  parthenogenesis  may  also  maintain  a 
definite  somatic  number.  It  seems  probable  that,  as  a 
result  of  the  irregularities  in  the  formation  of  the  pollen 
and  egg-cells  many  different  combinations  may  be  estab- 
lished. Without  a  knowledge  of  the  chromosome  interre- 
lations of  these  types  the  hereditary  processes  would 
have  been  very  baffling.  Even  with  this  advance  in  our 
knowledge  there  still  remains  a  great  deal  to  make  clear 
the  composition  of  these  hybrid  roses. 

Hurst,  who  has  studied  species  of  Rosa,  both  wild  and 
cultivated,  thinks  that  the  wild  diploid  species  consist  of 
five  primary  groups  that  may  be  designated  AA,  BB,  CC, 
DD,  EE,  Fig.  95,  a-d,  e-h,  i-1,  m-p,  q-t.  Many  combinations 
of  these  five  fundamental  types  are  recognizable.  Thus, 
one  tetraploid  is  designated  BB,  CC ;  another,  BB,  DD ; 
one  hexaploid  is  AA,  DD,  EE ;  another  hexaploid  is  AA, 
BB,  EE ;  an  octoploid  is  BB,  CC,  DD,  EE. 

Hurst  states  that  each  member  of  the  five  primary 
series  has  at  least  50  diagnostic  characters.  These  can  be 


Fig.  95. 


The  five  types  of  canina  roses,  viz.,  a-d,  e-h,  i-1,  rn-p,  q-t.  The  char- 
acteristics of  each  type  are  indicated  in  the  same  horizontal  line 
including  flower,  seed  capsule,  method  of  branching,  spines,  and 
leaf  insertion.   (After  Hurst.) 


POLYPLOID  SERIES  165 

recognized  in  combinations  in  the  hybrids.  The  environ- 
mental conditions  may  alternately  favor  the  expression 
of  one  or  the  other  set  of  characters.  Hurst  believes  that 
a  classification  of  the  species  of  the  genus  is  possible  on 
the  basis  of  these  interrelations. 

Other  Polyploid  Series. 

In  addition  to  the  types  that  have  just  been  described, 
there  are  a  number  of  other  groups  in  which  multiple 
chromosome  varieties  and  species  have  been  reported. 

The  genus  Hieracium  is  known  to  contain  some  species 
that  reproduce  by  sexual  methods,  and  other  species  that 
reproduce  by  parthenogenesis,  even  although  stamens  are 
sometimes  present  in  them  that  may  contain  some  normal 
pollen  grains.  Rosenberg  has  studied  the  development  of 
the  pollen  of  several  species  that  produce  pollen.  He  has 
also  examined  hybrids  between  different  species.  In  the 
latter  he  has  studied  the  maturation  divisions  of  the 
pollen  cells  of  the  hybrid  between  H.  auricula  with  18 
chromosomes  (n=9)  and  H.  aurantiacum  with  36  (n= 
18).  In  the  hybrid  there  are  9  gemini  and  9  single  chro- 
mosomes in  the  first  maturation  division  but  some  excep- 
tional cases  are  found,  due  perhaps  to  aberrant  numbers 
of  chromosomes  in  the  pollen  of  one  of  the  parents,  viz., 
H.  aurantiacum.  At  the  first  division  the  gemini  separate, 
and  most  of  the  single  chromosomes  divide. 

Rosenberg  has  also  studied  the  maturation  division  of 
Fx  hybrids  between  two  tetraploid  or  36  chromosome 
types,  viz.,  H.  pilosella  and  H.  aurantiacum.  The  somatic 
cells  of  the  hybrid  have  38  to  40  chromosomes.  In  two 
cases  18  gemini  were  present  and  4  single  chromosomes. 
In  another  cross  between  H.  excellens,  with  36  or  42 
chromosomes  (n=21),  and  H.  aurantiacum,  with  36  (n= 
18),  there  were  in  one  case  18  gemini.  It  is  probable  that 
the  H.  excellens  parent  had  36  chromosomes.  In  another 


166 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


similar  cross,  in  which  the  pollen  in  Fa  was  largely  abor- 
tive, there  were  large  numbers  of  gemini  present  and 
many  single  chromosomes.  Results  similar  to  these  were 


#  r 


w 


\W% 


Fig.  96. 

Maturation  stages  of  several  types  of  apogamous  species  of  Hiera- 

cium.   (After  Eosenberg.) 


found  in  two  other  tetraploid  crosses.  In  general,  the 
result  with  tetraploids  shows  that  like  chromosomes  are 
present  in  these  different  species  that  conjugate  with 
each  other,  or  at  least  it  seems  more  probable  that  the 


POLYPLOID  SERIES 


167 


S'emini  are  formed  in  this  way  rather  than  that  thev  are 
formed  bv  the  union  of  the  like  chromosomes  within  each 
species  group. 

Rosenberg  has  also  studied  the  maturation  of  the  pol- 
len in  species  of  Archieracium,  in  which  species  both 
sexual  and  parthenogenetic  methods  of  reproduction 
occur,  the  latter  being  the  more  common  method.  There 
is  no  reduction  division  in  the  parthenogenetic  types  in 


Fig.  97. 
Types  of  chromosomes  of  eight  varieties  of  chrysanthemums,  each 
having  the  reduced  number  of  nine  chromosomes.  (After  Tahara.) 


the  embryo  sac,  but  the  diploid  number  of  chromosomes 
is  retained.  The  pollen  development  is  much  altered  and 
good  pollen  is  seldom  present.  The  reduction  divisions  in 
the  pollen  mother  cells  are  very  irregular.  Rosenberg  has 
described  the  maturation  stages  of  several  apogamous 
species  of  Hieracium  in  which  the  pollen  is  scarcely  ever 
functional  (Fig.  96).  He  interprets  the  changes  as,  in 
part,  due  to  their  tetraploid  origin  (bivalent  and  single 
chromosomes  appear  in  most  types)  and  in  part  due  to  a 
progressive  loss  of  all  conjugation  between  the  chromo- 
somes, accompanied  by  a  suppression  of  one  of  the  matu- 


Fig.  98. 
Multiple  chromosome  groups  of  different  varieties  of  chrysanthe- 
mums; a,  with  9;  6,  with  9;  c,  with  18;  d,  with  21;  e,  with  36; 
/,  with  45  chromosomes.   (After  Tahara.) 


Fig.  99. 
Nuclei  in  the  diakinetic  stage  of  several  varieties  of  chrysanthe- 
mums, a  and  b  with  18  chromosomes;  c  with  27;  d  with  36;  e  with 
45;  f  with  45  chromosomes.   (After  Tahara.) 


POLYPLOID  SERIES  169 

ration  divisions.  It  is  suggested  that  a  comparable  series 
of  changes  may  exist  in  the  egg  mother  cells  and  lead  to 
the  retention  of  all  the  chromosomes  in  the  parthenoge- 
netic  egg-cells. 

In  the  cultivated  varieties  of  chrysanthemum,  Tahara 
has  found  a  polyploid  series.  In  ten  varieties  (Fig.  97) 
nine  haploid  chromosomes  are  present,  but  the  chromo- 
somes themselves  have  different  sizes,  and,  more  impor- 
tant still,  the  relative  size  of  the  chromosomes  may  be 
different  in  different  species  (Fig.  98).  This  point  will  be 
considered  later.  It  is  also  significant  that  the  nuclear 
size  may  be  different  in  some  of  these  cases  where  the 
total  number  of  chromosomes  is  the  same.  Other  species 
of  chrysanthemum  have  multiples  of  nine  (Fig.  99) ;  two 
species  have  18,  two  have  27,  one  has  36,  two  have  45.  The 
following  table  gives  the  relation  between  chromosome 
number  and  nuclear  size. 


Chromosome 

Nuclear 

Name 

number 

diameter 

Radius3 

Ch.  lavanduloefolium 

9 

5.1 

17.6 

Ch.  roseum 

9 

5.4 

19.7 

Ch.  japonicum 

9 

6.0 

29.0 

Ch.  nipponicum 

9 

6.0 

27.0 

Ch.  coronarium 

9 

7.0 

43.1 

Ch.  carinatum 

9 

7.0 

43.1 

Ch.  Leucanthemum 

18 

7.3 

50.7 

Ch.  morifolium 

21 

7.8 

57.3 

Ch.  Decaisneanum 

36 

8.8 

85.4 

Ch.  arcticum 

45 

9.9 

125.0 

Triploid  varieties  of  the  mulberry  (Morus)  have  been 
reported  by  Osawa.  Of  the  85  varieties  studied,  40  are 
triploids.  The  diploid  number  of  chromosomes  is  28  (n= 
14)  and  the  triploid  42  (3X14).  The  diploid  plants  are 
fertile,  while  the  maturation  divisions  of  the  triploid 
show  irregularities  (univalent  chromosomes)  and  have 
abortive  pollen  grains  and  embryo  sacs.  In  the  first  matu- 


170         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

ration  division  of  the  triploid,  both  in  the  pollen  and  in 
the  megaspore  mother  cell,  there  are  28  bivalents  and  14 
univalents.  The  latter  pass  to  the  poles  at  random.  They 
all  divide  at  the  second  division. 

In  the  maples  (Acer)  there  appears  to  be  a  possible 
polyploid  species.  Taylor  reported  two  species  with  26 
(n=13),  two  with  52  (n=26),  and  others  with  approxi- 
mately 144  (n=72),  or  108  (n=54),  or  72  (n=36).  Other 
species  with  different  numbers  were  also  found. 

In  the  sugar  cane  (Saccharum)  Tischler  found  races 
with  the  haploid  numbers  8,  16,  and  24  (bivalent)  chro- 
mosomes. Bremer  reports  about  40  haploid  chromosomes 
in  another  variety  and  56  in  a  third.  Other  numbers  have 
also  been  reported.  Some  of  the  combinations  may  be  due 
to  hybridization,  but  little  is  known  at  present  to  what 
extent  the  observed  differences  in  number  have  arisen  in 
this  wav.  Bremer  has  also  studied  maturation  divisions 
of  a  few  hybrids. 

In  the  genus  Carex,  Heilborn  states  that  the  chromo- 
some numbers  are  quite  different  and  that  no  apparent 
polyploid  series  exists  in  this  genus.  "It  is  of  importance 
now  to  define  somewhat  more  clearly  the  meaning  of  the 
word  polyploid.  It  appears  from  the  list  of  chromosome 
numbers  in  Chap.  II  that  there  are  several  numbers  that 
constitute,  apparently,  a  series  of  multiples  with  3  as  the 
fundamental  number  (9, 15,  24,  27,  33,  36,  and  42),  others, 
again,  that  form  a  series  with  4  as  fundamental  number 
(16,  24,  28,  32,  36,  40,  and  56),  others  with  7  (28,  35,  42, 
and  56)  and  so  on,  but,  according  to  the  author's  opinion, 
these  merely  arithmetical  relations  cannot  be  regarded 
as  cases  of  polyploidy.  The  chromosome  group  of  a  poly- 
ploid species  must  necessarily  contain  a  certain  number 
of  complete  haploid  chromosome  sets  and  it  must  have 
arisen  through  addition  of  such  sets.  We  know,  however, 
that,  for  instance,  C.  pilulifera  does  not  contain  3  sets  of 


POLYPLOID  SERIES  171 

3  chromosomes,  but  3  long,  4  medium,  and  2  short  chro- 
mosomes; that  C.  ericetorum  does  not  contain  5  such 
sets,  but  1  medium  and  14  short  chromosomes,  and  that, 
consequently,  the  chromosome  groups  in  these  two  spe- 
cies have  not  arisen  through  an  addition  of  such  sets  but 
in  some  other  way."  More  problematical  polyploid  series 
are  reported  in  Rumex,  Papaver,  Callitriche,  Viola,  Cam- 
panula, Lactuca.  Two  numbers,  one  of  which  is  double  or 
triple  the  other,  have  been  found  in  Plantago  (6,  12), 
Atriplex  (9,  18),  Drosera  (10,  20),  Platanthera  (21,  63). 
It  has  also  been  recently  reported  by  Longley  that  haw- 
thorns and  raspberries,  known  to  be  complex  polymor- 
phic species,  show  extensive  polyploidy. 


CHAPTER  XII 
HETEROPLOIDS 

IRREGULARITIES  in  the  division  or  the  separa- 
tion of  the  chromosomes  occasionally  cause  a  single 
chromosome  to  be  added  to  the  group.  Conversely, 
one  may  be  lost  from  the  group.  In  so  far  as  the  addition 
of  one  or  more  chromosomes  to,  or  loss  from,  a  given 
group  produces  a  new  number,  the  word  heteroploid  has 
been  used.  Another  word,  trisomic,  has  also  been  used 
for  cases  where  three  of  one  kind  are  present  (in  contrast 
to  triploid,  where  there  are  three  of  each  kind  present) 
and  the  word  triplo  combined  with  the  name  of  the  par- 
ticular chromosome  in  triplicate  has  also  been  used,  as 
triplo-IV  in  Drosophila.  Still  earlier,  an  extra  chromo- 
some was  called  a  supernumerary  or  m-chromosome,  etc. 
The  loss  of  one  member  of  a  pair  is  designated  by  the 
term  haplo-  combined  with  the  name  of  the  particular 
chromosome,  as  in  the  haplo-IV  type  in  Drosophila. 

Certain  mutant  types  of  Oenothera  have  been  found  to 
be  associated  with  the  addition  of  a  fifteenth  chromosome. 

Normally  Lamarck's  evening  primrose  has  14  chromo- 
somes. Certain  mutant  types,  known  as  lata  and  semi- 
lata,  have  15  chromosomes,  i.e.,  one  additional  chromo- 
some (Fig.  100).  The  lata  plants  differ  from  Lamarckiana 
in  many  small  details,  although  most  of  the  differences 
are  so  slight  that  only  an  expert  would  notice  them.  Ac- 
cording to  Gates,  one  of  the  lata  mutants  is  almost  com- 
pletely male-sterile,  and  its  production  of  seed  is  also 
greatly  reduced.  In  one  of  the  semi-lata  types  some  good 
pollen  is  produced. 


HETEROPLOIDS 


173 


The  frequency  of  occurrence  of  lata  types  varies  in  dif- 
ferent progenies  from  0.1  to  1.8  per  cent,  according  to 
Gates. 

At  the  maturation  of  the  pollen  of  the  15  chromosome 
types,  8  chromosomes  are  present.  Seven  are  in  pairs 


Fig.  100. 
Oenothera  lata.  (After  Anne  Lutz.) 


and  1  is  unpaired.  The  conjugants  separate  and  pass  to 
opposite  poles  at  the  first  maturation  division.  The  un- 
paired chromosome  does  not  divide  at  this  time,  but 
passes  intact  to  one  or  to  the  other  pole.  Other  irregu- 
larities in  the  maturation  divisions  occur  in  some  cases, 
but  whether  or  not  they  are  caused  by  the  extra  chromo- 
some is  unknown,  although  Gates  states  that  these  irregu- 


174         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

larities  are  much  more  frequent  in  triplo-typic  individ- 
uals than  in  normals. 

From  the  15  chromosome  types  two  kinds  of  germ-cells 
are  expected,  one  with  8,  one  with  7  chromosomes.  It  has 
been  shown  that  these  two  kinds  are  produced.  From  a 
genetic  standpoint  the  lata  type,  crossed  to  a  normal 
type,  should  produce  equal  numbers  of  lata  (8+7)  and 
normal  (7+7)  offspring.  This  is  approximately  what 
happens. 

The  most  interesting  question  concerning  these  triplo- 
types  relates  to  the  particular  chromosome  that  becomes 
the  supernumerary.  Since  there  are  seven  kinds  of  chro- 
mosomes, we  may  anticipate  that  any  one  may  appear  in 
triplicate.  De  Vries  has  recently  suggested  that  there  are 
seven  trisomic  types  in  Oenothera,  corresponding  to  the 
seven  possible  supernumeraries. 

It  is  also  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  types  with  two 
supernumeraries  (either  like  or  unlike),  the  tetrasomic 
types,  may  not  be  as  viable  as  trisomic  types.  It  is  known 
that  such  types  occur.  For  instance,  amongst  the  off- 
spring of  a  triplo-type  there  seems  to  be  a  good  chance 
for  the  formation  of  an  individual  with  two  like  super- 
numeraries when  an  8-chromosome  pollen  grain  fertilizes 
an  8-chromosome  egg.  This  would  give  a  tetra-type  or 
tetrasomic  group  for  one  particular  chromosome.  It 
would  be  a  stable  type  to  the  extent  that  8  paired  chro- 
mosomes are  present  in  each  germ-cell,  but  it  might  be 
even  more  unbalanced  than  a  triplo-type  with  only  one 
extra  chromosome.  Sixteen-chromosome  types  have  been 
recorded,  some  of  which  are  probably  multiples  of  the 
same  chromosome  when  they  are  derived  from  a  15  triplo- 
type,  but  their  relative  viability  is  not  recorded. 

It  seems,  a  priori,  possible  that  duplication  of  any  pair 
of  chromosomes  may  be  brought  about  through  a  triplo- 
type  giving  rise  to  a  tetratypic  individual.  But  even  if 


HETEROPLOIDS  175 

stability  should  be  attained,  the  more  important  factor 
of  gene  balancing  may  make  it  improbable  that  a  per- 
manent increase  in  the  chromosome  pairs  could  be  estab- 
lished in  this  way.  When  a  large  chromosome  number  is 
present  the  initial  stages  of  unbalancing  might  be  slight 
as  compared  with  forms  having  fewer  chromosomes,  be- 
cause in  the  former  the  ratio  would  be  less  disturbed. 

In  Drosophila  Bridges  found  a  triplo-type  for  the 
small  IV-chromosome,  and  since  three  genetic  factors 
are  present  in  this  small  chromosome  it  has  also  been 
possible  to  study  not  only  the  characters  that  are  affected 
by  the  presence  of  an  additional  IV-chromosome,  but  the 
bearing  of  this  condition  on  genetic  questions  in  general. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  has  been  found  that  an  individual 
with  three  X-chromosomes  usually  dies,  and  that  indi- 
viduals with  either  chromosome-II  or  -III  in  triplicate  do 
not  live. 

The  triplo-IV  Drosophila  is  not  strikingly  different 
from  the  normal,  and  the  two  can  be  distinguished  only 
with  difficulty.  The  general  color  of  the  body  is  a  little 
darker  and  the  trident  marking  on  the  thorax  is  absent 
(Fig.  32) ;  the  eyes  are  somewhat  smaller  and  have  a 
smooth  surface;  the  wings  are  narrower  and  more 
pointed  than  those  of  the  wild  type.  That  these  slight 
effects  are  due  to  the  presence  of  an  additional  small 
chromosome  was  shown  both  by  a  cytological  demonstra- 
tion of  its  presence  (Fig.  32)  and  by  genetic  tests.  When 
a  triplo-IV  is  crossed  to  eyeless  (eyeless  is  a  IV-chromo- 
some recessive  mutant  type)  some  of  the  offspring  (Fx) 
can  be  distinguished  by  the  characters  given  above  as 
triplo-IV  flies.  If  these  are  back-crossed  to  eyeless  (Fig. 
33),  flies  with  full  eyes  and  flies  with  " eyeless  eyes"  are 
produced  approximately  in  the  ratio  of  5  to  1.  As  shown 
in  Fig.  12  this  result  agrees  with  expectation  provided 
that  one  normal  gene  is  dominant  to  two  eyeless  genes. 


176         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

When  two  triplo-IV  flies  (obtained  in  the  way  de- 
scribed above)  that  have  two  ordinary  IV-chromosomes 
and  another  IV-chromosome  carrying  eyeless,  are  mated, 
they  give  approximately  26  full-eyed  flies  to  one  eyeless. 

From  this  cross  some  flies  might  be  expected  that  con- 
tained four  chromosome-IVs,  since  half  of  the  eggs  and 
half  of  the  sperm-cells  carry  two  of  these  chromosomes. 
If  such  tetra-typic  flies  developed,  the  expected  ratio 
would  be  35  full-eyed  to  one  eyeless.  The  ratio  found  (26 
to  1)  instead  of  the  expected  ratio  (on  the  assumption 
that  the  tetra-typic  flies  come  through)  is  due  to  the  death 
of  the  tetra-types.  In  fact,  no  flies  of  this  composition 
have  been  detected,  which  means  that,  despite  the  small- 
ness  of  these  chromosomes,  the  presence  of  four  of  them 
upsets  the  balance  of  the  genes  to  such  an  extent  that 
such  an  individual  does  not  develop  into  an  adult. 

In  contrast  to  these  triplo-types  of  Drosophila  there  is 
another  heteroploid  type,  the  haplo-IV  type  (Fig.  29),  in 
which  one  of  the  small  chromosomes  is  absent.  This  type 
has  appeared  very  often,  which  is  interpreted  to  mean 
that  one  of  these  small  chromosomes  is  sometimes  lost  in 
the  germ  track — possibly  as  a  result  of  two  passing  to 
one  pole  at  the  reduction  division.  The  haplo-IV  has  a 
paler  body  color  but  a  more  marked  trident  on  the  thorax, 
rather  large  eyes  with  a  rough  surface,  slender  bristles, 
and  somewhat  shortened  wings,  and  the  aristae  are  re- 
duced or  even  absent.  In  all  these  respects  its  characters 
are  the  opposite  of  those  of  the  triplo-type.  This  is  not  at 
all  surprising  if  the  IV-chromosome  contains  genes  that 
affect  many  parts  of  the  body  in  conjunction  with  other 
genes.  These  effects  are  increased  by  the  presence  of  an 
additional  chromosome  and  diminished  when  one  is  ab- 
sent. The  haplo-IV 's  emerge  four  or  five  days  later  than 
the  normals;  they  are  often  sterile  and  generally  poor 
producers ;  their  mortality  is  very  high.  There  is  abun- 


HETEROPLOIDS  177 

dant  cytological  and  genetic  evidence  that  these  flies  owe 
their  peculiarities  to  the  absence  of  one  chromosome. 

Flies  lacking  both  IV-chromosomes  have  not  been 
found  and  the  ratio  obtained  when  two  haplo-IV's  are 
bred  together  (giving  130  haplo-IV's  to  100  normals) 
shows  that  the  nullo-IV's  die. 

If  a  diploid  fly  that  is  eyeless  is  mated  to  a  haplo-IV 
fly  carrying  wild  type  genes  in  its  single  chromosome-IV, 
some  of  the  1\  offspring  will  be  eyeless  and  these  will  be 
haplo-IV.  Theoretically,  half  of  the  offspring  should  be 
eyeless,  but  the  presence  of  the  eyeless  gene  in  the  single 
fourth  chromosome  lowers  the  viability  of  the  haploid 
98  per  cent  of  expectation,  and  this  relation  holds  when 
the  other  recessive  mutant  types  (bent  and  shaven)  are 
present  in  the  single  IV-chromosome.  According  to 
Bridges,  bent  lowers  survival  by  95  per  cent  and  shaven, 
100  per  cent,  i.e.,  haplo-shaven  does  not  develop. 

The  Jimson  weed,  Datura  stramonium,  has  24  chromo- 
somes. A  number  of  types  under  cultivation  have  been 
detected  by  Blakeslee  and  Belling  with  25  chromosomes 
(2n+l).  It  is  probable  that  there  are  12  such  types,  each 
of  which  has  a  different  extra  chromosome.  The  slight 
but  constant  differences  shown  by  these  12  triplo-types 
(2n+l)  involve  all  parts  of  the  plant.  These  differences 
are  well  shown  in  the  capsules  (Fig.  101).  In  two  of  these, 
at  least  (triplo-globe  and  triplo-poinsettia),  in  which  Men- 
delian  factors  are  present  in  the  extra-chromosome 
group,  it  has  been  shown  by  Blakeslee,  Avery,  Farnham, 
and  Belling,  that  the  twenty-fifth  chromosome  involved  is 
a  different  one  in  the  two  cases.  In  one  of  these  in  particu- 
lar, namely,  the  trisomic  type  poinsettia,  involving  a  chro- 
mosome that  carries  the  gene- for  purple  stem  pigment 
and  white  flower  color,  the  effects  on  the  inheritance  due 
to  one  extra  chromosome  have  given  the  clearest  results. 
These  show  that  those  germ-cells  carrying  the  extra  chro- 


Norma/ 


(''air  Poin>,/f,v  Cocklebvr  J /r , 

ft 

ff/i,/,us  f?o//pJ  Reduced  BarM/uy 

§ 

6&>*sy  HkroearpA  C/ongafe  Sa,na<h 


Fig.  101. 

The  original  type  or  seed-capsule  of  Datura  stramonium,  and  the 

twelve  probable  trisomic  types.  (After  Blakeslee.) 


HETEROPLOIDS 


179 


mosome  are  less  viable  than  the  normal,  hence  deficiencies 
in  certain  expected  classes  occur;  in  fact,  these  germ- 
cells  (n+1)  are  not  transmitted  at  all  through  the  pollen 


Diploid 

(2-.) 

Ftg.  102. 

Normal  or  diploid  type  of  capsule  of  Datura  (2u)   as  contrasted 
(below)  with  2n-j-l  and  2n-f2  types  of  capsule.  (After  Blakeslee.) 

(or  only  to  a  slight  extent),  and  through  only  about  30 
per  cent  of  the  eggs.  When  these  relations  are  allowed 
for,  the  genetic  results  agree  with  expectation. 


180 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


Iii  their  study  of  the  trisomic  types  of  Datura,  Blakes- 
lee  aud  Belling  have  found  about  12  distinct  types  be- 
lono-ino:  to  the  2n+l  or  trisomic  series.  Since  there  are 
just  12  pairs  of  chromosomes,  only  12  simple  trisomic 
types  are  expected,  and,  in  fact,  evidence  has  been  found 
that  there  are  only  12  such  primary  types.  The  rest, 
called  secondaries,  appear  to  belong  to  one  or  another  of 
the  12  primary  types  (Fig.  102).  The  evidence  for  this 
comes  from  several  sources,  from  similarities  in  external 
appearance,  from  internal  structures  (as  shown  by  Sin- 
nott),  from  their  similar  mode  of  inheritance  (giving  the 
same  trisomic  inheritance  for  marked  chromosomes), 
from  the  reciprocal  throwing  of  one  member  of  the  group 
by  the  other,  and  from  the  sizes  of  the  extra  chromosomes 
(Belling). 

In  the  following  table  a  list  of  the  primaries  and  their 
secondaries  is  given.  These  have  been  derived  from  trip- 
loids. 


Primary  and 
(Primaries 


Secondary  (2n+l)  Types  in  Offspring  from  Triploids 
are  printed  in  capitals,  secondaries  in  lower  case  type.) 


3n  x 

3n  X 

sn  x 

3n  X 

SELF 

2n 

TOTAL 

SELF 

in 

TOTAL 

1. 

GLOBE 

5 

46 

51 

8.  BUCKLING 
Strawberrv 

9 

48 

57 

•■> 

POIN- 
SETTIA 

5 

34 

39 

Maple 

Wiry 

9.  GLOSSY 

o 

30 

32 

COCKLE- 

32 

38 

10.  MICRO- 

BUR 

6 

1 

1 

CARPIC 

4 

46 

50 

Wedge 

33 

37 

11.  ELONGATE 

o 

30 

32 

4 

ILEX 

4 

Undulate 

5. 

ECHINUS 
Mutilated 
Nubbin  (?) 

O 

15 

(2?) 

IS 
(t) 

12.  SPINACH(?) 

o 

o 

Totals  (2n  +  1) 

43 

381 

424 

6 

ROLLED 

Sugarloaf 

24 

24 

(2u  +  1  +  1) 

2n 

4n 

11 
30 

101 

215 

112 

248 

Polycarpic 

O 

•   •   • 

7 

REDUCED 

3 

3S 

41 

Grand  Totals 

S7 

697 

7S4 

HETEROPLOIDS 


181 


The  spontaneous  occurrence  of  primaries  and  second- 
aries is  given  in  the  next  table.  The  primaries  arise  in 
this  way  more  frequently  than  the  secondaries.  Breed- 
ing experiments  have  shown  that  whereas  primaries  may 
occasionally  throw  secondaries,  the  secondaries  regularly 
throw  their  primaries  more  frequently  than  they  throw 
new  mutants  belonging  to  the  other  groups.  Thus  of 
31,000  offspring  from  poinsettias  about  28  per  cent  were 
poinsettia  and  about  0.25  per  cent  were  the  secondary 
wiry.  Conversely,  when  wirys  were  the  parents  about 
0.75  per  cent  of  the  offspring  were  the  primary  poin- 
settia. 

Spontaneous  Occurrence  of  Primary  and  Secondary  (2n-)-l)  Mutants 
(Primaries  are  printed  in  capitals,  secondaries  in  lower-case  type.) 


FROM 

9D 

PARENTS 

O  "J  B  5 

TOTALS 

FROM 

2n 

PARENTS 

FROM  UN- 
RELATED 
(211+  1) 
PARENTS 

91 

9 

< 

O 

1.  GLOBE 

2.  POIN- 

SETTIA 
Wiry 

41 

28 

107 

47 

1 

148 

75 
1 

8.  BUCKLING 
Strawberry 
Maple 

9.  GLOSSY 

27 

1 

8 

71 

1 

2 

11 

98 
2 
2 

19 

3.  COCKLE- 

BUR 

Wedge 

4.  ILEX 

7 
19 

17 
27 

24 
46 

10.  MICRO- 

CARPIC 

11.  ELONGATE 
Undulate 

64 

100 

2 

1 

164 

2 
1 

5.  ECHINUS 
Mutilated 

10 
2 

1 

11 

4 

21 

6 
1 

12.  SPINACH(?) 

6 

4 

10 

Nubbin(?) 

Totals  (2n  -f  1) 

269 

506 

775 

6.  ROLLED 

Sugarloaf 
Polycarpic 

24 
3 
3 

25 

47 
9 

44 

71 

12 

3 

69 

Related  (2n -f  1) 
types 
2n 

Grand  totals 

32J523 

22,123 

70,281 

22,123 
102,804 

7.  REDUCED 

32,792 

92,910 

125,027 

The  breeding  experiments  of  "Wedge — a  Secondary  of 
the  Cocklebur  group — furnishes  the  following  evidence 
as  to  the  relation  of  secondaries  to  primaries.  "Both 
Poinsettia  and  its  Secondary  Wiry  give  trisomic  ratios 
for  the  color  factors  P,  p,  but  give  disomic  ratios  for 


182         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

spine  factors  A,  a,  indicating  that  both  Poinsettia  and 
Wiry  have  their  extra  chromosomes  in  the  set  carrying 
the  factors  P,  p,  but  not  in  the  set  with  the  factors  A,  a. 
Similarly,  the  ratios  for  Cocklebur  indicate  that  this  Pri- 
mary has  its  extra  chromosome  in  the  set  carrying  the 
factors  A,  a,  but  not  in  the  set  with  factors  P,  p.  Its 
Secondary  Wedge,  however,  fails  to  give  trisomic  ratios 
for  A,  a.  The  ratios  actually  found  resemble  those  in 
disomic  rather  than  in  trisomic  inheritance  and  seem  to 
indicate  a  deficiency  in  the  extra  chromosome  of  Wedge 
for  the  locus  A,  a,  since  the  evidence  strongly  indicates 
that  it  is  a  Secondary  of  Cocklebur.  If  A'  indicates  the 
modified  chromosome  and  A  and  a  go  to  opposite  poles 
at  reduction  division  in  a  Wedge  plant  with  the  formula 
AA'a,  the  gametes  would  be  A-f-a+AA'+aA'.  Such  be- 
havior would  account  for  the  ratios  [in  table  5].  If  A'  is 
deficient  for  the  factor  A,  the  gamete  aA'  would  carry  no 
factor  for  A ;  hence  the  disomic  ratios  between  armed  and 
inermis  Wedges  found  but  not  shown  in  the  table.  If  A 
and  a,  occasionally  should  go  to  the  same  pole,  the 
gametes  would  be  A'  (which  would  probably  die)  and  Aa, 
which  would  go  to  form  a  Primary  Cocklebur  occasion- 
ally thrown  by  Wedges. 

"The  hypothesis  of  a  deficiency  in  the  extra  chromo- 
some of  Secondaries  has  been  strengthened  by  Dr.  Bell- 
ing's  cytological  findings.  His  hypothesis  of  reversed 
crossing-over,  however,  completes  the  picture  by  indicat- 
ing a  doubling  of  a  part  of  the  chromosome  along  with  a 
deficiency  of  the  remaining  portion." 

Tetraploids  of  Datura  with  an  additional  chromosome 
have  also  been  reported  (Fig.  103).  In  one  of  these  shown 
in  the  figure  there  are  five  like  chromosomes  in  one  group, 
and  in  the  other  there  are  six  like  chromosomes. 

Belling  and  Blakeslee  have  studied  the  modes  of  union 
of  the  three  chromosomes  in  the  primary  and  in  the  sec- 


HETEROPLOIDS 


183 


ondary  trisomic  types  of  Datura,  and  have  found  certain 
differences  that  offer  a  suggestion  as  to  the  relation  of 
these  two  types.  In  the  upper  row  of  Fig.  104  the  differ- 


Fig.  103. 
Tetraploid  capsule  above,  and  below  4n-f-l,  4n-(-2,  and  4n-f-3  cap- 
sules. (After  Blakeslee.) 


ent  ways  in  which  the  three  chromosomes  of  the  primary 
type  are  united  are  shown.  The  numbers  below  each 
show  the  frequency  of  the  type.  Of  these  types  the  triva- 


184         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

lent  V  is  the  most  common  form  of  union  (48) ;  next  in 
frequency  is  the  ring-and-rod  type  (33) ;  then  the  Y  (17) ; 
the  straight  chain  (9) ;  the  ring  (1) ;  the  double  ring  (1) ; 
the  ring  of  two  with  the  third  member  left  over  (9-f-). 

From  ten  of  the  primary  25-chromosome  forms 


V 


O  8  6  I 


48         33  17        9       1  1  9+ 


From  ei§ht  of  the  secondary  25-chrom.  forms 


O0o 


26  13  1  3       2         51         Z0+ 

Fig.  104. 

Methods  of  union  of  the  three  chromosomes  of  a  trisomic  type  of 

Datura.  (After  Belling  and  Blakeslee.) 

Since  chromosomes  are  supposed  to  conjugate  by  like 
ends  coming  together  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that,  in 
these  types,  like  ends  (a  and  a,  Z  and  Z)  are  still  in  con- 
tact (see  Fig.  104,  upper  row). 

In  the  lower  row  of  Fig.  104  the  different  ways  in  which 
the  three  chromosomes  of  the  secondary  types  are  united 
are  shown.  In  general  the  types  are  the  same  as  those  of 


HETEROPLOIDS 


185 


the  primaries,  but  the  frequencies  are  different.  The 
most  noticeable  features  are  seen  in  the  last  two  types  (to 
the  right).  One  of  these  is  an  elongated  ring  of  three 
chromosomes,  the  other  is  a  ring  of  two  chromosomes  and 
a  small  single-ring  chromosome.  These  two  types  suggest 


A     Z 


Z     A 


AZ 


X 


AZ 


Fig.  105. 

Diagram  illustrating  possible  conjugation  of  two  chromosomes, 
turned  in  opposite  directions. 


that,  in  some  way,  the  end  of  one  chromosome  has  been 
changed.  Belling  and  Blakeslee  offer  the  following  provi- 
sional suggestions  as  to  how  such  a  change  may  have  been 
brought  about  at  a  preceding  stage  in  the  triploid  parent 
or  in  a  trivalent  of  a  primary  type.  Suppose,  for  example, 
two  chromosomes  should  come  to  lie  side  by  side  in  re- 
versed position  as  shown  in  Fig.  105,  and  suppose  they 
should  cross  over  in  the  middle,  which  is  the  only  level 


186 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


at  which  like  genes  come  together.  The  result  will  give 
two  chromosomes  each  having  its  two  ends  alike,  i.e.,  one 
has  A  and  A  at  its  ends,  the  other  Z  and  Z.  If  now  such  a 
chromosome  becomes  in  the  next  generation  a  member 


Primary  2n+l    plants 


Secondary  2n  +  l   plants 


A  A 


Z 


Fig.  106. 

Diagram  illustrating  possible  types  of  conjugation  of  three  chro- 
mosomes of  trisomic  types.   (After  Belling  and  Blakeslee.) 


of  a  trivalent  group,  it  is  possible  to  construct  such  modes 
of  union  as  indicated  in  Fig.  106,  where  in  a  Z-Z  chromo- 
some, combined  with  two  normal  partners,  like  ends  meet 
each  other. 

If  these  rings,  peculiar  to  the  secondaries,  can  be  ac- 
counted for  in  the  way  suggested,  it  follows  that  one  of 


HETEROPLOIDS  187 

the  trivalent  chromosomes  differs  from  the  other  two  by 
a  duplicated  half.  Hence  the  secondary  has  a  different 
gene  combination  from  the  primary. 

Kuwada  reports  20  chromosomes  (n=10)  for  corn 
(Zea  mays),  but  certain  sugar  corns  were  found  to  have 
21,  22,  aud  even  23  or  24  chromosomes.  Kuwada  suggests 
that  corn  is  a  hybrid,  one  of  whose  parents  was  the  Mexi- 
can teosinte  (Euchlaena).  One  of  the  corn  chromosomes 
that  is  longer  than  its  mate  was  derived  from  teosinte, 
he  thinks,  and  its  mate  from  some  unknown  species.  The 
longer  one  sometimes  breaks  into  two  pieces,  which  ac- 
counts for  the  additional  chromosomes  found  in  sugar 
corns.  If  this  interpretation  is  verified  (it  has  recently 
been  questioned),  these  21,  22,  and  23  chromosome  types 
are  not  strictly  trisomic. 

De  Vries'  conclusions  relating  to  the  extra  chromosome 
types  of  Oenothera  Lamarckiana  had  an  important  bear- 
ing on  his  interpretation  of  the  origin  of  progressive 
mutation,  hence  on  his  interpretation  of  the  relation  of 
mutation  to  evolution.  The  numerous  small  changes  in  the 
characters  of  the  individual  frequently  observed  in  triso- 
mic types  fulfill  de  Vries'  early  definition  as  to  what 
constitutes  an  elementary  species,  causing  at  a  stroke, 
as  it  were,  the  appearance  of  two  elementary  species. 

It  should  be  observed  that  when  a»mutational  effect  is 
produced  by  the  addition  of  a  whole  chromosome  the  re- 
sult involves,  so  far  as  the  germ  material  is  concerned, 
an  enormous  alteration  in  the  actual  number  of  the  he- 
reditary units.  This  change  is  scarcely  compatible  with 
the  comparison  to  a  change  in  a  single  chemical  molecule. 
Only  by  treating  the  chromosomes  as  a  unit  could  such  a 
comparison  have  any  weight.  The  constitution  of  the 
chromosomes,  from  the  viewpoint  of  their  genes,  is  hardly 
consistent  with  such  a  comparison. 

The  chief  interest  in  these  heteroploids,  as  I  interpret 


188         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

them,  lies  in  the  explanation  they  offer  of  a  peculiar  and 
interesting  genetic  situation  arising  from  the  occasional 
erratic  behavior  of  the  mechanism  that  is  involved  in  the 
processes  of  cell  division  and  maturation.  Unstable  forms 
are  produced,  that,  in  so  far  as  they  maintain  themselves, 
do  so  by  remaining  unstable,  i.e.,  with  an  extra  chromo- 
some. In  this  respect  they  differ  obviously  from  normal 


central 


lata      /  m  V   \     scintillans 


V 


>allescens  \    m  m         cana 


liquida     \    ^  0  /    spathulata 


Fig.  107. 
Diagram  illustrating  de  Vries'  idea  of  the  relation  between  the 
seven  chromosomes  of  O.  Lamarckiana  and  types  of  trisomic  mu- 
tants. 


types  and  species.  Furthermore,  most  of  the  evidence 
indicates  that  these  heteroploids  are  not  so  viable  as  the 
balanced  types  from  which  they  arise,  hence  would  rarely 
be  able  to  replace  them  or  act  as  substitutes  in  a  different 
environment. 

Nevertheless,  the  occurrence  of  heteroploidy  must  be 
regarded  as  a  significant  genetic  event  whose  explanation 
promises  to  clear  up  many  situations  that  would  be  very 
puzzling  without  the  information  which  a  study  of  their 
chromosomes  has  revealed. 


HETEROPLOIDS  189 

De  Vries  identifies  six  trisomic  mutant  types,  and  a 
seventh  one,  also,  that  differs  genetically  more  strikingly 
from  the  other  six  than  they  do  from  each  other.  These 
seven  trisomic  types  may,  he  suggests,  correspond  to  the 
seven  chromosomes  of  the  evening  primrose.  A  list  of  six 
of  them  is  given  below.  A  diagram  of  the  corresponding 
chromosome  groups  is  given  in  Fig.  107. 

15-chromosome  mutants. 

1.  Lata  group. 

a.  Semi-lata. 

b.  Sesquiplex  mutants:  albida,  flava,  delata. 

c.  Subovata,  sublinearis. 

2.  Scintillans  group. 

a.  Sesquiplex  mutants:  oblonga,  aurita,  auricula, 

nitens,  distans. 

b.  Diluta,  militaris,  venusta. 

3.  Cana  group :  candicans. 

■4.  Pallescens  group :  lactuca. 

5.  Liquida. 

6.  Spathulata. 

This  list  of  six  15-chromosome  primary  mutants  in- 
cludes some  secondary  mutant  types  arranged  under 
their  primaries.  Their  interrelations  are  shown  not  only 
by  similarities  in  characters,  but  also  by  the  frequency 
with  which  one  throws  the  other.  Two  of  them,  albida  and 
oblonga,  have  two  kinds  of  eggs  but  only  one  kind  of  pol- 
len, and  are  called  one-and-one-half  or  sesquiplex  mu- 
tants. Another  secondary,  candicans,  is  also  a  sesquiplex 
type.  The  central  or  largest  ' '  chromosome ' '  of  the  group 
(Fig  107)  carries  the  "factors"  for  velutina  or  for  those 
of  laeta.  De  Vries  assigns  to  them  also,  from  evidence 
found  by  Skull,  the  new  mutants  funif&lia  and  perrivens. 
It  may  seem  probable,  therefore,  following  Shull,  that 


190         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

the  factors  for  five  other  mutant  types1  of  Lamarckiana 
belong  in  this  group,  as  well  as  the  lethal  factors  that 
put  these  factors  in  a  balanced  lethal  condition.  Accord- 
ing to  Shull  the  appearance  of  these  recessive  characters 
is  due  to  crossing-over  between  the  members  of  a  pair  of 
chromosomes  here  identified  provisionally  as  the  large 
central  chromosome.2 

i  Kubricalyx  buds,  and  its  allelomorph  red  stem  (intensifier),  nanella 
(dwarf),  pink-coned  buds,  sulfur  colored  flowers,  revolute  leaves. 

2  Emerson  has  recently  pointed  out  that  the  evidence  so  far  published  by 
Shull  does  not  necessarily  prove  his  interpretation  of  the  balanced  lethal 
relation. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

SPECIES  CROSSING  AND  CHANGES  IN 
CHROMOSOME  NUMBER 

SOME  interesting  relations  have  come  to  light  as  a 
result  of  crossing  species  having  different  chromo- 
some numbers.  One  species  may  have  exactly  twice 
or  three  times  as  many  chromosomes  as  the  other;  in 
other  cases,  the  larger  chromosome  group  may  not  be  a 
multiple  of  the  other. 


»*  *    a  b 

Fig.  108. 

Diploid  and  haploid  groups  of  the  sundew,  Drosera  rotundifolia. 

(After  Rosenberg.) 

The  classic  case  is  that  of  the  cross  between  two  species 
of  sundew  by  Eosenberg  in  1903-1904. 

One  species  of  sundew,  Drosera  longifolia,  has  40  chro- 
mosomes (n=20),  another  species,  rotundifolia,  has  20 
chromosomes  (n=10)  (Fig.  108).  The  hybrid  has  30 
chromosomes  (20+10).  In  the  maturation  of  the  germ- 
cells  of  the  hybrid,  there  are  10  conjugating  chromo- 
somes, often  called  gemini  or  bivalents,  and  10  singles 
(univalents).  Rosenberg  interpreted  this  condition  to 
mean  that  10  of  the  longifolia  unite  with  10  of  the  rotun- 
difolia leaving  10  of  the  former  without  a  mate.  At  the 
first  maturation  division  of  the  germ-cell,  the  conjugants 


192         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

separate,  the  members  going  to  opposite  poles;  the  10 
single  chromosomes  are  distributed  irregularly,  without 
division,  to  the  daughter  cells.  Unfortunately  the  hybrid 
is  sterile,  and  cannot  be  used  for  further  genetic  work. 

The  cross  between  two  species  of  tobacco,  Nicotiana 
Tabacum  and  N.  sylvestris,  has  been  extensively  studied 
by  Goodspeed  and  Clausen.  Only  recently,  however,  has 
the  chromosome  number  been  determined;  Tabacum  has 
24  (n=12)  and  sylvestris  48  (n=24)  chromosomes.  This 
difference  in  chromosome  number  has  not  as  yet  been 
correlated  with  the  genetic  results ;  and  the  behavior  of 
the  chromosomes  in  the  maturation  divisions  has  not 
been  reported. 

The  hybrid  from  crossing  these  two  species  resembles 
in  every  particular  the  Tabacum  parent,  even  when  that 
parent  is  pure  for  factors  that  behave  as  recessives 
toward  the  normal  factors  of  the  type  Tabacum  {i.e.,  in 
crosses  with  varieties  or  races  of  Tabacum).  Goodspeed 
and  Clausen  interpret  this  result  to  mean  that  the  Taba- 
cum genes  dominate  as  a  group  the  sylvestris  genes.  They 
have  expressed  this  by  saying  that  the  ' '  reaction  system ' ' 
of  Tabacum  dominates  the  embryological  processes  of  the 
hybrid;  or  "the  elements  of  the  two  systems  must  be 
largely  mutually  incompatable. " 

The  hybrids  are  highly  sterile,  but  a  few  functional 
ovules  are  formed.  As  the  breeding  results  show,  these 
functional  ovules  are  exclusively  (or  predominately) 
either  pure  Tabacum  or  pure  sylvestris.  It  may  seem, 
therefore,  that  in  the  hybrid  only  those  (or  largely  only 
those)  ovules  that  contain  a  complete  set  (or  nearly  com- 
plete set)  of  one  or  the  other  group  of  chromosomes  are 
functional.  This  view  is  based  on  the  following  experi- 
ments. 

When  the  hybrid  is  fertilized  with  the  pollen  of  sylves- 
tris, a  variety  of  forms  is  produced,  among  which  there 


SPECIES  CROSSING  193 

is  a  considerable  proportion  of  plants  that  are  pure  syl- 
vestris  in  all  their  characters.  These  plants  are  fertile 
and  breed  true  to  sylvestris.  They  must  be  supposed  to 
have  come  from  ovules  with  a  sylvestris  chromosome 
group,  fertilized  by  sylvestris  pollen.  There  are  also 
plants  that  resemble  sylvestris,  but  contain  other  ele- 
ments, probably  derived  from  the  Tabacum  group  of 
chromosomes.  They  are  sterile. 

Back-crossing  to  Tabacum  was  unsuccessful,  but  a  few 
hybrids  have  appeared  in  the  field  from  open  pollination 
that  are  like  Tabacum  and  have  undoubtedly  come  from 
Tabacum  pollen.  Some  of  them  are  fertile.  Their  descend- 
ants never  show  sylvestris  characters.  They  exhibit  segre- 
gation for  whatever  Tabacum  genes  were  present.  There 
are  also  sterile  forms  in  the  series,  and  these  resemble  the 
F1  hybrids  between  Tabacum  and  sylvestris. 

These  remarkable  results  are  important  in  another  re- 
spect. The  Fx  hybrid  may  be  obtained  both  ways;  i.e., 
either  species  may  be  the  ovule  parent.  It  follows  that 
even  with  a  sylvestris  protoplasm  the  Tabacum  group  of 
genes  completely  determines  the  character  of  the  indi- 
vidual. This  is  strong  evidence  in  favor  of  the  influence 
of  the  scenes  in  the  determination  of  the  character  of  the 
individual,  since  this  result  is  obtained  when  the  proto- 
plasm belongs  to  a  widely  different  species. 

The  idea  of  a  reaction  system,  proposed  by  Clausen 
and  Goodspeed,  while  novel,  contains  nothing  in  principle 
that  is  opposed  to  the  general  interpretation  of  the  gene. 
It  means  only  that  the  haploid  set  of  genes  of  sylvestris, 
when  placed  in  opposition  to  the  haploid  set  of  genes  of 
Tabacum,  is  totally  eclipsed  and  ineffectual.  The  sylves- 
tris chromosomes,  nevertheless,  retain  their  identity. 
They  are  not  eliminated  or  injured,  since  from  the  hybrid 
a  set  of  functional  sylvestris  chromosomes  may  be  re- 
gained in  back-crosses  to  a  sylvestris  parent. 


194         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

An  extensive  series  of  crosses  between  species  of 
Crepis  have  been  carried  out  by  Babcock  and  Collins. 
The  chromosomes  of  these  hybrids  have  also  been  studied 
by  Miss  Mann. 

Crosses  between  Crepis  setosa  with  8  chromosomes 
(n=4),  and  C.  capillaris  with  6  chromosomes  (n=3)  have 
been  made  by  Collins  and  Mann.  The  hybrid  has  7  chro- 
mosomes. At  maturation  some  of  the  chromosomes  con- 
jugate and  other  chromosomes,  without  dividing,  are  scat- 
tered in  the  pollen  mother  cells,  forming  nuclei  with 
from  two  to  six  chromosomes.  At  the  second  division  all 
the  chromosomes  divide,  at  least,  those  in  the  larger 
groups,  and  pass  to  opposite  poles.  The  cytoplasm  usu- 
ally divides  into  four  cells,  but  sometimes  into  2,  3,  5,  or  6 
microspores. 

These  7-chromosome  hybrids  do  not  give  functional 
pollen,  but  some  of  the  ovules  are  functional.  When  the 
hybrid  was  used  as  pistil  parent  and  fertilized  by  pollen 
from  one  of  the  parents,  five  plants  were  obtained  with  8 
and  7  chromosomes.  The  maturation  stage  of  one  with  8 
chromosomes  was  examined.  It  had  4  bivalents,  which 
divided  normally.  The  plant  resembles  C.  setosa  in  its 
characters  and  has  the  same  type  of  chromosomes.  One 
of  the  parental  types  has  been  recovered. 

Another  cross  was  made  between  Crepis  biennis  with 
40  chromosomes  (n=20)  and  C.  setosa  with  8  chromo- 
somes (n=4)  (Fig.  109).  The  hybrid  has  24  chromosomes 
(20+4).  In  the  maturation  of  the  hybrid,  at  least  10 
bivalents  are  present,  and  a  few  univalents.  It  follows 
that  some  of  the  biennis  chromosomes  must  conjugate 
with  each  other,  since  setosa  contributes  only  4  chromo- 
somes. At  the  ensuing  division  2  to  4  chromosomes  lag 
behind  the  rest,  but  finally  pass,  in  most  cases,  to  one  or 
the  other  nucleus. 

The  hybrids  are  fertile.  They  produce  (F2)  plants  hav- 


SPECIES  CROSSING 


195 


ing  24  or  25  chromosomes.  There  seems  to  be  a  chance 
here  of  producing  new  stable  types  with  a  new  chromo- 
some number  that  may  contain  one  or  more  pairs  of  chro- 
mosomes   derived    from    the    species    contributing    the 


«&• 


setose 


Crepis 


biennis 


-> 


Fig.  109. 
Chromosome  groups  of  Crepis  setosa  and  C.  biennis.  (After  Collins 

and  Mann.) 

smaller  number.  The  presence  of  10  conjugants  in  the 
hybrid  suggests  that  Crepis  biennis  is  a  polyploid,  pos- 
sibly an  octoploid.  In  the  hybrid  the  like  chromosomes 
unite  in  pairs.  This  Fx  hybrid,  with  half  the  full  number 
of  biennis  chromosomes,  is  an  annual,  while  biennis  itself 
is  biennial.  The  reduction  in  the  number  of  its  chromo- 
somes has  caused  a  change  in  its  habits.  It  reaches  matu- 
rity in  half  the  time  necessary  for  biennis. 


196         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Two  types  of  Mexican  teosinte  have  been  described  by 
Longley,  one,  mexicana,  an  annual  type  with  20  chro- 
mosomes (n=10),  the  other,  perennis,  a  perennial  with 
40  chromosomes  (n=20).  Both  plants  have  normal  reduc- 
tion divisions.  When  the  diploid  teosinte  (n=10)  is 
crossed  to  Indian  corn  (n=10),  the  hybrid  has  20  chro- 
mosomes. At  maturation,  there  are  10  bivalents  in  the 
hybrid 's  germ-cells.  This  would  ordinarily  be  interpreted 
to  mean  that  10  chromosomes  of  teosinte  have  united  with 
10  of  Indian  corn. 


*•* 

/tfy\ 

*  > 

a 

6 
Fig.  110. 

c 

Keduced  chromosome 

group,  a,  of  perennial 

teosinte;  b,  of  hybrid 

with  maize;  c,  reduction  division  of  last.   (After  Longley.) 

When  the  perennial  teosinte  (n=20)  is  crossed  to  In- 
dian corn  (u=10)  the  hybrid  has  30  chromosomes.  At  the 
first  maturation  division  of  the  pollen  mother  cells  there 
were  found  some  trivalent  groups  loosely  held  together, 
some  bivalents,  and  some  single  chromosomes  in  varying 
numbers,  thus  as  4 :  6 :  6 ;  or  as  1 :  9  :  9 ;  or  as  2  :  10 :  4,  etc. ; 
see  Fip\  110b.  At  the  first  division  the  bivalents  divide 
and  the  partners  move  to  opposite  poles;  the  trivalents 
divide,  two  going  to  one  pole,  one  to  the  other ;  the  singles 
lag  and  are  distributed  (without  division)  irregularly  to 
the  two  poles  (Fig.  110c).  A  very  unequal  distribution 
results. 

Quite  recentlv  a  case  has  been  described  in  which  a 


?& 


••222* 


a 


Fig.  111. 

Cross  between  two  species  of  poppies,  one,  a,  Papaver  nudicaule, 
having  14  chromosomes  (n=7)  and  the  other,  c,  P.  striatocarpum 
having  70  chromosomes  (n— 35).  The  hybrid,  b,  has  42  (n=21). 
d-e,  embryo  mother  cell  of  hybrid.  /,  first  maturation  division  of 
hybrid,  anaphase.   (After  Ljungdahl.) 


198         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

new  stable  hybrid  that  is  fertile  has  been  produced  by 
crossing  two  species  with  widely  different  chromosome 
numbers.  Ljungdahl  (1924)  crossed  Papaver  nudicaule, 
having  14  chromosomes  (n=7),  with  P.  striatocarpum, 
with  70  chromosomes  (n=35)  (Fig.  111).  The  hybrid  has 
42  chromosomes.  At  maturation  of  the  hybrid  germ-cells 
there  are  21  bivalents  (Fig.  Ill,  b,  c-e).  These  divide,  21 
going  to  each  pole.  No  single  chromosomes  are  present, 
and  none  lag  on  the  spindle.  The  result  must  be  inter- 
preted to  mean  that  the  7  chromosomes  of  nudicaule  have 
mated  with  7  chromosomes  of  striatocarpum,  and  that  the 
remaining  28  chromosomes  of  striatocarpum  have  con- 
jugated in  twos  to  give  14  bivalents.  This  gives  a  total  of 
21  bivalents,  the  number  observed.  It  seems  natural  to 
assume  that  the  form  striatocarpum,  with  70  chromo- 
somes (n=35),  is  probably  a  decaploid  type,  i.e.,  a  type 
with  ten  times  each  kind  of  chromosome. 

The  new  type  (Fx)  produces  germ-cells  with  21  chro- 
mosomes. It  is  balanced  and  stable.  It  is  also  fertile  and 
may  be  expected  to  produce  a  new  stable  type.  From  it 
still  other  stable  types  are  theoretically  possible.  If  back- 
crossed  to  nudicaule  it  should  give  rise  to  a  tetraploid 
type  (21+7=28).  Back-crossed  with  striatocarpum  it 
should  produce  an  octoploid  type  (21+35=46).  Here, 
through  hybridization  of  a  diploid  and  a  decaploid  type, 
there  may  be  produced  in  subsequent  generations  tetra- 
ploids,  hexaploids,  and  octoploid  types  that  are  stable. 

Federley's  experiment  (Chapter  IX)  with  species  of 
moths  of  the  genus  Pygaera  illustrate  a  very  different 
relation.  Owing  to  the  failure  of  the  chromosomes  to  con- 
jugate in  the  germ-cells  of  the  hybrid  the  double  number 
is  retained.  By  back-crossing  the  double  number  may  be 
continued,  but  as  the  hybrids  are  very  sterile  nothing 
permanent  could  result  from  these  combinations  under 
natural  conditions. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

SEX  AND  GENES 

OUR  present  understanding  of  the  mechanism  of 
I  sex-determination  has  come  from  two  sources. 
Students  of  the  cell  have  discovered  the  role 
played  by  certain  chromosomes  and  students  of  genetics 
have  gone  further  and  have  discovered  important  facts 
as  to  the  role  of  the  genes. 

Two  principal  types  of  mechanism  for  sex-determina- 
tion are  known.  They  both  involve  the  same  principle, 
although  they  may  seem,  at  first,  to  be  the  converse  of 
each  other. 

The  first  type  may  be  called  the  insect  type,  because  in 
insects  we  have  the  best  cytological  and  genetic  evidence 
for  this  kind  of  sex-determining  mechanism.  The  second 
type  may  be  called  the  avian  type,  because  in  birds  we 
now  have  both  cytological  and  genetic  evidence  for  this 
alternative  mechanism.  It  is  also  present  in  moths. 

The  Insect  Type  (XX-XY). 

In  the  insect  type  the  female  has  two  sex-chromosomes 
that  are  called  X-chromosomes  (Fig.  109).  When  the  eggs 
of  the  female  ripen  (that  is,  after  each  has  given  off  its 
two  polar  bodies),  the  number  of  the  chromosomes  is  re- 
duced to  one-half.  Each  ripe  egg,  then,  contains  one  X 
and,  in  addition,  one  set  of  ordinary  chromosomes.  The 
male  has  one  X-chromosome  only  (Fig.  112).  In  some 
species  this  X  has  no  mate ;  but  in  other  species  it  has  a 
mate  that  is  called  the  Y-chromosome  (Fig.  113).  At  one 
of  the  maturation  divisions  the  X  and  the  Y  pass  to  oppo- 


6 


Iff 


t  t  • 


J{lt#«< 


f>n  Mm 

t(f •  •  • 4 


Fig.  112. 
Chromosome  group  of  male  and  of  female  Protenor,  the  former 
having  one  X-chromosome  and  no  Y -chromosome;  the  latter  having 
two  X-chromosomes.    (After  Wilson.) 


••• 


«r 


Am 


•••itt# 
tin  •*• 


Fig.  113. 

The  male  and  female  type  of  chromosome  groups  of  Lygaeus,  the 
former  with  X  and  Y;  the  latter  with  two  X-chromosomes.  (After 
Wilson.) 


SEX  AND  GENES 


201 


site  poles  (Fig.  113).  One  daughter  cell  gets  the  X,  the 
other  the  Y.  At  the  other  maturation  division  each  splits 
into  daughter  chromosomes.  The  outcome  is  four  cells 
that  later  become  spermatozoa;  two  contain  an  X-chro- 
mosome,  two  contain  a  Y-chromosome. 

Any  egg  fertilized  by  an  X-sperm  (Fig.  114)  gives  rise 
to  a  female  that  has  two  X's.  Any  egg  that  is  fertilized 


9 


cf 


Diploid  Nuclei     XX 


Gametes 
Fertilization 


XY 


Zugotes 


Fig.  114. 


Diagram  illustrating  the  XX-XY  type  of  mechanism  in  sex  deter- 
mination. 


by  a  Y-sperm  gives  rise  to  a  male.  Since  the  chances  are 
equal  that  an  egg  will  be  fertilized  by  one  or  the  other 
kind  of  sperm,  the  expectation  is  that  half  the  offspring 
will  be  female  and  half  will  be  male. 

Given  such  a  mechanism,  certain  kinds  of  inheritance 
are  explicable,  some  of  them  including  ratios  that  do  not 
appear,  at  first  sight,  to  conform  to  Mendel 's  3  to  1  ratio. 
On  closer  scrutiny,  however,  the  apparently  exceptional 
ratios  are  found  to  furnish  confirmation  of  Mendel 's  first 
law.  For  instance,  if  a  white-eyed  female  of  Drosophila 
is  bred  to  a  red-eyed  male,  the  female  offspring  are 
red-eyed  and  the  sons  are  white-eyed  (Fig.  115).  The 


r\    r\ 


Fig.  115. 
Inheritance  of  the  white-eyed  character  in  Drosophila.  The  gene 
for  white  eye  is  carried  by  the  X-chromosome  represented  here 
by  an  open  rod  (w).  The  normal  allelomorph  to  the  "white-eyed 
gene,"  namely,  the  "red-eyed  gene"  is  carried  here  by  the  black 
rod.  The  Y-chromosome  is  stippled. 


SEX  AND  GENES 


203 


explanation  is  obvious,  if  the  X-chromosomes  carry  the 
differential  genes  involved,  namely,  the  red-  and  white- 
producing  genes.  The  son  gets  his  single  X  from  his 
white-eyed  mother ;  and  the  daughter  gets  also  such  an  X, 
but  also  one  from  her  red-eyed  father.  The  latter  being 
dominant,  the  daughter  has  red  eyes. 


$> 


x<?& 


\ 


U>i 


Fig.  116. 
a,   The  reduced   group  of   chromosomes   in   man,   according  to  de 
Winiwarter;   b,  chromosome  group  in  man,  according  to  Painter; 
c  and  d,  side  view  of  first  maturation  division  showing  the  separa- 
tion of  the  X-  and  Y-chromosomes,  according  to  Painter. 


If  these  two  individuals  are  inbred  there  will  appear 
in  the  next  generation  white-eyed  and  red-eyed  offspring 
in  the  ratio  of  1 : 1 : 1 : 1.  This  ratio  is  due  to  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  X-chromosomes,  as  shown  in  the  middle  of  the 
diagram  (Fig.  115). 

In  passing,  it  is  not  without  interest  to  note  that  the 
cytological  evidence  and  the  genetic  evidence,  especially 


204 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


the  latter,  show  that  man  belongs  to  the  XX-XO  or  to  the 
XX-XY  type.  The  number  of  chromosomes  in  the  human 
race  has  only  recently  been  determined  with  any  degree 
of  accuracy.  The  earlier  observations  giving  fewer  have 


Fig.  117. 

Maturation    division   of   the    germ-cells    of   man,   illustrating   the 
separation  of  the  X-  and  the  Y-ehromosome.  (After  Painter.) 


been  shown  to  be  faulty,  owing  to  the  tendency  of  the 
chromosomes  to  stick  together  in  groups  when  the  cells 
are  preserved.  De  Winiwarter  gives  the  number  as  48 
in  the  female  (n=24)  and  47  in  the  male  (Fig.  116a), 
and  this  count  is  practically  confirmed  by  Painter,  who 
recently  has  shown  that  there  is  also  present  in  the 
male  a  small  chromosome  that  acts  as  the  mate  of  a  much 


SEX  AND  GENES 


205 


larger  X  (Fig.  117).  He  interprets  these  two  as  an  XY 
pair.  If  so,  there  are  48  chromosomes  in  each  sex,  but  in 
the  male  those  of  one  pair,  the  sex-chromosomes,  are 
unequal  in  size. 

More  recently  still  Oguma,  who  confirms  de  Winiwar- 
ter's numbers,  finds  no  Y-chromosome  in  the  male. 

The  genetic  evidence  for  man  is  quite  clear.  The  in- 
heritance of  haemophilia  (or  bleeding),  of  color  blind- 


9 


Diploid  Nuclei     VZ 


Gametes  W 

Fertilization 


Zygotes  WZ 


Fig.  118. 
Diagram  illustrating  the  WZ-ZZ  type  of  mechanism  in  sex  deter- 
mination. 


ness,  and  of  two  or  three  other  human  characters,  follow 
in  their  inheritance  the  same  method  of  transmission  seen 
in  the  white-eyed  flies. 

The  following  groups  of  animals  belong  to  the  XX-XY 
type  or  to  a  modification  of  this  type,  vie.,  the  XX-XO 
type,  in  which  0  means  the  absence  of  Y  or  no  X.  Several 
mammals  in  addition  to  man  have  been  reported  to  have 
this  mechanism — the  horse  and  the  opossum,  and  pos- 
sibly the  guinea  pig.  It  is  probable  that  the  Amphibia 
also  belong  here,  as  well  as  teleostean  fish.  Most  of  the 


206         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

insects  belong  to  this  group,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Lepidoptera  (moths  and  butterflies).  In  the  Hymenop- 
tera,  however,  another  mechanism  determines  sex  (see 
below).  The  roundworms  (Nematodes)  and  sea  urchins 
belong  also  to  the  XX-XO  type. 

The  Avian  Type  {WZ-ZZ). 

The  other  type  of  sex  mechanism,  the  avian-moth  type, 
is  shown  in  the  diagram  (Fig.  118).  The  male  has  two 
like  sex-chromosomes  that  may  be  called  ZZ.  These  sepa- 


M&le  Female 

Fig.  119. 
Male  and  female  chromosome  groups  of  the  fowl.  (After  Shiwago.) 

rate  at  one  of  the  two  maturation  divisions  and  each  ripe 
sperm-cell  comes  to  contain  one  Z.  The  female  has  one 
Z-chromosome  and  a  W-chromosome.  When  the  eggs  ma- 
ture, each  egg  is  left  with  one  or  the  other  of  these  chro- 
mosomes. Half  the  eggs  contain  a  Z-  and  half  contain  a 
W-chromosome.  Any  W-egg  fertilized  by  a  Z-sperm  pro- 
duces a  female  (WZ).  Any  Z-egg  fertilized  by  a  Z-sperm 
produces  a  male  (ZZ). 

Here  again  we  find  a  mechanism  that  automatically 
produces  two  kinds  of  individuals,  females  and  males, 
in  equal  numbers.  As  before,  a  1  to  1  sex-ratio  results 
from  the  combination  of  chromosomes  that  takes  place 


SEX  AND  GENES  207 

at  fertilization.  The  evidence  for  this  mechanism  in  birds 
comes  both  from  cytology  and  from  genetics,  although 
the  former  is  as  yet  not  entirely  satisfactory. 


Fig.  120. 
Diagram    of   cross   between   black   and   barred   poultry,   showing 

sex-linked  inheritance. 


208 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


According  to  Stevens,  in  the  chick  the  male  appears  to 
have  two  large  chromosomes  equal  in  size  (Fig.  119), 
presumably  X's;  the  female  has  only  one  of  these.  Shi- 
wasfo  and  Hance  confirm  these  relations. 


CR0S5ULARIATA  9  .01 


LACT1C0L0R  d  11 


O    ©  CffiM  CELLS  ® 

/\ 


LACT1C0L0R  9  01 


\ 


\      GROSSULARIATA  d  LI 


O    ©CERM  CELLS  ..©    © 


\. 


O  ©'"        O  ©"        *©  ®       "0  ^© 

GR0SSULAR1ATA  9  OL    LACT1C0L0R  9  01    CR05SULAR1ATA  d  1 L      LACTIC0L0R  6 


Fig.  121. 
Sex-linked  inheritance  in  the  currant  moth,  Abraxas. 


The  genetic  evidence  for  birds  is  beyond  dispute.  It 
comes  from  sex-linked  inheritance.  If  a  Black  Langshan 
male  is  mated  to  a  Barred  Plymouth  Rock  female,  the 
sons  are  barred,  the  daughters  are  black  (Fig.  120).  This 
is  expected  if  the  differential  genes  are  carried  by  the 
Z-chromosomes,  because  the  daughter  gets  her  single  Z- 
chromosome  from  her  father.  If  the  Ft  offspring  are  bred 


SEX  AND  GENES  209 

together,    they   produce   barred    and   black   males    and 
females  as  1:1:1:1. 

A  similar  mechanism  is  found  in  moths,  where  the  cyto- 
logical  evidence  is  more  certain.  When  a  female  of  the 
darker  wild  type  variety  of  the  currant  moth  (Abraxas) 
is  mated  to  a  lighter  mutant  type,  the  daughters  have  a 

a 


•  » 


X 

Fig.  122. 

c,  Eeduced  group  of  chromosomes  of  the  egg  of  Fumea  casta;  b 
and  &'  outer  and  inner  pole  of  the  first  maturation  division  of  the 
egg;  the  single  X -chromosome  is  present  only  at  one  pole.  (After 
Seiler.) 


210         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

lighter  color,  like  the  father;  the  sons  a  darker  color,  like 
the  mother  (Fig.  121).  The  daughter  gets  a  single  Z  from 
her  father ;  the  son  also  gets  this  Z  from  his  father,  but 
another  from  his  mother.  This  maternal  Z  carries  the 
gene  for  darker  color  that  is  dominant,  hence  the  darker 
color  of  her  sons. 

In  the  silkworm  moth,  Tanaka  has  found  a  sex-linked 
character,  translucent  skin  of  the  larva,  that  is  inherited 
as  though  carried  in  the  Z-chromosomes. 

In  the  moth  Fumea  casta  there  are  61  chromosomes  in 
the  female  and  62  in  the  male.  After  conjugation  of  the 
chromosomes  in  the  egg  there  are  31  chromosomes  pres- 
ent (Fig.  122a).  At  the  first  polar  division,  when  the  first 
polar  body  is  given  off,  30  of  the  chromosomes  (bivalents) 
divide  and  pass  to  opposite  poles ;  the  thirty-first  sin- 
gle chromosome  passes  undivided  to  one  or  the  other 
pole  (Fig.  119b  and  b').  Half  of  the  eggs  will  come  to 
contain  31,  half  30  chromosomes.  At  the  next  polar  divi- 
sion all  the  chromosomes  present  divide,  leaving  each 
egg  with  the  number  it  had  before  this  division  (i.e.,  31 
or  30).  In  the,  ripening  of  the  sperm  of  this  moth,  31 
bivalent  chromosomes  are  present  after  conjugation  of 
the  chromosomes.  At  the  first  division  the  members  of 
each  pair  separate  and  at  the  second  each  divides.  Each 
spermatozoon  carries  31  chromosomes.  Fertilization  of 
the  eggs  gives  the  following  combinations : 


Females  =  61<^ 


30s 
x31v 


Males      =  62< 


In  another  moth,  Talaeporia  tubulosa,  Seiler  finds  59 
chromosomes  in  the  female  and  60  in  the  male.  In  Soleno- 


SEX  AND  GENES  211 

bia  pineti  an  unpaired  chromosome  is  not  visible  in  the 
female  or  in  the  male,  nor  is  an  unpaired  chromosome 
visible  in  several  other  moths.  On  the  other  hand,  in 
Phragmatobia  fuliginosa  there  is  a  compound  chromo- 
some containing  the  sex-chromosome.  In  the  male  there 
are  two  of  these  present;  in  the  female  only  one  is  com- 
pound like  those  of  the  male.  It  seems  not  improbable 
that  this  relation  may  also  exist  in  other  moths  where  the 
W-element  and  the  Z-elements  do  not  appear  as  separate 
chromosomes. 

Another  demonstration  of  sex-linked  inheritance  in 
moths  has  been  given  by  Federley  in  a  cross  between  two 
species  of  moths  (Pygaera  anachoreta  and  P.  curtula). 
This  case  is  interesting  because  within  each  species  the 
male  and  female  caterpillars  are  alike.  They  show  specific 
differences,  however,  when  the  caterpillars  in  the  two 
species  are  compared.  This  specific  difference,  that  is  not 
dimorphic  within  the  species,  becomes  the  basis  for  a 
sexual  dimorphism  in  the  Fx  caterpillars  (when  the  cross 
is  made  "one  way"),  because,  as  the  results  show,  the 
main  genetic  difference  between  the  caterpillars  in  the 
two  races  lies  in  the  Z-chromosomes.  When  anachoreta  is 
the  mother  and  curtula  the  father,  the  hybrid  caterpillars, 
after  the  first  molt,  are  markedly  different.  The  hybrid 
male  caterpillars  are  closely  similar  to  those  of  the  mater- 
nal race  (anachoreta),  while  the  hybrid  female  caterpil- 
lars resemble  those  of  the  paternal  race  (curtula). 

The  reciprocal  cross  gives  offspring  that  are  all  alike. 
These  results  are  explicable  on  the  assumption  that  the 
anachoreta  Z-chromosome  carries  a  gene  (or  genes) 
dominant  to  the  gene  (or  genes)  in  the  Z-chromosome  of 
curtula.  The  special  interest  in  this  case  is  due  to  the 
genes  in  one  species  acting  as  a  dominant  to  allelomor- 
phic  genes  in  the  same  chromosome  of  the  other  species. 
The  analysis  of  the  result  can  be  carried  over  consistentlv 


212         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

to  the  next  generation,  produced  by  back-crossing  the  Fx 
male  to  either  parent  stock,  provided,  however,  the  trip- 
loid  nature  of  the  offspring  be  taken  into  account.  (See 
Chap.  IX.) 

There  are  no  grounds  for  supposing  that  the  chromo- 
somes involved  in  the  XX-XY  and  in  the  WZ-ZZ  types 
are  the  same.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine 
how  one  type  could  change  over  directly  into  the  other. 
There  is  no  theoretical  difficulty,  however,  in  supposing 
that  the  change  in  balance  that  gives  the  two  sexes  may 
have  arisen  independently  in  the  two  types,  even  although 
the  actual  genes  involved  are  the  same  or  nearly  the  same 
in  both. 

Sex-Chromosomes  in  Dioecious  Flowering  Plants. 

One  of  the  surprises  of  the  year  1923  was  the  simul- 
taneous announcement  by  four  independent  workers  that 
in  some  of  the  flowering  plants  with  separate  sexes  a 
mechanism  is  present  that  follows  the  XX-XY  type. 

Santos  found  in  the  male  of  Elodea  that  48  somatic 
chromosomes  are  present  (Fig.  123),  consisting  of  23 
pairs  of  autosomes  and  an  XY  unequal  pair.  At  matura- 
tion the  X  and  Y  separate.  Two  kinds  of  pollen  grains 
result,  one  with  X,  the  other  with  Y. 

Two  other  cytologists,  Kihara  and  Ono,  found  in  male 
plants  of  Rumex  15  somatic  chromosomes  consisting  of 
6  pairs  of  autosomes  and  3  heterochromosomes  (mx,  m2, 
and  M).  These  three  come  together  at  maturation  of  the 
germ-cells  to  form  a  group  (Fig.  123).  The  M  goes  to  one 
pole,  the  two  small  m's  to  the  opposite.  Two  kinds  of  pol- 
len grains  result,  6a-f  M  and  6a+m+m.  The  latter  are 
male-determining. 

Winge  found  an  XY  pair  of  chromosomes  in  two  spe- 
cies of  hops  (Humulus  lupulens  and  H.  japonica).  Nine 


*•*•• 


Elodea 


r_Y 


■x 


Humulus 


M     M 
•mm     mm 


Rumex 


V^llisnerm 


Vadlisnerm 


Mel&ndrium 


Me  tan  dpi  urn 


*% 

w 


Pollen      Ovule 


Fig.  123. 
Maturation  groups  of  several  dioecious  plants.  (After  Belar.) 


214         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

autosomes  and  an  XY  pair  are  present  in  the  male.  He 
also  found  in  Vallisneria  spirales  that  in  the  male  there  is 
an  unpaired  X-chromosome.  The  formula  is  8a+X. 

In  Melandrium,  Correns  has  concluded  from  breeding 
work  that  the  male  is  heterogametic.  Winge  reported  that 
the  male  formula  is  22a+X-f  Y,  which  confirms  Correns' 
deduction. 

Miss  Blackburn  also  reported  an  unequal  pair  of  chro- 
mosomes in  the  male  of  Melandrium.  She  adds  one  all- 
important  link  to  the  chain  of  evidence.  The  female  has 
two  equal  sex-chromosomes,  one  of  them  corresponding 
to  one  of  the  sex-chromosomes  of  the  male  (Fig.  123).  At 
maturation  they  conjugate  and  reduce. 

From  this  evidence  we  may,  I  think,  safely  conclude 
that  some  at  least  of  the  dioecious  flowering  plants  make 
use  of  the  same  kind  of  mechanism  for  sex-determination 
that  is  present  in  many  animals. 

Sex-Determination  in  Mosses. 

Several  years  before  these  observations  on  flowering 
plants  had  been  made,  it  had  been  shown  by  the  Marchals 
that  when  the  spores  are  formed  in  dioecious  mosses — 
mosses  that  have  separate  male  and  female  gametophytes1 
(or  sexual  prothallia) — two  of  the  spores  derived  from 

i  In  mosses,  ferns,  and  liverworts  the  haploid  or  gametophyte  generation 
is  spoken  of  as  consisting  of  two  sexes,  male  and  female,  and  the  diploid 
generation  (sporophyte)  as  non-sexual  or  neutral.  In  flowering  plants,  the 
plant  itself  corresponds  to  the  sporophyte  of  the  mosses.  It  carries,  as 
it  were,  the  gametophyte  generation  within  its  pistil  and  stamens.  A  paradox 
arises  from  the  use  of  the  same  terms  male  and  female  in  mosses  for  one 
generation,  that  is,  the  haploid  one,  and  for  the  alternative  generation  in 
flowering  plants,  that  is,  the  diploid.  The  paradox  is  not  so  much  a  question 
of  diploid  and  haploid  (this  contrast  is  encountered  even  within  the  same 
generation  in  some  animals — bee,  rotifers,  etc.),  but  in  using  the  same  terms 
for  contrasted  generations,  one  sexual,  the  other  non-sexual.  With  this  under- 
standing, however,  no  serious  difficulty  arises  by  following  conventional 
usage. 


SEX  AND  GENES 


215 


the  same  sporophyte  mother  cell  produce  female  game- 
tophytes  and  the  other  two  male  gametophytes. 

Somewhat  later  Allen  discovered  in  the  nearly  related 
group  of  liverworts  (Fig.  124)  that  in  the  haploid  female 


X.... 


saSU 


Y    ^^> 


Fig.  124. 
a,  Female   and  b,  male  prothallia  of  liverwort.   The   female  with 
one  large  X-chromosome,  a';  the  male  with  one  small  Y-chromo- 
some,  b'.  (After  Allen.) 


prothallium  (gametophyte),  with  eight  chromosomes, 
there  is  one  (X)  that  is  much  larger  than  the  other  seven 
chromosomes ;  and  in  the  haploid  male  prothallium  (game- 
tophyte), with  eight  chromosomes,  one  (Y)  is  much 
smaller  than  the  other  seven  (Fig.  121b').  Each  egg  will 


216         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

contain  an  X-,  and  each  sperm  a  Y-chromosome.  After 
fertilization  the  sporophyte  will  have  16  chromosomes 
(including  one  X  and  one  Y).  When  the  spores  are 
formed,  reduction  takes  place,  the  X  and  the  Y  separat- 
ing. Half  of  the  haploid  spores  so  formed  will  contain  an 
X  and  give  rise  to  a  female  prothallium,  and  half  will  con- 
tain a  Y  and  give  rise  to  a  male  prothallium. 

More  recently  still,  Wettstein  has  made  some  critical 
experiments  with  dioecious  mosses,  experiments  that 
carry  the  analysis  further.  By  utilizing  a  discovery  of  the 
Marchals,  he  produced  gainetophytes  that  contained  both 
the  male  and  the  female  groups  of  chromosomes  (Fig.  125 
to  the  left).  For  example,  following  the  Marchals'  method, 
he  cut  off  pieces  of  the  spore-bearing  stalk  (whose  cells 
are  diploid).  From  the  fragment  a  gametophyte  devel- 
oped, also  diploid.  In  this  way  he  obtained  FM  game- 
tophytes. 

Then  in  another  way  he  made  diploid  male  and  female 
moss  plants  that  were  double  females  (FF)  and  double 
males  (MM).  This  was  accomplished  as  follows: 

By  treating  the  protonema  threads  with  chloral  hy- 
drate and  other  drugs  and  reagents,  he  brought  about  the 
suppression  of  a  cell  division  in  an  individual  cell  after 
the  chromosomes  had  already  divided.  In  this  way  he 
could  produce  in  these  dioecious  species,  diploid  giant 
cells  that  were  doubled  in  their  female  or  else  in  their 
male  elements,  chromosomes,  for  example.  From  such  a 
diploid  cell  a  protonema  or  moss  plant  was  produced. 
By  artificial  means  Wettstein  then  brought  about  several 
new  combinations,  some  triploids,  others  tetraploids. 
Some  of  the  most  interesting  of  these  combinations  are 
shown  in  the  diagram  (Fig.  125,  to  the  right). 

A  diploid  cell  from  a  female  thread  gives  a  diploid 
moss  plant,  FF,  that  produces  diploid  egg-cells.  Similarly 
an  MM  plant  is  produced  from  a  diploid  male  thread. 


SEX  AND  GENES 


217 


When  an  FF  egg  and  an  MM  sperm  are  brought  together 
a  tetraploid  sporophyte  (FFMM)  is  produced. 

When  the  FF  ovule  is  fertilized  by  a  normal  male 

? 

\\// 

o 

2 


5 


-5 

0 


7^ 

o 


W//        *S 


A 

/   \ 


??<? 


^ 
* 


0 

0 


"^ 


^ 


^ 
^ 
^ 


^<f_ ' 

T 


^ 
^ 

V 


V 


4? 


^ 

^ 


Fig.  125. 

Diagram   illustrating  different  combinations  of   diploids  and 

triploid  mosses.  (After  Wettstein.) 


sperm  cell  M,  a  triploid  sporophyte  (FFM)  is  produced. 
Thus: 


M 


\ 


FFM 


FF 
/       \ 


MM 


FFMM 


From  each  sporophyte,  FFM  and  FFMM,  a  gametophyte 
can  be  regenerated.  Each  of  these  plants  develops  both 


218         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

male  and  female  elements,  and  both  produce  eggs  and 
sperm-cells;  but  the  number  of  female  organs  (arche- 
gonia)  and  of  male  organs  (antheridia)  and  their  time  of 
appearance  show  characteristic  differences. 

The  Marchals  had  obtained,  as  has  been  said,  the  dip- 
loid FM  gametophyte  in  the  same  species  used  by  Wett- 
stein,  and  had  shown  that  it  produces  both  female  and 
male  organs.  Wettstein  confirms  this  and  reports  that  the 
male  organs  develop  before  the  female. 

A  comparison  of  the  three  types,  FM,  FFM,  FFMM, 
is  interesting.  The  FM  plant  is  strongly  protandric.  At 
first  there  is  a  great  excess  of  antheridia  or  male  organs 
compared  with  archegonia.  The  archegonia  develop  later. 

The  FFMM  plant  is,  as  Wettstein  says,  twice  as 
strongly  protandric  as  the  FM  plant.  At  first  only  anthe- 
ridia appear.  Very  late  in  the  year,  when  the  old  anthe- 
ridia have  gone,  a  few  young  archegonia  appear — some 
plants  never  develop  them.  Still  later  a  vigorous  develop- 
ment of  female  organs  may  set  in. 

The  triploid  plants  are  protogynic.  At  least,  at  the  time 
when  the  FFMM  tetraploid  plants  have  only  male  organs 
(in  July),  the  triploids  have  only  female  organs.  Later 
(in  September)  both  organs  are  present. 

These  experiments  are  interesting  in  showing  how  arti- 
ficial hermaphroditic  individuals  may  be  made  from 
plants  that  normally  have  separate  sexes  by  combining 
the  two  sets  of  elements.  The  results  also  show  that  the 
sequence  in  which  the  sexual  organs  develop  is  deter- 
mined by  the  age  of  the  plant.  More  important  is  the 
actual  reversal  of  this  time  relation  by  changing  the 
genetic  composition  in  the  opposite  direction. 


CHAPTER  XV 

OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION 
INVOLVING  THE  SEX-CHROMOSOMES 

THE  determination  of  sex  through  the  redistribu- 
tion of  the  sex-chromosomes  in  the  germ-cells  is 
regulated  in  some  animals  in  other  ways  than 
those  described  in  the  preceding  chapter. 


* 


H 


«* 

«• 


Fig.  126. 

Separation  of  the  two  small  X-chromosomes  from  the  autosomes  in 

Ascaris  eggs.    (After  Geinitz.) 


The  Attachment  of  the  X-Chromo somes  to  Autosomes. 

The  attachment  of  the  sex-chromosomes  to  other  chro- 
mosomes, that  is  known  to  occur  in  a  few  forms,  tends  to 
conceal  the  differential  character  of  X-  and  Y-chromo- 


220 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


somes.  Their  presence  has  been  detected,  in  such  cases,  by 
their  occasional  separation,  as  in  Ascaris  (Fig.  126), 
from  their  attachment,  or  by  the  differential  staining 
properties  of  the  X-chromosome  in  the  male,  or,  as  in 
certain  moths  studied  by  Seiler,  by  the  regular  separation 
of  the  compound  chromosome  into  its  components  in  the 
somatic  cells  of  the  embryo. 


o^  4,. 


Ooqon ia 


)erma 


onia 


Fig.  127. 


Diagram  illustrating  the  distribution  of  the  attached  X-chromo- 
somes  in  the  male  and  female  of  Ascaris.   (After  Boveri.) 


9 


cf 


The  attachment  of  the  sex-chromosomes  to  ordinary 
chromosomes,  or  autosomes,  as  they  are  called,  involves 
the  mechanism  of  sex-linked  inheritance,  more  particu- 
larly should  crossing-over  take  place  in  the  male  between 
the  autosome  attached  to  the  X  and  its  mate  lacking  the 
attached  X.  An  example  will  illustrate  the  point  at  issue. 
In  Fig.  127  the  X-chromosomes  of  Ascaris  are  indicated 
by  the  black  ends  of  those  chromosomes  to  which  they  are 
attached.  In  the  female  there  are  two  X-chromosomes, 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     221 

each  attached  to  a  member  of  the  same  pair  of  autosomes. 
In  the  mature  egg  one  such  compound  chromosome  (there- 
fore one  X)  is  left  in  each  egg.  In  the  male,  one  X  is  pres- 
ent, attached  to  the  corresponding  autosome,  but  the 
other  autosome  has  no  attached  X.  After  maturation  half 
of  the  sperm-cells  will  contain  an  X,  half  will  be  without 
an  X.  The  mechanism  for  sex-determination  is  obviously 
here  the  same  as  in  the  XX-XO  type. 

In  the  female,  crossing-over  might  take  place  both  be- 
tween the  two  X-chromosomes  and  between  the  two  at- 
tached autosomes.  But  in  the  XO  male  the  situation 
would  be  different ;  for  in  the  male  the  X  part  of  the  com- 
pound chromosome  has  no  opposite,  hence  no  crossing- 
over  is  expected  in  that  part.  This  would  insure  the 
coherence  of  the  sex-differentiating  genes  and  of  the  sex- 
mechanism  ;  but  between  the  autosomal  parts  of  the  com- 
pound chromosome  an  interchange  might  then  take  place 
without  affecting  the  sex-mechanism.  The  characters 
whose  genes  lie  in  the  X-component  will  show  sex-linked 
inheritance,  i.e.,  the  recessive  character,  will  appear  in 
the  sons.  The  recessive  characters  whose  genes  are  in  the 
autosomal  part  will  not  appear  in  the  sons.  However,  the 
character  whose  genes  are  in  the  autosomal  part  will 
show  partial  linkage  to  sex  and  to  the  characters  whose 
genes  lie  in  the  X-component.1 

In  the  imaginary  example  just  given,  the  autosome 
without  an  attached  X,  that  is,  the  mate  of  the  compound 
chromosome  with  an  X  in  the  male,  will  appear  to  corre- 
spond to  the  Y-chromosome  of  the  ordinary  XX-XY  type 

i  According  to  McChmg  the  X-chromosome  in  the  male  of  Hesperotettix 
is  not  constantly  attached  to  the  same  autosome,  although  in  a  given  indi- 
vidual its  attachment  is  constant.  In  other  individuals  it  may  be  free.  Were 
sex-linked  characters  known  in  such  a  type,  their  inheritance  might  be 
complicated  by  this  inconstant  relation  of  the  X-chromosome  to  the  auto- 
somes. 


222         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

(because  it  is  confined  to  the  male  line),  except,  as  just 
pointed  out,  that  it  carries  genes  that  are  like  those  in  the 
corresponding  part  of  the  compound  X-chromosomes. 
Cases  of  inheritance  have,  in  fact,  been  recently  recorded 
where  certain  genes  appear  to  be  carried  by  the  Y-chro- 
mosome,  and  such  cases  have  been  interpreted  to  mean 
that  the  Y-chromosome  itself  may  sometimes  carry  genes. 
There  is  no  objection  to  such  a  statement  if  interpreted 
as  above,  but  there  is  an  obvious  objection  to  this  state- 
ment if  it  is  intended  to  mean  more  than  this;  for  the 
chromosomal  sex-mechanism  would  break  down  if  the 
X  and  the  Y  of  the  male  interchanged  throughout.  If  this 
happened,  the  two  chromosomes  would  after  a  time  be- 
come identical,  and  the  difference  in  balance  that  gives 
males  and  females  would  be  lost. 

The  Y -Chromosome. 

There  are  two  groups  in  which  the  genetic  evidence  has 
been  interpreted  to  mean  that  Mendelian  factors  may  be 
carried  in  the  Y-chromosome.  In  fish,  belonging  to  two 
different  families,  it  has  been  shown  by  Schmidt,  Aida, 
and  Winge  that  the  Y  carries  genes.  In  the  gypsy  moth 
Goldschmidt  has  interpreted  the  result  of  species-crosses 
in  the  same  way  (here  the  W-chromosome).  The  latter 
results  will  be  considered  in  the  chapter  on  sex  inter- 
grades  ;  the  former  may  now  be  taken  up. 

In  the  small  aquarium  fish,  Lebistes  reticulatus,  a  na- 
tive of  the  West  Indies  and  northern  South  America,  the 
males  are  highly  colored  and  strikingly  different  from  the 
females  (Fig.  128).  The  females  in  different  races  are 
closely  similar  to  each  other,  while  the  males  show  char- 
acteristic differences  in  color.  Schmidt  has  found  that 
when  a  male  of  one  race  is  bred  to  a  female  of  another 
race,  the  sons  are  like  the  father.  If  these  hybrids  (Fx) 
are  inbred,  their  sons  (F2)  are  again  all,  like  the  father, 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     223 

and  none  of  them  show  any  characters  of  males  of  the 
maternal  grandmother's  race.  The  F3  and  F4  males  are 
again  all  like  those  of  the  paternal  forefather.  There 
seems  to  be  here  no  Mendelian  splitting  for  any  charac- 
ters that  might  have  been  expected  to  have  come  through 
the  maternal  grandparent. 


crossover! 


Fig.  128. 
Diagram  illustrating  the  inheritance  of  a  sex-linked  character  in 
fish,   carried   both   by   the   X-   and    the   "  Y-chromosome. "    After 
Winge.) 


The  same  results  are  obtained  when  the  reciprocal 
cross  is  made;  the  sons  and  grandsons  are  all  like  the 
paternal  parent,  etc. 

In  another  fish,  Aplocheilus  latipes,  inhabiting  small 
streams  and  paddy  fields  of  Japan,  several  types  differ- 
ing in  color  are  found.  Other  types  have  also  appeared  in 
cultures.  In  these  fish  both  males  and  females  of  each 
type  occur.  Aida  has  shown  that  several  of  these  differ- 
ences are  transmitted  through  the  sex-chromosomes  (both 
X  and  Y).  The  genetic  transmission  of  these  characters 
can  be  explained  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  genes  are 
carried  sometimes  in  the  Y-  and  sometimes  in  the  X- 


221 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


chromosomes,  and  that  crossing-over  between  these  chro- 
mosomes may  take  place. 

For  example,  the  character,  white  body  color,  is  sex- 
linked  in  inheritance.  Its  allelomorph  is  red  body  color. 
When  a  pure  white  female  was  mated  to  a  pnre  red  male, 
the  sons  and  daughters  (F±)  were  all  red.  When  these 
were  inbred  they  gave, 

Red  2         Red  $         White  ?         White  $ 
41  76  43  0 

Assuming  that  the  genes  for  white  are  carried  in  the  two 
X-chromosomes  of  the  female  and  designating  such  a 
chromosome  by  Xw   (Fig.  129),  and  assuming  that  the 


white  Q 

x^x" 


b 


H 


re 


dc^ 


X  Y 


germ  cells 


Fa 


Fig.  129. 


Diagram   showing  the   inheritance   of   a  character   whose   gene   is 
carried  by  the  ' '  Y-chromosome, ' '  as  well  as  by  the  X-chromosome. 

gene  for  red  is  carried  both  by  the  X  and  the  Y  of  the 
male,  and  designating  these  by  Xr  and  Yr,  the  cross  given 
above  works  out  on  the  XX-XY  formula  as  shown  in  Fig. 
129.  If  red  (r)  dominates  white  (w),  both  sons  and  daugh- 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     225 

ters  (Fx)  will  be  red.  If  these  are  inbred  the  results  are 
shown  in  the  next  diagram  (Fig.  130).  White  and  red 
daughters  in  equal  numbers  are  expected  and  red  sons 
only,  that  are  equal  in  number  to  the  sum  of  the  two 
female  classes. 


^  red  c? 


Fig.  130. 
Diagram  illustrating  the  inheritance  of  red  and  white  color  from 
two  Ft  heterozygous  male  and  female  fish.  The  Y-chromosome  as 
well  as  the  X  may  carry  the  gene  for  red  (r). 


Thus  from  a  red  male  and  a  white  female  no  white 
grandsons  are  expected  on  this  formulation  unless  in  an 
FjXwYr  red  male,  crossing-over  between  X  and  Y  occurs 
to  give  a  Yw  chromosome  (Fig.  131).  When  such  a  chro- 
mosome meets  an  egg-carrying  Xw,  a  white  male,  XWYW, 
will  be  produced.  A  white  male  appeared,  in  fact,  in  one 
experiment  in  which  an  ¥1  heterozygous  red  male,  XwYr 
(obtained  in  the  above  experiment),  was  back-crossed  to 
a  pure  white  female.  The  results  obtained  were : 


Eed  $ 
2 


White  2 
197 


Red  S 
251 


White  $ 
1 


226         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

The  occurrence  here  of  two  red  9  's  and  one  white  male 
may  be  accounted  for,  if,  in  the  Fx$  (XwYr),  an  inter- 
change occurred  about  once  out  of  451  times,  as  shown  in 
Fig.  131.  Similar  results  were  obtained  when  white  and 
brown  males  were  crossed,  but  no  cross-overs  were  re- 
corded. When  variegated  red  females  and  white  males 
were  crossed,  the  same  kind  of  results  were  obtained  with 
11  cross-overs  out  of  172  individuals  in  the  back-cross. 


red  f^  d 

X'Yr 


crossover  gametes 
,erm  cells        X"  X*- Y  -  X*"-  Y* 


F2      xY    x"Y.    x"x'     Yt 

white  p     redd*     redo      white  d 

crossover  zygotes 

Fig.  131. 

Diagram  illustrating  crossing-over  between  genes  for  red  and  for 
white  carried  by  the  X-  and  ' '  Y-chromosome ' '  of  an  F1  male  fish. 
These  genes  are  interpreted  as  allelomorphs. 

Winge  (1922-1923)  extended  Schmidt's  experiments 
with  Lebistes,  and  independently  reached  the  same  con- 
clusions concerning  the  Y-chromosomes  as  had  Aida.  The 
results  of  a  cross  between  a  female  of  one  race,  X0X0,  and 
a  male  of  another  race,  XeYm,  are  shown  in  Fig.  128.  The 
ripe  germ-cells  of  this  heterozygous  male  are  represented 
by  two  non-cross-over  classes,  Xe  and  Ym,  and  two  cross- 
over classes,  X0  and  Yem.  Correspondingly  there  were  two 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     227 

kinds  of  males,  X0Ym  and  X0Yera.  The  latter  are  rare,  one 
ont  of  73  sons.2  Whether  crossing-over  also  occurs  in  the 
female  cannot  be  determined  from  Winge  's  data,  since  he 
gives  no  cases  of  XeXM  females.  Moreover,  he  represents 
one  type  of  female  as  X0  and  implies  that  the  X0-chromo- 
some  is  lacking  in  certain  genes.  Two  pairs  of  genes  are 
necessary  to  show  crossing-over  when  two  X's  are  pres- 
ent. In  fact,  Winge  represents  an  Xe  that  has  crossed  over 
to  a  Ym  as  X0  without  representing  the  reciprocal  allelo- 


_m . —    x_m 


m  II  \/  m 


non cross over  crossover 

Fig.  132. 
Diagram  illustrating  the  possible  relations  of  an  attached  X-chro- 
mosome   to   crossing-over  between   the   autosomal   portion   of   this 
compound  chromosome  and  the  autosome  (the  male  of  the  latter) 
here  called  Y. 


morphic  change.  The  full  formula  should  represent  one 
of  the  X's  containing  the  genes  M  and  e,  and  the  Y,  in 
this  case,  as  containing  the  genes  m  and  E.  After  cross- 
ing-over the  X  would  then  contain  E  and  M  and  the  Y 
would  contain  e  and  m,  as  shown  in  Fig.  132.  The  X-chro- 
mosome  after  crossing-over  is  not  X0,  but  XME,  and  the 
Y-chromosome  Yme.  If  m  and  e  are  dominant  over  M  and 
E,  the  results  would  be  as  recorded,  except  that  another 
cross-over  is  expected,  namely,  XME.  If  the  part  of  the  X 
to  the  left  of  the  M  contains  the  sex-determining  genes 
(the  heavier  part  of  the  X  in  the  figure)  the  absence  of 
this  cross-over  in  the  experiment  might  be  explained  as 
due  to  the  proximity  of  M  to  the  X-component. 

Aside  from  these  questions  of  interpretation,  the  re- 

2  In  another  experiment  4  cross-overs  out  of  68  sons  are  recorded. 


228         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

suits  show  that  certain  characters  follow  the  Y-chromo- 
some,  so-called,  in  inheritance.  The  results  are  not  incon- 
sistent with  those  recorded  in  other  cases  of  sex-linked 
inheritance,  provided  the  X-component  of  the  compound 
chromosome  is  absent  in  the  Y.  Whether  crossing-over 
occurs  in  the  female  of  the  two  species  of  fish  that  have 
been  studied  is  not  evident  from  the  published  results, 
partly  because  the  crosses  have  not  been  made  in  a  way 
to  bring  out  this  possibility,  and  partly  because  the  nota- 
tion used  is  such  as  to  obscure  this  possibility. 

Degeneration  of  Male-Producing  Sperm. 

In  two  closely  related  families  of  bugs,  the  Phylloxe- 
rans  and  Aphids,  belonging  to  the  XX-XO  type,  the  male- 
producing  class  of  sperms  (no  X)  degenerate  (Fig.  133). 
This  leaves  only  the  female-producing  sperms  (X).  The 
sexual  egg  (XX),  after  extrusion  of  two  polar  bodies,  is 
left  with  one  X-chromosome.  Fertilized  by  the  X-sperm, 
these  eggs  produce  only  females  (XX).  These  females  are 
called  stem  mothers.  They  are  parthenogenetic  and  be- 
come the  starting  point  of  a  succession  of  other  partheno- 
genetic females.  After  a  time,  some  of  these  females  may 
produce  male  offspring,  others  producing  sexual  females. 
The  latter  are  diploid,  like  their  mothers,  but  in  them  the 
chromosomes  conjugate  and  their  number  becomes  re- 
duced to  half.  The  former  individuals  that  produce  males 
do  so  by  a  process  that  will  be  described  in  the  next 
section. 

The  Elimination  of  One  X-Chromosome  from  a 
Diploid  Egg  to  Produce  a  Male. 

In  the  Phylloxerans,  as  stated  above,  a  certain  kind  of 
female  appears  near  the  end  of  the  parthenogenetic  cycle 
whose  eggs  are  a  little  smaller  than  those  of  the  earlier 
females.  Just  before  maturation  of  the  smaller  eggs  the 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     229 

X-chromosomes  come  together  (there  are  four  X's  pres- 
ent). Two  of  them  pass  out  of  the  egg  into  the  single 
polar  body  that  is  given  off  (Fig.  134).  The  autosomes 
at  this  time  divide,  and  half  of  each  is  eliminated.  The 


a 


d  e  f  '  g 

Fig.  133. 
First  maturation  division  of  the  bearberry  aphid.  At  the  first  divi- 
sion, a-c,  the  large  X-chromosome  passes  into  one  cell.  At  the 
second  division,  e,  f,  g,  this  cell  divides  again  producing  two  func- 
tional female-determining  sperms.  The  rudimentary  cell  does  not 
divide  again. 


egg  is  left  with  a  diploid  set  of  autosomes  and  half  of 
the  X-chromosomes.  It  develops,  by  parthenogenesis,  into 
a  male. 

In  the  Aphids  a  similar  process  takes  place.  The  actual 
extrusion  of  one  of  the  X's  from  the  egg  (there  are  only 
two  X's  present)  has  not  been  observed,  but  since,  after 
the  single  polar  body  is  given  off,  there  is  one  less  chro- 
mosome present  in  the  egg,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that 
one  is  lost,  as  in  the  Phylloxerans. 

In  these  two  groups  the  male  sex  is  determined  by  a 


230         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

different  process  from  that  which  takes  place  in  other 
insects,  but  the  same  mechanism  is  utilized  in  a  different 
way  to  bring  about  the  same  end-result. 

There  is  one  further  fact  of  unusual  interest  in  this 
case.  In  the  Phylloxerans  the  female  that  gives  rise  to  the 
male  eggs — she  is  called  the  male-egg  producer — forms 
smaller  eggs  than  did  her  parthenogenetic  forbears.  The 


k 


a 


b 
Fig.  134. 

a,  The  first  polar  spindle  of  a"  male  egg ' '  of  Phylloxera  in  which 
two  chromosomes  lag  on  the  spindle  and  are  ultimately  thrown  out 
of  the  egg,  leaving  five  chromosomes  in  the  egg  nucleus,  b,  The 
first  polar  spindle  of  a  female  egg,  in  which  all  six  chromosomes 
divide  leaving  six  chromosomes  in  the  egg  nucleus. 


fate  of  the  eggs  is,  therefore,  indicated  before  the  X- 
chromosomes  are  eliminated  from  them.  It  might  appear 
that,  here,  sex  is  determined  by  the  size  of  the  egg,  which 
might  mean  the  amount  of  cytoplasm  contained  in  it; 
but  the  conclusion  is  an  illegitimate  inference  from  the 
evidence,  since  the  egg  becomes  a  male  only  after  half  of 
its  X-chromosomes  are  eliminated.  What  would  happen 
if  they  were  retained  we  do  not  know — probably  the  egg 
would  develop  into  a  female.  At  any  rate,  we  have  here  an 
instance  of  a  change  that  has  taken  place  in  the  mother 
that  leads  to  the  formation  of  the  smaller  egg,  which,  in 
turn,  reduces  the  number  of  its  X-chromosomes  to  pro- 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     231 

duce  a  male.  The  nature  of  the  change  in  the  mother  is 
unknown  at  present.3 

Sex-Determination  through  the  Accidental  Loss 
of  a  Chromosome  in  Spermatogenesis. 

In  hermaphroditic  animals  no  sex-determining  mecha- 
nism has  been  found,  and  none  is  expected,  since  all  the 
individuals  are  alike,  each  with  an  ovary  and  a  testis.  In 


Fig.  135. 

First  and  second  maturation  division  of  the  sperm  cell  of  Angio- 

stomum  nigrovenosum.  At  the  second  division   (lower  line)  one  of 

the    X-chromosomes    gets    caught    in    the    division-plane.  (After 
Schleip.) 


one  species  of  nematode  worms,  Angiostomum  nigro- 
venosum, there  is  an  hermaphroditic  generation  that  alter- 
nates with  a  generation  consisting  of  males  and  females. 
Boveri  and  Schleip  have  shown  that  when  the  sperm-cells 
mature  in  the  parthenogenetic  generation  (Fig.  135)  one 

3  In  one  of  the  worms,  Dinophilus  apatris,  eggs  of  two  sizes  are  produced 
by  each  female.  Both  kinds  give  off  two  polar  bodies,  resulting  in  a  haploid 
pro-nucleus.  Both  kinds  of  eggs  are  fertilized;  the  larger  egg  produces 
females,  the  smaller  one  males  (Naehtsheim).  At  present  the  cause  of  the 
production  of  two  kinds  of  eggs  in  the  ovary  is  entirelv  unknown. 


232 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


of  the  X-chroniosomes  frequently  gets  lost  (being  caught 
in  the  division  plane)  and  this  leads  to  the  production  of 
two  classes  of  sperm,  with  five  and  six  chromosomes. 
In  the  maturation  of  the  eggs  of  the  same  female  the 


■■-■■'     *  >     .    t 


0  0    °0 


) 

} 

Co*  f 


o   O 

o 


:>  0 


Wi 


u 

o 

r 

v_ 

C 

o 

C 


O- 


<~\ 


^JO-V 


-rX      -   %v.  • 


-!'-Z.1\"   V 


w 


' 


Lt> 


y 


f 


Fig.  136. 
The  two  maturation  divisions  of  the  egg  of  Angiostomum  nigro- 
venosum.    Six   chromosomes   are  left   in   the   egg  nucleus.    (After 
Schleip.) 


twelve  chromosomes  conjugate,  giving  six  gemini  (Fig. 
136).  At  the  first  maturation  six  go  into  the  first  polar 
body  and  six  remain  in  the  egg.  These  split  and  six  daugh- 
ter chromosomes  go  into  the  second  polar  body,  leaving 
six  chromosomes  in  the  egg,  each  with  one  X-chromo- 
some.  An  egg  fertilized  by  a  sperm  with  six  chromosomes 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     233 

produces  a  female ;  an  egg  fertilized  by  a  sperm  with  five 
chromosomes  produces  a  male.  Here  an  accident  in  cell- 
division  becomes  the  mechanism  of  sex-determination. 

Diploid  Females  and  Haploid  Males. 

In  the  rotifers  there  is,  first,  a  long  series  of  genera- 
tions of  parthenogenetic  females  with  the  diploid  number 
of  chromosomes.  No  reduction  takes  place  in  the  eggs  and 
one  polar  body  is  given  off.  The  series  may  apparently 
continue  indefinitely  under  certain  conditions  of  nourish- 
ment. The  series  can,  however,  as  shown  by  Whitney,  be 
brought  to  an  end  by  a  change  in  diet — such  as  feeding 
the  females  on  a  green  flagellate.  A  female  feeding  on 
such  a  diet  now  produces  daughters  (by  parthenogenesis) 
with  dual  possibilities.  If  one  of  these  daughters  is  fertil- 
ized by  a  male  (that  may  have  then  appeared),  each  egg, 
before  maturation,  is  entered  by  a  single  sperm.  The  egg 
enlarges  in  the  ovary  and  a  thicker  shell  is  laid  over  it 
(Fig.  137).  It  gives  off  two  polar  bodies,  and  then  the 
sperm  nucleus  (haploid)  unites  with  the  haploid  nucleus 
of  the  egg,  restoring  the  full  number  of  chromosomes. 
This  egg  is  a  resting  or  winter  egg.  It  contains  the  dip- 
loid set  of  chromosomes,  and  after  a  time  develops  into 
the  stem  mother  of  a  new  line  of  parthenogenetic  females, 
etc. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  female  in  question  is  not  fer- 
tilized, she  produces  eggs  that  are  smaller  than  the  ordi- 
nary parthenogenetic  eggs.  The  chromosomes  conjugate, 
and  two  polar  bodies  are  given  off.  The  egg  is  left  with  a 
haploid  set  of  chromosomes.  It  segments,  without  dou- 
bling the  number  of  its  chromosomes,  and  produces  a  male. 
In  the  development  of  the  sperm-cells  in  this  male,  only 
one  maturation  division  takes  place.  The  functional 
sperm  with  the  haploid  number  of  chromosomes  fertilizes 
the  resting  egg  of  the  female. 


Fig.  137. 
The  rotifer,  Brachionus  bakeri.  A,  female  with  attached  partheno- 
genetic  female-producing  eggs.  B,  female  with  attached  partheno- 
genetic  male-producing  eggs.  C,  female  with  attached  sexual  eggs. 
D,  male.   (After  Whitney.) 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     235 

The  evidence,  taken  at  its  face  value,  appears  to  mean 
that  the  haploid  number  of  chromosomes  produces  a 
male,  the  diploid  a  female.  The  presence  of  sex-chromo- 
somes is  nowhere  apparent,  hence  the  presence  of  specific 
sex  genes  cannot  be  assumed.  Even  if  the  absence  of  such 
genes  be  granted,  it  is  not  apparent  why  the  half  number 
of  chromosomes  should  produce  a  male  and  the  diploid 
number  a  female,  unless  the  differential  factor  here  in- 
volved be  the  relation  between  the  amount  of  cytoplasm 
in  the  two  kinds  of  eggs  and  the  number  of  chromosomes 
present.  Even  then,  however,  the  result  is  difficult  to 
bring  into  accord  with  the  case  of  the  bee  (described 
below),  where  the  diploid  egg,  that  produces  a  female, 
and  the  haploid  egg,  that  produces  a  male,  have  the  same 
size.  The  outstanding  fact  in  both  cases  is  that  the  hap- 
loid number  of  chromosomes  determines  the  male  sex, 
even  although  something  else  determines  which  eggs  be- 
come haploid. 

It  might  be  possible  to  invent  an  explanation  involving 
sex-chromosomes  if  two  kinds  of  X-chromosomes  were 
postulated  and  if,  at  the  reduction  division,  one  passes 
out  into  the  polar  body  of  the  male  egg  and  the  other  one 
from  the  sexual  egg  (both  being  retained  in  the  partheno- 
genetic  egg) ;  but  it  must  be  confessed  that  at  present 
there  is  no  excuse  or  need  perhaps  for  advancing  such  a 
speculation. 

Sex-determination  in  bees,  and  in  their  near  relatives, 
the  wasps  and  ants,  is  also  connected  with  the  diploid  and 
haploid  condition  of  the  nuclei.  The  facts  seem  well  estab- 
lished, but  the  interpretation  here  is  also  obscure.  The 
queen  bee  deposits  eggs  in  the  queen-cells,  in  the  worker- 
cells,  and  in  the  drone-cells.  These  eggs  are,  before  being 
laid,  all  alike.  The  eggs  in  the  worker-cells  and  the  queen- 
cells  are  fertilized  at  the  time  of  deposition ;  in  the  drone 
cells  the  eggs  are  not  fertilized.  All  eggs  give  off  two 


236         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

polar  bodies.  The  egg  nucleus  is  left  with  the  haploid 
number  of  chromosomes.  In  the  fertilized  eggs  the  sperm 
brings  in  a  haploid  set  of  chromosomes,  which,  uniting 
with  the  egg  nucleus,  gives  the  diploid  number.  From 
these  eggs  females  develop  (queens  or  workers).  The 
queens  owe  their  more  complete  development  to  the  food 
supplied  to  the  larvae  in  the  queen-cells.  This  food  is 
different  from  that  given  to  the  larvae  in  the  worker-cells. 
The  males  (drones)  are,  as  has  been  said,  haploid.4 

In  this  case,  the  determination  of  sex  cannot  be  sup- 
posed to  be  due  to  any  effect  preceding  maturation.  There 
is  no  evidence  that  the  presence  of  the  sperm-nucleus  in 
the  egg  affects  the  way  in  which  the  maturation  division 
of  the  chromosomes  takes  place.  Furthermore,  there  is 
no  evidence  that  the  environment  (drone-cell  or  worker- 
cell)  has  any  effect  on  the  course  of  development.  There 
is,  in  fact,  no  evidence  here  that  any  particular  set  of 
chromosomes  has  been  set  apart  as  sex-chromosomes. 
The  only  known  difference  between  the  two  kinds  of  indi- 
viduals, females  and  males,  is  the  number  of  chromo- 
somes present.  We  can,  at  present,  only  fall  back  on  this 
relation  as  the  one  that  is  in  some  unknown  way  corre- 
lated with  sex-determination.  At  present  it  cannot  be 
satisfactorily  brought  into  line  with  other  cases  in  in- 
sects, where  sex  is  related  to  a  balance  between  genes  in 
the  chromosomes,  but  it  may  still  be  due  to  a  balance  be- 
tween the  chromosomes  (genes)  and  the  cytoplasm. 

There  is  one  further  fact  that  involves  sex-determina- 

*  It  is  known  that,  as  the  cleavage  of  the  unfertilized  egg  of  the  male 
proceeds,  each  chromosome  breaks  into  two  parts  (except  possibly  in  the 
nuclei  that  pass  into  the  germ-track).  This  process  does  not  appear  to  be  a 
' '  division ' '  of  each  chromosome,  but  rather  its  breaking  or  separating  into 
two  pieces.  If  this  interpretation  is  correct  there  is  no  actual  increase  in 
the  number  of  the  genes  and  the  occurrence  of  this  process  (also  known  in 
some  of  the  nematodes)  does  not  throw  any  light  on  the  question  of  sex- 
determination. 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     237 

tion  in  bees.  When  the  maturation  of  the  germ-cells  in  the 
male  takes  place,  the  first  division  is  abortive.  A  small 
cell  is  pinched  off  without  chromosomes  (Fig.  86).  At  the 
second  division  the  chromosomes  divide.  Half  pass  into 
one  cell,  that  is  very  small  and  later  degenerates;  half 
remain  in  the  larger  cell,  that  becomes  the  functional 
spermatozoon  and  contains  the  haploid  number  of  chro- 
mosomes. This  number  it  brings  into  the  egg,  which,  as 
stated,  then  develops  into  a  female. 

There  are  a  few  cases  on  record  (Newell)  where  two 
races  of  bees  have  been  crossed  and  the  progeny  of  the 
hybrid  recorded.  The  males  are  said  to  show  the  charac- 
ters of  one  or  the  other  original  race.  This  is  expected,  in 
so  far  as  the  two  races  differ  in  genes  in  one  and  the  same 
pair  of  chromosomes,  because  these  would  be  separated 
at  reduction,  and  one  or  the  other  would  be  retained  in 
the  haploid  egg  that  produces  a  male.  But  if  the  racial 
differences  depend  on  genes  lying  in  different  pairs  of 
chromosomes,  no  such  sharp  distinction  into  two  classes 
of  grandsons  is  to  be  expected. 

The  worker  bees  (and  ants)  occasionally  lay  eggs. 
These  become  males,  as  a  rule,  which  is  expected,  since 
the  workers  cannot  be  inseminated  by  the  drones.  There 
are  records  in  ants  of  the  rare  appearance  of  sexual  fe- 
males from  workers'  eggs.  It  may  be  supposed  that  this 
is  due  to  the  retention  of  a  double  set  of  chromosomes.  In 
the  "Cape  bees"  the  production  of  females  (queens) 
from  workers'  eggs  is  said  to  be  a  common  occurrence. 
Provisionally  we  may  apply  the  same  explanation  as  that 
given  above  for  the  females  of  worker  ants  that  rarely 
produce  eggs  some  of  which,  under  special  conditions, 
develop  into  females. 

The  direct  transmission  of  the  characters  of  the  mother 
to  her  haploid  sons  has  been  more  completely  demon- 
strated in  Whitings '  work  on  the  parasitic  wasp,  Habro- 


238         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

bracon.  The  common  type  has  black  eyes.  A  mutant  male 
with  orange  eyes  appeared  in  the  cultures.  Crossed  to 
black-eyed  females,  there  were  produced  by  parthenogen- 
esis 415  black-eyed  sons,  and  from  fertilized  eggs  383 
black-eyed  daughters. 

Four  of  these  (Fj)  daughters,  when  isolated,  produced 
parthenogenetically  268  black-eyed  males  and  326  orange- 
eyed  males  and  no  females. 

Eight  other  Fx  daughters  (from  the  original  orange 
male)  were  mated  with  their  F,  brothers.  There  were 
produced  257  black-eyed  sons,  239  orange-eyed  sons,  and 
425  black-eyed  daughters. 

The  original  mutant  orange-eyed  male,  when  bred  to 
his  Fj  daughter,  gave  221  black  males,  243  orange  males, 
44  black  females,  and  59  orange  females. 

These  results  are  expected  on  the  hypothesis  that  the 
male  is  haploid  and  comes  from  an  unfertilized  egg.  The 
gene  for  orange  eyes  and  that  for  black  eyes  separate  in 
the  germ-cells  of  the  hybrid  mother  when  her  germ-cells 
mature,  half  of  the  gametes  then  have  one  kind  of  gene, 
half  the  other  kind.  Any  pair  of  genes  in  any  pair  of  chro- 
mosomes will  give  the  same  result. 

The  reciprocal  cross  was  also  made,  namely,  an  orange 
female  was  crossed  to  a  black  male.  Eleven  such  matings 
gave  183  black  daughters  and  445  orange  males,  as  ex- 
pected ;  but  twenty-two  matings  gave,  in  addition  to  816 
black  females  and  889  orange  males,  57  black  males.  The 
occurrence  of  these  black  males  calls  for  a  different  ex- 
planation. They  have  obviously  come  from  eggs  fertilized 
by  a  black-producing  sperm.  A  possible  explanation 
would  seem  to  be  that  the  haploid  sperm-nucleus  has  de- 
veloped in  the  egg,  and  has  given  rise  to  those  parts  from 
which  the  eyes  at  least  have  come.  The  rest  of  the  egg 
might  then  get  its  nuclei  from  the  haploid  egg-nucleus. 
There  is,  in  fact,  some  evidence  that  this  is  the  correct 


OTHER  METHODS  OF  SEX-DETERMINATION     239 

explanation,  since  Whiting  has  shown  that  some  of  these 
exceptional  black  males  may  breed  as  though  all  their 
sperm  carried  only  the  orange  gene  of  the  mother.  But 
there  are  other  facts  indicating  that  in  these  cases  the 
explanation  is  not  so  simple  as  this,  for  most  of  the  black 
males  are  sterile,  as  well  as  the  few  daughters  arising 
from  those  males  that  are  fertile  (the  mosaic  males).5 
Whatever  the  final  solution  may  be  for  these  exceptional 
cases,  the  main  results  of  the  crosses  confirm  the  theory 
that  the  males  are  haploid. 

s  According  to  Anna  K.  Whiting  (1925),  "the  black-eyed  patroclinous 
males  show  a  higher  percentage  of  morphological  abnormalities  than  do 
males  and  females  normally  produced.  The  majority  of  patroclinous  males 
tested  have  been  sterile,  some  have  bred  as  blacks  and  been  partially  fertile, 
while  a  few  mosaics  have  produced  orange-eyed  daughters  and  have  been 
fully  fertile.  The  orange-eyed  daughters  of  patroclinous  males  are  normal 
in  morphology  and  fertility.  The  black-eyed  daughters  of  patroclinous  males 
are  few  in  number  and  show  a  large  percentage  of  abnormalities  and  are 
almost  completely  sterile."  The  exceptional  males  in  Hadrobracon  may  ex- 
plain some  of  the  anomalous  cases  that  have  been  recorded  in  honey  bees. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

INTERSEXES 

IN  recent  years  some  curious  individuals  have  been 
found  in  species  with  separate  sexes,  that  combine 
to  varying-  degrees  the  characters  of  males  and  fe- 
males. At  present  most  of  these  intersexes,  or  sex  inter- 
grades,  may  be  referred  to  four  sources:  (a)  to  changes 
in  the  ratio  of  the  sex-chromosomes  to  the  rest  of  the 
chromosomes ;  (b)  to  changes  in  the  genes  not  visibly 
connected  with  changes  in  chromosome  number;  (c)  to 
changes  that  result  from  crossing  wild  races,  and  (d)  to 
changes  in  the  environment. 

Intersexes  from  Triploid  Drosophila. 

To  the  first  class  of  intersexes  belong  some  of  the  off- 
spring of  triploid  females  of  Drosophila.  When  the  eggs 
of  a  triploid  female  mature,  the  chromosomes  are  irregu- 
larly distributed,  and,  after  the  polar  bodies  have  been 
given  off,  the  eggs  are  left  with  different  numbers  of 
chromosomes.  If  such  a  female  is  mated  to  a  normal  male 
whose  sperm  carries  one  set  of  chromosomes,  the  off- 
spring that  come  through  are  of  several  kinds  (Fig.  138). 
There  is  reason  to  believe  that  many  eggs  do  not  develop 
at  all,  because  they  lack  the  right  combination  to  produce 
a  new  individual;  but  amongst  the  survivors  there  are 
some  triploids,  more  diploids  (normals),  and  a  few  inter- 
sexes. These  intersexes  (Fig.  139)  have  three  sets  of 
autosomes  and  two  X-chromosomes  (Fig.  138).  The  for- 
mula is  3a+2X  (or  3a+2X+Y).  Thus,  although  the 
intersex  has  the  same  number  of  X-chromosomes  as  has 


INTERSEXES  241 

an  ordinary  female,  it  has  one  set  more  of  the  ordinary 
chromosomes.  It  is  clear  from  this  that  sex  is  determined 
not  by  the  actual  number  of  the  X-chromosomes  present, 
but  by  the  ratio  of  these  to  the  other  chromosomes. 


Diploid  Triploid  Tetraploid 


2a-f2X=$        3a+3X=$  4a+4X=$ 

Za-r  X+Y=d  Sa+X4Y=  Super d  4a+2X+Y=cf 

3a4-2X=  Inters  ex 
2>a+2X+Y= 

3a(-IV)+2X= 


>  > 


■>■> 


2>a(-IV)+2X= 
+Y 


>3 


Fig.  138. 

Diagram  giving  the  formulae  of  normal,  triploid,  tetraploid,  and 

intersexes  of  Drosophila  melanogaster.    (After  Bridges.) 


From  these  exceptional  relations  amongst  the  chromo- 
somes, described  by  Bridges,  he  concluded  that  sex  is 
determined  by  a  balance  between  the  X's  and  the  other 
chromosomes.  We  may  think  of  the  X-chromosomes  as 
containing  more  of  the  genes  that  go  to  produce  a  female, 
and  the  rest  of  the  chromosomes  as  containing  more  of 
the  genes  that  go  to  produce  a  male.  In  the  normal  fe- 
male, 2a+2X,  the  two  X's  turn  the  scale  toward  female- 
ness.  In  the  normal  male  there  is  only  one  X,  and  the 
balance  turns  the  other  way.  The  triploid,  3a+3X,  and 
the  tetraploid,  4a+4X,  have  the  same  balance  as  the 
normal  female  and  are  practically  identical  with  her.  The 


242 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


expectation  for  the  tetraploid  male,  4a+2X-f-Y  (that  has 
not  yet  been  obtained),  is  that  he  will  be  like  the  normal 
male,  since  the  balance  is  the  same  in  both. 

This  evidence  from  triploids  gives  no  specific  informa- 
tion as  to  the  occurrence  of  genes  for  sex-determination. 
If  we  think  of  the  chromosomes  only  in  terms  of  genes,  it 
follows  that  genes  are  involved,  but  the  evidence  does  not 


SuperfemaJ 


Fig.  139. 


Supermale 


Supersedes  of  Drosophila.  The  superfemale  has  three-  sets  of  auto- 
somes and  three  X-chromosomes.  The  supermale  has  three  sets  of 
autosomes  and  an  X-  and  Y-chromosome.    (After  Bridges.) 


Twc — 


show  what  they  are  like.  Even  if  genes  are  involved,  we 
cannot  state  whether  there  is  one  gene  in  the  X  that 
stands  for  femaleness,  or  hundreds  of  such  genes.  Simi- 
larly for  the  ordinary  chromosomes — the  evidence  does 
not  tell  us  whether  the  genes  for  maleness,  if  there  be 
such,  are  in  all  the  chromosomes  or  in  only  one  pair. 

There  are,  however,  two  ways  in  which  we  may  hope, 
some  day,  to  discover  something  about  the  genes  that 
influence  sex.  The  X-chromosome  may  become  frag- 
mented in  such  a  way  as  to  reveal  the  location  of  the  spe- 
cial genes  relating  to  sex,  if  there  are  such.  The  other 
hope  rests  on  the  occurrence  of  a  gene  mutation.  If  other 


INTERSEXES  243 

genes  mutate  why  not  sex-genes,  if  there  are  such  specific 
genes  f 

There  is,  in  fact,  one  certain  case  of  the  occurrence  of 
an  intersex  that  arose  by  a  mutant  change  in  the  second 
chromosome  of  Drosophila.  Sturtevant,  who  has  studied 
this  case,  found  that  it  is  due  to  a  change  in  genes  in  the 
second  chromosome.  The  female  is  turned  into  an  inter- 
sex. Unfortunately,  the  evidence  does  not  show  whether 
or  not  a  single  gene  only  was  affected. 

It  is  apparent,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  while  we 
can  interpret  the  sex-determining  formulae  in  terms  of 
genes,  we  have  no  direct  evidence,  at  present,  that  there 
are  any  specific  genes  for  maleness  and  femaleness. 
There  may  be  such  genes,  or  it  may  be  that  sex  is  deter- 
mined by  a  quantitative  balance  between  all  the  genes. 
But  since  we  have  much  evidence  that  the  genes  differ 
amongst  themselves  very  greatly  as  to  the  kind  of  effects 
that  they  produce,  it  seems  probable,  I  think,  that  certain 
genes  may  be  more  influential  as  sex  differentials  than 
are  other  genes. 

Intersexes  in  the  Gypsy  Moth. 

Goldschmidt  has  carried  out  an  extensive  series  of  very 
interesting  and  important  experiments  in  the  production 
of  intersexes  in  racial  crosses  of  the  gypsy  moth. 

When  the  female  of  the  common  European  gypsy  moth 
(Fig.  140a,  b)  is  crossed  to  a  Japanese  male,  equal  num- 
bers of  male  and  female  offspring  are  produced.  When 
the  cross  is  made  the  other  way  the  sons  are  normal,  but 
the  daughters  are  intersexes  or  male-like  females  (Fig. 
140c,  d). 

Later  Goldschmidt  carried  out  an  elaborate  series  of 
crosses  between  the  European  species  and  several  Japa- 
nese species  and  also  between  different  races  of  Japanese 
varieties  or  species.  The  results  may  be  arranged  in  two 


244 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


series.  In  one  series  the  females  are  finally  all  changed 
over  into  males ;  in  the  other  series  the  males  are  changed 
over  into  females.  The  former  change  is  spoken  of  as 
female  intersexuality ;  the  latter,  as  male  intersexuality. 
Without  attempting  to  review  the  long  series  of  experi- 
ments from  which  the  evidence  has  come,  Goldschmidt 's 
theoretical  deductions  may  be  stated  as  briefly  as  possible. 


Fig.  140. 

a,  Male  and  b,  female  of  Lymantria  dispar;   c  and  d  two  inter- 
sexes. (After  Goldschmidt.) 


The  formula  he  uses  for  the  male  is  MM  and  for  the 
female  Mm ;  in  other  words,  the  WZ-ZZ  formula.  In  addi- 
tion, however,  Goldschmidt  adds  another  set  of  sex-de- 
termining factors  that  at  first  he  called  FF,  which  stand, 
in  a  way,  for  femaleness.  The  male  factors  are  supposed 
to  segregate,  as  do  Mendelian  factors  in  general,  but  the 
FF  factors  do  not  segregate  and  are  transmitted  only 
through  the  egg.  They  were  supposed  to  reside  in  the 
cytoplasm,  although  Goldschmidt  has  later  shown  an  in- 
clination to  locate  them  in  the  W-chromosome. 


INTERSEXES  245 

By  assigning  numerical  values  to  the  big  M's  (none  to 
the  m)  and  to  FF  he  has  built  up  a  scheme  to  show  how, 
in  the  cross  first  mentioned,  equal  numbers  of  males  and 
females  result  when  the  cross  is  made  in  one  direction, 
and  intersexes  when  it  is  made  in  the  opposite  direction. 

In  like  manner,  by  assigning  arbitrary  values  to  the 
letters  in  each  of  the  other  crosses  a  more  or  less  con- 
sistent account  can  be  given  of  the  results. 

The  unique  feature  of  these  formulas  of  Goldschmidt 
is  not,  in  my  opinion,  the  numerical  values  attached  to 
the  factors,  for  these  are  arbitrary,  but  the  statements 
that  the  results  can  be  explained  only  by  the  assumption 
that  the  factors  for  femaleness  are  in  the  cytoplasm,  or 
else  in  the  W-chromosome.  In  this  respect  his  view  runs 
counter  to  the  conclusions  to  which  we  have  come  from  a 
study  of  the  triploids  in  Drosophila,  where  the  opposing 
influences  are  in  the  X-chromosomes  and  in  the  auto- 
somes. 

Goldschmidt  has  recently  (1923)  reported  a  few  ex- 
ceptional cases  in  which  the  evidence  indicates,  he  be- 
lieves, that  the  female-producing  factors  lie  in  the  W- 
chromosome.  One  such  case  relates  to  certain  racial 
crosses,  where,  through  non-disjunction,  a  female  re- 
ceives a  W-chromosome  (Y  in  his  formula)  from  the 
father  and  the  Z  from  the  mother.  This  is  the  reverse  of 
the  ordinary  transmission  of  these  chromosomes.  The 
results  indicate  that  the  female  factors  follow  the  W. 
Logically,  the  evidence  appears  satisfactory,  but  on  the 
other  hand  both  Doncaster  and  Seiler  have  reported  a 
few  exceptional  female  moths  in  which  the  W-chromo- 
some is  at  times  absent.  These  moths  were  normal  females 
in  every  respect  and  bred  as  such.1  They  could  not  be 

i  There  are  56  chromosomes  present  in  the  female  and  in  the  male  of 
Abraxas.  That  one  of  those  in  the  female  is  a  W-chromosome  is  very  prob- 
able, from  Doncaster 's  discovery  of  a  strain  in  which  the  females  have  only 


246         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

females,  on  Goldschmidt  's  view,  if  the  female  factors  are 
in  the  W-chromosome. 

Before  leaving  Goldschmidt 's  theories  a  very  interest- 
ing suggestion  that  he  has  made  to  account  for  the  mosaic 
character  of  the  intersexes  must  be  mentioned.  The  inter- 
sex consists  of  parts  that  are  male  and  parts  that  are 
female — patches  of  each.  Now  Goldschmidt  suggests  that 
this  is  brought  about  by  a  difference  of  time  at  which  the 
male  and  the  female  parts  are  determined  in  the  embryo. 
Expressed  in  a  different  way,  one  may  say  that  in  certain 
combinations  of  the  sex  factors  of  the  racial  hybrid- 
intersexes,  the  individual  starts  as  a  male.  The  organs  of 
the  embryo  that  are  the  first  to  be  laid  down  are  therefore 
male-like.  In  later  stages,  the  female  factors  overtake 
and  surpass  the  male-producing  ones,  so  that  the  later 
stages  of  the  embryo  are  like  the  female.  Hence  the 
mosaic  characters  for  this  one  class  of  intersexes. 

Conversely,  in  the  reciprocal  type  the  embryo  starts 
under  the  influence  of  the  female  factors,  and  the  first 
parts  of  the  embryo  to  be  laid  down  are  female-like.  In 
later  stages  the  male-producing  factors  overtake  and  sur- 
pass the  female  tendencies,  and  male  organs  develop. 

This  is  his  theory  in  broad  outline.  When  examined  in 
detail  doubts  arise,  since  it  is  bound  up  with  assumptions 
concerning  enzymes  that  are  philosophical  rather  than 
chemical.  Moreover,  the  male-  and  the  female-producing 
factors  are  identified  as  the  genes  themselves.  Such  an 
interpretation  of  the  process  is  at  present  purely  specu- 
lative. Furthermore,  his  basal  assumption,  namely,  that 
whichever  enzyme  starts  first,  it  is  overtaken  later  by  the 

55  chromosomes.  The  absence  of  one  chromosome,  presumably  the  W,  pro- 
duces no  visible  changes  in  the  character  of  the  female.  That  the  missing 
chromosome  is  really  a  sex-chromosome  and  not  an  autosome  is  highly 
probable  from  the  fact  that  individuals  lacking  it  are  always  females. 


INTERSEXES  247 

other  competing  enzyme,  really  begs  the  entire  question, 
since  this  is  not  a  recognized  feature  of  enzyme  behavior. 

The  Free  Martin. 

It  has  long  been  known  that  when  twins  in  cattle  are 
born,  one  of  which  is  a  normal  male,  the  other  a  "fe- 
male," the  latter  is  usually  sterile.  It  is  known  as  a  free 
martin.  The  external  genitalia  of  the  free  martin  are 


Fig.  141. 

Two  embrvo  calves,  one  of  which  will  become  a  free  martin,  whose 

placentas  are  united.   (After  Lillie.) 


generally  female,  or  much  more  female-like  than  male, 
but  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  gonads  may  resem- 
ble testes.  It  was  shown  by  Tandler  and  Keller  (1911) 
that  the  twins  (one  of  which  is  a  free  martin)  come  from 
two  eggs,  and  Lillie  (1917)  has  fully  confirmed  this  fact. 
It  was  also  shown  by  Tandler  and  Keller  that  there  is 
present  a  vascular  connection  between  the  two  embryos 
in  utero  by  means  of  intra-chorionic  connections  (Fig. 
141).  Magnussen  (1918)  described  a  considerable  number 
of  free  martins  of  various  ages,  and  has  shown  by  his- 


248         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

tological  examination  that  well-developed  testicular-like 
organs  are  present  in  older  free  martins,  i.e.,  that  the 
characteristic  tubular  structure  of  the  testes,  including 
rete  tubules,  sexual  cords,  and  epididymis,  is  present. 
Chapin  (1917)  and  Willier  (1921)  have  confirmed  these 
observations,  and  the  latter  especially  has  given  a  de- 
tailed account  of  the  transformation  of  the  "indifferent 
stage"  of  the  ovary  into  a  testis-like  structure. 

Magnussen  (who  erroneously  believed  the  free  martin 
to  be  a  male)  found  no  spermatozoa  in  the  "testes." 
Their  absence  he  believed  to  be  due  to  the  retention  of 
the  testes  within  the  body  cavity  (cryptorchidism).  It  is 
known  that  in  those  mammals  in  which  the  testes  nor- 
mally descend  into  the  scrotal  sacs,  sperm-cells  are  absent 
when  the  testes  are  retained,  but  in  the  early  embryo 
germ-cells  appear  while  the  testes  are  still  within  the 
body  cavity.  In  the  free  martin  there  are,  according  to 
Willier,  no  primordial  germ-cells  present  in  the  so-called 
testis. 

Lillie's  conclusion  that  the  free  martin  is  a  female 
whose  gonads  have  been  transformed  into  a  testis-like 
organ  is  so  strongly  supported  by  this  evidence  that  it 
can  scarcely  be  questioned,  but  whether  the  effect  is  to  be 
referred  to  the  composition  of  the  blood  of  the  male,  or, 
as  he  thinks,  to  an  ovarian  hormone  in  the  blood  is  open 
to  question,  since  there  is  at  present  no  evidence  of  any 
specific  substance  produced  by  the  gonad  of  the  male 
embryo  that  produces  such  an  effect  on  the  development 
of  the  young  ovary.  Since  all  the  tissues  of  the  male 
embryo  have  the  male  chromosomal  composition,  the 
blood  may  likewise  have  a  different  chemical  constitution 
from  that  of  the  female,  and  affect,  in  consequence,  the 
development  of  the  gonad.  It  is  generally  recognized  that 
the  young  gonads  have  rudiments  of  both  ovary  and  testes 
present,  or,  as  Willier  puts  it,  "the  primordium  of  each 


INTERSEXES  249 

male  structure  developed  in  the  free  martin  gonad  is 
present  in  the  ovary  at  the  time  of  sex  differentiation. ' 
The  most  significant  fact  in  these  observations  is  the 
absence  of  male  germ-cells  in  the  free  martin.  The  influ- 
ence of  the  blood  of  the  male  co-twin  does  not  bring  about 
the  transformation  of  the  primordial  egg  cells  into 
sperm-producing  cells. 

Individuals  with  both  male  and  female  sexual  organs, 
even  including  ovaries  and  testes,  have  been  frequently 
recorded  in  mammals,  including  man.  These  were  for- 
merly called  hermaphrodites,  but  now  are  sometimes 
called  intersexes  or  sex  intergrades.  The  conditions  that 
give  rise  to  them  are  unknown.  Crew  reports  twenty-five 
cases  in  goats,  seven  in  pigs.2  These,  Crew  believes,  are 
modified  males,  since  testes  were  present  in  all  of  them. 
Baker  has  recently  reported  that  the  sex  intergrading 
pigs  are  surprisingly  common  on  some  of  the  islands 
[New  Hebrides]  ;  "one  finds  them  in  nearly  every  little 
village. ' '  This  tendency  to  sexual  abnormality  is  inherited 
through  the  male  in  some  cases  reported  by  him.  Baker 
regards  them  as  probably  transformed  females.3 

2  Pick  and  others  had  earlier  described  such  individuals,  two  in  horses,  one 
in  sheep,  one  in  cattle. 

3  Prange  has  described  four  hermaphroditic  goats  with  external  female 
genitalia,  but  with  undeveloped  mammae.  In  sex  behavior  and  in  coat  they 
were  male-like.  Internally  both  male  and  female  ducts  were  present,  but 
the  gonads  were  testes   (cryptorchid). 

Miss  Harman  has  described  a  "  gynandromorphous "  cat  that  had  a 
testis  on  the  left  side  and  an  ovotestis  on  the  right  side.  The  reproductive 
system  of  the  left  side  is  like  that  of  a  normal  male,  while  that  of  the  right 
side  is  like  that  of  the  female,  except  for  the  si2e,  etc.,  of  the  uterine  tube. 


CHAPTER  XVII 

SEX  REVERSALS 

IN  the  older  literature  dealing  with  sex-determina- 
tion the  idea  is  often  expressed  that  the  sex  of  the 
embryo  is  determined  by  the  environmental  condi- 
tion under  which  the  embryo  develops.  In  other  words, 
the  young  embryo  has  no  sex,  or  is  indifferent,  and  its 
fate  is  determined  by  its  environment.  It  is  unnecessary 
to  go  over  again  the  evidence  from  which  this  idea  origi- 
nated, since  practically  all  of  it  has  been  shown  to  be 
defective  in  one  way  or  another. 

In  recent  years  there  has  been  some  discussion  con- 
cerning the  reversal  of  sex,  which  means,  by  implication, 
that  a  male,  already  determined  as  such,  can  become 
changed  into  a  female,  and  vice  versa.  It  has  even  been 
suggested  that,  if  this  can  be  shown  to  occur,  the  genetic 
interpretation  of  sex  is  discredited  or  even  overthrown. 
It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  point  out  that  there  is  nothing 
in  the  theory  of  sex  as  determined  by  sex-chromosomes 
or  genes  contradictory  to  the  idea  that  other  influences 
may  so  affect  the  development  of  the  individual  as  to 
change  or  even  reverse  the  balance  normally  determined 
by  the  genes.  To  fail  to  appreciate  this  is  to  fail  entirely 
in  grasping  the  ideas  that  underlie  the  theory  of  the  gene ; 
for  this  theory  postulates  no  more  than  that  in  a  given 
environment  such  and  such  effects  are  expected  as  a 
result  of  the  genes  present. 

It  is  no  more  surprising  that  a  genetic  male  might,  in 
an  abnormal  environment,  turn  into  a  female,  or  vice 
versa,  than  that  an  individual  might  at  one  stage  of  its 


SEX  REVERSALS 


251 


development  function  as  a  male  and  at  a  later  stage  as 
a  female.  It  remains,  then,  entirely  a  question  of  fact 
whether  evidence  can  be  produced  proving  that  an  indi- 
vidual having  the  genetic  make-up  of  a  male  may,  under  a 


Fig.  142. 
Spider  crab,  a,  normal  male;   a',  abdomen  of  normal  male  from 
below;    b,  normal   female;    &',   abdomen   of   normal   female    from 
below;  c,  parasitized  male;  c' ,  abdomen  of  parasitized  male  from 
below.   (After  Geoffrey  Smith.) 


different  set  of  conditions,  become  a  functional  female, 
or  the  reverse.  Several  such  cases  have  been  reported  in 
recent  years  which  call  for  a  careful  and  unprejudiced 
scrutiny. 

Environmental  Changes. 

It  was  shown  by  Giard  in  1886  that  when  the  males  of 
crabs  are  parasitized  by  other  crustaceans,  such  as  Pelto- 


252         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

gaster  or  Sacculina,  they  then  develop  external  charac- 
ters like  those  of  a  female.  In  Fig.  142a,  an  adult  male 
crab  is  shown,  with  its  large  claws,  and  in  a'  the  under 
side  of  its  abdomen  with  the  copulatory  appendages,  and 
in  b  an  adult  female  is  shown,  with  her  small  claws,  and 
in  b'  the  under  side  of  her  abdomen  with  the  setose  bifur- 
cated egg-carrying  appendages.  In  c  is  shown  a  male 
that  has  been  infected  at  an  early  stage;  the  claws  are 
small,  resembling  those  of  the  female,  and  the  abdomen  is 
broad  and  female-like ;  in  c'  the  under  side  of  the  abdo- 
men of  the  infected  male  is  shown.  It  has  small  bifurcated 
appendages  like  those  of  the  female. 

The  parasite  sends  long  root-like  processes  into  the 
body  of  the  crab,  on  which  the  parasite  lives  by  absorbing 
the  juices,  and  may,  in  turn,  set  up  physiological  proc- 
esses in  the  crab  itself.  The  testes  of  the  crab  may  not 
at  first  be  affected,  but  later  may  degenerate.  In  one  case, 
at  least,  where  the  parasite  had  fallen  off,  Geoffrey  Smith 
found  large  germ-cells  developing  in  the  regenerating 
testis,  which  he  interpreted  as  eggs. 

Giard  left  open  the  possibility  as  to  whether  the  change 
in  the  crab  was  due  to  the  absorbtion  of  the  testis,  or 
whether  the  action  was  more  direct  on  the  host.  Geoffrey 
Smith  has  brought  forward  some  evidence  relating  to 
fat  in  the  blood,  and  certain  arguments  in  favor  of  the 
view  that  the  change  in  the  crab  is  due  to  the  physiologi- 
cal effects  on  the  host.  There  is  no  evidence  in  Crustacea 
that  the  destruction  of  the  gonads  affects  the  secondary 
sexual  characters. 

In  insects,  where  there  is  evidence  from  castration,  it 
has  been  shown  that  the  removal  of  the  testes  or  ovary 
does  not  alter  the  secondary  sexual  characters.  It  is  all 
the  more  significant,  therefore,  that  in  one  case  described 
by  Kornhauser,  in  one  of  the  bugs  (Thelia)  that  is  para- 
sitized by  a  hymenopter  (Aphelopus),  the  male  shows 


SEX  REVERSALS  253 

the  secondary  characters  of  the  female  or  at  least  fails 
to  develop  those  of  the  male. 

While  most  of  the  decapod  Crustacea  have  male  and 
female  sexes  there  are  a  few  cases  where  both  ovaries 
and  testes  are  present  in  one  or  in  both  sexes,  and  there 
are  a  few  cases  where  the  young  males  may  have  large 
egg-like  cells  in  the  testes.  Several  crayfish  have  also  been 
described  that  are  sex  intergrades,  but  no  complete  re- 
versals are  known.1 

In  Daphnians,  and  related  forms,  intersexual  individ- 
uals have  been  described  by  several  observers  (Kuttner, 
Agar,  Banta,  etc.),  but  no  complete  reversals  are  known. 
Sexton  and  Huxley  have  recently  described  some  indi- 
viduals of  Gammarus  that  are  called  female  intersexes, 
which,  ''on  reaching  maturity,  more  or  less  closely  resem- 
ble females  but  gradually  come  to  resemble  males  more 
and  more  nearly." 

Most  of  the  barnacles  are  hermaphroditic.  In  some 
genera  there  are,  in  addition  to  the  large  sessile  hermaph- 
rodites, minute  complemental  males,  and  there  are  a  few 
other  species  with  sessile  female  individuals  and  comple- 
mental males.  The  sessile  individuals  are  generally  sup- 
posed to  be  true  females,  but  Geoffrey  Smith  has  sug- 
gested that  if  a  free-swimming  larva  becomes  fixed  it 
grows  to  full  size,  passing  through  the  male  stage  to  be- 
come a  female,  but  if  a  free-swimming  larva  attaches 
itself  to  a  female  it  develops  no  further  than  the  male 
stage.  This  seems  to  mean  no  more  than  that  the  environ- 
ment determines  whether  a  potential  individual  develops 
into  a  female  or  being  arrested  in  its  development  be- 
comes a  male. 

The  last  case  is  similar  to  another  in  the  gephyrean 
worm,  Bonellia,  described  by  Baltzer.  If  a  free-swimming 

i  See  Faxon,  Hay,  Ortman,  Andrews,  Turner. 


254         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

larva  attaches  itself  to  the  proboscis  of  a  female  it  remains 
extremely  small  and  develops  testes,  but  if  it  settles  down 
by  itself  it  becomes  a  large  female  individual.  The  evi- 
dence does  not  positively  rule  out  the  possibility  that 
there  are  two  kinds  of  individuals  that  behave  in  one  or 
the  other  way,  but  Baltzer's  interpretation  seems  very 
probable. 

If  the  correct  interpretation  for  the  barnacles  and  for 
Bonellia  is  that  suggested  above,  it  means  that  sex  is 
determined  in  these  forms  by  environmental  conditions, 
which  means,  in  terms  of  genes,  that  all  the  individuals 
are  alike.2 

Changes  of  Sex  Associated  with  Age. 

Biologists  are  familiar  with  several  cases  both  in  ani- 
mals and  in  plants  where  an  individual  may  first  function 
as  a  male  and  later  as  a  female,  or  vice  versa.  But  the 
special  cases  in  which  sex  reversal  takes  place  are  those 
whose  sex  is  known  to  be  determined  in  the  first  place 
by  their  chromosomal  make-up,  yet  which  are  said,  in 
rare  cases,  to  turn  into  the  opposite  sex  without  changing 
their  chromosome  complex. 

The  hagfish,  Myxine,  according  to  Nansen  and  Cun- 
ningham, is  male  when  young,  and  later  becomes  female ; 
but  the  subsequent  observations  of  the  Schreiners  indi- 
cate that  while  the  young  Myxine  is  hermaphroditic — the 
anterior  end  of  the  gonad  being  a  testis,  the  posterior 
an  ovary — it  is  not  so  functionally.  Later  each  individual 
becomes  definitively  male  or  female. 

Breeders  of  the  aquarium  fish,  Xiphophorus  helleri, 
have  reported  at  various  times  that  females  change  into 
males,  but,  unfortunately,  as  yet  there  is  no  account  of 

2  According  to  Gould,  if  a  young  individual  of  Crepidula  plana  settles 
down  near  a  female  it  becomes  at  first  a  male  and  remains  so  permanently; 
but  if  it  settles  down  away  from  large  individuals  it  fails  to  develop  testes 
and  passes  later  into  a  female. 


SEX  REVERSALS  255 

the  sex  of  the  offspring  produced  by  these  transformed 
females,  although  ripe  sperm  has  been  found  in  one  case 
at  least.  Recently  Essenberg  has  studied  the  development 
of  the  gonads  in  the  young  of  this  fish.  At  birth  the  fish 
measures  8  mm.  and  the  gonads  are  in  an  "indifferent 
stage,"  containing  two  kinds  of  cells  of  peritoneal  origin. 
At  10  mm.  the  sexes  are  distinct;  in  the  females  the  pri- 
mordial germ-cells  gradually  change  into  young  eggs ;  in 
the  male  the  definitive  germ-cells  (sperm-cells)  come 
from  the  peritoneal  cells.  In  the  immature  condition,  be- 
tween 10  and  26  mm.  in  length,  Essenberg  records  74 
females  and  36  males,  counting  amongst  the  females  the 
retrogressive  types,  i.e.,  those  in  process  of  transforma- 
tion from  "females"  to  "males."  The  sex  ratio  of  adult 
fish,  taken  from  Bellamy's  records,  is  given  as  75  5  to 
25  9  .  The  change  does  not  appear  to  be  due  to  differential 
viability,  but  to  "sex  inversion."  This  occurs  most  com- 
monly in  fishes  from  16  to  27  mm.,  but  may  occur  in  later 
stages  also.  The  data  indicate,  then,  that  approximately 
half  of  the  "females"  become  males.  This  statement  does 
not  mean,  however,  that  functional  females  have  changed 
into  males,  but  that  half  of  the  young  "females"  are 
identified  as  such  by  the  presence  of  an  ovary,  which 
later  changes  into  a  testis.  Whether  functional  females 
may  later  become  functional  males,  as  breeders  believe, 
is  as  vet  not  so  well  established. 

A  change  of  functional  females  into  individuals  with 
the  secondary  male  characters  in  another  fish,  Glary- 
dichthys  janarius,  has  been  reported  by  Philippi,  and 
similar  changes  in  two  other  species  by  Herzenstein. 

A  curious  case  has  recently  been  described  by  Junker 
in  the  stonefly,  Perla  marginata.  The  young  males  (Fig. 
143)  pass  through  a  stage  in  which  an  ovary  is  present 
that  contains  rudimentary  eggs  (Fig.  143).  The  male  has 
an  X-  and  a  Y-chromosome  and  the  female  two  X's  (Fig. 


256 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


144).  The  ovary  in  the  male  disappears  when  the  insect 
becomes  adult,  and  the  testes  produce  normal  sperma- 
tozoa. In  this  instance,  then,  we  must  infer  that,  in  the 
young  stages  of  the  male,  the  absence  of  one  X  does  not 

Pe-pla  marginata 


ovary 


Fig.  143. 

Perla  marginata  to  the  left.  The  ovotestis  of  a  young  male  to  the 

right.    (After  Junker.) 


suffice  to  suppress  the  development  of  an  ovary,  but  when 
the  individual  becomes  adult  its  chromosome  composition 
asserts  itself. 

Sex  and  Sex  Reversal  in  Frogs. 
It  has  been  known  ever  since  the  work  of  Pfliiger  in 
1881-1882  that  sex  ratios  in  young  frogs  are  peculiar,  and 
that,  at  the  time  of  metamorphosis  of  the  tadpole  into 


SEX  REVERSALS  257 

the  frog,  the  gonads  often  appear  to  be  intermediate.  The 
classification  of  individuals  of  this  sort  as  male  or  female 
has  led  to  much  dispute.  In  recent  years  it  has  been 
shown  that  these  intermediate  forms  often  become  males, 
and  it  has  even  been  claimed  that  in  many  races  all  males 
pass  through  this  stage. 


y 
Spermatagonia  DiPloid  Male  ^ 


'<• 

«»*^ 

> 


it 

Oogonia 


st 


Is  Spermatocyte 


Fig.  144. 

Chromosome  groups,  spermatogonia  and  oogonia,  and  diploid  male 
egg  of  Perla.  (After  Junker.) 


The  experiments  of  Richard  Hertwig  have  shown  that 
by  delaying  the  fertilization  of  the  frog's  egg,  the  pro- 
portion of  males  is  greatly  increased,  and,  in  extreme 
cases,  all  individuals  become  males.  The  attempts  to  cor- 
relate these  cases  of  retarded  fertilization  with  chromo- 
somal alterations  have  not  been  successful. 


258         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Further  study  lias  shown  that  the  earlier  results  were 
obscured  by  failure  to  realize  that  different  races  of  frogs 
show  remarkable  differences  in  the  development  of  the 
testes  and  ovaries.  Witschi  has  shown  that  in  general 
there  are  two  kinds  or  races  of  the  European  grass  frog, 
Rana  temporaria.  In  one  of  these  the  testes  and  ovaries 
differentiate  directly  from  the  early  gonad.  Such  races 
are  found  in  the  mountains  and  in  the  far  North.  In  the 
other  races,  living  in  the  valleys  and  in  the  middle  of 
Europe,  the  gonad  in  those  individuals  that  will  become 
males  passes  through  an  intermediate  stage  in  which 
large  cells  are  present  in  its  interior  which  he  regards 
as  immature  eggs.  These  are  replaced  later  by  a  new 
set  of  germ-cells  that  become  the  definitive  sperm.  These 
races  are  called  undifferentiated  races. 

Swingle  also  finds  in  the  American  bullfrog  two  types 
or  races,  speaking  broadly,  in  one  of  which  the  testes  and 
the  ovaries  differentiate  early  from  the  progonad.  In  the 
other  races  the  differentiation  is  delayed.  In  the  female 
of  these  races  the  larger  cells  of  the  progonad  become 
later  the  definitive  eggs,  but  in  the  male  the  progonad 
persists  for  some  time  after  the  female  has  differentiated. 
Its  large  cells  may  differentiate  into  spermatozoa.  These 
are,  however,  later  absorbed  for  the  most  part,  but  some 
of  those  that  remain  undifferentiated  become  the  defini- 
tive sperm-cells.  Swingle  does  not  interpret  the  large 
cells  in  the  male  progonad  as  eggs,  but  as  male  sperma- 
tocytes. He  shows  that  these  cells  pass  through  an  abor- 
tive maturation  division  and  then,  for  the  most  part, 
break  down.  In  other  words,  the  male  does  not  pass 
through  a  female  stage,  but  makes,  as  it  were,  an  abortive 
attempt  to  form  sperm  before  its  second  and  later  differ- 
entiation takes  place. 

Whatever  interpretation  is  placed  on  these  large  cells 
in  the  progonad,  the  important  point  for  present  con- 


SEX  REVERSALS  259 

sideration  is  whether  external  or  internal  conditions  may 
affect  the  progonad  of  the  prospective  female  in  such  a 
way  that  it  produces  later  functional  sperm-cells.  "Wit- 
schi's  evidence  is  in  favor  of  such  a  transformation  in 
those  races  that  are  indifferent. 

In  the  following  table  (Table  III)  Witschi  has  brought 
together  the  sex  ratios  reported  by  different  observers 
from  different  parts  of  Germany  and  Switzerland.  In  the 
right-hand  column  the  per  cent  of  females  is  given;  50 
per  cent  means  a  1  to  1  ratio.  It  will  be  seen  that  in  the 
first  two  groups  (Group  I  and  II)  the  sex  ratio  is  ap- 
proximately 1  to  1,  while  in  the  last  three  groups  (III, 
IV,  V)  the  proportion  of  females  is  higher,  culminating 
in  those  regions  where  all  the  individuals  from  a  pair 
may  be  females  (100  per  cent).  These  belong  to  the  indif- 
ferent races. 

The  most  important  facts  discovered  by  Witschi  relate 
to  the  inheritance  of  these  differences  shown  by  the  dif- 
ferentiated and  undifferentiated  races.  He  made  the  fol- 
lowing crosses  between  females  and  males  of  the  differ- 
ent races. 

(1)  9  undif.by  $  differ.=69  undif.  9  +  545 
(2)9  dif.      by  S  undif.  =34  9  +  52  S 

In  (1)  the  daughters  were  all  undifferentiated;  in  (2)  the 
daughters  differentiated  early.  He  draws  the  conclusion 
that  the  eggs  of  a  differentiated  race  are  more  strongly 
female-determining  than  the  eggs  of  an  undifferentiated 
race. 

In  another  experiment  he  crossed  undifferentiated 
races  whose  " female  determining  power"  (Kraft)  was 
greater  or  less,  and  concluded  that  weak  eggs  by  strong 
determining  sperm  gave  the  same  result  as  strong  eggs 
by  weak  sperm.  ' l  Eggs  and  female  determining  sperm  of 
the  same  type  have  the  same  genetic  constitution. ' ' 


260 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


TABLE  III 

Sex  Ratios  in  Different  Local  Races  of  the  Grass  Frog  Shortly 
after  Metamorphosis  (at  most  two  months) 

Those  with  asterisk  were  caught  in  the  open. 


CrTOU}) 

Locality 

Author 

X  timber 

of 
Animals 

Examined 

Percent  of 
Females 

I 

Ursprungtal 

(Bayr.  Alpen)  .     . 
Sertigtal,  Davos 

(Ratisehe  Alpen)  . 
Spitalboden   (Grim- 

sel,  Berneralpen)  . 

Konigsberg    . 

Witschi  (1914  b)      . 

Witschi  (1923  b)      . 

Witschi      .     .     . 
Witschi      .... 

Pfliiger  (1882)     .     j 

490 
814 

46* 

272 
370 
500* 

50 

50 

52 

44.5 
51.5 
53 

II 

Elsass  (Mm)  .     .     . 

Witschi      .... 
Witschi      .... 
Witschi      .... 
v.  Griesheim  und    J 
Pfliiger  (1881-82)    \ 
v.  Griesheim  (1881) 

424 

471 

290 

806 

668* 

245* 

405 

51 

52 

43 

64 

64 

62.5 

59 

Rostock     .... 

Witschi      .... 

in 

Pfliiger  (1882)     .     . 

58 

78 

rv 

Lochhausen 

(Munchen)  .     .     . 
Dorfen  (Munchen)  . 

Utrecht      .... 

Witschi  (1914  b)      . 
Schmitt  (1908)    .     . 

Pfliiger  (1882)     .     j 

221 
925* 

780 
459* 

83 
85 
87 

87 

V 

Freiburg  (in  Baden) 
Breslau      .... 
Breslau      .... 

Elsass  (r)  .     .     .     . 

Irschenhausen  ( Isar- 

tal  siidl.  Munchen) 

Witschi  (1923  a)      . 
Born  (1881)    .     .     . 
Witschi      .... 
Witschi     .... 

Witschi  (1914)    .     . 

276 
1,272 
213 
237 
241 

83 

95 

99 

100 

100 

Total  .... 

10,483 

The  chromosome  composition  of  frogs  has  been  in  dis- 
pute for  several  years,  not  only  as  to  the  number  of  chro- 
mosomes present,  but  as  to  whether  the  male  or  the  female 
is  digametic.  The  most  probable  number  of  chromosomes 
for  several  species  seems  to  be  26  (n=13).  Other  num- 


SEX  REVERSALS  261 

bers  (24,  25,  28)  have,  however,  been  reported.  According 
to  the  most  recent  account,  that  of  Witschi,  Rana  tem- 
poraria  has  26  chromosomes,  including  a  slightly  un- 


%>  1*  ffo  tf     w* 


# 


d 

Fig.  145. 
Chromosome  groups  of  the  frog  Eana  temporaria.  a,  Diploid  male 
group,  b  and  b'  anaphase  plates  of  first  spermatocyte  division  each 
showing  thirteen  chromosomes,  c  and  c'  ditto,  d  division  of  XY- 
chromosome  of  first  spermatocyte,  e,  separation  of  X  and  Y  at 
second  spermatocyte  division.   (After  Witschi.) 


equal  XY  pair  in  the  male  (Fig.  145).  If  this  is  confirmed, 
the  female  is  XX  (homogametic)  and  the  male  XY  (het- 
erogametic). 

Pniiger  (1882),  Richard  Hertwig  (1905),  and  later 
Kuschakewitsch  (1910)  have  shown  that  overripe  eggs 
give  an  increased  percentage  of  males.  In  so  far  as  these 


262         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

experiments  were  not  made  with  the  same  male  for  the 
same  sets  of  eggs,  the  results  are  doubtful.  Hertwig  him- 
self points  out  there  are  many  resemblances  between  the 
effect  of  cold  and  that  of  overripening.  Many  embryos 
are  deformed.  Witschi  has  confirmed  Hertwig 's  results 
(with  the  Irschenhausen  race).  Eggs  estimated  to  be  80 
to  100  hours  overripe  gave  74  $ ,  21  2  ,  20  indifferent  tad- 
poles.3 

Oscar  Hertwig  compared  the  sex  ratio  of  normal  and 
delayed  eggs  (67  hours'  interval)  with  the  following  re- 
sults. Larvae  49  days  old  (just  before  metamorphosis) 
that  came  from  normal  fertilization  gave  46  indiffer- 
ent 5  ;  those  from  'delayed  fertilization,  38  indifferent  2 
and  39  $ .  The  normal  frogs  about  150  days  old  were 
differentiated  females,  indifferent  females  as  to  gonads, 
and  males  (numbers  not  given),  and  from  the  delayed 
eggs  45  indifferent  2  and  313  $ .  Yearling  frogs  gave 
6  2  and  1  $  (normal  fertilization)  and  1  2  and  7  $  (de- 
layed fertilization).  The  overripeness  here  would  seem 
to  hasten  the  male  differentiation  and  in  the  second  place 
transform  the  indifferent  individuals  (here  ranked  undif- 
ferentiated females)  into  males. 

The  interpretation  of  the  results  produced  by  over- 
ripening  the  eggs  is  still  very  obscure.  Taken  at  their 
face  value  they  seem  to  show  that  individuals  that  would 
normally  become  females  may  become  males.  As  yet  no 
genetic  tests  have  been  made  of  the  sex-determining 
properties  of  the  spermatozoa  of  individuals  obtained  in 
this  way.  Theoretically,  these  should  be  homogametic.  It 
seems  improbable  that  such  individuals  could  live  and 
function  under  natural  conditions,  for,  although  over- 
ripeness  must  not  infrequently  occur,  normal  males  giv- 
ing 100  per  cent  females  are  practically  unknown.  Wit- 

3  There  was  20  per  cent  mortality  in  the  tadpoles  and  35  per  cent  in  the 
young  frogs. 


SEX  REVERSALS  263 

schi  has  pointed  out  that  the  overripe  eggs  undergo  an 
unusual  type  of  cleavage,  and  that  a  few  embryos  that  he 
examined  show  internal  defects,  but  the  relation  of  these 
defects  to  the  transformation  of  females  into  males  is  not 
apparent. 

The  possibility  of  transforming  individuals  having  an 
undifferentiated  or  juvenile  hermaphroditic  gonad  (or 
progonad)  into  females  by  external  agencies  is  furnished 
by  the  following  evidence  from  Witschi's  experiments 
(1914-1915). 

Tadpoles  of  the  Ursprungtal  race,  that  is,  probably  a 
differentiated  race,  gave,  at  10°  C,  23  males  and  44  fe- 
males; at  15°  C,  1315   and  140  5  ;  and  at  21°  C,  115  $ 
and  104  9 .  The  sex  of  the  tadpoles  of  this  race  is  appar- 
ently not  affected  by  temperature. 

On  the  other  hand,  tadpoles  of  the  Irschenhausen  race 
reared  at  20°  C.  gave  241  undifferentiated  females,  and  6 
lots  reared  at  10°  C.  gave  25  $  and  438  9 .  From  this  re- 
sult Witschi  concludes  that  cold  is  a  male  determining 
factor,  but  it  should  not  be  overlooked  that  many  of  these 
so-called  females  would  later  develop  into  male  frogs. 
In  a  later  account  of  these  experiments  he  states  that 
"cold  changes  the  males  into  protogynous  juvenile  her- 
maphrodites as  is  in  general  normal  for  undifferentiated 
races. ' ' 

It  seems  questionable,  therefore,  whether  there  is  any- 
thing more  here  than  a  retardation  of  the  definitive  male 
condition. 

In  so  far  as  it  is  possible  to  reach  a  provisional  conclu- 
sion from  the  evidence  available  at  present,  it  appears  that 
in  the  undifferentiated  races  the  germ-cells,  that  are  pres- 
ent in  half  the  individuals  that  would  normally  become 
females,  may  be  changed  over  into  sperm-cells,  or  else 
be  replaced  by  cells  from  a  different  source  that,  in  turn, 
become  sperm-cells.  In  other  words,  the  balance  of  the 


264 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


genes  that  ordinarily  suffices  in  frogs  to  give  males  or 
females  may  be  "overridden"  by  environmental  factors 
and  testes  may  develop  in  an  individual  whose  internal 
chromosomal  balance  would  produce  a  female.  Stated  in 
another  way,  this  may  mean  that  each  frog  is  capable  of 
developing  both  testes  and  ovary ;  that  under  normal  cir- 
cumstances the  XX  individual  develops  only  the  ovary 


a  b  c 

Fig.  146. 
Three  hermaphroditic  frogs.  (After  Crew  and  Witschi.) 


and  the  XY  individual  a  testis,  but  under  exceptional  con- 
ditions a  female  of  the  XX  type  may  develop  a  testis. 
The  possibility  of  the  reciprocal  change  has  not  been 
demonstrated. 

There  are  many  records  of  "hermaphrodite"  adult 
frogs  (Fig.  146).  Crew  has  listed  40  recent  cases.  Whether 
these  hermaphrodites  are  related  in  any  way  to  the  in- 
versions just  described  is  unknown.  It  is  significant  per- 
haps that  a  few  individual  hermaphrodites  have  also  been 
reported  from  those  experiments.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
possible  that  some  of  the  hermaphrodites  have  a  different 
origin.  There  is  not  much  evidence  that  they  can  be  ex- 
plained as  gynandromorphs  or  mosaics  due  to  elimination 


SEX  REVERSALS  265 

of  the  sex-chromosomes,  because  only  very  rarely  is  there 
indication  of  asymmetry  of  the  accessory  organs  outside 
the  gonads,  and  the  gonad  tissue  is  frequently  irregu- 
larly distributed.  Furthermore,  if  the  evidence  that  the 
sperm  and  eggs  of  hermaphrodites  are  both  homogametic 
is  valid,  the  ground  of  a  possible  explanation  due  to  chro- 
mosome elimination  is  removed. 

From  a  hermaphrodite  (Hh)  Witschi  was  able  to  ob- 
tain ripe  sperm  and  eggs.  He  tested  these  with  sperm 
and  eggs  from  a  differentiated  race  with  the  following 
results 

(1)  Eggs  dif.  9  by  sperm  from  herm.=  $  2 

(2)  Eggs  herm.  by  sperm  from  dif.   3  =  50%9  +  50%3 

The  eggs  of  the  hermaphrodite  were  also  fertilized  by 
sperm  of  the  same  individual  and  gave  45  $  and  one  her- 
maphrodite, thus 

(3)  Eggs  herm.  by  sperm  from  herm.=45  $  -fl  herm. 

These  results  can  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  original 
hermaphroditic  female  was  XX.  Each  ripe  egg  carried 
one  X.  Likewise  each  functional  sperm  must  also  have 
carried  one  X.  There  seems  to  be  no  escape  from  one  or 
the  other  conclusion,  either  that  every  sperm  carries  an 
X,  or  else  half  carry  X,  half  no  X,  but  the  latter  die  in  the 
female  (i.e.,  never  become  functional).4 

4  Crew  (1921)  has  also  reported  the  result  of  successful  fertilization  of 
the  eggs  of  a  hermaphrodite  (Fig.  14)  with  its  own  sperm.  In  each  tadpole 
the  development  of  the  gonad  was  direct.  All  the  offspring  (774)  that  were 
sufficiently  developed  to  determine  the  sex  were  female.  The  mother  may  be 
regarded  as  a  true  XX  female  that  produced  eggs  and  sperm,  each  with  an 
X-chromosome. 

It  is  conceivable,  but  perhaps  not  probable,  that  the  testis  in  the  her- 
maphroditic females  is  due  to  elimination  of  one  of  the  X-chromosomes  in  a 
somatic  division,  and  that  the  no  X-sperm  die.  (See  above.) 


266 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


The  Transformation  of  Bidder's  Organ  of  the 
Male  Toad  into  an  Ovary. 

The  anterior  part  of  the  testis  of  the  male  toad  is  com- 
posed of  rounded  cells  that  resemble  young  egg-cells 


Fig.  147. 

Bidder's  organ  at  the  anterior  end  of  the  testis  of  a  half -grown 
male  of  a  California  species  of  Bufo.  The  lobes  of  the  fat  bodies 
lie  at  the  sides,  the  kidney  beneath.  The  testes  are  indicated  by  the 
branching  blood  vessels  in  their  walls,  the  Bidder's  organs  lie  in 
front  of  the  testes  each  consisting  of  several  lobes. 


(Fig.  147).  It  is  conspicuous  in  the  young  toad  even  be- 
fore the  germ-cells  in  the  more  posterior  part  or  testis 
proper  have  differentiated.  The  anterior  part  is  called 
Bidder's  organ  and  has  for  many  years  excited  the  inter- 


SEX  REVERSALS 


267 


est  of  zoologists,  who  have  proposed  many  views  as  to  its 
possible  functions.  The  most  frequent  interpretation  is 
that  the  Bidder's  organ  is  an  ovary  and  the  resemblance 
of  its  cells  to  eggs  lends  strong  support  to  this  interpre- 
tation; but  the  presence  of  a  Bidder's  organ  at  the  ante- 


FiG.  148. 
Toad  in  third  year  from  which  the  testes  have  been  removed  at 
an  early  stage.  Bidder's  organ  has  developed  into  an  ovary.  In  the 
figure   (to  the  right)   the  ovary  is  turned  to  one  side  in  order  to 
show  the  enlarged  oviduct.    (After  Harms.) 


rior  end  of  the  true  ovary  in  the  young  female  is  difficult 
to  bring  into  accord  with  the  view  that  in  the  male  the 
same  organ  is  an  ovary,  for,  if  so,  the  female  has  a  rudi- 
mentary or  perhaps  ancestral  rudimentary  ovary  in 
front,  and  a  functional  one  behind  it. 

The  recent  experimental  work  of  Harms,  and  especially 
that  of  Miss  K.  Ponse,  has  shown  that  when  the  testes  are 
completely  removed  from  a  young  toad,  the  organ  of  Bid- 
der develops  after  two  or  three  years  into  an  ovary  with 


268         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

eggs  (Fig.  148).  The  eggs  have  been  deposited  and 
fertilized  and  observed  to  develop.  There  can  be  here 
no  doubt  but  that  a  female  has  arisen  after  removal 
of  the  testes,  but  whether  the  individual  operated  upon 
is  to  be  called  a  male  or  an  hermaphrodite  is  perhaps  a 
question  of  definition.  Personally,  I  should  call  the  above 
toad  a  male,  and  interpret  the  result  to  mean  that  a  male 
has  been  transformed  into  a  female  by  removal  of  the 
testes.  It  seems  to  me  a  matter  of  secondary  importance 
that  the  male  toad  carries  an  organ  whose  cells  are  poten- 
tially capable  of  developing  into  egg-cells,  for,  in  general, 
even  when  sex  is  determined  by  a  chromosomal  mecha- 
nism, there  is  no  implication  that  under  changed  condi- 
tions undifferentiated  cells  situated  in  that  part  of  the 
body  where  the  gonads  develop  might  not  become  egg- 
cells  even  with  the  chromosomal  complex  that  gives  rise 
to  a  male  under  other  circumstances.  In  terms  of  genes, 
this  means  that  in  the  toad  the  balance  of  the  genes  is 
such  that  under  the  normal  conditions  of  development 
one  part  of  the  gonad  (the  anterior  end)  begins  to  de- 
velop into  an  ovary,  while  another  part  (the  posterior 
end)  begins  to  develop  into  a  testis.  The  latter  overtakes 
the  former  as  development  proceeds  and  holds  its  further 
development  in  check.  If  the  testicular  end  is  removed, 
however,  this  control  is  lost,  and  the  cells  of  Bidder's 
organ  proceed  to  develop  into  functional  eggs.  If  this 
interpretation  is  correct  and  if  a  sex-chromosomal  mecha- 
nism is  present  in  toads  (which  has  not  as  yet  been 
certainly  demonstrated),  the  mature  eggs  that  come  from 
Bidder's  organ  should  have  the  same  chromosomal  com- 
plexes (possibly  an  X-  or  a  Y-chromosome  each)  as  have 
the  ripe  sperm  of  the  male.  Crossed  to  a  normal  male  the 
offspring  would  then  be  1  XX+2  XY+1  YY.  If  the  YY 
embryo  fails  to  develop  there  should  be  twice  as  many 
sons  as  daughters. 


SEX  REVERSALS  269 

Champy  lias  described  a  case  of  "total  sexual  inver- 
sion" in  Triton  alpestris.  A  male  triton  that  had  func- 
tioned as  a  fertile  male  was  subsequently  starved.  Under 
these  circumstances  the  normal  renewal  of  the  sperm 
does  not  take  place,  but  the  animal  remains  in  a  sort  of 
"neutral  condition,''  characterized  by  the  presence  in  the 
testis  of  primitive  germ-cells.  It  remains  in  this  condition 
throughout  the  winter.  Two  male  tritons  that  had  been 
treated  in  this  way,  underwent,  after  they  had  been  in- 
tensively renourished,  a  change  in  color  from  male  to 
female.  One  of  these  examined  several  months  later  fur- 
nished evidence  that  Champy  interprets  as  sex  inversion. 
Since  this  case  has  been  cited  recently  as  furnishing  com- 
plete evidence  of  sex  inversion,  it  may  be  worth  while  to 
give  a  somewhat  detailed  statement  as  to  what  Champy 
really  records.  In  place  of  the  ovaries  he  found  an  elon- 
gated organ  resembling  somewhat  a  young  ovary.  When 
sectioned  it  was  found  to  contain  young  egg-like  cells 
("ovocytes")  resembling  those  of  a  young  triton  at  the 
stage  of  metamorphosis.  An  oviduct  was  also  apparent, 
recognizable    by    its    white    color    and    sinuous    course. 
Champy  concludes  we  have  here  an  adult  animal  with 
the  ovary  of  a  young  female.  The  evidence  seems  to  indi- 
cate that  the  treatment  led  to  the  absorption  of  the  sper- 
matocytes and  sperm.  It  does  not  indicate  clearly  whether 
the  new  cells  that  come  to  replace  them  are  enlarged 
spermatogonia  or  primitive  germ-cells  or  young  ova.  In 
the  light  of  other  evidence  in  the  Amphibia  (Witschi, 
Harms,  Ponse)  it  may  seem  not  improbable  that  these 
cells  are  in  reality  young  egg-cells  and  that  a  partial 
inversion  has  taken  place. 

Sex  Reversal  in  Miastor. 

In  flies  belonging  to  the  genera  Miastor  and  Oligarces 
there  is  a  generation  consisting  of  sexual  winged  males 


270         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

and  females  that  appear  at  the  end  of  a  long  succession 
of  generations  of  maggots  reproducing  by  partheno- 
genesis. 

The  eggs  laid  by  the  winged  females  are  supposed  to 
be  fertilized  by  sperm  from  the  winged  males  and  develop 
as  far  as  the  maggot  (larval)  stage.  These  maggots,  with- 
out passing  on  to  the  adult  stage,  produce  eggs  that  de- 
velop by  parthenogenesis.  From  these  eggs  a  new  genera- 
tion of  maggots  arises  that  repeats  the  process.  This 
continues  throughout  the  year,  the  maggots  living  under 
the  bark  of  dead  trees,  and  in  some  species  on  mushrooms. 
In  the  spring  or  summer,  winged  males  and  females 
appear  from  eggs  laid  by  the  last  generation  of  maggots. 
The  appearance  of  the  winged  forms  seems  to  be  con- 
nected with  some  change  in  the  environment.  Recently 
Harris  has  shown  that  when  the  cultures  become  crowded, 
owing  to  the  presence  of  many  maggots,  the  adult  insects 
appear  if  suitable  conditions  prevail,  while  if  the  mag- 
gots are  reared  in  isolation,  or  in  small  numbers,  they 
continue  to  reproduce  in  the  larval  stages  (paedogene- 
sis).  The  effective  factors  in  crowding  are  not  known. 
If  young  from  a  single  individual  maggot  are  reared 
together,  and  if  their  offspring  in  turn  are  kept  in  the 
same  culture,  etc.,  it  has  been  found  by  Harris  that  when 
the  adult  flies  appear  they  are  of  one  sex  in  each  such 
culture.  This  seems  to  mean  that  each  individual  maggot 
is  either  male  or  female  in  genetic  constitution,  and  re- 
produces by  parthenogenesis  the  same  sex.  If  this  is  the 
correct  conclusion,  it  follows  that  both  the  male-deter- 
mined maggots  and  the  female-determined  maggots  pro- 
duce functional  eggs.  As  yet  we  have  no  evidence  relating 
to  the  distribution  of  the  sex-chromosomes  in  these  flies. 

There  is,  here,  an  example  of  male-determined  indi- 
viduals producing  parthenogenetic  eggs  at  one  phase  of 
the  life  cycle  and  spermatozoa  at  another  phase. 


SEX  REVERSALS  271 

Sex  Reversal  in  Birds. 

It  has  long  been  known  that  old  hens,  and  hens  with 
ovarian  tumors,  may  develop  the  secondary  plumage  of 
the  male,  and.  that  they  sometimes  show  characteristic 
male  behavior.  It  was  also  known  (Goodale)  that  after 
the  complete  removal  of  the  single  left  ovary  of  a  young 
chick,  the  bird,  when  mature,  develops  the  secondary 
sexual  characters  of  the  male  sex.  Both  effects  may  be 
interpreted  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  normal  ovary  of 
the  hen  produces  some  substance  that  suppresses  the  full 
development  of  the  plumage.  When  the  ovary  is  diseased 
or  removed  the  hen  then  develops  the  full  possibilities  of 
her  genetic  composition  as  seen  ordinarily  only  in  the 
male. 

It  is  also  known  that  hermaphroditic  fowls  occur  in 
which  both  ovaries  and  testes  may  be  present,  although 
neither,  as  a  rule,  is  fully  developed,  and  it  may  or  may 
not  be  significant  that  in  most  of  these  cases  the  gonad 
contains  a  tumor.  There  is  some  doubt  here  whether  the 
hermaphroditic  condition  came  first,  and  the  tumor  later, 
or,  the  ovary  of  a  normal  hen  becoming  tumorous,  a  testis 
began  later  to  develop.  In  none  of  these  cases  is  there 
evidence  of  sex  reversal  in  the  sense  that  the  bird  func- 
tioned at  one  time  as  a  female  and  later  as  a  male.  One 
case  has,  however,  been  recently  reported  by  Crew  (1923) 
in  which  a  hen  is  said  to  have  laid  eggs  and  reared  chicks 
(from  them?)  and  later  to  have  become  a  functional  male 
that  fertilized  two  eggs  of  a  normal  hen.  Concerning  the 
second  part  of  the  story  there  seems  to  be  no  question, 
since  the  results  were  obtained  under  controlled  condi- 
tions, but  the  previous  history  of  this  hen  is  not  perhaps 
above  suspicion,  since  it  was  apparently  an  unrecorded 
member  of  a  small  flock  and  no  evidence  by  direct  obser- 
vation or  by  trap  nesting  is  given  that  she  was  known  to 


272         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

lay  eggs.  When  killed  the  bird  was  found  to  have  exten- 
sive tumor  growths  in  the  situation  of  the  ovary.  ' '  Incor- 
porated in  the  dorsal  aspect  of  this  mass,  there  was  a 
structure  exactly  resembling  a  testis,  while  another,  simi- 
lar in  appearance,  was  situated  in  like  position  on  the 
other  side  of  the  body."  Every  stage  of  spermatogenesis 
was  present  in  the  testes.  On  the  left  side  "a  thin  straight 
oviduct  could  be  identified  having  a  diameter  of  3  mm. 
in  its  widest  part  near  the  cloaca. ' ' 

A  second  case  has  been  recorded  by  Riddle.  A  ring 
dove  functioned  first  as  a  female,  laying  a  series  of  eggs. 
She  ceased  later  to  lay  eggs,  and  frequently  acted  as  a 
male  in  courtship  and  copulation.  Many  months  later  she 
died  with  very  advanced  tuberculosis.  She  was  opened 
and  under  misapprehension  that  she  was  her  mate  (a 
male  that  had  died  YIV^  months  earlier)  was  recorded  as 
a  male.  Later,  when  her  number  and  record  were  deter- 
mined, it  was  found  that  she  had  been  the  female,  but  the 
"testes"  had  been  thrown  away.  There  is  here  no  record 
that  the  bodies  identified  as  testes  contained  sperm. 

The  Effect  of  Ovariotomy  in  Birds. 

The  complete  removal  of  the  single  left  ovary  of  young 
chicks  is  a  rather  difficult  operation.  In  1916  Goodale  car- 
ried out  several  successful  operations  of  this  kind.  The 
birds  developed  the  full  plumage  of  the  male.  Goodale 
also  reported  the  presence  on  the  right  side  of  a  rounded 
body  with  tubules  which  he  compared  with  early  ne- 
phrogenous tissue.  Benoit  has  also  recently  described  the 
effect  of  ovariotomy  on  young  birds.  In  general,  the  effect 
on  the  plumage,  comb,  and  spurs  is  the  same  as  in  Good- 
ale's  birds,  but  in  addition  he  describes  the  development 
of  a  testis  or  testis-like  organ  in  the  situs  of  the  rudimen- 
tary right  "ovary,"  and  sometimes  a  similar  organ  in 
the  place  of  the  left  ovary  removed.  In  one  case  germ- 


SEX  REVERSALS  273 

cells  in  all  stages  of  ripening  and  even  spermatozoa 
(pycnotic)  were  found.  This  single  case  calls  for  care- 
ful scrutiny,  since  it  is,  so  far,  the  only  recorded  case  of 
the  presence  in  the  testis-like  organs  of  spermatozoa,  or 
even  distinctive  germ-cells.  The  left  ovary  had  been  re- 
moved from  a  bird  twenty-six  days  after  hatching.  At  six 
months  its  comb  was  red,  turgid,  stood  upright,  and  was 
as  large  as  that  of  a  cock.  An  organ  "resembling  a  testis 
had  developed  on  the  right  side."  Histologically  it  was 
found  to  contain  seminiferous  tubules  containing  all 
stages  of  spermatogenesis.  The  nuclei  of  the  spermatids 
were  pycnotic  and  the  spermatozoa,  few  in  number,  ap- 
peared abnormal.  The  efferent  canal  of  the  male  extended 
from  this  body  to  the  cloaca.  There  was  also  present  at 
the  base  of  the  testis  a  tubular  structure  resembling  the 
epididymis  of  the  young  cock.  The  presence  of  sperma- 
tozoa in  the  testis-like  organ  is  the  only  record  of  this 
kind.  In  the  other  birds  operated  on  by  Benoit,  in  which 
testis-like  bodies  developed,  no  germ-cells  were  found. 
May  it  not  be  possible  that  in  the  above  case  a  mistake 
had  been  made  and  that  the  bird  was  in  reality  a  male? 
It  should  be  added  that  Benoit  found,  after  removing  its 
testis,  the  comb  shrank  and  the  bird  came  to  resemble  a 
capon.  In  other  cases,  no  such  decrease  of  the  comb  has 
been  reported.  Still,  it  is  just  possible  that  the  presence 
of  testis-like  organs  that  were  present  with  sperm  in 
them  may  be  held  responsible  for  the  full  development 
of  the  comb  and  wattles.  Another  bird,  ovariotomized  at 
four  days  after  hatching,  described  by  Benoit,  showed 
at  four  months  an  unusual  organ.  An  examination  re- 
vealed, on  the  right  side,  a  testicle-like  organ.  No  report 
of  its  contents  is  made. 

Benoit  examined  the  histological  structure  of  the  right 
rudimentarv  ovary  of  a  voung  normal  female.  He  de- 
scribes  it  as  identical  with  an  epididymis  of  a  young  male 


274         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

having  efferent  ciliated  canals  and  "rete  testis."  He  con- 
cluded that  the  right  gonad  of  birds  is  not  a  rudimentary 
ovary,  but  a  right  rudimentary  testis  that  enlarges  when 
the  left  ovarv  is  removed  to  become  a  testis.  The  evidence 
does  not,  I  think,  necessitate  this  conclusion,  for  it  is 
known  that  in  the  early  stage  of  development  of  the 
reproductive  organs  in  vertebrates,  the  essential  acces- 
sory organs  of  the  male  and  the  female  are  present  in 
both  sexes.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  upon  interfer- 
ence with  the  normal  process  of  development  (removal 
of  the  left  ovary)  these  rudimentary  organs  may  begin 
to  develop  and  produce  a  testis-like  structure,  which,  in 
most  cases  so  far  reported,  does  not  contain  sperm-cells. 
The  occurrence  of  globular  organs  (reported  by  Goodale 
and  Domm)  on  the  left  side  also  would  seem  to  support 
this  view,  rather  than  that  advanced  by  Benoit. 

A  preliminary  report  of  the  results  of  ovariotomy  in 
young  birds  has  recently  been  given  by  L.  V.  Domm 
(1924).  The  birds  when  they  become  adult  not  only  show 
secondary  male  characters  in  their  plumage,  comb,  wat- 
tles, and  spurs,  but  fight  with  normal  cocks,  crow,  and 
attempt  to  tread  hens.  One  bird  had  a  "white  testis-like 
organ"  in  the  position  of  the  normal  ovary  (removed). 
Associated  with  the  organ  was  also  a  small  ovarian  fol- 
licle. On  the  right  side  there  was  also  a  testis-like  organ. 
A  second  bird  was  similar  as  to  its  gonads.  In  a  third 
bird  a  testis-like  organ  was  present  only  on  the  right  side. 
In  none  of  these  cases  are  germ-cells  or  spermatozoa 
reported  as  present. 

Whether  these  cases  are  strictly  sex  reversals  cannot 
be  definitely  stated,  unless  Benoit 's  observation  on  the 
presence  of  sperm  is  confirmed.  Aside  from  this  unique 
statement,  the  other  results  appear  to  show  definitely 
that,  after  removal  of  the  ovary,  a  structure  develops  re- 
sembling in  its  appearance  a  testis  (except  for  the  pres- 


SEX  REVERSALS  275 

ence  of  germ-cells).  The  development  of  this  organ,  after 
castration,  can,  I  think,  be  provisionally  at  least  accounted 
for  by  a  secondary  growth  and  enlargement  of  the  funda- 
ments of  the  male  organs  that  are  known  to  be  present  in 
the  embryonic  stage.  The  maintenance  of  a  testis,  even  a 
functional  one,  in  a  female  body  is  not  in  itself  surpris- 
ing, since  it  is  known  that  pieces  of  testis,  grafted  into 
the  body  of  a  female,  may  continue  to  develop,  and  even 
to  produce  sperm. 

In  general,  it  appears  that  the  genetic  composition  of 
the  female  bird  (present  both  in  the  body-cells  and  in  the 
young  ovary)  creates  a  favorable  situation  for  the  de- 
velopment of  the  ovary,  rather  than  a  testis.  Conversely, 
in  the  male  the  genetic  composition  is  favorable  for  the 
development  of  the  testis.  In  the  male,  however,  the  early 
removal  of  the  testis  does  not  suffice  to  call  forth  the 
development  of  structures  peculiar  to  the  ovary. 

The  Sex  of  Parabiotic  Salamander  Twins. 

The  union  of  young  salamanders  by  side-to-side  fusion 
has  been  brought  about  by  several  embryologists.  The 
young  embryos  taken  from  the  egg,  just  after  closure  of 
the  medullary  folds,  have  portions  of  one  side  of  each 
removed  and  are  then  brought  in  contact  by  the  exposed 
surface.  Their  union  quickly  follows.  Burns  has  studied 
the  sex  of  the  united  (parabiotic)  twins.  He  found  that 
members  of  a  pair  were  always  of  the  same  sex ;  44  pairs 
were  both  males,  36  pairs  were  both  females.  Random 
union  would  give  1  pair  of  males  to  2  pairs  of  male- 
females  to  1  pair  of  females.  Since  no  double-sexed  pairs 
appear,  it  follows  either  that  pairs  of  opposite  sexes  die, 
or  that  the  sex  of  one  individual  changes  over  that  of  the 
other  and,  since  both  male  and  female  pairs  were  found, 
the  influence  is  sometimes  one  way,  sometimes  the  other 
way.  Unless  some  explanation  can  be  found  for  such  a 


276         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

difference  in  the  reciprocal  effects,  the  results  do  not 
convincingly  demonstrate  the  probability  of  the  latter 
interpretation. 

Sex  Reversal  in  Hemp. 

Many  of  the  flowering  plants  develop  both  pistils  con- 
taining egg-cells  and  stamens  containing  pollen  in  the 
same  flower,  sometimes  in  different  flowers  on  the  same 
plant.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  the  pollen  to  ripen  before 
the  ovules,  or,  in  other  cases,  the  ovules  before  the  pollen. 
In  other  plants,  the  ovules  may  develop  only  on  one  plant, 
and  the  pollen  on  another  plant,  i.e.,  the  sexes  are  sepa- 
rate, the  species  dioecious.  In  some  of  these  dioecious 
plants,  however,  the  organs  of  the  opposite  sex  may  occur 
as  rudiments;  occasionally  they  become  functional.  Cor- 
rens  has  studied  a  few  cases  of  this  kind,  and  has  at- 
tempted to  test  the  character  of  the  germ-cells  of  such 
exceptional  cases. 

More  recently  experiments  with  dioecious  hemp  (Can- 
nabis sativa)  by  Pritchard,  Schaffner,  and  McPhee  have 
shown  that  environmental  conditions  may  change  a  pistil- 
producing  plant  (or  female)  into  one  in  which  stamens 
and  even  functional  pollen  are  also  produced,  and,  con- 
versely, may  change  a  staminate  plant  into  one  producing 
pistils  containing  functional  eggs. 

When  hemp  seeds  are  planted  at  the  normal  time  in 
early  spring  they  produce  male  (staminate)  and  female 
(carpellate)  individuals  in  about  equal  numbers  (Fig. 
149),  but  Schaffner  has  found  that  when  planted  in  rich 
soil  accompanied  by  a  changed  light  period,  the  plants 
show  "sex  reversal"  in  both  directions.  "The  amount  of 
reversal  is  approximately  inversely  proportional  to  the 
length  of  daylight."  That  the  same  environment  should 
change  carpellate  into  staminate,  and  staminate  into  car- 
pellate plants   is   at  first   sight  rather  surprising,  for 


SEX  REVERSALS 


277 


one  might  anticipate  that  identical  conditions  would  tend 
to  bring  each  toward  a  neutral  or  intermediate  condition 
or  one  only  toward  the  other.  In  fact,  something  like  this 
seems  to  take  place,  for  on  a  carpellate  plant  stamens 


Fig.  149. 
Female  plant,  to  left,  and  male  plant,  to  right,  of  hemp.   (After 

Pritchard.) 


appear;  conversely,  on  a  staminate  plant,  pistils  may 
appear.  It  is  in  this  sense,  in  the  main,  that ' '  sex  rever- 
sal" occurs,  although  there  are  other  cases  still  in  which 
a  new  branch  of  a  pistillate  plant  may  develop  only  sta- 
mens, and  a  new  branch  of  a  staminate  plant  develop  only 
pistils.  In  these  extreme  cases  ' '  sex  reversal ' '  may  almost 
be  said  to  take  place  in  those  new  parts  that  develop 


278         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

under  changed  conditions.  McPhee,  who  has  also  studied 
the  effect  of  exposure  to  light  for  different  lengths  of 
time,  has  found  that  male  plants  may  produce  branches 
with  pistils,  and  vice  versa ;  but  he  points  out  that  many 
intersexual  flowers  also  appear  as  well  as  many  abnormal 
flowers.  He  states  "that  the  changes  produced  are  in 
many  cases  relatively  minor  ones  and  a  sweeping  conclu- 
sion that  genetic  factors  are  in  no  way  concerned  with 
sex  in  these  species  is  not  warranted  at  the  present 
time. ' ' 

The  question  as  to  whether  there  is  an  internal  sex- 
determining  factor  system — possibly  chromosomal — in 
hemp,  is  at  present  unanswered,  and  as  yet  we  have  only 
an  oral  report  by  McPhee  concerning  the  genetic  evi- 
dence, but  this  report  is  significant.  If  the  normal  female 
hemp  plant  is  homogametic  (XX)  and  the  male  hetero- 
gametic,  then  we  may  expect  when  a  female  is  trans- 
formed into  a  male  (or  more  accurately  produces  func- 
tional pollen)  that  all  the  pollen  grains  will  be  alike  as  to 
their  sex-determining  properties,  i.e.,  such  a  male  is 
homogametic.  McPhee 's  oral  report5  supports  this  view. 
Conversely,  if  the  male  (XY)  is  transformed  into  a  fe- 
male, then  two  kinds  of  eggs  are  expected.  This  seems  to 
be  realized. 

Correns  had  earlier  reported  somewhat  similar  results 
in  other  plants  but  the  data  relating  to  the  kinds  of 
gametes  produced  are  not  satisfactory.  It  is  to  be  hoped 
that  evidence  will  soon  be  available  that  bears  on  this 
question.  Assuming,  in  the  meantime,  that  there  is  an 
internal  mechanism  for  sex-determination  in  hemp  (pos- 
sibly of  the  XX-XY  type),  there  is  nothing  revolutionary 
in  the  discovery  that  sex  reversal  may  take  place  through 
environmental  agencies,  and  there  is  certainly  nothing 
in  these  results  that  is,  in  principle,  in  contradiction  to 

5  At  the  meeting  of  the  Zoological  Society,  1925. 


SEX  REVERSALS  279 

the  presence  of  a  sex-chromosomal  mechanism  that  is  sex- 
determining.  Such  a  mechanism  is  an  agent  that  tips  the 
scale  one  way  or  the  other  under  a  given  set  of  environ- 
mental conditions.  The  mechanism  has  never  been  under- 
stood in  any  other  way.  It  may  be  overborne  by  other 
agents  that  turn  the  scale  without  thereby  losing  its 
power  to  act  in  its  usual  way  when  the  conditions  return 
under  which  it  is  accustomed  to  work.  No  better  example 
of  this  relation  could  we  hope  to  find,  if  the  tentative  con- 
clusions stated  above  are  confirmed,  namely,  the  change 
of  a  homogametic  female  into  a  homogametic  male  in  a 
species  in  which  the  normal  male  is  heterogametic.  This, 
in  fact,  would  furnish  another  convincing  proof  of  the 
genetic  explanation  of  sex-determination,  and  one  that 
would  be  especially  instructive  for  those  who  fail  to 
understand  the  interpretation  that  geneticists  place  on 
this  mechanism  and  on  Mendelian  phenomena  in  general. 

Another  plant,  Mercurialis  annua,  has  separate  sexes 
but  rarely  a  pistillate  flower  appears  on  a  male  plant, 
and,  conversely,  a  staminate  flower  on  a  female  plant.  A 
male  plant  may  have  25,000  male  flowers  and  only  from 
1  to  47  pistillate  flowers,  while  the  staminate  flowers  on  a 
female  may  be  as  1  to  32. 

Yampolski  has  reported  the  sex  of  offspring  produced 
from  both  these  kinds  of  plants  after  self-fertilization. 
Offspring  from  selfed  female  plants  are  female  or  pre- 
dominantly female.  Offspring  of  selfed  male  plants  are 
male  or  predominantly  male. 

It  is  not  possible  at  present  to  give  a  satisfactory  ex- 
planation of  these  results  on  the  XX-XY  formula  unless 
rather  arbitrary  assumptions  are  made.  For  instance,  if 
the  female  plant  is  XX,  then  all  the  pollen  grains  she 
produces  should  carry  one  X,  hence  all  the  offspring 
should  be  females,  as  was  the  case.  But  if  the  male  plant 
is  XY,  half  the  mature  eggs  should  be  X  and  half  Y.  Simi- 


280 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


larly  for  the  pollen.  Self-fertilization  should  then  give 
1  XX+2  XY+1  YY.  If  YY  dies  there  should  be  one  fe- 
male to  two  male  offspring.  This,  however,  was  not  the 
result  obtained.  In  order  that  the  selfed  male  plants 
should  produce  only  males  it  must  be  assumed  that  the 
X  eggs  die  as  gametes  and  the  Y  eggs  only  are  func- 
tional. As  yet  there  is  no  evidence  either  for  or  against 
this  hypothesis.  Until  there  is  evidence  bearing  on  this 
question  the  case  must  be  left  open. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE 

IN  what  has  been  said,  so  far,  it  has  been  implied  that 
the  gene  is  a  stable  element  in  heredity,  but  whether 
it  is  stable  in  the  sense  that  a  chemical  molecule  is 
stable,  or  whether  it  is  stable  only  because  it  fluctuates 
quantitatively  about  a  persistent  standard,  is  a  question 
of  theoretical  and  perhaps  of  fundamental  importance. 

Since  the  gene  cannot  be  studied  directly  by  physical 
or  chemical  methods,  our  conclusions  concerning  its  sta- 
bility must  rest  on  deductions  from  its  effects. 

Mendel's  theory  of  heredity  postulates  that  the  gene 
is  stable.  It  assumes  that  the  gene  that  each  parent  con- 
tributes to  the  hybrid  remains  intact  in  its  new  environ- 
ment in  the  hybrid.  A  few  examples  will  serve  to  recall 
the  nature  of  the  evidence  for  this  conclusion. 

The  Andalusian  race  of  poultry  has  white,  black,  and 
blue  individuals.  If  a  white  bird  is  mated  to  a  black  one, 
the  offspring  are  slate-colored  or  blue.  If  two  of  these 
blue-colored  birds  are  mated,  the  offspring  fall  into  three 
classes,  black,  blue,  and  white,  in  the  proportion  of  1 :  2 : 1. 
The  gene  for  white  and  the  gene  for  black  separate  in  the 
blue  hybrid.  Half  the  mature  germ-cells  come  to  carry 
the  black-producing  element  and  half  the  white-produc- 
ing element.  Chance  fertilization  of  any  egg  by  any  sperm 
will  give  the  observed  proportions  1:2:1  in  the  second 
filial  generation. 

The  test  of  the  correctness  of  the  assumption  that  the 
germ-cells  of  the  hybrids  are  of  two  kinds  is  as  follows. 
If  a  blue  hybrid  is  back-crossed  to  a  pure  white  bird,  half 


282         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

the  offspring  will  be  blue  and  half  white.  If  a  blue  hybrid 
is  back-crossed  to  a  pure  black  bird,  half  the  chicks  will 
be  black  and  half  blue.  Both  results  are  consistent  with 
the  postulate  that  the  genes  of  the  blue  hybrid  are  pure, 
half  for  black  and  half  for  white.  Their  occurrence  in  the 
same  cell  has  not  resulted  in  contamination  or  mutual 
infection. 

In  the  example  just  given  the  hybrid  is  unlike  either 
parent  and,  in  a  sense,  is  intermediate  between  them.  In 
the  next  example  the  hybrid  is  indistinguishable  from  one 
parent.  If  a  black  guinea  pig  is  bred  to  a  white  one,  the 
offspring  are  black.  If  these  are  inbred,  the  offspring  are 
three  blacks  to  one  white.  The  extracted  whites  breed  as 
true  as  the  original  race  of  whites.  The  white  gene  has 
not  been  contaminated  by  the  black  gene  in  their  sojourn 
together  in  the  hybrid. 

In  the  next  example  a  case  is  chosen  in  which  the  two 
original  forms  are  much  alike,  and  the  hybrids,  while 
intermediate  to  some  degree,  are  so  variable  that,  at  the 
ends  of  the  series,  they  overlap  the  parental  types.  The 
types  differ  in  a  pair  of  genes. 

If  an  ebony  Drosophila  is  bred  to  a  sooty  one,  the  off- 
spring are,  as  stated,  intermediate,  but  variable.  If  these 
are  inbred,  they  produce  an  array  of  shades  that  give  a 
practically  continuous  series.  There  are  ways,  however, 
of  testing  the  grades.  When  this  is  done  it  is  found  that 
the  array  is  made  up  of  individuals  that  are  pure  for 
ebony,  others  that  are  hybrids,  and  others  that  are  pure 
for  sooty,  in  the  ratio  of  1 :  2 : 1.  Here  again  we  have  evi- 
dence that  the  genes  have  not  been  mixed.  The  continuous 
series  of  shades  is  merely  due  to  overlapping  variability 
of  the  characters. 

All  this  is  simple  and  clear  because  we  are  dealing  in 
each  case  with  a  single  pair  of  genes  that  act  as  differen- 
tials. These  cases  serve  to  establish  the  principle  at  stake. 


STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE  283 

In  practice,  however,  the  actual  conditions  are  not 
always  so  simple.  Many  types  differ  from  each  other  in 
several  genes,  each  of  which  has  an  effect  on  the  same 
character.  Consequently,  when  they  are  crossed  simple 
ratios  are  not  found.  For  example,  if  a  race  of  corn  with  a 
short  cob  is  crossed  to  a  race  with  a  long  cob,  the  next 
generation  has  cobs  of  intermediate  length.  If  these  are 
inbred  the  following  generation  has  cobs  of  all  sizes. 
Some  are  as  short  as  the  cobs  of  one  of  the  original  races, 
others  as  long  as  the  original  long.  These  stand  at  the 
ends.  Between  them  is  a  series  of  intermediate  sizes.  A 
test  of  the  individuals  of  this  generation  shows  that  there 
are  several  pairs  of  genes  that  affect  the  size  of  the  cob. 

Height  in  man  is  another  such  case.  A  man  may  be  tall 
because  he  has  long  legs,  or  because  he  has  a  long  body, 
or  both.  Some  of  the  genes  may  affect  all  parts,  but  other 
genes  may  affect  one  region  more  than  another.  The 
result  is  that  the  genetic  situation  is  complex  and,  as  yet, 
not  unraveled.  Added  to  this  is  the  probability  that  the 
environment  may  also  to  some  extent  affect  the  end- 
product. 

These  are  the  multiple  factor  cases,  and  students  of 
heredity  are  trying  to  determine  in  each  cross  how  many 
factors  are  present.  The  results  are  complex  only  because 
several  or  many  genes  are  involved. 

It  is  this  sort  of  variability  that  in  the  earlier  days, 
before  Mendel's  discovery  had  been  made  known,  sup- 
plied natural  selection  with  the  evidence  on  which  that 
theory  was  based.  This  question  will  be  considered  later, 
but  first  must  be  described  the  great  advance  in  our 
understanding  of  the  limitations  of  the  selection  theory 
that  was  made  in  1910  by  Johannsen's  brilliant  work. 

Johannsen  carried  out  his  experiments  with  a  garden 
plant,  the  princess  bean.  This  bean  reproduces  exclusively 
by  self-fertilization.  As  a  result  of  long-continued  in- 


284 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


breeding  each  individual  has  become  homozygous.  This 
means  that  the  two  members  of  each  pair  of  genes  are 
identical.  Hence  such  material  is  suitable  to  carry  out 


^vvv* 


r\n 


n 


n 


hoiSS 


no 


A-B 


Fig.  150. 
A-E  groups  of  beans  representing  five  pure  lines.  Below  A-E  the 
group  formed  of  the  combination  of  the  other  five.  (After  Johann- 
sen.) 


critical  experiments  to  determine  whether  individual  dif- 
ferences shown  by  the  beans  are  affected  by  selection. 
If  selection  changes  the  character  of  the  individual,  it 


STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE  285 

must,  under  these  conditions,  do  so  by  changing  the  gene 
itself. 

The  beans  produced  by  each  plant  are  somewhat  vari- 
able in  size,  and  when  arranged  according  to  sizes  they 
give  the  normal  curve  of  probability.  All  the  beans  from 
any  one  plant  and  all  of  the  descendents  of  this  plant 
have  the  same  distribution  (Fig.  150),  no  matter  whether 
large  beans  are  continually  selected,  or  small  beans  are 
picked  out  in  each  generation.  The  offspring  always  give 
the  same  groups  of  beans. 

Johannsen  detected  nine  races  of  beans  in  those  he 
examined.  He  interpreted  his  results  to  mean  that  the 
differences  in  size  of  the  beans  from  a  given  plant  are 
due  to  its  environment  in  the  widest  sense.  It  was  pos- 
sible to  demonstrate  this  with  material  in  which  the  mem- 
bers of  each  pair  of  genes  were  identical  when  selection 
began.  Selection  is  shown  to  have  no  effect  in  changing 
the  genes  themselves. 

When  sexually  reproducing  animals  or  plants  are 
selected  that  are  not  homozygous  at  the  start,  the  imme- 
diate outcome  is  different.  There  are  numerous  experi- 
ments showing  what  happens,  such  as  Cuenot's  results 
with  spotted  mice,  or  McDowell's  results  with  ear-length 
in  rabbits,  or  East  and  Hay's  experiments  with  corn. 
Any  of  these  might  serve  as  an  example  of  what  takes 
place  under  selection.  One  example  will  suffice. 

Castle  studied  the  effects  of  selection  of  the  color- 
pattern  of  a  race  of  hooded  rats  (Fig.  151).  Starting  with 
the  offspring  of  commercial  animals,  he  selected  in  one 
direction  those  rats  that  had  the  broadest  stripes,  and 
in  the  other  direction  the  rats  that  had  the  narrowest 
stripes,  keeping  these  two  lines  apart.  In  the  course  of  a 
few  generations  the  two  populations  became  measurably 
different — in  one  the  dorsal  stripe  was  broader,  on  the 
average,  than  in  the  original  group  of  rats ;  in  the  other, 


a_ 


286 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


the  stripe  was  narrower.  Selection  had  in  some  way- 
changed  the  width  of  the  stripe.  So  far  there  is  nothing 
in  the  results  to  show  that  this  change  may  not  have  been 
due  to  the  sorting  out  by  selection  of  two  sets  of  factors 
that  determine  the  width  of  the  dorsal  stripe.  Castle 
argued,  however,  that  he  was  dealing  with  the  effect  of  a 


Fig.  151. 
Four  types  of  hooded  rats.   (After  Castle.) 


single  gene,  because  when  the  striped  rats  are  crossed  to 
a  rat  with  uniform  coat  (all  black  or  all  gray)  and  the 
hybrid  (F2)  rats  are  inbred,  their  offspring  give  three 
uniform  to  one  spotted  coat.  This  Mendelian  ratio  does 
show,  in  fact,  that  a  spotted  coat  is  due  to  a  recessive 
gene,  but  it  does  not  show  that  the  effects  of  this  gene 
may  not  also  be  influenced  by  other  genetic  factors  that 
determine  the  width  of  the  stripe,  and  this  is  really  the 
question  at  issue. 


STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE  287 

A  later  experiment,  devised  by  Wright  and  carried  out 
by  Castle,  showed,  in  fact,  that  the  results  had  been  due 
to  the  isolation  of  modifying  genes  for  width  of  stripe. 
The  test  was  as  follows :  Each  of  the  highly  selected  races 
was  back-crossed  to  wild  rats,  that  is,  rats  with  uniform 
coat  color,  and  a  second  (extracted)  generation  of 
spotted  rats  obtained.  The  process  was  repeated  with 
the  (F2)  spotted  rats  obtained  from  the  first  back-cross. 
It  was  found  after  back-crossing  for  two  or  three  genera- 
tions that  the  selected  stock  began  to  change  back,  so  to 
speak,  to  its  original  state.  The  selected  race  with  a  nar- 
rower stripe  changed  toward  a  broader  stripe  and  the 
selected  race  with  a  broader  stripe  changed  toward  a 
narrower  stripe.  In  other  words,  the  two  selected  races 
became  more  and  more  like  each  other,  and  more  like  the 
original  race  from  which  they  had  started. 

This  result  is  completely  in  accord  with  the  view  that 
modifying  factors  are  present  in  the  wild  rats  that  affect 
the  width  of  the  stripe  in  animals  that  are  already 
striped.  In  other  words,  the  original  selection  had 
changed  the  character  of  the  stripe  by  sorting  out  those 
genes  that  made  it  broader  or  narrower. 

At  one  time  Castle  went  so  far  as  to  claim  that  the 
results  of  the  experiments  with  hooded  rats  reestablished 
a  view  that  he  ascribed  to  Darwin,  namely,  that  selection 
itself  brings  about  a  change  in  the  hereditary  materials 
in  the  direction  in  which  the  selection  takes  place.  If  this 
were  really  Darwin's  meaning,  such  an  interpretation  of 
variability  might  seem  greatly  to  strengthen  the  theory 
of  natural  selection  as  the  method  by  which  evolution  has 
taken  place.  Castle  said  in  1915:  "All  the  evidence  we 
have  thus  far  obtained  indicates  that  outside  modifiers 
will  not  account  for  the  changes  observed  in  the  hooded 
pattern,  itself  a  clear  Mendelian  unit.  We  are  forced  to 
conclude  that  this  unit  itself  changes  under  repeated 


288         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

selection  in  the  direction  of  the  selection;  sometimes 
abruptly,  as  in  the  case  of  our  'mutant'  race,  a  highly 
stable  plus  variation ;  but  much  of tener  gradually,  as  has 
occurred  continuously  in  both  the  plus  and  the  minus 
selection  series." 

In  the  following  year  he  said :  ' '  Many  students  of  ge- 
netics at  present  regard  unit-characters  as  unchangeable. 
.  .  .  For  several  years  I  have  been  investigating  this 
question,  and  the  general  conclusion  at  which  I  have 
arrived  is  this,  that  unit-characters  are  modifiable  as  well 
as  recombinable.  Many  Mendelians  think  otherwise,  but 
this  is,  I  believe,  because  they  have  not  studied  the  ques- 
tion closely  enough.  The  fact  is  unmistakable  that  unit- 
characters  are  subject  to  quantitative  variation.  .  .  . 
Selection,  as  an  agency  in  evolution,  must  then  be  re- 
stored to  the  important  place  which  it  held  in  Darwin's 
estimation,  an  agency  capable  of  producing  continuous 
and  progressive  racial  changes." 

A  careful  reading  of  Darwin's  books  will  fail  to  fur- 
nish a  single  clear  statement  to  the  effect  that  he  believed 
that  the  selection  process  determines  or  influences  the 
direction  of  future  variation,  unless  we  bring  into  the 
field  another  theory  held  by  Darwin,  namely,  the  theory 
of  inheritance  of  acquired  characters. 

Darwin  held  strongly  to  the  belief  in  Lamarck's  theory. 
He  did  not  hesitate  to  make  use  of  it  whenever  his  theory 
of  natural  selection  was  in  difficulty.  It  would  be  logical, 
therefore,  for  anyone  who  cared  to  do  so  (although  Dar- 
win himself  does  not  appear  to  have  put  the  two  views 
together,  nor  does  Castle)  to  point  out  that  whenever  a 
more  advantageous  type  is  selected  its  germ-cells  are 
exposed,  so  to  speak,  to  the  pangenes  produced  by  its  own 
body,  and  might  be  expected  to  be  changed  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  character  selected.  Hence  each  new  advance 
would  start  from  a  new  base,  and  if  scattering  variations 


STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE  289 

occurred  about  this  as  a  new  mode  that  overstepped  the 
previous  boundary,  further  advances  would  be  expected 
to  appear  in  the  direction  in  which  the  last  advance  took 
place.  In  other  words,  selection  would  bring  about  further 
advances  in  the  direction  in  which  each  selection  had 
taken  place. 

But,  as  I  have  said,  Darwin  never  made  use  of  this 
argument  in  favor  of  his  selection  theory,  although  it 
might  be  claimed  he  did  so  in  principle  whenever  he 
found  natural  selection  inadequate  to  explain  a  situation 
and  appealed  to  Lamarck's  principle  to  carry  through 
the  new  advance. 

Today  we  regard  the  selection  process,  whether  natural 
or  artificial,  as  capable,  at  most,  of  causing  changes  only 
to  the  extent  to  which  recombination  of  the  genes  already 
present  may  affect  a  change ;  or,  in  other  words,  selection 
cannot  cause  a  group  (species)  to  transcend  the  extreme 
variations  that  it  naturally  shows.  Rigorous  selection  can 
bring  a  population  to  a  point  where  all  of  the  individuals 
are  nearer  to  the  extreme  type  shown  by  the  original 
population,  but  beyond  this  it  cannot  go.  Only  by  the 
occurrence  of  a  new  mutation  in  a  gene,  or  by  a  mass- 
change  in  a  group  of  old  genes,  is  it  possible,  as  it  now 
appears  to  us,  for  a  permanent  advance — a  step  forward, 
or  backward — to  be  made. 

This  conclusion  is  not  only  a  logical  deduction  from 
the  theory  of  the  stability  of  the  gene,  but  rests  on  numer- 
ous observations  showing  that  whenever  a  population  is 
subjected  to  selection,  a  rather  rapid  change  begins,  but 
quickly  slows  down  and  soon  comes  to  a  standstill  at  or 
near  the  extreme  type  shown  by  a  few  individuals  of  the 
original  population. 

So  far  the  problem  of  the  stability  of  the  gene  has  been 
examined  with  respect  to  gene-contamination  in  the  hy- 
brid, and  from  the  point  of  view  of  selection.  The  possible 


290         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

influence  of  the  body  itself  on  the  constitution  of  the  gene 
has  been  only  touched  upon.  The  clean  separation  of  the 
genes  in  the  hybrid,  that  is  the  basal  postulate  of  Men- 
del's first  law,  would  not  be  possible  if  genes  were  sub- 
ject to  influences  from  the  bodily  characters  of  the  hybrid. 

This  conclusion  brings  us  face  to  face  with  the  La- 
marckian  theory  of  the  inheritance  of  acquired  charac- 
ters. It  would  take  us  too  far  afield  to  attempt  to  consider 
the  varied  claims  of  this  theory,  but  I  may  be  allowed  to 
call  attention  to  certain  relations  that  would  be  expected, 
if,  as  this  theory  postulates,  the  germ-cells  are  affected 
by  the  body  in  the  sense  that  a  change  in  a  character  may 
bring  about  corresponding  alterations  in  specific  genes. 
A  few  examples  will  illustrate  the  essential  facts. 

When  a  black  rabbit  is  bred  to  a  white  rabbit  the  hy- 
brid young  are  black,  yet  the  germ-cells  produced  in  this 
hybrid  are  black-  or  white-producing,  in  equal  numbers. 
The  black  hair  of  the  hybrid  has  no  influence  on  the  white 
germ-cells.  No  matter  how  long  the  genes  for  white  are 
carried  by  black  hybrids,  the  white  genes  remain  white. 

Now  if  the  white  gene  is  interpreted  as  an  entity  of 
some  sort,  it  should  show,  if  the  Lamarckian  theory 
holds,  some  effect  of  the  body  character  of  the  individual 
in  which  the  gene  is  carried. 

Suppose,  however,  the  white  gene  is  interpreted  as  the 
absence  of  the  black  gene.  Then,  of  course,  there  is  no 
reason  for  supposing  that  the  black  color  of  the  hybrid 
could  produce  any  influence  on  nothing.  To  anyone  hold- 
ing the  presence  and  absence  theory  this  argument 
against  Lamarck's  theory  is  not  cogent. 

There  is,  however,  another  line  of  approach  that  may 
be  more  to  the  point.  A  white  f our-o  'clock,  bred  to  a  red 
one,  produces  an  intermediate  hybrid  with  pink-colored 
flowers  (Fig.  5).  If  we  interpret  the  white  color  as  an 
absence,  the  red  must  be  due  to  a  presence.  The  color  of 


STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE 


291 


the  flower  of  the  hybrid — pink — is  weaker  than  the  red, 
and  if  the  character  affects  the  gene,  the  red-producing 
gene  in  this  hybrid  should  be  diluted  by  the  color  of  the 
flower.  No  such  effects  here,  or  elsewhere,  have  been  re- 
corded. The  red  and  the  white  genes  separate  in  the  pink 
hybrid  without  showing  any  somatic  effects. 


Fig.  152. 
a,  Abdomen  of  normal  male;   &,  of  "abnormal"  male;  c,  of  nor- 
mal female ;  d,  of  "  abnormal  ' '  female  of  Drosophila  melanogaster. 


The  evidence  from  another  source  is  perhaps  even  a 
stronger  argument  against  the  theory  of  the  inheritance 
of  acquired  characters.  There  is  a  race  of  Drosophila — 
called  abnormal  abdomen — in  which  the  regular  banding 
of  the  abdomen  is  more  or  less  obliterated  (Fig.  152). 
This  condition,  in  its  most  extreme  form,  appears  in  the 
first  flies  that  emerge  from  a  culture  when  the  food  is 
abundant  and  the  culture  is  moist  and  acid.  As  the  cul- 
ture gets  older  and  dryer,  the  flies  that  emerge  become 
more  and  more  normal  in  appearance,  until  at  last  they 
cannot  be  distinguished  from  wild  flies.  Here  we  have  a 
genetic  character  that  is  extremely  sensitive  to  the 
environment.  Such  characters  as  these  furnish  a  favor- 
able opportunity  to  study  the  possible  effects  of  the  body 
on  the  germ-cells. 

If  we  breed  the  first  hatched  flies  with  very  abnormal 


292         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

abdomens,  and  at  the  same  time  and  under  like  conditions 
we  breed  the  late  hatching  flies  with  normal  abdomens,  we 
obtain  exactly  the  same  kinds  of  flies  in  the  next  genera- 
tion. The  first  to  emerge  are  abnormal,  the  later  ones 
more  normal.  It  has  made  no  difference  whether  the  abdo- 
men of  the  parent  was  normal  or  abnormal,  so  far  as  the 
germ-cells  are  concerned. 

If  it  be  said  that  the  effects  might  be  too  small  to  be 
seen  at  first,  then  I  may  add  that  late-hatching  flies  have 
been  bred  from  for  ten  successive  generations  without 
any  observed  difference  in  the  results. 

Another  example  is  equally  convincing.  There  is  a 
mutant  stock  of  Drosophila  called  eyeless  (Fig.  30).  The 
eyes  are  smaller  than  the  normal  eye  and  very  variable. 
By  selection,  a  uniform  stock  has  been  produced  in  which 
most  of  the  flies  are  without  eyes,  but,  as  each  culture 
gets  older,  more  and  more  flies  have  eyes,  and  larger 
ones.  If,  now,  we  breed  from  the  late-hatched  flies,  the 
offspring  are  the  same  as  when  eyeless  flies  are  used. 

Here  the  presence  of  eyes  in  the  older  culture  is  a  posi- 
tive character  and  might  be  considered  to  furnish  better 
evidence  than  the  abnormal  abdomen,  where  the  sym- 
metry and  pigmentation  of  the  late  hatching  larvae  is 
less  obviously  a  present  character.  The  outcome  is,  how- 
ever, the  same  in  both  cases. 

It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  attempt  to  consider  here  the 
numerous  claimants  that  have  appeared  in  the  last  few 
years,  who  have  furnished  " proof,"  as  they  say,  of  the 
inheritance  of  acquired  characters.  I  choose  only  one 
case,  that  is  the  most  complete  of  its  kind,  since  it  gives 
the  numerical  and  quantitative  data  on  which  the  conclu- 
sions are  based.  I  refer  to  the  recent  work  of  Diirken.  The 
experiment  seems  to  have  been  carefully  made  and  ap- 
pears to  Diirken  to  furnish  proof  of  the  inheritance  of 
acquired  characters. 


STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE 


293 


Diirken  worked  with  the  chrysalids  (or  pupae)  of  the 
common  cabbage  butterfly  (Colias  brassicae).  Since  1890 
it  has  been  known  that  when  the  caterpillars  of  some 
butterflies  pupate  (that  is,  when  they  transform  into  the 
resting  chrysalis)  the  color  of  the  pupa  is  to  some  extent 
influenced  by  the  background,  or  by  the  color  of  the  light 
that  falls  on  it. 


Fig.  153. 
In  the  center  four  differently  colored  pupae  of  the  cabbage  butter- 
fly. Around  them  is  shown  the  characteristic  arrangement  of  the 
pigment   cells   in   the   epidermis   in   different   color   types.    (After 
Leonore  Brecher.) 


For  example,  the  pupae  of  the  cabbage  butterfly  are 
quite  dark,  if  the  caterpillars  live  and  transform  in  day- 
light, or  even  in  a  faint  light ;  but  if  the  caterpillar  lives 
in  yellow  or  red  surroundings  or  behind  a  yellow  or  red 
screen  the  pupae  are  green.  The  green  color  is  due  to  the 
absence  of  superficial  black  pigment.  In  its  absence  the 
greenish  yellow  color  of  the  interior  shows  through  the 
skin  (Fig.  153). 


294         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Diirken's  experiments  consisted  in  rearing  caterpillars 
in  orange  (or  red)  light,  where  the  pupae  assumed  a  light 
or  green  color.  The  butterflies  that  emerged  were  reared 
in  open  cages  and  their  eggs  collected.  Some  of  the  young 
from  these  eggs  were  reared  again  in  colored  light,  others 
in  bright  light  or  in  darkness.  The  latter  are  the  controls. 
The  results  are  summarized  in  the  chart  (Fig.  154).  The 
number  of  dark  chrysalids  is  indicated  by  the  length  of 
the  black  band,  and  the  green  or  light  ones  by  the  light 
band  in  the  chart.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  pupae  were 
classified  in  five  color  groups.  Three  of  these  were  then 
lumped  together  as  dark  and  the  other  two  as  light. 

As  shown  in  Fig.  154  at  1  (which  gives  the  normal 
coloration),  nearly  all  pupae,  collected  at  random  or  in 
normal  surroundings,  are  dark;  only  a  few  are  light  or 
green.  The  caterpillars  that  came  from  these  were  reared 
in  an  orange  environment.  When  they  transformed  into 
pupae  there  was  a  very  high  percentage  of  light-colored 
types,  2.  If  the  light-colored  types  only  are  now  picked 
out  and  reared,  some  in  orange,  some  in  the  light,  and 
others  in  the  dark,  the  results  are  shown  in  3a  and  3b.  In 
the  former,  there  are  more  light  pupae  than  before ;  since 
two  generations  have  been  in  orange,  the  effect  is  aug- 
mented. It  is  the  other  set,  3b,  however,  that  is  more  sig- 
nificant. As  the  bands  show  there  were  more  light  pupae 
than  in  the  wild  pupae,  1,  that  were  reared  in  the  light  or 
dark.  This  increase  Diirken  attributes  in  part  to  the  in- 
herited effect  of  the  orange  light  on  the  preceding  genera- 
tion, and  in  part  to  the  new  environment,  whose  effect  is 
in  the  opposite  direction. 

Now  this  interpretation,  from  the  point  of  view  of 
genetics,  is  not  satisfactory.  The  experiment  shows,  in  the 
first  place,  that  not  all  caterpillars  respond  to  the  orange 
light.  If  those  that  do  respond  are  genetically  different, 
then  of  course  when  they — the  light  pupae  in  the  experi- 


STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE  295 

merit — are  selected  for  the  second  orange  trial  and  for 
the  control  in  light  and  dark,  we  are  dealing  already  with 
a  more  responsive  type,  a  selected  group,  and  these  are 
expected  to  again  respond  in  the  next  generation,  as  they 
do  in  fact. 


G=3,73 


Normal 
Coloring 


Light 


Dark 


Fig.  154. 


Diagram   illustrating  the   results   of   selection   of   dark   and   light 
pupae  of  the  cabbage  butterfly.   (After  Diirken.) 


Therefore,  unless  the  material  is  genetically  homo- 
geneous at  the  start  or  unless  other  controls  are  used,  the 
evidence  fails  signally  to  establish  the  inherited  effect  of 
the  environment. 

The  same  error  runs  through  nearly  all  the  work  of 
this  sort  that  has  been  done.  Modern  geneties,  if  it  had 
accomplished  nothing  more,  would  have  justified  itself 
in  showing  the  worthlessness  of  such  evidence. 

We  may  pass  now  to  a  group  of  cases  in  some  of  which 
it  seems  probable  that  the  germ-cells  themselves  have 
been  directly  injured  by  special  treatment,  and  that  the 
injured  germ-material  is  transmitted  to  later  genera- 
tions. Owing  to  this  injury,  malformations  may  appear  in 
successive  generations.  This  means  that  the  treatment 


296 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


has  not  affected  the  germ-material  by  first  causing  de- 
fects in  the  embryo,  but  has  affected  both  the  embryo  and 
its  germ-cells  at  the  same  time. 

Stockard  carried  out  a  prolonged  series  of  experiments 
on  the  effects  of  alcohol  on  guinea  pigs.  The  guinea  pigs 
were  treated  by  placing  them  in  closed  tanks  over  strong 


Fig.  155. 
Two  abnormal  young  guinea  pigs  whose  ancestors  were  alcoholics. 

(After  Stockard.) 


alcohol.  They  breathed  the  air  saturated  with  alcohol, 
and  after  a  few  hours  became  completely  stupefied.  The 
treatment  was  carried  over  a  long  time.  Some  of  the 
guinea  pigs  were  bred  while  undergoing  treatment,  others 
onlv  at  the  end  of  the  treatment.  The  results  were  essen- 
tially  the  same.  Many  young  were  aborted  or  absorbed, 
others  were  born  dead,  others  showed  abnormalities, 
especially  in  the  nervous  system  and  eyes  (Fig.  155). 
Only  those  that  themselves  showed  no  defects  could  be 
bred.  From  these,  abnormal  young  continued  to  appear 


STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE  297 

along  with  other  individuals  normal  in  appearance.  In 
later  generations  abnormals  continued  to  appear,  but 
only  from  certain  individuals. 

If  we  examine  the  pedigrees  of  the  alcoholic  series 
there  is  no  evidence  that  the  results  conform  to  any  of 
the  known  Mendelian  ratios.  Moreover,  the  varied  locali- 
zation of  the  effects  shown  by  the  abnormals  is  not  of  a 
kind  that  resembles  what  we  meet  with  when  single  gene- 
changes  are  involved.  On  the  other  hand,  the  defects  have 
many  points  of  resemblance  to  the  kind  of  changes  that 
we  are  familiar  with  in  experimental  embryology  when 
abnormal  development  is  brought  about  by  treating  eggs 
with  toxic  agents.  Stockard  has  called  attention  to  these 
relations,  and  interprets  his  result  to  mean  that  an  injury 
of  some  sort  to  the  germ-cells  has  been  produced  by  the 
alcohol — an  injury  to  some  part  of  the  machinery  that  is 
involved  in  heredity.  The  effects  are  localized  only  in  so 
far  as  they  pertain  to  those  parts  of  the  body  that  are 
most  sensitive  to  any  departure  from  the  normal  course 
of  development.  These  parts  are  most  frequently  the 
nervous  svstem  and  the  sense  organs. 

More  recently  Little  and  Bagg  have  carried  out  a  series 
of  experiments  on  the  effects  of  radium  on  pregnant  mice 
and  rats.  When  the  treatment  is  properly  administered, 
the  young  mice  in  utero  may  develop  abnormally.  When 
examined  before  birth  many  of  them  show  hemorrhagic 
areas  (Fig.  156)  in  the  brain  and  cord,  or  elsewhere 
(especially  in  the  leg  rudiments).  Some  of  these  embryos 
die  before  parturition,  and  are  absorbed,  others  are 
aborted.  Still  others  are  born  alive  and  some  of  these  sur- 
vive and  may  procreate.  The  offspring  often  show  serious 
defects  in  the  brain  or  in  the  appendages.  One  or  both 
eyes  may  be  defective.  Both  eyes  may  be  absent,  or  one 
only  may  be  present,  much  reduced  in  size.  Bagg  has  bred 
some  of  these  mice  and  finds  that  they  produce  many 


298 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


abnormal  offspring  that  show  defects  similar,  in  a  gen- 
eral way,  to  those  induced  directly  in  the  original  em- 
bryos. 

How  shall  we  interpret  these  experiments?  Has  the 
radium  first  produced  its  effects  on  the  brain  of  the  de- 


5 

Fig.  156. 

Young  mice  embryos  with  hemorrhagic  areas  whose  mother  had 
been  treated  with  radium  when  the  young  were  in  utero.  (After 
Bagg.) 


veloping  embryo,  causing  defects,  and  is  it  owing  to  the 
presence  of  these  defects  that  the  germ-cells  of  the  same 
embryo  become  affected?  There  is  an  apparent  objection 
to  this  interpretation.  We  should  expect  when  the  brain 
alone  is  affected,  the  next  generation  should  show  brain 
defects ;  when  the  eye  is  the  principal  organ  affected,  the 
next  generation  should  show  only  eye  defects.  So  far  as 


STABILITY  OF  THE  GENE  299 

reported  the  results  are  not  like  this,  for  a  mouse  with 
abnormal  brain  and  full-sized  eyes  may  produce  offspring 
that  have  defective  eyes.  In  other  words,  there  is  not  here 
a  specific  effect,  but  a  general  one. 

The  other  interpretation  is  that  the  germ-cells  of  the 
young  mouse  in  utero  are  affected  by  the  radium.  When, 
in  turn,  these  germ-cells  produce  a  new  generation,  the 
individuals  are  defective  because  the  same  organs  whose 
normal  development  was  most  disturbed  are  the  organs 
that  are  most  easily  affected  by  any  alteration  in  the 
course  of  development.  They  are,  in  a  word,  the  weakest 
or  most  delicately  balanced  phases  of  development,  and 
therefore  the  first  ones  to  show  the  effect  of  any  depar- 
ture from  the  normal  course  of  events.  This  is,  I  think, 
at  present  the  most  plausible  explanation  of  these  and 
similar  experiments. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS 

THE  preceding  chapters  have  dealt  with  two  main 
topics :  with  the  effects  following  a  change  in  the 
number  of  the  chromosomes ;  and  with  the  effects 
following  a  change  within  a  chromosome  (a  point  muta- 
tion). The  theory  of  the  gene  is  broad  enough  to  cover 
both  these  kinds  of  changes,  although  its  main  concern  is 
with  the  gene  itself.  The  term  mutation  also  has  come, 
through  usage,  to  include  the  effects  produced  in  both 
these  wavs. 

These  kinds  of  changes  have  important  bearings  on 
current  genetic  theories. 

The  Effects  Produced  by  a  Change  in  Chromosome 
Number  and  by  a  Change  in  a  Gene. 

When  the  number  of  the  chromosomes  is  doubled,  tre- 
bled, or  multiplied  any  number  of  times,  the  individual 
has  the  same  kinds  of  genes  as  before,  and  they  stand  in 
the  same  numerical  ratio  to  one  another.  There  is  no 
a  priori  expectation  that  this  kind  of  change  would  affect 
the  character  of  the  individual,  were  it  not  that  the  vol- 
ume of  the  cytoplasm  may  not  increase  to  correspond 
with  the  increase  in  the  number  of  the  genes.  Just  what  a 
failure  to  attain  a  corresponding  increase  of  cytoplasmic 
volume  means  is  not  clear  at  present.  At  any  rate,  the 
results  show  that  triploid,  tetraploids,  octoploids,  etc., 
do  not  differ  markedly  in  any  special  characters  (except 
size)  from  the  original  diploid  type.  In  other  words,  the 
changes  produced  may  be  very  numerous,  but  not  strik- 
ingly different  from  the  original  ones. 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  301 

On  the  other  hand,  the  addition  of  a  single  chromosome 
or  of  two  members  of  the  same  pair,  or  of  two  or  more 
members  of  different  pairs  to  the  group,  or  the  loss  of  a 
whole  chromosome  from  the  group,  may  be  expected  to 
produce  more  evident  effects  on  the  individual.  There  is 
some  evidence  that  such  additions  or  losses  are  less  ex- 
treme when  many  chromosomes  are  present,  or  when  the 
change  takes  place  in  a  small  chromosome.  From  the 
point  of  view  of  the  theory  of  the  gene,  this  result  is  what 
would  be  anticipated.  For  instance,  the  addition  of  one 
chromosome  means  that  a  large  number  of  genes  are  now 
present  in  triplicate.  The  balance  of  the  genes  is  changed 
in  the  sense  that  there  are  now  present  more  genes  of 
certain  kinds  than  before,  but  since  no  new  genes  are 
added  the  effects  would  be  expected  to  be  distributed 
amongst  many  of  the  characters  that  might  be  somewhat 
enhanced  or  diminished  in  intensitv.  This  accords  with 
the  facts  as  yet  reported.  It  is  interesting  to  note,  how- 
ever, that,  as  far  as  known,  the  general  results  are  not 
beneficial  but,  if  anything,  deleterious.  This,  too,  is  ex- 
pected if  the  adjustments,  both  to  internal  and  to  exter- 
nal relations,  are  as  perfect  as  possible  in  the  normal 
individual  as  its  long  evolutionary  history  might  lead 
one  to  expect. 

Because  such  a  change  affects  many  parts  to  a  slight 
degree,  it  does  not  follow  that  such  effects  are  more  likely 
to  lead  to  the  establishment  of  a  new  viable  type  than 
when  changes  are  brought  about  one  step  at  a  time  by 
changes  in  single  genes. 

Furthermore,  even  the  addition  of  two  new  chromo- 
somes of  the  same  kind,  giving  possibly  a  new  stable  type 
of  inheritance,  does  not  improve  the  situation,  but,  as  far 
as  we  know, — the  evidence  is  slight  at  present, — the  mal- 
adjustments are  even  further  increased.  For  these 
reasons  it  does  not  seem  that  a  change  from  one  chromo- 


302         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

some  group  to  another  is  easily  brought  about  in  this' 
way,  although  the  possibility  of  such  a  change  cannot 
be  entirely  excluded.  We  need,  at  present,  more  evidence 
to  decide  this  question. 

The  same  arguments  apply,  though  less  strongly  per- 
haps, to  those  cases  when  parts  of  chromosomes  are 
added  to,  or  subtracted  from,  the  chromosome  group. 
The  effect  produced  is  the  same  in  kind,  but  less  in  de- 
gree, and  it  is  correspondingly  more  difficult  to  determine 
whether  the  final  effect  on  viability  is  injurious  or  bene- 
ficial. 

The  work  of  the  last  few  years  in  genetics  has  made  it 
clear  that,  despite  the  occurrence  of  the  same  number  of 
chromosomes  in  related  species  and  even  in  entire  fami- 
lies and  orders,  it  is  hazardous  to  assume  that  the  chro- 
mosomes, even  in  closely  related  species,  are  always  iden- 
tical as  to  their  genes.  The  genetic  evidence  is  beginning 
to  make  clear  that  readjustments  may  take  place  both 
within  the  chromosomes,  where  groups  of  genes  may 
come  to  lie  in  reversed  order,  and  between  different  chro- 
mosomes, where  blocks  of  genes  may  be  shifted,  without 
giving  a  measurable  difference  in  size.  Even  whole  chro- 
mosomes might  be  recombined  in  different  groupings 
without  changing  the  actual  number.  Alterations  of  these 
kinds  will  affect  profoundly  the  linkage  relations,  hence 
the  modes  of  inheritance  of  the  various  characters,  with- 
out, however,  changing  the  total  number  or  kinds  of  the 
genes  involved.  Unless,  therefore,  the  cytological  obser- 
vations are  checked  by  genetic  studies  it  will  always  be 
unsafe  to  assume  that  identity  in  number  of  chromo- 
somes means  a  correspondence  in  grouping  of  the  genes. 

Two  methods  by  which  changes  in  chromosome  num- 
bers take  place  are,  first,  the  union  of  two  chromosomes 
to  form  one,  as  in  the  attached  X's  of  Drosophila,  and 
the  occasional  breaking  apart  of  chromosomes,  as  re- 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  303 

ported  by  Hance  in  Oenothera  and  in  several  other  cases. 
The  temporary  separation  and  reunion  of  certain  chro- 
mosomes in  moths,  described  by  Seiler,  also  come  under 
this  heading,  especially  if,  as  he  supposes,  the  separated 
elements  may  sometimes  recombine  reciprocally. 

In  contrast  with  the  effect  produced  when  large  num- 
bers of  genes  are  involved,  the  effects  produced  by  a 
change  in  a  gene  appear  at  first  sight  much  more  ex- 
treme. This  first  impression  may,  however,  be  very  mis- 
leading. While  it  is  true  that  many  of  the  most  striking 
mutant  characters  studied  by  geneticists  are  markedly 
different  from  the  normal  character  with  which  they  are 
contrasted,  these  mutant  characters  have  often  been 
chosen  for  study  because  they  are  sharply  marked  off 
from  the  typical  character,  and  can,  in  consequence,  be 
readily  followed  in  succeeding  generations.  Their  sepa- 
ration is  accurate,  and  the  results  more  certain  than  in 
cases  where  the  differences  are  less  marked,  or  where 
there  is  an  overlap  between  the  characters  of  the  con- 
trasted pair.  Moreover,  the  more  bizarre  and  extreme 
modifications,  that  sometimes  amount  to  "abnormali- 
ties," are  the  ones  that  are  most  likely  to  attract  atten- 
tion and  interest,  hence  are  utilized  for  genetic  study, 
while  the  less  obvious  modifications  are  overlooked  or 
neglected.  Geneticists  are  familiar  with  the  fact  that  the 
more  intensively  any  particular  group  is  studied  the 
more  mutant  characters  are  found  which  had  been,  at 
first,  overlooked,  and  since  these  are  those  that  more 
nearly  approach  the  normal  type,  it  becomes  increasingly 
evident  that  the  mutation  process  involves  very  small,  as 
well  as  very  great,  modifications. 

In  the  older  literature  the  extreme,  abnormal  types 
were  called  sports,  and  for  a  long  time  it  was  supposed 
that  these  sports  were  sharply  separated  from  the  small 
or  individual  differences  constantly  present  in  all  species 


304         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

and  commonly  spoken  of  as  variations.  Today  we  know 
that  there  is  no  such  sharp  contrast,  but  that  sports  and 
variations  may  have  the  same  kind  of  origin,  and  are 
inherited  according  to  the  same  laws. 

It  is  true  that  many  of  the  small  individual  differences 
are  due  to  the  environmental  conditions  under  which  the 
development  takes  place,  and  superficial  examination 
fails  often  to  distinguish  between  this  sort  of  variability 
and  that  due  to  minor  changes  brought  about  by  genetic 
factors.  One  of  the  most  important  results  of  modern 
genetics  is  the  recognition  of  this  fact,  and  the  invention 
of  methods  by  which  the  smaller  differences  may  be  re- 
ferred to  one  or  to  the  other  of  these  factors.  If,  as  Dar- 
win supposed,  and  if,  as  is  generally  accepted  today,  the 
process  of  evolution  has  taken  place  by  the  slow  process 
of  accumulation  of  small  variations,  it  follows  that  it 
must  be  the  genetic  variations  that  are  utilized,  since 
these,  and  not  those  due  to  environmental  effects,  are 
inherited. 

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  from  what  has  just 
been  said,  that  mutant  changes  produce  only  a  single 
striking  or  even  a  single  small  change  in  one  particular 
part  of  the  body.  On  the  contrary,  the  evidence  from  the 
Drosophila  work,  which  is  in  accord  with  that  from  all 
other  forms  that  have  been  critically  studied,  shows  that 
even  in  those  cases  where  one  part  is  especially  modified, 
other  effects  are  commonly  present  in  several  or  in  all 
parts  of  the  body.  The  subsidiary  effects  not  only  involve 
structural  modifications,  but  physiological  effects  also, 
if  one  may  judge  by  the  activity,  the  fertility,  and  the 
length  of  life  of  the  mutants.  For  example,  the  loss  of 
positive  phototropism,  characteristic  of  Drosophila,  ac- 
companied a  change  involving  a  very  slight  alteration 
in  the  general  color  of  the  body. 

The  converse  of  this  relation  must  also  hold.  Slight 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  305 

changes  clue  to  a  mutated  gene  that  affect  physiological 
processes  and  reactions  may  frequently  be  accompanied 
by  alterations  in  external  structural  characters.  If  these 
physiological  changes  are  of  a  kind  to  better  adjust  the 
organism  to  its  environment,  they  may  be  expected  to 
persist,  and,  at  times,  lead  to  the  survival  of  new  types. 
These  types  may  then  differ  from  the  original  type  in 
superficial  characters  that  are  constant  but  trivial  in 
themselves.  Since  many  species  differences  appear  to  be 
of  this  kind,  it  is  plausible  to  interpret  their  constancy 
as  due  not  to  their  own  survival  value,  but  rather  due  to 
their  relation  to  some  other  deeply  seated  character  that 
is  important  for  the  welfare  of  the  species. 

In  the  light  of  what  has  just  been  said  we  can  give  a 
reasonable  explanation  of  the  differences  that  follow 
when  a  mutant  change  involves  a  whole  chromosome  (or 
part  of  one)  and  when  only  a  single  gene  is  involved.  The 
former  change  adds  nothing  intrinsically  new  to  the 
situation.  More  or  less  of  what  is  already  present  is  in- 
volved in  the  change,  and  the  effects  are  small  in  degree 
but  involve  a  large  number  of  characters.  The  latter 
change — mutation  in  a  single  gene — may  also  produce 
widespread  and  slight  effects,  but,  in  addition,  it  often 
happens  that  one  part  of  the  body  is  changed  to  a  strik- 
ing degree  along  with  other  changes  less  striking.  This 
latter  kind  of  change,  as  I  have  said,  supplies  materials 
favorable  for  genetic  study;  these  have  been  widely  uti- 
lized. Now  it  is  these  mutational  changes  that  have  occu- 
pied the  forefront  of  genetic  publication,  and  have  given 
rise  to  a  popular  illusion  that  each  such  mutant  character 
is  the  effect  of  only  one  gene,  and  by  implication  to  the 
fallacy,  more  insidious  still,  that  each  unit  character  has 
a  single  representative  in  the  germ  material.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  study  of  embryology  shows  that  every  organ 
of  the  body  is  the  end-result,  the  culmination  of  a  long 


306         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

series  of  processes.  A  change  that  affects  any  step  in  the 
process  may  be  expected  often  to  affect  a  change  in  the 
end-resnlt.  It  is  the  final  visible  effect  that  we  see,  not 
the  point  at  which  the  effect  was  brought  about.  If,  as  we 
may  readily  suppose,  very  many  steps  are  involved  in  the 
development  of  a  single  organ,  and  if  each  of  these  steps 
is  affected  by  the  action  of  a  host  of  genes,  there  can  be 
no  single  representative  in  the  germ-plasm  for  any  organ 
of  the  body,  however  small  or  trivial  that  organ  may  be. 
Suppose,  for  instance,  to  take  perhaps  an  extreme  case, 
all  the  genes  are  instrumental  in  producing  each  organ 
of  the  body.  This  may  only  mean  that  they  all  produce 
chemical  substances  essential  for  the  normal  course  of 
development.  If  now  one  gene  is  changed  so  that  it  pro- 
duces some  substance  different  from  that  which  it  pro- 
duced before,  the  end-result  may  be  affected,  and  if  the 
change  affects  one  organ  predominatingly  it  may  appear 
that  one  gene  alone  has  produced  this  effect.  In  a  strictly 
causal  sense  this  is  true,  but  the  effect  is  produced  only 
in  conjunction  with  all  the  other  genes.  In  other  words, 
they  are  all  still  contributing,  as  before,  to  the  end-result, 
which  is  different  in  so  far  as  one  of  them  is  different. 

In  this  sense,  then,  each  gene  may  have  a  specific  effect 
on  a  particular  organ,  but  this  gene  is  by  no  means  the 
sole  representative  of  that  organ,  and  it  has  also  equally 
specific  effects  on  other  organs,  and,  in  extreme  cases, 
perhaps  on  all  the  organs  or  characters  of  the  body. 

To  return  now  to  our  comparison.  The  effect  of  a 
change  in  a  gene  (which  if  recessive  means,  of  course,  .a 
pair  of  like  genes)  frequently  produces  a  more  localized 
effect  than  a  doubling  or  trebling  of  the  genes  already 
present,  because  a  change  in  one  gene  is  more  likely  to 
upset  the  established  relation  between  all  the  genes  than 
is  an  increase  in  the  number  of  genes  already  present.  By 
extension,  this  argument  seems  to  mean  that  each  gene 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  307 

lias  a  specific  effect  on  the  course  of  development,  and 
this  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  point  of  view  urged 
above,  that  all  the  genes  or  many  of  them  work  together 
toward  a  definite  and  complicated  end-product. 

The  best  argument  at  present  in  favor  of  a  specific 
action  of  each  gene  is  found  in  the  series  of  multiple  alle- 
lomorphs. Here  changes  in  the  same  locus  affect  pri- 
marily the  same  end-result  not  only  in  one  organ,  but  in 
all  the  parts  that  are  also  visibly  affected. 

Is  the  Mutation  Process  Due  to  a  Degradation 

of  the  Gene? 

In  his  mutation  theory  de  Vries  spoke  of  types  that  we 
now  call  mutant  recessive  types  as  arising  from  the  loss 
or  inactivation  of  genes.  Such  changes  he  regarded  as 
retrogressive.  At  about  the  same  time,  or  a  little  later, 
the  idea  that  recessive  characters  are  due  to  losses  of 
genes  from  the  germ  material  became  popular.  At  the 
present  time  several  critics  interested  primarily  in  the 
philosophical  discussion  of  evolution  have  attacked  with 
violence  the  idea  that  the  mutant  types  studied  by  geneti- 
cists have  anything  to  do  with  the  traditional  theory  of 
evolution.  With  this  latter  assertion  we  are  not  much  con- 
cerned, and  may  safely  leave  the  question  at  issue  for  the 
future  to  decide;  but  the  suggestion  that  the  mutation 
process,  in  so  far  as  it  involves  an  effect  on  single  genes, 
is  limited  to  the  loss  of  genes  or  to  their  partial  loss  or 
degradation,  as  I  venture  to  call  such  a  change,  is  a  mat- 
ter of  some  theoretical  interest;  for,  as  Bateson  elabo- 
rated in  his  1914  address,  it  leads  logically  to  the  idea 
that  the  materials  that  we  use  in  genetic  work  are  due  to 
loss  of  genes;  that  absences,  in  a  literal  sense,  are  the 
allelomorphs  of  wild  type  genes ;  and  that,  in  so  far  as 
this  evidence  applies  to  evolution,  it  leads  to  the  reductio 


308         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

ad  absurdum  that  that  process  has  been  a  steady  drain 
on  the  original  storehouse  of  genes  wherever  they  existed. 

In  chapter  VI  the  genetic  evidence  at  hand  that  bears 
on  this  question  has  been  considered,  and  it  is  unneces- 
sary to  summarize  again  what  was  there  said,  but  I  may 
be  allowed  to  repeat  that  it  is  not  justifiable  to  conclude 
from  the  fact  that  many  mutant  characters  are  defective, 
or  even  partial  or  complete  losses,  that  they  must,  there- 
fore, be  due  to  absences  of  a  corresponding  gene  in  the 
germ  material.  So  far  as  there  is  any  direct  evidence  that 
bears  on  this  question,  quite  aside  from  the  arbitrariness 
of  the  absence  hypothesis,  it  does  not,  as  I  have  at- 
tempted to  show,  support  such  a  point  of  view. 

There  remains,  however,  a  problem  of  some  interest, 
namely,  whether  some  or  many  of  the  changes  in  the 
genes  that  lead  to  the  occurrence  of  mutant  characters 
(whether  recessive,  intermediate,  or  dominant  makes 
little  difference)  may  not  be  due  to  a  breaking  up  of  a 
gene,  or  to  its  reconstitution  into  another  element  pro- 
ducing somewhat  different  effects.  There  is,  however,  no 
reason  for  assuming  that  such  change,  if  it  occurs,  is  a 
downhill  one  rather  than  the  development  of  a  more  com- 
plex gene,  unless  it  appears  more  probable,  a  priori,  that 
a  highly  complex  stable  compound  is  more  likely  to  break 
down  than  to  build  up.  Until  we  know  more  concerning 
the  chemical  constitution  of  the  genes,  and  how  they  grow 
and  divide,  it  is  quite  futile  to  argue  the  merits  of  the  two 
sides  of  the  argument.  For  the  genetic  theory  it  is  only 
necessary  to  assume  that  any  kind  of  a  change  may  suffice 
as  a  basis  for  what  is  observed  to  take  place. 

It  is  equally  futile  to  discuss,  at  present,  whether  new 
genes  arise  independently  of  the  old  ones,  and  worse  than 
futile  to  discuss  how  the  genes  arose  in  the  first  instance. 
The  evidence  that  we  have  furnishes  no  grounds  whatso- 
ever for  the  view  that  new  genes  independently  arise, 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  309 

but  it  would  be  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to 
show  that  they  do  not  arise.  To  the  ancients  it  seemed  not 
incredible  that  worms  and  eels  arose  from  the  river's 
slime,  and  that  vermin  in  general  arose  in  dark  dusty 
corners.  The  origin  of  bacterial  life  from  putrefying  sub- 
stances was  believed  in  only  one  generation  ago,  and  it 
was  extremely  difficult  to  prove  that  this  does  not  happen. 
It  may  be  equally  difficult  to  prove  convincingly,  to  one 
who  insists  on  believing  the  contrary,  that  genes  arise 
independently  of  other  genes ;  but  the  genetic  theory  need 
not  be  anxious  concerning  this  question  until  it  meets 
with  a  situation  where  such  a  postulate  becomes  neces- 
sary. At  present  we  find  no  need  of  interpolating  new 
genes  in  the  linkage  series,  or  at  the  ends  of  the  series. 
If  the  same  number  of  genes  is  present  in  a  white  blood 
corpuscle  as  in  all  the  other  cells  of  the  body  that  con- 
stitutes a  mammal,  and  if  the  former  makes  only  an 
amoeba-like  cell  and  the  rest  collectively  a  man,  it 
scarcely  seems  necessary  to  postulate  fewer  genes  for  an 
amoeba  or  more  for  a  man. 

Are  Genes  of  the  Order  of  Organic  Molecules? 

The  only  practical  interest  that  a  discussion  of  the 
question  as  to  whether  genes  are  organic  molecules  might 
have  would  relate  to  the  nature  of  their  stability.  By 
stability  we  might  mean  only  that  the  gene  tends  to  vary 
about  a  definite  mode,  or  we  might  mean  that  the  gene  is 
stable  in  the  sense  that  an  organic  molecule  is  stable.  The 
genetic  problem  would  be  simplified  if  we  could  establish 
the  latter  interpretation.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  gene 
is  regarded  as  merely  a  quantity  of  so  much  material,  we 
can  give  no  satisfactory  answer  as  to  why  it  remains  so 
constant  through  all  the  vicissitudes  of  outcrossing,  un- 
less we  appeal  to  mysterious  powers  of  organization  out- 
side the  genes  that  keep  them  constant.  There  is  little 


310         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

hope  at  present  of  settling  the  question.  A  few  years  ago 
I  attempted  to  make  a  calculation  as  to  the  size  of  the 
gene  in  the  hope  that  it  might  throw  a  little  light  on  the 
problem,  but  at  present  we  lack  sufficiently  exact  meas- 
urements to  make  such  a  calculation  more  than  a  specula- 
tion. It  seemed  to  show  that  the  order  of  magnitude  of 
the  gene  is  near  that  of  the  larger-sized  organic  mole- 
cules. If  any  weight  can  be  attached  to  the  result  it  indi- 
cates, perhaps,  that  the  gene  is  not  too  large  for  it  to  be 
considered  as  a  chemical  molecule,  but  further  than  this 
we  are  not  justified  in  going.  The  gene  might  even  then 
not  be  a  molecule  but  only  a  collection  of  organic  matter 
not  held  together  in  chemical  combination. 

When  all  this  is  given  due  weight  it  nevertheless  is 
difficult  to  resist  the  fascinating  assumption  that  the  gene 
is  constant  because  it  represents  an  organic  chemical 
entity.  This  is  the  simplest  assumption  that  one  can  make 
at  present,  and  since  this  view  is  consistent  with  all  that 
is  known  about  the  stability  of  the  gene  it  seems,  at  least, 
a  good  working  hypothesis. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Agar,  W.  E.  1914.  Parthenogenetic  and  sexual  reproduction  in  Simocepha- 
lus  vetulus  and  other  Cladocera.  Jour.  Genet.  III. 

Aida,  T.  1921.  On  the  inheritance  of  colour  in  a  fresh-water  fish,  Aplocheilus 
latipes,  Temmick  and  Schlegel,  with  special  reference  to  sex-linked  in- 
heritance. Genetics.  VI. 

Allen,  C.  E.  1917.  A  chromosome  difference  correlated  with  sex  differences 
in  Sphaerocarpos.  Science.  XL  VI. 

1919.  The  basis  of  sex  inheritance  in  Sphaerocarpos.  Proc.  Am.  Phil. 

Soc.  LVIII. 

1924.   Inheritance  by  tetrad   sibs   in   Sphaerocarpos.   Proc.  Am.   Phil. 


Soc.  LXIII. 
Andrews,  E.  A.  1909.  A  male  crayfish  with  some  female  organs.  Am.  Nat. 

XLIII. 
d'Angremond,   A.   1914.   Parthenokarpie  und   Samenbildung  bei  Bananen. 

Flora.  CVII. 
Artom,  C.  1921.  II  significato  delle  razze  e  delle  specie  tetraploidi  e  il  prob- 

lema  della  loro  origine.  Rivista  di  Biol.  III. 
1921.  Dati  citologici  sul  tetraploidismo  dell'  Artemia  salina  di  Mar- 

gherita  di  Savoia  (Puglia).  R.  Accademia  Naz.  dei  Lincei,  Roma.  XXX. 
1924.  II  tetraploidismo  dei  maschi  dell'  Artemia  salina  di  Odessa  in 


relazione  con  alcuni  problemi  generali  di  genetica.  Ibid.  XXXII. 

Baehr,  W.  B.  v.  1920.  Recherches  sur  la  maturation  des  oeufs  parthenogene- 
tiques  dans  1 'Aphis  Palmae.  La  Cellule.  XXX. 

Bagg,  H.  J.  1922.  Disturbance  in  mammalian  development  produced  by 
radium  emanation.  Am.  Jour.  Anat.  XXX. 

■  1923.  The  absence  of  one  kidney  associated  with  hereditary  abnormali- 
ties in  the  descendants  of  X-rayed  mice.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol,  and  Med. 
XXXI. 

1924.  The  absence  of  both  kidneys  associated  with  hereditary  abnor- 


malities in  mice.  Ibid.,  XXXI. 
Baker,  J.  R.   1925.   On   sex-intergrade  pigs:    their   anatomy,  genetics,   and 

developmental  physiology.  Brit.  Jour.  Exp.  Biol.  II. 
Baltzer,  F.  1914.  Die  Bestimmung  des  Geschlechts  nebst  einer  Analyse  des 

Geschlechts-dimorphismus    bei    Bonellia.    Mitteil.    Zool.    Station    Neapel. 

XXII. 

1924.  tjber  die  Giftwirkung  weiblicher  Bonellia-Gewebe  auf  das  Bonel- 

lia-Mannchen  und  andere  Organismen  und  ihre  Beziehung  zur  Bestimmung 
des  Geschlects  der  Bonellienlarve.  Natur.  Gesell.  in  Bern.  VIII. 

Banta,  A.  M.  1914.  One  hundred  parthenogenetic  generations  of  Daphnia 
without  sexual  forms.  Proc.  Soc.  Biol,  and  Med.  XI. 

1916.  Sex  intergrades  in  a  species  of  Crustacea.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc. 

II. 


312         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

1916.  A  sex-intergrade  strain  of  Cladocera.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol,  and 


Med.  XIV. 
— ■  1917.  A  strain  of  sex  intergrades.  Anat.  Kec.  XI. 

1918.  Sex  and  sex  intergrades  in  Cladocera.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  IV. 


Bartlett,  H.  H.  1915.  Additional  evidence  of  mutation  in  Oenothera.  Bot. 
Gaz.  LIX. 

1915.  The  mutations  of  Oenothera  stenomeres.  Am.  Jour.  Bot.  II. 

■  1915.  Mutations  en  masse.  Am.  Nat.  XLIX. 

1915.  Mass  mutation  in  Oenothera  pratincola.  Bot.  Gaz.  LX. 

Bateson,  W.   1913.   Mendel's  principles   of  heredity.  3d  impression.   Cam- 
bridge. 

1914.  Address.  Brit.  Assn.  Adv.  Sc,  Part  I,  Ref.  1;  Part  II,  Eef.  66. 

Bateson,  W.,  and  Punnett,  B.  C.  1905.  Rep.  Evol.  Com.  II. 

1911.   On  the  interrelations  of  genetic  factors.   Proc.   Boy.    Soc,  B. 

LXXXIV. 

■ 1911.  On  gametic  series  involving  reduplication  of  certain  terms.  Jour. 

Genet.  I. 
Bateson,  W.;    Saunders,  E.  R. ;   Punnett,  R.  C. ;   Hurst,  C.  C. ;   et  al. 

1902-1909.  Reports   (I  to  V)   to  the  Evolution  Committee  of  the  Royal 

Society.  London. 
Baur,  E.   1911.  Ein  Fall  von  Faktorenkoppelung  bei  Antirrhinum  majus. 

Verh.  naturf.  Ver.  Briinn.  XLIX. 

1912.  Vererbungs-  und  Bastardierungsversuche  mit  Antirrhinum — II. 

Faktorenkoppelung.  Zeit.  Abst.-Vererb.  VI. 

1914.  Einfuhrung  in  die  experimentelle  Vererbungslehre. 


Belar.    K.    1923.    fiber    den    Chromosomenzyklus    von    parthenogenetischen 
Erdnematoden.  Biol.  Zentralb.  XLIII. 

1924.  Neuere  Untersuchungen  iiber  Gesehlechtsehromosomen  bei  Pflan- 

zen.  Zeit.  f.  ind.  inst.  Abst.-Vererb.  XXXV. 

Belling,  J.   1921.  The  behavior  of  homologous  chromosomes  in  a  triploid 
canna.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  VII. 

1923.    The    attraction    between    homologous    chromosomes.    Eugenics, 

Genetics  and  the  Family.  I. 

1924.    Detachment     (elimination)     of    chromosomes    in    Cypripedium 


acaule.  Bot.  Gaz.  LXXVIII. 
Belling,  J.,  and  Blakeslee,  A.  F.  1922.  The  assortment  of  chromosomes  in 

triploid  Daturas.  Am.  Nat.  LVI. 
1923.  The  reduction  division  in  haploid,  diploid,  triploid,  and  tetra- 

ploid  Daturas.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  IX. 

1924.    The   distribution   of   chromosomes    in   tetraploid   Daturas.   Am. 


Nat.  LVIII. 

1924.  The  configurations  and  sizes  of  the  chromosomes  in  the  trivalents 

of  25-chromosome  Daturas.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  X. 

Benoit,   J.    1923.   Transformation   experimentale   du   sexe   par   ovariotomie 
precoce  chez  la  Poule  domestique.  L'Acad.  Sciences.  Paris.  CLXXVII. 

1923.  A  propos  du  changement  experimental  de  sexe  par  ovariotomie, 

chez  la  Poule.  Compt.  rend,  des  seances  d.  la  Societe  d.  Biol.  LXXXIX. 

1924.   Sur  la  signification  de  la   glande  genitale  rudimentaire   droite 


chez  la  Poule.  Compt.  rend.  l'Acad.  Sciences.  CLXXVIII. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  313 

1924.  Sur  un  nouveau  cas  d 'inversion  sexuelle  experimentale  chez  la 

Poule  domestique.  Compt.  rend.  l'Acad.   Sciences.   CLXXVIII. 

Berner,  O.  1924.  Un  coq  asexuel.  Eev.  Fran,  d'endocrin.  II. 

Blackburn,  K.  B.  1923.  Sex  chromosomes  in  plants.  Nature.  Nov.  10,  1923. 

1924.  The  cytologieal  aspects  of  the  determination  of  sex  in  dioecious 

forms  of  Lychnis.  Brit.  Jour.  Exp.  Biol.  I. 

1925.   Chromosomes   and   classification   in   the   genus   Rosa.   Am.   Nat. 


LIX. 

Blackburn,  K.  B.,  and  Harrison,  J.  W.  H.  1924.  A  preliminary  account 

of  the  chromosomes  and  chromosome  behaviour  in  the  Salicaceae.   Ann. 

of  Bot.  XXXVIII. 
1924.  Genetical  and  cytologieal  studies  in  hybrid  roses.  I.  The  origin 

of  a  fertile  hexaploid  form  in  the  pimpinellifolia-villosae  crosses.  Brit. 

Jour.  Exp.  Biol.  I. 
Blakeslee,  A.  F.  1921.  Types  of  mutations  and  their  possible  significance 

in  evolution.  Am.  Nat.  LV. 
■  1921.  The  globe,  a  simple  trisornic  mutant  in  Datura.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad. 

Sc.  VII. 

1922.  Variations   in  Datura,   due  to   changes  in   chromosome  number. 


Am.  Nat.  LVI. 

1924.   Distinction   between   primary   and   secondary   chromosomal   mu- 


tants in  Datura.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  X. 
Blakeslee,  A.  F.,  and  Avery,  B.  T.  1919.  Mutations  in  the  jimson  weed. 

Jour.  Heredity.  X. 
Blakeslee,  A.  F.,  and  Belling,  J.  1924.  Chromosomal  mutations  in  the 

jimson  weed,  Datura  stramonium.  Ibid.  XV. 
Blakeslee,  A.  F. ;  Belling,  John;  and  Farnham,  M.  E.  1920.  Chromosomal 

duplication  and  Mendelian  phenomena  in  Datura  mutants.  Science.  LII. 
Blakeslee,  A.  F. ;  Belling,  John;  Farnham,  M.  E. ;  and  Bergner,  A.  D. 

1922.  A  haploid  mutant  in  the  jimson  weed,  Datura  stramonium.  Ibid. 

LV. 
<->-      Boed^n,  K.   1924.  Die  typische  und  heterotypische  Kernteilung  der  Oeno- 

theren.  Zeit.  f.  Zell.  w.'Geweb.  I. 
Boring,  A.  M.  1923.  Notes  by  N.  M.  Stevens  on  chromosomes  of  the  domes- 
tic chicken.  Science.  LVIII. 
Boring,   A.   M.,   and   Pearl,   R.   1918.   Sex   studies.   Hermaphrodite   birds. 

Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXV. 
Bremer,  G.  1922.  A  cytologieal  investigation  of  some  species  and  species 

hybrids   within   the   genus    Saccharum.   Arch,   van   de    Suikerindustrie   in 

Nederlandsch-Indie. 

1923.  A  cytologieal  investigation  of  some  species  and  species  hybrids 

within  the  genus  Saccharum,  I.  Genetica.  V. 

1923.  II.  Ibid.  V. 

Bridges,  C.  B.  1913.  Non-disjunction  of  the  sex-ehromosomes  of  Drosophila. 
Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XV. 

1914.  Direct  proof  through  non-disjunetion  that  the  sex-linked  genes 

of  Drosophila  are  borne  by  the  X-chromosome.  Science,  n.s.  XL. 

1915.  A  linkage  variation  in  Drosophila.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XIX. 

1916.  Non-disjunetion  as  proof  of  the  chromosome  theory  of  heredity. 

Genetics.  I. 


314         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

1917.   The  elimination   of   males  in   alternate  generations   of  sex-con- 


trolled lines.  Anat.  Eec.  XI. 

—  1917.  An  intrinsic  difficulty  for  the  variable  force  hypothesis  of  cross- 
ing over.  Amer.  Nat.  LI. 

— -  1917.  Deficiency.  Genetics.  II. 

—  1918.  Maroon— a  recurrent  mutation  in  Drosophila.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad. 


Sc.  IV. 
—  1919.  Duplications.  Anat.  Kec.  XX. 

1919.   The   genetics  of   purple   eye  color   in   Drosophila  melanogaster. 


Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXVIII. 

1919.  Specific  modifiers  of  eosin  eye  color  in  Drosophila  melanogaster. 

Ibid.  XXVIII. 

1919.  Vermilion-deficiency.  Jour.  Gen.  Physiol.  I. 

1919.  The  developmental  stages  at  which  mutations  occur  in  the  germ 

tract.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol,  and  Med.  XVII. 

1920.  White-ocelli — an  example  of  a  "  slight ' '  mutant  character  with 


normal  viability.  Biol.  Bull.  XXXVIII. 
—  1920.  The  mutant  crossveinless  in  Drosophila  melanogaster.  Proc.  Nat. 

Acad.  Sc.  VI. 

— -  1921.  Gametic  and  observed  ratios  in  Drosophila.  Amer.  Nat.  LV. 
1921.  Proof  of  non-disjunction  for  the  fourth  chromosome  of  Droso- 


phila melanogaster.  Science,  n.s.  LIII. 

1921.  Current  maps  of  the  location  of  the  mutant  genes  of  Drosophila 

melanogaster.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  VII. 

1921.  Genetical  and  cytological  proof  of  non-disjunction  of  the  fourth 


chromosome  of  Drosophila  melanogaster.  Ibid.  VII. 
—  1921.    Triploid    intersexes    in    Drosophila    melanogaster.    Science,    n.s. 
LIV. 

1925.  Sex  in  relation  to  chromosomes  and  genes.  Am.  Nat.  LIX. 


Bridges,  C.  B.,  and  Morgan,  T.  H.  1919.  The  second-chromosome  group  of 
mutant  characters.  Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  No.  278. 

1923.  The  third-chromosome  group  of  mutant  characters  of  Drosophila 

melanogaster.  Ibid.  No.  327. 

Bonnier,   G.   1922.  Double  sex-linked  lethals  in  Drosophila  melanogaster. 
Acta  Zool.  III. 

1923.  Studies  on  high  and  low  non-disjunction  in  Drosophila  melano- 
gaster. Hereditas.  IV. 

-  1923.  tiber  die  Realisierung  verschiedener  Geschlechtsverhaltnisse  bei 


Drosophila  melanogaster.  Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XXX. 
-  1923.  On  different  sex-ratios  in  Drosophila  melanogaster.  Ibid.  XXXI. 
1924.  Contributions  to  the  knowledge  of  intra-  and  inter-specific  rela- 


tionships in  Drosophila.  Acta  Zool.  V. 
Boveri,   Th.    1908.   tJber   die   Beziehung   des   Chromatins   zur   Geschlechts- 

bestimmung.  Sitz.  Phys.-Med.  Gesell.  Wiirzburg,  Dez. 
■  1909.  Die  Blastomerenkerne  von  Ascaris  megalocephala  und  die  Theorie 

der  Chromosomen-Individualitat.  Arch.  Zellf.  III. 

1909.  Uber  Geschlechtschromosomen  bei  Nematoden.  Arch.   Zellf.  IV. 

1911.  Uber  die  Charaktere  von  Echiniden-Bastardlarven  bei  Hermaph- 


roditismus.  Verh.  Phys.-Med.  Gesell.  Wiirzburg.  XLI. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  315 

—  1911.  liber  das  Verhalten  der  Geschlechtschromosomen  bei  Hermaphro- 
ditismus.  Beobaehtungen  an  Ehabditis  nigrovenosa.  Verhand.  Phys.  Med. 
Gesell.  Wiirzburg  n.f.  XLI. 

—  1914.  fjber  die  Charaktere  von   Eohiniden-Bastardlarven  bei  verschie- 


dene    Mengenverhaltnis    miitterlicher    und    vaterlicher    Substanzen.    Yerh. 

Phys.-Med.  Gesell.  Wiirzburg.  XLII. 
Carothers,  E.  E.  1913.  The  Mendelian  ratio  in  relation  to  certain  orthop- 

teran  chromosomes.  Jour.  Morph.  XXIII. 
1917.  The  segregation  and  recombination  of  homologous  chromosomes 

found  in  two  genera  of  Acrididae.  Ibid.  XXVIII. 

1921.  Genetical  behavior  of  heteromorphic  homologous  chromosomes  of 


Circotettix   (Orthoptera).  Ibid.  XXXV. 
Castle,  W.  E.  1912.  The  inconstancy  of  unit-characters.  Am.  Nat.  XLVI. 

1914.   Size  inheritance  and  the  pure  line  theory.  Zeit.   f.   ind.   Abst.- 

Vererb.  XII. 

1916.  Can  selection  cause  genetic  change?  Am.  Nat.  L. 

1916.  Further  studies  on  piebald  rats  and  selection  with  observations 


on  gametic  coupling.  Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  No.  241. 

—  1919.  Studies  of  heredity  in  rabbits,  rats,  and  mice.  Ibid.  No.  288. 

—  1919.  Is  the  arrangement  of  the  genes  in  the  chromosome  linear?  Nat. 
Acad.  Sc.  V. 

—  1919.  Are  genes  linear  or  non-linear  in  arrangement?  Ibid.  V. 
1919.  Does  evolution  occur  exclusively  by  loss  of  genetic  factors?  Am. 


Nat.  LIII. 

Castle,  W.  E.,  and  Hadley,  P.  B.  1915.  The  English  rabbit  and  the  ques- 
tion of  Mendelian  unit-character  constancy.  Ibid.  XLIX. 

Castle,  W.  E.,  and  Phillips,  Joiin  C.  1914.  Piebald  rats  and  selection. 
Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  No.  195. 

Castle,  W.  E.,  and  Wachter,  W.  L.  1924.  Variations  of  linkage  in  rats  and 
mice.  Genetics.  IX. 

Chambers,  R.  1912.  A  discussion  of  Cyclops  viridis  Jurine.  Biol.  Bull.  XXII. 

Champy,  C.  1921.  Changement  experimental  du  sexe  chez  le  Triton  alpestris. 
Compt.  rend.  l'Acad.  Sciences.  CLXXII. 

1922.  £tude  experimentale  sur  les  differences  sexuelles  chez  les  Tri- 
tons: changement  de  sexe  experimental.  Arch.  d.  morph.  gen.  et  exper. 
VIII. 

Clausen,  J.  1922.  Studies  in  the  collective  species  Viola  tricolor  L.  II.  Bot. 
Tidsskift.  XXXVII. 

1924.  Increase  of  chromosome  numbers  in  Viola  experimentally  in- 
duced by  crossing.  Hereditas.  V. 

Clausen,  R.  E.,  and  Mann,  M.  C.  1924.  Inheritance  in  Nicotiana  Tabacum. 

v.  The  occurrence  of  haploid  plants  in  interspecific  progenies.  Proc.  Nat. 

Acad.  Sc.  X. 
Clausen,  R.  E.,  and  Goodspeed,  T.  H.   1916.  Hereditary  reaction-system 

relations — an  extension  of  Mendelian  concepts.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  II. 
Cleland,  R.  E.  1922.  The  reduction  divisions  in  the  pollen  mother  cells  of 

Oenothera  franciscana.  Am.  Jour.  Bot.  IX. 

1924.   Meiosis   in   pollen   mother   cells   of   Oenothera   franciscana    sul- 

furea.  Bot.  Gaz.  LXXVII. 

Collins,  E.  S.  1919.  Sex  segregation  in  the  Bryophyta.  Jour.  Genet.  VIII. 


316         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

1920.  The  genetics  of  sex  in  Funaria  hygrometrica.  Proc.  Boy.  Soc. 

XCI. 

1920.  Inbreeding  and  crossbreeding  in  Crepis  capillaris    (L.)    Wallr. 


Univ.  Calif.  Pub.  Agri.  Sc.  II. 
Collins,  J.  L.,  and  Mann,  M.  C.  1923.  Interspecific  hybrids  in  Crepis.  II. 

A  preliminary  report  on  the  results  of  hybridizing  Crepis  setosa  Hall. 

with  C.  capillaris  (L.)  Wallr.  and  with  C.  biennis  L.  Genetics.  VIII. 
Correns,  C.  1902.  iiber  den  Modus  und  den  Zeitpunkt  der  Spaltung,  etc. 

Bot.  Zeit.  LX. 

1909.  Zur  Kenntniss  der  Kolle  von  Kern  und  Plasma  bei  der  Verer- 

bung.  Zeit.  Abst.-Vererb.  II. 

1916.  Uber  den  Unterschied  von  tierischem  und  pflanzlichem  Zwitter- 


tum.  Biol.  Centralb.  XXXVI. 

—  1919.  Die  geschlechtliehe  Tendenz  der  Keimzellen  gemischtgeschlechti- 
ger  Pflanzen.  Zeit.  f.  Bot.  XII. 

1921.  Versuche  bei  Pflanzen  das  Geschlechtsverhaltnis  zu  verschieben. 


Hereditas.  II. 

Crew,  F.  A.  E.  1920.  A  description  of  certain  abnormalities  of  the  repro- 
ductive system  found  in  frogs,  and  a  suggestion  as  to  their  possible  signifi- 
cance. Proc.  Boy.  Phys.  Soc.  Edinburgh.  XX. 

1921.  Sex-reversal  in  frogs  and  toads.  A  review  of  the  recorded  cases 

of  abnormality  of  the  reproductive  system  and  an  account  of  breeding 
experiment.  Jour.  Genet.  XI. 

1923.  Studies  in  Intersexuality.  I.  A  peculiar  type  of  developmental 


intersexuality  in  the  male  of  the  domesticated  mammals.  II.  Sex-reversal 
in  the  fowl.  Proc.  Eoy.  Soc,  B.  XCV. 

1924.   Hermaphroditism  in  the  pig.  Jour.   Obstetrics  and   Gyn.  Brit. 


Emp.  XXXI. 
Cuenot,  L.  1898.  L 'hermaphrodisme  protandrique  d'Asterina  gibbosa  et  ses 

variations  suivant  les  localites.  Zool.  Anz.  XXI. 
1902.  La  loi  de  Mendel  et  l'heredite  de  la  pigmentation  chez  les  souris. 

Arch.  zool.  exper.  et  gen.  (3).  X. 

1903.  L'heredite  de  la  pigmentation  chez  les  souris  (2).  I.  Heredite  de 


la  pigmentation  chez  les  souris  noires.  Ibid.  I. 
—  1904.  L'heredite  de  la  pigmentation  chez  les  souris   (3).  I.  Les  for- 
mules  hereditaires.  Ibid.  II. 

1905.  Les  races  pures  et  leurs  combinaisons  chez  les  souris   (4).  Ibid. 


III. 

1907.  L'heredite  de  la  pigmentation  chez  les  souris  (5).  Ibid.  VI. 


Davis,  B.  M.   1909-1911.   Cytological  studies  on  Oenothera.  Ann.   of  Bot. 

XXIII,  XXIV,  XXV. 
1910.  Genetical  Studies  on  Oenothera.  Am.  Nat.  XLIV,  XLV,  XLVI, 

XL VII;  Zeit.  Abst.-Vererb.  XII. 

1913.  The  problem  of  the  origin  of  Oenothera  Lamarckiana  de  Vries. 


New  Phytol.  XII. 
—  1924.    The    behavior    of    Oenothera    neo-lamarckiana    in    selfed    line 


through  seven  generations.  Proc.  Am.  Phil.  Soc.  LXIII. 
Delage,  Y.  1903.  L'heredite,  et  les  grands  problemes  de  la  Biologie  Gen- 
erate. Paris. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  317 

Delaunay,  L.  1915.  Etude  eomparee  caryologique  de  quelques  especes  du 

genre  Muscari  Mill.  Mem.  de  la  soc.  natur.  de  Kiew.  XXV. 
Detlefsen,  J.  A.  1914.  Genetic  studies  on  a  cavy  species  cross.  Carnegie 

Inst.  Wash.  No.  205. 
Detlefsen,  J.  A.,  and  Eoberts,  E.  1921.  Studies  on  crossing-over.  I.  The 

effect  of  selection  on  cross-over  values.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXXII. 
Dokcaster,  L.  1908.  On  sex  inheritance  in  the  moth,  Abraxas  grossulariata 

and  its  var.  lacticolor.  Fourth  Kep.  Evol.  Com.,  Roy.  Soc.  London. 

1914.  Chromosomes,  heredity,  and  sex.  Quar.  Jour.  Micr.  Sc.  LIX. 

1914.  The  determination  of  sex.  Cambridge. 

1914.  On  the  relation  between  chromosomes,  sex-limited  transmission, 

and  sex-determination  in  Abraxas  grossulariata.  Jour.  Genet.  IV. 

1920.  An  introduction  to  the  study  of  cytology.  Cambridge. 


Doncaster,  L.,  and  Eaynor,  G.  H.  1906.  Breeding  experiments  with  Lepi- 

doptera.  Proc.  Zool.  Soc.  London. 
Durken,  B.  1923.  tlber  die  Wirkung  farbigen  Lichtes  auf  die  Puppen  des 

Kohlweissling    (Pieris   brassicae)    und  das  Verhalten   der   Nachkommen. 

Arch.  f.  Mikro.  Anat.  u.  Entw.  XCIX. 
East,  E.  M.  1910.  Notes  on  an  experiment  concerning  the  nature  of  unit 

characters.  Science.  XXXII. 

1911.  The  genotype  hypothesis  and  hybridization.  Am.  Nat.  XLV. 

1913.  Inheritance  of  flower  size  in  crosses  between  species  of  Nicotiana. 

Bot.  Gaz.  LV. 

■  1915.   The   chromosome  view  of  heredity  and   its  meaning  to   plant 


breeders.  Am.  Nat.  XLIX. 

1916.   Inheritance   in  crosses  between  Nicotiana   Langsdorfii   and  N. 


alata.  Genetics.  I. 
East,  E.  M.,  and  Hayes,  II.  K.  1911.  Inheritance  in  maize.  Conn.  Exp.  Sta. 

Bull.  No.  167. 
1912.   Heterozygosis   in   evolution  and  in   plant  breeding.   U.S.   Dept. 

Agr.,  Bureau  Plant  Ind.  Bull.  No.  243. 

1914.  A  genetic  analysis  of  the  changes  produced  by  selection  in  ex- 


periments with  tobacco.  Am.  Nat.  XLVIII. 

East,  E.  M.,  and  Jones,  D.  P.  1919.  Inbreeding  and  outbreeding.  Philadel- 
phia. 

East,  E.  M.,  and  Park,  J.  B.  1917.  Studies  in  self -sterility.  I.  Genetics.  II. 

Emerson,  R.  A.  1911.  Genetic  correlation  and  spurious  allelomorphism  in 
maize.  Ann.  Rep.  Neb.  Agr.  Exp.  Sta.  No.  24. 

1914.  The  inheritance  of  a  recurring  somatic  variation  in  variegated 

ears  of  maize.  Am.  Nat.  XLVIII. 

1917.  Genetical  analysis  of  variegated  pericarp  in  maize.  Genetics.  II. 


Emerson,  S.  H.  1924.  Do  balanced  lethals  explain  the  Oenothera  problem? 

Jour.  Wash.  Acad.  Sc.  XIV. 
Essenberg,  J.  M.  1923.  Sex-differentiation  in  the  viviparous  teleost  Xipho- 

phorus  helleri  Heckel.  Biol.  Bull.  XLV. 
Fankhauser,  G.  1924.  Analyse  der  physiologischen  Polyspermie  des  Triton- 

Eies  auf   Grund  von   Schniirungsexperimenten.   Jahrb.   d.   Phil.   Fak.   II. 

Universitat  Bern.  V. 
Farmer,  J.,  and  Digby,  L.  1910.  Cytological  features  of  varietal  and  hybrid 

ferns.  Ann.  of  Bot.  XXIV. 


318         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Faxon,  W.  1881.  Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  VIII. 

1885.  Mem.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Harvard  College.  X. 

1898.  Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.  XX. 

Federley,  H.  1912.  Das  Verhalten  der  Chromosomen  bei  der  Spermatogenese 

der  Schmetterlinge  Pygaera  anachoreta,  curtula  und  pigra  sowie  einiger 

ihrer  Bastarde.  Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  IX. 
.  1914.  Ein  Beitrag  zur  Kenntnis  der  Spermatogenese  bei  Mischlingen 

zwischen  Eltern  versehiedener   systematischer   Verwandtschaft.   Ofversigt 

af   Finska  Vetenskaps-Soeietetens  Forhandlingar.   LVI. 
Fell,  H.  B.  1923.  Histological  studies  on  the  gonads  of  the  fowl.  I.  The 

histological  basis  of  sex  reversal.  Brit.  Jour.  Exp.  Biol.  I. 
FiCK,  E.   1924.  Einiges  iiber  Vererbungsfragen.  Abhand.   Preus.   Akad.   d. 

Wiss.  Jahrg. 
Gates,  E.  E.  1913.  Tetraploid  mutants  and  chromosome  mechanisms.  Biol. 

Centralb.  XXXIII. 

1915.  On  the  modification  of  characters  by  crossing.  Am.  Nat.  XLIX. 

1915.  The  mutation  factor  in  evolution.  London. 

1916.  On  pairs  of  species.  Bot.  Gaz.  LXI. 

1917.  Vegetative  segregation  in  a  hybrid  race.  Jour.  Genet.  VI. 

1923.  Heredity  and  eugenics.  London. 

1924.  Polyploidy.  Brit.  Jour.  Exp.  Biol.  I. 

1925.  Species  and  chromosomes.  Am.   Nat.  LIX. 

Gates,  E.  E.,  and  Thomas,  N.  1914.  A  cytological  study  of  Oenothera  mut. 

lata  and  Oe.  mut.  semilata  in  relation  to  mutation.  Quar.  Jour.  Micr.  Sc. 

No.  236. 
Geerts,   J.    M.    1911.    Cytologische    Untersuehungen    einiger    Bastarde    von 

Oenothera  gigas.  Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesell.  XXIX. 
Geinitz,  B.  1915.  uber  Abweichungen  bei  der  Eireifung  von  Ascaris.  Arch. 

f.  Zellf.  XIII. 
Giard,  A.  1886.  De  l'influenee  de  certains  parasites  Ehizocephales  sur  les 

earacteres  sexuels  exterieurs  de  leur  hote.  C.  E.  Acad.  Sc.  Paris. 

1887.  La  castration  parasitaire.  Bull.  Sc.  Dep.  Nord.  XVIII. 

1887.   Sur   la   castration   parasitaire   chez   l'Eupagurus   bernhardus   et 

chez  la  Gebia  stellata.  C.  E.  Acad.  Sc.  Paris. 

1888.  Sur  la  castration  parasitaire  chez  les  genres  Paloemon  et  Hip- 


polyte.  Ibid. 

1888.  La  castration  parasitaire   (nouvelles  recherches).  Bull.  Sc.  Dep. 


Nord.  I. 
Goldschmidt,  E.  1912.  Erblichkeitsstudien  an  Schmetterlingen.  I,   1.   Zeit. 

f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  VII. 

1912.    Bemerkungen    zur    Vererbung    des    Geschlechtspolymorphismus. 

Ibid,  VIII. 

1916.  Experimental  intersexuality  and  the  sex  problem.  Am.  Nat.  L. 

1917.  A  further  contribution  to  the  theory  of  sex.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool. 


XXII. 

—  1917.  Crossing-over  ohne  Chiasmatypie?  Genetics.  II. 

1919.     Intersexualitat    und     Geschlechtsbestimmung.     Biol.     Zentralb. 

XXXIX. 

- —  1920.  Einfiihrung  in  die  Vererbungswissenschaft.  Leipzig. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  319 

—  1920,    1922,    1923.    Untersuchungen    iiber    Intersexualitat.    I,    II,    III. 
Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XXIII,  XXIX,  XXXI. 

1923.  The  mechanism  and  physiology  of  sex-determination.  London. 


Goodale,  H.  D.  1911.  Studies  on  hybrid  ducks.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  X. 

1911.  Some  results  of  castration  in  ducks.  Biol.  Bull.  XX. 

1911.  Sex-limited  inheritance  and  sexual  dimorphism  in  poultry.  Sci- 
ence. XXXIII. 

1913.   Castration    in   relation   to   the   secondary   sexual   characters    of 


brown  leghorns.  Am.  Nat.  XLV1I. 
— —  1916.  A  feminized  cockerel.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XX. 

1916.  Gonadectomy  in  relation  to  the  secondary  sexual  characters  of 


some  domestic  birds.  Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  Pub.  No.  243. 

1917.  Crossing  over  in  the  sex-chromosome  of  the  male  fowl.  Science, 


n.s.  XLVI. 

Goodspeed,  T.  H.  1913.  On  the  partial  sterility  of  Nicotiana  hybrids  made 
with  N.  sylvestris  as  a  parent.  Univ.  Calif.  Pub.  Bot.  V. 

1915.  Parthenogenesis,  parthenocarpy  and  phenospermy  in  Nicotiana. 

Univ.  Calif.  Pub.  Bot.  V. 

Goodspeed,  T.  H.,  and  Ayres,  A.  H.  1916.  On  the  partial  sterility  of  Nico- 
tiana hybrids  made  with  N.  sylvestris  as  a  parent.  II.  Univ.  Calif.  Pub. 
Bot.  V. 

Goodspeed,  T.  H.,  and  Clausen,  R.  E.  1917.  The  nature  of  the  Fj  species 
hybrids  between  Nicotiana  sylvestris  and  varieties  of  Nicotiana  tabacum. 
Univ.  Calif.  Pub.  Bot.  V. 

1917.   Mendelian   factor   differences   versus   reaction   system   contrasts 

in  heredity.  I  and  II.  Am.  Nat.  LI. 

1922.   Interspecific   hybridization    in   Nicotiana.    I.   On   the   results   of 

backcrossing  the  Fx  sylvestris-tabacum  hybrids  to  sylvestris.  Univ.  Calif. 
Pub.  Bot.  XI. 

Goodspeed,  T.  H.,  and  Kendall,  J.  N.  1916.  On  the  partial  sterility  of 
Nicotiana  hybrids  made  with  N.  sylvestris  as  a  parent.  III.  Ibid.  V. 

Greenwood,  A.  W.  1925.  Gonad  grafts  in  embryonic  chicks  and  their  rela- 
tion to  sexual  differentiation.  Brit.  Jour.  Exp.  Biol.  II. 

Gregory,  R.  P.  1909.  Note  on  the  histology  of  the  giant  and  ordinary  forms 
of  Primula  sinensis.  Proc.  Cambridge  Phil.   Soc.  XV. 

1911.  Experiments  with  Primula  sinensis.  Jour.  Genet.  I. 

1911.   On  gametic  coupling  and  repulsion  in  Primula  sinensis.   Proc. 

Roy.  Soc,  B.  LXXXIV. 

1912.   The  chromosomes  of   a  giant  form  of   Primula  sinensis.   Proc. 

Cambridge  Phil.  Soc.  XVI. 

1914.  On  the  genetics  of  tetraploid  plants  in  Primula  sinensis.  Proc. 

Roy.  Soc,  B.  LXXXVTI. 

Gould,  H.  N.  1917.  Studies  on  sex  in  the  hermaphrodite  mollusc  Crepidula 

plana.  I.  History  of  the  sexual  cycle.  Also  II.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXIII. 
Gowen,  J.  W.  1919.  A  biometrical  study  of  crossing  over.  On  the  mechanism 

of   crossing   over   in   the   third   chromosome   of   Drosophila  melanogaster. 

Genetics.  IV. 
Gowen,  M.   S.,  and  Gowen,  J.  W.  1922.  Complete  linkage  in  Drosophila 

melanogaster.  Amer.  Nat.  LVI. 


320         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Gudernatsch,   J.   F.   1911.   Hermaphroditismus   verus   in   man.   Am.   Jour. 

Anat.  XI. 
Haldane,  J.  B.  S.  1919.  The  combination  of  linkage  values,  and  the  calcu- 
lation of  distances  between  the  loci  of  linked  factors.  Jour.  Genet.  VIII. 
Hance,  K.  T.  1918.  Variations  in  the  number  of  somatic  chromosomes  in 

Oenothera  scintillans.  Genetics.  III. 
. 1924.   The  somatic  chromosomes   of  the  chick  and  their  possible  sex 

relations.  Science.  L1X. 
Harms,  W.   1921.  Untersuchungen  iiber  das  Biddersche   Organ  der  mann- 

lichen  und  weiblichen  Kroten.  I.  Die  Morphologie  des  Biddersehen  Organs. 

Zeit.  f.  d.  ges.  Anat.  LXII. 
1921.    Verwandlung    des    Biddersehen    Organs    in    ein    Ovarium   beim 

Mannchen  von  Bufo  vulgaris.  Zool.  Anz.  LIII. 
1923.  Untersuchungen  iiber  das  Biddersche  Organ  der  mannlichen  und 

weiblichen  Kroten.  II.  Die  Physiologie  des  Biddersehen  Organs  und  die 

experimentellphysiologische   Umdifferenzierung  vom  Mannchen  im   Weib- 

chen.  Zeit.  f.  d.  ges.  Anat.  LXIX. 

1923.   Die  physiologische   Geschlechtsumstimmung.   Verh.   d.  Deutsch. 


Zool.  Gesells.  E.  V.  XXVIII 

1924.   Weitere    Mitteilungen    iiber    die   physiologische    Geschlechtsum 


stimmung.  Ibid.  XXIX. 
Harman,    M.    T.    1917.    Another    case    of    Gynandromorphism.    Anat.    Eec. 

XIII. 
Harris,  E.  G.  1923.  Occurrence,  life-cycle,  and  maintenance,  under  artificial 
conditions,  of  Miastor.  Psyche.  XXX. 

1924.  Sex  of  adult  Ceeidomyidae   (Oligarces  sp.)   arising  from  larvae 

produced  by  Paedogenesis.  Ibid.  XXXI. 
Harrison,  J.  W.  H.  1919.  Studies  in  the  hybrid  Bistoninae.  III.  The  stimu- 
lus of  heterozygosis.  Jour.  Genet.  VIII. 

1919.  Studies  in  the  hybrid  Bistoninae.  IV.  Concerning  the  sex  and 

related  problems.  Ibid.  IX. 
Harrison,  J.  W.  H.,  and  Blackburn,  K.  1921.  The  status  of  the  British  rose 
forms  as  determined  by  their  cytological  behavior.  Ann.  of  Bot.  XXXV. 
Harrison,  J.  W.  H.,  and  Doncaster,  L.  1914.  On  hybrids  between  moths  of 
the  geometrid  sub-family  Bistoninae,  with  an  account  of  the  behavior  of 
the   chromosomes   in   gametogenesis   in   Lycia    (Biston)    hirtaria,   Ithysia 
(Nyssia)  zonaria  and  in  their  hybrids.  Jour.  Genet.  III. 
Hartman,  C.  1920.  The  free-martin  and  its  reciprocal.  Science.  LII. 
Hartman,  C,  and  Hamilton.  1922.  A  case  of  true  hermaphroditism  in  the 

fowl.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXXVI. 
Hartmann,  M.  1923.  fjber  sexuelle  Differenzierung  und  relative  Sexualitat. 

Studia  Mendeliana.  Briinn. 
Harvey,  E.  B.  1916.  A  review  of  the  chromosome  numbers  in  the  Metazoa. 
Jour.  Morph.  XXVIII. 

. .  1920.  A  review  of  the  chromosome  numbers  in  the  Metazoa.  II.  Ibid. 

XXXIV. 
Hay,  W.  P.  1905.  Smithsonian  Misc.  Coll.  III. 

Heilborn,  O.  1922.  Die  Chromosomezahlen  der  Gattung  Carex.  Svensk.  Bot. 
Tidskr.  XVI. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  321 

■  1924.    Chromosome    numbers    and    dimensions,    species-formation    and 

phylogeny  in  the  genus  Carex.  Hereditas.  V. 
Henking,  H.  1892.  Untersuchungen  iiber  die  ersten  Entwicklungsvorgange 

in  den  Eiern  der  Insekten.  Zeit.  f.  wiss.  Zool.  LIV. 
Heribert-Nilsson,  N.   1912.  Die  Variability  der   Oenothera  Lamarckiana 

und  das  Problem  der  Mutation.  Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  VIII. 
1920.  Zuwachsgeschwindigkeit  der  Pollenschlauche  und  gestorte  Men- 

delzahlen  bei  Oenothera  Lamarckiana.  Hereditas.  I. 

1920.  Kritische  Betrachtungen  und  faktorielle  Erklarung  der   Laeta- 


Velutinaspaltung  bei  Oenothera.  Ibid.  I. 
Hertwig,  P.   1920.   Ilaploide  und  diploide   Parthenogenese.  Biol.  Centralb. 

XL. 
Hertwig,  R.  1907.  Untersuchungen  iiber  das  sexualitatsproblem.  III.  Verh. 

d.  Deutsch.  Zool.  Gesells. 
. ]912.  tiber    don    derzeitigcn    Stand    <los    Sexualitatsproblems    nebst 

eigenen  Untersuchungen.  Biol.  Centralb.  XXXII. 

1921.  Tiber  den  Einfluss  der  uberreife  der  Eier  auf  das  Geschlechts- 

verhaltnis  bei  Frosehen  und  Schmetterlingen.  Sitzungsb.  d.  k.  bayer  Akad. 
Wiss.   (Math.-phys.  Kl.)   XXII. 

Hoyasse,  R.  1922.  Contribution  a  1 'etude  des  Chromosomes.  Variation  du 
nombre  et  regulation  en  parthenogenese.  Bull.  Biologique  de  la  France 
et  de  la  Belgique.  LVI. 

Hurst,  C.  C.  1925.  Experiments  in  Genetics.  Cambridge  University  Press. 

Huxley,  J.  S.  1920.  Note  on  an  alternating  preponderance  of  males  and 
females  in  fish,  and  its  possible  significance.  Jour.  Genet.  X. 

Huxley,  J.  S.,  and  Carr-Saunders,  A.  M.  1924.  Absence  of  prenatal  effects 
of  lens-antibodies  in  rabbits.  Brit.  Jour.  Exp.  Biol.  I. 

Janssens,  F.  A.  1905.  Evolution  des  au.xocytes  males  du  Batrachoseps  at- 
tenuates. La  Cellule.  XXII. 

1909.  La  theorie  de  la  chiasmatypie.  Nouvelle  interpretation  des  cineses 

de  maturation.  Ibid.  XXV. 

Jeffrey,  E.  C.  1925.  Polyploidy  and  the  origin  of  species.  Am.  Nat.  LIX. 
Jennings,  II.  S.  1911.  Pure  lines  in  the  study  of  genetics  in  lower  organ- 
isms. Am.  Nat.  XLV. 

1918.  Disproof  of  a  certain  type  of  theories  of  crossing  over  between 

chromosomes.  Ibid.  LI  I. 

1923.  Crossing  over   and  the  theory   that   the   genes   are   arranged   in 

serial  order.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  IX. 

1923.  The  numerical  relations  in  the  crossing  over  of  the  genes,  with  a 


critical  examination  of  the  theory  that  the  genes  are  arranged  in  a  linear 
series.  Genetics.  VIII. 

Johannsen,  W.  1909.  Elemente  der  exakten  Erblichkeitslehre.  Jena. 

1911.  The  genotype  conception  of  heredity.  Am.  Nat.  XLV. 

Jones,  D.  1917.  Dominance  of  linked  factors  as  a  means  of  accounting  for 
heterosis.  Genetics.  II. 

Junker,  H.  1923.  Cytologische  Untersuchungen  an  den  Geschlechtsorganen 
der  halbzwitterigen  Steinfliege  Perla  marginata.  Arch.  f.  Zellf.  XVII. 

Just,  G.  1924.  Untersuchungen  iiber  Faktorenaustausch.  Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.- 
Vererb.  XXXVI. 


322         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Kahle.  W.  1908.  Paedogenesis  bei  Cecidomyiden.  Zoologica.  Leipzig. 
Kihara,  H.  1919.  Tiber  cytologische  Studien  bei  einigen  Getreidearten.  II. 

Chromosomenzahlen  und  VerwandtschaftsverhiLltnisse  unter  Avena-Arten.  # 

Bot.  Mag.  Tokyo.  XXXIII. 
1921.    tiber    cytologische    Studien    bei    einigen    Getreidearten.    Ibid. 

XXXV. 

1924.  Cytologische  und  genetische  Studien  bei  wichtigen  Getreidearten 


mit  besonderen  Kiicksicht  auf  das  Verhalten   der  Chromosomen  und  die 
Sterilitat  in  den  Bastarden.  Memoirs  Coll.  Sc.  Kyoto  Imp.  Univ.,  Series 
B.  I. 
Krafka,  Jr.,  J.  1920.  The  effect  of  temperature  upon  facet  number  in  the 
bar-eyed  mutant  of  Drosophila.  Jour.  Gen.  Physiol.  II. 

1920.   Environmental   factors   other   than  temperature   affecting  facet 

number  in  the  bar-eyed  mutant  of  Drosophila.  Jour.  Gen.  Physiol.  III. 

Kuschakewitsch,  S.  1910.  Die  Entwicklungsgesehiehte  der  Keimdriisen 
von  Kana  esculenta.  Festschi.  f.  B.  Hertvog.  II. 

Kuwada,  Y.  1919.  Die  Chromosomenzahl  von  Zea  Mays  L.  Jour.  Coll.  Sc. 
Tokyo  Imp.  Univ.  XXXIX. 

Lancefield,  D.  E.  1922.  Linkage  relations  of  the  sex-linked  characters  in 
Drosophila  obscura.  Genetics.  VII. 

Lancefield,  K.  C,  and  Metz,  C.  W.  1922.  The  sex-linked  group  of  charac- 
ters in  Drosophila  willistoni.  Am.  Nat.  LVI. 

Lang,  A.  1904.  tiber  Vorversuche  zu  Untersuchungen  uber  die  Varietaten- 
bildung  von  Helix  hortensis  Miiller  und  Helix  nemoralis  L.  Abdruck  aus 
der  Festschrift  z.  siebzigsten  Geburtstage  v.  E.  Haeckel.  Jena. 

1908.  tiber  die  Bastarde  von  Helix  hortensis  Miiller  und  Helix  nemo- 
ralis. Jena. 

1911.    Fortgesetzte    Vererbungsstudien.    I.    Albinismus    bei    Bander- 


schnecken.  Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  V. 

1912.  Vererbungswissenschaftliche  Miszellen.  Zeits.  Abst.-Vererb.  VIII. 


Liu, ie,  F.  B.  1916.  The  theory  of  the  free-martin.  Science,  n.s.  XLIII. 

1917.  The  free-martin;  a  study  of  the  action  of  sex-hormones  in  the 

foetal  life  of  cattle.  Jour.  Exp.  Zobl.  XXIII. 

Lipschutz,  A.  1919.  Die  Pubertatsdriise  und  ihre  Wirkungen.  Bern. 
Little,  C.  C.  1913.  Experimental  studies  of  the  inheritance  of  color  in  mice. 
Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  No.  179. 

1914.  Dominant  and  recessive  spotting  in  mice.  Am.  Nat.  XLVIII. 

Ljungdahl,   H.    1922.   Zur   Zytologie    der   Gattung   Papaver.    Svensk   Bot. 

Tidskr.  XVI. 

Lock,  B.  H.  1906.  Eecent  progress  in  the  study  of  variation,  heredity  and 
evolution.  London  and  New  York. 

Longley,  A.  E.  1923.  Cytological  studies  in  the  genera  Kubus  and  Cratae- 
gus. Am.  Nat.  LVII. 

1924.  Cytological  studies  of  diploid  and  polyploid  forms  of  raspberries. 

Jour.  Agri.  Kesearch.  XXVII. 

-  1924.  Chromosomes  in  maize  and  maize  relatives.  Ibid.  XXVIII. 
1925.  Segregation  of  carbohydrates  in  maize-pollen.  Science.  LXI. 


Lotsy,  J.  P.  1911.  Hybrides  entre  especes  d 'Antirrhinum.  Bepts.  4th  Intern. 

Conf.  Genet.  Paris. 
1916.  Evolution  by  means  of  hybridization.  The  Hague. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  323 

Lutz,  A.  M.  1912.  Triploid  mutants  in  Oenothera.  Biol.  Centralb.  XXXII. 

1917.  Fifteen-  and  sixteen-chromosome  Oenothera  mutants.  Am.  Jour. 

Bot.  IV. 

Magnusson,  It.  1918.  Geschlechtslose  Zwillinge.  Eine  gewohnlich  Form  von 
Hermaphroditismus  beim  Binde.  Arch.  f.  Anat.  u.  Physiol. 

Malloch,  W.  S.  and  F.  W.  1924.  Species  crosses  in  Nicotiana,  with  par- 
ticular reference  to  N.  longiflora  x  N.  Tabacum,  N.  longiflora  x  N.  San- 
derae,  N.  Tabacum  x  N.  glauca.  Genetics.  IX. 

Mann,  M.  C.  1923.  The  occurrence  and  hereditary  behavior  of  two  new 
dominant  mutations  in  an  inbred  strain  of  Drosophila  melanogaster. 
Ibid.  VIII. 

1923.  A  demonstration  of  the  stability  of  the  genes  of  an  inbred  stock 

of   Drosophila   melanogaster   under   experimental   conditions.   Jour.    Exp. 
Zool.  XXXVIII. 

Marchal,  em.  1912.  Eeeherches  cytologiques  sur  le  genre  Amblystegium. 

Bull,  de  la  Soc.  roy.  de  Bot.  de  Belg.  LI. 
Marchal,  fiL.  and  km.   1906.  Kecherches   Experimentales  sur   la  Sexualite 

des  Spores  chez  les  Mousses  dioiques.  Mem.  couronnes,  par  la  Classe  dea 

sciences,  dans  la  seance  du  15  decembre  1905. 

1907,  1911,  and  1919.  Aposporie  et  sexualite  chez  les  mousses.  Bull,  de 

l'Acad.  roy.  de  Belg.  (Classe  de  science).  Nos.  7,  9-10,  1. 

Marshal,  J.  1907.  Sur  l'Ovogenese  des  Selaciens  et  de  quelques  autres 
Chordates.  I.  Morphologie  de  1 'Element  chromosomique  dans  1 'Ovocyte  I 
chez  les  Selaciens,  les  Teleosteens,  les  Tuniciers  et  l'Amphioxus.  La  Cel- 
lule. XXIV. 

Marshall,  W.  W.,  and  Muller,  II.  J.  1917.  The  effect  of  long-continued 
heterozygosis  on  a  variable  character  in  Drosophila.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool. 
XXII. 

Mayor,  J.  W.  1923.  An  effect  of  X-rays  on  crossing-over  in  Drosophila. 
Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol,  and  Med.  XX. 

1923.  An  effect  of  X-rays  on  the  linkage  of  Mendelian  characters  in 

the  first  chromosome  of  Drosophila.  Genetics.  VIII. 

May,  H.  G.  1917.  The  appearance  of  reverse  mutations  in  the  bar-eyed  race 

of  Drosophila  under  experimental  control.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  III. 
•  1917.  Selection  for  higher  and  lower  facet  numbers  in  the  bar-eyed 

race  of  Drosophila  and  the  appearance  of  reverse  mutations.  Biol.  Bull. 

XXXIII. 
McClung,  C.  E.   1902.  The  accessory  chromosome — sex  determinant?  Biol. 

Bull.  III. 
■  1902.  Notes  on  the  accessory  chromosome.  Anat.  Anz.  XX. 

1905.   The   chromosome   complex   of   orthopteran   spermatocytes.   Biol. 

Bull.  IX. 

1914.  A  comparative  study  of  the  chromosomes  in  orthopteran  sperma- 
togenesis. Jour.  Morph.  XXV. 

1917.  The  multiple  chromosomes  of  Hesperotettix  and  Mermiria.  Ibid. 


XXIX. 

McPhee,  H.  C.  1924.  The  influence  of  environment  on  sex  in  hemp,  Cannabis 

sativa  L.  Jour.  Agri.  Besearch.  XXVIII. 
1924.  Meiotic  cytokinesis  of  Cannabis.  Bot.  Gaz.  LXXVIII. 


324         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Mehling,   E.    19] 5.   Tiber   die   gynandromorphen   Bienen    des   Eugsterschen 

Stockes.  Verh.  Phys.-Med.  Gesell.  Wiirzburg.  XLVIII. 
Mendel,   G.    1865.    Versuche   iiber    Pflanzen-hybriden.    Verh.    Naturf.    Ver. 

Briinn.  IV. 
Metz,  C.  W.   1914.  An  apterous  Drosophila  and  its  genetic  behavior.  Am. 

Nat.  XLVIII. 

1914.  Chromosome  studies  in  the  Diptera.  I.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XVII. 

1916.  Mutations  in  three  species  of  Drosophila.  Genetics.  I. 

1916.  Chromosome  studies  on  the  Diptera.  II.  The  paired  association  of 

chromosomes  in  the  Diptera,  and  its  significance.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXI. 

1916.   Chromosome  studies  on   the  Diptera.   III.  Additional   types  of 


chromosome  groups  in  the  Drosophilidae.  Am.  Nat.  L. 

—  1916.   Linked   Mendelian   characters  in   a  new  species   of   Drosophila. 
Science  n.s.  XLIV. 

—  1918.  The  linkage  of  eight  sex-linked  characters  in  Drosophila  virilis. 


Genetics.  III. 

—  1920.  Correspondence  between  chromosome  number  and  linkage  groups 
in  Drosophila  virilis.  Science  n.s.  LI. 

—  1920.    The   arrangement    of    genes    in    Drosophila   virilis.    Proc.    Nat. 
Acad.  Sc.  VI. 

1925.  Chromosomes  and  sex  in  Sciara.  Science.  LXI. 


Metz,  C.  W.,  and  Moses,  M.  S.  1923.  Chromosomes  of  Drosophila.  Jour. 
Heredity.  XIV. 

Metz,  C.  W.;  Moses,  M.;  and  Mason,  E.  1923.  Genetic  studies  on  Droso- 
phila virilis,  with  considerations  on  the  genetics  of  other  species  of  Droso- 
phila. Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  No.  328. 

Meves.  Fr.  1907.  Die  Spermatocyten  bei  der  Honigbiene  Apis  mellifica  (L.) 
nebst  Bemerkungen  liber  Chromatinreduktion.  Arch.  f.  mikro.  Anat.  u. 
Entw.  LXX. 

Minoura,  T.  1921.  A  study  of  testis  and  ovary  grafts  on  the  hen's  egg  and 
their  effects  on  the  embryo.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXXI1L 

Mohr,  O.  L.  1919.  Character  changes  caused  by  mutation  of  an  entire  region 
of  a  chromosome  in  Drosophila.  Genetics.  IV. 

1921.    Den    Morgan 'ske    skole    og    dens    betydning    for    den    moderne 

arvelighedsforskning.  Nord.  Jordbrugsforsk.  Foren.  Kongr.  Kbenhavn. 

1922.   Cases  of  mimic  mutations  and  secondary  mutations  in  the  X- 


chromosome    of    Drosophila    melanogaster.    Zeit.    f.    ind.    Abst.-Vererb. 
XXVIII. 

—  1922.  o.  Winge's  paper  on  "The  interaction  between  two  closely  linked 
lethals  in  Drosophila  as  the  cause  of  the  apparent  constancy  of  the 
mutant  '  spread. '  ' '  Genetica.  IV. 

1923.  A  somatic  mutation  in  the  singed  locus  of  the  X-chromosome  in 


Drosophila  melanogaster.  Hereditas.  IV. 

1923.  Das  Deficiency-Phanomen  bei  Drosophila  niolanogaster.  Zeit.   f. 

ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XXX. 

1923.   A  genetic  and  cytological  analysis   of   a  section   deficiency   in- 


volving four  units  of  the  X-chromosome  in  Drosophila  melanogaster.  Ibid. 
XXXII. 
Moore,  C.  E.   1919.  On  the  physiological  properties  of  the  gonads  as  con- 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  325 

trollers  of  somatic  and  psychical  characteristics.  I.  The  rat.  Jour.   Exp. 
Zool.  XXVIII. 
—  1925.  Sex   determination   and   sex   differentiation   in   birds   and   mam- 


mals. Am.  Nat.  LIX. 
de  Mol,  W.  E.  Duplication  of  generative  nuclei  by  means  of  physiological 

stimuli  and  its  significance.  Genetica.  V. 
1921.  De  Pexistence  de  varietes  heteroploides  de  rHyacinthus  orien- 

talis  L.  dans  les  cultures  hollandaises.  Inst.  Bot.  Universitat  Zurich  Serie. 

II. 

1922.   The   disappearance   of   the   diploid   and  triploid   magnicoronate 


narcissi  from  the  larger  cultures  and  the  appearance  in  their  place  of 
tetraploid  forms.  Proc.  Koninklijke  Akad.  van  Wetenschappen  te  Am- 
sterdam. XXV. 

Morgan,  L.  V.  1922.  Non-criss-cross  inheritance  in  Drosophila  melanogaster. 
Biol.  Bull.  XLII. 

MORGAN,   T.    II.    1910.   Sex-limited    inheritance    in    Drosophila.    Science    n.s. 
XXII. 

1910.  The  method  of  inheritance  of  two  sex-limited  characters  in  the 

same  animal.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol,  and  Med.  VIII. 

1911.  An  attempt  to  analyze  the  constitution  of  the  chromosomes  on 


the  basis  of  sex-limited  inheritance  in  Drosophila.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XI. 
—  1912.  Further  experiments  with  mutations  in  eye-color  of  Drosophila: 
the  loss  of  the  orange  factor.  Jour.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phila.  XV. 

1912.   Eight   factors   that   show   sex-linked   inheritance   in   Drosophila. 


Science,  n.s.  XXXV. 

—  1912.  Heredity  of  body  color  in  Drosophila.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XIII. 

—  1912.  A  modification  of  the  sex-ratio,  and  of  other  ratios,  in  Droso- 
phila through  linkage.  Zeits.  Abst.-Vererb.  VII. 

—  1912.  The  explanation  of  a  new  sex-ratio  in  Drosophila.  Science  n.s. 


XXXVI. 

—  1912.  Complete  linkage  in  the  second  chromosome  of  the  male.  Science 
n.s.  XXXVI. 

—  1912.  The  elimination  of  the  sex-chromosomes  from  the     male-produc- 


ing eggs  of  Phylloxerans.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XII. 

—  1914.  The  failure  of  ether  to  produce  mutations  in  Drosophila.  Amer. 
Nat.  XLVIII. 

1914.   No   crossing  over   in   the   male  of   Drosophila   of   genes   in   the 


second  and  third  pairs  of  chromosomes.  Biol.  Bull.  XXVI. 

-  1914.  Two  sex-linked  lethal  factors  in  Drosophila  and  their  influence 
on  the  sex-ratio.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XVII. 

1914.  Heredity  and  sex.  New  York. 

1915.  The  predetermination  of  sex  in  Phylloxerans  and  Aphids.  Jour. 


Exp.  Zool.  XIX. 

—  1915.   The   infertility  of   rudimentary   winged   females   of  Drosophila 
ampelophila.  Amer.  Nat.  XLIX. 

—  1915.  The  constitution  of  the  hereditary  material.  Proc.  Amer.  Phil. 
Soc.  LIV. 

—  1915.  The  role  of  the  environment  in  the  realization  of  a  sex-linked 


Mendelian  character  in  Drosophila.  Amer.  Nat.  XLIX. 


326         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

1915.  Localization  of  the  hereditary  material  in  the  germ  cells.  Proc. 


Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  I. 

1916.  A  critique  of  the  theory  of  evolution.  Princeton  Press. 

1917.  An  examination   of   the   so-called   process   of   contamination   of 

the  genes.  Anat.  Eec.  XI. 

1917.  The  theory  of  the  gene.  Amer.  Nat.  LI. 

1918.  Concerning  the  mutation  theory.  Sc.  Mo.  V. 

1918.  Changes  in  factors  through  selection.  Ibid.  V. 

1918.  Evolution  by  mutation.  Ibid.  VI. 

1919.   A   demonstration   of   genes  modifying  the   character   ' '  notch. ' ' 

Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  No.  218. 

1919.  The  physical  basis  of  heredity.  Philadelphia. 

— ■  1922.    The    mechanism    of    heredity.    Nature    CIX,    Feb.    23,    Mar.    2, 
Mar.  9. 

-  1922.   On   the   mechanism   of   heredity.   Croon ian   Lecture.   Proc.   Roy. 
Soc,  B.  XCIV. 

-  1923.  The  modern  theory  of  genetics  and  the  problem  of  embryonic 
development.  Physiol.  Eev.  III. 

-  1924.  Are  acquired  characters  inherited?  Yale  Review.  XIII. 

-  1924.  Human  inheritance.  Am.  Nat.  LVIII. 


Morgan,  T.  H.,  and  Bridges,  C.  B.  1913.  Dilution  effects  and  bicolorism  in 
certain  eye  colors  of  Drosophila.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XV. 

1916.  Sex-linked  inheritance  in  Drosophila.  Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  No. 

237. 

1919.   The   construction   of   chromosome   maps.   Proc.   Soc.   Exp.   Biol. 

and  Med.  XVI. 

1919.  The  origin  of  gynandromorphs.  Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  No.  278. 

1919.  The  inheritance  of  a  fluctuating  character.  Jour.  Gen.  Physiol.  I. 

Morgan,  T.   H.,  and  Cattell,  E.   1912.  Data  for  the  study  of  sex-linked 

inheritance  in  Drosophila.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XIII. 

1913.  Additional  data  for  the  study  of  sex-linked  inheritance  in  Droso- 
phila. Ibid.  XIV. 

Morgan,  T.  H.,  and  Lynch,  C  J.  1912.  The  linkage  of  two  factors  in  Droso- 
phila that  are  not  sex-linked.  Biol.  Bull.  XXIII. 

Morgan,  T.  H.,  and  Plough,  H.  II.  1915.  The  appearance  of  known  muta- 
tions in  other  mutant  stocks.  Amer.  Nat.  XLIX. 

Morgan,  T.  H.;  Sttjrtevant,  A.  H. ;  and  Bridges,  C.  B.  1920.  The  evidence 
for  the  linear  order  of  the  genes.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  VI. 

Morgan,  T.  H.;  Sturtevant,  A.  H.;  Muller,  H.  J.;  and  Bridges,  C.  B. 
1915.  2d  ed.  1923.  The  mechanism  of  Mendelian  heredity.  Holt  &  Co. 

Muller,  H.  J.  1914.  A  factor  for  the  fourth  chromosome  of  Drosophila. 
Science,  n.s.  XXXIX. 

1914.  A  gene  for  the  fourth  chromosome  of  Drosophila.  Jour.  Exp. 

Zool.  XVII. 

1916.  The  mechanism  of  crossing  over.  Amer.  Nat.  L. 

1917.  An  Oenothera-like  case  in  Drosophila.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  III. 

1918.  Genetic  variability,  twin  hybrids  and  constant  hybrids,  in  a  case 

of  balanced  lethal  factors.  Genetics.  III. 

1920.  Are  the  factors  of  heredity  arranged  in  a  line?  Amer.  Nat.  LIV. 


Nachtsheim,   H.   1912.   Parthenogenese,   Eireifung  und   Geschlechtsbestim- 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  327 

mung   bei   der    Honigbiene.    Sitzungs    d.    Gesell.    f.    Morph.    u.    Phys.    in 
Miinchen. 

1913.   Cytologische   Studien   iiber   die   Gesehlechtsbestimmung   bei   der 


Honigbiene   (Aphis  mellifica  L.).  Arch.  f.  Zellf.  II. 
—  1914.  Das  Problem  der  Gesehlechtsbestimmung  bei  Dinophilus.  Berieh. 
d.  Naturf.  Gesell.  z.  Freiburg  i.  Br.  XXI. 

1920.    Crossing-over-Theorie    oder    Reduplikationshypothese?    Zeit.    f. 


ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XXII 

1921.   Sind  haploide  Organismen    (Metazoen)    lebensfahig?  Biol.   Zen 


tralb.  XLI. 
Nawaschix,    M.    1925.    Vlorphologisehe    Kernstudien    der    Crepis-*\rten    in 

bezug  auf  die  Artbildung.  Zeit.  f.  Zellf.  u.  mikr.  Anat.  II. 
Nemec,  B.  1904.  iiber  die  Eimvirkung  des  Chloralhydrates  auf  die  Kern- 

und  Zellteilung.  Pringsheims  Jahrb.  f.  wiss  Bot.  XXXIX. 

1910.  Das  Problem  der  Befruchtungsvorgange  und  andere  zytologisehe 

Fragen.  Berlin.  Gebriider  Borntraeger. 

Ortmanx,  A.  E.  1905.  Mem.  Carnegie  Mus.  II. 

Osawa,  I.  1913.  Studies  on  the  cytology  of  some  species  of  Taraxacum. 
Arch.  f.  Zellf.  X. 

1913.    On   the    development    of   the    pollen    grain    and    embryo-sac    of 

Daphne,  with  special   reference  to  the  sterility  of  Daphne  odora.  Jour. 
Coll.  Agri.  Tokyo.  IV. 

1916.  Triploid  mutants  in  garden  races  of  morus.  Japanese.  Bull.  Imp. 

Sericult.  Exp.  Sta.  Japan.  I. 

1920.    Cytological    and    experimental    studies    in    morus,    with    special 


reference  to  triploid  mutants.  Ibid.  I. 
Ostenfeld,  C.  II.   1925.  Some   remarks   on   species   and   chromosomes.   Am. 

Nat.  LIX. 
Overeem,  C.  VAN.   1921.   t'ber  Formen   m it    abweichender  Chromosomenzahl 

bei  Oenothera.  Bot.  Zentralb.  XXXVI I  I. 
1922.  "fiber  Formen  niit  abweichender  Chromosomenzahl  bei  Oenothera. 

Ibid.  XXXIX. 
Painter,  T.  S.  1922,  1923.  Studies  in  mammalian  spermatogenesis.  I  and 

II.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXXV  and  XXXVII. 
Peacock,  A.  D.   1925.  Animal  parthenogenesis  in   relation  to  chromosomes 

and  species.  Am.  Nat.  LIX. 
Pearl,  r.  1917.  The  selection  problem.  Am.  Nat.  LI. 
Pearl,  R,,  and  Curtis,  M.  1909.  A  case  of  incomplete  hermaphroditism. 

Biol.  Bull.  XVII. 
Pearl,  R.,  and  Surface,  F.  M.  1909.  Is  there  a  cumulative  effect  of  selec- 
tion? Data  from  the  study  of  fecundity  in  the  domestic  fowl.  Zeit.  f.  ind. 

Abst.-Vererb.  II. 
Percival,  J.  1921.  The  wheat  plant.  London.  Duckworth. 
Pick,  L.  1914.  tjber  den  wahren  Hermaphroditisnnis  des  Menschen  und  der 

Sangetiere.  Arch.  f.  mikr.  Anat.  LXXXIV. 
Pictet,   A.,   et  Ferrero,   A.    1924.   Segregation   dans   un   croisement   entre 

especes  de  Cobayes    (Cavia  aperea  par  Cavia  cobaya).   Soc.   d.  phys.   et 

d'his.  nat.  d.  Geneve.  XLI. 
Plough,  H.  H.  1917.  The  effect  of  temperature  on  linkage  in  the  second 

chromosome  of  Drosophila.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  III. 


328         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

1917.  The  effect  of  temperature  on  crossingover  in  Drosophila.  Jour. 


Exp.  Zool.  XXIV. 

1919.   Linear  arrangement   of  genes  and   double   crossing  over.   Proc. 


Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  V. 

1921.  Further  studies  on  the  effect  of  temperature  on  crossing  over. 

Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXII. 

1924.  Radium  radiations  and  crossing  over.  Amer.  Nat.  LVIII. 


Ponse,   K.    1924.   L'organe   de   Bidder  et  le   determinisme   des   caracteres 

sexuels  secondares  du  Crapaud   (Bufo  vulgaris  L.).  Rev.  Suisse  d.  Zool. 

XXXI. 
Ponse,  K.,  et  GuySnot,  E.   1923.  Inversion  experimentale  du  type  sexuel 

dans  la  gonade  du  Crapaud.  C.  R.  Soc.  Biol.  LXXXTX. 
Pritchard,  F.  S.  1916.  Change  of  sex  in  hemp.  Jour.  Heredity.  VII. 
Renner,   O.    1917.   Versuche   iiber   die    gametische   Konstitution   der   Oeno- 

theren.  Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XVIII. 

1918.  Oenothera   Lamarckiana   und   die   Mutationsthcorie.   Die   Natur- 

wissenschaften.  VT. 

Eiddle,  O.  1916.  Sex  control  and  known  correlations  in  pigeons.  Am.  Nat.  L. 

1916.  Success  in  controlling  sex.  Jour.  Heredity.  VII. 

1917.  The  control  of  the  sex  ratio.  Jour.  Wash.  Acad.  Se.  VII. 

1917.  The  theory  of  sex  as  stated  in  terms  of  results  of  studies  on 

pigeons.  Science,  n.s.  XLVI. 

1924.  A  case  of  complete  sex-reversal  in  the  adult  pigeon.  Am.  Nat. 

LVIII. 

1925.  Birds  without  gonads:   Their  origin,  behaviour,  and  bearing  on 

the  theory  of  the  internal  secretion  of  the  testis.  Brit.  Jour.  Exp.  Biol. 
II. 

Eosenberg,  O.  1909.  iiber  die  Chromosomenzahlen  bei  Taraxacum  und  Eosa. 

Swensk  Bot.  Tidskr.  III. 
1917.    Die    Beduktionsteilung    und    ihre    Degeneration    in    Ilieracium. 

Svensk.  Bot.  Tidskr.  XL  > 

1925.  Chromosomes  and  species.  Am.  Nat.  LIX. 

Safir,  S.  E.  1913.  A  new  eye  color  mutation  in  Drosophila.  Biol.  Bull.  XXV. 

1916.  Buff,  a  new  allelomorph  of  white  eye  color  in  Drosophila.  Genet- 
ics. I. 

1920.  Genetic  and  cytological  examination  of  the  phenomena  of  pri- 
mary non-disjunction  in  Drosophila  melanogaster.  Ibid.  V. 

Sakamura,  T.  1916.  ttber  die  Beeinflussung  der  Zell-  und  Kernteilung 
dureh  die  Chloralisierung  mit  besonderer  Bueksicht  auf  das  Verhalten 
der  Chromosomen.  Bot.  Mag.  Tokyo.  XXX. 

1918.   Kurze   Mitteilung   iiber   die   Chromosomenzahlen   und   die   Ver- 

wandtschaftsverhaltnisse  der  Triticum  Arten.  Ibid.  XXXII. 

1920.  Experimentelle  Studien  iiber  die  Zell-  und  Kernteilung  mit  beson- 
derer Eiicksieht  auf  Form,  grosse  und  Zahl  der  Chromosomen.  Jour.  Coll. 
Sci.  Imp.  Univ.  Tokyo.  XXXIX. 

Schaffner,  J.  H.  1919.  Complete  reversal  of  sex  in  hemp.  Science.  L. 

1921.   Influence   of   environment    on   sexual   expression   in   hemp.   Bot. 

Gaz.  LXXI. 

1923.  The  influence  of  relative  length  of  daylight  on  the  reversal  of 


sex  in  hemp.  Ecology.  IV. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  329 

1925.  Sex  determination  and  sex  differentiation  in  the  higher  plants. 

Am.  Nat.  LIX. 

Schleip,  W.  1911.  Das  Verhalten  des  Chromatins  bei  Angiostomum  (Rhab- 
donema)   nigrovenosum.  Arch.  f.  Zellf.  VII. 

Schmidt,  Johs.  1920.  The  genetic  behaviour  of  a  secondary  sexual  charac- 
ter. IV.  Compt.-rend.  des  Travaux  d.  Laboratoire  Carlsberg.  XIV. 

Schrader,  F.  1920.  Sex  determination  in  the  white-fly  (Trialeurodes 
vaporarium).  Jour.  Morph.  XXXIV. 

1921.  The  Chromosomes  of  Pseudococcus  nipae.  Biol.  Bull.  XL. 

1923.  A  study  of  the  chromosomes  in  three  species  of  Pseudococcus. 

Arch.  f.  Zellf.  XVII. 

Schweizer,  Jakob.  1923.  Polyploidie  und  Geschlechterverteilung  bei  Splach- 

num  sphaericum  (Linn.  Fil.)   Swartz.  Flora.  CXVI. 
Seiler,  J.   1914.  Das  Verhalten  der  Geschlechtschromosomen  bei  Lepidop- 

teren.  Arch.  f.  Zellf.  XIII. 

1917.  Geschlechtschromosomen-Untersuchungen  an  Psychiden.  Zeit.  f. 

ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XVIII. 

19,17.    Zytologisehe    Vererbungsstudien    an    Schmetterlingen.    Sitzungs. 

Ges.  naturf.  Fr.  Berlin.  II. 

1919.  Researches  on  the  sex-chromosomes  of  Psychidae  (Lepidoptera). 

Biol.  Bull.  XXXVI. 

1920.    Geschlechtschromosomen-TJntersuchungen   an   Psychiden.    I.    Ex- 

perimentelle  Beeinflussung  der  geschlechtsbestimmenden  Reifeteilung  bei 
Talaeporia  tubulosa  Retz.  Arch.  f.  Zellf.  XV. 

1921.   Geschlechtschromosomen-Untersuchungen  an  Psychiden.  II.   Die 

Chromosomenzahlen  von  Fumea  casta  und  Talaeporia  tubulosa.  Ibid.  XVI. 

■  1922.     Geschlechtschromosomen-Untersuchungen     an     Psychiden.     III. 

Chromosomenkoppelungen  bei  Solenobia  pineti  Z.  Ibid.  XVI. 

1923.  Geschlechtschromosomen-Untersuchungen  an  Psychiden.  IV.  Die 


Parthenogenese  der  Psychiden.  Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XXXI. 
Seiler,  J.,  und  Haniel,  C.  B.  1921.  Das  verschiedene  Verhalten  der  Chro- 

mosomen  in  Eireifung  und  Samenreifung  von  Lymantria  monacha  L.  Zeit. 

f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XXVII. 
Serebrovsky,  A.  S.  1922.  Crossing-over  involving  three  sex-linked  genes  in 

chickens.  Am.  Nat.  LVI. 
Sexton,  E.  W.,  and  Huxley,  J.  S.  1921.  Intersexes  in  Gammarus  cheureuxi 

and  related  forms.  Jour.  Marine  Biol.  Assn.  United  Kingdom.  XII. 
Sharp,  L.  W.  1921.  An  introduction  to  cytology.  New  York. 
Shiwago,  P.  J.  1924.  The  chromosome  complexes  in  the  somatic  cells  of 

male  and  female  of  the  domestic  chicken.  Science.  LX. 
Shull,  A.  F.  1910.  Studies  in  the  life  cycle  of  Hydatina  senta.  Jour.  Exp. 

Zool.  VIII. 

1915.  Inheritance  in  Hydatina  senta.  II.  Characters  of  the  females 

and  their  parthenogenetic  eggs.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XVIII. 

1915.  Periodicity  in  the  production  of  males  in  Hydatina  senta.  Biol. 

Bull.  XXVIII. 

1921.  Chromosomes  and  the  life  cycle  of  Hydatina  senta.  Biol.  Bull. 

XLI. 

1925.  Sex  and  the  parthenogenetic-bisexual  cycle.  Am.  Nat.  LIX. 


330        THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Shull,  A.  F.,  and  Ladoff,  Sonia.  1916.  Factors  affecting  male-production 

in  Hydatina.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXI. 
Shull,   G.   H.   1909.   The  "presence  and  absence"  hypothesis.   Am.   Nat. 

XLIII. 

1910.  Inheritance  of  sex  in  Lychnis.  Bot.  Gaz.  XLIX. 

1911.  Eeversible  sex-mutants  in  Lychnis  dioica.  Bot.  Gaz.  LIII. 

1912.  Hermaphrodite  females  in  Lychnis  dioica.  Science.  XXXVI. 

1914.  Duplicate  genes  for  capsule-form  in  Bursa  bursa-pastoris.  Zeit. 

f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XII. 

1923.  Further  evidence  of  linkage  with  crossing  over  in  Oenothera. 

Genetics.  VIII. 

1923.  Linkage  with  lethal  factors  in  the  solution  of  the  Oenothera 


problem.  Eugenics,  Genetics  and  the  Family.  I. 
Sinnott,  E.  W.,  and  Blakeslee,  A.  F.  1922.  Structural  changes  associated 

with  factor  mutations  and  with  chromosome  mutations  in  Datura.  Proc. 

Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  VIII. 
Smith,  Geoffrey.   1906.  Fauna  und  Flora  des  Golfes  von  Neapel.  Rhizo- 

cephala.  Zool.  Sta.  Neapel.  Monographic  XXIX.  t 

■  1909.  Crustacea.  Cam.  Nat.  Hist. 

1910-1912.   Studies   in   the   experimental   analysis   of   sex.   Parts    1-9. 

Quar.  Jour.  Micro.  Sc.  LIV,  LV,  LVI,  LVII,  LVIII. 

1911.  Sexual  changes  in  the  blood  and  liver  of  Carcinus  maenas.  Quar. 


Jour.  Micr.  Sc.  LVII. 

1913.  Studies  in  the  experimental  analysis  of  sex.  10.  The  effect  of 


Sacculina  on  the  storage  of  fat  and  glycogen  and  on  the  formation  of 

the  pigment  by  its  host.  Quar.  Jour.  Misc.  Sc.  LIX. 
Sorokine,  Helen.  1924.  The  satellites  in  the  somatic  mitoses  in  Eanunculus 

acris  L.  Publ.  de  la  fac.  des  sciences  de  l'univ.  Prague  Nr.  13. 
Spencer,  H.  1864.  The  principles  of  biology. 
Steinach,  E.  1913.  Feminierung  von  Mannchen  und  Maskulierung  von  Weib- 

chen.  Centralb.  f.  Phys.  XXVII. 

1916.  Pubertatsdriisen  und  Zwitterbildung.  Arch.  f.  d.  Entw.  d.  Organ. 

XLII. 

Steiner,  G.  1923.  Intersexes  in  Nematodes.  Jour.  Heredity.  XIV. 
Stevens,  N.  M.  1905.  Studies  in  spermatogenesis  with  especial  reference  to 
the  accessory  chromosome.  Carnegie  Inst.  Wash.  No.  36. 

1909.  An  unpaired  chromosome  in  the  aphids.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  VI. 

1911.  Heterochromosomes  in  the  guinea-pig.  Biol.  Bull.  XXI. 

Stockard,  C.  B.  1913.  The  effect  on  the  offspring  of  intoxicating  the  male 

parent  and  the  transmission  of  the  defects  to  subsequent  generations.  Am. 
Nat.  XLVII. 

1916.  The  hereditary  transmission  of  degeneracy  and  deformities  by 

the  descendants  of  alcoholized  mammals.  Interstate  Med.  Jour.  XXIII. 

1923.  Experimental  modification  of  the  germplasm  and  its  bearing  on 


the  inheritance  of  acquired  characters.  Am.  Phil.  Soc.  LXII. 
Stockard,  C.  E.,  and  Papanicolaou,  G.  1916.  A  further  analysis  of  the 

hereditary  transmission  of  degeneracy  and  deformities  by  the  descendants 

of  alcoholized  mammals.  II.  Am.  Nat.  L. 
1918.  Further  studies  on  the  modification  of  the  germ-cells  in  mam- 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  331 

mals:  The  effect  of  alcohol  on  treated  guinea-pigs  and  their  descendants. 

Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXVI. 
Stout,  A.  B.  1919.  Intersexes  in  Plantago  lanceolata.  Bot.  Gaz.  LXVIII. 
Strasburger,  E.  1910.  tiber  geschlechtbestimmende  Ursachen.  Jahr.  f.  wiss. 

Bot.  XLVIII. 
Strong,  B.  M.  1912.  Kesults  of  hybridizing  ring-doves,  including  sex-linked 

inheritance.  Biol.  Bull.  XXIII. 
Sturtevant,   A.   H.    1913.   A   third   group   of   linked   genes   in   Drosophila 

ampelophila.  Science,  n.s.  XXXVII. 

1913.  The  linear  arrangement  of  six  sex-linked  factors  in  Drosophila, 

as  shown  by  their  mode  of  association.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XIV. 

■  1914.   The  reduplication  hypothesis  as  applied  to  Drosophila.   Amer. 

Nat.  XLVIII. 
■  1915.   The  behavior  of  the   chromosomes  as  studied  through  linkage. 

Zeit.  Abst.-Vererb.  XIII. 

1915.  Experiments  on  sex  recognition  and  the  problem  of  sexual  selec- 
tion in  Drosophila.  Jour.  An.  Behav.  V. 

1915.  A  sex-linked  character  in  Drosophila  repleta.  Amer.  Nat.  XLIX. 

1916.   Notes   on   North  American   Drosophilidae   with   descriptions   of 

twenty-three  new  species.  Ann.  Ent.  Soc.  Amer.  IX. 

1917.  Crossing  over  without  chiasmatype?  Genetics.  II. 

1917.  An  analysis  of  the  effect   of  selection  on  bristle  number  in   a 

mutant  race  of  Drosophila.  Anat.  Bee.  XI. 

1917.  Genetic  factors  affecting  the  strength  of  linkage  in  Drosophila. 

Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  III. 

1918.  An  analysis  of  the  effects  of  selection.  Carnegie  Inst.  Wash. 

No.  264. 

1918.    A   synopsis    of    the   Neartic    species    of    the   genus    Drosophila 

(Sensu  lato).  Bull.  Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.  XXXVIII. 

191S.  A  parallel  mutation  in  Drosophila  funebris.  Science.  XLVIII. 

1919.  Inherited  linkage  variations  in  the  second  chromosome.  Carnegie 


Inst.  Wash.  No.  278. 

—  1920.  Intersexes  in  Drosophila  simulans.  Science,  n.s.  LI. 

—  1920.   The   vermilion   gene   and    gynandromorphism.   Proc.    Soc.    Exp. 
Biol,  and  Med.  XVII. 

—  1920.  Genetic  studies  on  Drosophila  simulans.  I.  Introduction.  Hybrids 
with  D.  melanogaster.  Genetics.  V. 

1921.   Genetic   studies   on   Drosophila   simulans.   II.    Sex-linked   group 

of  genes.  Ibid.  VI.  III.  Autosomal  genes.  General  discussion.  Ibid.  VI. 

—  1921.  The  North  American  species  of  Drosophila.  Carnegie  Inst.  Wash. 
No.  301. 


—  1921.  Linkage  variation  and  chromosome  maps.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc. 
VII. 

—  1921.  A  case  of  rearrangement  of  genes  in  Drosophila.  Ibid.  VII. 
1925.  The  effect  of  unequal  crossing-over  at  the  bar  locus  in  Droso- 


phila. Genetics.  X. 
Sturtevant,  A.  H.;  Bridges,  C.  B.;  and  Morgan,  T.  H.  1919.  The  spatial 

relations  of  genes.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  V. 
Sturtevant,  A.  H.,  and  Morgan,  T.  H.  1923.  Beverse  mutation  of  the  bar 

gene  correlated  with  crossing  over.  Science,  n.s.  LVII. 


332         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Swingle,  W.  1920.  Neoteny  and  the  sexual  problem.  Am.  Nat.  LIV. 

1922.  Is  there  a  transformation  of  sex  in  frogs?  Ibid.  LVI. 

1925.   Sex   differentiation   in   the  bullfrog    (Eana   catesbeiana).   Ibid. 

LIX. 

Tackholm,   G.    1920.   On  the   cytology  of  the   genus  Kosa.   Svensk.   Bot. 
Tidskr.  XIV. 

1922.  Zytologische  Studien  iiber  die  Gattung  Eosa.  Acta   Horti  Ber- 

giani.  VII. 

Tahara,  M.  1921.  Cytologische  Studien  an  einigen  Kompositen.  Jour.  Coll. 

Sc.  Tokyo  Imp.  Univ.  XLIII. 
Tanaxa,  Y.  1913.  A  study  of  Mendelian  factors  in  the  silkworm  Bombyx 

mori.  Jour.  Coll.  Agr.  Tohoku  Imp.  Univ.  (Sapporo,  Japan).  V. 

1913.  Gametic  coupling  and  repulsion  in  silkworms.  Ibid.  V. 

1914.  Sexual  dimorphism  of  gametic  series  in  the  reduplication.  Trans. 

Sapporo  Nat.  Hist.  Soc.  V. 

1914.    Further    data   on    the   reduplication    in    silkworms.    Jour.    Coll. 

Agr.  Tohoku  Imp.  Univ.  (Sapporo,  Japan).  VI. 

1915.  Occurrence  of  different  systems  of  gametic  reduplication  in  male 


and  female  hybrids.  Zeit.  Abst.-Vererb.  XIV. 

1916.  Genetic  studies  on  the  silkworm.  Jour.  Coll.  Agr.  Tohoku  Imp. 

Univ.  VII. 

1922.  Sex-linkage  in  the  silkworm.  Jour.  Genet.  XII. 

■  1924.  Maternal  inheritance  in  Bombyx  mori.  Genetics.  IX. 

Tandler,  J.,  und  Grosz,  S.  1913.  Die  biologischen  Grundlagen  der  sekun- 

daren  Geschlechtscharaktere.  Berlin. 
Tandler,  J.,  and  Keller,  K.  1910.  uber  den  Einfluss  der  Kastration  auf 

den  Organismus.  IV.  Die  Korperform  der  weiblichen  Friihkastraten  des 

Rindes.  Arch.  f.  d.  Entw.-Mech.  d.  Organ.  XXXI. 

1911.   uber  das  Verhalten  des  Chorions  bei  verschiedengeschlechtlicher 

Zwillingsgraviditiit  des  Bindes  und  iiber  die  Morphologie  den  Genitalien 
der  weiblichen  Tiere,  welche  einer  solchen  Graviditas  entstammen.  Deutsche 
tierarztliche  Wochenschrift.  No.  10. 

Taylor,  W.  R.  1920.  A  morphological  and  cytological  study  of  reproduction 

in  the  genus  Acer.  Bot.  Contrib.  Univ.  Pa.  V. 
Tennent,  D.  H.   1911.  A  heterochromosome  of  male  origin   in  Echinoids. 

Biol.  Bull.  XXI. 

1912.  Studies  in  cytology,  I  and  II.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XII. 

Tischler,  G.  1916.  Chromosomenzahl,  -Form  und  -Individualitat  im  Pflanz- 

enreiche.  Progressus  rei  bot.  V. 
Tournois,  J.  1911.  Anomalies  florales  du  houblon  Japonais  et  du  chanvre 

determinees  par  des  semis  Hatip.  Compt.  rend.  l'Acad.  Sc.  Paris.  CLIII. 
Toyama,  K.  1906.  On  the  hybridology  of  the  silkworms.  Rep.  Sericultural 

Assn.  Japan. 

1906.    Studies   on   the   hybridology   of    insects.   I.   On   some   silkworm 

crosses,  with  special  reference  to  Mendel 's  law  of  heredity.  Bull.  Coll.  Agr. 
Tokyo  Imp.  Univ.  VII. 

1912.  On  certain  characteristics  of  the  silk-worm  which  are  apparently 


non-Mendelian.  Biol.  Centralb.  XXXII. 
Trow,  A.  H.  1913.  Forms  of  reduplication — primary  and  secondary.  Jour. 
Genet.  II. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  333 

1916.  A  criticism  of  the  hypothesis  of  linkage  and  crossing  over.  Ibid. 

V. 

Turner,  C.  L.  1924.  Studies  on  the  secondary  sexual  characters  of  crayfishes. 

I.  Male  secondary  sexual  characters  in  females  of  Canibarus  propinquus. 

Biol.  Bull.  XLVI. 
De  la  Vaulx.    1919.   L 'intersexualite   chez  un   crustace   cladocere   Daphne 

atkinsoni.  Baird.  Compt.  rend.  Acad.  d.  Sc.  CLXIX. 
DE  Vries,  H.  1901-1903.  Die  Mutationstheorie.  Leipzig. 

■  1905.  Species  and  varieties;   their  origin  by  mutation.  Chicago. 

■  1907.   Plant-breeding;    comments   on  the  experiments  of  Nilsson   and 

Burbank.  Chicago. 
■  1907.  On  twin  hybrids.  Bot.  Gaz.  XLIV. 

1908.  Bastarde  von  Oenothera  gigas.  Ber.  Deutsch.  Bot.  Gesell.  XXVIa. 

1908.  tiber  die  Zwillingsbastarde  von  Oenothera  nanella.  Ibid.  XXVI. 

1909.  On  triple  hybrids.  Bot.  Gaz.  XLVII. 

1910.  Intracellular  Pangenesis.  Trans. 

1911.  Tiber  doppeltreziproke   Bastarde  vou   Oenothera  biennis  und  O. 


muricata.  Biol.  Centralb.  XXXI. 

—  1913.  Gruppenweise  Artbildung.  Berlin. 

—  1914.  The  probable  origin  of  Oenothera  Lamarckiana  Ser.  Bot.  Gaz. 
LVII. 

1915.  Oenothera  gigas  nanella,  a  Mendelian  mutant.  Ibid.  LX. 

1916.  New  dimorphic  mutants  of  the  Oenotheras.  Ibid.  LXII. 

1924.  On  physiological  chromomeres.  La  Cellule.  XXXV. 


DE  Vries,  H.,  and  BoedYN,  K.  1923.  On  the  distribution  of  mutant  charac- 
ters among  the  chromosomes  of  Oenothera  Lamarckiana.  Genetics.  VIII. 

1924.  Double  chromosomes  of  Oenothera  Lamarckiana  semigigas.  Bot. 

Gaz.  LXXVIII. 

Walton,  A.  C.  1924.  Studies  on  nematode  gametogenesis.  Zeit.  f.  Zell.  u. 

Geweb.  I. 
Weinstejn,   A.   1918.   Coincidence  of   crossing  over  in   Drosophila  melano- 

gaster  (ampelophila).  Genetics.  III. 

1920.    Homologous    genes    and    linear    linkage    in    Drosophila    virilis. 

Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sc.  VI. 

1922.  Crossing  over,  non-disjunction,  and  mutation  in  Drosophila  viri- 


lis. Sigma  Xi  Quar.  X. 
Weismann,  A.  1889.  Essays  upon  heredity.  Trans. 

1902.  The  germ  plasm.  Trans. 

1904.  The  evolution  theory.  Trans. 

Wenrich,  D.  H.  1916.  The  spermatogenesis  of  Phrynotettix  magnus  with 
special  reference  to  svnapsis  and  the  individuality  of  the  chromosomes. 
Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Harv.  Coll.  LX. 

Wettstein,  F.  v.  1923.  Kre^zungsversuche  mit  multiploiden  Moosrassen. 
I.  Biol.  Zentralb.  XLIII.  II.  Ibid.  XLIV. 

1924.    Gattungskrenzungen    bei    Moosen.    Zeit.    f.    ind.    Abst.-Vererb. 

XXXIII. 

1924.  Morphologie  und  Physiologie  des  Formwechsels  dcr  Moose  auf 


genetischer  Grundlage.  I.  Ibid.  XXXIII. 
White,  O.  E.  1916.  Inheritance  studies  in  Pisum.  I.  Inheritance  of  cotyledon 
color.  Am.  Nat.  L. 


334         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

1917.  Studies  of  inheritance  in  Pisum.  II.  The  present  state  of  knowl- 


edge of  heredity  and  variation  in  peas.  Proe.  Am.  Phil.  Soc.  LVI. 
—  1918.  Inheritance  studies  in  Pisum.  III.  The  inheritance  of  height  in 
peas.  Mem.  Torrey  Bot.  Club.  XVII. 

1917.  Inheritance  studies  in   Pisum.  IV.  Interrelation  of  the  genetic 


factors  of  Pisum.  Jour.  Agri.  Kesearch.  XI. 
Whiting,  Anna  R.  1925.  The  inheritance  of  sterility  and  of  other  defects 

induced   by   abnormal   fertilization   in   the   parasitic   wasp,    Hadrobracon 

juglandis  (Ashmead).  Genetics.  X. 
Whiting,  P.  W.  1918.  Sex-determination  and  biology  of  a  parasitic  wasp, 

Hadrobracon  brevicornis   (Wesmael).  Biol.  Bull.  XXXIV. 
— - —  1919.    Genetic    studies    on    the    Mediterranean    flour -moth,    Ephestia 

Kuhniella  Zeller.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXVIII. 

1921.  Studies  on  the  parasitic  wasp,   Hadrobracon  brevicornis    (Wes- 


mael). I.  Genetics  of  an  orange-eyed  mutation  and  the  production  of 
mosaic  males  from  fertilized  eggs.  Biol.  Bull.  XLI.  II.  A  lethal  factor 
linked  with  orange.  Ibid.  XLI. 

—  1921.  Rearing  meal  moths  and  parasitic  wasps  for  experimental  pur- 
poses. Jour.  Heredity.  XII. 

1921.  Heredity  in  wasps.  The  study  of  heredity  in  a  parthenogenetic 


insect,  the  parasitic  wasp,  Hadrobracon.  Ibid.  XII. 

1924.   A  study  of  hereditary  and  environmental  factors  determining 


a  variable  character.  Defective  and  freak  venation  in  the  parasitic  wasp, 
Hadrobracon    juglandis    (Ash.).    Studies   in   child   welfare.    Univ.    Iowa. 
First  Series.  No.  73.  III. 
Whitney,  D.  D.  1914.  The  influence  of  food  in  controlling  sex  in  Hydatina 
senta.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XVII. 

1916.  The  control  of  sex  by  food  in  five  species  of  rotifers.  Ibid.  XX. 

1917.  The  relative  influence  of  food  and  oxygen  in  controlling  sex  in 

rotifers.  Ibid.  XXIV. 

1924.   The   chromosome   cycle   in   the   rotifer   Asplanchna   intermedia. 

Anat.  Rec.  XXIX. 

Wieman,  H.  L.  1917.  The  chromosomes  of  human  spermatocytes.  Am.  Jour. 

Anat.  XXI. 
Willier,   B.    H.   1921.    Structures   and   homologies   of   free-martin   gonads. 

Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XXXIII. 
Wilson,  E.  B.  1899.  The  cell  in  development  and  inheritance.  New  York. 
- — —  1905-1910.  Studies  on  chromosomes,  I  to  VI.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  II,  III, 

VI,  IX. 

1910.   The  chromosomes  in  relation   to  the   determination  of  sex.   Sc. 


Progress.  No.  16. 

—  1911.  Studies  on  chromosomes.  VII.  Jour.  Morph.  XXII. 

—  1911.  The  sex  chromosomes.  Arch.  f.  Mikr.  Anat.  LXXVII. 

—  1912.  Studies  on  chromosomes.  VIII.  Jour.  Exp.  Zool.  XIII. 
1914.   Croonian  Lecture:   The  bearing  of  cytological  research  on  he- 


redity. Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  B.  LXXXVIII. 
Wilson,  E.  B.,  and  Morgan,  T.  H.  1920.  Chiasmatype  and  crossing  over. 

Am.  Nat.  LIV. 
Winge,  O.  1917.  The  chromosomes.  Their  numbers  and  general  importance. 

Compt.  rend.  trav.  d.  Lab.  d.  Carlsberg.  XIII. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  335 

1921.  On  a  partial  sex-linked  inheritance  of  eve-colour  in  man.  Ibid. 

XIV. 

1922.  A  peculiar  mode  of  inheritance  and  its  cytological  explanation. 

Jour.   Genetics.   XII.   One-sided  masculine   and  sex-linked  inheritance   in 
Lebistes  reticulatus.  Ibid.  XII. 

1923.  Crossing-over  between  the  X-  and  the  Y-chromosome  in  Lebistes. 

Jour.  Genet.  XIII. 

1923.   On  sex  chromosomes,  sex  determination,  and  preponderance  of 

females  in  some  dioecious  plants.  Compt.  rend.  d.  trav.  d.  Lab.  d.  Carls- 
berg.  XV. 

1924.  Zytologische  untersuchungen  iiber  Speltoide  und  andere  mutan- 

tenahnliche  aberranten  beim  Weizen.  Hereditas.  V. 

Winiwarter,  H.  de.  1921.  La  formule  chromosomiale  dans  l'espece  humaine. 
Compt.  rend,  seances  d.  la  Societe  d.  Biol.  LXXXV. 

1921.  Chiasmatypie  et  reduction.  Ibid.  LXXXV. 

Winkler,  H.  1910.  tiber  die  Nachkommenschaft  der  Solanum  Pfropfbas- 
tarde  und  die  Chromosomenzahlen  ihrer  Keimzellen.  Zeit.  f.  Bot.  II.  Rev. 
in  Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  III. 

1913-1914.  Die    Chimarenforschung   als    Methode    der    experimentellen 

Biologic  Phys.-Med.  Gesell.  Wiirzburg. 

1916.  tiber  die  expeiimentelle  Erzeugung  von  Pflanzen  mit  abweichen- 

den  Chromosomenzahlen.  Zeit.  f.  Bot.  VIII. 
Witschi,  E.  1921.  Der  Hermaphrodismus  der  Frosche  und  seine  Bedeutung 

fur    das    Geschlechtsproblem   und    die   Lehre    der   inneren    Sekretion    der 

Keimdriisen.  Arch.  f.  Entw.  Mech.  XLIX. 
■  1921.  Development  of  gonads  and  transformation  of  sex  in  the  frog. 

Am.  Nat.  LV. 
1922.  Experimente  mit  Froschzwittem.   Verhandl.   Deutsch.   Gesell.   f. 

Vererb.  Wien. 


1922.  Vererbung  und  Zytologie  des  Geschlechts  nach  Untersuchungen 

an  Froschen.  Zeit.  f.  ind.  Abst.-Vererb.  XXIX. 

1923.  tiber  die  genetische  Konstitution  der  Froschzwitter.  Biol.  Zen- 

tralb.  XLIH. 

1923.   tiber   bestimmt    gerichtete    Variation    von    Erbfaktoren.    Studia 

Mendeliana.  Briinn. 

■  1923.  Ergebnisse  der  neuren  Arbeiten  iiber  die  Geschlechtsprobleme  bei 

Amphibien.  Zeit.  Abst.-Vereb.  XXXI. 

1923.   tiber  geographische   Variation  und  Artbildung.   Rev.   Suisse   d. 

Zool.  XXX. 

1924.   Die   Entwicklung   der   Keimzellen    der   Rana   temporaria   L.    I. 

Urkeimzellen  und  Spermatogenese.  Zeit.  f.  Zelle.  und  Geweb.  I. 

1924.   Die   Beweise   fiir   die   Umwandlung   weiblicher   Jungfrosche   in 

mannliche   nach   uteriner   uberreife   der   Eier.   Arch.    f.   Mikro.   Anat.   u. 
Entw.  CII. 

Wodsedalek,  J.  E.  1913,  1914,  1920.   (a)   Spermatogenesis  in  the  pig,  etc. 

(b)   Spermatogenesis  of  the  horse,  etc.  (c)  Studies  on  the  cells  of  cattle 

with  special  reference  to  the  accessory  chromosome  and  chromotoid  body. 

Biol.  Bull.  XXV,  XXVI,  XXXVIII. 
Woltereck,    R.    1911.    tiber    Veranderung    der    Sexualitat   bei    Daphniden. 

Leipzig. 


336         THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 

Yampolsky,  C.  1919.  Inheritance  of  sex  in  Mercurialis  annua.  Am.  Jour. 

Bot.  VI. 

Yatsu,  N.  1921.  On  the  changes  in  the  reproductive  organs  in  heterosexual 
parabiosis  of  albino  rats.  Anat.  Eec.  XXI. 

Zawadowsky.  M.   1923.  Die  Entvricklungsmechanik  des  Geschlechts.    (Rus- 
sian, with  German  summary.)   Moscow. 

Zelexy.  C.  1917.  Full-eve  and  emarginate-eye  from  bar-eye  in  Drosophila 
without  change  in  the"  bar  gene.  Abst.  loth  Ann.  Meet.,  Am.  Soe.  Zool. 

1917.  Selection  for  high-facet  and  for  low-facet  number  in  the  bar-eyed 

race  of  Drosophila.  Ibid. 

1920.  A  change  in  the  bar  gene  of  Drosophila  melanogaster  involving 


further  decrease  in  facet  number  and  increase  in  dominance.  Jour.  Exp. 

Zool.  XXX. 
Zeleky,  C.  and  Mattoox,  E.  W.  1915.  The  effect  of  selection  upon  the 
"bar-eve"  mutant  of  Drosophila.  Ibid.  XIX. 


INDEX 


abnormal  abdomen,  291. 

Abraxas,  61,  62,  208,  209,  245. 

absence  of  genes,  71-77,  85. 

Acer,  170. 

Agar,  253. 

Aida,  222,  223,  226. 

albinos,  65. 

allelomorphs,  multiple,  92,  93. 

Allen,  128,  215. 

amphibia,  205. 

Andalusian  fowl,  281. 

Angiostomum,  231,  232, 

Anthothrips,  149. 

Antirrhinum,  97,  98. 

Aphelopus,  252. 

aphids,  228,  229,  230. 

Aplocheilus,  223. 

Archieracium,  167. 

Artemia,  108,  109. 

Artom,  108,  109. 

Ascaris,  38,  39,  107,  108,  136,  219, 

220. 
atavism,  85. 
Atriplex,  171. 
attached-X,  56-58. 
Avery,  177. 
avian  type,  206. 


B 

Babcock,  194. 
Bagg,  297,  298,  299. 
Baker,  249. 
balanced  genes.  124. 
Baltzer,  139,  254. 


Bank,  149. 

Banta,  253. 

bar-eye,  86-91. 

bar-infra-bar,  90,  91. 

barnacles,  253. 

barley,  150. 

Bateson,  10,  17,  307. 

Baur,  97,  98. 

bee.  106,  144-146,  214.  235-237. 

Belaf,  213. 

Bellamy,  255. 

Belling*     119-122,     132-134.     177, 

180,  182,  185,  186. 
Benoit,  272-274. 
bent  wings,  86. 
Bidder's  organ.  266-268. 
birds,  271-275. 
Blackburn,  158,  214. 
Blakeslee,  118-124,  133,  134,  142, 

143.  177-186. 
Boedyn.  110.  '«-> 

Boneilia,  253,  254. 
Boveri,  38,  108,  142,  145.  220,  231. 
brachydactyly  in  man,  64. 
Brecher,  293. 
Bremer.  170. 
Bridges.  79,  80,  135.  136,  175.  241. 

242. 
Bufo,  266. 
bullfrog.  25S-265. 
Burns,  275. 
butterflies,  206,  293. 


Callitriche,  171. 
Campanula,  171. 


338 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


Canina  roses,  159,  163,  164. 

Carina,  133. 

Cannabis,  276. 

Cape  bees,  237. 

Carex,  170,  171. 

Carothers,  35,  36. 

Castle,  285-289. 

cattle,  249. 

Cavia,  99. 

Champy,  269. 

Cbapin,  248. 

chart  of  chromosomes,  22,  23. 

chiasmatype,  41. 

chimaera,  113. 

chromosome  continuity,  37-39. 

chromosomes  and  genes,  45-58. 

chromosomes  of  Oenothera  gigas, 

109. 
chromosomes    of    0.    Lamarkiana, 

109. 
chromosomes  of  sweet  pea,  36. 
chrysanthemums,  168,  169. 

Clausen,  143,  192,  193. 

Cleland,  110,  111. 

Cocklebur,  181,  182. 

Colias,  293. 

Collins,  194. 

combs  of  fowls,  72,  73. 

corn,  82,  83,  85,  124,  196,  285. 

corn,  flinty,  83,  84. 

corn,  floury,  83,  84. 

Correns,  96,  214,  276,  278. 

coupling,  17. 

crayfish,  253. 

Crepidula,  254. 

Crepis,  194,  195. 

crossing-over,  14-22,  24 

Crew,  249,  264,  265,  271. 

Cuenot,  285. 

Cunningham,  254. 

curly,  63. 


D 

daphnians,  253. 

Darwin,  67,  287-289,  304. 

Darwin's  pangenesis,  28. 

Datura,  118,  119,  121,  122,  133, 
134,  142,  143,  177,  179,  182, 
183. 

Davis,  110,  111. 

Delage,  28. 

Delia  Valle,  107. 

Detlefsen,  98. 

Dinophilus,  231. 

Domm,  274. 

Doncaster,  245. 

double-bar,  87. 

double-infra-bar,  87. 

double-X,  56-58. 

Drosera,  171,  191. 

Drosophila  melanogaster,  11-23, 
40,  41,  47,  48,  50-52,  59,  60, 
64-66,  70,  75,  84-93,  99-101, 
104,  135,  136,  175,  201-203, 
241-243,  282,  291,  292,  304. 

D.  obscura,  103,  104. 

D.  simulans,  100,  101. 

D.  virilis,  102,  104. 

Durken,  293-295. 

E 

East,  96,  285. 

Einkorn,  151-153,  156,  157. 

Elodea,  212,  213. 

Emerson,  S.  H.,  71,  190. 

Emmer  wheat,  152-157. 

endosperm,  82-84. 

Essenberg,  255. 

Euchlaena,  123,  187. 

Ewing,  149. 

eyeless,  48,  49,  51,  52,  75,  292. 


INDEX 


339 


Farnham,  133,  177. 

Federley,  136,  137,  198,  211. 

ferns,  214. 

fish,  205. 

flowering  plants,  212. 

four-o'clock,  5-7,  290,  291. 

fowls,  72,  73,  206,  208. 

free  martin,  247. 

frog's  eggs,  139. 

Fumea,  209,  210. 

G 

Galton,  66. 

gametophyte,  125,  126. 
Gammarus,  253. 
Gates,  131,  172,  173. 
Geerts,  131. 
Geinitz,  219. 
Gelei,  43. 
gemmules,  29. 
genes,  45-58. 
germ-plasm,  28,  29. 
Giard,  251,  252. 
gipsy  moth,  243,  244. 
Glarydichthys,  255. 
Goldschmidt,  222,  243-246. 
Goodale,  271,  272,  274. 
Goodspeed,  192,  193. 
Gould,  254. 
grasshoppers,  35,  36. 
Gregory,  112. 

guinea  pig,  74,  98,  99,  205, 
296. 

H 

Habrobracon,  237-239. 
Hance,  303. 

haplo-IV,  47-49,  81,  176,  177. 
haploids,  139-149. 
Hargreaves,  148. 


282, 


Harman,  249. 

Harms,  267,  269. 

Harris,  270. 

Harrison,  158. 

hawthorns,  171. 

Hays,  285. 

Heilborn,  170. 

Helix,  99. 

hemp,  276-279. 

hermaphrodites,     249,     253,     254, 

264. 
Hertwig,  G.,  140. 
Hertwig,  O.,  140,  262. 
Hertwig,  R.,  258,  261,  262. 
Hertzenstein,  255. 
Hesperotettix,  221. 
heteroploids,  172-190. 
Hieracium,  165-167. 
Hindle,  149. 
honey  bee,  144. 
hooded  rats,  285-287. 
horse,  205. 
Hovasse,  107. 
Humulus,  212,  213. 
Hurst,  158,  163,  164. 
Huxley,  253. 
hyacinth,  132,  133. 
Hydatina,  147. 
Hymenoptera,  206. 


ids,  29,  30. 
Indian  corn,  37. 
infra-bar,  87,  89,  90,  91. 
infra-bar-bar,  90,  91. 
insect  type,  199. 
intersex,  136,  241. 


Janssens,  41,  42. 
Jimson  weed,  118,  177. 


340 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


Johannsen,  283-285. 
jungle  fowl,  75. 
Junker,  255-257. 

K 

Keller,  247. 

Kihara,  151,  152,  154-157,  212. 

Kornhauser,  252. 

Kuschakewitsch,  261. 

Kuttner,  253. 

Kuwada,  187. 


Lactuea,  171. 

Lancefield,  103,  104. 

Lang,  99. 

Lamarck's  theory,  30. 

Lamarck,  289,  290. 

lata  types,  70. 

Lebistes,  222,  226. 

leghorn  fowl,  75. 

Lepidoptera,  206. 

Lillie,  247,  248. 

linear  order,  22. 

linkage,  10-12,  14-20,  24. 

linkage  groups,  22,  23,  36,  48. 

Little,  297. 

liverworts,  128,  149,  214-216. 

Ljundahl,  197,  198. 

lobe,  62,  63. 

Longley,  123,  124,  171,  196. 

loss  of  gene,  94. 

Lutz,  Anne,  131,  173. 

Lygaeus,  200. 

Lymantria,  244. 

M 

m-chromosome,  105. 
McClung,  221. 
MacDowell,  285. 


McPhee,  276,  278. 

Magnussen,  247,  248. 

maize,  124. 

man,  203,  204,  205. 

man,  eye  color,  4,  5. 

Mann,  143,  194. 

map  of  the  chromosomes,  22,  23. 

maples,  170. 

Marchal,  El.  and  Em,  125,  126, 

128,  214,  216,  218. 
maturation  of  germ-cells,  33,  34. 
May,  86. 
mechanism    of    crossing-over,    39- 

44. 
Mehling,  145. 
Melandrium,  213,  214. 
Mendel,  72. 

Mendel's  laws,  1-25,  59. 
Mercurialis,  279,  280. 
Metapodius,  105,  106. 
Metz,  102,  104. 
Meves,  146. 
Miastor,  270. 
mice,  285. 
Mirabilis,  6. 
mites,  149. 
Myxine,  254. 
Mohr,  79. 

de  Mol,  124,  132,  133. 
Morgan,  H.  A.,  149. 
Morgan,  L.  V.,  82. 
Morgan,  T.  H.,  88. 
Morrill,  148. 
Morus,  169. 

mosses,  124-128,  149,  214. 
moths,  206. 
mulberry,  169. 
Muller,  112. 

mutant  characters,  59-71. 
mutation  theory,  67,  68,  95. 


INDEX 


341 


N 

Nachtsheim,  145,  231. 

Nansen,  254. 

Narcissus,  124. 

Nematodes,  206,  231. 

Newell,  237. 

Nicotiana,  96,  143,  144,  192,  193. 

nightshade,  112-116. 

non-disjunction,  53-55. 

notch  wing,  77-81. 

0 
oats,  150. 

Oenothera,  105,  131,  132. 
0.  franciscana,  111. 
0.  gigas,  70,  109,  110. 
O.  Lamarckiana,  69,  71,  109,  110, 

172,  187,  188. 
0.  lata,  172-174,  189. 
O.  semilata,  172,  189. 
Oguma,  205. 
Oligarces,  270. 
Ono,  212. 
opossum,  205. 
Osawa,  169. 
Overeem,  van,  131. 


Painter,  203,  204. 

pangenesis,  28. 

Papaver,  171,  197,  198. 

parabiotic  twins,  275. 

Parker,  149. 

particulate  theory  of  heredity,  26- 

31. 
pea  comb,  72,  73,  74. 
pea,  edible,  2,  7-10,  36,  37. 
pea,  sweet,  10,  11. 
Peltogaster,  252. 
Percival,  151. 
Perkins,   149. 


Perla,  255-257. 
Pfliiger,  256,  261. 
Philippi,  255. 
Phylloxerans,  228-230. 
physiological  units,  28. 
Phragmatobia,  105,  211. 
Pick,  249. 
pigs,  249. 
Planaria,  44. 

planarian  crossing-over,  43. 
Plantago,  171. 
Platanthera,  171. 
Poinsettia,  177,  181,  182. 
pollen  grains,  10. 
Ponse,  267,  269. 
polyploid  roses,  158-165. 
Polyploids,  150-171. 
poppy,  197,  198. 
poultry,  207. 
Prange,  249. 
Primula  sinensis,  112. 
Pritchard,  276,  277. 
Protenor,  200. 
protonema,  126. 
Punnett,  10,  17,  36. 
Pygaera,  136,  137,  198,  211. 

R 

rabbit,  albino,  74. 
rabbit,  black,  75. 
rabbits,  285,  290. 
radium,  139. 
Rana,  258-265. 
raspberries,  171. 
rats,  74,  285-287. 
recessive  characters,   74. 
recurrent  mutations,  66. 
repulsion,  17. 
retrograde  variety,  69. 
reverse  mutations,  85. 
Riddle,  272. 


342 


THE  THEORY  OF  THE  GENE 


ring  dove,  272. 

Rosenberg,  165,  166,  167,  191. 

roses,  158-165. 

Rosa,  163. 

rose  comb,  72,  73,  74. 

rotifer,  147,  214,  233,  234,  235. 

round  worms,  206. 

Rumex,  212,  213. 

rye,  150,  158. 

S 

Saccharum,  170. 

Sacculina,  252. 

Sakamura,  152. 

Salamander,  275. 

Santos,  212. 

Sax,  152,  155,  156. 

Schaffner,  276. 

Schleip,  231,  232. 

Scbmidt,  128,  222,  226. 

Schrader,  148. 

scute,  bristles,  86. 

sea  urchins,  206. 

Seller,    105,    209,   210,    220,    245, 

303. 
semi-gigas,  70. 
semi-lata  types,  70. 
sesquiplex  mutant  type,  189. 
sex,  199-218,  219. 
sex-chromosomes,  32,   52-55,   199- 

218. 
sex-determination,   219. 
sex-linkage,  52. 

sex-linked  inheritance,  207,  208. 
sex  reversals,  250-280. 
Sexton,  253. 
sheep,  249. 
Shiwago,  206,  208. 
Shull,  A.  P.,  149. 
Shull,  G.  H.,  71,  189,  190. 
single  comb,  73,  74. 


Sinnott,  180. 

Smith,  G.,  251-253. 

snail,  99. 

snapdragon,  97. 

Solenobia,  210. 

Solenum,  112-114. 

species,  68. 

"Species  and  Varieties,"  68. 

Spemann,  139,  140. 

Spencer,  Herbert,  28. 

spider  crab,  251. 

sporophyte,  125,  126. 

stable  type,  124. 

Stevens,  208. 

Stockard,  296,  297. 

stone  fly,  255. 

Stomps,  70,  131. 

Sturtevant,  88-91,  101,  102,  243. 

sugar  cane,  170. 

superfemale,  56,  242. 

supermale,  136,  241. 

sweet  peas,  10,  11,  36,  37. 

Swingle,  258. 


Tackholm,  158-163. 

tadpole,  256-265. 

Tahara,  167-169. 

Talaeporia,  210. 

Tandler,  247. 

Taylor,  170. 

teosinte,  123,  124,  187,  196. 

tetraploids,  105-130. 

tetra-type,  176. 

Thelia,  252. 

theories  of  heredity,  26-31. 

theory  of  the  gene,  25. 

thrips,  149. 

Tischler,  170. 

toad,  266. 

tobacco,  96. 


INDEX 


343 


tomato,  112,  113,  115-117. 
translocation,  80-82. 
Trialeurodes,  148. 
triplo-IV,  50,  51,  175,  176. 
triploid  Drosophila,  84. 
triploid  endosperm,  82. 
triploids,  131-138. 
trisomic  type,  177-189. 
Triticum,  151,  152. 
Triton,  140,  269. 
twins,  247,  275. 

V 

Vallisneria,  213,  214. 
vermilion  genes,  81,  82. 
vestigial,  75. 
Viola,  171. 

de  Vries,  67,  68,  69,  70,  71,  95, 
109,  131,  174,  187,  188,  189. 
Vulgare  wheat,  152,  154-157. 

W 

walnut  comb,  72,  73,  74. 
wasp,  237. 

W-chromosome,  245,  246. 
Wedge,  182. 
Weinstein,  102,  104. 


Weismann,  28-30. 

Wettstein,  128,  149,  216,  217,  218. 

wheats,  polyploids,  150-158. 

White,  O.  E.,  37. 

Whiting,  Anna  R.,  239. 

Whiting,  237-239. 

Whitney,  147,  233,  234. 

Williams,  148. 

Willier,  248. 

Winge,  214,  222,  223,  226,  227. 

Winiwarter,  203-205. 

Winkler,  112-118. 

Wiry,  181,  182. 

Witschi,  258-265,  269. 

Wright,  287. 


Xiphophorus,  254,  255. 

Y 

Yampolski,  279. 

Y-chromosome,  52,  105,  222,  239. 

yellow  mice,  64. 


Z 


Zea  mays,  123. 
Zeleny,  86.
