The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity (Thomas Hunt Morgan, 1915)
==========================================================
The chromosome theory of heredity: the fly room's founding monograph. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (cu31924003076639).

New York
State Cullege of Agriculture


At Cornell University
Sthaca, N. Y.


Library


ici


Cornell University


Library


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.


There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


THE MECHANISM


OF


MENDELIAN HEREDITY


I 0
0.0 = YELLO oF st
1.5 fF WHITE 00-F STAR
5.5 ECHINUS
sa Noaaal 90 -+ TRUNCATE,
137 4- CROSSVNL'SS 140 + STREAK
20.0 + CUT
275 + TAN af
Hs 29.0 + DACHS
330 -+ VERMILION 33.04 SKI
361 = MINIATURE T
430 + SABLE if
444 | GARNET 465 > BLACK
1 52.4 + PURPLE
565. {FORKED
57.0 {BAR
650 + CLEFT 650 + VESTIGIAL
680 + BOBBED T
70.0 + LOBE
735 + CURVED
88.0 -+ HUMPY
97.5 + ARC
98.5 $ PLEXUS
1030 + BROWN
1050 = SPECK


Il IV
00 + ROUGHOID 0.02: BENT
0.4/7 \SHAVEN
09} EYELESS
263 SEPIA
25.8 = HAIRY
385 + DICHAETE
42.0 + SCARLET
455 = PINK
540 4 SPINELESS
545 + BITHORAX
59.0 + GLASS
635 4+ DELTA
655 +-HAIRLESS ‘
675 +EBONY
/20 ++ WHITE-OCELLI
865 + ROUGH
954 fLARET
957 =F MINUTE
101.0 +-MINUTE-G


(Frontispiece)


THE MECHANISM


OF


MENDELIAN HEREDITY


BY
T. H. MORGAN


PROFESSOR OF EXPERIMENTAL ZOOLOGY
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY


A. H. STURTEVANT


RESEARCH ASSISTANT, CARNEGIE INSTITUTION


H. J. MULLER


ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF ZOOLOGY
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS


C. B. BRIDGES


RESEARCH ASSISTANT, CARNEGIE INSTITUTION


REVISED EDITION


NEW YORK
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY


(ee
QH Y3/
“ MSS

I7Ez


Co d


oi
Coprriaut, 1915, 1922,
BY
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY


2


PRINTED IN U.S. A.


To
EDMUND BEECHER WILSON


PREFACE


From ancient times heredity has been looked upon
as one of the central problems of biological philoso-
phy. It is true that this interest was largely specu-
lative rather than empirical. But since Mendel’s
discovery of the fundamental law of heredity in
1865, or rather since its re-discovery in 1900, a curious
situation has begun to develop. The students of
heredity calling themselves geneticists have begun
to draw away from the traditional fields of zoology
and botany, and have concentrated their attention
on the study of Mendel’s principles and their later
developments. The results of these investigators
appear largely in special journals. Their terminology
is often regarded by other zoologists as something
barbarous,—outside the ordinary routine of their pro-
fession. The tendency is to regard genetics as a sub-
ject for specialists instead of an all-important theme of
zoology and botany. No doubt this is but a passing
phase; for biologists can little afford to hand over to
a special group of investigators a part of their field
that is and always will be of vital import. It would
be as unfortunate for all biologists to remain ignorant
of the modern advances in the study of heredity as
it would be for the geneticists to remain unconcerned

vii


vill PREFACE


as to the value for their own work of many special
fields of biological inquiry. What is fundamental
in zoology and botany is not so extensive, or so in-
trinsically difficult, that a man equipped for his
profession should not be able to compass it.

In the following pages we have attempted to sepa-
rate those questions that seem to us significant
from that which is special or merely technical. We
have, of course, put our own interpretation on the
facts, and while this may not be agreed to on all sides,
yet we believe that in what is essential we have not
departed from the point of view that is held by many
of our co-workers at the present time. Exception
may perhaps be taken to the emphasis we have laid
on the chromosomes as the material basis of in-
heritance. Whether we are right here, the future—
probably a very near future—will decide. But it
should not pass unnoticed that even if the chromo-
some theory be denied, there is no result dealt with
in the following pages that may not be treated inde-
pendently of the chromosomes; for, we have made
no assumption concerning heredity that cannot also
be made abstractly without the chromosomes as
bearers of the postulated, hereditary factors. Why
then, we are often asked, do you drag in the chro-
mosomes? Our answer is that since the chromo-
somes furnish exactly the kind of mechanism that
the Mendelian laws call for; and since there is an
ever-increasing body of information that points
clearly to the chromosomes as the bearers of the


PREFACE 1x


Mendelian factors, it would be folly to close one’s
eyes to so patent a relation. Moreover, as biologists,
we are interested in heredity not primarily as a mathe-
matical formulation but rather as a problem concern-
ing the cell, the egg, and the sperm.

T. H. M.


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION


We have tried to bring the book up to date not
only by adding here and there throughout the text
the latest results on the subject, but also by adding
two entirely new chapters, and new maps of the
best known mutant factors. Much new material
has been added to the chapter on sex; the chapter
on selection has been largely rewritten. The new
chapters are one on heredity in Protozoa, and one
‘on mutation in the evening primrose. In the
latter field, the latest results of de Vries and others
on Oenothera, and the work on balanced lethals,
bid fair to bring the earlier discoveries of de Vries
into line with more recent work in the whole field
of mutation and inheritance.

In place of the “Appendix” we have prepared a
small manual for laboratory use (Henry Holt and
Co., Publishers) that gives directions for carrying
out genetic experiments with the pomace fly. These
experiments have been picked out as the ones most


x PREFACE


suitable for student work, and also because they
serve to illustrate, in a practical way, most of the
fundamental principles of heredity. In addition, the
newest culture methods for breeding Drosophila are
given, as well as other methods of handling this
material.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER I
MENDELIAN INHERITANCE AND THE CHROMOSOMES

PAGE

Introduction. The Groups of Linked Factors and the Chromo-
somes a eee s £ a BBs caae 1
The Inheritance of One Pair of Factors. . ........ 8
The Inheritance of Two or more Pairs of Factors ...... 20

CHAPTER II
TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY
Dominance and Recessiveness. . . eo oay ae a ae a Oe eae 27
Manifold Effects of Single Factors... .......4.- 32
Similar Effects Produced by Different Factors. ...... 36
Modification of the Effects of Factors Busine Hts ine Bi Met lien Be,  GPIG 38
I, By Environmental Influences , scat dag iah | Syrah se 38
II. By Developmental Influences. . . .. 1... ee 42
1II. By the Influence of Other Factors... .... 2s. 45
IV. Conclusion . . oi Hee ado A a Bee 46
CHAPTER III
LINKAGE

Examples Illustrating “Coupling”. . . © 2. 6 6 ee ee eee 48
Examples Illustrating “‘Repulsion” ... 1... +e ee ee 51
Examples of Different Frequencies of Crossing Over. ...... 52
The Mechanism of Crossing Over... .- - 0 6 ee ee eee 59
Double Crossing Over . ‘ & alitestighas  chysayeta cet le 62
The Principle of Interference. «© - - eee ee ee es 64
The Linear Arrangement of Factors shown by Linkage Relations . 64
Linkage in Other Animals and in Plants... 1... se eee 70
The Reduplication Hypothesis .......+.-. ic a aw a we TE


xii CONTENTS


CHAPTER IV
SEX INHERITANCE

PAGE
The Drosophila or XX-XY Type .............. 78
The Abraxas or WZ-ZZ Type .........+.004 83
What are Sex Factors? «200... fe 90
Hermaphroditism and Sex .... . Pge kes . 94
Parthenogenesis and Sex . . . 97
The Sex of Individuals Produced by: Artificial Parthenopanesis 106
Sex and Secondary Sexual Characters : ooh. 106
Parasitic Castration and Secondary Sexual Characters .. .. 114
Gynandromorphs and Sex . B00 eee se red tae ee 116
Intersexes and Sex ' gh ie! Gal AD ag 124
Triploid Intersexes in Drosophila RivlanGeaston ee ae ee ee eee 130
Sex and Sex-determining Gametes ...... ....... 132
Sex-ratios. . . 2... Wo Meera a & : ogo DBA

CHAPTER V

THE CHROMOSOMES AS BEARERS OF HEREDITARY
MATERIAL

The Evidence from Embryology ia Bo) ee RAG 141
The Individuality of the Chromosomes . . ¢ a 2 2S
The Chromosomes during the Maturation of the Germ Cells i . 155
Crossing Over. . . : se «ee «4 164
Other Theories of Crossing-over ’ ‘ sa as 168
Attachment of Sex-chromosomes to Ayitasmmes fe ware dae AS
Tetraploidy : 5 Rh, ie Gl denies ter Boe ep SA 174

CHAPTER VI

CYTOPLASMIC INHERITANCE

The Self-perpetuating Bodies in the Cytoplaam ... ... 182


CHAPTER VII


THE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE DISTRIBUTION OF
THE CHROMOSOMES AND OF THE GENETIC FACTORS


Parallelism between the Distribution of Chromosomes and of Factors 187
1. In Cases of Normal Distribution. Bo) Ai he Haye t 187


CONTENTS xiii


2. In Crosses between Species . ..... : 188

3. In. Mutant Races. . by ee PE ek 193

4. In Tetraploid Races . 194
Identity of Distribution of the Si-chrbriosomis and oF Gexdinked

Factors . : ar 195

1. In Ordinary Greases bia, ‘@acweidlise!2iaws 195

2. In Cases of Non-disjunction. == 8 ...... . 196


CHAPTER VIII
MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


Definition of Multiple Allelomorphs.............. 202
Examples of Multiple Allelomorphs . 202
The Alternative Interpretations of Identical Loci and Complete
Linkage. er ie ok” MR ge 204
CHAPTER IX
MULTIPLE’ FACTORS ,
The Meaning of the Term “Multiple Factors” ssa yl 219
Examples of Multiple Factor bee ES Bee AS Se Rs 219
Selection and Multiple Factors ep ey tah 248
CHAPTER X
THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS
On the Relation between Factors and Characters . .... 262
1. The Organism-as-a-Whole Objection : 265
2. The Invariability of the Factor and the Variability i in the
Character : a ae 266
3. So-called Contamination of Allelomorphs 268
4. Fractionation. 268
5. The Presence and Aoscuue Higpothiesis : 270


Weismann’s Preformation Hypothesis and the Factorial Theory . 277


CHAPTER XI


VARIATION IN THE PROTOZOA


Fission Lines ©. «1.2... eee eee 2» » 282
Change in Number of Nuclei ee Pas aa SE 2a a « 291


Xiv CONTENTS


CHAPTER XII
OENOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY


The Mutants of Oenothera Lamarckiana : oy 4% . 2... 808
Chromosome Aberrations of Oenothera . ......... 310
Gametic and Zygotic Lethals. .........2.. .  . 812
Pseudo-mutations by Crossing-over . ......... . 316
‘BIBIIOGRAPHY = ah), Gg hb Ss ew Gv eS a 321


THE MECHANISM OF
MENDELIAN HEREDITY


CHAPTER I


MENDELIAN INHERITANCE AND THE
CHROMOSOMES


Mendel’s fundamental law of segregation was
announced in 1865. It is very simple. The units
contributed by each parent separate in the germ cells
of the offspring without having had any influence on
each other. For example, in a cross between yellow-
seeded and green-seeded peas, one parent con-
tributes to the offspring a unit for yellow and the
other parent contributes a unit for green. These
units separate in the ripening of the germ cells of
the offspring so that half of the germ cells are yellow
producing and half are green producing. This sepa-
ration occurs both in the eggs and in the pollen.

Mendel did not know of any mechanism by which
such a process could take place. In fact, in 1865
very little was known about the ripening of the germ
cells. But in 1900, when Mendel’s long-forgotten
discovery was brought to light once more, a mechan-
ism had been discovered that fulfils exactly the
Mendelian requirements of pairing and separation.


The sperm of every species of animal or plant
1


2 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


carries a definite number of bodies called chromo-
somes. The egg carries the same number. Conse-
quently, when the sperm unites with the egg, the
fertilized égg will contain the double number of
chromosomes. For each chromosome contributed by
the sperm there is a corresponding chromosome con-
tributed by the egg, 7.e., there are two chromosomes
of each kind, which constitute a pair (Fig. 1, a).

When the fertilized egg divides, every chromo-
some splits into two chromosomes, and these two
daughter chromosomes then move apart, going to
opposite poles of the dividing cell (Fig. 1, c). Thus
each daughter cell (Fig. 1, d) receives one of the
daughter chromosomes formed from each original
chromosome. The same process occurs in all cell
divisions, so that all the cells of the animal or plant
come to contain the double set of chromosomes.

The germ cells also have at first the double set of
chromosomes, but when they are ready to go through
the last stages of their transformation into sperm
or eggs the chromosomes unite in pairs (Fig. 1, e).
Then follows a different kind of division (Fig. 1, f)
at which the chromosomes do not split but the ©
members of each pair of chromosomes separate and
each member goes into one of the daughter cells
(Fig. 1, 9, h). As a result each mature germ cell
receives one or the other member of every pair of
chromosomes and the number is reduced to half.
Thus the behavior of the chromosomes parallels the
behavior of the Mendelian units, for in the germ cells
each unit derived from the father separates from the


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 3


corresponding unit derived from the mother. These
units will henceforth be spoken of as factors; the
two factors of a pair are called allelomorphs of each


\
IS
i\
IX
‘ No «


hk


Fig. 1.—In the upper line, four stages in the division of the egg (or
of a body cell) are represented. Every chromosome divides when the
cell divides. In the lower line the ‘‘reduction division” of a germ cell,
after the chromosomes have united in pairs, is represented. The mem-
bers of each of the four pairs of chromosomes separate from each:other at


this division.
other. Their separation in the germ cells is called


segregation.
The possibility of explaining Mendelian phenomena


4 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


by means of the manceuvers of the chromosomes
seems to have occurred to more than one person,
but W. Sutton (1902) first presented the idea in
the form in which we recognize it today. More-
over, he not only called attention to the fact above
mentioned, that both chromosomes and hereditary
factors undergo segregation, but showed that if
the pairs assort independently, Mendel’s second law
(‘‘assortment”’) is fulfilled. Mendel had found that
when the inheritance of more than one pair of factors
is followed, the different pairs of factors sort out
independently of one another. , Thus in a cross of a
pea having both green seeds and tall stature with a
pea having yellow seeds and short stature, the fact
that a germ cell receives a particular member of one
pair (e.g., yellow) does not determine which member
of the other pair it receives; it is as likely to receive
the tall as the short. Sutton pointed out that in the
same way the segregation of one pair of chromosomes
is probably independent of the segregation of the
other pairs.

It was obvious from the beginning, however, that
there was one essential requirement of the chromo-
some view, namely, that all the factors carried by
the same chromosome should tend to remain together.
Therefore, since the number of inheritable characters
may be large in comparison with the number of pairs
of chromosomes, we should expect actually to find
not only the independent behavior of pairs, but also
cases in which characters are linked together in groups
in their inheritance. Even in species where a limited


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 5


number of Mendelian units are known, we should still
expect to find some of them in groups.

In 1906 Bateson and Punnett made the discovery
of linkage, which they called gametic coupling. They
found that when a sweet pea with factors for purple
flowers and long pollen grains was crossed to a pea
with factors for red flowers and round pollen grains,
the two factors that came from the same parent
tended to be inherited together. Here was the first
case that gave the sort of result that was to be ex-
pected if factors were in chromosomes, although this
relation was not pointed out at the time. In the
same year, however, Lock called attention to the
possible relation between the chromosome hypothesis
and linkage.

In other groups a few cases of coupling became
known, but nowhere had the evidence been sufficiently
ample or sufficiently studied to show how frequently
coupling occurs. Since 1910, however, in the fruit
fly, Drosophila melanogaster, a large number of new
characters have appeared by mutation, and so rapidly
does the animal reproduce that in a relatively short
time the inheritance of more than a hundred char-
acters has been studied. It became evident very soon
that these characters are inherited in groups. There
is one great group of characters that are sex linked.
There are two other groups of characters slightly
greater in number. Finally a character appeared
that did not belong to any of the other groups, and a
year later still another character appeared that was
linked to the last one but was independent of all the


6 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


other groups. Hence in Drosophila there are four
groups of characters, a partial list of which follows:


tan, nick, vg" dwarf, dw

GROUP I ey tb oblique dwarf-b
Abnormal, A tinged, w’ olive ebony, e
Bar, B ~'vermilion, v pads ebony‘, e4
Bar-—def’y Verm.—det’y Pale-u1, Pur Extended, Ds
bifid, bi Verm.—dup. patched giant, gt
blood, w? - white, w pinkish glass, gl
pores bd yellow, y Baa a gs ales H
road, br : pink-wing, pw airy,
buff, w GROUP II purple, pr Intensifier-Bd
cherry, w® abrupt purploid, pd Intensifier-s
cleft, cf amethyst reduced, rd 1 eee
club, cl antlered, vg roof kidney, k
crooked, fw apterous, ap safranin, sf lethals (9)
crossv’less, cv arc, a scraggly, rd* mahogany
cut, ct aristaless, al Ski-1, Si maroon, ma
cut®, ct? balloon, ba sienna, pr? Minute, M
cut®, cté black, b Snub, T* Minute-di1r
depressed blistered, bs square, T*4 Minute-f
double brown, bw speck, sp Minute-g
dusky, dy chubby Star, olive-111
dusky?, dy? cinnabar, cn strap, vge Pale-111, Prir
echinus, ec Confluent, Cf. straw, sw peach, pp
écru, we’? Cream-11 Streak, Sk pink, p
eosin, w? cream—b telegraph, tg Pointed-wing
facet, fa cream-c telescope, ts Roof-c
forked, f Ci translucent, tl rotated—abd.
furrowed, fw Cur trefoil, tf rough, ro
fused, fu Cus Truncate, T roughoid, ru
garnet, g Curly, Cy vortex, T? safranin—b
garnet”, g? curved, ¢ yellowish scarlet, st
ivory, w* dachs, d “S sepia, se
lemon Dachs-def’y GROUP III ski-111, si
lethals (50) dachsoid ascute, as smudge
lozenge, lz dachsous band, bn sooty, e°
lozenge”, 12? dash Beaded, Bd Spineless, ss
miniature, m Detached benign-tumor spread, sd
Notch, N (18) expanded, ex bithorax, bx tilt, tt
prune, pn flipper, fp ° bithorax—b tumor, tu
roughish, rh fringed, fr cardinal, ed Two-bristles
ruby, rb gap-vein claret, ca varnished, vr
ruby’, rb? Gull, cream -tIt vortex-In1
rudimentary, r humpy, hy compressed warped, wp
rud’y’, x7 jaunty, j curled, cu white-ocelli, wo
sable, s lethals ‘&) Curt with
Sable-dup. Lobe, L Cin, 1
scute, sc Lobe 2, L? Cup GROUP IV
short, br? Minute-b Deformed, Df bent, bt
singed, sn Minute-diz Delta, A bent 2, bt 2
small-eye, sy Minute-e Dichxte, D eyeless, ey
small-w’g, sl morula, mr dilute eyeless 2, ey ?
spot, y® narrow, nw divergent, dv


shaven, sv


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION tt


The four pairs of chromosomes of the female of
Drosophila are shown in Fig. 2 (to the left). There
are three pairs of large chromosomes and one pair of
small chromosomes. One of the four pairs is the
pair of sex or X chromosomes. In the male, Fig. 2
(to the right), there are likewise three pairs of large
chromosomes and a smaller pair. The two sex chro-
mosomes in the male have been found to be dis-


= J
IN SY,
Ae AY


Fic. 2.— Diagram of female and of male group (duplex) of chromosomes
of Drosophila melanogaster showing the four pairs of chromosomes. The
hook on the Y chromosome is characteristic. The members of each pair
are usually found together, as here.


tinguishable from each other in shape. This distinc-
tion was first observed in the odgonial figures of the
XXY females that had arisen through non-dis-
junction. Satisfactory figures of the spermatogonial
groups were much more difficult to obtain, but these
also showed that the Y was J-shaped and somewhat
longer than the X. In length the chromosomes are
in the ratio: X = 100: Y = 112: I] = 159: III =
159: IV = 12. Stevens’ work had seemed to show


8 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


that the X chromosome is attached to another
chromosome and that there is no Y chromosome.
In the earlier papers on Drosophila this relation of
the chromosomes was assumed to be correct and the
female was represented as XX and the male as XO.

In Drosophila, then, there is a numerical corre-
spondence between the number of hereditary groups
and the number of the chromosomes. Moreover, the
size relations of the groups and of the chromosomes
correspond. The method of inheritance of the
factors carried by these chromosomes will now be
considered more in detail.


Tue INHERITANCE OF ONE Pair oF FACTORS


The inheritance of a single pair of characters may
be illustrated by the following examples from Droso-
phila, one from each of the four groups.

The mutant stock called vestigial is so char-
acterized because it has only small vestiges of the
wings. If a fly with vestigial wings is mated to the
wild type with long wings (Fig. 3, P;), the offspring
will have long wings (Fig. 3, F,). If these hybrid flies
of the first generation (the first filial generation, or
F,) are mated to each other, their offspring (or F.)
will be of two sorts: some will have long wings and
others will have vestigial wings. There will be three
times as many flies with long wings as flies with
vestigial wings. This is the Mendelian ratio of
3:1 that appears when a single pair of characters is
involved.


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 9


Fie. 3.—Vestigial winged by long winged (wild-type) fly. The second
chromosome that carries the recessive factor for vestigial is here rep-
resented by the oval containing the letter v. The ‘‘normal” second
chromosome contains here the capital letter Vic


10 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


If the factors for vestigial wings are carried by a
pair of chromosomes (the chromosomes carrying v
in Fig. 3) then at the ripening of the germ cells (eggs
and sperm) such a pair of chromosomes will come
together and at reduction separate; so that each
germ cell will have one such chromosome and not
the other. (See Fig. 1, e-h.)

If such a germ cell fertilizes an egg of the wild fly
that contains a similar group of chromosomes, ex-


Fic. 4.—(A.) Fertilization of egg by sperm. (B.) Zygote formed by
union of egg and sperm. (C.) Diploid nucleus.


cept that the corresponding chromosome carries the
factor for long wings (Fig. 4, A), the result will be to
produce a fertilized egg (Fig. 4, C) in which one mem-
ber of the pair of chromosomes in question comes
from the mother and carries the factor for long, and
the other comes from the father and carries the
factor for vestigial wing. Since this egg with both
factors present produces a fly with long wings, the
vestigial character is said to be recessive to the long;
or conversely the long is said to be dominant to the
vestigial character.

When the eggs and the sperm of hybrid flies of this
origin come to ys the homologous chromo-


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION - ll


somes conjugate in pairs, as shown diagrammatically
in Fig.5,b. The chromosomes then separate (Fig. 5,¢
and d) at the time of division of the cell, and one of the
resulting daughter cells gets the chromosome bearing
the vestigial, and the other daughter cell gets the
homologous chromosome, bearing the long factor.
Hence, there will be two kinds of eggs in the female
and two kinds of spermatozoa in the male. When
two such hybrid flies mate with each other, any


JN
rd ds val,
nN “I


a 4


Fria. 5.—Diagram to illustrate in a heterozygous individual the con-
jugation and segregation of the chromosomes during “reduction.


sperm may meet and fertilize any egg. The possible
combinations that result, and the frequency with
which they occur, are shown in the next diagram
(Fig. 6, and also in Fig. 3.)

As shown in this diagram, a sperm bearing the fac-
tor for long fertilizing an egg bearing the same factor
produces a fly pure (homozygous) for long wings;
a sperm bearing the factor for long fertilizing an egg
bearing the factor for vestigial wings produces a hy-
brid fly (heterozygous) that has long wings, since, as
above, the long ‘‘dominates” the vestigial character.


12 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


Similarly, a sperm bearing the factor for vestigial
fertilizing an egg bearing the factor for long produces
a hybrid, or heterozygote, with long wings; a sperm
bearing the factor for vestigial fertilizing an egg


Fic. 6.—Diagram to illustrate how by the random meeting of two kinds
of sperm and two kinds of eggs the typical 3:1 ratio results.
bearing the same factor produces a homozygote,

having the recessive character vestigial wings.
Since the sperm and the eggs meet at random
there should be 1 long VV, to 2 long Vv, to 1 vestigial
vv; or, putting together all flies with long wings,
3 long to 1 vestigial. Three to one is the character-


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 13


istic Mendelian ratio when one pair of characters is
involved.

In a third-chromosome stock, ebony, the body and
wings are very dark in contrast to the wild fly whose
color is ‘“gray.’’ Gray is used to designate the color
of the wild fly, whose wings are gray, but whose
body is yellowish with black bands on the abdomen.
If ebony is crossed to gray the offspring (F) are gray
but are somewhat darker than the ordinary wild flies.
When these hybrids are inbred they give (F.) 1 gray,
to 2 intermediates, tol ebony. The group of inter-
mediates in the second generation (F.) can not be
separated accurately from the pure gray type. If they
are counted as gray, the result is three grays to one
ebony.

Since ebony and gray assort independently of long
and vestigial, as will be shown later, the factor for
ebony must be supposed to be carried by a chromo-
some of a different pair from the one that carries
vestigial. Since this chromosome behaves in the
same way as does the one that bears the vestigial
factor, the scheme used for vestigial will apply here
also.

Another mutant stock is characterized by small
eyes, and since in the extreme form it may lack one
or both eyes entirely (Fig. 7), the name “eyeless”’
has been given to this mutant. When this stock is
bred to wild flies the offspring have normal eyes.
These inbred give three normal to one eyeless fly.
As shown in the table on page 6, this character
belongs in still another, the fourth, group, and its


14 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


mode of inheritance is explicable on the supposition
that it lies in the fourth pair of chromosomes.
For an adequate understanding of the inheritance


Fic. 7.—Normal eyes of Drosophila a, a’. Eyeless b-d; b, b’ top and
side view of head of fly without eyes; c, c’ right and left eyes of another fly;
d, small eye on right side, none on left.


of factors in the first group it will be necessary to
consider the distribution of the sex chromosomes
(Fig. 8). In the female of Drosophila there are two
X chromosomes (XX). After the conjugation and


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 15


separation of the X chromosomes in the female there is
one X chromosome left in each egg. In the male there
is one X chromosome and another chromosome, its
mate, called the Y chromosome. Hence in the male
there are two classes of spermatozoa: one containing
X, the other Y. If a Y-bearing spermatozoon should


FEMALE MALE


BBY


88 Be


FEMALE


Fic. 8.—Diagram to show the history of the sex chromosomes from
one generation to the next.


fertilize an egg the result will be an XY individual,
or male. It is evident that the Y chromosome is
found only in the males, while an X chromosome
passes not only from female to female, but also from
female to male and from male to female.

As will be shown now, certain factors follow the
distribution of the X chromosomes and are there-


16 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


fore supposed to be contained in them. These factors
are said to be sex linked.

The inheritance of white eyes may serve as an
illustration for the entire group of sex linked char-
acters. If a white-eyed male is bred to a red-eyed
female (wild type) (Fig. 9), the sons and daughters
(F,) have red eyes. If these are inbred the offspring
(F.) are three reds to one white, but the white-eyed
flies are all males. If we trace the history of the sex
chromosomes we can see how this happens.

In the red-eyed mother, each egg contains an X
chromosome bearing a factor for red eyes. In the
white-eyed father, half of the spermatozoa contain an
X chromosome which carries a factor for white eyes,
while the other half contain a Y chromosome which
carries no factors (Fig. 9). Any egg fertilized by an
X-bearing spermatozoon of the white-eyed father will
produce a female that has one red-producing X chro-
mosome and one white-producing X chromosome
(Fig. 9). Her eyes are red, because red dominates
white. Any egg fertilized by a Y-bearing spermato-
zoon of the white-eyed father will produce a son
(Fig. 9) that has red eyes, because his X chromo-
some brings in the red factor from the mother, while
the Y chromosome does not bring in any dominant
factor. At the ripening of the germ cells in the F,
female the number of chromosomes is reduced to
half. There result two kinds of eggs, half with the
red-bearing and half with the white-bearing X (Fig.
9). Similarly in the male there will be two classes
of sperm, half with the red-bearing X chromosome,,


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 17


rail
josh


Fic. 9.—Red-eyed female by white-eyed male (D. melanogaster). This
is the reciprocal of the cross shown in Fig. 10.


18 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


half with the indifferent Y chromosome. Random
meeting of eggs and sperm will give the result shown
in the lower line of the diagram. There will bea3:1
ratio, as in other Mendelian crosses, but the white
individuals in F, will be males. The factor for red in
the F, male will always stay in the X chromosome, so
that all the female-producing spermatozoa will carry
red, and consequently all F, females will be red.
The males will have red eyes if they receive the red-
bearing chromosome from their mother and white
eyes if they receive the white-bearing chromosome
from their mother.

The reciprocal cross is made by mating a white-
eyed female to a red-eyed male (Fig. 10). The
daughters will have red eyes and the sons white eyes.
If these are inbred their offspring will be red and
white in equal numbers, and not the usual three
reds to one white. The explanation of this new
ratio is at once apparent as soon as the history of the
sex chromosomes is studied.

The two X chromosomes in the white-eyed mother
carry the factor for white eyes. After ripening, each
egg carries one white-bearing X chromosome. The
single X chromosome of the female-producing sper-
matozoon of the red-eyed father carries the factor for
red eyes; the male-producing spermatozoa carry the Y
chromosome which, as stated above, is indifferent.
Any egg fertilized by a spermatozoon containing the
red-bearing X chromosome will produce a red daugh-
ter, because red dominates white. Conversely, any
egg fertilized by the Y-bearing male-producing sper-


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 19


Fie. 10.—White-eyed female by red-eyed male (D. melanogaster).
The factors for these characters are carried by the X chromosomes. In
this diagram red is indicated by the symbol W and white by the symbol w.
The history of the chromosomes is shown in the middle of the diagram.


20 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


matozoon will produce a white-eyed son, because the
only X chromosome that the son contains is derived
from his mother, both of whose X chromosomes carry
a white-producing factor.

When these red-eyed daughters and white-eyed
sons are inbred the possible combinations are shown
in the lower line of the diagram (Fig. 10).

There will be two kinds of eggs, one containing a red-
bearing, the other a white-bearing, X chromosome.
The female-producing spermatozoa will contain a
white-bearing X chromosome; the male-producing
spermatozoa will contain a Y chromosome. A red-
bearing egg fertilized by a female-producing sper-
matozoon will produce a red-eyed female; a white-
bearing egg fertilized by a female-producing spermato-
zoon will produce a white-eyed female. A red-bear-
ing egg fertilized by a male-producing spermatozoon
will produce a red-eyed male; a white-bearing egg
fertilized by a male-producing spermatozoon will
produce a white-eyed male. The resulting ratio is
1 red to 1 white, in both sexes. _

The distribution of the chromosomes explains how
in one cross the Mendelian ratio of 3:1 obtains, and
also how in the reciprocal cross there is a 1:1 ratio.


Tue INHERITANCE OF Two or More INDEPENDENT
Pairs oF Factors


The application of the chromosome hypothesis
to crosses between races that differ in two pairs of
factors is illustrated by the following example (Fig.


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 21


11). If a vestigial gray fly is mated to a long-winged
ebony fly, all the offspring (F,) will have long wings
and gray (or slightly darker) body color. If these
hybrids (F,) are inbred, offspring (F2) will be pro-
duced in the ratios:

9 Flies with long wings and gray body color.

3 Flies with vestigial wings and gray body color.

3 Flies with long wings and ebony body color.

1 Fly with vestigial wings and ebony body color.

In the diagram (Fig. 11) the two pairs of chro-
mosomes that carry the genetic factors in question
are represented by short rods. In the vestigial fly
recessive factors for vestigial (v) are in the ‘‘second”’
chromosome. This same fly has two “third” chro-
mosomes that carry only normal factors, hence a
pair of factors normal for ebony (E). In the ebony
fly the third chromosomes carry recessive factors for
ebony (e), while the second chromosomes carry the
normal factors for vestigial (V). The formule for
the two parents are vvEE and VVee, and their
germ cells, respectively, vE and Ve.

The F, fly will have the composition vVEe, and
will show neither the vestigial nor the ebony char-
acter. It is heterozygous in each pair of factors—
i.e. one member of the second pair of chromosomes
carries v, the other V; similarly, for the third pair
of chromosomes, one member carries the factor e
and the other the normal allelomorph E.

In the maturation of the germ cells of the hybrid,
the members of each pair separate from each other
as shown in Fig. 11 in the gametogenesis of Fi.


22 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


Fig. 11.—Diagram illustrating assortment of two mutant characters,
vestigial and ebony.


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 23


The two pairs of chromosomes “assort” on the
spindle in either one of the two ways shown in the
diagram; resulting in four and only four kinds of
gametes. .


qb | (1D ep
CoC] Ca


i
00


Cc»
>


00


LONG GRAY LONG GRAY LONG GRAY LONG GRay


aii C— | ci ea
a iam)
LONG GRAY | LONG EBONY LONG ‘ GRAY LONG EBONY
Cc CH | Cc ae | GS CC | as a
ci > | ci CS | a Cc | a CS
LONG GRAY LONG GRAY VESTIGIAL GRAY VESTIGIAL «GRAY


ce


Jac | Ce | CD C~/ am exp


CIID a | CID emp | a CD
’ LONG GRAY LONG EBONY VESTIGIAL GRAY VESTIGIAL EBONY


Fig. 12.—Diagram to show the 16 possible kinds of permutations of
the four kinds of gametes of Fig. 11. Along the top line are four kinds
of eggs; along the left side are four kinds of sperm; in the squares are the
combinations formed by the meeting of each kind of egg with each kind
of sperm, giving 9 long gray; 3 long ebony; 3 vestigial gray; 1 vestigial
ebony.


The process just described takes place both in the
male and in the female. Consequently there will
be four kinds of eggs and four kinds of spermatozoa,


24 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


Chance meeting between these will give the results
shown in the next diagram (Fig. 12).

In the table (Fig. 12) the four kinds of eggs are
represented at the head of the four vertical columns,
and the four kinds of spermatozoa at the left of each
horizontal row. In the squares the combination of
each kind of sperm with each kind of egg is repre-
sented, giving the ratio of 9 long gray: 3 vestigial
gray: 3 long ebony: 1 vestigial ebony.

The F, expectation may, of course, be derived more
directly as follows: There will be 3 long to 1 ves-
tigial. These longs will be both gray and ebony in
the ratio again of 3 to 1; hence 9 long gray to 3 long
ebony. Correspondingly, the vestigials will be both
gray and ebony, in the ratio of 3 to 1; hence 3
vestigial gray to 1 vestigial ebony. The result is the
same as before.

If one of two independent pairs of characters is
sex linked, the same scheme holds in those cases where
the recessive sex linked character enters through the
grandfather, but the ratio is different when the re-
cessive sex linked character enters through the
grandmother (viz.,3:3:1:1), as is to be expected
from the mode of inheritance of white eyes taken
alone ;! and here, too, the result conforms fully to the
chromosome scheme.

Three factors can be worked out by means of the


1For example, taking white and red alone the ratio of the F. is
1:1. But among the reds the ratio of gray to ebony will be 3:1 and
. among the whites will be 3:1. Hence the result 3 red gray, 1 red ebony,
3 white gray, 1 white ebony.


MENDELIAN SEGREGATION 25


chromosomes as readily as one or two. It will not
be necessary to give the full analysis, for it will be
easily understood from the scheme already given.
If a fly with vestigial wings is crossed to an ebony,
eyeless fly three pairs of factors are involved that lie
in different chromosomes. The F, flies are normal,
for there is in the hybrid a normal mate for each of
the three recessive factors. The possible recombina-
tions are shown in the next diagram, Fig. 13. There


(os ga gy


° A ae © <<, a ° <e © wy f-
Fig. 13.—Diagram to show the segregation of the three pairs of chro-


mosomes. Eight combinations are possible, giving 8 kinds of germ cells,
with 64 possible re-combinations.


are four different positions for the chromosome pairs
on the spindle, leading to eight kinds of germ cells.
By chance meetings of the eight kinds of sperm with
the eight kinds of eggs there will result 8 types as


follows:
27 Long, gray, normal eye (wild type).
9 Vestigial, gray, normal eye.
9 Long, ebony, normal eye.
9 Long, gray, eyeless.
3 Vestigial, ebony, normal eye.
3 Vestigial, gray, eyeless.
3 Long, ebony, eyeless.
1 Vestigial, ebony, eyeless.


26 MENDELIAN SEGREGATION


The same manner of treatment will work for more
than three pairs of chromosomes; the number of
kinds of germ cells increases in geometrical ratio.
In most animals and plants the number of chromo-
somes is higher than in Drosophila, and the number
of pairs of factors that may show independent assort-
ment is, in consequence, increased. In the snail,
Helix hortensis, the half number of the chromosomes
is given as 22; in the potato beetle 18; in man, prob-
ably, 24; in the mouse 20; in cotton 28; in the four-
o’clock 16; in the garden pea 7; in corn 10; in the
evening primrose 7; in the nightshade 36; in tobacco
24; in the tomato 12; in wheat 8. If 20 pairs of
chromosomes are present there will be over one
million possible kinds of germ cells in the F, hybrid.
The number of combinations that two such sets of
germ cells may produce through fertilization is
enormously greater. From this point of view we
can understand the absence of identical individuals
in such mixed types as the human race. The chance
of identity is still further decreased since in addition
there may be very large numbers of factors within
each chromosome.


CHAPTER II
TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


Experience has shown that Mendelian inheritance
applies to all sorts of characters, structural, physio-
logical, pathological, and psychological ; to characters
peculiar to the egg, to the young, and even to old
age; to length of life; to fundamental taxonomic
characters as well as to “‘superficial’”’ characters; and
to characters intimately concerned in maintaining
the life of the individual, as well as to characters which
apparently do not influence survival. Some of these
different types and their mode of inheritance will be
briefly described, but since the general principles in-
volved are more important than the kind of character
that is affected, the results will be treated under
general headings.


DOMINANCE AND RECESSIVENESS


The four-o’clock (Mirabilis jalapa) has a white and
a red-flowered variety. If these are crossed the hy-
brid is pink in color. The pink hybrid inbred (self-
fertilized in this case) gives in the next generation
(F.) one red, to two pink, to one white (Fig. 14).
Owing to the intermediate color of the hybrid (or
heterozygote) it is impossible to say that either


color dominates the other. The factor for red and
27


28 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


the factor for white both affect the plant in which they
occur. In this and in similar cases the F, ratio of
1 :2:1 is obtained, because it is possible to distinguish
the pure red and the pure white from the heterozygous
plants.


Fic. 14.—Diagram to illustrate the cross between a red and a white
flowered Mirabilis jalapa (4 o’clock), which produces a pink, intermediate
heterozygote.


The Andalusian fowl is a similar case. When
certain races of black are bred to certain races or
kinds of “white” the hybrid is slate ‘blue”’ in color.
These blue birds, called Andalusians, when inbred,
give one black to two blue to one white. Blue is


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY 29


the heterozygous condition; it is not possible to
produce a pure breeding race of Andalusians, for the
combination that produced an Andalusian falls apart
in the germ cells of the Andalusian birds. The bird is
blue because the pigment is not spread evenly over
the feather but is restricted to small but black specks.


Fig. 15.—Normal (a, a’) and bar eye (8, b’) of Drosophila; shown in
side view, and as seen from above.


The Andalusian blue is a mosaic of black and white,
and not at all a dilute black.

A good example of an intermediate hybrid is found
when the mutant fly with bar eye (Fig. 15) is bred to a
wild fly. The daughters have bar eyes that are not
as narrow as those of the pure bar stock. The range
of variation is great, however, for some of the hybrids
have eyes that are nearly as round as the normal, and


30 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


in others the eye is nearly as narrow a bar as that of
pure stock. In the male, which has one factor for
bar eye, the eye is as narrow as in the pure (‘.e.,
homozygous) female with two factors. The inter-
mediate condition in the female which is hybrid
(heterozygous) for this factor is hence not explained
by the lesser effect of the single factor, but is probably
due to the competing influence of the other allelo-
morph. Of course it might be contended that since
in the male there is a different chromosome complex
(XABCD YABCD) from that in the female XABCD-
XABCD) it is this difference in other factors that
causes the heterozygous female to have a wider eye
than the male; but this argument is rendered improb-
able here, when we recall that in only one out of many
cases of sex linked inheritance, in which the hetero-
zygous female is intermediate, is the male different
from the homozygous female.

In other cases the influence of one of the parents
of the cross may be so slight as to escape detection
on ordinary observation, and may require special
measurements for demonstration. When flies with
miniature wings (Fig. 16) are mated to wild flies,
the daughters have long wings, which Lutz has shown
to be a little shorter in proportion to the length of
the legs than are the wings of wild females; but the
difference is so slight that it could not have been
detected without biometrical methods.

Finally, we must consider the class of cases in
which complete dominance has been described. All
the cases. given by Mendel in peas were supposed


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY 31


to fall under this heading: yellow dominates green,
round dominates wrinkled, etc.

Whether a character is completely dominant or not
appears to be a matter of no special significance.
In fact the failure of many characters toshow complete °


dominance raises a doubt.as to whether there is such


Fie. 16.—a, Long wing (wild type) of Drosophila; b, miniature wing.
(a and b are not drawn to scale.)
a_condition as-complete.dominance. Some cases ap-
proach so nearly to that condition that special tests
may be required to show that the hybrid is affected
by the recessive factor. For instance, in flies the
factor for white eyes seems to produce no effect
when white is bred to red. The F, reds are indis-
tinguishable from pure reds. But by weakening the
red by adding recessive factors other than white,
the influence of white can be demonstrated, as Mor-


32 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


gan and Bridges haveshown. ‘Therefore although the
effect. of the white factor can not be detected in the
single combination with red, it is reasonable to sup-
pose that some effect is. really present. Similarly,
conditions were found in which the effect of hetero-
zygosis for eosin, vermilion, or pink could be demon-
strated. While the question is one of only sub-
sidiary importance, yet in the separation of classes
it is often useful to be able to distinguish the pure
from the hybrid form; but whether this can or can not
be done in any given case does not affect the funda-
mental principle of segregation which is the essential
feature of Mendel’s discovery.


Manirotp Errects oF SINGLE Factors


It is customary to speak of a particular character
as the product of a single factor, as though the factor
affected only a particular color, or structure, or part
of the organism. But everyone familiar at first hand
with Mendelian inheritance knows that the so-called
unit character is only the most obvious or most sig-
nificant product of the postulated factor. Most
students of Mendelian heredity will freely grant that
the effects of a factor may be far-reaching and
manifold. A few examples may make this plain.

In Drosophila there is a mutant stock called
“club,” in which the wing pads fail to unfold (Fig. 17)
in about 20 per cent. of the flies. In the majority of
club flies the wings expand fully, and are like those
of the wild fly. Owing to this fact, that not all the


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY 33


flies even in a pure stock of club show this character,
it was difficult to study the inheritance of the
supposed factor that sometimes inhibits the unfolding
of the wing pads. Nevertheless, it was possible
even with this handicap to show that the character
depended on a sex linked recessive factor. Later


Fig. 17.—Club wing (to left). The absence of the spines on the side
of the thorax in ‘‘club” is shown in c, and the normal condition is shown


in b.


the discovery was made that a particular pair of

spines always present on the side of the thorax of

the wild flies, is absent from the club flies, irrespective

of whether the wings do or do not unfold (Fig. 17, c).

This constant feature of the mutant made its study

quite simple. Another pair of spines, those upon the
3


34 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


rear margin of the scutellum, point constantly in an
abnormal direction in club stock. The head of club
flies is often flattened, the eyes are smaller, and the
thorax and abdomen are somewhat distorted. Here
we have an example of a single germinal difference,
the factor for club, producing several distinct effects,


Fig. 18.—Rudimentary wing (to left), and truncate wing (to right).


some of which are constant features of the stock, while
others are occasional or variable.

Another and similar example is found in the rudi-
mentary winged flies (Fig. 18, a). The wing is usually
shorter than the abdomen, but may be longer and even
approach the normal wing in length and shape. The


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY 35


last pair of legs are often thicker and shorter. If
many larve are present, or the food conditions poor,
the larveeof rudimentary flies-can not stand thecompe-
tition and die off , and in consequence the rudimentary
class is smaller than expected. The males are fertile,
but the females are almost entirely sterile, although
rarely one of them may lay a few eggs and some of
these hatch. The infertility is probably due to ab-
sence or rareness of mature eggs in the ovaries.
There are also other effects than these four men-
tioned, all of which are produced by the same factor,
and, no doubt, were our knowledge complete, we
should find in all mutants many differences in addi-
tion to the ones picked out for study and called “unit
characters.”” DeVries’ definition of mutation en-
tirely covers this relation; in fact, it even goes
further and implies that a single difference may
affect the entire organization. Perhaps this does
occur, but practically the number of differences that
can be observed between a wild and a mutant stock
derived from it, is limited. The attack that is some-
times made on the unit character hypothesis fails in
its intention the moment it is understood that a
single factor (difference) has generally not one but
many effects. Most workers in Mendelian heredity
are fully conversant with these facts. This attack
on the unit character conception is usually made
by those not familiar with the actual situation and
who take the expression unit character too literally.
It may be conceded that the expression has at times
been abused even by some of Mendel’s followers.


36 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


StmizaR Errects PRODUCED BY DIFFERENT FACTORS


There are many cases.in which characters that are
superficially alike are the product of different factors.
White color that characterizes so many domesticated
races of plants and animals is a case in point. There
are two pure breeding races of white flowered sweet
peas. When crossed, they produce colored flowers.
When the F, offspring are inbred the F, generation
consists of 9 reds to 7 whites. This 9:7 ratio is a
special case of the 9:3:3:1, in which the last three
classes are superficially alike. The explanation here
is that there are two kinds of recessive whites that
have originated independently. On the chromo-
some hypothesis one white is due to mutation in one
chromosome and the other white to mutation in an-
other chromosome. When the races are crossed,
each race supplies that chromosome which contains
the normal factor of the white of the other race.
In the F, generation any plant that contains at least
one of the normal chromosomes of both pairs will
not be white. There will be nine such cases. Any
plant that contains both of the white-producing chro-
mosomes of either pair will be white. There will be
seven such cases.

There are also two pure races of white fowls that,
when crossed, give colored birds. Each white
behaves as a recessive to color. For instance, the
white silky crossed to a white dorking gives colored
birds. These inbred give 9 colored to 7 white
birds.


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY 37


There is a third kind of white race of poultry,
namely, white Leghorn, in which white is dominant.
Crossed to colored birds the offspring are white
(with often a few colored feathers, which indicates
that dominance is not complete).

In the silkworm also a dominant white and a reces-
sive white factor have been found. The genetic
results are comparable in all respects to those in the
fowl.

There are also cases of blacks or melanic types,
that have different factorial bases. There are three
black races of Drosophila—called sable, black, and
ebony—that belong respectively to the first, second,
and third groups. These are mueh alike, but close
scrutiny reveals slight differences. Any two crossed
together give gray F, flies.

There are three pink eye colors in Drosophila, one
whose locus is in the third chromosome (pink), and
two sex linked eye colors which are so similar that no
certain difference between them can be observed.

Not only pigment but also structural characters
may parallel each other in aremarkable manner. For
example, in Drosophila the mutant stocks ‘‘bow”
(sex linked) and ‘‘are” (IJ chromosome) have wings
that curve evenly downward over the abdomen.
There are also two kinds of flies whose wings turn
up sharply near the ends. These stocks are “‘jaunty”’
(second chromosome) and “jaunty I,’’ which is sex
linked. Two types, called “fringed” (II chromosome)
and “spread” (III chromosome), are characterized
by thin textured wings held out nearly at right


38 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


angles to the body. In the case of rudimentary and
truncate (Fig. 18) the wings are so similar that
without breeding tests one of them might easily be
taken for the other. Finally, ‘facet’”’ and “rough”
both have the ommatidia of the eye disarranged very
much in the same way.


MopIFIcATION OF THE EFFECTS OF FAcToRS


I. By Environmental Influences


It is a commonplace that the environment is es-
sential for the development of any trait, and that
traits may differ according to the environment in
which they develop. In most cases different genetic
types produce different results in any ordinary
environment. The environment, being common to
the two, may therefore in such cases be ignored,
or rather taken for granted. There are other cases,
however, in which a particular genetic type appears
different from another one only in a special environ-
ment. Where this environment is not the normal
one, its discovery is an essential element of the
experiment.

One of the best cases is that given by Baur. The
red primrose (Primula sinensis rubra) reared at a tem-
perature of 30°-35° C. (with moisture and shade)
has pure white flowers, but the same plants reared at
15°-20° have red flowers. If the white-bearing plants
are brought into a cooler place, the flowers that are
already in bloom remain white, but those that de-
velop later in the cooler temperature are red. There


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY 39


is another race of primula (Primula sinensis alba)
that always has white flowers, even at 20°. Strictly
speaking, we should say, not as we generally do for
brevity’s sake, that the difference between the
two races is that one has white, the other red flowers,
but we should say rather that P. rubra reacts at 20°
by producing red, at 30° by forming white flowers;
P. alba, on the other hand, reacts both at 20° and at
30° by producing white flowers. The constant dif-
ference between these races is not in their color, but in
the possibility of producing specific colors at certain
temperatures.

This is the point of view, of course, that must also
be taken for cases in which differences exist in all the
usual environments; for, here also, it is the different
possibilities of reaction that are inherited. Brevity
warrants us in speaking of particular characters as
inherited, rather than the specific possibility of reac-
tion that gave these characters; but no one need be
misled by the shorter expression.

Two similar cases of the influence of the environ-
ment have been found in Drosophila. There is a
mutant stock known as abnormal abdomen in which
the normal black bands of the abdomen are broken
and irregular or even entirely absent (Fig.19). Inflies
reared on moist food the abnormality is extreme;
but even in the same culture the flies that continue
to hatch become less and less abnormal as the culture
becomes more dry and the food scarce, until finally
the flies that emerge later can notbe told from normal
flies. If the culture is kept well fed the change does


40 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


not occur, but if the flies are reared on dry food they
are normal from the beginning. The character is a
sex linked dominant, as shown by the following
crosses. When an abnormal male is bred to a normal
(wild) female, the daughters are abnormal (if the


Fic. 19.—Mutant type called Abnormal Abdomen of Drosophila
ampelophila (the wings have been cut off); ais female; b, male; c, female
that approaches the normal type.


food is moist), but all the sons are normal. If the
medium is dry, however, both the daughters and the
sons alikearenormal. But these normal F, daughters
will produce the expected abnormal offspring if the
conditions are suitable, and these offspring are just as


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY Al


abnormal as though the female had herself been abnor-
mal. The reciprocal cross, viz., abnormal females by
normal males, givesabnormal sonsand daughters, if the
food is suitable, but normal if the food is dry, etc. In
both cases the F, gives the expectation for a sex-linked
dominant factor if the medium is suited to bring out
the abnormal character, and the result is entirely ob-
scured if the foodisdry. Here, at will, we can demon-
strate a regular Mendelian ratio by control of the
environment, and conversely, we can conceal com-
pletely what is taking place by substituting another
environment. That thesame genetic process is going
on in both cases can be demonstrated by suitable
tests.

A case similar in principle occurs in a mutant stock
of Drosophila that produces supernumerary legs.
This stock was observed in winter to produce a con-
siderable percentage of flies with supernumerary legs,
but few or none in summer, especially in warm
weather. Miss Hoge, who has studied this stock,
finds that when the flies are kept in an ice chest at a
temperature about 10° C. a high percentage of flies
with supernumerary legs occurs. Sometimes several
legs or parts of a leg are doubled, or the doubling
may occur twice in the same leg. The general rule
that Bateson pointed out for duplicated legs in other
insects appears to hold here, viz., the adjacent parts
are mirror images of each other.

In the cold the duplicate leg gives a regular
Mendelian result; but at normal temperature the
duplication is a rare.event and its mode of inheritance


42 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


obscured. In a hot climate there would be no evi-
dence that such a factor was being regularly trans-
mitted. But if the type moved into a cold region
it would show duplication in many of the legs.


II. By Developmental Influences


“Age,” too, is in a sense an environmental condi-
tion, which influences the development of characters.
Thus a white flower may change to purple as the plant
gets older, or the flaxen hair of a child may turn to
brown when he becomes a man. But, as in the case
of other “‘environmental’’ conditions, age may not
have the same effect on individuals with different
factors; in this way it comes about that animals or
plants which differ by certain factors may show a
difference in character only at certain ages, or may
not show the same difference at all ages. In Droso-
phila, flies with the factor for pink eyes are easily
distinguishable from those with the factor for purple
eyes, when the flies are young, but as they grow older,
the eyes of both races assume a dark purplish shade,
and become practically indistinguishable from each
other. Conversely, old flies with the factor for black
are usually easy to separate from those having the
normal “gray” factor, but the newly hatched flies,
in which the black pigment is not yet fully developed,
are separated with greater difficulty.

These cases in which a factor-difference has a visible
effect only at a certain age are in no fundamental
respect different from cases like that of the Drosophila


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY 43.


with reduplicated legs, where a factor difference has a
visible effect only under special external circum-
stances.

A number of cases of Mendelian inheritance are
known in which only the larve, and not the adults,
are affected. Tower has described crosses in which
the beetle Leptinotarsa signaticollis was crossed
with L. undecimlineata (Fig. 20, 4, B). In the first
stage (C), the larve of these two beetles are exactly
alike, but in the second stage, the larve of L. undecim-
lineata are white and the larve of L. signaticollis are
yellow; and in the third stage the undecimlineata larvee
are still white without stripes, while the others have
well-developed tergal stripes (B). When these species
are crossed under certain external conditions the F,
larve are yellow and, later, striped. The beetles that
come from them are intermediate. Inbred, these
beetles give three larve of the yellow type to one of
the white type.

There is extensive evidence from cytology, experi-
mental embryology, and regeneration, to show that
all the different cells of the body receive the same
hereditary factors. We must suppose, then, that
the Mendelian factors are not sorted out, each to its
appropriate cell, so that factors for color go only to
pigment cells, factors for wing-shape to cells of the
wings, etc., but that differentiation is due to the cumu-
lative effect of regional differences in the egg and
embryo, reacting with a complex factorial background
that is the same in every cell. These regional peculi-
arities of different parts of the egg and embryo, may,


44 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


like the age of the individual, also be considered as
influences external to the hereditary factors which
affect the development of characters. And not only


c


Fig. 20.—Leptinotarsa signaticollis (above), and L. undecimlineata
(below), with their full grown (B) and second stage (C) larve to the right
of each. (After Tower.)
do regional peculiarities influence characters, but
special regions are usually required for a given factor
difference to manifest itself, just as certain tempera-
tures or ages may be necessary. Thus when we


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY 45


speak of factors for eyes or for legs, we really mean
factor-differences which can produce effects only in
the eye, the leg, or other regions of the body. In
other cases the expression of a factor-difference may
not be limited to one region but may produce a
different effect in different regions; for example, a
gray white-bellied mouse, which differs from the
yellow mouse by only a single factor, is lighter than
yellow on the under side, but darker on the upper side.


IIT. By the Influence of Other Factors


Analogous also is the fact that certain factor-
differences produce a visible effect only when they are
in company with a particular complex of other heredi-
tary factors. Thus, a fly with the factors for ver-
milion eyes can not be distinguished from one with
the factors for pink eyes if both contain, in addition,
the factors for white eyes, for the factors for white
allow no other color to develop. Again, it is obvious
that without the factors necessary for the develop-
ment of a given character, no factors merely deter-
mining special modifications of that character can
have any effect. In other cases, the effect of a given
factor may not be entirely suppressed, but greatly
changed, if certain other factors in the hereditary
complex are changed. Thus, in flies which already
have the factor for vermilion eyes, the factor for
purple eyes produces an eye still lighter than ver-
noilion, but in flies containing the normal allelomorph
of the factor for vermilion, the factor for purple pro-


46 TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY


duces an eye decidedly darker than normal. Such
cases of interaction of factors, in which the effect of
one factor is altered by the action of another factor,
are very numerous.


IV. Conclusion


It would have been indeed strange if Mendelian
factor-differences had not been found that require
special conditions—environmental, developmental,
or factorial—in order to produce a given effect, or
any effect at all. For Mendelian factors may cause
or influence all sorts of characters—that is, any or all
kinds of developmental or physiological reactions;
and many of. these reactions are known to be affected
by age, temperature, region of the body, and so forth.
The facts given above are in no possible sense sub-
versive to Mendelian principles. On the contrary
they illustrate to great advantage the previously
given interpretation of all hereditary characters—
namely, that every character is the realized result of
the reaction of hereditary factors with each other
and with their environment. Failure to understand
this viewpoint has led to some futile criticism by the
opponents of the modern Mendelian interpretation
in terms of unit factors. This criticism is as pointless
as it would be to criticize the atomic theory on the
ground that oxygen does not, under all conditions,
and in all its compounds, give rise to substances with
the same properties.

The validity of the unit factor conception rests


TYPES OF MENDELIAN HEREDITY 47


upon the fact that whenever (as often happens) all
other conditions, external and internal, that modify
characters remain constant, clear-cut ratios are ob-
tained which can be explained only as due to segre-
gation, in definite ways, of particular hereditary
factors that perpetuate themselves unchanged from
generation to generation. The validity of the fac-
torial hypothesis may also be proved under circum-
stances not so well controlled, however. In cases
where, on the factorial hypothesis, a certain factor
is expected to be present in an individual, then,
even if the individual fails to develop the character
commonly taken as indicative of the factor, the actual
presence of the factor may be demonstrated by breed-
ing tests. For if, in subsequent generations, cir-
cumstances—genetic or environmental—are provided,
like those in which the character previously appeared,
it will again show itself. Flies of the race with ab-
normal abdomen, if raised in a dry bottle, appear
perfectly normal, but the presence within them of the
factor for abnormal may be demonstrated by rear-
ing their offspring in a wet bottle. Again, the factor
for pink eyes may be carried by a race with white
eyes, and although pink does not show in the white-
eyed race, its presence there may then be demon-
strated by crosses of these flies with flies that are not
white. Cases like these could be multiplied over and


over again.


CHAPTER III
LINKAGE


If two factors lie in the same member of a chromo-
some pair we should expect them always to be found
together in successive generations of a cross unless an
interchange can take place between such a chromo-
some and the homologous chromosome derived from
the other parent.

Whenever the two factors remain together in the
same chromosome there will be formed equal numbers
of gametes containing the two factors and of gametes
containing the normal allelomorphs of the two
factors. But if pieces of homologous chromosomes
are interchanged, then some of the gametes will con-
tain one of the factors in question, and an equal
number will contain the other factor. The process
of interchange between chromosomes is called cross-
ing over; the tendency of factors to stay together is
called linkage.

An example may make clearer this process of cross-
ing over. The factor for black body color and that
for vestigial wings both lie in the second pair of chro-
mosomes. If a black vestigial fly is crossed to a
wild fly (gray, long wings) (Fig. 21) the offspring are
gray with long wings. These F, flies have one chro-
mosome containing both the factor for black and the


factor for vestigial, and a homologous chromosome
48


LINKAGE 49


with the normal allelomorphs of these factors. After
maturation one or the other of these chromosomes


Fic. 21.—Back-cross of Fi @ (out of vestigial by black) by black
vestigial 9.


will be left in each egg and each sperm. The gametes
will consequently contain the same combinations of


50 LINKAGE


factors as were present in P, unless an interchange
has taken place between the two chromosomes. The
best way to find out whether such an interchange
has taken place is to mate the F, males and females
to the double recessive type, black vestigial, because
black and vestigial being recessive factors will not
obscure the factors that are carried by the gametes
of the F, to be tested. When the F; male is back-
crossed to a black vestigial female, Fig. 21 (second
line), only two classes of offspring are produced.
Half of the flies are black vestigial and half are gray
long. This must mean that there has been no cross-
ing over in the hybrid F, male; for he produces only
two kinds of gametes and these are of the kind that
combined to produce him. In other words, the
chromosomes received from his parents have re-
mained intact.

If we test the F, female, by back-crossing to a
black vestigial male, the result is different. If such a
female is bred to the double recessive male, black
vestigial, four kinds of offspring result, as follows:


Non-crossovers Crossovers
Black, vestigial Gray, long Black, long Gray, vestigial
41.5 per cent. 41.5 per cent. 8.5 per cent. 8.5 per cent.


83 per cent. 17 per cent.


Of these four classes the first two correspond to the
combinations which the F, received from its parents,
namely, black vestigial and gray long; the other two
are classes that would be expected if crossing over had


LINKAGE 51


taken place between black and vestigial in the pair
of homologous chromosomes. The numerical results


Fic. 22.—Back-cross of F; female (out of black by vestigial) by
black vestigial male.


show that this crossing over takes place in about
17 per cent. of cases. In other words, the chances are


52 LINKAGE


about five to one that the combination that went in
holds together.

It is also instructive to repeat the cross in such a
way that the two mutant factors, black and vestigial,
enter from different sides, 7.e., one parent contributes
black and the other vestigial. As shown in the next
diagram (Fig. 22), each parent carries in its chromo-
some one mutant factor and the normal allelomorph
of the other.

If the F,; males are backcrossed to black vestigial
females only two classes result, viz., black long and
gray vestigial Fig. 22 (third line). These are the
combinations that entered; hence no crossing over has
taken place in the F, males. We see that here the
linkage is not due to some affinity between the factors
black and vestigial, per se, for in this cross they always
enter different gametes as surely as they stayed
together before. The reason for this difference in
result is that in this cross they came from different
parents and must have been in opposite chromosomes,
whereas in the previous cross they were in the same
chromosome.

If we test the F, females by mating to black ves-
tigial males, four classes result, viz.,

Non-crossovers Crossovers

Black, long Gray, vestigial Black, vestigial Gray, long

41.5 per cent. 41.5 per cent. 8.5 per cent. 8.5 per cent.


83 per cent. 17 per cent.


Crossing over has taken place in the F, females,
and the numerical results show that this happens in


LINKAGE 53


17 per cent. of cases. Here too we see that now the
factors tend to separate, whereas in the case of the
other F, female they tended to stay together, since
they lay in the same chromosome. In the present
case, when the chromosomes interchange, the factors
are brought together, and so the crossover classes
are just the opposite in the two cases, as also are the
non-crossover classes. Yet there is the same amount
of crossing over shown in both crosses, so that the
frequency of the double recessives and double domi-

. nants in the first cross is exactly equal to the fre-
- quency of the single recessive and single dominants in
the last cross. Which classes shall have the high
frequency and which the low does not depend on the
nature of the factors themselves, therefore, but on
which ones come from the same parent, 7.e., lay in the
same chromosome at first, and which lay in opposite
chromosomes. The amount of crossing over is seen
to be independent of the way in which the factors enter
an individual. Hence it is fair to infer that the
process is not peculiar in any way to hybrids, but
takes place in the same way and to the same extent
in gametogenesis in pure homozygous stocks. This
is also indicated by the fact, later to be discussed,
that when several different allelomorphs of a factor
may occur, all give the same per cent. of crossing
over with other factors.

Many other combinations, involving a large num-
ber of different characters in the second group, have
been studied and give consistent results. There is
never any crossing over in the male; and, in the fe-


54 LINKAGE


male, the amount of crossing over is different for
different factor combinations, but, for any given com-
bination, it is not altered by the way in which the
factors entered the cross, and is, ordinarily, constant.

Tests like the preceding ones for the second group
have been carried out for the third group, and give
the same kind of results. There is crossing over in
the female and no crossing over in the male.

In the fourth group, where only three factors are
known, it is found that there is no crossing over
between them in the male, and only a very slight
amount in the female.

In the first group (sex linked characters), a very
large amount of data has been collected. Here again
there is abundant evidence to show that crossing
over takes place in the female, but not in the male.
The curious fact also comes to light that no mutations
have been discovered in the Y chromosome, nor does
it contain any factors dominant to any known
mutant or normal factors in its mate, the X chromo-
some. Since the linkage of a considerable number
of factors in the X chromosome has been studied in
detail the evidence from this source best serves to
illustrate cases where the linkage is strong, where it
is moderate, and where it is weak.

The body color called yellow and the eye color
white have been used in many experiments. If a
yellow white female is mated to a wild male (gray
red) (Fig. 23), the daughters are gray with red eyes
(like the fathers), but the sons are yellow white like


1 Subject to certain variations which will be noted later.


LINKAGE 55


Fic. 23.—Diagram illustrating the inheritance of two pairs of sex-
linked characters, viz., yellow white and gray red. In F, the males and
the females are of the same classes.


56 LINKAGE


the mother. The explanation of this result is obvious;
for the son gets his single X chromosome from his
mother, and should therefore have the characters
that go with this chromosome. His Y chromosome,
derived from the father, does not influence the result
at all. The daughters, however, get one X chromo-
some from the mother (yellow white) and the other
from the father (gray red). The factors for gray
and red dominating give gray red daughters.

The composition of these F,; females can be tested
by breeding to the double recessive male (yellow
white) since this does not carry any dominant factors
which will obscure what factors are received by the
F, females from their mothers. But the F, males
are themselves yellow white, so that the F, females
may be mated to their brothers. In fact, the out-
come is the same, whether a yellow white male from
stock or a yellow white F, brother is bred to the F,
female. The F, offspring of such crosses give the
following classes and ratios:

Non-crossovers Crossovers

Yellow white Gray red Yellow red Gray white

49.5 per cent. 49.5 per cent. 0.5 per cent. 0.5 per cent.


99 per cent. 1 per cent.


This F, result reveals the kinds of eggs produced by
the F, female (since a double recessive father was
used). Crossing over takes place between yellow
and white in only 1 per cent. of cases.

There is no way of testing linkage in the F,; male,
which is like a homozygous individual so far as the re-


LINKAGE 57


sult is concerned, as his Y chromosome does not
contain any factors dominant to yellow and white,
even though it came from the gray red male.

The reciprocal cross also offers certain points of
interest. When a gray red female is mated to a
yellow white male both sons and daughters are gray
red. The daughters get a gray red chromosome
from the mother and these factors dominate the
factors derived from the father. The sons (Fj) get
their single X chromosome from their mother and
show her colors (gray and red).

If these gray red F, females are back crossed
to a yellow white male they give the same numerical
result that this test gave in the reciprocal cross, viz.,
four classes of offspring with 1 per cent. of crossing
over.

The F, males behave in all crosses exactly as do
wild males, which is to be expected, since their single
X chromosome is derived from the wild type mother.

It will not be necessary to consider in detail the
same cross when the two factors enter from different
parents; they will now keep apart exactly to the
same degree that they kept together before. This
is illustrated for the backcross as follows:

Non-crossovers Crossovers

Yellow red Gray white Yellow white Gray red

49.5 per cent. 49.5 per cent. 0.5 per cent. 0.5 per cent.


99 per cent. 1 per cent.


As pointed out in the discussion of the black vestigial
cross, this fact is very important, for it serves to


58 LINKAGE


show in a most striking way that in the previous ex-
periment with yellow and white, these factors hold
together so strongly from generation to generation,
not because of any innate relation between these
characters, but simply because they started together
in the same chromosome.

In the case of yellow and white just given the
linkage between the two factors is very strong in the
sense just defined, that is, they tend in a high degree
to preserve whichever combination they have. Other
factors show a different strength of linkage. For
example, if a female with white eyes and miniature
wings is bred to a wild male, and then the F, females
(red, long) are backcrossed to white miniature males
they will give the following classes of offspring.

Non-crossovers Crossovers
White miniature Red long White long Red miniature
33.5 per cent. 33.5 per cent. 16.5 per cent. 16.5 per cent.


67 per cent. 33 per cent.


The two large classes, white miniature and red long,
correspond to the combinations that entered. The
two smaller classes are the crossover combinations.
Crossing over, therefore, takes place in 33 per cent.
of cases.

Another combination gives a still greater amount
of crossing over : the linkage may be said to be weaker.
If a white eyed female is bred to a bar male (bar is
a dominant mutation), and if the F, females (red
bar eyed) are bred to the double recessive (white
round eyed) sons, the following classes appear:


LINKAGE 59


Non-crossovers Crossovers ;
White round Red bar White bar Red round
28 per cent. 28 per cent. 22 per cent. 22 per cent.
56 per cent. 44 per cent.


Here a large amount of crossing over appears, about
44 per cent. In fact, so freely do the factors inter-
change that without sufficiently large and accurate
numbers the linkage might entirely escape detection.


THE MECHANISM OF CROSSING OVER


If it be admitted that the Mendelian factors are
carried by chromosomes it can not be denied that
interchange between homologous chromosomes must
occur, for sex linked factors cross over from each
other, and yet are known to be in the same pair of
chromosomes, since they all follow the X chromo-
some in its distribution. The evidence allows for no
other interpretation. But why should crossing over
take place so rarely between certain factors and so
often between others? We can make use here of
certain information in regard to the chromosomes
that gives a very simple answer to the question. In
the early germ cells, before the maturation period
begins, the chromosomes appear to be scattered in
the nuclei, and the homologous chromosomes in
many cases show no tendency to lie together, although
in some animals, e.g. in many flies, the members of a
pair are often found side by side. In thisearly period
the germ cells divide as do other cells and thereby
increase in numbers. But at the termination of this


60 LINKAGE


period, the homologous chromosomes unite in pairs.
There has been much controversy as to how this
union takes place, but in some cases at least, the
uniting chromosomes twist around each other as
they come together. This is illustrated to the left
in Fig. 24. As a consequence, parts of one chromo-


A B Cc D


Fic. 24.—Diagram to represent crossing over. At the level where the
black and the white rod cross in A, they fuse and unite as shown in D.
The details of the crossing over are shown in B and C.


some will come to lie now on one, now on the other
side of the mate. If when the twisted chromosomes
separate, the parts on the same side go to the same
pole the end result will be that shown to the right
in Fig. 24. Each chromosome has interchanged a
part with its mate. This process has been called
crossing over. It is, of course, also possible that the
twisted chromosomes do not break and reunite where


LINKAGE 61


they cross, and if they do not then when they begin
to separate they simply pull apart irrespective of the
side on which they lie. When this occurs each
chromosome remains intact and no crossing over
takes place.

Later some of the evidence on which the above
statements rest will be examined more critically.
For the present it need only be pointed out that
such a crossing over of parts of the chromosomes
would supply the necessary mechanism to account
for interchange. If the crossing over may occur at
any point in a chromosome, then the chance of its
occurrence between two given loci will be greater,
the greater the distance between those loci. If
then the Mendelian factors lie along the chromo-
somes, the amount of crossing over between any two
of them will depend on their distance apart. Should
two points lie near together a crossover will only
rarely occur between them; if they lie further apart
the chance of such a crossover taking place at some
point between them will be greater. From this
point of view the percentage of crossing over is an
expression of the “distance” of the factors from each
other. ;

In this way the diagram shown in the frontispiece
has been constructed. Not only can all the facts
of linkage so far studied be explained on this basis,
but, as will now be shown, certain further results can
be predicted. This is illustrated in what may be
called a three-point experiment, 7.e., an experiment
in which three pairs of factors are involved.


62 LINKAGE


The three factors already studied, namely, white,
miniature, and bar, furnish an excellent illustration.
If we represent the percentages of crossing over as
relative distances along the chromosome the three
points will lie as shown in Fig. 25.

If crossing over takes place between white and
miniature and between miniature and bar, then it


Fic. 25.—Diagram to illustrate double crossing over. The white and
the black rods (a) twist and cross at two points. Where they cross they
are represented as uniting (shown in c). That an interchange of pieces
has taken place between W and Br is demonstrated by the factor M
having gone over to the other chromosome.


might be expected sometimes to take place in both
regions at once, as shown in Fig. 25, b. The result here
would be to produce two chromosomes like those
shown in the lower figure. The combinations of
factors which these two chromosomes resulting from
double crossing over would contain, are white long
bar and red miniature round. Since these two classes


LINKAGE 63


of gametes are actually produced, the results of the
experiment fulfil the theoretical expectation.

There is a corollary of importance to this conclu-
sion. When across is made that involves only white
and bar, the double crossing over, that can be de-
tected only when an intermediate point is followed,
must still be supposed to take place. Whenever it
does take place white bar flies and red round flies
result. These will be added to the non-crossover
classes since they have the same external character-
istics. Hence the apparent non-crossover classes
will be increased and the crossovers decreased, so
that the sum of the value for W and M (88) and that
for M and B (22) is much greater than the value for
W and B (44) observed when only these two factors
are involved. Here then we have an explanation
of why long distances taken as a whole give too little
crossing over, aS compared with the same distances
taken section by section. The lowered percentage
is an actual mathematical necessity owing to the
occurrence of double crossing over.

In the case of double crossing over the two points
of crossing over can not be near together unless the
chromosomes are tightly twisted. Consequently,
when crossing over occurs at any point the region on
each side should be protected from further crossing
over. That this actually happens may now be dem-
onstrated. For example, from vermilion to sable is
10 units, and from sable to bar is 14 units more (as
seen in frontispiece). When crossing over occurs
between vermilion and sable the region between


64 LINKAGE


sable and bar should be somewhat protected from
crossing over. The usual amount of crossing over
between sable and bar is 14 per cent., but in those
cases in which crossing over between vermilion and
sable occurs, this value becomes reduced to somewhat
less than 4 per cent. In this same fashion a region
just to the left of sable is protected, but this protec-
tion decreases with the distance from the vermilion
sable region. The fact that one crossing over makes
less likely another crossing over in a nearby region,
or in a sense interferes with a second crossing over
nearby, is called interference. It is found that in-
terference decreases with increase of distance until,
in group I, it vanishes at a distance of about 46;
1.€., @ crossing over at one point does not affect the
chance of crossing over at another point 46 units
away. Weinstein finds, however, that at a still
greater distance interference reappears, so that
there is a modal distance between the two breaks in
double crossing over, possibly due to the threads
bending in loops that tend to have a certain length.

In the chromosome maps the distance taken as a
unit is that within which 1 per cent. of crossing
over occurs. Thus yellow and white are 1.5 units
apart in the frontispiece, since there is 1.5 per cent.
of crossing over between them. White and bifid
give 5.5 per cent., hence are placed 5.5 units apart,
and since yellow and bifid give 7 per cent., bifid must
be placed on the other side of white from yellow.
The other factors have been plotted similarly,
each locus being determined, as far as possible, by


LINKAGE 65


the per cent. of crossing over between it and the
factor nearest to it. For shorter distances it may be
said that the number of units on the map between any
two factors (A and C), will equal the per cent. of
crossing over that will actually be observed between
them in an experiment involving these two pairs of
factors, even although their distance on the map may
not have been obtained directly from their linkage
with each other, their positions having, instead, been
determined by their linkage with other factors. On
account of double crossing over, however, this would
not be expected to hold for the longer distances; and,
as has been explained, we do actually find that, if
long distances are involved, the distance between A
and C determined as on the map, by adding the inter-
mediate distances A-B and B-C, is longer than the
distance AC as directly determined in an experiment
involving only these two pairs of factors. It never-
theless remains true that, given the distance between
any two factors on the map, the per cent. of crossing
over between them can always be calculated from this
distance (since the amount of discrepancy due to
double crossing over also depends on the distance) ;
this shows that the amount of crossing over between
‘them is an expression of their position in a linear
series. This striking fact, that the mathematical
relations between the various linkage values conforms
to a linear series, is a strong argument that the factors
are actually arranged in line in the chromosomes.
If the relations between the various linkage values


were not determined by some linear relation of the
5


66 LINKAGE


factors but were of a random sort, these relations
could not be calculated from a linear map.

As a concrete illustration of the way in which a
group of factors behaves as a linear series, attention
may be called to the manner of distribution of the
factors among the germ cells of a female heterozygous
for a large number of factors in the same pair of
chromosomes. Let us write the factors derived from
one parent, 2.e., those in one of the chromosomes, on
one line (see formula p. 67), in the order which they
have on the map (see frontispiece), and the allelo-
morphic factors derived from the other parent, 7.e.,
those in the homologous chromosome, in correspond-
ing positions on the line below. Then in such a case
the mature eggs contain either all of the factors
represented on one line and none of those on the other,
or they contain all of the factors present in one section
of the line, and all of the factors present in the re-
maining section of the other line. In other words,
the factors obviously stick together in sections ac-
cording to their position in the linear series. When
double crossing over occurs the line is broken in two
places, but even here whole sections remain intact.

The above facts may be illustrated by an actual
case. The first formula shows the composition of
a hybrid female which has received from her mother
the mutant factors: yellow, white, abnormal, bifid,
vermilion, miniature, sable, rudimentary, and forked,
and from her father the normal allelomorphs of these
factors, together with the dominant mutant factor,
bar.


LINKAGE 67


ees vms aaa
YWAB, VMS RFB


A number of females of this type have been made
up by Muller. The next formula shows the kinds of
eggs that were produced by one of these females and
the numbers of each kind that were produced.


Non-crossovers:
ywab, vms rf b’-6.
YWAB VMS RFEB-8


Single crossovers:
YWabi vms rf b’-2.
YWAB; vms rf b’-2.
ywab VMS RFB-2.
YWAB,; Vms rf b’-l.
YWAB; VMS rf b’-l.
ywab vms RFB-1.


Double crossover:


ywah VMS RFb’‘-1.


Counts of over 600 offspring from females of the
same type have given similar results. The character-
istic method of interchange here demonstrated may
perhaps be better realized by contrasting the com-
binations just given with the following, which illus-
trate types of eggs found not to be produced by such
females: -


y WaB, Vm8 rf B’
YWab, Vms Rf B’


It is not supposed, however, that the per cent. of


68 LINKAGE


crossing over represents precisely the distance between
the factors, for it may be that crossing over is more
likely to take place in one region of the chromosome
than in another. In that case the distances between
factors in this region calculated from the amount of
crossing over between them, would be relatively
greater than the actual distance. It is supposed,
however, that at least the order of the factors in the
diagram represents their real order. Sturtevant
has found definite factors which alter the amount
of crossing over in the chromosomes, and these factors
actually do affect the amount of crossing over differ-
ently in the different regions. A map of the chromo-
somes based upon the per cent. of crossing over when
these factors are present would show different rela-
tive distances between the loci than those calculated
from the normal linkage values. It is to be noted,
however, that even in these diagrams, the order of
the factors remains unchanged. One of the factors
lies in the second chromosome and lowers the amount
of crossing over in certain regions of this chromosome;
the other lies in the third and apparently affects
only this chromosome, and chiefly the end of this
chromosome in which it itself is located. Bridges has
found that the percentage of crossing over in the sec-
ond chromosome is also lowered with increase in the
age of the female, and Plough has found that temper-
ature as well may affect the amount of crossing over.
This variation in crossing over is in no way preju-
dicial to the conception of crossing over above out-
lined. Variation in the amount of crossing over has


LINKAGE 69


also been found in other forms than Drosophila, but
in these cases the determining conditions and their
effect on the various linkage values have not as yet
been discovered.


LINKAGE IN OTHER ANIMALS AND IN PLANTS


Since the discovery in 1906 of linkage in sweet peas
many cases have been found in animals and in plants.
In sweet peas themselves two groups of linked factors
are now known, one containing three pairs of factors
and the other three or possibly four. In garden
- peas there are two pairs of linked factors and two
other cases that are doubtful; in the primrose there
is a group of five pairs of linked factors; in the
snap-dragon there is a group of three pairs; in
stocks there is a group of three or probably four
pairs. In animals, linkage, aside from sex linkage,
has been discovered in several forms besides Dro-
sophila, viz., in domesticated poultry by Goodale, in
pigeons by Cole, in rats and mice by Castle, in the
silk-worm moth by Tanaka, and in Apotettix by
Nabours. There are, it is true, several other cases
in which the evidence leads one to suspect that
linkage occurs, but these are too uncertain at present
to be included in the list. In all the above cases
the linkage is “ partial,’ that is, a certain amount
of crossing over takes place, at least in one sex.

There are a number of cases of sex linkage, which,
being only a special case of linkage, undoubtedly
belong in the same category, but the amount of cross-


70 LINKAGE


ing over between the sex factor and the various sex
linked factors can not be calculated, since in the sex
that is heterozygous for the sex factor no crossing
over has been observed. Sex linkage has been found


Fic. 26.—Black Langshan female by Barred Plymouth Rock male.
Compare with Fig. 30 (similar cross in Abraxas) for scheme of inheritance,
which is the same in both. Substitute Black for lacticolor and Bar for
grossulariata.


in the moths Abraxas (Figs. 30 and 31) and Lyman-
tria, in the fowl (Figs. 26, 27, 28, 29) (six factors),
canary, pigeon, Drosophila (Figs. 9 and 10), fish, cat,
man, and the plant Lychnis. In all, somewhat more
than fifteen species show linkage.

This number appears small in comparison with the


LINKAGE 71


large number of species in which Mendelian inheri-
tance has been discovered; but there are several rea-
sons why more cases have not been recorded. In
the first place, the number of chromosomes is generally
large compared with the number of characters that


Fig. 27.—Barred Plymouth Rock female by Langshan male. Compare
similar cross in Abraxas for scheme of inheritance.


have been studied in such a way that linkage would
be noticed. Thus, there is little chance of finding
two factors lying in the same chromosome. Sec-
ondly, unless this linkage is close, it might easily
escape detection, especially when the number of off-


vip LINKAGE


spring recorded is small. In such cases the data are
usually fitted to the nearest ‘““Mendelian”’ ratio even


Fic. 28.—Photograph of the P; (1 and 2) and F, (3 and 4) birds in such
a cross as that of Fig. 26.


though discrepancies are apparent. Even in species
where a number of different characters have been
studied these are often recorded in separate tables,


LINKAGE 73


which excludes the possibility of detecting any
linkage that is present, for obviously linkage cannot


Fig. 29.—Photograph of P; (1 and 2) and F, (3 and 4) birdsin such across
as that of Fig. 30. The P; male is a standard figure.


be seen unless at least two pairs of factors are studied
at thesame time. The steady increase in the number


74 LINKAGE


of cases of linkage that is occurring at the present
time, when the importance of detecting them has
become apparent, and the methods for studying
them have been worked out, appears to presage the
realization of linkage as a general phenomenon. Its
occurrence in such widely separated types is also a
sign that it is a constant accompaniment of Mende-
lian inheritance.


THE REDUPLICATION HYPOTHESIS


Linkage has been interpreted by Bateson and his
co-workers on a basis entirely different from that
adopted in this book. These investigators do not
connect Mendelian factors with the chromosomes in
any way, and do not suppose that segregation occurs
at the reduction division. In a case of linkage be-
tween two pairs of factors, Aa and Bb, the doubly
heterozygous individual will have the formula ABab.
Bateson supposes that in such an individual segre-
gation takes place before the reduction division—
perhaps in early cleavage stages, perhaps after the
formation of the gonads. Two cell divisions are
required for this segregation. In the first, A and a
do not divide, but one goes to each daughter cell,
1.e., they segregate. B and b, however, both divide,
and each daughter cell receives both B and b. The
resulting cells then have the formule, ABb and aBb,
respectively. In other words, A and a have segre-
gated, but B and b have not. At the next division
B and b segregate, giving four cells, with the combina-


LINKAGE 75


tions AB, Ab, aB, and ab, respectively. These cells
then proceed to divide, the number of divisions not
being the same for each, which results in the produc-
tion of more of some kinds of cells than of others.
But this multiplication must be assumed to be a
symmetrical process, since the observed number of
AB gametes equals the number of ab, and similarly
Ab equals aB. The whole process just described
is known as “reduplication.”” The term is applied
to the same cases as those included under the name
of linkage.

When three pairs of factors are involved in the same
“reduplication series’? Bateson supposed at one time
that they are segregated at three successive cell
divisions, after which the eight resulting cells divide
at unequal rates. Later Trow suggested for such a
case that perhaps only two segregating divisions occur
at first, producing the cells ABCc, AbCe, aBCc, and
abCc, which may then multiply so as to give the
proper proportions for the A and B combinations.
After this there occurs in every cell a division which
segregates C and c. The resulting cells then divide
again so as to produce the observed relations be-
tween the C pair and the other factors.

The nature of the factors themselves in the differ-
ent lines of cells resulting from segregation can not
be supposed to determine the difference in the number
of times that these lines divide, because if an indi-
vidual has received AB from one parent and ab from
the other, the lines of cells reduplicate in a way just
opposite to that in an individual which received Ab


76 LINKAGE


from one parent and aB from the other. In one
individual the line AB divides a certain number of
times more than aB, whereas in the other aB divides
just that many times more than AB. In other
words, the number of times a line of cells divides must
be assumed to be determined in some way by whether
or not, in its formation, certain factors separated
that had established a relation with each other by
being present together in the egg or sperm from which
the individual came. To explain this, Bateson and
Punnett have suggested that at the time of fertiliza-
tion there is established in the egg a “polarity”
which determines the planes of the segregating divi-
sions. But it seems impossible to imagine how this
or any other mechanism could bring about the above
result. On attempting to follow out in concrete
detail the events which must be assumed to occur in
any case of reduplication, we find that, if the above
stated relation is to hold, then, on “polarity” or any
other hypothesis, the assumption of the most intricate
and improbable relations and processes is forced upon
us.

This interpretation of linkage was originally based
largely upon the supposed fact that the “gametic.
ratios” (ratio of parental combinations to new or
crossover combinations in the gametes) fell into the
series 1:1:1:1,3:1:1:8, 7:1:1:7,15:1:1:15, 31:1:1:
31, etc. The supposed connection between this
series and reduplication is too involved to explain
here, and gametic ratios which do not fall into it are
nowdefinitely known. In fact,it seems probable that


LINKAGE 77


ratios which do fall into it are no more frequent than
would be expected from a chance distribution.
Another assumption upon which the reduplication
hypothesis is based is the old idea of somatic (pre-
reductional) segregation. This hypothesis, once ad-
vocated by Roux and Weismann as an explanation of
differentiation, is opposed by a large body of experi-
mental evidence from the fields of regeneration and
experimental embryology, and has been given up by
practically all students of developmental mechanics,
including Roux himself. Altenburg’s crosses of
Primula proved segregation of the linked factors to
occur after gonad formation. In flies Plough found
heat to affect linkage only if applied after the
completion of most, if not all, the gonial divisions
that might have ‘“‘reduplicated”’ the eggs in question.
At first it was doubted whether more than two
pairs of factors could show reduplication in the same
organism, but when it was experimentally proven
that two pairs were not the limit, the scheme was
extended. When gametic ratios not falling into the
3, 7, 15 series were found, the theory was modified
to permit other ratios. When it was found that the
result depended upon the way in which the factors
entered the cross, the ‘polarity’? hypothesis was
added. Some further extension would be necessary to
account for interference. That interference is a wide-
spread phenomenon is shown by its occurrence in
Altenburg’s Primula crosses, and in those of Ander-
son on corn—the only crosses outside of Drosophila
giving the exact relations of more than two factors.


CHAPTER IV
SEX INHERITANCE


There are two types of sex inheritance known in
those species in which separated sexes exist. In one
type, which may be called the Drosophila type (XX-
XY type, or, for short, the XY type), the female is
homozygous for a sex factor, the male heterozygous;
in the other, the Abraxas type (the WZ-ZZ type, or,
for short, the WZ type) the female is heterozygous for
a sex factor, the male homozygous. Since in both
cases the heterozygous individuals must always mate
with the homozygous ones there should result in each
succeeding generation equal numbers of heterozygous
and homozygous individuals, and so the bisexual con-
dition is perpetuated as follows:


Ss


| /\
Ce /


The genetic evidence so far gained has placed in the


Drosophila type the following animal forms: Dro-
78


SEX INHERITANCE 79


sophila, man, cat; and the plants; Lychnis and Bry-
onia. The cytological evidence refers to the same
type the insect groups of bugs, flies, beetles, grass-
hoppers; the spiders, certain worms (Ascaris), echino-
derms, amphibia and mammals (including man).
The genetic evidence has placed in the Abraxas
type several moths and butterflies, and several birds;
viz., chickens, ducks, and canaries.! Favorable
cytological evidence has been found only in the case
of a few moths.

In many cases of the Drosophila type, in which
the history of the sex chromosomes has been worked
out cytologically, it has been found that in the male
there is a pair of chromosomes, the two members
of which are different in size or shape. These are the
“sex chromosomes” and are designated as X and Y.
In many species of the Drosophila type the Y is
slightly smaller than the X, and in the various other
species of this type all gradations in the relative size
of the Y are found, between this condition and the
condition where Y is completely absent. In some
related species, on the other hand, the chromosomes
which obviously correspond to X and Y are alike in
appearance. It is not, after all, the size difference
usually visible in the male, between X and Y, which
gives these two chromosomes their significance in sex
determination, but rather a difference in the factors
they contain. The size difference is an incidental
concomitant, or, as it were, a token or label that is


1 Richardson’s work on strawberries suggests that this plant may come
under the Abraxas type. :


80 SEX INHERITANCE


not present in all species. In all these cases the
female contains two X chromosomes, the Y chromo-
some being confined to the male line.

This type of sex determination represents all eggs
as alike—each containing one X (after the polar
bodies have been extruded), but the sperm is of
two kinds, one containing the X and the other Y, or
merely no X. The scheme is as follows:


| /\
X Y
X XY


It wil) be seen that all the spermatozoa carrying X
produce females, while all those carrying Y or no X
produce males.

The Y chromosome, when present, descends from
father to son. It might seem, therefore, that if the
Y carried a sex factor for maleness the scheme would
work out as well as if a sex factor were carried by the
X chromosome. But in several cases there is no Y
in the male, and in certain cases to be described later,
due to non-disjunction, there are females that have a
formula XXY and yet their sex is not affected in any
way on account of the presence of the supernumerary
Y. It follows that sex is not determined by the
presence or absence of the Y chromosome but by the


SEX INHERITANCE 81


number of the X chromosomes that are present. In
the cases that follow, where sex determination of the
Drosophila type was discovered by a study of sex
linked inheritance, as well as in the above cases, where
the mechanism was discovered through cytological
observations, proof that the male is heterozygous for a
Mendelian factor for sex is derived from the fact that
he gives rise to two kinds of spermatozoa—male pro-
ducing and female producing—in equal numbers.
We know this in the cases worked out cytologically
because here the spermatozoa carrying X must all
produce females, while the other half must produce
males; and we know it, in the cases worked out gen-
etically, because here only half the spermatozoa from
a male with a dominant sex linked character carry
the dominant factor, and these all produce females,
while the rest produce males. The female must con-
tain the same Mendelian sex factor as is present in
the female-producing spermatozoa of the male; but
the female must be homozygous for this factor, since
any egg, if fertilized by a male-producing sperma-
tozoon, contributes this factor to the resulting male.

Although the only way in which the results of sex
linked inheritance of the Drosophila type differ
from non-sex linked cases is the one above stated,
namely, that a dominant male transmits his dominant
sex linked factor only to his daughters, nevertheless
it may be well at this point to recall specifically what
ratios are produced in consequence, in the various
types of crosses.

Examples of sex linked inheritance in Drosophila


&2 SEX INHERITANCE


have already been given; that of white eyes is typical
of all the rest. The main facts may be restated
here. If a white eyed male is bred to a red eyed
female the offspring are red eyed (Fig. 9). If these
are inbred all of the F, daughters are red eyed, but
half of the sons are white eyed and half red eyed.
In a word, the grandfather transmits his characters
visibly to half of his grandsons but to none of his
granddaughters.

In the reciprocal cross (Fig. 10), a white eyed
female bred to a red eyed male produces the criss-
cross result of red eyed daughters and white eyed
sons. These give white and red eyed males and fe-
males in equal numbers. On the assumption that the
factor for white eyes is carried by the sex chromo-
somes the inheritance of white eyes can be readily
understood. It will be observed that a female trans-
mits to each of her sons one of her X chromosomes
with all the factors contained in it. Her sons will
show all of these sex linked characters whether they
be dominant or recessive since they receive no other
X to dominate those characters and the Y contains
no dominant factor. For example, if a stock be
made up pure for yellow body color, white eyes, ab-
normal abdomen, bifid wings, sable body color, forked
spines and bar eyes, and if such a female be bred
to a wild male, all of her sons will be yellow,
white, abnormal, bifid, sable, forked and bar. The
daughters, however, wil! receive not only this chro-
mosome from their mother, but will also receive a
chromosome from the wild male (their father) con-


SEX INHERITANCE 83


taining the normal allelomorphs of all these factors.
In the case of all the factor-pairs, except abnormal
and bar, the normal allelomorph dominates. There-
fore, the females will appear normal for all characters
except abnormal and bar, which are dominant.

In the cat, Doncaster and Little describe a sex
linked factor affecting the color. In man several
characters, such as color blindness, hemophilia, and
others less certainly identified have been found to
follow the same scheme.

A comparison of sex linkage in Abraxas with that
in Drosophila shows that the mode of inheritance of
sex linked characters is identical in these two cases,
but the sex relations are exactly reversed. In the
Abraxas type sex linked inheritance takes place in
accord with the plan that the female is heterozygous
in sex production. If the chromosome that carries
this sex differentiator is called Z, and its mate in
the female W, the formula for the male would be ZZ
and that for the female WZ. The scheme follows:


A}
oS


ZL


Inheritance in Abraxas is illustrated in the follow-
ing diagrams (Figs. 30 and 31), in which the common


84 SEX INHERITANCE


wild type A. grossulariata is crossed to the rare mu-
tant type A. lacticolor.


GROSSULARIATA


Fig. 30.—Abraxas lacticolor female by A. grossulariata male. The sex
chromosomes are represented by the circles in the center of the diagram,
and the letters contained in them stand for the factors that each carries.
The W chromosome, confined to the female line, is represented without
either L or 1; for it, like the Y chromosome in Drosophila, carries no sex
linked factors.


SEX INHERITANCE 85


In the first cross (Fig. 30), where the lacticolor
female is mated to the grossulariata male, the off-


GROSSULARIATA 9 LACTICOLOR


Fie. 31.—Abraxas grossulariata female by A. lacticolor male. The re-
ciprocal cross of the one shown in Fig. 30.


spring are all of the grossulariata type. When these
are inbred they give (F2) three grossulariata to one


86 SEX INHERITANCE


lacticolor, but the lacticolors are females only. The
lacticolor grandmother has transmitted her peculi-
arity visibly to half of her granddaughters, but to
none of her grandsons.

In the reciprocal cross (Fig. 31) of lacticolor male
by grossulariata female, the daughters are like their
father (lacticolor), and the sons are like their mother
(grossulariata). This is so-called criss-cross inher-
itance. When the hybrids (F;) are inbred, they give
lacticolor males and females and grossulariata males
and females in equal numbers.

Sex linked inheritance, as shown by the foregoing
results, becomes intelligible if the factor for lacticolor
is carried by the chromosome Z. Its occurrence in
Z is indicated here by writing an | inside the circle
which represents that chromosome, while the allelo-
morphic character carried by the Z of the grossu-
lariata individual is indicated by writing L in the
circle. The W chromosome is indicated by the
blank circle. The two cases then work out as shown
in the diagrams.

The preceding analysis shows that the genetic
evidence calls for a mechanism in-which the female is
heterozygous for sex, since those of her eggs which
carry the factor for grossulariata all develop into
females, the others into males. In the case of
Abraxas there was for some years no positive cyto-
logical evidence in support of this view. Fortunately,
the cytological side is now in a much better position
owing to the work of Doncaster and Seiler.

Doncaster examined Abraxas cytologically, and


SEX INHERITANCE 87


found that both the female and the male have 56
chromosomes, with no obviously unequal pair.

Normally in Abraxas the sex ratio is about 1 to
1. In one exceptional line this equality of sexes
was not the rule. In this strain Doncaster found
many females which gave only daughters, and not a
single son. Other females of this line gave many
daughters but also a few sons, while still others gave
practically a normal 1 to 1 ratio.

When Doncaster examined this line cytologically,
he found that although the males were normal, with
56 chromosomes, the females were aberrant, having
only 55 chromosomes.

In the maturation of the eggs of such a 55 chromo-
some female, the odd chromosome went to one pole,
so that one polar plate had 27 and the other 28
chromosomes. Doncaster first thought that the odd
chromosome went more often to the polar body than
to the egg, and that eggs that eliminate the odd
chromosome become after fertilization individuals
with 55 chromosomes, that is, females — while the
few that retain it become 56 chromosome individuals
— that is, males. Later work showed that the egg is
left with 28 as often as 27 chromosomes. This result
upsets the earlier interpretation.

In normal strains there is a W chromosome present,
but since this W chromosome may be absent without
effect upon the sex of the individual, as shown above,
it must be regarded as functionless in determining
sex, and in this sense it corresponds to the Y of
Drosophila. This evidence proves that there is


88 SEX INHERITANCE


present in Abraxas that cytological basis which the
evidence from sex linkage demands, namely, a con-
dition the converse of that known in other groups of
insects.

The evidence that Seiler has obtained relates to the
wild strains of the moth Phragmatobia fuliginosa.
The reduced number of chromosomes in the polar
plate of the egg is 28 (Fig. 32, a). The large dyad
formed by synapsis of the sex chromosomes Z and W
is shown in the middle of the group. At the first
polar division all the chromosomes separate from
their mates, the ordinary chromosomes (autosomes)
as well as the sex chromosomes. But as W separates
from Z, it breaks into two parts which we may call
large W and small w (Fig. 32, b,c). As a result there
are 29 chromosomes at one pole (the pole that con-
tains W and w) and 28 chromosomes at the other
pole (the pole containing Z). Itis a matter of chance
which group goes into the polar body and which
remains in the egg. Consequently there are two
kinds of eggs, Ww and Z.

In the male there are 56 chromosomes, which give
the reduced number 28. The two large Z’s can be
made out in Fig. 32,d. These meet, when the reduced
number 28 is formed, and then separate, one going
to each pole (Fig. 32, h). Each spermatozoon con-
tains, therefore, one Z chromosome.


Fig. 32.—Phragmatobia fuliginosa. a, equatorial plate of first polar
body of egg; band 'c, daughter plates of the first polar spindle; d, equatorial
plate of spermatogonium; e, equatorial plate of first spermatocyte; f
and g, equatorial plates of second spermatocyte; h, anaphase stage of
first maturation; 4 and 7, equatorial plates of somatic cells with 56 (in 2),
and 61 chromosomes (in j). (After Seiler.)


SEX INHERITANCE 89


+, mer 299 Me
AYE Cis loots
» Tn eed | be .
o*% pow, ce
a b 2
o7c ee & %,° bed
3 : ; seastte 824:
oS a “5 02% Seote
d a f


90 SEX INHERITANCE


Any sperm fertilizing an egg containing Ww pro-
duces a female. The male embryos should contain
therefore 56 chromosomes, the female 57. Counts
of chromosomes in embryos show that while some
contain 56, others contain 58, 61 and 62. Seiler
suggests that the Z element is a compound and some-
times separates into its four components in the so-
matic cells. Recently (1919) Seiler has demonstrated
in two other moths a lagging chromosome that may
go out or remain in the egg in the ratio of 1.36 to 1.

In other Lepidoptera, examined by Stevens, by
Doncaster, by Dederer and by Seiler, the males and
females have the same chromosome configuration.
In other words, if a WZ pair is present in the female
the members are of the same size, or so nearly of the
same size that they cannot be distinguished. It
will be recalled that in a few other insects, believed
for other reasons to belong to the Drosophila type,
the X and the Y chromosomes are of the same size.
The failure to find two sizes of sex chromosomes in
moths is, therefore, not an argument against the view
that the female is heterozygous for a sex factor. On
the contrary, it is to be considered only a fortunate
circumstance that this difference in a sex factor is
sometimes associated with a size difference in no way
directly depending on the sex factor itself.


WHAT ARE SEx Factors


The inheritance of sex is explained by one chromo-
some difference that distinguishes the male from


SEX INHERITANCE 91


the female. It does not follow from this that
there is only one sex factor involved that is car-
ried by the sex chromosomes. The symbols used
here, viz., XX-XY and WZ-ZZ, are intended
primarily for the chromosomes, but also for the
sex factors.

These formule for the Drosophila type and for
the Abraxas type raise the question as to whether
the postulated sex factors are identical in the two
cases. The employment of different letters for the
two types suggests, of course, that the sex factors
may be different. And it is true that the two sets
of letters are used to avoid an apparent paradox
that appears if we use only X and Y in both cases.
If this is done, XY on one scheme represents the
male and on the other scheme the female. Never-
theless, for the present the employment of different
letters need not necessarily mean that different
factors for sex are present in the two great classes,
for these reverse results may be due to the action of
the same factor-difference. in a different setting.
For example, acid may be the color differentiator in
a setting of a certain solution containing it and litmus
(with one drop of acid the color being blue, with
two drops red), but in a setting containing Congo
red the same differentiator may produce just the
opposite effects (one drop red, two drops blue). On
the other hand, it is conceivable that the setting (lit-
mus and acid) may remain the same and yet a reverse
result be produced by having a different differentiator
—alkali instead of acid.


92 SEX INHERITANCE


Since genetics has at present nothing to offer that
will decide the question as to whether another set of
sex differentiators is present, or whether the same
differentiators with a different setting are involved
in these two cases, discussion is quite certain to be
futile.

It may seem inconsistent to use the name of the
chromosome as the symbol for the sex factor when
dealing with the inheritance of sex, while in all other
cases a factor representing a point in the chromosome
is used to designate the special character under con-
sideration. No doubt with this idea in mind, several
writers have followed the practice of indicating the
sex factor by a significant letter, such as F for female-
ness and M for maleness. As the use of such letters
often involves a question of interpretation, a brief
consideration may be given to this matter. In the
discussion that follows reference is made always to
the Drosophila type, but exactly the same arguments
apply to the Abraxas type.

1. It has been suggested, for example, that a factor
for the male be added to the formule so that maleness
may not appear simply as the absence of one factor
for femaleness. Thus, in such formule as FMFM
(¢) and FMM (32) the factor for maleness is added
to indicate that when a single amount of F is present
the male factors produce the male. But since M’s
are distributed everywhere, the formula is little more
than a concession to male vanity, for M is not here
a differentiator. Moreover, the use of the letters
MM is here unjustifiable because there is no ground


SEX INHERITANCE 93


for supposing that maleness is due to one pair of
factors. It must be due to a complex of many factors
all of which are present in both sexes.

2. Since there is evidence to show in some cases
that there is no sex factor in the Y chromosome, the
factor or factors carried by X can have no mate in
this sex, hence the allelomorph or allelomorphs must
be 0. If one chooses to represent this zero by a
small letter, by f or m for instance, there is no in-
consistency in doing so, for theré is in this instance
the cytological observation to justify its use. It is,
however, misleading to represent this 0 by M as has
sometimes been done.

3. There is at present no evidence to show that
there is only one factor for sex carried by each sex
chromosome, however probable this may seem from
other relations, for it has not been possible to de-
termine the linkage relation of the sex factor or fac-
tors to other factors in the sex chromosome, because
crossing over of like factors in the homozygous sex
would lead to no visible effect, and in the heterozy-
gous sex no crossing over takes place.

4. If in the formule FF (¢) and FO (¢) the letter
F is interpreted as a factor for femaleness, the formula
must not be construed as meaning that F may not
also be a factor for maleness. For, as a matter of
fact, one F factor may be essential to the production
of the male. Therefore, until we get more definite
information as to the existence of a single or of
several factors. for sex, and as to whether they are
the same factors in the two types, and what the rela-


94 SEX INHERITANCE


tion of F and M may be in hermaphroditic types, it is
less inconsistent to use the symbols for the sex chro-
mosomes as the symbols for the sex factors also, if
it is at the same time recognized that the whole
chromosome is not involved in determining sex.


HERMAPHRODITISM AND SEX


Typical hermaphrodites are individuals that ripen
both eggs and sperm. They are found widely repre-
sented in the plant and animal kingdoms, whole
orders and classes consisting almost entirely of such
individuals. Self-fertilization may occur, as in
many plants, but cross-fertilization between different
individuals appears more often to take place. In
addition to these typical cases, that call here for no
further comment, there are cases in which the in-
dividual may ripen first its sperm and later its eggs
(protandric hermaphroditism), or vice versa. There
are also several cases in which, in the young stages,
eggs (or egg-like cells) appear in a gonad that is
found subsequently to function as a testis. In the
amphipod crustacean, Orchestia gammarillus, Bou-
lenger found that 198 out of 217 young males con-
tained ova, or egg-like cells, in the testes. In the
adult males these cells had almost completely dis-
appeared. In the male harvestman (Phalangium)
large cells, said to be eggs, have been found in the
testes. In the testes of the young male frog of some
species there are large egg-like cells in the testes
just prior to the time of metamorphosis. They


SEX INHERITANCE 95


subsequently disappear. In the toad there is a
special enlargement at the anterior end of the
testis, called Bidder’s organ, that is composed
exclusively of large egg-like cells. The cells of this
organ may be the same as the scattered cells in the
testes of the young frog, which also occur sometimes
in the young toad. On the other hand the same
organ is found also in the young female toad, lasting
throughout the first year of her life. If it is an ovary
in the male, then the female would be said to have
two kinds of ovaries, one rudimentary the other
functional.

In the lamprey (Petromyzon) the young males
also frequently have cells in their testes that appear
to be immature ova. Schreiner has shown that in
the hagfish (Myxine) immature males have ova in
their testes, while immature females have young
sperm-cells in their ovaries. In this case the sexes
cannot be distinguished until maturity.

Certain teleostian fish pass through similar con-
ditions, but one teleost, Serranus, is described by
Dufossé and others as a true hermaphrodite.

Whether the two following cases belong under
this heading may seem questionable. According to
H. N. Gould, the mollusc Crepidula plana is male
in the juvenile stage and female in later stages.
He finds that unless a young specimen is placed in
the vicinity of a larger individual the testes and
male genitalia fail to develop, and when the animal
grows older it develops ovaries and oviduct. But
in the presence of a larger individual the young


96 SEX INHERITANCE


animal becomes and remains functionally male.
According to Baltzer, if the free swimming embryos
of the gephyrean worm, Bonellia, are isolated they
become sexual females. If however a swimming
embryo that is ready to settle down comes to
rest on the proboscis of a female, it develops into a
rudimentary but functional male. A few embryos
in each culture that do_not settle down show signs
of becoming hermaphroditic. It has been sug-
gested (Geoffrey Smith) that the parasitic males
(‘complementary males’) of certain species of
barnacles owe their condition to their surroundings,
as in Bonellia.

The most important information relating to the
chromosomes in hermaphrodites and unisexual forms
is that discovered by Boveri and Schleip from the
thread worm, Rhabdonema nigrovenosum. This
species has two generations in its life cycle. One
generation consists of parasitic hermaphrodites that
live in the lungs of the frog, the other consists of
free-living males and females. The hermaphrodites
and the free-living females have 12 chromosomes.
The males have 11 chromosomes. In the her-
maphrodite, both eggs and sperm are produced in
the same germ-tube. The egg after maturation
has 6 chromosomes. In the hermaphrodite two
classes of sperm are formed which, according to
Schleip, have 6 and 5 chromosomes respectively
(one X-chromosome having been lost at one di-
vision). The former fertilizing the egg produces a
free-living female, the latter a male. In the free-


SEX INHERITANCE 97


living male it must be assumed that the no-X
sperm is non-functional. The X-bearing sperms
would fertilize the eggs and produce the hermaphro-
ditic females.


PARTHENOGENESIS AND Sex


In the animal kingdom there are several cases
where a species reproduces for several generations
by parthenogenesis, and, then, at the end of the
chain, sexual forms appear. The rotifer, Hydatina
senta, is the best illustration since the change can
now be controlled (Whitney). This animal ordi-
narily produces parthenogenetic eggs (Fig. 33,
A, D), which give rise to females. If fed on a pure
diet of the protozoon, Polytoma, only these par-
thenogenetic females are produced in successive
generations (Whitney, Shull). If the diet is changed
to the green alga (Euglena) a female will then lay
eggs that give rise to a new kind of individual—a
male-producing female which is not externally
different from its mother. If the male-producing
female is not fertilized by a male, soon after hatch-
ing (B), she produces a large number of small eggs
(E) that develop parthenogenetically into males
(C), but.if she is fertilized she produces a few large
eggs with thick shells (F)—the resting eggs—that
always become females. Hence the change in diet
has caused the appearance of a new kind of in-
dividual that functions as a sexual female with the
production of a few, daughters, or as a partheno-


98 SEX INHERITANCE


genetic female producing many sons, according to
whether she has been fertilized soon after hatching
or not. The nature of the change in this female is
not known, but it is known that the small male-
producing eggs extrude two polar bodies, thus be-


Fig. 33. — Hydatina senta. — A, the ordinary parthenogenetic female.
B, sexual female, at time of hatching, when she is fertilized by the male.
C, male. D, parthenogenetic female egg. #, parthenogenetic male egg.
F, fertilized resting egg. (After Whitney.)


coming haploid. These males produce two kinds of
sperm, functional and non-functional; there are
just twice as many of the former as of the latter
(Whitney). In this respect the case appears similar
to that of the hornet, the male of which is haploid


SEX INHERITANCE 99


and produces two functional sperm cells to one
functionless. In the honey bee the situation is
similar. The eggs usually give off two polar bodies
thus becoming haploid. If such an egg is fertilized
it produces a female (queen or worker), if un-


Fig. 33A.—Spermatogenesis in the honey bee. a, 6, ¢,. abortive first
spermatocyte division. d, e,f, g, imperfect second spermatocyte division.
(After Meves.) ;


fertilized it develops parthenogenetically into a
male, which is thus haploid. In him the first sper-
matocyte division is abortive (Fig. 33, A, a-c), the
second is more complete, two nucleated cells result-
ing, but one of them is very small and does not


100 SEX INHERITANCE


develop further. Since one maturation division of
the chromosomes, presumably equational, takes
place, the functional sperm has the haploid number
of chromosomes. All the sperm are alike, and any
egg that is fertilized gives rise to a female, which is
diploid.

In some of the aphids there may be a long suc-
cession of parthenogenetic females, whose continu-


OPE
ORO


Fig. 33B.—Spermatogenesis of the bear-berry aphid. a, }, c, first sper-
matocyte division, with lagging chromosome. d, interkinesis stage. ¢,f, 9,
second spermatocyte division of functional cell.


ance has been shown to depend on environmental
conditions. At the end of the series males and
sexual females appear.

The parthenogenetic females have the diploid
number of chromosomes (Stevens, von Baer,


SEX INHERITANCE 101


Morgan). When the male appears, one chromosome
less is found in his somatic cells, and, since in the
nearly related phylloxerans a similar reduction takes
place and has been seen (Morgan) to be due to the
extrusion into the polar body of whole chromosomes,
it is practically certain that in the aphids the loss
takes place in the same way.

In the first spermatocyte division in the aphids
(Fig. 33 B, a-c), one cell gets the unpaired X
chromosome (the mate of the one lost in the polar
body when the male egg matured), and this cell
after another equational division (Fig. 33 B, e-f)
produces two functional spermatozoa. The cell
lacking the X degenerates. The sexual egg gives
off two polar bodies. It then contains the reduced
number of chromosomes including one X. Such
an egg fertilized by the functional X-bearing sperm
gives rise the following year to the stem-mother,
which becomes the progenitor of a new line of par-
thenogenetic females, etc.

In the phylloxerans of the hickories the fertilized
egg gives rise to a female called the stem-mother
(Fig. 84). She emerges from the egg in the early
spring and attaches herself by means of her proboscis
to a leaf, causing it to produce a gall that envelops
her. Within the gall she lays her eggs. These
hatch, and produce the winged or migrant gener-
ation (Fig. 34). In one species, P. caryzecaulis, all
the migrants in one gall are alike in that they
produce the same kind of egg, 7.e., in some galls all
the migrants contain large eggs (that produce sexual


102 SEX INHERITANCE


females), while in other galls all of the migrants
contain smaller eggs (that develop into males).
The sexual female lays one large egg, the winter
egg, from which the stem-mother emerges the fol-
lowing spring. The males give rise only to female-


Stern. Nether


3
Migrant. [producer


9
; K
cy


Fie. 384.—Diagram to illustrate the life cycle of Phylloxera caryxcaulis .


producing sperm, each spermatozoon containing
two sex chromosomes. The other class of sperm
degenerates. Hence we can understand why it is
that all fertilized eggs produce females only.

The chromosomal cycle undergoes the series of
changes shown in Fig. 35. In P. caryecaulis there
are eight chromosomes, including four sex chromo-


SEX INHERITANCE 103


somes (XxXx). Since the history of the sex chro-
mosomes alone furnishes certain information that
makes clear some of the changes in the life cycle,
the other chromosomes may be disregarded for the
present.

Starting at the bottom of the diagram it will be
seen that the sexual egg after extruding the two
polar bodies contains two sex chromosomes indicated
by X and x. Two kinds of males are indicated in
the diagram, one containing Xx the other Xx’, and
as a consequence there will be two kinds of female-
producing sperm, one kind for each male, namely,
Xx and Xx’. If the former fertilizes the sexual egg,
the resulting stem-mother will be XxXx, if the
latter, the stem-mother will be XxXx’. These two
kinds of stem-mothers are indicated at the top of
the diagram. One of them, XxXx, produces eggs
which, after extruding one polar body, give rise to
the migrants bearing large eggs; from the latter
eggs, in turn, come the sexual females. The other
stem-mother XxXx’, produces eggs, which, after
extruding one polar body, give rise to the migrants
bearing small eggs. Prior to the time when these
small eggs are about to give off their single polar
body, the two: large X’s conjugate and the two
small x’s conjugate, and when the polar body is
given off one large and one small X pass out, and
one large and one small X remain in the egg. In
other words there is at this time a reduction in the
number of sex chromosomes, and, as a consequence,
a male is produced. Now, as the diagram shows,


104 SEX INHERITANCE


Xx may remain in the egg and Xx’ pass out; or,
in other eggs, Xx’ may remain in the egg and Xx
may pass out. There will be, in consequence, two


T° GENERATION


Xx Xx Xx Xx’


STEM MOTHER ~ FEMALE-PRODUCING LINE (STEM MOTHER - MALE-PRODUCING LINE


| Xx STEM MOTHERS EGGS x | |


2"? GENERATION


1
Xx Xx Kx Kx
MIGRANT- FEMALE PRODUCER MIGRANT.- MALE PRODUCER
XX xx!
Hse. Xx SA&N.
| | | | POLAR SPINDLES | | | |
X Xx:
FEMALE ECG MALE ECCS
3”? GENERATION
Xx Xx Xx Xx
FEMALE MALE. TYPE 1 MALE.TYPE
FEMALE PRODUCING
oN,
Xx POLAR SPINDLE
| 2 DEGENERATE,
x PERM


SEXUAL EGG


Fig. 35.—Diagram to illustrate the chromosomal cycle of Phylloxera
caryecaulis.


SEX INHERITANCE 105


kinds of males, one Xx, the other Xx’, and as
stated, two kinds of female-producing sperm Xx
and Xx’.

Thus the life cycle is brought back to the starting
point. It may be added that so far as the chromo-
somes other than the X chromosomes are concerned
there is no synapsis and no reduction to the haploid
number in either line until the maturation divisions
of the third or sexual generation occur. The life
cycle of this species illustrates three points:

First.—That all of the sperm are female-produc-
ing, because the male-producing class of sperm de-
generates, as has been shown by direct observation.

Second.—That the parthenogenetic females can
produce males through the elimination of two chro-
mosomes. The female contains four sex chromo-
somes and the male two. The elimination of the
two chromosomes in the polar body of the male-
producing egg has been directly demonstrated.

Third—In this species the somewhat unusual
relation of one stem-mother giving rise to the line
that culminates in the sexual eggs, and of another
stem-mother giving rise to the line that culminates
in the males, can be explained on the assumption
that one pair of the sex chromosomes is heterozygous
in some factor indicated in the diagram by priming
one of the x’s. This explanation is in part theoreti-
cal, although it is based on the actual observation
of two kinds of males that differ in respect to the
behavior of one of the smaller x’s.

In other species of phylloxerans, and in many


106 SEX INHERITANCE


aphids, one stem-mother may produce both lines;
z.e., some of her offspring may ultimately give rise
to sexual females and others to males.


THE SEx oF INDIVIDUALS PRODUCED BY
ARTIFICIAL PARTHENOGENESIS


In only two species have individuals that have
been produced by artificial fertilization been raised
to a stage when their sex can be determined. Delage
reared two such sea urchins, that were probably
both males. Loeb has reared a number of frogs
that were mostly males, but a few were females.
Both sexes in Loeb’s case appeared to have the
diploid number of chromosomes; but until more is
known of the chromosome situation in these cases
it is not possible to offer any probable explanation
of them. The work of Schmitt-Marcel and others
also throws some doubt on the possibility of accu-
rately determining the sex of frogs until long after
metamorphosis.


Sex AND SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS


Males differ from females not only in the gonads
and in the accessory organs of reproduction (ducts,
glands, copulatory organs) but often show more
superficial differences that are called secondary
sexual characters. Genes concerned in the differ-
entiation of these have been shown, in two races
at least, not to lie in the sex-chromosomes. These


SEX INHERITANCE 107


characters are not sex-linked since they are not
associated with a particular sex-chromosome, yet
they may be said to be ‘“‘sex-limited.”’

The first case is that of hen-feathering, shown
by certain breeds of poultry. In Sebright bantams
the males (Fig. 36, a) are hen-feathered. If either
a male or a female Sebright is crossed to a race
with normal cock-feathering the male offspring are
hen-feathered. In the F, generation there are both


or b


Fig. 36.—a, Normal Sebright hen-feathered cock. 6, castrated
Sebright cock.


cock-feathered and hen-feathered males. This shows
that the dominant factors for hen-feathering are
not in the sex-chromosomes, for, if they were, the
F, generation from one cross would give only hen-
feathered males, and from the reciprocal cross both
kinds of males.

If a hen-feathered male is castrated the new
feathers that come in—immediately if old feathers
are plucked, otherwise at the next molt—are cock-
feathered (Fig. 36, b). It is obvious that something


108 SEX INHERITANCE


is produced in the testes of the hen-feathered birds,
that, acting together with the somatic complex of
the same bird, inhibits the full cock-feathering. It
seems probable that an internal secretion is set
free from the testes that acting in conjunction with
substances produced in the feather follicles, causes
the feathers to be like those of the hen, while in the
absence of this secretion the follicles produce cock-
feathering. In this case, one of the intermediate
stages between the gene and the feather is located
in the testes. It is interesting to note in this con-
nection that when a hen has her ovary removed
she also becomes cock-feathered (Goodale). In the
ovary there are certain cells, called luteal cells,
that are supposed to produce an internal secretion.
In the adult of ordinary cocks these cells are absent,
or rare, while in the testes of the Sebright, and also
in the testes of another race of hen-feathered birds,
the Campines, cells are present that look exactly
like those of the female ovary. It seems plausible
at least, that the secretion in question is produced
by these cells and that it produces the same effect
on the hen and on the hen-feathered male. In the
Campines the hen-feathered males are recognized
in some countries as the standard, while in other
countries cock-feathered males are the standard.
Here also it appears, although the evidence is less
certain, that the two races differ by a factor
for hen-feathering, and here too castration of the
hen-feathered cockerel causes him to develop the
cock-feathering like that of the other race.


SEX INHERITANCE 109


In certain sheep, such as some races of Merinos
(Fig. 36 A), the horns are present only in the ram.
If a young ram is castrated his horns fail to grow.
To study the inheritance of the factors involved in
this difference it would be necessary to use for
crossing with Merinos a different breed in which
the horns were present (or absent) in both sexes,
but such an experiment has not been made. There


i


Fig. 36A.—Merino sheep of Rambouillet. Ram horned, ewe hornless.


are other breeds of sheep in which both sexes are
hornless (Suffolks), and still other breeds in which
both sexes are horned, those of the ram being
larger (Dorsets) (Fig. 36 B). The two latter have
been crossed. It may be that we are dealing here
either with factors for horns different from those
in Merinos, or that modifying factors cause the
different conditions. In this cross (Fig. 36 C)
therefore it can not be said that we are studying


110 SEX INHERITANCE


the inheritance of a secondary sexual character
(for both sexes of the Suffolks are hornless and both
sexes of the Dorsets are horned), but we are study-
ing a single factor difference between the two
breeds in question, a difference that is not sex-
linked, but, is sex-limited in development. Horned
Dorsets crossed to hornless Suffolks give horned:
sons and hornless daughters. If these are inbred
they give three horned males to one hornless male,
and three hornless females to one horned female.


Fig. 36B.—Dorset sheep, both sexes horned, but ram with larger
horns than ewe. (After Arkell.)

The results are explicable if a factor difference
exists that is not in this case carried by the sex-
chromosomes, and if in the male one gene for horns
suffices to produce horns, while in the female two
genes for horns are necessary to produce horns.
For example, the horned breeds carry the genes
HH, and the hornless breeds their allelomorphs hh.
The F, sheep will be Hhe (hornless) and Hhe
(horned). If the female is XX and the male XY,
the F, gametes are as follows:

Gametes Fie HX —hX

Gametes Fiz HX — hX — Hy — hY


SEX INHERITANCE 111


Chance combination of any sperm with any egg
gives eight classes in F, which are the eight classes
described above. In this case the presence of


HH XX R hh XV


Hh XX &


HX-hX-HY-AY Sperm


Fig. 36C.—Cross of horned to hornless race of sheep.’ (After Wood,
photographs from Punnett.)


112 SEX INHERITANCE


testes in the male is presumably the essential
condition that brings about the development. of
horns in that sex when only one gene for horns is
present. We have already seen that the castrated
Merino ram fails to develop horns. In this case,
then, some substance is produced by the testes
that causes horns to develop. In another race, in
which both sexes are horned, but the horns of the
male are larger than those of the female, castration
limits the development of the horns to the condition


Fig. 36D.—Luschistus. To left, E variolarius male; to right,
Ie servus male. (After Foot and Strobell.)
shown by the females. In this race the testes cause
the horns to develop to a higher stage than that
shown by the female.

The second case is that of the two species of
bugs (Fig. 36 D) viz. Euchistus variolarius and E.
servus. The former has, in the male, a black spot
on the ventral surface of the end of the abdomen,
which is lacking in the male of the other species.
Among the females of both species the spot is
lacking. Foot and Strobell have shown that a


SEX INHERITANCE 113


single factor difference distinguishes the two species
in regard to the spot. The factor pair is not sex-
linked, and is, therefore, autosomal. In other
insects it has been shown by castration experiments
that the development of the secondary sexual
characters is not dependent on the presence of
the gonad and if this relation holds also for Euchistus
the factors must be supposed to produce their
effects or not, according to the sex of the individual
in which they occur.

Besides the above case of sex-limited characters
in a wild species we have several cases among the
mutant races of Drosophila melanogaster. These
mutants are characterized by a greater effect of a
gene on one sex than on the other, just as with the
horns of certain races of sheep. Among mutants
of this type are eosin, facet, and cut. Certain
mutations produce a visible difference in only one
sex; thus ‘‘side-abnormal”’ is distinguishable only
in females, the males being entirely normal in
appearance. A different type of this class is that
in which the mutation affects some distinctly male
or female organ such as “twisted penis,” or ‘‘closed
ovipositor.”’ Certain mutant races also are entirely
sterile in one sex but show a normal fertility in the
other sex. Thus ‘‘cleft”’ and ‘‘giant”’ are male-sterile,
while morula, fused and dwarf, are female-sterile.

In certain butterflies there are several types of
females but only one kind of male. It has been
shown by Punnett and others that such a state of
affairs is explicable on Mendelian principles if we


114 SEX INHERITANCE


assume that several genes are present that produce like
effects in the male but different effects in the female,
that is, the characters are sex-limited in development.


PARASITIC CASTRATION AND SECONDARY
SEXUAL CHARACTERS


It was first shown by Giard (1886) and later
confirmed by Geoffrey Smith (1906) and others,


2


Fig. 36E.—1, 2, adult normal male; 3, 4, adult normal female; 5, 6,
infected male that has assumed female characters. (After Geoffrey Smith.)


that when males (Fig. 36 EH, 1-2) of certain crabs
are parasitised by other crustaceans, such as Pelto-
gaster, Sacculina, etc., they develop the secondary
sexual characters of the female (Fig. 36 E, 5-6).


SEX INHERITANCE 115


The testes are destroyed, as a rule, by the parasite,
and this, no doubt, has given rise to the view that
the changes in the secondary sexual characters are
due to the removal of the testes—a view all the
more plausible since such effects were well known
in the mammals and birds. But Giard did not
commit himself wholly to such a view. He appears
to have thought that the influence of the parasite
might equally well be due to direct action on the
crab. The more general view, that the action is
through the loss of the gonads, has been challenged
by Geoffrey Smith. His view may appear to be
the more probable interpretation, but as yet it has
not sufficient experimental verification.
Kornhauser has recently discovered in one of
the bugs (Fig. 36 F) a critical case that shows that
a similar change in them is not due to the de-
struction of the gonad, but directly to some kind
of influence on the tissues of the host. The nymphs
of the tree-hopper Thelia bimaculata are parasitized
by a hymenopter, Aphelopus theliz. The egg
deposited in the nymph produces a chain of young
(polyembryony). The parasites in the male
(Fig. 36, F, 1) cause it to develop certain characters,
such as markings and some structural features, of
the female (Fig. 36, F, 3-4). Usually the testes are
destroyed; but in one case a testis was left and
developed spermatozoa; nevertheless the nymph
showed certain female characters. It is evident,
therefore, that the change may take place inde-
pendently of the gonads, and this is to be expected


116 SEX INHERITANCE


in insects at least, where there is abundant ex-
perimental evidence (Oudemanns, Kopec, Kellogg,
Meisenheimer, Regen) to show that there is no such
relation as in mammals and birds.


GYNANDROMORPHS AND SEX


In species that normally have separate sexes
individuals are occasionally met with that show


Vie. 361°.—Thelia bimaculata; 1, normal male; 2, normal female;
5 aes , 3 ) ’
3 and 4, parasitized males. (After Kornhauser.)


male characters in certain parts of the body and
female characters in other parts. All parts of the
body may be involved, including secondary sexual
characters, genitalia, and even the gonads. The


SEX INHERITANCE 117


group of Lepidoptera has furnished more cases than
all others taken together, although gynanders have
been found also in bees, wasps, ants, and less fre-
quently in other groups of insects; also they occur
"in spiders and lice, and rarely in crustacea and other
groups of animals. It is seldom possible to discover
the causes of these gynanders, either because their
ancestry is unknown, or because the heredity of the
characters involved has not been worked out. In
Drosophila, on the other hand, over a hundred
gynanders have arisen in pedigreed cultures, in
which known hereditary characters were present;
and, in fact, in some cases the cultures had been
made up in such a way as to give critical evidence
as to the origin of the individuals.

The most striking gynanders are those in which
one side of the body is female and the other side
male. The earliest of the completely bilateral
gynanders found in Drosophila is that shown in
c of Fig. 36 G. The right side of this fly was female
throughout, and the left side male. The left side
of head, thorax, and abdomen was smaller than the
right side, the antenna, the bristles, the legs, and
the wing of the left side were also smaller than the
same organs on the right side. Besides these differ-
ences in size, the left fore-leg bore a distinctly male
character, the sex-comb, and the left side of the
abdomen was colored and segmented as in the
male. The genitalia (nm c, of Fig. 36, G) were
distinctly of the male type on the left side, but on
the right the structures are neither purely female


118 SEX INHERITANCE


nor male. Ovaries were present in both sides of
the abdomen. The like character of the two gonads
is possibly due to the development of both from a
single cell set aside early in development.


Fig. 36G.—A, B, C, three gynanders of ge a male on one side,
female on the other. C, genitalia of gynander C; B, of normal male;
E, of normal female.


SEX INHERITANCE 119


In another case (A of Fig. 36 G) sex-linked
characters were present that appeared in the
gynander. In this gynander the left side of the
thorax and abdomen was male, but the head was
entirely female. The male parts all showed the
usual sex differences, and also the sex-linked re-
cessive character yellow body-color (unstippled).
This gynander arose from an egg, carrying an
eosin-bearing X, fertilized by an X-sperm bearing


Fig. 36H.—Diagram illustrating elimination of one sex-chromosome.


the genes for yellow and white. The zygote was
therefore female, and the female parts of the gynan-
der retain the above constitution. If at the first
segmentation division, the paternal (yellow white)
X divided normally and each daughter nucleus
received a yellow white X, but one daughter chro-
mosome of the other or maternal (eosin) X failed
to pass to the pole with the other chromosomes
(Fig. 36 H), then one of the two nuclei that re-
sulted from such a division was XX in constitution


120 SEX INHERITANCE


and gave rise to the female parts of the gynander,
while the other nucleus carried only the yellow
white X and gave rise to the male parts of the
gynander.

Another gynander, shown in B, Fig. 36 G, started
as an XX zygote that received the three characters
cherry (recessive) abnormal-abdomen (dominant)
and forked (recessive) from the mother, and ver-
milion (recessive) from the father. The female
parts show the dominant abnormal-abdomen. There
was elimination of a daughter vermilion X-chro-
mosome at the first, perhaps at the second nuclear
division, so that the male parts show all three
maternal characters cherry abnormal and forked.
Both fore-legs were male (sex-combs and forked
bristles); the right side of the thorax was male
(smaller size, smaller bristles and hairs, forked
bristles, smaller wing); the right side of the head
was male (cherry eye-color, forked bristles, etc.),
except for a tiny island of female tissue, red in
color, in the rear margin of the eye. The abdomen
was male on the right side as shown by the smaller
size, the more extreme abnormality, and somewhat
by the coloration.

In other gynandromorphs the anterior parts may
be female and the posterior male, or vice versa.
Only one quadrant may be male and the rest female,
or even smaller portions may be male, according to
whether elimination occurs at an early or a later
cleavage. Islands and streaks of one sex and the
irregular dividing line sometimes seen in the head


SEX INHERITANCE 121


or abdominal region may be due to the shifting of
nuclei in embryonic development.

Previous explanations of gynanders have involved
the use of whole nuclei, and have postulated that
the male parts are haploid, and the female parts
diploid. The gynanders of Drosophila have been
explained by the. behavior of an intra-nuclear
element—the X chromosome—and the cells of
both sexes remain diploid for the autosomes. That
both maternal and paternal autosomes were present
in both male and female parts of the Drosophila
gynanders was decisively proved in certain cases
by the introduction of autosomal characters as well
as sex-linked characters. In the gynanders that
arose in such crosses both sex-regions showed the
same condition with respect to these autosomal
characters.

There are a few gynanders in Drosophila that
can not be explained by simple elimination; but
another explanation appears to cover such cases,
namely that two nuclei were present in the egg
before fertilization. If one of these nuclei was
fertilized by an X-sperm and the other by a Y-
sperm the two halves of the resulting embryo may
be of different sexes, and even display different sex-
linked characters according to the constitution of
the two nuclei. The two interesting gynanders
described by Toyama in ‘the silk-worm moth
(Fig. 367) call for this type of explanation
(Fig. 36 J). In this connection it is interesting
to note that Doncaster has found binucleated eggs


122 SEX INHERITANCE


sty ped Lynand: vomorph al ain


Fig. 361.—Caterpillars of silkworm moth. The gynandromorph is
a hybrid between the striped and plain races. (After Toyama.)


in the moth Abraxas, and has observed that each
nucleus is fertilized by a single spermatozoon.

In the famous Eugster hive of bees studied by
von Sieboldt large numbers of gynanders were
found. A similar case is recorded by Engelhardt,
and more recent cases by Sheppard. The ex-
planation of these cases is less certain than those


SEX INHERITANCE 123


a


Fig. 36.J—Diagram giving the explanation of the gynander in Fig.
36.I by means of a.binucleated egg.


of the flies. One possible explanation has been
suggested by Boveri, namely, that a sperm enters
an egg that has already begun its first division and
fuses with only one of the resulting nuclei from the
first division (Fig. 36 K, A). This double nucleus
should produce female parts, while the single


Fig. 36K.—Diagram illustrating three theories of gynandromorphism
A, Boveri’s theory of partial fertilization; Morgan’s theory of super-
numerary sperm; C, theory of elimination, as in 36H.


124 SEX INHERITANCE


nucleus should give rise to male parts. Another
suggestion was made by Morgan, namely that one
sperm fuses with the egg nucleus and gives rise to
female parts, while another sperm that has also
entered, develops independently and produces male
parts (Fig. 36 K, B). It is known that more than
one sperm may enter the egg of the bee. A third
explanation is offered by the theory of elimination
of a daughter X-chromosome (Fig. 36 K, C), as
in Drosophila. This explanation would apply in
those cases where the bees were hybrids, provided
the racial characters that were involved in the
Eugster bees and in von Engelhardt’s bees are
carried by the sex-chromosome—a point not yet
determined.


INTERSEXES AND SEX


As first shown by Brake, remarkable mosaics of
male and female characters are found in hybrids
between the European and Japanese varieties of
gipsy moths Porthetria dispar and japonica, when
the cross is made one way but not when made the
other way. We owe to Goldschmidt not only a
most complete account of such hybrids but also of
hybrids between several Japanese local varieties of
this moth. A most astonishing series of mixtures
of male and female characters come to light, not
as sporadic occurrences, but as regular phenomena
of the crosses. In his earlier work Goldschmidt
called these mixed forms gynandromorphs, but his


SEX INHERITANCE 125


later work shows, he thinks, that they are different
from gynandromorphs; he now calls them intersexes.

The normal males and females of the gipsy moth
differ not only in the characteristic sex differences
of this group, but in other secondary sexual differ-
ences also (Fig. 362). The Japanese varieties
show these same differences. Japonica female by


Tig. 36L.—Gypsy moths. A, normal male, B, normal female.
C, D, “intersexes.” (After Goldschmidt.)


dispar male gives equal numbers of daughters and
sons, which are normal as to sex; but the reciprocal
cross, dispar female by japonica male gives normal
males and intersex or male-like females in equal
numbers.

The intersex females from the last and from other
crosses show a wide range in structure, in color,


126 SEX INHERITANCE


and in behavior, varying from almost normal
females at one end of the series to forms that ex-
ternally are about like the normal male. Not only
are the wings in extreme cases colored like those of
the normal male (with, however, occasional flecks
of white like the female), but the size and diverse
parts such as the antenne, the hair, the genitalia,
and even the gonads are mosaics of male and female
characteristics.

These relations are more interesting when crosses
involving different Japanese races are compared.
When Jap. G. male is crossed to Jap. K. female,
all F, daughters are slightly intersexual or male-
like. When Jap. H. female is crossed to Jap. G.
male, the daughters are somewhat more like males,
but their instincts are female, and they attract
males. The copulatory organs are so changed in
the direction of the male that mating is unsuccess-
ful; and eggs can not be laid, although character-
istic hairy sponges are made to receive them.
When Eur. F. female is mated to Jap. G. male;
the daughters are more than half-way transformed
into males. The secondary sexual characters are
almost male. The instincts and behavior are about
intermediate between those of the male and female
of the two normal races. Males are scarcely, or
not at all attracted, and no mating occurs. The
copulatory organs show the strangest combination
of male and female types. There are still typical
though rudimentary ovaries. When Jap. X female
is crossed to Eur. F. male, a still higher degree of


SEX INHERITANCE 127


intersexuality appears. Externally the daughters
_are “almost indistinguishable from normal males.”’
The instincts are entirely male and the moths try
unsuccessfully to mate with females. The gonads
look like testes, but show in sections a mixture of
ovarian and testicular tissue. A step further and
the daughters would be completely transformed into
males. The next cross gives this final stage. When
Jap. O male is crossed to any race of European
female, only males are produced, 7.e., all the
daughters become sons.

The reverse picture is given by those combinations
in which the intersexes are sons partly changed
over into daughters, a condition that Goldschmidt
terms male intersexuality. The wings are generally
streaked with white and in the extremest type only
a few spots of the brown characteristic of the male
appear on the wing-veins. The testis may contain
some ovarian tissue, but the changes in the gonads
do not appear to run parallel to those seen on the
surface.

The explanation that Goldschmidt offers for these
intersexes is entirely different from the explanation
that is demonstrated for the gynandromorphs of
Drosophila. He accepts the chromosome theory of
sex determination, and applies it to the present
case on the basis that the female is heterozygous
for the sex chromosome Mm (ZW), and the male
hymozygous MM (ZZ). In addition, however,
Goldschmidt adds another set of sex-determining
factors that he calls FF (inclosing them in brackets),


128 SEX INHERITANCE


which he locates either in the cytoplasm, that is,
outside the chromosomal mechanism, or, more ,
probably, in the W chromosome. These factors
do not segregate, and are transmitted from -the
female to her sons and daughters alike. The FF
factors stand for femaleness, which apparently in-
cludes the eggs, ovaries, secondary sexual charac-
ters, and genitalia, in fact, all parts associated with
the female. The sex of a given individual is de-
pendent on the balance struck by the activity of
the factors Mm and FF.

One illustration of the kind of explanation ad-
vanced by Goldschmidt may be given. As stated,
he represents the female by FFMm, and the male
by FFMM. If in a certain race the FF “factorial
set’’ is represented by 80 units, and the “‘present”’
male factor, M, by 60 units, then the above formula
for the female becomes 80 — 60 = +20, and the
male formula becomes 80 — (60 + 60) = —40. In
the former, female units ‘‘dominate,” in the latter,
the male. Values like these can be arbitrarily set
for all the different races. For instance the follow-
ing values are assigned to the ‘‘weak’’ European
race and the “strong” Japanese:


Weak European Race Strong Japanese Race


9 (FF) Mm 9 (FF) Mm
80 60 100 80
¢ (FF) MM ¢ (FF) MM


80 60, 60 100 80, 80


SEX INHERITANCE 129


If a Japanese female is crossed to a European male,
the F, female and male may be represented in the
following formula:


F, ¢ (FF) Mm F, ¢ (FF) M M
100 60 100 80, 60


Both ‘‘normal” female and male offspring are
expected in equal numbers. The reciprocal cross
gives a different result viz.:


F, ¢ (FF) Mm F, ¢ (FF) M M
80 =—80 80 80, 60


The F, female is FF —- M=0; and is therefore
represented as intersexual. It will be observed that
the so-called ‘‘female factors” in these formule
are supposed to be inherited entirely through the
mother.

By assigning different values to FF and M in
the different races it is possible to express the results
in such a way that the sexes obtained by various
crosses have different minimal values—those less
or more than any assigned value for a given sex
are interpreted as intersexes. In the example
cited, an exact balance (= 0) between the con-
flicting factors produces an individual that is neither
male nor female, but made up of a mosaic of parts
each of which is roughly comparable to the same
part in a male or a female.

A series of crosses between species of Biston
have been made by J. W. Harrison. The sex ratios
are altered and in some cases intersexual females


130 SEX INHERITANCE


appeared. The results are in many respects like
those of Goldschmidt.

Sturtevant has studied a race of intersexes in
Drosophila simulans. The intersexual individuals
are all alike, and have parts that are characteristic
of normal individuals of both sexes (ovipositor,
seminal receptacle, etc., of female; genital segment,
claspers, anal plates, etc., of male). Genetic evi-
dence shows that the intersexes are females, in
that they have two X-chromosomes, even in the
male-appearing parts. The result is produced by
a second-chromosome recessive mutant gene. In
this case, then, we are dealing with a modification
of the development of the female,—not with a
disturbance in the usual sex-determining mechanism.
In the cases of intersexuality recorded by Gold-
schmidt, Harrison, and others there seems to be no
proof that there is a single sex-determining gene that
has a different ‘‘ potency” in different species. The
case of Drosophila simulans shows that it is not admis-
sible to assume such an explanation without proof.


TRIPLOID INTERSEXES IN DROSOPHILA
MELANOGASTER


In Drosophila melanogaster, Bridges has found a
strain that continually produces individuals that
are intermediates between males and females. These
““intersexes”” can always be easily distinguished
from normal males or females because of their
larger size, their coarse-textured eyes, and by other


SEX INHERITANCE 131


characters peculiar to them. Within the class,
there is great fluctuation—on the one hand to in-
dividuals entirely male in appearance, and on the
other to individuals nearly all of whose character-
istics are female. An intersex of a high “female-
type” is an individual in which most of the parts
are purely female, a few parts are male, and others
are mixtures. The mid-grade intersexes usually
have rudimentary ovaries; but not infrequently
one gonad is a rudimentary testis, or a rudimentary
ovary with a follicle budding into a testis. The
testes of high grade male-type intersexes are like
those of normal males in size and appearance. All
intersexes are sterile. The stock is maintained by
breeding from sisters of the intersexes. Only a
small proportion of these gives intersexes. Genetic
tests and cytological examination show that the
intersex-producing females are triploid (8n), pos-
sessing three representatives of each of the four
chromosomes. Likewise the intersexes are shown
to be triploid for the autosomes, but only diploid
for the X-chromosomes. Individuals with two X-
chromosomes are not females if a third set of auto-
somes is present; they are altered to a greater or
less extent into males. Accordingly, the autosomes’
are shown to be as concerned in the production of
sex as are the so-called sex-chromosomes. The X-
chromosomes are seen to be chromosomes that are
female determining in tendency, while the auto-
somes are male determining.

If the chromosomes determine sex by means of


132 SEX INEHRITANCE


genes carried in them, we may say:—both sexes
are due to the simultaneous action of two sets of
genes, one set, located predominantly in the X-
chromosome, tending to produce the characters
called female, the other set, located predominantly
in the autosomes, tending to produce the characters
called male. These two sets of genes are not equally
effective, for the female-tendency genes outweigh
the male-tendency genes, and the diploid (or
triploid) form is a female. When the relative
number of the female-tendency genes is lowered by
the absence of one X, the male tendency genes
outweigh the female, and the result is the normal
haplo-X male. When the two sets of genes are
acting in a ratio between these two extremes, as is
the case in the ratios of 2X : 3 sets of autosomes, the
result is a sex intermediate—the intersex.

Individuals that have 3X: 2 sets of autosomes
(superfemales) and 1X : 3 sets of autosomes (super-
males) are likewise produced by triploid (8n)
females. They have been identified by genetic and
cytological tests. They form distinct types that are
easily distinguishable from normal females or males,
and they are sterile.


SEX AND SEX-DETERMINING GAMETES


The word sex is usually applied to many-celled
individuals, the male sex producing sperm and the
female sex producing eggs. In most races the male
and the female sex have the diploid (double) number


SEX INHERITANCE 133


of chromosomes; in some races the male has one
less chromosome than the female, in other races
the female has one less than the male. There are
races in which the male has the haploid (full)
number of chromosomes, while the female has the
double number. The gametes giving rise to these
two kinds of individuals are sometimes loosely re-
ferred to as male and female, but they are properly
only male-producing and féemale-producing in certain
combinations; for, as shown in non-disjunction, the
same gametes if they form other combinations may
give a result that is just the opposite from that
which usually occurs. Thus, a “female-producing”’
X-sperm will give rise to a male if it enters an egg
without an X.

The same terms male and female have been
carried over to the protozoa—organisms that are
one-celled like the gametes of multicellular forms;
but obviously the words are here used in a different
sense. In what manner the protozoa are to be
compared with the higher forms remains uncertain
until we have more definite information concerning
the chromatin changes that take place before,
during, and after, conjugation.

In the mosses and liverworts an interesting
situation exists. There are two alternating gener-
ations, one is diploid (sporophyte), the other haploid
(gametophyte). In mosses and liverworts with
separate sexes the sexual generation is haploid.

Allen has found in one of the liverworts, Sphero-
carpus, that there is an unequal pair of chromosomes


134 SEX INHERITANCE


in the cells of the sporophyte generation (diploid).
In the female gametophyte (haploid) the larger
member of the pair is present, and in the male
gametophyte (haploid) its smaller mate. At the
reduction division in the sporophyte, when four
spores are formed, two of the spores in each tetrad
contain each a large chromosome and two a small
one. It is fairly well determined that from each
set of four spores, two give rise to female plants of
the gametophyte generation, and two to male
plants. In this case the males and females are
plants with the haploid number of chromosomes,
one with the large chromosome and the other with
the small one. The sporophyte being diploid con-
tains both chromosomes, which, as stated, are
separated again when the spores are formed, 1.e.,
at a time corresponding, it would seem, to the
maturation division of the egg and the sperm.

_It may be recalled in this connection that the
male bee and the male Hydatina are haploid organ-
isms; but in them, unlike the haploid gametophyte
generation of the liverworts and mosses, modified
maturation divisions occur. By means of altera-
tions in the maturation divisions female-producing
gametes only are produced.


SEX-RATIOS


Both the XX-XY and the WZ-ZZ types give
equal numbers of males and females, provided that
both kinds of gametes are equally viable, that


SEX INHERITANCE 135


random fertilization occurs, and that the resulting
zygotes are equally viable. There is evidence
bearing on all these possible sources of disturbances
of the normal sex-ratios.

In the males of aphids and phylloxerans all of
the no-X gametes degenerate; in the male bee
three of the four gametes fail to develop; in the
hornet two of the four; in Hydatina one of the
primary spermatocytes gives rise to two female-
producing gametes, the other, which would give rise
to male-producing gametes, fails to divide and then
degenerates. In all of these cases fertilization
produces only females. The imperfect pollen grains
that are found in many plants, do not appear to
come under this heading, since they are not involved
in sex-determination.

Much of the genetic work goes to show that
selective fertilization does not take place. There is
one set of direct observations, on the unisexual
mollusk, Cumingia, that shows that the first sperm
that meets the egg, head on, enters the egg and
fertilizes it. It has been suggested that under
environmental conditions unfavorable to the sper-
matozoa, one kind may be affected more seriously, or
sooner, than the other kind, and thus bring about a
selective result; but no direct evidence has ever
been brought forward to substantiate such a view.
That one class of spermatozoa may travel faster
and hence may more often succeed in reaching the
egg first is a suggestion that is perhaps less hypo-
thetical than the last. Zeleny and Faust’s careful


136 SEX INHERITANCE


measurements of the sperm of insects, especially
those in which the female- and male-producing
sperm differ by a large X-chromosome, and the
later results of Goodrich in Ascaris incurva show
that the two classes of sperm may differ in size to
a considerable degree. (Fig. 36M).


60


40:


20


ro cia | 4/12] 12/31] 21 /a8]41 |s}azi2ai aifa7|ufizfi2!9 fro} a}a | 7 | 2}r-f2 prio pry
100 200 300 400 600 600 700 800 900 1000


Fig. 36M.—Curve showing dimorphism of sperm of Ascaris incurva.
a, outline of nucleus of one class, b, of other class of sperm. c, telophase
of differentiating division. (After Goodrich.)


During the long passage up the oviduct of a
mammal, it is possible that the lighter male-produc-
ing sperm may travel faster than the female-pro-
ducing sperm and therefore attain the upper reaches
of the oviduct in larger numbers. More males than
females would then be expected, and it is note-
worthy that this is the case in several mammals,
including man. Correns has obtained evidence that


SEX INHERITANCE 137


in Lychnis the male-producing pollen do not fertilize
proportionately as many eggs in competition as they
do when not enough pollen is present to fertilize
all the eggs. Presumably the pollen-tubes do not
grow as fast as those of the female-producing pollen.

There is one situation that calls for special notice.
In the WZ—ZZ type (moths and birds) the egg
contains WZ in conjugation before the polar bodies
are extruded. If it is only'a matter of chance
which way this pair (WZ) lies on the spindle, then
equal numbers of W-eggs and Z-eggs result after
the polar bodies have been given off. But if the
WZ pair should be placed so that the Z went out
more often, more females would be expected; and
if the W went out more often, then more males
would result. Now in a few cases (Doncaster and
Seiler) the W-chromosome is absent. In the egg
of such a female there would be a “lagging” Z on
the maturation spindle and if this tended to pass
out (or to be lost) more often than to remain in
the egg, the sex-ratio would be turned toward
females. In fact any sex-ratio might result from the
OZ type of individual. Moreover, once started,
such an OZ line would perpetuate itself. In the
case of the Y chromosome of the XX—XY type it
makes no difference in the sex-ratio to which pole
the X goes since both poles produce functional
sperm, and the Y has disappeared in many cases.

Another way in which sex-ratios are influenced is
through the viability of the zygotes. In extreme
cases, occurring in Drosophila all the offspring of a


138 SEX INHERITANCE


female may be daughters. Sex-linked lethals cause
this. A sex-linked lethal is inherited in the same
way as any other sex-linked gene, but causes the
death of any male that carries the gene in his single
X chromosome. A female, heterozygous for such
a@ recessive lethal, will survive. She produces only
half as many sons as daughters. Such 2:1 ratio
strains can be continued indefinitely by simple
breeding methods. A female may even be heter-
ozygous for two different recessive lethals. If these
lethals are both carried in the same member of the
X-pair, and are close together in the chromosome,
only a few more than half the sons will be eliminated;
but if they are far apart, so that crossing over be-
tween them is frequent, as many as three-fourths
of the sons may be killed. If the two lethals are
in opposite members of the X-pair and far apart,
then also about three-fourths of the sons are elimi-
nated; but the closer together the loci of these
opposed lethals are, the greater is the proportion of
sons killed. Thus, two sex-linked lethals may
determine any sex-ratio from 29 :le to 29 :0¢,
according to the particular linkage relations. There
is also a large class of sex-linked mutations in Dro-
sophila that are ‘“semi-lethal.”” Some of them kill
all males except an occasional one, while still others
allow more males to come through, the numbers of
male survivals being characteristic for each type,
and ranging up to the normal 1:1 ratio.

Lethals that kill female zygotes are not as
common as lethals that kill males. There are two


SEX INHERITANCE 139


sex-linked and two or three autosomal mutants
that are semi-lethal to different degrees in the
female but kill fewer males. One of these sex-
limited semi-lethals gives only male families under
certain environmental conditions.

The sex-ratio in the honey bee has no fixed value.
At one time of the year all of the offspring may be
daughters (queens and workers), and at another
time many sons may be produced. If the sperm
supply of the queen gives out, or if the queen has
not been fertilized, all of her offspring will be males.
The sex-ratio varies therefore from 100: 0 to 0: 100.
The determining factor for sex is two-fold; an
internal one producing only X-spermatozoa (that
accounts for the females) and an environmental
factor, namely, the conditions that determine
whether an egg is or is not fertilized. If it is not
fertilized, it produces a male by parthenogenetic
development.

Worker bees that are modified females may on
rare occasions lay eggs that develop parthenogenet-
ically. Such eggs produce males. While this is the
rule for most of the domesticated races of bees,
there has recently been described a race of African
bees whose workers readily produce offspring of
both sexes. In ants also there are well authenticated
cases where both queens and males have been
produced in queenless nests, although as a rule sex
in ants is determined as in bees, 7.e., only males
arise from unfertilized eggs. It seems not im-
probable in these exceptional cases that one of the


140 SEX INHERITANCE


reduction divisions is supressed when a worker’s
egg gives rise to a female. Such a supposition
finds some support in the fact that in other groups
of Hymenoptera (saw flies and gall flies) females
arise regularly from unfertilized eggs. In some of
the species of gall flies, males are unknown; in
others they appear very rarely.

The female of Dinophilus apatris produces large
and small eggs in equal numbers. From the former
arise females, from the latter males (Korschelt,
von Malsen, Shearer, Nachtsheim). The small eggs
may predominate in some of the earlier laid batches,
so that at this time sons are in excess, but if the
mother remains alive, so that the full output is
produced, the sex-ratio becomes 1 to 1 (Nachtsheim).
If the mother dies early, there may appear an excess
cf males. What factor determines whether an egg
is to become a large female-producing egg, or a
small male-producing egg is not known. The sug-
gestion, that the difference in size is due to the
number of yolk-bearing cells that are absorbed by
the egg during its growth period, has been disproven
by Nachtsheim; for he finds at the end of that
period that all the eggs are of the same size and the
difference in their size comes in later.


CHAPTER V


THE CHROMOSOMES AS BEARERS OF
HEREDITARY MATERIAL


The evidence in favor of the view that the chromo-
somes are the bearers of hereditary factors comes from
several sources and has continually grown stronger,
while a number of alleged facts, that seemed opposed
to this evidence, have either been disproven, or else
their value has been seriously questioned. We pro-
pose now to examine in some detail the observations
and experiments that bear on the chromosome theory
of heredity.


Tue EvIDENCE FROM EMBRYOLOGY


Relating to the Influence of the Chromosomes on
Development


It has been argued that since the sperm transmits
equally with the egg, and since only the sperm head,
consisting of the nucleus, enters the egg, inherit-
ance is only through the nucleus. But it must be
admitted that around the entering sperm nucleus
there may be a thin enveloping protoplasm, which,
however scanty, might suffice to transmit certain
cytoplasmic factors. Moreover, while the tail of


the sperm appears in some cases to be left outside the
141


142 THE CHROMOSOMES


egg, in other cases it appears to enter and to be
absorbed.

Behind the head of the spermatozoon, and at the
base of the tail, there is a middle piece which contains
a derivative of the old centriole or division center.
Since the centrosome carried by the sperm has been
found in some forms to give rise to the new centro-
somes that occupy the poles of the first cleavage spindle
of the egg, it may appear that a paternal contribu-
tion can come about in this way. It is true that the
continuity of the centrosome of the sperm with that
of the dividing egg has been disputed in some forms;
but it is difficult to prove that the sperm centrosome
is lost, even though it may disappear owing to loss
of staining power.

The nucleus contains a sap which is probably of
cytoplasmic origin. The presence of this sap may
again be appealed to by those who do not accept
the chromosomes as the bearers of heredity, as a
weak link in the evidence. It is true that the nuclear
sap appears to be squeezed out of the nucleus of the
sperm head, leaving a compact and apparently solid
mass of chromatin, yet its complete elimination can
not be proved. Hence, while those who favor
chromosomal transmission find in the facts of normal
fertilization strong ‘indications favorable to that
view, yet it is also true that those who are inclined to
dispute this view find several loopholes in the
argument of their opponents.

The importance of the nucleus in heredity has
further been shown by experiments of Bierens de


THE CHROMOSOMES 143


Haans, Herbst, and Boveri on giant eggs of sea
urchins fertilized by sperm of another species. The
hybrid larve produced when normal eggs of one
species are fertilized by sperm of the other species
are intermediate in character between the two
parental types of larvee; while those from giant eggs
of the same species fertilized by sperm of the other,
also intermediate, incline more to the maternal side.
The nucleus of the giant egg is double the size of
that of the normal egg and according to Bierens de
Haans the chromosomes are also double in number.
Consequently, the amount of maternal chromatin
should be double that introduced by the sperm, and
might produce a corresponding influence: on the
hybrid character. But since in these giant eggs the
cytoplasm is also doubled, it is not evident that the
results are due to the chromosomes rather than to the
cytoplasm. By means of the following ingenious
comparison Boveri has shown that the results must
be ascribed to the chromosomes rather than to
cytoplasm. Normal eggs were broken into frag-
ments, the nucleated pieces were fertilized with the
sperm of the other species, and those fragments of
half the volume of the normal egg were isolated.
As is known, such fragments develop into whole
larvee, whose nuclei will have the usual chromatin
content. The egg cytoplasm is, however, reduced to
half. Nevertheless the larve did not incline to the
paternal side, although these larvae, like all larve
from fragments, were often simpler than the normal.
Hence since a relative decrease in the amount of


144 THE CHROMOSOMES


cytoplasm does not here affect the character of the
larve, it is rational to suppose that an increase such
as is present in the giant eggs likewise produces no
such effects as observed in the larve. At the same
time, normal eggs were cross fertilized and in the
two-cell stage the blastomeres were separated. The
contributions by the two parents were relatively the
same as in the normal egg. These larve were like
those from egg fragments, and serve as a control of
those larve in so far as they bear on the question of
how far size alone may affect the result. Moreover,
in them, the relation of the chromosomes to the
cytoplasm is the same as in the normal egg (whether
the sperm does or does not bring in cytoplasm).
Hence, since the amount of cytoplasm is shown to
have no influence on the character of these larve,
there is no reason for supposing that it had any
influence in the case of the giant eggs.

Boveri’s studies upon dispermic fertilization of
the egg of the sea urchin bear directly upon the
question at issue. He found that when two sperm
simultaneously enter the same egg, each brings in a
centrosome, so that a tetra- or tri-polar spindle is
formed for the first division, as shown in Fig. 37.
Instead of a double set of chromosomes, as in normal
fertilization, there are three sets. At the first
division, the chromosomes are irregularly distrib-
uted upon the multipolar spindles. In consequence,
some cells may get one of each kind of chromosome,
while other cells may get less than a full complement
(Fig. 38). These dispermic eggs almost always give


THE CHROMOSOMES 145


rise to abnormal embryos, as several observers have
recorded. The result can best be attributed to the
irregular distribution of qualitatively different chro-
mosomes; only those embryos in which each cell has a
full complement developing normally.

Boveri’s evidence went still further, for he sepa-
rated the first cleavage cells of these dispermic eggs


7


Fig. 37.—Dispermic fertilization of egg of sea urchin. The four
centrosomes cause an unequal distribution of the fifty-four chromosomes,
leading at the first division to four cells which contain different num-
bers of chromosomes.


and followed their history. Some of them gave rise
to perfect dwarf larve. The number of normal
embryos was small, but was that expected on the
chance distribution of the chromosomes, for we
should expect to find in a few cases an isolated cell
that contained a full complement of chromosomes
and from such a cell a normal embryo would be
formed. The abnormality in development of the
rest of the isolated cells was not due to any harmful


146 THE CHROMOSOMES


effect caused by isolation, for it had been shown by
Driesch and others that when the first two cells of a
sea-urchin egg that has been normally fertilized are
separated, each forms a perfect embryo. Such cells,
although containing only half the cytoplasm, contain


Fic. 38.—Diagram to show five combinations of chromosomes result-
ing from the first division of dispermic eggs, in which either each cell gets
one complete set of chromosomes, a; or three cells get a full set, b; or
two cells, c¢; or one cell, d; or none of the four cells, e, get a full set.
(After Boveri.)


a full set of chromosomes. The difference, therefore,
between these cells and isolated cells from dispermic
eggs would seem to be due mainly to their different
chromosomal contents.

Further evidence in favor of the chromosomal hy-
pothesis is found in certain cases of hybrids between


THE CHROMOSOMES 147


species of sea urchins. The best analyzed cases are
those that Baltzer has worked out. Crosses were
made between four species of sea urchins; one such
cross will serve as an example (Fig. 39). The eggs
of Spherechinus were fertilized by the sperm of
Strongylocentrotus. The division of the chromo-
somes proceeded in normal manner. The pluteus


a a


3 Ye
an we


M 2 WA ats
3 Ba


Fic. 39.—1 and 1a, chromosomes in the first normal cleavage spindle of
Spherechinus; 2, equatorial plate of two-cell stage of same; 3 and 3a,
spindles of two-cell stage of egg of hybrid of Spherechinus by Strongy-
locentrotus; 4and 4a, same, equatorial plates; 5and 5a, hybrid of Strongy-
locentrotus by Spherechinus cleavage spindle i in telophase; 6, next stage
of last; 7, same, two-cell stage; 8, same, later; 9, same, four-cell stage;
10, same, "equatorial plate in two-cell stage (22 chromosomes); 11, same,
from later stage, 24 chromosomes. (After Baltzer.)


that developed was intermediate in character; or at
least showed peculiarities both of the maternal and
of the paternal types. The reciprocal cross was made
by fertilizing the eggs of Strongylocentrotus with the
sperm of Spherechinus. At the first cleavage of the
egg some of the chromosomes divide normally, while
other chromosomes remain inactive and finally be-


148 THE CHROMOSOMES


come scattered in the region.between the others that
have retreated toward the poles. When the division
is completed the belated chromosomes are found to
be excluded from the daughter nuclei. They appear
irregular in shape and show signs of degeneration.
At the next division of the egg they may still be found,
but they are lost later, and seem to take no part in the
development. The difference between this and the
other cross seems directly caused by the differences
observed in the behavior of the chromosomes.

A count of the chromosomes in the hybrid embryos
shows about twenty-one chromosomes. The mater-
nal nucleus contained eighteen. It appears that only
three of the paternal chromosomes have taken a
regular part in the development—fifteen of them must
have degenerated in the way described above. The
hybrid embryos that developed were often abnormal;
the few that developed as far as plutei were apparently
entirely maternal in character. Since the reciprocal
cross proves that the maternal characters are not
dominant, the most reasonable interpretation is that,
although the foreign sperm had started the develop-
ment, it had produced little or no effect on the char-
acter of the larve, and this absence of effect would
seem most probably to be due to the elimination of
most of the paternal chromosomes. It might pos-
sibly be maintained that the same kind of effect pro-
duced by the egg of Strongylocentrotus on the chro-
mosomes of Spheerechinus is likewise produced on the
protoplasm introduced by the sperm. But there is
here, in contrast to the case for the chromosomes,


THE CHROMOSOMES 149


no evidence of any abnormal cytoplasmic behavior
which could account for the observed abnormal effect.

Tennent also has found that when the sea urchin
Toxopneustes (?) is crossed to Hipponoé (¢) no
loss of chromatin occurs, while reciprocally some or
even all of the paternal (?) chromatin is eliminated,
but the character of the larve in the two cases does
not furnish a basis for discrimination as regards the
effects due to elimination. 4

Some experiments by Herbst also have an impor-
tant bearing on the question. The eggs of Sphere-
chinus were put into sea water to which a little
valerianic acid had been added. This is one of the
recognized methods of starting parthenogenetic de-
velopment. After five minutes the eggs were taken
out and put into pure sea water to which sperm of
Strongylocentrotus was added. The sperm fertilized
a few of the eggs. The eggs had already begun to
undergo some of the changes that lead to develop-
ment. The belated sperm failed to keep pace with
the division so that the paternal chromosomes did
not reach the poles of the egg before the egg chromo-
somes reformed their nuclei (Fig. 40). In conse-
quence, the paternal chromosomes formed a nucleus
of their own that came to lie in one of the cells formed
by the division of the egg. As a result one cell had a
maternal nucleus and the other had a double, paternal
and maternal, nucleus. In later development the
paternal nucleus became incorporated with the
maternal nucleus of its cell. Embryos were found
later, in the cultures, that were on one side maternal


150 THE CHROMOSOMES


and on the other side hybrid in character and
probably came from such half-fertilized eggs. It
will be recalled that Baltzer has shown that when
the cross is made in this direction both paternal and


Fig. 40.—1, The chromosomes of the egg lie in the equator of the
spindle, the chromosomes of the sperm at one side; 2, a later stage show-
ing all of the paternal chromosomes lying at one side’ passing to one pole;
3 (to the right), later stage; the conditions are the same; there is also a
supernumerary sperm in the egg (shown to the left, in another section);
4, same condition as last; 5, pluteus larva that is purely maternal on one
side, and hybrid on the other. (After Herbst.)


maternal chromosomes behave normally at each
division. The conclusion follows with much plausi-
bility that the absence of paternal characters on one
side is due to the absence of paternal chromosomes
on that side.


THE CHROMOSOMES 151


Tue INDIVIDUALITY OF THE CHROMOSOMES


The view that the chromosomes are persistent as
individual structures in the cell has steadily gained
ground during the last twenty years. The process
of karyokinetic or mitotic division by means of which
at each cell division the halves derived from a length-
wise split of each chromosome are carried to opposite
poles, so that a genetic continuity is maintained be-
tween corresponding chromosomes (and parts of
chromosomes) in mother and daughter cells, has been
found to be almost universal in both plants and
animals. It is true that several instances have been
described in which the nucleus simply pinches into
two parts, and there can be little doubt that such cases
occur; but no one has been able to show in a convinc-
ing way that cells which have once divided in this
manner ever return to the regular process of karyo-
kinetic division. Case after case of amitosis that
has been described for the germ cells has been either
disproven, or found to rest on faulty observation, or
else to relate to cells like those of the egg coats that
take no part in the germinal stream.

There are several observations that lead to the
view, at present generally accepted, that the chromo-
somes retain their individuality from one cell division
to the next. These may now be given.

During the resting stage the chromosomes spin out
in such a way that they appear to form a continuous
network in the nucleus. They can not be identified
individually during this period. When the chromo-


152 THE CHROMOSOMES


somes again become visible, preparatory to the next
division, it has been found by Boveri in Ascaris,
which is particularly well suited for the study of this
point, that in sister cells the configuration of the
groups of chromosomes is the same (Fig. 41). The
similarity of the sister cells would be expected had
the chromosomes retained during the resting stage
the same shape and size and relative location that
they had at the end of the last division. On no other


@ b c
Fic. 41.—Four pairs of sister cells of Ascaris, in which the chromo-


somes are reappearing. Note the similarity of arrangement in the cells
of each pair. (After Boveri.)


d


view can we so readily understand the similarities
between the sister cells; for, in other cells of these
same embryos that are not sister cells, a great variety
of arrangements is found, and no two arrangements
are so nearly alike as are those that are found in
cells that have separated from each other at the last
division. In a few instances certain observers be-
lieve that they have even been able to distinguish
the separate chromosomes throughout the whole


THE CHROMOSOMES 153


resting period of the cells, but this must be received
with some caution. In many animals and in some
plants the chromosomes are of very different sizes
and shapes, and many, or even all of them, can be
identified at each division. It is found that: these size
relations hold throughout all divisions of the cells.
While this evidence appears at first sight to show
that the chromosomes are structures that perpetuate
themseives, preserving their identity, yet it might be
maintained, in fact it has been maintained, that each
species has its own peculiar protoplasm from which
chromosomes of a particular kind and number are,
as it were, crystallized out anew before each cell
division. This point of view can not, however, be rec-
onciled with the evidence that follows. In Meta-
podius, Wilson has found that individuals may differ
in the particular chromosome that he calls. the m
chromosome. While the normal individuals have a
pair of m chromosomes, one individual had three
m’s; but all of the cells of any given individual
have the same number. These chromosomes furnish
strong support of the continuity of the chromosomes;
for, in whatever number they enter the individual
during fertilization, they retain that number through-
out all the subsequent generations of cells. The same
is true, of course, for the sex chromosomes.
Corroborative proof is found in certain hybrids,
where the evidence is even more significant, because
in such cases the chromosomes introduced by the
male are, as it were, in a foreign medium. For
example, Moenkhaus first pointed out that when


154 THE CHROMOSOMES


the fish Fundulus is crossed to another fish, Menidia,
the two kinds of chromosomes present in the fertilized
egg can readily be distinguished in later divisions.
Similar observations have been made for many
other crosses (Fig. 42) by Morris, Pinney, Hertwig,
Federley, Doncaster, Rosenberg, etc. Despite the
fact that the paternal chromosomes are in a foreign


|
i Hy RE,


| :
Wh i”
J '


Fic. 42.—a, Telophase, rae of an embryonic cell of Fundulus; 6,
telophase, division of an embryonic cell of egg of Fundulus fertilized by
sperm of Ctenolabrus. (After Morris.)


medium they retain their characteristic size, form,
and number. The embryos from these eggs are
abnormal, and often die, not because chromosomes
are eliminated but because the combination does not
work out successfully. On the other hand, in hybrid
embryos (studied by Herbst, Baltzer, and Tennent),
in which paternal chromosomes are eliminated, they


THE CHROMOSOMES 155


seem never to re-appear subsequently, while those
not eliminated always re-appear at the next cell
division. Other cases of the same sort are known.

In general it may be said that even an abnormal set
of chromosomes, once established in a cell, tends to
persist through all succeeding cell generations. This
evidence indicates that the chromosomes are not
mere products of the rest of the cell but are self-
perpetuating structures.


THE CHROMOSOMES DURING THE MATURATION OF
THE GERM CELLS


On the most essential point concerning the matura-
tion of the egg and sperm there is no dispute: the
observed number of chromosomes is reduced to half.
It is generally agreed that this lowering of the number
is due to the union of similar chromosomes in pairs,
each chromosome derived from the father conjugating
with the homologous chromosome derived from the
mother. In cases where different chromosomes can
be distinguished by their shape or size relations, the
relations of these pairs correspond exactly to what
they should be if like chromosomes conjugated.

When we come to consider how this union of
chromosomes is brought about, there is much diver-
gence of opinion, for the evidence is fragmentary or
contradictory on almost every point. The reason
for this uncertainty is clear: the stages at which the
reduction in the number of the chromosomes takes
place are extraordinarily difficult to interpret, be-


156 THE CHROMOSOMES


cause at this time the chromosomes are in the form
of what seems to be a dense tangle of long threads.
When this stage has been passed through, and the
chromosomes are distinguishable again, the pairing
has been completed. For any information that is
worth while we have to rely on the best material
available. It may be disputed which material is the
best, but it will be generally conceded that a few
types have shown themselves superior to others.
The account of maturation that is here followed
confines itself to two types—one for the male and the
other for the female. These are selected cases, it is
true, but they are those that give, in the opinion
of the writers, two of the most complete accounts of
these stages. The selection is admittedly not with-
out bias, for these types can be most advantageously
utilized to illustrate how crossing over can take
place between the members of homologous pairs of
chromosomes.

The salamander, Batracoseps attenuatus, has fur-
nished some of the best material for the study of the
ripening of the germ cells of the male. The account
that follows is taken from Janssens’ elaborate and
detailed study of the spermatogenesis of Batracoseps.

At the end of the multiplication period (spermato-
gonial divisions) the nucleus appears as shown in
Fig. 48,a. It then passes into a condition resembling
a resting stage, b. Later the chromosomes begin to
emerge in the form of long thin threads as shown in
c, d, e. In the last figure (the leptotene stage) the
ends of the thin threads are directed toward one pole


THE CHROMOSOMES 157


where some of the ends can be seen to be arranged in
pairs. As they unite in pairs these thin threads
often have the appearance of twisting tightly around


Fra. 43.—Spermatogenesis of Batracoseps attenuatus. a, late telophase
of spermatogonial division; b, resting stage after the last spermatogonial
division; c, appearance of the spireme; d and e, later stage of last (bouquet
grele); f, g, h, twisting of leptotene threads around each other (amphitene
stage); 7, amphitene stage (entire cell); 7, pachytene stage (bouquet
pachytene); &, longitudinal splitting of threads (strepsinema stage); l,
shortening and thickening of the chromosomes. (After Janssens.)


158 THE CHROMOSOMES


each other, beginning at the end where they first
approached each other. The details of the union
of the threads are further shown in f, g, h. As they
unite they contract until they are in the form of a
thicker thread, as seen in 7, where the process of
fusion has progressed as far as the middle of the
nucleus. Later, 7, the threads become fused through-
out their length (pachytene stage). Still later the
thick threads begin to show a longitudinal split
(diplotene stage), and cross connections, uniting the
halves of the threads, appear in different places.
The threads thicken until finally a stage is reached
like that shown in k, which, by further contraction,
reaches the condition shown in /, a stage preparatory
to the first maturation division. The threads of
each pair, in all the stages of the latter part of the
diplotene stage, are much twisted around each
other; they are now so thick that they show the
twisted condition very plainly.

The egg undergoes a series of changes during its
_ maturation which parallels those of the sperm, and
which leads also to the reduction in the number of the
chromosomes to half of the full number. The eggs
of a shark (Pristiurus melanostomus) have been
described by Maréchal as passing through the
following stages. At the end of the period of multi-
plication the eggs pass into a resting stage (Fig. 44, a)
in which the chromatin appears as a delicate reticu-
lum. A later stage is shown in b,c, when the separate
thin threads begin to make their appearance, and
take parallel courses, d (leptotene stage). These


THE CHROMOSOMES 159


Fig. 44.—The growth, synapsis, and reduction stages in the egg of
Pristiurus melanostomus. (After Maréchal.)


160 THE CHROMOSOMES


thin threads next assume the form of loops with their
free ends pointing toward one pole, e (bouquet
stage, also called the period of synapsis). At their
free ends the threads soon appear to meet in pairs,
d and e. Each pair, by the apparent fusion of its
threads, leads to the formation of a thick thread in
the form of a loop, f. Further condensation and
separation of the threads leads to the condition shown
ing. The thick double threads next show a length-
wise split, the halves being often twisted around
each other (diplotene stage) h. The pairs of threads
now begin again to become longer and to occupy
more of the interior of the nucleus as seen in 7. The
eggs have grown larger meanwhile and the yolk
appears. As the nucleus grows still larger, keeping
pace with the growth of the cell, the chromosomes
begin to lose their staining capacity. Despite the
difficulty of tracing the chromosomes throughout the
remaining period, Maréchal has succeeded in follow-
ing them, step by step. His drawings of the chro-
mosomes give the impression of the existence of a
central core or filament remaining, as shown in
Fig. 44 2, 7, k&. Delicate loops and threads are
attached to this core and may be traced out into the
region of each side of the chromosome. During
these stages deeply staining balls of material, the
nucleoli, appear in the nucleus. Finally the chro-
matin threads begin to condense again and once
more take the stain; the chromosomes are found lying
in pairs often twisted around each other as before, as
seen in 7. They pass in this condition on to the first


THE CHROMOSOMES 161


polar spindle, which develops in the egg as the
nuclear membrane breaks down.

At or before the time when the double chromo-
somes of the sperm and of the egg pass onto the


Fic. 45.—Diagram to illustrate the two reduction divisions of sperm-
atogonial cells. a, first spermatocyte with two tetrads; b and c, division
of last; d and f, division of two cells of c; e and g, completion of second -
division.
first maturation spindle, each half of the double
chromosome splits lengthwise so that four parallel
strands are present (Figs. 45, 46). One of the two
longitudinal splits in the tetrad is generally thought


162 THE CHROMOSOMES


to correspond to the former line of union of the
conjugating threads (reductional split); the other
split is then said to correspond to a division within
each thread (equational split). It is obvious, how-
ever, if crossing over has previously taken place
between the threads, or between strands only, that
these distinctions apply rather to segments of the
chromosomes than to the chromosomes as wholes.

These two splits are in preparation for the two
maturation divisions that usually take place in rapid
succession, without an intervening resting stage.
It is customary therefore to look upon the second
lengthwise split as a precocious split in the chromo-
somes preparatory to the second division. If the
reduction in the number of the chromosomes to half
of the original number were the sole object of the
reduction divisions, one division would suffice to
separate the two chromosomes of a pair that had
united and it is not apparent why there should be a
second division at all.

The two maturation divisions with tetrad forma-
tion are typically illustrated in the changes that take
place in the spermatogenesis and odégenesis of
Ascaris, the thread worm of the horse, as worked out
by van Beneden, Brauer, O. Hertwig and others.
In one variety four chromosomes occur which become
reduced to two; hence there are only two tetrads
present (Fig. 45, a). At the first division two halves
of each thread move to one pole and two to the
other as in 6 and c. At the second division the
separation of the two remaining threads takes place,


THE CHROMOSOMES 163


d and f. At the end of the process there are two
chromosomes remaining in each of the four cells, e
and g. Each cell becomes a spermatozoon. Here
as in most cases there is nothing to show whether
the first division is reductional and the second
equational, or the reverse. There is much divergence
of opinion on this point for different species. The end


Fic. 46.—Diagram to show the extrusion of the two polar bodies.
Two tetrads are represented in a. The two succeeding divisions b-c,
d-e, show the separation of the members of the tetrads with the result
that one of each kind is left in the egg.


result, however, is the same so far as the genetic
problem is concerned, the sequence being ordinarily
a matter of no significance.

In the egg (Fig. 46) the process is identical with
that in the sperm, except that one of the two cells
formed is much smaller than the other. The small
cellis the polar body. At the first division the nucleus


164 THE CHROMOSOMES


sends out half of its chromatin into the first polar
body (Fig. 46, c). Without a resting stage a new
spindle is formed around the chromosomes in the egg
and a second polar body is thrown off, asin e. The
first polar body may also divide. The three polar
bodies and the egg, f, are comparable to the four
spermatozoa. All four spermatozoa are functional,
but only one product of the two divisions of the egg
is functional. Unless the tetrad is specifically
oriented upon the polar spindle of the egg the chance
is equally good that any one of the four threads that
make up the tetrad will be the one that remains in
the egg.


CROSSING OVER


If the traditional view of the maturation of the
egg and of the sperm were accepted as covering the
entire behavior of .the chromosomes during this
period, there would be no possibility for an interchange
between the members of a pair. But there are
several stages in the ripening of the germ cells when
an interchange between homologous chromosomes
might possibly take place. For instance, when the
thin threads are coming together (Fig. 43, e, f, g, h)
several observers have described them as twisting
around each other (synaptic twisting) as represented
in these figures. If where the threads cross a part of
one thread becomes continuous with the remainder of
the other thread (Fig. 24) an interchange of pieces
will have been accomplished. If, as shown in Fig.
24, B, the chromosomes are represented as a linear


THE CHROMOSOMES 165


series of beads (chromomeres), then, when the con-
jugating chromosomes twist around each other,
whole sections of one chain will come to lie, now on
one side, now on the other side, in the double chro-
mosome. If, when the two series of beads come to
separate from each other, all of the segments that lie
on the same side tend to go to one pole, and all of
those on the opposite side to the other pole, each
series must, in order to separate, break apart between
the beads at the crossing point. Moreover, since
the essential part of the process is that homologous
beads go to opposite poles it follows that the break
between the beads of two chains must always be at
identical levels. It is not necessary to assume that
crossing over takes place at every node, but only that
it may sometimes take place. In fact, our work on
Drosophila shows for the sex chromosome in the
female that crossing over takes place in only about
half of the cells, and double crossing over is a rather
rare event.

There is a later stage also at which crossing over
might be supposed to take place. After the thin
threads have conjugated to form the thick threads,
and these have shortened and split lengthwise, four
strands are present (Fig. 47). If two of the strands
fuse at the crossing place (the pieces of one strand
uniting endwise with the pieces of the other) crossing
over is brought about. It is this type in particular
that Janssens named chiasmatype. In support of
this method of crossing over are Janssens’ observa-
tions on Batracoseps, where he concludes from the


166 THE CHROMOSOMES


method by which the strands are found joined at the
time when they draw apart, that cross union of the
threads must have previously taken place.

If crossing over be supposed to take place between
two single threads (Fig. 24) all four gametes that
ultimately result from such a cell will be crossover
gametes. On the other hand, if crossing over takes


aaa


Fic. 47.—Four stages in crossing over, according to ine “typical”
chiasma type of Janssens. The white rod and the black rod are each
split depatharibe crossing over takes place only between two of the four
strands


place by means of the chiasmatype (Fig. 47) only
two of the resulting four cells will be crossover
gametes, the other two being non-crossover gametes.

Looked at from the point of view of the total
output, there would be no way in which to tell
whether one or the other of the above processes has
taken place; although the formation of a given
number of crossover gametes involves only half as
many participating cells in the case of the single
thread type as in the case of the double thread type.


1Tf, after the thick threads have split, crossing over involving both
strands of each chromosome should take place, instead of only one
strand as in the chiasmatype, sensu strictu, all four gametes that result
would be crossover gametes.


THE CHROMOSOMES _ 167


At present it seems better not to attempt to
commit the theory of crossing over to one rather than
to another of these stages; for, whether the process
occurs at the leptotene thread stage as suggested
above, or, as Janssens believes, at a later stage
(strepsinema), the genetic result is the same. What
we wish to point out is that in the phases through
which the chromosomes pass at the maturation
stages there is given an opportunity for an inter-
change of parts. The genetic evidence shows very
clearly that interchanges do take place, as is best
illustrated in the case of the sex chromosomes,
whose history can be traced with some assurance
from one generation to the next.

What we wish especially to insist upon and empha-
size is that the evidence from linkage in Drosophila
has shown beyond any doubt that crossing over is
not a process that involves only a particular factor
in relation to its allelomorph. Our work has shown
positively that there is a tendency for large sections
of the chromosomes to interchange whenever crossing
over occurs.

Another idea that is likely to suggest itself in this
connection has also been disproven by the evidence
from Drosophila. It might be supposed that at a
resting stage the chromosomes go to pieces and the
fragments come together again before the next
division period. Linkage might then mean the
likelihood of fragments remaining intact, etc. But
if the chromosomes broke up completely into their
constituent elements at each resting period then


168 "THE CHROMOSOMES


there is no explanation as to why the factors in a
group remain together in sections as explained on
page 66. If it is supposed that the chromosomes
break only once or twice, and that linkage represents
the holding together of the pieces, then one is forced
to assume that the breaking up is the same in both
members of a pair, yet entirely inconstant in different
cells; for otherwise the reunion of the fragments
would lead to duplication or loss of whole sections
of the chromosomes, and all order would soon be lost.
A large amount of data relating to sex linked char-
acters has shown that the sex chromosomes must
remain intact as often as they break apart, and even
when they break apart this takes place, as a rule, at
only one place.


OTHER THEORIES OF CROSSING OVER


The ‘reduplication” theory of Bateson and
Punnett has been treated in another section (see
page 74) and the discussion need not be repeated
here.

It has been claimed by Goldschmidt that, even
though the groups of factors are admitted to be
carried in the chromosomes and to undergo some
sort of interchange before reduction, it is not neces-
sary to assume that this interchange is of the nature
of a crossing over of the threads. He has postulated
that during resting stages the genes are set free
from the forces that hold them in their places in the
chromosomes, and that when they reassume their
places before division the two allelomorphs may


THE CHROMOSOMES 169


sometime be found to have exchanged places in the
pair of chromosomes. Such interchange of genes is
due to variations in the strength of the specific
forces attracting each back to its place in the
original series, and is supposed to occur in a specific
proportion of cases, which is different for different
pairs of genes. The insufficiency of this hypothesis
becomes evident when we remember that whole
sections of the linear series are interchanged bodily,
a single pair of genes never interchanging alone.
There is the further point that after crossing over
has taken place the same percentage of interchange
is found in the next generation as occurred previ-
ously, a condition which is the reverse of that which
would result on Goldschmidt’s hypothesis.

Castle’s suggestion that the genes are arranged in
a three dimensional manner was arrived at by
combining linkage results obtained in different
experiments. It is well known that such results
are not strictly comparable. When data from a
single experiment involving many loci at once are
used, all the linkages of the factors are most nearly
represented by the distances of points in a curved
line lying in a single plane, instead of in three
dimensions. Further analysis shows that the curva-
ture of this line is due to multiple crossovers, which
have been omitted from the calculation of the
longer distances. When these corrections are made
the curved line of course resolves itself into a straight
line. Castle has now withdrawn his hypothesis of
three dimensional arrangement.


170 - THE CHROMOSOMES


Special attention must be called here to two facts
which have been repeatedly pointed out above, and
which have long been commonplaces in the literature
on linkage in Drosophila. First, owing to the ex-
istence of multiple crossing over, it is not true that
the distances between the factors in the straight
linear map have the same numerical values as the
observed percentage of recombination. Secondly,
owing to the reduction in the amount of multiple
crossing over caused by interference, it is not true
that the relation between map distance and recombi-
nation is that which would result if crossings over
were independent of each other (‘‘Trow’s formula”
assumed a relationship of linkages of this sort, but
it had already been disproved in Drosophila).
Haldane has recently restated the evidence against
these misconceptions in slightly different termi-
nology, under the erroneous impression that the
first of the misconceptions is held by Drosophila
workers. In substitution for these two views he
proposes an empirical formula to express the relation
supposedly existing between distance and separation
frequency. Such an attempt to find a general
formula is futile, for it has been proved that the
relationship between map-distance and observed
percentage of crossing over is different not only in
different chromosomes, but even very strikingly in
different regions of the same chromosome. The only.
satisfactory representation of such relationships is
one that gives for each chromosome and for each
region of that chromosome the observed relation


THE CHROMOSOMES 171


between map-distance and crossover values. From
such careful, detailed, region-by-region studies a
more general statement and formulation should
emerge. Until such studies are completed there is
nothing to be gained from a priori attempts to
formulate the relatignship. The Drosophila workers
had studied the possibilities of such formule and
had worked out several that applied under diverse
conditions. Such formule were recognized as too
partial and tentative to be worth publication as yet.
Moreover, it is evident from the foregoing that
within a given region the exact function of distance
represented by crossover values depends directly
upon the magnitude of the interference acting at
each given distance. The amount of interference
may be expressed by the index called “coincidence,”
which is obtained by dividing the number of double
crossovers actually observed by the number that
would be expected if crossings over were independent
of one another. Several series of results relating
distance and coincidence have already been pub-
lished, but it will require extended and special
experimentation before the relationship for each
region can be precisely determined. A formula for
the relation of distance to linkage has little meaning
in reference to the underlying chromosome processes
unless thus expressed, in terms of the actual coinci-
dences involved.


172 THE CHROMOSOMES


ATTACHMENT OF SEX-CHROMOSOMES TO
AUTOSOMES


If one or more genes for sex are present in a
chromosome, that chromosome would be designated
as a sex chromosome, but in order that the mecha-
nism give a differential result such chromosome
must be present in duplex (XX or ZZ) in some in-
dividuals and simplex (X or Z) in others. It is not
necessary in the simplex individual that one whole
chromosome be absent, but only that one should lack
factors for sex, as in the case of Y-chromosome
in one type, and supposedly the W-chromosome in
the other.

There is still another situation in regard to the
chromosomes that carry the sex genes. In a few
cases there is more than a suspicion that they are
attached to other chromosomes, or what amounts
to the same thing,that the region of the chromosomes
bearing sex determining genes lies at one end of an
ordinary chromosome. In such cases two of these
chromosomes with attached portions are supposed
to be present in the female (the XX type), but in
the male only one chromosome of the pair has the
attached portion. The thread worm, Ascaris, is a
case in point. It has been observed by Boveri,
Boring, Frolowa, Mulsow, Kautsch, and Geinitz
that occasionally one or two small detached pieces
of chromosomes are found constantly present in
certain individuals—pieces that show a tendency
in certain cells to become attached, or associated


THE CHROMOSOMES 173


with a pair of ordinary chromosomes. These pieces
have been supposed to be the sex chromosomes.
Their inconstancy and some apparent irregularity in
their distribution when the polar bodies are formed
has thrown some doubt on that interpretation.

Perhaps more significant are the observations of
Kautsch and Geinitz on the number of chromomeres
into which the somatic chromosomes of Ascaris are
resolved. It appears in some individuals (females?)
there are about 8 more of these than in other in-
dividuals (males?). This relation might be expressed
as follows:

52 chromosomes in male
(sperm)

60 chromosomes in female = 22 + 8 (egg) + 22 +
8 (sperm)
Kautsch has suggested that the 8 chromosomes are
attached at the ends of one of the pairs of chromo-
somes and are set free normally only when the
chromosomes break apart into their constituent
chromosomes. In the female two such chromosomes
would be present, in the male only one member of
the pair would have the attached part. The results
would then conform to the ordinary XX—XY
mechanism. The only objection to such a view is
that at an early stage the ends of the chromosomes
that go to the somatic cells appear to slough off.
If this involved the sex region, the sex determining
mechanism would be lost in the soma. But there
is some evidence that the sloughing off does not
include essential elements of the chromosomes; for,


22 + 8 (egg) + 22


174 THE CHROMOSOMES


in other nematodes, where many small chromosomes
are present, such a loss has been observed from all
of the chromosomes, which nevertheless retain their
constancy of number in the germ cells.

It is not without interest to find in these
Nematodes with many small chromosomes that the
female and the male have constantly different
‘numbers of chromosomes (Edwards, Gulick, Schleip)
—the additional ones corresponding to the extra
chromosomes of Ascaris. Thus Edwards finds in
Ascaris lumbricoides:

43 chromosomes in the male = 19 + 5 (egg) + 19
(male producing-sperm)

48 chromosomes in the female = 19+5 (egg)
19+ 5 (female producing-sperm)

In Ascaris incurva, Goodrich has shown (Fig. 36
M) that a sex chromosome complex consisting of 7
X-chromosomes goes to one pole of the spindle, so
that the female-producing sperm has 21 chromo-
somes; and the male-producing only 14: At the
time of reduction the X-chromosome complex of
7 elements shows a tendency to unite more or less
into a compound element (Fig. 36 M).


'TETRAPLOIDY


The fact that ‘pairs of species” are known, one
characterized by having twice the number of chro-
mosomes of the other, has suggested that new types
may arise through doubling of the chromosome
number. The double chromosome types are larger


THE CHROMOSOMES 175


and have larger cells than the type from which they
may be supposed to have arisen. The most im-
portant consideration in this connection is that
since through tetraploidy the number of genes is
doubled, opportunity is given by further mutation
in these genes for an indefinite increase in the
number of genes in the course of evolution. This
possibility suffices to meet the paradox stated by
Bateson, that there may have been no increase in
the number of genes in the course of evolution from
“amoeba to man.”’ Bateson suggested as a possi-
bility that all that has happened in the course of
evolution has resulted from the dropping out of some
of the original genes. While ‘‘evolution through loss
of genes”? cannot be refuted as an abstract conten-
tion, however improbable, it would still leave un-
solved the whole question as to the origin of the
genes present ‘at the beginning.” Such a specu-
lation rests nominally on an hypothesis concerning
the nature of mutation itself (loss of a factor).

In a few cases tetraploidy has arisen in pedigreed
material, and in two cases it has been induced
artificially. In the evening primrose, Oenothera, a
tetraploid form occasionally arises. It has been
called by its discoverer De Vries, O. gigas. The orig-
inal type O. Lamarckiana has 14 chromosomes and
O. gigas 28. Stomps has calculated that it occurs
only once in about 100,000 times. Several possible
ways in which it arises have been suggested. First,
that it arises after fertilization through division of
the chromosomes of the zygote unaccompanied by


176 THE CHROMOSOMES


nuclear and cell division. Second, that it comes
from the union of two gametes each with the un-
reduced number of chromosomes. Third, that such
plants do not arise from the egg itself, but as bud
sports from cells that had the diploid number of
chromosomes. There is somewhat better evidence
in favor of the second view than of the other two.
Whatever its origin, O. gigas breeds true in the
same sense as does the parent type, its germ-cells
having the double number of chromosomes after
reduction.

Gigas forms of Primula have appeared under
cultivation. Gregory has found some of these to
have tetraploid chromosomes. In other cases a giant
has appeared as a bud sport in the hybrid form
Primula Kewensis.

Tetraploid individuals have been artificially pro-
duced in mosses by the Marchals. In mosses there
are two generations that alternate—the sexual
generation that produces eggs and sperm, and the
sexual spore-bearing generation that arises from the
fertilized egg. The cells of the sexual moss-plant,
as well as the egg-cells and sperm that it produces,
have the haploid number of chromosomes. After
fertilization the egg contains the diploid number of
chromosomes, and since it gives rise to the sporo-
phyte, this also has the diploid number of chromo-
somes in all of its cells. The spores are formed by
two divisions, and one of them must be a reduction-
division, since each spore has the haploid number of
chromosomes.


THE CHROMOSOMES 177


The tissue of the sporophyte is capable of re-
generating if a piece of it is kept under proper
cultural conditions. Its cells do not regenerate
another sporophyte but instead a sexual moss-
plant, or gametophyte, which now has the diploid
number of cells, since it arose directly from sporo-
phyte tissue. These diploid gametophytes give rise
to antherozoids (without reducing) and to female
oospheres (without reducing). Therefore by the
union of the two a tetraploid sporophyte is pro-
duced. In a few mosses, octuploid sporophytes
have been produced, by starting with a tetraploid
sporophyte and repeating the procedure just
described.

Tetraploid plants of the tomato (Solanum
lycopersicum) and of the nightshade (Solanum
nigrum) have been artificially produced by Winkler
by means of the same kind of grafting experiments
that had produced periclinal chimaeras in his earlier
work. A piece of the nightshade was grafted onto
a tomato stock by a wedge-shaped union. After
union had taken place the combination was cut
across at the level of union in such a way that the
tissue of the nightshade was exposed on each side
of the cut surface and that of tomato in the middle
of the surface. If at the same time all the axial
buds were removed from such a piece new adven-
titious buds appeared on the cut surface. Most of
these gave rise to plants that were either night-
shades or tomatoes, but rarely a bud arose that had
a core of tomato tissue and a skin of nightshade


178 THE CHROMOSOMES


(periclinal chimaera), or a bud with the reverse
relations, namely, nightshade core and tomato skin.
Still another kind of bud also rarely arose, namely,
one that was tomato on one side (or in one section)
and nightshade on the other (sectorial chimaera).
In one instance a periclinal chimaera arose that was
a giant, and which Winkler showed was tetraploid.
It had a core of tomato cells that were tetraploid,
and a skin of nightshade. Winkler got rid of the
skin by cutting the stem of a young plant across
and removing its axial buds. The adventitious buds
that developed from the callus over the cut end
were in some cases composed entirely of tomato
cells, both in core and skin. Such plants were
pure tetraploid giants.

The cells of the ordinary tomato contain 24 chro-
mosomes (Fig. 47A, 6b), the pollen mother cells
contain the reduced number of chromosomes
(Fig. 47A, a). The tissue cells of the giant con-
tained 48 chromosomes (Fig. 47A, d), and the
pollen mother cells 24 chromosomes (Fig. 47A, c).
How the original doubling of the’ number of the
chromosomes comes about in cases like this one is
unknown. It may have arisen by two cells fusing
at the cut surface into a single cell that formed the
growing tip of a new plant, or a tetraploid cell may
have arisen by a direct doubling of the number of
chromosomes in a cell as a result of the failure of
the cell to divide after the chromosomes had divided.
Since giants never appeared from a callus or from
adventitious buds, except in cases where grafting


THE CHROMOSOMES 179


had first occurred, Winkler is inclined to ascribe
the results to some special conditions that are thus
introduced.

In somewhat the same way Winkler obtained a
giant nightshade plant. The ordinary cells of the


Fig. 47A—Chromosomes of normal and of giant tomato. a, pollen
mother cell of tomato with 12 chromosomes. 0b, somatic cell of tomato with
24 chromosomes. c, pollen mother cell of giant tomato, with 24 chromo-
somes. d, somatic cell of giant tomato with 48 chromosomes. (After
Winkler.)


nightshade contain 72 chromosomes (Fig. 47B, b),
and the pollen mother cells 36 chromosomes (Fig.


47B, a). The cells of the giant nightshade con-
tained 144 chromosomes (Fig. 47B, d), and the


180 THE CHROMOSOMES


Fig. 47B.—Chromosomes of normal and of giant nightshade. a, pollen
mother cell of nightshade, with 36 chromosomes. 6, somatic cell of night-
shade, with 72 chromosomes. c, pollen mother cell of giant nightshade,
with 72 chromosomes. d, somatic cell of giant nightshade, with 144
chromosomes. (After Winkler.)


THE CHROMOSOMES 181


pollen mother cells 72 chromosomes (Fig. 47B, c).
Both of these giant plants were larger than the
normal plant; they grew more vigorously and all
of the cells were larger. The difference in size
extends to the flowers, to the pollen, stomata,
trichomes, etc., and even the starch plastids are
larger. This latter condition seems anomalous, but
Winkler states that even in normal plants the size
of these plastids varies with the size of the cells
containing them.


CHAPTER VI
CYTOPLASMIC INHERITANCE


When a sperm, bearing a known dominant gene
for an embryo-character, fertilizes an egg, the
embryo may show only the recessive character of
the mother’s race. The rate of cleavage of the egg
is a case in point. These results are explicable,
because the egg cytoplasm has already developed
under the influence of the duplex maternal chro-
mosomes. On the other hand there may be self-
perpetuating bodies in the cytoplasm of the egg
that are responsible for certain characters, such as
the chlorophyll plastids. Both of these phenomena
are here described as cytoplasmic inheritance.

The interpretation of Mendelian inheritance on a
chromosomal basis by no means excludes the possi-
bility that there may be other forms of inheritance
depending on other cell materials. Although the
cytoplasm is essential for the development of the
organism, and is transmitted by the egg to each new
generation, its substance does not perpetuate itself
unchanged as do the chromosomes, and it is therefore
really not inherited. There are, however, certain
bodies carried by the protoplasm, such as plastids
(possibly also chondriosomes), which, like the chro-
matin, are able to grow and divide, and hence might
have the power to perpetuate themselves unchanged

182


CYTOPLASMIC INHERITANCE 183


indefinitely. Such bodies might not only produce
passive products, like starch or pigment, but even
active enzymes, which, interacting with other
products of development, might. determine the
characteristics of the race.

Structures like the shell and the yolk of eggs are
purely maternal in origin, but since they do not have
the power of growth and division, they are not able
to perpetuate themselves indefinitely, nevertheless
they may determine certain characteristics of the
embryo, and to this extent may appear to influence
the hereditary characters of the generation to which
the embryo belongs., For instance, the females of
certain races of silkworm moths have white eggs, be-.
cause the shell is white. If such eggs are fertilized by
sperm of another race, that has eggs with a domi-
nant green colored shell, the shells are nevertheless
white. Conversely when the green eggs of a female
moth of the green egg race are fertilized by the
sperm of a male of a white egg race, the color re-
mains green. When the moths develop from either
of these two kinds of hybrid eggs, one white, one
green, they lay only green eggs, because in the hybrid
the factor for green dominates and determines the
color of the shell that is produced in the new eggs.
These green eggs give rise to moths, three of which
lay eggs that are green to one that lays eggs that are
white, showing that here there is only the ordinary
case of Mendelian inheritance, which is obscured,
however, when the characters of the young embryo
are considered, because, as has been shown, these


184 CYTOPLASMIC INHERITANCE


characters are due to peculiarities of the eggs before
they are laid.

The serosa on the other hand is a cellular membrane
that develops around the embryo and produces pig-
ment. The pigment seen through the shell gives the
embryo a definite color, which in the hybrid embryo
is characteristic of the maternal race. Since the
serosa pigment is not present in the egg, but develops
after fertilization the inheritance here appears to be
determined by the character of the egg and not by the
sperm. But the genetic history of this character of
the embryo is apparently the same as that of the
color of the shell or of the yolk.. It can, therefore, be
interpreted in the same way. There must, then,
be present in the egg some substance that is at first
uncolored, and later this substance when carried into
the serosa produces pigment, presumably by inter-
acting with something else there. In the next genera-
tion, however, the influence of the father comes to
light when the F, embryo produces its serosa mate-
rial; for now the nucleus of the P, male has had op-
portunity to determine what this material may be,
and should the paternal factor be the dominant one
it determines the kind of material that the eggs will
contain and hence the color of the serosa of this new
generation.

A case of cytoplasmic inheritance has been de-
scribed by Correns in the four-o’clock, Mirabilis
jalapa. There is a race whose leaves are checkered
with green and white, but some branches may have
leaves entirely green, other branches may have only


CYTOPLASMIC INHERITANCE 185


white leaves. If the flowers of the green branches are
self-fertilized, the young plants are green. If the
flowers of the white branches are self-fertilized, the
offspring have white leaves and these plants perish
for want of chlorophyll. From the checkered
branches the offspring may be green, or checkered,
or white.

When a cross is made between the flowers borne
by branches that are unlike, the inheritance is purely
maternal. For example, if the pistil of a white
branch is fertilized with pollen from a pure green
plant, only white leaved offspring are produced.
The reciprocal cross, the pistil from a green branch
fertilized with pollen from a white branch, gives
only green offspring, and these remain green idl
all subsequent generations.

Correns points out that these results can be inter-
preted if the whitening is due to a sort of disease that
is carried by the cytoplasm. The egg cytoplasm
carries over the disease to the next generation. As
the pollen does not bring in any cytoplasm the
disease is not transmitted through the male side.

Baur points out that in several other plants in
which varieties with leaves marked with white exist,
as in Melandrium, Antirrhinum, etc., the inheritance
is strictly Mendelian, for the F, generation is green
and the F, generation is made up of three greens to
one marked with white. In these cases the color may
depend on a chromosomal factor. But there is a
case in Pelargonium that Baur thinks can not be
explained in either of the foregoing ways. Here


186 CYTOPLASMIC INHERITANCE


again there are mosaic branches, white branches, and
also green branches. Flowers on green branches
crossed with flowers on white branches give mosaic
plants, irrespective of which way the cross is made.
A self-fertilized flower from a green branch gives rise
to a plant with purely green leaves. If a flower from
a checkered branch is self-fertilized it produces a
checkered plant. If a flower from a white branch is
self-fertilized it gives rise to a white plant.

Baur suggests tentatively, the following hypothesis
to explain the case of Pelargonium. The green color
of this plant, like that of all flowering plants, is due
to chlorophyll grains and these grains multiply,
supplying all the cells in generations that subse-
quently arise with their quota of grains. In the
white parts these grains are defective in the sense
that they fail to produce the green color, but retain
their power of multiplying. If now it is assumed
that the pollen as well as the egg may transmit some
chlorophyll grains the results can be explained. For,
in the division of the cells that contain both green
(normal) and white (abnormal) grains there will
arise at times an unequal distribution of the grains,
and in extreme cases two kinds of branches may arise,
one with green and the other with white grains. The
hypothesis calls for transmission. through the cyto-
plasm of the pollen as well as through that of the
egg cell. Baur states that until this fact can be
established the interpretation must be uncertain.


CHAPTER VII


THE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE
DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES
AND OF THE GENETIC FACTORS


Attention has been called to the fact that paired
factors are distributed in the same way as are
homologous chromosomes, and that factors which
are assorted independently are distributed in the
same way as non-homologous chromosomes. In
proof of the latter point there is Wilson’s evidence
for a Metapodius with three homologous m-chromo-
somes. It was found that the extra m goes to the
gamete that receives X as often as to the other
gamete. Miss Carothers describes in detail several
‘cases in the spermatogenesis of grasshoppers where
the distribution of chromosome pairs with unequal
members shows complete independence between
pairs. Not only are the pairs of factors assorted
independently, as are the chromosomes, but in
Drosophila, where the number of independently
assorting groups of factors has been determined, it
has been found that the number is identical with the
number of chromosome pairs. Moreover, even the
relative sizes of the groups—both as determined by
the number of factors they contain and by the fre-
quency of crossing over within them—are the same

187


188 DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES


as those of the chromosomes. Finally, the distribu-
tion of the factors within any one group is what the
chromosome hypothesis calls for. For the fre-
quencies of separation (or combination) between the
different factors of a group are in a linear relation to
each other, and the relation is even specifically of
such a type (involving interference) as would be
expected to occur if the separations between the
factors resulted from the crossing over between two
twisted chromosomes which the cytological evidence
indicates may occur.

Even in cases where the chromosomes are not
distributed in the usual way it is found that the
factors have the same unusual method of distribu-
tion. For example, in moths there are some cases of
extraordinary interest because the chromosomes can
be traced to and through the ripening period of the
eggs of the hybrid. Certain species of the moth
Pygera that have different numbers of chromosomes
were crossed by Federley. The full number (calcu-
lated) and the reduced number of chromosomes in
the different species are as follows:


Diploid Haploid


P. anachoreta 60 30
P. curtula 58 29
P. pigra 46 23


In the hybrids, the full number is the sum of the two
haploid sets that went in from the parents. This
shows that the chromosomes preserve their individ-
uality through many successive cell divisions in a


DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES 189


foreign cytoplasm. In the maturation a few of the
chromosomes seem at times to unite in pairs, but
most of them fail to do so, so that while the number
of the chromosomes at the first maturation division
is slightly less than the full number it is much more
than half of that number. Different types of
hybrids behave slightly differently in respect to the
extent to which union in pairs takes place. The
failure to unite indicates that in normal maturation
homologous chromosomes mate with each other,
for here there are few or no chromosomes that are
strictly homologous and yet there is just as much
opportunity as in normal maturation for non-
homologous chromosomes from the same parent to
unite. |

When the first spermatocyte division takes place
in the hybrid, all the unmated chromosomes divide,
but the few chromosomes that are mated pre-
sumably separate. Consequently each of the daugh-
ter cells has the double number of chromosomes
(a set from each parent species), except for the few
chromosomes that had been united in pairs. At
the second maturation division the chromosomes
again divide, so that the spermatozoa too should
receive nearly the double number of chromosomes,
one set from one species, the other set from the other
species.

If, then, the factors are contained in the chromo-
somes, we should expect that, except for any factors
in the few chromosomes that mate and separate, the
hybrid would transmit, to all its offspring the same


190 DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES


factors, since every spermatozoon receives, with the
above exceptions, all the chromosomes (paternal and
maternal) that the hybrid contains. On crossing the
hybrid to either parent, it is found that the offspring
actually are very much alike, 7.e., have all received
practically the same factors—a striking contrast
to the result usually obtained in ‘‘backcrosses.”
In respect to just one character (a larval marking),
however, the above relation does not hold, but ordi-
nary Mendelian results are obtained, and this in turn
corresponds with the fact that a few chromosomes
do undergo segregation. In regard to the other char-
acters, not only are the offspring like each other, but
they resemble the hybrid more than either of the pure
species, corresponding with the fact that they contain
complete sets of chromosomes from both types. But
they do not look just like the F, hybrid, and cor-
respondingly one set of chromosomes is in the diploid,
the other in the haploidnumber. This isbecause they
receive a set of one species from both parents, but a
set of the other species only from the hybrid parent.
Federley also shows that when maturation takes place
in this triploid individual one set of chromosomes
does not undergo mating, but the others—presumably
those in the two identical sets—do pair with each
other, so that the total number is reduced to one bi-
valent set, and one single set. If the paired chromo-
somes separate and the unpaired ones divide, as oc-
curs in the F,; hybrid, the double number of chromo-
somes, a set of each species, will again be found in the
sperm, as was the case in the first hybrid. In other


DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES 191


words there is expected no return to either parent
type, but the hybrid when backcrossed always con-
tinues to produce hybrids. Moreover, there is no
apparent weakening or other influence exerted by the
egg on the foreign chromosomes even in successive
generations. The breeding results of Standfuss,
who backcrossed other moths for several generations,
show exactly this phenomenon—the same type of
_ hybrid constantly produced in every generation.

A similar behavior of the chromosomes has been
recently described by Doncaster in a cross between
other species of moths, and is illustrated in the
following figures. The full number of chromosomes
in the moth Biston hirtaria is shown in Fig. 48, a.
There are 28 in all, of which four are small. Another
species, Biston zonaria, has something over a hundred
very small chromosomes (Fig. 48,6). The reduced
number of chromosomes of the former species is 13
(one large one being coupled with a small one), of
the latter 56. The chromosome group of the hybrid
(zonaria ° by hirtaria “) is shown in Fig. 48,c. The
exact number of chromosomes is difficult to count, but
there are 14 large ones and about 56 small ones. In
this hybrid a stage is passed through that resembles
the synapsis stage. When the chromosomes emerge
from this stage (Fig. 48, c’), almost the full number are
found present, although Doncaster thinks that a few
of them have united in pairs; for as shown in the
figure there are now 12 or 13 large and 50 or 51 small
chromosomes. These are a few less than the full
number present before synapsis. In this case, how-


192 DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES


Cc Cc’


Fig. 48.—Biston hirtaria; a, spermatogonial chromosomes; a’, primary
spermatocyte chromosomes (reduced number). Biston zonaria; b, sper-
matogonial chromosomes; b’, primary spermatocytes (reduced number).
Hybrid, out of zonaria female by hirtaria male; c, spermatogonial chro-
mosomes; c’, primary spermatocytes. (After Harrison and Doncaster.)


DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES 193°


ever, no data concerning the genetic behavior of the
hybrids have been reported.

Another instance of parallelism between unusual
chromosome phenomena and genetic results is that
found in (Enothera lata and semilata by Lutz, Gates
and Thomas. The normal chromosome number in
(nothera lamarckiana is 14, but the race called lata
always has 15 chromosomes, 7.e., one kind of chromo-
some exists in the triploid number. This is true
even of lata plants which originated independently
of the ordinary stock, in widely different races of
(Enothera. The same results apply to semilata,
which appears to be a variety of lata. Lata and semi-
lata occasionally arise ‘spontaneously ” from lamarck-
iana, in a small per cent. of the offspring of any one
individual, and the explanation for this may be found
in the fact that occasionally, in the gametogenesis
of lamarckiana, two mated chromosomes, instead of
separating, pass to the same pole (non-disjunction)
so that the offspring would have three chromosomes of
this type and contain 15 chromosomes in all. The
behavior of the extra chromosome in the lata indi-
viduals is also of interest, for it is found that in
gametogenesis, when the mated chromosomes sepa-
rate, the extra chromosome does not divide regularly
as do unpaired chromosomes in moths, but tends to
pass to one pole. This would result in half the
gametes containing it and transmitting the lata con-
dition and the other half being normal. Very often,
however, the chromosome lags on the spindle and
so fails to be included in the nucleus of either daughter


194 DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES


cell, or it may even be torn apart, as if by spindle
fibers from opposite poles. Consequently less than
half of the gametes (at least the sperm, for gameto-
genesis was not studied in the female organs) receive
theextra chromosome. The proportion varies greatly
in different individuals. This conforms with the
genetic result that lata individuals, crossed to la-
marckiana, give varying proportions of lata offspring
but never produce offspring more than half of which
are lata.

In Primula, a striking case of correspondence be-
tween abnormal genetic and chromosome phenomena
has been found, that appears strongly in favor of the
chromosome hypothesis, although the discoverer,
Gregory, has hesitated to draw this conclusion. Two
giant races of the primula (P. sinensis) were found to
have twice the number of chromosomes character-
istic of other domesticated races. The breeding ex-
periments with these plants show that they also have
a double set of factors as compared with the same
factorsin ordinary primulas. Whilein ordinary plants
the chromosomes are paired and, therefore, each
factor is represented twice, for instance by A and A,
in the giants there are four like-chromosomes, hence
four factors AAAA. If the giant race contains some
factors already mutated, such as A’, the giant might
contain one, two, three, or four of the mutant
factors At. Such plants would be AAAA! or AAA'A}
or AA'A!A! or A'A'A'A'. As stated above, the
breeding work shows that there is a double set of
factors, but the evidence is as yet insufficient to de-


DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES 195


cide whether a mutant factor A! has as its mate, i.e.
always pairs at maturation with, a special one of the
remaining A’s or may become the mate of any one of
the three. On the chromosome hypothesis we should
expect, on the whole, the latter to be true. Which-
ever of these views becomes established the parallel
between the double set of chromosomes and the
double set of factors is the important fact. Gregory
admits this, but adds the caution: “Yet on the other
hand the tetraploid number of chromosomes may be
nothing more than an index of the quadruple nature
of the cell as a whole.”

In the preceding cases it has been shown that the
factors and the chromosomes have the same method
of distribution. In the case of sex and sex linked fac-
tors it can even be shown that they have the same
distribution as the sex chromosomes. This identity
of distribution holds not only for F, results and F;
tests, but for all kinds of backcrosses as well. The
relation holds, moreover, for all known sex linked
factors, of which in Drosophila there are more than
forty cases, and for all combinations of sex linked
factors. Not to interpret this evidence to mean
that the factors are contained in and carried by the
chromosomes is to reject a mechanistic basis known
to exist in the cell. Nothing is gained if, in order to
avoid the obvious connection between the inheritance
of the character and the transmission of the chromo-
some, we assume that something else in the cell, a
portion of the cytoplasm, perhaps, also follows the
distribution of the sex chromosomes. Such a postu-


196 DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES


late only adds an unknown and improbable assump-
tion and leaves the situation less clear than before.

The advantage of the chromosomal interpretation
as applied to the sex chromosomes is nowhere better
illustrated than in the history of a process called
non-disjunction, which was discovered by Bridges.
Furthermore this case, supported on the one hand
by extensive and definite experimental breeding and
on the other hand by cytological investigation, offers
the most direct evidence yet obtained concerning
the relations of particular characters and particular
chromosomes, for in this case an abnormal distribu-
tion of the sex chromosomes goes hand in hand with
an identical abnormal distribution of all sex linked
factors. It was found that females from a certain
strain of white-eyed flies gave, on out-crossing, about
5 per cent. of unexpected classes. For instance,
one of the white females crossed to a red-eyed male
(wild type) produced not only red-eyed daughters
and white-eyed sons, as expected, but also a few
white-eyed daughters and a corresponding number
of red-eyed sons. The approximate percentage in
which these classes appeared is as follows:


Red 2 White @ White 9? Red 2
47.5% 47.5% 2.5% 2.5%


In general, therefore, there were 95 per cent. of
expected forms and 5 per cent. of offspring that
were apparently inconsistent with expectation on the
chromosome theory. Closer inspection of these


DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES 197


results showed that the exceptions could be explained,
if, occasionally, the two X chromosomes failed to
disjoin in the reduction division, both passing out of
some of the eggs of the white-eyed mother into the
polar body, or, conversely, both remaining in the egg.
If the two white-bearing X’s should remain in the egg
then such an egg fertilized by a Y sperm would give
rise to a white-eyed daughter. Likewise the no-X
egg fertilized by the X sperm of a red-eyed male
would give a red-eyed son. The white daughters
would, as just shown, contain two X’s and one Y
chromosome, unlike ordinary daughters, which con-
tain. two X’s only. Since in these females there are
three sex chromosomes instead of a pair, at the
reduction division two must pass into one cell and


one into the other. This division might take place


nf ; XY xX Y d XX tj
in four ways: Yo yy xx and (representing


the egg below and the polar body above in each
case). The first two types of reduction, depending
on a more symmetrical pairing of the chromosomes,
might be more frequent than the other two types.
There would then be four types of eggs—a large
number of X and XY eggs, and a few XX and Y eggs.
Let us suppose that an XX Y white femaleismated toa
red male. The progeny produced by the X bearing
sperm would be:


x XY Xe. XY


Q red Q red missing G red


198 DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES


The same series of eggs fertilized by the male-
producing sperm, which carries a Y chromosome,


would give:
(5)


vy yYY 30Y. YY


O white O white Q white dies


If we consider these eight kinds of progeny we
see that the exceptional white females (7) would be
expected to repeat the process and be non-disjunc-
tional. This is what actually occurs, for all white
females that are the product of such a cross do, in
fact, give non-disjunction in the next generation.

The red males (4) are an exceptional class but
should not give exceptional results when bred to any
normal female, nor should they transmit non-dis-
junction. This has been shown to be true.

The red females are not alike in composition, half
of them (1) should behave like normal females
heterozygous for white and the other half (2) should
give exceptions. There are in fact found to be
these two kinds of red females in equal numbers.

The white males (5) and (6) are not alike; one
kind (5) is normal and the other (6) has two Y
chromosomes. The latter should be expected to
produce some XY sperm. These sperm would give
daughters which would not be exceptions, but such
females, with a formula XXY, should produce
exceptions. In fact from half of the white males (5
and 6), daughters are produced that give non-dis-
junction.


DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES 199


The results bear out to a remarkable degree the
hypothesis that they are due to a non-disjunction
of the sex chromosomes caused by the presence of a
Y chromosome in the females.

The hypothesis is capable of verification and
Bridges has made a study of the chromosomes of the
non-disjunctional females. He finds that such


2


4 X
X


Fic. 49.—Group of chromosomes of an XXY female of.a non-disjunc-
tional “‘line.”’


females contain an extra chromosome whose size,
shape and position show it to be a supernumerary
Y-chromosome. The normal group of chromosomes
of the female of Drosophila ampelophila is shown
in Fig. 12, and a group from a non-disjunction
female in Fig. 49. They differ by one chromosome,
namely, the extra Y.

One additional fact must be mentioned. If an
XXY female should be fertilized by an XYY male


200 DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES


some females would be produced that are XXYY,
owing to the union of an XY egg with an XY sperm
or an XX egg with a YY sperm. One such female
was found—she had two X and two Y chromosomes.

Here then is a case that seemed at first to be in
direct contradiction to the scheme of sex linked
inheritance based on the chromosome hypothesis,
which proved, however, on further examination to
give a brilliant confirmation of that theory; for not
only can the hereditary results be accounted for, but
the theory on which they were based was directly
confirmed by a microscopical study of the chromo-
somes themselves.

Cases indicating non-disjunction have also been
obtained in Abraxas, by Doncaster. _As stated in
the chapter on Sex Inheritance, he has found a strain
in which the males have 56 chromosomes—the
normal number, but the females have only 55 instead
of 56 chromosomes. It seems reasonable, then, to
suppose that such females arose by the passing of the
two sex chromosomes, ZZ, to one pole (spermatocyte)
leaving none at the other pole of the cell. The sperm
resulting from the no-Z cell fertilizing a Z egg would
give a ZO individual which would be a female with
55 chromosomes. All the daughters of the ZO
female would be ZO and her sons ZZ individuals:
and the race would continue in this fashion. On
the other hand, if the ZZ sperm produced by non-
disjunction fertilized a W egg, a male WZZ, corre-
sponding to the X XY female of Drosophila, would be
formed. Such a male would give rise to some sperm


DISTRIBUTION OF THE CHROMOSOMES 201


carrying both Z and W, and if such a ZW sperm
fertilized a zero egg of the 55 chromosome female, a
56 chromosome female would be produced. Don-
caster actually found such a female among offspring
from a cross of a female from the 55 chromosome
race with wild type male, and he found also the
genetic exceptions required on the assumption that
this male was a WZZ form.


CHAPTER VIII
MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


The meaning of the term multiple allelomorphs
may be illustrated by the following example:

1. If a white-eyed male of Drosophila is mated to
a red-eyed female, the F, ratio of 3 reds to 1 white is
explained by Mendel’s law, on the basis that the
factor for red is the allelomorph of the factor for
white.

2. If an eosin-eyed male is mated to a red-eyed
female, the F, ratio of 3 reds to 1 eosin is also ex-
plained if eosin and red are allelomorphs.

3. If the same white-eyed male is bred to an eosin-
eyed female, the F, ratio of 3 eosins to 1 white is
again explained by making eosin and white allelo-
morphs.

There are here three factors, any two of which
may meet, and whenever they do, they behave as
allelomorphs. They form a system of triple allelo-
morphs.

On: the chromosome hypothesis the explanation of
this relation is apparent. A mutant factor is located
at a definite point in a particular chromosome; its
normal allelomorph is supposed to occupy a corre-
sponding position (locus) in the homologous chromo-


some. If another mutation occurs at the same place,
202


MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS 203


the new factor must act as an allelomorph to the first
mutant, as well as to the “parent”? normal allelo-
morph.

Since these factors have the same location they
must all give the same linkage values with other fac-
tors. This has been shown to be true. For instance,
the factor for white eye color of Drosophila is very
closely linked to that for yellow body color. The
“distance” between them is 1 unit, which means
that crossing over takes place about once in a
hundred times. Eosin eye color gives the same
crossing over frequency with yellow.

White eye color gives with miniature wings about
33 per cent. crossing over. Eosin gives the same
value with miniature.

White gives 44 per cent. of crossing over with
bar eye. Eosin has the same value. Similar rela-
tions hold for all of the characters of the first group;
they all have the same linkage values for eosin that
they have for white. This example indicates that
the conception of allelomorphs should not be limited
to two different factors that occupy identical loci
in homologous chromosomes, but that there may be
three, as above, or even more different factors that
stand in such a relation to each other. Since they
lie in identical loci they are mutually exclusive, and
therefore no more than two cah occur in the same
animal at the same time. This is both demonstrated
by the facts and postulated by the chromosomal
mechanism.

On a priori grounds also it is reasonable to suppose


204 MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


that a factor could change in more than one way,
and thus give rise to multiple allelomorphs, unless
it is supposed that the only change possible in a factor
is a complete loss of the factor, as postulated in the
presence and absence theory.

There is, however, an alternative theory to that of
multiple allelomorphism. This alternative is com-
plete linkage. The numerical result can be equally
well explained if, instead of occupying identical loci,
the factors are so near together that they never
(or very rarely) cross over. For reasons that will be
given later we are inclined to think that the
explanation of multiple allelomorphism is in most
cases the more probable one, but the arguments in
favor of this view may be deferred until the facts
have been described.

There is a general relation that so far holds for
all cases in which multiple allelomorphs have been
discovered, namely, that the factor-differences pro-
duce similar effects. All of the following examples
illustrate this relation.

In rabbits (Fig. 50) the Himalayan pattern has
been shown to behave as a recessive to self-color and
a dominant to albino. Any two of these three types
of pigment formation and distribution give a 3:1
ratio in F, but no two of them, when crossed, ever
produce the third genetic type. In other words the
factors behave as though allelomorphic, for only two
can be gotten into any one individual. A-similar re-
lation has been described by Baur in the columbine,
where three types of leaves, green, variegated (green


MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS 205


fie. 50.—Himalayan, black and white rabbits. The factor that stands
for each is allelomorphic to the others.


206 MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


and yellow), and yellow form a triple system.
Emerson’s case for pod and leaves in beans—green
pods, green leaves; yellow pods, yellow leaves;
yellow pods, green leaves—also fulfill the conditions
of a triple allelomorph system. Shull has reported a
case in Lychnis which he interprets as due to triple
allelomorphs for sex-determining factors. Two of
them give reversible mutations as have white and
eosin in Drosophila.

Cases in which more than three allelomorphs have
been found may next be considered. The cases seem
to show that here also the same character is affected
by each of the mutant factors that form the multiple
system. In a few instances the characters have been
recognized as due to multiple allelomorphs, but in
most of them no sufficient interpretation has been
offered or else the explanation of complete linkage
has been advanced.

Tanaka has reported a case in the silkworm moth
which seems best interpreted as one of quadruple
allelomorphs. The four larval patterns called striped,
moricaud, normal, and plain (Fig. 51), are the char-
acters involved. Besides showing the ordinary be-
havior of multiple allelomorphs when mated together
these characters show linkage to another pair of
factors (for yellow and white cocoon color). So far
as the data go, the strength of this linkage seems to
be the same in all combinations tested.

In mice it has been shown (Cuénot, Morgan,
Sturtevant, and Little) that yellow, black, gray with
gray belly (wild type), and gray with white belly


MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS 207


(second wild type) are allelomorphs. It will be ob-
served here that the factor in the wild type gray
mouse is responsible for the appearance in each
hair of the three pigments, chocolate, yellow and


d


Fig. 51.—Four allelomorphic characters in the silkworm: a, Chinese
striped yellow; b, Chinese moricaud yellow; c, Japanese normal yellow;
d, Chinese plain white. :


black. Gray is therefore a mosaic effect, for these
colors are stratified in each hair from the base out-


ward in the order above named. The allelomorphic
factor for yellow gives rise te only one of these


208 MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


colors, although the others may to some extent
appear, especially in old mice. The third allelo-
morph produces only black or at least the chocolate
pigment, if present, is obscured by the darker color.
Finally, the fourth allelomorph produces gray on
the back and sides while the belly is pure white
(the under hair is black). This series illustrates
how allelomorphs of the same locus may not only
determine the color, but also act to determine where
a color is to develop. The allelomorphs differ there-
fore in regard to what part of the body they affect,
or the time in ontogeny when they act, as in the
banded hair of the gray mouse.

This case serves, therefore, as an excellent intro-
duction to the cases that Emerson has described in
corn (maize), in which the red color of the grain
(pericarp), cob, silk, and husk furnish a wonderful
series of character combinations that ‘can be ex-
plained on the multiple allelomorph hypothesis.
Emerson adopted the hypothesis of complete linkage,
but the same arguments as used in other cases lead us
to prefer the alternative of multiple allelomorphs. In
some varieties of corn the grain, cob, silk, and husk
are all red; in others all white; in others the grain is
red or variegated, the cob, silk, and husk white; in
others the grain is white or variegated, and the rest
red. Many different combinations are known,-and
so far as tested the combinations that go in through
the two parents come out in F, according to expecta-
tion, 7.e., they give no new gametic recombinations.
If we assume that there is a system of allelomorphs,


MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS 209


such that one affects one combination of parts,
another a different combination, the results find a
simple and consistent explanation. It may seem
strange at first that a factor may make the cob red
and not color the grain or husk, while another
allelomorph may make the grain and husk red but
not affect the cob color, but it is no more strange than
that one factor determines one distribution of the
pigment over the coat and even in each hair of the
gray mouse and another one determines another
distribution. .

Equally striking is the series of forms of the grouse
locust (Paratettix) that Nabours has recently studied.
Nine true breeding forms that are found in nature
were studied. They differ markedly in color pattern
(Fig. 52) but each color pattern behaves as a unit in
heredity. The hybrid is in a sense intermediate, the
color characters of each parent being superimposed.
In fact Nabours finds that simple inspection of the
hybrid suffices to show which forms were its parents.
In the germ cells of the hybrid the two parental color
types segregate as units. The resulting F. types
are in the 1:2:1lratio. It is obvious, since only two
of the color types can exist'in the same individual,
and since they separate in the germ cells, that the
condition of multiple allelomorphism is fulfilled.

All Nabour’s crosses relating to color pattern (with
some possible exceptions) follow the plan just out-
lined. The case at first sight appears unique in that
the color pattern of each type is complex in the sense
that different parts of the body are differently affected


210 MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


and in that in most cases the hybrid shows at the
same time the characters of each parent. Both of
these peculiarities occur in other cases, however,


Fie. 52.—Four types, A, B, C, J, of Paratettix. Below are hybrids
between A and B, B and C, and Band J. (After Nabours.)


as in Emerson’s corn for instance, although nowhere
perhaps so strikingly as in Paratettix.
In any attempt to decide between the two alter-


MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS 211


native views of identical loci and of complete linkage
the method of origin of the mutant allelomorph is a
matter of prime importance. Emerson has described
one type (“variegated’’ corn) in which a mutation
(to red) occurs frequently. This mutation is of
such a sort, as Emerson points out, that, on the
theory of complete linkage, it must involve the muta-
tion of two factors at the same time. On the theory
of multiple allelomorphs only one mutation is
necessary each time the change occurs. Fortunately
we have complete information concerning the origin
of the types of Drosophila that fall into this category.
One of these may now be given in detail before
attempting to decide between the claims of the rival
explanations.

In 1911 a few males with white eyes arose in a
culture of red eyed flies. From them the stock of
white eyed flies was obtained by the usual procedure.
In 1912, in a culture of white eyed flies having also
miniature wings and black body color, a male ap-
peared that had eosin eyes. He also had miniature
wings and black body color, so that there could be no
question of his origin from this particular stock.
The eosin stock is descended from this male.

In 1913, ina cross between vermilion eyed flies and
wild flies several males appeared in F, whose eyes
were quite different from vermilion. Analysis of
~ the case showed that a mutation had taken place in
the stock having vermilion eye color. The new color
proved to be a double recessive, for vermilion and
for a color called cherry. The new mutation had


212 MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


not occurred at the locus of the vermilion factor,
however, but at another locus where there had been a
normal factor. Subsequent work with the cherry
eye color showed that it was allelomorphic to white
and to eosin, the three eye colors and their normal
allelomorph forming a quadruple system.

To the preceding history must be added cases of
the return mutation from eosin to white. Such a
mutation occurred in 1914 in a culture of eosin flies
with miniature wings. The parents had been treated
with alcohol, but there is no evidence to show that
the alcohol had any connection with the event. A
single white eyed male appeared among many
hundred eosin brothers and sisters. The male had
miniature wings. When crossed by ordinary white
it produced white through two generations. There
can be little doubt that it is the same white as
the original white. In a pure bred stock, eosin
tan vermilion, a few males were found which had
a white eye color instead of the cream color of
eosin vermilion. These flies mated to white stock
gave white offspring for two generations. Here the
case was checked by two control characters, for
the new white-eyed males showed tan body color
and were proved to carry vermilion. In these
controlled cases the mutation took place in the
reverse direction from the original one. Three
other cases of eosin returning to white which are
apparently not explainable by contamination are also
recorded.

The appearance of eosin in the white-eyed stock


MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS 213


might be interpreted to mean that a mutation in eye
color had appeared in the white-eyed stock in a
factor located near the factor for white (‘‘completely
linked” with it) and that the effect of this new factor,
combined with that of the factor for white, which
was already there, gave the color that we call eosin.
EKosin from this point of view would be due to two
consecutive mutations of completely linked, neigh-
boring loci. This interpretation of two consecutive
mutations can not be made in the case of cherry,
however, for cherry arose from red by one step, just
as did white; yet cherry, like eosin, when mated to
white, does not give rise to offspring that are red.
It would follow on the complete linkage view that
cherry and white differ from red by the same factor,
but since they are not alike, that one of them must differ
from red by still another factor. Since each arose
from red immediately, it would follow that one of
them must have arisen by a simultaneous mutation
in two factors completely linked and affecting the
same character. All these assumptions must be
made on the theory of complete linkage, but are
avoided on the alternative theory of multiple
allelomorphs.

Exactly the same argument applies to many of the
other multiple allelomorph systems of Drosophila.
The recessive mutants pink and peach-colored eyes
each arose independently from red eyed flies, yet
when crossed do not give red, but a color intermedi-
ate between pink and peach. Secondly, sooty body
color arose in wild stock, although it was found only


214 MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


after the stock had been crossed to ebony, with which
it is allelomorphic. Here too the mutant forms
though both recessive to normal do not give normal
gray color when crossed together, but a color inter-
mediate between sooty and ebony. In both of these
cases the complete linkage view would require that
one of the mutant types had originated by a muta-
tion in two factors at once. In the case of another set


b


B


Fie. 53.—The abdomen of normal a,a, and spot, b,b’, males. The other
allelomorph is yellow (not shown here).


of triple allelomorphs known in Drosophila, namely,
yellow and spot (Fig. 53) and their normal allelo-
morph. The above argument does not apply; for
although spot and yellow are both recessive to gray
and give yellow when crossed to each other, spot
originated in flies already containing the allelomorph
for yellow.
The reasons may now be given that incline us to
think that the theory of identical loci is much more


MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS 215


probable for the cases known than is that of complete
linkage (in the sense defined). No one of the reasons
is in itself conclusive, but taken together they weight
the scales heavily on one side.

1. When two mutants that depend on “multiple
allelomorphs”’ are crossed they give in F, a type that
is like one or the other of the two mutants, or an
intermediate type. This type is scarcely ever like the
original (or wild) type. In this respect they differ
from other recessive mutant types which when
crossed together give the wild type. We understand
why in the latter cases the wild form is recovered.
It is because each mutant type contains besides its
mutant factor the normal (dominant) allelomorph
of the other type. Hence the original type is re-
constituted in the cross, as has been already stated.
But when two mutant allelomorphs occupying the
same locus are brought together neither of them
brings in the normal allelomorph of the other;
hence the wild type is not reconstituted. If the
cases in which these allelomorphic factors arose
independently are not cases of identical loci then the
explanation involves the occurrence of two muta-
tions at the same time, as explained in the case of
cherry. ,

2. It is a characteristic of “multiple allelomorphs”’
that the same character is affected. Nearness of
factors in the chromosome will not explain this fact
unless nearness means the same factorial basis, for
in the other mutants that we have obtained, nearness
of factors is in no way related to the kind of character


216 MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


or part of the body that is affected. It seems there-
fore more probable that this peculiar fact. connected
with multiple allelomorphs means that the same
portion of the chromosome is changed in one or
another direction.

3. Itis true that a very wide range of linkage values
has been obtained, that extends from almost free
segregation to less than 1 per cent. of crossovers.
However, if we should construct a curve showing the
number of cases exhibiting the various possible
linkage values, the number showing complete linkage
or, as we should say, multiple allelomorphism, would
be far in excess of the number of these to be expected
from the general shape of the rest of the curve. This
indicates that multiple allelomorphs are in a class
by themselves, not merely extreme cases of the same
type as an ordinary linkage case.

4. There is an a priori consideration that may not
be out of place in the argument. There is no suffi-
cient reason for supposing that only one sort of
mutation can occur in a given locus in the chromo-
some. If the basis of the chromosome is a chain of
chemically complex substances (e.g., proteins), any
slight addition or loss or even re-arrangement of the
atoms in the molecules of a bead in such a chain
might well produce an effect on the organism, and
perhaps a more marked effect on that particular
character that stands in closest relation to that
chemical body. Since we know that mutations and
even “reverse”? mutations actually occur, it would be
indeed strange if only one kind of change were


MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS 217


possible in a given locus. But if more than one
kind of change did take place in a locus, a series of
multiple allelomorphs would result.

The ability of the theory of multiple allelomorphs
(identical loci) to explain the peculiarities of so
many cases in such widely separated fields proves the
usefulness of the hypothesis. Although the theory
of complete linkage also will cover the numerical
results in these cases (and some of the simpler cases
cited may prove to fall under this head) there is the
very strong first-hand evidence that has just been
given that makes the theory of multiple allelomorphs
more probable than the former theory. It is im-
portant to recognize that there is this strong evidence

In favor of multiple allelomorphs, quite aside from
special cases of complete linkage, for, as will be shown
in the next chapter, there are some far-reaching
consequences of the theory of multiple allelomorphs.

A word may not be out of place here concerning
the relation of the theory of multiple allelomorphs to
the question of the variability of factors. The fact
that more than one change may take place in the
material at a given locus must not be taken to
mean that. the material is undergoing continuous
fluctuation, for such mutations occur rarely and
afterward behave as do other mutations. In only
one well established case, that of variegated corn,
do mutations appear frequently at a given locus.
But even in such a case the change can not properly
be said to be fluctuating, but is of a fixed nature,
and when it has once occurred the new factor


218 MULTIPLE ALLELOMORPHS


is no more subject to mutation than are other factors,
1.e., the factor has lost its unusual instability.

There is no a priori answer possible to the question
as to whether a mutation having occurred, a further
mutation of the mutated factor is more likely to
occur, for it is conceivable that while in one case
the new factor might be unstable, in another case it
might be even more stable than the original one.
In regard to the other question, as to whether a par-
ticular locus is more liable to mutate, the work on
Drosophila shows that certain loci do mutate more
often than do others, and this is shown not only in
the recurrence of the same mutation, but also in the
occurrence of multiple allelomorphs.

At present the series of white allelomorphs is:
white, eosin, cherry, blood, tinged, buff, ecru, ivory,
coral, and apricot. Each of these forms has appeared
by direct mutation from the wild-type. Crossed to
each other, the members of this series give com-
pounds that are intermediate in color between the
two types used as parents. In no case do such
crosses give wild-type progeny, which would be the
result expected if they were closely linked but non-
allelomorphic mutants. The hypothesis of close
linkage would require here the absurd supposition
that each type was produced not simply by one
change but by as many simultaneous changes as
there are mutant types in the series.


CHAPTER IX
MULTIPLE FACTORS


The term ‘multiple factors” has come, in prac-
tice, to be applied usually to cases in which two or
more factor-differences occur, all of which produce
similar effects. The frequency with which such
cases are found is not surprising, since, on the
factorial interpretation of heredity, it is apparent
that many factors must contribute toward the
making of every character. For example, the char-
acter, eye color, can appear only after the complex
series of developmental reactions has taken place,
whereby in turn head, eyes, pigment cells, etc., have
been formed, and so this character must ultimately
depend on all the factors affecting these processes.
There must, besides, be many factors that operate
in a more direct manner in the production of nearly
every character, since on analysis even the simplest
character usually proves to be the resultant of many
components, both physical and chemical. Thus
the color of the eye must depend, among other
things, on the size of the pigment granules, on their
number and on their color, and the color of the
pigment may in turn be dependent on reactions in
which many substances take part. It is therefore


evident that an apparently simple character, like eye
219


220 MULTIPLE FACTORS


color, involving only one organ, is, so far as its mode
of inheritance is concerned, in no wise different in
kind from a complex character like stature which, as
Bateson pointed out in 1902, must depend on all
factors affecting length of head, neck, trunk, or legs.

In the case of eye color in Drosophila, more than
25 factor-differences have arisen by mutation. Most
of these factor-differences are dissimilar in their
effects upon the eye color—thus, one differentiates
a purple eyed fly from the red, another differentiates
vermilion from red, another white from red, and so
on. It so happens, however, that two mutations
occurred, one in the sex-linked group, and one in the
third, each of which changed the red eye to a pink
color. It is to such cases only—where factor-
differences produce the same or very similar effects,
or effects that differ only in degree—that the term
“multiple factors’ has come to be _ specifically
applied. It should be recognized that this restric-
tion of the term is arbitrary, but there is a practical
advantage in grouping these particular cases to-
gether under a common heading, because crosses
involving several factor-differences that are similar
in effect give peculiar ratios and present certain
difficulties to a factorial analysis, not commonly met
with elsewhere.

In the above illustration of the sex-linked and
third chromosome pinks the two factor-differences
were not present in the same cross, and their in-
heritance was worked out separately. They were
shown to be in different loci, not by their behavior


MULTIPLE FACTORS 221


with reference to each other, but by their different
linkage values with other factors.

An example of a cross, involving at the same time
two factor-differences which have similar effects, is
Nilsson-Ehle’s cross of dark brown oats having two
dominant factors for dark glumes with white-glumed
plants having the two recessive allelomorphic factors
for light color. The expected F, ratio is 9 double
dominant dark browns (AB): 3 light browns having
the first recessive and the second dominant (aB): 3
light browns having the first dominant and the
second recessive (Ab): 1 double recessive white (ab).
Since the two factor-differences produce similar
results, however, the light browns, aB and Ab, are
indistinguishable; counting these two classes to-
gether, a9:6:l ratio results. The 9 double dominants
were distinguishable from the 6 single dominants,
the pigment being dark brown in the 9 cases where
both factors for dark glumes were present and both
factors for light glumes absent, but only light brown
in the 6 cases where one light and one dark factor
were present. Similarly the 1 double recessive,
having both light and no dark factors, was much
lighter even than the 6 light browns. This result
may be described by saying that the effects of the
factors for dark and for light were all cumulative
or summative, two darks producing a blacker pig-
ment than one, and two lights a paler color than one.

In many cases, multiple factors do not give results
that may, in the above sense, be called cumulative.
For example, if a white-flowered sweet pea (ab)


222 MULTIPLE FACTORS


having two pairs of recessive factors for white is
crossed with a colored sweet pea (AB), it is found
when the 9AB: 3aB: 3Ab: lab individuals appear in
F, that the aB and Ab plants, having only one
factor for white and one for red, are just as white as
the ab plants. In other words, the ab class can show
no cumulative effect of the two white factors. Since
the three latter classes all look white, they are added
together in the count, and a ratio of 9 reds: 7 whites
results.

It is commonly said that this result is due to the
occurrence of two factors “for red’’ (the dominants,
A and B), neither of which alone is sufficient to
produce any effect (since Ab and aB look no different
from ab), but which, when present together, act as
complements to each other and thus produce the red
color. Such an interpretation fails, however, to take
into consideration the possible effects of the recessive
factors ‘for white” (a and b). It is therefore un-
warranted, unless the “presence and absence”’ view
be accepted, namely, that the dominants are the
only real factors, the recessives being mere absences.
It would likewise be unwarranted, of course, to
ascribe the results purely to the recessive factors, and
so to conclude the similarity of aB and Ab to ab was
due to the fact that a and b were non-cumulative in
their effects. Neither of these methods of describing
such cases is therefore to be regarded as more than a
shorthand statement of the empirical facts.

In the cross of Bursa which follows, Shull, using
the presence and absence scheme, treated the case


MULTIPLE FACTORS 223


as one of two similar dominant factors producing a
non-cumulative result. (Here, then, the 9AB re-
semble the 3aB and 3Ab individuals and a 15:1 ratio
results.) To those who reject the idea that domi-
nance implies presence, recessiveness absence, there
is no great distinction between this case and that of


o'— cD Cd «D ed

: \ ! \ |
cp—| cpd.cp CD. ed
15:4

Ca— Cd. ed
3:1

«D— cD. Cd ©D.eD cDicd
15st 1:0 air

w= cd .Cd ed.cD dived
5s ail gel or


Fig. 54.—Diagram showing the kinds and composition of the F. capsules
of Bursa bursa-pastoris. (After Shull.)


the two whites with a 9:7 ratio. Shull found that
when a plant of Bursa bursa-pastoris with round
capsules is crossed to one with triangular capsules,
the round is recessive to triangular in F;. In F, the
round reappears only once in sixteen times (Fig. 54).
Thus in this cross round may be treated as the result-
ant of the two recessive factors, either of which by


224. MULTIPLE FACTORS


itself does not change the triangular type,-as shown by
the fact that both single recessives are triangular in
type and are identical in appearance with the double
dominant. Only where the two recessives occur in
the same individual does the type change to round.

Six families were bred from the F,, and gave the
following counts:


Triangular Round Ratio

507 30 16.9:1

146 4 36.5:1

48 3 16.1:1

179 9 19.9:1

1743 72 24.2:1

159 7 22.7:1

Totals 2782 125 22.3:1
Expected 2725 182 15.0:1


The actual ratios range from 16:1 to 36.5:1, which
exceed the expected ratio of 15:1. Nevertheless, the
deficiency in the round class is probably due to the
lower viability of the round-capsuled type, for in
later cultures where the conditions were more
favorable the expected 15:1 ratios are more nearly
realized. That 15:1 is the true ratio is shown by
tests that were applied to these F, plants. In Fig.
54, the 16 classes (15:1) of F, individuals are repre-
sented. Within each square is also given the genetic
composition of the class. The letter “c” stands for
one of the recessive factors, and the letter “d” for
the other factor. Both of these recessive factors
acting in conjunction produce theround capsules cedd.
Beneath each figure is given the expected ratio for


MULTIPLE FACTORS 225


the next generation when the plant of that composi-
tion is self-fertilized. It will be observed that the


1:0 ratio is expected 7 times.

3:1 ratio is expected 4 times.
15:1 ratio is expected 4 times.

0:1 ratio is expected 1 time.


This test was applied by Shull to his F, plants of the
triangular type. There were seven families that
gavea 1:Oratio, four that gave approximately a 3:1
ratio, and six that gave a 15:1 ratio. These results
are in fair accord with the expected numbers given
above.

When a further test was carried out by breeding
from the six 15:1 families of the F; group above
(which should be expected to give the same results
as the F, class, because they have the same composi-
tion), the ratios obtained were as follows:


1:0 ratio expected 35; realized 39.
3:1 ratio expected 20; realized 12.
15:1 ratio expected 20; realized 26.


The results agree again fairly well with the expecta-
tion.

A second test is found in self-fertilizing plants from
families that gavea 3:1 ratio. As the diagram shows
these contain only the one (‘‘c’’) or the other (‘‘d’’)
factor, they should give only homogeneous families
and 3:1 families—never 15:1 families. This result
also was obtained.

Nilsson-Ehle found that three recessive factors
must combine to produce an effect which, in the


226 MULTIPLE FACTORS


following case, is the production of a white-seeded
wheat. A cross between white-seeded and red-
seeded wheat gave in F, one white to sixty-three reds,
showing that three independent recessive factors
were involved.

Nilsson-Ehle also found that in oats a type without
ligules reappeared in F, in such a ratio that four
recessive factors must have combined to have pro-
duced the type without ligules. East found certain
kinds of yellow corn that gave in F, fifteen yellows
to one white. We may here also interpret the white
as the double recessive. East has pointed out that
in crosses of certain strains of red corn white appears
in F, in such a way as to suggest that three or possi-
bly four recessive factors combine to produce white.

In other cases of multiple factors, the two factor-
differences differ in the intensity of their effect, and
so in F, the two classes aB and Ab can be distin-
guished from each other, and a 9:3:3:1 ratio there-
fore results. In some of these cases, however, the
factors are in a sense non-cumulative in that one of
the factor-differences produces no effect when a given
allelomorph of the other pair of factors is present.
Thus, in the ratio 9AB:3aB:3Ab:lab if, in the
presence of b, a and A produce no different effect
there would be a ratio of 9:3:4. This is true ina
cross of a black mouse (AB) with a white mouse
carrying both the recessive factor (b) for producing
an absolutely white color and also the recessive
(a) which merely “dilutes” the black to blue. The
“diluter”’ a of course can not have any visible effect


MULTIPLE FACTORS 227


in a mouse already carrying b and therefore white.
There are also reverse cases where, in the presence of
B, a and A produce no different effect and thus a
ratio of 12AB + aB:3Ab:1ab is obtained.
Departures from the 9 :3:3:1 ratio different from
those given above result if one factor for a character
is dominant and another recessive. For example,
there is a white race of fowls that is dominant and
another white race that is recessive. There are two
cocoon colors in silkworm moths that have this same
relation. A cross of a dominant white to a recessive
white gives a ratio of 13:3. Here, instead of the
recessive classes resembling each other, so that a
9:6:1 or 9:7 ratio is produced, both the 9AB and 3Ab,
since they contain the dominant white (A), re-
semble the one ab containing the recessive white
(b), and only the 8aB appear colored. In this
case the effect of the white does not happen to be
cumulative, but there is no reason why factors which
differ as to dominance should not have a cumulative
action; if they did, a 3:10:3 ratio would result.
Cases belonging to any of the types above show
ratios further modified if dominance is incomplete,
for then the heterozygous classes are intermediate in
character between the others. Consequently, in
these cases, the different classes are usually not
as easy to distinguish from one another as if domi-
nance were complete, for the character differences now
separating the classes are smaller. In such cases,
especially if the character is appreciably influenced
by environmental conditions, the individuals in any


228 MULTIPLE FACTORS


one class may vary so much from each other as to
overstep the small differences separating the classes.
An accurate separation of the individuals into differ-
ent classes and a count of the number in each class is
then impossible, and .it becomes so difficult to de-
termine the number of factors involved and the
effect of each factor (or, rather, factor-difference)
that such cases have at times been used in attempts
to disprove the factorial hypothesis. The problem is
likewise more difficult if more than two factor-
differences occur. This is true especially in those
cases where the effects of the different factors are
cumulative, for then classes are produced showing
characters intermediate in various degrees between
the characters of the most extreme classes, just as in
cases of incomplete dominance. It will be instructive
to consider several instances of crosses of the above
types, since, although definite ratios can not be
obtained, there are various characteristic effects
produced which show that multiple factors are re-
‘sponsible for the peculiarities of the results.

The inheritance of black color in Drosophila has
already been described. Black is recessive to the
normal (‘“gray”’) color, but the heterozygous forms
are a little darker than the pure grays. Ebony is
another body color, similar in appearance to black,
but somewhat darker. It is similarly recessive to
gray, but the factor responsible for it is located in a
different chromosome (III) from that which carries
the factor for black (II). When black and ebony
are mated together we should expect gray flies in F,.


MULTIPLE FACTORS 229


Such flies were actually obtained, although they were
rather dark in color, since both black and ebony
produce some effects on flies heterozygous for them.
In F, the expectation is 9 gray, 3 black, 3 ebony,
and 1 black ebony (double recessive). When F,
was actually obtained it was found to be impossible
to make an accurate separation of the four classes.
There was a practically complete series ranging from
the normal gray to individuals darker than either
black or ebony. The gradation is obviously due
chiefly to the fact that dominance is not complete.
There are nine different classes expected, instead of
four, if heterozygous forms be counted. These nine
classes form groups, each with its own mode, the
outlying members of each group overlapping neigh-
boring groups. To add to the difficulty, the colors
change considerably with the age of the fly. There
are at least seven other mutant factors known in
Drosophila that make the flies darker. It will
readily be seen that, if one had a population contain-
ing a mixture of all these characters, analysis would be
well-nigh impossible.

Before making the above cross the inheritance of
black and of ebony had been studied separately, and
no difficulty in classification is encountered unless
they are used in the same cross. This information
made it possible for us to interpret the black ebony
cross. In the experiments now to be described, we
are dealing with factors which had not first been
studied separately, so that the interpretation is not so
obvious as in the preceding case.


230 MULTIPLE FACTORS


Two varieties of tobacco, Nicotiana alata grandi-
flora and N. forgetiana, were crossed by East. They
differ mainly in the size and color of the flower. The
corolla is three times as long in one as in the other
variety, aS seen in Fig. 55. In the table, page
185, the lengths of the corolla in the two varieties,


_ Fie. 55.—At the left a flower of Nicotiana alata grandiflora; at the
ee a flower of N. forgetiana; in the middle the F; hybrid. (After
ast.)


in the F,, and in the F, plants are given. The table
shows the small variability of the parents. The F,
generation is intermediate in length and also shows
little variability, while the F, generation gives no
definite ratios but exhibits great variability (Fig. 56),
and overlaps the two grandparental types, although
only a few flowers in F, are identical in size with those
of each of the two grandparental types. These
results are those expected if the two parent varieties


MULTIPLE FACTORS 231


differ in several factors that affect their size. If the
parent strains were pure the F, hybrids would all be
alike, or rather would show little if any more varia-
bility than either parent stock, because all these F,
plants receive the same contributions from the


Fie. 56.—At left, a flower of Nicotiana alata grandiflora; at right N.
forgetiana; between them are four F, flowers, showing the result of
re both in the length and the spread of the corolla. (After
parents. But when in the gametogenesis of the F,
plants these factors segregate, many new combina-
tions will be formed, and among them will be a few
combinations like those in the original varieties;
hence we expect in the F, a wider variability, with a
return to the grandparental types in a certain per-
centage of the plants. East suggests that four
pairs of factors may cover the results in this instance.


MULTIPLE FACTORS


232


i
Tt is |2 F |S |G |LTGTETISTISTISTIGTIZTOZOZI zl] >| Ft) so) tT] es | @ T Pog ‘ean jo
T T iS TL le iL |T [€ |S |S T |L it a T I : Lr & qysu0eT
T |€ |F |8 {OTIOT/PESESEZFSTlElpF jo | € ; | Tm 4s jo
ZS \€ |L OTS [8 iS | yjaueT
| ; | TO yay08
i as a als a 8 | |9 |¢ lal % | jo Se ee et a cme “req


TIGMOQOVIA *(O'd) SSoMoMOVG THL ANV (hq)
NOILVUINGAD LSuly FHL dO CNV SINGDNEAASVE]] OML GAL JO ALITIGVIUVA SAILVIAY
HHL MOHY OL ‘SHLONGT VNIQ) GNV SHLONGT TIONG No aasvg SINGUVG OL NOWVIAY NI NOLLVOIMISSVT()


Z |9 |SLIOSIF9ISOTIZOTISELISST9ET/62/22.9 9—T1(1ZE X FTE) 2
0% |8¢ joe |¢ (ize X PIE)
6 |ZE|9S/OS/6TIT 1ZgE “Is ByBTe “N


Beret 6 Fle ‘euerasioy “No


06|S8\O8|GZ|0L/S9|09 |SG \O¢ \SF OF SE oslee 0G


uolyeusIsoq


SIOJOUIN[IUL UT S19}U99 SSBIO)


ISVQ ‘VUOMIGNVAD VLIVIV "N
GNV VNVILEOU0, VNVLLOOIN NETMLEG SSOUD V NI VTIONOH JO HLONGT YO SNOILOATUISIC] AONTOOAAT


MULTIPLE FACTORS 233


A race of pigeons called fantails differs from other
pigeons, and from birds in general, by the large num-
ber of feathers in the tail. The ordinary pigeons have


nd
Le


ey


Back cross


I
ar


Fz


5 ee ee
0
er

0 ed

8 - ce


I
i
nb ry


» a a a |


Fig. 57.—lllustrating the results of a cross between pigeons with 12
tail feathers and a raee of fantail pigeons with from 28 to 38 tail feathers.
The number of feathers in Pi, Fi, F2, and the offspring of the backcross
(F, by fan tail) is given. In each case the numbers on the base line stand
for tail feathers. The vertical rows are the classes.


twelve tail feathers; the fantails used in the cross
have from 28 to 38 tail feathers. The F, hybrids


(41 birds) have from 12 to 20 tail feathers; the F,
have 12 to. 25 in a count of 67 birds. When the Fi


234 MULTIPLE FACTORS


birds are backcrossed (Fig. 57) to the fantail the
number of feathers varies from 19 to 31. On the
hypothesis that the race of fantails has been built
up by the accumulation of several factors these results
can be understood.

MacDowell has compared the length of skull and
of.one of the bones in the leg (ulna) of hybrids be-
tween domesticated races of rabbits in the F,
generation and in the backcross. As shown in the
table, page 185, the variability of the backcross is in
both characters greater than that of F,. Similar
though less convincing evidence was obtained for
body weight also.

The inheritance of ear length in rabbits has been
studied by Castle in a cross between lop-eared and
short-eared races (Fig. 58). He shows that the F,
generation has ears of intermediate length and that
the blend is ‘‘permanent,”’ 7.e., that “no reappearance
of the grandparental ear length occurs in generation
F., nor are the individuals of the second generation,
as a rule, more variable than those of the first
generation of cross breeds.’”’ In the light of Mac-
Dowell’s results for other quantitative characters in
rabbits it seems more probable that the number of
factors involved is greater for ear length than in the
other cases, hence more data will be necessary before
we can be certain that no reappearance of the
grandparental types will be found in F,. If four
independent factors were involved either grand-
parental type would be expected to reappear only
once in 256 times, with six factors only once in 4096


MULTIPLE FACTORS 235


times, ete. It would require a large number of off-
spring to prove the multiple factor hypothesis if the
reappearance of the grandparental types be de-
manded for such a proof.


Fic. 58.—Short-eared by lop-eared rabbit. F ,son of last; F2, daughter
of F, by his sister. (After Castle.)

Several excellent cases of multiple factors have been

worked out with Indian corn. Height of plant

(as a concomitant of its vigor), length of ear, and


236 MULTIPLE FACTORS


Longlh’ 7 [ee es ae
No Yor / PEMA MEN 7 4


Fre. 59.—Top line; at left, Tom Thumb pop corn; at right, black
Mexican sweet corn. Middle row; F, from crossing the above races.
Lower line F, of same cross. (After East.)


MULTIPLE FACTORS 237


productivity depend on multiple factors. For ex-
ample, East crossed the strain Tom Thumb (having
short ears) to black Mexican sweet (having long
ears). The relative length of ear in these two races
is shown in the upper line of Fig. 59, to the left and
to the right. A sample of the Fi ears is shown in
Fig. 59, the middle of the figure, while the variability
of the F, ears is shown in the lowest line. It is
evident not only that the original types reappear,
but that there are all intermediate lengths of ear
in F;.

These are only a few typical illustrations, se-
lected from among many similar cases in which a
small variability in F,; and a larger, continuous
variability in F, have been described. It should,
however, be noted that these criteria taken by them-
selves do not constitute decisive proof of the ex-
istence of multiple factors in any particular cross.
For even if only a single factor-difference is present,
the disturbing action of fluctuation in the somatic
manifestation of the factors may produce effects
superficially very similar to those described above,
provided the fluctuation is great enough to make
the different types overlap in appearance. This is
true especially in cases in which the dominance is
incomplete. A good example of this kind is Morgan
and Bridges’ cross of flies with and without a trident
pattern on the thorax (see Fig. 59A, I to X).
When the flies of the two parent races were classified
according to the different grades of intensity of
the marking (Fig. 59A), 1,614 of the lighter, or


238 MULTIPLE FACTORS


“without,” race gave curve a in Fig. 59B, and
2,538 of the “with” race gave curve b; it will be
seen that these curves overlap. The 2,587 F, gave
curve c, which shows the effect of incomplete
dominance, together with a degree of dispersion
about equal to that of the parental “with” race.
The 3,100 F, gave curve d, which at first sight
might be taken to indicate factor variability or the
effects of recombination of numerous factors.


Fig. 59A.—Grades I to X, showing “without” to “with” patterns
on thorax of Drosophila.


Curve e, however, shows the resultant which would
be obtained by a combination of curves a, ¢, and b
in a 1:2:1 proportion; the close similarity of this
to the observed F, curve shows that the latter
really represents a monohybrid Mendelian result.
Had more factors been concerned, the deviation of
the observed curve from the calculated would have
been of a different type from that which occurred—
fewer flies resembling the grandparents would have
appeared rather than more, at least in the case of


MULTIPLE FACTORS 239


one of the two grandparental types. As to the
exact way in which the curve of the F, individuals
in a case of multiple factors will differ from that in a
monohybrid cross like the above, no definite rule
can be formulated; the result will vary according
to the number and mode of interaction of the
multiple factors, but in any event the presence of
the multiple factors may be detected by comparing


Fer -
cent


ip
10 fi \ S =
ME [| SX Ks


y) y. ~.
/ ‘. ~s,
if “Ss ts
‘ ~h. was


Grad
Cea I 0 Ww y uw WwW Ww 16 x


Fig. 59B.—Curves representing the distribution of grades of the
trident pattern ‘‘with’’ in various stocks and crosses.
the observed curve with the one calculated from the
parental and F, curves by the method used in the
above experiment. The two curves should never
be the same, and the multiple factor curve will
almost always show a smoother, more even distri-
bution, with less tendency to form a mode at each
grandparental value.

In distinction to cases of single factor-differences,
it should also be noted that in cases of multiple


240 MULTIPLE FACTORS


factors the P, grades do not necessarily stand as
the extreme limits of the values obtained in F,
and F,. It will often happen that the F,, and,
more especially, some of the F, combinations, will
contain more factors (or rather, a more effective
combination of factors) for a given character than
either of the P, individuals possessed; for, each of
the Pi forms may have contained certain factors
for the given character, but different factors in the
two cases. This was true in the cross of black with
ebony flies reported on page 228. It should com-
monly be the result where each parental race has
separately been subjected to a process of selection
in the same direction for the character under con-
sideration, for in each line, factors favoring this
character, will be conserved, as they appear, but
in the two separate lines different sets of factors
for producing such a result will tend to accumulate.
In the case of “‘vigor,” just such selective processes
usually occur in nature, and as a result either
parental limit is often transgressed in F, or F;.
On the other hand, where the two races have been
selected in opposite directions, or where only one
of them has been subjected to selection—as in the
case of the fan-tail pigeons, lop-eared rabbits, and
other fancy breeds—practically all of the differential
factors tending to produce the given character are
commonly present in only one of the parental races,
and so only the extremes of the F, forms will reach
either of the parental grades. In either type of
case, however, the two characteristic signs of mul-


MULTIPLE FACTORS 241


tiple cumulative factors are conspicuously present —
namely, the great variability of the F, (or the back-
cross), aS compared with either of the Pi or the F,
groups, and the greater smoothness of its curve,
as compared with that which would result by
combining the P; and F, curves in 1:2:1 (or
1:1) ratio.

In certain cases showing characteristics of multi-
ple factor inheritance, the interpretation has not
at first been so clear as in the cases given above,
owing to the existence of certain peculiar features
which seemed rather to call for the assumption
of genetic .phenomena of totally different and
hitherto undemonstrated sort, such as a continual
fluctuation within the factor itself.

A case in point is that of truncate wing in Dro-
sophila (Fig. 18, 6), investigated by E. Altenburg
and H. J. Muller, which was the first of these
refractory cases to be solved. The race of truncate
flies is never uniform: it usually throws flies with
wings of various grades ranging all the way from
short truncate to normal. It was attempted,
through over 100 generations of selection, to obtain
a pure stock, but although the proportion of trun-
cates was raised to about 90 per cent., the normals
were never eliminated completely, and the grade of
truncation was still subject to much fluctuation.
Crosses of truncates to wild type flies produce
varying results: in F, 0 to 8 per cent. show some
truncation; in F, the proportion with any trace of
truncation is highly inconstant, being sometimes as


242 MULTIPLE FACTORS


low as 0 and rarely higher than 20 per cent.; in
later generations, however, the proportion and the
intensity of the extracted truncates may again be
raised, by selection, to about 90 per cent. That the
variation in truncation within the original highly
selected stock, as well as within the extracted stock,
is not merely a somatic effect due to uncontrollable
environmental influences was shown by the fact
that the variations in both lines were to a large
extent heritable: selection of normals resulted in a
much lower percentage of truncate offspring than
were thrown by their truncate brothers and sisters,
and selection of intermediates gave, on the average,
intermediate results. The fact that such genetic
differences are still constantly occurring in the
original stock, in spite of the long-continued se-
lection, seemed to indicate that here at least there
was a case of instability of factors or contamination
of allelomorphs.

An analysis of the factorial composition of the
truncate flies was then made by crossing them to
flies containing in each of their chromosomes other
mutant factors whose hereditary behavior was
known. In the second generation of the cross
(back-cross) these other factors served as identifying
marks which disclosed just which chromosomes of
the P, truncate fly each F, individual had or had
not received. By observing the amount of trun-
cation which accompanied each ascertained combi-
nation of chromosomes it could thus be determined
just what role each of the chromosomes played in


MULTIPLE FACTORS 243


the production of the truncate character. By this
means it was shown that in the production of this
character there are involved at least three factors
(T1, T:, T3), one in the first, one in the second, and
one or more in the third chromosome. The character
cannot make its appearance without the factor in
the second chromosome (T:), but it may appear
without either of the other factors, which are,
therefore, in the nature of intensifiers. Moreover,
truncate is influenced by still other factors. For
instance, bar, a first chromosome factor, acts in
much the same way as the ordinary first chro-
mosome intensifier. The female factors intensify
truncate, 7.e., truncate appears more readily in the
females than in the males and may, therefore, be
called partially ‘‘sex-limited.” Especially note-
worthy is the fact that while it rarely appears in
F, when crossed to the normal gray it is generally
dominant in an individual either homozygous or
heterozygous for black.

This latter circumstance made it possible to study
truncate as a dominant in heterozygous condition.
As will appear later, this simplified the problem
greatly, especially in determining whether or not
(1) the factors for truncate are stable; (2) whether
they are contaminated by their allelomorphs;
(3) whether any factors are concerned other than
those in the three groups mentioned.

In order to attack these questions recourse was
had to the information that had been gained con-
cerning the linkage of truncate with other factors


244 MULTIPLE FACTORS


whose modes of transmission were known; the latter
factors were again used as “identifying marks”’ in
following the distribution of the factors for truncate.
A truncate male containing factors for truncate in
both its second and third chromosomes was mated.
to a normal winged female containing in its second
chromosomes the factor for black, and in its third
chromosomes the factor for pink. The male offspring
of this mating will, therefore, have the formula
T. gray T, red
long black long pink.
males derive all sex-linked factors from their mother.
An F, male was then backcrossed to black pink
females. Since there is no crossing over in the male,
all the offspring of this backcross containing the
“identifying characters” gray and red will be
genetically identical, and like their father—unless
the factors for truncate are unstable, or contaminated
by their normal allelomorphs. The gray reds were
not all alike in appearance, however, some being
truncate, though most were long. Males of these
two classes were then tested by mating them in-
dividually, again to black pink females. From the
result of these matings it was clearly shown that the
longs and the truncates produced almost exactly
the same proportion of truncate, proving that they
had been alike genetically.

It will be observed that these test matings of
heterozygous gray red males to black pink females
were of exactly the same type as the cross of Fi;
consequently gray red males having the same


They will not contain T,, as


MULTIPLE FACTORS 245


combination of chromosomes as before will once
more have been produced (among other offspring);
such males may therefore be obtained and back-
crossed generation after generation, to black pink
females. In this way, although the flies are con-
tinually crossed and kept heterozygous, a “pure
line’? may be maintained in the sense that the same
chromosome combination is continually transmitted
without recombination. Two such heterozygous
lines were thus propagated for twelve generations,
and selected for truncate and for normal wing
respectively. At the end of that time they were
found still to be unchanged and like each other in
respect to the amount of their truncation. This
proved that there could not have been any con-
tamination or miscibility of the truncate factors
with their allelomorphs, or any instability of these
factors; the genetic variability of the original
truncate stock must therefore have been due en-
tirely to the recombination of multiple factors,
which was prevented in the present selection experi-
ment. It also follows that all of these differential
factors for truncate must be located in the chro-
mosomes (in the three large chromosomes), since
only the recombination of such factors had been
prevented by the experimental technique.

It remained to be determined why, in the original
truncate stock, recombinativn of factors could still
be going on, since the prolonged selection should
in any ordinary case have long since resulted in a
homozygous condition. Special tests were there-


246 MULTIPLE FACTORS


fore made in which the distribution of the various
component factors of truncate received from the
two parents could be separately followed among
their offspring, by reason of the association of the
homologous truncate factors in the different parents
with different linked factors for other characters.
It was found by this means that none of the off-
spring may ever receive the chief factor, T:, from
both parents, even though the latter both carry it;
Tz, in other words, acts as a lethal when homozygous
and so a pure stock cannot be obtained. T;, it was
found, may exist homozygously, but in that case
causes a marked reduction of fertility. This would
tend to keep the selected stock impure for T; as
well as for T,. Such a stock should throw a much
larger percent of normals than was actually ob-
tained in the selected race; the relative deficiency
of normals in the latter was evidently due to the
presence of another lethal factor in the chromosome
containing the normal allelomorph of truncate (see
case of beaded below).

The case of truncate is of interest not only be-


cause the results indicate that other non-conform- ~


able instances might be similarly explained, but also
because the new methods—involving linked ‘‘iden-
tifying factors’—which have been developed in
attacking it are singularly adapted to the solution
of such problems. The use of these methods has
been made possible by the information at hand as
to the arrangement of the factors in groups and as
to the frequencies of crossing over. Without such


MULTIPLE FACTORS 247


knowledge the case would have been practically
insoluble.

Similar methods of attack have also been used
by Dexter, and by Muller, in their experiments
with the ‘‘beaded” wing of Drosophila (Fig. 60).


Fig. 60.—Normal wing (to left) and beaded wing (to right) of
Drosophila. ;


The beaded character likewise is a variable one,
some of the beaded individuals being very nearly
normal in appearance. The degree of abnormality
and the proportion of abnormal offspring are both
capable of being altered, within limits, by selection
or by crossing to normal stock.

Dexter crossed beaded flies to flies carrying


248 MULTIPLE FACTORS


mutant factors in the different chromosomes and
studied the linkage of the beaded character with
these other characters. He found that beadedness
showed linkage to third-chromosome characters,
indicating that there is at least one factor for the
character located in that chromosome. He also
found that sometimes beadedness showed linkage
to second-chromosome characters, while at other
times it failed to do so. This indicated that the
beaded stock was impure for a factor located in the
second chromosome, which when present increases
the amount of beading. Selection would be effective
either by eliminating or by preserving this factor.

Later, Muller found, by means of linkage experi-
ments, that the chief factor for beaded, lying in the
third chromosome, is lethal when homozygous, but
that the highly selected heterozygous stock also
carries another lethal, lying in the homologous
third chromosome in almost complete linkage with
the normal allelomorph of beaded. Neither beaded
nor its normal allelomorph, therefore, can exist in
homozygous condition, and the stock breeds true
to its heterozygous type. Since this ‘balanced
lethal”’ stock had at the same time become homo-
zygous for the intensifier in the second chromosome,
it resulted that, although heterozygous for the
chief factor, it had become “pure” for the character
beaded. Further results with this stock will be
considered in the last chapter.

An extensive selection experiment was carried
out by Sturtevant on the character ‘dichaete,”’


MULTIPLE FACTORS 249


of Drosophila, which involves a reduction in the
number of dorso-central and scutellar bristles.
Pure dichaete stock cannot be maintained, since
dichaete, like the chief factors in both the preceding
cases, is lethal when homozygous, but the heter-
ozygous dichaetes show the wing and _ bristle
characters. Several different lines were maintained,
some being selected in a plus direction, for a larger
number of bristles, others in a minus direction.
Quantitative studies were made of the bristle
number of the dichaetes in each generation, and
mean, standard deviation, and parent-offspring corre-
lation were determined. Selection was apparently
effective in changing the lines, and reversed selection
seemed effective in certain instances. Whatever
the source of the result may have been, there could
be no doubt that the two sets of lines—plus and
minus—showed significant differences from each
other after the more than eleven generations of.
selection. Crosses made between these lines and
races with known mutant factors in the second
and third chromosomes proved that at least one
pair of modifying factors for bristle number in each
of these chromosomes was involved in causing the
difference between the plus and the minus lines.
The plus modifier in each chromosome was dominant
to its minus allelomorph, when in a fly having the
chief factor for dichaete. In flies without dichaete
the modifiers had much less, if any, effect.

When a plus dichaete race was crossed to a
minus, the F, resembled the plus parent more nearly,


250 MULTIPLE FACTORS


and there was little increased variability, but in
F, the variability was increased greatly: the ex-
treme grades of the selected stocks again appeared,
together with all intermediate values. The F, curve
was not, however, one that could be reconstructed
by simply compounding the P, and F, curves in
1:2:1 ratio as in Morgan and Bridges’ cross of
thorax pattern, for the proportion of intermediates
was much greater than in a distribution so calcu-


Fig. 61.—Series of arbitrary grades of hooded rats used in classifying
results of selection experiment. Above the figures the numbers assigned
to the grades are given (see text). (After Castle and Phillips.)


lated; this again showed that more than one pair of
modifying factors was involved.

One of the most exhaustively studied cases of the
effect of selection on a mixed population is that
carried out on hooded rats by Castle and his co-
workers, particularly Phillips. The pattern of
hooded rats is shown in Fig. 61. The dark pigment
covers the head and extends as a stripe down the
back. The extent of the hood and the breadth of
the dorsal band are so variable that in one direction,


MULTIPLE FACTORS 251


called plus, the rat is all black, except for a white
stripe on the belly, and in the other direction,
minus, the only black present is on the head.

Two selections were carried out: one in the plus
direction (toward the darker type), the other in the
minus direction (toward the lighter type). In the
case of both lines steady progress in the direction
of selection took place during the thirteen gener-
ations of the main experiment.

This progress in the direction of selection would
be expected if the race were not at the start pure
for factors that determine the amount of pigmen-
tation, since in all such cases the process of selection
in a heterogeneous population sorts out some of the
factors from others. Selection in most cases creates
nothing that is not already present, but separates
existing factors.

There are several ways in which the composition
of the rats after their selection can be tested, and
some of these tests Castle and Phillips have made.
When light-colored rats from the minus series were
bred to wild or to Irish rats that had a uniformly
(or nearly uniformly) dark coat, all the offspring
had practically completely colored coats. When
these were inbred they gave 3 uniform to 1 hooded
coat. This result shows that there is one chief
factor (which is recessive) for hooded coat. How-
ever, the F, hooded rats differed more among
themselves than did those from the grandparental
strain of hooded rats, which shows that other
factors were involved as well, that modified the


252 MULTIPLE FACTORS


extent of pigmentation of the hooded coat, but had
little effect on the uniform coat. The range of
variation was extended in the direction of the
darker coat, showing that modifying factors caus-
ing a darker coat had been introduced from the
wild strain; and such would be the expectation if
selection had eliminated from the domesticated
strain some of the factors making for the darker
coat that had been present in the original impure
population. Conversely the darker hooded rats,
plus series, were bred to wild gray rats: the F,
were uniform; these inbred gave 3 uniform to 1
hooded in F,. The range of variation of the latter
was again greater than that present in the dark
hooded rats which had not been outcrossed, but
now the range extended rather in the minus direc-
tion, z.e., the F, hooded rats were on the whole
lighter than their dark hooded grandparents. The
result is what the multiple factor hypothesis calls
for, if the wild or Irish rats contain factors that
influence the condition of the color pattern. Plus
selection had weeded out some of the ‘‘minus”
factors, but crossing with a race in which no se-
lection had been practised brought them back.
When the selected plus and minus races were
crossed to each other the variability was somewhat
increased in F,;, and was further increased in F,.
The extreme conditions of the grandparents rarely
appear in this generation. Again the results are
those the theory calls for.

The test of reversing the direction of selection


MULTIPLE FACTORS 253


was tried. The P, of the reversed minus line be-
longed to the 7 (and ‘‘71”’) generation of the minus
selection series. This generation had shown an
average grade of —1.56, which represented a re-
gression of 0.30 from those extreme individuals
(—1.86) of generation 6 from which they had arisen.
The range of generation 7 was from 0 to —2.50.
Some of the low-grade offspring ranging from
—0.37 to —0.87 were chosen for the return selection.
They produced 118 offspring whose average was
—1.28, a regression of 0.68, which is in the opposite
direction from the regression obtained in the
former (minus) selection. For six generations the
reversed selection went on and carried the race back
along its former course, 7.e., toward its original
condition. The fact that selection in the original
direction was still producing some effect when the
reversed selection began, means, on the multiple
factor hypothesis, that the stock was still heter-
ogeneous, in some factors at least, and, therefore,
reversing the process would be expected to give
the results that Castle and Phillips obtained.
These important results of Castle and Phillips
fulfil so entirely the expectation for multiple factors
that they might have been utilized as a good illus-
tration of the effects of selection on a group in which
a particular character owed its modifications to
multiple factors. The results are, however, of addi-
tional historical interest because they were used
for several years as the favorite experimental ‘‘ dem-
onstration” for a very different conception. The


254 MULTIPLE FACTORS


experiments had been begun to test the Darwinian
problem of whether selection of a fluctuating
character in a given direction would tend to further
variation in the same direction, and so enable the
establishment of a genetic type with a new mode,
and a new range of variation. When Castle found
that the selection was in fact successful in these
respects, he interpreted the results to mean that
through selection, or after selection, a ‘unit charac-
ter’ can be changed. He has used at times a word
familiar to readers of Darwin, namely, “‘ potency.”
The potency of a factor as well as of a character is
supposed to be a somewhat variable element, and
it was apparently presumed that this property of
the factor was responsible for the observed fluctu-
ation, rather than any recombination of modifying
factors.

In support of the view that the particular charac-
ter of the hooded rat differs from the wild rat by a
single (fluctuating) factor, rather than by multiple
factors, it was pointed out that the Mendelian
ratio of 3:1 was obtained in the F, generation
when these types were crossed. It should be ob-
served, however, that this ratio only shows that a
recessive factor for hoodedness must be present in
order that the rats may be hooded at all. One-
fourth of the rats will receive this factor and only
these will appear as some grade of hooded. Other
pairs of factors that modify the coat will be dis-
tributed independently of the former factor through-
out the F, individuals, but they may produce


MULTIPLE FACTORS 255


a visible effect only in the presence of this chief
factor for hoodedness. The F, from the crosses to
self-color indicate that such modifiers are really
present in the rats, since the hooded F, are far more
variable than their hooded ancestors. The under-
standing of this point is so important that similar
relations of the same sort may be cited. If a choco-
late mouse (7.e., one that carries the factors for black
and for cinnamon) is mated to a white mouse carry-
ing the factors for gray (instead of those for black
and cinnamon) the F, generation will be gray. In
the F, there are three colored mice to one white
one, but there are several sorts of colored mice.
Color of any kind is dependent on the action of a
factor allelomorphic to white, hence the 3 : 1 ratio,
but this classification ignores the occurrence of
several kinds of colored mice which are due to
differences in other factors determining what kind
of color will develop.

There are several cases in Drosophila that il-
lustrate the same point. Eosin is a light eye color.
Another factor called cream produces no effect on
other eye colors, but makes eosin still lighter. A
male pure for cream and for eosin bred to a red
female gives red eye color in F;. The Fy’s inbred
give three reds to one light eye color, but among
the lights three different but overlapping kinds
may be detected. Here, as in Castle’s case, there
is a chief factor (eosin) for reduced pigmentation,
which must be present if any reduction in the color
occurs at all, and another factor (cream) that


256 MULTIPLE FACTORS


modifies the amount of pigmentation when the
chief factor is present. Similarly the truncate and
the beaded intensifiers produced an effect upon the
wing only if their respective chief factor was present.

When it was recognized that the 3:1 ratio did
not establish the view that only one pair of factors
was being dealt with in the hooded rats, a new
experiment was devised, by Wright, which was
intended to discriminate between the effect of a
single factor-difference, combined with fluctuating
potency, and the effect of multiple factor-differences.
It will be remembered that the plus race—which
had an average grade at the time of +3.75—had
been crossed to normal and then extracted in F,,
when it was found to have a somewhat lighter
color— +3.17—than before. On the other hand
the minus race— —2.54,—when crossed: to normal
and extracted, averaged in F, —0.38. If multiple
factor differences were present, then if either ex-
tracted race were again crossed to normal and
extracted it should be changed still more in the
same direction, for it would come to contain an
assortment of independent modifying factors more
nearly like that in the normal race, even though it
had the original factor for hoodedness. With each
crossing and extraction the resulting hooded in-
dividuals should thus tend to approach more nearly
to this same normal composition as a limit, and
therefore they should also approach each other.
On the other hand, if the differences between the
hooded races lay in the potencies of their. chief


MULTIPLE FACTORS 257


factor, there was no known process whereby a
result of this kind would be expected. Castle found,
on performing the experiment, that when the minus
hooded of first extraction (—0.38) were crossed to
normal, the minus hooded of the second extraction
averaged +1.01, and when these were again crossed,
the minus of third extraction averaged +2.55, and
did not range below +1.00. The plus race, after
the second extraction, was apparently no further
modified than before, being +3.34, there was even
some change in the reverse direction; but this
result seemed due principally to the peculiar fac-
torial composition which one aberrant family hap-
pened to have received; after the third extraction
further change was again noticeable, the average
being +3.04. Moreover, some of the families were
of almost exactly the same grade as some of those
in the third extracted minus series. As a result of
these experiments, Castle has reversed his earlier
conclusion and states that the case is after all one
of multiple modifying factors.

In favor of the view that factors are constant are
the convincing experiments of Johannsen on the size
of the Princess beans. The material is highly favor-
able for work of this kind, not only because exact
measurements may be taken, but because the stocks
reproduce by self-fertilization and were found to be
homozygous. Johannsen’s results (Fig. 62) show
that no matter how many factors influence the size
of the bean, so long as the bean is homozygous,
selection of plus and minus variants produces no


258 MULTIPLE FACTORS


effect on subsequent generations. Exactly the
opposite results are expected when the population
is heteroenegous for multiple factors at the beginning
(see Fig. 62). In the latter case, selection of the
mixed material will lead to the isolation of definite


Fie. 62.—I. Five pure lines of beans (A, B, C, D, EF), and the popula-
tion (A-E) that results when they are mixed. II. The upper figure repre-
sents the original biotype, and the two figures below this, the two new
biotypes that arose from it. (After Johannsen.)


types and even to the produgtion of new types
through recombination. This is the source of most
of the success of the practical breeder.

To what has been said, however, one additional
consideration must be urged. Mutations may occur


MULTIPLE FACTORS 259


at any time and will be quickly observed if they are
in the direction in which a selective process is being
carried out. It may not be easy to recognize the
first appearance of a mutant and, in fact, its pres-
ence may be detected only after the selection has
gone so far that its origin is lost. The breeder may,
if he is not extremely observant, infer that his
selection is producing the desired effect on the
potency of the character, while in reality he is
studying the influence of a new factor on the charac-
ter under selection. This possibility may be il-
lustrated by two cases. In Castle’s experiments
two rats appeared that behaved like a new type.
In fact he gives them the value of mutants. In
Drosophila, Morgan carried out a selection experi-
ment for three years, involving upward of 75 gener-
ations. The character selected was a dark “trident”’
on the thorax (Fig. 63). In a few generations a
minus stock with no trident was established that
bred true. The plus stock went up and down, the
selection being not always thorough. A. stock that
always had the trident present to some degree was
obtained after a time. Later several other mu-
tations appeared, some of which greatly increased
the black on the thorax; some even swamped the
trident, making it a ‘broad band. Three such mu-
tant stocks were yseadily isolated. It might have
been concluded that these mutations had occurred
in the direction of selection, because selection had
changed the potency of the trident factor, were it
not that during these three years over 100 other


260 MULTIPLE FACTORS


mutant characters had appeared in Drosophila,
affecting every part of the body. Obviously when
such changes are taking place everywhere, one
would almost certainly find changes occurring in


e


Fic. 63.—Thorax of mutant stocks of Drosophila ampelophila. a,
race ‘“without’’ trident; b, race “with” trident; c, race called streak;
d, race called trefoil; e, race called band.


the parts that were being carefully scrutinized for
any changes whatever.

Zeleny, in the course of a long series of selections
for narrower and wider bar eye, found such mu-
tations in both the plus and the minus direction.
He determined that they took place in the chief
factor for bar eye itself, thus establishing a series of


MULTIPLE FACTORS 261


allelomorphs; the new types, like the old, were
however highly stable genetically, and not to be
confounded in any sense with “fluctuating factors.”
In addition to variation due to these mutations
in the chief factor, differences in modifying factors
have also been established between bar-eyed lines,
in the experiments of Matoon and Zeleny, of
Zeleny, and of May. In certain of these cases the
stocks were evidently heterozygous for the modifiers
from the beginning, but in other cases mutation
seems to have occurred during the course of the
experiment.


CHAPTER X
THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


In Mendelian heredity the word “factor” is used
for something which segregates in the germ cells,
and which is somehow connected with particular
effects on the organism that contains it. For exam-
ple, if a fly (°) with red eyes is crossed to a fly (¢)
with white eyes, there will be in F, three reds to one
white, and this ratio can be explained by the assump-
tion that in the F, hybrid something for red eyes
has separated from something for white eyes.

We may express these factorial relations in another
way by saying that a germ cell that produces white
eyes differs from a germ cell that produces red eyes
by one factor-difference. We think of this difference
as having arisen through a factor in the red-eyed wild
fly mutating to a factor for white.

Mendelian heredity has taught us that the germ
cells must contain many factors that affect the same
character. Red eye color in Drosophila, for exam-
ple, must be due to a large number of factors, for as
many as 25 mutations for eye color at different loci
have already come to light. Each produced a specific
effect on eye color; it is more than probable that in
the wild fly all or many of the normal allelomorphs at
these loci have something to do with red eye color.

262


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 263


One can therefore easily imagine that when one of
these 25 factors changes, a different end result is
produced, such as pink eyes, or vermilion eyes, or
white eyes or eosin eyes. Each such color may be
the product of 25 factors (probably of many more)
and each set of 25 or more differs from the normal
in a different factor. It is this one different factor
that we regard as the “unit factor” for this particular
effect, but obviously it is only one of the 25 unit
factors that are producing the effect. However'since
it is only this one factor and not all 25 which causes
the difference between this particular eye color and
the normal, we get simple Mendelian segregation in
respect to this difference. In this sense we may say
that a particular factor (p) is the cause of pink, for we
use cause here in the sense in which science always
uses this expression, namely, to mean that a particu-
lar system differs from another system only in one
special factor.

The converse relation is also true, namely, that a
single factor may affect more than one character.
For example, the factor for rudimentary wings in
Drosophila affects not only the wings, but the legs,
the number of eggs laid, the viability, etc. Indeed,
in his definition of mutation, DeVries supposed that a
change in a unit factor involves all parts of the body.
The germ cells may be thought of as a mixture of
many chemical substances, some of them more closely
related to the production of a special character, color,
for example, than are others. If any one of the sub-
stances undergoes a change, however ‘slight, the end


264 THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


product of the activity of the germ cell may be
different. All sorts of characters might be affected
by the change, but certain parts might be more con-
spicuously changed than are others. It is these more
obvious effects that we seize upon and call unit
characters. It is the custom of most writers to speak
of the most affected part as a ‘‘unit character,’’ and
to disregard minor or less obvious changes in other
parts. They frequently speak of a unit character as
the result of a unit factor, forgetting that the unit
character may be only one effect of the factor.

Failure to realize the importance of these two
points, namely, that a single factor may have sev-
eral effects, and that a single character may depend
on many factors, has led to much confusion between
factors and characters, and at times to the abuse of
the term ‘“‘unit character.” It can not, therefore,
be too strongly insisted upon that the real unit in
heredity is the factor, while the character is the prod-
uct of a number of genetic factors and of environ-
mental conditions. The character behaves as a unit
only when the contrasted individuals differ in regard
to a single genetic factor, and only in this case may
it be called a unit character. As soon as the indi-
viduals differ by two or more genetic factors that
affect the same character the latter can be no longer
considered a unit. So much misunderstanding has
arisen among geneticists themselves through the
careless use of the term “unit character” that
the term deserves the disrepute into which it is
falling.


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 265


In the following sections, several of the more im-
portant misconceptions arising from the confusion
between factors and characters will be considered
in turn:

1. There is a curious objection to the factorial
hypothesis that is sometimes brought forward. It
originated apparently as an objection to Weismann’s
idea that a single determinant stands for a single
character. Weismann’s idea of a sorting out of
determinants undoubtedly implies something of this
kind. The objection states that the organism is a
whole—that the whole determines the nature of the
parts. Such a statement, in so far as it has any
meaning at all, rests on a confusion of ideas. That
the different regions of the developing. embryo do
sometimes have an immediate influence on each other
has been abundantly demonstrated, as well as the
fact that in other cases parts have little or no in-
fluence on each other. That substances are pro-
duced in one place whose principal effects are seen
in other places is not likely to be denied. It has
even been insisted in the preceding pages that the
evidence from heredity indicates with great proba-
bility that there are many factors whose combined
effect is necessary for the production of each separate
character, as in the production of eye color, for
example. There is no reason why this interaction
should always take place within the separate cells;
in other words, why the products of factor A in one
cell should not sometimes affect the products of
factor B in another cell. The factorial hypothesis


266 THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


does not assume that any one factor produces a
particular character directly and by itself, but only
that a character in one organism may differ from a
character in another because the sets of factors in the
two organisms have one difference. This point is
not likely to be misunderstood by any one who grasps
the meaning of the factorial hypothesis. The ‘‘or-
ganism-as-a-whole”’ argument, so long as it is not a
vague and mystical sentiment incapable of clear
expression, has no terrors for the factorial hypothesis,
for this hypothesis disclaims any intention of making
one unit character the sole product of one factor of
the germ.

2. No one disputes that characters vary, but it has
become necessary to explain what we mean by this
statement. Many populations have been shown to
be mixtures of different genetic types. This means
that many of the individuals have different germ
plasms. In man, for instance, there are blue-eyed,
brown-eyed, black-eyed and pink-eyed individuals,
and these variations of eye color have been shown
by Hurst, the Davenports, Holmes and others to
depend on different factorial constitutions. It has
been shown in several cases, notably in corn, by
Shull, and by East and Hayes, that populations may
contain differences in many factors that have
similar effects on the same character. In this case
too the different factors that affect a part in the same
way are shown to separate and recombine in succes-
sive generations. The result is variability, but
variability of a sort that is compatible with the


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 267


invariability of the factors involved. When, how-
ever, these factors were sorted out so that strains
became homozygous, some variability probably due
to evironic differences still remained. That is, in
addition to the variation due to recombination it
has been found that even in pure races “unit char-
acters”? vary.. Why, then, it may be asked, do not
the factors that produce them vary also?
Johannsen’s work on material of a kind suitable
to give a definite answer to this question and by
methods that have not been questioned, has brought
out clearly certain facts. only vaguely stated before.
In a population of beans he found that each bean
gave rise by self-fertilization to what he called a pure
line. Each of the original beans proved to be homo-
zygous for all of the factors: involved. This was
probably due to self-fertilization through many genera-
tions, a process that automatically produces homo-
zygous lines. The weights of the descendants of any
given bean gave a curve of frequency which was
different from that of the whole population (Fig. 62).
Within the group derived from one bean, however, it
was found that any bean, whether heavier or lighter
than the others, gave a curve exactly like the curve
of the line from which it came. Evidently then the
size differences within these pure lines are not inherited.
They must be due to the environment of the plant, or
to the position of the bean in the pod, etc.; in other
words to conditions that are extrinsic to the germ
plasm. Here is a demonstration that the factors
do not vary, but give identical results in successive


268 THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


generations. Of course this demonstration could not
have been made with heterozygous individuals.

3. It has also been suggested that one factor may
sometimes contaminate its allelomorph, when the
two meet in the hybrid. There is no a priori reason
why this might not occur so far as we can see. The
question is whether there is any evidence to establish
or even make probable such a view. The great
body of Mendelian evidence points unmistakably
to the conclusion that as a rule contamination does
not occur. It will require equally clear evidence to
show that contamination does sometimes take place.
Until this evidence is forthcoming the facts which
have been said to support the hypothesis of contami-
nation find a more consistent explanation on the
hypothesis of multiple factors.

4. Bateson has recently argued from the visible
differences between characters that a process of
fractionation of factors takes place. The argument
is given in the following quotation:

“Some of my Mendelian colleagues have spoken
of genetic factors as permanent and indestructible.
Relative permanence in a sense they have, for they
commonly come out unchanged after segregation.
But I am satisfied that they may occasionally undergo
a quantitative disintegration, with the consequence
that varieties are produced intermediate between the
integral varieties from which they were derived.
These disintegrated conditions I have spoken of as
subtraction—or reduction—stages. For example,
the Picotee sweet pea, with its purple edges, can surely


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 269


be nothing but a condition produced by the factor
which ordinarily makes the fully purple flower, quanti-
tatively diminished. The pied animal, such as the
Dutch rabbit, must similarly be regarded as the re-
sult of partial defect of the chromogen from which the
pigment is formed, or conceivably of the factor which
effects its oxidation. On such lines I think we may
with great confidence interpret all those intergrading
forms which breed true and are not produced by
factorial interference.

“Tt is to be inferred that these fractional degrada~-
tions are the consequences of irregularities in segrega-
tion. We constantly see irregularities in the ordinary
meristic processes, and in the distribution of somatic
differentiation. We are familiar with half seg-
ments, with imperfect twinning, with leaves partially
petaloid, with petals partially sepaloid. All these
are evidences of departures from the normal regu-
larity in the rhythms of repetition, or in those waves
of differentiation by which the qualities are sorted
out among the parts of the body. Similarly, when
in segregation the qualities are sorted out among the
germ cells in certain critical cell divisions we can not
expect these differentiating divisions to be exempt
from the imperfections and irregularities which are
found in all the grosser divisions that we can observe.”

Bateson has assumed because the character ap-
pears to fractionate that we are to infer that some
particular factor, that stands for it, fractionates too,
but such a conclusion overlooks the fact that a char-
acter is produced by many factors in co-operation,


270 THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


and that, in consequence, many factor differences
may occur which will, in turn, cause the character
differences in question. Secondly, Bateson argues
that we should expect these irregularities to occur in
the segregation of character-factors during germ-cell
formation, because we find irregularities in the seg-
regation of factors during development. Appar-
ently Bateson holds the view that differentiation
of characters is the result of sorting out of factors
in the somatic divisions; in other words, he adopts
Weismann’s theory of embryonic development. Lo-
calization of factors is inferred from localization of
characters. Hence his employment of the idea
chiefly when patterns are involved. The conclusion
to which most modern students of experimental
embryology have arrived, a conclusion based on a
considerable body of evidence, is that differentiation
is not a consequence of sorting out of the hereditary
(genetic) materials. This conclusion is not con-
sidered or else is ignored by Bateson in this argument.

5. The confusion of character with factor is nowhere
more apparent than in the well-known presence and
absence hypothesis, and since this hypothesis has
been so widely employed in Mendelian literature it
calls for somewhat more extended analysis. The
hypothesis was first proposed to explain the inherit-
ance of combs in poultry (Fig. 64). Rose comb by
single comb gives in F, three rose to one single; pea
comb to single gives in F, three pea to one single.
When rose is bred to pea a new type of comb, called
walnut, appears, and in F, there are nine walnut:


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 271


three rose: three pea: one single. Since single comb
was not present in either of the grandparental strains,


Fic. 64.—Combs of fowls. a, Single; b, pea; ¢, rose; d, walnut; e, Breda.


how then can its appearance in this cross be explained?
The difficulty was met as follows: The ratio shows


272 THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


clearly that two pairs of Mendelian factorsare present.
Pea comb was assumed to lack a factor for rose, and
rose was assumed to lack a factor for pea. By re-
combination there should result in F, one individual
in sixteen that was no-rose no-pea. This is the single
comb. A single letter or symbol S was inserted in
all of the formule so that when neither rose nor pea
comb was present something would seem to be left
to represent the single comb.

The verification of the latter point was supposed
to be found in the relation of the single comb to a
combless condition found in the Breda race of fowls,
which, when crossed to single, gave in F, three
singles to one combless. In other words the comb-
less fowl was supposed to represent a race in which the
lowest stage of the series had been reached and the
last factor for comb had been lost. The series just
described was represented on the presence and ab-
sence scheme as follows:


Rose RpS
Pea rPS
Walnut RPS
Single rpS


There is, obviously, no necessity to make these
characters depend for their expression on losses of
something; for the small letters that here stand for
absences might just as well stand for actual factors
different from those represented by the large letters.
The formulz would then of course work out as well
as before. To those accustomed to the presence and


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 273


absence scheme it may, however, be difficult to think
of the small letters as anything but absences. It
may, therefore, be helpful to represent the same
formule: with other letters.

If the original comb was single, which in fact is
the type of comb of the wild bird from which the
domesticated races have come, a dominant muta-
tion from A to A’ gave rise to a rose comb; another
dominant mutation from the wild type that changed
B to B’ gave rise to a pea comb; a third but recessive
mutation that changed C to C’ gave rise to a “comb-
less” comb. The normal allelomorphs would be
represented by the same letters without the primes.
The formule (in simplex) for the combs would then
be as follows:


Wild type (single) A BC


Rose A/BC
Pea AB’C
Combless ABC’


The walnut comb that appears when pea is bred
to rose is, of course, the double dominant form A’B’C.

If it seems desirable to use letters that give a clue
to the name of the factor for which they stand, either
of the next alternatives would cover the case under
discussion. In the second of these the small letters
are not absences, but only the recessive allelomorphs.


Wild type (single) P RC or p’r’C
Rose P RC or p’R’'C
Pea PRC or P’r’C
Combless PRC’ or p’r’c


274 THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


It is a matter of little theoretical importance what
system of symbols is adopted, unless that system
proves to be impracticable, or unless it implies re-
lations that are unnecessary or unjustifiable. (See
Appendix.) ;

We do not wish to appear to base our objection to
the presence and absence hypothesis on the im-
practicability of its nomenclature in a new field,
but rather on the grounds that the conception of
presence and absence assumes that we do know
something about the relation between character
and factor that we can not possibly know. To as-
sume the absence of a factor from the absence of a
character is, in a sense, as naive as it was to assume
that an animal moved toward light because it liked
the light.

It need not be denied that losses of factors may
occur, and it may even be probable that a loss in the
germ plasm might lead to a loss in some part or parts
of the body, but there still remains no justification
for the assumption in any given case that we can
infer from the lack of a character in an animal or
plant a loss of factors. Such an assumption is en-
tirely gratuitous; and gives a totally false impression
concerning the factorial hypothesis of Mendelian
heredity. Moreover, if taken literally it may lead
to unwarranted conclusions in other fields.

It is similarly naive to assume the absence of a
factor from the recessiveness of the character, yet
the literature abounds with instances where the re-
cessiveness of the character is taken as a criterion for


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 275


assuming the absence of the factor, the dominant
character being considered as a ‘‘presence.”” Domi-
nance, however, is often found to be incomplete if
exact quantitative studies are made. In fact, char-
acters are known to show all degrees of dominance
and recessiveness over their alternative allelomorphs.
Which character is to be considered dominant and
which recessive when each allelomorph has an equal
effect, as in the case of the red and the white Mira-
bilis, is entirely a matter of choice. Hence,no matter
whether red or white is presence, the present factor is
not truly dominant. It seems reasonable, then, to
suppose that if presence and absence is true a hybrid
(with one presence) might approach more nearly the
type with two absences than to the type with two
presences. In such a case the present factor would
actually be the recessive. Such a case is in fact
known. In the cross of horned by hornless sheep,
the horned condition dominates in one sex and the
hornless in the other. Here no matter which is
considered as a presence it must be conceded that in
one sex or the other it is recessive. The view that
dominance of a factor proves its presence and
recessiveness its absence should therefore be aban-
doned.

A further argument against the theory of presence
and absence is found in the evidence, already given,
which indicates the possibility of multiple allelo-
morphs. On the presence and absence system, only
two kinds of -allelomorphs, the presence and the
absence, are possible, and no character differences


276 THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


can be due to different kinds of factors, all of them
“presences. ”’

A word here may not be out of place concerning
inhibitors. As pointed out, the adherents of presence
and absence generally interpret the absence of a char-
acter to mean the absence of a factor; they also inter-
pret recessiveness to mean the absence of a factor.
When cases come up in which a character is absent,
as horns in cattle, but the absence of the character
is dominant, an attempt is made to reconcile fact and
theory by ‘assuming that the factor for the absent
character is not really absent, but that an inhibitor
is present whose activity prevents the appearance of
the character.

Those who do not accept the presence and ab-
sence hypothesis need make no such assumption here
of course. To them there is no reason why a factor
for hornless should not dominate a factor for horns.
Moreover, the facts do not even require one to assume
that the hornless race differs from the horned because
of the lack or inhibition of certain reactions, for it is
possible in such cases that the reaction merely takes .
a different course, or may even proceed beyond the
usual point.

These statements are not, however, intended to
mean that factors may not at times act as inhibitors,
but rather that we do not know, and in most cases
can not know, in a single case enough about the
nature of the reaction to demonstrate the existence
of a factorial inhibitor.


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 277


WEISMANN’S PRA&FORMATION HYPOTHESIS AND THE
FactToriaL THEORY


Weismann’s theory of development postulates par-
ticles in the germ plasm that are sorted out in proper
sequence to appropriate parts of the body as the
embryonic cells divide. What determines the order
of the sorting out of the factors was not explained.
Weismann’s speculation differed from other preeform-
ation theories mainly in that he made use of the
chromosomal mechanism not only to carry the here-
ditary materials, but also to bring about the sorting
out of the materials in order to reach their final desti-
nation in the body. His theory as applied to
embryonic development failed, both because the facts
concerning the behavior of the chromosomes during
segmentation of the egg gave no support to his as-
sumption of sorting out of the materials of the chromo-
somes, and also because the data from experimental
embryology and regeneration indicated very clearly
that no such sorting process takes place. On the
other hand, Weismann’s ideas of heredity concern-
ing.the segregation in the reduction divisions of the
-egg and sperm of inherited materials present in the
chromosomes, furnish the basis of our present at-
tempt to explain heredity in terms of the cell.

In common with Weismann’s theory, the factorial
theory of heredity rests on the assumption that the
germ plasm contains a host of elements, that are in-
dependent of each other in the sense that one allelo-
morph may be substituted for another one without


278 THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


alteration of either, and that these allelomorphs will
now perpetuate themselves unchanged although in
company with different factors. Today this as-
sumption is no longer an a priori deduction, but a
conclusion from experimental data.

The second real and important point of agreement
between the factorial theory and Weismann’s theory
is that both maintain that at one period in the history
of the germ cells, factors of diverse origin separate
from each other in an orderly manner, half of them
going to each pole. The precise way in which this
is supposed to take place differs greatly on the
two views, but the essential point is the same. We
owe to Weismann more than to any other biologist
the conception of segregation at the reduction di-
vision of the egg and sperm—a conception of funda-
mental importance in the application of the chromo-
some theory to Mendelian heredity.

The factorial theory as such deals with the be-
havior of its factors in an abstract way, quite apart
from any material basis of which they may happen to
be composed. In this way it may measure their con-
stancy, segregation, linkage, etc. But the biologist
is not likely to stop here, for, to him the problem in-:
volves cells about whose history and processes he has
come to know certain facts. Weismann, following
Roux, was the first to point out that these facts give a
mechanism showing how separation of factors might
take place. The specific application of the behavior
of the chromosomes to heredity, then, is the third
important contribution which modern genetics owes


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 279


to Weismann. Today, however, we have advanced
beyond Weismann in this respect, and may more
specifically interpret our numerical results of inde-
pendent segregation, linkage, and even crossing over
on the basis of a chromosome mechanism. More-
over, the new facts have given us ideas very different
from those of Weismann regarding the arrangement
of the factors in the chromosomes and the way in
which the characters of an individual are determined
by the chromosomal factors.

In the last edition: of his Vortreege ueber Descen-
denztheorie (8d edition, 1913) Weismann modifies
his earlier views in regard to the factorial nature of
the chromosomes so that his conception of the germ
plasm is brought into harmony with the Mendelian
theory of heredity. Formerly he had supposed that
the chromosomes are all alike, or nearly alike, in so
far as each one carries a full assortment of “ids.”
Each id, in itself, represented the full complement of
all the factors that go to make up the organism.
But since the results of Mendelian heredity show that
all sorts of characters, however trivial, may be segre-
gated independently (which would not be the case,
if, as Weismann formerly supposed, all the heredi-
tary characters are carried by each chromosome),
it follows that the chromosomes must be bearers of
part ids (Theil Ids).

Weismann still adheres nevertheless to his mosaic
theory of development, but as before stated the
modern work on development does not support this
interpretation of development. His view assumes


280 THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS


disintegration of the germ plasm when the body cells
are produced in order to account for the localization
of characters; the other view, following the experi-
mental results and microscopical observations, as-
sumes, so far as the chromosomal materials are con-
cerned, that all of the hereditary factors are present
in every cell in the body. This view is essentially
that proposed by DeVries in his book on Intracellular
Pangenesis. The cause of the differentiation of the
cells of the embryo is not explained on the factorial
hypothesis of heredity. On the factorial hypothesis
the factors are conceived as chemical materials in the
egg, which, like all chemical bodies, have definite
composition. The characters of the organism are
far removed, in all likelihood, from these materials.
Between the two lies the whole world of embryonic
development in which many and varied reactions
take place before the end result, the character, emerges.
Obviously, however, if every cell in the body of one
individual has one complex, and every cell in the
body of another individual has another complex that
differs from the former by one difference, we can treat
the two systems as two complexes quite irrespective
of what development does so long as development is
orderly.

It is sometimes said that our theories of heredity
must remain superficial until we know something
of the reactions that transform the egg into the adult.
There can be no question of the paramount impor-
tance of finding out what takes place during develop-
ment. The efforts of all students of experimental


THE FACTORIAL HYPOTHESIS 281


embryology have been directed for several years
toward this goal. It may even be true that this
information, when gained, may help us to a better
understanding of the factorial theory—we can not
tell; for a knowledge of the chemistry of all of the pig-
ments in an animal or plant might still be very far
removed from an understanding of the chemical
constitution of the hereditary factors by whose
activity the pigments are ultimately produced.
However this may be, the far-reaching significance
of Mendel’s principles remains, and gives us a
numerical basis for the study of heredity. Although
Mendel’s law does not explain the phenomena of
development, and does not pretend to explain them,
it stands as a scientific explanation of heredity,
because it fulfils all the requirements of any causal
explanation.


CHAPTER XI
HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


While certain characteristics or processes in the
Protozoa have been shown to be transmitted along
fission lines, and in this sense to be “inherited,”
nevertheless it is a fact that almost nothing has
been found to show that single characters are
segregated in a Mendelian sense, although there are
indications that segregation of some sort takes
place after conjugation. It may therefore appear
questionable to use the word heredity, except in a
very general way, in describing what occurs in the
Protozoa.

Nearly all of the cases studied in protozoa relate
to fission lines, 7.e., to individuals that have been
produced by continued division of parent indi-
viduals, each giving rise to two daughter individuals.
In such asexual reproduction it has been commonly
assumed, on the basis of observation, that both
micronucleus and macronucleus are divided into
identical parts, and that the cytoplasm likewise is
divided into equivalent halves. In regard to the
cytoplasm, the halves are at first generally unlike;
in the more highly specialized forms of infusorians
the ends of the body are differently organized, and
these differences may persist through the division,


but are at once set straight by regeneration of the
282


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 283


missing parts. Should one end happen to have
some local peculiarity or abnormality, this may be
“inherited” through that half, but not by the other
half. The abnormality may be said to be persistent
rather than to be inherited.

Fission of protozoa is generally compared with
cell-division in the soma of higher forms. It is
known that here the two daughter-cells receive the
chromosome complex of the mother cell and usually
like parts of the maternal cytoplasm. When, as
often occurs in early embryonic cells (blastomeres),
the two daughter-cells get very different proportions
of the visible inclusions of the original parent cell
(such as pigment, or yolk) it has been shown by
centrifuging experiments that such inclusions do not
have a differentiating influence on the cells that
contain them. Embryonic differentiation might
however be influenced by other materials laid down
regionally in the egg and not displaced by centrifug-
ing. So far as known, such materials would have
no permanent effect upon inheritance unless they
were of a plastid character and capable of inde-
pendent multiplication. It is customary, therefore,
to consider all daughter cells as inheriting the entire
genetic complex of the mother cell, and differ-
entiation is ascribed to other influences than to
sorting out of hereditary materials. It is referred
to the environment in the widest sense, including
the relationship (physical and chemical) to neigh-
boring cells, and to the external surroundings of


the whole embryo.


284 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


Similarly in asexual reproduction through buds,
stolons, tubers and cuttings, the new plants inherit
the parental complex, and breed true as they would
have done had they remained a part of the original


4s$


aqui’


; agacn hipaqgasaaes’
oe (yayggaydavasoese:


, Agggqunedoscsrees: :
: ygggnnneoseer®


| ggggaouacess's


x


Fig. 65.—Diagram showing variation in 8 pure lines of Paramoecium.
(After Jennings.)
plant. Here again if plastid inheritance appears,
it is regarded as a special sort of inheritance that
involves a mechanism different from that of Men-
delian inheritance.


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 285


If these ideas are carried over to the Protozoa

we might anticipate that daughter individuals
would retain the characteristics of the parent cell
from which they came, and in general this is true.
Yet there are also records where selection of sister-
individuals may form the starting point for separate
lines that differ in definite ways. Our problem then
is to determine, if possible, what mechanism is
concerned in such results, how such differences arise,
and in what sense they may be said to be inherited.
The following evidence throws some light on these
questions.
:;fJennings finds that in any mass culture, or in
any pond, there are generally present several races
of paramecium besides the two standard types of
P. caudatum and P. aurelia. By breeding from
single individuals he separated from a certain mixed
* culture at least eight lines differing mainly in size
(Fig. 65). Later Jennings and Hargitt have sepa-
rated still other races of paramecium. Within such
races there is some fluctuating variability due to
environment, age, etc.; but any one of the indi-
viduals, whether large or small, will give rise to a
population that shows the same variability about a
mean as was shown by the race from which the
individual had been chosen.

Later Middleton (1915) working in Jennings’
laboratory studied the same problems in a different
infusorian, Stylonichia pustulata, that produces
fission lines in the same way as does paramecium.
Starting with a single individual he subjected the,


286 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


descendants to selection, the basis of which was
the rate of fission. For example, in one experiment
he selected fast and slow lines starting with sister
individuals. Repeating this selection for 130 days
he found that the division rates were slowly in-
creased or decreased. If the excess of generations
produced by the fast-selected line is expressed ‘‘as
a percentage of the total number of generations
produced by both sets the difference is 6.9 per cent.
for the first thirty days; 12.8 per cent. for the next
twenty days; 19.3 per cent. for the next thirty
days; and 21.2 per cent. for the last fifty days.”
The number of generations produced per line
during 130 days ranges for the first lines from 178
to 187, and for the slow line 116 to 128. ‘The
slowest fast-selected line produced 50 more gener-
ations than the fastest slow-selected lines.” The


difference that had arisen between the two lines ° °


was shown to be inherited in the following way.
At intervals some of the individuals were reared
without selection or else by ‘‘balanced selection.”


Thus after 80 days of selection two sets were sub-_ _


jected to no-selection. It was found that the
culture for fast-selection lines still maintained the
higher rate. In another test, a difference that had
been produced by 80 days of selection, lasted for
102 days without selection. When reversed se-
lection was carried out, however, the inherited
difference was lost ‘‘in the same way that it was
produced.” Moreover it was found that if conju-
gation occurred in the fast set or in the slow set


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 287


“the difference produced by selection continued to
exist after conjugation.”’ It appears that some kind
of change had been produced, and that the change
in rate was inherited after selection ceased.

More recently still Jennings (1916) has carried
out an elaborate experiment with another Protozoan,
Difflugia corona (Fig. 66). This form also shows
“in nature” great variability, due, it appears, to
several or to many races often existing in the same
locality. If any individual is taken as the starting
point for a new population, it is found that the
fission line that results is composed of individuals
that are more like the parent than like members of
the wild population taken as a whole. In other
words each individual tends to transmit its peculi-.
arities to its offspring, Fig. 67. Jennings then
showed that selection within a pure line, 7.e., in a
population descended from a single individual by
fission, brings about a change in the direction of
selection and that this change remains at least for a
time after selection ceases.

The characters that were examined included the
number of spines, the length of the spines, the
diameter of the shell, the depth of the shell, the
number of spines around the mouth, the diameter
of the mouth. Through selection many diverse
lines were produced in a strain coming from one
original individual. The selection was based not
only on individual differences, but also on ‘past
performance.”

Selection was often made by picking out extreme


288 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


Fig. 66.—Collection of individuals of Difflugia corona, to show the
variations in size and form, in number, length, and shape of the spines, etc.
(After Jennings.)


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 289


yp Pe


ae SENS


Fig. 67.—Parent and immediate offspring in 6 diverse strains or
families of Difflugia corona, to show the variation and the inheritance by
the progeny of the parental] diversities. (After Jennings.)


individuals, and allowing their offspring to multiply,
forming a population. The members of such a group
were then measured. It was found that the charac-
ter at first selected was present in the offspring.
In some cases selection ceased after a certain peculi-


290 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


1
B B B*

Fig. 68.—Arcella dentata. A, normal individual with two nuclei.
B, individual cut so as to include only one nucleus. B', offspring of B
B?, offspring of B'. (After Hegner.)
arity had been produced. The effects of the previous
selection were still observable after several gener-
ations had passed, although the difference some-
times declined.


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 291


Hegner has. studied similar problems on another
form, Arcella dentata (Fig. 68), in Jennings’ labo-
ratory, and has fully confirmed Jennings’ and
Middleton’s results. Hegner has made a number


Cis,


Fig. 69.—Arcella dentata. A, mononucleate individual. B, non-
nucleate, and C, binucleate individual, products of division of mono-
nucleate individual. D, descendant, and £, later descendant of C, ap-
proaching normal size. (After Hegner.)


of other experiments and observations that have a
bearing on the influence of the nuclei and of the
chromidial net of Arcella. In one species, A. dentata,
there are two nuclei situated opposite to each other
as seen in A, Fig. 68. If an individual is cut in


292 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


two pieces, the cut passing between the two nuclei,
each half will remain alive and later continue to
reproduce by fission. The first offspring produced
are smaller than normal, and contain but a single
nucleus (B' in Fig. 68). The offspring that they
produce are in turn larger (B? in Fig. 68). They
may still possess only one nucleus. But soon a
division takes place of such a sort that an empty
shell is formed (A-B in Fig. 69), while the mother
individual that produced the empty shell is now
found to contain two nuclei and has increased in
size (C in Fig. 69). Its next offspring is still larger,
and in the next or in a later generation the full size
of the Arcella is regained.

There is present in Arcella a net of chromidia
(A in Fig. 68), that forms a ring around the space
between the two nuclei. A portion of the proto-
plasm was cut off by Hegner in such a way that some
of the chromidial ring was removed although both
nuclei remained. When the operated individual
gave rise by fission to a daughter, the latter was
smaller than normal. Hegner attributes its size
to the smaller amount of cytoplasm in the mother
at this time, and not directly to the loss of chromidia.
When the daughter in turn produces a daughter, it
is found to be normal or to more nearly approach
the normal size. It is apparent, then, that if the
initial decrease is ascribed to the loss of chromidial
material rather than to protoplasm in general, it
must be admitted that Arcella can sooner or later
make good the loss sustained. It may seem doubt-


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 293


ful, therefore, whether one can safely appeal to
unequal division of the chromidial mass as the
means by which the selective process becomes
effective. On the other hand, there is evidence
from other observations that Hegner has made
that may seem to furnish at least a clue to the
agent through which the selective process takes
place. Let us examine thjs evidence.

In one species, Arcella polypora, there is a variable
number of nuclei ranging from 3 to 10. The di-
ameter of the shells correspondingly ranges from 25
to 33 units. The number of these nuclei may
change, and if large or small individuals are selected
it is found that the larger individuals have more
nuclei than the smaller ones. The change takes
place before or during the selection period, but is
not supposed to be directly affected by the selection
itself. The larger individuals that are picked are
larger because they have more nuclei, and the
small ones are smaller because they have lost one
or more nuclei. The change occurs at irregular
intervals, and consists generally in an increase or
decrease of one nucleus. ‘‘In several cases the
number of nuclei doubled from 3 to 6.” It was
found also that the diameter of the shell and the
number of spines are closely correlated, so that
when selection was made for more spines, the size
also increased, and vice versa. It is possible, there-
fore, that when selection of specimens took place,
what was really selected was variations in the
total nuclear mass. It is true that there were


294. HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


certain families whose members possessed a larger
number of nuclei but were smaller in diameter.
It is evident, therefore, that other factors than
nuclei number are also present. Possibly the amount
of chromatin in the nuclei of these families may be
different.

Since selection was also effective in Arcella
dentata, which has consistently only two nuclei, the
results here cannot be ascribed to an increase in
the number of nuclei, but Jennings has suggested
for Difflugia that ‘“‘the substances determining the
hereditary characters may be distributed with less
accuracy than in the higher organisms, so that the
two products of fission may often receive parts
that are not equivalent.’”’ Hegner thinks that this
may be true for Arcella and adds ‘“‘The sudden
large heritable change (mutations) would, according
to this suggestion, be due to large qualitative in-
equalities, and the smaller heritable variations to
smaller qualitative inequalities during nuclear di-
vision.”” Root (1918) has likewise carried out se-
lection experiments with Centropyxis and has re- -
corded changes following selection.

How these changes are brought about in the
Protozoa is by no means evident. Jennings has not
committed himself to any one interpretation. If
we were to accept an old and now discredited view
as to the influence of selection on any “fluctuating”
character, it might appear that that view was con-
firmed, namely, that any change that appears in
an individual will serve as a starting point for


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 295


further changes in the same direction under se-
lection. If the first change noticed were due to a
mutation, then the results would not be different in
principle from those that are observed in higher
forms, except that it would be necessary to assume
that such mutational changes are far more frequent
than is the case in those higher forms -that have
been investigated. There is also the possibility that
in the Protozoa the division of the chromatin is
not as precise as in the ordinary mitotic division of
higher forms. In fact, when we turn our attention
to the macronucleus we find that there is no con-
vineing evidence to show that this nucleus divides
with the same precision as do the chromosomes of
the Metazoon cell. ‘Lastly, there is the further
possibility of unequal distribution of extranuclear
chromatin (chromidia), which may in some cases
furnish a basis’ for the differences observed in the
selection experiments.

Recently Erdmann (’20) has shown in paramecium
that progressive changes in form take place between
two endomictic periods, hence some doubt is cast
on the value of the earlier results that took no
account of such a possibility. Moreover, Erdmann
thinks that after endomixis many new lines may
appear. If so, this throws further doubts on the
value of the interpretation of the earlier experiments
in which endomixis was overlooked. Still other
doubts arise in consequence of Jollos’ work (21),


described below.
Dallinger had experimented in 1887 on the effect


296 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


of raising the temperature of cultures containing
certain flagellates. In the course of seven years
he succeeded in producing a strain that could live
at a temperature of 70° C., although at first the
entire culture would be killed at a temperature
of 61° C.

Recently, Jollos (’13—'14) caused Paramecium
caudatum to acquire a resistance to compounds of
arsenic. At first the individuals were killed when
1.1 parts of a standard solution were added to 100
parts of water. Gradually they became accustomed
to live in 5 parts to 100. For several months they
retained their acquired resistance when returned to
their original environment, but they lost it at last.
The loss was slow in fission lines, but sometimes
sudden after a conjugation period. Jollos calls this
sort of an induced change, ‘‘ Dauer-modification,”
or long-persisting modification. He believes that it
has nothing to do with a nuclear change in the
hereditary constitution; 7.e., it is not a mutation
at all but is probably a change in the plasma or in
the macronucleus. The latter is absorbed during
conjugation, also during parthenogenesis, hence the
sudden disappearance of the Dauer-modification at
this time. On the other hand, certain kinds of
these modifications may even survive a conjugation
period. For instance, after the changes induced by
calcium treatment or by high temperature treat-
ment the effects may survive for a long time if only
fission takes place; they may survive several
parthenogenetic periods, or even a conjugation


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 297


period, but ultimately there is a return to the
original ‘“‘reaction-norm.”’

Jollos points out that failure to recognize such
effects has led to much confusion in previous work
on Protozoa, and he urges that in several of the
cases mentioned above the so-called effects of
selection were only ‘“‘temporary modifications” that
would have disappeared in time if selection were
withdrawn or the environmental changes that were
producing them were removed. In a word, that
many of the cases of inheritance of acquired charac-
ters, so-called, produced by selection, or otherwise,
are not comparable to the inheritance of characters
that have arisen by mutation, which are permanent
in that the germ-plasm itself has been affected.
That mutational changes also may arise in the
Protozoa in consequence of changes in the environ-
ment during the conjugation period is claimed by
Jollos. His evidence shows, he believes, that
mutations were induced both by arsenious acid and
by high temperature. He states that there is a
sensitive period at conjugation when mutations may
be induced by environmental influences that do not
affect the germ-plasm at other times. He is more
doubtful as to whether such a sensitive stage is
present during parthenogenesis (endomixis), but
thinks that it may occur then also. Jollos dis-
tinguishes such effects from recombination changes
in the germ-plasm, that may take place during
conjugation, but how the distinction could be made
manifest is not evident at all, for granting that


298 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


environmental changes affect the kind of recom-
binations that occur at conjugation, it would be
almost impossible to show that one was not dealing
with such effects, rather than with mutation.

It is not without interest in this connection to
call attention again to the results of selection in a
few of the higher plants where the basis of the
selected differences rests on plastids present in the
cytoplasm that multiply and transmit certain prop-
erties, independently of the hereditary complex
contained in the nucleus. Here selection also pro-
duces immediate results that may also be reversed
if not carried too far. Selection brings about
effects that are strikingly like these described in
the Protozoa, yet the mechanism in these same
plants that gives in them Mendelian inheritance is
not affected by selection of such ‘“‘cytoplasmic”’
differences. There is certainly no contradiction
here, but only two different processes each with its
own mechanism, both of which are equally entitled
to be called inheritance. Each of these kinds of


heredity may play an important role within its’ ~~


own field, and in both the protozoa and the metazoa
both kinds of inheritance may take place side by
side. Such an interpretation leads then to the two
following considerations:

First, it is thinkable at least, that selection in
the Metazoa might sometimes involve the cytoplasm
(and its inclusions) of the germ-cells themselves.
If so, selection might bring about changes compa-
rable to those described in the Protozoa. This might


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 299


take place independently of the mechanism of Men-
delian heredity that applies only to genes carried by
the chromosomes. All that need be said here is that
as yet no evidence for such influence has been found.

Second, it remains to be shown whether in ad-
dition to this somatic selection in the Protozoa, if
it be such, there may be another form of inheritance
of the same kind as that prevalent in the. Metazoa,
based on differences in the chromatin of the proto-
zoon individual. Let us now examine the evidence
bearing on this question.

In the process of conjugation in the Protozoa
there are phenomena that are often compared with
those that occur in higher forms before and at the
time of union of the sperm and egg. Whether
previous to nuclear interchange there is reduction
in the number of the hereditary elements and
whether through interchange there are brought about
recombinations of elements derived from the two
parents are questions that can only be settled, as
in the Metazoa, by a study of characteristics of
parents (conjugants) and offspring.

Taking up first the mechanism, that of para-
mecium may serve for example (Figs. 70 and 71).
During the time of fusion the macronucleus breaks
up and its fragments are later absorbed. The
micronucleus divides, and its daughter halves divide
again, producing four micronuclei. Three of these
are scattered in the protoplasm and disappear; one
again divides into two. One of its halves passes
into the other conjugant, and there unites with


300 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


Fig. 70.—Conjugation process in Paramoecium, and the two peculiar
divisions which follow it.


the one left in that individual. The exchange is
reciprocal. The conjugants separate. In each there


are three further divisions of the conjugant nucleus
to produce eight micronuclei. In each individual


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 301


four of the nuclei enlarge to form macronuclei,
four others remain as new micronuclei. Then the
individual divides twice (Fig. 70). The macro-


A la
=
=
4 »
B So =,
ae eee Sees
Cc S&S SS
4 >
D S S&S
=
= Ee =
S 7
i
= F -}
=,
7 7
K x
= = = =)
= y G z z
= 4 = £ , A ,
= = = bp H ©& z E z
E = =
AeeeEeCEeCEE eee E6C- EEE
B@EESCSEGCGE!' SPSCeCCuryryryv
= s S > 5 = = E>
=) = sy = =, c—) —) i
5 = = =) = BP! Ge EGA
y = “ayn “Mm “"@ J >, vam ee =
E/ E7 = oD oO wy


Fig. 71.—Diagram illustrating the history of the micronuclei in.the
conjugation and two subsequent divisions of Paramoecium.


nuclei and micronuclei do not divide at this time,
but are distributed equally to each of the first two
individuals, and then at the second division two go


302 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


to each of the resulting paramecia. Four lines of
descent come from these four individuals from each
ex-conjugant. Do the four different lines show
differences, and do these differences bear any re-
lation to the differences that existed in the original
parents? In other words, are the two cell divisions,
in which the products of the three divisions of the
conjugated nuclei are sorted out, comparable, as
has been suggested, to the two maturation divisions
of the Metazoa? Calkins and Gregory have ob-
tained results with Paramecium caudatum indicat-
ing that the four lines derived from each ex-con-
jugant may show different rates of division and
different frequencies of conjugation-periods. This
evidence see s at first sight to indicate that the
two cell-divisions following conjugation may produce
from the same material (conjugation nucleus) at
least four different lines. If these results do not
fall within the normal range of fluctuating vari-
ability, then it must be supposed that there occurs
some process of sorting out of the elements (genes?)
in the conjugated nucleus during its three con-
secutive divisions (in other words, segregation oc-
curs), or else that imperfections and irregularities in
the division either of the micronuclei or of the
cytoplasm are introduced at this time. If the latter
view were established one would expect that only
some of the new lines would have a survival value
if placed in competition. The remarkable fact that
many of these lines soon die out even with the best
attention, might possibly be appealed to as evidence


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 303


favorable to the view that the differences observed
are in reality failures or imperfections in the
processes taking place at this critical period.

This discussion is based on the assumption that
reduction occurs after separation. If on the other
hand, reduction of the chromosome number has
taken place in the two parental individuals in the
division immediately prior to interchange of micro-
nuclei, then the two daughter individuals after
interchange might be supposed to contain different
hereditary complexes, but unless some further re-
duction takes place the four granddaughters from
each ex-conjugant would be expected to give identi-
cal lines. In that case the evidence mentioned
above would appear to prove too much, for only two
different combinations are expected, not four or
eight.

Something like reduction must occur somewhere
if the chromosomes have the same values as in
higher forms, for, if not, their number would steadily
increase. An obvious objection to the hypothesis
that the reduction occurs immediately after conju-
gation, is that it is purely speculative, for nothing
peculiar in the division of the two micronuclei after
conjugation has been observed. The divisions
appear like ordinary divisions. Evidence as to
whether the last nuclear division just before conju-
gation is reductional, or not, ought to be obtained
from the history of so-called split-pairs. Jennings
separated in many cases two individuals of the same
line that were about to conjugate and recorded


304 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


their later rates of division. He compared their
rates with the rates of sister individuals that were
allowed to complete conjugation and then separate.
He found that the split-pairs divide more rapidly
than the ex-conjugants, and also that they show
greater variation between the members of the pair
than do the ex-conjugants. He interprets the
result to mean that the ex-conjugants should be
expected to be more alike in so far as they have
each received a part of the other. This would only
be expected, however, on the supposition that re-
duction did not take place at the last micronuclear
division, 7.e., just previous to conjugation; for, if
reduction had occurred then, the migrating nucleus
of individual A, received by the mate B, would not,
on the average, tend to be any more like the station-
ary nucleus of A than it is like either of the nuclei
of B, and so the ex-conjugants would be no more
alike than members of split-pairs. It may seem
that a test as to whether any of the micronuclear
divisions preceding conjugation are reductional might
be made if the rate of division of the split-pairs
were compared with that of the original strain from
which they were derived. Jennings has made such
a comparison and finds no difference between the
rate of fission of the split-pairs and the rate of
division of other individuals of the same culture
that had not conjugated. This evidence appears
to mean that no change in the hereditary complex
takes place during the three micronuclear divisions
preceding interchange; but this conclusion may


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 305


appear dubious until we know whether these di-
visions occur in the pairs which are split in the
same way as in the conjugating individuals. It
has also been shown by Woodruff and Erdmann
that at intervals a process occurs in paramecium
that they call endomixis, in which the individual
undergoes changes that are like the first steps taken
before conjugation. The old macronucleus breaks
down and is absorbed. The micronucleus divides
twice. Two of the four resulting nuclei disappear,
one becomes the new micronucleus, and the other
a new macronucleus. If reduction appears at this
time, we should expect that sudden differences in
the rate of division might appear. Erdmann finds
positive evidence that supports this expectation. If
the third micronuclear division, that does not appear
in endomixis but does appear prior to conjugation,
is the reduction division, then it may be difficult
to reconcile such an interpretation with the com-
parison of the split-pairs that Jennings has made.
There is some evidence, in forms other than
paramecium, showing that reduction in the number
of chromosomes takes place prior to interchange.
In the infusorian Didinium nasutum there are 16
chromosomes. In the first of the three maturation
divisions of the micronuclei each daughter gets
16. In the second division the 16 separate into two
groups of 8 each. In the third division each of
the 8 divides giving 8 to each daughter. The full
number would then be restored by conjugation.
In Uroleptis, Carchesium, Operculina, and Anoplo-


306 HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA


phrya, and in a few other forms, a similar reduction
in the number of the chromosomes has been ob-
served. It would seem more probable that we


Fig. 72.—Two species of Chlamydomonas, A and B. AA and BB,
conjugation cysts of A and B respectively. AB, hybrid cyst. a, b, ba,
ab, types that develop from hybrid cysts. (After Pascher.)


must look for reduction before nuclear interchange
rather than after that event. Even then it has by
no means been shown that reduction here means
segregation, as in the higher forms, for the value


HEREDITY IN THE PROTOZOA 307


of the individual chromosomes has not been demon-
strated. There is, it is true, one case at least—in
flagellates—in which the evidence seems to show
that segregation takes place after conjugation. It
has been shown by Pascher that when two species of
Chlamydomonas conjugate and then encyst (Fig. 72)
the resulting cyst is unlike the cyst of either parent,
and may be said to be intermediate. While in the
cyst, a reduction division occurs, and four new
individuals emerge. These then multiply by fission.
The offspring show the parental characters combined
in different ways. Some of the individuals are like
the parent species, others show recombinations of
the original characters. The results, if confirmed,
furnish evidence of segregation, but the numerical
relations between the different. types produced by
each cyst are unknown.


CHAPTER XII


(@NOTHERA AND THE MUTATION
THEORY


The mutation theory was first developed by
deVries on the basis of his extensive experiments
with the Evening Primrose, @inothera Lamarckiana.
This plant was found growing wild at Hilversum,
near Amsterdam, in Holland. DeVries noticed that
several aberrant types were growing with the
typical form, and when he planted in his garden
self-fertilized seed from Lamarckiana (the typical
form) he found that these other types reappeared
in small numbers, atid continued to do so year after
year and generation after generation. Most of the
new types themselves bred true with the exception
that they also gave a few aberrant types in the
same way as Lamarckiana. The following table
shows the percentages of certain types obtained
from Lamarckiana and from some of the new types .
themselves.

Soon after the rediscovery of Mendel’s work
(1900) the data that were rapidly collected regard-
ing the genetic behavior of many different animals
and plants made it evident that Cnothera was
unique in its behavior in many other ways than in
the relatively great frequency with which it pro-


duces new types. This led Bateson and Saunders,
308


CNOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY 309


Frequency of appearance from different races

New or “mutant” ~

ae Ta ick lata oo. simplex | nanella | oblonga} gigas
oblonga........ 0.7 0.7 6.1 0.0 O02! [is ee soece 0.0
nanella........ 0.5 0.4] 0.1 ee: || eee els 0.0 0.9
lata. ........., Ov4 Psa 0.4 0.3 0.02 0.0 0.0
scintillans..... 0.3 On. esehceos iy 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0
albida......... 0.2 2.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0
rubrinervis. .... 0.04 | 0.2] 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0
Ovata......... 0.01 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
deserens....... 0.0 0.0 | 0.0 3.2 0.0 0.0 0.0
metallica....... 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0
Total new types| 2.2 4.1] 6.7 6.5 0.05 | 0.3 0.9


as early as 1902, to suggest that O. Lamarckiana
might be a hybrid, and that the new types might
be simply recombination products. There were
very serious difficulties in the way of this hypothesis,
and it was not strongly urged by its proponents.
The view was, however, strengthened by a study of
the history of the species. The members of the
group to which it belongs are apparently all native
in America, but several of them have become
naturalized in Europe. It is very doubtful if
O. Lamarckiana occurs in America as a wild plant,
so that it may well be suspected of being a hybrid
that was first obtained artificially and that then
accidentally escaped and became established in
Europe. Davis has worked on this hypothesis and
has tried to synthesize the species by crossing wild
American species. The question has now lost
much of its point, however, through the discovery


310 CGNOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY


by deVries, Stomps, and Bartlett that undoubted
wild species of Ginothera show the same kind of
behavior as Lamarckiana, and like it produce
numerous new types.

The next suggestion as to the cause of the un-
usual behavior of Cinothera came with the dis-
covery by Lutz that the ‘‘mutant”’ gigas has twice
as many chromosomes as has the parent form,
Lamarckiana (the diploid numbers being 28 and
14, respectively). The situation is complicated by
the fact that there are apparently races that look
like gigas but have only 14 chromosomes. These
two races thus closely parallel the two giant races
of Primula sinensis of which one is diploid and the
other tetraploid. ‘The aberrant numbers observed
in gigas hybrids by Stomps may perhaps be due to
a process of fragmentation of chromosomes similar
to that described for O. scintillans by Hance.

Another type of variation in chromosome number
has been described by Gates and by Lutz. The
“mutant” types lata, semilata and scintillans have
15 chromosomes as: the diploid number, instead of
the 14 characteristic of Lamarckiana. As would
have been expected if the extra chromosome is re-
sponsible for their peculiarities, these forms do not
breed true. Each regularly produces many typical
Lamarckiana offspring, as well as other offspring
like itself. These cases have already been discussed
under non-disjunction (see Chapter VI).

Although differences in chromosome number due
to irregularities in reduction or fertilization may be


GENOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY 311


supposed to account for the types named, such
differences do not offer an explanation of most of
the other new types nor of the peculiar behavior
shown by species crosses in the genus CEnothera.
As will appear below these two classes of phenomena
both suggest strongly that the plants are heter-
ozygous, in spite of the fact that they breed nearly
true.

If O. biennis and O. syrticola (muricata) are
crossed, the F; hybrid strongly resembles the male
parent, whichever way the cross is made. Com-
binations of these hybrids with each other and with
both parent species have shown that the pollen
and egg cells of each species carry different genes.
The chief characteristics in which the two species
differ are transmitted only through the pollen, and
only the minor differences between the hybrids and
their respective fathers are due to genes transmitted
by the eggs... The hybrids themselves behave in
the same way so far as these characteristics are
concerned; what they received from their father
they transmit only through their pollen, what they
received from their mother they transmit only
through their eggs. As was pointed out by deVries,
this phenomenon is perhaps to be connected with
the fact, discovered in 1901 by Geerts, that about
half the pollen grains and about half the ovules
degenerate in certain of the @inotheras—apparently


1 These two species are quite similar, so that the characters transmitted
in this peculiar fashion constitute only a small proportion of all the
characters of the plants.


312 GNOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY


in all that show this peculiar behavior. It may be
supposed that the eggs that contain the chromo-
some carrying the dominant genes distinguishing
these species from each other all die, and that the
pollen containing the chromosome that carries the
recessive genes also dies. That is, we are dealing
with a case of gametic lethals, the result of which is


Fig. 73.—Twin hybrids; a, Oenothera laeta, and b, Oenothera
velutina. (After de Vries.)


to make the race in question breed constant though
heterozygous.

When O. biennis, O. syrticola, or certain other
species are fertilized by Lamarckiana or by certain
of its “mutants” (e.g., nanella, rubrinervis, or ob-
longa), the first generation hybrids are of two ‘dis-
tinct types, called by deVries “‘leta’’ and “velutina.”’
(Fig. 73.) This phenomenon was shown by deVries
to be due to a peculiarity of Lamarckiana and


CENOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY 313


its derivatives rather than to the other species.
An explanation was suggested in 1914 by Renner,
who found that about half of the seeds of Lamarck-
iana fail to germinate. He supposed that the
species was a permanent heterozygote for the leta-
velutina pair of characters, which he treated as
allelomorphs. The homozygous types were both
assumed to be inviable,.and to be represented by
the seeds that fail to germinate. This view was at
first opposed by deVries, but has since been adopted
by him, and has been substantiated by so much
evidence that it can now scarcely be doubted.

By 1917, then, the situation had been analyzed
far enough to indicate that CEnothera Lamarckiana
is a permanent heterozygote in at least two respects,
and that its peculiar behavior in crosses is at least
in part due to this heterozygosis. But in two
respects the results were still unsatisfactory. No
analogous case was known in any other organism,
so that the hypotheses seemed curiously artificial
and improbable; and there was no obvious relation
between the heterozygous nature of O. Lamarckiana
and the frequency with which it produces new types.

Both these objections were eliminated by the
work of Muller on certain peculiar races of Dro-
sophila. Muller examined the beaded race, which
had long been a puzzle to those studying Dro-
sophila. The beaded race, when first studied, did
not breed true, but constantly produced normal
flies. After a long period of selection, however, it
began to breed almost true. In crosses the character


314. GQNOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY


now appeared in about half the F;, flies, never in all
of them. Dexter had shown that the character was
influenced by environmental and genetic modifying
factors, and that the principal gene concerned was
probably in the third chromosome. The fact that
the stock had at first not bred true and then later
had come to do so remained unexplained. Muller
showed that the beaded factor itself is dominant,
and that it is lethal when homozygous—i.e., that
the homozygous beaded individual dies. The stock
had at first failed to breed true because all the
beaded individuals were heterozygous for the normal
allelomorph of beaded. But Muller also found that
in the final stock there was a new lethal factor in the
chromosome containing this normal allelomorph.
The event that caused the stock to begin to breed
true was evidently the mutation that produced this
lethal. Crossing-over between the beaded factor
and this lethal would ordinarily occur in a certain
number of cases, but it so happened that in the non-
beaded chromosome there was already present a
factor that practically prevents crossing over in this
region. The constitution of the individuals in the


beaded stock then is as follows: , where


‘Ci Ina
Bd represents the beaded factor, Cru the factor limit-
ing crossing-over, and lia the lethal factor. The
normal allelomorphs of these genes, present in the
opposite chromosomes, have not been represented
here. Such a “balanced lethal” stock not only
breeds true though heterozygous, but parallels the


CNOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY 315


(Enothera situation in other respects. If this stock
is crossed to wild type flies the F'; individuals are
beaded and wild-type in equal numbers, suggesting
at once the ‘‘twin hybrids” (leta and velutina) of
certain (Enothera crosses. If one of the “balanced”
chromosomes contains one or more recessive mutant
genes (and such have been purposely introduced into
it by appropriate crosses), crossing over between
any of the recessive genes and the lethal region may
cause the appearance of a small number of specimens
showing the corresponding recessive characters, and
these will be produced in small numbers generation
after generation, exactly as in the case of such
“mutants” of O. Lamarckiana as nanella or oblonga.
The frequency with which these types will appear
will depend simply on the frequency with which
crossing over occurs—.e., on the loci of the genes
in question.

Similar cases of balanced lethals have since been
observed in other races of D. melanogaster, such as
truncate and certain races of dichete. In at least
one instance such a race has been artificially made
up in order to save labor in keeping stock of certain
lethal characters. There are strong indications that
a somewhat similar case of balanced lethals occurs
in stocks (Matthiola).

This work of Muller’s, then, furnished definite
information that permanent heterozygotes due to
balanced lethals can and do exist, and furthermore
correlated this phenomenon with the repeated ap-
pearance of apparently new types in small numbers.


316 G@NOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY


An application of the principle of balanced lethals
to O. Lamarckiana indicates that the chromosome
pair that contains the balanced zygotic lethals (7.e.,
that is responsible for the differences between leta
and velutina) is the one that is most important in
the production of the “mutant” types. It is
apparently in this pair of chromosomes that nanella,
oblonga, rubrinervis, blandina, simplex, erythrina,
and others differ from typical Lamarckiana. If we
regard Lamarckiana itself as heterozygous and write


leta


its formula ————
velutina


it is possible to write similar
formule for the other types named, as has been
done in a slightly different fashion by deVries
himself. The ‘‘leta”’ and “velutina”’ are not to be
thought of as single allelomorphs, but rather as
whole homologous chromosomes that differ in a
number of genes. In the formule below the other
terms may be thought of as follows:


oblonga — mostly leta, but modified either by crossing over
or by mutation.

deserens — like leta in most respects.

decipiens — also like leta. Differs from deserens only in not
having a gene for brittleness.

blandina — smooth leaved; otherwise like velutina.


None of these, except oblonga, carries a lethal; the
lethals have presumably been lost by crossing over.

The terms just given apply to the chromosomes;
the plants themselves may be represented as follows:


CNOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY 317


oblonga : ._ deserens
oblonga = - rubrinervis = ————
velutina velutina


‘ deserens decipiens
lucida = or


leta leta
deserens decipi
deserens = — erythrina = es
deserens velutina
decipiens blandina
decipiens = = blandina = :
ae decipiens anne blandina
. leta (minus the lethal)
simplex =
leta,


There is apparently normally a gene for dwarfness
in the leta chromosome, and the appearance of
nanella is due to this gene crossing over from most
of the rest of the complex to give a chromosome that
is velutina plus dwarfness. This chromosome, if at
fertilization it enters the same zygote as a normal
leta chromosome, will give rise to a dwarf that is
still in the balanced lethal condition and that will
react in most respects like Lamarckiana itself.

It seems very probable that the differences be-
tween most of the chromosomes in these mutant
types are due to their being the results of crossing
over at different levels. They are simply mixtures
of the original leta and velutina chromosomes in
different proportions. DeVries, however, believes
that all of the differences between them are due to
mutation rather than to crossing over, and it may
well be that some of them are of this nature. It is
not yet possible to construct a map of this chromo-
some that will explain the observed results con-
sistently. Shull has recently given a preliminary


318 NOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY


report of experiments on the crossing over value for
some of the factors in this chromosome.

The interpretation just given will account for a
large proportion of the results reported by deVries
and others; but there still remain certain curious
facts that do not fall into line. There are some
other unusual factors that have not yet been taken
into account. Nevertheless, it is evident that
Cnothera will not long remain as the one out-
standing case that cannot be brought into line with
other genetic phenomena.

It is evident from what has been said that
(Enothera is not a favorable object for the study of
the manner and frequency of occurrence of new
mutations in the germ plasm. We require for such
a study an organism the normal genetic behavior of
which is thoroughly understood, and one that is
not normally heterozygous for an unknown number
of little understood genes. Yet it was deVries’
experiments with CEnothera that first drew attention
to mutation, and the whole history of the mutation
theory is bound up with Cnothera. These facts
have led certain authors to attack the mutation
theory and to proclaim its downfall. Lotsy, for
example, maintains that mutations do not occur
and that all evolution is due to hybridization and
recombination. The Cénotheras do furnish con-
clusive evidence that new types may appear suddenly
and without the occurrence of intermediates. It
was this phenomenon that deVries originally termed
mutation. Nowadays we use the term mutation


CENOTHERA AND THE MUTATION THEORY 319


to indicate a change in the nature of some part of
the germ-plasm; and the peculiar behavior of
(Enothera makes it very unfavorable for the study
of this phenomenon, or for the proof of its occurrence.
Fortunately, however, there is abundant evidence
that mutations in the germ-plasm do occur in other
forms, where they cannot possibly be explained as
recombination products.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Acar, W. E., 1914. Parthenogenetic and Sexual Reproduction
in Simocephalus vetulus and other Cladocera. Jour.
Genet., III.

Acar, W. E., 1920. Cytology. London.

ALLEN, C. E., 1919. The Basis of Sex Inheritance in Sphzro-
carpos. Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., 58.

ALTENBURG, E., 1916. Jinkage in Primula sinensis.
Genetics, 1.

AutensurG, E., and H. J. Muller, 1920. The Genetic Basis
of Truncate Wing — an Inconstant and Modifiable Char-
acter in Drosophila. Genetics, 5.

AnpeRson, E. G., 1921. The Inheritance of Salmon Silk
Color in Maize. Cornell Univ. Agr. Exp. Sta. Memoir.
48.

Bascock, E. B., and R. E. Clausen, 1918. Genetics in Re-
lation to Agriculture. New York.

Baiiey, P. G., 1914. Primary and Secondary Reduplication
Series. Jour. Gen., III.

Baurzer, F., 1910. Uber die Beziehung zwischen dem Chro-
matin und der Entwicklung und Vererbungsrichtung bei
Echinodermenbastarden. Arch. f. Zellf., V.

Baurzer, F., 1913. Uber die Herkunft der Idiochromosomen
bei Seeigeln. Sitz. Phys.-Med. Gesell. Wiirzburg, 19138.

Baurzpr, F., 1914. Die Bestimmung des Geschlechts nebst
einer Analyse des Geschlechts-dimorphismus bei Bonellia.
Mitterl. Zodl. Station Neapel, XXII.

Batrzer, F., 1914. Die Bestimmung und der Dimorphismus
des Geschlechts bei Bonellia. Sitz. Phys.-Med. Ges.

; Wirzburg, 1914.

Banta, A. M., 1918. Sex and Sex Intergrades in Cladocera.
Proc. Nat. Acad., 4.

BarBer, M. A., 1907. On Heredity in Certain Micro-organ-
isms. Kans. Univ. Sci. Bull., 4.

Bartuett, H. H., 1915. Mass Mutation in (CEnothera
pratincola. Bot. Gaz., 60.

321


322 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Bateson, W., 1909. Mendel’s Principles of Heredity.
Cambridge.

Bareson, W., 1913. Mendel’s Principles of Heredity. 3d
impression. Cambridge.

Barsson, W., and R. C. Punnett, 1905. Rep. Evol. Comm., II.

‘Bateson, W., and R. C. Punnerr, 1908. The Heredity of
Sex. Science, X XVII.

Bateson, W., and R. C. Punnett, 1911. On the Interrelations
of Genetic Factors. Proc. Roy. Soc., LX XXIV.

Bateson, W., and R. C. Punnett, 1911. The Inheritance of
the Peculiar Pigmentation of the Silky Fowl. Jour.
Gen., I.

Bareson, W., and R. C. Punnett, 1911. On Gametic Series
Involving Reduplication of Certain Terms. Jour. Gen., I.

Bateson, W., 1914. Address. British Assoc. Adv. Sei.,
Part I, Ref. 1; Part II, Ref. 66.

Baur, E., 1910. Propfbastarde. Biol. Centr., XXX.

Baur, E., 1911. Ein Fall von Faktorenkoppelung bei Antir-
rhinum majus. Verh. naturf. Ver. Briinn, XLIX.

Baur, E., 1912. Vererbungs- und Bastardierungsversuche mit
Antirrhinum — IJ. Faktorenkoppelung. Zeits. Abst. wu.
Vereb., VI.

Baur, E., 1912. Ein Fall von geschlechtsbegrenzter Vererbung
bei Melandrium album. Zeits. Abst. u. Vererb., VIII.

Baur, E., 1914. Einfithrung in die experimentelle Verer-
bungslehre.

Baur, E., 1919. Uber Selbststerilitat und tiber Kreuzungs-
versuche etc. in der Galtung Antirrhinum. Zeits. Abst.
Vererb., 21.

Bearp, J., 1902. The Determination of Sex in Animal De-
velopment. Zodél. Jahrb. Abt. Anat., XVI.

BeE.Luinc, JoHn, 1914. The Mode of Inheritance of Semi-
sterility in the Offspring of Certain Hybrid Plants. Zeits.
Abst. Vererb., XII.

BLAKESLEE, A. F., 1922. Variations in Datura, due to
Changes in Their Chromosome Number. Am. Nat., 56.

Bortne, A. M., 1909. A Small Chromosome in Ascaris megalo-
cephala. Arch. f. Zellf., IV.

Borine, Atice M., and Raymonp Part, 1914. The Odd


BIBLIOGRAPHY 323


Chromosome in the Spermatogenesis of the Domestic
Chicken. Jour. Exp. Zoél., XVI.

Boveri, Tu., 1907. Zellen Studien. Die Entwicklung dis-
permer Seeigel-Eier, etc. Jena.

Boveri, Tx., 1908. Uber die Beziehung des Chromatins zur
Geschlechtbestimmung. Sitz. Phys.-Med. Gesell. Wiirz-
burg, Dez., 1908.

Bovenr!, Tu., 1909. Die Blastomerenkerne von Ascaris megalo-
cephala und die Theorie der Chromosomen-Individualitat.
Arch. Zellf., III.

Bovert, Tu., 1909. Uber ‘“Geschlechtschromosomen’’ bei
Nematoden. Arch. Zellf., IV.

Boveri, Tu., 1911. Uber das Verhalten der Geschlechtschro-
mosomen bei Hermaphroditismus. Verh. Phys.-Med.
Gesell. Wiiraburg, XLI.

Boveri, Tu., 1911. Uber das Verhalten der Geschlechts-
chromosomen bei Hermaphroditismus. Verhandl. Phys.-
Med. Ces. Wiirzburg, 41.

Boveri, Tu., 1914. Uber die Charaktere von Echiniden-
Bastardlarven bei verschiedenen Mengenverhaltnis miitter-
licher und véaterlicher Substanzen. Verh. Phys.-Med.
Gesell. ‘Wiirzburg, XLIII.

Braver, A., 1893. Zur Kenntniss der Spermatogenese von
Ascaris megalocephala. Arch. mikr. Anat., XLII.
Brings, C. B., 1913. Partial Sex Linkage in the Pigeon.

Science, XXXVII.

Bripcgs, C. B., 1913. Non-disjunction of the Sex Chromo-
somes of Drosophila. Jour. Exp. Zodl., XV.
Brivgss, C. B., 1914. The Chromosome Hypothesis of
Linkage Applied to Cases in Sweet Peas and Primula.

Am, Nat., XLVIII.

Bripces, C. B., 1914. Direct Proof through Non-disjunction
that the Sex-linked Genes of Drosophila are Borne by
the X-chromosome. Science, XL.

Brincss, C. B., 1915. A Linkage Variation in Drosophila.
Journ. Exper. Zoél., 19.

Bringes, C. B., 191€. Non-disjunction as a Proof of the
Chromosome Theory of Heredity. Genetics, 1.

Brincss, C. B., 1917. Deficiency. Genetics, 2.


324 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Brivcgs, C. B., 1919. Vermilion-deficiency. Journ. Gener.
Physiol. , 1.

Bripgezs, C. B., 1919. Specific Modifiers of Eosin eye color.
Journ. Exper. Zodl., 28.

Bripeges, C. B., 1920. Current Maps of the Locations of the
Mutant Genes of Drosophila mellanogaster. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci., 7.

Brinces, C. B., 1921. Genetical and Eytological Proof of
Non-disjunction of the Fourth Chromosome of Droso-
phila melanogaster. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 7.

Bripces, C. B., 1921. Triploid Intersexes in Drosophila
melanogaster. Science, 54.

Brivess, C. B., 1922. The Origin of Variations in Sexual
and Sex-limited Characters. Am. Nat., 56.

Brivcss, C. B., and O. L. Monr, 1919. The Inheritance of
the Mutant Character ‘‘Vortex.”’ Genetics, 4.

Bripcss, C. B., and A. H. Srurrevant, 1914. A New Gene
in the Second Chromosome of Drosophila and some
Considerations on Differential Viability. Biol. Bull.,
XXVI.

Cauxins, G. N., and C. C. Lrep, 1902. Studies on the Life
History of Protozoa, II. Arch. Protist., 1902.

Catxins, G. N., 1902. Studies on the Life History of Pro-
tozoa. III. Brol. Bull., II.

Cauxins, G. N., 1904. Studies on the Life History of Pro-
tozoa. IV. Jour. Exp. Zoél., I.

Caukins, G. N., 1911. Protozoén Germ Plasm. Pop. Sci.
Monthly.

Caukins, G. N., 1918. Further Light on the Conjugation of
Paramecium. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., X.

Cauxins, G. N., and L. H. Grecory, 1913. Variations in the
Progeny of a Single Ex-conjugant of Paramecium cau-
datum. Journ. Exp. Zodl., 15.

CarotuErs, E. E., 1913. The Mendelian Ratio in Relation
to Certain Orthopteran Chromosomes. Jour. Morph.,
XXIV.

Carotuers, E. E., 1917. The Segregation and Recombination
of Homologous Chromosomes Found in Two Genera of
Acridide. Journ. Morph., 28.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 325


Caste, W. E., F.W. Carpenter, A. H.Cuark, 8. 0. Mast, and
W. M. Barrows, 1906. The Effects of Inbreeding, Cross-
breeding, and Selection upon the Fertility and Variability
of Drosophila. Proc. Am. Acad. Arts and Sci., XLI.

CastLtp, W. E., H. E. Waurer, R. C. MuLumnrx, and 8.
Coss, 1909. Studies of Inheritance in Rabbits. Carnegie
Inst. Wash., pub., 114.

Cast_e, W. E., and Joun C. Puituips, 1913. Further Experi-
ments on Ovarian Transplantation in Guinea-pigs. Science,
XXXVIII. j

CastLe, W. E., and Joun C. Puruuips, 1914. Piebald Rats
and Selection. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 195.

Castle, W. E., 1913. Reversion in Guinea-pigs and its
Explanation. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 179.

CastTLeE, W. E., 1914. Bateson on Problems of Genetics,
Weismann’s Vortrige tiber Deszendenztheorie and Bate-
son’s Principles of Heredity. Science, XL.

CasTLE, W. E., 1914. Some New Varieties of Rats and
Guinea-pigs and Their Relation to Problems of Color
Inheritance. Am. Nat., XLVITI.

CastiE, W. E., 1914. Size Inheritance and the Pure Line
Theory. Zeits. Abst. Vererb., XII.

Castle, W. E., 1914. Yellow Varieties of Rats. Am. Nat.,
XLVIII.

CastTLE, W. E., 1914. Pure Lines and Selection. Jour.
Heredity, V.

CastLeE, W. E., 1914. Variation and Selection; a Reply.
Zeits. Abst. Vererb., XII.

Castie, W. E., 1914. Multiple Factors in Heredity. Science,
XXXIX.

Caste, W. E., 1914. An Apple Chimera. Jour. Heredity, V.

CastLE, W. E., 1914. Nabours’ Grasshoppers, Multiple
Allelomorphism, Linkage and Misleading Terminologies
in Genetics. Am. Nat., XLVIII.

CasTLeE, W. E., 1914. Mr. Muller on the Constancy of
Mendelian Factors. Am. Nat., XLIX.

Castur, W. E., and Puitie B. Hapiey, 1915. The English
Rabbit and the Question of Mendelian Unit-character
Constancy. Am. Nat., XLIX.


326 BIBLIOGRAPHY:


Castie, W. E., 1915. Bateson’s Address, Mendelism and
Mutation.

Casrie, W. E., 1916. Further Studies on Piebald Rats and
Selection with Observations on Gametic Coupling.
Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 241.

Castie, W. E., 1919. Studies of Heredity in Rabbits, Rats,
and Mice. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 288.

Castie, W. E., 1919. Is the Arrangement of the Genes in the
Chromosomes Linear? Proc. Nat. Acad. Sct., 5.

CastLe, W. E., 1919. The Linkage System of Eight Sex-
linked Characters of Drosophila virilis. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci., 5.

CastieE, W. E., 1919. Are Genes Linear or Non-linear in
Arrangement? Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 5.

CastLe, W. E., 1920. Model of the Linkage System of Eleven
Second Chromosome Genes of Drosophila. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci., 6.

Cote, L. J., 1912. A Case of Sex-linked Inheritance in the
Domestic Pigeon. Science, XXXVI.

Couz, L. J., and F. J. Ketitny, 1919. Studies on Inheritance
in Pigeons. III. Genetics, 4.

Correns, C., 1902. Uber den Modus und den Zeitpunkt der
Spaltung, etc. Bot. Zeit., LX.

Correns, C., 1909. Zur Kenntniss der Rolle von Kern und
Plasma bei der Vererbung. Zeit. Abst. Vererb., II.
Cutnot, L., 1903. L’hérédité de la pigmentation chez les
souris (2), I. Hérédité de la pigmentation chez les souris

noires. Arch. Zodl. Exp. et Gén., I.

Cutnot, L., 1904. L’hérédité de la pigmentation chez les
souris (3), I. Les formules héréditaires. Arch. Zoél.
Exp. et Gén., I.

Cutnot, L., 1905. Les races pures et leurs combinaisons chez
les souris (4). Arch. Zoél. Exp. et Gén., III.

Cutnot, L., 1907. L’hérédité de la pigmentation chez les
souris (5). Arch. Zoél. Exp. et Gén., VI.

Cutnot, L., 1908. Sur quelques anomalies apparentes des
proportions mendéliennes (6). Arch. Zodl. Exp. et Gén.,
IX.

Cutwot, L., 1911. Les determinants de la couleur chez les


BIBLIOGRAPHY 327


souris étude comparative (7). Arch. Zodl. Exp. et Gén.,
VIII.

Cugnort, L., 1911. L’hérédité chez les souris. Verh. naturf.
Vereins in Brinn, XLIX.

Cufwor, L., 1909. Recherches sur l’hybridation. Proc. VII
Inter. Zoél. Congress.

Davenrort, C. B., 1906. Inheritance in Poultry. Carnegie
Inst. Wash., pub., 53.

Davenport, C. B., 1909. Inheritance of Characteristics in
Domestic Fowl. Carnegie Inst. Wash.,pub., 121.

Davenport, C. B., 1911. Heredity in Relation to Eugenics.
New York.

Davenport, C. B., 1912. Sex-limited Inheritance in Poultry.
Jour. Exp. Zoél., XIII.

Davis, B. M., 1910, 1911, 1912. Genetical Studies on Oeno-
thera. American Naturalist, XLIV, XLV, XLVI.

Davis, B. M., 1917. Some Inter- and Back-Crosses of F,
Oenothera. Genetics, II.

Dexcourr, A., and E. Guyinot, 1911. Génétique et milieu.
Bull. Scient. France Belg., XLV.

Dexter, J. S., 1912. On Coupling of Certain Sex-linked
Characters in Drosophila. Biol. Bull., XXIII.

Dexter, J. S., 1914. The Analysis of a Case of Continuous
Variation in Drosophila by a Study of Its Linkage Re-.
lations. Am. Nat., XLVIII.

Dexter, J. S., 1914. Nabours’ Breeding Experiments with
Grasshoppers. Am. Nat., XLVIII.

Dosetu, C. C., 1912. Some Recent Work on Mutation in
Micro-organisms. Journ. Genet., 2.

Doseut, C. C., 1914. A Commentary on the Genetics of
Ciliate Protozoa. Journ. Genet., 4.

Doncaster, L., 1907. Inheritance and Sex in Abraxas grossu-
lariata. Nature, LXXVI.

Doncaster, L., 1907. Gametogenesis and Fertilization in
Nematus ribesii. Q. J. M. 8., LI.

Doncaster, L., 1908. On Sex Inheritance in the Moth,
Abraxas grossulariata and its var. lacticolor. 4th Rep.
Evol. Comm., R. Soc. Lond.

Doncaster, L., 1910. Gametogenesis of the Gall-fly,


328 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Neuroterus lenticularis (Spathegaster baccarum). Part I.
Proc. Roy. Soc., B, LXXXIT.

Doncaster, L., 1911. Gametogenesis of the Gall-fly,
Neuroterus lenticularis. Part II. Proc. Roy. Soc.,
LXXXIII.

Doncaster, L., 1911. Note on the Inheritance of Characters
in which Dominance Appears to be Influenced by Sex.
Jour. Genet., I.

Doncaster, L., 1911. Some Stages in the Spermatogenesis of
Abraxas grossulariata and its var. lacticolor. Jour.
Genet., I.

Doncaster, L., 1912. The Chromosomes in the Odgenesis
and Spermatogenesis of Pieris brassice, and in the
Odgenesis of Abraxas grossulariata. Jour. Genet., II.

Doncaster, L., 1912. Note on the Chromosomes in Oégenesis
and Spermatogenesis of the White Butterfly, Pieris
brassice. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., XVI.

Doncaster, L., and G. H. Raynor, 1906. Breeding Experi-
ments with Lepidoptera. Proc. Zoél. Soc. Lond.

Doncaster, L., and G. Gray, 1911. Cytological Observations
on Cross-fertilized Echinoderm Eggs. Proc. Camb. Phil.
Soc., XVI.

Doncaster, L., and F. H. A. MarsHaty, 1910. The Effects
of One-sided Ovariotomy on the Sex of the Offspring.
Jour. Genet., I.

Doncaster, L., 1914. On the Relations between Chromo-
somes, Sex-limited Transmission and Sex Determination
in Abraxas grossulariata. Jour. Genet., IV.

Doncaster, L., 1914. Chromosomes, Heredity, and Sex.
Quart. Jour. Micr. Sc., No. 236.

Doncaster, L., 1914. The Determination of Sex. Cambridge.

Doncaster, L., 1920. An Introduction to the Study of
Cytology. Cambridge.|

Dorsey, M. J., 1914. Pollen Development in the Grape with
Special Reference to Sterility. Univ. Minn. Agric. Exp.
Station, Bull., 144.

Duruam, F. M., 1911. Further Experiments on Coat Color
in Mice. Jour. Genet., I.

Duruam, F. M., and D. E. C. Marryart, 1908. Note on the


BIBLIOGRAPHY 329


Inheritance of Sex in Canaries. 4th Rep. Evol. Comm.,
Roy. Soc. Lond.

East, E. M., 1910. Notes on an Experiment concerning the
Nature of Unit Characters. Science, XXXII.

East, E. M., 1911. The Genotype Hypothesis and Hybridi-
zation. Am. Nat., XLV.

East, E. M., 1912. A Study of Hybrids between Nicotiana
bigelovii and N. quadrivalvis. Bot. Gaz., LIII.

East, E. M., and H. K. Hayss, 1911. Inheritance in Maize.
Conn. Exp. Sta. Bull., 167.

East, E. M., and. H. K. Hayss, 1912. Heterozygosis in
Evolution and in Plant Breeding. U. S. Dept. Agric.,
Bureau Plant Ind. Bull., 248.

East, E. M., 1913. Inheritance of Flower Size in Crosses
between Species of Nicotiana. Bot. Gaz., LV.

East, E. M., and H. K. Hayss, 1914. A Genetic Analysis of
the Changes produced by Selection in Experiments with
Tobacco. Am. Nat., XLVIII.

East, E. M., 1915. The Chromosome View of Heredity and

_ its Meaning to Plant Breeders. Amer. Nat., 49.

East, E. M., 1916. Inheritance in Crosses between Nicotiana
langsdorfii and N. alata. Genetics, 1.

East, E. M., 1917. The Bearing of some General Biological
Facts on Bud Variation. Amer. Nat., 51.

East, E. M., 1919. Studies on Self-sterility. Genetics, 4.

East, E. M., and D. F. Jones, 1919. Inbreeding and Out-
breeding. Philadelphia.

East, E. M., and J. B. Parx, 1917. Studies in Self-sterility.
I. Genetics, 2.

Emerson, R. A., 1909. Inheritance of Color in the Seeds of
the Common Bean, Phaseolus vulgaris. Ann. Rep. Nebr.
Agr. Exp. Sta., XXII.

Emerson, R. A., 1910. The Inheritance of Sizes and Shapes
in Plants. Ann. Nat., XLIV.

Emerson, R. A., 1911. Genetic Correlation and Spurious
Allelomorphism in Maize. Ann. Rep. Nebr. Agr. Exp.
Sta., XXIV.

Emerson, R. A., 1912. The Inheritance of Certain Forms of
Chlorophyll Reduction in Corn Leaves. Ann. Rep. Nebr.
Agr. Exp. Sta., XXV.


330 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Emerson, R. A., 1912. The Inheritance of the Ligule and
Auricles of Corn Leaves. Ann. Rep. Nebr. Agr. Exp.
Sta., XXV.

Emerson, R. A., 1912. The Unexpected Occurrence of
Aleurone Colors in F, of a Cross between Non-colored
Varieties of Maize. Am. Nat., XLVI.

Emerson, R. A., and E. M. East, 1918. The Inheritance of
Quantitative Characters in Maize. Un. Neb. Agric. Exp.
Station Bull., 2.

Emerson, R. A., 1914. The Inheritance of a Recurring
Somatic Variation in Variegated Ears of Maize. Am.
Nat., XLVIII.

Emerson, R. A., 1917. Genetical Analysis of Variegated
Pericarp in Maize. Genetics, 2.

Emerson, R. A., 1922. The Nature of Bud Variations as
Indicated by their Mode of Inheritance, Am. Nat.,
56.

ERDMANN, R., 1920. Endomixis and Size Variations in Pure
Bred Lines of Paramcecium Aurelia. Arch. f. Entwick.
Mech., 46.

FEepERLEY, H., 1913. Das Verhalten der Chromosomen bei '
der Spermatogenese der Schmetterlinge, etc. Zeit. Abst.
Vererb., IX.

Foor, K., and E. C. Strosety, 1913. Preliminary Note on
the Results of Crossing Two Hemipterous Species, etc.
Biol. Bull., XXIV.

Foot, KaTHERINE, and E. C. Srropetz, 1914. Results of
Crossing Euschistus variolarius and Euschistus servus
with Reference to the Inheritance of an Exclusively Male
Character. Linn. Soc. Jour., XXXII.

Gartss, R. R., and N. Tuomas, 1914. A Cytological Study of
(Enothera mut. lata and CE. mut. semilata in Relation to
Mutation. Quart. Jour. Micr. Sc., No. 236.

GEROULD, J. H., 1911. The Inheritance of Polymorphism and
Sex in Colias philodice. Am. Nat., XLV.

GoLpscumipT, R., 1911. Einfithrung in die Vererbungswissen-
schaft. Leipzig.

GotpscumipT, R., 1912. Erblichkeitsstudien an Schmetter-
lingen. I, 1. Zeits. Abst. Vererb., VII.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 331


Go.tpscumipT, R., 1912. Bemerkungen zur Vererbung des
Geschlechtspolymorphismus. Zeits. Abst. Vererb., VIII.

GoLpscHMIDT, R., 1916. Experimental Intersexuality and the
Sex Problem. Amer. Nat., 50.

Gotpscumipt, R., 1917. <A Further Contribution to the
Theory of Sex. Jour. Exp. Zoél., 22.

Gotpscumipt, R., 1919. Intersexualitat und Geschlechts-
bestimmung. Biol. Zentrabl., 39.

Gotpscumipt, R., 1920. Mechanismus und Physiologie der’
Geschlechtsbestimmung. Berlin.

GoLpscHumipT, R., 1920. Untersuchungen iiber Intersexualitat.
Zeits. ind. Abst. Vererb., 23.

Goopate, H. D., 1910. Some Results of Castration in Ducks.
Biol. Bull., XX.

Goopaz, H. D., 1911. Studies on Hybrid Ducks. Jour.
Exp. Zoél., X.

GoopaLe, H. D., 1911. Sex-limited Inheritance and Sexual
Dimorphism in Poultry. Science, XX XIII.

Goopate, H. D., 1913. Castration in Relation to the Secondary
Sexual Characters of Brown Leghorns. Am. Nat., XLVII.

Goopatz, H. D., 1916., Gonadectomy in Relation to the
Secondary Sexual Characters of some Domestic Birds.
Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 248.
Goopa.ez, H. D., 1917. Crossing over in the Sex Chromosome
of the Male Fowl. Science, N. S., 46. ;
Goopricu, H. B., 1916. The Germ Cells in Ascaris incurva.
Journ. Exper. Zodl., 21.

Gowen, J. W., 1919. A Biometrical Study of Crossing Over.
Genetics, 4.

Grecory, R. P., 1911. Experiments with Primula sinensis.
Jour. Genet., I.

Grecory, R. P., 1911. On Gametic Coupling and Repulsion
in Primula sinensis. Proc. Roy. Soc., LXXXIV.

Grecory, R. P., 1914. On the Genetics of Tetraploid Plants
in Primula sinensis. Proc. Royal Soc., 1914.

Guticx, A., 1911. Uber die Geschlechtschromosomen bei
einigen Nematoden. Arch. f. Zellf., VI.

Guyer, M. F., 1902. Hybridism and the Germ Cell. Univ.
of Cincinnati Bull., No. 21.


332 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Guyer, M. F., 1903. The Germ Cell and the Results of
Mendel. Cincinnatt Lancet-Clinic.

Guyer, M. F., 1909. The Spermatogenesis of the Domestic
Chicken. Anat. Anz., XXXIV.

Guyer, M. F., 1910. Accessory Chromosomes in Man. Biol.
Bull., XTX.

Guyer, M. F., 1911. Nucleus and Cytoplasm in Heredity.
Am. Nat., XLV.

Guyer, M. F., 1922. Serological Reactions as a Probable
Cause of Variations. Am. Nat., 56.

Hacepoorn, A. L., 1912. The Genetic Factors in the De-
velopment of the House Mouse, etc. Zeits. Abst. Vererb.,
VI.

Harpane, J. B. §., 1919. The Combination of Linkage
Values, and the Calculation of Distances between the
Loci of Linked Factors. Journ. of Genetics, 8.

Hawpane, J. B. §., 1919. The Probable Errors of Calculated
Linkage Values, and the most Accurate Method of
Determining Gametic from Certain Zygotic Series. Journ.
of Genetics, 8.

. Hanes, R. T., 1918. Variations in. the Number of Somatic
Chromosomes in (Enothera scintillans. Genetics, 3.
Harrison, J. W. H., and L. Doncaster, 1914. On Hybrids
between Moths of the Geometrid Sub-family Bistoninz,
with an account of the Behavior of the Chromosomes in
Gametogenesis in Lycia (Biston) hirtaria, Ithysia (Nyssia)

zonaria and in their Hybrids. Jour. Genet., ITI.

Harrison, J. W. H., 1919. Studies in the Hybrid Bistonine.
IV. Jour. Genet., 9.

Heaps, W., 1908. The Proportions of the Sexes produced by
Whites and Colored Peoples in Cuba. Phil. Trans. Roy.
Soc. Lond., Series B, Vol. CC.

Heener, R. W., 1919. Heredity, Variation, and the Ap-
pearance of Diversities during the Vegetative Repro-
duction of Arcella dentata. Genetics, 4.

Heener, R. W., 1920. The Relations between Nuclear
Number, Chromatin Mass, and Shell Characteristics in
Arcella. Jour. Exp. Zodl., 30.

Henxine, H., 1891. Untersuchungen iiber die ersten Entwick-


BIBLIOGRAPHY 333


lungsvorgange in den Eiern der Insekten. Zeits. f. wiss.
Zo6l., LI.

Hoes, M. A., 1915. The Influence of Temperature on the
Development of a Mendelian Character. Jour. Exp. Zodl.,
XVIII.

Hoes, M. A., 1915. Another Gene in the Fourth Chromo-
some of Drosophila. Am. Nat., XLIX.

Hyper, R. R., 1914. Fertility and Sterility in Drosophila
ampelophila. I-IV. Jour. Exp. Zoél., XVII.

Hypz, R. R., 1916. Two New Members of a Sex-linked
Multiple (Sextuple) Allelomorph System. Genetics, 1.
Janssens, F. A., 1901. La spermatogénése chez les tritons.

La Cellule, XTX.

Janssens, F. A., 1905. Evolution des auxocytes males du
Batracoseps attenuatus. La Cellule, XXII.

Janssens, F. A., 1909. La théorie de la chiasmatypie.
Nouvelle interprétation des cinéses de maturation. La
Cellule, XXV.

JANSSENS, F. A., and R. Dumxz, 1903. L’élément nucléinien
pendant les cinéses de maturation des spermatocytes chez
Batracoseps attenuatus et Plethedon cinereus. La Cellule,
XX.

JENNINGS, H. S., 1911. Assortative Mating, Variability and
Inheritance of Size in the Conjugation of Paramecium.
Jour. Exp. Zool., XI.

Jennincs, H. S., 1911. Pure Lines in the Study of Genetics
in Lower Organisms. Amer. Nat., XLV.

JenninGs, H. §., 1913. The Effect of Conjugation i in Para-
mecium. Jour. Exp. Zoél., XIV.

JENNINGS, H. 8., and G. T. Hanerrr, 1910. Characteristics
of the Diverse Races of Paramecium. Jour. Morph.,
XXII.

Jennines, H. S., and K. 8. Lasuuzy, 1913. Biparental
Inheritance and the Question of Sexuality in Paramecium.
Jour. Exp. Zoél., XIV.

Jennines, H. 8., 1920. Life and Death, Heredity and
Evolution in Unicellular Organisms. Boston.

Jennines, H. S., 1922. . Variation in Uniparental Repro-
duction. Am. Nat., 56.


334 BIBLIOGRAPHY


JOHANNSEN, W., 1909. Elemente der exakten Erblichkeitslehre.


Jena.
JOHANNSEN, W., 1911. The Genotype Conception of Heredity.
Am. Nat., XLV.


Joxios, V., 1921. Experimentelle protistenstudien. I. Archiv
f. Protistenkunde, XLII.

Jones, D. F., 1917. Dominance of Linked Factors as a
Means of Accounting for Heterosis. Genetics, 2.

Kress, F., and C. Pettew, 1910. The Mode of Inheritance
of Stature and of Time of Flowering in Peas (Pisum
sativum). Jour. Genet., I.

Kein, D., and G. H. F. Nurrauy, 1919. Hermaphroditism
and other Abnormalities in Pediculus Humanis. Para-
sttology, 11.

Keiiocc, Vernon L., 1908. Inheritance in Silkworms, I.
Stan. Un. Pub., 1. ’

Kine, H. D., 1910. Temperature as a Factor in the Determi-
nation of Sex in Amphibians. Biol. Bull., XVIII.
Kine, H. D., 1911. The Sex Ratio in Hybrid Rats. Biol.

Bull., XXI.

Kine, H. D., 1912. Dimorphism in the Spermatozoa of
Necturus maculosus. Anat. Rec., VI.

Kine, H. D., 1912. Studies on Sex Determination in
Amphibians, V. Jour. Exp. Zoél., XXI.

Korscuett, E., 1882. Ueber Bau und Entwickelung des
Dinophilus apatris. Zeit. f. wiss. Zoél., XXXVII.
Krarka, J., 1920. The Effect of Temperature upon Facet
Number in the Bar-eyed Mutant of Drosophila. I.

Jour. Gen. Physiol., 2.

LANCEFIELD, R. C., and C. W. Merz, 1921. Non-Disjunction
and the Chromosome Relationships of Drosophila Willis-
torie. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 7.

Lane, A., 1912. Vererbungswissenschaftliche Miszellen. Zeits.
Abst. Vererb., VIII. ,

Lirr, JosEpH, 1915. Data on a Peculiar Mendelian Ratio in
Drosophila ampelophila. Am. Nat., XLIX.

Linus, F.R., 1917. The Free-martin, etc. Jour. Exp. Zodl., 23.

Linpstrom, E. W., 1918. Chlorophyll Inheritance in Maize.
Cornell Univ Agr. Exper. Sta. Mem., 13.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 335


- Lippincorr, W. A., 1918. Thé Case of the Blue Andalusian.
Amer. Nat., 52.

Litt.e, C. C., 1912. Preliminary Note on the Occurrence of
a Sex-limited Character in Cats. Science, XXXV.
Lirrie, C. C., 1918. Experimental Studies of the Inheritance
of Color in Mice. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 179.
Loss, J., 1912. Heredity in Heterogeneous Hybrids. Jour.

Morph., XXIII.

Loezs, J., and F. W. Bancrort, 1911. Some Experiments on
the Production of Mutants: in Drosophila. Science,
XXXII.

Lors, Jacquges, and F. W. Bancrort, 1913. Further Ob-
servations on Artificial Parthenogenesis in Frogs. Jour.
Exp. Zobl., XV.

Lotsy, J. B., 1912. Versuche iiber Artbastarde, etc. Zeits.
Abst. Vererb., 8.

Lutz, A. M., 1912. Triploid Mutants in CEnothera. Biol.
Centr., XXXII.

Lurz, F. E., 1911. Experiments with Drosophila ampelophila
concerning Evolution. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 143.

‘Lurz, F. E., 1913. Experiments concerning the Sexual
Difference in the Wing Length of Drosophila ampelophila.
Jour. Exp. Zo6l., XIV.

Lyncu, C. J., 1919. An Analysis of Certain Cases of Intra-
specific Sterility. Genet., 4.

MacCurpy, Hansrorp, and W. E. Cast, 1907. Selection
and Cross-breeding in Relation to the Inheritance of
Coat Pigments and Coat Patterns in Rats and Guinea-:
pigs. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 70.

MacDowett, E. C., 1914. Multiple Factors in Mendelian
Inheritance. Jour. Exp. Zoél., XVI.

Marchal El. and Em. 1907 and 1919. Aposoporie et Sexualité

~ chez les Mousses. Bull. de I’ Académie roy de Belgique.
Classe de Science. No. 7 (1907). No. 1 (1919).

Marfcuat, J., 1906. Sur l’Ovogénése des Sélaciens et de
quelques autres Chordates. La Cellule, XXIV.

MarsuHatu, W. W., and H. J. Muuuer, 1917. The Effect of
Long-continued Heterozygosis on a Variable Character in
Drosophila. Journ. Exper. Zodl., 22.


336 BIBLIOGRAPHY


May, H. G., 1917. The Appearance of Reverse Mutation in
the Bar-eyed Race of Drosophila. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 3.

McCuenpon, J. F., 1910. On the Effect of External Conditions
on the Reproduction of Daphnia. Am. Nat., XLIV.

McCune, C. E., 1902. The Accessory Chromosome — Sex
Determinant? Biol. Bull., ITI.

McCuung, C. E., 1902. Notes on the Accessory Chromosome.
Anat. Anz., XX.

McCuune, C. E., 1905. The Chromosome Complex of
Orthopteran Spermatocytes. Biol. Bull., IX.

McCuune, C. E., 1914. A Comparative Study of the Chro-
mosomes in Orthopteran Spermatogenesis. Jour. Morph.,
XXV.

McCuiune, C. E., 1917. The Multiple Chromosomes of
Hesperotettix and Mermiria. Jour. Morph., 29.

DE Meuere, J. C. H., 1910. Uber Jacobsons Ziichtungs-
versuche beziiglich des Polymorphismus von Papilio
Memnon. Zeits. Abst. Vererb., III.

pe Meyers, J. C. H., 1910. Uber getrennte Vererbung der
Geschlechter. Biol. Centr., XXX.

pE Meiers, J. C. H., 1911. Uber getrennte Vererbung der
Geschlechter. Arch. Rass. Gesell., VIII.

MEISENHEIMER, J., 1908. Uber den Zusammenhang von
Geschlechtsdriisen und sekundaren Geschlechtsmerkmalen
bei den Arthropoden. Verh. d. deutsch. Zoél. Gesell., 1908.

MEISENHEIMER, J., 1909. Experimentelle Studien zur Soma-
und Geschlechtsdifferenzierung, I. Jena, 1909.

MBIsENHEIMER, J., 1912. Experimentelle Studien zur Soma- -
und Geschlechtsdifferenzierung. Fests. zum 60 Geburtstage
von Dr. J. W. Spengel, III.

MeEnpeE., G., 1865. Versuche tiber Pflanzen-hybriden. Verh.
d. Naturf. Vereins in Briinn, IV.

Merz, C. W., 1914. An Apterous Drosophila and its Genetic
Behavior. Am. Nat., XLVIII.

Metz, C. W., 1914. Chromosome Studies in the Diptera., I.
Jour. Exp. Zoél., XVII.

Merz, C. W., 1918. The Linkage of Eight Sex-linked Charac-
ters in Drosophila virilis. Genetics, 3.

Mippieton, A. R., 1915. Heritable Variations and the


BIBLIOGRAPHY 337


Results of Selection in the Fission Rate of Stylonychia
pustulata. Jour. Exp. Zodl., 19.

Mircuseti, C. W., and J. H. Powers, 1914. Transmission
through the Resting Egg of Experimentally Induced
Characters in Asplanchna amphora. Jour. Exp. Zoél.,
XVI.

Moenxuavs, W. J., 1910. Cross Fertilization among Fishes.
Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci.

Moenxuavs,. W. J., 1911. Effects of Inbreeding, etc., in
Drosophila ampelophila. Jour. Morph., XXII.

Mone, O. L., 1919. Character Changes Caused by Mutation
of an Entire Region of a Chromosome in Drosophila.
Genetics, 4.

Monreomery, T. H., 1912. Human Spermatogenesis. Jour.
Acad. Nat. Sct. Phila., XV.

Morean, T. H., 1903. Recent Theories in Regard to the
Determination of Sex. Pop. Sci. Mon., 1903.

Morean, T. H., 1905. An Alternative Interpretation of the
Origin of Gynandromorphous Insects. Science, XXI.
Morean, T. H., 1906. The Male and Female Eggs of Phyl-

loxerans of the Hickories. Biol. Bull., X. :

Morean, T. H., 1907. Experimental Zodlogy. New York.

Morean, T. H., 1907. The Cause of Gynandromorphism in
Insects. Am. Nat., XLI.

Morean, T. H., 1908. The Production of two kinds of Sper-
matozoa in Phylloxerans. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. and
Med., V.

Morgan, T. H., 1909. Sex Determination and Parthenogenesis
in Phylloxerans and Aphids. Science, XXIX.

Morean, T. H., 1909. Hybridology and Gynandromorphism.
Am. Nat., XLITI.

Moraan, T. H., 1909. A Biological and Cytological Study of
Sex Determination in Phylloxerans and Aphids. Jour.
Exp. Zoél., VII.

Moreau, T. H., 1910. Sex-limited Inheritance in Drosophila.
Science, XXXII.

Morean, T. H., 1910. The Chromosomes in the Partheno-
genetic and Sexual Eggs of Phylloxerans and Aphids.
Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. and Med., VII.


338 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Morean, T. H., 1910. Chromosomes and Heredity. Am..
Nat., XLIV.

Morean, T. H., 1910. The Method of Inheritance of two
Sex-limited Characters in the Same Animal. Proc. Soc.
Exp. Biol. Med., VIII.

Morean, T. H., 1911. An Attempt to analyze the Constitution
of the Chromosomes on the Basis of Sex-limited In-
heritance in Drosophila. Jour. Exp. Zodl., XI.

Morgan, T. H., 1912. Heredity of Body Color in Drosophila.
Jour. Exp. Zodl., XIII.

Morean, T. H., 1912. A Modification of the Sex Ratio and
of other Ratios in Drosophila through Linkage. Zeits.
Abst. Vererb., VII.

Morean, T. H., 1913. Factors and Unit Characters in
Mendelian Heredity. 4m. Nat., XLVII.

Morean, T. H., 1914. Mosaics and Gynandromorphs in
Drosophila. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., XI.

Morean, T. H., 1914. The Failure of Ether to Produce
Mutations in Drosophila. Am. Nat., XLVIII.

Morgan, T. H., 1914. Sex-limited and Sex-linked Inheritance.
Am. Nat., XLVIII.

*“Morean, T. H., 1914. Two Sex-linked Lethal Factors in
Drosophila and their Influence on the Sex Ratio. Jour.
Exp. Zoél., XVII.

Morean, T. H., 1914. A Third Sex-linked Lethal Factor in

. Drosophila. Jour. Exp. Zoél., XVII.

Morean, T. H., 1916. A Critique of the Theory of Evolution.
Princeton.

Morean, T. H., 1917. The Theory of the Gene. Amer. Nat., 51.

Moraean, T. H., 1919. The Genetic and the Operative Evi-
dence Relating to Secondary Sexual Characters. Carnegie
Inst. Wash., pub., 285.

Morean, T. H., 1919. The Physical Basis of Heredity.
Philadelphia.

Morean, T. H., and C. B. Brinegs, 1913. Dilution effects
and Bicolorism in Certain Eye Colors of Drosophila.
Jour. Exp. Zodl., XV.

Morean, T. H., and C. B. Brings, 1916. Sex-linked In-
heritance in Drosophila. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 237.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 339


Morgan, T. H., and C. B. Bripgss, 1919. The Inheritance,
of a Fluctuating Character. Jour. Gen. Physiol., 1.
Morean, T. H., C. B. Briness, and A. H. Sturtevant, 1919.
Contributions to the Genetics of Drosophila Melanogaster.

Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 278.

Morgan, T. H., and E. Carreiy, 1912. Data for the Study
of Sex-linked Inheritance in Drosophila. Jour. Exp.
Zool., XIII.

Morean, T. H., and E. Carreiy, 1913. Additional Data for
the Study of Sex-linked Inheritance in Drosophila. Jour.
Exp. Zoél., XIV.

Morean, T. H., and H. D. Goopauz, 1912. Sex-linked
Inheritance in Poultry. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Scet.,
XXII.

Morgan, T. H., and C. J. Lyncu, 1912. The Linkage of
Two Factors in Drosophila that are not Sex-linked. Biol.
Bull., XXIII.

Morean, T. H., F. Payne, and E. N. Browns, 1910. A
Method to test the Hypothesis of Selective Fertilization.
Biol. Bull., XVIII.

Morritt, C. V., 1909. Preliminary note on the Chromosomes
in the Odgenesis, Fertilization and Cleavage of certain
Hemiptera. Science, XXX.

Morritt, C. V., 1910. The. Chromosomes in the Odgenesis,
Fertilization and Cleavage of Coreid Hemiptera. Biol.
Bull., XIX.

Morris, Marcaret, 1914. The Behavior of the Chromatin
in Hybrids between Fundulus and Ctenolabrus. Jour.
Exp. Zoél., XVI.

Morssz, M., 1910. Sterility. Am. Nat., XLIV.

Mutter, H. J., 1914. The Bearing of the Selection Experi-
ments of Castle and Phillips on the Variability of Genes.
Am. Nat., XLVIII.

Mutter, H. J.. 1914. A New Mode of Segregation in
Gregory’s Tetraploid Primulas. Am. Nat., XLVIII.
Mouter, H. J., 1914. A Gene for the Fourth Chromosome of

Drosophila. Jour. of Exp. Zoél., XVII.

Muuuer, H. J., 1916. The Mechanism of Crossing Over.

Amer. Nat., 50.


340? BIBLIOGRAPHY


Mutter, H. J., 1917. An CEnothera-like Case in Drosophila.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 3.

Muuer, H. J., 1918. Genetic Variability, Twin Hybrids and
Constant Hybrids in a Case of Balanced Lethal Factors.
Genetics, 3. :

Mutier, H. J., 1920. Further Changes in the White-Eye
Series of Drosophila and their Bearing on the Manner of
Occurrence of Mutation. Jour. Exp. Zodl., 31.

Mutter, H. J., 1922. Variations due to change in the In-
dividual Genl. Am. Nat., 56.

Mutter, H. J., 1920. Are the Factors of Heredity Arranged
in a Line? Amer. Nat., 54.

Mutter, H. J., and E. ALrenpurea, 1919. The Rate of Change
of Hereditary Factors in Drosophila. Proc. Soc. Exper.
Biol. and Med., 17.

Mutsow, K., 1912. Der Chromosomencyclus bei Ancyra-
canthus cystidicola Rud. Arch. f. Zelif., IX. 1.

Nasours, R. K., 1914. Studies of Inheritance and Evolution
in Orthoptera I. Jour. Genet., III.

Nazours, 'R. K., 1919. Parthenogenesis and Crossing Over
in the Grouse Locust Apotettix. Amer. Nat., 53.

NacutsHeim, H., 1912. Parthenogenese, Hireuifng und Ge-
schlechtsbestimmung bei der Honighbiene. Sitzungsber.
Gesell. Morph. u. Phys. Miinchen.

Nacutsuem, H., 1919. Zytologische und experimentelle
Untersuchungen iiber die Geschlechtsbestimmung bei
Dinophilus apatris. Arch. Mikr. Anat., 93.

Newman, H. H., 1907. Spawning Behavior and Sexual
Dimorphism in Fundulus heteroclitus and Allied Fish.
Biol. Bull., XII.

Newman, H. H., 1908. A Significant Case of Hermaphroditism
in Fish. Biol. .Bull., XV.

Newman, H. H., and J. T. Parrerson, 1909. A Case of
Normal Identical Quadruplets in the Nine-banded Ar-
madillo. Biol. Bull., XVII.

Newman, H. H., and J. T. Parrerson, 1910. The Develop-
ment of the Nine-banded Armadillo, ete. Jour. Morph.,
XXI.

Newnan, H. H., and J. T. Patrerson, 1911. The Limits of


BIBLIOGRAPHY 341


Hereditary Control in Armadillo Quadruplets. Jour.
Morph., XXII.

Newman, H. H., 1914. Modes of Inheritance in Teleost
Hybrids. Jour. Exp. Zoél., XVI.

Niusson-EHue, H., 1908. Einigé Ergebnisse von Kreuzungen
bei Hafer und Weizen. Botaniska Notiser.

Payne, F., 1912. A Further Study of the Chromosomes of
the Reduviide, ete. Jour. Morph., XXXIII.

Payne, F., 1912. The Chromosomes of Gryllotalpa borealis.
Arch. f. Zellf., TX.

Peart, M., and R., 1908. On the Relation of Race Crossing
to the Sex Ratio. Biol. Bull., XV.

PEARL, R., 1912. The Mode of Inheritance of Fecundity in
the Domestic Fowl. Jour. Exp. Zoél., XIII.

Peart, R., and H. M. Parsuiry, 1913. Data on Sex De-
termination in Cattle. Biol. Bull., XXIV.

PEARL, R., 1915. Modes of Research in Genetics. New York.

Pures, J. C., 1914. A Further Study of the Size In-
heritance in Ducks with Observations on the Sex Ratio of
Hybrid Birds. Jour. Exp. Zodl., XVI.

Pinney, E., 1918. A Study of the Relation of the Behavior
of the Chromatin to Development and Heredity. Jour.
Morph., 31.

Prats, L., 1918. Vererbungslehre. Leipzig.

PuioueH, H. H., 1917. The Effect of Temperature on Cross-
ing Over. Jour. Exp. Zodl., 24.

Punnett, R. C., 1903. On Nutrition and Sex Determination
in Man. Proc. Cambr. Phil. Soc., XII.

Punnett, R. C., 1906. Sex Determination in Hydatina, with
some Remarks on Parthenogenesis. Proc. Roy. Soc.,
LXXVIII.

Punnett, R. C., 1909. On the Alleged Influence of Lecithin
upon the Determination of Sex in Rabbits. Proc. Camb.
Phil. Soc., XV.

Punnett, R. C., 1910. “Mimicry” in Ceylon Butterflies, ete.
Spol. Zeyl., VII.

Punnett, R. C., 1911. Mendelism.

PunneETT, R. C., 1912. Inheritance of Coat Color in Rabbits.
Jour. Genet., IT.


342 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Punnert, R. C., 1915. Mimicry in Butterflies. Cambridge.

Raw1is, E., 1918. Sex Ratios in Drosophila ampelophila. Biol.
Bull., XXIV.

Renner, O., 1914. Befriichtung und Embryobildung bei
Cnothera Lamarckiana. Flora, 7.

Ricuarpson, C. W., 1914. A Preliminary Note on the
Genetics of Fragaria. Jour. Genet., III.

Rippie, O., 1912. Preliminary Chemical Studies on Male
and Female Producing Eggs of Pigeons. Science,
XXXV.

Rosertson, W. R. B., 1916. Chromosome Studies. I. Jour.
Morph., 27.

Sarir, 8. R., 1913. A New Eye Color Mutation in Droso-
phila and its Mode of Inheritance. Biol. Bull., XXV.

SaunperRs, E. R., 1911. Further Experiments on the In-
heritance of ‘‘Doubleness” and Other Characters in
Stocks. Jour. Genet., I.

SaunpeErs, E. R., 1911. Studies in the Inheritance of Double-
ness in Flowers. I. Petunia. Jour. Genet., I.

Scuuerp, J., 1911. Ueber die Chromosomenverhaeltnisse bei
Angiostomen. Archiv f. Zellforsch., 7.

SEILER, J.,.1913. Das Verhaltung der Geschlechtschromosomen
bei Lepidopteren. Zoél. Anz., XLI.

SEER, J., 1914. Das Verhalten der Geschlechtschromosomen
bei Lepidopteren. Arch. f. Zellf., XIII.

Seiter, J., 1917. Geschlechtschromosomenuntersuchungen
an Psychiden. Zeit. f. Abst. u Vererb. XVIII.

Suiter, J., 1917.  Zytologische Vererbungsstudien an
Schmetterlingen. Sttz. d. Gesell. nat. Freunde, 2.

Seiter, J., 1919. Researches on the Sex-chromosomes of
Psychide (Lepidoptera). Biol. Bull., 36.

SEILER, J., 1920. Geschlechtschromogsomen-Untersuchungen
an Psychiden, I. Arch. f. Zellf., XV.

SEILER, J., 1921. | Geschlechtschromosomen-Untersuchungen
Psychiden I. Arch. f. Zellf., XVI.

SEILER, J., 1921. Neue Ergebnisse der Chromosomenforschung.
Verh. d. schw. Nat. Gesell.

Seiter, J., and C. B. Hanret, 1921. Das verschiedene Ver-
halten der Chromosomen in Eireuifng und Samenreifung


BIBLIOGRAPHY 343


von Lymantria monarcha L. Zeit. f. ind. Abst. wu. Vererb.,
XXVII.

SHEARER, C., 1912. The Problem of Sex Determination in
Dinophilus gyrociliatus. Q. J. M. S., LVII.

SHEARER, C., W. DE Morgan, and H. M. Fucus, 1912. On
Paternal Characters in Echinoid Hybrids. Q. J. M. S.,
LVIII.

Dinophilus gyrociliatus. Q. J. M. Sc., 57.

Suu, A. F., 1910. Studies in the Life Cycle of Hydatina
senta. Jour. Exp. Zoél., VIII.

Suutt, A. F., 1915. Inheritance in Hydatina senta, II.
Characters of the Females and their Parthenogenetic
Eggs. Jour. Exp. Zodl., XVIII.

SHULL, G. H., 1908. The Composition of a Field of Maize.
Am. Breeders’ Assoc., IV.

SHULL, G. H., 1909. The ‘Presence and Absence’’ Hypothesis.
Am. Nat., XLII.

Suutt, G. H., 1909. A Pure Line Method in Corn Breeding.
Am. Breed. Ass., V.

Suu, G. H., 1910. Hybridization Methods in Corn Breed-
ing. Am. Breeder’s Mag., I.

Suutu, G. H., 1910. Inheritance of Sex in Lychnis. Bot.
Gaz., XLIX.

Suutt, G. H., 1911. Reversible Sex-mutants in Lychnis
dioica. Bot. Gaz., LIT.

Suu, G. H., 1912. ‘‘Genotypes,” ‘‘Biotypes,” ‘‘Pure Lines,”’
and “Clones.” Science, XXXV.

Suutt, G. H., 1912. Hermaphrodite Females in Lychnis
dioica. Science, XXXVI.

Suuti, G. H., 1914. Duplicate Genes for Capsule Form in
Bursa bursa-pastoris. Zeits. Abst. Vererb., XII.

Smiru, G., 1910. Studies in the Experimental Analysis of
Sex. Parts 1 and 2. Q. J. M. S., LIV.

Smiru, G., 1910. Studies in the Experimental Analysis of
Sex. Parts 3 and 4. Q. J. M. S., LV.

Smitn, G., 1911. Studies in the Experimental Analysis of
Sex. Part 5. Q. J. M. S., LVI.

Suiru, G., 1911. Studies in the Experimental Analysis of
Sex. Part 6. Q. J. M. 8S., LVI.


344 BIBLIOGRAPHY


SmitH, G., 1911. Studies in the Experimental Analysis of
Sex. Part 7. Q. J. M. S., LVI.

Spemann, H., 1895. Zur Entwicklung des Strongylus para-
doxus. Zoél. Jahrb., Anat. Abt., VIII.

Sprutman, W. J., 1908. Spurious Allelomorphism. Results of
Recent Investigations. Am. Nat., XLII.

Sprttman, W. J., 1909. Barring in Barred Plymouth Rocks.
Poultry, V.

Stanpruss, M., 1896. Handbuch der palaarktischen Gros-
schmetterlinge. Jena.

SranprFuss, M., 1910. Chaerocampa elpenor und einige Mittei-
lungen tiber Aglia tau. Jris, XXIV.

Staptes-Brown, R., 1912. Second Report on the Inheritance
of Color in Pigeons, with Special Reference to Sex-limited
Inheritance.

Srark, M. B., 1919. An Hereditary Tumor. Jour. Exp.
Zo6l., 27.

Stevens, N. M., 1905. Studies in Spermatogenesis with
Especial Reference to the “ Accessory Chromosome.”
Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 36.

Srrvens, N. M., 1908. A Study of the Germ Cells of Certain
Diptera. Jour. Exp. Zoél., V.

Srevens, N. M., 1911. Heterochromosomes in the Guinea~-
pig. Bol. Bull., XXI.

Sromes, T. J., 1916. Uber den Zusammenhang zwischen
Statur und Chromosomenzahl bei den CEnotheren. Biol.
Centralbl., 36.

Srurrevant, A. H., 1912a. An Experiment Dealing with Sex
Linkage in fowls. Jour. Exp. Zodl., XII.

Srurrevant, A. H., 1912b. Is there Association between the
Yellow and Agouti Factors in Mice? Am. Nat., XLVI.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1913a. The Linear Arrangement of Six
Sex-linked Factors in Drosophila, etc. Jour. Exp. Zodl.,
XIV.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1913b. The Himalayan Rabbit Case,
with Some Considerations on Multiple Allelomorphs. Am.
Nat., XLVII.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1913c. A Third Group of Linked Genes
in Drosophila ampelophila. Science, XXXVII.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 345


Sturtevant, A. H., 1914. Linkage in the Silkworm Moth.
Am. Nat., XLVIII.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1914. The Reduplication Hypothesis as
Applied to Drosophila. Am. Nat., XLVIII.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1915. No Crossing over in the Female
of the Silkworm Moth. Am. Nat., XLIX.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1915. The Behavior of the Chromosomes
as Studied through Linkage. Zetts. Abst. Vererb., XIII.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1918. A Parallel Mutation in Droso-
phila funebris. Science, 48.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1918. An Analysis of the Effects of
Selection. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 264.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1920. Intersexes in Drosophila simulans.
Science, N. S., 51.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1920. The Vermilion Gene and Gynan-
dromorphism. Proc. Sci. Exp. Brit. Med., 17.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1920-1921. Genetic Studies on Drosophila
Simulans, I-III. Genetics, 5, 6.

Srurtrevant, A. H., 1921. A Case of Rearrangement of Genes
in Drosophila. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 7.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1921. Linkage Variation and Cromo-
some Maps. Proc. Nat. Acad., 7.

Sturtevant, A. H., 1921. The North American Species of
Drosophila. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 301.

Tanaka, Y., 1913. A Study of Mendelian Factors in the
Silkworm, Bombyx mori. Jour. Coll. Agr., Tohoku Imp.
Uni., Sapporo, Japan, V.

Tanaka, Y., 1913. Gametic Coupling and Repulsion in Silk-
worms. Jour. Coll. Agr., Sapporo, Japan, V.

Tanaka, Y., 1914. Sexual Dimorphism of Gametic Series in
the Reduplication. Trans. Sapporo Nat. His. Soc., V.

Tanaka, Y., 1914. Further Data on the Re-duplication in
Silkworms. Jour. Coll. Agr., Sapporo, Japan, VI.

Tanaka, Y., 1916. Genetic Studies on the Silkworm. Jour.
Coll. Agr., Tohoku Imper. Univ., 7.

Tunnent, D. H., 1911. A Heterochromosome of Male Origin
in Echinoids. Biol. Bull., X XI.

Tennent, D. H., 1912. Studies in Cytology, I and IT. Jour.
Exp. Zoél., XII.


346 BIBLIOGRAPHY


TuomsEn, E., 1911. Die Differenzierung des Geschlechts und
das Verhaltnis der Geschlechter beim Hiihnchen. Arch.
Entw.-mech. der Org., XXXI.

Tower, W. L., 1906. An Investigation of Evolution in Chryso-
melid Beetles of the Genus Leptinotarsa. Carnegie Inst.
Wash., pub., 48.

Tower, W. L., 1910. The Determination of Dominance and
the Modification of Behavior in Alternative (Mendelian)
Inheritance, by Conditions Surrounding or Incident upon
the Germ Cells at Fertilization. Biol. Bull., XVIII, also
XX.

Tower, W. L.,' 1918. The Mechanism of Evolution in
Leptinotarsa. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 263.

Toyama, K., 1906. On the Hybridology of the Silkworm.
Report Sericultural Assoc., Japan, May, 1906.

Toyama, K., 1906. Studies on the Hybridology of Insects, I.
On. Some Silkworm Crosses, with Special Reference to
Mendel’s Law of Heredity. Bull. Coll. Agr., Tokyo Imp.
Uni., VII.

Toyama, K., 1912. On Certain Characteristics of the Silk-
worm apparently Non-mendelian. Biol. Cent., XXXII.

Trow, A. H., 1913. On the Inheritance of Certain Characters
in the Common Groundsel — Senecio vulgaris — and its
Segregates. Jour. Genet., II.

Trow, A. H., 1913. Forms of Reduplication — Primary and
Secondary. Jour. Genet., II.

v. TscHERMAK, A., 1910. Uber den Einfluss der Bastardierung
auf Form, Farbe und Zeichnung von Kanarieneiern. Biol.
Centr.. XXX

v. TscHERMAK, A., 1912. Uber Verinderung der Form Farbe
und Zeichnung von Kanarieneiern durch Bastardierung.
Arch. f. Gesell. Phys., CXLVIII.

v. TscuEeRMAK, E., 1908. Der moderne Stand des Vererbungs-
problems. Arch. Rass. und Geseil., V.

DE VILMORIN, P., and W. Barsson, 1911. A Case of Gametic
Coupling in Pisum. Proc. Roy. Soc., B, LXXXIV.

bE Vrigs, H., 1901. Die Mutationstheorie. Leipzig.

bE Vrigs, H. 1908. Uber die Zwillingsbastarde von Cénothera
-nanella. Ber. deutsch. Bot. Gesell., XXVI a.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 347


bE Vriss, H., 1908. Bastarde von Cinothera gigas. Ber.
deutsch. Bot. Gesell., XXVI. a.

DE VriEs, Hugo, 1909. On Triple Hybrids. Bot. Gaz., XLIX.

pE Vrigs, H., 1911. Uber doppeltreziproke Bastarde von
nothera biennis und O. muricata. Biol. Centr., XXXI.

DE Vriss, H., 1913. Gruppenweise Artbildung. Berlin.

DE Vriks, H., 1916. Gute, harte und leere Samen von
CEnothera. Zeits. Abst. Vererb., 16.

DE Vrizs, H., 1918. Mutations of Cnothera suaveolens.
Genetics, 3:

DE Vrigs, H., 1919. M£nothera Lamarckiana Mut. Simplex.
Ber. deutsch. Bot. Ges., 37.

DE Vrigs, H., 1919. CEnothera Lamarckiana Erythrina, eine
neue Halbmutante. Zeits. Abst. Vererb., 21.

DE Vries, H., 1919. CEnothera Rubrinervis, a Half Mutant.
Bot. Gaz., 47.

WEINSTEIN, A., 1918. Coincidence of Crossing over in Droso-
phila melanogaster. Genetics, 3.

Weinstein, A., 1920. Homologous Genes and Linear Linkage
in Drosophila virilis. Proc. Nat. Acad., 6.

Weisman, AuaustT, 1913. Vortrage iiber Deszendenztheorie.
Jena, 1913.

Wenricu, D. H., 1916. The Spermatogenesis of Phrynotettix
Magnus. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zoél. Harv., 60.

WHEELER, W. M., 1903. The Origin of Female and Worker
Ants from the Eggs of Parthenogenetic Workers. Science,
XVIII.

WHEELER, W. M., 1910. The Effects of Parasitic and Other

_ Kinds of Castration in Insects. Jour. Exp. Zodl., VITI.

WueEeELerR, W. M., 1910. A Gynandromorphous Mutillid.
Psyche, XVII.

WueEeer, W. M., 1914. Gynandromorphous Ants, Described
during the Decade, 1903-1913. Am. Nat., XLVIII.
Wuitman, C. O., 1919. Orthogenetic Evolution in Pigeons.

Edited by O. Rippiz. Carnegie Inst. Wash., pub., 257.

Wuirney, D. D., 1912. Reinvigoration Produced by Cross
Fertilization in Hydatina senta. Jour. Exp. Zodl., XII.

Wuirney, D. D., 1914. The Influence of Food in Controlling
Sex in Hydatina senta. Jour. Exp. Zodél., XVII.


348 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Wixtson, E. B., 1899. The Cell in Development and In-
heritance. New York.

Witson, E. B., 1905. Studies on Chromosomes, I and II.
Jour. Exp. Zodl., I.

Witson, E. B., 1906. Studies on Chromosomes, III. Jour
Exp. Zoél., III.

Witson, E. B., 1909. Studies on Chromosomes, IV and V.
Jour. Exp. Zodl., V1.

Witson, E. B., 1909. Recent Researches on the Determination
and Inheritance of Sex. Science, XXIX.

Witson, E. B., 1909. Secondary Chromosome Couplings and
the Sexual Relations in Abraxas. Science, XXIX

Witson, E. B., 1910. Note on the Chromosomes of Nezara.
Science, XX XI.

Witson, E. B., 1910. The Chromosomes in Relation to the
Determination of Sex. Sci. Progr., XVI.

Witson, E. B., 1910. Studies on Chromosomes, VI. Jour.
Exp. Zo6l., IX.

Wiuson, E. B., 1911. Studies on Chromosomes, VII. Jour.
Morph., XXII.

Wiuson, E. B., 1911. The Sex Chromosomes. Arch. Mikr.
Anat., LX XVII.

Witson, E. B., 1912. Studies on Chromosomes, VIII. Jour.
Exp. Zoél., XIII.

Witson, E. B., 1912. Some Aspects of Cytology in Relation
to the Study of Genetics. Am. Nat., XLVI.

Witson, E. B., 1914. Croonian Lecture: The Bearing of
Cytological Research on Heredity. Proc. Roy. Soc.
LXXXVIII.

Winker, H., 1916. Uber die experimentelle Erzeugung von
Pflanzen mit abweichenden chromosomenzahl. Zeits.
Botan., 8.

Wortereck, R., 1911. Uber Verinderung der Sexualitit bei
Daphniden. Leipzig, 1911.

Wooprurr, L. L., 1905. An Experimental Study of the Life
History of Hypotrichous Infusoria. Jour. Exp. Zoél., II.

Wooprwurr, L. L., 1908. The Life Cycle of Paramecium when
Subje&ted to a Varied Environment. Am. Nat., XLII.

Wooprurr, L. L., 1914. On So-called Conjugating and Non-


BIBLIOGRAPHY 349


Souneetne Races of Paramecium. Jour. Exp. Zoél.,

VI.

Wooprurr, L. L., and Ruopa Erpmann, 1914. A Normal
Periodic Reorganization Process without Cell Fusion in
Paramecium. Jour. Exp. Zoél., XVII.

Wooprurr, L. L., 1911. Two Thousand Generations of
Paramecium. Arch. f. Protistenkunde., 21.

Wooprvrr, L. L., and R. Erpmann, 1914. A Normal Periodic
Reorganization Process without Cell Fusion in Para-
mecium. Journ. Exper. Zoél., 17.

WriGut, SEWALL, 1914. Duplicate Genes. Am. Nat., XLVIII.

Wrieut, §.,.1917-1918. Color Inheritance in Mammals. I-
IX. Jour. Hered., 8, 9.

ZELENY, C., 1917. Full-eye and Emarginate Eye from Bar-
eye in Drosophila without Change in the Bar Gene.
Anat. Rec., 14.

ZELENY, C., 1917. Selection for High-facet and Low-facet
Number in the Bar-eyed Race of Drosophila. Anat.
Rec., 14.

ZELENY, C., 1918. Germinal Changes in the Bar-eyed Race of
Drosophila, during the Course of Selection for Facet
Number. Proc. Indiana Acad. Sci., 1917.

ZELENY, C., 1919. A Change in the Bar Gene of Drosophila
Involving further Decrease in Facet Number and Increase
in Dominance. Journ. Gen. Physiol., 2.

ZELENY, C., 1920. A Change in the Bar Gene of Drosophila
melanogaster Involving further Decrease in Facet Number
and Increase in Dominance. Journ. Exper. Zoél., 30.

ZELENY, C., and E. W. Marroon, 1915. The Effect: of Se-
lection upon the “Bareye” Mutant of Drosophila.
Journ. Exper. Zodl., 19.


INDEX


INDEX


A Baur, 38, 185, 186, 204
Abnormal abdomen, 39-41 Beans, 206, 257, 267
Abraxas, 70, 79, 83-88, 122 Beaded, 247
Bee, 139


Acclimatization, 296

Age, 42

Allelomorphs, 3
Allelomorphs of white, 218
Allen, 133


Beneden, van, 162
Bidder’s organ, 95
Bierens de Haans, 142
Biston zonaria, 191, 192


Altenburg, 77, 241 Sa ee
Amitosis, 151 ears : \ 35
YT


Andalusian, 28
Anderson, 77
Anoplophrya, 305
Antirrhinum, 185
Aphelopus, 115

Aphids, 100

Apotettis, 69

Arcella, 291, 292

Arcella dentata, 290, 294
Arcella polypora, 293
Ascaris, 79, 152, 172-4 Cc
Ascaris incurva, 136 Calkins, 302
Asexual reproduction, 283 - aixins,


Boulenger, 94

Boveri, 96, 123, 143-146, 152

Brauer, 162°

Breda fowl, 272

Bridges, 32, 68, 130, 196, 237,
250

Bryonia, 79

Bursa bursa-pastoris, 223


Campine, 108


B Canary, 70, 79
Carchesium, 305

Back-cross, 50 Carothers, 186
Baer, von, 100 Castle, 69, 169, 234, 250, 251, 254,
Balanced lethal, 246 255, 259
Baltzer, 96, 147, 150, 154 Castration, 107
Bar, 29, 58, 260 Cat, 70, 79
Barnacles, 96 Centropyxis, 294
Bateson, 5, 41, 74-77, 168, 175, Chlamydomonas, 306, 307

268-270 Chiasmatype, 166
Batracoseps, 156 , Chimaera, 178


353


354


Chondriosomes, 182
Chromidia, 292, 295
Chromosome individuality, 151
Club, 32-34

Cole, 69

Coincidence, 171

Columbine, 204

Complete linkage theory, 213, 217
Conjugation, 296, 299
Contamination, 268

Corn, 26, 237, 266

Correns, 136, 184, 185

Cotton, 26

Cream, 255

Crepidula, 95

Crossing over, 50, 164
Ctenolabrus, 154

Cuénot, 206

Cumingia, 135

Cumulative factors, 221
Cytoplasmic inheritance, 182-186


D


Dallinger, 295

Darwin, 254

Dauer-modification, 296

Davenport, 266

Dederer, 90

Dexter, 247

Delage, 106

Dichaete, 248

Didinium nasutum, 305

Difflugia corona, 287-289

Dinophilus, 140

Dispermy, 144

Dobell, 296

Doncaster, 86-87, 90, 121, 137,
154, 191

Double crossing over, 63

Driesch, 146

Drosophila simulans, 130

Dufossé, 95


INDEX


E


East, 230, 237, 266

Ebony, 138, 21-25, 228, 229
Elimination, 124

Emerson, 206, 208, 210, 211
Endomixis, 295
Engelhardt, 122
Environment, 38

Eosin, 203
Erdmann, 295, 304, 305
Euschistus, 112

Eugster bees, 122

Evening primrose (see Oenothera)
Eye color, 262

Eye color (man), 266
Eyeless, 13-14, 25


F
Factors, 3
Faust, 135
Federley, 156, 188, 190
Foot, 112


Four o’clock, 26-28, 184

Fowl, 28, 36, 69-73, 79, 107-108,
270

Fractionation, 268

Frog, 94, 106

Frolowa, 172

Fundulus, 154


Gates, 193

Geinitz, 172

Gaird, 114

Goldschmidt, 124-130, 168-169
Goodale, 69, 108 :
Goodrich, 136, 174

Gould, 95

Gregory, 176, 194-195, 302
Gynandromorphs, 116-124


INDEX 355


H L
Haldane, 170 Larval marking, 190
Haploidy, 134 Leptinotarsa, 26, 43-44
Hargitt, 285 Lethal, 138
Harrison, 192 Linkage, 5, 48-77
Hayes, 266 Little, 206
Hegner, 290, 292, 294 Lock, 5
Helix, 26 Loeb, 106
Hen-feathering, 107-108 Lutz, 30, 193
Herbst, 143, 149, 154 Lychnis, 70, 79, 137, 206
Hermaphroditism, 94 Lymantria, 70, 124-130


Hertwig, 154, 162
Hipponoe, 149


Hoge, 41 M
Holmes, 266
M-chrosomes, 187
Hooded rats, 250 :
oe Man, 26, 70, 79


Honey-bee, 99
Hornet, 98
Hornless sheep, 275
Horns, 109-112
Hurst, 266
Hydatina, 97-98


MacDowell, 234:

Map distance, 171
Maternal inheritance, 185
Maize, 208

Maréchal, 158, 176
Mattoon, 261
Maturation, 155


I May, 261
Indian corn, 235-236 arene my 88
Interference, 64, 77, 170-171 Meni dia. 154
Intersexes, 124-132 Merino, ‘109
Metapodius, 153, 187
J Mexican sweet corn, 236
Middleton, 285, 291
Janssens, 156, 164, 166 Miniature, 30-31, 58, 203
Jennings, 284-285, 291, 304-305 Mirabilis, 184
Johannsen, 257, 267 Moenkhaus, 153
Jollos, 295, 296, 297 Morgan, 31, 101, 124, 206, 287.
250, 259
Morris, 154
K Moth, 188, 191
Kautsch, 172-173 Mouse, 26, 69, 206
Kellogg, 116 Muller, 67, 241, 247-248
Kopee, 116 Mulsow, 172


Kornhauser, 115 Multiple allelomorphs, 202


396


Multiple factors, 219-261
Mutation, 35
Myxine, 95


N


Nabours, 69, 209

Nachtsheim, 140

Nematodes, 174

Nicotiana alata grandiflora, 232
Nicotiana forgetiana, 230-231
Nightshade, 26, 177
Nilsson-Ehle, 225-226
Non-disjunction, 193, 199


Oo


Oenothera, 26

Oenothera gigas, 175-176
Oenothera lamarckiana, 175, 193
Oenothera lata, 193

Oenothera semilata, 193
Opalina, 305

Operculina, 305

Orchestia, 94

Oudemanns, 116


P


Paramecium, 284, 285, 295, 296,
299, 302

Pascher, 306-307

Parasitic castration, 114-116

Paratettix, 209-210

Parthenogenesis, 97

Pea, 26, 69

Pea comb, 270

Pelargonium, 185-186

Peltogaster, 114

Petromyzon, 95

Phalangium, 94

Phillips, 250

Phragmatobia, 88-90


INDEX


Phylloxerans, 101-105

Pigeons, 69-70, 233, 240
Pinney, 154

Plastids, 182

Plough, 68, 77

Polarity, 76

Polytoma, 97

Polar bodies, 163

Porthetria (see Lymantria)
Potato beetle, (see Leptinotarsa)
Potency, 254

Preformation, 277

Presence and absence, 275
Primula, 38-39, 69, 77, 176, 194
Pristiurus, 158-160

Protozoa, 282-306

Punnett, 5, 113, 168

Pygera, 188


R


Rabbits, 204-205, 235, 240, 269
Rats, 69, 280
Reduplication, 74, 168
Reversible mutations, 206
Rhabdonema, 96

Root, 294

Rose comb, 270
Rosenberg, 154

Rotifer, 97

Roux, 77, 278
Rudimentary, 34-35


8


Sacculina, 114

Schleip, 96

Schmitt-Marcel, 106

Schreiner, 95

Sea-urchin, 106, 143, 147, 149

Sebright, 107

Secondary sexual characters, 106-
116


INDEX


Segregation, 1, 3

Seiler, 86, 88-90, 137

Selection, 286, 294, 296

Serosa, 184

Serranus, 95

Sex chromosome, 172-173

Sex-determining factors, 206

Sex factors, 172

Sex linked factors, 16, 195

Sex ratios, 134-140

Sheep, 109-112

Shull, 97, 206, 225, 266

Sieboldt, von, 122

Silkworm, 37, 69, 122, 183, 206

Smith, G., 96, 114

Snapdragon, 69

Solanum, 177

Spheerechinus, 147

Spherocarpos, 133-134

Spermatogenesis of grasshoppers,
186

Stevens, 7, 90, 100

Stocks, 69

Stomps, 175

Strobell, 112

Strongylocentrotus, 147

Sturtevant, 68, 130, 206, 248

Sweet pea, 5, 36, 69, 268

Sutton, 4

Stylonichia pustulata, 285


T


Tanaka, 69, 206
Tennent, 154
Tetraploidy, 174-177
Thelia, 115-116
Thomas, 193
Tobacco, 26
Tomato, 26, 177
Tower, 43
Toxopneustes, 149
Toyama, 122


357


Trident pattern, 237, 250, 259-260
Triploidy, 130
Trow, 75, 170
Truncate, 241


U


Unit Character, 264
Uroleptus, 305


Vv


Vestigial, 8-12, 21-25, 48-53
Vigor, 240
DeVries, 35, 263 280


Ww


Walnut comb, 270

W-chromosome, 172

Weismann, 77, 270, 277-278

Wheat, 26

White eye color, 16-20, 24, 31-32,
54-59, 203

Whitney, 97-98

Wilson, 153, 187

Winkler, 177-181

With, 238

Wood, 111

Woodruff, 304

Wright, 256


x

X-chromosome, 14, 15, 79-82, 198-
200

XX-XY type, 173

Y
Y-chromosome, 7,15, 79-82, 93, 172
Yellow, 54-58

Z
Zeleny, 135, 260


Quine Chen newness 2 Sores Be — : ae =


Serene ene ei a = or
5 cece
= : > :


