News from Nowhere
William Morris (1892)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): William Morris's 'News from Nowhere: or, An Epoch of Rest' (Kelmscott Press, 1892). Scan via Internet Archive. Runs complete through the Kelmscott colophon. This 1892 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

NEWS FROM NOWHERE: OR,
‘AN EPOCH OF REST, BEING SOME
CHAPTERS FROM A UTOPIAN RO-
MANCE, BY WILLIAM MORRIS.


ALIST OF THE CHAPTERS OF THIS.
BOOK.


I, Discussion and Bed


II. A Morning Bath 5
IIL. The Guest House and Break
fast therein 17
IV. A Market by the Way 3
V. Children on the Road 36
VI. A little Shopping 46
VII. Trafalgar Square 57
VIIL Anold Friend 8
IX. Conceming Love 73
X. Of Questions and Answers 8
XI. Conceming Government 106
XII. Conceming the Attangement
of Life 113
XIII, Conceming Politics 2


XIV. How Matters are Managed 122
XV. On the Lack of Incentive to
Labour in a Communist So-


ciety 130
XVI. Dinner in the Hall of the

Bloomsbury Market 141

XVII. How the Change came 147
XVI The Beginning of the New

ife 18;
XIX. The Drive back to Hammer» 7
smith 194


XX. The Hammersmith Guest-


House again
XXI. Going up the River bay
XXIL Hampton Court. Anda Prais-

er of Past Times aoe


XXIII. An Early Morning at Runny-
di


mede 222
XXIV. Up the Thames: the Second

bay 239

XXV. The Thitd Day on the Thames 243

XXVI. The Obstinate Refusers 249

XXVIL The Upper Waters 255

XXVIIL. The Little River 270
XIX. A Resting-Place on the Upper

Thames 276

XXX. TheJoumey's End 282
XXX An Old House amongst New

Ik 290


Fol
XXXII. The Feast’s Beginning, ..The
End 297


é


LS


XG
5)


el. THIS IS THE PICTU


HOUSE BY THE THAMES TO WHICH
THE PEOPLE OF THIS STORY WENT
HEREAFTER FOLLOWS THE BOOK ITA


SELF WHICH IS CALLED NEWS FROM}


NOWHERE OR AN EPOCH OF REST &


QD) saysafriend,there
lhadbeenonenight ©
a brisk conversa-
tional discussion,
as to what would
happen on the
MorrowoftheRe-


eloy
A


ing the subject, the discus
AN sion was good-tempered;
BI for those present beingused
FY topublicmeetings & after. @y
2 lecture debates, if they did
not listen to cach other's opinions, which
could scarcely be expected of them, at all


Thoughts in on


the under-
ground car-
riage


a subject which interests them. For the rest,
oo a eve six persons present, and consequently
shxserons ofthe pat were represented four of
sit Sis had strong but divergent Anarchist opin,
whiclOne of the sections, says our friend, aman
ips Ghe knows very wellindeed,satalmostsilent
withe beginning of the discussion, but at last got
San iato it, and finished by roaring out ve
feud, &¢damning all the rest for fools; afterwhid
Leiel a period of noise, and then a lull, durin
De Ain labicesaidi serra ie erent
Right very amicably, took his way home by him,
Taf roa gestern suburb, using the means of tra
yelling which civilisation has forced upon uslike
Nhabe. As hesat in that vapour-bath of hurried
and discontented humanity, a carriage of the uns
derground railway, he, lee others, stewed dis,
contentedly, while in self-reproachful mood he
turned over the many excellent and conclusive
arguments which, though they lay at his fingers’
ends hehad forgotten in the just past discussion.
But this frame of mind he was so used to, that it
didn’t last him long, and after a brief discomfort,
caused by disgust with himself for having lst
his temper, which he was also well used to, he
found himself musing on the subject-matter of
discussion, but still discontentedly and unhap-
pily. “IF T could bur see a dry off” he said to
imself; “if I could but see it!”


2


= S he formed the words, the train A fair night
x NaS stopped at his station, five min-
2% Ki utes’ walk from his own house,
VAN which stood on the banks of the
Kh Thames, alittleway abovean ugly
Ys spension bridge, He wentoutct
the station, still discontented and unhappy, mut-
tering, “IfI could but seeit! if Lcould butseeit!”
but had not gone many steps towards the river
before (saysour friend whotells the story) all that
discontent and trouble seemed to slip off him.
a= FT was a beautiful night of earl
winter, the air just sharp enoug!
to be refreshingafter the hot room
p)] and the stinking railway carriage.
) Thewind,which hadlavely turned
Pw a point or two north of west, had
blown the sky clear of all cloud save a light fleck
or two which went swiftly down the heavens.
‘There was a young moon halfway up the sky,
and as the home-farer caught sight of it, tangled
in the branches of a tall old elm, he could scarce
bring to his mind the shabby London suburb
where he was, & he feltas if hewere in a pleasant
country place: pleasanter, indeed, than the decp
country was as be had known i. Heeamenitt
down to the river-side, and lingered a little, look-
ing over the low wall to note the moonlit river,
near upon high water, go swirling and glittering
upto Chiswick Byot: as for the ugly bridge be-
2 3


Lying awake low


hhedidnotnotceit orthinkof it except when
ows coment (saysour friend) itstruck him that
£2 snissed the row of lights down stream. Then
he turned to his housedoor & let himself ins and
ae evas he shut the door to, disappeared all re-
Sveinbrance of that brilliant logic and foresight
Thich had so illuminated the recent discussion;
wid of the discussion itself there remained no
trace, save a vague hope, that was now becomea
pleasure, fordaysof peace and restandcleanness,
And smiling goodwill.LInthis mood hetumbled
into bed, and fell asleep after his wont, in two
minutes’ time; but (contrary to his wont) woke
up again not long after in that curiously wide-
awake condition which sometimes surprises even
good sleepers;a condition under which we feelall
Sur wits preternaturally sharpened, while all the
miserable muddles we have ever got into, all the
disgraces and losses of our lives, will insist on
thrusting themselves forward for the considera
tion of those sharpened wits. i

SUREIESAN this state helay (saysourfrien
4 GH lhe had Se eae

gar REA it: till the tale of his stupidities
Fad Parse amused him, and the entangle
(SAV)


Kay ies) ments before him, which he saw
asst so clearly, began to shape thems
selves into anamusingstory for him.@He he
one o'clock strike, then two, and then three} after
which he fell asleep again. Our friend says that
4


| nl Oi einai |


from that sleep he awoke once more, and after» To-morrow
wards went through such surprising adventures is a new day
that he thinks that they should be told to our

comrades, and indeed the public in general, and

therefore proposes to tell them now. But, sa

he, I think it would be better if I told them in the

first person, as if it were myself who had gone

through them; which, indeed, will be the easier

and more natural to me, since I understand the

feelings and desiresof thecomradeof whom I am

telling, better than any one elsein the world does.


CHAPTER II. A MORNING BATH.
Sp EEIGELL, I awoke, & found

ESS oy if thas Tyhiad’Rilecd ay
(fH, we (Al bed clothes off; and no d

pe

@/

ad

SAC? §) awake condition, as if I

WA BLO hadslepe fora long lon;

while, and could not shake off the weight o


wonder, for itwas hot &
slumber. In fact, I rather took it for granted that


thesun shining brightly.

I jumped up & washed,
I was at home in my own room than saw that it
was so.


&Xhurriedonmyclothes,
but in a hazy and half:


B


PZ peas air & pleasant breeze;my second,
as I began to gather my wits together, mere mea,
Sureless wonder: for it was winter when I went
to bed the last night; and now, by witness of the
riverside trees, itwas summer, a beautiful bright
morning seemingly ofearly June. However,there
Aasstilthe Thamessparkling underthesun, and
wear high water, as last night I hadseenit gleam,
ing under the moon.
==>) HAD by nomeans shaken off the
feeling of slumbrous oppression,
and wherever I might have been,
hoeld scare: have been quiteclll
scious of the place; so it was no
SG ronderthatl feleratherpuzzledin
despite of the familiar face ofthe Thames. Withal
! Ifeltdizzy and queer; & remembering that people
often got a boat and had a swim in mid-stream,1
Gouge! would do ‘eve oart le soaais very cae
quoth I to myself, but I daresay I shall findsomer
oneat Biffin’s to take me. However, I didn’t get
as far as Biffin’s, or even turn to my left thither
ward, because just then I began to see that there
was a landing-stage right before me in front of
a4 house: in fact, on the place where my next+


re


door neighbour had rigged oneup, though somer In the water
how it didn't look like that either. Down I went
on toit, and sure enough among the emptyboats
fnoored to it lay a man on his sculls in a solid
Tooking tub of a boat clearly meant for bathers.
He nodded to me, and bade me good-morning
as ifhe expected me, so I jumped in without any |
words, andhe paddledaway quietlyas I peeled for |
my swim. As we went, I looked down on the
water, and couldn’t help saying: “How clear the
water is this morning!” “Is it?” said he; “I
‘You know the flood-tide always

thickens ita bit.” “H’'m,” said I, “T have seen it
pretty muddy even at half-ebb.”

QE said nothing in answer, but
seemed rather astonished; and as
he nowlay juststemmingthetide; {


and Thadmy clothesoff, | jumped
Win without more ado. Of course

PL ANGZAMA when Thad my head above water

again I turned towardsthe tide, and my eyes nat- |
urally sought for the bridge, and so utterly as-

tonished was I by what I'saw, that I forgot to

strike out, & went down spluttering underwater

again, and when I came up made straight for the

boat; for I felt that I must ask some questions of

my waterman, so bewildering had been the half-

sight I had seen from the face of the river with

thewater hardly out of my eyes; though by this

time Iwasquit of the slumbrous & dizzy feeling,

7


A gallant


and was wide-awake and clear-headed.AsI got


waterman incotheboatfromthestepewhich he hadlowered,


Eheheldouthis handtohelpme,wewentdrifting
speedily up towards Chiswick; butnowhecaught
tp the culls and brought her head round again,
nad said:“A. short swim, neighbour; but per-
haps you find the water cold this morning, after
your joumey. Shall I put you ashore at once, or
Yrould you like to go down to Putney before
breakfast?” € He spoke in a way so unlike what
T should have expected from a Hammersmith
waterman that I stared at him, as I answered,
“Please to hold her a little; I want to look about
me a bit” All right,” he said; “it’s no less
pretty in its way here than it is off Barn Elms;
Hos jolly everywhere this time in the morning.
I'm glad you got up early; it's barely five o'dl
yet.’ CIf I was astonished with my sight of the
Fiver banks, Twas no less astonished at my water
‘man, now that I had time to look at him and see
him with my head and eyes clear.
[97 pe =RSZZE was a handsome young fellow,
ey Vi with a peculiarly pleasant and
Wj riendly look about his eyes, an
YA expression which was quite new
AS to me then, though I soon became
WY) familiar with it. For the rest, he
was dark-haired and berry-brown of skin, well-
knit and strong, and obviously used to exercising
hig mustles, but with nothing rough or eaase


i
|
]


ship lirniand een as might besHicdeess was ‘Thames
Tight SR AS Baie
Zeeny bat would have served very well as a cose
tume for a picture of fourteenth-century life: it
was of dark blue cloth, simple enough, butof fine
Bee et iota peatmorgeh ic Gade Goes
Teahe Peli orelt es waist and Tanai
HS gar eae ween fees Gee
premteies la shoceahe seciried oo eotibe eciie
ally manly and refined young gentleman,
PUying-wateran for a spree, and concluded
that this was the case.(QI felt that I must make
some. conversation; soli pointed to the Sumey
Bank where I noticed some light boarded stages
running dowa the foresorc,with afadlacsex at
the landward end of them, and said, “ What are
they doing with those things here? I we were on
Hedeys stool baveandtatches eects
drawing the salmon nets; but here .. .” “Well,”
said he, smiling, “of course that is what they are
fe QU hecincreate elton ice eet
Bogle nes ye ale ere ot ae
they arenot always in use; wedon t want salmon
exery day of the season,”
— ‘WAS going to say, “But is this
She (lamest bes heldanpineie
i in my wonder,and turned fay bee
Bilder eyed ean
FW the bridge again,andthence tothe
NEY shores of the London river; and


9


The bridge surely
andtheriver though


banks


there was enough to astonish me, For
there was a bridge across the stream and
houses on its banks, how all was changed from
ast night! The soap-works with their smoke,
vomiting chimneys were gone; the engineer's
Works gone; the lead-works gone; and no sound
of rivetting and hammering came down the west
Sand from Thorneycroft’s. Then the bridge! I
had perhaps dreamed of such a bridge, butnever
seen such an one out of an illuminated manu.
script; fornoteven the Ponte Vecchioat Florence
tame anywhere neat it. It was of stone arches,
splendidly solid of build, and as graceful as they
werestronghighenough alsotoletordina iver
traffic through easily. Over the parapet showed
quaint and fanciful little buildings, which I sup,
posed to be booths or shops, beset with painted
and gilded vanes and spirelets. The stone wasa
little weathered, but showed no marks of the
imy sootiness which I was used to on every
ondon building more than a yearold. In short
to me a wonder of a bridge. The sculler noted
my eager astonished look, and said, as ifinanswer
tomy thoughts, “ Ves, it io apretty bridge, isn’tit?
Even the up-stream bridges, which are somt
smaller, are scarcely daintier, & the down-stream
ones are scarcely more dignified and stately.” C1
found myself saying, almost against my will,
“Howoldis it?” “ Ob not very old,” he said; “it
was built or at least opened, in 2003. There
to be a rather plain timber bridge before then.”
10


SSSQRHE date shut my mouth as if a What year
ESSA key had been turned in a padlock ofthe world?
J fixed to my lips; for I saw that

W (( something inexplicable had hap-

NN pened, and that if I said much, I
should be mixed up in a game of
cross questions and crooked answers. So I tried
to look unconcerned, and to glance ina matter-of-
course way at the banks of the river, though this
is what I ane tothe bridgeand a little beyond;
Fayes techs RE RIO OPO NORD RE OOE
shores had a line of very pretty houses, low and
not large, standing back a little way from the
river; they were mostly builtof red brick & roofed
with tiles, & looked, above all, comfortable, and
as if they were, soto say, alive, and sympathetic
with the life of the dwellers in them. In front of
them, goingdown to the water's edge, there was a
continuous garden, in which the flowerswerenow
blooming luxuriantly, & sending delicious waves
of summerscentovertheeddying stream. Behind
the houses, I could see great trees rising, mostly
planes; and looking down the water, there were
the reaches towards Putney almost as if they
were a lake with a forest shore, so thick were the
big trees; and I said aloud, but as if to myself:
«Well, I'm glad that they have not built over
Barn Elms.”€I blushed for my fatuity as the
words slipped out of my mouth, and my com-
panion looked at me with a half smile which I
"


How to pay thought I understood; so to hide my confusion]


a stranger


thot Please take me ashore now: I want to get
said east” (He nodded, and brought hee
Seer witha diarp stroke, addicts eye
were atthe landingstage agai. He jumped off
we followed him} and of course I was not sur,
antied to see him wait, as if for the inevitable
Freee ace that follows the doing of a service toa
fellow-citizen. So I put my hand into my waist-
aecocket, and said: “Plow much?” though
<eitcith the uncomfortable feeling that perhaps
{twas offering money to a gentleman. He looked
punsled, and said: "How much? I don’t quite
Eecatead what you are asking about. Do you
Titan thetide? Ifo, itis cee on the turn ngwet
GiBIseet said waranccing: “leased
fake itamistif Lack you, L mean no offence: bat
Ghsougtl topay yout Youscelam astuaged
oid dant [iow your custorns or our eae
‘And therewith I ook a handful of money outof
may pocket one des ina foreign aunty, And
Bpihe ways | saw that the slver had oxpdined)
audiwas like a blackleaded stove in colour (LH
still seemed puzzled, bist not at all offended: and
he looked at the coins with some curiosity
thought: Well, after all, he is a waterman, andis
considering what he may venture to tle, He
seems such a nice fellow that I'm sure I don't
grudge him a litele over-payment. I wonder, B

theway, whether I coulda’e hire him as a guide


for a day or two, since he is so intelligent.
2


HEREWITH my new friend Ancient
A said thoughtfully: Ithink I know coins
ree ou mean, You think that I
SABE! have done youaservice; soyou feel
q>) Se) yourself Bend te give pe beter
od thing which I am not to give toa
neighbour, unless he has done something special
forme Thave Heardefthas kind of ching} bes par
don me for saying, that it seems to usa trouble-
some & roundabout custom; and we don’t know
how to manage it. And you see this ferrying and
giving peo le casts about the water is my busi-
ness, which I would do for anybody; so to take
its in connection with itwould look-very queen
Seuenren person gave me something, then
another might, & another, and so on; and I hope
re won't think me rude if I say that I shouldn't
ow where to stow away so many mementos of
friendship.” And he laughed loud and merrily,
as if the idea of being paid for hiswork wasavery
finnyjole confess t began to be afraid that the
man was mad, though he looked sane enough;
andI was rather glad to think that I was a good
swimmer, since we were so close to.a deep swift
stream. However, he went on by no means like
a madman: “ As to your coins, they are curious,
but not very old; they seem to be all of the reign
of Victoria; you might give them to some scant
ily-furnished museum. Ours has enough of such
coins, besides a fair number of earlier ones, many


43


Acicerone of which are beautiful, whereas these nineteenth
found


century ones are so beastly ugly, ain't they? We
five a piece of Edward I with the King ia'a
ship, & little leopards and fleurs-de-lys all along
the gunwale, so delicately worked. You see,” he
said, with poietic a smirk, “I am fond of
worlking in gold and fine metals; this buckle here
isan early piece of mine.” @ No doubt] looked a
little shy of him under the influence of that doubt
as to his sanity. So he broke off short, and said in
3 kind voice: “But I see that I am boring you, &
I ask your pardon. For, not to mince matters, I
can ll thet you are a stranger, and must come
from aplace very unlike England. But also it is
clear that it won't do to overdose you with infor-
mation about this place, and that you had best
suck it in little by little. Further, I should take it
as very kind in you if you would allow me tobe
Dereham oie tek,ereld ayn gee
have stumbled onme first. Though indeed itwill
bea mere kindness on your part, for almostany-
body would make as gooda guide, & many much
better.” (There certainly seemed no flavour in
him of Colney Hatch; and besides I thought I
could easily shake him off if it turned our that he
really was mad; so I said:“‘It is a very kind offer,
but it is difficult for me to accept it, unless...”
1 was going to say: Unless you will let me pay
youproperly ;but fearing tostirup Colney Hat

again, I changed the sentence into, ‘'I fear I shall
14


be taking you away from your work ..or your Another


amusement.” €
that, because it will give me an opportunity of
doing a good turn to a friend of mine, who wants
Poe eeu sor peepee en aoe
shire, who has rather overdone himself between
his weaving and his mathematics, both indoor
worl, you see; and being a great friend of mine,
henaturallycame tome to get him some outdoor
work, If you think you can put up withme, pray
ees apda eee areata presently:
“Tris true that I have promised to go up-stream
Spereedeeislifuendeat uname: (eeshelior bee
vest; but they won't be ready for us for more than
Fico ihre nceapan ieee
know, & see somevery nice people, besides mak-
ing notes of our ways in Oxfordshire, You could
hardly do better if you want to see the country.”
Cikte myself. obliged to thank him, whatever
might come of it; and he added eagerly: “Well,
then, that's settled. I will give my friend a call;
he is living in the Guest House like you, and
if he isn’t up yet, he ought to be, this fine sum-
mer morning. '‘@Therewith he took alittle silver
Lugle-hor from his girdle and blew two or three
sharp but agreeable notes on it; & presently from
the housewhich stood onthe site of myold dwel-
Ting (of which more hereafter) another youngman
came sauntering towards us. He was not so well
looking orso strongly made as my sculler friend,


6


“O,”hesaid, “don’ttroubleabout native


Shifting of
Sb


jobs


ing sandy-haired, rather pale, and not stout
pring et fe face was not wanting in that ha
end friendly expression which I had noticed in
fis friend. As he came up smiling towards us, |
Saw with pleasure thatI must give up the Coney
Hatch theory as to the waterman, for no two
madmen ever behaved as they did beforea sane
saath His dress also was of the same cut as the
first man’s, though somewhat gayer, the surcoat
beinglight green witha golden spray embroidered
on the breast, and his belt being of filagree silver.
ork (He gave me good-day very civilly, and
greeting his friend joyously, said: “Well, Dick,
Shhatis it this morning? Am I to have my work,
or rather your work? I dreamed last night that
we were upthe riverfishing.”“ All right, Bob)”
said my sculler; “you will drop into my place, &
if you find it too much, there is George Bright”
ling on the look-out for a stroke of work, and he -
lives close handy to you. Butsee, hereisastranger
who is willing to amuse me to-day by takingme
as his guide about our countryside, and youmay
imagine I don’t want to lose the opportunity; s0
you had better take to the boat at once. But in
any case I shouldn't have kept you out of it for
Tong, since I am due in the hayfelds in a few
days.” CThe newcomer rubbed his hands wit
glee, but turning to me, said in a friendly voice:
“ Neighbous both you and friend Dickarelucky,
& willhavea good time to-day, as indeed! sh

1


too, But you had better both come in with meat A change
‘once and get something to eat, lest you should of houses
fo ur dinner in your amusement. I suppose
ne into the Guest House after I hz ae

to bed last night?” €I nodded, not caring to enter

into along explanation which would have led to

nothing, and which in truth by this timeI should

have begun to doubt myself. And we all three

turned toward the door of the Guest House.


CHAPTER III. THE GUEST HOUSE

AND BREAKFAST THEREIN.

4 LINGERED a little

behindthe others tohave

Ha (ea stareat the house,
wi


$) longish building with its
Ay ceased away
Woe theicandsandiicn
traceried windows, coms
ing rather low down, set in the wall that faced us.
Itwas very handsomely built of red brick with a
lead roof; and high up above the windows there
rana frieze of figure subjects in baked clay, very
well executed, and designed with a force& direct
ness which I had never noticed in modern work
before. The subjects I recognised at once, and in-
deed was very particularly familiar with them.
<1


?


An interior


However, all this [took in in a minute; for we
were presently within doors, and standing ina
Pai ith a figor of marble mosaic and anopen
Ee ber roof. There were no windows on the side
Spporite to theriver,but arches below leadingin,
opp Pambers, one of which showed a glimpse of
«garden beyond, and above them along space of
set aly dainted (in fresco, 1 thought) wid
Tile: subjects to those of the frieze outside;
everything about the place was handsome and
generously solid as to material;and thoughitwas
eet very large (somewhat smaller than Crosby
Hall, perhaps), one felt in it that exhilarating


sense of space and freedom which satis
architecture always gives to an unanxious man
whois in thehabit of using his eyes.
= N this pleasant place, which of
course cee to be the hall of the
Guest House, three young women
PW] were flitting to Pee re ‘As they
Ay) were the first of the sex I had seen
we on this eventful morning, I nature
ally looked at them very attentively, and fou
them at least as good as the gardens, the architec:
ture, and the male men. As to their dress, which
of course I took note of, I should say that 2)
were decently veiled with drapery, andnotb
led up with millinery; that they were cl
like women, not upholstered like armchairs, a5
snoecromnen of our time are. In short, theirdress
E


‘was somewhat between thatof the ancient classi- Some fair


‘was never a dressy person,
= WORD or two from Robert the
SI weaver, and they bustled about on
our behoof, & presently came and
took us by the hand and led us to
a table in the pleasantest corner of
the hall, where our breakfast was
spread for us; and, as we sat down, one of them
hurried out by the chambers aforesaid, and came
back again in a little while with a great bunch of
roses, very different in size and quality to what
Hammersmith had been wont to grow, but very
like the produce of an old country garden, She
hurried back thence into the buttery, and came

2 19


A dainty
breakfast


back once more with a delicately made glass into
which she put the flowers and set them downs
themidst of ourtable. One of theothers, who hed
run off also, then came back with abig cabbage.
feaf filled with strawberries, some of them barely
ripe, & said as she set ‘them on the table, “There,
sents [thought of that before I got up this mon?
ing: but looking a the stranger here getting it
your boat, Dick, put itout of my head; so that]
was not before all the blackbirds: however, there
tre a few about as good as youwill get them any,
where in Hammersmith this morning.”


= oo atted her on the head


ina friendly manner; & we fell to
on our breakfast, which was sim-
ple enough, but most delicate

QUGN cooked and set on the table with


acarved and gilded inscription on the paneling


Table in an Oxford college hall, and a familiar
name in it forced me to read it through. Thusit
ran:


20


Guestsand neighbours, on the site of this Guest- Two
halloncestood the lecture-room of the Hammer- awkward
smith Socialists, Drink a glass to the memory! questions
May 1962.


It is difficult to tell you how I felt as I read these
words, and I suppose my face showed how much
Twas moved, for both my friends looked curious-
ly at me, and there was silence between us for
alittle while. @ Presently the weaver, who was
scarcely sowell manneredaman as the ferryman,
said tomerather awkwardly: € “Guest, we don’t
know whattocall you: isthere any indiscretion in
asking you your name?” “Well” said I, “Ihave
some doubts about it myself; so suppose you call
me Guest, which is a family name, you know, &
add William to it if you please.” Dick nodded
kindly to me; buta shade of anxiousness passed
over the weaver’s face, and he said:“I hope you
don't mind my asking, but would you tell me
where you come from? Tam curious about such
things, for good reasons. , literary reasons.” Dick
was clearly kicking him underneath the table;
but he was not much abashed, and awaited my
answer somewhat eagerly. As forme Iwas)ust
going to blurt out “Hammersmith,” when Tbe-

jought me what an entanglement of cross pur-
poses that would lead us into; so I took time to
invent a lie with circumstance, guarded by a little
truth, and said: “You see, I have been such along

2


Memories time away from Burope that things seemstran
ofearly daystomenows


but I was born and bred on the edge
of Eppiny Forest; Walthamstow & Woodford,
ep ENEMA pretty place, too,” broke in Dick
«ea very jolly place, now that the trees have had
time to grow again since the great clearing of
facsai tions." Quoth theirrepressible weaver,
eDeseneighbour,sinceyouknewthe Forest some
time ago, could you tell me what truth theres in
therumourthatinthenineteenth century the trees
wereall pollards?”
PS SEZEAAHIS was catching me on my at,
cheological natural-history side,
& I fell into the trap without any
WW thought of where andwhenl was:
so began on it, while one of the
Re VAY) cicls, the handsome one, who had
been scattering little twigs of lavender and other
sweet-smelling herbs about the floor, came neat
to listen, and stood behind me with her hand on
my shoulder,in which she held some of the plant
that I used to call balm: its strong sweet smd
brought back to my mind my very early ee


the kitchen-garden at Woodford, and the
blue plums which grew on the wall beyond the
sweet-herbpatch:aconnection ofmemoriesw!
Hiksarcaesr ees


US boy) £¢for long after, except for «podanstor
E ies abalst Cnrertietcaierte us
Ledee & forthe past about High
Beech, the Forest was almost
BF NEY wholly made up of pollard hom-
Benn: mixed with Rolly thickets. But when the
Corporationof London took itover about twenty,
fee bearsago,thetoppingé&lopping, which was a
partoftheold commoners’ right, came to an end,
Bethe trees were let to grow. But I have not seen
the place now formany years, except once, when
we Leaguers went a-pleasuring to High Beech,
Taras voy auch shocked then to sec how:itwas
built over & altered; and the other day we heard
that the philistines were going to landscape-gar-
den it. Butwhat youwere saying about the build
ing being stopped and the tees growing is only
t08 good news;..only you know...” Atthat
point I suddenly remembered Dick's date, and
cropped short, rather confused. The eager weaver
didn’t notice my confusion, but said hastily, as if.
he were slmost sware of his Breach of good man
ners, “ But Lsay, how oldareyou?” Dick éx the
pretty girl both burst out laughing, as if Robert's
Uadcewere excusabloon the sr coe ten
tricity; & Dick said amidst his laughter: “Hold
hard, Bob: this questioning of guests won't do.
‘Why, much learning isspoiling you. Youremind
Srecetlieradted ooheleraen tie mllyeld torete
23


A puzsle whe, according to the authors, were prepared to
asto ages tramp


fe down all good manners in the pursuit of
trae fan knowledge. The fact is, Lbegintothink
that you havesomuddled your head with mathe,
matics, & with grubbing into those idiotic books
about political economy (hehe!), that youscarces
fy know how to behave. Really, it is about time
tr you to take tosome open-air work, sothat
may clear away the cobuebs from your bai.”
C the weaver only laughed good:humouedly,
and the girl went up to him and patted hisckeek
and said laughingly: “ Poor fellow! he was born
s0.” As for me, I was a little puzzled, but] laugh,
ed also, partly for company's sake, & partly with
pleasure at their unanxious happiness ask G54
femperjand before Robert could maketheexcuse


to me which he was getting ready, I sai


ut
neighbours” ([hadcaughtupthatword), ‘Idon’t
inthe least mind answering questions, whealcan


do so: ask me as many as you please; it's fun for
me. I will tel you all about Epping Forestwhen
Trvass boy i you please} an ax so scjp aseae
nota fine lady, you know, so why should'nt tell
you? I’m hard on fifty-six.” I In spite of theres
cent lecture on good manners, the weaver cou
nothelp giving a long “whew” of astonishment,
a the others were so-amused by his naivere that
themerriment flitted all over their faces, thot
for courtesy’s sake they forbore actual laughter}
while I looked from one tothe other in a puzzled
24


mannef, and at last said: “Tell me, please, what A young.
is amiss: you know I want to learn from you. looking


‘And please laugh; only tell me.” €Well, they woman


did laugh andl joined them again for the above.
stated reasons. But at last the pretty woman said
coaxingly: “Well, well,he is rude, poor fellow!
bueryeveces] thy aetwell tel’ yousfiatiheds
thinking about: he means that you look rather
bid 3b poor agen But aurely-theresicedtbeins
gvoader snithat since yout have beentravellig}
and clearly fom all you have been saying in une
dodil entities lehad:dfiea acta taxtd; aids
doabetculy;tHavoneapesvery quicklyifone lived
attonyselantinppy penpic¥' Ais Rey a geeent
sotthier\Bagfand its-a) good place Hoh Reena

good looks,” She blushed and said: “How old
Eml, do you think?” Well, ’quoth I, “T have
always been told that a woman is as old as she
Tasks sorwithout offeace or latsery, Tshouldeay
that youwere twenty.” She laughed merrily, and
said, “Tam well served out for fishing for coms
pliments, since I have to tell you the truth, to wit,
that T am forey-two.? Cl stared at herjand dicw
musical laughter from hes again; bur T might
well stare, for there was nota careful line on her
Sates liteilin wasn wensothan vob icketiecks
full and ound, hee lips as:redias:thic'soscs lie
had brought in; her beautiful arms, which she
Hadiated ferlicr werk irwacinelekaosirk
shoulder to wrist. She blushed a litle under my


25


The guest
begins ask-
ingques-
tions


aze, though it was dear that she had taken me
eee ef eighty: s0 to pass it off Isaid:“Wel,
you see, the old ane is proved right again, and]
ught not to have let you tempt me into askin,
Jou a rude question,”@L She laughed again, an
yd: “Well, lads, old and young, I must get to
my work now, We shall be rather ban here pre-
sently; and I want toclear it off soon, for I began
to read a pretty old book yesterday, and I want
to get on with it this morning: so good-bye for
the present.” She waved a hand to us, & step
lightly down the hall, taking (as Scott pa
least part of the sun from our table as she went,
; AHEN she was gone, Dick said:
“Now, guest; won't you ask a
tiestion or two of ourfriendhere?
Hl tc is oaly fair that youshouldhene
your turn,” “I shall be very glad
2d to answer them,” said the weaver.
Tél ask you any questions, sir,” said I, “they
will not be very severe; but since I hear that you
are a weaver, I should like to ask you something
about that craft, as I am, or was, interested init’
@ “Oh,” said he, “I shall not be of much use to
you there, I'm afraid. I only do the most mer
chanical kind of weaving, and am in fact buta
sorry craftsman, unlike Dick here. Then besides
the weaving, I do a little with machine printing
and composing, though I am littleuse at the finer
apaise of printing; & moreover machine printing
2


ee


is dying out along with the waning ofthe pla Theweaver
of bookmaking; so I have had to turn to other defends
things that I have a taste for, and have taken to himself
asia and also I am writing a sort of
antiquarian bookabout the peaccableand private
history, so to say, of the end of the nineteenth
century, more for the sake of giving a picture of
the country before the fighting began than for
anything else. That was why I asked you those
questions about Epping Forest. You have rather
puzzled me, I confess, though your information
‘was so interesting. But later on, I hope, wemay
have some more talk together, when our friend
Dick isn’t here. I know he thinks me rates a

inder, and despises me for not being ve left
eit ary handetihavathe way oowataya: Prom
what I have readof the nineteenth century litera
ture (and I have read a good deal), it is clear to
me that this is a kind of revenge for the stupidity
of that day, which despised everybody who could
use his hands. But, Bick, old fellow, Ne quid
nimis! Don’t overdo it!” ‘Come now,” said
Dick, “am I likely to? Am I not the most tole-
rant man in theworld? Am I not quite contented
solongas youdon’t makeme learn mathematics,
orgo into your new science of zsthetics, and let
me do a little practical esthetics with my gold
and steel, and the blowpipe and the nice finle
hammer? But, hillo! here comes another ques-
tioner for you, my poor guest. I say, Bob, you

a7


comer


help me to defend him now.” “Here,
Biafin,” he cried out, after a pause; “here we are,
if you must have it!”CI looked over my shoul,
dey, and saw something flash and gleam in the
sunlight that lay across the hall; so I turned
round, & at myease saw a splendid figure slowly
sauntering over the pavement; a man whose sur,
coat was embroidered most pai ceed as well as
clegantly, so that the sun flashed back from him
as if hehad beenclad in golden armour. Theman
himself was tall, dark-haired, and exceedingly
handsome, & though his face was no less kindly
in expression than that of the others, he moved
with that somewhat Le ave mien which great
beauty is apt to give to both men and women,
Hecame and sat downatour tablewith a smiling
face, stretching out his long legs and hanging his
arm over the chair in the slowly graceful way
which tall and well-built people may use without
affectation. He was a man in the prime of life,
but looked as happy asa child who fis just got a
new toy. He bowed gracefully to me and said:
“I see clearly that you are the guest, of whom
Annie has just told me, who has come!
some distant country that does not know of us,
or our ways of life. So I daresay you would not
mind answering me a few questions; for you see
++ -"@ Here Dick broke in: “No, please, joffin!
let it alone for the present. Of course you want
the — to be happy and comfortable; and how

2


can that be if hehas to trouble himself with an- A ques-
swering all sorts of questions while he is still con- tioner put
fused with the new customs and people about of

him? No, no; I am going to take him where he

can aske questions himself, & have them answer

ed; that is, to my great-grandfather in Blooms:

bury: andI am sure you can’t have anything to
sayagainst that. Soinsteadof bothering, youhad

much better go out to James Allen's sd gee a

carriage for me, as I shall drive him up myself;
and please tell Jim to letme have theold grey, for
Tcan drive a wherry much better than a carriage.
Jump up, old fellow, and don’t be disappointed;
our guest will keep himself for you and your
stories.”(I stared at Dick; for I wondered at his
speaking to such a dignified-looking personage
so familiarly, notto say urtly; for I thought that
this Mr. Boffin, in spite of his well-known name
out of Dickens, must be at the least a senator of
these strange people. However, he got up and
said, “All right, old oar-wearer, whatever you
like; this is not one of my busy days; & though”
(with a condescending bow to me) “my pleasure
ofatalle with this learned guests put off Ladmit
that heought tv sce yourworthy kinsman assoon
as possible. Besides, perhaps hewill be the better
able to answer my questions after his own have
been answered.” And therewith he turned and
swung himself out of the hall,


29


HEN he was well gone, I said;
MIs itwrong to askwhat Mie Be
fin is? whose name, by the way,


iS


iS


likes? only we are his special lends, you lenow;
im.” CI held myto:


of the earth, where people are unhappy, and
sequently interesting to a story-teller, he thi
he might get some information out of you. O,
will be quite straightforward with you, for
matter, Oaly for your own comfon Lente
him!" "Well, Dick” said the weaver,

gedly, “I think his novels are very good.” “Of
course you do,” said Dick; “birds of a feather —
flock together; mathematics and antiquarian nor
vels stand on much the same footing. But here

3e


hecomesagain.” And in effect the Golden Dust- A drive in
man hailed us from the hall-door; so we all got Hammer-
up and went into the Borel before which, with smith
autrong grey horsein the shafts, stooda:caeria

ready for us, which I could not help noticing. Lt
qaslichededliniaidy, bee badont others te
erciy cal tity ale Ua dlneat reas
See crsinceroriarcicame especially the
“elegant” ones; but wasas gracefiland pleseane
ilies al cao on fete pot te DE mal
I. The girls, who had come into the porch to see
usoff wavedtheithandstous; the weavernodded
kindly; the dustman bowed as gracefully as a
troubsdour; Dick shook the reins & we were off


CHAPTER IV. A MARKET BY THE
WAY.


IE turned away from the
river at once, and were
soon in the main road
thatruns through Ham-
mersmith. But I should
B39 have had no guess as to
5) where Iwas,if I had not
Se Y Spee from. ue ‘water-
Ss) A side; forKingStreetwas
be RSS ERO sone, and the highway
zan through wide sunny meadows and garden-
like tillage. The Creek, whichwe crossed at. ‘once,
had been rescued from its culvert, and as wewent


38


A frank
and joyous
people


sae abviap held pegrecnateitewatery yeemeatl
Sette tide covered with gay boatsof differen
sizes. Therewere housesabout, someontheroad,
See amonget thefields with pleasant lanes lead,
seniom tether, & each surrounded by aterm,
ine arden, They were all pretty in design, and
108 84 as might be, but countryfied in appear.
gnce, like yeomen’s dwellings; some of them of
a rick Lie those by the river, but more of ins
fez and plaster, vikich were by the necessityog
their construction so like medizval houses of the
Sate qnaterials that [fairly felt as if Tomercaia
ja the fourteenth century ;a sensation helped out
fy the costume of the people that we metor
bussed, in whose dress there was nothing “mar
TeaaTt Atiiast Gretybody waa gaily deesedgie
sepeuilly the women, whowere sowell Ile
teevento hiandsome;that could acarcAiyeeee
cptepue Bom ealligy thy Comat ea
Hlontothe fact. Some faces sawthatwere thought
faljandin these I noticed great nobilty of
sion, butnoncthathada glimmerof erhapiiceal
andthe greateepast (we came pon a\gotm
frankly and openly joyous.

THOUGHT | knewthe Broad:
way by thelicof the roadsthatstill
metthere. Onthenorth sideof the
road was avange of bullies
courts, low, but very handsomely
buile and ornamented, and in that


by4)
Set
6}


ee |


way forming’a great contrast to the unpreten- A market&
tiousness of the houses round about; while above its beauty
thislowerbuildingrosethesteeplead-covered roof
and the buttresses and higher partof the wall ofa
great hall, of asplendid and exuberant style of ar
chitecture, of which one can say little more than
thatit seemed to meto embrace the best qualities
of the Gothic of northern Europe, with those of
the Saracenic & Byzantine building, though there
wasnocopying of any one of these styles. On the
other, thesouth side, of the road was an octagonal
building with ahigh roof, notunlike the Bapti
Teerlbeentcistosdaic extescit eCity needed:
edbya lean-tothatclearlymadeanarcade or clois
terto it: it also was most delicately ornamented,
This whole mass of architecture which we had
come upon so suddenly from amidstthe pleasant
fields was not only exquisitely beautiful in itself,
butitbore uponitthe expression of such generos-
ity and abundance of life that I was exhilarated
toa pitch which I had never yet reached. I fairly
loos for pleanuied Ly fem peered contee
derstand it, and satlooking on me with a pleased
& affectionatcinterest. Wehad pulled upsmongst
a crowd of carts, wherein sat handsome healthy-
looking people, men, women, and children very
gaily dressed, 8 which were clearly market carts,
asthey werefullofvery tempting-lookingcountry
produce,


di 33


SAID, “I need not ask if this ig
‘a market, for I see clearly that ¢
; but what market is it that itis


A theatre


ery.
re


(3 did? And what i
FY Pass44 so splen: whatis the glo,
€ Say By otabiall shzredandoyhasient


NEA building onthesouth side?” “Q)*
said he, “it is just our Hammersmith market;
and [am glad you likeitsomuch, forwearereally
roud of it. Of course the hall inside is our winter
Mote- House; for in summer we mostly meetin
the fields down bythe river opposite Barn Eims,
‘The building on our right hand is our theatre: I
hope youlike it.” should bea foolif Ididn’t,”
said I.Q/He blushed a littleashesaid: “I am,
of that, too, because I hada hand in it; I a
good part ofthe great doors, which are of damas-
wend bronze. We will look at them laterin the
day, perhaps; but we ought to be getting ‘on now,
‘Asto the market, thisis not one of our busy days;
so we shall do better withitanother ime Rese
i you will see more people.”(LI thanked him, and
said:*Arethese the regularcountry people! What
very pretty girls there are amongst them.” As I
spoke, my eye caught the face of a beautiful wo-
man, tall, dark-haired, 6&¢ white-skinned, dressed
ina pretty light-green dress in honour of the sea
son and the hot day, who smiled kindly on me,
and more kindly still, I thought, on Dick; so T
stopped a minute, but presently went on: “‘Iask —
because I do not see any of the country-looking -


34


copleI should have expected to seeata market: Where are

Seeeeietlingtibmes nere.”_“‘I don’t under the poor?
stand,” said he, “what kind of people you would
expect tosee; norquitewhat you mean by ‘coun-
people.’ These are the neighbours, and that
ike they run in the Thames valley. There are
parts of these islands which are rougher & rainier
than we are here, and there people are ruder in
their dress; and they themselves are tougher and
more hard-bittenthan weare tolookat. Butsome
people like their looks better than ours; they say
they have more character in them; that’s the
word. Well, it's a matter of taste. Anyhow, the
cross between us and them generally turns out
well,” added he, thoughtfully. 1 card him,
though my eyes were turned away from him, for
that pretty girl was just disappearing through the
gate with her big basket of early peas, and I felt
that disappointed kind of fecling whichovertakes
one when one has seen an interesting or lovely
face in the streets which one is never likely to see
again; and I was silent a little. At last I said:
“What I mean is, that I haven’t seen any poor
lees about, not one.”@ He knit his brows,
looked puzzled, andsaid: “No, naturally; ifany-
body is poorly, he is likely to be within doors, or
stlbesticcawling abois thcigarden iHcelleone
know of any one sick at present. Why should
you expect to see poorly people on the road?”
@"Noyno/’I said; “I don’t mean sick people

2 35


Kensington mean p


cor people, you know; rough people,”
said he, smiling merrily, “I really dg
hot know. The fact is, you must come alon,
quick to my great-grandfather, who will undere
sand you betterthan Ido. Comeon, Greylocks!”
Therewith he shook the reins, & we joggedalong
merrily eastward.


CHAPTER V. CHILDREN ON THE
AD.
BAST the Broadway


Hy there were fewer houses
on either side. We pre»
sently crossed a p

little brook that ran av
§) cross a piece of land dot
ted over with trees, and
awhile after cametoan-
other marketand towne
@ hall, aswe should call it.
Although there was nothing familiar tome in its
surroundings, I knew pretty wellwhere wewere,
and wasnot surprisedwhen my guidesaid briefly,
“Kensington "WMarket.” Just 7 chica
into a short street of houses; or rather, one long
house on either side of the way, built of timber
and plaster, and with a pretty arcade over the
footway before it. Quoth Dick: “This is Ken
sington proper. People are apt to gather here
rather thick, for they like the romance of the
3


wood; & naturalists hauntit,too; since itis awild A somewhat
spot even here, what there is of it; for itdoes not new forest
go far to the south: it goes from here northward
and west right over Paddington and a little way
down Notting Hill: thence it runs north-east
Primrose Hill, and so on; rather a narrow strip
of it gets through Kingsland to Stoke Newing-
ton and Clapton, where it spreads out along t
heights above the Lea marshes; on theotherside
of which,as you know,is Epping Forest holding
outa handto it. This part we are just coming to
iscalled Kensington Gardens; though why ‘gar-
dens’ I don’t know.” (I rather longed to say,
“Well, I know” ; but there were so many things
about me which I did not know, in spite of his
assumptions, that I thought it better to hold my
tongue. Theroad plunged atonce intoabeautiful
wood spreading out on either side, but obviously
much further on the north side, where even the
oaks and sweet chestnuts were ofa good growth;
while the quicker-growing trees (amongst which
I thought the planes & sycamorestoonumerous)
were very big and fine-grown, Iwas exceedingly
pleasant in the dappled shadow, for the day was
growing as hotasneed be, and the coolness and
shade soothed my excited mind into a condition
of dreamy pleasure, so that I felt as if I should
like to go on for ever through that balmy fresh-
ness. My companion seemed toshare inay fel
ings, and let the horse go slower and sloweras he


37


Babes in the sat inhaling the green forest scents, chiefamongst


wood


which was the smell of the trodden bracken near


e wayside.
= MANTIC as this Kensington
Wwoodwas, however, itwasnotlone,
ly. We cameon many groups both
comingand going, orwandeingin
the edges of the wood. Amongst
these were many children from six
oreight years old uptosixteen orseventeen, They
seemed to me to be especially fine specimens of
their race, & were clearly enjoying themselves to
theutmost; someofthem werehanging aboutlite
tletentspitched onthe greensward,andbysomeof
these fires were burning, with pots hanging over
them gipsy fashion. Dick explained to me that
there were scatteredhousesin the forest, & indeed
we caught a glimpse of one or two. He said they
weremostly quite small, such as used to be called
cottages when there were slaves in the land, but
they were pleasantenough & fitting forthewood.
"They must be pretty well stocked with chil,
den’ said I, pointing to the many youngsters
about the way.@.“O.” said he, “these ch
donot all come from the near houses, the
and houses, but from the countryside generally.
They often make up parties, and come toplayin
the woods for weeks togedier in summer)
living in tents, as you see. We rather encourage
them toit; theyleam todo things forthemselves
3


and get to notice the wild creatures; and, you see, Where are
the less they stew inside houses the better for the boy-
them, Indeed, I must tell you that many grown farms?
people will go to live in the forests through the
summer: though they for the most part go to the
biggerones, like Windsor, orthe Forestof Dean,
or the northern wastes. Apart from the other
pleasures of it, it gives them a little rough work,
which I am sorry to say is getting somewhat
scarce for theselast fifty years.” (He broke off, &
then said, “I tell you all this, because I see thatif
I talk I must be answering questions, which you
are thinking, even if you are not speaking them
out; but mykinsman will tell youmnoreabout it.”
CI saw that I was likely to get out of my depth
again,and so merely for the sakeof tiding over an
awkwardness & tosay something, I said: “Well,
the youngsters here will be all the fresher for
school when the summer gets overand they have
to go backe again” "School?" he said; “yes,
what do you mean by that word? I don’t seehow
it can have anything to do with children, We
talk, indeed, of a school of herring, anda school
of painting, & in the former sense we might talks
vf a school of children, but otherwise,” said he,
laughing, “I mustown myself beaten."({“Hang
it!” thought I, “I can’t open my mouth without
digging up somenew complexity.” Iwouldn't
to set a ee tight in his etymology; and
thought I'had best say nothing about the boy-
39


Ofeduca’ farms which I had been used to call schools, as]


tion


saw pretty clearly that they had disappeared; so
Toadl foceiittiesfurbling, <1 was using the
word in the sense of a system of education,”
“Education?” said he, meditatively, ‘I know
enough Latin to know that the word must come
from educere,to lead out; & I have heard itused;
but I have never met anybody who could give
me aclear explanation of what it means.” (You
may imagine how my new friends fell in my
esteem when I heard this frank avowal ; &I sai
rather contemptuously, “ Well, education means
asystem of, teaching young people: “Why not
oldpeoplealso?” said he, with atwinkleinhiseye,
“But,” he went on, “I can assure you that our
children learn, whetherthey gothrougha ‘system
of teaching’ or not. Why, you will not find one
of these children about here, boy or girl, whocans
not swim; and every one of them has been

to tumbling about the little forest ponies; there's
one of them now! Theyall of them know how to
cook; the bigger lads can mow; many can thatch
and do odd jobs at carpentering; or they know
howtokeep shop. I cantell you they knowplenty
of things. @.'“ Yes, but their mental education,
thetea tie ‘their minds,” said I, kindly trans
latingmy phrase.“ Guest said he,“ perhapsyou
have not learned to do these things which | have
been speaking about; and if that’s the case, don’t
you run away with the idea that it doesn’t

40


some skill to do them, and doesn’t give plenty of Ofeduca
work for one’s mind: you would change your tion
opinion if you saw 2 Dorsetshire lad thatching,
for instance. But, however, I understand you t0
be speaking of book-learning; and asto that,it is
a simple affair. Most children, seeingbookslying
about, manage to read by the time they are four
yearsold; though I amtold it hasnotalwaysbeen
so. As to writing, we do not encourage them to
scrawl too Beaton g scrawl a littlethey will),
because it gets them into a habit of ugly writing;
and what's the use of a lot of ugly writing bein;
done, when rough printing can Eeaoae soeasily
‘You understand that handsome writing we like,
and many people will write their books outwhen
they make them, or get them written; I mean
books of which only a few copies are needed;
poems, and such like, you know. However, lam
wandering from my lambs; but you must excuse
me, for I am interested in this matter of writing,
being myself a faic-writer.” € “Well,” said 1,
“about the children; when they know how to
read and write, don’t they learn something else;
languages, for instance?” “Of course,” hesaid;
“sometimes even before they can read, they can
talk French, which is the nearest language talked
on the other side of the water; and hey soon get
to know German also, which is talked by a huge
number of communes and colleges on the maine


land, These are the principal languageswe speak
at


Ofeduca’ in these islands, along with English, or Welsh,


tion


or Irish, which is another form of Welsh; and
children pick them up very quickly, because their
Elders all know them ; & besides our guests from
Gver seaoften bring their children with them, and
the little ones get together, and rub their speech
intoone another.” And the older languages?”
said 1. “O, yes,” said he, “they mostly lear
Lutin and Greek along with the modern ones,
when they do anything more than merely pick
upthe latter.” And history?” said 1; “howdo
you teach history?” “Well,” said he, “whena
Person can read, of course he reads what he lies
to; & he can easily get someone to tell him what
are the best books to read on such or sucha subs
ject, or to explain what he doesn’t understand in
the Books when ie treading chem" @Wel?
said I, “what else do they learn? I su
don't all fearn history?” “No, Bauer ed
tesome don’ care about ityin fact, I don't thinke
many do. [have heard my great-grandfather sa
thaste is mostly in poerioe OF terial and pers
and confusion that people care much about his
tory: and you know.” said my friend, with an
amiable smile, “we are not like that now. No;
many people study facts about the make of things
and themattersof cause andeffect, so that knows
ledge increases on us, if that be good; and some,
as you heardabout friend Bob yonder, will
time over mathematics. Tis no use forcing peo”
42


plestates” €Said 1: “Butyoudontmeanthat Ofeducs
children learnallthesethings?”QSaidhe: “That tion
depends onwhat youmean bychildren} and also
you must remember how much they differ. Asa
rule, they don't do much reading, except for a few
story-books, tll they are about fifteen years old,
we don’t encourage early bookishness: though
ou will find some children who will take to
[coks very early} which petheps i Sa¢ gdcd Se
them; but it's no use thwarting them; and very
often it doesn’t last longwith them, andtheyfind
their level before they are twenty years old, You
see, children are mostly given to imitating their
elders, and when they sce most peopleaboutthem
engaged in genuinely amusing work, like house-
building and street-paving, and gardening, and
the like, that is what they want to be doing; so I
don’tthink we need fear having too many book-
learned men.” Whatcould I say? Isatandheld
my peace, for fear of fresh entanglements. Be-
sides, I was using my eyes with all my might,
wondering, as the old horse jogged on, when I
should come into London proper, and what it
would belike: now.@Butmy companion couldn’t
let his subject quite drop, and went on meditas
tively: “A fter all, I don’t know that it does them
much harm, even if they do grow up bookstur
dents. Such people as that, 'tis a great pleasure
seeing them so happy over work which ie nn
much soughtfor. And besides, these students are


a


generally such pleasant people; sokindand sweet
Westmin’ Setigered; s0 humble, and at the same time ap


drasous to teach everybody all that they know,


HIS scemedtomesuch very queer

faske
ing him another question; when
justaswecametothetopofa risi
ground, down a long glade of the
43 wood on my right I'caught sight
of a stately building whose outline was familie
to me, and I cried out, “Westminster Abbey!”
“Yes,” said Dick, “Westminster Abbey, what
there is left of it.” “Why, what have you done
with it?” quoth I in terror. “What havewedone
with it?” said he; “nothing much, save clean it,
But you knowthe whole outside was spoiled cen-
turies ago: as to the inside, that remains in its
beauty after the great clearance, which took place
over a hundred years ago, of the beastly monu
ments to fools and knaves, which once blocked it
up, as greav-grandfather says.”

FEF BX JE went on a little further, and I
looked to the right again, & said,
bj in rather a doubtful tone of voice,
I] Why, there are the Houses of
\ \f Parliament! Doyoustillusethem?”
S204 CHe burst out laughing, & was
sometime before he could control himself; then
he clapped me on the back and said: “‘Itake you,

a4


neighbour; you may well wonder at our keeping The Dung.
them standing, & I know something about that, marker
and my old kinsman has given me books to read
about the strange game that they played there.
Use them? Well, yes, they are used for a sort of
subsidiarymarket, & a storage place for manure,
and they are handy for that, being on the water,
side. I believe it was intended to pull them down
juite at the beginning of our days; but there was,
iamieaisjaqeecs antiquarian society, which had
donesome service in past times & which straight-
way set up its pipe against their destruction, asit
has donewith many other buildings, which most
people looked upon as worthless & public nuis-
ances; and itwas so energetic, and had such good
reasons to give, that it generally gained its point;
and I must say that when all is said I am of
it: because you know at the worst these silly old
buildings serve as a kind of foil to the beautiful
ones abe we build now. You will see several
others in these parts; the place my grandfather
lives in, forinstance, and a Big building called St.
Paul's. And you see, in this matter, we need not
grudge a few poorish buildings standing, because
We can always build elsewhere; nor need we be
anxious as to the breeding of pleasant work in
such matters, for there is always room for more
and more worl: in a new building, even without
making it pretentious. For instance, elbow-room
within doors is to me so delightful that if I were


45


Piccadilly driven to it I would almost sactifice out-door


space to it. Then, of course, thereisthe ornament,
which, as we must all allow, may easily be over,
done in mere living-houses, but can hardly bein
mote-halls and markets, and soforth. I musttell
you, though, that my great-grandfather some,
times tells me I am a little crackedon this subject
of fine building; and indeed I do think that the
energies of mankindare chiefly of use tothem for
such work; for in that direction I can seenoend
to the work, while in many others a limit does
seem possible.”


CHAPTERVI.ALIT TLE SHOPPING.


ESS he spoke,wecamesud-
ff 1A genty aus of the woods
Gy YR) iand intoashortstreet of
if E YI handsomely builthouses
SEA which my companion
Ds ¢ named to me at once as,
Piccadilly:thelowerpart
ff these I should have
JAE |i) <alledshops, ifithadnot
eG een that nsfaraslcould
see, the people were ignorantofthe artsof buying
and selling. Wares were displayed in their fine
designed fronts, asifto tempt peoplein, & people
stood and ookedat them, or wentinandcame out
with parcels under their arms just like the real
thing. On each side of the street ran an elegant
46


sicade to protect foot passengers, as in adie of Iwantto
the old Italian cities, About alf-way down, a buy some-
huge building of the kind Iwas now prepared to thing
expecttold me thatthisalso was a cereee frome
kind,and had its special public buildings. € Said
Dek Hee pasisce iapnctheemat angel 6
fesent plan Ronamont thers! thesppetateiespt
slice Boi tex meine Corba ious eee
fromllaboutthecountryareapttadaifeapither
from tine to time, asfolk are-very thick eponthe

ind, which you will seeevidenceof presently,
de thireas¢ocaplewhdare ond cfcesana tienen
Tean’tsay that | am.” Cl couldn’thelpsralinges
sechow longa tradition would last. Here wasghe
ghost of London sl asering ftlfasacentre
an intellectual centre, for aught I knew. How-
ver, I said nothing, except that asked him to
drive very slowly, as the things in the booths
lookedexceedingly pretty.“‘Ves,” said he, “thisis
avery good market for pretty things, 8 is most
Ieept for thehandsomer goods, as the Housesvof-
De Secmnenttrnacke sew ieee pacrincy eabteres
and turnips and such like things, along with beer
and the rougher kind of wine, coneas:"€I'Then
lic looked at me curious: , & said," Perhaps you
Would like to doa little shopping, as'tis called” T
looked at what could see of ay sough blue duds,
which Thad plenty of opportunity of contrasting
wih the gay ate of the ctizens we had ome
across; andl thought that if, as seemed likely,


47


money


‘Whiere’sthe should presently beshown aboutasa curiosity for


theamusement of this most unbusinesslike peo.
ple, Ishold liketolook alittleless likeadischarged
ship'spurser. Butin spite ofall thathadhappened,
myhandwent down intomy pocket again, where
to my dismay it met nothing metallic except two
rusty old keys, and I remembered that actidtont
talkinthe guest-hallat HammersmithI hadtaken
thecashoutofmy pockettoshowtotheprettyAn-
nieand had left itlyingthere. My facetell fiftyper
cent., & Dick, beholding me, said rather sharply:
“Hilloa, Guest, what's the matter now? Is it a
wasp?” “No,” said I, “but I’ve left it behind.”
“Well,” said he, “whatever you haveleftbehind,
youcan get in this market again, sodoa’t trouble
yourself about it.” (LI had come to my senses by
this time, and remembering the astounding cus-
toms of this country, had nomind foranother lec-
tureon social economy & the Edwardian coinage}
soIsaidonly:“Mylothes..Couldn’tI? Yousee..
‘What do you think could be done aboutthem?”
He didn’tseem in the least inclined to laugh, but
said quite gravely:“O, don't get new clothes yet.
You see, my great-grandfather is an antiquarian,
and he will want to see you just as you are. And,
you know, I mustn't preach to you, but surely it
wouldn't be right for you to take away people's
pleasure of studying your atire by just going &
making yourself ike ersey boty else. You reel
that, don't you?” said he, earnestly. 1did NOT
48


eS ee eee


feel it my duty to set myself up for a scarecrow A need of
annie beauty-lovingpeople,butIsaw Thad tobacco

got across some ineradicable prejudice, and that

itwouldn’tdo to quarrel with my new friend, So |
I merely said, “O certainly, certainly.” “Well,”

said he, pleasantly, “you may as well see what

the inside of these booths is like: think of some-

thing you want.” Said I: “Could I get some to-

bacco and 2 pipe?” “Ofcourse,” said he; “what

was I thinking of, not asking you before? Well,

Bob is always telling me that we non-smokers
areaselfish lot, & I’m afraid he is right. But come

along; hereis a place just handy.” Therewith

he drew rein eign down, & I followed. A
veryhandsomewoman, splendidly cladin figured

silk, was slowly passing by, looking into the win-

dowsasshewent, To her quoth Dick: “Maiden,

would you kindly hold our horse while we go in

foralittle?”She nodded to us with a kind smile,

and{ellto patting the horse with her prettyhand,

What a beautiful creature!” said I to Dick as
weentered. What, old Greylocks?” said he, with
asly in.“No,no,"saidI;"Goldylocks,thelady.”
Well, sosheis,’ said he.’ Tisa good job there
aresomanyof them that every Jack mayhavehis
Jill:elsel fearthat weshould get fighting forthem.
Indeed,” said he, becoming very grave, “I don't
say thatitdoes not happen even now, sometimes,
Foryouknowlove is not avery reasonable thing,
and perversity and self-will are commoner than

er 49


Playing at some of our moralists think.” He added, ina still


shop-leep- more sombre tone: “Yes, only amonth ago there


ing


wasa miishap down by us;thst in the endcostthe
ives of two men & a woman, and, as it were, put
outthe sunlight for us for a while. Don’task me
bot ideriow Lmny tll yodaboutielates dt
Pay] this time we were within the

SY shop or booth, which hada coun,
1 tee and ahetved cal lshetwalls-al

i sctyestitioelstiicietay ce:
P scnce of showines, but otherwise
AZ not very different to what I had
been used to. Within were a couple of children,
a brown-skinned boy of about twelve, who sat
Fide tm botkalanddo rcsylicdesgisiseabiont
gene oltaefialirmmmasteinefalacieadit gs bclutd
iiesciiteas! AG} were potalyb tester lstne®
# Good aint Aasticieil flours? antl Dice
«My friend here wants tobaccoé&a pipe; canyou
helphim?” € Oyes, certainly,"said the gitwith
asort of demure slertness which was somewhat
amusing. The boy looked up and felltostaring at
my outlandish attire, but presently reddenedand
fumed hishead, as ifhelmew that he was not be-
havingprettily.€" Deatneighbour,’ssidthe gi,
withthe mosteolemn countenance of achildplay-
ingathecping shop,“ whactobucosityouwoud

stalkia,” q\


like?” uoth I, feeling as if I wereas-

sisting ata child's game, & wondering whether I

should get anything but make-believe, But the
>


jel tookea dainty little basket from a shelf beside Help yours

Fae rtf Panel (eT Ocean LSSE eau TGeAN
and put the filled basket down on the counter be-
fore ine, where could both smell and see that it
wasexcellent Latakia.” But youhaven’t weighed
SA galley usddsead how auch maleate
Gatviy Miahidsnid) ¢Vadvue yon weatavone
bag, because you may be gong where you ta
get Latakia. Where is your beg?” @ | fumbled
Sa nialantieipidlled cid any FSR

aioe eiict doeasiery with imefare esata Bock
Begetieraitiooked excfowniveurnodintantcd
did Deadneg boas, [cantgrreyousorictian
inlicibenerthanthatcotion yf And sheteied
elie clep adleare back resctiay Ace a8
passed the boy whispered something in his ear,
sikl Setnsdidedand gobiteniwentraaTHcetl
Reldiepian Heeilagertaidd shuarnbiatved migraec
bag, gaily embroidered, and said, “There, Ihave
iastonttonyoiyandvollias toleeye tit
prettyandwill holdalot."4 Therewith she fll to
cramming itwith the tobacco, andlaid it down by
me& said,“ Now forthe pipe: thatalso younust
etme choose for yous shereare three pretty éncs
justcome in.” €L She disappeared again, & came
backwithabig-bowledpiperherhand,carvedout
ofsomehasd wood very caborssely, and mounted
in gold sprinkled with little gems. [ewas, in short,
as prety and gaya ty as Thad ever seen some”
thing iketheestkind of Japanese work, butbet-

a a


buying


Playing at ter.€L"Dearme!”saidI,whenl seteyesonit,“this


isaltogether too grand for me, or for anybody but
the Bmperorof the World, Besides, Ishall lose it:
Lalways lose my pipes.” The child seemed rather
dashed, and said, “ Don’t youlike it, neighbour?”
“Oyes;" Isaid, “of course [likeit.” “Well, then,
take it,” said she, “and don’ttrouble aboutlosing
it. What wil matter if you do? Somebody i
sure to find it, and he will use it, and you will
get another.” (CI tookitout of her hand to lookat
it, and while Idid so, forgot my caution, and said,
“But however am I to pay for such a thing as
this?” € Dick laid his hand on my shoulder as I
spoke,and I,turning, met hiseyes with a comical
expression in them, which warned me against
another exhibition of extinct commercial moral-
ity; so I reddened and held my tongue, while the
girl simply looked at me with the deepest grav-
ity, as if Y were a foreigner blundering in my
speech, forshe clearly didn’t understand me a bit.
Thank you sovery much,” Isaid at lst, ffu-
sively, as I put the pipe in my pocket, not with
out a qualm of doubt as to whether I shouldn't
find myself before a magistrate presently. €“O,
you are so welcome,” said the little lass, with an
affectation of grown-up manners at their best,
which was very quaint. “Itis sucha pleasure to
serve dear old gentlemen like pe especially
whenonecanseeatonce that you have comefrom
far over sea.” “Yes, my dear,” quoth I, “I have
52


been a great traveller.” (LAs I told this lie from Refresh.
purepoliteness,in came the lad again, with atray mentfor the
Ps hands, on which I saw a long flask andweary
twobeautifl glasses.“ Neighbours," saidthe girl
(who did all the talking, her brother bein; very
Gy clearly) “please to drinkea glass to us before
yougoysincewedo not have guest like this every
day? € Therewith the boy put the tray on the
counter & solemnly poured outa straw-anloured
svine into the long bowls, Nothing loth, I drank,
Frelwas thistywith the hotday;and thinks I, I
am yet in the world, and the grapes of the Rhine
hate nobyetlost their flavour; forifever Iideank
good Steinberg, [drankitthat morning; é¢Timade
S mental note to-ask Dick how they managed to
mrkefinewincwhen there werenolongeslabours
ers compelled to drink rot-gut instead of the fine
qinewhichthey themsetvesmade.(i“Doa'tyoir
Meek d ieeeto tet deoe tlosact goatee’,
CIdon'tdrinkwine,’saidthelass;“Tlikelemon-
ade better: but I wish your health!” “And like
ginger-beer better,”’said the little lad. Well, well,
Shoupiulincdhes tavechiidtentabectachaceed
sui JA shea ithwee gave ica poste yet
‘went out of the booth.
EHO my disappointment, like a
$4 change in a dream, a tall old man
as eer our horse instead of
thebeautifilwoman. Heexplain-
edtous that the maiden could not
wait, and that he had taken her


53


Anhere-
ditary dis-
ease


place; and he winked at us and laughed when he
E whow ourfacesfell, sothatwehad nothing forit
but tolaughalso. €Whereareyougoing?” said
hetoDick. "To Bloomsbury,” said Dick.*‘Ifyou
two don’t want to be alone, I'll come with you,”
said the old man.“Alll right,” said Dick, “ tell
me when you want to get down and I'll stop for
you. Let's get on.”({So we got under way again;
and Laskedif children generally waited on people
the markets.“ Often enough,” said he, “when
sa tamatterofealingwith heavy weights but
by no means always. The children like to amuse
themselveswith it, anditis good forthem, because
they handlealot of diverse wares and get to learn
about them, how they are made, and where they
comefrom,and so on. Besides, itis suchvery easy
work that anybody can do it. Itis said that inthe
early days of our epoch there werea good many
people who were hereditarily afflicted with adis-
ease called Idleness, because they were the direct
descendants of those who in the bad times used
toforce other peopleto work for them ;the people,
you know, who are called slave-holders or em-
ployersof labour inthe history books. Well, these

idleness-stricken people used to serve booths all
their time, because they were fit for solittle. In
deed, Ibelievethat at onetime they were actually
compelled to do some such work, because they,
especially the women, got so ugly and produced
such ugly children if their disease was not treated
54


sharply, that the neighbours couldn't stand it! Women of
However, I’m happy to say thatall thatis gone by past days
doritliedaeasctsessherertiact, orexints isis told of
PA acranilie dala tctuscebapiericstaied/
cine carries it off. Itis sometimescalled the Blue-
devils now, of the Mulleygrubs. Quecr names,
Sint they?” “Ves,” said I, pondering much, But
Giecidcsestyalce in11sVer)allchatieersorcieigic
boar aud lbiavescen somedf these poor women
eidsBut my father used to know some'cf
fhem when they were young;andhesaidtharthey
wereaslittllie young womenasmaight be: they
hod hands like bunches of skewers, and wretched
iitdeasms like sticks; 8 waists lice hourglasses;
and thin lips and peaked noses and pale cheeks;
and they were always pretending to be offended
at sorting ou said or did to thems No wonder
shepibartie ychildten,forno dacexceptinienliE®
them could be in love with them, poor things!”
@ He stopped, and seemed to be musing on his
past then ssid: Anddo you know neigh
ours,thatonceonatime people werestill anxious
aboutthe discaseof Idleness: atone time'we gave
ourselves a great deal of trouble in tring fo cure
eopleaf , Haveyounotread any ofthe medical
ooks on the subject?” “No,” said I; for theold
fndairad speaking tosses Well Meaniitesct a
Graatantiglet the ionetatiewmiethiemcifealce
thelold médixeval disease OF lenecny:itecemnde
wasvery catching, formany of the people afilicted


55


plush


Wearers of by it were much secluded, and were waited upon


by a special class of diseased persons queerly
dressed up, so that they might be known. The
wore amongst other garments, breeches made of
worsted velvet, that stuff which used to be called
plush some yearsago," All this seemed very in
teresting to me, & I should like to have made the
old man talk more. But Dick got rather restive
under so much ancient history: besides, I suspect
he wanted to keep me as fresh as he could for his
reat-grandfather. So he burst out laughing at
fast, & said : “Excuse me, neighbours, but Ican’t
help it, Fancy people not liking to work! is too
ridiculous. Why, even you like to work, old fel
low . . sometimes,” said he, affectionately pat-
ting the old horse with the whip.“ What a queer
livensel it toviydorcilitie called Rlclleyeretbe\2
Anil he laughed ontalgatutticatinisccocslys
rathertoo much so, I thought, for his usual good
manners; and I laughed with him for company’s
sake, but from the teeth outward only; for I saw
nothing funny in people notlikingtowork,asyou
may well imagine.


CHAPTER VII. TRAFALGAR
SQUARE.


ZND now again I was
busy looking about me,
y for we were quite clear
) of Piccadilly Market, 8
[were in a region of ele-
gantly-builtmuch ornay
mented houses, which I
shouldhavecalledvillas
if they had been ugly &
\ pretentious, which was
very farfrom being the case. Hach house stood in
a garden carefully cultivated, and running over
with flowers. The blackbirds were singing their
best amidst the garden-trees, which, except for a
baythere aid these, 8 occasional groups of limes,
seemed to be all fruit-trees: there were a great
many cherry-trees, now all laden with fruit; and
several times as we passed by a garden we were
offered baskets of fine fruit by children and young
girls. Amidst all these gardens and houses it was
of course impossible to trace the sites of the old
streets: but it seemed tome that the main road
ways were the same as of old. ( We came pre:
sently into a large open space, sloping somewhat
toward the south, the sunny site of which had
been taken advantage of for planting an orchard,
mainly, as I couldsee, ofapricot trees, inthe midst
of which was a pretty gaylittle structure of wood,


57


Some Lon-


don villas


A vision of painted & gilded, that looked like a refreshment,
the Square stall. From the southern side of the said orchard

| asitwason ranalong road, chequered over with the shadow
another day of tall old pear trees, at the end of which showed

the hightowerof the Parliament House, or Dung

Market.
> 4 STRANGE sensation came

over me; I shut my eyes to keep
out the sight of the sun licen


lens, an


sunlight again and looked round me, and cried
outamongthe whispering treesand odorous blos-
j soms, “Trafalgar Square!” “Yes,” said Dick,
q who had drawn rein again, “so itis. Idon’t won-
58


der at your finding the name ridiculous: butafter James’ De-
all, it was naBaiits, business to alter it, since the mocratic
name of a dead folly doesn't bite. Yet sometimes History
I think we might have given it a name which
would have commemorated the greatbattlewhich
was fought on the spot itself in 1952. . that was
important enough, if the historians don’t lic,”
Which they generally do,or at least G74)’ sid
the old man, “For instance, what can you make
ofthis neighbours? Ihavereadamuddled account
ina book. O,a stupidbook! called (James' Social
Democratic History) of a fight which took place
herein or about the year 1887 (Iam bad atdates).
Some people, says this story, were going t0 hold
Ric soe Mets obocn mata thing, and the
Government of London, or the Council, or the
Commission, or what not other barbarous half
hatched body of fools, fell upon these citizens (as
theywerethen called) withthe armed hand. That
seems too ridiculous to be true; but according to
this version of the story, nothing much came of
it, which certainly is too ridiculous to be true.”
€“ Well,” quoth I, “but afterall your Mr. James
is right so far, and it is true; exceptthat there was
no ieseng, merely unarmed and peaceable peo-
ple attacked by ruffians armed with bludgeons.”
“And they put up with that?” said Dick, with
the first unpleasant expression I hadseen on his
‘ood-tempered face. 1 Said I, reddening: “We
Radso pet phen ay wecbekione helpit."€@The
59


Astoryhard old man lookedatme keenly, & said: “ You seem


to believe


to know a great deal about it, neighbour! And is
itreally truethatnothingcame ofit?’“Thiscame
of it,” said I, “that agood many people were sent
to prison because of it.” “What, eRhcbedee
ers?” said the old man. “Poor devils!” “No,
no,” said I, “of the bludgeoned.” €Said the old
man rather severely; “Friend, I expect that you
have been reading some rotten collection of lies,
and have been taken in by it too easily.” “Tas,
sure you,” said I, “what I have been saying is
true.” Well, well, I am sure you think so,neigh-
Hourttsaidttieoldmsaicbut lL don’tsee why you
should be so cocksure.” As I couldn’t explain
why, I held my tongue, Meanwhile, Dick, who
had been sitting with knitbrows, cogitating,spoke
at last, and said gently and rather sadly: “How
strange to think that there have been men like
ourselves, and living in this beautiful and happy
country, who I suppose had feelings & affections
like ourselves, who could yet do such dreadful
things.” €“ Yes,” said I, in a didactic tone; “yet
after all even those days were a great improve
ment on the days that had gone before them.
Have you not read of the Mediaval period, and
the ferocity of its criminal laws; and how inthose
days men fairly seemed tohaveenjoyed torment
ingtheirfellowmen?. . nay, forthematterofthat,
they made their God a tormentor &a jailerrather
than anything else.” € “Yes,” said Dick, “ there
60


are good books on that period also, someof which Where are
Thave read. But as to the great improvement of the prisons?
the nineteenth century, I don’t see it, After all,
the Medieval folk acted after their conscience,
as your remark about their God (which is true)
shows,and they were ready tobear what they in-
icted on others; whereas the nineteenth century
ones were hypocrites, & pretendedtobe humane,
and yet went on tormenting those whom they
daredtotreatso by shutting them upin prison, for
no reason at all, except that they were what they
themselves, the prison-masters, had forced them
to be. O, it’s horrible to think of!” (“But per-
haps,” said I, “they did notknow whatthe prisons
werelike.” Dick seemed roused, &even angry.
“More shameforthem,” said he, “when youand
I know it all these years afterwards. Look you,
neighbour, they couldn't fail to know what adis-
gracea prisonistothe Commonwealth atthe best,
andthat theirprisonswere a good step on towards
being at the worst.” € Quoth I: “But have you
noprisonsatall now?” As soonasthe wordswere
out of my mouth, I felt that I had made a mis-
take, for Dick flushed red and frowned. and the
old man looked surprised & pained ;and present!
Dick said angrily, yet as if restraining himself
somewhat, “Mian alive! how can you ask such a
question? Have I nottold youthat we knowwhat
a prison means by the undoubted evidence of
really trustworthy books, helped out by our own
6


Dicleangry imaginations? And haven't you specially called
atlast


meto notice that the people about the rosdeand
streets [ookhappyl&thow could theylookhappy
if they knew that their neighbours were shut

in prison, while they bore such things quietly?
Aad if sherewere people in prison, you cout
hide itfrom folk, like you mayan occasionalman,
slaying; because that isn't done of set purpose,
with alot of people backing up the slayer in cold
blood, as this prison businessis. Prisons, indeed!
Ono, no, no!” € Hestopped, and began to cool
down, and said in a kind voice:““But forgive me!
I needn't be so hot about it, since there are not
any prisons: I'm afraid you will thinle the worse
of me for losing my temper. Of course, you, coms
ingfrom theoutlands,cannotbeexpected to know
about these things. And now I’m afraid I have
made you feel uncomfortable.” LIn a way, he
had; but he was so generous in his heat, that I
liked him the better fort, and Isaid: "No, really
"tis allmy fault for beingso stupid. Let mechange
thesubject, & ask you what the stately buildingis
on our left just showing at the end of that grove
of plane-trees?” “Ah,” he said, “that is an old
building built before the middle of the twentieth
century, and as you see, in a queer fantastic style
not over beautiful; but there are some fine things
inside it, too, mostly pictures,some very old. Itis
called the National Gallery; I have sometimes
Puzzled as to what the name means: anyhow,

5


nowadayswhereverthereisa place where pictures Concerning
are kept as curiosities permanently, it is called a the making
National Gallery, perhaps after this one. Of of toys
course there are a good many of them up and
down the cane
A DID not try toenlightenhim, feel-
ing the tasktooheavy; but I pulled
BY out my magnificent pipeand fella”
smoking, and the old horse iogeed
onagain. Aswewent, Isaid: “This
pipe is a very elaborate toy, & you
seem so reasonable in this country, & your archi-
tecture is so good, that I wonder at your turning
out such trivialities.” It struck me as I spoke
that this was rather ungratefulof me,after having
received sucha fine present; but Dickdidn’t seem
to notice my bad manners, but said: “Well, I
don’t know; it is a prettything, and since nobod
need make such things unless they like, I don’t
see why they shouldn’t make them, if they like.
Ofcourse, if carvers were scarce they would all be
busy on the architecture, as you call it, and then
these ‘toys’ (a good word) would not be made;
but since thereare plentyof people whocancarve
+ «in fact, almost everybody, & as work is some-
what scarce, or we are afraid it may be, folk do
not discourage this kind of petty work.” € He
mused a little, and seemed somewhat pes 3
but presently his face cleared, & he said: “After
all, you must admit thatthe pipe is a very pretty
3


the facto-
| ries?


Where are thing, with the little people under the trees all


cut so clean and sweet; too elaborate for a pipe,
perhaps, but... well, it is very pretty.” “Too
valuable for its use perhaps,” said I. “What's
that?” said he; “I don’t understand.”
Sr] WAS justgoinginahelplesswa
0 try to make him understand,
xe when we came by the gates of a
PAO big rambling fil gen in which
Az) Work of some sort seemed going
Sawa on. What building is that?” said
I, eagerly; for it was a pleasure amidst all these
strange things to see something a little like what
Iwas used to:‘tit seems tobeafactory.”€" Yes,”
he said, “Ithink I know what you mean, & that's
what it is; but we don’t call them factories now,
but Banded-workshops:thatis,placeswherepeo-
plecollectwhowanttowork together."€{Isup,
pose,” said I, “ powerof some sort is used there?”
@“No, no,” said he. “Why should people col-
lect together to use power, when they can have it
at the places where they live, or hard by, any two
orthreeofthem,orany one, forthematterof that?
No; folle collect in thece Banded «workshops to
do handworkin which working together is neces
sary or convenient; such work is often very plea
sant. In there, for instance, they make pottery &
lass . . there, youcan sce thetopsof the furnaces.
Wall ofcourseit's handy to have fair-sized ovens
and kilns and glass-pots, and a good lot of things
64


ra aera aaa |


tousethem for: though of course there are a good Where is

many such places, as it would be ridiculous if a the smoke?

man hada liking for pot-making or glass-blow-

ing that he should have to live in one place, or

beobliged to forego the work he liked.” 1

see no smoke coming from the furnaces,” said I.

“Smoke?” said Dick; “why should you see

smoke?” I held my tongue, and he went on:“It’s

anice place inside, though asplain as you see out

side. As to the crafts, throwing the clay must be

jolly work: the glass-blowing is rather a swelter-

ing job; but some folk like it very much indeed;

and I don’tmuch wonder: there is such a senseof

power, when you have got deft in it, in dealing

with the hot metal. It makes a lot of pleasant

work,” said he, smiling, ““forhowever much care

you take of such goods, break they will, oneday

oranother, so there isalways plenty to do,” [held

my tongue and pondered. i

SOE—AE camejust here on a gang of men

@ |froad-mending, which delayed us

VES, Wei ia little; but | was not sorry for it;

\ AS) in forallI hadseen hitherto seemeda

sss WU merepart ofa summesholiday; 8

BE Pete | wanted tosechowthisfolkwould

setto on a piece of real necessary work, Theyhad

been resting, and had only just begun workagain

as we came up; so that the rattle of the picks was

whatwokemefrommymusing. Therewereabout

dozen ofthem, strong youngmen, looking much
1 65


A piece of like a boating partyat Oxford would havelooked
road-mend-in the days I remembered, and not moretroubled
ing


with theit work: their outer raiment lay on the
road-side in an orderly pile under the guardians
shipofasix-yeat-oldboy, whohadhisarmthrown
overthe neck ofa bigmastiff, whowas as happily
lazy as if the summer-day had been made for him
alone. As I eyed the pile of clothes, [could see the
gleamof gold and sifkembroidery onit, &:judged
that some of these workmen had tastes akin to
those of the Golden Dustman of Hammersmith,
Besidethem lay a good big basket that had hints
about it ofcold pie& wine: a half dozen of young
‘women stood by watching the work or the work
ts, both of which were worth watching, forthe
latter smote great strokes and were very deft in
thelr labottvand/as handsometlear bide fellows
as you might find a dozen of in a summer day.
Theywere laughing & talling merily with each
other &¢ the women, but presently their foreman
Tooled up andiekw nar waystoppediSohe mayed
his pick and sang out, “ Spall ho, mates! here are
neighbours who want to get past.” Whereon the
others etopped also, & drawing araund us, helped
the old horse by easing our wheelsover the half
undone read, and then, like men with a pleasant
task on hand, hurried back to their work, only
stopping to give us a smiling good-day; sothat
the sound of the picks broke out again before
Greplocksad ttn ois jog trot Dick Tooked
6


back over his shoulder at them and said: “They Anoarsman
arein luck to-day:it’s ight down good sport try”. on road-
inghow much pick-workeonecangetintoanhoury mending
asl can ste:those neighbours know their basis
ness well, Iris nota mere matter of strength get-
tingon: juickly with such work; isit, guest?” “I
shuld hinkenot,” said I,“buttotell youthe truth,
Thave never tried my hand at it.” “Really?”
aside gael, "thacseemsapity: 3 god work
Srbarieang homasdes and 1 liken acme
admit it is pleasanter the second week than the
first, Not that Tam a good hand att; the fellows
Seed tolehealtenieevcone jobrerhierel was wotleangs
I remember, and sing out to me, ‘Well rowed,
stroke!’ ‘Put your back into it, bow!’” “Not
much of a joke,” quoth I. “Well,” said Dick,
“everything seems like a joke when we have a
pleasant spell of work on,and good fellows m:
Sbodtuaj we feel w Happy; you know,” Agaanld
pondered silently.


f2 &


Thelong CHAPTER VIII. AN OLD FRIEND.


E now turned into a
q pleasant lane where
the branches of great
planctreesnearly met
overhead, but behind
them lay low houses
A standing rather close
64 together. This is
Long Acre,” quoth
Zax Dick; “so there must
once have been a cornfieldhere. Howcuriousit is
thatplaceschange so, & yetkeep their oldnames!
Just look how thick the houses stand! and they
are still goingon building, look you!” “Yes,” said
the oldman, “but I think thecornfields musthave
been builtoverbeforethemiddleofthenineteenth
century. I have heard that about here was one of
thethickest parts ofthe town. But Imust getdown
here, neighbours; Ihave gottocallon a friendwho
lives athe; ardens behindthis Long Acre. Good-
bye & good luck, Guest!” And he jumped down
and strode away vigorously, like a young man.
“Tow old should you say that neighbour will
be?” said] to Dickas welostsightof him; forlsaw
that he was old, and yet helooked dry andsturdy
Tikea piece of ancient oak;atype of old man] was
not used to seeing. €.“O, about ninety, I should
say,” said Dick. “How long-lived your people
mustbe!” said I.“ Yes,”said Dick, “certainly we
68


have beaten the threescore-and-ten of the old Memories
Jewish proverb-book. But then you see that was of Old Lon-
‘written of Syria, a hot dry country, where people don
jive taueen deandin outtemcetats crane Ties
ever, [don't think it matters much, so long as a
gan is healthy and happy while he is alive. But
how, Guest, we are so near to my old kinsman’s
dwelling-place that I think you had bevter k

Sill future questions for him,” (I nodded a yes;
and therewith we turned tothe left, & wentdown

a gentle slope through some beautiful rose-gar-
dens, laid out on what I tookto be the site of En-

dell Street. We passed on, and Dick drew rein an
instant as we came across long straightish road
with housesscantily scattered upand down it. He
waved his hand right & left, and said, “Holborn
thatside, Oxford Road that. This was once a very
important part of the crowded city outside the
saceat wali of the Remad and Mcaceyal bare
many of the feudal nobles of the Middle Ages,

we are told, had big houses on either sideof He -
born. I daresay you remember that the Bishop of
Ely’s house is mentioned in Shakespeare's play

of Keng Richard III.; andtherearesomeremains

of that still left. However, this road is not of the
sameimportance,now that theancientcityisgone,
walls &all.” € Hedrove on again, whileI smiled
faintly to think how the nineteenth century, of
which such big words have been said, counted for
nothing in the memory of this man, who read


fuseum


‘The British Shake


spare and had not forgotten the Mile
Ages. € We crossed the road into a short narrow
lane between the gardens, & came out again into
a wide road, on one side of which wasa great and
long building, turning its gables away from the
highway, which I saw at once was another public
group. Opposite toitwasa wide space of greenery,
without any wall or fence ofany kind. I looked
through thetreesandsaw beyond them a pillared
portico quite familiar tome.. .no less old a friend,
in fact, than the British Museum. It rather took
my breath away, amidst all the strange things I
had seen; butI held my tongue & let Dick speak.
Said he:


K yee is the British Muse-


N} um, where my great-grandfather
GA mostly lives; sol won't say much
about it. The building on the left
is the Muscum Market, &I think


gether pee pl earate host soof. ea ee
jorse under an arch-


zo


&aplashingfountsin in themidst,Nearthefoun- A rest for
tainwere afew market stalls, with awnings over Greylocs
themof geysteped linen elothy about which sora
people, mostly women & children, were moving
Peri locking atthe gusdacxmcscdthtce, Whe
‘found flocrof thebuildinground the quadrangle
P scczupindibyawidelarcade’or cloistet witsse
fancifulbutstrongarchitecture Lcouldnot enough
adiin Flr few people wercsnuntering o
Seri eee enti benatiea @Dskaecdinene
tae ally let anclarw tc eich Aedes
defagin-daysonaFriday yousrouldseeitthconged
andgay withpeople,and in theaftemoon theres
gencrally music about the fountain, However, I
arcaay wieshall have aguctiy good gatiering at
frac ridadayaieal Wericave circuited:
rangle and by an archway, into a large handsome
stable on the otherside, where wespeedily stalled
Hieold nag eande bien apysy with eee aes
andthen tuned and walked back again through
the market, Dick looking rather thoughtful, asit
seemed to me. I noticed that peoplecouldn’t help
looking at me rather hard; and considering my.
clothesand theirs, didn’t wonder; but whenever
they caught my cy they madeanew very friendly
signof green Wve walled stra ghitote the fae
court of the Museum, where, exceptthat the rail
ings were gone,and the whisperingboughs of the
trees were all about, nothing. seemed changed;
the very pigeons were wheeling about the bald,
zi


oe clinging to the ornaments of the pediment
as I had scen them of old. € Dick seemed grown
a little absent, but he could not forbear giving me
an architectural note, and said: “It is rather an
ugly old building, isn't it? Many people have
wanted to pull it Sownarid eeiuildinde perhaps
if work does really get scarce, we may yet do so.
Butjasmy great-grandfatherwilltell you,it would
not be quite a straightforward job; for there are
wonderful collections in there of all kinds of an-
tiquities, besides an enormous library with many
exceedingly beautiful books in it, & many others
most useful as genuine records, texts of ancient
works and thelike; and the worry &anxiety,and
even risk, there would be in moving all this has
saved the buildings themselves, Besides, as we
said before, itis nota bad thing to have some re-
cord of what our forefathers thought a handsome
building. For there is plenty of labour & material
in it.” €“I see there is,” said I,and I quite agree
with you. Butnow hadn't we better make haste
to see your great-prandfather?” In fact, I could
not help seeing that he was rather dallying with
the time. He eaid, “ Ves, we will gointo the house
in a minute. My kinsman is too old to do much
work in the Museum, where he was a custodian
of the books formany years; but he still lives here
a good deal; acct t think,” said he, smiling,
“that he looks upon himself as a part of the
babies of the books.a part of himy-l don't know
72


which.” He hesitated a little’ longer, then flushing A Museum
up, took my hand, and saying, “Come alone: House
thenl” led me toward the door of one of the oti


official dwellings.


CHAPTERIX.CONCERNINGLOVE.
OUR kinsman doesn't
much care for beautiful
building, then,” said I, as
we entered thesomewhat
dreary classical house;
which indeed was as bare
as need be, except for
ome big pots of the June
flowers which stoodabout
here and there; though it
was very clean and nicely whitewashed. €“O,1
don't know,” said Dick, rather absently. “He is
getting old certainly, for he isovera hundred and
,and no doubt he doesn’t care about moving.
But of course hecould live inaprettier house if he
liked: he is not obliged to live in one place any
Hose thascany onctlaeh Tiiieray) GuestteAee
he fed the way upstairs, and opening a door we
wentintoa fair-sized roomoftheoldtype,asplain
astherestofthe house, with a fewnecessary pieces
of furniture,and those very simpleand even rude,
but solid and witha good deal of carving abour
them, well designed but rather crudely executed,
73


The Sage Atthe furthest corner of the room, ata desk near


of Blooms. the window, sat alittle old man in a roomy oak


bury


chair, well becushioned. He was dressed in a sort
of Norfolk jacket of blue serge worn threadbare,
with breeches of the same, 8 grey worsted stock,
ings. He jumped up from his chair, and cried out
ina voice of considerable volume for such an old
man, “Welcome, Dick, my lad; Clara is here, &
will be more than glad to see you; so keep your
heart up.” "Clara here?” quoth Dick; “if thad
known, I would not have brought... At least I
mean I would...” Hewasstuttering & confused,
clearly because he was anxious to say nothing to
sauakemicfeeloue toormung Babe oid nikaete
hadnotseenmeatfirst, helpedhimoutbycoming
foewlatdandicayinyeo ak pe isd yaar
ardon me, for I did not notice that Dick, who is
Ligienngh aa hide anybody, you know, had
pratt ai frtond cate arestA nasties tyson
come tw youl All the morc/asllalmasthope that
youaregoing toamuseanold manby giving him
dhewa ftem over séajfor leati#eztharyousrecome,
from over the water and far off countries.” ( He
looked at me thoughtfully, almost anxiously, as
hesaidinachanged voice," MMi; ht Laskyouwhere
‘ou come from, as you are so clearly a stranger?
Tseidin an absent ways I used to live in Hage
land, and now] am come back again; and I slept
last night at the Hammersmith Guest House.’
GEe boredigvdypbudscened Titioagtes


74


little Pisreeciotes with my answer. As for me, I An old man
was now looking at him harder than good man- and a young
ners allowed of, pehaps; for in truth Bis face, woman
dried-apple-likeasitwas,seemedstrangely fami-
liarto me; asif I hadseen it before .. inalooking-

‘lass it mightbe, said I tomyself. €“ Well,” said
theold man, “Cwherever you Gome from, you are
comeamong friends. AndIseemy kinsman Rich

ard Hammond has an air area asif he had
brought you here for me todosomething for you.

Is that so, Dick?” Dick, who was getting still

more absent-minded & kept looking uneasily at
thedoor, managed to say, “Well, yes, kinsman:

our guest finds things much altered, and cannot
understand it; nor can I; so I thought I would

bring him toyou, since you knowmore of all that
has happened within the last two hundred years
than any body else does, .. What's that?”And
he turned toward the door again, We heard foot
steps outside; thedooropened, and incame a very
beautiful young woman, who stopped short on
seeing Dick, and flushed asredasa rose, butfaced
him nevertheless. Dick looked at her hard, and
halfreached out hishand toward her, & his whole
face quivered with emotion. (@ The old man did
not leave them long in this shy discomfort, but
said, smiling with an oldman’s mirth: “ Dick,my
lad, and you, my dear Clara, I rather fancy that
we two oldsters are in your way; for I think you
will have plenty to say to each other. You had


75


ning of a
quiet talk


The begin- better go into Nelson's room up above; I’know


hehas poue out Co hehas just been covering the
walls all over with medizval books, so it will be
pretty enough even foryoutwoand yourrenewed
ares ‘The girl reached out her hand to
ick, & taking his led him outof the room, look-
ing straight before her; but it was easy tosee that
her blushes came from happiness, not anger;as,
indeed, loveis farmoreself-conscious than wrath,
FZ BN WHEN the door had shut on them
Wthe old man turned to me, still
smiling, and said: “Frankly, my
l dear guest, you will domea great
service if you are come to set my
old tongue wagging. My love of
sides with me, or rather grows on me;
and though it is pleasant enough to see these
youngsters moving about & playing together so
seriously, as ifthewholeworld'd ended on their
kisses (as indeed it does somewhat), yet I don’t
think my tales of the past interest them much.
The last harvest, the last baby, the last knot of
carving in the market-place, is historyenough for
em. le wae different, I thinle, when Iwasa lad,
when we were not so assured of peace&¢ continue
ous plenty as we are now. . Well, well! Without
putting you to the question, let me ask you this:
Am I to consider you as an enquirer who knows
a little of our modern ways of life, or as one who
comes from some place where the very founda-


=S—— ——O eee


tionsof lifeare different fromours...doyouknow Aman from
anything or nothing aboutus?” @He looked at another
me keenly and with growing wonder in his eyes planet
as he spoke; and I answered in a low voice: “I
knowonly so much of your modern life as Icould
aather from using my eyes on the way here from
Blammertmithyand from asking sotne questions
of Richard Hammond, most of which he could
hardly understand.” The old man smiled at this.
“Then,” said he, “Iam to speak to youas...”
“As if | were a being from another planet,” said
I. €The old man, whose name, by the bye, like
his kinsman’s, was Hammond, smiled and nod-
ded, and wheeling his seat round tome, bade me
sit ina heavy oak chair, and said, as he saw m:
eyes fix on its curious carving: “Ves, Lam mud
tied to the past; my past, you understand. These
very pieces of furniture belong to a time before 5
my carly days; it was my father who got them
made; if they had been done within the last fifty
years they would have been much cleverer in
execution; but I don’t think I should have liked
them thebetter. Wewere almost beginning again
in those days: and they were brisk, hot-headed
times. But you hear how garrulous | am: ask me
questions, ask me questions about anything, dear
guest; since must talk, make my talk profitable
to you.” CI was silent for a minute, and then I
said, somewhat nervously: “Excuse me if | am
rude; but Iam so much interested in Richard,


77


| ation


An explan-since hehas been solkind tome, aperfect stranger,


thar should like to aslea question about him,”
“Wall,” said old Hammond, “if he were not
‘kind,'as youcall it,toaperfect stranger hewould
be thoughta strange person, & people would be
aptto shun him. But arkeon, ask on!don't be shy
of asking.” €Said I: “That beautiful girl, ishe
going to be married to her?” “Well,” said he,
“yes, he is. He has been married to her once al-
ready, and now I should say itis pretty clear that
hewill be married toher again.” “Indeed,” quoth
I, wondering what that meant. (“Here is the
whole tale,” said old Hammond; “a short one
enough; and now I hope a happy one: they lived

together two years the first ime; were both very

young; and then she got it into her head that she

was in love with somebody else. So she left poor

Dick; Isay poor Dick, because he had not found

any oneelse. But it did not last long, only about

2 year. Then she came to me,as she was in the

habit of bringing her troubles to theold carleyand

asked me how Dick was, and whether he was

happy, &all the rest of it. So Isaw how the land

lay, and said that he was very unhappy. and not

at all well which last at any rate was a lie. There,

you can guess the rest. Clara came to havea long

talk with me today, but Dick will serve her turn

much better. Indeed, if he hadn't chanced inupon

me to-day should have had tohave sent for him

tormorrow.” €“Dear me,” said I. “Have they

78


any children?” €“ Yes,” said he, “two; they are Where are
staying with one of my daughters at present, the divorce
where, indeed, Clara has mibatly been. Iwouldn’t courts?
lose sight of her, as I felt sure they would come
together again: and Dick, who is the best of good

fellows, really took the matter to heart. You see,

he had no other love to run to, as she had. Sol
managed it all; as I have done with such-like
matters before.” “Ah,” said I, “no doubt you
wanted to keep them out of the Divorce Court:

but I suppose it often has to settle such matters.”
@“Then you suppose nonsense,” said he, “I

know that there used to be such lunaticaffairs as
divorce-courts: but justconsider;all thecases that
cameintothem weremattersof sheets

and I think, dear guest,” said te smiling, “that
though you do come from another planet, you

can see from the mere outside look = world

that quarrels about private property could not go

Goer iontecusiabundaye @ludeedmaices

from Hammersmith to Bloomsbury, and all the

quiet happy life Ihad seen so many hints of, even
apartfrom my shopping, would have been enough

totell me that “‘the sacred rights of property,” as

We used to think of them, were now no more. So
Isatsilent while the old man took up the thread

of the discourse again & said: “Well, then, pro-

perty quarrels being no longer possible, what re-

mains in these matters that a court of law could

deal with? Fancy a court for enforcing acontract


79


women


Menand_ ofpassionorsentiment! Ifsuchathingwereneed.


edasa reductio ad absurdum of the enforcement
of contract, such a folly would do that for us.”
@ He wassilent. again a little, & then said: “You
must understand, once forall, thatwe have chang-
ed these matters; or rather, that our way of lock.
ingatthemhaschanged,aswe havechanged with.
in the last two hundred years. We do not deceive
ourselves, indeed, or believe that we can get rid of
all the trouble that besets the dealings between
the sexes. We know that we must face the un-
happiness that comes of man & women confus,
ing the relations between natural passion, and
sentiment, & the friendship which, when things
go well, softens the awakening from passing illa-
sions: butwearenot somadas topileup degrada
tion on that unhappiness by engaging in sordid
squabbles about livelihood and position, and the
ower of tyrannising over the children who have
Peecais ofloveorlust.”@Againhepaused
awhile, and again went on: “Calf love, mistaken
for a heroism that shall be life-long, yet earl
waning into disappointment; the inexplicable
daierhaticomrs\aaialemnencipeteiestae
theall-in-all tosomeonewoman, whose ordinat
human kindness & human beauty he has ideal-
ised into superhuman perfection, and made the
one object of his desire; or lastly the reasonable
Tonging ofa strong & thoughtful man to become
the most intimate friend of some beautiful and
80


wise woman, the very type of the beauty & glory The pain &
of the world which we love so well. .as we exult pleasure of
inall the pleasure and exaltation of pee which sentiment
goeswith these things, sowe set ourselves to bear
the sorrow which not unseldom goes with them
also;remembering those lines of the ancient poet
(I quote roughly from memory one of the many
translations of the nineteenth century):
‘For this the Gods have fashioned
man’s grief and evil day,
‘Thatstill for man hereafter
might be the tale andthe lay’
‘Well, well, ’tis little likely anyhow that all tales
shall be lacking, or all sorrow cured.” @ He was
silent for some time, and I would not interrupt
him. Atlasthe began again: “Butyoumustknow
that we of these generations are strong & healthy
of body, and live easily; we pass our lives in rea-
sonable strife with nature, exercising not oneside
of ourselves only, but all sides, taking the keenest
pleasure in all the life of the world. So it isa point
of honour with us not to be self-centred; not to
stippose that the world must cease because one
man issorry; therefore weshould think it foolish,
or tf you will, criminal, to exaggerate these mat-
ters of sentiment and sensibility: we are no more
inclined to eke out our sentimental sorrows than
to cherish our bodily pains; & we recognise that
there are other pleasures besides love-making.
You mustremember, also, that we arelongelived,
gt ct


| Reality in and that therefore beauty both in’ man and wor
| sentiment man is notas fleeting as it was in the days when
i we were burdened soheavily by self inflicted dis-
} eases.So we shake offthese griefs in a way which
] pethaps the sentimentalists of other times would
! think contemptible and unheroic, but which we
| think necessary and manlike. As on the other
hand, therefore, wehave ceased to be commercial
in ourlove-matters, so also we have ceased to be
artificially foolish. The folly which comes byna-
ture, the unwisdom of the immature man, or the
older man caught in atrap, we must put up with
that, norarewe much ashamed ofit;butto becon-
ventionally sensitiveor sentimental ., my friend,
Tam old and perhaps disappointed, but at least I
think we have cast off some of the follies of the
I older world.” ( He paused, as if for some words
i of mine; but I held my peace: then he went on:
{ “At least, if we suffer from the tyranny & fickle
\] ness of nature or our awn want of experience, we
neither grimace about it, nor lie. If there must be
} sundering betwixtthose whomeant never to sun-
| der, so it must be: but therenced be nopretext of
| unity when the realityof itis gone:nordowedrive
those who well know that they are incapable of
| it to profess an undying sentiment which they
cannot really feel: thus itisthat, as that monstro-
| sity of venal lust is no longer possible, so alsoitis
no longer needed. Don't misunderstand me. You
| didnotseemedshocked when told youthat there
82
|
|


wereina fawscotts tolenkicce toa trbivententi: Where aM
ment or passion; but so curiously are men made, Grundy?
thet perhaps you will be shocked when I tellyod
hse ebdeaf pabliconinen aren teed

the place of such courts, and which mi
tyrannical and unreasonable as they we
not say that people don’t judge thee neighboure
conduct, sometimes, doubtless, unfairly. But Ido
#57 shatthere iamounvacying conventional actof
Flgiy aoeiomplestt edped aabeice bee
crustes to stretch ot cramp their minds and lives;
no kypocritical exommunication-whicls people
FN a ties RE Green
Eihie,or-by the unexpressed threat of the lesset
interdict if they are lax in theie hypocrisy. Are
you shocked now?” No... no,” said I, wit
some hesitation. “It is all so different.” @ “At
anyrate,” saidhe, “one thing I think I cananswer
for: whatever sentiment there is, it is real... and
genceal} itis antconfined wipcepleveryapedally
feeds Tnnraleoigiessy nice ae Mica pogee
just now, that there is not by a greatwayas much
nulfecing involvedinthese matter cthesto men
or towomen as there used to be. But excuse me


for being 20 prolix on this question! You know
youasked to be treated like a being from another
planet.”


g2 83


cipation of
women


| NDEED Ithank youvery much,
sid I." Now may ask you abous


Baal B28 the position of women in your so-
FESS Pasay ciety?” CHelaughedveryhearti
ey K


Reo) for 2 man of his years, and said:

amet “It is not without reason that I

have got a reputation as a careful student of his-
tory. | believe I really dounderstand‘the Eman-
cipation of Women movement’ of thenineteenth
century. Idoubtifanyotherman nowalive does.”
C“ Well?” said I, alittle bit nettled by his merri-
ment. € Well,” said he, “of course you will see
that all that is a dead controversy now. The men
have no longer any opportunity of tyrannising
over the women, or the women over the men;
both of which thingstook placein thoseold times.
The women do what they can do best, and what
they like best, and the men are neither jealous of
it or injured by it. This is such a commonplace
that lam almost ashamed to state it.” € I said,
“O; Xlegislation?dothey takeany part in that?”
@ Hammond smiled and said:“I think youmay
wait for an answer to that question till we get on
to the subject of legislation. There maybe novel
ties to you in that subject also.” 1 “ Very well,” 1
said; “but about this woman question? I saw at
the Guest House that the women were waiting
on the men: that seems a little like reaction,
doesn'tit?” €“ Doesit?” said theold man;“per-
Boe een ounce unimportantoce

4


cupation, not deserving of respect, I believe that In praise of
was the opinion of the ‘advanced’ women of thehouse-keep-
nineteenth century, and their male backers, If iting
is yours, I recommend tayour noticean old Nor-
wegian folk-loretalecalled How the Man minded
the House, or somesuch title; theresult of which
minding was that, after various tribulations, the
man and the family cow balanced each other at
theend of a rope, the man hanging half-way u
the chimney, the cow dangling from the roof,
which, after the fashion of the country, was of
turf and sloping down low to the ground, Hard
on the cow, I ‘chink, Of course no such mishap
could happen to such a superior person as yout-
self,” he added, chuckling. @I sat somewhat un-
easy under this dry gibe. Indeed, his manner of
treating this latter part of the question seemed
to mea little disrespectful. “Come, now, my
friend,” quoth he, “don’t you know that it is
it pleasure to a clever. woman to manage a
ouse skilfully, and to do it so that all the house-
mates about her look pleased, and are grateful to
her? And then, you know, everybody likes to be
ordered about by a pretty woman: why, itis one
of the pleasantest forms of Hirtation, You are not
so old that you cannot remember that. Why, I
remember it well.” And the old fellow chuckled
again, and at last fairly burst out laughing, “Ex-
cuse me,” said he, after a while; “I am not laugh.
ing at anything you could be thinking of, but at
85


nity


Qfmater- that silly nineteenth-century fashion, current a-


mongst rich so-called cultivated people, of ignor-
ing all the steps by which their daily dinner was
reached, as matters too low for their lofty intelli-
gence. Uselessidiots! Come, now, lam a literary
man,’ as we queer animals used to be called, yet
Tam a pretty good cook myself.” “So am I,” said
1. “Well, then,” said he, “I really think you can
understand me better than youwouldseem todo,
judging by your words and your silence.” Said
I:*Perhapsthatisso;but people putting in prac’
tice commonly this sense of interest in the ordi-
nary occupations of life rather startles me. I will
ask-you a question or two presently about that.
But I want to return to the position of women
amongst you. ‘You have studied the ‘emancipa-
tion of women’ business of the nineteenth cen-
tury: don’t you remember that some of the‘su-
perior’ women wanted to emancipate the more
intelligent part of their sex from the bearing of
children?” @The old man grew quite serious
again, Saidher‘Idorememberaboutthatstrange
ece of baseless folly, the result, like all otherfol
Fire af the period, of the hideous class tyranny
which then obtained. What do we think of it
now?you would say. My friend, that is a ques-
tion easy to answer. How could it possibly be
but that maternity should be highly honoured a
mongst us? Surely itis amatterof course that the
natural and necessary pains which the mother
86


must go through form a bond of union between Heredity: a
man and woman, an extra stimulus to love and cutse or 2
affection between them, & that this isuniversally blessing?
recognised. For the rest, remember that all the
artificial burdens of motherhood are now done
away with. A mother has no longer any mere
corded anxieties for the future of her children.
They may indeed turn out better or worse; they
may disappoint her highest hopes; such anxie-
tics as these are a partof the mingled pleasureand

in which goes to make up the life of mankind.
Biasadilesnatics spared tie fax (ieadenitle
commonly thecertainty) thatartificial disabilities
would maleberchildecn somethinglessthacimen
and women: she knows that they will live & act
accordingtothe measure of their ownfaculties. In
times past, itis clear that the ‘Society’ of the day
helped its Judaic god, and the ‘Man of Science’
ofthe time,in visiting thesins of the fathersupon
the children. How to reverse this process, how to
take the sting out of heredity, has for long been
one of the most constant cares of the thoughtful
‘men amongst us. So that, you see, the ordinaril
healthy woman (& almostall aurwamen are bot
healthyand atleast comely), respected as a child
bearerandrearer of children, desired as a woman,
loved as a companion, unanxious forthe future of
herchildren, has far more instinct for ‘Maternity
than the poor drudge and mother of drudges of
past days could ever have had; or than her sister


87


Beauty the of theupper classes, brought up in affected ignor-
outcome of ance of natural facts, reared in an atmosphere of
love mingled prudery and prurience.” €“ You speak
warmly,” Isaid, “butIcanseethatyou are right.”
“Yes,” he said, ““& Iwill point out to you atoken
of all the benefits which we have gained by our
freedom, What did you think of the looks of the
people ‘whom you have come across to-day?”
@SaidI:“Tcould hardly have believedthat there
could be so many good-looking people in any
civilised country.” He crowed litle, ike the |
old bird he was. “What! are we still civilised?”
said he, “Well, as to our looks, the English and
| Jutish blood, which on the whole is pi inant
{ here, used not to produce much beauty. But I
think we have improved it. I know a man who
has a large collection of portraits printed from
photographs of the nineteenth century, & going
over those & comparing them with the everyday
faces in these times, putsthe improvement in our
good looks beyond a doubt, Now, there are some
i people who think it not too fantastic to connect
| this increase of beauty directly with our freedom
and good sensein the matters we have been speak-
ing of: they believe that a child born from the
natural and healthy love between aman & a wor
|
|


man, evenif that be transientislikely to turnout

betterin allways, andespecially in bodily beauty,

than the birth of the respectablecommercial mat-

riage bed, or of the dull despair ofthe drudge of
i]


that system. They say, Pleasure ae pleasure. Of educa»
‘Whatdoyouthink?”“ Iam much of that mind,” tion
said I.


CHAPTER X. OF QUESTIONS AND
ANSWERS.


ELL," said theold man,
shiftingin hischair,“you
must get on with your
questions, Guest; I have
been some time answer-
ing thisfirstone.”Said


4


y
Pp


BY Ba) 1: Iwant anextraword
fa ba Ca lor two about your ideas
S\EALe A) of education; although I

ESSE URL pa thered from Dick that


you let your children run wild and didn’t teach
them anything; & in short, that you have so re-
fined your education, that now you have none.”
Then you gathered left-handed,” quoth he.
“But of course I understand your point of view
about education, which isthatof times past, when
‘the struggle for life,’ as men used to phrase it
(ic.,the struggle for a slave's rations on one side,
& fora bouncing share of the slaveholder’s privi-
lege on the other), pinched ‘education’ for most
people into a niggardly dole of not very accurate
information; something to be swallowed by the
beginner in the art of living whether he liked it
or not, and was hungry for it or not: and which
89


Freedom
versuscram-
ming


had been chewed and digested over & over again
by people whodidn’t care aboutit inordertoserve
it outtoother people whodidn’tcareabout it’ CI
stopped the old man’s rising wrath by a laugh, &
said:‘*Well, youwere nottaught thatway, at an
rate, soyoumay letyourangerrun off youalittle.”
“True, true,” said he, smiling, “1 thanke fea
forcorrecting my ill-temper: I always fancy my
self as living in any period of which we may Le
speaking. But, however, to put it in a cooler way:
you expected to see children thrust into schools
when they hadreachedanage conventionally sup,
osed to be the due age, whatever their varyi
facultiesand dispositionsmight be, & when there,
with like disregard tofacts, tobe subjected toacer.
tainconventional course of ‘learning.’ My friend,
can’t you see that such proceeding means ignor,
ing the fact of growth, bodily and menealt’ No
one could come out of such a mill uninjured; and
those only would avoid being crushed by itwho
would have the spiritof rebellion pines them.
Fortunately most children have had that at all
times, or I donot know that we should ever have
reached our present position. Now you see what
it all comes to. In the old times all this was the
result of poverty. In the nineteenth century, so”
ciety wassomiserably poor, owing tothe system-
atised robbery on which it was founded, that real
education was impossible foranybody. The whole
theory of their so-called education was that itwas
90


§ THOUGHT a little, and said;
“You were speaking just now of
households: that sounded to me
a little like the customs of past
times; I should have thought you
SH would have lived morein public,”
@Phalangsteries, eh?” said he.“ Well, we live as
we like, and we like to live asa rule with certain
house-mates that we have got used to, Remem-
ber, again, that poverty is extinct, and that the
Fourierist phalangsteries & all their kind, as was.
but natural at the time, implied nothing but a
refuge from mere destitution, Such a way of life
as that, couldonly have been conceivedof by peor
ple surrounded by the worst form of poverty. But
you mustunderstand therewith, that though sep-
arate households are the rule amongst us, and
though they differ in their habits more or less,
yet no door is shut to any good-tempered person
who is content to live as the other hoaienues
do: only of course it would be unreasonable for
one man to drop into a household & bid the folk
of it to alter their habits to please him, since he
sau gu csewhiere & live as he pleases. However,
Ineednotsay much aboutalll this,as youare goin;
uptheriverwith Dick, & will find out for yoursel


by experience how these mattersare managed.”


92


IFTER a pause, I said: “Your big Where are
fi towns, now; how about them? the slums?
London, which . . which I have
read aboutasthe modern Babylon
f civilization, seems to have dis-
a appeared.” € “Well, well,” said
old Hammond, “perhaps after all it is more like
ancient Babylon now than the‘modern Babylon’
of the nineteenth century was. But let that pass.
After all, there isa soot deal of population in
places between here & Hammersmith; nor have
youseen the most populous partof thetown yet.”
€Tell me, then,” said I, how is it toward the
east?” Saidhe:“ Timewas, when if yoummounted
a good horse & rode straight away from my door
here at a round trot for an hour and a half, you
would still be in the thick of London, and the
greaterpart of that would be‘slums’ as they were
called; that is to say, placesof torture for innocent
men and women; or worse, stews for rearing and
breeding men & women in such degradation, that
that torture should seem to them mere ordinary
and natural life.” “Iknow, I know,” I said, rather
impatiently. “That waswhatwas; tellme some
thing of whats. Is any of thatleft?”@" Notan
inch,” saidhe;“butsomememory ofitabides with
us, & Iam glad ofit. Onceayear,on May-day,we
holdasolemn feast in those easterly communesof
London tocommemorateTheClearingof Misery
as it is called. On that day we have music and


93


Sa __ a aaa eee CO


The happy dancing, and merry games and happy feasting

memory of on the site of some of the worst of the old slums,

pastevils the traditional memory of which we have kept,
On that occasion the custom is for the prettiest
girls to sing some of the old revolutionary songs,
and those which were the groans of discontent,
once so hopeless, on the very spots where those
terrible crimes of class-murder were committed
day by day for so many years. Toa man like me,
who have studied the past so diligently, it isa
curious and touching sight to see some beautiful
girl, daintilyclad, and crowned with flowersfrom
theneighbouringmeadows,standingamongstthe
happy people, on some mound where of old time
ar ead apology fora house,a den in
which men & women lived packed amongst the
filth like pilchards in a cask; lived in such a way
that they could only have endured it,as I said just
now, by beingdegradedoutof humanity. .tohear
the terrible words of threateningand lamentation
coming from her sweetand beautiful lips, andshe
unconsciousof theirreal meaning: to heather, for
instance, singing Hood’s Song of the Shirt, and
to think that all thetime she doesnot understand
what itis all about. . a tragedy grown inconceiv-
able to her and herlisteners. Think of that, if you
can, and of how glorious life is grown!” €‘‘Ine
deed,” said I, “it is difficult for me think of it,
And I sat watchinghow hiseyes glittered, & how
the fresh life seemed to glow in his face, and I

94


wondered how at his age he shold think of the The “City”
happiness of the world, or indeed anything but
his coming dinner. €“Tell me in detail,” said I,
“what lies eastof Bloomsbury now?” €Saidhe:
“There are but few houses between this and the
outer part of the old city; but in the city we have
aeldy dwelling population. Ous forefathers,
inthe Arse clearing of the slums, were not in a
hurry to pull down the houses in what was called
atthe end of the nineteenth century the business
quarter of the town, & what later got tobe known
as the Swindling Kens, You see, these houses,
though they stood hideously thick on the ground,
were roomy and fuitly solid in building, & clean,
because they were not used for living in, but as
mere gambling booths; so the poor people from
the cleared slums took them for lodgings & dwelt
there, till the folk of those days had time to think
of something better for them; thus the buildings
were pulled down so gradually that people got
used to living thicker onthe ground there than in
most places; therefore it remains the most popu-
lous part of London, or perhaps of all these is-
lands. Butitis very pleasant there, partly because
of the splendour of the architeceare, which goes
further than what you will see elsewhere. How-
ever, this crowding, if it may be called so, does
notgofurtherthan a street called Aldgate, snare
which pethaps you may have heard of. Beyond
that the houses are scattered wide about the mea-


95


———


Theex- dows there, which are very beautiful, especially
treme East when you get on to the lovely river Lea (wher,
End old Isaak Walton used to fish’ you know’ shout
the places called Stratford and Old Ford, names
which of course youwillnothaveheardof, though

the Romans were busy there once tipona tims”

Not heard of them shoughe I to myacle. How

strange! that I who had seen the very last tem-

nant of the pleasantness of the meadows by the

Lea destroyed, should have heard them spoken

of with pleasantness come back to them tn full

measure, @ Hammond went on: “When you

et down to the Thames side you come onthe

Docks twichare waels othe naaceettcea:


i tury,and are still in use, although notsothronged
{ as they once were, since we discourage centralis-
| ational wecan and we have long ago dropped
| the pretension to be the market of the world. A-
} bout these Dock. ares good few homes, which,
| however, are not inhabited by many people per-
i


manently; I mean, those who use them come &
(| a good deal, the place being too low 8& marshy
} E roledeanrdigetiing Pestithe Docs eastrart

and landward it is all flat pasture, once marsh,
except for a few gardens, and there are very few
Permanentdwellingsthere:scarcely anything but
a few sheds, &cots for the men who come to look
after the great herds of cattle pasturing there, But
however, what with the beasts and the men, and
the scattered red-tiled roofs and the big hayricks,

96


itdoes not make a bad holiday to get a quietpony The manu-
and ride about there on a sunny afternoon of au’ facturing
tumn, and look over the river and the craft pass’ districts
ing up & down, and on to Shooters’ Hill and the

Kentish uplands, & then turn round to the wide

green sea of the Essex marsh-land, with the great

domed line of the sky, and the sun shining down

inone flood of peacefullightoverthelong distance.

There is a place called Canning’s Town, and fur-

therout, Silvertown, wherethe pleasantmeadows

are at their pleasantest: doubtless they were once
slums, & wretchedenough.” The names grated

on my ear, but I could not explain why to him,

So I said: “And south of the river, what is it

like?” @ He said: “You would find it much the

same as the land about Hammersmith. North,

again, the land runsup high, andthereis anagree-

able & well-built town called Hampstead, which

fitly ends London on that side. It looks down on

the north-western end of the forest you passed
eee I smiled. “So much for what was

once London,” said I. “Now tell me about the

other towns of the country.”

[ST SARE said:“Astothe bigmurky places


AGE W\ which were once, as we know, the
yy) 1 centres of manufacture, they have,
Wy

(@

[eee


0 Hike the brick and mortar desert of

W] London, disappeared; only, since

NPZAY they were centres of nothing but

"PRESSES asd correla piepobe bite aeet
hi 97


Adclean
country


the gambling market, they have left less signs of
their existence than London. Of course,the great
change in the use of mechanical force made this
an easy matter, andsomeapproachtotheirbreake
up as centres would probably have taken place,
even if we had not changed our habits so much,
butthey being such asthey were,nosacrifice would
have seemed too greata pricetopay for gettingrid
ofthe ‘manufacturing districts,’ asthey used to be
called. For the rest, whatever coal or mineral we
need, is brought to grass, and sent whither itis to
beused,with aslittleas possible of dirt,confusion,
and the distressing of quiet people’s lives. One is
tempted to believe from what one has read of the
condition of those districts in the nineteenth cen-
tury, that those who had them under their power
worried, befouled, and degraded men out of ma-
lice prepense: but it was not so; like the misedu
cation of which we were talking just now, itcame
of their dreadful poverty. They were obliged to
put up with everything, & even pretend thatthey
liked it;whereaswve cannow deal with things rea
sonably, and refuse to be saddled with what wedo
not want.” € Iconfess I was notsorry to cut short
with a question his glorifications of the age he
livedin. Said I: “How about the smaller: towns?
I suppose you have swept those away entirely?”
@No, no,” said he, “it hasn't gone that way.
Onthecontrary, there hasbeenbutlittleclearance,
though much rebuilding, in the smaller towns.
98


TDheicasinsthesindecdh when thepbadany; have What
Pee Pie cecal cere vac ora ttensane
and elbow-room has been got in theircentres: but left
Sec eitbeseaeietlli nah phecestrersicod
squares and market-places; so that it is bymeans
Sree Sin eusdunanehtnaare
S pselin obiften nt sat she toynnortie cles
Ser reoe like yisicanscadayceiehets beat
"Take Oxford, forinstance,” suid I. "Yes," said
ey suppoeciOzford was beauttfulieven in the
nineteenth century. At present ithasthegreatin,
teresee bes lkpcescrringsa grcatmansos pre-conic
terial balding and laaverybrantiulolace,yer
there aremanytowins which havebecome scarce
less beautiful” Said “In passing, may Lask
ifitis stillaplaceof learning? “Stil?” exidhe,
peulleeg SUGIN besarevected.ta eorne oft best
Pain ienactignay magica en Se
its nineteenth-century position. Itisreallearning,
Ienowledge cultivated Sorts qum sake, the Artef
Kaowledge, in short; which is followed there, ot
the Commerciallearningof the past. Though per
haps youdanotknow that in thenineteesth ene
tury Oxford &itslessinteresting sister Cambridge
Lecame definitely commercial. They (and espe-
cially Oxford) were the breeding places of a pecus
lias Class of parasites, who calles thetnselves cab
tivated people; they were indeed cynical enough,
as the so-called educated classes of the day gene,
sally were; but they affected an exaggeration of
:


99


| Oxford cynicism in order that they might be thought
onceun- knowing & worldly-wise. The rich middle classes
happy (they had no relation with the working classes)
treated them with thekind of contemptuous tole-
ration with which a medieval baron treated his
jester: though it must be said that they were by
no meansso pleasant asthe old jesters were, being
in fact, thebores of society. They were laughed at,
despised, and paid. Which last was what they
| aimed at.(Dear me! thought, how apt history
j istoreverse contemporary judgments.Surely only
the worst of them were as bad as that. But [must
admit that they were mostly prigs, and that they
werecommercial.[ said aloud,though moretomy-
selfthanto Hammond: “Well, how couldthey Ne
betterthantheagethatmadethem?’@“True,”he
said, “ but their pretensions were higher.” “Were
they?” said I, smiling. “You drive me from cor
nerto corner,” said he, smiling in turn. “Let me
say at least that they were a poor sequence to the
[ aspirations of Oxford of ‘the barbarous Middle
] Ages.’” “Yes, that will do,” said I. “Also,” said
Hammond, “what I have been saying of them is
" true in the main. But ask on!”
SAID: “ Wehaveheard about Lon-
donand themanufacturingdistricts
and the ordinary towns: howabout
the villages?” € Said Hammond:
@ “You must know that toward the
end of the nineteenth century the


villages were almost destroyed, unless wherethey Thevillages
became mere adjuncts to the manufacturing dis-
tricts, or formed a sort of minor manufacturin,
districts themselves. Houses were allowed to f
into decay and actual ruin; trees were cut down
for the sake of the few shillings which the poor
sticks would fetch;the building became inexpres-
sibly mean and hideous. Labour was scarce; but
wages fell nevertheless. All the small country arts
of life which onceadded to the little pleasures of
country people were lost. The country produce
which passed through the hands of the husband.
men never got so far as their mouths. Incredible
shabbiness and niggardly pinching reigned over
the fields and acres, which, in spite of the rude
andcareless husbandry of the times, were sokind
and bountiful, Had you any inkling of all this?”
C*Ihaveheard that it was so,” said 1; “but what
followed?” € “The change,” said Hammond,
“which in these matters took place very early in
ourepoch, was moststrangely rapid. People flock
ed into the country villages, and, so to say, flung
themselves upon the freed land like a wild beast
upon his prey; and in a very little time the vil-
lages of England were more populous than they
had been since the fourteenth century, and were
still growing fast. Of course, this invasion of the
country was awkward to deal with, & wouldhave
cteated much misery, ifthe folk hadstill been un-
derthe bondage of class monopoly. Butas it was,
101


ing down
into their
right places


Peopleshak- things soonrighted themselves. Peoplefoundout


what they were fit for, and gave up attempting to
push themselves into occupations in which th
must needs fail. The town invaded the counts’,
but the invaders like the warlieeinvadersofeay
days, yielded to the influence of their surround.
ings, and became country people; and in their
turn, as they became more numerous than the
townsmen, tnfluenced them also; so that the dif
ference between town and country grew less and
less; and it was indeed this world of the country
viviied bythe thought abriskeness of town-bred
foll-which has produced that happy andleisutely
but eager life of which you have hada first taste,
‘Ageia Listy, miany blinders were tnade; but we
havehadtime toset themright. Much was left for
the men of my eatlierlifeto deal with, The crude
ideas of the first part of the age of Freedom when
heciowere Shll oppibased' by the feat of poverty}
and!did not loolteatuiphate the peentnt'pleastre
of ordinary daily life) spoilt » great deal of what
the commercial dge had leftus ofexternal beautys
sis naira obras batslowty chat trices
covered from the injuries that they inflicted on
theinsclveseveriafter hey becaniehees Busalowd
as tie reds yperpcatsisadidleomctesn tipi’
yousee of us, the clearcrit will be to youthat we
are happy; that we live amidst beauty without
anys fea ot beccbetnyyeietainaieythasrerbae
plenty todo, on the wholeenjoy doingit, What
‘more can we ask of life?”
es


He paused, as if he were seeking for words with England a
which to express his thought. Then he said: garden
SHISishowwe stand. England was
onceacountry of clearingsamongst
the woods and wastes, with a few
townsinterspersed,whichwere for
tresses forthe feudalarmy, markets
S91 for the folk, gathering places forthe
craftsmen. It then became a country of huge and
foul workshops and fouler gambling-dens, sur-
rounded by anill-kept, poverty-stricken farm, pil
laged by: Secinshes otic workshops. It is now
a garden, where nothingis wasted and nothing is
spoilt, with the necessary dwellings, sheds, and
workshops scattered upanddown the country, all
trim and neat and pretty. For, indeed, we should
betoo much ashamed of ourselves if we allowed
the makingof goods, even onalargescale,tocarry
with it the appearance, even, of desolation and
misery. Why, my friend, those housewives we
were talking of just now would teach us better
than that.” € Said I: “This side of your change
iscertainly for the better. Butthough I shall soon
seesomeof these villages, tell mein awordor two
what they are like, just to prepare me.” "Per
haps,” said he, “you have seen a tolerable picture
of these villages asthey were beforethe end of the
nineteenth century? Such things exist.” “I have
seen several of such pictures,” said I. “Well,”
said Hammond, “our villagesaresomethinglike


103


Beauty the best of such places, with the church or mote,
without house of the neighbours for their chief building.


ruin


Only note that there are no tokens of poverty a»
bout them: notumble-down picturesque; which,
to tell you the truth, the artist usually availed
RansGnge baveellihis sacapacity-Aedl ot dad
chitecture. Such things do not please us, even
when they indicate no misery. Like the mediz-
vals,we like everything trim & clean, and orderly
and bright, as people always do when they have
any sense of architectural power; because then
they knowthattheycanhave whatthey want,and
they won't stand any nonsense from Nature in
their dealings with her.” €“ Besides the villages.
are there any scattered country houses?” said I.
“Yes, plenty,” said Hammond; “‘in fact, except
inthe wastes and forests and amongst the sand-
hills (like Hindhead in Surrey), itis not easy to
be out of sight of a house; and where the houses
are thinly scattered they run large, and are more
like the old colleges than ordinary houses as they
used to be, Thatis done forthe sake of society, for
a good many people can dwell in such houses, as
the cauntry dwellers are not necessarily husband,
men; though they almost all help in such workat
times. The life that goes on in these big dwellings
inthe countryis very pleasant, especially assome
ofthe most studious menof our timeliveinthem,
and altogetherthercis a greatvariety of mind and
mood to be found in them, which brightens and


tog


quickens the society there.” “I am rathersur> The wastes
prised,” said I, “by all this, forit seems to methat and forests
after ail the country mustbetolerably populous.”
Certainly,” said he; “the Pepsleson ispretty

much the same as it was at the end of the nine-

teenth century; we have spread it, thatis all. OF

course, also, we have helped to populate other

countries) white we were wahted nadavcrecalled

fo”


Ww if ee soe thing tt seenate me,
ROM [E) doesnot go with your word of ‘gar,
BRAY cen’ for the countey. You havespo.
‘eS Si kenofwastesand forests;andI my.
Gers id selfhaveseen the beginning of your
SPV Middtesexand Essex forest. Why
do you keep such things in a garden? and isn't it
very wastelul to do sof” (My friend,” he said,
‘we Tike these pieces of wild nature, & can afford
them, so we have them; let alone that as to the
forests, we need a great deal of timber, & suppose
that our sonsandsons’ sons will do the like. Asto
the land being a garden, I have heard that they
used to have shrubberies and rockeries in gardens
once; & though Imightnot like the artifiaalones,
Tassure you that sume of the natural rockeries of
our garden are worth seeing. Go north this sum-
mer andlook at the Cumberland and Westmore.
land ones, where, by the way, you will see some
sheep-feeding, so that they were not so wasteful
as you think; not so wasteful as forcing grounds


105


The sheep-


walks of t
north


for fruit outof season, Ithink. Go and have a look

e at the sheep-walks high up the slopes between
Ingleborough and Pen-y-gwent, & tell me ifyou
think wewaste the land thereby not covering it
with factories for making things that nobody
wants, which was the chief business of the nine-
teenth century.” € “I will try to go there,” said I.
“Ttwon’t take much trying,” said he.


CHAPTER XI. CONCERNING GO.
VERNMENT.


POW, said I, “I have come
QR I tothe pointofaskingques-
tions which I suppose will

be dry for you to answer
=) and difficult for you to ex-
Kgs lain; but I have foreseen
AW for some time past that I
must ask them, will I’nill
1. What kind of a govern-
ment have you? Flas re-
publicanism finally triumphed ?orhave you come
toa mere dictatorship, which some persons in the
nineteenth century used to Prophesy as the ulti
imate eGhaomrie of deraocracy! Indeed; ein det
question does notseem so very unreasonable, since
you have turned your Parliament House into a
dungrmarket. Or where do you house your pre-


sent Parliament?” € The old man answered my
106


| — sae a


smile with a hearty laugh, and said: “Well, well, Where is
dung is not the worst kind of corruption; fertility the Parlia-
may comeof that, whereasmeredearthcame from ment?
the other kind, of which those walls once held the

it supporters. Now, dear guest, letme tell you
thatourpresentparliamentwould behardtohouse
inone place, because the whole people isin our par-
liament.” €“Idon'tunderstand,” said 1. ‘No,
I suppose not,” said he. “I must now shock you
by telling you that we have no longer anythin,
which you, a native of another planet, would cal
a government.” €“I am not somuch shocked as
you might think,” said I, “as I know something
about governments. But tell me, how do you
manage, and how have you come to this state of
things?” @ Said he: “It is true that we have to
make some arrangements about our affairs, con
cerning which you canask presently jandit is also
true that everybody does not always agree with
the details of these arrangements; but, further, it
is true that a man no more needs an elaborate
system of government, with its army, navy, and
police, to force him to give way to the will of the
majority of his EQUALS, thanhe wants a simi-
lar machinery to make him understand that his
head & a stonewallcannot occupy the samespace
at the same moment. Do you want further ex
planation?” €‘ Well, yes, Ido,” quoth I.


107


SJELD Hammond settled himself in
S¥4 hischairwith a lookof enjoyment
which ratheralarmed me, & made
S| me dread a scientific disquisition:
CS] :0 sighed and abided. He suid:
c “T suppose you know pretty well
what the process of government was in the bad
old times?” €“I am supposed to know,” said 1,
Hammond. What was the government of these
dayg?Wasitreallythe Parliamentorany partofie?
:No.


H. Wasnot the Parliament on the onesideakind
ofwatch-committee sittingtosee thatthe ‘interests
of the Upper Classes took no hurt; and on the
other side a sort of blind todelude the people into
supposing that they had some share in the mane
agement of their own affairs?
liiElaxisesccnis tastiosree thie
H. To whatextent did the people manage their
own affairs?
Tel judgefrom what Thaveheard thet sometimes
they forced the Parliament tomakealawtolegaly
isesomealteration which had already taken place.
H. Anything eee?
I thinke not. As am informed, ifthe people
made any attempt to deal with the cause of their
grievances, the law stepped in & said, ths is sedi-
tion, revolt, or what not, and slew or tortured the
ringleaders of such attempts.
Hy\ebsimcacencae: he even oar en
nor the people either, what wasthe government?
108


I; Can you tell me? ‘What was
H._ Ithinkweshall not be farwrong if we say that govern-
government was the Law-Courts, backed up by ment?
the executive, which handled the brute force that
the deluded people allowed them to use for their
own purposes; I mean thearmy, navy, and police.
I: Reasonablemenmustneedsthink youareright.
H. Now as to those Law-Courts, Were they
places of fair dealing according to the ideas of the
day?Had a poorman a good chance of defending
his property and person in them?
I: Itis a commonplacethat even rich men looked
upon a law-suit as a dire misfortune, even if they
gained the case; and as fora poor one,why, itwas
considered a miracle of justice and beneficenceif a
poorman who had once got into the clutches of
the law escaped prison or utter ruin.
H. Itseems, then, my son, that the government
by law-courts and police, which was the real gov-
emmentof thenineteenth century, wasnota great
successeven tothe peopleof that day, living under
a class system which proclaimed inequality and
[eRe as the law of God and the bond which
eld the world together.
1: So it seems, indeed.
H. And now that all this is changed, and the
‘rights of property,” which mean the clenching
the fist on a piece of goods and crying out to the
neighbours, Vou shan’t have this! now that all
this has disappeared so utterlythat itis nolonger
109


‘What was possible even to jest upon its absurdity, is such a
‘4 ty,


it for?


Government possible

I: Itis impossible.

H. Yes, happily. But for what other purposethan
the protection of therich from the poor, thestrong
from the weak, did this Government exist?

[:T have heard that it was said that their office
was to defend their own citizens against attack
from other countries,

H. It was said; but was anyone expected to be-
lieve this? For instance, did the English Gov
ernment defend the English citizen against the
French?

I: Soitwas said.

H. Then ifthe Frenchhad invaded Englandand
conquered it, they would not have allowed the
English workmen to live well?

I, laughing: As faras I canmake out, the Eng-
lish masters of the English workmen sawtothat:
they took from their workmen as much of their
livelihood as they dared, because they wanted it
for themselves.

H. Butif the French had conquered, would they
not have talcen more till from the English work.
meni »
1: I donot think so; for in that case the English
workmenwouldhavediedofstarvation,&thenthe
French conquest would have ruined the French,
just as if the English horsesand cattle had died of
Under feeding, Sothatafterall, the Englishwork-


10


men would have been no worse off for the cone Had the
quest: their French masters could have got no pooracoun-
more from them than their English masters did. try?
H, This is true; and we may admit that the pre
tensions of the government to defend the poor
(ie., the useful) people against other countries
camictsiaashiar ucdhaeenbacas cfoaiee
have seen already that it was the function of gov.
eramment protect the sith’against thepoorsBue
didnotthe government defend itsrichmen against
other nations?
I: I do not remember to have heard that the rich
needed defence; because itis said that even when
two nations were at war, the rich men of each
nation gambled with each other pretty much as
usual, and even sold each other weapons where-
with to kill their own countrymen.
H.In short, it comes to this, that whereas the so-
called government of protection of property by
means of the law-courts meant destruction of
wealth, this defence of the citizens of one country
ageinst those of another country by means of war
or the threat of war meant pretty much the same
ing.
song deny it.
H. Therefore the government really existed for
the destruction of wealth?
I:Soit seems. And yet...
Hi. Yet what?
I: There were many rich people in those times,
mt


i eee |


Govern» H. You see the consequences of that fact?
i mentthe I: [think Ido. But tell me out what they were,
destroyer Fi. Ifthe governmenthabitually destroyed wealth
¢ country must have been poor?
I: Yes, certainly.


| H. Yet amidst this poverty the persons for the
i
j


sake of whom the government existed insisted on

being rich whatever might happen?

I: So itwas.

H. What must happen if in a poorcountrysome

people insist on being rich at the expense of the

others?

I: Unutterable poverty for the others. All this

misery, then, was caused by the destructive gov-

ernment of which we have been speaking?

H. Nay, itwould be incorrect tosayso. The gov-

ernment itself was butthe necessary result of the

careless, aimless tyranny of the times; it was but

themachinery oftyranny. Nowtyrannyhascome

| toanrend aid west longerncedvich machinery;
we could not possibly use it, since we are free.

| Therefore in your sense of the word we have no

| overnment. Do you understand this now?

| : Yes, I do. But I will ask you some more ques
tions as to how you as free men manage your af

| fairs.


H, With all my heart. Askaway.


| =


HAPTER XII. CONCERNING THE A new ha-
SRRANGEMENT OF LIFE, bitof life
FRO as I ELL,” I said, “about
cS M those ‘arrangements’

which you spoke of as
taking the place of go-
vernment, could you
give me any account of
A € “ Neigh,

bour,” he said, “al.

though we have sims


that I can better tell


you what we don’t do, than
what we do do.” €“ Well?” said I. “This is
theway'o put it,” said he: “We have been living
for ahundred and fifty years, at least, more or less
in our present manner, and a tradition or habit of
life has been growing on us; and that habit has
Lecomea habit of acting on the whole for the best,
Ttiseasy for us to livewithout robbingeach other.
Te would be possible for us to contend with and
rob each other, but it would be harder for us than
refraining from strife & robbery. That is in short
the foundation of our life and our happiness,”
i 113


classes?


Where are €“Whereasintheolddays,” said I, “itwas ver
the criminal hard to live without strife and robbery. That's


what you mean, isn’t it, by giving me the nega,
tive side of your good conditions?” € Yes,” he
said, “it was so hard, that those who habitually
acted fairly to their neighbourswere celebrated as
saints andl heroes,and were looked up towith the
greatest reverence.” “While they were alive?”
said I. “No,” said he, “‘after they were dead.”
“Butastothese days,” said; “youdon’tmean
to tell me that no one ever transgresses this habit
of good fellowship?” “ Certainly not,” said Ham-
mond, “butwhenthe transgressions occur, every-
body, transgressors and all, know them for what
theyare: the errors of friends, not the habitual ac-
tions of persons driven into enmity against so-
ciety.” “f see,” said I; “you mean that you have
no ‘criminal’ classes.’” “How could we have
them,” said he, “since there is no rich class to
breed enemies against the state by means of the
injustice of the state?”


OUD 1: “I thought that L under
(EQ) stood from somethingthatfellfrom


‘a alittle while ago that yous had
bs a) Abolished civil law. Is that So, liter
Gy (es WA ally?” “It abolished itself, my

SAA friend,” said he. “As I said before,
the civil law-courts were upheld for thedefenceof
private property ; for nobody ever pretended that
Fewas possible to make people act fairly to each

4


other by means of brute force. Well, private pro- Of crimes
pesty being abolished, all the laws & all the legal
‘crimes’ which it had manufactured of course
came to an end. ‘Thou shalt not steal,’had to be
translated into,“ Thou shalt work in order to live
happily.’ Is there any need to enforce that com:
mandment by violence?” “Well,” said I, “that
is understood, and I agreewith it; but how about
crimes of violence? would not their occurrence
(and you admit that they occur) make criminal


Taw. ce, — ra
BSR, ie: “In your sense of the
( GRY word, we have no criminal law
Ses ‘Y either. Let us Took at the shattie
PF Vii closer, and see whence crimes o}
Y Yas A violence spring. By far the greater
partof these in past days were the

result of the laws of private property, which for-
bade the satisfaction of their natural desires to all
buta privileged few, and of the general visible
coercion which came of those laws. All that cause
of violent crime is gone. Again, many violent
acts came from the artificial perversion of the
sexual passions, which caused overweening jea-
lousy aud the like miseries. Now, when you look
carefully into these, you will find that what lay at
the bottom of them was mostly the idea (a Iaw-
made idea) of the woman being the property of
the man, whether he were husband, fathen Uren


ther, or what not. That idea has of course van.
in 15


SSS | Cae _—stk


The causes. ished with private property,as well as certain fol.
l of violence liesabout tbe eae? °! pitti for following sas
natural desires in an illegal way, which of course

‘was alconivention exiised | by the laws of private

property. € Another cognate cause of crimes of

violence was the family tyranny, which was the

subject of so many novels and stories of the past,

and which once more was the result of private

| roperty. Of course thatis all ended, since fami-
ies are held together by nobondof coercion, legal

or social, but by mutual liking and affection, and

everybodyis free tocomeor goasheorshe pleases.

ermore, our standards of honourand public

estimation are very different from the old ones;

success in besting our neighbours is a road to re-

nown now closed, let us hope for ever. Bach man

| is free to exercise his special faculty tothe utmost,
| i and every one encourages him in so doing. So
thatwe have got rid of thescowling envy, coupled

i by the poets with hatred, and surely with good
reason; heaps of unhappiness and ill-blood were

caused by it, which with irritable and passionate

| men, i.e., energetic and active men, often led to
! violence.” I laughed, and said: “So that you


nowwithdraw youradmission, and saythatthere

is no violence amongst you?” “No,” said he,

“I withdraw nothing; as I told you, such things

will happen. Hot blood will err sometimes.

man may strike another, and the stricken strike

back again, and the result be a homicide, to put it
16


atthe worst. But what then? Shall we the neigh Of punish.
bours make it worse still? Shallwe think so poor ment

ly of each other as to suppose that the slain man

calls on us to revenge him, when we know that if

he had been maimed, he would, when in cold


@&) have hit the mark, That PUN-
\) (ISHMENT ofwhich men used

IN to tale so wisely & act so foolishly,
what was it but the expression of
their fear? And they had need to fear, since they,
ise, the rulers of society, were dwelling like an
armed band in a hostile country. Butwewho live
amongst ourfriendsneed neither fearnor punish.
Surely if we, in dread of an occasional rare homi-
cide, an occasional rough blow, weresolemnlyand
Aeealinan commithomicide and violence, wecould
only bea society of ferocious cowards. Don't you
think so, neighbour?” €“ Yes, I do, when I come
tothink of it from that side,” said I.@“Vet you
must understand,” said the old man, “that when
any violence is committed, we expect the trans-
gressor to make any atonement possible to him,


uz


Atonement and he himselfexpects it, Butagain, think if the
notpunish- destruction or serious injury of a man momen,


ment


tarily overcome by wrath orfolly can beanyatone-
ment to the commonwealth? Surely it con only
bean additional injuryto it.’ €Said 1: “But sup-
pose the man hasa habit of violence, kills aman
a year, for instance?” “Such a thing is un-
known,” said he. “In a society where there is no
punishment to evade,no law to triumph over,re-
morsewillcertainlyfollow transgression."(“And
lesser outbreaksof violence,” seidl, “howdo you
deal with them? for hitherto we have been talking
ofgreattragedics, Isuppose?” Said Hammond:
toffee doer fcnoe cele ot mad (in which case
he must be restrained till his sickness or madness
is cured) itis clear that grief & humiliation must
follow the ill-deed; & societyin generalwill make
that pretty clearto theill-doerifhe should chance
to be dull to it; & again, some kind of atonement
will follow, at the least,anopen acknowledgment
of the grief and humiliation. Is it so hard to say,
Task your pardon, neighbour? . . Well, some
times, it is hard. . and let it be.” €“ You think
that enough?” said 1.“ Ves,” said he, Mand
moreover itisall thatwe can do. If in additionwe
torture the man, we turn his grief into anger,and
the humiliation he would otherwise feel for his
wrong-doing is swallowed up by a hope of re-
venge for our wrong-doing to him. He has paid
the legal penalty, and can ‘go and sin again’ with
i)


comfort. Shall we commit such a folly, then? Re- Ofexchange

member Jesus had got the legal penalty remitted

before he said ‘Go, and sin no more.’ Let alone

that in a society of equals you will not find an

one to play the part of torturer or jailer, ane

many to act as nurse or doctor.” “So,” said I,

“you consider crime a mere spasmodic disease,

which requires no body of criminal law to deal

withit Pe “Prettymuchso,” saidhe; “and since,

as [have told you, we are a healthy people gene

rally, so we are not likely to be much troubled

with this disease.”

5 ELL,” said I, “you have no civil
law, and noctiminal law. Buthave

1) younolawsofthemarket,sotosay,
no regulation for the exchange of

Merc eeinen aoe at

if youhave no property.”Said he:


i


“We have no obvious individual exchange, as
you saw this morning, when you went a-shop-
ere are


ping; but of course regulations of the
markets, varying according to the circumstances
and guided by general custom. But as these are
matters of general assent, which nobody dreams
of objecting to, so also we havemade no provision
for enforcing them: therefore I don’t call them
laws. In law, whether it be criminal or civil, exe-
cution always follows judgment, and someone
mustsuffer. yousee the judgeon his bench,
yousee through him, as clearlyas if he were made


119


Laws of the of glass, the policeman to emprison, and the sol,


dier to slay some actual living person. Such fol
lies would make an agreeable market, wouldn't
they?” “Certainly,” said I, “that means tums
ing the market into a mere battle-field, in which
many people must sufferasmuch asin thebattle-
fieldof bulletand bayonet. And from what I have
seen I should suppose that your marketing, great
and little, is carried on in away that makes ita

leasant occupation,” (You are right, neigh-

jour,” said he. Although there are so many, in-
deed by far the greater number amongst us, who
would be unhappy if they were not engaged in
actually raalting shings; lead ehings @bigt tek
out beautiful under their hands, there are many,
like the housekeepers I-was speabing Of whate
delight is in administration and organisation, to
sidelong taledsrpndey I. dcan plage tote
keeping things together, avoiding waste, seeing
that nochinplstisks fastuselessly:Gucfipeoplcere
ehioroughly Happy sirtheir business) alleHle‘ more
as theyare dealing with actual facts, &¢ not merely
passing counters round to see-what share they
shall have in the privileged taxation of useful
people, which was the business of the commer
Cial folk in past days. Well, what are you going
toaskimencxt!”


CHAPTER XIII. CONCERNING
POLITICS.


AID I: “How do you
manage with politics?”
Said Hammond, smil-
ing: Iam glad that itis
of me that you ask that
uestion; { dobelieve
at anybody else would
make you explain your.
self, ot try to do so, till
Hf youweresickenedofask-
ing questions. Indeed, I believe lamtheonlyman
in'England who would know what you mean;
and since I know, I will answer your question
briefly by saying that we are very well off as to
politics, . . because we have none. If ever you
make a book out of this conversation, put this in
a chapter by itself, after the model of old Horre-
bow's Snakes in Iceland.” “I will,” said I.


Snakes in


Iceland


Of Nations CHAPTER XIV. HOW MATTERS


ARE MANAGED.


> BSB eign nations?” “I will
aE ERY not affect not to know


5
NZ at once that the whole
K\ f system of rival and con-
ry Ay tending nations which
oS played so great a part in
the‘ government’ of the world of civilisation has
disappeared along with the inequality betwixt
man & man in society.” “Does not that make
the world duller?” said I. “Why?” said the old
man.“The obliteration of national variety,” said
1.€ “Nonsense,” he said, somewhat snappishly.
“Cross the water and see. You will find plenty of
variety: the landscape, the building, the diet, the
amusements, all various. The men and women
varying in looks as well as in habits of thought;
thecostume farmore various than inthe commer-
vial periud. How should it add to the varicty
or dispel the dulness, to coerce certain families
or tribes, often heterogeneous and jarring with
fone another, into certain artificial and mechan-
ical groups, and call them nations, and stimulate
their patriotism. . i.e, their foolish and envious
prejudices?” “Well .. I don’t know how,” said
122


1.“ That'sright,”said Hammondcheerily;““you Politics of
can easily understand that now weare freed from the district
this folly itis obvious to us that by means of this
very diversity the different strains of blood in the
world can be serviceable & pleasant toeach other,
without in the least wanting to rob each other:
we are all bent on the same enterprise, making
the most of our lives. And I must tell you what-
ever quarrels or misunderstandings arise, they
very seldom take place between people of differ-
ent race; and consequently since there is less un-
reason in them, they are the more readily appeas-
ed.” €“ Good,” said I, “but as to those matters
of politics; as to general differences of opinion in
oneand the same community. Do you assert that
there are none?” @ “No, not at all,” said he,
somewhat snappishly; “but I do say that differ-
ences of opinion about real solid things need not,
and with us do not, crystallise people into parties
permanently hostiletooneanother, with different
theories as to the build of the universe and the
progress of time. Isn't that what politics used to
mean?” “Hi’m, well,” said I, “I am not so sure
ofthat.” €Said he: “I take you, neighbour; they
only pretended to this serious difference of opin-
ion; for ifit had existed they could not have dealt
together in the ordinary business of life; couldn't
have eaten togethee, bought and sold together,
gambled together, cheated other people together,
wut must have fought whenever they met: which
123


The politics would not have suited them at all. The game of
of haymak the masters of politics was to cajole or force the


public to pay the expense of aluxurious life and
excitingamusement fora few cliques of ambitious
persons: and the pretence of serious difference of

ion, belied by every action oftheir lives, was
quiite good enough for that. What has all that
got to dowithus.” @Said I: Why, nothing I
should hope, But I fear... Inshore | have been
told that political strife was a necessary result of
human nature.” "Human nature!” cried the
old boy, impetuously; “what human nature?
dee let comninatinee Coaaup cape fataxes Ory
holders or thehuman natureofwealthy freemen?
Which? Come, tell me that!” “Wall” said I,
“I suppose there would be a difference according
to eiicanastances th people’s| action about these
matters," should think so, indeed,” said he.
ails eevee teenetericete owatsicerteedacs
NG OE is Ee eag
istic tard patntreen eats ener conld
diob siyiie aneaipermanentiy Aa raleythedme
mediate outcome showswhich opinion onagiven
subjectda\checight ané, itis arnatter nf fact) act
of speculation, Forinstance, it is leasly noveasy
to knock up a political party on the question as
towhether haymaking in suchévsuch a country’
side shall begin this week or next, when all men
agree that it must at latest begin the week after
pox; and when any man cin go down into the

ae


fields himself and see whether the seeds are ripe Majority &
enough for the cutting.” €@ Said I: “And you minority
settle these differences, great and small, by the

will of the majority, I suppose?” € “Certainly,”

said he; “how else could we settle them? You see

in matters which are merely personal, which do

not affect the welfare of the community. .howa

man shall dress, what he shall eat & drink, what

he shall write and read, and so forth . . there can

be no difference of opinion, and everybody does

ashe pleases. Butwhen the matter is ofcommon

interest to the whole community, and the doing

or not doing something affects everybody, the
majority must have their way; unless the minoz-

ity were to take up arms and show by force that

they were the effective or real majority; which,

however, in a society of men who are free and

equal is little likely to happen; because in such


a community the apparent _majority is the real
sete eit ieee see |
know that too well to obstruct from mere pig-

headedness; especially as they have had plenty

of opportunity of putting forward their side of

the question.


SY OW is that managed?” said I.
Ny C “ Well,” said he, “let us take
one of our units of management,
fj 2 commune, or award, or aparish
3A) (for we have all three names, in-
WNT dicating little real distinction be
125


tween them now, though time was there was a
good deal). In such a district,as you would call it,
some neighbours think that something ought to
bedone or undone: anew town-hall built;aclear-
ance of inconvenient houses; orsay a stone bridge
substituted for some ugly old iron one:there yout
have undoing and doing in one. Well, at the next
ordinary meeting of the neighbours, or Mote, as
we call it, according to the ancient tongue of the
times before bureaucracy, a neighbour proposes
the change, and of course, if everybody agrees,
there is an end of discussion, except about details.
Equally, if no one backs the proposer, ‘seconds
him,’ it used to be called, the matter drops for the
time being;a thing not likely to happen amongst
reasonable men, however, as the proposer is sure
tohavetalked it over with others before the Mote.
But supposing the affair proposed & seconded, if
esohe neighbours disagree toit, if they think
thatthe beastly iron bridgewillservealittlelonger
and they don’t want to be bothered with building
a new one just then, they don’t count heads that
time, but put off the formal discussiontothe next

‘ote; and meantime arguments pro and con are
flying about, and some get printed, so that every-
body knows what is going on; & when the Mote
comes together again there is a regular discussion
shdatlasbavors byahow ofhandeslf tie division


isa close one, the question is again put of for fur
ther discussion; i
126


the division is a wide one, the


minority are asked if they will yield to the more Is demo
general opinion, which they often, nay, most com, cracy dead?


monly do. If they refuse, the question is debated
athird time,when, if the minority has not percep
tibly grown, they always give way; though I be,
lieve there is some half-forgotten rule by which
they might still carry it on further; but I say, what
alwayshappensisthat they areconvinced,not per-
hapsthattheir viewisthe wrongone, butthey ca
not persuade orforce the community toadopt i
Very good,” said I;" but whathappensif thedi
visions are still narrow?” Said he:“Asamatter
of principle and according tothe rule of such cases
the question mustthen lapse, and the majority, if
so narrow, hasto submit tosittingdown under the
status quo. But [must tell you that in pointof fact
the minority very seldom enforces this rule, but
generally yields in a friendly manner.”
SFREAUT do you know,” said I, “that
there is something in all this very
like democracy; & I thought that
M democracy was considered tobe in
4 smoribundconditionmany,many
AS years ago.” € The old boy's eyes
twinkled.“I grant youthatourmethods have that
drawback. But what is tobe done? We can’t get
anyone amongst usto complain of his not always
aving his own way in the teeth of the commu-
nity, when it is clear that everybody cannot have
that indulgence, What is to be done?“ Well,”


127


Substitutes said I,“I don’t know,


for demo-
cracy


”€ Said he:“The only al-
ternatives to our method that! can conceive of are
these. First, that we should choose out, or breed.
class of superior persons capable of judging on all
matters without consulting the neighbours; that,
in short, we should get for ourselves what used tg
be called an aristocracy of intellects or, secondly,
that for the purpose of safe-guarding the freedom
ofthe individee! will; we shocld revedt toa sysa
tem of private property again, & have slaves and
slave-holders once mere, Wat do you think of
those two expedients?” €“ Well,” said I, “there
isathird possibility, towit;that every man should
be quite Seaseee ‘other, andthat thus
thetyranny of society should be abolished.” He
looked hard at me fora second or two, and then
burst out laughing very heartily; & Lconfess that
joined him.’ en herecovered himself he nod-
dediabmabjand saiditVes; sv] quiteagee with
you, and so we all do.” € “ Yes,” I said, “and be-
Sides, it doesnot presshardly onthe minority :for,
ile da timaica ot the beideeynoitiats oBEReL
forwvork erietf Ke dotan'taqree 09 balldiag)
At least, T suppose not.” & He smiled,and said:
“Shrewdly pur; and yet from the point of view
of thenative of another planet. If theman of the
minority does find his feelings hurt, doubtless he
may relieve them by refusing to help in building
the bridge. But, dear neighbour, that is not a very
effective salve forthe wound caused by the‘tyran-
128


ny of a majority’ in our society; because all work Mutual
hat is done is either beneficial or hurtful to every gain & loss
member of society. ‘The man is benefited by the
bridge building if it turns out a good thing, and
hurt it turns out a badone,whetherhe puts
ahand to it or not; and meanwhile he is benefit-
ing the bridge builders byhis work,whatever that
may be. In fact,I see no help for him, except the
Plesmarcteeyineit told pons bridge-build-
ing turns out to be a mistake and hurts him; if it
benefits him, he must suffer in silence. A terrible
tyranny our Communism, is it not? Folk used
oftento be warned against this very unhappiness
in times past, when for every well-fed, contented
son, you sawathousand miserablestarvelings.
Nyleteos tor es we grow fac ecwelbtietap on
tyranny ;atyranny,tosay thetruth, nottobemade
visible by any microscope I know. Don't beafraid,
my friend ;wearenot going toseeke for: troubles by
calling our peace and plenty and happiness by ill
names whose very meaning we have forgotten!”
He sat musing for a little,and then started and
said:“‘Are there any more questions, dear guest?
Themorningis waning fastamidst my garrulity.”


The reward CHAPTERXV.ON THE LACKOFIN,


of labour


CENTIVE TO LABOURIN ACOM.
MUNIST SOCIETY. a
NX FES,” said 1.Twas expect.
Y Ging Dick & Claratomake
rs theirappearance any mo-
fA\\ ment: but is there time to
ABfasicjust one or two ques:
\) ions before they come?”
DC Tryit, dearncighbour;
AS ‘t;’saidold Hammond,
Tre SANG Forthemoreyouaskme
=< the better Iam pleased; &
atany rate if they do come & find me in the mid
dlc of an answer, they must sit quiet and pretend
to listentill [come to an end. It won't hurt them;
they willfinditquiteamusingenoughtositsideby
side, conscious of their proximity to each other.”
I smiled, as I was bound to, and said: “Good;
Iwill go on talking without noticing them when
they come in. Now, this is what I want to ask you
about, to wit, how you get people to work when
Hare W Ms tewetdot ibeGe Wespeaaly ew ae
et them towork streniioncly?” “No reward of
fabour?” said Hammond, gravely. ““The reward
of labourislife, Isthat notenough?”@Butnore-
ward forespecially good work,” quoth 1“Pleaty
of reward,” said he,““the reward of creation, The
wages which God gets,as people might have said
time agone. If you are going to ask to be paid for
130


the pleasure of creation, which is what excellence The plea
jn work: means, the next thing we shall hear of sureof work
will be a bill sent in for the begetting of children.”
Well, but,” said I,“the man of the nineteenth
century wouldsay thereisanatural desirctowards
the procreation of children, &@ a natural desire not
to work.” C“ Yes,yes,”said he,“'I know the anci-
ent platitude, wholly untrue; indeed, to us quite
meaningless, Fourier, whom all men laughed at,
understood the matter better.” Why isitmean-
inglesstoyou?” said I. He said “Because it im-
ies that all work is suffering, and we are so far
mm thinking that, that, as yout may havenoticed,
whereas we are not shortof wealth, there is a kind
of fear growing up amongst us that we shall one
day be short of work. Itisa pleasure which weare
afraid of losing, not a pain.” € “Yes,” said I, “I
have noticed that, 8& Iwas going to ask you about
that also. But inthe meantime,what do you posi-
tively mean toassert about the pleasurableness of
work among your”
IS, that all work is now pleasur-
able; either because of the hope
of gain in honour and wealth with


ses pleasurable excitement, even
‘when the actual work is not plea
sant; or else because it has grown into a plessur-
able habit, as in the case with what you may call
mechanical work;8¢ lastly (and mostof our work
2 131


Whereis is of this kind) because there is conscious sensu»
happiness ous pleasure in the work itself; it is done, that is,
ifwork be by artists.” € “I see,” said I. “Can you now tell
unhappy? mehow you have cometo this Bepey condition?


For, to speak plainly, this change from the condi,


tions of the older world seems to me far greater
& more important than all the other changes you
have told me about as to crime, politics, property,
marriage.”


OU are sight there.” said he. “In-
deed you may say rather thatiti
this change which makes all the
2g others possible, What is the ob-
W jectof Revolution? Surely tomake
W people happy. Revolution having
DReeetaRea Gecdeamel hone ave Ge ea
you prevent the counter-revolution from settin;
fabaeetehyanakoeseo asaya
‘we expect peace and stability hea eyes
Epa srs oe sascs ee thanns 2c Rea an
Sarieweresennhle ectation compared with
PastlAnd hepathean without basoydatwores
impossible.” "Most obviously truey’said I; for
Tehaughtthe alcihoy was preachinga lie} Bat
rica ery ianstion an te bw, ynegecied tied
happiness,” @" Brielly,”said he,” by the absence
ariel coercion, Sethe freedom every aad
todowhathe can do best, joined tothe knowledge
cf what productionsoflabous we really wanted. 1
must admit that thiskmowledgewereachedslow-
a


———EE


infully.” “Go on,"said I,“giveme more The World-
j pelneeenie more fully. For this cape inter- Market of
ests me intensely.” “Yes, I wil” said he; “but the past,


inorder to do so must weary youby talkinga lit-
tle about the past. Contrast is necessary for this
explanation. Do you mind?” €“ No, no,” said I.
Said he, settling himself in his chair again fora
Tong talk:"Teis clear from all that we hear & read,
that in the last age of civilisation men had got in-
to a vicious circle in the matter of production of
wares. They had reached a wonderful facility of

roduction, and in order to make the mostof that
Eiiticy chey liad graddally created (or'allowed 95
grow, rather) amostelaborate system of buying &
selling, which has been called the World-Marker;
and that World-Market, once set a-going, forced
themto goon making more & more of these wares,
whether they needed them or not. So that while
(Ge course) they could not free themselves from

¢ toil of making real necessaries, they created in
aneverendingseries sham orartificial necessaries,
which became, under the iron ruleof the aforesaid
World-Market, of equalimportancetothem with:
the real necessaries which supported life. By all
this they burdened themselves with a prodigious
massof work merely for the sakeof keeping theit
wretched system going.” Yes, & then?” said I.
Why then,sincethey had forcedthemselvesto
stagger along under this horrible burden of unne-
cessary production, itbecame impossibleforthem


133


Cheapness tolock uponlabour and its results from any other


pointof view than one, to wit, the ceaseless endea,
vourtoexpend theleast possibleamountof labour
onanyarticlemade,&yetatthesametimetomake
asmany asticlesas possible. Tothis ‘cheapeningof
roduction,’as itwascalled, everything was sacti-
iced. The happiness of the workman athis work,
nay, hismost elementary comfortand barehealth,
his food, his clothes, his dwelling, his leisure, his
amusement, his education. . his life, in short..did
not weigh a grain of sand in the balance against
this dire necessity of ‘cheap production’ of things,
agrest pact of which were not worth producing at
all. Nay, we are told, and we must believe it, so
overwhelming is the evidence, though many of
our people scarcely can believe it, that even rich &
powerfulmen, themasters of the poordevilsafore-
said, submitted toliveamidstsights & soundsand
smellswhich it is inthe very nature of mantoab-
hor and flee from, in order that their riches might
bolster upthis supremefolly. The whole commu.
nity, in fact,was cast intothe jawsof this ravening
monster, ‘the cheap production forced upon itby
the World- Market.” € “Near mel" said I. “But
what happened? Didnot their cleverness and fa-
cility in production master this chaosof mise at
last? Couldn’t they catch up with the World-Mar-
ket, and then set to work to devise means for re-
lieving themselves from this fearful task of extra
labour?” He smiled bitterly.“‘Didtheyeventry
4


to)”said he,“Lamnotsure. Youknow thataccord- Labour-
ing to the old saw the beetle gets used to living in saving
dung; and these people, whether they found the machines


SAEYDAY!” quoth he. “What's
that you are saying? the Iabour-
saving machines? Yes, they were
madeto ‘savelabour’ (or, to speak
] more plainly, the lives of men) on
ENGAM one piece of work in order that it
sight be expended Iwill ay wasted onanother,
pro


devices forcheapening labour simply resulted in
increasing the burden of labour. The ay ppeiite of
the World-Market grew with what cf on: the
countries within the ring of ‘civilisation’ (that is,
organised misery) were glutted with the abor-
tions of the market, and forceand fraud were used.
unsparingly to ‘open up’ countries outside that
pale. This process of ‘opening up’ is a stran;

‘one to those who have read the professions of the
men of that period aud do not understand their
practice; Nad oeduare shows us at its worst the


great viceof the nineteenth century: the useof hy,
Pocrisy and cant to evade the responsibility of
vicarious ferocity, When the civilised World.
Market coveted acountry not yet in its clutches,


135


—— ee


| Civilizing sometransparent pretext was found, the suppres,
the barba- sion ofa slavery different from and not socuel ag

rians that of commerce; the pushing of a religion no
| longer believed in by its promoters; the ‘rescue’
l| of some desperado or homicidal madman whose
| misdeeds had got him into trouble amongst the
| natives of the ‘barbarous’ country; any stick, in
| short, which would best thedog atall. Phen seme
bold unprincipled,ignorantadventurerwas found

(no difficult task in the days of competition), and

hewasbribed to ‘create a market’ by breaking up

whatever traditional society there might be inthe

doomed country, and by destroying whatever
leisureorpleasurehe found there. He forced wares

on the natives which they did not want, and took

their natural products in ‘exchange,’ as this form

of robbery was called, & thereby he ‘created new

| wants,’ to supply which (that is, to beallowed to
live by their new es) the hapless, helpless

eople had to sell themselves into the slavery of

Tpcless ciate they might have something

wherewith to purchase the nullities of ‘civilisa-

tion.’ Ah,” said theold man, pointingtothe Mu-

seum, “I have read books and papers in there

telling strange stories indeed of the dealings of

civilisation (or organised misery) with ‘non-civ-

ilisation’ ; from the time when the British Gov-


ernment deliberately sent blankets infected with

small-pox as choice gifts to inconvenient tribes of

Red-skins, to the time when Africa was infested
136


not to use;a jest which you, as coming from an-
other planet, mayunderstand, butwhich our folk
could not.” (Said I: “What! did theymakeno-
thing well?” €“Why, yes,” said he, “there was
oneclassof; ood which they didmake thorough!


well, and that was the class of machines whicl
were used for making things, Thesewere usually
quite perfect pieces of workmanship, admirably
‘d tothe end in view. Sothat it may be fairl}
said thatthe greatachievement ofthe ineteenth
century was the making of machines which were
wonders of invention, skill, and Patience, and
which wereused forthe production of measureless
quantitiesof worthless make-shifts. In truth, the


137


il Os ieee tit


Thenine» owners of themachinesdid notconsideranything
|| teenth cen- which they made as wares, but simply az meact
) tury for the enrichment of themselves. Of course the
i only admitted test of utility inwareswas thefind-
| ing of buyers for them, wise men or fools, as it
mightchance."(Q" And people putupwiththis?”
said I. For a time,” said he. “And then?”
\ “And then the overturn,” said the old man,
i smiling, “‘and the nineteenth century saw itself
| as a man who has lost his clothes whilst bathing,
| & hasto walk naked through the town.” “You
| arevery bitter aboutthatunlucky nineteenth cen-
| tury,” said 1.@“Naturally,” said he, “since I
know so much about it” €L He was silenta litle,
and then said: “There are traditions, nay, real
histories, in our family about it: my grandfather
was one of its victims. If you know somethin;
about it, you will understand what he suffere
when I tefl you that he was in those days a genu-
ine artist, a man of genius, and a revolutionist.”
| CI think I do understand,” said I: “but now,
as it seems, you have reversedall this?”
| QA ARETTY muchso,” saidhe. “The
AS (SY wareswhich wemake aremadebe-
| XY" J cause they are needed: men make
i for their neighbours’ use as if they


lwere making for themselves, not


<M for a vague market of which they

know nothing, and overwhich they have no con

i trol: as there 1s no buying and selling, itwould be
138


* work which woul


mete insanity to make goods on the chance of Free from
pit being waited forthercisna ba gevativene thaciarat
fechocan becormpelled to buy them, Sothaea tats Labour
cetiaatacle Unecednand toamastty ae ates
purpose. Nothingcan bemadeexceptfor genuine
fie pibecchcecpb pafecial cooddasemnsdca Mores
Bice aseih read ivr Miers iayrfoisid onthe
Store ntjscrera sta kenioxanse diene wacity aiid
as we are not driven to make a vast quantity of
deleudimpaitehihctimeandesonecicac ich
to consider our pleasure in making them. All

Si be inom to de by, band da
doneby immenselyimproved machinery; andin
allwork which itis. pleasure to do by hand ma
chinery is done without. There is no difficalty in
finding work which suits the special turn of mend
of everybody; so that no man is sacrificed to the
wants of another, From time to time, when we
have found out that some piece of work was too
disagreeable or troublesome, we have given it up
anddoncaltogetherwithoutthethingpeoducedl
it. Now, surely you can see that under these cir-
cumstances alf the work that wedo is an exercise
ofthe mind and body more or les pleasant to be
donc.s0thatinstead of avoiding work, everybody
seeks it: and, sincepeoplchave got defter in doing
the work generation after generation, it has bee
come so easy to do, that it Seemsae tf there were
less done, though probably mores produced. T
suppose this explains that fear, which T hinted at


139


just now, of a possible scarcity in work, which
erhaps you have already noticed, and which is a

| nottoo —_feelingon the increase,and has been for a score of
much _years."€“ But do you think,” said I,*“that there

i is any fear of a work-famine amon; ur”
} G"'No, Ido not” said he, “end Iwill tel why:
| it is each man’s business to make his own work
pleasanter and pleasanter, which of course tends
towards raising the standard of excellence, as no
man enjoys turning out work which isnot a credit
tohim,and also to greater deliberation in turning
it out; and there is such a vast number of things
which can be treated as works of art, that this
alone gives employment to a host of deft people.
Again, if art be inexhaustible, so is science also;
and though it is no longer the only innocentoc-
cupation which is thought worth an intelligent
man spending his time upon, as it once was, yet
there are, & I suppose will be, many people who
are excited by its conquest of difficulties,and care
for it more than for anything else. Again, asmore
& moreof pleasure is imported intowork, I think
we shall take up kinds of work which produce
desirable wares, but which we gave up because
wecould notcarry themon pleasantly. Moreover,
I think that it is only in parts of Burope which
are more advanced than the rest of theworld that
you will hear this talk of the fear of a work-fa-
mine. Those lands which were once the colonies
of Great Britain, forinstance, & especially Amex

tae


ica, that part of it, above all, which was once the Backward
United States, are now & will be fora longwhile America
Rees camatiasiaeict aie

especially the northern. pee ‘of America, suffered

so terribly from the full force of the last days of
civilisation, and became such horrible places to

live in, that they are now very backward in all

that makes life pleasant. Indeed, one may say
Magee tea iemctaigrareie Secpiecete

northern parts of America have becn engaged in
gradually making a dwelling-place outof astink-

ing dust-heap; and thereis still a great deal todo,

especially as the country is so big.” 1“ Well”

said I, “Lam exceedingly glad to think that you
ayeisuchla prowpect of happineanibetore pos:

But I should like to ask a few more questions, &

then haveidonefor toaday.”


CHAPTER XVI. DINNER IN THE
HALL OF THE BLOOMSBURY
MARKET.


S I spoke, I heard foot.
steps near the door; the
latch yielded, & incame
our two lovers, looking
so handsome that one
had nofeeling of shame
in looking on attheirlit-
tle-concealed lovemak-
ing; for indeed it seem-
edas if all the world


141


ty,


i


The reunit, mustbeinlove with them. Asforold Hammond,
ed lovers y


again


helooked onthem like an artist whohas just pain
ted a picture nearlyas well as he thoughthecould
when he began it, and was perfectly happy. He
said: ‘Sit down, sit down, young folk, and don't
makeanoise. Our guest here has still some ques-
tionstoaske me.” €“ Well, I should suppose so,”
said Dick; “you haveonlybeen three hours anda
half together; andit isn’t to be hopedthat thehis-
tory of two centuries could be told in three hours
and a half: let alone that, for all I know, you may
havebeen wanderingintothe realmsof geography
& craftsmanship.” €“As to noise, my dearkins-
man,” said Clara, “you will very soon bedisturbed
by the noise of the dinner-bell, which I should
ink will bevery pleasant musictoour guest, who
breakfasted early, it seems, and probably had a
tiring day yesterday.” € Isaid: “Well, since you
have spoken the word, I begin to feel that it is so;
but I have been feeding myself with wonder this
Jong time past: really, it's quite true,” quoth I,as
I saw her smile, O so prettily! € But just then
fromsome towerhigh up intheaircame thesound
of silvery chimes playing a oweet clear tune, that
sounded to my unaccustomed ears like the son;
ofthe first blackbird in the spring, & called rus
ofmemoriestomymind, someof badtimes,some
of good, butall sweetened nowintomere pleasure.
“No more questions now before dinner,” said
Clara; and she took my hand as an affectionate
142


child would, andledmeout of the roomand down
stairs into the forecourt of the Museum, leaving
the two Hammonds to followas they pleased.
SAE wentintothemarketplacewhich
Oe had been in before, a thinnish
Ye M sucamof elegantly. dressed peor
RSNA ple going in along with us. We
X NY turned into the cloister and came
®A toarichly moulded & carved door,
way, where avery pretty dark-haired young girl
gave us eacha beautiful bunch ofsummerflowers,
& we entered a hall much bigger than that of the
Hammersmith Guest House, more elaborate in
its architecture & perhaps morebeautiful. I found
it difficult to keep my eyes off the wall-pictures
(for [thought it bad manners to stare at Clara all
deeemrertioughishe yas quite wont) sTesarae
aglance that their subjects were taken from queer
ckieworld myths and imaginations which in yes
terday’s world only about half.a dozen people in
the country knew anything about; and when the
two Hammonds sat down opposite tous, I said to
the old man, pointing to the frieze: € “How
strange to see such subjects here!” “Why ?” said
he. “T don't see why you should be surprised;
everybody knows the tales; and they are graceful


+.““Blegant,” I mean, as a Persian pattern is ele-
gant; notlikearich “elegant” lady out foramorn,
ing call. I should rather call that genteel,


143


The
Blooms-


bury hall


Pictures of and pleasant subjects, not too tragic for a place
the world’s where people mostly eat and drink and amuse
childhood themselves, and yet full of incident.” CI smiled,


and said: “ Well, I scarcely expected tofind record
of the Seven Swans and the King of the Golden
Mountain and Faithful Henry,and such curious
pleasant imaginations as Jacob Grimm got toge-
ther from the childhood of the world, barely lin-
gering even in his time: I should have thought
youwould have forgotten suchchildishnessbythis
time.” @ Theold man smiled, and said nothing;
but Dick turned rather red, & broke out: “What
DO youmean, guest? I thinkthem very beautiful,
I mean not only the pictures, but the stories; and
when we were children we used to imagine them
goingon in every wood-end, by the bight of every
stream: every houseinthe fields wasthe Fairyland
King’s Housetous. Don’tyouremember,Clara?”
Yes,” she said; & it seemedtomeas ifa slight
cloud came overher fair face. Iwas going to speale
toheron the subject, when the pretty waitresses
cameto us smiling, & chattering sweetly like reed
warblersby theriverside,and fell to giving us our
dinner. Asto this, as at our breakfast, everythin,
was cooked and served with a daintiness whi
showed that those who had prepared it were in-
terested in it; but there was no excess either of
quantity orof gourmandise ing was sim.
Bete poevecllcnvofiskiad n
clear to us that this was no feast, onlyanordinary
144


meal. The glass, crockery, and plate were very Glass and
beautifultomy eyes, usedto thestudy ofmedizval pottery
art; butanineteenth century club-haunterwould,
Idaresay, have found themrough, and lacking in
Gea cece: being lead eee
though beautifully ornamented; the only porce.
lain being here and there a piece of old oriental
ware. The glass, again, though elegantand quaint,
and very varied in form, was somewhat bubbled
andhornierintexturethanthe commercial articles
ofthe nineteenth century. The furniture & general
fittings of the hall were much of a piece with the
sable reel aerchal sa Sere Patestiefommate ss
ted, but without the commercial “finish” of the
joiners and cabinet-makers of our time, Withal,
there was a total absence of what the nineteenth
century calls “comfort”... that is,stuffy inconve-
nience; sothat, even apart from the delightful ex-
citement of the day, I had never eaten my dinner
so pleasantly before.

PS STEqHEN we had done eating, and


© ff) were sitsing a little while, with a


f bottle ofvery good Bordeausx wine
Bebe uni C lage cate Bae
Nc ccviion ofthe subjeemmaneeet
ed the pictures, asthough ithad trou,
bledher. [She looked up t themé& said, “Hoge
is it that though weare so interested with our life
forthemostpart, yet when people take to writin;
Poemsorpainting pictures they seldom deal with
5


14)


Pek


SS i eer |


H Thesimpli- our modern life; or, if they do, take good care to
i cityof Art make their lees orpicturesunlike that life? Are
we not good enough to paint ourselves? Howis it
that we find the dreadful times of the past so in-
| teresting to us...in pictures and poetry?” € Old
| Hammond smiled. “It always was so, andI sup,
ose always will be,” said he, *howeveritmay Be
! explained. Itistruethatin the nineteenth century,
} when there was so little art 8 so much talk about
H it, there was a theory that art & imaginative lite.
| rature ought to deal with contemporry life; but
1 they never did so; for, if therewas anypretenceof
it, the author always took care (as Clara hinted
| just now) to disguise, or exaggerate, or idealise,
| and in some way or another make it strange; so
\ that, for all the verisimilitude there was, hemight
} just as well have dealt with the times of the Pha-
raohs.” € “ Well,” said Dick, “surely itis but na-
i tural to like these things strange; just aswhenwe
were children, as I said just now, we used to pre-
tend to be sovand-so in such-and-such a pl
That's what these pictures and poems do; and
| why shouldn’tthey?”  Thouhasthitis, Dick”


quoth old Hammond; “it isthechild-like part of
usthatproduces worksof imagination. When we
| ace cidca tens pases vo slour eit ROE


seem to have time for everything.” He sighed, &
then smiled and said: “At least let usrejoice that
we have got back our childhood again. Idrinkto
the days that are!” “Second childhood,” said

146


Tina low voice, and then blushed at my double Has the
rudeness, and hopedthat he hadn't heard. But he world grown
had, and turned to me smiling, and said: “Yes, youngagain?
whynot? And formypart Thopeitmaylastlong;
&el


atthe world'snext period of wise & unhappy
manhood, ifthat should happen, will speedily lead
us toa third childhood: if indeed this age be not
ourthird. Meantime, my friend, you must now
that we are too happy, both individually and col-
lectively, totroubleourselves about whatis tocome
hereafter.” “Well,formy part,” said Clara,“I wish
we wereinteresting enough to be written or pain-
ted about.” Dick answered her with some lover's
speech, impossible to be written down, and then
we sat quiet a little,


CHAPTER XVII. HOW THE
CHANGE CAME.
PAICK brokethesilenceat
last,saying:“Guest, for
ive us for alittle after-
inner dulness. What
would you like to do?
Shall wehaveout Grey-
locks and trot back to
Hammersmith? or will
idee come with us and
7 = ar some Welsh folle
sing in a hall close By here? or would you like


presently to come with me into the City and see
Iz 147


The guest some really fine building? or..what shall it he?”
left to heara €“ Well,” said I, “as am a stranger, | mustlet
little more you choose for me.” In point of fact, I did not by
any means want to be ‘amused’ just then; and
also rather felt as if the old man, with his know,
ledgeof pastimes, & evena kind of inverted sym,
pathy for them caused by hisactivehatredofthem,
was as it were a blanket for me against the cold
of this very new world, where I was, so to say,
stripped bare of every habitual thought and way
of acting; and didnotwanttoleave him toosoon.
He came to my rescue at once, and said .“ Wait
abit, Dick; thereis someone else to be consulted


anything especially puzzle
you about our way of living, now
you have heard a good deal & seen
a little of it?” ( Said I: “I think
what puzzles me most is how it all
i came about.” “It well may,” said


he,*‘sogreat as thechange is. It would be difficult How did
tered Sell you'the whole’ story, perhaps inv the change
possible: knowledge, discontent, treachery, dis- come
appointment, ruin, misery, air. those who
eed for the change because they could see fur-

ther than other people went throughallthese pha-
sesof suffering; & doubtless all the time the most
aera todked tain knowing what wes O04)
thinking itall a matter of course, like the rising &
setting of the sun, and indeed it was so.”€L““Tell
meone thing, if you can,”saidI.“‘Did the change,

the ‘revolution’ it used to be called, come peace-
fully?” C“ Peacefully?”’said he; “what peace was
there amongst those poorconfused wretches of the
ieieeniticenttay? eras anette

end: bitter war, till hope and pleasure put an end

to it” €“ Doyou mean actual fighting with wea-

pons?” saidI,“or the strikesand lock-outs & star-
vation of which we have heard?” ((“ Both, both,”

he said.““As a matterof fact, thehistory of the ter-

rible periodof transition from commercial slavery

to freedom may thus be summarised. When the
hope of realisingacommunal condition of life for

all menarose, quite late inthe nineteenth century,

the power of the middle classes, the then tyrants

of society, was so enormous and crushing, that to
almost all men, eventhose who had, youmay say
despite themselves, despite their reason and judg-
ment,conceived such hopes, itseemedadream,

much wasthisthecasethatsomeof thosemoreen-


149


Much
and litel
hope


gis! lightened men whowerethencalled Socialists aL


though they well knew, and even stated in public,
that the only reasonable condition of Society was
thatof pure Communism (suchasyou now see a»
roundyou),yetshrunk from whatseemed tothem
the barren task of preaching the realisation of a
happy dream, Looking back now,wecan see that
the great motive-powerof the change was along,
ing for freedom and equality, akin if you pleaseto
the unreasonable passion of the lover; a sickness
of heart that rejected with loathing the aimless,
solitary life of the well-to-do educatedmanof that
time: phrases,my dearfriend,which havelosttheir
meaning to us of the present day; so far removed
we are from the dreadful facts which they repre-
sent, Well, these men, though conscious of this
feeling, had no faith in it, as a means of bringing
about the change, Nor was that wonderful: for
looking around them they saw the huge mass of
the oppressed.lasses too much burdened withthe
misery of their lives, and too much overwhelmed
by the selfishness of misery, to be able to form a
conception of any escape from it except by the or
dinary way prescribed by the system of slavery
under which they lived; which was nothing more
than a remote chance of climbing out of the
oppressed into the oppressing class. Therefore,
though they knew that the only reasonable aim
for those who would better the world was a con-
dition of equality; in their impatience and despair
150


they managedtoconvince themselves that if they A halting
could by Me cicson iy sxvbk got the malice ae ebony
production & the management of property so al-
fered thatthe lower classes’ (sothe horrible word
ran) mighthavetheir slavery somewhat amelior-
ated, they would be ready to fit into this machin-
ee ee etic aes ced
Sthimoreé still more, untilatlasttheresult would
bea practical equality (they were very fondof us-
ing the word“ practical’), because ‘the rich’ would
be forced topay so much for keeping ‘the poor’ in
a tolerable condition that the condition of riches
would becomenolonger valuable & would gradu-
ally die out. Do you follow me?” €“ Partly,”said
1.“Go on.” € Said old Hammond: Well, since
you follow me, you will see that as a theory this
was not altogether unreasonable; but ‘practical.
ly, it turned out a failure,” € “How so?” said I.
€ “Well, don’t you see,” said he, “because it in-
volved the making of a machinery by those who
didn’t know what they wanted the machines to
do. So far as the massesof the oppressed class fur-
thered this scheme ofimprovement, they did itto
get themselves improved slave-rations, as many
Sf chen as could, And if those classes had really
been incapable of being touched by that instinct
which produced the passion for freedom & equal-
ity aforesaid,what would have happened, Ithink,
would have been this: that a certain part of the
working classes would have been so far improve


151


‘Thegrowth ed in condition that they would have approached
of a longing the condition of the middling rich men; but be-
| | low them would have been a great class of most
miserable slaves, whose slavery would have been
1 far more hopeless than the older class.slaveryhad
| been." What stood inthe way of this?” said I.
| Whi, of course,”said he, “just that instinct for
freedom aforesaid. It is true that the slave-class
could not conceive the happiness of a free life. Yet
they grew to understand (and very speedily too)
i) that they wereoppressed by their masters, 8& they
| assumed) you see how justly, that they could do
without them, though perhaps they scarce knew
| how; sothat itcametothis, that though they could
| not look forward to the happiness or peace of the
i freeman, they did atleast look forwardto the war
which a vague hope told them would bring that
peace about.” (“Could you tell me rather more
closely what actually took place?” said I; for I
thought him rather vague here. Yes,” he said,
“I can. The machinery of life for the use of peos
ple who didn’t know what they wanted of it, and
which was known at the time as State Socialism,
was partly putin mation, though in avery piece-
meal way. But itdid not work smoothly, it was,
of course, resisted at every turn by the capitalists;
and no wonder, for it tended more & more tou
set thecommercial system [havetold youof;with-
out providing anything really effective inits place.
H The result was growing confusion, great suffering
152


theworking classes, &as a consequence, Bane of


mn
gan ntent. For a long time matterswent on t
fike this. The power of the upper classes had les. ing-class


sened,as their command over wealth lessened, &¢ leads to the
they could not carry things wholly by the high destruction
hand as they had been used to do in earlier days, of classes


Sofar the State Socialists were justified by the re-
sult. Onthe other hand, the working clases were
ilL-organised, & growing poorer in reality, in spite
of the gains (also real in the long run) which ey
had forced from the masters. Thus matters hung
in the balance; the masters could not reduce their
slaves to complete subjection, though they put
down some feeble and partial riots easilyenough.
Theworkers forced their masters to grant them a-
meliorations,real orimaginary, of their condition,
but could not force freedom from them. At last
came a great crash. To explain this you must un-
derstand that very great progress had been made
amongst the workers;though, as before said, but
little in the direction of improved livelihood.”CI
played the innocent and said: “In what direction
could they improve if not in livelihood?” € Said
he:'“In the power to bring about a state of things
in which livelihood would be full, & easy to gain.
They had at last learned how to combine after
long period of mistakes and disasters, The work
men had now a regular organization inthe strug
gle which for more than half a century had been
accepted as an inevitable part of the conditions of


153


The general the modern system of labour & production. This
union of the combination had now taken the form of a federa
workers


tionof all, or almost all the recognised wage-paid
employments,and it was by its means that those
betterments of theconditions of the workman had
been forced from themasters: & thoughthey were
not seldom mixed up with the rioting that hap-
pened, especially in the earlier days of their orga
nization, it by no means formed an essential part
of their tactics; indeed at the time lamnowspeak-
ingof they had got to be so strong that most com
monly the mere threat of ‘strike’ was enough to
gain any minor point: because they had given up
the foolish tactics of the ancient trades unions of
calling out of work a part only of the workers of
such and such an industry, and supporting them
while out of work on the labour of those that re-
mained in, By this time they had a biggish fund
of money for the supportof strikes, andcouldstop
acertain industry altogether fora time, if they so
determined.” @ Said te Was there nota serious
danger of such moneysbeing misused; of jobbery,
in fact?” € Old Hammond wriggled uneasily on
his seat, and said: Though all this happened so
long ago, I still feel the pain of mere shame when
Lhave to tell you that it was more than a danger;
that such rascality often happened: indeed more
thanoncethewhol esoesbinahonscemes GSP Bing
to pieces because of it: but at the time of which

amtelling,thingslooked sothreatening,andtothe

154


workmen, at least, the necessity of their dealing The leaders
with the fast-gathering trouble whichthe labour- of the worl
gle had brought about, was so clear, thatthe men

conditions of the times had begot a deep serious

ness amongstall reasonable people; adetermina-

tion which put aside all non-essentials, and which :
tothinking men was ominous of the swiftly-ap-

proaching change: such an element was too dan-

gerous for meretraitors and self-seekers, & oneby

onethey werethrustoutand mostly joined thede-

clared reactionaries.” € “How about those ame-
Tiorations,” said 1; “what were they? or rather, of
whatnature?”@ Saidhe:‘Some of them, & these

of themost practical importancetothemen’slive-

lihood,were yielded by the masters by direct com,

pulsion onthe partof the men;thenewconditions

of labour so gained were indeed onl, customary,
enforced by nolaw: but, once: eaiblaheda teres:

ters durst not attempt to withdraw them in face

of the growing power of the combined workers,

Some again were steps on the path of ‘State Soci-
sconces importantof which canbe speed-

ily summed up. At the endof the nineteenth cen

tury the cry arose for compelling the masters to

empley their men a [ess nusuber of hours inthe

day :this cry gathered volume quickly, & the mas

ters had to yield to it. But it was, of course, clear

that unless this meant higher price for worle pet

hous, it would beamerenullity,andthat the mes.

ters, unless forced, would reduce it to that. There-


155


The law of foreafter along struggle another law was passed
minimum fixingaminimumprice forlabour inthe mostim-
and maxi- portant industries; which again had tobe supple-
mum


mented byalaw fixing the maximum priceenthe
chief wares then considered necessary for a worke:
man’s life.’ Vouwere getting perilously neato
the late Roman poor-rates,” said I, smiling, “and
the doling out of bread to the proletariat.” "So
many said at the time,” said the old man dily;
“and it has long been a commonplace that that
slough awaits State Socialism in the endjifit gets |
tothe endjwhich,as you knew, it did norwith us,
However,it wentfurtherthanthis minimumand |
mazimum business, which by the by wecan now |
see was necessary. The government now found it
imperativeon them tomeet the outcry of the mas-
seb daasiat te-approathing destruction of cri
mene (as desirable had they known itasthe ex?
Giledont Tob tivetCchersy wits ss since happily
tukeli plact)sAnuthep were forced comectit bya
measare hostile tothe masters,the establishment
of goverriment factories for the production of ne-
Cesky ires/aiel imaskcts for theivsalesThese
measureatalren altogether did do comething-they
‘were in fact of the nature of regulations made by
thecommander ofabeleagueredcity. Butofcourse
to the privileged clasces t seemed asif the end of
the world were come when such laws were enact
ed. Nor was that altogether without warrant:
thespreadof communisticthearies andthe partial
156


practice of State Socialism had at first disturbed, The break-
eee ntens real yarsche pangclones 497 omen cA
femof commerce undex which the old world had incomplete
Hi edisa ferestahily,oGlkad erased Sor veins fear StateSoc


alifcof gambler’s pleasure, and for many,ormost, ism
alife of mere misery:over & over againcame‘bad
times’ as they werecalled, & indeed they were bad
enough forthe wage-slaves. The year1952 wasone
of the worst of these times; the workmen suffer-
ed dreadfully: the partial, inefficient government
factories, which were terribly jobbed, all but broke
down, andavastpartof the population had for the
time being to be fed on undisguised ‘charity’ as it
was called. The Combined Workers watched the
situation with mingled hope and anxiety. They
had already formulated their general demands;
but nowbyasolemn & universal voteof the whole
of their federated societies,they insisted onthefirst
step being taken toward carrying out their de-
mands; this step would have led directly tohand-
ing over themanagementof thewhole natural re-
sources of the country, together with the machin-
ny for using themintothepowerof the Combined
forkers, & the reduction of the privileged classes
into the position of pensioners obviouslydepend-
enton the pleasure of the workers. The ‘Resolu-
tion,’ as it was called, which was widely published
inthe newspapers of theday, wasin factadeclara-
tion of war, & was so accepted by the masterclass,
‘They began henceforward to prepare for a firm


167


The Upper standagainst the‘ brutal & ferocious communism

Classesrally of theday,’as they phrased it. Andasthey werein

many sate still very powerful, or seemed sotobe,
0)


they still hoped by means of brute force to regain
some ofwhatthey had lost,andperhapsinthe end
the whole of it. It was said amongst them on all
hands thatit had been a great mistake of various
overnments not to have resisted sooner;and the
liberals &¢ radicals (the name,as perhaps youray
know, of the more democratically inclined part of
the ruling classes) were much blamed for having
led the world to this pass by their mis-timed pe-
dantry and foolish sentimentality:and one Glad-
stone, or Gledstein (probably, judging by this
name, of Scandinavian descent), a notable poli
tician of the nineteenth century, was especially
singled out for reprobation in this respect. I need
scarcely point out to you the absurdity of all this.
Bigewernble tragedy lay likiden Ged itty get
ning through a horse-collar of the reactionary
party. ‘The insatiable greed of the lower classes
mustberepressed’. “The people must be taught
a lesson’ .. these were the sacramental phrases
current amongst the ceactionists, and ominous
enough they were.” @ The old man stopped to
look fe at my attentive and pee ae
and then saidi“"f know, dear guest, that { have
been using words and phrases which few people
amongst us could understand without long and
laborious explanation; & not even then perhaps.
158


But since you have not yet gone to sleep, and The occa- q
since aga tpeaking Wor ab toa being fom ana cion ofthe
other planet, Imay venture toaskyou if youhave Crash
followed me thus far?” @“ O yes,’ said I, “I quite
understand: pray go on; a great deal of what you
have been saying was commonplace with us..
when..when...”€" Yes,"saidhe; ravely, when

were dwelling in the other planet. Well, now
Forthe crash aforesaid.”

AN somecomparatively trifling oc-

N casion a great meeting was sum-
WW moned bythe workmen leaders to
meet in Trafalgar Square (about
S the right to meet in which place
~— Tadienyeuvind exe bed
bickering). The civic bourgeois guard (called the
police) attacked the said meeting with bludgeons,
ing totheir custom ;many people were hurt
in the melee, of whom fiveinall died, either tram-
pled to death on the spot, or from the effects of
their cudgelling; the meeting was scattered, and
some hundred of prisoners cast into gaol. A simi-
lar meeting had been treated in the same way a
few days fetes place called Manchester,


which hac now disappeared. Thus the ‘lesson’
began. The whole country was thrown into a fer-
ment by this; meetings were heldwhich attemy

ed some rough organisation for the holding of
another meeting to retort on the authorities, A
huge crowd assembled in Trafalgar Square & the


159


called


A meeting neighbourhood (then a place of crowded streets)


and was too big for the bludgeon-armed police
to cope with; there wasa good deal of dry-blow
fighting; three or four of the people were killed,
&halfascore of policemen were crushed to death
in the throng, & the rest got away as they could,
This wasavictory for the people as faras it went,
The next dayall London (remember what itwas
in those days) was in a state of turmoil. Many of
the rich fled into the country; the executive got
together soldiery, but did not dare to use them;
and the police could not be massed in any one
place, because riots or threats of riots were every
where. But in Manchester, wherethe peoplewere
not so courageous or not so desperate as in Lon-
don, several of the popular leaders were arrested.
In London a convention of leaders was got to-
gether from the Federation of Combined Work-
men, and sat under the old revolutionary name
of the Committee of Public Safety; but as they
had no drilled and armed body of men to direct
they attempted no aggressive measures, but only
placarded the walls with somewhat vague ap-
peals to the workmen not to allow themselves
to be trampled upon. However, they called a
meeting in Trafalgar Square forthe day fortnight
of the Fanart skirmish. Meantime the
town grew no quieter, and business came pretty
much toan end. The newspapers, then,as always
hitherto almost eniely inthe hands of the mas-
16o


ters;clamoused to the Government for repressive Hunger
messires; the rich citizens were enrolled as an pushes
ext body of police and armed with Bludgeons things on
Gee hemi jinaay of there were sereng, well eds
full-blooded young men, & had plenty of stom>
ech feefighting ber the Goverment did nosdace
fousethem,and contented itselfwrith petting full
powersvotedioit by the Parliament forsuppres-
Big any revolt, and bringing up more and more
Pees onsdoria Thies passed thelwezk aftee
the great meeting; almost as large a one was held
eet Sta diye tech ment of peaceatventi
eile aaa oppontion totes offered aud
again the people cried ‘victory.’ Butonthe Mon-
day the people woke up to find that they were
Tuvierys Diietos the last few days thiere had heen
groupsof men parading the streets asking (or,
‘you please, demanding) money to buy food; and
what for goodwill, what for fear, the richer eople
gavethema good deal. The authorities of the pa
Sink Teeter sc ance
atpretent) gave willy-nilly what provisions they
couldtowandering people; & the Governmentby
means of its feeble national workshops, alsofed a
goodnumber of half-starved folk. Butinaddition
to this, several bakers’ shops and other provision
stores had been emptied without a grent deal of
disturbance. So far,s0 good. But on the Monday.
in question the Committee of Public Safety,
theonchandsfraidofgeneralunorganised pillage,
mm 164


perforce


Distribution & on the other emboldened b the wavering con,


duct of the authorities, sentadeputation provided
with carts and all necessary gear to clear out two
or three big provision stores in the town, leaving
papers with the shop managers promisingtopay
the price of them: and alsoin the part of the town
where they were strongest they took possession
ofseveral bakers’ shops & set menatworkinthem
for the benefit of the people; ... all of which was
done with little or no disturbance, the police as-
sisting in keepingorder at thesack ofthe stores, as
they would have done at a big fire. @ But at this
last stroke the reactionaries were so alarmed, that
they were determined to force the executive into
action. The newspapers next day all blazed into
the fury of frightened people, and threatened the
people, the Government, & everybody they could
think of, unless ‘order were at once restored.’ A.
deputation of leading commercial people waited
onthe Government and told them thatif theydid
notatoncearrestthe Committee of Public Safety,
they themselves would gathera body of men, arm.
them, and fall on ‘the incendiaries,’ as they call-
ed them. They, together with a number of the
fhewspaperieltors Lada longistecriow eit ciel
heads of the Government and two or three mili-
tary men, the deftest in theirart that the country
could furnish. The deputation came away from
that interview, says a contemporary eye-witness,
smiling and satisfied, & said no more about rais-
162


eS ee


is anti-popular army, but that afternoon left Reaction
Tendon intel faauiltes farthcireccatey tbat amned and
Potigewhere, € The next morning the Govern’ ready
fuent proclaimed a state of siege in London,...
athing common enough amongst the absolutist
vernments on the Continent, but unheard-of
EP England in those days. They appointed the
youngest and cleverest of their generals to com-
mand the proclaimed district; a man who had
won a certain sort of reputation in the disgraceful
Warsinwhich the country had been long engaged
from time to time. Thenewspapers werein ecsta,
cies, and all the most fervent of the reactionaries
noweametothe front; menwho in ordinary times
wereforced to keep their opinions tothemselves or
theirimmediate circle, but who began to look for-
ward to crushing once forall the Socialist, & even
democratic tendencies, which, said they, had been
treated with such foolish indulgence for the last
sixty years. But the clever general took no visible
action:and yetonlya few ofthe minor newspapers
abused him; thoughtful men gathered from this
thataplotwas hatching. As for the Committee of
Public Safety, whatever they thought of theispo-
sition, theyhad now gone too far to draw back;
& many of them, it seems, thought that the gov-
ernment would not act. They wenton quietly or-
ganising their foodsupply, which wasa miserable
driblet when all is said; and also as a retort to the
state of siege, they armed as many men as they
a 163


Amarch couldinthequarterwherethey werestrongest,but
into a trap didnoratempttodrillor organise them, thinking,


perhaps, that they could notatthe best turn them
into trained soldiers till they had some breathing
space. Theclever general hissoldiers,&thepalie
id not meddle with all this in the least in the
world; & things were quieterin London thatweek
end; though therewere riots in many places of the
provinces, which were quelled by the authorities
without much trouble. The most serious of these
were at Glasgow and Bristol.
FZT BX ELL, the Sunday of the meeting
l\came, and great crowds came to
Trafalgar See in procession,
the greater part of the Committee
Yamongst them, surrounded by
theirbandofmenarmedsomehow
‘Thestreets were quite peacefuland quiet,
though there were many spectators to see the pro-
cession pass. Trafalgar Square had no body of
police in it; the people took quiet possession of it,
and the meeting began. The armed men stood
Foubd the paincinal platformyand therewere fein
athersarmed amidetthe general crowd : hutby far
the greater part were unarmed, @ Most people
thought the meeting would go off peaceably; but
the members of the Commitee had heard from
variousquarters that something would beattemp-
ted against them; but these rumours were vague,
and theyad na idea of wher ehieatcaed:/They
164,


soon found out. @ For before the streets about The trap j
the Square were filled, a body of soldiers poured
intoitfromthenorth-westcomerandtookup their
laces by the houses that stood on the west side.
he people growled at the sight of the red-coats}
the armed menof the Committee stood undecid-
ed,not knowing what to do; and indeed this new
influx so jammed the crowd together that, unor-
ganised as they were, they had little chance of
working through it. They had scarcely grasped
the factof theirenemies being there, whenan
column ofsoldiers, pouring out ofthestreets which
Iediinto the great southern road goingdowntothe
Parliament House (still existing, and called the
Dung Market), and also from the embankment
by the side ofthe Thames, marched up, pushin;
ecrowd intoadenserand densermass, & forme
along the south side of the Square. Then any of
those who could see what was going on, knew at
once that they were in atrap, and could only won-
derwhat would bedonewith them.@Theclosely-
packed crowd would not or could not budge, ex-
cept under the influence of the height of teror,
which was soon to be supplied to them. A few of
the armed meu atruggled to the front, or climbed
up tothe base of the monumentwhich then stood
there, that they might face the wall ofhidden fire
before them; and tomost men (there were many
women amongst them) it seemed as ifthe end of
the world had come,and torday seemed strangely
105


bites


Thetrap different from yesterday. € No sooner were the


soldiers drawn up as aforesaidthan, says an eye:
witness, ‘a glittering officer on horseback carne
prancing out from the ranks on the south, and
read something from a paper which he held ia
his handywhich sometting, very few heard; but
Iwas told afterwards that ft was an order for us
to disperse, and a warning that he had legal right
to fice on the crowd else, and that he would doso,
The crowd took it asachallenge of some sort, and
a hoarse threatening roarwent up fromthem and
afterthat therewas comparative silenceforalittle,
till the officer had got back into the ranks. I was
near the edge of the crowd, towards the soldiers?
says this eye-witness, ‘and I saw three litle ma
chines being wheeled out in front of the ranks,
which I knew for mechanical guns, Leried out,
"Throw yourselves dawn they sre going tofirel?
But no one scarcely could throw himself down,
So tight asthe crows wetepereeiiiteer iestiee
order given, and wondered whiere Ishould be the
ext iunufe) and then «<elcwastenrt eect
hadopened, and hell had come up bodily amidst
us. It is no use trying to describe the scene that
followed. Deep lanes were mowed amidst the
thick crowd; the dead & dying coveredthe ground,
and the ahtieks and waila-and cree ionor
filled all the air till it seemed asif there were no-
thing else in the world but murder and death.
Theselof our atmed men who were silkustiat
166


cheered wildlyand opened a scattering fire on the The field of
lien Ones ceiaiics fell; Pe Isaw the deed
oss gong up apd down the ane urging the


eh Gaiice aceasta ycecetset theres tn
Fallen silence and let the butts of chcir guns fall,
Only one sergeantsan toamachine-gunand be.
gan set t going; bute tall youngman, an officer
$50, ran out of the ranks & dragged him back by
the collar, the soldiers stood there motionless
while the horror-stricken crowd, nearly wholly
Gnarmed (fot mostoF the armed men had fallen
Pothatficsedicharge) sesiiied outot the Square
Tovss told afiecaracdaithat the ltiess on the
estedebal Hatalscfanddonc theichactot tie
slaaghtes. How l got out ofthe Square scascely
Io lgrenti nouieclinigeigrmindyindessie,
Satertth ape atl texrriondaieapaite @ Se
eye cun eyewitness. “Thenumber of the slain
on the side of the people in that shooting during
@ minute was prodigious; but it was not easy to
comeatthetruth aboutit;itwas probably between
Geesederateeetal Ofte ous sig eee
Killed outeight, anda dozen wounded’

eeegg LISTENED, trembling with
} excitement. The old man’s eyes
glittered and his face flushed ache
spoke and old she aloof wheel
e often thought saighthapres
PRASIASA Ver I wondered that he should
have got so elatedaboutameremassacre, & Leeid,


167


‘Thebegin- “How fearful! And I suppose thatthis massacre
, ning ofthe put anend tothewhole revolution forthattime?”
| End @“No,no,” criedold Hammond; “‘it began it!”
He filled his glass and mine, and stood up
and cried out: “Drink this glass to the memory
1] of those who died there, for indeed it would bea
| long taletotellhow much we owe them.” Idrank,
| and he sat down again and went on. @ That
massacre of Trafalgar Square began the civil
war, though, like all such events, it gathered head |
slowly, and people scarcely knew what a crisis
they were acting in. € Terrible asthe massacre
was, and hideous and overpowering as the first
terror had been, when the people had time to
think about it, their feeling was one of anger
rather than fear; although the military organi-
sation of the state of siege was now carried out
without shrinking by the clever young general.
For though the ruling-classes when the news
ee ea ee
even dread, yet the Government and their im-
mediate backers felt that now the wine was
drawn and must be drunk. However, even the
most reactionary of the capitalist papers. with
twoexceptions, stunned bythetremendousnews,
simply gave an account of what had taken place
without making any comment upon it. The ex-
ceptions were one, a so-called ‘liberal’ paper
(the Government of the day was of that com-
plexion), which, after a preamble in which itde-
168


clared its undeviating sympathy with the cause What was
of labour, proceeded to point out that in times of to be said!


revolutionary disturbance it behoved the Govern-
ment to be just but firm, and that by far the most
merciful way of dealing with the poor madmen
who were attacking the very foundations of so-
ciety (which had made them mad and poor) was
to shoot them at once, so as to stop others from
drifting into a position in which they would run
achance of being shot. In short, it praised the de-
termined action of the Government as the acme
of human wisdom and mercy,and exulted in the
inauguration of an epoch of reasonabledemocracy
free foe the tyrannical fads of Socialism.’ The
other exception was a paper thought to be one of
the most violent opponents of democracy, and so
it was; but the editor of it found his manhood,
and spoke for himself and not for his paper. Ina
peacgles si grantreiords be askoah people to
consider what a society was worth which had to
be defended by the massacre of unarmed citizens,
and called on the Government to withdraw their
state of siege and put the general and his officers
who fired on the people on their trial for murder.
He went further, and declared that whatever his
opinion might be as to thedoctrines of the Socia-
lists, he for one should throw in his lot with the
people, until the Government atoned for their a-
trocity by showing that they were prepared tolis-
ten to the demands of men who knew what they


169,


Trial by wanted, & whom the decrepitude of society forced


jury


into pushing their demands in some way orother,
Ofcourse, this editor was immediately arrest.
ed by the military power; but hisbold words were
already in the hands of the public, and produced
a great effect: so great an effect, that the Govern,
ment, after some vacillation, withdrew the state
of siege; though at the same time it strengthened
the military organisation and made it more strin-
gent Tree of the Committee of Public Safety

jad been slain in Trafalgar Square: of therest,the
greater part went back to their old place of meet-
ing, & there awaitedthe event calmly. They were
arrested there on the Monday morning, & would
have been shot at once by the general, who was
amere military machine, if the Government had
Sopgrcilenctuce Wiecesponabiieyor kine cies
without any trial: There was frst a talk of trying
them by a special commission of judges,as it was
called: i.e., before a set of men bound tofind them
guilty, & whose business it was to doso. But with
the Government the cold fit had succeeded to the
hot one; and the prisoners were brought before a
juryat theassizes. There a fresh blow awaited the
Government; for in spite of the judge's charge,
which distinctly instructed the jury tofind the pri
soners guilty, they were acquitted, and the juryad-
ded to thei verdict a presentment, in which they
condemned the action of the soldiery, inthe queer
phraseology of the day, as‘rash, unfortunate,and

170


unnecessary.’ The Committee of Public Safety Two go-
renewed its sittings, and from thenceforth was a vernments


opular rallying-point in opposition to the Par-
iiament. The Government now gave way on all
sides, & made a show of yielding to the demands
of the people, though there was awide-spread plot
for effecting a coup d'etat set on foot between the
feadersof thetwo so-calledopposing parties inthe
parliamentary faction fight. The well-meaning
partof the public was overjoyed, & thought that
all danger of a civil war was over. The victory of
thepeople was celebrated by huge meetings held
in the parks and elsewhere, in memory of the vic-
tims of the great massacre. (But the measures
passed for the relief of the workers, though to the
upper classes they seemed ruinously revolution.
ary, were not thorough enough to give the people
food & adecentlife,8 they had tobe supplemented
7. ‘unwritten enactments without legality to back
em. Although the Government & Parliament
hadthe law-courts, the army, & ‘society’ at their
backs the Committee of Public Safety beganto be
aforcein thecountry, & really representedthe pro-
ducing classes. It began to improve immensely in
the days which followed on the acquittal of ats,
members. Its old members had little administra’
tive capacity; though, with the exception of a few
self-seckers& traitors, they were honest, courage,
‘ousmen,& many ofthem wereendowedwitheon.
siderable talent of other kinds. But now that the


171


The old or- times called for immediate action, came forward
der passing the men capable of setting it on foot; and a new
network of workmen's associations grew up ve
speedily, whose avowed single object was thet
ing over of the ship of the people into a simple
condition of Communism; andasthey practically
undertook also the management of the ordinary
labour-war, they soon became the mouthpiece &
intermediary of thewhole of the working-classes;
and themanufacturingprofit-grinders now found
themselves powerless before this combination.
Unless their committee, Parliament, plucked up
courage to begin the civil war again, and to shoot
right and left, they were bound to yield to thede-
} mands of the men whomtheyemployed,andpay ]
| higher and higher wages for shorter and shorter
days’ work. Yet one ally they had, and that was
the rapidly approaching breakdown of the whole
system foundedon the World- Marke: & itssup-
ply; which now became so clear to all people, that
the middle classes, who had been shocked forthe
moment into condemnation of the Government
for the great massacre, turned round nearly in a
mass, and called on the Government ta lank to
matters, &putanend to thetyranny of the Socia-
| list leaders. € Thus stimulated, the reactionist ©
plot exploded probably before it was: ripe butthis
time the peopleand theirleaders were forewarned,
and, before the reactionaries could get under way,
hadtaken the stepsthey thoughtnecessary.{The
172


Liberal Government (clearly by collusion) was A living or-
beaten by the Conservatives, though the latter ganization
Peenominally much in theminority. The popur hard tocrush
[prrepresentativesinthe House understood pretty

‘well what this meant, & after an attempt to fight

the matter out by divisionsin the Houseof Com-

mons, they madea protest, leftthe House, & came

jna body to the Committeeof Public Safety: and |
thecivilwar began again in good earnest.{ Yetits

first act was not one of mere fighting. The new

Tory Government determined to act, yet durst

not re-enactthestateof siege, but itsent a body of

soldiers &policetoarrestthe Committee of Public

Safety in the lump. They made no resistance,

though theymight havedone so, as theyhad now

a considerable body of men who were quite pre-

pared for extremities. But they were determined

totry first a weaponwhich they thought stronger

thanstreet fighting. T he members of the Com-

mittee went off quietly to prison; but they had
lefttheirsoul andtheirorganisation behind them.

For they depended not on a carefully arranged

centre with all kinds of checks and counter-checks

about it, but on a huge mass of people in thor-

vugh sympathy with the movement, bound to-

er by a great number of links of small cen-

tres with very simpleinstructions. These instruc-

tions were now carried out.’ The nextmorning,

when the leaders of the reaction were chuckling

at the effect which the report in the newspapers

173


A surprise of their stroke would have upon the public, no
newspapers appeared; and it was only towards
noon that a few straggling sheets, about the size
of the gazettes of the seventeenth century, work.
ed by policemen, soldiers, managers, and press,
writers, were diibbled through the strets..They
were greedily seized on and read; but by this time
the serious part of their news was stale, & people
did not need tobetold that the General Strike had
begun. The railways did not run, the telegraph,

| wires were unserved; flesh, fish, and green stuff
brought to market were allowed to lie there still

| packed and perishing; the thousands of middle-

} class families, who were utterlydependant forthe
next meal on the workers, made frantic efforts
through theirmore energetic members tocaterfor
the needs of the day, and amongst those of them
who could throw off thefearofwhat wasto follow,
there was, I am told, a certain enjoyment of this
unexpected picnic, a forecast of the days to come,
in which all labour grew pleasant. @ So passed
the first day, & towards evening the Government

‘ew quite distracted. They had but one resource
5 putting down any popular movement, to wit,
mere brute-force; but there was nothing for them
againstwhich tousetheirarmy & police; noarmed
bodies appeared in the streets; the offices of the
Federated Workmen were now, in appearance,
atleast, turned into places for the relief of people
thrown outof work, and under thecircumstances,

174


they durst not arrest the men engaged in such A disap.
business; all the more, as even that night many pointment
ite respectable people applied at these offices
1 iekiand swallowed down the charity of the
revolutionists along with their supper, So the
Governmentmassed soldiers and police here and
there, and sat still for that night, fully expect-
jngon the morrow some manifesto from ‘the re-
Bel athey now began to be called, which would
ive them an opportunity of acting in some wa}
opet aac disappointed. Theordinary
newspapers gaveup the struggle that morning, &¢
only onevery violentreactionary paper (called the
‘Daily Telegraph’) attempted an appearance, &
rated ‘the rebels’ in good set terms for their folly
and ingratitude in tearing out the bowels of their
‘common mother; the English Nation, for the
benefit ofa few greedy paid agitators, & the fools
whom they weredeluding. On the otherhand, the
‘Socialist papers (of which three only, represent-
‘ing somewhat different schools, were published
in London) came out full to the throat of well-
printedmatter. They were greedily bought by the
whole public, who, of course, like the Govern-
ment, expected 2 manifesto in them. But the
found no word of reference to the great subject. [¢
seemed as if their editors had ransacked their
drawers for articles which would have been in
Place forty years before, underthe technical name
ofeducetionalarticles. Most of these were admir-
be)


A challenge able and straightforward expositions of the doc-


trines & practice of Socialism, free from hasteand
spiteand hard words,& cameuponthepublicwith
a kind of May-day freshness, amidst the worry &
terrorofthe moment; & though the knowingwell
understood themeaningof this move in the game
was mere defiance, & atoken of irreconcilable hos»
tility to the then rulers of society, and though,
also, they were meant for nothing else by ‘the
rebels,’ yet they really had their effect as ‘educa-
tional articles.’ However, ‘education’ of another
kkind was acting upon the public with irresistible
power, and aebabhy cleared their heads a little,
As to the Government, they were absolutely
terrified by thisactof ‘boycotting’ (theslang word
then current for such acts of abstention). Theit
counsels became wild and vacillating to the last
degree: one hour they were for giving way for the
present tilltheycould hatchanother plot; thenext
they all butsentan order for the arrest inthe lump
of all the workmen’s committees; the next they
were on the point of ordering their brisk young
generaltotake any excuse thatoffered for another
massacre. But when they called to mind that the
soldiery in that ‘Battle’ of Trafalgar: Sik were
sodaunted by the slaughter which they had made,
that they could not be got to fire a second volley,
they shrank back again from the dreadful cour
age necessary for eonying) out another massacre,
cantimethe prisoners, brought the secondtime
171


before the magistrates under a strong escort of “Thou shalt
soldiers, were the second time remanded. The lack eve I
strike wentonthisdayalso. The workmen’s com: acl”
mittees were extended, & gaverelief to great num’
bers of people, for they had organised s consider
able amount of production of food by men whona
they could depend upon, Quite a number of well-
to-do people were now compelled to seek relief of
them, Butanothercuriousthinghappened:aband
of young men of the upper classes armed them-
selves,and coolly went marauding in the streets,
taking what suited them of such eatables & port.
ables as they came across in the shops which had
ventured to open. This operation they carried out
in Oxford Street, then a great streetof shopsofall
kinds. The Government, beingat thathour in one
oftheir yielding moods, thought thisa fine oppor
tunityforshowing their impartiality inthe main
tenance of ‘order,’ and sent to arrest these hun;
rich youths; who, however, surprised the policeby
avaliant resistance, so that all but three escaped.
‘The Government did not gain the reputation for
impartiality which they expected from this move;
forthey forgotthat there were noevening papers;
and the account of the skirmish spread wide in-
deed, butina distorted form; forit: wasmostly told
Hee exploit of the starving people from
the Eastend; and everybody thought it was but
natural for the Government to put them down
when and where they could. That evening the
n


7


Spies in the rebel prisoners were visited in their cells by very
prison


polite and sympathetic persons, who pointed out
fothem whats suicidal course they-were follows
ing, & howdangerous these extreme courses were
for the popular cause. Says one of the prisoners:
‘It was greatsportcomparing notes when wecame
‘out anent the attempt of the Government to“get
at” us separately in prison,and how we answered
the blandishments of the highly “intelligent and
refined” persons set ontopump us. One laughed;
another told extravagant long-bow stories to the
envoy;athird helda sulky silence;afourthdamn-
ed the polite spy and bade him hold his jaw, and
that was all they got out of us.’ So passed the
second day of the great strike. It was clear to all
thinking people that the third day would bring
cathe ean batbe present suspense and ill-con-
cealedterror wasunendurable. The ruling classes,
& the middle-class non-politicianswho had been
their real strength & support, were as sheep lack,
ing a shepherd; they literally did not know what
to do, @. One thing they found they had todo:
try toget the ‘rebels’ todo something. So the next
motning.the morning ofthe third day ofthestrike,
when the members of the Committee of Public

‘appeared again before the magistrate, they
found themselves treated with the greatest possi-
ble courtesy, in fact, rather as envoys and ambas-
sadorsthan prisoners. Inshort, the magistratehad
received his orders; and with no more to do than
178


ight come of a long stupid speech, which might Socialism

fone PeDileon mockery, he dis- a safeguard
chargedtheprisoners,whowentbacktotheirmeet- against the
ing-place &atonce beganadue sitting. It washigh mere breale
time. For this third day the masswas fermenting up
indeed. There was, of course, a vast number of
working people who were not organised in the
least in the world; men who had been used to act
astheirmastersdrovethem, orratherasthesystem
drove, of which their masters were a part. That
system was now falling to pieces, & the old pres,
sureof themasterhaving been taken off these poor
‘men, it seemed likely that nothing but the mere
animal necessities & passions of men would have
any hold onthem, and that mere generaloverturn
would be the result, Doubtless this would have
happened if it had not been that the huge mass
Bad been leavencdhy Sotslnterinia nh icin
place, and inthe second by scale ane ehde,
clared Socialists, many or indeed most of whom
‘were members of those bodies of workmen above
said. If anything ofthis kind had happened some
years before, when the masters of labour were
still looked upon asthe natural rulers of the peo-

le, and even the poorest and most ignorant men

leaned upon them for support, while they sub-
mitted to their fleecing, the entire break-up of all
society would have followed. But the long series
of years during which the workmen had learned
to despise their rulers, had done away with their

n2


79


seditious


Astraight dependence upon them, & they were now begin,
way with the ning to trust (somewhat dangerously, as events


proved) inthe non-legal leaders whom eventshad
thrust forward ;& though mostof these were now
become mere figure-heads, their names and re.
putations were useful in this crisis as a stop-gap.
@ The effect of the news, therefore, of the re-
lease of the Committee gave the Government
some breathing time: for it was received with the
greatest joy by the workers, and even the well-to
do saw in it a respite from the mere destruction
which they had begun to dread, and the fear of
which mostof them attributed to the weakness of
the Government. Asfar asthe passing hour went,
pethapsthey were right in this.” How do you
mean!” said I. “ at could the Government
have done? I often used to think that they would
be helpless in such a crisis.” € Said old Ham-
mond: “Of course I don’t doubt that in the lon;
iil iattets would have come'sboutas they dist
But if the Government could have treated their
army asa real army, and used them strategically
/ general would have done, looking on the
penple axa mere open enemy to be shot at and
dispersed wherever they tumed up, they would
probably have gained the victory at the time.”
“But would the soldiers have acted against the
eople in this way?”’said I. € Said he: “I think
Ecewalllb lays litaed that they: would Rave die
Seif they had met bodies of men armed, however
F


badly,and however badly they had been organis- Fear of the
ed, Ie seems also as if before the Trafalgar Square unknown
fnassacre they might as awhole have been depen-
ded upon ia upon an unarmed crowd, though
they were much honeycombed bySocialism. The
reason for this was that they dreaded the use by
apparently unarmed men of an explosive called
dynamite, of which many loud boasts were made
by the workers on the eve of these events; al-

ough it turned out to be of little use as a ma-
terial for war in the way that was expected. Of
course the officers of the soldiery fanned this fear
to the utmost, so that the rank and file pobably.
thought on that occasion that they were being led
into a desperate battle with men who were reall
armed, and whose weapon was the more dread-
ful, because it wasconcealed. After that massacre,
however, it was at all timesdoubtful ifthe regular
soldiers would fire upon an unarmed or half-arm-
ed crowd.” @ Said I:““The regular soldiers? Then
therewere other combatantsagainst the people?”
“Yes,” said he, “we shall come to that present-
ly.” € Certainly,” I said, “you had better goon
straight with your story. I see that time is wear

ing.”


See AID Hammond: “The Govern-
Ke ES Hment lst no time in coming to
Casta


termswiththe Committeeof Pub-


7) lic Safety indeed, they could think
INS ey of apthing elec shaniie dangeret
181


the moment. Theysent ad


Concessions creditedenvoytotreat with these men, who some.


how had obtained dominion overpeople’s minds,
while the formal rulers had no hold except over
their bodies. There is no need at present to go in-
tothe details of the truce (for such itwas) between
thesehigh contracting parties, the Government of
theempireof Great Britain anda handful ofwork-
ing-men (as they were called in scorn in those
days), amongst whom, indeed, were some very
capable and ‘square-headed’ persons, though, as
aforesaid, the abler men were not then the recog:
nised leaders. ‘Theupshotofitwasthatallthedel-
niteclaimsof the peoplehad to be granted. Wecan
now see that most of these claims were of them-
selves not worth either demanding or resisting;
but they were looked on at that time as most im-
portant, and they were at least tokens of revolt
against the miserable system of life which was

en beginning to tumble to pieces. One claim,
however, was of the utmost immediate import-
ance, & this the Government tried hardto evade;
but as they were not dealing with fools, they had
to yieldat last. This was the claim of recognition
and formal status for the Committee of Public
Safety, and all the associations which it fostered
under its wing. This itis clear meant two things:
first, amnesty for‘therebels,’ great & small, who,
without a distinct act of civil war, couldno longer
be attacked; and next, a continuance of the orga


nised revolution. Only one pointthe Government
182


could gain, andthatwasaname. The dreadful ree The Civil
Volutionary title was dropped, and the body, with War begins


its branches, acted under the respectable name of
the ‘Board of Conciliation and its local offices.’
Carrying this name, it became the leader of the
people in the civil war which soon followed.”
“0,” said I, somewhat startled, “so the civil
war went on, in spite ofall that had happened?”
“So it was,” said he. “In fact, it was this v
Tegal recognition which made thecivil warpossible
inthe ala sense of war; it took the Struggle
out of the element of meremassacres on one side,
and endurance plusstrikes ontheother.” (“And
can you tell me in what kind of way the war was
carried on?” said I.

IES, he said ; “we haverecordsand


of them I can give you in a few
M4 words. AsItold you, the rankand
é q fileof thearmy was nottobe trust
QW cc'by the reactonists; butthe of
cers generally were prepared foranything, forthey
weremostly the very stupidestmen inthe country.
‘Whateverthe Governmentmightdo,agreat part
of che upper and middle classes were determined
to set on foot a counter revolution; for the Com-
munism which now loomed ahead seemed quite
unendurable to them. Bands of young men, like
the marauders in the great strike of whom I told
you just now, armed themselves and drilled, and
583


eA


TheFriends began on any opportunity or pretencetoskirmish


the people in the streets. The Government
neitherhelpedthemnorputthemdown, butstood
by hopingthatsomethingmightcomeofit. These
‘Friends of Order,’ as they were called, had some
successes at first and grew bolder; they got many
officersof the regular army to help them, and b

their means laid hold of munitions of war ofall
kinds. One part of their tactics consisted in their
guarding and even garrisoning the big factories
of the period: they held at onetime, for instance,
the whole of that place called Manchester which
I spoke of just now. A sort of irregular war was
carried onwithvaried success alloverthecountry;
& atlast the Government, which at first pretend.
edtoignorethestrugele, or treat itasmererioting,
definitely declared for ‘the Friends of Order,’ and
joined to their bands whatsoever of the regular
army they could get together, and made a despe-
rate effort to overwhelm ‘the rebels, as they were
nowoncemore called, as indeed they called them-
selves. € It was too late. All ideas of peace ona
basis of compromise had disappeared on either
side. The end, it was seen clearly, must be either
absolute slavery for all but the privileged, or a
peters le Parade on equalien andi cocina
nism. The sloth, the hopelessness, and if | may
say s0, the cowardice ofthelast century, had given
place to the eager, restless heroism of detiared
revolutionary period, Iwillnotsay that the people

184


of that time foresaw the life we are leading now, Organiza-
futthere wasa general instinct amongst them to- tionofrevolt
wards the essential part of that life, & many men
saw clearly beyond the desperate struggle of the
day into the peace which it was to bring about.
Tiemen of that daywhowereon thesideof free-
dom werenot unhappy, Ithink, though they were
harassed by hopes and fears, and sometimes torn
by doubts, & the conflict of duties hard to reson
ile.” € Buthowdid the people, the revolution
ists, carry on the war? Whatwere the elements of
success on their side?” I put this question, be-
cause I wanted to bring the old man back to the
definite history, and take him out of the musing
moodso natural to an old man. @ He answered:
“Well, they did not lack organisers; for the very
conflict itself, in days when, as I told you, men of
any strength of mind cast aay all consideration
for the ordinary business of life, developed thene-
cessary talent amongst them. Indeed, from all I
havereadandheard,I much doubt whether, with
outthis seemingly dreadful civilwar,theduetalent
for administration would have been developed
amongst the workingmen. Anyhow, itwasthere,
‘and they soon got leaders far more than equal to
the best men amongst the reactionaries. Forthe
rest, they had no difficulty about the material of
theirarmy; for thatrevolutionaryinstinctsoacted
on theordinary soldierintheranksthatthe greater


art, certainly the best part, of the soldiers joined
185 |


The rebels’ the side of the people, But the main element of


popular ge- their success was this, that wherever the workin,
nerally


people were not coerced, they worleed, not forthe
reactionists, but for ‘the rebels’ The eactionist
could get no work done for them outside the dic,
tricts where they were all-powerful: and even in
those districts they were harassed by continual
risings; and inall eases8& everywhere pot nothin

donewithoutobstructionand black looksandsul.
Iciness; so that not only were their armies quite
worn out with the dificulties which they had to
meet, but the non-combatants who were on their
side were so worried and beset with hatred anda
thousand little troubles &zannoyancesthat lifebee
camealmost unendurableto them on thoseterms,
Not a few of them actually died of the worry;
many committed suiside! Of course, avastaure>
benef thera joined activelyinithecanteof reaction,
& found some solace ts taeie misery inthe eagess
Hese ction ict andl gttianiy loeansa garcons
aiusulanined @ tie tebels sldadthe reed
of these latter increased, it at last became clearto
all'men that the cause which was once hopeless,
was new triumphant, and that the hopelesecause


was that of slavery and privilege.”


CHAPTER XVIII. THE BEGINNING A new con-
OFTHE NEW LIFE. ception
ELL, said I, “0 you got
6 clear outof all your trou,
ble, Were people satis-
ied with te new det
ofthings when itcame?”
“People?” he said.
BS) “Well, surely all must
bs BA have been glad of peace
ence 9] whenit come;especially
QUAY when they found,asthey
musthavefound, that afterall, they, even theonce
rich, were not living very badly. As to those who
BE beet pose all saeco pt the war, whic ted
about two years, their condition had been better-
ing, in spite of thestrugglejand when peace came
atlast,in a very short timethey made greatstrides
towards a decentlife. The great difficulty was that
the once-poor had such a feeble conception of the
real pleasure of life: so to say, they did not ask
enough, did not how toask enough, fromthe new
state of things. It was perhaps rather a good than
an evil thing that the necessity for restoring the
wealth destroyed during the warforced them into
Working at frst almost ashard as they had been
| used to before the Revolution, For all historians
| are agreed that there never was a war in which
there wassomuch destruction of wares, & instru,
ments for making them as inthis civil war.” “I


187


BA


The des-


truction of I don’t see wi


“wealth”


guprather sus
i y,” said Hammond. € “Wit
said, “because the party oforder would surely ook
upon the wealth as thir own propery, no share
of which, ifthey could help it, should go to thes
slaves, supposing they conquered. And on the
other hand, it was just for the possession of that
wealth that ‘the rebels' were fighting, & I should
havethought, specially whenthey sawthat they
were winning, that they would have been careful
to destroyas litte as possibleof wheter conse
to be their own.” (It was as I have told you,
however,” said he. “The arty of order, when
they recovered from their frst sowardice of sure
prise, or, if you please, when they fairly saw that,
whatever happened, they would be ruined, fought
with great bitterness, cared litle what they did,
so long as they injured the enemies who had de-
stroyed the sweets of life for them. As to ‘there.
bels’ Ihave told you that the outbreak of actual
war made them careless of trying to save the
wretched scraps of wealth that they had. Iewas a
common saying amongst them, Let the country
hecleared ofeverythingexceptvaliantlivingmen,
tather than that we fall into slavery again!
FE SSRZE satsilently thinkcingalittlewhile,
NH andthen said: When theconflict
was once really begun, it was seen
H how litte of any value there was
the old world of slavery and in-
equality. Don't you sce what it


ised at that,” said 1.“ Are you?


means? Inthe times which you are thinking of, & The recon-
ofwhich you seemto knowsomuch, there wasno struction of
hope; potiee but the dull jog of the mill-horse. wealth
under compulsion of collar and whip; but in that
fighting-time that followed, all was hope: ‘the

rebels’ at least felt themselves strong enough to

build up the world again from its dry bones, and

theydidit, too!” said the old man, his eyes glitter-

ing under his beetlingbrows. He went on:“And

their GY pere at least and at last learned some-

thing about the reality of life, and its sorrows,

which they, their class, I mean, had once known

nothing of. In short, the two combatants, the
workman and the gentleman, between them...”
@ “Between them,” said I, REED “they


stroyed commercialism?” €. s


es, yes, yes,” said
he; “that is it. Nor could it have been destroyed
otherwise; except, perhaps,bythe whole of society
gradually falling into lower depths, till it should
at last reach a condition as rude as barbarism, but
lacking both the hope and the pleasures of bar-
barism. Surely the sharper, shorter remedy was
the happiest.” (Most surely,” said I.
AE AES, said the ofd man, “the world
“Ay was being brought to its second
QY birch; how could that take place
Dd without a tragedy? Moreover,
X18 think of it. The spirit of the new
LEARY days, of ourdays, was to be delight
in the life of the world; intense and overweening


189


The love of love of the very skin and surface of the earth on


the Earth


which man dwells, such asa lover has in the fair
flesh of the woman heloves; this, I say, was to be
the new spirit of the time. All other moods save
this had been exhausted: the unceasing criticism,
the boundless curiosity of the ways and thoughts
of man, which wasthemood of theancient Greek,
to whom these things were not so much a means,
as an end, was gone past recovery; nor had there
been reallyany shadowof itintheso-called science
of the nineteenth century, which, as you must
know, was in the main an appendage tothe com-
mercial system; nay, not iden ‘appendageto
the police of that system. In spite of appearances,
it waslimited & cowardly, because itdid notreally
believe in itself. It was the outcome, as it was the
sole relief, of the unhappinessof the period which

madelifeso bitter eventotherich, & which, asyou

may see with your bodily eyes, the great change

has sweptaway. More akin to our way of looking
at lifewas the spirit of the Basle ors 2 ‘whom,
heaven and the life of the next world was such a
reality, that it became to them a part of the life
Upon the earth which accordingly they loved and
adorned, in spite of the ascetic doctrines of their
formal creed, which bade them contemnit.@ But
thatalso, with itsassured belief in heaven and hell
as two countriesin which to live, has gone, &now
we do, both in word and in deed, believe in the
continuous lifeof the world ofmen, andas it were,

190


add every day of that common life to the little Religion


srack of days which our own mere individual
Sxperience wins for us: and consequently we are
happy. Do youwonderatit? In times past, indeed,
men were told to love their kind, to believe in the
religion of humanity, and so forth. But look you,
justin thedegreethataman had elevation of mind
& refinement enough tobeable tovaluethis idea,
was he repelled by the obvious aspect ofthe in-
Yividuals composing the mass which he was to
worship; and he could not evade that repulsion
bymalengaconventionalabstractionof mankind

t had little actual or historical relation to the
race; which to his eyes was divided into blind
its onthe one Rand and pater deaded
slaveson theother. Butnow, whereisthedifflculty
in accepting the religion of humanity, when the
menandwomen whe go tomake up humanity are
free, happy,and energetic at least, and most com.
monly beautiful of body also, and surrounded by
beautiful things of theirown fashioningand a na-
ture bettered and not worsened by contact with
snaakind? Thisis what this ageot the world has
reserved for us.” @ “It seems true,” said I, “or
ought w by, if what any eyes have seen is» when
of the general life you lead. Can you now tell me
anything of your progress afte the yeas ofthe
struggle?”


191


The battle


with utilita- (%


rianism


AID he: “I could easily tell you
more than you have time to listen
A‘; but Ican at least hint at one of
[i thechief difficulties which had tobe
AA met: and that was, that when men
PASSA began to settle down after the war,
and their labour had pretty much filled upthegap
in wealth caused by the destruction of thee war, a
kind of disappointment seemed coming over us,
and the prophecies of some of the reactionists of
past times seemedas ifthey would come true,and
a dull level of utilitarian comfort be the end fora
while of our aspirations and success. The loss of
the competitive spur to exertion had not, indeed,

done anythig to interfere with the necessary pro-

duction of the community, but how if it should

make men dull by givingthem too much timefor

thought or idle antag? But, after all, this dull

thunder-cloud only threatened us, & a roe
over. Probably, from what] have told you before,
youwillhave a guessatthe remedy forsuch a dis-
aster;rememberingalwaysthatmanyofthethings
which used to be produced, slave-wares forthe poor
& mere wealth-wasting wares for the rich, ceased
tobe made, [hat remedy was,in short,the produc
tion of what used to be called art, but which has
no nameamongstusnow, because ithas becomea
necessary partof the labour of every man who pro-
duces.” @ Said I: “What! had men any time or
opportunity forcultivating thefineartsamidstthe

192


desperate struggle for life and freedom that you The true


havetold meof?”@Said Hammond: “Youmust soil forartto
not supposethat thenewform of art was founded grow out of
chiefly on the memory of the art of the past; al
though, strange tosay, the civil warwasmuch less
destructive of art than of otherthings, andthough
what of art existed under the old forms, revived
in a wonderful way during the latter part of the
struggle, especially as regards music and poetry.
‘The art or work-pleasure, as one ought to call it,
of which I am now spealeing, sprun; up almost
spontancously, it seems, from a kind of instinct
amongst people, no longer driven desperately to
painful and terrible over-work, to dothe best
could with the work in hand, to make it excellent
of its kind;and when that had goneon for a little,
a craving for beauty seemed to awaken in men’s
minds, and they began rudely and awkwardly to
ornament the wares which they made; and when
they had once set toworkc at that, it soon began to
grow. All this was much helped by the abolition
of the squalor whichour immediateancestors put
up with so coolly; and by the leisurely, but not
stupid, country life which now grew (as [told you
before) to be common amongst us. [hus at
& by slow degrees we got pleasure into our work;
thenwe becameconscious of that pleasure, & cul-
tivated it, and took care that we had our fill of it;
and then all was gained, and we were happy. So
may it be for ages and ages!” € The old man fell
°


193


The young into a reverie, not altogether without melancholy


folk again


I thought; but I would not break it. Suddenly he
started, & said: “Well, dear guest, here are come
Dick and Clara tofetch you away, and there is an
ae deal yell Gasesuyy you il age
sorry for; the long dayiscoming to an end, & you
will have a pleasant ride back to Hammersmith,


CHAPTER XIX. THE DRIVE BACK
TO HAMMERSMITH.


ES) SAIDnothing, for was

not inclined for merepo-
liteness to him after such
H very serious talk; but in
factI shouldlikedtohave
gone ontalking with the
J olderman,whocouldun-
@ derstand something at
CSS Bid leastof my wontedways

Sof looking at life,where-
as, with the younger people, in spite of all their
kindness, I really was a being from another plan-
et. However, I made the best of it, and smiled as
amiably as I could onthe young couple; and Dick
returned the smile by saying: "Well, guest, Lam
glad to have you again, and to find that you and
my kinsman have not quite talked yourselves ine
toanother world; I was half suspecting as I was
listening tothe Welshmen yonder that youwould
presently be vanishing away from us, and began

194


to picture my kinsman sitting in the hall staring Novelty is
ating ee finding that he had been talking a good even
while past o nobody." fl rather uncomfort-o happy
able at this speech, for suddenly the picture of the people
‘Sordid squabble, the dirty and miserable tragedy
of the life I had left for a while, came before my
eyes; and I had, as it were, a vision of all my long-
ings for rest and peace in the past, and I loathed
the idea of going back toit again, But the old man
chuckled and said: “Don’t be afraid, Dick. In any
case, I have not been talking to thin air; nor, in-
deed to this new friend of ours only. Who knows
but I may not have beentalking to many people?
For perhaps our guest may some day go back to
the people he has come from, & may take a mes-
sage from us which may bear fruit for them, and
consequently for wus." C Dick looked puzzled,and
said: “Well, gaffer, [donot quite understand what
Siseh Aiba say is, that I hope he will not
leave us: for don’t you see, he is another kind of
man towhat weareused to, & somehow he makes
us thinkof all kind of things; and already I feel as
if I could understand Dickens the better for hav-
ing talked with him.” € “ Yes,” said Clara, “and
I ina few months we shall make him loole
younger;andI should like to see what he was like
with the wrinkles smoothed out of his face. Don’t
you think he will look younger after a little time
withus?”@The old man shook his head, &look-
ed eamestly at me, butdid not answer her, and for
02


195


|


Something amomentor twowewere allsilent.€ Then Clara


needed


brokeout: “Kinsman, Idon’tlike this: something
or another troubles me, and I feel as if something
untoward were going to happen. You have bees
talking of past miseries to the guest, & have been
living in past unhappy times, and it is in the air
all roundus, and makesus feel as if we were long-
ing for something that we cannot have.” € The
old man smiled on her kindly, and said: “ Well,
my child, if that is so, go and live in the present,
and youwill soon shake it off” Then he turnedto
me, and said: “Do you remember anything like
that, guest, inthe country fromwhichyou come?”
The lovers had turned aside now, & were talk-
ing together softly, and not heeding us; so I said,
but in a low voice:“Yes, when I was a happy child
ona sunny holiday, 8 hadeverything thar could
think of.” € “So it is,” said he. “You remember
just now youtwitted me with living inthe second
childhood of the world. You will find it a happy
world to live in; you will be happy there. for a
while.” € Again I did not like his scarcely veiled
threat,and was beginning to trouble myself with
trying to remember howl got amongst this curi-
ous people,whenthe old mancalledout inacheery
voice: Now, my children, take your guest away,
and make much of him; for it is your business to
make him sleck of skin and peaceful of mind: he
hasby nomeansbeenas lucky as you have. Fare-
well quest!” and he my hand warmly.
191


Good-bye,” said I,“and thank poavenn much A promise


forall that you have told me. I wi


come and see of harvest


wsassoomas I come back to London, May 1?” to come


tives hers teoue byallmranshiycan hs
eee crke ences ae DIE
fis cheery voice; “for when the hay is in up the
Hien T chall be for taking him s round though
the country between hay and wheat harvest, to see
how our fends live in the north country. Then
in the whest harvest we shall do good stroke of
See ES preference;
Porhewill begettingalitdehardwithalithe opens
Uxlicingand lshall bess tough as nails "€“But
ee tet alerte names Deke
Paeeileyideinecipreiey hand Sunibialetiogtien
C4“ Wil I sot?” taid Dick, somewhat boister:
Saisie Asslcpiciwlnasaaceiss panini nti
Piety sicsleverp night; c youwill lock eo Beee
tiful with your neck all brown, & your hands too,
tidy paroled pou coy ae wins eee
Gel rill eure of taage pane TIT
whims out of your head, my dear. However, our
week’shaymaking willdo allthat for you." The
ial reddened vey pretiland not for shame but
for pleasure; and the old man laughed, and said:
“Guest, Lsee that you will he as comfortable ag
need be; for you need not fear that those two will
betoooflicious with you:they will beso busy with
each other,that they will leave you good geal to
yourself, am sure,andthatis areal kindness tox


197


A parting guest,after all. O, youneed not be afraid of being


‘one too many, either: it is just what these birds in
anest like, tohavea good convenient friend toturn
to, so that they may relieve the ecstasies of love
with the solid commonplace of friendship, Be-
sides, Dick, & much more Clara, likes a little talk.
ing at times;and you know lovers do not talk un-
less they get intotrouble, they only prattle. Good-
bye, guest; may you be happy!” Clara went u

to old Haran cheer her arms about his neck
and kissed him heartily, and said: Youareadear
old man, & may have your jest about measmuch
as you please; and it won't be long before we see
you again; and you may be sure we shall make
our guest happy; though, mind you, there is some
truth in what you say.”

RSE quE N Ishookhands again, andwe
We


ear BEAN


4 wentoutof thehall & into theclois-


Gey) ters, & so inthe street found Grey-
RSG) locks in the shafts waiting for us.


EOE He waswelllooked after; foralittle
ws ladof aboutseven years old had his
handonthe rein and was solemnly looking up in-
to his face; on his back, withal, was a girl of foure
teen, holding athree-year old sister on before her;
while anothergirl, about ayearolder thantheboy,
hung on behind. The three were occupied partly
with eating cherries, partly with patting & punch-
ing Greylocks, who took all their caresses in goo

part, but pricked up his ears when Dick made his

198


appearance. The gilsgotoff quietly and goingup Beastifel


nerade muchof her8 snuggled up to
pened got intothe cattiage, Dick shook the
pane ewe gotunder way at once, Greylocks trot
Taarloberly between the lovely trees of the Lon,
don sess shat were sending floods of fragrance
son the cool evening air; for it was now gettin
nt a coect €L We could hardly go but fair an
softy all theway,asthere were great many peor
ple abroad in that cool hour. Seeing so many
cople made me notice their looks the more; and
Fraest say, my taste, cultivated in the sombre
greyness, of rather brownness, of the nineteenth
eerury, wasratherapt to condemn the gaiety &
brightness of the raiment and I even ventured to
say as much to Clara. She seemed rather: au
ed,andeven slightly indignant, and said: “Well,
fell what'athe mivec? They ate not aboutany
dirty work; they are only amusing themselves in
the fine evening; there is nothing to foul their
Pisces? Catiestioesi estab loclavetry paeety tt
isn’t gaudy, you know.” (Indeed that was true;
forcany, of tHespeople were clad ia colours that
‘were sober enough, though beautiful, & the har,
mon} ‘ofthecolours were perfectandmostdelight-
ful. € said:“ Yes, that is so; but how can every:
body afford such costly garments? Look! there
sorszimiddleagedman ina sobergrey dress; but
canseefromherethatitismade ofvery fine wool.
len stuff, and is covered with silk embroidery.”


199


er, clothes


Adefence of @ Said Clara: He could wear shabby clothes if
fine feathers he pleased, thatis, if hedidn’t thinkche wouldhurt


people's feelings by doing so.” “But pleasetell
me,” saidI, “how can they afford ie?” € As soon
as had spoken I perceived that had got back to
my old blunder;for I saw Dick's shoulders shale
ing with laughter;buthe wouldn'tsayaword, but
handed me over to the tender mercies of Clara,
who said: “Why Idon't know what you mean,
Ofcourse we can afford it, or else we shouldn'tdo
it, It would be easy enough forus to say, we will
only spend ourlabouron makingourclothescom-
fortable: but we don’t choose to stop there. Why
doyoufind faulewithus?Does it seem toyouas if
we starved ourselves offood inordertomale our-
selves fine clothes? or do you think there is any-
thing wrong in liking to see the coverings of our
bodiesbeautifullike ourbodiesare? justas adeer’s
or an otter'sskin hasbeenmade beautifulfromthe
first? Come, whatis wrongwith you?” CI bowed
before the storm, and mumbled out some excuse
or other. I must say, 1 might have known that
people who wereso fond of architecture generally,
would not be backward in oramenting them:
selves; all the more as the shape of their raiment,
apart from its colour, was both beautiful and rea-
sonable, veiling the form, without citherrmufling
or caricaturingit. € Clara was soon mollified;an

as we drove along toward the wood before men-
tioned, she said to Dick: “I tell you what, Dick:


200


now that kinsman Hammond theElderhas seen The guest
our questin his queer clothes, I thinkwe ought toto have new
find him something decent to put on for our jour’ clothes
ney to-morrow: especially since, if we donot, we
shall have toanswerall sorts of questions as tohis
clothes and where they came from. Besides,” she
said slily, “when heiscladin handsome garments
hewillnotbeso quick to blame us for ourchildish,
nessin wasting ourtimein making ourselves look
easant toeach other.” “Allright, Clara,” said
Bick; “he shall have everything that you. . that
he wants to have. I will look something out for
him before he gets up to-morrow.”


CHAPTER XX. THE HAMMER.
SMITH GUEST-HOUSE AGAIN.

s MIDST such talk driv.
ing quietly through the
balmy evening, we came
Yo Hammersmith, and
werewell received by our
friends there. Boffin, in a
fresh suitof clothes, wel.
A comed meback with sta-

tely courtesy ;theweaver
= SSE) wanted to button-hole
me and get out of me what old Hammond had
said, but was he cheerful when Dick
warned him off; Annie shookhands with me,and
hoped I had a pleasant day, so kindly, that I felt


201


A happy aslight
evening truth, Ih


ng as our hands parted; for to say the
Roevherbonenien lara, who semedts
always on the defensive, whereas Annie was
as frank as could be, and seemed to get hones
pleasure from everything & everybody abouther
without the least effort. We had quite a litte
feast that evenin; p partly in my honour, & partly,
I suspect, thoug! nothing was said about it, in
honourof Dick and Clara coming togetheragein,
e wine was of the best; the was redolentof
rich summer flowers; & after supper we not onl
had music (Annie, to my mind, surpassing all
the others for sweetness and clearness of voice, as
well asforfecling & meaning), but at last we even
gottotellingstories,& sat there listening, withno
otherlightbutthatofthesummermoon streaming
trowel the beastsfal srueeies nether
asiif we had belonged to time long passed, when
books were scarce é the art of reading somewhat
rate. Indeed, I may say here, that, though as you
Will ye massed any iene had meet ptaor)
shing te say about books, ytthey wer not gest
readers,considering the refinement of their man-
ners and th sat amount of leisure which they
obviously had. In fact, when Dick especially, men
tioned a book, he did so with an air ofa man who
has accomplished an achievement; as much as to


say, “There, you see, I have actually read that!”


out any of that sense of incongru-

ity, thatdread of approachingruin,
which had always beset me hitherto when I had
been amongst the beautiful works of art of the
past, mingled with the lovely nature of the pre-
sent} both of them, in fact, the result of the long
centuries of tradition, which had compelled men
to produce the art, and compelled nature to run
into the mould of the ages. Here I could enjoy
everything withoutan after-thought of the injus-
tice and miserable toil whichmademy leisure; the
ignorance and dulness of life which wenttomake
my keen appreciation of history; the tyranny and
the struggle full of fear and mishap which went
tomakemy romance. Theonly weight had upon
my heart was a vague fear as it drew toward bed.
time concerning the place wherein I should wake
‘on the morrow: but I choked that down, & went
to bed happy, and in avery few moments was in
adreamlese sleep.


Another


morning


HEN I did wake, toa
autiful sunny morn.
ing, I leapt out of bed
with my overnightap,
BM prehension still cling,
ing to me, which van-
ished delightfully how-
ever in a moment as I
lookedaroundmylittle
2M) steeping chamber and
saw the palebutpure-coloured figures painted on
the plaster of the wall, with verses written under-
neath them which I knew somewhat over well. I
dressed speedily, inasuitof blue laid ready forme,
SMSRMOT aE HC UGUrS Mashed wheal ladies
into it, feeling as I did so that excited pleasure of
anticipation of aholiday, which, well remembered
as it was, I had not feltsince I wasaboy,newcome
home for the summer holidays. It seemed quite
early in the morning, and I expected to have the
hall to myself bil came intoitoutof the corri-
dor wherein waemy sleeping chamber; but I met
‘Annieatonce, wholet fall her broom ®& gave mea
kiss, quite meaningless] fear,exceptas!
seen though she reddened as she di


from shyness, but from friendly pleasure, & then

stood and picked up her broom again, and went on

with her sweeping, nodding to me asif to bid me
204


stand outof the wayandlookon; which,tosaythe Breakfast


truth,] thoughtamusingenough,astherewerefive
other girls kelging! her, & their graceful figuresen-
gagedinthelesurely work wereworthgoingalong
way tosee, & theirmerry talkandlaughingasthey
sweptin quiteascientificmanner was worth going
along way toheat. But Annie presently threw me
back a word or two as she went on to the other
endofthe hall: “Guest,” shesaid, “I am glad that
youare up early, though we wouldn’tdisturb you;
for our Thames isa lovely river at half-past six
ona June morning: and as it would be a pity for
you tolose it, [am told just to give youacup of
milk anda bit of bread outside there, and put you
into the boat: for Dick & Clara are all readynow.
Wait half a minute till I have swept down this
row.” Sopresently sheletherbroom drop again,
and came and took me by the hand & led me out
on to the terrace above the river, to a little table
under the boughs, wheremy breadand milk took
the form of as dainty a breakfastasany one could
desire, & then sat bymeas Tate. And ina minute
ortwoDick and Claracametome, thelatter look-
ing most fresh and beautiful in a light sill em-
broidered gown, which to my unused cyes was
extravagantly gay and bright; while Dick was
also handsomely dressed in white flannel prettily

embroidered. Clara, raised her gown in Fextiate
as she gave me the morning greeting, and said
laughingly: “Look, guest! you see we are atleast

205


ea ae ee


Looking asfineasany of thepeople youfeltinclinedto scold
forward to last night; you see we are not going to make the
country bright day and the flowers feel ashamed of them,
pleasure _ selves, Nowscoldme!” € Quoth:““No, indeed;
thepair of you seem as if you were born out of the

! summer day itself; and I will scold you when I
scold it.” € “ Well, youknow,” said Dick, “this is

! eapecilday,..alldiedaysacc 1mean The hay-
harvest is in some ways better than corn-harvest

because of the beautiful weather; & really, unless

you had worked in the hayfield in fine weather,

you couldn’t tell what pleasant work it is. The

women look so pretty at it, too,” he said, shyly;

“so allthings considered, I think we are right to

adorn it ina simple manner.” “Do the women

i workat it in silk dresses?” said I, smiling. € Dick
} was going to answer me soberly; but Clara put
i her hand over his mouth, & said: No,no, Dick;
t not too much information for him, orl shall think
I that you are youroldkinsmanagain. Lethim find
! out for himself: he will not have long to wait.”
“Yes,” quoth Annie, “don'tmake yourdescrip-

i tion of the picture toofine, or elsehewill be disap-
i inted when the curtain is drawn. I don’t want
} fia to be dissppointed. Butnow it's ume for you
to be gone, if you are to have the best of the tide,
i andalsoof thesunny morning. Good-bye, guest.”
@She kissed me in her frank friendly way, and
almost took away from me my desire for the ex-
pedition thereby; but I had to get over that, as it
was SER Ee LS ae would hardly

201


be withouta’duelover of her ow aye: Wewent The mes
Seurishbbispaot tielanding stagejand got iatos moryof
setty boat, not too light tohold us and our ber country
Pngags comfortably, 8 handsomely ornaments misery
ed; ond just as we got in, down came Boffin and
Seepece pee nacll Ui fceactbed soared
his splendour in a due suit of working clothes,
crowned with a fantail hat, which he took off,
however; to wave os farewell with hia praveold
Seah lie courtesy, TheaDicbpasiedettias
the stream, and bent vigorously to his sculls, and
isracorrarn tioiperaite nolletece qnuibeneniteh
(Beics Garooipiee

EEPAS wrewent licouldact helppurting
fees loca pecmmtned peat ae
epic gacewas center
ofttas Isemembereditjand expect
lly thctebectin Cueweanitaier
AN estedlia the prcrlotcer ater
sesthercwioheerar favre isaac traced,
ugly without grace ofform ot face about then;
drested in wretched skimpy print gowns,& hide-
ous flapping sun-honnets, moving theirrakes in
a listless mechanical way. How often had that
marred the loveliness of the Juncday to me; how
often had Ilonged to see the hay-fields led
with men and women worthy of the sweet abun-
dance of midsummer, of its endless wealth of
Beautiflsights, and delicious sounds and scents,
Andnow, the worldhad grown old and wiser ond
Twas to sce my hope realised at last!


207


The CHAPTERXXILHAMPTONCOuRT,
London AND A PRAISER OF PAST TIMES,


River S ic
SSSA) on wewent, Dickrow-
Z OM ia aiileaty sieelecs wars


f] and Clara sitting by ny
<4 = sideadmiring his manly
i\s 5) yy’ natured face, and think-
i: DOAN ing, I fancy, of nothing
y KOE
FEN up the river, there was
VSS less difference between
bered it; for, setting aside the hideous vulgarity of
the cockney villas of the well-to-do, stockbrokers
beauty of the bough-hung banks, even this be-
inningofthecountry Thameswasalwaysbeauti


beauty & hear goed
oe) UsciAarewent hig
ey)
the Thamesof that day and Thames asIremem-
and other such, which in older time marred the }
I;andasweslipped between the lovely summer


greenery, Ialmostfeltmyyouth come back tome,
and as if I were onone of those water excursions
which used to enjoy somuch in days when Lwas
too happy to thinkthattherecould bemichamis
anyw!


‘last wecame toareach of theriver
whereontheleft hand avery pretty
little village, withsome old houses
in it, came down to the edge of the
water, overwhich wasaferryjand
beyond thesehouses theelm-beset


dows ina fringe of tall willows, while Old
Seong eS went the tow-path anda clear Buildings
space before a row is trees, eee ue Beha
ie e ornaments of a rhe:
Le ae eee pack ail ities Sack Ecresad
the end of the reach to make way fora little town
of quaint and pretty houses, some new, some old,
dominated by the long walls and sharp gables of
a great red-brick pile of building, partly of the
latest Gothic, partly of the court-style of Dutch
‘William, but so blended together by the bright
sun & beautiful surroundings including the bright
blue river, which it looked down upon, that even
idst the beautiful buildings of that newhappy
time it had a strange charmaboutit. A greatwave
of fragrance, amidst which the lime-tree blossom
was clearly to be distinguished, came down to us
from its unseen gardens, as Clara sat up in her
place,and said: @. “O Dick, dear, couldn’twestop
at Hampton Court for to-day,and take the guest
about the parka little,and show him those sweet
old buildings? Somehow, I suppose because you
have lived sonearit, you haveseldom taken meto
Hampton Court.” @ Dick rested on his oars a
little, and said: “ Well, well, Clara, you are
torday. I didn’t feel like stopping short of Shep-
perton for the night; suppose we just goandhave
ourdinnerat the Court, and goon againaboutfive
o'clock?” Well,’"she said, “so beit; but Ishould
like the guest to have spent an hour or two in the


P 209


Why parks? Park.” The Park!” said Dick; “why, the
whole Thames-side isaparkthistimeof theyear;
and for my part, [had rather lie underanelm-tree
on the borders of a wheat-field, with the bees
hummingaboutmeé the corn-crake crying from
furrow to furrow, than in any park in England,
Besides...” € “Besides,” said she, “ you want
toget on toyourdearly-loved upper Thames, and
show your prowess down the heavy swathes of
the mowing grass.” (She looked at him fondly,
and I could tell that she was seeing him in her
mind's eye showing his splendid form at its best
amidst therhymed strokesofthe scythes;andshe
looked down at her own pretty feet with a half
sigh, asthough shewere contrastingherslightwo-
man’s beauty with his man’s beauty; as women
will when they arereally in love, & are not spoiled
with conventional sentiment. (As for Dick, he
lookedat her admiringly a while,and then said at
last: Well, Clara, Tdo wish we were there? But,
hilloal we are getting back way.” And he set to
work sculling again,and in two minutes we were
all standing on the gravelly strand below the
bridge, which, as you may imagine, was no longer

old hideous iron abortion, but a handsome
piece of very solid oak framing.


ANE went intothe Courtandstraight Dinner at
GF ff into the great hall,sowell remem” Hampton
DAN vered, where there were tables Court
N spread for dinner, and everything
\\ Warranged much as in Hammer
EX 4 smith Guest-Hall. Dinner over,
we sauntered through the ancient rooms where
tthe pictures and tapestry werestill preserved,and
nothing was much changed, except that the peo-
ple whom we met there a an indefinable kind
of look of being at home and at case, which, com-
municated itself me,sothat feltthat the beauti-
fulold placewasminein thebestsenseofthe word;
and my pleasure of past days seemed to additself
tothat of to-day, &filledmy whole soul with con-


dwellings of the lesserfry of Court
flunkies, were now much used
people coming and going; for, beautiful as archi-
tecture had now become, and although the whole
face of the country had quite recovered its beauty,
there was still a sort of tradition of pleasure and
beauty which clungtothat group of buildings, and
people thought goingto Hampton Court a neces”
ary sutatler carting, oxthey dediathiecaemated
London was so grimy and miserable. We went
P2 au


A = SS 7


Landing at into someof the rooms looking into the old gar,
\ Runnymede den, and we were well received by the este in
them, whogotspeedily into talkwith us, & looked
with politely half-concealed wonderat my strange
| face. Besides these birds of passage, and a fewre,
| lardwellers in the place, we saw out in themea-
I lows near the garden, down “the Long Water,”
as it used to be called, many gay tents, with men,
women, and children round ebout them, As f
seemed, this plesurefoving people werefondaf |
tentvlife, with all its inconveniencies, which, in-
deed, they turned into pleasure also.
Fer Gn TE left this old friend by the time
appointed, and Imadesomefeeble
bi show of taking the sculls; but Dick
}] sepulsed me, notmuch tomy gricf,
I must say, as I found [had quite
Mewznd enough to do between the enj
siicavcofehe Uealittal siineiansiattylomeilae ly
| blended thoughts. €. ‘Asto Dick iewasquiterght
| to let him pull, forhe wasas strong asahorse, and
had the greatest delight in bodily exercise, what
ever it was. We really had some difficulty in get-
ting him to stop when it was getting rather more
than dusk, and the moon was brightening just as
we were off Runnymede, We landed there, and
were looking about for a place whereon to pitch
ourtents (for we had brought two with us), when
an old man came up to us, bade us good evening,
and asked if we were housed for that night; and


212


finding that we were not, bade us home to his A beautiful
Rescser Natl ag ladies wenterids hind: S-lsca garden


took his hand in a coaxing way which I noticed
she used with old men; and as we went on our
‘way, made some commonplace remark about the
beauty of the day. The old man stopped short, &
looked at her and said: “ You really like it then?”
Yes,” shesaid, looking very much astonished,
“Don't you?” €“ Well,” said he, “perhaps I do.
Idid, at any rate, when I was younger; but now
I think I should like it cooler.” @Shesaidnothing,
and went on, the night growing about as dark as
it would be; till just atthe rise of the hill we came
toa hedgewith a gate in it, which the old manun-
latched & led us into a garden, at theend of which
we could see a little house, one of whoselittlewin-
dows was already yellow with candlelight. We
couldseeevenunderthedoubtful lightofthemoon
& thelast of the westem glow that the garden was
stuffed full of flowers; and the fragrance it gave
out in the gathering coolness was so evoniiecflly
sweet, that it seemed the heart of thedelight
of the June dusk;sothatwethreestopped instinc-
tively, 8& Clara gave forth a littlesweet“O,” likea
bird beginning to sing. (“What's the matter?”
said the oldman, a little testily,and pulling at her
hand." There's no dog; or have you trodden ona
thorn & hurtyourfoot!” €No,no, neighbour,”
shesaid; “buthow sweet, howsweetstist “Of
courseitis,” said he, “but do you care somuch for
213


oa > ae


A poem that?” @She laughed out musically, and we fol.
girl


lowed suit in our gruffer voices;and thenshesaid,
“ Ofcourse Ido, neighbour;don’tyou 2" Well,
Idon’tknow,”quot theold fellow; thenheadded,
asifsomewhatashamed ofhimself:“ Besides, you
knowwhenthewatersareoutandall Runnymede
is flooded, it'snoneso pleasant.” (I should like
it,” quoth Dick.“ What jolly sail one would get
about hereon thefloodsonabright frosty January
morning!” € “Would youlike it?” said our host.
“Well, | won't arguewith you, neighbour;itisn’t
worth while, Come in and have some supper.”
See ax 1B went up a paved path between
the roses,and straightineoa pretty
H room, panelled and carved, and as
] clean as anew pin; but the chief
CN omament of which was a young ”
ywSZn woman, light haired & greyreyed,
but with her face and hands and bare feet tanned
quite brown with the sun. Though she was very
lightlyclad, that was clearly from choice, not from.
overty, though thesewere thefirst cottage-dwel-
ee Thad come across; for her gown was of silk,
& on her wrists were hrarelets that seemed tome
of value, She was lying on a sheep-skin neat the
window, but jumped up as soon as we entered,
andwhen she saw the guests behind the old man,
sheclappedherhandsand ried out with pleasure,
dnd when she gotus into the middle of theoom
fairly danced round us in delight of our company.
214


“What?” said the old man, “you are pleased, Only perch
are yous Ellen?” The gitl danced up to him and

threw her arms round him, and said: “Yes Lam,

andso ought you to be grandfather.” € “Well,

well, Iam,” said he, “as much as I can bepleased. |
Guests, please be seated.” @ This seemed rather {
strange tous; stranger,I suspect,tomy friendsthan 1
tome; but Dick took the opportunity of both the |
host & his grand-daughter being out of the room 1
to say to me, softly: “A grumbler: thereareafew |
of them still. Once upon a time, I am told, they

were quite a nuisance.” @The old man came in i
as he spoke and sat down beside us with a sigh,

which, indeed, seemed fetched up as if he wanted

us to take notice of it; but just then the girl came

inwith hevictuals,andthecarle missed hismark,

whatbetween our hungergenerallyandthat I was
pretty busy watchingthe grand-daughter moving

about as beautiful as a picture. Everything to

eat and drink, though it was somewhat different

towhat wehad had in London, was better than

good, butthe old man eyed rather sulkily the chief

dishonthetable, onwhichlayaleash of fineperch,

and said: € “H'm, perch! 1am sorry wecan't do

better for you, guests. The time was when we

might have had a good piece of salmon up from

London foryou; butthetimeshavegrown mean &

petty.” €“Yes, but you might have had it now,”

saidthe girl, giggling, “if youhad knownthatth

werecoming.” “It's our fault for notbringingit

215


The


worsening ly, “Butif
of books


with 1s neighbours,’said Dick, good humoured,
¢ times have: petty, atany rate

e perch haven't; that fellow in the middlethere
must have weighed a good two pounds when he
was showinghisdarkstripes & red finstothe mine
nowsyonder. And asto the salmon, why, neigh.
bour, my friend here, who comes from the out-
lands, was quite surprised yesterday moming
when I told him we had plenty of salmonatHam-
mersmith. Iam sure I have heacd nothing of the
times worsening.” He lookeda little uncomfor-
table. And the old man, turning to me, said very
courteously: € “Well, sir, Iam happy to see a
man from overthe water; but] really must appeal
to you to say whether on the whole you are not
better off in your country; where I suppose, from
whatour guest says, youare brisker &more alive,
because you have not wholly got rid of competi
tion. You see, I have read not a few books of the
past days,and certainly they aremuch more alive
than those which are written now; & good sound
unlimited competition was the condition under
whichthey werewritten,... ifwedidn'tknowthat
fromthe record of history, we should knowit from.
the books themselves. There is a spirit of adven-
turein them, & signs of a capacity toextract good
out of evil which our literature quite lacks now:
andIcannothelp thinking that our moralistsand
historians exaggerate hugely the unhappiness of
the past days, in which such splendid works of

216


imagination & intellect were produced.” (Clara “ The good
listened to him with restless eyes, as if she were old days”
excited and pleased; Dick knitted his brow and

looked stillmore uncomfortable, butsaid nothing.

Indeed, the old man gradually, as he warmed to

his subject, dropped hissneering manner, & both

spoke & oneal very seriously. But the girl broke

out before I could deliver myself of the answer I


was framing:
p IOOKS, books! always books,

od erandfather! When will you un-

GH derstandthatafterallitisthe world
VG} we live in which interests us; the
BS &j world of which we area part, and
BSN which wecanneverlovetoomuch?
Look!” she said, throwing open the casement
wider and showing us the white light sparkling
between theblackshadowsof the moonlit garden,
through which ran a little shiver of the summer
night-wind, “look! these are our books in these
days!...and these,” she said, stepping lightly up
to the two lovers & laying a hand on eachof their
shoulders; ‘and the guest there, with his over-sea
Imnowledgeand experience; .. yesand even you,
grandfather” (a smile ran over her face as she
spoke), “withall your grumbling & wishing your-
telfbackapain inthe good old days,...in which as
farasIcan make out,a harmless and lazy oldman
like you would either have pretty nearly starved,
or have had to pay soldiers and peopletotake the


217


———


Books for folk’s victuals and clothes and houses away from


the un-
happy


them by force, Yes, these are our books; & if we
want more,canwe notfind worktodointhe beau.
tiful buildings thatweraiseupall overthe country
(and I know there was nothing like them in past
times), wherein a man can put forth whatever is
in him, and make his hands set forth his mind
and his soul?” She paused little, and for my


" part could nothelp staringather, & thinking that


if she were a book, the pictures in it were most
lovely. The colour mantled in her delicate sun¢
burnt cheeks; her grey eyes, light amidst the tan
of her face, kindly looked on us all as she spoke,
She paused, & said again: @ “As for your books,
Hieymwere wrell enoughfsetined whee intelligent
people had but little else in which they could take
pleasure, and when they must needs supplement
the sordid miseries of their own levee imagi-
nationsof the lives ofotherpeople. But say flatly
that in spite ofall their cleverness andvigour,and
capacity for story-telling, thereissomethingloath-
some about them. Some of them, indeed,dohere
and there show some feeling for those whom the
history-hoolescall ‘ pane’ & ofthe misery af whose
lives we have some inkling; but presently they
iveitup, & towards the end of the story we must
3 contented to see the hero and heroine living
happily inanisland of blissonother people’stou
bles; and that after a long series of sham troubles
(ormostlysham) of theirownmaking, illustrated
a8


|


by dreary introspective nonsense about theirfeel- Regrets for
ings and aspirations, and all the rest of it; while competition
the world must even then have gone on its way,
and dug and sewed and baked and built and car-
tered round about these useless .,. animals.”
“There!” saidthe old man, revertingtohisdry
sulky manner again. “There's eloquence! I sup.
seyoulikeit?”“ Yes,” said I, very emphatically.
“Well,” said he,““now the storm of eloquence has
lulled for a little, suppose you answer my ques-
tion?... that is, if you like, you know,” quoth
he, with a sudden access of courtesy. € “What
question?” said I. For] must confess that Ellen's
strange and almost wild beauty had putit out of |
myhead. Said he: Firstof all (excusemy cate, |
chising), is there competition in life, after the old
kind, in the country whence you come?” “Yes,”
said I, “itis the rule there.” AndI wondered as I
spoke whatfresh complications I should getintoas
aresul ofthis answer“ Question two,’ said the
carle: “ Areyounotonthewholemuch freer, more
energetic ... in a word, healthier & happier ...for
it?” Ismiled.“Youwouldn’ttalksoifyouhadany
idea of ourlife. Tomeyouseem hereas ifyouwere
gin heaven compared with us of the country
fromwhichI came.” “Heaven?” said he: “youlike
heaven,doyou?” “Yes,” said I. .snappishly, Iam
afraid ; for 1 was beginning rathertoresenthis for
mula. € “Well, Iam far from sure that I do,”
quoth he.““I thinkonemaydo morewithone’slife
219


ee


“Ladies” than sitting ona damp cloud & singinghymns,”
| regretted CT was rather nettled by this inconsequence, wad
! said: “Well, neighbour, to be short, and without

using metaphors,in thelandwhence lcome,where

i the competition which produced those literary
| works which youadmireso much is sell the rule,
} most people are thoroughly unhappy ;here, tome
1 at least, most people seem thoroughly happy.”
@“ Nooffence, guest;no offence,” said he “but

let me ask you;youlike that, do you?” € His for

mula, put with such obstinate persistence, made

I us all laugh heartily; and even theold man joined
| in the laughter on the sly. However, hewas byno
| means beaten, and said presently: “From all 1
! can hear, I should judge that a young woman so
i beautiful as my dear Elfen yonder would have
| been a lady, as they called it in the old time, and
| Prnldctthevchad fowteaedfewrsgantall ceeke
| does now. What do yousay to that, eh?” @ Here
Clara, whohad been net much silent hither,

i) struck in, and said: “Well, really, L don't think
that youwouldhave mended matters, orthat they

want mending. Don’t you see that she is dressed
deliciously for this beautiful weather? And as for
| the sun-burning of your hayfields, why, Thopeto
ick up some of that formyself when we getalitele

Rese mike pence don’tneedalittlesun
| gamy pasty white skin!” €{And she stripped up
} the sleeve from her arm and laid it beside Ellen's
who was now sitting next her. To say the truth,

220


ilibaihas arnidsiig’s mac to'cee Cluma)patling Happy rest
herself forward as 2 town-bred fine lady, for she
wasas well-knitandclean-skinned a girl asmight
be met with anywhere at the best. Dick stroked
Elabecatifd arralxathecabylyfandipdlled deed
itiecvcarcn while ietiahel cenincast
and the old man said laughingly: “Well, I sup,
seyou do like that; don’t you?” € Ellen kissed
peter ficadsand weallsitaileattoraltde til
she broke out into a sweet shrill song, and heldus
llestiaaced With thc-wiowdex of ficnicieas voice:
fod the old grumblcr nxt looking at herlavingly.
The othe oung people sing alin due time
and then Ellen showed us to our beds in small
cottage chambers, fragrant and clean as the ideal
isle old pastoral porisj and thepleasuse of tic
evening quite extinguished my fer of at night
Buslshould saleup in the old miserahle word
aenrost pleasures, and hopes that were half


221


Asummer CHAPTERXXIII.ANEARLY MORN.


ING AT RUNNYMEDE.


ESS SAHOUGH there were
no rough noisestowake
me, I could not lie long
p)) abed the next morning,
where theworldseemed


=wr/Y
we!
Ze

stirring, since all was trim and in its place in the
Tittle parlour, and the table laid for the morning
meal. Nobody was afoot in the house as then,
however, so I went out a-doors, and after a turn
er two found the superabundant yarden, [want
dered down over the meadow to the river-side,
wherelay our boat looking quite familiar¢ friend.
Iytome lwalled up stream alittle, watchingthe
ght mist curling up from the river till the sun
gained power to draw itall away; saw the bleale
Speckling the water under the willow boughs,
viene the tiny flies they fed on were falling in
myriads; heard the great chubsplashing hereand
there atsome belated moth or other, and felt ale
most backe again in my boyhood. Then I went
back again tothe boat, and loitered there a minute
or two, and then walked slowly up the meadow
towards the little house. I noted now that there


222


were four more houses of about the same size on Gaily clad
the slope away from the river. The meadow in haymalers
Sictsl was poapenmto vu piforks yates
of flake-hurdles ran up the slope not far from me
oneach side, and inthe field soparted off from ours
on thelefe they were making hay busily by now,
inthesimple fashion ofthedays when I wasaboy,
My feet turned thatway instinctively,as I wanted |
to see how haymakers looked in these new and
better times, & also Irather expected to see Elfen
there. Icametothe hurdles and stood looking over
into the hayfeld and was close tothe end ofthe
long line of haymakers who were spreading the
low ridges todry off the night dew. The majority
of these were young women clad much like Ellen
last night, though not mostly in silk, but in light
woollenmostly gailyembroidered; the men being
all clad in white flannel embroidered in brightcol-
ours. The meadow looked like a gigantic tulip-
bed because of them. All hands were working de-
liberately but welland steadily, though they were
as noisy with merry tall as @ grove of autumn
starlings. Halfadozen of them men andwomen,
came upto me and shook hands, gaveme the sele
| of the morning, and asked » few questions as to
Whence and whither, and wishing me good iucle,
went back to theirwork Elfen to my disappoint,
Brent wasnot amongstthem but preset Lene


alightfigurecomeoutofthe hayfield higher upthe
len,


slope, & make for our house ;and that was
223


A fairy and holding a basket in her hand. But before she had


er home


come to the garden gate, out came Dick & Clara,
who, aftera minute's pause, eame down to mecr
me, leaving Ellen in the garden; then we three
went down to the boat, talking mere morning
pratile. We stayed there a litle, Dick arranging
some of the matters in her, for we had only takes
up tothe housesuch thingsas wethoughe thedew
mightdamage; & then wewent toward the house
agin sbut when we eante-ntar the gucdeny Dick
stopped us by layingahand on my «mand said:
“Just loolamoment.’C looked, andoverthe
low edge saw Ellen, shading hereyes against the
sunasshelookedtowardthehayfield,a light wind
stiringin hertawnyhair her eyesike lightjowels
amidst her sunburnt face, which locked i if the
warmth ofthe sun wereyetinit. € Look, guest,”
said Dick; “doesn't it all look like one cf those
very stories out of Grimm thatwewere talking a>
boutup ia Bloomsbury? Heearewetwoloea
wandering about the world,and we have come to
a nity gasden; and thers is the-vecy-fairy hepscle
amidst of it; | wonder what she wall do for us.”
Said Clara demurely, but not stiflly:'Is she a
good fairy, Dick?” @-“O yes)” said he; “and ace
Cording to the card,she would do better, ft were
tee sage ociieeelinpenitone yumi
friend of last night.” € We laughed at this; and
said, “T hope yeu see that you haveleftme out of
the tale.” € “Wel,” said he, “that's ue, You
ee


had better consider that you have got the cap of They:still
darkness, and are seeing everything, yourself in. like i
visible.” (That touched me on my weak side of
not feeling sure of my position in this beautiful
new country; 50, in order not to make matters
worse, I held my tongue, and we all went intothe
arden and up to the house together. I noticed by
ShewaythatClaramust really eatherhavefele the
contrast between herself as a town madam & this
jeceofthesummercountrythatwealladmiredso,
Forshchadratherdressedaher Bllenthatmorning
asto thinness & scantiness, & went barefoot also,
except for light sandals.


ests,


ry search into the nakedness of the


«


avoi ing complications than a downrightlie;so!
said: “T have been in this country before, and |
q #25)


- ai Re iS


Ofpast _havebeen onthe Thames in those days.”€“O,"
lories ... or said the old man, eagerly, “so you have been in
‘isgraces this country before. Now really, don’t you find it

apart from all theory, you know) mereka

for the worse?” €No, notat all,” said I;““Tfind
it much changed for the better.” “Ah,” quoth
he, I fear that youhave been prejudiced bysome
theory or another, However, of course the time
when youwerehere before musthave been sonear
our own days that the deterioration might not be
very great:as then we were, of course, still living
under the same customs as we are now. 1 was
thinking of earlierdays than that.” “In short,”
said Clara, “you have theories about the change
which has taken place.” “I have facts as well,”
saidhe.“Loolchere! from this hill youcan seejust
fourlittle houses, including thisone. Well, know
for certain that in old times, even in the summer,
when the leaves were thickest, you could see from.
the same place six quite big and fine houses; and
higher up the water, garden joined garden right
up to ‘Windsor; and there were big houses in all

thegardens. Ah! Englandwasanimportantplace ,

Gitth oaetdayald Qi cons getting octets and said

“What you mean is that youde-cockneyised the

place, and sent the damned flunkies packing, and

thateverybody-an live comfortably and happily,

and not a few damned thieves only, who were

centres of vulgarity and corruption whereverthey

were and who,asto this ibvlyaves destroyedits
2a


beauty morally, & had almostdestroyed it physi- Courtesy
ae reat yrrece itoninnt of ok CocrCamaaiae
Ie) i crice alte thts outbistitiwhich fonthe life obstinacy
of me I could not help, remembering how I had
suffered from cockneyism and its cause on those
Semewaters of old.time. But it last the oldman
said, quitecoolly: "My dearguest, [really don’t
inowwhat you mean by eithercockneys, or flun-
kies, or thieves, or esuneds a hoy only f a few
le could live happily and comfortal ina
Eee ciesappaAll cas socaiditneg acted
Rngeyrend [eccwith meaoif you like we'wil
change the subject.” C1 thought this kind and
hospitablein him, consideringhis obstinacy about
his theory; & hastened tosay that I didnotmean
ot Saree
Peaches tin scctanran ovesiabetandietly:
Ellen brokeins @£4 Grandfather; Gutiguest thre’
Cpa easinctlseoayithiacealiprstiat ie hkatlhis
tnd stapes oe Aiea ys or
Scetey- welche sbieq will darth fe beta nforyas
you know, I have been taught these things by
people who...” “Yes,” said the old man, “by
thesageof. Bloomsbury, andothers.” “O,” said
Dick, “s0:you'kaow any.old’ kinsman; Elam
mond?” €" Yes,” saidshe, “andotherpeopletoo,
as my grandfather says, and they have taught me
things: and this is the upshot of it. We live ina
lite house now, not because we have nothin
grander to dothan working in the fields, but be.
q2 aay


between a
count
man’s life
then & now


‘The contrast cause we please; for, if we liked, we could go and


liveinabighouseamongstpleasantcompanions.”
Grumbledtheoldman:"Just so! Asif Iwould
live amongst those conceited fellows; all of them
looking down upon me!”

E smiled on him kindly, but
went onas if he had not spoken:
Y ‘‘In the past times, when those

big houses of which grandfather
EY speaks were so plenty, we must
acd havelivedin a cottage whetherwe
had liked it or not;and the said cottage insteadof
havingin it everything we want, would have been
bare and empty. Weshould nothave got enough
toeat;ourclotheswould have beenugly tolookat,
dirty and frowsy. You, grandfather, have done no
hard work for years now, but wander about and
read your books and have nothing to worry yous
and as for me, I work hard when Fike it, because
Tlike it, and think it does me good, and knits up
my muscles, and makesme prettier tolookat, and
healthier & happier. But in those past days, you,
grandfather, would have had to work hard after
you were old; and would have beenalways afraid
of having to be shut up in a kind of prison along
with other old men, half-starved and without a-
musement. And as forme, I am twenty yearsold.
In those days my middle age would bebeginning
now, and in a few years Ishould be pinched, thin,
and haggard, beset with troubles and miseries,so

228


that no one could have guessed that I was oncea Specdily dies
beautiful girl. Is this what you have had in your beauty inthe
mind, guest?” said she, the tears in her eyes at poverty of
thouphtof the pastmiserts of people like herself civilization


Yes,” said I, much moved; “that and more.
Often, in my country I have seen that wretched
change you have spoken of, from the fresh hand-
some country lass tothe poor draggle-tailedcoun-
trywoman,” (The old man sat silent for alittle,
butpresently recovered himself & took comfort in
hisold phrase of: “Well, you like it so, do you?”
CYes,"saidEllen, “ Hovelife betterthan death.”
©“, you do, do you?” said he, “Well, for my
Tlike reading a good old book with plenty of
nin lke “Thackeray's “Vanity: Pa? Why
don't you write books like that now? Ask that
quetion of your Bloomsbury sage.” € Secin
ick’s cheeks reddening alittle at this sally, ani
noting thatsilence followed, [thought had better
do something. So I said: “I am only the guest,
friends; but I know you want to show me your
(See ca eS
}e moving presently, as itis certainly going to
ahetdayf goers


229


CHAPTER XXIV. UP THE THAMEs;
THE SECOND DAY.


BSAHEY were not slow to
ANY take my hint; & indeed,
jas to the mere time of

day, it was best for us

to be off, as it was past


. (down t0 our boat; Ellen
ie SZ thoughtfuland abstract’
ed; the old man very kind and courteous, as if to
makeup for hiscrabbedness of opinion. Clarawas
cheerful & natural, buta little sibs CoG cht;
and sheat least was not sorry tobe gone, ando
looked shyly and timidly at Ellen and herstrange
wild beauty. So we got into theboat, Dick saying
as he took his place, “ Well, it is a fine day!”"and
the old man answering“ What! you like that, do
you?” oncemore;and presently Dickwas sending
the bows swiftly through the slow weed-check:
stream. I turned roundas we got intomid-stream,
andwaving my hand to our hosts, saw Ellen lesue
ing on the old man’s shoulder, and caressing his
healthy apple-red cheek, and quite a keen pang
smoteme as I thoughthow I shouldneverseethe
beautiful girlagain. Presently | insisted on takin;
thesculle,and {rowed a good deal thatday ;whi


nodoubt accounts forthe fact that we got very late
230


tothe place which Dick had aimed at, Clara was Once
particularly affectionate to Dick, as I noticed from school
Ercrowingthwart;butasfor him, hewasasfrank
Iykindandmerryas everjand I was gladto seeit,
ee aeshivee creeenentenk inne hiaveeiken |
herearesses checsilly and without embarrass |
ment if he had been at allentangled by the fairy

ghi’s abodes |
NEED saylittleabout the lovely
reaches of the riveshere, [duly:no-
fed that absence of cockney vil
PA PAS which the old man had lamented;
(G2) PAY and I saw with pleasure that my
—_ 8 oldenemiesthe “Gothic” cast-iron
bridges had been seplaced by handsome coal and
fone ones] Alac:the banks of the fisestthatwe
pamed through had lost theircourly game-keep-
eth trimnessjand.were aa wild ahd beautiful |
need be, though the trees were clearly wellseen to.
Ibthougheit best/an orden torgce the mostadiect
information, to play the innocent about Eiton &
Windsor; but Dice volunteered his knowledge
s2 me as welay in Datchetfock about the frst
Quoth he: “Up yonderare some beautiful old
buildings, which were built for u great vollege or j
teaching-place by one of the medieval kings...
Edward the Sixth, Ithink” (Ismiledtomyselfat
hisrather natural blunder).““ Hemeantpoor pea:
ple'ssonstobetaught there what knowledge-wae
goinginhisdays;but it wasamatterof cousetheat


of our last nig


i DE:


231


‘Thema boy- in the times of which you seem to know so much


farm now a theyspoilt whatever good there was in the found.
college


er's intentions. My old kinsman says that th
treated them ina very simple way,and instead of
teachingpoormen’ssonstoknowsomething,they
taught rich men’s sonsto know nothing. Itseems
fromwhathesaysthat it was aplace for the ‘aris.
tocracy’ (if you know what that word means; 1
have been told its meaning) toget rid of the com.
pany of their male children for a great part of the
year. I daresay old Hammond would give you
plenty ofinformation indetail aboutit."“ What
is it used for now?” said I.“ Well,” said he, “the
buildings were a good deal spoilt by the last few
generations of aristocrats, who seemtohave had a
great hatred against beautiful old buildings, and
indeed all recordsof past history; butitisstillade-
lightful place. Ofcourse, we cannot use it quite as
thefounder intended, since our ideas about teach-
ing young people aresochanged from the ideas of
his time; so itis used now asa dwelling for people
engaged in learning; and folk from round about
come et taught things thatthey want to ear;
& there isa greatlibrary thereofthe bestbooks.So
that don’t think that the old dead kingwould be
much hurt if he were to come to life and see what
we are doing there.” € Well,” said Clara, laugh-
ing, “I think he would missthe boys.” “ Not al-
ways, my dear,” said Dick, “for there are often
plenty of boys there, who come to get taught; &
232


also,” said he, smiling, ‘‘to learn boating &swim- A Medix-
jning. [wish we could stop there: but perhapswe val Palace
fadbetterdothatcomingdownthewater.”@ The turned
Jock-gates opened as he spoke, and out we went, dwelling
and on. And as for Windsor, he said nothing till house


Tlayonmy oars (forl wasscullingthen) in Clewer
reach, & looking up, said:“ ‘Whatisall that build-
ingup there?” Saidhe: “There, Ithought | would
wait till you asked, yourself. That is Windsor
Castle: that also I thought I would keep for you
till we come down the water. Itlooks fine from
here,doesn’tit? Buta greatdeal of ithasbeen built
orskinned in the time ofthe Degradation,and we
wouldn’t pull the buildingsdown, sincethey were
there; justaswith the buildings of the Dung Mar-
ket. You know, of course, thatitwas thepalace of
our old medieval kings, and was used lateronfor
the same purpose by the parliamentary commer,
cial sham-kings, as my old kinsman calls them.”
“Yes,” said I, “I know all that. Whatisit used
for now?” € “A great many people live there,”
said he, “as, with all drawbacks, it is a pleasant
place; thereis also a well-arranged store of anti-
quities ofvarious kinds that have seemed worth
Keeping ..1 museum, it would have been called
inthe times youunderstandsowell.” CIdrewmy.
scullsthroughthe wateratthatlastword, & pulled
as if were fleeing from those times w!
derstood sowell; and we were soon going up the
oncesorely be-cockneyed reachesofthe riverabout


233


Haymak- eet os which now looked as pleasantand


ing again


able as the up-river reaches.


dispute. A light wind blew from the west; the
little clouds that had arisen at about our break-
fast time had seemed to get higher and higher in
the heavens; and in spite of the burning sun we
no more longed for rain than we feared it, Burn-
ing as the sun was, there was a fresh feeling in
the air that almost setus a-longing for the rest of
the hot afternoon, and the stretch of blossoming
wheat seen from the shadow of the boughs. No
one unburdened with very heavy anxieties could
have felt otherwise than happy that morning:
and it must be said that whateveranxictiesmight
lie beneath the surface of things, we didn’t seem
to come across any of them. € We passed by se-
veral fields where haymaking ‘was going on, but
Dick, aud especially Clara, were so jealous ofour
up-river festival that they would not allow me
to have much to say to them. I could only notice
thatthepeople inthe fields looked strong & hand-
some, both men and women, and thatso far from
there being any appearance of sordidness about
their attire, they seemed to be dressed specially
234


casion,.» lightly of course, but gailyand Force-

Lo Berl ca ceecays Dares
wellas yesterday, we had,as you may think, met
aid passed and been passed by many craft of one
fund and another. The most part of these were
being rowed like ourselves, or were sailing, in the
sort of way that sailingis managed on the upper
seaches of the river; but every now and then we
Etincon barges, laden with hay or other country

roduce, or carrying bricks, lime, timber, and the
[itt and these were going on their way without
any means of propulsion visible to me ... just a
manat the tiller, with oftenafriend or two laugh-
ing and talking with him. Dick, seeing on one oc-
casion this day, that I was looking rather hard on
oncofthese,said: “ Thatis one ofourforce-barges;
it is quite aseasy towork vehicles by force by water
asbyland.” (.L understood pretsywell that these
“force vehicles” had taken the place of our old
baoparsteattyite ibn Weck reeatest
ask any questions about them, as I knew well e+
nough both that I should never be able to under-
standhowthey were worked, & that in attempting
todo so I should betray myself, or get into some
complication impossible to explain; so Imerely
said: “Yes, of course, I understand.”


235


Bisham:
few folks at
home


AE went ashore at Bisham, where
f the remainsof the old Abbey and
Wthe Elizabethan house that had
{ been addedto them yetremained,
A‘, none the worse for many years of
LeZad careful & appreciative habitation,
Thefolloftheplace, however, were mostly inthe
fields that day, both men and women; so we met
onlytwooldmen there, & a youngerone whohad
stayed athome to get onwith someliterary worl,
which I imagine weconsiderably interrupted, Yer
Talso think that the hard-working man who re-
ceived us was not very sorry for the interruption.
Anyhow, he kept on pressing usto stay over and
overagain, till at last we did not get away till the
ecaillalthucbentagsbloweved; thie mareaed liste
tous;thenights werelight, forthemoon wasshin-
ing in her third Fereu and it wasall one to Dick
whether he sculled or sat quiet in the boat ; sowe
piesa aia erexeeiees iereveningean stone
brightontheremainsof theold buildingsat Med-
menham; close beside which arose an irregular
pee eebietldirigst which Dickitold s'was-a very
Bledeantshotserar there were pleaty. of hodses
visible on the wide meadows opposite, under the
hill; for, as it seemsthat the beauye Hurley had
compelled people to build& live therea good deal.
Thesun very low down showed us Henley litte
altered in outward aspect from what I remember-
edicActualdaylighthdledusaswepasscithcough
236


the lovely reaches of WargraveandShiplake;but Moonlit
the moon rose behind us presently. I should like night
fo have seen with my eyes what success the new
orderof thingshadhadin getting rid of the spraw- |
fing mess with which commercialism had littered
the banks ofthe wide stream about Reading and
Caversham: certainly everything smelt 00 de |
iciously in the early night for there to be any of
the old careless sordidness of so-called manufac-
turand inanswer to myauestonastowhat sort
ofa place Reading was, Dick answered: (“O,a
nicetown enough in its way; mostly rebuiltwithin
the last hundred yearsyand thereare a good many
houses, as you can see by the lights just downun-
der the hills yonder. In fact, itis one of the most
wulousplaceson the Thames round abouthere.
ep up your spirits, guest! we are close to our
journey send for thenight. loughttoaskyourpar-
don for not stopping at onc of the houseshere or
Righerup;buta rend, whotslivinginavery ples-
sant house in the Maple-Durham meads, pastice
ularly wanted me astGiewt comeand see him
on our way up the Thames; and I thought you
wouldn’t mind this bit of night travelling,” He
need not have adjused me to keep up my spirits,
which wereashighaspossible;thoughthestrange:
ness and excitement of the happy and quiet fife
Siieeee Seas


a little wearing off, yet a deep content, asdifferent
as possible from languid acquiesence, was taking


237 j


{ Se hae ps


The Maple its Place and I was, as it were, really new-born,

i Durham  @ Welanded presently just where I remembered

eads _therivermakingan elbowtothenorth towardsthe

! ancient house of the Blunts; with the wide mea.

dows spreading on theright-hand side,andon the

lefe the long line of beautiful old trees overhang,

ingthe water. As we got out of the boat, I said to

Dick: € “Is it the old house we are going to?”

| “No,” he said, “though that is standingstillin

green old age, and is aa inhabited. I see, by the

way, that you know your Thames well. But my

friend Walter Allen, who asked me to stop here,

} livesin a house, not very big, which hasbeen built

here lately, because these meadows are so much

liked, especially insummer, that there wasgetting

to be rathertoomuch, of tenting on the open field;

so the parishes here about, who rather objected to

that, built three houses between thisand Cavers-

ham, & quitealarge oneat Basildon, alittle higher

up. Look, yonder are the lights of Walter Allen’s
house!”


SAO we walked over the grass of the
fAmeadows under a flood of moon-

W light, and soon came to the house,
gehich was lowe and builtround 3
EA quadrangle bigenough to getplen-
SAG of sunshinein it, Walter Allen,


Dick's friend, was leaning against the jambof the

doorway waiting for us, and tool us into the

\ hall without overplus of words. There were not
228


many people in it, as some of the dwellers there Sorrow in 2
pees at the haymaking in the neighbour’ dwelling
hood, & some,as Walter told us, were wandering
about the meadow enjoying the beautiful moon-
litnight. Dick's friend looked tobe a man of about
forty ; tall, black-haired, very kind-looking and
thoughtful; but rather to my surprise there was a
shade of melancholy on his face, and he seemed a
littleabstracted andinattentivetoourchat,in spite
of obvious efforts tolisten.€ Dicklooked on him
from time to time, and seemed troubled ; & at last
hesaid: “I say, old fellow, if there isanything the
matter which we didn’t know of when you wrote
tome, don’t you think you had better tell us a+
boutitatonce; orelseweshallthink wehave come
here at an unlucky time, & are not quite wanted.”
@Walterturnedred, and seemed to havesomedif-
ficulty in restraining histears, butsaidat last:““OF
course everybody hereis very gladtoseeyou, Dick,
and your friends; but it is true that we are not at
ourbest, inspite of the fineweather & the glorious
hapeoe: chavehadadeath here.Said Dick:
“Well, you should get over that, neighbour: such
things must be.” €“ Yes,” Walter said, “but this
was a death by violence, andit seems likely tolead
toatleastonemore;and somehow it makes usfeel
rather shy of one another;& to say thetruth, that
is onereasonwhythereare sofewof us presentto-
night.”€Tellus the story, Walter,” said Dick,


“«perhapstelling itwill help you toshake off yout
sadness.”


239


BAID Walter: “ Well, I will; and]
4 will make it short enough, though
W) I daresay it might be spun out into
72/5) 2 long one, asused to be done with
IS} SQU7| such subjects in the old novels,
ISSEY There is avery charming girl here
whom we alike, and whom some of us do more
than like; and she very naturally liked one of us
better than anybody else, And another of us ¢
won't name him) gotfairly bitten with love
ness, and used to goabout making himself as un-
pleasant as he could; not of malice prepense, of
course;so thatthe girl, wholiked him wellenough
at first, though shedidn’t lovehim, began fairly to
dislike him. Of course, thoseof us who knew him
best, myself amongstothers, advised him to go a
way, as hewas making matters worse & worse for
himself every day. Well, he wouldn’ttakeourad-
vice (that also, I suppose, was a matter of course),
sowehad totell him that he must go, or the in-
evitable sending to Coventry would follow; forhis
individual trouble had so overmastered him that
we felt that we must go if he did not. @ He took
that better than we expected, when something or
other, an interview with the girl, I think, & some
hot words with the successfidlover followingdose
uponit, threw him quite off his balance; & hegot
hold of an axe and fell upon his rival when there
wasnooneby; &,in thestruggle that followed,the
man attacked hit him an unlucky blowandkilled


240


him, And now the slayer in his turn is so upset, Get over it

pir oe fle to kell hmself; and if he does, the speedily

girlwill do as much, I fear. And all this we could

So more help than the earthquake of the year be-

forelast,” €"Ieis very unhappy,” said Dick; “but

since themanisdeadand cannot be brought tolife |

again, and since the slayerhad no malice in him, |

Teannot for thelifeof mesce why he shouldn't get |

over it before long. Besides, it was the right man

that was killed and not the wrong. Why should

aman brood over a mere accident for ever? And

the girl?” €“As to her,” said Walter, “the whole

thing seems to haveinspired her with terrorrather

than grief. What you say about the man is true,

orit should be; but then, you see, the excitement

and jealousy that was the prelude to this tragedy

hadmade an evil and feverish element round a-

bout him, from which hedoes not seem tobe able

to escape. However, we have advised him to go a-

way, in fact, to cross the seas; but he is in such a

state that I do not think hecan go unlesssomeone

takes him, and I thinke it will fall to my lot to do

50; which is scarcely a cheerfuloutlook forme?

COyouwillfind a certain kind of interestin it,”

said Dick,“ Andofcourse he mustlouk upon the 4

affair from a reasonable point of view sooner or |

later.” Well, at any rate,” quoth Walter,“now

that] havecased mymindbymalking you uncom,

fortable, let us havean end of the subject for the

present. Are you going to take your guest to Ox. |
r


241 |


Remorse
unrelieved
by punish-
ment


fordi” €“ Why, of course we must passthrough
it,” said Dick, smiling, “as we are going into the
upper waters: but thought thatwe woul In’tstop
these or we shall ic bested asta che bo aking
up our way.So Oxfordand my learned lectureon
it, all got at second-hand from my old kinsman,
must wait till wecomedown the water a fortnight
hence.” (1 listened to this story with much sur-
prise, and couldnothelpwonderingatfirstthatthe
man who had slain the other had not been putin
custody till it could be proved that he killed his
rival in self-defence only. However, the more I
thought of it, the plainer it grew to me that noa-
mount of examination of witnesses, whohadwit-
nessed nothing but the ill-blood between the two
rivals, would have done ays toclear up the
case. I could not help thinking, also, that the re-
morse of this homicide gave point to what old
Hammondhadsaidto me aboutthewayin which
thisstrangepeopledealt with what] had been used
to hear called crimes. Truly, the remorse was ex-
aggerated; but it was quite clear that the slayer
took the wholeconsequencesof the act upon him,
self, and did not expect society to whitewash him
by punishing him. I had no fear any longer that
“thesacredness ofhuman life” was likelytosuffer
amongst my friends from the absence of gallows
and prison,


242


APTER XXV.THETHIRDDAY  Asolitary
Sn THE THAMES.
IS we went down to the


lboatnextmorning, Wal-
ter could not quite keep

loff the subject of last
night, though he was
|more hopeful than he

had beenthen, &seemed
ito think that if the un-
lucky homicidecouldnot
be got to go over-sea, he
might at any rate go and live somewhere in the
neighbourhood pretty much by himself; at any
rate, that was reat himself had proposed. To
Dick, and I must say to me also, this seemed a
strange remedy; and Dick said as much. Quoth
he: “@ Friend Walter, don’t set the man brood-
ing on the tragedy by letting him live alone. That
will only strengthen his idea that he has commit-
tedacrime,and you will have him killing himself
in good earnest.” (Said Clara: “Idon’t know. If
I may say what I think of it, it is that he had bet’
ter have his fill of gloom now, and, sotosay, wake
up presently to sechow litle need there has been
for it; and then hewill livehappily afterwards, As
for his killing himself, you need not be afraid of
that;for,fromall youtell me,heisreally very much
in love withthe woman; & tospeak plainly, until
his love is satisfied, he will not only stick to life


2 a


Seeking a as tightly as he can, but will also make the most
hermitage ofeveryeventofhislife...will, sotosay, hughim-
selfup infty and think that thisistheveal explay
faation of his taking the whole maaties with such
an excess of tragedy.” € Walter looked thought
ful and said: “ Well, you may be sight; and per?
haps we should have treated it all more lightly:
Bilt youistc) guest” (Sacningtonte), "sachet
happen 3 seldom that when they do hapeden
cannot help Being sch falestiat waives ee (i
fest, we are all inclined to excuse our poor fiend
for making usso unhappy, on the grovad thathe
dotait out of an exaggerated cespect for hata
life and its happiness, Well, lwill say no more ar
boutit;onlythis: will you givemeacastup stream,
as I want to look after a lonely habitation for the
poor fellow, since he will havettso, and Thearthat
there W one wisi enuldteiatus very Welle
downs beyond Streatley; so if you will put me ae
shore there I-willwalk yp the hil and look wtede
@-“Isthehousein question empty?” said “No,”
said Walter, “butthe man who lives there will,
SREBE ofcouterr when he leael tat we ott
‘Vousee, we think that the fresh air of the doataia
and the very emptiness of the landscape will do
our friend good.” €L “Ves,” said Clara, smiling,
“and he will not be so far from his beloved that
they cannot easily meet if they havea mind to...
Be ticy certainly oll


244


HIS talk had brought us down to Invention

the boat, and we were presently a-
Aloatonthe beautiful broadstream,

Avice driving the prow swiftly


(%
WF?

WRSEAD through the windless water of the
Ae earipsuramer morning, fox iewas
hot yet six o'clock. We were at the lock in a very
fittle time; and as we lay rising and rising on the
in-comingwater, Icould not help wonderingthat
myold friendthe pound-lock, and that of the very
simplest & most rural kind, should hold its place
there; so I said: “Ihave been wondering, as we
passed lockafter lock, that you people, so prosper-
ous.as you are,and especially since you are so an-
xxious for pleasant work todo, have not invented
something which would getridofthisclamey bust
nessof goingup-stairs by means of theserudecon-
frivances."€ Dicklaughed:"My deas friend,”said
he, “‘aslong as water has the clumsy habit ofrun-
ning down hill, I fearwemust humour it by going
up-stairs whenwe have our faces turned fromthe
sea.And really Idon’t seewhy you should fall foul
of Maple-Duthamlock, which I thinkavery pret-
ty place.” C There was no doubt about the latter
assertion, I thought, as I looked up at the over-
hanging boughs of the great trees, with the sun
coming glittering through the leaves, & listened
to thesongofthesummerblackbirdsas it mingled
with the sound of the backwater near us. So not
being able to say why I wanted the locks away...


245


age


A green old which, indeed Ididn’t do atall .. Uheldmy peace,


CBut Walter said:* You see, guest, this is not an
age of inventions. Thelastepoch didallthatforus,
and we are now content to use such of ts inven?
tionsaswe findhandy, & leave those alone which
wedon't want. I believe, as a matter of fact, that
some time ago (I can’tgive you a date) someela-
borate machinery wasused for the locks, though
people didnot gosofarastrytomakethewaterran
up hill. However, it was troublesome, I suppose;
and the simple hatches, and the gates, with a big
counterpoisingbeam, were found to answer eve
purpose, & were easily mendedwhen wanted wit
material always to hand: so here they are, as you
see.” “Besides,” said Dick, “this kind of lockis
pretty, s you can secjand I cannot help thinking
that yourmachine-lock, windiny uplike a watch,
Jwouldhavre beentigty sailgraild to eseeucaeie
look of the river:and thatis surely reasonenough
for keeping such locks as these. Good-bye, oldfel-
low!” said he to the lock, as he pushed us out
through the now open gates by a vigorous stroke
of the boat-hook. “May youllive long, and have

our green old age renewed for ever!”

RQOIN we went;and the waterhad the

Wl familiar aspect to me of the days
before Pangbourne had beenthor-
J oughly cocknified,asThaveseenit.

It {Bangbourre) was distinctly a

village still, ie.,a definite groupof


as mightbe. Thebeech-woods Haymaking

tor sell chat eo abcue Basildon but niaidens
Sheflatfields beneath them were much more popur
fags than I remembered them, as there were five
large houses insight, very carefully designed so as
sage hurt the characterof the country. Down on
the green lip of the river, just where the water
turns toward the Goring & Stresleyseachos rere
halfadozengirlsplayingabout onthe grass. They
hailedusaswereaboutpassingthem,astheynoted
that we were travellers, & we stopped a minute to
talk with them. They had been bathing, and were
light clad and barefooted, and were bound forthe
meadows on the Berkshire side, where the hay-
making had begun, & were passing thetimemer-
rily enough till the Berkshire folle came in their
punttofetchthem. At firstnothingwould content
them but we must go with them intothehayfield,
& breakfast with them; but Dick put forward his
theory ofbeginningthehay-harvesthigherup the
water 8 no spoiling my pleasure herein by give
ingme a taste of it elsewhere, and they gave way,
though unwillingly. In revenge they asked mea

reat many questiins about the country I came

rom and the mannersof life there, which I found
rather puzzling answerjand doubtless whatane
swers | did give were puzzling enough to them. I
noticed both with these pretty girls& with every.
body else we met, that in default of very serious
news, such as we had heard at Maple-Durham,


247


Country.


-ople who
Know the


country


they were cager to discuss all the little details of
life: the weather,the hay-crop, thelastnewhouse,
the plenty or lack of such& such birds, and so on;
andthey talked of thesethingsnotinafatuousand
conventional way, but as taking, I say, real ine
terest in them. Moreover, I found that the wo-
men knewas much about all these things asthe
men:couldname a flower,and knew its qualities;
couldtell youthe habitatof such & such birds and
fish, & thelike. (It is almost strange what adif-
ference this intelligence made in my estimate of
the country life of that day; for it used to be said
in past times, and on thewhole truly, thatoutside
their daily work country people knew little of the
country, and at least could tell you nothing about
it; while here were these people as eager aboutall
the goings on in the fields and woods and downs
as ifthey had been Cockneysnewly escaped from
the tyranny of bricks and mortar. € I may men-
tion as a detail worth noticing that not only did
there seem to bea great many more birds about
of thenon-predatory kinds, but their enemies the
birds of prey were also commoner. A kite hung
overourheads as we passed DS robin yea
day; magpies were quite common in the

rows; Isaw several sparrow-hawks, and I thinka
merlin;andnow pesrss we nerepesse the prey
bridge which had taken the placeof Basildon:
way-bridge,a couple of ravens croaked above our
Boat,as they sailed off tothe higher ground ofthe
24!


. I concluded from all this that the days of Not every-
voice were overjand did not even need body hay”
toask Dick a question about it. making


CHAPTER XXVI.THE OBSTINATE
ERS.
zens IEFOREwe parted from


these girls we saw two


then Dickbethoughthim
lof little banter of the


body of the male kind to
with them across the water, and where their
BeiSufek bonetar Seid onc:theystnersrattie
arty:“+O, they have gotthe big punttolesdstone
Pisisiau'the water” dh Whole you neon
ip

‘they,’ dear child 2” said Dick. Saidan older girl,
laughing: “You had better go &see them. Look
there,”andshe pointed northwest, ““don’tyousce
building going on there?” €.“ Yes,” said Dick,
“and Iam rathersurprised atthis time of the year;
why are they are not haymaking with you,”
Thegirsalllaughed atthis, and beforetheirlaugh
wasover,theBerkshire boathadrunonto the grass
and the gids stepped in lightly, still snigeering,
while the new comers gaveus the sele of he dae,


249


Something But before they wereunder way again, thetallgiel
to laugh at said : Excuse us for laughing, dear neighbours,


but we have had some friendly bickering withthe
builders up yonder, and as we havenotime to tell
you the story, youhad better go & ask them::the

will be glad to see you... if you don’t hinder their
work.” € They all laughed again at that, and
waved usapretty farewell as the punters setthem
over toward the other shore, & leftusstanding on
the bank beside our boat. € “ Let us go and see
them,” said Clara; “‘thatis,ifyouarenotinahurry
toget to Streatley, Walter?” “‘O no,” said Walter,
“Tshall be glad of the excuse to have alittle more

€ your company.”

MO welefttheboat moored there, and
|wenton uptheslope of thehill; but
I said to Dick on the way, being
somewhat mystified: “What was
pf all that laughing about ? what was

the joke?” € “I can guess pretty
well,” said Dick; “someof themup therehave got
apieceofworkwhich intereststhem, & they won't
to the haymaking, which doesn’tmatter at all,
fob eneeler plentyof penpletoda stich easy
hard workas that; only,sincehaymakingisaregu-
lar festival, the neighbours find it amusing to jeer
good-humouredly at them.’ @ “I see,” said I,
“‘much as ifin Dickens's time some young peo
ple were so wrapped up in their work that they
Wwoulda’tkeepChristmas.”€['Justso,” said Dick,
250


- Je need not be young either.” @ A hand
tonly these peo? st miean by edayshecd work?” some house
GRIT Quoth Dick: “ Did [say that? [mean work
Shi testhemuscles&thardensthem &sends you
pleasantly weary to bed, but which isn’t trying in
Pf eeways:doesn’tharass youin short. Such work
is aay pleasant if you don't overdo it, Only,
tind you, good mowing requires some litte skill,
I'm a pretty good mower.”
Stllcbroupheusuprothehouse
thatwasabuilding, note largeone,
[whichstoodattheendofabeautiful
orchard surrounded by an oldstone
wall. “O yes, see," said Dick; “I
remember, a beautiful place fora
house? but a starveling of a nineteenth century
house stood there: arn glad they are rebuilding:
i¢sall stone,too,though it need not have been in
thispartofthecountry my word though, they are
tiaking axiestjobiof ei burl woulda’ chavemade
itallashlar,"€{ Walter &¢ Clara were already talle
ing to a tall man clad in his mason’s blouse, who
looked aboutforty,butwas daresay older;hehad
his mallet &chiselin hand; there were at workin
the shed & on the scaffold abouthalfadozenmen
and two women, blousecladlikethecatles, whilea
very pretty woman who was not in the work but
was dressed in an elegant suit of blue linen came
sauntering uptouswith her knitting in her hand,
She welcomed us and said, smiling: So you are


251


life lasts


Warlchard come up from the water to see the Obstinate Re-
while shore fasers : where are you going haymaking, neigh.


bours?”€“O, right upaboveOxford,”said Dick;
“itis rather alate country. But what share have
BS zat ‘with the Refusers, pretty neighbour ?”

she;witha laugh:“O,lamthelucky onewho
doesn’t want to work; though sometimes I getit,
for I serve as model to Mistress Philippa there
when she wants one: she isourhead carver;come
and see her.” She led us up to the door of the un-
finished house, where a rather little woman was
working with mallet & chisel onthe wallnearby.
Sheseemedvveryintenton what she was doing, &
did not turn round when we came up; buta tall
woman, quite a girl she seemed, whowas at work
nearby,had already knocked off,and was standing
looking from Clara to Dick with delighted eyes.
None ofthe others paid much heed tous. The
blue-clad girl laid her hand onthe carver's shoul-
der and said: “ Now, Philippa, if you gobble up
yourworklike that, youwill soon havenonetodo;
and whatwill become of you then?” @Thecarver
turned round hurriedly and showed usthefaceofa
woman of forty (orsosheseemed),and saidrather
pettishly, but ina sweet voice : Don't talk non-
Sensei Rakes anddon'tinterruptme ifyoucanhelp
it.” Shestoppedshortwhenshesawus,then went
on with the kind smile of welcome which never
failedus:! Thankyou forcomingtoseeus, neigh-
bours ; but I am sure you won't think me unkind

252


<<: —— - i. -- na


if goon withmy work, especially when I tell you Indulgence
oe ‘was ill all through resi a May;and this for the best
open-air andthe sunand the work together, and carver
my feeling well again too, make a meredelightof
every hour tome j and excuse me, I must go on.”
She fellto work accordingly ona carving in low
relief of flowers and figures, but talked on amidst
her mallet strokes: Yousee, weall think thisthe
prettiest place for a houseupand down these rea-
ches ; and the site has been so long encumbered
with an unworthy one, that we masons were de-
termined to pay off fate and destiny for once, and
buildthe prettiesthouse wecouldcompasshere...
and so...and so...” Here she lapsed into mere
carving, but the tall foreman came up and said :
“Yes, neighbours, that is it:s0 it is going tobeall
ashlar because we wanttocarveakind of awreath
offlowersandfigures all roundit; & we havebeen
much hindered by one thing or other... Philip-
ree illnessamongstothers, ...& though wecould
avemanaged our wreath withouther.. .” “Could
youthough?” grumbled the last-named from the
face of the wall.““Well, at anyrate, she is ourbest
carver, 8 it would nothave been kind to beginthe )
carving withouther. So you see,"said he, looking
at Dick & me, “we really couldn't go haymaking,
couldweneighbours?But yousee weare gettingon
sofastnowwiththis splendid weather that I think
we may well spare a week orten days at wheat-
harvest; & won't we go at that workthen! Come


253


See ee eee


Drinking of downthentotheacres thatlie north-and-by west
healths hereat ourbacks &you shall see good harvesters,
neighbours.” C“Hurrah, fora good brag!” called
a voice from the scaffold above us; “our foreman
thinks thatan easier job than puttingone stone on
another!” € There was a general laugh at this
sally, in which the tall foreman joined; and with
it we saw a lad bringing outa little table into
the shadow of the stone-shed, which he set down
there, and then going back, came out again with
i the inevitable big wickered flask and tall glasses,
whereon the foreman led us up to due seats on
blocks of stone, and said: € “Well, neighbours,
drink to my brag coming true, or I shall think
you don’tbelieve me! Up there!” said he, hailing
the scaffold, “are you coming down for a glass’)
Three of the workmen came running down the
ladder as men with good “ building legs” will do;
but the others didn’t answer, except the joker (if
hemustsobecalled), whocalled outwithout tune
inground: “Excuse me, neighbours, for not get
ting down. I must get on: my work isnotsuperin-
tending, like the gaffer’s yonder; but, youfellows,
sendusup aglasstodrinkthehaymakers’ health.”
Of course, Philippa would not turn away trom.
her beloved work ; but the other woman carver


came; she turned out to be Philippa’s daughter,

butwasa tall strong girl, black-haired and gipsey-

like of face and curiously solemn of manner. The

rest gathered round us and clinked glasses, & the
254


ffold turned aboutanddranktoour The White
men on the ot busy little woman by the door Horserange
sald have none ofit all, but only shrugged her
Shoulders when herdaughter came up to her and
fouchedher. [So we shook handsandturned our
backs on the Obstinate Refusers, went down the
slopetoour boat before wehad gonemanyssteps
hesed thefulleune of tinkdling trowels mingle with
the humming of the bees and the singing of the
farks above the little plain of Basildon.


CHAPTER XXVII. THE UPPER
WATERS.
AEBS


iS i


Eset Walter ashore on
the Berkshire side, a7
}] midstallthe beauties of
H Streatley, and so went
Pj ourwaysintowhatonce
q would have been the
A dcepercountry underthe
{peer ace
Horsesand though the
BIN) contzast between half
cocknified and wholly unsophisticated country
liagof exultation rose with


course, ll signsof squalor and poverty had disap.
cient town, and
255


Another many uglyhouseshadbeen takendownandmany
elder


pretty new ones built, but I thoughtit curious, that
the town still looked like the old place I remem,
bered so well; for indeed it looked like that. ought
to have looked. @ At dinnerwe fell in with an old
but very bright and intelligent man, who seemed
inacountzy way to be ancthereditionsfold Fis
mond. He adap extraordinary detailed know,
fedgeoftheancenthistory ofthecountryside rast
thetime of Alfredto thedaysof the Parliamentary
‘Wars, many events of which, az you may inew,
‘wereenactedround about Wallingford. But, what
‘was imiore fiitercating to ts) he had detailed necseg
fthc period of che change cette presented
things, and told us a great deal about t, and espe?
cially of that exodus of the people from the town
foie countcy, & the gaddal ecavery bythetonal
bred peopleononeside,andthecountry-bred peor
pleonthe other, of thoseartsof life which theyhad
each lost; which loss,ashe toldus,hadat onetime §
gone sofat, that not only was it impossible tofind
Scarpenteror a smith in avillage orsmall country
town but tha penpein sch placeshaderen or
sttenhow to bake bread, that at Wallingford,
or instance, the bread came down with the news?
papers by an early train from London, worked in
fome way, the explanation of which I could not
understand, He told usalso that thetownsprople |
who came into the country used to pick up the
agricultural arts by carefully watching the way in
256


i shines worked, gathering an idea of Learning
phich the ta machinery; because at that time handicraft
almosteverythinginandaboutthefieldswasdone anew
py elatorate machines wsed quite unintelligently
bythe labourers, Ontheotherhand, the oldmena-
mongstthe labourers managed toteach the young-
crores gradually alittle artizanship, such as the
useofthesaw & the plane, the workof the smithy,
and so forth; for, oncemore, by that time it wasas
much as (or rather, more than) a man could do
to fix an ash pole toa rake by handiwork; so that
jtwouldtakeamachineworthathousand pounds,

a group of workmen, and half a day’s travelling,
to do fiveshillings’ worth of work. He showed us,
amongotherthings, anaccount of a certain village
| who were working hard at all this bust-
ness;and therecordof their intenseearnestnessin
gettingtothe bottom ofsome matter which in time
past would havebeen thought quite trivial, as, for
example, the due proportions of allali and oil for
seaprmakingforthe village wash,ortheexactheat
of the water into whicha leg of mutton should be
plunged for boiling, all this joined to theutter ab-
senceof anything like party feeling, which evenin
a village assembly would certainly have made ts
appearance in an earlierepoch, was very amusing,
and at thesametime instructive. I Thisoldman,
whose name was Henry Morsom, took us, after
our meal and a rest, into a biggish hall whichcon-
tind large collectionof articles of manufacture


257


Strange and art from the last da


ys of the machine period


theories to that day; and he went over them with us, and


explained them with great care. They also were
interesting, showing the transition from the

mi if work of the machines (which was at
about its worst a little after the Civil War before
told of) into the first years of the new handicraft
period. Of course, there was much overlapping of
the periods: and at firs the new handwark cene
in veryslowly.€{“ Youmustremember,” saidthe
oldantiquary, “ thatthehandicraft wasnotthe re
sult of what used tobecalled material necessity:on
the contrary, by that time the machines had been
somuchimprovedthat almostall neces ke
eae


might have beendonebythem: and indi
peopleat that time, &before it, used tothink that
machinery would entirely supersede handicraft;
which certainly, onthe face ofit,seemedmorethan
likely. Butthere wasanother opinion, farlesslogi-
cal, prevalent amongst the rich people before
daysof freedom, which did not dieoutat onceafter
that epoch had begun. This opinion, which from
allIcanlearn seemedasnatural thenasitseemsab-
surd now, was,that while the ordinary daily work
of the world would bedone entirely by automatic
machinery, the energies of the more intelligent
art of mankind would be set free to follow the
tee forms of the arts,as well as science: andthe
study of history. It was strange, was it not, that
they should thusignore that aspiration aftercom-
258


—— US ae ee ee


ity whichwenow recognise asthebond “ Nature”
Fe aoe ?” €Idid not answer, and man


emore. Dick looked thoughtful, &
Ha eet ae Bou Well Goat lise
Thais often heard my old kinsman say that the
cone aim ofall people before our time wastoavoid
work, or at least they thought it was; so of course
the work which their daily life forced them to do,
seemed morelikeworkthan that which they seem-
ed to choose for themselves.” “True enough,”
said Mlorsom.““ Anyhow, they soon began to find
out their mistake,and that only slaves and slave
holders could live solely by setting machines go-
ing.” € Clara broke inhere, flushinga little asshe
oe: Was not their mistake once morebred of
elite of slavery that they had been living?..a
UBL alla rops lel ceig ueeaster ye
except mankind, animate & inanimate, ‘nature,’
aspeople used to allt, as onething, & mankindas
another. It was natural to people thinking in
way, that they should try to make‘nature’ their
slave, since they thought ‘nature’ was somethin;
outside them.” “Surely,” said Morsom; “an
eywec pumtedactaer oy to do, till they found
thefeclinga instamechanicallife,whichhadbe-
in before the great change amongst peopl
Fad leisure to think of such things was sen
insensibly; till at last under the guise of pleasure
that was not supposed to be work, work that was
Pleasure began to push out the mechanical tol,


759)


|


‘Work ofthe which they had once hopedat the best toreduceto


transition


Aacrowliniterideeds but x
which, moreover, they found they could not limit
as they had hoped to 4o.” €." Whendidthisnew
revolution gather head?” said 1.@“Inthehalf-cen-
tury that followed the Great Change’"said Mion,
som, “it began to be noteworthy; machine after
machine was quietly dropped under the excuse
Phatificmachines could aveprodiiewrddor ai
and that works of art were more & more called for,
Look here,” he said, “here are some of the works
of that time, rough and unskilful in handiwork,
Iegetalal Ballou tig eae Nemecat lente
snaking?” 4." They sce very curious” anal take
fg Up a piece of pottery {cen anion eRe wee
mens which the antiquacy was showing us; ‘not
a bit like the work of either savages or barbarians,
Bedieci er tha let y nal Gis tseopentenled
sikstred of civilisation spressed vponthen.”?
“Yes,” said Mortom, “you must act lock for
delicacy there: in that period you could only have
ot thee froma man who was practically = slaves
tut now, yousee,” said he, leading me on alittle,
“we havelearned thetrickof handicraft,and have
added the utmost refinement Sterne wo
the freedom of fancy & imagination.” (Ll looked,
and wondered indeed at the deftness and abun-
dance of beauty of thework of men who had at
last learned toaccept lifeitself asa pleasure, &the
satisfaction of the common needsof mankindand
260


ver to get rid of;and


ion for them, as work fit for the best Another
the prepa mused silently; but at last I said: boat
"What is to come after?” € The old man
aughed.“Idon’t know,” said he;““wewill meet it
‘when it comes.”


EANWHILE, quoth Dick, “we
PARAM have gt to meet the rest of our
Bh CaN day'sjourney; sooutintothestreet

A AS


\ kk land down to the strand! Will you
PAYS Wc
OS.


comea turn with us, neighbour?
Our frend is greedy of your stor
ries.” “Iwill go as fir as Oxford with you,” said
he; “I want a book or two out of the Bodleian
Libary Lsuppose you will sleep inthe old sity?”
“No,"said Dick, “weare going higher up; the hay
is waitingusthere, you know.” Morsom nodded,
and we all went into the street together, and got
into the boat litele above the town bridge. But
just as Dick was getting the sculls into the row
locks, the bows of another boat came thrusting
through the low arch. Even at first sight it was a
gaylittle craft indeed... bright green, and painted
over with elegantly drawn flowers. As it cleared
the arch,afigureasbright and gay-cladasthe boat
rose up in it;a slim gurl dressed in light blue silk
that uttered in the draughty wind ofthe bridge,
thought I knew the figure, and sure enough, as
she turned herhead to us, and showed her beauti-
fulface, Isawwith joy that it was none other than
the fairy godmother from theabundant garden on
261


An expla. Runnymede, Ellen, to wit. € We all stopped to


nation


receive her, Dick rose in the boat and cried outa

fenal goo morrow; I triedtobeasgenialas Dick,

wut failed; Clara waved adelicatehandtoher; and
Morsom nodded & looked on with interest.Asto
Ellen, the beautiful brown ofher facewas deepens
clive ldsiuas shebroseh(the gorse Bn
boat alongsideours, andsaid: @““ You see, neigh-
bours, I had some doubt if you would all three
comebackpast Runnymede, orifyoudid, whether
you would stop there; and besides, am not sure
whether we, my father andI,shall not be awayin
a week or two, for he wants to see a brother of his
in the north country, andI should not like him to
gowithoutme. Sol thought mightneversee you
again, & that seemeduncomfortabletome, and...
soIcame after you.” €“ Well,” said Dick, “Iam
sureweareall very gladofthat;although youmay
be sure that as for Chis and me, we should have
madeapoint of coming to see you, and of coming
thesecond time, ifwehad found youaway thefirst.
But, dear neighbour, there you are alone in the
boat, and you have been sculling pretty hard; I
should think, and might find alittle quiet sitting
pleasant; so we had better part our company into
two.” € Yes,” said Ellen, “Ithought youwould
do that, so I have broughta rudder for my boat:
will you help me to ship it, please ?” € And she
went aft in her boat & pushed along our side till
she rk ‘brought the stern close to Dick's hand.

262


inourboatandshe in hers,andthe Shifting of
He inet inerten has eae Sheng
as you may imagine, no change pany
Ped shen placeinthearrangementof suchan un-
important matterastherudder of apleasure-boat.


‘Arehetwo beautiful young faces bentovertherud-


on its hooks; for,


der, they seemed to me to be very close together,
and though itonly lasted a momentasort of pang
shot through me as I looked on. Clara sat in her
place&&didnot look round, but presentlyshe said,
Wwith just the least stiffness in her tone: @ “How
shall we divide? Won't you go into Elllen’s boat,
Dick, since, without offence to our guest, you are
the better sculler?” € Dick stood up and laid his
handon hershoulder, & said: “No, no; let Guest
trywhathecando,heoughttobegettingintotrain-
ingby now. Besides, wearein: nohttp ‘wearenot
goingfar above Oxford; &evenif wearebenight-
ed, weshall havethemoon, which will give us no-
thing worse ofanight thanagreyer day.” “Be-
sides)” said I, “I may manage to do a little more
with my sculling than merely keeping the boat
from drifting down stream.” The all laughed at
this, asif ithadabeen very good joke & I thought
that Hllen’s laugh, even amongst the others, was
one of the pleasantest sounds Tad ever heard.


263


A the sculls, set to workto show o
NW alittle, For...mustI sayit?...Ifelt

as if even that happy world were
made the happier for my being so
near this strange girl: although I must say that
igen Csepeceoal had seen indiatmastiencnedy
she was the most unfamiliar to me, the most un-
like what I could have thought of. Clara, forin-
stance, beautiful and bright as she was, was not
unlikeavery pleasant and unaffected younglady;
andtheother girls alsoscemednothing more than
specimens of very much improved types which I
had known in other times. But this girl was not
only beautiful with a beauty quite different from
that of “a young lady,” but was in all ways so
strangely interesting; so that I kept wondering
what next shewould say ordotosurprise & please
me. Not, indeed, thattherewasanythingstartling
inwhat she actually said ordid; butitwasalldone
ina new way, and always with that indefinable
interest and pleasure of life, which I had noticed
mace oe lesa tp everybody, but which in her was
more marked and more charming than inanyone
else that [had seen. € We were soon under way
& goingata fairpace through the beautiful reaches
of the river, between Bensington& Dorchester. It
Wasnowaboutthe middle ofthe afternoon, warm
ratherthan hot, & quite windless; the clouds high

264


Ks CC rt~“‘“‘ Re


| upand ihe pat whteandaleaming sftened Lovely af


‘¢ sun’s burning, but did not hide the pale blue ternoon


in most places, though they seemed to give it
eb iie cy aatbertiieokcd
really likeavault, as poets have sometimes called
it, and not like mere limitless air, buta vault so
vastand full of light thatitdid not in any way op-
the spirits. It was the sort of afternoon that
Firenytoctmusthaye been thinking about, when
hesaid of the Lotos-Eaters'landthat it was aland
whereitwas always afternoon. Ellen leaned back
inthe stern & seemed toenjoy herself thoroughly.
T could see that she was really looking at things
and let nothing escape her, and as I watched her,
anuncomfortable feeling that she had beenalitele
touched by love of the deft, ready, and handsome
Dick,andthatshehad been constrained to follow
us because of it, faded out of my mind; since ifit
had been so, she surelycould not have beensoex-
citedly pleased,even with the beautiful scenes we
‘were passing through. For some time she did not
say much, butatlast,as wehad passed underShil-
lngford Bridge (new built, but somewhat on its
old fines), shebademeholdthe boatwhileshehad
a good look atthe landscape throughthe graceful
arch. Thensheturned abouttomeand said: [I
do not know whether to be sorry or glad that this
is the first time that I have been in xe reaches,
Ieis truethatitis a great pleasure tosee all this for
thefirsttime; but if hadhada year or two of me-


265


Traps for
the unwary


mory of it, how sweetly it would allhavemingled
with my life, waking or dreaming! Iam so glad
Dickhasbeen pulling slowly,soastolingeroutthe
time here. How do you feel about your first visit
Pathiegestoptcrsvas @-1domccaupporevticimenites
trap forme, butanyhow fell into it, & said:“My
first visit! It is not my first visit by manyatime.
know these reaches well; indeed, I maysaythat
I knowevery yard ofthe Thames from Hammer.
smith to Cricklade.” € I saw the complications
that might follow, as her eyes fixed mine with
a curious look in them, that I had seen before at
Runnymede, when I had said some somethin;
which made it difficult for others to understanc
my present position amongst these people. Ired-
dened, and said, in order to covermy mistake: “I
wonder you have never been up so high asthis,
since you live on the Thames, and moreover row
sowell that itwould beno great labourtoyou. Let
alone,” quoth I, insinuatingly, “that anybody
wouldbegladtorow you.” € She laughed, clearly
not at mycompliment (as I am sure she need not
have done, since it wasa very commonplace fact),
‘hut at samething which was stirring inher mind;
&shestill looked atmekindly, but with theabove-
said keen look in her eyes, and then she said:
Well, pechapsit is strange, though I havea
good deal to do at home, what with looking after
my father, and dealing with two or three youn
ede have taken a special liking to me, and
a


Icannot pleaseat once. But you,dear And yet


ow theupperriver, thanthat I shouldnot know
een Beets youhaveonlybeenin Eng-
fand a few days. But perhaps youmean that you
have read about it in books, and seen pictures of
it?... though that does notcometomuch either.”
“Truly,” said I. “Besides, [have not read any
books about the Thames: itwasoncof the minor
stupidities of our time that no one thought fit to
writea decentbookaboutwhatmay fairly becalled
our only English river.” € The words were no
sooner out of my mouth than I saw that 1 made
another mistake; and I felt really annoyed with
myself, as Ididnotwant to gointoalong explana-
tionjust then, or begin anotherseries of Odyssean
lies. Somehow, Ellen seemed to see this,and she
took no advantage of my slip; her piercing look
Bees eeniede whined Sanches nces sede
said: “Well, anyhow Iam gladthat lam travel
ling these waters with you, since you know our
riversowell, & I know little ofit past Pangbourne,
for you can tell me all I want to know about it.”
She pausedaminute, & then said: “Yet you must
understand that the part Ido know, I know as.
thoroughly as you do. I should be sorry for you
tothink that I am careless ofa thing so beautiful
and interesting as the Thames.” She said this
quiteearnestly, and with an air of affectionate ap-
peal to me which pleased me very much; but 1


267


Dorchester could see that she was only keeping herdoubts a


bout me for another time.


Ye


Dykes


SARESENTLY we came to Day's
Bi RSY Lock, where Dick and his two sit-
NY J ters had waited for us. He would
HRY ff havemegoashore,as iftoshowme
( fs); i fq something which I had never seen
before;and nothingloth I followed
him, Ellen by my side, to the well-remembered
Dykes,8cthe fongchurch beyond them,whichwas
still used for various purposes by the good folk of
Dorchester: where, by the way, the village guest-
house still had the sign of the Fleur-de-luce which
it used to bear in the days when hospitalityhadto
be bought and sold. This time, however, I made
no signof all this being familiar tome: thoughas
we satforawhileonthemoundof the Dykeslook-
ing up at Sinodun & itsclear-cut trench, &itssis-
termamelon of Whittenham, | feltsomewhatun-
comfortable under Ellen's serious attentive look,
which almost drew from me the cry: How little
anything is changed here!” € We stopped again
at Abingdon, which, like Wallingford, was in a
way both old andnewtome,sinceithad beenlifted
outof its nineteenth-century degradation& other-
wise was as little altered as might be.


tC (<‘;sé‘ <;S;:éi‘i‘i( rt;


coAUNSET wasin the skyaswe ski- We leave
Pa fl ted Oxfordby Oseney;we stopped Oxford be-
EVV) 5 minute ortwo hard by the ancient hind


Les castletoputHenryMorsomashore,
ey cy! Tewas amatterof course that so far
WEE NA) as they couldbeseen from theriver,
Tmissed noneofthetowersand spiresof that once
Kanberidden city; but the meadows all sound,
don hen had last passed through them, were
gettingdailymoreandmoresqualid more & more
Eiipressed with the seal of the“‘stirée intellectual
lifeof the nineteenth century,” were no longerin-
tellectual, buthad once again become as beautiful
ts theyshould be 8 the lttlehill of Hinksey, with
two or three very pretty stone houses new-grown
onit (use the word advisedly ; for they seemed
tobelong to it) looked down happily on the full
streams and waving grass, grey now, but for the
sunset, with its fast-ripening seeds The railway
having disappeared, therewith the various level
bridges overthe streamsof Thames, we weresoon
through Mcdicy Lock and in the wide waterthat
vwashesPort Meadow, withitsnumerous popula-
tion ofgeesenowisediminished; & I thought with
pera ‘how its name and use had survived from.
heolderimperfectcommunal period, throughthe
time of theconfused struggle and tyranny of thi

rights of property, into theres aero
ehttof propery intothe present rstandhappir
aes pl ommunism, € I was taken a-
gain at Godstow, to see the remainsof the


269


Highupthe oe nunnery, pretty nearly in the same condition


river


as I had remembered them; and from the hi,
bridge over the cutcloseby, I could seeeven inthe
twilight, how beautiful the little village with its
grey Stone houses had become; for we had now
comeintothe stone-country,inwhich every house
must be either built, wallsand roof, of grey stone
or be a blot on the landscape @ We still rowed on
after this, Ellen taking the sculls in my boat ; we
assed aweira little higherup,& aboutthreemiles
yond itcame by moonlightagaintoalittletown,
where we slept ata house thinly inhabited, as its
folk were mostly tented in the hay-fields.


CHAPTER XXVIII. THE LITTLE
RIVER.


o'clock the next morn-
ing, as we were still
twenty-five miles from
BM our resting place, and
Mj Dickwantedtobethere
A before dusk. The jour-
ney was pleasant, tho-
ghtothosewhodonot
know the upper Tha-
mes, there is little to say about it, Elfen & Iwere
once more together in her boat, though Dick, for
fairness’ sake, was forhavingmeinhis,and letting
the two women scull the green toy. Ellen, how-
270


, would not allow this, but claimed me as the The lovel
interesting personof the company “Afterhaving morning u
comesofar,” said she,“Iwillnot be put off witha
companionwho will be always thinking ofsome-
body else than me: the guest is the only person
who can amuse me properly. I meanthatreally,”
saidshe, turningtome,“andhavenotsaiditmere-
Iyasapretty saying.” € Clara blushed andlooked
very happy at all this; for I think up to this time
she had been ratherfrightened of Ellen. Asforme
I felt young again, and strange hopesofmy youth
were mingling with the pleasure of the present;
almost destroying it,and quickeningit intosome-
thing like pain.@LAs we passed through theshort
and winding reaches of the now quickly lessening
stream, Ellen said: “How pleasant this little river
istome,whoam used to a great wide wash of wa-
ter; it almost seems as if we shall have to stop at
every reachrend. I expect before I get home this
evening I shall have realised whata little country
Englands, since we can so soon get to the endof
its Digest tiver.” “It is not big,” said I,“ but it is
pretty.” €""Yes,” she said,“‘and don't you find it

iculttoimaginethe times whenthislittlepretty
country was treated by its foll asif ithad been an
ugly characterless waste, with no delicate beaut
to be guarded, with no heedtaken ofthe everireth
pleasure of the recurring seasons, and changeful
weather, & diverse quality of the soil, & soferth ?
How could people be so cruel to themselves?”


271


Adouble “And to each other,” said I, Then a sudden reso-


confession [ution took hold of me, and I said : “ Dear nei


he
bots may as well tell you st once thatil find tt
easier toimagineallthatugly pastthan you do, be-
cause Imyselfhave been part of it. Iseeboththat
ouhavedivined something ofthisinme;andalso
Aiciele peter lasvcie wfica ltl yountitias
that I am going to hide nothing from you at all.”
She was silent a little, and then she said:
friend, youhave guessed rightaboutme;andtotell
youthetruth Ihave followed youup from Runny-
mede in orderthat I might ask you many ques-
Tage Solita atest key ek g emaea ear
and thatinterested and pleasedme, & I wantedto
make you as happy as you could be. To say the
truth, therewasariskinit,’saidshe,blushing...“I
meanasto Dick & Clara; for I musttell you, since
we are going to be such close friends, that even
amongst us, where there are so many beautiful
women, [ have often troubled men’s minds disas-
trously. Thatis onereason why Iwas ivingalone
with my fatherin thecottage at Runnymede. But
itdidnotansweron thatscore; forof course people
came there asthe place isnotadesert,& theyseem-
edtofindmeall themoreinteresting forlivingalone
like that, & fell to making stories of me to them-
selves... like I know you did, my friend, Well, let
that pass. This evening, orto-morrow mornin
shallmakea proposal toyoutodosomethingwhich
would please meverymuch, & I think would not
272


—=—_—_—_—- ~EGF—~_—m>saii——_s_—


5 i sayingthatI would The peace-
art yo Coro Pe foriedeed inspite ful upper
doanyeiingin ee the too obvious signs of them waters
of my Yer feeling of renewed youth was not a
(thot aa ecasation, I think), in spite of ray
yeats-Lsay,lfeltaltogethertoo happyin the come
Jeayoftheedelightful gil, &waspreparedto take
eee cescicasen echaps.
CShelaughednow,butlookedverykindlyonme,

Ni a meantime ftps
ill let it be; for I must look at this new c
the epasingtrough Seehow therverhas
in: it is broad now, and the
Satceeealteyadew comming Anliools
reachesarel ry
theeisa fey!” Qtold her the name of a8
off to put the ferry-chain over our heads;
CEE Sak sates Repro eared
treeson our left hand, till the stream narrowed a-
gainand deepened, & werowed on between walls
of tall reeds, whose population of reed sparrows
and warblerswere delightfully restless, twittering
and chuckling as the wash of the boats stirred the
reeds ftom the water spwards in the si it
morning. @She smiled with pleasure, & her
eles ah of the new scene seemed to bring out
her beauty doubly as she leaned back amides the

ty ly.
cushions, though she was far from languid; her

fi


idleness being the idlenessof a person, strong and

welldsnit both in body & mind, deliberately rest-

ing. “Look!” she said, springing up suddenly
t


273


ee Ses


New Bridge from her place without any obvious effort, and


balancing herself with exquisite grace and case;
“ookeatthebeautifulold brdgeahead!”€"Inced
scarcely loocat tha’ sid Lot turning myhead
away from herbeauty.“I know whatitis; though”
‘with a smile) “we used not to eall it the Old
fidgetimeagune,” €[She looked down uponme
kindly, and said: “How wellwe get on now you
are no longer on your guard against me!” And
she stood looking thoughtfully at me still, till she
had to sit down as we passed under the middle
one of the rowof little painted arches of the oldest
bridge across the Thames. €“O the beautiful
fields!” she said; “I had no idea of the charm ofa
Sey small river like this. The smallness of the
scalcof everything, theshort reaches é thespeedy
change of the banks, give ones feeling of going
somewhere, of coming to something strange, @
feelingof adventure which Ihave notfelt in bigs
water” Toned up atherdlighedly for er
yoice,ssyingthevery thing which I wasthinkings
‘wie like wearesd to(caes She caight my eye & Hed
Eeeiireddened hadeeitictltna)mdbtiiaats
simply: ““Imusttell you, my friend. that when my
esis lexves thes macs hissnmer ie will a
me away to a place near the Roman wall in Cum
Betlandy sc thas this vayageof mines facewellia
the south; ofcourse with my goodwillinaway; 8
yet l am sorry for it. I hadn’tthe hearttotell Dick
fresteeiay disse wrewcrcan good aveene Rael
274


‘Thames-side; butsomehow to you I must needs Shifting of
oie” @ She tapped aad seemed very thought’ homes
fil for awhile and then said smiling:““I mustsay
that don’ lie movingfrom onchometoanother;
ne gets so pleasantly used to all the detail of the
fife sbout one; itfitsso harmoniously and happily
intoone’s own life, that beginning again, even in
asmall way, is a kindof pain, But | daresay in the
country which you come from, you would think
the worse ofme forit.” (Shesmiled atme cares,
singly as she spoke, and Imade haste to answers
“O, no,indeed again youecho my thoughts. But
We eee: ee laine
fama all J firve eae Ghat thece wan a great deal
ofchangingofabodeamongstyouinthiscountry.”
GANGA) ested ch cmste Georde ace Gores
move about; but except for pleasure-parties, es-
Piillyinharvestand hay ttm; like this of ours

don’t think they do so much. Iadmit that I also
have other moods than that of stay-at-home,as T
hintedjust now, & I should like to-go with youall
through the west-country, thinking of nothing,”
conchided she smiling. "I should have plenty
tothink of” said


t2 275


Harrowden
Hill


CHAPTER XXIX. A RESTING.
PLACE ON THE UPPER THAMES.


ERESENTLY ataplace


where the river flowed


piealowel wel sicpeestl
While for font dreeacle
fl ardstetiec oaessiverea
A beautiful bank whichal-

foatreactid the diontly
ofa hillaides the wide
A racadows spread before
us, & already the scythe was busy amidst thehay.
One change I noticed amidst the quiet beauty of
thefelis, to wie, thab hey were planted Wie trees
Hiscand there fen tate noes acd a serene
none of the niggardly begradging of space to 4
handsome treewhich ecembered too well;and
iouih the oladrd Wee often rolled (orshirowe
ed, a6 they call it in that country-side), this was
done with some regard to beauty: mean that
there was no polling of tows on rows so as to de-
stroy the pleasantnessofhalfamile of country, but
2 choupheful sequenceinthecutting,thatprevent
tdasidden baeraces anywhere. To be short, the
flelds were everywhere treated as a garden made
for the pleasure as well as the livelihood of all, as
old Hammond told me was the case.


276


> Cy)


><
4]


oS,


while to the north was a wide stretch of mead ris-
ing very gradually from the river's edge. A deli-
cate spire of an ancient building rose up from out
of thetrees in the middledistance, with a few grey
housesclustered aboutit; whilenearer tous, in fact
nothalf a furlong from the water, was a quitemo-
der stone house,a wide quadrangle of one story,
the buildings that made it being quitelow. There
was no garden between it and the river, nothing
butarowof peat-trees still quite young& slender;
and though there did not seem to be much orna-
mentaboutit, ithad a sort of natural elegance, like
that of the trees themselves. (As we sat looking
down on all this in dhe sweet June day, rather
happy than merry, Ellen, who sat next me, her
hand clasped about one knee, leaned sideways to
me,and said in a low voice which Dick and Clara
might have noted if they had not been busy in
happy wordless love-making: “Friend, in your


277


Why rich


country were the houses of your field-labourers


men’shouses anything like that?” (I said: “Well, atanyrate
were ugly


the houses of our sich men were not; they were
mere blots upon the face of the land.” (“I find
that hardto understand,” she said. “Ican seewhy
the workmen, who were so oppressed, shouldnet
have been able to live in beautiful houses; for it
takes time and leisure, and minds not over-bur-
dened with care, to make beautiful dwellings;and
Tquiteundécstent wuatthesencntneoplewen ich
aiavalia leneinerinaway as catay eaten
us) necessary. good things, But why therichmeny
Eh: had Che oe and Holga the ‘materials,
for building, as itwould be in this case, shouldnot
have housed themselves well Ido nptunderseand
asyet-I knowwhatyouaremeaningtosaytome;’”
shesaidslooking mefullanthceyes and bliatiingy
“\to wit that their houses & all belonging tother™
eee eral Paiy ee ary lens ther ches
be ancient like yonder remnant of our forefathers’
work” (pointing to the spire); “that they were,
let me see; what is the word?” @“ Vulgar, ’said I.
“Weusedtosay,” said I, “thattheugliness & vul-
garityof therich men's dwellings was 4 neces:
reflection from the sordidness and bareness of
which they forced upon the poor people.” (She
knitherbrows as in thought; then turned a brigh-
tened face onme,as ifshe hadcaught the: idea,and
said: “Yes, friend, I seewhat you mean. We have
sometimes those of vsuoloocintothesethings,
27


this very matter over; because, to say the Teachi
truth, we haveplenty of recordof; ‘theso-calledarte witoe os
ofthetime before Equality of Life; and there are words
ot wanting people who say that the state of thar
society was not the couse of allthat ugliness; that
theywereuglyintheirlife because theyliked tobe,
could havehad beautiful things about them it
they had chosen; just as a man or body of men
now may, ifthey please, make things more or less
Pesta taShop UL now what pou are going
tosay” €“Do you?” said I, smiling, yet with «
| beatingheart-(L “Yes,” she said;“youareanswer-
ing me, teaching me, in some way or another, al.
| though you havenotspoken thewordsaloud. You
were goingtosay that intimes of inequality it was
| an essential condition of the lifeof these rich men
that they should not themselves make what they
wantellortheadornmentoftherlives butehould
force hosetomakethem whom they forcedto live
Pinched and sordid lives; and that as a necessary
consequence the sordidnessand pinching, theugly
barrenness ofthose ruined lives, were worked up
{nto the adomment of the lives of the rich, andart
died outamongstmen? Wasthat what youwould
say my triend?” (Yes, yes,” I said, looking at
hereagerlyforshe hadrisen & wasstandingonthe
sdgeofthe bent,the light windstirringher dainty
faiment, one hand laid on her bosom, the other
“em stretched downward and clenched in her ear-
nestness. (“Tris true,” she said, “it is true! We
279


A fastfiiend. have proved ittrue!” (I think amidstmy, somes
ship


thing more than interest in her, & admiration for
her, I was Berane to wonder how it would all
end. Thad a glimmering of fear of what mightfol-
low; of anxiety as to the remedy which this new
age might offer for the missing of something one
mightset one’s heart on, Butnow Dick rose to his
feet and cried out in his hearty manner: “Neigh-
bour Ellen, are you quarrelling with the guest, or
are you worrying him to tell you things which
he cannot properly explain to our ignorance?”
“Neither, dear neighbour,” she said. “I wasso
far from quarrelling with him that I think I have
been making him good friends both with himself
& me. Is itso, dear guest?” she said lookingdown
atmewithadelightfulsmile of confidencein being
understood. @“Indeeditis,”said I.“ Well,more-
over,” shesaid, “I mustsay for himthat hehasex-
plained himself to me very well indeed, so that I
quite understandhim.”@“Allright,”"quoth Dick,
“When I first set eyes on you at Runnymede I
knew that there was something wonderfulinyour
keennessof wits. I don’t say that as a mere pretty
speech to please you,” said he quickly, “but be-
cause it is true; and it made me want to see more
of you. But, come, we ought to be going; for we
are nothalf way,andwe ought tobe inwell before
sunset.”


280


: Bee mighttellmea
ings clear to me, ifyou
Beri "Yes," said 1, “Lam pretty welfic,
that, ...& fornothing else...anoldmanlikeme.”
She did not notice the bitterness which, whether
Tlikedit or not, was in my voice as I spoke, but
wenton :“Itisnotsomuch formyself; Ishould be
ite content to dream about past times, and if I
could not idealise them, yet at leastidealise some
ofthe people who lived inthem.Butl thinksome-
times people are too careless of the history of the
past... tooaptto leave itin thehandsofold leaned
menilike Hammond. Who knows? happy as we
are, times may alter; wemay be bitten with some
impulse towards change, and many things may
stem too wonderful for us to resist, too exciting
Rottocatchat, if wedo not know thatthey are but
Bhases of what has been before; &ewithalruinous,
citful, andsordid.” (As we wentslowlydown
toward the boats she saidagain:“ Not for myself
alone, dear friend; I shall have children; perhaps
retheenda good many; Ihopeso.Andthough
ofcourse I cannot force any special kind of know-
ledge upon them, yet, my friend, I cannot help
thinking that ustas they might bellikemeinbody,


281


Still up


stream


ways of thinking; thatis, indeed, some of the ex-
sential part of myself; that part which was not
mere moods,created by the matters&eventsround
about me. What do you think?” € Ofone thing
Iwas sure, that her beauty and kindness & eager
nesscombined, forced metothinkasshedid, when
shewasnotearnestly layingherselfopento receive
my thoughts.Isaid, whatatthe time wastrue,that
I thought it mostimportant; and presently stood
entranced by the wonder of her grace as she step-
ped into the light boat, and held outher hand to
me. Andso on we went up the Thames still...or


whither?
CHAPTER XXX. THEJOURNEY’S
END.


INwewent.Inspiteofmy
new-born excitement a+
(gy bout Ellen, & my gather-
N) ing fear of whereit would
} fand me, Icouldnothelp
takingabundantinterest
in the condition ofthe ci-
z Y Aaa ver and itsbanks; all the
PY \ EIS] more as shenever seem
SGI Fk el ed weary of thechangin;
picture, but looked at every yard of flowery ban
& gurgling eddy with the samekind of affection
ate interest which I myself once had so fully, as I
282


|
so 1 mightimpress upon them some part ofmy |


trate. Atlastwe passedunderanother ancient New
fridge: & through meadowsborderedatfirstwith comers
huge elm-trees mingled with sweet chestnut of
but very elegant growth; and the mea-
Yowswidened outso much that itseemedasif the
trees mustnowbe onthebents only, or about the
houses, except for the growth of willows on the
immediate banks; sothat thewidestretch of grass
waslittlebroken here. Dick: potvery muchexcited
ow,andoften stood up in the boattoery outtous
that thiswassuchandsucha field, and so forth, &
we caught fie at his enthusiasm forthe hayfield
fetand pulled our best.
ZaPAT lastaswewere passing through a
reach of the river where on the side
lof the towing-path was a highish
bank with a thick whispering bed
of reeds before it, and on the other
ide a higher bank, clothed with
willowsthat dipped into the stream and crowned
ancientelm-trees,we saw bright figures coming
g close to the bank, as if they were looking
something; as, indeed, they were, and we...
is, Dick and his eampany ... werewhat thi
Tooking for. Dick lay on his oars, and we fol-
lowed his example. He gave a joyousshouttothe
people on the bank, which was echoed back from
‘tinmany voices, deepand sweetly shrill; forthere
Were above a dozen persons, both men, women,
and children, Atallhandsomewomas, with black
=


— ee


inthis strangely changed society with all ,
evils Hllen seemed delighted whiny ple neces


Iness


f pretty cor,
é iculties of
watrenginceringsothatthemestobviously use
fulworks lool his,

say pleased mehugely, &shewaspleasedat my
pleasure...but rather puzzled too. “You seem


istonished,” she said, just after we had passed a
mill pec spennet all the stream savethewa-
terwway for traffic, but whichwasas beautifulin its
asa Gothiccathedral..‘Youseemastonished
this being so pleasant to look at.” “Yes,” Isaid,
finaway lam; though I don't see why it should
wt be.” “Ah |” she said, looking at meadmir-
,yetwith a lurking smile in her face, “'you
all about the history of thepast. Were the;
always careful about this little stream whic!
so much pleasantness to the count
? It would always beeasyto managethislittle
Ah! I forgot, though,” she said, as her eye
htmine, “inthe days we are thinking of plea-


[should have said that all along the Thames
5 f mills used for various
po were in any degree un-

A y beautiful jandthe gar-
s about them marvels of loveliness.


283


Thetimes sure was wholly neglected in such matters. But
ofmisma- howdidthey manage theriverinthedaysthatyou
nagement ...” Livedin, she was going to say; but correcting


herself said...!'inthedays of which you haveres
cord?” Theymismanagedit’quoth I.“ Upto
the first half of the nineteenth century, when ft
wasstillmore or less of a highway forthe country
ple, some are was taken ofthe river and
anks; &€ though Idon'tsuppeseany one troubled
himselfabout ts aspect,yetitwastrimézbeautiful
Butwhen therailways.-. of which no doubt you
haveeard,..cameitta powes,they would notals
low the peopleof the country to use etherthena,
tural orartificial waterways, of which latter there
werea great many. [suppose when we get higher
Tce chalfsecor caf hnceyaveryiigoctanton
which one of these railways entirely closed to the
public cothat they might orcepeopletosendtheir
s by their private road, and so tax them as
eavilyas they ould” @ Ellen laughed hearty,
“Well” she sod, ‘thatisnotstated clearly enough
inourhistory-books, and itis worth knowing. But
certainly the people of those daysmusthavebeen
acuriously lazy set. We are not either fidgety or
dasniclsome now, but fany one triedsuch apiece
Affally on us, we should use the said waterways,
whoever gainsaid us:surely thatwould besimple
enough. However, I rememberothercases ofthis
stupidity when Twasonthe Rhinetwo yearsago,
Tremensber they showed usruins pf old castles,
i


— ——s


jchaccordingtowhatweheard,musthavebeen Private
wiieforpretty much thesame purpose astherail- companies
jayswere. But I am interrupting yourhistory of and therob-
theriver; Pray goon.” “ Itisbothshort&stupid ber-Inights
treugh,’ said 1.“"T heriverhavinglostits practical
ceeommercial value... thatis, being of no use to
or kemoneyof...” ( Shenodded. “understand
‘Ghatthatqueer phrase means,” saidshe.“Goon!”
(Wal, ie was utterly neglected, till at last it be-
gameanuisance...” “Yes,” quoth Ellen, “‘Iunder-
slike the railways and the robber knights.
Yes?” CSothen they turned themakeshiftbusi-
nessontoit, & handed it over toabodyupin Lon-
don, who from time to time, in orderto show that
hhad something to do, did some damagehere
there,...cutdown trees, destroying the banks
theebydeedgedtheriver(whereitwasnotneeded
sina), & threw the dredgings onthefieldsso as
tospoil them; andso forth. But for the most part
ty practiced ‘masterly inactivity,’ asitwasthen
wthatis, they drew their salaries; and let
things alone.” “ Drew their salaries,” shesaid. “I
knowthat means that they wereallowedtotakean
grslotofother people's goods fordoing nothing.
Andifthat had beenall,streally might have been
worth while to let them do so,if youcouldn’tfind
anyother way of keeping them quiet; butitseems
tomethatbeingso paid, they could nothelp doing
something, and that something was bound to be
mischief, ...because,” saidshe, indling with sud
5


The parsi- den anger, “the whole business was founded on
mony of op- liesand false pretensions. Idon’tmeanonly these


pression


river-guardians,butallthesemaster-people I have
readof.” € “Yes,” said I, “how happy you are to
have got out of the parsimony of oppression!”
Gigi peeved test what aast cntly andounes
whatanxiously.""Youseem tothinkthatitwillnot
last?” “Tewilllast for you,” quoth 1.4" Butwh,

not foryou?” said she.“'Surely itis forall the world;
and ifyour country is somewhat backward, twill
comeinto line before long. Or,” she said quickly,
“are you thinking that you must soon go back a-
gain? Iwillmake my proposal whichI told youof


stonceyandsopethapsputanendtoyour anxity.


Iwas goingto proposethat youshouldlive with us
where we are going. I feel quite old friends with
you, and should be sorry to lose you.” Then she
smiled on me and said: “Do you know I beginto
suspect you of wanting to nurse a sham sorrow,
like the ridiculous characters in some of those
ueerold novels that Ihave come across nowand.
en.” € I really had almost begun to suspect it
myself, butI refused toadmitsomuch;soI sighed
nomore, butfell to giving my: eee compan
Jon what little pieces of history | knew about the
river and its borderlands; & the timepassed plea-
santly enough ; and between the two of us (shewas
d berterscullerthan Iwas, and seemed quite tire-
less) we kept up fairly well with Dick, hot as the
afternoon was, and swallowed up the way at a
286


Ourup- wavy hair and deep-set grey eyes, came forwas

Apes teneest Hee fatale prope es eae A gest go A |
and said: “ Dick my friend, we have almost had
to wait for you! What excuse have you to make
foryourslavish punctuality? Why didn’tyoutake |
us surprise, and come yesterday?” “O,” said
Dick,with analmostimperceptiblejerkofhishead |
toward our boat, “wedidn’twanttocometooquick
up the water; thereisso much toseeforthose who
have not been up here before.” (True, true,” |
said the stately lady, for stately is the word that |
must be used for her; “and we want them to get
to know the wet way from the east thoroughly
well, since they must often use it now. But come
ashore at once, Dick, and you, dear neighbours
there is a breale in the reeds and a good landing
placejust round the corner. We can carry up your
things, orsend someof the ladsafterthem.”“No,
no,” said Dick; “it is easier going up by water,
though itis buta step. Besides, I want to bringmy
friend here tothe properplace. We will goontothe
Ford; and you can talk to us from the bankaswe |
paddlealong.” € He pulledhissculls through the
water, and on we went, turning a sharp angle &

ing north a little. Presently we saw before usa
bank elm-trees, which told usof ahouseamidst
them, though I looked in vain for the grey
that] expectedtoseethere.Aswewent,thefolkon
thebank talked indeed, mingling their kind voices
with the cuckoo's song, the sweet strong whi
2!


SS OOO


We seituckidaphed he caidaiterde
ofthe stcghecenthoughthlongrasotte meee


ing-field; whence came waves of frapran
Fonthe lowering clover amidstofthe ripe ceoes
(ina few minutes wehad passed through adecp
‘eddying pool into the sharp stream that ran from
{he ford, and beached our craft on a tiny steed
of limestone-gravel, and stepped ashore into the

rms ofour up-river friends, our journey done.
co $y DISENTANGLED myself


my right, and through the hawthorn sprays and

. ofthe weild roses could eather chad

try spreading out far away under the sun of the

evening, till something that might be called

hills with a look of sheep-pastures about them a-

teundeditwithasoftblue ine irene ea
2


Theold


country


brought to
life again


boughs still hid most of what houses there might
be in this riverside dwelling of men; but to the
right of the cart-road a few grey buildings cfd
Simplest kind showed here and there. There
stood in a dreamy mood, andrubbed my eyes asif
Twere abe whollp awake and balernoreigee
the gay-clad company of beausiesl cen feign
changed totwoorthreespindle-legged back-bow,
edmen& haggard, hollow-eyed, ill-fayouredwo-
men, who once ore down the spillob diselans
‘with theis heavy hopeless fers, Somiday 60 date
eason,t0 season, ectl yeactniyean Bee oactiteS
came as yet and may heart awclledettnicgeal
thoughtoFall thebeautifl prey villages forthe
river to the plain and the plain tothe Gplanlis
szhicia corel peaepetcia teckeeoate Ul ona
soa eich dirs atepenioneie ib aioe
couny tchesand seseciedeo mete


CHAPTER XXXI. AN OLD HOUSE
AMONGST NEW FOLK.
EFS I stood there Ellende-
tached herself from our
happy friends who still
stoodon a
and came up to me. She
PE SNGl took me by the hand, &
BN | said softly,“ Takemeon
to the house at once; we


oD neednotwaitfortheoth-


Ea) crs: I had rather not.”


damindto say that didnot know thewa
Gi had gehacthe riversidedwellersshouldiesdeofhe aa
fasifnost without my will my feet moved on as howe
pitt heroadthey knew. Theraisedwayledusinto
tan field bounded by abackwaterof the riveron
Soesie on the ight hand wecould sea cluster
ore mall houses 8 barns, new and old, and before
ees grey stone barn and a wall partly overgrown
wihay,over which a few grey gables showed.
Weenilage toad ended in theshallowoftheafores
aid backwater. We crossedtheroad, andagainal-
‘ost without my will my hand raised the latch
‘ofadoorin the wall, and we stood presently on a
stone pathwhich ledup to the old house to which
fatein the shape of Dick hadso strangely brought
ieinto this new world of men. My companion
veasigh of pleased surprise & enjoyment; nor
Plea for thegunten Gesecepticeralland
thebousewas redolentof the June flowers, andthe
roses were rolling over one another with that de-
licious superabundance of small well-tended gar-
dens which at frst sight takes away all thought
fiom thebeholdersave that of beauty. Theblack-
‘were singing their loudest, the doves were
sooing on theroof-ridge, the rooks inthehighclm-
trees beyond were garrulous among the young
leaves, and the swifts wheeled whining about the
tables. And the house itself was a fitguardian for
all the beauty ofthis heart of summer. Once a-
tainBllen echoed my thoughts as she said:“‘Yes,
u2 291


The Love friend, thisiswhat I cameoutfortosee:
of the Earth gabledold house built by the si


artosee:thismany,
implecountry folk


ofthe long-pasttimes,regardlessofallthetugron
that was ig onumties and courts, is lovely still
amidstall the beauty which theselatterdays have
created  & I donot wonder at our frends ending
it carefully and makingmuch of it. It 'seemstome
as if it had waited for these happy days, and held
in it the gathered crumbs of happinessef the cone
fused and turbulent past.” She led me up close
to the house, and laid her shapely sun-brewned
handandarmon thelichened wallasifto embrace
it, and cried out: “Ome! O me! How I love the
earth, andtheseasons, and weather, andall things
that deal with it, & all that grows out of it, as this
hasdone!” CI couldnotanswerher, orsayaword.
Her exultationand pleasurewere so keenand ex-
quisite, & her beauty, sodelicate, yet sointerfused
with energy, expressed it so fully, that any added
word would have been commonplace and futile.
Idreaded lest the others shouldcome in suddenly
and break the spell she had castabout me; butwe
stood there a while by the corner of the big gable
of the house, and na ane came. I heard the merry
voices some way off presently, & knew that they |
were goingalong theriver tothe greatmeadowon |
theothersideof the houseand garden. @ Wedrew
backalittle, &lookedupatthehouse:thedoorand _
the windows were open to the fragrantsun-cured
air; fromthe upper windowsills hungfestoonsof


292


ia honour of the festival, as tf theothers The
flowet athelovefortheoldhouse. “Come in’ of ents


if [could but say or show how I love it!”


EYE went in, & found no soul in any
Gri f room as we wandered from room
Qi to room, from the rose-covered
\\ i porch to the strange& quaint gar-
2 Y rets amongst the great timbers of
3 a4 the roof, where of old time the til-
Iersand herdsmen of the manor slept, but which
anightsseemed now, by thesmall sizeofthebeds,
and the litter of useless and disregarded matters,
bunches of dying flowers, feathers of birds, shells
of starling’s eggs, caddis worms in mugs, and the
like, seemed to be inhabited for the time by chil-
dren.  Everywherethere was but little furniture,
andthatonly themostnecessary,& ofthesimplest
forms. The extravagant love of ornament which
Thad noted in this people elsewhere seemed here
tohave given place to the feeling that the house
itselfand its associations was the ornament of the
Sountry life amidst which ithad beenleftstranded
293


What is at from old times, and that to re-ornament it would


an


but take away its use as a piece of natural beauty,
We sat down at last in a room over the wal
which Ellenhad caressed, & which was stillhung
with old tapestry, originally of no artistic value,
but now faded intopleasant grey tones which har-
mibaiael shereubtiyavell sock the quiet of the
oe and which would have been ill supplanted
yy brighter & morestriking decoration. 1 asked
a few random questions of Ellen as we sat there,
but scarcely listened toher answers, and presently
became silent, and then scarce conscious of any-
thing, but that I was there in that old room,
doves crooning fromthe roofs of the barn &dove-
cot beyond the window opposite tome.
thought returned to me after
what I think was buta minute or
Bd two, but which, asinavividdream,
seemed as if it had lasted a long
@ time, when I saw Ellen sitting,
NSS) looking all the fuller of life&plea-
sure & desire fromthecontrartwiththe grey ade
tapestry withits futiledesign, which wasnow only
Tere E eaeithad gewraiee faint and feeble.
@ She looked at me kindly, but as if she read me
through and throygh. Shesaid: “Youhave begun
again urnever-endingcontrast between the past
and this present. Is it not so?” €“True,” said].
“Twas thinking of what you, with your capacity
&intelligence, joinedto yourlove of pleasure, an
294


ur impatience of unreasonable restraint...
Perea ahavcieenin tak enataioe bee
how, whenalliswon and has been foralong time,
my heartis sickened with thinking of all the waste
tflife chathas goneon for somany years,” "So
many centuries,” she said, “so many ages!”
“True,"I said; “too true,” and sat pi has ain.
HIE roseand said: “Come, I must
P} not let you go off into a dream a-
N gain so soon, If we must lose you,
want you to see all that you can
see first before yougobackagain.”
EA “Lose me?” I said... go back
again? Am Inot to go up tothe North with you,
What do you mean?” She smiled somewhat
sadly and said: “Not yet; wewillnottalleof that
aly, what were you thinking of justnow?”
Cisid falteringy: wassayingtomyself, The
past, the present? Should she not have said the
contrast of the present with the future: of blind
despair with hope?” Iknewit,” shesaid, Then
she caught my hand and said excitedly: “Come,
while there is yet time! Come!” And she led me
out of the room) andas we were going downstairs
and out ofthe house intothe garden by. ittle side
doorwhich opened out of a curious lo by shesaid
ina calm voice, as if she wished me to forget her
sudden nervousness: “Come! we ought to join
the others before they come here looking for us.
And et me tell you, my friend, that I can see you
295


Ofthewaste are too apt to fall into mere d,
of the evil
days


reamy musing: ng


doubt because you are not yet used to our life of
reposeamidstofenergy ; of workwhich is pleasure
ure i


my father when he
f the soi. Well,
could not have borne that; therefore my bes
and cleverness and brightness” (she spoke wit
noblush or simper of false shams) “ould have
been sold to rich men, & mylife would have been
wasted indeed; for I know enough ofthatto know
that I should have had no choice,no erofwill
over mylife; andthat [should neverhave bought
pleasure from the rich men,or even opportunity
faction, whesehy. I might have wen aametria
excitement, I should have wrecked and wastedin
oneway oranother, either by penury or byluxury.
Is it not so?” € “Indeed it is,” said 1. She was
going say something else, when alte gucin
the fence, which led intoa small elm-shaded field,
was opened, and Dick came with hasty cheecfule
ness up the garden path, and was presently stand
=>


jagberweenus ahand laidon theshoulderofeach; The hay-
ing tetas Well, neighbours, [thought you twomncker for
Pisald like to see the old house quietly without the morrow
ceowdinit. Isn’t ita jewel ofa house after itskind?
‘Wallycome along, foritis getting towards dinner-
time. Perhaps you, guest, would like aswim be
fore we sit down to what I fancy will be a pretty
fngleas?” Veo Toi Vahoul eta”

“Well, good-bye for the present, neighbour
Pieri Dida. ¥lcsetones Cla selista
fGjins as ancy sheismoresthomeamongstoct
friends here.” €Clara came out of the fields ashe
spoke; and with one look at Elfen I turned and
wentwith Dick, doubting, if Imust say the truth,
whether I should see her again.


CHAPTER XXXII. THE FEAST’S
BEGINNING... THE END.
———_.


CK brought meatonce
intothelittle field which,
UB as I had seen from the
jgarden,was covered with
gaily coloured tents ar-


&


A aclyingonthegrasssome |
fifty or sixty men, wo- |
men, and children, all of :


themin the height of good temper &enjoyment...
withtheir holiday mood on, soto say @" You are
297


A swim
above the


weir


downright rest, which youknowis sgoodforthem,
cy gotoother


ve
the weirdttsmill- There wehadadelightfl swim
in the broad piece of water above the lock, where
the river looked much biggerthan its natural size
from its being dammed up by theweir. Now
we are in a fit mood for dinner,” said Dick, when
we had dressed and were goingthroughtthe grass
2gain; “and certainly of all the cheerful mealsin


year, thisone of haysel isthe cheerfllest not
29


evenexcepting thecorn-harvest feast;forthenthe Forebod-
yearis beginning to fail,andone cannothelphav- ings of the
inga feeling behindall the: gaiety, of thecomingof failing year
the dark days, andtheshorn fields and empty gar-
dens ; and the spring is almost too far off to look
forward to. It is, then, in the autumn, when one
almost believesindeath.”€ “How strangely you
talk,” said I,‘ofsuch a constantly tecurring & con-
sequently commonplacematterasthe sequence of
theseasons.” And indeed these people were like
children about such ahapemed iad whatseemed
tome a quite exaggerated interest inthe weather,
afine day, a dark night,or a brilliant one,and the
ike.“ Strangely?” said he.“‘Isitstrangetosym-
pathise with the year and its gains and losses?”
" Atany rate,” said I, “if youlook upon thecourse
ofthe year ag a beautiful and interesting drama,
which is what I think you do, you should be as
much pleased and interested with the winter and
itstrouble and pain as with this wonderful sum-
merluxury.” “And am I not?” said Dick, rather
warmly ;“onlyI can’t lookupon it as ifI weresit-
ting in a theatre seeing the play going on before
mejmyself talingnoa partofit. Itisdifficult,” said
he, smiling good-humouredly,foranondliterary
camayetll
man like me toexplain mysel proper , like that
dear girl Ellen would ; but | meanthatl am partof
itall,and feelthe pain aswellasthe pleasure inmy
‘own person. It is not done for me by somebody
else, merely that | may eat and drink and sleep ;
299


Leaving the but I myself do my share of it.” In his


river


wayalso,


as Ellen inhers, Icouldseethat Dickhadthatpas,
sionate love oftheearth whichwascommontobut
few people, atleast in the days I knew; in which
the prevailingfeclingamongstintellectual persons
was a kind ofsourdistasteforthe changing drama
ofthe year, forthe life ofearth and its dealings with
men. Indeed, in those days it was thought poctic
and imaginative to look upon lifeas a thing tobe
borne, rather than enjoyed. @ So I mused till
Dick’slaugh brought me back into the Oxford.
shirehayfields. “Onethingseems strange tome,”
saidhe... “that I mustneeds troublemyselfabout
the winter& its scantiness,in the midstofthesum-
merabundance.Ifithadn’thappenedto mebefore,
I should have thought it was your doing, guest;
that you had thrown akindofevilcharm over me.
Now, you know,” said he, suddenly, “that’s onl,
a joke, so you mustn't take itto heart.” € “All
right,” said I; “I don’t,” Yet I did feel somewhat
uneasy athis words, afterall. Wecrossed the cause>
way time,and did not turn back to thehouse,
but went along a path beside afield of wheat now
almostready to blossom. I said: “We do not dine
inthehouse orgarden,then?...asindeed I didnot
Ceeamie hcaieaeeicn forl cansee
that the houses are mostly very small.” € “Yes,
said Dick, “you are right, they are small in this
country-side : there are so many good old houses
left,that people dwella good dealin such small de-
300


tached houses. As to our dinner, we are going to i
have our feast in thechurch. I wish, for te ake, Pee
itwereasbigandhandsome as that ofthe oliRa, Mote-house
man town to the west, or the forest town to the
north;.’. but, however, it will hold usall; & though
itisalittlething, itis beautiful in its way.” € This
wassomewhat newto me, thisdinnerin a church,
and I thought of the church-ales of the Middle
‘Ages; but I'said nothing, and presently we came
faiceotheroad which ran throught village.
Dicklooked up and down it, and seeing only two
stagelinggroupebeforeus, said: “Itseemsasifwe
mustbe somewhat late; they are all gone on; and
the willbe suretomake apointof wating or ou
asthe guestof: ee since you comefromso far.”
@Hehastened ashespoke, & I keptup with him,

and presently we came toa little avenue of lime-

trees which led us straight to the church porch,

from whose open door came thecheerful voices &

iter & varied merriment. € “ Yes,” said Dick

“it’s the coolest place for one thing, this hoteven-

ing. Come along; they will be glad to see you.”
Indeed, in spite ofmy bath, I feltthe weathermore
Bepreatie hai onany day of ourjourney yet, We.
went into the church, which was a simple little
building with onelittle aisledivided from thenave
bythree round arches, achancel,&aratherroomy
transept for so small a building,the windowsmost-


*. Cirencester and Burford hemusthavemeant.
got


Re Gee ER


The feast ly of the graceful Oxfordshire fourteenth century


made ready type. There wasnoarchitectural decoration ine


in the old
church


looked,indeed,asifnone had been attempted since
the Puritans whitewashed the medizval saints
historieson thewall.Itwas,however,gaily dressed
up forthis latter-day festival, with festoonsofflow-
ets from archtoarch, and great pitchers of flowers
standing abouton thefloor; while underthewest
window hung two cross scythes, their blades po-
lished, whiteand gleaming from outof the flowers
thatwreathed them. Butits bestornamentwasthe
crowd of handsome,happy-looking menandwo-
menthatweresetdownto table,& who, with their
bright faces & rich hairover their gayholidayrai-
ment, looked as the Persian poet putsit, likeabed
oftulipsin thesun. Though thechurchwasasmall
one, there was plenty of room; fora small church
aeigeeitars sl onthiseveningthere
wasnoneed tosetcross tablesalong the transepts;
thoughdoubtless thesewould bewantednextday,
when the learned men of whom Dick had been
speaking should be come to take their morehum-


ble part in the haymaking. ;
% = STOOD. on the threshold, with
YR), 6574) the expectantsmileonmy tace ofa


RS


%


man who is going to take partina
festivity whichheisreally prepared
toenjoy. Dick,standing by mewas
$M iooking round the company with


anairof proprietorship in them, Ithought.Oppo-
302


sitemesatClaraand Ellen, with Dick’splaceopen Loveliness

between them: theyweresmiling, buttheisbeau- in a crowd
tiful faces were each turned towards the neigh-
ours on either side, who were talkingtothem, &
they did not seem to see me. I turned to Dickex-
ectinghim to leadme forward, andhe turned his
tome; butstrange to say, though it was smil-
ingandcheerfulasever, itmadenoresponse tomy
glance...nay,he seemed to take no eed atall of
iny presence,&¢ I noticed thatnone ofthe company
fooked at me. A pang shot through me,asofsome
disasterlongexpected and suddenlyrealised. Dick
moved on a little without awordtome. Iwas not
threeyards fromthetwowomen who,though they
hadbeenmycompanionsforsuchashorttime,had
really, as I thought, become my friends. Clara's
facewasturned full uponme now, butshe alsodid
notseemtosee me, though I know] was tryingto
catch her eye with an appealing look. I turned to
Ellen, and she did seem to recogniseme foranin-
stant; buther brightface turned saddirectly,& she
shook her head with a mournful look, and the
nextmomentall consciousness of mypresence had
faded from her face. I feltlonely & sick at heart
pastthe power of words to describe, [hung about
aminute longer, and then went out of the porch
again and through the lime-avenucintothe road,
while the blackbirdssang their strongest from the
bushes aboutmein the hot Juneevening. €@ Once
morewithout any conscious effortof willIsetmy

303


i |


Avoken of facetowardtheoldhouse bythe ford but.

thedream round the corner which led tear aged
came uponafigure strangely contrasting with he
joyous, beautiful people I had left elon we
church Ttwasa man who looked old, bur what
knew from habit, now half forgotten, wos rout
not more than fifty. His face was rugged, eprincd
catherthan dirty shiseyesdullbleared; hchody
bentyhiscalvesthinandspindly, hisfeet deeene
and limping. His clothing wasamixtureof Sere
rags long over-familiarto me. As [passed hinthe
touchedhishatwith some realgood-willandcour
tesy,andmuchservilityInexpressibly shocked,
Thurried pasthim & hastenedalong theroad tha
ledtothe riverandthelowerendofthevillage, but
juddeoly Tanwasit were able oud rong
long to meet me, like anightmare of my childish
days a forawhlel was conscious ofsothingele
than being inthe dark,and whether was walling
or sitting or lying down, I could not tell.


I lay in my bed in my house at dingy Ham,
mersmith thinking about itall and trying tocon-
sider if Iwas overwhelmed with decpairat finding
Thad been dreaming adream;and strange tosay,
I found thatI was not so despairing. ( Or indeed
was it a dream? If so, why was I so conscious all
alongthatl wasreallyseeingall that new lif from
the outside, still wrappedup in theprejudices the
anxieties, the distrust, of this time of doubt an
304


struggle. (All along, though those friends were Vision or
so realtome, [had been feelingas if I hadno busi- dream?

ness amongst them: as though the time would
comewhen they would rejectme, & say, as Ellen’s
last mournful lookseemedto say: “ No, it will not
do; you cannot be of us;you belong so entirely to
the unhappiness of the pe that our happiness


even would weary you, Go back again, now you
fave seenus,and your outward eyeshave learned
that in spite of all the infallible maxims of your
daythereisyet a time of rest in store forthe world,
when mastery has changed into fellowship, but
not before. Go back again, then, & while you live
‘youwill seeall round you people engaged inmak:
Totenliveliveswhich arenot theirown, while
they themselves care nothing for their own real
lives, men who hate life though they fear death.
Gobackand be the happierforhaving seen us, for
Savingadded hope to your struggle, Go on living
while you may, striving, with whatsoever pain &
labourneedsmustbe,to buildup littleby little the
new day of fellowship, and rest and happiness.”
Yes, surely! and if others can see it as I have
seen it, then it may be called a vision rather than
adream.


This book, News from Nowhere or an Epoch


of Rest, was written by William Morris ost

ined by him at the Kelmscott Press, Upoe
Mall, Hemmersmith, in the County of Mite
sex,and finished on the 2and day of November,
i892. Sold by Reeves & Turner, 196, Strand,
Londons


