The American Geography
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_the-american-geography-_morse-jedidiah_1794>. Public domain.

0 —
_ *
— 5 9 * -
.
.
E -
* * «
4 1 - . , 2
* * = *
; .
— - *
>
— — a * 8 ”
. a 5 ;
- oy 4 *
4 — +. *


- * ”
- 1 : — 4
* -
*
bo ” *
8
* * YZ
TY — * * — 9
* 1 4
*
, 1 *
* -
£
. * » * 3
* P p
"> - b
* * 8 „ ©


4


1 vw 5 LT EA þ |
e


AMERICAN GEOGRAPHY;


VIEW or rn PRESENT SITUATION
| OF THE |


UNITED STATES or AMERICA: „


CONTAINING:


| Atronomical Geography ; j Geographical Definitions, Diſcover, and General Deſcription


Of their Boundaries; Mountains; Lakes; Bays, and Rivers; Natural Hiſtory ; Production; : Population; 3 ö
: Goverament ; Agriculture; Commerce; Manufackurgs, and Hiſtory.— A conciſe Account | 1
of the War, and of the importanzemowhich have ſucceeded : |


A bertevkemfossesrar ION or-


KENTUCKY, 1 THE WESTERN TERRITORY, THE TERRITORY SOUTH or oho, 1
= AND. VERMONT: : 5 Zh =


1


Of their Extent; Civil Diviſions ; » Chief Towns; 5 Climates ; Soils; Trade; .; . en Courts
of Juſtice; Colleges; Academies; Religion ; Iſlands; Indians; Literary and Humane *
| Springs; Curioſities; Hiſtories; Mines; 3 Minerals; * Strength, &.


WITH A VIEW OF THE


BRITISH,. SPANISH, FRENCH,. PORTUGUESE, AND. DUTCH DOMINTONS, oN THE: 3
5 CONTINENT,. AND IN THE WEST INDIES, 4A
„ Ap or 4
By TJEDIDIAH MORSE, A. M. 4
A NEW | EDITION, *
a REVISED, CORRECT ED, AND GREATLY ENLARGED, BY THE AUTHOR, :
AND ILLUSTRATED WITH TWENTY-FIVE MAPS. . | ” Ks
— wäJͥaũ On — — — — —
London: ü | — = | -
PRINTED' FOR JOHN STOCKDALE, PICCADILLY. _ __
E ORE ff 9


2


r


*7 7 2 1 *


G


ä


3 ES W. | 6-4 * , - 2 2 : , G N 0 "= . 4 22 : 5 * 1 E r


*


ADVERTISEMENT.


T


communications from the Author, to the end of July laſt. It was the
Publiſher s intention to have given a complete Set of Maps on a very extenſive


ſcale; but finding that Mr. Arrowſmith had in great forwardneſs two large


ones of America, compiled from authentie materials that he had recently re-


ceived, and knowing that preference would be given to him, being univerfally
and deſervedly allowed to be one of the firſt Geographers now living, the Pub-
liſher has ꝓreſented him with the whole of the documents he had i in his poſſeſſion,


and declined proceeding with the plates that he had already begun - which of
courſe, had they been finiſhed, muſt have greatly enhanced the price of the pre- 2
| ſent volume. Moſt of the Readers will probably be ſatisfied with the Twenty-
five Maps now given on a {mall ſcale, which of themſelves form a complete:
American Atlas, Such as with for further information will be highly gratified |
by the ſight of Mr. Arrowſmith's Maps, which he underſtands will ſoon be


Publiſhed under the following titles:


1ſt. A Map of the United States of North America on a s Seale, ; ſhowing


the Progreſs of Geography to the preſent Time.


2d. A Map of that Part of North America to the North of FREY FR 5


of Latitude, exhibiting all the Diſcoveries made in the Interior Part of that
Continent, |


To the preſent Edition 1 is added a ſhort Account of EUROPE, ASIA, and
AFRICA,


raab. U—:! W. gg


HE preſent Edition of the . Work is brouglit Jown, by regular


Y F „a —
_ ö F* EP OE
rere
Y * . ” 4 by + F F | 5 bs


: h e WR * 0 —"_ * , 13 x l
_ Fong A : — 6 " o — . wp , — 28/3, . q \ — 2 , es eds N 4 9
ETD n "BAY TTY - » +4 4 r 9 Fry OF IM a 2 $53 g 9 3 : 5
> — 1 1 wW Pg \ * 4 ES. 1 8 "I p ns \ — 4 * * 2 S d 2 * "x 1 © *
4 COT . 2 \ 4 1 * 7 f 4 e N
1 - : = . * / 5
* * ”
, .
a — a 4 a * 8 * 1
. . ® .
2 —


| * Book may with more propriety be confiltred as a New Work, than « *


new: Edition, being ſo much altered and enlarged.


The Science of Geography, like many other Sciences, is not ee 55
rapid are the improvements made iu it by travellers and navigators — 2 22 do:


alterations and revolutions ſucceed'each other, that it is not an eaſy matter for a


Geog rapher 10 keep face with them. What is this year a: geographical truth, may”


the next year be a geographical error, and require correction. The aftonifbing.
progreſs of things i in the United States fince the year 1789, will readily. ſuggeſt*


to the reader the reaſon of the many: alterations: and additions in this new Edition. |
of the American. Geography, as contained in the following: Work. .
| The Author does not forget here very gratefully to acknowledge his great oblia


gations to ſeveral of the gentlemen who ſuſtain ſome of the higheſt offices in the:


general government, and to many gentlemen F reſpectability in the ſeveral States,


for their very liberal and valuable: communications, which have contributed not


a little to render the work accurate and uſeful. He hopes that ſuch uſe has been:
made of Ibeir . riendly affiftance,. as will induce them 10 continue it, and lo.


afford in future every information, and n bin, which may. tend to render the.


worl more .


Cuantzorows, ice 2), 1793.


Y


*


Of the ſeveral Aftronomical Syſtems /


. BS +»


eonon
Of Aſtronomy, as connected with


and ene. to the ſcience of” *
Geography, Lf 1


of the World,
Table of the Diameters, Periods, deo.
of the ſeveral * |


2
: Of Comets 1 id.
Of Fixed Stars, 5 5
Of Geography, its Riſe and Noers 8
; Figure, M , and Motion of -


the Earth, y OG 12


Doctrine of "the 8 8 N 14


Table of Cou ntries and remarkable *
Places, ſituated in the ref]
mates north of the


eqntained in a Degree of Longitude,


Net of Hhding thi Latitades and


ngitudes of Places from Celeſtial, 2
"Obſervations, _ 9 mid.


off "the. Globes, and their Uſe, * ws 22


Fg 3


Problems ſolved. on the Celeſtial Globe, 28


Mapner in Which different Nations


\ reckon Time, 30
Geo graphical Theorems „ or er,
tions, 3 le
Of Maps, and their Uſe, _ = 32


General Obſervations: conicernin g Heat
and Cold, AYERS TRAY 5 33


Temperature of Ae Pliced , ac-
- cording to their TIN H wo


wk |


Equator, = : - |
: Table ſhewing the number of Miles


392


——


is ks, | ” & 5 WE 9
"of N. 'T S.


| Genera Deſcription of Ame, in 1
Which the Queſtions, whence, and
by whom was America firſt peopled,


are diſcuſſed Account of the In-


dians—New Diſcoveries on the


9 orth-weſt Coaſt, &c. : 52
NORTH AMERICA. ©


9 Account of its Diſcovery ane
Settlement, in Chronological Order, 85
Boundaries Extent, Bays, * .

Straits, and Iſlands, 7
| Diviſions of North America, DE 98;


Table of the different Countries, Pro-
vinces, and States of N orth Ame
rica to whom belongi ng— Chief

Tons, and Number of Inhabi- 8

| | tants, > dis 260 | 85
e Daxisn Auges.


—_
2 ey


(Greenland,


Boundaries and Extent, Face of whe 9


N Population, „Kc. &c. "hid.
E Bnrrisn AMERICA. 2 68. WEL)
New Britain, „ e GELS UL. 1207
Upper and Lad; 111

'| Iſland of Cape Breton, 47-7 a
Nova Scotia, ; 118
Iſland of St. John's, c 122

4 Newfoundland, iT alu ibid. |

| Done e OP Un Ta


Dh General Deſcription of the United


3 of America, including a Hiſ-


15 tory of the late War, and man
Theory of the Winds, - dan 4 7 - other uſeful and entertaining Mat-
Ane of the Tides, | ab; al . ere £ TW - bes, CST
Length of Miles in different antries, 135 3
Natural Diviſions of the Earth, : | CI | Graxp Den ak un Urne e
aan of the Gregorian, or New! : Liſt of A 8 dus d pods by Ms 7
o N N DD
| Table, exhibiting the StiperficiaCon-" A 2. - Pennant, | 25
. tents of the whole Globe e 11 Hl Grand Diviſon, or Northern r
Mles, &c. &c. n "nl N ery Jes, ZONES,
1:9 AMERICA. "3b New England, „„ 273
9 of its , —Y WY 45-1. Vermont, 11 50 ele


New


1


1 ö
4 : *
43 0
- - =
bs.
8 —
. $4
\ » . -
N F
»
Rx
* De
x
— = > x
3 F,
©
"4% >
& * | 3
: a D. *
. 4 *
* 8. S
* 2
_ N 5
; |
"Hi
7 8
= 3 -
*% 4 3
+ BY
3 8
.
th L +4 .
5
* ; ;
15 * j
8 ;
F *
t *
n


New Hampſhire, _

Niſtrict of ns
Maſſachuſetts, .. / © idol

Rhode Iſland, F


Connecticut,


Paragua, or La Plata, 35289


Liſt of American Quadrapeds, byMr.


34
Second Grand Divius of Made due, 370
New Jork, 0. S . 372


*


New N 39 2110.9 TEES oy 403


1 21


Delaware, 449
Territory W of __ Oe, 454


Third Grand Prog or NO 1 States, 464 |
Maryland, ui 1 75 8 ibid.


Indiana, 2 5 SR I att. 504
Kentucky, FFF -


North Carolina, Es 313


Territo South of hio, "II 2
South Garotina.” 0 . Lee 471


Georgia, . 550 |


Spaniſh Du 3 in North America.


Faſt an We ory 56s
Mexico, or 'New Spain, ET 27


"SOUTH 1
Spaniſb Dominion e ee 9


| Terra Firma, or Caſtile del Oro, d | f


587 |


. America.


Brazil, E


| French America.


G 1 88 1


Surrinam, or Dutch — 594


Aboriginal America, * or that Part which the


dngians Pale.
Amazonia, 30'988
Patagonia, 50 e


Pennant, | you


0


WEST INDIA ISLANDS.


T General — of them, 0 608.


»


|
1


Britiſh Weſt Indies.


A.


St. Chyiſtopher's,,. 92


Antigua.
Grenada, and the « Grenadines, ,


| Domi

| St. Vincent,
Nevis, and Wee
Barbuda,

| Anguilla,

Bermudas, or Sommers' I ande,
ucay's,. or W e
00 Iflands,


1


H iſpaniola, or rt, Domingo, |
Porto Niee,
|Drnidad,

| Margatetis, |
Juan Fernandes,
Se SR aner Iain 10
NMartinico,

Gaudaloupe,


*


|


Curaſſou, *
Daniſb Weſt Indies
St, "IE


St. Croix, or Santa Cruz, 5 |


New Diſcoveries. |
Northemn Archi pelago,
The Pelew Iſlands,

. The Marqueſas Iſlands,

| Ingraham's Iſlands,
Otaheite, or
Society Iſlands,
The Friendly Iſlands,
New Zealand,
Continent of New Holland


The New: Hebrides 24 Ig
New Guinea . . 9e


New Ireland þ


Sandwich


Spaniſh Weh bn. MIS
Cuba, bo OY


— . 4 2 * 5
ft — 8 4 +> ” * 7
4 b * | : 11
4
e N a
4. f 1 1 ; 4 1
4 *. 4 4 we. 3 *
*


St. Ang „


Ka 95 27 „ ee
St. Euſtatis, or Euſtatia, | TY as


King _ 8 mand, ibid.


9 N r 1 *


Eu rOpe,
Denmark, |
Lapland, | 1
Sweden,
Muſcovy,
Great Britain and Ireland,
Germany,
Pruſſia,

Auſtria,

Bohemia,


Hungary,
Tranſylvania,


Poland,

Switzerland,

| Netherlands F

Holland,

Auſtrian and French Netherlands,

France,

Spain,

Portugal,

Italy,

Turkey in Europe,

Iſlands, Seas, Mountains, Kc. of
Europe, 5

Alia,


Page


655


660


664
665


674


675
97 J


643
646
647
648
650
652


657
658


659


661
662
663


66

&
670 |
671
672


|


Portia,


Turkey in Afia,

Tartary in Aſia,

The Empire of China,

Indoſtan, or India on this ſide the
Ganges,


The Peninſula of India vas the


Ganges,


Arabia,
Aſiatic Iſles,
Africa,
Egypt,

The States of "TR


Of Africa, from the Tropic of Can
der to the Cape n


African Iſlands,
General Remarks,
Federal Money,


Calculatians upon Population „
Index,


lid of Books amd Amhors


quoted and referred to in the


following Work, ke the laſt
Tage l


RN Ares. 3
| 8 Page.
Britiſh Weft Indies. ES,
arbadoes, . age
Rhode Ifland, St. Chaift@phar's, . % en nb
Connecticut, } | Antigua, OT” =
Second. Grout Divi, of Moat States, 370 | Grenada, and the Grenadines, 1 88


ONT I eee,
Feunfhlxanizz. 419 Barbuda, re oth WR


Delaware, 449 A 85 ; by
nguilla, 8
Territory Narben of the one, 754 Bermudas, or Sommers Iſlands, | ibid.


e n or Wee e 1 Fo a, or Bahama IA ads, 2

Indiana, r 593 | | . Spaniſh Heh na, XAT = IPD

, Kentucky, . 504 Cuba, Rs ein
. North Carolin, — 373 Hiſpaniola, or St. Domingo, 1
Territory South ebe, 327 | Porto Ries, ne e git DI/EULE 338

South Carolina, | 330 Tania |

Spaniſh D in North America. I Apa Periaaides, IT Ibid


8 1 Dann han. ny
E


2 or New Spain, EF 297" 572 St. e 5 Eph 55 ke 8 i .
55 SOUTH AMERICA; wel J Tevage, EE 5
. : Spaniſh Dominions in South America. 1 | - Dutch Wi an 1 ds
ot. Ediltativs or WO. Fo".
| Terra Firma, ee ey Cy ou, K eB £4
1 Fara : "jk m, * | „ 8 Croix,. or ns.”
3 oy oy Hy 591 | bf New Diſcoveries.
Y 1 French e, „ 'Northero Archi pelago, War:
"Dutch 1 - 1 | The Marqueſas Iſlands,


'7 | Ingraham s Iflands,
Surtinam, eee 594 Otaheite, or King George. 8 ms,
An America, or that Part which the Society Inands, . f
1 Lale. 5 The Friendly Iſlands,

n 2 5 3 598 New Zealand,


New Hampſhire,
Nifimct of Main,
utter


"Rk Ir G af,


a 4 * * * * " -
F ; er Rada * 2 1

eee be, a eee

* 5 - 1 i K 4 of
— .
* 6
. ; - :
*
*
= 89 „ 4


r


— 2 5 R
24 ee eee


. —


* .


_ - Patagonia, 500 | Continent of New Holland ts

_— __ Liſtof American Quadrupeds by Mr, The New Hebrides | „

Pennant, _ oz | New Guinea -————2%5-03>- 2
WEST INDIA ISLANDS. New Ireland.” 0M

2 General Deſeription of them 608, Sandwich PACT ati e


—


CONTENTS
Page


Eu rope,

Denmark,
Lapland, 93

Sweden, |

Muſcovy,

Great Britain and roland,
Germany,

Pruſſia,

Auſtria,

Bohemia,
Hungary,
Tranſylvania,
Poland,

; Switzerland,

5 Netherlands,

Holland,


Auſtrian rand French Netherlands,


France,

Spain

Portugal,

Italy,
Turkey in Europe,


IIlands, Seas, Mountains, &e, of


Europe,
| Aſia, 9 8 2 To


.
*
3 75


647


660


662
663
664

665.
667


643
646


648
650
652


657
658


659
661


668
670
671
672


67


675


658


Turkey in 1

Tartary in Aſia,

The Empire of China,

Indoſtan, or India on this ſide the
Ganges,


The Peninſula of India beyond the
655 .

Perſia,
Arabia.
Aſiatic Iſles,


Ganges,


Africa,
Egypt,


The States of Barbary,


Of Africa, from the Tropic of Can-
cer to the Cape of Good Hope,

African Iſlands,

General Remarks,

Federal Money, ©

Calculatians upon Population, „

Index,


For a Liſt of Books and Authors


quoted and referred to in the


following Work, ſee the laſt
85 oy


Page

678
681
682


686


688
689


690


693
694
695


. 696


698


700


701


ih.


795.


18.


23 19.


| 20, —
2 5 A
mY


1
| 44
2.


A Lift of the MAPS, with Directions for placing them.
DAP of America in general
—— Upper and Lower Canada, „5455 ey pb, rg IA 111
“WWE > - > =,» ewe ws; 118;
— r „„ ⁵ĩ˙· C 8 — r
Northern and Middle States, chmproticading the Weſtern: 105
Territory, and the Britiſh Dominions in North America, 5
Map of the State of Vermont
— — New Hampſhire, 25 „ —
— — — Maſſachuſetts, 335 — - —
; 1 | STR: RODS ĩ 4 Ong ITY ks
= 1 ES = eu 2 ee e 2 Kl 7 — | FL |


Map of the Southern States, containing Virginia 5: North Carolina,


South Carolina, and n * the We Provinces | in Eaſt
and Weſt Florida 4


— ä — — _” 2 — — — — * — PL —


Plan of the City of Waſhington, —— — 55 . 55 468
Map of the States of Virginia, Mary] and, and Is.


LY ns”


—— Back Settlements, —
ae State of N with a Plan of the © Raps 3 in \ the
| River Ohio,


—


— — State of North Carolina, 5 TE
—— Tenneſſee Government, — — . *
State of South Carolina, 5

2. Map of Faſt and Weſt Florida, - - - - - —
South America, Se e
—— the Welt Indies, - - 1
Wand vith the New 'Diforeris, «=.


_ OG 4


Ti darth is now tre ohio” as a Planet, 40 th in voce Gi fix ;


naturally invited the attention of este e obfervation of the heaven
bodies afforded them amuſement, 458 at the ſame time affiſted them in travelling in


repreſented. |


and light to the planets which revolve round it. The paths which the planets deſcri


rather interior planets—the four laſt, becauſe my move without the earth 8 orbit, are
called ſuperior, or more properly exterior planets.


whole number, before ſyppoſed to be only ve, is ſeven... The feventh | is neareſt to lariet, and. he
| 1 that of the latter? in about one day and nine hours,


, ” - *
: FT
14 * „ * 8 1 £ . 1 ;
: yo" a 4 F


Ft ASTRONOMY, . nel, 165, 41 22 fo, the ; Seraxe 7 3 5 =
TH TEIN i 1 Aer Nos Yor Tor =


n "es ; F =?
#


other bodies, of a fimilar nature, revolves round the Sun as its center. Some
acquaintance with the motions, times, diſtances, and magnitudes of theſe heayenly
bodies is neceſſary in order to a complete knowledge of Geography. The foience
which treats of the planets and other heavenly bodies, is called 29 Hence tha
propriety of introducing this work with a ſhart account of that ſcience, _.
W was firſt Ae to by the ſhepherds, on the beautiful plains of E


oil Babylon, Their employment ſed them to contemplate the ſtars. While their


flocks, in the filence of the e MoS en Joyin, ſweet repoſe, the angled ſky


the night. A ſtar guided the ſhepherds to the manger where our bleſſed Saviour was 5
born. By the aid of a lively ination, they diftributed the ſtars into a number of 5
conſtellations or Companies, 5 ich they gave the name of the animals Which ther


The Sun, the moſt glorious of the heavenly luminaries, is the unte of |
in their revolutions are called their orbits. The n of planets in che Solar Syſ- :


tem is ſeven; whoſe names, according to their nearneſß to the fun, are Mercury, 6 þ I


Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and the new planet Herſchel. The two
firſt of theſe, 'becaufs they move within the orbit of the carth, are called inferior, or a


To expreſs another diſtinction, theſe ſeven | tat anets are called pr imary planets, 3 in


reference to fourteen other bodies, which are called ſecndary planets, moons, or ſatellites,


which revolve round their reſpective primaries from weſt to caſt, and at the ſame time


move with them round the Sun. The earth has one ſatellite or moon, which perſorms
its revolution in. 29d/"72h, 44m. at the diſtance of about 60 ſemidiameters of the


earth, or 239,190 miles, and is carried with the earth round the fun once in a yr.
Jupiter has four moobs; Satutn bas ſeven,“ and is alfo encompaſſed With a broad
ring. The diameter of the ring is, to the- diameter of Saturn, as 9 to 4; and the E


ſpace between the body of Saturn and the: ring is equal to the breadth of the ring.


e 7
* The e De. Herſchel has lately diſcovered two other Satellites belong} gto Sui: thax |


fxth
| ah


B 5 Herſchel


next, "The ſyderial revolution of the former he ſuppoſes to be Ln ad in About tee ty<tWo 10 Bank


| | 1 ö "> | £ * * r 2 l
0 1 . : | | | | *


& e
FF n PORE Dt has
Herſchel“ has two moons, one of which revolves i in about nine, tlie other f in about
thirteen and an halt days.


Of the ſeveral ASTRON OMICAL SYSTEMS of the Wonlp.


BY the Ta ſyſtem i is meant an hypotheſis or ſuppoſition of à certain owder and ar-
rangement of the ſeveral parts of the univerſe, by which the aſtronomers explain all the
phenomena or appearance of the heavenly bodies, their motions, changes, &. The


moſt famous ſyſtems, or hypotheſes,” are the-Ptolemaic; the Ra OT: ä and!
the ö or W Syſtem.


This 65 dem, ſo called ae Claudius Piers; a a celebrated aſtronomer of N a
ſium, in Egypt, who adopted and defended the prevailing ſyſtem of that age, ſuppoſes
the earth immoveably fed in the center of the univerſe ; and that the- moon, the pla-
nets, and the ſtars, al move round it from eaſt to weſt, once in twenty-four hours, in

the following order: the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
and the fixed ſtars. Theſe were all ſuppoſed to be fixed in ge cryſtalline ſpheres, |
and to be included | in N called the, Primum Mobile, whacl gives motion to all the
- reſt.
This ſyſtem owed its ori gin to the ſenfible appearances of the celeſtial motions. It
was taken for granted, that the motions thoſe bodies appeared to poſſeſs, were real;
and not dreaming of any motion in the earth, nor being acquainted with the qiſtinc-
tions between abfolute, relative, ,or apparent motion, the philoſophers were incapable.
df forming adequate ideas of theſe particulars, and thence reduced to the neceſſity of
1 being miſled by their own ſenſes, for want of that aſſiſtance which aſter ages produced. .
It ĩs eaſy to N they had no notion of any other ſyſtem. but our own, nor of any
other world but the earth on which, we live. They were perſuaded that all things were -
made for the uſe of man; that all the ſtars 0 contained in one concave ſphere, con-
Sed at an equal diſtance from the earth ; and-that the Primum Mobile was circum-
ibed by the empyrean Heaven, of a og form, which they ſuppoſed, to. be the bliſsful
abode of. departed ſpuits., 'Bi modern obſervations: and. diſcoveries have ſufficiently
ſhewn' the abſurdities of this 17 em, ſo that it is now abandoned by all the learned, and
1 hard] ever mentioned but to he ex ploded. Even in the infancy af aſtronomy, it was
foun inſufficient to account for all the motions of the heavenly bodies, without having -
recourſe to ſuch abſurd fupponitgns that a. noy ice in literature would be ee to»
opole. . þ
| ; 7X mm” 27 The BRAHEAN SYSTEM. | e eee
J 5 1 a nobleman of, Denmark, and one of — . pr Holes 3
£ of bis time, pr ſed another ſyſtem to account ſor the motion of the heavenly bodies.
1 Unwilling to a of. the motion of the earth, and convinced that the Ptolemaic hy-
potheſis adam ue, he contrived: another, different from. any, thing, before of-


3


. 1 N { 3 > ;

=_ -This planet Was Aiſcovered by. William Herſch bel, 1 LD F. R. 85 1 16s. In a p HARD Dr.
Herſchel communicated to the Royal Socket in London, i ig. ziving an account of the e ements of this
new planet, and its two ſatellites, he Fre that one of theſe ſatellites revolves in about nine days, -the -
other in about thirteen and an half. The planet moves at about double the diſtance of Saturn= The quantity

of matter is ſeventeen times greater than the quantity of matter in the. earth; its magnitude about 80 times
greater; its denfity abaut 4 times leſs; and the power of gravity on its ſurface makes a heavy body fall 18
Ker in a ſecond. The Doctor, for the purpoſe of making greater diſcoveries in the heavens, has conſtructed
& grand refletiing, lelekcore, forty feet long, and N ſuch an as chat it is eaſy to walk through it.


ur. Price's Letter a Pr. Stiles, 1788.
. b fered:


INTRODUCTION, 3


4 to the world. In this hypothefis, the carth is ſuppoſed to be at reſt: in the center

of the univerſe, and the ſun, together with the planets 7 fixed ſtars, to revolve about
the earth in twenty-four hours; and at the ſame time all the planets, except the moon,
revolve about the ſun. But this was even mare abſt ard than 27 of $08 Y, and at
actin, cell was fo0n exploded. | | 3


The OPER Hl or "Tow Sorar SrsrEM.


* Coen the author of this ſyſtem, was born at Thorn, in Royal Prufſia, i in 1273.
5 This hypotheſis, which is now uirvetfllly adopted by all the learned in Europe, ſup-
poſes the ſun to be in the center of the hyltem, and that all the planets move round him uy.
tlie order we have alrcady mentianed. Theſe, together with the comets, form the con-
ſtituent parts of the Solar Syſtem. Sce Plate, where this is repreſented, and 6.2 which
an adequate idea of the whole may be cafily abtained.
But it muſt be obſerved, that, though the orbits of the planets are circles i in tho
ſcheme, ine are not really to, but- ellipſes, and the ſun placed in one of the focus's.
All the planets have one common focus, in which the 1 is placed. This ſuppoſition 5
readily folves all the appearances obſervable in the motion of the planets, and alſe
agrees with the ſtricteſt philaſophical and mathematical reaſoning. |
All the planets, in their revolutions, are ſometimes nearer to, and fandetimes farther
from, the Sun; a conſequence of that luminary's not being placed in the center of each
orbit, and their being ellipſes. Hence, alſo, we ſee the reaſon why the planets move
8 faſter as they approach nearer to the ſan, and ſlower as they recede from the fun.
If a right line, called by ſome the vector radius, be drawn from the fun through any
planet, and ſuppoſed to revolve round the ſun with the planet, this line will deſcribe, _
or pats over every part of the 9 of os orbit; 5 ſo that che vector ere ang be fai
to deſoribe the area of the orbit. : |
In the ſolar ſyſtem are obſerved two principal laws which regulate the motions of al 5
the planets. Theſe laws are the following: 15 - Bot.
I, e The planets deſcribe equal areas in 1 times?” That! is, the vector eiche in
equal portions of time, nee e pegs areas or r portions of _ en contained within
the planet's orbit. | |
2. © The ſquares of the x riodical times of the planets are as the eubes of e
diſtances from the fun.” That is, as the ſquare of the time Which any planet takes te
deſcribe its orbit, is to the ſquare of the time taken by any other lane to run through
its orbit; ſo is the cube of the mean diſtance of the former From the fun t0 A er of
the mean diſtance of the latter from the ſun. .
I Theſe are the two famous laws of Kepler, a e ndnemen whe flourithed'about ;
the beginning of the ſeventeenth century, and who deduced them from a multitude of
8 ; but the firſt who demonſtrated theſe 2000} was the ue Sir de N
Newton.
By the ſeeond law, the relative! diſinnoes of the plants moth the dun are un $ and
were the real diſtance of ay one of them determined, the abſolute diftaness of all the
others would be obtained. By the tranſit of Venus over the ſult in 1761, we now
know the real diſtances of the planets from the ſun much better than before: theſe,
together with the other neceſſary particulars for Og a W idea * the bowed
— are 3 in Sem wt tablo: 8


, . 7 2 ; N 5 . -
* ” — 4 1 I
; : : » 22 1477 14 E D 2 1
i # N 2 4441 144 S A 14 4 * 33.5 $ 5
— .
. 4


9 £4 : K 4 * *
b 8 * . : 5 TY *7 3 : , 75 12 , — * 75 wy z g 1 * »£
a *-" TV 25,48 ö Tk © "72 8 SM ie : 13 |
* :
. 7
- s . * 3 /
4
* 1


5
=
1

;

1

5
l
'

2

ö

i


of their orbits, and; after a ſhort


4 | INTRODUCTION: e
A TABLE of the Diameters, Periods, be. of the ſeveral Planets in the Solar Syſtem.


[


PIT: Tit TT INCY EMT TOE n r
Names of Diameter * Mean * Annual periods Diurnel W lourly mo- ourly mo- Lnclination]
iN wa 1 77 from the ſun. | round ſun. ion on its axis. 23 bit. CY — werd. "1

: I , 1 be 1 d. h. m. 1 1
Sun . we => . d. h 25 6 S 3.818 8 9 1
excury , . 3,000 | eee 87 23 | unknown | 109,699 Dru unknown}
enus | 9,330 |. 068,891,486 | 0 224 17 | 24 8 o 80, 295 43] : |
FTarth 216 95:17 3,000 1 8 0.0 | 08,243 | 1,042
Moon 6 JWT
Mars 55400 deen ] 1 321 17 | © 24 40 55,287 556
Jupiter 1 94,000 | 404,990, 97 11 314 18 © 9 is6 | 29,083 | 25,920
78,000 7,956,130 | 29 176 15 | unknown 22, 101 unknown
— 637,660 | x $00,000,000 1 A. e unknown ditto.


* the above Table, a competent idea of the Solar Syſtem may be obtained.


Te COME T 8.
; Baden the 1 and ſtars mentioned above, we perceive, in the cmd of the


| W many other bodies belonging to the ſyſtem of the ſun, that ſeem to have


much more irregular motions. Theſe are the comets, that, deſcending from the far


diſtant parts of the ſyſtem with great rapidity, ſurpriſe us with the ſingular appearance


of a train, or tail, which accompanies them, become viſible to us in the lower parts


ay, Co off again to vaſt diſtances, and diſappear.
ich move in all poſſible directions. Some revolve


They are large opaque bodies,


from weſt to eaſt; ſome from eaſt to weſt; others from ſouth to north, or from north to


ſouth. Their orbits have very different inclinations to the ecliptic. Some have con-


that the comets were intended by the all-wiſe Creator to connect ſyſtems,


| yſt
and chat ** of their ſeveral orbits. e the ſun, and one of the fixed ſtars. The


figures of the comets are very different. Some of them emit beams on all fides like
hair, and are called hairy comets, others have a long, fiery, tramſparent tail projeting
fromthe part which is ok to the ſun. Their magnitudes alſo are different. Some
appear mo bigg er than ſtars of the firſt magnitude; others larger than the moon.

©, Though ſome of the ancients had more juſt notions of theſe bodies, yet the opinion


having 1 2 that they were only meteors generated in the air, like thoſe we ſee


in it-every night, and in a few moments vaniſhing, no care was taken to obſerve or


reads) their phenomena accurately, till of late. Hence this part of aſtronomy is


y is
voly inapertort. The general doctrine is, that they are ſolid, compact bodies, like


ä 3 planets, and N Hs by the ſame laws of gravity, ſo as to detcribe equal areas


in equal times by radii drawn from the common center. They move about the ſun,


in ry eecentric ellipſes, and are of much greater denſity than the earth; for ſome


of them are heated in every period to fuch a degree as would vitrify or diſſipate any
ſabſtance known to us. Sir Iſaac Newton computed the heat of the comet that ap-


peared 1 in the year ear 1680, when neareſt the fun, to be 2000 times hotter than red bot
iron, and that being thus heated, it muſt retain its heat till it comes round again,
although its period ſhould be more than 205 000 years; and it is computed to be only


9 NN to Dr. Herſchel, it is about 8 times larger ow the earth, which would make its diameter


+ — E
— — 0 *


575.


DD > 8 = * einm 1 2 n 88 :
2 r 3 FF L
\ $a * - 2 8 . 2 *”% *
wa fer J ͤ ͤ On... 2 BU ape 2 08 >


 INTRODVUCTION' 5
The mumber of comets belonging to our ſyſtem is unknown. All thoſe which


*


have been obſerved have moved through the ethereal regions, and the orbit of


the planets, without ſuffering the leaſt ſenſible refiſtance in their motions, which


ſufficiently proves that the planets do not move in ſolid orbs. Of all the comets, the ;


periods of three only are known with any degree of certainty, being found to return
at intervals of 75, 129, and 575 years; and of theſe, that which appeared in 1686


is the moſt remarkable. This comet, at its greateſt diſtance, is about 11 thouſand


200 millions of miles from the ſun, while its leaſt diſtance from the center of the ſun,
is about 490 thouſand miles; within leſs than one third part of the ſun's ſemidiameter


from his ſurface. . In that part of his orbit which is neareſt to the ſun, it flies with


the amazing velocity of 880,000 miles in an hour; or above 244 miles in a ſecond:
a velocity much greater than any we are acquainted with, that of light excepted; and


the ſun, as ſeen from it, appears 100: degrees 1n breadth, conſequently 40,000 times


as large as he appears to us. The aſtoniſhing diſtance that this comet runs out ints
empty ſpace, naturally fuggeſts to our imagination the vaſt diſtance between our ſun


and the neareſt of the fixed ſtars, of whoſe attractions all the comets muſt keep clear,


to return periodically. and go round the fun. Dr. Halley, to whom every part of
aſtronomy, but this in a particular manner, is highly indebted, has joined His labouss


to thoſe of the great Sir Iſaac Newton on this ſubject. - Our 6 was out of the


way when this comet laſt paſſed near her orbit: but It requires a more pertect kn w
ledge of the motion of the comet, to be able to judge if it will always paſs by us
with ſo little effect; for it may be here obſerved, that the comet, in one part of his


orbit, approaches very near to the orbit of our earth: fo that in ſome ' revolutions, it


_ upprovet near enough to have very conſiderable if not fatal — upon Mt. 5


Of. the . FIXED STARS.


ee den thigh, they: ob nat est Set t the Wi Fa yl
conſidered here, as they are of infinite uſe in the practice of geography. They are


readily known from the planets by their twinkling. They are obſerved never to


change their ſituations with reſpect to each other, and hence they obtained the name
of fixed ftars; they thine by their own light; and there is the greateſt reaſon to
think they are ſuns fixed in the centers of other dyſtems, having planets and comets |
revolving round fhem like our ſun. They appear of various fizes, - owing to their
different diſtances; thoſe fizes are generally diſtinguiſhed into ſix or - ſeven elaſſes,
called magnitudes the largeſt and brighteſt are ſuid to be of the firſt magnitude;


thoſe of the next -claſs, or degree of brightneſs, are called ſtars of the ſecond mag-


nitude, and ſo on to the laſt, or thoſe juſt viſible to the naked eye. But, befides
| theſe, there are ſcattered in every part of the heavens, a -prodigious number of
Others, called teleſcopic ſtars, from their being -inviſible without the aſſiſtance of that

_ anſtrument. Great part of the modern aſtronomy, indeed, owes both its riſe and


perfection to that admirable. machine. The diſtance between the earth and the
neareſt fixed ftar is aſtomfhang.  'The orbit of the earth is at leaſt 162 millions ot
miles in diameter; yet this prodigious difference has no effect on the diftance of the


ſtar, which appears as far from the earth, when in the neareſt, as in the fartheſt point
of its orbit. It has been computed, by ſome of the moſſ able aſtronomers, that if a


cannon ball continued to move with the ſame velecity as when firſt diſcharged from
the piece, or 480 miles an hour, it would not reach the neareſt fixed tar i in leſs than
700,000 years. Light, which is tranſmitted” from one body to another almoſt inſtan-
arial; takes up more time in paſſing from the fixed ſtars to this earth, chan i
2 0


-


E TNTRODUCTION,

do in making a voyage to Europe; ſo that if all the fixed ſtars were now ſtrack out
of exiſtence, they would appear to us to keep their ſtations for ſeveral months yet ta
come. It is impoſſible, therefore, that they ſhould borrow their light from the ſun, as
do the planets. The diftance, therefore, is too great for the power of human beings
40 conceive ; the underſtanding is bewildered, and loſt in the contemplation; But,
though the fixed ftars are placed at ſuch immenſe diſtances from us and from each
other, and are, doubtleſs, ſuns illuminating different worlds, yet aſtronomers, in
order to facilitate their computations, conſider them all as equally diſtant from our
ſun, forming the furface of a ſphere, incloſing our ſyſtem, and called the celeſtial
ſphere: a ſuppoſition which may be ſtrictly admitted, conſidering the aſtoniſhing diſ-
tance of the neareſt fixed ſtar. n OS OO ̃ 8
A conſtellation is a number of ſtars which appear to he in the neighhourhood of
one another on the ſurface of the celeſtial ſpliere, and which aſtronomers, for their
eaſy remembrance, ſuppoſe to be circumſcribed with the outlines of ſome ancient or
other figure, whereby the motions of the planets is more readily deſcribed and com-
poſed. Theſe conſtellations are eighty in number; twelve of which are in the zodiac,
thirty-ſix in the northern, and thirty-two in the ſouthern hemiſphere. The number
of ftars in the whole amounts to two thouſand eight hundred and forty-threc, of
which twenty are of the firſt, ſixty-five of the ſecond, two hundred and five of the
third, four hundred and eighty- five of the fourth, fix hundred and forty-eight of the
fifth, and one thouſand four hundred and twenty of the ſixth magnitude.
Theſe ſtars, by not altering their ſituation in reſpect to one another, ſerve aſtrono-
mers as fixed points, whereby the motions of other bodies may be compared; and,
accordingly, their relative poſitions have been ſought after with the moſt aſſiduous
care, during many ages, and catalogues of the obſervations have, from time to time,
been publiſhed by thoſe who have been at the pains to make them. Among theſe, a
the moſt copious, and at the ſame time the moſt accurate, is that called the Hiſtoria

1 Caeeleſtis of Mr. Flamſtead. To confider theſe ſtars as deſigned merely to decorate |
=: - the ſky; and form a rich and beautiful canopy for this earth, would derogate from the AK
—_ wiſdom of the Creator. Aſtronomers, therefore, with much reaſon have conſidered: the
fixed ſtars as ſo many ſuns attended with a number of revolving planets, which they
illuminate, warm, and cheriſh. If this be true, there are as many ſyſtems as there
-are fixed ſtars. Theſe may-alfo revolve round one common center, forming one


A 3 ——— *. 9
» Mt 4
* — 2 T 2 1 **
e 0 N *
1


—


** — — p ]§＋r„—S⁊᷑ʒ wo - an


| immenſe ſyſtem of ſyſtems. All theſe ſyſtems, we may conceive, are filled with inhabi-
| -tants ſuited to their reſpective climes ; and are ſo many theatres, on which the great
= "Creator and Governor of the Univerſe diſplays his infinite power, wiſdom, and _
$ 7 -neſs. Such a view of the ſtarry heavens muſt fill the mind of every. contemplative
[| EEE, +beholder with ſublime, magnificent, and glorious ideas of the Creator.
—_ The ancient Egyptian prieſts, to whom the Greeks. owed all their phijoſophical


learning, are ſuppoſed to have been the firſt acquainted with the true ſyſtem of the
world. Pythagoras learned it in Egypt, and taught it to his diſciples, after his return
to Europe. But it was fo totally forgotten during the ages of ignorance, that when
Copernicus, a celebrated aſtronomer, revived it, in the fifteenth century, he was con-
fidered as the author rather than the reſtorer. Some of the learned immediately
adopted the hypotheſis, and it would probably ſoon have been univerſally: received,
had it not met with a formidable oppoſition from an ignorant and bigotted clergy.


Nurſed in the lap of indolence, and inveterate enemies to every ſpecies of free and
impartial ny they condemned the Copernican ſyſtem, under pretence' of its. being
Tepugnant to the facred writangs. | The thunder ef the Vatican was * to


/


[INTRODUCTION 1


 filence the voice wy reaſon, and the dread of ecclefiaſtical cenſures almoſt deterred”
mankind from thinking. At laſt, the reformation in. religion gave a fatal blow to-
fuperſtitious tyranny ;: the rays of learning broke through the night of ignorance, and
genuine philoſophy triumphed over the chicanery of the ſehools : mankind were now
convinced, that the ſcriptures were never intended to explain the ſyſtem of philoſophy,
but to make us humane, virtuous, and happy; that it is agreeable to the Great
Author of our being to contemplate his works, and diſplay the wonders of his creating
hand. From tflis fortunate æra the ſciences made rapid ſtrides toward perfection, and
every day produced a diſcovery of ſome new truth, or the detection of ſome ancient error.

Proofs were multiplied in confirmation of the Copernican ſyſtem, which is now eſta- -
bliſhed on a foundation not to be ſhaken. The aſtoniſhing harmony which prevails

among the ſeveral parts, prove it to have been the work of a divine hand; and that

nothing elſe than Infinite Wiſdom could have planned ſo beautiful a bee... tc
The limits we are confined to, will not admit of our multiplying proofs to eſtabliſh
the Copernican ſyſtem ; the following therefore only will be added; but theſe, if
there were no otlier, would be more than ſufficient for the purpoſe.
1. The planets Mercury and Venus are always obſerved to have two conjunctions
with the ſun, but no oppoſition ;* this could not happen, unleſs their orbits were
oircumſcribed by that of the earth.

2. Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn have each their conj junctions and oppattions to the

fun, alternately and ſucceſhvely,. wh ieh they could not have, unleſs. their orbs were |
exterior to that of the earth.

3. The greateſt elongation: or di ſtance of Mercury from the ſun is about twenty-
eight degrees, and that of - Venus forty-ſeven degrees ; which anſwers exactly to their
diſtance in the-Copernican ſyſtem : but according to the Ptolemaic, they muſt often
be 415 in oppoſition to him, or at the diſtance of 180 degrees:
In this difpofition of the planets, they will all of them be ſometimes much nearer:
to the earth than at others; the conſequence of which is, that their brightneſs and
ſplendour, as well as their apparent diameters, will be proportionally greater at one
time than at another; and this we obſerve to be true every day. Thus the apparent
diameter of Venus, when greateſt, is near fixty-fix ſeconds; when leaſt, not more
than nine ſeconds and a half: that of Mars, when greateſt, is twenty-one ſeconds;
when leaſt, only two and an half. But if the Fialanate e be true, they muſt
always be equal.
5. All the planets ſometimes appear in direct motion; | ſometimes ſtationary, and :
ſometimes retrograde. Theſe appearances muſt happen. according to the ene n
fyſtem, but are abſolutely repugnant to any other;

6. The bodies of Mercury and Venus,. in their ſuperior conjunction with the fan; |
| paſs behind the body of that luminary, and in the inferior conjunction are ſeen to
tranſit or paſs over his difk, in the form of a round black ſpot. Theſe phenomena are

W in the Copernican ſyſtem, but impoſſible in that of Ptolemy.

7. The times in which theſe conjunctions, oppoſitions, ſtations, and retrogradations
of the planets happen, are not ſuch as they would be, were the carth at reſt in the
center; but preciſely ſuch as Would happen, if the earth and all the planets move
about the ſun, in the order, and with the velocities aſſigned them in the Corpernican |
: TENG W this, and No W can be 2 85 true 7 of the World.


—


1 b ; of


_ about 50 years Wy the Exodus. From the days of TRANG * nn in


Hs INTRODUCTION.


Of GEOGRAPHY. —Tts Rin and Puoenzss.


| GEOGRAPHY is a word derived from the Greek,* and literally. ſignifies a | deferip-
tion of the earth, its figuro, magnitude, and the poſitions of the ſcyeral parts of 10
furface. Geography is either ##iver/al, as it relates to the earth in general, or par ticular,
as it relates by a any ms Agha part of it.

This ſcience, like all others of a practical nature, has 7 need towards 8.
hs ſlow, and, in tome periods of time, by almoſt imperceptible degrees. In the
infancy of the world the figure of the earth was unknown, It was generally ſuppoſed
to be a plane, of a circular ſurface, terminated by the heavens ; that this plane was of


: no remarkable thickneſs ; and that the regions . it were the habitations of ſpirits.


Obfervations, Deer, ſoon demonſtrated, that this was not the real figure of the


ch. The defire of keeping up a mutual intercourſe between cach other, and of
| exchanging their different commodities, induced the inhabitants of ancient times to


undertake journies of confiderable length ; and theſe were extended in proportion as
the inhabitants ſpread themſelves into diſtant countries. Their principal guides in
theſe journies were the heavenly bodies. The ſun was their direction during the day,


and the ſtars ſupplied his a in the night. The:plains of Afia, where theſe diſco-


veries were made, are extremely favourable for contemplating the face of the heavens.
during the night. Bleſſed with a climate generally ſerene, the ſky is rarely obſcured ;

and the practice. of ſleeping upon the houſe tops, which has been continued from tlie
earlieſt ages, rendered the poſitions of the ſtars familiar. They could not help obſer-
ving, that, while-the greater part revolyed round the earth, ſome in the northern parts


remained nearly in the ſame ſituation; and that the ſun every day, in his greateſt
elevation, iel oppoſite to the place of theſe ſtars. Hence it was natural to


imagine, that all the 'beavenly bodies revolved round ſome fixed point ſituated near


thoſe ſtars; and this point they called the pole. Aſſiſted by theſe diſcoveries, however


„and animated with a defire of carrying on a commerce with diſtant. { poople,
other


they travelled to very remote countries, and traded with the inhabitants

_ climes. Thoſe who directed their journies to the ſouth, could not help obſerving, that
the fixed point round which the —.— appeared to revolve, was nearer the horizon

there than in their own country; and that new ſtars appeared in the ſouthern extremi-


ties of the heavens, which they had not ſeen befom . On the contrary, thoſe who :


directed their courſe e the north, perceived that ſome of the ſtars in the ſouthern


Hemiſphere became mY refed, and” thoſe in the northern more elevated than in


their own country ey faw that the carth was not a plane, as they had at firſt
= ined, hut a * "They further obſerved, that after paſſing over equal diſtances


Mit dee of the meridian, the greateſt and leaſt elevations of the ſtars were


; equally increaſed or diminiſhed; and hence they found, that in the durection of the
a Lan 199 4 at leaſt, the ſurface of the earth was circular, From this period geogra


oved gradually by travels, by commerce, and by conqueſt,
omer has deſcribed ſo many with great accuracy and preciſion, that Strabo


confidinal him as the firſt among the geographers of early times.


3 divided the
ed by the
vented by the fecond


year into 365 ages ; which was undoubtedly a method hover. 6
and Gs them to him, It is ſaid to have been in-


ſurnamed Triſmegiſtus, who, according to Euſebius,


| the
ER 5 eee from yh eng ame b. |


2 8


•J/JJJ . OOO


of the earth in plano,


INTRODUCTION. 9
the ſixth century beſore Chriſt, very little ſeems to have been done towards the eſta-
bliſhment of geography. for 200 years. LES SHAKY 1 5 9

The expedition of Alexander, who extended his conqueſts into India, and to the
borders of Scythia, made the Greeks acquainted with many eountries very remote from
their own. That conqueror entertained in his ſervice two engineers, Diognetus and
Bæton, whoſe buſineſs conſiſted in meaſuring, and keeping an accurate account of his
marches. Pliny and Strabo have preſerved theſe meaſures ; Arrian has handed down to
us the particulars of the navigation of Nearchus and Oneficritus, who failed back with
Alexander's fleet from the mouth of the Indus to thoſe of the Euphrates and Tigris.
By reducing Tyre and Sidon, the Greeks informed themſelves of all the places to which


the Phenicians traded by ſea ; and we know that their commerce extended even to the


Britiſh Iflands. The-ſucceflors of Alexander in the Eaſt, by carrying their conqueſts
to the mouths of the Ganges, obtained a general knowledge of many parts of India.


Ptolemy Evergetes led his armies into Abyſſinia ; and from his marches and ſucceſs in


that diſtant country, a general knowledge of it was obtained. But geography acqui-
red ſtill greater advantages from the conqueſts of the Romans. Ambitious of eſtabliſn-
ing an univerſal monarchy, and of forcing all the inhabitants of the earth to ſubmit to

the Roman eagles, they carried their armies into very remote countries, and conquer-
ed the inhabitants of diſtant chmes. Hence the geographers of thoſe times were ena-


bled to deſcribe countries before hardly known, and correct the errors of former writers.

Ihe great roads of the empire, meaſured through their whole extent, proved extreme- |
Jy uſeful; and the Itineraries, though often altered, and ſometimes incorrect, afforded

conſiderable ailiſtance: © Accordingly moſt of the valuable geographical treatiſes wrote
by the ancients, were compoſed during the reigns of the Roman emperors. 3


So #&#


2


Timocharis and Ariſtillus, who began to obſerve about 295 years before Chriſt, ſeems -


to have been the firſt who attempted to fix the longitudes and latitudes of the fixed
ſtars, by confidering their diſtances from the equator. One of their obſervations gave
_ rife to the diſcovery of the preceſſion of the Equinoxes, which was firft obſerved by


Hipparchus about 150 years after; and he made uſe of Timocharis and Ariſtillus' me-


thod, in order to delineate the parallels of latitude, and the meridians on the ſurface
of the earth 3


thus laying the foundation of the ſcience of geography as we have it at
preſent. I e . Es FW |


Strabo and Ptolemy are the firſt amon g the ancient geographers, and diſpute the


chair of precedence. The geography of Ptolemy is more extenfive; it takes in a greater
Part of the earth, while it ſeems equally, circumſtantial every where: But this very ex-


tent renders it more ſuſpected: it is not eaſy to be every where exact and correct. Strabo,


on the contrary, relates very little more than what he ſaw with his own eyes; he made
d vaſt number of voyages to gain the experience neceſſary to give the requifite certain-


ty to his accounts, and is very ſhort in what he relates from others. Strabo was a phi-


loſopher as well as a geographer. Good ſenſe, perſpicuity, accuracy, and ſolidity of
Judgement are viſible in every part of his works. Ptolemy, however, by diſpoſing his
geography by latitudes and longitudes, opened a way for improvement, and pointed
out a method for carrying the art to perfection. The diſcovery of the longitudes and


latitudes immediately laid a foundation for making maps, or delineations of the ſurface


on a very different plan from what had been attempted before.
Formerly the maps were little more than rude outlines and topographical ſketches of


different countries. The earlieſt were thoſe of Seſoſtris, mentioned by Euſtathius;


who ſays,


that “ this Egyptian king, having traverſed great part of the carth, recorded


ms march in maps, and gave copies of his maps not only to the Egyptians, but to tie


C S⸗cpythians,


* INTRODUCTION.


Seythians, to their great aGoniſhment, '—Some have imagined, that the Jews made a
map of the holy land, when they gave the different portions to tlie nine tribes at Shi-
oh: For Joſhua tells us, that they were ſent to walk through the land, and that they
deſcribed it in ſeven parts in a book ; and Joſephus tells us, that when Joſhua ſent out
people from the different tribes to meaſure the land, he gave them, 88 as companions,
perions well {killed in geometry.

Eratoſthenes was the firſt who attemp ted to Are geography to a regular ſyſtem,
anck introduced a regular parallel of lafitnde. This was traced over certain places
where the longeſt day was of the ſame length. He began it from the ſtraits of Gibral-
tar; and it thence paſſed through the Sicilian ſea, and near the ſouthern extremities of
Peloponneſus. From thence it was continued through the iſland of Rhodes and the
bay of Iſſus; and there entering Cilicia, and croſſing the rivers Euphrates and Tigris,
it was extended to the mountains of India. By means of this line, he endeavoured
to rectify the errors of the ancient map, ſuppoſed to be that of Anaximander. In draw-
ing this parallel, he was regulated by obſerving where the longeſt day was fourteen
hours and an half, which e aſterwards determined to be tlie latitude of 36

degrees.

The firſt parallel 1 Rhodes was ever afterwards confi dived with a degree of
preference, like the foundation ſtone of all ancient aps; and the longitude of the
then known world was often attempted to be meaſured in ſtadia and miles, according
to the extent of that line, by many ſucceeding geographers.” Eratoſthenes ſoon after at-
tempted not only to draw other parallels of latitude, but alſo to trace a meridian at
right angles to theſe, paſſing through Rhodes and Alexandria, down to Syene and
Merce; and as the progreſs he thus made tended naturally to enlarge his ideas, he at
laſt undertook a till more arduous taſk, namely, to determine the circumference of
the globe by an actual meaſurement of a ſegment of one of its great circles. He knew
that at the ſummer ſolſtice, the ſun was vertical to the inhabitants of Syene, a town on
the confines of Ethiopia, under the tropic of Cancer, where they had a well ſunk for
that purpoſe, on the bottom of which the rays of the ſun fell perpendicular the day of


the ſummer ſolſtice: he obſerved, by the ſhadow of a wire ſet perpendicular in an he-


miſpherical baton, how much the ſun was on the ſame day at noon diſtant from the
zenith of Alexandria; and found that diſtance to be one 5oth part of a great circle in
the heavens. Suppoſing then Syene and Alexandria to be under the ſame meridian, he
concluded the diſtance between them to be the zoth part of a great circle upon the
earth ; and this diſtance being by meaſure 5000 ſtadia, he concluded the circumference
of the earth to be 2 50,000 ſtadia; but as this number divided by 360 would give 6943
ſtadia to a degree, either Eratofthenes himſelf, or ſome of his followers, aſſigned the
round number 700 ſtadia to a degree; which multiplied by 360, makes the circumfe-
rence of the earth 252,000 ſtadia; whence both theſe meaſures are given by different
authors as that of Eratoſthenes.


Aſtronomy was not neglected by the ancient geographers. They were convi inced,


that without its aſſiſtance no great progreſs could be made in their art. Their inſtru-
ments, indeed, were inaccurate and imperſect, but they were affiduous in their obſer-


vations. They generally determined the latitudes of places by the ſhadow of a gnomen
of ſome known height ; but they had no other method for determining the lon graces of


A ſadium 3s the 8th dds wile, hence 252,900 ſtadia are * 1,500 miles. The real circum-
ference of the earth is but 2 51038 K miles. m eq "


1


places


INTRODUCTION. 3


places than that of obſerving the eclipſes of the moon; they knew, that by comparing
the times when any of theſe phenomena happened at different places, the difference of
longitude between them might be known. © N

The parts of the earth's ſurſace known to the ancients were confined within narrow
bounds. On the weſt, the Atlantic ocean and Britiſh iſles limited their knowledge.
The Fortunate iſlands, now called the Canaries, were the remoteſt lands they were
acquainted with to the ſouth. Their notions were very imperfect with regard to the
northern countries. Though Scandmavia was known, yet that, and ſome other coun-
tries on the ſame continent, were conſidered as large iſlands. It is not eaſy to deter-
mine what place the ancients underſtood by Ultima Thule ; many take it for Iceland;
but Procopius thinks it was a part of Scandinavia. . 1
Their knowledge of Sarmatia and Scythia was far from extending to the fea which
bounds Ruſſia and Great Tartary on the north and eaſt. Their diſcoveries went no
farther than the Rippean mountains, which now divide Ruſſia from Siberia. The
weſtern frontier of China ſeems to have bounded the knowledge of the ancients on the
eaſt. Ptolemy, indeed, had a very imperfect notion of the ſouthern parts of that


cxtenſive empire. He compoſed his ſyſtem of geography about 150 years after Chriſt,


in the reign of Antoninus Pius. The principal materials he made uſe of for compoſing
this work, were the proportions of the gnomon 10 its ſhadow, taken by different aſtronomers
at the times of the equinoxes and ſolſtices; calculations founded upon the length of


the longeſt days; the meaſures or computed diſtances of the principal roads contained


in their ſurveys and itineraries ; and the various reports of travellers and navigators,


who often determined the diſtances of places by hearſay and conjecture. All theſe


were compared together, and digeſted into one uniform body or ſyſtem; and afterwards
were tranſlated by him into a new mathematical language, expreſſing the different
degrees of longitude and latitude, according to the invention of Hipparchus, but


which Ptolemy had the merit of carrying into full practice and execution, after it had


been neglected for upwards of 250 years. With ſuch imperfect and inaccurate mate


rials, it is no wonder to find many errors in Ptolemy's ſyſtem. Neither were theſe
errors ſuch as had been introduced in the more diſtant extremities of his maps, but even
in the very center of that part of the world which was the beſt known to the ancient
Greeks and Romans, and where all the famed ancient aſtronomers had made their


obſervations.—Yet this ſyſtem, with all its imperfections, continued in vogue till the


beginning of the preſent century. All the others, which now make ſo confpicuous a
figure in the commerce of Europe, were unknown. How far they extended their
diſcoveries with regard to Africa, cannot certainly be known. Some are of opinion,
that they were acquainted with the whole coaſt, having failed round the ſouthern extre-
mity, now called the Cape of Good Hope, and extended their voyages from the Red
Sea to the Mediterranean. Ptolemy, however, ſeems to infinuate, that the ſouthern
parts had eſcaped their knowledge. Indeed, the opinion almoſt univerſally embraced


by the ancients, that the torrid zone was uninhabitable, ſeems to prove, that their


knowledge of Africa was very confined; becauſe, as great part of that country lies in


the burning zone, their acquaintance with 1t muſt have convinced them, that the
general notion was founded on miſtake. 1 TEL


The diſcovery of the ſouthern parts of Africa was reſerved for the Portugueſe. Ani-


mated with a defire of finding a paſlage to the Eaſt Indies, they coaſted along the
weſtern ſide of Africa, and, in the fifteenth century, completed the deſign. - They
pre the Cape of Good Hope, and purſued their courſe to the Indies. The paſſage

eing thus opened, ſeveral European nations, deſirous of ſharing in the rich commerce


Ca "Of


LOS


12 INTRODUCTION:
of the eaſt, ſent their ſhips to the Indian fea, where they diſcovered the Afiatic iſlands,


and penetrated to the empire of Japan. The voyages of the Ruſhans have completed
our knowledge of the eaſtern parts of the continent of Afia.


The prodigious length of the voyage to India, round the ſouthern extremity of Africa,
induced Chriſtopher Columbus to attempt the diſcovery of a ſhorter tract. About the
end of the fifteenth century he croſſed the Atlantic ocean; but, inſtead of the Indies,
he found America, and put the crown of Caſtile, under whoſe auſpices the voyage was
undertaken, in poſſeſſion of a New World.

- The improvements in geography which ſince have ben place, have been owing to
the great progreſs made in aſtronomy. More correct methods and inſtruments for
obſerving the latitude have been found out; and the diſcovery of Jupiter's Satellites
have afforded a much eaſier method of finding the longitudes than was formerly known.
The voyages made by different nations alſo, which are now become frequent, have
brought to our knowledge, a vaſt number of countries utterly unknown before. The
voyages of Captain Cooke, and other late navigators and travellers, have contributed
greatly to the improvement of geography during the preſent century; ſo that now the
geography of the utmoſt extremities of the earth is in a fair way of being much better
known to the moderns than that of the adjacent countries was to the ancients, -


FIGURE, MAGNITUDE and MOTION of the EARTH.


THE. fundamental principles of geography are, the ſpherical figure of the earth ;
its rotation on its axis; its revolution round the ſun ; and the poſition of the axis
or line round which it revolves, with regard to the celeſtial luminaries. That the
earth and ſea taken aaa conſtitute one val ; 18 demonſtrable 112 the follo win 8
arguments: _ 5

Aft, Such a figure | is beſt ate to motion. 2d, The higher the eye is laced, the
more "extenſive i is the proſpect ; whence it is common for ſailors to climb up to the tops
of the maſts to diſcover land or ſhips at a diſtance. But this would give them no
advantage were it not for the convexity of the earth; for upon an infinitely extended
plane, objects would be vifible at the ſame diſtance whether, the eye were high or low ;

nor would any of them vaniſh till the angle under which they appeared became too
ſmall to be perceptible. zd, To people on ſhore, the maſt of a ſhip at ſea appears
before the hull; but were the earth an infinite plane, not the higheſt objects, but the

biggeſt, would be longeſt viſible; and the maſt of a ſhip would * by reaſon of
the ſmallneſs of its angle, long before the hull. ath, To people at fea, the land diſ-
appears, though near enough to be viſible, were it not for the intervening convexity of
the water. 5th, We argue from analogy,. all the other planets being of a ſpherical

figure. 6th, The carth has often been failed round; as by Magellan, Drake, Dampier,


Anſon, Cooke, and many others ; which demonſtrates that the ſurface of the ocean 1s


ſpherical ; and that the land is very little different, may eaſily be proved from the ſmall


eee, of any part of it above the ſurface of the water. The mouths of rivers, which
run 1000 miles, are not more than one mile below their ſources ; and the higheſt
mountains are not quite four miles of perpendicular height : fo that, thou gh ſome parts
of the land are elevated into hills, and others depreſſed into valleys, the whole may
Mill be accounted ſpherical. th, An undeniable and indeed ocular demonſtration of
the ſpherical figure of the earth is taken from the round figure of its ſhadow, which falls
upon the moon in the time of eclipſes. As various fides of the earth are turned to-
wards the ſun during the time of different phenomena of this kind, and the ſhadow in


al a appears circular, it is impoſſible to IR the figure of the earth to be th
other


B e


3


„ * EE W
A — 8 _—"Y rn 2 LAY WIRE bY AM * is * * 2 oy
4 — 0 ESR LIENS FIX.) * 1 Rr r S 1 b ier dnt ace tn th .
FFP e ²˙ w wt̃̃̃ ̃ ͤ =» 3233 3 e A n ton 4, SS IS vg * * ” 524 . 8 5 "a
OO RS rs. A n BETTE 8 e 8 a Ds. . Fe of fa bt , . n : AIR nl IE de 5 ng ml EOS 7 A Rows x) IE *
. Wy 6 AAS oF ITS 4 - : SEO ELEC He J ͤ I POS GS) . 4s 5 2 VE KD. GY Bee 2 — on prongs ER C=O 2 5 4 * 2 hs \
1 pA, 23S 297 1 TX RET . ws, n e N n e bes , 3 1 * 1 5 * 8 he e
8 75 "RS, n 8 — Wt 8 r AS > + 3 AE: n RT LE: N - < —x Fo - 5 ” 5 .
2 * n 14 . L ye Y bt 2 * * „ mw . . , ob 3 4 1 Y


TN
3 r *
3 me . e
% Kc
r


other than ſpherical.


the length of the days and nights, &c.
difference betwixt the ſame phenomena in different parts of the earth. Thus, though


W the whole night.


INTRO DU CT ION. es 1
The inequalities of its ſurface have no effect upon the ;caxth's
ſhadow on the moon; for as the diameter of the terraqueous globe is very little .leſs,
than 8000 miles, and the height of the higheſt mountain on earth not quite four, We.
cannot account the latter any mote than the 2000th part of the former; ſo that tlie
mountains bear no more proportion to the bulk of the earth, than gralys of duſt bear
to that of a common globe.

The earth is not truly ſpherical, but an oblate ſpheroid, or flatted at the poles,
ſomething in the form of a flat turnip. Its diameter from eaſt to weſt is a few miles.
longer than that from north to ſouth. As many find it difficult to conceive how people
can ſtand on the oppoſite fide of the globe without falling off, their conception may
be aſſiſted by ſuppoſing all the various s bodies on the carth's ſurface were of iron, and
a very large magnet were placed at the center; then all bodies being attracted towards
the center by the magnet they would not fall off, which way ſoever the carth ſhould
turn. Now the attraction of nn operates on all bodies, as that of magnetiſm
does on iron only

According to Norwood' s meaſure of a degree, which is generally preferred, c on ſuppo-
ſition that the earth is a true ſphere, its circumference is 25,020 miles. But by conſi-
dering its true figure, its circumference at the equator is 25,038 miles, and the length
of an elliptical meridian 25,927. Though the earth is an oblate ſpheroid, yet the
difference between the two diameters and their two circumferences is but ſmall. Had
the difference been more conſiderable, it would have greatly affected all nautical and


geographical concluſions deduced from a ſphere ; but the ſmallneſs of the difference


renders the error ſcarcely diſcernible, unleſs the diſtance be very great, and the latitudes
very high. In the conſtruction of globes, maps, charts, &c. the earth 1 is conſidered as


a perfect ſphere.


The earth, like the reſt of the planets, has two. motions, one e ound its axis, the .
round the ſan. It revolves round its axis once in 24 hours, and cauſes a continual
ſucceſſion of day and night, and an apparent motion of the heavenly bodies, from caſt to
weſt. By this motion on its axis the inhabitants on the equator are carried 1040 miles
in an hour. It completes its revolution round the ſun once in a year, and occaſions
8 difference in the length of the days and nights, and the agreeable varia in the
caſons.


The diameter of the earth's s orbit 1s 199,346,000 les, and its 1
597,987,646 miles. Its hourly motion in its orbit is 68,217 mules, which is 142 tunes
mean than that of a cannon ball, which moves about 8 miles in a minute; and would


22 years and 228 days in going from this earth to the ſun. Many of the terreſtrial


phenomena depend upon the globular figure of the earth, and the pofition of its axis


with regard to the fun; particularly the riſing and ſetting of the celeſtial luminaries,
It belongs to geography to take notice of the


the ſun riſes and ſets all over the world, the circumſtances of his doing ſo are very dif-
ferent in different countries. The moſt eee ee of theſe circumſtances is the duration


of the light not only of the ſun himſelf, but of the twilight before he riſes and aſter he


ſets. In the equatoria] regions, for inſtance, darknets comes on very ſoon after ſunſet :
becauſe the convexity of the earth comes quickly in between the eye of the obſerver and
the luminary, the motion of the earth being much more rapid there than any where
elſe. In our climate the twilight always continues between one and two hours, and
during the longeſt days 1 in the ſummer ſeaſon it continues in a conſiderable degree


In countries farther to the 3 or ſouthward, the
| twilight


3


14 INTRODUCTION.


twilight becomes brighter and brighter as we approach the poles, until at laſt the aun
does not appear to touch the horizon, but goes in a circle at fome diſtance above it for
many days ſucceſſively. In like manner, during the winter, the ſame luminary ſinks
lower and lower, until at laft he does not appear at all; and there is only a dim
twinkling of twilight for an hour or two in the middle of the day. By reaſon of the
refraction of the atmoſphere, however, the time of darkneſs, even in the moſt inhoſpi-
table climates, is always leſs than that of light; and ſo remarkable is the effect of this
property, that in the year 1682, when ſome itch navigators wintered in Nova Zembla,
the ſun was viſible to them fixteen days before he could have been ſeen above the
jon neg had there been no atmoſphere, or had it not been endowed with any ſuch
The reaſon of all this is, that in the northern and ſouthern regions only a ſmall |
part * the convexity of the globe 1s interpoſed betwixt us and the ſun for many days,
and in the high latitudes none at all. In the warmer climates the ſun has often a beau-
tiſul appearance at riſing and ſetting, by reaſon of the refraction of his light through
the vapours which are copiouſly raiſed in thoſe vom In the colder regions, halos,
parhelia, aurora borealis, and other meteors, are frequent; the two former owing to the
great quantity of vapour continually flying from the warm regions of the equator to the
colder ones of the poles. The aurora borealis is owing, ſome ſay, to the electrical
matter imbibed by the earth from the fun in the warm climates, and going off through
the upper regions of the atmoſphere to the place from whence it came. In the high
northern latitudes, thunder and lightning are unknown, or but ſeldom heard of ; but
the more terrible phenomena of earthquakes, volcanoes, &c. are by no means
unſrequent. Th heſe, however, ſeem avs Hh to affect iſlands and the maritime Pers of
the continent.
Notwithſtandin 2 the ſeeming . in the diſtribution of 1; ght WF darkneſs, it
is certain, that throughout the whole world there is nearly an equal proportion of light
diffuſed on every part, abſtracting from what is abſorbed by clouds, vapours, and the
atmoſphere itſelf. The equatorial regions have indeed the moſt intenſe light during the
day, but the nights are long and dark; while on the other hand, in the northerly and
foutherly parts, though the ſan ſhines leſs powerfully, yet the length of time that he
appears above the horizon, with the greater duration * che twilight, makes * for the
ſeeming deficiency. _
Were the earth a perfect tune, the ſun would appear to be vertical in every part of
it: for in compariſon with the immenſe magnitude of that luminary, the diameter of
this globe itſelf is but very ſmall: and as the ſun, were he near to us, would do much
more than cover the whole earth; ſo, though he were moved to any diſtance, the whole
diameter of the latter would make no difference in the apparent angle of his latitude.
By means of the globular figure of the earth alſo, along with the great diſparity between
the diameters of the two bodies, ſome advantage is given to the day over the night:
for thus the ſun being immenſely the larger of the two, ſhines upon more than one half
of the earth; whence the unenlightened part has a ſhorter way to go before it again


receives the benefit of his rays. This 1 is ri in oat teri Tee Venus
and Mercury, than 3 in the earth. OY


DOCTRINE. of the SPHERE.
. Dxrixrrroxs and PRINCIPLES, .


A SPHERE, with MPO is the whole frame of the l i being * a Sobular |


fi gure, -or more ſtrictly, the Primum 2 which encloſes all the other orbs and
Navenly bodies. f A direct


3


1

4
RR”.
„


INT RODUGTIO N. 2
A direct or right ſphere 3 is, when both the poles of the world are in the horizon, and


the equinoctial paſſes through the zenith; ſo that the equator and all its parallels; tuch!
as the tropics and polar circles, make right angles with the horizon, and are divided by


it into two equal parts; ſo that the fun, moon, and ſtars aſcend directly adds and.


deſcend directly below the horizon. See the Plate.
An oblique ſphere is that where all the diurnal motions are.-oblique to the } orizon.


This is common to all parts of the earth, except thoſe under the poles and the equator.


Iv an oblique ſphere, one of the 88 18 elevated above, and the other depreſt | ed below
the horizon. |
A parallel ſphere 1 is when one pole i is in the NBR and the other] in the nadir, in which


the equator, andall its parallels, ate parallel with the horizon: this poſition is peculiar |


to thoſe parts which he directly under the poles.

In geography the circles which the fun apparently deſcribes in the heavens, are ſup-
poſed to be extended as far as the earth, and marked on its ſurface. We may ima gine
as many circles as we pleaſe to be deſcribed on the earth, and their planes to be
extended to the celeſtial ſphere till they mark concentric ones on the heavens. Each
circle is divided into 360 equal parts, called degrees, each degree is divided into 60


denominated great and leſs circles.


ſeconds. The circles ſuppoſed by geographers to be deſcribed in this. manner, are


Great Circles are thoſe which divide either the celeſtial or terreſirial ſ] phere into to


equal. parts. Of theſe there are ix—the Equator, the Meridian, the Ecliptic, the


Horizon, and the two Colures.
Leſs Circles are thoſe which divide the ſphere into two unequal parts, ; of which there


are four, the two Tropics and the two Polar Circles.
Axis aud Poles of the Earth.] The axis of the earth is an imaginary line ls =


through its center from north to ſouth. The extreme points of the axis are called


the poles.


Equator.] The equator is that une or circle which encompaſſes the middle ſs the


parts of the world. From this line latitude is reckoned.
Meridian.) This circle, repreſented: on the artificial b by e a braſs. ring, paſſes


through the poles of the carth, and the zenith and the nadir, croſſing the equator. at
Tight angles 25 dividing the globe into caſtern and weſtern hemiſpheres. It is called

5 % . 1939150 the Latin meridies, mid-day ; becauſe when the fan comes to the ſouth. part

of this circle it is called noon, and the day is half ſpent. There are an infinite number

_ of. meridians, which vary as you travel caſt or AN Geographers aſſume one of the

meridians for the firſt; commonly that Which paſſes throu gh. the metropolis of their


earth, dividing the northern half from the ſouthern, This line is often called t
eguinoctial becauſe, when the ſun appears therein, the days and nights are equal 1 in *


/


own country. 'The meridian of Philadelphia is the firſt for Americans; that of Londop.


for the Engliſh ; and that of Paris for the French.


Zodiac.) If the two circles were drawn parallel to the ecliptic, at the diſtance of eight


degrees on each ſide of it, the ſpace, or girdle included between theſe two parallels,
fixteen degrees broad, and divided in the middle by the ecliptic, will comprehend
within it the orbits of all the planets, and is called the Zodiac. |

Ecliptic.] The Ecliptic is a great circle, in the plane of which the earth performs her
annual revolution round the ſan, or in which the ſyn ſeems to move round the earth,


once in a year. This circle is called the Ecliptic, from the word Eclipſe, becauſe no


eclipſe of the ſun or moon happens, but when the moon is in or near the plane of this


circle. It * an angle with the equator of 23* 30% and interſects it in two oppoſite


W OT, _


16 INTRODUCTION,


paſts, called the Eguinoctial points, becauſe when the ſun is in either of theſe points, he
no declination, and ſhines equally to both poles, and the day 1s then equal to the
night all over the world. The times when the fun paſſes through theſe points, are the
21ſt of March, and the 21ſt of September: The former is called the vernal, the latter
the autumnal equinox. _
The ecliptic is divided into twelve equal parts, of thirty degrees each, called ſigns.
Theſe begin at the vernal interſection of the ecliptic with the equator, and are numbered
from weſt to eaſt. The names and characters of the figns, with the months in which
the ſun enters them, are as follows : | ST) =


Latin names of the * Engliſh names, Characters. Months in which the
_ ſigns. 3 ſun enters them.
1 Aries The Ram „  _—_—
2 Taurus The Bull "of April
3 Gemini The Twins = May
4. Cancer The Crab E June
5 ee The Lion A. July
6 Virgo The Virgin l Auguſt
% eee The Scales 3 September
8 Scorpio The Scorpion 7, S
9 Sagittarius The Archer: 2 November
10 Capricornus The Goat * December
11 Aquarius The Water-Bearer = January AA
12 Piſces * "The - Fines : 6 February


The firſt ſix are called northern, and the latter ſouthern ſigns; becauſe the ſormer
poſſeſs that Half of the ecliptic, which lies to the northward of the equinoctial, and the
latter that half which lies to the ſouthward.

> _ Horizon.) The horizon, repreſented on the artificial lobe by a broad wooden circle,
divides it into upper and lower hemiſpheres. There are, geographically ſpeaking, two
Horizons, the Jenfible and the rational, The ſenſible horizon is that circle which limits
our proſpect ; where the ſky and the land, or water, appear to meet. The rational or
real horizon, is a circle whoſe plane paſſes through the center of the earth, dividing it
into upper and lower hemiſpheres.

The horizon is divided into four quarters, and each quarter into go degrees. The
four quartering points, viz. eaſt, weſt, north, and ſouth, are called the cardinal Points.
The poles of the horizon are the zenith and the nadir. The former 1s the point directly

| over our heads; the latter the point directly under our feet.

Colures.] The two meridians that paſs through the four above. niet points
have particular names; that which paſſes through the firſt degrees of Aries and Libra
11s called the equinoctial Colure, and that which paſſes through the firſt degrees of Cancer

and Capricorn is termed the ſolſtitial Colure. Theſe Colures cut each other at right
angles in the poles of the world. |

Circles of longitude in the heavens are great circles of the ſphere rote to paſs
through the poles of the ecliptic, and to cut the ecliptic at right angles, as the meridians

do the equinoctial.

The latitude of any heavenly obj ect is an arch of a circle of lod gitude „;intercepted
between the center of the object 7 — the ecliptic. If the object be on the north fide of

the ecliptic, it is ſaid to be in north latitude; if on the fouth, in ſouth latitude. |
Parallels 105 celeſtial e are mall circles drawn parallel to the ecliptic,


* The


4


=”
7 N
N
Wot
: A *
8 "
*.
x *
* 1
= Se
_—
8 15
(BY
bo
"
8
1
.J
"MY
—
1
1
1
-LY
—
1
bs.
i ”
Ta *
=
4s
be
"
k
_
WR.
3
"
mY
1
1
1
=
-
4
"
*
*
Ss.
2


INTRODUCTION. 29>


The longitude of any heavenly object i is an arch of the ecliptic, intercepted between
the firſt point of Aries, and a circle of longitude paſſing through the center of the
object. The right aſcenſion of any heavenly object is an arch of the equinoctial,
intercepted between the firſt point of Aries, and a meridian paſſing through the center


of the object.


The tation of any heavenly object is an arch of the meridian, intercepted
between the center of the object and the equinoctial. If the object be on the north


fide of the equinoctial, it is ſaid to have north declination ; if on he ſouth fide, it has


ſouth declination. All fmall circles in the celeſtial ſphere parallel to the equinoctial,
are called parallels of declination. Among theſe are the COPE of Cancer, the ITS of


Capricorn „the Arctic and Antarctic circles.


Tropics. * The tropics, are two circles drawn parallel to the equator, at the FT PUR
of 259 29 on each fide of it. Theſe circles form the limits of the ecliptic, or the ſun's


declination from the equator. That which is in the northern hemiſphere, is called the


tropic of Cancer, becauſe it touches the ecliptic in the ſign Cancer ; and that in the
ſouthern hemiſphere, is called the tropic of Capricorn, becauſe it touches the ecliptic in
the ſign Capricorn. On the 21ſt of June the ſun is in Cancer, and we have the longeſt
day. On the 21ſt of December the ſun is in Capricorn, and we have the ſhorteſt day.


They are called zropics, from the Greek word TREPo, 70 turn, becauſe when the ſun
arrives at them, he returns again to the equator.


Polar Circles.] The two polar circles are deſcribed round the poles of the earth at


the diſtance of 23 29'. The northern is called the Arctic circle, from Arctos, or the bear,
a conſtellation fituated near that place in the heavens ; the ſouthern, being oppoſite to
the former, is called the Antar#ic circle. —The polar circles bound the places where the
ſun fets daily. Beyond them the ſun revolves without ſetting.


The azimuths , or vertical circles, are great circles paſſing 9 throu gh the zenith and
nadir, and cutting the horizon at right angles.


The altitude of an heavenly object is an arch of a vertical circle, intercepted between
the center of the object and the horizon. _

The zenith Altes of any heavenly object, is an arch of a vertical circle, W
between the center of the object and the zenith. The meridian altitude, or meridian
zenith diſtance, is the altitude, or zenith diſtance, when the object 1 is in the meridian.

| Zones.) The ſurface of the earth is ſuppoſed to be divided into five unequal parts
called zones, each of which is terminated by two parallels of latitude. Of theſe five
Zones, one is called the torrid or burning zone; two are ſtiled frigid or frozen; and


two temperate ; names adapted to the N of Wo heat and cold to which their ſitu-


ations are liable.
The torrid zone is that portion of the: earth over every part of which the fun 18 per-


pendicular at ſome time of the year. The breadth of this zone is forty-ſeven degrees;
extending from twenty-three degrees and a half north latitude, to twenty-three degrees
and a half ſouth. The equator paſſes through the middle of this zone, which is termi-
nated on the north by the parallel of latitude called the tropic of Cancer, and on the


ſouth by the parallel called the tropic of Capricorn. The ancients conſidered this zone
as uninhabitable, on account of the heat, which they thought too great to be ſupported
by any human being, or even DE the vegetable creation: ; but perten has long ſince
refuted this notion.

Many parts of the torrid zone are remarkably as; : and it has 3 nd that |
the long nights, great dews, regular rains and breezes, which prevail 1 in almoſt every | |


Db 4 f Part


18 ˙ ¾J en |
part of the torrid zone, render the earth not only inhabitable, but alſo fo fruitful, that


two harveſts a year are very common. All forts of ſpices and drugs are almoſt folely


produced there; and it furniſhes more perfect metals, precious ſtones, and pearls, than
all the reſt of the carth together..
This zone comprehends the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, Philippine Fats, greater part


of South America and Africa, and almoſt all Capt. Cook's diſcoveries, including the


northern parts of New Holland.

The frigid zones are thoſe regions round the pole where the ſun does not riſe ſor
ſome days in the winter, nor ſet for ſome days in the ſummer. The two poles are the
centers of theſe zones, which extend from theſe points to twenty-three degrees and a
half nearly; that is, they are bounded by the northern and ſouthern parallels of latitude


of fixty-lix degrees and a half. The part that lies in the northern hemiſphere is called
the north frigid zone, and is bounded by a parallel called the arctic or polar circle;


and that in the ſouthern hemitphere, the ſouth frigid zone, and the parallel of latitude
which bounds it, is called the antarctic, or polar circle. The northern frigid zone
comprehends Nova Zembla, Lapland, part of Norway, Bathn's-Bay, part of Greenland,


and part of Siberia.—The ſouthern frigid zone has no land known to us. The two


temperate zones are the ſpaces contained between the tropics and polar circles.
The northern temperate zone contains almoſt all Europe, the greater part of Aſia,


part of Africa, the United States of America, and the Brittth Colomes.—The ſouthern


temperate zone comprizes the ſouth part of New Holland, CER 3
Cape of Good Hope and Cape Horn.

In the frigid zones the longeſt day is never below 24 Ho in the temperate zones
not quite ſo much, and in the torrid never more than 14 hours. 1

Climates. The word climate has two ſignifications, the one common, and the other


geographical. In common language, the word is uſed to denote the difference in the
ſeaſons and the temperature of the air. When two places caffer 1 in theſe reſpects, they


are ſaid to be in different climates.
In a geographical ſenſe, a climate is a tract of the aan 8 FRI and 3


- the equator and a parallel of latitude, or between two parallels of ſuch a breadth, as
that the length of the day in the one, be half an hour longer than in the other. Within |


the polar circles, ame the breadth of a circle is ſuch, that the length of a day, or
the time of the ſun's continuance above the horizon without ſetting, 1s a month longer
in one parallel, as you proceed northerly, than in the other. |


Under the equator, the day is always twelve hours long. The days omdually increaſe
in length as you advance either north or ſouth from the equator. The ſpace between


the equator, and a parallel line drawn at the diſtance of 8* 25', where the days are
twelve hours and a half long, is called the firſt climate; and by conceiving parallels
drawn in this manner, at the increaſe of every half hour, it will be found that there are
N chmates between the equator 8 each of the polar circles. Forty eight
in the whole. 1


Under the polar circles, the longeſt day is 88 hours. The ſun when at


the tropics, ſkims the horizon without ſetting. As you advance from the polar circles
to the poles, the ſun continues above the horizon for days, weeks, and months, in a


. conſtant increaſe, until you arrive at the poles, where the ſun is fix months above the


horizon ; and the whole year may be ſaid to conſiſt of but one day and one night.


There are thirty climates between the equator and either pole. In the firſt twenty-


four, between the equator and each polar circle, the period of increaſe for For


We.”
1 * -. „
"4 *
8
. is 4 5
Wy
.- 5 1
5 8
= on | K
A 1
* * 0
8
1 . * #
"I \
I


t


r Me)
.
_


INTRODUCTION. rg
climate is half an hour. In the other fix; between the polar circles and either pole, the


period of increaſe for each climate is a month. Theſe climates 1 n in


1 nt as you proceed from the — * be ſeen by * to the following
table:


*


—


Latitudes
in which the


reſpective


.


Names 1 Countries and wats Places, ſituated in the reſpeRiive Candies, north of
3 the Equator,


|


climates be-
gin and end.


| Climates.


*


| WITHIN THE FIRST CLIMATE LIE, |
124 8 25 { 1 The Gold coaſt in Africa, Molucca in Eaſt Indies, Cayenne & Surinam in S. Amer.
. 1-206 28 2 Abyſlinia, Siam, Madras, Darien, Barbadoes, Tobago, &c. |
13723 50 3 Mecca, Bombay, Bengal, Canton, Mexico, Jamaica, Guadaloupe.
14 30 25 | 4 Egypt, Delhi, Canary Iſles, Eaſt Florida, Havannah.
144. | 36 28 | 5 Gibraltar, leruſalem, Iſpahan, Nankin, Georgia and Carolinas.
| 41 22 | 6 Liſbon, Madrid, Aſia-Minor, Virginia, Maryland, Philadelphia.
IgE | 45 29 | 7 Rome, Genoa, Conſtantinople, Caſpian Sea, New York, New England,
49 0 8 Paris, Vienna, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, Canada.
16F | 52 00 9 London, Flanders, Prague, Dreſden, Cracow: Tartary.
17 | 54 27 | 10 Dublin, Warſaw, Holland, Hanover, Labrador, New South Wales.
175 | 56 37 | 11 Edinburgh, Copenhagen, Moſcow, capital of Ruſſia.
58 29 | 12 South part of Sweden, Tobelſki, capital of Siberia.
18% | 59 58 | 13 Orkney Iſles, Stockholm, capital of Sweden.
29-4. 67 IS: | 77 - Bergen in Norway, Peterſburgh in Ruſſia.
195 | 62 25 Hudſon” s Straits, North America.
| 63 22 | South part of Weſt Greenland, Siberia.
204 | 64 06 A Drontheim in Norway.
64 49 | 18 Part of Finland in Ka:
65 21 19 Archangel on the White-Sea, Ruſlia,
| 65 47 | 20 Heclain Iceland.
_ 21 221 66 ob | 21 Northern Parts of Ruſſia and Siberia.
CE 22] 23 | 66 20 22 New North Wales in North America.
72 1 231 66 28 23 Davis's Straits in ditto.”
24 | 66 31 | 24 Samoieda.
month 67 ar | 2; South Part of Live,


3


L 69 48 Weſt Greenland.
5 | 73 37 | 27 Zembla Auſtralis. LA.

| 78 30 | 38 Zembla Borealis. Et
1 84 og | 29 Spitſbergen, or Eaſt Greenland.
T 1 go o 30 EST: > (G7 is] Se 116
8 Latitude. ] The latitude of 'a lace h is its diſtance Hem the equator, excl; in
1 degrees, &c. north or ſouth, on the meridian. The greateſt latitude is that of the poles,
-Y which are ninety degrees diftant from the equator. If the place be fituated between the
+4 equator and the north pole, it is ſaid to be in north latitude ; if it he between the
15 equator and the ſouth pole, it is in ſonth latitude... 5 | 5
2 The elevation of the pole above the horizon, is always equal to the latitude of dhe
ht place for to a perſon f tuated on the equator, both poles will reſt in the horizon. If
0 you travel one, two, or more degrees north, the north pole will riſe Wm e or more
at degrees, and will keep pace with your diſtance from the equator.
= Longitude.\ Every place on the ſurface of the earth has its meridian: - The lind,
A of a place is the diſtance of its meridian from ſome! other fixed meridian; moaſured on
3 the equator. Longitade” is either eaſt or weſt All places eaſt of tlie fixed or dinft

| meridian, are in eaſt longitude; all weſt, in weſt longitude. Owthe equator, a degree
ay of longitude is equal to ſixty geographichb miles; and of courſe; a minute on the equator 2
* is equal to a mile. But 754 alb the meridians cut the equator: at Tight: angles, and
= Approach nearer and nearer to eaehòC other, until at laſt * the poles) it. is


D 2 | obvious \


20 INTRODUCTION.

obvious that the degrees of longitude will leſſen as you go from the equator to either

pole; ſo that in the fixticth degree of latitude, a degree of longitude is but thirty miles,

or halt along as a degree on the equator ; as is evident from the following table
E


Sang _ number of miles s contained in a degree of longitude i in each parallel of latitude from


VIS


oy - 1 ws Sa” ty
n = 24 3
* OY CIWS” 8 * TIS.”
1 . 4 V 8 * 8 1


1 r 3 RA wet”. n h
Ne ee Bens ras en eo og ne


| #1 the equator.
1 e 5.) Tees rib Ted |. Jes =. Ts
| WY Ln | .|E=| ©| .|h = Ol .[E=| |, | Es
| 9 „ 3 3 2 3 . 2 LE
e e e 0 e
it SS RS'B%S| RSI'8%| RE es] [a= 8%
159 56 | | 19 [50] 44 | | 37 47 56 | 55 3424 | 73 |17] 32
2 59 54 | | 20 5624 | 38 147] 16 | | 56 [33] 32 | | 74 [16] 32
3 59 52 | 21 56 00 | | 39 46 36 | | 57 132] 49 | | 75 [15] 32
| 4 [59] 50 | 22 55 36 | | 40 [46] 00 | | 58 [31] 48 | | 76 [14] 32
5 159] 46 | 2355 12 | | 4x 45 16 | | 59 30 50 | 77 [13] 32
| | 6 59 40 | 24 54 48 42 144} 36 60 30 00 | | 7B 1232
|. 7 [59] 37 | | 25 54 24 | | 43 |43| 52 | | 61:29] 04 | | 79 |:1] 28
859 24 26 54 00 44 43 8 | | 62 28 o8 | o 10 24
9 59 10 2753 28 | 45 42 24 | | 63 [27] 12 | | 81 09] 20 |
IO 59 oo 28 53 oo 46 41 40 | 64 2616 | 82 [08] 20
| 11 |58| 5229 52 28 | | 47 [41] 00 | | 65 125] 20 | | 83 0% 20
w 12 58 40 | | 3o 51 56 48 140] 8 | | 66 24 24 | 8406 12 |
WW .  . Þ| x3 [58] 28 | 31 [51] 24 | | 49 39 20 | 6% 23 28 | 85 [of 12 |
= ; 14 |58] 12 | | 32 50 52 | 50 [38] 22. | | 68 |22| 32 | | 86 [04| 12 |
15 380 oo | | 33 3% 20 | | 51 137] 44 | | 69 a1 32 | | 87 03 12 |
16 [57] 40 | | 34 |49| 44 | | 52 37 00 | | 70 20 32 | | 88 oa o4 |
| 17 [57] 20 | | 35 498 53 3608 | 71 119] 32 | | 89 o %%
(18 1571/4 | | 36148] 32 | | 54 135] 26] | 72 118! 32 | | 99.109] 09


Meruons of Hun the LATITUDES and LONGITUDES of PLACES fon .


CELESTIAL: OBSERVATIONS.


WHAT is meant by latitude and longitude has already been faſkciently end,
it r remains that we ſhew the methods uſed for finding both by celeſtial obſervations.


. EY 1. 07 finding the Latitude.


As the latitude of a TING 15 an arch of the meridian intercepted between the zenith 6 |
and the equinothal, which is always equal to the height of the viſible pole above the i
Lo it follows that if the meridional altitude, or its complement, the zenith diſtance, 1
3 celeſtial object, whoſe place in the heavens is known, can be found, the latitude
1 Thus, if the heavenly object be in the equinoctial, the zenith
222 will be equal to the latitude, which md be either north or ſouth, according as
- 2 obſerver is fituated either to the northward or ſouthward of the obj ect. But if the
un or ſtar hath either north or ſouth declination, that is, if its ont diurnal motion
be either to the northward or ſouthward of the equinoctial, the declination muſt either
be ſubtracted from, or added to, the zenith diane, according as the zenith diſtance ;
and N are of the ſame or different denominations. | bg
1.


| equinoctial.


INTRODUCTION: 21

1. If the zenith diſtance and declination have the ſame name, their difference will
give the latitude. And if the declination is greater than the zenith diſtance, the lati-
tude will be of the ſame name with the declination ; but if the declination be leſs than
the zenith diſtance, the latitude will be of a contrary name. If they are equal, the
latitude will be oo degrees, oo minutes; that is, the place is ſituated under the
2. If the declination and zenith diſtance are of contrary names, that is, one north
and the other ſouth, their ſum will be the latitude, and always of the ſame name with

the declination. _ - D „ 5 5

In moſt books of aſtronomy and navigation are tables of the declination of the fun,
and principal fixed ſtars ; and the meridian altitude of the ſun or ſtars may be eafily
found by a great variety of inſtruments. 1 Big B
3. When the object appears in the zenith, the latitude is equal to the declination,
and alſo of the ſame name. 8
There are ſeveral other methods for finding the latitude, but the above will be ſuffi -

cient in this place, eſpecially as it is generally uſed. 1 |


| II. Of finding the Longitude. ES 3
It has been already obſerved, that the difference of longitude between any two places
might be determined, by knowing the difference between the times that any remark-
able appearance in the heavens was ſeen in thoſe places. For ſince the ſun and fixed
ſtars appear to move round the earth, or, which is the ſame thing, the earth revolves
about its axis in twenty-four hours; it follows, that in every hour there paſſes over
the meridian one twenty- fourth part of 360 degrees, or of the whole circumference of
the equator, equal to fiſteen degrees, and a proportionable part in a greater or leſs


time.


”
"1
-K
7 3
*
R <7
D
.
4 -
"2
1 .
1
= :
2 MH
<5
.
* -.# :
——— IS
ww bh
oy 8 bs
_ TP
2 J > *
1
==
* "3
1
5
*
X.
£
a I
2
5 :
*
4
G = „
4
Ti?
1
4p;
*
of 1
*
.
EY
«3 *

* „
Tees?
OAT

* ii

E

*
+ 4 ® 5
1 :
**
.
.
*
8
3
Or
2p]
* 2
80
5
We
*
*
* -
*
Ee, 5
Be. «
Lo
EO
*
2
1
1
9
3
<P E.
*
RES — "Pu
1
©. i
1
1
: 4 By 49,
3
Ys My) K
+
1
=:
+ =
„
«v8
. =
4 2
- 5 :

vs 7
4 2 o
n
**

1
-$- —
8 1
N
-1
85
2
"£8
8
*
"Ta
4 *
<5
br
67
ae -
1
>,
2
>:
* Wo”. :
$52
5 , :
NT} :
4 *
© of
*
3 3
.
Ip
4 *
-» 3 8
*
* 40
_-
+
3

x 0
7
.* "4 *

—

*

* z .
AER
7"
1
3
- ==

«x ph

"
2
is
pot
1
2 +
1"

"=
MW
42 4 .
-  "_
We
* Pp
. .
A ot
1
4D
U * 7 *
1
1 ft
4» *
*
0
_ ©"
W ** 1


* , — r=, 2 . 20 an 7
q n _ K 4h 8 OY D ³ tag dt Fo oe oo So 12 OY go nt: WF n 17 *. 1 = 5
; A —_ — ee e e e p e IPL PORTEL no n R * wo 8
7 ⁵ ̃ ⁵) . REI, N EIS 8 (Vo ad 7 ONES s e et ee een IE Ee") na SLID I Het art el n e r 7 5 *


The heavenly bodies afford frequent opportunities for making obſervations of this
kind. For as theſe appearances conſiſt in the appulſes, that is, the approaches of the


heavenly bodies to one another, or their paſſing by one another; and theſe appulſes, x 8


when they happen, are ſeen at the ſame inſtant of abſolute time in all parts of the earth
{ Where they are viſible ; therefore, by knowing the relative times of the day when ſuch
appearances are ſeen in two diſtant places, the difference between thoſe times is known,
and conſequently the difference of longitude between thoſe places. 1
Several Ephemeres or Almanacks are annually publiſhed, in which the times when
the eclipſes of the fun, moon, and Jupiter's ſatellites ; the rifing, ſetting, and fouthing
of the planets ; the appulſus of the moon to certain fixed ſtars, and other celeſtial ap-

pearances, are determined with regard to ſome meridian. By the help of one of theſe
"ns and a careful obſervation of theſe appearances, the longitude may be deter-
Mined. - 1K J 0 i 2 .
Eclipſes of the moon, when they happen, afford one method of finding the diffe-
rence of longitude. For as theſe eclipſes are occaſioned by an interpoſition of the
earth between her and the ſun, and conſequently ſhe is immerſed in the earth's ſhadow,
the moment any part of her body is deprived of the ſolar rays, it is viſihle to all thoſe
people who can ſee her, at the ſame inſtant of abſolute time. Hence by obſerving the
beginning, middle, or end of an eclipſe of the moon, in any part of the world, noting
the apparent time of theſe phenomena, and comparing it with the calculations of the
ſame echpſe, adapted to ſome other meridian, the difference of time, and conſequently
the difference of longitude between thoſe two places, will be known.
1 EEE Suppoſe


-


22 INTRODUCTION.


_ Suppoſe, for inſtance, the beginning of an eclipſe of the moon happened at London
fixteen minutes after two in the morning, but not till fifty-ſeven minutes and forty ſe-
conds after fix in the morning at Boſton in New England; then will the difference
of time be four hours, forty-one minutes, forty feconds, equal to ſeventy degrees
twenty-five- minutes, the difference of longitude ; and becauſe the celipſe happened
later at Boſton than at London, the difference of longitude will be weſt. Conſe-
quently , if the longitude be reckoned from the meridian of London, the longitude of
Boſton will be ſeventy degrees twenty-five minutes weſt.

The longitude of places may alto be obtained from the obſervations of ular eclipfes, |
but theſe being incumbered with the conſideration of parallaxes, are much leſs adap-
ted to that purpoſe than thoſe of the moon.

But as the eclipſes of fun and moon happen but ſeldom, another expedient offers,
viz. the eclipſes of Jupiter's ſatellites. That planet has four moons or fatellites,
moving round him at different diſtances, and in different intervals of time; one
or more of which is eclipſed almoſt every night : for they difappear either in going
behind Jupiter, or paſſing before him; and the inſtant of ſuch immerſions or emerſions
may be ſeen by a retracting teleſcope of about eight or nine feet long, or a reflecting

one of nine inches focal length.

The paſſage of the moon, or the ſuperior planets, over the meridian , affords another
method of diſcovering the longitude : for by having the time in an ephemeris, when
the moon or any of the planets paſs the meridian of ſome place, and finding by obſer-
vation the time when the object paſſes the meridian of another place, the longitude will
be determined; for the difference of tune converted into degrees, &c. will hs the dif-
ference of longitude.

I here is ſtill another method, equally expeditious and certain, namely, the pute
of the moon to certain fixed ſtars, and their occultations by the interpoſition of her
body. For the moon finiſhing her revolution in the ſpace of twenty-ſeven days, ſeven
hours, ſorty- three minutes, there are but few clear nights, when the moon does not
paſs over, or ſo near ſome fixed ſtar, that the time of the neareſt approach, or the viſi-
ble conjunction, may be eaſily obſerved. And theſe, when compared with the viſible
time computed to the meridian of ſome place, will ſhew the difference of longitude.
The laſt method we ſhall mention for finding the longitude, is by a time-keeper, a
kind of clock or watch, which will always ſhew the true time under the meridian of
tome particular. place: for by finding the time of the day at any other place, and com-
paring them with the time then ſhewn by ſuch a machine, the difference of longitude
between thoſe places will be determined. The ingenious Mr. Harriſon, a few years
fince, completed ſuch a time-keeper, which was found upon trial to anſwer even be-
yond the moſt ſanguine expectations ; and he accordingly received ten thouſand pounds
from the goyernment, as a reward for his diſcovery : but for ſome reaſons, not gene-
rally known, the time-keeper has been hitherto kept from the | |


Of the GLOBES, and their Us.


AN artificial Globe is a round body, whoſe ſurface is every where equial ly prot
from the center. But by the globes here is meant two ſpherical bodies, whoſe convex
ſurfaces are ſuppoſed to give a true repreſentation of the earth and heavens, as: viſible
by obſervation. One of theſe is called the terreſtrial, the other the celeſtial globe. On


the convex ſurface of the terreſtrial globe, all the parts of the earthy Yang fea are Mane
ted! lin th thear relative _ form, and fituation.-'  - 3 1 1


3 On


FNR =
On the ſurface of the celeſtial globe, the images of the ſeveral conſtellations, and the


unformed ſtars, are delineated ; and the relative magnitude and poſition which the ſtars
are obſerved to have in the heavens, carefully preſerved. | |


%


In order to render theſe globular bodies more uſeful, they are fitted up with certain
appurtenances, whereby a great variety of uſeful problems are ſolved in a very eaſy and
expeditious manner. f | Io
I be brazen meridian is that ring or hoop in which the globe hangs on its axis, which
is repreſented by two wires paſſing through its poles. The circle is divided into four
quarters of go degrees each; in one femi-circle the diviſions begin at each pole, and
end at go degrees, where they meet. In the other ſemi-curcle, the diviſions begin at
the middle, and proceed thenee towards each pole, where they end at go degrees. The
graduated ſide of this brazen circle ſerves as a meridian for any point on the ſurface of
the earth, the globe being turned about till that point comes under the circle. 4
Ihe hour circle is a ſmall circle of braſs, divided into twenty-four hours, the quarters
and half quarters. It is fixed on the brazen meridian, equally diſtant from the north
end of the axis; to which is fixed an index, that points out the diviſions of the hour-
circle as the globe is turned round its axis. . „
I) be horizon is repreſented by the upper ſurface of the wooden circular frame, encom-

paſſing the globe about its middle. On this wooden frame is a kind of perpetual calen-
dar, contained in ſeveral concentric circles, the inner one is divided into four quarters
of ninety degrees each. The next circle is divided into the twelve months, with the
days in each according to the new ſtile, the next contains the twelve equal ſigns of the
Zodiac, each being divided into thirty degrees ; the next the twelve months and days
according to the old ſtile ; and there is another circle containing the thirty-two points
of the compaſs, with their halves and quarters. Although theſe circlcs are on all hori-
Zons, yet they are not always placed in the ſame diſpoſition. n. .
Ihe quadrant of altitude is a thin flip of braſs, one edge of which is graduated into
ninety degrees and their quarters, equal to thoſe of the meridian. To one end of this
is fixed a braſs nut and ſcrew, whereby it is put on, and faſtened to the meridian; if
it be fixed in the zenith or pole of the horizon, then the graduated edge repreſents a
vertical circle paſſing through any point. „FC F
Beſides theſe, there are ſeveral circles deſcribed on the ſurfaces of both globes, ſuch
as the equinoctial, or ecliptic, circles of longitude and right aſcenſion, the tropics, polar
circles, parallels of latitude and declination on the celeſtial globe; and on the terreſ-
trial, the equator, ecliptic, tropics, polar circles, parallels of latitude, hour-circles, or
_ meridians to every fifteen degrees; and on ſome globes, the ſpiral rhumbs flowing from
the ſeveral centers, called flies. %%%%%%%%%%%S 8

In uſing the Globes, keep the eaſt ſide of the horizon towards you (unleſs the pro-

blem requires the turning it) which fide you may know by the word Eaft, on the hori-


XZ 2Z20n; tor then you have the graduated meridian towards you, the quadrant of altitude


before you, and the globe divided exactly into two equal parts, by the graduated fide
of the meridian. _ 2 5 . * 3

The following problems, as being moſt uſeful and entertaining, are ſelected from a
great variety of others, which are eaſily ſolved with a globe fitted up with the afore-
mentioned appurtenances. ; ts | ? |


. —


I. The latitude of a place being given, to reflify the globe for that place. *
Let it be required to rectify the globe for the latitude of Boſton, 42 degrees 25
minutes North. | SN 4 Wi *
5 Elevate
Ts


*


*
o \ 24 1 . : . 2


degrees begin at the equator, then the degree of the meridian over it ſhews the lati-
tude; and the degree of the equator, under the meridian, ſhews the longitude.


half, give the diſtance in Engliſh miles nearly. Obſerve, while the - quadrant lies in
this poſition, what rhumb of the neareſt fly runs moſtly parallel to the edge of the
quadrant, and that rhumb ſhews nearly the bearing required.


was made before the alteration of the ſtile) and oppoſite to it, you will find the ſign


for the ſolution of the following problems.


When the ſun is 4 degrees 1 in 1 8 the earth is 4 degrees in * and ſo of any


24 INTRODUCTION.
Elevate the north pole, till the horizon cuts the brazen metidlane in 42” 2 26 and the
globe is then rectified for the latitude of Boſton. Bring Boſton to the meridian, and
you will find it in the zenith, or directly on the top of the globe. And ſo of oy other h

place.
II. To find the latitude and longitude of any place on the terreftrial globe.


Bring the given place under that fide of the graduated brazen meridian where the


Thus Boſton will be found to lie in 42 25, north latitude, and no? 37 weſt lon- =
gitude, from Greenwich, or 4* 43, caſt longitude from Philadelphia. | . 4


1


III. To find any place on the globe whoſe latitude and longitude are piven.


Bring the given longitude, found on the equator, to the meridian, and under the
given latitude, found on the meridian, is the place ſou ght.


IV. To find the FE iflauce and bearing of any 170 given places on the globe.
Lay the graduated edge of the quadrant of altitude over both places, the beginning


or o degree being on one of them, and the degrees between them ſhew- their diſtance ;
theſe degrees multiplied by 60, give the geographical miles, and, by ſrxty-nine and a


V. To find the ſun S place i in the ecliptic.
Look the day of the month in the outer calendar upon 'the horizon, (if the lobe


and degree the fun is in that day.— Thus on the 25th-of March, the ſun's place is 44
degrees in Aries.—Then look for that ſign and degree in the ecliptic line marked on the
globe, and you find the ſun's place; there fix on a {mall black patch, ſo is it prepared


Note. The earth's place is always in the ſign and degree oppoſite to the ſun; thus,


other.


VI. To find the ſun's declination, that is, bis diflance from the eguinoctial line, cther northward
0 or ſouthward.


* his place to the meridian; obſerve what degree of the mash he's over it,
and that is his declination. If the ſun lies on the north fide the line, he 1 is laid to have
north declination; but if on the ſouth fide, he has ſouth declination. 1
Thus on the 20th of April the fun has 114 degrees north declination, but on the FX
26th of October he has 124 ſouth declination. 3
Note. The greateſt declination can never be more than 2 31 degrees either north or
ſouth; that being the Milance of the tropics from the RY b which the
ſun never goes.


VII. 70 fud where the Jun is vertical on any day; that is, to find over wage . the 22 will
po that day.


-King the fu s place to the meridian, -obſerve his e or hold a pen or wire
over tt, then turn the globe round, and all thoſe countries which paſs under the wire
over


#. * . L
- : 2 £ S


dL .
— 2 4
: r


* 3 — "IPs .
r wc oa "XX Y 12 £
E


— 2 8 . ERS,
S
7 * * 32
. * n *
WE MF; OY


MET
5 WR . .


7
6
1%
un
8
= *
> 12
-
3
»
D
F
.
q
N *
5
7
*
So
4 . =
1
» 48 5
„
: +3
oe.”
5
* *. it
key *
- =
=
3
5
* *
| 4
by


[NTRODUCTION. 215


will have the ſan over their heads that day at noon. Thus, on the 16th day of April,
the inhabitants of the north part of Terra Firma, Porto Bello, Philippine Illes ſouthern


parts of India, Abyſſinia, Ethiopia, and Guinea, have the ſun over their heads that day


at twelve o'clock.


| Note. This appearance can only happen to thoſe who-live under the 1 Zone, be-
cauſe the ſun never: ſtrays farther from the equinoctial, either northward or ſouthward,


than the two tropics, from whence he returns again.


VIII. To find over whoſe heads the ſun is at ony hour, or to what place the ſun is vertical.


Bring the place where you are (ſuppoſe at Boſton) to the meridian ; ſet the index to
the given hour by your watch; then turn the globe till the index points to the upper
12, Or #001, look under the degree of declination for that day, and you find the cs to


which the ſun is vertical, or over whoſe head it is at that time.


Thus on the firſt day of May, at half paſt eight 0 clock, A. M. I find the fan's is then


vertical at Cape Verd, the weſtern point of Africa.


Note. If it be morning, the globe muſt be turned from caſt to weſt. If i in thy after-
noon, it muſt be turned from weſt to eaſt. 5 4


IX. To find, at an 9 hour of the day, d 0 "clock it is at any Hams in 155 .
Bring the place where you are to the braſs meridian; ſet the index to the hour by the


watch, turn the globe till the place you are looking for comes under the meridian > and


the index will point out the time required. ;
Thus when it is 10 o'clock in the morning, at Boſton, it it is 20 minutes paſt 12 at


Olinda, in Braſil, and 8 at Mexico, in New Spain; the former being 35 degrees W.
Long. and the latter 100 degrees W. Long.


Note. By this problem. you may likewiſe ſee, at one view, in diſtant countries, where


the inhabitants are ring where nnn een e going to


ner a where 70 bed.


* To find at what hour the fer riſes and ers any ” ay} in the year ; 2 45 upon what point of


the compaſs.


Redify the globe for the latitude of the place you are in ; bring the 6 8 8 to
the meridian, and ſet the index to 12; then turn the fun's place to the eaſtern edge of
the horizon, and the index wall point out the hour of riſing ; if you bring it to the
weſtern edge of the horizon, the index will ſhew the hour of ſetting. eg

Thus on the 1oth day of April, the fun roſe at half an hour after 5 0 (clock, and ſat


'half an hour before ſeven.


Note. In ſummer the ſun riſes and ſets a little to the northward oa the eaſt and IP


points; and in winter a little to the ſouthward of them. If, therefore, when the ſun's


place is brought to the eaſtern and weſtern edge of the horizon, you look:on the inner
circle, directly againſt the little patch, you will le the Point of the n upon which


11 ſun riſes and lets that day.


Wn - To find the length of the day and night at any time of the Hear. : ah |
Double the time of the ſun's riſing that day, and it gives the len gth of the night;


double the time of his ſetting, and it gives the length of the day.


This problem ſhews how long the ſun ſtays wel.) us. "_ Wund how long he is
abſent from us any —


: 3 | 7 5 8 Thus


* Dre


*


24 INTRODUCTION.
Elevate the north pole, till the horizon cuts the brazen neridian'4 in 42” 2 26 and the
globe is then rectified for the latitude of Boſton. Bring Boſton to the meridian, and
you will find it in the zenith, or cirectly on the top of the globe. And ſo of any other

place.
II. To find the latitude and longitude of any place on the terreſtrial globe.


Bring the given place under that fide of the graduated brazen meridian where the
degrees begin at the equator, then the degree of the meridian over it ſhews the lati-
tude; and the degree of the equator, under the meridian, ſhews the longitude.

Thus Boſion will be found to lie in 42 25, north latitude, and 50? 37 weſt lon-
gitude, from Greenwich, or 40 43 , eaſt longitude from Philadelphia.


HI. To find any place on the globe whoſe latitude and longitude are —


Bring the given longitude, found on the equator, to the meridian, and under the
given latitude, found on the meridian „is the place ſou ght.


IV. To find the diflauce and bearing of any two given 50 on the globe: 6


Lay the graduated edge of the quadrant of altitude over both places, the beginning

or o degree being on one of them, and the degrees between them ſhew-their diſtance ;

_ theſe degrees multiplied by 60, give the geographical miles, and, by frxty-nine and a

half, give the diſtance in En gliſh miles nearly. Obſerve, while the quadrant lies in
this poſition, what rhumb of the neareſt fly runs moſtly parallel to the edge of the 4
quadrant, and that rhumb ſhews nearly the bearing required. =


3


V. To find the ſun's place in the ecliptic.


Look the day of the month in the outer calendar upon the horizon, (if the globe 8. |
was made before the alteration of the ſtile) and oppoſite to it, you will find * fgn
and degree the ſun is in that day.— Thus on the 2 5th-of March, the ſun's place is 34
degrees in Aries.—Then look for that ſign and degree in the ecliptic line marked on the
globe, and you find the ſun's place; there fix on a ſmall black patch, ſo i is it Prepared 'Y
for the ſolution of the following problems. "8
Note. The earth's place is always in the ſign and Jegroe oppoſite to the ſun ; thus,
when the fun 1 18 4¹ degrees 1 in Os the. earth 1 18 44 e in Libra; and ſo of any :
Other.  .-


ou
» l S
* 1 = = - 5 ty — — 8 by FR *
— — i d . - * 1 — 2 —
, = een ds WY. = 4 Ys — ws» Poon — ä REY LIM -— IG __— — — — — — wa u 2 *
: * 4 Vai hots —.— ky l — 22 © DE * 2 7 — n r 8 —_— ow a — 148 — — #1 2 — 2 9 .4
— me > EMCI. 4 — * 2 — 9 N 52 1 2 — . P * 2 * * — * * * ——— _ - —
8 1 * ng So IRR 4 n N * r — —— — N fs ent woe —— 8 — — Po?

pers ings eter” DES 000 1 wa" K a ue 2 * Z 22 n a 6 — I - * « 2 - . —
22 k 2 Der " 2 * 2 1 p Arn — - =

5 — 8 * * Caſs ” a "a; — 1 N

2 2 2 29 A 4 G ; N
, N * hs Sor ole — : » * 8

— : .
1


VI. To find the ſun's declination, that is, his diflance from the equino#tia line, ale northward
. or ſouthward.


Bring his place to the meridian; obſerve what degree of the meridian Ber over it,
and that is his declination. If the ſan lies on the north ide the line, he 1 18 laid to have
north declination; but if on the ſouth fide, he has ſouth declination. -

Thus on the 2oth of April the ſun has 114 en north declination; but on the
26th of October he has 124 ſouth declination. _

Note. The greateſt declination can never be more a 234 de; zTEES either north or

ſouth; that being the diflance of the 9 from the hn, Tong which the
1 ſun never goes.


—


* 1 IRS
bY. ae, Fx 8 —
— Re pas ye pp


q o
\ 2 = — Hu Www 5 * 4
on vo of 7K - _ ORE. © - 7
— d & * 1
. = " 23 — A ——ä— — = — a
"> —_ N
— 2 FI any wa ff. -


VII. To fud where the ſun is vertical on any day ; that i is, to find: over wink heads the ſun will
- paſs that day.

Bring the Th s place to the meridian, - -obſerve his e or Wi a pen or wire
over it, then turn the globe round, and all thoſe countries which pa ſs under the wire
1 | FO over


AT |
ng Fu” . 47 4
2 — rr r 2 2 5 8 1 of * .


INTRODUCTION © 25


will have the ſun over their heads that day at noon. Thus, on the 16th day of April,
the inhabitants of the north part of Terra Firma, Porto Bello, Philippine Iſles, ſouthern
parts of India, Abyſſinia, * and Guinca, have the ſun over their heads that day
at twelve o'clock.

Note. This appearance can only happen to thoſe who-live under the i zone, be-
cauſe the ſun never ſtrays farther from the equinoctial, either northward or ſouthward,
than the two tropichy from whence he returns again.


VIII. To find over whoſe heads the ſun is at any hour, or to what place the fas} 15 vertical.


Bring the place where you are (ſuppoſe at Boſton) to the meridian; ſet the index to

the given hour by your watch; then turn the globe till the index points to the upper
12, Or #001, look under the degree of declination for that day, and you find the place to

which the ſun is vertical, or over whoſe head it is at that time.

Thus on the firſt day of May, at half paſt eight o'clock, A. M. I find the fan i is then
| vertical at Cape Verd, the weſtern point of Africa.

Noęte. If it be morning, the globe muſt be turned from caſt to weſt. If i in 5 after-

noon, it muſt be turned from welt to caſt. | i


IX. To find, at any hour of the day, ber 0 "cock it is at any Naw; in "dhe world.


| Bring the place where you are to the braſs meridian; ſet the index to the hour by the
watch, turn the globe till the place you are looking for comes under the meridian, and
the index will oint out the time required, ©

Thus when it is 10 o'clock in the morning, at Boſton, it is 20 minutes paſt 12 at
Olinda, in Brafil, and 8 at Mexico, in New wank ; the former being 35 degrees W.
Long. and the latter 100 degrees W. Long.

Note. By this problem you may likewile ſee, at one view, in diſtant countries, 1
the inhabitants are riſing where 5 e, ** * g to
aſſemblies and where 70 bed. Ty


X: 7 0 fad at what bour the Jun riſes and ſets any day's in the year; and 45 upon what point of


_ the compaſs.


ReQify the globe for the latitude of the place you are in ; bring the ſiin's 3 to
the meridian, and ſet the index to 12; then turn the fun's place to the eaſtern edge of
the horizon, and the index will point out the hour of riſing; if you n it to the
weſtern edge of the horizon, the index will ſhew the hour of ſetting. - _

Thus on the roth day of April, the fun roſe at half an hour after 5 9 (clock, and fat

half an hour before ſeven. :
Note. In ſummer the ſun riſes and ſets a little to the e of the eaſt and _
points; and in winter a little to the ſouthward of them. If, therefore, when the ſun's
place is brought to the eaſtern and weſtern edge of the horizon, you look:on the inner
circle, directly againſt the little patch, you will ſee the Point of the * upon which
the e fin riſes and ſets that day.


XI. To find the rb of the Fa and night at any time f ; 1. OY *.
Double the time of the ſun's riſing that day, and it gives the len gth of the vight


1 | double the time of his ſetting, and it gives the length of the day.
This problem ſhews how long the ſun Nays wth) us: vo end. how long be i is


abſent from us any night. 28
a E xa T hus


*


:
i
Fo
j
s 7
R :
; ö
4
| 4:4 F
: 3
5
47
= :
: £
443
4 :
n
348
4 44
'F
114
. N
iN L
"I
: .
" + FJ
pr
—
l 2 24 "
1
— 14
£
% 1
3
14
4
72
|
f 1
14
„
* 2
i2 VP *
*
©
=_
1
4
19
|
an o 4
bud .
8 .
5
1
5 e
11
. BY
ö „
h 4
Y
4 1
"+
1
|
EF
'
- E *
n 4
+431) p
. hs .
8 E!. M4
Dr
| 1,8 bs
» 8 -
> I =
* WW *
4 4, 2 Ba
++ 28
181 3 4
q BY
$ Ks
1 ,
1
i '- SIN
o 1 4
þ P |S
' :
[2
Ly ** F
5
5 4
5 ,
D "
N 7
%
1
1
+, \
_ "4 1
„
K 3s 2
4 ne
4
i4 4
_
* :
1122
r
N XS
r
5 IL
* p i 4
9 „ nf
47 | .*
1
7 4 RR x
T1. o
FIVE
Fis4 \ .
$48 #7 6
199 Ls
i 2 3 :
* 1 7 8 1
263 5
2 „
N vet. 1
EV 18 }
n
„ :
a
* 1
* E 1
5 "7 : 2
4 F3 »2 $4
. * N
„
„ n
! 1
= | „ .
„ *
*
: 7
1 7
:- T3
2 2 4
17 -
12 5
| 3
5
e
ts
©, *,
4 55 ;
8 9 4
r
g 4; Ws
#. BY
34 44
a* *
i
1 4
. > 5 7
1
49 »&
* o .


5
F
$
F
|
E
1


„
. e 3 80
2
* n NN 25
——— tapes ah = .
— — * . god —


26 INTRODUCTION.


Thus on the 3d day of May, the ſun riſes at 5 o'clock, and ſets at ſeven; therefore
the days are 14 hours long and the nights 10.


XII. To fiad the length of the longeſt or orie /t day at any place upon the earth.


Rectify the globe for that place; if its latitude be north, bring the, beginning ol


Cancer to the meridian; ſet the index to 12, then bring the ſame 55 of Cancer
to the eaſt part of the horizon, and the index will ſhew the time of the ſun's riſing.


If the ſame degree be brought to the weſtern ſide, the index will ſhew the time of


his ſetting, which doubled (as in the lat © will give the length of the longeſt
day and ſhorteſt night.


If we bring the beginnir — Capricorn to the meridian, and proceed in all reſpects


as before, we ſhall 9 41 ength of the longeſt night and ſhorteſt day.

Thus in the Great Mogul's SR the — geſt day is 14 hours; and the ſhorteſt
night 10 hours. The ſhorteſt day is 10 hours, and the longeſt night 14 hours.

At Peterſburgh, the ſeat of the Empreſs of Ruſſia, the longeſt day is about 194 hours,
_ the ſhorteſt night 4% hours. The ſhorteſt * 4 hours, and the longeſt night 191

urs.

Note. In all places near the equator, the ſun riſes and ſets at 6 o'clock the year |
round. From thence to the polar circles, the days increafe as the latitude increaſes ; ſo
that at thoſe eircles themſelves, the longeſt day is 24 hours, and the longeſt night juſt
the ſame. From the polar circles to the poles, the days continue tor lengthen into weeks


and months; ſo that at the very pole the ſun ſhines: for 6 months together in ſummer,


and is abſent from it 6 months in winter.—Note alſo; ; That when it is ſummer with the


northern inhabitants, it is winter with the ſouthern, and the contrary; and r part of


the world partakes of an equal ſhare of light and darkneſs,


XIII. 2˙ find all thoſe inhabitants to whom the ſun is this moment rifing or r ſetting in their
meridians or midnight.


Find the ſun's place in the ecliptic, and raiſe the pole as much above the horizon as


the ſun, that day, declines from the equator ; then bring the place where the ſun is


vertical at that hour, to the braſs meridian; ſo will it then be in the zenith or center of


the horizon. Now ſee what countries lie on the weſtern edge of the horizon ; for in


_= the ſun is ri/ing ;—to thoſe: on the eaſtern ſide he is fetting ;—to thoſe under the


3 of the meridian it is noon 4 Land to thoſe under the lower part of it, it is


3 —
Isa at Charleftown (Mal: ) on tlie 1oth of April, at 40 clock i in the morning :
The ſen is about riſing at  Brafil, S. America.


The fun is ſetting at - Ne Guinea, the Japan: Ifles and Kamiſchatka.


In the meridian, or noon, at - Perſia, Auſtria, and Nova Zembla.
Midnight at 8 1 1 0 Bay of Good Hope, in the vicinity of King.


George's Sound.


XIV. To find the beginning and end of moitight;


The twilight | is that faint light, which opens the morning by. little and little in the
eaft, before the fun riſes ; and 3 ſhuts in the evening in the zeſt, after the fun
is ſet. It ariſes from the ſun's illuminating the upper part of the atmoſphere, and
begins always when he approaches within 18 degrees of the eaſtern horizon; and ends


when he deſcends 48 degrees below the weſtern; when dark night n and
eontunues till another wy dawn.


To


"
4
7
*
3
I
+3
N
PS
*
64
1
1
*
*
£1
«Y
>
.
gs
A
—
Ef
1
1
"8
AM
+ 6
9
* 2a]
—5 J
1
fl
LEW $
1
1
— 8
2
- £6
0
9 7 Lf
% 8
*
"LP
4 f
n
3
„
88
„
be £
7
WE”
tag HN
898
3
7 5
l
1
3
de.”
2 Ms
£0
"SM
I 8 4
Te,
* 7
** -2Þ
Ee
*
b ED
2
1
Th
- *
5
1278
99
» ©,
*
1
=. / WY
- 4 „
af?
9
San
——
ITY —
1
5
1 3
_—
A
3
7
* ＋
[IM
i; "8 my
RES we
am
3 þ.)
*
- ©
PEE -,
7
- TC 2
* 2 D
- x8
*
4 -
3
1 3
Sn
+3 25
* 4
*
1
Nl
2
9 5
1
£5
"58
"A
"A
*
3
hh
5 4 *
Y os
uo
3 $4
3
hy.
Wo" %
WE 4”
RE 6
=.»
RN
Ws
* 2 e.
M1. 51
ed
* —
74
oY


4 1 3 1
* Pra)

— * £-> y [3

8 SE? n J


INTRODUCTION. 27


Jo find the legung of twilight ; reQify the globe; bring the fun's 5 place in the
ecliptic to the meridian, and ſet the index to 12 at noon. Turn the ©. gree of the
ecliptic, which is oppoſite to the ſun's place till it is elevated 18 degrees } in the qua-
drant of altitude above the horizon on the weſt, fo will the index PR the hour
twilight begins. 1
To find when it ends bring the ſame degree of the ecliptic to 18 degres of the
quadrant, on the eaſt fide, and the index will point the time twilight ends.
Thus on the roth of April, at Boſton, twilight begins at 41 minutes after 3 in the
morning, and ends 19 minutes after 8 in the evening. In London they have no total
night, but a conſtant twilight, while the ſun is beneath the horizon for two months,
from the 20th of May to the 20th of July.
Under the north pole, the twilight ceaſes when the ſun's deckinafion 4 15 greater than
18 degrees ſouth, which is from the 13th of November to the 29th of January; ſo that
notwithſtanding the ſun is abſent from that part of the world for half a year together, yet
total darkneſs does not continue above 11 weeks; and befides, the . is above the
Horizon, at the poles, for a whole fortnight of every month through the year
Norte. The leis the ſun's meridian altitude, the longer twilight continues: ; therefore,
at the equator, twilight is the ſhorteſt.


XV. To meaſure the diſtance from one town to another.


Only take their diſtance with a pair of dividers, and apply it to the equinoctial, that
will give the number of degrees between them, which being multiplied by 60, (the
number of geographical or computed miles in one degree) gives the exact diſtance
ſought :—Or, extend the quadrant of altitude from one place to another, that will ſhew |
the number of degrees in like manner, which may be reduced to miles as before.

Thus, the diſtance from London to Madrid is 114 degrees. From Paris to Conſtan-
tinople 194 degrees. From Briſtol, in England, to Boſton, is 45 2. which
multiplied by 695, (the number of Engliſh miles in a degree) gives 31274 mil 5
Note. No place can be further from another than 180 degrees — that being half the
circumference of the globe, and conſequently the greateſt diſtance.


XVI. To find all thoſe countries in which an eclipſe of the fun or moon will be viſible.


1. Of the Sun: Find the place to which the ſun is vertical at the time of the ks,
by problemn 7th, and bring it to the zenith, or top of the globe; then, to all thoſe
my above the ROTIZDn, if the eclipſe be "ny; will the ſun appear (part of it). viſibly
obſcured.
2. Of the Moon: Bring che Antipoden or country oppoſite the place where the ſun is
vertical at the time of the eclipſe, to the zenith or top of the globe, and then the _-
will be ſeen in all places above the horizon at that time. YN


XVII. To calculate the ws of the ear th, hat ! is, 10 to find how many miles i it is round.


A line going round our globe is ſuppoſed by mathematicians to be divided into 360
equal parts, called degrees; and each of theſe parts are ſuppoſed to be divided into 60 |
<qual parts, called minutes. Mr. Norwood found, by accurately meaſuring from bg
London to York in 1635, that one degree upon the earth's ſurface contained 6 94 ſtatute
miles nearly; conſequently if the whole 360 degrees be multiplied by 694 we Wal find
the circuit of hows whole earth, in "IPO mules, to be 25 1988 The accurate meaſure


aS 259038, | ts LEES
E 2 8 EEE Note,


— _ 4 1 92 — . . Bos yy — 5 * 4 * 2 — C Sc - D 2 - *
4 WP... 7 ah it %* e . 1 "ang 2 b n hy Tx Wo Se at _—_— : e BW OF RY 1 ras > FEY L
r 2 e 8 % AR e * . 2 ty 5 A,” — £65 4 : L . Bf” : 2 A 2 n Þ
. „ 3 S = I FC * ee DN % . «a fmt boa GI ITED ö n 2 8 SED e L ö 7% 2 1 4 - F - 1 8 = * rw
8 e . : Se; >. — q Nr See n 5 1 - Rot I 2 . 1 2 . 2 We 8 — = FF "IS 5 8 8 3 * 5 D ba eh . gp” N + - Pe 7 SY r F l A e 8 „ e 1 «
r * > 5 ES cr p ug? * 3 T r SRL ola Sf 7, ici +"; 3 . n 7 . 2 e r 1 N KR, £3 0.9 oO Ro Sr TIP + HR RE - 3 < 7 , 8 r „ * 4 >
Oe .. ̃ . ̃᷑ ̃ . ̃ ͤ ..,, ĩ 2 v7», 3 DESDE AG YG EN EE oe // V% ⁵ͤa“D c. ⅛ 9ç— ern OR OT I ada re k 5 — . ' .
4 8 r he BREA 8 . n . r een n py * "os a 15.5 6 „ ERCHT ORE EV rin bs AD! C Nee „ 1 1 x —_— Ne „„ - q
24 £7 — r 3 : 7 „ A Re PE 5 2 1 - _ . ; 8 * . TEE - . = 4 : f Ay FRA RA 7. * ? Ps. * : — 7 , a d
{ C b ; p 33 1 N F ; 5 a . , _ -


28 INTRODUCTION:


diameter will be 7; i. e. the diameter is always a little leſs than one third part of the


. r reckoned at 7, 970 meaſured miles.


multiply the . of the diameter Dy: 11, and the product divided by : 21, will give the


exactly alike on both globes. Both alto are rectified in the ſame manner. N. B. The


Note. 60 computed miles make a degree, which makes the circumference " be but
21,600 geqgraphical miles.


XVIII. 'To calculate the diameter of the earth, i, e. to find how many miles it is F<
It has been found by accurate menſaration, that if a circle meaſures. 22 round, its


crecumference 3 and this always holds true, be the circle bigger or leſs.* _

Therefore if we multiply the circumference of the earth by 7, and divide the product
by 22, the quotient will give the diameter, or thickneſs ; and which, in this _ will
be found to be 8018 meaſured, 6872 computed, miles. The diameter of the earth is


Note. From theſe dimenſions of the earth we may diſcover, 1K, that if there were a
hole made through it, and a mill-ſtone let fall into this hole, and it ſhould deſcend


at the rate of 1 mile a minute, it would be more than 34 days in coming to the
center.


2d. If a man bo Joon: of travelling round the earth; and ſhould go 20 miles each
day, he would be 3 years and z in completing the journey.


3d. If a bird ſhould fly round the earth in 2 days, ſhe muſt go at the rate of 325
(meaſured) miles an hour.


XIX. To find the ſuper fitial content of the earth.
Multiply the circumference by the diameter.


755 22 ' To find the ſolid content of the earth. . A og Ter
Multiply the ſurſace by one fixth of the diameter and it will give the flidity. Or, ;


ſolidity.


After the n manner we may find the frfach and ſolidity not only of the natural
globe, but alfo of the whole body of the atmoſphere ſurrounding it, (provided it be
always and every where of the ſame height) for having found the perpendicular height
thereof by that common experiment of the aſcent of Mercury at the foot and top of a
mountain, double the ſaid height and add the ſame diameter of tlie earth; then multi-


Ply the whole as a new diameter, by its proper circumference, and from the product
lubtract the ſolidity of the earth, it will leave that of the atmoſphere.


; PROBLEMS falved on the CELESTIAL GLOBE.


The equator, ecliptic, tropics, polar circles, horizon and brazen meridians, are


ſun's place for any day of the year, ſtands directly over that day on the horizon of the
celeſtial globe, as it 455 on that day of the e

The latitude and longitude of the ſtars, or of all other celeſtial 3 reckon-
ed in a very different raanner from the latitude and longitude of places on the earth;
ſor all terreſtrial latitudes are reckoned from the ſequator; and longitudes from the
meridian of ſome remarkable place, as, of London by the Britiſh, ant of Paris by the
French. But the aſtronomers of all nations agree in reckoning the latitudes of the moon,
ſtars, planets, and comets, from the ecliptic; and their longitudes from the equinoctial
colure, in that ſemicircle of it which cuts the ediptic at the beginning of Aries; and
ner eaſtw-ard, quite round the ſame Faneirele again. Conſequentdy thoſe ftars


*Note, The ED of a arcle is is to its diameter more _ as 355 tO 113.


\ | | which |


INTRO DVU CT TON 29


which lab: between the equinoctial and the northern half of tlie ecliptic, have north _
declination and ſouth latitude : thoſe which lie between the equinoctial and the ſou-
thern half of the ecliptic, | have ſouth deelimation and north: latitude; and all thoſe
which he between the a and Ae N their dedinations and latitudes of the fame
denomination. 1 11
Pros. I. To find the right acenGods and Aeclination of the . or any fixe# ſtar; :
bring the ſun's place in the ecliptic to the brazen meridian; then that degree in the |
equinoctial which is cut by the meridian, is the ſun's right aſtenfion ; and that degree
of the meridian which is over the ſun's place, is his declination. Bring any fixed ſtar to
the meridian, and its right aſcenſion. will be cut by the meridian. in the equinoctial; and
the degree of the meridian that ſtands over it is its declination... So that the right aſ-
cenſion and declination on the celeſtial globe are found in the ſame, manner as longi-
tude and latitude on the terreſtrial. +
II. To find the latitude and long tude of any ſtar. If. the. given flar be on the |
north fide of the ecliptic, place the ha degree of che quadrant of altitude on the north
pole of the ecliptic, where the twelve ſemicircles meet, which divide the ecliptic, into
the twelve ſigns; but if the ſtar be on the ſouth hde of the ecliptic, place, the goth de-
grec of the quadrant on the ſouth pole of the ntl: Keeping the goth degree of the
_ quadrant on the proper pole, turn the quadrant about, until its graduated edge cuts the
ſtar; then the number of degrees in the quadrant, between the ecliptic and the ſtar, is
its latitude ; and the degrees of the ecliptic, cut by the quadrant, i is the w_ 8 e
reckoned according to the ſign in which the quadrant then is.
III. To preſent the face of a ſtarry eben as ſeen from any * place of the
earth, at any hour of the night. — Rectify the celeſtial globe for the given latitude, the
zenith, and ſun's place, in every reſpect, as taught by the problem for the terreſtrial;
and turn it about, until the index points to the given hour; then the upper hemiſphere
of the globe will repreſent the viſible half of the heaven for that time; all the ſtars
upon the globe being then in ſuch ſituations, as exactly correſpond to thoſe in the
heaven. And if the globe be placed duly north and fouth, by means of a oP fea
compaſs, every ſtar in the globe will point to the like ſtar in the heaven: by which
means, the conſtellations and remarkable ſtars may be eafily Known. All thofe ſtars
FF which are in the eaſtern fide of the horizon, are then riſing in the eaſtern fide of the
| heaven; all in the weſtern; are ſetting in the weſtern fide; and all thoſe under the
upper part of the brazen meridian, between the ſouth point of the horizon and the
north pole, are at their greateſt altitude, if the latitude of the place he north; but if
the latitude be ſouth; thoſe ſtars which lie under the upper part of the meridian, be-
8 the north point of the horizon: and the ſouth 8 at rt aner *
titu ;
IV. The latitude of the place and day of the month being given” to find the time
when any known ſtar will riſe, or be upon the meridian, or ſet.
Having rectified the globe, turn it about until thie given ſtar comes to the clftern
= fide of the horizon, and the index will ſhow the time bf the ſtar's riſing; then turn the
_ globe weſtward; and when the ſtar comes to the brazen! meridian; the index will ſhow
the time of the ſtar's coming to the meridian of your place ; laſtly, turn on, until the
ſtar comes to the weſtern fas of the horizon, and the index will ſhow the time of the
ſtar's ſetting. N. B. In northern latitudes thoſe ſtars which are leſs diſtant from the
north pole than the quantity of its elevation above tlie north point of the horizon, never
118 and thoſe which are leſs diſtant from the ſouth. pole * the number degrees hy
Which


Dn


30 INTRODUCTION:


which it is depreſſed below the DING, never riſe : And vice bong, in ſouthern lati
tudes.
V. To find at what time of the year a ben ſtar ill ba: upon the inen, at a


given hour of the night. Bring the given ſtar to the upper ſemicirele of the braſs me-
ridian, and ſet the index to the given hour; then turn the globe, until the index ts


1 poin
to XII at noon, and the upper lemicirele of the meridian will then cut the ſun's place,


anſwerable to the day of the year fought ; which day may be my found againft UE
Uke 12 of the fun N the fm on the wooden horizon.


The di iferent MANNER by which # wk NATIONS and PEOPLE en TIME.


THE Babylonians, Perſians, and Hrians, and the inhabitants of ſome poſt. of Germay,
begin their days at fun- ring.


The (ancient) Fews, Athenians, and Tralians, wokon from ſun ſetting.
The Egyptians, like the Engliſh, &c. begin at midnight. 4
The aftronomers and Kanes, begin the day at noon, and reckon on 24 hours to the


next day at noon. And acc a this mode of reckoning are all the e of
the Jun, moon, and plavets, 1 ma aſerted 1 in the common almanacks.


GEOGRAPHICAL THEOREMS, or PROPOSITIONS.


THESE propoſitions, Which are deducible from the nature of the cin g — 11
the learner will find to be ſo n real ens, if he a r and contemplates
them upon the globe.

I. Places lying under the equator have no latitude; becauſe the reckoning of latitude
begins at the equator.


II. Under the poles of the world the latitude is greateſt, or ia 90 degrees; 3 becau ſe
the reckoning of latitude ends at the


I. Going fi the uquevy, townnls tHe e pole, the latitude increaſes ; but going to-
wards the equater, the latitude diminiſhes.


IV. The latitude fe! is equal to the height of the pole in degrr above the


horizon.


V. Places Hing under that W which i is actonnted the 2 have, 10 bngitude,
becauſe the reckoning of longitude begins at that meridian.


VI. Thoſe places have the greateſt bon gran which he under the meridian oppoſite
to that where longitude


VII. The longitude of any place cannot be enter than 1 80 degrees, caftiard. or


weſtward ; becauſe that brings you to the meridian ' oppofite to chat where longitude
began to be counted from.


VIII. No two ore can be diſtant from one another above 180 degrees ; becauſe
- 180 degrees is half the circumference of a great circle on the globe.


IX. All the inhabitants of the earth enjoy the ſun's l an equal length of time, and
have him equally abſent from them. + es 1


. Under the equizoial, the days and nights arc always equal to twelve hours; but
not exactly ſo in any other place.


XI. In all places between the equator and the holes, the days and nights are never
equal but at the time of the equinoxes, in March and September. 5
XII. The difference between the lengths of the days and nights in any 3 on
| * the eguator, is greater in r as the latitude of that place ——


2


9— 7." WM


INTRODUCTION. 31


XII. In places exactly under the polar circles, the fan , when at the ſummer
tropic, one whole day without ſetting ; and diſappears one whole day when in the


winter tropic: At other times it daily riſes and ſets as-elſewhere.


XIV. In all places of the frigid zones, the ſun appears every year without ſetting for
a certain number of days; and diſappears for about the fame ſpace of time. And the
nearer to, or further from the pole, thoſe places are, the longer or ſhorter is his ap-


pearance in, or abſence from them.


XV. To all places under the ſame ſemicircle of the meridian, n n bs -


or ſouth de en "tis equator; "it is "wow or eee hour of the "day.op
night at the ſame time preciſely. +


XVI. Places \ying eaſtward of 3 other place, kites their moraing, noon, and evening


hours earlier than at t that 2 155 one hour for every 25 der, recs it lies eaſtward:
of it.


XVII. Places lying weſtward of any other hs have their morning, noon, and. even-


ing hours later than at that Place, * one hour for _— 15 degrees it lies weſtward
o WE: 2:


XVIII. A perſon] in going caftward * round the lobe, will have bel one day
in his reckoning of time, above the account kept at the place he departed from: But


had his circuit been made weſtward, he would have been one day behind- the account |
kept at that place. .


XIX. Iwo perſons ſetting out at the fame time from a place to make the circuit


of the globe, one going eaſtward the other 1 n on — IN Þ differ 1 in their ;


account of time hy two entire days.
XX. To alt places within the rorrid ; 2086, ther n i. e. comes over the |


heads of the inhabitants, rice a year. To thoſe. under the tropics, once: But it is


never vertical to thoſe in the temperate or frigid xau es.
XXI. People who live to the north of the torrid zone, fe the fan due ſouth at noon 3 3


and thoſe who live tothe ſouth of the torrid zone, ſee the ſun due north at noon.


XXII. Thoſe who ſee the ſun to the . zorrhward have their ſhadows: projected ſouth--


ward; but when they ſee the fun to the fuuthward, their ſhadows are projected north-
| wry.


XXIII. The nearer'the ſun is to the zevith of any ee the ſhorter is the ſhadow


7 noon ; but the further from the zenith at noon; the longer is the ſnadow: The


ſhadow is always oppoſite to the ſun; and thoſe, who have the fun in their zenith, 1. e.
directly over their heads, have no [length of ] ſhadow at all.


XXIV. In all places ſituated 'i in à parallel ſphere, i. e. at or very near the pales, the
fan's daily motion runs always parallel, or nearly ſo, Hu ING horizon of wack


place. |
XXV. In all places ſituated in a ri bt ſphere; i. e. at or near the equator, the lun. 8


daily motion is 8 or nearly 8 to the horizon of ſuch places.


XXVI. In all places ſituated in an oblique ſphere, i. e. lying between the equator and


1 ; "the poles, the circle of the fun's daily motion i A 0 is ande; or cuts the ho-


rizon of ſuch place at unęqual angles.


XXVII. On the days of the \equinoxes only, that is, about the zoth-of March, and
23d of Sepia, the ſun riſes exactly in the eaft pon of the horizon, and lets in the
weſt point, to ev place upon carth. > 8

XXVII. To places in north latitude, tlie fun riſes: to the zorthward of e caſt; and
ts to the northavard ofiithe- weſt; from the vernal to the autammal equinox; ; and ries 0


. TIX. ©
\ Saget o
— N
.


= \ — b
_ — — Ss x
Z 1 _ —
R 4 - a * y P * > — —_— F541 *. * -
= — o_ y ; pe PRAC, . — —— — 1 8 * _ \
= * 3 py og. —— w * * 1 Nane 222 by 7 * _ . CE TW __ 1 . _ RET = N
U * wt. " * Hr gry PEI -- I = 0 — - : Fa b "I - 5 \ 4 44 -
a COON OO ow > rr — 9 592 = _— * of COP x n N q D - 89 „ * —
- q 1 * £4 Se 2 2 — 6. v 2 —— oh 93 — _— £ 7 s 9 2 m7 oY ”
\ \ N 4 — — oY _ * P + he 5 o 4 8 * 1 . —
> _ mY — * * 4 7 1 ————— 7 4-0 Ag rw e v3 \ 2 * oe 2 = * . . 1 * 3
* 1 = _ — - 22 - bY _ cz "NE 0 . 7 * . N * D * * - cabins 7 »— —_ __— i
> —— — 2 2 . - _y — E A 1 — 124 2 * * 8 4 apr : Y VT hg 4 3 L py —
= . 45 — — * 4 r re - 8 0 0 — — * EE "EI — * dad hoy Sa 8 . ** — = * Jau . * 8
5 = a * = * 2 Y 5 l Fa Ta - 1 8 X "3 — 0 —
IT en nt OE RE r 5 p 8 — — r ; wes Ns" . . K 5 ö abt : a l — gt
- 4 5 I . > — 4 3 \ whe d : p _— , ; ah - — . * n ho
*”_ . — N * by 2 Af Ty — - $4 -* np . 7 Jos n * = — * . 7 9 ä * N I . — h - « * A 4 — 1er r . —_—
* < L * 1 2 2 — 2 Le * * — 9 K 8 * o * I , es * o —— irre . :
— — — — * 4 8 8 A — N ho — — * 3 * 75 þ — 4 4 yon * 2 — _ SS > 93 - "I *
— 2 — — —— 8 5 2 * * 2 > ud — a> —+.. 4 K K — l ; n wy - — — a , es 5 a 1 * 7 a *
— "wy — 2 1 a n 1 E 9 242 2 95 I Y — — ö * 3 outs 4 * * ; A Ly s * ;
4 * 4 5 4 * =— K. : x
. 4 ;:


32 WWTRODUOT LON.
the bald of he cof, and fctst9 the ſeutbevard of hne act, from thertime bf the


an entire


| Ralf of the glabe, as the meridiani,


eye be-ſuppoſed to be re at an infinite aur hy is


—— to that of the wernʒ Fu tit get
Laftly. In all places of the torrid zone, the morning and evening N is. 110 aſt
m the two frigid zones it is and in ow. . zones ou twilight is a
min N two. rt) rods N £21 : ente 2526 4995..15


E 1 8 Of MAP FED their „ J. = e RES: —
A Map; is the depraſeiſtation of ſome part of the earth's turkace delineated. on a
ane according to the lawg of projection; for as the earth is of a mahnen ſenm, no
part of its ſpherical ſurface can be accurately exhibited on a plane.
Maps are either generah or partidulan : General maps are ſuch as * us a view of
hemiſphere. or r half of the globe, and are projected upon the plane of ſome!
t circle, which terminates the projected bemitpbere, and divides it from the other,
equator, or the horizon of ſome place; and from
this circle the projection 1 18 ſaid to be meridional, equatorial, OT horizontal. rt C


DANES e 90 I9ERIT


Particular maps are ſuch as exhibit a part leſs 9 a hemiſphere ; ſuch as maps of
Europe; AſiazAtrica, North: America, and South America 30% ot PRIN. Pita


wp cbuntnes, or leſſer diſtricts.
There are two methods of


it 16 Rad T 40 AI. 16 1 N


projecting the aids in cetera * viz. 3


and orthographic. - In order to form an adequate idea of the conſtruction of maps,


we may imagine the globe on which the circles are delineated, to be of thin glaſs, and
that half of it is AA at the fame. time. In taking this view, the eye may be con-


ceived to be placed at different diſtances from the hemiſphere to be regel. If the


eye be conceived to be placed in ſoma point of the ſurface af the ſphere to view the
concave of the oppoſite hemiſphere, it is called the ſtereographie projection): If the
called 191 orthographic pro-
jection. IPTG Sq 1.55) MY ] 1} 7} v7 36 141008 *
In the amen projeAibn» the, b about the middle are | contragid, \being
much leſs than thoſe nearer the circumference. } 1! 1) +.


All the maps in this treatiſe, and indeed thoſe in d al ethers are laid down


accordin g to the laws of tereographic projection. by

Maps differ from the globe in the ſame manner as a does from a Ratue.
The Ade truly r ee the earth, but a map no more than a plows ſurface can re-
preſent one that is ſp 1. But although the earth can never be. exhibited, exactly by


one map, yet by means of ſeveral of them, each containing about ten or twenty de-


grees of latitude, the / repreſentation will not fall very much ſhort of the globe for


exactneſs; beetle. ſuch maps, if joined together, would form a ſpherical convex


nearly as round as the globe itſelf.
Cardinal Points.] The north is conſidered as the upper


part of the map; the ſouth i is


at the bottom, oppoſite to the north; the eaſt is on the right hand, the face being
turned tothe north ; and the weſt on the leſt hand, oppoſite to the caſt, From the


top to the bottom are drawn meridians, or lines of longitude; and from fide to ſide,
parallels of latitude. The outermoſt of the meridians and parallels are marked with


degrees of latitude or longitude, ' by means of which, and the ſcale of miles, which is


commonly placed in the corner of the map, the fituation, diſtances, &c. of places may


be found, as on the artificial globe. Thus to find the diſtance of two places, ſuppoſe


Phil adelphia and Boſton, by the map, we have only to meaſure the ſpace between them
with the compales;: or a bit of thread, and to apply this diſtance to the ſcale of witer
whic


—


NET ES n
Y \ VE WED PP 2 4 5 ? * [
7 — 8 : 3 A an * Nn + * 8 Les L +; 2 7 « 18 2 * N a T SOA. +. 3 ** 7 *
- r n +” Pad + * £0 OA Io ng EN ne A 4 þ . REF gs, TO 3 W £ 9
3 ed] cd n 8 e eee ee 3 8 IS . 5 2 r ens * n 5 2 op 2 We. 2 y -
JV ĩ ⁊ 00000000 . „)))! a2 NE


1 NT R. o] TIO N. 33


which ſhews mat Benton is 286 miles diſtant from Philadelphia. If the places lie directly

north or ſouth; eaſt or welt; from one anotlier, e have only to obſerve the degrees on
the meridians and parallele and by turning thefe into miles, we obtain the diſtance
without meaſuring. Rivers are deſcribed in maps by blank lines, and are wider aa
wards the mouth than towards the head or ſpring. '' Mountains are ſketched on
as on a picture. Foreſts and woods are repreſented by a kind of ſhrub ; bogs —
moraſſes, by ſhades ; ſands and ſhallows are deſeribed by ſmall dots; and roads uſually
by double lines N car harbours, the depth of the water 1s s expreſſed oy 2 moon e
ſenting fate (til to t6 e ee 9H et)

When any PEP the heaven, or end are 0 0 . omthe right or left, we are to

underſtand the expreſſion” di ferently according to the profeſſion of the perſon Who

makes uſe of it ; becauſe, according to that, his face is ſuppoſed to be turned towards
a certain quarter. A geographer is 1 ke poſed to ſtand with his face to the north, becauſe
the northern part of OD world is beſt OWN. An aftronomer looks towards the ſouth,
to obſerve the celeſtial bodies as they come to the meridian. The ancient augurs in
obferving the flight of birds locked towards the caſt ; while tlie poets look weſt, towards
the Forfunate iſles. In books of geography, therefore, by the right hand we muſt.
underſtind' the eaſt; im thoſe of aſtronomy, the weſt; i ne Toa as IO to ne r
ſouth; * and! in the writings of poets, the north." 8 Mus! 3 |

> ABA LS MDQIOTIC: TALES 6074 ITY METS YE 8802 OH]. .


5 Gr OBSERVATIONS concerning {HEAT oxi chin., 8
| A. the p ſehe 25 E. of 9 6 Il i the principal ſou rce 0 het. As well as of rhe


and its abſence 15 9971 18 too ob 10 0 cher to have b
he next ſource of heat is the condenfation of . It i is well known that vapour
contains à quantity of the matter of heat l Eee no other effect, but that of
= making it aſſume. 20 aerial expand E vapour is condenfed te a Liquid; |
4 : ay during this condenſation a 5 — 255 h Wo” is ſet looſe, which warms the
2 meien atm. e 1 en 1s denen, cauled b by the, attraction of
ee olou Water £ ic I Na trineſs we fr equentl ly experience before rain.
| it 55 chief ſource of heat i in the e that ſurrounds. it, diſtance
4 the earth is the 92 00 if cold ; or, in other Words, the g greateſt cold mult peril


in the higheff regions of, 9 5 berg, and fo much. the eater, as clear unc ouded


air feems to receive no hea


+
I,
:

I
*

3
bf

5 4 2 2
"8
WJ

. 3d
5 , 3


— R . os” ,
b s WO * o * — 1 ©, * to *
e \ . 4 1 1 e es ; 9 #5488 E Le ER, OL,
3 * N „ LINE IC ora uw. 66 8 r 7 Ja n N 1 r b
Er EEE EL SLE a ang” a ae | | ot : |


qu


it whatſoever from the ra ys of he ſun, whether direct or
reflected. Thus if the focus of the moſt powerful burning-glas be directed on mere
E | as it does not h the Ka pge degree. of beat; and the reaſon is, becauſe the air
7 855 tranſparent, aff ords a a flage to the ra of light, which act as fire only when

con ned within the minuteſt in erſtices 'of bodies; as it is then, and then on y, that


© 60, ets.


they contract the attractiye power 0 of the, particles of matter; ;, in which action and re-
action heat conſiſts. ,

,; Henee. the lugheſt, mo mains .CYECN. ded the e aber ar durin Abele L 5
Fi * 251 * q ©, 8 - year,
copered ONS ſnow. „Boug . the cold. « of Pinchinca, one 5 the Cordeliers,


ummed diatel Wunder LA line, 00 1 from 7 to degrees under the, freezing point,

every. MIC befor nie and hence at a certain hei ght, Which varies in almoſt

Very, 1 0 de, a cap tantly-f 7 0 at nig! It, in every 10 ,t Town h in tlie BE 75 cli-

male it 33 * to ſome, fee he. next day : This hei; ght he he ron the, Hp. rag Wh gage:

lation: Between the tropics he places it at "the beight bf P12 5,577 tect.
8 n ' ET ol 3 533: nan a

* Extraded | ney Rinks es We b ih titled. % 'An ahh p01 * 25 rn oe Ufferent

latitudes,” — publiſhed. Þ | | p | |
| | =—


= * 2 * 2 VE * ox — a2 po * - —— 9
« ED . . 1 3 8 * 8
1 Kok „ 3 8 te NT AT RO AP ELEREY PTV > (m2, 24) SYS of
+ . 4 WE bs E325 þ * EPL 7, - „ .
* » = ES? 8 RF” Op. Ne, 8 5 3 . > A a I Wy I PLES,
S I * ;


3
5 85 W
9
8
2 o
3
3
_» ta
2
11
p .
.
LOO
AC
"8
3
15
M0
3
2
*
*
9
1
i ba”
*
9
%
8
1


7
2
*
o
D i=
*
**
*


34 INTRODUCTION:


At fill greater heights. it never freezes, not becauſe the cold decreaſes, but —
vapours do not aſcend ſo high this height Mr. Bouguer calls the wpper term of 2
and under the equator he fixes it at the height: of 28,000 fett, at moſt. Under che
equator, there being very little variety in the weather, the height of both terms is neurly
conſtant; under other latitudes this height is variable, both in ſummer and winter,
according to the degree of heat which prevails on the ſurface of the carth.
The next ceneral ſource of cold is, ewaporetion; for the attraction of the particles. of
liquids ana Gi as their points of contact! diminiſh, and thereby their capacity for
receiving the matter of heat (which is the ſame as that of light) inereaſes; by this
creaſed capacity, the matter of heat or fire contained- in the neighbouring bodies,
which, like all other fluids, lows where it finds leaſt reſiſtance, is determined to flow
towards the vapour; and conſequently thoſe bodies are cooled, though the vapour is
not heated; becwate the re- action of its nee 18 er ee 1 that nicht it had
before its capacity was inoreaied. .. 75 Ti
With reſpect to evaporation, we may remark, py That in Din vlimetas it is about
eee Ne vernal to the een won the autumnai is
Verna 8 * rin Ii
2dly. The deyeoe of ccd duned . n, is much greater 8
w — than the evaporatin * EE whichus produced when the evaporating
ſurface is the warmer of the two. HE, warm winds, as the Aer e &c.
are more deſiccative than cold w˖ndsss
3dUy. That it is greatly increaſed by a current ot air or wi . flowing « over the e
poxating flirface, not only ly becauſe the era drating ſurface is ereby increaſed, but allo
| becanſe unſaturated air is conſtantly brought into Winne with it, Hence it has been
_ remarked that calm days are the hotteſt. 2 5
athily. That tracts of land covered with trees ar veget: 8, ettlit more vapo + than
the fame ſpace covered with water, as Dr. Hales has OMferved. : Mr. Williams wund 5
E to amount to one third more . 3
e may obſerve, that the heat and el of different duntries are tranſmitted
from ofie to the other by the medium of 1 00 How the air of u call country Ts
determined to flow towards a warmer, is eaſily underftood ; but b what means warm
air is determined to flow towards cold countries, is ſomewhat. cult to explain. )
e here mention two cauſes that occur to me, wiſhing for, a fuller explanation. from =
others. 7
fl. If from any tract in the upper regions of the atmoſphere, two currents of air
flow in oppoſite N as ſometimes happens, the inferior air being læfs comprefſed
will become ſpecifically Vgliter; ; and currents of air in oppoſite directions tw the Upper :
currents will take plate.
2dly. T conceive that when caſterly er weſterly winds meet with: unequal force one 5
of them may be reflected northwards. RO
From 5 has been Already ſaid, it follows, that lame fittiativrls are bette Stell to
receive or communicate heat than other ſituations ; thus higlf and mountainous fitu-
ations being nearer to the ſource of cold, muſt be colder than Tower fituations ; -antl
countries covered with woods, as they prevent the acceſs of the ſun's rays to the earth;
or to the heaps of ſhow which they may conceal, and preſent more numerous
rating ſurſaces, muſt be colder than open countries, though ſituated in the Tame latitude';


* Hat i olerylts de in cling av eee pry ee rwe.


k..3.v L


.
—_ 1 _ , _ mis A _= - 9 wm — JE Ree i 1
| 0 8 8 n . Oe : R 3 \ . 2 r 2 nn Ie 2 4. D PP on, #- 3 ee 3 r .
v0. ent XS... ccc (c 8 3 . * OR LE I bs Ws, A ET 3 n 2 — = . Ls ED A 5 N . for. I 2 1 SHE 2 N b 6
Ds © LS . e „ 3 . . «YL: f 2 * 2 . 2 FIR r — 2 — A pK 2 n Ls 32 0 ED 9 5 N e 9 — 8 9 0 * 4 :
2 r Br 722 e A r e „„ yp ou RES F . E IDE 2.55 Eo TOR 2 e 1 CLONE IEICE ode WY oy They «4
be” 8 Te 22 8 8 — * as MELT.» Ag 2 48, "I e F c OF dar] EH. Z r J LE DT ENTS n E * r. 35 — 5
by ge 4 FREE 8 OD, 1 R yy 2 FEY Sex, 428 45 — 1 . I 2 e Mn r e are 3 FORE 2 N. thn LS . BO nd TR S oe at; : RS 4 _—_ > þ — *. ere r r "i YES
BID ph * N A 4 Nd a Va: OR ĩͤ c \ - 5 : 8 * l Rnd ont Or, og ns. nnen, 8 r "> 5 1 > .
„ r 8 Ry SA 2 Eg LI * 9 . 12 Fai ID "is On En . - C 3 * 8 4 * W — r = - -
. r 5 — 5 K 2 N N p e n _ r Vo 3 h 22 4 =, 1 . a :
Ser 72 4 N ” — 7 wa 4 575 A * 7
Ne 0 ws. ” 9 WY” 8 $ * . 5 ;
” n a * * : Ke K a 2 K - ö N n * n n _ . A K ,


EI
| 254


rg 8 I n oe ;
1 a, C 8

S

SS . *


5 . 7 5 n 722 k .
ESD 2 r ee NG ID Bs eng 8 r
8 * + wy R N 88 2 Ne O 8 Rs, . WES
rus. F w ot Ee OS OS CY F Tf. . . we no a 3
> bn OR RG STC * Ana oF: 7 FT Pres E wb” . 3 N or. h D > : 1 < 2 7 * 9 RIC. 3 1 5 1 .
e eee HE, - DR Bs " FEY 4? TO 8 2 8 . Ir $ Ee IP ee es,
< 3s , r 5 . KS; N N 8 af EA Ap Ende g 8 ++; 5 5 SE * FE" 5 3 * BE
- _ r 3 . FOoags * + . © eB I r root 97 > 5. TS i * S EP . ag. I, pra n
a] Z - : v : -. WF. y 2 3 r „ 4 n a | — ee N


1
14111


ys T
. ˙ ORR
o


INTRO DU CTI N. 35


and fince all tracts of land preſent infinite varieties of ſituations, uniform reſults cannot
here be expected.

With reſpect to the annual temperature, we we may remark, 1. That within 10
degrees of the poles the temperatures differ very little ; neither do they differ much
within ro degrees of the equator, |
2d. The temperatures of different years differ very little near the equator, but they
differ more and more, as the latitudes approach the poles.
3d. It ſcarce ever freezes in latitudes under 3 ” unleſs } in very elevated ſituations,
and it ſearce ever hails in latitudes higher than 605.
4th. Between latitudes 35 and 60?, in places adjacent to the ſea, it generally thaws
when the ſun's. altitude is 49", and ſeldom begins to freeze, until the ſun's meridian
altitude is below 409. - © 4
Hence we may obſerve, that the month of January is the coldeſt in every latitude. _.
24. That July is the warmeſt month in all latitudes above 48? ; but in lower lati-
A Fo. is generally the warmeſt.

December and Jannary, and alſo June and July, differ but little. In
7 ne above 305, the months of Auguit, September, October and November, differ
more from cach other, than thoſe of N March, April and May. In latitudes
under 30, the difference is not. ſo g The temperature of April approaches more,
every where, to the anndal e e than that of any other month; whence we
may infer, that the effects of natural cauſes, that operate gradually over a large extent,
do not arrive at their maximum, until the activity of the cauſes begins to diminiſh ; this
appears alſo in tlie operation of the moon on feas, which produces tides ; but after
theſe effects have arrived at their maximum, the decrements are more rapid than the
increments originally were, during the progreſs to that maximum.
= 4th. That the differences CON the hotteſt and coldeſt months, within a0 'of the
X <quator, are inconſiderable, t in ſome peculiar fituations ; but that they e
in proportion as we recede from t e equator. |


„
14,
_—_—..
[4 26S
3
1


th. That in the higheſt latitailes, we often meet with a heat of s or $0.de es;
and. 3 in latitudes 59 and 60, hs heat of July is frequent F greater art in
_—_— : latitude


= 6th: That every habitable latitude enjo s a heat of 60 degrees at leaſt, for 1 two
months; which heat ſeems neceflary for the growth and maturity of corn. The
ow” quicknefs of vegetation in the higher latitudes, proceeds from the duration of the fun
over the horizon. Rain is little wanted, as the earth is ſufficiently moiſtened by the
= liquefaction of the ſnow that covers it during the winter; 1 in all this We cannot buff.
= cicntly admire the wiſe diſpoſition of Providence. f
= 7th. It is owin gtothe lame provident hand, that the globe of the earth is interſected
AF with ſeas and monntains, in a manner, that on its firft appearance, ſeem altogether irre-
gular and fortuitous; 5 enting to the eye of ignorance, the view of an immenſe run;
bdut when the effects e ſeeming irregularities on the face of the globe are care-
HE fully inſpect they are foyn moſt beneficial and even nedeffary to the welfare! gk its
4 inhabitants; to ſay nothing of the advantages of trade and commerce ghd
not exiſt without theſe ſeas, it Is by their vicinity, that the cold of ſhe higher kites
is moderated, and the heat pf the Tower. It is by want of Teas thaf the ink:

; * as Siberia 'and Great „as well as thoſe of Africa, are Bn 10 is Un-
in Habitable; a circumſtan wy furniſhes a ſtrong prejudice a Fin, the opiniun, of
3 * who wink k els £0 countries Were the ernie habitations op If n th ie ſame
= | A STR: © £ MOI, manner.


Mini.


* 5
* $3
oF


36 INTRODUCTION.


manner, mauatzins are. neceſſary; not only as the reſervoirs af rivers, but as Aa *


againſt the violence of heat, in the warm latitudes: without the Alps, Pyrenees,
Apennine, the mountains of Dauphine, and. Auyergne; &c. Italy, „pain, and France,
. would be deprived of the mild temperature they at preſent enjoy. Without the Balgate

_ or Indian Appennine, India would have been a deſert. - Hence Jamaica, St.


>, Sumatra, and moſt other intertropical nds; are e n en


from which the breczes proceed that refreſh. them. en e r e Lone
Wo VIeW tl the Anxoar Teennatoks 1 different plc erer to the order f their,


1 5 5 LATITUDES: d fg e Rte n


N. 100 Longittde. i Ef MG 1
| deg. m. deg. m. | | nual heat.

12 9 1129 70, 5 1.57 "the Air $6471
e e lis Ni rofl Sen 6 40
a 359, 56 30, 24 E. 38, 8


1 rn „ n 944, 0; AO 8; rv ©
Solyſkamki 4 115 W tip et Je ts 6
ODS. FW ER OO ILSS (Tn
Berlin . De Wt FC


1

1

—

A

—

Gn (

bat

+:

PZ!

+>

IJ
r.

S

8 ˙5 7

— 9 288

DD © ©


=
3
2
I


- i
0 B.


»
0 E
* „ 0
W — .
D AJ .
* —
%
W
a E
*
— 7
4 Denies 0 >:
; —
*
0 Ky
- LE


Os


*
—
* f — ;
* . . 4
. - x
* C Fd 2 Ro”
1 5 7 5 7
* — *
— — —— 2 —
*
a
LEES
—
—


a


1 '
1 1
t '
1 '
888
SI
* s
bud
288
d - S 3
2 Þ
O”


8 A


—_, .


CL - g | $4 Ne 14 . * 6 17 N
Mcd Tr Gus _— —
4 Ba EN *
Bourdeaux — „„
N . * i «YC; : . 5 4
_ Montpelier | „„ ee Thos


Mont Lonis, i in Roufillon .


ts

'

1

=}
> >
en
—

Y

E


Trab, in W
e, in Jamaica


7

__
&

F

*
',-
Wy ;
1

” *

” I
3 7 N


F "4 *


%%% tn; de: Aff. Doi, fs
Quito e „ a1 „ N O, , 13 6 77) 50 W. 62.


” PI. — ” .
+ £2 » "4 " 8 vs 5 8
r e ix") b "0 15 . : Him. Fe SIO dS : a Cds A a Wo, WG 3 * 5 * * 4 * *
P rr 2 52 e . RT SET T; ECO TINS, e nn
— 8 SICS WG DS . 8 FA 2 8 5 n . 2 a FR 071 e ie... A D; 8 Lo Os 7 * 2 — b 5 ma? a 2 ot m3 4

Wo” Sa 1 — — 3 4 * n e hy 2 n pl x 8 1 a7 FR” 2 25 . > 1 4. b Py :

2 / 8 0 ; Px; N "> OLGA ö

ALS Jo * 5 „ of * * „ o = #6
1 TG "EY » q . > N


; : MEE Fo. J 3 dh, "rd 8 5 8
r n r l : 3 * 8 E N e %, 22 OR
. . oy 2 n n 3 | PF N n 3 . * YET tre Be 020 A
4 mM p . $7 PE. L on : 7 PT Sr Es SS b 4 OE x OG; ages. 2 an 4
TE. 75 78 3 = © LS 2 n 8 * 3 F: eg" 4 . I - 3 N ere 55 8 W tte
2 ᷣͤ „ = EY THF: he 4; 2 2 8 2 . — + N ry tt Nt 30 YE WITS 3 en 1 . 2
by N q 6 a r r ep * , N - — +* F S 5
0 3 y — 2


| 0 1 a *; 2 51 : '& ©
the ſouth and weſt,
| pol .
. | # | ww" FR
= | 4 , 7 p : * ö Jan * 17 1 * Tz 5
\ g *. 3. s 4 4 > 4 #
8 * ,


_, Longitude, | Mean an-


_


—


5 deg. m. deg. m. nual heat.


TTT


J
TT . ⁵—— O9- + | 90;


37-0 1 Ott Pet
T 3 | 1 af #541 | M 1 2 Latitude. « FE


o *
.


4


THEORY of He WIN DS.


$1}


AR is a fine inviſible fluid, ſurrounding the globe of the earth, and extending to
ſome miles above its ſurface : and that collection of it, together with the bodies it con-
tains, circumſcribing the earth, is called the atmoſp here


Few natural bodies have been the ſubject of more experiments than the air; and


from theſe it appears, that it is both heavy and elaſtic. By its gravity it is capable of


ſupporting all lighter bodies, as ſmoke, vapours, fumes, odours, &c. And by its elas-


ticity, a ſmall volume of air is capable of expanding itſelf in ſuch a manner as to fill a


very large ſpace, and alſo of being compreſſed into a much ſmaller compaſs. —Cold has
the property of compreſſing air, and heat of expanding it. But as ſoon as the expan-
ſion or compreſſion is taken away, it will return to its natural ſlate. Hence, if an
alteration be made in any part of the atmoſphere, either by heat or cold, the neigh-
bouring parts will be put into commotion, by the effort which the air always makes to
recover its former ſtate. Wind is nothing more than a ſtream or current of air capable
of very different degrees of velocity, and generally blowing from one point of the
horizon to its oppoſite part. The horizon, like all other great circles of the ſphere, is
divided into 360 degrees: but as theſe diviſions are too minute for common ule, it is
alſo divided into thirty two equal parts, called rhambs, or points of the compaſs. _


Winds are either conſtant or variable, general or particular. Conſtant winds are
ſuch as always blow the ſame way, at leaft for a confiderable length of time. Variable
| winds, are ſuch as frequently ſhift, or change from one point of the compaſs to another.
| A general wind, is that which blows the ſame way over a large tract of the earth the
greater part of the year. A particular wind is that which blows in any parienidr


place, ſometimes one way and ſometimes another. 11
be trade wind is a current of air blowing continually from the eaſt, on the Atlantie
and Pacific ocean, between thirty degrees north and thirty degrees ſouth latitude.
The cauſe of this conſtant wind is- the action of the ſun in his apparent motion from


| = caſt to weſt. For the air immediately under the ſun being more heated, and conſe-


quently more expanded in that part than in any other, the air to the eaſtward is con-
ſtantly ruſhing towards the weſt; in order to reſtore the equilibrium, or natural ſtate of
the atmoſphere; and by that means occaſions a continual current of air from the eaſt-
ward nee bereee molars 16 250)
But the trade-winds near the northern boundary, blow between the north and eaſt;
and near the ſouthern, between the ſouth and eaſt. For as the air is expanded by the


heat of the ſun near the equator, therefore the air from the northward and ſouthward


will both flow towards tlie equator, to reſtore the equilibrium. But theſe motions from


the north and ſouth being compounded with the foregoing eaſterly motion, will produce


the motions obſerved near the above limits, between the north and eaſt, and between


, * o * $8 1 .
i He 16 7h
*
|


Ewe wa S £04 HEE eine t
.


Y


5


*


38 FO INTRODUCTION.


It muſt however be obſerved, that theſe general currents of the wind are  Jiſtinrbea

on the continents and near the coaſt. Sometimes the nature of the ſoil increaſes or

leflens the heat in the atmoſphere ; and ſometimes chains of mountains. form a kind of

eddy near their weſtern fides ; hence the motions.of the winds may be different and

even contrary to the general motions above obſerved.

In ſome parts of the Indian Ocean another ſpecies of trade-winds, called monſoons
prevail. heſe blow fix months one way, and ſix months the contrary way.

Thefe phenomena flow from the ſanie cauſe.” For the air that is cool and denſe,
muſt rata the rarefied air in a continual ſtream upwards, where it muſt ſpread itſelf to
preſerve an equilibrium; conſequently- the upper Tours or current of the air will be
contrary to the under current; for the under current muſt move from thoſe parts where
the greateſt heat is; and ſo by a kind of circulation, the north-eaſt trade-wind below
will, be attended with a ſouth-weſt wind above; and a ſouth-eaſt below with a north-
weſt above. Experience has ſufficiently confirmed the truth of this propoſition; the


ſeamen always finding that as ſoon as they leave the trade- winds, they immudiat cly and
a wind blowing in an oppoſite direction.


Between the fourth and tenth degrees of north latitude, and between the largitates


of Cape Verd and the eaſternmoſt of the Cape de Verd Iſlands, is a tract of fea which

ſeems to be condemned to perpetual calms, attended with dreadful thunder and light-
nings, and ſuch frequent rains, that it has acquired the name of the Rains. This phe-
nomenon ſeems to be cauſed by the great rarefaction of the air on the neighbouring
coaſt, which cauſing a pe


| eee ene theſe frequent deluges of rain.


THEORY. of the TIDES 1.

BY the woal tide i is underſtood that motion of the water in the ſeas N rivers bby
which they regularly riſe and fall. 'The phenomena of the tides occaſioned a variety of
opinions among the ancient philoſopbers ; but the true cauſe continued unknown till
the latter end of the laſt century, when it was diſcovered by the illuſtrious cowl *
Newton, who deduced it from the following obſervations: = ;

One of the inherent properties of matter is gravitation or a * is owing
this property, that heavy bodies thrown up into the air fall down to the ſurface of the
earth in perpendicular directions. And as all lines drawn from the center of a ſphere
to its cifcumference are perpendicular to its ſurſace, therefore all heavy bodies fall in lines
tending to the center. This property of gravitation or attraction is found to be uni ver-


ſally diffuſed through this ſolar ſyſtem, and probably through the whole univerſe./: The


Heavenly bodies are governed by this great law f — Pr The earth and moon gra-


vitate mT or are attracted by the ſun. Experience has alſo: demonſtrated, that 4he


force of attraction exerted by theſe bodies on one another, is leſs and leſs, a ee are
farther removed aſunder in Proportion to the 1quares of thoſe diſtances.
From theſe general princi
center; of the earth will be lets on thoſe parts of its ſurface that are oppoſite to the ſun
and moon than in the others: and this deſect of gravitation in particular purts, is the
true cauſt of the ebbing and flowing of the tide. For it is evidem, that if no ſuch
forces wee exerted by the ſun and moon, the occans, being equally atttacied towards
the earth's center on all fides by the force of gravity, would continue (%y a tate af per ſact


en. But as theſe forces are really exerted, the waters in the oceans muſt riſe


, * 4 ——
* 4
= / | ;
4 .


8


en


rpetual current of air to ſet in from the weſtward, and this
current meeting here with the general trade-wind, the two currents balance each other,
and cauſe a general calm; while the vapours carried thither * cach . — and |


ples it follows, that the gravitation of Uodits tiwands the


*
ut; * >


.
C 2 3 4
- 22 a7 af >
, 8 enn vg WS 4 7 oy
0 * 4 . : WF 82 L r et q * * = =
: - K N 8 13 — 7 72 2 r : — 1 1 82 2 .

— . We Ts A Nr q : | ry „ e 7 - * ad. Te ne * 7 = G * . pa

. 2 N 8 TE Ke, g 4 5 A a — — * * 3 Eo n . \ * E - A 1 4 * - 4 —

EL bs _ A, . Dr Fee * 82 - — 2 8 n r Si ERC 1 FP . 367 art N ig wan? r in FAS: 7 8 FITS... 1 3 * -

W 8 22 3 = . Fen __ 2 4.2 2 S 3 TOs . 3 2 — a © . wo 2 * 4 Wa &* L Ar x 3 1

5 FFF ²˙ m ˙ 52214 oy « * \ «> N46 . 3 * CL 4 2 2 0 == * — r * 1

3% NY CANE IP OR D n 18 % Wn r Gar) £28 DIO 3's © od. 1 : IR. - 1 n e * » 1 4 *
er 3 Rx 9 2 OY a 4 2 My 7 2 3 Les 3 e 8 -, ; 5 2 2 2 —_— * 7 — = 2 # - 1 1 4 -
FFP | „%%% an
4 - Ry y o _>
. 4 -
6 R - n . :


„ Squat n UE TY
8 - * 5 N 1 5 2
8 c


n


1
# ___
=


INTRODUCTION. * „


higher in thoſe places where the fun and moon diminiſh theis gravity ; or * the
attraction of the ſun and moon is greateſt.

This being an undeniable fact, it follows, that as the * of gravity muſt be dimi-
niſhed moſt in thoſe places of the earth to which the moon is neareſt, viz, in the
| zenith ; therefore the waters in ſuch places will nie higher, and conſequently it will
be full ſea or flood in ſuch places.


= — . — P
- 2, x : „ þ
2 ay TY ae ETA * I . - OT 7 *
5 whe > Ig * D Sug - - - a. . A 3 1 . o
- RA . 2 1 8 q ” 7 is)
* {rt 2 N 2 A 2 « > .
2 id oe ee NS
n Ft ... MOSES


% — . _ p . A” — * n — "Ct as "
2 wo RO . Sx 1 . FF
a * , 8 8 2 TE 65 2 N wb _ 2 — r 4 WR ts * ; "2 8/20 n ö : 2
J d e or 1 oF OT SES, 8 2 e
r N nnn
UNE LS * „ SRO " 8 * 1 7 q
RN * < - = .


2 8 IP T: * "> IF ha 2 Wh G a
222


moon in the zenith, and thoſe in the nadir, or thoſe diametrically. oppoſite, will bare
the flood or hig · water at the ſame time.


towards the center; and therefore in thoſe places, the waters will be loweſt.

Prom what has been ſaid it follows, that if the furface of the earth Was entirely
covered with water, the ocean mut have a prolate ſpheroidical figure, the longer dia-

meter paſſing through the place where the moon is vertical, and the ſhorter x: 11th te

| appears in the horizon. And as the moon apparently ſhifts her place from gaſt to weſt


*
th


3


motion, thefe muſt be two floods . two. ebbs in the W of a lunar day, or about
twenty-four hours, fiſtye minutes. n i

= Hence we ſce the reaſon why the of high-water 3 js e Gilt y mingtes later every
1 Fa, That is, if it be high-water at eleven e it 90 wot de high-water ll mar
2X fifty minutes after eleven to mr wm.

Ine tides are higher than-orilinary twice every month, viz. about. the tune of the
new and full moon; and theſe are called ſpring tides: becauſe at theſe times both the
ſun and moon concur, or draw in the fame right line; and conſequently che tides muſt
be more elevated. When the tue uminaries are in conjunction, 'or-when the un and
moon are on the ſame ſide of the earth, they both copſpint; to raiſe the Mater in che
zenith, and conſequently in che nadir⸗ and when the ſun and moan are in oppoſition,
that is, when the earth is between em, while one m. ne water in Tm Acuith and
= nadir, the other does the fame in the nadir and zenith.
= The tides are lefs than ordinary twice every month ; that i is, about the times. XZ che
frſt and laſt quarters ef the moon; and thelgare called neap-tides.

. For in tlie quarters of the, moon, the ſun raiſes the Water uchere the moon qapreſſes
i; and depreſſes it where the, mon raiſes the water; the tides are made charclare by

14 the difference of their actions.

It is however neceſlary. to be obſerved, that the f pring tides happen. not preciſely at
SE | the new and full moon, but a day or two after, when Attractions of nd:
moon have added in the ſame direction for a conſiderable time. In che ſame manher

che neap-tides happen a day or two after the quarters, when the force of the moon 8
Wy attraction has been deſſened by that of deür 8 ee (ſeveral days t.

he -pring tides are greater about the time of the. ene at-other gimes.of
the year Saves e then leſs.

Becauſe the et eas e the ſpherdid, or the: tao Re rfiecds, will at hat
time be in 755 8 equator; and<canſequently: will deſcribe a great circle of the
Kurth, by ——ů—ů— will moveſwiſter, deſcribing a great circle
in the * ä uſed to deſaribe a ek: paralllitoithe ————


3 CY:


* 1 454% 2


From the fame principles it follows, that the parts of the earth directiy under the


But as the waters in the zenith and natir aid ot, the fame tins, therefore the 8
in their neighibeurhoed wall preſs towards theſe places to maintain the equilibrium ;;
and, to-ſupply: the places of theſe, others will move the ſame way, and ſo on to places
ninety degrees diſtant from the ſaid zenith and nadir; conſequently in thoſe places
where: the moon appears in the horizon, the waters will have more liberty to deſcend


in moving round the earth every day, the longer diameter of the ſpheroid following her


40 1 N rn d ö U TON.


quently the Katers being impelled more forcibly againſt the ſhores, they riſe
h gher.

Such eld be the phenomena of the tides if the n farſace of the earth was
entirely covered with water; but as this is not the caſe, there being beſides the con-
tinents, a multitude of iſlands, lying in the way of the tide, which interrupt its courſe;
therefore in many places near the ſh ores, a great variety of other appearanices, beſides
thoſe already enumerated, ariſe. Theſe require particular ſolutions, in which the
ſhores, ſtreights, ſhoals, rocks, and other objects, muſt be conſidered; a difquifition
which requires much more room than can be ſpared in this introduction. What has
been "ſaid will however be ſuffictent to explain the theory of the tides, and enable the
reader to purſue the bers wont 4 vers n the hee Ae that may ariſe with 1 to
1 particular place, DR a t


+. LENGTH of MILES | in different COUNTRIES. |


"THERE i is ſcarcely a greater variety in any thing than in this ſort of meu; not |
only thoſe of ſeparate dan ee differ, as the French from the Engliſh; but thoſe of the
ſame country vary in the different provinces, and all — from the ſtandard:


N en
3 4
; J 6 1 FIR 1 . 3 F r * 3 «A |
. n 7 - — < . 2 > fg” by 3 ot. <a . * = J \ 1 ws le = N
* 72 1 7 C FE r 99 O-) = as p TRIS”: Too, 1 2 PN 22 = TY Ow : %, # IT ow = . ">: ye *g =, * o \
art M4 an . . . p 5 8 * N V4
g * J :
*


Thus the N Engliſh. mile differs from the ſtatute mile, and the French have | 3
three ſorts of leagues. =
We ſ ſhall here” give = miles of ſeveral countries, compared with the Englith by :
Dr. Hall | ien
The Engliſh f Aatute ids N of 5280 feet, 1760 yards, 0 or bs furlongs. 1:
Eleven miles Iriſh are equal to fourteen Eng liſh. | | 201213. i
The Ruffian vorſt is little more than 3 Eng Tiſh... 10364 > 1474] t att i BW
The Turkiſh, Italian, and old Roman lefler des 1s neatly dab. i it
The Arabian, ancient and modern, is about 14 — 1 e Ik 6 bi 7 24a T
The Scotch mile is about 11 En liſh. I 22tart Bein 80 Met 116 %
The Indian is almoſt 3 Engliſh,” ii 28083 L1G 0 JD ten biin it
The Dutch, Spaniſh, and Poliſh, 18 about: " Engliſh. f Hinten Hon od 14
The German is more than 4 Engliſh. n 43 440 44, 440% Wl
The Swediſh, Daniſh, and Hungarian, is from 5 to 6 ene. alc 11s eee Il
The French common league i is near 3 Enghth, l e b ei ee 217 , oi J
1 ener marine league is 3 Engliſh — 01.14 67 | —__ 15 BY 21, 16h L
NATURAL DIVISIONS Fg EARTH. | Pre”


THE /Planet which we inhabit, called the Earth, is made up 3 b land ard vile,


and is therefore called terraqueous. About one fourth of the Airiace: of the globe is
land; the other three fourths are water. 5 *
| *. l 1701 RE


t The common diviſions of the land and water are as follows:


15


6-4 374 .Iba4
- The Divifions of Land are, 6 b The Divifions of Water are, f a6
X Contains bo A continent is a very 1 Fahy. An ocean is avaſt: called:
13 tract of country, not entirely 8 j tion of water, not entirely ſeparated by
rated by water. There are commonly land. There are five great oceans; the
reckoned two continents, the Eaftern and | Atlantic, lying between America on the
Weſtern. [The eaſtern continent is divided weſt, and yak and Africa on the caſt,
into Europe, Aſia, and Africa: The weſt- 13 „ooo miles wide. The Pacific, | between
ern, into North and South America. [To America on the'caſt, and Aſia on the weſt;
on We: ay: now add the continent. of 10,000 miles over. + The Indian; which


with, IS Wiaſhes


—" ks "aaa *


„


oy * . 4
- 65 Wi =" bo l . - Le Gag 2 = = «Sith "iy, s
3 RY I ERS Ca wa — NE 5 "YI © LH


r 3


SG Vos vv TT -


> ALAS 1


— 7% 1 . " r AE IO IEEE. r
; 4% PN OE PIP ATED. yr M 3 RT 20 w Et OR 6e! Rs
RR :!!! ace = owed |


main land; as the iſthmus of Darien, |
W which joins North and · South. America, 70
miles over; and the iſthmus of Suez,
Wich unites Afia. and. AIR, 60 miles


85 | Over. | " 7 |


== of the land more elevated than the 15 a-
eent country, and ſeen at a. diſtance; a8
3 my White Hills. : 3 bd


A ACCOUNT of the. GREGORIAN- or NEW STYLE. 85


entirely farreunded with water; as Rhode


85 W i


mountain. or hill” extending into the fra, |
= the extre
A point of flat land projecting far into the |
bea, is likewiſe called a cape;


* ;
2 , = 4 5


TNT ROD


| Wine: Holland, Which is found to be ſuffi- |
eiently large to bear the reſpectable name


ef continent. Some geographers reckon
four continents, viz. Europe, Aſia, Africa,


definition chere are but the three-mention- | Y


al- 30045 ono, |
Wands] An inandi is a 0 of ind i


II.
Hand, Long Iſland, en I de Great ö


nm. Peninjulas.] A pe
an iſland;..0r:a tract of land . ſurrounded
by water,; excepting; at one narrow neck;
as Boſton, the 10 8 n e and 8
Arabia. f


—
—


IV. — An bp is a narrow
neck of land joining Aa peninſula to the]


1


"IV; Promonitories.] K* omontory is


. of. which is called a cape.. |


as Cape-|
Ann; Cape Cod, Cape Hatteras, —


om. „eee and Cape


VI. Mountains. N 8 is a


vers; as lake Ontario, &c.


ninſula is almoſt |


*


UCTION. 41


waſhes the eaſtern ſhores of Africa, and
the ſouthern ſhores of Aſia, 3,000: miles


wide. Beſides theſe there is the Northern


or Frozen ocean, lying northward - of Eu-
and America. But-aceording to the above |


rope and'Afia, 3, ooo miles wide; and the
Southern, extending from the ſouthern:
coaſts of Any to. the ſouth. pole, 8; 300


miles over.
HI. Lakes. } A Naked 18 a large collection
of water in the interior parts of a country,


ſurrounded by land; moſt of them, how
ever, communicate with the ocean by ri-
A ſmall col
lection of water furrounded as above, 18
called a pond.

HI. Sas. ] A ſea or- gulf ie is a part of the
ocean, ſurrounded by land, excepting a
narrow paſs, called a ſtrait, by which.
it communicates with the ocean; as the
Mediterranean, Baltie, and Rod Seas;
and the gulfs of Mexico, St. Lawrence,
and Venice.

IV. Straits.] A ſtrait is a narrow pa-
ſage ont of one ſea into another; as the
ſtraits of Gibraltar, joining the Mediter- -
ranean to the Atlantic; the ftraits of Ba-


| belmandel; which unite the. Red Sea with.


the Indian Occan.
it

v. Bay] A bay 4 is a „ pet of t me fear
nts up into the main Tand, commonly
between two capes ; as Maſſachuſetts Bay,
between Ann and Cape Cod; Dela-
laware Bay, between Cape May and Cape
Henlopen; Cheſapeak Bay, between Cape
Henry.

VI. Rivers. A e confideratle
ſtream of water, iſſuing from one or more
ſprings, and gliding into the ſea. A *


ſtream i is called a rivulet or brook.


POPE Gregory the XIII: made a reformation of. the Calendar; The Julian | Calen-


dar, or Old Style, had, before that time, been in


* according to the Julian Calendar, conſiſts of 365 days and 6 hours; which 6.
ours, ; Deng, 0 one fourth part of a a day, the


* "From f Pike


* 5 N .


general uſe all over Europe. The


common years conſiſted of 30s 5 days, .
+ Arithwetic. es FL BAL


OY
every fourth
thoſe years
This computation, though near the truth,


the Chniſhan ra, to the + Ag of Po


reducing the Leap
common years, and retaining the Leap year


hours will exceed the ſolar


INTRODUCTION:


year one day was added to the month of February, which. mide each of
366 days, which are uſually called Leap Nears.


*


is more than the fler


pe Gregory; who therefore cauſed ten days to
taken out of the month of October, 1582, to make the


March, as it did at the time of that Council.
future, he ordered that three days ſhould be abated in
year at the cloſe of each cent


Equinox fall on
And to


at the cloſe of each fourth cen


two hours, ſo that in fifty centuries it will amount to a day.


3
the greate


ing the
order.


4 1 4


Exbibiring the Superficial Content of the whole Globe, in Square, Miles, ſixty, to 4 1 5


alſo of the Seas and Unknown Parts, the Habitable Earth, the Contixents ; tene the gras


the Gregorian Calendar, or New
er part of Europe, it did not take place
firſt of January 1752, and in September following,


Style, had long


EL EZ


8


Empires, and A Nandi, arran ged according to their magnitude.


Square Miles.

The Globe about 199, oo, ooo Celebes = 1

Seas and unknown parts 160,000,000 Manilllaa
The habitable World | - - $9,000,000 |: Iceland . 2
America . 14, 000, 000 Terra del rs — =
Afia — 3 10, 300, ooo Mindinao - 8
Africa | 7 - 9,590,000 | Cuba „„ „
Europe . . 2,000,000 | Java | | 37 1
Continent of es Holland 4,000,000 | Hiſpaniola _, "0 5 e
Perſian Empire under Darius 1,600,000 | Newfoundland 1985
Roman Empire in its meridian 1,600,000 | Ceylon
Ruffia = 4, ooo, oo e >
Chineſe 1 — ; 1,700,000 ' Formoſa _ „
Great Mogul — „ FaAmn  - - So!
United States of ae 1,000,000 | Gilolo .
Turkiſh Empire 90, 00 Sicily gg
Preſent Perſia - Sad; Timor NIE I MP PEAT TT hes
Madagaſcar © - — 168,000 es 23 2
Sumatra 129,000 | Jamaica FFF
Japan - 118,000 Flores
Great Britain — +2 e 1 TA Ne

5 D


year, by 11 minutes,
which in 131 years amounts to a whole day. In conſequence of this, the vernal equi-


nox was anticipated ten days from the general Council of Nice, held in the year 325 of


-prevent the like variation in
every four hundred years, by
ury, for three ſucceſhive. centuries, to -


tury only.
At that time this was confidered as exactly conformable to the true ſolar year ;


Dr. Hally makes the ſolar year to be 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 54 ſeconds, 41 3ds,
27 4ths, 36 5ths; according to which, in 400 years, the Julian year of 36 5 days 6
by three days, one hour and 53 gan) e 18 ny


been: ſec "Wha chout
in Great Britain and America till the


the 11 days were adjuſted, by call-
third 9 of that _ * fourteenth, and n the reſt in —


be
the 21ſt of


__
ö 0


at :


Square Mites,.
68, 400.
58, 500
46, 000
42, 000, 7.
39,00
38,00
238, 200
36, 0
_ 35,599
327,700


*


e
e


r
__


Breton


Socrata
Candia


| INTRODUCTION.


Porto Rico —


Corſica
Zealand
St.

Long Mind e or Manhattan
Majorca
Nap 2
Teneriff
Gothland
Madeira


—


—


St. Michael —


Skye
Lewis


Funen
 Yvica
Minorca
Rhodes


New Guinea
New Zealand
New Caledonia:


New Hebrides
Otaheite


Friendly Iſlands.
Marqueſas
E or David's


Pelew Iflands.


»


Square
Miles.


4, ooo


3,000


3,220 |


3,200


1, 900
1,400


1,400
1,400 |
| Bornholm
Wight
Malta
Barbadoes
Antigua |
St. Chriſtopher' 8
St. Helena
Guernſey
Rhode Iſland
Jerſey
Bermudas


1, 300


1,


950
920
900
886
768


625.


320
480


G 2


-


|


|


Cephalonia


Scio


Corfu
Man


Amboyna
Orkney Pomona


—


| Martinico
Lemnos


Providence


9


*


43


Square
Miles.


420
400
324
300
260
220
194
168
160
160


Iſlands lately Kifcovered, but not ſully


. explored, and rw dimenfions are not
exactly KNOWN.


AMERICA


S


3


Baum


*
8 4
: - % 6
*
0 * PR
i
dc. ot *
4 o
*
*
@ % *
? *
2
- 3
N
.
*
i
*
bl x
*
* T
- * *
—
* 3 5
"wy 4
&
*
*
.
*
0 + »
:
OC ö —


*;


Eee


.


*
of
22
—
*

A
4
5


HISTORY axy DISCOVERY.


| Wt OF | Fier
y — 1 2 2
. | . Ba c ' «EF g .
as : «. | ; , 4 £
Fx | | 3 3


0


x


T is believed by many, and not without ſome plauſible foundation, that America
x was known to the Ancients. Of this, however, hiſtory affords no certain evidence.
The Norwegians, the Welſh, and the Germans, each in their turn, have made preten-
ſions to the diſcovery of America. As early as 874 the Norwegians diſcovered, and
planted a colony in Iceland; and in 982, they diſcovered, and made ſettlements in
Greenland. Thence, ſome of their enterpriſing navigators, proceeded ſtill farther
weſtward till they diſcovered a country, the coaſt of which was ſandy, but the interior
parts level and covered with wood, on which account they called it Helle lund and Mcrk-
land, and having afterwards found ſome plants of the vine, which bore grapes, they
called it Wine-land or Vine- land. But where this country lies hiſtorians are not agreed.
lf it was any part of the American coaſt, as it probably muſt have been, all attempts
do plant colonies in it proved unſucceſsful, and the knowledge of it was ſoon loſt. 3 5


5 * Monſ. Mallet, in the firſt volume of his Northern Antiquities, gives us from authorities of unqueſtionable
—{E credibility, a circumſtantial account of the diſcovery and ſettlements of Vine- land. This Author informs that
2X Iceland was peopled by a colony of Norwegians, under Ingulph, in the year 874. Greenland was ſettled by
Erie Rufus, a young Norwegian, in the year 982; and before the eleventh century, churches were founded,

and a biſhopric erected at Garde, the capital of the ſettlement. Shortly after this, Biarn, an Icelandic navi-
gator, by accident, diſcovered land to the weſtward of Greenland, which was more fully explored in the ycac
= 2002, and from the deſcription given, anſwers to no other than the American coaſt. | BS:
Ihe diſcovery of a diſtant country, ſays our author, “ called Vine- land, and the reality of a Norwegian co-
= lony's ſettling there, appear to be facts, ſo well atteſted on all fides, and related with circumſtances fo probable,

2s to leave no room for any doubt. But to ſettle the geography of the country where this happened, is not ag
= -aſy.matter.. It could not, however, have been far Fom the coaſts of Labrador, or thoſe of Newfoundland ;


» £


both which are in the vicinity of Greenland.


Mr. Calm (or Kalm) a Sweediſh' botaniſt, educated under Linnzus, who ſome years ſiuce travelled through
Canada, with a view to acquaint himſelf with its natural hiſtory, conjectures that the colony of Nue- land was in
the Iſland of Newfoundland, which is ſeparated. Town that part of the continent called Labrador, by a narrow

| ftrait only, of a few leagues, called Belle. ile Pavis's ſtrait, which ſeparates Greenland from the American
| . continent, is known to be very narrow in ſeveral places. The Greenlanders, according to Mr. Egede, aſſert.
| that it 1s only a deep bay which runs on, narrowing towa s the north, till the oppoſite American continent
can be eaſily diſcerned from the Greenland ſhore ; lis, that the extremity of this bay ends in a river, over which
wandering lavages, inured to cold, might eaſily paſs from one land to the other, without canoes. And


_— the peopling of the north-eaſtern, part of, the. Amerigan continent is eaſily and rationally accounted
r | —_ nene n een, r . TEN +6 * 2


IT All: counts agree i deſcribi g Vine-land as a countr which ſpontaneouſly produces the Vine. And this
has Jed Br. Rosetten nf eite 3 conſider the whole hiſtory as too fabulous to be credited. Doctor Robert-
[Jon Aflerts that grapes are not the production either of Labrador, or Newfoundland. But the learned Mr. Ellis,


4 ls rokr AND DISCOVERY OF AMERICA.


The pretenfions of the Welſh to the diſcovery of America have but a Might Hands
tion. In the 12th century, according to Powell, a diſpute having ariſen among the
ſons of Owen Gwyneth, king of North-W ales, concerning the ſucceſſion to his crown,
Madoc, one of the number, weary of this contention, betook himſelf to ſea, in ſearch
of a more peaceful ſettlement.- He ſidered duc weſt, leaving Ireland to the north, and
arrived in an unknown country, which appeared to him lefirable . 3 he returned to
Wales, and carried thither ſeveral of his adherents and companions. This is ſaid to


2 ”


fince.


Some German authors aferibe the bons of bavilg diſcovered e to Martin
Behaim, their countryman. He deſcended from a noble family, of the imperial town
of Nuremburgh—was a ſcholar of the celebrated John Muller, and became an adept in
the ſcience of coſmography. Under the of the Ducheſs of Burgundy he
repaired to Liſbon, whither the fame of the Portugueſe diſcoveries invited all the
adventurous ſpirits of the age. In 1483, in company with Diego Cano, he made a
voyage tothe ſouthward, and is faid to have diſcovered the kingdom of Congo; on the
coaſt of Africa. He ſettled i in the iſland of Fayal, one of the Azores, and was a par-
ticular friend of Columbus. He conſtructed a terreſtrial globe, which, afterwards fell

into the hands of Magellan. On this globe Magellan laid down the, courſe which he
purpoſed to hold in ſearch of the communication with the South Sea, which he aſter-
wards diſcovered. In the year 1492, Behaim viſited his relations at Nuremburgh, and
left with them a map, drawn with his own hand, which is Kill preſerved among the
archives of the family. So far the ſtory of Martin Behaim is well authenticated; but
as to the accounts of his having diſcovered any part of the American coaſt, though


have taken place about the Foo 1170. He and his Gu have not been heard of 8


credited by ſome i ingemous men, they have too great an appearance of - conjecture to


gain general belief.“ For aught we can learn from authentic documents, the eaſtern
continent was the only theatre of hiſtory, the partial diſcoveries of the Norwegians


in his voyage to Hudſon's bay, mentions that he met with the vine, * the Enghſh ſettlements at chat place,
and compares the fruit of it to the currants of the Levant. And credible: travellers ſay that the vine grows
ſpontaneouſly in Canada, and in ſtill more northern latitudes, and bears a ſmall well- taſled fruit,

On the whole, concludes our Author, there can be no doubt but that the Norwegian Greentanders Hifco-
vered the American continent; that the place where they ſettled was eicher the country of Labrador or New-
foundland ; and that their colony ſubſiſted there a good while. This is all we can 1 5 wich any certaiuty.

If


TR endeavour to aſcertain the exact Cad extent and fortune of the eſtab * would Lg A Früitleſs
abour.


4 hers


*The Librarian of St. Mark- Library at Venice, | in a letter to the Editors of a fore aebi firbilhes
the following curious fact relative to the diſcovery of America...

To the inquiry which yo yo u make,” ſaid he * I anſwer, that in the nautical map erinm in St. Mark's
Library, and ly, publiſhed here by Signior Formaleoni,. onthe ſpot, wher at preſent the Antilles are knowh.
to be, there certainly is delineated, a great ifland, with various harbours, and near it is Write 9. r Aula.
The delineation and the writing are al by the ſame hand; it cannot therefore, be Taid,, that any addition has
been made to it. In it is written, in ancient characters, ard the ſame hand which wrote all the reſt; Anithear
Biancho de Venociis me fecit MCCCCEXXVI. I Let it not a appear extraordinary to you, that in thoſe times
they had a confuſed notion of the Antilles. I ſhall ew, that even before the'Uiſcovery of Cutunibus,:
an idea of them, and that the Autillia were mentioned. This 1 fran treat of in eee
oh Andria Biancho, N with the * of dt. Mark's Ubrary, Fe 2 8 g 8


my own.” ea Ties bein
N.B The Auill lic i the day of Mens, von Mi K's meren


Pat” "wo een au feb ws ah the yort of ran,


.
"TIF
ts hen, Joy thi Meng
* be os Nn |
SI D921 3800
12 775 4G * 4 9 4 1412 92 104 1. * 19 Lad ' 017 xt F. $94 N * J excepted 464 Sh
.
:
2 "6M L, ? _ * 4 * 25 * 174 r . * 1. ; + | "PR | . Le} 7 F< »
7 , 4 * 8 a ; . * 4 3 ad : 2 5 . A 0% % 1 Ms ha! 2 mY _ OL 45 "Mb, rr en 1. dds > $94 oe af 1
* * WII" ws 3 F


5 * r
* * * 2 "8 _ h 8 15 ; . ods 18 oh . . * A * {FE *
a 4 , * 8 * is * '


r ˙ m ] •uv y ꝛͤ— ;


.


1 2


„%
Py


©... vo it det he


HISTORY | AND DISCOVERY OY AMERICA, 47


IT cxcepted, from ereation till the year of our Lord 1492; aud Columbus has a fair claim
XX to the honour of being the diſcoverer of the NEW. WORLD). : Mich


-


As the following work propoſes to give a deſcription of ths NEW WORLD, as it


Was originally called, eſpecially of its moſt intereſting parts, which have lately become


the ſcene of the moſt important events that adorn the page of hiſtory, an account of its


2X diſcovery may rationally be expected. | | | 13-2985. Dov
CHRISTOPHER COLON or COLUMBUS, a ſubject of the republic of Genaa,

was among the foreigners, whom the fame of the diſcoveries of the Portugueſe, had
allured into their ſervice. He deſcended from a noble family reduced by misfortunes ;
but neither the time nor place of his birth. are certainly known. His anceſtors, having
had recourſe to a ſeafaring life for ſupport, Columbus, from his early youth, diſcovered
WF ſuch peculiar talents for that profeſſion, as indicated his future greatneſs. —His parents
X <ncouraged this original propenſity by giving him a ſuitable education. After acqui-


ring fome knowledge of the Latin tongue, the only language in which ſcience was


taught at that time, he was inſtructed in ee ee e eee
art of drawing. To theſe he applied with |
oc their connection with navigation, his favourite object, that he made rapid proficiency


in them. Thus qualified, in 1461, at the early age of fourteen, he went to ſea, and


began his career on that element which conducted him to ſo much glory. His early
voyages were limited principally to thoſe places which had before been diſcovered, in


which nothing very remarkable happened, except that in a ſea fight, off the coaſt of
Portugal, with ſome Venetian coaſters, the veſſel on board which he ſerved, took fire,
together with one of the enemy's, to which it was faſt grappled; upon which he threw


2X himſelf into the ſea, laid hold of a floating oar, and by the ſupport of it, and his dex-
XX terity in ſwimming, he reached the ſhore, though more than fix mules diſtant, and thus
preſerved a life deſigned for great undertakings. F
Soon after this he went to Liſbon, where he married a daughter of Bartholomew

Pereſtrello, one of the captains employed by Prince Henry in his early voyages, and
who had diſcovered and planted the iſlands of Porto Santo and Madeira. The jour-


nals and charts of this experienced navigator, his father-in-law, fell into his hands,


and he, with avidity, availed himſelf of the valuable information they contained. His
X impatience to viſit the places which Pereſtrello had ſeen and deſcribed, became irre-
ſiſtible; and he made a voyage to Madeira, and ſpent ſeveral years in trading with
that iſland, the Canaries, the Azores, the ſettlements in Guinea, and all other places
FE | which the Portugueſe had diſcovered on the continent of Africa. © +


_m


By the experience acquired during ſuch a variety of voyages, Columbus became one


coe the moſt {kilfu] navigators of Europe. But his ambition did not permit him to reſt
E | fatisfied with that praiſe. He aimed at ſomething more. A project had been conceived
nn of finding out a paſſage by ſea to the Eaſt Indies. The accompliſhment of this became
a4 favourite object with Columbus. The Portugueſe ſought this rout by ſteering towards
= the ſouth, in hope of arriving at India, by turning to thecaſt, after they had failed round
= the farther extremity of Africa; which paſſage was afterwards effected 1497, by Vaſco
de Gama, a Portugueſe navigator. Columbus contemplated a ſhorter and more direct
paſſage to the Eaft Indies, by failing towards the weſt, acroſs the Atlantic: Ocean.
The Principles and arguments which induced him to adopt this opinion, then conſidered
| as chimerical, were highly rational and philoſophical. The ſphericity and magnitude
of the earth were at that period aſcertained with fome degree of accuracy. From this
it was evident, that the continents of Hurope, Aſſa; and Atrica, formed but a fingÞ


part


ſuch ardour and predilection, on account


..


a: --: ' HISTORY AND DISCOVERY. or AMERICA.


part of the terraqueous globe. It appeared likew iſe extremely probable,, that the con
tinent on the one fide of the globe, was balanced by a proportionable quantity of land?
in the other hemiſphere. 'Theſs conclufions: concerning the exiſtence: of another conti-
nent, drawn from the figure and ſtructure of the globe, were confirmed by the-obſer--
vations and conjectures- of modern navigators, and from pieces of timber artificially
carved, canes of an enormous ſize, trees torn up by the roots,. and the dead bodies of
two'men with ſingutar features, which had been diſcovered and taken up, floating

before-a weſterly wind, or driven on the coaſts of the Azores.. 'Fhe force of this united,
evidence, arifing from theoretical principles and practical obſervations, led Columbus:
to conclude, that by failing directly towards the weſt, acroſs the Atlantic ocean, new
countries, wh ich * formed a part of the vaſt continent of India, muſt Hnfallibly: |
be diſcovered.
As early as the year 1474, de commuinicated his ingenious theory to Paul, a phyſi-.
eian of Florence, eminent for his knowledge of colmography. He warmly. approved.
of the plan; ſuggeſted ſeveral facts in confirmation of it, and encouraged Columbus tos
perſevere in an undertaking ſo laudable, and which. maſt nd ſo much to the bo-
nour of his country, and the benefit of Europe.
Columbus now became impatient to bring to: the teſt of axyeriment,. the truth of be.

9 ſtem, and to ſet out upon a voyage of diſcovery. The firſt ſtep towards this was to.
tecure the patronage of ſome of the conſiderable powers of Europe. With, this view he
laid: his ſcheme before the Senate of Genoa, and making his native. Ht beloved country,
the firſt tender of his ſervice, offered to fail, under the banners. of the republic, in
_ queſt of new regions which he expected to diſcover. But they, incapable of forming.
juft ideas of his principles, inconfiderately rezectedhis propoſal as chimerical. He then.
fabmitted his plan to the Portugueſe, who perfidiouſly attempted to-rob him of the ho- -

nour of accompliſhing it, by privately ſending another perſon to purſue the ſame. tract
which: he had propoſed. But the pilot, who was thus baſely employed. to execute
Columbus plan, had neither the genius nor the fortitude of its author. Contrary winds
aroft—no land appeared his courage failed, and he returned to. Liſbon , oFxecraling a

Fare which he had not abilities to execute.

On diſcovering this flagrant treachery, Columbus immediately quittod the kingdom ;
in diſguſt, and landed in Spain, towards the cloſe of the year 12404 Here he reſolved
to-propoſe it in perſon to Ferdinand and Iſabella, who at that time governed the united
' kingdoms of Caſtile and Arragon.. He, in the mean time, ſent his brother Bartholo-
mer to England, to propoſe his plan to. Henry VII.
After experiencing a ſeries of mortifying diſappeintments, I 2 tedious years,
wh ch the brevity of this hiſtory will not permit us to relate, Columbus, in deep an-
guiſh, withdrew from eee ee e, to repair to, England as his laſt eee At
t us junctute the affairs of Spain, which had been. perplexed in conſequence of a war
withry the Moors, took a favourable turn. Quintanilla and Santangel, two powerful
vigilant and diſcerning patrons of Columbus, ſeized this favourable opportunity. to make
one more effort in behalf of their friend. They addreſſed themſelves to, Iſabella, with
ſuch foreible 1 as produced. the defired effec. | They diſpelled all aden
doubts and fears; ſhe orde 1 Columbus, who had proceeded. on his. journey, to
inſtantly recalled - declared her reſolution to oeh him on his own. terms; and regret |
ting the low eſtate of her finances,  generouſl 2 offered to pledge her, own. jewels, in
order to raiſe as much money as might be needed in making Preparations for the voyr
= age. 3 in a angel gratitude, Ae the wen ee *


*


5 DISCOVERY OF AMERICA, 49
fave her from having recourſe to ſuch a mortifying expedient for procuring money, en-
gaged to advance, immediately, the ſum that was requiſite. xm |
Columbus had proceeded ſome leagues on his journey, when the meſſenger from
Iſabella overtook him. ' He returned with joy mingled with ſome degree of fear, left he
ſhould again be diſappointed. - The manner of his reception by the queen was, how-
ever, ſuch as quickly diſpelled his fears. A negociation commeneed, and was for-
warded with diſpatch, and a treaty of capitulation, with Columbus, was figned on the
5th of April 1492. The chief articles of it were, 1, Ferdinand and Iſabella, as ſove-
reigns of the ocean, conſtituted Columbus their high admiral in all the ſeas, iſlands,
and continents, which ſhould be diſcovered by his induſtry; and ſtipulated, that he
and his heirs for ever ſhould enjoy this office, with the ſame powers and prerogatives
which belonged to the high admiral of Caſtile, within the limits of his juriſdiction.
2. They appointed Columbus their viceroy in all the iſlands and continents which he
ſhould diſcover; but if, for the better adminiſtration of affairs, it ſhould be neceflary
to eſtabliſh a ſeparate governor in any of thoſe countries, they authoriſed Columbus
to name three perſons, of whom they would chuſe one for that office; and the dignity
of viceroy, with all its immunities, was likewiſe to be hereditary in the family of Co-
lumbus. 3. They granted to Columbus and his heirs for ever, the tenth of the free
profits accruing from the productions and commerce of the countries which he ſhould
diſcover. 4. They declared, if any controverſy or lawſuit ſhould ariſe, with reſpect to
any mercantile tranſaction, in the countries which ſhall be diſcovered, it ſhould be
determined by the ſole authority of Columbus, or of judges to be appointed by him.
5. They permitted Columbus to advance one eighth part of what ſhould be ex-
pended in prepating for the expedition, and in carrying on commerce with the coun-
3 which he ſhould diſcover, and intitled him, in return, to an eighth part of the
Though the name of Ferdinand appears conjoined with that of Iſabella in this
tranſaction, his diſtruſt of Columbus was ſo violent, that he refuſed to take any part
of the enterpriſe, as king of Arragon. As the whole expence of the expedition was
to be defrayed by the crown of Caſtile, Iſabella reſerved for her ſubjects of that king-
dom, an excluſive right to all the benefits which might redound from its ſucceſs. F

After all the efforts of Iſabella and Columbus, the armament was ſuitable, neither to
fhe dignity of the power who equipped it, nor to the importance of the ſervice to
which it was deſtined. It confiſted of three veſſels ; the largeſt, a ſhip of no con-
ſiderable burden, was commanded by Columbus, as admiral, who gave it the name of
Santa Maria. Of the ſecond, called the'Pinza, Martin Pinzon was: captain, and his
brother Francis pilot. The third, named the Nigna, was under the command of Vin-
cent Yanez Pinzon. Theſe two laſt mentioned were light veſſels, hardly ſuperior in
burden or force to large boats. —This little ſquadron was victualled for twelve months,
and had on board ninety men, moſtly failors, together with a few adventurers, WhO
followed the fortune of Columbus, and ſome gentlemen of Iſabella's court, whom ſhe
appointed to accompany him. The ſum employed in fitting out this ſquadron did not
JA rt ITT, 1 A .
On the 3d of Auguſt, 149a, being Friday,“ Columbus ſet fail, in the preſence 3


The ſuperſtitious notion chat Friday is an unlucky day to commence a voyage, did not, it ſeems, exiſt in

the time of Oolumbus; otherwiſe he, would not have fixed. on this unlucky day to ſet fail on ſo important a
voyage. When and whence did this ſuperſtitious notion originate? Why da men continue to entertain it, '
an age, which boaſts a freedom from the ſhackles of ſuperſtition 2. Is it not time that it was baniſhed ? p The


w


—_ a
* y


> a —— 3


— — 1 1 4 3a * — p 1
—— ag es APC; as LEADING r
1 0 88 ” 9 7 2 4 \ 4 os
=
o . . 4


3 DISCOVERY” OF AMERICA;
vaſt crowd of ſpectators, who offered fervent: fupplications to heaven for his ſucceſs,


which they rather wiſhed than expected. He ſteered directly for the Canary iflands,
and in the ſhort run thither, found tis ſhips crazy and ill appointed, and very unfit -


menced the voyage of diſcovery. |
the ufual track of navigation, and ſtretched into unknown and unfrequented ſeas.


for ſo long and dangerous a navigation as he had undertaken. After refitting them as


well as he could, he left the Canaries on the 6th of September, and here properly com-
He held his courſe due weſt, and immediately left


By the 14th of September the fleet was about 200 leagues weſt of the en at a


greater diſtance from land than any Spaniard had been before that time.


Columbus early diſcovered, from the ſpirit of his followers, that he muſt prepare to
ſtruggle, not only with the unavoidable difficulties which might be expected from the
nature of his undertaking, but with ſuch alto as were likely to ariſe from the igno-
Tance and timidity of the people under his command. All the art and addreſs he was


<maſter of was hardly fathcient to quell the mutinous diſpoſition of his ſailors, who
h ew the more turbulent in proportion as their diſtance from home increaſed. What
moſt aſtoniſhed Columbus, during the voyage, was the variation of the magnetic 7


needle. He obſcrved that it did not point exactly to the polar ſtar, but varied towards


the weſt. This appearance, then one of the myſterics of nature, though now familiar,


filled the companions of Columbus with terror. They were now in- the midſt of a
trackleſs ocean nature herſelf ſeemed to be altered, and the only guide they had left
was about to fail them. Columbus, with no leſs quickneſs than ingenuity, invented
a reaſon for this appearance, which, though it did not ſatisfy himielt, ſeemed fo Py
fible to them, that it diſpelled their fears, and filenced their murmurs.


On the evening of the 11th of October, Columbus was ſo confident... 5 various


appearances, of being near land, that he ordered the ſails to be furled, and the ſhips to

lie to, and ſtrict watch to be kept leſt they ſhould be driven on ſhore in the "night.
During this interval of ſuſpenſe and expectation, ' no man ſhut-his eyes, all kept on
deck, gazing intently towards that. quarter where they expected to diſcover the land,


which had ſo long been the object of their wiſhes. A little before midnight, Colum- |


bus, from the forecaſtle, deere a light at a diſtance and ſhortly after the joyful


ſound of land! land! was heard from the Pinta, which always kept a head of the other


ſhips. At the dawn of day, an iſland was ſeen from every ſhip, at the diſtance of


about two leagnes north, whoſe verdant aſpect indicated a moſt delightful country.
'The crews of all the ſhips, with tears of joy and tranſports of congratulation, unitedly
ang Te Deum, as a hymn of thankſgiving to God. They then, with feelings of ſelf | 1


condemnation, mingled with reverence, threw. anova at the feet of Columbus,
begged him to forgive their ignorance, incredulity and inſolence, which had given him
fo much unneceſſary diſquiet acknowledged his ſuperior abilities, and Promiſed obe-
dience in future.
At ſunriſing, the boats were manned and armed, and they rowed towards the
iſland with their colours diſplayed, with warlike muſic and other martial pomp. As
they approached the coaſt, they ſaw it covered with a multitude of people, whom the
novelty of the ſpectacle had drawn together, whoſe attitudes and geſtures expreſſed


wonder and aſtoniſhment at the ſtrange objects before them. Columbus was the firſt
European who ſet foot in the New Weid which he had diſcovered. He landed i in a


| maten of Columbus 3 in diſcovering a New World, during a voyag : commenced on F riday proves, if any thing, |


that this is the moſt luciy day in the ſeven, for going to ſea:—lf ſo, why would it not be well to ubſtitute it
N e r IS.


| 0


„


MY 9 © >

LY 33

: | . 2 : YE at art 8 ve:

ws 7 Spe os 8 vx o

„ S IEC

> n WE, - ROY Wd 1
4 a » A 8 „ WINS £5 Robots
<<, . -* 4 3s > D n a. 0 2
; 1 r


1 . *
Apr tb Hop er


1 13
=


_— -
* 4 x FM
1 4 _
>
5 : 13 [73 [ay 3 I
ä
2 * * 1
p 3 r 5 7
| 1, 8 20
— RE:
1 .
8 £
—
{ \
*
CY
| ;
1 f
J ;
CSI
; .


= 4


3

8 e

g 5 2 1 Mas 8 LA

- MT STONY n F

7 — — 1 Et S 2 1 8 N 5

Ee e 1 n D "Ihr

: IL ARC WIT ELSE S448 des EV SS EST on ccc er FI OY
8 8 & . Cop Pn FR 3 = Joy J FS F


7
y 7 *


* 4


DISCOVERY OF AMERICA. 3


rich dreſs, and with a naked ſword in his hand. His men followed, and kneeling
down, they all kiſſed the ground which they had ſo long deſired to ſee. They next
erected a crucifix, and proſtrating themſelves before it, returned thanks to God for
conducting their voyage to ſo happy an iſſue. They then took ſolemn and formal
poſſeſſion of the country for the crown of Caſtile and Leon. 9 15 5
The dreſs of the Spaniards, their beards, their arms, the vaſt machines with which
they had traverſed the ocean, the thundering roar of the cannon, accompanied With
lightning and ſmoke, filled the natives with ſurpriſe and terror, and they began to
confider them as children of the ſun, who had deſcended to viſit mortals here
o VVT 5
The Spaniards were hardly leſs amazed in their turn. The productions of the
iſland were different from any thing they had feen in Europe. The inhabitants ap-
peared in the ſimple innocence of nature, entirely naked. Their black hair, long and
uncurled, floated upon their ſhoulders, or was bound in treſſes round their heads.
They had no beards, and every part of their bodies was perfectly ſmooth. Their
complection was of a duſky copper colour; their features ſingular rather than diſ-
agreeable, and their aſpect gentle and timid. They were ſhy at firſt, through fear,
but ſoon became familiar with the Spaniards, and with tranſports of joy, received from
them various kinds of trinkets, in return for which they gave proviſions, and ſome
cotton yarn, the only commodity of value they could produce. Thus in the firſt in-
terview between the inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds, every thing was con-
ducted amicably, and to their mutual ſatisfactio n. .
Ihe iſland on which Columbus firſt landed he called San Salvador. It is one of
that large cluſter of iſlands known by the name of the Lucaya or Bahama iſlands, and
is above 3000 miles weſt of the Canariee. i ated 7
He afterwards touched at ſeveral iſlands of the fame cluſter, inquiring every where
for gold, which he thought was the only object of commerce worth his attention. In
ſteering ſouthward, he diſcovered: the iſlands of Cuba and Hiſpaniola, abounding in
all the neceſſaries of life, and inhabited by a humane and. hoſpitable people.


On his return to Spain he was overtaken by a ſtorm, which had nearly proved fatal
to his ſhips and their crews. At a criſis when all was given up for loſt, Co-


lumbus had preſence of mind enough to retire into his cabin, and to write upon
parchment a ſhort account of his voyage. This he wrapped in an oiled cloth, which


he incloſed in a cake of wax, put it into a tight caſk, and. threw it into the ſea, in
hopes that ſome fortunate accident might preſerve a depoſit of ſo much importance to
the world. He arrived at Palos in Spain, whence: he had ſailed: the year. before, on
the 15th of March 1493. He was welcomed with all the acclamations which the po-


pulace are ever ready to beſtow on great and glorious characters; and the court re-
ceived him with marks of the greateſt reſpect. 1 88 |


In September, of this year, (1493) Columbus failed upon his ſecond voyage to
America ; during the performance of which, he diſcevered the iſlands of Dominica,
Marigalante, Gaudaloupe, Montſerrat, Antigua, Porto Rico, and Jamaica; and re-
turned to Spain 1496. þ FN TE Amr os . 1 | | |

In 1498, he failed a third time for America; and on the 1ſt of Auguft diſcovered
the continent, at the mouth of the river Oronoke. He then coaſted along weſtward,
making other diſcoveries, for 200' leagues to Cape Vela, from which he croſſed over


od Hiſpaniola, where: he was ſeized by a new Spaniſh governour, and ſent home in


«+


ꝶ6ꝶ½e.hyůj 7˙“ r⁰


1 | DISCOVERTOOF AMERICA.


the Gulf of Darien, ſearching, in vain, for a paſſage to the
voyage, he was ſhipwrecked on the Iſland of Jamaica, where he ſuffered almoſt in-


In 1502 Columbus made his fourth, and laſt, voyage to Hiſpaniola; eue he "


went over to the continent diſcovered the bay of Honduags--theyce ſailed along the


main fhore eaſterly 200 leagues, to Cape Gracias a Dios, V.


a, Porto Bello, and
ſt Indies. During this


conceivably from the cruelty of the inhabitants,” the mutiny of his men, and eſpecially 5
from the infamous conduct of the governor of Hiſpaniola. He returned to Spain in


1504. On his arrival ye emed the fatal news of the death of His patranels, Queen -


Tabella. - 3 2 vs,
The jealous ad avaricious F EE immediatcly receiving thoſe golden ad-


| mas. Nr from theſe new diſcoveries, which they had promiſed, and loſt to the feel-


ings of humanity and gratitnde, ſuffered their can: and anden of Columbus to


degenerate into ignoble envy.


The latter part of his lite was made wretched: by the. cruel petitions of ws


9 8 enemies. Queen Iſabella, his friend and patroneſs, was no longer alive to afford him
relief. He ſought redreſs from Ferdinand, but in vain. Diſguſted with the ingra-
tttude of a monarch-whom he had ſerved ** ſo much fidelity and ſucceſs, exhauſted

with hardſhips, and broken with the infirmities which theſe brought upon him, Co-
| lumbus ended his active and uſeful life at Valadolid, on the 2oth-of May, 1506, in the


59th year of his age. He died with a compoſure. of mind ſuited to the magnanimity


which diſtinguiſhed his character, and with ſentiments of piety becoming that ſu-


preme reſpect for religion which he manifeſted in every occurrence of his life. He


was grave though courteous in his deportment, cireumſpect in his words and actions,
irreproachable in his morals, and exemplary in all the duties of his religion.


Among other adventurers to the New World, in purſuit of gold, was 73


6s. Veſpucius, a Florentine gentleman, whom Ferdinand had appointed to draw fea
charts, and to whom he had given the title of chief pilot. This man accompanied


Ojeda, an enterpriſing Spaniſh adventurer, to America; and having with much art,


d ſome degree of 1 drawn up an amuſing hiſtory of his voyage, he publiſh-
ed it to the world. It circulated rapidly, and was read with admiration. In his. nar-


rative, he had inſinuated that the glory of having firſt diſcovered the New World


belonged to him. This was in part believed, and theicountry began to be called aſter


the name of its ſuppoſed firſt diſcoverer. The unaccountable caprice of mankind has
| ed the error; ſo that now, by the univerſal-canſent of all nations, this new


quarter of the globe is called Amgrica. The bold pretenſions of a fortunate impoſ-


ter have robbed the diſcoverer of the New: World of a diſtinction which belonged to


him. The name of Americus has ſupplanted that of Columbus, and mankind are left
to regret an act of — which, 2


8 been ſanctioned * time, 28 can never
redreſs.


| GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA. |
| BOUNDARIES. ond EXTENT.


"HE continent of America, of the diſcovery of-which a ſuccinct account has juſt
been given, extends from Cape Horn, the ſouthern extremity of the continent,


in latitude 50 ſouth, to the _ bath ; -and INT 3 the 40th W cn, |


. 1, 6


* — . fot
* — — . 5


. We” + Far
epo li, 01,9070 ggg
mm OR ⁵ . A 5 Ks "Ucty 01,9920 ,n, |
. a 1 er UOPUOT 249.4 3/2, 2PNNOUOT OST
/ ĩ ĩ ˙—beN OO JJ]. f mm ” * ö 7
—. ð ed ed io GOIN . ? i, 4, i 7 | dr |
RO : — 3 e eee pA
5 OTXHW AO A T2) (MS >, J' FO: ITRSAL FE TT
0 — p
Lo-
O * | pur H AJ %
2 EY — s \ £ Pipnounaamg , Mc C | 3
D 4 433 s La 4-5
* x * >; may ks N 575 fr " U. erz. ka |
a | To ar 3 55 eee — —— Et
2 8 ae, 72 5 30
* Den r 5
n 5 ig _ 4
LH > pPuounry 5 | ”
— — 1e. XF. 22 2
ry 2 | * — r 4 ff
— * WT 2 PLL ” S NON : 22 — P og
-SAAHT 7 20140 2up 5 5 Rao
* — # op] ng | NH 1 * ame SNV rr 8 j ; 7 £1
tuo dr) hs 87 1 M |
5 *E tg lors bn — 8 Mo 1 S
8 4 — 4 ig M2 £5 nunydng 2D
| S A ; . | ;
* 7 thy © T” 10 I i rang u Z
< Dy: a 3 STIVAAOWI I)
18 7 N 2
| ID, _ ney 4e 8 F
= Liner A x 24v.20pngy 2m) A
| 4 1 2 benen, | 7
OL E * "vo 8 Try ae 4 on JT nog f
8 2 — — 3 2 oL
- — f g
p 8441 aw) Or
1209 . | 5
on 2
tha A q 88
8 el
| Primo Nrioqm A |
; n Sen.
" S' N 1 4 1 7 74 19275 . Len; 1 11
1 166, nooner Bl 2
- > |
po, gui
Suma $ 3 ;


n
e


— 2 2


— . —³g01 . Ro


—_ —


8 75 i


g 33 _ 2 8 ,
„„


* - 7 . 1's N. « 5
er 1 e x,
gs TER 2536 Je ASE 3 e 7


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA. © 3


and the d degree weſt longitude from Philadelphia. It is nearly ten thouſand
miles in length from. north to fouth. Its average breadth may be about 14 er-15
miles. This extenſive continent lies between the Pacific Ocean on the weſt, and the
Atlantic on the caſt. It is ſaid to contain upwards of 14,000,000 ſquare miles. 4h
 Crimars, 801L, AND PRODUCTIONS. .] In regard to each of theſe, America has all
the varieties which the earth affords. It ſtretches through almoſt the whole width of
the five zones, and feels the heat and cold of two ſummers and two winters in every
year. Moſt of the animal and vegetable productions which the eaſtern continent
affords, are found here; and many that are Peculiar to America, of which accounts
will be given in their proper places.

Rrvess.] This continent is watered by ſome of the largeſt rivers in the world.


The N of theſe are Rio de la Plata, the Amazon and Oronoke, 1 in South Ame
rica The


29 255 pi and St. Lawrence, in North America.
GuLe.] The Gulf or Bay of Mexico, lying in'the form of a baſon, batveen North


and South America, and opening to the eaſt, is conjectured by ſome to have been
formerly land; and that the conſtant attrition of the ben in the Gulf Stream has
worn it to its preſent form. The water in the Gulf of Mexico is ſaid to be many

| yards higher than on the weſtern fide of the continent in the Pacific Ocean.


GULF STREAM.] The Gulf Stream is a remarkable current, iſſuing from the Gulf of


Mexico, whence it takes its name, and proceeding along the coaſt of Florida and the


United States, to the banks of Newfoundland, where it turns off and runs down


through the Weſtern Iſlands; thence to the coaſt of Africa, and along that coaſt in a


ſouthern direction till it arrives at, and ſupplies the place of thoſe waters, carried by


the conſtant trade-winds from the coaſt of Africa towards the weſt, thus N 1


perpetual circulating current. 5
This ſtream is probably generated by the great accumul ation of water, on the


eaſtern coaſt of America between the tropics, by the trade-winds which conſtantly


blow there. , It is known. that a large piece of water ten miles broad, and general
only three feet deep, has, by a ſtrong wind, had it waters driven to one ſide And fo

tained fo as to become fix feet deep, while the windward fide was laid dry. This may
give ſome idea of the quantity heaped upon the American coaſt, and the reaſon of its


running down in a ſtrong current through the iſlands into the Gulf of Mexico and


iſſuing as above-mentioned. This alſo renders the opinion, that the waters in the bay


of Mexico are conſiderably higher than the waters on the oppoſite coaſt of the Pa-
cific Ocean, in a high degree probable.


This ſtream is diſtinguiſhed from the other parts of the ocean by the gulf weed,


with which it is every where interſperſed. It is alſo always much warmer, 8 or 10
degrees, than the ſea on each fide of it, and it does not ſpark e in the night, as-do the


other waters of the occan. It is no wonder that ſo vaſt a body of deep warm water,


ſeveral leagues wide, coming from between the tropics, and iſſuing out of the gulf,
into the northern ſeas, ſhould retain its warmth longer than the 20 or 30 days required
to its paſſing the DANES of Newfoundland. The quantity is too great, and too deep
to be ſuddenly cooled b paſling under a cooler air. The air immediately over it may


receive ſo much warmth from it as to be rarefied and riſe, being rendered lighter than


the air on each ſide of the ſtream; hence the ſurrounding denſer air muſt ind in to


ſupply the place of the riſing warm air, and meeting with each other form thoſe tor-
nadoes and water-ſpouts, which are ſo common in and near the ſtream : and as the


vapour from a cup of tea, in a warm room, is hardly diſcernible, but becomes viſible in
the cold air; ſo the vapour from the Gulf Stream, in warm latitudes, is fearcely viſible,


. . l bv 5 .
8 aw? OS 1 N * . Zales” * are r ag > We" ls hp © * "Y
4 ä — —⅛. A wer” |


4 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OP AMERICA.


but when it comes into cool air, off Newfoundland, it is eta into the fogs for
which thoſe parts are ſo remarkable.

The power of wind to raiſe water above its common level in the ſea, is evident by
the high tides occaſioned in all our American ſea ports, when a ſtrong north-eaſt
wind blows againſt the Gulf Stream.

Sgxilful . navigators, who have acquired a knowledge of the extent to which this
ſtream reaches on the New England coaſt, have learnt, in their voyages from Europe
to New England, New York, or Pennſylvania, to pats the banks of Newfoundland! in
about 44 or 45? North, atitude; to ſail thence in a courſe, between the northern edge
of the Gulf Stream, and the ſhoals and banks of Sable Iſland, George's Bank, and

Nantucket, by which they make better and quicker paſſages to America. {i

This ſtream is about 75 miles from the ſhores of the ſouthern States. The diſtance
increaſes as you proceed northward. The width of it is about 40 or 50 miles, widen-
ing towards, the north. Its common rapidity is 3 miles an hour. A north-eaſt wind
narrows the ſtream, renders it more rapid, aud drives it ncarer the coaſt; north-weſt
and weſt winds have a contrary effect.

IsTHMvus or Darien. | T he celebrated Ifhmus of Darien, which vides North and
South America, lies in about 8 North Latitude, and in the narroweſt part is not more
than 70 miles acroſs on an E. N. E. and W. S. W. courſe. The country about the

narrow weſt parts of the Itthmus is made up of low, ſickly vallies, and mountains of
ſuch ſtupendous height, as to incline one to imagine that nature had raiſed them to
ſerve as an eternal barrier between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, which here ap-
proach fo near each other, that from theſe mountains you can plainly diſcern the
waters of both at the ſame time and ſeemingly at a very ſmall diſtance.

Some have imagined it practicable to unite theſe oceans by a canal, through this
Iſthmus. But am Engliſh gentleman, from a late careful ſurvey of the country, pro-

nounces ſuch an undertaking i impracticable : as the monntams run north and wutl,
and ſeveral ridges of them, confiffing of little elſe than ſolid rock and immenſe beds of 3
oyſter ſhells, muſt be dug through in order to accompliſh it. But by going into
12 North Latitude, and joining the head of Lake Nicaragua to a ſmall river that runs
into the Pacific Ocean, a communication becomes practicable ; and by 30 miles digging

through a level, low country, two oceans may be joined, and a tedious navigation ſaved,
of 10,000 miles, round Cape Horn. What would be the conſequences of ſuch a junc-
tion is not caſy to fay, but it is very probable, that a ſmall canal, in ths place, would
in the courſe of a few years be formed into a deep river, more eſpecially when we con-
fider that the waters on the oppoſite ſhore of the Atlantic, as We e before obſerved, are
conſiderably higher than thofe in the Pacific.

Probably too, in a length of years, ſuch a junction OE wear away the cinhy parts

of the Iſthmus, and form a broad ſtrait between the oceans; in which caſe the Gulf

Stream would ceaſe, being turned into a different channel, and a voyage round the
world would become an inconfiderable thing.

Upwards of an hundred years ago, the Scots people had fo juſt an idea of the
importance of this Iſthmus, that they ſent out a colony to ſettle there, which 8 |
however, proved abortive, through the extreme jealouſy of the Spaniards in that nei ich-
bourhood, but more through the ſhameful partiality of William III. and the an of 85

the Engliſh nation.

MovunT a1ins.] The principal mountains on this Weſtern Continent are the famous da

of the Andes of South America. They ſtretch along the Pacific Ocean from the Straits
of Magellan to the Iſthmus of Darien or Panama, ISS! of 4000 miles; thence they


5 are


*


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA, | SE


are continued through the extenſive kingdom of New Spain till they loſe themſelves in
the unknown countries of the North. In New Spain, the moſt conſiderable part of this
chain is known by the name of Sierra Madre, particularly in Cinaloa, and Tarahumary,
provinces 1200 miles diſtant from thecapital. Farther north they have been called,
trom their bright appearance, the Shining Mountains.
Little is known reſpechng them. It is conjectured that they terminate in about 47 or
48 degrees of North latitude, where a number of rivers riſe and empty themſelves either
into the Pacific Ocean, into Hudſon's Bay, into the waters which lie between them, or
into the Atlantic ocean.
The Allegany Mountains, extending from Georgia to Hudſon's river, in New York,
are next in magnitude and 1 to the Andes. It is not improbable that they are a
branch of the Andes, ſtriking off in ſome part of South America, and interrupted by the
Gulf of Mexico. It has been conjectured that the Weſt India iſlands were formerly
united with each other, and red a part of the continent. Their preſent disjointed
fituation is ſuppoſed to have been occaſioned by the trade-winds. It is well known,
as we have before mentioned, that they produce a ſtrong and continual current in the
ocean from eaſt to weſt, which, by beating againſt the continent for along courte of
Fears, — 55 have cauſed nk alterations, and may poſſibly have produced ns effect
Juppoſe


In the Bahama channel are many indications that the Iſland of Cuba was once united
to Florida.
PoruLATTON.] There are no data from which we may eſtimate the number of inha-
bitants in America with any degree of accuracy. All calculations muſt proceed on
uncertain grounds. The population of moſt of thoſe countries which have been ſettled
by Europeans has not been aſcertained ; who then is capable of eſtimating the number
of inhabitants in thoſe numerous countries which have been very particularly explored,
and thoſe which are altogether unknown to any European or other civilized nation? and
ſuch are thoſe vaſt regions weſt, north-weſt, and north of the Miſſiſſippi and theLakes,
and immenſe countries in the interior parts of South America. The number of provin-
ces, kingdoms, and even of nations, 1s unknown. We can therefore har dy gueſs at
the number of inhabitants.
It has been common in eſtimating the populition of the whole world to give 150
millions to America. The calculations of P. Riccioli, make them 300 millions. Su-
ſimilch, in one part of his work, computes them at 100 millions, in another at 150
millions. —M. de Paw ſays, that political arithmeticians do not reckon more than 100
millions; but it is his own opinion that there are not more than from thirty to forty mil-
lions of « real Americans. 1 know not the principles upon which either of theſe au-
thors grounded their calculations. I am inclined, however, to differ from them all. Some
of. them I am perſuaded are far beyond the truth; ; and M. de Paw, I imagine, has erred
on the other hand. I ground my diſſent from the common opinion, and from the eſti-
mates of the forementioned reſpectable authors, on a calculation made on the following
imple principles, which I adopt becauſe I know of none better.

I ſuppoſe the continent of America to contain 14 millions of ſquare miles ; including
the iſlands, 15 millions. The United States contain one million ſquare miles, or one
fifteenth part of the American continent and iflands. I ſuppoſe (merely for the purpoſe
of calculation, what I do not believe to be fact) that Soles *thics part of America 1s as

populous as the United States. Probably there may he ſome parts, particularly the Welt .
India iſlands, and ſome provinces in Spaniſh America, which are more populous, but
there are many other parts which are by no means ſo populous. The probability in
my opinion, that the other parts of America, collectively confidered, are not men |


| o


35 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.


10 thickly inhabited as the territory of the United States. There is certainly no reaſon
to believe that they are more populous. Indian population is thin: and vaſt tracts of
_ deſerts, marſhes, and mountains are uninhabited. In the United States we reckon four
millions of inhabitants, Anglo-Americans, Negroes, Mulattoes, and Indians, within the
juriſdiction of the general government. Beſides theſe there may be about 50,000 In-
dans, independent of the United States, and ſubject to their own princes. The whole
population of the United States then we reckon at 4,0 50,000. If then we , Tuppo's
America to contain 15 millions of ſquare miles; and that 1 in every part it is equally as
populous as the United States, that is, that there are in every million of ſquare miles
4,050,000 inhabitants, the whole number will be fxty millions, ſeven hundred and fifty
thouſand. The exact number I preſume is conſiderably leſs than this.

WuEN was AME- 12 5 America was peopled very anciently and ſoon after the

' RICA PEOPLED ? I flood, is very probable : 1. Becauſe the aboriginal Americans,
till they became acquainted with Europeans, were ignorant of thoſe arts and inventions,
ſuch, among others, as thoſe of wax and oil for light, which being very ancient in Eu-
rope and Aſia, on the one hand, are, on the other, moſt uſeful, not to ſay neceſſary,
and when once diſcovered, are never forgotten. 2. Becauſe the poliſhed nations of the
New World, and particularly thoſe of Mexico, preſerve in their traditions and paintings,
the memory of the Creation of the World, the building of. the Tower of Babel, the
confuſion of languages, and the diſperſion of the people, though blended with ſome
fables, and had no knowledge of the events which happened afterwards 1 in Aſia, Africa,
or in Europe, many of which were too remarkable to eſcape the memory 3. Becauſe
neither was there among the Americans any knowledge of the people of the old conti-
nent, nor among the latter any account of the paſſage of the former'to the New World.
Theſe reaſons we preſume render it at leaſt probable that America was F early ö
c
Wo WERE THE FIRST 'On theſe two queſtions much has been fad. Thoſe who
PEOPLE oF AMERICA ? AND Joan: in queſtion the authority of the ſacred writings ſay, the
WHENCE DID THEY COME ? J Americans are not deſcendants from Adam, that he was
the father of the Afiatics only, and that God created other men to be the patriarchs of
the Europeans, Africans, and Americans. But this is'one among the many weak hypo-
theſes of unbelievers, and is wholly unſupported by hiſtory. It is contrary to the tra-
dition of the Americans, who in their paintings, and in their hymns, called themſelves
the deſcendants of thoſe who eſcaped from the general deluge. The Mexicans, Tol-
_tecas, and ſeveral other nations were agreed in this point. key all faid their anceſtors
.came from other parts into thoſe countries ;- they pointed out the road they came, and
even preſerved the names, true or falſe, of their firſt progenitors, 'who, after the con-
fuſion of languages, ſeparated from the reſt of mankind. The traditions, with others,
which the limits of this work will not allow us to inſert, conſidered in connection with
the facred writings, muſt convince us that we ought to ſeek among the deſcendants of
Noah, for the firſt peoplers of America.
But who were they ? To recite all the c opinions given in anſwer to this queſtion, and
the reaſons to ſupport them, would fill a volume. Dr. Robertſon, and the Abbe
Clavigero have extenſively and learnedly inveſtigated the ſubject. I cannot expect to
I afford the reader more ſatisfaction than to give him the reſult of their i inquiries. | Dr.

Robertſon, having recapitulated and canvalted the moſt 3 e on the ſub-

bell, comes to as following concluſions, viz.


es + "Abs Olaniger's Ein Mate, Vol. IL page 3100 *


*


a


GENERAL. DESCRIPTION OH AMERICA. b


. That America was not peopled by any nation from the ancient continent, which
had made any conſiderable progreſs in civilization ; berauſe when America was firſt
diſcovered, its inhabitants were unacquainted with the neceſſary arts of life, which are
the firſt eſſays of the human mind toward improvement; and if they had ever been ac-
quainted with them, for inſtance, with the plow, the loom, and the forge, their utility
would have been ſo great and obvious, that it is impoſſible; they ſhould have been loſt...
Therefore the anceſtors of the firſt ſettlers in Ae were uncivilized and eee een
with the neceſſary arts of life.

2. America could not have been propled: by any colony from the more ſouthern na-
tions of the ancient continent; becauſe none of the rude tribes of theſe parts poſſeſſed
enterprize, ingenuity, or power ſufficient to undertake ſuch a diſtant voyage: but more
eſpecially, becauſe, that in all America there is not an animal, tame or wild, which
properly belongs to the warm, or temperate countries of the eaſtern continent, The
firſt care of the Spaniards, when they. ſettled in America, was to ſtock it with all the
domeſtic animals of Europe. The fr ſettlers of. Virginia and New England drought
over with them, horſes, cattle, . {heep, &. Hence it is obvious that the people who
firſt ſettled in America, did not originate from thoſe countries where theſe animals abound,
otherwiſe, having been accuſtomed to their aid, they would have ſuppoſed them neceſ-
ſary to the improvement, and even ſupport, of civil ſociety. |
3. Since the animals in the northern regions of America correſpond with thoſe found
in Europe in the ſame latitudes, While thoſe in the tropical regions are indigenous,
and widely different from thoſe which inhabiß the correſponding regions on the eaſtern
continent, it is more than probable that. all the original American animals were of thoſe
kinds which inhabit northern regions only, and that the two continents, towards the
dene ee are 10 nearly: united as that theſe animals witze paſs from one to

e Other, |

4. It hayin 2 been eſtabliſhed beyond: a doubt, by the Showing of Capt. Cook in his
laſt voyage, that at Kamtſkatka, in about latitude 66° north, the continents of Aſia and
America are ſeparated by/a ſtrait only 18 miles wide, and that the inhabitants on each
continent are ſimilar, and frequently paſs and repaſs in canoes from one continent to the
other; from theſe and other circumſtances it is rendered highly probable, that America
was firſt peopled from the north-eaſt parts of Aſia. But fince the Eſquimaux Indians
n a ſeparate ſpecies of men, diſtinct from all the nations of the American Con-
tinent, in language, in diſpoſition, and in habits of life; and in all theſe reſpects bear
a near reſemblance to the northern Europeans, it is believed that the — Indians
emigrated from the north-weſt parts of Europe. Several circumſtances confirm this
belief. As early as the ninth century the Norwegians diſcovered Greenland, and plant-
ed colonies. there. "The communication with that country, after long plus we Was
renewed in the laſt century. Some Lutheran and Moravian miſſionaries, prompted by
zeal for propagating WOT jo Wy 19m faith, have ventured to ſettle in this frozen region.
From them we learn, that the north · weſt coaſt of Greenland is ſeparated from America,
but by a very narrow ſtrait, if ſeparated at all; and that the Eſquimaux of America
— reſemble the Greenlanders in their aſpect, dreſs, mode of Bs, and probably
language. By theſe decifive facts, not only the conſanguinity of the Eſquimaux and
Greenlandexs is eſtabliſhed, hut the poſſibility of peopling Amica from the, north- weſt
parts, of Europe. On; the whole, it appears rational tg.canclude,..that the progenitors,

of all the American nations, from Cape Horn to the ſouthern limit of Labrador, from
the fimiliarity of their ape, color, Kc, Feen from the north-eaſt parts of Aſia; and
chat the nations that inhabit Ar ef and the parts adjacent, from their -

WO 6 unlikeneſs


58 GENERAL DESCRIPTION Or AMERICA.


anlikeneſs to the American nations, and their reſemblance to the northern Europeans,
came over from the north-welt parts of Rur

© Such is the opinion of Dr. Robertſon, on aj queſtion beer us; and for want of
information, it is in ſeveral reſpects inaccurate and without foundation. Thie opinion
of the Abbe Clavigero, who was a native of America, and had much better advantages -
for knowing its hiſtory than Dr. Robertſon, and who alſo is a later writer, is in my
opinion far Jeſs exceptionable, and has much better grounds for its Tapport.” "TJ ex-

N his inion in the following concluſions :—
e deſcended from different nations, or from different families dit.
r aſter the confuſion of tongues. No perſon will doubt of the truth of this who
fas any knowledge of the multitude and great diverſity of the American languages. In
Mexico alone thirty-fi ve have already been diſcovered. In South America ſtill more
are known. In the beginning of the laſt century the Portugueſe counted Ffty in Ma-
ragnon.' Between ſome of theſe languages, there is indeed a er affinity; but others
are as Aﬀerent from each other as the Engliſh and the Hebrew. It is a truth, that no
hving or dead languages can differ more than'the languages of the Mexicans, Otomies,
Taraſcas, Mayas, and Miztecas, five languages prevailing in different provinces of
Mexico. It would therefore be abſurd to fay; that languages ſo different were diffe-
7 rent dialects of one original. Is it probable or even poſſible, that a nation ſhould alter

: its primative language to ſuch a degree, or multiply its dialects ſo variouſly as that there
ſhould not be, even after many centunes, if not ſome words common to all, at leaſt
an affinity between them, or ſome traces left of their origin?

2. The Americans do not derive their origin from any Feet ekifling as a nation
on the eaſtern continent; at leaſt there is no reaſon to affirm that they do. This infe-
rence is founded on the ſame argument with the preceding; ſince, if the Americans are
deſcendants from any of theſe nations it would be poſſfible to. trace their origin by ſome
marks in their languages, in ſpite of the antiquity of their ſeparation #but'any ſuch
traces have not yet been diſcovered, although moſt diligent 011 attentive ſearch has been

made, as appears from the work of Dommican Garcia. We have, ' ſays Clavigero,
leifurely compared the Mexican and other American languages with many others Which
are now living, and with thoſe which are dead, but have not been able to diſcover the
leaſt affinity between them. This argument is ſtrong with reſpect to the Americans,
as they ſhew great firmneſs and conſtaney in retaining their languages. The Mexicans
preſerve their language among the Spaniards, and the Otomies retain their difficult
diale& among Spaniards and See after commutũcation with both for more "than ”
two centuries and an half.
1 Americans deſcended Wenz different families diſperſed ne Bic the confuſion
es, as we believe, and have fince been ſeparated from thoſe others Who Peo-
e the countries on the caſtern continent, authors will labour in vain to ſeek, in
or cuſtoms of the Afiatics, for the origin of the people of America.
"6 moſt difficult point in the problem of the population of America remains to
be ſolved, and that is, how did the inhabitants and animals originally paſs to America,
and from what parts did they come? Among the various opinions of authors n
this point, the following is the Abbe Clavigero s:
1. The men and animals of America paſſed there tem the old continent. This i is
 eonfirmed by the facred'wr 8 ny who declares Noah the common father of
all men wh ſurvived the F s expreſsly, that in that general inundation of the


earth all ns Padres birds ptiles, periſhed, For t a few, of the ſeveral
t of Americs, Vol. IL f. a, fe. , |
ecic


ZZ ðᷣ ET Te I A TS


3


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF An, n. 35


ſpecies which were ſaved alive in the ark, to 1 ple the earth with their kind. The
 E ions which' the ſacred hiſtorian uſes to ſignify its univerſality, do not
it us to doubt, that all quadrupeds, birds, and reptiles, which are in © world,
deſoended from thoſe few individuals which were ſaved from the general inundation.
2. The firſt inhabitants of America might paſs there in veſſels by ſea, or travel bx
land or by ice. 1. They might either paſs there in veſſels deſignedly, if the N by
water were but ſmall, or be carried upon it accidentally by favourable winds. 2. They
might paſs by land; on the ſuppoſition of the union of the continents. 3- They might
alſo make that paſſage over the i ice of ſome frozen arm of the ſea.
3. The anceſtors of the nations which pled Auabuac, (now called New Spain)
might paſs from the northern countries of Europe into the northern parts of America,
or, which is more probable, from the moſt eaſtern parts of Aſia to the moſt weſtern
parts of America. This conclufion is founded on the conſtant and general tradition
_ of thoſe nations, ien unanimouſly ſay, that their anceſtors came into Anahuac from
the countries of the north and north-weſt. This tradition is confirmed by the remains
of many ancient edifices, built by thoſe eople in their migrations. In a journey made
by the Spaniards in 1606, from New Mexieo unto the river which they call Tizon, 600
miles from that province towards the north-weſt, they found there ſome large edifices,
and met with ſome Indians who ſpoke the Mexican language, and who told them, that
a few-days journey from that me towards the north, was the kingdom of Tollan, and
many other inhabited places, whence the Mexicans migrated; In fact, the whole
people of Anahuac have uſually affirmed, that towards the north were the kingdoms
and provinces of Tollan, Aztlan, Copalla, and ſeveral others, which have all Mexican
names. Boturini ſays, that in the ancient paintings of the Toltecas was repreſented
the migration of their anceſtors. through Afia and the northern countries of America,
until they eſtabliſhed themſelves in the country of Tollan; and even endeavours to
aſcertain in his general hiſtory, the rout they purſued in their travels.
With reſpect to the other nations of America, as there is no tradition among them,
concerning the way by which their anceſtors came to the new world, we can ſay
nothing certain of them. It is paſible, that they all paſſed by the ſame way in which
the anceſtors of the Mexicans pafſed; but it is more probable that they paſſed by a very
different rout. We conjecture, that the anceftors of the nations of South America
went there by the way in which the animals proper to hot countries paſſed; and that
the anceſtors of thoſe nations inhabiting Eſquimaux, and Labrador, and the countries
adjacent, paſſed thither from the north-weſt parts of Europe. The difference of cha-
rater which is diſcoverable in the three above-mentioned claſſes of aboriginal Ame-
ricans, and the fituation of the countries which they occupied, afford ground to ſuſpect
that they had different origins, and that their wee came there by different routs.
But this is mere conjecture.
4. The quadrupeds and 1 of” the new kd paſſed there EE land. This
fact is manifeſt from the improbability and inconſiſtency of all other op inions. St.
Auguſtin ſolves the difficulty of peopling the iſkinds with wild beaſts and deſtructive
animals by ſuppofing either, 1. That the angels tranſported them thither, (a ſolution,
which, though it cuts off every difficulty in the paſſage of animals to the new world,
would not be ſatisfactory in the preſent age); or 2. That they might ſwim to the iſlands; |
or 3. That they might have been carried there by men tor the ſake of es or 4.
That they might have been formed there by the Creator in the beginning, Others have
imagined that beaſts might paſs over ſome frozen ſtrait or arm of . 0 ſea. But as


12 GG neither


A


ͤ»Gyaö—eç— — — — a — — — — — c


$0


fon


that of the deluge.


| Time was when they did not inbabit
14 or 15 degrees on each fide of it. It decreaſes as you de part from this


GENERAL DESORIPTION - OF AMERICA. |
neither of theſgopinigns;can.be . * the prohability is, that the q
well as the reptites which are found in America, paſſed thither by. * and of _—_—
batt the two continents were formerly united. This was the opinion of Acoſta, Gro:
tius, Buffon, and ther great men. That this carth has experienced great changes

fince th deluge will not admit of a doubt. Earthquakes have ſwallowed up ne
tracts of land in ſome places—ſubterraneous fires have thrawn up others the ſca in


tome places has been, forced to retreat many miles from the ſhore—in others it has


ade encroachments——and.in many inſtances ſeparated territories which were formerly
ated. Very conſidexable tracts. of land have been alſo formed at the mouths of rivers.
We have many examples of all theſe revolutions Sicily Was formerly. united to the
continent—The ſtraits of Gibraltar, as Diodorus, Strabo, and other ancient authors


+. afhrm, were formed by a violent irruption of the ocean upon the land between the
5 mountains Abyla and Calpe. The people of Ceylon "ky gy ite Flame that a ſimilar


irruption of hs ſea ſeparated. their.iſland from the peninſula. of India. The. Lame is
believed. by thejinhabitants of Malabar with reſpect to the, Iſles of Maldivia, and by the
Haley with pe to Sumatra. Ceylon, as Buffon aſſerts, has loft 30 or 40 leagues
5h 6 the ſea; and Tongres, a place in the Low Countries, has gained zolleagues

0 land 45 the ſea—And Florida and the ſouthern American States have gained as


much from the Bay pf. . and the iſlands between North and South America,


The nort! mer. ae gypt owes its exiſtence. to inundations of the Nile And the
| Fir of- 11 1 Pebg in China, and part of Louiſiana in America, have both been
by the mud of rivers. . The peninſula of Yucatan has. every-appearance of having


once formed a part of the bed of, = ſea. In the ftraitiwhich ſeparates America, from


of the Line land which we ſuppoſe to have been ſwallowed up. by earthquakes ; which is


rendered probable by e multitude of; volcanoes which have been tliſcovered tin the |
peninſula of Kamtſatka... The


ſinking of, that land, however, and the ſeparation of
the two continents, as probably ggcafioned, by thoſe extraordinary earthquakes; men-
tioned in the hiſtorics « the AineTIGanSs: which formed an era almoſt as mami as


V 4410647


5. The e FRO 10 reptiles af 1 paſſed by: different places from the one :
continent to the other, Among the American beaſts there are many whoſe natures are
averſe to cold; ſuch are apes, 9 crocodiles, &c. There are others formed to in-
habit cold countries; ſuch are martins, rein-deer, and gluttons. The former could


not go to America through any country in the frigid zone their natures would not


have admitted it they would have periſhed in their paſſage We cannot indeed


imagine what inducement they could have to quit a climate, congenial to their nature,
and undertake a journey they knew not whither, through a region whoſe cold they
could not endure—How did ey know there was a country: friendly to their uta in
America?


The apes which are in New Spain pain paſſed x RY certainly, Frank South.


country—and it 1s known that they mins
from the South. The center of their population is 5" country under — and


on either
fide, till "= arrive at the tropics, when it ceaſes, and a are e found, except in ſome


e Clavigero's Hiſt. of Mex. vel. l. Dise. I. #16, where all theſe opinions are neun to be -
DJ nor to ſay W FL \ 2 hail e highly


8


Aſia, many iſlands are found yhich probably were the mountains belonging to that part


GENERAL DESCRIPTION: OP AMERICA: „


few diſtricts, which, from the peculiarity of their fituation, are as hot as the equinoctial
country. None can imagine that this ſpecies of animals travelled to the new world,
through the cold regions of the north. Nor can we believe that they were tranſported


thither by men; for, not to mention that ſomeè of them are of a ferocious diſpoſition,


and very unlikeiy to be ſelected to be oompanions on a long voyage, to people a new
country, there is another ſtill greater difficulty: as they could not have been conducted
over the ſeas and countries of the north, on account of the cold, they muſt have been


| tranſported from the warm countries of the old, to the warm countries of the new world;


over a ſea ſubject to a clime not diſſimilar to the native country of thoſe quadrupeds,


that is, by the countries of the ſouthern parts of Afia, to about the ſame latitudes in
America, over the Indian and Pacific Oceans or from the weſtern countries of Africa,


to the eaſtern. countries of America, over the Atlantic Ocean. If, therefore, men
tranſported thoſe animals from the one to the other world, they did it atrofs thoſe ſeas.
But was this navigation accidental or deſigned ? If the former, how;/ and why did they
carry ſo many animals with them? If the latter, if they were determined to paſs from


the old to the new continent, who gave them intelligence of the new world ? Who


ſhewed them the ſituation of 'thoſe countries? How did they venture to croſs ſuch
vaſt ſeas without a compaſs? In what veſſels did they paſs? If they landed there hap-
pily, why does there not remain, among the Americans, ſome memory of their con-


ſtructions? Why- but 1 is ee to are more . jections, ; theſe already meat ara


can never be anſwered. [ 104
Heſides, in the torrid zone, ld the warm WORD that dende upon it, in the new
world, ee are common animals which require a hot or temperate climate; and


live alternately on land or in ſweet water: how did ſuch Anal paſs uu s there? Not by
ey


the north they could not endure the cold—No-one will believe they were tranſported


by men nor yet that they ſwam thither 2000 miles through an ocean of ſalt water.


There remains no other ſolution but that of admitting an ancient union between the
equinoctial countries of America and thoſe of Africa and a connection of the northern


countries of America with Europe on the eaſt, and Afia on the weſt—ſo that there has


probably been a period fince the flood, when there was but ONE continent.—The
beaſts of cold climes Paſſed over the nini iſthmuſſes, which probably connected
Europe; America, and Aſia and the animals and reptiles peculiar to hot countries,
paſſed over the iſthmus that connected South America with Africa For the reaſons
already mentioned induce us to believe that there was. formerly a tract of land, which


united the: moſt eaſtern part of Brazil to the moſt weſtern part of Africa; and that all


the ſpace of land may have been ſunk by violent earthquakes, leaving oniy ſome traces


of it in that chain of iſlands of which Cape de Verd, Fernando, de Norona, Aſcenfion
and St. Matthew's iſlands make a part; and alſo in thoſe many ſand banks 1 5


by different navigators, and particularly by de Bauche, who ſounded that ſea with ę


exactneſs. Theſe iſlands and ſand banks y, probably, have been the higheſt parts of


that ſunken iſthmus. In like manner it is probable the north-weſtern part of America
was united to the north- eaſtern part of Aſia by a neck of land which has been ſank or
waſhed away, and the north-eaſtern parts of America to the north "weſtern, Parts of


8 Europe, by Greenland, Iceland, &c.


On the whole, we cannot but believe that the a and the reptiles of the new
world paſſed there by land, and by different routs, from the old continent. All other
ſuppoſitions are ſubject to heavy difficulties; and this is not without fome, which how-
ever are not altogether infurmountable. The greateſt is the improbability of an earth-
quake ſo great as to ſink a ſpace of land for more than 1500 miles in n length, which,
according


62 | GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA. |
according to our ſupp united Africa and South America. But we do not aſcribe
this ſlupendous revolution to a ſingle ſhock—it may have been effected by a ſucceſſion
of earthquakes. It is well known "that they are common in the climates hoſe we fup-
poſe the iſthmus. to have been. It is not impoſſible nor improbable, that ſuch an effect
ſhould be produced by earthquakes, nor 1s iſtory unfurniſhed with ſuch examples to
our purpoſe. The earthquake which was felt in Canada in 1663,“ overwhelmed a
chain of mountains of free tone more than 300 miles long, and the whole of that im-
menſe tract was changed into a plain. How great then muſt have been the oonvulſion

which was occaſioned by thoſe extraordinary earthquakes, mentioned in the hiſtories of
America, when the world was thought to be coming to an end!

It may farther be objected to this ſyſtem, that if beaſts paſſed by land from one con-
tinent to the other, it is not eaſy to aſſign the cauſe why ſome aries paſſed there with-
cout leaving a fingle individual in the old continent; and on the contrary, that fome |
entire Seeks ſhould remain in the old continent, and not a ſingle individual of them

paſs to America. But this objection operates with equal force againſtall other opinions,
except that which employs angels in the tratifportaticn of beaſts. But ſuppoſe it did

not, we have a ſatisfactory anſwer to it. All the quadrupeds of the earth are not yet

known, we cannot therefore ſay how many are in the one which are not in the other
continent. The knowledge of the beſt informed zoologiſts is very imperfect, and they
differ among themſelves. The Count de: Buffon numbers only two-hundred ſpecies of
quadrupeds. Bomare, who wrote a little after him, makes them 265; but to ſay how
many more there may be, and of what kinds they are, until we have examined the in-
terior regions of Africa, of a great part of Tartary, the country of the Amazons, and
the vaſt territory weſt of the Miſſiſſippi, and various other unexplored and extenſive
countnes,, which together conſtitute a great part of the whole globe, would be mere
conjecture. No argument, therefore, can be inferred from the difference of the
animals in the two continents againſt our tyſtem, till the animals 1 in theſe enen
regions ſhall have been examined.


We have dwelt the longer on this ſubje&, as it muſt be intereſting to every inquiſitive
mind, and the diſcuſſion of it is blended with much uſeful information.


| InyanirTanTs.) Having ſtated the preſent population of America, from the beſt
data we could find, and given the moſt probable accounts of the manner in which it


was originally peopled, it will be RES that we now ſay lometiung of its inhabitants,
of their character, manners, &c.


The preſent Americans, whoſe number we reckon at about 60 millions, may be di- -
| vided into two general claſſes—Firſt, the proper Americans, commonly called Indians,

ſometimes Aborigines, or thoſe who are deſcended from the firſt inhabitants of the new
world, and who have not mixed their blood with the inhabitants of the old continent.
Secondly, thoſe who have migrated, or have been tranſported to America, ſince its
diſcovery by Columbus, and their deſcendants. The former may be ſubdivided into
three claſſes; firſt, the South American Indians, who came over in the manner we
have ſuppoſed, from the northern and weſtern parts of Africa, and the ſouthern parts of
Aſia and Europe. Secondly, the Mexicans and all the Indians ſouth of the Lakes and

weſt of the MR 8: „ 'f the inhabitants of Eſquimaux, Labrador, and the
countries ound * latter may alſo be diſtinguiſhed into three clafſes—Virſt,


See an account of this earthg es, and of: many. ale which . in | New England, ; inthe third —
Vol. of the American Muſeum, p. 292, written by Frefeſſor Williams * of 8 ON Sr.


1 Abbe Clayigero's Hiſt, of Mexico, Vol. . Dill. I. 1 | 7 5 125
1 9055 b | 5 Euro-


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA. _. 69
Europeans of many different nations, who-have migrated to America, and their de-
ſcendants, of unmixed blood :—In this daſs we include, the Spaniards, Engliſh,
Scotch, Inſh, French, Portugueſe, Germans, Dutch, Swedes, &c. both in North and
South America. Secondly, Africans who have been tranſported to America and its
' Iſlands, and their deſcendants. Thirdly, the mixed breeds, called by the Spaniards,
Caftas, by the Engliſh Mulattoes, that 1s, thoſe who are deſcended from an European
and an American, or from an European and African, or from an African and American.
Leaving the ſecond claſs, viz. the migrants to America ſince its diſcovery by Columbus,
and their . deſcendants, to be deſcribed when we ſhall treat of the countries they re-
ſpectively inhabit, we ſhall, under this article, confine ourſelves to the proper abori-
ginal Americans, or Indians. | | Po e
Me begin with the South Americans. Various have been the accounts given of theſe
people. Some hiſtorians exalt them to the rank of the beſt and happieſt people on
earth; others ſeem unwilling to give them a place among human beings. We preſume
theſe hiſtorians, who differ 15 widely, ſpoke of different nations; and on this ground,
with proper allowances for exaggeration on both fides, we may reconcile them. Co-
lumbus gives the following account of the Indians of Hiſpamola, to Ferdinand and
Eb | eee e „ e e
l ſwear to your majeſties, that there is not a better people in the world than theſe;
more affectionate, affable, and mild; they love their neighbours as themſelves ; their
language is the ſweeteſt, the ſofteſt, and the moſt cheerful, for they always ſpeak ſmi-
ling; and although they go naked, let your majeſties believe me, their cuſtoms are
very becoming; and their King, who is ſerved with great majeſty, has ſuch engaging
manners, that it gives great pleaſure to ſee him, and alſo to conſider the great retentive
faculty of that people, and their deſire of knowledge, which invites them to aſk the
„„ Fong nooSarbic Odecomiatceaner bekohina
Las Caſas, the firſt biſhop of Chiapa, who reſided ſeveral years in different parts of
America, ſpeaks thus of them: The Americans are a people of a bright and hvely
genius, eaſy to be taught, and to apprehend every good doctrine, extremely ready to
embrace our faith, and the people, of all others in the world, who feel leaſt embar-
raſſment by it.“ In another place, this writer ſays, © The Indians have as good an
_ underſtanding, and acute a genius, as much docility and capacity for the moral and
ſpeculative ſciences, and are, in moſt inſtances, as rational in their political govern-
ment, as appears from many of their very prudent laws, and are as far advanced in
our faith and religion, in cuſtoms and civilization, where they have been taught
by perſons of religious and exemplary life, and are arriving at refinement and poliſh as


„


—


faſt as any nation ever did fince the times of the apoſtles. S I...
Doctor Robertſon, ſpeaking of the Mexicans and Peruvians, whom he is not diſ-
poſed to rank with thoſe nations which merit the name of civiliſed, has the following
remarks—* When compared with other parts of the new world, Mexico and Peru
may be conſidered as poliſhed ſtates. Inſtead of ſmall independent, hoſtile tribes,
ſtruggling for ſubſiſtence amidſt woods and marſhes, ſtrangers to induſtry and arts,
unacquainted with ſubordination, and almoſt without the appearance of regular go-
vernment, we find countries of great extent ſubjected to the dominion of one ſovereign,
the inhabitants collected together in cities, the wiſdom and foreſight of rulers employed
in providing for the maintenance and ſecurity of the people, che empire of laws in
ſome meaſure eſtabliſhed, the authority of religion recagnized, many of the arts effen- -


» Hift. Cohumb, Ch. xi


- r


*. —
2 ˖ — wt


FR. _
R _ . 3 — —
1 — os... 2
— — <
*
=


F
}
!
;
'
1
N


* G |: \ \ ; —
N , 4 3 — m — n + 5 EB ſha, l — * e 0
a 5 ö ” 50 Sw. N
: 8 4 ”—_ - © * <1 4 — 2 ” Se * 8 — * *
— 4236 _ * ” — * bas Fd ' - h 1 * 0 r 1 3 N — an * 1 5 N
PPP rr adn or ot ol SE ECD bd * — GE N
' a 9
* 6 A .


——
3


and at the point of death, and told her that if ſhe died wih out baptiſm, her ſoul would be eternally


h 7 6 * k
3
; ; s - "LF "4 ( # #54 4 i
« þ a : .
* 4$@S. # ; 1 15 a N N
* : % 5
" - » 7


54 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.


tial to life brought to ſome degree of maturity, and the 990075 of ſuch as are ornamental
beginning to appear.” Theſe are teſtimonies reſpecting the Indians who inhabit the
more northern parts of South America, and the iſlands; who appear to have made
greater advances in civilization than thoſe farther ſouth, concerning whom our infor-
mation is very imperfect,

Charlevoix, in his hiſtory of Paraguay, has collected from the Jeſuits, perhaps the
beſt information reſpecting the more ſouthern InFians. Comparing his particular de-


{criptions of the numerous nations who inhabit the ſouthern diviſion of South America,


we give the following as the leading traits in their general character. They are gene-


rally of an olive complection, ſome darker, others lighter, and ſome as White as the
Spaniards. Their ſtature is rather below than above the middling ſize; though ſome


nations rank among the talleſt of the human ſpecies - moſt of them are thick legged.
and jointed, and have round and flat faces.


Almoſt all the men and children, in the warm climates, and! in the ſummer, in
colder regions, £0 quite naked. The women wear no more covering than the moſt re-


laxed modeſty ſcems abſolutely to require. Every nation have a different dialect, and


a different mode of adorning themſelves. The clothing of ſuch as make uſe of it, is


made of the ſkins of beaſts, of feathers ſewed together, and in the ſouthern and colder


regions, where they raiſe ſheep, of woal manufactured into ſtuffs and blankets. They
are repreſented as almoſt univerſally addicted to drunkenneſs. There ſeems to be no
other vice common to them all. A few.of them are cannibals, and ſome nations are
idolators; in general they have ſome notions of a Supreme Being, and have words in
their various languages to expreſs their ideas of him. They believe in the immortality


bol the ſoul, and have ſome imperfect ideas of future e and puniſhments. They


are univerſally addicted to various ſuperſtitions, and have much to do with witches and
evil ſpirits.“ A great proportion of en lead a wandering. life, are extremely indolent,
dirty and wretched, living an fiſh, and the fleſh of the various wild animals, birds,
and even reptiles which inhahit the foreſts. All the Indians of South America,,

ſays Charlevoix, „have hot ſtomachs,” which can di geſt all ſorts of food, and in great
ee and they are in general © exceſſively voracious.” Their notions of religion
and government, with a few exceptions, are very rude. Some nations live com pactly


in towns and cultivate the earth, raiſing, among other productions, wheat, which they
bruiſe between ſtones, and make into cakes. Some nations are repreſented as dull,
cruel, and inconſtant—others as fierce, cunning, and thieviſh—ot hers as humane, in
Paaren 8 and hoſpitable—and in general they are kind and attentive to ſtrangers, ſo


ng as they are well uſed by them; and we {eldom read of their being firſt in a quar-


rel with thoſe who paſs their territories, or ſojourn among them, The aſtoniſhing


ſucceſs of the Jeſuits in converting ſuch multitudes of them to their faith, is a convic-


tive proof of their ca pacity to receive inſtruction; of their docility, humanity, and


Friendly diſpoſitions. -
All 3 agree that the middle and ſouthern parts of South America are very


thinly inhabited, being interſperſed with 8 ee of nde immenſe bar-


ren plains, act numerous ee WP


4 1 FA * . N 8 f
» | ff $3 | hp, *


* WO 8 2 leni o one day day: viſited' one eof the old women of he Wan 8 41 W witch,


torment
by the devils, She yery calmly anſwered, that they ha & beenher friends for a long dune ma 45 was there ·


fore very fure they would do ber'no hatin. Hiſt, ar, vol. ip. 406. t 3004


-m 4 174 err \ FEY
bh il 39 f 1


GENERAL DESCRIPTION, OF AMERICA. | 65
As to the ſecond claſs! of American Indians, who formerly inhabited, and who yet
inhabit Mexico and the country ſouth of the lakes and weſt of the Miſſiſſippi, and who
came over, as we have ſuppoſed, from the north-eaſt parts of Afia ; they ſeem, from
whatever cauſe, to be advanced ſomewhat higher in the ſcale of human beings than
the South Americans, if we except the Peruvians, who appear to have made greater
progreſs in civilization than even the Mexicans. Concerning the nations. of the vaft
country of Anahuac or New Spain, compoſing a large portion of the ſecond claſs of
the proper Americans, the Abbe Clavigero has the following obſervations : © We have
had intimate commerce for many years with the Americans, have lived ſeveral years in
a ſeminary deſtined for their inſtruction, had ſome Indians among our pupils, had par-
ticular knowledge of many American rectors, many nobles and numerous artiſts
attentively obſerved their character, their genius, their diſpoſitions and manner of
thinking ; and have examined, beſides, with the utmoſt diligence, their ancient hiſtory,
their religion, their government, their laws, and their cuſtoms; after ſuch long experi-
ence and ſtudy of them, from which we imagine ourfelves able to decide without dan-
ger of erring, we declare that the mental qualities of the American Indians are not in
the leaſt degree inferior to thoſe of the Europeans—that they are capable of all, even
the moſt abſtract ſciences, and that if equal care and pains were taken in their educa-
tion, we ſhould ſee riſe among them philoſophers, mathematicians, and divines, who
would rival the firſt in Europe. But it is not poſſible to make great progreſs in the
ſciences, in the midſt of a life of miſery, ſervitude, and oppreſſion. —Fheir ancient go-
vernment, their laws, and their arts, evidently demonſtrate that they ſuffered no want
of genius. 5 1 3 „ . |
8 This ſame author, who appears to be a competent judge, deſcribes the Mexicans as
being of a good ſtature, rather exceeding the middle fize—well-proportioned in all
their Iimbs—as having a fine olive complexion—narrow foreheads—black eyes—clean,
firm, regular white teeth—thick, black, coarſe gloſſy hair—thin beards, and generally
no hair on their legs, thighs, and arms. They are neither very beautiful nor the re-
verſe, but hold a middle place between the extremes. Some of the women are fair and
beautiful. Deformities are ſcarcely known among them. 'Their ſenſes are very acute,
eſpecially that of ſight, which they enjoy unumpaired to the greateſt age. They are
moderate eaters, but much addicted to intemperance in drinking, which, as far as we
know, is true of all the American Indians. They are patient of injuries and hard-
_ ſhips, and grateful for benefits. Good faith is not ſo much reſpected as it deſerves to
be. They are naturally unſocial, ſerious, and auſtere, and are more anxious to puniſh
_ crimes than to reward virtues. Generofity and perfect diſintereſtedneſs are ſtriking
traits in their character. Their religion is blended with much ſuperſtition ; and fome
of the more ignorant are very prone to idolatry. rt. Groen nn ly
The reſpect paid by children to their parents, and by the young to the old, among
thoſe people, is highly commendable. Parents are fond of their children. The affec-
tion of huſbands for their wives 1s leſs than the wives for their huſbands ; and it is very
common for men to love their neighbours' wives better than their own. Courage and
cowardice ſeem alternately to affect their minds, and it is difficult to determine which
predominates. They can meet dangers in war, and ſuch as proceed from natural
rauſes, with great intrepidity, but are panic ſtruck by the ſtern look of a Spaniard. - On
the whole, their character, like that of all other nations, is a mixture of good and had.
Of their morality, the following exhortation of a Mexican to his fon, may ferve as
a ſpecimen: „My fon, who art come into the light from the womb of thy mother


like a chicken from the egg, and like it art preparing to fly through the world, we


know


—


pq —


, as


"+45.


= |
JE gf Yo” A et AA A HERA Um)... ù d n.. ee r e "EY ACS 4 ry 9 no


. 322 o * o — — *
n


D ë . ny gry -m.
= —


* — . en et eas. Gas ; g — gt


F 9


— 92 0
Nr r


_ . > —
4A =, Ono —


Te» —— * A . $49 15 eden K * —
, N *
/ .
"


2 rr


4 4 990 „% 3 * ety oe
*
* -


W © 28


—— —᷑ꝛ—ͤ— — ER „ — 2 — — — Kw woo oe FFF ²˙ XQ èl He Roar > nc K4 9
. a ” 4
* *


|
*
1
=.
*
*
3
=


66 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.


know not how long Heaven will grant to us the enjoyment of that precious gem wich
we poſſeſs in thee; but however ſhort the period, endeavour to live exactly, praying
God continually to affiſt thee. He created thee : thou art his property. He is thy fa-


ther, and loves thee ſtill more than I do; repoſe in him thy thoughts, and day and night


direct thy fighs to him. Reverence and ſalute thy elders, and hold no one in contempt.


To the poor and diſtreſſed be not dumb, but rather uſe words of comfort. Honour all
perfons, particularly thy parents, to whom thou oweſt obedience, reſpect, and ſervice.


Guard againſt imitating the example of thoſe wicked ſons, who, like brutes that are


deprived of reaſon, neither reverence their parents, liſten to their inſtruction, nor ſub-
mit to their correction; becauſe whoever follows their ſteps will have an unhappy end,


will die in a deſperate or ſadden manner, or will be killed and devoured of wild


beaſts.
Mock not, my ſon, the aged or the unperfect. Sobrn not him whom you 55 fall


into ſome folly ar tranſgreſſion, nor make him reproaches; but reſtrain thyſelf, and


beware leſt thou fall into the ſame error which offends thee in another. Go not


| where thou art not called, nor interfere in that which does not concern thee. Endea-
vour to manifeſt thy good breeding in all thy words and actions. In converſation, do


not lay thy hands upon another, nor ſpeak too much, nor interrupt or diſturb another's


diſcourſe. When any one diſcourſes with thee, hear him attentively, and hold thyſelf


in an eaſy attitude, neither playing witli thy feet, nor putting thy mantle to thy mouth:


nor ſpitting too often, nor looking about you here and there, nor rifing up frequently
jf thou art fitting; for ſuch actions are indications of levity and low breeding.” —He


proceeds to mention ſcyeral particular vices which are to be avoided, and concludes—


Steal not, nor give thyſelf to gaming; otherwiſe thou wilt be a diſgrace to thy pa-
rents, whom thou oughteſt rather to honour for the education they have given thee.


If thou wilt be virtuous, thy example will put the wicked to ſhame. No more,


my ſon; enough hath been faid in diſcharge of the duties of a father. With theſe coun-


ſels I wiſh to fortify thy mind. Refuſe them not, nor act 1 in 1 contradiction to n


for on them thy life and all thy happineſs depend. 7


Although ſo much cannot be ſaid with truth, FRETS in favour of the more
northern Indians, whom we have included in the ſecond claſs, owing to the inferiority


of their advantages, yet we are far from thinking them inferior in point of corporeal or
mental endowments, to the Mexicans. In their complection, ſize, and form, they are


not in general unlike the Mexicans. In ſocial and domeſtic virtues, in agriculture,


arts, and manufactures, they are far behind-the Mexicans—in their hoſpitality, equal


and in their eloquence in council, and bravery in war, perhaps ſuperior. Their mode


of life, and the ſtate of ſociety among them, afford few objects for the apy either of
their literary or political abilities.


Monſ. Buffon has given an humiliating picture of the W of N orth 1


which, as it is a falſe one, I ſhall not give the reader. Mr. Jefferſon's anſwer to M.


Buffon, however, is fo full of the moſt valuable information on this ſubject, that it


muſt not be omitted in this place.“ Of the Indians of South America,” fon Mr. Jef-
ferſon, © I know nothing; for I would not honour with the appellation of knowledge,


what I derive from the fables publiſhed of them. Theſe I believe to be juſt as true as
the fables of Æſop. This belief is founded on what I have ſeen of man, white, red,


and black, and what has been written of him by authors, enlightened themſelves,


and writing amidſt an enlightened people. The Indian of North America being more
within our reach, I can ſpeak of him ſomewhat from my own knowledge, but more
from the information 5 "Ons bettcr acquainted with him, and on whoſe truth and

*


DES
2


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA. 67


judgement I. can rely. From theſe ſources Jam able to ſay, in contradiction to this
repreſentation, that he is neither more defective in ardor, nor more impotent with his
female, than the white reduced to the ſame diet and exerciſe : That he 1s brave, when
an enterprize depends on bravery ; education with him making the point of honour
conſiſt in the deſtruction of an enemy by ſtratagem, and in the preſervation of his
own perſon free from injury; or perhaps this is nature; while it is education which
teaches us to honour force more than fineſſe : that he will defend himſelf againſt an
hoſt of enemies, always chufing to be killed, rather than to ſurrender, -though it be
to the whites, who he knows will treat him well: that in other ſituations alſo he meets
death with more deliberation, and endures tortures with a firmneſs unknown almoſt .
to religious enthuſiaſm with us: that he is affeQionate to his children, careful of
them, and indulgent in the extreme: that his affections comprehend his other con-
ncctions, weakened, as with us, from circle to circle, as they recede from the center:
that his friendſhips are ſtrong and faithful to the uttermoſt “ extremity : that his ſenſi-
bility is keen, even the warriors weeping moſt bitterly on the loſs of their children,
though in general they endeavour to appear ſuperior to human events: that his vivacity
and activity of mind is equal to our's in the ſame ſituation ; hence his eagernels for hunt-
ing, and for games of chance. The women are ſubmitted to unjuſt drudgery. This I be-
licve is the caſe with every barbarous people. With ſuch, force is law. The ſtronger
_ ſex therefore impoſes on the weaker. It is civilization alone which replaces women in
the enjoyment of their natural equality. That firſt teaches us to ſubdue the ſelfiſh
_ paſſions, and to reſpect thoſe rights in others which we value in ourſelves. Were we

in equal barbariſm, our females would be equal drudges. The man with them is leſs
ſtrong than with us, but their women ſtronger than our's; and both for the ſame ob-
_ vious reaſon ; becauſe our man and their woman is habituated to labour, and formed
by it. With both races, the ſex which is indulged with eaſe is leaſt athletic. An In-
dian man is ſmall in the hand and wriſt, for the ſame reaſon for which a ſailor is large
and ſtrong in the arms and ſhoulders, and a porter in the legs and thighs.— They raiſe
fewer children than we do. The cauſes of this are to be found, not in a difference of
nature, but of circumſtance. The women very frequently attending the men in their
parties of war and of hunting, child-bearing becomes extremely inconvenient to them.
It is ſaid, therefore, that they have learnt the practice of procuring abortion by the uſe
of ſome vegetable; and that it even extends to prevent conception for a conſiderable
time after. During theſe parties they are expoſed to numerous hazards, to exceſſive |
exertions, to the greateſt extremities of hunger. Even at their homes the nation depends
for food, through a certain part of every year, on the gleanings of the foreſt: that is,
they experience a famine once in every year. With all animals, if the female be badly
fed, or not fed at all, her young perith : and if both male and female be reduced to
like want, generation becomes leſs active, leſs productive. To the obſtacles then of


* A remarkable inſtance of this-appeared in the caſe of the late Col. Byrd, who was ſent to the Cherokee
nation to tranſact ſome buſineſs with them, It happened that ſome of our diſorderly people had juſt killed
one or two of that nation. It was therefore propoſed in the council of the Cherokees that Colonel Byrd
ſhould be put to death, in revenge for the loſs of their countrymen. Among them was a chief called Silouee,
who, on ſome former occaſion, had contracted an acquaintance. and friendſhip with Colonel Byrd. He came
to him every night in his tent, and told him not to be afraid, they ſhould not kill him. After many days de-
liberation, however, the determination was, contrary to Silouee's expectation, that Byrd ſhould be put to
death, and ſome warriors were diſpatched as executioners. Silouee attended them, and when they entered
the tent, he threw. himſelf between them and Byrd, and faid to the warriors, “ this man is my friend: before
you get at him, you muſt kill me.“ On which they returned, and the council reſpected the principle ſo

much as to recede from their determination. * So


* 8 * þ 2 of Hg * £2
e 180 C 1 *
— 111 o # of 2 * . 1441.4
| K + | want
— : I


8 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.
want and hazard, which nature has oppoſed to the multiplication of wild animals, for
the purpoſe of reftraining their numbers within certain bounds, thoſe of labour and of
voluntary abortion are added with the Indian. No wonder then if they multiply leſs
than we do. Where food is regularly ſupplied, a ſingle farm will ſhew more of cattle,
than a whole country of foreſts can of buffaloes. The fame Indian women, when-
married to white traders, who feed them and their children plentifully and regularly,
who exempt them from exceſſive drudgery, who keep them ſtationary and unexpoſed
i to accident, produce and raife as many children as the white women. Inſtances are
* known, under thete circumſtances, of their rearing a dozen children. An inhuman.
practice once prevailed in this country of making flaves of the Indians. It is a
18 | fact well known with us, that the Indian women fo enſlaved, produced and raiſed
8 as numerous families as either the whites or blacks among whom they lived. —
It has been ſaid, that Indians have lefs hair than the whites, except on the head.
But this is a fact of which fair proof can ſcarcely be had. With them it is diſgraceful.
to be hairy on the body. They ſay it likens them to hogs. They therefore pluck the
hair as faſt as it appears. But the traders who marry their women, and prevail on
them to diſcontinue this practice, fay, that nature is the fame with them as with the
whites. Nor, if the fat be true, is the conſequence neceſſary which has been draw
from it. Negroes have notoriouſly leſs hair than the whites; yet they are more ar-
dent. But if cold and moiſture be the agents of nature for diminiſhing the races of
animals, how comes ſhe all at once to ſuſpend their operation as to the phyfical man
of the new world, and to let looſe their influence on his * faculties? How has
this combination of the elements and other phyſical cauſes, fo contrary to the emlarge-
ment of animal nature in this new world, theſe obſtacles to the developement and
formation of great germs, been arreſted and ſuſpended, fo as to permit the human
body to acquire its juſt dimenfions; and by what inconceivable proceſs has their
action been directed on his mind alone? To judge of the truth of this, to form a juſt
eſtimate of their genius and mental powers, more facts are wanting, and great allow-
ance to be made for thoſe circumſtances of their ſituation which call for a difplay of
particular talents only. This done, we ſhall probably find that they are formed in
mind as well as in body, on the ſame model with the“ Homo ſapiens Europæus.
- The principles of their ſociety forbidding all compulſion, they are to be led to dut
and to enterprize by perſonal influence and perſuaſion. Hence eloquence in Fleas” |
| bravery and addreſs in war, become the foundations of all conſequence with them.
To theſe acquirements all . their faculties are direfted. Of their bravery and addreſs
in war we have multiplied proofs, becauſe we have been the ſubjects on which they
were exerciſed. Of their eminence in oratory we have fewer examples, becauſe it is
diſplayed chiefly in their own councils. Some, however, we have of very ſuperior
luſtre. I may challenge. the whole orations of Demoſthenes and Cicero, and of any
more eminent orator, if 0 op has furniſhed a more eminent, to produce a ſingle
paſſage ſuperior to the ſpeech of Logan, a Mingo chief, to Lord Dunmore, when
_ governor of this tate. . And, as a teſtimony of their talents in this line, I beg leave
to introduce it, firſt ſtating the incidents neceſſary for underſtanding it. In the ſpring
of the year 1774, a robbery and murder were committed on an inhabitant of the
frontiers of Virginia, by two Indians of the Shawanee tribe. The neighbouring whites,
according to their cuſtom, undertook to puniſh this outrage in a ſu y way. Col.
Creſap, a man infamous for the many murders he had committed on thoſe much


Un: Syſt, Definition of a Man.


of


injured


GENERAL. DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA, i


mjured people, collected; à party, and proceeded down the Kanhaway in queſt of
vengeance. Unfortunately a canoe of women and children, with one man only, was
feen coming from the oppoſite ſhore, unarmed, and unſuſpecting an hoſtile attack
from the whites: Creſap and his party concealed themſelves on the bank of the river,
and the momentthe canoe reached the ſhore, fingled out their objects, and, at one
fire, killed every-perſon in it. This happened to be the family of Logan, who had
long been diſtinguiſhed as a friend of the whites. This unworthy return provoked
his vengeance. He-ccordingly fignalized himſelf in the war which enſued. In the
autumm of the ſame year, a deciſive battle was fought at the mouth of the Great
Kanhaway, between the collect forces of the Shawanees, Mingoes, and Delawares,
and a detachment of the Virginia militia. The Indians were defeated, and ſued for
peace. Logan however diſdained to be ſeen among the ſupphants. But, left the
fincerity of a treaty ſhould be diſtruſted, from which fo diſtinguiſhed a chief abſented
himſelf, he ſent by a meffenger the following ſpeech to be delivered to Lord Dun-
more: ; g 1 pp f 1 6 E342: | 3 | | 6
I 1 appeal to any white man to ſay, if ever he entered Logan's cabin hungry, and
he gave him not meat; if he ever came cold and naked, and he clothed him not.
During the courſe of the laſt long and bloody war, Logan remained idle in his cabin,
an advocate for peace. Such was my love for the whites, that my countrymen pointed
as they paſſed, and ſaid, Logan is the friend of white men.“ I had even thought to
have lived with yon, but for the injuries 6f one man. Col. Creſap, the laſt ſpring, in
cold blood, and unprovoked, murdered all the relations of Logan, not ſparing eren
my women and children. There runs not a drop of my blood in the veins of any
living. creature. This called on me for revenge. I have ſought it: I have killed
many: I have fully glutted my vengeance. For my country, I rejoice at the beams of
peace. But do not harbour a thought that mine is the joy of fear. Logan never felt
fear. He will not turn on his heel to ſave his life. Who is there to mourn for Logan?
,, ddr y  nd NES 8
| Before we condemn. the Indians of this continent as wanting genius, we muſt con-
ſider that letters have not yet been introduced among them. Were we to compare them
in their preſent ſtate with the Europeans north of the Alps, when the Roman arms and
arts firſt croſſed thoſe mountains, the compariſon would be unequal, becauſe at that
time, thoſe parts of Europe were ſwarming with numbers; becauſe numbers produce
emulation, and multiply the chances of improvement, and one improvement begets
another. Jet I may ſafely aſk, how many good poets, how many able mathemati-
oians, how many great inventors in arts or ſeiences, had Europe, north of the Alps,
then produced? And it was fixteen centuries after this before a Newton could be
formed. I do not mean to deny, that there are varieties in the race of man, diſtin-
guiſhed by their powers both of body and mind. I believe there are, as I ſee to be
the cafe in the races of other animals. I only mean to ſuggeſt a doubt, whether the
bulk and: faculties of animals depend on the fide of the Atlantic on which their food :
happens to grow, or which furniſhes the elements of which they are componnded? -
Whether nature has enliſted herſelf as a Cis or Trans-Atlantic partiſan? 1335
No people in the world have higher notions of military honour than the Indians.
The fortitude, the calmneſs and even exultation which they manifeſt while under the
extremeſt torture, is owing to their education, to their exalted ideas of military glory,
and their rude notions of future happineſs, which they believe they ſhall forfeit by the
leaſt manifeſtation of fear, or uneaſineſs, under their ſufferings. They are as bitter
and determined in their reſentments as they are fincere in their friendfhips, and _ x.
" I *


\


_


q o
d 1 — a _ „ 9 6 4 ag. —_ — 7 0 * — = \

0 S * 2 2 oo e uy y 2

Fon \ * — 1 * if * — n — a

4 a * a * Pr 2 1 2 0 — „ 7 * , 3 „ yhip+ a > 0 —— - a. =
„ el 0-ioonigh ir ere r e 0 — e - e er Que. 55-ag; — < . :
e - ——_— N ä * mir — > way todd " 3 44 * * Pw. * *
— e * _ N — — ; * N
, N 1 * * 4 m — ——_


>v>
—


— +


Nes
*


>,


.


„
_


\
2
A
11
1
1

|
:

's


760 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.
purſue their enemies ſeveral hundred miles through the woods, ſurmounting every


difficulty, in order to be revenged.* In their public councils they obſerye the greateſt
decorum. In the foremoſt rank fit the old men, who are the counſellors, then war-
riors, and next the women and children. As they keep no. records, it is the buſineſs


of the women to notice every thing that paſſes, to imprint it on their memories, and


tell it to their children. They are, in ſhort, the records of the council; and with ſur-
riſing exactneſs, preſerve the ſtipulations of treaties entered into a hundred years
Pack. Their kindneſs and hoſpitality is ſcarcely equalled by any civilized nation.


: > . >. © 3 5 : + Is | | In. i= II
Their politeneſs in converſation is even carried to exceſs, ſince it does not allow them


to contradict any thing that is aſſerted in their preſence. In ſhort, there appears to be.


much truth in Dr. Franklin's obſervation, We call them ſavages, becauſe their man-
ners differ from ours, which we think the perfection of civility; they think the ſame
of their's.“ 8 25 ö


Society among the Indiafis, we are ſorry to ſay, has not been improved, but in moſt
inſtances corrupted, by their intercourſe with Europeans. It is believed by many, that
the wars with them generally originate in the injuſtice, avarice, and pride of their
oppoſers and vanquiſhers.\ None, however, can juſtify their mode of carrying on a


war when once it has commenced. If the guilty, or thoſe who ſhould conceal and


defend the guilty, were the ſole objects of their vengeance, we could not condemn


2


*The following anecdote of an Algonquin woman, we find adduced as a remarkable proof of their innate


zz: 10.4% ©


% 7 4 x 32
r 44 54
2
- 3 is

=


| TL Sn
iin 3233-3818 *
e


9


r 8 n 7 2


wo [4] pn] 3 ww \ 5 gry e


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA, — 51
ters, brothers, and ſiſters, and treating them in all reſpects as ſach. There have been
inſtances of whites, thus adopted; while young, who have become chiefs of the nations


that adopted them. Compulſion has frequently been found neceſſary to ſeparate from
their Indian relations, thoſe white priſoners who have refided a few years with them;


and many men and women, who have been ranſomed and delivered up by the Indians


to their white parents or relations, have returned back to their Indian friends, and of
choice, married and ſettled among them.


A late enterpriſing traveller * into the country weſt of the Mifnff ppi, who took his


courſe weſt ſouth-weſt from the poſts on the lakes, and penetrated to the head of the


Miſſouri, and thence due weſt, till he arrived within about 500 miles of the Pacific
Ocean, informs, that beyond the Miſſouri he met with many powerful nations of In-


dians, who were in general courteous and hoſpitable. The nations which he viſited


to the weſtward appeared to be a poliſhed, civilized people, having regularly built
towns, and enjoying a ſtate of ſociety not far removed from the European; and in
order to be perfectly equal, wanting only the uſe of iron and ſteel. Their clothing is

of ſkins, cut in an elegant manner, and in'many reſpects preferable to the garments
in uſe among the whites. Adjacent to theſe nations is a vaſt range of mountains,
which may be called the Allegany of the weſtern parts of America, and ſerves as a
barrier againſt the too frequent incurſions of the coaſt Indians, who, Mr. Stewart


relates, appear to be inveterate enemies to the tribes eaſtward of the mountains.


The Indians are unacquainted with letters, and their hiſtory is preſerved in ſome


few inſtances by hieroglyphie paintings and ſculpture, but principally by tradition.


They often diſcover great ingenuity in communicating information to the abſent. Of =
the following inſtance of Indian hieroglyphic writing, Doctor Mitchell, -who 1 in a-very


obliging manner communicated it to the Author, was an eye-witneſs. |


Dr. Mitchell, in company with ſeveral other gentlemen, as they were proceeding up


Ononda go river, to an Indian treaty, overtook ſeveral canoes of Seneka Indians, who


encamped with them at night near fort Brewington; and the next day proving rainy,


they continued in company till the weather became ſo favourable as to permit them to
croſs the Oneida Lake. During the ſtorm, one of the Indian canoes ſtove, and be-


came unfit for ſervice. The commiſſioners took the crew on board their boat, and
carried them to a landing place ſome diſtance up Wood Creek. Here one of them, before


he left the water, took the following method to let his companions, who were. ]


behind, know when and whither they had proceeded. He took a piece of „ A

hewed it flat and ſmooth, and then raked his fire for a ſuitable coal, with which he
rudely delineated, on the ſlab, the figure of an Indian carrying a gun reverſed upon
his ſhoulder. In front of him he drew a crooked line, which reached to a man with
a long coat and a cocked hat, and holding a cane in his hand; and behind him a
framed houſe. He then took a ftrait pole, and tied ſome weeds and graſs upon one
end of it, and fixed the other in the earth, in ſuch a manner, that, in the poſition the


tun then was, which was fix o'clock in the morning, it caſt no thadow—or, i in other

words, he pointed it exactly towards the ſun. The meaning of all, was this

* Suſquewewah (the name of the Indian 0 left this ſp ot at fix o clock in the morning,
t


or when the ſun was in the place where the pole A e and has proceeded up Wood
Creek, (which 1 is Nene efopked) to! the l ſettlement Wen the ee of the


* Mr. gtemart. #4 7 att #2 | | Þ
+ This information of Mr. Stewart 8 eas to alm . accounts given of the kingdom of 7 © Bi by


5 the 3 who journeyed far north in 1606, and of whoſe diſcoveries, we have already ren an account
in Page 7 a


State
|


72 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.
. = State of New York are aſſembled to hold a treaty with the Indians. '— All theſe inſiguia
. were arranged fo conipicuouſly on the margin of the creek, that his companions behind
could ſcarcely avoid obſerving them as they paſſed.

In the interior parts of America various monuments of atk have been found, 8
diſcover greater ingenuity in their conſtruction, than the Preſent generation of Indians
appear to poſſeſs.— Two miles weſt of the Geneſſee river, in the State of New York,
we have been informed, “* are the remains of an ancient Indian Fort. It encloſes about

4 acres—18 encompatſted with a diteh 8 teet wide and 5j or 6 feet deep, and has fix gate
ways. Its form is circular, except on one part, Which is defended by nature with a
bigh bank, at the ſoet of which is a fine ſtream of water; there is an appearance of
there having been a deep covered way through the middle of the bank to the water.
Some of the trees on the bank and in * ditch look as if they had been growing 150
or 200 years. Half a mile ſeuth, on an eminence, are the ruins of another Indian
ſoitified town, of ſmaller dimenſions, and more advantageouſly ſituated for defence.
Ihe old Indians fay theſe forts were built before the Senakas were admitted into con-
| federacy with the Mohawks, Onondagos, Oneidas and Cayogas, and while the Senakas
were at war with the Miſhiluages, and other Indians, on the great lakes, which Mr.

Kirkland conjectures, from various accounts that ha received from different tribes, |
was at leaſt 300 years ago.

A few miles from the above-mentioned forts,. at a Mere which the Sovnka call
Tegateenedaghque, fignifying a town With a fort at each end, are the remains of
two other forts, conſtructed nearly in the ſame form, with Gas gates, a ditch, and
a ſiream of water, and a covered way to it.—Near the northern fort, are the
ruins of a funeral pile, 6 feet high, and 20 or 30 feet diameter, where were buried 800

Indians, who, according to tradition, fell in a famous battle fought at this place,
between the Senakas, who were the victors, and the weſtern Indians. The weapons
of war then in uſe were bows and arrows, the ſpear or javelin pointed with bone, and
the war club, or death mall. When the former fort of weapons were expended, they
came to cloſe. engagement with the latter. 'The warriors wore a ſhort jacket made of

willow ſticks or of mooſe wood, laced tight round their bodies—on their heads they
wore a cap of the fame kind, but commonly wove double, the better to ſecure them
againſt a mortal blow from the death-mall. The battle above mentioned was fou ght,

ſome of the Indians ſay 300, ſome 400, and ſome 500 lives or ages ago, and long
before the arrival of the Europeans. T hey commonly reckon a lite or an age, one
hundred winters or colds.

Mr. Kirkland obſerves, that there are fimilar veſtiges of ancient fortified towns
| throughout the extenſive. territories of the Six Nations, and, by Indian report, in

various other parts, and particularly on a branch of the Delaware river, which appear
to be very <0. 6h He adds, I find on inquiring, that a tradition prevails among
the Indians in gencral, that all Indians came from the weſt.” This is a confirmation
of the opinion that this ſecond claſs of Indians, of whom we have been ſpeaking, and
of which the Six Nations make a part, came over from the north-eaſt of Aſia, to the

north-weſt coaft of America, whence they migrated ſouth towards Mexico, and 8.
ward into the preſent territory of the United States. |
___ Judgingof the ancient Indians from the traditionary accounts of them, and the ruins
we have been deſcribing, we are led to conceive of them as a more civilized, ingenious,
and warlike people than their deſcendants at the preſent time. We are at a bs or |


— i TE _— "4 * a
222


* By the Rev. Mr. Kirkland, Miſflonary to the Six ix Nations, who viſited this For, bi 38, ö
che


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.


the cauſes of their degeneracy, unleſs we mention as ſuch the introduction of ſpirituous
liquors among them, a deep ſenſe of their inferiority in military {kill to the white
people, and their chagrin and broken heartedneſs, at the loſs of their lands, and being
torced to give place to their ſuppoſed enemies. | 8

The third claſs of American Indians, viz. thoſe who inhabit Eſquimaux, Labrador,
and the countries around, are much leſs known than either of the afore- mentioned


claſſes. Thoſe who profeſs to be beſt acquainted with them ſay, they differ in ſize and


ſhape from the other American Indians, and reſemble the Laplanders, and Samoieds,
of Europe, from whom it 1s conjectured they deſcended.


In the years 1771, and 1772, Mr. Hearne, an ingenious young gentleman, tra-


velled many hundred miles into theſe dreary countries, (for ſuch he found them) and


in his journal draws a plain, artleſs picture of the ſavage modes of life, the ſcanty


means of ſubſiſtance, and the fingular wretchedneſs in almoſt every reſpect, of the


various tribes, who, without fixed habitations, paſs their lives in. roving over. dreary
deſerts and frozen lakes, of the extenfive tract of continent through which he paſſed. -


The following extracts from his Journal will give the reader a better and more juſt
idea of theſe Indians, than any accounts of them which the author can furniſh from
any other ſource. „ EE Eh „
« We arrived at the Copper-mine river on the 13th of July, and as I found after-
Wards, about forty miles from its exit into the ſea. On our arrival at the river, the


Indians diſpatched three men before, as ſpies, to ſee if any Eſquimaux Indians were


about the river: and on the 15th of the ſame month, as I was continuing my ſurvey
towards the mouth of the river, I met the ſpies, who informed me there were five tents
of Eſquimaux on the weſt fide of the river, and by their accounts of the diſtance, I
judged they were about twelve miles off. On receiving this news, no more attention


was paid to my ſurvey, but their whole thought was engaged on planning the beſt


method of ſtealing on them the enſuing night, and killing them while afleep. The
better to complete their deſign it was neceſlary to croſs the river, and by the account
of the ſpies, no place was ſo proper for that purpoſe as where we were, it being fine
and ſmooth and at ſome diſtance from any cataract. Accordingly, after they had put
their guns, targets, ſpears, &c. in order, we were ferried over the river, the doing of


which (as we had only three canoes) took up a conſiderable time. It muſt be ;


obſerved that before we ſet out on the weſt fide, all the men painted their targets, ſome
with the image of the Sun, others with the Moon, others with different kinds of birds
and beaſts of prey, and ſome had the images of fairies, and other imaginary beings on
them, which, according to their filly imaginations, are inhabitants of the different


elements, as the earth, ſea, air, &c. By a ſtrict inquiry into the reaſon of this ſuper-


ſtition, I found that each man had the image of that being painted on his target, which
he relied moſt on for ſucceſs in the intended battle with the Eſquimaux : and ſome
were contented with a ſingle repreſentation, whilſt. others, doubtful, I ſuppoſe, of the
power of any fingle being, would have their targets covered to the very margin with
hieroglyphics, quite unintelligible. SOT; .


„ Crantz, however, is of a different opinion, as will be mentioned further on. 5
Mr. Hearne ſet out on his tour from Prince of Wales fort on Churchill river, N. Lat. 58 4%, W. Long.
97 /, and travelled nearly 1 300 miles in a north-weſterly direction. His whole track, to the northward of


61® N. Lat. lay nearly 600 miles due Weſt from the weſtern coaſt of Hudſon's bay. His Indian guides aſſured


him there were vaſt tracts of land, ſtretching further in the ſame direction. Hence it appears that a paſſage into
the Pacific ocean, round the N, Weſt port of America, is clearly impracticable. e


25


73


7


74 _ © GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.
« This piece of ſuperſtition being completed, we began to advance towards the
tents of the Eſquimaux, always walking in low grounds, and being very careful how
we croffed any hills, for tear of being teen by the inhabitants. The number of my
\ Jang being to far ſuperior to the five tents of Eſquimaux, and the warlike manner in
winch they were equipped, in proportion to what might be expected of the poor Eſqui-
maux, rendered a total maſlacre inevitable, unleſs kind Providence ſhould work a
miracle for their pretervation. The land was fo ſituated that we walked under cover
of the hills till we came within 200 yards of their tents, where the Indians that were
with me lay tome time in ambuſh, watching the motions of the Eſquimaux (for we
were in full fight of their tents). The Indians adviſed me to ſtay here till the fight
was over, with which I would by no means comply, for I thought when the Eſquimaux
were ſurpriſed, they would fly every way for reſuge, and if they found me alone, not
knowing me from an enemy, they would lay violent hands on me when there were
none to afliſt. I therefore determined to accompany them, aſſuring them at the ſame
time that I would have no hand in the murder unleſs I found it neceſſary for my own
ſafety. They ſeemed highly pleaſed with my propoſal, and directly fixed a ſpear and
bayonet for me, but I had no target. By the time this was all ſettled it was near one
o'clock in the morning, when finding all the Eſquimaux aſleep in their tents, they ran
on them without being diſcovered, until they came cloſe to their very doors. They
then began the cruel maſſacre, while I ſtood neuter in the rear, and in a few ſeconds
a ſcene truly ſhocking preſented itſelf to my view. For as the poor unhappy victims
were ſurpriſed in the midſt of their ſleep, they had neither power nor time to make any
reſiſtance, but men, women and children ran out of their tents quite naked. But
alas, where could they fly for ſhelter ! They every ſoul fell a ſacrifice to Indian barba-
rity, in all near thirty. The ſhrieks and groans of the poor expiring ſouls were truly
Horrible, and this was much increaſed by the fight of one poor gifl (about 18 years old)
whom they killed ſo near to me, that when the firſt ſpear was ſtruck into her, ſhe fell
down and twiſted about my feet and "og and it was with much difficulty I diſengaged
myſelf from her dying graſps. As the Indians purſued her, I ſolicited for her life, but
ſo far was it from being granted, that I was not fully aſſured of my own being in entire
ſaſety for offering to ſpeak in her behalf. When I begged her life, the two fellows that
followed her made no reply, till they had both their ſpears through her fixed into the
ground: they then both looked me ſternly in the face, and began to upbraid me, by
aſking if I wanted an Eſquimaux wife; at the ſame time paying no regard to the loud
{krieks of the poor girl, who was twining round the ſpears like an eel. Indeed I was
obliged at laſt to defire that they would be more expeditious in diſpatching her out of
her miſery, leſt otherwiſe I ſhould be obliged out of pity, to affiſt in performing that
friendly office. The brutiſh manner in which they uſed the bodies, which they had +.
deprived of life, is too ſhocking, and would be too indecent to deſcribe, and the terror
of mind I was in from ſuch a fituation is ſo much eafier to be conceived than deſcribed,
that I ſhall not attempt it. When they had completed this moſt inhuman murder, we
obſerved ſeven more tents on the oppoſite fide of the river. The Indians of theſe tents_
were ſoon in great confuſion, but did not offer to make their eſcape. The Indians
fired many ſhot at them acroſs the river, but the poor Eſquimaux were ſo unacquainted
with the nature of guns, that when the bullets ſtruck the rocks they ran in great bodies
to ſce what was ſent them, and ſeemed curious in examining the pieces of lead which
they found flatted on the rocks, till at laſt one man was ſhot through the leg, after
which they embarked in their canoes, with their wives and children, and paddled to a
„ 5 3 93 7 = ſhoal


[


/


bg


: B73 A 5 *
-
9 * 1
. *
. f F
*
1 *
% ”
. : . . * 1
* N :
1
— - 4 * =
4 | 4
.
- ” * -
*
—
o
* * 0
* *
=


ä ⅛—Ä od RN


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA. — 53


ſhoal in the river. When my Indians had made all their obſervations on the bodies, as
above mentioned, and had plundered their tents of all their copper-work (which they
and the Copper Indians uſed inſtead of iron) they aſſembled at the top of an high hill,


ſtanding in a circle with their fpears erect in the air, and gave ſhouts of victory, calling


Tima! Tima! by way of derifion to the ſurviving Eſquimaux who were ſtanding on
the ſhoal. We then went up the river about half a mile, to the place where our
canoes and baggage were, with an intent to croſs over and plunder the other ſeven
tents. It taking up a conſiderable time to get all acroſs the river, as we had only three
canoes, and being entirely under cover of the rocks, the poor Eſquimaux whom we
left on the ſhoal, thought we were gone about our own buſineſs, and had returned to


their own tents again. And the land was ſo fituated on the eaſt fide that the Indians.


went under cover of the hills, until they were within a hundred yards of their tents,


where they ſaw the Eſquimaux buſy in tying up their bundles. They ran on them again


with great fury, but having their canoes ready, they all embarked, and reached the
ſhoals before-mentioned, except one- poor old man, who being too attentive in tying
up his things, had not time to reach his canoe, and ſo fell a ſacrifice to Indian fury.
After the Indians had plundered theſe tents of what they thought worth their notice,
they threw their tent poles into the river, broke their ſtone kettles, and did all they


could to diſtreſs the poor ſurvivors. We found an aged woman at a ſmall diſtance up


the river, ſnaring of ſalmon, whom they butchered in the ſame manner, every mand.
having a thruſt at her with his ſpear.“ *
The other extract is as follows: „ Hires ajoxabic
This day, January the 11th, 1772, as the Indians were hunting, ſome of them
ſaw a ſtfange ſnow-ſhoe track, which they followed, and a a conſiderable diſtance.


came to a little hut, where they found a young woman fitting alone. They brought _
her to the tents, and on examining her found that ſhe was one of the weſtern dog-ribbed


Indians, and had been taken priſoner by the Arathapeſcow Indians, in the ſummer of


1770, and when the Indians, who took her. priſoner, were near this place in 1771,


ſhe eloped from them, with an intent to return to her own country. But it being ſo
far off, and when ſhe was taken priſoner having come all the way in canoes, with the
winding of rivers and lakes, ſhe had forgot the way, and had been in this little hut
ever ſince the beginning of fall. By her account of the moons paſt ſince her elope-


ment, it appears to have been the middle of laſt July when ſhe left the Arapatheſcow
Indians, and ſhe had not ſeen a human face ſince. She had ſupported herſelf by ſnaring


rabbits, partridges and ſquirrels, and was now in good health, and I think, as fine a
woman of a real Indian, as I have ſeen in any. part of North America. She had nothing
to make ſnares of but the ſinews of rabbits legs and feet, which ſhe twiſted together


for that purpoſe, and of the rabbits ſkins had made a neat and warm winter's clothing.


The ſtock of materials ſhe took with her when ſhe eloped, conſiſted of ahout five


inches of an. iron hoop for a knife, a ftone ſteel, and other hard ſtones for flints,


together with other fire tackle, as tinder, &e. about an inch and an half of the ſhank


of the ſhocing of an arrow, of iron, of which ſhe made an awl. She bad not been long
at the tents, before half a ſcore of men wreſtled to ſce who ſhould have her for a wife.


She ſays, that when the Arathapeſcow Indians took her priſoner they ſtole upon the
tents in the night, when all the inhabitants were aſleep, and murdered every foul
except herſelf and three other young women. Her father, mother, and huſband, were |
in the ſame tent with her, and they were all killed. Her child, of about five months


old, the took with her, wrapt in a bundle of her own clothing, undiſcovered, in the


night. But when ſhe arrived at the place where the Arathapeſcows had left their
Ron | 1 88 5 = Wives
4 . my 9


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.


wives, which was not far off, it being then day-break, theſe Indian women man
began to examine her bundle, and having there found the child, took it from her and


killed it immediately.


The relation of this ſhocking ſcene only ſerved the ſavages of
is ſo far to the weſtward, that ſhe ſays ſhe, never
{aw any iron or other metal till ſhe was taken priſoner ; thoſe of her tribe making their
hatchets and chiſſels of deer's horns, and knives of ſtone and bone; their arrows are
ſhod with a kind of ſlate, bone, and deer's horns, and their inſtruments io make their
wood work are nothing but beaver's teeth. They have frequently heard of the uſeful”
materials that the nations to the eaſt of them are e fupplicd with fem the Engliſh, but
inſtead of drawing nearer to be in the way of trading for iron work, &c. are obliged to
remove farther back to avoid the Arathapeſcow Indians, As they make ſurpriſing


my gang for laughter. Her country


- ſlaughter among them every year, both winter and ſummer.”


The Efquimaux, according to Mr. Pennant, are diſtin guiſhed from the tribes ſouth


He di-
rides them into two varieties. About Prince William's Sound they are of the largeſt


you advance northward they decreaſe in height, till they dwindle into the
_dwarfh tribes, which occupy ſome of the coaſts of the Icy ſea, and the maritime


'Their dwarfiſhneſs 1s doubtleſs


of them, chiefly by their dreſs, their canoes, and their inſtruments of chace.


"parts of Hudſon's Bay, of Greenland and Labrador.
occaſioned by the ſcantineſs of their proviſions, and the ſeverity of their climate.


Be-


ond the 67th deg. N. Lat. according to Capt. Ellis's account, there are no inhabitants.
he Arctic countries in America, Aſia, and Greenland, if inhabited at all, have very
few inhabitants; and thoſe are of the dwarfiſh kind, ſcattered on the banks of rivers,
lakes, and ſeas, and ſubſiſt miſerably upon fiſh, and the fleſh of thoſe animals which


. * inhabit thoſe frozen regions, with the ſkins of which they clothe themſelves.
- Mr. Crantz


\
oF


gives it as his opinion, that the Eſquimaux came originally from the 5
between the Icy ſea and Mungalia; becauſe ho
ty between them and the Kalmucks, Tunguſes and Kamſkadales,
who inhabit thoſe regions, than between them and the Laplanders, Samoieds and


nerally been
It is his opinion alſo, that Greenland was
period,
The rout which the firſt migrants |
poſes was, firſt into Tartary, after the diſperſion of the nations, thence into
Kamtſkatka, thence acroſs the ſtrait which ſeparates the two continents; whence the;


ſpread themſelves unmoleſted, into the then uninhabited countries round Hudſon's Bay,
and down as far ſouth as Canada. And here they were found in the 11th century, by
the Norwegians, in their Wineland. ' Afterwards theſe more ſoutherly regions were
conquered by the more numerous and powerful tribes ſouth of the lakes, and the Eſqui-
Here Capt Ellis found
the Eſquimaux, in his voyage to Hudſon's Bay, and diſcovered that they had the ſame
aſpect, dreſs, boats, hunting and fiſhing implements, habitations, manners and uſages


ey are often purſued and hunted by the other Indians, who
live about the ſouth and weſt ſhores of Hucſon 8 and who appear to be quite "i


north-eaſt regions of Great Tartary,
greater affini


obſerves a


Oſtiaks, who inhabit the north-weſt parts of Europe, whence, it has x
conjectured, the Eſquimaux migrated.


ſettled in the 14th century, from the north-caſtern parts of America; for till that


Greenland ap not to have had any inhabitants.


took, he ſup


maux were forced to retire as far north as the 6oth deg. N. lat.


as the Greenlanders.*


different Pr


The |


3 Aar. of the Moravian brethres, ks hind the Greenland language, made à voyage to Labrador in
On the fourth of September he met about 200 In-lians.


The firſt that he ſpoke to behaved very wild
; but when the Indian faw him clad in his own dreſs, and heard him ſpeak in His own language, he


1s come.” They conducted him n further up, to their
| | | families,


_ out to the others with ſhouts of joy, © Our friend


' GENERAL, DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA. | 77


The newl y-diſcovered American Indians about Nootka Sound diſguiſe themſelves
after the manner of the ancient Scythians, in dreſſes made of the ſkins of wolves and
other wild beaſts, and wear even the heads fitted to their OWN. Theſe habits they uſe
in the chaſe to circumvent the animals of the field.

Concerning the religion of the Indians much has been ud, and nch that has no
"foundation. ' In general it may be ſaid, that they all have an idea of a Supreme Being,
whom they worſhip under different names, and with a great variety of ſuperſtitious
rites and ceremonies. Some, particularly the nations of the Algonquin language, call
their Supreme God, the Great Hare; ſome Michabou, and others Atabocan. The Being
oppoſed to this F ft Spirit, whom they confidered : as the Creator and Governor of the
world, they ſtyle the Great Tyger.

The name of the Hurons' Supreme God, or more properly thete God of War, is
Areſkoui ; of the Iroquois, Agreſtouſe; but moſt of the nations ſouth of the Lakes, as
far as Louifiana, denominate their Supreme God, the Great, the Good, or the Grand
Spirit, to whom they aſcribe a kind of omnipreſence, and whom they invoke as their
guardian. To their evil genii they never addreſs themſelves, except to entreat them
not to do them any injury; and to appeaſe their wrath they often ſacrifice to them.

Mr. Kirkland mentions a ſmall lake, which he viſited, fituated at the foot of a pre-
cipice, nearly o feet perpendicular height, in the territory of the Six Nations, in
which, the old Indians affirm, refided formerly a demon in the ſhape of a dragon, and
that he had been ſeen frequently to diſgorge balls of liquid fire. To appeaſe his wrath,

they faid, many a ſacrifice of tobacco had been made at the lake by the fathers.


Nzw Discoveriss on THE NorTH-wesT CoasT or AMERICA. 1 The country on the
North Weſtern part of the Continent of America, bounded by the Pacific ocean, is yet
unexplored. We however have ſeveral charts of the coaſt: the lateſt publiſhed, is
that, taken by Captains Portlock and Dixon, in a voyage performed in the years
1785, 86, 87, and 88; and from the enterprizing genius and repeated voyages of our
own countrymen, we expect to be furniſhed with others much improved. This vaſt |
country, with very little deviation, has the appearance of one continued foreſt, being
covered with pines of a different ſpecies, and theſe intermixed with alder, birch, witch-
hazle, &c. beſides various kinds of bruſh-wood: and the valleys and low grounds
afford wild currants, gooſeberries, raſpberries, and various flowering ſhrubs. On the


rivers: among which are, Queen Charlotte's iſlands, * extending from N. lat.

42 to 54 18. — W. long. 129 54. to 133 18 from Greenwich. Nootka WY
ſituated in N. lat. 40 30. W. long. 126 42. Admiralty bay and port Mulgrave,
N. lat. 59" 31—W. Tous. 140? 18. Prince William's Sound, N. lat. 60 bv — W.
long. 147? 30'. Cook's river, N. lat. 59? 30 — W. long. 1539 12“

his coaſt is inhabited by numerous but ſmall tribes of Indians; each tribe appears
to be independent and governed by its own chief. They differ from each other in their
language and cuſtoms. The neighbouring tribes are frequently involved in wars with
each other. It is impoſſible to aſcertain with any degree of certainty the number of
inhabitants; but wer have been computed. at ten thouſand, from Cook' s river to


families, and though other Europeans think they riſk their lives in being alone with them, they ſhewed him
all imaginable friendſhip, and rejoiced when he gave them hopes of viſiting them the next year; which he did,
in company with the Rev. Mr. Drachart, a gentleman well {killed in the Greenland language. He found that
the two languages did not differ ſo much as the high and low Dutch—that their ſtature, w ay of l. Ling, dreſs,
tents, darts and boats were the ſame as the Greenjanders,
Since called W aſhington Iſland.


2 : e 5 Nootka


coaſt are many iſlands, ſpacious bays, commodious harbours and mouths of 3 5


— . ̃²


> = —
1 ——ů—ů — öÄ
* 4 - Es a — oo t__ ——— —ʒ— —


— — —jä
+


L


be:


78 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF MERICA.


Nootka Sound, an extent of about 1000 miles. Capt. Portlock ſaw at Cape Edge-
comb, ſeveral men much marked with the ſmall pox ;. and was: informed that the
diſtemper carried off great numbers of the inhabitants. From, what circumftances he
could collect, he conjectured it was brought by the Spaniards, who were there in 1775.

The natives are for 7 moſt part ſhort in ſtature: their faces, men and women, are
in general flat and round, with high cheek bones and flat noſes; and their teeth white
and regular. Their complections are lighter than the Southern Indians, and ſome of
their women have roſy checks. Both ſexes are fond of ornamenting themſelves with
beads and trinkets, and they generally paint their hands and faces. They have a
cuſtom of making a longitudinal lit in the under lip, between the mouth and chin,
ſome of them as as large as the mouth, in which they wear a piece of bone, wood, or
ivory, fitted with holes in it, from which they ſuſpend beads as low as the chin. T hey

are very fond of maſks or v iſors, and various kinds of caps painted with different 4
vices, ſuch as birds, beaſts, fiſhes, and ſometimes repreſentations of the human face.
They have likewiſe many devices carved in wood, which are greatly valued by them.


| There appears to be a greater uniformity in the dreſs of the different tribes than in
their ornaments. The aperture, or ſecond mouth, above the chin, ſeems confined to
the men of Cook's river and Prince William's Sound; whilſt the wooden ornament in


the under lip is worn by the women only, in that part of the coaſt from port Mulgrave
to Queen Charlotte's nds, — Thieving is a very prevalent inclination among them,
which is practiſed, not only upon ſtrangers, but among themſelves. In the courſe of


their trading, they are frequently ſeen to ſteal from each other, and on being detected


they will give up the articles ſtolen with a laugh, and immediately appear as uncon-


_ cerned as if nothing had happened. Their habitations are generally the moſt wretched
that can be conceived; a few poles ſtuck in. the ground, without regularity, looſely


covered with bark, conſtitute their huts, which are quite inſufficient to ſhelter them
from the ſnow and rain, and the infides of their dwellings exhibit a complete picture


of filth and indolence. In one corner are thrown the bones and remaining fragments
= victuals left at their meals; in another, heaps of fiſh and putrefied fleſh, greaſe,
—


il, &c. In ſhort, the whole ſerves to ſhew in how wretched a ſtate it is poſſible for
human beings to exiſt.
They ſubſiſt wholly by fiſhing and hunting. * 84 clothing i is made of the ſkins of


animals and birds; and the probable reaſon why the Indians take no greater pains in
the conſtruction of their habitations, is, that their fituation is merely temporary ; for
no ſooner does the maſter of a tribe find game begin to grow ſcarce, or fiſh not ſo


plenty as he expected, than he takes down his hut, puts the boards or barks into his
canoe, and paddles away to ſeek a ſpot better adapted to his purpoſes ; which having :
found, he erects his dwelling in the ſame careleſs manner as before.
Few or no remarks concerning their religious ceremonies have yet been handed to
us; but from the traits already diſcerned, theſe cannot be leſs rude tan their other


T cuſtoms.


The chief object of civilized nations in navigating this coaſt Fiete has been to


traffic with the natives for furs; which they give in exchange for pieces of iron, nails,


beads, penknives and other trifling trinkets. Theſe furs are carried to China and
diſpoſed of to a great profit. The ſkins obtained are thoſe of the ſea otter, racoon,
pine-martin, land beaver, earleſs mammot, &c. |
A traffick which in proſpe& affords ſuch uncommon profit, has induced many
citizens of the United States to en gage in it; "i whether the number of veſſels fitted


7 out


E i F


2


8


inhabitants of theſe iſlands are much commended, notwithſtanding their horrid cuſtom
hs 28 & MT ö - =


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA. 79


out by other nations has not made a ſcarcity of furs, and taught the natives to ſet a


higher value on them, experience will determine. 8
The following ſtatement ſhews the number of veſſels that had arrived at China, from
the N. W. coaſt, to February, 1788, with the number of furs, and their value, viz.


| | Tons From whence © Mo. of Furs Sold for

- Peſfſels, Names. Capts, Burden. Years. e obtained, Doll.
Brig - Hanna, 60 — 1785 8 * 560 S. Otter 20, 600
Ditto — ibid. — — ibid. — - 4


Snow, Capt. Cook, Lovie, 300
Snow, Experiment, Guiſe, - 100


. - 1786 - Bombay, - 600 - - 24,000
Nootka, - Mears | - 1786 - Bengal, 357 - 14,242
— 800


— Imperial Eagle, Berkley, - - —— - = — $30,000
FFF 1700 Skins imported by the |

TE OOO CE 09 0706 2 3 M2 vt, 0 - WENN, Wong, wloed:}
%%r 7 O74 EEC ß


are alſo other articles which might perhaps be procured to advantage, ſuch as ginſeng,


Hands. . . © -


Having left the Society Iſlands, Captain Cook proceeded to the northward, croſſing


found upon it, and the Captain cauſed the ſeeds of the cocoa-nut, yams, and melons,
to be planted. Fig F355 F 1 1 |
Proceeding ſtill to the northward, our navigator next fell in with five iſlands, to
which he gave the general name of Saxdwich Iles, in honour of his patron. Their
names in the language of the country are Woahoo, Atooi, Onecheow, Oreehoua, and
Tehoora. They are ſituated in the latitude of 21* 3o' and 22* 15 North, and between
199 20 and 201* 3o' E. Long. The longitude was deduced from no fewer than 72
ſets of lunar obſervations. The largeſt of theſe iſlands is Atooi, and does not in the
leaſt reſemble the iſlands of the South Sea formerly viſited by our navigators, excepting


only that it has hills near the center, which ſlope gradually towards the ſea-fide. The.


only domeſtic animals found upon it were hogs, dogs, and fowls. Captain Cook de-
ſigned to have made the inhabitants, of this iſland a preſent of ſome others; but being


driven out of it by ſtreſs of weather, he was obliged to land them upon a ſmaller one,


named Oxeeheeow. He left a he-goat with two females, and a boar and ſow of the
Engliſh breed, which is much ſuperior to that of the South Sea Iſlands. He left alſo
the ſeeds of melons, pumpkins, and. onions. ' The ſoil of this iſland ſeemed in general


to be poor: it was obſerved that the ground was covered with ſhrubs and plants, ſome


of which had a more delicious fragrancy than he had ever experienced before. The


8⁰ 5 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.


of cating human fleſh, In every thing manufactured: by them there is an ingenuity
and neatneſs in an uncommon degree; and the elegant fon and poliſh of ſome of their
fiſhing-hooks could not be exceeded by an European artiſt, even aflifted? by all his


Proper tools. From whatwas ſeen of their agriculture alſo, it appeared that they were


y no means novices in that art, and that the quantity and goodneſs of their vegetable
productions might with propriety be attributed as much to their ſkilful culture as to the
tertility of the ſoil. The language of the Sandwich Iſles is almoſt identically the lame
with that of Otaheite.

Proceeding farther to the northward, our navigator diſcovered the coaſt of New Al-
bion, on the 7th of March 1778. "Its appearance was very. different from that of the


countries with which they had hitherto been converſant. The land was full of moun-


tains, the tops of which were covered with ſnow; while the valleys between them, and
the grounds on the ſea coaſt, high as well as low, were covered with trees, which form-
ed a beautiful proſpect! as of one vaſt. foreſt, The place where they landed was
ſituated in N. Lat. 74 33“ E. Long. 235* 200. At firſt the natives ſeemed. to prefer
iron to every other article of commerce ; 1. at laſt they ſhowed ſuch a predilection for
braſs, that ſcarcely a bit of it was left in the ſhips, except what belonged to the neceſ-
ſary inftruments. It was obſeryed alſo, that theſe people were much more tenacious
of their property than any of the ſavage nations that had hitherto been met with, inſo-


much that they would part neither with wood, water, graſs, nor the moſt trifling ar-


ticle, without a compenſation, and wefe ſometimes very unreaſonable in their
demands; with which, however, the 1 always e as far as was in his


| F


The N wh the Reſolution was now anchored, was by our navfantie called 8
George's Sound, but he afterwards underſtood that the natives gave it the name of Nootka.
Its entrance is fituated in the eaſt corner of Ho oF jew Bay; in N. Lat. 498. 33“. E. Long.
3733 1%. i climate, as far as they had an opportunity of obſerving it, was much


milder than that on the eaſtern coaſt of the American continent in the ſame parallel 1


of latitude : and it was remarkable. that the thermometer, even in the night, never fell
lower than 42, while in the day time it frequently roſe to 60. The trees met with
here are chiefly the Canadian pine, white cypreſs, and ſome other kinds of pine.
There ſeemed to be a ſcarcity of birds, wr Pig are much haraſſed by the natives, who
ornament their clothes with the feathers, and uſe the fleſh for food. The people are


no ſtrangers to the uſe of metals, having iron tools in general uſe among them; and


Mr. Gore procured two filver ſpoons, of a conſtruction ſimilar to what may be ob-
ſerved in ſome Flemiſh pictures, from a native who wore them round his neck as an
ornament. It is moſt probable that theſe metals have been conveyed to them by the
way of Hudſon's Bay and Canada ; nor is it improbable that ſome of them may have


been introduced from the north weſtern parts of Mexico.


While Capt. Cooke ſailed along this coaſt, he kept always at a diſtance from "I
when the wind blew ſtrongly upon it; whence ſeveral large gaps were left unexplored.
particularly between the latitudes of 30 and 55% The exact fituation of the ſuppo-


_ 1ed ſtraits of Artian' was not aſcertained, though there is not the leaſt doubt, that if he


had lived to return by the ſame way in 1779, he would have examined ev rt with

his uſual accurac "On dep artin from Nootka Sound, our navigator firſt fell in with
an iſland in N. at. 59* 49. E. long. 216" 58. to which he gave the name of Kay's
Hand. Several others were diſcovered in the neighbourhood ; and the ſhip came to an
anchor i in an inlet named by the Captain Prince William's Sound. Here he had an op-
9 of making W obſervations on oy inhabitants, as well as on the nature


—


1
»


©


RO


OE tte


—


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF: AMERICA. 681


of the country. From every thing relative to the former, it was concluded, that the


inhabitants were of the ſame race with the Eſequimaux or Greenlanders. T he animals
were much the ſame with thoſe met with at Nootka, and a beautiful ſkin of one ani-
mal, which ſeemed to be peculiar to the place, was offered for ſale. Mr. Anderton
was inclined to think that it was the ſame to which Mr. Pennant has given the name
of the caſan marinot. The alcedo, or great king's fiſher, was found here, having very
fine and bright colours. The humming bird alſo came fre quently, and flew about the


thip while at anchor ; though it is ſcarce to be ſuppoſed that it can live throughout the


winter, on account of the extreme cold. The water fowl were in conſiderable plenty ;


and there is a ſpecies of diver which ſeemed to be peculiar to the place. Almoſt the


only kinds of fith met with in the place were torſł and halibut. The trees were chieff
the Canadian and ſpruce pines, ſome of which were of a conſiderable height and thick-
nets. The Sound is judged by Captain Cook to occupy a degree and a half of latitude.
and two of longitude, exclufively of its arms and branches, which were not explored.
There was every reaſon to believe that the inhabitants had never been viſited by any
European veſſel before; but our navigator found them in poſſe!ſion not only of iron


but of beads, which, it is probable, are conveyed to them acroſs the continent from Hud-
ſon's Bay.


Soon after leaving Prince“ William 8 Sound, our navigator fell in ah another inlet,


- which it was expected would lead either to the northern ſea or to Hudion's or Baffin's


bay; but upon examination it was found to end in a large river. This was traced for


210 miles from the mouth, as high as N. lat. 619 305 "and promiſes to vie with the


molt conſiderable ones already known, as it lies open by means of its various branches


to a very conſiderable inland communication. As no name was given by our com-


mander to this river, it was ordered by Lord Sandwich to be named Cook's River. The


inhabitants ſeemed to be of the ſame race with thoſe of Prince William's Sound; and
like them had glaſs beads and knives ; they were alſo cloathed in very fine furs; {0


that it ſeemed probable that a valuable fur trade might be carried on from that coun-
try. Several attempts have accordingly. been made from the Britiſh ſettlements in the
Eait Indies to eſtabliſh a traffic of that kind; but little benefit accrued from it, except


to the proprietors of the firſt veſſel, her cargo having greatly lowered the price of that -


commodity in the Chineſe market. It mult be obſerved, that on the weſtern fide of the
American continent, the only valuable ſkins met withare thoſe of the ſea otter : ; thoſe


Of the other animals, eſpecially foxes and OO OY of an inferior n to ſuch
as are met with in other parts. F556 0


Proceeding farther to the northward our navigator now fell in with a race of people N


who had evidently been viſited by the Ruſſians, and ſeemed to have adopted from them
tome improvements in dreſs, &c. In the proſecution of this part of their voyage, it ap-
peared that they had been providentially conveyed in the dark through a patlage ſo
dangerous, that our commander would not have ventured upon it in the day time.
P hey were now got in among thoſe iſlands which had lately been diſcovered by Capt.
Beering and other Ruſſian navigators, and came to an anchor in a harbour of Oona-
laſhka, ſituated in N. lat. 53* 55 E. long. 193* 30. Here it was remarked; that the
inhabitants had- as yet d 0 very little by their intercourſe with the Ruſſians; ſo


that they did not even dreſs the fiſh e uſed for their food, but devoured them quits
raw...


From Oonslaſhka our navi igator 1 again W the tad wi he


continued to trace as far as poſſible to the northward. In the latitude of 542 487 E. long.


195* 457 N. lat. is a volcano of the thape " th a perfect cone, . g the crater at the
| 8 0 5 N


32 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA,”


very ſummit. On the coaſt farther to the north the ſoil appears very barren, produc
ing neither tree ner ſhrub, though the lower grounds are not deſtitute of graſs and ſomo
other ants. To a rocky point of conſiderable height ſituated in N. lat, 58-42". E.
long 197* 36". our commander gave the name of Cape Newnham.


Here Mr. Anderſon, the ſurgeon of the Reſolution, died of a-confumption, under
Soon after he had breathed his-


which he had laboured for more than twelve months.
laſt, land being fecn at a diſtance, it was named Azderfon's Iſſand; and on the gtlr of
Auguſt the ſhip anchored under a point of the continent which he named Cape Prince of
Wales. This is remarkable for being the molt weſterty-ornt of the American continent
Hitherto known. It is fituated in N. tat. 65 46“, E. long. 1917 45. It is only 39 miles
diſtant from the eaſtern coaſt of Siberia; ſo that our commander had the pleaſure of at-
certaining the vicinity of the two continents to each other, which had only been imper-
fectly done by the Ruſſian navigators.
to the weſt and north, when he ſoon fell in with the country of the Tſchutſki, Which
Had been explored by Beering in 1728. Here he had an opportunity of correcting M.


Stzhlin's map, who had placed in theſe ſeas an imaginary iſland, on which he beſtowed


the name of Alaſchta. Being convinced that the land he had now reached was part of
the Aftatic continent, our commander directed his courſe caſtward, in order to fall in
| with that of America; and on the 17th reached the latitude of 70* 357. and E. long. 1799
41. Here they began to perceive that brightneſs in the, Nr on called by the mariners
the blink of the ice; and in 70? 41 they had | got quite up to it, ſo that no farther progreſs
eould be made. Next day they made a ſhift to get as far as 70* 44; but the ice was
now eas compact as a wall, and about ten or twelve feet in height. Its ſurface was ex-
tremely rugged, and farther to the northward appeared much higher: Its ſurtace was
covered with pools of water, and great numbers of ſœa-lions lay upon it, whoſe fleſh
they were now glad to uſe as food. Our commander continued to traverſe the Icy Sea


till the 26th, but the obſtructions becoming every day greater and greater, it was. thought


properto give over all further attempts of finding a paſſage to Europe for that year. Us


did not, however, omit the inveſtigation of the Aſiatic and American coaſts, until he


Had fully aſcertaincd the accuracy of Captain Beering's accounts as far as he went, and
corrected the errors of M. Stæhlin. Great additions were thus made to the geographi-
cal knowledge of this part of the globe. From Beering's ſtraits he failed for Oonalaſhka,
where he arrived on the 2d of October, and ſtaid for ſome time in order to repair his
ſhips. While the carpenters were employ ed in this work, one third of the people had
permiſſion to go on ſhore by turns, in order to gather berries, with which the iſland


abounds, and which, though now beginning to decay, were of great ſervice, in con-
With regard to-


junction with the ſpruce beer, to preſerve the people from the ſcurvy.
the natives of Oonalaſhka, they are to appearance the moſt jnoffenfive and peaceable
people in the world, not to, bel in a ſtate of civilization; though perhaps this may be-
owing in ſome meaſure to the connection they have long had with the Ruffians. From
te affinity obferved between the language of the Eſquimaux, Greer ,.mders, and thoſe


of Norton's Sound, in N. lat. 6% 557, there is great reaton to believe, that all thoſe


nationg are of the fame extraction; and if that be the cat, there is little reaſon to doubt,
that a communication, by ſea, exiſts between the caſtern and weſtern ſides of the A
merican continent; which, however, may probably be ſhut up by ice in. the winter
time, or even for the moſt part throughout the ycar.

The following information reſpecting


tic {ow Elcanora, om Boſton.


2 -.”. =


CTY ;


Setting ſail from this point next day, he ſteered _


the N. Weſt coaſt of America is extracted
fr m the journal of Mr. John Cordis of N Maflachuſctts, iccond officer of


2 I S 3 DM rep „ — GE tos r 9 * = \ e | e 8 „ _
as 3 n RIEL . < LT ET TG 4 bet ad * . Eq — SLES DA LOI So or 8 „ ＋* Tf * . * 4 2 e 4
. . . 7 > WEIR Ya 2x to SI h
0 0 5 a % - As * 3 — . . 4 3 n . © 1 3 or
* : n ä ene BE IAC 30s TA
* . 4 * n aer c 3 3 by
- J En, 5 —


GENERAL DESCRIPTION or AMERICA.” 33


On the zoth of Auguſt, 1789, Mr. Cordis, at Maſbington Iſland, left the flop
Waſhington, which was commanded by Captain Kendric, and went on board the
ſhow Eleanora, commanded by Captain Simeon Metcalf,

Captain Cook, when he patled this iſland, ſuppoſed it to be a part of the .
as the weather at the time was thick, and the w 1d boiſterous, which obliged him to
keep at ſea, till he made the weſtern cape of the continent in about lat. 5 52. Captain
Gray, in the floop Waſhington, firſt diſcovered it to o be an iſland, and gave it the
name of WAs HTC TON. To a harbour, about the middle of the iſland, he gave the
name of Barrel's Inlet, in honour of Joſcph Barrel, Etq., of Boſton. Another harbour,
whoſe entrance is in lat. 52* 12“ N. lon. 1 1360 W. they called Clinton's Har bor, in honor
of Govenor Clinton of New Tork.

On the continent oppoſite the iſland is a convenient harbour, with a-mmddy bottom
which they called Cordis's Cove. The iſland has many excellent harbours.

This ifland is about 100 miles in length, from S. E. to N. W. and about 30 in
breadth. The ſouthernmoſt point is in about lat. 51* 50 N. lon. 1355 W. |

It is compoſed principally of irregular mountains, the tops of which, even in ſummer,
are covered with ſnow. It abounds with ſpruce, pine, and cedar trees. Among other
animals on this iſſand, are the bear, deer, dog, teal, and ſea otter ; of the latter are
great numbers, whoſe ins are of a moſt beautiful black, intermixed with white hair,
and their fur is extremely fine and delicate.

The number of inhabitants on this iſland, Mr. Cordis conjectures, is between ten

and eleven thouſand. He calculates thus One of the chiefs informed him that he
poſſeſſed fix large canoes, or as they call them, Luæ Chepotts, which would carry up-
wards of 50 men each; and his tribe was large enough to man them all. There were

ſeventeen other chiefs, he ſaid, beſide himſelf, on the iſland; each of whom had
nearly the ſame nber of men; hence he conthades; that upon a moderate calcula-
tion each tribe contains 600 fouls; and the whole iſland about ten thoutand eight
hundred. |

The natives of this ifland are in genen! well made, robuſt, active, and athletic ;
and of a larger fize than thoſe on the oppoſite continent, and of a lighter compleQion. *

Their hair is very harſh and long, and tied back with a piece of red cedar bark. The
women have a very ſingular mode of ornamenting, or rather of disfiguring themſelves,
by making, when very young, a ſmall hole in the under lip, and putting in a ſmall
piece, or Plug of wood, for the purpoſe of keeping it diſtended. By frequently increa-
ling the fize of this plug, as they advance in age, by the time they are five and twenty.
the hole becomes large enough to contain a piece of wood two inches long, and about
an inch wide, the upper part of which is dug out in the form of a ſpoon, Which feryes

photh for ornament and ule, as it is uſed at their meals ro contain the oil for their fiſh,
This cuſtom, however, is not general throughout the iſland. Their war implements,
which they have frequent occaſion to ule, ſome or other of the tribes being almoſt per-
petually at war, are {pears about 15 fect long, with the ends pointed wit ſhells or ſtone,
and bows and arrows. The iron Which they obtain in traffic is immediately converted
into ornaments for the neck, and into knives. Their mode of working it could not be
diſcovered. It N a cuſtom in ſome of the tribes, when a priſoner offends them, for the
chiefs to kill and eat him. Mr. Cordis was an eye-witneſs to one inſtance of this kind,
as he found a piece ef human fleſh, with an Indian woman, the wife of a chief, of
which ſhe ate, and appeared to be fond. Their common diet is dried fiſh and their
ſpawns, mixed with a large quantity of fiſn oil. They ſometimes, when they have no
Kre gar, cat ſmall ned raw, juſt as they are taken from the watct. FE
& M 2 | F Their


S

4 ;
[
£
97
:
:
1 8
72
2
*
<2
2
22
Vers
Ne
9


: a 1 2 .
7 n n 5 4
1 3 a
4 0 * * - — — — — 2—j— arr — — a. — —
* ho 2 * >
* "ET. 3 — —
-
- od
" a 1.5 1 * — -- =
— — —̃ Eꝗ———— V Q Bree rr rt * : « *
4 ae
i


— my 2
— 4 —̃ o


|
WV;
j

L

f
15
Wi
1


PP


*


"WM GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.”


Their date are ſmall huts of a triangular form; conſtructed of poles, and the


bark of cedar trees, with a finall hole for a door. T hey frequently remove from place


to place as the fiſh go up or down the river. The men are extremely jealous of their
wives, but chaſtity is not among the virtues of the young unmarried women. Both men
and women generally paint themſelves red or black, every morning. Their dreſs con-
fifts of ſkins thrown over their ſhoulders, and tied round their necks with a leather
thong; the reſt part of their bodies is entirely naked, except the women, who ſome-
tivies, but not always, have a ſkin faſtened round their wait.

Their method of diſpoſing of their dead is very ſingular. They put the corpſe into


a a ſquare box; if the box happens to be too ſmall for "the body, they cut off the head,


or other parts of it, which they put into the vacant places. T his being done, the box


is ſecured by having ſeveral mats wound round it, and then 1s hoiſted into the top of


the higheſt tree in the neighbourhood , where it is faſtened and lett till the box decays


and drops in pieces. Though en aſked, they would not tell their reaſons for
this cuſtom.


The manner of treating the dead, on the continent oppoſite the iſland, 1s s ſomewhat :


different. T hey put the dead body into a ſquare box, when it has become a little pu-


trefied, and ſecure it well with cords. After this the relations of the deceaſed teat


N t res on the box, and with an inſtrument made of a ſhell, cut their faces till the
are covered with blood, ſpeaking all the while in a loud and melancholy tone. This


ceremony being over, they waſh themſelves, and return to the company with great gai-


ety. The corpſe is then put under a great tree, and covered with mats and earth, and


left to be devoured by wild beaſts.


It has becn conjectured by navigators upon this coaſt, that there 1s, | fome where be-
tween the latitudes of 30 and 60 degrees, a paſſage through the continent, from the
Pacific ocean, into Hudton's Bay. Mr. Cordis, by order of Capt. Metcalf, explored a


large ſtrait, to the eaſtward of Waſhington Iſland, running up N. E. into the coun-
try. On the 24th of September 1789, he left the ſhip, and in the yawl, with fix men,.


proceeded N. N. E. about 25 miles ap the ſtrait, where he found it about 3 miles wide.
The land on each fide was mountainous and woody, and bears and EA! Bind were heard.


during the night. Continuing his courſe next day, N. N. E. till ten o'clock A. M. he
found the firait to lead north, and to be much narrower. He kept on the caſtern ſhore,,


till 2 o'clock P. M. when the ſtrait opened wider to the N. E. The. next day he
proceeded upwards of 40 miles, N. E. and N. N. E. where he found the ſtrait —


wider than any part he had pailed, except the entrance. The time to which he was


limited being now expired, and his proviſions ſhort, he returned on board, ſirongly
impreſſed, however, with the opinion that this ſtrait conunun cated. with Hudlon' s Bay,
or with ſome of the waters of the Atlantic Oecan.


In January, 1790, Capt. Metcalf viſited the Sandwich 1 The principal of


theſe Iſlands, O rehy hee, according to Mr. Cordis's reckoning, lies in 197 50' N. lat.
and 154* 50, W. or in 203? 20 E. long. from Greenwich. The natives of theſe iſlands


are, generally ſpeaking, ſtout, vigorous, and active, and by being almoſt conſtantly in
the water, ſeem to be nearly amplibious. They are of a light copper colour, with


black hair. The women have a cuſtom of anointing themſeclves With an ointment. whic h
Eives them a yellowiſh appearance.


They have two kinds of canoes, the FP hat the double. The e are about
o feet long and two and a half broad; and to prevent their overturning, have an
pytatiuer whic h projects 5 feet from the canoe. The latter, are two canoes, connect-
ed by arched timbers, pafling from the gunwale of oue to the gunwale of the other,


| and


.


SETTLEMENT OF NORTH AMERICA. =


and are about three feet apart ; ſome of theſe double canoes are above 80 feet in len oth,


and will contain as many men. The paddles of theſe canoes are about g̊ feet long, and
the part which goes into the water 15 inches broad ; Wan theſe they will pac at the
rate of 6 miles an hour.

Theſe iflands produce fron x canes, potatoes, cocoa nuts, bread fruit, plantains,


water melons, yams, and a root they call tea, which is of a ſweetiſh taſte, not diſagree-


able. It is about the bigneſs of a man's arm and nearly as long. They have alſo a


root which they call ava. With its juice they often get intoxicated, or rather ſtupefied.


Thoſe who make a free uſe of it, when they become old, have a ſcaly appearance not
unlike the leproſy. Theſe iſlands abound with | hogs, which are large and good.
Dogs are confidered by the chiefs as a delicate dith, and are fed with great care for their
ute. A few dunghill fowls were alſo found on theſe n which, probably, were leſt
here by ſome thip, not many years ſince.

The only valuable wood on theſe iflands, is what 6 is called ſandle wood, which 18 of |


a yellowith colour, and has a moſt agreeable ſmell. It is much eſteemed. by the
Chineſe, Who burn it in their churches. They have another ſpecies of wood, not


unhke the lignum vile, with which they make their ſpears, which are from ten to
twelve feet in length. Theſe ſpears, with the knife, which is made of a ſmall piece of


wood, and on both fides ſtuck full of 1ſharks' tecth, 3 to be their only inſtru-


ments of war.
The land of 8 is nearly remade leagues i in circumference, and contains:


| upwards of 30,000 inhabitants, under the arbitrary government of one chief.


4 SUMMARY Kc of the P ff DISCOVERY and SETTLEMENT. *
NORTH AMERIC: A, arranged i in (One order.


NORTH AMERICA was dite overed in the reign of Henry VII. a. period when


the arts and ſciences had made very conſiderabſe -progreſs in Europe. Many of


the firſt adventurers were men of genius. and learning, and were careful to preſerve:


authentic records of fuch of their proceedings as would be intereſting. to poſterity.


Thee records afford ample documents for American hiſtorians. Perhaps: no people


on the globe can trace the hiſtory. of their origin and progreſs with fo much precifion,
as the inhabftantte of North America; particularly that Part. ot them Who inhabit the
territor y of the United States.
The fame which Columbus had acquired by Bis firſt diſcoveri ies on this weſtern con-
tinent, fpread through Europe, and inſpired many with the ſpir it of enter ps 85


1493.9 As early as 1495, four years only after the firſt diſcovery of America, Jo


Cabot, a Venetian, obtained a grant or commiſſion from Henry VI. to die over


unknown lands and annex them to tlie crown. *


In the fpring of 1496 he failed from England with two ſhips, carry ing with him! his
three ſons. In this voyage, which was intended for China, he fell in with the north |
tide of Terra Labratlor, and coaſted northerly as far as the 67th degree of latitude.

1497.] The next year he made a ſecond voyage to America with his ſon Sebaſtian,


Www ho afterwards n in the. diſcoveries which his father had begun. On the 24th .


5 p. Hazard's « Hiſtorical Calledlions,” page 9. Vol. I. where this grant is reeited at large. 1 1 is dated
J. 1395s
of


85 SETTLEMENT: Of NORTH AMERICK.


of June he diſcovered Bonaviſta, on the north-eaſt fide of Newfoundland. | Before his
teturn he traverſed the coaſt from Davis's ſtraits to Cape Floridaa.

. 1502.] Sebaſtian Cabot was this year at Newfoundland; and on his return, carried
three of the natives of that iſland to King Henry VII.
15 13.] In the ſpring of 1 51 3; John Ponce tailed from Porto Rich northerly, And
diſcovered the continent in 30? & north latitude. He landed in April, a ſeaſon when
the country around was covered with verdure, and in full bloom. "This circumſtance
induced him to call the country FLORIDA, Which, for many Fears, was the common
name for North and South America.


1516.] In 1516, Sir Sebaſtian Cabot and Sir Thomas Pert, explored the coaſt as
far 25 Brazil in South America. | ./

This vaſt extent of country, the coaſt of which was thas explored, remained
unclaimed and unſettled by any European power, (except w the Spaniards in South
America) for almoſt a century from the time of its diſcovery.

1524.] It was not till the year 1524 that France attempted diſcoveries on the Ame-
rican coaſt. Stimulated by his enterpriſing neighbours, Francis I. who poſſeſſed a
creat and active mind, ſent John Verazano, a Florentine, to America, for the purpoſe
of making diſcoveries. He traverſed the coaſt from latitude 20. to 50? north. In a
ſecond voyage, ſometime after, he was loſt. |

1525.] The next year Stephen Gomez, the firſt Spaniard who came upon the
American coaſt for difcovery, failed from Groyn in Spain, to Cuba and Florida, thence
northward to Cape Razo, in latitude 46 north, in ſearch of a northern paffag ge to the
Eaſt Indics. F |

1534, ] In the ſpring of 1534, by the direction of Francis I. a fleet was fitted out


at St. Alo s in France, with 3 to make diſcoveries in America. The command


oOo this fleet was given to James Cartier.* He arrived at Newfoundland in May of this


year ; thence he failed northerly; and on the day of the feſtival of St. Lawrence, he
found himſelf in about latitude 48* 30/ north, in the midſt of a broad gulf, which he
named St. Lawrence. He gave the ſame name to the river which emptics into it. In
this voyage, he ſailed as far north as latitude 5 95 expecting 1 in vain to find a paſſage
0 Chim, --:-

1535. The next year he failed up the river St. Lawrence 300 leagues, to the great
and fwitt Fall. He called the country New France; built a fort, in Which he ſpent the
winter, and returned in the following ſpring to France.

1539.] On the 12th of May, 1 5 39, Ferdinand de Soto, with goo men, befides
FBS ſailed from Cuba, having for his object the conqueſt of Florida. On the goth
of May he arrived at Spirito Santo, from whence he travelled northward to the Chick.
aſavy . in about latitude 355 or 367. He died and was buried on the bank of
M.iſſiſſippi River, May, 1542, aged 42 years. Alverdo ſucceeded him.

1 50 0 In 1542, Francis la Roche, Lord Robewell, was ſent to Clinada, by the
French king, with three ſhips and 2co men, women, and children. They wintered
here in a fort which they had built, and returned in the ſpring. About the year 1550,
a large number of adycnturers ſailed for Canada „but were never after heard of. In
1598, the king of France commiſfioned the Marquis de la Roche to conquer Canada,
and other countries not poſſeſſed by any Chriſtian Prince. We do not learn, howev 5


7 Hazard's Hiſtorical Collections, vol. . page 19, is a commiſſion from Francis I. to James Cartier or


Quartier, for making an eſtabliſhment in Canada, ited Oat, I 7 1 1515 Pr obably ths ene was "ha
| him in conſequence of his former diſcoveries, 3 th ,
tha


<RTTLEMENT. of NORTH AMERICA. .


that la Roche ever attempted to execute his commiſſion, or chat any further attempts
were made to ſettle Canada during this century.
January 6, 1548-49. | This year king Henry VII. granted a penſion for life to
Schaſtan Cabot, in conſideration of the. ee . ſervices he had rendered to the
kingdom by his diſcoveries in America.“ Very reſpectable deſcendants of the Cabot
family now live in the commonwealth of Maſſachuſetts.
1562.] The admiral of France, Chatillon, early in this year, ſent out a fleet under
the command of John Ribalt. He arrived at Cape Francis on the coaſt of Floiz. 1
near which, on the firſt of May, he diſcovered and entered a river, which he called
May river. It is more than probable that this river is the ſame which we now call St.
Mary” 85 which forms a part of the ſouthern boundary of the United States. As he
coaſted northward he ditcovered eight other rivers, one of which he called Port Royal,
and failed up it ſeveral leagues. On one of the rivers he built a fort and called it
Charles, in which he left a colony under the direction of Captain Albert. The ſeverity
| of Albert's mcaſur es excited a mutiny, in which, to the ruin of the colony, he
1564.] was flain. 'T'vo years after, Chatillon ſent Rene Laudonier with three ſhips to
Florida. In June he arrived at the river May, on which he built a tort, and,
in honour to his king, Charles IX. he called it CAROLIN A.
In Auguſt, this year, Capt. Ribalt arrived at Florida the ſecond time, with a flect of


direction of the unfortunate Capt. Albert.

a September following, Pedro Melandes, with fix Spaniſh ſhips, purſued Ribalt
up the river on Which he had ſettled, and overpowered him in numbers, cruelly
mailacred him and his whole company. Melandes, having in this way taken poſleffion
of the country, built three forts, and left them garriſoned with 1200 ſoldiers. Laudo-
nier and his colony on May River, receiving iet an of the fate of Ribalt, took ;
the alarm and eſcaped to France.

1567.] A fleet of three ſhips was this year ſent from France to Florida, ds the
command of Dominique d&Gourges. The object of this expedition was to diſpoſſeſs
* the Spaniards of that part of Florida which they had cruelly and unjuſtifiably
I 508: ] ſeized three years before. He arrived on the coaſt of Florida, April 1568, and
ſoon after made a fucceſsful attack upon the forts. The recent cruelty of Me-
E and his company excited revenge in the breaſt of Gourges, and rouſed the
unjuſtifiable principle of retaliation. He took the forts, put moſt of the Spamards to
the fword, and having burned and demoliſhed all their fortreſſes, returned to France.
ONE the 50 Fears next after thus event, the French enterprized no lettlements in

merica.

1576.] Capt. Frobiſher was fent this year to find out a north-weſt paſſage to the
Faſt Indies. The firſt land which he made on the coaſt was a cape, which, in honour
to the queen, he called Queen Elizabeth's Foreland. In coaſting northerly he diſcovered
the ſtraits which bear his name. He proſecuted his fearch for a paſſage into the
weſtern ocean, till he was prevented by the ice, and then returned to England-j
June 11th, 1578.] In 1578, Sir Humphrey Gilbert obtained a patent from queens
| E lizabeth, tor lands not yet poſſeſſed by any Chriſtian prince, provided he would take
potiefiion within fix your s. With this encouragement he ſailed for Ameri Ws and


* Hazard's Hiſt, Coll Vol: I. page 23. Hackluyt calls this 0 The large penſion granted by K. Edward :
YI. to Sebaſtian Cabot, conſtituting him Grand Pilot of England, ;
4 Hazard's Hiſtorical Corner Vol. J. Page 23-


1695


ſeven vellels, to recruit the colony, which, two Years before, he had left under the 1


— 8 Ia


- PI — „„ 0er — n — = —
* 4 l _ 2 , n R - * =
PPP - — — —_
oy Rea * e — . ay 44 — 4 Pe Arete rn 2 is "5 TX 4 r — —
Ss 9 2 0 23 — o — 2 8 2 _ ry
. A E * 0 — . — bt — 0 > = 4 —


i
l RY 1
_—_
v5 .
"v8
1
+ of
'$ 3M
165
41
b 1


B SETTLEMENT, OF NORTH AMERICA.
1583.] on the firſt of Auguſt, 1583, anchored in Conception Bay. Afterwards he
diſcovered and took poſſeſſion of St. John's Harbour, and the country ſouth of
In- purſuing his diſcoveries he loſt one of his ſhips on the ſhoals of Sablon, and on
his return home, a ſtorm overtook him, in which he was unfortunately 88 and the


intended ſettlement was prevented.
1584.] This year two patents were granted by queen Elizabeth, one to Adrian


Gilbert, (Feb. 6.) the other to Sir Walter Raleigh (Mar. 25.) for lands not poſſeſſed


by any Chriſtian prince.“ By the direction of Sir Walter, two ſhips were fitted and
ſent out under the command of Philip Amidas, and Arthur Barlow, with 107 pat-
ſengers. In June 1585 they arrived on the coaſt, and anchored in a harbour ſeven


leagues weſt of the Roanoke. This colony returned to England in June, 1586. On


the 1 3th of July, they, in a formal manner, took poſſeſſion of the country, and, in


honour of their virgin queen Elizabeth, they called it Virginia. Till this time the


country was known by the general name of Flor ida. Aﬀter this VIRGINIA became the
common name for all North America.

1586.] This year, Sw Walter Raleigh ſent Sir Ric hard Greenville to America,
with ſeven ſhips. He arrived at Wococon harbour in June. Having ſtationed a


colony of more than an hundred people at Roanoke, under the direction of Capt.
Ralph Lane, he coaſted Nerger gn as far as Cheſapeak Bay, and returned to


England.

The colony ones Capt. Lane endured extreme aii and muſt have periſhed;
had not Sir Francis Drake fortunately returned to Virginia, and carried them to Eng-
land, after having made ſeveral ee for the queen in the Weſt er and other

laces. .
A fortnight ater, Sir Richard Greenville arrived with new recruits ; ao bee


he did not find the colony which he had before left, and knew not but they had


riſhed, he had the raſhneſs to leave 30 men at the ſame place.
1587. 7 The year following, Sir Walter ſent another company to Vi irginia, under


Governor White, with a charter and twelve aſſiſtants. In July he arrived at Roa-


noke. Not one of the ſecond company remained. He A however, to riſk
a third colony. Abe ne he left 115 people at the old ſettlement, and returned
to England.

his year (Aug. 13.) Manteo was baptized. in Virginia. He was the firſt native
Indian who received that ordinance in that part of America, He, with Towaye,
another Indian, had viſited England, and returned home to Virginia with the colony.


On the 18th of Auguſt, Mrs. Dare was delivered of a daughter, whom ſhe called


VInGINIA. She was born at Roanoke, and was the firſt Engliſh child that was born


in North America.


1390.] In the year 1590, Governor White came over to Vina: with ſupplies i


and recruits for his colony; but, to his great grief, not a man was to be found. bey


had all miſerably famiſned with hunger, or were maſſacred by the Indians.
1602.] In the ſpring of this year, Bartholomew Gotnold, with 32 perſons, made a


| voyage to North Virginia, and diſcovered: and gave names to Cape Cod, Martha's
- Vineyard, and Elizabeth Iſlands, and to Dover- Cliff. Elizabeth Iſland was the place
Which they fixed for their firſt ſettlement. But the courage of thoſe who were to have


tarried, failing, they all went on board and returned to England. All the attempts to
Fray this continent which were e by the Dutch, F rench, and Engliſh, from its


„ Hande in col. Vol. f 5.5 8 e
„ Fe Yo I diſeovery


SETTLEMENT oF NORTH AMERICA. |
dikcovery to the preſent time, a period of 110 years, proved ineffeQual. The Spani-
ards . of all the European nations, had been ſucceſsful. There is no account of
there having been one European family, at this _ in 12 the vaſt extent of coaſt from
Florida to Greenland.
- 11603:] Martin Pring and William ben were this ear r ſent by Sir Walter Raloigh,
with two ſmall veſfels, to make diſcoveries in North Virginia. They came upon the
coaſt which was broken with a multitude of iflands, in latitude 43˙ 30 north. They
coaſted ſouthward to Cape Cod Bay; thence round the Cape into a commodious har-
bour in latitude 41 25 where they went aſhore and tarried ſeven weeks, during which
time they loaded one of their veRels with ſaflafras, and returned toEngland.
_ -- Bartholemew' Gilbert, in a voyage to South Virginia, an ſearch. of the third colquy
hich had been left there by. Governor White, in 1587, having touched at ſeveral of
the Weſt India Iſlands, landed near Cheſapeak Bay, where, in a ſkirmiſh with the Indi-
ans, he and four of his men were unfortunately ſlain. 15 reſt, without any further
ſearch for the colony returned to England. |
France, being at this time in a ſtate of tranquil ty in 1 conſequence of the edidt of
Nantz in favor oſ the Proteſtants, paſſed by Henry V. (April 1598) and of the peace
with Philip, king of Spain and Portugal, was induced to purſue her diſcoveries in Ame-
rica. According ythe king ſigned a patent & ãn favor of De Mons, (November 8, 1603)
of all the country from the 40th to the 46th degrees of north latitude, under the
1 604. name of Acadia. The next year De Mons ranged the coaft from . Lawrence
to Cape Sable, and round to Cape Cod. x
16057] In May 1605, George's Iliand and Pentecoſt Harbour were 2 by Capt
George ſeymouth. In May he entered a large river in latitude 43 0, (variatign
11 * 15 ' weſt; )which-Mr. Prince, :nthis Chronology, . ſuppoſes: muſt have been Sagada-
hok ; but from the latitude, it was more probably the Piſcataqua. Capt. Weymonth L
carried with'him/to-England five of the natives.
1666] April roth this year, James I. by pa patent, + divided Vigginia into two colonies.
The ſouthern, included all lands ee the and 41 degrees of north latitude.
This was ſtyled the fr ft colony, under the name — South Virginia, and was Franteduo
the London Company. The nortbern, called the ſecond colony, and known by the ge
neral name of North Virginia, included all lands between the 38th and 45th — 4
north latitude, and was granted to the Plymouth Company. of theſe colonies
| hatl a council of thirteen men to govern them. To prevent diſputes. about territory, the
colony which ſhould laſt place themſelves was ited to plant within an hundred
miles of the other. There appears to be an inconſiſtency in theſe grants, as the Aang 25
lying between the 38th. and 41ſt degrees are covered by both patents.
Both the London and Plymouth companies enter prized ſettlements within che limits of
their reſpective grants. With what ſueceſs will now be mentioned.


Company, went over with a colony to Virginia, and diſcovered. Pomhatan. how Han
river. In the mean time the Plymouth company ſent Capt. Hemy Chnllons, an a xſſel
of fifty- five tons, to plant a colony in North: * baun bie voyage be Nα⁸ taken
by a n 901.3 #2 is by H Ei
160% J The London: company this «ſpring nb Cpt Chr mene *
April iT three veſſels, to South Virginia. On the goth of April he en
Bay, and landed, a ſoon after gave t to 2 mode e 5 point 2 name of . ar
I 47 $60 21990 gl da a hn TE


* Hig Coll. Vol. 18 4. 4 lbid. p. 50.


/


Which


Mr. Pierey, Kretker to the Earl of Northumberland, in the ſervicęſof the © oY


90 SETTLEMENT. OP. NORTH AMERICA.


which it ſtill retains. Having elected Mr. Edward Wingfield pedfident for the
May 13.] year, they next day landed all their men, and began a ſettlement on James
| river, at a place which they called James Town. This is the firſt town that was
June 22.] ſettled by the Engliſh in North America. The June following, Capt. New-
port ſailed for England, leaving with the preſident one hundredandfourperſons.
Anpuf 22.| In Auguſt died Capt. Bartholemew Gotnold, the firſt projector of this
tettlement, and one of the council. The following winter James Town was burnt.
Duting this time, the Plymouth company fitted out two-ſhips under the command of
Admiral Rawley Gilbert. They ſailed for North Virginia on the 31ſt of May, with one
hundred planters, and Capt. George Popham for their preſident. They arrived in Au-
_ guſt and ſettled about nine or ten leagues to the ſouthward of the mouth of Sagadahok
river. A great part of the colony, however, diſheartened by the ſeverity of the' winter,
returned to we geg in December, leaving their preſident, Capt. Popham, with only
forty-five men.
lt was in the fall of this year that the famous Mr. Robinſon, with part of his congre-
gation, who afterwards ſettled at Plymouth in New-England, removed from the north
of England to Holland, to avoid the cruelties of Ran and for the ſake of en) *


| ing "my purity of worſhip and liberty of conſcience.”


This year a ſmall company of merchants at Dieppe and St. Malo's founded Quebee,
or rather the colony which they ſent built a few huts there, which did not take the form
of a town until the the reign of Lewis XIV.

1608. ] Sagadahok colony ſuffered incredible hardſhips after the departure of their
friends in — In the depth of winter, which was extremely cold, their ftore-
| houſe caught fire and was conſumed, with moſt of their proviſions and lodgings. Their
misfortunes were increaſed ſoon after by the death of their preſident. my Gilbert
was appoinied to ſucceed him.

Lord Chief Juſtice Popham made every exertion to keep this colony alive, by repeat-
edly ſending them ſupplies. . But the circumſtance of his death, which happened this
year, together with that of preſident Gilbert's being called to England to ſettle his

affairs, broke up the colony, and they all returned with him to England.

The unfavourable reports which theſe firſt unfortunate adventurers propa rated _
pectin A the country, prevented any turther HOO to ſettle N orth Win for ſeveral
years after.

F 1609. | The London Company, laſt year, ſent Capt. Nelſon, with two ſhips and one
hundred and twenty perſons, to James Town ; and this year, Capt. John Smith, after-
wards preſident, arrived on the coaſt of South Virginia, and by failng.up a number of
the rivers, diſcovered the interior country. In September, Capt. Newport arrived with

Tranny F 50 ns, which increaſed the colony to two hundred ſoulss.
| binſon and his congregation, who had ſettled at Amſterdam, e this
year * Leyden; where they remained more than eleven years, till a part of them came
over to New-England. F
The council for South Virginia having refigned their old commiſſion, 5 requeſted
and obtained a new one; in conſequence of which they appointed Sir Thomas Weſt,
Lord Dela War, general of the colony ; Sir Thomas Gates, his lieutenant ; Sir George
Somers, admiral; Sir Thomas Dale, high marſhall ; Sir Ferdinand Wainman, Nene
ral bf the horſe ; and Capt. Newport, vice-admiral. |


n * The ſecond Charter of Vinia n date May 93, 1609. Hiſt, Coll. Vol. I. p. 88. mY
| e


. © of 0 3


SETTLEMENT OF NORTH AMERICA. 91
June 8. In June, Sir Thomas Gates, Admiral Newport, and Sir George 3


With ſeven ſhips, a ketch and a pinnace, having five hundred ſouls on board,
July 24.] men, women, and children, failed from Falmouth for South Virginia. In croſ-

ſing the Bahama Gulf, on the 24th of July, the fleet was overtaken by a violent
ſtorm, and ſeparated. . Four days after, Sir George Somers ran his veſſel aſhore on one


of the Bermuda Iſlands, which, from this circumſtance, have been called the Somer
Iſlands. The people on board, one hundred and fifty in number, all got ſafe on ſhore;
and there remained until the following May. The remainder of the fleet arrived at
Virginia in Auguſt. The colony was now increaſed to five hundred men. Capt.
Smith, then preſident, a little before the arrival of the fleet, had been very badly burnt


by means of ſome powder which had accidently caught fire. This unfortunate circum-


| flance, together with the oppoſition he met with from thoſe who had lately arrived, in-
duced him to leave the colony and return to England; which he accordingly did the


laſt of September. Francis Weſt, his ſucceſſor 1 in office, ſoon followed him, and
George Piercy was elected prefident.


to Lord De la War, conſtituting him Governor and Captain General of South Virginia.


He ſoon after embarked for America, with Capt. Argal and one hundred and TAY, men
in three ſhips.:


The un ene people, * 5 the year before, had TED ſhip racked on the Ber-


muda Iſlands, had employed themſelves during the winter and 3 under the direc-
tion of Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Somers, and Admiral Newport, in building a
ſloop to tranſport themſelves to the continent. They embarked for Virginia on the roth


of May, with about one hundred and fifty perſons on board; leaving two of their men
behind, who choſe to ſtay; and landed at James Town on the 2 3d of the ſame month.
Finding the colony, which at the time of Capt. Smith's departure, conſiſted of five
hundred ſouls, now reduced to fixty, and thoſe few in a dif treſſed and wretched ſitu-
ation, they with one voice reſolved to return to England; and for this purpoſe, on the
7th of June, the whole colony repaired on board their veſſels, broke up the ſettlement,
and failed down the river on their way to their native coun

Fortunately, Lord De la War, who had embarked for James Town the March be-


fore, met them the day after they ſailed, and perſuaded them to return with him to


James Town, where they arrived and landed the 10th of June. The government of
the colony of right devolved upon Lord De la War. From this time we may date the


effectual ſettlement of Virginia. Its hiſtory from this * will be given in its =o


per place.
As early as the year 1607 and 1608, Henry Hudſon, an Engliſhman, under a com-


miſſion from King James, in the employ of certain merchants, made ſeveral voyages


for the diſcovery of a north-weſt paſſage to the Eaſt Indies. In 1 609, upon ſome miſ
underſtanding, he engaged in the Dutch ſervice, in the proſecution of the ſame deſign,
and on his return ranged along the ſea coaſt of what has ſince been called New Eng-
land, (which, three years before was granted by King James to his Engliſh ke
the Plymouth Company) and entered Hudſon's river, giving it his own nam

cended this river in his boat as far as what has ſince been called Aur ania or Fg


1613, the Dutch Weſt India company ſent ſome pertons to this river, to trade ou
the Indians; and as early as 1623, the Dutch had a, trading houſe on Conuecticut


river. In conſequence of theſe diſcoveries and ſettlements, the Dutch claimed all the
country extending from Cape Cod to Cape Henlopen along the ſca coaſt, and as far


back into, the Foantry as any of the rivers within thoſe. limits extend. But their 1
Nas


N 2


16 21 The year following, the South Virginia or I adi company, ſealed a patent


9* SETTLEMENT o NORTH AMERICA.
has beet: diſp
rs. 14 he Bt Seiles


eneral granted a patent to ſundry merchants for an exdufive trade on


Hridfon's river, who the fame year, (1614) built a fort on the weſt fide near
1673. Albany. From this time we may date the ſettlement of New York, the _—


tory o Which will be annexed to a deſeription of the State.


Conteption Bay, on the iſland of Newfoundland, was ſettled * the year — by |
cs a gwen a yr

* F l
| 8 St. hos Mount |
| Ftloments remained-


adult forty planters under Governor John Guy, to whom King 5 A
tent of mcorporation. 7 |


Chaplain, a Frenchinan, had begun a ſettlement at @uzbetM
Mak! and Port Royal were ſettled about the fame time. The
unciſturbed till 1613, when the Virginians, hearing that the French had ſettled within


their Hirits, ſent Capt. Argal to diſlodge them. For this purpoſe he failed to Sagada-
hok, took their forts at Mount Manſel, St. Croix, and Port Royal, with their 'veflels,


ordnance, cattle and proviſions, and carried them to James Town | in a e Quebec


was left in poſſeſſion of the French.


1614. | This e John Smith, with two ſhips and fortpaſive: men and boys,


made a voyage orth Virginia, to make experiments upon a gold and copper mine.
His Cots wer were, to fiſh 2 oh trade with the natives, if he ſhould fail in his ex


with regard to the mine. To facilitate this bufineſs, he took with him Tart, an In-
dian, perhaps one that Capt. Weymouth carried to England in 1605. In April he
reached the iſland Monahigan in latitude 43* 30. Here Capt. Smith was directed to

ſtay and keep poſſeſſion with ten men, for the purpoſe of making a trial of the whalin


bufineſs, but being diſappointed in this, he built feven boats, in which hirtyLſeven


men made a very ſucceſsful fiſhing voyage. In the mean time the'Ca
eight men only, in a ſmall boat, coaſted from Penobſcot fo Sagadahok, Acociſco,


a Paſſataquack, ra gabizanda, now called Cape Ann, thenee to. Acomac, where he
kirmifhed wih ute Indians; thence to . where he ſet his Indian, Tantum,


aſhore, and left him, and returned to Mon In this voyage he found two French
ſhips in the Bay of Maſſachuſetts, who had 2 there fix weeks before, and during
that time had been trading very advantageouſly with the Indians. It was conjectured


)
that'there were, at this time, three thottfand Indians upon the Maſſachuſetts lands.
In July, Capt. Smith embarked for England in one of


Capt. Smith's departure, Hunt perfidiouſly allured twenty Indians (one of whom was


Sguonto, afterwards fo ſerviceable to the Enghfh) to come on board his ſhip at Patuxit,


and ſeven more at Nauſit, and carried them to the iſland of Malaga, where he fold
them for twenty pounds each, to be flaves for life. This conduct, which fixes an in-
delible ſtigma upon the character of Hunt, excited in the breaſts of the Indians ſuch an
mrveterate hatred of the Engliſh, as that, for many years after, all commere zal inter-
courſe with them was rendered exceedin gly dangerous.


Capt. Smith arrived at London the laſt of Auguſt, where he drew a map of the coun-


try, and called it New EncLand. From this time North Virginia aſſumed the name


of New England, and the name Virginia was confined to the ſouthern colony. _
Between the years 1614 and 1620, ſeveral attempts were made by the Plymouth
Company to ſettle New England, but by various means they were all rendered inef-


fectual. During this time, however, an advantageous trade was * carried: on with the
natives.


1617.] In the year 1617, Mr. Robinſon and his congregation, 5 inenvöl by PER


ral weighty reaſons, meditated a removal to America. Various difficulties u
3- "0 vene


9


„ This extenfrve country, the Dutch called New Nuke land and itt


pectations |


ptain himſelf with


veſſels, leaving the other
under the command of Capt. Thomas 'Hant, to equip for a voyage to Spain. Aſter


WD. ©


3
ks
y
q 3
3 8
s 7
*
i 8
r
> *
7
ff J
*
1 - 1
+.
1 57
44
7
**
N y
Pp 1?
a e
5
r
7 8
TIL
ar m3
A
4
7 1
A
*
Pet
WY
418 5 < *
WISE
4 3
q *
a
..
. 1 2
DG Ja
of,
—
xt 8
8
. e ”
2 7
— 2
a =
N
1 8
8
e.
8
8
5 5
# 7
9
FEI
FY
.
x 1
.
88,
+4
CE
Fi
50%,
* Þ
W
*
7 *
7
7 :
; Fi
N
TI
ty
A
: Hoy
\ . we
- >
\ BF. is
o *
*
ih
3
tf ;
LF "7
* *
54 .
ys = f
4 oy
3. JI r
. Is 1
3
FSW
3
ES J
8 1
4 CY, 0
3
75
p
8
E ;
.
— 4
"3
TS.
OE
* 2
By
7 ©"
&FS
Ae
a
5 *
0d
8
5 .
.
LS :
3
—
La,
"7 2 *
CEE.
1
=
ps 2,
3
aq L
i,
7
5 3
x
1. 9
— g
Lys
#o I
2
* * þ by
*
=.
.
> *
WK -
2
We
*
3 A
"2
Sp
* wb
a”
3
p 8
£X
75 ,
57
= .
» J
4 7
b
. :
2
.
#
2:24
3 \
3
8
VP
.
.
3
»
” *
o * >
.
1
*
[3 1 P
.
1
52
2
Sy
* 4
;
4s
4
»


SETTLEMENT OF NORTH AMERICA. +


PF 1 vened to prevent the ſucces of their deſigns until the year 1620, when a part
of Mr. Robinſon's congregation came over and ſettled at Plymouth. At this
time commenced the ſettlement of New England.
The particulars relating to the firſt emigrations to this northern part of America, the
progreſs of its fettlement, &c. will be * in the hiſtory of New England, to which
the reader is referred.
In order to preſerve the chnopelogical apex in which the ſeveral colonies, now
grown into. independent ſtates, were firſt ſettled, it will be neceſſary that I
1621.] ſhould juſt mention, that the next year after the ſettlement of Plymouth, Cap-
a John Maſon obtained of the Plymouth Council a grant of a part of the
1623. ] preſent State of New Hampſhire. Two years after, under the authority of this
grant, a ſmall colony fixed down near the mouth of Piſcataqua river. From
this period we may date the ſettlement of New HAursRIRE.
1627.] In 1627, a colony of Swedes and Finns came over and landed at Cape
Henlopen; and afterwards purchaſed of the Indians the land from Cape Henlopen to


the Falls of Delaware, on both ſides the river, which they called New W


Stream. On this river they built ſeveral forts, and made ſettlements.


1628.] On the 19th Ss, March, 1628, the Council for New England ſold 0 Sir


Henry Roſwell, and five others, a large tract of land lying round Maſſachuſetts


Bay. The June following, Capt. John Endicot, with his wife and company, came
over and ſettled at Naumkeag, now called Salem.“ - This was the firſt Englith ſettle- :


ment which was made in MassacayvstTTs Bay. Plymouth, indeed, which is now in-
cluded in the commonwealth of Maſſachuſetts, was ſettled eight years before, but at


this time it was a ſeparate colony, under a diſtinct government; and continued ſo,


until the ſecond charter of Maſſachuſetts was granted by William and Mary in 1691 ;


by which, e the nde of Main "_ Sagadabak, were tes al 15 Maſſa-


chuſetts.


June 13, 163 30 In che reign of Charles the Firſt, Lord Babies; Nom an n Catho- .
hee, applied for, and obtained a grant of a tract of land upon Cheſapeak Bay, about


one hundred and forty miles long and one hundred and thirty broad. 1 aſter this,
in conſequence of the rigour of the laws of England againſt the Roman Catholies,


Lord Baltimore, with a number of his perſecuted brethren, came over and ſettled it, 8


and in honour of Queen Henrietta Maria, they called it MARYLAND.


The firſt grant of Connecticut was made by Robert. Earl of Warwick, prefident of |
Mar. 11 the 8 of Plymouth, to Lord Say and Seal, to Lord Brook and others,


9th J in the year 163 1c In cohſequence of deveral. ſmaller grants made atter-


1631. by the patentees to particular perſons, Mr. Fenwick made a ſettlement at
the mouth of Connecticut e and called it Saybrook. About the lame. ke 3


15 15955


8 3 e v ho ek. at As were Ralph 80 rague, with his brethren, Richard and Wil-
13 who, with three or four more, by Goyernor Endicot's conſent, undertook a journey t. through the woods
above twelve miles weſtward, till they came to a neck of land called. Miſhawwm, b

Rivers, full of Indians, named Aberginians. Their old Sachem being dead, his eldeſt 26. called by tlie
Engliſh, John Sagamore, was chief; a man of gentle and good diſpoſition, by whoſe free conſent they ſet-


ted here; [where they ſound but one Engliſh * thatched and palliſadoed, poſſeſſed by To Ae,


2 a ſmith.” Prince's Chron. p. 174


T June 1629, Mr. Thomas Graves removed from Salem to U pepuuen, and with t 3 Governor's s conſent


called it Cbarleflown. He laid the town out in two acte' 5 built the Great 2 8 which.) afterwards


became the houſe of Public Worſhip. Mr, Br gut, Miniſter * bid. Pe 188. —
* Hazard's Hiſt. Coll. v. 3 on


etween M yſtic an Charles 5


| Bb 1 Fo num- 8


94 SEFI'LEMENT OF NORTH AMERICA.


16 36. a number of people from Maſſachuſetts Bay came and began ſettle-
ments at Harttord, Wethersfield, and Windſor, on Connecticut river. Thus
commenced the Engliſh ſettlement of Connectreur.
Rhode Hland was firſt ſettled in conſequence of religious len Mrr. Roger
Willams, who was among thoſe who came early over to Maflachuſetts, not agree-


ing with ſome of his brethren in ſentiment, was very unjuſtifiably banithed the


colony, and went with twelve others, his Weg and ſettled at Provi-


16 35-] ee in 16 35. From this beginning aroſe the colony, now State of RlODE
SLAND.


1664. On the 20tlr of March, 1664, Charles the Second granted. 0 the Duke of
York, what is now called Nzw Jznsey, then a part of a large tract of country, by the
name of New Netherland. Some parts of New Jerſey . ſettled by the Dutch as


early as about 1615.


1662.] In the year 6 Charles the Second granted to dward Earl of Claren-


don, and ſeven others, almoſt the whole territory of the three Southern States, North


and South Carolina and Georgia, Two years after he granted a ſecond
1664. ] charter, enlarging their boundaries. The proprietors, by virtue of authority
veſted in them by their charter, e engaged Mr. Locke to frame a ſyſtem of laws for


the government of their intended colony. Notwithſtanding theſe preparations, no effectual


ſettlement was made until the year 1669, (though one was attempted in 1667)
TOO: ] when Governor Sayle came over with colony and fixed on a neck of land
N between Aſhley and Cooper rivers. Thus commenced the ſettlement of
Caiotor; which then included the whole territory between the 297 and 365 30
North latitude, together with the Bahama Iſlands, hang: between latitude 22 and
27 North.
1681. The Royal charter for Peanfybuikla was: granted to William 8 on the
A44th March 1681. The firſt colony came over the next year and ſettled under


1682.] the proprietor, William Penn, who acted as governor from October 1682, to


Auguſt 1684. The firſt _— in the wine?» ovince of Pennſylvania was held at
Cheſter, on the 4th of December 1682. illiam Penn, a Quaker, juſtly cele-


| brated as a great and good man had the 3 of laying the foundation of the . 5
ſent populous and very flouriſhing STATE.of PENNSYLVANIA. —

The proprietary government in Carolina was attended with fo many in inconvenie-
cies, and occafioned ſuch violent diſſenſions among the ſettlers, that the Parliament


of Great Britain was induced to take the province under their immediate care. 'The


proprietors, (except Lord Granville) accepted of C. 22,500 ſterling, from the crown


for the property and juriſdiction. This agreement was ratified by act of par-


7729. }hament in 1729. A clauſe in this act reſerved to Lord Granville his eighth


ſhare of the property and arrears of quit-rents, which continued legally veſted .


in his family till the revolution in 1776. Lord Granville's ſhare made a part of the
| preſent State of North Carolina. About the year 1729, the extenſive territory belong-


ing to the proprietors was divided into North and South Carolina. T hey e
ſoparate royal-governments-until they became independent States.

For the relief of poor indigent people of Great Britain and Ireland, and for the
ſecurity of Carolina, a project was formed for planting a colony between the rivers _
Savannah and Alataimahs. Accordingly, application being made to King George the

Second, he iſſued letters patent, bearing date June gth, 1732, for legally car-


1732. ] rying into execution the ene Ke. plan. In honour of the king, who great-


Jy encouraged the plan, they called the new province, GEORGIA. Twenty-one
truſtces


SETTLEMENT OF NORTH AMERICA. 93


truſtees were e appointed to conduct the affairs relating to the ſettlement of the pro-
vince. The November following, one hundred and fifteen perſons, one of whom was
General Oglethorp, embarked for Georgia, where they arrived; and landed at Yama-
craw. In exploring the country, they found an elevated pleaſant ſpot of ground on
the bank of a navigable river, upon which they marked out a town, and from the
Indian name of the river which paſſed by it, called it Savannah. From this period
we may date the ſettlement of GEORGIA.
The country now called Kentucky, was well known to the Indian traders many
years before its ſettlement. They gave a deſcription of it to Lewis Evans, who
1752.] publiſhed his firſt map of it as carly as the year 1752. James Macbride, with
1754. | fome JOS, explored this e in 1754. Colonel Daniel Boon viſited it
e
1773. 22 years after, Col. Boon and his any, with five other families, who
were joined by forty men from Powle's valley, began the ſettlement of Kentucky, *
which is now one of the moſt growing colonies, perhaps, in the world, and was erect-
cd into an independent ſtate, by act of Congrels, December 6th, 1 279 and received
into the Union, June 1ſt, 1792. |
The tract of country called VerMonT, before the late war, was claimed both by
New York and New Hampſhire. When hoſtilities commenced between Great Bri in
and her colonies, the inhabitants conſidering themſelves as in a ſtate of nature, as to
civil government, and not within any legal juriſdiction, aſſociated and formed for
themſelves a conſtitution of government. Under this conſtitution, they have ever
fince continued to exerciſe all the powers of an independent State. Vermont was not
admitted into union with the other ſtates till March 4th, 1791; yet we may
1777.) venture to date her political exiſtence as a ſeparate government, from the year
1777, becauſe, ſince that time, Vermont has to all intents and purpoſes been a
ſovereign and independent State. The firſt ſettlement 1 in this ſtate was made at Ben-
nington as early as about 1764. or
The extenſive tract of country lying north-weſt of the Ohio Rives: within the li-
1787. mits of the United States, was erected into a ſeparate temporary government, by
an ordinance of congreſs paſſed the 13th of July, 1787.
Thus we have given a ſummary view of the firſt diſcoveries and progrethve ſettle-
ment of North America in their chronological order.
THE following recapitulation will r the whole 1 in one view.


Names of places. | | When ſettled. e y ies.
Quebec, — . 1608 By the French.
Virginia, . June 10, 1610 By Lord De la War.
Newfoundland, — June, 1610 By Governor John Guy.


New Vork, 1 eee

New Jerſey,” } about 1614 By the Dutch.

3 Ee” 1620 By part of Mr. Robinſon's COUNT
New Hampſhire, 8 485 1623 By a ſmall Engliſh colony near the mouth


of Piſcataqua river.


* This ſettlement was de in violation of the Treaty, in 1768, at Fort gemein which 3 ſtipu-
lates, that this tract of country ſhould be reſerved for the weſtern nations to hunt upon, until they and the
crown of England ſhould otherwiſe lee. This has dere one great cauſe of the enmity of thoſe Indian
nations to the — | [Col. Morgan.


Names


— |


96 NORTH. KT.


Names of places. n pen ſettles. td, By tohom. 5 Le
J 4% By tho ele wad bee f
Pennfylvania, } a e wel insg.
Maffachietts Bay - 18628 By Capt. John Endicot and company. |
NI. 1 *) E „ Lord Baltimore, with a e of Ro-
n D 14233 man Catholics.
nn e Mr. Fenwick, at Saybrock, near the
Contiecticut, F . 1635 th of Connecticut river.
. ö By Mr. Ro r Williams and hi rſe ted
OI: (0
Granted to the Duke of York by Charles II.
1 „ and made a diſtinét government, and
Nes Jerſey, fte ſettled ſome time before this by the
South Carolina 1669 By n
Fe ne N 1682 By William Penn, with a colony of 8
Pennſylvania, | -- Rh
EP ERR i FT Iiparate government, ſet⸗
North Cardlina, SS. about 1728 tled before by. the En glith.
Georgia, 8 WS. 1732 By General Oglethorp.
Kentucky, i — 1773 By Col. Daniel Boon.
4 By Emigrants from Connecticut and. other
Vermont, — on about 1764 parts of New England. |
* N. W. of Ohio . 1787 By the Ohio and other companies.
The above dates are from the periods when the firſt ne ſettlements were


made.


1
%


BOUNDARIES AND EXTENT.


TORTH AMERICA comprehends all that part of the weſtern continent which

lies north of the iſthmus of Darien, extending north and ſouth; from about the

1oth degree north latitude to the north pole; and eaſt and weſt from the Atlantic to

| | the Pacific Ocean, between the 45th and r6 «th degrees weſt longitude from London.

HhHeyond the joth degree N. Lat. few diſeoveries have been made. In July 1779, 155

FF Cook proceeded as far as lat. 715 when he came to a ſolid body of ice extending from
| : | continent to continent.


* Bars, SounDs, STRAITS, AND I ande. Of theſe (except thoſe in the United States
Thich we ſhall deſcribe undler that head) we know little more than their names.

"Baffin's Bay, lying between the 7oth and goth degrees N. Lat. is the largeſt and. mof
northern, that has yet been diſcovered in North America. It opens into de A lac

| RI ocean through Baffin's and Davis 5 Straits, between Cape . on the Labrador


„
1


7
/ N
=


NORTH AMERICA 97


coaſt, and Cape Farewell. It communicates with Hudſon's Bay to the ſouth, through
a cluſter of iſlands. In this capacious bay or gulph is James Iſland, the ſouth point
of which is called Cape Bedford; and the ſmaller iſlands of Waygate and Diſko.


Davis's Straits ſeparate Greenland from the American continent, and are between Cape


Walſingham, on James Iſland, and South Bay in Greenland, where they are about 60
leagues broad, and extend from the 67th to the 7 11t degrees of latitude above Diſko
iſland. The moſt ſouthern point of Greenland is called Cape Farewell. 11

Hudſon's Bay took its name from Henry Hudſon, who diſcovered it in 1610. It
lies between 51 and 69 degrees of north latitude. The eaſtern boundary of the Bay


is Terra de Labrador; the northern part has a ſtraight coaſt, faciſig the bay, guarded


with a line of iſles innumerable. A vaſt bay, called the Archiwinnipy Sea, lies within


it, and opens into Hudſon's Bay, by means of gulph Hazard, through which tlie


| Beluga whales paſs in great numbers. The entrance of the bay, from the Atlantic
occan, after leaving, to the north, Cape Farewell and Davis's Straits, is between
Reſolution iſles on the north, and Button's iſles, on the Labrador coaſt, to the ſouth,

forming the eaſtern extremity of Hudſon's Straits.


The coaſts are very high, rocky and rugged at top; in ſome places precipitous, but
ſometimes exhibit extenſive beaches. The iſlands of Saliſbury, Nottingham, and


Digges are very lofty and naked. The depth of water in the middle of the bay is 140


fathoms. From Cape Churchill to the ſouth end of the bay are regular ſoundings ; |
near the ſhore, ſhallow, with muddy or ſandy bottom. To the northward of Churchill,
the ſoundings are irregular, the bottom rocky, and in ſome parts the rocks appear


above the ſurface at low water.


James's Bay lies at the bottom, or moſt ſouthern part of Hudſon's Bay, with which


it communicates, and divides New Britain from South Wales. To the northweſtward


of Hudſon's Bay is an extenſive chain of lakes, among which is Lake Menichlich, lat.
61?, long. 105 W. North of this is Lake Dobount, to the northward of which lies
the extenſive country of the northern Indians. Weſt of theſe lakes, between the
latitudes of 60 and 66 degrees, after paſſing a large cluſter of unnamed lakes, lies the lake
or ſea Arathapeſcow, whoſe ſouthern ſhores are inhabited by the Arathapeſcow Indians.
North of this, and near the Arctic circle, is Lake Edlande, around which live the
Dog-ribbed Indians. Further north is Buffaloe lake, near which, is Copper Mine
river, in lat. 72* N. and long. 119 W. of Greenwich. The Copper Mine Indians


«


inhabit this country. _ 7 Lhe 766 5
Between Copper Mine river, (which according to Mr. Herne empties into the


Northern ſea, where the tide riſes 12 or 14 feet, and which in its whole courſe is


encumbered with ſhoals and falls) and the North-weſt coaſt of America, is an extenſive


tract of unexplored country, As you deſcęnd from north to ſouth on the weſtern oõſt


of America, juſt ſouth of the Arctic circle, you come to Cape Prince of Wales, oppoſite
Eaſt Cape on the eaſtern continent; and here the two continents approach neareſt to
each other. Proceeding ſouthward you paſs Norton Sound, Cape Stephen's, Shoalneſs,


| Briſtol Bay, Prince William's Sound, Cook's River, Admiralty Bay, and Port Mul-
grave, Nootka Sound, &c. From Nootka Sound proceeding ſouth, you paſs, the


4


.


unexplored country of New Albion, thence to California, and New Mexico.


_ Rh hag DIVI-


0 98 ]
DIVISIONS OF NORTH AMERICA.


HE vaſt tract 65 ebigtitry.; bounded weſt by the Paciftc Gn, ſouth 480 caſt by
California, New Mexico, and Lopuifiana—the United States, Canada and the
Atlantic ocean, and extending as far north as the country is habitable (a few ſcattered
Engliſh, French, and ſome other European ſettlements excepted) is inhabited wholly -
by various nations and tribes of Indians. The Indians alfo poſſeſs large tracts of
country within the Spatiſh American and Britiſh dominions. Thoſe parts of North
America not inhabited by Indians, belong (if we include Greenland) to Denmark,
Great Britain, the American States, and Spain. Spain claims Eaſt and Weſt Florida, |
and all weſt of the Miſſiſſippi, and ſouth of the northern boundaries of Louiſiana,
New Mexico and California. Great Britain claims all the country inhabited by Euro-
peans, lying north and eaſt of the United States, except Greenland, which belongs to-
Denmark. The remaining part is the territory of the Fifteen United States. 1 he
Particular Provinces and States, are exhibited in the followi ing table:


1 . „ e
5 Belong-


FR Provinces, 755 Number of 1
. and States. „ | Inhabitants. _ Chief Towns. ;
8 0 Greenland 10, ooo New Herrnhut
2 "'£ New Britain 4 unknown 5
© | Upper Canada . ©. 20,000 3 Detroit, Niagara
„Lower Canada 130, 00 Quebec, Montreal
© } Cape Breton I. 1,000 Sidney, Louiſburgh
bel 1 New Brunſwick Fredericktown
=Z | Nova Scotia 1 J 35% Halifax
= | St. John's Iſl.] in 1783. 5,000 Charlottetown
( Newfoundland Iſland 7,000 Placentia, St. John's
Vermont 3,339 Windſer, Rutland
New Hampfhire 88 141,885 Portſmouth, Concord
I Mafſachuſetts }- 387,787 Boſton, Salem, Newbury Port
15 Diſtrict of Maine 1 906,540 Portland, Hallowell |
Rhode Ifland 68,825 Newport, Providence
8 | Connecticut 237,946 New Haven, Hartford -
E New York . 349,120 New York, Albany
New Jerſey 184,139 Trenton, Burlington, Brunſwick:
Fes , Pen ain 1 7 434,373 Philadelphia, Lancaſter
| * Delaware 509,094 Dover, Wilmington, Newcaſtle
= | Maryland” 319,928 Annapolis, Baltimore
I | Virginia 747,610 Richmond, Peterſburgh, Norfolk.
= | Kentucky 243,077 Lexington
S North Carolina 393,751 Newbern, Edenton, Halifax
__ +. South Carolina 249,073 Charleſton, Columbia
| Georgia 82,5348 Savannah, Auguſta
Territory S. of Ohio 35,691 Abingdon
Territory N. W. of Ohio M,-Larietta bY
| | | ” Span-


GREENLAND 1 99


Belong» Coun ties, Provinces,


ing to and State. 1 4” Chief Towns.
5 ( Eaſt Florida oy Torr Auguſtine
'S | ' Weſt Florida ee Penſacola
ee ane
EIT New Mexico St. Fee
8. California s (1557 51k een
. Menien, Or Nen Spain een Mexico


x! R E E N * A. N .


His W country. proper ly belong to nelthhir of the two continents unleſs,
5 as ſeems probable, it be united to America to the northward of Davis Straits.
As it has commonly been deſcribed as belonging to Europe, we ſhall give Guthries
account of it in our deſcription of that quarter of the Globe. From its contiguity to,
and probable umon with the American continent, however, it appears moſt proper to
rank it among the countries of the weſtern continent; and we have accordingly given
it a place in the table of diviſions of N. America, and ſhall here give a new n
of it from the beſt authorities extant.

BON DARIES AND EXTENT. | - — ; is bounded by Davis' Straits, which divide
it from America, on the weſt; to the northward, it is not limited, except by ſome
unknown ocean, 'or by the North pole; eaſt, it has the Icy ſea, and a ſtrait which
ſeparates it from Iceland; ſouth-eaſt, it is waſhed by the Atlantic ocean ; ſouth, it ter-
minates in a point called Cape Farewell, in latitude 59 degrees north. From Cape
Farewell, north-eaſterly, along the ſouth-eaſt ſhore, the coaſt has been diſcovered as far
as 80 degrees north, 2 along the weſtern ſhore, up Davis Straits, as far as the
78th degree.

Whether Greenland 50 an iſland, has not yet been dockied: as no ſhip his yet
penetrated higher than the 48th degree, on account of the ice. That it is not an


Davis' Straits, * or rather Baffin's Bay, grows narrower and narrower towards the 78th
degree north. 2d. Becauſe the coaſt, which in other places is very high towards the
ſea, grows lower and lower northward. 3d. The tide, which at Cape Farewell, and
as far up as Cockin's Sound, in latitude 63, riſes 18 feet at the new and full moon,
decreaſes to the northward of Ditko, fo that in latitude 70% it riſes little more than 8
fcet, and probably continues to diminiſn, till there is no tide at all. + To the above
may be added the relation of the Greenlanders, (which however cannot be much
depended on) viz. that the trait contracts itſelf ſo narrow at laſt, that ey can go on


* Theſe Greits were firſt diſcovered by John Davis, an Engliſhman, in 1 400 55 in hie attempt 6 to find a
north-weſt paſſage to the Eaſt Indies.


+ See © Ellis? Voyage to Hudſon's Bay for the Diſoovery of the N. W. Paſſage.” p. 50 to 54. From the
"reaſons above, the Engliſh Ca 14 Baffin gave up all hope of finding a paſſage” into the South Sea, Na g
N Straits, and OY concludes that Greenland joins America, © ___ 5 4


0


O 2 7 Z > ST | | 5 the


—


land, but a part of the American continent, is rendered probable; iſt. Becauſe


100 | GG RR EE NEL A V-Þ

the ice ſo near to the other fide as to be able to call to the inhabitants, and that they

can ſtrike a fiſh on both fides at once; but that there runs ſuch a ſtrong current from

the north into the ſtrait, that they cannot paſs it. 1

Fack oF THE CounTRyY.| The weftern coaſt, which is waſhed by Davis' Straits,
is high, rocky, barren land, which rears its head, in moſt places cloſe to the ſea, in
lofty mountains and inacceſſible clifts, and meets the mariner's eye 40 leagues at ſea,

All theſe, except the exceſſively ſteep and ſlippery rocks, are conſtantly covered with

ice and ſnow, which has alſo, in length of time, filled all the elevated plains, and

many valleys, and probably increaſes yearly. "Thoſe rocks and cliffs, which are bare
of ſnow, look, at a diſtance, of a dark brown, and quite naked as to any kind of
growth ; but by a nearer inſpection, they are found to be interſperſed with many veins
of variegated colours of ſtone, here and there ſpread over with a liitle earth and turf.
 PorvLation.| Moſt of the Greenlanders live to the ſouthward of the 62d degree
of N. latitude, or as the inhabitants are wont to ſay, in the ſouth; but no Europeans
live there, ſo that theſe parts are but little known. The European colonies have fixed
themſelves to the northward of latitude 62. F
| Formerly the weſtern part of Greenland was inhabited by ſome thouſands of
Indians; but the ſmall pox, in 1733, almoſt depopulated this country, which is the
fineſt part of Gehhne. 4g 1 oh N
A factor, who lived many years in the country, and whoſe accuracy, as far as the
ſubject will admit, may be depended on, found, in the compaſs of 40 leagues, which
was the circle of his dealings, 957 ſouls, conſtant reſidents, Belides occaſional viſitors.
This part of Greenland is the moſt populous, except Diſko Bay, (which is the beſt
place for trade) and the ſouthern parts. In other places, a perſon may travel 60 miles
and not meet with a fingle perſon. Suppoſe, however, that the country is inhabited
for the ſpace of 400 leagues, and that there are 1000 ſouls for every 40 leagues, the =
amount would be 10,000. The above-mentioned factor thinks that there are not _
more than 7000, becauſe there are ſo many deſert places. He aſſerts, indeed, that the
native Greenlanders, in 1730, amounted to 30, ooo; and when he made his, firſt calcu-
lation in 1746, there were ſtill 20,000. Conſequently ſince that time their number
has diminiſhed at leaſt one half. 5 N 2 5 ps
Cur1osiTiEs.] The aſtoniſhing mountains of ice in this country may well be reck-

__ oned among its greateſt curioſities. Twelve leagues from the colony at Good Hope,
lies the famous Ice-glance, called in ſome charts E:s-blink.. It is a large highfield of
ice, whote glance in the air may be ſeen for many leagues at fea, reſembling the
Aurora Borealis. The mouth of an inlet, four leagues north of the colony, is blocked

up in ſuch a manner, by many large pieces of ice driven out by the ebb, that it forms
a phenomenon like an arched ice bridge, ſtretching from land to land, eight leagues
in length, and two in breadth. The openings or arches of it are computed to be from
14 to 40 yards high. People might pats through tliem in boats, if they were not afraid
of the broken fragments of ice that often fall from the top and ſides of the arches.
Places are found here where Greenland: houſes once ſtood, which proves that the
mouth of this harbour was once open. 8 5 —
ä Nothing can exhibit a more dreadful, and at the ſame time a more dazzling
. appearance, than thoſe prodigious maſſes of ice that ſurround the whole coaſt in
various forms, reflecting a multitude. of colours from the ſun beams, and calling to
mind the enchanting ſcenes of romance. Such proſpects they yield m calm weather,
3 but when the wind begins to blow, and the waves to riſe in vaſt billows, the violent
| ſhocks of thoſe pieces of ice daſhing againſt one another fill the mind with horror.
| 2 | 8 The


N AN . e 101


The ice mountains are pieces of ice floating in the ſea, of an amazing ſize, and of
very Curious forms : ſome have the appearance of a church or caſtle, with ſquare or
ointed turrets ; . others, of a ſhip under ſail; and people have often given themſelves
fruitleſs toil to go on board and pilot the imaginary ſhip into harbour; others look like
large iſlands, with plains, vallies, and hills, which often rear their heads 200 yards
above the level of the ſea. In Diſko Bay, on a ground which the whale fiſhers ſay is
oo fathoms deep, ſeveral ſuch ice mountains have ſtood faſt for many years, one of
which they call the city Harlem, and another Amſterdam. This ice for the moſt part,
is very hard, clear, and tranſparent as glaſs, of a pale green colour, and ſome pieces
{ky blue but if you melt it and let it freeze again it becomes white.
Tits, SrRINes, AND Rivers. | The tide flows from ſouth to north, and riſes in
common three fathoms in the ſouth ; two, at Good Hope, and one at Diſko, and con-
tinues to decreaſe as you proceed north. It is remarkable that the wells and ſprings in
the country riſe and fall, in exact conformity to the waxing and waning of}the moon,
or the ebbing and flowing of the tides. In winter, eſpecially, when all is covered over
with ice and ſnow, new and briſk fountains of water riſe at ſpring tides, and diſappear
again in places where there is commonly no water, and which are elevated far above
the level of the ſea: V Fe
This country, in general, is not fo well ſupplied with water as the hilly countries
in warmer regions. Moſt of the fprings which afford clear and wholeſome water have
no other ſupply than the melted and imbibed ſnow water. In the valhes, large ponds
are thinly interſperſed, which are fed by the ice and ſnow diſtilling from the mountains.
The little ſtreams from the hills, called ſahnon elves, are not ſo confiderable as the
hill waters in more ſouthern latitudes. Gr pre og og poets 2s
The country does not admit of large rivers. The vallies are not long, for the moun-
tains preſently ſhoot up aloft, and are covered with perpetual ice, which melts very
little, and of courfe affords the fprings but a ſcanty ſapply. Many ſprings are therefore
dry in ſummer, and in the winter are arreſted by the froſt. Men and beaſts would
then die of thirſt, if a wife Providence had not ordered, that in the hardeſt winter,
rains and thaws ſometimes happen, when the filtrated ſnow water gathers m pools
under the ice, and is thence taken by the inhabitants. | SIT ads :
Alx AND SEASONS. ] As this country is covered, in moſt places, with everlaſting
ice and ſnow, it is eaſy to imagine that it muſt be extremely cold. In thoſe places
where'the inhabitants enjoy the viſits of the ſun for an hour or two in a day in winter,
the cold is tolerable, though even then ſtrong liquors will freeze, when out of the
warm rooms. But where the fun entirely forfakes the horizon, while people are
drinking tea, the emptied cup will freeze on the table. Mr. Paul Edge, in his Journal
of January 7th, 1738, records the following effects of cold at Diſko : © The ice and
| hoar froſt reaches through the chimney to the ſtove's mouth, without being thawed
by the fire in the day time. Over the chimney is an arch of froſt with ſmall holes,
through which the ſmoke diſcharges itſelf. The door and walls are as if they were
plaſtered over with froſt, and; which is fearcely credible, beds are often frozen to the
bedſtead. 'The linen is frozen to the drawers. The upper cider-down-bed and the
Pillows are quite ſtiff with froſt an inch thick, from the breath. The fleſh barrels muſt
be hewn in pieces to get out the meat.” Ce |
The moſt fevere cold commences in January, and is fo piercing in February and
March, that the ſtones ſplit, and the ſea recks like an oven, eſpecially in the bays.
When this f-of ſmoke, as it is called, is waſted into the colder atmoſphere, it freezes
= | Uto


„


102 6 R E E N IL AN D.


into little 3 icy particles, which are driven by the wind, and create ſuch a keen cold on
the land, that one can ſcarcely leave the houſe without being frozen.
We may fix the limits of their ſummer from the beginning of May to the end of
September; for during theſe five months the natives encamp in tents. The ground
however is not thawed till June, and then only on the furtace, and till then, it does
not entirely leave off ſnowing. In Auguſt it begins to ſnow again, but the permanent
ſnows do not fall till October. In the long ſummer days, the weather is ſo hot as to
_ oblige the inhabitants to throw off their warm garments. The heat, in a clear ſun-
ſhine upon the open ſea, has been known to be 10 great, as to melt che Pitch on tlie
ſides of a ſhip.
In ſummer there is no night in this country. Beyond the 66th degree, in the longeſt
days, the ſun does not ſet ; and at Good Hope, in latitude 64*, the ſun does not ſet


till zo minutes aſter 10 o'clock, and riſes again 50 minutes after one o'clock. The FE


winter days are proportionably ſhort.

PRODUCTIONS, MINERAL AND VEGETABLE.] The amiantus and aſbeſtos, or ſtone
flax, is found in plenty in the hills of this country. There are alſo quartzes and
cryſtals in pretty large pieces, coarſe marble of all colours, iron ſtone and ore, and a
ſoft ſtone called by Nome, French chalk, by others baſtard marble, out of which the
inhabitants make all their veſſels. W hen rubbed with oil, it aſſumes a beautiful
marble ſmoothneſs, and grows more firm and ſolid by being uſed over the fire.

Among the vegetables of this cold country are — of various ſorts, angelica,
wild tanſey, ſcurvy graſs in great quantities, wild roſemary, dandelions in plenty,
and various ſorts of graſs. Whortle-berries and cranberries grow here. Europeans

have ſown barley and oats, which grow as high and thrifty as in warmer climates, but
| ſeldom advance ſo far as to ear, and never, even in the warmeſt places, to matority,


|  becaule the froſty nights begin too ſoon.


AxIAALS.] Unfruitful as this country is, it affords food for ſome, though but few
kinds of beaſts, which furniſh the natives with food and raiment. Of the wild game,
are white hares, rein deer, foxes, and white bears, who are fierce and muſchievous.
The Greenlanders have no tame animals but a ſpecies of dogs, which reſemble
wolves.

Ihe Seal of Greenland is a quadruped, and amphibious. There are ſeveral ſorts
of them, but they are alike in having a tough hairy 1kin, like the land animals, except
that the hair is thick, ſhort and ſmooth. They have two ſhort feet before, ſtanding
downwards, for the conveniency of rowing, and behind they have alſo two ſtanding
outwards for ſtecring, one on each fide of the tail. They have five toes on their feet,
each conſiſting of four joints, and terminating in a long nail or claw, with which they
climb the ice or rocks. The hinder feet are webbed like thoſe of a gooſe, fo that in
fvimming they ſpread them like a fan. The water is their proper element, and fiſh
their food. Their fleſh affords the inhabitants a nouriſhing food, and their ſkins an
excellent warm covering.

RELIOION.] The firſt miſſionaries among the Greenlanders entertained a doubt
whether they had any conception of a Divine Being, as they had no word in their
language by which to deſignate him. When they were aſked who made the heaven
and earth, and all viſible things? their anſwer was“ We know not; or, we don't
know him ; or, 1t muſt have been ſome mighty. perſon ; or, things always have been
as they are, and will always remain ſo.” But when they underſtood their language
better, they found they had ſome vague notions concerning the ſoul, and ſpirits ; and

Were


ba.


GEE EE VE:-N LA N-D.: 5 ro
were ſolicitous about the fate after death. It was evident alſo that they had ſome faint
conceptions of a Divine Being. 15 1 APE

They believe in the doctrine of the tranſmigration of ſouls—that the ſoul is a ſpiritual |
eflence, quite different from the body—that it needs no corporeal nouriſhment—that
it ſurvives the body, and lives in a future better ſtate, which they believe will never
end. But they have very different ideas of this ſtate. Many place their Elyſium in the
abyſſes of the ocean, or the bowels of the earth, and think the deep cavities of the
rocks are the avenues leading to it. There dwells Torngarſuck* and his mother; there
a joyous ſummer is perpetual, and a ſhining ſun is obſcured by no night; there is the
limpid ſtream, and abundance of fowls, fiſhes, rein deer, and their beloved ſeals, and


theſe are all to be caught without toil, nay they are even found in a great kettle boiling”


alive. But to theſe delightful ſeats none muſt approach but thote who have been,
dextrous and diligent at their work, (for this is their grand idea of virtue) that have
performed great exploits, and have maſtered many whales and ſeals, have undergone
creat hardſhips, have been drowned in the ſea, or died in childbed. The diſembodied


ſpirit does not enter dancing into the Elyſian fields, but muſt ſpend five whole days,


ſome ſay longer, in ſliding down a rugged rock, which is thereby ſmeared with blood
and gore. Thoſe unfortunate ſouls which are obliged to perform this rough journey


in the cold winter, or in boiſterous weather, are peculiar objects of their pity, becauſe


they may be eaſily deſtroyed on the road, which deſtruction they call the ſecond death,
and deſcribe it as a perfect extinction, and this, to them, is the moſt dreadful conſi-
deration. Therefore during theſe five days or more, the ſurviving relations muſt
abſtain from certain meats, and from all noiſy work, (except the neceſſary fiſhing) that


the ſoul may not be diſturbed or periſh in its perilous paſſage. From all which, it is


plain that the Greenlanders, ſtupid as they have been repreſented, have an idea that


the good will be rewarded—and the bad puniſhed—and that they conceive a horror at


the thoughts of the entire annihilation of the foul.  _
Others have their paradiſe among the celeſtial bodies, and they imagine their flight
thither ſo eaſy and rapid, that the foul reſts the very ſame evening in the manſion of the
moon, who was a Greenlander, and there it can-dance and play at ball with the reſt
of the ſouls ; for they think the northern lights to be the dance of ſportive ſouls. The
fouls in this paradiſe are placed in tents round a vaſt lake abounding with fiſh and
fowl. When this lake overflows, it rains on the earth, but ſhould the dam once break,


there would be a general deluge.


The wiſer Greenlanders, who confider the ſoul as a ſpiritual immaterial eſſence,


laugh at- all this, and ſay, if there ſhould be ſuch a material, luxuriant paradiſe,


where ſouls could entertain themſelves with hunting, fill it can only endure for a


time; afterwards the fouls will certainly be conveyed to the peaceful manfions : but


they know not what their food or employment will be. On the other hand, they
place their hell in the ſubterrancous regions, which are devoid of light and heat, and


filled with perpetual terror and anxiety. This laſt fort of people lead a regular lite,
and refrain from every thing they think is evil. 3 Es:
\ Hisrory.] Weſt Greenland was firſt peopled by Europeans in the eighth century.


At that time a company of Icelanders, headed by one Ericke Rande, were by accident
driven on the coaſt. On his return he- repreſented the country infuch a favourable:
icht, that ſome families again followed him thither, where they ſoon became a thriving


colony, and beſtowed on their new habitation the name of Groenland, or Greenland, on
| Account of its verdant appearance. This colony was converted to Chriſtianity by a


*The name of the good ſpirit, anſwering to the heathen Jupiter. |


miſſionary |


VVV NES Lt:


dence was cut off, and all knowledge of Greenland has been buried in oblivion. _


various cauſes; but the moſt probable is the following: the colony, from its firſt ſettle-
ment, had been harrafied by the natives, a barbarous and ſavage people, agreeing in


This nation, called Schrellinge, at length prevailed againſt the Iceland ſettlers who in-


nothing alive but ſome cattle and flocks of ſheep running wild about the country.


Greenland, and from tradition confirm this conjecture. They affirm that the houſes


their anceſtors deſtroyed. There are reaſons, however, for believing that there may


be ſtill ſome deſcendants of the ancient Iceland colony remaining in the eaſtern diſ-
tains, perpetually covered with ſnow, which divide the two parts of Greenland ; while
they have been rendered inacceſſible by tea, by the vaſt quantity of ice driven from
Spitzbergen, or Eaſt Greenland, One would imagine that there muſt have been ſome


that the coaſt of Greenland is now become almoſt totally inacceſſible, though formerly


counts, though moſt of them romantic and ſlightly atteſted, which render it probable


tainly comprehended twelve extenſive pariſhes, one hundred and ninety villages, 2


_ caſtern Greenlanders to be a cruel, barbarous nation, that deſtroy and eat all ſtrange!
Who fall into their hands. About a century after all intercourſe between Norway and


venturers, Mogens Heinſon, after having ſurmounted many difficulties and danger


muthonary from Norway, ſent thither by the celebrated Olaf, the firſt Norwegian
monarch who embraced the true religion. The Greenland: ſettlement continued to
mereaſe and thrive under his protection; and in a little time the country was pro-
vided with many towns, churches, convents, biſhops, &c. under the jurifdiction of the,
Archbiſhop of Drontheim. A confiderable commerce was carried on between Green-
land and Norway; and a regular interoourſe maintained between the two countrics
till the year 1406, when the laſt biſhop was ſent over. From that time all correſpon-


This ſtrange and abrupt ceflation of all trade and intercourſe has been attributed to


; TELE... A A A | 7 g D
cuſtoms, garb, and appearance, with the Eſquimaux found about Hudion's Bay,


habited the weſtern diſtrict, and exterminated them in the 14th century: inſomuch,
that when their brethren of the eaſtern diſtrict came to their aſſiſtance, they found


Perhaps they themſelves afterwards experienced the ſame fate, and were totally de-
ſtroyed by theſe Schrellings, whoſe deſcendants fiill inhabit the weſtern parts of


and villages, whote ruins ſtill appear, were inhabited by a nation of ſtrangers, whom


trict, though they cannot be viſited by land, on account of the ſtupendous moun-


confiderable alteration in the northern parts of the world ſince the 15th century, ſo


viſited with very little difficulty. It is alſo natural to aſk, by what means the people


of the eaſtern colony ſurmounted the above-mentioned obſtacles when they went to
the aſſiſtance of their weſtern friends; how they returned to their own country; and
in what manner hiſtorians learned the ſucceſs of their expedition? Concerning all
this we have very little ſatisfactory information. All that can be learned from the
moſt authentic records is, that Greenland was divided into two diſtricts, called Met


gd and Eaft Bygd% that the weſtern diviſion contained four pariſhes and 100 villages:
t the eaſtern diſtrict was ſtill more flouriſhing, as being nearer to Iceland, foorer
ſetiled, and more frequented by ſhipping from Norway. There are alto many ac-


that part of the caſtern colony ſtill ſubfiſts, who, at ſome time or other, may have
given the imperfect relation above mentioned. This colony, in ancient times, ccr-


biſhop's ſee, and two monaſteries. The preſent inhabitants of the weſtern diſtrict are
entirely ignorant of this part, from e they are entirely divided by rocks, moun-
tains, and deſerts, and ſtill more frequently by their apprehenſion : for they believe the


Greenland had ceaſed, ſeveral ſhips were ſent ſucceſſively by the kings of Denmark, in
order to diſcover the caſtern diſtrict ; but all of them miſcarried. Among theſe ad-


got fight of the land, which, however, he could not approach, At his return, 4
2 85 | „ Pretended


| GREENLAND. 1:5; 15
pretended that the ſhip was arreſted in the middle of her courſe; by certain rocks of
loadſtone at the bottom of the ſea. The ſame year, 1576, in which this attempt was
made, has been rendered remarkable by the voyage of Captain Martin Frobiſher, ſent
upon the ſame errand by Queen Elizabeth. He likewiſe deſcribed the land; but
could not reach it, and therefore returned to England ; yet not before he bad tailed
ſixty leagues in the ſtrait, which ſtill retains his name, and landed on ſeveral iſlands,
where he had ſome communication with the natives. He had likewiſe taken poſſeſſion
of the country in the name of Queen Elizabeth ; and brought away ſome pieces of
heavy black ſtone, from which the refiners of London extracted a certain proportion of
cold. In the enſuing ſpring, he undertook a ſecond voyage at the head of a imall
tquadron, equipped at the expence of the public; entered the ſtraits a ſecond time;
_ diſcovered upon an iſland a gold and filver mine; beſtowed names on ditterent bays,
iſlands, and headlands; and brought away a lading of ore, together with two natives,
a male and a female, whom the Englith kidnapped. 2 0


- »


Such was the ſucceſs. of this voyage, that another armament was fitted out under
the auſpices of Admiral Frobiſher, conſiſting of fifteen ſail, including a conſiderable
number of ſoldiers, miners, {melters, carpenters, and bakers, to remain all winter near
the mines in a wooden fort, the different pieces of which they carried. out in their
tranſports. They met with boiſterous weather, impenetrable fogs, and violent cur-
rents, upon the coaſt of Greenland, which retarded their operations until the ſeaſon
was far advanced. Part of their wooden fort was loſt at fea; and they had neither
proviſion. nor fuel ſufficient for the winter. The admiral therefore determined to
return with as much ore as he could procure : of this they obtained large quantities
out of a new mine; to which they gave the name of the Counteſs of Suſſex. The
| likewiſe built an houſe of ſtone and lime, provided with ovens ; and here, with a
view to conciliate the affections of the natives, they left a quantity of ſmall morrice-
bells, knives, beads, looking-glaſſes, leaden pictures, and other toys, together with

ſeveral loaves of bread. They buried the timber of the fort where it could be eafily

found next year; and ſowed corn, peas, and other grain, by way of experiment, to
know what the country would produce. Having taken theſe precautions, they failed
from thence in the beginning of September; and after a month's ſtormy paſſage, ar-

rived in England: but this noble deſign was never proſecuted. _ - |
* Chriſtian IV. King of Denmark, being defirous of diſcovering the old Greenland
ſettlement, ſent three ſhips thither, under the command of Captain Godſke Linde-
now; who is ſaid to have reached the caſt coaſt of Greenland, where he traded with
the ſavage inhabitants, ſuch as they are ſtill found in the weſtern diſtrict, but ſaw no
itgns of a civilized people. Had he actually landed in the eaſtern diviſion, he muſt
have perceived tome remains of the ancient colony, even in the ruins of their con-
vents and villages. Lindenow kidnapped two of the natives, who were conveyed to
Copenhagen; and the ſame cruel fraud“ was practiſed by two other ſhips which
17565 | 1-19: EE nes TP failed


Nothing can be more inhuman and repugnant to the dictates of common juſtice, than this practice of
tear ing away poor creatures from their country, their families, and connections, unleſs we ſuppoſe them al-
together deſtitute of natural affection; and that this was not the caſe with thoſe poor Greenlanders, ſome of
whom were brought alive to Copenhagen, appears from the whole tenor of their conduct, upon their firſt
capture, and during their confinement in Denmark. When firſt captivated, they rent the air with their gries
aud lamentations: they even leaped into the ſea; and, when taken on board, tor ſome time refuſed all fuſ-
tenance. Their eyes were continually turned towards their dear country, aud their faces always bathed in
cars. Even the countenance of his Daniſh majeſty, and the careſſes of the court and people, could not alle-
late their grief. One of them was perceived to ſhed tears always when he ſaw an infant in the mother's

P - - Arms z


106 „„ Nee
failed into Davis's Straits, where they diſcovered divers fine harbours and delightful
meadows covered with verdure. In ſome places they are faid-to have found a con-
fiderable quantity of ore, every hundred pounds of which yielded twenty-fix ounces
of filver. The fame Admiral Lindenow made another voyage to the coaſt of Green-
land in the year 16c6, directing his courſe to the weſtward of Cape Farewell. He
coaſted along the ſtraits of Davis; and having made fome obſervations on the face of
the country, the harbours, and iflands, returned to Denmark. Carſten Richards, being
detached with two ſhips on the ſame diſcovery, deſcrisd the high land on the
ec ſide of Greenland; but was hindered by the ice from approaching the
Ore |
Other expeditions of the ſame nature have been planned and executed with the
ſame bad ſucceſs, under the auſpices of a Daniſh company of merchants. Two ſhips
returned from the weſtern part of Greenland loaded with a kind of yellow ſand, ſup-
poſed to contain a large proportion of gold. This being aſſayed by the goldimiths of
Copenhagen, Was condemned as uſeleſs, and thrown overboard: but from a ſmall
quantity of this ſand, which was reſerved as a curiofity, an expert chemiſt afterwards
extracted a quantity of pure gold. The captain, who brought home this adventure,
was ſo chagrined at his diſappointment, that he died of grief, without having left any
directions concerning the place where the ſand had been diſcovered. In the year
1654, Henry Moller, a rich Dane, equipped a veſſel under the command of David de
Nelles, who failed to the weſt coaſt of Greenland, from which he carried off three
women of the country. Other efforts have been made, under the efforts of the Daniſh
king, for the diſcovery and recovery of the old Iceland colony in Greenland: but all
of them miſcarried, and people began to look upon ſuch expeditions as wild and
chimerical. At length the Greenland, company at Bergen in Norway tranſported a
colony to the weſtern coaſt, about the 64th degree of latitude, and theſe Norwegians
failed 1n the year 1712, accompanied by the Reverend Hans Egede, to whoſe care,
ability, and preciſion, we owe the beſt and moſt authentic account of modern Green-
land. This gentleman endeavoured to reach the caftern diſtrict, by coaſting ſouth-
wards, and advanced as far as the States Promontory: but the ſcaſon of the year, and
continual ſtorms, obliged him to return; and as he could not even find the Strait of
Frobiſher, he concluded that no ſuch place ever exiſted, In the year 1724, a ſhip,
being equipped by the company, failed on this diſcovery, with a view to land on t 6
caſt tide oppoſite to Iceland; but the vaſt ſhoals of ice, which barricadoed that part
of the coaſt, rendered this ſcheme impracticable. His Daniſh majeſty, in the year
1728, cauſed horſes to be tranſported to Greenland, in hopes that the ſettlers might,
by their means, travel over land to the eaſtern diſtrict; but the icy mountains were
found impailable. Finally, Lieutenant Richards, in a ſhip which had wintered near
the new Daniſh colony, attempted, in his return to Denmark, to land on the eaftern
ſhore, but all his endeavours proved abortrve. _
Mr. Egede is of opinion, that the only practicable method of reaching that part of
the country, will be to coaſt north-about 1 in ſmall veſſels, between the great flakes of


arms; a — from whence it was naturally . that he had left his wife with a young child
in Greenland. Two of them went to ſea in their little canoes in hope of reaching Greenland; but one of
them was retaken. Other two made the ſame attempt, but were driven by a ſtorm on the coaſt of Schonen,
where they were apprehended by the peafants, and reconveyed to Copenhagen. One of them afterwards
died of a fever, caught in fiſhing pearl, during the winter, for the governor of Kolding. The reſt lived .
ſome years in Denmark; but at length, ſecing no proſpect of being able to 8 their native country, they
ſunk into a kind of melancholy * and 2


— * — 8


*


5 BRITISH AMERICA _- 197
ice and the ſhore; as the Greenlanders have declared, that the currents continually
iſfuing from the bays and inlets, and running ſouth-weſtwards along the ſhore, hinder
the ice from adhering to the land; fo that there is always a channel open, through
which veſſels of ſmall burden might paſs, eſpecially if lodges were built at ſuitable
diſtances on the ſhore, for the convenience and direction of the adyventurers.


*.


Wii 29 gue 4 5 . *


BRITISH AME RICA.
SITUATION AND EXTENT.


Urn the general name of Britiſh America, we comprehend the vaſt and un-

WW known extent of country, bounded ſouth, by the United States of America, and
the Atlantic ocean ; eaſt, by the ſame ocean and Davis's Straits, which divide it from
Greenland; extending north to the northern limits of the Hudſon's Bay charter; and
weſtward to an unknown extent—lying between 42 30 and 7* north latitude ; and
between 50* and 1052 weſt long. from Greenwich; and between 25* eaſt and 30ꝰ welt
long. from —U—— ont FVV
Divisfoxs.] Britiſh America is divided into four provinces, viz. 1. 194 75 Canada;
2. Lower Canada, to which are annexed New Britain, or the country lying round
Hudſon's Bay, and the Iſland of Cape Breton; 3. New Brunſwick; 4. Nova Scotia,
to which is annexed the Iſland of St. John's. Beſides theſe. there is the Iſland of New-
foundland, which is governed by the admiral for the time being, and two lieutenant
governors, who refide at Placentia and St. John's. The troops ſtationed at New-
foundland, however, are ſubject to the orders of the Governor-gencral of the four


-


5 Britiſh Provinces.


THE country lying round Hudſon's Bay, or the country of the Eſquimaux, com-
prehending Labrador, New North and South Wales, has obtained the general
name of NRw BRTralx, and is attached to the government of Lower Canada. A
ſupcrintendant of trade, appointed by the Governor- general of the four Britiſh Pro-
vinces, and reſponſible to him, reſides at Labrador. 33 ³˙ te JST

Rivens.] The principal rivers which water this country, are the Wager, Monk,
Seal, Pockerekeſko, Churchill, Nelſon, Hayes, New Severn, Albany, and Mooſe
rivers, all which empty into Hudſon's and James Bay from the weſt. The mouths of
all the rivers are filled with ſhoals, except Churchill's, in which. the largeſt ſhips may
lie; but ten miles higher the channel is obſtructed by ſand banks. All the rivers as far
as they have been explored, are full of rapids and cataracts, from ten to fixty feet per-
pendicular, Down theſe rivers the Indian traders find a quick paſſage; but their

return is @ labour of many months. == a

| P 2 : F ACE


*


108 5 N E W BRITAIN.


FACE OF THR Corner, Sorr, &c.] As far inland as the Hudſon Bay Company
have ſettlements, which is 600 miles to the weſt of Fort Churchill, at a place called
Hudſon Houſe, lat. 53 lon. 106* 27 W. from London, is flat country: nor is it
known how far to the caſtward the great chain ſeen by navigators from the Pacific


Ocean branches off. From Mooſe River, or the bottom of the bay, to Cape


Churchill, the land is flat, marſhy, and wooded witli pines, birch, larch, and willows.


From Cape Churchill, to W ager's River, the coaſts are high and rocky to the very


ſea, and woodleſs, except the. mouths of Pockerekeſko and Seal rivers. The hills on
their back are naked, nor are there any trees for a creat diſtance inland,

The eaſtern coaſt f is barren, paſt the efforts of. cultivation.
where uneven, and covered with maſſes of ſtone of an amazing ſize. It is a country
of fruitleſs and frightful mountains, ſome of an aftomthing height.
full of lakes, formed not from ſprings, but rain and ſnow, ſo chilly as to be productive
of a few tmall trout only. The mountains have here and there a blighted ſhrub, or a
little moſs.
cedars, or rather a ſpecies of the juniper.
ceaſes.
— from land.

IX HABTTAN TS, CusToms, &c.
along the coaſts, Eſquimaux.


In latitude 60, on this coaſt, vegetation


The dogs of the former are very ſmall; of the lalter,
large, and headed like a fox. Notwithſtanding they have rein deer, they never train
them for the ſledge, but apply their dogs to that ute. Walruſes viſit a place called
Nuchvunk, in latitude 602, during winter; from thence the natives purchaſe the teeth
with which they head their darts.


The laudable zeal of the Moravian clergy induced them, in the year 1752, to ſend.
They fixed on Neſbit's harbour for their


_ miſhonaries from Greenland to this country.
ſettlement ; but of the firſt party, ſome of them were killed, and the others driven
away. In 1764, under the protection of the Britiſh government, another attempt was
made.
on with ſucceſs.
CLIMATE.


by intervals the whole winter; and, when the froſt is moſt rigorous, in form of the


fineſt ſand. The ice on the rivers is eight feet thick. Port wine freezes into a ſolid


maſs; brandy coagulates. "The very breath falls on the blankets of the beds in the form
of a hoar froſt, and the bedclIoaths often are found frozen to the wall. The ſun riſes,
in the ſhorteſt day, five minutes paſt nine, and ſets five minutes before three. In the
_ longeſt day the ſun riſes at three, and ſets about nine.
May, and hot weather commences about the middle of June, which at times is ſo
violent as to ſcorch the faces of the hunters. Thunder is not frequent, but very
violent. But there muſt be a
which reaches from lat. 30. 40, to lat. 63 north. — During winter the firmament is not
without its beauties.
richly tinged with all the colours of the rainbow. The ſun riſes and ſets with a large
cone of yellowiſh light. The night is enlivened with the Aurora Borealis, which
ſpreads a thouſand different lights and colours over the whole concave of the tky, not


to be defaced even by the Os of the full moon ; and the n are of a Hery


rednets.,
A 154434


The 1 18 every :


The vallies are


The vallies are full of crooked, ſtunted trees, pines, fir, birch, and
The whole 855 like that on the weſt, is faced with iflands at ſome diſtance


The inhabitants among the mountains are Indians; ;


The miſſionaries were well received by the e and the miſſion goes


The 3 even about Haye' J river, in only lat. 57% , is, during
winter, exceſſively cold. The ſnows begin to fall in October, and continue falling


The ice begins to diſappear i in


great difference of heat and cold in this vaſt extent,


Mock ſuns, halos are not unfrequent; they are very bright, and


1
by 4
e


NEW .BRITATHD. 109
 Axrais.} The animals of theſe countries are, the mooſe deer, ſtags, rein deer,
bears, tygers, buffaloes, wolves, foxes, beavers, otters, lynxes, martins, ſquirrels,
ermines, wild cats, and hares. The rein deer paſs in vaſt herds towards the north in
October, ſeeking the extreme cold. The male polar bears rove out at fea, on the
floating ice, moſt of the winter, and till June; the females lie concealed in the woods,
or beneath the banks of rivers, till March, when they come abroad with their twin
cubs, and bend their courſe to the fea in ſeareh of their conſorts. Several are killed in
their paſſage ; and thoſe that are wounded ſhow vaſt fary, roar hideouſly, and bite
and throw up in the air even their own progeny. The females and the young, when
not interrupted, continue their way to the ſea. In June the males return to ſhore, and
by Auguſt are joined by their conſorts, with their cubs, by that time of a conſiderable
ſize. The feathered kinds are, geeſe, buſtards, ducks, growſe, and all manner of
wild fowls. Indeed multitudes of. birds retire to this remote country, to Labrador and
Newfoundland, from places more -remotely ſouth, perhaps from the Antilles ; and.
ſome even of the moſt delicate little ſpecies. Moſt of them, with numbers of aquatic
fowls, are ſcen returning ſouthward with their young broods to more favourable
climates. The ſavages in ſome reſpects regulate their months by the appearance of
birds; and have their gooſe month, from the vernal appearance of geeſe, from the
ſouth. All the growſe kind, ravens, cinereous crows, titmouſe, and Lapland finch,
brave the ſevereſt winter; and ſeveral of the falcons and owls ſeek ſhelter in the
woods. Of fiſh, there are whales, morſes, ſeals, codfiſh, and a white fiſh, preferable
to herrings ; and 1n their rivers and freſh waters, pike, perch, carp, and trout. |
All the quadrupeds of theſe countries are clothed with a cloſe, ſoft, warm fur. In
ſummer there is here, as in other places, a variety in the colours of the ſeveral animals ;
when that ſeaſon is over, which holds only for three months, they all aſſume the livery
of winter, and every fort of beaſts, and moſt of their fowls, are of the colour of the
ſnow ; every thing animate and inanimate is white. This is a ſurpriſing phenomenon.
But what is yet more ſurpriſing, and what is indeed one of the moſt ſtriking things,
that draw the moſt inattentive to an admiration of the wiſdom and goodneſs of Pro-
vidence, is, that the dogs and cats from Britain that have been carried into Hudſon's
Bay, on the approach of winter, have entirely changed their appearance, and acquired
a much longer, ſofter, and thicker coat of hair than they had originally. .
DIscovERY AND CouukRCE.] The knowledge of theſe northern ſeas and countries
was owing to a project ſtarted in England for the diſcovery of a north-weſt paſſage to
China and the Eaſt Indies, as early as the year 1576. Since then it has been frequently
dropped and as often revived, but never yet completed ; and from the late voyages of
diſoovery it ſeems probable, that no practicable paſſage ever can be found. Frobither
diſcovered the Main of New Britain, or Terra de Labrador, and thoſe ſtraits to which
he has given his name. In 1 585, John Davis ſailed from Portſmouth, and viewed
that and the more northern coaſts, but he ſeems never to have entered the bay. Hud-
ion made three voyages on the ſame adventure, the firſt in 1607, the ſecond in 1608,
and his third and laſt in 1610. This bold and judicious navigator entered the ſtraits
that lead into the bay known by his name, coaſted a great part of it, and penetrated to
eighty degrees and a half, into the heart of the frozen zone. His ardour for the dit-
covery not being abated by the difficulties he ſtruggled with in this empire of winter,
and world of froſt and ſnow, he ſtayed here until the enſuing ſpring, and prepared, in
the beginning of 1611, to purſue his diſcoveries, but his crew, who ſuffered equal
Pang without the ſame ſpirit to ſupport them, mutinied, ſeized upon him and
ven of thoſe who were moſt faithful to him, and committed them to the fury of the


\ 4 wy


9


* * * - 4 * =
ee i Us r 8 .


which, on account of much copper being found near it, had obtained the name of the
b Copper Mine river. The Company being deſirous of examining into this matter with
eee directed Mr. Hearne, a young gentleman in their ſervicc, and who having


© Endnote dt Rt ni


ſeemed, by the edges of the 1 ice, to rife about 12 or 14 feet. This riſe, on account of
the falls, will carry it but a very ſmall way within the river's mouth, ſo that the water


emptied itſelf into being the ſea, or a branch of it, by the quantity of whale bone and
ſeal tkins which the Eſquimaux had at their tents ; and alſo by the number of ſeals
which he faw upon the ice. The ſea, at the river's mouth, was full of iſlands and
ſhoals, as far as he could ſee, by the aſſiſtance of a pocket teleſcope ; and the ice was


and as he had found the river and ſea, in every reſpect unlikely to be of any utility, he
thought it unneceſſary to wait for fair weather, to determine the latitude more exactly


>


110 ( SKITATN.
icy ſeas in an open boat, Hudſon and his companions were either fvallowed up by


the waves, or gaining the inhoſpitable coaſt, were deſtroyed by the ſavages; but the
ſhip and the reſt of the men returned home.


Other attempts towards a diſcovery were made in 1612 and 1667 ; and a patent for
lanting the country, with a charter for a company, was obtained in the year 1670.
Ia 1646 Captain Ellis wintered as far north as 537 degrees and a half, and Captain
Chriſtopher attempted farther diſcoveries in 1361. But beſides theſe voyages, we are
indebted to the Hudſon's Bay Company for a johrney by land; * which throws much
additional light on this matter, by affording what may be called demonſtration, =
much farther North, at leaſt in ſome parts of their voyage, ſhips muſt go, before f y
can pats from one fide of America to the other. The northern Indians, who came


down to the Company's factories: to trade, had brought to their knowledge a river,


n bronght up for the navy, and ſerved in it the war before laſt, was extremely x well


qualified tor the purpoſe, to proceed over land, under the convoy of thoſe Indians, for
that river; which he had orders to furvey, if poſſible, quite down to its exit into the
ſea; to make obſervations for fixing the latitudes and longitudes ; and to bring home
maps and drawings, both of it and the countnes through which he ſhould paſs.


Accordingly Mr. Hearne ſet out from Prince of Wales's Fort, on Churchill river,


latitude 584“ North, and longitude 94 ! Weſt from Greenwich, on the 7th of
December, 1770. Mr. Hearne on the 1 3th of July reached the Copper Mine river,
and found it all the way, even to its exit into the 1 incumbered with ſhoals and falls,


an nd ry ha. itſelf into it over a dry flat of the ſhore, the tide being then out, which


in it has not the leaſt brackiſh taſte. Mr. Hearne is, nevertheleſs, fre of the place it


not yet (July 17th) broke up, but thawed away only for about three quarters of a
mile from the ſhore, and for a little way round the iſland and ſhoals which lay off the


river's mouth. But he had the moſt extenfive view of the ſea when he was about . |
miles up the river, from which ſtation the extreme Toon of it bore N. W. by


and N. E.


By the time Mr. Hearne kind finiſhed is ſurvey of the river, which was about one


o'clock in the morning on the 18th, there came on a very thick fog and drizzling rain;


by obſervation ; but by the extraordinary care he took in obſerving the courſes and


diſtances, walking from Congecathowhachaga, where he had two very good obſervations, - :


he thinks the latitude may be ane e on within 10“ at the utmoſt. It appears from
the map which Mr, Hearne conſtructed of this fingular journey, that the mouth of thc
Copper Mine river lies in latitude 72 N. and longitude 25 W. from Churchill river;
that is, about 119˙ W. of Greenwich. | Mr. land s journey back from the a


* See page 73.


Mine


—— ———ñ̃ ——


_ Nr


8
1 o
d *


Rex ay 2 8 7


4


m FIEPHA2 OST A FOLT 01-429 070 h


ud.


or


E


=.


ian ot old) SIM apmmnouo7 4


N digi,


> y*


SPV, 7 :


HY 4110


7


—


5


wy


4


1,
L, rrmm oy PP


grUDyryg. ,


PS 09 ; f =


ol


— 7


0 noma


—


—


an 7
2


*


en.
Gobν,ẽp eg N


-\ — li 2 .
| 5 F Fs unn
2d | 1 5
| : * | 7 $0
Lye f Y | Dogon, * 71 , FM 7 , D032 Gnu2F 7 0 ; | Spoon
OY ous oY el _ I 910.40 o
| — 2 | | | T 7 | ;
* 1 : 1911” wo 202d, * 4 Ne / 7
80 £4 | . RY | A HUPODDOISHF Ns
— N \ 1.
RT LLL ; | |
/ doodo uu e
— N
ro Ip CST 2 | | | | | |
e Sa T , M bp
J P


r £404 MEAN


„. %


8 J QC | I * ſr WE Yr 757 N


en A. L


4 - 2 — 1
— 7 b
_—_ -» ** E


n *
— 7 > - poll of
* . N :
24 IC X i. 2 r
DAY . 2 e „ \ le = ans
r
. . ,


—
-


UPPER AND LOWER CANADA. 111
Mine river to Churchill laſted till June goth 1772; ſo that he was abſent almoſt a year
and ſeven months. The unparalleled hardthips he fuffered, and the effential ſervice
he performed, have met with a ſuitable reward from his maſters. He has been ſeveral

\ years governor of Prince of Wales's Fort on Churchill river, where he was taken Y
priſoner by the French in 1982. . 8 3 ky |

Though the adventurers failed in the original purpoſe for which they navigated this 4
bay, their project, even in its failure, has been of great advantage to England. The
vaſt countries which ſurround Hudſon's Bay, as we have already obſerved, abound
with animals, whoſe fur and ſkins are excellent. In 1670, a charter was granted to

a Company, which does not confift of above nine or ten perſons, for the excluſive.
trade to this bay, and they have acted under it ever ſince with great benefit to the

private men who compoſe the company, though comparatively with little advantage
to Great Britain, The fur and peltry trade might be carried on to a much greater
extent, were it not entirely in the hands of this excluſive company, whoſe interctted,

not to ſay! iniquitous ſpirit, has been the ſubject of long and juſt complaint. The
company employ four ſhips, and 1 30 ſeamen. They have ſeveral forts, viz. Prince of

Wales's fort, Churchill river, Nelſon, New Severn, and Albany, which ſtand on the

== weſt ſide of the bay, and are garriſoned by 186-men. The French, in May 1782,
BE took and deſtroyed theſe forts, and the ſettlements, &c. ſaid to amount to the value of
Zoo, oool. They export commoditics to the value of 16,0001. and carry home returns
to the value of 29,340]. which yield to the revenue 3,7341. This includes the fiſhery

in Hudſon's Bay. This commerce, ſmall as it is, affords immenſe profits to the com-

pany, and even ſome advantages to Great Britain in general; for the commodities”
exchanged with the Indians for their ſkins and furs, are all manufactured in Britain ;
and as the Indians are not very mee in their choice, ſuch things are ſent of which there

is the greateſt plenty, and which, in the mercantile phraſe, are drugs. Though the

workmanſhip too happens to be in many reſpects ſo deficient, that no civilized people
Would take it, it may be admired among the Indians. On the other hand, the ſkins.
and furs brought from Hudſon's Bay are manufactured, and afford articles for trading
with many nations of Europe, to great advantage. Theſe circumſtances prove the
immenſe benefit that would redound to Britain, by throwing open the trade to -
Hudion's Bay, fince even in its preſent reſtrained ſtate it is ſo advantageous. The i
only attempt made to trade with Labrador, has been directed towards the fiſhery. ©


Great Britain has no ſettlement here. The annual produce of the fiſhery amounts to
| Upwards of 49, oool. it BY. A OBS -


De


= Publiched October 10 27704. by Sto ckdale Z.


UPPER axp LOWER CANADA.


= | HE Provinces of Upper and Lower Canada, conſtituted by act of Parliament in
YA fuel 1791, comprehend the territory heretofore called Canada, or the Province of


S$SITUA T1 ON ann EXTENT,


Length 690 JJ Longer at
Breadth 3 20] between J 14 E. and 6 W. from Philadelphia, |
8 42 30 and 52 N. latitude. 3
85 „ wy S
b 7


* „ *
9 er. n 9 r ä A 2 He . A+ fie ths " ä Re 28 "
3 93 be EY © reer . N ˙ bag We 2.4.7 5p. 4" he 224 3 * 2 8 * po 22
r A p : : - . 3 33 — ith ti Ls * ＋4 * A *
ene 8 N , , boy 4b ty. ov gh * EX 4 4 J
10 A — ry * eu; — * hoe 11 a " „ —
W * ng. * * OY * <%


Nn n


A * *
r
X ORE
D


* ee "4 2 —_- : k 5 e
Le W
W > SS Ws aa, · , ˙— r


: —


2 — *
$4 94 (hv: 8 25 waa 297 0 e —_
* ES r 4. 1


9 — N 23 k _ "A
ODE DD IRS, Io era. Drxomacey


i
,
—


1 UPPER axy LOWER CANADA.
Bor NDARIES AND Divisioks. ] Bounded north, by New Britain; eaſt, by the Gulf


of St. Law rence, and part of the Province of New Brunſwick ; Dun and ſouth,


by the Diſtrict of Mam, New Hampſhire, Vermont, New York and the lakes; : the
weſtern boundary is undefined. The Province of Upper Canada is the ſame as what is
_ commonly called the Upper Country. It lies north of the great lakes, between tlie
iatitudes of 42* 30 and 50*, and is ſeparated from New York by the river St. Law-
rence, here called the Cataraqui, and the Lakes Ontario and Erie.


Lowe Canada lies on both ſides the river St. Lawrence, between 61? 4 71 1 W.


. lon. from London; and 45* and 52 N. lat. and is bounded ſouth by New Brunſwick,
Maine, New Hampſhire, Vermont, and New Vork; and weſt by Upper Canada.
The line which divides Upper from Lower Canada commences at a ſtone boundary,


on the north bank of the lake St. Francis, at the cove weſt of Pointe au Boudet, in the
limit between the townſhip of Lancaſter and the Seigneurie of New Longuevil, running


along the ſaid limit in the direction of north thirty tour degrees welt, to the weſternmoſt


angle of the ſaid Seigneurie of New Longuev il; thence along the north-weſtern boun-
_ dary of the Scigneuric of Vandreuil, running north, twenty-five degrees caſt, until it


ſtrikes the Ottawas river ; to aſcend the faid river into the lake Tomiſcanning ; ; and


from the head of the ſaid lake by a line drawn due north, until it ſtrikes the boundary


line of Hudſon's Bay or New Britain. Upper Canada, to include all the territory to
the weſtward and ſouthward of the ſaid 198 to the utmoſt extent of the country KNOWN
by the name of Canada. ;


Rivexs.] The river St. Lawrence is one of the largeſt rivers in North America.


It iflues from Lake Ontario, forming the outlet of the long chain of great lakes, which


ſeparate Upper Canada from the United States. It takes its courſe north-eaſt ; waſhes
the ifland of Montreal, which it cmboſoms ; juſt above which it receives Ottawas


from the weſt, and forms many fertile iſlands: Continuing the ſame courſe, it meets


the tide upwards of 400 miles from the ſea, and is fo far navigable for large veſlels.


Below Quebec it becomes broad and of ſufficient depth for ſhips of war. Having


received in its courſe, beſides Ottawas, St. John's, Seguina, Deſpraires, Trois Ripieres,
and innumerable other ſmaller ſtreams, it falls into the ocean at Cape Rofieres, by


mouth go miles broad. In its courſe it forms a great variety of bays, harbours fo


lands, many of them fruitful and extremely pleaſant.
A river has been lately ſurveyed, by the deputy Surveyor General of Canada, from


its entrance into the Bay of Kenty, near Cadaraqui, to its ſource of Lake St. Che; from
which there is an eaſy and ſhort portage acroſs N. W. to the N. E. angle of Lake
Huron ; and another that is neither long nor difficult, to the ſouthward, to the old
ſettlement of Toronto. This is a ſhort Tout from Fort Frontinac to Michillimak-


kinak.


Cunare.] Winter continues with ſach ſeverity from December to April, as that
the largeſt rivers are frozen over, and the ſnow lies commonly from four to fix feet deep
during the. winter. But the air is ſo ſerene and clear, and the inhabitants ſo well
defended againſt the cold, that this ſeaſon 1s neither unhealthy nor unpleaſant. The
ſprings open ſuddenly, and vegetation is ſurprizingly rapid. The ſummer is delightful,
except that a part of it is extremely hot.

So1L AvD PRODUcE.] Though the climate be cold, and the winter long and
tedious, the ſoil is in general very good, and in many parts both pleaſant and fertile,
producing wheat, barley, rye, with many other ſorts of grain, fruits, and vegetables:


tobacco, m particular, thrives well, and is much cultivated, The ls of Orleans,
near


Bat


2


UPPER AND LOWER CANADA. nz 4


near Quebec, and the lands upon the river St. Lawrence and other rivers are remark -

able for the richneſs of the ſoil. The meadow grounds in Canada, which are well wa-

tered, yield excellent grats, and feed aer numbers of great and fmall cattle.

AnI1MALSs. |] See this article under the head of the United'Statcs. |

PrIncipPaL Tow Ns. | Quebec is the capital, not only of Lower Canada, but of "JF

Britiſh America, and is fituated at the contiuence of the rivers St. Lewrehce and St.

Charles, or the Little River, about 32c miles from the ſea. It is built on a rock, partly

of marble, and partly of ſlate. The town is 3 into an upper and lower. The

houſes in both are of ſtone, and built in a tolerable manner. The fortifications are

ſtrong, though not regular. 'The town 1s covered with a regular and beautiful citadel,

in which the governor reſides. The number of inhabitants is computed at about

15, 00. The river, which from the ſea hither is four or five leagues broad, narrows

all of a ſudden to about a mile wide. The haven, which lies oppoſite the town, is ſaſt

and commodious, and about five fathoms deep. The harbour is flanked by two baf-

tions, that are raiſed 25 fect from the gr round, winch 1 18 about the he: gut of the: lides at

the time of the equinox; .

From Quebec to Montreal; which? is about 170 miles, in FT RE up theriverBt.

Lawrence, the eye is entertained with beautiful landicapes, the banks being in many

places very bold and ficep, and ſhaded with lofty trees. The farms lie r cloſe: all

the way, ſeveral gentlemen's houſes, neatly built, ſhew themſelves at intervals, and there

is all t : appearance of à flouriſhing colony; but there are few. towns or villages. It

Is pretty much like the well ſettled parts of Virginia and Maryland, where the planters

are wholly within themſelves. Many beautiful iflands are interſperſed in the channel

of the river, which have an agreeable effect upon the eye. After paſſing the. Riche-

lieu iſlands, the air becomes ſo mild and temperate, that the traveller thinks 8

himſelf tranſported to another climate; ; "On this 1 is to be underſtood only i in the ſummer e

months. — .

The town e Trois Rivieres, or the Three Rivers, 18 about half way Wire I

Quebec and Montreal, and has its name from three rivers which join their currents

here, and fall into the river St. Lawrence. It is much reſorted to by ſeveral nations of

Indians, who, by means of theſe rivers, come hither and trade with the inhabitants in

various kinds of furs and ſkins. The country is pleaſant, and fertile in corn, a KC.

and great numbers of handſome houſes ſtand on both ſides the river. TY -: mY
Montreal ftands on an iſland in the river St. Lawrence, which is ten leagues in hon th, | ry

and four in breadth, at the foot of a mountain which gives name to it, about half a

league from the ſouth ſhore. While the French had poſſeſſion of Canada, both the

city and iſland of Montreal belonged to private proprietors, who liad improved them

fo well, that the whole iſland had become a moft delightful ſpot, and produced every 3

thing that could adminiſter to the conveniencics of life. The city forms an oblong ſquare, _ —

divided by regular and well-formed ftreets ; and when taken by the Engliſh the houſes

vere built in a very handſome manner ; and every houſe might be ſeen at one view

from the harbour, or from the ſouthernmoſt fide of the river, as the hill on the ſide of

which the town ſtands falls gradually to the water. This lace\ is ſurrounded by a wall

and a dryditch; and its fortifications have heen much improved by the: Engliſh. Mon-
_ treal is nearly as large as Quebcc, but fince it fell into the hands of the Engliſh it has

ſuffered much by fires.
The princi Pal Ys i in Upper Canada are Kingſton, on Lake Ovtario; Niagar .

between 2251 . and — Erie, and Detr oft, ftuited on the weſtern _ of

2 | ctroit -


1 * 0 A 6 „ n 8 * a
\ 2 , d F a " "IN 4 eb * 1 * hs PP TT RY = n 2 Nr Te n * N 2 -
"OE R " _— l 3 . n an 2 e — = A ö 18 4 Os = * * 0 - * PP
i e "SERIE i «Fae > tel AS 2 7 r! od wat 88 8 F ; * * Gt. - : - - a 5 a . . 12 1 Ae 1 2
* ” 4 * a — . . . 4 _ * 2
- 8 33 4 ">. > fn a > | "Oo" " .
* _— | - : —


* ;
— © AHI 25.99 — ae


#74 - | UPPER AND LOWER CAN. ADA.
Detroit river, between Lake Eri ie and Lake Huron, and nine miles below Lake St.
Clair. “*


GovrENNIENT. By the Quebec act, paſſed by the parliament of Great Britain i in 9
year 1791, fo much of the act of the 14th of George III. patſed1 in the year 1774, as


Telates to the appointment of a council for the government of the province of Quebec.


is repealed; and it is enacted that there ſhall be within each of the provinces of Up

and Lower Canada, a legiflative council, and an aſſembly, who, with the conſent of
the Governor, appointed | by the King, ſhall bave power to make laws. The Gover-
nor may give or withhold his Majeſty s aflent to bills paſſed by the legiſlative council


and aſſemblv, or reſerve them for his Majeſty's pleaſure. Bills reſerved are to have no


force till his Majeſty's aſſent is ſignified by the Governor, which, to be valid, muſt be


ſignified within two years from the time the bill is preſented to the Bene nor. The
SGovernor muſt tranſmit to the Secretary of State copies of ſuch bills as have been aflen-


ted to, which his Majeſty in council may declare his diſallowance of within two years
from the receipt.


The Legiſlative Council is to conſiſt of not fewer than ſeven members for Upper, and
fifteen ſor Lower Canada, to be ſummoned by the Governor, who muſt be authorized


by the King. Such members are to hold their ſeats for life; unleſs forfeited by four
years continual abſence, or by ſwearing allegiance to ſome foreign power.


The Houſe of Aſſembly is to conſiſt of not leſs than ſixteen members from Upper, and
not leſs than fifty from Lower Canada, choſen by the freeholders in the ſeveral towns
and diſtricts. The council and aſſembly are to be called together at leaſt once in every
year, and every aſſembly is to continue four years, unleſs ſooner diſſolved by the Go-
vernor. All queſtions are to be decided by a majority of votes of the members preſent.
His Majeſty may authorize the Governor to fix the time and place of holding the elec-
tions, (ſubject, however, to ſuch proviſions as may hereafter be made by the Legiſlature)
and to fix the times and places of holding the ſeſſions of the aſſembly, and to Proreguc


and diflolve the ſame whenever he ſhall judge it neceſſary.


The Governor, to gether with ſuch of * executive council as ; ſhall Ka appointed by 5
the King, for the affairs of each province, are to be a court of civil juriſdiction for hear- |
ing and determining appeals, ſubject, however, to ſuch appeals from their judgement as


heretofore exiſted. All lands in Uyuer Canada are to be granted hereafter in free and


common ſoccage; and alſo in Lower Canada, when the grantee ſhall defire it, ſubject


nevertheleſs to alterations by an act of the Legiſlature. _


Britiſh America is ſuperintended by an officer ſtiled Governor General of the four
_ Britith provinces in North America, who, beſides other powers, is commander in chief


of all the Britiſh troops in-the four provinces and the governments attached to them
and Newfoundland. Each of the provinces have a Lieutenant Governor, who, in


the abſence of the Governor General, has all the powers requiſite, to a chief
_ magiſtrate.


PoPULATION. | Upper Canada; though an infant ſettlement, is ſaid by ſome to con-


tain 40;000, by others, only 20,000 inhabitants. The truth probably is between them.
Lower Canada, in 1784, contained 113,012 ſouls. Both provinces may now contain


about 1 50,000 ſouls, which number is e both by natural. increaſe and by
emigrations. | |


Niagara and Detroit, though #ow in poſſeſſion of the Britin erben contrary? to treaty of peace, are


both within the lümits of the United States,


RELIGITOx


* . N
— p
VV ER
CS EEE mig ie Ns Lb
_ , ** , cate ao


3 N 2
l


[ f POL BATS 4.8 BY — PR \ r q (FS.
VERY - . 3 Wa Gu. p 2. ol + SEED o * 8 - TS. F4 MIS
N & * 25 » * __ Tr d g
S . 8 * N F
S2 2 ot OWE Ne TOs ESL ig th CS I IL "a both oo J


5


* 2 ODE [7 a LD)
7 CC
gt * N
pe ET 3 3
f N


THE ISLAND OF CAPE BRETON. 11 5


ReL1610Nn. | As many as about nine tenths of the inhabitants of theſe provinces. are
Roman Catholics, who enjoy under the preſent government, the ſame proviſion, rights,
and privileges, as were granted them in 1774, by the act of 14th of George III. The
reſt of the people are Epiſcopalians, Preſpyteri ians, and a few of almoſt all the different
ſocts of Chriſtians.
Agrceably to conſtitution, his Majeſty may . the Governor to make allot-
ments of lands, for the ſupport of a Proteſtant cler gy in each province, out of the crown
lands already granted; and to the tame purpoſe is to be appropr iated the amount of
one ſeventh of che value of all future grants of lands. His Majeſty may authorize the
Governor, with the advice of the Executive Cauncil, to erect parſonages, according to
the eſtabliſhment of the church of England, within every townſhip, or pariſh already
formed, or which; may hereafter be formed; and to endow them with ſo much of the
lands appropriated, as aforeſaid, as they ſhall judge to be expedient ; and alſo to preſent
to every ſuch parſonage, a miniſter of the church of England, duly ordained, who is
to hold andenjoy in the ſame manner, and upon the ſame conditions, as incumbents i in
England. But preſentations to parſonages, and the enjoyment of them, are to be ſub-


; ject to the eccleſiaſtical juriſdiction granted to the bithop of Nova Scotia.


Trans. | The amount of the exports from the province of Quebec, in the year 1786,
was £343,262: 19: 6. The amount of imports in the ſame year was £325,116. The
exports conſiſted of wheat, flour, biſcuit, flaxſced, lumber of various kinds, fiſh, pot—
aſh, oil, ginſeng and other medicinal roots, but prineipally of furs and peltries, to "the
amount of £285,977. The imports confilted of rum, brandy, molaſles, coffee, ſugar,
wines, tobacco, ſalt, chocolate, . proviſions for the troops, and dry goods. :
| Hrsrozy.} This country was diſcovered by the Engliſh as early as about 1497, and
| ſettled by the French in 1608, who kept poſſeſſion of it till 1760, when it was taken
by the Britiſh arms, and at the treaty of Paris, in 1763, was ceded, by France, to the
crown of England, to whom it has ever ſince belonged. &
For the beſt hiſtory of this country the reader is referred to Charlevoix' 8 hiſtory of it ;


to the Encyclopedia Britannica ; e Canada, Quebec, and e No. 19 5
2005 ang 207.


Tus ISLAND oF CAPE BRETON.


Ani to the Province of LOWER CANADA.


"HE iſland, or rather collection of iſlands, called by the French Les Iſt de Madame,
which lie ſo contiguous as that they are commonly called but one, and compre-


6 2%


hended under the name of the Iſland of Cape Breton, lies between lat. 45* and 47 NM.


and between 59* and 60%, W. long. from London, or 14* and 157 E. long. from Phi-
ladelphia, and about 45 leagues to the eaſtward of Halifax. It is about 100 miles in
length, and 50 in breadth ; and is ſeparated from Nova Scotia by a narrow ſtrait, call-

ed the Gut of Canſo, which is the communication between the Atlantic Ocean and the
Gulf of St. Lawrence.
It is ſurrounded with little ſharp-pointed rocks, * from each other by the waves,

above which ſome of their tops: arc ville.” All its harbours are open to the eaſt, turn-


Q 2 in


s ME 116 ITIIE ISLAND OF CAPE BRETON.
| ing towards the ſouth. On the other parts of the coaſt there are but a few anchoring
places for tmall veſſels, in croeks, or between iſlets. The harbour of St. Peter's,
at the weſt end of the iſland, is a very commodious place for carry ing on the
fiſhery.
Face or Tae Cour xTRx, . SOIL AND PropvcrioNs.)] Except in the hilly
parts, the ſurface of the country has but little ſolidity, being every where covered with
a light moſs and with water. The dampneſs of the 10011 is es haled in fogs, without ren-
dering the air unwholeſome. In other reſpects, the climate is very cold, owing either
to the prodigious quantity of lakes, which cover above half the iſland, and remain fro-
zen 1 time; or to the number of foreſts, that totally intercept the rays of the ſun;
the effect of which is beides decreaſed by perpetual clouds. |

The inhabitants never applied themſelves to agriculture, the ſoil being unt for it.
They often ſowed corn, but it ſeldom came to maturity; and when it did thrive ſo
much as to be worth reaping, it had degenerated fo conſiderably, that it was not fit for

ſeed for the next harveſt. They have only continued to Pant a few 2 e that are
tolerably well taſted, but muſt be renewed every year from abroad. The poorneſs and
ſcarcity of paſtures has likewiſe prevented the mast of cattle. In a a the ſoil of
Cap Breton ſeems calculated to invite none but fiſhermen and ſoldiers.
hough the iſland was entirely covered with foreſts before it was inhabited, its wood
bas ſcarce ever been an object of trade. A great quantity, however, of ſoft wood, was
foumd there, fit for firing, and ſome that might be uſed for timber; but the oak has al-
ways been ſcarce, and the fir never yielding much refin.

PoruLiaTION, Curgr Towns, 9] On this iſland there are Bout 1000 inhabitants,

who have a lieutenant governor rehident'among them, appointed by the king, The

OG, are Many, the capital, and Louiſburg, which has the beſt harbour in
the Han

This iſland may 'S confi tered as the key to Canada, as the very valuable fiſhery,

ir its neighbourhood, depends for its protection on the poſſeſſion of this iſland; as no
nation can carry it on without ſome convenient harbour of ſtrength to 1 and pro-
tect it; and Louiſburg is the principal one for theſe purpoſes.

TRADE . | The peltry trade was a very inconfiderable object. It conſiſted only i in the
{ſkins of a few lynxes, elks, muſk-rats, wild cats, bears, Sw and foxes, both of a
red, filver, at colour. Some of theſe were procured from a colony of Micmac
Indians, who hal feel tled on the iſland with the French, and never could raiſe more


ng; 9 et 7
Pt - — — . —__ -
'


mn eee ee Mie het eee ET e
a — — * * — 842 „ — — —— —
—— x — n 65 5 = ”


than 60 men able to bear arms. The reſt came from St. John's or the neighbouring
4 continent. Greater advantages might poſſibly have been derived from the coal mines 4
: | which abound in this iſland. They lie in a horizontal direction; and being no more
d.an fix or eight fect below the ſurface, may be worked without digging deep, or drain-
ing off the waters. Notwithſtanding the prodigious demand for this coal from New 3
England, from the year 1745 to 1749, theſe mines would probably have been forſa-
ken, had not the ſhips, which were ſent out to the French iſlands, wanted ballaſt. In
— «ONE: bf theſe mines, a fire has been kindled which could never yet be extinguiſhed. _
. The people of Cape Breton did not ſend all their fiſh to Europe. They ſent part of
i to the French ſouthern iſlands, on board 20 or 25 ſhips from 70 to 140 tons burden.
Beſides the cod, which make at leaſt half their cargo, they exported to the other colo-
nies, timber, planks, thin oak boards, ſalted ſalmon and mackerel, train oil, and ſea-coal.
20 were e paid for, ſome in UE and coffee, but chiefly in rum and molaſſes. The


2 | iſland


5 2
a "IS." we. LD 4 p LF 3 y +4 4 * - — -
* a * 1 * * 8 . +) 03 F * 2 e „
3 . tas; 7 ä . 7, R N * „ EAES. 1 1 * 5 8 . *
| 8 Fn 2 0 _ , . FED . "4 : Dy 9 2 Sr 3 , p ny ror r
9 Ea * e 2 I" — * pl ** : bs * YN an 2
— TIT I — N * 1 . = 5 1 I p_— 4, 3F 2 As at? * . _ l ” L Leh 1
n 3 n y — 47 5s 4 — y cans. r 7 f — . :
5 * cular if — > > {4 n . SS IO ge C . * .
* * * n : at


f
1
.
{
*
.
|
y
IT


'©1
20
7
I
1 .
|
N 4
|
3
A


A 4
\
*


THE ISLAND OF CAPE BRETON. 117
'and could not conſume all theſe commodities. Canada took off but a ſmall part of
the overplus ; it was chiefly bought by. the people of New. England, who gave in ex-
change, fruits, vegetables, wood, bricks, and cattle. This trade of exchange was al-
lowed, but a ſmuggling trade was added to it, carried on in flour and falt fiſh. |

In 1743, while this iſland belonged to the French, they caught 1,149,000 quintals
of dry fiſh, and 3,500,000 do. of mud-fiſh, the value of both which, including 3,1163
tons of train oil, drawn from the blubber, amounted to £926,577 : 10. ſterhng, accor-
ding to the prime coſt of the fiſhat Newfoundland. The whole value of this trade, an-
nually, at that period, amounted to a million ſterling. No leſs than 564 ſhips, beſides
ſhallops, and 27, ooo ſeamen, were employed in this trade. Charlevoix, in his Hiſtory
of France, ſays, * This fiſhery is a more valuable ſource of wealth and power to France,
than even the mines of Peru and Mexico would be.” RA 5
HIsTORY.] Though ſome fiſhermen had long reſorted to this iſland every ſummer,
not more than 20 or 30 had ever fixed there. The French, who took poſſeſſion of it
in Auguſt 1713, were properly the firſt inhabitants. They changed its name into that
of Iſle Royale, and fixed upon Fort Dauphin for their principal ſettlement. This har-
bour was two leagues in circumference. The ſhips came to the very ſhore, and were
ſheltered from the winds. Foreſts, affording oak ſufficient to fortify and build a large
city, were near at hand; the ground appeared leſs barren than in other parts, and the
fiſhery was more plentiful. This harbour might have been rendered impregnable at a


made a ſtronger impreffion than the advantages reſulting from it) occaſioned it to be
abandoned, after great labour had been beſtowed upon the undertaking. 'They then
turned their views to Louiſburg, the acceſs to which was eafier ; and convenience was
thus preferred to ſecurity: the fortification of Louiſburg, however, was not begun
In the year 1714, ſome-fiſhermen, who till then had lived in Newfoundland, ſettled
in this iſland. It was expected that their number would ſoon have been increaſed by
the Acadians, who were at liberty, from the treaties that had been granted them, to
remove with all their effects, and even to diſpoſe of their eſtates; but theſe hopes were
diſappointed. The Acadians choſe rather to retain their poſſeſſions under the domi-
nion of Britain, than to give them up for any precarious advantage they might derive
= from their attachment to France. Their place was ſupplied by ſome diſtreſſed adven-
1 turers from Europe, who came over from time to time to Cape Breton, and the number
of inhabitants gradually increaſed to 4000. They were ſeitled at Louiſburg, Fort
Dauphin, Port Toulouſe, Neruka, and on all the coaſts where they found a proper
beach for drying the cold. J!. 88
This iſland remained in poſſeſſion of the French till 1745, when it was captured
for the crown of Great Britain, by a body of troops from New England, under the
command of Lieutenant General William Pepperell. For the authentic particulars of
this important, fingular, and ſucceſsful expedition, ſee The American Apollo.” Part
Wo 6 Vol. I. containing the publications of the Hiſtorical Society, in Boſton. Alſo Ency-
| clopedia Britanni ca, article Breton. | Sas L. get 2 3 |


NOVA


trifling expence; but the difficulty of approaching it (a circumſtance that had at firſt


nr at —


v 6 A464 ö. „„ ow


Rd — 2 a


* — " p 0 : * £
r F. - #9 Mn *


9 4


— —  — — * 1 i I a *


e e 30g, 13s 4
bv + i -


A


e


5 em TEN


„ 5 1 pa n P
FRY 4 2 2 1
e N —— PRI Wi Sn + 2 ot_ 4/44 1 * 1


„ a * „ 3 — Tre” 2835 e
a — + tak CID EN * 1 n e 2 0 * .
—
„ — —


— g=r te: „ 9 W n * *


- —— U ä4—— „ —  —— —
—— — —AEp—— , w —
* 8 .
* bo
.
„ p *
*
*


I RC vas


n=


ot Pg
<<. ottoman arr er et


_——_——  ——


— 4 ——
P
2 *


* ay > N * — n
PL + 2 ack 12 + A > «
PI a . — -
-


"22 BoA eee PFF Ms 3 NE Is penile dd Is ©


o ” -


NG A NOF


Comprebeuding rhe P, ovinces of NEW BRUNSWICK and NOVA SCOTIA. A


"BOUNDARIES AND EXTENT. 72 ot LARS 4
Miles. Degrees. ONE 5 7555
43 30 and 49 north latitude. n
ede 5 between {6 and 67 eaſt longitude from London. |
ne ITY . 8 and 15 caft longitude from Fhilatlclphiar


Bor NDARIES, |


the Gulf of St. Lawrence, usch waſhes its coaſt 110 leagues


ia extent, from the Gut of. Canſo, at its entrance into the gulf, to Cape Rozier, which
forms the fourth part of the River St. Lawrence) and by the Gut of Canſo, which
divides it from Cape Breton; ſouth, it is waſhed by the Atlantic Ocean, having a ſea
coaſt of 9o leagues, from Cape Canſo, eaſt, to Cape Sables, weſt; which forms one


part of the entrance into the Bay of Fundy, which alſo forms a part of its ſouthern
dy een ; weſt, by a part of Lower Canada, and the Diſtrict of Maine.
The tract of country within theſe limits, known by the name of Nova Scotia, 0 or
New Scotland, was, in 1784, divided into two provinces, viz. New Brunſwick on
the north-weſt, and Nova Scotia on the ſouth-eaſt. - The former comprehends that


part of the old province of Nova Scotia, which lies to the northward and weſtward of
a line drawn from the mouth of the River St. Croix, through the center of the Bay of
Fundy to Bay Verte, and thence into the Gulf of St. Lawrence, including all lands


within 6 leagues of the coaſt. The reſt is the province of Nova Scotia, to Which is


annexed, the iſland .of St. 4 ohn 5 which lies north 1555 * in the e of fit
Lawrence.


Ley | ft.


Dunes In 7793. we! were e the following, counties in Nona Scotia, viz. 5 65


Counties.  Tonſtpe 2 Daker 2 Riu. e 5
„„ % RF A ee eb All 9 Ay
1 J St. Croix linto the Avon,
Hanrs, -Windſſoe rr , "0 ; 15808
the river: d Raldatut . {Kenetcoot | _ and except the
e e | N rt 155 8 1 1 laſt navigable.
Avon. WWW t NNavig. 40 m. for
Sh g 1 . : | EY . J x rel 0 2 J yell. of 60 tons. |
] Halifax te ARCO c bon ke”
1 3 London Der fi iſn & Scotch Fr
HALIFAS. 4 Truro pl _—_
Eaftcrs gert] Onſlow __ New England | Shebbenatcatie, B Boatable, at
* Colcheſter TFT Pitcoudiac *
of Nova * Lawrence | Memremcoot © -
bia. South ten 4 |
: Canſo 2 ;
3 Tinmouth J
* = <p | | K1NG5,
8 - :


= *
— We: 4 . 7


OUNDED on the north;-by the River Sto Lawren . "ond; 15


TOPS U9}) Pp 204034)


716 4


TIIN
*

*
*


pF


2 *


2
uh


iii 2»)


" 7 py


001112247 ip 47 1077 0742900 PHINGH]


20 __— EN 70 2


..


—


uu ſſſſſſſiſſiſſſſſſſſſſſſſum ſſeſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſe e ee ö nba


gina iat, 1211117, 12/2)
z gui AA


Zi SSOL)


r


1 0


ihii,ο,z und g „mib 7


— —-.


ſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſt ſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſſ


2p) fung
of Fee


| 8 | 8
ng LF:
*

7 Pia


O


+4
= 3


tg twp 29D þ


| p 1 1.


Fd


<< MF


v.10) Og
h


-
—


h $IJ0 8885


SLGO "RY


n


T mee
Ve v7

, UPONRLNS
DOPNM, HI . E


e .
1.1997 | 7


OY


1 = 1 UOP22).


Q


= A - - =


e 9


„„ —


Avg ,
aan h
te — . 0 8 a == : : . . = = E 7 2 =
%, UM PS —_ 1 „ FEI _ | —


"2


Mona


TT Mee


69


OMMmMmOOTmTm] lm TT LT _—_——_WwwW


4


e £*


SCOTIA.


NOVA 119
Counties. Townſhips. By whom ſettled. Rivers.
* r
i . | Habitant, navig. for veſſ. of 40 tons
S a ſmall diſtance.
KinGs, | Corn Canaid, nav. for veſſ. of 160 tons
on the Baton þ z or 4 miles.
of Miner Haren | Cornwallis, navig. for veſſ. of 100
1 | ; tons 5 m. for v. of 30 tons 10 m.
. t Salmon Vers" 55
barns J ſett. from Ire. ]) | .
| Want N | and New Eng.
4 1 + do. afinetown- | 8 1 for ſhips of
Ax NA POLIS, Ic.8g ſmhip 30 miles any burthen 10 miles of 100 tons
on Annapolis Granville - ſin leng. on the 215 miles; tide flows 30 miles, paſ-
rer 5 Annapolis Bay of Fundy. _ in boats to Ren 20 mules of
Þ# 140 families of | Horton.
| Chre' E 234 8 s
MonQon | BDC er t oB th ods. i otras:
- x: 20h 7 -, 1AnLac J] Which are nav. 3 or 4.
% $444 I Narequeſn miles for veſſels of 5.
© þ Cumberland Jo. 1 v1, 4LaPlanche tons:
CoMBER- | i 5 10 } ſettled from N. Napan
1 { "Sackville, | Eng. & Torkſh. 3 } ſhoak rivers.
atthe head of Amber, tene em N. Memem. .
ns F Wis Hillſboro! _ pof Ire. N. Eng. | Petcoudia navigable 4 or 5 i.
08 Þ Hopewell. _ and D 4 Chepodie
T ys? jt 70 He rbert 8 by. boats to-
4 Deter & 2506 1 its head 12 miles.
i r 5 5 | * | | | :
SUNBURY, | Gage Town ,
on the river Burton
St. John's, Sunbury. E St. John 85 deſeribed under the
north ſhore st. Ann's A ſettled from i head of rivers. h 1
of Bay of Willmot * To Maſſachuſetts, * |
ns al Newton Connecticut, R
J:Maugerville -/ &c. "_
Argyle Scots & Acad.
 Quexxs, .. Varmoutn New England. S
ſouth ſide of Barrington - Quakers from þ None :
Bay of Fundy. |, (Sable Iſl.) "TNantncket-; „
55 Liverpool New England.
Iriſn formerly, _
Lo NEN 1 New Dubli in 7 — RY by
on Mahone Lunenburg Germans None...
Bay. _ | Cheſter. New England. |
: ) Blandford 3 families only.“
There are ſettlements of Acadians on all theſe rivers, whoſe banks are good land. f
RIVERS.


Ly al ths + "_ 7 7 of .
— ”_ —_— n 7 4, +a — _
_ « Das
—


—— — . 2—
11


|
4:0
N by
*
|
Ry -
4 :
+


— —
o


receives the waters of. St. Croix river. | At the entrants of this, ba is.


1783, to 600 families. Since that time it has become leſs populous. Guy


__ NOVA SCOTIA.


Rivrzs, Bars, Lakes, and Cars. Is . Moſt of the rivers. which water this country
have already been mentioned. The rivers Riſgonche and Nipifiguit, run from weſt to
caſt into Chaleur and Nipiſiguit Bays, which communicate with the Gulph of St.
Lawrence. The river St. Croix, (which is the true St. Croix, is yet undetermined)
emptics into Paſſamaquoddy Bay, and forms a part of the boundary between New
Brunſwick and Main. St. John's is the largeſt river in the province. It empties into
the north fide of the bay of Fundy, and is navigable for veſſels of 50 tons, 60 miles,
and for boats upwards of 200 miles. This is a common rout to Quebec. The banks

of this river, enziched by the atinual freſhets, are excellent land. About 30 miles


from the mouth of this river commences a fine level country, covered with large trees


of timber of various kinds. Maſts, from 20 to 30 inches in diameter, have been cui
on this tract. The tide flows, in this river, 80 or go miles. It furniſhes the inha-
bitants with fatmon, baG, and ſturgeon - Near fort Howe, the river ſuddenly Narrows,
and occafions a fall at certain times of tide, like that at London Bridge.

The coaſt of theſe provinces is ndented with numerous bays, / and We hi
bours. "The principal; as yon deſcend Toutherly from the mouth of St. Lawrence river,
are Gaſpce, Chaleur, Verte, which is ſeparated from the bay of. Fundy by a narrow
iſthmus of about 18 miles wide; cape and harbour of Canto, 40 leagues eaſtward of
Halifax. Chedabucto Bay is about 10 leagues N. W. of Canſo. Cliebucto Bay, on
which ſtands the town of Halifax. In the bay of Fundy, which extends 50 leagros
into the country, the ebb and flow of the tide is from 45 _ 60 feet. Chenigto Bay is
at the head of Fundy Bay. Palſamaquoddy Bay bo erd un the Diftrict of Main, and


a iſland; granted
to ſeveral gentlemen in Liverpool, in, Lancaſhire, wholnamedit am) zobello. At a very


_ conſiderable expence, they attempted is'form a ſettlement here, bin Jed. On fevcral
_ ether iſlands in this: bay ” are ſettlements made by people from Maffachuſetts.


Among the lakes in theſe provinces, -which are very numbrous, and as yet without
names, is Grand Lake, in the province of New Brunſwick, near St. John's river, about
30 miles long and B or 10 broad, and in ſome places 40 fathoms deep.

The principal capes are Cape Canſo, on the weſt fide of the entrance into Chee
bucto Bay, and Cape Sables, on the eaſt fide of the entrance into the bay of Fundy.
PxRINSCIPAL Towxs.] Halifax is the capital of the province of Nova Sootig. It
ſtands on Chebucto Bay, eommodiouſly ſituated for the fiſhery, and has a communi-
cation with other parts of this province and New, Brunſwick, by land and water
carriage. It has a good harbour, where a ſmall ſquadron of ſhips of war lies during the
winter, and in the ſummer protects the fiſhery. - The town has an entrenchment,
and is ſtrengthened. with forts. of timber. = is ſaid to contain 15 or 16,000
inhabitants.


Shelburne (Nova Scotia) © on Port Roſeway, near Cape Sables, was ſap ppo oſed, 1
oroug

{Nova Scotia) formerly called Mancheſter, ſituated on Chedabuctd Bay, about 10
leagues N. W. of Cape Canſo, contained, in 1783, about 250 families. Rawdon
{Nova Scotia) 40 miles from Halifax, has about 60 houſes. Annapolis (Nova Scotia)
on the eaſt ſide of Fundy Bay, has one of the fineft harbours 1 in the World. In Wen
xeſpects it is a poor, inaufidtene place. _

Fredricktown, about 90 miles up- St. 1 ohn's River, 18 the capital of the Provins:
of New Brunſwick. | WER PIPTEL 216k 2 Fu 2 |


Cina,


for about 30 men.


to the Micmacks.


N.-D. YA... $6.0. 7-4-4 121


ſions enough for home conſumption,


*


Forts. |] Theſe are Fort Edward at Windſor, capable of containing 200 men I |


*


IxNDIANs. ] Theſe are the Micmacks, and the tribe called the Marechites. The.
former inhabit the caſtern ſhore, between Halifax and Cape Breton; between Cum-
berland county and the north-eaſt coaſt of the province, towards Chaleur Bay; about
the heads of the rivers which run through the counties of Hants and King's County;
and between Cape Sable and Annapolis Royal. This tribe is ſuppoſed to have about


Zoo fighting men. The Marechites inhabit the river St. John, and around Paſſama-


quoddy Bay; are eſtimated at 140 fighting men; they are much ſuperior in all reſpects
AxIXAISs.] The ſame as in tlie United States though much leſs numerous.
Txape.] The exports from Great Britain to this country confiſt chiefly of linen


and woollen cloths, and other neceſſaries for wear, of fiſhing tackle, and rigging for
ſhips. The amount of exports, at an average of three years, before the new ſettlements,

| was about 26,5001. The only articles obtained in exchange. are, timber and the
produce of the fiſhery, which, at a like average, amounted to 38, oool. But from the


late increaſe of inhabitants, it is ſuppoſed that they will now erect ſaw mulls, and
endeavour to ſupply the Weſt India iſlands with lumber of every kind, as well as the
produce of the fiſhery, which will be a profitable article to both countries. The whole
population of Nova Scotia and the iſlands adjoining, is eſtimated at $0,000. This
eſtimate it is ſuppoſed is conſiderably too large. Recent accounts of theſe ſettlements


repreſent them as in a declining ſtate, having great numbers of the houſes built in the


new towns uninhabited, and conſiderably reduced in value.
Hisrorxy.] Notwithſtanding the forbidding appearance of this country, it was here
that ſome of the firſt European ſettlements were made. The firſt grant of lands in it


was given by James I. to his ſecretary, Sir William Alexander, from whom it had the


name of Nova Scotia, or New Scotland. Since then it has frequently changed hands,


from one private proprietor to another, and from the French to the Engliſh nation
backward and forward. It was not confirmed to the Engliſh, till the peace of Utrecht,

and their defign in acquiring it does not ſeem to have ariſen fo much from any proſpect,
of direct profit to be obtained by it, as from an apprehenſion that the French, by poſ-

{ſling this province, might have had it in their power to annoy the other Britiſh


L 1
*


ſettlements. Upon this principle, 3000 families were tranſported in 1749, at the


Tage of the government, into this country, who built and ſettled the town of


Halifax, N 1 81 ; N | :


= * | — —.—. | ISLAND


[ aa |
ISLAND or sr. JOHN.


HIS iſland lies in the gulf of St. Lawrence, near the northern coaſt of the pro-
vince of Nova Scotia, and is about 60 miles long, and 30 or 40 broad. It has
ſeveral fine rivers, a rich ſoil, and is pleaſantly ſituated. Charlotte-town is its principal
town, and is the refidence of the lieutenant-governor, who is the chief officer on the


iſland. The number of inhabitants are eſtimated at about 5000. Upon the reduction


of Cape Breton, in 1745, the inhabitants of this iſland, amounting to about 4000;
ſubmitted quietly to the Britiſh arms. While the French poſſeſſed this iſland, Hep
improved it to ſo much advantage, that it was called the granary of Canada, which.
it faxniſhed with great plenty of corn, as well as beet and pork. It is attached to the


*


province of Nova Scotia.


© —
EP .


NEWFOUNDLAND ISLAND.


ſeparated from Labrador, or New Britain, by the ſtraits of Belleiſle; and from Canada,


by the bay of St. Lawrence; being 550 miles long and 200 broad. The coaſts are
extremely ſubject to fogs, attended with almoſt continual ftorms of ſnow and ſleet, the
ſky being uſually overcaſt. From the ſoil of this iſland the Britiſh reap no great
advantage, for the cold is long continued and ſevere ; and the ſummer heat, though
Violent, warms it not enough to produce any thing valuable; for the ſoil, at leaſt in


_ thoſe parts of the iſland which have been explored, is rocky and barren. However,


it ig watered by ſeveral good rivers, and has many large and good harbours. This


iſland, whenever the continent ſhall come to fail of timber, convenient to navigation
(which on the fea coaſt perhaps will be at no very


what at preſent · it is chiefly valuable for, is the great fiſhery of cod ©
thoſe ſhoals, which are called: the Banks of Newfoundland. Great Britain and North


America, at the loweſt computation, annually employ 3ooo fail of ſmall craft in this


fiſhery; on board of which, and on ſhore to cure and pack the fiſh, are upwards of
100, ooo hands; ſo that this fiſhery is not only a very valuable branch of trade to the


- merchant, but a ſource of livelihood to ſo. many thouſands of poor people, and a moſt
excellent nurſery to the royal navy. This fiſhery is computed to increaſe the national
ſtock 300, oool. a year in gold and filver, remitted for the cod fold in the North, in
Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the Levant. The plenty of cod, both on the great bank
and the leſſer ones, which lie to the caſt and fouth-eaſt of this iſland, is inconceivable; .


and not only cod, but ſeveral other ſpecies of fiſh, are caught there in abundance; all


of which are nearly in an equal plenty along the ſhores of Newfoundland, Nova Scotia,
New England, and the iſle of Cape Breton; and very profitable fiſheries are carried on


upon all their coaſts. | — 3 6
This iſland, after various diſputes about the property, was entirely ceded to England
by the treaty of Utrecht, in 1713; but the 2 leſt at liberty to dry their nets


*
*


EWFOUNDLAND is fituated to the eaſt of the gulf of St. Lawrence, between |
46 and 52 degrees of north latitude, and between 53 and 59 degrees weſt long.


| erl very remote period, ) it is faid, will afford
a large ſupply for maſts, yards, and all forts of lumber for the Weſt India trade. But
of cod carried on upon


F
5
„r


8 *
1 — ä 4 4 CFR TI aa ond a = A ws — « PR” a » x: * 8 N OY R "on l 8 ** n * ; 9 5 2 9 q *
22 R yn, OE SI KS * n nns e N hes a . TOTES S , N E * ” / : 8 5 Y Ya I 3 5 n n 1 * Þ 2 4
8 o — ns 6 2 2 N . N r Ann * * 8 . Þ : , * * : 5 \ 3 * —
l 1 e 9 OI FT TIO * ** 2 >; eee I I ds” R Ls db 0% 2% or 3 ON n ” 7 : 3 7 — - £* N sf PARSE ES = 136 72 r 3 HEL
2 * r n E FRO NE EEO A Ia F * SS nets 0 i o 2 9 2 Sx n R . 1 . *, * = 4 k 7 : 0 - : 6 $ DEL ED Sy 4 _ RD oo. b 8
. g . N 33 r S ᷑ c 6 OE Mee 1 at 7 * F 3 A OL, os Es I PEFC 3 2 n 9 * ; : 7 1 dE :
- as : * 5 5 R > 3 N - r RS 2 . "he 2 Ne . 2 ot : fo
4 4 44 4+ N N » A * 7 = : * Du, 3 wth as ne, RL "4 =, 1 0
- A . 3 2 N * 3 . « 26%" 5 Eo RN r 3 2
* s ” I * * POS * 4 n „ . A. 257 3 N «4 WIT pate, © . .
F a of "a. r 5 * r 4 FP en n 6 * N T n 5
5 > L 8 r A EO AE ER ECT ⁵ A ̃—„— 4 7 i DIS a8 Ie lh pet
K 9 ö P : e 5 2 . 2 A N : N


*O


5 - - - — 7 8 . E #
l * « . ITE LS” FS 9 20 nr r 9 1 - #* F I —
ö EP — * 2 8 1 LOND 1 2 R IT * * — Nr 2 * - . 4 - | -. : N ; = : F * * g N 1 „ r "0H - >
— — * TSS bas. Saves * * 28 Tots 7 ; ION 18 1 : 9 Tod *%. b 28 a A : ST 8 n „ 1 N 3s 58 "Py . 15 e 1 * S OY ne N * TH ». 6% . 1 ＋ 2282 * 5 f 1 Y ” 5 CS .
" * 5 -4 K
N Y 2 ö 5 * 4 4 * * c N 4 b


LINN 5
8
9


9 4 n
9 9 Sek
L


A


}


— —


Hah iB al


mn —


—
1


i —
—— i


— —


*
+ A


——


PB
Tl


© —_
CSF GOO? 2


——


—


SLAWPREMN CH:


100% U


j


r
Coe


216


317


58


0 Rarles


—


A Jomple Gay =
= — lire.


Bradore —_—__—————
"dc 3
Harbour ä _”* n J


ä — 1 —
——— ——— 1 » — — —
== — 8 1 R ; | = — =
* — —


oli H <=


= Hawkes J
Marbour


— ——


— —2—2—


„ Green


Bar OF


—


— Oar

CI nee wo
-— — ——
— — —
— > — —


NEWFOUNDLAND


Qs 1 * .* *
Britzeh Wilder
7 0
3 ——


„


60


RET 5 7


4M


= —— a oy


um- m7


C—__ v


BONAVISTA.


2


Mn


UU


Anmmununume . | | || ||


FLEE HAAHHLLEEMITESS


nme


ty


AT OO


Bublivhed ty I. Stockdale Nu ur U fro. ©


T7;


endon.


—


*
*
. *
* 5
a R
* |
. 3 5
*
V 7
.
- 4
-
FE
| .
:
= 1
2
| \
5
5 -
* ;
:
;
* | |
5
*
A
© 0 : 5
5
7 * - a
- c-
2


*


2


8


4.
et


c


.


3


4


>.


A 2. pes


43


THE UNITED STATES EY
bn the northern ſhores of the iſland; and by the treaty of 1763, they were permitted to
fiſh in the gulf of St. Lawrence, but with this limitation, that they ſhould not approach
within three leagues of any of the coaſts belonging to England. The ſmall iflands of


St. Pierre and Miquelon, ſituated to the ſouthward of Newfoundland, were alſo ceded

to the French, who ſtipulated to erect no fortifications on theſe iſlands, nor to keep
more than 50 ſoldiers to enforce the police. By the laſt treaty of peace, the French
are to enjoy the fiſheries on the north and on the weſt coaſts of the iſland ; and the


4


*


5 inhabitants of the United States are allowed the ſame privileges in fiſhing as before
their independence. The chief towns in Newfoundland are, Placentia, Bonaviſta, **


and St. John's: but not above 1000 families remain here in winter. A ſmall ſquadron
of men of war are ſent out every ſpring to protect the fiſheries and inhabitants, the


admiral of which, for the time being, is governor of the iſland, beſides whom there are


two lieutenant governors, one at Placentia, and the other at St. Johns.


——


Txz UNITED STATES or AMERICA.
60; © $1TVATION AND EXTENT. ory mg
i Sn Degrees.


WO vhs = TEN 7315 and 4b North latitude. 3
enten 1259) between 9 8 E. and 24 W. longitude from Philadelphia.
"NATION CE... La 96° W. longitude from London.


Bousp ans  TROUNDED north and eaſt by Britiſh America, or the provinces
_ BounpDarigs. | |


of Upper and Lower Canada, and New Brunſwick ; fouth- |


eaſt, by the Atlantic Ocean ; ſouth, by Eaſt and Weſt Florida; weſt,” by the river


In the treaty of peace, concluded in 1783, the limits of the American United States
are more particularly defined in the words following : © And that all diſputes which
might ariſe in future on the ſubject of the boundaries of the ſaid United States may be
prevented, it is hereby agreed and declared, that the following are and ſhall be their
boundaries, viz. From the north-weſt angle of Nova Sgetia, viz. that angle which
is formed by a line drawn due north from the ſource of St. Croix River to the High-
lands, along the ſaid Highlands, which divide thoſe rivers that empty. themſelves into
the river St. Lawrence, from thoſe whicl fall into the Atlantic Ocean, to the north-
weſternmoſt head of Connecticut river; thence down along the middle of that river to
the forty-fifth degree of north latitude; from thence by a line due weſt on ſaid latitude,
until it ſtrikes the river Iroquois or Cataraqui ; thence along the middle of the faid
river into Lake Ontario; through the middle of ſaid lake, until it ſtrikes the commu-
mation by water between that lake and Lake Erie; thence along the middle of ſaid
communication into Lake Erie, through the middle of ſaid lake, until it arrives at the
water communication between that lake and Lake Huron; thence through the middle
Of ſaid lake to the water communication between that lake and Lake Superior; thence
through Lake Superior, northward of the Iſles Royal and Phillipeaux, to the Long
Lake; thence through the middle of ſaid Long Lake, and the water communication
between it and the Lake of the Woods; to the ſaid Lake of de Woods; thenee thro'
the ſaid lake to the moſt north-weſtern point thereof, and from thence, on a due ao
„ * e courſe,


—


—


=
1
:
|
CY
— *
5
*
os 2
1 ö
*
4
4 1
L IL
EY
1 x
1
*

i *
1
BY "1
* 18

41

. :
4
Oo $5
_ A „
4
bd ”
3
.
> | ]
* _
1
4 1B
.
* 4 4 2
wy!
3h
* 1 *
4
1
E
e L
* 2 C
L *
"
N J 75
17
1
4
4. 4 .
„ a
1 *
* 7
* * *
2 "M
: 4
4 2
4 *
1
7 3

3 44

#74

: 4

1 1

7% 3
i o
__
74
1 1 >
IS *
bo -

- $
1 * 8

3 *

446 x:

'e;
7
=_
+4 *%s 4
Ht i
17 *
Fri
+ 44
+ I. -
+ =T
i1

A *

1

3

x +

5 *

7 © Xs

„

4+

VI

$5


7


aforcſaid Highlands, which divide the rivers that fall into the Atlantic Ocean, from


Penn ylvania, on the eaſt; the boundary line between Great Britain and the United
States, extending from the River St. Croix to the north-weſt N of the Lake of®
the Woods, on the north; the River Mifſiſſippi, to the mouth of


have been, by the ceſfion of ſome of the original thirteen ſtates, and by the treaty of


124 THE UNITED STATES


courſe, to the Rirer Mifſiflippi ; thence by a line to be drawn along the middle of ſaick
River Miffiffippi, until it ſhall interſect the northernmoſt part of the mn n
of north latitude.
Bouth, by a line to be drawn tus: caſt from the determination of the line laſt⸗
mentioned, in the latitude of thirty-one degrees north of the equator, to the middle
of the River. Apalachichola, or Catahouche ; thence along the middle thereof to its
punction with the Flint River; thence. ſtrait to the head of St. Mary's River; and
thence down along the middle of St. Mary's River to the Atlantic Occkan. |
* Eait, by a line to be drawn along the middle of the River St. Croix, from its
mouth, in the Bay of Fundy, to its ſource, and from its ſource directly north, to the


thoſe: which tall into the River St. Lawrence ; comprehending all iflands within twenty
leagues of any part of the ſhores of the United States, and lying between lines to be
drawn due eaſt from the points where the aforeſaid boundaries between Nova Scotia
on the one part, and Eaſt Florida on the other, ſhall reſpectively touch the Bay of
Fundy and the Atlantic Ocean, excepting ſuch iſlands as now are, or heretofore have
been, within the limits of the ſaid province of Nova Scotia.“

The territory of. the United States, according to Mr. Fans contains, by compu-
tation, a million of quare miles, in which are.

640, 000,000 acres.
Dedut for water 51,00, 0


— - 38 2 .


—


—


: 1 of lun! in the United States 589,000,000 _ 5
That part of the United States comprehended betcheen the weſt boundary line of


e Ohio, on the
weſt ;-and the River-Ohio on the ſouth, to the aforementioned bounds of Pen wy 1—
vania, contains, * computation, about 47 1,000 ſquare miles, in which are
2863, 040, ooo acres.
Doduc for water 4 3 og, oo \


——


To be diſpoſed of by order of —
V bhen purchaſed of the Indians 220,000,000 | Yn
The whole of this mmente extent of unapproprated weſtern territory : containing,
as above ſtated, 220,000,000 of acres, and ſeveral large tracts ſouth of. the Ohio,“


peace, transferred to the federal government, and arc pledged as a fund for ſinking the
debt of the United States. Of this territory the Indians now poſſeſs a very large pro-
portion. Mr. Jefferſon, in his report to congreſs, Nov. 8, 1791, deſeribes the boun-
dary line between us and the Indians, as follows: * Beginning at the mouth of the
Cay ahoga (which falls into the ſouthernmoſt part of Lake Erie) and running up the
river to the portage, between that and the: Tuſcaroro (or N. E.) branch of the
Muſkingum ; then down the ſaid branch to the forks, at the croſſin — above Fort
Lawrence; then weſtwardly, towards the portage of the Great Miami, to the main
branch of that river; then down the Miami, to the fork of that river, next below the


<0 Ceded by North Carolina, South Cargtion and Georgi, with certain reſervation for the Indians and
her e as will be mentioned hereaſter. | - ond
old


old


THE UNITED STATES. 125,
old fort, which was taken by the French in 1752; thence due weſt to the river De la
Panſe (a branch of the Wabaſh) and down that river to the Wabaſh. So far the line
is preciſely determined, and cleared of the claims of the Indians. The tract compre-
hending the whole country within the above deſcribed line, the Wabaſh, the Ohio,
and the weſtern limits of Pennſylvama, contains about 55,000 ſquare miles. How
far on the weſtern ſide of the Wabaſh, the ſouthern boundary of the Indians has
been defined, we know not. It 1s only underſtood, in general, that their title to the


lower country, between that river and the W was formerly * by the
French, while in their n er | 2


E imale of the nonber of acres of Water, north Part weſtward of the River Ohio, within the


territory f the United Slates, -


| 8 Acres.

m Lake Ae CCC - 221,952,780
Lake of the Woodds + $35 ig
Lake Amid; A 1 inf gen „ ˙à—Ä—ñ—xdä 88 — — 165, 200

% » ͤ ͤ % % 66,000
Lake Michigan fs 3 — SET nn 20,368,000
Bay. Puan | . EI Wt. . | 4" ; 1,216,000

Lake Huron eee ee OO ER
Jake ob A ⁵ fi en bi eee 9,600
Lake rie, waſtern part - - 2,252,800
Sundry ſmall lakes and rivers © = 1 = . . e

Bo 1525 4 | 43-040,008
 Eflimate of the a of acres «of Water within the Thirteen United States. x:
In the Lakes, &c. as above me tioned he ing n= I . 4 009.
In Lake Erie, weſtward of the line extended

from the north-weſt corner of Pennſylvania,

due north to the boundary between the Britiſh

territory and the United States VENTA | £10,000.

In Lake Ontario nn - Oo -- ĩ (
Lake Champlain 863 500, ooo
s THT Tg 1,700,000 |
JJ Se na 2330, ooo
Delaware Barr 2 630, 00
All the rivers within the thirteen States, in- =
cluding the Ohio e 470 1 28, ooo, oc
222
En 51 ,000,000


Lakes. 5; It may in truth be ſaid, that no part of the TY is ſo well watered with
ſprings, rivulets, rivers, and lakes, as the territory of the United States. By means of


theſe various ſtreams and collections of water, the whole country is chequered into


iſlands and peninſulas. The United States, and indeed all parts- of North America,
ſeem to bak been formed by nature for the moſt intimate union. The facilities of
ps A


.  _ THE UNITED STATES.
navigation render the communication between the ports of Georgia and New Hamp-
ſhire far more expeditious and practicable, than between thoſe of Provence and
Picardy, in France; Cornwall and Caithnefs, in Great Britain; or Gallicia and Cata-
lonia, in Spain. The canals propoſed between Suſquehannah and Delaware, between
Paſquetank and Elizabeth rivers, in Virginia, and between the Schuylkill and Suſque-
hannah, will open a communication from the Carolinas to the weſtern counties of
Pennſylvania and New York. The improvements of the Potomak will give a paſſage
from the ſouthern ſtates to the weſtern parts of Virginia, Maryland, Pennſylvania, and
even tothe lakes. From Detroit to Alexandria, on the Potomak, fix hundred and
ſeven miles, are but two carrying places, which together do not exceed the diſtance of
forty miles. The canals of Delaware and Cheſapeak will open the communication
from South Carolina to New Jerſey, Delaware, the moſt populous parts of Penn-
ſylvania, and the nudland counties of New York. Were theſe and the propoſed canal
between Aſhley and Cooper-rivers in South Carolina, the canals in the northern parts
of the ſtate of New York, and thoſe of Maſſachuſetts and New Hampſhire all opened,
North America would thereby be converted inte a cluſter of large and fertile flands,
communicating with each .other with eaſe and little ROPE and in vers. inftances 5
without tho uncertainty or danger of the ſeas.
There is nothing in other parts of the globe, which reſembles PRs Pee chain
of lakes in this part of the world. They may properly be termed inland ſeas of freſh
water: and even thoſe of the ſecond or third claſs in magnitude are of larger circuit
than the greateſt lake in the eaſtern continent. Some of the moſt northern lakes
belonging to the United States, have never been ſurveyed; or even viſited by the white
ple; of courſe we have no deſcription of them which can be relied on as accurate.
Others have been partially ſurveyed, and their relative ſituation determined. The beſt
account of them which we have been able to procure is as follows:
The Lake of the Woods, the moſt northern in the United States, is fo billed from
| 5 large quantities of wood growing on its banks; ſuch as oaks, pines, firs, ſpruce,
This lake lies nearly eaſt of the ſouth end of Lake Winnepeek, and 1s ſuppoſed
| 4 * the ſource or conductor of one branch of the river Bourbon, if there be fach 3
river. Its length from eaſt to weſt is ſaid to be about ſeventy miles, and in ſome
places it is forty miles wide. The Killiſtinoe Indians encamp on its borders to fiſh
and hunt. This lake is the communication between the Lakes Winnepeok and Bour-
bon, and Lake Superior.
Rainy, or Long Lake, lies eaſt of the Lake of the Woods, and is. ſaid to be nearly
an hundred be, long, and in no part more than twenty miles wide.
Eaſtward of this ! e lie ſeveral ſmall ones, which extend in a . to the great
carrying place, and thence into Lake Superior. Between theſe little lakes are ſeveral
carrying places, which render the trade to the north-weſt difficult, and exceedingly
tedious, as it takes two years to make one voyage from Michillimakkinak to theſe
arts. 2 .
n Lake Superior, formerly termed the Upper Lake, from its northern ſituation, is ſo
called from its magnitude, it being the largeſt on the continent. It may juſtly be
. termed the Caſpian of America, and is ſuppoſed to be the largeſt body of freſh water
: on the globe. According to the French charts, it is 1500 miles in cireumference. A
great part of the coaſt is bounded by rocks and uneven ground. The water is pure
and tranſparent, and appears generally throug hout the lake, to lie upon a bed of huge
rocks. It has been remarked, in regard to he waters of this lake, with how much


trum I pretend not to ſay, that although their furface, — the heat of the ſummer,
OT:


.


N 2 4 3 2 -
Pa s o uo * « © —-
44 49 #44 — rr nee 4 — rr 4 NE: o 4 *
* o a " 4 — hd - bu
1 — — — eneyernmyyrs nn oe Fa ——
y_ 7 _— l , — OY 2 * 4 4 . — be —— Ae ee —
_ 4 —_— » o . Py » * 2. by
- * + —
„ ae Low 1 * — — — * -
us ar * 1 - 5
L


od bv Ado 4 \I FI
n n * * Ro D A


**%
«},
Rz t
_—_—
©

RS.
74 *
3
{ '3

* "4
4 - ia
. +» WI
_
og *

4 9
1.

n
* p

„

ro


__ THE UNITED STATES. 127
is impregnated with no ſmall degree of warmth, yet on letting down a cup to the
depth of about a fathom, the water drawn from thence is cool and refreſhing.

The fituation of this lake, from the moſt accurate obſervations which have come-:to
our knowledge, lies between forty- ſix and fifty degrees of north latitude, and between
nine and eighteen degrees of weſt longitude from the meridian of Philadelphia.

There are many iſlands in this lake, two of them have each land enough, if proper
for cultivation, to form a conſiderable province; eſpecially Iſle Royal, which is not
leſs than an hundred miles long, and in many places forty broad. The natives ſup-
poſe theſe iſlands are the refidence of the Great Spirit. hs:
Iwo large rivers empty themſelves into this lake, on the north and north-eaſt fide ;
one is called the Nipegon, which leads to a tribe of the Chipeways, who inhabit a
lake of the ſame name, and the other is the Michipicooton river, the ſource of which
is towards James Bay, from whence there is ſaid to be but a ſhort portage to another
river, which empties itſelf into that bay. _ e
Not far from the Nipegon is a ſmall river, that, juſt. before it enters the lake, has
a perpendicular fall from the top of a mountain, of more than a hundred feet. It is
very narrow, and appears at a diſtance like a white garter ſuſpended in the air.
There are upwards of thirty other rivers, which empty into this lake, ſome of which
are of conſiderable fize. On the ſouth fide of it is a remarkable point or cape of


2 about ſixty miles in length, called Point Chegomegan. About an hundred miles weſt


= without danger.


of this cape, a conſiderable river falls into the lake, the head of which is compoſed
of a great aſſemblage of fmall ſtreams. This river is remarkable for the abundance
of virgin copper that is found on and near its banks. Many fmall iſlands, particu-
larly on the eaſtern ſhores, abound with copper ore lying in beds, with the appearance
of copperas. This metal might be eafily made a very advantageous article of com-
merce. This lake abounds with fiſh, particularly trout and ſturgeon ; the former
weigh from twelve to fifty pounds, and are caught almoſt any ſeaſon of the year in


great plenty. Storms affect this lake as much as they do the Atlantic Ocean; the 3


waves run as high, and the navigation is equally dangerous. It diſcharges its waters
from the ſouth-eaſt corner, through the Straits of St. Marie, which are about forty
miles long, Near the upper end of theſe ſtraits is a rapid, which, though it is impoſ-
_ fible for canoes to aſcend, yet, when conducted by careful pilots, may be deſcended
Though Lake Superior is ſupplied by near forty rivers, many of which are large,
yet it does not appear that one tenth part of the waters which are conveyed into it
by theſe rivers, is diſcharged by the above-mentioned ſtrait. Such a ſuperabundance
of water can be diſpoſed of only by evaporation. The entrance into this lake _
V , - "the


That ſuch a ſuperabundance of water ſhould be diſpoſed of by evaporation is b |

There are ſome ſeas” ſays an ingenious correſpondent, who has not obliged me with his name, „ in which
| there is a pretty juſt balance between the waters received from rivers, brooks, &c. and the waſte by evapo-
lation. Of this the Caſpian Sea, in Aſia, affords an inſtance ; which, though it receives ſeveral large rivers,
has no outlet. There are others, (to ſpeak in botrowed language) whoſe expence exceeds their income; and
theſe would ſoon become bankrupt, were it not for the ſupplies which they conſtantly receive from larger
| 10 ections of water, with which they are connected; ſuch are the Black and Mediterranean ſeas; into t


zormer of which there is a conſtant current from the Mediterranean, through the Boſphorus of Thrace; and
into the latter, from the Atlantic,


Es | through the Straits of Gibraltar. Others again derive more from their
he Bad d than they loſe by evaporation. Theſe give riſe to large rivers. Of this kind are


45 ambea in Africa, the Winipiſeogee in New Hampſhire, Lake Superior, and other waters in North
umerica; and the quantity they diſcharge is only the difference between the influx and the evaporation. It is


bbſerveable,


PF © UNITED STATES.


the Straits of St. Marie affords one of the moſt pleafing proſpects in the works! On
the left may be ſeen many beautiful little iflands that extend a confiderable way be-
fore vou; and on the right, an agreeable ſucceſſion of ſmall points of land that pro-
ject a little way into the water, "ard contribute, with the 1flands, to render this de-
lightful baſon calm, and ſecure from thoſe tempeſtuous winds by which the adjoin-
ing lake is frequently troubled.
Lake Huron, into which you enter through the Straits of St. Marie, is next in magni-
tude to Lake Superior. It lies between 43* 30 and 46* 3o of north latitude, and
between fix and eight degrees weſt io id Its circumference is about one thouſand
miles. On the north fide of this lake is an iſland called Manataulin, ſignifying a
place of ſpirits, and is conſidered as ſacred by the Indians. On the ſouth-weſt part
of this lake is Saganaum Bay, about eighty miles in length, and about eighteen or
twenty miles broad. Thunder Bay, ſo called from the thunder that is frequently heard
here, lies about half way between Saganaum Bay and the north-weſt corner of the
lake. It is about nine miles acroſs either way. The fiſh are the ſame as in Lake
Superior. At the north-weſt corner this lake communicates with Lake _— gan, by
the Straits of Michillimakkinak.

The Chipeway Indians live ſcattered around this lake: particularly 1 near r Saganaum
Bay. On its banks are found amazing quantities of fand cherries. -

Michigan Lake lies between latitude 42* Io and 46* 30 north; and between 1 I1* and

13* weſt long. from Philadelphia. Its computed length is 280 miles from north to
ſouth ; its breadth from ſixty to ſeventy miles. It is navigable for ſhipping of any
burthen; and at the north-eaſtern part communicates with Lake Huron, by a ſtrait

fix miles broad, on the ſouth ſide of which ſtands fort Michillimakkinak, which is
the name of the ſtrait. In this lake are ſeveral kinds of fiſh, particularly trout of an
excellent quality, weighing from twenty to fixty pounds, and ſome have been taken
in the Straits of Michillimakkinak, of ninety pounds. Weſtward of this lake are
large meadows, iaid to extend to the Miſſiſſippi. It receives a number of rivers from
the weſt and eaſt, among which is the river St. Joſeph, very rapid and full of iſlands;
it ſprings from a number of ſmall lakes, a little to the north-weſt of the Miami village,
and runs north-weſt into the ſouth-eafc part of the lake. On the north fide of this
river is fort St. Joſeph, from which there is a road, bearing north of eaſt, to Detroit.
The Powtewatamie Indians who have about 200 fighting men, inhabit this river 13
polite fort St. Joſeph. _

Between Lake Michigan on the weſt, and Lakes Huron, St; Clair, and the weſt
end of Erie on the caſt, is a fine tract of country, peninſulated, more than 250 miles
in length, and from 150 to 200 in breadth. The banks of the lakes, for a few miles

inland, are ſandy and barren, producing a few pines, ſhrub oaks; and cedars. Back
of this, from either lake, the timber is heavy and good, and the ſoil luxuriant.

Lake St. Clair lies about half way between Lake Huron and Lake Erie, and is
about ninety miles im circumference. It receives the waters of the three great lakes,
Superior, Michigan, and Huron, and diſcharges them through the river or ſtrait, call-

ed Detroit, (which is in French, the d; into Lake Erie. T his lake! is of e an oval


3 that on the mores the evapornitidh is ch gester than at a diſtance from PI on. Fs ocean.
The remarkable cluſter of Jakes in the middle of North America, of which Lake Superior is one, was

doubtleſs deſigned by a wiſe Providence, to furniſh the interior parts of the country with that ſupply of i
pours, without which, like the interior parts of Africa, they muſt have been a mere We. It may 18 though t


equally ſurprizing that there ſhould be any water at all at charged from them, as that the quantity | 1 beat
ſo ſmall a propyrtondo' what wy receive.


2 3 5 | | form,


THE UNITED: STATES. -—" i


form, -and navigahle for large veſſels. The fort of Detroit is fituated on the weſtern
bank of the river of the ſane name, about nine miles below Lake St. Clair. The
ſettlements are extended on. bot ſides of the. ſtrait or river for many miles to-
warde Lake Erie, and iome-tew- above the tort.

Lake Erie is fituated between torty-one and forty-three degrees of north latitude,
and between h 40 and 85 degrees welt longitude. It is nearly three hundred miles
Jong from cat to w. eſt, and about forty in its broadeſt part. A point of land pro-
jects from the nortli ff as into this lake, ſeveral miles, towards 1 ſouth-eaſt, called
Long Point. The lands and banks towards the weſt end of the lake are fo rnifefted
with rattle-ſnakes, as to render it dangerous to land on them. The lake is covered near
the banks of the iſlands with the large pond lily, the leaves of which lie on the ſurface
of the water ſo thick as to cover it entirely for many acres. together; on theſe, in the
ſummer ſeaſon, lie myriads of water ſnakes baſking in the, ſun. Of the venemous
ſerpents which inſeſt this lake, the hiſſing ſnake is the moſt remarkable: it is about
eighteen inches. long, ſmall, and ſpeckled. When you approach it, it flattens itſelf -
ina moment, and its ſpots, w hich are of various colours, become viſibly brighter through
rage; at the ſame time it blows from its mouth, with great force, a ſubtle wind, faid
to be of a nauſeous ſmell; and if drawn in with the breath of the unwary traveller,
will infallibly bring on a decline, that in a few months muſt prove mortal, No
_ remedy: has yet been found to counteract its baneful influence. This lake is of a more
dangerous navigation than any of the others, on account of the craggy rocks which


project into the water, in a perpendicular direction, m miles ORE from the
northern ſhore, affording no ſhelter from ſtorms.


Preſque Iſle is on the ſouth-eaſt ſhore of this Inks: about lat. 42 100 From this
to Fort Le Beuf, on French Creek, is a portage of 154 miles. About twenty miles
north-caſt of this is. another portage of 95 miles, between Chatoughque Crock, empty-
ing into Lake Erie, and Chatoughque Lake, a water of Allegany river.

Fort Erie ſtands on the northern ſhore of Lake Erie, and the weſt bank af Niagara
river, in Upper Canada. This lake, at its north-eaſt end, communicates with Lake
Ontario by the river Niagara, which runs from ſouth to north, about thirty mules,
including its windings, embracing in its courſe Grand Iſland and receiving Tone-
wanto Creek, from the eaſt. About the middle of this river are the celebrated falls of
Niagara, which - are reckoned one of the greateſt nat. ral. curioſities in the world.
The waters which ſupply the-river Niagara riſe near two thouſand miles to the north-
weſt, and paſling through the Lakes Superior, Michigan, Huron, - and Erie, receiving
in their courſe conſtant accumulations, at length, with aſtoniſhing grandeur, ruth
down a ſtupendous precipice of 150 feet perpendicular; and in a ſtrong rapid, that
extends to the diſtance of eight gr nine miles below, fall near as much more; the
river then loſes itſelf in Lake Ontario. The noiſe of theſe falls, in a clear day and
fair wind, may be heard between forty and fifty miles. When the water ſtrikes the
bottom its ſpray riſes a great height in the air, occafioning a thick cloud of vapours,
in which, when the ſun ſhines, may be ſeen, morning and evening, a beautiful rain-
bow. Fort Niagara 1 is fituated on the. caſt fide of Niagara river, at its entrance into
Lake Ontario. This fort, and that at Detroit, contrary to the treaty of 1783, are yet
in the poſſeſſion of the Britiſh Government.

Lake Ontario is ſituated between forty- three and forty-five degrees north latitude,
and between one and five degrees weſt longitude. Its form is nearly oval. Its greateſt

ength is from ſouth-weſt to north-eaſt, and its circumference about fix hundred
miles. It abounds with fiſh of an excellent flavour, n which are the Oſwego


8 FF —


bals, weighing three or four pounds. It receives the waters of the Cheneſſce river
from the ſouth, and of Onoridago, at Fort Oſwego, from the ſouth-eaſt, by which it
communicates, through Lake Oneida and Wood Creek, with Mohawk river. On
the north-eaſt, this lake diſcharges itſelf through the river Cataraqui, (which at Mon-
treal, takes the name of St. Lawrence) into the Atlantic Ocean. ;

About eight miles from the weſt end of Lake Ontario 1s a curious cavern, which
the Meſſiſaugas Indians call Manito' ah wwigzwam, or houſe of the Devil. The mountains
which border on the lake, at this place, break off abruptly, and form a precipice of Mil
200 ſeet perpendicular deſcent ; at the bottom of which the cavern begins. The firſt
opening is large enough for three men conveniently to walk abreaſt, It continues of
this bigneſs for ſeventy yards in a horizontal direction. Then it falls almoſt perpen-
dicularly fifty yards, which may be deſcended by irregular ſteps from one to four feet
diſtant from each other. It then continues forty yards horizontally, at the end of
which is another perpendicular deſcent, down which there are no ſteps. The cold

here is intenſe. - In ſpring and autumn, there are, once in about a week, exploſions
from this cavern, which ſhake the ground for ſixteen miles rounct. 5
Lake Champlain is next in ſize to Lake Ontario, and lies nearly eaſt from it, form-
ing a part of the dividing line between the State of New York and the State of Ver-
mont. It took its name from a French governor, whoſe name was Champlain, who
was drowned in it. It was before called Corlaer's Lake. It is about gghty miles in
length from north to ſouth, and in its broadeſt part fourteen. It is well ſtored with
fiſh, and the land on its borders, and on the banks. of its rivers, 18 good. Crown
Point and Ticonderoga are fituated on the banks of this lake, near the ſouthern part
nr ePaper 8 „5 : EH des 1 58
Lake George lies to the ſouthward of Champlain, and is a moſt clear, beautiſul
collection of water, thirty-ſix miles long and from one to ſeven miles wide. It em-
boſoms more than 200 iflands, ſome ſay 365; very few of which are any thing more
than barren rock, covered with heath, and a few cedar, ſpruce, and hemlock trees, and
ſhrubs, and abundance of rattle-ſnakes. On each fide it is ſkirted by prodigious
mountains, from which large quantities of red cedar are every year carried to New
York for ſhip timber. The lake is fall of fiſhes, and ſome of the beſt kind; among whict:
are the black Oſwego baſs and large ſpeckled trouts. The water of this lake is about -
100 feet above the level of Lake Champlain. The portage between the two lakes is
one mile and a half; but with a ſmall expence might be reduced to fixty yards; and
With one or two locks might be made navigable through for batteaux. This lake, in
the French charts, is called Lake St. Sacrament ; and it is ſaid that the Roman Catho-
lies, in former times, were at the pains to procure this water for facramental uſes it
all their churches in Canada: hence probably it derived its name.
_ Rrvers. | The Miſſiſſippi receives the waters of the Ohio and Illinois, and their nu-
merous branches from the eaſt ; and of the Miſſouri and other rivers from the weſt.
"Theſe nfighty ſtreams united, are borne down with increaſing majeſty, through vaſt
foreſts and meadows, and diſcharged into the Gulf of Mexico. The great length and
uncommon depth of this river, ſays Mr. Hutchins, and the exceſſive muddineſs and fa-
lubrious quality of its waters, after its junction with the Miſſouri, arc very fingular.*


x30 THE UNITED STATES


1 * n 1 R 9 . r * ** ; OT C2] 1 ö We k SDS 2 O is L _
r Ln EI aft, a Be I TING r ea EN Oe dS c i TN RE 5 F 0 ; * Wo ks Ss N o 4 : VT
. G — 2 * 5 TY. * x F „ . To 2 C8 RE 4 n W TONNE » 7© uy W x 3
> 3 : : * g . 4 -' vp no I SEE ETC „ / Ent EO BI Ft OE? 5 N eV.
"Ib, « . * 0 * 4 SEE BAI A N e 125 7 9 2 0


r bl * .
Ys „ —


_ * To a half pint tumbler of this water has been found a ſediment of one inch of impalpable marle- like ſub-
ſtance. It is, notwithſtanding, extremely wholeſome and well taſted, and very cool in the hotteit ſeaſons of
the year; the rowers, who are there employed, drink of it when they are in the treeſt perſpiration, and never
receive any bad effects ſrom it. The inhabitants of New Orleans uſe no other water tian that of the river,
which, by being kept in jars, becomes perfectly clear. 5 | The


THE UNITED STATES.


5 TT
The direction of the channel is fo crooked, that from New Orleans to the month of the
Ohio, a diſtance which does not exceed four hundred and ſixty miles in a ſtrait line,
is about eight hundred and fifty-fix by water. It may be ſhortened at leaſt two hun-
dred and fifty miles by cutting acroſs eight or ten necks of land, ſome of which are not
thirty yards wide. Charlevoix relates that in the year 1722, at Point Coupce, or Cut
Point, the river made a great turn, and ſome Canadians, by deepening the channel of


a ſmall brook, diverted the waters of the river into it. The impetuoſity of the ſtream
was ſo violent, and the ſoil of fo rich and looſe a quality, that in a ſhort time the point
was entirely cut through, and travellers ſaved fourteen leagues of their voyage. The
old bed has no water in it, the times of the periodical overflowings only excepted. The
new channel has been fince ſounded with a line of thirty fathoms, without finding bot-
tom. Several other points, of great extent, have, in like manner, been ſince cut off,
and the river diverted into new channels. Gs 2
In the ſpring floods the Miſſiſſippi is very high, and the current fo ſtrong that it is
with difficulty it can be aſcended; but this diſadvantage is remedied in ſome meaſure
by eddies or counter currents, which are generally found in the bends cloſe to the banks
of the river, and aſſiſt the aſcending boats. The current at this ſeaſon deſcends at the
rate of about five miles an hour. In autumn, when the waters are low, it does not run
| faſter than two miles, but it is rapid in ſuch parts of the river as have cluſters of iſlands,
ſhoals, and ſand banks. The circumference of many of theſe ſhoals being ſeveral miles,
the voyage is longer and in ſome parts more dangerous than, in the ſpring. The mer-
chandize neceſſary for the commerce of the upper ſettlements on or near the Miſſiſſippi,
is conveyed in the ſpring and autumn in batteaux, rowed by eighteen: or twenty men,
and carrying about forty tons. From New Orleans to the Illinois, the voyage is com-
monly performed in eight or ten weeks. A prodigious number of iſlands, ſome of
which are of great extent, interſperſe that mighty river. Its waters, after overflowing
its banks below the river Ibberville on the eaſt, and the river Rouge on the weſt, never
return within them again, there being many outlets or ſtreams, by which they are con-
ducted into the bay of Mexico, more eſpecially on the weſt fide of the Miſſiſſippi, di-


W viding the country into numerous iſlands. Theſe ſingularities diſtinguiſh it from every


other known river in the world. Below the Ibberville, the land begins to be very low
on both ſides of the river, acroſs the country, and gradually declines as it approaches
nearer to the ſea. The iſland of New Orleans, and the lands oppoſite, are to all ap-
pearance of no long date; for in digging ever ſo little below the ſurface, you find water
and great quantities of trees. The many beeches and breakers, as well as inlets, which
have ariſen-out of the channel within the laſt half century, at the ſeveral mouths of
the river, are convincing proofs that this peninſula was wholly formed in the. ſame
manner. And it is certain that when La Salle failed down the Miſſiſſippi to the ſea,
the opening of that river was very different from what it is at preſent.

The nearer you approach to the ſea, this truth becomes more ſtriking. The bars
that croſs moſt of theſe ſmall channels, opened by the current, have been multiplied
by means of the trees carried down with the ſtreams ; one of which, ſtopped by its
roots or branches in a ſhallow part, is ſufficient to obſtruct the paſſage of thouſands
more, and to fix them at the ſame place. Aſtoniſhing collections of trees are daily
ſeen in patting between the Balize and the Miſſouri. No human force is ſufficient to
remove them, and the mud carried down by the river ſerves to bind and cement them
together. They are gradually covered, and every inundation not only extends their
length and breadth, but adds another layer to their height. In leſs than ten years time,

| | 2 ä canes;


132 THE UNITED STATES.
canes, ſhrubs, and aquatic timber grow on them, and form points and iflands, which
forcibly ſhift the bed of the river.
Nothing can be aſſerted with certainty, reſpecting the length of this river. Its ſource
is not known, but ſuppoſed to be upwards of three thouſand miles from the ſea as the
river runs. We only know, that from St. Antony's falls, in lat. 4.52, it glides with a
pleaſant clear current, and receives many large and very extenſive tributary ſtreams
before its junction with the Miſſourß without greatly increaſing the breadth of the
Miffiſſippi, though they do its depth and rapidity. Ie muddy waters of the Miffouri 5
diſcolour the lower part of the river, till it empties into the Bay of Mexico. The Miſ- 5
ſouri is a longer, broader, and deeper river than the Mifſiſſippi, and affords a more
extenſive navigation; ; it is, in fact, the principal river, contributing more to the common
ſtream than does the Miffiffippi. It has been aſcended by French traders about twelve
or thirtęeen hundred miles, and from the depth of water, and breadth of the river at that
diſtance, it appeared to be navigable many miles further.
From the Miffouri river, to nearly oppofite the Ohio, the W reſtern bank of the Miſ-
ſiſſippi, is, ſome few places excepted, higher than the eaſtern. From Mine an fer, to
the Ibberville, the eaſtern bank 1 18 higher than the weſtern, on which there is not a
ſingle Mſcernible riting. or eminence, the diſtance of ſeven hundred and fifty miles.
From the Iberville to the ſea, there are no eminences on either ſide, though the eaſ-
tern bank appears rather the hi cheſt of the two, as far as the Engliſh turn. T hence
the banks gradually dirmnith 1 in hei ght to the mouths of the river, where they are but
A few feet higher than the common Jurface of the water.
The ſlime which the annual floods of the river Mifliflippi leaves on the ſurface of the :
aFadcht ſhores, may be compared with that of the Nile, which depoſits a fimilar ma-
nure, and for many centuries paſt has inſured the fertility of Egypt. When its banks
ſhall have been cultivated, as the excellency of its ſoil and temperature of the climate
deſerve, its population will equal that of any other part of the world. The trade, wealth,
and power of America, may, at ſome future period, depend, and perhaps center upon
the Miſſiſſippi. This alſo reſembles the Nile in the number of its mouths, all ifluing
into a ſea that may be compared to the Mediterranean, which is bounded on the north
and ſouth by the two continents of Europe and Africa, 'as the Mexican bay is by North
and South America. The ſmalter months of this river might be eaſily ſtopped up, by
means of thoſe floating trees with which the river, during the floods, is always covered.
The whole force of tlie channel being united, the only e then left would Joe |
pb) grow deep, and the bar be removed.
hoever for a moment will caft his eye over a map of the town of New Orleans,
and the immenſe country around it, and view its advantageous fituation, muſt be con-
vinced that it, or ſome place near it, muſt, in proceſs of lie, become one of the great-
eſt marts in the world.
I be falls of St. Anthony, in about latitude 45*, teten their name from Father
Lewis Hennipin, à French miffionary, who travelled into theſe parts about the yea!
1680, and was the firſt European ever ſeen by the natives. The whole river, which
is more than 250 yards wide, falls perpendicularly about thirty feet, and forms a molt
pleaſing cataract. The rapids below, in the ſpace of three hundred yards, render the
deſcent confiderabl greater ; ſo that when viewed at a diſtance, they appear to be
much higher than they really are. In the middle of the falls is a ſmall iſland, about
forty feet broad, and ſomewhat longer, on which grow a few cragged hemlock aud
ſpruce trees: and about half way between this iſland and the eaſtern ſhore is a rock.
hang at the very edge- of the fall, in an oblique poſition, five or ſix feet broad, and


; 4 thurt


—ͤ——— ̃ — —

_ _—— |

2 x
2 a


11
* Pi
2 4


THE UNITED STATES. 133
thirty or forty long. Theſe falls are peculiarly ſituated, as they are approachable with-
out the leaſt obſtruction from any intervening hill or precipice, which cannot be ſaid
of any other conſiderable fall, perhaps in the world. The country around is exceed-
ingly beautiful. It is not an uninterrupted plain, where the eye finds no relief, but
compoſed of many gentle aſcents, which in the ſpring and ſummer are covered
with verdure, and interſperſed with little groves, that give a PIES variety. to the #

roſpect.
: A little diftance below the falls i is a ſmall iſland of about an acre and an half, on
which grow a great number of oak trees, almoſt all the branches of which, able to bear
the weight, are, in the proper ſeaſon of the year, loaded with eagle's neſts. Their in-
ſtinctive wiſdom has taught them to chooſe this place, as it is ſecure, on account of the
rapids above, from the attacks of either man or beaſt. |
From the beſt accounts that can be obtained from the Indians, we learn'thit the four


moſt capital rivers. on, the continent of North America, viz. the St. Lawrence, the


Mifſſiſſippi, the River Bourbon, and the Oregon, or the river of the Weſt, have their
ſources in the ſame neighbourhood. The waters of thethree former are ſaid to be
within thirty miles of each other ; the latter is rather farther weſt.

This ſhews that theſe parts are the higheſt lands in North America; and it is an in-


fſftance not to be paralleled in the other three quarters of the globe, that ſour rivers of


ſuch magnitude ſhould take their riſe together, and each, after running ſeparate eour-
ſes, diſcharge their waters into different oceans, at the diſtance of more than two thou-
ſand miles from their ſources. For in their paſſage from this ſpot to the bay of St. La
- - rence, eaſt ; to the bay of Mexico, ſouth ; to Hudſon's Bay, north ; and to the bay
at the ſtraits of Annian, weſt ; where the river Oregon is ſuppoſed to empty, each of
them traverſes upwards of two thouſand mules.
The Ohio is a moſt beautiful river. Its current gentle, waters clear, and boſom
fmooth and unbroken by rocks and rapids, a ſingle inſtance only excepted. It is one
quarter of a mile wide at Fort Pitt; five hundred yards at the mouth of the Great Kan-
haway; 1200 yards at Louiſville ; and the rapids, half a mile, in ſome few places be-
low Louiſville : but its general breadth does not exceed 600 yards. In ſome places its
width is not 400, and in one place particularly, far below the rapids, it is leſs than
300. Its breadth in no one place exceeds 1200 yards, and at its 0 with the Mi-
filſippi, neither river is more than goo yards wide.*: -


1 Its length, as 5 meaſured according to its meanders by Capt. Hutchins, is as fol- |
lows,


*


From Fort Pitt GS Miles. Miles.
To Log's Town. 184 To Hockhocking : ,
Big Beaver Creek 10 ; Great Kanhaway.” "24 *
Little Beaver Creek _ 24+ - \Guiandot -- 8
Yellow Creck „„ Sandy Creck 142
Two Creeks A o 4
Long Reach - -, -- 53 1 To Little Miarai OE i ee 126 4A
End Long Reach 16 Licking Creek mT
Muſkingum e Great Miami: _ - 26+
Little Kanhaway 'If C Big Bones | | W Ras


*


The alterations in the deſeription of this river were ee by the We agen Col. George Morgan


of New Jerſey, a gentleman of accurate obſervation, and who has repeatedly paſſed this riv er r from Tüiwurg
to its junction with the — |


* YI»:


134 THE UNITED STATES. |
as Miles. | 7 - *
To Kentucky 44 1 To Big Cave | 42 4
Rapids 4 772 Shawnee River 324
Low Country” 155 2 Cherokee River | 13
Buffalo River 641 Maſſac 11
Wabath 972 Mifſiſſippi e 46
1188


In common winter id ſpring floods, it affords 30 or 40 feet water to Louiſville, 25
or 39 ſbet to La Tarte's rapids, forty miles above the mouth of the great Kanhaway,
and a ſufficiency at all times for light batteaux and canoes to Fort Pitt. The rapids

are in latitude 38* 8“. The inundations of this river begin about the laſt of March, and


ſubſide in July, although they frequently happen in other months, ſo that boats which!


carry 300 barrels of flour, from the Monongahela, or Youhiogany, above Pittſburg

have ſeldom long to wait for water only. During theſe floods a firſt rate man of wit
may be carried from Louiſville to New Orleans, if the ſudden turns of the river and the
ſirength of its current will admit a ſafe ſteerage ; and it is the opinion of Col. Morgan,


who has had all the means of information, that a veſſel properly built for the ſea, to draw
12 feet water, when loaded, and carrying from 12 to 1600 barrels of flour, may be


more eaſily, cheaply, and ſafely navigated from Pittſburg to the ſea, than thoſe now in
uſe ; and that this matter only requires one man of capacity and enterprize to aſcertain
it. He obſerv es, that a vefſel intended to be rigged as a brigantine, ſnow, or ſhip,


 thould be double decked, take her maſts on deck, and be rowed to the Iberville, be-


low which are no lands, or to New Orleans, with 20 men, ſo as to afford reliefs of
10 and 10 in the night.—Such a veſſel, without the uſe of oars, he ſays, would float
to New Orleans, from Pittſburg, 20 times in 24 hours. If this be ſo, what agreeable

proſpects are preſented to our brethren and fellow citizens in the weſtern country.


The rapids at Louifville deſcend about 10 fect in a length of a mile and a halt. The


| bed of the river there is a ſolid rock, and is divided by an iſland into two br anches, the
ſouthern of which is about two hundred yards wide, but impaſſable in dry feaſons. The
bed of the northern branch is worn into channels by the conſtant courſe of the water,


and attrition of the pebble ſtones carried on with that, ſo as to be paſſable for batteaux
through the greater part of the year. Let it is thought that the ſouthern arm may be
moſt caſily opened for conſtant navigation. The riſe of the waters in theſe rapids does
not exceed 20 or 25 fect. We havea fort, ſituated at the head of the falls. The ee |


on the ſouth fide riſes very gradually.


At Fort Pitt the river Ohio loſes its name, branching into the Monong gahela and


Allegany. |

Ihe Monongahela is four handred yards wide at its mouth. From thence is 3
or fifteen miles to the mouth of Yohogany, where it is three hundred yards wide. Thence
to Redſtone by Water is fifty miles, by land thirty. Then to the mouth of Cheat river,
by water forty miles, by land twenty-eight, the width continuing at three hundred yards,

and the navigation god for boats. Thence the width is about two hundred yards to
the weſtern fork, fifty miles higher, and the navigation frequently interrupted by ra-
pids; which, however, with a ſwell of two or three feet, become very pailable for
boats. It then admits light boats, except in dry ſeaſons, ſixty-five i? further, to
the head of Tygart's valley, preſenting only ſome tmall rapids and falls of one or two
feet perpendicular, and leſſening in its width to twenty yards. The Weſtern fork 15


Uavig gable} 1n the winter ten or fifteen miles towards the northern of the Little Kanhaway,


and


—


$54
* *
py l
A


* = ”
_


1


Re.


ra-
for


WO


K 15


fu,


"TRE UNITUD STATES ns


will admit a good waggon road to it. The Yohogany is the principal branch of this
river. It paſſes through the Laurel mountain, about thirty miles from its mouth; is,
ſo far, from three hundred to one hundred and fifty yards wide, and the navigation
much obſtructed in dry weather by rapids and ſhoals. In its paſtfage through the moun-
tain it makes very great falls, admitting no navigation for ten miles, to the Turkey foot.
Thence to the Great Croſſing, about twenty miles, it is again navigable, except in dry
ſeaſons, and at this place is two hundred yards wide. The fources of this river are di-


vided from thoſe of the Patomak by the Allegany mountain. From the falls, where


it interſects the Laurel mountain, to Fort Cumberland, the head of the navigation on
the Patomak, is forty miles of very mountainous road. Will's creck, at the mouth of
which was Fort Cumberland, is thirty or forty yards wide, but affords no navigation
as yet, Cheat river, another conſiderable branch of the Monongahela, is two hundred
yards wide at its mouth, and one hundred yards at the Dunkard's fettlement, fifty miles


higher. It is navigable for boats, except in dry feafons. The boundary between Vir-
ginia and Pennſylvania croſſes it about three or four miles above its mouth.


The Allegany river affords navigation at all ſeaſons for light batteaux to Venango,
at the mouth of French creek, here it is two hundred yards wide; and it 18 practiſed


even to Le Bœuf, from whence there is a portage of fifteen miles and a half to Preſque
Iſle on Lake. Erie. 5 ; v5 eats


The country watered by the Miſſiſſippi and its eaſtern branches conſtitutes five-eighitlis


of the United States; two of which five-eighths are occupied by the Ohio and its waters:
the reſiduary ſtreams, which run into the Gulf of Mexico, the Atlantic, and the St.


Lawrence, water the remaining three-eightlis.


Before we quit the ſubject of the weſtern waters, we will take a view of their prin- 5


cipal connections with the Atlantic. Theſe are four, the Hudſon's river, the Patomak,


St. Lawrence, and Miſſiſſippi. Down the laſt will paſs all the heavy commodities. But
the navigation through the Gulf of Mexico is ſo dangerous, and that up the Miſſiſſippi


difficult and tedious, that it is thought probable that European merchandize will not


be conveyed through that channel. It is moſt likely that flour, timber, and other heavy _


articles will be floated on rafts, which will themſelves be an article for ſale as well as


their loading, the navigators returning by land, as at preſent. There will therefore be
a competition between the Hudſon, the Patomak, and the St. Lawrence rivets, for the
refidue of the commerce of all the country weſtward of Lake Erie, on the waters of the
lakes of the Ohio, and upper parts of Miſſiſſippi. To go to New York, that part of


the trade which comes from the lakes or their waters, muſt firſt be brought into Lake


Erie. Between Lake Superior and its waters, and Huron, are the rapids of St. Marie.


which will permit boats to paſs, but not larger veffels. Lakes Huron and Michigan


afford communication with Lake Erie by veſſels of eight feet draught. That part of
the trade which comes ſrom the waters of the Miſſiſſippi, muſt paſs from the mthrough-
tome portage into the.waters of the lakes. The portage from the Illinois river into a
water of Michigan, is of one mile only. From the Wabaſh, Miami, Muſkingum,
or Allegany; are portages into the waters of Lake Erie, of from one to fifteen miles.
When the commodities are brought into and have paſſed through Lake Erie, there is
between that and Ontario an interruption by the falls of Niagara, where the portage 1s
of eight miles; and between Ontario and the Hudſon's river are portages of the falls of
Onondago, a little above Oſwego, of a quarter of a mile; from Wood ereck to the Mo-


hawks river, two miles « at the little falls of the Mohawks river, halt a mile, and from
Schenectady to Albany, ſixteen miles. Beſides the increaſe of expenee occafioned by


requent change of carriage, there is an increaſed ritk of pillage produced by committing
2 eee merchandize


5 U
57 1 - + — - 3 = 1 — wn
5 4 b * 5 - —4 p 0 * a 22 ö « 0 -
= ” 2 3 =_ — * 50 —— 3 4 5 , y 4 > a a * - - 5 82 82 ele % 2 9 - * 8 — - . o hls Ky — — — = ——
= 2 - be He 4 9 Sr 2 J — * 1 · — * hk hs _ n : Lot : ene Nn — — * — cs nar IT I ge 22 2 | F< 2 — w . — — PX 5
—— — \ 3 * * 8 - > "Fu * 6 * ” 2 : 1 q 7 / . n - +, - \ % , „ 2 a 4 "oo * — = © als Gs Py * 22 * > > £ wy * 3 + — - — —
5 4 \ & 2 y l l . , e k 4 b * j. n . k . \ 3 — r 3 ? ; S / 0 * ag 4 * * _ d 0 -
1 < . b 0 n 8 wy hs O —_ $$.» . ” Fl — we, * . _"_—* + - 5 228 nf * 5 5 : 5 n 7 * 1
3 _ W » — « 5 - b — 3 "_ Ae WW wy * R * y bn * — — — 222. . 5 * * : - 2 f ROT RR e's 1 * * 5 — — l 7 8 * * * do + dS Pw %s * r ar — - " — _ "4 22 n N
EY. 43 12 h * * = by. <=_S C 7 a —_— 8 2 * 2 7 1 3 1 nr” » I v4 5 * n : A , - . 5 * 2 = 0 . 44 « ” _—_ 28 e N 2 N 2 - ö a, ” Unto IJ 4 \ 55 ” i 4
k a > 8 1 5 Y * 1 . « - 4 1 L jp . * . 1 2 < n + : 4 3 2 . 15 * * . n : of * 8 3 13 r 6 : 2 A 4
* n ; jp? 1 — Is. 222 8 * * — n - AY Fir 5 N RF * 1 wen ht; ye 4 cg . * R # oy 4 . x - * W 9 SEE hos N * 3 — ES r £4 HE" * — _
n - — 22 "4 <0, - A * 4 i „ — 1 - A * = * 2 p E b 2 Jt N N x PLE: Y 1 4 — ” * 2 * &, 8 * % by > 3 ns : r 8 9 wats _ —— 1 a * 6 - ”
a oo ws 4 4 * — — * A * * Py, I ak 0 , r 133 i, a wo DL. PI Op | "Is *. 4 0 ſy JET. nn ̃ ö. . © EE rr pag ES o
\ *4 — . 0 — 4 = S. "EE 5 * wat 8 : 2 7 pe... > LH J x Pe 4 — 6.5 e — *
— * "nes * OE Toms I» 4» be POOLE AS "TE * 2 De 7 2 * W 5 thy .—— = — 22 2 — . GON _ . @
jo: ww . , 4 „ * * ** 4 — a7 ae Pe to
N Y * , 2 1 — 5 7 .
- 1 = — 2 — | Sr pa a .
a : — 9s" — — Int -
; ＋
. : - © 0 . * 4


Ks, OY NJ > *
4 — — *


——_—— oo


136


merchan dize to a greater. number of hands ſucceſſively.
under the tollowing circumſtances.


THE UNITED STATES.


The Patomak offers Hal
For the trade of the lakes and their waters weſt-


ward of Lake Erie, when it ſhall have entered that lake, muſt coaſt along its ſouthern
more, on account of the number and excellence of its harbours ; the northern, though


thorteſt, having few harbours, and theſe unſafe.


Having reached Cayahoga, to pro-


ceed on to New York, it will have eight hundred and twenty-five miles and five
portages; whereas if is but four hundred and twenty-five miles to Alexandria, its
emporium on the Patomak, if it turns into the Cayahoga, and patles through that, Big-


| beaver, Ohio, Yohogany, (or Monongalia :


and Cheat) and Patomak, and there are


but two portages ; the firſt of Which, between Cayahoga and Beaver, may be removed
by uniting the ſources of theſe waters, which are lakes in the neighbourhood of each


* ad in a champaign country ;


will be from fifteen to forty miles, according. to the trouble which 1ſhall be taken to
approach the two navigations.


the other, from the waters of Ohio to Patomak,


For the tr ade of the Ohio, or that which ſhall come


into it from its own Waters or the Miſſiſſippi, it is nearer through the Patomak to


Alexandria than New-York, by five hundred and eighty miles, and is interrupted by
one portage only.


There is another circumſtance of difference too. The lakes them-


telves never freeze, but the communications between them freeze, and the. Hudſon's


river is itfelt ſhut up by the ice three months in the year; whereas the channel to the


Cheſapeek leads directly into a warmer climate. The ſouthern parts of it very rarely


freeze at all, and whenever the northern do, it is ſo near the ſources of the rivers, m_ jy


the frequent floods, to which they are there liable, break up the ice immediately, 1


that veſſels may paſs through the whole winter, ſubject only to accidental and ont
delays.


Add to all this, that in caſe of a war with our neighbours of Canada, or the


Indians, the rout to New York becomes a frontier , through almoſt its whole length,
and all commerce through it ceaſes from that moument.—But the channel to New


York is already known to practice ; whereas, the u
Patomak, and the great falls of the latter, are yet to be cleared of their fixed ob-


ſtructions.
The rout by St. Lawrence is well 3 to be attended with many advantages,


and with ſome diſadvantages.


enterprizing Pennſylvanians contemplate, which, if effected, will be the eaſieſt, cheapeſt,
and ſureſt paſſage from the lakes, and Ohio river, by means of the Suſquehanna, and


a canal from thence to Philadelphia.
tween Suſquehanna and the Schuy 1kill rivers is now actually in execution.


The latter part of this plan, viz. the canal be-
Should


they accompliſh their whole ſcheme, and they appear confident of ſucceſs, Philadel-


phia in all probability will DOCOME, in ſome future period, the "_ city that has
ever yet exiſted.


Particular deſcriptions of the lier rivers in the United States are reſerved to be


given in the geographical account of thoſe ſtates through which they reſpectively


*


One general obſervation reſpecting the rivers will, however, be naturally in-


troduced here, and that is, that the entrance into almoſt all the rivers, inlets, and bays,
from New Hampſhire to Georgia, are from ſouth-eaſt to north-weſt.


Bars. |


which are equal 1 in ſize to any in the known world. — Beginning at the north-eaſterly


part of the continent, and proceeeding ſouth-weſterly,
of St. Lawrence, which receives the waters of the river of the ſame name.


you firſt find the bay or gulf
Next are


-Chedabukto and Chebukto Bays, in Nova Scotia, the latter diſtinguiſhed by the lots
of a French fleet in a former war between F rance and Great Britain, The Bay of


I A


upper waters of the Ohio and the


But there is a\fifth rout, which the enlightened and


The coaſt of the United States is indented with numerous bays, ſome of


2 4 - gl ., * * . * — — n 2 « o 2 » 4 o —
n 2 ä r ccc x nan iT : 2 3 * Y 5 n 2 VESTN a: OR - WEE. "3 22 e TY x NE ALS 2 - 1
n 3 $3 »þ TA 9 bb | Ye ROOTS ä 5 R 3 P 3 ee * E : > re Tots? 8 9 * A . **" F 7 0 ” F
CCC ee ET 2 a 3 # 8 > |
— . 22 P PE \ RL L . dA Le Sg IR SIC OLI n N ; r R . 825 ö 8 F COIs


3


IT UNITED STATES. 137

Fundy, between Nova Scotia and New Brunſwick, is remarkable for its tides, which
riſe to the height of fifty or fixty feet, and flow ſo rapidly as to overtake animals

which feed upon the ſhore. Paſſamaquoddy, Penobſcot, Broad and Caſco- Bays, lie.

along the coaſt of the diſtrict of Maine. Maſſachuſetts Bay ſpreads eaftward of Bo-
ton, and is comprehended between Cape Ann on the north, and Cape Cod on the
ſouth. The points of Boſton Harbour are Nahant and Alderton Points. Paffing by
Narraganfet and other bays in the ſtate of Rhode Ifland, you enter Long Ifland
Sound, between Montauk Point and the Main. This Sound, as it is called, is a kind
of inland fea, from three to twenty-five miles broad, and about one hundred and
forty miles long, extending the whole length of the iſland, and dividing it from Con-
necticut. It communicates with the ocean at both ends of Long Iſland, and atiords a

very ſafe and convenient inland navigation.


Ihe celebrated ſtrait, called Hell-Gate, is near the weſt end of this ſound, about
eight miles eaſtward of New York city, and is remarkable for its Whirlpools, which
make a tremendous roaring at certain times of tide. Theſe whirlpools are occaſioned
by the narrowneſs and crookedneſs of the paſs, and a bed of rocks which extend quite
acroſs it; and not by the meeting of the tides from eaſt to weſt, as has been conjec-
tured, becauſe they meet at Frogs Point, feveral miles above. A ſkilful pilot may with
fafety conduct a ſhip of any burden through this ſtrait with the tide, or, at ſtill water,
with a fair wind *. 92 Ys 1 Me Jo f f
Delaware Bay is fixty miles long, from the cape to the entrance of the river Dela-
ware at Bombay Hook; and fo wide in ſome parts, as that a ſhip, in the middle of it,
cannot be ſeen from the land. It opens into the Atlantic north-weſt and ſouth-eaſt,
between Cape Henlopen on the right, and Cape May on. the left. Theſe capes are


eighteen or twenty miles apart.
*The following ingenious geological remar ks of Pr. Mitchell's, on certain maritime parts of the ftate of
1 New York, deſerve a place in this connectionns:F | „ e 20s
| % From the ſurvey of the foſlils in theſe parts of the American coaſt one becomes convinced, that the
principal ſhare of them is 6RANITICAL, compoſed of the ſame ſorts of materials with the bigheft Alps, Pyrenees,
85 Caucaſus, and Andes, and like them deſtitute of metals and petrifattions. | |
d The occurrence of no horizontal ſtrata, and the frequency of vertical layers, lead us further to ſuppoſe that
t, : theſe are not ſecondary collections of minerals, but are certainly in a tate of primeval arrangement. |
4 The Steatites, Amianthus, Shoerl, Feldſpath, Mica, Garnet, Faſpar,. Shiſtus, Aſbeſtos, aud Quartz, mult all be
confidered as primitive foſils, and by no means of an alluvial nature. VV
E- What inference remains now to be drawn from this ſtatement of facts, but that the faſhionable opinion of
14 conſidering theſe maritime parts of our country as flats, hove up from the deeps by the ſea, or brought down
4. trom the heights by the rivers, ſtands unſupported by reaſon, and contradicted by experience? „„
A more probable opinion is, that Long Iſfand, and the adjacent continent, were in former days continuous,
las or only ſeparated by a ſmall river, and that the ſtrait which now divides them, was formed by ſucceſſive in-
roads of the ſea from tne eaſtward and weſtward in the courſe of ages. This conjecture is ſupported by the
be :acts which follow, 20 ait: 1. The foſſil bodies on both ſhores have a near reſemblance. 2. The rocks and
2 Hands lying between are formed of ſimilar materials. 3. In ſeveral places, particularly at White-Stone and
ey Hell-Gate, the diſtance from land to land is very ſmall, 4. Wherever the ſhore is not compoſed of ſolid: .
- rock, there the water continues to make great ingroachmeats, and to cauſe the high banks to tumble down,
To 33 1s true, not only here, but at Moncton, Newton, and elſewhere, at this very day. 5. The rocky piles in the
Sound, called Executions, and SteppingStones; and thoſe named Hurtleberry Iſland, Pea Iſland, Heart Iſland,
| . and many more that lie up and down, are ſtrong circumſtances in favour of this opinion; for from ſeveral
e 01 of them all the earthy matter, as far as the higheſt tides can reach, has long ſince been carried away, and
erly from the reſt, the ſand and gravel continue to be removed by daily attrition; as-is true alſo of the Brothers,
gulf Syker's, Blackwell's, and other iſlands. 6. There is a tradition among that race of men, who, previous to
"are e Europeans, poſſeſſed this tract of country, that at ſome di ſtant period, in former times, their anceſtors


could ſtep from rock to rock, and croſs this arm of che ſea on foot at Hell-Gate.:


1


The


1
« .*
N 1 „ 2 o * * A 1 1 - .
— _ „ * q LI _— l * 2 1 . * ** * 1 7 4 . *
5 7 R 1 1 * _—_—— F 4 bu iy 2 f 4 : ee Ga mit. SECT) n 2 e £4 wt ST #'* i u * +
. 5 2 2 2 8 3 i * 3 — F yp AY SÞ A - >» yt — «> a 2 . 4
IF e 9 I Re > & Rue. rd pete” - - a— - — 2 — _ eee 2 8 — 8 N r
— Ee arne 7 5 p 25 pe Oy | * er eee n > — — — — oy >
» 4 To K n = > ic 4 1 * 2 pay U wh a—- : * 46 End; 2 —
W * 21 +» * EAI * "W444 a= yg 3 = * ron RET PER Wr „ e " 2 is * z . K # - 8
>. F ,


a


N 0 4 r & 4
2


A
6 . . ** *
n * 5 7 8
* ; 8
— * — *
7 "


2


7 1
25 FO z p 2 2 223
— N FA Yy T: * * « 6 9. my - " Fee - * n — — 4 dd wat — 6 ju —
„ . N RO; K C rs afes M ; 1 1 0 — * 2 ; N * * „.
12 n 2 F .* & 4 * - . 9 Ss C r af * Sr: > 2h. 4. 4 84 Rr err 3 — — = 742 ” N £ 5 v4 _
q 1 — 7 4 * 5 D : f * * Q 7 4 — C N —— TY * * * * * * 1 q * 1 E 4 0 1 4 1 8 P Tok J 8 o 0 3 * A

* faq . ee 5 - N 8 WV * PEE i a3 * > A - Wer a 1 1 F by _ wt + 4 n 2 * 5 , :

Ra 7 1 . x ;{ Bug, oy 4 5 FLY - g , +I a7 _ N | |
7 ba. on 8 "MS F 4 * a ” * * * a 8 ;

* 5 ar, . £4. a VIP A = 2 445 N 8 In | | | |
a —— — . * * a a * 1 5 J F 3 ” x "I p " L » 90 _ . - — — " n . m - *
A 4 . * 23 - $5 44 —_— — 5 — — — * . * c . . ö
. 8 . - 5 10 es . 6 es We : ” | |


land, in {many places, annually infringes upon the ocean. It is an authenticated fact,


138 3 THE UNITED STATES.

The Cheſapeek is one of the largeſt bays in the known world. Its entrance 18
nearly E. N. E. and S. S. W. between Cape Charles, lat. 37% 12, and Cape Henry,
lat. 37, in Virginia, twelve miles wide, and it extends two hundred and ſeventy miles


to the northward, dividing Virginia and Maryland. It is from ſeven to eighteen miles
broad, and gener ally as much as nine fathoms deep; aftording many commodious har-


bours, and a ſafe and eaſy navigation. It receives the waters of the Suſquehannah,


Patomak, Rappahannok, York and James rivers, which are all large and navigable.
FACE OF THE COU NTRY. | The tract of country belonging to the United States is
happily variegated with plains and mountains, hills and vallics. Some parts are rocky,
particularly New England, the north parts of New York, and New Jerſey, and a
broad ſpace, including the ſeveral ridges of the long range of mountains which run


touth-weſtward through Pennſylvania, Virginia, North Carolina, and part of Georgia,


dividing the waters which flow into the Atlantic from thoſe which fall into the Miffit⸗ ä
fippi. In the parts eaſt of the Allegany mountains, in the ſouthern ſtates, the coun-
for ſeveral hundred miles in length, and fixty or ſeventy, and ſometimes more, in


breadth, is level and entirely free from ſtone. It has been a queſtion agitated by the
curious, whether the extenſive tract of low flat country, which fronts the 4
ſtates ſouth of New York, and extends back to the hills, has remained in its preſent


form and ſituation ever fince the flood : or whether it has been made by the particles


of earth which have been waſhed down from the adjacent mountains, and by the


accumulation of ſoil from the decay of vegetable ſubſtances ; or by carth waſhed out


of the bay of Mexico by the Gulf Stream, and lodged on the coaſt; or by the re-


ceſs of the ocean, occaſioned by a change in ſome other parts of the earth. Several


phenomena deſerve conſideration in n an opinion on this queſtion.


1. It is a fact, well known to every perſon of obſervation who has lived in, or tra-


velled through, the ſouthern ſtates, that marine ſhells and other ſubſtances which are
Peculiar to the ſea ſhore, are almoſt invariably found by digging eighteen or twenty
feet below the ſurface of the earth. A gentleman of veracity told me, that in ſinking


a well many miles from the ſea, he found, at the depth of twenty feet, every appear-


ance of a ſalt marſh, that is, marſh graſs, rt mud, and brackiſh water. In all this
flat country, until you come to the hilly land, wherever you dig a well, you find the


water, at a certain depth, freſh and tolerable good; but if you exceed that depth two
or three feet, you come to a faltiſh or brackiſh water that is ſcarcely drinkable, and


the earth dug up reſembles, in bh and ſmell, that which 1s dug up on the
edges of the ſalt marſhes.


2. On and near the margin of the rivers are frequently found land hills, which ap-
r to have been drifted into ridges by the force of water. At the bottom of ſome of


| the banks in the rivers, fifteen or twenty feet below the ſurface of the earth, are waſhed
bout from the ſolid ground, logs, branches, and leaves of trees; and the whole bank,


from bottom to top, appears ſtreaked with layers of logs, leaves, and ſand. Theſe ap-
pearances are ſeen far up the rivers, from cighty to an hundred miles from the ſea,
where, when. the rivers are low, the banks are from fifteen to twenty feet high. As,
you proceed down the rivers towards the ſea, the banks decreaſe in height, but ſtill
are formed of layers of ſand, leaves, and logs, ſome of which are e ſound, and
appear to have been ſuddenly covered to a confiderable depth.

It has been obſerved, that the rivers in the ſouthern ſtates frequently vary their
channels; ; that the ſwamps and low grounds are conſtantly filling up, and that the


that


| THE UNITED STATES. 139
that no longer ago than 1771, at Cape Lookout, on the coaſt of North Carolina, in
about latitude 34 507 there was an excellent harbour, capacious enough to receive an
hundred ſail of ſhipping at a time, in a good depth of water: it is now entirely filled
up, and is ſolid ground. Inſtances of this Kind are frequent along the coaſt. ey
It is obſervable, likewiſe, that there is a gradual deſcent of about eight hundred feet,
by meaſurement, from tlie foot of the mountains to the ſea board. This deſcent con-
tinues, as is demonſtrated by ſoundings, far into the ſea. 1
4. It is worthy of obſervation, that the ſoil on the banks of the rivers is propor-
tionably coarſe or fine according to its diſtance from the mountains. When you firſt
leave the mountains, and for a conſiderable diſtance, it is obſervable, that tiie ſoil is
coarſe, with a large mixture of ſand and ſhining heavy particles. As you proceed to-
ward the ſea, the foil is leſs coarſe, and fo on; in proportion as you advance, the ſoil
is finer and finer, until, finally, is depoſited a ſoil ſo fine, that it conſolidates into
perfect clay; but a clay of a peculiar quality, for a great part of it has intermixed
with it reddiſh ſtreaks and veins, like a ſpecies of ochre, brought probably from the
red lands which he up towards the mountains. This clay, when dug up and expoted
to the weather, will diffolve into a fine mould, without the leaſt mixture of ſand or
any gritty ſubſtance whatever. Now we know that running waters, when turbid, will
depoſit, firſt, the coarſeſt and heavieſt particles, mediately, thoſe of the ſeveral inter-
mediate degrees of fineneſs, and ultimately, thoſe which are the moſt light and ſubtle;
and ſuch in fact is the general quality of the ſoil on the banks of the ſouthern
rivers. | S I NN TTs
56. It is a well-known fact, that on the banks of Savannah river, about ninety miles
from the fea in a direct line, and one hundred and fifty or two hundred, as the river


runs, there is a very remarkable collection of oyſter ſhells of an uncommon ſize. They


run in a north-eaſt and ſouth-weſt direction, nearly parallel to the ſea coaſt, in three
_ diſtinct ridges, which together occupy a ſpace of ſeven miles in breadth. The ridges
commence at Savannah river, and have been traced as far ſouth as the northern
branches of the Alatamaha river. They are found in ſuch quantities, as that the in-
digo planters carry them away in large boat loads, for the purpoſe of making lime
water, to be ufed in the manufacture of indigo. There are thouſands and thouſands
of tons ſtill remaining.* The queſtion is, how came they here? It cannot be ſup-
poſed that they were carried by land. Neither is it probable that they were conveyed.
mn canoes, or boats, to ſuch a diſtance: from the place where oyſters are now found.
The uncivilized natives, agreeably to their roving manner of living, would rather have
removed to the ſea ſhore, than have been at ſuch immenſe labour in procuring oyſters.
Beſides, the difficulties of conveying them would have been inſurmountable. They


On the Georgia fide of the river, about 15 miles below Silver Bluff, the high road croſſes a. ridge of
high-ſwelling hills of uncommon elevation, and perhaps 50 feet higher than the ſurface of the river. Theſe
hills are from three feet below the common vegetative ſurface, to the depth of 20 or 30 feet, compoſed en-
tirely of foſſil oyſter ſhells, internally of the colour and conſiſtency of clear white marble: they are of an-
ncredible magnitude, generally 15 or 20 inches in length; from 6 to 8 wide, and from 2 to 4 in thick-
ness, and their hollows ſufficient to receive an ordinary man's foot. They appear all to. have been opened
fore the period of petrifaction; a tranſmutation they ſeem evidently to have ſuffered. They are un-
oubtediy very ancient, or perhaps antediluvian. The adjacent inhabitants burn them to lime for building,
for which purpoſe they ſerve very well; and would undoubtedly afford an excellent manure, when their lands,
equrre it, theſe hills now being remarkably fertile. The heaps of ſhells lie upon a fratzm of yellowiſh ſand
mould, of ſeveral feet in depth, upon a foundation of ſoft white rocks, that has the outward appearance of
ree-ſtone, but on ſtrict examination is really a teſtaceous concrete, or compoſition of ſand and pulveriſed
A ſhells. In ſhort, this teſtaceous rock approaches near in quality and appearance to the Bahama or Bermu--
diaa White Rock.“ Bartram's Travels, p. 318. e


—. ies Vould


140 Tn VNITAD STATES.
would not only have had a ſtrong current in the river againft them, an obſtacle which


would not have been cafily overcome by the Indians, who have ever bad a great averſion


to labour; but could they have ſurmounted this difficulty , oyſters conveyed ſuch a
diſtance, cither by land or water, in fo warm a climate, would have fpoiled on the
paſſage, and have become uſeleſs. The cireumfiance of theſe thells being found in


ſuch quantities, at ſo great a diſtance from the ſea, can be rationally accounted for in


no other way, than by N that the ſea ſhore was formerly near this bed of
{thells, and that the ocean has ſince, by the operation of certain cauſes not yet fully


- inveſtigated, receded. Theſe phenomena, it is preſumed, will authorize this conelu-


fion, that a great part of the flat country which ſpreads eaſterly of the Allegany
mountains, had, in ſome paſt period, a ſuperincumbent tea ; or rather, that the con-
ſtant accretion of ſoil from the various cauſes before hinted at, has forced it to re-
tire.


Nocrr ams.) The tract of cn eaſt of Hudfon' s river, comprehending part


of the State of New York, the four New England States, and Vermont, is rough,


billy, and in ſome parts mountainous. Theſe mountains will be more particularly
deſcribed under New England. In all parts of the world, and particularly on this
weſtern continent, it is obſervable, that as you depart from the occan, or from a river,


the land gradually riſes; and the height of land, in common, is about equally diſtant
trom the water on either fide. The Andes, i in South America, form the height of land


between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The high lands between the diſtrict of


Maine and the province of Lower Canada, divide the rivers which fall into the St.


Lawrence, north, and into the Atlantic, fouth. The Green Mountains, in Vermont,
divide the waters which flow eaſterly into Connecticut river from thoſe which fall
weſterly into Lake Champ] ain, Lake George, and Hudton's River.

Between the Atlantic, the Mifliffippi, and the lakes, runs a long range of mountains,
made up of a great number of ridges. Theſe mountains extend north-eaſterl. and
ſouth-weſterly, nearly parallel to the ſea coaſt, about nine hundred miles in length,
and from fixty to one hundred and fifty and two hundred miles in breadth. Mr.
Evans obſerves, with reſpect to that part of theſe mountains which he travelled over,


viz. in the back part of Pennſylvania, that fcarcely one acre in ten is capable of cul-


ture. "This, however, is not the caſe in all parts of this range. Numerous tracts of


fine arable and grazing land intervene between the ridges. The different ridges


_ which compoſe this unmentc range of mountains, have different names in different


| ſtates.


As you advance from the Atlantic, the firſt ridge i in Pennſylvania, Virginia, and


Eh North Carolina, is the Blue Ridge, or South Mountain, which is from one hundred


and thirty to two hundred miles from the ſea. Between this and the North Moun-
tain ſpreads a large fertile vale ; next lies the Allegany ridge; next beyond this is the
Long Ridge, called the Laurel Mountains, in a ſpur of which, about latitude 369, is
a ſpring of water fifty feet deep, very cold, and it is ſaid, as blue as indigo. From


theſe ſeveral ridges proceed innumerable nameleſs branches or ſpurs. The Kittatinny


mountains run through the northern parts of New Jerſey and Pennſylvania. All


theſe ridges, except the Allegany, are ſeparated by rivers, which appear to have forced
their pa Mages through ſolid rocks.


The principal ridge is the Allegany, which bas been deſcriptively called the back-bort
of the United States. The general name for theſe mountains, taken collectively,
ſeems not yet to have been determined. Mr. Evans calls them the Endleſs Mountains:
N have called them the Appalachian Mountains, from a tribe of Indians who live

OR


my


bone +
ely, .
ins?


THE UNITED STATES. ON
off a river which proceeds from this mountain, ealled the Appalachicola. But the
moſt common name is the Allegany Mountains, fo called, either from the principal
ridge of the range, or from their running nearly paralle] to the Allegany or Ohio
river; which, from its head waters, till it empties into the Miſſiſſippi, is known and
called by the name of Allegany River, by the Seneca and other tribes of the Six


Nations, who once inhabited it. Theſe mountains are not confuſedly ſcattered and


broken, rifing here and there into high peaks, overtopping each other, but ſtretch
along in uniform ridges, ſcarcely half a mile high. They ſpread as you proceed ſouth,
and ſome of them terminate in high perpendicular bluffs. Others gradually ſubſide
into a level country, giving riſe to the rivers which run ſoutherly into the Gulf of
Mexico. | NF 1 3 5
They afford many curious phenomena, from which naturaliſts have deduced many


theories of the earth. Some of them have been whimfical enough; Mr. Evans fup-


poſes that the moſt obvious of the theories which have been formed of the earth is,
that it was originally made out of the ruins of another. Bones and ſhelts which
eſcaped the fate of ſofter animal fubſtances, we find mixed with the old materials,


and elegantly preferved in the loeſe ftones and rocky baſes of the higheſt of theſe
hills.“ With deference, however, to Mr. Evans's opinien, thefe appearances have


heen much more rationally accounted for by ſuppefing the reality of the flood, of


Which Moſes has given us an account. Mr. Evans thinks this too great a miracle to


obtain belief. But whether is it a greater miracle fer the Creator to alter a globe of
carth by a deluge, when made, or to create one new from the ruins of another? The
tormer certainty is not leſs credible than the latter. Theſe mountains, fay our |
author, “ exifted in their preſent elevated height before the deluge, but not fo bare
of foil as now.” How Mr. Evans came to be ſo circumſtantially acquainted with


theſe pretended facts, is difficult to determine, unleſs we ſuppeſe him to have been an


Antediluvian, and to have ſurveyed them accurately before the eonvulſions of the de-
luge; and until we can be fully aſſured of this, we muſt be excuſed in not affenting
to his opinion, and in adhering to the old philoſophy of Moſes and his advocates.


= Vc have every reaſon to believe that the primitive ftate of the earth was totally meta-


morphoſed by the firſt convulfion of nature at the time of the deluge ; that the foun-


 7ains of the great deep were indeed broken up, and that the various rata of the earth were


diſſovered, and thrown into every poſſible degree of confuſion and diſorder. Henee |


thoſe vaſt piles of mountains which lift their craggy cliffs to the clouds, were proba-


bly thrown together from the floating ruins of the earth: and this conjecture is re-


markably cenfirmed by the vaſt number of foſſils and other marine exuvie which are
found imbeded on the tops of mountains, in the interior parts of continents remote
from the ſea, in all parts of the world hitherto explored. The various circumſtances


attending theſe marine hodies leave us to conclude, that they were actually generated,
lived, and died in the very beds wherein they were found, and therefore thete beds
mult have-eriginally been at the bottom of the ocean, though now in many inſtances


elevated ſeveral miles above its ſurface. Hence it appears that mountains and conti-
nents were not primary productions of nature, but of a very diſtant period of time
| from the creation of the world; a time long enough for the ſtrata to have acquired
their greateſt degree of coheſion and hardneſs; and tor the teſtaceous matter of marine
Thells to become changed to a ſtony ſubſtance; for in the fiſſures of the lime- ſtone


and other ſtrata, fragments of the ſame ſhell have been frequently found adhering to each


"de of the cleft, in the very ſtate in which they were originally broken; ſo that if the


&yeral parts were brought together, they would apparently tally with each other


3 ( xactN


*


wo.


,
:
- =
wv
.
; *
=
: *
I
iv
:% ;
5 Fd J
1:4
.
1
.
4
1
_
1
.
4.08
4 k 1
— 1
13
7 £
5 =”
; 1
3&5
* 3
s 1
. bo 1 o
Lhe 1
1
3
7
4 G
;. . 3
+3
>
* =»
*
MY
by.
.
8 1
&
.
1%.
8
+
1
>...
*
7%
4.7
_—_—
. vi
8 %
14
1
*
5 *
fly AS
. 4
* 4 *
2 * ©]
=}
, 82 4
1 =. -
*F .
17 : 1
x *
7 % :
+ * 1
228
_
: ©
: — ry Y
1
Er
4 +
AY 4 4 R
?
IA
7 *
:; .
« *
1
11 .
— -
=
i L
1
» 8
*
7
-* J .
” - $22
. 2s
is) =—
*
$36
3
IS £5
*
» \
M1 -
Z 7
*
1 1
*
4
20
\ ag
.
8 4
SG
" AY
*
2
N
*
F
13
3
.
© Eat
8
.
8
3
4 1 tha
77 2
*
$1 #+©
a
Ss -
WE ns 4
.
17
i "RT |
FLY
p BY
„
1 F
x* |
y w
=
1 3
13
3%
=
bY
23
1


8


0 4,
3
7
8 *
Wi
4,0")
* .
5
3
ne 4
l 9
Co i
o —
7
* -
' 3%
>
Tv
1
3
-<
"wt
--—_
*
=
i \
2 q
4 *
2
Ny 1
*
4
3
be 3
-*y
CB >, *
A 8
\ "=
-
A *
r .
23
>
18 -
"7
4 3
Is pf
. der
- 2 Fo
be;
© nh
* .
.
.
0
N
» it


142 | TAR UNITED STATES.
exactly. A very conſiderable time therefore muſt have elapſed- between the chaotic
ſtate of the earth and the deluge, which agrees with the account of Moſes, who


makes it a little upwards of fixteen hundred years. 'Thele obſervations are intended
to ſhew, in one inſtance out of many others, the agreement between revelation and


reaſon, betweerr the account which Moſes gives us of the creation and deluge, and
the prefent appearances of nature. / Thoſe who wifi to have this agreement more
fully and fatisfactorily ſtated, are referred to a very learned and ingenious “ Iugu⁰


into We original ate and formation of the earth,” by John Whitehurft, F. R. S. to whom
I acknowledge mytelt indebted for tome of the ioregoing oblervations. . n


Sol AND VEGETABLE PRODUCTIONS. | In the United States are to be found every


ſpecies of ſoil that the earth affords. In one part of them or another, they produce.


all the various kinds of fruits, grain, pulſe, and hortuline plants and roots, which“
are found in Europe, and have been thence tranſplanted to America. Beſides theſe,


a great variety of native vegetable productions. |


%


The natural hiftory of the American States, particularly of New England, is yet
in its infancy. Several ingenious ſoreigners, {killed in botany, have viſited the


ſouthern, and ſome of the middle ſtates, and Canada, and theſe ſtates have alſo had


ingenious botaniſts of- their own, who have made conſiderable progreſs in deſcribing
the productions of thoſe parts of America which they have viſited; but New England


| ſeems not to have engaged the attention either of foreign or American botaniſts. There


was never an attempt to deſcribe botanically, the vegetable productions of the eaſtern


| ſtates, till the Rev. Dr. Cutler, of Ipſwich, turned his attention to the ſubject. The


reſult of his firſt inquiries was publiſhed in the firſt volume of the Memoirs of the


American Academy of Arts and Sciences.“ Since that period, „the Doctor has paid


very particular attention to this his favourite ſtudy; and the public may ſhortly expect
to be gratified and improved by his botanical deſcriptions and diſcoveries.«“ To his
liberal and generous communications, I am principally indebted for the following ac-
coumt of the vegetable productions of the eaſtern and middle ſtates. es


N. B. The following catalogues are all incomplete, and defigned only to give
general ideas. They contain, however, more correct information concerning the Na-
tural Hiſtory of New England, than has yet been publiſhed. _ | .


GRAIN CULTIVATED IN THE EASTERN AND MipDLE STATES.] Indian corn (Zea
mays) a native grain of North America. The varieties of this grain, occaſioned by


a difference in ſoil, cultivation, and climate, are almoſt cndleſfs. Winter and ſum-
mer rye (ſecale cereale, hybernum et vernum,) the only ſpecies cultivated by our
_ farmers. The winter rye ſucceeds beſt in ground newly cleared, but ſummer tye is


The productions of the ſouthern ſtates and of Canada have not been well eſcribed by any one author,


n a work profeſſedly for that-purpoſe ; but are moſtly intermixed with the productions of other parts of the


vorld, in the large works of European botaniſts. This renders it difficult to ſele& them, and to give an ac-
curate connected account of them. To remedy this inconvenience, and to reſcue this country from the re-
proach of not having any authentic and ſcientific account of its natural hiſtory, Dr. Cutler, who has already
examined nearly all the vegetables of New England, intends, as ſoon as his leiſure will admit, to publiſh a
botanical work, of conſiderable magnitude, confined principally to the productions of the New England
| ſtates. Dr. Barton, of Philadelphia, I am informed, is collecting materials for a work of a- ſimilar nature,
io comprehend the middle and ſouthern ſtates: ſo that both together will form a complete Natural Hiſtory
ef the American States. | | „„ ;
+ Of all the different kinds of Indian corn, botaniſts. have been able to find but one /pecies, The difter-
ence in this genus of plants is probably accidental, owing to the above-mentioned cauſes. It is poſſible, how-
ever, that among theſe varieties, ſpecific characters may yet be found. What is called the /piked Indian corn,
is probably only a variety. The plant commonly known in the ſouthern ſtates by the name of Guinea corn,
is of the family of grafles, as are.rye, wheat, barley, oats, &c. FT FRF |
| | 5 © | | 1 7 frequently


%


frequently ſown in old towns, where the land has been long under cultivation. The


Pagated for feed and hay:


Wire graſs (Poa comprefſa.)—Fowl Meadow graſs (Poa aviaria,


following, V1Z.


THE UNITED STATES. 143


winter and ſummer rye are the ſame ſpecies, forming two varieties; but the winter and
ſummer wheat are two diſtinct ſpecies. Several ſpecies of barley are cultivated, the


moſt common is the fix ranked (Hordeum hexaſtichon,) and the two ranked (Hordeum


dittichon.) The wheat principally cultivated. are the winter and ſummer (Triticum


hybernum et æſtivum.) —Oats (Avena ſativa. )—Buck-wheat (Polygonum fagopirum.


In the ſouthern States, as far north as Virginia, where the lands are ſuitable, beſides
the grain already mentioned, they cultivate rice.—This grain was brought into Caro-
lina firſt by Sir Nathaniel Johnſon, in 1688; and afterwards more and of a different
kind, probably a variety, was imported by a ſhip from Madagaſcar, in 1696; till

«which time it was not much cultivated. It tucceeds well alſo on the Ohio river, where
it is planted both on the high and low grounds, and in the fame fields with Indian corn


and other grain. A gentleman who had planted it ſeveral years in his garden, informed
Dr. Cutler that it yielded at the rate of 80 buſhels an acre.


At Marietta, it has
anſwered the moſt ſanguine expectations of the inhabitants, producing equal to any


y
other grain, without being at any time overflowed with water. The Doctor himſelf


ſaw it growing in a very fiourithing ſtate, on high land, but it had not, at the ſeaſon
he ſaw it, began to bloom. It was faid not to be of the ſame ſpecies of Carolina rice.


It is probably the wild rice, which I have been informed grows in plenty, in ſome of
the interior parts of North America, and is the moſt valuable of all the ſpontaneous
productions of the country. In Pennſylvamia grows a ſort of grain called, by the
Germans, Spells, which reſembles wheat; and is a very valuable grain. Es,
 Curvivated GRASSES IN THE EASTERN AND MIDDLE STATES. | All the graſſes,
cultivated in the middle and New England States, are found growing indigenous. It


is not improbable, however, that ſome of them may be naturalized exotics. The


following are the principal graſſes ſown in our cultivated ground, or in any way pro-


Herd's Grais or Fox Tail, (Alopecurus pratenſis,) this is reckoned the beſt graſs we
have, is a native, and ſuppoſed to be peculiar to this country. Blue Graſs (Alopecurus


geniculatus.)—Many ſpecies of Bent (Agroſtis,) particularly the Rhode Ifland Bent


(Agroſtis interrupta.) The ſmall and great Engliſh graſs (Poa trivialis et pratenſis.)—


ſpiculis ſubbifloris.) *
Red and white clover (Trifolium pratenſe et repens.) ) Dn TT EE Hey.
The graſſes of Virginia, according to Mr. Jefferſon, are Lucerne, St. Foin, Burnet,


Timothy, Ray, and Orchard graſs, red, white, and yellow clover ; Greenſwerd, Blue


graſs and Crab graſs. South of Virginia very little attention is
of graſſes.


the woods.


Narrvx Gnassks IX NRW ENGLAND. ] Beſides the cultivated graſſes, the States of


New England abound with a great variety which are found growing in their native
foils and fituations, many of which have not been deſcribed by any botanical writers.
The ſmall experiments which have been made, ſufficiently evince that ſeveral of them


make excellent hay. They might be greatly improved by cultivation, and are highly
worthy the attention of our farmers. Thoſe which are found moſt common are the


| id to the cultivation
The winters are ſo mild, that the cattle find a tolerable ſupply of food in


* The Fowl meadows, on Neponſit river, between Dedham and Stoughton, are conſidered by ſome a
a * large tract of land is there cleared and ſowed with an excellent kind of graſs, without the _
ance of man.“ | |


Dr. Fiſber.


*
*


244 THE UNITED STATES.
The vernal graſs (Anthoxanthum odoratum.)—Timothy, or bulbus Cat's tail prats


{Phleum pratenſe.)— Several ſpecies of Panic graſs (Pa nicum)—Scveral ſpecies of Bent


Agroſtis)— Hair graſs (Kira aquatica)— Numerons ſpecics of Poa.—Quaking graſs,
(Briza) ſeveral fpecies—Cock's foot graſs (Dactylis glomerata)—Milfet (Milium


effuſum) Feſcue grafs (Feſtuco) many tpecies—Oat t graſs (Avena ſpicata)—Reed |
graſs (Arundo) ſeveral ſpecie Brome graſs (Bromus ſquarroſus— lime graſs (Elymus


hy ſtrix)— Barley graſs (Hordeum pratenſe) - Dog's or couch graſs (Dritivom repens)—
Many ſpecies of ruſh graſs (Juncus)—Numerous {pecies ys Cares, in freſh and ſalt,
marſhy ground. Several ſpecies of Beard grats | (Andropogon)—Soſt graſs, (Holcus


lanatus et odoratus)—Befides theſe, there are : manly valuable graties which, at preſent,
are non-deleripts,


Wir Favrrs Ix New ExcLaxd.] Black Currant (Ribes nigrum )—Gooſeberry


(Ribes gloflularia)—Prickly Gooſeberry (Ribes cynofbati)—Two ſpecies of Gra


pes
the Black Grape (Vitis labruſea,) and Fox Grape (Vitis vulpina.) Of theſe two


tpectes we have many varieties, differing only in ſize, colour, and taſte. An excellent
wine, and in large quantities, has lately been made by the French people, at their new
ſettlement on the Ohio river, from the native grapes, without, any kind of cultivation.
22 collected the grapes promiſcuouſly from all the varieties growing in that country.
e e wines of different, and no doubt ſome of them, of a much better
2 might have been made. The native grape is propagated with great eaſe ; its


growth. is luxuriant, overſ preading the higheſt trees in the foreſts, and by proper
attention would afford an rn ſupply of wines, in the northern as well as fouthern


States. The principal difficulty ſeems to be the want of a proper knowledge of the
proceſs in making wine, and preparing it for uſe.— Barberry buſh (Berberis vulgaris)
Whortleberry (Vaccinium liguſtrmum) — Blueberry (Vaccinium oorymbefum)- WIe
Whortleberry (Vaccinium album) — Indian Gooſeberry (Vaccinium frondoſum)—Long-
leaved Whortleberry (Vaccinium e (Vaccinium. oxycouos).
ene Plum (Prunus americana) — Beach Plum (Prunus maratima) — Large black
rry (Prunus nigra) Purple Cherry (Prunus virginiana) Wild red Cherry (Prunus
Wh or Choak Cherry (Prunus canadenfis)—Mountain — (Prunus
montana) — Service- tree Meſp us canadenfis)—Brambleberry (Rubus occidentalis)
Sawteat Blackberry or Bumblckites (Rubus Sasel) -N Blackberry (Rubus


moluccanus)—Dewberry (Rubus hitpidus) Common Raſpberry (Rubus idæus)


Smooth-ſtalked Raſpberry (Rubus canadenfis) Superb Raſpberry (Rubus odoratus)
Strawberry (Fragaria veſca.) The native ſtrawberry is much improved by culti-
vation, and produces a larger and better-flavoured fruit, than the exotic. Mulberry
(Morus nigra.)

For information on this artiele; reſpelting the Southern States, the reader may

conſult what Cateſby, Clayton, Jefferſon, and Bartram have written upon it.

Nor FRurr.] hite Oak (Quercus alba) Red Oak (Quercus rubra) and ſeveral
other ſpecies with fmaller fruit. Black Walnut (Juglans nigra) — White Walnut,
Butternut, or Oilnut (Juglans cathartica) White, or round nut Hiccory (Juglans


alba) —Shag-bark r Juglans cineria.)* —Cheſnut (Fagus er :
quipin, or dwarf Cheſnut (Fag us pumula)—Beech nut (Fagus ſytvatica, )—Hazlenut |


(Corylus avallana)—Filbert (Corytas cornuta.)


We may here mention the Paccan or Illinois nut n alba, foliolis lanceolatis,
acuminatis, ſerratis, tomentoſis, fructu minore, ovato, compreſſo, vi in ſculpto, dulci,


* The fame, probably, as . $ Scaly bark. u of Virginia, (Juglans alba, cortice ſquamoſo.)
putamine,


1

1

"Mg"

27 A V

* 4

*

1

.

ry *

ay, ,

*

*

*

*

1
& “
*
4
"2
— - v4
*
| *
3
* a,
3
3
* ij
9
1
A
GM
: 22
1 8
2
1 7
3
1 WW
X

i I

.*

__—

=

a 0 F

"0 id
_ 9 4
. 8
*

* *

. * x8
4 <
. 5

Y wh

\ *

*

re 7 a n
Wy.

n *
- ff 0 *

+ b
1
25 ,

LY
Le 2
0 *

«

8
R 4
3 .
* 4 N

* =
* * ad mY

0 15
8 N oY:
Fa .
5 =
9 4 *
=
\ -

BY *
n
* 2
122

"ie

* 5

> FOES
* oy
. 1:
*W *
5 Sk

55 #7

3 I”

3
2 9
* ra
=
: _
Fi N
1

DT,”
* *
1

LS : ' 4*

"8
a
1
1
1

_ . - Pe .
fg 4
——
=
* 7

+. 9.
43 2»
J 1
* -

k *;
„
©
_

J 28 at. *
45 «
=
- 7 —_

1
7 "> 8
-
3 ;
1
_
Ed To
==

$$. -
1
8 *
3
_

& 3 7
Is T3
or. 3
1
"=q 1-4
3
*
3 x
___

.
1

5 _

- 68
- =
1
1
_
—«
_—_—.”
"I
IS
3

*
"8
Xx

"a

4
"i
.
„
= * . 1
8
* *

*
8
*
3

* »

4
oe .
4

”
=
*

* x
I
.$
a5 a"
©
3
*
8 :
I -

_—
. 8
14 Pr
"3 a
*

* :

Ne 1

5
1

*

1

«


*


do ß Ds


K R


k SY be TD Sb n : > g
POS x ba f R - . ye" 25 AA EVI . vgs 2 1 4 <4 5 IS
| * * r e * . N . f ET Mods no TE =, 4174, AE
, > p D , 4 27 s \ n 2 ; \ * 5 g "= —. 3-0 NS eee F * OST .
ITE $i fk 100 r * e * — d oF . 3 þ * 4 is * . - <4 8 a > 3 N F n as rf. N a
NY * * R LS . r 3 ; 1 7 p . * * 200 5.5 7 — 1 ISI CY UI; CG LES ar cy 65 +” Js
9 — DL ONS jo Rae FC rn RF Wine NE ISS 1 . p FEE LO, = > THT ne? AG 8 N Is 2 he n | . . ; ; . 1 n
g eee , . y y c h 28 cl | 5 :
— Ss * On ng TT OF e r . . ra 04% (Hd TREE ou ne ors Þ * 5
waiters FN R ö n r n r T . NS SY 7 IS 2 * 0 # N " .
a co ä — e ee FE PANE G29 F age; CEO 8 5 0 CA : : .
£ RE ASE LE RB 2. 5 ;
* 4 7 — = s


„ THE UNITED STATES.


145
putamine, tenerrimo. Jefferſon.) This nut is about the ſize of a large, long acorn,
and of an oval form, the ſhell is eaſily cracked, and the kernel ſhaped like that of a
walnut. The trees which bear this fruit grow, naturally, on the Miffiſſippi and its
branches, ſouth of forty degrees north latitude. They grow well when planted in the


ſouthern Atlantic States.


Mepicinal PLANTS IN NEW EncGLand.] Among the native and uncultivated


plants of New England, the following have been employed for medicinal purpoſes.


Water Horehound (Lycopus virginica)—Blue Flag (Iris ,virginica)—Skunk Cabbage
(Arum Americanum. Cateſb. and Dracontium ſœtidum. Linn.)—Partridge-herry


(Mitchella repens) — Great, and Marth Plantain (Plantago' major et maritima) Witch


Hazel (Hamamelis virginica)—Hounds ae (Cynogloſſum officinale) Comfrey
(Symphytum officin.)— Bear's ear Samcle (Cortuſa gmelini)—Appleperu (Datura
ſtrammonium) — Bitterſweet (Solanum dulca-mare)—Tivertwig, or American Mazerion
(Celaſtrus ſcandens)—Elm * (Ulmus americana)—Great Laſerwort, and Wild Angelica
(Laſerpitium trilobum, et latifolium)— Angelica, or American Maſterwort (Angelica


lucida) - Water Elder (Virburnum opulus)—Elder (Sambucus nigra)—Chickweed


(Alſina media) Pettimorrel, or Life of man (Aralia racemoſa)—Sarſaparilla (Aralia


nudicaulis?) -Marſh Roſemary (Statice limonium)—Sundew (Droſera rotundifolia)—


Solomon's Seal (Convallaria ſtellata ?)—Adder's Tongue (Convallaria bifolia)— 5
Unicorn (Aletris farinoſa)— Sweet Flag (Acorus calamus) Several ſpecies of Dock _
(Rumex)—Biſtort ( Polygonum biſtorta) - Spice wood, or Feverbuſh (Laurus benzoin)


Daſſafras (Laurus ſaflatras)—Conſumption Root (Pyrola rotundifolia) - Rheumatiſin
Weed (Pyrola minor) - Mouſe Ear (Ceraſtium viſcoſum)—Gargit, or Skoke (Phyto-


lacca decandria)— Wild Hyſſop (Lythrum hyſopis)—Agrimony (Agrimonia cupatoria)
Common Avens, or Herb Bennet (Geum Virg.) - Water Avens, or Throat Root
(Geum rivale)—Blood Root, or Puccoon (Sanguinario canadenſis)—Celandine
(Chelidonium majus)—Yellow Water Lily (Nymphœa lutea)—Pond Lily (Nymphea
alba) Golden Thread, or Mouth Root (Nigella ?)—Liverwort (Anemone hepatica)


ECrowsfoot (Ranunculus Pennſylv.)—Germander (Teucrum Virg.)—Catmint, or
Catnip (Nepeta cataria) Head Betony (Betonica officinalis) Horſemint, Spearmint,


Watermint, and Penniroyal (Mentha ſpicata, viridis, aquatica, et pulegium) Ground


Ivy, or Gill go over the ground (Glecoma hederacea)—Hedge Nettle (Stachys ſylvatica)


—Horeheund (Marrubium vulgare) Motherwort (Leonorus eardiaca)— Wild Mar-
zorum (Origanum vulgare) Wild Lavender (Trichoſtema?) - Wood Betony (Pidi-.
cularis canadenſis)—Shepherd's Purſe or Pouch (Thlapſpi burſa paſtoris) Water
Creſſes (Siſymbrium naſturttum)—Cranesbill (Geranium macrorhizum)—Marſh Mal
low (Althea officin.) Mallow (Malva rotundifolia)—Succory (Crepis barbata)—
Burdock (Actium lappa)—Devil's Bit (Serratula amara) The root reſembles the Euro-


pean Devil's Bit (Scabivſa ſucciſa) from which circumſtance the Engliſh name has


probably been apphed to this plant.—Tanſey (Tanacetum vulgare)—Wormwood
{Artemiſia abſinthiani)—Lite everlaſting (Gnaphalium odoratiſſimum?)— Colts Foot
{Tuſfilago farfara)—Golden-rod (Solidago canad.)—Elecampane (Inula helenium)—
Mayweed (Anthemis cotula)—Yarrow (Achillea millefolia)—American Pride (Lobelia
cardinalis) Three other ſpecies of Lobelia (Lobelia dortmanna, kalmii, et ſphilitica)—
Dragon Root (Arum Virg.)—Stinging Nettle (Urtica urens)—White Walnut, Butter
Nut, or Oilnut (Juglans cathartica)—Swamp Willow (Salix cinerea ?)—Sweet Gale


{Myrica gale)—White Hellebore, or Pokeroot (Veratrum album) —Moonwort (Of-


* The bark of the ſweet Elm, is a moſt excellent mucilage,


TJ: . mung


146 | THE UNITED STATES:


munda nana male Fern (Pteris caudata) Hearts Tongue (\6 lentum ſcolo-
pendrium)—Spleenwort {(Atpleninm falicifolium)—Black Maidenhair (Afplenum adi-
antum.) To the above we may add, Arſmart (Eolygonum Sagitatum. Linn.)

Among a great variety of other mediciaal plants in the ſouthern and middle States:
are Pink Root ( ) an excellent vermifuge--Senna (Caſſia liguſtrina)

Clivers or Gooſe-graſs (Galium ſpurium)— Palma Obriſti (Ricinus) from which the
_ Caſtor oil is exprefled Sex eral ſpecies of Mallow--luctian Phyſic (Spiræa trifoliata)—
Euphorhial Ipecacuanhe--Pleurity Root (A ſclepias decumbens) Virginia Snake Root
(Ariſtolochia ſerpentaria) — Black Snake Root (Acta racemoſa) Seneca Rattle-ſnake
Root (Polygala Senega)—Valerian (Valeriana locuſta radiata)—Ginfeng (Panax
quinquefolium)—Angelica (Angelica ſylveſtris)—Caffava (Jatropha urens.)

\ FLrowteRinG TREES AND SHRUBS IN THE UnirzD STATES. | Globe Flower (Ce-
phalanthus occidentalis)—Pigeonberry (Ciſſus ficyoides) — Virginian Dogwood (Cornus
florida)—Conel (Cornus canadenſis)—Red-flowered Honeyſuckle (Azalea nudiflora)
White American Honeyſuckle (Azalea viſcoſa)—American Tea (Ceanothus ameri-
canus) Cherry Honey ſuckle (Lonicera dierv illa) Virginia ſcarlet Honeyſuckle (Lo-
nicera virginiana)— Dwarf Cherry Honeyſuckle (Lonicera canadenſis) Evergreen
Spindle Tree (Euonymus ſempervirens)—Virginian Itea (Itea virginica) Stag's-horn
Sumach (Rhus typhinum) — Black Haw (Viburnum prunifolium)—Blackberried Elder
(Sambucus nigra) Redberried Elder (Sambucus canadenſis) — Scarlet-flowered Horſe
Cheſnut (AÆſculus pavia)— Judas Tree (Cercis canadenfis)— Great Laurel (Kalmia
latifolia)— Dwarf Laurel (Kalmia anguſtifoia)—Thyme-leaved Marſh Ciſtus (Ledum
Thymifolium)— American Senna (Rhodora canadentis)—Roſe Bay Tree (Rhodo-
dendrum maximum) - White Pepper Buſh (Andromeda arborea)—Red-bud Andro.
meda (Andromeda racemoſa) Bog Evergreen (Andromeda calyculata) Carolina
Red bud (Andromeda nitida) Carolina Iron-wood Tree (Andromeda plumata)
Carolinian Syrianga (Philadelphus inodorus) Sorbus Tree (Sorbus aucuparia)—
Mountain Ath (Sorbus americana) Service Tree (Meſpilus canadenſis)—Medlar Tree
(Neſpilus nivea) Sweet- ſcented Crab Apple-tree (Pyrus coronaria) — Meadow Sweet
(Spiræa ſalicifolia)— Queen of the Meadows (Spiræa tomentoſa) Canadian Spirea
(Spirza hypericifolia) Wild Roſe (Roſa carolina) —Pennſylvanian Swamp Roſe
(Roſa paluſtris) Superb Raſpberry (Rubus odoratus)—Carolian Fothergilla (Fother-

gilla gardeni) Tulip Tree (Liriodendrum tulipifera) Evergreen Tulip Tree (Mag-
nolia grandiflora) Climbing Trumpet Flower (Bignonia radicans) - Virginian Stew-

artia (Stewartia malacodendron)— Franklin Tree (Franklinia alatamaha)—Locuit

Tree (Robinia pſcud acacia)—Roſeflowered Locuſt Tree (Robinia e
Willow (Salix cineria )—Redflowerecd Maple (Acer rubrum.)

N. B. The above catalogue is far from being complete, but may ſerve to give 4
tolerable idea of this claſs of ſhrubs, in the United States.

Fioaksr TREEs.] Were we poſſeſſed of accurate materials for the purpoſc, it
would far exceed the limits of a work embracing ſuch a variety of ſubjects; to give
complete catalogue of our trees. From the foregoing catalogues the reader muſt
neceffarily conclude that they are very numerous. And it ought to be obſerved that
_ almoſt all of them, for ſome purpoſe or other, have been uſed as timber. Some of the
moſt uſeful ſpecies of trees, however, muſt not be omitted, and are the following— }
ELM (Ulmus americana) Of Us tree there 1 18 but one ſpecies * of which there are

2 12


Query. Is not what is called the Sꝛwect Elm, the bark of which 1 is uſed medicinally, e h eſteemed |
a different 1| pecies from the Ulmus Americana?


*


\


lew years paſt.


THE UNITED-SDATES. - | 147
two varieties, the white and the red. WILD CHERRY; many ſpecies, highly valued
for cabinet work. Locus (Robinia pſeudo-acacia) of quick growth, good for fuel,
and excellent for poſts to ſet in the ground, and trunnels for ſhips.—BIxch; ſeveral
ſpecies, 1. White (Betula alba) 2. Black (Betula nigra) 3. Red or Yellow (Betula
lenta)—Oax ; ſeveral: ſpecies,” 1. Black (Quercus niger) 2. Red (Quercus rubra)
three varieties. 3. White (Quercus alba) 4. Shrub or Ground Oak (Quercus pumila)
5. Cheſtnut Oak (Quercus prinus) 6. Live Oak (Quercus ſempervirens—Quercus
Virginiana, Millar.) 7. Black Jack Oak (Quercus aquatica, Clayton) The two laſt are
peculiar'to the ſouthern States. CHESNUT (Fagus caſtanca) chiefly uſed for fencing.
Dach (Fagus ſylvatica) three varieties.—PixE (Pinus) ſeven ſpecies. 1. White
Pinus ſtrobus) the prince of the American foreſts, in ſize, age, and majeſty of appear-


ance. It is found in the greateſt abundance in Maine, New Hampthire, and Ver-


mont—Excellent for maſts, bowſprits and yards for ſhips.—2. Yellow (Pinus pinea)
its plank and boards are uted for the floors of houſes and the decks of ſhips—3. Black
or Pitch Pine (Pinus tæda) when burnt in kilns it makes the beſt of charcoal; its
knots and roots being full of the terebinthine oil, when kindled, afford a brighter
light than candles; its ſoot is collected and uſed for lampblack. It grows ſparſely in
the New England and middle States, but in the greateſt plenty in the ſouthern States,
between the ſea coaſt and the mountains. From it they make tar in large quantities.


4. The Larch (Pinus larix) Its turpentine is ſaid to be the ſame with the Burgundy |
pitch. Beſides theſe, naturaliſts reckon the Fir (Pinus balſamea)—Spruce (Pinus


canadenſis—Hemlock (Pinus abies)—ArBor Vitz (Thuya occidentalis) the ſame as
what is called WHITE Cepar.—Juxietr or RED CEDAR (Juniperus virginica) It
produces the Juniperberry.—-WITE CEDAR, of the ſouthern States (Cupreſſus


Thyoides) different from the white cedar of the northern States. —CyrRxess (Cupreſſus


diſticha) Found only in the ſouthern States—Uſed for ſhingles and other purpoſes.


Grows in ſwamps, very large. WHITE WILLOw (Salix alba) The bark of its root is


an excellent ſubſtitute for the Peruvian bark. As (Fraxinus americana) two ſpecies,
Black, or Swamp Aſh, and White Aſh.—MarrE, three ſpecies; 1. White (Acer
negundo) much uſed in cabinet work. 2. Red (Acer rubrum) 3. Black Rock or
Sugar Maple (Acer ſaccharinum) Its ſap has a ſaccharine quality; and when refined
and hardened by boiling and baking, makes a well-taſted and wholeſome ſugar, the
manufacture of which has greatly increaſed in the eaſtern and middle States, within a


There is in the United States, an infinitude of trees of leſs note, and many probably
equally noticeable with thoſe enumerated, for a catalogue and deſcriptions of which, I
muſt refer the reader, (till a more perfect catalogue be furniſhed by Dr. Cutler and Dr.


_ Barton, to Cateſby's Natural Hiſtory Dr. Clayton's Flora Virginica—Mr. - Jefferſon's


Notes on Virginia—Mr. Bartram's Travels through North and South Carolina, &c.—


Dr. Cutler's paper in the Memoirs of the American Academy—and Dr. Belknap's |


Hiſtory of New Hampſhire, Vol. TIT. op RS
ExoTic Frvirs.] Of theſe, Apples are the moſt common in the United States.

They grow in the greateſt plenty and variety in the eaſtern and middle States; and

the cyder which is expreſſed from them, affords the moiſt common and wholeſome


liquor that is drank by the inhabitants. The Crab. Apple ( Pyrus coronaria) though
not an exotic, on account of its being a genuine, but diſtinct tpecies of the- Apple,
ought to. be mentioned in this connection. It grows in all parts of North America,


which have been explored, from the Atlantic as far weſt as the Mithifipp1. Its bloſſoms


are remarkably fragrant ; its fruit ſmall, poſſeſſing, perhaps, of all vegetables, the


2 | keeneſt


STATES:


THE UNITED
keeneſt acid. The c yder made of this fruit is admired
excellent vinegar.


exotic fruits are pears, peaches, quinces, mulberries,
barberries, of all which, except quinces and barberries, we have many ſpecies and


148


by connoiſſeurs: it makes
The European Crab Apple is very different from ours. The other


plums, cherries, currants,


varieties. Theſe, with a few apricots and nectarines, flouriſh in the: eaſtern States,
and are in perfection in the middle States.“
The exotic fruits of the ſouthern ftates, beſides thoſe already mentioned, are figs,


_ oranges, and lemons.


Pelsk AND HorTuLingE PLANTS AND Roors. Beſides thoſe tranſplanted. from
Europe to America, of which we have all the various kinds that Europe produces, the


following are natives of this country, Potatoes, (Solanum tuberoſum) Ground Nuts, a:
ſort of potatoe, probably a ſpecies, highly reliſted by ſome people; Tobacco (Nico-


tiana)—Pumpkins (Cucurbita pepo)—Cymlings (Cucurbita verrucoſa)—Squaſhes.
(Cucurbito. melopepo) Cantelope melons, Beans, Peas, Hops. Probably others.
Ax1iMALs.| America contains, at leaſt, one half, and the territory of the United
States about one fourth of the quadrupeds of the known world. Some of them are
common to North America, and to the European and Aſiatic parts of the Eaſtern Con-
tinent; others are peculiar to this country. All thoſe that are common to both conti-
nents, are found in the northern parts of them, and are fuch as may be ſuppoſed to
have migrated from one continent to the other. Comparing individuals of the ſame:
ſpecies, inhabiting the different continents, ſome are perfectly fimilar ; between others,


there 18 ſome difference 1 in fize, colour, or other circumſtances ;. in forme few inſtances


the European animal is larger than the American; in others, the reverſe is true. A


ſimilar variety, ariſing from the temperature of the climate, quantity of food furniſhed
in the parts they inhabit, degree of ſafety, &. takes place between individuals of the
ſame ſpecies, in different parts of this continent. 5

But our information on this ſubject is not ſufficient to authorize many 8
It is very probable that ſome of our quadrupeds are utterly unknown; others are known


only by common report, from hunters and others, and therefore could not be ſcienti-


fically deferibed ; and with reſpect to many others, the multiplying and. PIE:

names has produced great uncertainty and confuſion.
The Rev. Dr. Cutler has obliged mewith the following Catalogue of our Animals,

with their Linnzan 1 names annexed.


*


( — Phoca vitulina.
A - - Canis lupus
Red Fox 55 „ Canis alopex ?:
Grey Fox „ Canis.
Wild cat — V Felis lynx.
. — - Viverra putorius.
n — — Muſtella lutra? i
Martin - — — Muſtela.
Weaſel - 3 8 Muſtela martes?


* In regard to tree fruit” (fays Dr. Tenny of Exeter, in New Hampſhire, i in a letter to Dr. Belkna p55 oof of


are in too northern a climate to have it of the firſt quality, without particular attention.


New York New


Jerſey and Pennſylvania, have it in perfection. As you depart from that tract, either ſouthward or northward;


it degenerates. 1 believe, however, that good fruit might be produced even in [New Ham


able attention,


ire, with ſuit ·
Beltnap's Hift. N. H. Vol. III. p. 140 ·


+ Animals in is which have been hunted for their fleſh or. fur, fuch : as ths moole, deer, beaver, xc.


have become leſs in ſize ſince the arrival * Europeans.


Ermine


THE UNITED STATES. N


Ermine 55 — Muſtela erminea.
Bear: = 14 — Urſus arctos.
Racoon — — — Urſus lotor.
Wolverine 8 — Urſus luſcus.
Wood chuck = = 4 (Urſi vel muſtelæ ſpecies.)
Mole - DS — Talpa europea.
Shrew mouſe - - — Sorex criſtatus.
Ground mouſe — — Sorex murinus.
Field mouſe - — 3 Sorex araneus.
Porcupine — — Hyftrix dorſata.
Hare OF Leepus timidus?
Rabbit — - CLepus cuniculus.
Beaver - OE - Caſtor fiber.
 Muſquaſh = 8 - Caſtor zibethicus.
MAT. > - 7 1.8 —
Black rat — . Mus
Black ſquirrel — — Sciurus niger.
Grey ditto = - S Scturus cinereus..
Red ditto — — — Sciurus flayns.
Striped ditto — — Sciurus ſtriatus.
Flying ditto — — Sciurus volans.
= Mooſe — — Cervus tarandus..
= Deer = — Cervus dama.
—_  - e Mamillary biped
Bat 8 — Veſpertilio murinus.


The importance of this part of our Ame hiſtory has induced me to pay the moſt
alliduous attention to it, and to ſeek information from: every authority on the ſubject.
With the liberal and generous aſſiſtance of an ingenious friend,“ I have been enabled.

to form the following catalogue of the Quadruped animals within the United ne
and to add the deſcriptions of them which ſucceed.


Mammouth * Caribou * Bear * Catamount
Hippotamus TT ² Ioer . * Wolverene * Cour -
* Biſon. | ' %Fallow Deer * Wolf * Mountain: Cat
* Mooſe * Roe VVV * Lynx
* Marony” * Opoſſum * Flying Squirrel. * Muſ quaſh.

* Kincajou. * Woodchuck = » Moris

* Wealel: : Urchin: 5 * Field mouſe * Seal.

* Ermine- Hare a * Wood Rat Maniti

* Martin. - * Racoon * Shrew Mouſe Sapajou
| *Mink * Fox Squirrel * Purple Mole Sagoin.

Otter * Grey Squirrel! Black Mole
* Fiſher *Red Squirrel Water Rat
*Skrunk X Striped Squirrel * Beaver


N. B. Thoſe Animals to which an aſteriſm & is prefixed, are fur animals; whoſe”
ins are ſometimes dreſſed in allum, with the hair on, and worn in dreſs; or. whoſe-
fur or ſoft hair is uſed for various manufactural purpoles.. :


* Dr. Fiſher of Beverly. 3


AL, animal is added upon the _— of Dr, Mitchill, Prof, Nat. Hiſt, Sc. Columbia College; N.
The


4
0


-
4
* —
.
.


Tp 81


bs: THE UNITED; STATES oO :


of the ſame ſpecies with the European animals of the ſame name.


mals, in general, that they are not of ſo ſavage a nature as thoſe in Europe. W


found in the northern parts of both the old and new world. From the form of their
| teeth, they are ſuppoſed to have been carnivorous. Like the elephant they were: armed


Ohio river. Theſe licks were formerly frequented by a vaſt number of graminivorous
animals, on account of the falt, of which they are exceſſively ſond. From the appear-


few ſcattered grinders, have indeed been found in other places; but it has been ſuppoſed theſe have been brought


head chief was a very old man to be engaged in war; he told me he was 84 years old; he was probably as


After making him ſome ſmall acceptable preſents of tobacco, paint, ammunition, &c. and complimenting


The Wolf, Fox, Weaſel, Ermine, Otter, Flying Squirrel, Bat, and Water Rat, are


The Fallow Deer, Grey Fox, Martin, Otter, Opoſſum, Woodchuck, Hare, bine
of theſe Squirrels, and the Beaver, have been tamed. Probably moſt of theſe, and
ſome others, might be perfectly domeſticated. It has been obſerved of our wild ani-


Of the animals ſuppoſed to be larger in America than in Europe, are the following,
viz. Mooſe or Elk, Fallow Deer, Bear, Weaſel, Otter, and Beaver. Of thoſe that
are leſs, are the Hare, Red Squirrel, and Shrew Moute. | :


Mauorf.] This name has been given to an unknown animal, whoſe bones are


with tuſks of ivory; but they obviouſly diftered from the elephant in fize ; their bones
prove them to have been 5 or 6 times as large. Theſe enormous bones are found in
teveral parts of North America, * particularly about the ſalt licks or ſprings, near the


ance of theſe bones, ſome of which are entirely above ground, others wholly buried,
it is probable that the animals died at different periods, tome perhaps as lately as the
firſt ſettlement of this country by the Europeans. | 31

Mr. Jefferſon informs us, that a late governor of Virginia, having aſked ſome dele-
gates of the Delawares, what they knew or had heard reſpecting this animal, the chief


CE Col. G. Morgan, in a note to the Author, ſays they are found © only at the ſalt licks on the Ohio ; ſome


from the above-mentioned depoſit, by Indian warriors and others who have paſſed it; as we know many have
been ſpread in this manner. When I firſt viſited this falt lick, ſays the Col. in 1766, I met here a large party
of the Iroquois and Wyandot Indians, who were then on a war expedition againſt the Chicaſaw tribe. The


much as 80. I fixed on this venerable chief, as a perſon from whom ſome knowledge might be obtained.


him upon the wiſdom of his nation, their prowneſs in war and prudence in peace, intimated to him my igno-
rance reſpecting the great bones before us, which nothing but his ſuperior knowledge could remove; and ac-
cordingly requeſted-him to inform me what he knew concerning them. Agreeably to the cuſtoms of his nation,
he anſwered me-in fubſtance, as follows. „ =P | „
„ Whilſt I was yet a boy I paſſed this road, ſeveral times, to war againſt the Catawbas; and the wiſe old
chiefs, among whom was my grandfather, then gave me the tradition, handed down to us, reſpecting theſe
bones, the like to which are found in no other part of the country. It is as follows::
After the Great Spirit firſt formed the world, he made the various birds and beaſts, which now inhabit it.
He alſo made man; but having formed him white, and very imperfect and ill-tempered, he placed him on one
fide of it where he now inhabits, and from whence he has lately found a paſſage acroſs the great water to be .
plague to us. As the Great Spirit was not pleaſed with this his work, he 4, of black clay, and made what
you call a Negro, with a woolly head. This black man was much better than the white man, but ſtill he did
not anſwer the wiſh of the Great Spirit, that is, he was imperfect ; at laſt, the Great Spirit having procureda
Piece of pure, fine red clay, formed from it, the Red Man, perfectly to his mind; and he was ſo well pleaſed
with him, that he placed him on this great ifland, ſeparate from the white and black men ; and gave him rules
for his conduct, promiſing happineſs in proportion as they ſhould be obſerved. He increaſed exceedingly, and
was periectly happy for ages ; but the fooliſh young people, at length forgetting his rules, became exceed-
_ ingly il-tempered and wicked. In conſequence of this, the Great Spirit created the great buffaloe, the bones
of which you now ſee before us; theſe made war upon the human ſpecies alone, and deſtroyed all but a few,
who repented and promiſed the Great Spirit to live according to his laws, if he would reſtrain the devouring
enemy: whereupon he ſent lightning and thunder and deſtroyed the whole race, in this ſpot, two excepted,
a male and a female, which he ſhut up in yonder mountain, ready to let loofe again, ſhould occaſion require:
Col. Morgan adds, © I have every material bone of the anatomy of this animal, with ſeveral jaw bones i
+ Which the grinders are entire; and ſeveral of the great tuſks, one of which is fix feet long. He adds, 5 5


THE UNITED STATES. „
ſpeaker immediately put himſelf into an oratorial attitude, and with a pomp inited to
the ſuppoſed elevation of his ſubject, informed him that it was a tradition handed
down from their fathers, That in ancient times a herd of them came to the Big-bone
licks, and began an univerſal deſtruction of the bears, deer, elks, buffaloes, and other
animals Which had been created for the uſe of the Indians : that the Great Man above,
looking down and teeing this, was ſo enraged that he ſeized his lightning, deſcended
to the earth, feated himſelf upon a neighbouring mountain, on a rock, on which his
ſcat and the print of his feet are ſtill to be ſeen, and hurled his bolts among them till
the whole were ſlaughtered, except the big bull, who, preſenting his forehead to the
11 ſhook them off as they fell; but at Tength miſting one, it wounded him in the

whereon, ſpringing round, he bounded over the Ohio, the Wabaſh, the Illinois,
ane y, over the great lakes, where he is living at this day *.”

{11 POFOTAMUS. ] | That this animal ever exiſted in America was not ſuppoſed till
a f. years ago. The ingenious Dr. Mitchill, in a letter to the author, ſays, * That
in . 1 1788, ſome teeth were dug up in Long Iſland, which, from their ſhape, _
fize, 4.14 confiſtence, beyond a doubt, belong tothe Hiprororamus. Some of them,

lh WEE pretented to me, I forwarded to Mr. Peale of Philadelphia. They agree

exactly wil: Hoſe of the ſame animal, which I ſaw in the Aſhmolean Muſeum at
Oxford, and in the Leverian Collection at London. They moreover correſpond, pre-
cifely, wich the plate and deſcription. of that animal's ſkull and jaws, as given by Dr.
Grew, in Aiujeo Regal:s Societatis and printed at London in folio, 1681. He i is, there-
fore, worthy of a place in our hiſtory as well as the Mammoth.”

Bisox.] This animal has generally been called the Buffalo, but very improperly, as
this name has been appropriated to another animal. He is of the ſame ſpecies with
our common neat cattle, their difference being the effect of domeſtication. Compared

with the neat cattle, the Biſon is confiderably larger, eſpecially about the fore parts of
his body. On his ſhoulders ariſes a large fleſhy or griſly ſubſtance, which extends
along the back. The hair on his head, neck, and ſhoulders, is long and woolly, and

all of it is fit to be ſpun or wrought into hats. Calves from the domeſtic cow and
wild bulls are ſometimes raiſed ; bat when they grow up, they become ſo wild that no
common fence will confine them.—I: found in the middle ſtates.

Theſe animals were once exceedingly numerous in the weſtern parts of Virginia |
and Pennſylvania; and ſo late as the year 1766, herds of 400 were frequently ſeen in
Kentucky, and from thence to the Miſliippi. Wo.

The American foreſts abound with various animals of the 5 kind: naturaliſts
have arranged them differently. I have followed M. de Buffon, w 10 has TOO |
them all to the ſeveral ſpecies known in Europe.

Moosk.] Of theſe there are two kinds, the black and the grey. The black are ſaid to
have been from 8 to. 12 feet high; at preſent they are very rarely ſeen. The grey
Mooſe are generally as tall as a horſe, and tome arc much taller; both have ſpreading |


twenty in eircumference. But ſuppoſing ſome ER and that probably the word inches awake? to have deen
added to the twenty, J have not ventured to add it - or to alter it.

Salt works, of conſiderable importance, have been eſtabliſhed at the lick, where theſe pol are found.
It has been ſaid by Mr. Jefferſon, that the grinders of the Mammoth are five or fix times as lar ge as
_ thoſe of the elephant. Col. Morgan ſays not; „ have ſeen,” he obſerves, “the grinder of an elephant as

urge and as heavy as the largeſt of the Mammoth. — They are indeed thinner, deeper rooted, and dif-


| erently ſhaped, denoting a graminivorous animal; whereas the — of the Mammoth reſemble Gow of
a wolf or dog, and ſhew them to haye been carnivorous.”


9 5 b | palmated = :


132 THE UNITED STATES —_


palmated horns, weighing from 30 to 40 pounds. Theſe are beg annually, 3 in the
month of F ebruary. They never run, but trot with amazing 1p2ci. In ſummer they

feed on wild graſſes, and the leaves of the moſt mucilaginous ſkrubs. In winter they
torm herds; and when the ſnow falls, by moving conſtantly in a ſmall circle, they
tread the ſhow hard, and form what is called a pen. While the ſnow is deep and will
not bear them, they are confined within this pen, and eat all the bark and twigs
within their reach. They are conſidered as of the tame ſpecies with the Elk of the
eaſtern continent.—They are found in New-England.

Car1zov. ] This animal is diſtinguiſhed by its ; branching g palmated horns, with brow
antlers. He is probably the rein deer of the northern parts of Europe. From the
tendons of this animal, as well as of the Mooſe, the aboriginal natives made very to-
ler able thread. —Found in the Diſtrict of Main.

DER. ] The Red Deer * has round branching horns. Of this ſpecies we have three
or four different kinds or varieties; one of which, found on the Ohio river, and in its
vicinity, is very large, and there commonly called the EL.
The Fal iow Dex * has branching palmated horns. In the United States, theſe
animals are larger than the European, of a different colour, and ſuppoſed by ſome, to
be of a different ſpecies. In the ſouthern ſtates, are ſeveral animals, ſuppoſed to be


Farieties of the Rox DEER. *


Bx4r.] Of this animal two ſorts are found in the northern ſtates ; both are black,
but different in their forms and habits. One has ſhort legs, a thick, clumſy body, is
generally fat, and is very fond of fweet vegetable food, ſuch as ſweet apples, Indian
corn in the milk, berries, grapes, honey, &c. Probably he is not carnivorous. As
ſoon as the firſt ſhow falls, he betakes himſelf to his den, which is a hole in a cleft of
rocks, a hollow tree, or ſome ſuch place; here he gradually becomes torpid, and dozes

away the winter, ſucking his paws, and expending the ſtock of fat which he had pre-
viouſly acquired.

The other ſort is diſtinguiſhed by the name of the Runes Bra, ad ſeems to be
à grade between the preceding and the wolf. His legs are longer, and his body more

jean aud gaunt. He is carnivorous, frequently deſtroying calves, ſheep, and pigs;
and ſometimes children. In winter he migrates to the ſouthward. The former ap-
pears to be the common black bear of Europe; the latter correſponds to the brown
bear of the Alps; and is probably of the ſame ſpecies with thoſe ſpoken of II. Kings
di. 24th, which formerly inhabited the mountainous * of Judea, between Jeri
and Bethel. Found in all the States.
The Worvzxexs, called in Canada the Carcajou, and by hunters, the Beaver Eater,
ſcems to be a grade between the bear and the woodchuck. He agrees exactly with
the badger of Europe. His length is 14 feet and upwards; his circumference nearly
two feet; his head and ears reſemble a woodchuck's ; his legs ſhort ; feet and paws
large and ſtrong ; tail about ſeven inches long, black, and very buſhy or ſhaggy ; hair
about two inches long, and very coarſe ; his head, fallow grey; back almoſt black;
breaſt, ſpotted with white ; belly, dark brown ; fides and rump, light reddiſh brown.
This animal lives in holes, cannot run faſt, and has a clumſy appearance. He 1s very
miſchievous to hunters, following them when ſetting their traps, and W their
game, particularly the beaver. Found in the northern States.


* The male © the Red Deer is called Stag: the female, Hind; the young, Calf. The male of the Fallow
Deer is called Buck ; the female, Doe; 83 young, Fawn, The * Bi ct, and Roe Doe, are the male and
female of the Roe, |

Work.


1 i


. THE UNITED STATES. 153
Wore.] Of this animal, which is of the dog kind, or rather of the dog himſelf in his
favage ſtate, we have great numbers, and a conſiderable variety in fize and colour.
- The dimenſions of a ſkin, meaſured for writing this account, were as follows : length of
the body 5 fect; the fore legs 18 inches; of the hind legs 15 inches; of the tail 18
inches. Phe circumference of the body. was from 24 to 3 feet. The colour of theſe
animals in the northern States is generally a light dirty fallow, with a liſt of black
along their back. In ſome, the black is extended down their ſides, and ſometimes
forms waving ſtreaks; others are ſaid to be ſpotted : ſome of them, particularly in the
ſouthern States, are entirely black, and conſiderably ſmaller. The Indians are ſaid to
have ſo far tamed ſome of theſe animals before their acquaintance with the Europeans,

as to have uſed them in hunting. They next made ute of European dogs, and after-
wards of mongrels, the oftspring of the wolt and dog, as being more docile than the
former, and more eager in the chaſe than the latter. The appearance of many of the
dogs, in the newly-ſettled parts of the country, indicate their relation to the wolf —
Found in all the States. 9
Fox.] Of foxes we have a great variety; ſuch as the Silver Fox, Red Fox, Grey
Fox, Croſs Fox, Brant Fox, and ſeveral others. Naturaliſts have generally ſuppoſed
that there is more than one ſpecies of foxes, but they differ v ery much in their mode
of arranging them, It is highly probable, however, that there is but one ſpecics of

theſe animals, as they are found in all their varieties of ſize, and of ſhades variouſl
intermixed, in different parts of the United States. Foxes and other animals furniſhed


with fur, of the northern States, are larger than thoſe of the ſouthern.

. CarAMONT.] This animal, the moſt dreaded by hunters of any of the inhabitants
"= of the foreſts, is rarely ſeen, which is probably the reaſon why no account of him has
a ever been publiſhed, to our knowledge, except what is contained in a letter of Mr:

5 Collinſon's to M. de Buffon. The dimenſions of one, killed a few years ago, in New
1 | Hampſhire, as nearly as could be aſcertained by the ſkin, were. as follows: the length

of his body (including the head) 6 feet; circumference of his body 25 feet; lengtb of
mM his tail 3 feet, and of his legs about one foot. The colour, along his back, is nearly

_ black; on his ſides, a dark reddiſh brown; his feet black. He ſeems not calculated 2 ;
p- running, but leaps with ſurprizing agility. His favourite food is blood, which, like
AY other animals of the cat kind, he takes from the jugular veſſels of cattle, deer; &.
os leaving the carcaſe. Smaller prey he takes to his den; and he has been known to
ho carry off a child. He ſeems to be allured by fire, which terrifies all other carnivorous

animals, and betrays no fear of either man or beaſt He 1 15 found 1 in the map .
r, middle States. 0
ith _ Covear.] The body of this PRONE 18 about 5 feet long; - his legs longer in  pragar- .
ly tion to his body, than thoſe of the common cat. His colour his a dark fallow. In his
0 habits and manners he reſembles the reſt of the family. —He is found in the ſouthern: a
pair States, and there called the Tyger. a
. MovuxTain Car.] (Pardalis, Linn. Ocelot, de Buffon. )—The length: of his body 18
oth from 3 to four feet; his tail about 2 feet. His colour is a fallow ground, with black
very pots and ſtripes. The male has a black liſt along his back, and is the moſt beautiful
Reit animal of the cat kind. He is as. 5 fierce, but will ſeldom nent a man.
Found in the ſouthern States.
| Lrxx.] We have three kinds of the Lynx, each probably cpa a difin ſpe 2
_ The firf, (Lupus Cervarins, Linn. 3d edit.) is called by the De and Engliſh _ 4:
cans, Loup Cervier. x He i is from 24 to three feet in len gth; his il! 18 about 5 inches. |

Folk. | - * Pronounced Loocervee. or INT. "IIA . *

mw 2 e e wha His


1
8 YE . LI
* 7 *.
2


2154 THE UNITED STATES,
is hair 15 lone, of a light grey colour, forming, in ſome places, ſmall, irre 1 dark
ſhades; the end of his Tail is black. His fur is fine and thick. Hei is the Lynx of
Siberia, and ſome of the northern parts of Europe. A few may be found in the Darth.
eaſtern parts of the diſtrict of Main; but in the higher latitudes they are more
numerous.
The ſecond, (Catus cervarius, Linn, ) is called by the French Americans, Chat Cervier;
and in New England, the Wild Cat. He is conſiderably leſs than the former, or the
Lotp Cervier. He i 18 Gem 2 to 24 fect long; his tail is proportionably ſhorter, about
3 inches long, and wants the tuſt of black hair on the end of it. His hair is ſhorter,
particularly on his legs and feet; ; is of a darker colour, brown, dark fallow, and grey,
variouſly intermixed. His fur is ſaid to be of a very different quality; his ears are
ſhorter, and he has very little of the pencil of black hairs on the tips of them, which is
"fo remarkable in the former kind. This animal deſtroyed many of the cattle of the
firſt ſettlers of New England.
The third ſpecies is about the ſize of a common cat. The colour of the male is
bright brown or bay, with black ſpots on his legs. His tail is about 4 inches —
and encircled by 8 white rings: the female is of a reddiſh grey. Found in the mid- |
dle and ſouthern States.
| Maneavy.} This animal very uh reſembles the European wild-cat, both in Gm
and fize. His colour is like that of ſome of our tabby cats, dark waving ſtreaks, on.
a fallow ground Found in the ſouthern States.
KixcaJov.] This animal is frequently confounded with the Carcaj jon,. though 'S
reſembles him in nething but the name. He belongs to the family * cats; 2 leaſt
be very much reſembles them. He is about as large : as a common cat, and is better
formed for agility and ſpeed, than for ſtrength. His tail gradually tapers to the end,
and is as long as his whole body. His colour is yellow. Between him and the fox
there is perpetual war. He hunts in the ſame manner as do other animals of that
_ -elafs; but being able to ſuſpend himſelf by twining the end. of his tail round the limb
' of a tree, or the like, he can purſue his prey where other cats cannot; and when he
attacks a large animal, his tail enables him to. ſecure his hold till he can open the
*blood vefſels of the neck. In ſome parts of Canada theſe animals are very numerous,
and make great havoc among the deer, and do not ſpare even the ncat cattle. But
we have heard of none in theſe ſtates, bent a few in the northern parts of New
6 Hampthire. .
The WrAsET is whom nine inches in length; his body i is remarkably round and
fender; his tail long and: well-furniſhed with hair; his legs very ſhort, and his toes
armed with ſharp claws: His hair is ſhort and: thick, and of a: pale yellowiſh colour,
except about the breaſt, where it is white. This is a very ſprightly animal; notwith-
ſtanding the ſhortneſs- of its legs, it feems ta dart rather than to run. He. kills and
eats rats, ſtriped ſquirrels, and other ſmall quadrupeds: he likewiſe Kills. fowls, fucks
their blood, and eſteems their eggs a delicacy.
The Exatixs does not differ materially from the weaſel: in ſize; form, or habits;
even his colour is the ſame in ſummer, except that the end of his tail is black, and the
edges: of his ears and toes are white. In winter he is; entirely white; except the tip of
the tail. He is generally confidered as forming a ſpecies diſtinct from the weaſel;
- but Linnæus makes. them the ſame. hey are ſaid to be found in Canada; and Dr.


nn mentions, that a few have been ſeen in New: Hampſhire.

In addition to the preceding, we have another variety of this family. It a appears to

« differ from the weaſel in no — except its colour, Which! is perfectly white, both

in ſummer and winter.


MakTIN


THE UNITED STATES. 155;
r This animal is called the Martin (Marte) by M. de Buffon: —in England,
the Pine Martin, Fir Martin, Lellow-breaſted Martin, Pine Weaſel, and Yellow-
breaſted Weaſel; in New England the Sable; and by the Indians, Wauppanaugh.
He is formed like the Weaſel; is generally about ſixteen inches long, and is of a fallow
colour; but his ſize, and the ſhades of his colour, vary in different parts of the coun-
try. Some have ſpots of yellow on the breaſt, others of white, and others have none.
He keeps in foreſts, chiefly on trees, and lives by hunting. He is found in the northern
States. 1 |

Mixx. |] The Mink is about as large as a martin, and of the ſame form. The hair

on its tail is ſhorter ; its colour is generally black; ſome have a white ſpot under their
_ throats; others have none. They burrow in the ground, and purſue their prey both.
in freſh and falt water. Thoſe which frequent the ſalt water are of a larger fize,
lighter colour, and have inferior fur. They are found in conſiderable numbers, both
in the ſouthern and northern States EE ye ap *
Or TER. | The Otter very much reſembles the mink in its form and habits. Its colour


4 is not ſo dark; its fize much larger, being about 3 feet long and 15 inches in cir-

g cumference. It lives in holes in banks near the water, and feeds on fiſh and amphi-
bious animals.—Found in all the State. 5

p Frsnes. | In Canada he is called Pekan : in theſe ſtates frequently the Black Cat,
» but improperly, as he does not belong to the claſs of cats. He has a general reſem-
2 blance to the martin, but is conſiderably larger, being from 20 to 24 inches in length,
4 and 12 in circumference. His tail is a little more than half his length; its hair long

and buſhy. His fore legs about 44 inches long, his hinder legs fix inches. His ears
L ſhort and round. His colour is black, except the head, neck, and ſhoulders, which

, are a dark grey. He lives by hunting, and occaſionally purſues his prey in the water.
* Found in the northern States. . "I 3
* SKUNK. | This animal is about a foot and an half long, of a moderate height and
6 J ſize. His tail is long and buſhy; his hair long and chiefly black; but on his head,
he neck, and back, is found more or leſs of white, without any regularity or uniformity.

; He appears to ſee but indifferently when the ſun ſhines ; and therefore in the day-
= time keeps cloſe to his burrow. As ſoon as the twilight commences, he goes in queſt
- of his food, which is principally beetles and other inſects: he is alſo very fond of eggs
* and young chickens. His fleſh is ſaid to be tolerably good, and his fat is ſometimes
* = uſed as an emollient. But what renders this animal remarkable is, his being furniſhed
wn  vith organs for ſecreting and retaining a liquor, volatile and fœtid beyond any thing
- known, and which he has the power of emitting to the diſtance of a rod or more,
; * when neceſſary for his defence. When this ammunition is expended he is quite
” f barmleſs.“ This volatile fœtor is a powerful antiſpaſmodic.— Found in all the States.
ick „„ 1 8 5 e Another
zo; * Concerning the American ſkunk, Dr. Mitchell, in a letter to Dr. Poſt, 1988, writes thus: 4 Not. long

: fince I had an opportunity to diſſect the American ſkunk (Viverra putorius, Linn.) The moſt remarkable
the : appearances, on examination, were the following: the ſkin was exceedingly Jax, infomuch that when pulled
p of May from the ſubjacent membrane, the hairs, in many places drawn through it, were left rooted in the fat;
ald; the urine poſſeſſed no more fœtor than is common to that excrementitious fluid in many other animals: but
| De. ine peculiar . odoriferous ſubſtance, which the creature emits when purſued, proceeds from two ſacks, each
t Fable of containing about half an ounce, fituated at the extremity of the intgfimam rectum, and ſurrounded
1123 15 large and ſtrong circular muſcles, which contracting by a voluntary exertion, force out the thick yellowiſh
ars {0 9 0 through two ducts, opening near the verge of the anus. As the animal is neither ſwift nor ſtrung,
both Fr As to have been given it as a defence againſt its enemies, on whoſe approach the volatile matter 1


charged with conſiderable force, and to no ſmall diſtance, From its analogy to muſk, ambergris, civet,
| 1 X 2 1 ud


156 THE UNITED STATES.


Another $tinkard, called the $ quaſh," is ſaid by Buffon, to be found in 985 of che
ſouthern States. He is of a cheat colour; climbs trees, and kills. poultry... ©»
. Oeossvar. | This animal is about a foot and a half long; has a long pointed noſe,
furniſhed with long ſtiff hairs; ears thin and naked; tail naked, nearly as long as the
body, and capable of holding the animal ſuſpended ; legs ſhort ; feet ſmall and naked.
He uſes his forepaws like a monkey. His body is well covered with a woolly fur,
white at the roots, and black at the ends. His hair is long, thin, and coarſe; its
colour black and white, forming a grey of various ſhades ; and theſe different ſhades
are ofters ſo intermixed as to give a ſpotted or variegated appearance. But the moſt
ſingilar part of this animal is a kind of falſe belly or pouch, with which the female is
furnithed ; it is formed by a duplicature of the ſkin; is fo placed as to include her
teats, and has an aperture which ſhe can open and ſhut at pleaſure. She brings forth
her young from four. to fix at a time, while they are not bigger than a bean; incloſes
them in this pouch, and they, from a principle of inſtinct, affix themſelves to her teats:
here they remain and are nouriſhed till they are able to run about, and are after-
wards taken in occaſionally, particularly in time of danger. The Opoſſum feeds on
vegetables, particularly fruit. He likewiſe kills poultry, ſucks their blood, and cats
their eggs. His fat is uſed inſtead of lard or butter. — F ound in the ſouthern and
middle States.
 Woopcnvcs. | (Monax, de Buffon.) His body is about fixteen inchis long, and
nearly the ſame in circumference ; his tail is moderately long, and full of hair. His
colour is a mixture of {allow and grey. He digs a burrow. in, or near, ſome culti-
vated field, and feeds on pulſe, the tops of cultivated clover, &c. He is general!
very fat, excepting in the ſpring. The young are good meat; the old are rather 8
and diſagreeable. In the beginning of October they retire to their burrows, and live
in a torpid ſtate about ſix months. In many reſpects he agrees with the Marmot of the
Alps; in others he differs, and on the whole is probably not the ſame.
An animal reſembling the Wobdchyck i 18 found 11 in the ſouthern en, which is ſup
poſed to form another ſpecies. |
- Uzxcnin. | The Urchin, or Urſon, is about two feet in length, and, when fat, the
fame in circumference. He is commonly called Hedge-hog or Porcupine, but differs
from both thoſe animals in every characteriſtic mark, excepting his being armed with
quills on his back and fides. Theſe quills are nearly as large as a wheat ſtraw, from
three to four inches long, and, unleſs erected, nearly covered by the animal's hair.
Their points are very hard, and filled with innumerable very fmall barbs or ſcales,
whole points are raiſed from the body of the quill. When the Urchin is attacked by
a dog, wolf, or other beaſt of prey, he throws himſelf into a poſture of defence, by
ſhortening his body, elevating his back, and erecting his quills. The aſſailant ſoon |
finds ſome of thoſe weapons ftuck into his mouth, or ther 7 part of his body, and every
effort which he makes to free himſelf, cauſes them to penetrate the farther; they
_ have been known to bury themſelves entirely i in a few minutes. Sometimes they prove
fatal; at other times hey make their way out again through the ſkin from various


eu? Par COS Of OT • ˙ EN — > ad. »
. ͤ %K ER ea ana A a ͤ 0


W 5
2 ä EEE -— Ska


and 3 1 am ſtrongly inclined to think it might be with advantage ranked among the antiſpaſmodics of the
Materia Medica, or claſſed with drugs in the ſhops of perfumers.

A fimilar ſubſtance, although not ſo abundant and fragrant, I have likewiſe found in bags of the ſame kind,
: when I diſſected the common weaſel, ( Muftela vulgaris) which, in all probability, will be found to poll ſſeſs

virtues not much differing from the Hochar, or liquor of the Viverra, or the American ſkunk. _

The Muſquaſh (Cafor muſcbatus) which I have alſo diſſected, has no ſacks of this kind, and therefore I at
foreibly led to ſuſpect chat! its odour reſides i in the cuticular exhalants and perſpired matter.


Inn STATES | 1 57 _
parts of the body. If not moleſted, the Urchin is an inoffenſive animal. He finds
a hole or hollow which he makes his reſidence, and feeds on the bark and roots of
vegetables. His fleſh, in the opinion of hunters, is equal to that of a ſucking pig.
is found in the northern States. HS
Hars.] Of this animal we have two kinds, which appear to be different ſpecies :
the one is commonly called the White Rabbit, or Coney; the other fimply the Rabbit;
but from the proportional length of their hinder legs, and other ſpecific marks, they
both belong to the family of the hare. The former has a covering of coarſe white
hair, which comes on before winter, and falls: off the enſuing ſpring. He is about
half the ſize of a large European hare, and twice as large as the other kind. The
latter burrows in the ground like a rabbit. They are both found in the ſame tract of
country, but have not been known to aſſociate. The former is found in the northern
States, and appears to be the ſame as the hare of the northern part of Europe; the
latter is found in all the States, and 1s probably a ſpecies peculiar to America. SLE
* Raccoon. | The Raccoon, in the form and fize of his body, reſembles the fox; his
legs are larger and ſhorter. His toes are long, and armed with ſharp claws. His
body is grey; his tail annulated with alternate rings of black and brown. In his:
manners he reſembles the ſquirrel; like him he lives on trees, feeds on Indian corn,
acorns, &c. and ſerves himſelf with his fore paws. His fleſh is good meat, and his-
fur is valued by the hatters.—He 1s found in all the climates of the temperate zone in:
North America. _ rg ore ooyel- i tt be £6 „
The Fox SQUIRREL. | Of this animal there are ſeveral varieties, black, red, and
grey. It is nearly twice as large as the common grey ſquirrel, and is found. in the
fouthern States, and is peculiar to this continent. „„ 5
The GREY SauiIRREL of America does not agree exactly with that of Europe, but
is generally conſidered as of the ſame ſpecies. Its name indieates its general colour;
but ſome are black, and others black on the back, and grey on the ſides. They make
a neſt of moſs in a hollow tree, and here they depoſit their proviſion of nuts and:
acorns; this is the place of their reſidence during the winter, and here they bring
forth their young. Their ſummer houſe, which is built of ſticks and leaves, is placed
near the top of the tree. They ſometimes migrate in confiderable numbers. If in.
their courſe they meet with a river, each of them takes a ſhingle, piece of bark, or the
like, and carries it to the water. Thus equipped, they embark, and erect their tails.
to the gentle breeze, which ſoon wafts them over in ſafety ; but a fadden flaw. of
wind ſometimes produces a deſtructive ſhipwreck. The greater part of the males of


| ' SS, ol
3 3 1 9 1
*
: 57 E b


-


4 FR 3 2 6 Er l
WWW


ö ä
8 * n * 8283 1


this ſpecies is found caſtrated. | e . r
A Grey Squirrel is found in Virginia, nearly twice as large as this. Whether it be
the ſame, or a different ſpecies, is un certain. EE

Ihe Rep SauixREL is lets than the grey ſquirrel. It has a red hiſt along its back,
grey on its fides, and white under the belly. It differs in ſome reſpects from the com-

mon European ſquirrel ; but M. de Buffon conſiders it as the fame fpecies. Its food.

8 the ſame as that of the grey ſquirrel, except that it ſometimes feeds on the ſeeds of

the pine and other evergreens'; hence it is ſometimes called the pine ſquirrel, and is
found farther to the northward than the grey ſquirrel. It ſpends part of its time on

trees in queſt of food; but conſiders its hole, under ſome rock or log, as its.


ome, _ Two erode Le — nmr en FT
ne STRIPED SQUIRREL is ſtill leſs than the laſt mentioned. Its colour is red. It
has a narrow ſtripe of black along its back: at the diſtance of about half an inch,
on each fide, is a- ſtripe of white, bordered with very narrow ſtripes of black. Its
F . | belly


153 a THE UNITED STATES.
belly is white. In the males, the colours are brighter and better defined chan! in the


temale. It is ſometimes called a mouſe ſquirrel, and ground fquirrel, from its forming


a burrow in looſe ground. Linnæus confounds ät with-a ſiriped mouſe ſquirrel, found
in the north of Aſia; but that animal is repreſented as in ſome meaſure reſembling the
mouſe; whereas our's is a genuine ſquirrel. In the ſummer it feeds on apples, peaches,
and various kinds of fruit and ſceds; and for its winter {tore lays up nuts, acorns, and
grain. It ſometimes aſcends trees in queſt of food, but always deſcends on the ap-


pearance of danger; nor does it feel ſecure but in its hole, a ſtone wall, or ſome covert


place. Found in the northern and middle States.
Frying So pIRREL. ] This is the leaſt and moſt ſingular of the claſs of Cure A


duplicature of the ſkin connects the fore and hinder legs t together: by extending this


membrane, it is able to leap much farther, and to alight with more ſafety than other


tquirrels. It lives in the holes of trees, and feeds on feeds. — found in all the
States.


Ber.] The Bat is fo common and fo firigilat a creature that a particular deſcription


of it is unneceſſary.— Found both in America and Euro


Fie.p Morss. | This ſpecies in England is called the ſhort-tailed field mouſe. It


has a general reſemblance to the common houſe mouſe ; but both its body and tail


are larger and his hair has a flight reddifh tint. Its food depends very much on its


ſituation. In gardens it often defiroys young fruit trees by cating their bark; in fields
and meadows it feeds on the roots of graſs, ſometimes leaving a groove in the ſward,


which appear$%as if it had been cut out with a gouge. In woods, they are ſaid to


feed on nas and to lay up a large ſtore of them in their burrows.


Woop Rar.) This is a very curious animal; not half the ſize of the Abbe


rat; of a dark brown or black colour; their tails ſlender and ſhort in proportion, and
covered thinly with ſhort hair. They are ſingular with reſpect to their ingenuity and


labour in conſtruéting their habitations, which are conical pyramids, about three
or four feet high, conſtructed with dry branches, which they collect with great labour


and perſeverance, and pile up without any apparent order; yet they are fo interwoven


with one another, that it would take a bear or wild cat ſome time to pull one of theſe


caſtles to pieces, and allow the animals ſufficient time to retreat with their young.


There is likewiſe a ground rat, twice as large as the common rat, which burrows
in the ground.” —Bartram's Travels.


' SKREW Mousk.] This is the ſmalleſt of auaieipede; ind holds nearly the fame
place among them as the humming bird does among the feathered race. Some of the


European ſhrew mice are three inches long: we have ſeen but two or three of the


American, and thoſe dried; but ſhould not judge that thoſe ever exceeded two


3nches. Their head, which n about one third of their whole length, has ſome


reſemblance to that of a mole ; the cars are wanting; their eyes ſcarcely viſible ; the
noſe very long, pointed, and furniſhed with long hairs. In other reſpects theſe reſem-
eble the common mouſe. They live in woods, and are Tuppolcd to feed on gram and
wmnccis.—Found in New England. |

Mork.] The Purple Mole is found in Virginia ; the Black Mole in New Eng-


land; he lives in and about the water: they differ from one another, and both from the
European.


The WATER Rae” 1s about the ſize of the common rat; brown on the back and


white under the belly; feeds on aquatic animals.
BravgER.] The Beaver is an amphibious animal, whick cannot live for any length
of tine in the water; and can exit without it, provided he has the convenience

| 2 | ſometimes


MI
3


.


THE UNTTEBED STATES. 159
ſometimes bathing himſelf. The largeſt beavers, formerly, were four fect in length,
and weighed fifty or ſixty pounds. At preſent they are not more than three feet in
tength, and may weigh from twenty-five to thirty pounds. The head of this animal
is large, and his ears ſort and round. Their fore teeth are prominent, long, broad,
ſtrong, and grooved or hollowed like a gouge. Their fore legs are ſhort, with toes


ſeparate; their hinder legs are long, with toes webbed. The tail is large, broad, and


ſcaly, reſembling the body of a fiſh. Their colour is generally a dark brown, but
varies according to the climate they inhabit. Their hair is long and coarſe; the fur


5 very thick, fine, and highly valued. The caſtor uſed in medicine is found in ſacks:


formed behind the kidneys. 97 2 1 8 00
Their houſes are always ſituated in the water; ſometimes they make uſe of a natu-


ral pond, but generally they chooſe to form one by building a dam acroſs ſome brook.


or rivulet. For this purpoſe they ſelect a number of ſapplings of ſoft wood, generally
of leſs than fix inches diameter, but ſometimes of ſixteen or eighteen inches; theſe
they fell and divide into proper lengths, and: place them in the water, ſo that the


length of the ſticks make the width of the dam. Theſe ſticks they lay in mud. or clay,
their tails ſerving them for trowels, as their teeth did for axes. Theſe dams are fix or


eight feet thick at bottom, ſloping on the ſide oppoſed to the ſtream, and are about a
quarter as broad at top as at bottom. Near the top of the dam they leave one or more
waſte ways, or ſliding places, to carry off the ſurplus water. 3

The formation of their cabins is no leſs remarkable. They conſiſt of two ſtories,


one under, the other above water. They are ſhaped: like the oval beehive; and of a.
fize proportioned to the number of inhabitants. The walls of, the lower apartments
are two or three feet thick, formed like their dams; thoſe of the upper ſtory are
thinner, and the whole, on the inſide, plaiſtered with mud. Each family conſtructs.
and inhabits its own cabin. The upper apartments are curiouſly ſtrewed with leaves,


and rendered neat, clean, and comfortable. The winter never ſurprizes theſe animals,
before their bufineſs is completed; for their houſes are generally finiſhed by the laſt of
September, and their ftock of proviſions laid in, which. conſiſts of ſmall: pieces of
wood depoſited in the lower apartments. Before a ſtorm, all hands are employed in


_ repairing or ſtrengthening their dams. They retain this induſtrious habit even after


they are domeſticated. In ſummer they roam abroad and feed on. leaves, twigs, . and:
food of that kind. Theſe beavers are conſidered as the ſame ſpecies as thoſe in Europe,
but are vaſtly ſuperior to them in every reſpect. ES V

| There is likewiſe a race of beavers, called ferriers, who dig holes and live a ſolitary


unſocial life, Theſe are probably ſavages, who liave never formed themſelves into ſo-


eieties, and conſequently, have not made thoſe improvements, which are to. be acquired:


only in a focial ſtate.— Found in all the States.


The Mosa Ash or Mos k Rar is about fifteen inches in length, and a foot in cir-
cumference. His tail is nearly a foot long, his hair very ſhort; the colour on his back,
dark; on his. ſides, generally reddiſh-;, his head: and tail very much: reſemble thoſe of a


W vat. This animal is furniſhed with glands, which ſeparate a ſubſtance that has the
. imell of muſk. In his mode of living, he is a diſtant imitator of the beaver; builds


à rude cabin in ſhallow water, and feeds on vegetables. Found in the northern. and
middle States. 0


The Morss. or Szx Cow, more properly called the Sca Elephant, las two large


_ wory tuſks, which ſhoot from the upper jaw : its. head alſo is formed like that of the


elephant, and would entirely reſemble it in that part, if it had a trunk; but the


morſe is deprived of that inſtrument which ſerves the elephant in place of an arm and


hand;


160 | ' THE UN ITED: STATES.


hand, and has real arms. Theſe members, like thoſe of the ſeal, are (Hut up writlün


the ſkin, to that nothing appcars outwardly but its hands and feet. Its body is long
and tapering, thickeſt towards the neck; the toes and the hands, or feet; are covered
with a membrane, and terminated by ſhort and ſharp-pointed claws. Excepting the


two great tuſks, and the cutting teeth, the morſe perfectly reſembles the ſcal; it is only


much larger and ſtronger, the morſe being commonly from twelve to fixteen feet in
length, and eight or nine in circumference ; whereas the largeſt ſeals are no more than
ſeven or eight feet long. The morſes and ſeals frequent the ſame places. They have


the ſame habits in every reſpect, except, that there are fewer varieties of the morſe


than of the ſeal ; they are hkewiſe more attached to one particular climate, and are


rarely found, except in the northern ſeas.


The Sxar., of which there are ſeveral ſpecies, is an e aimed, living the


greater part of the time in the ſea, and feeds on marine plants. Theſe animals formerly


frequented our northern ſhores ; but at preſent have nearly forſaken them. _.
MaxaTi.] This animal forms the connecting link between beaſts and fiſhes. It


cannot be called a quadruped ; nor can it entirely be termed a fiſn; it partakes of the
nature of the fiſh byits two feet or hands; but the binder deer which are almoſt wholly


concealed in the bodies of the ſeal and morle, are entirely wanting in the manati,
Inſtead of two ſhort feet, and a ſmall, narrow tail, which is placed in a horizontal


direction in the morſe, the manati has only a thick tail, ſpread out broad like a fan. It


is a very clumſy miſhapen animal, with a head thicker than that of an ox; ; eyes ſmall;


and the two feet are placed near the head, for the purpoſe of ſwimming. It is of
ſufficient ſize to-form a load for two oxen. Its fleſh, which is more like beef than fiſh,


is ſaid to be excellent for eating. They are about 15 feet long, and 6 broad. As this
animal has only fore feet, it has obtained the name of Manati, i. e. © an animal with
both hands.” The female has breaſts placed forward hke thoſe of a woman, and the
generally brings forth two young ones at a time, which ſhe ſuckles. It is not properly
amphibious ; it only raiſes its head out ef the water to feed on the herbage by the ſea-
fde.—This animal is very common in South America, and ſome, it is laid, have

been found in the ſouthern States. Ag


SaPAJou, Sao] There are various ſpecies of ankliahs faid to inhabit the ak


on the lower part of the Miſſiſſippi, called Sapajous and Sagoins. The former are


capable of ſuſpending themſelves by their tails; the latter are not. They have a
general reſemblance to monkeys ; but are not ſufficiently non, to be e,


deſcribed.


Bixps.] Several catalogues of the birds in the ſouthern and middle States have


been publiſhed by different authors; and one, of thoſe in New Hampſhire, by Dr.


Belknap; but no general catalogue of the birds in the American States has yet
appeared. The following catalogue, which claims to be the moſt full and complete
of any yet publiſhed, though far from perfection, has been carefully ſelected from


Bartram's Travels, Jefferſon's Notes on Virginia, Belknap's Hiſtory o New Hamp-


ſhire, and a Manuſcript furniſhed by Dr. Cutler. Bartram's catalogue, as far as it
extends, appears to be the moſt accurate and complete, and his mode of arrangement
the moſt natural and intel: gible; I have therefore ns it, and inſerted his notes


and references. -


pi


bs The birds to whole names in \ this eatalogue, theſe niarks [* + t | C ] are ednet are 3 bitt,
which, according to Bartram, are ſeen in Pennſylvania, Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina,
Georgia and Florida, from the ſea-coaſt weſtward to the — mountains, via. |


hc +


NE + Theſe


THE UNITED STATES. 161


Popular Names.
The Ou.
+ Great White Owl _


Great Horned Owl.


+ Great Horned White Owl

S$ Horned Owl _
« Whooting Owl

+ Sharp Winged or Speckled Owl
Little Screech Owl |


8 Barn Owl——


The VurTuRE.

|| Turkey Buzzard

| White Tailed Vulture ü

Black Vulture, or Carrion Crow
EAGLE and Hawk.

Great Grey Eagle.


Bald Eagle
Fiſhing Eagle


Great Eagle Hawk
q Hen Hawk
Chicken Hawk


* Pigeon Hawk


« Black Hawk


* Marſh Hawk


* Sparrow Hawk, or leaſt Hawk


Brown Eagle


Large Brown Hawk
Pigeon Hawk
Fiſh Hawk
Bird Hawk 55
KITE HAWE.“
|| Forked Tail Hawk, or Kite
Sharp Winged Hawk, of a pale, ſky-


Hack:


Sharp Winged Hawk, of a dark a) | Palos Nr


duſky blue colour


Vultur aura.


blue colour, the tip of the ing :


Bartram's Deſignation.
| OTRIX.
Strix arcticus, corpore toto niveo. |
Strix pythaules, corpore rufo.
Strix maximus, corpore niveo.
Strix bubo ? Peck.
Strix acclamator, corpore griſeo.
Strix perigrinator, corpore verſicolore.
| Strix aluco. Cutler. Belknap.


Strix aſio, corpore ferrugimo.


Strix paſſeri. Cutler. Belknap.
e VuLTUR. 5205


Vultur ſacra.


Vultur atratus.


„ .
2 regalis.
Falco leucocephalus.
Falco piſcatorius.


Falco Aquilinus, cauda ferruginio.
Falco gallinarius.


Falco pularius.


Falco columbarius.


Falco niger.
Falco ranivorus.
Falco ſparvenius.
Falco fulvus. Belknap.


Falco hudſonius? Belknap.
Falco ſubbateo. Peck.
Falco haliætus. Peck.


Lanius Canadenſis. Belknap. Cutler.


MMILus.
Falco furcatus.


Falco glaucus.


(*) Theſe arrive in Pennſylvania in the ſpring, from the ſouth ; and after building their neſts and rearing


8 eir young, return ſouthward in autumn.
(4) Theſe arrive in Pennſylvania in autumn,


wnter, others continue their


$1


from the north, where ſome of them continue during the


journey as far ſouth as Florida. They return northward in the ſpring, probably
to breed and rear their young. eee e


1 ) Theſe arrive in the ſpring, in Carolina and Florida, from the ſouth; breed and rear their young, and
eturn a


| gan to the ſouth at the approach of winter. Theſe never migrate ſo far north as Pennſylvania. :
(). Theſe are natives of Carolina, Georgia and Florida; where they breed and continue the year r ound.
(J) Theſe breed and continue the year round in Ennis. 8 1


-($) Theſe are found in New-England.


5 Kite hawks are characterized by having long ſharp-pointed wings; being of ſwift flight; ſailing


Without flapping their wings; having long, ligh


t bodies, and feeding out of their claws on the wing.


Parrot


162


Popular Names.
I Parrot of Carolina, or Parrakeet
The Crow kind.
The Raven
Great Sea-fide Crow or Rook
Common Crow
d Royſton Crow
I Blue Jay
Little Jay of Florida
q Purple Jackdaw or Crow Blackþird
* Leffer Purple Jackdaw
* Cuckow of Carohna
Whet Saw
 WooprrcxERs.
a Greateſt Creſied Woodpecker, having
a white back


:}


THE UNITED STATES.


Bariram's Deſionation,


Pſitticus Carolinienfis.
Cokvus.


Corvus carnivorus.


Corvus maritimus.
Corvus frugivorus.
Corvus cornix. Cutler.


Corvus criſtatus, piea glandaris.


Great Red Creſted, Black Woodpecker


Red Headed Woodpecker
Gold Winged Woodpecker

Red Bellied Woodpecker

q| Leaſt Spotted Woodpecker


J Hairy, Speckled and Creſted 9


ecker

© Yellow Bellied Woodpecker
Swallow Woodpecker
Speckled Woodpecker
Nuthatch


Small Nuthatch
T Little, Brown variegated r
* Pine Creeper
* Blue and White, pied Creeper
Great Creſted King Fiſher
* Humming Bird


* Little Grey Butcher Bird of Pennſylvania


* Little Black Capped Butcher
* King Bud
* Pewit, or Black Cap Fly Catcher
Great Creſted, Yellow Bellied Fly
S—_—
Leſſer Pewit, or Brown and Greeniſh }
* "41 Catcher
_ * Little Olixe-coloured Fly Catcher
* Little Domeſtic Fly Catcher,
Wren
* Red Eyed Fly Catcher
* 'Turtle Dove of Carolina
Ground Dove
f Wild Pigeon


*


5 Picus varius.


|


or Green] a;


Corvus Floridanus, pica glandaria minor.


Gracula quiſcula.


Gracula purpurea.


Cuculus Carolinienſis.
Canning Carver.
Bee oper! Pic us.


Picus principalis


Picus pileatus.
Picus erythrocephalus.
Picus auratus.


Picus Carolinus.
Picus pubeſcens.


Picus villoſus.


Picus hirundinaceus. Cutler.
Picus maculoſus. Cutler.
Sitta capite nigro. Cateſby.
Sitta capite fuſco. Cateſby.
Certhia rufa. 7 5
Certhia pinus.


Certhia picta.


Alcedo alcyon.
Trochylus colubris.
Lanius griſeus.

Lanius garrulus.
Lanius tyrannus.
Muſcicapa nunciola.


Muſcicapa criſtata...


Muſcicapa rapax.. _
Muſcicapa ſubviridis.
Muſcicapa cantacrix..


Muſcicapa ſylvicola.
Columba Carolinienfis.
Columba paſſerina.
Columba migratoria.


Popular Names.

* 4 Meadow Lark

Sky Lark

Little Brown Lark

Red Winged Starling—Marſh Black Bird,
or Red Winged Black Bird _
© Robin Red Breaſt. Field F are.
* Fox coloured Thruſh

* Mocking Bird -. ©

* Wood Thraſh _

* Leaſt Golden Crown Thraſh

$ Croſs Bill

Cherry Bird ai

* Baltimore Bird, or Hay Neſt
* Goldfinch, or [Qcras Minor

* Sand Hill Red Bird of Carolina
* Summer Red Bird

* Yellow Breaſted Chat


* Cat Bird, or Chicken Bird
© Crown Bird, or Cedar Bird


1 Wild Turkey


' Pheaſant of Pennſylvania, or
tridge of New England.
q Mountain Cock, or Grous Ptarmi: gan. *
Mitchill.)

uail or Partridge

| 4 Red Bird. Virginia ae

7 Croſs Beaak

* Blue Croſs Beak

Rice Bird. * Boblincoln

+ Blue or Slate coloured Rice Bird
Pied Rice Bird *

+ Painted Finch, or Nonparcil

\ Red Linnet

Blue Linnet

q Goldfinch. Yellow Bird (Cutler. 0 or
Lettuce Bird 7
.Leſſer Goldfinch

„ Leaſt Finch


85 Towhe Bird, ds Cheeweeh 155


Par- +


pied rice bird the male, and the other, the female.
eme, Old n blackbird,


THE UNITED STATES.


Alauda campeſtris, g.


LoCxia curvi roſtra?


Graxryorous TRIBEs.


by The rice bird and pied rice e bird are POTTY ſuppoſed to be male and female of the ſanie f
Called | ig New Eagland boblincoln, 2


112


163


Bartram's Deſignation.

Alauda magna.
itture flavo.
Alauda migratoria, corpore toto ferruginio.
Sturnus niger alis ſuperne rubentibus,

Cateſby.
Turdus migratorius.
Turdus rufus.
Turdus polyglottos.


_ Turdus melodes.


Turdus minimus, vertice aurio.
Belknap.


Ampelis garralus. Cutler.


Oriolus Baltimore.


Oriolus ſpurius.


 Merula flammula.

. Merula Marilandica.
Garrulus auſtralis.
1 lividus, apice nigra.


Muſcicapa vertice nigro. Cateſby.
Ampelis garrulus. N
Meleagris Americanus.

| Gallopavo fylveſtris. Cateſby.
Tetrae tympanus.


—


Tetrao lagopus.
Tetrao minor, ſ. coturnix.


Loxia cardinalis.
Loxia roſtro forficato.


Loxia cærulea.
Emberiza oryzivora.


Emberiza livida.


Emberiza varia.


Linaria ciris.


Tanagra rubra.
Linaria cyanea.
fy Carduelus Americanus.
Fringilla triſtis. Linn.
Carduelus pinus.
Carduelus pufilus.
Fringilla erythrophthal ma.
4 Paſſer nigris oculis rubris. * 4


dy 1 *


+ Parole


164: . THE UNITED STATES.
Bartram's Dofus. i


Fringilla purpurea.


| Names.
＋ Purple Finch


d Spring Bird
+ Hemp Bird
Winter Sparrow


+ Red, Fox-coloured, Ground or Hedge] |


Sparrow
＋ Large, Brown, W bite he Sparrow
* Little Houſe Sparrow, or ae Bird


Reed Sparrow

* Little Field Sparrow

+ Snow Bird

* May Bird

* Red-winged Starling, or Corn Thief


* Cowpen Bird


Blue Bird


* Water Wagtail
_* Houſe Wren .

© * Marſh Wren 2

* Great Wren of ca Bode - dark
brown, throat and Heart, Pale 0
colour

Grape Bird 0

* Little Bluiſh Grey Wren

+ Golden Crown Wren


T Ruby Crown Wren (E iwards )


* Olive- coloured, Yellow-throated Wren
* Red Start

* Yellow-hooded Titmouſe

* Bluiſh Grey Creſted Titmouſe

7 Black Cap Titmouſe

Summer Yellow Bird

* Yellow Rum | | i
Tom Teet 5 ;
# Various coloured Little Finch Creeper
* Little Chocolate Breaſt Titmouſe

* Yellow-Red Polk
Green Black-throated Fly Catcher

* Golden winged Fly Catcher

* Blue-winged Yellow Bird

* Yellow-throated Creeper

* Houſe Swallow, or Chimney Swallow
* Great Purple Martin

* Bank Martin or Swallow.
White-bellied Martin.


Regulus peregrinus, gutture flavo.


2 ringilla. Cutler.
Fringilla canabina.
Fringilla griſea, Cutler.


Fringilla rufa.


Fringilla fuſca.


Paſſer domeſticus
Paſſer paluſtris.


Paſſer agreſtis.
Paſſer nivalis.


Calandra pratenſis.


Sturnus predatorius.
Fr ſtercorarius.


Paſſer fuſcus. Cateſby.
re ſialis.


Rubicula Americana cerulea. Cateſby.
Motacilla fluviatilis.


Motacilla domeſtica (regulus rufus. A -


Motacilla paluſtris (regulus _—_—


Motacilla Caroliniana (regulus magaws. )


Motacilla 6 Cutler,


Regulus griſeus.


Regulus criſtatus.


[FO criſtatus, Alter vertiee rubini


coloris.


Ruticilla Americana.

Luſcinia, ſ. philomela Americana.
Parus criſtatus.
Parus Europeus.

Parus luteus.


Parus cedrus, uropygio flavo.
Parus atricapillus. *
Parus varius.


Parus peregrinus.
Parus aureus, vertice rubro.
Parus viridis, gutture ä
Parus alis aureis.


Parus aureus alis cæruleis.
Parus griccus gutture luteo.


Hirundo pelaſgia, cauda aculeata.


Hirundo purpurea.


Hirundo riparia, vertice purpurea TN
32 Barn


Hirundo


o
Y : *
SS I mY 1 —


THE UNITED STATES.


Popular Names.
Barn Swallow _
+ Great Bat, or Chuck wills widow, .
wh Goat Sucker „„
+ Whip-poor-will »
#* Night | Hawk


165
Bartram's Deſignation.

Hirundo ſubis. Cutler.

Caprimulgus lucifugus. We


1 gus minor Americanus. cateſby. :
Caprimulgus Europeus. Cutler.
Caprimulgus Americanus. Cutler.


AMPHIBIOUS or Aavarto Binps, or 2 as obtain their Joos from, and 2 de in the Water. 5


The Cranes.
| Great Whooping Crane


+ Great Savanna Crane


| The HRV.
« Great Bluiſh Grey Creſted Heron
* Great White River Heron

.$ Crane:
* Little White Heron,
d Stork ,_

Little Creſted Purple, or Blue Heron
Dos * Grey, White Creſted, Heron
} SpeckledCreſted Heron, or Crab Catcher


* Marſh Bittern, , Or Indian Hen


Qua Bird, or Frog Catcher
+ Little Browniſh ſpotted Bittern
} Creſted Blue Bittern, called Poor Job
Green Bittern. Poke. Skouk. _
* Lefſer Green Bittern _. ;
* Leaſt Brown and Striped Bittern
* Spoon Bill; ſeen as far north as the

river Alatamaha 3 . }

The Woop PELICAN,

; Wood Pelican
White Curlew {tit
} Duſky and White 8
= [Crying Bird, beautifully ſp f . 5
= | Ganet, perhaps little ilerent from
A the This 1
| White Godwit |
Great red-breaſted Godwit:
The greater Godwit
1 Red Shark, or Pool Stripe
q Great ſea-coafſt Curlew

* Leffer field Curlew


3


* Bartram conſiders the whip-
t they are well known to bed


SE


rent birds, 8


 Ardea Herodias.


Ardea alba minor.
 Ardea ciconia.
Ardea purpurea criſtata.


 Ardea varra criſtata.


*


GRUs.


4 Grus clamator, vertice papilloſo, corpore


niveo, remigibus nigris. |
{ om pratenfis, corpore cinereo, vertice
papilloſo. |
ARDEA. -


Ardea immaculata. - _
Ardea Canadenſis. Cutler.


'Gatler: ;


Ardea maculata criſtata.
Ardea migitans.


Ardea ſtellaris Americana. Cateſby.


; Anas clamator, corpore ſubceruleo.


Ardea ſubfuſca ſtillata.
Ardea violacca.
Ardea vireſcens.
Ardea vireſcens minor.


Ardea parva.


Patalea ajaja.


Taxralus.
Tantalus loculator.


Pantalus alber.
Wy Tantalus fuſcus.


Tantalus pictus, (Ephouſkyka.


Indian.)
Tantalus Ichthyophagus. .


Numenius, alba varia.
Numenius pectore rufſov.


Numenius Americana.
Numenius fluvialis.
Numenius magnus rufus...


Numenius minor campeſtris.


or- wil and the night-hawk as the ſame bird (Caprimulgus Amerieanys) )


4 Sea-fide.


2


166


Popular Names.
aq Sea-ſide lefler Curlew
Great red Woodcock
Wood Snipe
Meadow Snipe *
* Red coot-footed Tring
* White-tlroated, coot-footed Tring
* Black Cap, coot-footed Tring
¶ Spotted Tring. Rock bird
Little pond Snipe
Little brown pool Snipe


Little Tri rings of the ſea ſhore. Sand birds


Eye
4 Humility
Turnſtone or Dotrili
_ + Wild Swan
Canadian Gooſe


＋ Blue-winged Gooſe


+ Laughing Gooſe
+ White Brant Gooſe
© 2 Great parti-coloured Brantor Grey Gooſe


' + Great Wild Duck. Duck and Mallard


+ Great Black Duck


Bull Neck or Buffaloe Head Quindar
Blue Bill


+ Black Whi ite-faced Duck |
Wood Duck

+ Sprigtail Duck .

+ Little Brown and White Duck
+ Various coloured Duck, his breaſt =


neck as though ornamented with
chains of beads


+ Little Black and White Duck, called}


Butter Back
Sea Duck


- Bea Pigeon


$ Old Wife


? Blue-winged Shoveller


Dipper D.
EAI.
6 r 54


Blue-winged Teal

Leaſt a e pap Teal -
* Whiftling Duck 5
+ Great Fiſhing Duck


I Round creſted Duck
x 1


*


THE UNITED
Numenius cinereus.


Scolapax fedoa.
Scolapax minor arvenſis.


Tringa fulicaria? Cutler.


M.orinella Americana.
Cygnus ferus.


Anſer aleis ceruleis.
Alnſer fuſcus maculatus.


Anas mi


| 1 major pectore raſs. i


STATES.
Bartrum's Defignation


Scolapax Americana rufa.
Cutler.


Tringa rufa. -

'Tringa cinerea, gutture albo.
Tringa vertice nigro.

Tringa maculata.

Tringa griſeus.

Tringa fuſca.

Tringa parva.


Tringa interpres ? Cutler.


Anſer Canadenſis.


Anſer branta, corpore albo, remigibusnigris. ;
Anſer branta, griſea maculata. :
Anas fera torquata maJor, caput et collum ;

4 viridi ſplendentis, dorſum griſeo fuſcum,
pectore rufeſcente, ſpeculum violacrum.

| Anas nigra maxima.

Acas bucepala.


Anas ſubcerulea.


Anas Lebe et.


Anas arborea. + *
Annas caudacuta. 8


Anas ruſtica.


Anas principalis, maculata.


Anas minor picta. .
_ Anas molliſſima. Cutler.

Anas hiſtrionica? Cutler.
 ſ Anas Hyemalis.


| Peck.
LU Anas. ſtrepera? Cutler.


Anas Americanus lato roſtro.
Anas albeola. Cutler.


QUERAVIDULE.
Anas f 8


Anas


Cateſpy.


nſã.
iſcors.


gratoria.
Anas fiſtuloſa.


In" eucultatus,


*


THE UNITED STATES.


Popular Names.
# Fel Crow 8
| Great Black Cormorant of Florida, 0
having a read beak
Snake Bird of Florida
Great Black and White Pied Diver ons
„11138
Large Spotted Loon, or OY ]
+ Great Speckled Diver |
«| Little-eared Brown Dobchick
Little-creſted Brown Dobchick
d Dobchick or Notail _
$ Cream-coloured Sheldrake
S Red-bellied Sheldrake
Pyed 1
0 Penguin
Water 1100
d Murr
d Petteril
I Tropic Bird
J Great White Gull
¶ Great Grey Gull
Little White, River Gull.
_  Mackarel Gull
{I Fiſhing Gull
Sea Swallow or Noddy
|


Sea Sucker
Pintado Bird.
d Thornback
Shear Water or Razor Bill


＋ Frigate or Man of War Bird
Booby


Shag
Pelican of the Miſliffippi,
holds 2 or 3 quarts
f American Sea Pelican
The Pxrover KIND.
* Kildee or Chattering Plover
Great Spotted Plover
* Little Sea-fide Ring-necked Plover
* WH Winet, or er Catcher
Great Blue or Slate- coloured Coot
> White Head Coot
Brown Coot


_ * Soree. Brown Rail. Wi


whoſe pouch 1


dgeon


x Little dark Blue Water Rail
* Greater Brown Rail


ö 5 har or Slate-colouree Water Rail of *


orida


Col
Col
Colymbus e


_ Lafus


Pelicanus ſula.


—


167
Bartram's Def nal ob ---


Colymbus migratorius.


Colymbus Floridanus
Colymbus colubrinus, cauda elongata.


Colymbus muſicus.


Colymbus Glacialis.


Colymbus arcticus.


Peck.
ymbus auritus et cornutus.
ymbus minor fuſcus.

Peck.
Mergus merganſer ? Cutler.
Mergus ſerrator? Cutler.


Mergus caſtor ? Cutler.


Alea impennis. Cutler. '
Alea arctica ?


Cutler.


Alea torda. Peck.


Procellaria pelagica. Peck.


Phazton ætherius.
Larus alber.
griſeus.
Larus alba minor.


Larus ridibundus. Cutler.
Sterna minuta.


Cutler.
Sterna ſtolida.


Petromyzon marinus.
Petrella pintado.

Raja fullonica ? Peck.
Rynchops niger.


Pelicanus aquilus.


Peck, |


Pelicanus — Cutler.


Pelicanus.


Onocratalus 3
CuARADRIVUSs.


| Carats vociferus.


Charadrius maculatus.
Charadrius minor.
Hematopus oftrealegus
Fulica Floridana.
Anas ſpectabilis. Cutler.
Anas fuſca. Cutler.
Rallus Virginianus.


Kallus aquaticus minor.


Rallus rufus.
Rallus = or fubcerylens.


: Peep


166 nE UNITED STATES.

Popular Names.  Bartram's Deſignation. :
y Peep Rallus Carolinus. Cutler,
* Flamingo; ſeen about the point of Flo- |


rida; rarely as far North as St. a- Pheenicopters 7 rubes.
8 guſtine | ; :


Beſides theſe, the neee have not been . or Hud. | unlek, vader diffs
rent names, they are contained in the above catalogue.


Sheldrach, or Canvas Back LT, | Mow Bird 1 TITS. 1334p
Ball Coot | , Blue Pete 5041 1rwortt :
Sat Witch 725: Water Wagtail

Water Pheaſant Fs Wakon Bird,


The Birds of America, ſays Cateſby, generally exceed thoſe of Tarps, in the beauty
of their plumage, but are much inferior to them in the melody of their notes.
The middle States, including Virginia, appear to be the climates, in North America,
where the greateſt number. oF variety. of birds of paſſage celebrate their nuptials and
rear their offspring, with which they annually return to more ſouthern regions. Moſt
of our birds are birds of paſſage from the ſouthward. The eagle, the pheaſant, grous,
and partridge of Pennſylvama, ſeveral ſpecies of woodpeckers, the crow; blue jay, robin,
marſh wren, ſeveral ſpecies of ſparrows or ſnow birds, and the fwallow, are
perhaps, nearly all the land birds that continue the our round to the northward of


V.irginia.


Very few tribes of birds build or rear their young in the SEE or maritime parts of
Virginia, in Carolina, Georgia, and Florida; yet all thoſe numerous tribes, e
ol the ſoft- billed kind, Winch breed in Pennſylvania, paſs, in the ſpring ſeaſon, throug

theſe regions in a few weeks time, making but very ſhort ſtages vy the way; and again,

but few of them winter there on their return ſouthwardly.


It is not known how far to the ſouth they continue their rout, during, their abſence
from the northern and middle States.


«The Swax (Cygnus ferus) is the largeſt of the aquatic 5 of birds which is ſeen in
this country. One of them has been known to weigh 36 1b. and to be 6 feet in length, |
from the bill to the feet, when ftretched. It makes a found reſemblin · that of a trun-
pet, both when in the water and on the wing.” (Belknap.)

The Can ADIAn GOOSE (Anfer Canadenfis) is a bird of — 1 and gregarious. The
offspring of the Canadian and common gooſe are mongrels, a0 reckoned more valua-
ble than either of them ſingly, but do not propagate. +

The PraxMicaxn (Tetrao-lagopus) ordinarily inhabits the colder climates about Hud-
ſon's Bay, but is ſometimes driven, through want of food, to the more ſouthern lati-
_ tudes. In the winter of 1788 theſe birds were taken plentifully about Quebec. When-

ever the winter of the Arctic region ſets in with rain, ſo as to cover the, branches and
leaves of trees with a glaze of ice, they are deprived of their food, and obliged to fly to
the ſouth, to a milder climate, where it can be procured. Hence they frequently whit
the United States. Their feathers are moſtly white, covered with down quite to the
nails, and their fleſh black, and of an exquiſite reliſh. .Y
Probably this is a different bird from Bartram 8 Mountain Cock or Grous, though
both have the ſame Linnæan name.

The Qrair, or PaRTRIDGE (Tetrao minor, ſ. 3 This bird i 1s. the Quail. of New
En gland, and the Partridge of the ſouthern Mates ; but is properly neither. It is a 5
, PS


-


TC STATES: 169
peculiar to America. The Partridge of New England (Tetrao tympanus) is the Pheaſaut
of Pennſylvania, but 1s miſcalled in both places. It is a ſpecies of the Grows. Neither
the Pheaſant, Partridge, or Quail, are found in America. 55 : |

Cucxow (Cuculus Carolinienſis.) Theſe birds are ſaid not to pair, like the reſt of the
feathered tribes. When the female appears on the wing ſhe is often attended by two
or three males. Unlike all other birds, ſhe does not build a neſt of her own, but takes
the opportunity, while the Hedge Sparrow (probably they make uſe of other neſts) is
laying her eggs, to depoſite her egg among the reſt, leaving the future care of it en-
tirely to the hedge ſparrow. The cuckow's egg requires no longer incubation than her
own. When the hedge ſparrow has ſat her uſual time, and diſengaged the young cuc-
kow and ſome of her own offspring from their ſhells, the young cuckow, aſtonithing
as it may ſeem, immediately ſets about clearing the neſt of the young ſparrows, and the
remaining unhatched eggs, and with ſurprizing expertneſs ſoon accompliſhes the buſi-

neſs, and remains ſole poſſeſſor of the neſt, and the only object of the ſparrow's future

. e a = |
The Waxox BIRD, which probably is of the ſame ſpecies with the bird of Paradiſe.
receives its name from the ideas the Indians have of its ſuperior excellence; the Wakon
Bird being in their language the bird of the Great Spirit. It is nearly the ſize of a ſwal-
low, of a brown colour, ſhaded about the neck with a bright green. The wings are of
a darker brown than the body. Its tail is compoſed of four or five feathers, hh arg
three times as long as its body, and which are beautifully ſhaded with green and purple.
It carries this fine length of plumage in the ſame manner as the peacock does his, but
it is not known whether, like him, it ever raiſes it to an erect poſition.

The WuerTsaw is of the cuckow kind, being, like that, a ſolitary bird, and ſcarcely _
ever ſeen. In the ſummer months it is heard in the groves, where it makes a noiſe ike
the filing of a ſaw, from which circumſtance it has received its name. Carver.
The Hummine BIX D (Trochilus colubris) is the ſmalleſt of all the feathered inhabitants
of the air. Its plumage ſurpaſſes deſcription. On its head is a ſmall tuft of jetty black ;
ts breaſt is red; its belly white; its back, wings, and tail of the fineſt pale green; ſinall
tpecks of gold are ſcattered over it with inexpreſſible grace: and to crown the whole,
an almoſt imperceptible down ſoftens the ſeveral colours, and produces the moſt plea-
ſing ſhades. e Fn e „„ erg * .

 AmyniBrovs Rx TILESs.] Among theſe are the mud tortoiſe or turtle (Tefudo denticu-
lata.) Speckled land tortoiſe (Teftudo Carolina.) Great ſoft-ſhelled tortoiſe of Florida
(Teſtudo naſo cylindracea elongato, truncato. Bartram.) When full grown it weighs
trom 30 to 40 pounds, extremely fat and delicious food. —Great land tortoiſe, called
gopher, its upper ſhell is about 18 inches long, and from 10 to 12 broad. Found ſouth


of Savanna River. ä * .
Io ſpecies of freſh water tortoiſes inhabit the tide water rivers in the ſouthern States,
one is large, weighing from 10 to 12 pounds; the back ſhell nearly of an oval form;
the other ſpecies ſmall ; but both are eſteemed delicious food. 1
Of the frog kind (Rane) are many ſpecies. The toad (Rana buſo ?) ſeveral ſpecies,
the red, brown, and black. The former are the largeſt ; the latter the ſmalleſt. Pond
frog (Rana ocellata.) Green fountain frog (Rana eſculanta.) Tree frog (Rana muculala.) Bull
frog (Rana boans,) Beſides theſe are the duſky brown, ſpotted frog of Carolina, 8 or g


inches long from the noſe to the extremity of the toes; their voice reſembles the grunting of
Lan, ions Muſeum, for Jan. 1792, p. 36. Extracted from the Philo, P of the Roval Society, 5
2 a fine.


mo THE UNITED STATES,


a ſwine. The bell frog, fo called becauſe their voice is fancied to be exactly like that


of a loud cow bell, A beautiful green frog, whoſe noiſe is like the barking of little

dogs, or the yelping of puppies. A leſs green frog, whoſe notes reſemble thoſe of young
chickens.--Little grey-tpeckled frog, which makes a noiſe like the ſtriking of two pebbles:
together under the ſurface of the water. There is yet an extremely diminutive: tpecies-


of frogs, called by ſome Savannah crickets, whoſe notes are not unlike the chattering of


young birds or crickets. They are found in great multitudes after plentiful] rains.


Of lizards (Lacerte) we have alto many ſpecies. The alligator, or American croco-


dile, is a very large, ugly, terrible creature, of prodigious ſtrength, activity, and ſwift-


neſs in the water. They are from 12 to 23 feet in length; their bodies are as large as


that of a horſe, and are covered with horny plates or ſcales, faid to be impenetrable to a


rifle ball, except about their heads and juſt behind their fore legs, where they are vul-
nerable ; in ſhape they reſemble the lizard. The head ofa full- grown alligator is about


three feet long, and the mouth opens nearly the ſame length. The eyes are compara-
tively ſmall, and the whole head, in the water, appears at a diſtance like a piece of rot-
ten, floating wood. The upper jaw only moves, and this they raiſe fo as to form a
right angle with the lower one. They. open their mouths while they lie baſking in
the ſun, on the banks of rivers and creeks, and when filled with flies, muſketoes, and


other inſects, they ſuddenly let fall their upper jaw with ſurprifing noiſe, and thus ſe-


cure their prey. They have two large, ſtrong, conical tuſks, as white as ivory, which.


are not covered with any ſkin or lips, and which give the animal a frightful appearance.


In the ſpring, which is their ſeaſon for breeding, they make a moſt hideous and terri-


ſying roar, reſembling the ſound of diftant thunder. The alligator is an evaporous-
animal; their neſts, which are commonly built on the margin of ſome creek or river,
at the diſtance of 15 or 20 yards from the water, are in the form of an obtuſe cone,
about 4 feet high, and 4 or 5 in diameter at their baſis. They are conſtructed with. a ſort
of mortar, made of a mixture of mud, graſs, and herbage. Firſt they lay a floor of this


compoſition, on which they V depoſit a layer of eggs; and upon this a ſtratum. of their


mortar, 7 or 8 inches thick; and then another layer of eggs, and in this manner, one


ſtratum upon another, nearly to the top of the neſt. They lay from one to two hun-


dred eggs in a neſt. Theſe are hatched, it is ſuppoſed, by the heat of the ſun, aſſiſted,
perhaps, by the fermentation of the vegetable mortar in which they are depoſited. The:
female, it is ſaid, carefully watches her own neſt of eggs till they are all hatched; ſhe
then takes her brood under her care, and leads them about the ſhores hke as a. hen does:
her chickens, and is equally courageous in defending them in time of danger. When:
1 lies baſking upon warm banks with her brood around her, the young ones may be


ſeard whinin and barking like young puppies. The old feed on the young alligators, -
till they get ſo large as that they cannot make a prey of them; ſo that happily but few.


of a brood ſurvive the age of a year. They are fond of the fleſh of dogs and hogs, which
they devour whenever they have an opportunity. Their principal food is fiſh. In Ca-
rolina and Georgia they retire into their dens, which they form by burrowing far un-
der ground, commencing under water and working upwards, and there remain in a
torpid ſtate during the winter. Further ſouth, in warmer climates, they are more nu-
merous, and more fierce and'ravenous, and will boldly attack a man. In South: Ame-
rica, the carrion vulture is the inſtrument of Providence to deſtroy multitudes of young


alligators, which would otherwiſe render the country uninhabitable.


-


_ © Befides the alligator, we have of this ſpecies of amphibious reptiles, the brown. lizard
( Laceria punclala.) Swift (Lacerta fuſciala?)--Green lizard, or little green cameleon of
Carolina, about 6 or 7 inches long; it has a large red gill under its throat, and, =


4


gh —
3


THE UNITED STATES. -
the clthlcbn; has the facull v of changing its colour. The ſtriped lizard or ſcorpion. .


Blue-bellied, ſquamous lizards, ſeveral varieties. Large copper- coloured lizard.— Swift,


ſlender, blue lizard, with a long ſlender tail, as brittle as that of the glaſs ſnake. The
two laſt are rarely deen, but are ſometimes found about old log buildings 1 in the ſou-
thern States.

Au H BTIOUS SERPENTS. The characters py which amphibious ſerpents are diſtin-
guiſhed are theſe, the belly is furniſhed with ſcuta, and the tail has both ſcuta 1 ſcales.
Of theſe reptiles, the * are found in the United States:


Rattle Snake CT RE, Crotalus horridus. 55
Yellow Rattle Snake 1
Small Rattle Snake We Crotali ſpecies.
Baſtard Rattle Snake „
Moccaſin Snake
Grey-ſpotted Moccaſin Snake of _ Coluber— 5
ins |
Water Viper, with a | ſharp thorn tail Coluber inte:


Black Viper Coluber preſter.
Brown Viper Coluber luridus.
White-bodied, Weed ehe Snake Coluber atropos.
Black Snake with linear rings Coluber leberis.
A Snake with 152 ſcutæ and 135 ſcutelle Coluber diſpas.
Bluiſh- green Snake, with a ſtretched out }


__ triangular ſnout, or Hognoſe Snake Coluber myQterizans.


Copper-bellied Snake ö Coluber erythrogaſter.
* Snake * | Ks | PE gee 5 l conſtrictor.
ite Neck Black 3 b luber 5
Small Brown Adder ö | Coluber ſtriatulus.
ome 2 8 „„ ͤũ V punctatis.
ater er - | Coluber
Brown Snake | Coluber ſipedon.
Little Brown Bead Snake Coluber annulatus.
8 Snake CONE flagellum,
orn Snake : | oluber fulvius.
Green Snake 5 | Coluber zftivus.
Wampum Snake 3 Coluber faſciatus.
Ribbon Snake )
Pine, Horn, or Bull Snake, with a or- „ 8
ny ſpear in his tail q | .
Joint Snake
I. Snake 35 ä
triped Snake A 18 ?
J TR ele, 9
Glaſs Snake | Anguis ventralis.
Browniſh-ſpotted Snake Anguis reticulata, _
Yel lowich-White Snake Anguis E 5 .
Ring Snake VVV | De ERAS IL Beta DAS O WAG
Two headed Snake : 5


” WE THE UNITED STATES.


The RarrLE Sxaxr (Crotalus borridus) is the largeſt ſerpent yet known. to exit in
America. They are from four to upwards of fix feet in length, and from four to. ſix
inches in diameter. Formerly, it is faid, they were much larger. Their rattles conſiſt
of ſeveral articulated, cruſtaceous, or rather horny bags, forming their tails, which,
when they move, make a rattling noiſe, warning people of their approach. It is ſaid,
they will not attack a perſon unleſs previouſly provoked. When moleſted or irritated,
they erect their rattles, and by intervals give the warning alarm. If purſued and over-
taken, they inſtantly throw themſelves into the ſpiral coil; their whole body ſwells
through rage, continually tiſing and falling like a beflows; their beautiful parti-
coloured ſkin becomes ſpeckled and rough by dilatation ; their head and neck are flat--
tened, their checks ſwollen, and their lips conſtricted, diſcovering their fatal fangs;-
their eyes red as burning coals, and their brandiſhing forked tongues of the colour of.
the hotteſt flame, menace a horrid death. They never ſtrike unleſs ſure of their
mark. They are fuppoſed to have the power of faſcination in an eminent degree;
and it is generally believed that they charm birds, rabbits, ſquirrels, and other animals,
in ſuch a manner as that they loſe the power of reſiſtance, and flutter and move ſlowly,
but reluctantly, towards the yawning jaws of their devourers, and either creep into-
their mouths, or lie down and fuffer themſelves to be taken and ſwallowed. This
_ dreaded reptile is eaſily killed. One well-directed ſtroke on the head or acroſs the
back with a ſtick not larger than a man's thumb, is ſufficient to kill the largeſt; and
they are ſo flow of motion that they cannot make their eſcape; nor do they attempt it
when attacked. Many different remcdies for the bite of a rattle-ſnake have been.
preſcribed and uſed with different ſucceſs ; the following, received from good autho-.
rity, is recommended as a cure for the bite of all venomous ſnakes ; © Bind a ligature -
tight round the leg or thigh, above the part bitten, {6 as to interrupt the circulation;
then open or ſcarily the wound with a lancet, knife, or flint, and ſuck the wound or
let a friend do it, then rub it with any unctuous matter, either animal or vegetable; or
if that cannot be procured, make uſe of falt. Take care to keep the bowels open and.
free. by drinking ſweet oil and milk ar cream. If. pure honey be at hand apply it to
the wound, after opening and ſucking, it, in preference to any other thing, and eat.
plentifully of honey and milk.” on oo nog
The baſtard rattle-ſnake is of the nature of the aſp or adder of the eaſtern conti-
nent ; 1n torm and colour they reſemble the rattle-ſnake; are eight or ten. inches long,
and very ſpiteful and venomous. Like the rattle-ſnake they throw tliemſelves into a
coil, fell and flatten their bodies, continually darting out their heads, and ſeem capa-
dle of ſpringing beyond their length. Found in the ſouthern Stats
The moccafin ſnake is from three to five feet in length, and as thick as a man's leg.
When diſturbed by an enemy they throw themſelves into a coil, and then gradually,
raiſe their upper jaw till it falls back, nearly touching the neck, at the ſame time vi-
b ating their long purple forked tongue, and directing their crooked” poiſonous fangs -
towards their enemy. In this attitude the creature has a moſt terrifying appearance.
It is ſaid their bite is incurable ; but the probability is, that it is not. Like the rattle-
fake they are low in their motion, and never bite a perſon unleſs provoked. Found |
in abundance in the ſwamps and low. grounds in the ſouthern States. V
The other moccaſin ſnake is about five or fix feet. long, and as, thick as a mans?
arm, of a pale grey ſky- coloured ground, with brown undulatory ringlets. They are
laid not to be venomous, have no poiſonous ſangs, are very ſwift and active, and flee
from an enemy. Found in the ſouthern States, and ſuppoſed to be a ſpecies of the


wampum.


3 3
, " = a "4 * 8 7 r 1 \ mY
\ TL > nd en PR 1 n 5 5 5 > . "4 Los
, f & . 3 f PI N n n 2 :; 2 7 9 oe OP
n "_ = A = 7 5 WES * n « Ta b k © 0. Lo 3 N 2 tf 8 , I>\ 1 OY
l | 1452 * PRC 2 =, * R 8 CORE N A . > 2 I Da nn >. THE? 7 : * Fe 2 / N LS e 3 By . = 0
22 I pF; - by OF i AY Ie BE, - £ ng I RL WEST'S © WIS, l : wy nad N n TY __ . . 3.0 : * N * ' g y
win I ot gy en , 7 9 N uy V7 2 _ . 2 * 8 3 of *; . WAP * n chi * 8 * og ot 12 7 *: ** ; y
COIN DIST, 88 * * 2 e ,, T r e 3 Og. ? 1
- nol es A N 4 * 1 — * + 4 0; J ; : r 2 9 — e * 5 1 * *
D «4 de es: . I , / N 5 5
9 4 N 1 A . HIS ON AE A ets ERP N N Sol P 5 \ * a 0
=, 8 R N * . :
. ar : 4 A a 1 : 5


retreat in time of danger. 85


Pennant, in his Britiſh Zoology, diſtributes fiſh into three diviſions, comprehending *


| THE UNITED STATES. R

wampum {nake of Pennſylvania, if not the ſame ſnake, though larger and deeper

loured. | 175 ; - jp |
8 The black ſnake is of various lengths from three to ſix feet, all over of a ſhining:
black; it is not venomous; is uſeful in deſtroying rats, and purſues its prey with
wonderful agility. It is faid that it will deſtroy the rattle-ſnake by twiſting round it
and whipping it to death. It has been reported alſo that they have ſometimes twined-
themſelves round the bodies of children, ſqueezing them till they die.— They are found


in all the States.


The coach-whip ſnake is of various and beautiſul colours, ſome parts brown, or:


chocolate, others black and others white; it is fix or ſeven feet long, and very ſlender
and active; it runs ſwiftly, and is quite inoffenſive; but the Indians imagine that it


is able to cut a man in two with a jerk of its tail. Like the black ſnake, it will run


upon its tail, with its head and body erect.


The pine or bull ſnake, called alſo tie horn ſnake, is the largeſt of the ſerpent”


kind known in North America, except the rattle-ſnake, and perhaps exceeds him in
length. They are pied, black and white; are inoffenſive with reſpect to mankind,


but devour ſquirrels, rabbits, and every other creature they can take as food. Their
tails terminate with a hard horny ſpur, which they vibrate very quick when diſturbed,
but they never attempt to ſtrike with it. They have dens in the earth to witch they


The glaſs ſnake has a very ſmall head; the upper part of its body is- of a colour


| blended brown and: green, . moſt regularly and elegantly ſpotted with yellow. Its ſkin -
is very ſmooth. and ſhining, with ſmall ſcales, more cloſely connected than thoſe of


other ſerpents, and of a different ſtructure. A ſmall blow with a ſtick will ſeparate


the body, not only at the place ſtruck, but at two or three other places, the muſcles
being articulated: in a ſingular manner quite through to the vertebra. They appear


earlier in the ſpring than any other ſerpent, and are numerous in the ſandy woods of


the Carolinas and Georgia, and harmleſs.


The joint-ſnake, if we may credit Carver's account of it, is a great curioſity. Its


| ſkin is as hard as parchment, and as ſmooth as glaſs. It is beautifully ſtreaked with


black and white. It is ſo ſtiff, and has fo few joints, and thoſe fo unyielding, that it
can hardly bend itſelf into the form. of a hoop. When it is ſtruck it breaks like a
pipe ſtem; and you may, with a whip, break it from the tail to the bowels into
pieces not an inch. long, and not produce the leaſt tincture of blood. It is not
venomous. | 5 e pg N 1

The two headed ſnake has generally been conſidered as a monſtrous production.


I am diſpoſed to believe, however, that it is a diſtinct ſpecies of ſerpents. I have ſeen


one, and received accounts of three others, found in different parts of the United


States. One of theſe was about eight inches long, and both heads, as to every out-
| . ward appearance, were equally perfect, and branching out from the neck at an acute


angle.


The ſnakes are not ſo numerous nor ſo venomous in the northern as in the ſouthern .
States. In the latter, however, the inhabitants are furniſhed with a much greater
variety of plants and herbs, which afford immediate relief to perſons bitten by theſe '
Yenomous creatures. It. is an obſervation worthy of perpetual: and grateful . remem- :
brance, that, wherever venomous animals are found, the God of nature has kindly.
provided ſufficient antidotes againſt their poiſon. - 1 5

Fishrs.)] Fiſhes form the fourth claſs of animals in the Linnæan ſyſtem. Mr.


ſix.


174 II UNITED STATES


ſix orders. His diviſions are, into Cetaceons, Cartilaginous, and Bony. We are not
ſufficiently informed on this part of our natural hiſtory, to arrange the following ca-


talogue of our fiſhes agreeably to Mr. Pennant's judicious diviſions :


Cxeraceous Fisn.


The Whale Dolphin Porpefle  Grampws Beluga.
CaxRTILAGN os Fisn. 1 |
Lamprey | Brown-ſpotted Gar fiſh Red-bellied Bream _
Skate Lump finn Silver or White Bream
Shark Pipe fiſh Tell Bream: .
Dog-fith | _ Golden Bream or Sun fiſh Black or Blue Bream.
Sturgeon 0 5 . .
1 BoNY FISRH. * |
_ Conger eel Tat fiſh
Snake fiſh Skipjack Minow
Haddock „ Week fiſh
Cog: © Horſe Mackarel King fiſh
Froſt fiſh Blue Mackarel  _ Sale:
Pollock Speckled Mackate! Mummychog
Small Pollock Samon White fiſh
Hake Salmon Trout I ̃'ide black fiſh
Sculpion : e Rock black fiſh
Plaice _.. amelt OT) Blue fiſh (Begallo)
Flounder | Pike or Pickerei Sheeps head
Hollybut Atherine Red drum
"Ea Mullet | Black drm
Red Perch Herring Branded drum
White Perch | ag be 2 | Sheeps-head drum
_ » Yellow Perch Pond fiſh MMoſsbonker
Sea Perch | _ Toad fiſh  Shadine
Whiting Roach Porfie
Striped Baſs Hlardhead 1
Alewife b Flying fiſn.
Chub 5 .


The Wnarx (Balena myſticetus) is the largeſt of all animals. In the northern ſeas
ſome are found ninety feet in length; and in the torrid zone, where they are un-
moleſted, whales have been ſeen 160 feet in length. The head is greatly diſpropor-
tioned to the fize of the body. In the middle of the head are two, orifices, through
which they ſpout water to a great height. The eyes are not larger than thoſe of an
ox, and are placed towards the back of the head, for the convenience of ſeeing both

before and behind. They are guarded by eyelids as in quadrupeds ; and they appear
to be very ſharp fighted, and quick of hearing. What is called wwhalebone adheres to
the upper jaw, and is formed of thin parallel . ſome of the longeſt are twelve


* Probably ſome that are placed under this divifion belong to one or ther of the preceding, we are nt
TI | 75


able accurately to claſs them.


— f


THE UNITED STATES. 175.


et in length: of theſe there are from 350 to 500 on each fide, according to the age
of the whale. The tail, which alone it uſes to advance itſelf in the water, is broad
and ſemilunar, and when the fiſh hes on one fide, its blow is tremendous. |
In copulation the male and female join, it is aflerted, more humano; and once in
two years feel the acceſſes of deſire. Their fidelity to each other is remarkable. An
inſtance of it is related by Mr. Anderſon, as follows“ Some fiſhers having ſtruck one
of two whales, a male and a female, in company, the wounded fiſh made a long and
terrible reſiſtance; it ſtruck down a boat, with two men in it, with a ſingle blow of
its tail, by which all went to the bottom. The other ſtill attended its companion and
lent it every aſſiſtance, till, at laſt, the fiſh that was ſtruck, ſunk under the number of
its wounds, while its faithful aſſociate, diſdaining to ſurvive the loſs, with great bel-
lowing ſtretched itſelf upon the dead fiſh and ſhared its fate.” The whale goes with
young nine or ten months, and generally produces one young one, never above two,
which are black and about ten feet long. The teats of the female are placed in the
lower part of the belly. When ſhe ſuckles her young ſhe throws herſelf on one fide,
on the ſurface: of the water, and the young ones attach themſelves to the teats.
Nothing can exceed the tenderneſs and care of the female for her young. „


1


The whale louſe, ſword fiſh, and threſher (a ſpecies of /qzalrs) are mortal enemics to
the whale, who itſelf is an inoffenſive animal. ms _


Formerly whales were found in plenty upon the coaſts of the United States ; at


3B | preſent they are ſcarce. The principal branch of the whale fiſhery, in the United


States, is carried on from Nantucket. , The enterprize of the Nantucket whalemen is
remarkable. Not ſatisfied with the ſcope which the Atlantic Ocean affords them,
they have lately proceeded round Cape Horn, and penetrated the great Weſtern
Ocean, in purſuit of whales. Capt. Worth has lately returned from a very ſucceſsful
voyage, of which he gives the following account, viz. that he went to the fouthward.
from Nantucket, doubled Cape Horn, and then purſued a north weſtwardly courſe, till.
he arrived at the iſland of Juan Fernandes. That here, where a harpoon was ſcarcely
cer thrown, the whales fwim in ſhoals, and that it is quite a matter of choice which
. of the company they fhall fall upon. That along the coaſt of Chili, for a conſiderable
== diſtance at ſea, no rain falls to incommode the frying of blubber, as happens to the
great diſadvantage of the whaling buſineſs in Hudſon's Bay and Davis's Straits; ſo
that they can carry on their buſineſs without any of the interruptions common in
other places, in conſequence of which they can make more advantageous voyages. A K


= cargo worth 6000l. fterling, it is faid, has been procured in a fifteen months voyage


to this ocean. For the manner of taking the whales, ſee Part II. |
. The Bz1vea (Delphinus beluga) is the 4th and laſt ſpecies of the Dolphin genus.
WW {bc hcad is ſhort, noſe blunt, eyes and mouth ſmall, in each fide of each jaw are nine
Feth, ſhort and rather blunt; thoſe of the upper jaw are bent and hollowed, fitted to
receive the teeth of the under jaw when the mouth is cloſed; it has pectoral fins,
| nearly of an oval form; beneath the ſkin may be felt the bones of five fingers, which
eerminate at the edge of the fin in five very ſenſible projections. This brings it into
dhe next rank, in the order of beings, with the Manati, which we have already de-
= f{ribed under the head of animals. Found in the northern parts of the American
coaſts, particularly in the Gulf of St. Lawrence and Hudſon's Bay.
_ the Lamprey frequents moſt of the rivers in the New England States, eſpecially
Where the paſſage is not interrupted by dams. 'That part of the lamprey which is
below the air holes is ſalted and dried for food. After the ſpawning ſeaſon is over,
and the young fry have gone down to the ſea, the old fithes attach themſelves to the


1 TOOt(ts


2


— 1 3
J n 5 N - 7 4 - N "a
1 1 0 Ll. « wot AY

8 22 ee 4

*

* ”

j
*


—


n
1 $24 * * 5 2 5


—— . a
_— = 4 8 F
. 2 ge 7 FA r * 2 in
3 F + bub 4 18-33 1 RP.
a Sn e 22 tf = is 4 99 483 * X i |
n - —_— > — 4 a ” ay ©
p N RN 1 1 A + _ - 1 7.
4 * 7 eat z4 6 * — — 8 *
n ce ry — oe  —— — — N a E
d= — . 28 4 * + 0 a
F .


| Horned Bectle


: \ > 3 = FS OT

\ re 1 1 *
— : * * 2 8 5

. : ' - * J ” ANY * "4 42


276 THE UNITED STATES.
roots and limbs of trees, which have fallen or run into the water, and there er erifh. |
A mortification begins at the tail, and proceeds upward to the vital part. Fiſh of this
kind have been found at Plymouth, in New Hampſhire, in different ſtages of putre-
faction.“


The amphibious lobſter is found in the ſmall brooks and Frramps | in the back parts
of North Carolina. In its head is found the cye-ſtone.
Ixszcrts.] The following catalogues of inſects and vermes, wont ſome ſmall ad-


re and the antexed def eriptions, ; arc taken from Dr. Belknap' 8 Flitory of New
Hampthire, vol. iii. p- 180—183.


Carabus Americanus,
Numerous ſpecies.


S$carabeus ſimſon.
Carolina Beetle Scarabæus Carolinus.
Dunghill Beetle Scarabreus ſtercorarius.
Apple Beetle Scarabæœus horticola ?
Golden Beetle Scarabæus lanigerus. *
Several new ſpecies, and others that have
YE 7, ˙ o o
Stag Beetle Lucanus cervus.
Fluted Beetle Lucanus interruptus.
1 I Dermeſtes lardarius.
3 Dermeſtes typographus.
Water Flea a LT _ Gyrinus natator.

Fetid Beetle 5 Sieh ha veſpillo. |
Lady Fly Coccindlia 2—puſtulata, ep
"> 8 Several ſpecies.

Ch ſorcla—man ſpecies.
Wheat Fly 6 fi! : l oh
Wen... Bruchus piſi.
Snouted Weevil Curculio quercus.
25 Many ſpecies.
Goat Chaffer e Ie CDeoerambyx coriarius.
8 Many ſpecies.
Fire Fly 3 85 Lampyris lucida.
2 5 SY Several ſpecies.
Skipper : e Elater oculatus.
| EE, Many ſpecies.
Glow Worm  Cicindela Carolina.
* | One or two other ſpecies.
Cantharides 2 Bupreſtris mariana.
3 Two or three other ſpecies,
Water Beetle PD ytiſcus piceus.
| Dytiſcus marginalis,
| DPD ytiſcus ſtriatus. ö
Several other ſpecies.
Black Beetle


2 Belknap's Hiſt, New Hampſhire, vol. iii. p. 176, Gs
8 2 5 Bloſſom


TH E UNITE D STATES.


| Bloſſom Eater 1 177
| eloe nigra.
Staphylinus maxilloſus.
Cockroach iy r ee ſpecies
Graſshopper | „ latta Americana ind: vo
Cricket * it e 10 Grill FOE OI)
Locuſt r us,—Numerous
Mole Cricket 5 RY —
Froghopper e Grillus gryllotalpa.
Balm Cricket | } Cicada.—Mar :
9 175 and Small 5 icada.—Many ſpecies.
ater Fly 5 V
Boat Fl7 4 j | Notanecta.— Several I.
Bug o | es :
Laut, on amis ; Cinex.—Numerous
: s ſpecies.
Louſe, on leaves of trees and plants Aphis braffice. . ; _
Bug, on plants and trees n ſpecies.
Butterfly 3 * ſpecies.
3 um
I Ni ght Flutterer Papilio. (een dee and ſercral
On! Moth - Sphinx. i P
oth, or Miller any new ſpecies. /
Apple Moth, or Cank Palæna.— 8
er W a.— Numer
Dragon Fl 8 om Phalæna wauaria? 5 —
Adder * on] Libell
DT uM be ula.—Several ſpecies.
1 A. 555 Hemerabius e
ak Apple ny. 1 TT
Saw F ly. $3 3 51. f Cynips.— Several {ect es, |
i 8 |  Tenthredo betuls.
Heine! 7 £5) N v
r 1 6 eſpa,—Many ſpecies. |
Wild "ag ir on ; x 5 71 s þ f SY Eo Ah 4 4
a I A ho And dende ie! pis.—Several ſpecies.
lack Fl | 21111 j {3 N Formi
Brown Fly .in £5, Th M AN ſpecies.
Hort Fly | uſta,—Numerous ſpecies.
oſquito, or Tab: 5
Stinging Fl om Vile 28 3 9 8 75 ro 1 85 1 87
| TT v5 7 755 wo Ye « c Cptiops calcitrans.
ather Long I "Podura nivalis.
8 ider n i „ eee Phalangium. |
| E tei 5 110 nen — v Wet Tr 7
Hermit Cra In 15 wy p72 CORK, __ 8 FF Z
dende 4 Gab | = oh a r 5 i
i 41 0 11 2 on 1150 1 wa J % 4% 11 7 ee IG 1
, iolils tt iy HITCH MN 1 1 3116; 14 2 4 ** — 08 8 g 6 , 32H +
/ 1 : 1 2 eh 6 King


and ft * & $44 4
.


W EEEEIS oe y I CST


ö


7 - —— -- — 2 N r © 0 3 82 F -
Wi r „% we yp ag 299 gt wa 2 * by
- \ 2 bl T 4 — << 5 * — P - — "
wud... * p 5. - — 28
„ LR. ICY {
2 Fg a BE. ada . — -


—
* k 4 8 2. © LE :
= *. l - 5 4 * * 4 % 0 * 1
0 * * n * - — 7 — 0 . "on = Ps
iS 2 or - — 9 1 8 * * * s a2. ** * * - . 2 Ae K
2 2 N 3 * al . K Sa A 0 . 10 n
N . 4 ht + Ip gat aa rt 5 . „ 2 — e ** - ©
v * * b 8 . « & 9h _ 1 2 | . 7 4 7
e ,
.
9 N
: :


3 *


5


—


3 „ ee 2

r TW ,

A A * 2 * 1 e
_—


*
>:
*
4


ſect is probably a non-deſcript, and peculiar to the United States.“


had an opportunity of obſerving ſome facts relating to this de


175 | THE UNITED STATES.


ing Crab, or Horſe Stone Monoculus polyphemus.
Monoculus piſcinus.
Cray Fiſh.
ibious Lobſter. |
Ws 1 | "Monoculus pulex. | | oy ©
Monoculus quadricornis. |
V. ER M E 8. :
Sea Clam HH an} Holothuria phantaphus.
Squid | : FTT
3 Sepia loligo.
. Meduſa pilearis. 4.
Star Fiſh, or Finger Fiſh Aſterias. Three or four ſpecies,
——_ | Echinus.—Several ſpecies.. .
Barnacle >: - - Ro |
ES -... Mya arenana. ND
Razor Shell Clam | 2 = "Pe ee Is
Long Shell Clam | SGiolen radiatis. 3
Oyſter N Oſtrea .
Muſcle 5 Mytilus edulis.
——_— JJ. - ts
Lampets ET C
Sand Shell Clam 8 Sabella granulata. 3 55
Sea Anemone Anemone marina (locomotiva.) _


The Wheat Fly, commonly, but improper] y, called the Heſſian Fly, which has, of


late years, proved ſo deſtructive to the wheat in various parts of the United States, has


generally been ſuppoſed to have been imported from Europe. This opinion, however,
ſeems not to be well founded. Count Ginnanni of Ravenna, in a late learned Trea-


tiſe on the Diſeaſes of Wheat in its growing State between Seed Time and Harveſt,


has given an account of more than oy different inſects that infeſt the Italian wheat, 7
and yet our wheat, fly is not delineated nor deſcribed. There is reaſon, therefore, to


doubt its exiſtence in the ſouth of Europe. Sir Joſeph Banks ſaid it did not exiſt in
England; nor could he collect any account of it in Germany. This deſtructive in-


*


* The following intereſting information reſpecting this inſe&, communicated to the preſident of the Phi-


- ladelphia Society for promoting Agriculture, deſeryes to be made as public as poſſible, for the benefit of our


farmers whoſe fields are or may hereafter be liable to the ravages of this devouring fly.  *,
N Proſpect Hill, June 12, 1 792. a [State of Delaware. ]
Dear Sir,


As the wheat fields in this neightourhood, are now kris from the ravages of the Heſſian fly, I have
ructive inſect, which, perhaps, if publichy

made known, may ſerve to obviate, or at leaſt to diminiſh, its pernicious effects. . 3
This fly made its firſt appearance in this neighbourhood about the 1 5th of laſt September. They arrived
in prodigious clouds, and immediately depoſited their eggs in. the wheat, which at that time afforded them
: le.nidus. I diſcovered, by accurate obſervation, that the plants, which had then preciſely two blades


were ſelected for this purpoſe. In the 8 of theſe two blades, immediately at the root of the plant,
the 25. were laid, amounting, in ſome inf


tances, to a dozen and more. As theſe eggs continued to ſwell, the *
n upon the tender capillary veſſels of the plant became more violent, until, at length, all eren


wh _
2:38


4 tes of farms will


THE UNITED STATES. i79

The Ink or Cattle fiſh is a curioſity. It is furniſhed with a cyft of black liquor,
which is a tolerable ſubſtitute for ink. This it emits, when purſued by its enemies.
The moment this liquor is emitted, the water becomes like a thick black cloud in the
eyes of its purſuer, and it improves this opportunity to make its eſcape. This cyſt of


liquor appears deſigned by Providence ſolely for the purpoſe of perſonal defence, and


is certainly a moſt apt and curious contrivance. The whalemen call theſe fiſh, Squids,

and fay that they are eaten in abundance by ſome fpecies of whales.
PopULATION. | According to the cenſus, taken by order of Congreſs, in 1790, the

number of inhabitants in the United States of America, was three millions nine hun-


dred thirty thouſand, nearly. In this number, none of the inhabitants of the territory


N. W. of the River Ohio, are included. Theſe added, would undoubtedly have in-


_ creaſed the number to 3,950,000, at the period the cenſus was taken. The increaſe -
ſince, on ſuppoſition that the inhabitants of the United States double once in twenty
years, has been about 200,000 : ſo that now, 1792, there are, probably, 4,150,000 |

ſouls in the American United States. 24, FE =


This number 1s rapidly multiplying by emigrations from Europe, as well as by na-
tural increaſe. 'The American republic is compoſed of almoſt all nations, languages,
characters, and religions, which Europe can furniſh ; the greater part, however, are de-


ſcended from the Engliſh; and all may, perhaps, be diftingmſhingly denominated


FEDERAL AMERICANS.


vas intercepted, and theſe blades were deſtroyed, Where the ſoil was thin, I obſerved, that, with theſe blades,
the plant alſo periſhed ; but in rich ground, freſh ſhoots were made from the root of the plant juſt below
the junction of the original blades, and became flouriſhing plants in the fall, or early in the ſpring. As the
laſt fall was very dry and mild, many of theſe eggs were hatched before winter; but I do not imagine the
grubs could have arrived at the fly ſtate before the froſts ; ſo that, in all probability, they were deſtroyed be-


hatched at the cloſe of the winter, or have come from a diſtance to us. They depoſited their eggs imme-
diately in the ſpring wheat, and that which had been ſown late in the fall; and, according to the quality of
the ſoil, their effect has been preciſely the ſame. A piece of yellow-bearded wheat, which I ſowed in No-
vember, is the only field that I have examined in which there is no appearance of this inſect; and I am in-
formed by my neighbours, that this is the caſe wherever this ſpecies of wheat has been ſown. I own that I
am at a Joſs to account for this quality in the bearded wheat; the two firſt blades of which, it ſhould ſeem, are
equally tender as thoſe of any other kind. Its power of refiſtance may poſſibly ariſe chiefly from its being


in the 1 At any rate, it certainly admits of being ſown later than any other, and thus effectually


eſcapes the
bearded wheat upon rich land, is the only certain method of preventing the ravages of the fly. If the ſeed,


may ſtill be enhanced, and his apprehenſions diminiſhed ; nay, perhaps, by attending to theſe particulars, the
tivation, from which human labour will reap the moſt ample fruits. of its


much ſooner into that ſtate of cu


make to human induſtry, why may not this. inſect be directed, by kind Providence, to lead us to this point of
national opulence? _ |


| 8 are all infected; and ſome common wheat, which is contiguous to it, is nearly deſtroyed. So th
e. bring ravages of the inſect, which have been ſo ſeverely felt by other kinds of grain, ſowa even on a very


ponding farmers in this quarter. 5
| ; — H. 3


Aa 2


fore the ſpring. Very early, however, in May, the fly appeared in great numbers, which muſt have been


leſs debilitated by the winter froſt, and conſequently from being ſooner out of the way of the fly early
ravages of the inſect, It follows, from what has been obſerved, that late ſowing of the yellow-
moreover, be ſteeped in ſtrong brine, or a decoction of elders, or other nauſeous herbs, the farmer's hopes
4 appearance of this fly among us, ſo far from injuring, may promote very materially the preſent ſtate of our
gagriculture. The in to large, inſtead of rich fields of wheat, will be gradually done away; the
e e Int the number of farmers will be increaſed, and our country brought
exertions. $0 that, if the proſperity of a country conſiſts ee in the greater returns that the ſoil can


N Since writing the above, I have renewed my ſearching among the yellow-bearded wheat ſown in
ovember, and cannot find in it any ſigns of the fly. Pieces of ſpring-wheat, of oats, and of rye, lying very


1 have not as yet reached this ſpecies. of wheat. If other communications to the ſociety ſhouid eſta-
ul the immunity of % wheat from the deſtruction of this inſect, they will greatly raiſe the ſpirits of the,


June 14, 1792. 3 EE 75 WOO et 6 | |
It.


9


"=
|
$1

=
4
*
3
þ


8 464 557 WET 3 a 3 aw. is 4


Ls £6.


- A FF
f f


nn. LET CSP FSIEPY
6 H


2 e . "REFS...


180 THE UNITED STATES,


It has generally been confidered as a fact, that, of the linman race, more males than
females are born info the world. The proportion commonly fixed on, is as thirteen


to twelve. Hence a concluſive argument has been derived againſt polygamy. The
larger number of males has been believed to be a wiſe appointment of Providence, to
balance the deſtruction of the males in war, by ſea, and by other occupations more


hazardous to life than the domeſtic employment 'of the female fex. The following


table, formed from the cenſus of the United States, in which the males and females
are numbered in different columns, furniſhes a new proof of the truth of the common
opinion, as it reſpects the United States:“ e eee
VVV


3 7 Males. Females. Exceſs. .
Vermont - - - — 44,763 40,505 4,258 | Males.
New Hampſhire - - 750,937 70,160 „„
Diſtrict of Maine { 5 | 5 3 e
Maſſachuſett - - 182,742 . 190,582 7,840 Females,
| Rhode Iſland = - 31,818 32,652 834 A.
Connecticut - = 114,926 117,448 2,522 do.
JJ ẽỹꝙßf . 8 9,502 Males.
New Jerſey _ - 86,667 83,287 3,380 do.
Pennſylvania - — 217,736 206,263 11,373 do.
D , . 1 i1;g4o »: do.
Maryland 107,54 101,333 35,8339 40.
Virginia ag T — — 227,071 5 215,040 12,025 l do. |
Kentucky - - 32,211 28,022 3,289 640.
North Carolina 14,94 140,710 6,784 do.
South Carolina - - 73,298 JJ  » Ao
Georgia „ ld 0  NTT >I0G
Territory S. of Ohio - 16,548 15,365 24184 de.


It is remarkable, that the exceſs in all the States' is on the fide of males, except in


Maſſachuſetts, Rhode Ifland, and Connecticut. In theſe States the females are con-
fiderably the moſt numerous. This difference is obviouſly to be aſcribed to the large


migrations from all theſe States to Vermont, the northern and weſtern parts of New
York, the territory N. W. of Ohio, Kentucky, Pennſylvania, and ſome to almoſt all


the ſouthern States. A great proportion of theſe migrants were males; and while they
have ſerved to increaſe the proportion of males in the States where they have ſettled,
as is ſtrikingly the caſe in Vermont and Kentucky, to which the migrations have been


moſt numerous, and where the males are to the females nearly as fen to nine, they have


ſerved to leſſen the proportion of males in the States from whence they emigrated.
The increaſe of ths


The number of ſlaves, in 1790, in all the States, was 697,697.
number fince, owing to ſalutary laws, in ſeveral of the States, and the humane cxer-


* Mr. Bruce, in his Travels, as we fhall, in the ſecond part of this work more particularly relate, affirms,


mat in that tract of country fromthe Iſthmus of Suez to the Straits of Babelmandel, which contains the thief


Arabias, the proportion is fully four women to one man.


+ In the columns of the cenſus, in which are noted all other free perſons and flaves, the males and fe-
males are not diſtinguiſhed, and are therefore not regarded in this table. AS | |


1 The males and females are not diſtinguiſned in the diſtrict of Main, in the late cenſus.


| tiors


N l nd aaa Corte dE oa 7 ds adn NT; n N ;
e ee Ee Eg Ck toe a ds bed I . a rt ae ae 9 8 * . ;
l 5 2 — e <E NN = IFN. 1 n N 2 n Fern ee 5 w n LITE TENT If FEY wp 5 oe of IF = * : 7 od + 4 "I bx l * 2 5
75 c Ie be en SO I ES Pa FFP . . * 9 SY f 7 ES 1 few I F * 8 : wy s u OI "97M — ele AZ ; a "CEE"
5 e 3 n 2 rr 3 ! ; . , I, . 4 . 3 9 4 a 4 : -
” A ©. ho q n y IH F 7 EIA e \ 72 : 38 q 8 4 8 2
y 8 — 1 gs n i 5 * 5 1 3 METS pet 5 — e * e 4


> EI WE RISES UT "AE"
r 88 pug 0


| THE UNITED STATES. 3
tions which have been made in favour of their emancipation, has happily been ſmall,
and probably will be leſs in future. Ht. 3 TL A d e ee dy
© CHARACTER AND MANNERS. | Federal Americans, collected together from various
countries, of different habits, formed under different governments, have yet to form
their national character, or we may rather ſay, it is in a forming ſtate. They have not
vet exiſted as a nation long enough for us to form an idea of what will be, in its ma-
turity, its prominent features. Judging, however, from its preſent promiſing infancy, .
we are encouraged to hope, that, at ſome future period, not far diſtant, it will, in.
_ every point of view, be reſpectable. _ Wye 5 oy

Until the revolution, which was accompliſhed in 1783, Europeans were ſtrangely.
ignorant of America and its inhabitants. They concluded, that the new world muft
be inferior to the old. The Count de Buffon ſuppoſed, that the animals in this coun-
try were uniformly leſs than in Europe, and thence concluded, that, “on this fide the
Atlantic, there is a tendency in nature to belittle her productions.“ The Abbe Ray- .
nal, in a former edition of his works, ſuppoſed this belirthiug tendency, or influence, had
its effects on the race of whites tranſplanted from Europe, and thence had the pre-
| ſumption to aſſert, that“ America had not yet produced one good poet, one able
mathematician, one man of genius in a fingle art or ſcience.” Had the Abbe been
juſtly informed reſpecting Americans, we preſume he would not have made an aſſer-
tion ſo ungenerous and injurious to their genius and literary character. This aflertion.
drew from Mr. Jefferſon the following reply: F
« When we ſhall have exiſted as a people as long as the Greeks did before they
preg a Homer, the Romans a Virgil, the French a Racine and Voltaire, the Eng-
liſh a Shakeſpeare and Milton, ſhould this reproach be ſtill true, we will inquire from:
what unfriendly cauſes it has proceeded, that the other countries of Europe and quar-
ters of the earth, ſnall not have inſcribed any name in the roll of poets.. In war we
have produced a W asnineToN, whoſe memory will be adored while liberty ſhall have
votaries, whoſe name will triumph over time, and will in future ages aſſume its juſt
ſtation among the moſt celebrated worthies of the world, when that wretched-philoſo-
phy ſhall be forgotten, which would arrange him among the degeneracies of nature.
In phyſics we have produced a FxAxKLIx, than whom no-one” of the preſent age has
made more important diſcoveries, nor has enriched philoſophy with more, or more in-
genious ſolutions of the phænomena of nature. We have ſuppoſed Mr. RirTExnovss .
fecond to no aſtronomer living: that in genius he muſt fe the firſt, becauſe he is
ſelf-taught. As am artiſt, he has exhibited as great proofs of mechanical genius as the
world has ever produced. He has not indeed made a world; but he has, by imitation,
approached nearer its Maker than any man who has lived from the creation. to this
day. As in philoſophy and war, ſo in government, in oratory, in painting, in the
plaſtic art, we might ſhew that America, though but a child of yeſterday, has already
gven hopeful proots of genius, as well of the nobler kinds, wth aront: the beſt fecl-
ings of man, which call him into action, which ſabſtantiate his freedom, and conduct
him to happineſs, as of the ſabordinate, which ſerve to amuſe him only. We there-
fore ſuppoſe, that this reproach is as unjuſt as it is unkind; and that, of the gemuſes
which adorn the preſent age, America contributes its full ſhare. For comparing it
with thoſe countries, where genius is moſt cultivated, where are the moſt excellent
models for art, and ſcaffoldings for the attainment of ſcience, as France and. England.
for inſtance, we calculate thus: the United States contain three millions of inhabi--
tants, France twenty millions, and the Britiſh iſlands ten. We produce a Waſhington, a-
Franklin, a. Rittenhouſe. France then ſhould have half a. dozen in each of theie 3 ; |
2. 3


182 THE UNITED STATES.
and Great Britain half that number, equally eminent. It may be true that F


us high ideas of the genius of her inhabitants. It would be injuring too many of
them to name particularly a Voltaire, a Buffon, the conſtellation of Encyclopediſts,
the Abbe Raynal himſelf, &c. &c. We therefore have reaſon to believe ſhe can pro-
duce her full quota of genius.“ |


fince the memory of man, I mean that of the declaration and eſtabliſhment of inde-


pendence, and that of the adoption of a new form of government without bloodſhed,
have called to hiſtoric fame many noble and diſtinguiſhed characters who might


otherwiſe have ſlept in oblivion.


But while we exhibit the fair ſide of the character of Federal Americans, we would


not be thought blind to their faults. _ . TY INE

An European writer has juſtly obſerved, that “ if there be an object truly ridiculous
in nature, it is an American patriot, ſigning reſolutions of independency with one
hand, and with the other brandiſhing a whip over his affrighted ſlaves.”


Much has been written to ſhew the injuſtice and iniquity of enſlaving the Africans ;


ſo much, as to render it unneceſſary here to ſay any thing on that part of the ſubject.


We cannot, however, forbear introducing a few obſervations ref


be included, 1s much


the labour of the free man, influenced by the powerful motive of gain, is, at leaſt,
twice as profitable to the employer as that of the ſlave. Beſides, ſlavery is the bane
of induſtry. It renders labour, among the whites, not only unfaſhionable, but diſ-
reputable. Induftry is the offspring of neceſſity rather than of choice. Slavery pre-
cludes this neceſſity ; and indolence, which ſtrikes at the root of all focial and political
happineſs, is the unhappy conſequence. Theſe obſervations, without adding any thing


upon the injuſtice of the practice, ſhew that ſlavery is impolitic.


Its influence on manners and morals is equally pernicious. The negro wenches,
in many inſtances, are nurſes to their miſtreſſes children. The infant babe, as ſoon


as it is born, is delivered to its black nurſe, and perhaps ſeldom or never taſtes a drop
of its mother's milk The children, by being brought up, and conſtantly aſſociating


with the negroes, too often imbibe their low ideas, and vitiated manners and morals,
and contract a negroiſb kind of accent and dialect, which they often carry with them


through life.


Jo theſe I ſhall add the obſervations of a native * of a ſtate which contains a greater


number of flaves than any of the others. Although his obſervations upon the in-


fluence of ſlavery were intended for a particular ftate, they will apply equally well to


all places where this pernicious practice in auy conſiderable degree prevails.


There muſt doubtleſs,” he obſerves, © be an unhappy influence on the manners of
our people, produced by the exiſtence of ſlavery among us. The whole commerce be-


tween maſter and ſlave is a perpetuab exerciſe of the moſt boiſterous paſſions, the moſt
unremitting deſpotiſm on the one part, and degrading ſubmiſſions on the other. Our
children ſee this, and learn to imitate it; for man is an imitative animal. This qua-


lity is the germ of all education in him. From his cradle to his grave, he is learning to


Mr. Jefferſon, 45
| e ag


—
9 *


has; we are but juſt becoming acquainted with her, and our acquaintance ſo far gives


The two late important revolutions in America, which have been ſcarcely exceeded


pecting the influence
of ſlavery upon policy, morals, and manners. From calculations on the ſubject, it has
been found, that the expence of maintaining a flave, eſpecially if the purchaſe money

greater than that of maintaining a free man: this, however, is
_ diſputed by ſome ;” but ſuppoſe the expence in both caſes be equal, it is certain that


L
9
» 4% 5
T4 EA
br”.
* Fa
— WA
©
4

, 6&0
N
3 1p

SS

* .

* VE #
5 *
TSR

1 4 4
N
\ *

1 v6;
2

- L 4

s
4 oo!

* *

Y 4
3

__
f Wy
, —
3
* 1 4
SLY
<1 8
15 *
SI
: £0
2%
«
* * I'S
* \ «
4 ,

l F-

het

1 x 8
*
* 3
* *
* .

i A,
Fa 2 *
POR:
— 3
Ty ,
. 5
* "at : *
a 4

wy 2.

* *
wh
4 * o

js A

0 Bat
- **
9

e 9
RS

* 1 Ob

4 *

4 Y

þ

* .

. 2

0 >

x Fo

oy =

© *

* ©
7
.
4 * C
£ oy

2 3

1 8

s n

7 -*

. k

s BY

+ Js
| „

5 7 2

* 1 %

* 2

52
N

4 "i

a 8
0 » 5 o
4 >=

* 1 *

1 8

7
=

7 "re +

„N N

= .

N 5

>, 6

1 "7
» * 6-00
4 do.
o Fe 4

*4 *

n

8 _

_ 2 F
1 = 6x

. SE
2 2
Ei. - ith
> *
_ .
_—
_—

. „

* *
* „.
8 8
_
» »F
* 7
A
„ 23 7
* [4 *

1 *

_—_

- ER

W_ SOC. =
* U

4 .

— > 24

Wt
_—-.
—_—

7
"0p N
1 + ad
Q 2
5 9
1
8 4
vey 7
>
=_
7 de
r

* * *
r
BEL -. 4
*

Pe. =.
» Bb
0 2
CS
* N
1
AJ 8
* 2 *
= 2
SET

3
1 .

5 46 4 2

_

_

5 2
1

WA
. Ml *

= Fa

a 1
9 LEY

* 5

3

9
_

—

N = =

—

_

— n
8 r

*

8

1
- $0
_ -

* 4 *
i

>

_

4 .
1

_
—_—

Ls

= :
_
2 3
_
_

1
-
A < 5 "bs
_
_._

3 5
1
1:78 F
=
_

; a

n
Pp LIES 2%

- Moe
_- a
bs FF”
_

3

_

,

_—

1 N
5

*

6

1

os
"A
"A
"i
1
\
+ th
1 N 7
-— 55S

1

F A
. 4x
* *
2 %
. LF
_—_
*

. v0
"=>

Is

"op

N

4 2

3

:

__—_—

4"; 0

ne

4144
A

„

WE,
*

"Þ
3
© 2
1
Po”
-

3

*
=
*
=>
_ 4
-£
Ci
> ©

*-
"
+?
*
A

,


THE UNITED STATES. 3
do what he ſees others do. If a parent could find no motive either in his philanthropy


or his ſelf- love, for reſtraining the intemperance of paſſion towards his ſlave, it ſhould
always be a ſufficient one that his child is preſent. But generally it is not ſufficient.
The parent ſtorms, the child looks on, catches the lineaments of wrath, puts on the
fame airs in the circle of ſmaller ſlaves, gives a looſe to his worſt of paſſions, and thus
nurſed, educated, and daily exerciſed in tyranny, cannot but be ſtamped by it with
odious peculianties. 'The man muſt be a prodigy who can retain his manners and'mo-
rals undepraved i ſuch circumſtances. And with what execration ſhould the ſtateſ-
man be loaded, who, permitting one half of the citizens thus to trample on the rights of
the other, transforms thoſe into deſpots, and theſe into enemies; deſtroys the morals of
the one part, and the amor patrie of the other. For if a ſlave can have a country in
this world, it muſt be any other in preference to that in which he is born to live and la-
bour for another : in which he muſt lock up the faculties of his nature, contribute as
far as depends on his individual endeavours to the evaniſhment of the human race, or
entail his own miſerable condition on the endleſs generations proceeding from him.
With the morals of the people, their induſtry alſo is deſtroyed. For in a warm climate,
no man will labour for himſelf who can make another labour for him. This is ſo true,
that of the proprietors of ſlaves a very ſmall proportion indeed are ever ſeen to labour.
And can the liberties of a nation be thought ſecure when we have removed their onl
firm baſis, a conviction in the minds of the people that theſe hberties are the gift of God?
That they are not to be violated but with his wrath ? Indeed I tremble far my country
when J reflect that God is juſt : that his juſtice cannot ſleep for ever : that conſidering
numbers, nature, and natural means only, a revolution of the wheel of fortune, an ex-
change of ſituation, is among poſſible events: that it may become probable by ſuper-
natural interference, !—The Almighty has no attribute which can take fide with us in
ſuch a conteſt. But it is impoſſible to be temperate and to purſue this ſubject through
the various conſiderations of policy, of morals, of hiſtory, natural and civil. We muſt
| be contented to hope they will force their way into every one's mind. I think a change
already perceptible, ſince the origin of the preſent revolution. The ſpirit of the maſter
is abating, that of the ſlave riſing from the duſt, his condition mollifying, the way 1
hope preparing, under the auſpices of heaven, for a total emancipation, and that this
is diſpoſed, in the order of events, to be with the conſent of their maſters, rather than
by their extirpation. 4 E 4 ut:
Under the Federal government, from the meaſures already adopted, we have reaſon
to believe that all ſlaves in the United States, will in time be emancipated, in a man-
ner moſt conſiſtent with their own happineſs, and the true intereſt of their proprietors.
Whether this will be effected by tranſporting them back to Africa ; or by colonizing
them in ſome part of our own territory, and extending to them our alliance and protec-
tion, until they ſhall have acquired ſtrength ſufficient for their own defence ; or by in-
corporation with the whites ; or in ſome other way, remains to be determined. ö
In the middle and northern States, there are comparatively but few flaves; and of
courſe there is leſs difficulty in giving them their freedom. In Maffachuſetts alone,
and we mention it to their diſtinguiſhed honour, there are xoNE. Societies for the ma-
numiſſion of ſlaves have been inſtituted in Philadelphia and New Tork, and other
places, and laws have been enacted, and other meaſures taken, in the New England
States, to accompliſh the ſame purpoſe. The FRIENDS, (commonly called Quakers)
have evinced the propriety of their name, by their goodneſs in originating, and their
Vigorous exertions in executing, this truly humane and benevolent defign,


The


.


8
= 41
_ 4 .
8 Ls
= \
3 :
. —
'& }
„
2
*
* Tz
= :
A N
.
»
— 5 1


3 l a0 _ — -
— — dab +
3 — h *


„„ HE UNITE STATES i:


The Eugliſh Language is univerially ſpoken in the United States, and in it bufinef;
is tranſacted, and the records are kept. It is ſpoken with great purity, and prononn-
ced with propriety in New England, by perſons of education; and, excepting ſome
corruptions in pronunciation; by all ranks of people. In the middle and fouthern States,
-where:they. have had a great influx of foreigners, the language, in many inſtances, is
:corrupted, | etpecially in pronunciation. Attempts are making to introduce an unifor-
mity ot pronunciation throughout the States, which for political, as well as other rea-
ſons, it is hoped will meet the approbation and encouragement of all literary and in-
fluential characters. 9 11


Swedes, and Jews; all theſe, except the Scotch and Iriſh, retain, in a greater or leſs
-degree, their native language, in which they perform their public worſhip, converſe and
tranſact their buſineſs with each ot ler. LY 11


and when the language, manners, cuſtoms, political and religious ſentiments of the


AMRRICANS.


ang to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of their intentions, they did,
in the name and by the authority of the good people of the colonies, folemnly publiſh
and declare, That theſe: United Colonies were, and of right ought to be, FxkE and
IDEEN DEN States; that they were abſolved from all allegiance to the Britiſh crown,


| be, totally diflolved ; and that as Free and Independent States, they had full power to
levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, eſtabliſh commeroe, and do all other acts
and things which Independent States may of right do. For the ſupport of this decla-
ration, with a firm reliance on the protection of divine Providence, the delegates then


and agreed, that each State ſhould retain its ſovereignty, freedom, and independence,
and every power, juriſdiction, and right not expreſsly delegated to Congreſs by the con-
federation. By theſe articles, the thirteen United States ſeverally entered into a firm
league of friendſhip with each other for their common defence, the ſecurity of their li-
| bertics, and their mutual and general welfare, and bound themſelves to afliſt each other,
_ againſt all force offered to, or attacks that might be made upon all, or any of them,
vin account of religion, ſovereignty, commerce, or any other pretence whatever. But


| Legiſlature of each State ſhould direct, to meet in Congreſs the firſt Monday in No-


der of the year. No State was to be repreſented in Congreſs by leſs than two, or mort


Intermingled with the Americans, are the Dutch, Scotch, Iriſh, French, Germans,


The time, however, is anticipated, when all improper diſtinctions ſhall be aboliſhed :


mixed mats of people who inhabit the United States, ſhall have become fo aſſimilated,
as that all nominal diſtinctions ſhall be loſt in the general and honourable name of

GOovVERSMENT. | Until the fourth of July, 1776, the preſent United States were Bri- |
tith colonies. On that memorable day, the Repreſentatives of the United States of
America, in Congrets aſſembled, made a folemn declaration, in which they aſfigned
their reatons fox withdrawing their allegiance from the King of Great Britain. Appeal-


and that all political connection between them and Great Britain was, and ought to


in Congreſs, fifty-five in number, mutually pledged to each other their lives, their for-
tunes, and their ſacred honour. . N e

At the ſame time they publiſhed articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union be-
tween the States, in which they took the ſtyle of“ THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA,


4or the more convenient management of the general intereſts of the United States, it
was determined, that Delegates ſhould be annually'appointed, in ſuch manner as the


vyember of every year, with a power reſerved to each State to recall its delegates, or an
ol them, at any time within the year, and to ſend others in their ſtead for the remain-


ban ſeven members; and no perſon could be a delegate for more than three years, in
| Te ot any


THE UNITED STATES. 185
any term of fix years, nor was any perſon, being a delegate, capable of holding any office
under the United States, for which he, or any other for his benefit, ſhould receive any
ſalary, fees, or emolument of any kind. In determining queſtions in Congreſs, each
State was to have one vote. Every State was bound to abide by the determinations of
Congreſs in all-queſtions which were ſubmitted to them by the confederation, The ar-
ticles of confederation were to be invariably obſerved by every State, and the Union to
be perpetual : nor was any alteration at any time hereafter to be made in any of the ar-
ticles, unleſs ſuch alterations be agreed to in Congreſs, and be afterwards confirmed by
the legiſlatures of every State. The articles of confederation were ratified by Congreſs,
N The Re 9 of confederation being found inadequate to the purpoſes of a federal
government, for reaſons hereafter mentioned, delegates were choſen in each of the Uni-
ted States, to meet and fix upon the neceſſary amendments. They accordingly met in

convention at Philadelphia, in the ſummer of 1787, and agreed to propoſe the ſollow-
ing conſtitution for the conſideration of their conſtituents: —{# Hs
_ ConsTITuT10Nn. |] Ws, THE PzoPLE of the United States, in order, to form a more perfect
union, eftabliſh juſtice, inſure domeſtic tranquility, ee for the common defence,
promote the general welfare, and ſecure the bleſſings of liberty to ourſelves and our poſ-
terity, do ordain and eftabliſh this Conſtitution for the United States of America.
ARTICLE I.— ect. 1. ALL legiſlative powers herein granted ſhall be veſted in a Con-
greſs of the United States, which ſhall confiſt of a Senate and Houſe of Repreſen-
JJ) pppd d CL Ito nap 7000 £ :
Sect. 2. The Houſe of Repreſentatives ſhall be compoſed of members choſen every
ſecond year by the people of the ſeveral States, and the electors in each State ſhall have
* qualifications requiſite for electors of the moſt numerous branch of the State legiſ-
laturs. - 7 2? 4:5 19575 JJ%%%%ͤ§;[Üeè;; 8 bs
Ne perſon ſhall be a repreſentative who ſhall not have attained to the age of twen-
ty-five years, and been ſeven yeats a citizen of the United States, and who ſhall not,
when elected, be an inhabitant of that State in which he ſhall be choſen. Goes
Repreſentatives and direct taxes ſhall be apportioned among the ſeveral States which
may be included within this. Union, according to their reſpective numbers, which ſhall
be determined by adding to the whole number of free perſons, including thoſe bound
to ſervice for a term of years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three fifths of all other
perſons. The actual enumeration ſhall be made within three years after the firſt meet-
ing of the Congreſs of the United States, and within every ſubſequent term of terr years,
in ſuch manner as they ſhall by law direct. The number of repreſentatives ſhall not
exceed one for every thirty thouſand, but each State ſhall have at leaſt one repreſenta-
tive; and, until ſuch enumeration ſhall be made, the State of New Hampſhire ſhall,
be entitled to chooſe three, Maſſachuſetts eight, Rhode Ifland and Providence Plante
tions one, Connecticut five, New York fix, New Jerſy four, Pennſylvania eight, De-
laware one, Maryland fix, Virginia ten, North Carolina five, Seuth Carolina five,
and Georgia three: AIG e Ld 6 e ee
When vacancies happen in the repreſentation from any State, the executive autho-
rity thereof ſhall iſſue writs of election to fill ſuch vacancies. nN
The Houſe of Repreſentatives ſhall chooſe their Speaker and other officers ; and ſhall
have the ſole power of impeachment. Kaba ELD
; Set, 3. The Senate of the United States ſhall be compoſed of tWo ſenators from each
State, choſen by the legiſlature thereof, for fix years; and each ſenatoy ſhall have one


=. |
| Bb ___, Immediately


136 THE UNITED STATES.


Immediately after they ſhall be aſſembled, in conſequence of the firſt election, they
ſhall be divided as equally as may be into three claſſes. 'The ſeats of the ſenators of
the firſt claſs ſhalt be vacated at the expiration of the ſecond year; of the ſecond claſs
at the expiration of the fourth year; and of the third olaſs at the expiration of the


fixth year, fo that one third may be choſen every ſecond year; and if vacancies


happen by reſignation, or otherwiſe, during the receſs of the legiſlature of any State,
the executive thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the
legiſlature, which ſhall then fill ſuch vacancies.


No perſon ſhall be a ſenator who ſhall not have rained to the age of thirty years, 1


and been nine years a citizen of the United States, and who ſhall not, when elected,
be an inhabitant of that State for which he ſhall be choſen.


The Vice-Preſident of the United States ſhall be Prefident of the Sebite, but an :


have no vote, unleſs they be equally divided.
The Senate ſhall chooſe their other officers, and alſo a Preſident
the United States.
The Senate ſhall have the ſole power 10 We all impeachaterits.


that purpoſe, they ſhall be on oath or affirmation. When the Preſident of the United


States is tried, the chief juſtice ſhall preſide : and no perſon ſhall be convicted without |


the concurrence of two thirds of the members preſent.
Judgement in caſes of impeachment ſhall not extend further than to carat, from:


office, and diſqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honour, truſt, or profit, under


the United States; but the party convicted ſhall nevertheleſs be liable and ROO to
. indictment, trial, judgement, and puniſhment, according to law. ©
Set. 4. The times, places, and manner of holding elections for ſenators and repre-


ſentatives, ſhall be preſcribed in each State by the legiſlature thereof; but the Congreſs.


may at any time by law make or alter fuch regulations, capt! as to the plqoes of
chuſing ſenators.


The Congreſs ſhall aſſemble at leaſt once in every year, and ſuch 3 ſhall be on.


the firſt Monday in December, unleſs they ſhall by law appoint a different day.

Seft. 5
of its own members, and a majority 10 each ſhall conſtitute a quorum to do buſineſs;
but a ſmaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authoriſed to compel


the attendance of abſent members, in ſuch a nme and under ſuch ine as l


houſe may provide.
Fach houſe may determine the rules of its proceedings, puniſh its mombers for
diſorderly behaviour, and, with the concurrence of two thirds, expel a member.

Each houſe ſhall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time publiſſi
the ſame, excepting ſuch parts as may in their judgement require ſecrecy ; and the yeas
and nays of the members of either houſe on any queſtion ſhall, at the deſire of ou
fifth of thoſe preſent, be entered on the journal.

Neither houſe, during the ſeſſion of Congreſs, ſhall, without the canta of the
other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that in which the
two houſes ſhall be fitting.

Sect. 6. The Senators and Repreſentatives ſhall receive a compenſation for their
ſervices, to be aſcertained by law, and paid out of the treaſury of the United States.


They ſhall, in alt caſes, except treaſon, felony, and breach of the peace, be priv ileged 4
from arreſt during their attendance at the ſeſſion of their reſpective houſes, and in £00g


pro tempore ii in
the abſence of the Vice- Freſident, or w hen he wal exerciſe the office of Prefident of


When fitting for


Each houſe ſhall be the judge of the elections, returns, and qualifications


M0
3
2


THE UNITED STATES. 185
to and returning from the ſame ; and for any ſpecch or debate in either houſe, they
ſhall not be queſtioned in any other place.
No ſenator or repreſentative ſhall, during the time for which he was elected, be

appointed to any civil office under the authority of the United States, which ſhall have

been created, or the emoluments whereof ſhall have been increaſed during ſuch time;
and no perſon holding any office under the United States ſhall be a member of either

Houſe during his continuance in office.

$28. 7. All bills for raifing revenue ſhall originate in the Houſe of Repreſentatives;

but the Senate may propoſe or concur with amendments, as on other bills.

Every bill which ſhall have paſſed the Houſe of Repreſentatives and the Senate,
ſhall, before it becomes a law, be preſented to the Prefident of the United States; if
be approve, he ſhall ſign it, but if not, he ſhall return it, with his objections, to that
houſe in which it ſhall have originated, who ſhall enter the objections at large on their
journal, and proceed to re-conſider it. If, after ſuch re-conſideration, two thirds of
that houſe ſhall agree to paſs the bill, it ſhall be ſent, together with the objections, to
the other houle, by which it ſhall likewiſe be re-confidered, and if approved by two
thirds of that houſe, it ſhall become a law. But in all ſuch caſes the votes of both
houſes thall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the perſons voting for
and againſt the bill ſhall be entered on the journal of each houſe reſpectively. If any
bill ſhall not be returned by the Prefident within ten days, (Sundays excepted) after it
ſhall have been preſented to him, the ſame ſhall be a law, in like manner as if he had
figned it, unleſs the Congreſs, "7 their eee 180 ent its return, in which caſe
it thall not be a law. |

Exery order, reſolution, or vote; to which the concurrence of the Senate and Houſe :
of Repreſentatives may be neceſſary (except on a queſtion of adjournment) ſhall be
preſented to the Preſident of the United States ; and before the ſame ſhall take effect,
ſhall be approved by him, or, being diſapproved by him, ſhall be re-paſſed by two
thirds of the Senate and Houſe of Repreſentatives, according to the rules and limitations
preſcribed in the caſe of a bill.

ect. 8. The Congreſs ſhall have power |

To lay and collect taxes, duties, impoſts, and exciſes; ite pay the debts and vrovide 5
for the common defence and general welfare of the United States; but all duties,

impoſts, and exciſes ſhall be uniform throughout the United States;

To borrow money on the credit of the United States; 3 5

To regulate commerce with 12 nations, and among the feveral States, and with


me Indian tribes:


Iyo eſtabliſh an uniform ns of 3 and uniform laws 0 on the ſubject of
bankruptcies throughout the United States;


To coin money, regulate the value Fe and of foreign coin, and fix the dandard
of weights and meaſures ;


To provide for the puniſhment of counterſeiting the ſecurities and current coin of |
the United State; 25


To eftabliſh poſt offices and oft roads 3: 85 | BLE
To promote the progreſs of Na ience and uſeful adi hos 9 for limited "0 IVY |


to authors and inventors, the excluſive right to thieir —— "writings and di-
veries; | |


To conſtitute 1 tribunals inferior to the ſupreme court ; |
Jo define and puniſh piracies and ſelonics committed on the high n and offences E
29 the law of nations Tz 19 45209


Bb 2 5 To


4869 | THE UNITED STATES.
To declare war, grant letters of marque and repriſal, aud make rules concerning


captures on land and water ;
To raiſe and ſupport armies, but no appropriation of * to that uſe mal be for
a longer term than two years;
To provide and maintain a navy; |
To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces;
To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union, ſuppreſs
inſurrections, and repel invaſions;
To provide for organizing, arming, and diſciplining the bs. and for governing
ſuch part of them as may be employed in the ſervice of the United States, reſerving to
the States reſpectively, the appointment of the officers, and the authority of dN
the militia according to the diſcipline preſcribed by Congreſs; _
To exerciſe excluſive legiſlation in all caſes whatſoever, over fuch diftrict (not
exceeding ten miles fquare) as may by ceſſion of particular States, and the acceptance
of Congreſs, become the ſeat of government of the United States; and to exerciſe like
authority over all places purchafed by the conſent of the tegiſlature of the State in which
the ſame ſhall be, for the erection of forts, magazines, arſenals, nene and other
needful buildings :>And _
To make all laws which ſhall be neceſſary; and proper for! carrying into cxecufion
the foregoing powers, and all other powers veſted by. this conſtitution in the aan
ment of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof.
Sect. 9. The migration or importation of ſuch perſons as any of the States now 'exiſt- |
ing ſhall think proper to admit, ſhall not be prohibited by the Congreſs prior to the year
one thouſand eight hundred and eight, but a tax or duty op! be en on duch
importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each perſon.
The privilege of the, writ of habeas: corpus ſhall not be Culpended, uvleſs when i in
caſes of rebellion or invaſion the public ſafety may require it.
No bill of attainder or ex poſt facto law ſhall be paſſed.
No capitation, or other direct tax, ſhall be laid, unkeſs 1 in \propartion to the cenſus
or enumeration herein before directed to be taken. ; £1)
No tax or duty ſhall be laid on articles exported from any: State A eder
ſhall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports of one State over
thoſe of another: nor ſhall veſſels bound to or from one n be r to enter,
clear, or pay duties in another. 8
No money ſhall be drawn from the treaſury, but in > conſequence: af appropriations
made by . and a regular ſtatement and account of the receipts and n ok
all public money ſhall be pubhſhed from time to time.
Do title of nobility ſhall be granted by the United States. And no perſon holding
any office of profit or truſt under them, ſhall, without the conſent of Congreſs, accept ig
of any preſent, emolument, office, or title of any kind een from any king, *
or foreign ſtate.
Sect. 10. No State ſhall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation; grant
letters of marque and repriſal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make any thing 55
gold and filver coin a tender in payment of debts; paſs any bill of attainder, ex poſt
in. 4 law, or law. impairing the obligation of contracts, or grant any title ol
nobility.


No State ſhall, without the conſent of the Con orels; lay any impoſts or duties on


»


imports or exports, except what may be abſolutely n. ary for executing its inſpection
lavys; and the net proguce of all duties and * laid by any State on unports or


expo ts,


THE UNITED STATES. | 189
exports, ſhall be for the uſe of the Treafury of the United States ; and all ſuch laws
ſhall be ſubject to the reviſion and controul of the Congreſs. No State ſhall, without
the- conſent of Congreſs, lay any duty of tonnage, keep troops, or ſhips of war, in
time of peace, enter into any agreement or compact with another State, or with a
foreign power, or engage in war, unleſs actually invaded, or in ſuch imminent danger
as will not admit of delay. . | .

ART. II.— Seck. 1. The executive power ſhall be veſted in a Preſident of the
United States of America. He ſhall hold his office during the term of four years,
and, together with the Vice-Preſident, choſen for the ſame term, be elected as

follows; 7 0h nh hen: E Eh 4 8 Po
Fach State ſhall appoint, in fuch manner as the legiſlature thereof may direct, a
number of electors, equal to the whole number of ſenators and repreſentatives to
which the State may be intitled in the Congreſs : but no ſenator or repreſentative, or
perſon holding an office of truſt or profit under the United States, ſhall be appointed
an elector. F 1 8 | | 1 N = 5

The electors ſhall meet in their reſpective States, and vote by ballot for two perſons,
of whom one at leaft ſhall not be an inhabitant of the ſame State with themſelves.
And they ſhall make a lift of all the perſons voted for, and of the number of votes for
each ; which liſt they ſhall fign and certify, and tranſmit, ſealed, to the ſeat of the
government of the United States, directed to the Preſident of the Senate. The Pre-
ſident of the Senate ſhall, in the preſence of the Senate and Houſe of Repreſentatives, .
open all the certificates, and the votes ſhall then be counted. The perſon having the
greateſt number of votes ſhall be the Preſident, if ſuch number be a majority of the whole
number of electors appointed; and if there be more than one who have ſuch majority,
and have an equal number of votes, then the Houſe. of Repreſentatives ſhall immedi-


' 2} _ ately chooſe by ballot one of them for Preſident ; and if no perſon have a majority,


then from the five higheſt on the liſt, the ſaid houſe ſhall in like manner chooſe the
Preſident. But in choofing the Prefident, the votes ſhall be taken by States, the
repreſentations from each State having one vote; a quorum for this purpoſe ſhall confiſt
of a member or members from two thirds of the States, and a majority of all the States

ſhall be neceſſary to a choice. In every caſe, after the choice of the Preſident, the
perſon having the greateſt number of votes of the electors ſhall be the Vice-Preſident. .


But if there ſhould remain two or more who have equal votes, the Senate ſhall chooſe |


from them by ballot the Vice-Preſident. EEG 5 bie
The Congreſs may determine the time of chooſing the electors, and the day


I on which they ſhall give their votes; which day ſhall be the ſame throughout the
= United States. SHER: e eee ! . . 5


Noa perſon, except a natural-born citizen, or a citizen of the United States at the


time of the adoption of this conſtitution, ſhall be eligible to the office of | Prefident ; . .
neither ſhall any perſon be eligible to that office who ſhall not have attained to the
age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a refident within the United


. Incaſe of the removal of the Preſident from office, or of his death, reſignation, or
ability to diſcharge the powers and duties of the ſaid office, the ſame ſhall devolve on
the Vice-Prefident, and the Congreſs may by law provide for the caſe of removal,
death, reſignation, or inability, both of the Preſident and Vice-Preſident, declaring
what officer ſhall then act as Prefident, and ſuch officer ſhall act accordingly, until
the diſability be removed, or a Preſident ſhall be elected. C


Ihe


190 THE UNITED: STATES.


The Prefident ſhall, at tated times, receive for his ſervices, a compenſation, which
ſhall neither be increaſed or diminithed during the period for which he ſhall have been


clected, and he ſhall not receive within that period any other emolument from the
United States, or any of them.


Before he enters on the execution of his office, he ſhall take the following oath or


affirmation:
« do folemuly ſwear (or affirm) that I will ſaithfully execute the office nk Pre-


« fident of the United States, and will, to the beſt of my ability; preſerve, proted, and


4 defend the conſtitution of the United States.


Seck. 2. The Preſident ſhall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the
United States, and of the militia of the ſeveral States, when called into the actual


ſervice of the United States; he may require the opinion, in writing, of the principal


officer in each of the executive departments, upon any fubject relating to the duties of
7 their reſpective offices, and he ſhall have power to grant reprieves and en for


offences againſt the United States, except in caſes of impcachnient.


He ſhall have power, by and with the advice and conſent of the Senate, to make
treaties, provided two thirds of the ſenators preſent concur; and he ſhall nominate,


and by and with the advice and conſent of the Senate ſhall appoint ambaſſadors,
other public miniſters, and conſuls, judges of the ſupreme court, and. all other officers


of the United States, whoſe appointments are not herein otherwiſe provided for, and


which ſhall be eſtabliſhed by law. But the Congreſs may by law veſt the appoint-
ment of ſuch inferior officers, as they think proper, in the Frefident ee in the courts
of Jaw, or in the heads of departments.

The Preſident ſhall have Power to fill up all vacancies ; that x may | hap rin the
_ receſs of the ſenate, by granting commiſſions which hall expire at lie e end of their
next ſeſſion. E. H e
Sect. 3. He ſhall from time to time give to the Congreſs information 4 the ſtate
of the union, and recommend to their confideration ſuch meaſures as he ſhall-judge
neceſſary and expedient ; he may, on extraordinary occaſions, conyene both houſes,
or either of them, and in caſe of diſagreement between them, with. xeſpect to the time


of adjournment, he may adjourn them to ſuch time as he ſhall think proper; he ſhall


receive ambaſſadors and other public miniſters; he ſhall take care that the laws be
faithfully exccuted, and ſhall commiſſion all the officers of the United States.
. Preſident, Vice-preſident, and all civil officers of the United States,
ſhall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, treaſon, bribery,
or other high crimes and miſdemeanors, +
Axr. IIL—S28. 1. The judicial power of the United States ſhall be veſted i in one
ſupreme court, and in ſuch inferior courts as the Congreſs may from time to time
ordain and eſtabliſh. The judges, both of the ſupreme and inferior courts, ſhall hold
their offices during good behaviour, and ſhall, at ſtated: times, receive for their ſer-


vices, a cope, which ſhall not be diminiſhed during their continuance in


Office.


Sect. 2. The Fe OE wer ſhall extend to all caſes, in law and equity, ariſing
under this confiituticn, the laws of the United States, and treaties made, or which


ſhall be made, under their authority ; to all caſes affecting ambaſſadors, other publio


miniſters, and conſuls; to all caſes of admiralty and maritime juriſdiction; to con- |


troverſies to which the United States ſhall be a party ; to controverſies between two
or-more States, between a State and citizens of another State, between citizens af 4
ferent States, between citizens of the lam State claiming lands under grants of


2


8 HE UNITED STATES. 191


ſerent States, and between a State, or the citizens thercof, and forcign ſtates, citizens,
or ſubjects. |


In all caſes affecting ambaſſadors, other public miniſters, and conſuls, and thoſe in
which a State ſhall be party, the ſupreme court ſhall have original juriſdictzon. In
all the other caſes before mentioned, the ſupreme court ſhall have.appellate juriſdic- -
tion, both as to law and fact, with ſuch exceptions, and under ſuch regulations as the
Congreſs ſhall mae. 3 5 FN .

I) he trial of all crimes, except in caſes of impeachment, ſhall be by jury; and ſuch
trial ſhall be held in the State where the faid erime ſhall have been committed; but
when not committed within any State, the trial ſhall be at ſuch place or places as the
Congreſs may by Iaw have directed. _ 3 5 eee e F carts

Sect. 3. Treaſon againſt the United States ſhall conſiſt only in levying war againſt
them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No perſon ſhall
de convicted of treaſon unleſs on the teſtimony of two witneſſes to the ſame overt act,
bor on confeſſion in open court. OO FF 157
5 The Congreſs ſhall have power to declare the puniſhment of treaſon, but no attain-
der of treaſon ſhall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except during the life of
the pr RT. Eo: 2 VöNNCW
Ax. IV.— ect. 1. Full faith and credit ſhall be given in each State to the public
acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other State. And the Congreſs may by,
general laws preſcribe the manner in which ſuch acts, records, and proceedings ſhall
= bc proved, and the effect thereof. + EEE


—


HSect. 2. The citizens of each State ſhall be entitled to all privileges and immunities
ol citizens in the ſeveral States. Heal 6 wid „ 1 =

A perſon charged in any State with treaſon, - felony, or other crime, who ſhall flee
= icom juſtice, and be found in another State, ſhall, on demand of the executive au-
= thority.of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the State
J7ͤ;—⁵V—ů00 d;; ont bs Won ren,
| No perſon held to fervice or lab r in one State, under the laws thereof, eſcaping
mo another, ſhall, in conſequence of any law or regulation therein, be diſcharged
= irom ſuch ſervice or labour, but ſhall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom
WF {31 ſervice or labour may be due. 9 5 „ 5

Sect. 3. New States may be admitted by the Congreſs into this union, but no new
diate thall be formed or erected within the juriſdiction. of any other State; nor any
A State be ſormed by the junction of two or more States, or parts of States, without the
onkdent of the legiſlatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congreſss.

The Congreſs ſhall have power to diſpoſe of and make all needful rules and regu-
W {1005 reſpecting the territory or other property belonging to the United States ; and
ooching in this conſtitution ſhall be ſo conſtrued as to prejudice any claims of the


) * 1


United States, or of any particular State; r —_— TR ey IDES
Heck. 4. The United States ſhall guarantee to every State in this union a republican
A form of government, and ſhall protect each of them againſt invaſion; and on appli-
aon of the legiſlature, or of the executive (when the legiſlature cannot be convened).
| &gamlt domeſtic violence. 3 5 % ale a 22rÞt- tr re6] |
. ART, V.—The Congreſs, whenever two thirds of both houſes ſhall deem it neceſ-
ary, thall propoſe amendments to this . conſtitution, or, on the application of the le-
zillatures of two thirds of the ſeveral States, ſhall call a convention for propoſing
ments, which, in either caſe, ſhall be valid to all intents and purpoſes, as part
uus conſtitution, when ratified by the legiſlatures of three fourths of the ſeveral
| ö States,


3;
States, or by conventions in three fourths thereof, as the one or the other mike of


ratification may be propoſed by the Congrels: provided, that no amendment which


may be made prior to the year one thouſand eight hundred and eight, ſhall in any
manner affect the firſt and fourth clauſes in the ninth ſection of the firſt article;


and that no State, without its conſent, ſhall be deprived of its equal ſuffrage in the
Senate. |


Akr. VI.—All debts contracted, and engagements entered into before the adoption


of this conſtitution, ſhall be as valid againſt the United States under this conſtitution,
as under the confederation.


This conftitution, and the laws of the United States Witch ſhall be made in pur-


Münte thereof; and all treaties made, or which ſhall be made, under the authority of


the United States, ſhall be the ſupreme law of the land ; and the judges in every State
ſhall be bound thereby, any thing in the conſtitution or laws of any State to the con-
trary notwithſtanding.

The Senators and Repreſentatives before mentioned, and the Members of the ſeveral
State Legiſlatures, and all Executive and Judicial Officers , both of the United States and
of the ſeveral States, ſhall be bound by oath or affirmation to ſupport this conſtitution;


but no religious teſt ſhall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public


truſt under the United States.


Arr. VIL—The ratification of the conventions öf nine States ſhall. be ſafh-
cient for the cftabliſhment of this conſtituion between the States ſo ratifying the


fame. 42


DONE in Convention, by the unanimous conſent of the States preſcnt, tbe ſeventeenth day of
| September, in the year of our Lord One Thouſand Seven Hundred and Eighty-ſeven, aud of


the Independence of the United States Y America the T' welftb, I. Ai uneſs Whereof, we have


| bereumo fubſcribed our names.


GEORGE WASHINGTON, Profun.
Signed a by all the Delegates zobich were preſent from twelve States.


Ae, WILLIAM JACKSON, ee.
Tn CO NYE NTIO N, Monday, September 17, 1787.


PRESENT,
The States of New n Maſſachuſetts, Connecticut, Mr. Heniltos Ga New York


New Jer ſey, Pennſylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Fi . North Carolina, South Carolind


and Georgia.


ResoLveD, That the preceding cen ve laid belire the United States in
Congreſs aſſembled, and that it is the opinion of this Convention, that it ſhould 8
wards be ſubmitted to a Convention of Delegates, choſen in each State by the people


thereof, under the recommendation of its legiſlature, for their aſſent and ratification;


and that each Convention aſſenting to, and ratifying the ſame, ſhould give notice
thereof to the United States in Congreſs aſſemblect.


Reſolved, That it is the opinion of this Convention, that as ſoon as the conventions |


of nine States ſhall have ratified this conſtitution, the United States in Congreſs aſſem


bled ſhould fix a day on which electors ſhould be appointed by the States Which
ſhall have ratified the ſame, and a day on which the — ſhould


for the Preſident, and the time and place for commencing proceedings under this Cof-


Ritution. That after ſuch publication, the electors ſhould be appointed, and | te


ſenators and repreſentatives elected: that the clectors ſhould meet on the day .


aſſemble to vote


Ky) Ts
9 4


..
5 y


_. THE UNIT RP STATES. =


for the election of the preſident, and ſhould tranſmit their votes certified, ſigned, ſeal-
ed, and directed, as. the conſtitution requires, to the Secret ary of the United States
in Congreſs aſſembled ; that the ſenators .and repreſentatives ſhould convene at the
time and place aſſigned; that the ſenators ſhould appoint a preſident of the ſenate,
for the ſole purpoſe of receiving, opening, and counting the votes for preſident ; and,
that after he ſhall be choſen, the Congreſs, together with the Preſident, ſhould, with-
out delay, proceed to execute this conftitution. e by
e y the unanimous order of the Convention, 1 5
7 GEORGE WASHINGTON, Preſident.
WILLIAM JACKSON, Secretary.


. In CONVENTION, September 17, 1787.
WE . no the honour to ſubmit to the confideration of the United States
in Congreſs aflembled, that conſtitution which has appeared to us the moſt ad-
wvideable.:. IE | 6 CIO,
he friends of our country have long ſeen and defired, that the power of making
War, peace, and treaties, that of levying money and regulating commerce, and the
_ correſpondent executive and judicial authorities, ſhould be fully and effectually veſted
in the general government of the union; but the impropriety of delegating ſuch ex-
tenſive truſt to one body of men is evident. Hence reſults the neceſſity of a different
om. CC ants 5
It is obviouſly impracticable, in the federal government of theſe States, to ſecure all
rights of independent ſovereignty to each, and yet provide for the intereſt and ſafety
of all. Individuals entering into ſociety muſt give up a ſhare of liberty to preferve
the reſt. The magnitude of the ſacrifice muſt depend as well on fituation and cir-
cumſtance, as on the object to be attained. It is at all times difficult to draw with
precifion the line between thoſe rights which muſt be ſurrendered, and thoſe which
may be reſerved; and on the np occaſion this difficulty was increaſed by a dif-
es among the ſeveral States as to their ſituation, extent, habits, and particular
intereſts. | 5 1 | 5 „ I
In all our deliberations on this ſubject, we kept ſteadily in our view, that which
appears to us the greateſt intereſt of every true American, the conſolidation of ou
union, in which is involved our proſperity, felicity,, ſafety, perhaps our national exiſt-
| ence. This important conſideration, ſeriouſly and deeply impreſſed on our minds,
led each ſtate in the convention to be leſs rigid on points of inferior magnitude, than
might have been otherwiſe expected; and thus the conſtitution, which we now pre-
ſent, is the reſult, of a ſpirit of amity, and of that mutual deference and on
which the peculiarity of our political fituation rendered indiſpenſable. SH
That it will meet the full and entire approbation of every State is not perhaps to be
expected: but each will doubtleſs conſider, that had her intereſts been alone conſult-
ed, the conſequences might haye been particularly diſagreeable or injurious to others:
that it is liable to as few exceptions as could et le have been expected, we hope
and believe: that it may promote the laſting welfare-of that country to dear to us all,


and ſecure her freedom and happineſs, is our moſt ardent wiſh. ©
With great reſpect, we have the honour to be, Sir, your Excelleney's moſt obe-


_ RF GRORGE WASHINGTON, Fre
41 By unanimaus order of the Convention. r
Tlis Excellency the Prefident of the e Rug e ee =


194 THE UNITED STATES.
The conventions of a number of the States having at the time of their adopting the conflitition er-
preſſed a defire, in order to prevent miſconſtruftion or abuſe of its powers, that further declaya-


tory and reſtrictive clauſes ſhould be added: and as extending the ground of public confidence i in
the government will beſt enſure the beneficent ends of its inflitution,


Reſolved by the Senate and Houſe of Repreſentatives of the United States of 3
in Congreſs aſſembled, two-thirds of both houſes concurring, That the following arti-
cles be Propoſed to the legiflatures of the ſeveral States, as amendments to the conſti-
tution of the United States, all or any of which articles, when ratified by three-fourths
of the ſaid legitlatures, to be valid to all mtents and purpoſes, as yu of the ſaid con-
ſtitution: viz.


Articles in addition io, and amendment of, the conſtitution of the United States of America, pro-
poſed by Congreſs, and ratified by the leg Natures of the ſeveral _— Panna to the f Hes
article of the original conſtitution.


Ar. I.—After the firſt enumeration required by the firſt article of the con UB
there ſhall be one repreſentative for every thirty thouſand, until the number ſhall
amount to one hundred, after which the proportion'thall be fo regulated by Congreſs,
that there ſhall be not leſs than one hundred repreſentatives, nor leſs than one repre-

ſentative for every forty thouſand perſons, until the number of repreſentatives fhall
amount to two hundred, after which the proportion ſhall be ſo regulated by Congreſs,
that there ſhall not be leſs than two hundred repreſentatives, nor more than one re-
preſentative for every fifty thouſand. perſons.

ART. IL.—Nd law varying the compenſation for the ferent of the fehlte al
repreſentatives ſhall take et tect, until an election of repreſentatives ſhall have in-
| ervened. 85
* ART. III. Congress ſhall "mike no law reſpecting an eſtabliſhment of religion, r
prohibiting the free exerciſe thereof; or. abridging the freedom of ſpeech, or of the
preſs; or, the ri right of people. peaceably to aſſemble, and to petition the N for
a redreſs of grievances. _

Axr. IV.—A well-regulated iilittz being neceſſary to the ſecurity b a free ſtats, the
right of the people to keep and bear arms ſhall not be infringed.
Ar. V. No foldier ſhall in time ol peace be quartered in any houſe Without

2 1 conſent of the owner, nor it time, of war, but in a manfier to be preſcribed by -

aw. A 85

Art. VI —The right of the" pebple to be Aire in | thei perſons, Road. papers,

and effects, againſt unreaſonable ſearches and ſeizures, ſhall not be violated; and no
warrants ſhall ifſue, but upon probable cauſe, ſupported by oath or affirmation, and
pa dts the Place to be ſearched, and the | perfons or things to be

ſeiz 5

Azz. VIL—No perſ perſon ſhall. be held to anſwer for a capital, or otherwiſe infamous

crime, unleſs on a ee or indictment of a grand jury, except in caſes ariſing

in the land or nav forces, or in the militia when in actual ſervice, in time of war or
public danger; nor ſhall any perſon be ſubject for the ſame offence to be twice put in

Jeopardy of life or limb; nor ſhall be compelled in any criminal caſe to be a witnels

againſt himſelf, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due proceſs o of

law ; nor ſhall private Property be taken for public ufe Vichdut juſt compenſation.

Ar. VIII. In all criminal proſecutions the accuſed ſhall enjoy the rigfit to a ſpeedy
aud public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and diſtrict wherein the crime 121
have been committed, whic trie ſhall have been W 5 by lay W. a


1 14 14304
3


A : ? ö . | '
l 1 * * j Fs, ; 0
— wd.- eg uz — i VO OR » —


* 4 2 RIA";
- - . r WES , — 9 = "ay o * 9 ER '2- " — N oO 5 4 4 Kh. „ +0 PROTO ; - MER THER an © 0
= Rt — 8 . . 8 en . RE Ts SN 3 1 Fe, =, A . to 7 * er *
n NEC * r 9 1 1 L 0 . a r Sy * K. e q
= l = = _ PI EISTIY + £2 FN; + 1 EY * * - 8 EI RS E ICT * 3 1 — e Na n x 4 :
\ TH —> - - 2532 : n N : s Tx . * 5 e 9 * 2 8 TINY ol nn SONS wh 0 Pe 9 q

x F _ 4 7 9 ory Ce. 44, = ANN SS 8 s - l * I'o8; * s * £ & 4 % i

DEF, 22 9 7 n : Ne Ps poet r * I 5 - t j * , .
a gr on RET SA 8 2 =} VILLE | : : a , 9 | :


THE UNITED STATES. 95.


40-be informed of the nature and cauſe of the accuſation; to be confronted with the


witneſſes againſt him; to have compulſory proceſs for obtaining witnefles in his favour,


and to have the aſſiſtance of counſel for his defence.  — +


Arr. IX.—lIn ſuits at common law, where the value in controverſy ſhall exceed


twenty dollars, the right of trial hy jury ſhall be preſerved, and no fact, tried by a


jury, ſhall be othervit
ing to the rules of the common law.


ſhall be otherwiſe re- examined in any court of the United States, than accord-


ARr. X.—Exceffive bail-ſhall not be required, nor exceſſive fines impoſed, nor cruel


and unuſual puniſhments inflicted. . | |


ART. XI.—The enumeration in the conſtitution, of certain rights, ſhall not hn n


ſtrued to deny or diſparage others retained by the people.


- 4
=»


ART. XII.— The powers not delegated to the United States by the Huſtitutien,
nor prohibited by it to the States, are reſerved to the States reſpectively, or to the
people. 4 0% | | .


The following States have ratified all the foregoing articles of amendment to the


conſtitution of the United States, viz. Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina,


New York, Virginia, -and Vermont. New Hampſhire, New. erſey, and Pennſylvania
reject the ſecond article; and Delaware rejects the firſt article. No official returns,


-* *


to our knowledge, have been made from the other States.


SOCIETY OF, THE CINCINNATI. | This ſociety was inſtituted immediately on the cloſe
of the war in 1783. At their firſt general meeting at Philadelphia, in May 1784, they
altered and amended the original inſtitution, and requced it to its preſent form. They
denominated. themſelyes * The Society of the Cincinnalh from the high veneration they
poſſeſſed for the character of that illuſtrious Roman, Lucius Quintius Cincinnatun.
The perſons who conſtitute this ſociety, and all the commiſſioned and brevet officers
of the army and navy of the United States, who ſerved three years, and who left the
ſervice with reputation; all officers who were in actual ſervice at the concluſion of the
war; all the principal ſtaff officers of the continental army; and the officers WhO
12 75 been deranged by the ſeveral reſolutions of Congreſs, upon the different reforms
of the , ĩð 1 $41 Cad Ine r „ ADE

There 5 alſo admitted into this ſociety, the late and preſent miniſters of his moſt


Chriſtian Majeſty to the United States; all the generals and colonels of regiments, and


legions of the land forces; all the admirals and captains of the navy, ranking as
colonels, who have co- operated with the armies of the United States in their exer-


| tions for liberty ; and ſuch other perſons as have been admitted by the reſpective State |


The motives which originally induced the officers of the American army to form
themſelves into a ſociety of friends, are ſummed up in a maſterly manner, in their
cucular letter.“ Having,” ſay they, © lived in the ſtricteſt habits of amity through

the various ſtages of a war, unparalleled in many of its circumſtances; having ſeen
the objects for which we have contended, happily attained ; in the moment of triumph
and ſeparation, when we were about to act the laſt pleaſing, melancholy ſcene in our
military drama—pleaſing, becauſe we were to leave our country poſſeſſed of inde+
Pendence and peace—melancholy, becauſe we were to part, perhaps never to mect
again; while every, breaſt was penetrated with feelings which can be more eafily'con-
ceived than deſcribed ; while every little act of tenderneſs recurred freſh to the recol-
ection, it was impoſſible not to wiſh our friendſhips ſhould be continued; it was
extremely natural to deſire they might 2 perpetuated by our poſterity, to the remoteſt
6 155 N 5 | C 2: ö | | "© | 85 àAgCs.


ry


7 n A „ eee W 1 1 * 8 5 ee l
br hs, PC . 0 N . 5 n * ARE. TE - ST ny 2
L 2 2 N HF 4 e ho. 4 ; f y 254 #4 * r l MPS. f "SR + r 9 * nne
C ; . d l 6 N 8


2 "v4, PR,


*
Ao 4

7 4

4 47 wy *


LI 4 1
- * 1
by 3 F
* A 1 0
reer e
N 7 F :
.-
p , Nur s 0 X ”
-- 4
2 4
= 9 — * ——


Oey


3


« 2 N 5 ef $428 << 5 g 1 ü Y 55 1 7 — pe 2 1 5 wy - q Gt
r c ³˙üꝛ ie Aline .
6 r 3 * . N 1 FF 16-4 od. 5 2 . * 4 aids, Re — SO OP 4 5 y


_ exported.


pp FS 3 | |
196 HRB UNITED STATES.
ages. With theſe impreſſions, and with ſuch ſentiments, we candidly confeſs we
ligned the inflitution. Mie know our motives were irreproachable.
They reſt their inſtitution upon the two great pillars of Fxrznpsnte and ChHanrrx.
Their benevolent intentions are, to diffuſe comfort and ſupport to any of their unfor-
tunate companions who have ſeen better days, and have merited a milder fate ; to wipe


the tear from the eye of the widow, who muſt have been conſigned, with her helpleſs


infants, to indigence and wretchednets, but for this charitable inftitution ; to ſuccour
the ſatherleſs; to reſcue the female orphan from deſtruction ; and to enable the ſon to
emulate the virtucs of the father. Let us then,” they conclude, © proſecute with
ardor what we have inſtituted in fincerity ; let Heaven and our own conſciences


approve our conduct; let our actions be our beſt comment on our words; and let us.
leave a leflon to poſterity, THAT THE GLORY OF SOLDIERS CANNOT. BE COMPLETED,


WITHOUT ACTING WELL THE PART OF C{TIZENS.”


The fociety have an order, (v1z.) a Bald Eagle of gold, bearing on its breaſt the


_ emblems deſcribed as follows


The principal figure is CixcinnaTrs ; three fenators preſenting him with a ſword
and other military enſigns: on a field in the back ground, his wife ſtanding at the door
of their cottage ; near it a plough and other inſtruments of hufbandry. Round the
whole, omnia reliquit ſervare rempublicam. On the reverſe, the fun riſing, a city with
open gates, and veſſels entering the port; tame crowning Cincinnatus with a wreath,


infcribed, virtutis premium. Below, hands joining, ſupporting a heart; with the
motto, eo perpetua. Round the whole, ſoctetas Cincinnatoram, inſtituta, A. D. 1783.


 A6RICULTURE, COMMERCE, AND MANnuracTUuREs. | The three important objects
of attention in the United States are agriculture, commerce, and manufactures. The
richneſs of the foil, which amply rewards the induftrious hufbandman; the tempe-
rature of the climate, which admits of ſteady labour; the cheapneſs of land, which
tempts the foreigner from his native home, lead us to fix on agrieulture as the preſent


great leading intereſt of this country. This farniſhes outward cargoes not only for all


our own ſhips, but for thoſe alſo which foreign nations ſend to our ports; or in other
words, it pays for all our importations ; it ſapplies a great part of the clothing of the


inhabitants, and foed for them and their cattle. What is conſumed at home,


including the materials for manufacturing, is four or five times the value of what is

The number of people employed in agriculture, is at leaſt three parts in four of the
inhabitants of the United States; ſome ſay more. It follows of courſe that they form
the body of the militia, who are the bulwurk of the nation. The value of their pro-
perty occupied by agriculture, is many times greater than the property employed in
every other way. The ſettlement of waſte lands, the fubdiviſion of farms, and the
numerous improvements in huſbandry, annually increaſe the pre-eminence of the ag.


cultural intereſt. The reſources we derive from it, are at al} times certain and indiſ-


penſably neceſſary: beſides, the rural life promotes health, by its active nature; and
morality, by keeping people from the luxuries and vices of the populous towns: In |
ſhort, agriculture is the ſpring of our commerce, and the parent of our mannfacturss.
The vaſt extent of ſea-coaſt, which ſpreads before theſe confederated States; the
number of excellent harbours and ſea-port towns; the numerous creeks and immenſe
bays, which indent the coaſt; and the rivers, lakes, and canals, which peninſulste
the whole country; added to its agricultural advantages and improvements, give this
part of the world ſuperior advantages for trade, Our commeree, including our m_


THE UNITED STATES. 199
_— imports, ſhipping, manufactures, and fiſheries, may properly be conſidered as forming
= one intereſt. This has been conſidered as the great object, and the moſt important
SS i;ntereft of the New England States. |
Since commerce has ever been conſidered as the handmaid of agriculture, particularly
in this country, where the agricultural intereſt fo greatly predominates ; and fince
neither can flouriſh without the other, policy and intereſt point out the neceſſity of
ſuch a ſyſtem of commercial and agricultural regulations, as will originate and effec-
tually preferve a proper connection and balance between them. Es e
The conſumption of fiſh, oil, whale-bone, and other articles obtained through the
fiſheries, in the towns and counties that are convenient for navigation, has become
much greater than is generally ſuppoſed. It is computed that no leſs than five thou-
ſand barrels of mackarel, ſalmon and pickled codfiſh are vended annually in the city of
Philadelphia: add to them the dried fiſh, oil, ſpermaceti candles, whale-bone, &c.
and it will be found that a little fleet of ſloops and ſchooners are employed in the
buſineſs. „ 8 SOPs INS
The demand for the forementioned articles is proportionably great in the other parts
of the union, (eſpecially in Boſton and the large commercial towns that he along the
coaſt north-eaſtward, which enter largely into the fiſhing trade) and the veſſels em-
ployed in tranſporting them proportionably numerous. The increaſe of our towns and
& manufactures will increaſe the demand for theſe articles, and of courſe the number of
= coaſting veſſels. In the preſent ſtate of our navigation, we can be in no doubt of
procuring theſe ſupplies by means of our own veſſels: This will afford encouragement
to the buſineſs of ſhip-building, and increaſe the number of our ſeamen, who muſt
_ hereafter form an important part of the defence of our country. Add to theſe, our
_ Proſpects from the fur trade of Canada. The vaſt ſettlements which are making at
Pittſburg, Geneſſe, and in other parts in the neighbourhood of Canada; the advan-
tages of our inland navigation, by means of the lakes, the northern branches of the
Ohio, the Patomak, the Suſquehannah and the Hudſon, with many other circum-
| ſtances depending not only on the fituation, but likewiſe on the climate, proximity,
&c. muſt, in a few years, put a large ſhare of this fur trade into our hands, and pro-
cure us, at leaft, our proportionable ſhare of the large profits thence ariſing, which
Canada, ſince the year 1763, has enjoyed almoſt Erclufiech Theſe advantages,
however, are ſtill but in proſpect; and Raſt ernin ſo until the Britiſh, agreeably to
treaty, ſhall have evacuated the forts at Niagara, the large ſettlements of the Heights,
and that of Michillimakinak. Although the Britiſh, by the treaty of peace, are to
enjoy with us the portages of the navigation of the lakes, yet, ſhould a diſpute ae, it
will not be convenient for them to contend with us; for the northern and north-
eaitcrn parts of the contitient, included in the Britiſh limits, are much colder, more
mountainous and poorer than the United States, and have no rivers, but ſuch as are
fall of rapids and falls; conſequently, this trade cannot be carried on by the Canadians
with the ſame facility nor advantage as by us. Still they will have left the excluſive
night to the communication from Montreal with the High. lande through the large
mer of the Ottawas, which flows into the river St. Lawrence at the lake of the Two
I Mountains, nine miles from that city; but its rapids and falls will render this way,
if not mpracticable, at leaſt always very expenſive and precarious. ©
'The quantity of fur exporteÞ ftom the northern parts of America to Great Britain,
2 amounted yearly to about forty one thoufand pounds ſterling, eſtimated from the
freight during the years 1768, 1769, and 1770. The exports of buck-tkins amounted
5 upwards o thirty three thouſand pounds. The ſales of fur, which take place in
ah: London


198 THE UNITED STATES.


London every ſpring, produced in 1782, four thouſand ſeven hundred pounds. It was
a little increated in 1 783, and 1 in 1784, it exceeded two hundred and forty five thou-
ſand pounds. All this fur is paid for by Englith manufacturers; and a fourth part of
it is worked in England, where its worth is "doubled This valuable trade, winch 1s


carried on through Quebec, will a great, part of it fall into our hands, as ſoon as the


fortifications, which the Britiſh poſſeſs in our northern territories, ſhall be reſtored to
us. To this conſideration, rather than to the pretended compaſſion for the Royalifis,
may be attributed the delay of that reſtitution. The period when this reſtitution muſt
be made, the Britiſh anticipate with ſorrow. Such are tome. of the commercial
| reſources and proſpects of this country.

But for various reaſons, the advantages for trade which nature has fo Pen given
us, have never, till ſince the eſtabliſhment of the preſent government, been properly
improved. Before the revolution, Great Britain claimed an excluſive right to the trade


of her American colonies. This right, which ſhe inflexibly maintained, enabled her to
fix her own pr ICE, as well on the articles which ſhe 3 from us, as 1 3


r. *


carriers, that was e e too e 2 to be withftood, to te rere URI FL


and freights. Although we will not even hazard'a.can jecture how much Great Britain.
enriched herſelf by this excluſive trade with her 3 yet this we may ſay, that by
denying us the privilege of carrying our produce to foreign markets, ſhe deprived us of
the opportunity of realizing, in their full extent, the advantages for trade which We
has given us.


The late war; which brou ght about our ſeparation from Great Britain, threw our |


9 affairs into great confuſion. T he powers of the old confederation were


unequal to the complete execution of any meaſures, calculated effectually to recover


them from their deranged ſituation. Through want of power in the old Congreſs to
collect a revenue for the diſcharge of ur foreign and domeſtic debt, our credit was
deſtroyed, and trade of conſequence, greatly embaraſſed. Each State, i in her dee
regulations of trade, regarded her own intereſt, while that of the union was neglecte

And © different were the intereſts of the ſeveral States, that their laws reſpecting


trade often claſhed with each other, and were, productive of unhappy conſequences.


The large commercial States had it in thein power to oppreſs their neighbours ; and in
ſome inſtances this power was directly, or indiręctly exerciſed. Theſe impolitic and.


unjuſtifiable regulations, formed on the impreſſion of the moment, and proceeding
from no uniform or permanent principles, excited unhappy jealouſies between the
claſhing States, and occaſioned frequent, ſtagnations in their trade, and in ſome
inſtances, a ſecrecy in their commercial , policy. But the wiſe meaſures which have
been adopted by Congreſs, under our preſent efficient government, have extricated us


almoſt entirely from theſe embarraſſments, and put a new and pleaſing face upon our
public affairs, Inveſted with the adequate powers, Congreſs. have formed a ſyſtem of
commercial regulations, which enable us to meet the oppoſers of our trade upon their


own ground ; a ſyſtem which has placed our commerce on a reſpectable, uniform, and
intelligible footing, adapted to, promote the general intereſts 5 the union „ with the


ſmalleſt injury to the individual States.


The following tables, taken from authenticated copics, will give the beſt idea of the


preſent ſtate of commerce in the United Malen. 1


ABSTRACT


he he X . N 4 þ ; 3 " has . LD 4 o & a b r EL 4 RXV \ f * 45 th * ir 1 Y wo, l _
8 . 3 N 5 wa 7 R 415 R N yy * N 3 e 9 4 ag ES oe ND 88. „ 8 93 8 o N FV EY SW] YT roar Ag '-- 24, OE t
ABSTRACT of D EE TIY —
— LIC O UTIFES ariſing on G00 |
- WI: |


S, WAREsS, and MERCHANDISE. Imbörted into: thi ! wc. ©... =


r WE TOUT FOI GO SY


467 a 0 58 3 c
: SELVIS dux N en © ar N = 7 n Suipus pur 0641 19400 YT 243 uo Fupuaume?
4 } * 12 Ur l e R 2 LUO > Pra u 30


LOVMLSAY


O 72 "ITY — n 1
S . erer ro eee e | of 1 8
— Te 8284 EL <6 8 91 T7 7709 . „ bois sf
vB 7280˙8 194 "$0191 2g 866 Fog a — Yeo —. [LL 98611077 97272 2 3 = Fig - 1239. T, —
1 2 81 O08 42g 29 60 5" e = 96 *t+ OZ *£E/ — 2 — — 4 by
112 188% [69 *299%tr 2 *gi5'- | 64 *gft 5 Sz | LL 08 89 » e 5838 82 ba EY 1000 24
ol *goF*z7 6 218 f gi ore +£E bir 2 2 1. 50888 fi. 961 [fog 797 0 77x ̃ĩ⅛˙ K
| boi 2 51 FY oF 11 · 24. | 0% [10g (LEFT 124 "20597 |» eu
481 40 58 812•81 a LL *gf9 * [og et 9 25 10425 u
. STD 92 *LSE gb »F14 „ | L4-+LES- [$62 5 25 dt 196 news 9 10% |- > - 25 „
| 1 „ 1. e 98 Ce K |.
VWWWWCC＋CWC 05 431 5 . 1 . bust —
i - : 7 "A | | — | 5 S 16% *£76*%E * 15 dere FOR 22 3 4D
95 ·948⁵ 1 169 | og 51 . * „„ ee ee 9 280 |- - uurAlA uus,
IL 28675 427 — 8 | 99 181 r s „ af 787 9 8 n __ 7 *£129% |= - 2
ELE *OF 1 14. 08 | | +þ + a - F. 28 *+9 | 28 816 ol 8 | + 960 28 ; 771 bs 4 ye Leo — — AOX N
.. 9 *g7 81 ˙88 Sg *g&& 18 gy geg |. 24 *Egitr (£9 8101
1 *>$T11 LC 86 T2 85 16 75 bop Fol 147. ＋ "Ong: 82 *9f9 gi · Lor % tg 4 Kt 5 —moihauuog
; *£69 | * 9887 281 his <<] 1 e 14 2 67 | 95. 491⁰² 8 *£904%gÞ 780 72 !˙5 9 2 2 © 6 - - pury[ Spo
of EE! [99756 ne n %% 4956 542 9 d CVVT 2 0 ants
2 — 7 1. 1597 . 10 700 *59256 5 — r hots dd! d
1 XIVIIIꝗ IVAA % 3 S TAAAs14 8241 | ”
A Tres ng | vag Tan. | 34 v5 wed. 512862 = 2
7 £ | * Big f 1 8 pol * r aa 8A LV ILS
— | ; 14wazdo 0 O 010 *
. anvrg aan oy Auf N ray jo Ee a . eee eee :
* UH. 8210
- 1 . —.— 1 A199, usa TVUINAD
12 . CF 6 OY — — = 7 4
. „1 So ena r
8 "ECO on: Fo O - cM _— | | | Rane 002 bee 9560 s. 0g
2 = v7 290 £ 19 *#t+651 | 29 TIT (7, 101 9 degor re rr e  4quounaedag Aurel L J
5 © —_— 7 2 51 "Li 00 1 79 0% 977 45 n 50 ESL 120.
2 b. golte⸗ n nn 65 0% | lg e. e
T2 kg eee 66 · | 99 * 15 175 . 190 TL, of 88⁵1 46 — . 28 ET 16 fs 8 ruſſoaro y3nog
„ eee 5 2 6 97 1 288 199 e 98-0811 TAS Cu 7 1739079 - _ EUtOTEY du
72 5 " 98 *£g2% 91 707 LP ＋ 29 92211 1 86 *OF2<6££ 5 Fa = ö 2 1 5 0 „Logs“ ot Rg 3 N
* * 406. : J. | O *gOL'Þ * 7
E 68 *596%LoL. — BY 8 Ge = 4: 4248 71 699.51 (9 go | 90.45 ; 57 Skolgek [: puri ie
79980849 n)) , ĩ⸗ 980 . ene
791 1284879 ++ 4¹¹ eb. or 1 55 by 85 Ks en Jy . | 5 25 * — enuea4juuag
Fes. 15887901 761 219 „ | + 62 88875 $ 8 85809 - ra 598491 59 rοο e f Z £5 » b N Ac fle! MIN.
£25 *S01%or. | 18 g 01 688 S 75 519211 [ To t99g%s 6 20% - 9 2 NON ma
BH | IXL i *LoLl*ott Z00 88281 N 8 081 IT ) bg <£SGeCu 5 686811 89 81 *1 'ELE 906⁵¹ - {8 2 2 ec 4 | | by mofhsuuo)
| Hz 000% 89118 "46 51 T 9 5595 5 oy Denen 72 N £46 82801 7 {+ 61 77 |=. = puzy] 2poyy
WES | "207 *FJ 0 4 . - & « 18 PR % 3 369 '010%G68 6 8 +Þz 3 = og? | = gents 1k 4.
# 2 T 1) 700 |: ogy. 104 1 85 ; 9 55 + 14 6 , N
E 9 4. "4p 13% PA”. Te % 0 7e ene e i nN
% 40 DP | e DEA - bi ebe 5 = FR, — = —
. yJunow'y N -"SRIUNOY S q, N 2 | *Sarzncq Jo us 3 ut uPIlLaWwy ur | - «ann 5 * | by
„ is webe e 3 STLVIS
BE 5 [ O1 40 uOl pP | OI Jo zan 5 *


lib 3 naasof
761
ww Pay ©2f0 5 DN canTRaY yay AY
TY


F
* 9


|
ABSTRACT


51895784457 I 5
— — : 911 Tg 5 | 1
Ol 6164s | = * Fel begof 2 10 oh #
* 20555 £+5 *610*L "| 680514 291 86.7742 a Re _—
££ <g91+%06 16545692 9 oL*Þ1 | £E-gigt 1650 95 oof 5 by # 8118 r182099
be 9019 Erz 669% (29 be 3." 05 59 8˙ο 25 08 ler dl 89 Ser | e | :7 eutJoXry y3nog
| Ly '£Lg*t 218 | r or -r£5 8117 * 1 S2 46 e +6 FUJS3EJ YLI0NE.
2 +6 8 84 98 56705 11 2% e freg 41 £81625 | - [5 gh. .16 1
—_— bats |6 Log 3 5.6 er- cs | Gu ge 12. . 61 e
05 016¹⁵ 98 28 151 go ⁊ 95 1 + — gCott a. *g29%9Þ | 3 0 HA. SOS 1 3 4 i
42 884 Hl 8 ws 8 Oe 77. Lo: 106 7441 ig gy opl gy | = & Gps E —_— |
4 1 | 0 . a W ; * | — ; RE | i | :
HK 8 049 ˙1 : . 14 *gFo'zr r 181% | £1 —. . 78 by FOE E „„ ' [. - 5 | 1n01uuey
S 22. TC. 1 „ 80 870 x 1th | 4
„51 1ISANO _ 8 91 . f * X noeh
AQ NOIZ8OJ] 1 | * A Es hi | ha oerSG-no g 91719} 225012 ae Alt”
1 G | WEE. SETTER .
2 . : | 1 dT, | dNV NANA ö X AVXN INA 3 go”.
1 1 3 2 | SYLVIS
— — 81 | / 5
4 84 0148 *128*z|05 4s 8 * — — 5 5
— 87 601 18 878 —— 89 ELlz *C+665z 5 06g c be 3 - : 5 8 |
A 09 *10£*%41 6 do 1 1 5 | 96 121 og rr a 5755. 1230.1, ee
2 : BY E „ 2 E 4 89 „Fi [11 * 9% 18 [£5 201 |
* 1 ED | vc 05 25 E . 9 | 5rg rb -olg't g ——_—
— * = o5 19 - a 0 , :: 0 | 2 | 2 0 ; 5 . > ynog
2 5 | $ 5 7 89 b Y 92 989 {+ ha 3 30 — 05 25 | 9 | ufo quod
” | | 15 ' — [1 ho” [ % 32 | *Lg1 } 21 1 685 05 182 f god I : 4 punkte
4 a: - 7 ; 1 | 21 | . 1 2 | | | GS | * | 2H ue] *
1111 2 far * %% Heist ctse * _—_ e
, WS | ef; * 5 Ca. 14 bite SES "> 8 5 uag ED
r <> Be ** _ w 1 dor 3 5 IN Fo *£vs | » A 2880
5 - | 5 3 | © 118 *O00 8 E | | 66 N 65 | 1
seg 7 AFP : 8 = 6g 8 r „„
* | — ph | 47 —— — 2 GH e r
a AVO ogg b ie,, —


200


babe 4 8d 4


ASHES, Pot
Aſhes, Pearl —
Apples — -
Bricks oY -
Boats = - —

Bellows for ſmiths — -
Beer, Ale, and Porter -
Ditto, bottled - —

Boots . - —

Boot · legs -
Brimſtone 7 -
Blacking or Lampblack =
n -
_ Cider - — — -

Ditto bottled — —

Chalk w FED
Cotton * — —
Coffee —- - —

Cocoa 5 5

Chocolate 5 «
Candles, Myrtle Wax —

|  Tallow - —

Cables and Cordage —
__— _  - —

wn ' - 7s

Sheet —

1 Manufactured

Cale 1
Craneberries DS -
no. Fa &

Corn-fans 5


Canes and Walking ficke
Cotton and Wool-cards


CaARRIACGEs.
Conphes. Chariots, Phactons, &c.
Waggons and Carts | —
Duck American 8 ans
Ruſſia "> M
Dnues and Mepicines..
8 Salts «


Pink, China and Snake Root, Ke.
Saſſafras Bark —


Saſſafras Wood or Root -


D uantity.


THE UNITED STATES.


3,083.74 tons
3,197.52 ditto
12,332 - barrels
737,64 number
99
=
44,526 gallons
719 dozens
482 pairs
17 ditto
3,280 pounds
8,518 citto
18 buſhels
1,604 barrels
310 dozens
CCC
189,316 pounds
962,977 ditto
23, 322 ditto
497 boxes
348 ditto
185 ditto
2,745 ditto
3,333 per 11alb.
40 dito
216 ditto
296 ditto
1,480 pounds
3,780 buſhels
720 ditto
300 groſs
1 iber
598 ditto
25 dozens
85 number
25 Ccitto
478 bolts
235 ditto
1,580 pounds
14, 900 ditto
344 tons
341 ditto
Carried forward


4 4-43-74 2 WEE “ Fen = SEE q 3.4. 0-0-0


„


251


ABSTRACT of Goops, Warns, and Muzcuaornn, exported from the United States,
from the 1 ft of October, 1790, to the goth of September, 179m.


SPECIES or MERCHAN DISE EXPORTED.


Valze.
Dollars 308,362


431,676
12,352


2,582


2,970
120


8,905.


1,438
2,892
34
98


2,850
9


20


2,541
r
180


5 47,329


144, 446.


55


832. 20
23.832


2,088
1,665


13,725


27,264
300
4,320


77992


493.


33


785
360
45


16
153


2,350


12, 300
1,280


4, 7 80
2,350


158


3,000


390


685


1,059, 006.


28


202 THE UNITED STATES.


83 aud STONE WARE.


Stane -

Yellow or Queen' 8 —

Flaxſced __ 8

Flax R - —

Feathers - - -

Fhnts = = - —
Franks of Veſſels -

„  Snows © - -

| Boats —

Houſes ee


Windows and Doors -
FURNITURE HovsE.


Tables 5 —
Bedſteads — =
Detks = . -
Bureaus - — —
Sophas and Settees —
Clocks: = —
Clock caſes = | —
Cheſts WE LIM
_ Chairs, Windſor - - {ah
Chairs, Ruſh  - —
. FISHERIES.
_ Fiſh dried Vf.
Fiſh pickled . Is
Oil, Whale 125 — —
Oil, Spermaceti =
Cans ditto hs
Whalebone os —
Genſang — _—
Grindſtones — -
Glaſs Ware = -
Ditts for Windows 2
' GROCERIES.
m_ Caſſia and Cinnamon —
Cloves -- WA -
Pimento * 4
8
Brown Sugar - -
Loaf Sugar
Other Sugars - =
Nins ® 1
__ GRAIN and Poulsk.
Wheat - 2 4
Rye — = .
Barley Dy” Is
Indian Corn . >
Oats i - ns 8
Buck Wheat 5
Peas and Beans 8 -
Horns and Horntips —
Hides, raw: - -- 8


55

157
58,492
18,000
900


40, 00


1


40


29,208


2
21


92

1,778
900
141,701


492


737:304


1,157


400


1,018,339


30,737


35
1,713, 241


116,634


14,499
165,273
119,776


Brought forward, dollars 1,05 +666. 28


dozens 100
crates © 1,884 1
caſks 119 7 les: 33 5
pounds TO 1,488 =:
_ ditto — 420 :
number - | 200 8
25 Ny . 4OO 1
„„ 300 =.
- 2 97750 |
4 „ 46
< Ig 750 *
Ty . 180 ©:
e ” 1,560 Mb
5 24
8 834
— — 640
— | — | 90
— — 1
>”. 25 55134
- - FP e |
quin. per r121b., 9 <4 a. 50
Dales „
gallons — 89, 464. 60
5 8 53,838
boxes > 5 54,720 | 5
pounds — 24,965. 80
ditto 1 7,682. 80
number * .
crates - 84 -
boxes 5 920
pounds J
ditto 5 * 15138
ditto 5 22 07 2
ditto - 246
ditto — 55,864. 32
ditto „„ 2231.33
ditto - | 132
ditto - 64
buſhels. — 1,018,339
ditto 5 19,470. 61
ditto Le 3533
"amo... - 856,620. 50
ditto 23,326.80
ditto - 4,784.67
ditto 2 123,954 75
number 1,348
A 1,408
Carried forward — 4,857,007: 37


THE UNITED STATES.


N forward, 2 4,8 57,667. 32

435 |

1,740
650

1,544

2,006


IRON WROUGHT.


o —
Drawing Knives
Scythes —
Locks and Bolts —
Shovels 5
Skimmers and Ladles
Anchors —
Grapnals —
Muſkets —
Cutlaſſes —


Knives and Forks -


Cannon


L Cheſts of Carpenters Tools


IRON CASTINGS.


Waggon Boxes -
Pots, Kettles, and RT Caſtings


Swivels — —
Shot for Cannon —
Iron, the ton |
Pig — —
Bar — —
Nail Rods «© —
Hoops — —
Indigo (ſee note a.) -
Leather, tanned and areſſed —
Line — —
Lap, Sheet — -
Pig ph
Shot 3 — —
ty Nos LIVE Srock.
V
Horſes 3 =
Mules - 5 15
Sheep * - 8
= OS 5 5
Hogs = > in
: TROY . =
. or dry Goods, foreign
Molaſſes 7 ” 285 benen
Mltllſtones a 5
Muſtard R i
Madder 8 i
Nails 5 5 5
Negro Slaves - 3
Dd 2


4/408
497,720
5,424
1,320
45
162
6,473


4,627

6,975
444

19,377


4


| 16,803
10,217


1,439
2 2,]2 L


2


710
1,034
130,293


24


203


1,305
gallons - 1,044 .
pounds - 200
ditto — 103
tons - 25,075
number . 979
Es - 99. 96
"" ” +
- - 48
— 600
- „ 130. 50
pair - 50
number - 5,300
Ko , 244
= — 809
— - 144
1 5 — — 1
2 200
pairs — 83
number 600
— - 1,110
— - 24.
; — - 150
tons 108,647. 50
ditto - 27,900
ditto — 800
ditto 5 1,980
Ibs. and ſundry caſks 579,234
pounds - 1,356
buſhels - 198.
ſheets - 1,650
tons = 1,648
pounds - 388. 38
number — 84,442. 67
- 279, 00
7 11 E787 00
- =..." 1
- - Sc}
- — 435368. 10
dozens - 15,325. 50
packages, eſtimated at 120,000
gallons A 38 !' > Of," » BA
number - | 200.
pounds - 390
ditto - 258. 50
ditto — 19,543. 95
number 3,808
Carried forward


- 6,217,330. 48


204 THE UNITED STATES.


Brought forward, dols. 6,217,330. 48 Z
Nankeens . — — 7,070 pieces — 10, 605 3
| Nuts — a 52S 1,240 buſhels 5 8 1,240 0
" Nav Stores. (ſee note A.) 3 FN 5
2 „„ 5 . 3,818 barrels 6,68 1. 50 2
. Tut = 27. - 51,044 ditto 76,566
3 "Rn a 229 ditto 570 9
* Turpentine - 53,107 ditto 116,214 ;
. Fpirits of Turpentine 1,172 gallons 586 :
11 Oi Linfeed - 90 ditto 45 -
IE Porcelain or China Ware boxes 1 Mi
4 Powder, Gun - 25,854 pounds 1,405. 60 Fs
a Powder, Hair - 1,270 ditto 319 44
4 Pomatum - 45 ditto 22.50 .
7 Paints A A 1,529 ditto 304 8
Tf Pri ating Preſſes — 4 number 200 >
Plaiſter of Paris „ 4 tons 32 5
Psovlsloxs. „„ I Pe. f
Rice (ſee note A.) - 93,329 tierces 1,136,599. 50 8
Flour 5 5 119,681 barrels 3,408,245. 50 .
Ship Stuff - 6,484 ditto 12,968 :
Rye Meal - 24, 002 ditto 60, 155 .
Indian Meal — 70,339 ditto 1 40,78 2
Buckwheat Meal 422 ditto 1,603. 60 5
Oat Meal - 6 ditto 16 af
Bread = - 100,279 ditto 250,697. 50 22
Becf © - . 62,371 ditto 374,226 8
R - 26,635 ditto 266,350
Crackers - - 15,346 kegs 6,138.40
Hams and Bacon 295,047 pounds 26,590. 23
Veniſon and Mutton Hams 600 ditto 10 —
Chee — 120,901 ditto 8,463. 7
Lard - - 522,715 ditto 41,817.20
Butter . 16,670 firkins 91,0685
Sauſages - - 250 pounds 25
Freſh Beef * | 62,209 ditto | 3,690. 7 .
Freſh Pork - 29,334 ditto 1,760. 4
Carcaſes of Mutton 561 number 2,80;
Neats Tongues = 160 harrels 1,200
| Oyſters Pickled - 1,228 kegs 2,456
Potatoes = - 22,203 buſhels 6,505. 75
Onions - 42,420 ditto "1,010 -
Other Vegetables - ſundries — 1,
Reeds — — 15,450 — oY 50
SyiRIIsõ.
Rum, American —— 513,234 gallons 2053, 293. 60
Rum, Weſt India © - 4,742 ditto 3,793- 60
Brandy - 158 ditto 158
Brandy, * . 753 ditto _
Gin - 10,252 ditto 8,201. 60
Ditto — — 3,817 caſes 1 5,268
Ditto — — 35039 jugs 509. 15
Cordials - - 69 caſes 207 _
Carried forwars 12,534,474 68


Bridles


Soap
Sago
Starch
Snuff
8


Silk, Raw


Saddles, Men's


Silver, Old


Salt


. Eſſence of


Garden
Muſtard
Hay
Cotton


 Norocco


Calf in Hair


Deer and Mooſe


Seals


THE UNITED STATES.


SADLERY.


$x8ps.


SkIxs 4 Fors.


a _


Bear, Wolf, and Tyger


Otter


Deer Skins


a 99


Skins and Furs unknown


Tallow


Twine ©


Towcloth


Tin


Ditto manufactured
Tras—Bohea 1
Souchong


Green
Hyſon


Vi negar
Varniſh


Ma *


Other Wines


Bottled


Toys for Children


\
_


Wax, Bees


Myrtle
Whips


= Tobacco [ſee note wi
Ditto manufactured
b | Types


| 1 1 . -


Wines.


His we cots


.


Coach and other Carriage Harneſs
Waggon and Cart Geers
Shoes, Mens and Womens


„


%%% ͤ ᷣͤ ß f


a % 1 U G TI ED


414
402


74
5


7,46


09 Þ
2,382


160


Y 55689


1,375


153
WD
4,208


94


1,060
660


60
109


132


101,272


"$1,122


317,95
191


1,850


1122


_
172


492


.
2,235 A


2,248


76,466


"003336
6


224,538
2,272


146


205


Brought forward 12,534,474. 68


number - 4,968
es , 4.50
ſets - 1,740
_s . | 50
pairs - 6,341. 40
boxes - 2,764
pounds - 382. 82
ditto — 90. 60
ditto — 3,137. 80
bundles — 77333. 33
pounds 8 425. 34
ounces - 103
buſhels — 1,% 2
cCaſes — "GTP:
pounds - 1,060
35 88
33 5 8
buſhels =. 104. 99
number of - 264
ditto 321. 60
ditto — 366
ditto 13,360
ditto — $6.09:
ditto - 166. 67
ounds 24,555- 59
_ caſks and packets 132,0
hogſheads 3,469,448
pounds - 12,168. 60
boxes - "god. -
pounds - 28,547.35
Per 11210. - = 441. 8&
yards - 1,233
dozens — 230 -
boxes - 120
dozens - 80
cheſts - 1,750
| ditto _ 24,000 |
ditto - 5,340
ditto - 145,323. 75
gallons 562
ditto — 20
ditto - 99,405. 80
ditto - 24,2 52 8
dozens . - 42
pounds — 53,889. 12
ditto 272. 64
number — 26


Carried forward I 6,602,42 53. 62


mY


206 THE UNITED STATES.
Brought forwars, dols. 16,602,425, 62
Woop. |
Staves Pe Heading — 29,061,590 number = 360, 663
Shingles — — 74,205,976 - - 133,570
Shook Caſks - — 43,032 - - 29,422. 40
Caſks — — 297 - 297
Laths: — - 25,500 - — 20. 40
Hoops — — 474 185 - 14,221. 55
Hoop-poles — — 3,422 . - ; 27. 60
—_— , 495 5 - 3.6
Bow ſprits — - 42 - — 420
Booms — 74 - - 148-
Spars - - 4,993 8 8 7,474. 50
Hand Spikes 36,714 — - 1,529 75
Pumps - - — 9 - - 1260
Boxes and Brakes - 56 - 14
Blocks — 75, 40 - 2,000
Oars — — 28,456 5,691. 20
Oar Rafters - 13,080 — - 2,616
Trunnels — 45, 05 137.71
Cedar and Oak Knees - 1,067 - - 746. 90
Breaſt Hooks — 50 — - 100 by
Carlings = - 13 43
Anchor Stocks — 809 — — 404. 50
Cedar Poſts — JW 297. 50
Oak Boards and Plank - 963, 822 feet — 9,638. 22
Pine Boards and Plank 27,288,928 ditto e 223.35 56
Other Boards and Flank - 3,463,673 ditto — - 24,0 30. 73
N ” -237,496 ditto -" 87. 48
Oak, Pine, &c. — 2, 180, 137 ditto — 213,801. 37
2 Ditto, ditto — 4% tons: — 41,325
> TMahogany - > 0 ns .
Lignum Vitæ — 1, 180 per 112lb.. - 354
Logwood and Nicaragua 1053 ditto - 105. 50
| Mahogany, Logwood, &c. 3,251 pieces - 2,879. 86
( 75 38,680 ditto 5 18, ,000
1 Cords of Oak, Pine, Hickory, & &. 499 cords - 748. 50
Ditto of Oak Bark 57 ditto - I
Oak Bark, Ground 3 1,040 hhds. - 6,240
- Maſt Hoops - 148 dozens. - 111
Axe Helves - 149 ditto - 74.50
Truſs Hoops - 15 fets 2 37.50
 Yokes and Bowes for Oxen 197 ditto: - 295. 59
Lock Stocks - . 4, ooo number - „
Worm Tubs - 5 6 ditto — 30
Wheel Barrows | 6 ditto - 9. 60 |
Waggon and Cart Wheels 25 pairs - goo: Þ
Spokes and Fellies — | 12,972 number = 1 5621. 50 |
Spinning Wheels - 17 ditto - Ws, 1 08
Tabs, Pails, &c. + # $746 WR 34 dozens - 150
Bowls Diſhes, Hatten, &e. 170 ditto - 34
Total dollars, 17, 7717550 45


(A.) Returns for wo quarters from Charleſton, and from ſeveral ſmall ports, are deficient,


nr UNITED STATE 07


S8UM MART OF EXPORTS. |
{ SUMMARY of the VALVE and DesTINATION of the ExeorTs of the UnivnD States
neces agrecably to the foregoing abſtratt.


5 1 | Dols. Cts.
Jo the dominions of Ruſſia " - : 8 3,570
To the dominions of Sweden - 5 5 - - 21,866. 2
To the dominions of Denmark - „„ — - 299273. $3-
To the dominions of the United Netherlands — Wo 1,634,825. 6
To the dominions of Great Britain - HD 8 7,953,418. 21
To the Imperial ports of the Auſtrian Netherlands and Germany 362,010. 21
To Hamburg, Bremen, and other Hanſe towns - =_ 64,259. 25
To the dominions-of France Et 2 8 5 4,298,762. 26
To the dominions of Spain - 5 13:5 301,286. 95
To the dominions of Portugal == 8 e — 1,039, 696. 47
Jo the Italian Portes 3 = 31,726. 90
TO Morocco — 1 : = N 3,660. 50
Jo the Eaſt Indies, generally — N — - 328, 628. 46
To Africa, generally - Ws 5 5 168,477. 92
To the We Indies, enerally NO | | — | — ge 59,434. 36
To the North Weſt Coaſt of America = - 3,380
To Europe and the Weſt Indies for a market - 0 209,274, 5
Total Dollars 17,871,681. 4%


The exports of the year ending September 31, 1792, amounted =
- value to . 12 15 ll | | 5 .


Treaſury Department, March 28th, 1792.


„„ Te TENCH COXE, Afi. Sec.
The foregoing tables will ſerve to give the reader an accurate view of the ſtate of
our commerce with foreign nations ; of the articles, and the quantity exported of cach,
and of the amount of duties ariſing from our imports and tonnagge.
In this connection it may be uſeful to notice the principal reſtrictions, impoſitions,
and prohibitions ſuſtained by the United States, in their trade with the Britiſh domi=
nions, in contraſt with thoſe ſuſtained by Great Britain in her trade with the United
States; and this is the more neceſſary, as there are not wanting perſons who affirm,
that the balance of favour is given to the United States, and that Great Britain is ſo
far injured by our deportment, as to juſtify a retaliation. pps 5 |
The principal facts, relative to the queſtion of reciprocity of commercial regula-
lations, between Great Britain and the United States of America, have, by a gentle-


man who had acceſs to every neceſſary information for the purpoſe, been thrown into
the form of a table, as follows: 2


GREAT BRITAIN TE UNITED STATES
. Prohibits American veſſels from enter- = Admit Britiſh veſſels into al! their ports,
mg into the ports of - ſeveral parts of her ſubject to a tonnage duty of 44 cents, or
L dominions, viz. the Weſt Indies, Canada, 24 ſterling pence, more than American
Nova Scotia, New Brunſwick, Newfound- veſſels, and an addition of one tenth to
and, Cape Breton, Hudſon's Bay, Hon- the amount of the impoſt accruing on


duras Bay, and her Eaſt India ſpice- their cargocs.
market, C


3 *


208


GREAT BRITAIN.

She impoles double light money on
American veſſels in. moſt of her ports.

She prohibits the navigating ad libiſum,
of American veſſels, by native or other
ſeamen.

She prohibits the employment of Ame-
rican built {hips by her own citizens, in
many branches of trade, upon any terms.


She charges a duty on_ American fail

cloth, made up in the United States for
Britiſh {hips.
She prohibits the importation of goods
from ſeveral parts of her dominions into
others, in American veſſels, upon any
terms.


into Great Britain, by American vefſels,

from any other country than the United

States..

She d the importation into Great
Britain from the United States, by Ameri-

can veſſels, of all goods not produced by

the United States.

She prohibits the importation of any
goods previouſly brought into the United
States, from the ſaid States into Great Bri-
tain, even in Britiſh veſſels.


She prohibits the exportation of ſeveral

articles from Great Britain to the United
States.

She lays duties of various rates upon the
exportation of many articles to the United
336 +.

She prohibits the importation of all ma-
nu{actures from the United States, into her
European dominions, and her colonies,
unleſs it be ſome very ſimple preparations


and decoctions, requiſite to her navy,


thipping, and manufactures.”
She impoſes very conſiderable duties up-


on ſome of the agricultural productions of


the United States, and excludes others by
duties equal to their value.


THE UNITED STATES.


She prohibits the importation of goods
into the United States, in Britiſh veſſels,


+ tain.


Tux UNITED STATES.
They do not impoſe extra light joe


on Britiſh veſſels in any of their ports


They admit the navigating of Britiſh
veſſels by native or other ſeamen, ad libitum.


They admit the employment of Britiſh
built ſhips by their own citizens, in every
branch of trade, upon the terms of 44 cents
extra per ton, and one tenth extra on the
impoſt ariſing from their cargoes.

They do not charge a duty on Britiſh


fail cloth, made up in Great Britain for


American ſhips.

They admit the importation of goods
from any part of their dominions into ano-
ther, in Britiſh veſſels, on the terms of
44 cents per ton extra on the veſſel.
They admit the importation of goods


from every country whatever,
T hey do not prohibit the importation |


into the United States from Great Britain,
by Britiſh veſſels, of any goods not pro-


duced by Great Britain.
They do not prohibit the importation of


any goods previouſly brought into Great L


Britain, from that kingdom into the
United States, in either Britith or American :


bottoms.


They do 828 prohibit the e: ation of
any article from the United States to Great


Britain.


They do not ay a duty on the exporta- . |
tion of any article whatever to Great Bri-


They do not prohibit the importation of I
any manufacture whatever from Great
Britain.


They 3 moderate duties (lower
than any other foreign nation by 2, 3, an
4 tor one) on the produce and manufactures o
Great Britain, except in a very few in-


ftances, and exclude ſcarcely any articles


She


by duties equal to their ===>


THE UNITED STATES.


| GREAT BRITAIN.

She prohibits, for conſiderable terms of
time, ſome of the principal agricultural pro-
ductions of the United States, and others
at all times.


It is underſtood that by treaty ſhe grants
| ſome favours, which are not extended to


the United States.


She prohibits the importation of ſome
American articles, in American ſhips, or


any but Britiſh ſhips, into her European


dominions. 3

She does not permit an American citi-
zen to import goods into ſome of her do-
minions, and to fell them there, even in
Britiſh veſſels. In other parts of her do-


minions, ſhe lays an extra tax on him, or


. his ſales: :<. FE


She impoſes heavy duties on certain ar-


ticles of the produce of the Amercian fiſh-


eries, and inſupportable duties on others,
in ſome parts of her dominions: and in


other parts, ſhe prohibits their importa-


tion. FTE 755
She prohibits the conſumption of ſome


American articles, of which ſhe permits
the importation. |


She prohibits the importation of Ame-
rican articles from foreign countries into


the Britiſh dominions, even in her own


Tus UNITED STATES.
They prohibit none of the agricultural


| productions of Great Britain or her domi-


nions.


They treat Great Britain as favourably
as any nation whatever, as to ſhips, im-
ports, and exports, and in all other ret-


pects. To | e
I bey do not prohibit the importation of
any Britith article in Britiſh veſſels, or any


but American veſſels.


They permit a Britiſh citizen to import
goods into all their ports, in any veſſels,


and to ſell them there without any extra


tax on him, or his ſales.


They impoſe only five per cent. on the


produce of the Britiſh fiſheries (which.


duty is drawn back on exportation) and
admit every article derived from them.


They do not prohibit the conſumption
of any Britiſh article whatever. |


They do not prohibit the importation of :


Britiſh articles from foreign countries in


any ſhips, i


209


Beſides, there is no country that contributes ſo much to the ſupport of the navy of
Great Britain as the United States, by the employment they give to her ſhips. From


Auguſt 1789, to Auguſt 1790, no leſs than 230,000 tons of Britiſh veſſels cleared
from theſe States; which much exceed the quantity of veſſels they employed the ſame
The whole Baltic trade of Great Britain, with all the coun-


year in the Ruſſian trade.


tries of the various powers that lie within the Sound, important as it is to her, does not


fill more. Their trade with Holland, France, Spain, and Portugal, does not altoge-
ther employ as many veſſels. Their whole fiſheries, American colonial trade, and


Weſt India trade, do not employ and load more. And how, it may be aſked, are the


Vnited States requited for thus ſtrengthening the acknowledged bulwark of Great Britain,


by annually giving a complete lading to the unequalled quantity of 230, ooo tons of her
private veſſels? The whele of the American veſſels, which have arrived in our ports in


to no more than 43, 580 tons.


the ſame year, from all the countries and places ſubject to the Britiſh crown, amount


Our allies and friends, the French, have been more liberal in their poliey. In the


I


F


arret, paſſed in council, December 29, 1787, for encouraging the commerce of France
ee e e ee 8


210 THE UNITED STATES.
with the United States of America, it is ordained, That whale oil and ſpermaceti, the
produce of the fiſheries of the United States, brought directly into France in French or
American bottoms, thall be fubject to a duty only of ſeven livres ten ſols (equal to fix -
ſhillings and three pence ſterling) the barrel of five hundred and twenty weight; and
whate fins ſhall be ſubject to a duty of only fix livres thirteen ſols and four deniers
(equal to five ſhillings and fix pence halfpenny) the quintal, with ten ſols per livre on
_ each of the ſaid duties; which ten ſols per livre was to ceaſe on the laſt day of Decem-
ber. 1790. 1: ts DM ta SED
." I'm Mer fiſh oils and dry falted fiſh, produced and imported as aforefaid, are not
liable to pay any other or greater duties, than the moſt favoured nations are, or thall
be ſubject to in the ſame caſe. V ; EET
Corn, wheat, rye, rice, peas, beans, Tentils, flax-ſeed, and other feeds, flour, trees
and ſhrubs, pot and pearl aſhes, ſkins, and fur of beaver, raw hides, furs and peltry, 2
and timber carried from the United States to France in French or American bottoms,
are ſubject to a duty of one eighth per cent. on their value. Veflels, proved to have
been built in the United States, and ſold in France, or purchaſed by Frenchmen, are
exempted from duties. Turpentine, tar and pitch, are liable to a duty of two and a
half per cent. on their value. Arms may be imported mto the United States, in French
or American veſſels, on paying a duty of one eighth per cent. on their value; and gun-
powder duty free, by giving a cautionary bond. Books and papers of all ſorts, impor-
ted as aforeſaid, are to be exempted from all duties, and entitled to a reſtitution of the
fabrication duties on paper and paſte board. Permiſſion is given to ſtore all produc-
tions and merchandize of the United States, for fix months, in all the ports of France
open to the commerce of her colonies, ſubject to a duty only of one eighth per cent. His
majeſty reſerves to himſelf the power of granting encouragement to favour the exporta- A
tion of arms, hard ware, jewelry, bonetry, wool, cotton, coarſe wollens, fmall drape-
ries, and ſtuffs of cotton of all ſorts, and other merchandize of fabric, whieh may be .
ſent to the United States. „„ 3 eee eee
As to other merchandizes not enumerated in this act, imported and exported in French
or American veſſels, and with reſpect to all commercial conventions whatever, his ma-
jeſty ordained, That the citizens of the United States enjoy in France, the ſame rights,
privileges, and exemptions, with the ſubjects of his majeſty; ſaving what is provided in
the ninth article hereof.* 8 "7 „ e
* His late majeſty granted to the citizens and inhabitants of the United States all the ad-
vantages which are enjoyed, or which may be hereafter enjoyed, by the moſt favoured
nations in his colonies of America: and moreevecr his majeſty enſured to the ſaid citizens
and inhabitants of the United States, all the privileges and advantages which his own
ſubjects of France enjoy or ſhall enjoy in Aſia, and in the ſeas leading thereto, provi- |
ded always, that their veſſels ſhall have been fitted out andidiſpatched in ſome port of
th: United States.“ n + N „
ManvuyacTuREs.] We now come to the ſubject of our Manufactures; a ſubject
which has lately become in a high degree intereſting to the inhabitants of the United


* The article referred to ordains, that The admiralty duties on the veſſels of the United States entering
into, or going out of the ports of France, ſhall not be levied but conformably with the edict of the month of
June laſt, in the caſes therein provided, and with the letters patent of the tenth of January, 1770, for the ob-
jects for which no provifion ſhall have been made by the ſaid edict: his majeſty referving to himſelf moreover;
to make known his intentions as to the manner in which the ſaid duties mall be levied, - whether in proportion
to the tonnage of the veſſels, or etherwiſe, as alſo to ſimplify the ſaid duties of the admiralty, and to regulate
them as far as ſhall be poſſibl: on the principles of reciprocity, as ſoon as the orders ſhall be completed, which
were given by h,s majeſty acec rding to the twenty - ſix th article of the ſaid act of the month of June laſt.


2 States,


more B to the health and morals of women and children than night work, which has induced the we!
tipo ed to work their Factories during the Day only. | nel | *


THE UNITED STATES. 21


States, but which is too copious to be treated at large in a work of this kind.“ I ſhall
confine what I have to ſay in this place, on this article, to a few general obſervations


on the advantages of encouraging manufactures in the United States; and to an enu-


meration of the articles already manufactured among ns, and a ſpecification of thoſe
branches which merit or require to be particularly encouraged.
The prevailing diſpoſition among the European nations, and particularly Great


Britain, to reſtrict and embarraſs the external trade of the United States, have forced


them to ſerious and falutary reflections on the importance and neceſſity of enlarging
the ſphere of their domeſtic commerce, and creating a more extenſive demand at home,
for the increaſing ſurplus of their agricultural produce, by adopting meaſures for in-


creaſing the variety and quantity of their manufactures, and conſequently the number


of manufacturers. This circumſtance, and the complete ſucceſs which has rewarded


manufacturing enterpriſe in ſome valuable branches, and the promiſing proſpects
which attend ſome leſs mature eſſays, have put the matter of expediency of encouraging
manufactures in the United States, which was not-long ſince deemed very queſtionable,


beyond a doubt; and they alſo juſtify the belief, that the obſtacles to the increaſe of


this ſpecies of employment among us are lets formidable than have been generally
- imagined. That manufacturing eſtabliſhments would, in a variety of reſpects, be
| advantageous to theſe States, appears very evident from the following circum-
ftances:z—  __© | 2 Ne = „ |


1. They would occaſion a proper diviſion of labour, than which there is ſcarcely
any thing of greater moment in the ceconomy of a nation. The ſeparation of occu-
pations cauſes each to be carried to much greater perfection than it could poſſibly


55 acquire, if they were blended; becauſe there would be a ſaving of time, by avoiding


that loſs of it which is occaſioned by a frequent change from one operation to an-
other of a different nature; and becauſe from a conftant and undivided application


to a fingle object, there naturally reſults a greater ſkill and dexterity in accomplith-


ing it. | _ | | | N 3 | |
2. Manufacturing eſtabliſhments would be a means of extending the uſe of na-


cbinery; which, as it is an artificial aid to man, and, to all the purpoſes of labour,


an increaſe of hands and of ftrength, without the expence of maintaining the labourer, is of


great importance in the general maſs of national induſtry. The cotton-mill, invented


in England within the laſt twenty years, is a fignal illuſtration of this general idea.
In conſequence of it, all the different proceſſes for ſpinning cotton are performed by
means of machines, which are put in motion by water, and attended chiefly by women
and children; and by a ſmaller number of perſons, in the whole, than are requitite in


the ordinary mode of ſpinning. And the operations of this mill may be continued


night and day with convenience and advantage. It is eaſy to conceive the prodigious
effect of ſuch a machine. To this invention is to be attributed, effentially, the im-


menſe progreſs, which has been ſo ſuddenly made in Great Britain, in the various fa-


brics of cotton. The value of labour-ſaving machines has, in ſome degre:, Bec.


Mr. Hamilton, Secretary of the Treaſury, in his © Report on the Subject of Manufactures,“ and the
Writer (ſuppoſed to be Mr. Coxe, Afliſtant to the Secretary of the Treaſury) of * A brief Examin tion of
Lord Sheffield's Obſervations on the Commerce of the United States, in two ſupplementary notes on Ame-
rican Manufactures, have given the fulleſt and moſt accurate information on this ſubject, To them the


reader is referred, if he wiſhes for a more particular account of our manufactures than is here given.— They


are my principal authorities for what follows. | |
+ But it has been proved by ſome of the moſt reſpectable characters in Mancheſter, that nothing can be


,


Ee2 1 known


"a CE

* mY — *
9 2 — —
a 2 5 2 ws wy. *
pe mY — — *w 7 - *
— . _ * —_—
: : * **
0 4 „ 4
* «„ ——L—1 ü—P — — — —_—
-


212 . THE UNITED STATES.


known and experienced already among us; and by their general adoption in their moſt.
improved ſtate, to the cotton, flaxen, hempen, metal, and part of the woollen and
filken branches, to all of which raw materials they apply, the United States might,
in a very few years, acquire a deſireable degree of independency on Britiſh and other


foreign manufactures. And as to advantageous fituations for the erection of mills,
and for the eſtabliſhment of manufactures in general, no country has more, and few


ſo many as the United States: and we are far from being deficient in ingenious me-


chanics who are capable, not only of erecting machines already invented, and makin


improvements upon them, but alſo of inventing new machines of the moſt complicated
hn , 1


3. Another advantage reſulting from manufacturing eſtabliſhments is, they would


afford employment to clafſes of people who are cither not fully occupied, or wholly


idle, and thereby give occafion to the exertion of a greater quantity of induſtry,
even by the ſame number of perſons. In general, women and children are rendered
more uſeful, and the latter more early uſeful, by manufacturing eſtabliſhments, than
they would otherwiſe be. Of the number employed in the cotton manufactories


of Great Britain, it is computed that 4 in 7, nearly, are women and children;
of whom the greateſt proportion are children; and many of them of a tender age.


4. The eſtabliſhment of manufaQures would greatly increafe the inducements


which this country, in its preſent ſtate, holds out to foreigners to come among us,
and become citizens. The oppreſſion that is experienced by the people in ſome parts


of Europe, and the diſtreſſes that multitudes are brought into by the diſturbed ftate


of ſo many kingdoms, have excited a diſpoſition in many of their valuable citizens,
to emigrate to a country where they may enjoy freedom and peace. The effect of


multiplying the opportunities of employment to thoſe who emigrate, by manufaQural
eſtabliſhments, would probably be an increaſe of the number and extent of valuable
_acquiſitions to the population, arts, and induſtry of the country. This ſentiment,


however, ought to be known, that while we think ourſelves juſtifiable, as it reſpects
the cauſe of humanity, religion, and policy, in benefiting our country, by opening


an aſylum for the oppreſſed and diſtreſſed citizens of Europe, we are very far from
finding a pleaſure in thoſe affecting calamities which render a removal, on their part,


defireable. Ack A eo fi os barks mecenads ee
European manufacturers, liſtening to the powerful invitations of a better price


ſor their fabrics or their labour—of greater cheapneſs of proviſions and raw materials
of an exemption from the chief part of the taxes, burdens, and reſtraints, which they


endure in the Old World—of freedom from thoſe diſtreſſes and embarraſſments into


„


which they have been thrown by the diſturbances of Europe of greater perſonal in-
ndence and conſequence, under the operations of a more equal government


and of what is far more precious than mere religious toleration, a perfect equality of


religious privileges eneouraged, I ſay, by all theſe powerful inducements, manufac-
turers would probably flock from Europe to America, to purſue their reſpective
occupations, if they were once made ſenſible of the advantages they would enjoy,
and were inſpired with an aſſurance of encouragement and employment. : |
Beſides, the advantages already enumerated, which would reſult to theſe States from
the encouragement of manufactures, we may add, that in this way, greater ſcope


would be afforded for the exerciſe of the various talents and diſpoſitions of men, 2


more ample field opened for enterpriſe ; which circumſtances are the more important,
as there ſeems evidently to be, in the genius of the people of this country, a remark-
able aptitude for mechanical inventions and improvements, and a ſingular ſpirit of


enterpriſe. The increaſe of manufactures, alſo, would be a mean of creating, in ſome


inſtances


THE UNITED STATES. 213
inſtances a new, and ſecuring in all, a more certain and fteady demand for the ſur-
plus produce of the ſoil. This circumſtance, as it is a principal mean by which
the eſtabliſhment of manufactures contributes to an augmentation of the produce
or revenue of a country, and has an immediate and direct relation to the proſperity
of agriculture, is among the moſt important advantages enumerated. =
| But there are other conſiderations which ſerve to fortify the idea, that the encou-
= ragement of manufactures is the intereſt of all parts of the union. If the northern

and middle States ſhould be the principal ſcenes of ſuch eſtabliſhments, they would
immediately benefit the more ſouthern, by creating a demand for productions, ſome
of which they have in common with the other States, and others of which either are
peculiar to them, or more abundant, or of better quality than elſewhere. Theſe
productions principally are, timber, flax, hemp, cotton, wool, raw filk, indigo,
iron, lead, furs, hides, ſkins, and coals; of theſe articles, cotton and indigo are
peculiar to the ſouthern States; flax and hemp are, or may be, raiſed in greater
abundance there than in the more northern States; and the wool of Virginia is ſaid
to be of a better quality than that of any other State, which is probable, as Virginia
embraces the ſame latitudes of the fineſt wool countries in Europe. The climate of
the ſouth is alſo better adapted to the production of filk. The extenſive cultivation
of cotton can hardly be expected, but from the previous ,eſtabliſhment of domeſtic
manufactories of the article; and the fureſt encouragement and vent for the others
would reſult from fimilar eftabliſhments in regard to them. os -.
The moſt material objection that has been made to the purſuit of manufactures in
the United States, is the impracticability of ſucceſs, arifing from ſcarcity. of hands,
dearneſs of labour, and want of capital. The laſt of theſe circumſtances, want of
capital, has no real foundation. With regard to the ſcarcity of hands, the fact muſt be
applied, with no ſmall qualification, to certain parts of the United States. There are large


; diſtricts, which may be confidered as pretty fully peopled ; and which, notwithſtanding
a continual drain for diſtant ſettlements, are thickly interſperſed with flouriſhing and
4 increaſing towns. Connecticut and Maſſachuſetts contain, on an average, as many
1 as 55 inhabitants to every ſquare mile; and the county of Effex, in Maſſachuſetts,
F will average 135 inhabitants to every ſquare mile. This latter diſtrict has already
reached the point at which the complaint of ſcarcity of hands ceaſes ; and the-ahove-

( mentioned States at large are not far remote from, and are approaching faſt towards | .
— it: and having, perhaps, fewer attractions to agriculture than ſome other more
y ſouthern and temperate parts of the union, they exhibit a proportionably ſtronger
o Propenfity to the purſuit of manufactures, which is exemplified in the maturity which
1 = ome branches have already attained in theſe diſtrict z.

— Hut there are circumſtances which have been already noticed with another view,
of that materially diminiſh every where the effect of a ſcarcity of hands. Theſe cir-
c- cumſtances are the great uſe which may be made of women and children the vaſt ex-
ve tenſion given, by late improvements, to the employment of machines, which, ſubſti-
Ys tuting the agency of fire and water, has prodigiouſly leſſened the neceſſity for manual

labour—and laſt y, the attraction of foreign emigrants. In all our populons towns
om there is already a large proportion of ingenious and valuable workmen in different
pe arts and trades, who, by expatiating from Europe, have improved their own condi-
a, tion, and added to the: induſtry and wealth of the United States. It is a natural
i rs ence, from the experience we have already had, that as ſoon as the United States
rk-


all preſent the countenance of a ſerious proſecution of manufactures as ſoon as fo-


rcign artiſts ſhall be made ſenſible, that the ſtate of things he e affords a mora


| cer-
taiut -


1 HE UNITED STATEsS.


tainty of employment and encouragement, competent numbers of European workmen
will tranſplant themſelves, ſo as effectually to enſure the ſucceſs of the deſign.
Theſe circumſtances ſufficiently obviate the objection which ariſes from a ſcarcity of
hands. EN 1 =F LO Oat eb xg
But, to all the arguments which are brought to evince the impracticability of ſuc-
ceſs, in manufacturing eſtabliſhments in the United States, it would be a ſufficient
| anſwer, to refer to the experience of what has been already done. It is certain that
ſeveral important branches have grown up and flourithed, with a rapidity which tur-
prizes; affording an encouraging aſſurance of ſucceſs in future attempts. Of theſe
the following are the moſt conſiderable, viz. Of Skins —Tanned and tawed leathers,
dreſſed ſkins, ſhoes, boots, and ſlippers, harneſs and ſaddlery of all kinds, portman-
teaus and trunks, leather breeches, gloves, muffs and tippets, parchment and glue.—
Of Tron—Bar and ſheet iron, ſteel, nail rods and nails, implements of huſbandry,
ſtoves, pots and other houſehold utenſils, the ſteel and iron work of carriages and for
ſhip building, anchors, ſcale beams and weights, and various tools of artificers, arms
of different kinds.—Of od Ships, cabinet wares, and turnery, wool and cotton
cards, and other machinery for manufactures and huſbandry, mathematical inſtru-
ments, coopers wares of every kind. —Of Flax and Hemp—Cables, fail cloth, cordage,
twine and packthread.—Of Clay—Bricks and coarſe tiles, and potters wares.—Ardent
ſpirits and malt liquors, —Writing and printing paper, ſheathing and wrapping paper,
paſte boards, fullers or preſs papers, and paper hangings.— Hats of fur and wool, and
mixtures of both, Womens ſtuff and filk ſhoes. —Refined ſugars.—Chocolate.—Oil
of animals and ſeeds, ſoap, ſpermaceti and tallow candles—Copper and braſs wares,
particularly utenſils for diſtillers, ſugar refiners and brewers, hand irons and other arti-
cles for houſehold uſe—clocks, philoſophical apparatus Tin wares of almoſt all kinds
1 for ordinary uſe—Carriages of all kinds Snuff, chewing and ſmoking tobacco
Starch and hair powder Lampblack and other painters colours Gunpowder.

Beſides the manufacture of theſe articles, which are carried on as regular trades,
and have attained to a conſiderable degree of maturity, there is a vaſt ſcene of houſe-
hold manufacturing, which contributes very largely to the ſupply of the community.
Theſe domeſtic manufactures are proſecuted as well in the ſouthern, as in the middle
and northern States; great quantities of coarſe cloths, coatings, ſerges and flannels,
} linſey woolſeys, hoſiery of wool, cotton and thread, coarſe fuſtians, jeans and muſlins,
1 checked and ſtriped cotton and linen goods, bedticks, coverlets, and counterpanes,
1 tow linens, coarſe ſhirtings, ſheetings, towelling and table linen, and various mix-
tures of wool and cotton, and of cotton and flax, are made in the houſehold way,
and in many inſtances, to an extent not only ſufficient for the ſupply of the families
in which they are made, but for fale, and even in ſome caſes for exportation. It 13
compu'ed in a number of diſtricts, that two thirds, three fourths, four fifths, and in
ſome places even a greater proportion, of all the cloathing of the inhabitants is made
by th:mſelyes, In a moral and political view theſe facts are highly pleaſing and inte-
4 citing. 1 . EE gory 4 ok e G8
1 , The above enumeration does not comprehend all the articles that are manu factured
IE as regular trades, The following articles, though manufactured in a leſs extenſive =
degree, and ſome of them in leſs perfection, ought to be added—Gold, filver, pewter,
lead, glaſs and ſtone wares of many kinds, books in various languages, printing types
and preſſes, bells, combs, buttons, corn fans, ploughs and all other implements of
huſbandry. Some of theſe are ſtill in their infancy, as are others not enumerated,
but which are attended with favourable appearances. There are other articles allo 5

| * | .


"vl


THE UNITED STATES. 215
very great importance, which, though ſtrictly ſpeaking manufactures, are omitted, as
being immediately connected with huſbandry ; ſuch are flour and meal of all kinds,
pot and pearl aſhes, pitch, tar, turpentine, maple ſugar, wine, and the like.
| Having pointed out the advantages of encouraging manufactures in the United
States, and enumerated the articles manufactured, it remains that we ſpecify ſome of
the articles which merit or require encouragement. In making the ſelection of objects,
five circumſtances are entitled to particular attention: the capacity of the country to
furniſh the raw material—the degree in which the nature of the manufacture admits
of a ſubſtitute for manual labour in machinery—the faculty of execution—the exten-
ſivenets of the uſes to which the article can be applied—its ſubſerviency to other in-
tereſts, particularly the great one of national defence. And of this deſcription, none
are more eſſential in their kinds, or more extenſive in their uſes, than the manufac-
tures of iron, ſteel, copper, braſs, lead, coal, wood, ſkins, grain, flax and hemp,


cotton, wool, filk, glaſs, gunpowder, paper, printed books, refined ſugars, choco-
late, wines, and maple ſugar. Theſe are the moſt important of the ſeveral kinds
of manufactures, which appear to require, and at the ſame time to be the moſt proper


for public encouragement, either by bounties on the articles manufactured, duties on
imported articles of the ſame kind, or drawbacks of the duties upon the imported raw
materials, according to the nature of the caſe. e e
We have mentioned the manufactures of wine and maple ſugar, as objects worthy
of legiſlative attention and encouragement in the United States. As to the firſt, ſac-
ceſsful experiments have already been made, by ſome new ſettlers of French people,


on the river Ohio, k Which evince the practicability of the manufacture of wines of


an excellent quality: and as grapes are the ſpontaneous production of all the United


States, and, by culture, might be raiſed in any deſirable quantity, and in great per-


fection, this manufacture, with proper legiſlative encouragement, might be carried on

to ſuch an extent, as greatly to diminiſh, and in time, perhaps, wholly to preclude

foreign importations. 5 5 95 3 55
The manufacture of maple ſugar, though it has for many years been carried on, in


the ſmall way, in the eaſtern States, has but very lately become an object of public

attention. — The eaſtern and middle States furniſh a ſufficient number of maple trees
to ſupply the United States with the article of ſugar; and, it is aſſerted, of a quality

equal, in the opinion of competent Judges, to the beſt ſugars imported from the


Weſt India Iſlands.” A perſon, whoſe judgement on this ſubject is much to be relied
on, as well from his experience in the buſineſs, as his eſtabliſhed character for candor
and integrity, has given it as his opinion, © That four active and induſtrious men,
well provided with materials and conveniencies proper for carrying on the buſineſs,
may make, in a common ſeaſon, which laſts from four to fix weeks, 400olbs. of ſugar,
that is 1000lIbs. to each man.” If ſuch be the amazing product of fix weeks labour
of an individual, What may be expected from the labours of the many thouſands of


people who now inhabit, and may hereafter inhabit, the extenſive tracts of country


which abound with the ſugar maple tree? This manufacture is ſo important and in-
tereſting, that it reſpects the wealth and proſperity of our country, and the cauſe of
humanity, that it deſerves the countenance of every good citizen, and even national
encouragement. No leſs than 18 millions of pounds of Weſt India fugars, manu-


lactured by the hands of faves, is annually imported into and conſumed in the United


States. In proportion as this quantity can be leſſened by our own manufacturers,
7 Wa | by -
0 * See page 144.


216 THE UNITED STATES. |
by the hands of freemen, the wealth of the United States will be increaſed, and the


cauſe of humanity promoted, W
Military STRENGTH. | Standing armies are deemed inconſiſtent with a republican ;
government ; we of courſe have none.“ Our military ſtrength lies in a well-diſciplined |
militia, According to the late cenſus, there are in the United States, 814,000 men of
16 years old and upwards, whites, Suppoſe that the ſuperannuated, the officers of go-
vernment, and the other claſſes of people who are excuſed from military duty, amount
to 114,000, there will remain a militia of 700, ooo men. Of theie a great proportion
are well-diſciplined, veteran troops. No nation or kingdom in Europe can bring into
the field an army of equal numbers, more formidable than can be raiſed in the United
States.
e The Revenue of the United States is raiſed from duties on the tonnage of
veſſels entered in the United States, and on imported goods, wares, and merchandize,
and from an exciſe on various articles of conſumption. The amount of the duties ari-
ling on the tonnage of veſſels, for the year commencing October 1ſt, 1790, and ending
September 3oth, 1791, amounted to 145,347 dollars. The duties arifing on goods, wares,
and merchandize, for the ſame year, amounted to 3,006,722 dollars. The whole
amount of the revenue from the exciſe is not accurately known. In Maſſachuſetts it „
amounts annually to 200,000 dollars. The old Congreſs, in their laſt requiſitions, A
_ confidered Maſſachuſetts as a fixth part. If this proportion be accurate, the Whole
amount of the exciſe will be 1, 200, ooo dollars.
I his revenue is appropriated to the purpoſes of ſupporting the civil and military eſta»
bliſhments, to the payment of the intereſt, and the diminution of the Principal of the
Public Debt.


In the year following, October iſt, 1 789, the expentes and revenue of government
were as follows,


Total 749,232, 14 | MT no”


TN
eee
„ "aw


_ . 8 | | Expenſes. 5 TE 3
1 | Dols. Cts. 3 bY retain Dols. Cts,
4 Civil liſt 225775 53 Duties on Imports 1,903,790. 48
J Additional expenſe 50,7 56. 7 Duties on Tongs 5 16 5246 165. 93
z War — 47 1 9 .

3 | — | Total 2:069.175 2


From a report of the Secretary of the Saks. of the 2 3d of 1 I 79 2, it 2
rs that the whole amount of the domeſtic debt of the United States, principal and in-
tereſt, which has been ſubſcribed to the loan ꝓropoſed concerning that debt, by the act
intituled, “An act making proviſion for the debt of the United States, is


Dollars 31 8 I, 22


which, purſuant to the terms of that act, has been converted into ſtock

bearing an immediate intereſt of 6 per cent. 55 py 145 197,460. 43
$tock bearing the like intereſt from Jan. 1, 1801 | ior} (fp 7,088,727. 79
Stock be an immediate ee of 3 per cent. A | 30, 531,33.


| Ws . C1 tg Making together. Dollars Fg nab, 2 22


* Upwards of $909 8 men have lately been raiſed, for three years for the defence of the frontiers of the
| of


* nited States.


THE UNITED STATES. 1

Of which there ſtands to the credit of the Truſtees of the ſinking fund, in con-
ſequence of purchaſes of the public debt made under their direction, the ſum
| os Dollars 1,131,364. 76


Phe unſubſcribed reſidae of the ſaid debt amounts to 10,616,604. 65


The debts of the reſpective States collectively are eftimated to amount
e CTY | ö 25,403,302
of which, 21,500,000 dollars have been aſſumed, and 17,0%, 334 éͥů n
ſubſcribed, agreeably to act of Congreſs of 4th of Auguſt 1790.
The amount of a debt due to certain foreign officers, who ſerved the
United States during the late war, with arrears of intereſt, is 220,646. $1
5 FoREICN DxBrT. |
The whole amount of the Foreign Debt of the United States is about 12 million
dollars ; of which about 6,900,000 dollars are due to France, and the reſt to Holland.
The Executive has been empowered to make an additional Loan in Holland, ſufficient
to pay the debt to France; and meaſures for that purpoſe have been in agitation in
Holland. 5 %%%ͤͤͤ gf £7 >) CA 3
The act, making proviſion for the debt of the United States, has appropriated the
proceeds of the weſtern lands as a fund for the diſcharge of the public debt. And the
act, making proviſion for the reduction of the public debt, has appropriated all the ſur-
plus of the duties on imports and tonnage, to the end of the year 1790, to the e rang
of purchaſing the debt at the market price; and has authorized the Preſident to bor-
row the further ſum of two millions of dollars for the ſame object. Theſe meaſures
ſerve to indicate the intention of the legiſlature, as early and as faſt as pofſible, to pro-
vide for the extinguiſhment of the exiſting debt. „ *
Ihe preſent eligible ſituation of the United States, compared with that of Europe at
large, as it reſpects taxes or contributions for the payment of all publie charges, appears
from the following ſtatement, furniſhed by a gentleman of acknowledged abilities. In
= the United States, the average proportion of his earnings which each citizen pays for
= the ſupport of the civil, military, and naval eſtabliſhments, and for the diſcharge of the _
| intereſt of the public debts of his country, is about one dollar and a quarter; equal to
two days labour, nearly; that is, 5 millions of dollars to 4 millions of people. In Great
Britain, France, Holland, Spain, Portugal, Germany, &c. the taxes for theſe objects,
on an average, amount to about fix dollars and a quarter to each perſon. Hence it ap-
pears, that in the United States we enjoy the bleſſings of free government and mild
laws; of perſonal liberty, and protection of property, for one fifth part of the ſam for
each individual, which is paid in Europe for the purchaſe of public benefits of a fimilar
nature, and too generally without attaining their objects: tor leſs than one fiſth, indeed,
as in European countries in general, 10 days labour, on an average, do not amount
to 64 dollars. In this eſtimate proper allowances are made for public debts. The In-
dian war in the United States, at preſent, requires nearly half a million of dollars an-
nually, extra; but this, being temporary only, is not taken into the eſtimate. 39
From the beſt data that can be collected, the taxes in the United States, for county,
town and pariſh purpoſes ; for the ſupport of ſchools, the poor, roads, &c. appcar to
be conſiderably leſs than in thoſe countries; and perhaps the objects of them, except in
roads, is attained in a more perfect degree. Great preciſion is not. to be expected in
theſe calculations ; but we have ſufficient documents to prove that we are not far from
the truth. The proportion in the United States is well aſcertained ; and with equal
accuracy m France, by Mr. Neckar; and in England, Holland, Spain, and other
kingdoms in Europe, by him, Zimmermann, and other writers on the ſubject.
| Ff | Far


- ” -
1


218 THE UNITED STATES.
For tho obje oCts of the late war and civil government, in the United States; nearly 12
millions of dollars were annually raiſed, for nine years ſucceſſively, apportioned on 1 :
number of inhabitants at that period, which amounted to a little ſhort of four dollars to
each perſon. This was raiſed principally by direct taxes. Perhaps a contribution of
fix thats a perſon would not have been fo teverely felt, had” a part of it been raiſed
b y impoſt and excite. Theſe ſums, raiſed for the wur, by the free exertions of the peo-
ple, obviate all ſuch objections as afſort that the United States are poor: at the fame
time they evince that their fituation is eligible and proſperous, by ſhewing how
large a proportion of their earnings, Ns people, in general, can apply to- their Private


Urpotes,
? . \NK OF THE UNITED: STATES. | This Bank was incorporated by act of Sn
February 25ih, 1791, by the name and ſtile of The Preſident, Directors, and Company of the
Bank of the United States. The amount of the capital ſtock is 10 million dollars, one
fourth of which is in gold and filver ; the other three fourths, in that part of the pub-
lic debt of the United States, which, at the time of payment, bears an accruing intereſt

ol 6 per cent. per annum. TWO millions of this capital ſtock of 10 millions, is ſub-

{cribed by the Prefident, in behalf of the United States. The Stockholders are to con-

tinue a corporate body by the act, until the 4th day of March 1811; and are capable,

in law, of holding property to an amount not exceeding, in the whole, 15 million dol--
lars, including the aforefaid 10 million dollars, capital ſtock. The corporation may

not at any time owe, whether by bond, bill or note, or other contract, more than 10'

million dollars, over and above the monies then actually depoſited in the Bank for ſaſe

keeping, unleſs: the contracting of any greater debt ſhall have been previouſly autho-

_ _rited by a law of tho United: States. The corporation is not at liberty to receive more
than 6 per cent. per annum for or upon its loans or difcounts ; nor to purchaſe any

ublic debt whatever, or to deal or trade, directly or indirectly, in any thing except
Pille of exchange, gold or ſilver bullion, or in the ſale of goods really — truly pledged
ſor money lent, and not redeemed in due time, or of goods which ſhall be — —
of its bonds; they may ſell any part of the public debt of which its ſtock ſhall # com-
poſed. Loans, not exceeding 1 00,000 dollars, may be made to the United States, and
articular States, of a ſum not exceeding 50,000 dollars.

e Hier for the purpoſes of diſcount and. depoſit only, may be eſtabliſhed within the
United States, upon the fame terms, and in the ſame manner, as ſhall be practiſed at
the Bank. Four of theſe offices, called Branch Banks, have been already eſtabliſhed,

- viz. at Boſton, New York, Baltimore, and Charleſton; The faith of the United States
18 pledged that no other bank ſhall be eſtabliſhed by any future law of'the United States,
during the continuance of the above Corporation. "The great benefits of this Bank, as

it reſpects: public credit and commerce,. have already been experienced.

RELIeIOx.] The conſtitution of the United States provides againſt the making of
any law reſpecting an eſtablithment of religion, or prohibiting the free exerciſe of it.
And in the conſtitutions of the reſpective States: religious liberty is a ſundamental prin-
ciple. In this important article, our government is diſtinguiſhed from that of ever)
bother nation, if we except France. Religion here is placed on its proper baſis; will-
out the feeble and unwarranted aid of the civil power, it is left to be ſupported by 11s
own evidence, by the lives of its proteſtors, and the Almighty care of its Divine Author.

All being thus left at liberty to choote their own religion, the 3 as might ea-
fily be ſuppoſed, have varied in their choice. The bulk of the would denomi-
nate themſelves Chriſtians; a ſmall proportion of them are TOLD . N plead the ſuffil⸗
eiency of natural religion, and re revelation as unneceſſary and tabulous ; and

1 i man),


.
% __
rr » *
W253.
3


THE UNITED STATES. 219


many, we have reaſon to believe, have yet their religion to chooſe. Chriſtians proſeſs


their religion under various forms, and with different ideas of its doctrines, ordinances,
and precepts. The following denominations of Chriſtians are more or leſs numerous
in the United States, viz. Congregationaliſts, Preſpyterians, Dutch Reformed Church,
Epiſcopalians, Baptiſts, Quakers or Friends, Methodiſts, Roman Catholics, German
Lutherans, German Calviniſts or Prefbyterians, Moravians, Tunkers, Mennoniſts,
VUniverſalifts, and Shakers. CO No mn ee ah e 1 0
Of theſe the ConcreGATIONALISTS are the moſt numerous. In New England
alone, beſides thoſe which are ſcattered through the middle and ſouthern States, there


mu


church, or peccant party therein, obſtinately perfiſting in error or ſcandal.” .


are not leſs than 1000 congregations of this denomination, viz.


In New Hampſhire — — Wy 200
Maſſachuſetts — — — 140
Rhode Iſland — * — Be
Connecticut — — =... 4 "Y}
Vermont (ſay) 1 - - 150 -
Total — 1088


It is difficult to ſay what is the preſent eccleſiaſtical oonſtitution of the Congrega-
*#1onal churches. Formerly their eccleſiaſtical proceedings were regulated, in Matta-


chuſetts, by the Cambridge Platform of church diſeipline, eſtabliſhed by the ſynod, in


1648; and in Connecticut, by the Saybrook Platform of diſcipline; but ſince the re-


volution, leſs regard has been paid to theſe conſtitutions, and in many inſtances they


:ate wholly diſuſed. Congregationaliſts are pretty generally agreed in this opinion,
that « Every church or particular congregation of viſible Taints, in goſpel order, being


furniſhed with a Paſtor or Biſhop, and walking together in truth and peace, has re-


. ceived from the Lord Jeſus fall power and authority, eccleſiaſtical within itſelf, re-
gularly to adminiſter all the ordinances of Chrift, and is not under any other ecclefi-


-aſtical juriſdiction vhatſoever.,” Their churches, with ſome exceptions, diſclaim the


word Independent, as applicable to them, and claim a fiſterly relation to each other.


From the anſwer of the elders, and other meflengers of the churches affembled at


Boſton, in the year 1662, to the queſtions propoſed to them by order of the General


each other in the following acts, viz. ny
1. © In hearty care and prayer one for another.—2. In afferding. relief, by com-


"Court, it appears that the churches, at that peried, profeſſed to held communion with


municating'of their gifts in temporal or ſpiritual neceſſities.—3. In maintaining unity


and peace, by giving account one to another of their public actions, when it is pro-


perly defired; to ſtrengthen one another in their regular adminiſtrations; in particular


by a concurrent teſt:mony againſt perſons juffly cenſured.—4. To ſeck and accept help
from, and afford help to each other, in caſe of diviſions and contentions, whereby


the peace of any church is diſturbed; in matters of more than ordinary importance,
as the ordination, inftallation, removal, and depoſition of paſtors or biſhops; in


doubtful and difficult queſtions and controverfies, doctrinal or practical, that may ariſe;
and for the rectifying of mal- adminiſtration, and healing of errors and ſoandals that arc
not healed among themſelves.—5. In taking notice, with a ſpirit of love and faith-


tulneks, of the troubles and difficulties, errors and ſcandals of another church, and


to adminiſter help (when the caſe manifeſtly calls for it) though they ſhould ſo neglect


their own good and duty, as not to ſeek it.—6. In admonifhing one another, when
there is cauſe for it; and after a due courſe of meaus, patiently to withdraw from a


Ff 2


A con-


220 THE UNITED STATES.


A conſociation of churches was, at the period mentioned, conſidered as neceſſary to
2 communion of churches, (the former being but an agreement to maintain the latter


and therefore a duty. The conſociation of churches they defined to be,“ Their


mutual and ſolemn agreement to exerciſe communion in ſuch acts as aforeſaid (mean-
ing the acts of communion above recited) amongſt themſelves, with ſpecial re-
ference to thoſe churches which, by Providence, are planted in a convenient vicinity,
though with liberty reſerved without offence, to make uſe of others, as the nature of
the caſe, or the advantage of the opportunity may lead thereunto.” .
The miniſters of the Congregational order are pretty generally aſſociated for the
purpoſes of licenfing candidates for the miniſtry, and friendly intercourſe and im-


provement ; but there are few Congregational churches that are conſociated on the


above principles; and the practice has very generally gone into diſuſe, and with it


the communion of churches in moſt of the acts before recited. In Connecticut and


the weſtern parts of Maſſachuſetts, the churches have deviated leſs from their original
conſtitution. The degeneracy of the Congregational churches from that order, tellow-


| ſhip, and harmony, in diſcipline, doctrines, and friendly advice and aſſiſtance in eccle-
ſiaſtical matters, which formerly ſubſiſted between them, is matter of deep regret to

many, not to ſay to moſt people of that denomination. A reformation, or a return
to a practice conformable to the originial principles of the Congregational churches, is


an event more earneſtly deſired, than confidently expected.


Congregationaliſts are divided in opinion reſpecting the doctrines of the goſpel, and


the proper ſubjects of its ordinances. The body of them are Calviniſts; a reſpecta-


ble proportion are what may be denominated Hopkenſian Calviniſts; beſides theſe,
ſome are Arminians, ſome Arians, a few Socinians, and a number who have adopted
Dr. Chauncy's ſcheme of the final ſalvation of all men.“ .


Next to the Congregationaliſts, PxesBYTERIANS are the moſt numerous denomi-


nation of Chriſtians in the United States. They have a conflitution by which they
regulate all their eccleſiaſtical proceedings, and a confeſſion of faith, which all church


officers and church members are required to ſubſcribe. Hence they have preſerved a
fngular uniformity in their religious ſentiments, and have conducted their ecclefiaftical


affairs with a great degree of order and harmony.


The body of the preſbyterians inhabit the middle and ſouthern States, and are
united under the fame conftitution. By this conſtitution, the Preſbyterians who are


governed by it, are divided into five Synods and ſeventeen Preſbyteries ; viz. Synod of
New York, « preſbyteries, 94 congregations, 61 ſettled miniſters.—2. Synod of Phi-


ladelphia, 5 preſbyteries, 92 congregations, 60 ſettled miniſters, beſides the miniſters
and congregations belonging to Baltimore preſbytery.—3. Synod of Virginia, 4 preſ-
byteries, 70 congregations, 40 ſettled miniſters, exclufive of the congregations and
miniſters of Tranſylvania preſbytery.—4. Synod of the Carolinas, 3 preſbyteries, 82
congregations, 42 ſettled miniſters, the miniſters and congregations in Abington preſ-


| bytery not included. If we ſuppoſe the number of congregations in the preſbyteries


which made no returns to their ſynods, to be 100, and the number of ſettled miniſters
in the ſame to be 40, the whole number of preſbyterian congregations in this connec-
tion will be 438, which are ſupplied by 223 ſettled miniſters, and between 70 and 80
candidates, beſides a number of ordained miniſters who have no particular charges.


Each of the four ſynods meet annually ; beſides which they have a joint meeting, bp
their commiſſioners, once a year, in General Aſſembly at Philadelphia.


The reader will find a well-digeſted ſummary of the peculiar ſentiments of each of theſe ſects, in


H. Adams's View of Religions.“
ru 9 | ; ions The


Y * * A , b Be OV 9 5 . » bh K WE *
4 , 7 . 2 N - , 4 * .. * „ 939 4 < 2 * ws * « Y ET IDS ; of . RF Les 1 - q ths « 25 _ V * =
i 2 * 2 * " F4 * In 7 * iſh 5 * — 6 * * IA 4 4h 0 * py wy me 422 — ** 2 e ** — * v CDS > * . N * * » 75 * TY
q D p74 £ IK 4 > Mig — bs, x» — 7." 3 n 2 83 s N SP IO * * * — * 4 1 = 0 1 1 15 8 * hy *.
* r 2 a4 It, 5 * r re N Ap 2-95 8 * w * 4 5 8 . 2 ay; * I - * p . bet +
Oy F 8 3 eats, 32 CES WWW r * Lu 4 W494," "BFA a BY” <4 0 i 3 = | + 4 . , 2 Wy
"s A r DER n 45 R 1 FEI r 3 N Js af * RET N 4,5 RS een wks OBE SS WES. ws 8 y <. + * 58 r. * © OR * 2 1
5 8 1 . — & 5 . Wh, an F EC DEER AT WAY, © ITO INS. „ „ ; a." os 2 r — © De. v4 EY : *
I 0 & f N 4 ch 8 1 n { > N 2 1 e 3 92 5
; 8 1 4 , 8 1 5 : * .


JETTEC 221
The Preſbyterian churches are governed by congregational, preſbyterial, and ſyno-
dical' aflemblies : theſe aſſemblies poſſeſs no civil juriſdiction. Their power is
wholly moral or ſpiritual, and that only miniſterial or declarative. They poſſeſs the
right of requiring obedience to the laws of Chriſt, and of excluding the diſobedient
from the privileges of the church; and the powers requiſite for obtaining evidence
and inflicting cenſure ; but the higheſt puniſhment, to which their authority extends,
is to exclude the contumacious and impenitent from the congregation of believers. _
The Charch-Seffion, which is the congregational aſſembly of judicatory, conſiſts of
the miniſter or miniſters and elders of a particular congregation. This body is inveſted
with the ſpiritual government of the congregation ; and have power to inquire into
the knowledge and Chriſtian conduct of all its members ; to call before them offenders
and witneſſes, of their own denomination ; to admonith, ſuſpend, or exclude from the
ſacraments, ſuch as deſerve theſe cenfures ; to concert meaſures for promoting the ſpi-
ritual intereſts of the congregation, and to appoint delegates to the higher judicatories
of the church. LITE, 3 . 192 .
A Preſbytery conſiſts of all the miniſters, and one ruling elder from each congrega-
tion, within a certain diſtrict. Three miniſters and three elders, conſtitutionally con-
vened, are competent to do buſineſs. This body have cognizance of all things that
regard the welfare of the particular churches within their bounds, which are not cog-
nizable by the ſeffion. Allo, they have a power of receiving and iſſuing appeals from
the ſefſions—of examining and licenfing candidates for the miniſtry—of ordaining,
ſettling, removing, or judging miniſters—of reſolving queſtions of doctrine or diſ-
cipline—of condemning erroneous opinions, that injure the purity or peace of the
church—of viſiting particular churches, to inquire into their ſtate, and redreſs the
evils that may have ariſen in them—of uniting or dividing congregations, at the re-
queſt of the people, and. whatever elſe pertains to the ſpiritual concerns of the churches
under their care. HRT» 5 55 3
A Hned is a convention of ſeveral preſbyteries. The ſynod have power to admit
and judge of appeals, regularly brought up from the preſbyteries—to give their judge-
ment on all references made to them of an eccleſiaſtical kind to correct and regulate
the proceedings of preſbyteries—to take effectual care that preſbyteries obſerve the


> conſtitution of the church, &c. © 1567-2 f BC ki
7 The higheſt judicatory of the Preſbyterian church is ſtiled The General Aſſembly of the
$ Preſbyterian Church in the United States of America. This grand Aſſembly is to conſiſt of
Þ an equal delegation of biſhops and elders from each preſbytery within their juriſ-
$ diction, by the title of Commiſſioners to the General Aſſembly. Fourteen commiſſioners
* make a quorum. The General Aſſembly conſtitute the bond of union, peace, corre- |
d ſpondence, and mutual confidence among all their churches; and have power to
2 receive and iſſue all appeals and references which may regularly be brought before
- them from inferior judicatories—to regulate and correct the proceedings of the ſynods,
8 & c. To the General Aſſembly alſo belongs the power of conſulting, reaſoning, and
8 Judging in controverfies reſpecting doctrine and diſcipline; of reproving, warning, or
* bearing teſtimony againſt error in doctrine, or immorality in practice in any church,
0 pretbytery, or ſynod—of correſponding with foreign churches—of putting a ſtop to
8. ſchiſmatical contentions and diſputations—and in general of recommending and at-
K tempting reformation of manners, and of promoting charity, truth, and holineſs in all
the churches—and alſo of erecting new ſynods when they judge it neceffary.
in The conſeſſion of faith adopted by the Prefbyterian church, embraces what are call-
7 ed the Calviniſtic doctrines and none who diſbeheve theſe doctrines are admitted


into


7


into. fellowſhip with their churches, The General 'Aflembly of the Preſbyterian church


2 PHE UNITED STATES.


hold a friendly correſpondence with the General Aſſociation in Connecticut, by letter,
and by admitting delegates from their > bodies to fit in each. other 8 gener]


; meetings.


Diſconnecteũ with the churches of a we have been ſpeak! ne, thew are four
{mall preſþyteries in Ne England, who have a ſimilar form of eccleſiaſtical. Bevern-
ment and diſcipline, and proſels the ſame doctrines.

Beſides theſe, there is the © Aſſociate Prefbytery of Pennſy lvania,” having a ſepa-


rate ecdefiaſtical juriſdiction in America, and belonging to the Aſſociate Synod of
Edinburgh, vhich they declare is the only ecdefiaſtical body, either in Britain or Ame-


rica, with avlnch they are agreed concerning the doctrine and order of the church of
Chriſt, and concerning the duty of confeſſing the truth, and bearing witneſs to it by


1 a public-teſtimony againſt the errors of the times. This connection is not to be un-
derſtood as in kenling ſubjection to a ſoreign juriſdiction; but is preſerved for the ſake


of maintaining unity with their brethren in the profeſſion of the Chriſtian faith, and


ſuch an intercourſe as might be of ſervice to the intereſts of religion. This ſect of


Preſbyterians are commonly known by the name of Szceders, on account of their. ſcecd-


ing from the national church in Scotland, 1736.“
The Durch Rxroxxugo churches in the -United States, who maintain the dodeine
of the ſynod of Dort, held in 1618, are between 70 and 80 in number, conſtituting
ſix clafles, which form one ſynod, ſtyled © The Dutch Reformed Synod of New


York and New Jerſey.” The claſſes confift of miniſters and ruling elders; each
.claſs delegates two miniſters and an elder to repreſent them in ſynod. From the firſt
planting of the Dutch churches in New York and New Jerſey, they have; under the


direction of the elaffis -of Amſterdam, been formed exactly upon the plan of the


eſtabliſhed church of Holland as far as that is eccleſiaſtical. A ſtrict eorreſpondenee
is maintained between-the Dutch Reformed Synod of New York and New Jerſey, and
the ſynod of North Holland and the claffis of Amfterdam. The acts of their 6 [nods
are mixtinelty exchanged every year, and mutual advice is given and received in diſ-
putes reſpecting doctrinal points and church diſcipline.

The Prorzsrant Epi3coras. «Church in the United States (the ne of that


denomination in New England excepted) met in Conventien at Philadelphia, October


1785, and reviſed the book of common prayer, and adminiſtration of the facraments,

and other rites and ceremonies, with a view to render the liturgy conſiſtent with the

American Revolution. But this reviſed form was ROO by none of the churches,
except one or two in Philadelphia.


In October 1789, at another meeting of thier convention, a plan of union among
all the Proteſtant Epiſcopal churches in the United States of America was agreed upon


and ſettled; and an adequate repreſentation from the ſeveral States being preſent, the)
again reviſed the book of common prayer, which is now publiſhed and generally
adopted by their churches. They alſo agreed upon and publiſhed 17 canons for
.the nun hacer of their church, the firſt of which declares that there mall, in this
church, be three orders in: the miniſtry, viz. Biſhops, Prieſts, and Deacons.”

At the fame time they agreed upon a Conſtitution, -which provides that there ſhall


be a general convention of the Proteſtant Epiſcopal Church in the United, States, on


the ſecond "Tueſday of September, of every third year from 1789-—That each ſtate is
entitled to a repreſentation of both the Clergy and laity, or ner of them, _ may


+ See H. Adams's &-View of Religions,” Article, "ES Fs q


1


THE UNITED STATES. 223
ſend deputies, not exceeding four of cach order, choſen by the convention of the
State—That the biſhops of the church, when three or more are preſent, ſhall, in their
general conventions, £m a ſeparate houſe. with a right to originate and propoſe acts


for the concurrence ' of the houſe of deputies, compoted of clergy and laity ; and
with a power to negative acts paſſed by the houſe of deputies, unleſs adhered to by.


four-fiſths of the other houſe—That every biſhop ſhall confine the exerciſe of his


epitcopal office to his proper dioceſe or diſtrict—That no perſon ſhall be admitted to


holy orders, until examined by the biſhop and two preſbyters, having produced tlie


requiſite teſtimonials—and that no perſon ſhall be ordained until he ſhall have ſub-
ſeribed the following declaration—* I do believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and
New Teſtament to be the Word of God, and to contain all things neceflary. to fal--

vation; and I do ſolemnly engage to conform to the doctrines and worſhip of the Pro-
teſtant Epiſcopal Church in the United States.

They have not yet adopted any Articles of religion other tlian thoſe contained in the
Apoſtles and Nicene Creeds. The number of Epiſcopal churches in the United States
is not aſcertained; in New England there are between forty and fifty; but in the
ſouthern ſtates, they are much more numerous. Four Biſhops, viz. of Connecticut, 2
New, York, Pennſylvania, and Virginia, have been elected by the conventions of their


reſpective States, and have been duly conſecrated: The former by the Biſhops of the


Scotch Church, the three latter, by the Biſhops of the Engliſh church. And theſe


four, in September 1992, united in the conſecration of a fifth, elected by the convention
of the ſtate of Maryland.


The Barrisrs, with ſome exceptions, are upon the Calviniftic plan, as to doctrines,
and independents as to church government and diſcipline. Except thoſe who are ſtyled
* Open communion-baptifts,” of whom there is but one aſſociation, they refuſe to commu-
nicate in the ordinance of the Lord's Supper with other denominations ; becauſe they
hold that immerſion only is the true baptiſm, and that baptiſm is neceſſary to commu-
nion; it is, therefore; improper and inconfiſtent, in their o inion, to admit unbaptized
perſons, (as all others are, in their view, but themſelves) to join with them in this
ordinance; though they allow miniſters of other denen n e to preach. to their con-
gregations, and ſometimes to affiſt in ordaining their miniſters.

From an account taken by a. preacher * of the baptiſt denomination, who yas
travelled through the United States, to aſcertain their number and ſtate, we are euabled


t give the following ſtatement. of their. afſociations; churches, miniſters, church mem


bers, and Principles:


MixisTERs
| YN e Cnvkcnes ordained. Vicenſed: Mr MBERS-
EP £ _ DIA oo F
Mlaſſachuſetts Ek Re Os LR
Rhode Iſland: ED | | JT; 39. .
Connecticut . 8 8
Vermont 4 34 „„ 15 1610
New York FF | oo... © 3997
JO CES AS - Re Cn '
Penn a 28 F
Delaware . ORE x 8 3 45 :


aui ſrward 398 336 1753 25856


| STATES.
„Mr. John Aſplund.


N 2 . * 2
22 . 2 2 — 1
* — *
— — — - — — — = — -
„„„%„„%„ —— — pra — — * T
— — w


* 2
——
— —


224 THE UNITED STATES


M1x1sTERS. 3
* DTATES CnvrcHtes ordained licenſed MRMABER .
Brought forward 396 „
Virginia | wi 207 1 109 20157
Kentucky 42 40 21 3105
Weſtern Territory I — — 30
North Carolina J 7742
Deceded Territory 3 1 889
South Carolina 68 48 28 4012
Georgia „ 9 3184
"Total 868 710 422 64975
Of theſe there are OT .  MinisTErs.
6a 7 Assoc. Cuvux. ordained licenſed Mz.
Six principle Baptiſts 5 | 18 26 4 | 1599
Open Communion Do. 1 15 : 2703 „„
General Proviſion Do. „„ TR 30 26 I
Seventh Day Do. Ott { oo! | CO CE”. eh.
Regular or Particular Do. 3 ð % Ghai 2006 58827
Total 35 868 710 „ 6


Jo this account, the compiler conjectures that 1 zoo members, and 30 churches
ought to be added making the whole number of churches. about goo, and the mem-


bers about 66,000. He ſuppoſes moreover that at leaſt three times as many attend their
meetings, as have joined their churches, which, if we .ſuppoſe all who attend their
meetings are in principle Baptiſts, will make the whole number of that denomination


in theſe ſtates, 198,000, or a twenty-ſixth part of the inhabitants.
Some of the leading principles of the regular or particular baptiſts, are—The impu-
tation of Adam's fin to his poſterity—the inability of man to recover himſelf—effectual


calling by ſovereign grage—juſtification by the imputed righteouſneſs of Chriſt—
_ immerſion for baptiſm, and that on profeſſion of faith and repentance—congregational |


churches, and their independeney, and reception into them. upon evidence of ſound
converſion. _ e 7 e e

We ſhall next ſpeak of the people called QuAK ERS.“ This denomination of Chriſ-
tians aroſe about the year 1648, and were firſt collected into religious ſocieties by their


highly reſpected elder, George Fox. They came to America as early as 1656. The


firſt ſettlers of Pennſylvania were all of this denomination ; and the number of Friends
meetings in the United States, at preſent, is about 320. .
Their doctrinal tenets may he ſummarily expreſſed as follows In common with
other Chriſtians, they believe in One Eternal God, and in Jeſus Chriſt the Meſſiah and
Mediator of the new coyenant. To Chriſt alone, in whoſe divinity they believe, the)
give the title of the Vord of God, and not to the Scriptures ; yet they profeſs a high


eſteem for theſe ſacred writings, in ſubordination to the Spirit who indited them, and


# 1


* They received their — from this circumſtance “! In the year 160, George Fog being brought


before two juſtices in Derbyfhire, one of them, ſcoffing at him, for having bidden him and thoſe about him, to
#remble at the word of the Lord, gave to him and his followers, the name of alert; a name by which the
have ſince been uſually denominated : but they themſelves adopted the appellation-of Friends.


= \ = _
\ e EL UE NETS
9 wt R WR 7 A 7.
- q % — , 4 * £5 . » .- 4 * * Fs \ -
4 6 N — * "Eh I Lot MD e FATS 5 o 2» 1 = 5s a 8 > : f —


THE UNITED STATES. 225
pelieve that they are able, durdüg h faith, to make wiſe to ſalvation—They Tevetence
the excellent 2 of Scripture, and believe them practicable and binding on every
Chriſtian; and that in the life to come, every man will be rewarded according to his
works. In order to enable mankind to put in practice theſe precepts, they believe,


that every man coming into the world, is endued with a meaſure of the Light, Grace
or Good Spirit of Chriſt ; by which he is enabled to diftinguiſh good from evil, and


correct the diſorder! paſſions and corrupt propenſities of his nature, which mere reaſon


18 altogether inſufficient to overcome — that this divine grace is, to thoſe who ſincere
ſcek it, an all- ſufficient and preſent help in time of need and that by it the ſnares of


the enemy are detected, his allurements avoided, and deliverance experienced, throu


faith in its effectual operation, and the foul tranſlated out of the kingdom of darkneſs
into the marvellous light and kingdom of the Son of God—Thus perfuaded, they


think this divine influence eſpecially neceſſary to the performance of the higheſt act of
which the human mind is capable, the worſhip of God in ſpirit and in truth; and
therefore confider, as obſtructions to pure worſhip, all forms which divert the mind
from the ſecret influence of this unction of the Holy One Though true worſhip is not
cConfined to time or place, they believe it is incumbent on churches to meet often
together, but dare not depend for acceptance on a formal repetition of the words and


experiences of others They think it is their duty to wait in filence to have a'true ſight


of their condition beſtowed on them; and believe even a fingle figh, ariſing from a
ſenſe of their mfirmities and need of divine help, to be more acceptable to God, than
| an ny performances which originate in the will of man.


They believe the renewed aſſiſtance of the light and power of Chriſt, which is not at


our command, nor attainable by ſtudy, but the free gif of God, to be indiſpenſably
neceſſary to all true miniſtry.— Hence * their teſtimony againſt preaching for hire,
and conſcientious refuſal to ſupport ſuch miniſtry by tythes or other means As they
dare not encourage any mini but ſuch as they believe to ſpring from the influence
of the Holy Spirit; ſo neither « they attem]j 11 to reſtrain this influence to perſons of


any condition in life, or to the male b 5 fuch of the female ſex as appear to


be qualified, to exerciſe their gifts for the general edification of the church.


They hold that as there is one Lord and one faith, fo his baptiſm is one in nature


and operation, and that nothing ſhort of it can make ns living members of his myſtical
body; and that baptiſm with water belonged to an inferior and decreaſing diſpenſation.


With - reſpect to the Lord's Supper, they believe that communication between Chriſt


and his church is not maintained by that nor any other external ordinance, but only
by a real participation of his divine nature, through faith; that this is the ſupper


alluded to Rev. uw. 20—and that where the ſubſtancæ 2 is attained, it is waere to
_ attend to the ſhadow.


Believing that the grace of God is alone ſaſſicient for fatration, they can neither
admit that it is conferred. on a few only, while. others are left without it; nor, thus


| aſſerting its univerſality, can they limit” its operation to a partial cleanfing of the ſoul


from fin, even in this life—On the contrary, they believe that God doth vouchſafe to


aſſiſt the obedient to ſubmit to the guidance of his pure ſpirit, through whoſe affiftante


they are enabled to being forth, fruits unto holines, and.to Rand porfect | in their preſept


Tänk.


As to vaths,. * de Vterally, by Chriſt's poſitive injun&tion,” 1 Swear not


at all.“ They believe that“ wars and fightings” are, in their, origin and
_ utterly repugnant to the Goſpel, which) ſtill breathes Peace * good will do


men.


Ge


226 THE UNITED STATES.
men.“ They alſo are firmly perſuaded, that if the benevolence of the Goſpet were ge-
nerally prevalent in the minds of men, it would effectually prevent them from oppreſſ-
ing, much more ſrom enſlaving their brethren, of whatever complexion; and would
even influence their treatment of the brute creation, which would no longer groan the
victims of their avarice, or of their falſe ideas of pleaſure.— They proſeſs that their prin-
ciples, which inculcate ſubmiſſion to the laws in all caſes wherein conſcience is not vio-
lated, are a ſecurity to the ſalutary purpoſes of government. —But they hold that the
civil magittrate has no right to interfere in matters of religion, and think perſecution,
in any degree, unwarrantable.— They reject the uſe of thoſe names of the months and
days, 'which, having been given in honour of the heroes or gods of the heathen, ori-
ginated in their flattery or ſuperſtition; and the cuſtom of ſpeaking to a ſingle.perſon in
the plural number, as having ariſen alſo from motives of adulation. Compliments,
- ſuperfluity of apparel or furniture, outward ſhews of rejoicing or mourning, and ob-
ſervations of days and times, they deem incompatible with the ſimplicity and ſincerity
of a Chriſtian life and they condemn public diverſions, gaming, and other vain amuſe-
ments of the world. They require no formal ſubſcription to any articles, either as the
condition of memberſhip, or to quality for the ſervice of the church g.
To effect the ſalutary purpoſes of diſcipline, Monthly, Quarterly, and Yearly mect-
ings are eſtabliſhed.— A monthly meeting is compoſed of ſeveral neighbouring congrega-
tions.—Its buſineſs is to provide for the ſubſiſtence of the poor, and for the education
of their offspring to judge of the ſincerity and fitneſs of perſons appearing to be con-
vinced of the religious principles of the ſociety, and defiring to be admitted to mem-_
berſhip; to excite due attention to the diſcharge of religious and moral duties; to deal
with diforderly members to appoint overſcers to ſee that the rules of their diſcipline are
(r 4... IIS 8
A Quarterly meeting is compoſed of ſeveral Monthly meetings. At this meeting
are produced written, anſwers from monthly meetings, to certain queſtions reſpecting
the conduct of their members and the meeting's care over them. The accounts thus
received, are digeſted and ſent by repretentatives to the yearly meeting. Appeals
from the judgement of monthly meetings are brought to the quarterly meetings.
The Yearly meeting has the general ſuperintendance of the ſociety in the country in
which it is eſtabliſhed. The buſineſs of this meeting is to give forth its advice—make
ſuch regulations as appear to be requiſite, or excite to the obſervance of thoſe already
made, &c. Appeals from the judgement of quarterly meetings are here finally deter-


During the late war, ſome of their number, contrary to this article of their faith, thought it their duty

to take up arms in defence of their country. This laid the foundation of a feceffion from their brethren, and
they now form a ſeparate congregation in Philadelphia, by the name of the Reſiſting or fighting Quakers.”

I In the preſent war of liberality and humanity, againſt avarice and cruelty, in defence of the Blacks, the

| Quakers have had the fignal honour of having firſt ſet the illuſtrious example. 5 3

Their mode of marrying is as follows Thoſe who intend to marry, appear together, and propoſe their

intention to the monthly meeting, and if not attended by their parents or guardians, produce a written certifi-

eate of their conſent, ſigned in the preſence of witneſſes. The meeting then appoints a committee to- inquire

whether they are clear of other engagements reſpecting marriage; and if at a ſubſequent meeting, to which

the parties alſo come and declare the continuance of their intention, no objections are reported, they have the

meeting's conſent to ſolemnize their intended marriage. This is done in a public meeting for worſhip, to-
wards the cloſe of which the parties ſtand up and ſolemnly take each other for huſband and wife. A certificate

of the proceedings is then pubüciy read, and ſigned by the parties, and afterwards by the relations and others 45

witneſſes, which cloſes the ſolemnity. FFF — 8 ieee BY.

9 The Quakers have, in all, ſeven yearly meetings. One in London, to which come repreſentatives

from Ireland. The other fix are in the United States. 1. New England, 2. New York, 3. New ! erſey,

and Pennſylvania, 4. Maryland, 5. Virginia, 6. The Carolinas and Georgia, | e


mined;


continue in their ſocieties, that the


by the late Lady Huntingdon


THE UNITED STATES. ; 427
mined; and a brotherly correſpondence, by epiſtles, is maintained with other yearly
meetings. | | : oye
As they believe women may be rightly called to the work of the miniſtry, they alſo
think they may ſhare in their Chriſtian diſcipline. Accordingly they have monthly,
quarterly, and yearly meetings of their own ſex ; held at the ſame time, and in the ſame
place with thoſe of the men ; but ſeparately, and without the power of making rules.
Their elders and miniſters have meetings peculiar to themſelves. Theſe meetings,
called Meetings of miniſters and elders, are generally held in the compaſs of each
monthly, quarterly, and yearly meeting—for the purpoſes of exciting each other to
the diſcharge of their ſeveral duties—of extending advice to thoſe who may appear
weak, &c. They alſo, in the intervals of the yearly meetings, give certificates to
thoſe miniſters who travel abroad in the work of the miniſtry. oo f
The yearly meeting, held in London, 1675, appointed a meeting to be held in
that city, for the purpoſe of adviſing or aſſiſting in caſes of ſuffering for conſcience
ſake, called a Meeting for ſufferings, which is yet continued. It is compoſed of
Friends under the name of correſpondents, choſen by the ſeveral quarterly meetings,
who reſide in and near the city. This meeting is entruſted with the care of printing


and diſtributing books, and with the management of its ſtock, and conſidered as a
ſtanding committee of the yearly meeting.—In none of their meetings have they a


Preſident, as they believe Divine Wiſdom alone ou
ber a right to claim pre-eminence over the reſt.


The MerTropr1sT denomination of Chriſtians aroſe in England in 1739; and made
their firſt appearance in America about 24 years fince. Their general ſtyle is, The
United Societies of the Methodiſt Epiſcopal Church.” They profeſs themſelves to be
* a company of men, having the form and ſeeking the power of godlineſs, united in
order to pray together, to receive the word of exhortation, and to watch over one
another in love, that they may help each other to work out their ſalvation.” Each
ſociety is divided into claſſes of 12 perſons; one of whom is ſtiled the Leader, whoſe
bufineſs it is to ſee each perſon in his claſs once a week, in order to inquire how their
ſouls proſper, to adviſe, reprove, comfort, or exhort as occaſion may require; and to


e e ron; Geonl


receive contributions for the relief of the Church and Poor. In order to admiſſion


into their ſocieties they require only one condition, viz. A defire to flee from the
wrath to come, i. e. a deſire to be ſaved from their fins.” It is expected of all who
y {ſhould evidence their deſire of ſalvation, by
doing ne harm, by avoiding all manner of evil, by doing all manner of good, as they
have ability and opportunity, eſpecially to the houſchold of faith; employing them
preferably to others, buying of one another (unleſs they can be ſerved better elſe-


where) and helping each other in bufineſs—And alſo by attending upon all the ordi-


nances of God; ſuch as public worſhip, the ſupper of the Lord, family and private
prayer, ſearching the ſeriptures, and faſting or abſtinence. The late celebrated Mr.
John Weſley is conſidered as the father of this claſs of Methodiſts, who, as they deny
tome of the leading Calviniſtic doctrines, an! hold ſome of the peculiar tenets of
Arminius, may be called Arminian Methodiſts —The famous Mr. Whitefield was the
leader of the Calviniſtic Methodiſts, who aie numerous in England, and a few are in
different parts of the United States, who are patronized and ſupplied with miniſters,
In 1788, the number of Meſieian Methodiſts in the United States ſtood in the
following manner | PEST Y e


Ge 2


Georgia


— ORG


*
of *
*
1
n ? G
3
=_ j
'Y
+ + \
—_—
1
6 { .
1
* {
5
i L
*
48
* ip
:
1
„
_
7 |
1 .
—_—
+4
+ 3
*
.
"y
%

4
1H
*
93 > |
7
*
4 * -
"=
” ad
= 74

3 |
.
* !
*
* U
a. :
s , i
*
xd
.
i x4 ;
* 4

*

.

—_—

a*2 3 -
_—
=.
*

f |

1
N 8
HR x

: :
4

: .
: |
- ig
. ;

is.

* 3
1
1 *
2 : :
. 5 G
"WY |
=_
— A

=

8
—_—
oy -
I&7Y :
74
: Me.
"A. :
35 »
 .._-
7 :
* 1 *
DO | *
<4 þ
[> .

by
*
1

A ;
I. .
3
1

s

N 2

.

8 1
. 5

* :

1
#

* :
N =
6 ö 1

FI *
1

. ?

=.”

#1 :
.

*
1 g s
*
5

.—

A
4
2

_— -

+
3
iS
—_
33
»
_ -

—
1
==
bs
_ v4 4
—
_
20
"A
5 $ »
4%
42
* q
#. L 2
24
5 ö
— I
*
x _
>
%. P ?
or >).
8
_— -
=
of *
— :
. of
=
_—_—
4 of =
"I :
8
1 *
——BY
——
73
I
Ig t
N 1
3
» . .
"=
4, 45 [
. J
hb?
41% :
1 D
©” Jil
*
* =—
"*
of 1
_ -
L :
.
2
er,
C .
_
*
.
1
4 "=
5
.
.
3 4
1
E
4 4
* .
* N
.
|
5
# &
F ;
%
ba
+2
n
*
1
>
4
4
» 4


-
:
'
:
:
}
.
by
*


the Methodiſt Epiſcopal church, amounted, in 1790, to 71,568. 5


reſpectable.


2 HE UNITED STATES.

Geegia 4/415 = an . Delaware. 7 i: ni
South Carolina — 3366 Pennfylvama 3 1998
North Carolina K 6770 Ne Jerley 5 $3.4 5-47 $ÞE1

Virginia — — 14356 New York = — 2004
Maryland . CHO was 11017 | . „


. „
Since this eftimate of their numbers was taken, ſome few ſcattering ſocieties have


been collected in different parts of the New England States, and. their numbers.


increaſed in other parts; fo that in 1790, the whole connection amounted to 57, 62 1.
To ſuperintend the methodiſt connection in America, they had, in 1788, two. Biſhops,
30 Elders, and z0 Deacons. „ 85
In Great Britain and Ireland, the whole number of perſons in full connection with

The whole number of Rowan CarTrorics in the United States is eſtimated at about
50, 00; one half of which are in the State of Maryland. Their peculiar and leading
doctrines and tenets are too generally known to need a recital here. They have a
Biſhop, who refides in Baltimore, and many of their congregations are large and


The German inhabitants in theſe ſtates, who principally belong to Pennſylvania


and New York, are divided into a variety of ſects; the principal of which are,


Lutherans, Calviniſts or Preſbyterians, Moravians, Tunkers, and Mennoniſts. Of
theſe the German Lutherans are the moſt numerous. Of this denomination, and the


German Preſbyterians or Calviniſts, who are next to them in numbers, there are


upwards of 60 miniſters: in Pennſylvania—and the former have 12, and the latter 6
churches in the ſtate of New York. Many of their churches are large and ſplendid,
and in ſome inſtances furniſhed with organs. Theſe two denominations live together
in the greateſt harmony, often preaching in each other's churches, and ſometimes
uniting in the erection of a church, in which they alternately worſhip.  _
The Moravians are a reſpectable body of Chriſtians in theſe States. Of this deno-
mination, there were, in 1788, about 1300 ſouls in Pennſylvania ; viz. at Bethlehem,


between 5 and 600, which number has fince increaſed—at Nazareth, 450—at Litiz,
upwards of 300. Their other fettlements, in the United States, are at Hope, in New


Jerſey, about 100 fouls ; at Wachovia, on Yadkin river, North Carolina, contain-
ing 6 churches. Beſides theſe regular ſettlements, formed by ſuch only as are mem-
bers of the brethren's church, and live together in good order and harmony, there are


in different parts of Pennſylvania, Maryland, and New Jerſey, and in the cities of |
Newport, (Rhode Ifland) New York, Philadelphia, Lancaſter, York-town, &c. congre-


gations of the brethren, who have their own church and miniſter, and hold the ſame
principles, and doctrinal tenets, and church rites and ceremonies as the former,


though their local fituation does not admit of ſuch particular regulations, as are pe-


culiar to the regular ſettlements. _ . BITS | VV
They call themſelves, The United Brethren of the Proteſtant Epiſcopal Church.”
They are called Moravians, becauſe the firft ſettlers in the Engliſh dominions were
chiefly emigrants from Moravia. Theſe were the remnant and genuine deſcendents
of the church of the antient United Brethren, eſtabliſhed in Bohemia and Moravia,
as early as the year 1456. About the middle of the laſt century, they leſt their native
country to avoid perſecution, and to enjoy liberty of conſcience, and the true exerciſe
of the religion of their forefathers. They were received in Saxony, and other Pro-
teſtant dominions, and were encouraged to ſettle among them, and were joined by


wmany


THE UNITED STATES. 0g 229
many ſerious people of other dominions. They adhere to the Auguſtin Confeſſion
of Faith, Which was drawn up by Proteſtant divines at the time of the reformation
in Germany, in the year 1530, and preſented at the diet of the empire at Auſburg ;
and which, at that time, contained the doctrinal ſyſtem of all the eftabliſhed Pro-
teſtant churches. They retain the diſcipline of their ancient church, and make ule of
Epiſcopal ordination, which has been handed down to them in a direct line of ſacceſ- |
fion for more than three hundred years“
They profets to live in ſtrict obedience to the ordinances of Chriit, ſuch as the
obſervation of the Sabbath, Infant Baptiſm, and the Lord's Supper ; and in addition
to theſe, they practiſe the foot waſhing, the kiſs of love, and the uſe of the lot.
They were introduced into America by Count Zinzendorf, and ſettled at Bethle-
hem, which is their principal ſettlement in America, as early as 1741. Regularity,
induſtry, ingenuity, and ceconomy, are characteriſtics of theſe people. he TM
The Tunxxxs are fo called in deriſion, from the word tunben, to put @ morcel in ſauce. *
The Engliſh word that conveys the proper meaning of Tunkers is Sops or Dippers.
They are alſo called Tumblers, from the manner in which they perform baptiſm,
which is by putting the perſon, while kneeling, head firſt under water, ſo as to re-
femble the motion of the body in the action of tumbling. The Germans ſound the
letters f and þ like d and p; hence the words 'Tunkers and Tumblers, have been cor-
ruptly written Dunkers and Dumplerss  —_ 3 .
The firſt appearing of theſe people in America was in the fall of the year 1719,
when about twenty families landed in Philadelphia, and diſperſed themſelves'in various
parts of Pennſylvania. They are what are called General Baptiſts, and hold to gene-
ral redemption and general ſalvation. They uſe great plainnefs of drefs and language,
and will neither ſwear, nor fight, nor go to law, nor take intereft for the money they
lend. They commonly wear their beards—keep the firſt day Sabbath, except one
_ congregation—have the Lord's Supper with its ancient attendants of Love-feaſts,
with waſhing of feet, kiſs of charity, and right hand of fellowſhip. They anoint the
fick with oil for their recovery, and uſe the trine immerſion, with laying on of hands
and prayer, even while the perſon baptiſed is in the water. Their church government
and diſcipline are the fame with thoſe of the Engliſh Baptiſts, except that every brother
is allowed to ſpeak in the congregation ; and their beſt ſpeaker is uſually ordained to
be their miniſter. They have deacons, deaconeſſes (from among their ancient widows)
and exhorters, who are all licenſed to uſe their gifts ſtatedly. On the whole, notwith-
ftanding their peculiarities, they appear to be humble, well-meaning Chriſtians, and
have acquired the character of the harmleſs Tunkers .
Their principal ſettlement is at Ephrata, ſometimes called Tunkers- own, in Lan-
_cafter county, fixty miles weftward of Philadelphia. It confiſts of about forty
buildings, of which three are places of worſhip : one is called Sharon, and adjoins the
ſiſter's apartment as a chapel ; another, belonging to the brothers' apartment, is calle&
Bethany. To theſe the brethren and ſiſters reſort, ſeparately, to worſhip morning and
evening, and ſometimes in the night. The third is a common church, called Zion,
Where all in the ſettlement meet once a week for public worthip. The brethren have


* See David Crantz* Hiſt. of The ancient and modern United Brethren's Church, tranſlated from the
German, by the Rev. Benjamin La Trobe.” London, 1780. Thoſe who wiſh to obtain a thorough and
impartial knowledge of their religious ſentiments and cuſtoms, may ſee them excellently fummed up in a
pan, but nervous ſtile, in * An expoſition of Chriſtian Doctrine, as taught in the Proteſtant church of the
ere Brethren,* written in German, by A. G. Spangenberg, and tranſlated and publiſhed in Engliſh in


x | . adopted


—
—
— l * 2 =
=_ \ . — * 4 —_- * 2 1 * ; OILY
— Oar IE oy 4 gg ads wot . "= rs mo 55x — pho 4 - / 4 <b> . - *
_ . oy , 4 * r Nr * x TT N 2 — i
; 7 32 — N n 2 3 2 > / 0 Ow — mSen" * _- free et — — :
ö * a > wid hb 2 2 =
a * „ 2 2 2 pad; - — . 8 9 N =
4 . : — „ — y a
* — —— — —— 222 N
22 F — A200 tHe
* by * AL


0 1 — a . 8
n SF x a6 4, £345. 2 2 * =
As; "14 _y FEW NO ISTH TO: OP
- * A * W_—— 4 CI 2


b
*
:
_
«< IIS
„
3 p
4 N
7 by -
4 i
5 ;
; i
b
*
th „
N
. *
=
1
© g
.
4
=
ny
12 d
1
I © as
—
1
[EY
iT
.
>. I
2 R
* q
WS
d V
3 5
3
1
"i
*
53 ;
wr
i £ 5
© 4
WP is
.4
1
1
By 5
_
A 1
bs 42 :
N
Py
WEE.
1
EM
VF
-
HEY
-—=
a
v9
x C
+4
"x
4 * .
. o
N
. .
*
4
4
2348
""
<> I
"
-
- 4
44a -
A
ry .
2
K #
3
© »
8
"3 wi
HA TY
+
4 iN
4%
N I
B
i '
E 4
p
8
7
©
< l
„
3
7
1
1
*
E
*
1 |
«LS
* AF"
4 |
* 4
.
+ 7
1
.
—
5 ,
+» 4


62
1
g 0
=
:
7 1
41 1
1:4
1
19
& *


PO THE UNITED STATES.


adopted the White Friars' dreſs, with ſome alterations; the ſiſters that of the nuns;
and both like them have taken the vow of celibacy. All, however, do not keep the vow.
When they marry, they leave their cells and go among the married people. They
ſubſiſt by cultivating their lands, by attending a printing office, a griſt mill, a paper


mill, an oil mill, &c. and the ſiſters by ſpinning, weaving, ſewing, &c. They at firſt


ſlept on board conches, but now on beds, and have otherwiſe abated much of their
former ſeverity. This congregation keep the ſeventh day Sabbath. Their ſinging is


charming, owing to the pleaſantnefs of their voices, the variety of parts, and the
devout manner of performance. Beſides this congregation at Ephrata, there were, in


1770, fourteen others in various other parts of Pennſylvania, and ſome in Maryland.
The whole, excluſive of thoſe in Maryland, amounted to upwards of 2000 ſouls, -
The MENNONISTS derive their name from Menno Simon, a native of Witmars in


Germany, a man of learning, born in the year 1505, in the time of the reformation b


Luther and Calvin. He was a famous Roman Catholic preacher, till about the year
1531, when he became a Baptiſt. Some of his followers came into Pennſylvania from
New York and ſettled at German-town, as early as 1692. This is at preſent their


principal congregation, and the mother of the reſt. Their whole number, in 1970, in
Pennſylvania, was upwards of 4000, divided into thirteen churches, and forty-two


congreg*.ions, under the care of fifteen ordained miniſters, and fifty-three licenſed
rcachers. : oe ener OE Pats 17
N The Mennoniſts do not, like the Tunkers, hold the doctrine of general ſalvation;
yet like them, they will neither ſwear nor fight, nor bear any civil office, nor go
to law, nor take intereſt for the money they lend, though many break this laſt
rule. Some of them wear their beards; waſh each others feet, &c. and all uſe plain-
neſs of ſpeech and dreſs. - Some have been expelled their ſociety for wearing buckles in


their ſhoes, and having pocket holes in their coats. 'Their church government 1s


democratical. They call themſelves the Harmleſs Chriſtians, Revengeleſs Chriſtians, -
and Weaponleſs Chriſtians. They are Baptiſts rather in name than in fact; for they
do not ute immerſion. Their common mode of baptiſm is this: the perſon to be
baptized kneels ; the miniſter holds his hands over him, into which the deacon pours


Water, which runs through upon the head of the perſon kneeling. After this, follow
impoſition of hands and prayer. ts


The denomination ſtiled UNVERSALIs Ts, though their ſchemes are very various,


may properly enough be divided into two claſſes, viz. Thoſe who embrace the ſcheme
of Dr. Chauncey, exhibited in his book entitled The Salvation of all Men;“ and


the diſciples of Mr. Wincheſter and Mr. John Murray. 1


A judicious ſummary of Dr. Chauncey's ſentiments has been given, * as follows:
© That the ſcheme of revelation has the happineſs of all mankind lying at bottom,


as its great and ultimate end; that it gradually tends fo this end; and will not fail of


its accompliſhment, when fully completed. Some, in conſequence of its operation, as


conducted by the Son of God, will be diſpoſed and enabled, in this preſent ſtate, to


make ſuch improvements in virtue, the only rational preparative for happineſs, as that
they ſhall enter upon the enjoyment of it in the next ſtate. Others, who have proved
incurable under the means which-have been uſed with them in this ſtate, inſtead of
being happy in the next, will be awfully miſerable; not to continue ſo finally, but
that they may be convinced of their folly, and recovered to a virtuous frame of mind:


In H. Adams's 4 View of Religions,” article Univerſalifts, whene the reader may find alſo a ſummary of


the arguments for and againſt his ſcheme,


and


- THE UNITED STATES. 231
and this will be the effect of the future torments upon many; the conſequence whereof
will be their ſalvation, they being thus fitted for it. And there may be yet other ſtates,
beſore the ſcheme of God may be pertected, and mankind univerſally cured of their
moral diſorders, and in this way qualified for, and finally inſtated in, eternal happineſs...
But however many ſtates ſome of the individuals of the human ſpecies may paſs
through, and of however long continuance they may be, the whole is intended to
ſubſerve the grand deſign of univerſal happineſs, and will finally terminate in it; inſo-
much, that the Sou of God and Saviour of men will not deliver up his truſt into the
hands of the Father, who committed it to him, till he has diſcharged his obligations in
virtue of it; having finally fixed all men in heaven, when God will be All in All.

The number of this denomination is not known. The open advocates of this ſcheme
are few ; though the number is larger, who embrace the doctrine of the ſalvation of
all men, upon principles ſimilar, but variouſly differing from thoſe on which the above-
mentioned ſcheme is grounded. „ RE TS rite To's
The latter claſs of Univerſaliſts have a new ſcheme, differing eſſentially from that of
the former, which they reject as inconſiſtent and abſurd : and they cannot conceive
how they who embrace it, can, © with any degree of propriety, be called Univerſaliſts,
on Apoſtolic principles, as it does not appear that they have any idea of being ſaved
by, or in the Lord, with an everlaſting, or with any ſalvation.” Hence they call them
« Phariſaical Univerſaliſts, who are willing to juſtify themſebves.” * _ 1 1
It is difficult to ſay what is the preſent ſcheme of the denomination of which we are
now ſpeaking; for they differ not only from all other Univerſaliſts, and from each

other, but even from themſelves at different periods. The reader, however, may form
an idea of ſome of their tenets from what follows, collected from the letter referred to
in the note. This letter, wrnten lately, by the head of the denomination, and pro-
feſſing to rectify miſtakes reſpecting doctrines propagated under the Chriſtian name
to give the character of a Con/iflent Univerſaliſi—and to acquaint the world with their rea!
ſentiments, we have reaſon to conclude, gives as true an account of their ſcheme as can
be obtamed. ©: -- 1 „ | 7
From this letter it appears, that they believe © that Religion of {ome ſort or other,
is a public benefit ;” and that every perſon is at liberty, and is bound, to ſupport what
he conceives to be the true Religion That public worſhip on every firſt day of the
week, is an incumbent duty on all real lovers of divine truth—that prayer, as it indi-
_ Cates truſt in, and dependence on God, is part of his worſhip— They believe that the
Deceiver, who beguiled Eve, and not our firſt parents themſelves, did the deed which
brought ruin and death on all the human race—That there are two claſſes of fallen ſin-
ners the Angels who kept not their firſt eſtate, and the human nature, deceived by the

former, and apparently deſtroyed conſequent thereon—that a 2 God, in the law given by
Moles, has denounced death and the curſe on every one who continueth not in all things,
written in the book of the law to do them but that the ſume God was manifeſted in the
fleth as the head of every man, made under the law, io redeem them that are under the late,
being made a curſe for them—that he taſted death for every man, being a Saviour, not of a
few only, but of all mex—and that the declaration of this is the Gofpel. —T hey believe
that when God denounces on the human race, woes, wrath, tribulation, death, damna- _
tion, &c. in the Scriptures, he ſpeaks in his legiſlative capacity, as the juſt God who
wil by 10 means clear the gyiltz=that when he ſpeaks of mercy, grace, peace, of life as
the gift of God, and ſalvation in whole or in part, he ſpeaks in the character of the


* See Mr. Murray's 5. Letter to a Friend,“ page 40, 41. printed in Boſton, 1791.


Jif


7
* |
4A
%
5
=
:
:
i
* :
-
S :
44
Co : :
\%F
:
»
> 4
.
iv .
Es
*
SY
2 5
*
1
* Y
1 !
o
.
*
* — *
1
ES
a0
* V
81
1 :
„
1
_ ;
. =
3 4
* »
. :
4 :
B
o
- *
4 e
* 5
* 5
+
2 I
3 ;
IS
—*M
* — .
34
£148
47
F
by
6.3
-M
7 4
.
.
bs.
R 2
Lhe
8 * L ;
+42
%
1 *
* ＋
4 2
£ : *
: 4 »
: 6
9 .
2
x A
2
* £1
8 ns
- *
"=
2 1
=_
"4 . 71
1
_—
_
AY
+3
"2 1 #7
ui 4
E 7
4
bye =
x
1
- 1
= =
20
FPS,
*% -
5
* * 3
4 * - 1
- 3 o
4 CY
-
TY
2
1 bt 5
8 8
q 7 4
5 =
_
ne
=
Ms
IV -
4
. £
5
- <7
__ -
3
"ug 1
all =
5 2 *
# ,
_ -
—_ -
=# I
3
* 1
.
* I
CO
»Y
= Bp
3
®
hay
--
-
_—
1
4
1 *
i
„
3
r
- 1 A
-& 3
1
"i
5 | *
. by
2
: 3
> .
oF
4 b
=_
4
4
! q
#3
8
—
i
+Y
| =
* 7]
4
of =
E 3
+2
1
LS


avoid contention, © to become all things to all men,” and to bapfize 3


a=. -,_ rer OTA FEES.


— a | : ' F > 3 b F 8 33
juſt God and Saviour—that the former is the language of the law ; the latter is the


language of the Goſpel. DEL © a3 1 „ ͤ Ä
Confeſſion of fins—Repentance, and ſupplications for mercy and forgiveneſs, make
no part of their creed or worthip. —=—_ J6ʒ:E:t':t:t... 88
They believe that the Prince of Peace came to ſave the human nature from the power
and dominion of the Devil, and his works that he came to deſtroy the latter, that he
might ſave the former—That * Sin is the work of the Devil—that he is the Worker and


Doer of whatever gives offence” —That Jeſus, as the Saviour. of the world, ſhall


ſeparate from his kingdom, both the evil #orker and his evil works; the evil Worker,
in the character of goats—the evil works in the character of fares.— They ſuppoſe that
what is wicked in mankind, is repreſented by the evil feed fown by the evi! One in human
nature, and that when the Sower of the evil ſeed, and all the evil ſeed fown, ſhall
be ſeparated from the ſeed which God ſowed, then the ſeed which is properly God's
ſeed, will be like him who ſowed it, pure and holy,” I nent
They conſider all ordinances as merely ſhadows ; yet they celebrate the Lord's Supper,
by eating and drinking wine—and ſome of them ſuppoſe that every time they eat bread
and drink wine, they comply with our Lord's injunction, * Do this in remembrance
of me. Various other opinions prevail among them reſpecting this ordinance, and


that of baptiſm. They admit of but oe baptiſm, the baptizer Jeſus Chriſt; the


elements made uſe of, the Holy Ghoft and fire” —yet they are SITS, in order to
U th 1,” 21 infants y ſprink.
ling, or adults by immerſion—or to omit theſe figns altogether, according as the
opinions of parents may vary upon this ſubject—Some think it proper to dedicate their
children to the Lord, by putting them into the arms of the miniſter, to be by him
preſented to Chriſt, to be baptized with his baptiſm, in the name of the Trinity, the
miniſter at the ſame time to bleſs them in the words in which God commanded Aaron
and his ſons to bleſs the children of Iſrael The Lord blefs thee, '&c.” —It appears,
in ſhort, that their notions reſpecting ' theſe ordinances are various, vague, and
unſettled. _ = EE ED E „
They believe in a judgement paſt and a judgement to come - that the paſt judgement


is either that in which the world was judged in the ſecond Adam, according to the


word of the Saviour, Now is the judgement of this world—now is the Prince of this world


| caſt out and judgement executed on them and on the whole haman nature, according to


the righteous judgement of God—or that which every man is to exerciſe upon himſelf,
according to the words © judge yourſelves and ye ſhall not be judged” “ The judgement
to come is that in which all who have not judged themſelves—all unbelievers of the
human race, and all the fallen angels, ſhall be judged by the Saviour—but theſe two
characters, viz. unbelievers of the human race, and the fallen angels, ſhall be placed, the
former on the right, the latter on the leſt hand of their Judge; the one under the deno-
mination of /þzep, for whoſe ſalvation the Saviour laid down his life—the other under
the denomination of geats, who are the accurſed, whoſe nature he paſſed by“ The
human nature” (i. e. the ſheep or unbelievers of the human race) * as: the offspring of
the everlaſting Father, and the ranſomed of the Lord — ſhall be brought, by divine power,
into the kingdom prepared for them, before the foundation of the world the other nature, (i. e.
the goats, or fallen angels) „will be ſent into the fire prepared for them.” * 70
© © The reader will doubtleſs notice that the plural pronoun them, is ſeveral times uſed to expreſs the ſingular
noun human nature, and Prince, of this world, As the human nature, &c. ſhall be brought into-the K 1
prepared for them; the other aature will be ſent into the fire prepared for ben the Prince of this world, ”


ö r AF „ 3 BY © {© 3 — Sb.
of 4 _ = &4 F g ; 4
ll. "IF K : 2 * * 9 * my N.. a * * *
1 %


— LY
*


THE UNITED STATES. 455


which it appears, that it is their opinion, that unbelievers of the human race, or ſheep, and
the fallen angels, Or goats, will be the only claſles of creatures concerned in the awards
of the laſt judgement—and that the righteous, or believers in Chriſt, will not then be
judged, having previouſly judged themſelves*—< But the reſt of mankind,” ſay they,
« will be the ſubjects of this judgement, when our Saviour all be revealed from heaven
in flaming fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the goſpel; and they
Shall then be punifhed with everlaſting deftruftion from the preſence of the Lord and the glory of
his power.” Their inference from, and expoſition of this paſſage, are peculiar, and


will ſerve to give the reader an idea of their manner of explaining other parallel
aſſages of Scripture. From this awful revelation of the Saviour, to take vengeance


on them that know not God, and obey not the goſpel, they infer this conſequence,
they ſhall then be made to know God, and obey the goſpel.” —The everlaſting deſtruc-
tion, from the preſence of the Lord and the glory of his power, with which they Gall


be puniſhed, they ſuppoſe is ſuffered by unbelievers, in conſequence of the revelation of


the everlaſting deſtruction, previous to this awful period—and that they will ſuffer no
puniſhment after it—for “ it is not ſaid, they tay, © that they thall be evertaſtingly
puniſhed with deſtruction.” They explain their idea of everlaſting puniſhment aud


ſuffering the pain of eternal fire, thus, © Were it poſſible to find a culinary fire that


never would be extinguiſhed, but in the ſtricteſt tenſe of the word, was everlafling dr


eternal—ſhould any member of the body paſs through that burning flame, though but
a moment of time had been thus ſpent in paſſing through; yet even in that moment, it


would ſuffer the pain of eternal fire.”-—But whether they believe it poſſible that there


ſhould be ſuch a fire, or that unbelievers ſhall be doomed to ſuffer the puniſhment of


eternal fire by thus paſſing through it, they do not declare.


They do not ſuppoſe that all mankind will be on a level in the article of death,
but that they who die in unbelief, will Jie down in ſorrow, and rite to the reſurredtion


of damnation, or condemnation ; and when the books ſhall be opened, and the dead,


both ſmall and great, ſhall be judged out of the things written in the books—every
mouth ſhall be ſtopped, and all the world become guilty betore God ; and while con-
ſcious of guilt, but ignorant of a Saviour—they ſhall call on the rocks and mountains
to fall on them to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb—But that in this judgement


the judge is the Saviour they will be judged by heir ozon head; and as the head of


every man is Chriſt all of courſe muſt be acquitted and ſaved.
Although they believe that the Devil is the ber or worker of every thing that gives
offence ; yet they aſſert that “ all men at all times are ſinners, and come ſhort of the


glory of God” —but they believe that what Chriſt ſuffered, * was conſidered by the :


_ Great Lawgiver, as done and ſuffered by every man in his own perſon ; and that every


man is as much intereſted in what Chriſt, the ſecond Adam did, as they were in what
the firſt Adam did thus believing they conſider God as juſt in being their Saviour,


as he would have been in their eternal damnation.


The Conſiftent Univerſaliſt, “ does not conſider himſelf under the law any more than


a woman conſiders herſelf under the direction or dominion of a huſband that is dead


and buried—nor is he afraid of death, being aſſured that 1 clus hath aboliſhed death,


and left nothing of it but the ſhadoro,”


0.


grammatical propriety of which, the compiler does not hold himſelf reſponſible, ; |


* In the followin
Here,


be caſt out, and judgement be executed on them. This is a phraſeology peculiar to this denomination, for the


Fw are contidered in their diſtinct characters, as good and evil, or deliever and unbeliever, as obildren of
% and children of darkneſs—and judged by their own head. Letter, p. 33s


H b = The


be g paſſage, the contrary ſeems to be aſſerted. Speaking of the laſt judgement it is ſaid,
inſtead of head and members being judged together, by the head, Cbriſt, the divine nature, the wem-


Ll
1
i
5
1
:
;
.


= * 8 2 D — nnn -- Shes x” * y = ar2T 7 = 4 A
—_ Os Go yr” + a IT. — I * pen I ; » -" - 1 b
Ears 3 * - yy fy = 7 4 - 42 * ©; "by *- * " 4, * 4 222 4 „ 3
Is N - i - ; N 4 | JO. 2p 4 e * = _ 4
* : Py . W a » G . 7 — 8 £ 3 P - * — 2. — -
88 —— FT — gory — pu — - , — -
* v . 2 " — o
> \ ” * 5 8 *
" — 5 ng 4 on * 4 hy .
Se 2 — 3 2 + * 2 — N


1 _
» *
o 1


mh


* —
24
> LE


—  — — — 4


Or — a


Le a — 254 Ws


a


*
5
„
, 3
"x |
. 2
- :
_—
"4
BE 77
q $
. .
if 5
:
7 1 .
4 x
* :
8
„
*
8
+2 >
2 *
=
1
a
=
.
„
KS © )
=
: *
-— ==
„
18
5 po
. Wy
# - =
1 1
3
8 .
*
DB
* d
74
* A
„
"|
p : -
+ 5
- "MX
"MY
2
* x 1
9 %
Le
£ 1
*
1
8
1
Ss |
"x
A}
"5
, + -
—
os +.
1
*
4 _
- +2
4
4 9
—
wm
1
: =
F
*
. :
iu) ih
+.
* *
1
1
* *
”
3
Ry - 4
4 q
_— ;
{==
+ %.Y
Pp
1
2
Pp
+ f >
. 1
U
[2 *
4 3
7
7 |
. 4
8
8. :
7 A
- F
.
2
b ,
43 g
44
4
; 4
WS
*
2 1
1
1 -
*
Wu


234 THE UNITED STATES.


doing right as men—as members of civil ſociety—and as Chriſtians. “ As mere men”


A»
— a0 N


Her followers aſſerted, that ſhe was the woman ſpoken of in the twelfth chapter of the


ſenſual relation to Adam the firſt, and come to be tranſparent in their ideas, in the


1 —— 8 rn — *
N 4. * *
PR * 2 2 Wo ey


% *% ä * 2
% LS > *


l * , I * 4 7 : j oaks 2 __
-. * LEY os bes Rn * 22 * ML . *
4 : . P Fs I... CF I» . F a dls


The Univerfaliſts of this denomination, in common with other Chriſtians, profeſs
themſelves to be the advocates of piety, religion, and morality.— They aſſert the duty of -


they hold, that “ they muſt follow nature, or they will ſink beneath the level of the
beatts of the field” - and yet they aftert that © al7 e righteouſneſs found in the beft of
mere buman nature is but as a filthy rag — That as members of civil tocicty they muſt
fabmit to the laws, or if thought too ſcvere, they may avoid them by a removal from
the ſtate.” —That as Chriſtians they muſt be under the direction of Chriſt, and do what-
foever he commands them; and theſe are his commandments, © that we believe in him, and
love one another,” : . Eg,
Theie are but a few of this denomination of Univerſaliſts in the United States Of
theſe few, ſome are in Pennſylvania - ſome in different parts of New York, Connecticut,
Rhode Ifland, and New Hampſhire ; but the body of them are in Boſton, and. Glou-
cefter, in Maſſachuſetts. They have ſeveral conſtituted churches, which are governed
by an eccleſiaſtical conftitution, formed in 1789, by a ſmall convention of their
miniſters at Philadelphia. | Bs 8 3335
Thers is a ſmall and ſingular ſect of Chriſtians, called SAR ERS, which have ſprung
up among us as lately as 1774; when a few of this ſect came from England to New
York, and there being joined by a few others, they ſettled at Nitqueunia, above
Albany, which is their principal ſettlement : a few others are ſcattered in different
parts of the conntry. | | | | 5


The head of this party, while ſhe lived,“ was Anna Leeſe, ſtyled the Elect Lady.


\


Revelation, and that the ſpoke ſeventy-two tongues : and although theſe tongues were
unintelligible to the living, . ſhe converted with the dead who underſtood her language.
They alledged alſo that the was the mother of all the Ele# ; that ſhe travailed for the
whole world—that no bleffing could deſcend to any perfon but only by and through
her, and that in the way of her being poſſeſſed of their fins, by their confeſſing and
repenting of them, one by one, according to her direction. 3 fe
Their leading doctrinal tenets, as given by one of their own denomination, are,
* That the firſt reſurrection is already come, and now is the time to judge themſelves.
That they have power to heal the ſick, to raiſe the dead, and caſt out devils. That
they have a correſpondence with angels, the ſpirits of the ſaints and their departed
friends. That they ſpeak with divers kind of tongues in their public aſſemblics. That
it is lawful to practiſe vecal muſic with dancing in the Chriſtian churches, if it be practiſed
in praiſing the Lord. That their church is come out of the order of natural generation,
to be as Chriſt was; and that thoſe who have wives are as though they had none.
That by theſe means heaven begins upon earth, and they thereby loſe their earthly and


bright and heavenly viſions of God. That ſome of their people are of the number of
the 144,000, who were redeemed from the earth, and were not defiled with women.
That the word everlaſting, when applied to the puniſhment of the wicked, means
only a limited period, except in the cafe of thoſe who fall from heir church; and that
for ſuch there is no forgiveneſs, neither in this world nor that which is to comg. That
it is unlawful to ſwear, game, or uſe compliments—and that water baptiſm and the
Lord's Supper are aboliſhed. That Adam's fin is not imputed to his poſterity and

that the doctrines of election and reprobation arc to be rejected. 9 5 5


* Notwithſtanding her predictions and aſſertions to the contrary, ſhe died in 1784 and was ſucceeded by
one James Whitaker, who alſo died in 1787, Joſeph Meacham, who has attained the reputation of a prophet
among them, is at preſent their Leader, 8


The


>, = N . , 7 |
9 „ ; .


: * * r a » = 4 — "4 N * ot + —
— _ a „ 2 run ot oh : 2 * 3 1 4 l . - 1 * | 14 * ” oy g . * 2. oy ö . : = 4 ah LO * * p
N 7 * * "> - 4 x * FI * - * GAS * * . : RE f = As * en 2 3 ” *" _—_ ** og . 5 A 7 Fe hy
. * 4 1 - '


2


THE UNITED STATES. 235
Ihe diſcipline of this denomination is founded on the ſuppoſed perfection of their
leaders. The Mother, or the Elect Lady, it is faid, obeys God through Chrift.
European elders obey her. American labourers, and common people obey them ; while
confeſſion is made of every ſecret thing, from the oldeſt to the youngeſt. The people
are made to believe that they are ſeen through and through in the goſpel glaſs of per-
ſection, by their teachers, who behold the ſtate of the dead, and innumerable worlds
of ſpirits good and bad. 8 e | „ 8 ) |
Theſe people are generally inſtructed to be very induſtrious, and to bring in ac-
cording to their ability, to keep up the meeting. They vary in their exerciſes. Their
heavy dancing, as it is called, is performed by a perpetual ſpringing from the houſe
floor, about four inches up and down, both in the men's and women's apartment,
moving about with extraordinary tranſport, ſinging ſometimes one at a time, ſome-
times more, making a perfect charm. . N 5
This elevation affects the nerves, ſo that they have intervals of ſhuddering, as if
they were in a ſtrong fit of the ague. They ſometimes clap hands and leap fo as to
ſtrike the joiſts above their heads. They throw off their outſide garments in theſe
exerciſes, and ſpend their ſtrength very cheertully this way. Their chief ſpeaker often
calls for attention; when they all ſtop and hear ſome harangue, and then fall to
dancing again. They aſſert that their dancing is the token of the great joy and hap- |
pineſs of the new Feruſalem ſtate, and denotes the victory over fin. One of the poſ- |
tures, which increaſes among them, is turning round very ſwift for an hour or two. |
5


—


— — —— —


OO


This, they ſay, is to ſhow the great power of God.


They ſometimes fail on their knees and make a ſound like the roaring of many |
WIRE in groans and cries to God, as they ſay, for the wicked world who perſecute =
T_ > TE 155 „„ 5 „„ |

The Jews are not numerous in the United States. They have ſynagogues at Sa- -
vannah, Charleſton, (South Carolina) Philadelphia, New York, and Newport. Beſides -
thoſe who reſide at theſe places, there are others ſcattered in different towns in the
United State. V 1

Ihe Jews in Charleſton, among other peculiarities in burying their dead, have
theſe: Aſter the funeral dirge is ſung, and juſt before the corpſe is depoſited in the
grave, the coffin is opened, and a ſmall bag of earth, taken from the grave, is carefully
put under the head of the deceaſed ; then ſome powder, ſaid to be earth brought from
Jeruſalem, and carefully kept for this purpoſe, is taken and put upon the eyes of the
corpſe, in token of their remembrance of the holy land, and of their expectations of
returning thither in God's appointed time. Whether this cuſtom is univerſal among
the Jews, is not T pan „ 1 . |
They generally expect a glorious return to the Holy Land, when they ſhall be ex-
_ alted above all the nations of the earth. And they flatter themſelves that the period
4 their return will ſpeedily arrive, though they do not venture to fix the preciſe
time. 3 „F TH |
The whole number of perſons who profeſs the Jewiſh religion, in all parts of the
world, 1s ſuppoſed to be about three millions, who, as their phraſe is, are witneſſes of
the unity of God in all the nations in the world. NT IR
8 Beſides the religious ſets enumerated, there are a few of the German inhabitants
in Pennſylvania, who are ſtyled SwIxSsEILDIANSs, and, in Maryland, a ſmall number


5


n „ Bin


H. Adams's « View of Religions.” Article Shakers, CNT
f. For the articles of their faith, &c. ſee H. Adams's View of Religions,“ Article Jes page 290.


Hh 2 | | called


— - — — 2 —
— = , * — — — ay IS <a —_ * — IS *
— 1 = = 1 2 * x * —— ne — n e . > + the * A 5 4 4 4
— * > — * „* 3 — 1 n - . as 4 ** 4 +, wh 3 FR * A > Ss 6. ai 4 a 7 r 3 3 - — a"
1 n _ __— r . of © 1 * $246 ? þ ELVES 20% . thy CES CAS» 2 8898 ; 9 * rn 1 - ö voy btn : —
= I =. _— 4 4 — 4 . = 4 OE 4 * e 2 , + n — eons vo : BST. 2 = — n n #144 1 2 rot os 0 — the -—# 0 >
7 8 4 * * * * 1 — 80 + "IL 2 . » * * oy , £48 - „ 1 La 4 e 8 0 - N *
4 7 9 « i oy; At 0 4 7 4 £ A L 2 bay 2 Ni 1 . Fs * * * 1
FL AIRS, c N 1 7 2s l : e * 2 * 2 (4 * N . P r 1 2 N * 95 _ ©. ae Er * A & or we 2 * * * =» 4 * | 4 * * : . N
g „. 2 5 ge * Ke * 2 8 9 * E „ren * * * . X. ar Y Satan . re — r $ 13 4 TURAL N : N * N
" . . a . - wes Lo ns we % . W 2 7 C FC, - : . . — . RX IK. K
. 4 9 2 9 TI R 6 4 daCo © " NT. I b ;, $1 A 9 N N . ae = $75 NEE 4-4 — BS N 7
4 + ror 6, PRI n 1 *% + wee * Y ne nds as oo 4 ont . > = o
* i " 2 » 222 * * * * „ * es - * — A 5 ,
. AN . 1 Y .
IE SIE re og  -< Sr : * ** a


. T” — > 1
188 0 + =. 4% Res 27: Bat =


„
„K 4 <, 907 2 = © —


3% ones C4


— — — pP 8 L —


r —


r


2 Ry


2


. es Es
236 | THE UNITED STATES.


called NreoLttes or New QuaxERs ; but with the diſtinguiſhing ſentiments of theſe
ſects I am not acquainted. 3 Ss
HrsToxy.] In addition to what we have already ſaid of the diſcovery and ſettle-
ment of North America, we ſhall here give a brief hiſtory of the late war with Great
Britain, with a ſketch of the events which preceded and prepared the way for the re-
volution. This general view of the hiſtory of the United States will ſerve as a ſuit-


able introduction to the particular hiſtories of the ſeveral States, which will be grven in


their proper places. 3 5

America was originally peopled by uncivilized nations, who lived moſtly by hunt-
ing and fiſhing. The Europeans, who firſt vifited theſe ſhores, treating the natives
as wild beaſts of the foreft, which have no property in the woods where they roam,
planted the ſtandard of their reſpective maſters, where they firſt landed, and in their


names claimed the country by right of diſcovery,* Prior to any ſettlement in North
America, numerous titles of this kind were acquired by the Engliſh, French, Spaniſh,
and Dutch navigators, who came hither for the purpoſes of fiſhing and trading with the


natives. Slight as ſuch titles were, they were afterwards the cauſes of contention be-
tween the European nations. The ſubjects of different princes often laid claim to the


ſame tract of country, becauſe both had diſcovered the ſame river or promontory; or
| becauſe the extent of their reſpective claims was undetermined. Br FP


While the ſettlements in this vaſt uncultivated country were inconſiderable and
ſcattered, and the trade of it confined to the bartering of a few trinkets for furs, a
trade carried on by a few adventurers, the interfering of claims produced no important


controverſy among the ſettlers or the nations of Europe. But in proportion to the


progreſs of population, and the growth of the American trade, the jealouſies of the
nations, which had made early diſcoveries and ſettlements on this coaſt, were alarmed ;


ancient claims were revived ; and each power took meaſures to extend and ſecure its


own poſſeſſions at the expence of a rival. os : Ge Th Ny,
By the treaty of Utrecht in 1713, the Engliſh claimed a right of cutting logwood in


the Bay of Campeachy, in South America. In the exerciſe of this right, the Enghſh
merchants had frequent opportunities of carrying on a contraband trade with the


Spaniſh ſettlements on the continent. To remedy this evil, the Spaniards reſolved to


annihilate a claim, which, though often acknowledged, had never been clearly aſcer-


tained. To effect this deſign they captured the Engliſh veſſels, which they found


along the Spaniſh Main, and many of the Britiſh ſubjects were doomed to work in the


mines of Potoſt. „„ 17 15 0

Repeated ſeverities of this kind at length (1739) produced a war between England
and Spain, Porto Bello was taken from the Spaniards by Admiral Vernon. Com-
modore Anſon, with a fquadron of ſhips, failed to the South Seas, diſtreſſed the
Spaniſh ſettlements on the weſtern ſhore of America, and took a galleon laden with
immenſe riches. But in 1741, a formidable armament, deſtined to attack Carthagena,


under the command of Lord Cathcart, returned unſucceſsful, with the loſs of upwards


of twelve thouſand Britiſh ſoldiers and ſeamen; and the defeat of the expedition
raiſed a clamour againſt the miniſter, Sir Robert Walpole, which produced a change
in the adminiſtration. This change removed the ſcene of war to Europe, ſo that
America was not immediately affected by the ſubſequent tranſactions, except that


* As well may the New Zealanders, who have not yet diſcovered Europe, fit out a ſhip, land on the coaſt


of England or France, and, finding no inhabitants but poor fiſhernien and peaſants, claim the whole country


by right of diſcovery, | CONE N
| | Louiſburgh,


ſoon broke forth in open war.


- 2 : * ; 10 a a 5
aa * W DP * >» > A, od 9 - - A 7” ”. 2 Su, 4 A : *
g 3 > g * A ' ww 4* be 8 1 * * * | ** * F » 244 * * 8 22 9 8 «# * .


Louiſburgh, the principal fortreſs of Cape Breton, was taken from the French by. Gene-
ral Pepperel}, aſſiſted by Commodore Warren and a body of New England troops.“
This war was ended in 1748, by the treaty of peace ſigned at Aix la. Chapelle, by
which reſtitution. was made, on both ſides, of all places during the war.
peace however was of ſhort duration. The French poſſeſſed Canada, and had
made conſiderable ſettlements in Florida, claiming the country on both ſides of the
Miſſiſſippi, by right of diſcovery. Jo ſecure and extend their claims, they eſtabliſhed
a line of forts from Canada to Florida. They had ſecured the important paſs at Nia-
gara, and erected a fort at the junction of the Allegany and Monongahela rivers, called


Fort Du Queſne. They took pains to ſecure the friendſhip and aſſiſtance of the


natives; encroachments were made upon the Engliſh poſſeſſions, and mutual injuries
fucceeded. The diſputes among the ſettlers in America, and the meaſures taken
by the French to command all the trade of the St. Lawrence river on the north,
and of the Miſſiſſippi on the ſouth, excited a jealoufy in the Engliſh nation, which


The next year three other expeditions. were undertaken in America again ſt the


French. One was conducted by General Monckton, who had orders to drive the
French from their encroachments on the province of Nova Scotia. This expedition

was attended with ſucceſs. General Johnſon was ordered with a body of troops to
take poſſeſſion of Crown Point, but he did not ſucceed. General Shirley commanded


an expedition againſt the fort at Niagara, but loſt the ſeaſon by delay. 30
In 1755, General Braddock marched againſt fort Du Queſne, but in penetrating


| through the wilderneſs, he incantiouſly fell into an ambuſcade, and ſuffered a total
defeat. General Braddock was killed, but the enemy not purſuing the vanquiſhed
acroſs the river, being eager in plundering the baggage of the dead, a part of his


troops were ſaved by flight under the conduct of General Waſhington, at that time a
colonel, who then began to exhibit proofs of thofe military talents, by which he after-


wards conducted the. armies of America to victory, and his country to indepen-


dence. 5 | | Wo 5
The ill ſucceſs of theſe expeditions left the Engliſh ſettlements in America expoſed
to the depredations of both the French and Indians. - But the war now raged in


Europe and the.Eaſt Indies, and engaged the attention of both nations in thoſe


quarters.


It was not until the campaign in 17 58, that affairs aſſumed a more favourable aſpect 5
m America. But upon a change of adminiſtration, Mr. Pitt was appointed prime


miniſter, and the operations of war became more vigorous and ſucceſsful. General
Amherſt was ſent to take poſſeſſion of Cape Breton; and after a warm fiege, the gar-
riſon of Louiſburgh ſurrendered. by capitulation. General Forbes was ſucceſsful in
taking poſſeſſion of Fort Du Queſne, which the French thought fit to abandon. But
General Abercrombie, who commanded the troops deſtined to act againſt the French
at Crown Point and Ticonderoga, attacked the lines at Ticonderoga, and was defeated.
with a terrible laughter of his troops. After his defeat, he returned to his camp at
Lake George. =. | LEE =
The next year, more effectual meaſures were taken to ſubdue the French in Ame-
rica, General Prideaux and Sir William Johnſon began the operations of the cam--
paign by taking the French fort near Niagara. General Amherſt took poſſeſſion of
the forts at Crown Point and Ticonderoga, which the French had abandoned.


* See page 117;


t General Prideaux was killed by the burſting of a-mortar before the ſurrender of the French.


But


|
|
|
|


* o
CO —— — — — — ——
7 ir : D dj


w
2 S
n ane


PEO = * oy *
* ev N ee *
118 2 „eee © 3 ane *

2 rn «6s + PT LE 8 ; >
< as. = > Y -


8 Ld
» + xe *


„ e


4 muy * 4 as tmp; - 17 * > » Whos - 28 * « 4s
; E k by * 2 n N — n
1 l a uy * a — —— — — 2 — — 40
b —— —ͤ—U— ad —— — — — =- 8
23532 RR ——ũ——ũ640 4 — N » TI — —


8 2 Z *
4


1 — KA —
2 3 LINES .F tr * =: WI
ne 2 (Ig rd
„ £ N * a
4 Ix + TR © 12 * * 5
— Fs . 2 FS _ <3 r mug * err. ſhag © TY.
H oP „ „ r en y EV. 1 5 * won
— — , * . — * 5 c —— <4 ++
A 8 : - ; * 1 bo, 24 * r . N - * - — PRs —_ ,
1 — A I * „ 9 8, ag th A AA „ *
E Iz * ; FO v 9 uo i. . I 27” SS nd "Up . * ? — 2 — —
6— * err - aw A : R r 4 2 2 E : » 928 * + 5 2
A & RS; "ID 4 — r * Als «ae te
* n TIT 7 4, ö f Y 5 — W
\ <DA e F — . # — 2 —— ”
— , 4 N F


2
—


rr eee


* 1
2


A hs * *
n -
——— —— 4 porn


. 1
1 P 5
ONES Ad. tes


ARS
, ——_——_——
.


2
— i > mere.


4
* 8 „ R


— INES. + Rs


*


—— ͤ— nk


rr


nh 2 * . AS hs


EP
—— aps 1d - 6 ener a
e *


*
<a>


I er


= A nm nn IN : ds


TTY
— —


theſe was ſoon followed by


1763, the parliament had been ſatisfied


243 THE UNITED STATES. |
But the decifive blow which proved fatal to the French intereſts in America, Was


the defeat of the French army, and the taking of Quebec, by the brave General Wolfe.
This hero was flain in the beginning of the action on the plains of Abram, and Mon-


feur Montcalm, the French commander, likewiſe loſt his life.” The loſs of Quebec


was ſoon followed by the capture of Montreal, by General Amherſt, and Canada has
remained ever ſince in pofletiion of the Englith. 25 s
Colonel Grant, in 1761, defeated the Cherokees in Carolina, and obliged them to
ſue for peace. The next year Martinico was taken by Admiral Rodney and General
Monckton; and alto the iſland of Grenada, St. Vincents, and others. The capture of
the ſurrender of the Havannah, the capital of the land
of Cuba. 76 I 5 5 1 5
In 1763, a definitive treaty of peace was concluded at Paris, between Great Britain,
France, and Spain ; by which the Engliſh ceded to the French ſeveral Hands which
they had taken from them in the Weſt Indies, but were confirmed in the poſſeſſion
of all North America on this fide the Mifſiflippi, except the iſland of Orleans. |
But this war, however brilliant the ſucceſſes and glorious the event, proved the cauſe
of great and unexpected misfortunes to Great Britain. Engaged with the combined
powers of France and Spain, during ſeveral years, her exertions were ſupriſing and her
expente immenſe. To diſcharge the debts of the nation, the parliament was obliged
to have recourſe to new expedients for raiſing money. Previous to the laſt treaty in
to raiſe a revenue from the American colomes
by a monopoly of their trade. © .


It will be proper here to obſerve, that there were four kinds of government eſtab-


liſhed in the Britiſh American Colonies. The firſt was a charter government, b


which the powers of legiflation were veſted in a governor, council, and aſſembly, choſen
by the people. Of this kind were the governments of Connecticut and Rhode Iſland.
The ſecond was a proprietary government, in which the proprietor of the province


Was governor; although he generally refided abroad, and adminiſtered the govern-


ment by a deputy of his own appointment; the aſſembly only being choſen by the
people. Such were the governments of Pennſylvania and Maryland; and originally
of New Jerſey and Carolina. The third kind was that of royal government, where

the governor and council were appointed by the crown, and the aſſembly by the
people. Of this kind were the governments of New Hampſhire, New York, New
Jerſey, (after the year 1702) Virginia, the Carolinas, after the reſignation of the pro-
prietors, in 1728, and Georgia. The fourth kind was that of Maflachuſetts, which
differed from all the reſt. The governor was appointed by the king; ſo far it was a
royal government ; but the members of the council were elected by the repreſentatives
of the people. The governor, however, had a right to negative a certain number, but
not to fill up vacancies thus occaſioned. This variety of governments created different


degrees of dependence on the crown. In the royal government, to render a law valid,
it was conſtitutionally required that it ſhould be ratified by the king; but the charter


governments were empowered to enact laws and no ratification by the king was
neceſſary, It was only required that ſuch laws ſhould not be contrary to the laws of
England. The charter of Connecticut is expreſs to this purpoſe. £7 th

At the beginning of the laſt war with France, commiſſioners from many of the
colonies had aſſembled at Albany, and propoſed that a great council ſhould be formed
by deputies from the ſeveral colonies, which, with a general governor to be appointed
by the crown, ſhould be empowered to take meaſures for the common ſafety, and to
raiſe money for the execution of their defigns. This propoſal was not reliſhed by the


I  Britifb


2
d
d
0
16
(þ


THE UNITED STATES. 270


Britiſh miniſtry; but in place of this plan, it was propoſed, that the governors of the
colonies, with the affiftance of one or two of their council, ſhould aſſemble and concert
meaſures for the general defence; erect forts, levy troops, and draw on the treaſury of
England for monies that ſhould be wanted; but the treaſury to be reimburſed by a tax
on the colonies, to be laid by the Engliſh parliament. To this plan, which would
imply an avowal of the right of partiament to tax the colonies, the provincial aſſernblies
objected with unſhaken firmneſs. It ſeems therefore that the Britiſh parliament, before


the war, had it in contemplation to exerciſe the right they claimed of taxing the colo-


nies at pleaſure, without permitting them to be repreſented. Indeed it is obvious that
they laid hold of the alarming ſituation of the colonies, about the year 1754 and 1755,


to force them into an acknowledgement of the right, or to the adoption of meaſures.
that might afterwards be drawn into precedent. The colomes, however, with an


uncommon foreſight and firmneſs, defeated all their attempts. The war was carried
on by requiſitions on the colonies for ſupplies of men and money, or by voluntary
contribubons.”- TOES TS LES; ; 1 5 F

But no ſooner was peace concluded, than the Engliſh parliament reſumed the plan


of taxing the colonies; and to juſtify their attempts, ſaid, that the money to be raiſed,
was to be appropriated to defray the expenſe of defending them in the late war.


The firſt attempt to raiſe a revenue in America appeared in the memorable amp act,
paſſed March 22, 1765 ; by which it was enacted that certain inſtruments of writing,


as bills, bonds, &c. ſhould not be valid in law, unleſs drawn on ſtamped paper, on


which a duty was laid. When this bill was brought in, Mr. Charles Townſend con-
cluded a ſpeech in its favour, with words to the following effect, And now, will theſe

Americans, children planted by our care, nouriſhed up by our indulgence, till they are
grown to a degree of ſtrength and opulence, and protected by our arms, will they
grudge to contribute their mite to relieve us from the heavy weight of that burden


which we he under?” TO which Colonel Barre replied. <© They planted by your
care! No, your oppreſſions planted them in America. They fled from tyranny to a
then uncultivated and unhoſpitable country, where they expoſed themſelves to almoſt
all the hardſhips to which human nature is liable; and among others to the cruelty of


a ſavage foe, the moſt ſubtle, and I will take upon me to ſay, the moſt formidable of
any people upon the face of God's earth ; and yet, actuated by principles of true Englith
liberty, they met all hardſhips with pleaſure, compared with thoſe who ſuffered in their


own country, from the hands of thoſe who ſhould have been their triends.—They


nouriſhed up by your indulgence ! They grew by your neglect of them. As ſoon as
you began to care about them, that care was exerciſed in ſending perſons to rule them
in one department and another, who were perhaps the deputies of deputies to ſome


members of this houſe, ſent to ſpy out their liberties, to miſrepreſent their actions and
to prey upon them.—Men whoſe behaviour, on many occaſions, has cauſed the blood


of thoſe tons of liberty to recoil within them. Men promoted to the higheſt ſeats of
Juſtice, ſome, who to my knowledge were glad, by going to a foreign country, to
eſcape being brought to the bar of a court of juſtice in their own. They protected by
your arms! They have nobly taken up arms in your defence, have exerted a valour
amidſt their conſtant and laborious induſtry, tor the defence of a country whoſe frontier


er drenched in blood, while its interior parts yielded all its little ſavings to your emo-
nent; and believe me, remember I this day told you fo, that the ſame ſpirit of


treedom


forbia which adtuated that people at firſt, will accompany them ſtill: but prudence
orbias


me to explain myſelt farther. God knows, I do not at this time ſpeak from
anq motives of party heat; what I deliver are the genuine ſentiments of my heart.
| e RD However


9
*
E


w
—


33
'S; - as — —„—ẽ
* *


= — — - 3 Du — IC SPIN 4 2 - _ ? © *=— EV
— _ SER 4 beas, 9 . FAY =; , he (> N a e 1 1 y * 8 Sy * fps - (hw or” S 11 5% N = Fs
* = v 2 8 acdc b k * A 1 1 — 1 - 4 = d © of $3 AY [nw] 4 * a7 - 2 7 E. 5 -
l —— " "7 - C4 N > - go A . . N 14 28 i, » d FAY * * he Ss: * > r W of , Eo. 4 CT. * «> = * * — 4
N 6 I Y $0 . 3 AR Foe? . i XL 7 5 My * AK. * K % "I. 4 . - n r 10 2 _ <-> —— * 1 4 w N
2 21 e & 7 thi 22 N 1 * N * wo „ 18 gr = eh 4 PF 1 9 r — +» dA 48-44% r * mes 90 G N 5 2 . "hf — 1 _— —
LIE ”> wt 75 „ * 5 * r 4 . . 3 $A LT A 75 * * 3 j 2 : ; be n : $ s wu) 0 "we * * * * 5 mar 1 n \ 7 #; Ws 5 2 * I
yp 5 AT E * n . of,» a Str 2 e e e +; tad ee W . r Fr ©” "Pp 1 LY e z —— n 4 W. a *
n os = 8 v pe ee W * * e rr W c 1 LIT He +. * 88 | ok r W — 1 — £ . . ”
. L A 3 K 2 n J 5 . N | IR, . 8 af 4 I" ; 3 ; 9 4 8 "IIA bY 2 4” . _ . 2 — 1 L — 8
R -— n. N — x n SED IR] p * n — } 4 — * * * . — — "ee — 1 rey atone —— 2:2 — |
= 3 448 J . r ' .
.
, q
5 p . 2 ©


* you de . 2 $» 0.43 4 ab 8 * . 4 2 3 * — 2 xt 4
— ET nad * — — 22 2 „ a © 46 AS +) _— - 44" „ - = W-


Li +
$ = A
e
ra ho URS x


— — _ — 883 _ . g OE
ä —7＋* . 4 — A 5 £ r .
* 5 & . *. * 0 3 "args
* ——— n N 328 5 *
_ W


„ £2. Saw...
y n
—— —


*


* * n
— tn ar Ro


RGA —


— „ r
6 —
* _ ͤ ͤ j „


—— — *
_ 4 *
—— _— NL Rds a ob — .
— — — 2 —


this houſe may be, yet I claim to know more of America than moſt of you, having ſeen
them, if ever they ſhould be violated : but the ſubject is too delicate—T will ſay no
people were filled with apprehenfions at an act which they ſuppoſed to be an attack on


importation and uſe of Britiſh manufactures, until the act ſhould be repealed. This


Americans, and excited a general oppoſition to the meaſure ; ſo that parliament


ſole, nor principal cauſe of the oppoſition ; it was the principle, which, once admitted,
would have ſubjected the colonies to unlimited parliamentary taxation, without the


aà right to make laws of ſufficient validity, to bind the colonies in all caſes what ⸗


importation of tea was prohibited. In the royal and proprietary governments, and in


* 1
22


240 THE UNITED STATES. 3
However ſuperior to me in general knowledge and experience, the reſpectable body of


and been converſant in that country. The people I believe are as truly loyal as any

ſubjects the king has, but a people jealous of their liberties, and who wi vindicate

more.” 5 1 .
No ſooner was this act publiſned in America, than it raiſed a general alarm. The


their conſtitutional rights. The colonies petitioned the king and parliament for a
redreſs of the grievance, and formed aſſociations for the purpoſe of preventing the


ſpirited and unanimous oppoſition of the Americans produced the deſired effect; and
on the 18th of March, 1766, the ſtamp act was repealed. The news of the repeal
was received in the colonies with univerſal joy, and the trade between them and Great
Britain was renewed on the moſt liberal footing. Tg RAFAL.
The parliament, by repealing this act ſo obnoxious to their American brethren,
did not intend to lay afide the ſcheme of raifing a revenue in the colonies, but
merely to change the mode. Accordingly the next year, they paſſed an act, laying a
certain duty on glaſs, tea, paper, and painters colours ; articles which were much
wanted, and not manufactured in America. This act kindled the reſentment of the


thought proper, in 1770, to take off theſe duties, except three-pence a pound on tea.
Yet this duty, however trifling, kept alive the jealouſy of the coloniſts, and their oppo-
ſition to parliamentary taxation continued and increaſed. |  _ e


But it muſt be remembered that the inconvenience of paying the duty was not the


privilege of being repreſented. The right, abſtractly conſidered, was denied; and the
fmalleſt attempt to eſtabliſh the claim by precedent, was uniformly reſiſted. The
Americans could not be deceived as to the views of parliament; for the repeal of the
ſtamp act was accompanied with an unequivocal declaration, that the parliament had


ſoever.” Ws 2 7:
The colomies therefore entered into meaſures to encourage their own manufactures, |
and home productions, and to retrench the uſe of foreign ſuperfluities ; while the


Maſſachuſetts, the governors and people were in a ſtate of continual warfare. Aſſem-
blies were repeatedly called, and ſuddenly diflolved. While fitting, the afſemblics
employed the tune in ſtating grievances and framing remonſtrances. 'To inflame theſe
diſcontents, an act of parliament was paſſed, ordaining that the governors and judges
ſhould receive their ſalaries of the crown ; thus making them independent of the pro-
vincial aſſemblies, and removeable only at the pleaſure of the king. |

I heſe arbitrary proceedings, with many others not here mentioned, * could not fail
of producing a rupture. a OT . 8 |

On the ſecond of March, a fray took place in Boſton, near Mr. Gray's ropewalk, |
between a private ſoldier of the 29th regiment, and an inhabitant. The former was


dee an enumeration of grieyances in the © AQ of Independence,” and in a variety of petitions to tis
king an] parli. m. At. | Ab


3 ä


1


ail


the


cd


A


ſupported by his comrades, the latter by the rope-makers, till ſeveral on both ſides were
involved in the conſequences. - On the fifth a more dreadful ſcene was preſented.
The ſoldiers, when under arms, were preſſed upon, intulted and pelted by a mob armed
with clubs, ſticks, and ſnowballs covering ſtones. They were alſo dared to fire. In
this ſituation, one of the ſoldiers who had received a blow, in reſentment fired at the
ſuppoſed aggreſſor. This was followed by a ſingle diſcharge from fix others. Three:
of the inhabitants were killed, and five were dangerouſly wounded. The town was
immediately in commotion. Such was the temper, force, and number of the inha-


| bitants, that nothing but an engagement to remove the troops out of the town,


together with the advice of moderate men, prevented the townſmen from falling on the


| ſoldiers. The killed were buried in one vault, and in a moſt reſpectſul manner, in


order to expreſs the indignation of the inhabitants at the laughter of their brethren,


by ſoldiers quartered among them, in violation of their civil liberties. Capt. Preſton, |
who commanded the party which fired on the inhabitants, was committed to jail, and
afterwards tried. The captain, and ſix of the men, were acquitted. 'I'wo were brought
in gwilty of man-flaughter. It appeared on the trial, that the ſoldiers were abuſed,
inſulted, threatened and pelted, before they fired. It was alſo proved, that only ſeven
guns were fired by the eight priſoners. Theſe circumſtances induced the jury to make
a favourable verdict. The reſult of the trial reflected great honour on John Adams,


and Joſrah Quincy, Eſqrs. the council for the priſoners; and alſo on the integrity of
the jury, who ventured to give an upright verdict, in defiance of popular opinions.


The conſequences of this tragical event ſank deep in the minds of the people, and
were made fubſervient to important purpoſes. The anniverſary of it was obferved
with great ſolemnity for 13 years. Eloquent orators were ſucceffively employed to


deliver an annual oration to preſerve the remembrance of it freth in their minds. On
theſe occaſions the bleſſings of liberty the horrors of ſlavery—the dangers of a ſtanding


army—the rights of the colonies, and a variety of ſuch topics, were repreſented to
the public view under their moſt pleaſing and alarming forms. Theſe annual ora-
tions adminiftered fuel to the fire of liberty, and kept it burning, with an inceſſant


flame;*


In 17553, the ſpirit of the Americans broke out into open violence. The Gaſpee,


an armed fchooner belonging to his Britannic Majeſty, had been ſtationed at Pro-
vidence, in Rhode Ifland, to prevent ſmuggling. The vigilance of the commander


_ irritated the inhabitants to that degree, that about two hundred armed men entered the
veſſel at night, compelled the officers and men to go aſhore, and ſet fire to the
ſchooner. A reward of five hundred pounds, offered by government for apprehending


any of the perſons concerned in this daring act, produced no effectual difcovery.
About this time, the diſcovery and publication of ſome private confidential letters,

written by the royal officers in Boſton, to perſons in office in England, ſerved to con-

Arm the apprehenftons of the Americans, with reſpect to the defigns of the Britiſh


government. It was now made obvious that more effectual meaſures would be taken
do eſtabliſh the fapremacy of the Britiſh Parliament over the colonies. The letters
recommended deciſive meafures, and the writers were charged, by the exaſperated


Americans, with betraying their truſt and the pcople they governed. hr
As the reſolations of the colonies not to import or confume tea, had, in a great.


meature, - deprived the Engliſh government of a revenue from this quarter, the par-
liament formed a ſcheme of introducing tea into America, under cover of the Eaſi


dee Ramſay's Hiſtory of the American Revolution, p. 90. Printed for J. Stockdale.
ER. Abs» REG . India


THE UNITED STATES. OY


—_—— Ot. ———


|


8 — — n


|
|
|
|
|
|
|


*

% .

OO OI r OE EE" w ü r ˙ m % —˙¹tulN — —
* 9 — —


Fc ²˙üöÄ WE” EI
my - » => — ee a ES l


»
* IPRS


4
r — —


—— — — . rn


242 THE UNITED STATES.


India Company. For this purpoſe an act was paſſed, enabling the company to export
all forts of teas, duty free, to any place whatever. The company departed from their:
uſual mode of doing buſineſs, and became their own exporters.” Several ſhips were
treizhted with teas, and ſent to the American colonies, and factors were appointed to,
receive and diſpoſe of their cargoes. | |


The Americans, determined to oppoſe the revenue ſtem of the Engliſh. parliament 2
in every poſſible ſhape, confidered the attempt of the Eaſt India Company to evade


the reſolutions of the colonies, and diſpoſe of teas in America, as an indirect mode of
taxation, ſanctioned by the authority of parliament. The people aſſembled in various
places, and in the large commercial towns, took meaſures to. prevent the landing of


the teas. Committees were appointed, and armed with extenſive powers to. inſpect
merchants books, te- propoſe teſts, and to make uſe of other expedients to fruſtrate the:


defigns of the Eaſt India Company. The fame ſpirit pervaded the people from New
Hampfhire to Georgia. In ſome places, the confignees of the teas were intimidated ſo


far as to relinquiſh their appointments, or to enter into engagements not to act in that


capacity. The cargo ſent to South Carolina was ſtored, the conſignees being reſtrained


from offering the tea for ſale. In other provinces, the ſhips returned back without


diſcharging their cargoes.


{ It was otherwiſe in Maſſachuſetts. The tea ſhips deſigned for the ſupply of Boſton:


were conſigned to the ſon, couſins, and particular friends of Governor Hutchinſon.
When they were called upon to reſign, they anſwered, “ That it was out of their


power.” The collector refuſed te give a clearance, unleſs the veſſels were diſcharged.


of dutiable articles. The governor refuſed to give a. paſs for the veſſels, unleſs pro-


PE qualified from the euſtom-houſe. The governor likewiſe requeſted. Admiral |


Montague to guard the paſſages out of the harbour, and gave orders to ſuffer no veſſels,
coaſters excepted, to pals the fortreſs, from the town, without a paſs ſigned by himſelf.


From a combination of theſe circumſtances, the return of the tea veſſels: from Boſton.


Was rendered impoſſible. The inhabitants then: had no alternative, but to prevent


the landing of the tea, or to ſuffer it to be landed, and depend on the unanimity of the


people not to purchaſe it, or to deſtroy the tea, or to ſuffer a deep laid ſcheme. againſt
their facred liberties to take effect. The firſt would have required inceſſant watching
by night, as well as by day, for a period of time, the duration of which. no. one could
compute. The ſecond would have beer; viſionary to. childiſhneſs, by fuſpending the
liberties of a grawing country, on the ſelf-denial and diſcretion of every tea drinker in
the province. They viewed. the tea as a vehicle of an unconſtitutional tax, and as
inſeparably aſſociated with it. To avoid the one they reſolved to deſtroy the other.
About ſeventeen perſons, dreſſed as Indians, repaired to the tea ſhips, broke open 342
_ cheſts of tea, and without doing any other damage, diſcharged their contents into
the water.* ks, ö Fo PTR 5: !? WOW fi pug
No ſooner did the news of this deſtruction. of the tea reach Great Britain, than the
parliament determined to puniſh. that devoted town. , On the king's laying the Ame-
rican papers before them, a bill was brought in and paſſed, to © diſcontinue the


landing and diſcharging, lading and ſhipping of goods, wares,. and merchandizes, at


the town of Boſton, or within the harbour.”


This act, paſſed March 25, 1774, and called The Boſton Port Bill, threw the inha-
bitants into the greateſt conſternation. - The town of Boſton paſſed a reſolution, ex-


preſſing their ſenſe of this oppreſſive meaſure, and a defire that all the colonies would


concur to ſtop all importations from Great Britain. Moſt of the colonies —_ oe
* Ramſay's Hiſtory, p. 99.


.


"IS


colonies. The


THE UNITED STATES.
fpirited reſolutions on this occafion, to unite with Maſſachuſetts in a firm oppoſition
to the unconſtitutional meaſures of the parliament. The firſt of June, the day on
which the Port Bill was to take place, was appointed to be kept as a day of humiliation,
faſting and prayer throughout the colonies, to ſeek the Divine direction and aid, in that
critical and gloomy juncture of affairs. Sw : CEE

It ought here to be obſerved,*that this rational and pious cuſtom of obſerving faſts


in times of diſtreſs and impending danger, and of celebrating days of public thankſ-


giving, after having received ſpecial tokens of Divine favour, has ever prevailed in


New England ſince its frft ſettlement, and in fome parts of other States. Theſe public


ſupplications and acknowledgements to heaven at the commencement of hoſtilities,


and during the whole progreſs of the war, were more frequent than uſual, and were


attended with uncommon fervour and ſolemnity. They were conſidered by the people,
as an humble appeal to heaven for the juſtneſs of their cauſe, and deſigned to manifeſt


their dependence on the Gop or Hoss for aid and ſueceſs in maintaining it againft their


hoſtile brethren. The prayers and public diſcourſes of the clergy, who were friends to
their ſuffering country, (and there were very few who were not) breathed the ſpirit of
patriotiſm ; and as their piety and integrity had generally ſecured to them the confidence
of the people, they had great influence and ſucceſs in encouraging them to engage in
its defence. In this way, that claſs of citizens aiged the cauſe of their country; and


to their pious-exertions, under the GREAT ARBITER ef human affairs, has been juſtly
_ aſcribed no inconfiderable ſhare of the ſucceſs and victory that crewned the Ame-


rican arms.


During the height of the conſternation and confuſion which the Boſton Port Bill


occaſioned, and at the very time when a town meeting was fitting to conſider of it,
General Gage, who had been appomted to the government of Maſſachuſetts, arrived


mim the harbour. His arrival, however, did not allay the popular ferment, or check


the progreſs of the meaſures then taking, to unite the colonies in oppoſition to the


opprefſive acts of parliament. He was received with all the honours uſual on ſuch
occaſions. Wo | ” 55 5 1 N
But the Port Bill was net the only act that alarmed the apprehenſions of the Ame

ricans. Determined to compel the province of Maſſachuſetts to ſubmit to their laws,


parliament paſſed an act for “ The better regulating government in the province of


Maſſachuſetts Bay.” The object of this act was to alter the government, as it ſtood
on the charter of King William; and to make the judges and ſheriffs dependent on
the king, and removeable at his will and pleaſure. t |


This act was ſoon followed by another, which ordained that any perſon, indicted
for murder, or other capital offence, committed in aiding the magiſtrates in executing
tne laws, might be ſent by the governor, either to any other colony, or to Great
Britain, for his trial. L.- . . 1 1 NIE»


This was ſoon followed by the Quebec Bill, which extended the bounds of that


_ Province, and granted many privileges to the Roman Catholics. The object of this


bill was, to ſecure the attachment of that province to the crown of England, and


Prevent its joining the colonies in their reſiſtance of the laws of parliament.


But theſe meaſures did- not intimidate the Americans. On the other hand, they


ſerved to confirm their former apprehenſions of the evil defigns of government, and to


unite the colonies in their oppoſition. A enen of opinion with reſpect to
the unconſtitutional acts of parliament, produced an uniformity of proceedings in the
p people generally concurred in a propoſition for holding a congreſs, by


Iiz of


243


eputation from the ſeveral colonies, in order to concert meaſures for. the preſervation


— — — —V—ꝛů— — — e — GA”. P


244 THE UNITED STATES.


of their rights. Deputies were accordingly appointed, and met at Philadelphia, on
the 26th of October, 1774.

In this firft congreſs, the proceedings were cool, deliberate, and loyal ; but marked
with unanimity and firmneſs. Their firſt act was a declaration, or ſtate of their claims
as to the enjoyment of all the rights of Britith ſubjects, and particularly that of taxing
themfelves excluſively, and of regulating the internal police of the colonies. They
alſo drew up a petition to the king, complaining of their grievances, and praying for a
repeal of the unconſtitutional and oppreffive acts of parliament. They ſigned an aſſo-
eiation to ſuſpend the importation of Br iti{h goods, and the exportation 'of American;
produce, until their grievances ſhould be redrefied. They ſent an addreſs to the inha-
bitants of Great Britain, and another to the people of America; in the former of which
they enumerated the oppreſſive ſteps of parhament, and called on their Britiſh brethren
not to aid the miniſtry in enſlaving their American ſubjects; and in the latter, they


endeavoured to confirm the people in a ſpirited and unanimous determination to defend


their conſtitutional rights.

In the mean time every thing in Maſſachuſetts wore the appearance of oppoſition by
Cavs: A new council for the governor had been appointed by the crown. New
Judges were appointed and attempted to proceed in the execution of their office; but
the juries refuſed to be ſworn under them. In ſome counties, the people aſſembled to
prevent the courts from proceeding to buſineſs; and in Berkſhire they ſucceeded,


letting an example of reſiſtance that has fince been followed, in violation of the bis


of the State.
In this ſituatioh of affairs, the day ſor the annual muſter of the militia approached.
General Gage, apprehenſive of ſome violence, had the precaution to ſeize the magazines


of ammunition and ftores at Cambridge and Charteſtown, and lodged them in Boſton.
This meaſure, with the fortifying of the neck of land which Jonny Boſton to the main


land at Roxbury, cauſed an univerſal alarm and ferment.
On this occaſion, an aſſembly of delegates from all the towns in Suffolk county
was called; and ſeveral ſpirited reſolutions were agreed to. Theſe reſolutions were
pPretaced with a declaration of allegiance; but they breathed a ſpirit of freedom that
dos honour to the delegates. They declared that the late acts of parliament, and the
proceedings of General 'Ga ge, were glaring infractions of their rights and liberties,
which their duty called them to defend by all lawful means.

_ This aſſembly remonftrated againſt the fortification of Boſton Neck, and againſt the
Quebec Bill ; and reſolved upon a ſuſpenſion of commerce, an encouragement of arts


and manufactures, the holding of a provincial congreſs, and a ſubmiſſion to the mea-


fures which ſhould be recommended by the continental congreſs. They recommended
that the collectors of taxes ſhould not pay any money into the treaſury without further
orders; they alſo recommended peace and good order, as they meant to act merely
upon the defenſive,

In anſwer to their remonſirance, General Gag e affared them that he had no intention
to prevent the free egreſs and regreſs of the 1 ban to and from the town of Boſton,
and that he would not ſuffer any perſon under his command to injure the 3
property of any of his Majeſty's ſubjects.

Previous to this, a general aſſembly had been 8 by the governor to wet


at Salem; and notwithſtanding the writs had been countermanded by tha ene, 8


pr roclamation, on account of the violence of the times, and the reſignation of ſeveral
the new countellors, yet in defianee of the proclamation, go of the newly- elected mem-


bars met at Walt _ and place appointed; and ſoon aſter reſolved themſelxves into à


Provinci


THE UNITED STATES. 245
Provincial Congreſs and adjourned to Concord, 19 miles from Boſton, and after ch H-
fins Mr. Hancock preſident, proceeded to buſineſs.

The congreſs addreſſed the governor with a rehearſal of their diſtreſſes, and took
the neceſſary ſteps for defending their rights. They regulated the militia, made provi-
fion for ſupplying the treaſury, and furniſhing the people with arms ; and ſuch was the
enthufiaſm and union of the people, that the recommendations of the provincial con-
greſs had the force of laws. * 5 e 0] ie e
General Gage was incenſed at theſe meaſures. He deelared in his anſwer to the ad-
dreſs, that Britain could never harbour the black defign of enſlaving her ſubjects, and


publiſhed a proclamation, in which he inſinuated that ſueh proceedings amounted to
rebellion. He alſo ordered barracks to be erected for the ſoldiers; but he found diffi-
culty in procuring labourers, either in Boſton or New York. | -


In the beginning of 1775, the fiſhery bills were paſſed in parliament, by which the
colonies were prohibited to trade with Great Britain, Ireland, or the Weſt Indies, or to
take fiſh on the banks of Newfoundlanßc. ee $94 |

In the diſtreſſes to which theſe acts of parliament reduced the town of Boſton, the


unanimity of the colonies was remarkable, in the large ſupplies of proviſion furniſhed
by the inhabitants of different towns from New Hampſhire to Georgia, and ſhipped to


the relief of the ſufferers. FE A e 5 e 3
Preparations began to be made, to oppoſe by force the execution of theſe acts of
parliament. The militia of the country were trained to the uſe of arms great encou-


ragement was | abby for the manufacture of gunpowder, and meaſures were taken to
obtain all kinds of military ſtores. = Is Es eb Y 817


In February, Colonel Leſhe was ſent with a detachment of troops from Boſton, to


take poſſeffion of ſome cannon at Salem. But the people had intelligence of the deſign
—took up the draw-bridge in that town, and prevented the troops from paſſing, until
the cannon were ſecured ; ſo that the expedition farled. «| 2


Proviſions and military ſtores were alſo collected and ſtored in different places, par-


ticularly at Concord. General Gage, though zealous for his royal maſter's intereſt,


diſcovered a prevailing deſire after a peaceable accommodation. He wiſhed to prevent


hoſtiltties by depriving the inhabitants of the means neceſſary for carrying them on.


With this view,“ he determined to deſtroy the fiores which he knew were collected for


the ſupport of a provincial army ; and wiſhing to accompliſh this without bloodſhed,


he took every procaution: to effect it by ſurpriſe, and without alarming the country. At
= <elcven o'clock at night 800 grenadiers and light infantry, the flower of the royal army,
embarked at the common, landed at Leechmore's Point and marched for Coneord, under
= the command of Lieutenant-colonel Smith. Neither the ſecrecy with which this expe-


dition was planned—the privacy with which the troops marched out, nor an order that


no inliabitant ſhould leave Boſton, were ſufficient to prevent intelligence from being
ſent to the country militia of what was going on. About two in the morning, 130 of


the Lexington militia had affembled to oppoſe them, but the air being chilly, and'in-
telligenee reſpecting the regulars uncertain, they were diſmiſfed, with orders te appear
again at the beat of drum. They collected a ſeeond time, to the number of 70, between.
4 and 5 o'clock in the morning, and the Britiſh regulars ſoon after made their appear-
ance, Major Pitcairn, who led the advanced corps, rode up to them and called out,


3 Diſperſe, you rebels; throw down your arms and diſperſe.” They ſtilk continued a


2 2 It is believed that another object of this expedition was, to ſeize on the perſons of Meſſrs. Hancock and
Adams, who dy their ſpirited exertions had rendered themſelves obnoxious to General Gage. I
| 8 ody,


— <A een


Ker


|
1
*
1
»
[1 =
[

$

0

:

= o
+ 4
C
* My
++
1 4
01088
. ly
$ _ . -
1 |
7 —

* .
3+ hs
© + 8
* *

+ LM
*
4 3 4s
I ＋ * 8
r
n 1
bi *- ©>Y
7 :
6 * N
* .
„
. *
. 2
$ 4
35
<5 *
. I
2 * *
=_”
| 3
: N 1
. ”
4 S 3
2
_
1
*
8 T
4 3
. -*;3f
y +
—_

a :
.
r

wa WM
, 1 7
72 1
* x
PE
3
3
Hg . 13
- .  -_
{3 -®
3 _
* 2
+ YA 3
* x
' - 4
»
+ 2M
B >
—_
ky 4
7 3 Os -
A _—
©; = a

. #2
4 "8
4 *}
1

$ I

+ k 4

* 4 *
3
1 0
. bs

, "A

*
.
K

7

2 3

3 -N

. :
3 4

bo _
"LY

[2 *

EY
A A
1 J
+ ks

„

Z bs
"%s
KM
8
1 *

” 2X
8
bs _ *
+.
75 *
9
*. 3 a
1
1
.
.
%
5 *
=.
A
5
0
1
3

*
i —
2 TL
"+ 1
1
.

2
Tis,
„

CP
*
S

.

_ 2.

> if
8

2 3
1

©
2M
"VIS
WT -

% ,

4 *
*
* »

«x 7

4 1
2

<2
«

F 4
. *

CEE:

4

24 5
1 I
N

1

Bs

1
wo a

--» Y

25

Xe ©

*
=_Y

234
$224

1

1

9 2 7

"I

bs 7 *

*

2

WT

"> *

"24 *

5

IT .

s *

k „

8

* N
+

oY .

3


4
*


l 5 th

is 1 * 5
4 b .

2 $ a = *

— "ER.


4 n 4 I A „

Nr r Tad 02 Sac * F ours a R 8 IN 2 * .

LW run pegs 74 abi I F ˙ APD FEACS 0 ISHS oi I ne et as oo 1 —. . 1, =" hg *** i e 3
N 1 4 4 ö hob £5. Galore ths FIDE . e . — * R D 4 * 8 8 4 : I YI dow 6 —
J dtteds Ab ingot 9 KA * R R eval C 2 3 „ ee :

2 = + "ada F Tine : 2 , BT, * . 4 * 2 5 * 39 * > wag oy -

- Rn E SF 7 „„ ne: £ : k

= — y


rr
c
_—_— Ye. ö > .
r 22 .
+ — 1E. „


road.


*


246 THE UNITED STATES


F. dy, on which he advanced nearer—diſcharged his piſtol—and ordered his ſoldiers to


nc. A diſperſion of the militia was the conſequence, but the firing of the regular
was nevertheleſs continued. Individuals finding they were fired upon, though diſper-
fing, returned the fire. Three or four of the militia were killed on the green. A few
more were ſhot after they had begun to diſperſe. The royal detachment proceeded on
to Concord, and executed their commiſſion. They diſabled two 24 pounders—threw


zoolb. of ball into rivers and wells, and broke in pieces about 60 barrels of flour. Mr.


John Buterick, major of a minute regiment, not knowing what had paſſed at Lexington,


ordered his men not to give the firſt fire, that they might not be the aggreſſors. Upon


his approaching near the regulars, they fired, and killed Captain Iſaac Davis, and one
private of the provincial minute men. The fire was returned, and a ſkirmiſh enſued,


The king's troops having done their buſineſs, began their retreat towards Boſton. This
was conducted with expedition, for the adjacent inhabitants had aſſembled in arms and


began to attack them in every direction. In their return to Lexington they were ex-


ceedingly annoyed, both by thoſe who preſſed on their rear, and others who poured in


from all ſides, firing from behind ſtone walls, and ſuch like coverts, which ſupplied


the place of lines and redoubts. At Lexington the regulars were joined by a detach-


ment of goo men under Lord Piercy, which had been ſent out by General Gage to ſup-
port Lieutenant-colonel Smith. This reinforcement, having two pieces of cannon, awed


the provincials, and kept them at a greater diſtance ; but they continued a conſtant,


though irregular and ſcattering fire, which did great execution. The cloſe firing from


| behind the walls by good markſmen, put the regular troops in no ſmall confuſion, but


they neverthelefs kept up a britk retreating fire on the militia and minute men. A lit-


tle after ſunſet the regulars reached Bunker's-hill, worn down with exceſſive fatigue,
having marched that day between thirty and forty miles. On the next day they croſſed
Charleſtown ferry, to Boſton. | PRE OS eg


There never were more than 400 provincials engaged at one time, and often not ſo
many. As ſome tired and gave out, others came up and took their places. There was


ſcarcely any diſcipline obſerved among them. Officers and privates fired when they
were ready and ſaw a royal uniform, without waiting for the word of command. Their
knowledge of the country enabled them to gain opportunities, by croſſing fields and


fences, and to act as flanking parties againſt the king's troops, who kept to the main


The regulars had 65 Killed, 174 wounded, and 24 made priſoner Of the provin-


| cials 49 were killed, and 39 wounded and miſling.


Here was ſpilt the fi ſt blood in the late war; a war which ſevered America from the
Britiſh empire. Lexington opened the firſt ſcene to this great drama, which, in its pro-
greſs, exhibited the moſt illuſtrious characters and events, and cloſed with a revolution,
equally glorious for the actors, and important in its conſequences to mankind. .
This battle rouſed all America. The Provincial Congreſs of Maſſachuſetts being at
this time in ſeſſion, voted that An army of 30,000 men be immediately raiſed ; that

13, 600 be of their own province, and that a letter and delegate be ſent to the ſeveral


colonies of . New Hampſhire, Connecticut, and Rhode Ifland.” The militia collected


from all quarters, and Boſton, in a few days, was beſieged by twenty thouſand men.
A ſtop was put to all intercourſe between the town and country, and the inhabitants
were reduced to great want of proviſions. General Gage promiſed to let the people
depart, if they would deliver up their arms. The people complied ; but when the ge-
acral had obtamed their arms, he refuſed to let the people go. „ N þ This


ON — S 9 . 2 Ade. PR N n In =
2 1 TE oe bs Eo es ad W * W Ps * 1 TY
7 KW . 9 O'S 8
EOF 2 2 | 8 "EY


This breach of faith, and the conſequences that attended it, were juſtly and greatly
complained of; and although many, at different times, were permitted to leave the
town, they were obliged to leave all their effects behind: ſo that many who had been
uſed to live in eaſe and affluence, were at once reduced to extreme indigence and miſery.
A circumſtance peculiarly and wantonly aggravating, and which was the ground of the
bittereſt complaints of congreſs, was, that paſſports were granted and retained in ſuch
a manner, as that families were broken, and the deareſt connections ſeparated ; part
being compelled to quit the town, and part cruelly retained againſt their inclination.
About the latter end-of May a great part of the reinforcements ordered from Great
Britain arrived at Boſton. Three Britiſh Generals, Howe, Burgoyne, and Clinton,
whoſe behaviour in the preceding war had gained them great reputation, alſo arrived
about the ſame time. General Gage, thus reinforced, prepared for acting with more-
deciſion ; but before he proceeded to extremities, he conceived it due to ancient forms:
to iſſue a proclamation, holding forth to the inhabitants the alternative of peace or war.
He therefore offered pardon in the king's name, to all who ſhould forthwitbh lay down:
their arms, and return to their refpective: occupations and peaceable duties, excepting:
only from the benefit of that pardon Samuel Adams and John Hancock,” whole:
offences were ſaid to be © of too flagitious a nature to admit of any other confideration
than that of condign puniſhment.” He alſo proclaimed, that not only the perſons above
named and excepted, but alſo all their adherents, aſſociates, and correſpondents ſhould:
be deemed guilty of treaſon and rebellion, and treated accordingly. By this proclama-
tion it was alfo declared, © that as the eourts of judicature were ſhut, martial taw ſhould
take place, till a due courſe of juſtice ſhould be re-eſtabliſhed.” It was ſuppoſed. that
this proclamation was a prelude to hoſtilities, and preparations were accordingly made
by the Americans. The heights of Charleſtown were ſo ſituated as to make the poſſeſ-
hen of them a matter of great conſequence to either of the contending parties. Orders
wire therefore iſſued, June 16th, by the provincial commanders, that a detachment of
a thouſand men ſhould intrench upon Breed's-hill.“ Here the Americans; between:
midnight and morning, with uncommon. expedition and filence; threw up a ſmall re- .
doubt, which the Britiſh did not diſcover tilt the morning of the 17th, when they began
an inceflant firing and continued it till afternoon. With the intrepidity of veteran fol-
diers the Americans bore this fire, and proceeded to finiſh their redoubt, and to throw
up a breaſt-work, extending caſtward of it to the bottom of the hill. About noon Ge-
neral Gage detached Major-general Howe and Brigadier-general Pigot, with the flower
of his army, in two detachments, amounting in the whole to nearly 3000-men.—Fhey
landed at a point about 150 or 200 rods S. E. of the redoubt, and deliberately prepared
tor the attack. While the troops, who firſt landed, were waiting for a reinforcement,
the Americans on the left wing, towards Myſtic river, for their ſecurity, pulled up ſome
adjoining poſt and rail fence, and ſet it down in two parallel lines, near each other,
and filled: the ſpace between with hay, which the day before was mowed: and remained!
unn the adjacent field. The Britiſh troops, in the mean. time formed in two-lines, and“
about 3 Oclock advanced flowly towards the Americans. The hills and ſteeples im
oſton, and the circumjacent country, were crowded with anxious ſpectators of the
dubious conflict. While: ſome felt for the honour of the Britiſh troops, multitudes, with
a keener ſenſiblity, felt for the liberties of a great and growing country. The attack
eommenced on the part of the Britiſh. troops. The Americaus had the precaution to


Ante ang through miſtake; have called the hill where the battle was fought, Binker*s-bill, which is a
Uarter of a mile north. of Breed's-hill, where the battle was fought. wo br
| TE 'xeterve


w ET IE hy wlll r 2h
* „ „ 7 «
N 7* 2 x


>. So & =


= C4 © + Af


* "td Os W 1
„ R
mY : * © 3> 36 * . 8
1 n W a" 285 » 9
en FEES. 4 ww
— bhp ae: 4


— I
A * B E p r
= my 1 4 * ? «+ dh. acas 4 8 A * 1
„„ Re Uo or EE a y 2 - 5 N n
* * ju 2 q 2 i Vo Ea - I 5 N * 1 0 > > => 04. Coe nn
od *. 8 - . — * — Py RN * 2 4 0
— * . 4 2 0 — — A SIP N 3 fe * « n
* * . q 9 3 * = 2 2 | £ A a
2 — 8 _ *


Wi
Ki
3
.
Ti
+1
*j
= 2
RS
. Y
" &
1
8
71
be
- +
BY +
. =
_—
42
44 4
1
_—
K .
If
*
ba
__ 5
By
* Li
= .
Ph E
#
£5
4
8
© „ *
_—
+
5
1
.
1
$ «7
©» 7
* oy
— "
- (Fi
© hy
*
<2
kat
48
N 1
1
=
„
- Xs
©:
<4
5
*
*
-
1 3
he”
3
15 $
bs ”
_
r
* *
* „
2
3
1
=
0
*
1
3
% — #
y 15
1
mT
.
—
1 £
: bl
B
4
XX
39
*
Fog + - 4
big bY
1}
7 >
{4
IB
« 1?
tg 1
3
.
=
"*
7
1
"ſp
bt.
2
* 5
74
F *
_
MM
_
"2
K
3
1 -
TY "I
=
_
of
WE.
=
1
- "il
20 4
"+=
_—
-
WE:
.
Af :
wo
—
-»
.
ET
Wo.
_
3
3
1 ©
45 k
WS is
= x
.  .
= 4 *
57
1
A
_”


;


a


- N
—
= _— — AT om —__— eo
=O” ES en
P "> nm N
2 than : e'S I” . *
A _ oo ooo IR


lh THE UNITED STATES.


reſerve tlieir fire, till their enemies had approached within 20 or 12 rods of their works.
They then began a well-directed and furious diſcharge of ſmall arms, which mowed


down their enemies in ranks, and occationed a ditorderly and precipttate retreat. Their
officers rallied them with difficulty, and puſhed them forward with their {ſwords to a


ſecond attack. They were in the fame manner put to flight a ſecond time. With ſtill
greater difficulty they were forced by General Howe to, a third attack. By this time
the powder of the Americans began to fail, and their redoubt was attacked on two fides.
Under theſe circumftances, a retreat was ordered; the left wing of the Americans,
N. E. of the redoubt, ſtill continuing their fire, ignorant of what had taken place on
the right, till the Britiſh had nearly ſurrounded thein. The retreat was effected, with
an inconſiderable loſs, conſidering the greater part of the diſtance they had to paſs was
completely expoſed to the inceffant fire of the Glaigow man of war and twe floating
hattenggs. i; 55 125. 4 | FF
During the heat of this bloody action, by order of General Gage, Charlefiown was
ſet on fire by a battery on Cops-hill, in Boſton, and a party from the Somerſet man
of war lying in Charles river, and nearly 400 houſes, including fix public buildings,
were confumed, with their furniture, &c. valued by 19 men under oath, at £156,900,
ſpecic; and 2000 perſons reduced from affluence and mediocrity, to the moſt aggrava-
4d poverty and ex. . CCC
The number of Americans engaged in this memorable action amounted to 1.500 only.
There have been few battles in modern wars in which, all circumſtances confidered,
there was a greater flaughter of men than in this ſhort engagement. The loſs of the
Britiſh, as acknowledged by General Gage, amounted to 1054 men. Nineteen com-
miſſioned officers were killed and 70 wounded. The lots of the Americans was 77
killed—278 wounded and miſſing. 3 eee
The death of Major- general Warren, who four days before had received his com-
miſſion, and who, having had no command aſſigned him, tought this day as a volun-
teer, was particularly and greatly lamented. To the pureſt patriotiſm, and the moſt
undaunted bravery, he added the virtues of domeſtic life, the eloquence of an accom-
pliſhed orator, and the wiſdom of an able ſtateſman.” . e
About this time a ſcheme was laid by 2. number of gentlemen in Connecticut, to take
poſſeſſion of Ticonderoga, where a great quantity of military ſtores were lodged, and
which is the key to. Canada. Having made the neceffary preparations, and collected
270 men, chiefly Green Mountain boys, they rendezvouſed at Caſtleton where they were
joined by Col. Allen, and ſhortly after by Col. Arnold from Cambridge, under com-
miſſion from the Provincial Congreſs. Col. Allen commanded this volunteer party.
Having arrived at Lake Chaplain, oppofite Ticonderoga, in the night, Cols. Allen and
Arnold, with 83 men, croſſed over, and at the dawn of day entered the fort without
reſiſtance, and called upon the commander, who was in bed, to ſurrender the fort.
He aſked by what authority? Col. Allen replied—* I demand it in the name of the
Great Jehovah and of the Continental Congreſs.” —Thus the fort was captured, with
its valuable ſtores and 48 priſoners. Crown Point was taken at the ſame time, by Col.
This pleaſant town, (that part of it which was burnt) has fince been rebuilt upon an improved plan, and
in the fall of 1792, contained, beſides a large meeting houſe, alms houſe, ſchool houſe, and a number of ſtores
and other buildings, about 215 dwelling houſes, inhabited by 234 families, The whole number of ſouls was
4254, of which 220 were males of 21 years and upwards. The number of males of upwards of 21 years in
this town before the war was 360, of which, in April 1790, 100 only lived in Charleſtown, 135 had nevef
returned, 125 bad died. In November 1791, there were no leſs than 139 widows of men who were natives


of Charleſtown, befides 16 other widows of Charleſtown men, not natives, making in the whole 155, of whom
77 were in the town. At this time there were not more than 10 widowers. Waren
8 > 2


„


1
1


throughout every part of the globe.


his military appointment.


due was a


THE UNITED STATES. 249
Warren, and poſſeſſion obtained of all Lake Champlain, in the courſe of a few days, by
a few determined men. oy
On the 15th of June, two days before the memorable battle on Breed's-hill, the Con-
tinental Congreſs unanimouſly appointed George Waſhington, Eſq ;* a native of Vir-
* 2 9 | ginia,
* Notwithſtanding it has often been alerted, with confidence, that Preſident Waſhington was a native of


England, certain it 1s his anceſtors came from thence to this country ſo long ago as the year 1657. He, in
the third deſcent after their migration, was born on the 11th of February, (old ſtyle) 1732, at the pariſh of


| Waſhington, in Weftmoreland county, in Virginia. His father's family was numerous, and he was the firſt


fruit of a ſecond marriage. His education having been principally conducted by a private tutor, at *


years old he was entered a midſhipman on board of a Britiſh veſſel of war ſtationed on the coaſt of Virginia,


and his baggage prepared for embarkation ; but the plan was abandoned on account of the reluctance his
mother expreſſed to his engaging in that profeſſion. | | 1 |

Previous to this tranſaction, when he was but ten years of age, his father died, and the charge of the family
deyolved on his eldeſt brother. His eldeſt brother, a young man of the moſt promiſing talents, had a com-


mand in the colonial troops employed againſt Carthagena, and on his return from the expedition, named his
neu patrimonial manſion Mou Nr VERNoN, in honour of the admiral of that name, from whom he had re-


ceived many civilities. He was afterwards made Adjutant-general of the militia of Virginia, but did not
Jong ſurvive. At his deceaſe, the eldeſt ſon by the ſecond marriage inherited this ſeat, and a conſiderable


landed property. In conſequence of the extenſive limits of the colony, the vacant office of Adjutant-general


was divided into three diſtricts, and the future Hero of America, before he attained his twentieth year, began
his military ſervice by a principal appointment in that department, with the rank/of Major. LE

When he was little more than twenty-one years of age, an event occurred which called his abilities into pub-
lic notice. In 1753, while the government of the colony was adminiſtered by Lieutenant-governor Din-
widdie, encroachments were reported to have been made by the French from Canada, .on the territories of the
Britiſh colonies, at the weſtward. Mr. Waſhington, who was ſent with plenary powers to aſcertain the facts,


treat with the ſavages, and warn the French to deſiſt from their aggreſſions, performed the duties of his miſ- |


ſion with ſingular induſtry, intelligence, and addreſs. His journal and report to Governor Dinwiddie,


which were publiſhed, announced to the world that correctneſs of mind, manlineſs in ſtyle, and accuracy in


mode of Going buſineſs, which have ſince characteriſed him in the conduct of more arduous affairs. But it was
deemed, by ſome, an extraordinary circumſtance that ſo juvenile and inexperienced a perſon ſhould have


been employed on a negociation, with which ſubjects of the greateſt ＋ 1Saomgs were involved ; ſubjects,


which ſhortly after became the origin of a war between England and France, that raged for many years:


It would not comport with the intended brevity of this ſketch, to mention in detail the fatignes he endured,
the plans he ſuggeſted, or the ſyſtem he purſued for the defence of the frontiers, during this war, unti} the.


_ Tranquillity on the frontiers of the middle colonies having been reſtored, and the health of Colonel


Waſhington having become extremelyd ebilitated by an inveterate pulmonary complaint, in 17 59, he reſigned


His health was gradually re-eſtabliſhed. He married Mrs. Cuſtis, f a handſome and amiable young
widow, poſſeſſed of an ample jointure ; and ſettled as a planter and farmer on his eſtate at Mount Vernon, ia
Fairfax county. „„ | | | | |


After he left the army, until the year 177 5, he cultivated the arts of peace. He was conſtantly a member


of aſſembly, a magiſtrate of his county, and a judge of the court. He was elected a delegate to the firſt


Congreſs in 1774; as well as to that which aſſembled in the year following. Soon after the war broke out,


Colon: ppointed, as we have mentioned, by Congreſs, Commander in Chief of the forces of the United
olonies. N | bong 5 | = peers


It is the leſs neceſſary to particularize, in this place, his tranſactions in the courſe of the late war, becauſe .


the impreſſion which they made is yet freſh in every mind. But it is hoped poſterity will be taught, in what


manner he transformed an undiſciplined body of peaſantry into a regular army of ſoldiers. -Commentaries on
bis campaigns would undoubtedly be highly intereſting and inſtructive to future generations. The conduct of
the firſt campaign, in compelling the Britiſh troops to abandon Boſton, by a bloodleſs victory, will merit a
minute narration, But a * 1. would ſcarcely contain the mortifications he experienced, and the hazards to
which he was expoſed, in 1776 and 1777, in contending againſt the proweſs of Britain, with an inadequate
force. His good deſtiny and conſummate prudence, prevented want of ſucceſs from producing want of con-
ence on the part of the public; for want of ſuccels is apt to lead to the adoption of pernicious counſels,
through the levity of the people, or the ambition of their demagogues. Shortly after this period, ſprang up
we only cabal that ever exiſted during his public life, to rob him of his reputation and command. It proved.


+ Preſident and Mrs. Waſhington were both born in the ſame year. -


K k


250 . THE UNITED STATES.
ginia, to the chief command of the American army. This gentleman had been a diſ-
tinguithed and fucceſsful officer in the preceding war, and ſeem deſtined by heaven to
be.the ſaviour of his country. He accepted the appointment with a diffidence which
was a proof of his modeſty, his. prudence, and his greatneſs ; and by his matchleſs
Kill, fortitude, and perſeverance, conducted America through indeſcribable ditficul-
ties to independence and peace. 5 | | Eos
_ General Waſhington, with other officers appointed by Congreſs, arrived at Cam-
bridge, and took command of the American army in July. From this time, the
affairs of America began to aſſume the appearance of a regular and general oppoſition
to the forces of Great Britain. Ns $1 | V
In autumn, a body of troops, under the command of General Montgomery, be-
ſieged and took the garriſon at St. Johu's, which commands the entrance into Canada.
The priſoners amounted to about ſeven hundred. General Montgomery purſued his
ſucceſs, and took Montreal; and deſigned to puſh his victories to Quebec. e
A body of troops, commanded by General Arnold, was ordered to march to Canada
by the river Kennebek, and through the wilderneſs. After ſuffering every hardſhip,
and the moſt diſtreſſing hunger, they arrived in Canada, and were joined by General
Montgomery, before Quebec. This city, which was commanded by Governor Carle-
ton, was immediately befieged : but there being little hope of taking the town by a
Gege, 1k was determined to lem lt. 6 wy
The garriſon of Quebec, at this time, confiſted of about 1520 men, of which 800
were militia. The American army conſiſted of 800 men. General Montgomery
having divided his little army into four detachments, ordered two feints to be made
againſt the upper town, one by Colonel Livingſton, at the head of the Canadians,
againſt St. John's Gate; the other by Major Brown againſt Cape Diamond; reſerving
to himſelf and Colonel Arnold, the two principal attacks againſt the lower town. At


as impotent in effect, ae it was audacious in deſign. In the three ſucceeding years the germ of diſcipline un»
folded; and the ſources of America having been called into co-operation with the land and naval armies of
France, produced the glorious campaign in 1781. From this time the gloom began to diſappear from our
itical horizon, and the affairs ot the Union proceeded in a meliorating train, till a peace was moſt ably
negociated by our ambaſſadors in Europe in 1783. ©. 3
No perſon, who had not the advantage of being preſent when General Waſhington received the intelligence
of peace, and who did not accompany him to his domeſtic retirement, can deſcribe the relief which that joyful
event brought to his labouring mind, or the ſupreme ſatisfaction with which he withdrew to private life.
From his triumphal entry into New York, upon the evacuation of that city by the Britiſh army, to his arrival
at Mount Vernon, after the reſignation of his commiſſion to Congreſs, feſtive crowds impeded his paſſage
through all the populous towns; the devotion of a whole people purſued him with prayers. to Heaven .
hleſſings on his head, while their gratitude ſought the moſt expreſſive language of maniteſting itfelf to him, as
their common father and benefactor. When he became a private citizen, he had the unuſual felicity to find
that his native State was among the moſt zealous in doing juſtice to his merits; and that ſtronger demonſtra-
tions of affectionate eſteem (if poſlible) were given by the citizens of his neighbourhood, than by any other
deſcription of men on the continent. But he bas conſtantly declined accepting any compenſation for his ſer-
vices, or proviſion for the augmented expences which have been incurred by him in conſequence of his public
employment, although propoſals have been made in the moſt delicate manner, eſpecially by the States of Vir⸗
gina and Pennſylvania. _ 3 Sans
I be ha pinelſs of private life he did not long enjoy. In 1789, by the unanimous voice of his countrymen,
he was called to the dignified office of Chief Magiſtrate of the United States of America; which office he has
ever fince fuſtained; and with how much dignity, prudence, and ability, the general applauſe of his conſti-
tuents amply teſtify. The hiſtory of the life, and the delineation of the character of this truly great man, are
ſubjects 1 will occupy many of the moſt entertaining and inſtructive pages of the future impartial hiſ⸗
tories of America. . ws 1 „ 41 |


While true merit is eſteemed; or virtue honoured, mankind will never ceaſe to revere the memory of this
Hero; and while gratitude remains in the human breaſt; the praiſes of WAs GTroN ſhall dwell on every
American tongue, Sos | 8


*
8
LK
:
-: 8
*
5
3
* 33
: -
1
1
"3
6 «
*
LS:
&
=
17
U 4
=
5 4
7 o
*;
©
75
*
i
20
3 1
4 *
8
_
1
F 217
1
2 3
Mx
1 ? "
+ =
0
bo
__
-1— $4
8
4
=”!
1
1
2%
2767
*
Ti
5 eS
by”,
1&8
8
4X
=
= *
*
4
D .
*
*
_
© :
M315
1
„
—_ ”
.
Y
r
.
1
* 91
N
5
1
1
— - an:
— . 7
Ke
8H
4
"m8
=
..*
48
e
1
. © |
Lo .
*
N
1
"4 .
3
1
> 9
EY
» 4
4
.
1
FA
4
IX
1
IT.
ts”
1
1
4 1
5 *
_
.
xx
#4
. 12
4
_” |
»M
:%
d 4
+ 45M
14 ON ©
8
"=
a


: + e _ five


*
*
d
7
FX
Þ
- Ty
Lk
4 »
14
by
=—_
74 ;
*
=
. N
m d
L _
.F oP" 4
=
4 8 4
no +8
T3 .
1
x * 4
. -=
* 2 >
r
+,
h =
2 .
©, WS
-q7 „
©
_—
©, ==
3 V
* +»,
= :- -.
Eg. __—_
3.
.
r
*, $68
7. C 8 *
3:
WE»
2; x
4 Py.
Ma 5. - *
\ I
1 1 * E.
** *
6. %
4 Rr
+ -V
, >
3 x
8 1
N. LY.
$2. A
| 485
* 3 ,”
7
= AF
8. Y
17 4
.
7 +8
+<s +-
—_— -
7 . 1
. 1 *
_—
5 W
+ W334
p wes
4
ol
_
_ ©
1
»# 1 *
„ 0
by bf
1
* if
4 _—_
_
+TÞ 2 7 5
_—_
1
Ty?)
4-2
"SED
E ;
7
1 Fl
. .S
w 4 — 8 ”
"=
„
1
7)
* 7
* 3
. * 7
1
x *
40 1
. 8
x © 4%
> v1 *
8 $
"
\ ts
— bi,
E .
_— .
7 BY 1
24 2
4 4 by *
4 «

A = | <1
—_—
4 *

+36
xo
= * * \
.
A _ 5
> =
5
2
_
»
59
—_—_ -
5 .
8
I + *
OE.
hs
_
+:
> I 7
5 * 5
E - —
=. 5
£#YT
'&%
PyS - 4x
8
r
N ST
4
SP :
X -
rf 8
7
. SY
x ws
29 3
[ .
: a
M$
LIN, >
n
.
3
3 x
Wa
7 wr Re
F a0
9
 F. $a
Db -
7
hn
ay N -
bw i
l —
o *
1
4 '—
4
*
* .
3
1
3 bd
&* .
* :
47 7
8
"os. BY
EE
*
1.00
5
© 2%
8
3
3
1
. =
Foy
LEE
1
sf
$4
© £20
1
22
"uk ©
"2 As
* 4
.
..-Y
» YER
*
2
&
As
424
— =
7.
LS:
+48
.
« 2
44 ee
A
= £1
1
8
% $4
1346
\ 25
N
.
9
.
* 1
0
28
25 oy.
COU s
*
.
*
* .
Y:
* P
-,
95.5
*
62
2
228
3
2
—
*
*
2
55 1 .
4 # *
9 1
- 4
=_
_—
* *
E
0
2 1
_
*
,
„
* 5 2
4 — a5
_
4 + -
We.”
11
1 | 1
4 4
4
is f -
| e
_—
r
*
s
*
[
+ 4
b
*
7


c rnd.


was wounded, and was obliged to be carried off the field of battle. His pa


by General Howe. -


town.


conſider himſelf as an American.


THE:UNITED- STATES. 251
five o'clock in the morning General Montgomery advanced againft the lower town:
he paſſed the firſt barrier, and was juſt opening to attack the ſecond, when he was
killed, together with his Aid-de-camp, Captain McPherſon. This ſo diſpirited the
men, that Colonel Campbell, on whom the command devolved, r proper to
draw them off. In the mean time Colonel Arnold, with 350 men, made a ſucceſsful
attack on another part of the town. In the attack of the firſt battery, Colonel Arnold


Iis party, how-
ever, commanded by Captain Morgan of Virginia, proceeded, and entered the town ;


but not being joined by the other parties, was obliged to ſurrender to ſuperior force.


The loſs of the Americans in killed and wounded, was about 100, and zoo were
taken priſoners. Hiſtorians will do juſtice to the bravery of the Provincial troops on


this occaſion. 1 | 6 „ SME
After the defeat, Colonel Arnold, -who now commanded the troops, continued tome


months before Quebec, although his troops were reduced in numbers, and ſuffered
incredibly from cold and ficknelts. EET TH ot eter rot FTA:


Ihe death of General Montgomery was greatly and fincerely regretted on both ſides.
« His many amiable qualities had procured him an uncommon ſhare of private affec-


tion, and his great abilities, an equal proportion of public eſteem. His name was
mentioned in parliament with fingular reſpect: the Miniſter himſelf acknowledged his


worth, while he reprobated the cauſe in which he fell. He concluded an involuntary


panegyric, by ſaying, © Curſe on his virtues, they have undone his country.“ T“


About this time, the large and flouriſhing town of Norfolk in Virginia was burnt
by order of Lord Dunmore, the then governor of that province. 8
General Gage went to England in September, and was ſucceeded in the command


*


Falmouth, a confiderable town in "Es province of Main, in Maſſachuſetts, ſhared


the fate of Norfolk; being laid in aſhes by order of the Britiſh admiral. =


The Britiſh government entered into treaties with ſome of the German princes for


about fourteen thouſand men, who were to be ſent to America the next year, to aſſiſt


in ſubduing the colonies. The parliament alſo paſſed an act, forbidding all intercourſe
with America; and while they repealed the Boſton port and fiſhery bills, they declared


all American property on the high ſeas, forfeited to the captors.


Meaſures were taken- to annoy the enemy- in Boſton : for this purpoſe, batteries
were opened on ſeveral hills, from whence ſhot and bombs were thrown into the
But the batteries which were opened on Dorcheſter point had the beſt effect,


and ſoon obliged General Howe to abandon the town. In March 1776 the Britiſh


troops embarked for Halifax, and General Waſhington entered Boſton in triumph.
In the enſuing ſummer, a ſmall ſquadron of ſhips commanded by Sir Peter Parker,


and a body of troops under the Generals Clinton and Cornwallis, attempted to take


Charleſton, the-capital of South Carolina. The ſhips made a violent attack upon the


* General Montgomery deſcended from a reſpectable family in the North of Ireland, and was born in the
year 1737. His attachment to liberty was innate, and matured by a fine education and an excellent under-
ſtanding, Having married a wife, and purchafed an eſtate in New York, he was, from theſe circumſtances,
as well as from his natural love of freedom, and from a conviction of the juſtneſs of her cauſe, induced to
From principle, he early embarked in her cauſe, and quitted the ſweets of
ealy fortyne, the enjoyment of a loved and philoſophical rural. life, with the higheſt domeſtic felicity, to take
an alive ſhare in all the hardſhips and dangers that attend the ſoldier's life. ;
* Orgs he came over to America, he had been an officer in the ſervice of England, and had ſucceſsfully


fein her battles with the immortal Wolfe at Quebec, in the war of 1756, on the very ſpot, where, when


ng under the ſtandard of freedom, he was doomit to fall in arme againſt hen
2 888 K k 2 | fort


252 oy THE UNITED 3TATES.


fort on Sullivan's Iſland, but were repulſed with great loſs, and the expedition was
abandoned.
In July, Congreſs publiſhed their declication of independence, which ſeparated:
America from Great Britain. This great event took place two hundred and eighty-
four years after the diſcovery of America by Columbus—one hundred and ſixty-ſix
from the firſt effectual ſettlement in Virginia, and one hundred and fiſty-ſix from the
firſt ſettlement of Plymouth in Maſſachuſetts, which were the earlieſt Enghth ſettle-
ments in America.
Juſt after this declaration, General Howe, with a
Fork, and landed his troops on Staten Iftand. General Waſhington was in New


York with about thirtcen thouſand men, who were encampec either in the city or the


neighbouring fortifications.
The operations of the Britiſh
Auguſt. The American Generals Sullivan and Lord Sterling, with a large body of
men, were made priſoners. The night after the engagement, a retreat was 5 e
and executed with ſuch ſilence, that the Americans left the iſland without _—
their enemies, and without loſs.

In September, the city of New York was abandoned by the American amy, and
taken by the Britiſh.


In November, Fort Waſhington | on York Iſland was: tukes, and more than two


thouſand Americans made priſoners. Fort Lee, oppoſite to Fort Waſhington, on the
Jerſey ſhore, was foon after taken, but the garriſon eſcaped.
About the ſame time, General Clinton was ſent with a body of troops to take poſe
ſeſſion of Rhode Iſland, and ſucceeded. In addition: to all theſe lofſes and defeats,
the American army ſuffered by deſertion, and more by fickneſs, which was 1
and very mortal.
The northern army at Ticonderoga was in a diſagreeable Gbuntion; particularly after
the battle on Lake Champlain, in which the American force, conſiſting of a few light
veſſels, under the 9 of Generals Arnold and Waterbury, was totally diſperſed:


But General Carleton, inſtead of purſuing his victory, landed at Crown Point, recon-


noitered our poſts at nn and Mount ü ane hes and returned to winter
| 2 in Canada.


The American army might now be ſaid to be no more.


thouſand men, did not now exceed three thouſand. The term of their engagements
being expired, they returned in large bodies to their families and friends; the few,


who, from perſonal att achme nt, local circumſtances, or ſuperior perſeverance and


bravery, continued with the Generals Waſhington and Lee, were too inconſiderable
to appear formidable in the view of a powerful and victorious enemy.


In this alarming and critical ſituation of affairs, General Lee, throu gh an imprudent


7 neſs, which ill became a man in his important ſtation, was captured by a party
of Britiſh light hoxſe, commanded by Colonel Harcourt. This unfortunate circum-
ſtance gave a ſevere ſhock to the remaining hopes of the little army, and rendered
their fituation truly diſtreſſing.

- While theſe thi
being diſcouraged by the loſs of General Lee, and always ready to improve every ad-
vantage to raiſe the drooping ſpirits of his handful of men,. had made a ftand on the
Pennſylvania ſide of the Delaware. He collected his ſcattered forces, called in 95


ande of the Pennſylvania militia, and on the — of the 2 50 of December, 1 710


whe.


powerful fas, arrived near New


began by the 2 ion on Long Iſland in che month of


All that now rondindd of
an army, which, at the opening of the campaign, amounted to at leaſt twenty-five


ings were tranſacting in New Jerſey, General Waſhington, far from


+ "a8 |
4


THE UNITED STATES. 253


when the enemy were lulled into ſecurity by the idea of his weakneſs, and by the in-
elemency of the night, which was remarkably boiſterous, as well as by the fumes of a
Chriſtmas eve, he croſſed the river, and, at the breaking of day, marched down to
Trenton; and ſo completely ſurpriſed them, that the greater part of the detachment,
which were ſtationed at this place, ſurrendered aſter a ſhort refiſtance. The horſemen
and a few others made their eſcape at the oppoſite end of the town. Upwards of nine
hundred Heſſians were taken priſoners at this time. 1
The addreſs in planning and executing this enterprize reflected the higheſt honour

on the commander, and the ſucceſs revived the deſponding hopes of America. The loſs
of General Mercer, a gallant officer, at Princeton, was the principal circumſtance that
allayed the joys of victory. Dot on CCC
The following year, 1777, was diſtinguiſned by very memorable events in favour
of America. On the opening of the campaign, Governor Tryon was ſent with a body
of troops to deſtroy the ſtores at Danbury in Connecticut. This plan was executed,
and the town moſtly burnt. The enemy ſuffered in their retreat, and the Americans
loſt General Wooſter, a brave and experienced officer.
General Preſcot was taken from his quarters on Rhode Iſland, by the addreſs and
enterprize of Colonel Barton, and conveyed priſoner to the continent.

General Burgoyne, who commanded the northern Britiſh army, took poſſeſſion of
Ticonderoga, which had been abandoned by the Americans. He puſhed his ſucceſſes,
croſſed Lake George, and encamped upon the banks of the Hudſon, near Saratoga.
His progreſs, however, was checked by the defeat of Colonel Baum, near Bennington,
in which the undiſciplined militia, under General Stark, diſplayed unexampled bra-
very, and captured almoſt the whole detachment. The militia aſſembled from all
parts of New England to ſtop the progreſs of General Burgoyne.


: |. Theſe; with the regular troops, formed a reſpectable army, commanded by General
| Gates. After two ſevere actions, in which the Generals Lincoln and Arnold behaved


with uncommon gallantry, and were wounded, General Burgoyne found himſelf en-
cloſed with brave troops, and was forced to ſurrender his whole army, amounting to
five thouſand: ſeven hundred and fifty-two men, into the hands of the Americans.“
This memorable event happened on the 17th of October, 1777; and diffuſed an uni-
verſal joy over America, and laid a foundation for the treaty with France.
But before theſe tranſactions, the main body of the Britiſh forces had embarked at
New York, failed up the Cheſapeak, and landed at the head of Elk river. The army
ſoon began their march for Philadelphia. General Waſhington had determined to
oppoſe them, and for this purpoſe made a ftand, firſt at Red Clay Creek, and then
upon the heights near Brandywine Creek. Here the armies engaged, and the Ame-
= Ticans were overpowered, and ſuffered great loſs. The enemy ſoon purſued their
= march, and took poſſeſſion of Philadelphia towards the cloſe of September.
Dot long after, the two armies were again engaged at Germantown, and in tlie
beginning of the action, the Americans had the advantage; but by ſome unlucky
accident, the fortune of the day was turned in favour of the Britiſh. Both ſides ſut--
fered conſiderable loſſes; on the fide of the Americans was General Naſh. _
In an attack upon the forts at Mud Iſland and Red Bank, the Heſſians were unſuc-
ceſsful, and their commander, Colonel Donop, killed. The Britiſh alſo loſt the
Auguſta, a {hip of the line. But the forts were afterwards taken, and the navigation


* When General Burgoyne left Canada, his army conſiſted of 10,000 men, together with one of the moſt
complete and grand trains of artillery that was ever ſent from Great Britain. a,
of


254 THE UNITED STATES:
of the Delaware opened. General Waſhington was reinforced, with a part of the
troops which had compoſed the northern army, under General Gates; and both ar-


mies retired to winter quarters.
In October, the fame month in which General Burgoyne was taken at Saratoga


| General Vaughan, with a ſmall fleet, failed up Hudſon's river, and burnt Kingſton, a


beautiful Dutch ſettlement, on the weſt fide of the river.

'The beginning of the next year, 1778, was diſtinguiſhed by a treaty of alliance
between France and America; by which we obtained a powerful and generous ally.
When the Engliſh miniſtry were informed that this treaty was on foot, they diſpatched
commiſſioners to America to attempt a reconciliation. But America would not now
accept their offers. Early in the ſpring, Count d'Eſtaing, with a fleet of fifteen fail
of the line, was ſent by the court of France to aſſiſt America.

General Howe left the army, and returned to England ; the command then de-
volved upon Sir Henry Clinton. |


In June the Britiſh army left Philadelphia, as ebe for New York : on their


march they were annoyed by the Americans ; and at Monmouth a very regular action
took place between part of the armies ; the enemy were repulfed with great loſs.


General Lee, for his miſconduct that day, was ſuſpended, and was never afterwards :


permitted to join the army.
General Lee's conduct, at Geral times beter this, had been very ſuſpicious. In


December, 1776, he lay at Chatham, about eleven miles from Elizabeth Town, with


a brigade of troops, when a great quantity of baggage was ftored at Elizabeth Town,
under a guard of only five hundred Heſſians. General Lee was appriſed of this, and


might have ſurpriſed the guard and taken the baggage ; but he neglected the opportu-
"nity, and after ſeveral marches and counter-marches between 'Troy, Chatham, and


Morris Town, he took up his quarters at, or near White's tavern, where he was ſur-


Lui and taken priſoner by a party of the Britiſh horſe. He was heard to ſay, re-
, that General Waſhington would ruin a fine army. It was ſuſpected that he
E den igns to ſupplant the General, and his friends attempted to place him at the head
of the army. General Waſhington s prudent delays and cautious movements afforded
General Lee's friends many opportunities to ſpread reports unfavourable to his cha-
racter. It was infinuated, with fome ſucceſs, that General Waſhington wanted
courage and abilities. Reports of this kind, at one time, rendered General Lee very
popular, and, it is ſuppoſed, he wiſhed to fruſtrate General Waſhington's plans, in
order to increaſe the ſuſpicions already entertained of his generalſhip, and turn the


public clamour in his own favour. His conduct at Monmouth was, by ſome, ſuppoſed


to have proceeded from fuch a deſign ; for he commanded the Hower of the American
army, and was not deſtitute of courage.


In Auguſt, General Sullivan, with a large body of troops, attempted to take pol-


ſeſſion of Rhode Iſland, but did not ſucceed. Soon after, the ſtores and ſhipping at
Bedford, in Maſſachuſetts, were burnt by a party of the Britiſh troops. ſame


year, Savannah, the capital of Georgia, Was taken — the Britiſh, under the command


of Colonel Campbell.


In the following year, 1779, General Lincoln was appointed to the command of the
ſouthern army.


Governor Tryen and Sir George Collier made an incurſion into Connecticut, and |


burnt the towns of Fairfield and Norwalk. But the American arms were crowne


with ſucceſs in a bold attack upon Stoney Point, which was ſurprized and taken by 15
rar


THE UNITED STATES.


made priſoners, with little loſs on either fide,


except ſome veſſels which were burnt by the Americans themſelves.


In October, General Lincoln and Count d' Eſtaing made an aſſault
wounded.


provifions and ſettlements that fell in their way.


brave General Wayne, in the night of the 15th of July. Five hundred men were


255


A party of Britiſh forces attempted this ſummer to build a fort on Penobſcot river,
for the purpoſe of cutting timber in the neighbouring foreſt. A plan was laid in Mat-
ſachuſetts to diſlodge them, and a confiderable fleet collected for the purpoſe : but the
plan failed of ſucceſs, and the whole marine force fell into the hands of the Briti


ih,


0 upon Savannah;
but they were repulſed with conſiderable loſs. In this action, the celebrated Poliſh


Count Pulaſki, who had acquired the reputation of a brave ſoldier, was mortally


In this ſummer General Sullivan marched with a body of troops into the Indian:
country, in the weſtern part of the New York State, and burnt and deſtroyed all their


On the opening of the campaign the next year, 1780, the Britiſh troops left Rhode


Iſland. An expedition, under General Clinton and Lord Cornwallis, was undertaken


| againſt Charleſton, South Carolina, where General Lineoln commanded.


priſoners.
|  Gener
another army collected.


marched through the ſouthern States, and ſuppoſed them entirely ſubdued.
The fame ſummer, the Britiſh troops made fre
into the Jerſeys, ravaging and plundering the country.


In July, a French fleet, under Monfieur de Ternay, with a body of land forces,
f mr mag by Count de Rochambeau, arrived at Rhode Ifland, to the great joy of the
mericans. 1 „ .
13 This year was alſo diſtinguiſhed by the treachery of General Arnold. Ge-
4 . neral Waſhington having ſome buſineſs to tranſact at Weathersfield in Connecticut,
= left Arnold to command the important peſt of Weſt Point, which guards a paſs ir
0 HAaucdlſon's river, about fixty miles from New York. Arnold's ee in the city of
5 = Philadelphia, the preceding winter, had been cenſured; and the treatment he received
x m conlequence, had given him offence, © ooh e
lle determined to take revenge, and for this purpoſe, he entered into a negociation
Ne =_ with Sir Henry Clinton to deliver Weſt Point, and the army, into the hands of the
= = Britiſh, While General Waſhington was abſent, he diſmounted the cannon. in ſome.
of 3 4 Aa forts, and took other ſteps to render the taking of the poſt caſy for the
. hut by a providential diſcovery the whole plan was defeated. Major Andre, Adju-
inn tant-general in the Britiſh army, aid-du-camp to General Clinton, a brave officer;
ihe e had been ſent np the river as a ſpy, to concert the plan of operations with:
50 DO, was taken, condemned by a court-martial, and executed. Arnold made
5 = eſeape, by getting on board the Vulture, a Britiſh veſſel which lay in the river.
or = eneral Waſhington arrived in camp juſt after Arnold made his eſcape, and re-
\ the Nored order in the garriſon. OS


Alter the defeat « General Gates, in Carolina, General Greene


This.


town, after a cloſe ſiege of about ſix weeks, was ſurrendered to the Britiſh com-
mander; and General Lincoln, and the whole American garriſon, were made


ral Gates was appointed to the command in the ſouthern department, and *


| In Auguſt, Lord Cornwallis attacked the American troops at
Camden, in South Carolina, and routed them with confiderable loſs. He afterwards.


quent incurfions from New York.


was appointed to-
command


456 THE UNITED STATES.


command in the ſouthern department.# From this period, things in that quarter
wore a more favourable aſpect. Colonel Tarleton, the active commander of the
Britiſh legion, was defeated by General Morgan, the intrepid commander of the
riflemen. 123 | | „ |
After a variety of movements the two armies met at Guilford, in Carolina. Here
was one of the beſt fought actions during the war. General Greene and Lord Corn-
Wallis exerted themſelves at the head of their reſpective :armies; and although the
Americans were obliged to retire from the field, yet the Britiſh army ſuffered an
+ rg loſs, and could not purſue the victory. The action happened on the 15th
arch, 1781. | 8 5 . TS 15
In the yg eh , General Arnold, who was made a brigadier-general in the Britiſh
ſervice, with a ſmall number of troops ſailed for Virgima, and plundered the country.
This called the attention of the French fleet to that quarter, and a naval engagement
took place between the Engliſh and French, in which ſome of the Engliſh ſhips were
much damaged, and one entirely diſabled. VVV
After the battle of Guilford, General Greene moved towards South Carolina, to
drive the Britiſh from their poſts in that State. Here Lord Rawdon obtained an in-
conſiderable advantage over the Americans, near Camden. But General Greene more
than recovered this diſadvantage, by the brilliant and ſucceſsful action at the Eutaw
Springs; where General Marian diſtinguiſhed himſelf, and the brave Col. Waſhington
was wounded and taken priſoner. Ys VV N |
Lord Cornwakis, finding General Greene ſucceſsful in Carolina, marched to Vir-
ginia, collected his forces, and fortified himſelf in York Town. In the mean time ü
Arnold made an incurſion into Connecticut, burnt a part of New London, took Fort
_ Griſwold by ſtorm, and put the garriſon to the ſword. The garriſon conſiſted chiefly ME
of men collected from the little town of Groton, which, by the ſavage cruelty of
the Britiſh officer who commanded the attack, loſt, in one hour, almoſt all its heads
of families. The brave Colonel Ledyard, who commanded the fort, was ſlain with his
.own ſword after he had ſurrendered. _ ; „„ CATS,
The Marquis de la Fayette, ſ the brave and generous nobleman, whoſe ſervices
command the gratitude of every American, had been diſpatched with about two _
| * 44


General Greene was born at Warwick, in the State of Rhode Iſland, about the year 1741, of reputable |
Parents, belonging to the ſociety of Friends. He was endowed with an uncommon degree of judgement and
penetration; his 1 was benevolent, and his manners affable. At an early period of life he was choſen

a member of the Aſſembly, and he diſcharged his truſt to the entire ſatisfaction of his conſtituents.
After the battle: of Lexington, three regiments of troops were raiſed in Rhode Iſland, and the command of
them given to Mr. Greene, who was nominated a brigadier-general. His merit and abilities, both in coun

and in the field, were ſoon noticed by General Waſhington, and in Auguſt 1776 he was appointed Major-

general. His action with the Brittſh troops at Eutaw Springs was one of the beſt conducted, and moſt ſuc-
ceſsful engagements that took place during the war. For this General Greene was honoured by Cong'*

with a Britiſh ſtandard and a gold medal. As a reward for his particular ſervices in the ſouthern department,
the State of Georgia preſented him with a large and valuable tract of land on an iſland near 'Savannab. _,

Alfter the war he returned to his native State. The contentions and bad policy of that State induced him

to leave it and retire to his eſtate in Georgia. : MEG, .

He removed his family in October 1785 ; but in June the next ſummer, the extreme heat, and the fatigue
Of a walk, brought on a diſorder that put a period to his life, on the 19th of the fame month. He lived uni-
verſally loved and reſpected, and his death was univerſally lamented. | e 1
His body was interred in Savannah, and the funeral proceſſion attended by the Cincinnati. 5

+ The Marquis de la Fayette was born about the year 1757. At the age of nineteen he eſpouſed the _

& America, with all the ardoug which the moſt generous philanthropy could inſpire. At a very early Perf


*


THE UNITED STATES. 350
ſand light —— from the main army, to watch the motions of Lord Cornwallis in
Virginia. 8 pt6ſcouted this expedition with the greateſt military ability. AJthongh
his force was much inferior to that of the enemy, he obliged them to leave Richmond
and Williamſburgh, and to ſeek protection under their ſhipping.” _ 7 |


"oh


About the laſt of Auguft, Count de Graſſe arrived in the Cheſapeek and blocked uh


the Britiſh troops at York-town. Admiral Greaves, with a Britiſh fleet, appeared off
the Capes, and an action ſucceeded; but it was not decifive. e
General Waſhington had before this time moved the main body of his army, to-
gether with the French troops, to the ſouthward; and as ſoon as he heard of the arrival
of the French fleet in the Cheſapeek, he made rapid marches to the head of Elk, where
embarkins, the troops ſoon arrived at York-town. © nt
A cloſe ſiege immediately commenced, and was carried on with ſuch vigour, by the
combined forces of America and, France, that Lord Cornwallis was obliged to fur-
render. This glorious event, which togk. place on the a gth of October, 1781, decided
the conteſt in favour of America; and laid the foundation of a general peace.
A few months after the furrender of Cornwallis, the Britſh evacuated all their poſts
in South Carolina and Georgia, and retired to the main army in New York. ©
The next ſpring, 1782, Sir Guy Carleton arrived in New York, and took the com-
mand of the Britiſh army in America: immediately on his arrival, he acquainted
General Waſhington and Congreſs, that negociations for peace had commenced” at
ro DOES d . ID he Het Ne IE
On the goth of November, 1782, the proviſional articles of peace and reconci;
Liation, between Great Britain and the American States, were ſigned at Paris; by


of the war he determined to embark from his native country for the United States: before he could complete
bis intention, intelligence arrived in Europe, that the American inſurgents, reduced to two thouſand men,


| were flying through 8 before a Britiſh force of thirty thouſand regulars. The news fo effectually extin-
, -guiſhed the little credit which America had in Europe, in the beginning of the year 1777, that the Commif-
i fioners of Congreſs at Paris, though they had previouſly encouraged his project, could not procure a veſſel to
ö forward his intentions. Under theſe circumſtances, they thought it but honeſt to diſſuade him from the pre-
ſent proſecution: of his perilous enterpriſe. It was in vain they acted ſo candid a part. The flame which
6 America had Kkindled 1 his breaſt, could not be extinguifhed by her misfortunes. <Hitherto,* ſaid he, in
. the true ſpirit of patriotiſm, * I have only cheriſhed your cauſe—now I am going to ſerve it. The lower it is
J in the opinion of the people, the greater will be the effect of my departure; and ſihce you cannot get a veſſel,
| 1 ſhall purchaſe and fit out one to carry your diſpatches to Congreſs and myſelf to America.“ Whilſt this
5 veſſel was preparing he viſited England, was introduced to the King's miniſter and many of the nobility and
le firſt characters of the nation. By this means he was enabled to form a good judgement of men and things
d there. He embarked and arrived in Charleſton early in the year 1777. Lengfeld ſoon conferred o him the
en rank of major-general: he accepted the appointment, but not without exaQting two cohditions, which dif-
played the elevation of his ſpirit; the one, that he ſhould ſerve on his own expence; the other, that he ſnonld
of begin Me Es rr ðß er re Ln ang oo
cil He was ſoon appointed to command an expedition to Canada. The plan was to croſs the lakes on the ice;
or- the object, to ſeize Montreal and St. John's. He was now at the age of twenty, and muſt have keenly ex-
c- perienced the allurements of independent command; but his cool judgement, and honeſt heart, reſtrainerl
els him from indulging a paſſion for military fame, under circumſtances which might haye mjured” the cauſe
ot, which he had ſo.zealouſly eſpouſed. He found that, in caſe of his proceeding, the army under his command
would be in danger of experiencing a fate ſimilar to that of the unfortunate Burgoyne. With a boldneſs of
um Juclgement that would have done honour to the moſt experienced general, and without advancing beyond
| Alvany, he relinquiſhed the expedition. Soon after he received the thanks of Congreſs for his prudence.
gue ir. the four campaigns which ſucceeded the arrival of the Marquis de la Fayette in America, he gave re-
uni; peated proofs of his military talents in the middle and eaſtern States; but the events that: took place under
| bis command in Virginia, contributed moſt to his military glorrrrrrtt.t.‚.‚‚ “
Some time after the capture of Cornwallis, the Marquis de la Fayette went to France, where he uſed his
auſe _ endeavours to promote the commercial and political intereſts of theſe States, and to effect a revolution in his
of native: country in favour of liberty. It remains for future ages to pourtray the virtues and exploits of this


aIuly great man — this friend to human nature this ſecond WAs HIN GTox. l hic!
| WilICH


258 THE UNITED STATES.


bu which Great Britain acknowledged the independenee and ſovereignty of the United
3 States of America. Theſe articles were ratified by a defini! we treaty, September 3d,
3 1783. This peace was negociated on the part of Great Britain * r. Oſwald, and
the definitive treaty was ſigned by Mr. Hartley; and on the part of the United States

by John Adams, John Jay,“ and Benjamin Franklin, Eiquires.-
* John Jay, Efq. is a deſcendent of one of the French Proteſtant Emigrants,, who came to America, in


conſequence of the Revolution of the Edict of Nantz, in 1685. It is remarkable that among the-deicendent:
of theſe emigrants, ſome of whom ſettled in New York, and ſome in Boſton,, there have been the. following.
eminent characters James Bowdoin, Eſq. who had been Governor of the Commonwealth of Maſſachuſetts,
and at his death was Prefident of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences ;: Henry Laurens, Eſq. who has
been Preſident of Congrefs, and Ambaſſador to a foreign court ; Elias Boudinot, r has been Preſident
of Congreſs, and is now a Repreſentative ; and John Jay, Eſq. who has been Preſident of Congreſs, Ambaſ·
ſador to a foreign Court, and is now Chief Juſtice of the American States. <=.


+ Dr. Franklin was born in Boſton, January 6th, 1706, O. S. He was educated to the buſineſs of printing.
In the firſt twenty-four years of his life he paſſed through an uncommon variety of ſcenes, which he improved
to valuable purpoſes. He early diſcovered a ſtrong and diſtinguiſhing mind, and a fertile inventive genius. About
the age of 24 he married Miſs Read of Philadelphia, where he had eſtabliſhed himſelf as a printer. In 1736
he was choſen Clerk of the General Aﬀembly of Pennſylvania; and the year following was appointed Pott- -
maſter in Philadelphia. In 1744, he broached the idea of the American Phaloſophical-Society, and had the
pleafure to find it meet with all the ſucceſs he could deſire. He was the principal inſtrument alſo in planning
and eſtabliſhing. the Academy of Philadelphia, from which have ſprung the College and Univerſity of that
8 5 | 5 | TIER | |
In 1747, and for twenty years after, ſucceſſively, he was choſen a repreſentative to the Aſſembly. for the
city of Philadelphia; in which fituation he was highly reſpe&ed and ſingularly uſeful. He was appointed
joint Poſt-maſter General with Mr. William Hunter in-1753. He was greatly inſtrumental in carrying into 1
effect Dr. Bond's plan for an hoſpital in Philadelphia, the advantages of which have been extenſively ex- *
perienced. By this time his character as a philoſopher was known in Euro 1


pe as well as America, and he re-
ceived the honorary degree of Maſter of Arts from Yale and Harvard Colleges. | |


In 1754, he was appointed one of the Commiſſioners from Pennſylvania to attend. the celebrated Albany s
Co s, in order to deviſe a plan for defending the country againſt the French. Here he drew up his
« Albany Plan of Union,” which was unanimouſly agreed to by Congreſs, but, though wiſely adapted to pre ·
ſerve the harmony between Great Britain and. her Colonies, was ultimately rejected. 3

In 1757, the Aſſembly of Pennſylvania, indignant at the obſtinacy of the governors, who were fhackled
with ijaſtructions not to aſſent to any tax bill, that did not exempt the eſtates of the proprietors from contri-


A ·ĩ ·˖


„


r


. 9 1 1 - ** 7. *
— * r W 2 at eu err
N 1 3 26542" B63 _— v4. — r 4 TIC e 4 7 * «
- : — — * 7 5 4 * -» 1 r „ "7; 2 Se * * PW” i Li og — 2 ee.
6 K * 3 #4 BAS 4 2 E . red Ry yu * 4 of 2. IJ — Þ > A n N 1 2 £ , 8 y .
* ? $22 | PREY Tong SE 32 N . ny „ © ©) > 0 IT 3 3 e ry „ tered n p #19 22 N 2 .
* Ya g * „ * py ad 78 X + a >. \ «1,6? 1 I "x 24 s [7 * — > r 1 py Ad 4. « N ö i T0 TRE” * * -%.
J 7 8 . a . 1 y A * 8 94 > „ 4 k - £6 * 1 * 4 [+ 1 * x Ex, 4 Vx £7 4 A* 42 ” - rn
. * * 5 F 1 * 0 d * ve & i 5 q + : ad > -& _ n 4 , 1 : 7 - 7 1 - - 0 -
. Ws 25 he et auch Sr 9 * * 8 , +67, Ip 2:33" 2 Wa 1 | 42 8 n q EM PY . 2 a £m r — 2232
* "MS, o 1 . 25 2 5 . 164.4 —＋ 1 2 0 or 0 . oy fe 7 3 4 A. 2, e. — _ - £
"OR IIs cj 7 2 E Hows? Ss ; A 6 ; 2 2 =... > > * $a 3 — 7. , 1 3.664 "X03 : . —_
» WF 7 r 3 2 5 — 8 Ls — * 4 . 3 - a 5 n 7 J * W * 1 Lol 4
1 Wong Oo 1 4 * - ad 1 x . * 9 4 ME” > | — LR 2 .
28 N * Nen 43 — & > „ n 2 ** . * 1 5 K 3 re OT R .
. SEAS N * f 3 „ i WR Po 1) mY > got SEES * - * — - -
TIT. . . : 4 pn , * 7 - * 5
a -. * 1


n n
— * * 0 * . R N
2 ' - * n
C2 Mg -at ts bo x 4 F <> ; + 2 1 l 44 *
> \ a 7 _ - > F (85 pi S434 n ep 48 4 "3 er BE tains es, wel 0 &
- % * 4 I 3 1 5 x Mc RS. = þ — 222 8 4 1 % E * & th. I 7 * — 4 7 . ', 4
2 < OT? = FD — gp > 4, b EI . P R lh. Mk > WS. - * Bots i BSE Mn 21 4 :
"IR Mx 4 wei Y . K 2 * De — * es bt re. $4 - E * rad t — 5 9-2
* * e 1 e as * ” : * : d 4 3 » — — 9 N * 1X 7 2 de { . L 24 3 * <=: 5 p r
g 45 o © COS. - \ p DP. s 2 5 N 2 XJ "| * « TALES. * S - q * — Dy, |
* : _ _— — 1 (On. IC by L HS + * * — 4 J W RV a * A 8 a
. — v2. ale EFS * ' = atm Neha Ao , FIGS ? „ WY — a .
th — — S CI Ty — N a L BE — b *
9 9 5 ©. - x a mos . 5 . ;
2 — — 2 * g '
- = .


| buting to the public ſervice, determined to fend an agent to-London, to petition the King for redreſs. Mr. a
D Franklin was appointed for this purpoſe, and ably negociated the buſineſs ; for which, on his return to Phila- 3
delphia, he received the thanks of the General Aſſembly. .


__ His diſtinguiſhed literary reputation procured him, while in England, the honorary title of Doctor of Laws 1
from Edinburgh and Oxford Univerſities. 88 1 e =
Some time after this, he was again fent to England, by the Aſſembly of Pennſylvania,. with a petition to have 2
a new form of gevernment eſtabliſhed, and to be taken under the royal protection. Before his return to Ame- 1
rica, he travelled, in 1766, into Germany, and in 1767, into France; and wherever he appeared, he was
received with the higheſt no and veneration. His endeavours to prevent the enaction of the fanp act,
the ability with which he ſuſtained his examination at the bar of the Houſe of Commons, his obtaining and
forwarding to Boſton the inſidious letters of Governor Hutchinſon, procured for him, on his return to America,
the moſt unbounded applaufe of his countrymen. He was ſoon elected a member of Congreſs ; and in 177%
was choſen with John Adams and Edward Rutledge, Eſquires, a Committee of Congreſs to wait on Lord:
Howe, and to inquire into the extent of his powers to treat of the reſtoratiowof peace, Lord Howe having.
expreſied his concern at being obliged to diſtreſs thoſe whom he ſo much. regarded, Dr. Franklin aſſured him,
that the Americans, out of reciprocal regard; would endeavour to leſſen, as much as poſſible, the pain he
might feel on their account, by taking the utmoſt care of themſelves. | |


In 1776, a convention was called, in Pennſylvania, to eſtabliſh a new form.of government. Dr. Franklin
was appointed Preſident. The latter end of the ſame year he was ſent to France, where, with the afliſtance of


Mr. vilas Dean, he negociated a treaty with France, Feb. 1778.

We have already mentioned his being one cf the three Commiſſioners who negociated the peace of 1783+
He returned to America in 1785, and was choſen Prefident of the Supreme Executive Council of Pennſyl-
vania, and in 1787, was appointed a delegate from that State to the auguſt body which formed the preſent
frame of government of the United States. 5 | —


.


— — *


r
EEE]


— —


On


THE UNITED STATES.

Thus ended a long and arduous conflict, in which Great Britain expended near an

hundred millions of money, with an hundred thouſand lives, and won nothing.

America endured every cruelty and diſtreſs from her enemies; loſt many lives and

much treaſure ; but delivered herſelf from a foreign domintion, and gained a rank
among the nations of the earth. a


259


Holland acknowledged the independence of the United States on the 19th of April,
* 1782; Sweden, February 5th, 1783; Denmark, the 25th of February; Spain, in March,
and Ruſſia, in July 1783. 8 SELL 1 5
No ſooner was peace reſtored by the definitive treaty, and the Britiſh troops with-
drawn from the country, than the United States began to experience the defects of their
general government. While an enemy was in the country, fear, which had firſt im-
pelled the colonies to aſſociate in mutual defence, continued to operate as a band of
political union. It gave to the reſolutions and recommendations of Congreſs the force
of laws, and generally commanded a ready acquieſcence on the part of the State
legiſlatures. Articles of confederation and perpetual union had heen framed in Con-
greſs, and ſubmitted to the conſideration of the States, in the year 1778. Some of the
States immediately acceded to them; but others, which had not unappropriated lands,
heſitated to ſubfcribe a compact, which would give an advantage to the States which
poſſeſſed large tracts of unlocated lands, and were thus capable of a great ſuperiority
in wealth and population. All objections however had been overcome, and by the
acceſſion of Maryland in March 1781, the articles of confederation were ratified, as the
frame of government for the United States. 1 FELT
Theſe articles, however, were framed during the rage of war, when a principle of
common ſafety fupphed the place of a coercive pow er in government, by men who
could have had no experience in the art of governing an extenſive country, and under
circumftances the moſt critical and embarraſſing. To have offered to the people, at
that time, a ſyſtem of government armed with the powers neceſſary to regulate and
control the contending intereſts of thirteen States, and the pefſeſhons of millions of
People, might have raiſed a jealouſy between the States or in the minds of the people
at large, that would have weakened the operations of war, and perhaps have rendered
an union ampracticable. Hence the numerous defects of the confederation, We
On the condluſion of peace, theſe defects began to be felt. Each State aſſumed
the right of diſputing the propriety of the reſolutions of Congreſs, and the intereſt of
an individual State wag placed in oppoſition to the common intereſt of the union. In


1


On the 1th of April, 1790, after a long and painful illneſs, he reſigned a life which had been fingularly
devoted to the welfare of his country and the good of mankind. . | = \
Among the many teſtimonies of reſpect paid to his memory, the 'Cengreſs of the United States, and the
National Aſſembly of France, went into mourning-on his dein ”
- Dr Franklin poſſeſſed an original genius. The faculties of his mind qualified him to penetrate into
every ſcience ; and his ſingular and unremitting diligence left no field of knowledge unexplored. He was
eminently diſtinguiſhed as a politician, anda ſcholar, and if poſſible more ſo as a man and a citizen. He
Las great in common things, and his life was uſeful beyond moſt men that have lived. The whole tenor of
his life was a perpetual ee againſt the idle, the extravagant, and the proud. It was his principal aim to
inſpire mankind with a love of induftry, temperance, and frugality. By a judicious diviſion of time, he
zequired the art of doing every thing to advantage. In whatever ſituation he was placed, by chance or deſign,
de extracted fomething uſeful for himſelf or others. His manners were eaſy and accommodating, and his
addreſs winning and reſpectful. All who knew him ſpeak of him as an agreeable man; and all who have
_ deard of him, applaud him as a very uſeful one. A man ſo-wiſe and fo amiable, could not but have many
admirers and many friends, s TE I dn ers R


* American : Muſeum, Vol. VIII.


LI 2 TT 5 addition


1.
ie
1


260 THE UNITED STATES


addition to this ſource of diviſion, a jealouſy of the powers of Congreſs began to: be
excited in the minds of people. | | |


This jealouſy of the privileges of treemen had been rouſed by the oppreſſive a&
of the Britiſh parliament ; and vo ſooner had the danger from this quarter ceaſed,
than the fears of people changed their object, and were turned againit their own
rules „ | mani Fav 2 Y

In this ſituation, there were not wanting men of induſtry and talents, who had
been enemies to the revolution, and who embraced the opportunity to multiply the
apprehenſions of people and increate the popular diſcontents. A remarkable inſtance


of this happened in Connecticut. As ſoon as the tumults of war had fubſided, an


attempt was made to convince the people, that the act of Congrets paſſed in 1778,
granting to the officers of the armytmli-pay tor lite, was highly unjuſt and tyran-
nical ; and that it was but the firit ſtep towards the eſtabliſhment of penſions and an


nncontrolable deſpotiſm. The act of Congress, paſſed in 1783, commuting half-pay
for life, for five years full pay, was deſigned to. appeaſe the apprehenſions of people;


and to convince them that this gratuity was intended merely to indemnify the-officers
for their lofles by the depreciating of the paper curreney, and not to eſtablith a pre-
cedent for the granting of penſions. This act however did not ſatisfy the people, who.
ſuppoted that the officers had been generally indemnified for the loſs of their pay by


the grants made them from time to time by the legiſlatures of the ſeveral States.
Heſides, the act, while it gave five years full pay to the officers, allowed but one years


pay to tlie privates; a diſtinction which had great influence in exciting and conti-
nuing the popular ferment, and one that turned a large ſhare of the public rage


augainſt the officers themſelves. 73 8 N > e
The moment an alarm was raiſed reſpecting this act of Congreſs, the enemies cf
our independence became active in blowing up the flame, by ſpreading reports un-


favourable to tlie general government, and: tending to create public diſſenſions. Newſ-


papers, in ſome parts of the country, were filled with inflammatory publications;
while falſe reports and groundleſs infinuations were induſtriouſly. circulated to the


prejudice of Congreſs and the officers of the late army. Among a people feelingly alive


to every thing that could affect the rights for which they had been contending, theſe


reports could not fail of having a powerful effect; the clamour ſoon became general;
the officers of the army, it was believed, had attempted to raiſe their fortunes on
the diſtreſſes of their fellow citizens, and Congreſs become tlre tyrants of their
country. IT 1 9


Connecticut was the ſeat of this uneaſineſs; although other States were much


agitated on the occaſion. But the inhabitants of that State, accuſtomed to order and
a due ſubordination to the laws, did not proceed to outrages; they took their uſual


mode of collecting the ſenſe of the State aſſembled in town meetings —appointed


committees to meet in convention, and. conſult what meaſures ſhould. be adopted to
procure a redreſs of their grievances. In this convention, which was held at Middle-
town, ſome nugatory reſolves were paſſed, expreſſing the diſapprobation of the halt-
pay act, and the ſubſequent commutation. of the grant for five years whole pay. The
ſame ſpirit alſo diſcovered itſelf in the aſſembly at their October ſeſſion 1783. A re-
monſtrance againſt the acts in favour of the officers was framed in the Houſe of Re-
preſentatives, and notwithſtanding, the Upper Houſe retuſed to concur in the meaſure,


it was ſent to Congreſs. 1 .
During this ſituation of affairs, the public odium againſt the officers was augment-


ed by another circumſtance, The officers, juſt before the diſbanding of the w_


3 - ny »
„% ]ðV“½é˙ ͤ ( IS, he 5
+ 3 ETC 2
— 1 e 1 2

. + N


SI


= * 3 , 1
9 : 5 a 3 ; 2 ? . hos
n 3 IS r 3 . „000 8
9 4 C 5 135 Ms S oY 1. 4 e l e * a0 7
DINE * eee N N TION ATA met] ret K e e


THE UNITED STATES. 461


Cincinnatus. i. nh 2 e
Whatever were the real views of the framers of this inſtitution, its deſign was
generally underſtood to be harmleſs and honourable. The oſtenſible views of the


fociety could not however ſcreen .1t from popular jealouſy. A ſpirited pamphlet ap-


peared im South Carolina, the avowed production of Mr. Burke, one of ihe judges of


the ſupreme court in that State, in which the author attempted to prove that the prin-


| | 5 . a . 5 þ . ' 8 1
ciples; on which the ſociety was formed, would, in proceſs of time, originate and


eſtabliſh an order of nobility in this country, which would be repugnant to. the genius
of our republican governments, and dangerous to liberty. This pamphlet appeared in
Connecticut, during the commotions raifed by the half-pay and commutation acts, and
contributed not a little to fpread the flame. of oppoſition. : e e nh:
Notwitlifſtanding the diſcontents of the people were general, and ready to burſt forth


in ſedition, yet men of information, viz. the officers of government, the clergy, and
perſons of liberal education, were moſtly oppoſed to the unconſtitutional ſteps taken
| by the committees and convention at Middletown. They ſupported the propriety of


the meaſures of Congreſs, both by converſation and writing, proved that ſuch grants
to the army were neceſſary to keep the troops together, and that the expenſe would not
be enormous nor oppreſſive. During the cloſe of the year 1783, every poſſible exertion


was made to enhghten the people, and ich was the effect of the arguments uſed by


the minority, that in the beginning of the following year, the oppoſition ſubſided, the


committees were diſmiſſed, and tranquillity reſtored to the State. In May, the legit-
lature were able to carry ſeveral meaſures which had before been extremely unpopular.
An act was pafled granting the impoſt of five per cent. to Congreſs ; another giving.


great encouragement to commerce; and ſeveral towns were incorporated with extenſive
privileges, for the purpoſe of regulating the exports of the State, and facilitating the


collection of debts.


The oppoſition to the congreſſional acts in favour of the officers, and to the order of


the Cincinnati, did not riſe to the ſame pitch in the other States as in Connecticut; yet


it produced much diſturbance in Maſſachuſetts, and ſome others. Jealouſy of power
had been univerſally ſpread among the people of the United States. The deſtruction
of the old forms of governments, and the licentiouſneſs of war, had, in a great meaſure,
broken their habits of obedience; their paſſions had been inflamed by the cry of
deſpotiſm; and like centinels, who have been ſuddenly ſurpriſed by the approach of
an enemy, the ruſtling of a leaf was ſufficient to give them an alarm: This ſpirit of


| jealouſy operated with other cauſes to relax the energy of ; federal. operations.


During the war, vaſt ſums of paper currency had been emitted by Congreſs, and


large quantities of ſpecie had been introduced, towards the cloſe of the war, by the
French army, and the Spaniſh , trade. This plenty of money enabled the States to


comply with the firſt requiſitions. of Congreſs ; ſo that durin g two-or three: years, the


federal treaſury was, in ſome meaſure, ſupplied. But when the danger of war had
ceated, and the vaſt importations of foreign goods had leffened the quantity of circu-


lating ſpecie, the States began to be very remiſs in furniſhing their proportion of
monies. The annihilation: of the credit of the paper bills had totally ſtopped their


Lirculation, and the ſpecie was leaving the country in cargoes for remittanees to Great
Britain; ſtill the luxurious habits of the people, contracted during the war, called tor


new fupplies of goods, and private gratification ſeronded the narrow policy of ſtate
intereſt in defcating the operations of the general government. e


had formed a ſociety, called by the name of the Cincinnati, after the Roman Dictator,


Thus


252


THE UNITED STATES.


Thus the revenues of Congreſs were annually-diminiſhing; ſome of the States who]
neglecting to make proviſion for paying the intereſt of the national debt ; others


making but a partial proviſion, until the ſcanty ſupplies received from a few of the


richeſt States, would hardly ſatisfy the demands of the civil lift. 1 50

This weakneſs of the federal government, in conjunction with the flood of certi-
ficates or public ſecurities, which Congreſs could neither fund nor pay, occaſioned
them to depreciate to a very inconſiderable value. The officers and ſoldiers of the late


army, and thoſe who furniſhed fupplies for public exigoncies, were obhged to receive


for wages theſe certificates, or promiſſory notes, which paſſed at a fifth, an eighth, or a


tenth-of their nominal value; being tlris deprived at once of the greateſt part of the
reward due for their ſervices. Some indeed profited by ſpeculations in theſe evidences
of the public debt; but ſuch as were under a neteflity of parting with them, were
robbed of that fuppert which they had a right to expect and demand from their
countrymen. FORE, _
Pennſylvania indeed made a provifien for paying the intereſt of her debts, both
Mate and federal; aſſuming her ſuppoſed proportion of the continental debt, and
giving the creditors of her own State notes in exchange for thoſe of the United States.
The reſources of that State are immenſe, but ſhe was not able to make punctual pay-
ments, even in a depreciated paper currency. VVV
Maſſachuſetts, in her zeal to comply fully with the requiſttions of Congreſs, and
ſatisfy the demands of her on creditors, laid a heavy tax upon the people. This was
the immediate cauſe of the rebetlion in that State, in 1786. But a heavy debt lying on
the State, added to burdens of the ſame nature, upon almoſt every corporation within


it; a decline, or rather an extinction of public credit; a relaxation and corruption of
manners, and a free uſe of foreign luxuries; a decay of trade and manufactures, with
a prevailing ſcarcity of money; and, above all, individuals involved in debt to each


other. Theſe were the real, though more remote cauſes of the inſurrection. It was
the tax which the people were required to pay, that cauſed them to feel the evils which
we have enumerated — this called forth all their other grievances; and the firſt act of
violence committed was the burning or deſtroying of the tax bill. This ſedition threw the
State into a convulſion which laſted about a year; courts of juſtice were violently ob-


ſtructed; the collection of debts was ſuſpended; and a body of armed troops, under


the command of General Lincoln, was employed during the winter of 1786, to diſperſe
the inſurgents. Yet ſo numerous were the latter in the counties of Worceſter, Hamp-
Fire, and Berkſhire, and ſo obftinately combined to oppoſe the execution of law b
force, that the governor and council of the State thought proper not to intruſt Gen
Lincoln with military powers, except to act on the defenſive, and to
force, in caſe the inſurgents ſhould attack him. The leaders of the rebels, however,


were not men of talents ; they were deſperate, but without fortitude ; and even while
kgperior force, they appeared to be impreſſed with that conſci-


they were ſupported with a |
ouſneſs of guilt, which awes the moſt daring wretch, and makes him ſhrink from his
purpaſe. This appears by the conduct of a large party of the rebels before the magazine
at Springfield, where General Shepard, with a {mall guard, was ſtationed to protect
the continental ſtores. The inſurgents ap
of numbers, but a few ſhot from the artillery made the multitude retreat in diſorder
with the loſs of four men. This ſpirited conduct of General Shepard, with the induſtry,
rſeverance, and prudent firmneſs of General Lincoln, diſperſed the rebels - drove the
icaders from the State, and reſtored tranquillity. An act of indemnity was paſſed in


the legiſlaturc for all the inſurgents, except a few of the leaders, on 0 oy


I


repel force with |


red upon the plain, with a vaſt ſuperiority


_


x
_


F A Dollar 1


THE UNITED STATES. 263


Gould become peaceable ſubjects, and. take the oath of allegiance: The leaders
afterwards petitioned for pardon, which, from motives of policy, was granted by the


legiſlature.*


But the loſs of public credit, popular diſturbances, and inſurrections, were not tlie
only evils which were generated by the peculiar circumſtances of the times. The
emiſſions of bills of credit and tender laws were added. to the black catalogue of poli-
tical diiorders. CE 8 [ WS

The expedient of ſupplying the deficiencies of ſpecie, by emiſſions of paper bills,
was adopted very early in the colonies. The expedient was obvious and produced
good effects. In a new country, where population is rapid, and the value of lands
increaſing, the farmer finds an advantage in paying legal intereſt for money; for if he
can pay the intereſt by his profits, the increaſing value of his lands will in a few


years diſcharge the principal.


In no colony was this advantage more ſenfibly experienced than in Pennſylvania:
The emigrations to that province were numerous the natural population rapid and
theſe circumſtances combined, advanced the value of real property to an aſtoniſhing
degree. As the firſt ſettlers there, as well as in other provinces, were poor, the pur-
chaſe of a few foreign articles drained them of ſpecie. Indeed for many years, the
balance of trade muſt have neceſſarily been greatly againſt the colonies.
But bills of credit, emitted by the State and loaned to the induſtrious inhabitants,
ſupplied the want of ſpecie, and enabled the farmer to purchaſe ſtock. Theſe bills
were generally a legal tender in all coloniat or private contracts, and the ſums iſſued:
did not generally exceed the quantity requiſite for a medium of trade; they retained
their full nominat value in the purchaſe of commodities : but as they were not received


by the Britiſh merchants, in payment of their goods, there was a great demand for


ſpecie and bills, which. occaſioned the latter at various times to appreciate. Thus was
introduced a difference between the Englith ſterling money and the currencies of the
colonies, which remains to this day. f ein] Ed £25 2

The advantages the colonies had derived from bills of credit, under the Britiſh
government, ſuggeſted to Congreſs, in 1775, the idea of iſſuing bills for the purpoſe
of carrying on the war; and this was perhaps their only expedient. Money could


not be raiſed by taxation it could not be borrowed. The firſt emiſſions had no other
effect upon the medium of commerce, thau to drive the ſpecie from circulation. But


when. the paper ſubſtituted for ſpecie had, by repeated emiſſions, augmented the ſum
m circulation, much beyond the uſual ſum of ſpecie, the bills began tv loſe their
value. The depreciation continued in proportion to the ſums emitted; until ſeventy,


and even one hundred and fifty nominal paper dollars, were Hardly an equivalent for
one Spaniſke milled. dollar. Still, from the year 1775 to 1781, this depreciating paper


currency was almoſt the only medium of trade. It ſupplied the place of ſpecie, and
enabled Congreſs to ſupport a numerous army; until the ſum im circulation amounted:


t two hundred millions of dollars. But about the year 1780, ſpecie began to be


plentiful, being introduced by the French army, a private trade with-the Spaniſh:


Wands, and an illicit intercourſe with the Britiſh garriſon at. New York. This cir-


eumſtance accelerated the depreciation of paper bills, untiNheir value had ſunk almoſt


* See an elegant and impartial Hiſtory. of this Rebellion, by George Richards Minot,-Eſq.. |
n Sterling money is 48. Cd. But the price of a Dollar roſe in New England currency to 6s.
n'New Jerſey, Pennſylvania, and Maryland, to 78. 6d: in Virginia to 68. in North Carolina
olma and Georgia to 48. 8d.. This difference, originating between paper and ſpecie, or
continued afterwards to exiſt in the nominal eſtimation of gold and ſilver.


m New York to Bs. 1


to 8s, in South Car
ills,


10


*
* Ate Dogs on ns
_« e
: * 5


4 F A : bl *
| 8 6 x: |: wt 3 + $2, J + 1
3 Dy - ID > hn B 3 8 r d * you”


*
* 3 Se
e


r.. lier: om;


5


1 4 1 *
ren
N SLES;


4
*
4
1


r
whe” | Ee” +
& 1 N L% A
A AF A —
r LY


—
* = * *


2 * = IF; Fe 55 9 AT, Pew”
. IO 4
n *


2221 2 ” A » —
: | f . 7 > | : . N ;
wy _ : : $ s — ay 9 P 7 46 n. an 89 A ALT _— IAG; -
" 4 n a * % 4 + unn : k year” #45 4 vu. n . it FS „rr 9 N E 22 * 1 ve dn * —
n 5 a __— gee 4, #4. ax 5 * N ? ' * N 222 6— 2 24 — 26”; — 3 ö by r — — _
KI enn renn _ — — ; ts. FELT 3 2 g N neee © us SS Howe W 4: — . n — . * * Ad. ES 9 .
F i : — — 3 ' «LA 2 1 £ * cole 7 - , 1 „ 5 . 9 5 K ke 4
1 -- > — ory = TV 4 n N * 2 5 2 b 7 ls
r s 2 e . RE Pd > af!
So 0 0 . F


* „ _


5 E 4 INTRT Tab #R, "Wi"


264 | THE UNITED STATES.


to nothing. In 1781, the merchants and brokers in the ſouthern States, apprehenſive
of the approaching fate of the currency, puſhed immenſe quantities of it ſildenly into
New England—made vaſt purchaſes of goods in Boſton—and inſtantly the bills
vaniſhed from circulation. . FLIQER 1 GD 4

The whole hiſtory of this continental paper is a hiſtory of public and private frauds;
Old ſpecie debts were often paid in a depreciated currency—and even new contracts


for a few weeks or days were often diſcharged with a ſmall part of the value received.


From this plenty and fluctuating ſtate of the medium ſprung hoſts of ſpeculators and
itinerant traders, who left their honeſt occupations for the-proſpect of immenſe gains,
in a fraudulent buſineſs, that depended on no fixed principles, and the profits of which
could be reduced to no certain calculations. Ne ding k nels Woo laeoce


To increafe theſe evils, a project was formed to fix the prices of articles, and reſtrain
perſons from giving or receiving more for any commodity than the price ſtated by
authority. Theſe regulating acts were reprobated by every man acquainted with com-
merce and finance; as they were intended to prevent an effect without removing the
cauſe. To attempt to fix the value of money, while ſtreams of bills were inceſſantly


flowing from the treaſury of the United States, was as ridiculous as an attempt to reſtrain
the riſing of water in rivers amidſt ſhowers of rain. e 0


Notwithſtanding all oppoſition, ſome States framed and attempted to enforce theſe
regulating acts. The effect was, a momentary apparent ſtand in the price of articles;


innumerable acts of collafion and evaſion among the diſhoneſt ; numberleſs injuries


done to the honeſt ; and finally a total diſregard of all ſuch regulations, and the con-
ſequential contempt of laws and the authority of the magiſtrate. - 3 COL Yep M1


During theſe fluctuations of buſineſs, occaſioned by the variable value of money,


people loft fight, in ſome meaſure, of the ſteady principles which had before governed
their intercourſe with each other. Speculation followed and relaxed the rigour of com-


Induſtry likewiſe had ſuffered by the flood of money which had deluged the States.
The prices of produce had riſen in proportion to the quantity of money in circulation,
and the demand for the commodities of the country. This made the acquiſition of


money eaſy, and indolence and luxury, with their train of deſolating conſequences,
ſpread themſelves among all deſcriptions of people. F


But as ſoon as hoſtilities between Great Britain and America were ſuſpended, the
ſcene was changed. The bills emitted by Congreſs had for ſome time before ceaſed to
circulate ; and the ſpecie of the country was ſoon drained off to pay for foreign goods,
the importations of which exceeded all calculation. Within two years from the cloſe
of the war, a ſcarcity of money was the general cry. The merchants found it impoſſible
to collect their debts, and make punctual remittances to their creditors in Great Britain;
and the conſumers were driven to the neceſſity of retrenching their ſurperfluities in


living, and of returning to their ancient habits of induſtry and ceconomy.


This change was however progreſſive and flow. In many of the States which


ſuffered by the numerous debts they had contracted, and by the diſtreſſes of war, the


people called aloud for emiſſions of paper bills to ſupply the deficiency of a medium.


The depreciation of the continental bills was a recent example of the ill effects of fuch


an expedient, and the impoſſibility of ſupporting the credit of paper was urged by the


oppoſers of the meaſure as a ſubſtantial argument againſt adopting it. But nothing
would filence the popular clamor ; and many men of the firft talents and eminence
united their voices with that of the populace. Paper money had formerly maintained it

End . eee credi


* » ta


- F


THE UNITED STATES. 265


credit, and been of ſingular utility: and paſt experience, notwithſtanding 4 change of
circumſtances, was an argument in its favor that bore down all oppoſition. ay
Pennſylvania, although one of the richeſt States in the union, was the firſt to emit
bills of credit, as a ſubſtitute for ſpecie. But the revolution had removed the neceſſity
of it, at the ſame time that it had deſtroyed the means by which its former credit had
been ſupported. Lands, at the cloſe of the war, were not riſing in value—bills on
London could not ſo readily be purchaſed, as while the province was dependent on
Great Britain—the State was ſplit into parties, one of which attempted to defeat the
meaſures moſt popular with the other—and the depreciation of continental bills, with
the injuries which it had done to individuals, inſpired a general diftruſt of all public
7 EY „ ang Hf |
Notwithſtanding a part of the money was loaned on good landed ſecurity, and the
faith of that wealthy State pledged for the redemption of the whole at its nominal
value, yet the advantages of ſpecie as a medium of commerce, eſpecially as an article
of remittance to London, ſoon made a difference of ten per cent. between the bills of
credit and ſpecie. This difference may be conſidered rather as an appreciation of gold
and filver, than a depreciation of paper; but its effects, in a commercial ftate, mutt be
highly prejudicial. It opens the door to frauds of all kinds, and frauds are uſually
practiſed on the honeſt and unſuſpecting, eſpecially upon all clafſes of labourers.
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, had recourſe to the ſame wretched
expedient to ſupply themſelves with money; not reflecting that induſtry, frugality,


and good commercial laws are the only means of turning the balance of trade in tavour


of a country, and that this balance is the only permanent ſource of ſolid wealth and
ready money. But the bills they emitted ſhared a worſe ſate than thoſe of Pennſylvania;


they expelled almoſt all the circulating caſh from the States; they loſt a great part of


their nominal value, they impoveriſhed the merchants, and embarrafled the planters. -
The State of Virginia tolerated a baſe practice among the inhabitants of cutting


dollars and ſmaller pieces of filver, in order to prevent it from leaving the State. This
pernicious practice prevailed alſo in Georgia.“ 8 :


Maryland eſcaped the calamity of a paper currency. The houſe of delegates brought


forward a hill for the emiſſion of bills of credit to a large amount ; but the ſenate firmly
and ſucceſsfully reſiſted the


celsfu pernicious ſcheme. The oppoſition between the two
houſes was violent and tumultuous; it threatened the State with anarchy; but the


queſtion was carried to the people, and the good ſenſe of the ſenate finally prevailed.


Ney Jerſey is ſituated between two of the largeſt commercial towns in America, and 5


conſequently drained of ſpecie. This State alſo emitted a large ſum in bills of credit,


which ſerved to pay the intereſt of the public debt; but the currency depreciated, as
in other States. N 1 155 —


Rhode Ifland exhibited a melancholy proof of that licentiouſneſs and anarchy which


always follows a æclaxation of the moral principles: In a rage for ſupplying the State
with money, and filling every man's poc


wit et without obliging him to earn it by lus
diligence, the legiſlature paſſed an act for making one hundred thouſand pounds in
bills; a ſum much more than ſufficient ſor a medium of trade in that State, even without
any ſpecie. "The merohants in Newport and Providence oppoſed the act with firmneſs;
and their oppoſition. added. freſſi vigor to the reſolution of the aſſembly, and induced
them te enforce the ſcheme by a legal tender of a moſt extraordinary nature. They

* 3 N dl d Ip fre pieces, and each paths by woll for a quarter; ſo that the man who cut it

— NM m paſſed


1 IHE UNITED STATES.
paſſed an act, ordaining that if any creditor ſhould refuſe to take their bills, for any
debt whatever, the debtor might lodge the ſum due, with a juſtice of the peace, who
ſhould give notice of it in the public papers; and if the creditor did not appear and
receive the money within fix months from the firſt notice, his debt fhould be forfeited.
This act aſtoniſhed all honeſt men; and even the promoters of paper money-making
in other States, and other principles, reprobated this act of Rhode Iſland, as wicked
and opprefiive, But the State was governed by faction. During the cry for paper
money, a number of boiſtereus, ignorant men were elected into the legiſlature; from
the ſmaller towns in the State. Finding themſelves united with a majority in 1
they formed and executed any plan their inclination ſuggeſted ; they oppoſed every
meaſure that was agreeable to the mercantile intereſt ; they not only made bad laws, to
ſuit their own wicked purpoſes, but appointed their own corrupt creatures to fill the
judicial and executive departments. Their money depreciated ſufficiently to anſwer
all their vile purpoſes in the diſcharge of debts—bufineſs almoſt totally ceated, all con-
fidence was loſt, the State was thrown into confuſion at home and was execrated
abroad. | DNS „ .
Mafſachufetts Bay had the good fortune, amidft her political calamities, to prevent


an emiſſion of bills of credit. New Hampſhire made no paper; but in the diſtreſſes
which followed her loſs of buſineſs after the war, the legiſlature made horſes, lumber,
and moſt articles of produce, a legal tender in the fulfilment of contracts. It is


doubtleſs unjuſt to oblige a creditor to receive any thing for his debt, which he had
not in contemplation at the time of the contract. But as the commodities which were


to be a tender by law, in New Hampſhire, were of an intrinfic value, bearing ſome


proportion to the amount of the debt, the injuſtice of the law was Teſs flagrant than
that which enforced the tender of paper in Rhode Iſland. Indeed a fimilar law pre-

vailed for ſome time in Maſſachuſetts; and in Connecticut it is optional with the
creditor, either to impriſon the debtor or take land on execution at a price to be fixed

by three indifferent freeholders; provided no other means of payment ſhalk appear to
ſatisfy the demand. It muſt not, however, be omitted, that while the moſt flouriſhing
commercial States introduced a paper medium, to the great injury of honeſt men, a bill


for an emiſſion of paper in Connecticut, where there is very little ſpecie, could never


command more than one eighth of the votes of the legiſlature. The movers of the

bill have hardly eſcaped ridicule ; ſo generally is the meaſure reprobated as a ſource of.
frands and public miſchief. e ods. Ol en iis pr wh oO OASIS

The legiflature of New York, a State that had the leaſt neceſſity and apology for


making paper money, as her commercial advantages always furniſh her with. ſpecie


ſuffieient for a medium, iſſued a large ſum in bills of credit, which ſupported their
value better than the currency of any other State. Still the paper raited the value of.


ſpecie, which is always in demand for exportation, and this difference of exchange
between paper and ſpecie ever expoſes commerce to moſt of | the inconveniencics


reſulting from a depreciated medium. 08
Ziuch is the hiſtory of paper money thus far; a miſerable ſubſtitute for real coin, in 2
country where the reins of government are too weak to compel the ſulfilment of public
engagements, and where all confidence in public faith is totally deſtroyed. ©
While the States were thus endeavouring to repair the loſs of ſpecie by empty pro-
mifes, and to ſupport their buſineſs by ſhadows, rather than by reatity; the Britiſh
miniftry formed ſome commercial regulations that deprived them of the profits of ther
trade to the Weft Indies and Great Britain. Heavy duties were laid upon. ſuch articles
as were remitted to the London merchants for their goods, and ſuch were the duties


upon


. nas ee” Fra eb IR Edt Reo tant io. RNS, ? Rade r 2 r ; b — K . X
5 E e., 3 FE '5 2. 5 r wh: ds ao. n F * r 4 r # 2 *
5 < BY er OR OE A ARR AE OR LIST V S COLD eee e ee ond IO 8 ö bs, 7
. 85 1 A2 275 AI 1 23 vp 132 * BY Ae = e 8 S FEE _ Dr F. Cod» os Ces Mr Oy « * 7 11 2 2 *
8 . 7 ; : I $4 TEES if C F 5


_—
__


THE UNITED STATES. 267
upon American bottoms, that the States were almoſt wholly deprived of the carrying
trade. A prohibition was laid upon the produce of the United States, ſhipped to the
Engliſh Weſt India Iflands in American built veſſels, and in thoſe manned by Ame-
rican ſeamen. Theſe reſtrictions fell heavy upon the eaſtern States, which depended
much upon ſhip-building for the ſupport of their trade ; and they materially injured
the buſineſs of the other States. 3 N 3
Without a union that was able to form and execute a general ſyſtem of commercial
regulations, ſome of the States attempted to impoſe reſtraints upon the Britiſh trade
that ſhould indemnify the merchant for the loſſes he had ſuffered, or induce the Britiſh
miniſtry to enter into a commercial treaty, and relax the rigour of their navigation
laws. Theſe meaſures however produced nothing but miſchief. The States did not
act in concert, and the reſtraints laid on the trade of one State operated to throw the
buſineſs into the hands of its neighbour. Maſſachuſetts, in her zeal to counteract the
effect of the Engliſh navigation laws, laid enormous duties upon Britiſh goods im-
ported into that State; but the other States did not adopt a ſimilar meaſure ; and the
loſs of buſineſs ſoon obliged that State to repeal or ſuſpend the law. Thus when Penn-
fylvania laid heavy duties en Britiſh goods, Delaware and New Jerſey made a number
of free ports to encourage the landing of goods within the limits of thoſe States; and
the duties in Pennſylvania ſerved no purpoſe but to create ſmuggling. .
Thus divided, the States began to feel their weakneſs : moft of the legiſlatures had
neglected to comply with the requiſitions of Congreſs for furniſhing the federal trea-
ſury ; the reſolves of Congreſs were diſregarded ; the propoſition for a general impoſt
to be laid and collected by Congreſs was negatived, firſt by Rhode Ifland, and atter-
wards by New York. The Britiſh troops continued, under pretence of a breach of
treaty on the part of America, to hold poſſeſſion of the forts on the frontiers of the
States. Many of the States individually were infeſted with popular commotions or
iniquitous tender laws, while they were oppreſſed with public debts ; the certificates


or public notes had loſt moſt of their value, and circulated merely as the objects of |


ſpeculation ; Congreſs loſt their reſpectability, and the United States their credit and
importance. VVG J
In the midſt of theſe calamities, a propoſition was made in 1785, in the Houſe of
Delegates in Virginia, to appoint Commiſſioners to meet ſuch as might be appointed
in the other States, who ſhould form a ſyſtem of commercial regulations for the United
States, and recommend it to the ſeveral legiſlatures for adoption. Commitfioners were
accordingly appointed, and a requeſt was made to the legiſlatures of the other States
to accede to the propoſition. Accordingly, ſeveral of the States appointed Commiſ-—
ſioners, who met at Annapolis in the ſummer of 1786, to conſult what meaſures ſhould
be taken to unite the States in ſome general and efficient commercial ſyſtem. But as
the States were not all repreſented, and the powers of the Commiſſioners were, in their
opinion, too limited to propoſe a ſyſtem of regulations adequate to the purpoſes of
 Eovernment, they agreed to recommend a general convention to be held at Philadelphia
the next year, with powers to frame a general plan of government for the United
States. This meaſure appeared to the Commiſſioners abſolutely neceſſary. The old
contederation was effentially defective: it was deſtitute of almoſt every principle
neceſſary to give effect to legiſlation. Abs + m0
It was defective in the article of legiſlating over States, inſtead of individuals. All
ſtory teſtifies that recommendations will not operate as laws, and compulſion cannot
e exerciſed over States without violence, war, and anarchy. The confederation was
alſo deſtitute of a ſanction to its laws, When reſolutions were paſſed in Congrets,
OL M m 2 there.


265 THE UNITED STATES. F
there was no power to compel obedience by fine, by ſuſpenſion of privileges, or other *
means: it was alſo deſtitute of a guarantee for the State governments. Had one State ng
been invaded by its neighbour, the Union was not conſtitutionally bound to affift in
repelling the invaſion, and ſupporting the conſtitution of the invaded State. The eon-
federation was further deficient in the principle of apportioning the quotas of money to
be farniſhed hy each State; in a want of power to form commercial laws, and to raiſe ÞÞ
troops for the defence and ſecurity of the Union ; in the equal ſuffrage of the States, *
which placed Rhode Ifland on a footing in Congreſs with Virginia; and to crown all 1
the defects, we may add the want of a judiciary power, to define the laws of the 3
Union, and to reconcile the contradictory deciſions of a number of independent judi- 15
„„ . 5 1 5
Theſe and many inferior defects were obvious to the Commiſſioners, and therefore 93
they urged a general convention, with powers to form, and offer to the conſideration 1
4 of the States, a ſyſtem of general government that ſhould be lets exceptienable : ac-


A


*, 2 1 . " * N y
8 ?
- k .
r 3 * q = 4 1 2 þ N : 9 woof» £4. * p4 4
- * kgs . 4 n 3 * 4 - _ _ £2, £3 af 5 — 4 * e * 0
i . - Ie wp — . eas Bob wel 3-2 : _— EN ED 2 - nah» agen "> hos he - . ws _ Es +»; . * rn 5 * — SS >
3 > Woes « ? 4 f i E-4 * . * Bt, a _ d «A „ * 4 4 ſe ö 5 or
oY 1 K J * * 9 7 - = * 222 7 ws 1 . 7 , * — — — — - 240.41 2 $4 1 23 972 * > - 5 * be * — —_ ®. F
OOO 323 Woes 4 1 r * 6 Wy — 5 1 oor” 4 * 3 * 4 r 22 "FA s 8 — - 4-5» RIB ror and * * * * 9 0 1 * 1 * *
* FF F F * * bo — . a; 3.4% £0. 1 „ * 47 __ — a 9 * 1 3 * 5 0 yy" hk , N K = K PS. _”
„ e r . robs N4 * ö 1 ' 4 n * * 3 3 2 — 32 EI þ * 2 * Jn - ——__— — N —
$7 0 . PRE l C £ + £%. 11 2 * 5 — 1 : 1 . :
8 "WP" > 6 1 . * - * * - p * -
of * — — 2 —


cCeordingly, in May, 1787, delegates from all the States, except Rhode Iſland, aſſembledi

. at Philadelphia, and choſe General Waſhington for their Preſident. After four months 1

deliberation, in which the claſhing intereſts of the ſeveral States appeared in all their 4
force, the convention agreed to recommend the plan of federal government, which we
have already recited. EG . 1
As ſoon as the plan of the federal conſtitution was ſubmitted to the legiflatures of
the ſeveral States, they proceeded to take meaſures for collecting the ſenſe of the peo-
ple upon the propriety of adopting it. In the ſmall State of Delaware, a convention
was called in November, which, after a few days deliberation, ratified the conſtitution
without a diſſenting voice. : 1 5


In the convention of Pennſylvania, held the ſame month, there was a ſpirited oppo-
fition to the new form of government. The debates were long and intereſting. Great
abilities and firmneſs were diſplayed on both ſides; but, on the 13th of December,
the conſtitution was received by two-thirds of the members. The minority were diſ-
2 _ fatisfied, and, with an obſtinacy that ill became the repreſentatives of a free people,
k publithed their reaſons of diſſent, which were calculated to inflame a party already
s 2 and which, in fact, produced ſome diſturbances in the weſtern part of the
State. . . 8 ; 38

In New Jerſey, the convention which met in December, were unanimous in adopt-
ing the conſtitution ; as was likewiſe that of Georgia.


=
- © ICT K 2 _ * * 7
9 — 2 N - Ei jo T — - 4
TRI - * 9 Gb eo 6 * Tn £ * * pa” ng * Py. as i ; 3X6 *
, * * Ss 2 5 7 Wh - % 7 og x G », Tag oa * 1 1 „ 4 »
n * * * Aa pl C 7 N. f n * A ; . * 5 _ oo we bugs 2, 9 - .
A X " 2 at Mob 4 Wt, nr 9 er. © \ * 4 4 N g "1 . 4 BY N 8 2. * WE 7 o 2 4 4
4 - \ 4,” v 4 a * . : ms l 4+ G G 0 8 ” * —
%% A Loaded. ²˙ . ˙ on oa n * "x" vs de ney e a town rien Page 25. ma 4 * *
5 1 * J - l 8 * 4 # 8 4 2 5 . - „ nd 1 2 5 — 83 — *
«ot . , n 2 r 5 * he. a - = — n 8 . a . 2 4 POE. W $5 4 _ 4 N F * 3 * 9 — 2 — *
* * of . 1 * OY 4 *of 2 + * 6 = oo = 4 7 * » 3 7 Ne. ba. 2 ap * 4 [4 —
W . a8 e = 1 a 3 r 3 ” . gh a * r * * N 2 3 ha . — * 3 1 7
N >< wr jv nt 2: 7 4 , 5
37 g * 8 wo ft TL: pr ET - OF - * a Fg 4 ** *
9


wo
bag voto Hog 4
4 , La
F „
e n N
3 IE ET


= © :
* N 2 2
15 „
1 £1 „ 3% e
= 20 e -- en *
F 2


mug
*


3
a bt


*
A I
L * .
N. 7 3 = I SW 8
e .
* * — o w»


LES
2 n
8 3 —


— "4 w *
. as] *
I * Y


gy


In Connecticut, there was ſome oppoſition ; but the conftitution was, on the gth of--
January, 1788, ratified by three-fourths of the votes in convention, and the minority
peaceably acquieſced in the decifion, 1 „ | owns
In Maſſachuſetts, the oppoſition was large and reſpectable. The convention, con-
fiſting of more than three hundred delegates, were aſſembled in January, and conti-
nued their debates, with great candour and liberality, about five weeks. At length
the queſtion was carried for the conſtitution by a ſmall majority; and the minority,
with that manly condeſcenſion which becomes great minds, ſubmitted to the meaſure,
and united to ſupport the government. . ESA nga genes
In New Hampſhire, the federal cauſe was for ſome time doubtful. The greateſt
number of the delegates in convention were, at firſt, on the ſide of the oppoſition ;
and ſome, who might have had their objections . removed by the diſcuſſion of the
ſubject, were inſtructed to reject the conſtitution. - Although the inſtructions of con-
ſtituents cannot, on the true principles of repreſentation, be binding upon a deput),
in any legiſlative aſſembly, becauſe his conſtituents are but a part of the State, _
| a


Win
a


7, So 4 5 £3 A S0 r
F .
v1 Es. _©_—_
*


— 1
Was


5 +
_ 3 .


_


_ 8
_—
_


—


THE UNITED STATES. 269


have not heard the arguments and objections of the whole ; whereas his act is to affect
the whole State, and therefore is to be directed by the ſenſe or wiſdom of the whole,
collected in the legiſlative aſſembly; yet the delegates in the New Hampſhire conven-
tion conceived very erroneouſſy, that the ſenſe of the freemen in the towns, thoſe little
diſtricts, where no act of legiſlation can be performed, impoſed a reſtraint _ their
own wills. “* An adjournment was therefore moved and carried. This gave the people
opportunity to gain a farther knowledge of the merits of the conſtitution; and at the
ſecond meeting of the convention it was ratified by a reſpectable majority.
In Maryland, ſeveral men of abilities appeared in the oppoſition, and were unre-
mitted in their endeavours to perfuade the people, that the propoſed plan of govern-
ment was artfully calculated to deprive them of their deareſt rights; yet in convention
it appeared, that five-fixths of the voices were in favour of it. i Ra
In South Carolina, the oppoſition was reſpectable; but two-thirds of the convention


appeared to advocate and vote for the conſtitution.


In Virginia, many of the principal characters oppoſed the ratification of the conſti-
tution with great abilities and induſtry ; but, after a full diſcuſſion of the ſubject, a
ſmall majority, of a numerous convention, appeared for its adoption.
In New York, two-thirds of the delegates in convention were, at their firſt meeting,
determined to reject the conſtitution. Here, therefore, the debates were the moſt in-


tereſting, and the event extremely doubtful. The argument was managed with un-


common. addreſs and abilities on both fides of the queſtion. But during the ſeſſion,
the ninth and tenth States had acceded to the propoſed plan, fo that by the conſtitu-
tion, Congrets were empowered to iſſue an ordinance for orgamzing the new govern-
ment. This event placed the oppofition on new ground; and the expediency of


uniting with the other States—the generous motives of conciliating all differences, and
the danger of a rejection, influenced a reſpectable number, who were originally
oppoſed to the conſtitution, to join the federal intereſt. The conſtitution was accord-
ingly ratified by a ſmall majority; but the ratification was accompanied here, as in.


Virginia, with a bill of rights, declaratory of the ſenſe of the convention as to certain


great principles, and with a catalogue of amendments, which were to be recommended


to the conſideration of the new Congreſs, and the ſeveral State Legiſlatures.

North Carolina met in convention in July, to deliberate on the new conſtitution.
After a ſhort ſeſſion, they rejected it by a majority of one hundred and ſeventy-ſix
againſt feventy-ſix. In November, 1789, however, this State again met in conven-


tion, and ratified the conſtitution by a large majority.


\ ©


Rhode Ifland was doomed to be the ſport of a blind and fingular policy. The


legiſlature, in conſiſtency with the meaſures which had been before purſued, did not


call a convention to collec the ſenſe of the State upon the propoſed conftitution ; but
in an unconſtitutional and abſurd manner, ſubmitted the plan of government to the
conſideration of the people. Accordingly, it was brought before town-meetings, and
in moſt of them rejected. In ſome of the large towns, particularly in Newport and
Providence, the people collected and reſolved with great propriety, that they could
not take up the ſubject; and that the propoſition for embracing or rejecting the tederal
conftitution could come before no tribunal but that of the State in convention or
legiſlature. On the 24th of May, 1790, a-convention of this State met at Newport,


and on the agth, adopted the conftitution by a majority of #zv0 only.


* This pernicious opinion has prevailed in;all the States, and done infinite miſchief.


Vermont,


*
be. & ©
"T £2


n. 0 5 - I a
— — — ** . . * - 4 * 2 1
Ga — n IDES. 1 — 8
_- 4 XL re, — — 4 he 8 = — - 8 '
g 2 CER > . 6 5 * hy | F 4
4.55 7 me 4 a „ " N £8 - — 2 & 2 *
26% 1 vs


boy
- „
2 * *
« N e <4
N
r
* * > A 1
* — + 4% "on


$2
*
Lot


E
1
: Pp


*


270 THE UNITED STATES.


Vermont, in convention at Bennington, January rioth, 1791, ratified the conſtitu-
tion of the United States by a great majority.“ | | |


From the moment the proceedings of the general convention at Philadelphia tran.
fpired, the public mind was exceedingly agitated, and ſuſpended between hope and


fear, until nine States had ratified their plan of a federal government. Indeed the
anxiety continued until Virginia and New York had acceded to the ſyſtem. But this


did not prevent the demonſtrations of their joy on the acceſſion of each State. 100

On the ratification in Maſſachuſetts, the citizens of Boſton, in the elevation of their
joy, formed a proceſſion in honour of the happy event, which was novel, ſplendid,
and magnificent. This example was afterwards followed, and in ſome inſtances im-
proved upon, in Baltimore, Charleſton, Philadelphia, Newhaven, Portſmouth, and
New York, ſucceſſively. Nothing couid equal the beauty and grandeur of theſe exhi-


| bitions. A ſhip was mounted upon wheels, and drawn through the ſtreets ; mechanics


erected ſtages, and exhibited ſpecimens of labour in their ſeveral occupations as they
moved along the road; flags with emblems, deſcriptive of all the arts and of the
federal union, were invented and diſplayed in honour of the government; multitudes |
of all ranks in life aſſembled to view the ſplendid ſcenes ; while ſobriety, joy, and


harmony, marked the brilliant exhibitions, by which the Americans celebrated the
_ eſtabliſhment of their Empire. 3


On the 3d of March, 1789, the delegates from the eleven States, which at that time


had ratified the conſtitution, aſſembled at New York, where a convenient and elegant


building had been prepared for their accommodation. On opening and counting the


votes for preſident, it was found that GEORGE WASHINGTON was unaximoyſly elected to
that dignified office, and that Joun ApamsFÞ was choſen Vice Preſident. The annun-
_ ciation of the choice of the firſt and ſecond Magiſtrates of the United States occaſioned


a general diffution of joy among the friends to the Union, aud fully evinced that theſe
eminent characters were the choice of the people. 5 bis %


i


On


* The following exhibits at one view the order, time, &c. in which the ſeveral States ratified the Federal
_ Conſtitution: 1 „„ 5 rg th; . Majority.
Delaware, December 3, 1787, nunanimoufly. 5
Pennſylvania, December 13, | 46 to 23 23
New ſerſey, December 19, unanimouſly. =”

_ Georgia, January 2, 1788, unanimouſſr.
Connecticut, 23 „ 128 to 40 "8:
Maſlachuſetts, SEES / | , 8. * f 187 to 168 19
Maryland, ant: ab; n 0 0 IS SEE

South Carolina, May BJ | "260 q 73 76
New Hampſhire, une _— To 37 o 45 FEM
Virginia, . une 265 89 to 79 10
New York, ul 26, | 30 to 25 i

North Carolina, November 27, 1589, 209" (0-39 + ©: £108
Rhode Iſland, May % ²wmß .. ß
Vermont, January 20, 1797, by a great majoritʒ.
Kentucky. | SIN 5


+ Mr. Adams is a deſcendant of one of the firſt families who founded the colony of Maſſachuſetts Bay, in
1630. He was born at Braintree, in Maſſachuſetts, October 19th, 1735. hen 5 ;
He was by profeſſion a lawyer, and ſuch were his abilities and integrity, that he attracted the attention,
the eſteem, and the confidence of his fellow citizens. Not contented with barely maintaining the rights
of individuals, he early fignalized himſelf in the defence of the rights of his country and of mankind at lalge,
by writing his admirable Diſſertation on the Canon and Feudal Laws; a work well adapted to convince or
confound the advocates either for civil or ecclefiaftical tyranny. It evinced that be had abilities to
powerful aid in the formation of republics on the genuine principles of juſtice and virtue.


The


of the people had time to ſubſide. The trial at lengt
he diſplayed the moſt extenſive knowledge of the laws of his country, and of humanity; and at the con-
cluſion he had the ſatis faction of proving to Great Britain herſelf, that the citizens of Maſſachuſetts would be


reſolution of the 4th of July, 1776, w


greſs to aſſiſt at any conference which mig


THE UNITED STATES. 271


On the zoth of April, 1789, Gronen WasHx rox was inaugurated PaRESIDExT of
the United States of America, in the city of New York. The ceremony was per-
formed in the open gallery of Federal Hall, in the view of many thouſand ſpectators.
The oath was adminiſtered by Chancellor Livingſton. Several circumſtances concurred
to render the ſcene unuſually folemn—the preſence of the beloved Father and Deliverer
of his country—the impreſſions of gratitude for his paſt ſervices—the vaſt concourſe of
ſpectators—the devout fervency with which he repeated the oath, and the reverential


The zeal and firmneſs with which Mr. Adams. defended the liberties of his country, did not prevent his
acting in the ſervice of her enemies, where he thought they were treated with too much ſeverity. Called upon
by his profeſſion, he boldly ſtood forth as the advocate of Capt. Preſton, who had been impriſoned as the
murderer of ſome of the citizens of Boſton, on the memorable th of March, 1770. His chent's cauſe was
moſt unpopular. The whole town had been in a ſtate of irritation, on account of the conduct of Governar
Hutchinſon, and the troops which were ſtationed in it. Their reſentment now burſt into a flame, But he


felt the cauſe to be a juſt one; and the danger of incurring the diſpleaſure of his countrymen could not deter |


reat addreſs by keeping off the trial till the paſſions


kim from undertaking it. He conducted the cauſe with g . 1
commenced, and laſted ſeveral days, during which


juſt and humane to their enemies amidſt the groſſeſt inſults and provocations. Capt. Preſton was acquitted.
In this moſt delicate and important trial, Mr. Adams manifefted that firmneſs of mind, that diſintereſted and
enlightened patriotiſm, and that love of juſtice and humanity, which have uniformly marked his conduct in
all thoſe great departments which he has ſince filled with fo much ability and dig nit. TE
He was a member of the firſt Congreſs in 1774; and was one of the principal promoters of the famous
hich declared the American Colonies. FREE, SOVEREIGN, AND IN DE-


PENDENT STATES.


Having been for a conſiderable length of time one of the commiſſioners of the war department, and a prin-
cipal ſuggeſtor of the terms to be offered to France, for forming a treaty of alliance and commerce, he was
fent to the Court of Verſailles, as one of the miniſters plenipotentiary of the United States, to conſummate
that important buſineſs, , FSFE 5 ; „„

On his return from France he was called upon by Maſſachuſetts to aſſiſt in forming a plan of government;
and to him this State is chiefly indebted for their preſent excellent conſtitution. 5 .
After this important buſineſs was accompliſhed, he returned to Europe, veſted with full powers from Con-
bt be opened for the eſtabliſhment of peace; and he ſoon after re-

ceived other powers to negociate a loan of money for the uſe of the United States, and to repreſent them as
their Miniſter Plenipotentiary to their High Mightineſſes the States General of the United Provinces. Such
3mportant truſts ſhew in what high eftimation he was held by his country, and the able and ſatisfa cry
manner in which he executed them, proved that their confidence was well placed. '' . .
While in Europe, Mr. Adams publiſhed his learned and celebrated work, entitled “ A Defence of the
Conſtitutions of Government of the United States of America,” or more properly ſpeaking, The Hiſtory
of the Principal Republics in the World,” in 3 vols. 8vo. printed for J. Stockdale, in which he advocates, as
the fundamental principles of a free government—equal repreſentation, of which numbers, or property, or


both, ſhould be-the rule a total ſeparation of the executive from the legiſlative power, and of the judicial


from both—and a balance in the legiſlature, by three independent equal branches. If there is one certain
ruth,” ſays he, to be collected from the hiſtory of all ages, it is this: That the people's rights and liberties,
anc the democratical mixture in a conſtitution, can never be preſerved without a ſtrong executive, or in other
words, without ſeparating the executive power from the legiſlative.” | 1 5


3 Fe 3 e Pg
A character who rendered ſuch eminent ſervices to his country, both at home and abroad, in ſeaſons of


the greateſt gloomineſs and danger, and who poſſeſſed ſuch an extenſive knowledge of politics and govern-
ment, did not remain unnoticed by his grateful countrymen. He was called, in 1789, by the choice of his
conn, to the vice- preſideney of the United States, which office he ſtill retains. $0
. They who have had an opportunity of knowing his Excellency, Mr. Adams,” ſays an European writer,
trace in his features the moſt unequivocal marks of probity and candour. He unites to that gravity, which
15 ſuitable to the dignity. of his ſtation, an affability which prejudices you in his favour. Although of a filent
7 as 15 Common to men who engage in important affairs, yet he has a natural eloquence for the diſcuffion
0 e ſubjects, and for the recommending and enforcing. the meaſures and ſyſtems which are dictated
- 5 — Policy. He has neither the corrupted: nar carrupting principles of Lord Cheſterfield, hut the plain
; virtuous demeanour of Sir William Temple. Like him alſo he is ſimple in negociation, where he finds
andour in thoſe who treat with him ; Otherwiſe he has the ſeverity of a true republican, his high idea of


* 5 4 8 2 * . ” . . . . o — 0 . .
dans Bing him 2 rigidneſs which makes it difficult for him to accommodate himſelf to thoſe intrigues whicty
can politics have introduced into negociation.”


manner


272 GRAND DIVISIONS OF THL UNITED STATES.


manner in which he bowed to kiſs the ſacred volume—theſe circumſtances, together
with that of his being choſen to the moſt dignified office in America, and perhaps in
the world, by the unanimous voice of more than three millions of enhghtened freemey,
all conſpired to place this among the moſt auguſt and intereſting ſcenes which have ever
been exhibited on this globe.“ EE 5 | 1 108 5 E
Hitherto the deliberations of the legiſlature of the Union have been marked with
wiſdom, and the meaſures they have adopted have been productive of great national
proſperity. The wiſe appointments to office, which, in general, have been made—
the eſtabliſhment of a revenue and judiciary ſyſtem, and of a national bank—the af.
ſumption of the debts of the individual States, and the encouragement that has been
given to manufactures, commerce, literature, and to uſeful inventions, open the faireſt


proſpect of the peace, union, and increaſing reſpectability of the American States.


TS.


' GRAND DIVISIONS or ru UNITED STATES. |


THE AxkRICAN Reevsiic, of which we have given a general account, conſiſts of
| 4 three grand diviſiens, denominated the Northern, or more properly Eaſtern, Madl,
and nne, % ©7 %%% dps ns

” The jrft diviſion, (the Northern or Eaſtern States) comprehends
VERMONT, || MaAssACHUSETTS,
New HAursHIR ,, Rnopz IsLAN D,
Dis r RIC of Mains, (belonging Connecticut. ;

, oe a Age 3
heſe are called the New England States, and comprehend that part of America,
hich, fince the year 1614, has been known by the name of NRW ENGLAND.

9 5 The ſecond diviſion (the Middle States) comprehends


New York, DELAWARE
New IERSEVY, TekRTTonr, N. W. of Onto.
-PeEXNYSLVANIA, 333 FI.


The third diviſion (the Southern States) comprehends


«


 MaryLanD, TankRITORY S. of Onto,
VirGiNiA, Son Carolina,
KENTUckx, SGB!᷑roncIA.
Nonk rg CAROLIN A, |
Of theſe we ſhall treat wn their order.


Alt ſeemed, from the number of witneſſes,” faid a ſpectator of the ſcene, * to be a folemn appeil to
heaven and earth at once. Upon the ſubject of this great and good man, I may, perhaps, be an ent bal,
but, I confeſs, I was under an awful and religious perſuaſion, that the gracious Ruler of the Univerſe wi
looking down at that moment with eee complacency on an act, which, to a part of his creatures, was ſs

very important. Under this impreſſion, when the Chancellor pronounced, in a very feeling manner, 6 LONG
| Live GeorGE WASHINGTON, my ſenfibility was wound up to ſuch a pitch, that I could do no more than
wave my hat with the reſt, without the power of joining in the repeated acclamations which rent the air.”


8 0 NEW


f C.Comfort


—
- — 2
T5 )

roo {ed 25 — r 1 A
5 . m-a• 7 a
8 : X eari ietta

The boundary between he lo ONangje ound C.Jones 5
f 1 Hull nh, & Vir 11/1 „ COlumOnt wunty / Boar 7
Q 7 . var Je
8 SIOMUNLON long Wand Ht Mourni 7 £7, of
T "I . . bd 4 : 0 $
Ji Arti, Ones h,νάEẽ, 6 Atte beit. N 5 The 7 :

c 1 8 5 ; 2 I, * ol, inugan Nivel
3 L A „ (uten County. Op
: 5 Jin 8 SU he (OUNY . 443 — 0 A
; tors 9 Mtchmondt un - ha ] \ M F

. . * vo . 4 4
Sd A Multan Hons & Villages COUNTIES IN MASS ACHIUSIETS | S () | | N
. | |
8 A: Burnt ble ( nl H | lite c
COUNTIES iv N. FORK n /Yrmouth int *.
4 . s i . d Viners R of 5 * \

: 1 lew Jork Cnnts ieder, County ” CON A - Pc W
@ 2 Wost Ohewter (ounts 10 7777 7e Ci * A (a? I B \ | Y C

3 Mulhensr unly : ULampohitre U ut, AA pet 8 x | 2 | 8

| « wr COUNL Is 222 5 4 NH luke | 0 *
—— | a? — 5 Uh 7 | N f 8
* ”= l 0 R | ron |/ | 8

: 4


57
Je Patron


I. A KE


IR | lupe
> <> . ? a
1 2 b s Henly Hic
8 Ah Talib hf | 4
= Lake 7 |
— — ! 1/, eee. 7
8 Be, Az ED; x Dc —
8 a . a, ara 0
8 57 '2 wad? * t]
*. Wy
>. —
5 Ph
3 *
> >>
Of |
5 N
* b nw 2 4
17. 79. 77. 157. 0 * 1 .
* *
= 2 * a *
. eee = = Q> 8
— — >
> 8 —
l | 2 „ N *
1 : 50 — * ö * —
[. R 09 | . 2 .
"== <S 1 —
* — L «
yy "Y * — Lake
7 ier, -> N I
22 I
Hip, 3 Ez
= >>
4 — E.
S of * oh
=>
+ "M . I \ .
4 » : N \ Je Lake
%- f -. 5 * *
« JL » N "(0
X — 7... 1 oe“?
0 2% e, ue, P! N
e 77 = © ) —
* l l N ; ont
1 E 3 Nog a £0;; . h 8 9 ir. 2 C wall nl. | |
. n. wm 4 < , : *
f 25 anne x p IR G ro.
nao Figs 78 * K E |
— « .
— - TE, x
SE JI 8 4,
> Mee 77 5
' 4 "ns Q » . . .
VC 1 Myr: Je 2 F. II $i tan J. Go, WH
. * S c 14 (tt 7 — %.. : \r oY
SUNichlas ie 45 > N , ape.
3 : 57 p X alch,
EI PAR ID
Blanches # |, | 8 5
1 . _— 1 A — Th N
Malton — 2 J L A K F. rel! 1
JA, R MN | | . Tour Ry 1
2. 9 ; *
, N 7 | * en — 4
8 7 "ag... — 9 0 NTX ARI eue,
6 . ; A { > 0 "ax 5 5
(NI r . 6 2 . "Ils T- Fa N AA OC 72 20
7 Ol 4 45 als xu «ry, HORA /
\ PT. 7 \ 4 ar oF Abi de, 7
| 77 8 2 , — 3 97 7
lead Mit * " SHY Detroit & P =” / 2 2 9 $ 5 411
4 10 = 75. 2 1 \ od » -/ " e wy
: F LP — , (


A. 4,
bon "Pe Ws: As Ana)


535


2, ; n
N 17. | . I (het x
: 1 J ORSO "I 4
: IN Juliet 0 Y > oy 2 , Zn Fa
= > » 8 oh - 5 4 75761.
2 N 0 P. Shs INTE Le Hand / 7 — Ao 7Y 70 7
- 0p ue, VA OR bs 1 „ R I L. 3 An [voga R OY) Auge
Ort, © 6 \ 2% (5
A ny a\ \ TY WH => Pink 5 2
S P Bia I N An * 706. — „ Many
> 18 K Gund R
S E \ W Ty — 4
* I <A 2 Je \ al Port. F = ry le may
4 "7 . gs ; 1 ; Y „„ %% ow IP AYR %.%
6 . .— — —. 0 — — Ts. 7
3 © — a L | * = >
| . = f = =) =. 1 n Is gu 2 . = 5 = f's — *
r 3 N , NP NGN N
8 ke p * i \ ewe S\ | 3 ; 4 — 4 N » * x * A N * 857 7 *
E 77 e LP — — * * 8 2 5 8 "Mor s 5
” , 4 f "Sh. * 'T R 4 = 4 4 g 4 ICY Y 7 | —
[E708 4, i 1 N OT” 2 oo Junburi ] \
CF, * 4 ) p Y
8 . = 0 <L RR 75 7 ON oy:
Lueg — Carticle el.
: : S . "dp.
N NJ UH WES "y
| ; hg 8 I.. e T4 - rene Pp, ©
>| C0 IG PHLADELLE >
Y 12 0 10 OM PA v\ : * 3 Br .. Ae CA
8 lf | 4- 8
: | 1 8 5
Z 7 Ra N. * Clar "MW | I R 3 ee N. wg
UP : P 4 if Noh, 8 17 Oran 45 OO * ;
Op p NI. W Jt Rx f oft Vine Ko lorew OO 15.5
Mer; fo tes "7 A 5
5 * ee 1 I 7 A N Y : þ OD S .
h © we /. 47 Wks: « mn are 41. An 1? 1 27 Nn 9 1 4
E t 54 : _ RIA - * B . :
S'Genevieye MM. dard 4.
4 $ :
j
= \ i 7
WP? | 4 R M Y LA NDS Yah d. 2 2
\ 1 "x WR / WS - 0 ON * I & mappen R 3
S / aqrie 4 | ( ) II \ 2
: f T- Pp
T 4 d » 4 F ” * I 2. \ ' 855 York R
1 N 1 RJ 224 K I N 7
- / . 7
, * ; 2 — b 3 U 8 K Y James R 64
= - — LF; ; * 3
8 — 4 * Lak PQ CHE
| — 0 .
N


Nx un Ill Ill


70


With 1141 WHAM WINE


75


2 L meinen mme ein en


z TT MI NT nnn || \\\\\\\\ BA * III t ſſſſſo . — VV) \\\\
—


—


fgllt Morles Groguphy Publirheil /


—
« — — "
999 Wet [rem © Londen 47
11 Ine mg "mT Nm |


— — ————j—ä— o— _ as — _ —


pinugan Nivel


OE


L Peritibi


tring bo
/ AT V 47 Wart
| The In: 7 Count. $4 Wy = 4 4 1 it N ted tO \ the cold Q
: x FUTLLILER <
() R g Suvage Nation who hf Leons av. A's
- Vorth Wes! al Fu <p N J 47 (hat 1 *


ue \


J. PBamabas


U


1 ;


N 357 g
7 5 8 : n *
lakes & dy iis WV. or AKSTILAA : 2
1 . ; av J =
bl <gſ} Bas C. N. \. :
. ] Md, 5 +++ ; - P
Ji 5 h : oF TP * * XV "& J. 28 8
2 [ ö HA . 3 . . A 1 I J. 4 ; al V
>) g 2 Jl NY 2
5 .
Dy * ; Magdale L Z
2 \ VII. Cape 52 5
RY |
N 1 -
— 7 S | : -
5 7 rt Dauphin -
) 7. A.
| =
5 his PL 2 > 1 A Richmond 7 Z
1 ' 4. N a x Z
Y 8 | Y Z \ RJ <1Y J 2 Jouiſburg 2
2 : a *
/S * IM
(8 \ Fri A =
1 J Q D © J | . £4 J 7 2
\'E. VS Wc mn bertan now Ras
*\ . N « \ 5 =} a 5 K :
* ( (a 3
; * Truro * r
— — 4 7 7
N 0 N Hin. * R
| 7. V. Va . *
Dla, Wind. 3


LINTON COOUN


18
eU
> N Valle


> X
(s * * H
"Me S o 31
51


>
+ * PF a I = * ol .
=» oy D 775 «(114 %. 7 Aeneon „ AHtur Ii.“ ＋
* 1 g. ungabury eee . FEA Arburr [Þrt II
a Srofarry Fe 2 8 a 11 >
2 2 . 22 kind eulen n | | -
FP aner, 8 4 „ ebe, A. Z
« CC 64 He words * =
. Lethe 3 * oh Þ BOSTON, HY A A ' =
Pſuderon „ Elf 9 2 2 5 ig uſt, * „ 1
Amnoston / Si pw Cape C.


Ley „% iro 0090 onde, EEE 44 44


(
Tub, un


= i H an;
I = — 1 ur. bn


+ 222 N
i
. mane


*,
'.
—


Kune
4 4 — 2
R 4 8 2. » <
Mor 2 A, Fa
OO OS AGRA
10%. 7 N 2 e,
— 7h Ai, 727
ag ON # Do amps ried g


2. "Wi.
VP,
75


LLADELLH
\c Wer, 5 2


"NON


Burl


14 2 7

noton

Sunn

ö 22222 1 Int.
Lillle Eng Ha:


1 Ec
/ \\N 4


C * 4 „
Oreat Foy Hat


*.
——
—t—ͤ


CHESAPEAK B


VIA Irrer


arns


/ - Notre n.
+ F-» «TN
23 15 0


2 LCHAMPHALALN . 8 Y
2 = n, 2 4 „ "2X 7 , Roval
27“ 22 Mo, Tr ond, al * 8 : , > 435
þ WW f Brut "ic 5
. &: 8 7 a "4, "2
Pp N — 0 \$ \þ 4 "A, Ly Jbl. N
an -> IL &F . ” war
ry / _ » — — . IM
D -» 4 oP
£5 NLE 7 da k
OA FL huvty a „Vun. b. 12
. * 91777, , 5 " * * 4
2 A\ (14707 lil. D 2 Ulitabe th ( 2 Sa 0
„ Onondan V Ne arati Jae eACO /
c WSO


2 ble


Kastham
Sand A C)


K | D


P 1.50 Ms


i Hos war


5 | - avis nl 1


N


E]


bl Dll. V. lo


1 N 8 eli. 6


Fe” 7. N.
— I" al /
\ — 2 D
"© De 7 5
8 1


12

D
oli

85 NS


+» W


— _ — ——
454 f


.*


| \
2 —
!
U
—
g
1
7 —
Vir”
1 | Oz,
7
4 \ wh
i} .
IP)
LS


, i 13 / | «
NEW
Bay ;


—
4
—
—
—
4
3,
—
—
m


FO is * Porta Port y N 1)
6 1 J. I ; | \ 1:: ;


I ;
2+ Ualilax


_ e.


mivepool


WAN WAL \


Vet / 3 Z
A 1 * -

\ * ; | |

JD | "4
| A 9 17 a 1 1. - 10
Of the -
NORTHE mn 1.4 HMHIDDEE
£ 4 FAY A 4 4 ;
| 8 1 A 1 L 83

Com re be nding {be Weltern Ter ritor * and 22 :

Brinſth Dominions |

„ OR TH. 1. HMM RT. I. .

NN [rom the bart Authorities. Z

Mi EE: Ss . -

_NMW MW Humm INV _WODD WT T7 "WW TW III In III TOW ay


70 15


Publichel br J.Stockdale ./1::"25, 7702.


Engrave 77 by G. Alln Sith Wile Row V r/anlen


r


r


4


A a


„


Sad


3


2


3 —— —


oh TEE, of ts


NEW ENGLAND ; or NorTHERN or EASTERN STATES.


SITUATION any BOUN DARIES.


TEW ENGLAND lies between 41 and 46 degrees N. Lat. and between r degree
30 minutes, and 8 degrees E. Lon. from Philadelphia ; and 1s bounded north by
Lower Canada; eaſt, by the province of New Brunſwick, and the Atlantic Ocean;
ſouth, by the fame ocean, and Long Iſland Sound; weft, by the State of New York. |
It lies in the form of a quarter of a circle. Its weſt line, beginning at the mouth of
Byram river, which empties into Long Iſland Sound at the ſouth-weſt corner of Con-
necticut, Lat. 41 degrees, runs a little eaſt of north, until it ſtrikes the 45th degree of
Latitude, and then curves to the eaſtward almoſt to the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
CLIMATE AND DiszASE.] New England has a very healthful climate, as is evinced
by the longevity of the inhabitants. It is eſtimated that about one in ſeven of the in-
habitants live to the age of ſeventy years; and about one in thirteen or fourteen to
_ eighty years and upwards.
North-weſt, weſt, and ſouth-weſt winds are the moſt prevalent. Faſt and north-
eaſt winds, which are unelaſtic and diſagreeable, are frequent at certain ſeaſons of the
year, particularly 1 in April and May, on the ſea coaſts. The weather is leſs variable
than in the middle and eſpecially the ſouthern States, and more ſo than in Canada.
The extremes of heat and cold, according g to Fahrenheit's thermometer, are from 20* be-
low, to 100 above o. The medium is from 48 to 30. The inhabitants of New
England, on account of the dryneſs of their e can endure, without incon-
venience, a greater degree of heat than the inhabitants of a moiſter climate. It is ſup-
poſed by ſome philoſophers, that the difference of moiſture in the atmoſphere in Penn-
tylvania and New England is fuch, as that a perſon might bear at leaſt ten degrees ot
heat more in the latter than in the former. |
The quantity of rain which falls in England annually, is computed to w 24 inches; 1
in France 18 inches, and in New England from 48 to 50 inches; and yet in New
England they ſuffer more from drought than in either of the forementioned countries, al-
though they have more than double the quantity of rain. Theſe facts evince the re-
markable dryneſs of the atmoſphere in this eaſtern diviſion of the United States, and
in part account for its fingular healthfulneſs. Winter commonly commences, in its
ſeverity, about the middle of December ſometimes earlier, and ſomctimes not till
Chriſtmas. Cattle are fed or houſed, in the northern parts of New England, from
about the 20th of November to the 20th of May; in the ſouthern parts not quite ſo
long. There have been froſts in almoſt every month in the year, though not in the
ſame year; but not very injurious. |
The diſeaſes meſt prevalent in New England are the following, viz.


Alvine fluxes, Inflammatory
St. Anthony's Fire, Slow nervous, and N F gvers
Aſthma, ; Mixed |
Atrophy, Pulmonary Conſumption,
Catarrb, 5 Quinſy,
Colic, Rheumatiſm.
7 EAR Theſe


ov a.


274 NEW ENGLAND.


places, and in caſes where there is a probability of a general ſpread of the infection in


the idleneſs, luxurics, and debaucheries of the firſt, and the miſery and too frequent


pieſt diviſion of the three. Of the rich and poor, the American Republic furniſhes


apply to New England at large. |


| Hibit a romantic appearance: They ſeem an ocean of woods, ſwelled and deprefled in


Theſeꝰ diforders, of which the pulmonary conſumption is much the moſt deſtruc-
tive, are commonly the effect of imprudent expoſures to cold and rainy weather, even-
ing air, and the wearing of damp linen; or from frequent exceſſes in the uſe of ſtrong -
liquors, efpecially of freth diſtilled rum, which in too many inſtances prove the bane of
morals, and the ruin of families. | | IE,

The tmall pox, which is a ſpecific, infectious diſcaſe, is not allowed at preſent to be
communicated by inoculation, except in hoſpitals erected for the purpoſe in bye


a town. Nor is this diſcaſe permitted to be communicated generally by inoculation, in
any of the United. States, except New York, New Jerſey, Pennſylvania, Delaware, and
South Carolina. 3 hi a hg
In populous towns, the prevalent diſeaſes are more numerous and complicated,
owing to walt of freſh air and exerciſe, and to luxurious and faſhionable living.
A late writer ® has obſerved that © in other countries, men are divided according to
their wealth or indigence, into three claſfes ; the opulent, the middling, and the poor;


intemperance of the laſt, deſtroy the greater proportion of theſe two. The inter-
mediate claſs is below thoſe indulgencies which prove fatal to the rich, and above
thoſe ſufferings to which the untortunate poor fall victims: this is therefore the hap-


a much ſmaller proportion than any other diſtrict of the known world. In Connec-
ticut particularly, the diſtribution of wealth and its concomitants is more equal than
elſewhere, and therefore, as far as exceſs or want of wealth may prove deſtructive or
ſalutary to life, the inhabitants of this State may plcad exemption. from diſeaſes.”
What this writer ſays of Connecticut in particular, will, with very few exceptions,


Facx or THE Country, MovxTaixs, &c.] New England is a high, hilly, and in
ſome parts a mountainous country, formed by nature to be inhabited by a hardy race
of free, independent republicans. The mountains are comparatively ſmall, running
nearly north and ſouth in ridges parallel to each other. Between theſe ridges flow
the great rivers in majeſtic meanders, receiving the innumerable rivulets and larger
{treams which proceed from the mountains on each fide. To a ſpeRator on the top of
a neighbouring mountain, the vales between the ridges, while in a ſtate of nature, ex-


its ſurface like that of the great ocean itſelf. A richer, though leſs romantic view is
preſented, when the valleys, by induſtrious huſbandmen, have been cleared of their
natural growth; and the fruit of their Jabour appears in loaded orchards, extenfive


* .


meadows, covercd with large herds of ſheep and neat cattle, and rich fields of flax,


corn, and the various kind of grain. abe 5 e
Theſe valleys are of various breadths, from two to twenty miles; and by the annual
inundations of the rivers and ſmall ſtreams which flow through them, there is fre-
quently an accumulation of rich, fat foil, left upon their ſurface when the waters
r-tire. 1 | ee CC 5 b
There are three principal ranges of mountains, paſſing nearly from ſouth-weſt to
north-eaſt, through New. England. Theſe confiſt of a multitude of parallel ridges,
each having many ſpurs, deviating from the courſe of the general range ; which ſpurs
are again broken into irregular, hilly land. The main ridges commence in high bluff


Dr. Foulke, in a diſcourſe which he lately read before the American Philoſophical Society.
| 2 heads


heads near the ſea coaſt ; and ſometimes A a 8 . in the interior part of the

country. One of the main ranges runs between Connecticut and Hudſon's rivers.

This range branches, and bounds the vales through which flows the Houſatonick river.
1 Ly me, on the eaſt ſide of the mouth of Connecticut river, another range of
mountains commences, forming the eaſtern boundary of Connecticut vale. This range
runs northerly, at the diſtance, gencrally, of about ten or twelve miles eaſt from the
river, and paſſes through Maſlachuſetts, from where the range takes the name of

Chicabee Mountains ; thence crofling into New Hampſhire, at the diflance of about

twenty miles from the Maſſachuſetts line, it runs up into a very high peak, called

Monaduock, which terminates this ridge of the range. A weſtern ridge continues, and

in about latitude 4.3* 20, runs up into Sunapee mountains. About 50 mules further,
in the ſame ridge, 1s Mooſe-helock mountain.

A third range begins near Stonington in Connection, It takes its courſe nortli-
eaſterly, and is 5 ſometimes broken and diſcontinued; it then riſes again, and ranges in

the ſame direction into New Hampſhire.

Theſe ranges of mountains are full of ſprings of water, that give riſe to numberleſs
ſtreams of various ſizes, which, interlocking each other in every direction, and falling
over the rocks in romantic caſcades, flow meandering into the rivers below, No country

on the globe is better watered than New England.

On the ſea coaſt the land is low, and in many parts level and ſandy. In the valleys,
between the fore-mentioned ranges of mountains, the land is generally broken, and
in many places rocky, but of a Hrong rich ſoil, capable of being cultivated to good

advantage, which alto is the caſe with many ſpots even on the tops of the mountains.

Rivess.] The principal rivers in New England are Penobſcot, Kennebeck, An-
droſcoign or Ameriſcoggin, Saco, (pronounced Sazuco) Merrimack, Connecticut, Hou-
ſatonick, and Onion rivers, beſides many ſmaller ones.

FLOWERING SHRUBS AND PLANTS. | Dr. Cutler has farniſhed the ſollowi ing cata-
Jogue of flowering ſhrubs and plants in New England, which. from the attention he has
paid to natural hiſtory, we have reaſon to rely upon as accurate.

Blue Flag (Iris virginica)—Globe Flower (Cephalanthus occidentalis)—Pigeonberry
{Ciffus ficyoides)—Cornel (Cornus Canadenſis)—American Honeyſuckle (Azalea
viſcoſa) American Tea (Ceanothus Americanus)—Cherry Honey ſuckle (Lonicera

diervilla)—Great Convolvulus (Convolvulus arvenſis)—Stag's horn Sumach (Rhus
typhinum)—Mealtree (Viburnum lantana)—W hite flowered Elder (Sambucus nigra)
Red berried Elder (Sambucus Canadenfis.)—Meadow Blue-bells (Gentiana ciliata)
Lilies, ſeveral ſpecies (Lilium)—Bethlem Star (Ornithogulum Juteum)—American
Senna (Rhodora Canadenſis)—Great Laurel (Kalmia latitolia)—Dwart Laurel (Kalmia
anguſtifolia)—White Pepper Buſh (Andromeda arborea)—Bog Evergreen (Andromeda
_calyculata)—Sweet Pepper Buſh (Clethra alniftoha)—Mountain Laurel, or Sorbus
tree (Sorbus aucupora ?)—Meadow Sweet (Spirza ſalicifolia) Queen of the Meadows
(Spiræa tormentoſa)—Service Tree (Meſpilus Canadenſis) Wild Roſe (Rota Carolina)
Superb Raſpberry (Rubus odoratus)—Baneberry (Actea fſpicata)—Side-ſaddte
Flower (Sarracena purpurea)—Red Columbine (Aquilegia Canadenfis)—Anemone,
ſeveral ſpecies (Anemone hepatica, ſylveſtris et nemorota)—Traveller's Joy (Clematis {
Virginica)—Dragon's Head (Dracocephalum Virginicum)—Snap Dragon (Antirrhinum
Canadenfis)—American Cardamine (Cardamine Virginica) Lupin (Lupinus anguſti-
tolia)—Locuſt (Robinia pſeud-acacia)—Beach Pea (Piſum maritimum)—Pied Peg
(Pifum ochrus)—Wood Pea (Orobus ſylraticus)—Variegated Pea (Lathyrus hetero-
phy llus) — Meadow Sunflower . ciliare) American Amaranthus (Gnaphalium


n 2 helian


bh. Jt


Vork, into Kentucky, and the Weſtern Territory, and into Geo
ſcattered into every State, and every town of note in the Union.


276 NEW ENGLAND.


helian themifolinm)—New England After (After Nova Anglicum)—Smooth-leaved


Golden-rod (Solidago altiſſima) New England Sunflower (Helianthus divaricatus)
American Pride (Lobelia cardinalis) Ladies Plume (Orchis pycodes) Ladies Slipper


(Cypripedium calceolus)—Blue-eye (Siſyrinchium Bermudiauna) Swamp Willow, or


Dog- wood (Salix cinerea ?)—Red-flowered Maple (Acerubrum).


PropvcTiONSs FROM CULTURE. | New England, generally ſpeaking, is better adapted
for grazing than for grain, though a ſufficient quantity of the latter is raiſed for home
conſumption, if we except wheat, which is imported in confiderable quantities from
fhe middle and ſouthern States. Indian corn, rye, oats, barley, buck wheat, flax and
bemp, generally ſucceed very well. Wheat is cultivated to advantage in many parts
of the interior country, but on the ſea coaſt it is ſubject to blaſt. This has been at-


tributed to various cauſes, but the true one probably is, the ſudden, cold, eaſterly


winds, after a hot day, which cauſe a ſtagnation and extravaſation of the juices of the


ſtalk. Apples are common, and in general plenty in New England, and cyder conſti-


tutes the principal drink of the inhabitants. Peaches do not thrive as well as formerly.
The other common fruits are more or leſs cultivated in different parte.
New England is a fine grazing country; the valleys, between the hills, are generally
interſected with brooks of water, the banks of which are lined with a tract of rich
meadow or intervale land. The high and rocky ground is, in many parts, covered
with clover, and generally affords the fineft of paſture. It will not be a matter of


wonder, therefore, that New England boaſts of raiſing ſome of the fineſt cattle in the


world; nor will ſhe be envied, when the labour of raiſing them is taken into view.
Two months of the hotteſt ſeaſon in the year, the farmers are employed in procuring
food for their cattle, and the cold winter is ſpent in dealing it out to them. The plea-
fare and profit of doing this is, however, a ſatisfying compenſation to the honeſt and
induſtrious farmer. Butter and cheeſe are made for exportation. Conſiderable at-
tention has lately been paid to the raifing of ſheep. „%%


PorurLATTON, CHARACTER, AND DtvRRSTLONSs.] New England is the moſt populous


part of the United States. It contains, according to the cenſus of 1790, 1,009,522


fouls. The great body of theſe are landholders and cultivators of the foil. As they


poſſeſs, in fee ſimple, the farms which they cultivate, they are naturally all attached to


their country; the cultivation of the ſoil makes them robuſt and healthy, and enables
them to defend it. | | 1 uh Ss


New England may with propriety be called a nurſery of men, whence are annually
tranſplanted, into other parts of the United States, thouſands of its natives. Vaſt
numbers of them, ſince the war, have emigrated into the northern parts of New
rgia ; and ſome arc
The inhabitants of New England are almoſt univerſally of Engtiſh deſcent ; and it
is owing to this circumſtance, and to the great and general attention that has been
paid to education, that the Engliſh language has been preſerved among them ſo free
of corruption. 985 5 5
The New Englanders are generally tall, ſtout, and well built. Their education,
laws, and ſituation, ſerve to inſpire them with high notions of liberty. Their jealouſy
is awakened at the firſt motion towards an invaſion of their rights. They are indeed
often jealous to exceſs; a circumſtance which is a fruitful ſource of imaginary griev-
ances, and of groundleſs ſuſpicions and complaints againſt government. But theſe
ebullitions of jealouſy, though cenſurable, and productive of ſome political evils, ſhew


that the eſſence of true liberty exiſts in New England; for jealouly is a guardian of


*


uberty,


NEW ENGLAND 277


liberty, and a characteriſtic of free republicans. A chief foundation of liberty and equa-
lity in the New England States 1s a law bywhich inteſtate eſtates deſcend to all the
children, or other heirs, in equal proportions, except to the eldeft fon, who has two
ſhares. In 1789 Maſſachuſetts aboliſhed this exception. In conſequence of theſe laws,
the people of New England enjoy an equality of condition unknown in any other part
of the world : and it is in this way that the people have preſerved that happy medio-
crity among themſelves, which, by inducing economy and induſtry, removes from them
temptations to luxury, and forms them to habits of ſobriety and temperance. At the
ſame time, their induſtry and frugality exempt them from want, and trom the dent
of ſubmitting to any encroachments on their liberties.

In New En gland, learning is more generally diffuſed among all ranks of people than
in any other part of the globe ; SHINS, trom the excellent eſtabliſhment of ſchools in
almoſt every townſhip.

| In theſe ſchools, which are generally ſupported by a public tax, and under the direc-
tion of a ſchool committee, are taught the elements of reading, writing, and arithme-
tic, and in the more wealthy towns, they are e to introduce the higher
branches of grammar, geography, &c.

A very valuable ſource of ii formation to the people i is the newſpapers, of which not
leſs than thirty thouſand are printed every. week in New England, and circulate in al-
moſt every town and village in the country.*

A perſon of mature age, who cannot both read and write, is rarely to be found. By
means of this general eſtabliſhment ot ſchools, the extenfive circulation of Newſpapers,
and the conſequent ſpread of learning, every townſhip throughout the country is fur-

niſhed with men capable of conducting the affairs of their town with judgement and diſ-
cretion. Theſe men are the channels of political information to the lower claſs of peo-
ple; if ſuch a claſs may be ſaid to exiſt in New England, where every man thinks him-
ſelf at leaſt as good as his neighbour, and believes that all mankind are, or ought to be,
equal. The people, from their childhood, form habits of canvaſſing public affairs, and
commence politicians. This naturally leads them to be very inquiſitive. It is with
knowledge as with riches, the more a man has, the more he wiſhes to obtain; his de-
fire has no bound, This defire after knowledge, in a greater or leſs degree, prevails
throughout all claſſes of people in New England; and from their various modes of
exprefling it, ſome of which are blunt and familiar, bordering on impertinence, ſtran-
gers have been induced to mention impertinent inquifitiveneſs as a diſtinguiſhing characte-
_ iſtic of New England people. But this is true only with regard to that claſs of people
who have confined themſelves to domeſtic life, and have not had opportunity of min-
gling with the world ; and ſuch people are not peculiar to New England; they com-
poſe a great part of the citizens of every ſtate and coun

| Before the late war, which introduced into New England a flood of corruptions, ith
many improvements, the ſabbath was obſerved with great ſtrictneſs; no unneceſſary
travelling, no ſecular buſineſs, no viſiting, no diverſions were permitted on that ſa-
cred day. They confidered it as conſecrated to divine worſhip, and were generally
punctual and ſerious in their attendance upon it. Their laws were ſtrict in guardin
the ſabbath againſt every innovation. The ſuppoſed ſeverity with which t eſe laws
Were compoſed and executed, together with ſome other traits in their religious charac-


* According to an accurate eſtimate lately made, it appears that no leſs than 77,000, newſpapers are
printed weekly, in the American States, which, in a year, would _ to upwards of four millions, and at
4 cents each would make 160,000 dollars. | 2

T,


278 NEW EN GLAN P.


ter, have acquired for the New Englanders, the name of a ſuperſtitious, biggotted peo-
ple. But ſuperſtition and bigotry are fo indefinite in their fignifications, and to vari-


and liberalize away all true religion, of which there is very great danger, they will


the predominating vices, that particularly call for humiliation, are enumerated. In
autumn, after harveſt, that gladſome era in the huſbandman's life, the governors again
iſſue their proclamations, appointing a day of public thankſgiving, enumerating the


ouſly applied by pertons of different principles and educations, that it is not caſy to
determine whether they ever deſerved that character. Leaving every perſon to enjoy
his own opinion in regard to this matter, we will only obſerve, that, fince the war, a
catholic tolerant ſpirit, occaſioned by a more enlarged intercourſe with mankind, has
greatly increaſed, and is becoming univerſal ; and if they do not break the proper bound,


counteract that ſtrong propenſity in human nature, which leads men to vibrate from
one extreme to its oppoſite. SIN Cpt Fn fra eee
There is one diſtinguiſhing characteriſtic in the religious character of this people, which
we muſt not omit to mention; and that is, the cuſtom of annually celebrating Faſts
and Thankigivings. In the ſpring, the governors of the ſeveral New England States,
except Rhode Iſland, iſſue their proclamations, appointing a day to be religiouſly ob-
terved in faſting, humiliation, and prayer throughout their reſpective States, in which


public bleſſings received in the courſe of the foregoing year.
This pious cuſtom originated with their venerable anceſtors, the firſt ſettlers of New
England; and has been handed down as facred, through the ſucceſſive generations of
their poſterity. A cuſtom ſo rational, and ſo happily calculated to cheriſh in the minds
of the people a ſenſe of their dependence on the GREAT BENEFACTOR of the world for
all their bleſſings, it is hoped will ever be ſacredly preſerved.  —_ -
The people of New England generally obtain their eſtates by hard and perſevering
labour : they of conſequence know their value, and ſpend with frugality. Yet in no
country do the indigent and unfortunate fare better. Their laws oblige every town to
provide a competent maintenance for their poor, and the neceſſitous ſtranger is pro-
tected, and reheved by their humane inſtitutions. It may in truth be ſaid, that in no
part of the world are the people happier, better furniſhed with the neceſſaries and con-
veniencies of life, or more independent, than the farmers in New England. As the great
body of the people are hardy, independent freeholders, their manners are, as they ought
to be, congenial to their employment, plain, ſimple, and unpoliſhed. Strangers are
received and entertained among them with a great deal of artleſs ſincerity, and friendly,
unformal hoſpitality. Their children, thoſe imitative creatures, to whoſe education
particular attention is paid, early imbibe the manners and habits of thoſe around them;
and the ftranger, with pleaſure, notices the honeſt and decent reſpect that is paid him
by the children as he paſſes through the country, 15


-


As the people, by repreſentation, make their own laws and appoint their own offi-
cers, they cannot be opprefled ; and living under governments which have few lucra-
tive places, they have few motives to bribery, corrupt canvaſſings, or intrigue. Real
abilities and a moral character unblemiſhed are the qualifications requiſite in the view
of moſt people, for officers of public traſt. The expreſſion of a with to be promoted,
is, in ſome parts of New England, the direct way to be diſappointed. þ © |

The inhabitants, in ſome parts of New England, are generally fond of the arts anc
ſciences, and have cultivated them with great ſucceſs. Their colleges have flouriſhed. _

The illuſtrious characters they have produced, who have diftinguiſhed themſelves in

politics, law, divinity, the mathematics, and philoſophy, natural and civil hiſtory,
apd in the fine arts, particularly poetry, evince the truth of theſe obſervations, M

: any


NEW ENGLAND. 5 279.


Many of the women in New England are handſome. They generally have (air, freſh,
and healthful countenances, mingled with much female ſoftnets and delicacy. Thoſe
who have had the advantages of a good education (and they are numerous) are genteel,
eaſy, and agreeable in their manners, and are ſprightly and ſenſible in converſation.
They are early taught to manage domeſtic concerns with neatneſs and economy. La-
dies of the firſt rank and fortune make it a part of their daily buſineſs to ſuperintend
the affairs of the family. Employment at the needle, in cookery, and at the ſpinning
wheel, with them is honourable. Idleneſs, even in thoſe of independent fortunes, is
univerſally diſreputable. The women in country towns, manufacture the greateſt part
of the cloathing of their families. Their linen and woollen cloths are ſtrong and decent.
Their butter and cheeſe is not inferior to any in the world. ON:
Dancing 1s the principal and favourite amuſement in New England ; and of this the
young people of both ſexes are extremely fond. Gaming is practiſed by none but thoſe


who cannot, or rather will not, find a reputable employment. The gameſter, the horſe


jockey, and the knave, are equally deſpiſed, and their company is avoided by all who
would ſuſtain fair and irreproachable characters. „

The athletic and healthy diverſions of cricket, foot ball, quoits, wreſtling, jumping,
hopping, foot races, and priſon bats, are univerſally practiſed in the country, and tome
of them in the moſt populous places, and by people of almoſt all ranks. .

HIsroRY.] New England owes its firſt ſettlement to religious perſecution. Soon
after the commencement of the reformation * in England, which was not until the year-
1534, the Proteſtants were divided into two parties, one the followers of Luther, and
the other of Calvin. The former had choſen gradually, and almoſt imperceptibly, to
recede from the church of Rome; while the latter, more zealous, and convinced of
the importance of a thorough reformation, and at the iame time poſſeſſing much firm
neſs and high notions of religions liberty, was for effecting a thorough change at once.
Their conſequent endeavours to expunge from the church all the inventions which had
been brought into it ſince the days of the Apoſtles, and to introduce the “ Scripture pu-
. rity,” derived for them the name of Puritans. From theſe the inhabitants of New
England deſcended. „ th


The firſt company that came to New England planted themſelves at Plymouth.
They werea part of the Rev. Mr. Robinſon's congregation, which for 12 years before had
lived in Holland, for the fake of enjoying liberty of conſcience. They came over in
the year aft r t A R


* The reformation was begun by Martin Luther, a native of Saxony, born in the year 1483. He was edu-
cated in the Roman Catholic religion, and was an Auguſtin Friar, when, in 1517, having written ninety-five
- Theles againſt the Pope's indulgencies, he exhibited them to public view on the church door at Wirtenburg,
in Saxony, and thus began the reformation in Germany. In 1528, the reformed religion was introduced into
Switzerland by Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and others. „„

The year following, the Diet of the German Empire aſfembled at Spire, and iſſued a decree againſt the re»
formation. Againſt this decree, the Elector of Saxony, George, Marquis of Brandenburg, Erneſt, and Fran-
eis, Duke of Lunenburg, the Landgrave of Heſs, and the Count of Anhalt, who were joined by ſeveral of
the cities, publicly read their Proze/t, and in this way, acquired for themſelves and their ſucceſſors down to
the preſent time, the name of Proteflants. g GEE e | [©
Calviu, another celebrated reformer, was born at Noyon, in France, in the year 1509. He improved upon
Luther's plan—expunged many of the Romiſh ceremonies which he had indulged—entertained different ideas
concerning ſome of the great doctrines of Chriſtianity, and ſet the Proteſtants at a greater remove from the
Roman Catholic religion. The followers of Luther have been diſtinguiſhed by the name of Eztherans ; and.
the followers of Calvin by the name of Catvinifts. | |


Such wasthe rapid growth of the Proteſtant intereſt, that in 1 563, only 46 years after the commencement of
the reformation by Luther, there were in France 2150 aſſemblies of Proteſtants, ; Ae


a NEW: ENGLAND.


It was their intention to have ſettled at the mouth of Hudfon's river; but the Dutch,
intending to plant a colony there of their own, privately lured the maſter of the ſhip
to contrive delays in England, and then to conduct them to theſe northern coaſts, and
il there, under pretence of ſhoals and winter, to diſcourage" them from venturing to the
f place of deſtination. This is confidently afferted by the hiſtorians of that time. Al-
„ though Cape Cod harbour, in which they firſt anchored, was good, the country around
þ was ſandy and barren, Theſe were diſcouraging circumſtances; but the ſeaſon being
1 far advanced, tliey prudently determined to make the beſt of their preſent ſituation.
i} As they were not within the limits of their patent, and conſequently not under the
f Juriſdiction of the Virginia company, they concluded it neceflary to eſtabliſh a ſeparate
. government for themſelves. Accordingly, before they landed, having on their knees
|


devoutly given thanks to God for their fate arrival, they formed themſelves into a body
= - politic, by a ſolemn contraft,®* to which they all ſubſcribed, thereby making it the baſis
5 of their government. They choſe Mr. John Carver, a gentleman of piety and appro-
| 5 ved abilities, to be their governor for the firſt year. This was on the 11th of Novem-


= ber, 1620. VF Fr

ii | I ) heir next object was to fix on a convenient place for ſettlement. . In doing this they
[| were obliged to encounter numerous difficulties, and to ſuffer incredible hardſhips,
MF 2 Many of them were ſick in conſequence of the fatigues of a long voyage: Their provi-


ſions were bad—the ſeaſon was uncommonly cold—the Indians, though afterwards
— friendly, were now hoſtile and they were unacquainted with the coaſt. Theſe diffi-
1 culties they ſurmouuted, and on the 3ſt of December they were all ſafely landed at
1 a place, which, in grateful commemoration of Plymouth in England, the town which
they laſt left in their native land, they called Plymouth. This is the firſt Engliſh town
that was ſettled in New England. e V
In ſome of their excurſions in ſearch of a ſuitable place for ſettlement, they found
buried ſeveral baſkets of Indian corn, to the amount of ten buſhels, which fortunately
ſerved them for planting the next ſpring, and perhaps was the means of preſerving them
from periſhing with hunger. They made diligent inquiry for the owners, whom they
found, and aſterwards paid the full value of the corn. 3 |
Before the end of November, Suſanna, the Wife of William White, was delivered
of a ſon, whom they called Peregrine, He is ſuppoſed to have been the firſt child of
European extract born in New Englae. Hake
_ The whole company that landed conſiſted of but 101 ſouls. Their fituation was diſ-
treſſing, and their proſpect truly diſmal and diſcouraging. Their neareſt neighbours,
except the natives, were a French ſettlement at Port Royal, and one of the Engliſh at


F be following is an authentic copy of this contract“ In the name of God, Amen: We whoſe Names
are under-written, the Loyal Subjects of our dread Sovereign Lord, King James, by the grace of God, of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, &. av; bs
Having undertaken, for the Glory of God, and the advancement of the Chriſtian Faith and honour of our
King and country, a Voyage to Plant the firſt Colony in the Northern parts of Virginia; Do, by theſe Pre-
ſents, ſolemnly and mutually, in the Preſence of God, and one of another, Covenant and Combine ourſelves
together unto a Civil Body Politic, for our better Ordering and Preſervation, and Furtherance of the Ends
aforeſaid; and by virtue hereof to ena, conſtitute, and frame ſuch juſt and equal Laws, Ordinances, AQts,
Conſtitutions, and Offices from Time to Time, as ſhall be thought moſt meet and convenient for the General
Good of the Colony; unto which we Promiſe all due Submiſſion and Obedience: In witneſs whereof we have
| hereunder ſubſcribed our names at Cape Cod, the 11th of November, in the Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
. 3 of England, France, and Ireland, the Eighteenth, and of Scotland the Fifty-fourth, Anno
om1ni, 1620.“ | I. |
This inſtrument was ſigned by 24 heads of families, with the number in their reſpective families annexed,
and 17 ſingle men, making in the whole 161 ſouls, 1 1 5 ee
ht 2 Virgima-


3 NEM ENGLAND. 281

Virginia. The neareſt of theſe was five hundred miles from them, and utterly incapa-
ble of affording them relief in a time of famine or danger. Wherever they turned their
eyes, diſtreſs was before them. Perſecuted for their religion in their native land—grie-
ved for the profanation of the holy Sabbath, and other licentiouſnets in Holland—fa-
tigued by their long and boiſterous voyage—diſappointed through the treachery of their
commander, of their expected country—forced on a dangerous and unknown ſhore,
in the advance of a cold winter—furrounded with hoſtile barbarians, without any hope
of human ſuccour denied the aid or favour of the court of England—without a patent


V xithout a public promiſe of a peaceable enjoyment of their religious liberties—worn


out with toil and ſufferings—without convenient ſhelter from the rigours of the wea-


ther. Such were the proſpects, and ſuch the ſituation of the pious ſolitary Chriſtians ;


and to add to their diſtreſſes, a general and very mortal ſickneſs prevailed among them,
which ſwept off forty-ſix of their number before the opening of the next ſpring. - To

ſupport them under theſc trials, they had need of all the aids and comforts which Chriſ-
tianity affords ; and theſe were ficient The free and unmoleſted enjoyment of their
religion reconciled them to their humble and lonely fituation—They bore their hard-
ſhips with unexampled patience, and perſevered in their pilgrimage of almoſt unparal-


leled trials, with ſuch reſignation and calmneſs, as gave proof of great piety and uncon-
querable virtue. wo es | >


On the zd of November, 1620, King James ſigned a patent, incorporating the duke
of Lenox, the Marquiſſes of Buckingham and Hamilton, the Earls of Arundel and


Warwick, Sir Francis Gorges, with thirty-four others, and their ſucceſſors, ſtilin


them, © The council eſtabliſhed in Plymouth, in the county of Devon, for the I |
ing, ruling, ordering, and governing of New England in America.“ To this council
he granted all that part of America which lies between the 40th and 48th degrees of
north latitude. This patent is the great civil baſis of all the grants and patents by which!
New England was afterwards divided. 5 5
The Plymouth council retained the power veſted in them by the crown, until the
year 1635, when they reſigned their charter. Previous to this, however, the council


had made ſeveral grants of land to adventurers, who propoſed to ſettle in New Eng-


land. —They granted New Hampſhire to Captain John Maſon in 1621—the Province


of Main, to Sir R. Gorges in 1622, and Maſſachuſetts Bay to Sir Henry Roſwell and


five others, in 1627. | 3 5 „ |
As early as March, 1621, Maſafloit,* one of the moſt powerful Sagamores of the


neighbouring Indians, with fixty attendants, made a viſit to the Plymouth ſettlers, and


entered into a formal and very friendly treaty with them, wherein they agreed to avoid
injuries on both ſides to puniſh offenders—to reſtore ſtolen goods—to aſſiſt each
other in all juſtifiable wars to promote peace among their neighbours, &c.—Maſai-


ſoit and his ſucceſſors, for fifty. years, inviolably obſerved this treaty. The Epgliſh are


much indebted to him for his friendſhip ; and his memory will ever be reſpected in

New ag... 3 3 fa 3 ;
The Narraganſets, diſliking the conduct of Maſaſſoit, declared war againſt him,

which occaſioned much confuſion and fighting among the Indians. The Plymouth


colony interpoſed in favour of Maſaſſoit, their good ally, and terminated the diſpute,


to the terror of their enemies. Even Canonicus himſelf, the terrific Sachem of the
N arraganſets, ſued for peace. — — | —


* Thefeat of Maſaſſvit was at Pakanokit, on Namaſket river, which empties into Narraganſet Bay.
| Oo


Th:


282 NEW ENGLAND.

The prudent, friendly, and upright conduct of the Plymouth colony towards tlicir
neighbours, the Indians, ſecured their friendſhip and alliance. On the 13th of Sep-
tember 1621, no leſs than nine Sachems declared allegiance to King James; and Ma-
ſaſſoit, with many of his Sub-Sachems, who lived around the bays of Patuxent and
Maſſachuſetts, ſubſcribed a writing, acknowledging the King of England their maſter.
Thete tranſactions are ſo many proofs of the peacetul and benevolent difpofition of the
Plyaouth ſettlers ; for had they been otherwiſe diſpoſed, they never could have intro- |
duced and maintained a friend y intercourſe with the natives.

On the 10th of September this year, the king granted to Sir William Alexander "BN
patent of all the tract of country bounded by a line drawn from Cape Sables to the Bay
of St. Mary; thence to the river St. Croix; thence north to Canada river; down the
river to Gachepe ; thence ſouth-eaſt to Cape Breton iſland and Cape Breton ; thence
round to Cape Sables ; with all ſeas and iflands within fix leagues of the weſtern and
eaſtern parts, and within forty leagues ſouthward of Cape Breton and Cape Sables; to
be called Nova Scotia.

The firſt duel in New England was fought with ſword and dagger between two ſer-
vants : neither of them was killed, but both were wounded. Por this diſgraceful of-
fence, they were formally tried before the whole company, and ſentenced to have
their heads and fect tied together, and ſo to be tWenty-four hours without meat or dr ink.“

This year, 1622, died Huanto, the friend of the Engliſh, who merits to have his
name perpetuated in hiſtory. Squanto was one of the twenty Indians whom Hunt
perfidiouſly carried to Spain ;* whence he came to London, and afterwards to his
native country with the Plymouth colony. Forgetti A perfidy of thoſe who made
him a captive, he became a warm friend to the Englith, and contitined fo to the day
of his death. A few days before he died, he defired the Governor to pray that he.

might go to the Engliſhman's God in heaven.

In March, 1624, Mr. Winſlow, agent for the colony, arrived, and, together with a
good ſupply of cloathing, bronght Jab and three heifers, which were the firſt cattle of
the kind in this part of America. From theſe, and others that were afterwards brought
over from England, ſprang the prefent multitude of cattle in the northern States. None
of the domeſtic animals were found in America by the firſt European ſettlers.

At the cloſe of this year, 1624, the plantation at New Plymouth confiſted of 180
perſons, who lived in thirty-two dwelling houſes. Their ſtock was a few cattle and

goats, and a plenty of ſwine and poultry. Their town was impaled about half a mile
in compaſs. On a high mount in the town they had erected a fort of wood, lime, and
ſtone, and a handſome watch tower. |

The year 1625 is diftinguiſhed by the death of the Rev. Mr. Robinſon : he died | oY
Leyden, in March, in the goth year of his age. He was truly a great and good man,
and lived in great jove and harmony with his people: he was held in high eſtimation
by all his acquaintance, for his learning, piety, moderation, and excellent accom-
pliiſhments. His death was lamented as a public loſs, and felt by none more than by
his beloved and far diſtant people at Plymouth. His ſon Ifaac came over to Plymouth,
where he hved to the age of go years. His deſcendants ſtill live in Barnſtable county,
in Maſſachuſetts.

Aſter the death of Mr. Robinſon, the remaining part of his congregation were ex-
tremely defirous of coming over to their friends at Plymouth, and meaſures were taken


for the purpoſe ; yet it was not until the year 1629 that they effected their deſigu. |


+ See page 92. 5
rom


\*


From this time New England began to flouriſh. Sir Henry Roſwell and others had
received a patent of Maſſachuſetts from the council of New England. Settlements

were ſucceſsfully enterprized at Salem, Charleſton, Boſton, Dorcheſter, and other

places, ſo that in forty years from this time, 1629, 120 towns were ſettled, and forty

churches were gathered. |

The Laudian perſecution was conducted with unrelenting ſeverity ; and while it

cauted the deſtruction of thouſands in England, proved to be a principle of life and

vigour to the infant ſettlements in America. Several men of eminence in England, who

were the friends and protectors of the Puritans, entertained a deſign of ſettling in New
England, if they ſhould fail in the meaſures they were purſuing for the eſtablithment of
the liberty, and the reformation of the religion of their own country. They ſolicited.
and obtained grants in New England, and were at great pains in ſettling them. Among
theſe patentces were the Lords Brook, Say and Seal, the Pelhams, the Hampdens, and
the Pyms ; names which afterwards appeared with great eclat. Sir Matthew Boynton,

Sir William Conſtable, Sir Arthur Haſlerig, and Oliver Cromwell, were actually upon
the point of embarking for New England, when Archbiſhop Laud, unwilling that fo
many objects of his hatred ſhould be removed out of the reach of his power, applied

for, and obtained, an order from the court to put a ſtop to theſe tranſportations.

However, he was not able to prevail ſo far as to hinder New England from receiving
vaſt additions, as well of the clergy, who were ſilenced and deprived of their living
for non-conformity, as of the Jaity who adhered to their opinions.


*


The colony of Plymouth remained without a charter, until they were incorporated
with Maffachuſetts in 1691 or 1692. Notwithſtanding this, it was a government de
_ ja, and conſidered as ſuch by King Charles in his letters and orders, which were ſent
them at various times previous to their incorporation with Maſſachuſetts. OE
It was in the ſpring of 1630, that the EAT consPiRacy was entered into by the
Indians in all parts, from the Narraganſets round to the eaſtward, to extirpate the
tngliſh. The colony at Plymouth was the principal object of this conſpiracy: they
well knew that if they could effect the deſtruction of Plymouth, the infant ſettlement
at Maſſachuſetts would fall an eaſy ſacrifice. They laid their plan with much art.
Under colour of having ſome diverſion at Plymouth, they intended to have fallen upon
the inhabitants, and thus to have effected their defign. But their plot was diſcloſed
to the people at Charleſton, by John Sagamore, an Indian, who had always been a
_ great friend to the. Engliſh. This treacherous defign of the Indians alarmed the
Engliſh, and induced them to erect forts and maintain guards, to prevent any ſuch
fatal ſurprize in future. Theſe preparations, and the firing of the great guns, fo terri-
tied the Indians, that they diſperſed, relinquiſhed their deſign, and declared themſelves
the friends of the Engliſh. V; 5

Such was the vaſt increaſe of inhabitants in New England by natural population,
and particularly by emigrations from Great Britain, that in a few years, beſides the
lettlements in Plymouth and Maſſachuſetts, very flouriſhing colonies were planted in
Rhode Ifland, Connecticut, New Haven and New Hampſhire. The dangers to
which theſe colonies were expoſed from the ſurrounding Indians, as well as from the
Dutch, who, although very friendly to the infant colony at Plymouth, were now likely
to prove troubleſome neighbours, firſt induced them to think of an alliance and con-
federacy for their mutual defence. Accordingly in 1643, the four colonies of Ply-
mouth, Maſlachuſetts, Connecticut, and New Haven, agreed upon articles of
confederation, whereby. a congreſs was formed, conſiſting of two commiſſioners from
cach colony, who were choſen annually, and when met, were conſidered as the repre-
3 I O O2 ſentatives


Fg


284 N NEW ENGLAND.
ſentatives of © The United Colonies of New England.” The powers delegated to the
commiſſioners were much the tame as thoſe veſted in Congreſs by the articles of confe-
deration, agreed upon by the United States in 1778. The colony of Rhode Iſland
would gladly have joined in this confederacy, but Maffachuſetts, for particular reaſons,
refuſed to admit their commiſſioners. This union ſubfiſted, with ſome few alterations,
until the year 1686, when all the charters, except __ of Connecticut, were, in effec,
vacated by a commillion from James II.
The reader will obtain the beſt knowledge of the hiſtory of New England: by con-
' ſulting Hutchinſon's Hiſtory of Maflachuſetts—Hazard's Hiſtorical Collections, 4to.
2 vols. the 2d vol. not yet publiſhed, but ready for the preſs—Belknap's Hiſtory of
New Hampthire—The firſt letter in Dr. Gordon's Hiſtory of the American Revolution
—Governor Winthrop's Journal—Chalmer's Political Annals—and Gookins' Hiſto-
rical Collections of the Indians in New England, publiſhed 1 in Boſton 5 the Hiſtorical
OY in the American ASTD, 1792.


7B KM ONT;
SITUATION A AND EXTENT.


Miles.
Length 15 40 44, and 450 N, 1
Breadth 30 between 1 35 and 3? 30 E. Long. from Phil.


Don ARIES.) OUNDED north, by Lower Canada; eaſt, by Connecticut River,
which divides it from New H ampthire ; Pulk, by Maſſachuſetts;

weſt, by New Vork.
Div1s1oxs. ] Vermont is naturally divided by the Green Nienna, which runs
1 to north, and div ides the State nearly in the middle. Its civil diviſions are
as ollows: FOR. <7


2 EG. BENNINGTON, | 5 3 NEWBVURX,
= | RUTLAND, RUTLAND, = Wixpson, WinpsoR,
S ADDISON,  Appison, | = { Newraxt,
S 8 Winpnan,

z (CHITTENDON, COLCHESTER, a | PUTNEY.


* Theſe counties are divided into upwards of 200 townſhips, which are generally fix
miles ſquare, In every townſhip is a reſerve of two rights of land, of 350 acres each,
one to be appropriated for the ſupport of public {ſchools ; the other to be given in fec
to the firſt miniſter who ſettles in the townſhip. A part of the townſhips were granted
by the governor of New Hampſhire, and the other part by that of Vermont. In thoſe
townſhips granted by the former, a right of land is reſerved for the ſupport of the goſpel
in foreign parts; in thoſe granted by the latter, a college right, and a right for the
ſupport of county grammar ſchools, are reſerved. In theſe reſervations, liberal provi-
fon is made for che 1 of the goſpel, and for the promotion of common and col-
leglate education.
 - Ryvers.| The principal rivers in this State are, Mickifcoui, Lamoille, Onion, and
Otter Creek rivers, which run from eaſt to weſt into Lake Champlain; Weſt, Sexton's,
Black, 3 White, ONE; Weld's, Wait s, Pall umſick, and


ſeveral


1


7425


Lake Memp hremago


(HIT TENDEN


\
\
4


Hire Lamoills


17
AM,
2 2
KO
= 1⁰ IIS


—
— | / ;
> : | | p / 4
S COUNTY Ei , vo - iS
0 ; * e \ —
TD F | \


1 { . | eee
7 Onana


p £ ST * :
i {Sf COUNTY


"ip — ont 3 2 7 Pe 3 2:
7 8 / "*"”
1 — /
; c


O N


.
as
*
——


— 0
—


*.
.
*
*.
hs
.
**,
*.
.
.


—.— Fo 7 2 £ Wi X. D 5 O R


| 7 | V
CoUNTT N


ö


a eG
. : 1 . WH 4P Th:
| of |


\ /


\ VERMONT. /


Fa '


% %


Jeale of g Miles
8 EI n - MY — . ,
N 7 i 1


' 1


mommy mmm mmm


ö


43


Lab Oct." 2 of 791. by /. Stockdale, / Yecndilly.


—


—— —— 7——


5 - 1
.
3


um


e N


tet


> $9 #2, i, co #4 Wa IP > F


. 1 —


VERMONT. 285
ſeveral ſmaller rivers, which run from weſt to eaſt, into Connecticut river. Over the
river Lamoille is a natural ſtone bridge ſeven or eight rods in length. Otter Creek is
navigable for boats 5o miles: its banks are excellent land, being annually overflowed
and enriched. White river takes its name from the peculiar whiteneſs of its water,
cauſed by the clear white ſtones and gravel which conſtitute the hed of this river quite
to its ſource. This peculiarity deceives people in regard to its depth. It riſes in the
center of the State, flows through a rich tract of country free from ſwamps, and empties
into the Connecticut four miles below Dartmouth College, and is from 100 to 150 yards
wide, ſome diſtance from its mouth. Ompompanoofuck 3 is a ſhort, furious river, not

more than 40 or 50 yards wide, emptying into the Connecticut at Norwich. Weld's
is alſo a ſhort and rapid river, 40 yards acroſs. Paſſumſick is 100 yards wide, and
noted for the quantity and quality of the falmon it produces. On this river, which is
ſettled 20 miles up, are ſome of the beſt townſhips in the State.

Lak ES AND SexinGs.] Memphremagog is the largeſt lake in this State. It is the
reſervoir of three conſiderable ſtreams, Black, Barton, and Clyde rivers. One of theſe
riſes in Willoughby Lake, and forms a communication between that and lake St.
Peter's, in the river St. Lawrence. Iſſuing from Willoughby's Lake, it empties into

Memphremagog, and thence, by the name of St. Francis, empties into the St. Peter.
This river 18 not all the way navigable ; otherwiſe it would afford a communication of

very great importance to the northern part of this State, as the ſettlers might tranſport
their produce with great eaſe to Montreal or Quebec. Willoughby's Lake furniſhes
fiſh reſembling baſs, of an excellent flavour, weighing from 10 to 30 pounds. They
form a moſt delicious feaſt for the new ſettlers : people travel 20 miles to this lake to
procure a winter's ſtock of this fiſh. Lake Bombazon, in the county of Rutland,
gives rife to a branch of Poultney River, on which iron works have been erected in
the townſhip of Fair Haven.

In ſome low lands, over againſt the great Ox Bow, a remarkable ſpring was ai
covered, about 20 years ſince, which dries up once in two or three years, and burſis
out in another place. It has a ſtrong 1mell of ſulphur, and throws up continually a
peculiar kind of white ſand. A thick yellow ſcum riſes upon the water when ſettled.
Ponds, and other collections of water in this State, are 1 clear and tranſpa-
rent, and afford abundance of trout and perch.
| Mountains. ] The principal mountain in this State is the one we have already
mentioned, which dwides the State nearly in the center, between Connecticut River
and Lake Champlain. The aſcent from the eaſt to the top of this mountain is much
eaſter than from the weſt, till you get to Onion River, where the mountain terminates.
The height of land is generally from 20 to 30 miles from the river, and about the ſame
diſtance! from the New York line. The natural growth upon this mountain is hemlock,
pine, ſpruce, and other evergreens ; hence it has always a green appearance, and on

this account has obtained the deſcriptive name of Yer Mons, Green Mountain. On ſome
high parts of this mountain ſnow lies till May, and ſometimes till June. This chain

of mountams paſlcs through Maſſachuſetts and Connecticut, and terminates in New

aven.
The other noted mountain is Aſchutney, 1 on 3 River, in the
townſhips of Windſor and Weathersfield, and Upper Great Monadnock, quite in the
N. E. corner of the State.
It is remarkable, that the hills and mountains are generally covered on the eaſt fides
with what is called hard wood, ſuch as birch, beech, maple, aſh, elm, and butternut; 3
the weſt ſide is Senerall y covered with evergreens.


ClIuATE.


286 VERMONT.


_ Ciimare.] During the wintor ſeaſon, which commonly laſts from the beginning of
November to the middle of April, the inhabitants enjoy a ſerene ſky, and a keen cold
air. Snow begins to fall, commonly, by the firſt of November; but the permanent
moves do not fall till about the roth of December, which prevent the ground freezing
to any conſiderable depth. In April the ſnow is gradually diſſolved by the warm
mtluences of the fun, which moiſtens and enriches the carth, and vegetation advances
with ſurprifing rapidity. e |
Fack oy THE CouxnTRy, Soil, PRODUCTIONS, &c. | This State, generally ſpeaking,
is hilly but not rocky. Weſt of the mountain, from the county of Rutland northward
to the Canada line, is a flat country well adapted for tillage. The State at large is
well watered, and aftords the beſt of paſturage for cattle. Some of the fineſt beef
cattle in the world are driven from this State. Horſes alſo are raiſed for exportation.
The natural growth upon the rivers, is white pines of ſeveral kinds, intermingled with
low mtervales of beech, elm, and white oak. Back from the rivers, the land is tinckly
timbered with birch, ſugar maple, aſh, butternut, and white oak of an excellent
quality. The ſoil is natural for wheat, rye, barley, oats, flax, hemp, &c. Indian
corn, back from the river, is frequently injured by the froſt ; but on the river it is raiſed
in as great perfection as in any part of New England, owing in a great meaſure to the
fogs ariſing from the river, which either prevent or extract the froſt. Theſe. togs
begin as ſoon as the corn is in danger from ſroſts, and laſt till cold weather commences.
Fruit trees, in the northern counties, do not proſper. ed! 4
TRADE AND MAxvracruRks.] The inhabitants of this State trade principally with
Boſton, New York, and Hartford; The articles of export are pot and pearl aſhes,
chiefly beet, horſes, grain, ſome butter and cheeſe, lumber, &c. The inhabitants
generally manufacture their own clothing, in the family way. Grain has been raiſed
in ſuch plenty within a few years paſt, that the inhabitants have been induced to
attempt the manufacture of corn ſpirits. For this purpoſe fix or ſeven ſtills have
already been erected, which yield a tufficient ſupply for the people, and a profit to the
owners. Vaſt quantities of pot and pearl aſhes are made in every part of the State.
But one of the moſt important manufactures in this State is that of maple ſugar. It
has been eſtimated by a competent judge, that the average quantity made for every
family back of Connecticut River, is 200lbs. a year. One man, with but ordinary
advantages, in one month, made 5 5olbs. of a quality equal to imported brown ſugar.
In two towns, in Orange county, containing no more than 40 families, 13, ooolbs. of
ſugar were made in the year 1791. The probability is, that in a few years maple ſugar
will become an article of export. In ſome parts of the State, the inhabitants are
beginning to line the roads with maple trees; and it would certainly be a wiſe meaſure
if this practice ſhould: become general throughout the States. Orchards of theſe trees,
planted on ſloping hills, ſo as to render it ealy to collect the juice, might be attended
wich peculiar advantages to the owners. 1 . 3
PorurAriox, RELIGION, AND CHARACTER:] In 1790, according to the cenſus then
taken, this ſtate contained 85,539 inhabitants, conſiſting chiefly of emigrants from
Connecticut and Maſſachuſetts, and their deſcendants. Two townſhips in Orange
County are ſettled principally by Scotch pcopte. The body of the people are Congre-
gationaliſts. The other denominations are Preſbyterians, Baptiſts, and Epiſcopalians.
This State is rapidly peopling. Five years ago, the townſhip of Danville, in the county
of Orange, was a. wilderneſs, without ſo much as a ſingle family. Now they have
two conſiderable companies of militia ; beſides a company of light infantry, dreſſed
l uniform, | * =


£+ S's 4 > —


| VERMONT. 1 7 287

The inhabitants of this State are an aſſemblage of people from various places, of
different ſentiments, manners, and habits. They have not lived together long enough
to aſſimilate and form a general character. Aſſemble together in imagination, a number
individuals of different nations - conſider them as living together amicably, and aſſiſt-
ing each other through the toils and difficulties of life; and yet rigorouſly oppoſed in
particular religious and political tenets; jealous of their rulers, and tenacious of their
liberties--diſpofitions which originate naturally from the dread of experienced oppreſſion,
and the habit of living under a free government and you have a pretty juſt idea of the
character of the people of Vermont. Indolence is never a characteriſtical feature of
the ſettlers of a new country. Emigrants in general are active and induſtrious. The
_ oppoſite characters have neither ſpirit nor inclination to quit their native ſpot. - The in-
ference is, that Vermont is peopled with an active, induſtrious, hardy, frugal race;
as is really the caſe. And as it is a maxim that the inhabitants of all new countries
grow virtuous before they degenerate, it will moſt probably be ſo in Vermont.
MILITARY STRENGTH. ] In 1788, there were upwards of 17,000 men upon the
militia rolls of this State. "Theſe confiſted of two diviſions, one on the weſt, the other
on the caſt fide of the mountain. In theſe two diviſions were 7 brigades, conſiſting of
22 regiments. The bravery of the Vermontcers, or Green Mountain-boys, is pro-
verbial. 85 | 3 3 3 Pe
ILITERATURE AND IurROVEMEN TS.] Much cannot be ſaid in favour of the preſent
ſtate of literature in this State; but their proſpects in this regard are good. In every
charter of a town, as we have mentioned, proviſion is made for ſchools, by reſerving a
certain quantity of land ſolely for their ſupport. The aſſembly of this State, in their
Odcober ſeffion in 1791, paſſed an act for the eſtabliſhment of a college in the town of
Burlington, on Lake Champlain, on the ſouth ſide of Onion river, and appointed ten
"Truſtees. General Ira Allen, one of the Truſtees, on certain conditions, offers lands,
c. to the amount of 4000l. towards this eſtabliſhment. 5
The expediency of opening a communication between the waters of Lake Champlain
and Hudſon's River; and of rendering the navigation of Connecticut River more eaſy
and advantageous, has been diſcuſſed by the legiſlature of this State; and meaſures
have been adopted to effect the latter, by incorporating a company for the purpoſe of
locking Bellows” falls, who are to complete the work within four years from the paſſing
of the act, and to receive a toll for all boats that paſs ; the toll to be a ſubject of regu;
lation. The works are already begun, and when completed will be of great advantage

to the State, by facilitating the exportation of their produce. The other propoſed canal
between Lake Champlain and Hudſon's River would alſo be important, but it is
doubtful whether it will, at preſent, be accompliſhed. 3 5 3
Cn Towxs.] In a new and interior country, large, populous towns are not to
he expected. Bennington, ſituated near the ſouth-weſt corner of the State, is one of
the largeſt, It contains about 2400 inhabitants, a number of handſome houſes, a con-
gregational church, a court houſe and gaol. A famous battle was fought in or near
this town, during the late war, in 1777, between Brigadier-general Starke, at the
head of 800 undiſciplined militia, and a detachment of General Burgoyne's army,
commanded by Colonel Baum. In this action and the one that ſucceeded it in the fame
place, and on the ſame day, between a reinforcement of the Britiſh, under Colonel
Breymen, and General Starke, who was reinforced by Colonel Warner, with a conti-
nental regiment, were taken, 4 braſs field pieces, and other military ſtores, and 700
priſoners. The overthrow of theſe detachments was the firſt link in a grand chain of
cauſes, which finally proved the ruin of the royal army. This is one of the oldeſt
2 EI towns


288 1 VERMONT.


towns in the State, being firſt ſettled about the year 1764, and is a thriving town; and
has been, till lately, the ſeat of government. 0 Ed.
Windfor and Rutland, by a late act of the legiſlature, are alternately to be the ſeat
of government for 8 years. The former is fituated on Connecticut River, and contains
about 1600 inhabitants ; the latter lies upon Otter Creek, and contains upwards of
14c0 inhabitants. Both are flouriſhing towns. Guilford, Brattleborough, Putney,
Weſtminſter, Weathersfield, Hartland, Norwich, and Newbury, are conſiderable
towns, lying from ſouth to north, on Connecticut River. Newbury is the ſhire town
of Orange county, which comprehends about three eighths of the whole State, and
contains about goo inhabitants.“ It has a court houſe, and a very elegant meeting
bouſe for congregationaliſts, with a ſteeple, the firſt erected in the State. The cele-
brated Coos meadows or intervales commence about 9 miles below this town. New-
bury court houfe ſtands on the high lands back from the river, and commands a fine
view of what is called the great Ox Bow, which is formed by a curious bend in the
river. It is one of the moſt beautiful and fertile meadows in New England. The
circumference of this bow is about 44 miles; its greateſt depth is.ſeven-cighths of a
mile, containing about 450 acres. At the ſeaſon when nature is dreſſed in her green
attire, a view of this meadow from the high lands is truly luxuriant. 5
Shaſtſbury, Pownal, Mancheſter, Clarendon, Poultney, Pawlet, Danby and Char-
lotte, are conſiderable and flouriſhing towns, weſt of the mountain. In the town of
Orwell is Mount Independence, at the ſouthern extremity of Lake Champlain,
oppoſite to which is Ticonderoga, in the State of New York. _ .
ee es There is a very remarkable ledge of rocks in the town of Bradford,
in the county of Orange. It lies on the weſt bank of Connecticut River, and is as
much as 200 feet high. It appears to hang over and threaten the traveller as he paſſes.
The ſpace between this ledge and the river is ſcarcely wide enough for a road. —
In the townſhip of Tinmouth, on the fide of a ſmall hill, is a very curious cave.
The chaſm at its entrance is about four feet in circumference. Entering this you
deſcend 104 feet, and then opens a ſpacious room, 20 feet in breadth, and 100 feet in
length. The angle of deſcent is about 45 degrees. The roof of this cavern is of rock,
through which the water is continually percolating. The ſtalactites which hang from
the roof appear like icicles on the eves of houſes, and are continually increaſing in
number and magnitude, The bottom and ſides are daily incruſting with ſpar and
other mineral fubſtances. On the fides of this ſubterraneous hall are tables, chairs,
benches, &c. which appear to have been artificially carved, This richly ornamented
room, when illuminated with the candles of the guides, has an enchanting effect upon
the eye of the ſpectator. If we might be indulged in affigning the general cauſe of
- theſe aſtoniſhing appearances, we ſhall conclude from the various circumſtances
accompanying them, that they ariſe from water filtrating ſlowly through the incumbent


* General Bayley and Col. Thomas Johnſon, enterprized the firſt ſettlements into this part of the country,
about the year 1762. At this period there was no road nor human inhabitant for 70 miles down the river,
nor for as many miles eaſtward, It is now thickly inhabited by thriving farmers. Ag DATE

+ Though out of place, the information not being received early enough to be inſerted under its proper
head, I cannot refrain from communicating the following curious and uſeful information.

The river St. Lawrence, at Montreal, is about 3 miles wide. There is an iſland near the middle of the
river, oppoſite the city, at the lower end of which is a mill, with 8 pair of ſtones, all kept in motion at the
ſame time, with one wheel. The works are ſaid to have coſt we" ſterling. A large mound of ſtone, &c-

built out into the river, ſtops a ſufficiency of water to keep the mill in perpetual motion. And what is ver)
curious, at the end of this mound or dam, veſſels paſs againſt the ſtream, while the mill is in motion. Perhaps

. there is not another mill of the kind in the world, | r
3th ſtrald;


right to hold themſelves, their houſes, papers,
for them, are


Aucive to the beſt good of the State, ſhall be intitled to all the Peivil


his belief in one God in future rewards


VERMONT. T 289


ſtrata; and king ap in its paſſage : a variety of mineral ſabfiances, and becoming thus


ſaturated with metallic particles, gradually exſuding on the ſurſace of the caverns and
fiffures, in a quieſcent ſtate, the aqueous particles evaporate, and leave the mineral
ſubſtances to umte according to their affi nities.

At the end of this cave is a circular hole, 15 feet deep, apparently hewn out in a
conical form, enlarging gradually as you deſcend, in the form of a ſagar loaf, At the
bottom is a ſpring of freſh water in continual motion, like the boiling of a PR. Its
depth has never been ſounded.

ConsTITUTION. | The inhabitants of Vermont, by their repreſentatives j in conven-
tion, at Windſor, on the 25th of December, 1777, declared that the territory called
ks ermont was, and of right ought to be, a free and independent State; and for the

ſe of maintaining regular government in the ſame, they made a ſolemn decla-
os of their rights, and ratified a conſtitution, of which the following is an abſtract:

Their declaration, which makes a part of their conſtitution, aſſerts that all men are
born equally ftree—with equal rights, and ought to enjoy liberty of conſcience—free-
dom of the preſs—trial by jury—power to form new States in vacant countries, and
to regulate their own internal police—that all elections ought to be free—that all power


- originally i in the people that government ought: to be inſtituted for the common


benefit of the community—and that the community have a right to reform or aboliſh


government—that every member of ſociety hath a right to protection of life, liberty,


and property and in return is bound to contribute his proportion of the expenſe of


that protection, and yield his perſonal ſervice when neceſſary that he ſhall not be


obliged to give evidence againſt himſelf that the people have a right to bear arm
but no ſtanding armies ſhall be maintained in time of peace — that the people have a
and poſſeſſions, free from ſearch or
ſeizure - and therefore warrants without oaths firſt made, affording ſufficient foundation
to that right, and ought not to be no perſon ſhall
be liable to be tranſportod out adage for tral for any offence committed within
this State, &c.

By the frame of government, the e legiſlative power is veſted in a houſe of
repreſentatives of the freemen of the State of Vermont, to be choſen annually by the
freemen on the firſt Tueſday in September, and to mect the ſecond Thurſday of the
ſucceeding October—This body is veſted with all the neceſſary for the legi(-


lature of a free ſtate Tw thirds of the whole num of repreſontatives elected


make a quorum.


Each inhabited town throu ghout the State has a right to Kad one repreſentative to
the aſlembly. _

The ſupreme executive power 1s 3 in a vernor, lieutenant-governor, 2
twelve counſellors, to be choſen annually in the 1 manner, and * with the


ſame powers as in Connecticut.


Every perſon of the age of 21 years, who had refaled i in the State one whole year
next before the election of repreſentatives, and is of a quiet, peaceable behaviour, and
will bind himſelf by his oath, to do what he ſhall in conſcience judge to * * con-
Er a freeman


of this State.
Each member of the Houſe of Repreſentatives, before he takes his ſeat, muſt declare
and puniſhments, and in the divinity of the
Criptures of the Old and New Teſtament, — — profeſs the proteſtant religion.
Co urts of juſtice are to be cſtabliſhed in every county throughout the State.


P p The


_—  ___ VERMONT.


3


The ſu 5 and die ſever WF of common pleas of this State, beſides the-


powers —_ exerciſed by ſuch courts, have the powers of a court of chancery, ſo far


as relates to perpetuating teſtimony, obtaining evidence from places not within the
State, and the care of the perſons and eſtates. of thoſe who are non compotes mentis, &c.
All proſecutions are to be commenced im the name and by the authority of the freemen-


of the State of Vermont. The legiſlature are to regulate CO ſo as to prevent


tuities.
All field and ſtaff ner and commiſſioned officers of the army, and all general


officers of the militia, ſhalt be choſen by the general affembly, and be commulſioned-


by the governor.
Every ſeventh year, with the year. 1783, thirteen perſons ( none of whom are


to be of the council or aſſembly) ſhall be choſen by the freemen, and be called the
council of cenſors, whoſe duty it ſhall be to inquire whether the conſtitution has been


preſerved inviolate in every part Whether the legiſlative and executive powers have


been properly exerciſed taxes juſtly laid and collected the public monies rightly


diſpoſed of and the laws duly executed. For theſe purpoſes they ſhall have power
to ſend for perſons, papers, &c.— to paſs public cenfures—to order impeachments, and


to recommend the repeal of all laws enacted contrary to the principles of the conſti-


tution. They are to be veſted with theſe powers for one year only, after the day of


their election.


© The council of cenſors, when neceſſary, may call a convention, to meet two years

after their fitting—to alter the conſtitution the propoſed alterations to be PUNE: at

leaſt ſix months before the election of delegates to ſuch convention.
His roR x.] The tract of country called Vermont, before the late war, was claimed :


both by New York and New Hampſhire; and theſe interfering claims have been the


occaſion of much warm altercation, the particulars of which it would be neither enter-


_ taining nor uſeful to detail. They were not finally adjuſted till-fince the peace. When


hoſtilities commenced between Great Britain and her colonies, the inhabitants of this


diſtrict, confidering themſelves as in a ſtate of nature, and not within the juriſdiction


either. of New York or New Hampſhire, aſſociated and formed for thaniſchres the con-

ſtitution, of which we have given an abſtract. Under this conſtitution they have:
continued to exerciſe all the powers of an independent ſtate, and have been proſpered.
On the fourth of March, 1791, agreeably to act of Congreſs of December 6th, 1790,


- this State became one of the United States, and conſtitutes the 8 and not —
5 leaf TT RA ae: in the American Union.


£1 :


NEW HAMPSHIRE:


Sekt lets AND Exrxr.


LID Miles. | |
Lengt h 168 14300 41 tad! 455 ry N. Latitude. -
Bradl 60 between 4 30 and 6* 17 E. Longitadle. —
OUNDED north, by the Province of Lower Canada; eaſt,
Bo onpanes.) | by the Diſtrict of Main and the Atlantic Ocean; ſouth, by
Maſſachuſetts ; {ek by the * bank of Connecticut River; ; Fear 9,491


ſquare


„w —] 1 + PS... bi 2 ͤ 4


5 — Xa :: mũmʒm7ꝙ—! 4


Mlebrook 2


1
W Cockburn


A MAP
ol


. VEW FLAMPSHIRE


/


\ tratford


Hillsela


2 Mites


*


Kilkenny »


> Ammorts@ggin fh,


| alp |


Sandwich © 2 Vir
T. or *
Moultonborough A
; * ; 4 * 7 7 5 7


Tenn .
E


a Mollet rough


—
3


=
—
*


1 71 Imantou 7. N :


A =
ate * Canterburdv P E
Salsbury -


p NN


Ba | 5 er

an 8 u 8 13a ON
0 Brathord® +; — — |
| as SI 5 2


Men- Boston
Hedtord
SAmbherst,


— PLovels P
"Muldletown | 2
7


wh


—
—
2
7


72 Longuude Weſt 7. "from London


ittle Oe P N


York


Publiſhed July. (7.1794 by I Stockdale Naa dillu.


—
3 TT
5


E | UDC 4 eddock


—— —


ws


— ——_— ——


ꝙ＋E——U— : ͤÄ — *
— — — — = x - > * 5 * wo — I


P
m CC


=
D *


"=>


- 4 : «6 I 1 Af 1 * P .
n 4 r ” >> "uf 4 * 5254665. we! 3 FF —— —
es» * * * I." 9 ax" Capt A . 1 . _ ” TIE « * 3 N n 3 2 G 4 4
3 K * 1 2 4 b 5 . : . YE 1 * * : . * + . 8 2 . g *
— - * FR pA "Wn 8 r PR * e 8 , ; : | 1 7 "ag | TV |
TAN 2 5 ra; wt 2 5 c oh © hw © 9 . r wet} Ges 5. | 38 e . 2 Ri Y . — 1 : : * g Px 2
| | | 1 . Y we S. ot ay” 36; 4 * WE 5 4 "2A v3.4 5 ? 7 TY =» * 4 1 - — E
5 N _ , 1 g 8 = 7) |


„ r CR — —


NEW HAMPSHIRE. ND
quare miles, or 6 074, 240 acres ; of which at leaſt 100, ooo acres are water. The ſhape


_ of New Hampſhire reſembles an open fan; Connecticut river makes the curve, the
ſouthern line the ſhorteſt, the eaſtern line the longeſt ſide.


CiviL Divisroxs. ] This State is divided into 5 countries, w hich are fubdivided into
_ townſhips, moſt of which are about 6 miles {quare.


Counties. 771 Townſhips. Inbabitauts. Chief * Towns,


. Ne. Tnhab.
uy -Portimouth, Lat. 43 5 4,720

| | 5 „„ Lord | 1349
Stratford | 24 and3 loeations 2 1 1 ol | EO a 3 5
Hillſborough 37 and 3 locations 28,772 Amhurſt 2,369
Cheſhire 34 32,071 Charleſton 7
Graſton 187 50 and 17 locations 13,472 A Path 5 2 .

81 as 144,885 gc


CLIMATE. |] See New "a Wy


Face or THE CovnTay.] This State has but about! $ miles of i ſea coaſt, at its ſouth-


_ eaſt corner. In this diſtance there are ſeveral ' coves for fiſhing veſfels ; but the onl


harbour for ſhips is the entrance of Piſcataqua river, the ſhores of which are rocky. The


ſhore is moſtly a ſandy beach, adjoining which are ſalt marſhes, interfected by creeks.


From the ſea no remarkable high lands in New Hampſhire appear, nearer than 20 or,


30 miles. The firſt ridge, by the name of the Blue Hills, paſſes through Rocheſter,


Barrington, and Nottingham, and the ſeveral ſummits are diſtinguiſhed by different
names. Beyond theſe are ſeveral higher, detached mountains. Farther back, the


mountains riſe ſtill higher, and among this third range, Chocorua, Oſſapy, and Kyar-

farge, are the principal. Beyond theſe is the lofty ridge which divides the branches of
Connecticut and Merrimack rivers, denominated The Height of Land. In this ridge is
the celebrated Monadnock mountain. Thirty miles north of which is Sunapee, and
48 miles further, in the ſame direction, is Mooſehillock mountain. The ridge is then
continued northerly, dividing the waters of the river Connecticut from thoſe of Saco,


and Ameriſcoggin. Here the mountains riſe much higher, and the moſt elevated ſum-
mits in this range are the White Mountains. The lands weſt of this laſt mentioned


range of mountains, bordering on Connecticut river, are interſperſed with extenſive
meadows or intervales, rich and well watered.


MovxTaixs. | We have already named the moſt conſiderable mountains in this State.


Several of them require a particular deſcription. We begin with the Monadnock, which
lies 10 miles north of the ſouthern boundary of the State, and 22 miles eaſt of Connec-
ticut river. The elevation of this mountain above tlie level of the ſea, as meaſured by


James W inthrop, Eſq. 1780, is 3254 feet. The baſe of this mountain is about five


miles in diameter from north to ſouth, and three from eaſt to weſt. Its ſummit is a bald
rock: and on the ſides are ſome appearances of the exploſion of ſubterraneous fires.
In Weſt River mountain, adjoining Connecticut river, in the townſhip ef Cheſterfield,
appearances of a ſimilar nature are more viſible. About the year 1730, the garriſon
of Fort Dummer, four miles diſtant, was alarmed with frequent exploſions of fire and
oke emitted from the mountain. The like appearances have been obſerved ſince.


P pa OD Offapy


— . —̃ 2 ———— 2— »


. NEW HAMPSHIRE.
mountain lies adjoining the town of Moultonborough, on the north eaſt. In
this town it is obferved, AF in a N. E. ſtorm the wind falls over the mountain, like
water over a dam; and with fuch force, as frequently to unroot houſes,
Mooſchillock mountain is the higheſt of this chain, the White Mountains excepted.
It takes its name from the circumſtance of its being a remarkable range for Mooſe.
This mountain is about 70 miles weſtward of the White mountains. From its N. W.
fide flows Baker's river, a branch of Pemigewaſſet. On this mountain ſnow has been
ſeeu, from the town of Newbury, on the zoih of June and 31ſt of Auguſt ; and on the
mountains intervening, called Franconia and Lincoln e ſnow, it is faid, lies
rough the year.
People who live near theſe mountains, by noticing the various movements of attrac-
ted vapours, can form a pretty accurate Judgement of the weather; and they hence ſtyle
theſe mountains their Almanack. If a cloud is attracted by a mountain, and hovers
on its top, they predict rain; and if after rain the mountain continues capped, they
expect a repetition of ſhowers. A ſtorm is preceded for ſeveral hours by a ME» of
the mountain, which may be heard 10 or 12 miles.
But the White Mountains are by far the moſt ſtupendous of any in this State or in
New England, and perhaps are the moſt remarkable of any within the United States;
they therefore merit po notice. The Rev. Dr. Belknap elegantly deſcribes them
as folows :
They are undoubtedly the higheſt land in New England, and in clear weather,
are diſoovered before any other land, by veſſels coming in to the eaſtern. coaſt : but by
_ reaſon of their white appearance, are frequently miftaken for clouds. They are viſible
on the land at the diſtance of eighty miles, on the ſouth and ſouth-eaſt fides; they ap-
pear higher when viewed from the north-eaft, and it is faid, they are ſeen from the neigh-
bourhood of Chamble and Quebec. The Indians gave them the name of Agiocochook :
They had a very ancient tradition that their country was once drowned, with all its in-
habitants, except one Powaw and his wife, who, foreſeeing the flood, fled to theſe
mountains, where they were preſerved, and that from them the country was re-peo-
pled.“ They had a ſuperſtitions veneration for the ſummit, as the habitation of inviſi-
ble beings; they never venture to aſcend it, and always endeavour to diſſuade every
one from the attempt. From them, and the captives, whom they ſometimes led to
Canada, through the paſſes of theſe mountains, many fictions have been propagated,
which have grven riſe to marvellous and incredible ales; ; particularly, it has been re-
: ed, that at immenſe and inacceſſible heights there have been ſeen carbuncles,
which are ſuppoſed to appear luminous in the night. Some writers, who have attempted
to gr an account of theſe mountains, have aſcribed the whiteneſs of them to ſhining
rocks, or a kind of white moſs ; and the higheſt ſummit has been deemed inacceſſible
on account of the extreme cold, which threatens to freeze the traveller in the midſt of
ſummer.
Nature has, indeed, in that region, formed her works on a large ſcale, and preſented
to view many objects which do not ordinarily occur. A perſon who is unacquainted
with a mountainous country, cannot, upon his firſt coming into it, make an adequate
judgement of height and diſtances ; he will 3 imagine every thing to be nearer and lets |
than it really is, until, by experience, he learns to correct his apprehenfions, and ac-
commodate his eye to the magnitude and ſituation of the objects around him. When


amazement 1s excited by the grandeur and ſublimity of the Hanes preſented to view, it
2 16


Joſſelyn's Voyage to New England, p. 135.


NEW HAMPSHIRE. 293
16 necefſary to curb the imagination, and exercifc judgement with mathematical pre-
cifion; or the temptation to romance will be invincible.
The White Mountains are the moſt elevated part of a ridge, which extends N. E.
and S. W. to an immenſe diſtance. The area of their baſe is an irregular figure, the
whole circuit of which is not leſs than ſixty miles. The number of ſummits within
this area cannot at preſent be aſcertained, the country round them being a thick wil-
derneſs. The greateft number which can be ſeen at once, is at Dartmouth, on the
N. W. ſide, where ſeven ſummits appear at one view, of which four are bald. Of
theſe the three higheſt are the moſt diſtant, being on the eaſtern ſide of the clufter ;
one of theſe is the mountain which makes ſo majeſtic an appearance all along the ſhore
of the eaſtern counties of Mafſſachuſetts: It has lately been diſtinguiſhed by the name
of Mount WASHINGTON.
To arrive at the foot of this mountain, a is a continual aſcent of twelve miles,
from the plain of Pigwacket, which brings the traveller to the height of land between
Saco and Ameriſcoggin rivers. At this height there is a level of about a mile ſquare,
part of which is a meadow, formerly a beaver pond, with a dam at each end. Here,
though elevated more than three thouſand feet above the level of the ſea , the traveller
finds himſelf in a deep valley. On the eaſt is a ſteep mountain, out of which iſſue |
ſeveral ſprings, one of which is the fountain of Ellis River, a branch of Saco, |
which runs ſouth ; another of Peabody river, a branch of Ameriſcoggin, which
runs north. From this meadow towards the weſt, there is an uninterrupted aſcent on
a ridge between two deep gullies, to the ſummit of Mount Waſhington. |
The lower part of the mountain is ſhaded by a thick growth of ſpruce md fir.
I be furface is compoſed of rocks, covered with very long green moſs, which extends
from one rock to another, and is, in many places, ſo thick and ſtrong as to bear a
man's weight. This immenſe bed of moſs ſerves as a ſponge to retain the moiſture
brought by the clouds and vapours, which are frequently riſing and gathering round
the mountains; the thick growth of wood prevents the rays of the fan from. pene-
trating to exhale it; ſo that there is a conſtant ſupply of water depoſited in the
crevices of the rocks, and Mug in the form of ſprings from every part of the
mountain.


The rocks which compoſe the ſurface of the mountain, are, in ſome parts, ſlate, in
others flint; ſome ſpecimens of rock chryſtal have been .found, but of no great
value. No lime ſtone has yet been diſcovered, though the moſt likely rocks have |
heen tried with aqua fortis. There is one precipice on the eaſtern fide, not only
completely perpendicular, but compoſed of ſquare ſtones, as regular as a piece of
maſonry; it is about five feet high, and from fifteen to twenty in length. The up-
permoſt rocks of the mountain are the common quartz, of a dark grey colour; when
broken, they ſhew very ſmall ſhining ſpecks, but there is no ſuch appearance on the
exterior part. The eaſtern fide of the mountain riſes in an angle of 45 degrees, and
requires fix or ſeven hours of hard labour to aſcend it. Many of the precipices are ſo
ſteep as to oblige the traveller to uſe his hands, as well as his feet, and to hold
by the trees, which diminiſh in fize, till they degenerate into ſhrubs and buſhes.
Above theſe are low vines, ſome bearing red, and others blue berries, and the:
N vegetation is a ſpecies of gras, called winter-graſs, mixed with the moſs of
the rocks
Having ſurmounted the upper and ſteepeſt precipice, there is a large area, called
the plain. It is a dry heath, compoſed of rocks covered with moſs, and bearing the
appearance of a paſture in the beginning of the winter feaſon. In ſome .
etween


. NEW HAMP SHIRT.


or heath bird reſorts, and is generally out of danger. The ſugar loaf, which ſtands on


above the level of the ſea.*


between the rocks, there are ſprings of water, in others, dry gravel. Here the grous


this plain, is a pyramidal heap of grey rocks, which, in ſome places, are formed lik“
winding ſteps. This pinnacle has been aſcended in a hour and a half. The traveller
having gained the ſummit, is recompenſed for his toll, if the 1ky be ſerene, with a moſt


noble and extenfive proſpect. On the S. E. fide, there is a view of the Atlantic Ocean,


the neareſt part of which is ſixty- five miles in a direct line. On the W. and. N. the
proſpect is bounded by the high lands, which ſeparate the waters of Connecticut and
Ameriſcoggin rivers from thoſe of Lake Champlain and St. Lawrence. On the ſouth,


it extends to the ſouthernmoſt mountains of New Hampſhire, comprehending a view


of the Lake Winipiſeogee. On every fide of theſe mountains are long winding gullies,
beginning at the precipice below the plain, and deepening in the deſcent. In winter,
the ſnow lodges in theſe gullies; and being driven, by the N. W. and N. E. wind,


from the top, is deepeſt in thoſe which are fituated on the ſoutherly fide. It is obſerved


to lie longer in the ſpring on the ſouth, than on the N. W. fide, Which is the caſe with


many other hills in New Hampſhire.


* N


During the period of nine or ten months, the mountains exhibit more or leſs of that
bright appearance, from which they are denominated white. In the ſpring, when the
ſnow is partly diſſolved, they appear of a pale blue, ſtreaked with white; and aſter
it is wholly gone, at the diſtance of 60 miles, they are altogether of the ſame pale blue,
nearly approaching a ſky colour ; while at-the ſame time, viewed at the diſtance of
eight miles or leſs, they appear of the proper colour of the rock. Theſe changes are
abſerved by people who live within conſtant view of them; and from theſe facts and


_ obſervations, it may with certainty be concluded, that the whiteneſs of them is wholly
cauſed by the ſnow, and not by any other white ſubſtance, for in fact there is


None. 1 "LOND F
A company of gentlemen viſited theſe mountains in July 1784, with a view to make
particular obſervations on the ſeveral phenomena which might occur. It happened
unfortunately, that thick clouds covered the mountains almoſt the whole time, fo that
ſeme of the inſtruments, which, with much labour, they had carried up, were rendered
. „ 5 5 NE
The height of the mountain was computed, in round numbers, at five thouſand
five hundred feet above the meadow, in the valley below, and nearly ten thouſand feet
Theſe vaſt and irregular heights, being copiouſly repleniſhed with water, exhibit a
great variety of beautiful caſcades ; ſome of which fall in a perpendicular ſheet or
ſpout, others are winding and ſloping, others ſpread and form a baſon in the rock, and
then guſh in a cataract over its edge. A poetic fancy may find full gratification amidit
theſe wild and rugged ſcenes, if its ardour be not checked by the fatigue of the ap-
proach. Almoſt every thing in nature, which can be ſuppoſed capable of inſpiring
ideas of the ſublime and beautiful, is here realized. Aged mountains, ſtupendous
elevations, rolling clouds, impending rocks, verdant woods, chryſtal ſtreams, tlie
gentle rill, and the roaring torrent, all conſpire to amaze, to ſoothe, and to en-


_ rapture.


This computation was made by the Rev. Dr. Cutler. Subſequent obſervations and calculations have
induced the author to believe the computation of his ingenious friend too moderate, and he is perſuaded, that
whenever the mountain can be meaſured with the requiſite preciſion, it will be found to wet ten thouſand,

Feet of perpendicular altitude above the level of the ocean. boo: Bo e 3


NEW HAMPSHIRE. 295


On tlie weſtern part of theſe mountains 1s a paſs, commonly called the Notch, which,
in the narroweſt part, meaſures but twenty-two feet, between two perpendicular rocks.
From the height above it, a brook deſcends, and meanders through a meadow, formerþ
a beaver pond. It is ſurrounded by rocks, which on one fide are perpendicular, and
on the others rife in an angle of forty-five degrees—a ſtrikingly pictureſque ſcene!
This defile was known to the Indians, who formerly led their captives through it to
Canada; but it had been forgotten or neglected, till the year 1771, when two hunters
paſſed through it, and from their report, the proprietors of lands, on the northern parts
of Connecticut river, formed the plan of a road: through it to- the Upper Coos, from
which it is diſtant twenty-five miles. Along the eaſtern fide of the meadow, under
the perpendicular rock, is a cauſeway of large logs, funk into the mud by rocks blown
with gunpowder from the mountain. On this foundation 1s conſtructed a road which
paſſes through the narrow defile at the ſouth end of the meadow, leaving a paſſage
for the rivulet, which glides along. the weſtern ſide. This rivulet is the head of the
river Saco; and on the north fide of the meadow, at a little diſtance, is another hrook, -
which is the head of Amonooſuck, a-large branch of Connecticut river. The latitude
- of this -plape 445 . nn ng ie Ge 5 5
The rivulet, which gives riſe to Saco; deſeends towards the ſouth ; and at a little
diſtance from the defile, its waters are augmented by two ſtreams from the left, one of
which deſcends in a trench of two feet wide, and is called the flume, from the near
teſemblance which it bears to an artificial flume. Over theſe are thrown ſtrong bridges;
and the whole conſtruction of this road is firm and durable; much labour has been
expended upon it, and the neat proceeds of a confiſcated eſtate were applied to defray
the expenſe. In the deſcent the paſs widens, and the ſtream increaſes; but for eight
or ten miles from the notch, the mountains on each ſide are ſo near, as to leave room
only for the river and its intervales; which are not more than half a mile wide. In
the courſe of this deſcent, ſeveral curious objects preſent themſelves to view. On the
ſide of one mountain is a projection reſembling a ſhelf, on which ſtands four large
ſquare rocks, in a form reſembling as many huge folio volumes. In two or three
places, at immenſe heights, and perfectly inacceſſible, appear rocks of a white and red
hue, the ſurface of which is poliſhed like a mirror by the conſtant trickling of water
over them. Theſe being expoſed-to the weſt and ſouth, are capable, in the night, of
reflecting the moon and ſtar beams to the wondering traveller in the deep, dark valley
et and by the help of imagination, are ſufficient to give riſe to the fiction of car-
uncles. im „ OG IE |
To encompaſs theſe mountains, as the roads are laid out through the eaſtern and
weſtern paſſes, and round the northern fide of the whole cluſter, it is neceffary to
travel more than ſeventy miles, and to ford eight conſiderable rivers, beſides many
ſmaller ſtreams. The diſtance between the heads of rivers, which purſue ſuch different
courſes, from this immenſe elevation, and which fall into the ſea, ſo many hundred
miles aſunder, is ſo ſmall, that a traveller may, in the courſe of one day, drink the
waters of Saco, Ameriſcoggin, and Connecticut rivers. Theſe waters are all perfectly
limpid and fweet, excepting one brook, on the eaſtern ſide of Mount Waſhington, .
which has a ſaponaceous taſte, and is covered with a very thick and ſtrong froth. It is
ſaid, that there is a part of the mountain where the magnetic needle refuſes to traverſe;
this is probably cauſed by a body of iron ore. It is alſo faid that a mineral, ſuppoſed
to be. lead, has been diſcovered near the eaſtern paſs; but that the ſpot cannot now
be found. What ſtores the bowels of theſe mountains contain, time muſt unfold ; all
lcarches for-ſubterraneous treaſures having hitherto proved fruitleſs, * The moſt de
3 1 | TOONS.”


296 NEW HAMPSHIRE.


riches which they yield, are the freſhets which bring down the ſoil to the inter rale
below, and form a fine mould, producing, by the aid of cultivation, corn and herbage
in the moſt luxuriant plenty.“

Rrvers.] Five of the largeſt ſtreams in New England receive more or leſs of
their waters from this State. Theſe are Connecticut, Ameriſcoggin, Saco, Merrimack,
and Piſcataqua rivers.

Connecticut river riſes in the Highlands which ſeparate the United States from the
Britiſh province of Lower Canada. It has been ſurveyed about twenty-five miles

beyond the 43th degree of latitude, to the head ſpring of its north-weſtern branch? It
is ſettled all the way nearly to its ſource. Its Nn. courſe is about S. S. W. It ex-
tends along the weſtern fide of New Hampſhire about 170 miles, and then paſſes
into Maffachuſetts. The rivers which it receives from Vermont; on the weſtern ſide,
have been already mentioned. Beſides fmaller ſtreams, it receives from New Hamp-
hire, Upper Amonooſuck, Much pafles through excellent meadows, Iirael river, a
romantic ſtream, bordered with fine land, as is John's river, a deep, muddy ſtream, |
twenty-five or thirty yards wide, fix miles below Iirael river. This country is called
Upper Coos. Juſt above the town of Haverhill, in Lower Coos, falls in Great or
Lower Amonooſuck, 100 yards wide; and which, two miles from its mouth, receives
Wild Amonooſuck, forty yards wide, from Franconia and Lincoln mountains. Two
or three hours heavy rain raiſes the water in this river ſeveral feet, and occaſions a
current ſo furious, as to put in motion ſtones of a foot in diameter; but its violence ſoon
ſubſides. As you proceed ſouth to the Maſſaclruſetts line you paſs Sugar, Cold, and

Aſhuelot rivers. | :
Connecticut river, in its courſe between New Hampſhire and Wes has two
confiderable falls; the firſt are called Fifteen Mile Falls, between Upper and Lower
Coos-—the river is rapid for twenty miles. At Walpole is a ſecond remarkable fall,
formerly known by the name of the Great Fall, now denominated Belfows' Falls.
The breadth of the river above them is, in me places, twenty-two, in others not
above fixteen rods. The depth of the channel is about twenty-five foet, and com-
monly runs full of water. In September 1792, however, owing to the ſevere draught,
the water of the river, it is ſaid, © paſſed within the ſpace of twelve feet wide and 25
feet deep.” A large rock divides the ſtream into two channels, each about ninety feet
wide. When the water is low, the eaſtern channel is dry, being eroſſed by a bar of
ſolid rock, and the whole ſtream falls into the weſtern channel, where it is contracted
to the breadth of ſixteen feet, and flows with aſtoniſhing rapidity. The perpendicular
height of this fall has not been aſcertained, nor the depth of the water below it.
There are ſeveral pitches one above another, in the length of half a mile, the largeſt
of which is that where the rock divides the ſtream. Notwithſtanding the velocity of
the current, the ſalmon paſs up the fall, and are taken many miles above; but the
ſhad proceed no farther. Ihis is the famous fall which is fo extravagantly and
8 deſcribed in an anonymous publication, filled with ſuch extravagant falſe- |
Hoods, mandy known by the title of © Peters' Hiſtory of Connecticut.”
On the ſteep ſides of the ifland rock hang ſeveral arm chairs, faſtened to ladders,
and fecured by a He, in which fiſhermen ſet to catch ſalmon with dip-
ping nets. In 1764, a bridge of timber, conſtructed by Colonel Hale, was projected
over this fall, 365 feet fong, and fapported 3 in the middle by the great rock, under
which the higheſt floods paſs without detriment. This; is the firft and ny bridge that


* $9: be bang Hiflry of Nor Hampchire, Vol. III. p. 39- |


| has


NEW HAMPSHIRE. 297
has been erected upon this river, but it is in contemplation to erect another, thirty
miles above, at the middle bar of Agar Falls, where the paſſage for the water between
the rocks is about 100 feet wide. This place is in the townſhip of Lebanon, two miles
below Dartmouth College. This beauiful river, in its whole length, is lined on each
fide, with a great number of the moſt flouriſhing and pleaſant towns in the United
States. In its whole courſe it preſerves a diſtance of from 80 to 100 miles from the
fea colt. : | 4
_ Merrimack river is formed by the confluence of Pemigewaſſet and Winnipiſeogee
rivers ; the former is a very rapid river, and ſprings from a white mountain, weſt of
the noted mountains of that name; and before its junction with the Winnipiſeogee
branch, it receives from the weſt, Baker's river, a pleaſant ſtream, forty miles in length,
and ſeveral ſmaller ſtreams. The Winnipiſeogee branch riſes from the lake of the
fame name. The ſtream which iſſues from the lake is ſmall, and in its courſe paſſes
through a bay twelve miles long, and from three to five broad. A few miles from its
entrance into the Pemigewaſlet, 1s a place called the Wares, remarkable for the number
of falmon and ſhad which are here caught. The river is wide, and fo ſhallow that
the fiſhermen turn the courſe of the river in a ſhort time, or compreſs it into a
narrow channci, where they fix their gill nets, and take the fiſh as they pals up the
fiream. After the Pemigewaſſet receives the waters of Winnipiſeogee, it takes the
name of Mernraack ; and after a courſe of about ninety miles, firſt in a ſoutherly, and
then in an eaſterly direction, and paſſing over Hookſet, Amuſkeag, and Pantucket
Falls, empties into the fea at Newburyport. From the welt it receives, Blackwater,
Contoocook, Piſcataquoag, Souhegan, Nafkua, and Concord rivers; from the eaſt,
Bowcook, Suncook, Cohas, .Beaver, Spicket, and Powow rivers. Contoocook heads


near Monadnock mountain, 1s very rapid, and ten or twelve miles from its mouth is


100 yards wide. Juſt before its entrance into the Merrimack it branches and forms a
beautiful iſland of five or fix acres. This iſland is remarkable, as being the ſpot where
a Mrs. Dunſtan performed an extraordinary exploit. This woman had been taken by
a party of Indians from Haverkill in Maſſachuſetts, and carried to this iſſand. The
Indians, eight or ten in number, fatigued, and thinking themſelves ſecure, fell afleep.
She improved this importunity to make her eſcape, and that ſhe might effect it without
danger of being purſued, ſhe, with one of their tomahawks killed them all, and ſcalped
them, and took their canoe, and returned down the river to Haverhill, and carried the
ſcalps to Boſton, where ſhe was generouſly rewarded. ID 5 =
A bridge has lately been projected over Amuikeag Falls, 556 fect in length, and 80

feet wide, ſupported by five piers, and an abutment on cach tide ; the top of the bridge
is thirty feet from the bottom of the river. In the conſtruction of the wood work
. 2000 tons of timber were uſed; and what is remarkable, this bridge was rendered
paſſable for travellers in fifty-ſeven days aſter it was begun. Two other bridges are
building over this river in Maſſachuſetts. j -
The Piſcataqua is the only large river whoſe whole courſe is in New Hampſhire.
Its head is a pond in the N. E. corner of the town of Wakefield, and its geaeral courſe
thence, to the ſea, is S. S. E. about forty miles. It divides New Hampſhire from York
County, in the diſtrict of Main, and is called Salmon-fall river, from its head to the
lower falls at Berwick, where it aflumes the name of Newichawannock, which it
bears till it meets with Cocheche river, which comes from Dover, when both run
together in one channel to Hilton's Point, where the weſtern branch meets it. From
this junction to the ſea, the river is fo rapid that it never freezes; the diſtance is ſeven
miles, and the courſe generally from S. to S. E. The weſtern branch is formed by
0 a Sypwamſcot


298 | NEW HAMPSHIRE,


Swamſcot river, which comes from Exeter, Winnicot river, which comes throu oh
Greenland, and Lamprey river, which divides Newmarket from Durham ; thete Ng
into a bay, four miles wide, called the Great Bay. The water in its further progreſs-
is contracted into a leſſer bay, and then it receives Oyſter river, which runs through
Durham and Back river, which comes from Dover, and at length meets with. the main
ſtream at Hilton's Point. The tide riſes into all theſe bays, and branches as far as the-
lower falls in each river, and forms a moſt rapid current, eſpecially at the ſeaſon of the
freſhets, vhen the ebb continues about two hours longer than the flood; and were it
not tor the numerous eddies, formed by the indentin gs of the ſhore, the ſerrics would
then be unpatſlable.
At the lower falls in the ſeveral branches of the river, are landing places; hn
lumber and other country produce is tranſported, and veſſels or boats from below diſ-
charge their lading: to that in each river there is a convenient trading-place, not more:
than twelve or fifteen miles diſtant from Portſmouth, with which there is conſtant:
communication by every tide. Thus the river, from its form and the ſituation of its.
branches, is extremely favourable to the purpoſes of navigation and commerce.
At Dover is a high neck of land, between the main branch of Paſcataqua and
Back river, about two miles long, and half a mile wide, rifing gently. along a fine
road, and declining on each fide like a ſhip's deck. It commands an extenſive and
variegated proſpect of the rivers, bays, adjacent ſhores, and diſtant mountains. It
has often been admired by travellers, as an elegant ſituation for a city, and by military
gentlemen, for a fortreſs. The firſt ſettlers pitched here, but the trade has long ſince
been removed to Cochecho Falls, about four miles farther up; and this beautiful. ſpot:
is almoſt deſerted of inhabitants.


Amariſcoggin and Saco. rivers are principally in the difirict of Main, and will be
deſcribed under that head.
Laxes.] Winnipiſeogee lake, is the largeſt collection of water in New. Hamp-
ſhire. It is about 24 miles in length, from S. E. to N. W. and of very unequaE
breadth, from 3 to 12 miles. It is full of iſlands, and. is ſupplied with. numerous.
rivulets from the ſurrounding mountains. This lake is frozen about three months in!
a year, and many fleighs and teams from the circumjacent towns croſs it on the ice.
In ſummer it is navigable its whole length. The landing on the 8. E. ſide oſ the lake
1s 26 miles from Dover landing, where the tide flows.
The other conſiderable lakes are, Umbagog, in the N. E. corner of the State; and
partly in the diſtrict of Main, Squam, Sunnapee, and Great Oſſapee. |
Soil axD PRoDuCTIONs.] Of theſe there is a great variety in this State: The
intervale lands upon the margin of the large rivers are the moſt valuable, becauſe they
are overfiowed and enriched every year by the water from the uplands, which brings:
down a fat ſhme or ſediment. There are generally two ftrata of intervale lands on
the borders of the large rivers, one is overflowed every year; the other, which is con-
ſiderably higher, only in very high freſhets. Theſe intervale lands are of various
breadth, according to the near or remote fituation of the hills. On Connecticut river,
they are from a quarter of a mile to a mile and a half on each ſide; and it is obſerv-
able, that they yield wheat in greater abundance and perfection than the ſame kind of
ſoil eaſt of the height of land. Theſe lands; in every part of the State, yield all; the
other kinds of grain in the greateſt perfection; but are not ſo good for paſture as the
_ uplands of a proper quality. The wide-ſpreading hills are generally much efteemed _
as warm and rich; rocky, moiſt land is accounted good ſor paſture;. drained:
ſwamps have a deep mellow ſoil; and the valleys between. hills are generally very.


productive. | Apples :
* Belknap's Hiſt, vol. iii, page 207, |


NEW HAMPSHIRE _ 299

Apples and pears are the moſt common, and the principal fruits cultivated in this
State. No-good huſbandman thinks his farm complete without an orchard.

| Agriculture is the chief bufineſs of the inhabitants of this State. Beef, pork,
mutton, poultry, wheat, rye, Indian corn, barley, pulſe, butter, cheeſe, flax, hemp,
hops, eſculent plants and roots, articles which will always find a market, may be pro-
-duced in almoſt any quantity in New Hampſhire.

Trans and ManvracTuREs.] The inhabitants in the ſouth-weſtern quarter of
this State-generally carry their produce to Boſton. In the middle and northern part,
as far as the Lower Coos, they trade at Portſmouth. Above the Lower Coos there
are yet no convenient roads directly to the ſea-coaſt. The people on the upper
branches of Saco river find their neareſt market at Portland, in the diſtrict of Main;
and thither the inhabitants of Upper . Coos have generally carried their produce; ſome |
have gone in the other direction to New- York market. But from a ſurvey made in

1782, it was found that a road from the upper Amonooſuck, which empties into Con-
necticut river, to the head of navigation in Kennebeck river, is very practicable:

the diſtance 80 or go miles; and for a third part of that diſtance from Kennebeck, there
are already roads and ſettlements.

The articles and the quantity of each, exported and imported into the port of Paſ-


cataqua, in two years following O ober iſt, 1789, will appear from the following
tables taken from Dr. e 8 _—


TABLE of EXPORTATION 3 the” Port of PASCATAQUA, | from October r,
| = 175g, to October 1, 1791.


Articles __— 7 0 Europe. W. Fndies, N Scotia. Africa, Total.
1000 feet of Pine Boards = „ 0847 t1,0932-- 96 69 18,034
Ditto, feet of oak plarck <- 378 26 — 55
Ditto, ſtaves and heading = — 1317 1608 44 — 2969
Ditto, clapboards — . "19 — — 21
Ditto, ſhingles © = = =» — 268 _ — 2689
Ditto, hoops — — - - — 794 7 — 862
Feet of oar raſters - - = 47,000 950 — — 470
Tons of pine timber 88 86 — — 1742
Ditto, oak timber ns 251 20 — — £27
Frames of houſes „ — I'S — — 12
Pine maſts — - — 41 * ot — — 45
Spruce 1111. ͤ 8 13 72 — — S8
Shook hogſheads — 2 8 — 2079 — — dag
Waggons = - 4 — — 9 _ _ 0M
Pairs of cart wheels = 1 — 14 — _ I4
Sets of yokes and — 28 — — 28
Boats hn 22 8 _ 20 _ _ 30
Handſſ pikes 8 8 - : 8 — — — 80
Quintale of dry fiſh = 8 250 26,207 _ — 26,457
Barrels of pickled fiſh | — — — — 501 — — 501
Ditto, whale oil 3 — 120 — — 120
itto, tar — 25 — — 1613 bo 2 —


3 NEW HAMPSHIRE.


| Articles exported To Europe, V. Indies V. Scotia, Africa, Total.
Caſks of flax-ſeed -


— — 1798 — — — 1798
Barrels of beef — 2 — — 2775 2 — 2777
Ditto, pork — — — 9 1 — 10
Ditto, rice — — — - — — — 2 2
Buſhels of Indian corn - 3 — 391 — 2000 239
Oxen and cows 5 8 — 577 33 — 610
o - — — 207 2 — 209
Sheep — - - - — 261 229 — 4090
Gallons of N. E. rum 1 — — — — 150 1449 1599
Ditto, Madeira wine - n — 845 — — 845
Thouſands of bricks - -— - _ 129. — — 129
Tons of pot aſh - - — 882 — — — 882
Ditto, pearl aſn - — 305 — — 8285 304
Boxes of candles - Ot. TR nes 28 — — 28.


Total value of exportation for two years 296,839 45 51 cents.


TABLE of IMPORTATION into the Port of . from October I,
79 to October I, 1791. :


Articles imported from E urope. We f Tadie es. N. Scotia. Total. 5
Gallons of rum VVV — 1 38,017 — 138,977
Do. gm - „ LONy — h — 222
Do: molaſſes „„ — 270,785 — 270,85
Do. wine 25 9 1 5
Z 5 5 92 75 2
Do. porter V 457 on 5 457
Ibs. of unrefined 1 8 — 546,648 — 546,648
Do. loaf ſugar 2 — 5 77 77
Do. coffee | — — — — 68,633 wen 68,633
Do. cotton „ — 17,564 — 17,564
Do. cocoa „ 7 — — 27,944 — 27,944
Do. 8 1 1056 — — 1056
r 5 8 os 2696 86 — 2782
. ĩðͤ v 2204 — — 2204
Do. - mise 5 — 16,890 — — 16, 890
Hundreds of cordage. ew 17,1,7 — — 17,1,7
Do. — — - 940 - - 3 — 940
Buſhels of fallt ES, (partY — 98,336
a ST SIS SIRE. ©: — 3131
Ibs. of ſteet unwrought - «=. "GT — — 16, 527
Do. bar and ſheet m__ „„ 3 4336
Grindſtones 3 _ (a few not 79


N. B. What comes coaſt-ways from any of the United States cannot be aſcer- 25
tained; as no re entries are made where only the produce of the United States is


WP. board except accompanied with more than two hundred dollars value of foreign
articles


. The value of imported articles is generally . by the Boſton
market.“
8 TABLE


NE HAMPSHIRE,


TABLE of CLEARANCES at the Port of PASCATAQUA, from October 1, 1789,
to October 1, 1791.


)) L614

+ | ES EF | -| 8|%

= | © = 1-4 ++ 0 S

VVV

23 „

Ii es

8. 8 8A

28 — | 2 | 2 * S 8

85 [8 | - 2 — | = * *

France 5 7 1

French Weſt Indies 17 70 3910] 136 16616 264 | 16880
St. Peter's and Miquelon - | | | 8| 1] 9 428] 34 | 462
England  — - [16] 25] x| [ 42} 6725 441] | 7166
Scotland „ * n. 3 616
Ireland 5 - 3-84 M1 +. 4--: 44}... 606] SW 666
Britiſh Weſt Indies T* n 3434
Nova Scotia — „„ 1a 1432 4
Portugueſe Iſlands a 2 2 [ 5 1 + 1 162] 162
Holland and Plantations - | | | | | of 233 | | 233
Denmark and Iſlands | „/ 70 fn „„
Aries , e oo I 9;
Coaſting and cod fiſhery - 1+ | 4010] 5o| 1166 ***
Total 0 43 roy 10522 277] 26560 298 4077 162 31097


STATEMENT of the FISHERIES at PASCATAQA and its nei ;ghbourhood- ,


Schooners 27 1
Beats — 20 employed i in the Cod and Scale
Tonnage — 630 Fiſhery annually... DE
Soeamen -.:- ˙ | 0
The Schooners, Boats, and — belon ging to the Illes of Shoals are e not: included
in the above eſtimation.


5
 Produd of the Fiſhery 3 in the year 179 K.
Merchantable fiſh — 5170
| Quintals made 2 { Jamaica ditto — 14217
| | Scale ditto 6463 |


—ͤ ͤ— —ê


Total 25850


The fiſh made at the Iſles of Shoals are included in this ſtatement.
The ſacceſs of the fiſhery in this ſeaſon was uncommonly good.
The ſtaple commodities of New Hampſhire 'are ſhips, lumber, proviſions, fith,
horſes, pot and Pons aſhes, — flax ſeed.— Ships are built in all the towns contiguous
to


30⁰² NEW HAMPSHIRE:


to the river Paſcataqua and its branches. The number of ſhips, built in 1790, was 8;
Ur 1701, 20. | th 2s . 12 PK
The number of ſhips and other veflels belonging to the port of Paſcataqua, in 1791,


, x
-


Was as follows :_ above foo tons, 33; under. 100 tons, 5o—mn all 83.

The people in the country generally manufacture their own clothing; and confide-
Table quantities of tow cloth for exportation. The other manufactures are pot and
Pearl aſhes, maple ſugar, bricks and pattety, and ſome iron, not ſufficient, however,
for home conſumption, though it might be made an article of exportation.
| apy an act of aflembly, oi January, 1792, a bank, by the name of © The
Bank of New Hampthire,” was eſtabliſhed, to continue fifty years, under the manage-
ment of a preſident and ſeven directors. The capital ſtock is 60,000 dollars; and the
ſtockholders have liberty to increaſe it to 200, ooo dollars ſpecie, and 100,000 dollars
I any othcr efrate.: 7: 5 5 = WE IS
Po ULATION AND CHARACTER.] The number of inhabitants in 1790, has been

mentioned in the preceding table of divifions. In 1767 they were eſtimated at 52,700.
The mean increaſing ratio per annum ſince, Dr. Belknap reckons at 3883. According
to this mode of computation, the humber of people in New Hampſhire has actually
doubled in leſs than 19 years; 7 of thoſe 19 were years of war. TEND

Dr. Belknap mentions a number of inſtances of remarkable longevity in this State.
In Barrington, 14 of the firſt ſettlers were living in 1785, who were between 80 and
go years of age. In Londonderry, the firſt planters lived on an average, to 80 years,
and ſome to 1c4. One Robert Macklin, a native of Scotland, died at Wakefield, in
1787, aged 115. He frequently walked from Portſmouth to Boſton, 66 miles, in one
day, and returned the next. He performed this journey the laſt time, when he was
Bo years old. ( 3 | 5

The inhabitants of New Hampſhire, like the ſettlers in all new countries, are in
general, a hardy, robuſt, active, brave people. The advantages of early education
have not been fo generally enjoyed, as good men have wiſhed; in conſequence of
which there has been a deficiency of perſons properly qualified to fill the various
departments of government. But fince the revolution, the means of information and
amprovement have been increaſed and extended, and this political evil in a great
meaſure remedied, _ 5 1 5


* 4
5 tA Sw —
— - . 5 . r ts „ ee Wo awd
P 4 . 2 td 7 * 2 x g 3 — 42. — * 7 -
PPP e n r Ct et 4 * — 2 | — —
hs... 3 — 1 8 — 91 r » 2 e - . eee — <olhs 3 —_— l : 2
* 7 n 5 2 * OY > 22 2 2 3 — — 5 wa 7 N af :
1 * ” . bf * pe 7 * my 1 , f


— "C7 N
- As n 78 We £7 *
* * n FRY 1 n N
e 1
> *
22 22 .


8 s mes „% BU» 22 2
Kr aa cr Bae
— * 4 ' - by + l 7 -
RM
3


e


2
8 * N "
panty ; $ . as k * * _ , 4 * 5

— 8 , 2 <= Nes 2 71 2 1 4 « 6 n =" - : — 3

Pan" "Im ** - . ? 7 8 r * 4, | | : 2 -
Pay” . 9 *. 7 5 * a * of +a x4 * * 7 *. my — — — 9 * +
PIES. > 1 - * * * — p FS pa —
* 4 w * Ln” 2 * * * r — — —— — tran. ate _ :
oO 2 : * _ ___ . 5 fe 2
5127 2 ** — K


* wo 1 . £226


< The free indulgenee of ſpirituous hquors has been, and is now, one of the greateſt
faults of many of the people of New Hampſhire ; eſpecially in the neighbourhood of
the river Paſcataqua and its branches, and wherever the buſineſs of getting lumber
forms the principal employment of the people. In travelling up the country it affords
pleaſure to obſerve the various articles of produce and manufacture coming to market;
but in travelling down the country it is equally diſguſtſul to meet the ſame teams
returning, loaded with-caſks of rum, along with fiſh, falt, and other neceſſary articles.
Among huſbandmen, eyder is their common drink. Malt liquor is not fo frequently
uſed as its wholeſomeneſs deſerves. But after all, there are no perſons more robuſt =
and healthy, than thoſe, whoſe only or principal drink is the ſimple element, with
whicl! nature has univerſally and bountifully ſupplied this happy land.” “ e
CoLLEGE, ACADEMIES, Ec. The only college in this State is in the townſhip bs --
Hanover, ſituated on a beautiful plain about half a mile eaſt of Connecticut river, in
latitude 43* 33'. It was named Darimouth College, after the Right Honourable J#7am
Earl of Dartmouth, who wag one of its principal benefactors. It was founded by the
late pious and benevolent Dr. Eleazer Wheelock, who, in 1769, obtained a royal charter,
* Dr. Belknap,


NEW HAMPSHIRE. 303
wherein ample privileges were granted, and ſuitable proviſion made for the education
and inſtruction of youth of the Indian tribes, in reading, writing, and all parts of
learning which ſhould appear neceſſary and expedient for civilizing and chriſtianizing
the children of Pagans, as well as in all liberal arts and ſciences, and alſo of Engliſ 4
youths and any others. The very humane and laudable attempts which have been
made to chriſtianize and educate the Indians, have not, through their native untrgcta-
pleneſs, been crowned with that ſucceſs which was hoped and expected. Its ſituation
in a frontier country expoſed it during the late war to many inconveniencies, which
impeded its proſperity. It flouriſhed, however, amidſt all its embarrafſments, and! 18.
now one of the moſt growing ſeminaries i in the United States.”


The funds of this college conſiſt chiefly in lands, amounting to about 80,800 acres,. MY


which are increaſing in value, in proportion to the growth of the country. Twelve


hundred acres lie contiguous to the college, and are capable of the beſt improvement.
Twelve thouſand acres lie in Vermont. A tract of 8 miles ſquare was granted by the
aſſembly of New Hampſhire 3 in 1789. The revenue of the college, arifing from the

lands, amounts annually to 140l. By contracts already made, it will amount in four:
years to 450b; and 1 in. twelve one to- , The income from tuition. is about 600l.
per annum.


The number of under pradiaatns, in 1790, OR BR 190; they have ſince increaſed..
A grammar ſchool of about 50 or 60 ſcholars is annexed to the college.


The ſtudents are under the immediate government and. inſtruction. of a prefident,
who is alſo profeſſor of hiſtory ; a profeſſor of mathematics and natural philoſophy, a
profeſſor of languages, and two tutors. In the 22 years ſince the college was And,
479 ſtudents have received degrees, 1 40 of whom: are, or have been, miniſters of the:
goſpel, and 448 are now living.

The college is furniſhed with a handſome library, and a philoſophical apparatus
: tolerably complete. A new college building; of wood; 1 50 by 50 feet, and three
ſtories high, was erected in 1786, and ſince finiſhed, containing 36 rooms for ſtudents,
Its fituation is elevated, healthful, and pleaſant, commanding an extenſive profpect to
the weſt. There are three other public buildings belonging to the college.

There are a number of academies in this State; the principal of which is at Exeter,
ſbunded and endowed by the Hon. John Phillips, L. L. D. of Exeter, and incorporated
by act of aſſembly in 1781, by the name of © Phillips's Exeter Academy.” It is a very
reſpectable and uſeful inſtitution, under the inſpection of a board of truſtees, and the
immediate government and inſtruction of a preceptor and an aſſiſtant. It has a fund:

of nearly 10, oool, one fifth of which is in lands not yet productive. The preſent
annual income is 480l. It has commonly between 50 and 6 ſtudents.

An Academy at New Ipſwich was incorporated in 1 789; 3 and has a fund of about
1000l. and generally from 40 to 50 ſcholars.


There is another academy at Atkinſon, founded bo the Hon. Nathaniel Peabody, who»
has endowed it with a donation of 1000 acres of land. It was incorporated in 1790.

At Amherſt, an academy was incorporated in 1791, by the name of the © Aurean:
Academy.” * inſtitutions are forming at Charleſtown, Concord, and other places,
which, with the peculiar attention which has lately been paid to ſchools by the legiſ-
ature, and the eſtabliſhment: of ſocial libraries in ſeveral towns, afford. a Pleaſing

proſpect of the increaſe of literature and: uſeful knowledge 1 in this State.
__ Chipp Towns. | Portſmouth is the largeſt town in this State. Its longitude 1 is 700
40 ſrom the obſervatory at Greenwich. It is about two miles from the ſea, on the


a» _ tout.


-


N e 2 5 A. — 7 owes 50 . - 2 > > 4
- P "= * . - 8 P 1” 4 5 ' : * of (ut
p — 2 4 . 0 f 3 az — £824 - EY 2 5 2 * - $a SEN xo a >; 2 3 Xx oy. *4 ow ©
WI "oF: has _ „ a 6 WR ob Bay. + <4 COND TY A 7 MC N l 20 & ole tude 8 n 2 * —
N ad: 9 N ESE þ 9 — of 8 #4 — "Ho es 2 — d wal
- — - P — \


* 5 3
A
ot 22 > 9 5 k * »
ne A 7 a
a * ns.
h A „rr > mh


x ar Mor 47 of i I hls A eee TRY


l 1 4.
192 1 2 5 + <8"
F 22 2 —
ry p a>, .
— - 8 * „ 2 N r. tA — * * - — 4 D
4 i 5 4 9 ny : a — n I "© n 16 93 - © Rn 7 7 Ne ; 3 * 8 NED » . 8 * 23
28 2 tl * We N ä 3 bu Sac wg g £ 1 5 8 >= * D ' * + $0 8 8 8 S 2 = 2 - 3
mari, lt — n ; 51 7 wc”
1 . Rad * L * * 4 — ö * d # - " ſs Ae Nene 2 tn * — &
\ 0 © wh . 1 N 1 _ 5 , 4 * V # 8 er 1 £9 * * .
* . : * * * ** — wb * 2 a * ft " * i — 5 1 n Sb 5- —- . N 2 ** "FF" 5 - * 2 5 — f 2 3
N " ” N + F 2 — 8 _ & * * 5 7 bs 6 2 —— x. ** — — . e . AE F Ls - 7 2 * 4
0 may OE * + OE 22 K r ere te SOS 2 * — TE 7 A 2 +08 ow 7 - _ — * *


304 NE HAMPSH IRR.


ſouth ſide of Paſcataqua river. It contains about 640 dwelling houſes, and nearly ax
many other buildings, beſides thote for public uſes, which are three congregational
churches, one epiſcopal, one unwwerfaliff, a ſtate houſe, market houſe, four ſchool
houſes, and a work houte.

Its harbour is one of the fineſt on the continent, having a ſufficient depth of water
for veſſels of any burthen. It is defended againſt ſtorms by the adjacent land, in ſuch
a manner, as that ſhips may ſecurely ride there in any ſeaſon of the year. Beſides,
the harbour is ſo well fortified by nature that very little art will be neceſſary to render
it impregnable. Its vicinity to the ſea renders it very convenient for naval trade. A


light houſe, with a ſingle light, ſtands at the entrance of the harbour. Ships of war


have been built here ; among others, the America, of 74 guns, launched Nov. 1782,
and preſented to the King of France by the Congreſs of the United States.

Exeter is 15 miles S. W. from Portſmouth, fituated at the head of navigation, upon
Swamſcot, or Exeter river. The tide rites here 11 feet, it is well ſituated for a manu-
facturing town, and has already a duck manufactory, in its infancy---6 ſaw mills, a


fulling mill, ſlitting mill, paper mill, ſnuff mill, two chocolate and 10 grift mills,


won works, and a printing office. The public buildmgs are two congregational
churches, an academy, a new and handſome court houſe and a gaol. The public
offices of the State are kept here. Formerly this town was famous for ſhip building,
but this buſineſs has not flouriſhed ſince its interruption by the war.

Concord is a pleaſant, flouriſhing, inland town, ſituated on the weſt bank of Merri-
mack river, 54 miles W. N. W. from Portſmouth. The general court, of late, have
commonly held their ſeſſions here ; and from its central fituation, and a thriving back
country, it will probably ſoon become the permanent ſeat of government. Much of


the trade of the upper country centers in this town.


Dover, Amherſt, Keen, Charleſtown, Plymouth, and H averhill, are the other moſt
conſiderable towns in this State. Haverill is a new, thriving town, on the eaſt fide
of Connecticut river, in Lower Coos. It is the moſt conſiderable town in the county
of Grafton, and has a well-conſtructed court houſe and a congregational church. In
it is a bed of iron ore, which has yielded ſome profit to the proprietor—allſo a quarry of
free ſtone, from which the people are ſupplied with chimney pieces, Hearth ſtones,
&c. It has allo a ſulling mill and an oil mill, and many other excellent mill feats.

CURIOSITIES AND "CANAL. | In the townſhip of Cheſter is a circular eminence,
half a mile in diameter, and 400 feet high, called Rattleſnake Hill. On the ſouth
fide, 10 yards from its = a is the entrance of a cave called the Devil's Den, in which
is a room 15 or 20 feet ſquare and 4 feet high, floored and circled by a regular rock,
from the upper part of which are dependent 1 many excreſcences, . ir lt in the form and


ne of a pear, and when approached by a torch throw out a ſparkling luſtre of almoſt


every hue. Many frightful ſtories have been told of this eave by thoſe who delight! in


the marvellous. It is a cold, dreary, gloomy place.


In the town of Durham is a rock, computed to weigh 60 or 70 tons. It lies ſo exadtly
poiſed on another rock, as to be eaſily moved with one finger. It is en the top of a bill,
and appears to be natural. In the townſhip of Atkinſon, in a large meadow, there 154
ſmall iſland of 6 or 7 acres, which was — loaded with valuable pine timber, and


other foreſt wood. When the meadow is overflowed, by means of an artificial dam,
tmis iſland riſes with the water, which is ſometimes 6 feet. Near the middle of the


iſland is a ſmall pond, which has been gradually leſſening ever ſince it was known, and
is now almoſt covered with verdure. In this — a pole 50 feet long has n
Withou


NEW HAMPSHIRE. 305


without finding bottom. In the water of that pond, there have been fiſh in plenty,
which, when the meadow has been overflowed, have appeared there, and when the
water has been drawn off, have been leſt on the meadow, at which time the iſland
ſettles to its uſual place. | | 5

In the year 1791, a canal was cut through the marſhes, which opens an inland
navigation, from Hampton, through Saliſbury, into Merrimack River, for about 8
miles. By this paſſage, loaded boats may be conducted with the utmoſt eaſe and ſafety.
 Rxx1610n.| The principal denominations of Chriſtians in this State are Congrega-
tionaliſts, Preſbyterians, Epiſcopalians, Baptiſts, and Quakers. There is a ſmall
ſociety of Sandemanians, and another of Uniyerfaliſts, in Portſmouth. For the diſtin-
guiſhing characteriſtics of theſe ſeveral ſects, ſee the general account of the United
States, article Rei1G6ion. e 5


«© The people in general throughout the State are profeſſors of the Chriſtian reli gion


in ſome form or other. There is, however, a ſort of wiſe men, who pretend to reject


it ; but they have not pet been able to ſubſtitute a better in its place.” “
ConsTITUTION S| The citizens of this State have lately formed for themſelves a con-

ſtitution of government upon the ſame general principles with their former one,

which is not yet publiſhed. E


Htsrok v.] The firſt diſcovery made by the Engliſh of any part of New Hampſhire,
was in 1614, by Captain John Smith, who ranged the ſhore [aol Penobſcot to Cape
Cod; and in this rout, diſcovered the river Paſcataqua. On his return to England, he
publiſhed a deſcription of the country, with a map of the coaſt, which he preſented to

Prince Charles, who gave it the name of NRW ENGLAND. The firſt ſettlement was
made in 15234. A ee 3


New Hampſhire * for many years under the juriſdiction of the Governor of Maſſa-
chuſetts, yet they had a ſeparate legiſlature. They ever bore a proportionable ſhare of


the expences and levies in all enterpriſes, expeditions, and military exertions, whether
planned by the colony or the crown. In every ſtage of the oppoſition that was made to
the incroachments of the Britiſh parliament, the people, who ever had a high ſenſe of
their council was appointed by royal mandamus, their patriotic ardour was checked by
| theſe crown officers. But when freed from this reſtraint, they flew eagerly to the


American ſtandard, when the voice of their country declared for war, and their troops


had a large ſhare of the hazard and fatigue, as well as of the glory of accompliſhing the
late revolution. in BEE. ob tieoys:
As the beſt and only hiſtory of this State, the reader is referred to the Rev. Dr.
Belknap's, publiſhed” com lete, in 3 vols. 8vo. in 1792, written in a pure, neat,
_ hiſtoric ſtyle— The two firk volumes contain the-hiſtary of New Hampſhire ; the third
contains A geographical deſcription of the State, with ſketches of its natural hiſtory,
Productions and improvements, laws and government,” -and is replete with curious and
_ uſeful information, and interſperſed with many ingenious and philoſophical remarks.
From. this yoluaze mach aflifiance has been derived, in making the foregoing


7


liberty, cheerfully bore their part. At the commencement of hoſtilities, indeed, while


#


- ” a -» 4 . R
i . ö
L 306 J
! "— 8 . 1 0


DIS TR HC OF MAIN.

„ 5 )GBelonging to Maſſachuſetts.) |
| SITUATION AND ExTENT. N | 4

Mile. wah 84. miles.

Length 170 4 and of E. Longitude. | ler)

Breadth 1575 between Lis and 48* N. Latitude. } 21,750 4645-100)


800 ü be north, by Lower Canada, from which it is ſeparated
Funden! by the high lands; caſt, by the river St. Croix,“ and a line
drawn due north from ite ſource to the ſaid highlands, which divides it from the Province
of New Brunſwick ; ſouth, by the Atlantic Ocean; weſt, by New Hampſhire.
Lhe Old Province of Main (included in the above limits) i is bounded on the weſt by
New Hampſture ; ſouth by the Atlantic Ocean, and north and north-eaſt by the land,
called in ſome maps Sagadahock. It was ſuppoſed at the, time of its being made a
province, to have been 120 miles ſquare ; but by a ſettlement of the line, in 1737, on
the part, or fide adjoining New Hampſhire, the form of the land was reduced from a
ſquare to that of a ianond, The Province of Main contains, HOC to Donglas,
about 9,600 ſquare miles.


Drisfoxs.] The Diftrit of Main is divided into five counties, vir.


Counties. No. Inhabitants. Chief Towns. Inhabitants. .
= J... 2, 900 :
Cumberland 5 255450 * | Portland Lat. 43⁵ 43 2,240 :
3 e 8
Lincoln Ws , Hallowell Rs 4 hp
„ 8 { Waldoborough JON
Hancock - .. 9, 549 3 (encbfeot 1 ,


Waſhington Fo * 2,758 „ 8 5 | | 818


? t p
3 4 3


Total 96, 540


Face or IR Country, Soll, AND, CAT. ] The diſſrict of - Main, though an
elevated tract of country, cannot be called mountainous. A great proportion of the
1 lands are arable go excecdin gly fertile, partieuyarly between Fenobſcot and Kenebeck


2 » What ri river is DEL to apller the name of st. Cpeir- in the treaty of ga! is at preſent a ſubject of
diſpute between Great Britain and the United States. The French, according to their mode of taking poſ-
- ſeſhon, always fixeda croſs in every river they came to. _ Almoſt every river on the coalt they diſcovered, has
in turn been called La Riviere de St. Croix.
There are three rivers that empty chemſelyes into the Bay. of Paſſamaquaddy, the eaſternmoſt always
called by the native Indians and F 204.4, St. Croix, and the middle one Schoodiac. Before the commencement
of the late war, Governor Barnard ſent Mr. Mitchell, a furveyor, and ſeveral others, to explore the Bay of
Paſſamaquaddy, to examine the natives, and to find out which was the true river St. Croix. They did accord-
ingly, and reported it to be the eaſternmoſt river, and returned correſpondent plans of their TINT: At the
forming of the treaty of peace, the commiſſioners had Mitchell's maps ; and in fixing the boundary between
that part of Nova Scotia, now called New Brunſwick, and the Commonwealth of Maſſachuſetts, they con-
ſidered it to be the river laid down by him. After the peace, the Britiſh ſubjects of Nova Scotia took poſleſ-
ſion of all the lands between St. Croix and Schoodiac rivers, which tract is ſaid to be nearly as large as the
State of New Hampſhire, and now hold poſſeſſion of- the ſame, aſſerting that Schoodiac is the true St. Croix;
they alſo claim all the iſlands in the Bay of — although ſeveral of them lie ſeveral miles weſt of
; the gver. wi they call the boundary,”


FI


rivers.


DISTRICT, OP MAIN. 307


rivers. - On ſome parts of the ſea coaſt the lands are but indifferent; but this defect
might eaſily be remedied, by manuring it with a marine vegetable, called rock weed,
which grows on the rocks between high and low water mark, all along the ſhores. It.
makes a moſt excellent, manure, and the ſupply is immenſe. It generally grows in
this diſtrict on ally/the ſhores that are waſhed by the fea, and the breadth of the border
is in proportion to the height the tide riſes, which, in the eaſtern part of the diſtrict, is
nearly 30 feet. It is eſtimated that there are 4000 acres of this rock weed on this coaſt,
and that each acre will produce annually 20 loads, making in the whole 80,000 loads
of the beſt manure, 10 of which ſpread upon an acre are reckoned ſufficient for
three years. The country, has a large proportion of dead ſwamps and ſunken lands,
which are eaſily drained, and leave a rich, fat ſoil. The interior country is univerſally
repreſented as being of an excellent ſoil, well adapted both for tillage and paſture.— The
lands in general are caſily cleared, having but little under bruſh. „0
I) be diſtrict of Main may naturally be conſidered in three diviſions---The fr com-
prehending the tract lying eaſt of Penobſcot. river, of about 4,500,000 acres -The
ſecond, and beſt tract, of about 4,000,000 acres, lying between Penobſcot and Kennebeck
rivers-—The third, firſt ſottled and moſt populous at preſent, weſt of Kennebeck river,


containing alſo, about 4,000,000 .acres. 11 ES
I)!uhe climate does not materially differ from the reſt of New England. The weather
is more regular in the winter, which uſually laſts,” with ſeverity, from the middle of
December-to tire laſt of March; during this time the ponds and freſh water rivers are |
paſſable on the ice, and fleighing continues uninterrupted by thaws, which are common
in the three ſouthern New England States. Although vegetation in the ſpring com-.
mences earlier in theſe States than in the diſtrict of Main, yet in the latter it is much
' more rapid. The elevation of the lands in general---the purity of the air, which is
rendered ſweet and ſalubrious by the balſamic qualities of many of the foreſt trees---the
limpid ſtreams, both large and ſmall, which abundantly water this country, and the
regularity of he weather, al unite to render this one of the healthieſt countries in the
| Rivers, Lak Es, &c.] This diſtrict has a ſeaſt coaſt of about 240 miles, in which
diſtance there is an abundance of ſaſe and commodious harbours; beſides which there
is a ſecurity given to navigation, on ſome part of the coaſt, by what is called the inland
paſſage. Almoſt the whole coaſt is lined with iſlands, among which veſſels may gene-
/// ᷣ œT ̃²⁵˙•rtNNXXnXnXnXnX!X!X!Xł!;!/ͥ A Ro,
The country of which we are ſpeaking, is watered by many large and ſmall rivers.
The principal are the following, as you proceed from eaſt to welt. St. Croix, a ſhort.
river, iſſuing from a large pond in the vicinity of St. John's river, remarkable only for
its forming a part of the eaſtern boundary of the United States. Next is Paſſamaquaddy
river, which, With the Schoodiac from the weſt, falls by one mouth into Paſſamaquaddy
Bay. Oppoſite Mount Deſert Ifland, which is about 15 miles long and 12 broad,
Union river. empties into a large bay. A ſhort diſtance weſt is the noble Penobſcot,
which riſes in two branches from the highlands. Between' the fource of the
welt fork, and its junction with the eaſt, is Mooſchead Lake, 30 or 40 miles long
and 15 wide. The eaſtern branch paſſes through ſeveral ſmaller lakes. From The
Forks, as they are called, the Penobſcot Indians paſs to Canada, up either
branch, principally the weſt, the ſource of which they ſay is not more than 20 miles
from the waters that empty into the river St. Lawrence. At the Forks is a remarkable
high mountain. From the Forks down to Indian Old Town, ſituated on an iſland in
this river, is about 60 miles, 40 of which the water flows in a ſtill; ſmooth ſtream, and
in the whole diſtance there are no falls bo IE the paſſing of boats, In this *
r 2 the


e 1» age * * 0 „ n

1 ann ""

* £4 4 „
22 2 > i er

2 : 1 5 1

b of N :
T T *

* * a As * „ OO

* © :


*
„
4 2


r ee


the river widens, and embraces a large number of fmall iſtands; and about half way


weſt, whoſe mouths are nearly oppoſite cach other. About 60 rods below Indian Old


Mai hy GA . \ l 2 p At — — & —

* F e NF Y Fa * * 3 * 1 ” of * * a: F. ha Aa a © 3 *

4 l n * uy br” — „ len N „ et — — — 8
gw 2 „ 2 8 4 22 M 2 933 7 * » — <> vw

5 % 4 os .. — 2 — hed 2 ISA — —

. pes 2 1 + , - 2 > - = 2 11 7 — - N —
* Karle Ar ; #5 -— W7 * OO, * 2 *
— 2 - * 31 F n n n 2 * 927 «<#. 32 181 4 -


r


ſhip of Pownalborough.


Ko *
1 .
* |
--
kg |
XY
: 200 .
I 4
* ny d
A N
2
+ 7
*
1

$ BP 1:

4 =. OF þ
> » IJ
387 4

1 31 3

ws .

* 7s 4 7

i „

= 4 34

| "1 | |

1 .

*


3


308 DISTRICT OF MAIN.
receives two conſiderable tributary ſtreams, one from the eaſt and the other from the


Town are the Great Falls, where is a carrying-place of about 20 rods ; thence, 12
miles to the head of the tide, there are no falls to obſtruct boats. Veſſels of 30 tons,
come within a mile of the head of the tide. Thence, 35 miles to the head of the bay,
to the ſite of Old Fort Pownal, the river is remarkably ſtraight, and eaſily navigated.
Paſſing by Majabagaduſe on the eaſt, 7 miles, and Owl's Head, 20 miles further, on
the weſt, you enter the ocean. . . e eee

Proceeding weſtward, over ſeveral ſmall crecks, you come to Kennebeck, one of
the fineſt rivers in this country. One branch of it riſes in the highlands, a ſhort


_ diſtance from a branch of the Chaudiere, which empties into the St. Lawrence ;


another branch riſes in Mooſe Head Lake. In its courſe, it receives Sandy river front
the weſt, and Sebaſticook and ſeveral others from the caſt, and paſſes to the ſea by
Cape Small Point. It is navigable for veſſels of 150 tons upwards of 40 miles
Sheepſcut river is navigable 20 or 30 miles, and empties into the ocean a little to


| theeaſt of Kennebeck. On this river is the important port of Wifcaſſet, in the town-


2


Ameriſcoggin, now more generally called Androſcoggin, properl


y ſpeaking, is but


the main weſtern branch of the Kennebeck. Its ſources are north of Lake U dee |
ich it


Its courſe is ſouthwardly, till it approaches near the White Mountains, from which it
receives Mooſe and Peabody rivers, and then turns to the eaſt, and then ſouth-eaſt,
in which courſe it paſſes within two miles of the ſea-cbaſt, and turning north runs
over Pejepſkaeg, falls into Merry Meeting Bay, where it forms a junction with the
Kennebeck, 20 miles from the fea. Formerly, from this bay to the ſea, the confluent
ſtream was called Saggadahock. The lands on this river are very good. Steven's
river heads within a mite of Merry Meeting Bay. A canal, uniting theſe waters,
has lately been opened. Cullen's river 1s between Freeport. and North Yarmouth.
Royal's river empties itfelf info the fea in North Yarmouth. Preſumſcut is fed by
Sebacook Lake, and meets the ſea at Falmouth. Noneſuch river paſſes to fea
through Scarborough. It receives its name from its extraordinary frethets: —©-
Saco river is one of the three largeſt rivers in this diſtri. The principal part of
its water falls from the White Mountains. Its. courſe, ſome diſtance from its fource,
is ſouthwardly; it then fuddenly bends to the eaſt; and croſſes into the diſtrict of


Main, and then makes a large bend to the north-eaſt, eaſt, and ſouth-weſt, em-


bracing the fine townſhip of Fryeburg, in the county of York. Its general courſe
thence to the lea is S. E. Great and Little Offapee rivers fall into it from the weſt.


This river is navigable for ſhips to Saco Falls, about fix miles from the fea. Here the


fiver is broken by Indian Iſland, over which is the Poſt-road. A bridge is thrown over
each of the branches. A number of Mills are erected here, to which logs are floated
from 40 or 50 miles above; and veſſels can come quite to the mills to take in the
lumber. Four million feet of pine boards were annually fawed'at theſe mills before
the war. Biddeford and Pepperill-borough lic on either fide of the mouth of this


*


*


river. Mouſom, York, and Cape Neddock rivers, in the county of Vork, are fhort
and inconſiderable ſtreams. e |


Wie have already mentioned the moſt confiderable lakes, which are know in this
diftrit, . Lake Schacook, 18 miles N. W. of Portland, in extent is equal to two large


_ DISTRICT OF MAIN. RT -
townſhips, and is connected with Long Pond, on the N. W. by Sungo river. The
whole extent of theſe waters is nearly 30 miles N. W. and S. E. |
Bays AND Carts. | The principal bays are, Paſſamaquaddy, Machias, Penobſcot,
Caſco, and Wells. Of theſe, Penobſcot and Caſco are the moſt remarkable. Both.
are full of iſlands, ſome of which are large enough for townſhips. Long Iſland, im
the center of Penobſcot Bay, is 15 miles in length, and from 2 to 3 in breadth, and
forms an incorporated townſhip, by the name of Ifleſborough, containing about 400
inhabitants. On a fine peninſula on the eaſt fide of the bay the Britiſh built a fort
and made a ſettlement, which is now the ſhire town in the county of Hancock. The
points of Caſco Bay are, Cape Small Point on the eaſt, and Cape Elizabeth on the
weſt. This bay is about 25 miles wide, and 14 deep, forming a moſt excellent
harbour for veſſels of any burden, and interſperſed with a multitude of iſlands,
ſome of which are nearly large enough for townſhips. Wells Bay lies between Cape
Porpoiſe and Cape Neddock. fe 6 3 ip er2 0m a8

P opucrrioxs.] The foil of this country in general, where it is properly fitted to
receive the ſeed, appears to be very friendly to the growth of wheat, rye, barley, oats,
peas, hemp, flax, as well as for the production of almoſt all kinds of culinary roots
and plants, and for Engliſh graſs ; and alſo for Indian corn, provided the ſeed be pro-
cured from a more northern climate. Hops are the. ſpontaneous growth of this


the northern and eaſtern parts of this diſtrict. It is ſaid, however, that a century ago,
there were good orchards within the county of Waſhington, about the Bay of Paſſa-
maquaddy, which were deſtroyed after Colonel Church broke up the French ſettle-
ments at that place. From ſome experiments of the preſent inhabitants, the pre-
ſumption is rather againſt the growth of fruit-trees. In the counties of York and
Cumberland, fruit is as plenty as in New Hampſhire. This country is equally
K for grazing as for tillage, and large ſtocks of neat cattle may be fed both ſummer
ind winter. 7 HELI rin As . If}
The natural growth of this country eonſiſts of white pine and ſpruce trees in large
quantities, ſuitable for maſts, boards, and ſhingles: the white pine is, perhaps, of all
others, the moſt uſeful and important ; no wood will ſupply its place in building.
Maple, beech, white and grey oak, and yellow birch, are the growth of this country.
The birch is a large fightly tree, and is uſed for cabinet-work, and receives a. poliſh
| little inferior to mahogany. The outer bark, which conſiſts of a great number of
layers, when ſeparated, is as ſmooth and ſoft as the beſt writing-paper, and in ſome
caſes is a tolerable ſubſtitute for it. The low lands produce fir. This tree is fit

neither for timber nor fuel; but it yields a balſam that is highly prized. This balſam
is contained in ſmall protuberances like bliſters, under the ſmooth bark of the tree.
N fir is an evergreen, reſembling the ſpruce, but very tapering, and neither tall nor
3 N a EET” CITES |
Under this article the following remarks of General Lincoln merit a place:

« From the different rivers, in this eaſtern country, waters may be drawn for mills,
and all water work; beſides, many are the advantages which ariſe to a country,


*


through which ſtreams of water are ſo liberally interſperſed, as they are in this; and


elpecially when they abound, as many of theſe do, with fiſh of different kinds;
among them are the ſalmon, ſhad, alewive, and others, which ſeek the quiet waters
of the lakes, as the only places in which they can with ſafety lodge their ſpawns.
From this ſource, the inland country may draw a ſupply of fiſh, equal to all their de-
mands, (if they are not interrupted in their paſſage,) which are rendered n

| | valuable,


country. It is yet problematical, whether apple and other fruit-trees will flouriſ in


— — x
5 Ps Sat 2
«a —— 9 ate 1
— 2 —5 — „ 8 =
_ — 2 s . 2 5
2 - 2 dy; ov 8 # A y =


2 — "a
*


. wg Y
* ſh x i
2 Wong”
_


e


7 2 3 1
5 * * =, 2
n — . of
. T
oh Xa :


;

:

2
:

N

v

«

- B
5

<<"

HY 1

4 -
Fae:
on *
3 -
$
Hi.
$3FY
"wks .
3 3
* {|
5 -
We

*
£ *

1
©

©.

3 —

.

574

14
9
*
oF
1
„
1
1 1

74
8

*

15 >
.

* *

£ 1

—
1
+ > 3

4 os. 1

EY

„ 0

br. 7

9
ie K
„

N
77 .
4 **
VN. SY
: "1

** 1

22

— 5

if 3 -
"Me LY
” 3
1
__
” 4 F

SS... -
,
+ XS

1
„

1
7 * 15
„ * -
.,—
1

5 * 3

3 2 8
„

*

*

p 8
ug 3
FEES,

= 4
1
E
9 715 :
” £86
» BS

=—

4 2 —— |

_ - .

C _

hey A 4

4 I 4

5

 $© 2
< "IX'Y

>
=
4
SY

j AN

n
1 +

2 *
* =
1
1 * 2 .

4 > *
=
, . &
r
8 *
n
1
11 —

18
-& 8

1

Gat
Fo £4 $

l

o AY 2 7
1 d "4

1
oe. -
—_—
* » »

N <4 y
"ret

—_ F
* "is C

R

2

— WI
* I
_— <a
y,

1
1

4 _
*
1
—
WEIS: -

- +4

-— "4 \
72 1
- 2-59 *
. —

+ \ *4 a
1
1

.

65 1
8 8

. 3
, 3

+ & 4
"1 4
ls <4
.
44
x 8 «
*
*


*
53
1


”
5
4
5
*
10
a
1
a .
2 1
fa py .
P) wy 5 :
4 . 1
al "x 3
*®.. i
To i :
1
I. I
s 6 |
_— *
| 91
1 Wh 1
1
74 +a


moos, — — —


valuable, as their annual return is at a! ſeaſon of the year when moſt needed, and


natural obſtruction be thrown in their way. Whilſt the people inland may be ſup-


5 places than a common canoe. Great advantages ariſe alto to thoſe who live on the


tbe moole and deer, and the waters being covered with wild fowls of different kinds.“


mo 1774 br 1775, the inhabitants generally followed the lumber trade to the neglect


which of late, however, have become ſcarce ; white pine boards, ſhip timber, and


7 — 4õe 3


Fro piSTRICT OFT MAIN.


when they can be cured with a very little falt ; ſo that a long and free uſe of them:
will nbt be injurious to the health. of the inhabitants. The certainty of the ſapply
adds to its value. Theſe fiſh, as is ſuppoſed, and of which there cannot, I think, be
a doubt, return to the ſame waters yearly, in which they were ſpawned, unleſs ſome.


plied with theſe fiſh, the inhabitants of the ſea-coaſt may be ſupplied with the cod and
other ground fiſh, which are allured quite into their harbours, in purſuit of the river
fiſh, and may be taken with the greateſt eaſe, as no other craft is neceſſary in many


ſea-coaſt, from the ſhel-fiſh, viz. the lobſter, the ſcollop, and the clam. - To theſe
advantages may be added, thoſe which ariſe from the foreſts being filled with


CoMMERCE AND MaNnuFACTUREs.] From the firſt ſettlement of Main, until the


of agriculture. his afforded an immediate profit. Large quantities 'of corn and'
other grain were annually imported from Boſton and other places, without which it
was ſuppoſed the inhabitants could not have ſubſiſted. But the late war, by render-
ing theſe reſources precarious, put the inhabitants upon their true intereſt, 1. e. the
cultivation of their lands. The inhabitants now raiſe a ſufficient quantity for their
own conſumption; though too many are ſtill more fond of the axe than of the plough.
Their wool and flax are very good; hemp has lately been tried with great ſucceſs.
Almoſt every family manufacture wool and flax into cos 11 make EY" uten-
ils of every kind for their own uſe. _ {

ExeorTs. | This country abounds with 1 55 various s kinds, ſuch as maſts, b


every ſpecies of ſplit lumber manufactured from pine and oak; theſe are exported from
the different 8 in immenſe . Dried fin furniſhes a 8 article of
export.
"Max NERAL +} Mountain nag. bog iron ore are found i in ſome parts, , and works have
been erected for its manufacture.
|. There is a ſpecies of ſtone i in Lebanon, „ in the county of York, which yiclds cop-
peras and fulphur.
STATE OF: LatznAtURs.) The e of a college near Ciſco Bay is contem-
Plated, and the legiſlature have proceeded ſo far in the bufineſs, as to determine on

the principles of ſuch an eſtabliſhment. Academies in Hallowell, Berwick, Fryeburg,
and Machias, have been incorporated by the legiſlature, and endowed with handſome
grants of the public lands. And it 1s. 1 juſt to obſerve, that town-ſchools are very
generally maintained in moſt of the towns that are able to defray the expence, ms a
ſpirit of improvement is increaſing.
CHIEF e Portland is the capital of the diſtrict of Main. It is ſituated on

a promontory in Caſco Bay, and was formerly a part of Falmouth. In July 1786,
this part of the town being the moſt populous and mercantile, and ſituated on the
harbour, together with the iſlands which belong to Falmouth, was incorporated by the
name of Portland. It has a moſt excellent, fafe, and capacious harbour, which is
ſeldom or never completely frozen over. It is near the Main Ocean, and is caty- 0
acceſs. The inhabitants carry on a conſiderable foreign trade, build ſhips, and are
largely concerned in the fiſhery. It is one of the moſt thriving commercial towns in
$do Commonwealth of Maſſachuſetts. 3 three fourths of it was laid, in aſhes


No by


DISTRECT OF MAIN. aur


by the Britiſh fleet in 1775, it has ſince been entirely rebuilt, and contains about 2300
inhabitants. Among its public buildings are three churches, two for Congreg gationaliſts 5
and one for Epiſcopalians; and a handſome court-houſe.

A light-houfe has lately been erected on a point of land called Portland Head, at
the cine of the harbour. It is a ſtone Tac 72 feet high, excluſive of the
lanthorn

York is 74 miles N. E. Som Boſton, and 9 * Fran Portſmouth. It is IS into two
pariſhes of Congregationaliſts. York Bene, which is navigable for veſſels of 250 tons:
6 or 7 miles from the fea, paſſes through the town. Over this river, about a mile
from the ſea, a wooden bridge was built in 1761, 270 feet long, excluſive of the
| wharves at each end, which reach to the 3 and 2c feet wade. The bridge
ſtands on thirteen piers; and was planned and conducted by Major Samuel Sewall, an
ingenious mechanic, and a native of the town. The model of Charles river bridge
was taken from this, and was built under the ſuperintendance of the ſame gentleman.
It has alſo ſerved as the model of Malden and Beverly bridges, and has been imitated,
even in Europe, by thoſe ingenious American artiſts, Meflieurs Coxe and T hompſon..


This town was ſettled as early as 1630, and was then called A gamentieus , from a:


remarkable high hill in it of that name, a noted land mark for mariners. It is in.
lat 48 18 ede


About the year 1 640, 8 great part 40 this town was s incorporated "= Sir 88
Gorges, by the name of Georgiana. He appointed a Mayor and Aldermen, and made
it a free port. In 1652, when it fell under the juriſdiction of Mafſſachuſetts, it aſſumed
the name of Vork, which it has ſince retained.

Hallowell is a very flouriſhing town, ſituated in latitude 447 40, at the head of the
tide waters on Kenneheck river. Pownalborough, Penobſcot, and Machias, are alſo
towns of conſiderable and increaſing importance. Bangor, fituated at the head of

the tide waters on Penobſcot river, latitude 455, it is thought will in a few Years
become a place of very conſiderable trade. The other towns of conſideration are,

Kittery, Wells, Biddeford, Berwick, North Yarmouth, and Waldoborougſg.
Poros ATToN, CHARACTER, AND Rna6ton.] For the firſt of thefe articles, fee the
table of diviſions. There are no peculiar features in the character of the people of
this diſtrict, to diſtinguiſk them from their neighbours in New Hampſhire and Ver-

mont. Placed as they are in like circumſtances, they are like them, a brave,
| hardy, enterpriſing, induſtrious, hoſpitable people. The prevailing religious deno-
minations are Congreg gationaliſts and r ; there are a tew Epiſcopalians and Ro-


man Catholics.


InDIAns.] The remains : of the Penobſcot tribe are the only Indians who! t: ke up
their reſidence in this diſtrict. They confiſt of about 100 families, and live together in re-
gular ſociety at Indian Old Town, which is ſituated on an iſland of about 200 acres,
in Penobſcot river, juſt above the Great Falls. They are Roman Catholics, and
have a prieſt, who refides among them, and adminiſters the ordinances. They have
a decent houſe for public worthip, with a bell, and another building, where they
meet to tranſact the public buſineſs of their tribe. In their ailembles all things are
. mavagec with the greateſt order and decorum. The Sachems form the legiſlative and
executive authority of the tribe; though the heads of all the families are. invited
to be preſent at their periodical public meetings. The tribe is increaſing, in con-


5 of an obligation laid, by the Sachems, on the young people, to marry
carl 7.


In


'3t2 ' DISTRICT OF MAIN.

In a former war, this tribe loſt their lands; but, at the commencement of the la
war, the Provincial Congreſs granted them all the lands from the head of the tide in
Penobſcot river, included in lines drawn fix miles from the river on each ſide, i. e.


a tract, twelve miles wide, interſected in the middle by the river. They, however,
confider that they have a right to hunt and fiſh as far as the mouth of the bay of


4,
rene - - $- +4 _
* 2 Y b
_ —— 5 0 o ——
i 25 Is Hitt = . 8 1 —
+ - + - Ki Wa 5 — > — = me
4 © 4


— — *
«th N & 2
. * .
th * = 4 444,
. - " dns. i 3 A sf >" 1 © 4
N TTL TE e299 oooh ons OT, G . „
99 oli —5 1 n _ n 4. * - > * r
—— —— — —


Fl Penobſcot ends. This was their original right, in ane to any other tribe,
1 and they now occupy it.

Pe | CoxsrrruTION. | The fame as Maffachuſetts. |
1 HisroRr.] The firſt attempt to ſettle this eountry was made in bete on the weſt


ſide of Kennebeck, near the ſea. No permanent ſettlement, however, was at this time
effected. It does not appear that any further attompts were made until between 8
ears 1620 and 1630. |
The Dutch formerly had a ſettlement at the place, which 3 is now called Newcaſtle,
which was under the juriſdiction of the governor of New York, then called Manhadoes.
The town was built on a beautiful neck of land, where rows of old cellars are now to
be ſeen. |
In 1635, Sir Ferdinando Gorges obtained a grant from the Council of Plymouth, of
the tract of country between the rivers Paſcataqua and Saggadahock, or Kennebeck;


r Seen


PE
* 1 — — 3 * 75 1
ö


err ee
* g 8 TT"? N od
PP ˙ 2 +;
CC
81 x 4 * * 2 n


; and up Kennebeck ſo far as to form a ſquare of 120 miles. It is ſuppoſed that Sir Fer-
Fi 85 dinand firſt inſtituted government in this province.

Fits > In 1639, Gorges obtained from the Crown a charter of the foil and juriſiRion,
pits Fx ov ihe g as ample Powers, perhaps, as the King of England ever granted to any
p35 ſubje
is in the ſame year he appointed a governor and council, and: they ie iſtered
* juſtice to the ſettlers until about the year 1647, when hearing of the death of Gorges,
5 they ſuppoſed their authority ceaſed ; and the people on the ſpot univerſally com-
(72 bined — agreed to be under civil government, and to elect their officers annually.
* SGovernment was adminiſtered in this form until 1652, when the inhabitants ſub-
by mitted fo the Maſſachuſetts, who, by a new conſtruction of their charter, which was
+ Hl given to Roſſwell and others in 1 62 8, claimed the ſoil and juriſdiction of the province

1 3 of Main, as far as the middle of Caſco Bay. Main then firſt took the name of York-
os - ſhire ; and county courts were held in the manner they were in Maſfachuſetts, and the

i 44 towns had liberty to ſend their deputics to the general court at Boſton.

T 52 In 1691, by charter from William and Mary, the province of Main, and the Jarge
i territory eaſtward, extending to Nova Scotia, was incorporated with the Maſſachuſetts

i Bay; ſince which it has been governed, and courts held as in other parts of the
174 4 Maflachuſetts.
1 The ſeparation of this district from Maff achuſetts, and its erection into an inde-
1 pendent State, have been ſubjects diſcuſſed by the inhabitants in town meeting, by
* the appointment of the „ Such is the rapid ſettlement and growth of
141 this country, that the period when this contemplated ſeparation will take place is
#4 | probably not far diſtant. a
175 For the beſt hiſtorical account of this diſtrict, the reader is fred to Memoirs
155 of Sir Ferdinando Gorges,” by the Rev. Dr. Belknap, publiſhed in the Columbia 5
1 — . — for 1788 —and to Hutchinſon 8 Hiſtory of Maffachuſetts.

'

1

14 |

8 MASSACHUSETTS.


-\7 EL "- 1


3 „„ pa * + = - J
Pray” FAS — — ů


FK—KKK•ʃ—ÜKV⁊vV—&ůũ2Sçl⁰ . ˙ — op TOO — —


2 * pn wins 501 2 6227 |
3 FAY N 1 "Fes 4


| a | | |
| C % ie.

* en ů f
— YT 5 —


*


+


9 $SSITILIMOHLAF


— yoquiy uo;


| 5 , EO S LASIIDVS SVN.


% H R


, e FAS
F 24 e 5


4 — wo 70% 0b | |
* N N 5 2 eb
oy 6 — 6 = |


yP1.01f


, Wn NOUN,


Argymorgy n
„, 1914) WJ


AVE QUO) HdV)
„ pfui U


ien,


po deo
oy


| ary


N ; L


* .
6 „
LEY"
3
*


* 5 9
Do SLASIHOVSSFIY


uuy adv »


| 4210 PUP | 6
n — 1
Þ |


pury] quali |


Td HSA ß 5


* + 5 7
bod ET? Re 1 1 * * , . wa Oe Sc 2 . —
; * j 2 4 3 — * » * & by
3 4 3 * 0 wy My WS P 44 25 05 RS — 1 Fez g * 4 « LACS 8 * Sr 3 OE 0
: 1 Wo be . N bi 0 Ale 8 C 0 ai P ; — | k
2 _ . * 8 9 = - 5 n 2 ene ENS , 3 T7 1 7 : 6 90" 0 þ 4 N N be 4 1 IR _ Ty = *
a n „ F ͤ it eg 5 n W . ö TS 5 82 8 ni... CY Ts OI ON : „ Ie: ® 7 3 |
. 3 1 + wi 4 ; 4 2 5 FY 2 l a. 1 0 822 * _ a N 5 8 h — 8 EA 3 ' X
* r A 3 2 2 Nee _ _ OE * „A 3 3 ne 5 8 2 r * oy 1 "up ts 4 2 P * *
"4 Lakes A 1 9 n e 8 d 1 " . ] - 26 4. (EE ll * » N * 1 A . 1 * I 108 * > * . MS 8 * 2
2 % ba ho? : « * By # ; % $20! * e; AL od wir o . ACS 3.2 a 8 * = yy 25 —
f l 4 bs N IS wi 7 +
w 0 4 * hs att add. wit e 1 * Has F .
r e | & r > * Dre ere je ne - nay a


—.— —


Free bats ˙ * eh, _
ef - Ib lg oa 97k es


* v * S EO n p .
2 8 85 8 yy r — n n
L ** »-k< ASL y 8 , jp 2 8
1 * aan N 4 1
— f


, 0 »
- _ * 5 \ 2 2
r 3 4 7 o *
3 5 * e * 4 * 2
0 1 ts _ OE deve TBS _—_
* 4 e "RF *
f — SI > 0


BouNDARIES. þ


Drv1s10Ns. ] This. ꝓart of Maſſachuſetts is divided into the collaring counties:


No. Fam.
8038


10883


= 3 8
Nantucket -


Worceſter -
Berkſhire —


( 313' )


MASSACHUSETTS.


| Miles.
Length 12
Breadth 50


145 between


SITUATION AND EXTENT.


7


x 30 and 5 40 E. Long.
41 go and 439 N. Lat.


Sq. Miles.
} 6250.


OUNDED north, by Vermont and New Hampſhire ; eaft, by the


Atlantic Ocean ; ſouth, by the Atlantic, Rhode Hand: and Con-
necticut; weſt, by New York.


Counties. No. Townr,
Suffolk = |
Eſſex - 22
Middleſex - 41
Hampſhire - 60
Plymouth 13
Piehl 15 |
Barnſtable -
Duke's


26


Eleven counties 265


8
RivERs.


No. How.
0355


. 7644
5998
9181


4240

4514,
2343 -
1013
8613


4476 ;


54377


See New En gland. |
Houſatonick river riſes from ſeveral ſources | in the weſtern parts of this


1580
9617


3173

5441

2
558
872


9729


4899


55770


No. Taha.


44875
- $7993:

42737

3968


29535


.


17354


3265


46:0


56807
330291


378787


Ch, Towns, Wo. Inh.
 Bosron =< 18038
1 7921
INewbury Port 48 3 7
Charleſtown 1583
Concord — 1590
Northampton 1628
E - IIS
Plymouth - 2995
Taunton -<- 3804
| Barnſtable * 2610
Edgartown - 1352
Sherburne = 4620
Worceſter - 2095
LB ge 1336
Great Barrington 1373
P ulation for eve
Kquare mile bo. 5


State, and flows ſoutherly through Connecticut into Long Iſland Sound. Deerfield
river falls into Connecticut river, from the weſt, between Deerfield and Greenfield.


A moſt excellent and beautiful tract of EDS I lies on its banks.


Weſtfield river


empties into the Connecticut at Weſt Springfield. Connecticut river paſſes through
this State, and interſects the county of Hampſhire : in its courſe it runs over falls above


Deerfield, and between Northampton and Springfield.


A company, by the name of


The Proprietors of the Locks and Canals on Connecticut river,“ was incorporated
by the General Court in 1792, for the purpoſe of rendering Connecticut river paſſable


river northward to New Hampſhire.
Miller's and Chicapee rivers fall into Connecticut on the eaſt fide ; the former at


dor boats and other things, from Chica


Northfield, the latter at Springfield.


In the eaſtern part of the State is Merrimack, which we have already i in part de-


ſorbed, It is navigable 8 veſſels of burden about vr of miles from its mouth, where
e +


it


*
8 [4
* 1
® *
* **


313 MASSACHUSETTS.
and Haverhill. Vaſt quantities of ſhip timber, ranging timber, * deals, clap-


and ſummer conſiderable quantities of ſalmon, ſhad, and ale wives are caught, which


and made the maintenance of them a public charge. The houſes ate of wood, and.


with ſafety, until they are abreaſt of the lights, where is a bold ſhore and good an-


ber of excellent mill feats. From Dedham the courſe of the river 1s northerly through


Watertown and Cambridge, and paſſes into Boſton harbour, between Charleſtown and
Boſton: it is navigable for boats to Watertown ſeven miles. |


runs) from its mouth. This river is navigable for boats to the firſt fall, five miles from


it is obſtructed by the firſt falls, or rapids, called Mitchell's Eddy, between Bradford


boards, ſhingles, ſtaves, and other lumber, are brought down m rafts, fo conſtructed, as
to paſs all the falls in the river except thoſe of Amuſkaeg and Pautucket. In the ſpring


are either uſed as bait in the cod fiſhery, or pickled and ſhipped to the Weſt Indies.
There are twelve ferrics acroſs this river in the county of Eſſex. The bar acroſs the
month of this river is a very great incumbrance to the navigation, and is Epectally ter-
rible to ſtrangers. There are 16 feet water upon it at common tides. In 1787

the general court granted a ſum of money for the erection of two ſufficient light houſes,


contrived to be removed at pleaſure, ſo as to be always contormed to the ſhifting of
the bar; and thus the ſingle rule of bringing them in a line will be the only neceſ-
ſary direction for veſſels approaching the harbour, and by this direction they may fait |


choring ground. The bridges over this river will be mentioned under that head.
Nathua, Concord, and Shaw ſheen rivers, riſe in this State, and run a north-eaſterly
courſe into the Merrimack. Parker's river takes its riſe in Row ley, and, after a courſe
of a few miles, paſſes into the Sound which ſeparates Plumb Ifland from the main
land. It is navigable about two miles from its mouth. - Ipſwich and Chebacco rivers.
aſs through the town of Iptwich into Ipſwich Bay. Miſtick river falls into Boſton:
3 caſt of the peninſula of Charleſtown : it is navigable three miles to Medford..
Charles river is a conſiderable ſtream, the principal branch of which riſes from a
pond bordering on Hopkinton : it paſſes through Holliſton and Bellingham, and di
vides Medway from Medfield, Wrentham and Franklin, and thence into Dedham,
where, by a curious bend, it forms a peninſula of goo acres of land. And what is very
ſingular, a ſtream called Mother Brook, runs out of this river, in this town, and falls
into Neponſet river, which anſwers to a er uniting the two rivers, and affords a num-


Newton, paſſing over romantic falls—it then bends to the north-eaſt and eaſt, through


Neponſet river originates chiefly from Muddy and Punkapog Ponds, in Stoughton,
and Maſhapog Pond in Sharon, and after paſſing over falls ſufficient to carry "mills,
unites with other ſmall ſtreams, and forms a very conſtant ſupply of water for the many
mills fituated on the river below, until it meets the tide in Milton, from whence it is
navigable for veſſels of 150 tons burthen to the bay, diftant about four miles. Neponſet
river, from Milton to the Bay, forms a regular and beautiful ſerpentine, interſperſed
with hillocks of wood ſo regularly placed, that from Milton Hill it affords: one of the
fineſt proſpects 1n the world. Paſſing Fore and Back rivers in Weymouth, you. come'
to North river, which riſes in Indian Head Pond in Pembroke, and running in a ſerpen-
tine courſe between Scituate and Marſhfield paſſes to the ſea. This river for its fize is
remarkable for its great depth of water, it being, in ſome places, not more than 40 or |
o feet wide, and yet veſſels of 300 tons are built at Pembroke, 18 miles (as the river


its ſource in Indian Head Pond; thence to the neareſt waters which run into Taunton-
river is only three miles. A canal to connect the waters of theſe two rivers, which
communicate with Narraganſet and Maſſachuſetts Bays, would be of great utility, as it
would ſave a long and dangerous navigation round Cape Cod.


Taunton


| MASSACHUSETTS. - yrs
_ -» Taunton river is made up of ſeveral ſtreams which unite in or near the town of
Bridgwater. Its courſe is from N. E. to S. W. till it falls into Narraganſet Bay at
Tiverton, oppoſite the north end of Rhode Ifland. It receives a conſiderable tributary
ſtream at Taunton from the north-weſt. The head waters of Pautucket and Providence
rivers, in Rhode Ifland, and of Quinnabaug and Shetucket rivers, in Connectidut,
are in this State. Des | 4
Carts, Bays, IsLANnDs, &c. | - The only Capes of note, on the coaſt of this Stata,
are Cape Ann on the north fide of Maſſachuſetts Bay, and Cape Cod on the ſouth.”
Cape Cod, ſo called probably from the multitudes of cod fiſh which are found on its
«coaſt, is the ſouth-caſterly part of the Commonwealth of Maſſachuſetts: in ſhape it
_ reſemble a man's arm when bended, with the hand turned inward towards the body,
The Cape comprehends the county of Baraſtable, and is between 70 and 80 miles in
length, FFF 180 | | 8
y Provincia Town is the hook of the Cape, and is generally narrow, the wideſt place
not being more than three miles in extent. The harbour, which is one of the beſt in
the State, opens to the ſouthward, and has depth of water for any ſhips. I was the firſt
Hort entered by our forefathers when they came to ſettle in this country, in 1620. This place
has been in a ſtate of thriving and decaying many times; it is now rifing. It contains
about ninety families, whoſe whole dependence is upon the ſea for their ſupport: they
employ about twenty fail of veſſels, great and ſmall, in the cod fiſhery : they have been
remarkably ſucceſsful of late. Ten of their veſſels, employed in 1790 upon the Grand
Bank, took eleven thouſand quintals of cod fiſh. They have not loſt a veſſel, or a man,
JJ C nn oy
The houſes ſtand upon the inner ſide of the hook of the Cape, fronting ſouth-eaſt,
and looking into the harbour: they are ſmall, one ſtory high, and ſet up on blocks or
piles, that the driving ſands may paſs under them, otherwiſe they would be buried in
Jand. The houſes ſtand in one range upon the beach; the flakes on which they dry
their fiſh are round them. The veſſels run in upon the ſhore, which is a ſoft ſand,
throw their fiſh over, where they are waſhed from the falt, and carried up to the flakes
on hand-barrows. 215 1 5 CC „
They raiſe nothing from their lands, but are wholly dependent upon Boſton market,
and other places, for every kind of vegetable production. VVV
There are but two horſes, and two yoke of oxen, kept in the town: they have about
fifty cows, which feed in the ſpring upon beach graſs, which grows here and there upon
the ſhore; and in ſummer they feed in the ſunken ponds and marſhy places, that are
found between the ſand hills. Here the cows are ſeen wading, and even ſwimming,
plunging their heads into the water up to their horns, picking a ſcanty ſubſiſtence from
the roots and herbs produced in the water. They are fed in the winter on ſedge cut
upon the flats. „ el 5 e
Except a border of looſe land, which runs round the whole place, it is very broken
and hilly. Theſe hills are white ſand, and their produce is whortleberry buſhes, and
mall pitch pine ſhrubs. The pines, next the village, have been much cut off for fire-
wood. Cutting away the wood expoſes the hills to be torn away by the violence of the
winds, and, in ſome inſtances, perſons have been obliged to remove their houſes to pre-
vent being covered up. Theſe hills and ſand heaps are conſtantly ſhifting ; and when :
torn away in one place, are piled up on another: it is not unfrequent to have their fiſh
flakes covered with banks of ſand like ſnow. Immediately in ſtepping from any houſe,
the foot ſinks in ſand to the depth of the ſhoe. The moſt ſoutherly point of this place,
called Wood End, is five miles ſouth-weſt from the village. What is EE BO
812 | Oum,


n


HLH —
+5 * 2.086 N TY 3 gr 4 . „ N - #6 »
„ J «„ 3; * e + ax . |
rr 1 r
0 TER 5 $a Toes. Frm tf l _—— 2 7 EY wy ; ” *
K 4 © ”
. " — — p 2 — 1449. 4 "I


Re


,

4 r * 19 *
e 7 8
14. * 22 > Þ... > * 4 14 7

8 8 1 K. 4 ds, 5d
Xe; 7.46

„ aldhys *
9 \ 2 . * .
Ln al AA Ew - ou 2


Op >) :


N 88
. N we
58 5 nor. + 1
7 p * "I
HIT 4 2 3 1 —
N ** hot


316


woods with the winds, and as it covers the trees to the tops, they die. As ſoon as a
tops of the trees appear above the ſand, but they are all dead: where they have been


ſome have been fo long whipped and worn out with the ſand and winds, that there is
nothing remaining but the hearts and knots of the trees. But over the greater part of


from the village to fith in boats: here they keep their fiſhing apparatus and lodge. At


| haddock, and other kinds of fiſh, are taken in plenty, whenever the weather will per-


rings: the two latter are often taken in their harbour in great abundance. At this


_ faſtened to an iron chain with a ſwivel, to prevent them from biting or twiſting it off.


As this harbour is of ſo much conſequence, often affording a ſhelter from ſtorms to


ſides exempting them from taxation. That encouragement is now withholden, and a poll-


MASSACHUSETTS.


Point, known to all ſeamen, is the north-weſterly extremity of the Cape, and hes north-
weſt from the village, diſtant three miles. | IN

A traveller, in paſſing from the village over to Race Point, about mid-way, travels
ſome diftance through a pine wood, the trees about twenty feet in height; at length, he
finds the path obſtructed with a mound of ſand, almoſt perpendicular, riſing among
the trees to their tops: his horſe with difficulty mounts this precipice, his feet finking
almoſt to the knees in the ſand. This volume of ſand is gradually rolling into the


traveller mounts this bank, a curious ſpectacle preſents to view, a deſert of white ſand,
five miles in length, parallel with the ſea, and one mile and an halt in breadth. The


lately covered, the bark and twigs are ſtill remaining, from others they are fallen off;


this deſert the trees have long ſince diſappeared. 0 50 P 1 75 ;
Atſter croſſing this wilderneſs, where the horſe ſinks to his feflocks at every ſtep, you
arrive at Race Point. Hereare a number of huts erected by the perions who come over


the diſtance of fifteen rods from the Point, the water is thirty fathoms in depth, and cod,
mit. They take many kinds of fiſh with ſeins, ſuch as pollock, mackarel, and her-


place, Race Point, are ſeen, at ſome times, hundreds of ſharks lying on the fthore,
which have been cauglit by the boats when fiſhing for cod: they weigh from three to

fix hundred weight: their livers, which produce oil, are the only parts of them of
which any uſe is made. They are taken by a large hook baited with a cod fiſh, and


When the ſhark has ſerzed the hook they drag him up to the ſtern of the boat, and
being too large to take on board the boats there made uſe of, they row aſhore with
him, drag him up on the beach, rip him open, take out his liver, and the carcaſe is
left to periſh. Fiſhing, either at ſea in veſſels, or round the ſhore in boats, is the whole
employment of all the inhabitants. There is no employment but this to which they
can turn their attention : and the boys, as ſoon as they have ſtrength to pull a codfiſh,
are put on board a boat or a veſſel. exert 5 5 |
veſſels both inward and outward bound, it is of importance that there ſhould always
be a ſettlement here. The Province formerly afforded them ſome encouragement, be-


tax has been required, whether with good policy, has been doubted by many : the
inhabitants complain of it, as an unreaſonable burthen. Their employment is a great
public benefit, and what they acquire is through many perils and the hardeſt labour.
The extent of Cape Cod, on the outer ſhore, beginning at Wood End, round to
Buzzard's Bay, or to the line between Sandwich and Wareham, is about one hundred

and thirty miles. The inner ſhore on Maſſachuſetts Bay is about ſeventy-five miles.
The road that is commonly travelled on to the Cape is on the inner fide, and meaſured
by this, the extent of the Cape will be as firſt mentioned. Cape Cod, in general, is 4
thin, barren ſoil, by far the moſt ſo of any 52 of New England: but the ſea air im-
pregnates all vegetables with a quality which renders them far more nutritive to cattle,
than the ſame quantity far inland; it being an undoubted fact, that cattle will do well
5


MASSACHUSETTS. 317
in ſach paſtures, as far up in the country would ſtarve them at once. Their ſalt hay,
which is almoſt their only forage, affords a manure which is alſo far ſuperior to that
which is made at a diſtance from the ſea : this greatly affiſts their crops of corn and rye,
beyond what the land promiſes in its appearance. The lands of Cape Cod could never
ſapport its inhabitants, which are nearly 17,000. A great part of the men and boys
are conſtantly employed at fea. In this buſineſs they ſupport themſelves and families ;
and it is obſerved, that the young people form family connections earher in life than in
any other patt of the country; Which, perhaps, is one evidence that the means of ſub-
ſiſtence are eaſily obtainable. Cape Cod is nurſery for ſeamen, and, in that view,
one of the moſt important places in the State, or in America. If the cultivation of the
ſea is a bleſſing to any nation, we may conſider the inhabitants of the Cape as he moſt
valuable among our countrymen.

The Cape abounds with clear freſh ns generally ſtocked with fiſh : there is little
ſunken land: the wood on the Cape is generally pitch pine: there are few or no ſtones
below Barnſtable : the cellars are walled with brick, in a circular form, to prevent the
looſe ſand from caving in: the wells are ſecured in the fame manner, and they are
obliged to keep them covered to prevent the ſand from blowing in and ſpoiling the
water. Formerly, the inhabitants took many whales round the Capes, chiefly in Maſ-
ſachuſetts Bay; but that bufineſs is almoſt at an end. The manner of taking black
fiſh is ſomewhat ſingular: they are a fiſh of the whale kind, of about five tons weight,
and produce oil in the ſame manner as a whale. When a ſhoal of them is diſcovered,
which ſometimes conſiſts of ſeveral hundreds, the inhabitants put off in boats, get
without them, and drive them like ſo many cattle on to the ſhore and flats, where
they are left by the tide and fall an eaſy prey. The ſhore of the Cape is, in many
places, covered with the huge bones of theſe fifth. and of whales, which remain uncon-
ſumed for many years. Many perſons conjecture, that the Cape is gradually wearing
away, and that it will finally fall a ſacrifice to the ravages of the winds and the ſeas,
and many circumſtances favour ſuch an opinion. At Province Town harbour ſtumps
of trees are ſeen, which the ſea now covers in common tides. When the Engliſh firſt
| ſettled upon the Cape, there was an iſland off Chatham, at three leagues diftance,
called Webb's and, containing twenty acres, covered with red cedar or favin : the
inhabitants of Nantucket uſed to carry wood from it. This iſland has been wholly
worn away for almoſt a century. A large rock that was upon the iſland, and which
ſettled as the earth waſhed away, now marks the place; it riſes as much above the
bottom of the ſea, as it uſed to riſe above the ſurface of the ground : the water is fix
fathoms deep on this pot: and 1 in 2 places on the Cape the ſea appears to be en-
croaching on the land.

The Cape is ſo expoſed to 1 in every direction, that fruit trees do not thrive : .
there are few orchards of any conſequence below Barnſtable : there is not a cyder mill
in the county. In many places, their foreſt trees have more the IE of a prim
hedge than of timber.

The Cape is an healthy fituation, 5 except for thoſe conſtitutions which are too deli-
cate for the piercing winds that come from the ſea.

The inhabitants in general live as long as in the other parts of the northern States.
The winds, in every direction, come from the ſea ; and invalids, by viſiting the
Cape, ſometimes experience the ſame benefit as from going to ſca.*

The principal bays on the coaſt of Maſſachuſetts are, Ipſwich, Boſton, Plymouth,

Cape Cod or TC and Buzzard" 8 Bays. Manx iſlands are ſcattered along the


coaſt,
* See Maſſachuſetts Magazine for March, 179 .


313 5 MASSACHUSETTS.


coat, the moſt noted of which are Plumb Iſland, which is about nine miles in length,
extending from Merrimack. river on the north, to the entrance of Ipſwich river on the
ſouth, and 1s ſeparated from the main land by a narrow found, called Plumb Ifland
river, fordable in ſeveral places at low water. It conſiſts principally of ſand, blown
into curious heaps, and crowned with buſhes bearing the beach plumb. There is,
however, a valuable property of ſalt marſh, and at the ſouth end of the ifland are two
or three good farms: on the north end are the light-houſes betore-mentioned : on the
tea ſhore of this iſland, and on Saliſbury beach, the Marine Society, and other Gen-
tlemen of Newbury Port, have humanely erected ſeveral ſmall houſes, furniſhed with
ſuel and other conveniencies for the rel ief of mariners who wo be N on n this
coaſt,
Nantucket Ifland 155 ſouth of Cape Cod: it 0 according to Douglas, 23 ,000
acres, including the beach. No mention is made of the diſcovery and ſettlement of
this iſland, under its preſent name, by any of our hiſtorians. | It is more than probable
that this is the ifland which is uſually called Nautican by ancient voyagers. As the
I iſland is low and fandy it is calculated only for theſe people who are willing to depend
almoſt entirely on the watery element for ſubſiſtence. The land of itſelf bn e
one county by the name of Nantucket. It has but one town, called Sherburne,
containing 4020 inhabitants, and ſends one repreſentative to the General Aſembly.
1 The inhabitants formerly carried on the moſt confiderable whale fiſhery on the coaſt,
= but the war almoſt ruined this buſineſs. . T hey have fince, however, revived it again,
Vibe and purſue the whales, even into the Great Pacific Ocean. There is not a fin gle tree
$321 on the iſland of natural growth; they have a place called the Woods, but it has been
. deſtitute of trees for theſe 60 years paſt. The iſland was formerly well wooded. The
people, eſpecially the females, are fondly attached to the iſland, "008 few wiſh to
migrate to a more deſirable fituation.

The inhabitants of this iſland are principally men there is one ſociety of 5
gregationaliſts. Forty years ago there were three congregations of Indians, each of
Which had a houſe for worſhip and a teacher: their laſt Indian paſtor died o years
ſince, and was a worthy, reſpectable character.

Martha's Vineyard, which lies a little to the weſtward of Nantucket, is about

_ twenty-one miles in length and four in breadth : it contains three ſocieties of Congre-
gationaliſts at Edgarton, Tiſbury, and Chilmark, two of Baptiſts, without miniſters,
and three congregations of Indians, one of which is ſupplied by an ordained Indian
miniſter, and to the others, the Rev. Mr. Mayhew preaches in rotation, and ſuperin-
tends the whole. This, and the neighbouring ifland, conſtitute Duke's county, con-
taining 3265 inhabitants, between 400 and 500 of which are Indians and Mulattoes,

ſubſiſting by agriculture and fiſhing.

Edgarton, which includes the fertile iſland of Chabaquidick, thee miles long and
one and a half broad, is the ſhire town.. This little iſland joins. to the: har-
bour and renders it very ſecure. Gayhead, the weſternmoſt part of the ifland,
containing about 2400 acres, is very good tillage land, and is wholly occupied by
Indians, but not well cultivated. One-third of this tract is the property of the Engliſh
ſociety for propagating the goſpel in New England. The principal productions of the
ifland are corn, rye, and oats. They raiſe ſheep and cattle in conſiderable numbers.
There are four mill ſtreams in Tiſbury. The inhabitants of this county ſend three


repreſentatives, and, in conjunction with N antucket, one ſenator to the General


= =
by N

Tx

ws P

. 47 oe? E
. — .

2 * 22 .

.

— | 4*2 .
r
123 7S 13

12221

91 4 x

4 r .

"8 ., |
3 £ i

* A > Ea MA

C ; r *

1

r .

* 4 = R

3 ©. %

+ „
1 * 4

4 _ 1

1

9 "> x 3
> FM

5 1 2

1

1 .

1

. . |

A %* id
þ "hs „
s "FX: 4 p
. | i
5 "OS > 4
5 3
>.” 1
; bes 1
4 EX 4
5 N .
"= wb b
'F- * ;
1 5 1 Y N
. 4 2 ** .
2. 64, (
* fo = Ba

.
13 4

* "IF 6

3 ;

A AN
*:-, 7+ WM
1 .

. =,
- » 4
SY £2
wo *
2 .
44 —
x 1
=>
| +- i
1 be %

6 0 iZ
p — 4
pd -

Cz 5 1
1
"8.4
- r
5 . 1 . 8

* ts be
bo %. +»
„

F © ITY
. * — 4
Y * 4

4 1 * x - 8

Fr "42. 8

q 4 . 'F 15
3 *.
C _ bh,

5
1 5 4 W
1 : -

—

* * 3

8 *. 5.

4% 8 + c

4 2 * *
13 * 2
3 _—
OT
8 4 4
* >
* 8 ug
.
N r
” . * "ag
- "EW
£ +
n
:F 8
. 3
: 7 3-4
F i
* Ga ö |
2 . 1 4 7 4
4 << =
9199 Y .
4 *
2 4
& 5 A
2 * 77
7 N. hq .
\ * ” o
r
1 4
* 4 4 2 t
* ER” - \
CZ 63
x wy * /
Y n }
* 1 =
M
* %
12 2 72 <

I , .

2
3
18 „

On 4 .
5
6%
| "1 :
o = 3

*

2 '
12 J
EG 4+
* x

+ 7

2
x4 105


i
*
7
1
Gy
*
Foe
.
.
5
4 J
7 8
r
= o p
1
1 4 *
; 14 f
1 Fa
"og ; 4
; ut * |
* J
.
| .
L
8 *


Court.
The other iflands of conſideration are in MaSlachuſetts Bay, which i is a eee
ver-


— — — 9 — — >
oe Be n
"VE." „ .
— r


MASSACHUSETTS. 319


diverſified by about forty of various ſizes : ſeven of them only are within the juriſdictions
of the town of Boſton, and taxed with it. Caftle Hland is about three miles from
Boſton, and contains about 18 acres of land. The buildings are, the Governor's
houſe, ,a magazine, gaol, barracks, and workſhops. In June, 1792, there were con-
fined on this iſland 77 convicts, who are employed in the manufacture of nails, and
guarded by a company of between 60 and 70 ſoldiers. The fort on this ifland” com-
mands the entrance of the harbour : here are mounted 30 pieces of cannon, and 34
others lie diſmounted. ==

Liehr Houvszs.] Within this State are the following lightchouls on Plumb:
Iſland, near Newbury, are two, which we have already mentioned: on Thatcher's
Iſland, off Cape Ann, two lights of equal height; another ſtands on a rock on the
north fide of the entrance of Boſton harbour, with one ſingle light: on the north point
of Plymouth harbour are two lights: on a point at the entrance of the harbour on the
iſland of Nantucket, is one with a ſingle light; this light may be ſeen as far as Nan
tucket ſhoals extend ; the iſland being low, the light appears over it.

Fac or THE COUNTRY. |] See New England. "By an admeaſurement made by the
barometer at Princetown, in this State, about 4 5 miles N. W. from Boſton, and at
 Cambirdge, in 1777, it appears that Princetown is 1332 feet higher than the level of
the la. The top of Wachurſt mountain in Princetown was found to be 2989 feet above
the level of the ſea. A hill of this height, in a clear horizon, may be ſeen: 67 miles.

S0oIL AND PRODUCTIONS. ] In Maſſachuſetts are to be found all the varieties of ſoil,
from very good to very bad, capable of yielding all the different productions common


_ to the climate, ſuch as Indian corn, rye, wheat, barley, oats, hemp, flax, hops, po


tatoes, field beans and peas—apples, pears, peaches, plums, cherries, &c. It has
been obſerved; that the effects of the eaſt winds extend farther inland than formerly,
and injure the tender fruits, particularly the peach, and even the more hardy apple.
The average produce of the good lands, well cultivated, has been eſtimated as follows:
40 buſhels ot corn on an acre—30 of barley 20 of wheat—30. of rye—100 of potatoes.
| The ſtaple commodities of this State are fiſh, beef, and lumber.

CoMMERCE. | The following abſtract of goods, wares, and merchandize, exported

from this State, from the firſt of October 1790, to the 31ſt of September 1791, will
give the reader the beſt idea of their articles of export, and the quantity of each.


EXPORTS from MASSACHUSETTS, from October 1„ 1790, to. September 37, 179 Pp


Aſh, Pot Ce tons 783.20 Coffee do. 68,044:
===, Pearl ” '2,1539-80 | Cocos - r
Apples pag bbls. 1,131 | Chocolate boxes 8

Bricks | num, 330,250 Candles---Myrtle - de. - 248
Smiths“ Bellows VVV .
Boats r eee do. 1106
Beer, Ale, and Porter, gal, 15,3323 Cables and Cordage tons 32
Boots | pairs 339 | —-—— cwt. 18
Brimſtone lbs. 3,280 [te 7 16
Blacking or Lampblack, kegs 158 ee Gt. 20
Cider © "bbls. 292 Manufactured do- 1,480
— = doz. 1 Coals * DUI... 1,48:
Chalk Eau i tons 10 [Cranberries do. 688
Cotton © 5 Ibs. .. 33,371 | Canes and Walking dick 96


320 MASSACHUSETTS.


ExeorTs from MAsSACHUSETTS continued.


Cards, cotton & wool doz. 25 | Iron-wrought---Axes num. 662
Coaches, Chaiſes, Phaetons "> "10 |} ©" do. 48
Carts and Waggons 3 Locks and Bolts do. ' 2,000
Duck, American bolts 288 Shovels 0 247
Drugs Glauber Salts lbs. 1,220 | Skimmers & Ladles pr. 15
Saſſafras Root tons 17 Anchors num. 66
Earthen ware--Yell. or Queen's, crates 92 Z 60
Stone _ 8 -- Cutlaſſes „ 72
Flaxſecd hhds. 6,056 | Knives and Forks do. 240
Flax „ Cheſts of Carpenter's Tools 4
Feathers do. 100 | Jron-cafi--Pots, Kettles, &c. do. 702
 Flints FP Cannon .
Frames of—-Boats "0 1 Shot for Cannon do. 1,000
. do. 180 | Tron the ton Pig tons 173%
Windows & Doors do. =o 1 1 N 36.18
Houſehold Furniture — - A Nail Rods -
Tables do. 37 1... _ do.

Deſks 2h 23 | Indigo Ibs. 1,238
Bureaus 3 Leather, tann'd & drefs'd do. 1,240
Sophas ne 8 — —

ä 705 Lime - Dutt. _ 456
Windſor & Ruſh che 54 Shot 208. . -- 2,083-

Fi -ſberies-—Fiſh dried cwt. 326,560 J Live Stock „
Ditto pickled bbls. 20,177 HForned Cattle num. 652
Oil Whale gal. 270, 810 %%% m WC:
Oil Spermaceti do. 70,266 | Sheep o.
Sperma. Candles boxes 2,927 Hogs do. 619
Whalebone lbs. 85,16 Poultry dos. 999
Genſang lbs. 3,096 | Merchandize foreign packages 179
Grindſtones num. 104 | Molaſſes 5 gal. 11,421
Glaſs---Ware __ crates JJ © © © © mmm; =
Window boxes 13 | Muſtard lbs. 780
Greceries--Caflia & Cinnam. Ibs. 1,178 Madder „
JJ . * do. 20,909
Pepper do. 92 | Nankeens num. of pieces 3,94
Brown Sugar do. 3, 904 | Nuts 0 buſh. 692
Raifins do. 100 | Napd] Stores---Pitch bbls. 552
Grain and Pulſe--- 3 I do. 2,824
Wheat buſh, 52 [  Turpentine do. 4,266
Rye do. 2,350 | Roſin . 23
Barley . i on, Baie — 90
; Indian Corn do. 69,064 | Powder, Gun Ibs. 13,814
Oats do. 447 | -—-----, Hair | do. 166
| Peas and Beans do. 43,746 | Pomatum do. 45
Horns and Horntips num. 71,281 Paints | do. 840
Hats do. 376 | Provifions--—Rice tierces 810
Hops Ibs. 650 Flour _ Ibs. 21,236
tay _ tons 53 | Ship Stuff do. _214


Exronrs


MASSACHUSETTS. | 3251


Exrokrs from MASSACHUSETTS continued.


Value of Goods, Wares, and Merchandiſe, exported: from Maſſachuſetts in the abore-


2,445,975 ay |


mentioned Year,


Tx.


Proviſions---Indian Meal blbs. 7, ooo | Toys for Children ds. :.raf
Rye ditto do. 252 Tin manufactured doz. 14
Bread do. 2,285 | Teas-—Bohea cheſts 64
Bert | do. 30, 499 | S8Souchong do. 1084
Pork do. 3,174 Green do. 178

Crackers ; Kegs T0124 - _ Hyſon | 5 6285
Hams and Bacon lbs. $6,946 | Vinegar gal. 2,098
Veniſon & Mutton Hams do. 200 | Hines---Madeira do. 4,622
Cheeſe + e Other Wines do. 37940
Lard _ M7, | Bottled — 8"

Butter 7 firkin 3,873 | Wax Bees - 10
Sauſages blbs. 250 | Myrtle do. 1,946
Freſh Beef do. .92,269 | Whips num. 144
— Porx do. 29,334 | Wood---Stav. & Head. num. 5,456,041
Carcaſes of Mutton num. 561 i Shingles do. 12,32 52600
Neats Tongues Ibs. 154 {| Shooks& Caſks do. 29,895
Oyſters, Pickled kegs a JJV 15,500
| Potatoes P Hoops & Hop-poles do. $11,764

Onions „„ r 1 2419

Spirits---Rum, American gal. 298,357  Bowſprits 42

——— „Weſt India do. 2,734 | Booms . 74
Brandy r $------ | 3
Sin Mn Handſpikes OT 13,126

r do. 6 Pumps . 23

Sadlery---Saddles & Bridles num. 70 Boxes and Brakes - 6

: Carriage Harneſs ſets 1 Blocks _ $,162

Shoes , e g4499-- | Oars and Raſters 335,920

Soap 1185 boxes . % 8 35,905

Snuff „„ we Cedar and Oak Knees RE: >

Steel bundles 8 Carvings .

Spruce, Eſſence of caſes 34 „44 375

Salt 5 buſh. 3,647 | Oak Boards & Planks, feet 568, 565.

Seeds, Hay Ibs. 60 [| PineBoards&Planksdo. 21,136, 10

Heins and Furs--- EEE IE. Hs do. 37448, 369
Morocco num. 134 ! Sr.
Calf in Hair do. 290 Oak and Pine Timber 68,238
Deer and Mooſe do. 962 ñ . Oak & Pine ditto tons 13,366
Bears, Ke. do. CC Pine pieces 6, 436
Deer & other Skins unknown, Oak, Pine, & Hic ry cords 494

bhhds. caſks, and packages 56 Ml Oak Bark ö ds; 1

Tobacco hhds. —— 40 Oak ditto ground  hhds. 6

Ditto, manufactured lbs. 71,198 Maſt Hoops doz. 110

Tallow do. 273,641 | Yokes for Open 96

Twine 7 cwt. 1,900 | Beſides a Variety of Saller articles.

Tow Cloth _ yards 4,548


It


=


322 MASSACHUSETTS.


It maſt be noted, that the foregoing abſtract comprehends thoſe articles nds which
were exported to foreign orts; the domeſtic trade is not taken into the account.
Shoes, cards, hats, faddlery, and various other manufactures, and ſeveral articles of tire


produce ot the country, to a great amount, were the fame year exported to; the
touthern States.


This State owns more than three times as many tons of ſhipping as any other of the
States, and more than one third part of the whole that belongs to the United'States.*
Upwards of 29,000 tons are employed in carrying on the fiſheries ; 46,000 in the
coaſting bufineſs, and 96,564 in trading with almoſt all parts of the world. Pot and
pearl ath, ſtaves, flax-ſeed, bees-wax, Ne. are carried chiefly to Great Britain, in re-
mittance for their manufactures; maſts and proviſions to the Eaſt Indies; fiſh, oil,
beef, pork, lumber, candles, &c. are carried to the Weſt Indies, for their produce, and
the two firſt articles, fiſh and oil, to France, Spain, and Portugal; roots, vegetables,


fruits, and ſmall meats, to Nova Scotia and New Brunſwick ; hats, ſaddlery, c


cabinet-
work, men's and women's ſhoes, nails, tow- cloth, barley, hops, butter, cheeſe, &c. to
the ſouthern States.


The Negro trade was prohibited by law in 1778, and there is not
a ſingle ſlave belonging to the Commonwealth.


Maxvracrykks.] If we except printing types, ſtone wares, pitch, tar and turpen-
tine, and wine, moſt if not all the other articles enumerated in pages 204 and 205, a


manufactured in a greater or leſs degree in this State. There is a duck manufacto
Boſton, from which 1700 bolts, of 40 yards each, faid to be the beſt duck ever bebe |
ſeen in America, have been ſold in one year. Matafettirice of this kind have been
begun in Salem, Haverhill, and Springfield, and are ſaid to be in a promifing way.
Manufactories of cotton goods have been eſtabliſhed at Beverley and Worceſter; and
a much credit is due to the patriotic gentlemen who began them; although by their

ſevering exertions, they have not been able to ſurmount the various obſtacles in the
way of ſucceſs. At Taunton » Bridgewater, Middleborough, and ſome other places,
nails have been made in ſuch quantities as to prevent, in a great meaſure, the impor-
tation of them from Great Britain. In this State there are thirteen paper mulls, five on
Neponſet river, five on Charles river , one at Andover, on Shawſheen river, one at
Springfield, and the other at Sutton, in Worceſter county. Ten of theſe mills have
two vats each, and when in action, employ ten men, and as many girls and boys, and
produce at the rate of 60,000 reams of writing, printing, and wrapping paper, annu-
ally. It is eftimated that zventy thouſand pounds worth of paper is yearly made by theſe
mills; and the quantity is annually and rapidly increaſing. ._

The principal card manufactory is in Boſton, and belongs to Mr. Giles Richards,
and Co. in which are made yearly about oO dozen of cotton and wool cards, of the
various kinds or numbers, which conſume about a hundred caſks of wire, averaged at
3ol. a caſk, and about 20,000 tanned calf, ſheep, and lamb ſkins, at 2s. each. The
Ricking of theſe cards employs not leſs than 1000 people, chiefly children, and about
ſixty men are fully occupied in manufacturing card boards, card tacks, and finiſhing

the cards. It is eſtimated that about 2000 dozen cards are made at the other manufac-
tories in different parts of the State. |

The ſeat of the /hoe manufacture is at Lynn, eight 585 to the Berti d of Boſton,
in the County of Eſſex. It is not caſy to fix the number of ſhoes annually made by
the induſtrious inhabitants of this town, but it has been eſtimated by thoſe moſt com-

tent to form an accurate judgement, that, beſides the home conſumption, and the
* Ban ſent every week to Boſton and other 25 aces, ſeveral hundred thouſand


“ See page 200,


p: air


3 MASSACHUSETTS. 323
pair are ſhipped to the different parts of the United States. One man, Mr. B. Johnſon,
from his own workſhop, in the courſe of ſeven months, ſhipped 20,600 pair of ſhoes,
valued at 4,979l. 6s. excluſive of large numbers ſold in the vicinity.

Silk and thread lace, of an elegant texture, are manufactured by women and chil-
dren, in large quantities, in the town of Ipſwich, in Eſſex County, and fold for uſe
and exportation in Boſton, and other mercantile towns. This manufacture, if properly
regulated and encouraged, might be productive of great and extenſive advantages. In
the year 1790, no leſs than 41,979 yards were made in this town; and the quantity,
it is ſuppoſed, has ſince been conſiderably increaſed. . : OTH?
A wire manufactory has lately been erected at a conſiderable expence in Dedham,
in Suffolk County, for the purpoſe of drawing wire for the uſe of the fiſh-hook and

card manufacturers in Boſton. The effays which have already been made promiſe
ſucceſs. 8 5 5 Ole.
There are ſeveral ſnuff, oil, chocolate, and powder mills in different parts of the
State; and a number of iron works and ſhitting mills, beſides other mills, in common
uſe, m great abundance, for ſawing lumber, grinding grain, and fulling cloth.
There are 62 diſtilleries in this State, employed in diſtilling from foreign materials.
In theſe diſtilleries are 158 fills, which together contain 102,173 gallons. Beſides
theſe, there are twelve country ſtills employed in diſtilling domeſtic materials; but theſe
are ſmall, and the moſt of them very lately erected, and ſome have never yet been -
worked. One million nine hundred thouſand gallons have been diſtilled in one year,
which, at a duty of eleven cents a gallon, -yields a revenue to the government- of
209,000 dollars. J 8 5
A brick pyramidical glaſs-houſe was erected in Boſton by a company of gentlemen
in 1789; but for want of workmen ſkilled in the buſineſs, their works were not put
in operation effectually till November 1792; and although ſeveral of the firſt eſſays
or meltings proved unſucceſsful, later eſſays gives the fulleſt ground to believe that this
very important manufacture may be proſecuted to the advantage of the proprietors, as
well as to the great benefit of the public. From the ſpecimens of glaſs exhibited, it
appears to be of the beſt quality for clearneſs and goodneſs; and as there is an abun-
dance of the material for this manufacture at command, there can be little doubt of its
being carried to ſuch an extent, in the courſe of a few years, as to preclude foreign
importations, whieh will make a vaſt ſaving: to our country, Every friend to his
country muſt with that the patriotic company which have eſtabliſhed this manufacture,
might meet with fach ſucceſs as to have their expenſes reimburſed, which have already
exceeded the fum of 16, ooo dollars. 55 ͥ (

BrIDGes AND CAN ALS.] The bridges that merit notice in this State are the follow-
ing, viz. Charles river bridge, built in 1786-7, 1503 feet long, and connecting Boſton
and Charleſtown. It is built on 75 piers, with a convenient draw in the middle, for
the paſſage of veſſels. Each pier is compoſed of ſeven ſticks of oak timber, united
by a cap piece, ſtrong braces and girts, and afterwards driven into the bed of the river,
and firmly ſecured by a ſingle pile on each ſide, driven obliquely to a ſolid bottom.
The piers are connected to each other by large ſtring pieces, which are covered witgk
four inch plank. The bridge is 43 feet in width, and on each ſide is accommodated
with a paſſage ſix feet wide, railed in for the ſafety of people on foot. The hridge has
a gradual riſe from each end, ſo as to be two feet higher in the middle than at thie

extremities. Forty elegant lamps are erected, at a ſuitable diſtance from each other, to

illuminate it when neceſſary. There are ſour ſtrong ſtone wharves connected with
three piers each, ſank in various parts of the river. The machinery of the draw is
; . 7 85 ſimple,


334 MASSACHUSETTS,


firaple, and requires but two men to raiſe it. At the higheſt tides the water riſes twelve
or fourteen feet; the floor of the bridge is then about four feet above the water. The
depth of the water in the channel at low tide is twenty-ſeven feet. This bridge was.
completed in thirteen months; and while it exhibits the greateſt effect of private
enterprize of this kind in the United States, it being the firſt bridge of conſiderable
magnitude that has been erected, preſents a moſt pleaſing proof, how certainly objects.
of magnitude may be attained by ſpirited exertions.

The ſuccets d attended this experiment led others to en gage in ſimilar works of
enterprize. Malden bridge acroſs Myſtic river, connecting Charleſtown. with Malden,
was begun in April 1787, and was opened for paſſengers the September following.
This bridge, including the abutments, 15 2420 feet long, and 32 feet wide, it has a
draw 30 feet wide. The deepeſt water at full tide is 23 feet. The expenſe of this:
bridge was eſtimated at 53ool.
Effex bridge, upwards of 1500 feet in length, with a well-contrived draw, was
coeds in 1789, and connects Salem with Beverly. 'The expenſe of this bridge 18
ſaid not to have exceeded one third part of that of Charles river bridge, yet it is.
eſteemed. quite equal in ſtrength, and 1s thought by travellers to be W 2 in point
of beauty

In WE» on the poſt road between Boſton. and Newburyport, is a bridge acroſs:
Parker s river 870 feet long, and 26 feet wide, conſiſting of nine ſolid piers and. eight.
Wooden arches. This bridge was built in the year 1738.
A bridge over Merrimack river, in the county of Eſſex, about two miles above:
| Newburyport, is nearly completed. At the place where the bridge is erected, an:
iſland divides the river into two branches. An arch of 160 feet diameter and 40 feet.
above the level of high water, connects this iſland with the main on one ſide; the:
channel on the other fide is wider, but the center arch is but 1 40 feet diameter.
Greater ingenuity is diſcovered in the conſtruction of this bridge, than in any.that have
hitherto been built; and it is one among the vaſt number of ſtupendous: and uſeful
works which owe their origin to that confidence between man and. man, which has:
been created or reſtored by the meaſures of the. general government.

Another ingeniouſly conſtructed bridge has lately been completed over this river
at Pautucket Falls, between Chelmsford and Dracut, in the county of. Middleſex.
Theſe bridges are all ſupported by a toll.

Several other bridges are contemplated: in different parts of the State, 5 and: ane
is actually begun, which, when completed, will connect the weſt part of Boſton with:

Cambridge, over Charles river, and will be more than.twice as long, and attended with:
nearly twice the expenſe of any other that has yet been built in this or in any of the:
United States.

The legiſlature, in February 1 7925 were petitioned: by a company for liberty to build
a bridge over Connecticut river, at Montague; which was granted.

The only canals of importance which have been contemplated in this common
wealth, are one between Barnſtable and Buzzard's Bay, and thoſe neceſſary to render
Connecticut river navigable, both of which we have mentioned, and one which ſhall
open a communication between the town of Boſton and ſome part of Connecticut river,
ſor which purpoſe General Knox and others were incorporated in 1792, by the Name:
of © The Proprietors of the Maſſachuſetts Canal.” A

_ CurtositiEs. |. In the north part of the townſhip of Adams, in Berkſhire county,
not half a mile from Stamford, in Vermont, is a natural curiofity which merits a de-
2 A pretty mill ſtream, called Hudſon s Brook, which riſes in Vermont, Sj nd

IIs:


MASSACHUSETTS. 325


falls into the north branch of Hooſuck river, has, for thirty or forty rods, formed a
very deep channel through a quarry of white marble. 'The hill, gradually deſcending
towards the fouth, terminates in a ſteep precipice, down which probably the water
once tumbled. But finding in ſome places a natural chaſm in the rocks, and in others
Wearing, them away, as is evident from their appearance, it has formed a hana which
in ſome places is more than ſixty feet deep. Over this channel, where deepeſt, ſome
of the rocks remain, and form a natural bridge. From the top of this bridge to the
y ig: 1 1 is ſixty-two feet ; its length is about twelve or fifteen, and its breadth about

Partly under this bridge, and about ten or twelve feet below it, is another, which
1 1 0 but not ſo long; for at the eaſt end they form one body of rock, twelve or
fourteen: feet thick, and under this the water flows. It is evident, from the appearance
of the rocks, that the water in ſome places formerly flowed forty or fifty feet above
s preſent bed. Many cavities, of different figures and dimenſions, but generally circu-
lar, are worn out in the rocks. One of theſe, 1 in the ſolid rock, is about four feet in dia-
meter, and four or five feet deep; the rock is on one fide worn through at the bottom.
A little above the bridge, on the welt ſide of the:chaſm, is a cave or little room, which
has a convenient entrance at the north, and a paſſage out at the eaſt. From the weſt
fide of this cave a chaſm: extends into the hill, but ſoon becomes too narrow to paſs.
'The rocks here, which are moſily white, thou oh i in fome places clouded or ſtreaked.
with other colours, appear to be 010 that ſpecies of coarſe white marble which is common
at Laneſborough, and in other towns in Berkſhire county.

In the town of Wrentham, about two miles S. E. of the meeting houſe, is a curious
cavern called Wampom's:Rock, from an Indian family of that name who reſided in it for
a number of years. It is ſituated on the ſouth ſide of a hill, and is ſurrounded by a
number of broken rocks. It is nearly ſquare, each ſide meaſuring about. nine feet.
The height is about eight feet i in front, but from the center it leſſens to-about four feet.
At preſent it ſerves only as a ſhelter for cattle and ſheep, as do one or two other rocks:
or caves in the town, Hamea inhabited by Indians.

Under this article we mention the falls of Po wow river, which e in New Ham
ſhire, and falls into the Merrimack between Saliſbury and Ameſbury, in the county of :

Eſſex. At theſe falls, the deſcent of the water, in the diſtance of fifty rods, is 100. feet,
and in its paſſage carries one bloomery, five ſaw mills, ſeven griſt mills, two; linſeed.
oil mills, one fulling mill, and one ſnuff mill, beſides ſeveral: wheels, auxiliary to

different labours, The rapid fall of the water—the dams at very ſhort! diſtances :
croſſing the river—the various wheels and mills arifing almoſt immediately ane over
another —and the very irregular and groteſque ſituation of the houſes and other build-
ings on the adjoining grounds, gives this place a romantic appearance, and afford in


dme whole, one of the moſt ſingular views to be found in this country...


Lynn beach may be reckoned a curioſity. It is one mile in length, and connects the
peninſula, called Nahant, with the main land. This is a. place of much reſort for
parties of pleaſure from Boſton , Charleſtown, Salem, and Marblehead, in the ſuramer-
leaſon. The beach is uſed as a race ground, for which it. is well calculated, being level,
mooth, and hard.

Minz nals, Fossils, AND: Minezar SPRINGS. | Iron ore in TINY quantities is
ſound in various parts of this State, particularly in the old colony of Plymouth, in the
towns of Middleborough, Bridgewater, Taunton, Attleborough,. Stou ghton, and the
towns in that neighbourhood; Which has in conſequence become the ſeat of the iron
manufactures. The ſlitting. mills in this difirict, it is ſaid, annually flit 600 tons of
iron; and one company has lately been formed; which will annually manufacture into.


nails,


326 MASSACHUSETTS.


nails, of a quality equal to thoſe imported, 300 tons of iron. The number of ſpikes
and nails made in this State is ſuppoſed now to be twice as large as that made in 1788,
and is ſtill increaſing, and will probably ſoon preclude all foreign importations, and
from the abundance of the raw material may become an article of export. 1550
Copper ore is found at Leverett, in the county of Hampſhire, and at Attleborough, in
the county of Briſto l. Several mines of black lead have been diſcovered in Brimfield,
in Hampſhire county; and white pipe clay, and yellow and red ochre, at Martha's
Vineyard. Allum ſlate, or ſtone, has been found in ſome parts; and alſo ruddle or a
red earth, which has been uſed as a ground colour for priming, inftead of Spaniſh
brown. In a quarry of hme-ſtone, in the pariſh of Byefield, in the county of Eſſex, is
found the Afbeftos, or incombuſtible cotton, as it has been called. Marble has been
found in the ſame vicinity, and it is conjectured that there are conſiderable beds of it.
The fpecimens of it already exhibited have been beautifully variegated in colour, and
admit an admirable poliſh. . A marble quarry at Laneſborough affords very good
marble. fe Hon Hob 3 F SR
Several mineral ſprings have been found in different parts of the State, particularly at
Lynn, Wrentham, Menotomy Pariſh in Cambridge, &c. but none are celebrated as
places of reſort for invalids. 5 p< Sons .
LITERAR Y, HUuAxR, and other SociErIEs.] Theſe inſtitutions in Maſſachuſetts
exhibit a fair trait in the character of the inhabitants. Among the firſt literary inſtitu-
tions in this State is the American Acapemy oF ARTS AND SCIENCES, incorporated
May 4th, 1780. It is declared in the act, that the end and defign of the inſtitution is
to promote and encourage the knowledge of the antiquities of America, and of the na-
' tural hiſtory of the country, and to determine the uſcs to which the various natural pro-
ductions of the country may be applied; alſo to promote and encourage medical diſco-
veries, mathematical diſquiſitions, philoſophical inquiries and experiments; aſtrono-
mical, meteorological, and geographical obſervations; improvements in agriculture, arts,
manufacture, commerce, and the cultivation of every ſcience that may tend to advance
a free, independent, and virtuous people. There are never to be more than two hun-
dred members, nor leſs than forty. This ſociety has four ſtated annual meetings.
The MassacyvseTTs CHARITABLE SOCIETY, incorporated December 16th, 1779, is
intended for the mutual aid of themſelves and families, who may be diſtreſſed by any
of the adverſe accidents of life, and for the comforting and relieving of widows and or-
phans of their deceaſed members. The members of this ſociety meet annually, and are
not to exceed an hundred in number... e 1
The Bos rox ErIscor AL CHARITABLE Society, firſt inſtituted in 1724, and incorpo-
rated February 12, 1784, has for its object, charity to ſuch as are of the epiſcopal
church, and to ſuch others as the ſociety ſhall think fit; but more eſpecially the relief
of thoſe who are members of, and benefactors to, the ſociety, and afterwards become ſuit-
able objects of its charity. The members of this ſociety meet annually, and are not to
exceed one hundred in number. 1 3 TH, |
The MassacuusgrTTs MEDICAL SoctETY was incorporated November 1ſt, 1781. The
deſign of this inſtitution is, to promote medical and ſurgical knowledge, inquiries into
the animal economy, and the properties and effects of medicine, by encouraging a free
mntercourſe with the gentlemen of the faculty throughout the United States of America,
and a friendly correſpondence with the eminent in thoſe profeffions throughout the
world. The number of Fellows who are inhabitants of the State, cannot exceed ſe-
venty. The preſent number is ſixty one, and thirteen have died fince its eſtabliſhment,
The powers veſtedin the ſociety are—To chooſe their officers, and enact any Jaws for


their


MASSACHUSETTS. LOR |.
their own government which is not repugnant to the laws of the Commonwealth—To
uſe a common ſeal—To ſue and be ſued—To hold real eſtate of the annual income of
{200, and perſonal eſtate of the annual income of {600—To elect, ſuſpend, expel or
disfranchiſe any teHows of the ſociety To deſcribe and point out, from time to time,
ſach a mode of medical inſtruction or education as they ſhall judge requiſite for candi-
dates for the practice of phyfic and ſurgery To examine all candidates who ſhall offer
themſelves for examination, reſpecting their {kill in the profeſſion And to ge letters
teſtimonial of their approbation to all ſuch as may be duly qualified to practiſe.“
Committees are appointed in each county to receive communications from, and to
correſpond with. their medical brethren who are not fellows of the ſociety ; and this has
led to the formation of ſeveral medical affociations, whoſe views are to aid the lauda-
ble deſigns of this important inſtitution.
Further to evidence their humanity and benevolence, a number of the medical and
other gentlemen, in the town of Boſton, in 1 785, formed a ſociety, by the name of the
HUMANE SOCIETY, for the purpoſe of recovering perſons apparently dead, from drown-
ing, ſuffocation, ſtrangling, and other accidents. This ſociety, which was incorpo-
rated in 1791, have erected ſeven huts, furniſhed with wood, ſtraw, cabbins, tinder boxes,
blankets, &c. two on Lovel's lfland, one on Calf Ifland in Boſton harbour, two on
Nantaſket beach, and another on Scituate beach . near Marſhfield, for-the comfort of
ſhipwrecked ſeamen. Huts of the ſame kind are erected on Plum Ifland, near New-
bury, by the marine ſociety of that place, already mentioned; and there are alſo ſome
contiguous to Hampton and Saliſpury Beach. |
At their ſemi-annual meetings, a public diſcourſe is delivered by ſome 3 appointed
by the truſtees for that purpoſe, on ſome medical ſubject connected with the principal
object of the ſociety; and as a ſtimulus to inveſtigation, and a reward of merit, a me-
aal is adjudged annually by the preſident and truſtees, to the perſon who exhibits the
moſt aproved diſſertation.
The SOCIETY FOR PROPAGATING THE Gosrkl. among the Indians and others in
North America, was incorporated November 19, 1787. They are enabled to receive
tubſcriptions of charitably diſpoſed: perſons, and may take any perſonal eſtate in ſucceſ-
ſion. All donations to the ſociety, either by ſubſcriptions, legacy or otherwiſe, except-
ing ſuch as may be differently appropriated by the donors, to- make a. part of, or be
put into the capital ſtock of the ſociety, which is to be put out on intereſt on good ſecu-
_ rity, or otherwiſe improved to the beſt advantage, and the income and profits are to be
applied to the purpoſes aforeſaid, in ſuch manner as the ſociety ſhall judge moſt condu-
eive to anſwer the deſign of their inſtitution. For ſeveral years paſt miſſionaries have
been appointed and ſupported by the ſociety to viſit the ern parts of the Diſtrict of
Main, where the people are generally deſtitute of the means of religious inſtruction,
and to ſpend the ſummer months with them. The ſucceſs of theſe miſſions have been
dighly ſatisfactory to the ſociety. Several thouſand books of different kinds, ſuited to
the ſtate of the people, have been purchaſed by the ſociety's funds, and diſtributed
among them and the Oneida Indians.
A part of this ſociety are a board of commiſſioners from the Scot' s ſociety for promo-
ting Chriſtian knowledge among the Indians in America. -
The MAs8ACHUSETTS. SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING AGRICULTURE was incorporated in
1792, in conſequence of which the agricultural committee of the Academy } is diſſolved.


* The qualifications required of candidates for examination, and the books recommended by the ſociety, are
publiſhed in Fleet“ s Maſſachuſetts Regiſter, . A. D. 1791. \ |
| AT.


328 MASSACHUSETTS.

At a late meeting of this ſociety, in Boſton, a very confiderable ſum of money was ſh.
ſcribed, for eſtabliſhing a fund to defray the * of 1 Aer which
may be voted by the ſociety.

A ſociety was eftabliſhed in this State in 1791, called the Hivronrbxt Sorry, the
profeſſed defign of which is to collect, preſerve, and communicate materials for a com-
plete hiſtory of this country from the beg ng of its ſettlement.

Next to Pennſylvania, this State has the greateſt number of ſocieties for the promo-
tion of uſeful knowledge and human bappineſb: ; and as they are founded on the broad
baſis of benevolence, patriotiſm, and charity, they cannot fail to proſper. Theſe inſtitu-
tions, which are faſt increaſing in almoſt every State in the Union, are ſo many evidences
of the advanced and advancing ſtate of civilization and improvement in this count
and of the excellence of our national government. They prove' likewiſe that a free
republican government, like ours, is the moſt happily calculated to promote a general
diffuſion of uſeful knowledge, and the moſt favourable to the SOIT and _—
feelings of the human heart.

LrrexaTuRs, CoLLEGEs, ACADENTES, > [According bs: the laws of this com-
monwealth, every town having fifty houſeholders or upwards, is to be provided with
one or more ſchool-maſters to teach children and youth to read and write, and inſtruct
them in the Engliſh language, arithmetic, orthography, and decent behaviour; and
where any town has two hundred families, there is alſo to be a grammar ſchool ſet up
therein, and ſome diſcreet perſon, well inſtructed in the Latin, Greek and Engliſh

languages, procured to keep the ſame, and be ſuitably paid by the inhabitants. The
penalty for neglect of ſchools in towns of fifty families is FOR an of one hundred


8 kamilies 20l.—of one hundred and fifty, 3ol.


- Theſe laws reſpecting ſchools are not fo well ronndlec in many parts of the State,
as the wiſe purpoſes which they were intended to Panſy i; and the e en of the


people require.


In Boſton there are ſeven public ſchools, f upported wholly at the expenſe of the
town, and in which the children of every claſs of citizens freely aſſociate. In the Latin
grammar ſchool the rudiments of the Latin and Greek languages are taught, and boys
qualified for the univerſities ; into this ſchool none are admitted till ten years of age,
having been previouſly well inftructed in Engliſh grammar. In the three Engliſh 7
mar ſchools, the children of both ſexes, from ſeven to fourteen years of age, are
inſtructed in ſpelling, accenting and reading the Engliſh language both proſe and
verſe, with propriety, alſo in Engliſh grammar and compoſition, together with the
rudiments of geography; in the other three the ſame children are taught writing and
arithmetic. Theſe {chools are attended alternately, and each of them is furniſhed with

an uſher or aſſiſtant. The maſters of theſe ſchools have each a fWlary of 6665 dollars

per annum, payable quarterly.

They are all under the immediate care of a committee of twenty-one gentlemen : for
the time being, choſen annually, whoſe duty it is © to viſit the ſchools at leaſt once in
three months, to examine the ſcholars in the various branches in which they are taught,
to devite the beft methods for the inſtruction and government of the ſchools, to give
ſuch advice to the maſters as they ſhall think expedient, and by all proper methods to
excite in children a laudable ambition to excel in a virtuous, amiable deportment, and
in every branch of uſcful knowledge.” At the annual viſitation in July 1792, there
were preſent 470 girls and 720 boys. Beſides theſe there are ſeveral private ſchools,

for inſtruction in the Engliſh, Latin, and French lapguages—in writing, arithmetic,
and the higher branches of the mathematics - and alſo in muſic and dancing. E
there


MASSACHUSETTS. 1


there is not a town in the world, the youth of which more fully enjoy the benefits of
fchool education, than Boſton. And when we confider how inſeparably the happineſs
and proſperity of our country, and the exiſtence of our preſent happy government, are
connected. with the education of children, too much credit cannot be given to the
enlightened citizens of this town, for the attention they have paid to this important
buſineſs, and the worthy example they have exhibited for the imitation of others. |

Next in importance to the grammar ſchools are the Academies, in which, as well as
in the grammar ſchools, young gentlemen are fitted for admiſſion to the univerſity.

Dumasr Acapeny, at Newbury, was founded as early as 1756, by means of a
liberal donation from the Honourable William Dummer, formerly Licutenant-governor,
and a worthy man, whoſe name it has ever ſince retained. It was opened in 1763,
and incorporated by an act of the general court, in 1782. By the act the number of
truſtees is not to exceed fifteen, who are to manage the funds for the ſupport of the
inſtructors. This academy is at preſent in a flouriſhing ſtate.

PHILLIPS ACADEMY, in Andover, was founded and handſomely endowed April 21.
1778, by the Honourable Samuel Phillips, Eſq. of Andover, in the county of Eſſex,
and commonwealth of Maffachuſetts, lately deceaſed, and his brother the Honourable
John Phillips, L. L. D. of Exeter, in the State of New Hampſhire. It was incorporated
October 4, 1780. It is under the direction of thirteen truſtees of reſpectable characters,
and the immediate care of a principal, (who is one of the truſtees ex officio) an aſſiſtant,

and a writing maſter. They are accommodated with a large and elegant building,
erected at the expenſe of the founders, and their brother, the Honourable William
Phillips, Eſq. of Boſton. It is fituated on a delightful eminence, near the manſion
houſe of the Honourahle Samuel Phillips, Eſq. its diſtinguiſhed patron, and ſon of the
deceaſed founder—is encompaſſed with a ſalubrious air, and commands an extenfive
proſpect. The lower ſtory contains a large ſchool-room, with ample accommodations
tor an hundred ſtudents, and two other apartments for a library, and other purpoſes :
the upper ſtory conſiſts of a ſpacious hall, ſixty- four feet in length, and thirty-three

feet in breadth, defigned for exhibitions and other public occaſions. =

The defign of this foundation, according to its conſtitution, is, “ The promotion of
true piety and virtue, the inſtruction of youth in the Engliſh, Latin, and Greek lan-
guages ; together with writing, arithmetic, practical geometry, muſic and anner,
logie and geography; and ſuch other of the liberal arts and ſciences, or Janguages, as
opportunity and ability may heteafter admit, and the truſtees ſhall direct.“ br

LEICESTER ACADEMY, in the townſhip, of Leiceſter, and county of Worceſter, was
incorporated in 1784. For the encouragement of this inſtitution, Ebenezer Crafts and

Jacob Davis, Eſquires, Rente gave a large and commodious manſion houſe, lands
and appurtenances, in Leiceſter

In Williamſtown, in Berkſhire county, is another Academy. Col. Ephraim Wil-
liams laid the foundation of it by a handſome donation in lands. In 1790, partly by
lottery and partly by the liberal donation of gentlemen in the town, a brick edifice was
erected, 82 feet by 42, and four ſtories high, containing twenty-four, rooms for
ſtudents, a large ſchool room, a dining hall, and a room tor public ſpeaking. It has a
preceptor, ,an,uſher, and a maſter of the Engliſh ſchool. The number of ſtudents is
at prefent between fiſty and ſixty, beſides the ſcholars of the free ſchool. The lan- 5
gnages and ſciences uſually 5 in the American colleges are taught here, Board,
nition, and other expenſes of education are very low ; and from its ſituation, and other |
eireümſtances, it is likely, in 3 Jhoxt n to become an inſlitution of couliderabls 5


utilit and impo tance.
Yan mp I pu 1


830 MASSACHUSETTS.


An Academy at Taunton was incorporated in 1792.

At Hingham is a well endowed ſchool, which, in honour of its principal donor and
founder, is called DERBY School.

Theſe Academies are deſigned to diſſeminate virtue and true piety, to · promote the
education of youth in the Engliſh, Latin, Greek, and French languages, in writing,
arithmetic, oratory, geography, practical geometry, logic, philoſophy, and ſuch other
of the liberal arts and ſciences, or languages, as may be thought expedient.

| Haxvary Uxrversrey takes its date from the year 1638. Two years before, the

general court gave four hundred pounds for the ſupport of a pubhe ſchool at Newtown,
which has fince been called Cambridge. This year (1638) the Rev. Mr. John Har-
vard, a worthy miniſter refiding in Charleſtown, died, and left a.donation of 7791. for
the uſe of the forementioned public ſchool. In honour to the memory of ſo liberal a
benefactor, the general court, the e. ordered that the ſchool ſhould: take the
name of HARVARD COLLEGE.

In 1642, the College was put upon a more reſpectable footing, and the governor,
deputy governor, and magiſtrates, and the miniſters of the fix next adjacent towns,
with the preſident, were erected into a corporation for the ordering and managing its
concerns. It received its firſt charter in 1650.

Cambridge, in which the univerſity is fituated, is a pleaſant village, four miles weſt-
ward from Boſton, containing a number of gentlemen” s ſeats which are neat and well
built. The univerſity confifts of four elegant brick edifices, handſomely encloſed.
They ſtand on a beautiful green which ſpreads to the north-weſt, and exhibit a

eaſing view.

Pp E Bk of the ſeveral buildings are, Harvard Hall, Maſſachuſetts Hall, Hollis
Hall and Holden Chapel. Harvard Hall is divided into fix apartments; one of which
is appropriated for the library, one for the muſeum, two for the philoſophical appa-
ratus; one is uſed for a chapel, and the other for a dining hall. The library, in 1791,
conſiſted of upwards of 13,000 volumes; and will be continually increaſing from the
intereſt of permanent funds, as well as from caſual benefactions. The philoſophical
apparatus belonging to this univerſity, coſt between 1400l. and I zool. lawful money,
and is the moſt elegant and complete of any in America.

Agreeable to the preſe nt conſtitution of Maſſachuſetts, his excellency the governor,
heutenant-governor, the council and ſenate, the prefident of the univerſity, and the
miniſters of the congregational churches in the towns of Boſton, Charleſtown, Cam-
Unie Watertown, Roxbury, and Dorcheſter, Are, ex officris, overſeers of the
Univorfit

- = We b is a diſtinct body, confifting of ſeven members, in whom, is veſted

the property of the univerſity.
Harvard univerſity has a Prefident, Emeritus Profeflor of Divin ity—Hollifian Profeſſor
of Divinity Hancock Profeſſor of Hebrew and other Oriental languages — Hollis Pro-
feflor of Mathematics and Natural PhiloſophyHerſey Profefſor of Anatomy and Sur-
gery—Herſey Profeſſor of the theory and practice of Phyfic—Erving Profeſſor of
Chymiſtry and Materia Medica — four tutors, who teach the Greek and Latin languages,
logic, metaphyſics, and ethics, geography, and the elements of geometry, natural Philo-
ſophy, aftronomy, and hiſtory; and a preceptor of the French language.

This univerſity, as to its library, philofophical apparatus and profeſſorſhips, is at
preſent the firſt literary inſtitution on this continent. Since its firſt eſtabliſhment,
upwards of 3, 300 ſtudents bave received * degrees from its ſucceflive "out

5 1 09 II: abou


# :
Su 4 *


MASSACHUSETTS. 331


about one third of whom have been ordained to the work of the goſpel miniſtry, It has
generally from 130 to 160 ſtudents.

This univerſity is liberally endowed, and is frequently receiving donations for the
eſtabliſhment of new profeflorſhips. F. ormerly there was an annual grant made by the
legiſlature, to the preſident and profeſſors, of from four to five hundred pounds, Which
for ſeveral years paſt has been diſcontinued.

Baxks.] There are four incorporated Banks in this Commonwealth, of which the

Branch Bank in Boſton, which is a part of the National Bank, is one. The Maſſa-
Chuſetts Bank in Boſton was incorporated in 1784. It was deſigned as a public benefit,
and more particularly to accommodate the mercantile intereſt. Its prefent capital con-
fiſts of 800 ſhares of 500 dollars each, making in all 400,000 dollars. It is kept open
every day in the year, except public days. The annual meetin g for the choice of nine
directors is on the firſt Wedneſday in January, _

Eſſex Bank, at Salem, was incorporated 1792, and! is under che management of a
preſident and fix directors.

Union Bank, in Boſton, was alſo incorporated i in 1792, and has a preſident and

eleven directors. Its capital conſiſts of 100,000 ſhares of eight dollars each, fo that
when the payment of the thares ſhall be completed, the whole ſtock will amount to
800,000 dollars.

Carr Towxs.] Bosrox is the capital, not only of Maſſachuſetts, but of New
England, and lies in lat. 42* 23 N. It is built on a peninſula of an irregular form, at
the bottom of Maſſachuſetts Bay. The neck or iſthmus which joins the peninſula to
the continent, is at the ſouth end of the town, and leads to Roxbury. The length of
the town it(elf ; is not quite two miles; its breadth is various. At the entrance from
Roxbury it is narrow, The greateſt breadth is one mile and 139 yards. The buildings
in the town cover about 1000 acres. It contains nearly 2000 dwelling houſes and
about 20,000 inhabitants.

In this town there are ſeventy-nine ſtreets, ne ight "Rob * twenty-one alleys,
excluſive of ſquares and courts; and about eighty wharts and quays very convenient for
veſſels. The principal whart extends 6co yards into the ſea, and 1s covered on the north
Hide with large and convenient ſtores. It far exceeds any other wharf in the United States.
In Boſton are 17 houſes for public worſhip ; of which nine are for Congregationaliſts,
three for Epiſcopalians, twe for Baptiſts, one tor the Friends, one for Univerſaliſts,
and one for Roman Catholics. -

The other public buildings are the ſtate houſe, court houſe, gaol, Faneuil Hall, an

alms houſe, a work houſe, a bridewell, and powder magazine. That building which
was formerly the governor's houſe, is now occupied in its ſeveral apartments, by the
council, the treaſurer, and the ſecretary ; the two latter hold their offices in it. Moſt
of the public buildings are handſome, and tome of them are elegant. The town is
irregularly built, but, as it Hes in a circular form around the harbour, it exhibits a very
handſome view as you approach it from the ſea. On the weſt fide of the town is the
mall, a very beautiful public walk, adorned with rows of trees, and in view of the
common, which is always open to refreſhing breezes. Beacon hill, on which a hand-
ſome monument, commemorative of ſome of the moit important events of the late war,
haas lately been erectod, overlooks the town from the weſt, and affords a fine variegated |

Proſpect.
; The harbourof Bonn! is ſafe, and large enough to contain 500 ſhips at anchor, in
a good depth of water; while the entrance is ſo narrow as ſcarcely to admit two ſhips


abreaſt, It is  diucrffied, as WC la ve Tr obſerved, with: 40 illauds, which attor 4
U 2. "0


332 MASSACHUSETTS.
rich paſturing, hay, and grain. About three miles from the town is the caſtle, which
commands the entrance of the harbour:

The market in this town is ſupplied with an abundance of becf, pork, mutton, lamb,
veal, and poultry, and of à quality equal to any in the world; and alſo with meal,
butter. cheeſe, roots, vegetables, and fruits of various kinds, in great plenty. T he
fiſh market is alto excellent, and not only furnithes the tables of the rich with ſome of.
the grcateſt dainties, hut is allo a {ſingular bleſſing to the poor. | |

At an annual meeting m March, even ſelect men are choſen for the more nada
government of the town ; at the ſame time are elected a town clerk, a town treaſurer,
12 overſcers of the poor, 12 firewards, 12 clerks of the market, 12 ſcavengers, and 12
conftables, beſides àa number of other officers. Attempts have been made to change
the government of the town from its preſent form to that of a city, but the propoſed
form not being conſonant to the democratic ſpirit of the body of the people, it has
been rejected...
| Boſton was ſettled as early a as the year 16 30, from Charleſtown. The peninſula
was called, by the natives, Shawmut ; but the inhabitants of Charleſtown, from the
view they had of three hills, called it Trimountain. The new inhabitants, however,
named it Boſton, out of reſpect to the Rev. Mr. Cotton, formerly a miniſter of Boſton,
in England, who was expected to come over to New England. He was afterwards
' miniſter of the firft church. |

It has been computed, that during the fs | in 1775, as many houſes were deſtroyed |
in Boſton by the Britiſh troops, as were burnt in Charleſtown. Since the peace. a
ſpirit of repairs and improvement has diffuſed itſelf among the inhabitants. The ſtreets
of late have been lighted with lamps at the expenſe of the town; and ſome ſmall
beginnings have been made towards improving the ſtreets by new paving them, which
it is hoped will ſtimulate to like improvements through the town. The principal ma-
nufactures here are, rum, beer, paper hangings, of which 24,000 pieces-are annually.
made, loaf ſugar, cordage, cards, fail cloth, ſpermaceti and tallow candles, glaſs—
there are thirty diſtillerics, two breweries, eight ſugar houſes, and eleven rope walks.
A tew years may render the metropolis of Maſſachuſetts as famed for arts, Manu-
factures, and commerce, as any city in the United States. ;

Salem, the ſecond town for ſize in the Commonwealth, containing 928 houſes and
7921 inhabitants, and except Plymouth, the oldeſt, was ſettled in 1628, by Governor
Endicot, and was called by the Indians, Naumkeag. Here are a meeting of Quakers,

an epiſcopal church and five congregational ſocieties. The town is fituated on a penin-
ſula, formed by two ſmall inlets of the ſea, called North and South rivers. The former
of theſe paſſes into Beverly Harbour, and has a draw-bridge acroſs it, built many years
ago at private expenſe.—At this place ſome part of the ſhipping of the town is fitted
out; but the principal harbour and place for buſineſs is on the other fide of the town,
at South river, if that may properly be called a river, which depends on the flowing of
the ſea for the water it contains. So ſhoal is this harbour that veſſels which draw more
than ten or twelve feet of water, muſt be laden and unladen at a diſtance from the
wharts by the aſſiſtance of lighters. This inconvenience, notwithſtanding, .more navi-
gation is owned, and more trade carried on in Salem than in any port in the Common-
wealth, Boſton excepted. The fiſhery, the trade to the Weſt Indies, to Europe, ta.
the coaſt of Africa, to the Eaſt Indies, and the freighting buſineſs from the ſouthern
States, are here all purſued with energy and ſpirit. The enterprize of the merchants
of this place is equalled by nothing but their indefatigable induſtry and ſevere economy.
This latter virtue forms a diſtinguiſhing feature in the character of the people of this


£ town.


MASSACHUSETTS. 333
town. Some perſons of rank, in former times, having carried it to an unbecoming
length, gave a character to the people in general of a diſgraceful parſimony, But,
whether this reproach was ever juſtly applied in ſo extenſive a meaſure or not, nothing
can be more injurious than to continue it at the preſent time; for it may juſtly be ſaid
of the inhabitants of Salem at this day, that, with a laudable attention to the acquiſi-
tion of property, they exhibit a public ſpirit and hoſpitality, alike honourable to them-
ſelves and their country. A general plainneſs and neatneſs in dreſs, buildings and
equipage, and a certain ſtillneſs and gravity of manner, perhaps in ſome degree
peculiar to commercial people, diſtinguiſh them from the citizens of the metropolis:
It is indeed to be wiſhed that the ſober induſtry here ſo univerſally practiſed, may
become more extenſive through the union, and form the national character: of federal.
Americans. * „ mg os
A court houſe, built in 1786, at the joint expenſe of the — and town, forms x
principal ornament, and is executed in a ſtyle of architecture that would add to the
_ elegance of any city in the union. The Supreme Judicial Court holds a term hefe the
ſecond Tueſday of November, the courts of Common Pleas and Seſſions, the. ſecond.
'ueſday of March and September. READS? 5
A manufactory of duck and fail cloth was lately inſtituted here, and is proſecuted
with much ſpirit. > 1 e N
The melancholy deluſion of 1692 originated in this town, in the family of the Rev.
Mr. Paris, the then miniſter, and here was the principal theatre of the bloody buſineſs.
At the upper end of the town, at a place called, from the number of executions which
took place there, Gallows-hill, the graves of the unhappy ſufferers may yet be traced.
Though this unfortunate and diſgraceful buſineſs was chiefly tranſacted here, it is well
known that the leading people, both of church and ſtate, in the colony, took an
active part in it. Unjuſt therefore and highly abſurd it is to fix a peculiar odium on
the town of Salem for what was the general weakneſs or crime of the country. While
the ſarcaſtic ſmile is excited among the vain and unthinking, or the inſulting abuſe of
illiberal prejudice is unjaſtly thrown on this ſhocking tragedy, the ſerious cannot but
lament to find the human mind ſubject to ſo groſs deceptions, and the man of candour”
will haſten to drop the curtain on the diſmal ſcene. = 5 VV
_ South-eaſt from Salem, and at four miles diſtance from it, lies Marblehead, con-
taining one epiſcopal and two congregational churches, beſides a ſmall ſociety of ſepa-
ratiſts. The chief attention of this town is devoted to the bank fiſhery, and more is done
in that line than in any port in the government. The late war putting a total ſtop to
this buſineſs, and vaſt numbers of the men before employed in it being loſt by land and
water, the peace found thoſe who ſurvived in circumſtances of great diſtreſs. Great
exertions were made to revive the former courſe of buſineſs, and it is lamented by every
friend to induſtry and the proſperity of the country, that theſe exertions have not been
_ crowned with more ſucceſs; every thing here has more and more the ſymptoms of
decay. The great number of widows and orphans cauſed by the war, and left at the.
cloſe of it to the charge of the town, are a melancholy burthen which nothing
leſs than governmental aid can relieve. A lottery has been granted by the. legiſlature
tor the double purpoſe of leſſening the weight of this burden, and repairing the ſea _
wall, which protects the harbour, and which was in imminent danger of giving way,
to the great detriment, if not utter ruin of the port. 8 vr
A peculiarity obſervable in-our fiſhing town may be worthy mentioning. The ſpring,
ummer, and autumn, being entirely occupied in the laborious purſuit of their employs _
ment, leaves no time for amuſements. In winter, every thing is different. There are.


yy


IO  'MASSAQCHUSBEP TS. 1


few calls to labour, and all are devoted to mirth and jollity. A continual round of
gaiety and diſſipation occupy the fiſnherman's time, until returning ſpring calls him to
returning labour, which he now purſues as eagerly as he did juſt before his amuſement.
Newbury Port, originally part of Newbury, from which its incorporation detached
it in 1764, and by which and Merrimack river it is wholly encircled, is perhaps the
moſt limited in its extent of land, of any townſhip in the Commonwealth, containing
but about 640 acres. Here are four houſes for public worſhip, via. one Epiſcopalian,
one Preſbyterian, and two Congregational, It was formerly remarkable for the number
of veffels annually built here; but fince the commencement. of the late war, this
buſineſs has in a great degree failed, and no manufacture of conſequence has yet ſup-
plied its place. The continental frigates, Boflon and Hancock, were built here,
beſides many large private armed ſhips, during the war. Ihe trade to the Weſt Indies
is carried on here with much ſpirit and to a great amount. Large quantities of rum are
diſtilled, which is principally exported to the ſouthern States. Some veſſels are em-
ployed in the freighting buſineſs, and a few in the fiſhery. In November, 1790, there
were owned in this port fix ſhips, 45 brigantines, 39 ſcooners, and 28 floops, making
in the whole 11,870 tons. A term of the courts of Common Pleas and General Seffions
is held here on the laft Tueſday in September. W BE ye
Ipſwich, by the Indians called Agawam, in the county of Eſſex, is 32 miles N. N. E.
from Boſton, is divided into five pariſhes, and contains 4562 inhabitants. An excellent
ſtone bridge, acroſs Ipſwich river, compoſed of two arches, with one ſolid pier in the
bed of the river, connects the two parts of the town, and was executed under the
direction of the late Honourable Judge Choate, in a ſtyle of ſtrength and neatneſs
hitherto unequalled in this country. IThis was heretofore a place of much more conſi-
. deration than at preſent. Its decline is attributed to a barred harbour and ſhoal rivers,
Its natural fituation is very pleaſant, and on all accounts excellently well calculated ta
be a large manufacturing town. The fupreme Judicial Court, the courts of Common
Pleas and Seſſions, are held here once in a year; and from its central fituation, appears
to be the moſt convenient place for all the courts and public offices of the county.
Charleſtown, called by the aboriginal inhabitants, Miſhacwum, lies north of Boſton,
with which it is connected by Charles river bridge, and is the principal town in Mid-
dleſex county. The town, properly ſo called, is built on a peninfula, formed by Myſtic
river, on the eaſt, and a bay, ſetting up from Charles river on the weſt. It is very
advantageouſly fituated for health,“ navigation, trade, and manufactures of almoſt all
the various kinds. A dam acroſs the mouth of the bay, which ſets up from Charles
river, weft of the town, would afford a great number of mill ſeats for manufactures.
Bunker, Breed's, and Cobble, now Barrel's, hills, are celebrated in the hiſtory of the
American Revolution; and no lets fo for the elegant and delightful proſpects which
they afford of Boſton, and its charmingly variegated harbour—of Cambridge and its
Colleges, and of an extenſive tract of highly cultivated country, SJ T6811
Ihe deſtruction of this town by the Britiſh, in 1975, we have mentioned in the
hiſtorical ſketch we have given of the war. Before its deſtruction, ſeveral branches of
manufactures were carried on to great advantage, ſome of which have been fince
revived ; particularly the manufacture of pot and pearl aſn, rum, ſhips, leather in all
its branches, ſilver, tin, braſs, and pewter. e


* In three years, ending 1791, eighty perſons died, nineteen of whom were upwards of bo years old; ten
were upwards of 70 four upwards of 80, and one go. | F


Cambridge


MASSACHUSETTS. 3


Cambricher and Concord are the moſt confiderable inland towns in the county of
Middlefex, the former is four miles from Boſton, and is a pleaſant town, and the ſeat of
the univerſity. The latter is nineteen miles N. W. of Boſton, and is alſo pleaſant,
healthy, thriving town. The Provincial Congreſs fat in Concord in 1774, and the
general court have frequently held their ſeſſions here when contagious diſeaſes have
_ prevailed in the capital. This town is rendered famous in hiſtory by its being the place
where the firſt oppoſition was made to the Britiſh troops, on the memorable 19th of
April 1775. The public buildings are, a congregational church, a ſpacious ſtone gaol,
the beſt in New England, and a county court houſe. The town is accommodated
with three handſome bridges, one of which is 208 feet long and 18 feet wide, ſupported
by twelve piers, built after the manner of Charles river bridge. In 1791, there were
1590 inhabitants, in this town, eighty of whom were upwards 70 years old. For
thirteen years paſt the average number of deaths has been ſeventeen, one in four of
whom were 70 years old and apwards. |
Plymouth, the principal town in the county of the ſame name, and the capital of the
old colony, fo called, is 42 miles S. E. of Boſton, and contains about 300 houſes.
Before the war, the inhabitants of this town employed ninety fail of veſſels, chiefly in
the fiſhing buſineſs. But in the courſe of the war, they were moſtly taken or deſtroyed
by the enemy, and their ſeamen captivated, and many of the inhabitants reduced to
indigence. They have ſince, in a great meaſure, emerged from their diſtreſſed ſtate.
The harbour is ſpacious, but the water is not deep. The town is famous for being the
firſt place ſettled by the pious anceſtors of the New Englanders, in 1620.
| Worceſter, the ſhire town of the county of the ſame name, is the largeſt inland
town in New England, and is ſituated about forty-ſeven miles weſtward of Boſton.
The public buildings in this town, are two congregational churches, a court houſe.
and a ſtrong ftone gaot. The inhabitants carry on a large inland trade, and manu
facture pot and pearl aſh, cotton and linen goods, beſides ſome other articles.
Printing, in its various branches, is carried on very extenſively in this town, by
Iſaiah Thomas, who, in the year 1791, carried through his preſſes two editions of the
Bible, the one the large royal quarto, the firſt of that kind publiſhed in America, the
other a large folio, with fifty copper plates, beſides feveral other books of conſequence.
His printing apparatus conſiſts of ten printing pteſſes, with types in proportion; and
he is now making preparations for the printing of bibles of various ſmaller kinds,
which will cauſe him to make a great addition to his works, of both er and types.
This printing apparatus is now the largeſt in America.
On Connecticut river, in the county of Hampſhire, there are a number of very
pleaſant towns, among which are Springfield and Hadley, on the eaſt fide of the river;
Northampton, Hatfield and Deerfield on the weft. . Courts are held in all theſe places
in their turn, except Hatfield. Springfield is the oldeſt of theſe towns, having been
ſettled as early as 1636. Its public buildiugs are a congregational church, court houſe,
and gaol. & large proportion of the military ſtores of the commonw ealth are lodged
here. Aclear meandering brook runs through the town from north to ſouth, and adds |
much to its beauty and pleaſantneſs.
Stockbridge, Great Barrington, and Lenox, are the prineipal towns in Berkſhire
county, and he from 45 to 55 miles W. N. W. from Springfield.
MILITARY STRENGTH. | The active militia of Maſlachuletts is eompoſed of all able
bodied, white male citizens from 16 to 40 years of age, excepting officers of govern-
ment, ang thoſe who have held commiſſioners, &c. The whole is completely armed”


and organized, and is formed mto nine divifions, each commanded by a major-general,
| ; ninetec n


336 MASSACHUSETTS.


nineteen brigades, confiſting of ſeventy-nine regiments of infantry, eleven battalions of
- cavalry, and eight battalions of artillery; er forming a well regulated body of
50, ooo infantry, 2000 cavalry, and 1 500 artillery men, with fixty pieces of field
artillery. This active military corps is aſſembled by companies for diſcipline, in their
reſpective diſtricts, four times a year; and once a year by oxgunants, or brigades.; at
which time they are reviewed and inſpected.
Heſides the military ſtrength above mentioned, whiah may be conſidered as · tlie ative
militia of the State, there are enrolled about 25,000 men from 40 to 60 years of age,
whoare obliged always to keep themſelves completely armed ; and they are required,
under penalty by law, to exhibit their arms-once a year to their reſpective captains,
who make returns thereof. This laſt corps is called the alarm hit, and may be Pro-
perly diftinguithed as the Corps de Reſerve of the Commonwealth. ==

ReLis10x. | The religion of this Commonwealth. .is eſtabliſhed, by their. excellent
conſtitution, on a moſt liberal and tolerant plan. All perſons of whatever religious
profeſſion or ſentiments, may worſhip God agreeably to the dictates of their own con-
iciences, unmoleſted, provided they do not diſturb the peace.

The following ſtatement thews what are the ſeveral religious denominations i in this
State, and their Proportional numbers,


| Number of Suppoſed number of
Denominations. Congregations. each denomination.
Congregationaliſts, — 400 — 277,600
Baptiſts, „„ Gn” 58,296
Epiſcopalians, — 5 333 14,
Friends, or Quakers, CCC += 6, 940...
Preſbyterians, EE oe Rees "Ta
= "Univerfaliſts, „ Pape 1,388.
7 Roman Catholics — 73 5 694
Total 517 8 3 358,798


In this ſtatement, it is {ſuppoſed that all the inhabitants in the State conſider theim-
{elves as belonging to one or the other of the religious denominations mentioned; and
that each religious ſociety, of every denomination, is compoſed of an equal number of
fouls; that is, each is ſuppoſed to contain 694, which, if we reckon the number of
inhabitants in the State at 358,798, will be the proportion for each congregation.

Although this may not be an exact apportionment of the different ſects, yet it is per-
Raps as accurate as the nature of the ſubject will allow, and ſufficient to give a general
idea of the proportion which the ſeveral denominations bear to each other.

The number of congregational churches in 1749 was 250.

In 1760, the number of inhabitants in this State was about 268, 8 50. 1 he propor- ”
tion of the ſects was then nearly as follows, viz.


| TURIN Winder of.
Sects. Congregrations. ſouls of each ſect.
Congregationaliſts, — 306 een
Friends meetings, „V | PEO 116,93.
Baptiſts, | a MTS 14743.
Epiſcopalians, : Mi . OS.
Preſbyterians, wa 4 ere 2,944
Total 365 n


Popu-


MASSACHUSETTS. | 337
PorvLATTON.] The population of the State is accurately ſtated in the table of di-
viſions. The counties of Eſſex, part of Suffolk, and part of Hampſhire, are the
moſt populous parts of the State. Eſſex has as many as 135 inhabitants for every
ſquare mile. „ 3 | |
CHARAC TER, ManNEss, &c.] See New England. 3 .
Revenue AND Taxts. | The principal ſources of revenue are land and poll taxes,
and the ſales of new lands. Taxes are levied on all males between ſixteen and fifty,
except ſuch as are exempted by law—alſo on the number of acres of improved and un-
improved land—on dwelling-houſes and barns, ware-houſes, ſtores, &c. Theſe are
all valued, and upon this valuation taxes are laid, fo many pounds for every Ioool.
INVENTIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS. | Great improvements have of late been made in
{everal manufacturing machines, by which thoſe ſpecies of manufacture in which they
are employed have been greatly facilitated in the execution, and fewer hands required.
But the moſt ingenious improvement or invention, and which moſt deſerves notice, is
a complete and elegant Planetarium, fix feet in diameter, conſtructed by Mr. Joſeph
Pope, of Boſton. This is entirely a work of original genius and aſſiduous applica-
tion, as Mr. Pope never ſaw a machine of the kind till his own was completed. It
exhibits a proof of great ſtrength of mind, and really does him much honour, both
as a philoſopher and a mechanic. This machine has been purchaſed for the Univerſity
at Cambridge, and is a very uſeful and ornamental addition to the philoſophical
apparatus. i | L | ; | F
Bas The conſtitution of the Commonwealth of Maſſachuſetts eſta-
bliſhed in 1780, contains a declaration of rights and a frame of government. The
declaration aſſerts the natural freedom and equality of men---Liberty of conſfcience---
Freedom of the Preſs---Trial by jury---Sovereignty and independence---that all power
is in the people---that hereditary honours and emoluments are inadmiſſible that every
ſubject is entitled to protection of life, liberty, and property---and, in return, muſt
obey the laws and pay his roperion of the common expenſe---that he ſhall not be
obliged to accuſe himſelf, but may be heard in his own defence---that he may keep
arms; but ſtanding armies ſhall not be maintained in time of peace---that no tax
ſhall be levied without the conſent of the people by their repreſentatives---that no ex
poſt facto law ſhall be made---that the martial law ſhall extend only to men in actual
military ſervice---that the legiſlative, executive, and judiciary powers ſhall be kept
diſtinct, &c. By the frame of government, the power of legiſlation is lodged in a
general court, conſiſting of two branches, viz. a Rate and a houſe of repreſentatives,
each having a negative upon the other. They meet annually on the lait. Wedneſday
in May. No act can be paſſed without the approbation of the governor, - unleſs two _
- thirds of both branches are in favour of it after a reviſal. Either branch, or the go-
vernor and council, may require the opinion of the juſtices of the ſupreme judicial
court upon important queſtions. Senators are choſen by diſtricts, of which there
cannot be leſs than thirteen. The number of counſellors and ſenators, for the whole
Commonwealth, is forty ; the number of each diſtrict is in proportion to their public
taxes; but no diſtrict ſhall be ſo large, as to have more than 1ix. Sixteen ſenators
make a quorum. The repreſentatives are choſen by the ſeveral towns, according to
their numbers of rateable polls. For 1 50 polls one is elected; and for every addition
01 225, an additional one. Their travelling expentes, to and from the general court,
ve defrayed by the public, but their wages for attendance are paid by their own towns.
Impeachments for miſconduct in office are made by the repreſentatives, and tried by
the lenate ; but the judgement can go only to removal from office and future diſqualifi-
cation. Money bills originate in the houſe of repreſentatives, but way be altezed 15


1 * ee three 68:4 + e un E e e W K 12 3


r
a. ö —


not be diminiſhed, although, they may


ESA rn” AE EROS A 3 ADS, 7 os 4 te bt. 00 boi ov ates
4 1 338 | Ns e Wy e o 1 SYAND | 1 "il


11. ſenate, Repreſentatives are privileged. from arxeſts on meſne proceſs. Yxty: mein-
hers mak a quorum. The ſupreme ecutive, authority is veſted in a governor, who:
is elected annually by the 1 . | 8 5 a council conſiſting, of the lieutenant-
governor,” and nine gentlemen Reken out 25 the forty, who are returned: for coun-
fellors and ſenators. Five counſellors, make, a quorum. The governor is commander
of all the military force of the Commoryyealth. He may convene the general court,
may adjourn them, when the two branches. diſagree about: the time; and. in Weir


receſs may prorogue them from time 10 time, mot exceeding ninety days---may. pardon


convicts, but the legiſlature alone can, . grant pardons,. before conviction... He com-
miſſions all officers, and with the advice, af the council, appoints all judicial officers.


Military officers are thus a ppointed; the reſpective companies chooſe their captain and


ſubalterns, who chooſe their regimental, « cers, who. chooſe their brigadiers. The


major generals are appoihted by the general court. Juſtices, of the peace are com-
aiiſfioned for ſeven years all other judicial, and all executive and military officers,
continue during good be! aviour, yet are removeable by the governor, upon addreſs of
the legiſlature... The falaries of the goyernor and juſtices, of the ſupreme court can-
1 enlarged. Official qualifications are as.
follows :---for a voter, twenty-one years of age, one year's reſidence, a freehold of zl.
annual value, or 60l. of any other eftate---for a repreſentative, 1ocl. freehold, or 200l.


other eſtate, and one year's reſidence in the town for a ſenator, 3aol. freehold, or


660. other eſtate in the Commonwealth, and five year's reſidence in the .
governor or lieutenant-governor, 1000l. "freehold, and feven year's refidence. Every


governor, Iicutenant- overnor, 12 5 lor, ſenator, or repreſentative, muſt declare
that he believes the Chriſtian religion, and has the legal qualifications. A governor,


lieutenant goverhor, or juſtice of the ſupreme court, can hold no other gr No


man ſhall hold two of theſe offices, Judge of probates, ſheriff}, regiſter. No, juſtices.
of the ſupreme court, ſecretary, attorney-general, treaſurer, judge. of Le vg in-


ſtructor of Hatyard d College, clerk, regiſter, ſheriff, or cuſtom officer, can, have a ſeat


in the legiſlature; The privilege of. habeas Corpus cannot, be ſuſpended more than a


year at one time. In 1795, if two thirds, of the e qualified voters defire, a. convention.
thall be called to reviſe the conſtitution.


HisTory. ] See Hutchinſon's Hiſtory of Maſfachuſctts—Minot' 8 Hiſtory ait the In-


ſurrection in Maffachuſetts— The Publications of the Hiſtorical Society, in the Ame.


rican Apollo -Hazard's 8 Hiſtorical Colle&ions—-Chalmer' 8 3 Annals, and: :
ny." 20 of the Feat calle: * f


ö * _ 3 na
, F 1 & A
w . F 25 1 5 * . 0 f 7
* | f 2 "2 iy ; % 4 % 8 1 7
8 * a; - 72 *


1


| RHODE ISLAND, AND PROVIDENCE. PLANTATIONS. 8. |


. — A


 S1TVATION 4 AND Exraur. S —
Mites: 4 75
Length 68 and 4 E. Long.
Breadth 4 between JE ahd 43 N. Lat.
OUNDED north and eaſt, by the Commonweal Ith of Maſ-
1 ſachuſetts; ſouth, by the Atlantic ; weſt, by Vonbecteut. |


—


Theſe limits comprehend what is called Rhode Hland and Providence Plantations.


CVE Divistons And 9 0 This State is 47 5 into five COULD; which
are ſubdivided into 30 townſhips, as follows:


Y Württ — Counties. .
„ : ? n . * |


Publiſhed Julv 15.1794 H. Stockdale, Rixadill:.


F | 8
J <= S”*
3 N
*> #8
4 22
f . .
2 |
| Glocefter of ; N. | |
tow Ru &) Bruith Mit
2 Pas | x ret tes
2 | Pamaganset P* | —— k — 1
}
: —
3 > \
3 | 8 | Fe
| ,
: 2 , | V 30
„„ > P | SV ( |
8 ' Settuate 2 N 2: by
; S 2 —
N . 9 8 Provivence WIS N
8 ; / We. — 97 — | T
8 j *S, S * ——ů 8
j A - , | 3 5 | |
988 „ Dighton |
| WS Feluret * PE 3
| Ng 8 | | i
= J 9
f | | \ - =
[1 — 7 5 n
| } Ee Warwick =
I = 8 ] 40
; | T f | |
| 75 N ; IR |
| EE | D |
| | — fun * ul
| * / { Weſt Greenwich Laſt Greenwich Tiverton. ; [
| F ; FE. ; H
j ö ö ö
; ö i J
| / 9 | Fe .
1 8 / North kingſton
: Y 8 8
z\ j | | 3
{. 8 / Peequamseut IX
8 ET YM Pond 4 T
| T FE 8 8
8 * 9
8 . V , 8
= > T | 8 —
* 21 | —
| : a A rer — Wardens ond.
* (harlſton South A
IWeſterhh+ | 2 525 4 |
| ; 8 eſt U . | 5 Ampſton 6 : |
| j Nenegrets fond R..
| 7 | | r 4
5 4
. Judith | | \
F |
1 7 | | 20
| of
— 8 f ;
ras rep mon = =
| 4 Mhettos Souly. 5 Anmes S*.


P


e ͤ ˙ .:ꝛA—ͤ —Üͥͤ:C
* * 3 *


| Towns.


Newpo
—
New Shoreham
Jameſtown
| Middletown
4 Tivertown
Little Compton
Providence
] Smithfield
| Scituate
I | Glouceſter
PROVIDENCE 4 Cumberland
I Cranſton
Johnſton
North Providence
Foſter
Weſterly .
North Kingſton
f South Kingſton
WASHINGTON & Charleſtown
„
Richmond
C Hopkinton
[ Briſtol
Warren
L Barrington
Warwick
| Eaſt Greenwich -
} Weſt Greenwich
bans 7


Counties.


NREwORT


BRISTOIL.


KENT


Total five  "Thiy


the year


15,352 Whites
1738 1 2,6 33 Blacks


and Hog iſlands.
The harbours are, Ne


average breadth; is about four miles.


RH OBE


between the main land: on the eaſt and weſt
principal of which are Rhode Iſland, Canontmmicut, Frudenbe, Patience, Hope, Dyer's 3


e , cc 5-56


„ t 4.2


ISLAND.
No. of
Inhabitants.


6716


1560


682
507
840
2453
1542


6380
3171


2315


4025
1964


1877


1320
1071
2268
2298
2907
2022
2498
1760
2462
1405
1122
683
2493
1824
2054


2477


67877


A; 29,7 5 Whites
| 174 s{ 4 755 Blacks


54,435 Whites 48,5 8 Whites |
1774] 5,243 Blacks i a 178g 3 30 1 Blacks
Bays, Hanzobns, AND ISLANDS. ' Natragy


rr ES NgMERATFRANM.


FS T4 +75 9


| 1761
67,
eee


nſet Bay makes up from ſouth to north,
It emboſoms many fertile iſlands, the


Slaves.


223 ;


> 14,300


itee_fownſhips,


3F


No. in each
County.


22 > 3,217


38 3
8 8,848
Is 68, 82 5
The number of inhabitants in Rhode Iſland and Providence Plantations was in


1 5,939 Whites


7957 Blacks
77 Whites,


$ Blacks


wport, Providence, Wickford: Patuxet, Warren, and Br iſtol.

Rhode Iſland, Rag which the State takes half its name, is 1 3 miles in length; ; *
It is divided into t
Portimonth, and Middletown. This iſland, in pöint of foil, climate, and fifuation,


Y x 2


Ney port,


may


RHODE, ISLAND.


may be ranked among the fineſt and moſt charming in the would. In its moſt
flouriſhing ſtate, it was called by travellers the Eden of America. But the change
which the ravages of war, and a decreate of buſineſs, have effected, is great and me-
lancholy. Some of the moſt ornamental country ſeats were deftroyed, and their fine
groves, orchards, and fruit-trees, wantonly cut down; and the gloom of its preſent
decayed ſtat is heightened by its charming natural ſituation, and by reflecting upon
its former glory. The farming intereſt ſuffered far leſs injury than the commercial
city of Newport, and has nearly recovered its former ſtate—Between 30, 00 and:
40,000 ſheep are fed on this iſland, befides neat cattle and horſes.
Canonnicut Ifland lies weſt of Rhode Iſland, and is fix miles in length, and about
one mile in breadth. It was purchaſed of the Indians in 16 57, and incorporated by
act of aſſembly by the name of the Iſland of Jameſtown, in 1678.
Block Iſland, called by the Indians, Maniſſes, is 21 miles S. S. W. from Newport,
and is the ſouthernmoſt land belonging to the State. It was erected into a townſhip,
by the name of New Shoreham, in 1672: The inhabitants of this iſland were for--
merly noted for making good cheeſe. They catch conſiderable: quantities of cod fiſh.
round the ledges near the iſland.
Prudence Iſland is nearly or quite as large as Canonnicut, and lies north of it, RP
is a part of the townſhip of Portſmouth.
Rrvers.] Providenee and Taunton rivers both fall into Narraganſet bay, „the
former on the weſt, the latter on the eaſt ſide of Rhode Iſland. Providence river
riſes partly in Maſfachuſetts, and is uavigable as far as Providence for ſhips of goo
tons, 3o miles from the ſea. Taunton river is navigable for tmall veſſels to Taunton. |
Common tides riſe about four feet.
Fall river is ſmall, riſing in Freetown, and paſſing through Tivertown. The line
between the States of Maſſachuſetts and Rhode Iſland paſſes Fall river bridge.
Patuxet river riſes in Maſhapog pond, and five miles below Providence, empties into
Narraganſet bay. Pawtucket river, called more northerly Blackſtone's river, empties
into Scekhonck river, four miles N. N. E. from Providence, where are the falls here-
after deſcribed, over which is a bridge, on the poſt-road to Boſton, and 40 miles
from thence. The confluent fiream empties into Providence river, about a mile below
Wayboflett, or the great bridge. Naſpatucket river falls into the bay about one mile
and- a half N. W. of Wayvoffett bridge. MoſhaffucK river falls into the ſame bay,
three-fourths of a mile north of the bridge. Theſe rivers united form Providence
river, which, a few miles below the town, receives the name of Narraganſet bay, and
affords fine fiſh, oyſters, and lobſters in great plenty. /
_—_ Crimarte. | Rhode Iſland. is as healthful a country as any part of North America.
The winters in the maritime parts of the State are milder than in the inland country;
the air being ſoftened by a ſea vapour, which alſo enriches the ſoil. The ſummers are
delightful, eſpecially on Rhode Iſland, where the extreme heats, which prevail in other
parts of America, are allayed by cool and refreſhing breezes from the ſea.
Fines. In the rivers and bays is plenty of ſheeps-head, black-fiſh, herring, ſhad,
lobſters, oyſters, and clams; and around the ſhores of Rhode Ifland, beſides thoſe
already mentioned, are cod, halibut, mackerel, baſs, haddock, &c. &c. to the amount
of more than ſeventy different kinds, ſo that in the ſeaſons of fiſh, the markets are
22 TH them. Travellers are agreed that Newport furniſhes the beſt fiſh-market in
wor
RRLIeIox.] The conſtitution of the State admits of no religious eſtabliſhments,
-any further than depends upon the n choice of individuals. All * =
ell


RHODE ISLAND. | 341
fefſing one Supreme Being, are equally protected by the laws, and no particular ſect
ean claim pre-eminence. This unlimited liberty in religion is one principal cauſe why
there is ſuch a variety of religious ſects in Rhode Iſland. The Baptiſts are the moſt
numerous of any denomination in the State. Theſe, as well as the other Baptiſts in
New England, are chiefly upon the Calviniſtic plan as to doctrines, and independents
in regard to church government. There are, however, ſome, who profeſs the Armi-
nian tenets, and are called Arminian Baptiſts. Others obſerve the Jewiſh, or Saturday
Sabbath, from a perſuaſion that it was one of the ten commandments, which they
plead are all in their nature moral, and were never abrogated in the New Teſtament, -
and mult, at leaft, be deemed of equal validity for public worſhip as any day particu-
larly ſet apart by Jeſus Chriſt and his Apoſtles. Theſe are called Sabbatarian, or
Seventh-day Baptiſts. There are others, who are called Separate Baptiſts.

The other religious denominations in Rhode Iſland are, Congregationalifts, Friends
or Quakers, Epiſcopalians, Moravians, and Jews. Befides theſe, there is a- con-
ſiderable number of the people, who can be reduced to no particular denomination...
In many towns, public worſhip is too much neglected by the greater part of the

inhabitants. They pay no taxes for the ſupport of ecclefiaſtics of any denomination ;
and a peculiarity which diſtinguiſhes this State from. every other proteſtant country in
the known world is, that no contract formed by the miniſter with his people,
for his falary, is valid in law: ſo that miniſters are dependent wholly on the
integrity of the people for their ſupport, ſince their ſalaries are not recoverable
by law. It ought in juſtice, however, to- be obſerved, that the clergy 'in general
are liberally. maintained, and none who merit it have reaſon to complain for want
of ſupport. _ „ Vf. „

LirERATURE. | The literature of this State is confined principally to the towns: of
Newport and Providence. There are men of learning and abilities ſcattered through
other towns, but they are rare. The bulk of the inhabitants, in other parts of the
State, are involved in greater ignorance, perhaps, than in moſt other parts of New

England. An impartial hiſtory of their tranſactions fince the peace, would evince the
truth of the above obſervations. „ 5 EE
At Providence is Rhode Iſland college. The charter for founding this ſeminary of
learning was granted by the general aſſembly of the State, by the name of the
* Truſtees and Fellows of the College or Univerſity, in the Englith colony of Rhode
Iſland and Providence Plantations,” * in 1764, in conſequence of the petition of a
large number of the moſt reſpectable characters in the State. By the charter, the
corporation of the college conſiſts of two ſeparate branches, with diſtinct, ſeparate,
and reſpective powers. The number of truſtees is thirty-ſix, of whom twenty-two are


of the denomination called Baptiſts, five of the denomination of Friends, five Epiſco- _


palians, and four Congregationaliſts. The ſame proportion of the different denomi-
nations to continue in perpetuum. The number of the fellows (inclufive of the pre-
ſident, who is a fellow ex officio) is twelve, of whom eight arc Baptiſts, the others
choſen indiſcriminately from any denomination. The concurrence of both branches,
bya majority of each, is neceſſary for the validity of an act, except adjudging and
conferring degrees, which excluſively belongs to the fellowſhip as a learned faculty.
The preſident muſt be a Baptiſt: profeſſors and other officers of inſtruction are not
limited to any particular denomination. There is annually a general meeting of the
corporation, on the firſt Wedneſday in September, at which time the public com-

mencement is held. | .


| * This name to be altered when any generous benefactor ariſes, which by his liberal donation ſhall entitle |
bimſelf to the honour of giving the college a name. |


This


342 5 RHODE ISLAND. |

This inſtitution was firſt founded at Warren, in the county of Briſtol, and thr
- firſi commencement held there in 1769.

In the year 1770, the college was removed to Providence, -where a large, elegant
building was erected for its accommodation, by the generous donations of individuals,
moſtly from the town of Providence. It is ſituated on a hill to the eaſt- of the town;
and while its elevated ſituation renders it delightful, by commanding an extenſive,
variegated proſpect, it furniſhes it with a pure, ſalubrious air. The edifice is of
brick, four ſtories high, 150 feet long, and 46 wide, with a projection of ten feet each
fide. - It has an entry lengthwiſe, with rooms on each fide. There are 48 rooms for
the accommodation of fiudents, and eight larger ones for public uſes, The roof is
covered with ſlate.

From December 17 79, to June 1782, the college edifice was uſed by the French
and American troops tor an hoſpital and barracks, ſo that the courſe of education
was interrupted during that period. No degrees were conferred from 1776 to 1786.
From 1786, the college again became regular, and 1 is now very unn, comm
up ards of ſixty ſtudents.

This infiitution is under the inſtruction of a preſident, a proſeſſor of divinity, a pro-
teffor of natural and experimental philoſophy, a profeſſor of mathematics and aſtro-
nomy, a proteflor of natural hiſtory, and three tutors. The inſtitution has a library,
of between two and three thouſand volumes, containing a valuable philoſophical ap-
paratus. Nearly all the funds of the college .are at intereſt in the treaſury of the
State, and amount to almoſt 2000].


At Newport there is a flouriſhing academy, under the direction of a rector and
tutors, who teach the learned lan DG. Engliſh grammar, geography, -&c.
SocikEriESs.] A marine ſociety was eſtabliſhed at Newport in 1752, for the purpoſe |
pl relieving diſtreſſed widows and orphans of maritime brethren, and ſuch of their ſo-
exety as may need aſſiſtance.

The Providence ſociety for promoting the abolition of ſlavery, for the relief of 7
ſons: unlawfully held in bondage, and for improving the condition of the African *
commenced in 1789, and was incorporated the year following. It confiſts of upwards
of 150 members, part of whom belong to the State of Maſſachuſetts.

MovusxTaix. |] In the town of Briſtol is Mount Hope, or as ſome call it, Mount Haup,
which is remarkable only for its having been the ſeat of King Philip, and the Place
where he was killed.

BRI DGES.] The great bridge in the town of Providence, formerly called Weyboſſet,
from a high hill of that name, which ſtood near the weſt end of the bridge, but
which is now removed, and its baſe built upon, is the only bridge of conſiderable note
in this State. It is 260 feet long, and 22 feet wide, ſupported by two wooden treſſels
and two ſtone Pillars. It unites the eaſtern and weſtern parts of the town, and is a
poop of reſort in ſummer, affording a pleaſant proj pect of all veſſels entering and

eaving the harbour. This is not a toll-bridge.

I he bridge over Patucket Falls is a work of conſiderable magnitude, and much
4 nuty. -

he aſſembly of OR S > chef ſeſſion of May 1792, paſſed an act andbagbentivi X
three companies, for the. purpote of erecting three bridgee—one-over the upper, and
another over the lower ferry of Scekhonk river, and a third over Howland! ferry, which
wauld unite Rhode Ifland with Tiverton on the main; the two former will greatly ac-


commodate the town of Providence the latter muſt prove highly advantageous to the


3 2 e of Newport and others on Rhode Hand: To ſuch. works. of —_— and: onter
e every good man wiſhes ſucceſs, |


8011


RHO DE ISLAND. 343
Sort. AND PRODUcTIoxSs.] This State, generally ſpeaking, is a country for paſture
and. not for gram. It howevor produces corn, rye, barley, oats,” and in ſome parts
wheat, ſufficient for home conſumption; and the various kinds of graffes, fruits, and
culinary roots and plants in great abundance, and in good perfection; cider is made
for exportation. The north-weſtern parts of the State are but thinly inhabited, and
are more rocky and barren than the other parts. The tract of country lying between
South Kingſton and the. Connecticut line, called the Narraganſet country, is
excellent grazing land, and is inhabited by a number of Jarge and wealthy farmers,
who raiſe. ſome of the fincſt- neat cattle in New England; weighing from 1600 to
1800 weight. They keep large dairies, and make butter and cheeſe of the beſt
quality and in large quantities for exportation. Narraganſet has been famed for an
excellent breed of pacing Horſes, remarkable for their ſpeed and hardinefs for
enduring the fatigues of a journey ; this breed of. horſes has much depreciated of
late, the beſt mares having been purchaſed by the people from the weſtward. =
TRADE. | Before the war, the merchants in Rhode Iſland imported from Great
Britain, dry goods from Africa, ſlaves from the Weſt Indies, ſugars, coffees, and
molaſſes—and from the neighbouring colonies, lumber and proviſions. With the
bills which they obtained in Surinam and other Dutch Weſt India Iſlands, they
paid their merchants in England; their ſugars they carried to Holland; the ſlaves
from Africa, they carried to the Weſt Indies, together with the lumber and pro-
viſions procured from their neighbours; the rum diſtilled from the molaſſes was
carried to Africa to purchaſe negroes ; with their dry goods from England they
trafficked with the neighbouring colonies. By this kind of circuitous commerce, they
ſubſiſted and grew rich. But the war, and ſome other events, have had a' great,
and in_moſt reſpects, an injurious effect upon the trade of this State. The ſlave _
trade, which was a ſource of wealth to many of the people in Newport, and in other
parts of the State, has happily been aboliſhed. The legiſlature have paſſed a law
prohibiting ſhips from going to Africa for ſlaves, and ſelling them in the Weſt India
Wands; and the oath of one ſeaman, belonging to the ſhip, is fufficrent evidence
of the fact. This law is; more favourable to the cauſe of humanity than to the
temporal intereſts of the merchants who had heen engaged jn this inhuman traffick:
The town of Briſtol carries on a confiderable trade to Africa, the Weſt Indies, and
to different parts of the United States: but by far the greateſt part of the commerce
of this State is. at preſent. carried on by the inhabitants of the flouriſhing town of


Providence. In June 1 79t, there were belonging to this port e
Tons. qs parts:


11 Ships, containing _— 35,006 54
35 Brigs $7: FS „„ 46
1 SROW- + 3 = - 141
1 Polecre S PFs r 101
2; "SeRoOoners-. =. = - 5 15320 21
$6 Sloops — „ 2 LIE = = — 7 vt
Total 129 fail, containing | 5 115942 84


The preſent exports from the State are has Ge lumber, horſes, cattle, beef, pork,
| fiſh, poultry, onions, butter, cheeſe, barley, grain, ſpirits, and cotton and Tine
goods. The imports conſiſts of European and Weſt India goods, and logwood
from the Bay of Honduras. Upwards of - 600 veſſels enter and clear annually at the /
different ports in this State. The amount of exports from this State to foreign
countries, for one year, * the 3oth of —— 1791, was 470,131 dollars
9 cents. 3 Lieut


344 RHODE ISLAND.


Lienr Hovss.] For the ſafety and convenience of failing into the Narraganſet Bay
and harbour of Newport, a light houſe was erected in 1749, in Beavertail, at the
ſouth end of Canonnicut Iſland. „„ e 3
The diameter at the baſe is 24 feet, and at the top 13 feet. The height from
the ground to the top of the cornice is 58 feet, round which is à gallery, and
within that ſtands the lanthorn, which is about 11 feet high, and 8 feet in diameter.
The ground the light houſe ſtands upon is about 12 feet above the furface of
the ſea at high water. e ks F |
_ MaxveacTtuses.] The inhabitants of this State are progreſſing rapidly in this
branch of buſineſs. A cotton manufactory has been erected at Providence, which
from preſent proſpects will anſwer the expectations of the proprietors. The warps
are ſpun by water with a machine, which is an improvement of Mr. Arkwright's ;
and ſtrong, ſmooth and excellent yarn, is thus made both for warps and ftockings.
The filling of the cotton goods is ſpun with jennies. In theſe ſeveral works five
carding machines are employcd, .and a calender, conſtructed after the European
manner. Jeans, fuſtians, denims, thickſets, velvets, &c. &c. are here manufactur-
ed and ſent to the ſouthern States. Large quantities of linen avd tow cloth are made
in different parts of this State for exportation. But the moſt conſiderable manufac-
| tures in this State are thoſe of iron, fuck .as bar and ſheet iron, ſteel, nail rods and
nails, implements of huſbandry, ſtoves, pots, and other houſhold utenſils, the iron

Work of ſhipping, anchors, bells &c. The other manufactures of this State are

rum, corn, ſpirits, chocolate, paper, wool and cotton cards, &c. beſide domeſtic
_ manufactures for family uſe, which, in this, in common with the other States,

amount to a vaſt ſum which cannot be aſcertained. . VFA
MixERALS, Foss1Ls, &c.] Iron ore is found in great plenty in ſeveral parts of
the State. The iron works on Patuxet river, twelve miles from Providence, are
ſupplied with ore from a bed four miles and a half diſtant, which lies in a valley,
through which runs a brook. The brook is turned into a new channel, and the ore
pits are cleared of water by a ſteam engine, conſtructed and made at the furnace,
by, and under the direction, of the late Joſeph Brown, Eſq. of Providence, which
continues a very uſeful monument of his mechanical genius. At this ore bed are a
variety of ores, curious ſtones, and ochres. LSE 1

At Diamond Hill, in the county of Providence, which is ſo called from its ſparkling
and ſhining appearance, there are a variety of peculiar ſtones, more curious than
uſeful. Not far from this hill, in the townſhip of Cumberland, is a copper mine,
mixed with iron ſtrongly impregnated with loadſtone, of which ſome large pieces
have been found in the neighbourhood. No method has yet been diſcovered to work
it to advantage. 1 „„ e

An abundance of limeſtone is found in this State, particularly in the county of
Providence, of which large quantities of lime are made and exported. This lime-
ſtone is of different colours, and is the true marble, both of the white, plain, and
variegated. It takes a fine poliſh, and works equal to any in America.

There are ſeveral mineral ſprings in this State; to one of which, near Providence,
many people reſort to bathe and drink the water. „

CuI EL e Newport and Providence are the two principal towns in the

State. Newport lies in lat. 4135. This town was firſt ſettled by Mr. William
Coddington, afterwards governon, and the father of Rhode Iſland, with ſeventeen
others, in 1639. Its harbour, which is one of the fineſt in the world, ſpreads weſt-
ward. beſore the town. The entrance is eaſy and fate, and a large fleet may anchor


*


RHODE ISLAND. 345
in it and ride in perfect ſecurity. It is probable this may, in ſome future period,
become one of the man of war ports of the American Empire. The town lies north
and ſouth upon a gradual aſcent as you proceed eaſtward from the water, and exhibits
a beautiful view from the harbour, and from the neighbouring hills which he weſt-
ward upon the main. Weſt of the town is Goat Ifland, on which is a fort.
Between this iſland and Rhode Iſland is the barbour. Front or water ſtreet is a mile
in len

N — contains about 1000 houſes, built chiekly of wood. It has nine houſes for
public worſhip : three for the Baptiſts, two for Congregationaliſts, one for Epiſco-
palians, one for Quakers, one for Moravians, and a ſynagogue for the Jews. The
other public buildings are a ſtate-houſe, and an edifice for the public library. The
| ſituation, form, and architecture of the ſtate-houſe, give it a pleafing appearance.
It ſtands ſufficiently elevated, and a long Wharf and 8 Parade lead up to it from
the harbour.

The prohibition of the: ſlave teas. the deſtructive influence of paper money
(which has now, however, ceaſed to operate) combined with the devaſtation of a cruel
war, have occafioned a ſtagnation of buſineſs which is truly melancholy and diſ-
treſſing. This city, far famed for the beauty of its ſituation, the ſalubrity of its
climate, and the hoſpitality and politeneſs of its inhabitants, and which was the
place of reſort for invalids from a great diſtance, now wears the gloomy aſpect of
decay. Thouſands of its inhabitants are almoſt deſtitute of employment. This
circumſtance, together with that of there being a great abundance of raw materials
in the vicinity, ſtrongly mark out this city as a convenient and proper fituation for
_ extenſive manufactures. Should the gentlemen of fortune turn their capitals into
this channel, it 1s thought that they would not only derive a profit to themſelves,
but be inftrumental in giving employment and bread to thouſands of now wanne
people, and of reviving the former importance of their beautiful city.

The excellent accommodations and regulations of the numerous packets Which belong
to this port, and which ply thence to Providence and New Vork, ou ight not to paſs
_ unnoticed. They are ſaid to be ſuperior to any thing of the kind in Europe. 'The
appearance -of the iſlands in Narraganſet Bay, and of the circumjacent country, in
the ſpring and ſummer . either from the land or water, 1s ern. beautiful
and charming.


Providence, ſituated in lat. 41* 51 on both fided of Providence river, is 3 5 miles .
from the ſea, and 30 N. by W. from Newport. It is the oldeſt town in the State. 1


Roger Williams, and his company, were its firſt ſettlers in 1636.

This town is divided into two parts by the river, and connected by the bridge
already deſcribed. Ships of almoſt any fize fail up and down the channel, which
is marked out by ſtakes, erected at points, ſhoals, and beds lying in the river: ſo that
ſtrangers may come up to the town without a pilot. A ſhip of 950 tons, for the
Eaſt India trade, was lately built in this town, and fitted for ſea. 1 1764 there were
belonging to the county of Providence, 54 ſail of veſſels, containing 4,320 tons.
In 1791, they had 129 ſail, containing 11,942 tons.

This town ſuffered much by. the Indian war of 1675, . 1 a number of its
inhabitants removed to Rhode iſland for ſhelter. In the late war the caſe Was
reverſed ; many of the inhabitants of that Iſland removed to Providence.

The public buildings are, an elegant mceting houſe for Baptiſts, 80 fect ſquars,
With a lofty and beautiful ſteeple and a large bell, caſt at the Furnace, Hope in
Scituato—a mee ting houſe for Friends or Guakers, two for Congregationaliſts,
Ty an


"<>


346 RHODE ISLAND.
an epiſe copal church, a handſome court-houſe, 70 feet by 4, in which is depoſited a
library for the uſe of the inhabitants of the town and;country—a work-houſe, a market- |
houſe 80 feet long and 40 feet wide, and a brick ſchool-liouſe, in which four ſchools
are kept. The college ediſice we have already mentioned. The houſes in this town
are generally built of wood, though there are ſome brick buildings which are large and
elegant. At a convenient diſtance from the town an hoſpital for the ſmnall-pox, and
other diſeaſes, has been erected. There are two ſpermaceti works, a number of diſtilleries,
ſugar-hiouſes, and other manufactories. Several forts were erected in and near Provi-
dence during the late war, which, however, are not kept in repair. This town has
an extenfive trade with Mailachuſetts, Connecticut, and part of Vermont; and from

1 its advantageous ſituation, promiſes to be among the lar geſt towns in New England.

il K fends four repreſentatives to the General Atflembly—the other towns in the county

=: - lend but two.

= Briſtol is a pleaſant thr iving bowie about 16 miles north of N ewport, on the main :

1 part of the town was deſtroyed by the Britiſh, but it has ſince been rebuilt : it has an
epiſcopal and 'a congregational church. This town is noted for raiſing large quantities
of onion and other roots. A number of veſſels are owned by the inhabitants, and they
earry on a conſiderable trade to Africa, the Wen nn and to different party of the

United States.


Warren is alſo a flouriſhing town—trades to the wen Indies and other places, and
builds ſhips.
Little Compton, called by the Indians FIRE is dad to be. the beſt cultientel town-
ſhip in the State, and aftords a greater ſupply of proviſions for market, ſuch as meats
of the ſeveral kinds, butter, cheeſe, vegetables, &c. than any. other town of its ſize.
The inhabitants, who are an induſtrious and ſober people, and in theſe reſpects an ex-
ample worthy the notice and imitation of their brethren in ſome other parts of the State,
manufacture linen and tow cloth, ms: &e. of an excellent. enen, and 1 in con-
fiderable quantities for ſale.


Eaſt Greenwich and Warwick are notei] for making good Oder, and formerly for
_ raifing tobacco for exportation.
IxDIAXs.] A few years ſince there we about 500 Indians in this State: the makes
part of them reſide at Charleſtown: they are peaceable and well- diſpoſed tenen governe
ment, and ſpeak the Engliſh language.
CrkiosrrIxs. About four miles north-eaſt of Providence lies a ſmall villas; called.
Pautucket, a place of ſome trade, and famous for lamprey eels. Through this village
runs Pautucket river, which empties into Seekhonk river at this place. In this river is
a beautiful fall of water, directly over which a bridge has been built, which divides the
Commonwealth of Maſſachuſetts from the State of Rhode Iſland. The fall, in its
whole length, is upwards of fifty feet: the water paſſes through ſeveral chaſims in a
rock which runs diametrically acroſs the bed of the ſtream, and ſerves as a dam to the
water. Several mills have been erected upon theſe falls ; and the ſpouts and channels
which have been conſtructed to conduct the ſtreams to their reſpective wheels, and the
bridge, have taken very much from the beauty and-grandeur of the ſcene which would
otherwiſe have been indeſcribably charming and romantic.
_ In the town of Middletown, on Rhode Ifland, about two mailed: from New wport, is a
Place called Purgatory; it joins to the ſea on the eaſt fide of the iſland: it 6 is a large
gavity or opening, in a high bed of rocks, about twelve feet in diameter at top ; and
about forty feet oP before you reach the water, of which, as It 2 5 the ſea, it has


always


RHODE ISLAND. LY.
always a large depth. The rocks on each fide appear to have been once united, and


were probably ſeparated by ſome convulſion in nature. |

ConsTITUTION. | The conſtitution of this State is founded on the charter granted
by Charles II. in 1663; and the frame of government was not eſſentially altered by
the revolution. The legiſlature of this State confiſts of two branches---a ſenate or
upper houſe, compoſed of ten members, beſides the governor and deputy-governor,
called, in the charter, . az//ants---and a houſe of repreſentatives, compoſed of deputies
from the ſeveral towns. The members of the legiſlature are choſen twice a year; and
there are two ſeſſions of this body annually, viz. on the firſt Wedneſday in May, and
the laſt Wedneſday in October. . i tags * 85
The ſupreme executive power is veſted in a governor, or, in his abſence, in the
deputy-governor, who, with the aſſiſtants, ſecretary, and general treaſurer, are choſen
annually in May by the ſuffrages of the people. The governor preſides in the upper
houſe, but has only a ſingle voice in enacting laws.

There is one ſupreme judicial court, compoſed of five judges, whoſe juriſdiction ex-

| tends over the whole State, and who hold two courts annually in each county.

In cach county there is an inferior court of common pleas and general ſeſſions of the
peace, held twice a year for the trial of cauſes, not capital, arifing within the county,
trom which an appeal lies to the ſupreme court. Trp En

 HisToky. | This State was firſt ſettled from Maſſachuſetts. Motives of the ſame
kind with thoſe which are well known to have occaſioned the ſettlement of moſt of the
other United States, gave birth to this. The emigrants from England who came to
Maſlachuſetts, though they did not perfectly agree in religious ſentiments, had been
tolerably united by their common zeal againſt the ceremonies of the church of England.
But as ſoon as they were removed from eccleſiaſtical courts, and poſſeſſed of a patent
allowing liberty of conſcience, they fell into difputes and contentions among them-
telves : and notwithſtanding all their ſufferings and complaints in England, excited by
the principle of uniformity, tuch is human nature, the majority here were as fond of this
principle, as thoſe from whoſe perſecution they had fled. _ 3 =

The true grounds of religious liberty were not embraced or underſiood at this time
by any ſect. While all diſclaimed perſecution for the ſake of conſcience, a regard for
the public peace and for the preſervation of the church of Chriſt from infection, toge-
ther with the obſtinacy of the Hereticks, was urged in juſtification of that, which,
ſtripped of all its diſguiſes, the light of nature and the laws of Chriſt in the moſt


ſolemn manner condemn. 1 | TS
Mr. Roger Williams, a miniſter who came over to New England in 1631, was
charged with holding a variety of errors, and was on that account forced to leave his
houſe, land, wife and children, at Salem, in the dead of winter, and to ſeek a reſi-
dence without the limits of Maſſachuſetts. Governor Winthrop adviſed him to purſue |
his courſe to Nehiganſet, or Narraganſot Bay, which he did, and fixed hinvelf at
Secunk, or Seekhonk now Rehoboth : but that place being within the bounds of Ply-
mouth colony, Governor W inflow, in a friendly manner, advited hun to remove to
the other fide of the river, where the lands were not covered by any patent. Accord-
ingly in 1636, Mr. Williams, and four others, croffed Seckhonk river, and landed
among the Indians, by whom they were hoſpitably received, and thus laid the founda-
ton of a town, which, from a ſenſe of God's mercitul providence to bim, be called
Providence. Here he was ſoon after joined by a number of others, and though they. were
leeured from the Indians by the terror of the Engliſh, yet they, tor a conſiderable time,
1 7 2 355 ſuſtered


- 348 : RH ODE ISL AND. »


ſuffered much from fatigue and want; but they enjoyed liberty of conſcience, whick
has ever fince been inviolably maintained in this State. ende
{ The unhappy diviſions and contentions in Maffachuſetts ſtill prevailed, and in the
year 1636, Governor Winthrop ſtrove to exterminate the opinions which he diſap-
proved: accordingly, a Synod was called at Newtown (now Cambridge) on the 3oth
of Auguſt, when eighty erroneous opinions were preſented, debated, and condemned;
and a court holden in October following, at the fame place, baniſhed a few leading
perſons of thoſe. accuſed of theſe errors, and cenſured ſeveral others; not, it ſeems; for
holding theſe opinions, but for ſeditious conduct. The diſputes which occaſtoned this
diſturbance, were about the ſame points as the five queſtions debated between the Synod
and Mr. Cotton, which are thus deſeribed by Dr. Mather: They were, © about the
order of things in our union to our Lord Jeſus Chriſt ; about the influence of our faith
in the application of his righteouſneſs ; about the uſe of our ſanctification in evidencing
our juſtification ; and about the confideration of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt by men yet under
a covenant of works; briefly, they were about the points whereupon depends the
grounds of our aſſurance of bleſſedneſs in a better world.” * „% FCA
The whole colony of Maſſachuſetts at this time was in a violent ferment.. The
election of civil officers was carried by a party ſpirit, excited by religious diſſenſion.
Thoſe who were baniſhed by the court, joined by a number of their friends, went in
queſt of a new ſettlement, and came to Providence, where they were kindly enter-
_ tained by Mr. R. Williams; who, by the affiſtance of Sir Henry Vane, jun. procured
for them, from the Indians, Aquidnick, now Rhode Iſland. Here, in 1638, the
people, eighteen in number, formed themſelves into a body politic, and choſe Mr.
Coddington, their leader, to be their judge or chief magiſtrate. This ſame year the
.Sachems ſigned the deed or grant of the iſland ; for which Indian gift, it is faid, they
paid very dearly, by being obliged to make repeated purchaſes of the ſame lands from


ſeveral claimants. 5 | .
The other parts, of the State were purchaſed of the natives at ſeveral ſucceſſive
riods. 5 3 1 55 3

"I the year 1643, the people being deſtitute of a patent-or any legal authority, Mr.

Williams went to England as agent; and, by the aſſiſtance of Sir Henry Vane, jun.

obtained by the Earl of Warwick (then governor and admiral of all the plantations)

and his council, © a free and abſolute charter of civil incorporation of Providence Plan-
tations, in Narraganſet Bay.” This laſted until the charter granted by Charles II. in

1663, by which the incorporation was ſtiled, © the Englith colony of Rhode Ifland,

and Providence Plantations in New England.” This charter, without any eſſential

alteration, has remained the foundation of their government ever ſince. 1

As the original inhabitants of this State were perſecuted for the ſake of conſcience, 2
moſt liberal and free toleration was eſtabliſhed by them. So little has the civil autho-

_ rity to do with religion here, that, as has been already hinted, no contract between à
miniſter and a ſociety (unleſs incorporated for that purpoſe) is of any force. It 1s pro-
bably ſor theſe reaſons that ſo many different ſects have ever been found here; and

that the Sabbath, and all religious inſtitutions, have been more neglected in this than

in any other of the New England States. Mr. Williams became a Baptiſt in a fe
years aſter his ſettling at Providence, and was active in forming a church of that perſua-

ſion in 1639, but ceaſed to walk with it the following year. This church, in 1653

diſagreed about the rite of laying on of hands, ſome holding it neceſſary to church

communion, others eſteeming it indifferent; upon which the church divided. At

5 | | Ne pon,


0


* Mag. B. 7. 17.


82020


.


—— —
* 0
.


*


—— 3 — —E—EƷᷣͤä— .


O
Nie


nn


i H. mu) |


* umſſpvi


—


2 S UMO}I ppi


Connecticuè
*
-
_
F.


We UPUlA\ (


REN.
Non
nente
0
u.
[|
U
1
U
ö a
Kanqzn 1
4
1
U
,
_— OOO GE neacs U
|


—— — — 2. —
— —— ———


CONNECTICUT. 349


Newport, Mr. John Clark and ſome others formed a church, in 1 644, on = princi-
ples of the Baptiſts ; which church was afterwards divided like that at Providence.

In 1700 the Friends or Quakers meeting-houſe was built in Newport: their yearly
meeting, till Governor Coddington's death, was held in his houſe, and. he died a mem
ber of that body in 1688.

In 1720 there was a Congregational church exthored at Newport; and the Reverend
Nathaniel Clap was ordained its paſtor. Out of this church another was formed in
1728. The worſhip of God, according to the rites of the church of England, was in-
fituted here, in 1706, by the Society for propagating the goſpel in foreign parts.
And in 1738, there were ſeven worſhipping aſſemblies in this town, and a large ſo-


_ eiety of Quakers at Portſmouth, at the other end of the iſland.


In 1630 the colony was filled with inhabitants, and chiefly, by the 3 increaſe
of the ſettlers. The number of ſouls in the State at this time was 17,93 55 of which
no more than 985 were Indians, and 1648 Negroes.

In 1738, there were above one hundred fail of veſſels belonging to- —
The colony of Rhode Iſland, from its local ſituation, has ever been leſs expoſed to
the incurſions of the neighbouring Indians, and from the French from Canada, than
their neighbours in Maſlachuſetts and Connecticut. Many of the colony have, from
its firſt eſtabliſhment, profeſſed - the principles. of the Quakers, which forbad them to
fight: for theſe reaſons, the colony has been very little concerned in the old wars with
the French and Indians. In the expedition againſt Port Royal in 1710, and in the
abortive attempt againſt Canada in 1711, they had ſome forces. Towards the intended.
expedition againſt Canada, in 1746, they raiſed 300 men, and equipped a ſloop of war
with 100 ſeamen; but in their voyage to. Nova Scotia they met with misfortunes” and
returned. Soon after, the deſign was drop op
Throughout the whole of the late war with Great Britain, the inhabitants of | |
this State have manifeſted a patriotic ſpirit; their troops have behaved Sallantiy, and
they are honoured in. OY N the ſecond nl in the field.“

* |


CONNECTICUT:


f | Survarion d Exroxr.

Mile Nr. | Sets; | „

Length 82 41e 5 42% N 2 N. Latitude. 8

N — between 14 1* 50 and ag. E. Longitude.

B JOUNDED north, by Maſſachuſetts ; eaſt, by Rhode Illand;

N ouxpaxEs,] ſouth, by the Sound, which divides it from Long Ifland ; w eſt,

by the State of New York.

The divifional line between Connecticut and Maſſachuſetts, as ſettled in 1 7 13, was

found to be about ſevent -two miles in length. The line dividing Connecticut from

Rhode Iſland was ſettled in 1728, and found to be about 45 miles. The ſea coaſt,

from the mouth of Paukatuk river, which forms a part of the eaſtern boundary of

Connecticut, in a direct ſouth-weſterly line to the mouth of Byram river, is reckoned

at about ninety miles. The line between Connecticut and New York runs ſrom 22
| EN + tude


„General Green.


{$22 — TI TOE ET ‚ PPP
-. *


350 ; CONNECTICUT.
tude 410 to latitude 42* 2; 72 miles. Connecticut contains about 4, 674 ſquare miles;
equal to about 2,640,000 acres.

Civil Divisioxs. ] Connecticut is divided into eight counties, and about 100 town-
ſhips. Each townſhip is a corporation, inveſted with power to hold lands, chooſe
their own town officers, to make prudential laws, the penalty of tranſgreſſion not to
exceed twenty thillings, and to chooſe their own repreſentatives to the General Aſſem-
bly. The townſhips are generally divided into two or more pariſhes, in each of which
18 one or more places for public worſhip, and ſchool-houſes at convenient diſtances.


The names of the counties, their chief towns, and population, in 1790, were as


Counties. Tot. No. Inhab. No. Fema. Slaves. Chief Towns.
Hartford „ 46,029 ii 6 Hartford.
New Haven 30, 830 15,258 433 New Haven.
811 1 * | New London.

New London - 33, 200 16,478 586 { Wk”
Fairfield 5 36,250 r { Baldur
Windham - 28,921 _. 14,406 184 Windham.
Litchfield - 230,788. "£6,900. 233 Litchfield.
n 8 9 I MNMiddleton.
Middleſex | - 18,855 9,632 . Ha TEA
Tohd 14,108 8 510 47 'Tolland.
Total "Janet 237,940: 437,445 26704.


Rivers. ] The principal rivers in this State are Connecticut, Houſatonick, the
Thames, and their branches. Under the heads of New Hampſhire and Maſſachuſetts
we have already deſcribed Connecticut river till it enters this State: ſoon after it enters
the beunds of Connecticut it paſſes over Enfield falls, to render which navigable for
boats, a company has been conſtituted, and a ſum of money raiſed by lottery. At
Windfor it receives Windſor Ferry river from the weſt, which is formed by the junction
of Farmingham and Poquabock rivers. At Hartford it meets the tide, and thence
flows, in a crooked channel, into Long Iſland ſound. It is from 80 to 100 rods wide,
130 miles from its mouth. 7 eh

At its mouth is a bar of ſand which conſiderably obſtructs the navigation. Ten feet
water at full tides 1s found on this bar, and the ſame depth to Middleton : the diſtance
of the bar from this place, as the river runs, is thirty-ſix miles. Above Middleton are
ſeveral ſhoals which ſtretch quite acroſs the river: only ſix feet water is found on the
ſhoal at high tide, and here the tide ebbs and flows but about eight inches. About
three miles below Middleton the river is contracted to about 40 rods in breadth by two
high mountains: almoſt every where elſe the banks are low, and ſpread into fine ex-
tenfive meadows : in the ſpring floods, which generally happen in May, theſe meadows |
arc covered with water. At Hartford, the water ſometimes riſes twenty feet above the
cormon ſurface of the river, and having all to paſs through the above-mentioned

ſtreight, it is ſometimes two or three weeks before it returns to its uſual bed, Theſe
floods add nothing to the depth of water on the bar at the mouth of the river; this bar

lying too far off in the ſound to be affected by them. 5
On this beautiful river, whoſe banks are ſettled almoſt to its ſource, are many plea-
fant, neat, well-built towns. On its weſtern bank, from its mouth northward, 2
7 4 | 8 we


CONNECTICUT. 351
the towns of Saybrook, Haddam, Middleton, Weathersfield, Hartford, Windſor, and
Suffield. On its eaſtern bank, as you aſcend the river, are * Eafi Haddam,
Glaſtenbury, Eaſt Harttord, Eaſt Windſor, and Enfield.

This river is navigable to Hartford, upwards of fiſty miles from its mouth, and the
produce of the country for two hundred miles above is brought thither in boats: the
boats which are uſed in this buſineſs are flat-bottomed, long and narrow, for the con-
venience of going up ſtream, and of fo light a make as to be portable in carts : they are
taken out of the river at three different carrying places, all.of which make fifteen miles.
Theſe obſtructions will in a few years, it is probable, be all removed.

Sturgeon, ſalmon, and ſhad, are caught in plenty in their ſeaſon, from the mouth
of the river upwards, excepting ſturgeon, which do not aſcend the upper falls; beſides

a variety of {mall fiſh, ſuch as pike, carp, perch, &c. _

From this river were employed, in 1789, three brigs of one hundred and 42800 tons

each, in the European trade; and about ſixty ſail, from ſixty to one hundred and fift
tons, in the Weſt India trade ; ; beſides a few fiſhermen, and forty or fifty coaſting:

veſſels.

One branch of the Houſatonick* riſes in Laneſborough, the other in Windſor, both
in Berkſhire county, in Maſſachuſetts: it paſſes through a number of pleaſant towns,
and empties into the ſound between Stratford and Milford: it is navigable twelve

miles to Derby. A bar of ſhells, at its mouth, obſtructs its navigation for large veſ-
fels. In this river, between Saliſbury and Canaan. is a cataract,. where the water of
the whole river, which is 150 yards wide, falls about ſixty feet perpendicular, in a
perfect white ſheet, exhibiting a ſcene exceedingly grand and beautiful.
Naugatuk is a ſmall river which riſes in Fine, and ee into the Houfa-
tomck at Derby.

The Thames empties into Long Iſland found at New London : it 1s navigable four-
teen miles to Norwich Landing: here it loſes its name, and branches into Sbentucket

on the eaſt, and Norwich or Little river on the weſt. The city of Norwich ſtands on
the tongue of land between theſe rivers. . Little river, about'a mile from its mouth,
has a remarkable and very romantic cataract. A rock, ten or twelve. feet in ndi-
cular height, extends quite acroſs the channel of the river: over this the whole river
pitches, in one entire ſheet, upon a bed of rocks below. Here the river is compreſſed
into a very narrow channel between two craggy cliffs, one of which towers to a con-
ſiderable height: the channel deſcends gradually, is very crooked, and covered with
pointed rocks. Upon thete the water ſwiftly tumbles, foaming w ith the moſt violent
agitation, fifteen or twenty rods, into a broad baſon which ſpreads before it. At the
bottom of the perpendicular falls the rocks are curiouſly excavated by the conſtant
pouring of the water: ſome of the cavities, which are all of a circular form, are five or
| tix feet deep. The ſmoothneſs of the water above its deſcent—the regularity and
beauty of the perpendicular fall—the tremendous roughneſs of the other, and the
craggy, towering cliff which impends the whole, preſent to the view of the ſpectator a
ſcene indefcribably delightful and majeſtic. On this river are ſome of the fineſt mill
rats in New England; and thoſe immediately below the falls, occupied by Lathrop's
mills, are, perhaps, not exceeded by any in the world. Acroſs the mouth of this river
is a broad, commodious bridge, in the form of a wharf, built at a great expence. _

Shetucket river, the other branch of the Thames, four miles from its mouth, receives
Quinnabogue, which has its ſource in Brimfield in Maſſachuſetts ; thence paſſing
through. Sturbridge and E in Maſſachuſetts, it croſſes into Connecticut and


divide
+ An Indian name, ſignifying Over the 8


der


2.26, 8 . 3 — * 9 * : * 6 - = PIES 99 — 5 1e
* no p 8 ar as 4 2 { ARE - KX 2 * 7 * f „ ; p "WD * " FB X 7 2 ä * A 4 — 2 3
| — — rr 3 EF r ä 3 * d 838 * . —
* . OIL ny — 2 E n n Nan wh * — e * N e +. SS 0 * K 1 2 5 8 9 7 . ay 3 e * — — FE PY K # i 5 F -_ \ : wrath rb — aan
* * _ FS 2 „ oe = - 8 r 28 E 9 * Rl EY * IO» 1 . 2 8 TY * > „ 23 RET n 2 5 8 * 5 2225 N. : p& $4 & i l * — * e Fi * * WS des * 4 2-4 * 9 " 4
Is (IDF. 5 r * g * EE PIT n N IF © r * 2 r n 5 . ö 8. p (4 WET 2 2 - . a » 4 % * 2+; 64. ot FE REY 81 * . : Saks — 4 FER — * * * — — — -
s SY - * 2 ds 8 1 * - * B+? o a > \ $54 . N * 4 * o * = 1 4 * _ * 4 A "I goth — : — . * N 13331 * ses A 4
1 NT E224, * 3 1 6 <7 ww od - A 4 & e 5 * 1 1 0 — W — ʒ́— 222 e 8 I LY 3 9 = —_— *
* KI ; Ds 15 8 * N TY 2 * es A 2 K * 4 "ID "ET 1 Py \ 4 RR — totitat. ROI 49% "I eb — es — <A x 2 * p _ * IS 6 * 4 > 4 l — N
” * . ware i an. r 3 bo N 3 — AP . re ws — * * : .
* " oY go, - 4 -. ©» » os! oy. 2 IE” * n - * 3 * 4 wy * * - 1
. Ba 3 8 22 — A 1


£ ; ;
| WI
- M64 *
abs


TW [4+ »


divides Pomfret from Killingly, Canterbury from Plainfield, and Liſbon from Preflon,
and then mingles with the Shetucket. In paſling through this lilly country, it
tumbles over many falls, two of which, one in Thompſon, the other in Brooklyn, are
thirty feet each, and affords a vaſt number of fine mill ſeats. In its courſe it receives


a great number of tributary ſtreams, the el of which are Muddy Brook, and
Five Mile river.

Shetucket river is formed by tlie junction of Willamantick and Mount Hope rivers,
which unite between Windham and Lebanon. In Liſbon it receives Little river; and
at a little diftance farther the Quinnabogue, and empties as above.

Thele rivers are fed by numberlets brooks from every part of the country. At the
mouth of Shetucket, is a bridge of timber 1 24 feet in length, ſupported at each end by
pillars, and held up in the middle by braces on the top, in the nature of an arch.

Paukatuck river is an inconfiderable ſtream which heads in Stonington, and empties

into Stonington harbour. It forms part of the dividing line between e and
Rhode Ifland.
Eaſt, or North Haven river, l in Southington, ne far from a bend in Far-
mington river, and paſſing through Wallingford and North Haven, falls into New
Haven harbour. It has been meditated to connect the ſource of this river with Far-
mington river.


Eaſt and Weſt rivers are inconfiderable firears, bounding the __ of New Haven
on the caſt and weſt.

Weſt of the Houfatonick, are a number of ſmall rivers which fall into the ſound.
Among theſe is Byram river, noticeable only as forming a part of the boundary be-
tween New York and Connecticut. But neither this, nor any of the others, are con-
fderable enough to merit particular deſcriptions.

HarBovurs.| The two principal harbours are at New London and New 8
The ſormer opens to the ſouth. From the light-houſe, which ſtands at the mouth of
the harbour, to the town, is about three miles; the breadth is three quarters of a mile,

and in ſome places more. The harbour has from five to fix fathoin water—a clear
bettom—tough, ooze, and as far as one mile above the town is ene ſecure, and
commodious for large ſhips.

New Haven harbour is greatly inferior to that of New London. It is a bay which
ſets up northerly from the ſound, about four miles. Its entrance is about half a mile
wide. It has very good anchorage, and two and an half fathom at low water, and
three fathom and four feet at common tides.
About a mile from the town, on the channel, a pier is erected, at which veſſels of
ſuch ſize as cannot come up to the wharf, lade and unlade. A fam of money has
lately been raiſed by lottery for the purpoſe of extending the long wharf to this pier,
and the work 1s partly accompliſhed. When completed, this wharf will be the longeſt
in the United States, and will be a vaſt benefit to the town.


The whole of the fea coaſt is indented with harbours, many of which are ſafe and
commodious, but are not ſufficiently uſed to merit a deſcription.
CLIMATE, SOIL, Ax D PRODUCTIONS. | Connecticut, though ſubject to the extremes
of heat and cold in their ſeaſons, and to frequent ſudden changes, is very healthful.
The north-weſt winds, in the winter ſeaſon, are often extremely ſevere and piercing,
occaſioned by the great body of ſnow which lies concealed from the diſſolving in-
fluenee of the ſun, in the immenſe foreſts north and north-weſt. The clear and ſerene
te mperature of the ſky, however, makes amends for the ſeverity of the weather, and
is favourable to health and ae ey 18 generally broken land, made


up


CONNECTICUT, 353


up of mountains, hills, and vallies; and is exccedingly well watered. Some fmall
arts of it are thin and barren. It lies in the fifth and fixth northern climates, and has
a ſtrong fertile ſoil. Its principal productions are Indian corn, rye, wheat in man
parts of the State, oats, and barley, which are heavy and good, and of Jate, buck
wheat—flax in large quantities—4ome hemp, potatoes of teveral kinds, pumpkins,
turnips, peas, beans, &c. &c. Fruits of all kinds, which are eommon to the climate.
The ſoil is very well calculated for paſture and mowing, which enables the farmers to
feed large numbers of neat cattle and horſes. Actual calculation has evinced, that
any giyen quantity of the beſt mowing land in Connecticut produces about twice as
much clear profit, as the ſame quantity of the beſt wheat land in the State of New
York. Many farmers, in the eaſtern part of the State, have lately found their advan-
tage in raiſing mules, which are carried from the ports of Norwich and New London
to the Weſt India lands, and yield a handſome profit. The beef, pork, butter, aud
cheeſe of Connecticut, are equal to any in the world. _ 0
TRA DE.] The trade of Connecticut is principally with the Weſt India iſlands, and
is carried on in veſſels from ſixty to an hundred and forty tons. The exports conſiſt
of horſes, mules, oxen, oak ſtaves, hoops, pine boards, oak plank, beans, Indian corn,
fiſh, beef, pork, &c. Horſes, live cattle and lumber, are permitted in the Dutch,
Daniſh, and French ports. . N , og
Connecticut has a large number of coaſting veſſels employed in carrying the pro -
duce of the State to other States. To Rhode Iland, Maſſachuſetts, and New Hamp-
ſhire, they carry pork, wheat, corn, and rye; to North and South Carolinas and
Georgia, butter, cheeſe, ſalted beet, cyder, apples, potatoes, hay, &c. and receive in
return, rice, indigo, and money. But as New York is nearer, and the ſtate of the
markets always well known, much of the produce of Connecticut, eſpecially of the
weſtern parts, is carried there; particularly pot and pearl aſh, flax feed, beef, pork,
cheeſe, and butter, in large quantities. Moſt of the produce of Connecticut river from
the parts of Matlachuſetts, New Hampſhire, and Vermont, as well as of Connec-
ticut, which are adjacent, goes to the ſame market. Conſiderable quantities of
the produce of the eaſtern parts of the State are marketed at Boſton and Providence.
Ihe value of the whole exported produce and commedities from this State, before
the year 1774, was then eftimated at about 200,000]. lawful money, annually. In the
year ending September 3oth, 1791, the amount of foreign exports from this State was
710, 340 dollars—beſides articles carried to different parts of the United States to a
great amount. This State owns and employs in the foreign and coaſting trade, 32,867
tons of ſhipping. jj We Cot oO ro RT gel 5
MAN UrACTURES.] The farmers in Connecticut and their families are moſtly clothed
in plain, decent, homeſpun cloth. The linens and woollens are manufactured in the
family way; and although they are generally of a coarſer kind they are of a ſtronger
texture, and much more durable than thoſe imported from France and Great Britain.
Many of their cloths are fine and handſome. 5 1
A woollen manufactory has been eftabliſhed at Hartford. The legiſlature of the
State have encouraged it, and it bids fair to grow into importance. Mr. Chittendon,
of New Haven, has invented a uſeſul machine for bending and cutting card teeth.
This machine is put in motion by a manderil twelve inches in length, and one inch in
diameter. Connected with the manderil are fix parts of the machine, independent of
cach other; the firſt introduces a certain length of wire into the chops of the corone;
the ſecond, ſhuts the chops and holds faſt the wire in the middle until it is finiſhed;
the third, cuts off the wire; the fourth, doubles the tooth in proper form; the fifth,


2 2 makes


354 5 CONNECTICUT.
makes the laſt bend; and the fixth, delivers the finiſhed tooth from the machine. The
manderil is moved by a band wheel, five feet in diameter, turned hy a crank. One
revolution of the manderil makes one tooth; ten are made in a fecond, 36,000 in an
hour. With one machine like this, teeth enough might be made to fill cards ſufficient
for all the manufacturers in New England. In New Haven are linen and button
mauufactories, which fluurith. In Hartford are glats works, a ſnuff and powder mill,
and iron works, ane a ſlitting mill. Iron works are eſtabliſhed alſo at Saliſbury, Nor-
Wich, and other parts of the State. At Stafford is a furnace at which are made large
quantities of hollow ware, and other ironmougery, ſufficient to ſupply the whole State,
Paper is manufactured at Norwich, Hartford, New Haven, and in Litchfield county.
Nails, of every fize, are made in almoſt every town and village in Connecticut; ſo
that confiderable quantities can be exported to the neighbouring States, and at a
better rate than they can be had from Europe. Ironmongery, hats, candles, leather,
ſhoes, and boots, are manufactured in this State. Oil mills, of a new and very ingenious.
conſtruction, have been erected in ſeveral parts of the State. A duck manutaQtory
has been eſtabliſhed at Stratford, and it is ſaid is doing well. 3
PoruLATION AND CHARACTER. | Connecticut is the moſt populous, in proportion
to its extent, of any of the "Thirteen States. It is laid out in 1mall farms from fifty to
three or four hundred acres each, which are held by the farmers in fee ſimple ; and are
generally cultivated as well as the nature of the foil will admit. The State is chequered
-with innumerable roads or highways croſſing each other in every direction. A tra-
veller in any of theſe roads, even in the moſt unſettled parts of the State, will ſeldom
paſs more than two or three miles without finding a houſe or cottage, and a farm under
ſuch improvements, as to afford the neceſſaries for the ſupport of a ſamily. The
Whole State reſembles a well-cultivated garden, which, with that degree of induſtry
that is neceſſary to happineſs, produces the neceſſaries and conveniencies of life in
great plenty. 3 5 „„
In 1756 the number of inhabitants in Connecticut was 130, 611. In 1774, there
were 197,856 ſouls. In eighteen years the increaſe was 67, 245. From 1774 to 1782,
the increaſe was but 11,294 perſons. This comparatively ſmall increaſe of inhabitants
may be ſatisfactorily accounted for from the deſtruction of the war, and the numerous
- emigrations to Vermont, the weſcern parts of New Hampſhire, New York, and the
WRV OL „„
The inhabitants are almoſt entirely of Engliſh deſcent. There are no Dutch,
French, or Germans, and very few Scotch or Iriſh people in any part of the State.
In addition to what has been already ſaid under New England it may be obſerved,
that the people of Connecticut are remarkably fond of having all their diſputes, even
thoſe of the moſt trivial kind, ſettled according to law, The prevalence of this litigious
ſpirit affords employment and ſupport for a numerous body of lawyers. The number
of actions entered annually upon the ſeveral dockets in the State juſtifies the above
obfervations. That party ſpirit, however, which is the bane of political happineſs,
has not raged with ſuch violence in this State as in Maſſachuſetts and Rhode Ifland.
Public proceedings have been conducted generally, and eſpecially of late, with much
ealmneſs and candour. The people are well informed in regard to their rights, and
| judicious in the methods they adopt to ſecure them. The State enjoys a great ſhare of
political tranquillity. — 3


Ihe clergy, who are numerous, and, as a. body, very reſpectable, have hitherto
_ preſerved a kind of ariſtocratical balance in the very democratical government of the
State; which has happily operated as a check upon the overbearing ſpirit of .

= | mie _ caniſm,


CONNECTICU T. 355
caniſin. It has been lamented that the unhappy religious diſputes which have too
much prevailed among ſome of the clergy, and an inattention to the qualifications of
thoſe who have been admitted to the ſacred office, have, heretofore, conſiderably di-
miniſhed their influence. It is a pleaſing circumſiance that the rage for theological
diſputation 1 is abating, and greater ſtrictneſs is obſerved in the admiſſion of candidates
to the miniſtry. Their influence is on the increaſe, and it is no doubt to be attributed,
in part, to their increaſing inflnence, that an evident reformation in the manners of the
people of this State has taken place ſince the peace.
 RExx1610x.] Such as is happily adapted to a republican government. As to the
mode of exerciſing church government and diſcipline, it might not improperly be called
a republican religion. Each church has a ſeparate juriſdiction, and claims authority:
to chooſe their own miniſter, to exerciſe judgement and to enjoy goſpel ordinances
_ within itſelf. The churches, however, are not independent of each other; they are

aſſociated for mutual benefit and convenience. The aſſociations have power to licenſe
candidates for the miniſtry, to conſult for the general welfare, and to recommend
meaſures to be adopted by the churches, but have no authority to enforce them.
When diſputes ariſe in churches, councils are called by the parties to ſettle them; but
their power is only adviſory, There are eleven aſſociations in the State, and they
meet twice in a year. Theſe are all combined in one general aſſociation, who meet
annuall
All e that are conſiſtent with the peace of ſociety, are. tolerated in Connec-
ticut; and a ſpirit of liberality and catholiciſm is increaſing. There are very few re-
ligious ſes in this State. The bulk of the people are Congregationaliſts. Beſides
theſe there are Epiſcopalians and Baptiſts ; and formerly there was a ſociety of Sandi-
manians at New Haven; but they are now reduced to a very ſmall number. The
Epiſcopalian churches are reſpectable, and are under the ſuperintendence of a biſhop. |
 DaMaGEs SUSTAINED IN THE LATE War.] After the eſtabliſhment of the peace in
1783, a number of gentlemen were appointed by the General Aſſembly to eſtimate the


damages done by the Britiſh troops in the ſeveral towns — they ravaged. The
following is the reſult of their f inquiries:


Amount of loſſes.


New London (burnt by Benedict Arnold, "JED Ea 6; 175 1 L. 145,788 15 6
Groton, s Sv * _ W . 0:0
Scattering JJ ms uy | 9,806 9 2


178,312 10 8


—  —_—


Norwalk, (burnt by the Britiſh, 1255 3 - „ 34,867 9 2
— — Confiſcated property and other loſſes 3 2,077 00

| 36,944 9 2
Geenen 8 9 3 - 6,365 11 8
— — Loſſes of men not on oath _ WES wy . 17 7

Tagen 6,735 93
Fairfield, (burnt 1770 . | Ks E - 40809 2 10


„(/. Bac a |


9
*


Fariegated and extremely beautiful. There are about 500 dwelling houſes i in the city,


ſautneſs of ſituation and ſalubrity of air, New Haven is not exceeded by any city 1 in


356 CONNECTICUT. |
Amount of loſſes.
New Haven, ravaged by Governor Tryon, July 1779, 4,93 76
Faſt Haven, ditto ditto 2 © oy
Weſt Haven, ditto ditto 5 | CES 5 474 03


Other loſſes not before computed 586 or


CY


q
9


_ 30,836 2 2


—


Amount of the loſſes i in the w hole State, in money, valued as
in 1774, 1 80 e ern; 4-0 > by © 294,235 26 1


The foregoing eftimate includes merchandize and public blildings. Excluſive of
theſe, the loſſes are eſtimated at £.167,000. To compenſate the ſufferers, the General
Court, in May 1792, granted them 506,000 acres of the weſtern part of the reſeryed
lands of Connecticut, which lie weſt of Pennſylvania, ©

CHite Towns. There are a great number of very pleaſant towns, both mari-
time and inland, in Connecticut. It contains five cities, incorporated with extenſive
Juriſdiction in civil cauſes. Two of theſe, Hartford and Newhaven, are capitals of the
State. The General Aſſembly is holden at the former in May, and at the latter in
October, annually. .

HnrrORD (city) is fituated at the head of navigation. on the weſt ſide of Connec-
ticut river, about fifty miles from its entrance into the ſound. Its buildings are a ſtate
houſe, two churches for Congregationaliſts, a diſtillery, beſides upwards of 390 dwel-
ling houſes, a number of which are handſomely built with brick.

The town is divided by a ſmall river, with high romantic banks. Over this river
is a bridge connecting the two diviſions of the town: Hartford is advantageouſly
ſituated for trade, has a very fine back country, enters largely into the manufacturing
buſineſs, and is a rich, flouriſhing, commercial town. A bank has ney. been eſtab-
| Lfhed in this city. |

NEW Haves (city) lies round the head of a bay, which makes up boat four miles
north from the ſound. - It covers part of a large plain, which is circumſcribed on three
tides by high hills or mountains. Two ſmall rivers bound the city eaſt and welt.
The town was originally laid out in ſquares of ſixty rods. Many of the ſquares have
been divided by croſs ſtreets. Four Aueets run north-weſt and ſouth-caſt, theſe are
croſſed by others at right angles. Near the center of the city is the public ſquare; on
and around which are the public buildings, which are, a ſtate houſe, college, and
chapel, three churches for Congregationaliſts and one for Epiſcopalians. Thele are all
bandfome and commodious buildings. The college, chapel, ſtate houſe, and one of
_the churches, are of brick. The public ſquare is encircled with rows of trees, which
render it both convenient and delightful. Its beauty, however, is greatly diminiſhed
by RE ground, and ſeveral of the public buildings, which e a conſiderable
part of it
Many of the ſtrects are ornamented with two rows of trees, one on each ſide,
which gives the city w rural appearance. The proſpect from the ficeples is greatly


3 of wood, and well built, and ſome of them elegant. The ſtreets are ſandy,
nt neat and cleanly. Within the limits of the city are 4000 ſouls, About one in
ſeventy die annually; this Proves the healthſulneſs of its climate. Indeed, as to plea-


America |


CONNECTICUT, 7
America. - It carries on a conſiderable trade with New York and the Weſt India Ifland-,
and ſeveral kinds of manufactures, and is flouriſhing.

New LonpoN (city) ſtands on the weſt ſide of the river. Thames, near its cntrance
into the ſound, in latitude 4 25%. It has two places for public worſhip, one for
Epiſcopalians, and one for Congregationaliſts; ; about 300 dwelling-houlſes,. and 4600
mhabitants. Its harbour is the beſt 1 in Connecticut. It is defended by Fort Trum-
bull and Fort Griſwold, the one in New London, the other in Groton. A confider-
able part of the town was burnt by Benedict Arnold in 1787. It has ſince been re-
„„

Nokwron (city) ſtands at the head of Thames river, 14 miles north from New
London. It is a commercial city, has a rich and extenſive back country, and avails
itſelf of its natural advantages at the head of navigation: It: fituation upon a river,
which affords a great number of convenient ſeats for mills and water-machines of all
kinds, render it very eligible in a manufactural view.

The inhabitants are not neglectful of the advantages which nature has ſo liberally
given them. They manufacture paper of all kinds, ſtockings, clocks and watches,
chaiſes, buttons, ſtone and carthen-ware, wire, oil, chocolate; bells, anchors, and all
kinds of forge work. The eity contains about 450 dwelling-houſes, a court-houſe,
and two churches for Congregationaliſts, and one for Epiſcopalians, and about 300
inhabitants. The city is in three detached, compact diviſions ; viz. Chelſea, at the
landing, the town, and Bean Hill; in the latter diviſion is an academy; and in the
town is a ſchool, ſupported by a donation from Dr. Daniel Lathrop, deceaſed. The
courts of law are held alternately at New London and Norwich:

MrippLeTox (city) is pleafantly ſituated on the weſtern bank of Connecticut river,
fiſteen miles ſouth # Hartford, It is the principal town in Middleſex county —has
about 300 houſes—a court-houſe—one church for Congregationaliſts—one for Epiſco-
palians—a naval office and carries on a large and increaſing trade.

Four miles ſouth of Hartford is WETHERSFIELD, a very pleaſant town, of between:
two and three hundred houſes, ſituated on à fine ſoil, with an elegant brick church
for Congregationaliſts. | A fair is held here twice a Fear. This town is noted for
railing onions.


Windſor, N Litchfield, Milford, Stratford, F ela Guilford: Stam=-


tord, W indham, Sutheld, and Enfield, are all conliderable and very pleafant
towns.

Cokiosrriks.] Two miles weſt of New Haven i is a mountain, on the top of which:
is a cave, remarkable for having bcen the reſidence: of Generals Whaley and Goffe,
two of the judges of Charles I. who was beheaded: They arrived at Boſton, July
1660, and came to New Haven the following year, and retired, and concealed them-
ielves behind Weſt Mountain, three miles from New Haven. They ſoon after re-
moved. to Milford, where they lived concealed until October, 1664, when they re-
turned to New Hay en, and immediately procceded to Hadley, where they remained
concealcd for about ten years, in which time Whaley died, and Goffe ſoon after Hed.
in 1665, John Dixwell, Eſq. another of the King's judges, viſited them while at
Hadley, and afterwards proceeded to New Haven, "where he lived many years, and
was known by the name of John Davis. Here he died, and was buried*in. the public
burying-place, where his grave-ſtone 1s ſtanding to 1815 day, with this inſcription: —
J. D. Eſq. deceaſed, March 18th, in the 82d year of his age, 1688.“

In the town of Pomfict is a cave, rendered remarkable by tho humourous adventure


of General Putnam. e
7 "OLLEG ES)


358 CONNECTICU T.
CoLLEGES, ACADEMIES, AND ScHoors.] In no part of the world is the education
of all ranks of people more attended to than in Connecticut. Almoſt every town in
the State is divided into diſtricts, and each diſtrict has a public ſchool kept in it a
greater or lets part of every year, Somewhat more than one third of the monies
arifing from a tax on the polls and rateable eſtate of the inhabitants is appropriated
to the ſupport of ſchools in the ſeveral towns, for the education of children and
youth. The law directs that a grainmar-ſchool ſhall be kept in every county town
throughout the State. TA 72 | Et amen fn
There is a grammar-ſchool at Hartford, aud another at New Haven, ſupported by a
donation of Governor Hopkins. This vencrable and benevolent gentleman, in his laſt
will, dated 1657, left in the hands of Theophilus Eaton, Eſq. and three others, a
legacy of 13241. © as an encouragement, in theſe: foreign plantations, of breed-
ing up hopeful youths, both at tlie gram mar- ſchool and college.“ In 1664, this
legacy was equally divided between New Haven and Hartford; and grammar-ſchools
were erected, which have been ſupported ever fince..  - ooo
Academies have been eſtabliſhed at Greenfield, Plainfield, Norwich, Windham,
and Pomtret, ſome of which are flouriſhing. To „
IXI CoLLRGR was founded in 1700, and remained at Killingworth until 1707
then at Saybrook until 1716, when it was removed and fixed at New Haven. Among
its principal benefactors was Governor Yale, in honour of whom, in 1718, it was
named YALE CoLLEce. Its firſt building was erected in 1717, being 170 feet in
length, and 22 in breadth, built of wood. This was taken down in 1782. The
preſent college c{ifice, which is of brick, was built in 1750, under the direction of
the Rev. Prefident Clap, and is 100 feet long, and 40 feet wide, three ſtories high,
and contains thirty-two chambers, and ſixty-four ſtudies, convenient for the reception
of a hundred ſtudents. The college chapel, which is alſo of brick, was built in 1761,
being 50 feet by 40, with a ſteeple 125 feet high. In this building is the public li-
brary, confiſting of about 2500 volumes; and the philoſophical apparatus, which by
a late handſome addition is now as complete as moſt others in the United States, and
contains the machines neceflary for exhibiting experiments in the whole courſe of ex-
perimental philoſophy and aſtronomy. 3333 3
Ihc college muſeum, to which additions are conſtantly making, contains many na-
- tural curioſitics. . FTW 5
This literary inſtitution was incorporated by the general aſſembly of Connecticut,
The firſt charter of incorporation was granted to eleven miniſters, under the denomi-
nation of truſtces, 1701. The powers of the truſtees were enlarged by the additional.
charter, 1723. And by that of 1745, the truſtees were incorporated by the name of
The Prefident and Fellows of Yale College, New Haven.” By an act of the
General Aſſembly © for enlarging the powers and increaſing the funds of Yale College,
paſſed in May 1792, and accepted by the corporation, the governor, lieutenant-
governor, and the fix ſenior aſſiſtants in the council of the State, for the time being,
are ever hereafter, by virtue of their offices, to be truſtees and fellows of the college,
in addition to the former corporation. The corporation are empowered to hold eſtatcs,
continue their fucceſſion, make academic laws, elect and conſtitute all officers of in-
ſtruction and government uſual in univerſities, and confer all learned degrees. The
immediate exceutive government is in the hands of the prefident and tutors. The
prefent officers and inftructors of the college are, a preſident, who is alſo profeſſor of
_exlefiaſkical hiſtory, a profeſſor of divinity, and three tutors. The number of ſtudents
on an average is about 130, divided into four claſſes. It is worthy of remark, that


CONNECTICUT. TW 359


as many as five-ſixths of thoſe who have received their education at this univerſity, were
patives of Connecticut,

The funds of this college received a very liberal addition by a grant of the Gen
Aſſembly in the act of 1792, before mentioned; which will enable the corporation to
erect a new building for the accommodation of the ſtudents, to ſupport feveral new
profeſſorſhips, and to make a handſome addition to the library.

The courſe of education, in this univerſity, comprehends the whole cirele of litera-
ture. The three learned languages are taught, together with ſo much of the ſeiences
as can be communicated in four years.
In May and September, annually, the ſeveral claſfes are eritically examined in all
their claſſical ſtudies. As incentives to improvement in compoſition and oratory,
quarterly exerciſes are appointed by the preſident and tutors, to be exhibited by the
reſpective claſſes in rotation. A public commencement is held annually on the ſecond
Wedneſday in September, which calls together a more numerous and brilliant aſſembly

than are convened by any other anniverſary 3 in the State.

About 2200 have received the honours of this univerſity , of whom _— 760 have
been ordained to the work of the goſpel miniſtry. _

MIxERALS Ax p Foss1Ls. 1 On the bank of Connecticut river, two miles from Mid-
dleton, is a lead mine, which was wrought during the war, at the expenſe of the
State, and was productive. It is too expenſive to work in time of peace. Copper
mines have been diſcovered and opened in ſeveral parts of the State, but have proved
unprofitable, and are much neglected. Iron ore abounds in many parts of the State.
Talks of various kinds, white, brown, and chocolate coloured cryſtals, zink or
ſpelter, a ſemi-metal, and ſeveral other foſſils and metals have been found in Con-
necticut.

Mops or LevyixnG Taxks. All frecholders in the State are required by law to-
give in liſts of their polls an i eſtate, to perſons appointed in the reſpective
towns to receive them, on or before the 20th of Auguſt annually. Theſe are valued
according to law, arranged in proper order, and ſent to the General Aſſembly annually
in Ma

The form total of the liſt of the polls and rateable eſtate of the inhabitants of Con-
necticut, as brought into the General 3 in May I 7875 was as follows:


. |
Sum total of the fingle liſt ) TY wn” 5
Affeſſments — . 47, 2 9
One quarter of the er ld — „„ „


Total {-1, 533,867 18 5 2


F Acctſſus. Prefidents. 28 Exitus:
A. b. As De
Wor Abraham Pierſon, — — 1707
171 Timothy Cutler, S. T. D. — - 7a

| 1 . Eliſha Williams - - 1739 _
1739 TDhomas Clap — - 1766
1777 Ezra Stiles, S. T. PD. L. L. D.


+ In Connecticut, horſes, horned cattle, cultivated and uncultivated land, Koufes, ſhipping, all forts of

riding-carriages, clocks and watches, ſilver ptate and money at intereſt, are rateable eſtate. All males between

lixteen and ſeventy years of age, unleſs exempted by law, are ſubjects of taxation, ;
n


P * *


as 3 CONNECTICUT.


On this ſum taxes are levied fo much on the pound, according to the fum propoſed
to be raiſod. A tax of 2d. on a pound would raiſe 12,7821. 48. 2
The ordinary annual expences of the government before the war amounted to near
goool. ſterling, excluſive of that which was appropriated to the ſupport of ſchools.
The expenſes have fince increaſed. WY VV
Mix ERAL SrRIN Gs.] At Stafford is a medicinal ſpring, which is ſaid to be a ſove-
reign remedy ſor ſcorbutic, cutaneous, and other diſorders. *
CoxsTITUTION AND CouRTs or Jusrick,] The conſtitution of Connecticut is
founded on their charter, which was granted by Charles IT. in 1662, and on a law of
the State. Contented with this form of government, the people have not been
diſpoſed to run the hazard of framing a new conſtitution ſince the declaration of inde-
pendence. | 8 „„ core! - was 8
Agreœeable to this charter, the ſupreme legiſlative authority of the State is veſted in
a governor, heutenant-governor, twelve aſſiſtants or counſellors, and the repreſenta-
tives of the people, ſtiled the General Aſſembly. The governor, heutenant-governor,
and aſſiſtants, are annually choſen by the freemen, in the month of May. The repre-
ſentatives (their number not to exceed two from each town) are choſen by the freemen
twice a year, to attend the two annual ſeſſions, on the ſecond Thurſdays in May and
October. This aſſembly has power to erect judicatories for the trial of cauſes, civil
and criminal, and to ordain and eſtabliſh laws for ſettling the forms and ceremonies of
government. By theſc laws the General Aſſembly is divided into two branches, called
the upper and lower houſes. The upper houſe is compoſed of the governor, licutenant-
governor, and aſſiſtants. The lower houſe, of the repreſentatives of the people. No
law can paſs without the concurrence of both houſes. The judges of the ſuperior
court hold their offices during the pleaſure of the General Aſſembly. The judges of
the county courts, and juſtices, are annually appointed. Sheriffs are appointed by the
governor and council, without limitation of time. The governor is captain-general of
the militia, the lieutenant-governor lieutenant-gencral. All other military officers are
appointed by the aſſembly, and commiſſioned by the governor. =
The mode of electing the governor, licutenant-governor, aſſiſtants, treaſurer, and
_ ſecretary, is as follows: the freemen in the ſeveral towns meet on the Monday next
after the firſt Tueſday in April annually, and give in their votes for the perſons they
chooſe for the ſaid offices refpectively, with their names written on a piece of paper,
which are received and ſealed up by a conſtable in open meeting, the votes for cach
office by themſelves, with the name of the town and office written on the outfide.
Theſe votes, thus ſealed, are ſent to the General Aſſembly in May, and there counted
by a committee from both houſes. All freemen are eligible to any office in govern-
ment. In chooſing aſſiſtants, twenty perſons are nominated, by the vote of each frec-
man, at the treeman's meeting for chooſing repreſentatives in September annually.
"Theſe votes are ſealed up, and ſent to the General Aſſembly in October, and are there
counted by a committee of both houſes, and the twenty perſons who have the moſt
votes ſtand in nomination ; out of which number, the twelve who have the greateſt
number of votes, given by the freemen at their meeting in April, are in May declared
aſſiſtants in the manner above mentioned. The qualifications of freemen are, quiet and
peaceable behaviour, a civil converſation, and freehold eſtate to the value of forty
ſhillings per annum, or forty pounds perſonal eſtate in the liſt, certified by the ſelect-
men of the town; it is neceſſary, alſo, that they take the oath of fidelity to the
State. Their names are inrolled in the town-clerk's office, and they continue frec-
SS | — 1 men


CONNECTICUT. os


men for life, unleſs disfranchiſed by ſentence of the ſuperior court, on conviction of
miſdemeanor. : e | |
The courts are as follow: The juſtices of the peace, of whom a number are an-

nually appointed in each town by the General Aſſembly, have authority to hear and
determine civil actions, where the demand does not exceed four pounds. If the de-
mand exceeds forty ſhillings, an appeal to the county is allowed. They have cogni-
ſance of ſmall ae and may puniſh by fine, not exceeding forty ſhillings, or

whipping, not exceeding ten ſtripes, or fitting in the ſtocks. There are eight county-
courts in the State, held in the ſeveral counties by one judge and four juſtices of the
quorum, who have juriſdiction of all criminal caſes ariſing within their reſpective
counties, where the puniſhment does not extend to life, limb, or baniſhment. They
have original juriſdiction of all civil actions which exceed the juriſdiction of a juſtice.
Either party may appeal to the ſuperior court, if tlie demand exceeds 2ol. except on
bonds or notes vouched by two witneſſes. _ e oy F:4. 4
There are ſeveral courts of probate in each county, conſiſting of one judge. The
peculiar province of this court 1s, the probate of wills, granting adminiſtration on in-
teſtate eſtates, ordering diſtribution of them, and appointing guardians for minors,
&c. An appeal lies from any decree of this court to the ſuperior court. T

The ſuperior court conſiſts of five judges. Tt has authority in all criminal caſes ex-

tending to life, limb, or baniſhment, and other high crimes and miſdemeanors, to
grant divorces, and to hear and determine all civil actions brought by appeal from the
county courts, or the court of probate, and to correct the errors of all inferior
_ courts. This is a circuit-court, and has two ſtated ſeſſions in each county annually.
The ſuperior and county courts try matters of fact by jury, or without, if the parties
will agree. | l 1 J =
There is a ſupreme court of errors, confiſting of the lieutenant-governor, and the
twelve aſſiſtants. Their ſole buſineſs is to determine writs of error, brought on judge-
ments of the ſuperior court, where the error complained of appears on the record.
They have two ſtated ſeſſions annually, viz. on the Tueſdays of the weeks preceding
the ſtated ſeſſions of the General Afﬀſembly. 5 N


The county court is a court of chancery, empowered to hear and determine caſes in
equity, where the matter in demand does not exceed one hundred pounds. The ſu-
perior court has cogniſance of all caſes, where the demand exceeds that ſum. Error
may be brought from the county to the ſuperior court, and from the ſuperior
court to the ſupreme court of errors, on judgement in caſes of equity as well as
of law. 5 5 VP

The General Aſſembly only have power to grant pardons and reprieves—to grant
commiſſions of bankruptcy—or protect the perſons and eſtates of unfortunate


. debtors


The common law of England, fo far as it is applicable to this country, is conſidered
as the common law of this State. The reports of adjudication in the courts of king's
bench, common pleas, and chancery, are read in the courts of this State as authorities;
yet the judges do not confider them as concluſively binding, unleſs founded on ſolid
reaſons which will apply in this State, or ſanctioned by concurrent adjudications of
their own courts. 755 | OD NA
The feadal ſyſtem of deſcents was never adopted in this State. All the real eftate
ol inteſtates is divided equally among the children, males and females, except that the
eldeſt fon has a double portion. And all eſtates given in tail, muſt be given to ſome
perſon then in being, or to their e es Tue, and ſhall become fee ſimple eſtates
| Z 4 we to


362 | CONNECTICUT.


to the iſſue of the firſt donee in tail. The widow of an inteſtate is entitled to a third
part of the perſonal eſtate for ever, and to her dower, or third part of the houſes and
lands belonging to the inteſtate at the time of his death, during her life. was
PRACTICE of Law.] The practice of law in this State has more ſimplicity, but leſs
precifion, than in England. Afliftants and judges are empowered tv iſſue writs through
the State, and juſtices, through their reſpective counties. In theſe writs the ſubſtance
of the complaints or the declarations muſt be contained, and if neither of the parties
ſhew good reaſon for delay, the cauſes are heard and determined the ſame term to which
the writs are returnable. Few of the fictions of law ſo common in the Englith practice,
are known in this State. The plaintiff always has his election to attach or ſummon the
detendant. Attornies are admitted and qualified by the county courts. Previous to
their admiſſion to the bar, they muſt ſtudy iwo years with a practifing attorney in the
State, if they have had a college education, and three years if they have not; their
morals muſt be good, and their characters unblemiſhed, and they muſt ſuſtain an
examination by the attornies of the court of the county where they are admitted, and be
by them recommended to the court. When admitted to the county court, they can
practiſe, without other qualifications, in any court in the State. There are upon an
average, about fifteen attornies to each county, one hundred and twenty in the State;
a very great proportion for the real exigencies of the people. Yet from the litigious
ſpirit of the citizens, the moſt of them find employment and ſupport. * There is no
attorney general, but there is one attorney to the State in each county. —
NRW INVENTIONS.] Early inthe war, Mr. David Buſhnel, of Saybrook, invented
a machine for ſubmarine navigation, altogether different from any thing hitherto deviſed
by the art of man. This machine was ſo conſtructed as that it could be rowed hori-
zontally, at any given depth, under water, and could be raiſed or depreſſed at pleature.
To this machine, called the American Tartle, was attached a magazine: of powder,
_ which was intended to be faſtened under the bottom of a ſhip, with a driving ſcrew, in
ſuch a way as that the ſame ſtroke which diſengaged it from the machine ſhould put the
internal clock work in motion. This being done, the ordinary operation of a gun
lock, at the diſtance of half an hour, or any determinate time, would cauſe the powder
to explode and leave the effects to the common laws of nature. The fimplicity, yet
combination diſcovered in the mechaniſm of this wonderful machine, have been acknow-
ledged by thoſe ſkilled in phyſics, and particularly hydraulics, to be not leſs ingemous
than novel. Mr. Buſhnel invented ſeveral other curious machines for the annoyance
of the Britiſh ſhipping, but from accidents, not militating againſt the philoſophical
principles, on which their ſucceſs depended, they but partially ſucceeded. He deſtroyed
a veſſel in the charge of Commodore Symmonds. One of his kegs alſo demoliſhed a
veſſel near the Long Iſland ſhore. About Chriſtmas 1777, he committed to the De-
laware river a number of kegs, deſtined to fall among the Britiſh fleet at Philadelphia ;
but this ſquadron of kegs, having been ſeparated and retarded by the ice, demoliſhed |
but a ſingle boat. This cataſtrophe, however, produced an alarm, unprecedented in
its nature and degree; which has been ſo happily deſcribed by the late Hon. Francis
Hopkinſon, in a ſong, ſtiled The Battle of the Kegs,”* that the event it celebrates
will not be forgotten, ſo long as mankind ſhall continue to be delighted with works of
humour and taſte. MIR > |


Mr. Hanks, of Litchfield, has invented a method of winding up clocks by means
of air or wind only, which is ingenious, and practiſed upon in New York and other

laces. | e 3 ä
T 2 * See Hopkinſon's Works, lately publiſhed in Philadelphia. 5 M WY


. CONNECTICUT. 363
Mr. Clos of Norwich, has conſtructed a Dock Dr udge, which is a boat for


clearing docks and removing bars in rivers; a very ingemous and uſeful machine. Its
good effects have already been experienced in the navigation of the river Thames, the
channel of which has been conſiderably deepened. This machine will, no doubt, be
productive of very great advantages to navigation throughout the United States.

The Rev. Joſeph Badger, while a member of Yale College in 1785, conſtructed an
ingenious planetarium, (without ever having ſeen one of the kind) which 1s PTE in
the library of that univerſity.

HisTory.] As there is no particular hiſtory of this State, to which the reader can
be referred, the author will, no doubt, be indulged in ſo far deviating from his general
plan, as to relate the following particulars, collected with great pains, relative to the
ſettlement and progreſs of things in this State.

I be preſent territory of Connecticut, at the time of tlie firſt arrival of the Engliſh, 5
was poſſeſſed by the e the Mohegan, Podunk, and many other imaller tribes
| of Indians.

The Pequots were numerous and warlike. Their country extended al the ſea
coaſt from Paukatuck, to Connecticut river. About the year 1630, this powerful tribe
extended their conqueſts over a confiderable part of Connecticut, over all Long Iſland
and part of Narraganſet. SAssacus, who was the grand monarch of the whole country,
was king of this nation. The ſeat of his dominion was at New London ; the ancient
Indian name of which was Pequot. |

The Mohegans were a numerous tribe, and their territory extenfive. 'Their ancient
claim comprehended moſt of New London county, almoſt the whole of the county of
Windham, and a part of the counties of Tolland and Hartford. Unevs, diſtinguiſhed

for his friendſhip to the Engliſh, was the Sachem of this tribe. | 8
The Podunks inhabited Eaſt Hartford, and the circumjacent country. The firſt
ſachem of this tribe, of whom the Engliſh had any knowledge, was Tatanimoo; He
was able to bring into the field more than 200 fighting men. 1

The firſt grant of Connecticut was made, by the Plymouth council, to the Earl of
Warwick, in 1630, and confirmed by his Majeſty in council the ſame year. This
grant comprehended ** all that part of New England which hes weſt from Narraganſet
river, 120 miles on the ſea coaſt, from thence, in latitude and breadth aforeſaid, to the
South Sea.” The year following, the Earl aſſigned this grant to Lord Say and Seal,
Lord Brook, and nine others.

No Engliſh ſettlements were attempted in Connecticut until the year 16 33, when a
number of Indian traders, having purchaſed of Zequaſſon and Natawanut, two prin-

cipal ſachems, a tract of land at the mouth of Little river in Windſor, built a houſe
and fortified it, and ever after maintained their right of ſoil upon the river.

The ſame year, a little before the arrival of the Engliſh, a company of Dutch traders
came to Hartford, and built a houſe which they called the Hirſe of Goaoa Hope, and
_ erected a ſmall fort, in which they planted two cannon. The remains of this ſettle-

ment are ftill viſible on the bank of Connecticut river. This was the only ſettlement
of the Dutch in Connecticut in theſe ancient times. The Dutch, and after them the

province of New York, for a long time claimed as far caſt as the weſtern hank of Con
necticut river. It belongs to the profeſſed hiſtorian to prove or diſprove the juſtice of
this claim. Douglaſs ſay s, „The partition line between New York and Connecticut,
as eltabliſhed December 1, 1664, run from the mouth of Memoroncok river, (a little


3A 2 weſt


agreed upon articles of civil government. Theſe articles were the foundation of Con-


364 CONNECTICUT.
weſt from Byram river,) N. N. W. and was the ancient eafterly limits of New York, until
November 23, 1683, when the line was run nearly the tame as it is now ſettled. 1
In 1634, Lord Say and Seal, &c. ſent over a ſmall number of men, who built a fort
at Saybrook, and held a treaty with the Pequot Indians, who in a formal manner
gave to the Englith their right to Connecticut river and the adjacent country.
In 1635, the Plymouth council granted to the Duke of Hamilton, all lands between
Narraganſet and Connecticut rivers, and back into the country as far as Maſſachuſetts
ſouth line. This covered a part of the Earl of Warwick's patent, and occaſioned ſome
diſputes in the colony. There were ſeveral —— to revive the en claim, but
were never proſecuted.
In October of this year, about ſixty perſons, from Newtown, Dorcheſter, and
Watertown, in Maflachuſetts, came and ſettled at Hartford, Wethersfield, and Windſor
in Connecticut ; and the June following the famous Mr. Hooker, and his company,
came and ſettled at Hartford, and was a friend and father to the colony till his death.
© The firſt court held in Connecticut was at Hartford, April 26th, 16 36; and the
next year was diſtinguiſhed by the war with the Pequots.
The Englith obtained the country eaſt of the Dutch ſettlements, by right of conqueſt:
The purſuit of the Indians led to an acquaintance with the lands on the ſea coaſt, from
Saybrook to Fairfield. It was reported to be a very fine country. This favourable
report induced Mefſrs. Eaton and Hopkins, two very reſpectable London merchants,
and Mr. Davenport, a man of diſtinguiſhed piety and abilities, with their company,
who arrived this year (1637) from London, to think of this part of the country as the
place of their ſettlement. Their friends in Maſſachuſetts, ſorry to part with ſo valuable
a company, diſſuaded them from their purpoſe. Influenced, however, by the pro:
miſing proſpects which the country afforded, and flattering themſelves that they ſhould
be out of the juriſdiction of a general governor, with which the country was from time
to time threatened, they determined to proceed. Accordingly in March 1638, with
the conſent of their friends on Connecticut river, they ſettled at New Haven, and laid
the foundation of a flouriſhing colony, of which Quinipiak, now New Haven, was
the chief town. The firſt publi ic worſhip in this new plantation was attended on
Lord's day April 18th, 1638, under a large ſpreading oak. The Rev. Mr. Davenport
preached from Matt. iii. 1. on the temptations of the wilderneſs. Both colonies, by
voluntary compact, formed themſelves into diſtinct commonwealths and remained fo
until their union in 1665.
In 1639, the three towns on Connecticut river, already mentioned, finding them-
ſelves without the limits of any juriſdiction, formed themſelves into a body politic, and


necticut charter, which was granted in 1662. The ſubftance of the articles, ſo far as

they reſpect the holding of aſſemblies, the time and manner of electing magiſtrates and

| Other civil officers, (except that in the old confederation no perſon was to be choſen

_ governor more than once in two years) and the extent of legiſlative powers, was tranſ-
ferred into, and eſtabliſhed in ſaid charter.

The firſt church was gathered in New Haven this year, and conſiſted of &ven mem
bers. Theſe were choſen by the ſettlers, after Mr. Davenport had preached from the
words of Solomon, Wiſdom hath builded her houſe, ſhe hath hewed out her ſeven
pillars.” Theſe men were, indeed, the pillars of the church, to whom the reſt were
added as they became qualifed. They were alſo the court to = all civil actions.


The
. DRI. Sum. vol. II. P. 161.


CONNECTICU T. 9

The firſt ſettlers in New Haven had all things in common; all purchaſes were made
in the name and for the uſe of the whole plantation, and the lands were apportioned out
to each family, -according to their number and original ſtock.

At their firſt election, in October 1639, Mr. Theophilus Eaton was choſen governor
for the firſt year. Their elections, by agreement, were to be annual, and the word of
God their only rule in conducting the affairs of government in the plantation.

In 1643, articles of confederation between the four New England colonies were una
nimouſly adopted by the colonies of New Haven and Connecticut.

The general court of New Haven, this year eſtabliſhed it as a fundamental article
not to be diſputed, That none be admitted as free burgeſſes but church members, and
that none but ſuch ſhould vote at elections. They alſo ordained, That each town
chooſe from among themſelves judges (church members) to be a court, to have cog-
nizance of all civil actions not exceeding twenty pounds; and of criminal caſes, where
the puniſhment was fitting in the ſtocks, whipping, and fining not exceeding five
pounds. There was liberty of appeal from this court to the court of magiſtrates. The
court of. magiſtrates conſiſted of all the magiſtrates throughout the colony, who were
to meet twice a Legs at New Haven, for the trial of all capital cauſes. Six made
a quorum. _

The general court was to conſiſt of the governor, r magiſtrates, and
two repreſentatives from each town. The annual election of officers of government
was at this time eſtabliſhed, and has ever ſince continued.

"The unſettled ſtate of the colony had hitherto prevented their eſtabliſhing a code
of laws. To ſupply this defect, the general court ordered, © That the judicial laws of
God as they were delivered to Moſes, and as they are a fence to the moral, being
neither typical nor ceremonial, nor having any reference to Canaan, ſhall be accounted
of moral equity and generally bind all offenders, and be a rule to all the courts: in this
juriſdiction in their Proceedings againſt offenders, until they be branched out into par-
ticulars hereafter,” _

About this time a war broke out between the Mohegan and arms zanſet 6 A
perſonal quarrel between Onkus, ſachem of Wehen, and 8 ſachem of Con
necticut, was the foundation of the war. x

In conſideration of the ſucceſs and increaſe of the New England colonies, and that
they had been of no charge to the nation, and in proſpect of their being in future very
ſerviceable to it, the Engliſh parliament, March 10th, 1643, granted them an EXemp -
tion from all cuſtoms, ſubſidies, and other duties, until further order.
In 1644, the Connecticut adventurers purchaſed of Mr. Fenwick, agent for Lord 5

Say and Seal, and Lord Brook, their right to the colony of Connecticut, for 1600l.
-, "Ts colony of Connecticut expreſſed their diſapprobation of the uſe of tobacco, in
an act of their General Aſſembly at Hartford, in 1647, wherein it was ordered, That
no perſon under the age of twenty years, nor any other that hath already accuſtomed
himſelf to the uſe thereof, ſhall take any tobacco, until he ſhall have brought a certi-
ficate, from under the hand of ſome who are approved for knowledge and 1kill in
phyſic, that it is uſeful for him; and alſo that he hath received a licenſe from the court
for the ſame. All others who had addicted themſelves to the ute of tobacco were, by
the ſame court, prohibited taking it in any company, or at their labours, or on their
travels, unleſs they were ten miles at leaſt from any houſe, or more than once a day, -
though not in company, on pain of a fine of ;/ix-pence for each time; to: be proved by
one ſubſtantial evidence. The conſtable in each town to make preſentment of ſuch :
tranſgreſſions |


* See Winthrop's Journal, P. 303, 305.


366 CONNECTICUT.


tranſgreſſions to the particular court, and upon conviction the fine to be paid without
gainſayin
: Malta Frafctts and New Haven lbtiics were more cruel towards the Quakers than
either Connecticut or Plymouth. Of the four, Connecticut was the moſt moderate.
The general court of New Haven, 1658, paſſed a ſevere law :againft the Quakers.
They introduced their law, which was copied t from the act of the commiſſioners of the
colonies, with this preamble :

« Whereas there is a curſed fect of heretics lately ſprung up in the world, ny
called Quakers, who take upon them that they are immediately ſent from God, and
infallibly affified by the Spirit, who yet ſpeak and write blaſphemous opinions, deſpiſe
government, and the order of God in church and ee ſpeakin 8· evil *

dignities, &c. |

'Ordered—that wholbever ſhall bring, or cauſe to be brought, aby known Quaker or
*Quakers, or other blaſphemous heretics, ſhall forfeit the ſum of 50l. Alſo,

Bs Quaker come into this juriſdiction on civil bufineſs, the time of his ſtay ſhall be
limited by the civil authority, and he ſhall not ute any means to corrupt or ſeduce
others. On his firſt arrival, he thall appear before a magiſtrate, and from him receive
licenſe to paſs on his buſineſs ; and (tor the better prevention of hurt to the people)
have one or more to attend upon him at their charge, &c. The penalties. in caſe

of diſobedience were w hipping, e labour, and a deprivation of all oonverſe
with any perſon.” _

For the ſecond offence the perſon was to be branded in the hand with the letter H—
to ſuffer impriſonment—and be put to labour. For the third, to be branded in the
other hand, impriſoned, &c. as before. For the fourth, the offender was to have his
tongue bored through with a red hot iron—impriſoned—and kept to labour, until ſent

away at their own charge.


Any perſon who ſhould attempt to defend the ſentiments of the Quakers, was, or the
third offence, to be ſentenced to baniſhment. <
Had the pious framers of theſe laws paid a due attention to the excellent alice of
that ſagacious doctor of the law, Gamaliel, they would, perhaps, have been prevented
from the adoption of ſuch ſevere and unjuſtifiable meaſures. This wiſe man, when his
countrymen were about to be outrageous in perſecuting the apoſiles, addreſſed them in
the following words, which merit to be engraved in letters of gold; . Refrain from theſe
men, and let them alone; for if this council or this work be of men, it will come to nought : but
if it be of God, ye cannot overthroz it; left haply ye be found to fight even againſt God.. * This
divine maxim was but little attended to in times of perſecuiion. Our anceſtors ſeem to
have left it to poſterity to make the important diſcovery , that perſecution? 1s the direct
method to multiply its objects. |
But theſe people, who have been ſo much cenſured and ridiculed, had, TOAD as
many virtues as their poſterity. And it would be wiſe in the moderns, who ſtand
elevated upon the ſhoulders of their anceſtors, with tlie book of their experience ſpread
before them, to improve their virtues and veil their faults. |
The colomies of Connecticut and New Haven, from their firſt ſettlement, increaſed
rapidly; tracts of land were purchaſed of the Indians, and new towns ſettled from
Stamford to Stonington, and far back into the country, when in 1661, Major John
Y Maſon, as agent for the colony, bought of the natives all lands which had NT before
been purchaſed by particular towns, and made a public ſurrender of them to the colony,
in n the preſence of the General Aſſembly. Having done theſe things, the coloniſts you
tione


* Acts, Chap. v.


CONNECTICUT.


tioned King Charles II. for a charter, and their petition was granted. His Majeſty on


the 23d of April, 1662, iſſued his letters patent under the great ſeal, ordaining that


the colony of Connecticut ſhould, for ever hereafter, be one body corporate and politic,


in fact and in name, confirming to them their ancient grant and purchaſe, and fixing
their boundaries as follows, viz. © All that part of his Majeſty's dominions in New
England, in America, bounded eaſt by Narraganſet river, commonly called Narra-
ganſet bay, Where the river falleth into the ſea ;- and on the north by the line of Maſſa-
chuſetts plantation, and on the ſouth by the ſea, and in longitude as the line of the


Maſſachuſetts colony running from eaſt to weſt, that is to ſay, from the ſaid Narra-
ganſet bay on the eaſt, to the South ſea on the weſt part, with the iſlands thereunto
belonging.” This charter has ever fince remained the bafis of the government of


Connecticut.


Such was the 1gnorance of the Europeans, reſpecting the geography of America,


that their patents extended they knew not where; many of them were of doubtful con-


ſtruction; and very often covered each other in part, and have produced innumerable:
diſputes and miſchiefs in the colonies, ſome of which are not ſettled to this day. It is
not my buſineſs to touch upon theſe diſputes. I. have only to obferve, that Connecticut
eonſtrued her charter as authorifing them to paſs over New York, which was then in
poſſeſſton of the ſubjects of a Chriſtian prince, and claimed, in latitude and breadth.
mentioned therein, to the South fea. Accordingly purchaſes were made of the Indians
on the Delaware river, weſt of the weſtern bounds of New. York, and within the
ſuppoſed limits of Connecticut charter, and ſettlements were made thereon by people


from, and under the juriſdiction of Connecticut. The charter of Pennſylvania granted


to William Penn, in 1681, covered theſe ſettlements. This laid the foundation for a


diſpute, Which for a long time was maintained with warmth on both fides. The matter


was at laſt ſubmitted to gentlemen choſen. for the purpoſe, who decided the difpute in


favour of Pennſylvania. Many, however, ſtill aflert the juſtice of the Connecticut


The State of Connecticut have coded to Congreſs all their lands weſt of Pennſyl-⸗
vania, except a reſerve bounded eaſt by Pennſylvania; and extending in length, 120


miles weſt, and in breadth from latitude 417 to 42 27 north. This ceffion, Congreſs
hae ͥ ůd.iln ili
The colony of New Haven, though unconnected with the colony of Connecticut,
was comprehended within the limits of their charter, and, as they concluded, within
their juriſdiction. But New Haven remonſtrated againſt their claim, and refuſed to
unite with them, until they ſhould hear from England. It was not until the year


1665, when it was believed that the king's commiſſioners had a deſign upon the New


England charters, that theſe two colonies formed an union, which has ever fince
amicably ſubſiſted between them. Hg SF DENT vt ity


In 1672, the laws of the colony were reviſed, and the general court ordered them


to be printed: and alfo, © that every family ſhould buy one of the law books ſuch as


pay in filver to have a book for twelve pence ; ſuch as pay in wheat, to pay a-peck


and a half a book; and ſuch as pay in peas, to pay two ſhillings a book, the peas at
three ſhillings the buſhel.” Perhaps it is owing to this early and univerſal ſpread of


law books, that the people of Connecticut are to this day ſo fond of the law.
In 1750, the laws of Connecticut were again reviſed, aud publiſhed in a ſmall
folio volume of 2 58 pages. Dr. Douglaſs obſerves, * that they were the moſt
natural, equitable, . plain and conciſe code of laws, for plantations, hitherto _— 2
3. DE : cIc


367


— —— — —


Connccticut was ſaved by an artful expedient.


368 | CONNECTICUT.
There has been a reviſion of them fince the peace of 1783, in Which they were
greatly and very judiciouſly fimplified.
The years 1675 and 1676 were diſtinguiſhed by the wars with Philip and his
Indians, and with the Narraganſets, by which the colony was thrown into great
diſtreſs and confufion. The inroads of the enraged ſavages were marked with cruel
murders, and with fire and devaſtation, -
In 1684, the charter of Maflachuſetts Bay and Plymouth were taken away, in
conſequence of Quo zwarrantos which had been iſſued againſt them. The charter of


Connecticut has ever made rapid advances in population. There have been more
emigrations from this than from any of the other States, and yet it is at preſent full
of inhabitants. This increaſe may be aſcribed to ſevera] cauſes. The bulk of the
inhabitants are induſtrious, fagacious huſbandmen. Their farms furniſh them with
all the neceſſaries, moſt of the conveniencies and but few of the luxuries of life.
They of courſe muſt be generally temperate, and if they chooſe, can ſubſiſt with as
much independence as is conſiſtent with happineſs. The fubfiſtence of. the farmer
is fubtiantial, aud does not depend on incidental circumſtances, like that of moſt
other profeſſions. There is no neceſſity of ſerving an apprenticeſhip to the buſineſs, nor
of a large ſtock of money to commence it to advantage. Farmers, who deal much in
barter, have leſs need of money than any other claſs of people. The eafe with
which a comfortable ſubſiſtence is obtained, induces the huſbandman to marry
young. The cultivation of his farm makes him ſtrong and healthful. He tous
cheertully through the day—cats the fruit of his own labour with a gladſome heart—
at night devoutly thanks his bounteous God for his daily blefſings—retires to reſt;
and his ſleep is ſweet. Such circumſtances as theſe have greatly contributed to the
amazing increaſe of inhabitants in this State.
Beſides, the people live under a free government, and have no fear of : a tyrant.
There are no overgrown eſtates with rich and ambitious landlords, to have an undue
and pernicious influence in the election of civil officers. Property is equally enough
divided, and muſt continue to be ſo, as long as the eſtates deſcend as they now do.
No perſon qualified by law 1s prohibited from voting. He who has the moſt merit,
not he who has the moſt money, is generally choſen into public office. As inſtances
of this, it is to be obſeryed, that many of the citizens of Connecticut, from the
Humble walks of life, have ariſen to the firſt offices in the State, and filled them
with dignity and reputation, That baſe buſineſs of electioneering, which is ſo
directly calculated to introduce wicked and defigning men into office, is yet but little
known in Connecticut. A man who wiſhes to be choſen into office, acts wately, for
that end, when he keeps his defires to himſelf.
A thirſt for learning prevails among all ranks of people in the State. More of
the young men in Connecticut, in proportion to their numbers, receive a public
education, than in any of the States.

Some have believed, and with reaſon, that the andes for 1 and col-
legiate education is too great that it induces too many to leave the plough. It
men of liberal education would return to the farm, and uſe their knowledge in
improving agriculture, and encouraging manufactures, there could not be too many
men of learning in the State: but this is too ſeldom the caſe.

Connecticut had but a ſmall proportion of citizens who did not join in oppoſing
the oppreſſive meaſures of Great Britain, and was active and influential, both we

| it


CONNECTICUT. 369


field and in the cabinet, in bringing about the revolution. Her ſoldiers were ap-
plauded by the commander in chief, for their bravery and fidelity.
What has been ſaid in favour of Connecticut, though true when generally applicd,
needs to be qualified with ſome exceptions. Dr. Douglaſs ſpoke the truth when he
ſaid, that“ ſome of the meaner ſort are villains.” Too many are idle and diſſipated,
and much time is unprofitably and wickedly ſpent at taverns, in law ſuits, and petty
arbitrations. The public ſchools, in ſome parts of the State, have been too much
neglected, and in procuring inſtructors, too little attention is paid to their moral and
literary qualifications. = Ft V . 1 g
The revolution, which ſo eſſentially affected the governments of moſt of the colo-
nies, produced no very perceptible alteration in the government of Connecticut. While
under the juriſdiction of Great Britain, they elected their own governors, and all ſub-
ordinate civil officers, and made their own laws, in the ſame manner, and with as
little controul as they now do. Connecticut has ever been a republic, and perhaps as
zerfect and as happy a republie as has ever exiſted: while other States, more monar-
chical in their government and manners, have been under a neceſſity of undertaking
the difficult taſk of altering their old, or forming new conſtitutions, and of changing
their monarchical for republican manners, Connecticut has uninterruptedly proceeded
in her old track, both as to government and manners; and, by theſe means, has
avoided thoſe convulſions which have rent other States into violent parties.
At the anniverſary election of governor and other public officers, which is held
yearly at Hartford on the ſecond -Fhurſday in May, a ſermon is preached, which is pub-
liſhed at the expenſe of the State. On theſe occaſions a vaſt concourſe of reſpectable
_ citizens, particularly of the.clergy, are collected from every part of the State; and
while they add dignity and ſolemnity to the important and joyful tranſactions of the
day, ferve to exterminate party ſpirit, and to harmonize the civil and religious intereſts
_ of the Stalin. arr wy ro wt] cyan ba 2
Connecticut has been highly diſtinguiſhed in having a ſucceſſion of governors, emi-
nent both for their religious and political accompliſhments. With the following liſt of
their names I ſhall conclude my account of Connecticut: A
Colony of New Haven.
„ +. Acceſſus. .; Names: 7 Exitus.
1639 Theop. Eaton, Eq. - 1659 died.
1659 Fra. Newman, Elq.  - 1661 died.
9 80 õͤͤͤ -..-. 1665. © --
This year, 1665, the colonies of Hew Haven and Connecticut united, and Governor
Winthrop was governor of both, and Governor Leet, deputy-governor.


Would it not anſwer many valuable purpoſes if the gentlemen, who are annually appointed to preach the

election ſermons, would furniſh a ſketch of the hiſtory of the State for the current year, to be publiſhed at the

cloſe of their ſermons ? Such a ſketch, which might eaſily be made, would render election ſermons much more
valuable. They would then be a very authentic de/þo/itum of facts for future hiſtorians of the State they

would:be more generally and more eagerly purchaſed and read—they would ſerve to diſſeminate important

knowledge, that of the internal affairs of the State, which every citizen ought to know, and might, if judi-

ciouſly executed, operate as a check upon party ſpirit, and upon ambitious and deſigning men, *

The Rev. Mr. Benjamin Trumbull, of North Haven, has for ſeveral years, with indefatigable induſtry,

been making collections for a hiſtory of Connecticut. His abilities as a writer, and his accuracy as a hiſtorian,
the public x dane know. It is hoped the public will ſhortly be favoured with his hiſtory. Through his in-

dulgence in permitting me to ſeleck from his manuſcripts, I am enabled to publiſh many of the above facts.


1 e Colony
*


K 4 * ny 9 Gates of 3 fa ao tn et OS * 3 * 2 * N
— ä * 8 ;
FEE |


1655 Thomas Wells, Efq. — 1656


* fe *


370 MI DDI STATES


Colony of Connecticut. Colony of Connecticut.
Acceſſus. Names. Exitus. Acceſſus. Names. Exitus,
1639 John Haynes, Eſq. - 1640 | 1656 John Webſter, Ti =... 1087.
1640 Edward Hopkins, Eſq. - 1641 | 1657 John Winthrop, Eſq. - 1658
1641 John Haynes, Efq. » 1642 | 1658 Thomas Wells, Eq. = 1659
1642 George Wyllis, Eſy. - 1643 | 1659 John Winthrop, Eq. = 1676
1643 John Haynes, Efq. - 16441676 William Leet, Eg.  - 1680
1644 Edward Hopkins, Eſqg, = 1645 1680 Robert Treat, Fig. --- -  1008-
1045 John Haynes, Eq.  =- 1646 | 1696- John Winthrop, Eſq. =—- 1707
1646 Edward Hopkins, Eg. 1647 | 1707 Gurdon Saltonſtall, Eſq. - 1724
1647 John Haynes, Eſq. - 1648 | 1724. Joſeph Talcott, Eſq = 1741
1648 Edward Hopkins, Eg. 1649 | 1741 Jonathan Law, Eſq. „
1649 John Haynes, Eg. - 1650 | 1751 Roger Woolcot, Eſg.k 1754
1650 Edward Hopkins, Eſq. =- 1651 | 1754 Thomas Fitch, Eſq. 8
1651 John Haynes, Eq.  —- 1652 | 1766 William Pitkin, Eg. 1769
1652 Edward Hopkins, Eq. = 1653 | 1769 Jonathan Trumbull, Eſq. 1784
1653 John Haynes, Elqg. died 1653 | 1784 Matthew Griſwold, Eſq. - 1785
16 534 Edward Hopkins, Eſq. — 16 5 5 | 178 5 Samuel Huntington, CC, , = —


MIDDLE STATES.


Ne now come io the SEcoXD GRAND Dxv1S10N of the United STAtRs, comprehending.


NEW YORK, © ' DELAWARE, 200 Yd
NEW JERSEY, TERRITORY N. W. or OHIO.


PENNSYLVANIA,


e es. ] POUNDED north, by Upper Canada, from which it is ſeparated


by the Lakes; eaſt, by the New England States; ſouth, by the
Atlantic Ocean, Maryland, Virginia, and the Ohio river, which ſeparates it from
Kentucky; weſt, by the Mifſiſſippi river. M AE EL


Rivers and Bars. | The principal rivers in this diſtrict are, the Hudſon, the Dela


ware, the Suſquehannah, the Ohio, the Mififfippt, and their branches. York, Dela-


ware, and part of Cheſapeak bays are in this diſtrict. 7 ER
Cumarte.] The climate of this Grand Divifion, lying almoſt i the fame latitudes;
even the ſame ſucceſſive ſeaſons and months differ from each other every year: and there
is, perhaps, but one ſteady trait in the character of this climate, and that is; it is uni-
formly variable : the changes of weather are great and frequently ſudden. The range
of the quickfilver in Fahrenheit's thermometer, according to Dr. Mitchill, is between


the 24th degree below, and the 105th degree above cypher; and it has been known to


vary 50 degrees in the courſe of 26 hours. Such alterations ate much more conſidera-
ble along the coaſt than in the interior and midland parts of the country; and, where-
e FITTED Oe ever


1766


2 .


varies but little from that of New England: there are no two ſucceſſive years alike;


MIDDLE STATES. N


ever they prevail, are accompanied with proportionate changes in the air, from calms to
winds, and from moiſture to dryneſs. Storms and hurricanes ſometimes happen, which
are ſo violent as to overſet veſſels, demoliſh fences, uproot trees, and unroof buildings.
Droughts, of fix weeks or two months contirmance, occur now and then. Rain has
been known to fall in ſuch abundance that the earth, by meaſurement, has received 6,
inches on a level, in the ſhort ſpace of four hours. The quantity of water which falls
in rain and ſnow, one year with another, amounts to from 24 to 36 inches. In the
northern parts of this diſtrict the ſnow falls in larger quantities, lies longer, and the
cold is more ſteady and intenſe, by many degrees, than in ſouthern ; hence the cHmate
of the former is more agreeable. in winter, and that of the latter in ſummer. The
warmeſt weather is generally in the month of July ; but intenſely warm days are often
felt in May, June, Auguſt, and September.— f Men e ſays, that during his
reſidence in the country, in the State of Pennſy ids: he never had paſſed a ſummer
without diſcovering froſt in every month in the year, except July. The greateſt degree
of heat upon record i in Philadelphia, in 1 789, was 90˙.— The ſtandard temperature of
air in Philadelphia is $524 degrees, which is the temperature of their deepeſt wells, and
the mean heat of their common ſpring water. There are ſeldom more than four months
in the year in which the weather is agreeable without a fire: in winter, the winds -
generally come from the N. W. in fair, and from the N. E. in wet weather. The
N. W. winds are uncommonly dry as well as cold.
The climate on the weſt fide of the Allegany mountains differs materially from that
on the eaſt ſide, in the temperature of the air, and the effects of the wind upon the
weather, and in the quantity of rain and ſnow which fall every year. The S. W. winds, |
on the weſt ſide of the mountain, are accompanied by cold and rain. The temperature
of the air is ſeldom ſo cold or ſo hot, by ſeveral degrees, as on the eaft ſide of the
mountain.
On the Whole, it appears that the climate of this diviſion of the United, States 1s
compound of moſt of the climates in the world—it has the moiſture of Ireland in the
ſpring—the heat of Africa in ſummer the temperature of Italy in June—the ſky of
Egypt in autumn the ſnow and cold of Norway, and the ice of Holland, in winter— _
the tempeſts, in a certain degree, of the Weſt Indies in every ſcaſon—and the variable 0;
winds and weather of Great Britain in every month of the year.
From this account of the climate of this diſtrict it is eaſy to aſcertain what degrees of
health, and what diſeaſes prevail. As the inhabitants have the climates, ſo they have
the acute diſeaſes of all the countries that have been mentioned. Although it might be
ſuppoſed, that with ſuch changes and varieties in the weather, there would be con-
nected epidemical diſeaſes and an unwholeſome climate, yet, on tlie hole, it 18 found
in this diſtrict to be as healthy as any part of the United States. *


3 Dr. Mitchill. Dr. Ruſh.


1 The ROTO remarks are grounded on the authorities of Dr. Ruſh and Dr. VMitchull, who bave pub-
liſhed the reſult of their 1 input ies in Mr. Carey's Muſeum, vols. Mb and 7th. |


6
* ROE TI 1 g * . mi 1 0 ar 4 T C2 »% n WE; ; . Fg +
- phi" rn ; 2 ; .


e e Ogg


B SITUATION AND "rao H 15 59-32 To: $f;
I = gg. Miles.
a 359} be between {4 40 r N. Lat.


—


Readth 300 5 W. and 1* 30 E. Long. Aue


POUNDED fouth-caſtwardlly, by the Atlantic Ocean; $5 a
Bouxp ARIES B Connecticut, Maffachuſettd "and Vermont ; north, by the 14 1 *


degree of latitude, which divides it from Canada; ; 'north-weſtardly, by the river Iro-
quois, or St. Lawrence, and the lakes Ontario and Erie ; ſouth-weſt and ſouth, by
Pennſylvania and New Jerſey. | 3

Crivit Drvisioxs.] This State is divided into 19 counties which, by a an aft of the
legiſlature paſſed 1 in March, 1 788, were ſubdivided into towynſhips. 885


Counties. Towns. No. Inh. Chief Towns. No. Inhab. 15
t - $9831 New York City - __  :
Albany % „ © Alley -t£ - 43408.
AE x Eaſt Ham pton © 23260
Suffolk "20 Wh 26448 3 1 1497 .
Queen's. --: 16 . Wc. mY
8 1 9 - . „„ Io” 3.4
in Ihe 6 4495 | Brooklyn - 1503 2 Ml
Richmond 4 jã ĩ d
Welchen 21 483 Bedford — 2470
3 e A Golhen - *' -” 2045 -.
. PS | 18 =. |
Ulfter - 14 29397) ingen 3929
Bo PORE ĩ AT. f Pou hkeepfie — 2529
Fa . IE” Ks 2 „ lu 8 2 5 4 5
Columbia 8 27732 AKinderhook © 4661 |
Ranſſelaer beormed face che cenſus Lanſinburg 3
5 Widhington” 3 i 14042 Salem =...  Q180_ -:
Clinton 4 1614 Plattſburg — 8 * 1
Montgomery 11 28848 divided fincethecenſus into three counties.
ET 10% -;  Canadyque  - - ;


a Total number of inhabitants in the
5 ME | 340120 State, according to the cenſus of


3 n | 1790. ail a
8 Herkemer 3 14000) German Flats 1400
8 50 Otlego 132000 l Coope „

a 8 ES Reit olk re”

| Tyoga n 2700 | | |

20 * mw FOR Union Town 5


Theſe three laſt-nientioned counties have back ſeparated from Montgomery 6 nee the
cenſus, and have acquired the greater part of their inhabitants ſubſequent to that period,
- moſt of whom emigrated from the New England States. The county of Herkemer is
compoſed of the towns of German Flats, Herkemer, and Whiteſtown, which, in 1792,
was divided into ſeveral other towns, and contained in 1790, according to the cenſus,
4723 inhabitants; fince which, this number has been increaſed to — of 14,000.


4
25
: a
wage et .
*
—— at oi VO EIS * 2 _ 1 —— — 3 vs
”
* ww .


e — 2


2. *


1


, | — * ny * * .
. ts tr, ors i NT a at echt he e BS Tit UND e eee —


LON CANADA


|
ul d N
U


S* Regis Tillage


wad
%


—
We


Ne


b


U


U


"Wi 10


10 06
1e


Il
fl
j


1
|
|


Il,


|


|
|


| l;
My!


|
will


|


| ne seut River


*


FountaanJ Toun


= . i
Batavia


A
—


8 Np Uaverſtar;
3 IGG |


%


THE STATE OF 5


NEW YORK.


Longuude Test trom London.


MIN
0
73


76”


MASSACHUSETS |


NECTIEUT|


7


—— —'


— —


Alubliched ug! 2041704 bv J Stookdale, Piccadilly.


n 1


Noh 2 „


&>


I f —
Ort n


N 4 of 1s 2, — |


_ . oe 2 N
„ er


A =


PP ed naar ee EE oe oye


12


*
COS


n


1 2— 42


NEW YORK. FOO 373


The townſhips, into which the counties are divided, are corporations inveſted with
certain privileges. The act directs, that the freeholders in the ſeveral townſhips ſhall
aſſemble in town meetings, on the firſt Tueſday in April annually, and chooſe their
town officers, viz. one ſuperviſor, one town clerk, from three to ſeven aſſeſſors, one
or more collectors, two pverſcers of the poor, commiſſioners of highways, conſtables,
fence-viewers, pound-maſters, - &. Theſe are to hold their reſpective offices one year,
or until others be choſen. This act, which appears to have originated from a ſpirit of
pure republicaniſm, came in force the firſt day of April, 1789. It has a happy ten-

_ dency to diſſeminate through the State ſuch information and ſuch principles as are cal- -
culated to cheriſh the ſpirit of freedom, and to ſupport our republican government.
The frequent collection of people in town meetings makes them acquainted with each |
other, and aſſimilates their ideas and their manners: their being inveſted with power, : |
makes them feel their importance, and rouſes their ambition ; their town meetin ..- -
will be a ſchool, in which all the free citizens of the State may learn how to tranſact |
buſineſs with propriety, and in which they may qualify themſelves for the higher offices 1
of the State ; the number of public offices will be increaſed, without increafing the ex-

penſes of the State; and as the defire of promotion is innate in human nature, and

as ambition to poſſeſs the requiſite qualifications commonly accompanies this defire, the
probability is, that the number of perſons qualified for public office will be increaſed,
and of courſe the number of good citizens proportionably multiplied, and the ſubordi-

nate civil affairs of the State more faithfully and more regularly tranſacted.

Rivers AND Canats.] Hudſon's river is one of the largeſt and fineſt rivers in tlie


United States: it riſes in the mountainous country between the lakes Ontario and
Champlain. In its courſe ſouth-eaſterly it approaches within ſix or eight miles of Lake
| George; then, after a ſhort courſe eaſt, turns ſoutherly and receives the Socendaga
from the ſouth-weſt, which heads in the neighbourhood of Mohawk river. The courſe
of the river thence to New York, where it empties into York Bay, is very uniformly
ſouth, 12 deg. or 15 deg. weſt. Its whole length is about 250 miles; from Albany to
Lake George is ſixty- five miles. This diſtance, the river is navigable only for batteaux,
and has two portages, occaſioned by falls of half a mile each. „5 1
The banks of Hudſon's river, eſpecially on the weſtern fide, as far as the highlands
extend, are chiefly rocky cliffs. The paſſage through the highlands, whieh is fixteen
miles, affords a wild romantic ſcene : in this narrow paſs; on cach fide of which the
mountains tower to a great height, the wind, if there be any, 1s collected and com-
preſſed, and blows continually as through a bellows : veſſels, in paſſing through it,
are often obliged to lower their fails. The bed of this river, which is deep and ſmooth =
to an aſtoniſhing diſtance, through a hilly, rocky country, and even through ridges of
ſome of the higheſt mountains in the United States, muſt undoubtedly have been pro-
_ duced by ſome mighty convulſion in nature. The tide flows a few miles above Albany,
which is 160 miles from New York : it is navigable for floops of 80 tons to Albany,
and for ſhips to Hudſon: ſhip navigation to Albany is interrupted by a number of
iſlands, ſix or eight miles below the city, called the Over/laugh. It is in contempla-
tion to confine the river to one channel, by which means the channel will be deepened,
and the difficulty of approaching Albany with veſſels of a larger ſize be removed.
About 60 miles above New York the water becomes freſh. The river is ſtored with a
variety of fiſh,, which renders a ſummer paflage to Albany delightful and amuſing to
thoſe who are ſond of angling. + 5
Ide advantages of this river for carrying on the fur trade with Canada, by means of
the lakes, have been already mentioned: its conveniencies for internal commerce are
N I ol ſingularly


373 | NEW YORK.


fingularly great: the produce of the remoteſt farms i is eaſily and ſpeedily conveyed to A
certain and profitable market, and at the loweſt expenſe: in this reſpect, New York
has greatly the advantage of Philadelphia. A great proportion of the produce of Penn-
ſylvama is carried to market in waggons, over a great extent of country, fome of which
is rough; hence it is that Philadelphia is -crowded with waggons, carts, horſes and
their drivers, to do the ſame buſineſs that is done in New York, where all the produce
of the country is brought to market by water with much leſs ſhew and parade. But
Philadelphia has other advantages, Which will be mentioned in their proper place, to
compentate for this natural defect. The inereaſing population of the fertile lands upon
the northern branches of the Hudſon muſt annually increaſe the amazing wealth that
is conveyed by its waters to New York: added to this, the ground has been marked
out, the level aſcertained, a company incorporated, by the name of © The Prefident,
Directors, and Company of the Northern Inland Lock Navigation, m the State of
New Tork,“ and funds ſubſcribed for the purpoſe of cutting a canal from the neareft
approximating point of Hudſon's river to South Bay, which empties into the ſouth end
of Lake Champlain: the diftance is 18 miles. The difference of level and the face of
the country arc ſuch, as to juſtify a belief that the opening of this canal will not be leſs
practicable than uſeful. *
Saranac river paſſes through Plattſburg into Lake Champlain: it has been explored
nearly 30 miles, and there found equal in ſize to the mouth. In this river is the greateſt
abundance of fiſh, ſuch as ſalmon, baſs, pike, pickerel, trout, &c.
Sable river, not far from the Saranac, is ſcarcely 60 yards wide. On this ſtream are
remarkable falls: the whole deſcent of the water is about 200 feet in ſeveral pitches,
the greateſt of which is 40 feet perpendicular: at the foot of it the water is unfathom-
able. A large pine has been ſeen, in a freſhet, to pitch over endwiſe, and remain ſeveral
minutes under water. The ſtream is confined by high rocks on either fide, a ſpace of
40 feet, and the banks at the falls are, at leaſt, as many feet bigh. In a freſhet the
flood wood frequently lodges, and in a few minutes the water rites to full banks, and
then burſts away its obſtructions with a moſt tremendous craſhing. The Big and Lit-
tle Chazy rivers are in the townſhip of Champlain, which borders on the Canada line:
both are navigable ſome miles, the former ſix or ſeven, affording good mill ſeats—
» Neveral mills are already erected. The Britiſh have a poſt, and maintain a ſmall gar-
| riſon, at Point-au- fer in this townſhip.
The river Boquet paſſes through the town of Willſborough, in Clinton county, and
is navigable for boats about two miles, and 18 there interrupted by falls, on which are
mills. At this place are the remains of an entrenchment thrown up by General Bur-
goyne. Here he gave his famous war feaſt to his © numerous hoſts of ſavages,” and
here, probably, he firſt conceived that celebrated proclamation which he afterwards
brought forth. =
: Black river riſes in the high country, near the ſources of Canada Creck, which falls
into Mohawk river, and takes its courſe N. W. and then N. E. till it ditcharges itſelf
into Cataraqua or Iroquois river, not far from Swegauchee : it is faid to be navigable
for batteaux up to the lower falls, 60 miles, which is diſtant from the flouriſhing ſettle-
ment of Whiteſtown 25 miles. The whole * of this river is reckoned at 112
miles.
Onondago river riſes in the Oneida lake, runs  weſtwardly into Lake Ontario at
Oſwego : it is boatable from its mouth to the head of the lake, 74 miles, (except a fall


hich occaſions a portage of twenty yards) thence batteaux go up Wood Creek _
0
\


NEW YORK, 7”;
to Fort Stanwix, 40 miles, whence there is a portage of a mile to Mohawk river,
Toward the head waters of this river ſalmon are caught in great quantitics.

Mohawk river riſes to the northward of Fort Stanwix, about eight miles from Black
river, and runs ſouthwardly 20 miles, to the fort; then eaſtward, 110 miles; into the
Hudſon. The produce that is conveyed down this river is landed at Skenectady, and
is thence carried by land ſixteen miles, over a barren ſhrub plain, to Albany. Except
a portage of about a mile, occaſioned by the little falls, 56 miles above Skenectady,

the river is paſſable for boats from SkeneQady nearly or quite to its ſource. The per-
pendicular deſcent of theſe falls is eſtimated at 42 feet in the courſe of one mile; and
it is ſuppoſed, they might be locked fo as to be rendered paſſable for boats carrying
five tons, for about 1 5,000]. eurrency. The Cohoez in this river are a great curiolity ; :
they are three miles from its entrance into the Hudſon. The river is about 100 yards
wide; the rock, over which it pours as over a mill dam, extends almoſt in a line from:
one fide of the river to the other, and is about thirty feet perpendicular height. In-
cluding the deſcent above, the fall is as much as fixty or ſeventy feet: the rocks below,
in ſome places, are worn many feet deep by the conſtant friction of the water. The
view of this tremendous cataract is diminiſhed by the height of the banks on each ſide
of the river. About a mile below the falls the river branches and forms a large iſland ;.
but the two mouths may be ſeen af the ſame time from the oppoſite bank of the Hud--
fon : the branches are fordable at low water, but are dangerous. A company by the
name of The Preſident, Directors, and Company of the Weſtern Inland Lock Na-
| vigation, in the State of New York,” were incorporated by the legiſlature of New
York, in March, 1792, for the purpoſe of opening a lock navigation from the now
| navigable part of Hudſon's river, to be extended to Lake Ontario, and to the Seneca
lake. This rout has been ſurveyed and found practicable, the expenſe eſtimated, and
the funds ſubſcribed, and the work is to be executed with all poſſible diſpatch. The
opening of this navigation would be a vaſt acquiſition to the commerce of this State.
A ſhore of at leaſt 1000 miles in length would, in conſequence of it, be waſhed by
boatable waters, excluſive of all the great lakes, and many millions of acres of cxcel-
lent tillage land, rapidly ſettling, would be eee with water communication.
for conveying their produce to market.

Delaware river riſes in Lake Utſtayantho, lat. 42 25, and takes its courſe ſoutli-
weſt, until it croſſes into Pennſylvania in latitude 42“; thence ſouthwardly, dividing
New York from Pennſylvania, until it ſtrikes the north-weſt corner of New Jerſcy, in
latitude 41* 24'; and then paſſes off to ſea, through Delaware bay, having New Jer-

ey on the eaſt fide. and Pennſylvania and Delaware on the weſt.

Suſquchannah E. Branch river has its ſource in lake Otiego, lat. 42 55”, from which
i takes a ſouth-weſt courſe: it croſſes the line which divides New Vork and Pennſyl-
vania three times, the laſt time near Tyoga point, where it receives Tyoga river. Bat-
2 paſs to- its fource ; thence to Mohawk river 1s but twenty miles, capable of good
roads;

Tyoga river . in the Allegany mountains, in choat latitude 42 runs caſtwardly
and empties into the Sutquehannah at Tyoga point, in. latitude 41 57. It is boatable

about 50 miles.

SGencca river riſes in the Seneca country, and runs eaſtwardly, and in its paſſage re-
ccives the waters of the Seneca and Cayuga lakes, (which lie north and ſouth, ten or
twelve miles apart, each is between thirty and forty miles in length, and about a mile
in breadth) 4 empties into the Onondago river, 14 miles above the falls, at a place
called Three Rivers. From Three River point to O nondago lake, up Seneca. 1 iS
2 ; 12 miles.


r 3 E —
RRR .


l a 88 N am. If * n Kt _”_——_ { x PIETY Fenn "%
2 - * " ” * 5 Nr . Fran e he * 45 ** * + n oe 4+ 4 y * 8 ty,
_ 1 - K * 1 p — © Att 21 cs »% 2 M$ $8, -- Sb 9 - e . 5 ? b 3 2 ; al 52. p 8 þ Y 2 Y l
oa res Trot Gl ears fe, Py a Wa Ln — 9 4 0 p coins nn len n ＋3— 2 A n n 8 © + i - + 7- n As TOY
OY TEK - K _ L F * * 5 P bed . : 4 wo F - 5
oak ba 88 1 por > . * GIF as . . , * 4 wks agen — . * — — 4 —— — - — * * *.. A * 3 - 6 *


64” .


D un
W
- : i a


376 NEW YORK.


12 miles. Within Half a mile of this lake a falt ſpring iffues from the ground, the
water of which is falter than that of the ocean: it conſtantly emits water in ſufficient
quantity for works of any extent: it is probable the w. hole country will be ſupplied
from this ſpring, and at a very cheap rate. 'This ſpring 1 18 the property of the State.
This river is boatable from the lakes downwards.

Cheneſſee river rites near the ſource of the Tyoga, and runs northwardly by the


_ Cheneflee caſtle and flats, and empties into Lake Ontario eighty miles eaſt of Niagara


fort. On this river is one ſet of large falls, not far from its junction with Lake On-
tario. The inhabitants improve theſe falls to good purpoſe, by the erection of mills
upon them.

The north eaſt branch of the Allegany river heads in the Allegany mountains, near
the ſource of the Tyoga, and runs directly weſt until it is joined by a larger branch


from the ſouthward, which riſes near the weſt branch of the Suſquehannah : their; junc-
tion is on the line between Pennſylvania and New York. From this junction the river


purſues a north-weſt courſe, leaving a ſegment of the river of about fifty miles in
length, in the State of New York, thence it proceeds in a circuitous ſouth-weſt direc-
tion, until it croſſes into Pennſylvania; 3 from thence to its entrance into the Miſliflippi,
it has already been deſcribed.


There are few fiſh in the rivers, but in the brooks are plenty of trout ; and in the


lakes, yellow perch, ſunfiſh, ſalmon trout, catfiſh, and a variety of others.


From -this account of the rivers, it is caſy to conceive the excellent advantages for
conveying produce to market from every part of the State.


The ſettlements already made in this State, are chiefly upon two narrow oblongs,


extending from the city of New York, eaſt and north. The one eaſt, is Long Iſland,


which is 140 mules long, narrow, and ſurrounded by the ſea. T he one extending
north is about forty miles in breadth, and biſected by the Hudfon : and ſuch is the in-
terſection of the whole State by the branches of the Hudſon, the Delaware, the Suſ-
quehannah, and other rivers which have been mentioned, that there are few places


_ throu ghout its whole extent, that are more than fifteen or twenty miles from ſome
| boatable or navigable ſtream.


Bars axp Lakes. | York bay, which is nine miles long and four broad, Seed to
the ſouthward before the city of New York. It is formed by the confluence of the
Eaſt and Hudſon's rivers, and emboſoms ſeveral ſmall iſlands, of which Governor's |
Iſland is the principal : it communicates with the ocean through the Narrows, between


Staten and Long Iflands, which are ſcarcely two miles wide. The paſſage up to New |


York from Sandy Hook, the point of land that extends fartheſt into the ſea, is ſafe,
and not above twenty miles in length. The common navigation is between the eaſt
and weſt banks, in about twenty-two feet water. There is a light-houſe at Sandy
Hook on a peninſula from the Jerſey ſhore.
South bay les 12 or 15 miles Bon of the northern bend in Hudſon- s river: at its
north end it receives Wood Creek from the ſouth, which is navigable ſeveral miles, and
lined with fine meadows; ſoon aſter it mingles its waters with Eaſt bay, which ſtretches
eaſtward into Vermont. At the junction of theſe bays commences another bay or lake,
from half a mile to a mile wide, whoſe banks are ſteep hills, or cliffs of rocks, gene-


rally inacceſſible. At Ticonderoga this bay receives the waters of Lake George from


the ſouth-weſt, through a large brook, which rolls down a gentle declivity, at the foot


of which were formerly a ſet of ſaw mills. The waters of Lake e are 100 feet
higher than thoſe of the 912 N 3 5
nei


NEW YORK. 377


Onde Lake lies about twenty miles weſt of Fort Stanwi 1K, and extends weſtward
about 30 miles.
Salt Lake is ſmall, and empties into Seneca river ſoon after its junction with the
Onondago river, about 12 miles from Three River point. This lake is ſtrongly im-
regnated with ſaline particles, which circumſtance gave riſe to its name. The Indians
nine their falt from it. |

Lake Otſego, at the head of Suſquehannah river, is about nine miles long and nar-
row, perhaps not more than a mile We: T he land on the banks of this lake is very

good, and the cultivation of it eaſy.

Caniaderago lake 1s nearly as large as Lake” Otſego, and fix miles weſt of it K
fiream, by the name of Oaks Creck, iſſues from it, and falls into the Suſquehannah-
river, about five miles below Otſego.” The _ chooſe | in the State of New Tork is
aid to be made upon this Creek. | |

Chatoque lake is the ſource of Conawon go river, Which emptics into the A
the lower end of it, whence the river ne. is in latitude 425 10˙; from thence to
its head is about twenty-five miles. From the north-weſt part of this to lake Erie is
nine miles, and was once a coinmijnication uſed by the French.

On the north fide of the mountains, in Orange county, is a very valuable tract
called the Drowned Lands, containing about 40 or 50, O00 acres. The waters, which
deſcend from the ſurrounding hills, being but ſlowly diſcharged by the river iſſuing

from it, cover theſe vaſt meadows every winter, and render them extremely fertile ; but -
they expoſe the inhabitants in the:vicinity'to intermittents. The Walkhill river which
paſſes through this extenſive amphibious tract, and empties into Hudſon's river, is in
the ſpring ſtored with very large eels in great plenty. The bottom of this river is a
broken rock; and, it is ſuppoſed, that for 2000l. the channel might be deepened

ſo as to let off all the waters from the meadows, and thereby redeem from the floods a
large tract of rich land, for graſs, hemp, and Indian corn.

Roaps.] The roads in this State have been in general but illy Sende to till within ;
the two or three laſt years. - The legiſlature, convinced of the importance of attending
to the matter, and perhaps ſtimulated by the enterprizing and active Pennſylvanians, |
who are competitors for the trade of the weſtern country, have lately granted very libe-
ral ſums towards improving thoſe roads that traverſe the moſt ſettled parts of the coun-
try, and opening ſuch as lead into the weſtern and northern parts of the State, uniting,
as far as poſſible, the eſtabliſhments on the Hudſon's river, and the moſt populous |
parts of the interior country by the neareſt practicable diſtances. A poſt regularly rides

from Albany to the Cheneſſee river, once a fortnight, through Whiteſtown, Geneva,
Canadaqua, Canawargus, and Williamſburgh, on the Chenetlee river. By this eſta-
bliſhment a ſafe and direct conveyance is opened between the moſt interior parts of 1
United States, to the weſt, and the ſeveral States in the Union. IT

A grand road was opened through Clinton county, which borders upon Canada, in
the year 1790, under the direction of a Mr. Rogers, of Dutcheſs county, and whe - .
him called Rogers' road. This road adds greatly to the convenience and Laſety of tra-
yelling between the State of New York and Canada, eſpecially in the winter, N . |
paſting the lakes on ice is often dangerous, and always uncomfortable: = |

A road alſo has been lately cut from Katt 8 Kill, on the 2 l weltwardly, which |
pailes near Owalco lake. eee
Babes. ] A bridge, called Staats Bridge, 2 50 PE long; bum! wy a ſufficient widths
to admit two carriages abreaſt, has lately been thrown. ado Abrams Creek; which
talls ito Hudſon S river, near the city of Hadſon, by which 2 cominunication with the :


gc country,


*


378 NEW YORK.


cquntry, in a new. direction, is opened from tlie city of Hudſon; and a —
of ſour or five miles in tlie main poſt road from New Vork to Albany.
Skaticook bridge, in the town of that name, 10 miles ſrom Lanſinburgli; is an inge-
nious ſtructure, built at the private expente-of an eee and liberal gentleman,

It coſt 1 400l. currency. =

The legiſlature of the State have granted 3000l. to build a bridge over the ſprouts of
Mohawk river, whenever the ſum of-1060k. ſhall be ſubſexibed and paid This bridge
will be one of the longeſt in America, and will open a direct communication to a very
extenſive country, progreſſing faſt in. e in be north-weſtern parts of the
State.
FACE or rug County, > EE Sou, AvD \ PRoDveTIONs.] The State, to.
ſpeak generally, is interſedted by ridges of mountains running ina north-caft and fouth-
weſt direction. Beyond the Allegany mountains, however, the country is a dead:
level, of a fine rich ſoil, covered in its natural ſtate with maple, beech, birch; cherry,
black walnut, locuſt, hickory, and ſome mulberry trees. On the banks of Lake
Erie are a few cheſnut and oak ridges. Hemlock ſwamps are interſperſed thinly
through the country. All the creeks that empty into Lake Erie, have falls, which
afford many excellent mill-ſeats.
The lands between the Seneca and Cayuga Lakes: are e e uncommonly ex-
cellent, being moſt agreebly diverſified with gentle riſings, and: timbered with lofty:
trees, with little underwood. The legiſlature of this State: have:granted- one million
and a halt acres of land as a gratuity to ther offioers and ſoldiers of tlie line of this State.
This tract is bounded. welt. by the i eaſt ſhore of the Seneca, Dake, and the Maſſa-
chuſetts lands in the new- county of. Ontarie; north, by part of: Lake Ontario near
Fort Oſwego; ſonth, by a ridge 70. the Allegany — and the Pennſylvania:
line; and eaſt, by the mw Creek (Which falls: nearly into the middle of the
Oneida Lake) and that part of Montgomery which Ins 47 555 ſettling by the New
England Prople very rapidly ſince the peace.
"This p leaſant country is divided into twenty-five -towiniſhi 508 of; 60,000; acres each, Th
Which = agam ſubdivided . into: 100 conveniont farms, of 600: acres,. making 1 in the:
whole 2,500.farms.
Eaſt of the Allegany mountains the- - country is broken into hills with BA inter-
Teh vallies. The hills are clothed thick with timber, and when cleared. afford:
very fine paſture: the vallies, when cultivated, produce wheat, emp finx, .
— oats, yy Indian corn.
Beſides the trees: already mentioned, there are ir various parts of the State, the:
ſeyeral kinds of oak, ſuch as white, red, yellow, black, and cheſnut oak; white,
yellow, ſpruce, and pitch pines: cedar, — butternut, aſpin, common y called.
poplar, white wood, which in Pennſylvania is called poplar, and in England the
tulip tree, rock, maple, the linden tree, Which, with: the white wood, grows on the
low rich ground, the button wood, ſhrub-cranberry, the fruit of which hangs in
cluſters ke grapes as large as cherries; this ſhrub too grows on low ground.


Beſides thefe is the ſumach, which bears cluſters of redberries : the Indians chew-
the leaves inſtead of 23 the berries are uſed in dyes... Of the commodities
produced from culture, wheat is the ſtaple. Of this article in wheat and flour,
equivalent to one million buſhels are Dake: exported. Indian corn and peas are
af raiſed for exportation; and rye, oats, barley, &c. far home conſumption.
N =


Pag: of the State lar ge dairies are kept, which furniſh for the market butter
chocſe. The beſt lands in this State which! lie along the Mowhawk river, _ |
36 $4 (976 7 nort


NEW YORK. 379


north of it, RY weſt of the Allegany mountains, are yet moſtly 1 in a ate of nature,
but are moſt rapidly ſettling.
The county of Clinton in the moſt northern part of the State, on Lake Champlain
Land Lake George, lies about midway between Quebec and New York, and from
230 to 240 miles from each, and is ſettled by about 2000 inhabitants. A great pro-
portion of the lands in this county are of an excellent quality, and produee in abun-
dance the various kinds of grain cultivated in other parts of the State. The
inhabitants manufacture earthen ware, pot and pearl aſh, in large quantities,
which they export to New York or Quebee—Their wool is of a better quality than
that which is produced in more ſouthern climates ; their beef and pork is ſecond ' to
none; and the price of ſtall fed beef in Montreal (diſtant 60 miles from Plattſburg)
is ſuch as to encourage the farmers to drive their cattle to that market. Their foreſts
ſupply them with ſugar and molaſſes, as every family, with no more implements
than are neceſſary for common uſe, can make a ſufficiency for its own conſumption,
and that at a ſeaſon when the farmer can be no otherwiſe employed. The foil is
well adapted to the culture of hemp. The land earriage from any part of the cbuntry,
in tranſporting their produce to New Vork, does not exceed 18 miles. The carrying
place at Ticonderoga is one mile and athalf; and from Fort George at the ſouth
end of the lake of the fame name, to Fort Edward, is but 14 miles ; after which
there are two or three ſmall obſtructions by falls, which are about to be removed
by the proprietors of tlie northern canal. From this cou nty to Quebec are annually
ſent large rafts, the rapids at St. John's and | Chamblee being the only interruption
in the navigation, and thoſe not ſo great but that at ſome ſeaſons, batteaux with
fixty buſhels. of ſalt can aſcend them. At this A from the ſea, Talt is ſold at
half a dollar a buſhél. |
In the northern and unſettled Wet the state are a plenty of mooſe Ger; bears, .
; ſome beavers, martins, and moſt other inhabitants of the foreſt, except wolves.
Ducks, growſo, pigeons, and fiſh of many kinds, and particularly falmon, are hon
in great abundance in different parts, and eſpecially i in the county of Clinton. At
the mouth of Saranac river, which falls into - Champlain, the falmon are found C
ſuch plenty, that it is uſual to'take 4 or 500 in a day with ſpears and ſinall ſcoop
nets. They are caught from May till November, and make excellent falted pro-


viſions, and every cottager, by ſpending an hour in the evening, may. obtain a ſuffi-
cient ſupply for his family.


PoruLATION AND "CHARACTER. ] For the population of this State, Acer to 5
the cenfus of 1 790, the reader is referred to the table of divifions. In 1786, the
number of inhabitants was 2385897, of which 18,889 were blacks. In 1756,
there were 96,775 inhabitants, e 13,542 blacks. The average annual in-
creaſe of inhabitants in this State, from 1 756 to 1786, was 4, 554. The ＋ *
increaſe for the four years ſucceeding 1786, was upwards of 25, 00. A great
Portion of this increaſe conſiſts of emigrants from the New England States. The
population for every ſhuare mile, . ng the whole State, 18 nearly cight, which 2
thews that u great part of the State is yet unſettled.

The effects of the Revolution have been as Ferdy and as Ha ppily ſelt by this,
as by any of the United States. The acceſſion of inhabitants within a few 'yeirs
has been great, even beyond calculation; und fo long as lands can be obtained
upon advantageous terms, and with a good title, an the: e wilt "government
ccontinuesto protect induſtry and encourage commeree, ſo long' k ey will continue to
increaſe; The new ſettlements that are forming ini tlie northern A0 weſtern parts


g-G-2: oi


380 | NEW YORK.
of the State, are principally by people from New England. It is remarkable that
the Dutch enterprize few or no ſettlements. Among all the new townſhips that have
bern ſettledſince the peace, (and they have been aſtoniſhingly numerous) it is not
known that one has been ſettled by the Dutch. Although: they are as © intent upom
gain as other people, they had — 22, reſt ſecure of what they poſſeſs, than hazard
all or even a part, iu uncertain attempts to increaſe it.

The Engliſh language is generally ſpoken thr oughout the State, but is. not a little
corrupted by the Dutch, diale&t, which is ſtill ſpoken in ſome counties, particularly
in King's, Vikier, Albany, and chat part of Ong which lies ſouth of the mountains.
But as Dutch ſchools. arè almoſt, if not Wholly, diſcontinued, that language, in a feu
generations, will probably ceaſe to be uſed at all; and the increaſe of Englith.
Ts has already, had a nen t in the ee eee of the Engliſh:
anguage. c

The manners of the people differ as * as s their language. The anceſtors of the
inhabitants in the ſouthern and middle: parts of Long Iſland were either natives of

England or the immediate deſcendants of the firſt ſettlers of New: England, and their

manners and cuſtoms are ſimilar to thoſe of their anceſtors. The counties inhabited
by the Dutch have adopted. the Engliſh manners in a great degree, but ſtill retain:
many modes, particularly in their religion, which are peculiar te the Hollanders..
They are induſtrious, , neat, and economical in the management of their farms and
their families. Whatever bufi neſs they purſue, they generally follow the old track.
of their forefathers, and ſeldom invent any new improvements in, agriculture,

manufactures, or mechanics. They were the. firſt ſettlers of this State, and were
particularly friendly to the Engliſh colony that ſettled at Plymouth in New England,
in 1620; and continued to be amicably diſpoſed towards the Engliſh colonies caſt
of them, until the ee Giſpute: aroſe. COmcerDINg: the lands: n Canpedicut ;
river. 775 55 1.

The [EU WO and its Ie hdr have had: a very perceptible; influenoe in

diffuſing a ſpirit of liberality among the Dutch, and in diſpelling the clouds of
ignorance and national prejudice. Schools, academies, and colleges, are eſtabliſhed
\ and eſtabliſhing for the A apt ae of their children in the Engliſh; and learned lan-
guages, and in the arts and ſciences, and a literary and ſcientific ſpirit is evidently
increaſing. If ſuch are the buddi ngs of improvement in the davon of our empire,
what a rich harveſt may we expect in its meridian!
Ihe city of New York is inhabited principally by Merchants, phyſicians, lawyers,
mechanics, ſhopkeepers, and tradeſmen compoſed of almoſt all nations and religions.
| They are generally reſpectable in their ſeveral profeſſions, and ſuſtam the re putaton «
of honeſt, punctual, and fair dealers.
The manners and character of the inhabitants of every 8 or State will
take their colouring, in a. greater or leſs degree, from the peculiar manners of the
-firft ſettlers. It is much more natural for emigrants to a ſettlement to adopt the
cuſtoms of the original inhabitants, than the contrary, even though the emigrants
ſhould in length of time become the moſt numerous. Hence it is that the neatneſs,
parſimony, and induſtry of the Dutch were early imitated by the firſt En gliſh ſettlers
in the province, and, until the revolution, formed a diſtinguiſhing trait in their
provincial character. It is ſtill diſcernible, though in a much leſs s degree, and wall
-probably continue viſible for many years to come.
_ » Beſides the Dutch and Engliſh already mentioned, there are in this State many
emigrants from Scotland, Ireland, , and ſome ſew from F uc Many *
| ermans


NEW YORK. „


Girniane are ſettled on the Mohawk, and ſome Scots people on the Hudſon, in the
county of Waſhington. The. principal part of the two former ſettled in the city of
New York ; and retain the manners, the rehgion, and ſome of them the language
of their reſpective countries. The French emigrants: ſettled principally at New
Rochelle and on Staten ifland, and their deſcendants, feveral of them now fill ſome
of the higheſt offices in the United States.
Cute Tow Ns.] There are three incorporated cities in this State; ;* New York, |
Albany, and Hudſon. New York, is the capital of the State, and ſtands on the fouth-
weſt point of Manhattan, commonly called New York Iſland, at the confluence of the
Hudſon and Eaſt rivers. The principal part of the city lies on the eaſt ſide of the
land, although the buildings extend from one river to- the other. The length of the
oity on Eaſt rtver is about two miles; but falls much ſhort of that diſtance on the
banks of the Hudſon. Its breadth, on an average, is nearly three fourths of a mile;
and its circumference may be four miles. The plan of the city is not perfectly regular,
but is laid-out:witk reference to the ſituation: of the ground. The ground which was
unoccupied before the peace of 1783, was laid out in parallel ſtreets of convenient
width, which has had a good effect upon the parts of the city lately built. The prin-
cipal ſtreets run nearly parallel with the rivers. Theſe are interſected, though not at
right angles; by ſtreets· running · from river to river. In the width of the ſtreets there
is a great diverſity. W ater-ſtreet and. Queen-ſtreet, which occupy the banks of Eaſt
river, are very conveniently fituated for buſineſs, but they are low and too narrow;
not admitting in ſome places of walks on the fides for foot-paſſengers. Broad-ſtreet, |
extending from the Exchange to City-hall, is ſufficiently wide. This was originally
built on each fide of the creek, which penetrated almoſt to the City-hall. This ſtreet
is low, but pleaſant. But the moſt convenient and agreeable part of the city is the
Broadway. It begins at a point which is formed by the junction of the Hudſon and
Eaſt rivers, occupies the height of land between them, upon a true meridional line,
riſes gently to the northward, is near 70 feet wide, adorned,' where the fort formerly
ſtood, (which has lately been levelled) with an elegant brick edifice for the accommo-
dation of the governor of the State, and a public walk from the extrenuty of the point,
occupying the ground of the lower battery, which is now demoliſhed; alſo with two
Epiſcopal churches, and a number of elegant private buildings. It terminates, to the
northward, in a triangular area, fronting the bridewell and ie hwuſez and commands
from any point, a view of the Bay and Narrows.
Since the year 1788, that part of the city which was buried in ruins during the war,
has been rapidly rebuilding ; the ſtreets widened, ſtraitened, raiſed in the middle under
an angle ſufficient to carry off the water to the ſide gutters, and foot-ways of brick
made on each fide. At this time, the part that was e by fire is almoſt wholly
covered with elegant briek houſes.
Wall- ſtreet is generally 50 feet wide and elevated, and the Db elegant. Ha-
nover- ſquare and Dock- ſtreet are conveniently ſituated for buſinets, and the houſes ;
well-built. William-ftreet is alfo elevated and convenient, and is the principal market
for retailing dry goods. Many of the other ſtrects are pleaſant, but moſt of them are
irregular and narrow.
The houſes are generally built of buiak, and the roofs tiled. Ther are remaining
a few houſes built after the old Dutch manner; but the Engliſh taſte. has Prevailed
almoſt a centu |
Upon the - I RY point of the 8 a fork with 4 baſtions formerly ſtood;
and allo a battery below... The arca of the fort contained an elegant houſe for the ac-
commodation


4
*
944
1
4
a.
Ge
E
L *
nd
41
1
.
85
24
2
8
1
4 2
-B
Y
44
zi
*Y
4
1%
* 28
3;
3
9
*
4
5 >
+3
.
Y


r AA oe HE og df er 3 * *


7 71 Dee
a


.
* r e
N 3 8 2 14 £9


pe; G _
* 24: 7 —
7 * 1 N * . * ee * 5 AO
tk 9 Nw P „ „ Y x
n . a” N a 1 P OY fake - "IR
ä ö r N n


c

5 * ft 1 - OT OE?

4 to, <A> ee ot b fg: W

2 N 1 . r n
— JE a I _— I nun? V


352 NEW YORK.


commodation of the ro yal governors, and was conſumed by fire in Governor "Tryon" 8
time. Tlus fort and ary were removed in the year 1791.


The moſt magnificent edifice in this city is Federal-hall, ſituated at the head of
Broad-ſtreet, where its front appears to great advantage. The baſement ſtory is Tuſ-


can, and is pierced with feven openings; four mally pillars in the center ſupport four


Doric columns and a pediment. The freeze is ingemiouſly divided, to admit 13 ſtars
in metopes; theſe, with the American Eagle, and other inſignia in the de, hen 'and


the tablets over the windows, filed with the 13 arrows and the olive-branch united,


mark it as a building deſignated for national purpoſes. After entering from the Br oad
ſtreet, we find a plainly-finiſhed ſquare room, flagged with ſtone, and to which the


_ <itizens have free acceſs; from this we enter the veſlibule in the center of the pile,


which leads in front to the floor of the repreſentatives' room, or real Federal-hall, and
through two arches on each fide by a public ſtair-caſe on the left, and by a private one
on the right, to the ſenate-chamber and lobbies. |

This veſtibule is paved with marble—1s very lofty and well- finiſhed; the lower part


38 of .a hght ruſtic, which ſupports a handſome iron gallery; the upper half is in a


lighter ſtyle, and is finiſhed with a ſky- light of about 12 by 18 feet, which i is 0 ere
with a profuſion of ornament in the richeſt taſte. The repreſentatives' room is a ſpacious
and elegant apartment, 61-feet deep, 58 wide, and 3b high, a coved ceiling 2 about


10 feet high, not included. This room is of an octangular form; four of its ſides are
rounded in the manner of niches, and give a graceful variety to the whole. The


windows are large, and placed 16 feet from the floor ; all below them is fimſhed with
plain wainſcot, interrupted -only by four chimnics; but above theſe a number of
Ionic columns and pilafters, with their proper entablature, are very judiciouſly diſ-
poſed, and give great clegance. In the-pannels between the windows trophies are
carved, and the letters U. S. in a cypher ſurrounded with laurel. The ſpeaker's chair


E oppoſite the great door, and-raiſed by ſeveral ſteps ; the chairs for the members are


ranged ſemicircularly, in two rows, in front of the ſpeaker. There are two galleries
for the accommodation of ſpectators.

On the left of the veſtibule is a lobby, 19 by 48 feet, finiſhed with Tuſcan pilaſters.
This leads to the ſenate-chamber, which is 40 feet long, 30 wide, and 20 high, with


an arched ceiling. It has three windows in front and three back. Thoſe in front open


into a gallery, 12 feet deep, guarded by an elegant iron railing. In this gallery our
beloved PR ESD ENA, attended by the Senate and Houſe of Repreſentatives, took his oath


of office, in the face of Heaven, and in preſence of a large concourſe of people aſlem-
bled in front.


The ſenate-chamber is decorated with pilaſters, of an ner invented by Maj jor


L'Enfant the architect, which have a magnificent appearance. The marble, which 1s


uſed in the chimnies, is American; and for beauty of ſhades and poliſh is. equal to any


Of its kind in Europe. Beſides theſe, there are ſeveral other rooms for uſe and conve-


nicnce; a library, lobbics, and commuttec rooms above, and guard-rooms below.


The building on the whole docs much credit to the ingenuity and abilities of the ar-


chitect.
The other public buildings in the city are, three houſes for public worſhip. for the
Dutch Reformed church—four Preſbyterian churches—three Epiſcopal churches ; two


for German Lutheransand Calviniſts two Friends meeting-houſes - two [for;Baptiſts—


two for Methodiſis—one for Moravians - one Roman Catholic church one French
Proteſtant church, out of repair and a Jew's tynagogue. Beſides theſe, there is the
governor s houſc alrcady mentioned, a moſt elegant building the college, gaol, and


ſever; al


NEW YORK. | 383
feverali other buildings of leſs note. The city is accommodated with four markets in
different parts, which are furniſhed with a great plenty and variety of proviſions in neat
and excellent order. eee 5

The government of the city, which was incorporated in 1696, is now in the hands:
of a mayor, aldermen, and common- council. Phe city is divided into ſeven wards, in
each of which there is choſen annually by the people, an alderman and an afſiſtant,
who, together with the recorder, are appointed annually by the council of appoint--
ment. 5 | |

The mayor's court, which is
putation as a court of la. 5 :

A court of ſeſſions: is:likewiſe held for the trial of criminal cauſes 0
The fituation of the city is both healthy and pleaſant. Surrounded on all ſides by:
water, it is refreſhed with cool breezes in ſummer, and the air in winter is more tem-
perate than in other places under the ſame parallel. York Iſland is 15 miles in length,
and hardly one in breadth. It is joined to the Main by a bridge, called King's bridge.
The channels between Long and Staten Iſlands, and between Long and York Iſlands, .
are ſo narrow as to occafion an unuſual rapidity: of the tides, which is increaſed by
the confluence of the waters of the Hudſon and Eaſt river: this rapidity in general
prevents the obſtruction of the channel by ice, ſo that the navigation is clear, except |
for a few days in ſeaſons when the weather is uncommonly ſevere. There is no bafon:
or bay for the reception of ſhips ; but the road where they lie, in Eaſt river, is defended:
from the violence of the ſea by the iſlands, which interlock with each other; ſo that
except that of Rliode Iſland, and Portland; in the diftrict of Main, the harbour of
New York, which admits ſhips of any burthen, is the beſt in the United States.

This city is efteemed the moſt ehgible ſituation for commerce in the United States.
It almoſt neeoſſarily commands the trade of one half New Jerſey, moſt of that of Con-
necticut, and part of that of Maſſachuſetts, and almoſt the whole of Vermont, beſides:
the whole fertile interior country, which is penetrated by one of the. largeſt rivers in-
America. This city imports moſt of the goods conſumed; between a line of 30 miles
eaſt of Connecticut river, and 20 miles weſt of the Hudſon, which is 130 miles, and
between the ocean and the confines of Canada, about 400 miles; a+ confiderable
portion of which is the beſt peopled of any part of the United States, and the whole
territory contains at leaſt 800, ooo people, or one fiſtli of the inhabitants of the Union.
Beſides, ſome of the other States are partially ſupplied with goods from New Vork.

But in the ſtaple commodity, (flour) Pennſylvania and Maryland have exceeded it
the ſuperfine flour of thoſe States commanding a higher price than that of New. Tork;
not that the quality of the grain is worſe, but becauſe greater attention is paid in thoſe
States to the inſpection and manufacture of that article. i IS FEED
In the manufacture, likewiſe, - of iron, paper, cabinet works, &c. Pennſylvania ex-
ceeds not only New York, but all her fiſter States: In time of peace, however, New
York will command more commercial buſineſs. than any town in the United States.
In time of war it will be inſecure without a marine force; but a ſmall number of ſhips
will be able to defend it from the moſt formidable attacks by ſea. FEE:


held from time to time by adjournment, is in high re


/


A want of good water is a great inconvenience to the citizens, there being few wells.
un the city, Moſt of the people are ſupplied every day with freſh water, conveyed to.
their doors in caſks, from a pump near the head of Queen-ſtreet, which receives it
from a ſpring almoſt a mile from the center of the city. This well is. about 20 feet
deep, and four feet diameter The average quantity drawn daily from this remarkable:


ſhends.


well is 110 hogſheads of 1.30 gallons cach. In ſome hot ſummer-days 216 hog
* „


384 NEW YORK.


have been-drawn from it; and what is very ſingular, there are never more or Teſs than
three feet of water in tha. well. The water is ſold commonly at 3d. a hogſhead at the.
pump. Several propoſals have been made by individuals to ſupply the citizens by pipes; T7
but none have yet been accepted. |
Ne York is the gayeſt place in America. The ladies, in the ED GIS and brilliancy 7
of their dreſs, are not equalled in any city in the United States; not even in Charles-
town, South Carolina, which has heretofore been called the center of the beau monde.
The ladies, however, are not ſolely employed in attentions to dreſs ; there are many
who are ſtudious to add to the brilliant external accompliſhments, the more brilliant
and laſting accompliſhments of the mind: nor have they been unſucceſsful; for New
York can boaſt of great numbers of refined taſte, whoſe minds are W. improved, N
and whote converſation is as inviting as their perſonal charms. Iinctured with
a. Duteh education, they manage: their families with good ®conemy and br ergo
neatnets. _
In point of ſociability and hoſpitality, New Yerk i is ; hardly exrecded by. any town in
the United States. If, however, in regard to theſe agreeable characteriſtics, the pre-
-fexence mult be given to any one place, it decidedly belongs to Charleſtown, South
Carolina. Some travellers-have, in theſe reſpects, Saen Boſton the preference to New |
Vork. 2
An inquirer, who would wiſh to acquaint himſelf with the State of the people of |
New York, their manners and government, would naturally aſk the citizens for their
ſocieties for the encouragement of ſciences, arts, manufactures, &c. ; for their public
libraries ; for their patrons of literature ; their well-regulated academies ; for their fe-
male academy for inſtructing young ladies in geography, hiſtory, belles lettres, &c.
Such inquiries might be made with propriety, but could not at preſent be anſwered ſa-
tisfactorily. From the ſpirit of improvement, however, which has of late appeared,
there is reaſon - to believe, that this trait in the character of the citizens of New
| York will ſoon give place to one diſtinguiſhed for a preference for theſe things.
On a eb. view of this city, as deſcribed thirty years ago, and in its preſent ſtate,
the compariſon is flattering to the preſent age; particularly the improvements in taſte,
elegance of manners, and that eaſy unaffected civility and politeneſs. Which form the
Happineſs of ſocial intercourfe. |
It is found, by a memorandum in one of the old regiſters, that the number of To
inhabitants in the city, taken by order of the King, in | Up your ONE was as
fallows: _ . |


; 5 ? 946 | BB 0 fainen - + N N 209
. Omen —— | 101 | 22 tj | . 5 OED
Young men and boys 864  Negr 138 2 4; girls 5644 9 7 |


1 Young women and girls 899


%%%ͤ . 8


The number of 8 in the city and county of New York i in 17 56 was 10,881; 75
1771—21,863 ; 1786—23,614; 1790—33, 1317.
I) be city of Albany is ſituated upon the weſt fide of Hudſon's river, 160 nie north
oof the city of New York, in latitude 42% 36“, and is, by charter granted! in 1686, one
mile upon the river, and 16 miles back. It contains upw ards of 1000 houſes, built
moſtly by trading people on the margin of the river. he houſes ſiand chiefly upon
Ten, Market, and Water ſtreets, and fix ohr ſtreets or lanes, which crols. them -o *
. + righ


.
o - we


*


NEW YORK. 383


bs ight angles. They are moſtly built in the old Dutch Gothic ſt yle, with the gable
end to the ſtreet, which cuſtom the firſt ſettlers brought with a from Holland.
The gable end 1s commonly of brick, with the heavy-moulded ornament of ſtaunting
with notches, like ſtairs, and an iron horſe for a weather-cock at top. The houſes are
ſeldom more than one ſtory and a half high, and have but little convenience, and leſs
elegance ; but they are kept very neat, being rubbed with. a mop almoſt every day,
and ſcoured every week, Many new houſes, however, have lately been built in this
city, all in the modern ftyle ; the inhabitants are paving the ſtrects in the New York
plan with foot-ways, and. making other improvements.
The city of Albany contains about 4000 inhabitants, collected from various s parts.
As great a variety of languages 'are ſpoken in Albany as in any town in the United
States, but the Engliſh predominates, and the uſe of every other is conſtantly leſſen-
ing. Adventurers, in purfuit of wealth, are led here by the advantages for trade,
which this place affords.

Albany 1 is unrivalled in its fituation. It ſtands on the bank of one of the fineſt
rivers in the world, at the head of ſloop navigation, It enjoys a falubrious air, as is
evinced by the longevity of its inhabitants. It is the natural emporium of the in-
creaſing trade of a large extent of country weſt and north ; a country of an excellent
ſoil, abounding in every article for the Weſt India market, plentifully watered with

navigable lakes, creeks, and rivers, as yet only partially peopled, but ſettling with
almoſt unexampled rapidity, and capable of affording ſubſiſtence and aMluence to
millions of inhabitants. No part of America affords a more eligible opening for emi-
grants than this; and when the contemplated locks and canals are completed, the
bridge over the Mohawk river erected, and convenient roads opened into every part
of the country, all which will, it 1s expected, be accompliſhed in a few years, Albany
will probably increaſe and flouriſh Lag almoſt every other city or town in the
United States.

The well- water in this city is extremely bad, ſcarcely drinkable by thoſe who are not
accuſtomed to it. It oozes through a ſtiff blue clay, and it imbibes in its paſſage the
fine particles common to that kind of foil : this difcolours it, and when expoſed any
length of time to the air, it acquires a diſagreeable taſte. Indeed, all the water for
cooking is brought from the river, and many families uſe it to drink. The water in
the wells is unwholeſome, being full of little inſects, reſembling, except in ſize, thoſe
which we frequently ſee in ſtagnated rain-water. But the inhabitants are about to
the cite this e * conſtructing water-works to convey good water into
the city.

- hes public buildings are, a Low Dutch Walch one ſor Preſpyterians, one e for Ger-


mans or High Dutch, one for Epiſcopalians—a hoſpital, the city-hall, and a handſome
brick gaol.


The city of Hudſon has had the moſt rapid growth of any place in America, if we
except Baltimore, in Maryland. It is ſituated on the eaſt ſide of Hudſon's river, in :
latitude 42? 2.5, and is 130 miles north of New Tork; 30 miles ſouth of Albany, and
four miles weſt from Old Claverack town. It is ſurrounded by an extenfive and
fertile back W and, in Pen to its ze and population, carries on a large
trade.

No longer ago than the autumn of 1783, Meſfrs. Seth and Thomas Jenkins, from
Providence. in the State of Rhode Ifland, having firſt reconnoitred all the way up the
river, fixed, on the unſettled ſpot where Hudſon now ſtands, for a town, To this ſpot
they found the river was navigable for veſſels of any frze. They purchifet a tract of


A about


386 «wk ak


about a mile ſquare, bordering on the river, with a large bay to the ſouthward, and
divided it into thirty parcels or ſhares. Other adventurers were admitted to propor-
tions, and the town was laid out in tquares, formed by ſpacious ſtreets, crofling each
other at right angles: each tquare contains thirty lots, two deep, divided by a twenty
feet alley; each lot is fifty fect in front and 120 feet in depth.
In the ſpring of 1784, 1cveral houſes and ſtores were erected.” The increaſe of the
town from this period to the ſpring ot 1786, two years only, was aſtoniſhingly rapid,
and reflects great honour upon the enterprizing and perſevering ſpirit of the original
founders. In the ſpace of time juſt mentioned, no leſs than 150 dwelling houſes, be-
_ tides ſhops, barns, and other buildings, four warehouſes, ſeveral wharves, ſpermaceti
works, a covered rope walk, and one of the beſt diſtilleries in America, were erected,
and 1500 ſouls collected on a ſpot, which, three years before, was improved as a farm,
and but two years before began to be built. Its increaſe fince has been very rapid; a
printing- office has been eſtabliſned, and ſeveral public buildings have been erected,
| befides dwelling houſes, ſtores, &c. The inhabitants are plentifully and conveniently
ſupplied with water, brought to their cellars in wooden pipes from a ſpring two miles
from the town. |
It ſtands on an eminence, from which are extenſive and delightful views to the north- |
weſt, north, and round that way to the ſouth-eaſt, conſiſting of hills and vallies, va-
riegated Ny ith woods and orchards, corn-fields and meadows, with the river, which.i 18
in moſt places a mile over, and may be ſeen a conſiderable diſtance to the northward,
forming a number of bays and creeks. From the ſouth-eaſt to the ſouth-weſt, the
city is ſcreened with hills at different diſtances, and weſt, afar off over the river and
a large valley, the proſpect is bounded by a chain of ſtupendous mountains, called the
Katts- kill, running to the weſt- north weſt, Which add magnificence and ſublimity to
the whole ſcene.
Uppwards of twelve hundred fleighs entered the city daily, for ſeveral days together,
in February 1786, loaded with grain of various kinds, boards, ſhingles, ſtaves, hoops,
iron ware, ſtone for building, fire-wood, and ſundry articles of proviſion for the
market, from which ſome idea may be formed of the advantage of its ſituation with.
reſpect to the country adjacent, which is every way extenſi ve and tertile, particularly
weſtward. The original proprietors of Hudſon offered to purchaſe a tract of land ad-
joining the ſouth part of the city of Albany, and were conſtrained, by a refuſal of the
propofition, to become competitors for the commerce of the northern country, when
otherwiſe they would have added great wealth and conſequence.to Albany.

: Poughkeepfie is the ſhire town of Dutcheſs county, and is ſituated upon the eaſt
fide of Hudſon's river, and north of Wapping kill or creek. It is a pleaſant little
town, and has frequently been the ſeat of the State government.
Lanſinburgh, formerly called the New City, ſtands on the eaſt fide of the Hudion,
zuſt oppoſite the ſouth branch of Mohawk river, and nine miles north of Albany.
It is a very flouriſhing place, pleaſantly fituated on a plain at the foot of a hill.

- Kingſton is the county town of Ulſter. Before it was burnt by the Britiſh, in 1777,
it contained about 200 houſes, regularly built on an elevated dry plain, at the mouth
of a little pleaſant ſtream, called Euſopus kill or creek, that emptjes into the Hudſon;
but is nearly two miles weſt from the river. The town has been rebuilt.
 Skenectady is fixteen miles north-weſt of Albany, in Albany county, ſituated on the
banks of the Mohawk river. The town is compact and regular, built of brick, and,
cepting a few, in the old Dutch ſtyle, on a rich flat of low land, ſurrounded with

hills. The windings « of the river — the > town „ and. the fields, which are often


overflowed


— = |
| 2 — , VE ONER 7. ob" 8 44.7. i M6 Le. 9 5 *
8 | / Ing 8 l £5 a0 4.4 rt Ir + 2nd 42 ts, * > i 4 * - __ e N
r © LR . IERI  a * A gs. 0 9 / wo 8 4+ * ETD * . + — ap ,

n a — + wn” the 4 2 e | |
FRO Ae tr |

— owurety,,; * :
* 15 . 4; : Fart c |


Ad 26>. 1
E „ Hg;
os. * 2 «>,


mb IF, . .
. 8.5 l * * * 4 * * 7 .
N n

8 4 Y 77" PS Tv” * n ; iS 4


3


*
=
KY
1
& 1


n *
ö


U


2 eee


e
a
N A
4 *
1 2 4 . Ta "—_— VEE i
_ Tit: * — by FR * 0 .


4H ö
n ade —
9 *

uw 3


*
— . Pp
*


- ne ES A
POE TO


NEW YORK. 387
overflowed in the ſpring, afford a beautiful proſpect about harveſt time. As it is at
the foot of navigation on a long river, which patles through a very fertile country,
one would ſuppole it to embrace much of the commerce of it ; but originally knowing
no other than the fur trade, ſince the revolution the place has decayed, and no advantage

been taken of its happy ſituation. 5 5
Plattſburgh is an extenſive townſhip in Clinton county, fituated on the weſt margin
of Lake Champlain. From the ſouth part of the town the mountains trund away
wide from the lake, and leave a charming tract of excellent land, of a rich loam, well
watered, and about an equal proportion ſuitable for meadow and for tillage. The
land riſes in a gentle aſcent for ſeveral miles from the lake, of which every farm will
have a delightful view. Seven years ago, this townſhip and the whole county indeed,
which at preſent contains ſeveral thouſand inhabitants, was a wilderneſs; now they
have a houſe for public worſhip, a court houſe, and gaol. The courts of common

pleas and general ſeſſions of the peace fit here twice in a year. They have artiſans of
almoſt every kind among them, and furniſh among themſelves all the materials for
building, glaſs excepted. Polite circles may here be found, and the genteel traveller
be entertained with the luxuries of a ſea-port, a tune on the harpſichord, and a philo-
| ſophical converſation. This, with many other inſtances 'of the kind, ſerve to verify

a prophetic remark, in a letter of Congreſs to their conſtituents, written in a time of

gloomy deſpondency, to the following purport : < Vaſt lakes and rivers, ſcarcely known
or explored, whoſe waters have rolled for ages in filence and obſcurity to the ocean,
and extenſive wilderneſſes of fertile ſoil, the dwelling place of ſavage beaſts, ſhall yet
hear the din of induſtry, become ſubſervient to commerce, and boaſt delightful villas,
gilded fpires, and ſpacious cities riſing on their banks, and fields loaded with the fruit
of cultivation.” 85 e 5 33 on:
' AGRICULTURE AND MAN UrACTURESs.] New York is confiderably behind her neigh-
bours in New England, New Jerſey, and Pennſylvania, in point of improvements in
agriculture and manufactures. Among other reaſons for this deficiency, that of want
of enterprize in the inhabitants is not the leaſt. Indeed their local advantages have
been ſuch as that they have grown rich without enterprize. Beſides, lands have
hitherto been cheap, and farms of courſe large, and it requires much leſs ingenuity to
raiſe 1000 buſhels of wheat upon fixty acres of land, than to raife the ſame quantity
upon thirty acres. So long, therefore, as the farmer in New York can have ſixty
| acres of land to raiſe 1000 buſhels of wheat, he will never trouble himſelf to
find out how he can raiſe the ſame quantity upon half the land. It is population
alone that ſtamps a value upon lands, and lays a foundation for high improvements
in agriculture. When a man is obliged to maintain a family on a finall farm, his
invention is exerciſed to find out every improvement that may render it more produc-
tive. This appears to be the great reaſon why the lands on Delaware and Connecticut
rivers produce the farmer twice as much clear profit as lands in equal quantity and of
the ſame quality upon the Hudſon. If the preceding obſervation be juſt, improve-
ments will keep pace with population and the increaſing value of lands. Another
cauſe, which has heretofore operated in preventing agricultural improvements in this
State, has been their government, which, in the manner it was conducled until the
revolution, was extremely unfavourable to improvements of almoſt every kind, and
particularly in agriculture. The governors were many of them land jobbers, bent on
making their fortunes, and being inveſted with power to do this, they either engroſſed
tor themſelves, or patented away to their particular favourites, a yery great proportion
of the whole province. This, as has been before obterved, proved an effectual bar to
population, and of courte, according to our preſent hypotheſis, has kept down the
3D 2 Price


ws 4 hey

n 9 5 5 n
„ a

A Load jo et 2 7 4 -


2
* *


n
2 whats 4s
2 * = ,


r
„ 2 Fr


r
„


WES
n
-der 4


8
cf
a
By
£


388 - NEW Fo
ice of lands, and fo prevented improvements in agriculture. It onght to be obſerved,
In this connection, that theſe o. 7er-grown eſtates could be cultivated only by the hands
of tenants, who, baving no right in the foil, and no certain proſpect of continuing
upon the farm which they held at the will of their landlord, had no motives to make
thoſe expenſive improv ements, which, though not immediately productive, Would
rove very profitable in ſome future period. "The tenant, dependent on his landlord
bet his annual ſupport, eonfines his views and improvements to the preſent year;
while the independent freeholder, ſecure of his eftate for himſelf and his ſucceſſors,
carries his views into futurity, and early lays the foundation for growing improvement.
yt theſe obſtacles have been removed, in a great meaſure, by the revolution. The
nius of the government of this State, however, ſtill favours large monopolies of
dach, which have, for ſome years back, been granted without regard either to quantity
or ſettlement. The fine fertile country of the Mohawk, in Montgomery county, which
was formerly poſſeſſed by Sir William Johnſon, and other land jobbers, who were
enemies to their country, has been forfeited to the State, and is now ſplit up into fre-
| Hold eſtates, and ſettling with aſtoniſhing rapidity.
| The foregoing obſervations will in a great meaſure account for the great neglect of
manufactural improvements. Mr. Smith in his hiſtory of New York, more than thirty
years ago, obſerved, © It is much owing to the difproportion between the number of
our inhabitants, and the vaſt tracts ſtill remaining to be ſettled, that we have not as
yet entered upon ſcarcely any other manufactures than ſuch as are indiſpenſably neceſ-
 fary for our home convenience.” This fame caute has operated ever ſince 1 in the fame
way, though not of late in the ſame degree.
Grcat improvements in agriculture cannot be expocted (unleſs they are © made by a
few individuals who have a particular genius for that buſineſs) fo long as lands are
plenty and cheap; and improvements in manufactures never precede, but invariably
Flow improvements in agriculture. Theſe obſervations apply more particularly to
the country. The city of New York contains a great number of people, who are
employed in various kinds of manufaftures.. Among many other articles manufac-
tured. in this city are wheel carriages of all kinds, loaf ſugar, bread, beer, ſhoes and:
boots, ſaddlery, cabinct work, cutlery, hats, wool cards, clocks, watches, potters ware,
_ umbrellas, all kinds of mathematical and makical inſtruments, ſhips, aid every thing
neceſſary for their equipment. Glaſs works, and ſeveral iron works, have been. eftab-
| Hfhed in different parts of the country, but they never till lately have been very pro-
ductive, owing folely to the want of workmen, and the high price of labour, its ne-
ceſſary conſequence. The internal reſources and advantages for theſe manufactories,
ſuch as ore, wood, water, hearth ſtone, proper ſituations for bloomeries, forges, and alF
kinds of water works, are immenſe. There are ſeveral paper mills in the State, which:
are worked to advantage. The manufacture of maple ſugar, within a few years paſt,
has become an object of great importance. As many as 300 cheſts of 4oolb. each;
were made in the thinly inhabited county of Otſego, in the year 1791; befides.
large quantities, ſufficient for home conſumption, in other newly: ſettled parts of the
State.

TuapRE.] The ſituation of New Vork, with reſpect to foreign markets, has de-
cidedly the preference to any of the States. It has, at all ſeaſons of the year, a ſhort
and caſy acceſs to the ocean. We have already mentioned that it commands the trade
of a great proportion of the beſt ſettled and beſt cultivated parts of the United States.


New Lork has not been unmindful of her ſuperior local advantages, but has availed
herſelf of them to their full extent.


-


Their


NEW YORK. 389.


Their exports to the Weſt Indies are, bifenit, „Indian corn, apples, onions,
boards, ſtaves, horfes, fheep, butter, cheeſe, inked oyflers beef and pork. But wheat
is the ſtaple commodity of the State, of which no lets than 674,700 buſhels were ex-
ported in the year 1975, beſides 2,55 5 tons of breud, and 2,828 tons of flour. In-
tpectors of flour are appointed to prevent impoſitions, and to ſce that none is exported
but that which is deemed by them merchantable. Weſt India goods are received in
return for theſe. articles. Beſides the above mentioned articles, are exported flax-ſeed,
cotton wool, ſarſaparilla, coffee, indigo, rice, pig iron, bar iron, pot aſh, pearl aſh,
fars, deers ſkins, log-wood, fuſtic, mahogany, bees-wax, oil, Madeira wine, rum, tar,
pitch, turpentine, Whale fins, fifth, ſugars, molaffes, ſalt, tobacco, lard, &c. but moſt of
theſe articles are imported for re-exportation. The trade of this State has greatly in-
creaſed fince the revolution, and the balance is almoſt conſtantly in its favour. The
exports to foreign parts, for the year ending September zoth, 1791, confiſting prin-
cipally of the articles above enumerated, amounted to 2,516,197 dollars. Fhis State
owns 46,626 tons of ſhipping, beſides which ſhe finds employment for about 40, oo
tons of foreign veſlels. OHM» MVP FJC
MrpicIx AI SeRixGs. | The moſt noted ſprings in this State are thoſe of Saratoga:
they are eight or nine in number, ſituated in the margin of a marſh, formed by a
branch of Kayadaroſſora Creek, about twelve miles weſt from the confluence of Fiſh:
Creek and Hudſon's river. They are ſurrounded by a rock of a peculiar kind, formed
by petrifactions. One of them, however, more particularly attracts the attention; it
riſes above the ſurface of the earth five or fix feet, in the form of a pyramid. The
aperture in the top, which diſcovers the water, is perfectly cylindrical, of about nine
inches diameter. In this the water is about twelve inches below the top, except at the
time of its annual diſcharge, which is commonly in the beginning of ſummer. At.
all times it appears to be in as great agitation as if boiling in a pot, although it is
extremely cold. The fame appearances obtain in the other ſprings, except that
ou: ſurrounding rocks are of different figures, and the water flows regularly from-
By obſervation and experiment, the principał impregnation. of the water is found
to be a foſſile acid, which is predominant in the taſte. Tt is alfo ſtrongly impregnated
with a faline ſubſtance, which is very diſcernible in the taſte of the water, and in the
taſte and ſmell of the petrified tmatter about it. From the corroſive and diffolving-
nature of the acid, the water acquires a chalybeate property, and receives into its com-
poſition a portion of calearerous earth, which, when ſeparated, refembles an impure
magneſia. As the different ſprings have no eſſential variance in the nature of their
waters, but the proportions of the chalybeate impregnation, it is rendered probable that
they are derived from one common ſource, but flow in ſeparate channels, where they
have connection with metallic bodies in greater or leſs Proportions. The ſtomachs -
of ſome females, however, are ſo delicate, as to perceive a difference in the effect and
operation of the different ſpringss. | VVV |
The prodigious quantity of air contained in this water makes another diſtinguiſh- =
ing property of it. This air, firiving for enlargement, produces the fermentation and
violent action of the water before deſcribed. After the water has ſtood a ſmall time in
an open veſſel (no tight one will contain it) the air efcapes, the water becomes vapid,
and loſes all that life and pungency which diſtinguith it when firſt taken from the-
pool. The particles of diffolved earth are depoſited as the water flows off, which,
with the combation of the ſalts fixt air, concrete and form the rocks about the


ſprings. | |
iS As


Yu


4
f
:
:

*2J
” 1
of
1 *
"=

1
5
U
.*
*
.
:
*
| 4
4
7 2

F

wlll
ww
4
-

«

K. 1
5 » :
Wh

1
- WY
4
A 4
— 7 0
*

* by
RR
3

3
4 by,

1
a k
.

*

*

2 þ .
1 .
N 4
N

| .

:B .

$678
34 2 :

*
ka
-% 4
4
SB

5
B
£4
3 *

4 4
_

+1

- C $1
"RY
- <4

"i
1
- if
;
"af 1

1 of
* :
"KA
Sax''Y

*
-

3

[E- *

9

2 7

i oa
be

== *
a 5 4
o * a
5
ar

. * 1

« =

To”
<=
=_—

-% L

1 is is

1 7 *

Pa?

*
bo g

1

5
4
45 by
* 4

1 N

3.5 a.

A * :

a

"7 Wat

1 Y

* : %

Wh

SY

58

, -

_

A if hy
*
4

£%
SY
*

*

.

5 *

i5Y

1

*

3

=

*
48

Þ
HY

„ . A

"> N
41 4Y
% 5
1
+
3
7 N :
A 4
LY. «
n


5 DO 2d


390 NEW YORK.


was thrown into convulſions in leſs than half a minute, and gaſping, ſhewed figns of


_ revived and became lively. On immerſion again for a minute in the gas, the . was


in leſs than one minute, thrown into convulſive motions, made to pant for breath, and


into light and ſpongy bread, without the aid of yeaſt or leaven.


that produced by ordinary fermentation.


y
S
;
—
0
x
;
1
v1
=
3
=
N
1 -
;
3
A
3


4-- <> 4 p. "I; q Les 4
23232 , Y $8624 v
ah TY 4" |


=
2 ä 5 wk
GOL 4 W — - _


of the ſuitableneſs of the waters to their complaints, many have imprudently en


As to ) the quality of theſe medicinal ſprings, to moſt people who drink the waters,
they are at firſt very diſagreeable, having a ſtrong, brackiſh, briny taſte; but uſe in a
Pay meaſure takes off the nauſcouſneſs, and renders them palateable, an d to man
very grateful. Upon a few they operate as an emetic; upon moſt as cathartic and
diuretic. They may be taken in very large quantities without ſenſible injury, or di-
agreeable operation.


be following curious experiments made on theſe waters, are extracted from Dr.
Mitchell's Journal :


A young turkey held a few inches above the water in the crater of the lower ſpring,


approaching death ; but on removal from that Place, and expoſure: to the freſh air,


taken out languid and motionleſs. _
A ſmall dog put into the ſame cavity, and made to Lathes the contained air, was,


laſtly to loſe entirely the power to cry or move; when taken out, he was too weak


to ſtand, but ſoon, in the common air, acquired ſtrength enough to riſe aud ſtagger
away.


A trout recently caught, and briſkly ſwimming in a pail of brook water, was care-
Fully put into a veſſel juſt filled from the ſpring, the fiſh was inftantly agitated with


violent convulfions, tal loſt the capacity to move and poiſe itſelf, grew Rupid
and inſenfible, and in a few minutes was dead.


A candle repeatedly lighted and let down near the ſurface of the water, was ſuddenly
extinguiſhed, and not a veſtige of light or fire remained on the wick.
A bottle filled with the water and ſhaken emits ſuddenly a large quantity of aerial
matter, that either forces out the cork, or makes a way beſide or ou it, or burſts
hee

A quantity of wheaten flour IRE ne | with this water and kneaded into dou gh,
when made into cakes and put into a baking pan, roſe, during the application of heat,


From which it appears that the air extricated trom the water is preciſely ſimilar to


Some lime water, made of ſtalactites brought from the ian cave at Rhine-
bec, became immediately turbid on mixture with the ſpring water, but when the water
had been lately drawn, the precipitate was quickly re-diſſolved.


Some of the rock ſurrounding the ſpring, on being put into the fire, calcined to
quick-lime and ſlacked very well. :


When the acrial matter has evaporated, the water loſes its tranſparency and lets fall
a calcareous ſediment. _

Wbence it is true, that the gas is aerial acid, that the rock is lime-ftone; and that
by means of the former the water becomes capable of diflolvarg and ee the -
Jaftex.
Great numbers of people, under a variety of maladies, reſort to theſe ſprings, and

many find relief, and a conſiderable number a complete cure, particularly in bilious
diſorders, ſalt ms and relaxations. But as the waters are unfr iendly and even fatal
jn ſome diſorders, they ought to be uſed under the direction of a phyſician thoroughly
acquainted with the qualities of the waters, and the diſeaſes of the patients. Ignorant


away their lives in the uſe of them.“


NEW YORK. | 391
New Lebanon ſprings are next in celebrity to thoſe of Saratoga. New Lebanon
is a pleafant village, ſituated partly in a vale, and partly on the declivity of hills.
The pool is fituated on a. commanding eminence, overlooking the valley, and
ſurroinded with a few houſes, which Ard but indifferent accommodations tor the va-
tetudinarians who reſort here in ſearch of health. The waters have an agreeable tem-
perature, and are not unpleaſant to the taſte. From the experiments of Dr. Mitchell,
it appears that the water contains no Iron, no lime, no neutral ſalt, no fixed alr, no other
acid; that ſoap unites very well with the water, makes a good lather, and 18 excellent
for bleaching cloths; that the ſpring is a Therme, and has a plenty of lime- ſtone
in its neighbourhood. Its warmth is fo confiderable that during the coolneſs of the
morning, even in Auguſt, copious vapours are emitted by the pool, and the ſtream.
which utues from it, for a conſiderable diſtance ; but the evaporated. matter has no
peculiar odour. From all which particulars taken together, this theory rationally
reſults; a quantity of iron and brimſtone, ſomewhere within the mountain, are, by
reaſon of their chemical affinity, in the act of combining into martial pyrites.
During their action upon each other, beat is produced, and pure air abſorbed. The.
water running in the neighbourhood of this bed of pyrites borrows ſome of its heat,
and receives alſo that part of the atmoſpheric fluid winch remains after the con-
ſumption of the pure air, to wit, foul or azotic gas. But as the heat is excited in-
the bowels of a calcareous mountain, it happens, that- by the combination of the
line tone with a very ſmall portion of the ſulphur, à calcareous hepar is formed, which
flying off in the form of hepatic gas, gives an exceedingly ſlight tincture to the water of
the pool. Theſe waters are uſed with ſucceſs, it is faid, in ſcorbutic and rheumatic
diſeaſes, ſalt rheums, &c. but are pernicious to conſumptive perſons.
In the new town of Renſſalaer, nearly oppoſite the city of Albany, a meth.

_ cinal ſpring has lately been diſcovered, combining moſt of the valuable pro-
perties of the celebrated waters of Saratoga. Should further experiments con-
firm the favorable opinion already entertained of this ſpring, it will prove a
fortunate diſcovery for the city of Albany, and for the country adjoining, as well as.
for the invalids who annually refort to. e under many inconveniencies and
at a great expenſe. 5
Ihe ſalt ſprings we have already mentioned. The weight of a buſhel of the
ſalt made of theſe waters is 56 lb. and is equal in goodneſs to that * rom.
Turks Iſland. Th
MixgRALS AND Fossits.] This State emboſoms vaſt quantities of iron ore.
Naturaliſts obſerve that ore, in ſwamps and pondy ground, vegetates and in-
creaſes. There is a. filver. mine at Philipſburg, which produces virgin ſilver.
Lead is found in  Herkemer county, and ſulphur in Montgomery. Spar, zink
or ſpelter, a ſemi-metal, magnez, uſed in glazings, pyrites of a golden hne,
various kinds of copper ore, and lead and coal mines, are found in this State.
Alſo petrified wood, plaſter of Paris, iſinglaſs in ſheets, tale and cryſi.«s of
various kinds and colours, flint, aſbeſtos, and ſeveral other foffils. A ſmall black. |
ſtone has alſo been found, which vitriſies with a ſmall heat, and, it is ſaid, des 3
excellent glaſs.

LizrBRaky anD Huwaxs SocrRTIESs.] There are very few ſocieties for improve-
ment in knowledge or humanity in this State; and theſe few are in the city of New
Tork. The firſt is, The ſociety for promoting uſeful knowledge.” This ſo-
ciety is upon an eſtabliſhment fimilar to other philoſophical ſocieties in Europe


and America, but is not incorporated. The members mect once a month. Secondly,
be


r me Ry” LEM


29" "KS ee oY; 1 E Th |
* „ 54
W 0 4A 2 3


„ 3


39 NEW YORK:


college in the province of New York. The


BD
5
2
*
*
1
2 +
SZ
2
3 y
L .
5
,
1
1335
by
=
=
_ *
„ 6
*
"©
»
H ”
"=%Y
=
5
5
"©
bed
-
4 + *
$i
=
.
* -v# -
8
.
\ +
* 0
a
8
3
Ws
3
"
4H
*” «8
_=
I -
.
* 7
. 3 „
*
*
"7 %
.
E=
*
»>
PLE
* «27
Bo
$4
*
8
72 . ; — A
.” a
* .
Ip:
4 8
_- C
__ 8
VA
* <=
4
*
*
8 4 x
7
4
?
4 b
"v6 Y
1.
* |
>,
33%
bh *
. *
S044
—
#- 2
en:
1
7
1 .
3
«A *
. TM
.
2 7 :
% *
1
*
*
8
__—
+
[* *. 8
1
BS. -
_——_
FEY
N
1 .
7. 5%
—_— .
3
. £
FS
\in
+8
Pt
Bi
1 3
A
4M
.. +48
by
*
*
is
7 I
E
_


7
* =
4
* bs %
4
83
5
2 *
4 |
A1


The Society for the manumiſtion of ſlaves and protecting ſuch of them as have


been or may be liberated.” This ſociety meets once a quarter. Both theſe focicties
confiſt of gentlemen of the firſt character in the city, and of ſome in other parts


of the State. Beſides theſe there is a Marine ſociety, a ſociety for the relief of
poor Debtors confined in gaol. A manufacturing ſociety, an Agricultural ſociety


lately eſtablithed, of which the members of the legiſlature are ex officiis members,
and a Medical ſociety... Ot


LITERATURE, COLLEGES, ACADEMIES, 2 Until the year 1754, there was no
ate of literature, at that time, I ſhall
give in the words of their hiſtorian: Our ſchools are in the loweſt order; the


inſtructors want inſtruction, and through a long and ſhameful neglect of all the arts


and ſciences, our common \pcech is extremely corrupt, and the evidences of a bad
taſte, both as to thought and language, are viſible in all our proceedings, public:


and private.” This may have been a juſt repreſentation at the time when it was
written; but much attention has ſince been paid to education. There are eight
incorporated academies in different parts of the State; but many parts of the country


are yet either unfurniſhed with ſchools, or the ſchools which they have are kept
by low, ignorant men, which are worſe than none; for children had better remain
in 1gnorance than be illy taught: We are happy to add, that the legiſlature have
lately patronized collegiate and academic education, by granting a large gratuity
to the college and academies in this State, which, in addition to their former funds,
renders their endowments handſome, and adequate to their expenditures. : |
King's College, in the city of New York, was principally founded by the voluntary
contributions of the inhabitants of the province, aſſiſted by the General Aſſembly,
and the corporation of Trinity Church; in the year 1754, a royal charter (and
grant of money) being then obtained, incorporating a number of gentlemen therein
mentioned, by the name of The governors of the college of the province of New
York, in the city of New York, in America ;” and granting to them and their ſuc-


_ teffors for ever, amongſt various other rights and privileges, the power of conferring
all fuch degrees as are uſually conferred by either of the E


ngliſh Univerſities. =»
By the charter it was provided that the prefident ſhall always be a member of
the church of England, and that a form of prayer collected from the liturgy of that
church, with a particular prayer for the college, ſhall be daily uſed, morning and
evening, in the college chapel; at the ſame time, no teſt of their religious perſuaſion
was required from any of the fellows, profeſſors, or tutors; and the advantages of
education were equally extended to ſtudents of all denominations. - TIED +.
The building (which is only one third of the intended ſtructure) confiſts of an
elegant ſtone edifice, three complete ſtories high, with four ſtair-caſes, twelve
apartments in each, a chapel, hall,” library, muſeum, anatomical theatre, and a
ſchool for experimental philoſophy. © „


The college is ſituated on a dry gravelly foil, about 150 yards from the bank
of 1 river, which it overlooks; commanding a moſt extenſive and beautiful
proſpect. FOR 154 ; 3
the revolution, the legiſlature paſſed an act conſtituting 21 gentlemen
(of whom the Governor and Lieutenant-governor for the time being are members
ex officits) a body corporate and politic, by the name of. © The regents of the uni-
verſity of the State of New York.” They are entruſted with the care of literature
in general in the State, and have power to grant charters of incorporation for ys


NEW YORK. ON di: I


colleges and academies throughout the ſtate, are to viſit theſe inſtitutions as often
as they ſhall think proper, and report their ate to the legiſlature once a year.
King's College, which we have already deſcribed, is now called Col uxgTA
CoLLE6E. This college, by an act of the legiſſature paſſed in the ſpring of 1787,
was put under the care of 24 Gentlemen, who are a body corporate, by the name
and ſtyle of © The Truſtees 6 of Columbia College in the city of New York.” This
body poſſeſs all the powers veſted in the governors of King's college before the
revolution, or in the regents of the univerſity ſince the revolution, fo far as their
power reſpected this inſtitution. No regent can be a truſtee of any particular
college or academy in the State. The regents of the uni uyerſity have power to.
confer the higher degrees, and them only.

Ihe college edifice has received no additions ſince the peace. The funds, exclu-
ſive of the Fiverat grant of the legiſlature, amount to between twelve and thir-
| teen—thoufand pounds currency, the income of which is ſufficient for preſent
exigencies.

This college is now in a thriving ſtate, and has about 100 ſtudents in the four
| claſſes, beſides medical ſtudents. The officers of inſtruction and immediate. =
government are a preſident, profeſſor of mathematics and natural philoſophy, a
profeſſor of logic and geography, and a profeſſor of languages. A complete
medical ſchool has been lately annexed to the college, aud able profeſſors appoint-
ed by the truſtees in every branch of that important ſcience, who regularly teach
their reſpective branches with reputation. The number of medical ſtudents is
about 50, and increaſing. The library and muſeum were deſtroyed during the war..
The philoſophical apparatus is new and complete.

Of the eight incorporated academies, one is at Flatbuſh in King s county, on
Long Ifland, four miles from Brooklyn-ferry. It is. fituated in a pleaſant, healthy
village. The building is large, handſome, and convenient, and is called Eraſmus:
Hall. The academy 1 1s Bouriſhing under the care of a principal and other ſubordinate
inſtructors.

| There is another at Eaſt Hampton, on the eaſt end of Long Iſland, by the
name of CLIxTON Acapgmy. The others are in different parts of the State. Be-
ſides theſe there are ſchools eſtabliſhed and maintained by the voluntary contributions
of the parents. A ſpirit for literary Dy is evidently diffuſing its influence
throughout the State.

RELIOIOx.] The conſtitution of this State provides for © the free exerciſe and en-
joyment of religious profefſion and worſhip, without diſcrimination or preference
within the State, for all mankind. Provided that the liberty of conſcience hereby
granted, ſhall not be ſo conſtrued as to excuſe acts of licentiouſneſs, or Juſtify
* practices inconfiſtent with the peace and ſafety of the State.”

| The various religious denominations in this State are the following; En gliſn
Preſbyterians, Dutch reformed, Baptiſts, Epiſcopalians, Friends or Quakers,
_ German, Lutherans, Moravians, Methodiſts, Roman Catholics, Jews, Shakers,
and a few of - the followers. of Jemima Wilkinſon. The Shakers are principally
ſettled: at New Lebanon, and the followers of Jemima Wilkinſon at Geneva,
about twelve miles S. W. of the Cayoga Lake. For the peculiar ſentiments of theſe:
various religious: ſects ſee the general Account of the United States, under the
article Religion.
In April 1784 the legiſlature of this State paſſed an act enabling all religious
denominations to appoint truſtees, not leſs * three or more than nine, Who thall
3 | N


394 NEW YORK.


be a body corporate, for the purpoſe of taking care of the te mporalities of their
reſpoctixe congregations, and for the other purpoſes therein mentioned. |

The miniſters of every denomination in the State are ſupported by the voluntary
contributions of the people, raiſed generaily by ſubicription, or by a tax
upon the pews; except the Dutch churches in New York, Skenectady, and
Kingſton, which have, except the two laſt, large eſtates confirmed by charter.
The Epitcopal church alto in New York. poſlelles a very large eſtate in and near
the cit

Cerro ION . AND CorrTs or Jusrick.] The preſent conſtitution of the State
was eſtabliſhed by convention authorized for the purpoſe, April 2oth, 1977.

The ſupreme legiſlative powers of the State are veſted in two branches, a Senate
and Aſſembly. The members of the ſenate are elected by the freeholders of the State,
who poſſeſs freehold eſtates to the value of 1ool. clear of debts. For the purpoſe of
electing tenators, the State 1s divided into four great diſtricts, each of which chooſes
1 certain number, viz. x


[New York, ]=1 ?
1 8 | Suffolk, 8 ; 3
Southern diſtrict, includ- | Weſt Cheſter, (% Middle Putcheſs,] .
i Ulſter, Six.
ing the counties of - King's, 8 Diſtrict Orange.
| Queen? 5 —
{ Richmond, 3
Albany,) a... { Waſhington, ?
Dire ſ Mont- Fix. Diſtrict Cumberland, Three.
1 1 gomery 1 1 9


The ſenators are divided by lot into four claſſes, fix in each dad: and numbered,
firſt, ſecond, third, and fourth. The ſeats of the firſt claſs are vacated at the expiration
of one year ; the ſecond, at the expiration of the next, &c. and their places filled
by new elections. Thus a ſmall change is made in the ſenate every year; but three
fourths of the members remaining preſerve a knowledge of the buſineſs of a former
ſeſſion. A majority of the ſenate is neceſſary to do buſineſs, and each branch of
the legiſlature has a negative upon the other.

The legiſlature can at any time alter this diviſion of the State for the choice of
ſenators ; and an increaſe of electors in any diſtrict, to the amount of one twenty-

fourth of the electors in the whole State, entitles the diſtrict to another ſenator.
But the number of ſenators can never exceed one hundred.

The affembly of the State is compoſed of repreſentatives from the ſey eral counties,

choſen Annually 1 in May in the following proportion:


For the city and county of New Vork, nine.
For the city and county of Albany, ſaver.


For Dutcheſs, - 7 For Richmond,
Weſt Cheſter, 6 Montgomer 7
Ulſter, - - 6 | Waſhington,
Suffolk, 5 and Clinton,

. Queen's, — — Columbia,
Orange, — 4 | Cumberland, = :
King's, - 2


| Gloucefler, —


NEW YORK. 395


By the conſtitution, however, it is ordered, that at the end of ſeven years after the
termination of the late war, a cenſus of the electors and inhabitants ſhall be taken,
and the repreſentation apportioned ac cording, to the number of electors in each
count
Ev oy male inhabitant of full age, who has reſided in the State fix months preceding
the day ot election, and poſſeſling a frechold to the value of twenty pounds in the
county where he is to give his vote, or has rented a tenement therein of the yearly
value of forty ſtullings, and has been rated and actually paid taxes, is entitled to vote
for repreſentatives in Aſſembly - The freedom of the cities of New York and Albany
likewiſe entitles a perſon to the privilege of voting for members of Aſſembly in the city
or county where he refides. The method of voting is now by ballot, but ſubj ect to
alteration by the legiſlature. The houſe of Aſſembly, a majority of Which! © henry.
to proceeq>to buſineſs, chooſes its own ſpeaker, and is a judge of its own privileges.
In all debates on great queſtions, the houſe reſolves "ſelf into a committee of the
whole; the ſpeaker leaves the chair, and a chairman is appointed for the occaſion. .
After the buſineſs is completed, the committee rites, the ſpeaker takes the chair, and
the chairman reports to the houſe the proceedings of the committee. How far this
| imitation of the Britiſh Houſe of Commons is ſupported by good reaſons it may not be
eaſy to determine. Certain it is, that in other legiſlatures, the proceedings are e
well conducted without this formality. *
The number of BIRT: 18 limited to three hundred. The preſent number is
ſixty- five. |
The ſupreme executive power of the State i is veſted in a \ governor, (in whoſe hes
a deputy-governor is appointed to ſerve) choſen once in three years by the freemen of
the State; the lientenant-governor is, by his office, prefident of the ſenate; and,
upon an equal diviſion of voices, has a caſting vote; but has no voice on other
occaſions. The governor has not a ſeat in the legiſlature ; but as a member of the
council of reviſion and council of appointment, he has a vaſt influence in the State.
The council of reviſion. is compoſed of the chancellor, the judges of the ſupreme
court, or any of them, and the governor.” This council is empowered to reviſe all.
bills which have paſſed the two houſes of the legiſlature, and if it thall appear to the
council that ſuch bills ought not to paſs into laws, they ſhall be returned to the houſe
in which they originated, with the objections of the counciÞ in writing. The houſe
ſhall then proceed to reconſider the bills, with the objections, and if notwithſtanding,
two thirds of the houſe ſhall agree to the bills, they ſhall be ſent to the other houte,
where they ſhall be reconſidered and the aſſent of two thirds of the members pals them.
into laws. But if a bill is not returned in ten days, it becomes a law of courſe.

The ſubordinate officers of ſtate are appointed by the council of appointment, which is
compoſed of one ſenator from each diſtrict, to be choſen annually by the legiſlature,
with the governor, . or in his abſence, the lieutenant-governor or the preſident of the.
ſenate, who has a caſting vote only.
All military officers hold their commiſſions during pleaſure. The chancellor, the
judges of the ſupreme court, and the firſt judge of each county court, hold their offices
during good behaviour. T heſe officers can hold no other office at the ſame time, except
that of delegate to Congreſs.

Sheriffs and coroners are. appointed annually, and . can 0 but four years
ſucceſſively.
A court of errors and impeachment is inſtituted, CE: of the preſident of the.


ſenate, the ſenate, chancellor and . judges of the ſupreme. court, or the major part of.
| 3E 2 them,


395 "NEW TORX.
them, under the regulation of the legiſlature. The power of impeachment is veſted in
the Houſe of Repreſentatives, and the members on trial muſt be ſworn.
. Beſides the court of errors and impeachment, there is, firſt, a court of chancery, con-
fiſting of a chancellor appointed by the council of appointment, who holds his office
during good behaviour, or until he arrive at the age of ſixty years. Secondly, a ſupreme
court, the judges of which are appointed in the ſame manner and for the ſame time as
the chancellor. This is a circuit court. "Thirdly, county courts, held in each county,
the judges of which are appointed in the manner above mentioned, and the firſt judge
holds his office during good behaviour, or until he arrive at the age of fixty years. Be-
| fides theſe, there are the juſtices' courts, court of probates, court of admiralty, court
of exchequer, a court of oyer and terminer and general gaol delivery, and court of
quarter ſeſſions. Yo VVV .
The practice in the ſupreme court, to which an appeal lies from the courts below, is
in imitation of the courts of common pleas and king's bench in England.
All free governments abound with lawyers. Where men have the privilege of
thinking and acting for themſelves, they will involve themſelves in debt and quarrel
with their neighbours. In proportion to the debts and diſputes of the people, lawyers
will multiply. Of theſe America furniſhes a plentiful growth, and New York has its
ſhare, as it contains not lefs than 120 licenſed attornies. In this State, the practice of
law is conformed to the Engliſh mode, and is perhaps better regulated than in the other
States. The ſeveral degrees in the profeſſion, the number of critical examinations that
candidates are obliged to paſs through before they can be admitted as counſellors in the
| higher courts, together with the time of ſtudy required by the rules of admiſſion, render
an acceſs to the firſt honors of the bar ſo difficult as to preclude ignorant pretenders to
the important ſcience of law. New York can boaſt of many eminent characters in all
the learned profeflions, and has furniſhed America with ſome of her moſt able legiſ-
lators. It is, however, to be feared that a too rigid adherence to the forms of legal
proceſs in England has ſometimes perplexed the road to juſtice, and prevented
—_— improvements in the practice, not only of this but of moſt of the other
States. e ;

_ Mirrraxy STRENGTH. | By official returns of the militia of this State, made to the
_ governor by the adjutant-general, it appears that the total number in 1789, was 42,679;
1790—44, 259; 1791—50,399. Beſides theſe there are as many as 5000 or 6000 of
the militia in the new ſettlements, who are not yet organized. „
Fons, 1 Theſe are principally in ruins. The demolition of the fort in the
ity of New York has been mentioned. Remains of the fortifications on Long Iſland,
Vork Ifland, White Plains, Weſt Point, and other places, are ſtill viſible. Fort
Stanwix, built by the Britiſh in 1758, at the expenſe, it is ſaid, of 60,0001. is 107 miles
weſtward of Skenectady, on an artificial eminence bordering on the Mohawk river,
and in travelling this diſtance, you paſs Fort Hunter, Fort Anthony, Fort Plain, Fort
Herkemer, and Fort Schuyler. As you proceed weſtward of Fort Stanwix, you paſs
Fort Bull, and Fort Breweton, at the weft end of Oneida Lake. Fort George is at the
ſouth end of Lake George. At the point where Lake George communicates with Lake
Champlain is the famous poſt of Ticonderoga, by which word the Canadians under-
ſtand noiſy, The works at this place are in ſuch a ſtate of dilapidation, that a ſtranger
can ſcarcely form an idea of their conſtruction. They are, however, ſituated on ſuch
high ground as to command the communication between the lakes George and Cham-
plain. Oppoſite, on the ſouth ſide of the water that empties out of Lake George, is a


mountain, to appearance inacceſſible, called Mount Defiance, where General Burgoyne


1 NEW YORK. 397
in the late war, with a boldneſs, ſecrecy, and diſpatch almoſt unparalleled, conveyed
a number of cannon, ſtores, and troops. The cannon were raiſed by large braſs tackles
from tree to tree, and from rock to rock, over dens of rattle-ſnakes, to the ſummit,
which entirely commands the works of Ticonderoga. This circumftance muſt ever
be conſidered as a full juſtification of General Sinclair's ſudden retreat with the Ame-
rican army, and the obſervation which he made on his trial, in his own defence, that,
« though he had loſt a poſt, he had faved a State,” was afterwards verified,
Crown Point is- fifteen miles north of Ticonderoga on Lake Champlain. The fort
at this place, in which a Britiſh garriſon was always kept, from the reduction of Canada
till the American Revolution, was the moft regular, and the moſt expenſive of any
ever conſtructed, and fupported by the Britiſh government in North America. The
walls are of wood and earth, about ſixteen feet high, and twenty feet thick, and
nearly 1530 yards ſquare ; ſurrounded by a deep and broad ditch cut through a ſolid
rock. It ftands on a rifing ground perhaps 200 yards from the lake, with which there
was a covered way, by which the garriſon could be ſupplied with water in time of a
ſiege. The only gate opens on the north towards the lake, where there was a draw-
bridge. On the right and left, as you enter the fort, are a row of ſtone barracks, not
inelegantly built, ſufficient to contain 1500 or 2000 troops; the parade is between
them, and is a flat ſmooth rock. There were ſeveral outworks, which are now in
- ruins, as is the principal fort, except the walls, and the walls of the barracks, which
fill remam;'/ 7 & 5j Ry We 5
| Banks.| There are two or three incorporated Banks in the city of New York,
beſides a branch of the national bank, and one has lately been eftabliſhed in the
city of Albany. FE REEL . RE PD gr ee od po PEO,
| Move or RarsING INTERNAL Taxes. | The legiſlature fix upon the ſum to be
raiſed, and apportion it among the ſeveral counties. This being done the fupervifors,
one from each townſhipin the reſpective counties, aſſemble and 3 to each townſhip
its proportion of the quota of the county. The ſuperviſor and aſſeſſors in each town-
ſhip then apportion their quota among the individuals of the townſhip, according to
the value of their real and perſonal eſtates. The tax, thus laid, is collected by the
collector of the townſhip, and lodged with the county treaſurer, who tranſmits it to the
treaſurer of the State. e N EE 5 5
Fixx 2 A variety of circumſtances have conſpired to fill the treaſury of this
State, and wholly to fuperſede the neceſſity of taxation for ſeveral years paſt; fir ſt,
confiſcations and economical management of that property; ſecond, ſales of unappro-
priated lands; and third, a duty on imports previous to the eſtabliſhment of the federal
government. The two former were ſold for continental certificates, at a time when the
credit of the State was perhaps above the par of the Union, which was the cauſe of
getting a large ſum of the public debt into the treaſury of the State at a depreciated
value. Theſe certificates, ſince the funding ſyſtem came into operation, added to the
aſſumed State debt, a vaſt quantity of which was alſo in the treaſury, forms an enor-
mous maſs of property, yielding an annuity of upwards of 100,000 dollars; and when
the deferred debt ſhall become a fix per cent. ſtock, this annuity will be increaſed to
upwards of 200,000 dollars. 2 1
The ability of the State, therefore, is abundantly competent to aid public inſtitutions
of every kind, to make roads, erect bridges, open canals, and to puſh every kind of
umprovement to the moſt deſirable length. It could be wiſhed, that thoſe citizens who
were exiled during the war, and whoſe property was expoſed during its continuance to
wanton depredations, could be thought of by a legiſlature pofſeſſing ſo fully the *


398 NEW YORK.


of difcrimirating this unhappy clais: of ſufferers, and making them compenſation for


their voluntary tacnfices. |


_ CrumosrTits.] In the county of Montgomery is a ſmall, rapid ſtream, emptying
into Scroon Lake, weſt of Lake George : ; it runs under a hill, the baſe of which is 60
or 70 yards diaracter, forming a moft curious and beautiful arch in the rock, as white as
ſow. The fury of the w ater and the roughneſs of the bottom, added to the terrific
noiſe within, has hitherto prevented any perſon from paſſing through the chaſm.

In the townſhip of Williborough, in Clinton county, is a curious Split Rock. A


Point of a mountain, which projected about 30 yards into Lake Champlain, appears


to have been broken by ſome violent ſhock of nature. It is removed from the main
rock or mountain about twenty feet, and the oppoſite ſides ſo exactly ſuit each other,
that one needs no, other proof of their having been once united. The point broken off
contains about half an acre, and is covered with wood. The height of the rock on
each fide of the fiſſure is about twelve feet. Round this point is a ſpacious bay,
ſheltered from the ſouth-weſt and north-weſt winds by the ſurrounding hills and woods.


On the weſt fide are four or five finely cultivated farms, which altogether, at certain


ſeaſons, and in certain ſituations, form one of the moſt beautiful landſcapes i imagi-
nable. Sailing under this coaſt for ſeverał miles before you come to Split Rock, the
mountains, rude and barren, ſeem to hang over the paſſenger and threaten deſtruction;
—A water, boundleſs to the fight, lies before him; man feels his own littleneſs, and
infidelity itſelf pays an unwilling homage to the Creator. Inſtantly and unexpectedly
the ſcene changes, and peeping with greedy eye through the fiſſure, nature preſents


to the view a filver baſon, a verdant lawn, a humble cottage, a golden harveſt, a


_ majeſtic foreſt, a lofty mountain, an azure ſky, * one above another “ in juſt


gradation to the amazing whole.” *


A few months ago a very extraordinary cavern, at a i place called by the Indians,
Sepaſcot, on the eſtate of the Miſs Rutſens, at Ryhnbeck, in Dutcheſs county, was


diſcovered. A lad, by chance, paſſing near its entrance, which lay between two huge


”


rocks on the declivity of a ſteep hill, on prying into the gloomy receſs, ſaw the top of


a ladder, by which he deſcended about ten feet, and found himſelf in a ſubterraneous
apartment, more capacious than he then choſe to inveſtigate. He found, however, that
it had been the abode of perſons, who probably during the war not daring to be ſeen
openly, had taken ſhelter there, as bits of cloth and pieces of leather were ſcattered
about its floor. He then left the place, and little more was thought of it, until three
weeks ago, the writer of this account made one of a large party, who went trom the ſeat
of a gentleman in the neighbourhood on purpoſe to examine it. We tound its
entrance much ſmaller than we expected, and with ſome difficulty gained the ladder,
by means of which the remaining deſcent was made tolerably eaſy. Two young ladies
were with us, who had heroiſm enough to make the trophimium tour with us. We
had fix candles to ſcrutinize the receſſes of the apartment, where, perhaps, light, for
upwards of five thouſand years before, had never gleamed. -We tound .the cave
divided by a narrow paſſage into two diviſions ; the firſt being about ſeventeen feet in
length, and ſo low that a child of eight years old could but juſt walk upright in it; the
breadth is about eight or ten feet. 'The ſecond between twelve and fourteen feet in
length, but much higher and broader than the firſt. In this laſt room we found that
three bats had taken up their winter Warters, and hung ſuſpended from the roof, as it


* Mr. M. L. Woolſey of Plattſburgh. To this ingenious gentleman, the author | is indebted for much
valuable information concerning Clinton county, d


3 „ = : | were,


NEW YORK. 399
were, by the very tips of the wings. But what makes the cave peculiarly worthy of
notice is the petritying quality of the water, that by a gentle oozing, continually drops
from every part of the ceiling, the whole of which exactly reſembles a mill gutter in a
froſty morning, with a thouſand icicles impending. Theſe concretions are formed by
the water, and probably are conſtantly. increaſing. They have in almoſt every reſpect
the appearance of icicles, and may be broken off by the hand if not mote than two
inches in circumference. They appear of a confiftence much like indurated lime,
almoſt tranſparent, and are all perforated quite through the whole length, with a hole
of the ſize of that in a tobacco pipe, through which aperture the water unremittedly
drops, although very flow. When a perſon is in the remoteſt room, and the lights are
removed into the firſt, thoſe pendant drops of water make an appearance more ſplendid
than can well be imagined. Some of thoſe ſtony icicles have at length reached the
bottom of the cave, and now form pillars, ſome of more than two feet in girth, of the
appearance of marble, and almoſt as hard. They put one in mind of Solomon's Jachin.
and Boaz, imagination very eafily giving them pedeſtals and chapiters and even
 wreathen work. ESA tus „FF |
But what we moſt admired, was the ſkeleton of a large ſnake, turned into ſolid ſtone
by the petriſying quality of the water before mentioned. It was with ſome difficulty
torn up with an axe from the rock it lay upon (ſome of which adhered to it) and is now.
in the poſſeſſion of the relate. 3332 WHT Os 0
We found the inmoſt receſſes of this cavern very warm, and experienced the want of
free air by a difficult reſpiration, although the candles burnt very clear. ”'*
InDians.] The body of the Six Nations inhabit the weſtern parts of this State.
The principal part of the Mohawk tribe reſide on Grand river, in Upper Canada ; and
there are two villages of Senecas on the Allegany river, near the north line of Pennfyl-
vania, and a few Delawares and Skawaghkees, on Bnftaloe Creek. Including theſe,
and the Stockbridge and Mohegan Indians, who have migrated and ſettled in the
vicinity of Oneida, there are, in the Six Nations, according to an accurate eſtimate.
lately made by the Rev. Mr. Kirkland, miſſionary among them, 6330 ſouls. He
adds, that among theſe there is comparatively but very few children.
Ihe following extract of a letter from Mr. Kirkland to the author will give the
reader an idea of the characters, which, according to Indian tradition, are excluded
from the happy country: The region of Pure Spirits, the Five Nations call Eſianane.
The only characters which, according to their traditions, cannot be admitted to parti-
cipate of the pleaſures and-delights of -this happy country, are reduced to three, viz.
1amcides,; the diſobedient to the counſels of the chiefs ; and ſuch as put away their wives
on account of pregnancy. According to their tradition, there is a gloomy, fathomleſs
gulph, near the borders of the delightful manſions of Eſkanane, over which all good
and brave ſpirits paſs with ſafety, under the conduct of a faithful and ſkilful guide
appointed for that purpoſe ; but when a ſuicide, or any of the above-mentioned cha-
racters, approach this gulph, the conductor, who poſſeſſes a moſt penetrating eye,
inſtantly diſcovers their ſpiritual features and character, and denies them his aid,
. Aligning his reaſons. They will, however, attempt to croſs upon a ſmall pole, Which,
before they reach the middle, trembles and ſhakes, till preſently down they fall with.
rid ſhrieks. In this dark and dreary gulph, they ſuppoſe refides a great dog, ſome
Wy a dragon, infected with the itch, which makes him perpetually reſtleſs and ſpiteful.
te guilty inhabitants of this miſerable region, all catch this diſeaſe of the great dog,
and grope and roam from ſide to ſide of their gloomy manſion in perpetual torments.
| Someumes


—


0 Maſſachuſetts Magazine for November, 1792.


4⁰⁰ NEW YORK.


Sometimes they approach fo near the happy fields of Eſkanane, that they can hear the
ſongs and dances of their former companions. This only ſerves to increaſe their tor-
ments, as they can diſcern no light, nor difcover any paſſage by which they can gain
accets to them. They ſuppoſe ideots and dogs go into the ſame gulph, but have a more
comfortable apartment, where they enjoy ſome little light.” Mr. Kirkland adds, that
- ſeveral other nations of Indians with whom he has converſed on the ſubject, have nearly
the ſame traditionary notions of a future ſtate. They almoſt univerſally agree in this,
that the departed ſpirit is ten days in its paſſage to their happy elyfium, after it Teaves
the body; ſome of them ſuppoſe its courſe is towards the ſouth ; others that it aſcends
from ſome lofty mountain. 78 18 R
I be Oreidas inhabit on Oneida creek, twenty-one miles weft of Fort Stanwix.
The Taſcaroras migrated from North Carolina and the frontiers of Virginia, and
were adopted by the Oneidas, with whom they have ever ſince lived. They were ori-
ginally of the ſame nation. . EE Le SEG e
II The Senecas inhabit on the Cheneſſee river, at the Cheneſſee caſtle. They have two
towns of ſixty or ſeventy ſouls each, on French Creek, in Pennſylvama ; and another
town on Buffaloe Creek, attached to the Britiſh ; two ſmall towns on Allegany river,
3 to the Americans. Obeil or Cornplanter, one of the Seneca chiefs, reſided
— 8 5 | Dares PINS Ts
The Moharoks were acknowledged by the other tribes, to uſe their own expreſſion,
to be the true old heads of the confederacy ;” and were, formerly, a powerful tribe,
inhabiting on the Mohawk river. As they were ſtrongly attached to the Johnſon
family on account of Sir William Johnſon, they e to Canada, with Sir John
Johnſon, about the year 1776. There is now only one family of them in the State,
and they live about a mile from Fort Hunter. The father of this family was drowned
in the winter - of 1788. 5 OATS FARES fic OH WO TORE FO OM
All the confederated tribes, except the Oneidas and Tuſcaroras, ſided with the Britiſh
in the late war, and fought againſt the Americans. : 1
The Onondagas live near the Onondaga lake, about twenty-five miles from the Oneida
lake. In the ſpring of 1779, a regiment of men were ſent from Albany, by General
J. Clinton, againſt the Onondagas. This regiment ſurprized their town, took thirty-
three priſoners, killed twelve or fourteen, and returned without the loſs of a man. A
party of the Indians were at this time ravaging the American frontiers. —
There are very few of the Delaware tribe in this State. ©
The Five Confederated Nations were ſettled: along the banks of the Suſquehannah;.
and In the adjacent country, until the year 1779, when General Sullivan, with an
army of 4000 men, drove them from their country to Niagara, but could not bring
them to action. They waited, but waited in vain, for the aſſiſtance of the elements,
or, as they expreſſed themſelves, for the aſſiſtance of the Great Spirit. Had heavy
rains fallen while General Sullivan's army was advanced into their country, perhaps
few of his ſoldiers would have eſcaped, and none of their baggage, ammunition, or
artillery. This expedition had a good effect. General Sullivan burnt ſeveral of their
towns and deſtroyed their proviſions. Since this irruption into. their country, their
former habitations have been moſtly deſerted, and many of them have gone to Canada.
On the 13th of November, 1787, John Livingſton, Eſq. and four others, obtained
of the Six Nations of Indians a leaſe for 999 years, on a - yearly rent reſerved of 2000
dollars, of all the country included in the following limits, viz. Beginning at a place
commonly known by the name of Canada creek, about ſeven miles weſt of Fort Stan-
wir, now Fort Shuyler, thence north-caſtwardly to the line of the province of. *
75 LOOROR | | | 1. e os ene


NEW YORRE. 40¹


thenee along . ſaid line to the Penn ylvania line; thence eaſt on the ſaid Ki or Penn-
1ylvania line, to the line of Ne ſo called by the State of New York ; thence
along the ſaid line of property to Canada Creek aforeſaid. And on the 18th of Jan.
1788, the ſame perſons obtained a leaſe of the Oneida Indians for 999 years, on a rent
reſerved for the firſt year, of 1200 dollars, and increafing it at the rate of 100 dollars
a year, until it amounts to 1500 dollars, of all the tract of land commonly called the
Oneida country, except a reſervation of ſeveral tracts ſpecified in the leaſe. But theſe
leaſes having been obtained without the conſent of the legiſlature of the State, the ſenate
and aſſembly, in their ſeſſion, March, 1788, refolved, © That the ſaid leaſes are pur-
chaſes of lands, and therefore, that by the conſtitution of this State, the ſaid leaſes are
not binding on the ſaid Indians, and are not valid.” Since this a treaty has been con-
cluded with the ſaid Indians, the bargain of the leaſes annulled, and all the Tountry
purchaſed of the natives, except a reſervation to the Oneidas, Cay ugas, and Onondagas,
defined by certain marks and boundaries.

IsLanDs.| There are three iſlands of note belonging to this State, viz. York Iſland,
which has already been deſcribed, Long Iſland, and Staten Iſland.

Long Iſland extends 140 miles, and terminates with Montauk point. It i is not
more than ten miles in breadth on a medium, and is ſeparated from Connecticut by
Long Iſland ſound. The iſland is divided into three counties; wang s, Queen's, and
Suffolk.
King's County lies at the weſt end of Long Iſland, oppoſite New York, and is not
above ten miles long, and eight broad. The inhabitants are principally Dutch, and
live well. It contains a number of pleaſant villages, of which Flatbuth, Brooklyn, and
Bedford, are the principal. 5

Queen's County lies next to King's as you proceed . It is about thirty miles
long and twelve broad. Jamaica, Newtown, Hampſtead, in which is a handſome
court houſe, and Oyſterbay, are the principal villages in this county.

Suffolk County is about 100 miles long and ten broad, and comprehends all the
eaſtern part of the iſland, and ſeveral little iſlands adjoining ; viz. Shelter Iſland,
Fiſher's Iſland, Plum Iſland, and the Ifle of White. lis principal towns are Hunt:
ington, Southampton, Smithtown, Brook Haven, Eaft Hampton, in which is the
academy, Southhold, and Bridge Hampton.

The ſouth fide of the iſland is flat land, of a light ſandy foil, pondered on the ſea
coaſt with large tracts of ſalt meadow, extending from the weſt point of the iſland to
Southampton. This ſoil, however, is well calculated for raiſing grain, eſpecially
Indian corn. The north fide of the iflandis hilly, and of a ſtrong ſoil, adapted to the
culture of grain, hay, and fruit. A ridge of hills extends from Jamaica to Southhold.
Large herds of cattle feed en TOON Plain, and on the falt marſhes upon the
Jouth fide of the ifland. |
_ Hampſtcad plain, in Queen! s county, is a curioſity. It is fixteen miles in length,
eaſt ani. welt, and ſeven or eight miles wide. The foil is black, and to appearance
rich, and yet it was never known to have any natural growth, but a kind of wild graſs,
and a few ſhrubs. It is frequented by vaſt numbers of plover. Rye 1 tolerably
well on ſome parts of the Plain. The moſt of it lies common for ca horſes, bg
ſheep. As there is nothing to impede the proſpect in the whole length of this plain, it *
has a curious but tireſome effect upon the eye, not unlike that of the ocean.

Eaſt of this plain, on the middle of the iſland, is a barren heath, overgrown with
ſhrub oaks and * in Which it is 1 there are ſeveral thouſand deer. It is
3F *


*


402 NEW IO RK.
frequented alſo by a great number of growſe, a very delicious bird. Laws have been
patſed for the preſervation of theſe birds and the deer.

It is remarkable that on Montauk point, at the eaſt end of the iſland, there are no
flies. Between this point and Eaſt Hampton is a beach, three quarters of a mile wide,
in the center of which was found, about fifty years ago, under a ſand hilt which was
e up by the wind, the entire ſkeleton of a large whale, * half a mile from

e Water.


There are very * rivers upon the iſland. The largeſt is Peakonock, which riſes
about ten miles weſt of a place called River-head, where the court houſe ſtands, and
runs eaſterly into a large bay dividing Southhold from Southampton. In this bay are

Robin and Shelter iſlands.

The ſouth fide of the iſland is indented with numerous ſtreams of various 905
which fall into a large bay, two or three miles over, formed by a beach, about eighty |
rods wide, which_appears like a border to the iſland, extending from the welt end of it
to Southampton. Through this beach, in various places, are inlets of ſuch depth as to
admit of veſlels of ſixty or ſeventy tons. This bay was formerly freſh water. Oyſters,
clams, and fiſh of various kinds, are caught with eaſe, and in great plenty in this bay,
with ſeines, during the winter ſeaſon. It is not uncommon to ſee forty or fifty veſſels
here loading with oyſters at the ſame time. And what is almoſt incredible, though I
was told of it by two gentlemen of truth, and who were well informed as to the matter,
thirty waggon loads of baſs have been caught i in this bay at one draught.

. pond lies about the center of the iſland, between Smithtown and
Iſlip, and is about a mile in circumference. This pond has been found by obſervation,
to riſe gradually for ſeveral years, until it had arrived to a certain height, and then to
fall more rapidly to its loweſt bed ; and thus it 1s continually ebbing and flowing. The
_ cauſe of this curious phenomenon has never been inveſtigated. Two miles to the ſouth-

ward of this pond is a conſiderable en, called Connecticut river, which Ns
into the ba

There 15 two whale fiſheries; one from Sagg harbour, which produces about 000
barrels of oil annually ; the other is much ſmaller, and is carried on by the inha-
bitants in the winter ſeaſon, from the ſouth fide of the iſland. They commonly catch
from three to ſeven whales in a ſeaſon, which produce from twenty-five to forty barrels
each of oil. This fiſhery was formerly a ſource of conſiderable wealth to the inha-
bitants, but through a ſcarcity of whales, it has greatly declined of late years.

There is a conſiderable trade carried on from Sagg harbour, whence is exported to-
the Weſt Indies, and other places, whale oil, pitch-pine boards, horſes, cattle, flax-
ſeed, beef, &c. The produce of the middle and weſtern parts of the fland 18 carried

to New York. The iſland contains 36,949 inhabitants.
Staten Iſland lies nine miles ſouth-weſt of the city of New York, and forms "RY
mond county. It is about eighteen miles in length, and, at a medium, ſix or ſeven in
breadth, and contains 3,835 inhabitants. On the ſouth fide is a conſiderable tract of
level, good land; but the ifland in general is rough, and the hills high. Richmond is
the only town of any note on the iſland, and that is a poor, inconſiderable place. The
inhabitants are principally deſcendants of the Dutch and French.


e e See Smith's Hiſtory of New York, publiſhed by Matthew Carey, and
Hazard's Collection of State Papers.


In 1787, the legiſlature of this State ceded to the commonwealth of Maſſachuſetts, 8
all the "008 within their juriſdiction, weſt of a meridian that Then be drawn from a


point


"1 * * BM * 4 —
* — Z ů —ů ů —— det; . ; - : — — | Y
1 * 1 — ad Ay. ts. „„ 1 4 * * * * I". M's i , — — : |
2 * nee Fm e Dc ſl —_—


—


: L - * \ 1
| , Wrtrer OY 2
British Miles. | :


\ Aon apack, .


N
f


4


Oxmrd


quakimunke


. f | Hackmsa >&
þ Veal] New rk ot ®
| A Field }
7, D mY NEW YORK
\ Eltzabeth 7:
Raway


| wh
Woodbridge

* 0 p
Amboy


Bruneswick


4 110i 1
*


i E Jeddleton
Maigdenhead | |
Freehold Shrewobur,
. Trenton Cranbery |
o. lem.
| o Ge ,
. — Bordentoun _ | a |


vw urlmngton


nantholly


Ongs


yrees


Monros


< ; * 2 1
n OE


S


hn rent


„


— Poo. —
——


—


NEN JERSEY


< AUTHORITIES.
5


——— ᷑e
—


ongitude Weſt om London.


———— —


*


weſ
of Delaware and Penn


| taining about 83


NEW JERSEY.


A


—


> "Names hard to govern, Names.
Nicollss 1664 Burnet
Lovelace Yo, 5 1668 8
Androſs ra 31 1674 Vandam
Brockhuſt 1682 2
Dongan N 1683 Clark
Slaughter of Clinton
Ingoldlby =— be 1691 Oſborn
OY Bs a0 bo; De Lancex
Bellemonf— je Sir Charles Hardy
_ Nanfan .. 1 - 16 De Lancey
Bellemont 1700 Colden (Prefident) |
Depeyſter | 1700 Monckton
Smith = 1700 Colden
Nanfan „ 1701 Monckton
| *Cornbury | Fs 15702 Colden
Lovelace 1708 Sir Henry Moore
Schuyler — eg >.
Ingoldſbß 17009 Dunmore
Beckmann 171% In
Hunter A A Co = 585 FP ns
16. of


— -_


N E 1 * * 6 K v.


| Survazton / AND Kara.


N &
82 *.


%
*


. by 395 * 41 a North Lastsde.


403


oint in the nooth; boundary line of Pennſylvania, eighty-two miles weſt from the
laware; (excepting one mile along the eaſt fide of Niagara river) and alſo ten
townſhips between the Chenengo and Owegy rivers, reſerving the Juriſdiction to the


State of New York. This ceſſion was made to area; a Nein of Maffachuſetts founded
upon their 1 charter.


> Ali if & Govenxons Wy the year 1660 10 the preſent time.
5 Began to Bovern.


1
1728
1231
1732
1735
1743
1753
1733
1755
1757
1760
1761
176
1762
1763
765
1769
1770
1
4775


The body ol the State lies] ade, the meri-


*Utian of Philadelphia, and. 1* Eaſt Longitude, —=*
en wa J Bounpe, eaſt, by Hudſon's river and the fea; ſouth,


by the ſea;


by Delaware bay and river; which divide it from the. States


Flvania north, by a line drawn from the mouth

kamak river, in datitude 1 24 to a point on Hudſon's river in latitude”: "41% Con-

20 ſquare miles, equal to 5,324,800 Feres. ;

CIVIL Dyrstoxs, PorvLaTION, &c. | a

WAY are ſubdivided unto! 'nincty-four Wenige or PrevinGs, as tollows:
Dns


New


Jerſey is divided into


of Mahak-


þ cen n counties,


2 a. 6


— : I. >
* 4
8
; 0
4
bs


n eee eee eee


27 at


IO gt LS


3 . n a
W *. p


N " . 1 ** 5
n „
* N 4 .


— = — wy


.
4
l
»
= l
i
t 1
_
V%
U
-
®
:
1
$
bs -
oa
E 5
2 k
2 }
44 :
r ,
* :
3
|
= 5
— 4
* *
> E
N 5
** oY
+
4X *
1 >
.
1
+
0 o
"a x
2 „ . 1
WY
_ :
t * L
___ 1
4 :
"FR 4
1
13 |
»4 "a
. þ
2 \
Wa :
at: :
=
* * —
a
4” "7 *
*
2 Y "i
th; E
: 2 :
\ : 6 4
12 |
"=
1
_ =
„
; —
1
3
9
2 ce
0 v4
'* 2
X e £ f
45 S
1
K F 4 1
N >
» a ry
* Ke i
of 5
. 3
* 1 Þ
- 1
# 5 +.
=>
d *
3 23 Md
* =
S- ,
1 n
by : :
+"
5
2 :
MF :
7
5 ?
- > 6 *
wang =
,
ou S 4
v ,
2
LE
4 4.
4M.
7 BB
*
; -
3
G
=
£ 4
y A
RS -
0 x 1
5 3
N. =
* 9
oy ;
» = *
"x —
7 8 C
IS». ö
* — N. 2 1
Fo
r
r
5 8
7 ”.
*%& —
3
% 8
5 77
o 2 7
ond G
+ "4%
F 3 2
* 2 =
A SITS 2
A *
1 kd "*
£5 BD
* 3 » o
- 8
.
a 5
.
N
3 .
1
; 4 k
2 *
0 7 - *
F, þ LE G 1
LES
_ X83» oa
« 1 7 -B
x wes S * a 1
K . 4
„
. 5
1
4 * *
327 L
0 . 1
r
„ 1
J K
3 .
*, 4:4
=. 8 ,
X F 9
- 4
*
„
1 1 * 2
ES
LIES }
<<: =
Es \
bad A
ST” .
3
* 4 7 +:
1
2 * *
1
-
1
7 **
1
5 \
a
— 7 :
Bf * ti
3 %
* 2
wa 4
W
1 of
I
*
47 1
.
= * 8 =
F 4
4 4 —
0. .
1
E
1 FRE.
; 4 . + x
.
N
5 1
*
.
42
«'C *
13
1
.
1
_ 3
s 4
WR
:
"TY þ
= \
K :
$5
*
=
_
4 - -
4 .
TY U q
vs 7
$4 .
1
1
5 1
76 1
a" o
\
.
1 s
* 0
b .
T /
+
{4p 1
= **
£ .
7 D A
7A
4


494 NEW JERSEY.


ſea.


ſouth-eaſt, by Hudſon's river and the ocean; and on the weſt, by the river Delaware.


the common road from New York to Philadelphia, croſſes three confiderable rivers,


.
| Total No. of
Counties. Principal Towns. Len. Bred. Inhabitants, No. Slav.
Cape May. | None. 1.30 +9 [0439 84” yn
| Cumberland. Bridgetown. 50 | 20 | 8,248 I20
Theſe ſeven comties lie | Salem. _—_ WI „
8. 5 Delaware V | T1 Tikes
river Cope May and Glow: 4 Glouceſter. | ee ed 1 30 | 22 | 13,360 191
celter extend acroſs to the 3 Burlington & Ot | 3
| | Burlington. | Borde 85 a 60 | 30 | 18,095 227
Hunterdon. |} Trenton. * | 37 | 12 | 80,253] 1,301
1 Suſſex. 8 | | Newtown. ' | | 19,500 | 439
| [ Bergen. JHackinfak. | f{ 7 12,6or| 2,301
Theſs- four Gries: ie [Newark and „
_ N. os. arihe Eaſtern | Effex. be 1 3 k 175 785 11
e of the State. Wan Amboy & part! N act.
on, Middleſex. ef Brunſwick. i „
Monmouth. 1 8030 | 16,928 | 1,596
ek &} tf [| 45 | 7
Somerſet. 6, wh pt Brunfwick. | 12,296 | 1,810
Morris. Mortiftown, | 25 | 20 | 16,216 60z


—


Total Thirteen 755 184,139 11 423
Bars, Poxns, Rivers Ax Canars.] New Jerſey is waſhed, on the eaſt and


The moft remarkable bays are, Arthur Kull, or Newark bay, formed by the union
of Paſſaik and Hackinſak rivers. This bay opens to the right and left, and embraces
Staten Iſland. There is a long bay formed by a beach, four or five miles from the
ſhore, extending along the coaſt north- eaſt and fouth-weſt, from Manaſquand river,
in Monmouth county, almoſt to Cape May. Through. this beach are a number of
inlets, by which the bay communicates with the ocean. :

On the top of a mountain, in Morris county, is a lake or pond, three miles in length,
and from a mile to a mile and an half in breadth, from which proceeds a continual
ſtream. It is in ſome places deep. The water is of a fea green colour; but when
taken up in a tumbler, is, like the water of the ocean, clear and ef a cryſtalline


The rivers m this State, though not Targe, are nnmerous. A traveller, in paſſing.


viz. the Hackinſak and Paſſaik, between Bergen and Newark, and the Raritan by
Brunſwick. The Hackinſak riſes in Bergen county, runs a fouthwardly courſe, and
empties into Newark bay. At the ferry, near its mouth, it is 460 yards wide, and is
navigable fifteen miles. FO WE 1
Paſſaik is a very crooked river. It riſes in a large ſwamp in Morris county. Its
general courſe is from W. N. W. to E. S. E. until it mitigles with the Hackinſak at
the head of Newark bay. It is navigable about ten miles, and is ago yards wide at
the ferry. The cataract (or Great Falls) in this river, is one of the greateſt natural
curioſities in the State. The river is about forty yards wide, and moves in a flow, gents |
| L 8 Current,


F


NEW JERSEY. 405
eyrrent, until coming within a ſhort diſtance of a deep cleft in a rock, which croſſes
the channel ; it deſcends and falls above ſeventy feet perpendicularly, in one entire
ſheet. One end of the cleft, which was evidently made by ſome violent convulfion in
nature, is cloſed ; at the other, the water ruſhes out with incredible ſwiftneſs, forming
an acute ng with its former direction, and is received into a large baſon, whence it
takes a winding courſe through the rocks, and ſpreads into a broad ſmooth ſtream.
The cleft is from four to twelve feet broad. The falling of the water occaſions a cloud
of vapour to ariſe, which by floating amidft the ſun beams, preſents to the view rain-
| bows, that add beauty to the tremendous ſcene. The new manufacturing town of
Patterſon is erected upon the Great Falls in this river. The weſtern bank of the river,
between Newark and the Falls, affords one of the pleaſanteſt roads for a party of plea-
ſure in New Jerſey. The bank being high, gives the traveller an elevated and extenſive:
view of the oppoſite ſhore, which is low and fertile, forming a landſcape pictureſque
and beautiful. Many handſome country ſeats adorn the ſides of this river; and there
are elegant ſituations for more. Gentlemen of fortune might here diſplay their taſte to
advantage. The fiſh of various kinds with which this river abounds, while they would
furniſh the table with an agreeable repaſt, would afford the ſportſman an innocent aud
manly amuſement. OED | Re EN PR
Raritan river is formed by two conſiderable fireams called the north and ſouth
branches; one of which has its ſource in Morris, the other in Hunterdon county. It
paſſes by Brunſwick and Amboy, and mingles with the waters of the Arthur Kull


two hundred and fifty yards at Brunſwick, and is navigable about ſixteen miles. It is.
ſuppoſed that this river is capable of a very ſteady lock navigation, as high as the
junction of the north and ſouth branches; and thence up the ſouth branch to Grandin's.
Bridge in Kingwood. Thence to Delaware river is ten or twelve miles. It is Gappeſed
a portage will be here eſtabliſhed by a turnpike road: or the waters of the Raritan,
may be united with thoſe of the Delaware, by a canal from the ſouth branch of the
Raritan to Muſconeteony river, which empties into the Delaware, or from Capoolong
Creek, a water of the Raritan, emptying at Grandin's Bridge, and Neceſſackaway, a
water of the Delaware. It is ſuppoſed alſo that an inland navigation from Philadelphia


ware, emptying at Trenton) towards Princeton; and from thence- by a canal to the
Millſtone, a water of the river to New Brunſwick. 5 , =
At Raritan hills, through which this river paſſes, is a ſmall caſcade, where the water
falls fifteen or twenty feet, very romantically, between two rocks. This river oppoſite
to Brunſwick is ſo ſhallow, that it is fordable at low water with horſes and carriages,,
but a little below it deepens fo faſt that a twenty gun ſhip may ride ſecurely at any time
of tide. The tide, however, riſes fo high that large ſhallops paſs a mile above the ford;
fo that it is no uncommon thing to ſee veflels of conſiderable burden riding at anchor,
and a number of large river craft lying above, ſome dry, and others on their beam ends
for want of water, within gunſhot of each other. 5 EE
Bridges have lately been erected, and are now nearly or quite completed (agreeably
to laws of the State paſſed for that purpoſe) over the Paſſaik, Hackinſak, and Raritan


greatly facilitate the intercourſe between theſe two great cities.
HBeſides theſe are Ceſarea river, or Cohanſey creek, which riſes in Salem county, and:
E about thirty miles in length, and navigable for veſſels of an hundred tons to Bridge-
town, twenty es en i W. 18

5 5  Maulicus:


found, and helps to form the fine harbour of Amboy. It is a mile wide at its mouth,


to New York may be effected by proceeding up the Aſanpink, (a water of the Dela-


rivers, on the poſt road between New York and Philadelphia. Theſe bridges will!“


406 e NEW JERSEY.

Mulicus river divides the counties of Glouceſter and Burlington, and is navigable
twenty miles for veſſels of ſixty tons.

Maurice river rites in Glouceſter county, runs fouthwardly about forty miles,
and is navigable for veſſels of an hundred tons, fifteen miles, and for ſhallops ten
miles farther.

Alloway Creek, in the county of Salem, is navigable ſixteen miles for ſhallops,
with ſeveral obſtructions of drawbridges. Ancocus O reck, in Burlington county, is
alſo navigable fixteen miles. Theſe, with many other ſmaller ſtreams, empty into the

Delaware, and carry down the produce which their fertile banks and the neighbouring

country afford. |

That part of the State which borders on a the ſea, is indented with a great number of :
{mal rivers and crecks, ſuch as Great Egg Harbour, and Little Egg Harbour rivers,
Navefink, Shark, Matticung, and Forked rivers, which, as the country is flat, are
navigable for ſmall craſt almoſt to their ſources.

Paulin s Kiln, in Suſſex county, is navigable for craft fiſteen miles; and the Muſco-

netcony, which divides Hunterdon from Suſſex, is capable of beneficial improvement,
as is the Pequeſt or Pequaſſet, between the two laſt mentioned rivers.

This State is remarkable ſor mill ſeats, eleven hundred of which are already i im-
proved; five hundred with flour mills, and the reſt with ſaw mills, fulling mills,
forges, furnaces, ſhtting, and rolling mills, paper, powder, and oil mills.

Sandy Hook, or Point, is in the townſhip of Middletown ; and on this point ſtands
a light houſe, one hundred feet high, built by the citizens of New York.

Fack or THE CounTRY, MouNnTaixs, SOIL, AND PRODUCTIONS. | The counties of
Suſſex, Morris, and the northern part of Bergen, are mountainous. The Soutb Moun-

_ which is one ridge of the great Allegany Range, croſſes this State in about latitude
1 This mountain emboſoms ſuch amazing quantities of iron ore, that it may not
een be called the Iron Mountain. The Kittatiny ridge paſſes through this State
north of the South mountain. Several ſpurs from theſe mountains are projected in a
ſouthern direction. One paſſes between Springfield and Chatham ; another runs weſt
of it, by Morriſtown, Batkinridge, and Vealtown. . The interior country 1s, in general,
| agrecably variegated with hills and vallies. The ſouthern counties which lie along the
ſea coaſt, are pretty uniformly flat and ſandy. The noted Highlands of Naveſink,
and Center bill, are almoſt the only hills within the diſtance of many mules from the
ſea coaſt. The Highlands of Navefink are on the ſea coaſt near Sandy Hook, in the
townſhip of Middletown, and are the firſt lands that are diſcovered by mariners, as-
they come upon the coaſt. They riſe about fix hundred feet above the ſurface of the
water.

As much as five eighths of moſt of the ſouthern counties, or one fourth of the whole :
State, is almoſt a ſandy barren waſte, unfit in many parts for cultivation. The land on
the ſea coaſt in this, like that in the more ſouthern States, has every appearance of made
ground. The ſoil is generally a light ſand ; and by digging, on an average, about

fifty feet below the ſurface, (which can be done, even at the diſtance of twenty or thirty
miles from the ſea, without any impediment from rocks or ſtones) you come to ſalt
marſh. The gentleman who gave this information adds, * have ſeen an oyſter ſhell
that would hold a pint, which was dug out of the marſh, at fifty fect deep, in digging 2
well.” * About ſeven years fince,” continues my informer, « at Long Branch, in the
county of Monmouth, in the banks of the Atlantic, which were greatly torn by a great
riſe of the ſea in a violent caſterly ſtorm, was diſcovered the ſkeleton of ſome huge car-
nivorous animal. The country people who firſt law 3 it had fo little curioſity, as to wage


| NEW JERSEY. | 407
it to be wholly deſtroyed, except a jaw tooth which I ſaw. This was about two and
an half inches wide, five inches long, and as many deep. The perſon who helped to
take it out of the bank aſſured me, there was one rib ſeven feet four inches, and
another four feet long.” The bones of another of theſe animals has lately been diſ-
covered in a meadow, in the county of Glouceſter, on the river Delaware, by a negro,
who was digging a ditch, 3 or 4 feet deep. Part of theſe bones were ſent to Philadel-
phia.—To account for theſe curious phenomena is not my buſineſs ; this is left for
the ingenious naturaliſt, who has abilities and leiſure to compare facts and appearances
of this kind, and who probably may thence drav/ concluſions which may throw much
light on the ancient hiſtory of this country. © . | Th
This State has all the varieties of ſoil from the worſt to the beſt kind. It has a great
proportion of barrens. The good land in the ſouthern counties lies principally on the
banks of rivers and creeks. The ſoil on theſe banks is generally a ſtiff clay; and
while in a ſtate of nature, produces various ſpecies of oak, hickory, poplar, cheſnut,
aſh, gum, &c. The barrens produce little elſe but ſhrub oaks and yellow pines.
Theſe ſandy lands yield an immenſe quantity of bog iron ore, which is worked up to
great advantage in the iron works in theſe counties. There are large bodies of falt
meadow along the lower part of the Delaware river and bay, which afford a plentiful
paſture for cattle in ſummer, and hay in winter ; but the flies and muſketoes frequent
theſe meadows in large ſwarms, in the months of June, July, and Auguſt, and prove
very troubleſome both to man and beaſt. In Glouceſter and Cumberland counties are
ſeveral large tracts of banked meadow. Their vicinity to Philadelplſia renders them
highly valuable. Along the ſea-coaſt the inhabitants ſubſiſt principally, by feeding
cattle on the falt meadows, and by the fiſh of various kinds, ſuch as rock, drum, ſhad,
perch, &c. black turtle, crabs, and oyſters, which the ſea, rivers, and creeks, afford
in great abundance. They raiſe Indian corn, rye, potatoes, &c. but not for exporta-
tion. Their ſwamps afford lumber, which is eaſily conveyed to a good market. The
ſugar maple tree is common in Suſſex county upon the Delaware. hg:
In the hilly and mountainous parts of the State, which are not too rocky for culti-
vation, the ſoil is of a ſtronger kind, and covered in its natural ſtate with ſtately oaks,
hickories, cheſnuts, &c. and when cultivated produces wheat, rye, Indian corn, buck
wheat, oats, barley, flax, and fruits of all kinds common to the climate. The land
in this hilly country is good for grazing, and farmers feed great numbers of cattle for
New York and Philadelphia markets; and many of them keep large dairies, as there
are large tracts of fine meadows between the hills. |
The orchards in many parts of the State equal any in the United States, and their
cyder is ſaid, and not without reaſon, to be the beſt in the world. It is pretty certain,
that it cannot be ſurpaſſed in goodneſss. . „FFC EET tc.
The markets of New York and Philadelphia receive a very confiderable proportion of
their ſupplies from the contiguous parts of New Jerſey. And it 1s worthy of remark,
that theſe contiguous parts are exceedingly well calculated, as to the nature and fertility
of their ſoils, to afford theſe ſupplies; and the intervention. of a great number of na-
vigable rivers and creeks renders it very convenient to market their produce. Theſe:
ſupplies conſiſt of vegetables of many kinds, apples, pears, peaches, plums, ſtraw-.
berries, cherries, and other fruits; cyder in large quantities, and of the beſt quality,
butter, cheeſe, beef, pork, mutton, and the leſſer meats. 5 22
TxnADRE.] The trade of this State is carried on almoſt ſolely with and. from. thoſe two:
great commercial cities, New York on one fide, and Philadelphia on the other; though:
it wants not good ports of its own, Several attempts have been made by the 2
| ure


*


—


405 NEW JERSEY.


ture to ſecure to the State its own natural advantages, by granting extraordinary pri-
vileges to merchants who would ſettle at Amboy and Burlington, two very commo-
dious ports. But the people having long been accuſtomed to tend their produce to the
markets of Philadelphia and New York, and of courſe having their correſpondencies
eſtabliſhed, and their mode of dealing fixed, they find it difficult to turn their trade
from the old channel. Beſides, in theſe large cities, where are fo many able mer-
chants, and fo many wants to be ſupplied, credits are more eaſtly obtained, and a
better and quicker market is found for produce, than could be expected in towns leſs
populous and flouriſhing. Thete and other cauſes of the fame kind have hitherto ren-
dered abortive the encouragements held out by the legiſlature.
The articles exported, beſides thoſe already mentioned, are wheat, flour, horſes,
hire cattle, hams, which are celebrated as beings among the beſt in the world, lumber,
flax-ſeed, leather, iron, in great quantities, in pigs and bars, and formerly copper ore;
but the mines have not been worked fince the commencement of the late war. The
imports confiſt chiefly of Weſt India goods.
ManverAcTtUurEs AND AGRICULTURE. | The manufactures of this State have hitherto
been very inconfiderable, not ſufficient to ſupply its own conſumption, if we except
the articles of iron, nails, and leather. A ſpirit of induſtry and improvement, parti-
cularly in manufactures, has, however, greatly increaſed in the two laſt years. Moſt
of the families in the country, and many in the populous towns, are clothed in firong,
decent homeſpun; and it 1s a happy circumſtance tor our country, that this plain
AMERICAN drels 1 is every day growing more faſhionable, not only in this, but in all the
States.
In Trenton-Newark and Elizabeth - town, are ſeveral very valuable tan-yards, where
leather in large quantities, and of an excellent quality, is made and exported to the
neighbouring markets. Steel was manufactured at Trenton in the time of the war,
but not confiderably S
In Glouceſter county is a glaſs-houſe. Paper-mills and nail-manufactories are
efected and worked to good advantage in ſeveral parts of the State. Wheat allo is
manufactured into flour, and Indian corn into meal, to good account, in the weſtern
counties, where wheat is the ſtaple commodity. But the iron manufacture is of all
others the greateſt ſource of wealth to the State. Iron works are eredted in Glou-
ceſter, Burlington, Suſſex, Morris, and other counties. The mountains in the county
of Morris give riſe to a number of ſtreams neceſſary and convenient for theſe works,
and at the ſame time furniſh a copious ſupply of wood and ore of a ſuperior quality.
In this county alone are no leſs than ſeven rich iron mines, from which might be taken
ore ſufficient to ſupply the United States; and to work it into iron are two furnaces,
two rolling and ſlitting mills, and about thirty forges, containing from two to four
fires each. Theſe works produce annually about 540 tons of bar iron, 800 tons of
Pigs, beſides large quantities of hollow ware, ſheet iron, and nail rods. In the whole
State, it is ſuppoſed there is yearly made about 1200 tons of bar iron, 1200 ditto of
Pigs, 80 ditto of nail rods, excluſive of hollow ware, and various other caſtings, of
which vaſt quantities are made.
Early in the late war, a powder-mill was erected in Morriſtown by Colonel Ford,
who was enabled, by the ample ſupply of falt-petre furniſhed by the patriotic inhabi-
tants, to make a conſiderable quantity of that valuable and neceſſary article, at a time
when it was moſt needed ; and when the enemy were at the door, it afforded a timely


ſupply.


—


NEW JERSEY. oe -


A manufacturing company was incorporated, in 1791, by the legiſlature of this
State, and favoured with very great privileges. The better to encourage every kind of
manufacture, a ſubſcription was opened, under the patronage of the Secretary of the
"Treaſury of the United States, for this important purpoſe. Fach ſubſcriber promiſed
to pay, for every ſhare annexed to his name, 400 dollars to the truſtees appointed to
receive it. A ſum of upwards of 500,000 dollars was almoſt immediately ſubſcribed,
and the directors of the aſſociation have ſince taken the proper meaſures to carry into
effect their extenſive plan. They have fixed on the Great Falls in Paſſaik river,
and the ground adjoining, for the erection of the mills, and the town, which they call
PATERSON, in honour of the preſent governor of New Jerſey. Every advantage ap-
pears to be concentrated in this delightful ſituation, to make it one of the moſt eligible
in the United States for the permanent eſtabliſhment of manufactures. Already a
large ſum of money has been expended, and the works are in forwardneſss.
Although the bulk of the inhabitants in this State are farmers, yet agriculture has
not been improved (a few inſtances excepted) to that degree, which from long expe-
rience we might rationally expect, and which the fertility of the ſoil, in many places,
ſcems to encourage. A great part of the inhabitants are Dutch, who, although they are
an general neat and induſtrious farmers, have very little enterpriſe, and ſeldom adopt
any new improvements in huſbandry, becauſe, through habits and want of education
to expand and liberaliſe their minds, they think their old modes of tilling the beſt.
Indeed, thus is the caſe with the great body of the eommon people, and proves almoſt
an inſurmountable obſtacle to agricultural maprovementss © |
MIN ES and MINERALS.] This State emboſoms vaſt quantities of iron and copper
ore. The iron ore is of two kinds; one is capable of being manufactured into mal-
Jeable iron, and is found in mountains and in low barrens; the other, called bog ore,
grows in rich bottoms; and yields iron of a hard, brittle quality, and is commonly
manufactured into hollow ware, and uſed ſometimes inſtead of ſtone in building.
A number of copper-mines have been diſcovered in different parts of the State:
one is in Bergen county, which when worked by the Schuylers, (to whom it
Ms Dia was conſiderably productive; but they have for many years been neg-
ected. 5 we . |
The following account of a copper-mine at New Brunſwick is given by a gentleman
of diſtinction, well informed upon the ſubject : ; 5 :
About the years 1748, 1749, 1750, feveral lumps of virgin eopper, from five to
thirty pounds weight, (in the whole upwards of 200 pounds,) were plowed up in a
field belonging te Philip French, Eſq. within a quarter of a mile of New Brunſwick.
This induced Mr. Elias Boudinot, of the city of Philadelphia, to take a leaſe of Mr.
French, of this land, for ninety-nine years, in order to ſearch for copper ore, a body
bf which, he concluded, muſt be contained in this hill. He took in ſeveral partners,
and about the year 1751, opened a pit in the low grounds, about 200 or 300 yards
from the river. He was led to this ſpot by a friend of his, who a little before,
paſſing by at three-o'clock in the morning, obſerved a body of flame ariſe out of the
ground, as large as a common: ſized man, and ſoon after die away. He drove a ſtake
on the ſpot. About fifteen feet deep, Mr. Boudinot came on a vein of bluiſh ſtone,
about two feet thick, between two perpendicular looſe bodies of red rock, covered
with a ſheet of pure virgin copper, a little thicker than gold leaf. This bluiſh ftone
was filled with ſparks of virgin copper, very much like copper-filings, and now and
then a large lump of virgin copper, from five to thirty paunds weight. He followed
tis vein almoſt thirty feet, when, the water coming in very faſt, the expenſe became
" I „„


o


reer „ Th © i 2 * *
* 1 *. * ov 2 * 7
ww j .
n E


1 1 1 2 " . 6 — 8 * =
A eee 9 142 r r n —
- 4a} Ev 5 at: 2:4 & oc (5 Sn I y * 4 Warn * r r 2 4 "MAE 3 8 8 F . 2 * — 1 8 . „ ang 2 cs: \
"4? Tas; EL Sa £F* Sa * 44 r 2 2 8 y I - Code Y ” * — 1 4 det Fg x Rr 5 % —_— * . mu Bp += * ſ 3 * 8
„ - det — . E RAE GEASS N e =, > ß OTE rr 8 9 r 2 : 2
* MR 4 2 - 7 5 * _ N = a N a 2 1 5 * 5. 4a * 2 1 4 on * p 8 * N * ae *; * 1 . 1 ' ey 0 © p * 1 „ - w4
1 * mu EI IS * 6 64. & 1 * FN 1 , ö n > —_ * "+ x7


RY


**
„
5


ang * © Mint 4235 * A
——_ _— ——_——_— OOO INIT 1
i. 2 2 — 2 Mm I —


*
3 3-4 8 3 *.
r * > : 3 PI Fes 1 es
1 n 4 22 N * 1 98 n as 6 g
"RY 1 RR 3
97. '5 — £5 bd I rer *


ſent to England without ever paſſing through the fire; but labour was too high to


the hills beyond Boundbrook, known by the name of Van Horne's mountain, but for


until the Britiſh deſtroyed it in the beginning of the war. The inhabitants made it


410 3555 NEW JERSEY.


too great for the company's capital. A ſftamping-mill was erected, when, by reducing
the bluiſh ſtone to a powder, and waſhing it in large tubs, the ſtone was carried off,
and the fine copper preſerved, by which means many tons of the pureſt copper were


render it poſſible for the company to proceed. Sheets of copper about the thickneſs
of two pennies, and three feet ſquare, on an average, have been taken from between
the rocks, within.ſour feet of the ſurface, in ſeveral parts of the hill. At about fifty
or fixty feet deep, they came to a body of fine ſolid ore in the midſt of this bluiſh
vein, but between rocks of a white flinty fpar, which, however, was worked out in
a few days. Theſe works lie now wholly neglected, although the vem when left was
Ticher than ever it had been. There was alto a very rich vein of copper ore diſcovered
at Rocky Hill, in Somerſet county, which has alſo been neglected trom the heavy ex-
penſe attending the working of it. 'There have been vanous attempts made to ſearch


the ſame reaſon is now neglected. This mountain diſcovers the greateſt appearance of

copper ore of any place in the State: it may be picked up on the ſurface of many
rts of it. A ſmelting-furnace was erected before the revolution, in the neighbour-

Food, by two Germans, who were making very conſiderable profit on their work,


worth their while by collecting the ore from the ſurface, and by partially digging into
the hill, to ſupply the furnace. Beſides, a company opened a very large ſhatt on the
fide of the hill, from which alſo a great deal of valuable ore and ſome virgm copper
were taken. Two lumps of virgin copper were found here in the year 17 54, which
weighed 1900 pounds.” WT LS Fe 1 l TS
A lead-mane has been diſcovered in Hopewell townſhip, four miles from Trenton.
There is ſaid to be coal on Raritan river, below Brunſwick, and at Pluckemin ; and
turf in Bethlehem, at the head of its ſouth branch; and alſo at Springfield on Raway
river, which is remarkable for mill ſeats. „ 5 ho
Colos SprixGs. In the upper part of the county of Morris is a cold mineral
ſpring, which is frequented by valetudinarians, and its waters have been uſed with ve
confiderable ſucceſs. In the townſhip of Hanover, in this county, on a ridge of hills,
are a number of wells, which regularly ebb and flow about fix feet, twice in every
twenty-four hours. Theſe wells are nearly forty miles from the fea in a ſtraight linc.
In the county of Cape May is a ſpring of freſh water, which boils up from the bottom
of a ſalt water creek, which runs nearly dry at low tide ; but at flood tide is covered
with water directly from the ocean, to the depth of three or four feet; yet in this ſitu
ation, by letting down a bottle, well corked, through the ſalt-water into the ſpring,
and immediately drawing the cork with a ſtring prepared for the purpoſe, it may be
drawn up fall of fine, untainted freſh water. There are ſprings of this kind in other
parts of the State. In the county of Hunterdon, near the top of Muſkonetcong moun-
tain, is a noted medicinal ſpring, to which invalids refort from every quarter. It iſſues
from the ſide of a mountain, and is conveyed into an artificial reſervoir for the accom-
modation of thoſe who with to bathe in, as well as to drink, the waters. It is a ſtrong
chalybeate, and very cold. Theſe waters have been uſed with very conſiderable ſuc-
ceſs; but perhaps the exerciſe neceſſary to get to them, and the purity of the air in
this lofty fituation, aided by a lively imagination, have as great efficacy in caring the
patient as the waters. Wks | TEE Te
A curious ſpring has been difcovered, about 200 yards from the ſouth branch of
Raritan river, from which, even. in the dryeſt ſcaſons, a finall ſtream iſſues, 8
oh 5 | when


NEW JERSEY. 1


when the wind continues to blow from the north-weſt for more than two days ſucceſ-
ſively, when it ceaſes to run; and if the water be taken out of tlie caſk placed in the
grounds it will remain empty until the wind changes, when it is again filled and flows
as uſual. 5 5
Caves, MoxumenTs, &c.] In the townſhip of Shrewſbury, in Monmouth county,
on the fide of a branch of Navefink river, is a remarkable cave, in which there are
three rooms. The cave is about thirty feet long and fifteen feet broad. Each of the
rooms are arched ; the center of the arch is about five feet from the bottom of the cave ;
the fides not more than two and an half. The mouth of the cave is ſmall ; the bottom
is a looſe ſand; and the arch is formed in a ſoft rock, through the pores of which the
moiſture is ſlowly exudated, and falls in drops on the ſand below. 4
On Sandy Hook, about a mile from the light-houſe, is a monument, which was
erected to commemorate a very melancholy event that took place juſt at the cloſe of
the late war. The following inſcription, which is upon a marble plate on one ſide of
the monument, will afford ſufficient information of the matter:
Here lies the remains of the honourable Hamilton Douglaſs Halliburton, ſon of
Sholto Charles, Earl of Morton, and heir of the ancient family of Halliburton of Pit-
curr in Scotland; who periſhed on this coaſt with twelve more young gentlemen, and
one common ſailor, in the ſpirited diſcharge of duty, the goth or 31ſt of December,
1783; born October 10th 1763: a youth who, in contempt of hardſhip and danger,
though poſſeſſed of an ample fortune, ſerved ſeven years in the Britiſh navy with a
manly courage. He ſeemed to be deſerving of a better fate. To his dear memory,
and that of his unfortunate companions, this monumental ſtone is erected by his un
happy mother Katharine, Counteſs Dowager of Morton. „„


James Champion, Lieutenant of Marines,

} Alexander FJohnſon Ji
I] George Paddy, þMidthipmen
I Robert Heywood, . |


Charles Gaſcoigne, J © « { Pilliam Tomlinſon,
1 Andrew Hamilton, \ = S Joh M*Chair,
1 William Scott, [3 = | 7am Spray,

L David Reddie, 3 T3 | Robert Mood,


George Towers, Sailor. +
Caſt away in purſuit of deſerters ; all found dead, and buried in this grave.
Of his Britannic Majeſty's Ship Afiſtance, |
Mr. HALLIBZVRTON, Firſt Lieutenant.“


Porr riOx.] According to the cenſus of 1790, as given in the Table, there were
in this State 184, 139 inhabitants, of whom 11,423 were flaves. The average popu-
lation for every. ſquare mile is nearly 22. The number of inhabitants in this State
was in 1738-47, 369, including 3981 flaves; in 174561, 40g, including 4606 flaves;
in 1784—140,435, including 1939 ſlaves. This year there were 10,501 blacks, of
which 1939 only were returned as ſlaves. PISS e
The average annual increaſe ſince 1738 has been 2630, excluſive of emigrations,
which, ſince 1783, have been numerous to the country welt of the Allegany Moun-
tains. Theſe emigrations will leſſen in proportion as the inhabitants turn their atten-
tion to inanuſactures. 3 . eee ee eee
Wy 362 CHARACTER,


412 Nene r.


ChaxAcrRR, ManNers, Ax D Cusroxs.] Many circumſtances concur: to? render
theſe various in different parts of the State. The inhabitants are a collection of Low
Dutch, Germans, Engliſh, Scotch, Iriſh, and New Englanders, or their deſcendants.
National attachment, and mutual convenience, have generally induced theſe feverat
kinds of people to ſettle together in a body, and in this way their peculiar” national
manners, cuſtoms, and characters are ſti] preferved, eſpecially among the poorer claſs
of people, who have little intercourſe with any but thoſe of their own nation. Reli-
gion, although its tendency is to unite people in thoſe things that are eſſential. to hap-
meſs, occaſions wide differences as to manners, cuſtoms, and even character. The
Preſbyterian, the Quaker, the Epiſcopalian, the Baptiſt, the German and Low Dutch
Calviniſt, the Methodiſt, and the Moravian, have each their diſtinguiſhing characte-
riſtics, either in their worſhip, their difcipline, or their dreſs. There is ſtill another
characteriſtical difference, diſtinct from either of the others, which ariſes from the in-
tercourſe of the inhabitants with different States. The people in Welt Jerſey trade to
Philadelphia, and of courſe imitate their faſhions and imbibe their manners. The in-
| habitants of Eaſt Jerſey trade to New York, and 5 brown their faſhions and manners
according to thofe in New York. So that the difference, in regard to faſhions and
manners, between Eaſt and Weſt Jerſey, is nearly as great as between New York and
Philadelphia. Add to all theſe the differences common in all countries, ariſing from
the various occupations of men, ſuch as the civilian, the divine, the lawyer, the phy-
fictan, the mechanic; the clowniſh, the decent, and the reſpectable farmer, all of
whom have different purſuits, or purſue the ſame thing differently, and of courſe muſt
have different ideas and manners. When we take into view all theſe differences, (and
all theſe differences exiſt in New Jerſey, and many of them in all the other States) it
cannot be expected that many general obſeryations will apply. It may, however, in
truth be ſaid, that the people' of New Jerſey are generally induſtrious, frugal, and
hoſpitable. There are, comparatively, but few men of learning in the State, nor can
it be ſaid, that the people in general have a taſte for the ſciences. The poorer claſs,
in which may be included a conſiderable proportion of the inhabitants of the whole
State, are inattentive to the education of their children, who are but too generally
left to grow up in ignorance. There are, however, a number of gentlemen of the firſt
rank in abilities and learning in the civil offices of the State, and in the ſeveral learned
_ profeſſions. WE „„ 5 8
It is not the buſineſs of a geographer to compliment the ladies; nor would we be
thought to do it, when we fay, that there is at leaſt as great a number of induſtrious,
diſcreet, amiable, genteel, and handſome women in New Jerſey, in proportion to the
number of inhabitants, as in any of the Thirteen States. %%% PII
: nne There are in this State, about fifty Preſbyterian congregations, ſubject
to the care of three Preſbyteries, viz. That of New York, of New Brunſwick, and
Philadelphia. A part of the charge of New York and Philadelphia Preſbyteries lies in
New Jerſey, and part in their own reſpective States. 5 „
Beſides theſe, there are upwards of forty congregations of Friends, thirty of the
Baptiſts, twenty-five of Epiſcopalians, twenty-eight of Dutch Reformed, beſides Me-
thodiſts, and a ſettlement of Moravians. 7


All theſe religious denominations live together in peace and harmony ; and are al-
lowed, by the conſtitution of the State, to worſhip Almighty God agreeably to the
dictates of their own conſciences; and are not compelled to attend or ſupport any
worſhip contrary to their own faith and judgement. All Proteſtant inhabitants of
peaceable behaviour are eligible to the civil offices of the State. 3

5 — « ä


CoLLEGES,


NEW JERSEY. 413
| CoLLEGES, ACADEMIRS,. AND Schools.] There are two colleges in New Jerſey ;
one at Princetown, called Naſſau Hall; the other at Brunſwick, called Queen's Col-
lege. The college at Princetown was-firſt founded by charter from John Hamilton,
Eiq. Preſident of the Council, about the year 1738, and enlarged by Governor Bel-
cher in 1747. The charter delegates a power of granting to * the ſtudents of ſaid
college, or to any others thought worthy of them, all ſuch degrees as are granted in
either of our Univerſities, or any other college in Great Britain.” It has twenty-three
truſtees. The governor of the State, and the prefident of the college are, ex officiis,
wo of them. It has an annual income of about gool. currency; of which 200l. ariſe
{rom funded public ſecurities and lands, and the 1eſt from the fees of the ſtudents.
The preſident of the college is alſo profeſſor of eloquence, criticiſm, and chrono-
| logy. The vice-preſident is alſo profeſſor of divinity and moral philoſophy. There is
alſo a profeſſor of mathematics and natural philoſophy, and two maſters of languages.
The four claſſes in college contain commonly from 70 to 100 ſtudents. There is a
grammar- ſchool of about 20 ſcholars, connected with the college, under the ſuperin-
tendance of the preſident, and taught ſometimes by a ſenior ſcholar, and. ſometimes by
CC 1 VV „ 1
| Before the war, this college was furniſhed with a philoſophical apparatus, worth:
zool. which (except the elegant Orrery conſtructed by Mr. Rittenhouſe) was almoſt
entirely deſtroyed by the Britiſh army in the late war, as was allo the library, which

now. confiſts of between 2000 and 3000 volumes. Eo


The college edifice is handſomely built with ſtone, and is 180 fect in length, 54 in
breadth, and four ſtories high; and is divided into 42 convenient chambers for the
accommodation of the ſtudents, beſides a dining-hall, chapel, and room for the


library. Its ſituation is elevated and exceedingly pleaſant and healthful. It is remark- e


able, that ſince the removal of the college to Princetown in 1756, there have been but
five or ſix deaths among the ſtudents. The


view from the college balcony is extenſive
and charming. 33 . „
The college has been under the care of a ſucceſſion of preſidents, eminent ſor piety
and learning; and has furniſhed a number of civilians, divines, and phyſicians of the
firſt rank in America.“ „„ J IgT 1
The charter for Queen's College, at Brunſwick, was granted juſt before the war, in
conſequence of an application from a body of the Dutch church. Its funds, raiſed
wholly by free donations, amounted, ſoon after its eſtabliſhment, to 4oool. but they
were conſiderably diminiſhed by the war. The grammar-ſchool, which is connected
with the college, conſiſts of between thirty and forty ſtudents, under the care of the
truſtees. The college at preſent is not in a very flourithing ſtate.
There are a number of good academies in this State. One at Freehold, in the
county of Monmouth; another at Trenton, in which are about 80 ſtudents in the dif-
ferent branches. It has a fund of about 1 50l. per annum, axiſing from the intereſt on
public ſecurities. Another in Hackkinſak, in the county of Bergen, of upwards of


* Acceſſus. » Preſidents. 5 ; Exitue.
1746 Rev. Jonathan Dickinſon, — 1747
1743 Rev. Aaron Burr, | - — 1757

17588 Rev. Jonathan Edwards, - - 1758
— $6 Rev. Samuel Davies, - - . 1760
1761 Rev. Samuel Finley, D. D. 1 1766


1767 Rev. John Witherſpoon, D. D.


an


411 NEW IE RSE X.


an hundred ſcholars. Inſtrudtion and board are faid to be cheaper here than in any
other part of the State. There is another flouriſhing academy at Orangedale, in the
county of Eſſex, conſiſting of nearly as many ſcholars as any of the others, furniſhed
with able inſtructors and good accommodations. Another has lately been opened at
Elizabethtown, and conſiſts of upwards of twenty ſtudents in the languages, and is
increaſing. An academy, by the name of Burlington academy, has lately been eſta-
bliſhed at Burlington, under the direction of ſeven truſtees, and the inſtruction of
two preceptors. The ſyſtem of education adopted in this academy, is deſigned to
Prepare the ſcholars for the ſtudy of the more difficult claſſics and the higher branches
of ſcience in a college or univerſity. At Newark, an academy was founded in June
1792, and promiſes to be a uſeful inſtitution. Beſides theſe, there are grammar
fchools at Springfield, Morriſtown, Bordentown, and Amboy. There are no regular
eſtabliſhments for common ſchools in the State. The uſual mode of education is for
the inhabitants of a village or neighbourhood to join in affording a temporary ſupport
for a ſchoolmaſter, upon duch terms as are mutually agreeable. But the encourage-
ment which theſe occaſional teachers meet with, is generally ſuch, as that no perſon
of abilities adequate to the buſineſs, will undertake it; and of courſe, little advan-
(age is derived from theſe ſchools. The improvement in theſe common ſchools is ge-
nerally in proportion to the pay of the teacher. It is therefore much to be regretted
that the legiſlature do not take up this ſubject and adopt ſome ſuch method of ſupport-
ing public ſchools as has been n pon with viſtble good ſucceſs in ſome of the
New England States.
CulEr Towxs.] There are a number of towns in this State, nearly of equal ſize
and importance, and none that has more than about two hundred houſes compact
built. TaENTOx is one of the largeſt towns in New Jerſey and the capital of the
State. It is ſituated on the north-eaſt fide of the river Delaware, oppoſite the falls,
nearly 1 in the center of the State, from north to ſouth, in latitude 40 155, and about
20 eaſt of the meridian of Philadelphia. The river is not navigable above theſe falls,
except for boats which will carry from five to ſeven hundred buſhels of wheat. This
| woes, with Lamberton, which joins it on the ſouth, contains upwards of two hun-
dred houſes, and about 2000 inhabitants. Here the legiſlature ſtatedly meets, the
ſupreme courts fits, and moſt of the public offices are kept. The inhabitants have
lately erected a handſome court houſe 100 feet by 50, with a ſemi-hexagon at each
end, over which is to be a balluſtrade. In the neighbourhood of this pleaſant
town are ſoveral gentlemen's ſeats, finely fituated on the banks of the Delaware, and
ornamented with taſte and elegance. This town, being a thoroughfare between the
eaſtern parts of the State and Philadelphia, has a conſiderable inland trade. |
BurxLINGToN (city) extends three miles along the Delaware, and one mile back,
at right angles, into the county of Burlington, and is twenty miles above Philadel-
phia by water, and ſeveutecn by land. The iſland, Which is the moſt populous |
part of the city, is a mile and a quarter in length, and three quarters of «a mile in
breadth. It has four entrances over bridges and cauſeways, and a quantity of bank
meadow adjoining. On the ifland are about 160 houſes, 1000 wlüte and 100
black inhabitants, But few of the Negroes are ſlaves. The main ſtreets are con-
veniently ſpacious, and moſtly ornamented with trees in the fronts of the houſes,
which are regularly arranged. The Delaware, oppoſite the town, is about a mile
wide; and under ſhelter of Mittinnicunk and Burks ngton Iflands, affords a ſafe and
convenient harbour. It is commodiouſly fituated for trade, but is too near the


opulent city of 9 to admit of * conſiderable increaſe of foreign com-
| 4 | merec.


NEW JERSEY. 415
merce. There are two houſes for public worſhip in the town, one for the Friends
or Quakers, who are the moſt numerous, and one for Epiſcopalians. The other
public buildings are two market houſes, a court houſe, and the beſt gaol in the
State. Beſides theſe, there 18 an academy already mentioned, a free ſchool, a nail
manufactory, and an excellent diſtillery, if that can be called excellent which pro-
duces a poiſon both of health and morals. |

The city was a free port under the State. The mayor, recorder, and. aldermen
hold a commercial court, when the matter in controverſy is between foreigners and
foreigners, or between foreigners and citizens. The iſland of Burlington was laid
out, and the firſt ſettlements made as carly as 1677. In 1682, the iſland of Mittin-
nicunk, or Free School Iſland, was given for the uſe of the iſland of Burlington ; the
yearly profits arifing from it (which amount to 1801.) are appropriated for the educa-
tion of poor children.

PERTH AmBor (city) took its name from James Drammond, Earl of Perth, and
Ambo, the Indian word for point, and ſtands on a neck of land included between
Raritan river and Arthur Kull found. Its fituation is high and healthy. It lies
open to Sandy Hook, and has one of the beſt harbours on the continent. Veſſels
from ſea may enter it in one tide in almoſt any weather. Great efforts have been
made, and legiſlative encouragements offered, to render it a place of trade, but
without ſucceſs. This town was early incorporated with city privileges, and con-
tinued to ſend two members to the General Aſſembly until the revolution: until
this event, it was the capital of Eaſt Jerſey; and the legillature and ſupreme court
uſed to fit here and at Burlington alternately.

 Brxunswick (city) was incorporated in 1784, and is ſituated on the ſouth-weſt
fide of Raritan river, over which a fine bridge has lately been built, twelve miles
above Amboy. It contains about two hundred houſes, and nearly two thou-
ſand inhabitants, one half of whom are Dutch. Its fituation is low and unpleaſant, -
being on the bank of a river, and under a high hill which riſes at the back of the
town. | The i ice, at the breaking up of the river in winter, frequently lodges on the
x ſhallow fording place juſt oppoſite the town, and forms a temporary dam, which.
occaſions the water to riſe many feet above its uſual height, and ſometimes to over-

flow the lower floors of thoſe houſes which are not guarded againſt this incon-
venience by having their foundations elevated. The ſtreets are raiſed and paved
with ſtone. The water in the ſprings and wells is generally bad. The inhabitants
are beginning to build on the hill above the town, which is very pleaſant, and
commands a pretty proſpect. IT he citizens have a conſiderable inland trade, and
ſeveral ſmall veſſels belonging to the port.
PRINT wN is à pleaſant village, of about 80 houſes, 52 miles from New
York, and 42 from Philadelphia. Its public buildings are a large college edifice of
ſtone, already deſcribed, and a Preſbyterian church built of brick. 1s ſituation is
remarkably healthy.

ELIZABETHTOWN (borough) is fifteen miles from New York. Its ſituation 4
pleaſant, and its ſoil equal in fertility to any in the State. In the compact part
of the town there are about one hundred and fifty houſes. The public build-
ings are a very handſome Preſbyterian brick church lately built,“ an Epitcopal
church alſo of brick, and an academy. This is one of the oldeſt towns in the
State. It was purchaſed of the Indians as carly as ben and was: ſettled {von after.


* Their former church, which was very elegant, was burnt in 2380» by a refugee, who was a native,
and an inhabitant of Elizabethtown,
NEWARK


416


NEW JERSEY.


NxewaRrK is ſeven miles from New York. It is a handſome, flouriſhing towng
about the fize of Elizabethtown, and has two Preſbyterian churches, one of which
is of ſtone, and is the largeſt and moſt elegant building in the State. Beſides
theſe there is an epiſcopal church, a court-houſe and gaol- This town is celebrated


for the excellence of its cyder, and is the ſeat of the 1
the State : the average number made daily


about 200 pair.


Practice of PHYSICK. |
of about thirty of their moſt reſpectable


yſicians, who meet twice a year.


eſt ſhoe manufactory in
throughout the year, is eſtimated at


There is a © Medical Society” in this State, conſiſting


No


perſon is admitted to the practice of phyſic without a licence from the ſupreme
court, founded on a certificate from this ſocicty, or at leaſt two of its members,
. teſtifying his ſkill and abilities. It is remarkable that in the county ef Cape May,


no re


©


TU


%


women, except in ſome extraordinary caſes.


Practice or Law.] No perſon is permitted to


ular phyſician has ever found ſupport. Medicine has been adminiſtered by


practiſe as an attorney in any


court without a licence from the governor. This cannot be obtained unleſs the
candidate ſhall be above twenty-one years of age, and ſhall have ſerved a regular
clerkſhip with ſome licenſed attorney for four years, and have taken a degree in
ſome public college, otherwiſe he muſt ſerve five years. This regulation is con-


ſidered by ſome as a


depreciation of rights in


regard to citizens of other States,


and a bar to the progreſs of knowledge He muſt alſo ſubmit to an examination by
three of the moſt eminent counſellors in the State, in the preſence of the judges of the
ſupreme court. After three years practice as an attorney, he becomes a candidate


for a counſellor's licence, which is


granted on a like examination. Many of the


people here, however, as in other States, think (becauſe perhaps they are inſtruments


in oblieng them to


rience has verified this obſervation in the county
No lawyer lives within ſixty miles of that count


their courts. -


Coxsrrrurrox.] The


pay their debts) that the lawyers know too much. But
heir knowledge will not injure thoſe who are innocent, and who will let them
alone.


of Cape May.
y, and it is ſeldom that they attend


government of this State, agreeable to their conſtitution,


is veſted in a governor, legiſlative council, and general aſſembly. The governor

is choſen annually, by the council and aſſembly jeintly, and is ſtiled, Governor
and commander in chief in and over the State af New Jerſey, and the territories
thereunto beloning, chancellor and ordinary of the ſame.” The legiſlative council


is com


They muſt be worth one thouſand pounds in real and


of one member from each county, choſen annually by the people.


perſonal eſtate within the


county, and have been freeholders and inhabitants of the counties they repreſent


For one


year. The General Aſſembly is compoſed of three members from each county


_ «choſen as above; each of them muſt be worth five hundred pounds, in real and perſonal


eſtate within the county, and have been freeholders and inhabitants as above. Each
of theſe, on taking his ſeat in the legiſlature, muſt ſwear“ that he will not aſſent to


any law, vote, or proceeding, which ſhall a
of the ſtate, or that ſhall annul or r
Annual elections, nor
of conſcience.”


r to him 1njurious to the public welfare
epeal that part of the conſtitution which eſtabliſhes


that part reſpecting trial by jury, nor that which ſecures liberty


5 The governor ſits in, and preſides over the legiſlative council, and has a caſting vote
in their debates. His privy or executive council is compoſed of any three members


of the legiſlative council: and the governor and any ſeven members of the cou


*


ncil
Ale


NEW JERSEY. 2419


are a court of appeals an the laſt reſort, as to points of law in civil caſes, and poſſeſs
a power of pardoning criminals in all cafes whatſocver. The council chuſe one of
their members to be vice-preſident, who, when the governor is abſent from the State,
poſſeſſes the ſupreme executive power. The council may originate any bills, except
preparing and altering any money bill, which is the ſole prerogative of the Aſſem-
bly: in every other reſpect their powers are equal. Every bill is read three times in
each houſe. None of the judges of the ſupreme court, or other courts, ſheriffs, or
any perſon poſſeſſed of any poſt of profit under the governor, except juſtices: of the
peace, is entitled to a ſeat in the Aſſembly. The eſtate of a ſuicide is not forfeited for
his offence. 5 W e i 2 8
Courts oF JusTICE, Laws, &c.| The courts. of juſtice in this State are, firſt,
Juſtices Courts. A competent number of perſons are appointed in each county by the
council and aſſembly in joint meeting, who are called juſtices of the peace, and con-
tinue in office five years; who, beſides being conſervators of the peace, agreeably to
the Engliſh laws, are authorized to hold courts for the trial of cauſes under twelve
pounds. From this court, perſons aggrieved may appeal to the quarter ſeſſions.
Secondly,” Courts of Quarter Seſſions of the Peace, are held quarterly in every county, by
at leaſt three of the juſtices. This court takes cognizance of breaches of the peace,
and is generally regulated by the rules of the Englith law. | nr a
Thirdly, Courts of Common Pleas, which are held quarterly by judges appointed for
that purpoſe, in the ſame manner as the juſtices of the peace, and who are commonly
of their number, and hold their commiſſions five years. This court may be held by
a ſingle judge, and has cognizance of demands to any amount, and is conſtructed on,
and governed by, the principle of the Engliſh laws. es ay nnd
Fourthly, Supreme Courts, which are held four times in a year, at Trenton, by three
judges appointed for that purpoſe, who hold their offices three years; but one judge
only is neceſſary to the holding this court. This court has cognizance of all actions,
both civil and criminal, throughout the State, having the united authority of the courts
of king's bench, common pleas, and exchequer in England. The courts of oyer and
terminer and niſi prius, commonly held once a year in each county, for the trial of
cauſes arifing in the county, and brought to iſſue in the ſupreme court, are properly
branches of this court, and are held by one of the judges of it, except that in the
courts of oyer and terminer, ſome of the gentlemen of the county are always added
5 the commiſſion as aſſiſtants to the judge; but they cannot hold the court without
Fifthly, Orphan's Courts, lately eſtabliſhed by act of Aſſembly, are held by the judges
of the court of common pleas, er officiis, and have cogmzance of all matters relating
to wills, admunſtration, &c. _ eee 5 : .
Sixthly, Court of Chancery, held by the governor ex officio, always open. It is a court
of law and equity, founded on the ſame principles, and governed by the ſame rules, as
the court of chancery in England. ' — , "agg
Seventhly, High Court of Errors and Appeals, compoſed of the governor, and ſeven of
the council, and is a court of appeals in the laſt reſort, in all caſes of la.
_ All the Engliſh laws which had been practiſed upon in the State, and which are not
' repugnant to revolution principles, were adopted by tlie conflatution, and very -few
alterations of conſequence have fince been made, except in the deſcent of the real
eſtates, which, inſtead of deſcending to the eldeſt ſon, agreeable to,the old feudal ſyſ-
tem, as formerly, are now divided (where 8 is no will) two ſhares to each ol,


418 „ NEW JERSEY. 2
and one ſhare to each daughter; 1. e. the ſons have double the daughter s portions;
but all the ſons have equal portions, and all the daugliters.


Murrary STRENGTH. ] The military ſtrength New Jerſey conſiſts of a militia,
of between 430,000 and 40,000 men.


 Hrsrory. | See Smith's Hiſtory of New Jerfey—and' Hazard's State Papers. .
This State was the ſeat of war for ſeveral years, during the conteſt: between Great
Britain and America. Her loſſes both of mem and property, in proportion to the popu-
lation and wealth of the State, was greater than of any other of the T hirteen States.
When General Waſhington was retreating through the Jerſeys, almoſt forfaken by all
others, her militia were at all times obedient to his orders; and for a conſiderable
length of time, compoſed the ſtrength of his army. There is hardly a town in the
State that lay in the progreſs of the Britiſh army, that was not rendered ſignal by
fome enterprize or exploit. At Trenton the enemy received a check, which may be
faid with juſtice to have turned the tide of war. At Princeton, the ſeat of the muſes,
they received another, which, united, obliged them to retire-with precipitation, and.
take refuge in diſgraceful winter quarters. But whatever honour this State might de-
rive from-the relation, it is not our bufinefs to give a particular deſcription of _ battles.
or ſieges; we leave this to the pen of the hiſtorian, and only obſerve in general, that
the many military achievements performed by the Jerſey ſoldiers, / give this State one
of the firſt ranks among her fiſters in a military view, and entitle hier to a ſhare of


praiſe in the accompliſhment of the late glorious revolution that bears no Proportion
to her fire.


Govennc ORS of Nzw Janskr, from the 1 of the Geverenene by: the Pnorsirrons
in 1702, ſo the preſent. time.
+ Edward, Viſcount Cornbury, 1702 to 1708, removed and ſücceeded by


| + John, Lord Lovelace, 20 to 709, died and the RENE: He devolved:
Lt. Gov. Richard. Ingeldſby, ryog to 192 Oz. when came inn
Brigadier Robert Hunter, 1710 to 1 720, who reſigned in favour of
William Burnet, 1720 to. 1727, removed and ſucceeded by. -
John Montgomery, 185728 to 1731, died and was ſucceeded by
+ William: Croſby, 731 t0-1 17 36, ond: and.the government. devolved” |
k John Anderſon, Pact of* the- Council, RE 36, b whoſe death about two weeks
LE the ent devolved to


rn ee Cuncit 1926 to 1738
Thoſe marked -+ were Governors in chief, and down to tlüis me were Gere


New. Yerk and New Jerſey, but from 1738 forward, New Jerſey has had a ſeparate :
governor.


d, Lewis Morris, 1738 to l 746, Sed and the government devolved 5
Ichn Hamilton, ee, 1746 INS 5 whole death it devolved o
Iuobm Reading, Preſdent, 1746. to 1747
n Jonathan Belcher _ 1747 to. 1757, died an the government again de-


2 0 | volved to.
John Reading, Prefldent, 1575757 tor 1768.


| bz Pownall, then Governor of Maſſachuſetts, bein g Licutcnant-governor, ar-
rived on the death of Governor Belcher, but continued! in the province a few days


Day.
+ Francis


2 _—_
<4 Y


o * \
—
:
.
*
, >
5
:
Ll
4
*
4

-
7

o

*
*
- #5
1
A.
»
% +
: N
l :

4

wA 4 _-

1 , [2

1

1183

* x

* Y *

2 *

* *

4 s
* 53
"BY

£8

1488

"x As .

8 .

PID ;
r
* * WER

$88
_

> © &

- * *
* 9

2

* 4.44

* uw .

„ e

PER

+7

2

5 1

1 —

4 U

.

N

4 » #1
*> 4
1 a

9 oy

<

7 8

Fa '>
# 1 7

BIT

2 * I

” OY 8

.

- L 1 » Þ [3

rX
n :
1 "IS

* *

Ts, « *

14

* . 1

2 8

1 3 %

=.

. * pu =

5 -

n
* * ha *

þ ” 4 :

' 466.0

232
__
= : 4+ .54
- = Sa
i 3
"1 — , 5
. »
R 4

_ 3 1

68 þ

=T 0

'% 3%

2 5 0
:  _

FS
1 11 :
o 1 5

> 4 $

| 2
.

- * FF.

K $

1 75

8 |
N 84

r *
4 * .
ES >: ;
bh WT i
= 3

2
[4% 4

TE

_

i "Ts 4

—

—

* 2 5

3 * Y

* "i Ls
FS.
3 20

-* - +

Eee
SS 2
RIC
j 3
ns I
3 »
* RT *
4 133 }
* *
1 { „
74 p ;
2 2 wa 8
> --% q
N . 1
Ys — 4 [*
"Ro "2
1 1
ws -
„„
Ts :

#4 — «
3 75 * "3 *
1 |
RS 9 * 3 ö
TE *
CHD .

4 "I q

$2 E 1

2 * * \
A . ;
-* 4 bt
AF, 4
9 -

2 ”% Y
ty 22 * J
—
1 — *
2 —
r 5
- L 20 CON
n 4
1
+32
* *
45 7 4 3 . * .
r
M2200 LS
n 1 1
"SY
— : by
> © 8
64 „„
=> 1
H 2 . . :
S
1 * 2 *
1
W. »
5. = b
7 16 -
, + 7
1 "3x8 ,
„ *
.
3 „
+ --

x. 3 a4 |
n
N. I 7
2 p * 7 * *
r 4
4.4898
"1 HEY -

8 3 *

7 <A *
N. 4

3

"4 IT; -- £4

3 CE. 5

"+ Th ;

* - ,
* -S

EM TA
* 8
N 28 q
— £
q "i :

1 G 74

. 1
3 -

S:

i 1

7 *

* + .
* — .
18
E
EN

Y *

— 8

a 8 1

0 , *
95 £
3
4 „
4
4
# 2 4
C 9 = *
”
bg 44
"ls R's 5
1 : 5
=
*
1 14
. ' FRY
A &'Þ
„ if
1 4
*

3 - v9

vs 2K i
3 .

54

l 4. 2 .
"A 4 54

LEED.

1 d
2 N
CORO
& 455 Fix
i . 3
1
.
N —
1
o
_
_
$
p ”
_ k
1%
. 5
*
* *
Y 3 i;
_ £
#
11
4
4 5
4
+ Xx
y 1
*
Sv :
os”) 4
"7 "|
3 *
—
+ Roh
7 * F
15 9 4 4
1
by”
l *


1 „*


——


E — Dee
———


rr a
| > * TIOPTTLO . UM pu ue 2 | og 72


Sl
yoq on woay
DPINFATASN AT

20 JECT .


INI9H1A


hu


—ͤ— —A—1w. lBhLl̃[E]Jͥ˙˙éæ—m:n— oᷣTSAQm2i:gU kV 2 „ „„ „444444 nne,


by | SUN


710 ounumny
„ IN.


AIP OY) |
eee. lunoqegu¹


DUNOQSLAqUPY,) ©


AISHAS MAN


n gr Ko


IG —

LOI DIUDT] Ta \

| 0199-41)
*


* 7410 I IN


3
By |
So ene pg ,t.


DH


Lan,
o I, mw wy our 1


— * . |
* 1.4% L J. 19A = n oqf |
D | uma. | 7e - . . £
| -\
1 PUNOQUM]T] © | | 2 7 c *
| | | | 8 1 H¹j,ꝭ
8 4 a
| 2
＋


5 nn


WA
Ft


.
Ad
>


ion ©


| 1


„%j


2
ol *


8 Wen N 9 4,\ N 4
l | v
6 ＋ Dy | \ 9 t N 8 Ss ; 4)
L 2 av | A "49 — . 499
0 HAY — N l
WER Og PIN (O a
* e S. uf 044) | *
J *
\ 1
)\) 2 | prone
hin isi, e LY i : *
75 Fo 3 8 2 :
'


—


„„ „„ )
266% ̊ꝑ⁊ * „„ ——— nenen eee e 5


5 | — |
5 8
1 1
Li 4. | | | a0, 1 | =
| /A | | 3 veg 7


[ +I,


”y


Vo MAN 410 ALVALS


a, *


r E err er r
58 — * hes 2 * r Ko I =

4 1 * N 8 2 F 2 MLA gs 7. f

P rage? 2 tr PS od CSE" Xs


2 1 = 333


. 1 . 7 wes! 2 = Ty ” "1
— act's «wt * 8 g . mo — — 2 2 wy Is
"4 "0 * 4 8 1 - 0 EA: Vn
CE F 8 1 * * POWs


* 1


o
2


S + Þy ay | * . Ad... * 2 *
re * * 1 ©
* 25 N 1 2 # PP 212 1
1 5 _ <>
* ns ES
wg * a *
ta


ogg 1


„


Ts
1 bl
-—_ y


NEE:


:
8
:
nd
8
8
2
;
*
5
7
8


223 23


Fro. *


ener © J114es 17 4 tes 4. «+


78"


5 PENNSYLVANIA. 419
+ Francis Bernard, £4 £ zi 368: o 1760, removedto Boſton andfacceeded by
+ Thomas Boone, 1760 to 1763 „removed to 8. Carolina and ue,
ABR” iS ceeded by
+ Joſiah Hardy, 1 1761 to 4763, removed and ſucceeded by 7
V5 William Franklin, 135763 to 1776, removed and ſucceeded Ws 5


1 William En e ShcA ans. to 1790, died and eee 15
William Tatterſont : . \ (A798 * A Me 441


4 |


*


N.


7 7
- of - '% g


PENNSYLVANIA.


| Mites. - hats $rTuATION AND ExrExr. i es 3 > Miles.
Length 288 oe 20, E. and 500 W. Longitude. E 7
Breadth 1 600 between 130 » 43, and 42 N. Latitude. 44, 900


5 OUNDED eaſt, by Delaware river, which Aivides it from Mew
BouxDARIEs:] | D Jerſey ; north, by New York, and a territory of about 202,000 .
acres, on Lake Erie, purchaſed of "Congreſs by this State; north-weſt, by a part of
Lake Eric, where there is a good port; weſt, by the Weſtern Territory, and a
of Virginia; ſouth, by a part of Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware. The State les
in the form of à parallelogram. |
 Crvis.;Drvisrons. Pennſylvania i is divided into twenty-two counties, which, *


their county town, tuation, &c. are mentioned in the following table, as alſo the va- |
rious kinds of mines and minerals 1 in the gate.


Counties. Th <| No. Inhab. " Chief Towns, 12 eee — . Mes Kg
Thiladelphia 4 34.391 | Philadelphia on 8 R All :
Cheſter J 27, 937 | Weſt Cheſter | ditto + ] All | Iron ore

Delaware YT 9,483 Cheſter ditto All * 1 £3
Bucks I | 235,401 Newtown" ditto All Iron ore & lead
N e 11 22,929 | Norriſtown on Schuylk R. | All | Iron ore

Lancaſter ,  _ { 36,147 | Lancaſter. on Suſqueh. R.] All | Iron ore & cop.

E Dauphin „ | 18,17 7 Harifburgh | ditto - 2 Iron ore |
o 8 £554 30,179 Reading on Schn yik R. 2 I. ore, coal mi. FI
Northampton 24, 250 {Eaſton | fon pa bag R.] 5 Iron ore

Luzerne 4904 „ on Suſqueh.R.| 4 L. ore, ooal mi. be.
York. 4445 | $97,747 York” {ditto | 2 | Iron ore/ |
Cumberland | 18,243 | Carliſſe | ditto! 2 Lore & lead min.
Northumberland 1 -17,161-| Sunbury {| onW. bran. Su. „ I. ore, ſalt p.
Franklin Tr 5,655 | Chamberſton | onSuſq ueh. R. 2 Iron ore
Bedford $47 4  IR,AQ Bedford Pon Nun R. 2 Iron mines, &c.
Kuntington | I 7565 | Huntington ditto | 3 | Coal & lead mi.
Mifflin J 9,562-+Lewifburgh - ditto f Iron ore
Weſtmoreland © WE 16,018 Greenſburgh on AlleganyR. 1 Coal mines
Fayette 2 > 1 Union on Mononga. | + Coal & iron min.
Waſhington 23,866 Waſhington |S.W.cor.State| 4 ditto, ditto
A I 10,309 1 1 | 3 | ditto, ditto 4
Total N 8 „ - TIRE 3 Rivrns,


* Avery lar proportion of the vacant lands i in the State are ia this connty, N eee to the
Mount'of Recs Now. millions of antes. No '


_ : . ; 4 4/8 S e ee
* PAT 3 „ oe Rt + n W's een Ne. Ne . — ON Wy e e wh
a — - — . —— | * |


' CT LE TEE OE


*
* - , D
ent : n Warn D n , «4 4 5 n er „ 10 * *
r <4 ee * " — ;
* :


470 PENNSYLVANIA,
Rivers, Canxrs, &c.] There are fix conſiderable rivers which, with their nume-
rous branches, pemnſulate the whole State, viz. The Delaware, Schuylkill, Suſque-
Hannah, Youghiogeny, Monongahela, and Allegany. The bay and river Delaware
are navigable: from the ſea up to the. great or lower falls at Trenton, 155 miles; and
are accommodated with a light houſe, on Cape Henlopen, and with buoys ind piers
for the direction” and ſafety of ſhips The diſtance of Philadelphia from the ſea is
about 60 miles acroſs the land in a S. W. courſe, to the New Jerſey coaſt, and 120+
miles by the ſhip channel of the Delaware. So far it is navigable for a 74 gun ſhip.
Sloops go 35 miles farther, to Trenton falls. The river is navigable for boats that
carry eight or nine tons, an hundred miles farther, and for Indian canoes, except
ſeveral ſmall falls or portages, 150 miles. At Eafton it receives the Lehigh from the
_ weſt, which is navigable thirty miles. The tide ſets up as high as Trenton Falls, and
at Philadelphia riſes generally about five or fix feet. A north-eaft and eaſt wind raiſes
- It err.
Between Cape Henlopen and Cape May is the entrance into the Delaware bay.
The entrance into the river is twenty es farther up, at Bombay Hook, where the
river is four or five miles wide. From Bombay Hook to Reedy Iſland is twenty miles.
This ifland is the rendezvous of outward bound ſhips in autumn and ſpring, waiting
for a favourable wind. The courſe from this to the ſea is S. S. E. fo that a N. W. .
wind, which is the prevailing. wind in theſe ſeaſons, is fair for veſſels to put out to ſea.
This river is generally ſrozen one or two months in the year at Philadelphia, fo. as to
prevent navigation, but veſſels may at all times make a ſecure harbour at Port Penn,
at Reedy Iſland, where. picrs have been erected. by the State. Veſſels are 7
from twelve to twenty-four hours in aſcending this beautiful river to Philadelphia:
and the navigation is- ſaſe, and in the milder ſeaſons, eſpecialiy in the ſummer, is in i
deſcribeably pleaſant. - 4
From Cheſter to Philadel phia, twenty milos by water and fifteen by land, the chan--
nel of the river is narrowed by iflands of marſh, which are generally banked and f
turned into rich and immenſely valuable meadows.
Billingſport, twelve miles below Philadelphia, was fortified: ! in the late war for the
- defence of the channel. Oppoſite this fort, ſeveral large frames of timber, headed
with iron ſpikes, called chevaux de frizes, were ſank to prevent the Britiſh ſhips from
paſting. Sinee the peace, a curious machine has been invented in Finn o
ralſc them.
_The Sehuy}kill riſes W of the Kittat inny mountains , through which it
fles, into a fine champaign country, and runs, from its ſource, upwards of 120 miles
In a ſouth- eaſt direction; and paſſing through the limits of the city of Philadelphia
falls into the Delaware oppoſite Mud Iſland, fix: or ſeven miles below the city. It is
navigable from above Reading, eighty- five or ninety miles to its mouth. There are
four floating bridges thrown acroſs it, made of logs faſtened together, and 758 g upon
the water, in the vicinity of Philadelphia. 5
The N. E. branch of the Suſquehannab river riſes in "a Otſego and Otego, in
the State of New York, and runs in ſuch a winding courſe as to croſs the boundary
line between New Vork and Pennfylvania three times. It receives Tyoga river, one
of its principal branches, in lat. 415 557, three miles ſouth of the boundary ne. The
Suſquchannah branch is navigable for batteaux to its ſource, whence, to Mohawk
river, is but twenty miles. The Tyoga branch is navigable fifty miles for batteaux;
and its ſource is but a ſew miles from the Cheneſſec, which empties into lake Ontario.
From Tyoga point, the river proceeds ſouth eaſt to Wyoming without any der |


i N


PENNSYLVANIA. 421

tlon by falls, and then ſouth-eaſt, over Wyoming falls, till at Sunbury, in about lat.
41, it meets the weſt branch of Suſquebhannah, which is navigable ninety miles from
its mouth, and ſome of the branches' of it are navigable fifty miles, and approach
very near ſome of the boatable branches of the Allegany river. This noble river is
paſſable to Middletown, (below Harris' Ferry) with boats, carrying ſeveral hundred
buſhels, and with rafts of boards, &c. from the State of New York, as well as down

the Tyoga, and Juniata branches, ſeveral hundred miles, in their different windings,
but it is attended with difficulty and danger on account of the numerous falls below

Middletown. About fiftcen miles above Harriſburg, it receives the Juniata' from the
north-weſt, 3 from the Allegany mountains, and flowing through-a moun--
10 broken, yet cultivable country. This river is navigable 120 miles from its
mouth. | - 5 | .
The Swetara, which falls into the Suſquchannah from the north-eaſt, is navigable
fifteen miles. About half a mile from the mouth of this river, and a mile from Mid-


ſome ſtone building, has four pair of ſtones, arid is perhaps in every reſpect one of the


moſt complete in the State. But the moſt remarkable circumſtance relative to it, is


gree of boldneſs to a length of 476 rods or perchee, through rocks and hills, and every
obſtacle in its courſe, as cannot fail to excite a very high idea of the enterprize and
perſevering induſtry of Mr. George Frey, the undertaker and owner. 3
From Swetata to the Tulpehoken branch of Schuylkill, a canal and lock navigation:
is undertaken, and the works commenced, by an incorporated company whoſe capital
is 400,000 dollars. This leads through the Schuylkill to Philadelphia. When this
ſhall be effected, a paſſage will be open to Philadelphia from the Juniata, the Tyoga,
and the eaſt, and weſt branches of the Suſquehannah, which water at leaſt 15,000,000
of acres. From this junction, the general courſe of the Suſquehannah is about ſouth-
caſt until it falls into the head of the Cheſapeak bay at Havre de Grace. It is above a
nile wide at its mouth, and is navigable for ſea veſſels but about five miles, on account
of its rapids. The banks of the river are very romantic, particularly where it paſſes:
through the mountains. This paſſage has every appearance of having been forced
through by the preffure of the water, or of having been burſt open by ſome convul-
ſion in nature. „ | ! att
Ihe ſeveral branches of the Youghiogeny river riſe on the weſt fide of the Allegany.
mountains. After running a ſhort diſtance, they unite and form a large. heautiful
river, which, in paſſing ſome of the moſt weſtern ridges of the mountains, precipitates:
itſelf over a level ledge of rocks, lying nearly at right angles to the courte of tlie
river. Theſe falls, called the Ohiopyle falls, are about twenty feet in perpendicular
height, and the river. is perhaps eighty yards wide. For a confiderable diſtance below
the falls, the water is very rapid, and boils and foams vehemently, occaſioning a con-
tinual miſt to riſe from it, even at noon day, and in fair weather. The river at this
place runs to the ſouth-weſt, but preſently winds round to the north-weſt, and conti-
nuing this courſe for thirty or forty miles, it loſes its name by uniting with the Mo-
nongahela, which comes from the ſouthward, and contains, perhaps, twice as much
water. Theſe united ſtreams, ſhortly after their junction, mingle with the waters of
the Allegany and Pittſburgh, and together form the grand river Ohio. 8


The Monongahela has been already particularly deſcribed, and ſome obſervations
made on the navigation of the Allegany. In addition it may be obſerved, that the
junction of French Creek (which comes from the north-weſt) with the Allegany, are
the remains of a Britiſh fortification ; and about a mile above is Fort Franklin, built

| NE) 2, | in


dletown, is a griſt mill, which merits particular notice. It is a very large and hand-


the Race, Which is a canal from twenty to thirty feet wide, and carried with ſuch a de-


1 | PENNSYLVANIA.


in 1787, and then guarded by a company of American ſoldiers. , The Pennſylvania
north line crofles French Creek about three miles above Le Boeuf, where there was
formerly a ſort. From Le Bœuf to Preſqueiſle, fiftecn or ſixteen miles, is an old
waggon Toad, cut by the French in the war of 1755. The lands on French Creek.
are very rich, and moſtly cleared, which is an evidence that its former Indian inhahi-.
tants were numerous. Fourteen miles from the mouth of this creck is a gentle REA,
thence to its mouth, it is ſlow, deep, and ſmooth. n
| -"There is ſaid to be a practicable communication between the father branch of the.
Tyoga and a branch of the Allegany, the head waters of which are but a ſhort diſ-
+tance from each other. The Seneca Indians ſay they can walk four times in a day,
from the boatable waters of the Allegany to thoſe of the Tyoga, at the place now
mentioned. And between the Suſquehannah, juſt before it croſſes into Pennſylvania
the firſt time, and the Delaware, is a portage of only twelve miles. Raſts of timber,
Plank, boards, and ſtaves, with other articles upon them, can be brought down the
Delaware from the counties of Montgomery and Otſego in New York, 200 miles
above the city by the courſe of the river. Some money was expended by the govern-
ment and Jandholders in improving the navigation up towards the ſource, before the
revolution, and there has been a ſurvey fince made, for the purpoſe of proceeding in
the improvement of this and the other principal rivers of Pennſylvania, and for making
communications by canals in the improved part, and by roads in the unimproved part
of the State. Great progreſs has already been made in theſe improvements, and the
. exertions for their completion are ſtill continued. The Pennſylvanians are much in-
clined to ſuch enterprizes, having found great benefit from them. On the comple-
tion of the preſent plans, the State will be as conveniently interſected by roads as any
other of its ſize in the Union, which will greatly facilitate the ſettlement of its new
lands. A flight view of the map of Pennſylvania will ſhew how finely this State is
watered by the Delaware and its branches, the Schuylkill, the Juniata, the Suſque-
hannah and its branches, the Ohio, the Allegany, Youghiogeny, and Monongahela.
The Patomak and Lake Erie alſo afford proſpects of conſiderable benefit from their
navigation. Nature has done much for Pennſylvania in regard to inland water car-
Triage, which is ſtrikingly exemplified by this fact, that although Philadelphia and lake
Erie are diſtant from each other above 300 miles, there is no doubt but that the rivers
of the State may be ſo improved, as to reduce the land carriage between them nine
tenths. In the ſame way the navigation to Pittſburg, after due improvement, may be
uſed inſtead of land carriage for the whole diſtance, except twenty-three miles. —By
theſe routs it is clear, that a large proportion of the foreign articles uſed on the weſ-
tern waters muſt be tranſported, and their furs, ſkins, ginſeng, hemp, flax, pot aſh,
and other valuable commodities, brought to Philadelphia. The hemp and oa timber
for the Ruſſian navy is tranſported by inland navigation 1200 miles, and yet hemp is
ſhipped from that kingdom on lower terms than from any other part of the known
world. Ruſſia, long fince the ſettlement of Pennſylvania by civilized and enlightened
py ple, was in a ſtate of abſolute barbariſm, np deſtitute of theſe improvements.
uch therefore is to be expected from the continued exertions of the prudent, induſ-
trious, and ſenfible inhabitants of Pennſylvania, in the courſe of the preſent century.
One remark muft not be omitted here, and that is, that in all the back country


waters of this State, even in thoſe high up in the mountains, marine petriſactions are
found in great abundance.


SwWAMrs.] The only ſwamps worth noticing are, the Great Swamp, between Nor-
#hampton and Luzerne counties, and Buffaloe . in the State of New York, ſome


diſtance


PENNSYLVANIA. 423
diſtance north of the Pennſylvania: line. Theſe ſwamps, on examination and ſurvey; .
are found to be bodies of farm land, thickly covered: with beach and ſugar maple.
MovnTars, Fact or Tye CounTRY, Soil, and NATURAL ADVANTAGES.] A con-
fiderable proportion of this State may be called mountainous ; particularly the coun-
ties of Bedford, Huntingdon, Cumberland, part of Franklin, Dauphin, and part of
Bucks and Northampton, through which paſs, under various names, the numerous
ridges and ſpurs, which collectively form what we chuſe to call, for the fake of clear-
nefs, THE GREAT RANGE of AzLEGany MounTains. The principal ridges in this
range, in Pennſylvania, are the Kittatinny, or Blue Mountains, which paſs north of
Nazareth in Northampton county, and purſue a ſouth-weſt courſe acroſs the Lehigh,
through Dauphin county, juſt above Harriſburg, thence on the weſt fide of the Suſ
quehannah through Cumberland and Franklin counties. Back of theſe, and nearly
parallel with them, are Peters, Tuſcarra, and Neſcopek mountains, on the eaſt of the
Suſquehannah; and on the weſt, Shareman's Hills, Sideling Hills, Ragged, Great:
Warriors, Evit's and Wills“ mountains; then the great Allegany ridge, which being
the largeſt; gives its name to the whole range; weſt of this are the Cheſnut ridges.
Between the Juniata and the weft branch of. the Suſquehannah are Jacks, Tuſſys,
Nittiny, and. Bald Eagle mountains. The vales between theſe mountains are gene-
rally of a rich; black ſoil, ſuited to the various kinds of grain and graſs. Some of
the mountains will admit of cultivation almoſt to their tops: The other parts of the
State are generally level, or agrecably variegated with hills and vallies. 8


In this connection, I beg leave to introduce the remarks of Mr. Charles Thompſon,
the late ſecretary of Congreſs, which were ſuggeſted on his reading Mr. Jefferſon's
deſcription of the paſſage of the Patomak through the Blue ridge. The reflectjons I
was led into on viewing this paſſage of the Patomak through the Blue ridge were, that
this country muſt have ſuffered ſome violent convulſion, and that the face of it muſt
have been changed from what it probably was ſome centuries ago; that the broken
and ragged faces of the mountain on each ſide the river; the tremendous rocks, which
are left with one end fixed in the precipice, and the other jutting out and ſeemingly
ready to fall for want of ſupport; the bed of the river for ſeveral miles below obſtruc-
ted, and filled with the looſe ſtones carried from this moznd ; in ſhort; every thing
on which you caſt your eye evidently demonſtrates a difrupture and breach in the
mountain, and that, before this happened; what is now a fruitful vale, was formerly a
great lake or collection of water, which poſſibly might have here formed a mighty
caſcade; or had its vent to the ocean by the Suſquehannah, where the Blue ridge ſeems
to terminate. Befides this, there are other parts of this country which bear evident
traces of a like convulſion. From the beſt accounts I have been able to obtain, the
place where the Delaware now flows through the Kittatinny mountain, which is a
continuation of what is called the North Ridge, or mountain, was not its original
_ courſe, but that it paſſed through what is now called the Wind-gap, a place ſeveral
miles to the weſtward, and above an hundred feet higher than the preſent bed of the
river. This wind- gap is about a mile broad, and the ſtones in it ſuch as ſeem to have
been waſhed for ages by water running over them. Should this have been the caſe,
there muſt have been a large lake behind that mountain, and by ſome uncommon
ſwell in the waters, or by ſome convulſion of nature, the river muſt haye opened its
way through a different part of the mountain, and meeting there with leſs obſtruction,
carried away with the oppoſing mounds of earth, and deluged'tho-country-below.with
the immenſe collection of waters to which this new paſſage gave vent. There are ſtill
remaining, and daily diſcovered, innumerable inſtances of ſuch a ddluge on ba

N a es


f


424 - . PENN SYLVANIA.


ſides of the river, aſier it paſſed the hills above the fall of Trenton, and reached the


k VT-- YR 6


Philadelphia ſtands evidently appears to be made ground. The different ſtrata through
which they paſs in digging to water, the; acorns, leaves, and, {ſometimes branches,
which are found above twenty feet below the ſurface, all ſeem to demonitrate this. 1
am informed [that at Yorktown in Virginia, in the bank of Vork river, there are dif-
ferent ſtrata of ſhells and earth, one above another, which ſeem to point gut that the
country there has undergone ſeveral changes; that the ſea has, for a ſueceſſion of ages,
occupied the place where dry land now appears: and that the ground has been ſud-
xenly raiſed at various periods. What a change would it make in the country below,
ſhould the mountains at Niagara, by any accident, be cleft aſunder, and a paſſage
ſuddenly opened to drain off the waters of Erie and the Upper lakes! While rumi-
nating on theſe ſubjects, IJ haye often been hurried away by fancy, and led to imagine,
that what is now the bay of Mexico, was once a champaign country; and that from
the point or cape of Florida, there was a continued range of mountains through Cuba,
Hiſpaniola, Porto Rico, Martinique, Guadaloupe, Barbadoes, and Trinidad, till it
reached the coaſt of America, and formed the ſhores which bounded the ocean, and
guarded the country behind: that, by ſome convulſion or. ſhock of nature, the ſea had
broken through theſe mounds, and deluged that vaſt plain, till it reached the foot of
the Andes; that being there heaped up by the trade winds, always blowing from one
quarter, it had found its way back, as it continues to do, through the gulph between
Florida and Cuba, carrying with it the loom and ſand it may have ſcooped from the
country it had occupied, part of which it may have depoſited on the ſhores of North
America, and which part formed the banks of Newfoundland.— But theſe are only
%%% ̃ M ĩ˙Üv cs oy en 262506; bovRey bY
The foil of Pennſylvania is of various kinds; in ſome parts it is barren; a great
proportion of the State is good land, and no inconfiderable part is very good. Per-
haps the proportion of firſt rate land is not greater in any of the Thirteen States.
The richeſt part of the State that is ſettled in Lancaſter county, and the valley through
Cumberland, York, and Franklin. The richeſt that is unſettled, is between Allegany
river and Lake Erie, in the north-weſt corner of the State, and in the country on the
heads of the eaſtern branches of the Allegany. Of this fine trac}, 100,000 acres, Iy-
ing on, and near French Creek, are for ſale by the State. The convenient communi-
cations through this creek into the Allegany, and from the Allegany, through, various
 «reeks and rivers to Suſquehannah and Patomak, have already been mentioned. 25
Ihe ſouth fide of Pennſylvania is the beſt ſettled land throughout, owing entirely
to the circumſtance of the weſtern road having been run by the armies, prior to 17 625
through the towns of Lancaſter, Carliſle, and Bedford, and thence to Pittſburg.
For the purpoſe of turning the tide of ſettlers from this old channel into the unſettled
parts of the State, the government and landed intereſt of Pennſylvania have been, and
are ſtill buſy in cutting convenient roads. During the ſummer. of 1788 they run a
road north, from a former road beyond Bethlehem, 2 the north portage between De-
laware and Suſquehannah : and thenee north eighty degrees weſt to the mouth of the
Tyoga, the firſt ſeventy miles, and the laſt above fixty. It is now in contemplation


* Jeſferſoo's Hiltory of Virginia, printed for I. Stockdale, Appendix No. I


1


PENNSTLVANIA. 425
to eut a road from Sunbury, at the forks of the eaſt and weſt branches of Suſquelian-
nah ; welt 150 miles to the mouth:of Toby's Creek, which empties into the Allegany
river from the caſt. This road will be through a tract of rich land, now for ſale by
the State. A road is alto cut from the mouth of the Tyoga, ſouthward, to the mouth
of Loyal, a branch of the weſt branch of Suſquchannah. Another road is cut from
Huntingdon town, on Franks town branch of the Jumata, weſtward thirty miles to
Conemagh, a navigable branch of the Allegany. .

Thus the well-judged policy of this State is paving the way for the ſettlement of all
their waſte lands. And to evidence their benevolence, and their wiſhes to have the
advantages of education increated and more extenſively enjoyed, they have allotted
60,000 acres of theſe waſte lands for the uſe of public es ; auch above 60,000 +
more have been granted for that purpoſe, and to the ſocieties eſtabliſhed for the | pt |

motion of knowledge, the arts, religion, &. A confiderable part of the lands of
this State remain at preſent for ſale by the public. The Pennſylvanians having
no diſputes with the Indians about boundaries, and all the lands within the State, be-
ing purchaſed at a fair and open treaty, and there being ſome ſettlements weſtward
of the Pennfylvania line, tliere is little apprehenſion of the Indiaus any where, and
in moſt parts of the State no danger at all.

Among the natural advantages "of Pennſylvania, her al moſt innumerable mill ſeats
ought not to be omitted. They are conveniently diſtributed by Providence throughout
the State, and afford the means of eſtabliſhing every ſpecies of mill work and labour-
ſaving machines, to meet the produce and raw materials almoſt at the farmers doors.
In tlie preſent ſituation of this country, wanting hands for farming, and in the pre-
ſent ſtate of manufactures, when ingenious mechaniſin is every day and every where
invented to leſſen the neceſſity for manual labour, this natural advantage muſt appear
of ineſtimable importance. Hemp and flax are among the moſt profitable productions
of the rich midland and new counties, the Cream of which is yet to be ſkimmed. It
is therefore a moſt pleaſing fact, that they have in this State the full-ſized and com-
plete morements or works of a water mill and machinery, to fliver, rove, and - 8
flax and hemp into threads or yarns, fit for linen of thirty cuts to the pound, or any
coarſer kind, ſheetings, towelling, fail cloth, oznabrigs, twine, and the ſtrans or yarns |
for cordage. The ſame machinery is calculated for the roving or preparing, and ſpin-
ning of combed wool into worſted yarn. They have alſo the movements and complete
machinery of Sir Richard Arkwright's water- mill for ſpinning yarns of cotton. And
though the climate of the State is not fit for cultivatiug that raw material, yet cotton
can be raiſed with profit in every State in the Union ſouthward of Fennſy Ivania, and » »
imported from the Eaſt and Weſt Indies.

It is certain that this extraordinary capacity of our - country . mechanical works .
has either called forth, in an unuſual degree, the mechanical powers of the human
wind, or that Providence has beſtowed upon the people of this and our ſiſter States an
uncommon portion of this talent, which its nature and ſituation require. Rittenhouſe
and Frontlin: ſtand unrivalled in mechanical philoſophy; and thoſe who know our

country are well informed, that to theſe two great names we could add a conſiderable |
liſt of philoſophical and practical mechanicians, in a variety of branches. |

So many of the neceſſury and convenient arts and trades depend upon the plenty and :
cheapneſs of fuel, that it appears proper to take notice of this article. - Till the. rero-
lution, the dependence of the people was almoſt eutirely upon wood fuel, of which,
n the moſt Populous places, there is ſtill a great abundance, and in all interior ſitun-
tions immenſe quantities; but tlie increuſe of manufactures has occaſioned them to _

| 3 I | IP”;


*


20 6* FE NNSNYLVANTA.


Ecir attention. to coal. Of this uſeful foſſile Providence has given them very great
quantities in the middle and weſtern, country. In the vicinity of Wyoming, on the |
Suſquiehantahy: is one bed of the open burning kind, and of the moſt intenſe heat.
Oh the head: waters of Schuylkill and Lehigh are ſome conſiderable bodies. At the
head of the weftern branch of Suſquehannah is a moſt extenſive body, which ſtretches
over the country ſouth-weſtwardly, ſo as to be found in the greateſt plenty at Pittſ-
burgh, where the Allegany and Voughiogeny unite, and form the head of the Ohio.
ell the coal has hitherto been accidentally found on the ſurface of the earth, or diſ-
covered in the digging of common cellars, fo that when the wood fuel ſhall become
ftarce, and the European methods of boring ſhall be ſkilfully purſued, there can be
no doubt of its being found in many other places. At preſent, the ballaſting of ſhips
from coal countries abroad, and the coal mines in Virginia, which lie convenient to
{ſhip navigation, occafion a good deal of coal to be brought to the Philadelphia mar-
ket. From this great abundance and variety of fuel it reſults, that Pennfylvania, and
the United States in general, are welb ſuited to all manufactories that are effected by
fire; ſuch as furnaces, foundaries, forges, glaſs houſes, breweries, diſtilleries, ſteel
wigs: ſmith ſhops, and all other manufactories: in metal, ſoap boiling, chandllers 7
ſhops, pot aſh works, ſugar and other refineries, &c. &c. 5
Ship building! is a buſineſs in which the port of Philadelphia exceeds moſt parts of |
the world. Maſts, ſpars, timber, and.plank, not only from their own State and the
other States on the Delaware, are conſtantly for ſale in their market; but the mu
_ of the Chefapeak, and the evergreen or live oak and red cedar of the Carolinas and
Georgia, are fo abundantly imported, that nine-tenths of their veſſels are built of
them. No veſſels are better than theſe. A live oak and cedar ſhip of 200 tons, car-
penter's meaſurement, can be fitted to take in a cargo for fourteen pounds r er
per ton; and there is not a port in Europe in which an oak ſhip can be equally we
built and fitted for twenty pounds per ton currency, or twelve pounds ſterling. This
fact may appear doubtful or extraordinary, but it is certainly true; and it is greatly in
favour of the ſhip carpenters and other tradefmen pals e. in fitting and builing
thips, as well as merchants and. farmers, whoſe intereſts are 1 much connected with
navigation.
The diſtance of Philadelphia from the * has been made a an objection by ſome, and!
the clofing of the river by the ice, which happens almoſt every winter. Amſterdam,
the greateſt port in Europe, is inacceſſible in the winter. But it is a fact, that, not-
withſtanding; theſe objections, their veſſels make as many Weſt India voyages as thoſe
of the two other principal ſea ports of the Middle States; and though the river is
frozen from three to nme weeks almoſt every winter, yet there are occaſional openings,
which give opportunities for fleets of merchantmen to go out and come in- The fine
corn and proviſion country which lies near Philadelphia, enables the merchants to load
their veſſels in the winter, and the market is regularly ſupplied with flour, pork, beef,
lumber, ſtaves, iron, and many other of their principal articles of exportation. Lit-
tle time is therefore loſt, and their trade inereaſes. The crop of 1789, and other ex-
ports from the harveſt of that year to that of 1790, it was ſuppo ed, would load
120,000 tons of ſhipping. A very extenfive back country; and many large bodies
of ow lands, are ſettling faft, Which muſt ſend. their "re een to the Pluladelplua
market |
_ PRODUCTIONS, MaxuracTuxes, AGRICULTURE, Exronrs, bel we mention
theſe articles together, becauſe it is difficult to feparate them. Under the 1
head, we have * ſome things that —_— be naturally mentioned here: I hey
1 Pr UCC,


Fs


hs


PENNSYELVANETA


pfoduce, manufactures, and exports of Pennſylvania are very many and various Wiz.
hst, flour, middlings, fhip ſtuff, bran, fhorts, ſhip bread, yp water bxcuit; rye,
rye flour, Inſlian corn or maize, Indian meal, buck-wheat, buck-wheat! meal, bar-and
pig iron, ſteel, nail rods, nails, Iron hoops,. rolled i iron, tire, gunpowder, cannon ball,
Ten annum muſquets, ſhips, boats, oars, hand{ IN maſts, ſpars, ſhip timber, ſhip |


blocks, cordage, ſquare timber, ſcantling, plank, boards, thre es, heading, ſhingles,
wooden hoops, tanners bark, corn fans, coopers wares, bricks, coarſe earthen or potters
ware, a very little ordinary ſtone ware, glue, parchment, ſhoes, boots, ſole leather,
upper leather, dreſſed deer and ſheep ſkins, and gloves, and garments of the ſame, fine
hats, many common, and a few coarle ; thread, cotton, worfted and yarn hoſiery,
writing, wrapping, blotting, ſheathing, and banging paper, ſtationary, playing cards,
copper, filver and gold, clocks and watches, muſical inſtruments, ſnuff, manufactured
tobacco, chocolate, muſtard ſeed and muſtard, ſtarch, hair powder, flax ſeed, flax ſeed
oil, flax, hemp, wool, and cotton cards, pickled beef, pork, ſhad, herrings s, tongues and
ſturgeon, hams and other bacon, tallow, hogs lard, Tong cheeſe, candles, ſoap, bees-
wax, loaf ſugar, pot and pearl aſh, rum and other firong waters, beer, porter, hops,
winter and ſummer barley, oats; ſpelts, onions, potatoes, turnips, cabbages, carrots,
parſnips, red and white clover, timothy, and moſt European vegetables and graſſes,
apples, peaches; plums, pears, apricots, grapes, both native and imported, and other
European fruits, working and pleaſurable carriages, horfes, black cattle, Thoep, hgh

wood for cabmet-makers, lime- ſtone, coal, free-ſtone, and marble.
Some of theſe productions are fine, ſome indifferent; ſome of the ma gutes are
conſiderable, for a young country circumſtanced as this has been, ſome inconſiderable;
but they are enumerated to ſhow the general nature of the State, and the various pur-
ſuits of the inhabitants. In addition to them we may mention, that a lead mine and
two or three falt ſprings have been diſcovered in the new country, which will no doubt
be worked, as ſoon as the demand for theſe articles to the weſtward increaſes. - We
_ ought alſo. to notice the great foreſts for making pot and pearl aſh. Marble 1 18 found
in many parts of the State.

The manufactures of Pennſylvania have increaſed exceedingly within 4 how years,
as well by maſter workmen and j journeymen from abroad, as by the increaſed ſkill and
induſtry of their own citizens. Houſehold or family manufactures have greatly ad-
vanced, and valuable acquiſitions have been made of implements and machinery to fave
labour, either imported, or invented in the United States. The hand machines for
carding and ſpinning cotton have been introduced by foreigners, and improved upon;
but they have lately obtained the water mill for ſpinning cotton, and a water mill for
flax, which is applicable alſo to ſpinning hemp and wool: Theſe machines promiſe
an early eſtabliſhment of the cotton, linen, and hempen branches, and muſt be of very
great ſervice in the woollen branch. Additional employment for weavers, dyers,
bleachers, and other manufacturers, muſt be the conſequence. Paper mills, gunpowder
_ mills, ſteel works, rolling and ſlitting mulls, printing figured goods of paper, linen and
cotton, coach making, book printing, and ſeveral other branches, are wonderfully ad-
vanced, and every month ſeems to extend the old manufactures, or to introduce new
ones. There are upwards of fifty paper mills in Pennſylvania which work materials
of no intrinſic value. The manufactures from the mills are computed at 250,000
dollars. The hands employed i in them do not exceed 300. It is calculated that their
paper mills alone indemnify them for five eighths of their Wein of the 9, Dag of the
gencral reren and the intereſt of the ꝓublie debt. : 5 0k

| 312 : The


*
_


428 PENNSYLVANIA.


+» ſubſtantial farmer that has a family about him, eafily to make twelve hundred weight


Of theſe there are ſume millions of acres in Pennſylvania and the adjacent States, and


| for the above ſhort period, may make large quantities.


The advancement of the agriculture: of Pennſylvania is the beſt proof that can be
given of the comfort and happineſs it affords to its farming, manufacturing, and trading
citizens. In the year 1786 their exports of flour were 150,000 barrels (excluſive ot
many other articles); in 1787 they were 202;000 barrels; in 1788 they were 220, 00
barrels; and in 1789 they were 369,618 barrels, which exceeds any export ever made
in the times of the province or in the times of the commonwealth. The produce of
flax is increaſed in a much greater degree, and that of wool is confiderably more than
it was before the revolution. A new article is likely to be added to the liſt of their
productions, which is a well-taſted and wholſome gar, made of the Maple-iree. It
has been proved by many fair and careful experiments, that it is in'the power.of a


of this ſugar every ſeaſon, without hiring any additional hands, or any utenſils but
thoſe that are neceſſary for his family and farm uſe. The time in which it can be made
is from the middle of February to the end of March, when farmers in this count
have very little to do, as it is too early to plough or dig. The price of ſugar being
lower here than in Europe, this article may be reckoned at 100 Mexican dollars per
annum to every careful and ſkilful farmer, that owns land bearing the ſugar maple.


at leaſt one or two millions belonging to this State for ſale. It ſeems alſo highly pro-
bable that this valuable tree may be tranſplanted, and thus be obtained by almoſt any
farmer in the State, and that men of property, who will purchaſe kettles and hire hands


No difficult; lies in the way of any perſon who defires to become a free and equal
citizen. On the day of his landing he may buy a' farm, a houſe, merchandize, or raw
materials; he may open a work-ſhop, a counting-houſe, an office, or any other place
of lawful buſineſs, and purſue his calling without any hindrance, or the payment of
apy ſum of money to the public. The right of electing and being elected (which does
not affect his buſineſs or his ſafety) as not granted till the expiration of two years, which

prudence requires. Saas | ee e FT

A privilege, almoſt peculiar to this State, has been granted to foreigners by the
legiſlature ; that of buying and holding lands and houſes within this Commonwealth;

without relinquiſhing their allegiance to the country in which they were born. They
can ſell or bequeath the lands, receive the rents, and, in ſhort, have every territorial
and pecuniary right that a naturabborn Pennfylvaman has; but no civil rights. As
they profeſs to owe allegiance to a foreign prince or government, and reſide in a foreign
country, where they of courſe have civil rights, they cannot claim them, nor ought
they to deſire them here, ſince no man can ſerve two maſters. If they chuſe, at any
tune after purchaſe, to come out to this country and make themſelves citizens; or if
they chuſe to give their eſtate to a child, or other perſon, who will do fo, either of them
may become citizens to all intents and purpoſe s.
Such is the preſent ſituation of things in Pennſylvania, which is more or leſs the
ſame in ſeveral other of the American States, viz. Diſtrict of Main, New Hampſhire;
Vermont, New York, Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia; but though not ſo in the
reſt, the principal difference is, that they are ſo fully peopled, that there are few new
lands of any value unfold, and farming lands, that are improved, are of courſe dearer.
In thote States, however, . agriculture, commerce, manufactures, the fiſheries, - and
navigation, afford comfortabic ſubſiſtence and ample rewards of profit to the induſtri-
ous aud well-dilpoted, aniidſt the bleſſings of eivil and religious bberty. oo oe
8 | e e PorulATIOx


2 ö


—


PENNSTLYANIA. : _ 429
porub rio AND CHaRACTER.] The population of this State is oa in the
table. It is nearly ten for every ſquare mile. The number of militia 1s eſtimated at
upwards of 90,000, between 18 and 53 years of age.
The inhabitants are principally the deſcendants of the Engliſh, Iriſh, and Germans,
| with ſome Scotch, Welch, Swedes, and a few Dutch. There are alſo many of the
Iriſh and Germans who emigrated when young or middle aged. The Friends and
Epiſcopalians are chiefly of Engliſh extraction, and compoſe about one third of the in-
habitants. They live principally in the city of Philadelphia, and in the counties of
Cheſter, Philadelphia, Bucks, and Montgomery. The Iriſh are moſtly Preſbyterians,
but ſome Catholics. . Their anceſtors came from the north of Ireland, which was
originally ſettled from Scotland ; hence they have ſometimes been called Scotch Iriſh,
to denote their double deſcent : but they are commonly and more properly called
Triſh, or the deſcendants of people from the north of Ireland. They inhabit the weſtern
and frontier counties, and are numerous.
The Germans compoſe about one quarter of the inhabitants of Pcnnſy lvania.
They are moſt numerous in the north parts of the city of Philadelphia, 5/4 the
counties of Philadelphia, Montgomery, Bucks, Dauphin, Lancaſter, York, and
Northampton, moſtly in the four laſt, and are ſpreading in other parts. They confiti
of Lutherans, (who are the moſt numerous ſect) Calviniſts or Reformed Church, Mo-
ravians, Catholics, Mennoniſts, Tunkers (corruptly called Dunkers), and Zwingfelters,
who are a ſpecies of Quakers. Theſe are all Aae for their temperance, in-
du ſtry, and economy.
The Germans have uſually fifteen of fixty-nine members i in the Aſſembly ; and ſome
of them have ariſen to the firſt honours in the State, and now fill a number of the
higher offices; yet the body of them want education. A literary rt has however
of late been increafin g among them.
The Baptiſts (except the Mennoniſt and T anker Baptiſts, who are Germans) are
chiefly the 1 of emigrants from Wales, and are not numerous. A propor-
tionate aſſemblage of the national prejudices, the manners, cuſtems, religions, and
political ſentiments of all theſe, will form the Pennſy e800 character. As the lead-
ing traits in this character, thus conſtituted, we may venture to mention induſtry, ſtu-
Fality, bordering in ſome inſtances on parſimony, enterprize, a taſte and ability for
improvements in mechanics, in manufactures, in agriculture, in public buildings and
inſtitutions, in commerce, and in the liberal ſciences ; temperance, plainneſs, and ſim-
plicity in dreſs and manners; pride and humility in their extremes; inoffenſiveneſs
and intrigue; and in regard to religion, variety and harmony. Such e to be the
diſtimguiſhing traits in the collective Pennſylvanian character.
RLICiox. The ſituation of religion and religious rights and liberty i in Penne *
vania, is a matter that deſcrves the attention of all ſober and well-diſpoſed people, |
who may have thoughts of this country. This State always afforded an aſylum to the
perſecuted ſes of Europe. No church or ſociety ever was eſtablithed Tad no tithes
or tenths can be demanded ; and though tome regulations of the Crown of England
excladed two-churches from a thare in the government of the province, theſe are now
done away with regard to every religious ſociety whatever, except the Hebrew Church.
But a convention of {ſpecial repreſentatives of the citizens of Pennſylvania have had
under conſideration all the errors that have inadvertently crept into their conſtitution _
and frame of government, and, in the act they have publiſhed for the examination of
the people, they have rejected the half-way doctrine of 'ToLERATION, and have efabliſhed,


upon firm and perſectiy equal n all denominations d: religious meu. By the pro-
** Y 11008


b.
3
72
10
3
47
4
1
©
* U
by MY.
IB
- &%
*


43 PENNSYLVANIA.


Fete 9 unlawfully * in * This ſociety was begun in 1774, 1 e


viſions of the new code, a Proteſtant, a Roman Catholic, and a Hebrew, may elect
or be elected to any office in the State, and nN any lawful calling, enen or
profefſion. a

ILT ERARY, Hrstaxr, AND OTHER USEFUL Socixris- J Theſe are more numerous
and flouriſhing in Pennſylvania, than in any of the Fifteen States. The names of


theſe improving inſtitutions, the times when they were eſtabliſhed, and a ſummary of


the benevolent defigns they were intended to accomplith, will be mentioned in their
order.

1. Tur AuxRLCAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, held at Philadelpbia, for promoting uſeful
Fnozledge. This ſociety was formed January zd, 1769, by the union of two other
literary ſocieties that had ſubſiſted for ſome time in Philadelphia, and were created one
body corporate and politic, with ſuch powers, privileges, and immunities as are neceſ-
fary for anſwermg the valuable purpoſes which the fociety had originally in view, by
a charter granted by the Commonwealth of Pennſylvania, on the 15th of March, 1780,
This ſociety have already publiſhed two very Wann volumes of their tranfaclins, ;
one in 1771, the other in 1786. 985 5

In 1771, this ſociety conſiſted of nearly 300 Wenders and upwards of 120 have
fince been added ; a large proportion of which are foreigners of he firſt diſtinction 1 in


Europe. 5


Their charter allows them to hold lands, = & c. to the amount of the alin
yearly value of ten thouſand buſhels of wheat. 1 he number of members is not
limited.


2. Taz Society rox PROMOTING PoLITICAL Inarmins confiſing of fit members
inſtituted in February, 1787.


Tun CoLLxcs or PaysIcraxs, inſtituted in 1787, for the ptomotiohn of me-
dical, anatomical, and chemical une 5 Incorporated by act of A March,


1789.


„ Tux Pascher ined Hosprral., a humane inſtitution, which was firſt meditated


In 1750, and carried into effect by means of a liberal ſubſcription of about $oool. and


by the affiſtance of the Aſſembly, who, in 1751, granted as much more for the purpoſe.
'The preſent building was begun in 1754, and finiſhed in 1756. This hoſpital is
under the direction of twelve managers, choſen annually, and is viſited every year by
a committee of the Aſſembly. The accounts of the managers are ſubmitted to the
inſpection of the legiſlature. Six phyſicians attend gratis, and generally preſcribe
twice or three times in a week, in their turns. This hoſpital is the — —
of lunatics and madmen, and of thoſe affected with other diſorders, and are unable to
ſupport themſelves. Here they are humanely treated and well provided for.

. Tar PRHILADELTHIA Dis Ex SAR V, for the medical relief of the poor. This benevo-
Tent inſtitution was eſtabliſhed on the 13th of April, 1786, and is ſupported by annual


5 ſubſeriptions of thirty-frve ſhillings each perſon. No leſs than 1 800 patients were ad-


mitted within ſixteen months aſter the firſt opening of the diſpenſary. It is under the
direction of twelve managers and ſix phyſicians, all of whom attend gratis. This in-


ſtitution exhibits an application of ſomething like the mechanical powers to the pur-
8 of humanity. ih


e greateſt quantity of good is produced this way with the
eaſt money. Five hundred pounds a year defrays all the expenſes of the inſtitution.
The poor are taken care of in their own houſes, and provide every Yung for them-


elves, except medicines, cordial drinks, &c.


6. TRE PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY, for promoting the abolition of Slavery, and the ** of


| PENNSYLVANIA. 431
on the 23d of April, 1787. The officers of the ſociety conſiſt of a preſident, two
vice- preſidents, two ſecretaries, a treaſurer, four counſellors, an electing committee of
twelve, and an acting committee of fix members; all of whom, except the laſt, are to
be choſen annually by ballot, on the firſt Monday in January. ＋ he ſociety meet
quarterly, and each member contributes ten ſhillings annually, in quarterly payments,
towards defraying its contingent expenſes. 15 „ 125
The legiſlature of this State have favoured the humane deſigns of this ſociety, by
« An Act for the gradual Abolition of Slavery,” paſſed on the firſt of March, 1780
wherein, among other things, it is ordained that no perſon born within the State, after
the paſling of the act, ſhall be conſidered as a ſervant for life; and all perpetuaE
ſlavery is by this act for ever aboliſhed. The act provides, that thoſe who would,
in caſe this act had not been made, have been born ſervants or ſlaves, ſhall be deemed
ſuch, till they ſhall attain the age of twenty-eight years; but they are to be treated in
all reſpects as ſervants bound by indenture for four years Po |
7. THE SOCIETY OF THE UNITED BRETHREN, for propagating the goſpel among the
beathens, inſtituted in 1787, to be held ſtatedly at Bethlehem. An act, incorporating:
this ſociety, and inveſting it with all neceffary powers and privileges for accom-
pliſhing its pious defigns, was paſſed by the legiſlature of the State, on the 27th of
February, 1788. They can hold lands, houſes, &c. to the annual amount of two
thouſand pounds. 33 N 5
Theſe pious Brethren, commonly called Moravians, began a miſſion among the
Mahikan, Wampano, Delaware, Shawanoe, Nantikok, and other Indians, about fifty.
years ago, and were ſo ſucceſsful as to add more than one thouſand” ſouls to the
Chriſtian church by baptiſm. Six hundred of theſe have died in the Chriſtian faith;
about 3oo live with the miſſionaries near Lake Erie, and the reſt are either dead, or
apoſtates in the wilderneſs. 5 5 3 15
8. Tae PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY, for the encouragement of manufactures and uſeful arts,
inſtituted in 1787, open for the reception of every citizen in the United. States, which
will fulfil the engagements of a member of the ſame. The ſociety is under the direc--
tion of a preſident, four vice-prefidents, and twelve managers, befides ſubordinate:
_ officers. Each member, on his admiffion, pays ten ſhillings at leaſt into the general
fund; and the ſame ſum annually, till he ſhall ceaſe to be a member. _ |
Beſides theſe, a very reſpectable inſurance company has lately been eſtabliſhed in:
Philadelphia, with a capital of 600,000 dollars, who. have commenced bufineſs to ad-
vantage — There is alſo a SociETY FOR ALLEVIATING THE MISERIES OF PRISONS; and a
_ Humanz'Socregry, for the recovering and reſtoring to life the bodies of drowned per-
tons, inſtituted in 1770, under the direction of thirteen managers. And. a Society for
the aid and protection of eee 5 $4 5
Alſo, an Agricultural Society ; a Society for German emigrants; a Marine Society, conſiſt-
ing of captains of veſſels ; a Charitable Society for the ſupport of widows and families of
Preſbyterian clergymen; and St. George's, St. Andrew's, and the Hibernian Charitable Societies.
Moſt of theſe ſocieties are in the city of Philadelphia. 5
ColL RES, ACADEMIES, AND Schools.] From the enterprizing and literary ſpirit
of the Pennſylvanians, we ſhould naturally conclude, what is fact, that theſe are
numerous, 1 | : rs |
In Philadelphia is the Univerſity of Pennſylvania, founded and endowed by the le--
* giſlature during the war: Profeſſorſnips are eſtabliſhed in all the liberal arts and:
leiences, and a complete courſe of education may be purſued here from the firſt rudi-
ments of literature to the higheſt branches of ſcience..


Th


432 PENNSYLVANIA.


The college and academy of Philadelphia was founded by charter between thirty
and torty years ago, and endowed by ſubſcriptions of liberal-minded pertons. Though
this inſtitution was interrupted in its progr eſs for ſeveral years during the late war, yet
being re-eſtabliſhed ſince the peace, it has rapidly recovered its former ſtate of proſ-
rity, and to the bench of profeffors has lately been added one of common and
ederal law, which renders it in reality, though not in name, an univerſity. An act
to unite theſe two inſtitutions has paſſedl the legiſlature. By their union they will con-
| fiitute one of the moſt reſpectable ſeminaries of learning in the United States.
Dicxixsox Corto, at Carlifle, 120 miles weſtward of Philadelphia, was founded
in 1783, and has a principal, three profeſſors, a philoſophical apparatus, a library
conhfting of nearly 3000 volumes, four thouſand pounds in funded certificates, and
10,000 acres of land; the lait, the donation of the State. In 1787, there were eighty
ſtudents belonging to thus college. This number is annually increafing. It was.
named aſter his Excellency John Dickinſon, author of the Penniy Ivania F armer's
Letters, and formerly Preſident of the Supreme Executive Council of this State.
In 178), a college was founded at Lancaſter, ſixty-ſix miles from Philadelphia, and
honoured with the name of FRANKLIN CoLLEGE, after his Excellency Dr. Franklin.
| Phits college is for the Germans; in which they may educate their youth in their own
Janguage, Amt in conformity to their own habits. The Engliſh language, however, is
taught in it. Its endowments are nearly the ſame as thoſe of Dickinſon College. Its:
truſices conſiſt of Lutherans, Preſbyterians, Calviniſts, and Engliſh ; of each an mn
number. The principal is a Lutheran, and the vice-principal is a Calviniſt.
The Epiſcopalians have an academy at York town, in York county. There are alſo
. at German town, at Pittſburg, at Waſhington, at Allen's town, and other
places; theſe are endowed 80 donations from _ legiſlature, and by liberal contribu-
tions of individuals.
The ſchools for young men and women in Bethlehem and Nazareth, Pang the
4 direction of the people called Moravians, are upon the beſt eſiabliſhment of any
ſchools in America. Beſides theſe, there are private-:chools, in different parts of the
State; and to promote the education of poor children, the State have appropriated a
large tract of land for the eſtabliſhment of free ſchools. A great proportion of the
labouring people among the Germans and Iriſh are, however, extremely ignorant.
Cui Er » Tow xs.) The city of Philadelphia, capital of the State of Pennſylvania,
and the preſent ſeat of government of the United States of America, lies in latitude
39% 56 North, and longitude 75% 8' 45 Weſt from Greenwich, upon the weſtern
bank of the River Delaware, which 1s here but a mile 1n breadth, about 120 miles
from the Atlantic ocean, by the courſe of the bay and river, about 35 or 60 miles from
the ſea, in a ſouth-eaſtward direction.
It was laid out by William Penn, the farſ | proprietary and founder of the province,
in the year 1683, and ſettled by a colony . England, which arrived in that and the
preceding years, and was increaſed, by a conſtant and rogular influx of foreigners, to
10 great a degree, that in leſs than a century, and within the life- time of the firſt perſon
born within it of European parents, it was computed to contain 6000 houſes and
40,000 inhabitants in the city and ſuburbs, | |
The ground plot of the city is an oblong ſquare, about one mile North and South,
and two + miles Eaſt and Weſt, lying in the. narroweſt. part of the iſthmus between the
Delaware and Schuylkill rivers, about five miles in a right line above their confluence.


1 he plain is ſo nearly ley vel, — upon the bank of the Delaware, n art and labour
were


.
.
_ 4
=
1
Mn
* ov
*
4
U
+4 v
o
*
- .
wo
F
»
-
*

u 3 7
« .

U *

"of -
19
> —
? >
.
i
2 ”
3 . V5
b 7
a
* , >

7 4 7

8 q
» I

2 £,

- *

 * 5

1

.
* -
-
$
y E
> :
*
1 3 +
4.23
2
0
LY =
$
y *
5
E
.
© Ez
* : 2
4 N
8
7
7 4

2 .

. 3 o

* o

wa:

= * N
1
. *
VS
* .
N * £2
LY
7
1-4
5 4
1
1 4
* .&
- o
5 -
"#3 |
>
* 1 4
1 £ :
4
< .
o $ N
"iz :
1
. þ *
2 2
1
* *
*
4 i» 4
2 VB .
n F
1
*
4 0 * *
rr
-—*

PR. *

4 * *

228 4

* 148
1 3
r 5
xy Wy.
_— >
54
*
i
4
- . x
*
4
E ?
2
4 1
*
=
ANY: 1
* x
of - V 2
5 _
* 4
*: 1
1
. g
8
#
1
3
** © uy
5 =
Ih :

* 4 *

*

* -

-

7 a
< 4 .
we.
+

* $
2
8 : 7
EE 5
1

OE *

* : - * .

Se e

:
* —
4 *
5 1. 8 by
:
» »
*

* 2 *

7 4 1
1 2
9
2 q i. :
: © IN =
4
2 3
*
I La.
=
8
. by
R s
* I
3 3
—
4 1 2
4
— *
« A
%
* A :
® *
—
LEY: E
.
WW.
54
8
* 8
N
& 6
by
* = : :
-
* «7 2
1
7 +
2 -
q
*
Ly
of 3
2 3
1% *
\ 5
1 2 &
0
4
:
I
WY 1
3
by
1
2 bs.
4A
> * :
*
Y
＋ E
*
7
*.
” * *
— @ L
a 4
b *
* 8
*
* 1
» d P
= F .
" * 1
d
5
5 —
$2.38 -
EO
«
>
pl
4 *
_
3

LE!

CY # .
4

, 7 :

*

F
4
3
* »

2

*

8

3

# * 4
4
*

; 1

Po 4 -

3

+ K fp

. 2 7

4 A
4 %

+

j a
4
4

by
_
.
o
£1
5 7
$a N
D + re
\ 2 0
.
3
FE * :
1 «
1 & F
? q
f
7 10
— ”
Y
- .
be :
_—


i
i


*


/


PENNSYLVANIA. 7 433
were neceſſary to dig common ſewers and watercourſes in many places to drain the
ſtreets. In the beginning of this ſettlement it was expected, that the fronts on both
rivers would be firſt improved for the convenience of trade and navigation, and that the
buildings would extend gradually in the rear of each, until they would meet and form
one town extending from eaſt to weſt; but experience ſoon convinced the ſettlers that
the Delaware front was alone ſuthcient for quays and landing places, and that the
- Schuylkill lay at too great a diſtance to form part of the town on its banks; whence it
followed that the town increaſed northward and ſouthward of the original plot, on the
Delaware front, and now occupies a ſpace near three miles in length, north and ſouth,
while the buildings in the middle, where they are moſt extended, do not reach a mile
from the Delaware. CE 4 5 5 95
The city has been twice incorporated, and the limits thereof reſtrained to the oblong
originally laid out by William Penn, without including the northern or ſouthern
ſuburbs, This plot is interſected by a number of ſtreets at right angles with each other,
nine of which run eaſt and weſt from Delaware to Schuylkill, and twenty-three north
and ſouth, croſſing the firſt at right angles, forming one hundred and eighty-four
ſquares of lots for buildings. The ſtreets running eaſt. and weſt are named (except
High Street near the middle of the city) from the trees found in the country upon the
arrival of the colony; Vine, Saſſafras, Mulberry, High, Cheſnut, Walnut, Spruce,
Pine, and Cedar Streets, and thoſe running north and ſouth from their numeral order,
Front, Second, Third, Fourth, &c. to Broad Street, which is midway between the
two rivers. In deeds, and other deſcriptive writings, which require exactneſs, theſe
ſtreets have the Delaware or Schuylkill prefixed to their numeral names, to diſtinguiſh
to which front they belong; as Delaware Second Street, &c. but as there are very few
buildings weſtward of Broad Street, this addition is never made in common conver-
ſation, but when they are named they are underſtood of the Delaware front, unleſs
Schuylkill be added. vi] 16} 27 oe fr ora ors ddd on Os
Ot theſe, High Street is roo feet, Broad Street 113, Mulberry 60, and all the others
zo feet wide. Within the improved parts of the city they are paved in the middle with
pebble ſtanes, for carts and carriages, which uſually contain three fiſths of the whole
breadth, and on each fide with bricks for foot paſſengers ; between the brick and ſtone
pavements: are gutters, paved with brick, to carry off the water, and the foot ways
are defended from the approach of carriages by rows of poſts placed without the gutters,
at the diſtance of ten or twelve feet from each other. | To Ol 0 TER
| Beſides the forementioned main ſtreets, there are many others not originally laid
down inthe plot, the moſt public of which are Water Street and Dock Street. Water
Street is thirty feet wide, running below the bank, at the diſtance of about forty feet
_ eaſtward from and parallel to Front Street, extending from the north line of the city
ſouthward to the bridge over the dock, which was formerly a draw bridge, and retains
that name in common uſe, although it was converted into a ſtone arch above thirty
years ſince; from the bridge it is forty feet wide in a right line to Pine Street, and
leaves a row of houſes without yards, on the bank, in its whole length, between it and
Front Street; ſouthward of Pine Street, there is an offset of about eighty fect eaſtward,
and the ſtreet from thence to Cedar Street is forty-five feet. wide, and called PennStreet. -
This ftreet, in the original plan, was intended only for a cart way to accommodate the
wharves and ſtores to be erected under the bank, and not to rife more than four feet
above it, ſo as to leave the river open to the view from the weſt fide of Front Street;
but the inhabitants were ſoon convinced that the ground, on both ſtreets, was too valu-
able tobe kept unimproved, in any degree, merely: for the ſake of a proſpect, and it is
"it | - 1 88 cloſely


434 WIT. PENNSYLVANIA.

clolely built with lofty houſes (except a very few vacancies here and there) throughout
the whole: front on both ſides, and commodious wharves are extended into the river, at
which the largeſt ſhips that uſe the port, can lie in ſafety to diſcharge and receive their
cargoes,” and are defended from the ice in winter by the piers, made of logs extendin
into the river, funk with ſtone and filled with carth, ſo as to be equally firm with the
main land.
Dock Street is the Ree oth fireet in the city; W at the bridge in Front |
Street, and extending-north-weſtward in a ſerpentine tract through two ſquares, acroſs
Second and Walnut Streets, and terminates at Third Street; another branch of it extends
ſouth-weſtward acroſs Spruce Street, and terminates at Ne Street. The ground
occupied by this ſtreet, alt by an open ſpace between it and Spruce Street, below the
bridge, was formerly a fwamp, and was given by William Penn to the corporation for
the uſe of the city; it was intended as a place to dig a baſon and docks to ſhelter the
fhipping, but experience proved that ſhips could be defended from the ice by the piers
extended into the river, and that the dar; could not be kept clean but at an expenſe far
beyond its utility, wherefore it was neglected till it became a nuiſance offenſive to the
ſmell and injurious to the health of the inhabitants, and was by act of Aſſembly,
ordered to be arched over and covered with earth, hereby the city acquired a beau-
tiful ftreet more than one hundred feet . breadth. towards the Water and not leſs than
ninety feet in the narroweſt part.

The number of the ſtreets, lanes; nd Alloys, lid ent by the owners of the lots
| before they were-built on, is too great to be enumerated here, there being ſcarce a ſquare
that is not interſeed by one or more of them, ſome of them continued in a right line
through ſeveral ſquares, and ſo r as to be 0 miſtaken for main ſtreets, others
: only through one ſquare. _

I be city was firſt incorporated by batten under the great teal af the province, in
the year 1701; before that period it was called the town of Philadelphia. By this
charter William Penn nominated the firſt mayor, recorder, aldermen, and common
councilmen, and granted them, among other privileges and franchiſes, that of electing
others to ſupply vacancies, and even to increaſe their own number at pleaſure. The
public grounds were granted to them by the name of the mayor and commonalty of the
city of Philadelphia, but the commonalty had no ſhare in the government or eſtate of
the city, the whole body being ſelf- elective, and not accountable to the citizens in any
el Tt would be difficult to account for ſo extraordinary a charter from the wiſdom
of William Penn, did not tradition inform us that among the firſt ſettlers were a conſi-
derable number from the city of Briſtol in England, whoſe charter, granted at an early
period, before the rights of the commonalty were well underſtood, had been famili-
arized by habit, which induced them to requeſt a fimilar one; a copy of the Briſtol
charter Tas accordingly procured, and with little variation adopted. It was not long,
however, before the commonalty began to be diſſatisfied with it and to make frequent
complaints to the Aſſembly, of the abuſes that were practiſed under it; many of which
appear upon the minutes of the houſe, At an early; period after the charter, the legiſ-
lative powers of this corporation were very limited; they tould not levy a ſhilling by
taxes for any uſe whatever, and could employ the income of the city eſtates only for
the uſe and embelliſhment of the city; wherefore we ſee few monuments raiſed to pre-
ſerve the memory of that corporation. Althoughtthe firſt men for integrity and abilities
to be found in the city were elected into the 2 — of the body politic, yet ſuch is the
nature of unlimited power, not aceountable to the people, that it will divert the beſt
m 12 purpoſes, Which, before Oy Were e with the W * would . i
| A: _  bigly


MPENNSYEVANIG 35


hi gbly-approved. The jealouſy-which the' citizens entertained of the corporation Per-
vaded the General Aſſembly of the province; and chen the lighting, watching, and
paving the city became a deſirable object, the repreſentatives of the freemen would not
entruſt the corporation alone with the power of raifing or expending the money neceſ-
fary for theſe purpoſes; they could not, however, caſt; ſuch a reflection on the reſpect-
able characters of which that body was compoſedz:as wholly: to veſt theſe powers with
others; they purſued a middle line, and conſtituted. two ſeparate bodies by the names
of city wardens and ſtreet commiſſioners, to the former of whom: the lighting and
watching, and to the latter the paving of the-ſtreets, was committed; the mayor; or
recorder, and four of the aldermen concurring with each body in aying the taxes
and preſcribing the mode of expending them; thus the city legiſlation for theſe purpoſes
became compounded of two branches, the wardens and commiſſioners immediately
elected by the people, in the ſame manner as their repreſentatives in Aſſembly, conſti-
tuted the democratic, and the mayor and aldermen the ariſtocratic branch. Theſe
bodies, thus compounded, conducted the buſineſs committed to them with great
harmony, nor is there the leaſt recollection of any diſagreement between them; the
taxes were laid with equality, collected witli e e eee and expended for the real
uſe and improvement of the city; one complaint only had foundation, which aroſe
from the nature rather than ffom any abuſe of the powers: the number of wardens and
ſtreet commiſſioners was lo gang as ot very mate n to render thoſe boards
too expenſive. er ae bal Yoo 3
For the bib of the late eotjoration! it cult 500 to be ed that the mayor 8
court was always filled with an able lawyer fox the recorder, and another for the
proſecution. of criminal offences; and ſuch was the:onderly. and upright adminiſtra-
uon of juſtice in it, that no court in the * or perhaps in any other country,
exceeded it.
The prejudices under which the old; ion laboured from its original conſtitu-
tion, were ſo ſtrong, that apon the revolution, the General. Aſſembly declared, by an
act paſſed during their firſt ſeſſian, That the powerszand- juriſdiction hitherto exer
ciſed by the mayor, recorder, and aldermen of the city of Philadelphia, were not 5
founded on the authority of the people, and are therefore become null and void.“ ;
Wherefore, by that and ſeveral ſabſequent acts, the powerd of he corporation were
diſtributedibetween the ſupreme executive council, the city magiſtrates, and the wardens
and ſtreet commiſſioners, who exerciſed them fm the yar 975 to 1789. The preju-.
dices, which had no foundation as againſt corporations general, but only againſt.
the conſtitution of the late corporation, of the city, were. however 10 ſtrong, that it was
with difficulty the people could be prevailed upon to ſubmit, to amew incorporation of
the city. The defects in BE, adminiſtration of juſtice and, Wee o the police of the
city at length became ſo g laring, that they were ſeen by all claſſes, ol people, and their
minds prepared for an act 0 41 incorporation. The General Aſſembſy, 3 in the winter
ſalſions of 1780, favouring. the wiſhes of the citizens, patſed an act, intitled, An Act
to incorporate the city of Philadelphia, which, with. a fuppleanent palſed.! in 1790,
conſtitutes the preſent city charter. By theſe acts
Ihe common council conſiſts of two branches; fifteen aldentien are choſen the
flecholders t cortinue in office for ſeven years; they chuſe 'a recorder from the
citizens at latge tor ſeven years, and a mayor from their” own number for one year,
Thirty common councilmen are choſen by the citizens at large, entitled to vote for
repreſentatives in Aſſembly, to continue i in office ſor three years; theſe were intended
to —_ 4 W * upon the principle that the * * frecholders, 5
11601 1 8 or


* )
” - 4


„% pp NsTEVA NIE.


for a term, would produce a' more ſclect body of aldermen, and that thevhivend
at large would chuſe characters fitter to reprefent and form the popular branch of
1 Eight aldermen and fixteen commom councilmen form a quorum or
to tranſact buſineſt,, at which the mayor or recorder preſides; they fit and deli-
berate together, but no act is legal, unleſs & majority of the aldermen, a majority of
the common councilmen and the mayor or e concur. ©
There is not in the world a more liberal plan of city government; every
claſs of citizens are air opportunity of repreſenting and being repreſented. The body
is ſufficiently ndmerous to contain ſome of every deſcription, and of every ſpecies of
talents and information neceſſary for deliberation and. execution, and yet not ſo large as
to be encumbered with its own weight; it poſſeſſes the powers of legiſlation and tax-
ation in all cafes neceflary for the welkgoverning and improving the city, except in:
contradiction to acts of the General: Aſſembly; and from the many improvements
already introduced, there is reaſon to hope that its Police wall be Nn to that of n
modern city.

A city court is held by the mayor, recorder, and aldermen four times a years my
holds cognizance of all crimes and miſdemeanors committed within the city.

A court of alderman, having cognizanee. of debts above forty ſhillings, and' not
exceeding ten pounds, is held every week, beginning on Monday NATE: nd SO
by adjournments until the buſineſs of this week is fimthed..

Each alderman has {


eparate cognizance of debts under forty killings. IS

I) be number of inhabitants within the city and ſuburbs (including the daiſtrict of
Southwark and the compactly built part of tlie Northern Liberties, which, to every
purpoſe but as to their government, are conſidered as parts of the city) is found by the
late cenfus. to be 42,520, and the number of Houſes 6 565 1 and ſtores or We


thops 415:
The houſes for public worſhip are > NUTMErOUS, and are as follows:
The Friends or Quakers, have


I The Swediſh: Lutherans, 1%+
The Prefbyterians, and 8 The Moravians, e
The Epi ians, 3 The | *
The German Lutherans, 2 The Univerſal Baptits, T
The German Calviniſts, 1 Phe Methodiſts, I
The Cathohcs, 4 The Jews. 1


The other public buildings in the city, deſides the univerſity and e aan
mentioned, are the following, viz. :
A ſtate houſe and offices,


Two incorporated banks,


Two city court houſes, A houſe of correction,

A county court houſe; A dramatic theatre,

A carpenters hall, A public obſervatory,

A philoſophical ſociety” 8 ball, A medical theatre and elaboratory,
A diſpenſary, _ Three brick market houſes,

A hofpital, and offices, A fiſh market,

An alms houſe, A public gaol.


The ſtate houſe is in Cheſnut Street, WR Fifth and Sixth Streets, and was edel
as carly as 1735. The building is rather magnificent than elegant, but when it is


one of theſe honſes is for thoſe Quakers who took np arms in defence of their country, in the late war,
contrary to the eſtabliſhed principles of the Friends. They call themſelves Free © vakers.


7 This is the oldſt church in or near the city, and has lately been auntened to the Epiſcopal order.
| 2 remem-


PENN SYLVANIA. 437


ternembered af it was built within ſifty-three years after the firſt European cabin Was
erected in 8 its architecture is juſtly admired. The ſtate houſe yard is a
neat, and fpacious public walk, ornamented: with rows of- trees; but a bien
brick wal, whidyeacloſes it, limits the proſpect. |
In 1 187. an elegant court Rouſe was erectedꝭ en the left of the ſtate houſe; and on
the right, the town hall or new court houſe, and a Philoſophical hall. Theſe add.
much fo'the beauty of the ſquare, ,
South of the ſtate houſe is the public ohol; built of fone:: It has a ground half
loty, and two ſtories above it. r apartment is arched 'with ſtone againſt fire and
force. It & & hollow quare, one hundred feet in front, and is the neateſt and moſt
ſecure building of the kind in America. To the gaol is ahnexed a Work houſe, with
yards to each, w ſeparate the ſexes, and criminals from debtors. There have lately
been added & hea in the yards for ſolitary confinement of criminals according to
the new penal code. Of 4060 debtors, and 4000 criminals, in the whole 8060 wo
were confined i in'this new gaol, between the 28th of September, 1780, and the 5th 'of |
tember 1590, twelve only died a natural death in the gaok.
ie hoſpital and poor houſe, in which are upwards of 300 poor people, dhe
ther we confider the buildings, or the defigns for which they were erected, are unri-


valled in America.
The German urch, lately erected, is one of the moſt ele t churches in America.
itiz, a great mechanical


Mr. D: Taneberger, one of the united brethren's ſociety at
genius, has completed and erected a large organ for this churel. .
I be market houſe in High Street is acknowledged by Europeans to exceed any thing
they have ſeen of the kind, in extent, neatneſs, Variety and abundance of proviſions.
That at Callow-hilty at the north end of the city, and that at the north end, do honour
to the citizens and their police.
Ihe eity is provided witlr a number of public and private charitable inſtitutions; the
principal of which are, the houſe of employment, a large commodious building, where
the poor of the city and ſome adjoini ing townſhips are ſupported and employed in coarſe
manufactures to aid in defraying their expenſes, under the care of the overſeers and
guardians of the poor, who are a corporate body created for this W by act of
Aſſembiy, with power to lay taxes for its further ſupport.
The ennſylvania hoſpital, already mentioned.
The Quaker's alms houſe is ſupported by chat. ſociety for the aſe of their own poor ; 1
it is divided into a number of ſeparate houſes and rooms for families or ſingle perſons


who have fallen into decay; moſt of them contribute by their induſtry towards their


own ſupport, but are ſupp lied with' whatever their induſtry falls ſhort of procuring,
by a committee of the ſociety, and live more comfortably than many who in full health
and unhurt by accident, provide for their own ſubſiſtence ; there is a conſiderable
garden belonging to this ut, from which the city 1s ſupplied, at very moderate
prices, with every kind of medicinal herbs common to the climate.
A houſe founded by the late Dr. John Kearſley the elder, for the fupport of twelve
_ elderly widows of the Proteſtant Epiſcopal communion, in which a number of perſons |
of that deſcription, who have ſeen. better days, are very comfortably and decently
provided for.
The humane ſociety for recovering perſons ſuppoſed to be dead by drowning, .
bliſhed upon ſimilar principles with thoſe of the ſame name in moſt ſea ports in Europe;
it is under the care of twelve man: , annually choſen * the ſubſcribers ; Þ. phy-
cians


— _—_


123 "


_ - -


2 0 — 0 Neg — — — * - "mk. - 1 *
F 5 . * 5 0 6 +4 1 bd
wt 8 * * ** 9 pe n *
S 05s ie ep


23 <0


FR ä
> 0 — -
— — ws a . g
2
*


a —
— x


longer be burthenſome to individuals.


merit. c :


—


= PENNSYLVANIA.


ſicians afford their aid to this inſtitution gratis, a number of cheſe being appeäntod for
the: ſe by the managers. lit . — pd, 1 04 bet;


oft every teligious f. ſociety has 4 fund under proper Aegctlan, Gp of vyhich are
indfforated for the refief of the widows and en of they: clergy o * diſtreſſed


members of their communion. an Kt ul
Phere are alſo ſocieties formed for the N of Ho n Persons,

with funds raifed by ſubfcriptions or otherwiſe, for the purpoſe,;fuch.as, the ſea Captains

ſociety, the Delaware pilots ſociety, ſeparate. ſocieties tor the, gelieł and aſſiſtande of


emigrants and other, diſtreſſed perſons,, rom England, Scotland, Ireland, Seunany,


&c. ſome of which ale incorporated, ſo that there can, ſcarce happen an jinſtaneę of. in:


dividual diſtreſs, for Which a mode. of advice, aſſiſtance, or relief is not reren without :
refort to public beggihg. þ 63 das, 01. 82


Seminaries of learning are effavliſhed upon the moſt enlarged and liberal p Vole hn


of which the principal are, the Ape of Fenn and college of er ;
already noticed. oy . Ben 2797
Almoſt every religious i ſociety have x one or pena ſchools under Han 3 direc-
tion, for the education of their own youth of both ſexes, as well of the rich, Who are
able to Pay, y, as of the” Poor, who arc taught and provided with books and ſtationary
gratis; *beſtdes which; there are a number of private ſchools under the direction of
— and mi iſtreſſes. independent of - any. public body; and; there, are ſeveral private
academies for the inſtructjion of young ladies in all the branches of. lite literature,
i:table to the fex, andi tliere is no indixidual, whoſe parents or guanlians, maſters or,
miſtreſſes, will take the trouble to apphh⸗ but. will be admitted into ſoine one of thęeſe
ſchools, and if they are unable to Fay, wall be taught gratis; it ought mot, , be
omitted; that there 3a ſchool ſor the. Afri ricans, of. every ſhade or colour, kept unden tlic
care and at the expenſe of the Quakers, into which are admitted gratis, ſlaves as well


5


as free perſons of 3 age, of both fexes, and taught, reading, Writing, arithmetic,
kvittng, ſewing, and other uſeful female FLOWS ee this ſchool: was originally,


inftituted by private ſubſcriptions of the ſocicty,. with, a view to prepare that degraded;
race for a better ſituation in, civil life ; but the will of the late Antony Benezet, of bene-


volent memory, a conſiderable donation from the ſociety, 1 in England, and ſome other;


charitable deviſes, have provided funds adequate to its future ſupport, and it will no.
| | Wet N 798
Sunday ſchools, for the inſtruction of children 8 would pr ſpend that day
in idleneſs or miſchief, have lately been inſtituted, and. it-18 to he Hoped Al, hy 1
amend the morals and conduct of the riſing generation.
I be public library of Philadelphia is a moſt uſeful inſtitution; ; it contains near ten
thoufand volumes, well ſelected, for the information and improvement of all ranks of


the citizens; they are depoſited in an elegant building lately erected, in a modern


ſtyle, are are acceſſible every day in the week, except Sunday. Here the man of


learning may conſult the work of the remoteſt ages, and trace hiſtories, arts, and ſciences
from their infancy to this preſent ſtate of improvement, and the mechanic, the labourer,
the ſtudent or apprentice may be ſupplied with books to improve their minds or amuſe |
them in their vacant hours at home, The company conſiſts of ſome hundreds of pro-
prietors, incorporated by charter, Who pay ten ſhillings annually for the i 6 of
new books, and defraying incidental expenſes ; twelve directors axe annually; choſen,
who manage the concerns of the company and keep a correſpondence, with Europe,
from whence they are n ſupplic with new publications of reputation, and


The


9


%


| PENNSYLVANIA. 439
The corporation have lately ordered the ſtreets, lanes, and alleys to be marked at
every interſection of cach other, and the houſes to be numbered. The names painted
on boards, with an index hand pointing to the progreſſion of the numbers, are already
affxed at the corners of the ſtrects, ſo that with the aid of the directory, a ſtranger may
find without difficulty, any houſe whoſe ſtreet and number is known. ©
The city, within a few years paſt, has experienced a very remarkable revolution in
reſpect to the healthineſs of its inhabitants; the hill of mortality proves that the number
of deaths has conſiderably decreaſed fince the year 1783, notwithſtanding the great
increaſe of its population; this change in favour of health and life is afcribed'by phy-
ſicians to the co-operation of the following cauſes: 1ſt, The arching the dock, whereby
a very noxious and offenſive nuiſance was removed. 2d, The cultivation of the lots
adjoining and partly ſurrounding the city, whereby another extenſive ſource of putrid
exbalations is dried up. 3d, An increaſed care in cleanfing the ſtreets. 4th, An
increaſe of -horticulture, and conſequently greater conſumption of vegetable aliments.-
_ 8th, The inſtitution of the diſpenſary, which has extended medical aid to many hun-
dreds. in a year, Who either periſhed for the want of it, or were facrificed by quacks..
6th, The more improved ſtate of phyſic, whence ſeveral diſeaſes formerly fatal in moſt
inſtanees are better underſtood and treated, and therefore more generally cured. * And
2th, From a general diffuſion of knowledge among all claſſes of people, from their
libraries, their numerous ſocieties, monthly, weekly, and daily publications, whence
the people at large are better acquainted than formerly with the means of preſerving.
their health, as may be exemplified in one inſtance; there was but one death in the
fummer of 1792 from drinking cold water, whereas ſome years ago twenty has not
been an uncommon number from this fingle cauſe; _ Ca rags Es


No city can beaft'of fo many uſeful improvements in manufactures,. in the mecha-
nical arts, in the aft of healing, and particularly in the ſcience of humanity, as Phila-
delphia. The tradeſmen and manufacturers have become ſo numerous, that they are
beginning to aſſociate for mutual improvement, and to promote regularity and uni-
formity in their ſeveral occupations. The carpenters, the cordwainers, the tailors;

the watch- makers, the joiners, and hair-dreſſers, have already aſſociated, and others
are forming into companies upon the fame'plan. © © © ©
The Philadelphians have exerted their endeavours with happy and growing ſucceſs,
to prevent the intemperate uſe of ſpirituous liquors..+ In accompliſhing this benevolent
purpoſe, on which ſo much of the proſperity and glory of our empire depend, every
good citizen in the Union ought cheerfully to lend his aid and influence. As one im-
portant "ſtep towards effecting their deſign, they are encouraging breweries, which are
faſt increaſing. There are fourteen already in the city, and ſeven or eight in the

country. The increaſe of the conſumption of beer, in the courſe of a few years paſt,

in every part of America, and particularly in Pennſylvania, has been aſtoniſhing. It
has become a faſhionable drink, and it is not improbable, but that in a few ycars it
will come into univerſal uſe among all claſſes of people. In proportion as the uſe of
beer increaſes, in the ſame proportion will the uſe of ſpirituous liquors decreaſe. This

In July, 1793, x moſt malignant fever broke out in Philadelphia, which.raged with ſuch uncommon fury,
that there were buried of this diſeaſe from the 1 of Auguſt, to the gth of November, four thouſand and thirty-
ſeven perſons, as was collected from the ſeveral books kept by the clergymen and ſextons. The firſt ſymptoms


of this melancholy. diforder were diſcovered on the 26th of July, but of the-cauſe, the opinions of the faculty
are various. — 5 . | e NE AY : | TT IgE


It is much to be wiſhed that our Londoners would follow their laudable example, |
| 2 will


*


«1
«+ «= Y
'S — 42
1-2
2
vs »
i
' D
.
RE
18
A
„
1
7 ö &
4
3.8
57
1
3 kl
1 +3; »
4 * 83
\ ©
8-8
.


-Us ITED AMERICA.


have alſo a court houſe and a college. Thirt y-eight Years ago, this ſpat was a wil-


the Allegany and Monongahela river, and about a quarter of a mile above their con-


f fiſty- three miles north of Philadelphia, in latitude 40 37. The town being built


440 PENNSYLVANIA.


will be a happy chan e. The Philadelphia porter, which is exported to- various para
is reckoned equal to t at which is 3 in London.

In ſhort, 22, * we conſider the local ſituation, the ſize, the beauty, the variety
and utility of the improvements in in, mechanics, in agriculture, and manufactures, or
the induſtry, the enterprize, the humanity, and the abilities of the inhabitants of the

city of Philadelphia, it merits to he viewed as the capital of the flouriſhing Hauri or


The borough of LaxcAs TER is che lar geſt inland town; in:the United, States. It is
the ſeat of juſt tice in Lancaſter county, 545.) ſtands on-Coneſtoga Creek, ſixty-ſix miles,
a little to che north of the weſt from Philadelphia. Its trade is already — and
muſt increaſe in proportion as the ſurrounding country pop pulates. It contains abaut
ſeven or eight hundred hauſes, beſides a moſt elegant. court houſe, a number of hand-
ſome churches, and other public buildings, and about five thauſand ſouls, a great pro-
Portion of whom : are manufacturers.

CARLISLE is the ſeat of juſtice in Cumberland county, and is one hundred and
twenty miles weſtward of Philadelphia. It contains upwards of 1500 inhabitants, who
live in more than three hundred ſtone houſes, and worſhip in three churches. They


derneſs, and inhabited by Indians Inka bers A like inftance of ie raped progreſs
of the arts of civilized lite is ſcarcely to be faund inthiſtory.
| P1TTSBURGH, on the weſtern ſide of the Allegany mountains, 320 des weſtward af
Philadelphia, is beautifully ſituated on a large plain, which is the point of land between


fluence, in latitude 40 26' north. It contains about two hundred houſes, ſtores, aud
ſhops, and eight or nine hundred inhabitants, who are qt Preſbyterians and Epiſ-
copalians. The ſurrounding country is very hilly, but goad land, and well ſtored
with excellent coal. The rivers abound -with fine fiſh, fuch as pike, pearch, and cat
fiſh, which arc all much larger than the dame ſpecies on the eaſtern fide of the
mountains. an
This town is laid out. on Penn 85 lan, and i 18 eee for the travellers from
the Eaftern and Middle States, to the ſettlements on the Ohio. Nit
Soxnvnv, the ſhire town of Northumberland county, is ſituated on the eaft ade of
Suſquchannah river, juſt below the junction of the eaſt and weſt branches, in about
latitude 40 53', and about 1 20 pt Fa north-weſt from Philadelphia, and contains
about 100 houſes. .
*  BeTHLEREM is fituated on the river Lehigh, a weſtern branch of the Delaware,


— on high riſing ground, and partly on the lower banks of the Manakes, (a fine
ö creek, which affords trout and other fiſh) has a very pleaſant and healthy ſituation, I
and 1s frequently viſited in the ſummer ſeaſon, by gentry from different = The
proſpect is not extenſive, being bounded very near by a chin of the Lehigh hills.
To the northward is a tract of land called the dy lands. |
In the year 1987, the number of inhabitants amounted to between 500 and 600,
and the houſes were about ſixty in number, moſtly good fs buildings of lme-ſtone.
The town has fince conſiderably increaſed. 5
Beſides the chuteh or public men dan, there are theres Jaxgs ſpacious build- 5


ings, VIZ. 5
445 The


SR : 8 .


1. The fingle brethren's or young men's houſe, facing the main ſtreet or public
road. Here the greateſt part of the ſingle tradeſmen, journeymen, and apprentices of
the town are boarded at a moderate rate, under the inſpection of an elder and warden,
and have, beſides the public meetings, their houſe for devotions, morning and evening
prayers. Different traces are carried on in the houſe for the benefit of the ſame.
2. The ſingle ſiſter's, or young women's houſe, where they live under the care
of female inſpectors. Such as are not employed in private families, earn. their

bread moſtly by ſpinning, ſewing, fine needle-work, Loitting, and other female
occupations. 12 5 5 .


Though this houſe has its particular regulations to preſerve order and decorum, and
may perhaps bear ſome reſemblance to a nunnery, (being ſometimes improperly ſo
called) yet the plan is very different. The ladies are at liberty to go about their
buſineſs in the town, or to take a walk for recreation; and ſome are employed in
private families, or live with their parents; neither are they bound to remain in the
lingle ſtate, for every year ſome of them enter into the married ſtate. 5
As to their almoſt uniform dreſs, the women in general, for the ſake of avoiding
extravagance, and the follies of faſhion, have hitherto kept to a particular fimple dreſs,
introduced among them in Germany many years ago. 1 IE
3. The houſe for the widow women; where ſuch as have not a houſe of their own,
or means to have their own houſe furniſhed, live nearly in the ſame way as do the ſingle
ſiſters. Such as are poor, infirm, and ſuperannuated, are aſſiſted or maintained by the
congregation, as is the caſe with other members of the ſame that are not able to
obtain fubſiſtence: for themſelves. -- Ee ak note
There is, beſides, an inſtitution of a ſociety of married men, begun fince the
year 1770, for the ſupport of their widows. A conſiderable fund or principal has
been raiſed by them, the intereſt of which, as well as. the yearly contributions of the
members, is reguarly divided among the widows, whoſe huſbands have been members
of the inſtitution. _ 355 3 PT 3
In the houſe adjoining the church is the ſchool for girls; and ſince the year 1787,
a boarding ſchool for young ladies from different parts, who are inſtrudted in reading
and writing, (both Engliſh and German) grammar, arithmetic, hiſtory, geography,
needles. —T—pß ooo oi; 4 3 |
The miniſter of the place has the ſpecial care and inſpection of this as well as
of the boys ſchool, which is kept in a ſeparate houſe, fitted to that purpoſe, and
are taught reading and writing in both languages, the rudiments of the Latin tongue,
arithmetic, &c. Theſe ſchools, eſpecially that for the young ladies, are deſervedly in
very high repute, and ſcholars: more than can be accommodated, are offered from all
parts of the United States. 5 5 . . RA
Heſides the different houſes for private tradeſmen, mechanics, and others, there is a
public tavern at the north end of the town, with good accommodations; alſo a ſtore,
with a general aſſortment of goods; an apothecary's ſhop; a large farm yard; and on
the lower part, on Manakes Creek, is a large tanyard, a currier's and dyer's ſhop,
a griſt mill, fulling mill, oil mill, and ſaw mill; and on the banks of the Lehigh,
a brewery. 5 „ 1 3
The town is ſupplied with good water from a ſpring, which being in the lower part
of the town, is raiſed up the hill by a machine of a very ſimple conftruction, to the
height of upwards of one hundred feet, into a reſervoir, whence 1t 1s conducted by
pipes into the ſeveral ſtreets and public buildings of the town. 5


3 L 3 Thg-


442 PENNSTLVANIA.
The ferry acroſs the river is of ſuch particular contrivance, that a flat, large enough:
to carry a team of fix horfes, runs on a ſtrong rope fixed and ſtretched acroſs ; and,
by the mere force of the ſtream, without any other aſſiſtance, croſſes the river
backwards and forwards ; the flat always being put in an oblique direction, with its:
foremoſt end verging towards the line deſcribed by the rope. |
The greater part of the inhabitants, as well as tlie people in the neighbourhood...
being of German extraction, this language is more in uſe than the Engliſh. The
latter, however, is taught in the ſchools, and divine ſervice performed in both lan-
807 AZARETH 1s ten miles north from Bethlehem, and fixty-three north from Phila-
delphia: it is a tract of good land, containing about 5000 acres, purchaſed originally
by the Rev. Mr. George Whitfield in 1240, and fold two years after to the brethren.
The town was laid out almoſt in the center of this tract in 1772. Two ſtreets croſs -
each other at right angles, and form a ſquare, in the middle, of 340 by 200 feet.
The largeſt building is a ſtone houſe, erected in 1255, named Nazareth Hall; ninety-
eight by forty fix long, and fifty-four in height. In the lowermoſt ſtory is a ſpacious
meeting-hall, or church; the upper part of the houſe is chiefly fitted for a boarding-
ſchool, where youth, from different parts, are under the eare and inſpection of the
miniſter of the place and ſeveral tutors, and are inſtructed in the Engliſh, German,
Latin, and French languages; in hiſtory, geography, book-keeping, mathematics,
muſic, drawing, and other ſciences. The front of the houſe faces a large ſquare open
to the ſouth, adjoining a fine piece of meadow ground; and commands a moſt |
beautiful and extenſive proſpect. Another elegant building on the eaſt ſide of Na-
zareth Hall is inhabited by fingle ſiſters, who have the ſame regulations and way of
living as thoſe in Bethlehem. Befides their principal manufactory for ſpinning and
twiſting cotton, they have lately begun to draw wax tapers. . y
At the ſouth-weft corner of the aforeſaid ſquare, in the middle of the town, is
the fingle brethren's houſe, and on the eaſt- ſouth-eaſt corner a ſtore. On the ſouth-
ernmoſt end of the ſtreet is a good tavern.. The houſes are, a few excepted, built
of lime-ſtone, one or two ſtories high, inhabited by tradefmen and mechanics moſtly
of German extraction. The inhabitants are ſupplied” with water conveyed to them
by pipes from a fine ſpring near the town: The place is noted for having an ex-
ceedingly pleafant ſituation, and enjoying a pure and falubrious air. The number
of inhabitants in the town and farms belonging to it, (Schœneck included) conſti-
tuting one congregation, and meeting for divine ſervice on Sundays and holidays at
Nazareth Hall, was, in the year 1788, about 4506. 1 e
Linz is in Lancaſter county and Warwick townſhip, eight miles from Lancaſter,
and ſeventy miles weſt from Philadelphia. This ſettlement was begun in the year
1757. There are now, befides an elegant church, and the houſes of the fingle bre-
thren and fingle ſiſters, which form a large ſquare, a number of houſes for private
families, with a ſtore and (tavern, all in one ſtreet. There is alſo a good farm and
ſeveral mill works belonging to the place. The number of inhabitants, including
thoſe that belong to Litiz congregation, living on their farms in tlie neighbourhood,
amounted, in 1787, to upwards of 300. 3 3 I REN
The three laſt-mentioned towns, are fettled chiefly by Moravians, or the United-
Brethren. 2 ate?


*


_ HarnisBURGH, as it is commonly called, but legally ſtyled Louiſburgh, is the prin-
cipal town in Dauphin county, is a very flouriſhing place, about 100 miles welt by


north


* 5


PENNSYLVANIA. 1
north from Philadelphia. It contained, in 1789, 130 dwelling houſes, a ſtone gaol,
and a German church. At that period it had been ſettled but about three years. |

Waſhington, 3os miles welt of Philadelphia, and beyond the Ohio, has been ſet-
tled fince the war, and is remarkable for the variety of its manufactures for ſo young
and interior a town ; it has thirty-two manufactures of twenty-two different kinds.

Cuxtious Serings.] In the neighbourhood of Reading is a ſpring about fourteen
feet deep and about 100 feet ſquare ; a full mill ſtream iſſues from it; the waters are
clear and full of fiſhes. From appearances, it is probable that this ſpring is the out-
let of a very conſiderable river, which a mile and an half or two miles above this
place, ſinks into the earth, and is conveyed to this outlet in a ſubterraneous channel.

In the northern parts of Pennſylvania there is a creek called Oil Creek, which
_ empties into the Allegany river; it iſſues from a ſpring, on the top of which floats
an oil, ſimilar to that called Barbadoes tar, and from which one man may gather
ſeveral gallons in a day. The troops ſent to guard the weſtern poſts halted at this
ſpring, collected ſome of the oil, and bathed their joints with it. This gave them

cat relief from the rheumatic complaints with which they were affected: the waters,
of which the troops drank freely, operated as a gentle cathartic. 1

REMARKABLE CAvEs. | There are three remarkable grottos, or caves, in this State;
one near Carliſle, in Cumberland county ; one in the townſhip of Durham, in Bucks
county, and the other at Swetara, in Lancaſter county; the latter is on the eaſt bank
of Swetara river, about two miles above its confluence with the Suſquehannah. Its
aperture is under a pretty high bank, and from fifteen to twenty feet wide, and from
ſeven to ten in height. You enter, by a gradual deſcent, fo low, as that the ſurface
of the river is rather higher than the bottom of the cave, and in your progreſs paſs
through a number of paſſages and apartments of various dimenſions, ſome low and

narrow, others very high and ſpacious, vaulted by magnificent canopies, fretted with
a variety of depending petrifactions, ſome of which are drawn to a great length by
means of the conſtant exudation and accretion of petrifying matter, till ſolid pillars
have been gradually formed. Theſe appear as ſupports to the roof, which is of ſolid
lime ſtone, perhaps twenty feet thick. Thirty years ago there were ten ſuch pillars,
ach fix Ga 31 in diameter, and fix feet high, all ſo ranged, that the place they
encloſed reſembled a ſanctuary in a Roman church: no royal throne ever exhibited
more grandeur than this Iuſus nature. The reſemblances of ſeveral monuments are
found indented in the walls on the ſides of the cave, which appear like the tombs of
| departed heroes. Suſpended from the roof is © the bell, (which is nothing more than

a ſtone projected in an unuſual form) ſo called from the ſound it occaſions when
ſtruck, which is fimilar to that of a bell. 5 .
Some of the ſtalactites are of a colour like ſugar- candy, and others reſemble loaf-

ſugar; but their beauty is much defaced by the ſmoke of the torches which are fre-
quently employed in conducting the curious traveller through this gloomy receſs.
The water, which is exudated through the roof, runs down the declivity, and is both
pleaſant and wholeſome to drink. There are ſeveral holes in the bottom of the cave
deſcending perpendicularly, perhaps into an abyſs below, which renders it dange-
rous to walk without a light. At the end of the cave is a pretty brook, which, after

a ſhort courſe, loſes itſelf among the rocks. Beyond this brook is an outlet from the
cave by a very narrow aperture. Through this the vapours continually paſs out-
wards with a ſtrong current of air and aſcend, reſembling at night the ſmoke of a
furnace. Part of theſe vapours and fogs appear, on aſcending, to be condenſed at
the head of this great alembic, and * more volatile parts to be carried off *
| 312 che


. |
the aperture communicating with the exterior air beſore-mentioned, by the force of
the air in its paſſage.


 AxT1auiTiEs J On a high hill, near the Tyoga river, a little to the ſouthward of
the line which divides New York from Penntylvania, are to be ſeen the remains of


an ancient foriification. The form of it is circular, and it is enc ompaſicd with an
entrenchment. The entrenchment only remains. The Indians are entirely ignorant
of the origin of thete works. The hill is an excellent fituation for a fort, and com-
mands a delighttul view of the country around it, which is low and fertile. There
is a fortification of a fimilar kind at Unaditla, in the flat lands, and they are nu-
merous in the weſtern counties.
Corsriruriox.] The ſupreme executive power of the commonwealth 3 is veſted i in
a Governor ; the legiſlative, in a General Aſſembly, confiſting of a ſenate and a houſe
of repreſentatives. "The erer is choſen for three years, but cannot hold his office
more than nine years in twelve. A plurality of votes makes a choice. The repre-
ſentatixes are elected for one year; the ſenators for four. The latter are divided into
four claſſes. The time of one claſs expires each year, whoſe ſeats are then filled b
new elections. Each county chooſes its repreſentatives ſeparately. The ſenators are
choſen in diſtricts formed by the legiſlature. There is to be an enumeration of the
inhabitants once in ſeven years. The number of ſenators and repreſentatives is, after
each enumeration, to be fixed by the legiſlature, and apportioned among the teveral
counties and diſtricts, according to the number of taxable inhabitants. There can
be never fewer than fixty, nor more than 100 repreſentatives. The number of ſena-
tors cannot be lets than one fourth, nor greater than one third of the repreſentatives.
The elections are made on the ſecond Tueſday of October. The General Aſſembly
meets on the firſt Tueſday of December in each year, unleſs ſooner convened by the
_ governor. A majority of each houſe makes a quorum to do buſineſs, and a lefs num-
ber may adjourn from day to day, and compel the attendance of members. Each
houſe chooſes its ſpeaker and other officers, judges of the qualifications of its mem-
bers, and eſtabliſhes the rules of its proceedings. Impeachments are made by the houſe |
of repreſentatives, and tried by the ſenate. All bills for raiſing revenue originate in
the lower houſe, but the ſenate may propoſe amendments. The ſenators and repre-
ſentatives are free from arreſts while attending the public buſineſs, except in caſes of
treaſon, felony, and breach of the peace; and are not liable to be queſtioned concern
ing any thing ſaid in public debate. They are compenſated out of the public treaſury,
from which no money can be drawn but in conſequence of appropriation by law.
The journals of both houſes are publiſhed weekly, and their doors kept open, unlefs
their buſineſs requires ſecreſy. All bills which have paſſed both houtes muſt be pre-
ſented to the governor ; if he approve he muſt ſign them, but if he does not approve, .
he muſt return them within ten days, with his objections, to the houſe in Which
they originated : no bill, ſo returned, ſhall become-a law, unlefs it be repaſſed ” two -
thirds of both houſes. The governor is commander in chief of the military force, .
may remit fines and forfeitures, and grant reprieves and pardons, except in caſes ot
impeachment ; may require information from all executive officers; may, on extra-
ordinary occaſions, convene the General Aſſembly, and adjourn it, for any term not
exceeding four months, in caſe the two branches cannot agree on the time themſelves.
He muſt inform the General Aſſembly of the ſtate of the commonwealth : recommend
| An meaſures as he fhall judge ex 8 and ſee that the laws are faithfully exe-
cuted. In caſe of vacancy in the o of governor, the ſpeaker of the ſenate exer-
' ciſes that office. -The judicial power is veſted in a ſupreme and inferior court, the


judges


PENNSYLVANIA. — 4
:udges of which, and juſtices of the peace, are appointed by the governor, and com-
miſſioned du ring good behaviour; but are removeable on tſie addreſs of both houſes.
The other omicers of the State ate appointed, ſome by the Governor, ſome by tlie
General Afﬀembly, and ſome by the people. The qualifications for an elector are
twenty-one years of age, two years reſidence, and payment of taxes. They are pri-
vileged from arreſts in civil actions while attending elections. Thoſe for a repreſen-
tative are, tet enty-one years of age and three years inhabitancy. For a ſenator,
twenty- five years of age and four years inliabitancey. For a governor, thirty years of
age and ſeven years inhabitancy. The governor can hold no other office. The ſenators.
and repreſentatives none, but-of attorney at law and in the militia. No perſon
holding an office of traſt, or profit, under the United States, can hold any office in
this State, to which a ſalary 3 is by law annexed. All the officers of the State are liable
to impeachment, and are bound by oath, or affirmation, to ſupport the e
and perform the duties of their offices.
The declaration of rights aſſerts tlie natural freedom and equality of all; libe
of conſcience; freedom: of elections and of the preſs; ſubordination of the ork
to the civil powers; trial by jury; ſecurity from unreaſonable ſearches and ſeizures ;
a right to an equal difiributvn of juſtice; to be heard in criminal proſecutions ; to
petition for the redreſs of grievances ; to bear arms; and to emigrate from the State.
It declares; that all power is inherent in the people, and that they may, at any time,
alter their form of government ; that no perſon ſhall be obliged to maintain religions:
worthip, or ſupport any miniſtry ; that all perſons believing in the being of a God,
and a future ſtate of rewards and puniſhments, are eligible to office; that laws:
cannot be ſuſpended but by the legiſlature ; that all perſons ſhall be bailable, unleſs:
tor capital offences, when the proof is evident, or preſumption ſtrong ; that every
debtor ſhall be releaſed from priſon on delivering his eſtate to his creditors, according
to law, except there be ſtrong preſumption of fraud that the privileges of the writ
of habeas corpus ſhall not be ſuſpended but in time of rebellion, or public danger; that
no ex poſt fatto law ſhall be made; that no perſon ſhall be attainted by the legiſſature,


or forteit his eſtate for longer term than his own life; that no title of nobility, or
hereditary diſtinction, ſhall ever be granted.


The foregoing conſtitution was ratified in 1 790.


Among other uſeſul laws of this State, of a public nature, are, one that declares |
all rivers and creeks to be highways; a law for the emancipation of negroes, already
mentioned ; a bankrupt law, nearly on the model of the bankrupt laws of England;

a law commuting hard labour for a long term of years, for death, as a pumſhment
for many crimes which are made capital by the laws of England. Murder, arſon,
and one or two other crimes, are yet puniſhed with death.

New InvexTioxs.] Theſe have been numerous and uſeful. Among oth ers are
the ſollowing: A new model of the planetary worlds, by Mr. Rittenhouſe, com-

_ monly, but improperly, called an orrery ; a quadrant, by Mr. Godfrey, called by the
Plagiary name of Hadley's quadrant ; a ſteam boat, ſo conſtructed, as that by the
aſſiſtance of ſteam, operating on certain machinery II the boat, it moves with
conſiderable rapidity againſt the fiream without the aid of hands.  Mefirs. Fitch

and Rumſay contend with each other for the honour of this invention. Befides theſe,
there. have been invented. many manufacturing machines for _ carding, ſpinning,


ER &c, Which perform a an immenſe deal of W rk with very little manual |
Lance,


r ũ . ,


„„ 66


0 ; :
— — — - | — ay
F _— —_—, . a" — — — —
FRY _ — m_—_y — —— —— be


3. In Hisronr. +:


446 PENNSYLVANIA.


Hisrokr.] Pennſylvania was granted by King Charles II. to Mr. William Penn,
ſon of the famous Admiral Penn, in conſideration of his father's ſervices to the crown.*
Mr. Penn's petition for the grant was preſented to the king in 1680; and after con-
ſiderable delays, occaſioned by Lord Baltimore's agent, who apprehended: it might

_ interfere with the Maryland patent, the charter of Pennſylvania received the royal
fignature on the 4th of March, 168z. Jo ſecure his title againſt all claims and pre-
vent future altercation, Mr. Penn procured a quit claim deed from the duke of
York, of all the lands, covered by his own patent, to which the duke could have the.

| leaſt pretenſions. This deed bears date Auguſt 21, 1682. On the 24th of the fame
month he obtained from the duke, by deed of feoffment, Newcaſtle, with twelve
miles of the adjacent territory, and the lands ſouth to the Hoarkills. In December
following, Mr. Feun effected a union of the lower counties with. the province of Penn- N

IylIvania. |
: The firft dane of government for Penniylvania is dated in 1682. By this form,
all legiſlative powers were veſted in the governor and freemen of the province, in
the provincial council, and a general aſſembly. The council was to conſiſt of Rventy-
two members, choſen by the freemen; of which the governor, or his deputy, was
perpetual preſident, with a treble vote. One third of this council went out of office

every year, and their ſeats were ſupplied by new elections.

The General Aſſembly was at firſt to conſiſt of all the freemen, afterwards of 200,
and never to exceed 5300.

In 1683 Mr. Penn offered another frame of government, in which the number of
repreſentatives was reduced, and the governor vefted with a negative upon all bills


paſſed in Aſſembly. By ſeveral ſpecious arguments the people were perſuaded to ac-
cept-this frame of government.

Not long after, a diſpute between Mr. Penn and Lord Baltimore requ ired the former
to go to England, and he committed the adminiſtration of government to five com-
miſſioners taken from the council. In 1686 Mr. Penn required the commiſſioners
to diſſolve the frame of government; but not being able to effect his purpoſe, he,
in 1688, appointed Capt. John Blackwell his deputy. From this period the proprie-
tors uſually reſided in England, and adminiſtered the government by deputies, who

were devoted to their intereſt. Jealouſies aroſe between the people and their gover-
nors, which never ceaſed till the late revolution. The primary cauſe of theſe jealouſies
was an attempt of the proprietary to extend his own power, and abridge that of the
Aſſembly; and the conſequence WAS, inceſſant diſputes and diſfenſions in the le-
8 giſlature.

" In 1689, Governor Blackwell, finding vimaſelf oppoſed 3 in his views, had recourſe
to artifice, and prevailed on certain members of the council to withdraw themſelves

from the houſe ; thus defeating the meaſures of the legiſlature. . The houſe voted
this to be treachery , and addreſſed the governor on the occaſion.

In 1693, the king and queen aſſumed the government into their own hands. Col.
Fe was 3 governor of New York and Pennſylvania by one and the


* A large debt dr. due from the crown to Mr. Penn, a


part of which he offered to remit, on condition |
he obtained bis” grant


This, whatever benevolent motives are held out to the world, muſt have been a
conſideration with the king in making the grant.


bays, Dr. Franklin's Hiſtorical Review of the Conſtitution and Government of Pennſylvania, p. 16.


Two inſtances of a ſeceſſion of members from the Aſſembly, with ſimilar views, have taken _ fince -
the revolution, and ſeem to have been copied from the example in 1689.


1


| PENNSYLVANIA. 447
ſame commiſſion, with equal powers in both provinces. By this commiſſion, the-
number of counſellors in Pennſylvania was reduced. 1
Under the adminiſtration of Governor Markham in 1696, a new form of govern-
ment was eſtabliſhed in Pennſylvania. The election of the council and aſſembly now
became annual, and the legiſlature,, with their powers and forms of proceeding, . was
new-modelled. es No | | el
In 1699, the proprietary arrived from England, and aſſumed the reins of govern-

ment. While he remained in Pennſylvania, the laſt charter of privileges or frame of
government, which continued till the revolution, was agreed upon and eſtabliſhed.
This was completed and delivered to the people by tle proprietary, October 28, 1701,
juſt on his embarking for England. The inhabitants of the Territory, as it was then
called, or the lower counties, refuſed to-aceept this charter, and thus ſeparated them--
ſelves from the province of Pennſylvania; They afterwards had their own aſſembly,
in which the governor of Pennſylvania uſed to-prefide. 5
In September 1700, the Suſquehannah Indians granted to Mr. Penn all their lands

on both fides the river. The Suſquehannah, Shawaneſe, and Patomak Indians,
however, entered into articles of agreement with Mr. Penn, by which, on certain
conditions of peaceable and friendly behaviour,. they were permitted to ſettle
about the head of Patomak, in the province of Pennſylvania. The Conoſtoga chiefs
alſo in 1701 ratified the grant of the Suſquehannah Indians made the preceding
ear. 2 | 5 * 8
r In 1708, Mr. Penn obtamed from the. Sachems of the country, a confirmation of
the grants made by former Indians, of all the lands from Duck Creek to the moun-
tains, and from:the Delaware to-the Suſquehannah. In this deed, the Sachems declared
that they had ſeen and heard read divers prior deeds, which had been given to Mr.


Penn by former chiefs.” .
While Mr. Penn was in America; he erected Philadelphia into a corporation. The
charter was dated October 25, 1701, by which the police of the city was veſted in a:
mayor, recorder, aldermen, and common-council, with power to inquire into treaſons,
murders, and other felonies ; and to inquire into and puniſh ſmaller crimes. The cor-
poration had alſo extenſive civil juriſdiction ;: but it was diſſolved at the late revolution,
and Philadelphia was governed like other counties in tlie State, till 1789, when it was
again incorporated. 3 5 1 5

By the favourable terms which Mr. Penn offered to ſettlers, and an unlimited tole-
ration of all religious denominations, the population of the province was extremely
rapid. Notwithſtanding the attempts of the proprietary or his governors to extend his
own power, and accumulate property by procuring grants from the people, and ex-
empting his lands from taxation, the government was generally mild, and the burdens
of the people by no means oppreſſive. The ſelfiſh deſigns of the proprietaries were
vigorouſly and: conſtantly oppoſed by the Aſſembly, whoſe firmneſs preſerved the
charter rights of the province. |


At the revolution, the government was aboliſhed. The proprietaries were abſent,
and the people, by their repreſentatives, formed a new conſtitution on republican

principles, The proprietaries were excluded from all ſhare in the government, and
the legiſlature offered them 130, oool. in lieu of all quit-rents, which was finally ac-
cepted. The proprietaries, however, till poſſeſs in Pennſylvania many large tracts of
excellent land. | 5.

It is to be regretted, that among all the able writers in this important State, none
has yet gratified the public with its intereſting hiſtory. As this is not profeſſedly the
provinco-


/


448


of goV vernors. .


4 Lis of the ſeveral PRoRIRTOns, Govzxxons, LIEUTENANT - -GovERNORs, and
PrE*LDENTS of the PROVINCE, wish the T1 mes A 4 their, e Aaminfſiration. 55


The Honourable W; Ham Penn, born 1644, died I 15.


Governor,


"PENNSYLVANIA.


province of a geographer, 2. more particular detail of hiſtorical: Gam than * "REY
been given, will not be expected. PLN AI conclude Bk in aste lif


Porn [ETORS, |


(Thomas Penn, and

1 Richard Penn,

Jn Penn, ſen. and
e Penn, nd. 5.


Goverxors, &c.


Lieutenant-Gover o, William Penn, 1
Preſident, Thomas Lloyd,
Deputy Lieutenaut-Gov. John Blackwell,

Preſident and Council governed,

Deputy Governor, Benjamin Fletcher,
Lieutenant-Governor, William Markham,
Lieutenant-Governor, William Penn, Proprietor,

- Deputy Lieutenant-Gov. Andrew Hamilton, 3
Preſident and Council governed,

Deputy Lieutenant-Gov. John Evans,

PP Cookin, .:
Sir William Keith, Bart.
Patrick Gordon
George Thomas,
Prefident, | Anthony Palmer,
2 Lieutenant-Gov. James Hamilton,
Robert Hunter Morris,
William Denny,
8 James Hamilton,

5 1 John Penn,
Preſident, James Hamilton,
Lieutenant. Governor, Richard Penn,

Thomas Wharton,

Preſidents of the Supreme Joſeph Reed,

Executive Council f] William Moore,

the State of Penn- | John Dickinſon,

ſylvania, Benjamin Franklin,
e Mifflin, fie
Thomas Mifflin, Oc. 1790.


died 1771.


Feb. 1689-90, to April 26, 1693


—


of


from Oct. 1682, to Aug. 1684
Aug. 1684, to Dec. 1688
Dec. 1688, to Feb. 1689-90


26 Apnl 1693, to 3 June 1693
3 June 1693, to Dec. 1699


3 Dec. 1699, to 1 Nov. 1501
1 Nov. 1701, to Feb. 1502-3
Feb. 1702-3, to Feb. 1703-4
Feb. 1703-4, to Feb. 1708-9
March 1708-9, to 177
1717, to June 1726


June 1726, to 1736
1738, to 1747
1747, to 1748


1748, to Oct. 1754
Oct. 1754, to 19 Aug. 1756
19 if) 1756, to 17 Nov. 1759
47 Nov. 1759, to 21 Oct. 1763
31 Oct. 1763, to 6 May, 1771
6 May 1771, to 16 yo 1771
| 40
March 1777, to a 1778
Oct. 1778, to Oct. 1781
Nov. 1781, to Nov. 1782
Nov. 1782, to Oct. 1785
Oct. 1785, to Oct. 1788
Oct. 1788, to Oct. 1790


DELAWARE.


e
ons e e e


10 5 SITUATION AND EXTENT.

1. 17777 MOR .” Sq. Miles.

FPength 921 between 139 30 and 4, N. Lat. J %%
Breadth 4 between {| % and I 45 W. IG e


e 2. 1. ee 1 JyOUNDED on the eaſt, by the river and bay of the
DYVRDAKIEE HED Naum. D ſame name, and the Atlantic ocean; an ſouth,
by a line from Fenewick's Iſland, in latitude 38 207 30“, drawn weſt till it interſeas
what is commonly called the fangent line, dividing it from the State of Maryland; on
the weſt, by the ſaid tangent line, paſſing northward up the peninſula, till it touches
the weſtern part of the territorial circle; and thence on the north, by the ſaid circle,
deſcribed with a radius of 12 miles about the town of Newcaftle. r

This State appears to have derived its name from Lord Delawar, who completed the
ſettlement of Virginia. 15 =p Cs OE We,

CIVIL Divistons. | This State is divided into three counties, which are ſubdivided
into hundreds. i, PT | ante


Counties. No. Inhab. = Slaves, Chief Towns.
NewcasTrLE | 19,6866 | 2562 | Newcaſtk
rr. 18,920 2380 Dover
: | : 1 1 CHESS 05 of | | — 1 3
| Total | 59,0904 | 8887


| Before the revolution this diſtrict of country was denominated, © The three lower
e © bonita ge | 5 | „ .
RKRivkxs AND Cakxks.] The eaſtern fide of the State is indented with a large num-
ber of creeks, or ſmall rivers, which generally have a ſhort courſe, foft banks, nume-
rous ſhoals, and are ſkirted with very extenſive marſhes, and empty into the river and
bay of Delaware. In the ſouthern and weſtern parts of this State ſpring the head
waters of Pocomoke, Wicomico, Nanticoke, Choptank, Cheſter, Saflafras, and Bo-
henna rivers, all falling into Cheſapeak bay, and ſome of them are navigable 20 or 30
miles into the country, for veſſels of 50 or 60 tons. „FFF


PUBLIC IMexoveMENTs. | Juſt before the commencement of the war, a work of con-
ſiderable importance was begun at Lewes, in the touthern part of the State, viz. the
crection of a bridge and cauſeway from the town, over the creek and marſh to the op-
polite cape. This expenſive work was juſt completed when the Britiſh ſhips firſt came
into the road of Lewes. In order to prevent too eaſy a communication, they partially
removed it; and it being afterwards neglected, it was in complete ruins at the cloſe of
the war. A bridge, upon the fame plan, but upon a new foundation, has lately been
crected at the ſole expenſe of individuals: it extends about a quarter of a mile from
the town to the beach, over a wide creek and marſh. The inhabitants are compenſated
for their expenſe, by the facility of the communication between the town and the
Cape. x 3 — —ͤ—ͤ— N e 8 * |
Several canals in different parts of this State are contemplated, one of which is down
the waters of the Brandywine. tha — os


*


ge oo MY Facg


5 DELAWARE.


Fact or THE 88 Soil, AND PRODUCTIONS. ] The tate of Delaware, the
upper parts of the county of Neweaſtle excepted, is, to ſpeak generally, extremely low
and level. Large quantities of ſtagnant water, at particular ſeaſons of the year, over-

ſpreading a great 8 of the land, render it equally unfit for the purpoſes of
agriculture, and injurious to the health of the inhabitants. The ſpine, or higheſt ridge
of the peninſula, runs through the State of Delaware, inclined to the eaſtern or De-
laware fide. It is deſignated in Suſſex, Kent, and part of Newcaſtle county, by a
remarkable chain of ſwamps, from which the waters deſcend on each fide, paſſing on
the caſt to the Delaware, and on the weſt to the Cheſapeak. Many of the
ſhrubs and plants growing in theſe Hrampe are ſimilar to thoſe found on the higheſt
mountains. Ho

Delaware is chiefly an agricultural State. It includes a very denne tract of country ;
and ſcarcely any part of the Union can be ſelected more adapted to the different pur-

oſes of agriculture, or in which a greater variety of the moſt uſeful productions can
2 ſo conveniently and plentifully reared. The foil along the Delaware river, and
from eight to ten miles into the interior country, is generally a rich clay, producing
large timber, and well adapted to the various purpoſes of agriculture. From
thence to the ſwamps above mentioned the ſoil is light, ſandy, and of an inferior
ualit
1 The general aſpect of the country is very favourable for cultivation. Excepting ſome
of the upper parts of the county of Newcaſtle, the ſurface of the State is very little
broken or irregular. The heights of Chriſtiana are lofty and commanding; ſome of
the hills of Brandywine are rough and ſtony; but deſcending from theſe, and a few
others, the lower country is ſo little diverfified as almoſt to form one extended plain.
In the county of Newcaſtle, the ſoil conſiſts of a ſtrong clay; in Kent, there is a con-
ſiderable mixture of ſand; and in Suffex, the quantity of ſand altogether predom-
nates. Wheat is the ſtaple of this State: it grows here in ſuch perfection as not only to
de particularly ſought by the manufacturers of flour throughout the Union, but alſo to
be diſtinguiſhed and preferred, for its ſuperior qualities, in foreign markets. This
wheat poſſeſſes an uncommon ſoftneſs and whiteneſs, very favourable to the manufac-
ture of ſuperfine flour, and in other reſpects far exceeds the hard and flinty grains
raiſed in general on the high lands. Beſides wheat, this State generally produces
plentiful crops of Indian corn, barley, rye, oats, Bax, © buck-wheat, and pota-
toes. It abounds in natural and artificial meadows, containing a large variety of
graſſes. Hemp, cotton, and filk, if properly attended to, doubtleſs would flouriſh
very well.
The county of Suſſex, beſides producing a conſiderable quantity of grain, particularly
of Indian corn, poſſeſſes excellent grazing lands. This county alſo exports very large
quantities of lumber, obtained chiefly from an extenſive ſwamp, called the Indian River
or Cyprets Swamp, lying partly within this State, and partly in the State of Maryland.
This moraſs extends ſix miles from eaſt to weft, and nearly twelve from north to ſouth,
including an area of nearly 50,000 acres of land. The whote of this ſwamp is a high
and level baſon, very wet, though undoubtedly the higheſt land between the ſea and
the bay, whence the Pocomoke deſcends on one fide, and Indian river and St. Martin's
on the other. This * contains a yoo! — of F trees, wild beaſts, birds,
and reptiles.
CHIEF 7 Dov ER, in the county of Kent, is the ſeat of government. It
ſtands on Jones' Creek, a few miles from the Delaware river, and conſiſts of about

100 Routes, principally of brick. Four ſtreets interſect each other at right Es

ole


DE LAW ARE. 437


whoſe e form a ſpacious parade, on the eaſt ſide of h i is an elegant ſtate-
houſe of brick. The town has a lively appearance, and drives on a confiderable trade
with Philadelphia. Wheat is the principal article of export. «1 The landing is five or
{ix miles from the town of Dover. 0 |

New CASTLE is 35 miles below Philadelphia, on the weſt fiank of Drlawate river, lt
was firſt ſettled by the Swedes, about the year 1627, and called Stockholm; it was after-


wards taken by the Dutch, and called New Amſterdam. When it fell into the hands |


of the Engliſh, it was called by its preſent name. It contains about 60 houſes, which


have the alpec of decay, and was formerly the ſeat ol 1 This is the firſt
town that was ſettled on Delaware river.


WIL]INGTON is ſituated a mile and a half eld of a river, on Chriſtiana


Creck, 28 miles ſouthward from Philadelphia. It is much the largeſt and pleaſanteſt
town in the State, containing upwards of 400 houſes, Which are handſomely built
upon a gentle aſcent of an eminence, and ſhow to great advantage as you fail up the
Delaware; it contains about 2, 400 inhabitants. In this town are two Preſbyterian


Churches, a Swediſh Epiſcopal church, a Baptiſt and a Quaker meeting, and a few ;


Methodiſts. There is alſo a flouriſhing academy of about 40 or 50 ſcholars, who are
taught the languages, and ſome of the ſciences. This academy, in proper time, is in-


tended to be erected into a college. There is another academy at Newark in this


county, which was incorporated in 1 769. Theſe, acadenues were interrupted during


the war, and their funds ruined by the depreciation of Continental paper money.
Since the peace learning ſeems to revive and flouriſh. 4


Mixxonb is fituated at the ſource of a ſmall river, 15 miles from Delaware bay, and
| 1 50 ſouthward of Philadelphia, This town, which contains about 80 houſes, has been


built, except one houſe, bros the revolution; it is laid out with much good taſte, and
is by no means en un inhabitants are Epiſcopalians, e and Me- :


thodiſt 8. Hy 1 5 ?


Duck CakEK Cas Ro Abs—is 12 mn len nörth wilt from "RO 2 has eighty or
ninety houſes, which ſtand on one ſtreet. It carries on a conſiderable trade with Phila-


delphia, and is one of the largelt wheat markets 1 in the State. Kon ig 5 a un of


_ confiderable trade. TI 14 1


Lxwrs is fituated a few miles above the light-houſe on x Cope 8 1 bnd
about 150 houſes, built chiefly on a ſtreet, which is more than three miles in length,
and extending along a-creek: which ſeparates the town from the pitch of the cape.

The ſituation is high, and commands a full proſpect of the light-houſe and the ſea.
The court-houſe and gaol are commodious buildings, and give an air of importance to
the town. The ſituation of this place muſt at ſome future time render it conſiderably
important. Placed at the entrance of a bay, which is crowded with veſſels from all
parts of the world, and which is frequently cloſed with ice a part of the winter ſeaſon,
ueceſſity ſeems to require, and nature ſeems to ſuggeſt, the ſorming this port into a
harbour for ſhipping. Nothing has prevented this heretofore but the deficiency of
water in the creek. This want can be cheaply and eaſily ſupplied by a ſmall canal, ſo
as to afford a paſſage for the waters of Rehoboth into Lewes creek, which would en-
ſure an adequate ſupply... The circumjacent country is beautifully diverſified with
hills, wood, ſtreams, and lakes, forming. an agreeable contraſt to the. naked ſandy:


. Which terminates in the * but it is greatly infeſted with muſketocs and ſand
les. 8 |


5


M2 2 i l 1


F ' ;
3 .*
P Ee ee Le ee Ee .


=. | DELAWARE.


TRADE AND Mavwvractoxns.] We have already mentioned wheat as the Aiapite
commodity of this State. This is manufactured into flour and exported in large quan-
tities. The exports from the port of Wihnington, where a number of ſquare-rigged
veſſels are owned, for the year 1786, in the article of flour, was 20, 783 barrels ſuper-
fine, 457 ditto common, 256 ditto middlings, and 346 ditto ſhip Muff The manu-
facture of flour is carried to a higher degree of perfection in this State, than in any
others in the Union. Befides the 9 mills on red clay and white clay
creeks, and. other ſtreams in different parts of the State, the celebrated collection of
mills at Brandywine merit a particular deſcription. Here are to be ſeen, at one view,
12 merchant mills (beſides a ſaw mill) whic have double that number of pairs of
ſtones, all of ſuperior dimenſions, and excellent conſtruction. Theſe mills are thre:
miles from the mouth of the creeks on which they ſtand, half a mile from Wilming-
ton, and 27 from Philadelphia, on the poſt road from the eaſtern to the ſouthern States
They are called the Brandywine mills, from the ſtream on which they are orectel
This ſtream nies near the Welch mountains in Pennſylvania, and after a winding

courſe of 30 or 30 miles through falls, which furniſh numerous ſeats (130 of which are
already occupied) for every ſpecies of water Works, empties into Chriſtian: a ercek, near

Wilmington. The quantity of wheat manufactured at theſe mills annually 5s not ac-
curately aſcertained : it is eſtimated, however, by the beſt informed on the ſubject,
that theſe mills can grind 400, ooo buſhels in a year. But although they are capable
of manufacturing this quantity yearly, yet from the difficulty of procuring a permanent
ſupply of grain, the inſtability of the flour- market, and other circumſtances, there are
not commonly more than from about 290 to 3oo, ooo buſhels of wheat and corn manu-
factured here annually. In the fall of 1789, and ſpring of 1 790, there were made at
the Brandywine mills: eg barrels of ſuperfine flour, 1354 7 of common, 400
ditto middlings, as of ſhip ſtuff, and 2000 ditto corn meal. The quantity of
wheat and corn ground, from which this flour, &c. was made, was 308, ooo buſhels,
equal to the export in thoſe articles N 88 the pore” of me for the ſame

car. 5
? Theſe mills give eee to how 200 o perſons, vir. oute to tend che mills
from 50to 70 coopers, to make caſks for the flour, a ſufficient number.to man 12 fl 5
of about 30 tons each, which are employed in the tranſportation of the wheat and
flour, the reſt in various other occupations connected with. the mills. The navigation
quite to theſe mills is ſach, that a veſſel carrying 1ooo buthets'of wheat may be laid
along fide of any of theſe wille; un beſide ſome of them the water is of ſufficient
depth to admit veſſels of twice the above ſiae. The veſſels are unloaded with aſtoniſh-
ing expedition. There have been inſtances of 1000 bufnels being carried to the height
of four ſtories in four hours. It is frequently the caſe, that veſſels with 1000 buſhels
af wheat come up with flood tide, unlade, and go away the ſucceedihg ebb, with 300
barrels of flour on board. In conſequence of the machines introduced by the in-
genious Mr. Ohver Evans, three quarters of the manual labour before found neceſſary
is Now ſufficient for every purpoſe. By means of theſe machines, when mide nile of
in the full extent propoſed by the inventor, ths wheatiwill-be received on tlie:thallop's
deck, thence carried to the upper loft of the mill, and à conſiderable portion of the
fame returned in flour on the lower floor, ready for packing,” without the aſſiſtande of
manual labour but in a very ſmall degree, in proportion to the buſineſs done. The
tranſportation of flour from theſe mills to the port of Wilmington does not require
half an hour; and it is frequently” the caſe, that a cargo is taken from the * _
2 delivered


DELAWARE, 453
delivered at Philadelphia the ſame day. The fituation of theſe mills is very pleaſant
and healthful. The firſt mill was built here about 50 years fince. There is now a
ſmall town of forty houſes, principally ſtone and brick, which, together with the mills
and the veſſels loading and unloading beſide them, furniſh a charming proſpect from
the bridge, from whence they are all in full vice. DE. GEE
Beſides the wheat and flour trade, this State exports lumber and various other
4 The amount of exports for the year ending September 30, 1791, was 199, 840
yer oy 8 a 2
 LiouT-nouss.| The light-houſe, near the town of Lewes, was burnt in 1 77.
Since the war it has been completed and handſomely repaired. It is a fine ſtone
ſtructure, eight ſtories high ; the annual expenſe of which is eſtimated at about 65ol.
 Reri6ton.] In this State there is a variety of religious denominations. Of the
Preſbyterian ſect, there are 24 churches; of the Epiſcopal, 14; of the Baptiſt, 7 ;
of the Methodift, a conſiderable number, eſpecially in the two lower counties of Kent
and Suſſex, the number of their churches is not exactly aſcertained. Befides theie,
there is a Swediſh church at Wilmington, which is one of the oldeſt churches in the


JJ...

\ PopuLaT10N. | See table of diviſions. e 8

MINERALS. ] In the county of Suſſex, among the branches of the Nanticoke river,
large quantities of bog iron ore are to be found. Before the revolution, this ore was

worked to conſiderable extent; it was thought to be of a good quality, and pe-
culiarly adapted to the purpoſes. of caſtings. Theſe works have chiefly fallen to


 - Congrrrvrion.] The conſtitution of this State begins by declaring ſome of the
rights of the people, and enumerates nearly the fame that are mentioned in the decla-
ration of rights of Pennſylvania : it then delegates the legiſlative power to a General
Aſſembly, confiſting of a ſenate and a houſe of repreſentatives ; and the executive, to
a goyernor. All theſe are choſen by the people on the firſt Tueſday of October. The
gover.1or for three years; but he is not eligible for the next three; he muſt be thirty
years old, and have been an inhabitant of the State fix years, and of the United States
dwelve years. A plurality of votes makes a choice. The ſenators are choſen for three
years, muſt be twenty-ſeven years old, freeholders of 200 acres of land, or poſſeſſed of
100]. property, and have been inhabitants of the State three years. They are divided
into three claſſes, the time of one claſs expiring each year, and their ſeats being filled
by new elections. The repreſentatives are choſen for one year, muſt be 24 years old,
freeholders, and have been inhabitants three years. The conſtitution provides, that
there ſhall be ſeven repreſentatives and three ſenators choſen by each county; but the
General Aſſembly has power to increaſe the number, where two-thirds of each branch
ſhall think it expedient ; provided the number of ſenators ſhall never be * than
one half, nor leſs than one third, of the number of repreſentatives. The General
Aſſembly meets on the firſt Tueſday of January annually, unleſs ſooner convened by
the governor. Each branch has all the powers neceſſary for a branch of the legiſlature |
of a free and independent State. A majority of each conſtitutes a quorum to do bu-
lineſs, and a leſs number may adjourn from day to day, and compel the attendance of
members. They are privileged from arreſts, while attending on public buſineſs,
except in caſts of treaſon, felony, and breach of the peace; and for things ſaid in pub-
lic debate, are. not queſtionable elſewhere. They are compenſated out of the public
treaſury, - from which no money can be drawn but in conſequence of os RTE” by
= | aw.


954 TERRITORY N. w. OF 'THE-OINO.


law. Impeachments are made by the Lower Houſe, and tried by the Senate. Reve:
nue bills originate in the Houſe of Repreſentatives, but the Leute may propoſe alte- ?
rations. A j journal is kept of their proceedings, and publiſhed at the end of every.
ſeſſion, and the doors of both houtes are kept open wat the buſineſs require ſecrecy,
The governor is commander in cluef of the military force; may remit fines and ſor-
feitures, and grant reprieves and pardons, except in caſes of impeachment; may re-
quire information from all executive officers, may convene the General Aſſembly on
extraordinary occaſions, and adjourn them to any time not exceeding three months;
when they cannot agree on the time themielves. He muſt inform them of affairs con-
cerning the State, recommend to them ſuch meaſures as he ſhall judge expedient; and
ſee that the laws are faithfully executed. The ſpeaker of the — and after him,
the ſpeaker of the Houſe of Repreſentatives, ſhall exerciſe the office of governor, in
caſe of vacancy. The judicial power is veſted in a court of chanoery, and ſeveral
common law, courts. The judges are appointed by the governor, and commiſſioned
during good behaviour, and the juſtices of the peace for ſeven years; all removeable,
on the addreſs of two thirds of both houſes of Aſſembly. The other officers of the
State are appointed, ſome by the governor, ſome by the General Aſſembly, and ſome
by the people. No perſon concerned in any army or navy contract, or holding any. -
office, except the attorney-general, officers uſually appointed by the courts of juſtice,
attornies at law, and @fficers -1n the militia, can be a ſenator, or repreſentative. The
governor can hold no other office. No federal officer can hold an office in this State
to which a ſalary is by law annexed. The clergy are excluded from all civil offices.
All officers are impeachable and are bound by oath or affirmation to ſupport the con-
ſtitution and perform the duties of their office. All free white men, twenty-one years
old, having been two years inhabitants, and paid taxes, are electors; and are pri-
vileged from arreſts in civil actions while attending elections. The General Aſſem-
bly, with the approbation of the governor, have a right under certain regulations and
reſtrictions to make amendments to this conſtitution. A convention 1559 ao be called
wings a majority of the.people fhall ſignify their wiſh for it. |
The foregoing conſtitution was ratified on the 12th of June, 1792.
HrsTory. | The reader Will find a well-written ſketch of the hiſtory of this State
in the American edition of the e * by Thomas D „in Phila-


PIT... oy | "+44 1856


1 : ; . : x 7 BY 5
4 * a > 3's ' | "> | I. > I "Mt £ 7 6 g ?


.


TERRITORY N.W. OF THE onto.


| 2&1}


1  SrevamION AND Exrpxr. , I
| .- Miles. Square Miles. 1-21


5 Length go 3 and 50. N. Lat. eres! ,
Breadth 700 beben 1 6o and 23” W. Long. 1 411,300 .


- Hs extenſive tract of country is bounded north, b of the
Bouxanm. J T northern boundary line 7 5 United States; eaſt; 1 e lakes
and Pennſylvania; ſouth, by the Ohio river; weſt, by the Miffiffippi. Mr. 1
the late geographer of the United States, eſtimates that this tract contains 263,049,009,
acres, of which #049008; are water; this deducted, there will remain de
0


TERRITORY N.W. OF THE OHIO: 455


| of acres, belonging to the federal government, to be ſold for the difc arge of the na-

tional debt; except a narrow ſtrip of land bordering, on the ſouth of Lake Erie, and

ſtretching 120 miles weſt of the weſtern limit of Pennſylvania, which belongs to Con-

necticut.

But a ſmall proportion of theſe lands is yet purchaſed of the natives, and to be
diſpoſed of by Congreſs. Beginning on the meridian line, which forms the weſtern:

boundary of Pennſylvania, ſeven ranges of townthips have been ſurveyed and. laid off

by order of Congreſs. As a north and ſouth line ſtrikes the Ohio in an oblique direc-
tion, the termination of the ſeventh range falls upon that river, nine miles above the
Muſkingum, which is the firſt large river that falls into the Ohio. It forms the junc-

tion 172 miles below Fort Pitt, including the windings of the Ohio, CO in a direct
line is but ninety miles. |

The lands in which the Indian title is extinguiſhed, and which are now purchaſing
under the United States, are defined within the limits mentioned page 1 24, to which
the reader is referred. On theſe lands ſeveral ſettlements are commencing, one at

Marietta, at the mouth of Muſkingum, under the direction of the Ohio company;

another between the Miami rivers, under the direction of Colonel Symmes; and a
French ſettlement at Galliopolis. There are feveral other tracts delineated on the
map, which have been granted by Congreſs to particular companies, and other tracts
for particular uſes, which remain without any Engliſh ſettlements.


into four counties as follows :


Counties. „ erefted. MES 8 When erected.
Waſhington 1788 July 26th | St. Clair; 1790 April ws”
Hamilton 1790 Jan. 2d Knox  __ gg 20th


Theſe counties have been organized with the proper civil and military officers.
The county of St. Clair is divided into three diſtricts, viz. the diſtrict of Cahokia, the


ſeſſions of the peace, county courts of common pleas, and courts of probate, to be held
in each of theſe diftricts, as if each was a diſtintt county; the officers of the RO to
act by deputy, except in the diſtrict where they reſide. _
Rivers. ] The Muſkingum is a gentle river, confined by banks ſo high as to pre


at its head. From thence, by a 8 of about one mile, a communication is opened
to Lake Erie, through the 20 Rook which is a ſtream of great utility, navigable the


well known to the Hudſon, in the State of New Vork. 1

The Hockhocking reſembles the Muſkingum, though ſomewhat Fo 9 in "I
It is navigable for large boats about ſeventy miles, and for ſmall ones much further.
On the banks of this very uſeful ſtream are found inexhauſtible quarries of free-ſtone,
large beds of iron ore, and ſome rich mines of lead. Coal mines and falt ſprings are
frequent in the neighbourhood of this ſtream, as _ are in every part of the weſtern


ble ſtore, of that neceſſary article. Beds of white and blue clay, of an excellent quality,
are likewiſe found here. ſuitable for the manufacture of glaſs, crockery, and other


earthen wares: Red bole and an other uſeful * have been obſerved on the
branches of this river. 1 | 1
le


Civ Drvisions. | That part of this territory in which the Indian title is extin-
guiſhed, and which is ſettling under the government of the United LIES. 18. divided.


4
_—
'1

N


diſtrict of Prairie-du-rochers, and the diſtrict of Kaſkaſkias. Courts of general quarter


vent its overflowing. It is 250 yards wide at its confluence with the Ohio, and navi-
33 gable by large batteaux and barges to the Three Legs; and by ſmall ones to the lake


whole length without any obſtruction from falls. F rom Lake Erie the avenue is


territory. The ſalt that may be obtained from thoſe ſprings will afford an inexhauſti-


\ I
rr ee Ede Sa — I ꝛ———3


455 TERRITORY N. W. OF THE OHIO.
The Scioto is a larger river than either of the preceding, and a more exten.

_ five navigation. It is paſſable for large barges for 200 = * with a portage of only
four miles to the Sandufky, a good W dle ftream that falls into the Lake Erie.
Through the Sanduſky and »c1oto hes the moſt common paſs from Canada to the
Ohio and Miſſiffippi; one of the moſt extenſive and uſeful communications that are to
be found in any country. Prodigious extenfions of territory are here connected ; and,
from the rapidity with which the weſtern parts of Canada, Lake Erie, and the Ken-
tucky countries are ſettling, we may anticipate an immenſe intercourſe between them.
The lands on the borders of theſe middle frreams, from this circumſtance alone, afide
from their natural fertility, muft be rendered vaſtly valuable. The flour, corn, flax,
hemp, &c. raiſed for exportation in that great country between the Lakes Huron and
Ontario, will find an outlet through Lake Erie and theſe rivers, or down the Miſſiſ-
ſippi. The Ohio merchant can give a higher price than thoſe of Quebec for theſe +
commodities, as they may be tranſported from the former to Florida and the Weſt
India lands, with leſs expente, riſk, and infurance, than from the latter; while the
from the place of growth to the Ohio will not be one fourth of what it would


_—_ Quebec, and much leſs than even to the Oneida lake. The ftream of Scioto is


gentle, no where broken b Ang 5 falls: at ſome places, in the ſpring of the year, it over-
flows its banks, pro r large natural rice plantations. Salt ſprings, coal mines,
white and blue = = 3 abound in the country adjoining this river.
The Little Miami is too ſmall for batteaux navigation. Its banks are good land,
and ſo high as to prevent, in common, the overflowing of the water.
The Great Miami has a very ſtoney channel, and a ſwift ſtream, but no ſalls. It
is formed of ſeveral large branches, which are paſſable for boats a great diſtance. One.
branch comes from the weſt, and riſes in the Wabaſh country : another riſes near the
head waters of Miami river, which runs into Lake Erie; and a ſhort Pg drrides
another branch of Sanduſky river. It alſo interlocks with the Scioto
The Wabaſh is a beautiful river, with high and fertile banks. It empties into the
Ohio by a mouth 270 yards wide, 1020 miles below Fort Pitt. In the ſpring, ſummer,
and autumn, it is paſſable with batteaux three feet water, 412 miles, to Ouita-
non, a ſmall French ſettlement, on the weſt fide of the river; and for large canoes
197 miles further, to the Miami carrying place, nine miles from Miami village. This
village ſtands on Miami river, which empties into the ſouth-weſt part of Lake Erie.
The communication between Detroit, and the IIlinois, and Ohio countries, 15 up
Miami river to Miami village, thence, by land, nine miles, when the rivers are high;
and from eighteen to thirty when they are low, through a level country to the
Wabaſh, ard' through the various branches of the Wabath to the Places of deſti-
nation.
A ſilver mine has been Se! about twenty-e icht miles above Ouiatanon, on the
northern fide of the Wabaſh. Salt ſprings, lime, free-ſtone „blue, yellow, and white
clay, are found in plenty upon this river.
The rivers Avaſe and Kaſkaſkias empty into the Miſh ppi from: the north-caſt ; the
former is navigable for boats ſixty, and the latter about 1 30 miles. 8 both run
through a rich country,” which has extenſive meadows.
Between the Kaſkaikias and Illinois rivers, which are -four miles apart, is an
extenſive tract of level, rich land, which termmates in a e ridge, about fiſteen
 milles before you reach the Illinois river. In this delightful vale are a number of
French villages which, together with thoſe of St. Genevieve and St. * on the
weltern ſide of the Miſſiſſippi, contained in 1771, 157 3 ace men. A
One


TERRITORY ' N. W. OF THE OHIO: 457
One hundred and ſeventy- ſix miles above the Ohio, and eighteen miles above the
Niffouri, the Illinois empties into the Miſſiſſippi from the north-eaſt by a mouth 400
rards wide. This river is bordered with fine meadows, which in ſome places extend
as far as the eye can reach: this river furniſhes a communication with Lake Michigan,
by the Chicago river, between which and the Illinois are two portages, the longeſt of
- which does not exceed four miles. It receives a number of rivers which are from
20 to Ioo yards wide, and navigable for boats from 15 to 180 miles. On the north-
weſtern fide of this river is a coal mine, which extends for half a mile along the mid-
dle of the bank of the river, and about the ſame diftance below the coal mine are two
talt ponds, 100 yards in circumference, and ſeveral feet in depth. The water is flag-
nant, and of a yellowiſh colour; but the French and natives make good falt from it.
The ſoil of the Illinois country is, in general. of a ſupenor quality: its natural growth
confiſts of oak, hiccory, cedar, mulberry, &e. hops, dying drugs, medicinal plants of

' ſeveral kinds, and excellent wild grapes. In the year 4" 4 hi French vitlers made
110 hogſheads of firong wine from thete grapes.
There are many other rivers of equal ſize and importance —_ thoſe we have been |
_ deſcribing, which are not ſufficiently known for, accurate deſcriptions. =_
Porrrariox.] The number of ſouls in this large tract af country bas not been
aſcertained. From the beſt data the author has received, ws population ney: be eſti-
mated as follows: a

Indians (ſuppoſe) 12 - — 6 5,000# I 792.
Ohio Company purchaſe nw" — e 2,500 do.
Col. Symmes ſettlements. i 45090 do.
Galliopolis, (French ſettlement) oppoſite the Kanhawa river 1,00 do.
Vincennes and its vicinity, on the Wabaſh, — — 1,500 do.
Naſkaſkias and Cahokia . r


At Grand Ruifſcau, . of St. Philip and bra du ache 1 |<
Total EP 72,820


In 1790 there were in the town of Vincennes about forty American families and
thi irty-one flaves: and on the Miſſiſſippi, forty American families and ſeventy- three
ſlaves, all included in the above eſtimate. On the Spaniſh or weſtern fide of the
1 there were in 1790, about 1800 ſouls, principally at Genevieve and St.
uls. |
| Face er THE Cement; SoIL, AND Paoprerioxs Jo the remarks on theſe WY
interſperſed in the deſcription of the rivers, we will add ſome obſervations from an ano-
nymous pamphlet publiſhed not long ſince, which we preſume are the moſt authen-
tic, reſpecting the part of that country which has been MIR of the Indians, of
any that have been given.
The undiſtinguiſhed terms of 8 that are commonly uſed in ſpeaking of
the natural fertility of the country on the weſtern waters of the United States, would
render it difficult, without accurate attention in the ſurveys, to aſcribe a preference to
any particular part; or to give a juſt deſcription of the territory under conſideration,
without the hazard of W fuſpectad of exaggeration : but 1 in this we have the united


» The 3 1 inhabit this country are the "EVER on both ſides the Miffiſſippi; the ee
8 the Illinois; the Piankaſhaws and other tribes, on the Wabaſh; the Shawaneſe, on the Scioto; che De: :
N the Miamis, the Ouiſcons, Maſcontens, Sakies, Sioux, Mekekouakis, the Pilans, Powtowatz:::


>leſſaques, Ottawas, Chipewas, and Wiandots. The whole amounting to ine en, 3
3 N opunuo .


— — — — —— 8 \ apes a . 6, + 208% ate *


ſtretches from the Muſkingum to the Scioto and the great Miami rivers.*


for the whole tract of the globe comprehended between the weſtern ſkirts of the Al-


themſelves into the Ohio; thence eaſt along the ridge that ſeparates the lakes and


They are interſperſed with all the variety of ſoil which conduees to pleaſantneſs of


interior parts. Theſe afford as rich a foil as can be imagined, and may be reduced


high and low lands produce vaſt quantities of natural grapes of various kinds, of


fection. a


inhabitants may be for ever ſupplied with a ſufficiency of ſugar, by


46% TERRITORY N. w. OF THE OHIO. |
opinion of the geographer, the ſurveyors, and every traveller that has been intimate]

acquainted with the country, and marked every natural object with the moſt —
jous exactneſs— That no part of the federal territory unites ſo many advantages, in
point of health, fertility, variety of production, and foreign intercourſe, as that which


„Colonel Gordon, in his Journal, ſpeaking of a much larger range of country, in
which this is included, and makes unqueſtionably the fineſt part, has the following
obſervation: The country on the Ohio is every where pleafant, with large level ſpots
of rich land, and remarkably healthy. One general remark of this nature will ferve


legany mountains; thence running ſouth-weſtwardly to the diſtance of zoo miles to
the Ohio falls; then croſſing them northerly to the heads of the rivers that empty


Ohio ſtreams to French Creek : this country may, from a proper knowledge, be af-
firmed to be the moſt healthy, the moſt pleaſant, the moft commodious and moſt
fertile fpot of earth, known to the European people. „C OE ORERL 2's 8
The lands on the various ſtreams above-mentioned, which fall into the Ohio,
are now more accurately known, and may be deſcribed with confidence and preciſion.


ſituation, and lays the foundation for the wealth of an agricultural and manufacturing
people. Large level bottoms, or natural meadows, from twenty to fifty miles in cir-
euit, are every where found bordering the rivers, and variegating the country in the


to proper cultivation with very little labour. It is ſaid, that in many of theſe bottoms
a. man may clear an acre a day, fit for planting with Indian corn, there being no un-
derwood; and the trees growing very high and large, but not thick together, need
nothing but girdling. „ . e
The prevailing growth of timber, and the more uſeful trees, are, maple or ſugar
tree, ſyeamore, black and white mulberry, black and white walnut, butternut, cheſ-
nut; white, black, Spaniſh, and cheſnut oaks, hiccory, cherry, buckwood or horſe
cheſnut; honey locuſt, elm, cucumber tree, lynn tree, gum tree, iron wood, afh, aſpin,
faſſaſtas, crab apple tree, paupaw or cuſtard apple, a variety of plum trees, nine bark
tpice, and leather-wood buſhes. General Parſons meaſured a black walnut tree near
Muſkingum, whoſe circumference, at five feet from the ground, was twenty-two feet.
A fycamore, near the ſame place, meaſured forty-four feet in circumference, at ſome:
diſtance from the ground White and black eak, and cheſnut, with moſt: of the
above-ment.oned ' timbers, grow large and plenty upon the high grounds: both the


which the ſettlers univerſally make a ſufficiency for their own conſumption of rich
red wine. It is afferted in the old ſettlement of St. Vincent, where they have had
opportunity to try it, that age will render this wine preſerable to moſt of the Ryropean

wines. Cotton is the natural production of this country, and grows in gr


*
, <4
* * 5


The ſugar maple is a moſt valuable tree for an inland country; any number of
N few


* A gentleman who has viſited this country 1 this account is a little too highly embelliſhed ; he
acknowledges that it is a very fine country, but thinks that there are other parts of the weſtern unſettled


country, which unite at leaſt as many, if not more-advantages, than the tract above mentioned.


TERRITORY N. w. OF THE OHIO. 439


trees 2 the uſe of each family: a tree will yield about ten pounds of ſugar a year,
and the labour is very trifling : the ſap is extracted in the months of Feb and


March, and granulated, by the ſimple operation of boiling, to a ſugar equal 1 in flayour

and whiteneſs to the beſt Muſcovado.

«« Springs of excellent water abound in every part of this territory; ; and ſmall and

large ſtreams, for mills and other purpoſes, are actually interſperſed, as if by art,
that there be no deficiency in any of the conveniencies of life.

« Very little waſte land is to be found in any part of this tract of country; there are
no ſwamps but ſuch as may be readily drained, and made into arable and meadow land;
and though the hills are frequent, they are gentle and ſwelling, no where high or in-
capable of tillage ; they are of a deep, rich ſoil, covered with a heavy growth of tim-
ber, and well adapted to the production of wheat, rye, indigo, tobacco, &c.


The communications between this co untry and the ſea will be principally i in the
four following directions:


1. The route through the Scioto and Muſkingum to Lake Erie, and ſo to the
river Hudſon ; which has been already deſcribed.

4 2. The paſſage up the Ohio and Monongahela to the portage above-mentioned, |
which leads to the navigable waters of the Patomak ; this portage is thirty miles, and
will probably be rendered much leſs by the execution of the plans now on foot for
opening the navigation of thoſe waters.

© 3. The Great Kanhaway, which falls into the Ohio from the Virginia ſhore, he-
tween the Hockhocking and the Scioto, opens an extenſive navigation from the ſouth-
caſt, and leaves but eighteen miles portage from the navigable waters of James river
in Virginia. This communication for the country between Muſkingum and Scioto,
will probably be more uſed than any other for the exportation of manufactures and
other light and valuable articles, and eſpecially for the importation of foreign com-
modities, which may be brought from the Cheſapeak to the Ohio much cheaper than
they are now carried from Philadelphia to Carliſle, and the other thick-ſettled back

counties of Pennſylvania. _

4. But the current down the Ohio and Miſfiſfippi, for heavy articles that ſuit the
Florida and Weſt India markets, ſuch as corn, flour, beef, lumber, &c. will be more
frequently loaded than any ſtreams on earth. . 'The diſtance from the Scioto to the Mif-
15 pi is 800 miles, from thence to the ſea is goo. This whole courſe is eaſily run

fteen days, and the paſſage up thoſe rivers is not ſo difficult as has uſually been
ra It is found, by late experiments, that ſails are uſed to great advantage
againſt the current of the Ohio; and it is worthy of obſervation, that in all probabi-
tity ſteam boats will be found to do infinite ſervice in all our extenſive river navi-
gation. 5

1 deſign of Congreſs and of the Ohio Company is, that the clans ſhall .
proceed regularly down the Ohio, and northward to Lake Erie; and it is probable,
that not many years will elapſe, before the whole country Fes Miami will be
brought to that degree of cultivation, which will exhibit all its latent beauties, and
juſtify thoſe deſcriptions of travellers which have ſo often made it the garden of the

world, the ſeat of wealth, and the center of a great empire.
Axis, 1 No country is better ſtocked with wild game of every kind';
zunumerable her s of deer and w ild cattle are ſheltered in the groves, and fed in the


A gentleman of much obſervation, and a great traveller in this Sountry, is of opinion, that 18 com-
munication or route is chanerical,


3 Na , extenſive


460 TERRITORY N. W. OF THE OHmf.
extenfive bottoms that every where abound ; an unqueſtionable proof of the preat
fertility of the ſoil : turkies, geeſe, ducks, ſwans, tcal, pheaſants, partridges, &c. are,
from obſervation, believed to be in greater plenty here, than the tame poultry are in
any part of the old ſettlements in America. e FFV
e The rivers are well ſtored with fiſh of various kinds, and many of them of ay
_ excellent quality. They are generally large, though of different fizes ; the cat fiſh,
% hich is the largeſt, and of a delicious flavour, weighs from fix to eighty pounds.“
_ AxTraviTIEs AND Curtosities. ] The number of old forfs found in the Kentucky
conntry are the admiration of the curious, and a matter of much tpeculation ; they
2: moſtly of an oblong form, ſituated on ſtrong, well-choſen ground, and con-
dus to water: when, by whom, and for what purpofe theſe were thrown up, is
certain ; they are undoubtedly very ancient, as there is not the leaſt viſible difference
in the. age or fize of the timber growing on or within theſe forts, and that which
grows without; and the old natives have loſt all tradition reſpecting them. Dr.
Cutler, who has accurately examined the trees on theſe forts, and which he thinks,
from appearances, are the ſecond growth, is of opinion, that they muſt have been
built upwards, of 1000 years ago: they muſt have been the efforts of a people much
more devoted to labour than our preſent race of Indians; and it is difficult to con-
ceive how they could be conſtructed without the ufe of iron tools. At a convenient
diſtance from - theſe always ſtands a ſmall mound of earth, thrown up in the form of
a pyramid, and ſeems in ſome meafure proportioned to the ſize of its adjacent fortifi-
cation. On examination, they have been found to contain a chalky fubſtance, ſup-
J VVV
Under this head we may mention the extenſive meadows, or, as the French call
them, Prairie, which anfwer to what, in the ſouthern States, are called Savannas;
they are a rich plain, without trees, and covered with graſs; ſome of theſe, between
St. Vincennes and the Miſſiſſippi, are thirty or forty miles in extent. In paſſing them,
as far as the eye can reach, there is not a tree to be ſeen; but there is plenty of deer,
wild cattle, bears, and wolves, and innumerable flocks of turkies; theſe, with the
JJ c rpa n
Fonts. ] The poſts eftabliſhed for the protection of the frontiers are as follow:
Franklin, on French Creek; Harmar, at the mouth of Muſkingum; Stuben, at
the rapids of the Ohio; Fayette, Hamilton, Knox, Jefferfon, St. Clair, Marietta, and
J 8 e . +
__ _GovenxmexT, &c.] By an ordinance of Congreſs, paſſed on the 13th of July,
1787, this country, for the purpoſes of temporary government, was erected into one
_diffrit, ſunject, however, to a diviſion, when circumſtances ſhall make it expedient,
In the ſame ordinance it is provided, that Congreſs ſhall appoint a governor, whoſe
commiſſion ſhall continue in force three years, unleſs fooner revoked. CEN


The governor muſt reſide in the diſtrict, and have a freehold eſtate therein, in
1000 acres of land, while in the exerciſe of his office.
Congreſs, from time to time, are to appoint a ſecretary, to continue in office four
years, unleſs fooner removed, who muſt reſide in the diſtrict, and have an eſtate of
50o acres of land, while in office. 955 Hibs e 5
The bufineſs of the ſecretary is, to keep and preſerve the acts and laws of the
legiflature, and the public records of the diſtrict, and the proceedings of the governor
in his cxecutive department; and to tranſmit authentic copies of ſuch acts and pro-
cecdings, every fix months, to the ſecretary of Congreſs. 155


Ks


TERRITORY N. W. OF THE OHIO. 46%

The ordinance provides, that Congreſs ſhall appoint three judges, poſſeſſed each of
$00 acres of land in the diſtrift in which they are to wide” and to hold their com-
miſſions during good behaviour, any two of whom ſhall form a court, which ſhall
have a common law juriſdiction. ' The governor and judges are authorized to adopt
and publiſh in the diſtrict, ſuch laws of the original States, criminal and civil, as
may be neceſſary and beft ſuited to the cireumſtances of the diftrit, and report them
to Congreſs; and, if approved, they ſhall continue in force till the organization of
the General Aſſembly of the diſtrict, who ſhall have authority to alter them. The
governor is to command the militia, and appoint and commiſſion their officers, ex-
_ cept general officers, who are to be appointed and commiffioned by Congrets.
Previouſly to the organization of the Aſſembly, the governor is to appoint ſuch |
magiſtrates and civil eh as ſhall be deemed neceſſary for the e of peace
and order. | 55

So ſoon as there ſhall be 5000 free male inhabitants of full age in the diſtrict, they

ſhall receive authority to elect repreſentatives, one for every 500 free male inhabitants,
to repreſent them in the General Aſſembly; the repreſentation to increaſe progreſſively
with the number of free male inhabitants till there be twenty-five repreſentatives ;
after which, the number and proportion of the repreſentatives ſhall be regulated by
the legiſlature. A repreſentative muſt poſſeſs, in fee ſimple, 200 acres of land, and
be a reſident in the diſtrict ; and muſt have been a citizen of the United States, or
a reſident in the diſtrict, three years preceding his election. An elector muſt have
fifty acres of land in the diſtrict, muſt have been a citizen of one of the States, and
muſt be a reſident in the diftrict, or muſt poſſeſs the ſame freehold, and have been
two years a reſident in the diſtrict. The repreſentatives, when duly elected, are to
continue in office two years.
T be General Aſſembly, or Legillature, ſhall conſiſt of the governor, lein tere
council, and houſe of repreſentatives. The legiſlative council ſhall confiſt of five
members, to continue in office five years, unleſs ſooner removed by Congreſs ; three
make a quorum. ''The council are to be thus appointed: the governor and repre-
ſentatives, when met, ſhall nominate ten perſons, reſidents in the diſtrict, and each
poſſeſſed of a freehold i in zoo acres of land, and return their names to Congrets, Who
all appoint and commiſſion five of them to ſerve as aforefaid.

All bills paſſed by a majority in the houfe, and in council, ſhall be referred to the
governor for his aſſent; but no bill, or legiſlative act whatever, ſhall be of force
without his aſſent. The governor ſhall have power to convene, Prorogue, and di-
ſolve the General Aſſembly, when, in his opinion, it ſhall be expedient.

The legiſlature, when organized, ſhall have authority, by joint ballot, to- clect a
delegate to Congreſs, who ſhall have a ſeat in Congreſs, with a right of debating, but
but not of voting, daring this temporary government.

And for extending the fandamental principles of civil and religious liberty, which
form the -bafis whereon theſe republics, their laws and conflitutions,- are erected ; to
fix and eſtabliſh thoſe principles as the baſis of all laws, conſtitutions, and govern-
ments, which for ever hereatter ſhall be formed in the ſaid territory; to provide alſo _
for the eſtabliſhment of ſtate and permanent government therein, and for their ad-
miſſion to ſhare in the ſederal councils on an equal footing with the original States,
at as carly periods as may be conſiſtent with the general intereſt : |

It is hereby ordained and declared, by the authority aforeſaid, That the fol! owning
articles ſhall be conſidered as articles of compact, between the original States and


the people, and States in the aid territory, and for ever remain unalterable, unleſs by
common conſent, to wit: |


« Article


1 TERRITORY N. w. OFTHE OH.


« Article 1ſt. No perſon, demeaning himſelf in a peaceable and orderly manner,
ſhall ever be moleſted on account of his mode of worthip or. religious enguments 3 in
the ſaid territory.

Article ad. The inhabitants of the ſaid territory ſhall always he entitled to the be-
neſits of the writ of habeas corpus, and of = trial by jury, of a. proportionate re-
preſentation of the people in the legiſlature, and of judicial proceedings, according
to the courſe of the common law.: all perſons ſhall be bailable unleſs for capital of-
fences, where the proof ſhall be cvident, or the preſumption great: all fines ſhall


be moderate, and no cruel or unuſual puniſhment ſhall be inflicted; no man


| thall be deprived of his liberty or property but by the judgement» of his peers, or of
| the law of the land; and ſhould the public exigencies make it neceſſary for the com-
mon preſervation to take any perſon's. property, or to demand his particular ſervices,
full compenſation ſhall be made for the ſame; and in the Juſt preſervation of the rights
and property, it is underftood and declared, that no law ought ever to be made, or
have force in the ſaid territory, that ſhall in any manner whatever interfere with, or
affect private contracts or engagements bona fide, and without fraud previouſly formed.

Article 3d. Religion, morality, and knowledge, being neceſſary to good govern-
ment and the happineſs of mankind, ſchools and the means of education ſhall for
ever be encouraged; the utmoſt good faith ſhall always be obferved towards the
Indians; their lands and property thall never be taken from them without their con-
ſent; and in their property, rights, and liberty, they ſhall never be invaded or diſ-
turbed, unleſs in juſt and lawful wars authorized by Congreſs ; but laws founded in
guſtice and humanity ſhall from time to time be made, for preventing wrongs being =
done to them, and for preſerving peace and friendſhip with them. _
Article 4th. The ſaid territory, and the States which may be formed therein, ſhall
for ever remain a part of this confederacy of the United States of America, ſubject
to the articles of confederation, and to ſuch alterations therein as ſhall be conſtitu-
tionally made; and to all the acts and ordinances of the United States, in Congreſs
.aflembled, conformable thereto. The inhabitants and ſettlers in the ſaid territo
ſhall be ſubject to pay a part of the federal debts contracted, or to be contracted, and
a proportionable part of the expences of government, to be apportioned on them 1
Congreſs, according to the ſame common rule and meaſure, by which apportion-
ments thereof ſhall be made on the other States, and tlie taxes for paying their pro-
portion, ſhall be laid and levied by the authority and direction of the legiſlatures of
the diſtrict, or diſtricts, -or new ſtates, as in the original States, within the time agreed
upon by. the United States in Congreſs aſſembled. The legiſlatures of thoſe diſtricts,
or new ſtates ſhall never interfere with the primary diſpoſal of the ſoil by the United
States, in Congreſs aſſembled, nor with any regulations Congreſs may find neceſſary
for ſecurmg the title in ſuch ſoil to the bong fide purchaſers. No tax ſhall be impoſed
on lands the property of the United States; and in no caſe ſhall non-reſident pro-

prietors be taxed higher than reſidents. The navigable waters leading into the Miſſiſ-
ſippi and St. Lawrence, and the carrying places between the fame, ſhall be common
Highways, and for ever free, as well to the inhabitants of the ſaid territory, as to the
citizens of the United States, and thoſe of any other States that may be admitted into
the confederacy, without any tax, impoſt, or duty, therefor.

-« Article 5th. There ſhall' be formed in the ſaid territory, not leſs than three,” nor
more than five States; and the boundaries of the States, as ſoon as Virginia ſhall alter
her act of ceſſion, and conſent to the ſame, ſhall become fixed and - eſtabliſhed as
com, viz, The weſtern State in the ſaid OTE ſhall be bounded on the 3


3 a


TERRITORY N. W. OF THE OHIO: 463
the Ohio, and Wabaſh rivers; a direct line drawn from the Wabaſh and Poſt Vin-


cents due north to the territorial line between the United States and Canada, and by
the ſaid territqrial line to the lake of the Woods and the Miſſiſſippi. The middle
State ſhall be: bounded by the ſaid direct line, the Wabaſh from Poſt Vincents to the
Ohio-; by the Ohio by a direct line drawn due north from the mouth of the Great


Miami to the ſaid territorial line, and by the ſaid territorial line. The eaſtern State
ſhall be bounded by the laſt-mentioned direct line, the Ohio, Pennſylvania, and the


ſaid territorial. line: Provided however, and it is further underſtood and declared, that


the boundaries of theſe three States ſhall be ſubject ſo far to be altered, that if Con-
greſs hereafter ſhall find it expedient, they ſhall have authority to form one, or two -
States, in that part of the ſaid territory which lies north of an eaſt and weft line

drawn through the ſoutherly bend or extreme of Lake Michigan; and when any of-
the ſaid States ſhall have 60,000 free inhabitants therein, ſuch State ſhall be ad-
mitted by its delegates into the Congreſs of the United States, on an equal footing:
with the original States in all reſpects whatever; and ſhall be at liberty to form a.
permanent conſtitution and ſtate government : Provided the conſtitution and govern--
ment ſo to be formed ſhall be. republican, and in conformity to the principles con-
tained in theſe articles; and ſo far as it can be confiſtent with the general intereſt of
the confederacy, fuch admiſſion ſhall be allowed at an earlier period, and when there


may he a leſs number of free inhabitants in the State than 60, ooo.


Article 6th. There ſhall be neither ſlavery nor involuntary ſervitude in the ſaid”


territory, otherwiſe than in the puniſhment of crimes, whereof the party ſhall have


been we 6 convicted : Provided always, that any perſon eſcaping into the ſame, from


whom labour or ſervice is lawfully claimed in any of the original States, ſuch fugitive


may be lawfully reclaimed, and conveyed to the perſon claiming his or her labour or


ſervice as aforeſaid.“


Such is the preſent government of the Weſtern Territory, and ſuch the political


obligations of the adyenturers into this fertile and delightful part of the United States.

In the ordinance, of Congreſs, for the government of this territory, it is provided,
that after the ſaid territory acquires a certain degree of population, it ſhall be di-
vided into States. The eaſtern State, that is thus provided to be made, is bounded:
on the Great Miami on the weſt, and by the Pennſylvania line on the eaſt. The
center of this State will fall between the Scioto and the Hockhocking. At the mouth
of one of theſe rivers will probably be the ſeat of government for this State; and,

if we may indulge the ſublime contemplation of beholding the whole territory of the


United States ſettled by an enlightened people, and continued under one extended


government, on the river Ohio, and not far from this ſpot, will be the ſeat of empire


for the whole dominion. This is central to the whole; it will beſt accommodate


every, part; it is the moſt pleaſant, and probably the moſt healthful. 3
Ihe ſettlement of this country has been checked, for ſeveral years paſt, by the un-


happy Indian war, an amicable termination of which, it is ardently wiſhed, might.


ſpeedily take place.


SOUTHERN


— — — — Ds Ge —ů —— — * 1
— — — 2


— —̈—̃ ĩů4ᷣ—— — . "yy
uri - 7 * 1
1 * 8 3 x. TR * 12
n -


* | . 9 464)


SOUTHERN STATES,


The Thinp, and much the Jargeft GRAND Division of the Uinvle STATES comprehend;


MaRYLAND, Teakrrony, Sourn of Onro,
VIRGINIA, SouTH CAROLINA, and
KENTUCKY, GEORGIA,


NorTH CaROLN A,


"HIS extenſive diviſion is bounded north by pennſj 1vania and the Ohio river; weſt

by the Miſſiſſippi; ſouth by Eaſt and Weſt Florida ; eaft by the Atlantic ocean
and the Delaware State; It is interſected in a N. E. and S. W. direction, by the
range of Allegany mountains, which give riſe to many noble rivers, which fall either
into the Atlantic on the eaſt, or the Miſſiſſippi on the weſt. From the ſea coaſt,
ſixty, eighty, and in ſome parts 100 miles back towards the mountains, the country,
generally ſpeaking, is nearly a dead level, and a very large proportion of it is covered,
in its natural ſtate, with pitch pines. In the neighbourhood of ſtagnant waters,
which abound in this level country, the inhabitants are fickly. In the back, hilly,
and mountainous country, they are as healthy as in any part of America.

This diſtrict of the Union contains upwards of one million nine hundred thouſand
inhabitants, of whom 648,439 are ſlaves, which is 7hirteen fourteentbs of the whole
number of flaves in the United States. The influence of ſlavery has produced a very
diſtinguiſhing feature in the general character of the inhabitants, which, though now
diſcernible to their diſadvantage, has been ſoftened and meliorated by the benign effects
of the revolution, and the progreſs of 2 and humanity.

The following may be conſidered as the principal productions of this diviſion; 3
tobacco, rice, indigo, wheat, corn, cotton, tar, pitch, turpentine, and lumber.

In this diſtrict is fixed the e ſeat of wo general N


- 4


; - SITVATION AND EXTENT,


Miles; 2 | LY Square Miles


Length 134 37 8& and 39 44 N. Lat. ] 14,000
Breadth | $333 betwee * { 1 and 4 30 W. 5 fourth of


; Wbich 1 15 water.


: OUNDED north; by Pennſy lvania; eaſt, by Delaware State and
Boes panne ] B the Atlantic ocean ; ſouth vo, weſt, by Virginia.
Civil Drvrsioxs AND PoruLATION.] This State is divided into nineteen counties,


cleven of which are on the Maſtern, and eight on the Eaſtern ſhore of Cheſapeak bay. ]


Counties.


oy
5
9
A
a
\
=
:
g
8
:
;
*
*
»
4
p
-
G |
'
7
J
d
* R
*
>
„

g
*
*
0

«
4
.
5
1
*
>»
.
-
4
—
* ä
.
1
| NF
5
_
|
5
.
"
:
?
?
;
/
f
—
”
5
|
|
„
p
*
.
4
.
.
.
v
4
1
*
8
4
= %


30


inmnm mmm


—


Village


more tt 1! erm pr er ene eee


91 ( Q


( A! —


—
—


i
( P 2 NI * 1 * .


—
*
b


Of


7 Yr n.


'
1
1


'
\
\t
'


4 cord + 0o/o:. 0:00. 0405
\


*


(umbertanl
Settlements s})


H. C


Jr. bY *
N


U


7 RANGES


* 2 — Cn 7 Dr ——
[ 1 6-9-0 '
. for
« PALANDS: 11 1 4 92
2 A oeGecs ES. 4 .
, 2 i | : i I} ov
BY. / 1 3
— "= -
2 SSP
= Mt.


WASHINGTON


2
*
Eg


© Oh. Lead Man


: —_— __


a To
I ui iu 1.


85
2 p
=> 2 X Care". Aram
9 Lu", + 9+ % %“ + $5494 Sc. 4


Hh watt K.


>-
—
"Sa
5
21 \v8001[025 I


| Alibama R..


Mobi,


e;
eee „


/
/


* e,, .
= 7 h
f. 417 * _ H. e.


AJ 2 |: g
"WON Frederiint


Umberland


SE S"MARYS HR.
1


e iulhu-
Rn q Se Johns H. s,
Ir p |


|
-— JL &STAUGUSTINE


iu
2


Tah 01 «
1 ;
4 eie


9 Ne Ape
i geo 15 'E :
. lake 2 we * 3 ln.
75 rum. 2 1 ö
3 NN Q pr Carnareral
* Am ; M! 5 |


Bo oi


DES:
*


"Now Enjul® |
1.


- *
.
8
|
% X ö


Cayos lnelole OX
MHelleys J. A.


: 0 , AE L W
Alitlet A: IA, * wh E
In . 0 1 r i ; H |
SPAROOR SAN he oC CE 2 |; | Hil Palmar
1 þ 2 6 A.
© == 7. f J= * ö N 6. - e.:
Balm J. | - |
Boca u y | 2 7 r Leecyt
3 = % J
J
FM» 4 0 4
o 8 ee
Boca Gapartllo dee 5 . „ I Or


3 " . :
A „ uni
Boca Granda %. <# L
- The ne


Hero Seco


Curt 7 6


(larlos .


Vine οαο


„ „e
„er


Punta Large


Pungo Bay


bf p * D j 7 2 1 f
Punta Hancha : F A A . arga


or Cape Sable tg 2.
| 7 „ . . | R
225 500 54 Wer |
y” * Pe Matacomb 1
9 al


Deng 2 0909;
S
S Riu 2 52 .
22 2 *


80


: a „ — |
Engraved jor Morſes Geography, Pub/r5ht „, John Stockdale n / £


45


Lil


4 f A.


LUNEXBURG C*


——— —


Trvin


Moravia
N SCN


iu YOU


nn


Ne


— — ——
N
EXPLANATION
May |
* Air | e between the United States
EC. Hh; lopen and Spaniſh Dominions


= Dirvivtonal lines between vach Slttle


=Y Lines UW mining the terittor. , clamodt


4 by erte Indians. lion


—) 0
> lar J.
meren,


Roads
0 Towns


Indian Towns ant Villuges


In.


Wages Head
__—”


42. *
Erommock


Aid ee


E]
-
2
3
=
:
3
2


MAL MMHALLL


TY, 70 7 7 .


. -
Nur:


fin.


675


» 7,7 QS
Zee. 2 "thr,
>


2


Td
berni.


Scale o/ Niles 69% 7 @ Degree.


40 60 80. 700
Eee


— ;
/00 200


TIN


%% ln.


PE CAN EH


l 22 .


Mig or


"of Leer


, 701


rw JS


Gran


jarga


Indian M.


=
5 .


Oh Or
ville lt .


ein iin the Hock


FLORIDA


*


V


eCO v
COOUT | e
1


S


A
a, A Þ;
( of the STATES S of )


VIRGINTA, NORIT RTH CAROLINA,


SOUTH CAROLINA axv GEORGIA;


Comprehending the SPANISH PROVINCES of


£4ST' any WEST FLORIDA:


— ff. hibitling the BoundYal us


as fixed by the late Treaty of Peace between the
UNITED STATES and the SPANISH DOMINIONS,


Compiled ron — > vers & Obs CFVAUIONS


JO; ropl 7 2


—


80


uintuunnanmuuunenantumtun


35


Stockdale u 7 25 1799,


I iim inn e.


45 „ d nes Rs
#8


+ tn; e tt tt” ate, 1h, eee ere ee,  FEM


6 . — GOP ANEoE nar [2
oi „ oh cf pr ey: ne yy


N Re d


MARYLAND 46


Counties, _ No, Inhabitants. | Ceuntes. No. Inhabitants.
Hartford 14,976 Ceal 13,625
Baltimore | 25,434 1 © Kent 12,836

Do. Town & Precincts 13,503 [] Queen Ann 15,463
© 1 Ann Arundel _ 22,598 [Caroline 9,506-
= | Frederick 30,791 : 5 Talbot 13,08 4
UN } Allegany 4,809 — Somerſet 105,610
E } Waſhington 15,822 E | Dorcheſter 15,875
4 | Montgomery 28, 003 I Worceſter | I 1,640
S | Prince George 21,344 —
ä 8,652 Eaſtern Shore 107,639
| Charles ae, Weſtern Shore 212,089
b Mary's e 15,544 : —
| Toe in the State 319,728
Total 1 2, 89


Number of Slaves in the State 103, 036.


Lach of the counties ſends four e ;ves to the houſe of Adds A beſides
which the city of Annapolis, and town of Baltimore, ſend each two.

Bays and RIVERS.] Cheſapeak bay, as we have already hinted, divides this State
into the eaſtern and weſtern divifions. This bay, which i b the largeſt ; in the United
States, was particularly deſcribed in the general account of the United States. It
_ affords many good fiſheries, and is remarkable for the excellence of its crabs, and
alſo for a particular ſpecies of wild duck, called © canvas back.” In a commercial
view, it is of immenſe advantage to the State; ; it receives a number of large rivers.
From the eaſtern ſhore in Maryland, among other ſmaller ones, it receives Poco--
moke, Nantikoke, Choptank, Cheſter, and Elk rivers. From the north, the rapid
Suſquehannah ; and from the weft, Patapſco, Severn, Patuxent, and Patomak, half
of which is in Maryland, and half in Virginia. Except the Suſ quehannah and Pato-
mak, theſe are ſmall rivers. Patapſco river is but about thirty erde yards wide at the
ferry, juſt before it empties into the baſon upon which Baltimore ſtands ; its ſource 18
in York- county in Pennſylvania; its courſe_js ſouthwardly till it reaches Elkridge
landing, about eight miles weftward of Baltimore; ; it then turns eaſtward, in a broad
OY reach,” by Baltimore, which it leaves on the north, and: paſſes into the Cheſa-
Pea *

The entrance into Baltimore harbour, about a mile below Fell's Point, is Hardly

piſtol ſhot acroſs, and of courſe may be. eafily defended againſt naval-force. 0
Scvern is a ſhort, inconſiderable river, paſſing by Annapolis, Which it leaves to
the ſouth; emptying by a broad mouth, into the Cheſapeak.

Patuxent is à larger river than the Patapico; ; it riſes in Ann Arundel county, and
runs ſouth-eaſtwardly, and then eaſt into the bay, fifteen or twenty miles north of
the mouth of Patomak. There are ſeveral ſmall rivers, ſuch as Wigheocomico, Eaſt-


ern Branch, Monocafp, ant Conegocheague, which empty into Fatomak river from
the Maryland ſide. |
Facs or THE eas Cuncars, So1L, AND Ponce none; "Baſt of the blue
ridge of mountains, Which ſtretches. acroſs the weſtern part of this State, the land,
like that in all the ſouthern States, is generally level and free of ſtones; and appears
to have been made much in the ſame way; of oy the 1 85 R be Kaner, and
the natural growth not remarkably different.


30 The


466 MARYLAN D. |
The ground i is uniformly level and low in moſt of the counties on the eaſtern ſhore,
and conſequently covered in many places with ſtagnant water, except where it is in-
terſected by numerous creeks. Here alſo are large tracts of marſh, which, during the
day, load the atmoſphere with vapour, that falls in dew in the cloſe of the ſummer
and fall ſeaſons, which are fickly. The ſpring and ſummer are moſt healthy.
The foil of the good land in Mary land is of ſuch a nature and quality as to pro-
duce from twelve to fixteen buſhels of wheat, or from twenty to thirty buſhels of
Indian corn per acre. Ten buſhels of wheat, and fifteen buſhels of Corry per acre,
may be the annual average crops in the State at large.
Wheat and tobacco are the ſtaple commodities. Tobacco is: generally cullibubes i in
ſets, by negroes, in the following manner: The ſeed is ſown in beds of fine mould,
and tranſplanted the beginning of May; the plants are ſet at the diſtance of three or
four feet from each other, and are hilled and kept continually free of weeds ; when
as many leaves have ſhot out as the foil will nouriſh to advantage, the top of the
plant is broken off, which prevents its growing higher: it is carefully kept clear of
worms, and the ſuckers, which put out between the leaves, are taken off at proper
times, till the plant arrives at perfection, which is in Auguſt : when the leaves turn
of a brownifh colour, and begm to be ſpotted, the plant i is cut down and hung up
to dry, after having ſweat in heaps one night. When it can be handled withous
crumbling, which is alway in moiſt weather, the leaves are tapped from the Ralk, and
tied in bundles, and packed for exportation in hogſheads containing 800 or goo pounds.
No ſuckers nor ground leaves are allowed to be merchantable. An induſtrious perſon
may Sg 60009 A of tobacco, (which yield 100dalb.) and four acres of Indian
corn.
In the interior country, on the uplands, cash quantities of hemp and flax
are raiſed. As long ago as 1751, in the month of October, no leſs than fixty wag-
gons, loaded with flax-ſeed, came down to Baltimore from the back country.
Io articles are faid to be peculiar to Maryland, viz. the genuine 2vbire wheat,
which grows in Kent, Queen Ann's and Talbot counties, on the eaſtern ſhore, and
which degenerates in other places, and the bright &:te's foot tobacco, which is pro-
duced at Elkridge, on the Patuxent, on the weftern ſnore.
Among other kinds of timber is the oak, of ſeveral kinds, which; is of a ſtraight
5 and eaſily rives into Res for exportation. The black walnut is in demand
for cabinets, tables, and other furniture. The apples of this State are large, but
mealy; their peaches plenty and good : from theſe the inhabitants diſtil cyder, brandy;
and teach brandy.
The foreſts nd with nuts of various kinds, ak are colletively called] maſt; 3
on this maſt vaſt numbers of fwine are fed, which run wild in the Ef 4s theſe
fwine, when fatted, are caught, killed, barrelled, and exported in great quantities.
This traffie formerly was carried on to a very conſiderable extent; Douglas ſays, that
* in the year 1733, which was a good maſting year, one gentleman, a ane and
mercbant in Virginia, ſalted up 3000 barrels of pork.” -
PoPULATION AND. CHARACTER. ] The population of this State is exhibited: in the
foregoing table : by that it appears, that 1 number of inhabitants in the State, in-
Auding the negroes, is 3 19,728, Which is nearly twenty-three for every ſquare mile.
The inhabitants, except in the populous towns, ite on their plantations, often. ſeveral
miles diſtant from each other. To an inhabitant of the middle; and eſpecially of
i the caſtern States, which are thickly populated, they appear to live very retired and


wen lives. The effects of this n ſolitude are nei in the countenances,
N 28


—


as well as in the manners and dreſs oſ many of the country people. You obſerve com-


ble and genuine offspring of ſocial intercourſe ; nor do you find that attention paid to
dreſs which is common, and which decency and propriety have rendered neceſſary


among people who are liable to receive company almoſt every day: unaccuſtomed,
in a great meaſure, to frequent and friendly viſits, they often ſuffer too much negli-


gence in their dreſs. As the negroes perform all the manual labour, their maſters are
Jeft to ſaunter away life in ſloth, and too often in ignorance. Theſe obſervations,


however, muſt, in juſtice, be limited to the people in the country, and to thoſe parti-


cularly whoſe poverty or parſimony prevents their ſpending a part of their time in
ulous towns, or otherwiſe mingling with the world; and with theſe limitations, they

will equally apply to all the ſouthern States. The inhabitants of the populous towns,

and thoſe from the country who have intercourſe with them, are, in their manners and


4


cuſtoms, genteel and agreeable.


That pride which grows on ſlavery, and is habitual to thoſe who, from their in-


fancy, are taught to believe and to feel their ſuperiority, is a viſible characteriſtic of
the inhabitants of Maryland ; but with this characteriſtic we muſt not fail to conne&


that of hoſpitality to ſtrangers, which is equally univerſal and obvious. Many of the


women poſſeſs all the amiable, and many of the elegant accompliſhments of their ſex.
The inhabitants are made up of various nations of many different religious ſenti-
ments; few general obſervations, therefore, of a characteriſtical kind will apply: it


may be ſaid, however, with great truth, that they are in general very federal, and friends
to good government. They owe little money as a State, and are willing and able to
diſcharge their debts: their credit is very good; and although they have fo great a

proportion of ſlaves, yet a number of influential gentlemen have evinced their huma-
_ nity and their diſpoſition to aboliſh ſo diſreputable a traffic, by forming themſelves into


a ſociety for the abolition of negro ſlavery. 1 „
Culkr Towns. | Ax NAPOLIs (city) is the capital of Maryland, and the wealthieſt

town of its ſize in America: it is ſituated at the mouth of Severn river, on a healthy

ſpot, 30 miles ſouth of Baltimore: it is a place of little note in the commercial world.


The houſes, about 260 in number, are generally large and elegant, indicative of great
wealth: the number of inhabitants does not exceed 2000. The deſign of thoſe who
planned the city was to have the whole in the form of a circle, with the ſtreets like


radii, beginning at the center where the State Houſe ſtands ;- and thence diverging in


every direction. The principal part of the buildings are arranged agreeably to this


aukward plan. The State Houſe is an elegant building.


BALTIMORE has had the moſt rapid growth of any town on the continent, and is the
fourth in fize and the fifth in trade in the United States.“ It lies in latitude 39“ 217,


on the north ſide of Patapſco river, around what is called the Baſon, in which the
water, at common tides, is about five or ſix feet deep. Baltimore is divided into the


town and Fell's point by a creek, over which are two bridges; but the houſes extend,
in a ſparſe ſituation, from one to the other. At Fell's point the water is deep enough
for ſhips of burden; but ſmall veſſels only go up to the town. The ſituation of the town
is low, and was formerly unhealthy ; but the increaſe of houſes, and, of courſe, of ſmoke, |


the tendency of which is to deſtroy or to diſpel damp and unwholeſome vapours, and


the improvements that have been made, particularly that of paving the fireets, have


* In point of fize, the towns in the United States may be ranked in this order-- Philadelphia, New York,
Boſton, Baltimore, Charleſtown, &c. In point of trade, New York, Philadelphia, Boſton, Charleſtown,
timore, &c. e


MARYLAND. 46


paratively little of that cheerful ſprightlineſs of look and action, which is the invaria-


3 02 5 f rendered


nw pwr. oo ˙ . —¹l!l. eur oa—__ ro r
2 2 - SR Ee 2 wich
* 2 A 7 7 * 3 _ - P & 4 —
p 2


1.


3 2 G Ct


* At.
n


42 ER er ng; at, 48 > »


2 · ˙———


rendered it tolerably healthy. The houſes were mumbered i in 1987, and found to be
1955; about 1200 of which were in the town, and the reſt at Fell's point: the preſent
number is about 2300.. The number of warehouſes and ſtores is 164, and of churches
nine, which belong to German Calviniſts and Lutherans, Epiſcopalians, Preſbyterians,
Roman Catholirs, Baptiſts, Methodifts, Quakers, Nicolites, or New Quakers. The
number of inhabitants in the town and precincts, according to the cenſus'of 1790, was


13,503. There are many very reſpectable families in Baltimore who live gentedlly, are
hoſpitable to ſtrangers, and maintain a friendly and improving intercourſe with each


other; but the bulk of the inhabitants, recently collected from almoſt all quarters of
the world, bent on the purſuit of wealth, varying in their habits, their manners and


their religions, have yet their general character to form.
Market ſtreet is the rincipal ſtreet in the town, and runs nearly eaſt and weſt a mile


in length, parallel with the Ws x this is croſſed by ſeveral other ſtreets leading from


the water, a _ of which, particularly Calvert, South, and Gay-ftreets, are well
built. North and eaſt of the town the land riſes and affords a fine proſpect of the town
and hay. Belvidera, the ſeat of Colonel Howard, exhibits a fine Jandicape—the town
the point—the ſhipping, both in the baſon and at Fell's point—the bay, as far as
the eye can reach—tifing ground on the right and left of the harbour—a grove of trees


on the declivity at the right—a ſtream of water breaking over the rocks at the foot of |


the hill on the left—alF conſpire to complete the beauty and grandeur of the proſp


 GroRGETOWN ſtands on the bank of the River Patomak, about 160 miles from its
entrance into Cheſa


of the rrver, were, probably, at ſome former period overflowed, as at the depth of
eight or ten feet below the ſurface marine ſhells: have been found. Dr. Martin con-
 eludes an account of the climate and diſeaſes of this town, in the following words :


Upon the whole, Georgetown and its vicinity may be conſidered as a healthy part


_ of America; and in any diſputes about the propriety of the ſeat of the general govern-
ment being frxed here, no objection can be urged againſt it on account of its diſeaſes.”


FaepeRIEKTOWN is a fine flouriſhing inland town, of npwards of 300 houſes, built


principally of brick and ſtone, and moſtly on one broad ſtreet: it is ſituated in a fertile
country, about four miles ſouth of Catokton mountain, and is a place of confiderable
rade: it has four places for public worſhip; one ſor Preſbyterians, two for Dutch Lu-


therans and 8 and one for Baptiſts; beſides a public gaol and a brick market-
houſe.


Ferre is but little inferior to-Fredericktown, and 1s fituated: in thie beautiful


and well-cultivated valley of Conegocheague, and. carries on a conſiderable trade with 1


the weſtern country.


ELVLrox is fituated near the head of Cheſipeak bay, on a (mall river which bears
the. name of the town. It enjoys great advant


Biltimore and Philadelphia. The tides ebb and flow to this town. =


The city of W asnixGToN, in the territory of CoLuns1a, was ceded; by the States


of Virginia and Maryland, to the United States, and by them eſtabliſhed as the ſeat of
their government, after the year 1800. This city, which: is now building, ſtands at
the junction of the rivers Patomak and the Eaſtern branches, latitude 38 53“ north,
extending nearly four miles up each, and including a tract of territory, exceeded, iN
point of convenience, ſalubrity, and beauty, by none in America; for although
the land in general appzars level, yet, by gentle and gradual ſwellings, a variety
of elegant proi ſpects are produced, and a | Tamcent deſcent formed for 3


4; 5 — L *
4 n fu OR EO & oe nt


X , . : 4 NI 5
; een een e eee e . e e e e te ego - . ee e TE.” at


peak Bay. The ground on which it ſands is very broken, being a
clufter of little hills, which, though at preſent elevated conſiderably above the farface


ages from the carrying-trade between. |


|
|
|


-
H
a
©


2
L
2
7 -
/ — —
14 —
7
” .
= * .
1
#
p
”


-- — — — ——


Fj


o
— *
FS
'{
(


* —
— - -
9 4 * PP *
A
* 4


ö


1


e


[
#44
Th
| 2%
F > Rk. *
4 . * 1
NINE 5 —
W 8 |
| —


LLL ere yaw CY


= — . 2 i
— 7 Tas , '
— — — 7 — or. 7
5 * —  k , 4 ;
— SF, © Tat 7 i
— — —— —_— 2 7 1
— Sn T3 4 . 7
— 5 "T4 Abe - - 1 4
/ by _ 6 * *
; oy + ws
2 — [>


2 JL2os UL O29
7 SSD Cd.


j
|
|


)NIHSVAM


|


* * ** 5 *
— * A WA / f f
% 7 "4 . { .
— 2 C - * . .
— * * 7 „ Id. .
" — ry 2 — — 2 94. I] \ ?
— . 2 * . 7 * 14 |
a: 4 4, * a 1 * , 6 ! 5
woo 2 * 11 —
\ 4.
2 — N 46 \ —
2 A. AY oe f nn | |
» an i [1 \ , .
- — % — — ern 0 9 11 i N — ,
. O * 0
* * ® * — - —
— < 1 n 6 , . \ \ 6 A -
\ 0 , % w—_0 — — p ! ;
8 1.4 / t FLY W WW . — .
p | PS. / KASY \ \ be 2 \
y e # q as \ 1 . — * — —
1. 1 5 \ . V9 5 —
. 2 — 7 \
} 4 - 0 .


4
*
*


:


o ALLY Pon


COLL


MF ARCLOCGUUBGBEOCGD


aC0Kf30 0


LD


(JI QUILL, UN
2. JUJUO NT YH
1135290 Y
JUYljas
14%
ebe
nnn
3


— 1 p
us u 7


88
WY 0
III
\ r e
34335


a 04 \N bY


FWW SCC UU


Ude


241


CE


GOOG
UCL HZ


EY


«41 1J


L


L. EUULLLED
82


2


2
G.
A


f


—


%,


ed WE 1182 WP
932 —
ee : 3 * , 9 988 — =;
UGDDZ Sous IGOR Db. 25 8 088388 4

eee


F ooARVWWY wy
DJ0 0 00999t7 tk YAH JU WU 25s
SEO OONINDG I SITIO Hoo
JIN JHJJJJIC B JV ON U TIL QUAD
JOQGOUIJJ03NLS k IN 1D gs MU LY


"THI KEI OJ AH


—


9
/ ;
ö „
{/ JF a. ——
ES * 8
i >. 8 — oO
— 1 AS
J — E:
— XN — Ms *
— £4 *
— On _ 4
” „
8 - v1
\ —
KY * So”
| 2
i -
=


— -
e

x

*


L


728 hd hs


2 2 27, L
2 *
8a
—


E
- 6


= 1


Duca


ELCL TU Cb


L
LU CH


Dede
*
UL


SL LULL


2
2


LE3C ED


ds ati #1
e ee 22


.


—
——


5


[


"2d,


V2


EU
I


1


40


——— —


L


We:
10 [= 18 IDO DMS,
ES” HR. Nd YL SHI JI) ULKEJED
Sol Amur 1 N eee 1 AMET;
a 3 1404474111 8
ö „% n
2 F DG; i
£ IL IGPO 15
11327


=.
of
p


©


1 % ” | ; | " _

„ V 1 1 4 — 8 p N

c —
"4 2 hs


p ˖


MARYLAND: 469;
off the water occafioned by rain. Within the limits of the city are a great number of
excellent ſprings; and by digging wells, water of the beſt quadiey may readily be had.
Befides, the never- failing ſtreams, that now run through that territory, may alſo be
collected for the uſe of the city. The waters of Reedy branch -and of Tiber creck may-
be conveyed. to the Prefident's houſe.. The ſource of Tiber creek is elevated about 236
feet above the level of the tide in ſaid creek. The perpendicular height of the ground
on which the capital is to ſtand, is 78 feet above the level of the tide in Fiber creek :
the water of Tiber creek may, A alle, be conveyed to the capital, and, after water-
ing Lon art of the city, may be deſtined to other uſeful purpoſes.

aſtern branch is one of the ſafeſt and moſt commodious harbours in America,

wit ſufficiently deep for the largeſt ſhips for about four miles above its mouth, while
the channel lies cloſe along the bank adjoining the city, and affords a large and con-
venient harbour. The Patomak, although only navigable for ſmall craft, for a conſi-
derable diſtance from its banks next to the city (excepting about half a mile above the
junction of the rivers) will nevertheleſs afford a capacious ſummer harbour; as an im-
menſe number of ſhips may ride in the great channel, oppoſite to and below the ci
The fituation of this metropolis is upon the great poſt road, equi-diftant from the
northern and ſouthern extremities of the Union, and nearly ſo from the Atlantic and
Pittſburg, upon the beſt navigation, and in the midſt of a commercial territory, pro-
bably the richeſt, and commanding the moſt extenſive internal reſources of any in
America. It has therefore many advantages to recommend it, as an eli * place for
the permanent ſeat of the general government; and as it is likel pecdily built,
and otherwife improved, by the public-ſpirited enterprize of the Ib le 0 the United
States, and even by foreigners, it may be expected to grow up with a degree of raph-
dity hitherto unparalleled in the annals of cities.

The plan of this city appears to contain ſome important improvements upon that of
the beſt planned cities in the world, combining, in a remarkable degree, convenience,
_ regularity, elegance of proſpect, and a free circulation of air. The poſitions for the
different public edifices, and for the ſeveral ſquares and areas of different ſhapes as they
are laid down, were firſt determined on the moſt advantageous ground, commanding.
the moſt extenſive proſpects, and from their fituation, ſuſceptible of ſuch improvements
as either uſe or ornament may hereafter require. The Capitol will be fituated ms a
mel beautiful eminence, commanding a complete view of every part of the eity, and
of a conſiderable part of the country around. The Preſident's houſe will ftand on a
riſing ground, poſſeſſing a delightful water proſpect, together with a commanding view
of the Capitol, and the moſt material parts of the city. Lines, or avenues, of direct
communication, have been deviſed to connect the moſt diſtant and important objects.
Theſe tranſverſe avennes, or diagonal ſtreets, are laid out en the moſt advantageous
_ ground for profpect and convenience, and are calculated not only to produce a variety
of charming proſpe&s, but greatly to faciktate the communication throughout the city.
North and ſouth lines, interfected by others running due eaſt and weſt, make the dif-
tribution of the city into ſtreets, ſquares, Kc. and thoſe lines have been ſo corabined as
to meet at certain given points, with the divergent avenues, fo as to form, on the
ſpaces firft determined, the different ſquares or areas. The grand avenues, and tack
ftreets. as lead immediately to public places, are from 130 to 160 feet wide, and m
be conveniently divided into footways, a walk planted with trees on each fide, and 4
paved way for carriages. The other ſtreets are from 9o to 110 feet wide.

In order to execute this plan, Mr: Ellicott drew a true meridional line by colbMial
obſervation, which paſſes through the area intended for the Capitel. This my 4

crotle


47⁰ MARYLAND.


croſſed by another, running due eaſt and weſt, which paſſes through the ſame area.
Theſe lines were accurately meaſured, and made the baſes on which the whole plan
was executed. He ran all the lines by a tranſit inſtrument, and determined the acute
angles by actual meaſurement, leaving nothing to the uncertainty of the compaſs.

. Mixes and Maxvuractures.] Mines of iron ore, of a ſuperior quality, abound in
many parts of the State. Furnaces for running this ore into pigs and hollow ware, and
' forges to refine pig iron into bars, are numerous, and worked to great extent and profit.
This is the only manufacture of importance carried on in the State, except it be that of
wheat into flour and curing tobacco. TR 777 w
Trape.] The trade of Maryland is principally carried on from Baltimore, with the


other States, with the Weſt Indies, and with ſome parts of Europe. To theſe places


they ſend annually about 30,000 hogſheads of tobacco, beſides large quantities of


wheat, flour, pig won, lumber, and corn; beans, pork, and flax ſeed in ſmaller


quantities ; and receive in return, clothing for themſelves and negroes, and other dry
goods, wines, ſpirits, ſugars, and other Weſt India commodities. The balance is


generally in their favour.


The total amount of exports from Baltimore from Oct. 1, ol. Oh, -

1789, to Sept. 30, 1790, was — __ 2,027,777 64

Value of imports for the tame time —— — 1,945,899 55
Exports from Oct. 1, 1790, to Sept. 30, 1717979 — 3,131,227 55


During the laſt mentioned period, the quantity of wheat exported was 205,571
buſhels ; Indian corn, 205,043 ditto ; buck wheat, 4,286 ditto; peas, 10,619 ditto ;
beſides 151,445 barrels of wheat flour; 4,325 ditto, Indian meal; 6,761 ditto, bread;
and 3,104 kegs of crackers. | | eats dof aye OE 2
RELIcION.] The Roman Catholics, who were the firſt ſettlers in Maryland, are

the moſt numerous religious fect. Beſides theſe, there are Proteſtant Epiſcopalians,


Engliſh, Scotch, and Inſh Preſbyterians, German Calviniſts, German Lutherans,
Friends, Baptiſts, Methodiſts, Mennoniſts, Nicolites, or new Quakers ; who all enjoy


Uberty of conſcience.


SRMuINARIES OF LEARNING, &c.| Waſhington academy, in Somerſet county, was


inſtituted by law in 1779: it was founded and is ſupported by voluntary ſubſcriptions


and private donations, and is authorized to receive giſts and legacies, and to hold 2000
acres of land. A ſupplement to the law, paſſed in 1784, increaſed the number of truſ-


tees from eleven to fifteen. 725 | "4; 6 1 :
In 1782, a college was inſtituted at Cheſtertown, in Kent county, and was honoured


with the name of W asminGToN CoLLEGE, after Preſident Waſhington. It is under


the management of 24 viſitors or governors, with power to ſupply vacancies and hold


_ eſtates, whoſe yearly value ſhall not exceed 60001. current money. By a law enacted
in 1787, a permanent fund was granted to this inſtitution of 12501. a year, currency,


out of the monies ariſing from marriage licenſes, fines, and forfeitures on the Eaſtern
W 25 7055 Sr | FEY


St. John's College was inſtituted in 1784, to have alſo 24 truſtees, with power to


keep up the ſucceſſion by ſupplying vacancies, and to receive an annual income of


goool. A permanent fund is aſſigned this college, of 1750l. a year, out of the monies
arifing from marriage licenſes, ordinary licenſes, fines and forfeitures, on the weſtern


ſhore. This college is to be at Annapolis, where a building is now prepared for it.


Very liberal ſubſcriptions were obtained towards founding and carrying on theſe ſemi-


naries. The two colleges conſtitute one univerſity, by the name of the Univerſity of


Maryland,” whereof the governor of the State for the time being is chancellor, and


the


— — 22 aa


the principal of one of them, vice-chancellor, either by ſeniority or by election „as may
| hereafter be provided for by rule or by law. The chancellor 1s empowered to call a
meeting of the truſtees, or a repreſentation of ſeven of each, and two of the members
of the faculty of each, (the prineipal being one) which meeting is ſtiled, The Con-
vocation of the Univerfity of Maryland,” who are to frame the laws, preſerve unifor-
mity of manners and literature in the colleges, confer the higher degrees, determine
appeals, &c. |

"The Roman Catholics have alſo erected a college at Georgetown, on Patomak nver,
for the promotion of general literature.


In 1785, the Methodiſts inſtituted a college at Abingdon, i in Harford county, by the


name of Cokeſbury College, after Thomas Coke, and Francis Aſhbury, biſhops of the
Methodiſt Epiſcopal Church. The college edifice is of brick, handſomely built, on a


healthy ſpot, enjoying a fine air, and a very extenſive proſpect.
The ſtudents, who are to conſiſt of the ſons of travelling preachers, the ſons of an-


nual ſubſcribers, the ſons of the members of the Methodiſt ſociety and orphans, are in-


ſtructed in Engliſh, Latin, Greek, Logic, Rhetoric, Hiſtory, Geography, Natural
Philoſophy and Aſtronomy ; and when the finances of the college will admit, they are
to be taught the Hebrew, French, and German languages.


The college was erected and is ſupported wholly by bſcription and voluntary


donations.


| The ſtudents have regular hours for riſing, for prayers, for their meals, for ſtudy 5
and for recreation: they are all to be in bed preciſely at nine o'clock. Their recrea-


tions, (for they are to . < indulged in nothing which the world calls play) are gar-
dening, walking, riding, and bathing, without doors; and within doors, the carpen-
ters, joiners, cabinet-makers, or turner's buſineſs. Suitable proviſion is made for theſe

ſeveral occupations, which are to be confidered, not as matters of drudgery and con-
ſtraint, but as pleaſing and healthful recreations both for the body and mind. Another
of their rules, which, though new and fingular, is favourable to the health and vigour
of the body and mind, is, that the ſtudents ſhall not ſleep on feather beds but on mat-


treſſes, — each one by bimſelf. Farticular attention 15 pad to tue morals and religion


| of the ſtudents. ATTE] | ö 4


There are a few other 8 8 a inferior note, in Kffevent ark of the


State, and proviſion. is made for free ſchools in moſt of the counties; though ſome are


entirely neglected, and very few carried on with any ſucceſs; ſo: that a great proportion
of the lower claſs of people are ignorant; and there are not a few who cannot write
their names. But the revolution, among other happy effects, has rouſed the ſpirit of


education, Which is faſt ent _ watery influences over this and the other
fouthern States.


NaruRAL Cantor ass, ] There are ed remarkable: caves in the weſtern. part of les.


this State, but particular and accurate deſcriptions of them have not been received.


ExpRNSES OT GOVERNMENT. AND Taxes. | The annual expenſes of e 5


are eſtimated at about 29,909), PORT: The revenue ariſes chiefly. from taxes on
real and perſonal FC leg


CoxsTITuTrIox.] The legiſlature 3 18 compoſed: of two diftin& branches, 71 Senate and


Houſe of Delegates, and ſtiled, The General Aſſembly of Maryland. The ſenators.


are elected in the tollowing manner: On the firſt of September, every fifth year, the
Ircemen chaoſe two men in each county to. be electors of the ſenate, alid one elector
for the city of Annapolis, and one for the town of Baltimore. Theſe electors muſt
have the qualrfications neceſſary for county delegates : they meet at Anna-


1 polis,


MARYLAND. ©.


rr ww ware eo Leg


17 MARYLAND. 27
polis, or ſuch other place as ſhall be appointed for convening the legiſlature, on the
third Monday in September, every fifth year, and elect by ballot fifteen ſenators out
ot their own body, or from the people at large. Nine of theſe muſt be refidents on the
weſtern ſhore, and fix on the eaſtern; they muſt be more than'twenty-five years of
age; muſt have refided in the State more than three years next preceding the election,
and have real and perſonal property above the value of a thouſand pounds. The ſenate
may originate any bills, except money bills, to which they can only give their aſſent or
Aiſſent. The ſenate choofe their preſidlent by ballot. The houſe of delegates is com-
poſed of ſour members for each county, choſen annually the firſt Monday in October.
The city of Annapolis and town of Baltimore ſend each two delegates. The qualifi-
cations of a delegate are, full age, one year's refidence in the county where he is choſen,
and real and perſonal property above the value of five hundred pounds. Both houſes
chooſe their own officers, and judge of the election of their members: a majority of
each is a quorum. The election of ſenators and delegates is viva voce, and ſheriffs the
returning officers, except in Baltimore town, where the commiſſioners ſuperintend the
elections and make returns. The ſtated ſeſſion of. the legiſlature is on the firſt Monday
in November. The qualifications of a freeman are full age, a frechold eſtate of fifty
acres of land, and actual refidence in the county where he offers to vote, property to
the value of thirty pounds in any part of the State, and a year's reſidence in the county


Where he offers to vote.


On the ſecond Monday in November, annually, a governor is appointed by the
joint ballot of both houſes, taken in each houſe reſpectively, and: depoſited in a con-
ference room; where the boxes are examined by a joint nommittee of both houſcs, and
the number of votes ſeverally reported. The governor cannot continue inioffice longer
than three years ſucceſſively, nor be re- elected until the expiration of four years after
he has been out of office. The qualifications for the chief magiſtracy are, twenty-five
years of age, five years reſidence in the State next preceding the election, and real
_ and perſonal eſtate above the value of five thouſand pounds, one thouſand of Which
muff be freehold eſtate. On the ſecond Tueſday of November, annually, the ſenators
and delegates elect, hy joint ballot, five able and iqhſcreet men, above twenty- five years
of age, reſidents in the State three years next preceding the election, and poſſeſſing a
frechold of lands and tenements above the value of a thouſand pounds, to be a council
for afliſting the governor in the duties of his office. Senators, delegates, and members
of council, whilſt ſuch, can hold no other office of profit, nor receive the profits of any
office exerciſed by another. The governor, with the advice of his council, appoints
the chancellor, all judges and juſtices, the attorney-general, naval and militia officers,
regiſters of the land office, ſurveyors, and all other civil officers, except conſtables, |
aſſeſſors, and overſeers of the roads. A court of appeals is eſtabliſhed for the final |
determination of all cauſes which may be brought from the general court“ of admiralty,
or of chancery, . ee AS LIT ee 4 .
This conſtitution was eſtabliſned by a convention of delegates, 'at Annapolis, |
Auguſt 14, 1776, 5 RT , Th Dt 3
HisToxy, | Maryland was granted by king Charles I. to George Calvert. baron
of Baltimore, in Ireland, June 20, 1032. The government of the province *. 2 b
| | | = | Charter,


* In ſome of the eaſtern States the legiſlature is called the General Court. In ſome of the ſouthern, the

General Court is the Supreme Judicial Court. | 44 3 1 4 5
I. George Calvert, lord Baltimore, the founder of Maryland, born in 1582, was educated at Oxford un?
verfity, was knighted in 1617, by James I. and two years after was appointed one of che principal eren


charter, veſted in the proprietary; but it appears, that he either never exerciſed theſe
powers alone, or but for a ſhort time; for we find, that in 1637 the freemen rejected
a body of laws drawn up in England, and tranſmitted by his lordihip, in order to be
ꝓaſſed for the government of the province. In the place of theſe, they propoſed fort: -
two bills to be enacted into laws, by the conſent of the proprietary: theſe were, how-
ever, never enacted; at leaſt, they are not on record. |
The honourable. Leonard, Calvert, Eſq. Lord Baltimore's brother, was the firſt

governor, or lieutenant-general. In 1638 a law was paſled; conſtituting the firſt
regular Houſe of Aſſembly, which was to conſiſt of ſuch repreſentatives, called Bur-
geſles, as ſhould be elected purſuant to writs iſſued by the governor. Theſe burgeſſes
poſſeſſed all the powers of: the perſons electing them; but any other freemen, who did not
afſent to the election, might take their ſeats in perſon. Tevelve burgeſſes or freemen,
with the lieutenant-general and ſecretary, conſtituted the aſſembly or legiſlature. This
aſſembly ſat at St. Mary's, one of the ſouthern counties, which was the firſt ſettled
part of Maryland, OO PO WT One! 15


In 1642, it was enacted, that ten members of the aſſembly, of whom the governor |
and ſix burgeſſes were to be ſeven, ſhould be a houſe ; and if ſickneſs ſhould prevent
that number from attending, the members preſent ſhould make a houſdme.

In 1644, one Ingle excited a rebellion, forced the governor to fly to Virginia for aid
and protection, and ſeized the records and the great ſeal; the laſt of which, with moſt
of the records of the province, were loft or deſtroyed. From this period, to the year
1647, when order was reſtored, the proceedings of the province are involved in
obſcurity. %%% ot hover aps ep t VVV 1

In J 9 1646, the Houſe of Aſfembly, or more properly the burgeſſes, requeſted
that they might be ſeparated into two branches — the burgeſſes by themſelves, with a
negative upon bills. This was not granted by the lieutenant-general at that time;
but in 1650, an act was paſſed dividing the aſſembly into two houſes: the governor, ſe-

cretary, and any one or more of the council, formed the Upper Houſe ; the delegates
from the ſeveral: hundreds, who now” repreſent the freemen, formed the. Lower Houſe.
At this time there were in the province but two counties, St. Mary's and the Iſle of


of ſtate, which office he diſcharged with great induſtry and fidelity, and was rewarded by the King with a pen-
ſion ofa thouſand pounds a year. Having enjoyed this office about five years, he refigned it in 1614, freely
owning to his Majeſty, that he was become a Roman Catholic. This honeſt confeſſion ſo affected the King,
that he continued him privy counſellor during his reign, and in 1625, created him (by the name of Sir George
Calvert, of Danbywiſke in Yorkſhire, knight) baron of Baltimore, in the county .of Longford, in Ireland.
While he was ſecretary, he obtained a patent of the province of Avalon in Newfoundland, where he built an
houſe, and ſpent a 5, oool. in advancing this new plantation; but finding it expoſed to the French, was obliged
at laſt to abandon it. . : _ | . „ .
Upon this he came over to Virginia, and having taken a view of the country returned to England, and ob-
tained from Charles I. who was his friend, a patent, to him and his heirs, for Maryland.“ He died in Lon-
don, April 15, 1642. Though he was a Roman Catholic, yet he kept himſelf ſincere and diſengaged from
all intereſts; and was the only ſtataſman that, being engaged to a decried party, managed his buſineſs, with
that great reſpect for all ſides, that all who knew him applauded him; and none. who had any thing to do with
him complained of him.“ He was a man of great abilities and candour. Judge Popham, and Lord Baltimore,
though agreed in the public deſign of foreign plantations, differed in the manner of managing them. The
former was for extirpating the original inhabitants, the latter for converting them; the one ſent the vicious
and profligate, the other the ſober and virtuous, to the plantations ; one was for preſent profit, the other for
reaſonable expectation, wiſhing to have but few governors, and thoſe not intereſted merchants, but diſinte-
_ Teſted gentlemen ; granting liberties with great caution, and leaving every one to provide for himſelf by his
own induſtry, and not out of a common ſtock, F EELREIOIRIEL 3ST UTI 2
 * Seea copy of this patent in Hazard's Hiſtorical Collections, page 327.
+ See Carcy's Muſeum, Vol. 6, page 492. R


Rnd


3 P 5 | 5 Kent,


474 MARYLAND.
Kent, but Ann Arundel was added the fame ſeſſion. This was during the adminiſtra.
tion of Governor Stone.

In 1654, during Cromwell's aſurpation in England, an act was paſſed, reſtraining
the exercile of the Roman Catholic religion. This n muſt have been procured by the
mere terror of Cromwell's power, for the firſt and principal inhabitants were Catholics,”

Indeed the power of Cromwell was not eftabliſhed in Maryland without force and
ploodfhed. His friends and foes came to an open rupture, an engagement enſued,
Governor Stone was taken priſoner, and condemned to-be ſhot : this ſentence, however,
was not executed, but he was kept a long time in confinement..

In March 1658, Joſiah Fendall, Eſq. was appointed hentenant-general of Mary-
land by commiſſion from Oliver Cromwell: he diflolve the upper 9 and furren-
dered the powers of government into the hands of the delegates.

Upon the reſtoration m 1660, the honourable Philip Calvert, Efq. was appointed
governor ; the old form of government was revived ; Fendall, and one Gerrard, a
counſellor, were indicted, found guilty, and condemned to baniſhmont, with the loſs.
of their eſtates; but, upon petition, they were pardoned. =

In 1689, the de ee was taken out of the hands of Lord Baltimore by the grand
convention of England; and in 1 My 5 Mr. Copley was appointed governor by commiſ-

ſion from William and Mary. |

In 1692, the Proteſtant religion was eſtabliſhed by law.

In 1699, under the adminiſtration of Governor Blackiſton, it was enacted, that
Annapolis fhould be the ſeat of government.

In 1 71 6, the government of this province was reſtored to the conprictary, and con-

_ tinned in his hands tilt the late revolution, „when, though a minor, his property in the
lands was confiſcated, and the government aſſumed by the freemen of the province,
ho formed the conſtitution now exiſting. At the cloſe of the war, Henry Harford,
+ Efq. the natural fon and heir of Lord Baltimore, petitioned the legiſlature of Mary-
land for his eftate, but his petition was not granted. Mr. Harford eſtimated his loſs
of quit-rents, valued at twenty-five years purchaſe, and including | arrears, at
 £.259,488 : 5: o, dollars at 7/6—and the value of his manors and reſerved lands at


4 £-327:441 of * ſame . 5


Lov of GoverNoRs, ith the dates of their appointments.


Hon. Leonard Calvert, Efg. appointed governor, OY = el 637


Thomas Green, 'Efq. : 44 an ne Tn
William Stone, Eſq. — — — „ 10400
The government remained 1 in the hands of the parliament commiſſioners *
during the time of Oliver Cromwell's uſurpation, == - — 1654


Ihe commiſſioners, by certain articles of agreement then entered into, de-
Ivered up the government into the hands of Jonah Fendall, Eſq. then


gOVErnor, =” - = — 1656
Hon. Phillip Calvert, made governor - i e 2 = 1660
Charles Calvert, Eſq. - = 1662
Upon the death of Cecilius, the gov ernmgent de ſeended to Charles, fad |

Baltimore, who came into the province — Tk 2 1675
Thomas Notly, Eſq. governor = oe — 6 2009


Who Path det till Nas Lordthip returned a ſecond time to the province in


— 4 WV


wy
WA
*


2. „& | REY | | | 1 PF: DF | > | "
N ; | | . | | 2 F 5
4 1 5 > "TN. | | - | ö
I BC: de? 2
C)
e .


„ - 2
L!* uni,


(Hurd .


—


Hab lasted Jub, 16. 1794 by 1


U
U 25 *
\ , ; \ Ms c * SP |! {
— Gy X _ (3 1 elch ort 1k wad New : jr Ya n \
/ — \ . — * 3 /
/ =. \ 2 N (A arrow \ A \ {Olaxs/Nouse
N | | RE
5 . * * SO
v . — . = 1 1 a — * Pa, WO *
2 [ Vom da [ C74 Mo Greenwic 8 2
D Noni 1 \ Y * - Y 2
I | U = 2 Jo, : _ == \ b — S .
2 n i : \ * I” WY ©
2 Bali ðncxe Iungeberry 5 \ = 3 a oroherter
\ | — * {| % . a $51] ; FR 8 — SY 2
; \ | = (IVE I! 7 r . : %. ; a D 7
- | 2 ; TH | | 1 17 8 1 8 N ws, A \ ＋
bedertch | <= 5 10ẽẽꝭ ut A - — — 7
25 : 1 | oY * * ewtown: - \ - — 5 : '3 | f
% Y | \ — e l, 4
8 | — N . . | \ N | SI 4 | | ? if. F
R Y | L.. 8 + ; LS. wa | 2 l/ 4
0 d | 2 CD as, wait. . 79
RY 4 2 > n 1 6 — 2 . 1
JOG NC A ako - &\ \ * A ;
- WY * +— +4 * . — 1 3 7/
— — | * 8
"I > APOLTS) Z \ - | —— >» Tape May |
\tenbur, Q L 6 | * 8 * | + 65 e
aden0199 : . Cent enStown * [ ; 8 .
ASHER C1.97/ Ro | 7 Porehill Road <
- — K =s
| | \ / El a. ape James
a 8 7 : a ; \
2 | Dp MApibornyt 24 0 \
12 8 4 , U t 5 4b * 2 \ * F | Rehoboth Bau eo
. | "x  , N F \ 1 :
A 3 ro / Vizcatamir Pol | N I 8
7 a ; * © / »
G A 1 8 8 j Hollan or : \ _ g > F r r Cape \ |
/ ) | Colcheſter ; art ambridge * 8 .
4 ö r | | > 2 | Lehr hum N, "ING |
* N ; Z Vos Ju U 2 . N > Js W . 4 ee Ibu N |
) ; . 7 Tri 1 T7171 (r oY * * 1 Fea |
| | | 5 6 | 2} ank el * by /-:-
2 | of Jhartes, mY 2 — N NN S{(Hille b. N >
| — 5 5 2
| & Wo 8 2 ns : Boe 8 E | \
- Goran 75 e. 5 2 1 \. | | | 8 f & | TJ nepuchen N |
( Marle 5 2 . * JJ 2 | Q Lenm » d |
87 No ee 7 3 ＋ 8 lib * 3
of > da nouth PETS } | 8 A=- | og J 1 Ul ang mon | N |
U 3 8 4, LM | K J 'A * N 8 3 V. * | |
—_—— 8 a 5 . | wg | FAY Jnomln 8
7 d Sd ; . 85 4 8 In W 2
py N | $ - WR | YE 1
8 N i % $!)Marys . e . | )
— ; Of i 888 | Le 7 . 3 C * \ nal ed ar frlands
WE N terry e IV 5 1 un ar
% W fe | ; Tot. n 1 |. <> © - Th fa. H 0 —
<p S LS +4 dy ne — * tend - 1 L 8 \
Ja 2 R... {on 4 2 | ny 7 1
cf > — 3 EL ; "3h 4 8 * N
aſthool >. Fontterav . IM + V of - CE — [ | V
Hah Hobeothte A 27 22 SY T | | y
['.\ We J 7 ran R 1 De Hom NJ
, ZY. | |
5 / |
& Ilicon 4 |
Wy 7
2 / ue N
* FA * | *
Pye 2 / . | |
Ca,
\ 1
\ i unger 7
ef Nn . pt + pe uli,
; n ys Woe P27; Ne N 4 f 55 g
7\ 22 a> 7 S
1 ö Uk | : e * ;
; HS RAD” „ * —
Oover Zur. ; * 2 | * 0 4 (1 J 3 |
2994 | [ LE x N 7 Paw A. : 15 ST |
©". : * * * > 1 |
; ” Ee ; on. FA 1107178 ons 571 . / |
N „ — 5 e n het 1 5 0 * 7 0
. joe ele 11 A
44 | FLO 3 VIRGINIA
J : * — — o |
Le Eebiward 8 n Iv ; ne : Eo EE Bag
/ arwick\., Mito 80 HA 8 1 7
5 Pp | be - d 2 7 * | 1857
e ; REES MARYLAND |
* BaV, == j
es S , umathfield . = and |
Walton & . {/ , Oehield Ie = | | 110
ö Norfolk | + 2 i 5 |
8 "Af Yonfouh 4 DELAWARE.
a be”. Suffolk Pas A = | |
IS . =
7 | —
D ö


A
O
©


. /6. 1794 by I led Precadilly.


716


Brityh Miles


”0 20 Jo
| t ron


= 6" Longitude West from London.


[Mutlow Se. 6 James" 0


8


VIRGINIA.


King William and Queen Mary took upon them the Wenment, and
ap inked Lyonel Copley, Eiq. governor - - 1692
rancis Nicholſon, Eſq. - 604


1694

Upon the death of Qucen Ma ry, the government” 1 was alto gether in che ,

hands of King William III. - — 2 5 nous
Nathaniel Blackiſton, Eſq. governor =


| 169
By the death of King W "iam III. Queen Ann tou upon her the govern- *
m the ſame governor was continued


475


— 1701-
Thomas Finch, Eſq. preſident — tm 415 3
John Seymour, Eſq. governor - - 1 1704 A»
Edward Lloyd, Eſq. preſident - - ” RIF „ |
John Hart, E . governor — — | 4 |


1714
Upon the death of Queen Ann, King 8 I. took upon him the ED
government and the ſame governor was continued 17156


The government was reſtored to Charles, Lord Baltimore, wh ſued a
new commiſſion to John Hart, Eſq. - - 5 5 1716
Charles Calvert, Eſq. governor — * — 1720
Benedict Leonard Calvert, Eſq. governor - 2 ho 1727
The Proprietor came into the province in - - — 1735
And returned to England - — 1734
Samuel Ogle, Eſq. governor . Fa — 1737 ” =
Thomas Bladen, Eſq. governor _ : . — . : „ 1944 =
Samuel Ogle, Eſq. governor _ SE] - - =


By the death of Charles, Lord Battimorss the Morince deſvented to his
fon Frederick. Governor Ogle died the ſame oy


- — 1751
Benjamin Taſker, Eſq. preſident - — ] = I
Horatio Sharp, Eſq. governor JOE . — 2 18
Robert Eden, Eſq. governor — - — 1769
Frederick, Lord Baron of Baltimore, died p - — JL
Robert Eden, Eſq. governoer 3 — „ -/- Þ
Some of the governors fince the revolution have been ee
- Thomas Johnſon, Jun. | William Smallwood,
William „ . John Eager Howard,
Te n Lec, IF "Ap TO 3


= 1 R G 1 N 1 A*


Srraarion 1b Exrzxr.


Len gh 2 co an. WI ng * e
Br eadth 224 0 between 138 36? 30˙ and 40 30 N. Lang 2 5 79,000


Born ARI S.] | PounpeD north, by Maryland, part of Pennſyvania, and


Ohio river ; welt, 'by Kentucky ſouth, KA N orth Ren *
and eaſt, by the Atlantic oecan.


In the followin deſcription of this State the Author has made a free uſe of Me. 7 eſferſord s hefobrated Hif-
tory of FREY rinted tor Mr, Stockdale, London.


3P 2


- ** IN bd * :


Civil


r 2 a " W ES me 7 I "Oy
8 8
ago „ A AA" 1 gs og te eee >


476


VIRGINIA.
Civil Drerstoxs AND PoPULATION.
and by another diviſion into pariſhes, which, with the number of 1


] This State is divided into ei


ing to the cenſus of 1790, are mentioned in the following


——


Counties.


{ Ohio


1 Monongalia


Waſhington


Wie
n


Kanawa
Hampſhire
Berkley

| Frederick
| Shenandoah'


A.


—_—


—


x the Bluc Ridge and the Tide Waters.


1 — _ ent


Weſt of the Blue Ridge.


—_
he od


d- &


ae


"Loudoun
| Fauquier

| Culpepper
Spotſylvania


Orange


| Louiſa


Goochland
Flavania
Albemarle
Amherſt
Buckingham
| Bedford
Henry
Pittſylvania
| Halifax
Charlotte


Amelia


| Nottaway


unenburg


Mecklenburg


C Brunſwick


Er


Greenbriar


Prince Edward
Cumberland
| Powhatan


TABLE.


3


*


« 18 „


ee 4 è ˙ »» 1 4 WF; v L £0


ho ty-two counties,


bitants, accord -


Total Inhabitants.
5212
4768
23752


6015


1734
19713
19681
10810
7449
10886
6548
18962
5 17892
22105
11252
9921
9467
9053
3921
12585
13703
9779
19532
8479
11379
14722
10078
8100


$8153
- 6822


18097
8059


14733


Between


VIRGINIA. 8


Counties. | | ;
([ Greenvville L _ Total Inhabitants. -
8 +4 Dinwiddie: JE 35 6302 |
4 Chefterficld b 9 - 153934
318 4519 — 8173
g 2 | Surry * — 0
5 Sullex- 3 : : 6227
| = Southampton A 53' 7 g 105 54
== | Ile of Wight © +54 OE
5 Nanſemond oh 1 9028.
E J Norfolk = _ : * goro.
1 — | * Fes 3
| L Princeſs Ann -- A = we:
"I Henrico — Gra: 7795
5 | Hanover a 3 1 12000
86 E New K 5 — * 14754
g þ | New Kent = |
| Þ | Charles City: he © 5239
3 8 Willamtburg 5 | : : wry
$4 | York * * 2760 — 5233
I Warwick . 990 5 =”
1 Elizabeth City 5 1876 2 oe
5 a b Caroline 1 (os i NT
S LE | King Willam - 151 4 oy i
888 95 King and Queen Le 5151 | 8128 =
8 87 Eſſex Bu 5.143 - 9377 FP h
V E | Middleſex . - 2 = s
8 | Glouceſter 255 : 4140
| Z i 7063 - 13498
2 Fwy 8 4574 - 12320
3 e ; % 1
Wo li OT — 4036 3 8
SE Kin Ge 3 | 958 | |
8 * i 157 85 7366 |
=] A 984 - 698 114
482 Weſtmoreland X 39 9985 |
Northumberland gy - 2» 7785 \
[ Llancafter Sg 2 2 \
3 „ = 5638 \
HE l Nena 5 5 As 3955 |
mY . 3 „ 5889 |
wy The following gare new counties:
| Counties 5 | Slaves. £ Tot inhabitants,
Lain — — 7685
1 nklin =. 12073. p 1
1 : 67 - 2080
Randolph 8 © 2
Hard — . 951
Penal, 55 : 369 - 6
Pendleton 133
e | 13 - 2452
_  Ruflell * HW 190 5 8
f 3338
Total amount "292, 627 25-.983
The whole number of Inhabitants 5 747,610


* | 1 -


478 VIRGINIA.


Kentacky,"\ which till late 4x belonged to this State, contains 73 677 inhabitants, which
added to 747,610, makes 821,287.
In tle year 1581, a very inaccurate cenſus Was taken, ſeveral counties madd no
1 return: but ſupplying by conjecture the deficiencies, the population of Virginia was
| then computed at 56 7,614; the increaſe then is 258,673, and is as 9 to 13 in ten
|


Years.
The increaſe of flaves, during thoſe ten years, has been leſs than it had been ob
4 ſerved for a century befure. The reaton is, that about 30,000 flaves periſhed with the
| tnall-pox or camp fever, caught from the Britath army, or went off with them while
ö


Lord Cornwallis was roving over tliat State.


CrixarE.] In an extenſive country, it will be expected that the climate is not the
ſame in all its parts. It is remarkable that, proceeding on the fame parallel of latitude
weſterly, the climate becomes colder in like manner as when you proceed northwardly.
This continues to be the caſe till you attain the ſummit of the Allegany, which is the
higheſt land between the ocean and the Miſſiſſippi. From thence, deſcending in the
ſame latitude to the Miſſiſſippi, the change N ; and, if we may believe travellers,
| it becomes warmer there than it is in the fame latitude on the ſea ſide. Their teſtimony
| | is ſtrengthened by the vegetables and animals which ſubſiſt and multiply there natu-
35 rally, and do not on theea-coaſt. Thus catalpas grow ſpontaneouſly on the Miſſiſſippi,
3K as far as the latitude of 37*, and reeds as far as 385 fn. even winter on the
| | Sciota, in the 39th degree of latitude. _

The ſouth-weſt winds, eaſt of the mountains, are moſt predominant. Next to theſe, ;
on the ſea-coaſt, the north-eaſt, and at the mountains, the north-weſt winds prevail.

The difference between theſe winds is very great. The north-eaſt is loaded with va-
pour, inſomuch that the ſalt manufacturers have found that their chryſtals would not
thoot while that blows; it eccafions a diſtreſſing chill, and a heavineſs and depreſſion
of the ſpirits. "The north-weſt 1s dry, cooling, elaſtic and animating. 'The eaſt and
touth-caft breezes come on generally in the afternoon. They have advanced into the
country very ſenſibly within-the memory of people now living. Mr. Jefferſon reckons
the extremes ef heat and cold to be g8* above, and 65 below o, in Fahrenheit 8 ther-
mometer.

That fluctuation between heat and cold, ſo deſtructive to fruit, prevails leſs 5 in Vr
ginia than in Pennſylvania, in the ſpring ſeaſon; nor is the overflowing of the rivers
in Virginia ſo extenfive or ſo frequent at that ſeaſon, as thoſe of the New England
States; becauſe the ſhows in the former do not lie accumulating all winter, to be diſ-
tolved all at once in the ſpring, as they do ſometimes in the latter. In Virginia, be-
low the mountains, ſnow ſeldom lies more than a day or two, and ſeldom a weck;
and the large rivers ſeldom freeze over. This fluctuation of weather, however, is ſuf. | =
ficient to render the winters and ſprings very unwholeſome, as the inhabitants have to |
walk in almoſt perpetual flop.

The months ef June and July, though often the hotteſt, are the moſt healthy in the
year. The weather is then dry "Ind lets liable to change than in Auguſt and September,
when the rain commences, and ſudden variations take place.

On the ſca coaſt, the land is low, generally within twelve feet of the level of the
ſea, interſected in all directions with ſakt creeks and rivers, the heads of which form
ſwamps and marſhes, and fenny ground, covered with water in wet ſeaſons. The
uncultivated lands are covered with large trees and thick underwood. © The vicinity of
the tea, and falt creeks and rivers, occaſion a conſtant moiſture and warmth of the f
atmoſphere, ſo that although under the ſame latitude, roo or 140 miles in the country,
deep fnows, and frozen rivers irequently happen, for a ſhort ſeaſon, yet here ſuch 5

currenc


1 ö — ä *
r . n 5
. - 3 *


r r a. +. 2


-


VIRGINIA. 475


currences are conſidered as phenomena; for theſe reaſons, the trees are often in bloom
as early as the laſt of February; from this period, however, till the end of April,
the inhabitants are incommoded by cold rains, piercing winds, and ſharp froſts, whick
ſubje&s them to the inflammatory difeaſes, known here under the names of pleuriſy
and peripneumony.

Rivkxs anD Carars.] An inſpection of the map of Virginia will give a better
idea of the geography of its rivers, than any deſcription 1 in writing. Their navigation:
may be imperfectly noted.

Roanoke, ſo far as it hes within this State, is no where navigable, but for canoes, or
light batteaux ; and even for theſe, in ſuch detached parcels as to have prevented the
inhabitants from availing themſelves of it at all.

James River, and its waters, afford navigation as follows : The whole of Elizabeth:
river, the loweſt of thoſe which run into James river, is a harbour, and would con-
- tain upwards of 300 ſhips. The channel is from 150 to 200 fathoms wide, and at

common flood tide, affords eighteeen feet water to Norfolk. The Strafford,. a fixty—
gun ſhip, went there, lightening herſelf to croſs the bar at Sowell's Point. The Fier
Rodrigue, pierced for ſixty- four guns, and carrying fiſty, went there without lighten-
ing. Craney iſland, at the mouth of this river, commands its channel tolerably well.

Nanſemond River is navigable to Sleepy Hole, for veſſels of 250 tons; to Suffolk,
for thoſe of 100 tons; and to Milner's, for thoſe of twenty-five. Pagan Creek affords
eight or ten feet water to Smithfield, which admits veſſels of twenty tons. Chickaho-
miny has at its mouth a bar, on which is only twelve feet water at common flood tide.
Veſſels paſſing that, may go eight miles up the river; thoſe of ten feet draught may go
four miles farther, and thoſe of fix tons burthen twenty miles farther.

Appamattor may be navigated as far as Broadways, by any veſſel which has croſſed
Harriſon's bar in James river; it keeps eight or nine feet water a mile or two higher
_ upto TINT 8 bar, and four feet on that and upwards to Peterſburg, where all navi-
tion ceaſes. |
"James River itſelf affords harbour for veſſels of any 7 in Hampton KW bat not
m ſafety through the whole winter; and there is navigable water for them as far as
Mulberry iſland. A forty-gun ſhip goes to Jameſtown, and, lightening herſelf, may
paſs to Harriſon's bar, on which there is only fifteen feet water. Veſſels of 250 tons
may go to Warwick; thoſe of 125 go to Rocket's, a mile below Richmond; from
thence j 18 about Sen feet water to Richmond; and about the center of the town, four
ſect and a half, where the navigation is interrupted by falls, which in a courſe of fix
miles deſcend about 80 feet perpendicular: above theſe it is reſumed in canoes and:
batteaux, and is proſecuted ſafely and advantageouſly to within ten miles of the Blue
Ridge; and even through the Blue Ridge a ton weight has been brought; and the
expenſe would not be great, when compared with its object, to open a tolerable na-
vigation up Jackſon's river and Carpenter's creek, to within twenty-five miles of
Howard's creek of Green Briar, both of which have then water enough to float vel-
ſels into the Great Kanhaway. In ſome future ſtate of population, it is poſſible that
its navigation may alſo be made to interlock with that of Patomak, and through that
to communicate by a ſhort portage with the Ohio. It is to be noted, that this river
s called in the maps James river, only to its confluence with the Rivanna ; thence to-
the Blue Ridge it is called the Fluvanna ; and thence to its ſource, Jackſon” S river.
Put in common ſpeech it is called James river to its ſource.

The Rivanna, a branch of James river, is navigable for canocs and batteaux to its

interſection with the ſouth-weſt mountains, whuctr is about twenty-two miles; and


2 may


lotteſville.


river is a mile and a half wide, and the channel only ſeventy-five fathom, and paſſing
under a high bank. At the confluence of Pamunkey and Mattapony, it is reduced


ſhore, receive only very ſmall veſſels, and theſe can but enter them. Rappahannock
affords four fathom water to Hobb's Hole, and two fathoms from thence to Frederickſ-


Bay; three at Aquia; one and a half at Hallooing Point; one and a quarter at Alex-


The. tides in the Patomak are not very ſtrong, excepting afterſ great rains, when the
ebb is pretty ſtrong; then there is little or no flood; and there is never more than fous


this river is above 300 miles; and navigable for fhips the greateſt burthen, nearly that


mile and a quarter; 3d, The Seneca Falls, fix miles above the former, which form
| ſhort, irregular rapids, with a fall of about ten feet; and 4th, The Sheuandoab Fulls,
fixty miles from the Seneca, where is a fall of about thirty feet in three miles: from


oppoſed to the navigation above and between theſe falls are of little conſequence. '


completion. The preſident and directors of the incorporated company have ſince ſup-


no more than two places, the Great and the Little Falls; fix at the former, and three


4³⁰ 3 VIRGINIA. 5
may eaſily be opened to navigation through thoſe mountains, to its fork above Char. |


Fork River, at Yorktown, affords the beſt harbour in the State for veſſels of the
largeſt fize. The river there narrows to the width of a mile, and is contained within
very high banks, cloſe under which the veſſels may ride. It holds four fathom water
at high tide for twenty-five miles above York to the mouth of Poropotank, where the


to three fathom depth, which continues yup Pamunkey to Cumberland, where the
width is 100 yards, aud up Mattapony to Within two miles of Frazier's ferry, where
it becomes two and a half fathom deep, and holds that about five miles. Pamunkey
2s then capable of navigation for loaded flats to Brockman's bridge, fifty miles above
Hanovertown, and Mattapony to Downer's bridge, ſeventy miles above its mouth.
 Piankatank, the little rivers making ont of Mobjack Bay and thoſe of the Eaſtern


burg, 110 miles. Xo Kt TX © hes. 7
Patomak is ſeven and a half miles wide at the month ; four and a half at Nomony


andria, Its ſoundings are ſeven fathom at the mouth ; five at St. George's Iſland;
four and a half at Lower Matchodic ; three at Swan's Point, and thence up to Alex-
andria ; thence ten feet water to the falls, which are thirteen miles above Alexandria.


or five hours flood, except with long and ſtrong ſouth winds.


The diſtance from the Capes of Virginia to the termination of the tide water in


diſtance. From thence this river, obſtructed by four conſiderable falls, extends
through a vaſt tract of inhabited country towards its fource. Theſe falls are, 1ſt, The
Liitle Falls, three miles above tide water, in which diſtance there is a fall of thirty-ſix
fert: 2d, The Great Falls, fix miles higher, where is a fall of ſeventy-fix feet in one


which laſt, Fort Cumberland is about 120 miles diftant, The obſtructions which are


Early in the year 1785, the legiſlatures of Virginia and Maryland paſſed acts to
encourage opening the navigation of this river. It was eſtimated that the expenſe of =:
the works would amount to 50,0001. ſterling, and ten years were allowed for their


poſed that 45,0001. would be adequate to the operation, and that it will be accom-
Sacre in a ſhortcr period than was ſtipulated. Their calculations are founded ou
the progreſs already made, and the ſummary mode eſtabliſhed for enforcing the collec-
tion of the dividends, as the money may become neceffary. © Bn Fs 5
According to the opinion of the preſident aud directors, /ocks * will be neceſſary at


at


A lock is a baſon placed lengthwiſe in a river or canal, lined with walls of maſonry on each ſide, —
terminated by two gates, placed where there is a caſcade or natural fall of the country; and fo conſtrucer 3


VIRGINIA. j 481
at the latter. At the latter nothing had been attempted in 1789. At the Great Falls,
where the difficulties were judged by many to be inſurmountable, the work is nearly
or quite completed. At the Seneca Falls the laborious part of the buſineſs is entirely
accompliſhed, by removing the obſtacles and making the deſcent more gradual ; ſo
that nothing remained in 1789 but to finiſh the channel for this gentle current in a
workmanlike manner. At the Shenandoah, where the river breaks through the Blue
ridge, though a prodigious ene of labour has been beſtowed, yet the paſſage is
not yet perfected. Such proficiency has been made, however, that an avenue for a
partial navigation has been opened from Fort Cumberland to the Great Falls, which are
within nine miles of a ſhipping port.“ 4-24 | |


As ſoon as the proprietors ſhall begin to receive toll, they will doubtleſs find an
ample compenſation for their pecuniary advances. By an eſtimate made many years
ago, it was calculated that the amount, in the commencement, would be at the rate
of 11,8751. Virginia currency, per annum. The toll muſt every year become more
productive ; as the quantity of articles for exportation will be augmented in a rapid
ratio, with the 1ncreaſe of population and the extenſion of ſettlements. In the mean
time the effect will be immediately ſeen in the agriculture of the interior country; for
the multitude of horſes now employed in carrying produce to market, will then be uſed
altogether for. the purpoſes of tillage. - But, in order to form juſt conceptions of the
utility of this inland navigation, it would be requiſite to notice the long rivers which
empty into the Patomak, and even to take a ſurvey of the geographical poſition of the
weſtern waters. 5 Ho NEL © erroodt S136 £4: 1
The Shenandbab, which empties juſt above the Blue mountains, may, according to
report, be made navigable, at a trifling expence, more than 150 miles from its con-
fluence with the Patomak; and will receive and bear the produce of the richeſt part
of the State. Commiſſioners have been appointed to form a plan, and to eſtimate the
expence of opening the channel of this river, if on examination it fhould be found
practicable. The South Branch, fill higher, is navigable in its actual condition nearly
or quite 100 miles, through exceedingly fertile lands. Between theſe on the Virginia
fide are ſeveral ſmaller rivers, that may with eaſe be improved, fo as to afford a
_ pallage for boats. On the Maryland ſide are the Monocaſy, Antietam, and Conego-
cheague, ſome of which paſs. through the State of Maryland, and have their ſources
in Pennſylvania. 26535 0 i 2 Bas Fa 771 ˙ 86 1 4 = "Sow :
From Fort Cumberland, (or Wills“ Creek) one or two good waggon roads may be
had (where the diſtance is ſaid by ſome to be thirty-five and by others forty miles) to
the Youghiogany, a large and navigable branch of the Monongahela, which laſt


7


forms a junction with the Allegany at Fort Pitt.


that the baſon being filled with water by an upper ſtuice, to the level of the waters above, a veſſel may aſcend
through the upper gate; or the water in the lock being reduced to the level of the water at the bottom of
the caſcade, the veſſel may aſcend through the lower gate; for when the waters are brought te a level on
either ſide, the gate on that fide may be eahly opened. But as the lower gate is ſtrained in proportion to the
depth of water it ſupports, when the perpendicular height of the water exceeds twelve or thirteen feet, more
locks Ber one become neceſſary. Thus, if the fall be ſeventeen feet, two lecks are required, each having
eight feet fall; and if the fall be twenty - fix feet, three locks are neceſſary, each having eight feet eight inches
fall. The fide walls of the locks ought to be very ſtrong. Where the natural foundation is bad, they ſhould
de founded on piles, and-platforms of wood: they ſhould Ixewiſe lope outwards, in order to refiſt the prei-
lure of the earth behinue. ER . e


The author has been diſappointed in receiving an account of the preſent ſtate of the Virginia canals and
30 But,


482 VIRGINIA.
Hut, by paſfling farther up the Patomak than Fort Cumberland, which may very
eafily be done, a portage by a good waggon road to Cheat river, another large branch
of the Monongahela, can be obtained through a ſpace which ſome ſay is twenty, others
twenty-two, others twenty five, and none more than thirty miles.

_ When we have arrived at either of theſe weſtern waters, the navigation through
that immenſe region is opened by a thoutand directions, and to the lakes in ſeveral
places by portages of leſs than ten miles; and by one portage, it is aſſerted, of not
more than a ſingle mile. Fr. $194 | pt: 18221
Notwithſtanding it was ſneeringly ſaid by ſome foreigners, at the beginning of this


undertaking, that the Americans are fond of engaging in ſplendid projects which they
could never accompliſh ; yet it is hoped the ſucceſs of this firſt eſſay towards impro-


ving their inland navigation, will, in ſome degree, reſcue them from the reproach
intended to have been fixed upon their national character, by the unmerited imputa-
tion. "Wy | F [1
The Great Kanbatva is a river of confiderable note for the fertility of its land, and
Full more, as leading towards the head waters of James river. Nevertheleſs, it is


doubttul whether its great and numerous rapids will admit a navigation, but at an ex-
pence to which at will require ages to render its inhabitants equal. The great obſtacles


begin at what are called the Great Falls, ninety miles. above the mouth, below which
are only five or fix rapids, and theſe paſlable, with ſome difficulty, even at low water.


From the falls to the mouth of Green Briar is 100 miles, and thence to the lead mines


120. It is 280 yards wide at its mouth. | „ ihe A LOSS: FOI
The Liiile Kanhawa is 150 yards wide at the mouth. It yields a navigation of ten


—


miles onhy. Perhaps its northern branch, called Junius Creek, which interlocks with


the weſtern waters of Monongahela, may one day admit a ſhorter paſſage from the


latter into the Ohio.


 MouxTaixs.] It is worthy notice, that the mountains are not ſolitary and ſcattered
confuſedly over the face of the country; but commence at about 150 miles from the
ſea coaſt, are diſpoſed in ridges one behind another, running nearly parallel with the
ſea coaſt, though rather approaching it as they advance north-eaſtwardly. To the
ſouth-weſt, as the tract of country between the ſea coaſt and the Miſſiſſippi becomes
narrower, the mountains converge into a fingle ridge, which, as it approaches the


Gulph of Mexico, ſubſides into plain country, and gives riſe to ſome. of the waters of


that gulph, and particularly to a river called Apalachicola, probably from the Apala-
chies, an Indian nation formerly refiding on it. Hence the mountains giving riſe to
that river, and ſeen from its various parts, were called the Apalachian Mountains,
being in fact the end or termination only of the great ridges paſting through the Conti-
nent. European geographers, however, extended the ſame northwardly as far as the


mountains extended; ſome giving it after their ſeparation into different ridges, to the


Blue Ridge, others to the North Mountains, others to the Allegany, others to the
Laurel Ridge, as may be ſeen in their different maps. But none of. theſe ridges were
ever known by that name to the inhabitants, either native or emigrant, but as they ſaw
them ſo called in European maps. In the ſame direction generally are the veins of
lime-ſtone, coal, and other minerals hitherto diſcovered ; and ſo range the falls of the
great rivers. But the courſes of the great rivers are at right angles with theſe. James
and Patomak penetrate through all the ridges of mountains eaſtward of the Allegany,


that js broken by no watercourſe. It is in fact the ſpine of the country. between the
Atlantic on one fide, and the Miſliflippi and St. Lawrence on the other. The paſſage
| : | | | | 0


12


III 483
the Patomak through the Blue ridge is perhaps one of the moſt ſtupendous ſcenes in
nature, You ftand-on a very high point of land. On your right comes up the She-
nandoah, having ranged along the foot of the mountain an hundred miles to ſeek a
vent; on your left approaches the Patomak, in queſt of a paſſage alto : in the mo-
ment of their junction they ruſh together againſt the mountain, rend it atunder, and
aſs off to the ſea. . The firſt glance of this ſcene hurries our ſenſes into the opinion,
that this earth has been created in time, that the mountains were formed firſt, that the
rivers began to flow afterwards ; that in this place particularly they have been dammed
up by the Blue ridge of mountains, and have formed an ocean which filled the whole
valley; that continuing to riſe they have at length broken over at this ſpot, and have
torn the mountain down from its ſummit to its baſe. The piles of rock on each hand,
but particularly on the Shenandoah, the evident marks of their diſruption and avul- -
ſion from their beds by the moſt powerful agents of nature, corroborate the impreſſion:
but the diſtant finiſhing which nature has given to the picture, is of a very different
character. It is a true contraſt to the fore ground; it is as placid and delightful, as
that is wild and tremendous. For the mountain, being cloven aſunder, preſents to
the eye, through the cleft, a ſmall catch of ſmooth blue horizon, at an infinite diſ-
tance, in the plain country, inviting you, as it were, from the riot and tumult roaring
around, to paſs through the breach and participate of the calm below. Here the eye
ultimately compoſes itſelf ; and that way too, the road actually leads. You croſs the
Patomak above the junction, paſs along its fide through the baſe of the mountain for
three miles, its terrrible precipices hanging in fragments over you, and within about
twenty miles reach of Fredericktown and the fine country round that. This ſcene is
worth a voyage acroſs the Atlantic. Yet here, as in the neighbourhood of the Natu-
ral Bridge, are people who have paſſed their lives within half a dozen miles, and have
never been to ſurvey theſe monuments of a war between rivers and mountains, which
mult have ſhaken the earth itfelf to its center. The height of the mountains has not
yet been eſtimated with any degree of exactneſs. The Allegany being the great ridge
which divides the waters of the Atlantic from thoſe of the Miſſiſſippi, its ſummit is
doubtleſs more elevated above the ocean than that of any other mountain. But its
relative height, compared with the bafe on which it ſtands, is not ſo great as that of
tome others, the country rifing behind the ſucceſſive ridges like the ſteps of ſtairs. The
mountains of the Blue ridge, and of theſe the peaks of Qtter are thought to be
of a greater height meaſured from their baſe than any others in Virginia, and. perhaps
in North America. From data, which may be found a tolerable conjecture, we ſup-
pote the higheſt peak to be about 4000 feet perpendicular, which is not a fifth part
of the height of the mountains of South America, nor one third of the height which
would be neceſſary in our latitude to preſerve ice in the open air unmelted through
the year. The ridge of mountains next beyond the Blue ridge, called the North
Mountain, is of the greateſt extent; for which reaſon they are named by the Indians
the Endleſs Mountains. 3 N =
The Ouafioto mountains are fifty or ſixty miles. wide at the Gap: Theſe mountains
abound in coal, lime, and free-ſtone ; the ſummits of them are generally covered with
à good ſoil, and a variety of timber; and the low, intervale lands are rich and remar-
kably well watered. _ . „
Fack or THE CounTRY, S01L, PRODucrroxs, &c.] The whole country below the
mountains, which are about 150, ſome ſay 200 miles from the ſea, is level, and ſeems
from various appearances to have been once waſhed by the ſca. The land. between
York and James rivers is very level, and its ſurface about forty feet above high water


32 2 mark.


the Cheſapeak. | | | 'F


and kept them confined in a final} paſture, near his ſeat, where no cattle*had been for


484 Ver

mark. It appears, from obſervation, to have ariſen to its preſent height, at different
periods far diſtant from cach other, and that at theſe periods it was waſhed by the ſea;
tor near Yorktown, where the banks are perpendicular, you firſt fee a fratum, inter-
mixed with ſmall ſhells reſembling a mixture of clay and fand, and about five feet
thick ; on this lies horizontally, ſmall white ſhells, cockle, clam, &c. an inch or two
thick; then a body of earth ſimilar to that firſt mentioned, eighteen inches thick; then
a layer of ſhells and another body of carth ; on this a layer of three feet of white ſhells
mixed with fand, on which lay a body of oyſter ſhells ſix feet thick, which were covered
with carth to the ſurface. The oyſter ſhells are fo united by a very ſtrong cement that
they fall, only when undermined, and then in large bodies, from one to twenty tons


weight. They have the appearance of large rocks on the ſhore.*


Theſe appearances continue in a greater or leſs degree in the banks of James river,


one hundred miles from the fea; the appearances then vary, and the banks are filled


with ſharks' teeth, bones of large and tmall fiſh petrified, and many other petrifac-
tions, ſome reſembling the bones of land and other animals, other vegetable ſubſtances.


Theſe appearances are not confined to the river banks, but are ſeen in various places


in gullies at conſiderable diſtances from the rivers. In one part of the State for ſeventy
miles in length, by ſinking a well, you apparently come to the bottom of what was
formerly a watercourſe. And even as high up as Botetourt county, among the Alle-


gany mountains, there is a tract of land, judged to be 40,000 acres, ſurrounded on


every fide by mountains, which is entirely covered with oyſter and cockle ſhells, and,
from ſome gullies, they appear to be of confiderable depth. A plantation at Day's
Point, on James river, of as many as 1000 acres, appears at a diſtance as if covered
with ſnow, but on examination the white appearance is found to ariſe from a bed of
clam ſhells, which by repeated plowing have become ſine and mixed with earth. _
The foil below the mountains ſeems to have acquired a character for goodneſs which

it by no means deſerves. Though not rich it is well ſuited to the growth of tobacco
and Indian corn, and parts of it, for wheat. Good crops of cotton, flax, and hemp


are alſo raiſed ; and in ſome counties they have plenty of cyder, and exquiſite brandy,


diſtilled from peaches, which grow in great abundance upon the numerous rivers' of
The planters, before the war, paid their principal attention to the culture of tobacco,
of which there uſed to be exported, generally, 55,000 hogſheads a year. Since the
revolution they are turning their attention more to the cultivation of wheat, Indian
corn, barley, flax, and hemp. It is expected that this State will add the article of rice
to the lift of her exports; as it is ſuppoſed a large body of ſwamp, in the caſternmoſt
coumties, is capable of producing it. 8 b
Horned or neat cattle are bred in great numbers in the weſtern counties of Virginia,
as well as in the States ſouth of it, where they have an cxtenſive range, and mild
winters, without any permanent ſnows.— They run at large, are not houſed, and
multiply very faſt.—“ In the lower parts of the State a diſcaſe prevails among the neat
cattle which proves fatal to all that are not bred there. The oxen, from the more
Northern States, which were employed at the ſiege of Yorktown, in October 1781.
almoſt all died, ſometimes forty of them in a night, and often ſuddenly dropped down
dead in the roads. It is ſaid that the ſeeds of this diſcaſe were brought from the
Havannah to South Carolina or Georgia in ſome hides; and that the diſeaſe has pro-
greſſed northward to Virginia. Lord Dunmore imported ſome cattle ſrom Rhode Ifland,


ſome
* General Lincoln.


.


which in the open ait was at 307, roſe to 57 of Fahrenheit's thermometer.


VIRGINIA. KEE 485
ſome years, and where they could not intermix with other cattle, and yet tliey ſoon
,,


The gentlemen, being fond of pleaſure, have taken much pains to raiſe a 90 =
breed of horſes, and have ſucceeded in it beyond any of the States. They will give


r00ol. ſterling for a good ſeed horſe. Horſe- racing has had a great tendency to encou-
rage the breeding of good horſes, as it affords an opportunity of putting them to the
trial of their ſpeed. They are more elegant, and will. perform more ſervice, than the


horſes of the northern States. | ö


An intelligent gentleman, an inhabitant of Virginia, informs, that caves among the


mountains have lately been diſcovered, which yield ſalt petre in ſuch abundance, that


he judges 500,000 pounds of it might be collected from them annually. 4b
This State does not abound with good fiſh. Sturgeon, ſhad, and herring are the
moſt plenty; pearch, ſheepſhead, drum, rock fiſh, and trout are common; beſides
theſe they have oyſters in abundance, crabs, ſhrimps, &c. e 4
 Cascapes, CuriosiTiEs, AND Caverns. | The only remarkable caſcade in this


State is that of Falling Spring, in Auguſta. It is a water of James river, where it is


called Jackſon's river, riſing in the warm ſpring mountains about twenty miles ſouth-
weſt of the warm ſpring, and flowing into that valley. About three quarters of a mile
from its ſource, it falls over a rock two hundred ſeet into the valley below. The fheet


of water is hroken in its breadth by the rock in two or three places, but not at all in its
height. Between the ſheet and rock, at the bottom, you may walk acroſs dry. This


cataract will bear no compariſon with that of Niagara, as to the quantity of water


compoſing it; the ſheet being only twelve or fiftcen feet wide above, and ſomewhat


more fpread below; but it is half as high agam.


In the lime: ſtone country, there are many caverns of very conſiderable extent. The
moſt noted is called Madifon's cave, and is on the north fide of the Blue ridge, near


the interſection of the Rockingham and Auguſta line with the ſouth fork of the fouth-
ern river of Shenandoah. It is in a hill of about two hundred feet perpendiculat


height; the aſcent of which, on one ſide, is ſo ſteep that you may pitch a biſcuit from its


ſummit into the river which waſhes its baſe. The entrance of the cave is, in this ſide,
about two thirds of the way up. It extends into the earth about three hundred feet,
branching into ſubordinate caverns, ſometimes aſcending a little, but more generally


_ deſcending, and at length terminates in two different places, at batons of water of
unknown extent, and which appear to be nearly on a level with the water of the river.


It is probably one of the many reſervoirs with which the interior parts of the carth are


ſuppoſed to abound, and which yield ſupplies to the fountains: of water, diſtinguiſhed
from others only by its being acceſſible. The vault ot this cave is of ſolid lime-ſtone,


from twenty to forty or fifty feet high, through which water is contmually exudating.
This, trickling down the fides of the cave, has incrutted them over in the form of


elegant drapery ; and dripping from the top of the vault, generates on that, and on the
bate below, ſtalactites of a conical form, ſome of which have met and formed maſſive
columns. Jy OE 8


Another of theſe caves is near the North Mountain, in the county of Frederick.
The entrance into this is on the top of .an extenſive ridge. You deſcend thirty or
forty feet, as into a well, from whence the cave then extends, ncarly horizontally,
tour hundred feet into the earth, preſerving a breadth of from twenty to fiſty feet, and
a height of from five to twelve feet. After entering this cave a few feet, the mercury,


At
* General Lincolu. =


7
*.


486 VIRGINIA.

At the Panther gap, in the ridge which divides the waters of the Cow and the Calf
paſture, is what is called the Blowing Cave. It is in the fide of a hill; is of about one
hundred feet diameter, and emits conſtantly a current of air of ſuch force, as to kee
the weeds proſtrate to the diſtance of twenty yards before it. This current is ſtrongeſt
in dry froſty weather, and in long ſpells of rain weakeſt. Regular inſpirations and
expirations of air, by caverns and fiſſures, have been probably enough accounted for,
by ſuppoſing them combined with intermitting fountains, as they mult of courſe inhale.
the air while the reſervoirs are emptying themſelves, and again emit it while they are
Filling. But a conſtant iſſue of air, only varying in its force as the weather is drier or
damper, will require a new hypotheſis. There is another blowing cave in the Cum-
berland mountain, about a mile from where it croſſes the Carolina line. All we know
of this is, that it is not conſtant, and that a fountain of water iſſues from it.

The Natural Bridge 1s the moſt ſublime of nature's works. It is on the aſcent of a
hill, which ſeems to have been cloven through its length by ſome great convulfion.
The fiflure, juſt at the bridge, is by ſome admeaſurements, two hundred and ſeventy
feet deep, by others only two hundred and five. It is about forty-five feet wide at the
bottom, and ninety feet at the top ; this of courſe determines the length of the bridge,
and its height from the water. Its breadth in the middle is about ſixty feet, but more
at the ends, and the thickneſs of the maſs at the ſummit of the arch about forty feet.
A part of this thickneſs is conſtituted by a coat of earth, which gives growth to many
large trees. The reſidue, with the hill on both ſides, is ſolid rock of lime- ſtone. The
arch approaches the ſemi-elliptical form; but the larger axis of the ellipſis, which
would be the cord of the arch, is many times longer than the tranſverſe. Though the
fides of this bridge are provided in ſome parts with a parapet of fixed rocks, yet few
men have reſolution to walk to them and look over into the abyſs. You involuntarily
fall on your hands and feet, creep to the parapet and peep over it. If the view from
the top be painful and intolerable, that from below is dehghtful in an equal extreme.
It is impoſſible for the emotions ariſing from the ſublime, to be felt beyond what they
are here: ſo beautiful an arch, ſo elevated, ſo light, and ſpringing as it were up to
Heaven, the rapture of the ſpectator is really indeſcribable ! The fiſſure continuing
narrow, deep, and ſtraight, for a conſiderable diſtance above and below the bridge,
opens a ſhort but very pleafing view of the North mountain on one fide, and Blue
Ridge on the other, at the diſtance each of them of about five miles. This bridge is

in the county of Rockbridge, to which it has given name, and aftords a public and
commodious paſſage over a valley, which cannot be croſſed elſewhere for a conſiderable
dittance. The ſtream paſſing under it is called Cedar Creek. It is a water of James
river, and fufficient in the drieſt ſeaſons to turn a griſt mill, though its fountain is not
more than two miles above.“ There is a natural bridge ſimilar to the above over
Stock Creek, a branch of Pelcton river, in Waſhington county. jus | i
Mix ES Ax D MixERALS.] Virginia is the moſt pregnant with minerals and foſſils
of any State in the Union. A fingle lump of gold ore has been found, near the falls of
Rappahannock river, which yielded 17 dwt. of gold, of extraordinary ductility. No.
other indication of gold has been diſcovered in its neighbourhood. BB
On the great Kanhawa, oppoſite to the mouth of Cripple Creek, and alſo about
twenty-five miles from the ſouthern boundary of the State, in the county of Montgo-


* Don Ulloa mentions a break, ſimilar to this, in the province of Angaraez, in South America, It is from
ſixteen to twenty-two feet wide, one hundred and eleven deep, and of one mile and three quarters continuance,
Engliſh meaſure. Its breadch at top is not ſenſibly greater than at bottom.


2 | ICT),


VIRGINIA. 487
mery, are mines of lead. The metal is mixed, ſometimes with earth, and ſometimes
with rock, which requires the force of gunpowder to open it; and is accompanied witli
a portion of filver, too ſmall to be worth ſeparation under any procets hitherto attempted
there. The proportion yielded is from 30 to 80 lb. of pure metal from 100 lb. of
waſhed ore. The moſt common is that of 6o to the 100 Ib. The veins are at ſome-
times moſt flattering ; at others they ditappear ſuddenly and totally. They enter the
ſide of the hill, and proceed horizontally. Two of them have been wrought by the
public. Theſe would employ about fifty labourers to advantage. Thirty men, who
have at the ſame time raiſed their own corn, have produced ſixty tons of lead in the


year; but the general quantity is from twenty to twenty-five tons. The preſent furnace


is a mile from the ore bank, and on the oppoſite fide of the river. The ore is firſt
waggoned to the river, a quarter of a mile, then laden on board of canoes and carried


acroſs the river, which 1s there about two hundred yards wide, and then again taken


into waggons and carricd to the furnace. This mode was originally adopted, that they


might avail themſelves of a good ſituation on a creck, for a pounding mill; but it would


be caſy to have the furnace and pounding mill on the ſame fide of the river, which


would yield water, without any dam, by a canal of about half a mile in length. From


the furnace the lead 1s tranſported one hundred and thirty miles along a good road,


leading through the peaks of Otter to Lynch's ferry, or Winſton's, on James river, from
' whence it is carried by water about the tame diſtance to Weſtham. This land carriage


may be greatly ſhortened, by delivering the lead on James river, above the Blue Ridge,
from whence a ton weight has been brought in two canoes. The Great Kanhawa has
conſiderable falls in the neighbourhood of the mines. About ſeven miles below are


three falls, of three or four feet perpendicular each: and three miles above is a rapid of
three miles continuance, which has been compared in its deſcent to the great fall of


James river ; yet it is the opinion, that they may be laid open for uſeful navigation,


fo as to reduce very much the portage between the Kanhawa and James river.


A mine of copper was opened in the county of Amherſt, on the north fide of James
river, and another in the oppoſite county, on the ſouth ſide. However, either from


bad management or the poverty of the veins, they were diſcontinued. A few years ago


there were fix iron mines worked in this State. Two of them made about one hundred
and fifty tons bar iron each; the others made each from fix hundred to one thouſand


fix hundred tons of pig iron annually. Beſides theſe, a forge at Frederickſburgh, made
about three hundred tons a year of bar iron, from pigs imported from Maryland; and
a forge on Neapſco of Patomak, worked in the fame way. The indications of iron in
other places are numerous, and diſperſed through all the middle country. The tough-


neſs of the caſt iron of ſome of the furnaces is very remarkable. Pots and other utenſils,
caſt thinner than uſual, of this iron, may be ſately thrown into or out of the waggons


in which they are tranſported. Salt pans made of the ſame, and no longer wanted for
that purpoſe, cannot be broken up in order to be melted again, unleſs previouſly drilled


m many parts. 2 | ; „ \
In the weſtern part of the State we are told of iron mines on Cheſnut Creek, a
ranch of the Great Kanhawa, near where it crofles the Carolina line; and in other
places, h 1 VC
Conſiderable quantities of black lead are taken occaſionally for uſe from Winterham,
in the county of Amelia. There is no work eſtabliſhed at it, thoſe who want, going
and procuring it for themſelves. OO VVV
The country on both ſides of James river, from fifteen to twenty miles above Rich-
mond, and for ſeveral miles northward and ſouthward, is replete with mineral £2
? ve


488 VIRGINIA.


opened, and worked to an extent equal to the demand. The pits which have been


an opinion, that the whole tract between the Laurel Mountain, Miſſiſſippi, and Ohio,
Fields coal. It is allo known in many places on the north fide of the Ohio. The coal


There is very good marble, and in very great abundance, on- James river, at the


Prince William, two miles below the Pignut ridge of mountains; thence it paſſes on

nearly parallel with that, and croſſes the Rivanna about five miles below it, where it
yards wide. From the Blue ridge weſtwardly the whole country ſeems to be founded
to north-eaſt,


change of air and regimen, as to their real virtnes. None of them have undergone a
chemical analyſis in ſkilful hands, nor been ſo far the ſubject of obſervations as to have


of a very excellent quality. Being in the hands of many proprietors, pits have been


opened lie 150 or 200 feet above the bed of the river, and have been very little incom-
moded with water. The firſt diſcovery of the coal is ſaid to have been made by a boy,
digging after a cray-fith ; it has alſo been found on the bottom of trees blown up. In
many places it lies within three or four feet of the ſurface of the ground. It is conjec-
tured that o. oo bufhels might be raiſed from one pit in 12 months. OY

In the wefiern country, coal is known to be in fo many places, as to have induced


at Putſburgh is of a very ſuperior quality: a bed of it at that place has been on fire ſince
the year 1765. Another coal hill on the Pike Run of Monongahela has been on fire
ten years; yet it has burnt away about 20 yards only. „
I have known one inſtance, jays Mr. Jefferſon, of an emerald found in this coun-
try. Amethyſts have been frequent, and chryſtals common; yet not in ſuch numbers
any of them as to be worth ſeeking. | 5 :


mouth of Rockfiſh : ſome white and as pure as one might expect to find on the ſur-
face of the earth; but generally variegated with red, blue, and purple. None of it
has ever been worked: it forms a very large precipice, which hangs over a navigable
part of the r- irt. Foy DT vr] VF
But one vein of lime- ſtone is known below the Blue Ridge : its firſt appearance is in


is ealled the South-weſt Ridge: it then croſſes Hardware, above the mouth of Hud-
ſon's exeek, James river, at the mouth of Rockfiſh, at the marble quarry before ſpoken
of, probably runs up that river to where it appears again at Roſs's iron works, and 10
paſſes off ſouth-weftwardly by Flat creek of Otter river: it is never more than 100


on a rock of lime- ſtone, befides infinite quantities on the ſurface, both looſe and fixed:
this is cut into beds, which range, as the mountains and fea coaſt do, from ſouth-weſt


MRDICI SAL Serix6s. | There are feveral medicinal ſprings, ſome of which are indu-
bitably efficacious, while others ſeem to owe their reputation as much to fancy, and


to give little more than an enumeration of them. |
The moſt efficacious of theſe are two ſprings in Auguſta, near the ſources of James
river, where it is called Jackfon's river. They riſe near the foot of the ridge of moun-
tains, generally called the Warm ſpring mountain, but in the maps Jackſon's moun-
tains. The one is diſtinguiſhed by the name of the Warm Spring, and the other of
the Hot Spring. The warm fpring iſſues with a very bold ftream, ſufficient to work
a griſt mill, and to keep the waters of its baſon, which is zo feet in diameter, at the
vital warmth, viz. 96* of Fahrenheit's thermometer. The matter with which theſe waters
is alljed is very volatile; its ſmell indicates it to be ſulphureous, as alſo does the cir-
cumſtance of turning ſilver black: they relieve rheumatifms : other complaints alſo of
very different natures have been removed or leſſened by them. It rains here four or
five days in every week, | $5 .
1 ;


produced a reduction into claſſes of the diforders which they relieve ; it is in my power


A OS. %. cd Rc ad


VIRGINIA. | 489

The hot ſpring is about ſix miles from the warm, is much ſmaller, and has been ſo
hot as to have boiled an egg. Some believe its degree of heat to be leſſened: it raiſes
the mercury in Fahrenheit's thermometer to 1 12 degrees, which is fever heat: it fome-
times reheves where the warm ſpring fails. A fountain of common water, ifluing
within a few inches of its margin, gives it a ſingular appearance. Comparing the tem-
perature of theſe with that of the hot ſprings of Kamſchatka, of which Krachininni—
kow gives an account, the difference is very great, the latter riſing the mercury to 200
degrees, which is within 12 degrees of boiling water. Theſe ſprings are very much
reſor ted to, in ſpite of a total w ant of accommodation for the fick. Their waters are
ſtrongeſt in the hotteſt montns, which occaſions their being viſited 1 in July and Auguſt
principally,

The ſweet ſprings are in the county of Botetourt, at the aloe foot of the Allegany,
about 42 miles from the warm ſprings. They are ſtill leſs known, Having been found
to relieve caſes in which the others had been ineffectually tried, it is probable | their

compoſition is different: they are different allo in their temperature, being as cold as
common water; which is not mentioned, however, as a proof of a diſtinct impregna-
tion. This is among the firſt ſources of James river.

On Patomak river, in Berkeley county, above the North Mountain, arc medicinal
ſprings, much more frequented than thote of Auguſta : their powers, however, are
leſs, the waters weakly mineralized, and ſcarcely warm. They are more viſited, be-
cauſe fituated 1n a fertile, plentiful, and populous country, provided with better ac-
commodations, always ſafe from the Indians, and neareſt to the more populaus States.
In Louiſa county, on the head waters of the South Anna branch of York river, are
ſprings of ſome medicinal virtue ; they are, however, not much uſed. There is a weak


_ chalybeate at Richmond, and many others in various parts of the country, which are


of too little worth, or too little note to be enumerated after thoſe before mentioned.

We are told of a ſulphur ſpring on Howard's creck of green briar. In the low
grounds of the Great Kanhawa, ſeven miles above the mouth of Elk river, and 67
above that of the Kanhawa itſelf, is a hole in the earth of the capacity of 30 or 40
gallons, from which iſſues conſtantly a bituminous vapour, in fo ſtrong a current, as
to give to the ſand about its orifice the motion which it has in a boiling ſpring. 'On
preſenting a lighted candle or torch within 18 inches of the hole, it flames up in a co-
lumn of 18 inches diameter, and four or five feet in height, which ſometimes burns
out in 20 minutes, and at other times has been known to continue three days, and
then has been left burning. The flame is unſteady, of the denſity of that of burning
ſpirits, and ſmells like burning pit coal. Water ſometimes collects in the baſon, which
is remarkably cold, and is kept in ebullition by the vapour iſſuing through it; if the

vapour be fired in that ſtate, the water ſoon becomes ſo warm that the hand cannot
bear it, and evaporates wholly in a ſhort time. This, . with the circumjacent lands, (
the property of Preſident Waſhington and of General Lewis.

There 1s a finular one on Sandy river, the flame of lich is a column of about 12
inches diameter and three feet high. General Clarke kindled the — ſtaid about
an hour, and leſt it burning.

The mention of uncommon ſprings leads to that of Syphon. fountains : there is one
of theſe near the interſection of the Lord Fairfax's boundary with the North Moun-
tain, not far from Brock's gap, on the ſtream of which is a grift mill, which grinds two
buſhels of grain at every flood of the ſpring. Another near the Cow Paſture riv er, a
mile and a half below its confluence ith the Bull Paſture river, and 16 or 17 miles


3 R 0 | | *


bs Q - 43 3 4D l 4
N 9 *
> . — 4.4 I % * *
E ²˙- „ ** % .


1 VIRGINIA.


from the Hot Springs, which intermits once in every twelve hours. One alto near the :
mouth of the Narth Holton. |

After theſe may be mentioned, the Natural Well or the lands of a Mr. Lewis, in
Frederick county: it is ſomewhat larger than a common well; the water riſes in it as


Hear the ſurface of the earth as in the neighbouring artificial wells, and is of a depth as
yet unknown. It is ſaid, there is a current in it tending ſenſibly downwards; if this


be true, it probably feeds ſome fountain, of winch it is the natural reſervoir, diftin-


3 1 from others, like that of Maditon's cave, by being acceſſible: it is uſed with a


ucket and windlats as an ordinary well.
— . Fra Tv
MilrTIA.] Every able-bodied freeman, between the ages of 16 and 530, is enrolled.


in the militia. Thoſe of every county are formed into companies, and theſe again into


one or more battalions, according to the numbers in the county: they are commanded


by colonels, and other ſubordinate officers, as in the regular ſervice. In every coun


is a county lieutenant, who commands the whole militia in his county, but ranks only


as a colonel in the field. They have no general officers always exiſting : thele are ap-


pointed occaſionally, when an invaſion or inſurrection happens, and their commiſſion


_ determines with the occafion. The governor is head of the military as well as civil


power. The law requires every militia-man to provide himſelf with the arms uſual in


the regular ſervice. But this injunction was always indifferently complied with, and


the arms they had have been ſo frequently called for to arm the regulars, that in the
lower parts of the country they are entirely diſarmed. In the middle country a fourth


or fifth part of them may have ſuch firelocks as they had provided to deſtroy the


noxious animals which infeſt their farms; and on the weſtern fide of the Blue Ridge
they are generally armed with rifles. 5 VV
The interſection of Virginia, by ſo many navigable rivers, renders it almoſt incapa-


ble of defence: as the land will not ſapport a great number of people, a force cannot


be towns, but nature has ſaid there ſhall not; an


foon be collected to repel a ſudden invafion. If the militia bear the ſame proportion

to the number of inhabitants now, as in 1782, they amount to about 68,000.
Culkr Towns. ] They have no townſhips. in this State, nor any towns of conſe-

quence, ow1ng probably to the interſection of the country by navigable rivers, which


drings the trade to the doors of the inhabitants, and prevents the neceſſity of their going
in n of it'to a diſtance. 8
V


ILLIAMSBUKGH, Which till the year 1780 was the ſeat of government, never con-
tained above 1800 inhabitants, and Norfolk, the moſt populous town they ever had


in Virginia, contained but 6000. The towns, or more properly villages or hamlets,


are as follows: © #
On James river and its waters—Norfolk, Portſmouth, Hampton, Suffolk, Smith-
field, Williamſburg, Peterſburg, Richmond, the ſeat of government, Mancheſter, .


Charlotteſville, New London.—On York river and its waters, York, Newcalile, .


Hanover.—On Rappahannock, Urbanna, Port Royal, Frederickſburg, Falmouth.—-


On Patomak and its waters, Dumfries, Colcheſter, Alexandria, Wincheſter, Staunton.


There are places at which, like ſome of the foregoing, the laws have ſaid there ſhall
4 they remain unworthy of enume-
ration. Norfolk will probably become the emporium for all the trade of the Cheſapeak


Bay and its waters; and a canal of eight or ten miles, which is- contemplated, and


will probably ſoon be completed, will bring it to all that of Albemarle ſound and its


Waters. Secondary to this place, are the towns at the head of the tide. waters, to wit,


Peterſburg on Appamattox, Richmond on James river, Newcaſtle on York river, Fre-
. derickiburgh


VIRGINIA. . 491


derickſburgh on Rappahannock, and Alexandria on Patomak. From theſe the diſtri-


bution will be to ſubordinate ſituations of the country. Accidental circumſtances how -
ever may control the indications of nature, and in no inſtances do they do it more
frequently than in the riſe and fall of towns. F
To the foregoing general account, we add the following more particular de-
ſcriptions: 5 F
ALEXANDRIA ſtands on the ſouth bank of Patomak river in Fairfax county: its ſitu-
ation is elevated arid pleaſant ; the ſoil is clay. The original ſettlers, anticipating its
ſuture growth and importance, laid out the ſtreets upon the plan of Philadelphia. It
contains about 400 houſes, many of which are handiomely built, and nearly 3000 in-


| habitants. This town, upon opening the navigation of Patomak river, and in conſe-


quence of its vicinity to the city of Waſhington, will probably be one of the moſt
thriving commercial places on the continent. 5 BN „„
Movuxt VERNON, the celebrated ſeat of Preſident Waſhington, is pleaſantly ſituated
on tl Virginia bank of the river Patomak, where it is nearly two miles wide, and is
about 280 miles from the ſea, and 127 from Point Look-out, at the mouth of the river.
It is nine miles below Alexandria, and four above the beautiful ſeat of the late Colonel
Fairfax, called Bellevoir. The area of the mount is 200 feet above the ſurface of the
river, and, after furniſhing a lawn of five acres in front, and about the fame in rear vf
the buildings, falls off rather abruptly on thoſe two quarters. On the north end it ſub-


ſides gradually into extenfive paſture grounds; while on the ſouth it ſlopes more
_ ſteeply in a ſhorter diſtance, and terminates with the coach-houſe, ſtables, vineyard,


and nurſeries. On either wing is a thick grove of different flowering foreſt trees.

Parallel with them, on the land fide, are two ſpacious gardens, into which one is led
by two ſerpentine gravel walks, planted with weeping willows and ſhady ſhrubs.
The manſion houſe itfelf (though much embelliſhed by, yet not perfectly ſatisfactory
to the chaſte taſte of the preſent poſſeſſor) appears venerable and convenient. The
ſuperb banquetting room has been finiſhed ſince he returned home from the army. A
lotty portico, 96 feet in length, ſupported by eight pillars, has a pleaſing effect when -


viewed from the water; the whole aſſemblage of the green-houſe, ſchool-houſe, offices
and ſervants' halls, when ſeen from the land fide, bears a reſemblance to a rural vil-


lage; eſpecially as the lands on that fide are laid out ſomewhat in the form of Engliſh .


_ gardens, in meadows and graſs grounds, ornamented with little copſes, circular clumps,


and ſingle trees. A ſmall park on the margin of the river, where the Englith fallow-


deer, and the American wild deer are ſeen through the thickets, alternately with the


veſſels as they are ſailing along, add a romantic and pictureſque appearance to the.
whole fcenery. On the oppoſite tide of a ſmall creek to the northward, an extenſive
plain, exhibiting corn-fields and cattle grazing, affords in ſummer a luxuriant land-
ſcape ; while the blended verdure of woodlands and cultivated declivities, on the
Maryland ſhore, variegates the proſpect in a charming manner. Such are the:philo- ,


ſophic ſhades to which the late Commander in Chief of the American armies retired
from the tumultuous ſcenes of a buſy world, and which he has ſince left to dignify,
by his nnequalled abilities, the moſt important office in the gift of his fellow citizens.


FA&RDERICKSBURGH, in the county of: Spotſylvania, is fituated on the ſouth ſide of


Rappahannock river, 110 miles from its mouth ; and contains about 200 houſes, prin-.
cipally on one ſtreet, which runs nearly parallel with the river, and 1500 inhabitants.


Rrcuwoxp, in the county of Henrico, is the preſent ſeat of government, and ſtands
on tlie north tide of James river, juſt at the foot of the falls, and contains between 460


and 500 houſes, and nearly 4000 inhabitants. Part of the houſes are built upon the


38-2 | margin


ye” ant I


Y: 1 from others, like that of Maditon's cave, by being accefſible: it is uſed with a
Bucket and windlats as an ordinary well. |


490 VIRGINIA.


mouth of the North Holton.


near the ſurface of the earth as in the neighbouring artificial wells, and is of a depth as
yet unknown. It is ſaid, there is a current in it tending ſenſibly downwards; if this


as a colonel in the field. They have no general officers always exiſting : theſe are ap-


the regular ſervice. But this injunction was always indifferently complied with, and


from the Hot Springs, which intermits once in every twelve hours. One alto near the :


After theſe may be mentioned, the Natural Well or the lands of a Mr. Lewis, in
Frederick county: it is ſomewhat larger than a common well; the water riſes in it as


be true, it probably feeds ſome fountain, of winch it is the natural reſervoir, diſtin-


PopuLATfON.] Sce table. | : Ng
M11 a.] Every able-bodied freeman, between the ages of 16 and 30, is enrolled:
in the militia. Thoſe of every county are formed into companies, and theſe again into
one or more battalions, according to the numbers in the county: they are commanded -
by colonels, and other ſubordinate officers, as in the regular ſervice. In every county
is a county lieutenant, who commands the whole militia in his county, but ranks only


pointed occaſionally, when an invaſion or inſurrection happens, and their commiſſion
determines with the occaſion. The governor is head of the military as well as civil
power. The law requires every militia-man to provide himſelf with the arms uſual in


the arms they had have been ſo frequently called for to arm the regulars, that in the
lower parts of the country they are entirely diſarmed. In the middle country a fourth


or fifth part of them may have ſuch firelocks as they had provided to deſtroy the


* {4


noxious animals which infeſt their farms; and on the weſtern fide of the Blue Ridge
they are generally armed with rifles. _ VVV
The interſection of Virginia, by ſo many navigable rivers, renders it almoſt incapa-


*


ble of defence: as the land will not ſapport a great number of people, a force cannot


foon be collected to repel a ſudden invaſion. If the militia bear the ſame proportion
to the number of inhabitants now, as in 1782, they amount to about 68,000.

_ Cate Towxs.| They have no townſhips in this State, nor any towns of conſe-
quence, owing probably to the interſection of the country by navigable rivers, which


brings the trade to the doors of the inhabitants, and prevents the neceſſity of their going


in queſt of it'to a diſtance. Ns 1 55
WILIA Ss BUN, Which till the year 1780 was the ſeat of government, never con-


tained above 1800 inhabitants, and Norfolk, the moſt populous town they ever had


in Virginia, contained but 6900. The towns, or more properly villages or hamlets,

I e | | 3 - >
On James river and its waters—Norfolk, Portſmouth, Hampton, Suffolk, Smith- _

field, Williamfburg, Peterſburg, Richmond, the ſeat of government, Mancheſter,


_ Charlotteſville, New London.— On York river and its waters, York, Newecatile, .


Hanover.—On Rappahannock, Urbanna, Port Royal, Frederickſburg, Falmouth.—-


On Patomak and its waters, Dumfries, Colcheſter, Alexandria, Wincheſter, Staunton. .


There are places at which, like ſome of the foregoing, the laws have ſaid there ſhall


be towns, but nature has ſaid there ſhall not; and they remain unworthy of enume-
ration. Norfolk will probably become the emporium for all the trade of the Cheſapeak


Bay and its waters; and a canal of eight or ten miles, which is contemplated, and


will probably ſoon be completed, will bring it to all that of Albemarle ſound and its |
Waters. Secondary to this place, are the towns at the head of the tide. waters, to wit,


Peterſburg on Appamattox, Richmond on James river, . Newcaſtle on York river, Fre-
e derickſburgh


VIRGINIA. 491
derickſburgh on Rappahannock, and Alexandria on Patomak. From theſe the diſtri-
bution will be to ſubordinate fituations of the country. Accidental circumſtances how-
ever may control the indications of nature, and in no inſtances do they do it more
frequently than in the riſe and fall of towns. DT
To the foregoing general account, we add the following more particular de-
ſcriptions : 5 | | fn”,
ALEXANDRIA ſtands on the ſouth bank of Patomak river in Fairfax county: its ſitu-
ation is elevated arid pleaſant ; the ſoil is clay. The original ſettlers, anticipating its
ſuture growth and importance, laid out the ſtreets upon the plan of Philadelphia. It
contains about 400 houſes, many of which are handſomely built, and nearly 3000 in-
| habitants. This town, upon opening the navigation of Patomak river, and in conſe- |
quence of its vicinity to the city of Waſhington, will probably be one of the moſt 1
thriving commercial places on the continent. Es ad f
| MovxrT VERNON, the celebrated ſeat of Preſident Waſhington, is pleaſantly ſttuated
on th2 Virginia bank of the river Patomak, where it is nearly two miles wide, and is
about 280 miles from the ſea, and 127 from Point Look-out, at the mouth of the river.
It is nine miles below Alexandria, and four above the beautiful ſeat of the late Colonel
Fairtax, called Bellevoir. The area of the mount is 200 fect above the ſurface of the
river, and, after furniſhing a lawn of five acres in front, and about the ſame in rear vf
the buildings, falls off rather abruptly on thoſe two quarters. On the north end it ſub-
tides gradually into extenſive paſture grounds; while on the ſouth it ſlopes more
| ſteeply in a ſhorter diſtance, and terminates with the coach-houſe, ſtables, vineyard,
and nurſeries. On either wing is a thick grove of different flowering foreſt trees.
Parallel with them, on the land fide, are two ſpacious gardens, into which one is led
by two ſerpentine gravel walks, planted with weeping willows and ſhady ſhrubs.
The manſion houſe itſelf (though much embelliſhed by, yet not perfectly ſatisfactory
to the chaſte taſte of the preſent poſſeſſor) appears venerable and convenient. The
ſuperb banquetting room has been finiſhed ſince he returned home from the army. A
 lotty portico, 96 feet in length, ſupported by eight pillars, has a pleaſing effect when -
viewed from the water; the whole aſſemblage of the green-houſe, ſchool houſe, offices
and ſervants halls, when ſeen from the land fide, bears a reſemblance to a rural vil-
lage; eſpecially as the lands on that fide are laid out ſomewhat in the form of Engliſh .
gardens, in meadows and graſs grounds, ornamented with little copſes, circular clumps,
and ſingle trees. A ſmall park on the margin of the river, where the Engliſh fallow-
deer, and the American wild deer are ſeen through the thickets, alternately with the
veſſels as they are ſailing along, add a romantic and pictureſque appearance to the.
whole ſcenery. On the oppoſite ſide of a ſmall creek to the northward, an extenfive
plain, exhibiting corn-fields and cattle grazing, affords'in ſummer a luxuriant land-
ſcape; while the blended verdure of woodlands and cultivated declivities, on the
Maryland ſhore, variegates the proſpect in a charming manner. Such are the philo-
ſophic ſhades to which the late Commander in Chief of the American armies retired
from the tumultuous ſcenes of a buſy world, and which he has ſince left to dignify,
by his uncqualled abilities, the moſt important office in the gift of his fellow citizens.
FREDERICESBURGH, in the county of Spotſylvania, is fituated on the ſouth fide of
Rappahannock river, 1 ro miles from its mouth ; and contains about 200 houſes, prins.
cipally on one ſtreet, which runs nearly parallel with the river, and 1500 inhabitants.
Rreuwoxp, in the county of Henrico, is the preſent ſeat of government, and ftands =
on tlie north tide of James river, juſt at the foot of the falls, and contains between 460 1
und 500 houles, and nearly 4000 inhabitants. Part of the houſes are built upon the
| 3R 2 wm margin


492 VIRGINIA.

margin of the river, convenient for buſineſs; the reſt are upon a hill which overlooks
the lower part of the town, and commands an extenſive proſpect of the river and adja-
cent country, The new houtcs are well built. A large ſtate-houſe, or capitol, has
lately been erected on the hill. The lower part of the town is divided by a creek,

over which is a convenient bridge. A bridge between 300 and 400 yards in length, has
lately been thrown acrots James river at the ſoot of the tall, by Colonel Mayo. That
part from Nlancheſter to the ifland is built on fifteen boats. From the iſland to the

rocks was formerly à floating bridge of rafts, but Colonel Mayo has now built it of
framed log piers, filled with ſtone. Frbm the rocks to the landing at Richmond, the-
bridge is, continued on framed piers filled with ſtone. This bridge connects Richmond
with Mancheſter 3 and as the paſſengers pay toll it produces a | handſome revenue to
Colonel Mavo, who is the ſole proprictor.

The falls above the bridge are ſeven miles in length. A noble canal is cutting and
nearly completed on the north fide of the river, which is to terminate in a bafon of
about two acres, in the town. of Richmond. From this baton to the wharves in the:
river will be a land carriage of about a mule. This canal is cutting under the direction
of a company, who have calculated the expentc at 30, oo0l. Virginia money: this the
have divided into 500 ſhares of Gol. each. The opening of this canal promiſes the ad-
dition of much wealth to Richmond.

PETERSBURGH, 25 miles ftouthward of Richmond, Aands on the fouth fide of Appa-
mattox river, and contains upwards of 300 houſes in two diviſions; one is upon a clay
cold foil, and is very dirty, the other upon a plain of ſand or loam. There is no re-
gularity and very little clegance in Peterſburgh, it is merely a place of buſineſs. The
Free Maſons have a hall "tolerably elegant. It is very unhealthy,* being ſhut out
| from the acceſs of the winds by high hills on every fide. This confined ſituation has
ſuch an effect npon the conſtitutions of the inhabitants, that they very nearly reſemble
thoſe of hard drinkers; hence, in the opinion of phyſicians, they require a confiderable_
POLE of ſtimulating aliments and vinous drinks to keep up a balance between the

teveral functions of the body.

About 2200 hogſheads of tobacco are inſpected here annually. Like Richmond,
W iamſburgh, Alexandria, and Norfolk, it is a. corporation; and what is ſingular,

<tertburgh city comprehends a part of three counties. - The celebrated Indian qucen,
Poc ahonta, from whom deſcended the Randolph and Bowling families, formerly re-
ſided at this place. Peterſburgh and its ſuburbs contain about 3000 inhabitants.

W HULLIAMSBURGH is 60 miles eaſtward of Richmond, ſituated between two erecks;
_ one falling anto James, the other into York river. T he diſtance of cach landing place
is about a mile from the town, which, with the diſudvantage of not being able to-
bring up large veſſels, and want of cnterprize in the inhabitants, are the reaſons why
it never flourithed : it conſiſts of about 200 houſes, going faſt to decay, and has about
1400 inhabitants: it is regularly laid out in parallel ſtrects, with a ſquare 1 in the center,
through which runs the princiy, l ſtreet, E. and W. about a mile in length, aud more
tan 100 feet wide. At the ends of this ſtreet are two public buildings, the college
and capitol: beſides theſe, there is an epiſcopal church, a priſon, a hoſpital for luna-
tics, and the palace; all of them extre mely indifferent. In the capitol is a large mar-
ble ſtatue, in the Tikenets of Narbone Berkley, Lord Botciourt, a man diſtinguiſhed
for his love of piety, literature, and good government, and formerly aaa of Vir-


* It is aſſerted, as an undoubted £1, by a number of Polen en well acquainted with this town, that, in
178, 0 child only bo ad d h | le.“
78 one child only boru im it had arrived to manhood, and he was a cripple.”


2 | ginia:


VIRGINIA. 495


rinia: it was erected at the expenſe of the State, ſome time ſince the year 1771. The
capitol is little better than in ruins, and this elegant ſtatue is expoſed to the rudeneſs
of negroes and boys, and is ſhamefully defaced.

Every thing in Williamſburgh appears dull, forſaken, and melancholy ; no trade;
no amuſement, but the infamous one of gaming; no induſtry, and very little appear-
ance of religion. The unproſperous ſtate of the college, but principally the removal
of the ſeat of government, have contributed much to the decline of this city.

YoRKTOWN, 13 miles eaſtward from Wilhamſburgh, and 14 from! Monday's s point
at the mouth of the river, is a place of about 100 houſes, ſituated on the ſouth ſide of
York river, and contains about 700 inhabitants. It was rendered famous by the cap-
ture of Lord Cornwallis and his army, on the Lgth of October, 178 I, by the united
forces of France and America.

CoLLEGts, AcaDEtEs, &c.] The college of William and Mary was founded in the
time of King William and Queen Mary, who granted to it 20,000 acres of land, and

a penny a pound duty on certain tobaccos exported from Virginia and Maryland, which
had been levied by the ftatute of 25 Car. II. The aſſembly alſo gave it, by temporary
laws, a duty on liquors imported, and ſkins and furs exported. From theſe reſources
it received upwards of 3000l. The buildings are of brick, ſufficient for an indifferent
accommodation of perhaps 100 ſtudents. By its charter it was to be under the govern-
ment of 20 viſitors, who were to be its legiſlators, and to have a prefident and fix pro-
feſſors, who were incorporated: it was allowed a repreſentative in the General
Aſſembly. Under this charter, a profeſſorſhip of the Greek and Latin languages, a
profeſſorſhip of mathematics, one of moral philoſophy, and two of divinity, were eſta-
| bliſkel. To theſe were annexed, for a fixth profeſſorſhip, a conſiderable donation by
a Mr. Boyle of England, for the inſtruction of the Indians, and their converſion to
_ Chriſtianity : this was called the profeſſorſhip of Brafferton, from an eſtate of that.

name in England, purchaſed. with the monies given. The admiſſion of the learners of
Latin and Greek filled the college with children: this rendering it diſagreeable and de-
grading to young gentlemen already prepared for entering on the ſciences, they were
diſcour aged from reſorting to it, and thus the ſchools for mathematics and moral phi-
toſophy, which might have been of ſome ſeryice, became of very little. The revenues
too were exhauſted in accommodating thoſe who. came only to acquire the rudiments.
of ſcience. After the preſent revolution, the viſitors having no power to change thoſe
circumſtances in the conſtitution of the college which were fixed by the charter, and
deing therefore confined in the number of profeſſorſhips, undertook to change the ob-
jects of the profeſſorſhips. They excluded the two ſchools for divinity, and that for
the Greek and Latin languages, and ſubſtituted others; fo that at pretent they ſtand.
thus -A profefforſnip for law and police; anatomy and medicine; ; natural philoſophy
and mathematics; moral philoſophy, the law of nature and nations, the fine arts; mo-
dern languages; for the Brafferton.

Meaſures have been taken to increaſe the number of profeſſor ſhips, as well fon the:
purpoſe of ſubdividing thoſe already inſtituted, as of adding others tor other branches
of ference. To the proteſſorſhips uſually eſtabliſhed in the univerſities of Europe, it.
would ſeem proper to add one for the ancient languages and literature of the north, on:

account of their connection with our own language, Jaws, cuſtoms, and. hiſtory.. The
purpoſes of the Brafferton inſtitution would be better anſwered by maintaining a per-
petual miſſion among the Indian tribes, the object of winch, be ſides inſtructing them
in the principles of Chriſtianity, as the founder requires, ſhould be to collect their tra-
ditions, laws, cuſtoms, languages, and other circumſtances which might lead to a
diſcovery


as much longer as they pleaſe, paying for it. Theſe ſchools to be under a viſitor, who


496 VTRGINIA.
difcovery of their relation to one another, or deſcent from other nations. When theft
objects are accompliſhed with-one tribe, the miffionary might paſs on to another. Y
The college edifice. is a huge, miſhapen pile; © which but that it has a root, would
be taken for a brick kiln.” In 178), there about thirty young gentlemen members of
this college, a large proportion of which were law ftudents. The academy in Prince
Edward county has been erected into a college by the name of Hampden Sydney col-
lege. It has been a flouriſhing ſeminary, but is now ſaid to be on the decline.
There are ſeveral academies in Virginia; one at Alexandria, one at Norfolk, and

: others in other places. | 4 e | A
Since the declaration of independence the laws of Virginia have been reviſed by a
committee appointed for the purpoſe, who have reported their work to the Aſſembly;
one object of this reviſal was to diffuſe knowledge more generally through the maſs of
the people. The bill for this purpoſe “ propoſes to lay off every eounty into ſmall.
diſtricts of five or fix miles ſquare, called hundreds, and in each of them to eſtabliſh a
ſchool for teaching reading, writing, and anthmetic. The tutor to be ſupported by
the hundred, and all perſons in it entitled to fend their -cluldren three years gratis, and


is annually to chuſe the boy of beſt genius in the ſchool, of thoſe whoſe parents are too
poor to give them further education, and to ſend him forward to one of the grammar
ſchools, of which twenty are propoſed to be erected in different parts of the country,
for teaching Greek, Latin, Geography, and the higher branches of numerical arithme-
tic. Of the boys thas ſent in any one year, trial 1s to be made at the grammar ſchools,
one or two years, and the beſt genius of the -whole ſelected and continued fix years,
and the refidue diſmiſſed; by this means twenty of the beſt geniufles will be raked
from the rubbiſh annually, and inftructed, at the public expenſe, fo far as the gram-
mar ſchools go. At the end of ſix years inſtruction, one half are to be diſcontinued
(from among whom the grammar ſchools will probably be ſupplied with future mai-
ters), and the other half, who are to be choſen for the ſuperiority of their parts and dit-
pofition, are to be fent and continued three years in the ftudy of fuch tciences as they
ſhall chuſe, at William and Mary college, the plan of which is propoſed to be en-
larged, as will be hereafter explained, and extended to all the uſeful ſciences. The
ultimate reſult of the whole ſcheme of education would be the teaching all the children
of the State reading, writing, and common arithmetic ; turning out ten annually” of
ſuperior genius, well taught in Greek, Latin, Geography, and the higher branches of
arithmetic; turning out ten others annually, of ſtill ſuperior parts, who, to thoſe
branches of learning, hall have added fach of the ſciences as their genius hall have
led them to; the furniſtiing to the wealthier part of the people convenient ſchools, at
which their children may be educated, at their own expenſe. The general objects of
this law are to provide an education adapted to the years, to the capacity, and the con-
dition of every one, and directed to their freedom and happineſs. Specific detail were
not proper for the law: thefe muſt be the buſineſs of the viſitors entruſted with its exe-
cution. The firft ſtage of this education being the ſchools of the hundreds, wherein
the great maſs of the people will receive their inſtruction, the principal foundations of
future order will be laid here. The firſt elements of morality may be inſtilled into
their minds; fuch as, when further developed as their judgements advance in ſtrength,
may teach them how to promote their own greateſt happine(s, by ſhewing them that it
does not depend on the condition of life in which chance has placed them, but is al-
ways the reſult of a good conſcience, good health, occupation, and freedom in all juſt


purſuits. Thoſe whom either the wealth of their parents, or the adoption of the ow
: nall


8


— —


T LT _cyT cr [ TT...


VIRGINIA. if 497
ſhall deſtine to higher degrees of learning, will go on to the grammar ſchools, which con-
ſtitute the next ſtage, . there to be inftructed in the languages. As ſoon as they are of a
ſufficient age, it is ſuppoſed they will be ſent on from the grammar ſchools to the uni-
vorſity, which conſtitutes the third and laſt ſtage, there to ſtudy thoſe ſciences which
may be adapted to their views. By that part of the plan which preſcribes the ſelection


of the youths of genius from among the claſſes of the poor, the State will avail itſelf of


thoſe talents which nature has town as liberally among tlie poor as the rich, but which
periſh without uſe, if not ſought for and cultivated. But of all the views of this law
none is more important, none more legitimate, than that of rendering the people the
ſafe, as they are (he ultimate, guardians of their own liberty: for this purpoſe, the
reading in the firſt ſtage, where they will receive their whole education, is propoſed, as


| has been ſaid, to be chiefly hiſtorical. Hiſtory, by appriſing them of the paſt, will


enable them to judge of the future; it will avail them of the experience of other times


and other nations; it will qualify them as judges of the actions and deſigns of men;


it will enable them to know ambition under every difguite it may aſſume; and know- -
ing it, to defeat its views. In every government on earth is ſome trace of human weak- -
neſs, ſome germ of corruption and degeneracy, which cunning will diſcover, and
wickedneſs inſenſibly open, cultivate, and improve. Every government degenerates -
when truſted to the rulers of the people alone : the people themſelves therefore are its


only ſafe depoſitories ; and to render even them ſaſe, their minds muſt be improved to
a certain degree: this indeed is not all that is neceſſary, though it be eſſentially neceſ-


ſary. The influence over government niuſt be ſhared among all the people. If every
individual, which compoſes their maſs, participates of the ultimate authority, the
government will be ſafe; becauſe the corrupting the whole maſs will exceed any private
reſources of wealth; and public ones cannot be provided but by levies on the people:


in this caſe every man would have to pay his own. price. The government of Great
Britain has been corrupted, becauſe but one man in ten has a right to vote for members
of parliament. The ſellers of the government therefore get nine-tenths of their price


clear. 19 8 8

The excellent meaſures for the diffufion of uſeful knowledge, which the foremen-
tioned bill propoſes, have not yet been carried into effect. And it will be happy if the
great inequality in the circumſtances of the citizens; the pride, the independence, and
the indolence of one claſs; and the poverty and depreſſion of the other, do not prove


inſuperable difficulties in the way of their univerſal operation.


RE11610N. | The firſt ſettlers in this country were emigrants from England, of the
Engliſh church, juſt at a point of time when it was fluſhed with complete victory over
the religious of all other perſuaſions. Poſſeſſed, as they became, of the powers of
making, adminiſtering, . and executing the laws, they ſhewed equal intolerance in this
country with their Preſbyterian brethren, who had emigrated to the northern govern-
ment. The Quakers were flying fron: perſecution in England: they caſt their eyes on theſe


new countries, as aſylums of civil and religious treedom ; but they found them free only


for the reigning ſect. Several acts of the Virginia aſſembly of 1659, 1662, and 1663, had.


made it penal in their parents to refuſe to have their children baptized; had prohibited


the unlawful aſſembling of Quakers ; had made it penal for any maſter of a veſſel to
bring a Quaker into the State; had ordered thoſe already here, and ſuch as ſhould


come thereafter, to be impriſoned till they ſhould abjure the country; provided a


milder puniſhment for their firſt and ſecond return, but death for the third; had inhibited :


all perſons from ſuffering their meetings in or near their houſes, entertaining them in-
dividually, or diſpofing of books which ſupported their tenets, If no capital execution


3 took.


: "
N ” Y PF * 922
8 1 . $ 8 4 ts "oe mY 4 8 p N * D * 8 ** 6 7 — = * — - 232. J ve <
\ FRED 5 . 1 8 1 , \ ; 25 22 , 2 <4 3 a r 7 * N . - "Yo; "ur ery —— — * „ 1 4 1 * m we r «hs, IS: 2 * " 2 T wp r We K y * ä — N 2 — N 2 "Y of 5 * * * a 7 *
” 24 2 72 ON - E þ 4 > at rr N n * . ee >; 47 . ot WW Ewe +, ©" Fe,» * * 8 * * , = — OG * 82 n re ends * a 9 7 ** * g 0 9 m7 N
* N : * * * 8 9 = : * * * a * — 9 K r N l . now AP 4 * 3 p Ne 11 IP > n 4 2 4 * N « . 1 * + re "—_—_ 98 83 — *
ä 1 — — — : g mor wg Sa 1 0 : , 0 * 4 2 * e . s a e ; 1 *
- + 1/4 ld — „ — „ 2 — ; |
= Fl
x ;


453 VIRIGINIA.


took place here, as did in New England, it was not owing to the moderation of the church,
or ſpirit of the legitlatare, as may be interred from the law itſelf; but to hiſtorical cir-
cumſtances winch have not been. handed down to us. The Epiſcopalians retained full
poſſeſſion of the country about a century. Other opinions began to creep in; and the
great care of the government to ſupport their own church, having begotten an equal
degree of indolence in its clergy, two-thirds of the people had become diffenters at the
commencement of the preſent revolution. The laws, indeed, were ſtill oppreſſive on
them, but the ſpirit of the one party had ſubſided into moderation, and of the other
had riſen to a degree of determination which commanded reſpect. .

The preſent denominations of Chriſtians in Virginia are Preſbyterians, who are the
moſt numerous, and inhabit the weſtern parts of the State; Epiſcopalians, who are the
moſt ancient ſettlers, and occupy the eaſtern and firſt ſettled parts of the State. Inter-
mingled with theſe are great numbers of Baptiſts and Methodiſts. , 1

CnaracrerR, Maxx ERS, axp Crsroms.] Virginia prides itſelf in being “ The


Ancient Dominion.” It has produced tome of the moſt diſtinguiſhed and influential


men that have been active in effecting the two late grand and important revolutions in
America. Her political and military character Will rank among the firſt in the page of
hiſtory : but it is to be obſerved, that this character haz been obtained for the Virginians
by a few eminent men, who have taken the lead in ail their public tranſactions, and
who, in ſhort, govern Virginia; for the great body of the people do not concern them-
ſelves with pohtics; ſo that their government, though nominally republican, is, in fact,
oligarchal or ariſtocratical. e PE rae? .
'The Virgmians, who are rich, are in general ſenſible, polite, and hoſpitable, and
of an independent ſpirit. The poor are ignorant and abject, and all are of an inquiſi-
tive turn. A conſiderable proportion of the people are much addicted to gaming,
drinking, fwearing, horſe-racing, cock-tighting, and moſt kinds of diſſipation. There
is a much greater diſparity between the rich and the poor, in Virginia, than in any of
the northern States. The native inhabitants are too generally unacquainted with bu-
fineſs, owing to their pride, and falſe notions of greatneſs. Before the revolution they
conſidered it as bencath a gentleman to attend to mercantile matters, and devoted their
time principally to amuſement. By theſe means the Scotch people and other foreigners
who came among them, became their merchants, and ſuddenly grew rich. The in-
fluence of ſlavery here is equally pernicious to the morals of the citizens as in the
other ſouthern States. 5 . :
Coxsrixurliex, Courts, AND Laws.] The executive powers are lodged in the
Hands of a governor, choſen annually, and incapable of acting more than three years


in ſeven. He is aſſiſted by a council of eight members. The judiciary powers arc
divided among ſeveral courts, as will be hereafter explained. Legiſlation is exerciſed


by two houſes of Aſſembly, the one called the Houſe of Delegates, compoſed of two


members ſrom each county, choſen annually by the citizens, poſſeſſing an eſtate for


life in 100 acres of uninhabited land, or twenty-five acres with a houſe on it, or in a
houſe or lot in ſome town; the other called the Senate, confiſting of twenty-four
members choſen quadrennially by the ſame electors, who for this purpoſe are diſtri-
buted into twenty-four diſtricts. The concurrence of both houſes is neceſſary to the
paſſing of a law. They have the appointment of the governor and council, the
judges of the ſuperior courts, auditors, attorney-general, treaſurer, regiſter of the land
office. 3 5 _ 3 .
This conſtitution was the firſt that was formed in the whole United States. 5
| | | ; ere


.


ere


VIRGINIA. 499


"There are three ſuperior courts, to which appeals lie from the courts below, to wit,
te high court of ch:cery, the general court, and court of admiralty. The firſt and


cond of theſe receive appeals from the county courts, and alſo have original jurit-
diction where the fabje&t of controverſy is of the value of ten pounds ſterling, or


where it concerns the title or hounds of land. The juriſdiction of the admiralty 18
original altogeiher. The higli court of chancery is compoſed of three judges, the
general court of five, and the court of a miraltry of three. The two firſt hold their


{effions at Richmond at ſtated times, the chancery twice in the year, and the general


court twice for bufinets cle and criminal, and twice more for criminal only. 'The


court of admiralty fits at e iHamſburgh whenever a controverty ariſes.


There is one fupreme court, called the Court of Appeals, com poſed of the judges


of the three BY berlor courts, aflembling twice a year at ſtated times at Richmond.


This court receives a 25 peals in all civil caſes from each of the PENG courts, and de-
termines them finally. But it has no original purifdiction.

Ad public accounts are ſettled with a board of auditors conſiſting of three mem-
bers appo! inted by the General Ailembiy, any two of Whom may act. But an indi-
— 5 0 e a with th je de termination of that board, may carry his caſe into the


Vir ginia, „ Keept 0 oy Ir as a Fileretice 4 condition render them ep able To
theſe were added a number of acts of A iembly pafſed during the monarchy, and
ordinances of convention, and acts of Af an lince the eſtablithent of the republic.
The following variations from the Britiſh moſlel are worthy of notice:
Debtors unable to pay their debts, and making faithful delivery of their whole
effects, arc releaſed from their Chr, and their perſons for ever diſcharged from
reſtraint for ſach previous debts : but any property they may afterwards acquire will be
ſubject to their creditors. The poor, unable to ſupport themſelves, are maintained by
an aſſeſſment on the titheable perions in their parith. A foreigner of any nation, not
in open war, becomes naturalized by removing to the State to refide, and taking an


oath of fidelity; and thereby acquires every r right of a native citizen. Slaves paſs by
deſcent and dower as lands do. Slaves, as well as lands, were entailable during the


monarchy : but, by an act of the firſt republican Aſſembly, all donces in tail, preſent
and future, were veſted with the abſolute dominion of the entailed ſubject.. Gaming
debts are made void, and monies actually paid to diſcharge ſuch debts (if they exceed


forty ſhillings) may be recovered by the payer within three months, or by any other


perſon afterwards, Tobacco, flour, beef, pork, tar, pitch, and turpentine, mull be in-
{pected by perſons publicly appointed before they can be exported.

In 1585, the Aflembly enacted, that no man ſhould be compelled to ſupport any
religious wor ſhip, place, or miniſter whatſocver, nor be enforced, reſtrained, moleſted,
or burdened in his body or goods, nor otherwiſe ſuffer on account of his religious
opinions or beliet ; but that all men ſhould be free to profeſs, and by argument to
maintain, their opinion in matters of religion; and that the tame ſhould in no Wiſe


diminiſh, enlarge, or affect their civil capacities.


In October 1786, an act was paſled by the Aſſembly pfohibiting the 8


of flaves into the Commonwealth, upon penalty of the forfeiture of the ſum of 10001.


for every ſlave. And every ſlave imported contrary to the true intent and meaning of
this act, becomes free.


Min s AND ComMERcCEe,] Before the war, the inhabitants of this State
paid but little attention to the manufacture of their own clothing. It has been


3 - thought


$00 VIRGINIA.

thought they uſed to import as much as ſeven-eighths of their clothing, and that th
now manufacture three-quarters of it. We have before mentioned that conſiderable
quantities of iron are manufactured in this State. To theſe we may add the manu-
facture of lead; beſides which they have few others of conſequence. * people are
much attached to agriculture and prefer foreign manufactures.


Before the war this State exported, communiòus arms, . to the beſt infor-
mation that could be obtained, as ſfollows :


TAB UE.

Articles. | 0 | | Quantity. | Amount in Dollars.
Tobacco . 55,000 hhds. of 1oolb. 1,650,000
Wheat - pM 800,000 bufhels 666, 6663
Indian corn - 600,000 buthels 200,000
Shipping — — 100,000
_ planks, ſkantling, 3 2 2 1 66,6662

Aves. Vs =
Tar, pitch, turpentine - 3 40,000 barrels 40,000
Peltry, viz. ſkins of deer, beavers, 3 |
cm. muſk rats, 9 e 180 hhds, of 60olb. | SI DOD. -
Pork - — 4, ooo barrels 40,000
Flax-ſeed, hemp, cotton . — — m 8,000
Pit coal, pig iron 8 — — | 6,6665
Peas 1 8 5,000 buſhels 33334

Beef - — 1,000 barreis FR 3,3333
Sturgeon, white ſhad, herring — „ 5 3,3334
Brandy from peaches and Pples, OO YE Oe | 1.6662

and whitkey : 25 5 e
Horſes — — — I 666
2.33.3333


This ſum is equal to 850, oool. Virginia money, 657,142 guineas.


The amount of exports from this State in the year ſucceeding October 1, 1790, con-
ſiſting chiefly of articles mentioned in the foregoing table, was 3,131,227 dollars. 3.
About 40, o hogſheads of tobacco only were exported this year.
In the year 17 58, this State exported feventy thouſand hogſheads of tobacco, which
was the greateſt quantity ever produced in this country in one year. But its culture
has fait dechned ſince the commencement of the war, and that of wheat taken its
place. The price which it commands at market will not enable the planter to cultivate
it. Were the ſupply ſtill to depend on Virginia and Maryland alone, as its culture

becomes more difficult, this price would rite, ſo as to enable the planter to ſurmount

thoſe difficulties and to live. But the weſtern country on the Miſſiſſippi, and the
ear of Georgia, have freſh and fertile Tands in abundance, and a hotter ſan, are
able to underſell theſo two States, and will oblige them in time to abandon the raiſing
tobacco altogether. And a happy obligation for them it will be. It is a culture pro-
ductive of infinite wretchednets. Thoſe employed in it are in a continued ſtate of ex-
ertion beyond the powers of nature to ſupport. Little food of any kind is raiſed by
them; ſo that the men and animals on theſo farms are bad fed, and the earth is


rapidly


VIRGINIA. 501
rapidly impoveriſhed, The cultivation of wheat is the reverſe in every cireumſtance.
Beſides clothing the earth with herbage, and preſerving its fertility, it feeds the la-
bourers plentifully, requires from them only a moderate toil, except in the feaſon of
harveſt, raiſes great numbers of animals for food and ſervice, and diffuſes plenty and
happineſs among the whole. It is eaſter to make an hundred buthels of wheat than a
thouſand weight of tobacco, and they arc worth more when made,

It is not eaſy to ſay what are the articles either of neceſſity, comfort, or luxury,
: ch cannot be raied here, as every thing hardier than the olive, and as hardy as
the fig, may be raiſed in the open air. Sugar, coffee, and tea, indeed, are not
between theſe limits ; and habit having placed them among the neceſlaries of life with
the wealthy, as long as thete habits remain, they muſt go for them to thoſe countries
which are able to furniſh them.

HIsTOR v.] We have already given a brief hiſtorical account of the firſt ſettle-
ment of Vir ginia, till the arrival of Lord Delaware in 1610. His arrival with a freſh
ſupply of ſettlers and proviſions revived the drooping ſpirits of the former COMPANY,
and gave permanency and reſpectability to the ſettlement.

In April 1613, Mr. John Rolf, a worthy young gentleman, was married to Poca-
Jontas, the daughter of Porohatan, the famous Indian chief. This connection, which
was very agreable both to tl. Engliſh and Indians, was the toundation of a IN
and advantageous commerce between them.

In 1616, Mr. Rolf, with his wife Pocahontas, vita England, where ſhe was treated
with that attention and reſpect which ſhe had merited by her important ſervices to the
colony in Virginia. She died the year following at Graveſend, in the 22d year o
her age, juſt as ſhe was about to embark for America. She had embraced the Chriſ-
tian religion; and in her life and death evidenced the ſincerity of her profeſſion.
She left a little ſon, who, having received his education in England, came over to
Virginia, where he lived and died in affluence and honour, leaving behind him
an only daughter. Her deſcendants Are among the moſt reſpectable families in
Virginia.

Tomocomo, a ſenſible Indian, inather -in-law to Pocahontas, accompanied her to
England; and was directed by Powhatan to bring him an exact account of the num-
bers and ſtrength of the Englith. For this purpoſe, when he arrived at Plymouth, he
took a long ſtick, intending to cut a notch in it for every perſon he ſhould ſee. This
he ſoon found impracticable, and threw away his ſiick. On his return, being aſked
by Powhatan, how many people there were, he is ſaid to have replied, © Count the
ſtars in the ſky, the leaves on the trees, and the ſands on the tca ſhore; for ſuch is the
number of the people in England.“

In purſuance of the authorities given to the company by their coma has and
more eſpecially of that part in the charter of 1609, which authoriſed them to eſtabliſh
a form of government, they, on the 24th of July, 1621, by charter under their com-
mon ſeal, declared, That ſrom thenceforward there ſhould be two fupreme councils in
Virginia, the one to be called the Council of State, to be placed and diſplaced by the
trcalurer, council in England, and company, from time to time, whoſe office was to
be that of aſſiſting and adv ifing the governor; the other to be called the General
Aſſembly, to be convened by the governor once yearly, or oſtener, which was to conſiſt
of the council of ſtate, and two Durgeſſes out of every town, hundred, or plantation,
to be reſpectively choſen by the inhabitants. In this all matters were to be decided by
the greater part of the votes preſent : ; reſerving to the governor a negative voice; and
they were to have power to treat, contuit, and conclude all en occaſions con-
382 cerning


_— 1 << > cam oe . * 0 * Dong —
— — N


- „„ e "id 2 * 4 .
f ; ” N 58 1 PROS. ee
5 * . 6 r ak... * *
D E 4 . Pt — . „ b e "oi; a PC 2g; 87 . e
1 — — — is. cd — y LSD . 5 5 g *


$02 VIRGINIA.
cerning the public weal, and to make laws for the behoof and government of the
colony, imitating and following the Jaws and policy of England as nearly as might be:
provided that thefe laws ſhould have no force till ratified in a general quarter court of


the company in England, and returned under their common teal, nd declaring that,


aſter the government of the colony ſhould be well tramed and ſettled, no orders of the
council in England: fheuld bind the colony unlets rutitied by the ſaic General Aflem-


bly. The king and company quarrelled, and by a uixture of law and force, the latter


were ouſted of all their rights, without retribution, aſter having expended 100,000l..


in eſtabliſhing the colony, without the tmalleſt aid from government. King James


fafpended their powers by proclamation of July 15, 1924, and Charles I. took the
government into his own hands. Both fides had their partiſans in the colony: but in
truth, the people of the colony in general thought themtelves little concerned in the
ditpute. There being three parties intereſted in theſe ſeveral charters, what paſſed


between the firſt and ſecond it was thought could not affect the third. If the king


feized on the powers of the company, they only paſted into other hands without in-

creaſe or diminution, while the rights of the people remained as they were: but they
did not remain ſo long. The northern parts of their conntry were granted away to
the Lords Baltimore and Fairfax, the firſt of theſe obtaining alto the rights of ſeparate


juriſdiction and government. And in 1650 the parliament, confidering itſelf as ſtand-


ing in the place of their depoſed king, and as having ſucceeded to all his powers,
without as well as within the realm, began to affume a right over the colonies, paſſing
an act for inhibiting their trade with foreign nations. This ſucceſſion to the exerciſe


of the kingly authority gave the firſt colour for parliamentary interference with the
colonies, and produced that fatal precedent which they continued to follow after they


had retired, in other reſpects, within their proper functions. When this colony, there-
fore, which ſtill maintamed its oppoſition to Cromwell and the parliament, was in-


duced in 1651 to lay down their arms, they previoully ſecured their moſt effential
rights by a ſolemn convention. 5 : „
This convention, entered into with arms in their hands, they ſuppoſed had ſecured


the ancient limits of their country; its free trade; its exemption from taxation but by
their own aſſembly, and excluſion of military force from among them. Yet in every


of theſe points was this convention violated by ſubſequent king: and parliaments, and


other infractions of their conftitution, equally dangerous, committed. The General


Aſſembly, Which was compoled of the council of ſtate and burgeſſes, fitting together


and deciding by plurality of voices, was ſplit into two houſes, by which the council
obtained a ſeparate negative on their laws. Appeals from their ſupreme court, which
had been fixed by law.in their Gencral Aſſembly, were arbitrarily revoked to England,
to be there heard before the king and council. Inſtead of 400 miles on the fea coaſt,
they were reduced, in the ſpace of thirty years, to about 100 miles. Their trade with
ſoreigners was totally fuppreſſed, and, when carried to Great Britain, was there loaded
with impoſts. It is unneceflary, however, to glean up the ſeveral inſtances of injury,
as ſeattered throngh American and Britiſh hiſtory; and the more eſpecially, as, b
paſſing on to the acceſſion of the preſent king, we ſhall find ſpecimens of them all,
aggravated, multiplied, and crowded within a ſmall compaſs of time, ſo as to evince'a
fixed defign of conſidering the rights of the people, whether natural, conventional, or
chartered, as mere nullities. "The colonies were taxed internally; their eſſential in-
tereſts ſacrificed to individuals in Great Britain; their legiſlatures ſuſpended ; charters
annulled; trials by juries taken away; their perſons ſubjected to tranſportation acroſs
the Atlantic, and to trial beſore foreign judicatories; their ſupplications for Tone
tmoug


y V
2 WWW
PPC N :
2 N 72 BIT 3
8 SY


"IR INP
$1 3
VIP


3
n


eee. . „ A4.


0 : v.) N \ D F
— RD = ; one 2


*
VNV % , 8


„ Vun
70 P


tf Dy 1171 W901 u) 75
LA 1990 f =


—
#
4 I


j
—— — —— — 5
3 — 2 '


1191147] 1


/RUOK- 1s
MAN of


"IN * | A


-
2


Fs


F 4 p.m 01g 11
aw je 1
4


*
K ˙· EE Pre ah Tn ES add 5 _ *. - —
4 ww 8 2 4 » * 4 2
2 . gt e 1 * At 8.4 * 1 n 83 *
1 n 1 CCC oy 3 * * — ra | 5
2 2 5 4
4 "= 12 * 1 *


P p>= +» on 1 Ke? » h . 55 £ * — F
RR) pu 1 PR 3 —— FOR


"per


Cx 4A 0


—
—-
* N &
* „„
, ITITTIEILLELS ——
„„ „65 „ 4
. „ „„ „6 6 „„ . p


4


5 4 s 2 x N I. J.


* 4


a 4 1
4 ”


CELL 9


on 1


AVI


Sd. NANA ILA MVA
5 = oy Jo


*


—


*


1 ü —.— 503

thought beneath anſwer ; themſelves publiſhed as cowards in the councils of their
mother country and-courts of Europe; armed troops ſent among them to enforce ſub-
miſſion to theſe violences; and actual hoſtilities commenced againſt them. No alter-
native was: preſented but refiſtance or unconditional ſubmiſſion. Between theſe could
be no heſitation. They cloſed in the appeal to arms. They declared themſelves Inde-
pendent States. They confederated together in one great republic ; thus ſecuring to
every State the benefit of an union of their whole force. They fought—they conquered.
Hand obtained an honourable and glorious peace. "EIS .


Lisr of Parsipxxrs and GovRnNORS of VIRGINTA, from its firſt ſettlement to the year


1624.“

Edward Maria Wingfield, from May, 1607, to Sept. 1607
John Ratcliffe, „ Sept. 1607, to July, 1608
Mat. Scrivener, Vice-Preſident, July, 2608, to Sept. 1608
John Smith, . Sept. 1608, to Sept. 1609
George Percy, Governor Sept. 1609, to May, 1610

Sir Thomas Gates, May, 1610, to June, 1610

Lord Delaware, June, 1610, to March, 1611
George Percy, . March, 1611, to May, 1611
Sir Thomas Dale, 7 May, r611, to Aug. 1611
Sir Thomas Gates, B Auguſt, 1611, to- 1014

Sir Thomas Dale, e 1616
George Yeardley, 1616, to 1617
Samuel Argall, 167%, to _ 1619
George Yeardley,. : 41 to Nov. 1621
Sir Francis Wyat, r © © 16064;


| JNDIANA, fo called, is a tract of land lying on the Ohio river, in the State of Vir- |


Shawaneſe, Delaware, and Huron tribes, as a compenſation for the loſſes they had ſuſ-
tained by the depredations of the latter, in the year 1753. This ſeſſion was made in a.
_ congreſs of the repreſentatives of the Six Nations at Fort Stanwix, by an indenture,
ſigned the 3d of November, 1768, witneſſing, © That for and in confideration of

85,916E 108. 8d. York currency, (the fame being the amount of goods ſeized and taken.
by ſaid Indians from ſaid Trent, &c.) they did grant, bargain, fell, &c. to his Majeſty,
his heirs, and ſuccęſſors, for the only ute of the ſaid William Trent, &c. all that tract
or parcel of la , beginning at the ſoutherly fide of the Little Kanhawa Creek, where
u empties itſetf into the river Ohio; and running thence ſouth-eaſt to the Laurel Hill;
thence along lle Laurel Hill until it ſtrikes the River Monongahela; thence down the
Smith britgs down the hiſtory of Virginia no farther than this period. A liſt of the governors ſince has

not deen received. | VVV io 1 1


"_—


« — —


e eee eee, wee
Daa S d A
. 0 wot ans "
a n P ˙ . n eee 1 .
* — LEES 1 nn K eee 1 A k
4 * 0 44 5 = . *. 57 ge + N
* 5


1 ginia, ceded to William Trent and twenty-two others, by the Six Nations, and the _


=


Fo e KENTUCKY.


f ream of the ſaid river, according to the ſeveral courſes thereof to the ſouthern boun.
dary line of the province of Pennty lvania ; thence weſtwardly along the courſe of the
ſaid province boundary line as far as the ſame ſhall extend; thence | by the ſame courſe
to the River Ohio, and then down the River Ohio to the place of beginning, in-
cluſively.“ This indenture was ſigned by fix Indian chicts, in preſence of Sir William
Johnſon, Governor Franklin of New Jerſey, and the Commullioners. trom Virginia,
Pennfylvama, &c. making twelve in the Whole.
Since the Indians had an undiſputed title to the above limited territary, either from
pre-occupancy or conqueſt, and their right was expreſsly acknowledged by the above
deed of ceilion to the crown, it is very evident that Mn Trent, in his own right, and as
attorney for the traders, has a good, lawtul, and ſufficient title to the land granted by
the {aid deed of conveyance.
This matter was laid before Congreſs in the year 1782, and a committee appointed
to conſider it, who, in May, reported as follows: “ On the whole, your committee are
of opinion that the purchaſes of Colonel Croghan and the Indian company were made
Band fide for a valuable confideration, according to the then utage and cuſtoms of pur-
chafing Indian lands from the Indians, with the knowledge, conſent, and approbation
of the Crown of Great Britain, the then government of New York and Virginia, and
therefore do recommend that it be
Reſolved, That if the ſaid lands are finally ceded or adj judged to the United States in
point of juriſdiction, that Congreſs will confirm to uch of the ſaid purchaſers who
are, and thall be citizens of the United States, or cither of them, their reſpective ſhares
and proportions of ſaid lauds, making a reaſonable deduction for the oy of the quit
rents reſerved by the Crown of England. 25
Notwithſtanding this report of the committee, the queſtion could never be brought
to a deciſion betore Congrets. The federal conſtitution has, however, made proviſion
for the determination of this buſineſs before the ſupreme federal court. But previous
to an appcal to this court, the proprietors thought proper, by their agent, Colonel
Morgan, (who is alſo a proprietor) to preſent a memorial to the legiſlature of Virginia,
ſetting forth their claims, and praying that the buſineſs might be equitably ſettled,
This memorial was preſented in — 17993 and thus the Indiana buſineſs reſts
for the preſent.


* E N 11 c 4 *


* Srrvariox AND 3 3
Miles. Square Miles,
Length $2 3 { g0 and 152 W. Longitude. 1 |


Breadth 200 36* 30 and 39˙ 30 N. Latitude.
A , DOUNDED north-weſt, by the River Ohio; weſt, by Cumberland
_ BouxDARIEs. ] B river; ſouth, by North Carolina; eaſt, by Sandy river, and a line


drawn due ſouth from its fource, till it Krikes the northern mace, of North |
Carolina.


50,000


2 5 Crei.


> rs


— r 222


V——


i
;


DN


— OP ——


Lecaway -


RAPIDS, þ


tn the


4 | |
o RIVER OHIO.


From A ue B. is the (arrving Place V
on the Northern Side of the Ohuo
Him C Die he rualest and ö
Mortert (arrving Flace.

The dotted Line reprevent.s the
Channel of the Rives:


"II


A Scale of 1200 nde
4 Jule of 10 Miler antuh. „


40 | 20 30


EXPLANATION .

H-Satons or Forts.
alt. prime and Licks.
FB -Zown.s. I;

B-Dwel/ng houses and Mills.

A-Wigwams. | 3
Ie dolled Lines Teprevent Roads;\
Jome (dul, ollen not. |


* ON |
The Stream of the Ohro 1s in evervpart
Moderate. except the Rapids


fte! (rg Grant
150,000 Hut


| HF? ue
.


— ——
— ́ʒzuä—ä—ñ—ůä— — — - 7


 Mingo 2
hve here N


Tae


es below þ
ort Pitt ,


—


— ==]


— 2

= Q
J N. e ge. La D, , >; ;

— 4
% N * —
d »
N
V V cf ,
CARS
Wo "A =
— N it

. 5 7 = . .
Q \ , Ns.
9.0
N a / 1;

%.
V 4 2 2 L
*
oW
o


Fane _ Fo,\ Lan


3 / battle? wl here


; 4: 5 - Han UN CO JS


Cen!“ (arg Grant
150,000 Acres


Clarkville LIT CS == Z


| 3 MAT Ahe, Il


ee.
2


! 4 — . ö 8 8
Hi him. 4 Y
. Y
N


—


*
*
*


*
8
\
*
*
*
*
*
BE
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
N


R T
\ lol: (gr.. e 7 J * ] J
WD 2 * r 6 JD. \ *.* 4
N 8 | ay II ** 5
8 * Arrods
d CHards Town A own |
N » | JV KI 7 7


| „ 5. —
e — _—_;
D Hamed J


C


Hertande gy Vi f 5


*
Pied
-
FX
-*
o® ;
P


. aruding


4 . 5
. Ld
*
; ; ; Fi 6
. y *
: *
. 7 >
> *
— , a . *
D *
— N e > o *
% *
3 | 5
D * 8
. Pd
-


o -
— -
N


Here ts an extensive Track cuillis Green River Plains
which produces no Timber, and but lite Hater, mos
fertile, and cover d with excellent Cris and Herbage ( W.


R
|
ll
|
ö
i


Here the Oo runs a Machern cour.se
Ao Green liver which falle into if
220 Miles below the Rupids. xm


i 2 Dots | 55 |


-.

vo

7
P
25 *
—

.

b 7 ND ne


Hang%g Fol


.
i!


Carpenters Sta.
i ©... ARANCR


ere e. VA |


e Fon 22 "A


97


Xx
6, D


; | Al if | X
Ny F 3 8
N Sie Oo
A D F | | |
"= — 8 =. & . ;
&. 5 B 8 7 Atlem
| _ = —f 7 and.. : | |
2 — * Y I Little Laage e, 1
| „ and — #; 3 *
<> 222 7 = . - >; gs” 4-* 14!
p I D | e « Y 1


- . LS CogSooo 0s 0heo ve”
-


36 mach guru with; the


45 —
| 2


8 e : Publirhed Nov.”23, 1793, by John?


*
-
*
-
S660 ooo”


a0 ae
0 [| „
N.


M. 2 .
Col Marrhalr Of Bram,


\
we J
*


Boons


1 Morrirons


& \ TN ell
IP > : I


„
D == DJ * - 2
8


* Y
rocks ) oe Waonmans


Mnoblick
47 Namen


LES
*
„


**
(ol. gelb vie


Tang ug Tork = Ulternans Mill


GO


Deni Jn. pos
aa na (7:


C2


.
.
*.


Col.Boons


FA * 5


V


MOIonnmetsr << .

% K Lexington
CH, eg /

Irm For Nau, M STouds


. Dun.“


-


2


4x ,. AY"

Y e- ueber, , W
) of

4. |

WHO


*


D
>


7
-
.
„
-
. ol
*
7
. *
-
-
„
*
*
n -
*
-
Wo
*
0


N


8
N


*
90
*


La- 21 5


4
4 -


22


Will


— 8
— De *
. N .
4 J \
ob


—
*


1
mat?


*
*
J W


*
*


all


S IC \ (*
2 \


2 15 Free


„„
"0 67 * 771


Virgura


Er (7:


*
—
*
*
*
*
7
%
Meg,
*
9
8 *”
*co OS
CY


.


13. by John Stockdale, Piccadilly. _—


KENTUCKY. 505


Ctvii Drvisroxs.] Kentucky was originally divided into two counties, Lincoln
and Jefferſon. It has ſince been ſubdivided into nine, which follow :


Counties. No. Inhab. Chief Towns. No. Inhab.
Jefferſon, | 7 RP Lovisvitis, 200
Fayette, 1 LEXINGTON, 834
Bourbon, 7,837 . RY
Mercer, 6,941 Danville, 150
Nelſon, 11,299 Bearditown, 216
Maditon, 5,772
Lincoln, 6, 548

Woodford, . 9,210 _ N
Maſon, 5 .D,#07 Waſhington, 462


Total 73,677 of whom 12,430 are flaves.


As moſt-of theſe counties are very large, it is probable that ſubdiviſions will con-
tinue to be made, as population increaſes.

Rivers. ] The River Ohio waſhes the north-weſtern fide of Kentucky, in its
whole extent. Its principal branches, which water this fertile tract of country, are
Sandy, Licking, Kentucky, Salt, Green, and Cumberland rivers. Theſe again branch
in various directions into rivulets of different magnitudes, fertilizing the country in
all its parts, At the bottoms of theſe watercourſes the lime-ſtone Tock, which is
common to this country, appears of a greyiſh colour ; and where it lies expoſed to the
air, in its natural ſtate, it looks like brown free-ſtone. On the banks of theſe rivers
and rivulets, this ſtone has the appearance of fine marble, bein 8 of the ſame texture,
and is found in the greateſt plenty.

Sandy, Licking, and Kentucky rivers riſe near each other, in the Cumberland
mountains. Of theſe, Sandy river only breaks through the mountain. This river
_ conſtitutes a part of the eaftern boundary of Kentucky.


Licking river runs in a north-weſt direction upwards of 100 miles, a: nd | is about
100 yards broad at its mouth.


Kentucky is a very crooked river, and after running a courſe of more : than 220 Miles,
empties into the Ohio by a mouth 150 yards broad.

Salt river riſes at four different places near cach other. The windings of this river
are curious. The four branches, after a circuitous courſe round a fine tract of land,
unite; and after running about fifteen miles, empty into the Ohio, twenty miles
below the falls. Its general courſe is weſtward; its jength about e miles; and at.
its mouth is eighty yards wide.


Green river purſues a weſtern courſe upwar FE $3 150 miles, and by a mouth eighty
yards wide, falls into the Ohio, 120 miles below the rapids. |

Cumberland river interlocks with the northern branch of Kentucky, and ln
round the other arms of Kentucky, among the mountains in a ſouthern courſe, 100
miles; then in a' ſouth-weſtern courſe for above 200 more; then in a ſouthern and
louth-weſtern courſe for about 250 more, finds the Ohio, 413 Arcs below the falls.
At Nathville, this river 18 200 yards broad, and at its mouth 300. The river in about
half its courſe, paſſes through the territory ſouth of the Olo. ;

Theſe rivers are navigable for boats almoſt to their ſources, without rapids, for the
greateſt part of the year. Frequent rains in the latter end of the autumn produce
floods in the Ohio, and it is an uncommon ſcaſon when one of thoſe floods docs not


tappen


6


6— ³˙ 0 2


ſage from Pittſburgh to that place nearly a month.


506 KENTUCKY.


CT


happen before Chriſtmas. If there is much froſty weather in the upper parts of be

country, its waters generally remain low until they begin to thaw. But if the river is
not frozen over, which is not very common, there 1s always water ſufficient for boat
of any fize, from November until May; when the waters generally begin to ſubſide;

and by the midelle of June, in moſt ſeafons, they are too low for boats above fort

tons, and theſe mult be-fiat-bottomed. The froſt ſeldom continues ſo long as the
middle of February, and immediately upon its breaking the river 1s flooded ; this flogd
may in a degree ſubſide, but for no length of time; and it is from that period until
May, that the boats generally come down the river. The diſtance of deſcending is in
proportion to the height of the water; but the average diſtance is about eighity miles in
twenty-four hours, and from ſixty to one hundred are the extremes; ſo that the mean
time of going in a flat-bottomed boat from Pittſburgh to the rapids, is between eight
and nine days, and about twenty days more to New Orleans ; which will make a pat-


=


The little rivulets which chequer the country, begin to leſſen in June, and quite dif. |
appear in the months of Auguſt, September, and October. The autumnal rains,
however, in November repleniſh them again. The method of getting a ſupply of


Water in the dry ſcaſon is by finking wells, which are caſily dug, and afford excellent


water. The want of water in autumn is the great complaint. Mills, that may be
fapplied with water eight months in a year, may be erected in a thouſand different
places. Wind-mills and horſe-mills may ſupply the other four months.

The banks of the rivers are generally high and compoſed of lme-ſtone. . After hea
rains, the water in the rivers riſes from 10 to 30 feet. 20
SekIx GS.] There are five noted ialt ſprings or licks in this country; viz. the higher
and lower Blue Springs, on Licking river, from ſome of which, it is ſaid, iſſue ſtreams
of briniſh water the Big Bone lick, Drennon's licks, and Bullet's lick, at Saltfburgh.
The laſt of theſe licks, though in low order, bas ſupplied this country and Cumberland
with ſalt, at twenty ſhillings the buthel, Virginia currency; aud ſome is exported to
the Illinois country. The method of procuring water from theſe licks is by finking
wells from 30 to 40 feet deep. The water drawn from theſe wells is more ſtrongly im-
pregnated with ſalt than the water from the fea. A flrait road, 40 feet-wide, has been
cut from Saltſburgh to Louiſville, 24 miles. : 1

Fack or THE COUNTRY, SOIL, AND PRODUcB.] This whole country, as far as has

yet been diſcovered, lies upon a bed of lime- ſtone; which in general is about fix feet
below the ſurface, except in the vallies, where the ſoil is much thinner. A tract of


about twenty miles, along the banks of the Ohio, 1s hilly, broken land, interſperſed
with many fertile ſpots. Ihe reſt of the country is agreeably uneven, gently aſcending
and deſcending at no great diſtances. The angles of aſcent are from eight to twenty-


four degrees, and ſometimes more. The vallics in common are very narrow, andthe
ſoil in them 1s very thin, and of an inferior quality ; and that along the aſcending
ground is frequently not much better; ſor where you ſee a tree blown up, you find
the roots clinguig to the upper parts of the rock. The ſoil, on theſe agrecable aſcents,
(for they cannot be called hills) is ſufficicntly deep, as is evident from the ſize of the
trees. The ſoil is either black, or tinged witli a lighter or deeper vermilion, or is of the
colour of dark aſhes. In many places there are appearances of potter's clay, and coal
in abundance. The country promiſes to be well ſupplied with wholefome, well-taſted
watcr. In Nelſon county, north-vreft of Rolling fork, a branch of Salt river, is a tract
of about forty miles ſyuare, moſily barren, interſperſed with plains and ſtrips of good
land, wiuch arc advantageous ſituations for railing cattle, as the neighbouring des,

a


K ENT UCK T. 307
as they are improperly ſtyled, are covered with graſs, and afford good paſturage. The
lands eaſt of Nolin Creek, a branch of Green river, are in general of an inferior
quality; but the banks of Green river afford many defirable ſituations.
Towards the head waters of Kentucky river, which interlock with the waters of
Cumberland and Sandy rivers, and the whole country eaſtward and ſouthward as far
as the Holitein river, is broken, mountainous, and almoſt impenetrable ; and from the
deſcription given by hunters, it is much doubted whether it will ever be practicable to
make a paſlable road from Kentucky acroſs to Wincheſter, in Virginia, on the eaſt
fide of the mountains, which, on a ſtraight line, is not perhaps more than four hundred
miles, and the way now travelled is ſix hundred. No country will admit of being
thicker ſettled with farmers, who confine themſelves to agriculture, than this.
Elkhorn river, a branch of the Kentucky, from the ſouth-eaſt, waters a country fine
beyond deſcription. Indeed, the country eaſt and ſouth of this, including the head
waters of Lacking river, Hickman's and Jeflamine Creeks, and the remarkable bend in
Kentucky river, may be called an extenſive garden. The ſoil is deep and black, and
the natural growth, large walnuts, honey and black locuſt, poplar, elm, oak, hickory,
ſugar tree, &. Grape vines run to the tops of the trees; and the ſurface of the
ground is covered with clover, blue graſs, and wild rye. On this fertile tract, and
the Licking river, and the head waters of Salt river, are the bulk of the ſettlements
in this country. The ſoil within a mile or two of Kentucky river is generally
of 2 8 and fourth rates; and as you advance towards the Ohio, the land is poor
Dick's rrver runs through a great body of firſt rate land, abounding with cane, and
affords many excellent mill ſeats. Salt river has good lands on its head waters, except
that they are low and unhealthy, but for twenty-five miles before it empties into the
Ohio, the land on each fide is level and poor, and abounds with ponds. =
Cumberland river, ſo much of it as paſſes through Kentucky, traverſes, ſome parts
excepted, a hilly, poor country. 3 T-
Green river overflows its banks a confiderable way up, at the ſeaſon when the Ohio
ſwells, which is in April. This ſwell in Green river occaſions ſeveral of its branches
to overflow, and cover the low grounds with water, leaves and vegetable ſubſtances,
which, in ſummer, become nex1ous and unhealthy. Its banks are fine and fertile.
There is a great body of good land near the falls and rapids in the Ohio, called Bare


Graſs; but the climate is rendered unhealthy by ponds of ſtagnant water, which may
be eaſily drained. 7 |


This country in general is well timbered. Of the natural growth which is peculiar
to this country, we may reckon the ſugar, the coffee, the papaw, and the cucumber
tree. The two laſt are ſoft wood, and bear a fruit of the ſhape and ſize of a cu-
cumber. The coffee tree reſembles the black oak, and bears a pod, which incloſes a
ſeed, of which a drink is made not unlike coffee. Beſides theſe, there is the honey
locuſt, black mulberry, wild cherry, of a large ſize. The buck-eye, an exccedingly,
ſoft wood, is the horſe cheſnut of Europe. The magnolia bears a beautiful bloffom,
of a rich and exquiſite fragrance. Such is the variety and beauty of the flowering.
ſhrubs and plants which grow ſpontancouſly in this country, that iu the proper ſcafou
the wilderneſs appears in bloſſom. . |
The accounts of the fertility of the foil in this country have, in ſome inſtances, ex
ceeded belief; and probably have been exaggerated. That tome parts of Kentucky,
particularly the high grounds, are remarkably good, all accounts agree. The lands of
the firſt rate are too rich for wheat, and will produce 50 or. 60, and in ſome inſtances,


21 | i


NY j - *
1 > + N n N \ 4:
a. R OT OY San Ar Ire ee


a3 - KENTUCKY.


it is affirmed, 100 buſhels of good corn, an acre. In common, the land will prodice
thirty buſhels of wheat or rye an acre. Barley, oats, cotton, flax, hemp, and vege-.
tables of all kinds, common in this climate, yield abundantly. The old Virginia
planters ſay, that if the climate does not prove too moiſt, few foils known will yield
more or better tobacco. Experience has proved, that the climate is not too moiſt.

Great quantities of this article have been exported to France and Spain, through Neu

Orleans; and it is a well-known fact, that Philadelphia is a profitable market for the
Kentucky planter, notwithſtanding all the inconveniencies and expenſes of re- ſhipment
at New Orleans, under a Spaniſh government. What advantages then may not
this country expect from a tree navigation of the Mifſiſſippi, unreſtrained by Spaniſh


policy!


In the weſtern territory 18 found all the variety of ſoil and climate neceſſary to the


culture of every kind of grain, fibrous plants, cotton, fruits, vegetables, and all ſorts
of proviſions. The upper ſettlements on the Ohio produce chiefly wheat, oats, barley,


rye, Indian corn or maize, hemp, and flax. The fruits are, apples, pears, cherries,
peaches, plums, ſtrawberries, raſpberries, currants, gooſeberries, and grapes ; of cu-


_ liriary plants and vegetables, there are turnips, potatoes, carrots, parſnips, cymbiline


or ſquaſh, cucumbers, peas, beans, afparagus, cabbages, brocoh, celery, and ſallads;
befides which, there are melons and herbs of every ſort. The proviſions conſiſt of


beef, pork, mutton, veal, and a varicty of poultry, ſuch as ducks, Muſcovy ducks,
turkies, geeſe, dunghill fowls, and pigeons. Some conſiderable quantity of ſpirits


diſtilled from rye, and likewiſe cyder, are ſent down the river to a market, in thoſe


infant ſetttements where the inhabitants have not had time to bring orchards to any


perfection, or have not a ſuperfluity of grain to diſtil into fpirits. The beef, pork,
and flour are diſpoſed of in the ſame way. The flax and hemp are packed on horfes


and ſent acroſs the mountain to the inland towns of Pennſylvania and Maryland.


In the rivers are plenty of buffalo, pike, and catfiſh, of uncommon fize ; ſalmon,


| moles. rock, _ 5 eel, ſuckers, ſunfiſh, Kc. Shad have not been caught! in the


weſtern water
Swamps are rare in Kentucky ; and of courſe the rept iles which they produce, ſuch


as ſnakes, frogs, &c. are not numerous. The honey-bee may be called a. domeſtic
inſect, as it is faid not to be found but in civiliſed countries. This is confirmed by a
ſaying, which is common among the Indians, when they ſec a ſwarm of bees in the


woods —< Well, brothers, it is time for us to decamp, for the white people are
coming.“ Neverthelefs bees, of late years, have abounded, to their amazement, even
200 miles N. and N. W. of the Ohio.
The quadrupeds, .except the buffalo, are the ſame as in n Virginia and the Carolinas.
 Crimarte. | Healthy and delightful, ſome few places in the neighbourhood of ponds


and low grounds excepted. 'The inhabitants do not experience the extremes of heat


and cold. Snow ſeldom falls deep or lies long. The winter, which begins about


_ Chriſtmas, is never longer than three months, and is commonly but two, and is ſa |
mild that cattle can ſubſiſt without fodder.


Cnree Towns. ] Lxxixo rox, which ſtands on the head waters of EKKhorn river, 18
reckoned the capital of Kentucky. Here the courts are held, and buſineſs regularly
conducted. In 1786 it contained about 100 houſes, and ſeveral ſtores, with a good


_ affortment of dry goods. It has greatly increaſed . and contains about you! in-


habitants.


 'Wasninerton, the ſhire town of Maſon county, 18 . ſecond town in this State,
3 about 500 inhabitants,


TER


KENTUCKY.” 509


LuuxSTOWx is weſt of Lexington, on the eaſtern bank of Kentucky river; it is regu-
larly laid out, and is flourithing. The banks of Kentucky river are remarkably high,
in ſome places zoo and 400 feet, compoſed generally of ſtupendous perpendicular rock:
the contequence is, there are tew croſſing places; the beſt is at Leeſtown, which 3s
a circumitance that muſt contribute much to its increaſe. |


place of great trade; it has been made a port of entry. Its unhealthineſs, owjäng to
ſtagnated waters at the back of the town, has conſiderably retarded its growth.
Betides theſe, there is Beardſtown, in Nelſon county; and Harrodiburg, in Mercer
county; both on the head waters of Salt river. Danville, Boonſborough, and Gran-
ville, are alſo increaſing towns. CFC 8 85
PoPULATION AND pee We The population of this State in 1790, is given in
the preceding table. In 1783, in the county of Lincoln“ only, there were on the militia
rolls 3370 men, chiefly emigrants from the lower parts of Virginia. In 1784, the
number of inhabitants were reckoned at upwards of 30,000. It is aſſerted, that at


been long enough together to form an umtorm national character. Among the ſettlers
there are.gentlemen of abilities, and many genteel families, from ſeveral of the States,
who give dignity and reſpectability to the ſettlement. They are, in general, more
regular than people who generally ſettle new countries. | - FEY


There are ſeveral large congregations of Pretbyterians, and tome few of other deno-
 minations. _ | _— s A


powers of government are divided into three diſtinct departments; legiſlative, execu-
tive, and judiciary. The legiſlative power is veſted in a General Aſſemby, conſiſting
of a ſenate and houſe of repreſentatives; the ſupreme executive, in a governor; the
judiciary, in the ſupreme court of appeals, and ſuch inferior courts as the legiſlature
may eſtabliſh. The repreſentatives are choſen annually by the people; the ſenators
and governor are choſen for tour years, by electors appointed tor that purpoſe ; the


ſenate. An enumeration of the free male inhabitants, above twenty-one years old, is
to be made once in four years. After cach enumeration, the number of ſenators and
repreſentatives is to be fixed by the legiſlature, and apportioned among the ſeveral
Counties according to the number of inhabitants. There can never be fewer than 40,
nor more than 100 repreſentatives. The ſenate at firſt confiſted of eleven members;
and for the addition of every four repreſentatives, one ſenator 1s to be added. The
repreſentatives muſt be twenty-four years old; the ſenators twenty-ſeven ; the governor


thirty, and all.of them muſt have been inhabitants of the State two years. The go-


vernor can hold no other office. The members of the General Aflembly none but
thoſe of attorney at law, juſtice of the peace, coroner, and in the militia. The
judges, and all other officers, muſt be inhabitants of the counties for Which they are


appointed. The governor, members of the General Aſſembly, and judges, receive


ſtated ſalaries out of the public treaſury, from which no money can be drawn, but in
conſequence of appropriation by law. All officers take an oath of fidelity to diſcharge
the duties of their offices, and are liable to impeachment for miſconduct. Hective


* The county, it is to be remembered, has fince been divided and ſubdivided, "4
3T 2 officers


Lov1sVILLE is at the rapids of the Ohio, in a fertile country, and promiſes to bea


leaſt 20,000 migrated here in the year 1787. Theſe people, collected from different
States, of different manners, cuſtoms, religions, and political ſentiments, have not


RELIOION.] The Baptiſts are the moſt numerous religious ſect in Kentucky,


ConsTITUTION.] By the conſtitution of this State, formed and adopted in 1792, the


judges are appointed, during good behaviour, by the governor, with advice of the


s "4
|
|


unleſs ſecrecy be requifite. The doors of both houſes are kept open. The members
of the legiſlature, while attending the public buſineſs, are privileged from arreſts in


5
eee


P EC ECT Cs AA PHE te


_— ; * * " ny 1
p a 4 5 74 7 LCM f G 2 2 4
Lo RT, OT SEES


7 KENTUCKY.


officers mutt ſwear that they have not uſed bribery in obtaining their elections. All


free male citizens, twenty-one years old, having reſided in the State two years, or in


the county where they offer to vote, one year, have a right to vote for repreſentatives,
and tor electors of ſenators and governor, and are privileged from arreſt, in civil ac-
tions, while attending that buſineſs. The General Aflemby meets on the firſt Mon-


day in November in each year, unleſs fooner convened by the governor. Each houſe


Chooſes its ſpeaker and other officers, judges of the qualification: of its members, and


rules of its proceedings, of which a journal 1s Kept and publiſhed weekly,


civil actions, and may not be queſtioned elſewhere for any thing faid in public debate.


- Impeachments are made by the lower houſe, and tried by the upper. All revenue
bills originate in the houſe of repreſentatives, and are amendable by the ſenate, like
other bills. Each bill paſſed by both houſes is preſented to the governor, who muſt
ſign it if he approve it; if not, he muſt return it within ten days to the houfe in which


u originated; if it be not returned, or if, when returned, it be re-paſſed by two thirds


of both houſes, it is a law without his ſignature. The governor has power to appoint


molt of the executive offices of the State; to remit fincs and forfeitures, and grant re-
prieves and pardons, except in caſes of impeachment ; to require information from ex-
ecutive officers ; to convene the General Aſſembly on extraordinary occaſions, and
adjourn them in caſe they cannot agree on the time themſelves. He muſt inform the
legiſlature of the ſtate of the commonwealth ; recommend to them ſuch meaſures as


he ſhall judge expedient ; and fee that the laws are faithfully executed. The ſpeaker
of the ſenate exerciſes the office of governor in caſe of vacancy. The legiflature has


power to forbid the farther importation of flaves, but not to emancipate thoſe already
in the State without the conſent of the owner, or paying an equivalent. Treaſon


againſt the commonwealth conſiſts only in levying war againſt it, or in adhering to its


enemies, giving them aid and comfort, .


Ihe declaration of rights aſſerts the civil equality of all; their right to alter the go-


vernment at any time; liberty of conſcience; freedom of elections, and of the preſs;


trial by jury; the ſubordination of the military to the civil power; the rights of cri-
minals to be heard in their own defence; the right of the people to petition for the
redreſs of grievances, to bear arms, and to emigrate from the State. It prohibits un-


reaſonable ſearches and ſeizures ; exceſſive bail; confinement of debtors, unleſs there
be preſumption of fraud; ſuſpenſion of habeas corpus writ, unleſs in rebellion or in-


vaſion ; ex poſt facto laws; attainder by the legiſlature ; ftanding armies ; titles of
- nobility and hereditary diſtinction.


LiTERATURE AND IMPROVEMENTS.] The legiflature of Virginia, while Kentucky


belonged to that State, made proviſion for a college in it, and endowed it with very
_ conſiderable landed funds. The Rev. John Todd gave a very handſome library for its


uſe. Schools are eſtabliſhed in the ſeveral towns, and in general regularly and hand-


ſomely ſupported. They have a printing-office, and publiſh a Weekly Gazette. They
have erected a paper mill, an oil mill, fulling mills, aw mills, and a great number of


valuable grift malls. Their ſalt works are more than ſufficient to ſupply all their


inhabitants, at a low price. They make confiderable quantities of ſugar from the
ſugar trees. Labourers, particularly tradeſmen, are exceedingly wanted here.


Cux1osITIEs.] The banks, or rather precipices, of Kentucky and Dick's river, are
to be reckoned among the natural curioſities of this country. Here the aſtoniſhed eye
deholds 300 or 400 feet of ſolid perpendicular rock, in ſome parts, of the *

; 1 | | | , *


KENTUCKY. I
kind, and in others of fine white marble, curiouſly chequered with ſtrata of aſtoniſh-
ing regularity. Theſe rivers have the appearance of deep artificial canals. Their high
rocky banks are covered with red cedar groves.


Caves have been diſcovered in this country of ſeveral miles in length, under a fine
lime-ſtone rock, ſupported by curious arches and pillars. Springs that emit ſulphu-


reous matter have been found in ſeveral parts of the country. One is near a falt ſpring


in the neighbourhood of Boonſborough. There are three ſprings or ponds of bitumen
near Green river, which do not form a ſtream, but empty themſelves into a common
reſervoir, and when uſed in lamps, anſwer all the purpoſes of the beſt oil. Copperas
and alum are among the minerals of Kentucky. Near Lexington are found curious
ſepulchres full of human ſkeletons. It has been afferted, that a man, in or near Lex-
ington, having dug five or ſix feet below the ſurface of the ground, came to a large
Hat _ under which was a well of common depth, regularly and artificially
ſtoned. | 1 85 e 5
| HisTorvy. |] Though the war which took place between England and France in the
year 1755, terminated ſo gloriouſly for Great Britain, and ſecurely for the then colo-
nies, ſtill we remained ignorant of the whole of the fine country lying between
the high hills, which riſe from Great Sandy river, approximate the Allegany
Mountain, and extending down the Ohio to its confluence with the Miſſiſſippi, and
back to thoſe ridges of mountains which traverſe America in a S. W. by W. direction,
until they are loſt in the flat lands of Weſt Florida. However, certain men, called
Long Hunters, from Virginia and North Carolina, by penetrating theſe mountains,
(which ramify into a country 200 miles over from E. to W. called the wilderneſs,)
were faſcinated with the beauty and luxuriance of the country on the weſtern fide.
As grant had been ſold by the Six Nations of Indians to ſome Britiſh commiſſioners at
Fort Stanwix in 1768, which comprehended this country, and which afforded the
Americans a pretext for a right to ſettle it ; but thofe Indian natives who were not
concerned in the grant, became diſſatisfied with the proſpect of a ſettlement which
might become fo dangerous a thorn in their fide, and committed ſome maſſacres upon
the firſt explorers of the country. However, after the expedition of Lord Dunmore
in 1774, and the battle at the mouth of the Great Kanhaway, between the army of
Colonel Lewis and the confederated tribes of Indians, they were in ſome meaſure quiet.
The Aſſembly of Virginia began now to encourage the peopling that diſtrict of coun-
try called Kentucky, from the name of a river which runs nearly through the middle
of it. This encouragement conſiſted in offering 400 acres of land to every perſon. who
engaged to build a cabin, clear a piece of land, and produce a crop of Indian. corn.
This was called a ſettlement right. Some hundreds of theſe ſettlements were made;
but, in the mean time, Mr. Richard Henderſon, of North Carolina, a man of no in-
eonfiderable abilities, and more enterpriſe, had obtained a grant from the Cherokee
tribe of Indians for this ſame tract of country; and though it was contrary to. the. laws
of the land for any private citizen to make purchaſes of the Indians, ſtu Mr. Hen-
derſon perſevered in his intention of eftabliſhing a colony of his own. He actually:
took poſſeſſion of the country, with many of his followers, where he remained pretty
quiet, making very little improvement, Virginia being at that time entirely occupied
with the war, which had commenced between Great Britain and the confederated
States. Moſt of the young men from the back ſettlements of Virginia and Penniylva-
nia, who would have migrated to this country, having engaged in the war, formed
that body of men, called Rifle-men ; which not only checked the growth of: the ſettle-
ment, but ſo dried up the ſources of emigration, that it was near being annihilated by
the fury of the ſavages. | —


country was ſurveyed and patented, and the
their buſineſs in as much quiet and ſafety as they could have done in any part of Eu-
rope. Court-houſes were built in the different counties, and roads were opened for


another link in the great federal chain.


872 2 KENTUCKY.
The legality of Mr. H-mderfon's claim was inveſtigated: by the State of Virginia i in
1781 ; and though there could be no fort of equity in it, he having acted in contempt
ot the State, the legiſlature, to avoid feuds or difturbances, (for Henderſon ſtill had


influence) agreed, as an indemnification for the expenſe and trouble he had been at,


that he ſhould be allowed a tract of country 12 miles 1quare, hing in the forks of the
Ohio and Green rivers : a tract of his own chuſing.


Virginia gave farther rewards and encouragements at this time to the firſt ſottlers,


for the perils they had undergone 1n the eſtabliſhment of their ſettlement, of a tract of


1000 acres, called a pre- emption right, to be laid off adjoining to the ſettlement of
400 acres, the grantee only paying office-fees for the ſame. After this period, (1. e

1781) a land office was opened by the State, granting warrants for any quantity of
unlocated land, upon condition of certain ſums of tlie depreciated continental cur-
rency being paid into the treaſure, at ſo much for 100 acres. The preat plenty and


little value of this money ſoon cauſed the whole country to be located, witch was one


of the material cauſes of its rapid population.
It was neceſſary, in the management of this buſineſs, that care ſhould be taken to


prevent that perpſexity and litigation, which the oy Manner ! in which that buſineſs


roduce. For this purpoſe, three


was executed in many inſtances would neceſſarily 72
ay or cauſe to be laid off, by their


principal ſurveyors were appointed, who were to


deputies, the different locations within the limits of their diftricts : this being done,


and recorded in the office, the original ſurvey was ſent to the deputy regiſter's office,
there to be recorded; from which it was ſent to the principal regiſter's office at Rich-
mond, the teat of government, there to remain twelve months, in order that any per-
ſon having a claim, by virtue of a prior location, might have an opportunity to enter


a caveat, and prevent a furreptitious grant from ifſung. Commiſſioners were alto


{ent to adjuſt the claims of fettlement and pre-emption rights; by which means order
was preſerved, and the government of a diſtrict of country, detached, and ene
at that time more than 200 miles from any other ſettled count


The years 1783 and 1784 brought out vaſt numbers of emigrants from all parts of


America, particularly the latter year, when it was ſuppoſed that in Kentucky alone,
not leſs than 12,000 ſouls became ſettlers; ſeveral Europeans from France, England,


and Ireland, were among the number. In 1783, 1784, and 1785, great part of the


people in the interior ſettlements purſued


carriages, which ſeven years before had not been ſeen in the country.
hitherto were for fingle horſes. 55

In 1785, the diſtrict had grown ſo conſiderable from the great number of emi-
grants which had arrived, and that reſpectability which it had acquired produced a
diſpoſition in the inhabitants to become an independent State, and to be admitted as


A convention was immediately formed by
ſending deputies from the different counties, who met at Danville, for the purpoſe of


The only roads


taking the matter into conſideration; when it was determined, after ſome debating,


to petition Virginia for that purpoſe. However, this buſineſs was procraſtinated ; for


finding, though they might ſeparate whenever they choſe, yet that it was optional with |
the legiſlature of Virginia to recommend them to be taken into the federal government


(which they were not likely to do, and which it was certain could not be done with-


out ) they were content to remain as they were for that time.


The


*


mum


uUninimumummumtteem l 5 Mm I


Meet) s, 5 elt!


Wy *
BS


S
225 £ Carden


2
«7 *
FR
.


ny 044)


mA ALIENS


| trons”
Lower - Cane


12 » » a <<
4 hy 71. .


Men.


N Unten
* tinto


F,
perwecond (fr
e


LE W >
NI pUOUNan >.
Wa
* #1 Ore


/ }Armstro "” nk
re


© — —
/
/


7


| : . 28 0 | Fi : 2 .
2 8 I— - 60600 ERR ; - 1
\ . i 1
* . th, . * —
g 2 2
E Me n - : — AI 2
—N— — — —  - — — — — <- - -< < - „ =


0 M C4 ROLL TH


%


Cod AMAB 8•o ROY


5 „ 5h | 7


—


NORTH CAROLINA


—


| _ from the beſt 8
| AUTH 2 1


b jon —
5 __ MAarrigon ve.
E |


. i —
— ern eeery — eee test, LIE rr eee, eee
— | - — — — nun. 8 | m_ | mY Joo JO "Lai


Prblivhed Silly 24 ”


a Hdd


c 0 . — — eee
\ . N 12
WAS „A VI
4 \
— == 7 ] * — a
7 r


—


1 ü


WMunuimmeen Mme
7


"LY,
4 N
a COIL LS
—_


BEMARLE SOUND


- Bo


Jo
N *

—

7 1


. Ve £\ 0
_ * 9 0
I ©.


yon ScUPORUN — .


————— 1.


rot? 8 "8


*


ny 2


{a Hinton: i"


\


eb...
Yamp!N\


reel 2 * oy :
*S>0 be OY 955


r Beacon 7
8 X * 3 LE ©
kens Ord | | N EW s . _


p j


li Xp

= » — 28

UPls Scheer,
DA


burte 77


- *
- — -4 Po


» * ? ,
* * — = — & - L
— * = 1 * * — _ 9 \
\ N w = 5 - 1 1 — — \
« & . — * —
* 7 9 1 — * A N | — 6
* o = — * * *,
» . — PF * 2 = *.
; . ö 8 ; i ; 4 — X * *.
y) . © "4 g — =” * 4 * .
- ; A t, : þ ; K * * .
\ pl f * .
» JO — 1 / — v0.
* . — :
SI *


<Þ HE SON : dos


tSlunds df
: WJ | ; 8 — : * 8 *
- | Core Sound... =<l o 4 - | | *
Ee Mara ; — »
£ Lookout Þ
\ : 72 x LN £ N . . ; 4 -
» 6&4 9 h | ['P
'S: 2 il Inlet | | 0
ſen —
ww
=
Pa
Y K | |
2 N Ir LIE |
WT | unſwie AE 2 |
{ E 3 4 en n ja 7 A _
== 1 * 7 L


Mummy | . C 1 *
— Þþ/1(ddimmooo; FO IIA ape F ear
Mmmm MIO


0 L .
7 Trey
Q Fey mn ey
® l s mee


O |
7 8 — Tum


y 241794 by Fg
. G,. J. Storkdats PLicendilly .


rr — — —


— W 33 e


1 2 e — 2 2


NORTH CAROLINA. 313


The federal government in the courſe of the year 1785, undertook to lay off the
country welt of the Ohio, in ſuch manner as would anſwer the 8 of ſelling the


land, and ſetting the country; but, owing to a variety of cauſes, their progreſs was
very flow. However, ſome land was furveyed in 1786 and 1787, and in the latter
year a ſettlement was formed upon the Muſkingum, which may be looked upon as the
commencement of the American ſettlements upon the weſtern fide of the Ohio. In
1788 and 1789, ſome farther ſurveying was done ; but little fince has been tranſacted
in thoſe parts, except wars between the Indians and the ſettlers. Sol |


—


9 ,
* -
: * * 0 p
* 1 — *
45 A
* ; ” 5 %
* % 4 p * £ ;
; 1 ? *- * 3 * .
1 «2 *
-


NORTH. SAR OLILINA.
| = SITUATION AND EXTENT: 5 715


84. Miles:


ee  ARot=nill Cad Wee i.


rec i OUNDED nbrth, Virginia; eaſt, by the Atlantic ocean;
Boux DAKIES.] B fouth, by South-Carolina Gy Georgia if 4 by a chain of
mountains'a'few miles to the weſtward of the Great Appalachian Mountain. This
chain of mountains, taking the whole for à part, has oecafionally been called the Great
Iron Mountain. All that vaft country which lies on the weſt of the Tron Mountain,
was ſurrendered to the United wn I tate of North Carolina in the year 1799.
It has ſince been erected into a ſepardte. go rment,. commonly called the Territory


*
$ 4
.


South of Ohio, or the Tenneſſee government.“


Curl Drvistons. | This State is divided into eight diſtricts, which are ſubdivided
into zg⁵,õ,, . e . 1 Fs


= 136
= : *


The charter limits of North. Carolina are a line, begmning on the fea fide, at a cedar ſtake, at or near

the mouth of a little river, (being the ſouthern-extremity of Brunſwic county) and running thence a north-
welt courſe through the boundary-houte, in lat. 33 56' ts lat. 35%, and on that parallel weſt as far as is men-
| tioned in the charter of K. Charles II. to the original proprietors of Carolina, vaz. to the South Sea. Their
northern line begins on the ſea-coaſt in lat. 36 30“, and runs due weſt to the termination of the ſouthern line.
This line ſtrikes the Miſhflippi 15 miles below the month of the Ohio. Theſe limits were aſcertained and
confirmed agreeably to an order of George II. in council, in the year ——. Great Britain, by the treaty of
1763, which was made with France and Spain, ſurrendered hei claim to all the territory weſtward of the
Miſſifſippi; and thoſe nations, by the ſame treaty, granted to Great Britain the free navigation, of the Miſſiſ-
ppi. By the treaty of 1783, between Spain and. Great Britain, his Catholic Majeſty expreſsly confirms the
former treaty of 1763, except ſuch parts as are there excepted; conſequently he confirms to Great Britain
the navigation of the Miſſiſſtppi; and Great Britain, on her part, yielus to the United States her entire right
to the navigation of the Miſſiſſippi. Rut ſince Spain now claims the excluſive navigation. of the Miſfiſſippi,
which ſne had formerly ſurrendered, it is very probable that the United States, to whom North Carolina has
ceded her weſtern territory, may claim the lands on the weſt fide of the Miſſiſſippi, which were within the
original charter bounds of that State. Led Taha —


9 4 * %
4 SY


1 NORTH CAROLINA.


TABLE.
BR | | 3 ies. Diſtricts.
Counties, Diſtricts. YI ne Halifax
2 . „Northampton
= 8 HAAAx. i
E ; 1815 unties, 64, 630 3
5 | p 7 co » 04,030 =
wp {Chowan N g | inhabitants. Chief > mg
2 | San 5 hn = | town, Halifax Franklin
Wow 1 Camden 28 | 1 8
YZ EvexTox. | Paſquotank 32 1 Naſh
Z | 9 counties, 53,770 3 Perquimins |] * | ee 4 5 Orange
inhabitants. Chie ] Gates S3] HirisBokoven. | Chatham
2 | town, Edenton. 1 Hertford v © | 6 counties, 59,98 34 Granville
=] Bertie : = Z | inhabitants, ee : 8
2 * 258 22 town, Hillſborough AKC
25 W 35 ("> ies 8 Randolf
>| 1 ID 5 3 5 Rowan
S | Wumnerox. [N. Hanover 8 E | 1 Mecklenburgh
S . Brunſwick 53 ram
w] 5 counties, 26,035 Duplin Sy - SarisBukRY. {| Rockingham
* inhabitants. Chief n 2s counties, 66,480 Iredell
2 | town, Wilmington. r A inhabitants. Chief Surry
3 „ ö SH town, Saliſbury. 5 1
81 1 281 N X Stokes EF”:
8 | { Craven „ 5 v1] Wn (Guilford
| c | . Beaufort | 98 = OY 123 . ö Burke |
7 n 5 | Te Carteret. ; VE 1 | Mor GAN. 1 Ruthford
. S4 counties, 33,293 Tincolnn
s | 9 counties, 55540. Pitt 28 inhabitants. Mrz.
8 | inhabitants. Chief] par, „
= 1 town, Newbern. W | | S 2 | LY | EE Cumberland
3 ayne 35 FaveTTE. Moore
E| . Hyde . Fur. Rich
5 1 Jones SZ | 6 counties, 34,020 Richmond
+. * 22] inbabitants. Chief ; Robiſon
4 2 2 town, Fayetteville.] Sampſon


R chowan river is formed by the confluence of three rivers, VIZ. the Me-

1 > roo and Black ber al of which riſe in Virginia. It falls myo the

north-weſt corner of Albemarle Sound, and is three miles wide at its mouth , but nar-
3 i river, ſormed by two principal branches, W .
vrhich riſes in Virginia, and Dan river, which riſes in North 3 The 2 5 55
on this river are ſubject to inundations. It is navigable only for ſhallops, wor =
but about 60 or 70 miles, on account of falls, which in a great meaſure 7 1570

water communication with the back country. It empties, by ſeveral on hs, bi my
fouth-weſt end of Albemarle Sound. The Jlanters, on the banks 1 5 is 22 —
ſuppoſed to be the wealthieſt in North Carolina. One of them, it is ſaid, r
Z30oo barrels of corn, and 4000 buſhels of peas, annually.


Cuſhai is a ſmall river, which empties into Albemarle Sound between Chowan and
the Roanoke. 3


NORTH CAROLINA. | urs


Pamlico or Tar river opens into Pamlico ſound. Its courle is from north-weſt te
ſouth-caſt. It is navigable for veſſels drawing nine feet water to the town of Waſh-
4ngton, about forty miles from its mouth; and for ſcows or flats, carrying thirty or
forty hogſheads, fifty miles further, to the town of Tarborough. Beyond this place
the river is inconſiderable and is not navigable. þ>Þ>>”

Neus river empties into Pamlico ſound below Newbern. It is navigable for ſea
veſſels about twelve miles above the town of Newbern ; for ſcows fifty miles, and for
{mall boats two hundred miles. |

Trent river, from the ſouth-weſt, falls into the Neus at Newbern. It is navigable
for ſea veſſels about twelve miles above the town, and for boats thirty. FE]
There are ſeveral other rivers of leſs note, among which are the Paſquotank, Per-
quimins, Little river, Alligator, &c. which diſcharge themſelves into Albemarle
found. All the rivers in North Carolina, and, it may be added, in South Carolina,
Georgia, and the Floridas, which empty into the Atlantic ocean, are navigable by any
veſſel that can paſs the bar at their mouth. While the watercourſes continue wide
enough for: veſſels to turn round, there is generally a ſufficient depth of water for them
JJ 111 VVV . . ;

Cape Fear, more properly Clarendon river, opens into the ſea at Cape Fear, in
about latitude 33* 45. As you aſcend it, you paſs Brunſwick on the left, and Wil-
mington on the right. The river then divides into north-eaſt and north-weſt branches,
nas they are called. It is navigable for large veſſels to Wilmington, and for boats to
Fayetteville, near ninety miles further. This river affords the beſt navigation in North
Carolina. Yadkin river riſes in this State, and running ſouth-eaſtwardly, oroſſes

into South Carolina, where it takes the name of Pedee, and paſſes te ſea below
Georgetown. © JJ)! | SON.”

This State would be much more valuable, were it not that the rivers are barred at
their mouths, and the coaſt furniſhes no good harbours. Theſe circumſtances will
prevent the State-from building large ſhips, for which they have an abundance of
excellent timber. Several cauſes have been aſſigned for all the harbours and rivers
being barred, ſouth of the Cheſapeak. Some ſuppoſe the bars are formed by the
current of the long rivers throwing up the ſands, where their _— terminates ;
2 ſay that a bank is thrown up by the Gulf Stream, which runs near theſe
The banks of the rivers in this, and the other neighbouring States, often overflow
after great rains; which does much damage to the plantations. A gentleman on the
ſpot aſſerts, that he has ſeen the water thirty feet below the banks of the river, juſt after
it had been ten feet above them. This is owing to the narrowneſs of the mouths of
the rivers, which do not afford a ſufficient channel for the waters, accumulating every
mile, to diſcharge themſelves into the ocean. „ .

Souxps, Carts, INLETs, &c.] Pamlico ſound 1s a kind of lake or inland ſea, from
ten to twenty miles broad, and nearly one hundred miles in length. It is ſeparated
from the ſea, in its whole length, by a beach of ſand hardly a mile wide, generally
covered with ſmall trees or buſhes. Through this bank are ſeveral ſmall inlets, by
which boats may paſs. But Ocrecok inlet is the only one that will admit veſſels of
burden into the diſtricts of Edenton and Newbern. This inlet is in latitude 35 1&,
and opens into Pamlico ſound between Ocrecok iſland and Core bank; the land on
the north is called Ocrecok ; and on the ſouth Portſmouth. A bar of hard ſand croſſes
this inlet, on which, at low tide, there are fourteen feet water. Six miles within this
bar is a hard ſand ſhoal, called the Ec acroſs the channel. On each _

1 : 3 | ot


— . 0-419 225, Ay » Atm ac


eee


516 NORTH CAROLINA.


of the channel are dangerous ſhoals, ſometimes dry. There is from eight to nine fect
water at full tide, according to the winds, on the Swaſh. Common tides riſe eighteen
inches on the bar, and ten on the Swaſh.” Between the bar and the Swaſh is good
anchoring ground, called the Upper and Lower anchorages. Ships drawing ten "feet
water do not come farther than the firſt Anchorage, till lightened. Few mariners,
though acquainted with the inlets, chooſe to bring in their own veſlels, as the bar
often ſhifts during their abſence on a voyage. North of Pamlico found, and commu-
nicating with it, is Albemarle tound, ſixty - miles } in length, and from eight to twelve


in breadth:


Core ſand hies ſouth of F and Wonen des with it. Theſe found


are ſo large when compared with their inlets from the ſea, that no tide can be per-


ceived in any of the rivers which empty into them ; nor is the water falt even. in the
mouths of theſe rivers.


Cape Hatteras is in latitude 35 5 At tlie time of Sir Walter Ralcigh 8 RENE ;


bing the American ſhores, the thou in the vicinity of Hatteras were found to be


extremely dangerous, and no veſſels, in that latitude, ventured within feven leagues


of the land. From a ſurvey of the ancient drafts of this patt of the coaſt, there can be
no doubt but the fears of former navigators were not without foundation , as theſe
ſhoals are laid down very large in extent, and in many rag covered with not more


than five or fix feet water, at a great diſtance from the land. |

The conſtant experience of the coaſting trade of the United States demanfirates,
mer that the ancient draſts were purpoſely falfified in order to deter ſeamen from
venturing too near a coaſt, with which they had as yet a very ſlender acquaintance, or
(which äs tho moſt probable) that by the ſtrong currents hereabouts, which are only
counter currents of the Gulph Stream, the ſands, which were originally heaped up in
this part of the ocean by ſome ancient convulſion of nature, have been gradually


wearing away, and diminiſhing to what we find them to beat this tine.


At preſent the ont ſhaals, w hich lie about fourtben miles ſouth-weſt of tlie Dane,


are but of five or fix acres extent, and where they arc really dangerous to veſſels oi
moderate drauglit, not morethan half that number of acres. | On the ſhoaleſt part of
theſe is, at Jaws: water, about ten feet, and here at times the ocean breaks in a tre-


mendous manner,” ſpouting as it were; tothe clouds, from the violent agitations' of


the Gulf Stream, which touches the eaſtern edge of the banks, from whence the decli-


vity is ſudden, that is to ay, from ten fathoms to no ſoimdings. O the ſpot above-


mentioned, Which“ is firm r it has been the lot of many a good veſſel to ſtrike,


in a gale of wind, and to go to pieces. In moderate weather, however, theſe ſhoals


may be paſſed over, if neceſſary, at full tide, without much danger, by veſſels oo:
drawing more than eight, nine, or ten feet water.


From this bank, Which was formerly of vaſt extent, and ine! the Full Moon Shoal, a
ridge runs' theiwhole diſtance to the Thas, about a north-weſt icourſe : this ridge, which
is about half k mile wide, has on it at low tide generally ten, eleven, and twelve feet


water, with gaps at ray intervals, affording good channels of about fifteen or ſixteen


feet water. Ihe moſt noted of the ſe channels, and moſt uſed by coaſting veſlels, is


about one mile and a half from the land, and may eafily be known by a range of
breakers which arc always ſeen on the weſt Ade, and a breaker head or two on the
eaſtern ſide, which, however, are not ſo conſtant, only appearing iwhen the ſea is
conſiderably agitated. This channel is at leaſt two and à half miles wide; arid might.
at full ſea be fately pafſed by the largeſt ſhips. "Theſe, however, rarely attempt it.
The common tides ſwell about fix feet, and always come from the ſouth-caſt.— A little


north


IS)


NORTH CAROLINA. 377


north of the Cape is good anchoring in four or five fathoms, and with the wind to the
weſtward, a boat may land in ſafety, and even bring off caſæs of freſh water, plenty of
which is 10 he found every. where on the beach, by digging a foot or ito, and putting a barrel
into the fan. | 408 | ; e
Cape Lookout is ſonth of Cape Hatteras, oppoſite Core ſound, and has alread
been mentioned as having had an excellent harbour entirely filled up with land tince
the yoar e,, 7:7 att 3 | 1 e 1
Cape Fear is remarkable for a dangerous ſhoal called, from its form, the Frying pan.
This ſhoal lies at the entrance of Cape Fear river, the ſouth part of it, fix miles from
Cape Fear pitch, in latitude 33? 32. e yy
Swamrs.] There are two twamps that have been called Diſmal. x
Great Diſmal is on the dividing line between Virginia and North Carolina. It is
chiefly owned by!two companies. The Virginia company, of whom the Preſident of
the United States is one, owns ioo, oo acres. The North Carolina company owns
40,900 acres. In the midſt of this Ditmal there is a lake about ſeven miles long, called
Drummond's pond. The waters of that lake in rainy ſeaſous diſcharge themſelves to
the ſouthward into Paſquetank of North Carolina, and to the north and eaſtward into
the branches of the Nantemond, Elizabeth river, and a river which runs into Currituck
ſound; a navigable canal is to be dug from the head of Patquetank to the head of
Elizabeth river in Virginia, the diſtance about fourteen miles. This canal will paſs
about a mile to the eaſtward of Drummond's pond, and will receive water from that
lake: to paſs through the lake would not be fate tor low-ſided veflels. The company
by whom this canal is to be cut, have been incorporated by the concurring laws of
Virginia, and North Carolina. In September, 1791, the ſubſcription being nearly full,
the company choſe their directors, and other officers. By the canal the exports of
Norfolk mult be greatly increaſed. I e e e
The other Diſmal is in Currituck county on the ſouth ſide of Albemarle ſound. This
Diſmal had not drawn the public attention as an object of importance before the end of
the late war, at which time it was chiefly taken up. It is now ſuppoſed to contain one
of the moſt valuable rice eſtates in America. In the midit of this Ditmal there is a lake
of about eleven miles long, and ſeven miles broad. In the year 1785, or 1786, Joſiah
Collins, Eſq. of Edenton, in company with Mefirs. Allen and Dickinſon of that place,
having taken up near r00,000 acres of land round the lake, reſolving to make a navi-
_ gable canal from the lake to the head of Skuppernong river: the diſtance five and a
half miles. This canal, twenty feet wide, was finiſhed in 1790, and the company in
1791 raiſed above one hundred and twenty acres of rice on the margin. The natural
channel by which the lake uſed to diſcharge its waters is now ſtopped, and the waters
pais off by the canal. About five hundred yards from the lake, the company have
erected ſeveral ſaw mulls. The water in the lake is higher than the ſurface of the
ground for about half a mile from the lake on both ſides of the canal; whence it follows,
that the company can at any time lay under water about ten thoutand acres of a rich
 1wamp, which proves admirably fitted for reee. e. Ie
- Prixcivar, Towns. | Newbern, Edenton, Wilmington, Halifax, Hillſborough,
Saliſbury, and Fayetteville, cach in their turns have been the teat of the General
Ailembly. At preſent they have no capital. According to the conſtitution of this
State, the General Aſſemblies are to meet at any place they think fit on their own ad-
journments. The effect of this power was ſuch as might be expected, in a ſtate where
there is no very large city or town nearly central; it was the ſource of conſtant
intrigue and diſquictude, The aflembly ſeldom fat twice in ſucceſſion in the ſame
Ly place,


NORTH CAROLINA.

place. The public officers were ſcattered over every part of the country. You could
ſeldom viſit the governor, the ſecretary, the treaſurer, or the comptroller, im kf riding
than two or three hundred miles. Hence records were loft, accounts were badly kept,
and the State from that ſingle misfortune 1s ſuppoſed to have loſt more than a million


| Z [31-28
|


| of dollars. It was equally clear to all parties that the government- ſhould not be
[ itinerant, and the convention which met in the year 1788, to conſider of the new
| federal conſtitution according to their inſtructions, took this part of their own conſti-


tution into their confideration, and by a very ſmall majority reſolved that the ſeat of
= government ſhould be fixed at ſome place to be agreed on by commiſſioners, within
| ten miles of Wake court houſe. This is a healthy and central fituation. But an act

J of the legiſlature became neceſſary to give effect to this ordinance, and in ſubſequent

J aſſemblics, there has generally been a fimilar majority, that is to ſay, a majority of one
= or two to oppoſe the ordinance. The profits that might ariſe to a few publicans and
ö ſhopkeepers at ſome other town in Which the Aſſembly might meet, occaſioned more

activity and procured more votes than the patriotic deſire of terminating. ditputes and

1 fecuring a quiet, orderly, and good government. For the honour of reaton, by which

q we ſhould be governed rather than by paſſion, it is to be wiſhed that our legiſlatures,
xz n ſimilar circumſtances, had not acted in a fimilar manner. . e

The General Aſſembly of the State, at their ſeſſion in December, 1791, paſſed a law
for carrying the ordinance into effect, and appropriated 10, oool. towards erecting

ublic buildings. . . 15 es e

bo NEewBERN 2 the largeſt town in the State. It ſtands on a flat, fandy point of land,
formed by the confluence of the rivers Neus on the north, and Trent on the ſouth.

Oppofite the town, the Neus is about a mile and a half, and the Trent three quarters
of a mile wide. The town contains about four hundred houſes,* all built of weod,


| camping He palace, the church, the gaol, and two dwelling houſes, which are of
\ brick. The palace is a building erected by the province before the revolution, and
| Was 5


formerly the reſidence of the governors. It is large and elegant, two ſtoxies high,
with two wings for offices, a little advanced in front towards the town; theſe wings


1 are connected with the principal building by a circular arcade. This once handſome
4 and well-furniſhed building is now much out of repair. One of the halls is uſed for a
| dancing, and another for a ſchool-room ; which are the only preſent uſes of this palace.
4 The arms of the king of Great Britain ſtill appear in a pediment in front of the building.
=. The Epifcopat church is a fmall brick building, with a bell. It is the only houſe for
; Public worſhip in the place. A rum diſtillery has Iately been ereéted in this town. It
; ED is the county town of Craven county, and has a court honſe and gael. The court
1 houſe is raiſed on brick arches ſo as to render the lower part a convenient market place;
: but the principal marketing is done with the people in their canoes and boats at the
1 J 3 | sf
3 EnExrox is fituated on the north fide of Albemarle ſound; and has about one


hundred and fifty indifferent wood houſes, and a few handſome buildings. It has a
—_ brick church for Epiſcopalians, which for many years has been much neglected, and
j ſerves only to ſhew that the people once had a regard, at leaſt, ſor the externals of
j religion. Its Jocal fitnation is advantageous for trade, but not for health. It is the
ER county town of Chowan county, and has a court houſe and gaol. In or near the town
| hved the proprietary, and the firſt of the royal governors. |


® In September 1791, near one third part of this town was conſumed by fire —4
y WilLmmocroN


NORTH CAROLINA. 519
W 1L.MINXGTON 1 a town of about one hundred and eĩglity houſes, fituated on the eaſt
fide of. the eaſtern branch of Cape Fear or Clarendon river, thirty-four miles from the
ſea. The courſe of the river, as it paſſes by the town, is from north to ſouth, and is
about one hundred and fifty yards wide. Eon 5
In 1786 a fire broke ont, fuppoſed to have been kindled by negroes, and conſumed
about twenty-five or thirty houſes. The town is rebuilding ſlowly.
— HiLLsBOROUGH is an inland town, ſituated in a high, healthy, and fertile country,
one hundred and eighty miles north of the weſt from Newbern. It is ſettled by about
ſixty or ſeventy families. 5 5
SALISBURY is agrecably ſituated, about five miles from Yadkin river, and contains
about ninety dwelling houſes. . VVV E
_ _ Harteax is a pretty town, and ftands on the weſtern bank of the Roanoke, about
fix miles below the falls, and has about thirty or forty dwelling houſes. | |
FAYETTEVILLE ſtands on the weſt fide of Clarendon, commonly called Cape Fear
river, and about a mile from its banks. It is well-built on both fides of a creek, from
which the town was formerly called Crofs Creek. Iwo fmall creeks unite near the
town, and an ifland, juſt below the junction, divides the creek. Some perſon took it
into his head that the creeks croſſed each other without mixing their waters; and
the ſtrangeneſs or improbability of the thing, as in many other caſes, ſeems to
have been the reaſon, why it was believed. Since the peace, this town has flourithed,
but a conſiderable part of it was burnt in 1792. It is ſituated on a ſettlement of
Scotch Highlanders. , N
WASHINGTON is ſituated in the county of Beaufort, on the north fide of Tar river, in
latitude 356 30, diſtant from Ocrecok inlet ninety miles. From this town is exported
tobacco of the Peterſburgh quality, pork, beef, Indian corn, peas, beans, pitch, tar,
_ turpentine, roſin, &c. and pine * ſhingles, and oak ſtaves. About one hundred


and thirty veſſels enter annually at the cuſtom houſe in this town. .
GREREENEVILLE, fo called after Major-general Nathaniel Greene, is ftrfated in Pitt
county, on the ſouth. bank of Tar river, in latitude 35 35%, diſtant from Ocrecok
mlet one hundred and ten miles. At this town there 1s an academy eſtabliſhed, called
the Pitt Academy. TED? LE, . 1
TarBokoOUGH is fituated in the county of Edgecomb, on the ſouth bank of Tar
river, in latitude 35e 45', diſtant from Ocrecok inlet one hundred and forty miles. At
this town large quantities of tobacco of the Peteriburgh quality, pork, beef, and Indian
- corn, are collected for exportation. ' ox TS:
Face or THE Coux TRY, Soi, AND PRoDUcTIONSs. | North Carolina, in its whole
width, for fixty miles from the ſea, is a dead level. A great proportion of this tract
lies in foreſt, and is barren. On the banks of ſome of the rivers, particularly of
the Roanoke, the land is fertile and good. Interfperſed through the other parts are
glades of rich ſwamp, and ridges of oak land, of a black, fertile foil. In all this cham-
paign country, marine productions are found by digging eighteen or twenty feet below
the ſurface of the ground. The ſea coaft, the ſounds, inlets, and the Tower parts of
the rivers, have uniformly a muddy, ſoft bottom. Sixty or eighty miles from the ſea,
the country riſes into hills and mountains, as deſcribed under this head in South Caro-
lina and Georgia. 1 ———
Wheat, rye, barley, oats, and flax, grow well in the back hilly country. Indian
corn and pulſe of all kinds in all parts. Ground peas run on the ſurface of the earth,
and are covered by hand with a light mould, and the pods grow under ground: they


are eaten raw or roaſted, and taſte much like a hazlenut. Cotton and hemp are up
; oh conſi-


520 NORTH CAROLINA.
conſiderably cultivated here, and might be raifed in much greater plenty. The cotton

is planted yearly : the ſtalk dies with the froſt. The labour of one man will produce
one thouſand pounds in the feeds, or two hundred and fifty fit for manufacturing.
The country is generally friendly to the raifing of ſheep, which yield from three
quarters of a pound to two pounds and a half of wool, which is ſhort and not


*%


very fine. . Pe „„ | |

1 is no uncommon thing for the farmer to mark from five hundred to one thouſand
calves in a year. . No farther attention is paid to them till they are fit - for flaughter;
then they are taken up, killed, barrelled, and ſent to the Weſt India market. Their
pork is raited with as little trouble, large quantitics'of which, before the war, were ſent
to New England, particularly to Boſton and Salem. Ke HE


Txavx.] A great proportion of the produce of the back country, conſiſting of
tobacco, wheat, Indian corn, &c. is carried to market in South Carolina and Virginia.
The ſouthern interior countries, carry their produce to Charleſtown ; and the northern!
to Petertburgh in Virginia. The exports from the lower parts of the State are tar,
pitch, turpentine, rofin, Indian corn, boards, ſcantling, ſtaves, ſhingles, turs, tobacco,
-pork, lard, tallow, bees-wax, myrtle-wax, and a few other articles, amounting in the
year, ending in September zoth, r79r, to 524.348 dollars. Their trade is cluefly
with the Weſt Indies and the northern States. From the latter they receive flour,
_.cheeſe, cyder, apples, potatoes, iron wares, cabinet wares, hats, and dry goods of all
kinds, imported from Great Britain, France, and Holland, tcas, &. From the Weſt
Indies, rum, fugar, and coffee. . 5 1 ee i
__ Crimarts, DiskAsEs, &c.] Inthe flat country, near the ſea coaft, the inhabitants,
during the ſummer and autumn, are ſubject to intermitting fevers, which often prove
latal, as bilious or nervous ſymptoms prevail. Theſe fevers are ſeldom immediatel
dangerous to the natives who are temperate, or to ſtrangers who are prudent. They,
however. if ſuffered to continue for any length of time, bring on other diſorders,
which greatly impair the pate! er eafo8t==:ut td, debilitate the conſtitution, and
terminate in death. The countenances of the inhabitants during theſe ſeaſons, have
generally a pale yellowith caſt, occaſioned by the prevalence of bilious ſymptoms.
1 hey have very little of the bloom and freſhneſs of the people in the northern
It has been obſerved that more of the inhabitants, of the men eſpecially, die during
the winter by pleuriſies and peripneumonies, than during the warm months by bilious
complaints. Theſe pleurifies are brought on by intemperance, and by an imprudent
expoſure to the weather. Were the inhabitants cautious and prudent in theſe reſpects,
it is alledged by their phyſicians, that they might in general eſcape the danger of theſe
fatal diſeaſes. The ute of flannel next to the ſkin during the winter, is reckoned an
excellent preventative of the diſeaſes incident to this climate. The weſtern hilly parts
of the State are as healthy as any of the United States. That country is fertile, full of
_ ſprings and rivulets of pure water. The air there is ſerene a great part of the year, and
the inhabitants live to old age, which cannot ſo generally be ſaid of the inhabitants of
the flat country. Though the days in ſummer are extremely hot, the nights are cool
and refreſhing. Autumn is very pleaſant, both in regard to the temperature and ſerenity
of the weather, and the richneſs and variety of the vegetable productions which the
{caton affords... The winters are ſo mild in ſome years, that autumn may be ſaid to


continue till ſpring. Wheat harveſt is the beginning of June, and that of Indian corn
early in September. | 2 EP . 4 745


NATURAL


NORTH CAROLIN X. | 21


Narux AL IIIsroxx, MaxuracTures, &c.] The large natural grow th of the plains
in the low country is almoſt univer ſally pitch pine, which is a tall, handene tree, far
ſuperior to the pitch pine of the northern States. This tree may be called the ſtaple
commodity of North Carolina. It affords pitch, tar, turpentine, and various kinds of
lumber, which together conſtitute at leaſt one half of the exports of this State. This
pine is of two kinds, the common and the long-leaved. The latter has a leaf ſhaped
like other pines, but is nearly half a yard in length, hanging in large cluſters. No
country produces finer white and red oak for ſtaves. The 1 ſwamps abound with cyprus
and bay trees. The latter is an evergreen, and is food for the cattle in the winter.

The leaves are ſhaped like thoſe of the peach tree, but larger. The moſt common kinds
of timber in the back country are, oak, walnut, and pine. A ſpecies of oak grows in
the moiſt, ſandy ſoil, called black jack. It ſeldom grows larger than eight or nine

inches diameter. It is worthy of remark, that the trees in the low country, near the
ſea coaſt, are loaded with vaſt quantities of a long ſpecies of moſs, which, by abſorbing
the noxious vapour that is exhaled from ſtagnated Waters, contributes much, it is ſup-
poſed, to the healthineſs of the climate. This hypotheſis is confirmed by experience,
tince it is commonly obſerved, that the country is much leſs healthy for a tew years
after having been cleared, than while in a ſtate of nature.

The Mitsletoe is common in the back country. This is a ſhrub which ere in kind,
perhaps, from all others. It never grows out of the earth, but on the tops of trees.
The roots (if they may be ſo called) run under the bark of the tree, and incor ee |
with the wood. It is an evergreen, reſembling the garden box wood.

The principal wild fruits are plums, grapes, ſtrawberries, and e

The country is generally covered with herbage of various kinds, and a ſpecies of wild
graſs.” It abounds with medicinal plants and roots; among others are the ginſeng;
Virginia ſnake root; Seneca ſnake root, an herb of the emetic kind, like epicacuana;
Lyon's heart, which is a ſovereign remedy for the bite of a ſerpent. A ſpecies of the
ſenſitive plant is alſo found here; it is a ſort of brier, the ſtalk of which dies with the
froſt, but the root lives through the winter, and ſhoots again in the ſpring. The
lighteſt touch of a leaf cauſes it to turn and cling cloſe to the ſtalk. Although it fo
calily takes the alarm, and apparently ſhrinks from danger, in the ſpace of two
minutes after it is touched; it perfectly recovers its former ſituation. The mucipula
veneris is alſo found here. The rich bottoms are overgrown with canes. The leaves
are greon all the winter, and afford an excellent food for cattle. . They are of a {weetidh
taſte, like the ſtalks of green corn, which they in many reſpects reſemble.
There is a long ridge of lime-ſtone, which, extending in a ſouth-weſter ly eon,
croſſes the whole State of North Carolina. It crofles Dan river to the weſtward of the
Sawro towns, crofles the Yadkin about fiſty miles north-weſt ſrom Saliſbury, and thence |
proceeds by the way of King's mountain to the ſouthern States. No lime-ſtone has been
tound to the eaſtward of that ridge. 'A ſpecies of rock has been found in ſeveral places,
of which lime 1s made, which is obviouſly a concretion of marine ſhells. The State is
traverfed nearly in the ſame direction by another ſtratum of rocks which. paſſes near
Warrenton. It is a circumſtance worthy of obſervation that the ſprings of water on
the north-weſt ſide of the ridge are -apt to fail in dry ſcaſons; on the ſouth-weſt. fide
they ſeldom fail.

The river i tiene: it paſſes Saliſbur y, is n four hundred 8 We
but it is reduced between two hills, about twenty-five miles to the ran ba. of that
town, to the width of eighty or one hundred feet. For two miles it is narrow and


1 but the moſt narrow and moſt rapid part is net above half a mile in f.
| n


—


322 NORTH CAROLINA.


In this narrow part, ſhad are caught in the ſpring of the year, by hoop nets, in the
eddies, as faſt as the ſtrongeſt men are able to throw them out. Perhaps there is not
in the United States a more eligible ſituation for a large manufacturing town. Boats
with forty or fifty hogſhcads pats caſily from theſe rapids to Georgetown.

The late war, by w which North Carolina was greatly convulſed, put a ſtop to ſeveral
iron works. At preſent there are four or five furnaces in the State that are in blaſt,
and a proportionable number of forges. There is one in Guilford county, one in
Surry, and one in Wilkes, all on the Yadkin ; and one in Lincoln. The quality of
the iron is excellent.

One paper mill has lately 156 erected at Salem, by the Moravians, to great
advrantaps.
 Rxra610n.] The weſtern parts of this State, which have been ſettled within the
laſt forty years, are chiefly inhabited by Preſbyterians from Pennſylvania, the deſcen-
dants of people from the north of Ireland, and are exceedingly attached to the doctrines,
diſcipline, and uſages of the, church of Scotland. They are a regular induſtrious
people. Almoſtattthe inhabitants between the Catawba and Yadkin rivers are of
this denomination, and they are in general well ſupplied with a ſenſtble and learned
miniſtry. There are interſperſed ſome ſettlements of Germans, both Lutherans and
Calviniſts, but they have very few miniſters.

The Moravians have ſeveral flouriſhing ſettlements in this State. In 1 751, they
purchaſed of Lord Granville one hundred thouſand acres of land, between Dan and
Yadkin rivers, about ten miles ſouth of Pilot mountain, in Surry county, and called it
Wachovia, after an eſtate of Count Zinzendorf, in Auſtria. In 1755, this tract, by
an act of Aſſembly, was made a ſeparate pariſh by the name of Dobb's pariſh, The

firſt ſettlement, called Bethabara, was begun in 1753, by a number of the brethren
from Pennſylvania, in a very wild, uninhabited country, which, from that time, began |
to be rapidly ſettled by farmers from the middle States. |
In 1759, Bethany, a regular village, was laid out and ſettled, In 1766, Salem,
which is now the prineipal ſettlement, and nearly in the center of Wachovia, was ſettled
by a coflection 83 The ſame conſſitution and regulations are eſtabliſhed
pere, as in other regular ſettlements of the united brethren. Beſides, there are in

Wachovia three churches, one in Friedland, one in Friedburg, and another at Hope,
each of which has a miniſter of the brethren's church. Theſe people, by their
induſtry and attention to various branches of manufacture, are "oP uſeful to the

country around them.

Idee Friends or Quakers have a ſettlement in New Cant: 4 in Guilford county,
and ſeveral congregations at Perquimins. and Paſquetank. The Methodiſts and
Baptiſts are numerous and increafing. Beſides the Jenomitiations already mentioned,
there is a very numerous body of people in this, and in all the ſouthern States, who


cannot properly be claſſed with any ſect of Chriſtians, having never made any pro-


ſeſſion of Chriſtianity.
The inhabitants of Wilmington, Newbern, Edenton, and Tr diſtricts, making
about three-fifths of the State, once profeſſed themſelves of the epiſcopal church: the
clergy in theſe diſtricts were chiefly miſſionaries, and in e t cir political at-
e at the commencement w4 the late war, perſonal ſafety, or real intercſt, or


perhaps a eonvittion of the impolicy of oppoſing -Great Britain, from whence they
received their ſalaries, induced them almoſt univerſally to declare r in favour

of the Britiſh government, and to emigrate. There may ba one or two of the ori-
Sinal dergy n. n at * they have no particular paſtoral charge; indeed


the


NORTH, CAROLINA KY
the inhabitants in the diſtricts: above mentioned. ſeem now to be making the experi-


ment, whether Chriſtianity can exiſt Iong in a country where there is no viſible
Chriſtian church: the Baptiſts and Methodiſts have ſent a number of miſſionary
preachers inte theſe diſtricts, and ſome of them have pretty large congregations ; it
1s. not improbable that one or the other of theſe denominations, and api both,
may acquire-confiftency, and eſtabliſh permapent churches. = 1
| COLLEGES AND ACADENIES. | The General Aſſembly of North Carolina, in De-
cember, 1789, paſſed a law een forty gentlemen, five from each diſtrict, as
truſtecs of tlie univerſity of North Carolina; to this univerſity they gave, by a fub-
ſequent, Jaw, all the debts due to the State from ſheriffs or other holders of public
money, and which had been due before the year 1783; they alſo gave it all eſcheated
property within the State. Whenever: the truſtees ſhall have collected a ſufficient
tum of the old dehts,-.or from the fale of eſcheated property, the value of which is
conſiderable, to pay the expenſe. of erecting buildings, they are to fix on a proper
place and progecd, to finich the buildings: a conſiderable. qygntity of land has already
been given to the univerſity. The General Aſſembly, in December, 1791, loaned
5oool. to the truſtees, to enable them to proceed immediately with their buildings.
There is a very good academy at Warrenton, another at Williamſborough in Gran-
ville, and three or four others in the State, of conſiderable node.
PoPULATION, \ CHARACTER, MaxxERS, AND Cusroms.] From the marſhal's re-
turn it appears, that the number of inhabitants, in the year 1791, was 393,751, of
whom 293,179 were citizens : perhaps there are few inſtances of ſuch a rapid increaſe
of inhabitants as we find in this State; in the year 1710, we are well affured, that
the number of inhabitants in North Carolina did not exceed 6000: this extraordinary
Increaſe muſt ariſe, in à great meaſure, from the migration of inhabitants from other
States, or from diſtant ;countrics ; but this will not fully account for the preſent flate
ot population in North Carolina. By examining the return, we find there are 147,494
white male inhabitants; we alſo find, that the number of males under fixteen years
exceeds, the number above ſixteen by 7518, which is about one-ninęteenth of the
whole. This is a very remarkable fact, as it reſpects the.increaſe of the human ſpecies.
We find a ſmall difference in the States of Delaware, Virginia, and Georgia, in fa-
vour of thoſe under ſixteen. The difference in Kentucky is ſimilar to that in North
Carolina. In the other States, the number above ſixteen is greateſt, and in the ſeveral
kingdoms in Europe, as far as our information reaches, the inhabitants above ſixteen
are univerſally much more numerous than thoſe under that age. The great difference
that appears in North Carolina in favour of children, cannot be explained by fup-
Poſing that the climate is ſickly, for we know that ſuch climates are equally fatal to
young and old. The idea too of & fickly climate does not accord with the prodigious
increaſe of inhabitants in this State, nor with another fact, viz. that there is a con-
ſiderable proportion of very old inhabitants in the State. To explain this we muſt
obſerve, that the human ſpecies, and all other animals, are found to increaſe in pro-
portion to the comforts of life, and the eaſe with which they can ſupport their pro-
geny. Remove the rigours of an 1 5 climate, and the more uniform diffua-
tive to matrimony, the apprehended difficulty of fupporting a family, and the human
ſpecies would double, not in twenty but in fifteen years. In North Carolina, neither
the cold of winter, nor the heat of ſummer, are in the back country at all diſagree-
able; land continues to be plenty and cheap; grain is raiſed with ſo much eaſe, and
the trouble of providing for cattle in winter ſo trifling, that a man ſupports his fa-
mily with half the labour that is required in the cold climates. Under theſe ad-
| | TS vantage,


„% ] aul e


vantages, we are not to wonder that people in all ranks of life ſhould marry very
young; we have heard of grandmothers in that State who were not more than twenty-
teven years old. OED ge | wn OM ;
The North Carolinians are moſily planters, and live from half a mile to three and
four miles from each other on their plantations ; they have a plentiful country, no-
ready market for their produce, little intercourſe with ſtrangers, and a natural fond-
neſs for ſociety, which induce them to be hoſpitable to travellers —
| The general topics of converſation among the men, when cards, the bottle, and
occurrences of the day do not intervene, are negroes, the prices of indigo, rice, tohacco,
&c. They appear to have little taſte for the ſciences. Political inquiries and philo-
ſophical diſquiſitions are attended to but by a few men of genius and induſtry, and
are too laborious for the minds of the people at large. Leſs attention and reſpect are
paid to the women here, than in thoſe parts of the United States where the inhabi-
tants have made greater r progreſs in the arts of civilized life ; indeed it is a truth con-
firmed by obſervation, that in proportion to the advancement of civilization, in the
ſame proportion will reſpect for the women be increaſed ; ſo that the progreſs of ci-
vilization in countrics, in ſtates, in towns, and in families, =_ be marked by the
degree of attention which is paid by huſbands to their wives, and by the young men-
to the young women. yas a 3 W
Temperance and induſtry are not to be reckoned among the virtues of the North
Carolinians; the time which they waſte in drinking, idling, and gambling, leaves
them very little opportunity to improve their plantations or their minds; the improve-
ment of the former is left to their overſeers and negroes; the improvement of the
latter is too oſten neglected. Were the time which is thus waſted, ſpent in cultivating
the foil, and in treaſuring up knowledge, they might be both wealthy and learned;
for they have a productive country, and are by no means deſtitute of genius.
Time that is not employed in ſtudy or uſeful labour, in every country, is generally
ſpent in hurtful or innocent exerciſes, according to the cuſtom of the place; or tlie
taſte of the parties. The citizens of North Carolina, who are not better employed,
ſpend their time in drinking, or gaming at cards and dice, in cock-fighting or horſe»
F HR 8 OE! „„
We are told, that a ſtrange and very barbarous practice prevailed among the lower
_ claſs of people, before the revolution, in the back parts of Virginia, North and South
Carolinas, and Georgia; it was called gouging, and was neither more nor leſs than a
man, when boxing, putting out the eye of his antagoniſt with his thumb: How
quick, under a mild government, is the reformation of manners! We have lately
been told, that in a particular county, where, at the quarterly court twenty years ago,
a day feldom paſſed without ten or fifteen boxing matches, it is now a rare thing to
rf ae ne earl os e
North Carolina, as already obſerved, has had a rapid growth; in the year 1710 it
contained but about 1200 fencible men; it is now, in point of numbers, the fourth:
State in the Union. During this amazing progreſs in population, which has been
greatly aided by emigrations from Pennſylvania, Virginia, and other States, while
cach has been endeavouring to mcreaſe his fortune, the human mind, like an un-
weeded garden, has been ſuffered to ſhoot up in wild diforder: But when we con-
ſider, that, during the late revolution, this State produced many diſtinguiſhed pa-
triots and politicians, that ſhe fent her thouſands to: the defence of Georgia and
South Carolina, and gave occaſional ſuccours to Virginia; when we confider too the
difficulties ſhe has had to encounter from a mixture of inhabitants, collected — dif-
e ad,” erent


NORTH CAROLINA _ 3256


ferent parts, ſtrangers to each other, and intent upon gain, we hall find many n
worthy of praiſe in her general character..

| ConsTITUTION. + By the conſtitution of this State, which was ratified in Dovemn-
ber, 1776, all legiſlative authority is veſted in two diſtinct branches, both dependent
-on the people, viz. a Senate and Houſe of Commons, which, when convened for
buſineſs, are ſtyled. the General Aſſembly.


The ſenate is np of . one for each county , choſen annually
by ballot. .

be houſe of commons conſiſts of cepteſbmiativas choſen in the ſame way, two for
cach county, and one for each of the towns of Edenton, N ewbern, Wilmington d
Saliſbury, Hillſborough, Halifax, and Fayetteville. |

The qualifications for a ſenator, are one year's reſidence immediately preceding his
election in the county in which he is choſen, and goo acres of land in fee.

A member. of the houſe of commons muſt have uſually reſided in the county in
which he is elected one year immediately preceding his election, and for ſix months
ſhall have poſſeſſed, and continue to poſſeſs, in the county which he repreſents, not
leſs than 100 acres of land in fee, or for the term of his own life.

A freeman of twenty-one years of age, who has been an inhabitant in the State
twelve months immediately preceding the day of any election, and who had poſſeſſed a
freehold of fifty acres of land within the county for fix months next before, and at the
day of election, is entitled to vote for a member of the ſenate. -

All freemen; of twenty-one years of age, who have been inhabitants of the State
the. year next before the election, and have paid Pubic taxes, may vote for members
of the houſe of commons.

The ſenate and houſe of commons, ho Arend. hae each their own. „
and are judges of the qualifications and elections of their members: they jointly,
by ballot, at their firſt meeting after each annual election, chooſe a governor for one
year, who is not eligible to that office longer than three years, in fix ſucceſſive
years, and who muſt poſſeſs a freehold of more than 10001. and have been an inha-
tant of the State above five years. They, in the ſame manner, and at the ſame time,

elect ſeven perſons to be a council of ſtate for one year, to adviſe the governor in the
exccution of his office. They appoint a treaſurer or treaſurers for the State. They

trennially chooſe a ſtate ſecretary. - They jointly appoint judges of the ſupreme
courts of law ahd equity; judges of admiralty, and the attorney general, who are
commiſſioned by the governor, and hold their offices during good behaviour. They
prepare bills, which muſt be read three times in each houſe, and be ſigned by the
ſpeaker of both houſes before they paſs into laws |
Judges of the ſupreme court, members of the council, judges of admiralt y, trea-
ſurers, ſecretaries, attorney-generals for the State, clerks of record, clergymen, per-
ſons denying the being of a God, the truth of the Proteſtant religion, or the divine
authority of the Old and New Teſtament, receivers of public monies, whoſe accounts
are unſettled, military officers in actual ſervice, are all incligible to a ſeat either in
the ſenate or houſe of commons ; juſtices of the peace, being recommended by the
_ repreſentatives, are commiſſioned by the gavernor, and hold their offices during good

behaviour. The conſtitution allows of no religious eſtabliſhment, the legiſlature are
authorized to regulate entails ſo as to prevent perpetuities. A majority of both Houſes
is neceſſary to do buſineſs.
Husronx.] The hiſtory of North Carolina is leſs 1 than that of any of the
other States; from the beſt accounts that hiſtory affords, the firſt permanent ſettle-


S368 ment


— -


|
'
|
|
|
|


RM CA EOLINSE.
vantages, we are not to wonder that people in all ranks of Iiſe ſhould marry very
young; we have heard of grandmothers in that State who were not more than twenty-
teven years old. : | | f
The North Carolinians are moſily planters, and live from half a mile to three and


four miles from each other on their plantations; they have a plentiful country, no-


market for their produce, little intercourſe with ſtrangers, and a natural fond-


_ neſs for ſociety, which induce them to be hoſpitable to travellers.


The general topics of converſation among the men, when cards, the bottle, ' and


- occurrences of the day do not intervene, are negroes, the prices of indigo, rice, tobacco,


&c. They appear to have little taſte for the ſciences. Political inquiries and philo-
ſophical diſquifitions are attended to but by a few men of genius and induſtry, and
are too laborious for the minds of the people at large. Leſs attention and reſpect are-
paid to the women here, than in thoſe parts of the United States where the inhabi-


tants have made greater L Progreſs in the arts of civilized liſe; indeed it is a truth con-


firmed by obſervation, that in proportion to the advancement of civilization, in the


ſame proportion will reſpect for the women be increaſed ; ſo that the progreſs of ci-
vilization in countries, in ſtates, in towns, and in families, may be marked by the


degree of attention which is paid by huſbands to their wives, and by the young men
to the young women. 50 5 e
Temperance and induſtry are not to be reckoned among the virtues of the North


Carolinians; the time which they waſte in drinking, idling, and gambling, leaves


them very little opportunity to improve their plantations or their minds; the improve-


ment of the former is left to their overſeers and negroes; the improvement of the


latter is too oſten neglected. Were the time which is thus waſted, ſpent in cultivating


the ſoil, and in treaſuring up knowledge, they might be both wealthy and learned ;:


for they have a productive country, and are by no means deſtitute of genius.
Time that is not employed in ſtudy or uſeful labour, in every country, is generally
fpent in hurtful or innocent exerciſes, according to the cuſtom of the place; or the
taſte of the parties. The citizens of North Carolina, who are not better employed,
ſpend their time in drinking, or gaming at cards and dice, in cock-fighting or horſe» -


racing. N


We are told, that a ſtrange and very barbarous practice prevailed among the lower


claſs of people, before the revolution, in the back parts of Virginia, North and South
Carolinas, and Georgia; it was called gong


1g, and was neither more nor leſs than a
man, when boxing, putting out the eye of his antagoniſt with his thumb: Ho


quick, under a mild government, is the reformation of manners! We have lately
been told, that in a particular county, where, at tlie quarterly court twenty years ago,
a day feldom paſſed without ten or fifteen boxing matches, it is now a rare thing to


Z — : AY | E
North Carolina, as alrcady obſerved, has had a rapid growth; in the year 1710 it
contained but about 1200 fencible men; it is now, in point of numbers, the fourth:
State in the Union. During this amazing progreſs in population, which has been
greatly aided by emigrations from Pennſylvama, Virgima, and other States, while
each has been endeavouring to mcreaſe his fortune, the human mind, like an un-


wWeeded garden, has been ſuffered to ſhoot up in wild diforder: But when we con-


fider, that, during the late revolution, this State produced many diſtinguiſhed pa-
triots and politicians, that ſhe fent her thouſands to the defence of Georgia ant
South Carolina, and gave occaſional ſuccours to Virginia; when we confider too the


difficulties ſhe has had to encounter from a mixture of inhabitants, collected from dif-


ferent


NORTH eon 525


ferent parts, ſtrangers to each other, and intent upon gain, we ball find many things
worthy of praiſe in her general character.
 ConsT1TUTION. | By the conſtitution of this State, which was ratified in Dovem-
ber, 1776, all legiſlative authority is veſted in two diſtinct branches, both dependent
-on the people, viz. a Senate and Houſe of Commons , which, when convened for
buſineſs, are ſtyled. the General Aſſembly.


| 28 ſenate is compoſed of repreſentatives, ons: for FRY county , choſen annually
by ballot. . f

The houſe of commons conſiſts of repreſentative choſen in the ſame way, two for
each county, and one. for each of the towns of Edenton, N ewbern, Wilmington,
_ Saliſbury, Hillſborough, Halifax, and Fayetteville. |

The qualifications for a ſenator, are one year's refidence immediately preceding his
election in the county in which he is choſen, and 300 acres of land in fee.

A member. of the houſe of commons muſt have uſually reſided in the county in
which he is elected one year immediately preceding his election, and for ſix months
ſhall have poſſeſſed, and continue to poſſeſs, in the county which he repreſents, not

leſs than 100 acres of land in fee, or for the term of his own life.

A freeman of twenty-one years of age, who has been an inhabitant in the State
twelve months immediately preceding the day of any election, and who had poſſeſſed a
freehold of fifty acres of des within the county for ſix months next GG, and at the
day of election, is entitled to vote for a member of the ſenate. -
All freemen of twenty-one years of age, who have been inhabitants of the State
the. year next before the election, and have paid * taxes, may vote for members
of the houſe of commons.
The ſenate and houſe of commons, ham convened, 0 each their own. ber,
and are judges of the qualifications and elections of their members: they jointly,
by ballot, at their firſt meeting after each annual election, chooſe a governor for one
year, who is not eligible to that office longer than three years, m fix ſucceſſive
years, and who muſt poſſeſs a freehold of more than 10001. and have been an inha-
tant of the State above five years. They, in the ſame manner, and at the ſame time,
elect ſeven perſons to be a council of ſtate for one year, to adviſe the governor in the
- exccution of his office. They appoint a treaſurer or treaſurers for the State. They

trennially chooſe a tate ſecretary. - They jointly appoint judges of the ſupreme
courts of law and equity; judges of admiralty, and the attorney general, who are
_ commiſſioned by the governor, and hold their offices during good behaviour. They

prepare bills, which muſt be read three times-in each houſe, and be ſigned by the
ſpeaker of both houſes before they pats into laws.

Judges of the ſupreme court, members of the council, ade of admiralt y, trea
ſurers, ſecretaries, attorney-generals for the State, clerks 3 record, 3 : per
ſons denying the being of a God, the truth of the Proteſtant religion, or the divine
authority of the Old and New Teſtament, receivers of public monies, whoſe accounts
are unſettled, military officers in actual ſervice, are all ineligible to a ſcat either in
the ſenate or houſe of commons; juſtices of the peace, being recommended by the
repreſentatives, are commiſſioned by the governor, and hold their offices during good
behaviour. The conſtitution allows of no religious eſtabliſhment, the legiſlature are
authorized to regulate entails ſo as to prevent perpetuities. A majority of both Houſes
is neceſſary to do buſineſs,

Is ronx.] The hiſtory of North Carolina is leſs 3 than that of any of the
other States; from the beſt accounts that hiſtory affords, the firſt permanent ſettle-


48S +: | ment


NORTH CAROLINA.


ment in North Carolina was made about the year 1710, by a number of Palatines
from Germany, who had been reduced to circumſtances: of great indigence by a ca-
lamitous war: The proprietors of Carolina, knowing that the value of their lands
depended on the ſtrength of their ſettlements, determined to give every poſſible en-
couragement to ſuch emigrants. Ships were accordingly provided for their tranfporta-
tion, and inſtructions were given to Governor Tynte, to allow roo acres of land for
every man, woman, and child, fre of quit rents, for the firſt ten years; but at the
expiration of that term, to pay one penny per acre annual rent for ever, atcording
to. the uſages and cuſtoms of the province. Upon their arrival Governor Tynte
granted them a tract of land in North Carolina, fince called Albemarle and Bath
precincts, where they ſettled, and flattered themſelves with having found in the hi-
deous wilderneſs, a happy retreat from the deſolations of a war which then raged in
Europe. e 3 1 e r
In he year 1512, a dangerous conſpiracy was formed by the Coree and Tufcorora

tribes of Indians, to murder and expel this infant colony. The foundation for this.
_ conſpiracy is not known; probably they were offended at the encroachments upon
their hunting ground. They managed their conſpiracy with great cunning and pro-
found ſecrecy. They furrounded their principal town with a breaſt work to ſecure
their families. Here the warriors convened to the number of 1200. From this
place of rendezvous they ſent out ſmall parties, by different roads, who entered the
tettlement under the maſk of friendſhip. At the change of the full on all of
them had agreed to begin them murderous operations the ſame night. When the
night came, they entered the houſes of the planters, demanding proviſions, and pre-
tending to be offended, fell to murdering men, women, and children, without mercy
or diſtinction. One hundred and thirty-ſeven ſettlers, among whom were a Swiſs
baron, and almoſt all the poor Palatines that had lately come into the oountry, were
ſlaughtered the firſt night. - Such was the ſecrecy and diſpatch of the Indians in this
expedition, that none knew what had befallen his neighbour until the barbarians had
reached his -own door. Some ifew, however, eſcaped, and gave the alarm. The
militia aſſembled in arms, and kept watch day and night, until the news of the ſad;
diſaſter had reached the province of South Carolina. Governor Craven loft no time


326


*


in ſending a force to their relief. The Aſiembly voted. 4000l. for the ſerviec of the


war. A body of 600 militia, under the eommand of Colonel Barnwell, and 366.

Indians of different tribes, with different commanders, marched with great expedition
through a hideous wilderneſs to. their afliftance. In their firſt encounter with the
Indians they killed 300 and took 100 priſoners. Aſter this defeat, the Tuſrororas
retreated to their fortified town, which was ſhortly after ſurrendered to Colonel Barn-
well. In this expedition it was computed: that near a tliouſand Tuſcororas were
_ Killed, wounded, and taken. The remainder of the tribe foon aſter abandoned their
country, and joined the Five Nations, with whom. they have ever ſince remained:

After this, the infant colony remained in peace; and continued to flouriſh under the

general government of South Carolina: till about the year 1729, when. ſeven of the
Proprietors, for a valuable confideration, veſted their property and juriſdiction in the
crown, and the colony was erected. into a ſeparate province, by the name of North
Carolina, and its preſents limit eſtabliſned by an order of George II. From this
period to the revolution mn. 1776, the hiſtory of North Carolina is unpublithed, and of
courſe unknown, except to thoſe who have had aceeſs to the records of the province.
Some of the moſt important events that have ſince taken place, have been already
mentioned in the general. hiſtory of the United States. i F 5


E R —FFͥq‚ ap may aosy” 7 Ag * FOL1 or Aa pra fi pep 47 a


- A - 72 Py PE


' F641
"LNAWNYHTAOD AASSANNAL.


N 5% Jo AV ÞF*


o Jabn], :
\ 888 _
%,


\


\


um by


1
* - 1. wn . uh as
l U 4


M
UU aw A


N.


29 oO ai | 91


J7 ..
mp ini,


3.


Af


EE . RG


1 140-19 Yo 0


**


I PS — 124N |


| oy 9 py |
J =
5 7A PA


- PF


15 Ta.
AMD;1LNAY +. Jo
LL


eee


*


. * 5 4 . "ee Fn, . F =, * o 4
r ̃ œö , e rp ut Pn $I


9


TERRITORY SOUTH or OHIO,
OR THE TENNESSEE GOVERNMENT.


$1TVATION AND ExTexT.
- Miles. 3
Length 360 0 20 and 16? 30, ngitude
© A" 10 41 W N 35 and 36 30 N. Latitude


B F T HE Tenneſſee government, or the territory of the United States;
OUNDARIES.” ſouth. of the river Ohio, 1s that tract of country which was ceded:
to the United States by the State of North Carolina in the year 1789. It is bounded:


north, By Kentucky and part of Virginia; eaſt, by the Stone, Yellow, Iron, and
Bald mountains, which divides it irons North Carolina; ſouth, by South Carolina |


and Georgia; weft, by the Mifſſiſſip


CrviL Divrsroxs AND PorurA. =o This extenſive diſtrict is Aiden into the fol-


lowing counties: :


1 Counties


No. Inhabit.


leſſen the ne


The above is according to the returns made by the governor of this territory in

1791. Owing to imperfect returns made to him, it does not comprehend. the 7 52
number of inhabitants. We have no data on which to calculate the probable defi-
eiency.. In 1788, the number of inhabitants were reckoned at about 40, ooo; they
muſt have greatly increaſed ſince that period. In 1 705, there were but about ten:
families ſettled weſt of the Kanhawa ; fo many had joined them in 1773, that the


ſettlement weſt of the Kanhawa was erected into a. county, and in. ITO TIE OE into
three counties:


The: inhabitants of this diſtrict emigrated” chiefly doc Fennffiragis, that part of”
The anceſtors of theſe people were gene-


Virginia which lies weſt of the Blue Ridge.
rally of the Scotch nation, fome of whom. emigrated firſt to Ireland, and from thence


to America. A few. Germans and 15 gliſh are intermixed. The proportion of the


ing from the foregoing imperfect cenſus, is as
ten to one. In 1788, it was thought there were twenty white perſons to one negroe.


whites to the black in this diſtrict, jud


The erection of this territory into a ſeparate goverment, it is believ ed, will tend to
population.

SoIL, | The farmers on Cumberland river, for the ſake of defcribing their lands, 5
diſtinguiſh them by firſt, ſecond, and third' quality. Land of the fil quality will:

bear Indian corn or hemp, but it will not'bear wheat without great reduction. Land
of the ſecond quality does not bear wheat to · advantage until it has been. reduced by
two or three crops of corn, hemp, tobacco, or cotton. Land of the third quality
bears 0 kmd of grain that is ufually fown:on ay: ground in the. Atlantic States.


* * ſeven and a balf millions of acres of this Gait has boen het purckaſed 8 the Indians. 5


E V No. Inhabit- 3 . Counties.
2 . | Waſhington, — 5872 * Davidſon, — — 3439
2 & | Sullivan, — 4447 | Sumner, — — 22196
=. Sa 5 | | "J .
SS \ Green; — ITS "Tennefſee, — — 1387
4 8 Hawkins, . 6970 £ —
= {Southof French Reoad, 36179 | = L . Total 2589


528 TERRITORY SOUTH OF OHIO.


It is agreed by all who have viſited the Cumberland ſettlement, that 700 buſhels of
Indian corn are frequently gathered from an acre of their beſt land; ſixty or ſeventy
bufhels from an acre is very common, but the farmer who expects to gather ſuch a
crop, muſt be careful, while the corn is ſoit, to guard it againſt bears and racoons.
Wheat, barley, oats, rye, buckwheat, Indian corn, peaſe, hea As, potatoes of both.
ſorts, flax, hemp, tobacco, indigo, rice, and cotton, have already been planted in


that ſettlement, and they all thrive in great perfection; the utual crop of cotton is
"800 pounds to the acre; the ſtaple is long and fine. It is alledged, however, that the
lands on the ſmall rivers that run into the Miſſiſſippi, have decided preference to
thoſe on the Cumberland river, for the production of cotton and indigo. No expe-
riments have been made on land near the Miffiſſippi within the ceded territory; but
there is a ſmall ſettlement farther down the river, within the limits of the United
States, on a ſimilar foil, where the growth and quality of cotton is ſo remarkable,
that its culture is more profitable than any other crop. The ſoil on thoſe rivers is
deep and light, having a ſmall mixture 0: nd, with a black earth ; hence, as the
planters alledge, it proves favourable to the culture of all kinds ol roots, as well as
of indigo and cotton. |
_Crimarts.] Moderate and healthy. In the tract lying between the Great Iſland,
as it is called, and the Kanhawa, the ſummers - arc remarkably cool, aud the air
rather moiſt. South-weſt of this, as far as the Indian towns, the diamine: is much
warmer, and the ſoil better adapted to the productions of the ſouthern States.
The diſeaſes to which the adult inhabitants are moſt liable, are pluriſies , Theuma-
tiſms, and rarely agues and fevers: fo healthy have been the inhabitants, that from
the firſt ſettlement of the country to 1788, not a ſingle phyſician had ſettled among
them. It is to the inhabitants a wad advantage, that they are almoſt beyond the reach
of thoſe luxuries which are enjoyed, and thoſe epidemical diſeaſes which are conſe-
quently frequent, in populous towns on the ſea coaſt. An inhabitant of this diſtrict
writes, Our phyſicians are, a fine climate, healthy, robuſt mothers and fathers,
plain and plentiful diet, and enough of exerciſc: there is not a regular bred phyſician
reſiding in the whole diſtrict.” |
RivERS AND Mouxraixs.] The Tenneſſee, called alſs the Cherokee, and ab-
ſurdly the Hegohege river, is the largeſt branch of the Ohio; it riſes in the moun-
tains of Virginia, latitude 37, and purſes a courſe of about 1000 miles ſouth and
8 nearly te latitude 34*, receiving from both ſides a number of large tribu-
tary ſtreams; it then wheels about to the north, in a circuitous courſe, and mingles
with the Ohio, nearly ſixty miles from its mouth : from its entrance into the Ohio,
to the Muſcle ſhoals, 250 miles, the current is very gentle, and the river deep enough,
at all ſeaſons, for the largeſt row boats: the Muſcle ſhoals are about twenty miles in
length. At this place the river ſpreads to the width of three miles, and forms a
number of iſlands, and is of difficult paſſage, except when there is a fwell in the
river. From theſe ſhoals to the whirl or ſuck, the place where the river breaks
through the Great Ridge, or Cumberland mountain, is 250 miles, the navigation all
the way excellent.
The Cumberland mountain, in its whole extent, from the Great Kanhawa to the
Tenneſſee, conſiſts of the moſt ſtupendous piles of craggy rocks of any mountain in
the weſtern, country; in ſeveral parts of it, for miles, it is inacceſſible even to the
Indians on foot; in one place particularly, near the ſummit of the mountain, there
is a moſt remarkable ledge of rocks of about thirty miles in length and 200 feet thick,
ſewing a. eren face to the ſouth- caſt more noble and grand than any 2
4 fici


40 fortification in the known world, and apparently equal in point of regularity.
Through this ſtupendous pile, according to a modern hypotheſis, had the waters of
all the upper branches of the Tenneſſee to force their way; the attempt would have
been impracticable at any other place than the one mentioned for more than 100


miles eaſtwardly. Here then ſeems to have been the chaſm, left by the Creator, to con-
vey off thoſe waters which muſt otherwiſe have overflowed; and rendered uſeleſs a


vaſt tract of valuable country, encompaſſed within the mountains.


The #hirl, as it is ealled, is in about latitude 35 it is reekoned a greater eurioſity


than the burſting of the Patomak through the Blue Ridge, which is ſ@ inimitably de-


ſcribed by Mr. Jefferſon. The river, which a few miles above is half a mile wide, is


here 0 to the width of about 100 yards; juſt as it enters the mountain, a


large rock projects from the northern ſhore in an oblique direction, which renders the


bed of the river ſtill narrower, and cauſes a fadden bend; the water of the river is


of courſe thrown with great rapidity againft the fouthern ſhore, whence it abounds-
around the. point of the rock and produces the whirl, which is about eighty yards in


circumference. Canoes have often been carried into this whirl, and eſcaped by the
dexterity of the rowers without damage. In leſs than a mile below the whirl, the


river road into its common width, and, except Muſcle Shoals, rac mentioned,
flows beautiful and placid till it mingles with the Ohio.


Six miles above As wharl are the Chiccamogga towns, on the banks of the river,


and of à large creek of the ſame name; from theſe towns to the mouth of the Hi-


waſſee is fixty miles by water, and about forty by land; this river is a. ſouth branch
of the Tenneſſee, and navigable till it penetrates the mountains on its ſouth fide';

up this river, in theſe mountains, a mine has been diſcovered and ore taken, from
which, it is ſaid, gold was extracted by an artiſt, while the Britiſh were in poſſeſſion
of Georgia: it is certain, but few Indians know the ſpot, and thoſe who do are very


anxious to keep it a ſecret: the gentleman who gave the author this information has
been within view of the place. The mountain is very high and barren, and has


ſeveral of the appearances deſcribed by mineraliſts. The difcovery was made by
means of the river's undermining the baſe of a large cliff or ſpur of the mountain,


which occaſioned a great column of the earth or rock to tumble into the river; this-


diſrupture diſcovered the vein of yellow metal at a great depth. The climate, the
fine ſprings, and fertile plains, render the banks of this n a moſt delightful place
of ſettlement. From a branch of the Hiwaſſee, called Amoia, there is but a ſhort
portage to a branch of the Mobile, and the road all the diſtance firm and level.


Paſſing up the Tenneſſee, ſixty miles from the mouth of the Hiwaſſee, you come


to the mouth of Peleſon or Clinch river, from the north, which is large and-naviga-
ble for boats upwards of 200 miles, receiving in its courſe, beſides inferior ſtreams,
Powell's river, which is nearly as large as the main river, and boatable roo miles:
this laſt- mentioned river runs through Powell 8 Valley, an excellent tract of e
abounding with fine ſprings.

From the Pelefon to the junction of the Holſtein and Tenneflee i is computed forty
miles; this laſt is the inch which formerly gave its name to. the main river, not


from its ſize, but from its notoriety, having on its banks a. vaſt number of Indian


villages, and the chief town of the Cherokee Indians, called Chota, and was there-
fore called Cherokee river; but the name of Fenneffee has of late obtained: it croſſes
the valley at nearly ri ight angles with the mountains, and has on its banks a number
of beautiful plains, which are chiefly improved as corn fields by the Indians. In


\ For ty


TERRITORY SOUTH OF OHIO. - 529


I 7885 the whites had advanced their ſettlements within ten miles of the Indian villages.


. - r ᷑ê L! tan ae ity -m 7


530 TERRITORY SOUTH OF OHIO.


Forty miles from the Tenneflee, up the Holſtein branch, comes in Frank river, vul-
garly called French Broad, four or five hundred yards wide; thence, purfuing the
Holſtein 200 miles, you come to Long Ifland, which is the higheſt navigation yet
uſed; thence about 100 miles is the ſource of the river. One mile below Long
Iand eomes in North Holſtein, and 20 miles above it the Wattago ; the former is
100 yards wide at its mouth, and, with a {mall expenſe, might be made navigable
to Campbell's Salines, ſeventy miles farther up. On the banks of the Holſtein are
many mines of iron ore, of the beſt kind, ſome of which have been opened and
worked to ad\antage, and enough might be made to ſupply the whole weſtern country;

and theſe mines are the more valuable, as there is ſaid to be none of this ore near the
Mifliflippi, and very little north of the Ohio. In the Tenneſſee and its upper. branches
are great numbers of fiſh, ſome of which are very large and of an excellent flavour,

The head waters of the great Kanhawa are in the weſtern part of North Carolina,
in the moſt eaſtern ridge of the Allegany or Appalachian mountains, and fouth of
the 36th degree of latitude. Its head branches encircle thoſe of the Holſtein, from

which they are ſeparated by the Iron mountain, through which it paſſes, ten miles
above the lead mines; thence ſteering its courſe along the foot * the Allegany
222 until it receives Little river from the eaſt, it turns to the north, which is
its general courſe till it meets the Ohio. About 60 miles from Little river it re-
ceives Green Briar river from the eaſt, which is the only conſiderable tributary ſtream
in all that diſtance. About forty miles below the mouth of Green Briar river, (in
Virginia) in the Kanhawa, is a remarkable cataract, A large rock, a little elevated
in the middle, croſſes the bed of the river, over which the matte oer and falls about
1 ſeet perpendicularly, except at one ſide, where the deſcent is more gradual.
The Shawanee, now called Cumberland river, of the ſouthern branches of the
Ohio, is next in ſize to the Tenneſſee, and extends enſtwardly nearly as far, but runs
aà much more direct courſe; it is navigable for ſmall craft as far as Naſhville; from
the ſouth it receives Hatper's, Coney, Obey's, and Clear Fork rivers; and from the
north, Red and Rock Caſtle rivers, beſides many ſmaller ſtreams.

The land on the waters of Tenneſſee and Cumberland rivers is e wall tim-
bered; in ſome places there ate glades of rich land without timber, but theſe are not
frequent nor large. The general growth is ptplar, hickory, black walnut, buck eye,
or or the horſe cheſnut, ſyeamore, locuſt, and the ſugar maple. The under growth, in

places, is cane fifteen or twenty feet high, fo cloſe together as to exclude all
other plants; where the cane does not abound, we find red bud, wild plum, fpice
wood, red and white mulberry, ginſ , Virginia and Sencka ſnake root, angelica, |
tweet aniſe, ginger, and wild hops e glades are covered with clover, wild rye,
_buffalo graſs, and pea vine.. On he bills, at the head of rivers, we find ſtately red
cedars ; many of theſe trees are four feet in diameter, and forty feet clear of limbs.

It would take a volume to deſcribe particularly the mountains of this territory,
above half of which is covered with thoſe which are uninhabitable; » ſome of theſe
mountains, particularly Cumberland, or Great Laurel Ridge, are the moſt ſtupendous

Piles in the United States; they aboutd with ginſeng and ftone coal. . Clinch moun-
tain is ſouth of theſe, in'which Burk's Garden and Morris's Nob might be deſcribed
as curioſities.

The Iron mountain, Which conſtitutes the houn Webern this diſtrict and North
Carolina, extends from near the lead mines, on the Kanhawa, through the Cherokee

county, to the ſouth of Chota, and terminates near the ſources of the Mobile. The

caverns and caſcades in theſe mountains are innumerable, | |

Anzita.]


TERRITORY SOUTH OF Olo. $31


 Anwats.] A few years ſince, this country abounded with large herds of wild
cattle, improperly called buffaloes; but the improvident or ill-diſpoſed among the
firſt ſettlers, have deſtroyed multitudes of them out of mere wantonneſs; they are
ſtall to be found on ſome of the ſouth branches of Cumberland river. Elk, or mooſe,
are ſeen in many places, chiefly among the mountains. The deer are become com-
paratively ſcarce, ſo that no perſon makes a buſineſs of hunting them for their ſkins
only. Enough of bears and wolves yet remain. Beavers and otters are caught in
plenty in the upper branches of Cumberland and Kentucky rivers.

They have pheaſants, partridges, or quails, and turkies in abundance through the
year. During the winter their waters are covered with the ſwan, wild gooſe, brant,
and duck. Cat-fiſh have been caught in thoſe rivers that weighed above 190 PEO,
and perch that weighed above twenty pounds.

The mammoth, the king of the land animals, was formerly an inhabitant of this
country, as appears from his bones, which have been dug up by labourers at Camp-
bell's Salines, on North Holſtein, when faking. ſalt Pw? oy were from three to
ſeven feet below the ſurface of the earth.

SalLIx ES, Mixes, SerINGs, &c.| Campbell's Sales juſt OR TOR | are the only
ones that have yet been diſcovered on the upper branches of the Tenneflee and on
this ſide the wilderneſs, though great ſearch has been made for them. The tract
which contains theſe ſalines is a great natural curioſity; it was difcovered by Capt.
Charles Campbell, about 1745, who was one of the firſt explorers of the weſtern
country. In 1753, he procured a patent for it from the governor of Virginia. His
ſon, the late General William Campbell, the ſame who behaved ſo gallantly in the
American war, in the years 1780 and 1781, became owner of it on kis death. But
it was not till the time of his death, when ſalt was very ſcarce and dear, that ſalt
water was diſcovered, -and falt made by a poor man; fince that time, under the di-
rection of Colonel Arthur Campbell, it has been improved to a conſiderable extent,
and many thouſands of inhabitants are ſupplied from it with ſalt of a ſuperior qua-
lity, and at a low price. The tract confiſts of about 3oo acres of flat marſh land,
of as rich a ſoil as can be imagined: in this flat, pits are ſunk in order to obtain the
talt water; the beſt is found from thirty to forty feet deep; aſter paſſing througli the
rich foil or mud, from fix to ten feet, you come to a very brittle lime- ſtone rock,
with cracks or chafns, through which the ſalt water iſſues into the pits, whence it is
drawn by buckets and put into the boilers, which are placed in furnaces adjoining the”
pits. The hills that ſurround this flat are cov ered with ine timber, and not far diſtant
a coal mine has been difcovered. |
On Frank river, about thirty miles 3 IN a direct line fan its mouth, a large, clear, |
medicinal ſpring has lately been diſcovered, which, on experiment, has been found
* 10 various complaints of the human body. Its temperature ratlier exceeds :

ood. heat.


On the fame river, nearer its mouth, A valuable lead mine has lately been ditoo- ;
vered. J |
| CoMMERCE. ] This out Nod many valuable articles of export, duch as
fine waggon and ſaddle horſes, beef, cattle, ginteng, deer ſkins and furs, cotton, hemp,
and flax, which may 'be tranſported by land; alſo iron, lumber, pork, and flour,
which might be exported in great quantities, if the navigation of the Miſſiſſippi oO
opened; but there are few of the inhabitants who underſtand COMMErce, Or are 2
ſeſſed of proper capitals; of courſe it is badly managed: the wieked practice of
jobbing engroſſes tos much of the attention of the inhabitants. The degraded ſtate
| 3 Y to


332 TERRITORY SOUTH OF' OHIO.
of commerce has rendered neceſſary a general attention to home manufactures; and it
is to be hoped that the eyes of the people will ſoon be opened to their true intereſt, and


agriculture, commerce, and manufactures, each receive proper attention.

REL1@10N. ] The Preſbyterians are the prevailing denomination of Chriſtians in this
diſtrict: they have a Preſbytery, called the Abingdon Preſbytery, eſtabliſhed by act
of ſynod, which, in 1788, confiſted of 23 large congregations, who were then ſapplied
by only fix miniſters. There are. alſo ſome of the Baptiſt and Methodiſt deno-
minations.

Acab Rr AND SOCIETY. ] The inhabitants of this diſtrict have not been inattentive
to the intereſts of ſcience. An academy and ſeveral grammar ſchools have been eſta-
bliſhed; and a ſociety, who fiyle themſelves, © A Society for promoting Uſeful
2 Knowledge. It is of modern date, but much good. is expected from it. A _ for

literature is increaſing among them.
SGovRRNNENTr.] Similar to that eſtabliſhed by Congreſs i in the anvitory of the
United States, north-weſt of the Ohio. The governor is the executive (and, in his
abſence, the ſecretary), and the governor and three judges the — power, in the
diſtrict.

CHARACTER, Maxxzss, AND 3 There is nothing in the character of this
people that diſtinguiſhes them from the ſettlers of new countries in general. Amon

the bulk. of the inhabitants a great ſimplicity of manners prevails. Duplicity or the
etiquette of cities and populous places is unknown among them. If a man deceives
another, he is deemed and called a liar; and it frequently happens that a bloody
noſe” is the conſequence, Wreſtling, jumping, running foot races, and playing at
ball, are the common diverfions. Dancing is coming into faſhion. Card playing is
a rare amuſement. The hunting ſhirt is all worn by the militia on duty, and by hun-
4 in — of. game. At home, and at dane e, ny dreſs like the
Vir
Damen By THz WII * Great was the damage ſuſtained by the inhabitants of this
_ diſtrict during the war, occaſioned by the incurſions of the Indians; and it is much to


the honour of this patriotic people, that when they were offered protetion by the
Britiſh, in the early ſtage of the war, they nobly refuſed it.


P Prinezeat To wNs. |. Naſhville, the ſhire town of Davidon county, is the largeſt
town in the territory. The courts are held here; and it has two houſes for public
worſhip, and a handſomely endowed academy, eſtabliſhed in 1786.
Abingdon 1s the county town of Waſhington county : it contained, in 1 788, about
20 houſes, and was rapidly increaſing: it is about 260 miles from Richmond in Vir-
28 a direct line, and 310 as the road runs, bearing a little to the ſouth of welt,
6*
3 = In 1788, the militia of this difirift amounted to between 7 and 8000
effective men, who were principally armed with rifles. It is fi ppoſed that their num-
ber is 8 nearly one half ſince that period. :
ReveNnuE. The public revenueamounts to about 55 or 6000 pounds, raiſed chiefly
by a tax on ſlaves, lands, and horſes.
Roaps. ] The following are the diſtances on the new f from Naſhville, i in David-


ſon county, to Fort — near. the junction of Fine river with the
Tenneſſee. E


From


ſprings of water.


Miles.
From Naſhville to Stony From King's Spring 3—
river — 9 Grovet's Creek — 7
Big Spring - 0 The foot of Cumberland
Cedar Lick - — 4 Mountain „ „
Little Spring 1 — 6 Through the Mountain
Barton's Creek — 2 to Emmery's river, a
Spring Creek - — branch of the Peleſon 11
Martin's Spring — 0 To the Pappa Ford of
Blair's Spring „ the Peleſon or Clinch
Buck Spring — 12 . — 12
Fountaines — To Campbell's ſtation,
Smith's Creek — 6 near Holſtein — 10
Coney River — 11 To the Great Iſland - 100
Mine Lic = 9 To Abingdon in Waſh-
Falling Creek — 9 ington county = 35
War Path FIN | To Richmond in Virgi- 310
Bear Creek - =. "18 nia s
Camp Creek — Total - 0365 -


riages, as there will be only the Cumberland mountain to paſs, and that is eaſy of
aſcent ; and beyond it, the road is generally level and firm, abounding with fine
IxDiaxns. ] The Indian tribes, within and in the vicinity of this diſtrict, are the
Cherokees and Chicaſaws. The Cherokees have been a warlike and numerous nation;
but by continual wars, in which it has been their deſtiny to be engaged with the north-
ern Indian tribes, they were reduced, at the commencement of the laſt war, to about
2000 fighting men; ſince which they have been reduced more than one-half, and have
become weak and puſillanimous. FFF 5

The Chicaſaws, of all the Indian tribes within the limits of the United States, merit


them: they glory in ſaying, that they never ſhed the blood of an Anglo American.
There is ſo great an affinity between the Chicaſaw and Choctaw languages, that the
common pcople can converſe together, each ſpeaking in his own diale&t. They are a
_ perſonable people, and have an openneſs in their countenances and behaviour, uncom-


ſtill retain an hereditary hatred. Would it not be the policy of Congreſs to treat
with theſe nations ? and might not their friendſhip be greatly ſerviceable to the Union ?
 Hrsrory:}] The eaſtern parts of this diſtrict were explored by Colonels Wood, Pat-


ton, Buchanan, Captain Charles Campbell, and Dr. T. Walker, (each of whom were
concerned in large grants of land from the government) as early as between the years of


1740 and 1750. In 1754, at the commencement of the French war, not more than
50 families had ſettled here, who were either deſtroyed or driven off by the Indians be-
fore the cloſe of the following year. It remained uninhabited till 1765, when the
ſettlement of it re-commenced.; and in 177 8 (ſuch was the vaſt acceſſion of .

| © a 3 2 1C


' TERRITORY SOUTH OF OHIO. nn


By this new road, a pleaſant paſſage may be had to the weſtern country with car-


the moſt from the Americans, having at all times maintained a brotherly attachment to


mon among ſavages. Theſe nations ſay, they are the remnant of a great nation that
once lived far to the weſt, which was deſtroyed by the Spaniards, for whom they


_—_ TERRITORY SOUTH OF OMIO.


the « ountry as far weſt as the Long Iſland of Holſtein, an extent of more than 120
in length from caſt to weſt, was well peopled.

1 1.1774, a war broke out with the northern Indians over the' Ohio, which iſſued
£23 their ſuing for peace, which was granted them on eaſy terms.

The year 1776 was ſignalized by a formidable 1 invaſion of the Cherokees, contrived.
by the Britin tuperinte: adant, Mr. Steuart. Their intention was to de populate the
country as far as the Kanhawa, becaute this brave people had rejected, with a noble
firmnci3 and indignation, the propoſals of Henry Steuart and Alexander Camerſon for
Joining the Britiſh ſtandard, and were almoſt unanimous in their reſolution to ſupport

the meatures of Congreſs. This invaſion iſſued in a total defeat of the Indians.

In 1 780. the tories of the weſtern parts of North Carolina and Virginia, emboldened
by the reduction of Charleſtown by the Britiſh, embodied in armed parties, and pro-
cceded towards the lead mines on the Kanhawa, to take poſſeſſion of ſome lead ftores.
at that place, but were defeated in their attempt by the viguance of Col. A. Campbell
and Col. Chockett.

_ Various other movements took place i in the courſe of this year, but the moſt intereſt-
ing and brilliant was the battle of King's Mountain, which was fought and won by
Z about goo Mountaineers, (as the veteran ſons of this diſtrict were called) commanded

by the brave General William Campbell, againſt a party of the Britiſh under the com-
mand of Colonel Ferguſon. Upwards of 1100 of the enemy were either killed,
wounded, or taken ; among the former was Col. Ferguſon, an officer of diſtinguiſhed
merit.* In arouſing the inhabitants, iſſuing orders, collecting the forces, and in ar-
ranging and animating the men, at the place of rendezvous, previous to this ſucceſsful
expedition, much was done by the activity and deciſion of Gl Arthur Campbell, the

ſenior officer of the diſtrict, to whom much praiſe is due.
Soon after this, to defeat a meditated invaſion of the Cherokee Wa which was
diſcovered by Naney Ward, an Indian woman, called, from this circumſtance, the
weſtern Pocahonta, Col. A. Campbell, with 700 mountaineers, well mounted, pene-
trated far into the Cherokee country ; introduced the. new and ſucceſsful Ay of
fighting Indians on horſeback ; accompliſhed his deſigns, and returned in Jan. 1781.
In the celebrated battle at Guildford, March 15, 1781, the mountaineers, under
Gen. W. Campbell, who on that day commanded with great applauſe the left wing of
the army, behaved with their uſual gallantry. Tlns nearly cloſed the active part which.
the Mountain men took in the American war.

In 1782, the legiſlature of North Carolina appointed commiſſioners to explore tlie
weſtern part of the State, (by which is meant as well the. lands included in Davidſon

county, as thoſe between the ſouth boundary of this county, and thoſe between the
_ rivers Miſſiflippi and Tenneſſee) and report to the ſucceeding legiſlature, which part

was beſt for the payment of the bounty promiſed to the officers and ſoldiers of the con-
tinental line of that State; and they accordingly did explore the before-deſcribed tract
of country, and reported to the legiſlature in the ſpring of the year 1783. Although
this country was not eſtabliſhed. by law before the [is Sentlones period, yet a few fa-
milies had ſettled in the year 1780, principally under the guidance of Col. James Ro-
bertſon, on Cumberland river, and called the place Naſhville, in honour of Brigadier-

General Francis Naſh, who fell at Germantown, in the year 1777 ; but he had but
ſew followers until the year 1783, after the Peace had taken place, and aſter an act


* Sce Ramſay's Revol. South. Carolina, vol. II. page 1817. 5 3


TERRITORY SOUTH OF OHIO. 535


had paſſed, directing the military or bounty warrants of the officers and ſoldiers to be
located in this county. Theſe cireumſtances induced many officers and ſoldiers to re-
pair immediately thither, to ſecure and ſettle their lands; and ſuch as did not chuſe to go,
fold their warrants to citizens who did go: in conſequence of this, many people from
almoſt every State in the Union became purchafer s of theſe military warrants, and are fince
become refidents of this county; and many valuable and opulent families have removed
to it from the Natches. Colonel Robertfon, when he ſettled at Naſhv ille, was upwards
of 200 miles diſtant (to the weſtward) from any other ſettlement in his own State, and
was equally diſtant from the then ſettled parts of Kentucky. Hence it will readily be
ſuppoſed, that himſelf and party were in danger every hour of being cut off by the


Indians, againſt whom his principal ſecurity was, that he was as far diſtant from them


as from the white people; and lender as this ſceurity may appear, his party never ſuſ-
tained any damage from the Indians, but what was done by parties of hunters, who
happened to find out his 1ettlements. The face of this country is in general level, and


the foil very rich, equal to any other part ot America, and produces in abundance
every thing that can be expected from ſo temperate a climate and fo rich a foil. It is
common for the planter to gather from his fields, upon an average, fixty buſhels of


Indian corn per acre. This county is well watered by the rivers Tenneſſce and Cum-


berland, and their branches. Both of theſe rivers empty into the Ohio ſhortly after


they paſs the north boundary of the State. As the waters of the Cumberland from


Naſhville, and of the Tenneflee from the Muſcle ſhoals to the Ohio, are navigable to
the Ohio and Miſſiſſippi, the people of courſe, who live in this county or the adjacent:


country, have the ſame advantages of water conveyance for trade, as 5 thoſe who live on
the Ohio or Miſſiſſippi, to New Orleans or elſewliere.


Beſides, there is another probable avenue through which trade will be carried on
with this county and the adjacent country, which is from Mobile, up the waters of


the Mobile river as far as it is navigable, thence by a land carriage of about 50 miles


(at moſt) to Ocochappo creek, which empties into the Tenneſſee at the lower end of


the Muſcle ſhoals. The mouth of this creek is the center of a piece of ground, the


diameter of which is five miles, ceded by the ſouthern Indians at the treaty of Hop-


well, on Keeowee, to the United States, for the eſtabliſhment of trading poſts. _
In 1785, in conformity to the reſolves of Congreſs of April 23, 1784, the inhabi-
tants of this diſtrict eflayed to form themſelves into a body politic, by the name of the


State of Frankland ;” but, differing among themſelves as to the form of govern-
ment, and about other matters, in the iſſue of which ſome blood was ſhed ; and being


oppoſed by ſome leading characters in the eaſtern parts, the ſcheme. was given up, and
the inhabitants remained in general peaceable until 1790, when Congreſs eſtabliſhed
their preſent government. Since this period, ſome late incurſions of the Indians ex-
<cpted, the inhabitants have been e and e c


SOUTH


„3534 *


„ r — R wn,


( $30 J
SOUTH CAROLIN A.


SITVATION AND EXTENT.


3 Miles. Square Miles. |
Length 2001 4 and 9 W. Lon.
Breadth E een 135 and 35 W. Lat. nr


e * OUNDED north, by North Carolina, and the Tenneſſee govern-
ment; eaſt, by the Atlantic Ocean; ſouth, and ſouth-weſt, by
Savannah river, and a branch of its head waters, called Tugule river, which div ides


this State from Georgia.“


Civil Divistons AnD PoPULATION J The proprietors who firſt ſent ſettlers to Caro- |


generally named after |
the proprietors. No county courts, however, were eſtabliſhed, and this. diviſion,


though for a long time kept up in the province, became in a great meaſure obſolete,


lina, divided it into counties and pariſhes. 'The counties are


previous to the revolution. Since the revolution, county courts have been eſtabliſhed,


where a majority of the inhabitants have petitioned for them, and the State is now
divided into diſtricts and counties; and the counties are ſubdivided, in the lower


country, into pariſhes; and in the upper country, into ſmaller or voting diſtricts.
Tas ſeven. en, in which are 35 counties, as follows: 1


eee a, om | Cranmrowndiftrig,
Od | oe Hilton, between Santee and
Savannah rivers. Lincoln, 24 Combahee rivers. }
er Brav- Ch. town CHARLES-
„ ro] N, 76,98 8 in- Colleton,


habitants. Bartholomew.


[Clarendon,
3 | Campen diſtrict, alt Richland,
veſt of Beaufort diſ- ; | of Georgetown diſ-] Fairfield,
trict. Chief town tmriict. Chief town Claremont,
| ORANGEBURGH, . = Campen, 38,065 1 in- | Lancaſter,
13,513 inhabitants]. | Habitants. {| York,


4 Cheſter.


| Nivpry-aix diſtri, # Abbeville,
GRoneRrowx aifrict, | comprehends all Edgefield,


between Santee ri- | Winyah, other parts of the | Newbury,
ver and North Ca- Willamſburgh, | State, not included Union,


rolina. Chief town fpKingſton, in the other diſtrict. ) Laurens, |
GEORGETOWN, Laberty. Chief town Cau- Spartanburgh,
22,122 inhabitants. As | BRIDGE, 73,729 in- Greenville, |

3 | Habitants, Pendleton.


#* See page 548, note.


: — » FP bits * 8 p _ A ded” AY - * . nf *
E e 6


CERA WS


"BD\ SJa11ee


SAVANNA


ODOT EIT


0
62 47


—— e— — — — — — 35


— —


——— — . — 22 — —


Tam! Jus: 72. 1304. fr J Stahiate.


80* 1 20


=

LN 6 *

gn
> .
N .


1


* . 5
pg= Charleſton Bar
US; 0 | dQ „„ TIS | |
. 7 |


* „* 2 I. | 4
25 EAG


55 5 — Y
{ SOUTH CAROLINA |
eum the beat
AUTHORITIES. /

: yy 5 f


\
—


Sd


Longuude Wert {form London


— IT = = +
es &
WO ”, cs


N AI) Helena Sound >


60® 79*


—


—— 2
33


SOUTH CAROLINA. 337


CHRERA s diſtrict, weſt}
of Georgetown diſ- Marlborough,
trict. Chief town >Cheſterfield,
—, 10, 706 in- | Darlington.
habitants.


Total number of inhabitants in 1791, 249,073, of whom 107,094 were ſlaves.
The committee, appointed by act of Aſſembly to divide the diſtricts into counties,
were directed to lay them as nearly 40 miles ſquare as was practicable, due regard being


id to ſituations, natural boundaries, &c. | ;
As the lower country was originally ſettled by people from Europe, under the pro-
prietary government and influence, all the then counties were divided into pariſhes :
and even now, although the old counties are done away, the boundaries altered, and
new ones eſtabliſhed, the divifion of pariſhes ſubfiſts in the three lower diſtricts, the
people chuſe their ſenators and repreſentatives by pariſhes, as formerly. But in the
middle and upper diſtricts, which were ſettled by people of various nations from
Europe, but principally by northern emigrants, pariſhes are hardly known, except per-
haps in Orangeburgh diſtrict. In theſe diſtricts the people vote in ſmall diviſions, as
convenience dictates. 333 8 . 5
CLiMATE. | The climate is different in different parts of the State: along the ſea
coaſt, bilious diſeaſes, and fevers of various kinds, are prevalent between July and
October. The probability of dying is much greater between the 2oth of June and the
_ 20th of October, than in the other eight months in the year. : ;
One cauſe of theſe diſeaſes is, a low marſhy country, which is overflowed for the
fake of cultivating rice. The exhalations from theſe ſtagnated waters, from the rivers,
and from the neighbouring ocean, and the profuſe perſpiration of vegetables of all
kinds, which cover the ground, fill the air with moiſture : this moiſture falls in fre-
quent rains and copious dews. From actual obſervation it has been found that the
average annual fall of rain for ten years was 42 inches; without regarding the moiſture
that fell in fogs and dews. The great heat of the day relaxes the body, and the agree-
able coolneſs of the evening invites to an expoſure to theſe heavy dews. 3
The diſagreeable effects of this climate, experience has proved, might in a great
meaſure be avoided by thoſe inhabitants, whoſe circumſtances will admit of their re-
moval from the neighbourhood of the rice ſwamps to healthier ſituations, during the
months of July, Auguſt, September, and October; and in the worſt fituations, by
temperance and care. Violent exerciſe on horſeback, chiefly, expoſure to the meridian
rays of the ſun, ſudden ſhowers of rain, and the night air, are too frequently the cauſes
of fevers and other diſorders. Would the ſportſmen deny themſelves, during the fall
months, their favourite amuſements of hunting and fiſhing, or confine themſelves to a
very few hours, in the morning or evening ; would the induſtrious planter vifit his
fields only at the ſame hours ; or would the poorer claſs of people pay due attention to
their manner of living, and obſerve the precautions recommended to them by men of
knowledge and experience, much ſickneſs and many diſtreſſing events might be pre-
vented. The upper country, fituated in the medium between extreme heat and cold,
is as healthful as any part of the United States. caged .
ph nu” This State is watered by four large navigable rivers, beſides a great num-
ber of ſmaller ones, which are paſſable in boats. The river Savannah waſhes it in its
whole length from ſouth-eaſt to north-weſt, The Ediſto riſes in two branches 2
"4 | _ Y remark-


ln . l
2 + | 2 * 3


538 SOUTH CAROLINA


remarkable ridge i in the interior part of the State. Theſe branches unite below Orange-
burgh, which ſtands on the North Fork, and form Ediſto river, which, having paſſed
Jackſonſburgh, leaving it on the ſouth, branches and embraces Ediſto iſland.

Santee is the largeſt and longeſt river in this State: it emptics into the ocean by two
mouths, a little ſouth of Georgetown. About 120 miles in a direct line from its


mouth, it branches into the Congarec and Waterce; the latter or northern branch


paſſes the Catabaw nation of Indians, and bears the name of the Catabaw river from
this ſettlement to its ſource. The Congaree branches into Saluda and Broad rivers.
Broad river again branches mto Enoree, Fyger, and Pacolet rivers, on the latter of
which are the celebrated Pacolet ſprings.

Pedee river riſes in North Carolina, where it is called Vadkin river: in this State,
however, it takes the name of Pedee; and, receiving the waters of Lynche's creek,
Little-Pedee, and Black river, it joins the Wakkamaw river, near Georgetown. Theſe


united ſtreams, with the acceſſion of a ſmall creek, on which Georgetown ſtands, form


Winyaw bay, which, about 12 miles below, communicates with the ocean. All the
forementioned rivers, except Edifto, riſes from various ſources in that ridge of moun-
tains which divides the waters which flow into the Atlantic ocean, from thoſe which


fall into the Mifliſſippi.


The rivers of a ſecondary ſize, as you paſs from N. to S. are Wakkamaw, Black
river, Cooper, Aſhepoo, and Combahee. Theſe rivers afford, to the proprietors of


their banks, a confiderable quantity of tide ramp or rice land, flowable from the


rivers, except in extraordinary droughts.
In the third claſs are comprehended thoſe rivers which extend but a ſhort diſtance


from the ocean, and ſerve, by branching into numberleſs crecks, as drains to take off
the quantity of rain water, which comes down from the large inland ſwamps; or are
merely arms of the ſea: of this kind, are Aſhley, Stono, Coofaw., Broad, Colleton,


May, New, and Right's rivers. The tide, in no part of the State, flows more than


25 miles from the ſea.


Cax AL.] A company has been incorporated for the purpoſe of connecting Cooper


and Santee rivers by a canal of 21 miles in length. The ſum ſuppoſed to be necefſary
to complete this extenſive work is 55,620). ſterling. Twenty-five per cent. are allowed
by the legiflature in tolls for all monies advanced by ſtockholders. The advantage of


a canal at this place, to one who inſpects a map of the Carolinas, muſt appear to be


great, both to the public and to the proprietors.


MovuxTaixs. | Except the high hills of Santee, the Ride: and ſome few other hills,
this country is hike one extenſive plain, till you reach the Tryon and Hogback moun-


' tains, 220 miles north-weſt of Charleſtown. The elevation of theſe mountains above
their baſe is 3840 feet, and above the ſea coaſt 4640. There is exhibited from the top


of theſe mountains an extenſive view of this State, North Carolina, and Georgia: and


as no object intervenes to obſtruct the view, a man with 7el:ſcopic eyes might diſcern veſ-


{els at ſea. The mountains weſt and north-weſt riſe much higher than theſe, and form
a ridge, which divides the waters of Tenneſſee and Santee rivers. |

HaxBorrs.] The only harbours of note are thoſe of Charleſtown, Port Royal, and
Georgetown. Charleſtown harbour is ; Ypacious, convenient, andifafe : it is formed by


the junction of Aſhley and | Cooper rivers : its entrance is guarded by Fort Johnſon.
_ Twelyc miles from the city is a bar, over which are four channels; one, by the name

of Ship Channel, has 18 feet water; another 16+ ; the other two are for ſmaller veſſels.
Tze tides riſe from five to eight feet. Port Royal has an excellent harbour, of ſuffi-

cient extent to contain the largeſt fleet in the world.


I The


SOUTH CAROLINA. 539


The har at the entrance of Winyaw bay, which leads to Georgetown, does not ad-
mit of veſſels drawing more than 11 fect water; and is, in many reſpects, a very dan-
gerous place. This circumſtance has proved injurious to the growth of Georgetown,
which is otherwiſe exceedingly well fituated for all the purpoſes of an extenſive
trade. 5 1 5 |
IsLAxps.] The ſea coaſt is bordered with a chain of fine ſea iſlands, around which


the ſea flows, opening an excellent inland navigation, for the conveyance of produce


to market. 415
North of Charleſtown harbour lie Bull's, Dewee's, and Sullivan's iſlands, which
form the north part of the harbour. James iſland lies on the other ſide of the harbour,


oppoſite Charleſtown, containing about fifty families. Further S. W. is John's iſland,


larger than James; Stono river, which forms a convenient and ſafe harbour, - divides
theſe iſlands. Contiguous to John's iſland, and connected with it, by a bridge, is
Wadmelaw ; caſt of which are the ſmall iſles of Keyway and Simmon. Between theſe


and Ediſto ifland is N. Ediſto inlet, which alto affords a good harbour for veſſels of
_ eaſy draft of water. South of Ediſto iſland is S. Ediſto inlet, through which enter,


Coolaw. e 0 5
On the S. W. ſide of St. Helena iſland lies a cluſter of iſlands, one of the largeſt of
which is Port. Royal. Adjacent to Port Royal lie St. Helena, Ladies iſland, Paris


from the northward, all the veſſels bound to Beaufort, Aſheepoo, Combahee and


iſland, and the Hunting iſlands, five or fix in number, bordering on the ocean, ſo


called from the number of deer and other wild game found upon them. All theſe
lands, and ſome others of leſs note, belong to St. Helena pariſh. 55


Croſſing Broad river, you come to Hilton Head, the moſt ſouthern ſea illand in ca-


rolina. Weſt and ſouth-weſt of Hilton Head, lie Pinckney's, Bulls, Dawfuſkies, and
ſome ſmaller iſlands, between which and Hilton Head, are Calibogie river and found,


which form the outlet of May and New rivers. |


The ſoil on theſe iſlands is generally better adapted to the culture of indigo than the


main, and leſs ſuited to rice: cotton grows very well upon them. The natural growth


is the live oak, which is ſo excellent tor ſhip timber, and the palmetto or cabbage tree,
the utility of which, in the conſtruction of forts, was experienced during the late war.

CulkEr Towns. | CHARLESTOWN is the only confiderable town in South Carolina: it
is ſituated on the tongue of land which is formed by the confluence of Aſhley and
Cooper. rivers, which are large and navigable. Theſe rivers mingle their waters imme-


Giately below the town, and form a ſpacious and convenient harbour, which commu-


nicates with the ocean juft below Sullivan's iſland, which it leaves on the north, ſeven
miles ſouth-eaſt of the town. In theſe rivers the tide riſes, in common about 64 feet.*
The continued agitation which this occaſions in the waters which almoſt furround
Charleſtown ; the refreſhing fea breezes which are regularly felt, and the fmoke riſing
from ſo many chimneys, render Charleſtown more healthy than any part of the low
country in the ſoutherngſtates. On this account it is the reſort of great numbers of


_ gentlemen, invalids from the Weſt India. iſlands, and of the rich planters from the


country, who come here to ſpend the fickly months, as they are called, an queſt of
health and of the ſocial enjoyments which the city affords: and in no part of America
are the ſocial bleſſings enjoyed more rationally and liberally than in Charleſtown. Un-
affected hoſpitality, affability, caſe in manners and addrets, and a diſpoſition to make
* It is worthy of remark, that the tide uniformly riſes conſiderably higher in the night. than in the day;
often from ten to. twelve inches. The fact is certain; the cauſe is unkuown. by


. . 8 5 0 : .
37 their


549 SOUTH CAROLINA, |
their gueſts welcome, eaſy, and pleaſed with themſelves, are characteriſtics of the re-
ipectable people in Charleſtown. TE |
The land on which the town is built is flat and low, and the water brackiſh and un-
wholeſome. The ſtreets from caſt to weſt extend from river to river, and, running in
a ſtraight line, not only open beautiful proſpects each way, but afford excellent oppor-
tunities, by means of ſubterranean drains, for removing all nuiſances, and keeping the
city clean and healthy. Theſe ſtreets are interſected by others, nearly at right angles,
and throw the town into a number of ſquares, with dwelling houſes in front, and office
houſes and little gardens behind. Some of the {ſtreets are conveniently wide, but moſt.
of thera are much too narrow, eſpecially for fo populous a city, in fo warm a climate.
Beſides their being a nurſery for various diſeaſes from their confined fituation, they
have been found extremely inconvenient in caſe of fires, the deſtructive effects of which
have been frequently felt in this city. The houſes, which have been lately built, are
brick, with tiled roofs. Some of the buildings in Charleſtown are elegant, and moſt
bf them are neat, airy, and well furniſhed. The public buildings are, an exchange,
ſtate houſe, lately rebuilt, armoury, poor houſe, two large churches for Epiſcopa-
bans, two for Congregationaliſts or Independents, one for Scotch Preſbyterians, one
for Baptiſts, one for German. Lutherans, two for the Methodiſts, (a large houſe for
worſhip, being lately finiſhed by them) one for French Proteſtants, beſides a meeting
houſe for Quakers, a Roman Catholic chapel, and a Jewiſh ſynagogue.
But little attention is paid to the public markets. A great proportion of the moſt
wealthy inhabitants have plantations, from which they receive ſupplies of almoſt every
article of living. The country abounds with poultry and wild ducks : their beef, mut-
ton, and veal, are not of the beſt kind. Few fiſh are brought to market. f
In 1787, it was computed that there was 1600 houſes in this city, and 9600 white
inhabitants, and 5400 negroes; and what evinces the healthineſs of the place, upwards
of 200 of the white inhabitants were above 60 years of age. In 1791, there were
16,359 inhabitants, of whom 7684 were ſlaves „ 9995
Charleſtowu was incorporated in 1783, and divided into 13 wards, which chuſe as
many wardens, from among whom the citizens elect an intendant of the city. The
intendant and wardens form the city council, who have power to make and enforce
| _by«-laws for the regulation of the city. C |
BxAuroxr, on Port Royal iſland, is a pleaſant little town, of about 530 or 60 houſes,
and 200 inhabitants, who are diſtinguiſhed for their hoſpitality and politeneſs. The
| _ conrts which were formerly held here, are now held at Cooſawhatchie. 550
| GEORGETOWN, the ſeat of juſtice in Georgetown diſtrict, ſtands on a ſpot of land
| near the junction of a number of rivers, which, when united in one broad ſtream, by
the name of Winyaw, fall into the ocean 12 miles below the town. ; + Es
CoLunB1a, which has lately been made the ſeat of government by the legiſlature,
ſtands juſt below the junction of Saluda and Broad rivers, on the Congaree. The pub-
lie offices have, however, in ſome inſtances been divided, for the accommodation of
the inhabitants of the lower counties, and a branch of each retained in Charleſtown.
CAMDEN; on the Wateree, N. W. of Santee hills, 130 miles weſt of north from
Charleſtown, is regularly built, upen a good plan; but a ſmall part of it is yet
_ PurySBURGH is a hilly village, about 20 miles above Savannah, on the north bank
of the river of the ſame name. It was early ſettled by foreigners, with a view to the
culture of filk, which for a while they attended to with ſpirit. The mulberry trees are
yet ſtanding, and ſome attention is ill paid to the making of filk : but the profits of


the


%


SOUTH CAROLINA 541


the rice and indigo ſoon diverted the original planters from alinoſt every other purſuit.
Beſides theſe, are Jackſonborough, Orangeburgh, Winnſborough, and Cambridge, which
are all inconfiderable villages of from 30 to 60 dwelling houſes.
GENERAL Fack OF THE CounTRY.] The whole State, to the diſtance of 80 miles
from the ſea, is level, and almoſt without a ſtone. - In this diſtance, by a graduaF
aſcent from the ſea coaſt, the land riſes about 190 feet. Here, if you proceed in a
W. N. W. courſe from -Charleſtown, commences a curiouſly uneven country. The
traveller is conſtantly aſcending or deſcending little ſand hills, which nature ſeems to
have diſunited in a frolic. If a pretty high ſea were ſuddenly arreſted, and transformed
into ſand hills, in the very form the waves exiſted at the moment of transformation, it
would preſent the eye with juſt ſuch a view as is here to be ſeen. Some little herbage,
and a few ſmall pines grow even on this ſoil, The inhabitants are few, and have but a
ſcanty ſubſiſtence on corn and ſweet potatoes, which grow here tolerably well. This
curious country continues for ſixty miles, till you arrive at a place called The Ridpe,
140 miles from Charleſtown. This ridge is a remarkable tract of high ground, as you
approach it from the ſea, but level as you advance north-weſt from its ſummit. It is
a fine high, healthy belt of land, well watered, and of a good ſoil, and extends from
the Savannah to Broad river, in about 6* go weſt longitude from Philadelphia.
Beyond this ridge commences a country exactly reſembling the northern States.
Here hills and dales, with all their verdure and variegated beauty, preſent themſelves
to the eye. Wheat fields, which are rare in the low country, begin to grow common.
Here Heaven has beſtowed its bleſſing with a moſt bounteous hand. The air is much
more temperate and healthful than nearer to the ſea. The hills are covered with va-
luable woods; the vallies watered with beautiful rivers, and the fertility of the ſoil is
equal to every vegetable production. This, by way of diſtinction, is called the Upper
Country, where are different modes and different articles of cultivation; where the
manners of the people, and even their language, have a different tone. The land
ſtill riſes by a gradual aſcent ; cach ſucceeding hill overlooks that which immediately
precedes it, till, having advanced 220 miles in a north-weſt direction from Charleſ-
town, the elevation of the land above the ſea coaſt is found by menſuration to be 800
feet. Here commences a mountainous country, which continues riſing. to the weſtern
termmating point of this State. „„ on v0
So1L AND PRoDUcCTIoNS.] The foil may be divided into four kinds ; firſt, the pine
barren, which is valuable only for its timber. Interſperſed among the pine barren
are tracts of land free of timber, and every kind of growth but that of graſs. Theſe
tracts are called ſavannahs, conſtituting a ſecond kind of ſoil, good for grazing. The
third kind is that of the ſwamps and low grounds on the rivers, which is a mixture of
black loam and fat clay, producing naturally canes in great plenty, cypreſs, bays,
loblolly pines, &c. In theſe ſwamps rice is cultivated, which. conflitutes the ſtaple
e of the State. The high lands, commonly known by the name of oak and
hiccory lands, conftitute the fourth kind of ſoil. The natural growth is oak, hiccory, |
walnut, pine, and locuſt. On theſe lands, in the low country, are-cultivated Indian
corn principally; and in the back country, beſides theſe, they raiſe tobacco m lange
quantities, wheat, rye, barley, oats, hemp, flax, cotton, and ſik““CL“̃qnꝛ
There is little fruit in this State, eſpecially in the lower parts of it. - They have
oranges, which are chiefly ſour, and figs in plenty, a few limes and lemons, pomegra-


u See the nature of the foil:more particularly deſcribed; under this head in the deſcription of Georgia.


542 SOUTH CAROLINA.


nates, pears. and peaches; apples are ſcarce, and are imported from the northern
States. Melons, (eſpecially the water melon) are raiſed here in great perfection.
The river ſwamps. in which rice can be cultivated with any tolerable degree of ſafet
and ſucces, - do not extend higher up the rivers than the head of the tides; and in
eſtimating the value of this ſpecies of rice land, the height which the tide nies is taken
into contideration, thoſe lying where it riſes to a proper pitch for overflowing the
ſwamps being the moſt valuable. "The beſt inland ſwamps, winch conſtitute a fecond
tpecies of rice land, are ſuch as are furniſhed with reſerves of water. Theſe reſerves
are formed by means of large banks thrown up at the upper parts of the fWamps, whence
it is conveyed, when needed, to the fields of rice. f N .
At the diſtance of about 110 miles from the ſea, the river ſwamps terminate, and
the high lands extend quite to the rivers, and form banks, in ſome places, ſeveral hun-
dred feet high from the ſurtace of the water, and afford many extenſive and delightful
1, views. 'Thete high banks are interwoven with layers of leaves and different coloured
earth, and abound with quarries of free-ſtone, pebbles, flint, chryſtals, iron ore in
; abundance, filver; lead, ſulphur, and coarſe diamonds. 1 SEO Et
The ſwamps above the head of the tide are occaſionally planted with corn, cotton,
and indigo. The foil is very rich, yielding from forty to fifty buſhels of corn an acre.
It is curious to obſerve the gradations from the ſea coaſt to the upper country, with
reſpect to the produce, the mode of cultivation, and the cultivators. On the ſtands.
N upon the ſea coaſt, and for forty or fifty miles back (and on the rivers much farther)
1 the cultivators are all ſlaves. No white man, to ſpeak generally, ever thinks of ſettling
a farm and improving it for himſelf without negroes. If he has no negroes, he hires
- himfelf as overſeer to ſome rich planter, who has more than he can or will attend to,
till he can purchaſe for himſelf. The articles cultivated are corn and potatoes, which,
with the ſmall rice, are food for the negroes; rice, indigo, and cotton, for exportation.
The culture of this laſt article is capable of being increaſed equal to almoſt any
demand. The ſoil was cultivated, till lately, almoſt wholly by manual labour. The
plough, till ſince the peace, was ſcarcely uſed. Now, the plough and harrow and
other improvements are introduced into the rice ſwamps with great ſucceſs, and will
no doubt become general. In the middle ſettlements, negroes are not ſo numerous.
Ihe maſter attends perſonally to his own buſineſs. The land is not properly ſituated
Sor rice. It produces moderately good indigo weed, and ſome tobacco is raiſed for
texportation. The farmer is contented to raiſe corn, potatoes, oats, rye, poultry, and a
Uitle wheat. In the upper country, there are but few negroes ;. generally ſpeaking,
the farmers have none, and depend, like the inhabitants of the northern States, upon
the labour of themſelves and families for ſubſiſtence; the plough is uſed almoſt wholly...
Indian corn in great quantities, wheat, rye, potatoes, &c. are raiſed. for food, and
much tobacco and ſome wheat, cotton and indigo for exportation.
Mop or CULTIVATING wn Rice ground is prepared only by effectually
fecuring it from the water, except ſome: higher parts of it, which are ſometimes dug up
with a hoe, or mellowed by a plough or harrow. When the rice is young, the over-
Howing of the, water does not prevent its growth. Thoſe who have water in reſerve,
j commonly let it in upon their rice, after firſt going through with the hoe, while it is
| young, though it is deemed beſt to keep out the graſs without this aid, by the hoe
f | only. The water is commonly, kept on the rice eight or ten days after hoeing. When
the car is formed, the water is continued on till it is ripe. It is hoed three or four
times. When the graſs is very thick, a negroe cannot hoe more than one ſixteenth of
I 7 | | a


ae Laney > Wh ae ee. CE" Coo doings. x


a ms Va
- — 8 3 ! ö 29
a ww 1 bs gy ER 3 y


SOUTH CAROLINA. 543
an acre in a day. From three pecks to a buſhel is ſown an acre. It produces from
fifty to eighty buſhels of rough rice an acre; 120 buſhels of rough rice have been pro-
duced on one acre; twenty buſhels of which make about 500 pounds, or eight and a
quarter buſhels clean rice for market. After it is threſhed, it is winnowed, and then
ground in a mill, conſtructed of two blocks in a fimple manner; then winnowed by
a fan conſtructed for that purpoſe, then beat in a mortar by hand, or now generally
by horſe or water machines, then ſifted, to ſeparate the whole rice from that which is
broken and the flour. The whole rice 1is.then barrelled in caſks of about 500 pounds,
or eight and a quarter buſhels. The ſmall rice ſerves for proviſions, and the flour for
provender, the chaff for manure, and the ſtraw for fodder. The blade is green and
treſh while the ear is ripe. The price is from 9s. 4d. to 10s. 6d. a hundred; dollars
45. 8d. 335 125 5 NT,
 MaxnvracTurts.| In the middle, and eſpecially in the upper country, the people

are obliged to manufacture their own. cotton and woollen cloths, and moſt of their
huſbandry tools; but in the lower country, the mhabitants, for theſe articles, depend
almoſt entirely on their merchants. ' Late accounts from the interior parts of this State
inform, that the inhabitants manufacture, entirely in the family way, as much as they
have. occaſion for; that cotton, hemp, and flax are plenty; that they have a confider-
able ſtock of good ſheep; that great exertions are made, and much done in the houſe-
hold way; that they have long been in the habit of doing ſomething in family manu-
factures, but within a few years paſt great improvements have been made. The Wo-
men do the weaving and leave the men to attend to agriculture.
This State furniſhes all the materials, and. of the beſt kind, for ſhip building. The
live oak, and the pitch and yellow pines, are of a ſuperior quality. Ships might be
built here with more eaſe, and to much greater advantage, than in the middle and
eaſtern States. A want of ſeamen is one reaſon why this buſineſs is not more generally
attended to. 15 DEM ORC : e 1 .
So much attention is now paid to the manufacture of indigo in this State, that it
bids fair to rival that of the French. It is to be regretted, that it is ſtill the practice of
the merchants concerned in the Carolina trade to ſell, at foreign markets, the Carolina
indigo of the firſt quality, as French. „ £
ConsTITUTION. | The legiſlative authority is veſted in a General Aſſembly, con-
fiſting of a Senate and Houſe of Repreſentatives. There are 124 repreſentatives, and
35 ſenators appointed among the ſeveral diſtricts. The repreſentatives are choſen for
two years, mult be free white men, twenty-one years old, and have been inhabitants
of the State three years. If reſident in the diſtrict, they muſt have a treehold of 300
acres of land, and ten negroes, or real eſtate worth 15ol. ſterling; clear of debt ; it
non-reſident, muſt have a freehold in the diſtrict worth ;o0l. ſterling clear of debt.
The ſenators are chofen for four years, and divided into two claſſes, one claſs being
choſen every ſecond year. They muſt be free white men, thirty years old, and have
3 been inhabitants five years. If reſident in the diſtrict, they muſt have a frechold worth
px 30ol. ſterling, clear of debt; if non-reſident, a freehold worth 1000l. ſterling, clear of
debt. Every free white man, twenty-one years old, having been an inhabitant of the
State two. years, and been a freeholder of fifty acres of land, or a town lot, fix months,,
or having been reſident in the diſtri ſix. months, and paid a tax of 3s. ſterling, has a
right to vote for members of the legiſlature. The General Aſſembly is choſen on the
ſecond Monday of October, and meets on the fourth Monday in November annually.
Each houſe chooſes its own officers, judges of the qualifications of its members, and
has a negative on the other. A majority of each make a quorum from day to aa men
. | compel


„
o


8 SOUTH CAROLINA.


compel the attendance of members. They are protected, in their perſons and eſtates,
during the ſeflions, and ten days before and after; except in caſes of treaſon, felony,
and breach of the peace, They are paid out of the public treaſury, from which ng
money is dtawn but by the legiſlative authority. Revenue bills originate in the lower
houſe, but may be altered or rejected by the ſenate. Army and navy contractors, and
all officers, excepting officers in the militia, juſtices of the peace, and juſtices of
the county courts which have no ſalaries, are excluded from the General Aſſembly.
The clergy are excluded from civil offices. The executive authority is veſted in a
governor, choſen for two years, by both houſes of aſſembly jointly ; but he cannot be
re-elected till after four years. He muſt be thirty years old, have been an inhabitant
of the State ten years, and have an eſtate in it worth 1 500l. ſterling, clear of debt.
He can hold no other office, except in the militia. A lieutenant-governor is choſen
in the ſame manner, for the ſame time, and poſſeſſing the ſame qualifications; and
holds the office of governor in caſe of vacancy. The governor is commander in chief
of the military force; has power to remit fines and forfeitures, and grant reprieves and
pardons, except in caſes of impeachment ; to require information of executive officers;
to convene the General Aſſembly on extraordinary occaſions, and to adjourn them to
any time not beyond the fourth Monday in November next enſuing, in caſe they can-
not agrec on the time themſelves. He muſt inform the General Aſſembly of the
condition of the State; recommend ſuch meatures as he ſhall judge expedient ; and
take care that the laws are faithfully executed in mercy. The legiſlature has power
to veſt the judicial authority in ſuch courts as it thall think proper. The judges hold
their commiſſion during good behaviour. Thoſe of the ſuperior courts are elected by
joint ballot of both houtes of aſſembly; have a ſtated ſalary, and can hold no "ox
office. All officers take an oath of fideli ity to their duty, and to the conſtitution of _
State, and of the United States; and, for malconduct, may be impeached by the
Houſe of Repreſentatives, and tried by the Senate. This conftitution aſſerts the ſu-
preme power of the people; liberty of conſcience; trial 44 and ſubordination of
4be military to the civil power. It excludes ex poft facto laws; bills of attainder ; ex-
ceſſive bail; and titles of nobility and hereditary diſtinction.
The legiſlature has power, under certain regulations, to. make amendments to the


conſtitution. And a convention may be called a vote of two thirds of both branches
of the whole repreſentation.


This conſtitution was ratified June 3d, 1790.

Laws.] The laws of this State have nothing in Pe of a particular nature, ex-

© cepting what ariſes from the permiſſion of ſlavery. The evidence of a ſlave cannot
be taken againſt a white man; and the maſter who kills his ſlave is not puniſhable
otherwiſe than by a pocuniary mult, and twelve months impriſonment.

A committee was appointed, at the ſeſſion of the legiſlature in 1792, to put 11 train
the buſineis of reviſing and amending the negro. wg or the law for governing the
ſlaves. The iſſue we hope will mehorate the condition of the flaves, and afford an
evidence to the world of the enlightened policy, and increaſing humanity of the
citizens of this State. We OO an iſſue of 13 the rather, becauſe a diſ-
poſition to ſoften the rigors of ſlavery has of late been manifeſted, by allowing them
fiſh, tobacco, and ſummer clothing, which formerly was not cuſtomary.

A law, altering the mode of deſcent of inteſtate eſtates, which formerly deſcended
according to the laws of England, was paſſed in 1792. According to the preſent law,


a more equal partition takes place, and more conformable to a — TIED
and to the dictates of natural affection.


2 | By


SOUTH CAROLINA. | . 545


By a late regulation, the judges of the court, who before had a ſalary of 50 ol. each,
and fees, have now 60ol. and no fees. The chief juſtice has 800].

STATE OF LITERATURE. | Gentlemen of fortune, before the late war, ſent their
fons to Europe for education. During the war and fince, they have generally ſent
them to the middle and northern States. Thoſe who have been at this expenſe in edu-
cating their ſons, have been but comparatively few in number, fo that the literature
of the State is at a low ebb. Since the peace, however, it has begun to flouriſh. -
There are ſeveral reſpectable academies at Charleſtown; one at Beaufort, on Port
Royal Ifland, and ſeveral others in different parts of the State. Three colleges have
lately been incorporated by law ; one at Charleſtown, one at Winnſborough, in the


diſtri&t of Camden, the other at Cambridge, in the diſtrict of Ninety-Six. The public
and private donations for the ſupport of theſe three colleges were originally intended


to have been appropriated jointly, for the erecting and ſupporting of one reſpectable


college. The diviſion of theſe donations has fruſtrated this defign. Part of the old


barracks in Charleſtown has been handſomely fitted up, and converted into a college,
and there are a number of ſtudents ; but it does not yet merit a more dignified name


than that of a reſpectable academy. The Mount Sion College, at Winnſborough, is


ſupported by a reſpectable ſociety of gentlemen, who have long been incorporated.
This inſtitution flouriſhes and bids fair for uſefulneſs. The college at Cambridge is
no more than a grammar ſchool. That the literature of this State might be put upon
a reſpectable footing, nothing is wanting but a ſpirit of enterprize among its wealthy
inhabitants. V „„ . VF

CHARITABLE AND OTHER SOCIETIES. | Theſe are the South Carolina, Mount Sion,
Library and St. Cecilia Societies; a ſociety for the relief of the widows and orphans
of clergymen, a medical ſociety lately inſtituted in Charleſtown, and a muſical fociety.
At Beaufort and on St. Helena are ſeveral charitable ſocieties, incorporated with funds
to a conſiderable amount, defigned principally for the education of poor children, and


«which promiſe, at a future day, to be of great public utility. What are called Jockey


Clubs, have increaſed within a few years. 55
IxDIARs.] The Catabaws are the only nation of Indians in this State. They have
but one town, called Catabaw, fituated on Catabaw river, in latitude 34 49, on


the boundary line between North and South Carolinas, and contains about 450 inha-


bitants, of which about 1 50 are fighting men. "Fi
It is worthy of remark, that this nation was long at war with the Six Nations, into


whoſe country they often penetrated, which it is ſaid no other Indian nation from the.


ſouth or weſt ever did. The Six Nations always confidered them as the braveſt of their


enemies, till they were ſurrounded by the ſettlements of white people, whole neigh-


bourhood, with other concurrent cauſes, have rendered them corrupt and nerveleſs.
Rericion. ] Since the revolution, by which all denominations were put on an


equal footing, there have been no diſputes between different religious ſects. They all


agree to differ. 2 TE :
Ihe upper parts of this State are ſettled chiefly by Preſbyterians, Baptiſts, and


Methodiſts. From this moſt probable calculations it is ſuppoſed that the religious


denominations of this State, as to numbers, may be ranked as follows: Preſby-

terians, including the Congregational and Independent churches, Epiſcopalians, Baptiſts,

Methodiſts, &c. 2 | EEE Ent

CuAkAcrRR.] There is no peculiarity in the manners of the inhabitants of this

State, except what arifes from the miſchievous influence of flavery ; and in this,

indecd, they do not differ from the inhabitants of the other ſouthern States. —
2 j y


ſoftneſs and delicacy in their appearance and manners; and many of them polſlcts the


or fifteen hundred guineas have been ſometimes laid on theſe occafions.


 eeremonies, which a miſguided faſhion has here introduced and rendered neceſſary.


than a wedding, unleſs particularly invited. Wine, punch, and all kinds of liquors,


go to the houſe of mourning than to the houſe of feaſting, would be unintelligible


4 and wholly applicable here, as it would be cicult to diſtinguiſh the houſe of mourn-


546 SOUTH CAROLINA:


by exempting great numbers from the neceſſities of labour, leads to luxury, diſſipation,
and extravagance. The abſolute authority which is exerciſed over their * tos
much favours a haughty ſupercilious behaviour. A diſpoſition to obey the Chriftian
precept, Do to others as you would that others ſhould do unto you,“ is not cheriſhe(
by a daily exhibition of many made for one. The Carolinians ſooner arrive at
maturity, both in their bodies and minds, than the natives of colder climates. I hey
poſſeſs a natural quickneſs and vivacity of genius, ſuperior to the inhabitants of the
north ; but too generally want that enterprize and perſeverance, which are neceffary
for the higheſt attainments in the arts and ſciences. They have, indeed, few motives
to enterprize. Inhabiting a fertile country, Which, by the labour of laves, produces
plentiſully, and creates affluence; * in a climate which favours indulgence, ealc, and a
diſpoſition for convivial pleaſures, they too generally reſt contented with barely
knowledge cnough to tranſact the common affairs of life. There are not a few
inſtances, however, in this State, in which genius has been united with application,
and the effects of their union have been 3 experienced, not only oP this State,
but by the United States.

The wealth produced by the. labour of the ſlaves, furniſhes their proprictors with
the means of hofpitality ; and no people in the world uſe theſe means with more
liberality. Many of the inhabitants ſpare no pains or expenſe in giving the higheſt
polith of education to their children, by enabling them to travel, and by other means
unattainable by thoſe who have but moderate fortunes.

The Carolinians are generally affable and eaſy in their manners, and. polite and
attentive to ſtrangers. The ladies want the bloom of the north, but have an engaging


polite and elegant accompliſhments.
Hunting is the moſt faſhionable amuſement i in this State. At this the country gen-
tlemen are > extremely expert, and with ſurpriſing dexterity purſue their game through

the woods. Gaming of all kinds is more diſcountenanced, among faſhionable people,
in this than in any of the ſouthern States. Twice a year, ſtatedly, a claſs of ſportive
gentlemen, in this and the neighbouring States, have their horſe-races. Bets of ten


There is no inſtance, perhaps, in which the richer claſs of people treſpaſs more on
the rules of propriety than in the mode of conducting their funerals. That a decent
reſpect be paid to the dead, is the natural dictate of refined humanity ; but this is not
done by ſumptuous and expenfive entertainments, ſplendid decorations, and pompous.


In Charleſtown, and other parts of the State, no perſons attend a funeral any more


tea, coffee, cake, &c. in profuſion, are handed round on theſe ſolemn occaſions. In
mort, one would ſuppoſe that the religious proverb of the wiſe man, It 1s better to


ing from the houſe of feaſting.
MiiiTAaRY STRENGTH. | There are between 20,000 and 30,000 fighting 1 men in this
State. About ten men are kept to guard Fort Johnſon, on James Iſland, at the en-
trance of Charleſtown harbour, by which no veſſel can paſs, unleſs the maſter or mate
make oath that there is no malignant diſtemper on board. The militia laws, enacting
that every freeman, between 16 and 50 years of age, ' ſhall be prepared for war, have
been but indifferently obeyed fince the peace. An unuſual. degree of — ſpirit,
1 owever;


SOUTH CAROLIN A. 547
however, ſeems lately to have ariſen among the citizens of Charleſtown. No leſs than
eight volunteer uniform companies have lately formed in this city, beſides a troop af
horſe, and the ancient battalion of artillery. | 2 | |

PusLic RRVBNURE AND ExpENsES.] The public revenue of this State is, nominally,
90, oo0l. fterling ; but a great part of this is either not collected, or paid in ſecurities,
which are much depreciated. The expenſes of government are about 16,006.
„„ th Fig UF 18

Mope or LEvyinG Taxes. | The great bulk of the revenue of tlie State is raiſed by
a tax on lands and negroes. The lands, for the purpoſe of being taxed according te
their value, are divided into three grand diviſions; the firſt reaches from the ſea-coaſt
to the extent of the flowing of the tides; the ſecond, from theſe points to the fall of
the rivers; and thence to the utmoſt verge of the weſtern ſettlement makes the third.
Theſe grand diviſions, for the ſake of more exactly aſcertaining the value of the lands,

are ſubdivided into 21 different ſpecies ; the moſt valuable of which is eſtimated at fix
pounds, and the leaſt valuable at one ſhilling per acre. One per cent. on the value
thus eſtimated 1s levied from all granted lands in the State. The collection of. taxes is
not annexed to the office of ſheriff, but is committed to particular gentlemen ap-
pointed for that purpoſe, who are allowed two and a half per cent. in Charleftown,
and five per cent. in the other parts of the State, on all they collect. - - _

Banks. | Befides a branch of the national bank, a bank, by the name of the South
Carolina bank, was eſtabliſhed in 1792 in Charleſto wn. 1

 Damace BY THE LATE: Wax. ] The damages which this State ſuſtained in the late
war are thus eſtimated : the three entire crops of 1779, 1780, and 2781, all of which
were uſed by the Britiſh.; the crop of 1782, taken by the Americans; about 25,000
negroes; many thouſand pounds worth of plate, and houſhold furniture in abun-
dance; the villages of Georgetown and Camden burnt; the loſs to the citizens di-
rectly by the plunderings and devaſtations of the Britiſh army, and indirectly. by Ame-
rican impreſſments, and by the depreciation of the paper currency, together with tlie
heavy debt of 1, 200, oool. ſterling, incurred for the ſupport of the war, in one aggre-
gate view, make the price of independence to South Carolina, excluſive of the blood
ol its citizens, upwards of 3, ooo, oool. ſterling. _ 47 ras 3

_ Commerce. | The little attention that has been paid to manufactures, occaſions a
vaſt conſumption of foreign imported articles; but the quantities and value of their
exports generally leave a balance in favour of the State, except when there are large
importations of negroes. e r
The amount of exports from the port of 'Charteſtown, in the year ending November
1787, was then. eſtimated, from authentic documents, at 505,279L 198. 5d. ſterling.
money. The number of veſſels cleared from the cuſtom-houſe the tame year, was 947,
meaſuring 62,118 tons; 735 of theſe, meaſuring 4,331 tons, were American; tlie
others belonged to Great Britain, Spain, France, the United. Netherlands, and

ireland; ct ny ; T i
The principal articles exported from this State are, riee, indigo, tobacco, ſbins of
various kinds, beef, pork, cotton, pitch, tar, roſin, turpentine, myrtle wax, lumber,
naval ſtores, cork, leather, pink root, ſnake root, ginſeng, &c. In the moſt ſucceſs-
fal ſeaſons, there have been as many as 140,000 barrels of rice, and 1, 300, ooolbs.
of indigo, exported in a year. From the 15th of December, 1791, to September,
1792, 108,567 tierces of rice, averaging 550lbs. nett weight cach, were exported
from Charleſtown. In the year ending September zoth, 1791, excluſive of two
RTE 4A | Line —— auarters,


—


548 SOUTH CAROLINA.
quarters, for w hich no returns were made, the amount of exports from this State was
23,866,021 dollars.
PrAcTiCE or Law, Covkrs, Nc. ] From the firſt ſettlement of this country in 1669, to
the year 1769, a ſingle court, called the Court of Common Pleas, was thought ſufficient
to tranſact the judicial buſineſs of the State. This court was invariably held at Charles
town, where all the records were kept, and all civil buſineſs — As the pro-
* ince increaſed, inconveniencies aroſe, and created uneaſineſs among the people. 15
To remedy theſe inconveniencies an act was paſſed in 1769, by which the province
Was divided into ſeven diſtticts, which have been mentioned. The court of common
as (inveſted with the powers of the ſame court in England) ſat four times a year in
Charleſtown. By the above-mentioned act, the judges of the court of common pleas
were empowered to ſit as judges of the court of” ſeſlions, inveſted with the powers of
the court of king's bench in England, in the criminal juriſdiction. The act likewiſe
directed the judges of the courts'of common pleas and e in Charleſtown diſtrict,
to divide, and two of the judges to procced on what is called the northern circuit,
and the other two'on the ſouthern circuit, diſtributing juſtice in their progreſs. This
mode of adminiſtering juſtice continued till 1785, when, by the unanimous exertions
of the two upper diſtricts, an act was paſſed, eſtabliſhing county courts in all the
counties of the four diſtricts of Camden, Ninety Six, 3 and Orangeburgh.

"The county courts are empowered to fit four times in a year. Before the eſtabliſh-
ment of county courts, the lawyers all refided at Charleſtown, under the immediate
eye of government; and the Carolina bar was as pure and genteel as any in the

'United States. Since this eſtabliſhment, lawyers have flocked in from all quarters,
and ſettled in different pus of the country, and law. ſuits han been eren Beyond
all former knowledge.

His rok. ] The reformation i in France occafioned a cath war betweththe: Proteſtant
and Catholic parties in that kingdom. During theſe domeſtic troubles, Jaſper de Co-

Heni, a princip pal commander of the Proteſtant army, fitted out two ſhips, and ſent
them with a colony to America, under the command of Jean Ribaud, for the purpoſe

of ſecuring a retreat from proſecution. + Ribaud landed at the mouth of what oy now

called Albemarle river, in North Carolina. This colony, after enduring incredible
hardſhips, were extirpated by the Spaniards. No further attempts were made to plant

a colony 1 in this quarter, till the reign of Charles II. of England. Mention is, - how-

ever, made of Sir Robert Heath's having obtaineda grant of Carolina, from Charles I.

in 1630; but no ſettlements were made in conſequence of this grant.

In 1662, after the reſtoration of Charles II. Edward, Earl of Clarendon, —_ Gown
Mey obtained a grant of all lands lying between the 31ſt and 36th degrees of north 1

latitude.

A ſecond charter, given two years after, enlarged their . and compre-
hended all that province, territory, &e. extending eaſtward as far as the north end of
Currituck Inlet, upon a {trait line welterly to Wyonoke Creek, which lies within or
about latitude 4367 300; and fo weſt, in a direct line as far as the South Sea; and ſouth
and weftward'as far as 29* nor th latitude incluſive ; and ſo weſt in direct e to the

Soutli Sea.“ Of this lar ge e territory, the Ng condiitated theſe cight perſons wh

rds


Various cauſes have rendered it — to divide this extenſive territory in 1728, North Carolina

was erected into a ſeparate province. In 1732, 01 6 II. granted to certain truſtees therein mentioned,
and to their ſucceſſors, a charter of all that part of WO lying ee the moſt northern —_ 52
avan


thouſand acres of land, which was to be unalienable.


SOUTH CAROLINA, ry


Lords Proprietors ; inveſting them with all neceſſary powers to ſettle and govern the

fame. i Iv 5 ab en
Nothing was ſucceſsfully done towards the ſettlement of this country till 1609; at

this time, the proprietors, in virtue of their powers, engaged the famous Mr. Locke to


frame for them a conſtitution and body of laws. This conſtitution, conſiſting of 120


articles, was ariſtocratical, and though ingenious in theory, cauld never be ſucceſsſully
reduced to practice. BT ee 2017-1151 | | |

Three claftes of nobility were to be eſtabliſhed, viz. barons, caffiques, and land-
graves. The firſt to poſſeſs twelve; the ſecond, twenty-four ; the third, forty-eight


In 1669, William Sayle being appointed firſt governor of this country, embarked:


with a colony, and ſettled on the neck of land where Charleſtown now ſtands.


During the continuance of the proprietary government, a period of 50 years,


(reckoning from 1669 to 1719) the colony was involved in perpetual quarrels. Often-


times they were haraſſed by the Indians; ſometimes infeſted with pirates: frequently
invaded by the French and Spaniſh fleets ; conſtantly. uneaſy under their. injudicious
government; and quarrelling with their governors — : 25

But their moſt bitter diſſenſions were reſpecting religion. The Epiſcopalians being.
more numerous than the diſſenters, attempted to exclude the latter from a ſeat in the


legiſlature. Theſe attempts fo far ſucceeded, as that the Church of England, by


Savannah river; along the fea coaſt, to the moſt ſouthern ſtream of Alatamaha river; weſtward, from the:


heads of theſe rivers, reſpeCtively in direct lines to the South Sea, incluſively, with all iſlands within twenty


0 leagues of the ſame.


In 1762, the governor of South Carolina, conceivin that the lands lying ſonth of Alatamaha river be-
longed to South Carolina, granted ſeveral tracts of faid land. Upon complaint being made by the govern-


ment of Georgia, of this fuppoſed encroachment: on their territory, his Majeſty iſſued a proclamation in 1763,


anne xing to Georgia all the lands lying between the rivers Alatamaha and St. Mary's, but did not by this
annul the Carolina grants. The boundary line, dividing the two provinces (now States) of South Carolina
and Georgia, had long been the fubject of controverſy; the former claiming the lands lying between the
North Carolina line, and a line to run due weſt from the mouth of Fugulo and Keowee rivers; confequently,
that that fpot was the head of Savannah river; the latter contended, that the ſource of Keowee river was to-
he conſidered as the head of Savannah river. = 5
For the purpoſe of ſettling this controverſy, commiſſioners were appointed in April, 1787, by the contend-
ing States, welded with full powers to determine the controverted boundary, which they fixed as follows:
The moſt northern branch or ſtream of the river Savannah, from the fea or mouth of ſuch ſtream, to


the fork or conffuence of the rivers, now called Tugulo and Keowee, and from thence the moſt northern
branch or ſtream of the ſaid river Tugulo, till it interſects the northern boundary line of South Carolina, if


the ſaid branch of Tugulo extends ſo far north, reſerving all the iſlands in the ſaid rivers Savannah and Tu-
gulo to Georgia: but if the ſaid branch or ſtream of Tugulo does not extend to the north boundary line ot


South Carolina, then a weſt line to the Miſſiſippi to be drawn from the head ſpring or ſource of the ſaid


branch of Tugulo river, which extends to the higheſt northern latitude, ſhall for ever hereafter form the ſepa-
rating limit and boundary between the States of South Carolina and Georgia.” þ 5
It is ſuppoſed, in the map of this State, that the moſt northern branch of the Tugulo river interſects the
northern ry of South Carolina, which, if it be fact, brings the State to a point in latitude 355 and about
8? 25" weſt longitude from Philadelphia; but it is not yet aſcertained whether this will be the cate. If it ſhall
be found that the moſt northern ſource of the Tugulo does not extend to latitude 355, then South Carolina, or
the United States by her affignment, will claim a ſtrip of country extending from the meridian welt to the


Miſiffippi, in breadth from the moſt northern fource of the Tugulo to latitude 355, unleſs the treaties ſub -


ſiſting between the United States and the Creek Indians ſhall interfere and bound them as they do Georgia.


It ought to be here noted, that South Carolina, in the forementioned treaty with Georgia, gave-up a claim
which it had till then retained, to the lands ſouth of the Alatamaha, as a return to Georgia for agreeing that
the boundary between the two States ſhould be the moſt northern branch of the Tugulo, initead of the
Keowee, as had been originally infiſted on by the State of Georgia. This contirms to the State of -South
Ne a very rich tract of country, which had been reſerved by that State for the officers and {oldiers of the
ate army. l % | 0 3


4A 2 a ma-


350 GEORGIA.


a majority of votes, was eſtabliſhed by law. This'illiberal act threw the oolomyil info
the utmoſt confuſion, and was followed by a train of evil conſequences, which proved
to be the principal cauſe of the revolution which ſoon followed. Notwithſtanding the
act eſtabliſhing the Church of England was repealed, tranquillity was not reſtoret to
the c6lany. A change of government was generally defired by the coloniſts. The
bound that they were not ſufficiently protected by their proprietary conſtitution, -and
effected & revolution about the year 1719, and the government became regal.

In 1728, the proprietors accepted 22,500]. flerling from the crown, for the property
and juriſdiction, except Lord Granville, who reſerved his eighth of the property,
which has never yet been formally given up. At this time the.conſtitution. was new-
modelled, and the terr tory, limited by the original n was divided into North
and South Carolinas.

From this period the colony began to flouriſh. It was protected by a government,
formed on the plan of the Engliſh- conſtitution. Under the foſtering care of the Mo-
ther Country, its growth was aſtoniſhingly rapid. Between the years 1763 and 1775,
the number of inhabitants was more than doubled. No one mdulged a with for a
change in their political conſtitution, till the memorable ſtamp act paſſed in 1765.

From this period till 1775, various attempts were made by Great Britain to tax her
colonies without conſent; theſe attempts were invariably oppoſed. The congreſs,


who met at Philadelphia this year, unanimouſly approved the Upon, and on the
I gth of April war commenced. |
During the vigorous contelt for independence, this: State was-a great ſufferer. For
: W585 years it was the feat. of the war. It feels and laments the loſs of many reſpectable
citizens. Since the peace, it has been emerging from that melancholy confuſion and
Poverty, in which it was generally involved by the devaſtations of a relentleſs enemy.
The inhabitants are-faſt multiplying by emigrations: from other States; the agricultural
intereſts of the State are reviving; commerce is flouriſhin g economy is becoming
more faſhionable; and ſcience begins to ſpread her ſalutary influences among the
citizens. And under the operation of the preſent government, this State, from her
natural, commercial, and agricultural advantages, and the abilities of her leading
characters, promiſes to become one of the richeſt in the Union.
See Ramſay's Hiſtory of the Revolution in South Carolina, and the Hiſtory of Caro-
Lina and Georgia, anonymous, * to be by Hewett. |


46 £440.34:


S1TvarION AxD EXTENT.
Miles. N * |

Length 6001 ,_, 5 and 16 W. Long.

Breadth 2 Ry . by 31? and 35 55 Lat.


„ POUNDED cat, by 755 Atlantic ocean; ſouth, by Taſt and Welt
BorxDanirs V Floridas; weſt, by the river Miſſiſſippi; north 47 north-eaſt, by
Sauth Carolina, and by lands ceded to the United States by South Carolina, 5


Civ IL


-


IL


northern boundary. From the foot of this mountain ſpreads a wide extended Ru


of the richeſt ſoil, and in a latitude and climate well acapled: to the cultivation 0
of the Eaſt India productions. |


Ovi Drvisroxs Au v PorulArrox. x. That 2 of the State which has been laid out


an counties, is divided into three diſtricts, which are ſubdivided into 11 counties,


which, with the number of inhabitants, are as follows :


Didrics. e. | Chief Towns.
3 e — St. Patrick's
Lower diſtrict, Glyn 8 'Brunſwick
contains 21,566 4 Liberty Le Sunbury
inhabitants. Chatham . SAVvANNAH
„ Effingham - | Ebenezer
NIiddle IG ; 0 Richmond 1 AGUSTA
d contains 26, 336 "OT Burke ins 1; « 1 *
| Inhabitants. L Waſhington IEA Golphinton
Upper diſtrict, Wilkes ee e "Waſhington
contains 37,946 Franklin oſt
: inhabitants. Green 2 1 0 3  Greenſburgh


Total number of inhabitants 3 in the State, 82, 548, of whom 29,264 are flaves.


Before the revolution, Georgia, like all the ken States, was divided a0 pariſhes;


but this mode of diviſion is now aboliſhed, and that of counties has ſucceeded in its
room.


Fach oF THE Covxray.] The caller. part of the State, between the mountains
and the ocean, and the rivers Savannah and St. Mary's, a tract of country more than
120 miles from north to ſouth, and 40 or 50 caſt and weſt, is entirely level, without
a hill or ſtone. At the diſtance of about 40 or 50 miles from the. ſea- board, or ſalt-


marſh, the lands begin to be more or leſs uneven. The ridges gradually riſe one above


another into hills, and the hills ſucceſſively increaſing in height, till they finally ter-


minate in mountains. That vaſt chain of mountains which commences with the Katt's


Kill, near Hudſon's river, in the State of New York, known by the names. of the Alle-
gany and Apalachian Mountains, terminate-in this State, about 60 miles ſouth of its


moſt


CLIMATE, DiszAsks, &c.] In ſome parts of this State, at particular ſeaſons of the
year, the climate cannot be efteemed ſalubrious. In the low country near the rice
ſwamps, bilious complaints, and fevers of various kinds, are pretty univerſal during
the months of July, AuguB,, and September, which, for this Lenſon, are called the


_ hckly months.


The diſorders peculiar to this climate originale partly from the ks of the water,


which in the low country, except in and about Savannah and ſome other places, where
good ſprings are found, is generally brackiſh, and partly from the noxious putrid


vapours which are exhaled from the ſtagnant waters in the rice ſwamps. Beſides,


the long continuance of warm weather pr roduces a general relaxation of the nervous


ſyſtem, and as a great proportion of the inhabitants have no neceſſary labour to call
them to exerciſe, alarge ſhare of indolence is the natural conſequence ; and indolence,


eſpecially amongſt a luxurious people, is ever the parent of diſcaſe. The immenſe


uantities of ſpirituous liquors which are uſed 0 correct the brackiſhneſs of the
| Water,


552 15 | GEORGIA.


water, form a ſpecies of intemperance which too often- proves“ Tttrouns to the conflitu-
tion. Parents of infirm, fickly habits. often, in more ſenfes thatt one, have children of
their own hkenets. A contiderable part of tho diſeaſes of the prefent inhabitants may
therefore be conſidered as hereditary.
Before the ſickly ſeaſon commences, many of the rich planters of this State remove
with their families to the ſea iſlands, or ſome elevated healthy, ſttuation, where they
reſide three or four months, for the benefit of the freſh air. In the winter and ſpring,
pleuriſies, peripnemnaonies, and other inflammatory, diforders, occaſioned by iudden
and violent colds, are conſiderably. common and frequently fatal. Conſumptions,
epilepſics, cancers, palſies, and apoplexies, are not ſo COMMON AY the inhabitants of
the ſouthern as northern climates.
The winters in Georgia are very mild and N Snow is eadeom or never ſeen.


Vegetation is not frequently prevented by ſevere froſts. Cattle ſubſiſt tolerably well
through the winter, without any other food than what they obtain in the woods and


ſav an nals, and are fatter in that ſeaſon than in any other. rd the hilly country, which
begins about fifty, and in ſome places one hundred miles from the ſea, the air is pure
and falubrious, and the water plenty and good. From June to September, the mer-
cury in Fahrenheit's thermometer commonly fluctuates from 76 to go? ; in winter,
from 40 to 60%.- The moſt prevailing winds are ſouth-weſt and eaft ; in winter,
north-weſt. The eaſt wind is warmeſt in winter and cooleſt in ſummer. The
ſouth wind, in ſummer and fall particularly, 1 1s damp, fultry, unelaſtic, and of courſe
unhealthy. |
In the ſouth-eaſt parts of this State, which lie within a few degrees of the torrid
zone, the atmoſphere is Kept in motion by impreſſions from the trade winds. This
ſerves to purify the air, and render it fit for reſpiration ; ſo that it is found to have a
very advantageous effect on perſons of conſumptive habits.
Rivess.] Savannah river divides this State from South Carolina. Its courſe is
nearly from north-weſt to ſouth-eaſt. ' It is formed principally of two branches, by the
names of Tugulo and Keowee, which fpring from the mountains, and unite fifteen
miles north-weſt of the northern boundary of Wilkes county. It is navigable for
large veſlels up to Savannah, and for boats of one hundred feet keel as far as Auguſta.
After rifing a fall juft above this place, it is paſſable for boats to the mouth of Tugulo
river. After it takes the name of Savannah, at the confluence of the Tugulo and
Keowee, it receives a number of tributary ſtreams, from the Georgia ſide, the principal
of which is Broad river, which riſes in the county of Franklin, and runs ſouth-eaſt
through part of Wilkes county, and mingles with Savannah at the town of Peterſburgh,
and might, with a trifling expenſe, be made boatable twenty-five or thirty miles
through the beſt ſettlements in Wilkes county. Tybee bar, at the entrance of Savarmah
1 in latitude 31 67, has ſixteen feet water at half tide.


he eechee e about eighteen miles ſouth of the Savannah, is a ſmaller river, and
nearly parallel with it in its courſe.
L about fixty miles ſouth of Kant river, has its 3 in the
Cherokee mountains, near the head of Tugulo, the great weſt branch of Savannah,
and, before it leaves the mountains, is joined and e by innumerable rivulets;
thence it deſcends through the hilly country, with all its collateral branches, and winds
rapidly amongft hills two hundred and fifty miles, and then enters the flat, plain
country, by the name of the Oakmulge ; thence meandering one hundred and fiſty
miles, it 1s * on the eaſt ſide by the Ocone, which likewiſe. HEAR + in the lower
ridges


* Pronounced i


GEORGIA. | 553


ridges of the mountains. Aſter this confluence, having now gained a vaſt acquiſition
of waters, it affumes the name of Alatamaha, when it becomes a large majeſtic river,
flowing with gentle windings through a vaſt plain foreſt, near one hundred miles,
and enters the Atlantic by ſeveral mouths. The north channel, or entrance, glides by
the heights of Darien, on the eaſt bank, about ten miles above the bar, and, runnin

from thence with ſeveral turnings, enters the ocean between Sapello and Wolf iflands.


The ſouth channel, which is eſteemed the largeſt and deepeſt, after its ſeparation from


the north, deſcends gently, winding by MeIntoſh's and Broughton iſlands; and
laſtly, by the weſt coaſt of St. Simon's iſland, enters the ocean, through St. Simon's


ſound, between the ſouth end of the iſland of that name and the north end of Jekyl
ifland. On the weft banks of the ſouth channel, ten or twelve miles above its mouth,


and nearly oppofite Darien, are to be ſeen the remains of an ancient fort, or fortifica-


tion; it is now a regular tetragon terrace, about four feet high, with baſtions at each


angle; the area may contain about an acre of ground, but the fofle which ſurrounded
it is nearly filled np. There are large live oaks, pines, and other trees, growing upon
it, and in the old fields adjoining. It is ſuppoſed to have been the work of the French
or Spaniards. . A large ſwamp lies betwixt it and the river, and a conſiderable creek
runs cloſe by the works, and enters the river through the ſwamp, a ſmall diſtance above


Broughton iſland. About ſeventy or eighty miles above the confluence of the Oak-
mulge and Ocone, the trading path from Auguſta to the Creek nation, croſſes theſe


fine rivers, which. are there forty miles apart. On the eaft banks of the Oakmulgs,
this: trading road runs nearly-two miles through ancient Indian fields, which are called
the Qakmulge fields; they are the rich low lands of the river. On the heights of theſe
low grounds are yet viſible monuments or traces of an ancient town, ſuch as artificial
mounts. or terraces, ſquares, and banks, encircling conſiderable areas. Their old fields


and planting land extend up and down the river, fifteen or twenty miles from this


ſite. And, if we are to give credit to the account the Creeks give of themſelves, this
place is remarkable for being the firſt town or ſettlement, when they fat down (as they
term it) or eſtabliſhed themſelves, after their emigration from the weſt, beyond the
Miſſiſſippi, their original native country. e OE ee =
Beſides theſe, there is Turtle river, Little Sitilla or St. Ille, Great Sitilla, Crooked
river, and St. Mary's, which form a part of the ſouthern boundary of the United


States. St. Mary's river has its ſource. from a vaſt lake, or rather marſh, called


Ouaquaphenogaw, hereafter deſcribed, and flows through a vaſt plain and pine


foreſt, about one hundred and fifty miles to the ocean, with which it communicates


between the points of Amelia and Talbert's iſlands, latitude 30% 44, and is navigable


for veſſels of conſiderable burthen for ninety miles. Its banks afford immenſe quan-
tities of fine timber, ſuited to the Weſt India market. Along this river, every four or


five miles, are bluffs convenient for veſſels to haul to and load. 2


The rivers in the middle and weſtern parts of this State are, Apalachicola, which is
formed by the Chatahouchee and Flint rivers, Mobile, Paſcagoula, and Pearl rivers.
All theſe running ſouthwardly, empty into the Gulf of Mexico. The forementioned

rivers abound with a great variety of fiſh, among which are the mullet, whiting,
ſheepſhead, cat, rock, trout, drum, baſs, brim, white, ſhad, and ſturgeon. The bays
and lagoons are ſtored with oyſters, and other ſhell fiſh, crabs, ſhrimps, &c. The


clams, in particular, are large, their meat white, tender, and delicate. The
ſhark and great black ſtingray are inſatiable cannibals, and very troubleſome to the
fiſhermen, =» 63 ICT AO TILA 5 ee

3 1 Laxes


C34 | GEORGIA,


rich land ; one of which the preſent g generation of Creek Indians reprefent as the moſt


women are incomparably beautiful. They tell you-alfo that this terreſtrial paradiſe has
_ relieved by a company of beautiful women, whom they call daughters ef the Sun, who


Huſbands were fierce men, and cruel to ftrangers. They further ſay that theſe hunters


ſequeſtered country, which ſeems not improbable, whieh is, that the inhabitants are


a bloody and decifrve battle between them and the Creeks, (who, it is certain, con-


| empties into the Bay of Apalachi at St. Mark's, are ſaid to flow. from this lake.“


called the Gooſepond, a tract of about one hundred and eighty acres, covered with
living water about two feet deep. It diſcharges into the river, and is fed by two


ſprings.


yards wide, about one hundred and forty-four miles from the ſea, and one hundred
and twenty-ſeven north-weſt of Savannah. The town, which in 1787 contained two
hundred houſes, is on a fine large plain, at the foot of the firſt falls in the river, which
in a dry ſeaſon are four or five feet in height; and as it enjoys the beſt foil, and the


| SavaNnNan, the former capitat of Georgia, ſtands on a high ſandy bluff, on the


of its inhabitants, exclufive of the blacks, amounted at that tune to about ei icht hun-


Laxkrs and Swaxies.] The lake, or rather marſh, called. Ouaquaphenogaw, lies
between Flint and Oakmul ge rivers, and is nearly three hundred miles in circum-
ference: In wet ſeaſons it appears like an inland fea, and has ſeveral large iſlands of


bliſsful ſpot on-earth. They fay it is inhabited by-a-peculiar race of Indians, whoſe


been ſeen by ſome enterpriſing hunters, when im purſuit of their game, who being loſt
in inextricable ſwamps and bogs, and on the point of periſhing, were unexpectedly


kindly gave them ſuch proviſions as they had with them, conſiſting of fruit and. corn
cakes, and then enjoined- them to fly for ſafety to their own. country, becauſe their


had a' view of their ſettlements, ſituated on the elevated banks of an iſland, in a beau-
tifuł lake; but that in their endeavours to approach it, they were involved in perpetual
labyrinth, and, like enchanted land, ftill as they imagined they had juſt. gained it, it
ſeemed to fly before them. They determined at length to quitthe e purſuit, and
with much difficulty effected a retreat. When they reported their adventures to their
countrymen, the young warriors were inflamed with an irrefiſtible deſire to invade
and conquer fo charming a country, but all their attempts had hitherto proved fruitleſs,
they never being able again to find the ſpot. They tell another ſtory concerning this


the poſterity of a fugitive remnant of the ancient Yamaſes, who eſcaped: maſſacre after


quered and nearly exterminated that once powerful people) and here found an. a\flum, :
remote and fecure from the fury of their proud conquerors..
The rivers St. Mary, Sitilla or St. Ille, and the beautiful Little St. Juan, which


About fixteen miles from the mouth of Broad river, on its ſouth fide, is what is


Cnikr Towns. ] The preſent: ſeat of government in this State is AvcusTa. It is
fituated on the ſouth-weſt bank of Savannah. river, which is here about five hundred


advantage of a central fituation between the upper and lower counties, 1s rifing faft
into importance. In 1782 there were but three or four houſes in the town.


ſouth ſide of the river of the ſame name, and feventeen miles from its mouth. The
town is regularly built in the form of a parallellogram, and, including its ſuburbs,
contained, in 1787, two hundred and twenty-ſeven dwelling houſes, one Epiſcopal
church, a Preſbyterian church, a Synagogue, and a court houſe. The number


dred and thirty, — of whom were Jews.


50 Bartram's Travels.


In


In


G EORGI 4. | 75 4 55
In Savannah, and within a 8 of about ten miles from it, there were, in


the ſummer of 1 787, about 230% inhabitants. Of theſe one hundred and ninety-two


were above fifty years of age, and all in good health. The ages of a lady and her fix


children, then living in the-town, amounted to three hundred and eighty- five years.


This computation, which was actually made, ſerves to ew that Savannah! is not really |


ſo unhealthy as has been commonly reprefented.


SUNBURY is a fea port town, favoured with a dale ae yery convenient harbour.
Several fmall iſlands intervene, and partly obſtruct a diſtant view of the ocean ; and,
interlocking with each other, render the paſſage out to ſea winding, but not difficult.
It is a very pleaſant, healthy town; and is the reſort of the planters from the adjacent
places of Midway and Newport, during the fickly months. It was burnt by the Britiſh


in the late war, but has ſince been rebuilt. An academy was eſtabliſhed here i in 1788,


which, under an able inſtructor, has proved a very uſeful inſtitution.
Brunswick, in Glynn county, latitude 319 10, is ſituated at the mouth of Turtle


river, at which place this river empties itſelf into St. Simon's ſound. Brunſwick has a


ſafe and capacious harbour; and the bar, at the entrance into it, has water deep enough


for the largeſt veſſel that Fo ims. The town 1s regularly lad out, but not yet built.


From its advantageous fituation, and from the fertility of the back country, it 22


to be hereafter one of the firſt trading towns in Georgia.


FRED ERICA, on the iſland of St. Simon, is nearly in latitude 31“ 15“; it is one of


the oldeſt towns in Georgia, and was founded by General Oglethorpe. The for-
treſs was regular and beautiful, conſtructed chiefly with brick, and is now in ruins.


The town contains but few houſes, which ſtand on an eminence, if conſidered with


regard to the marſhes before it, upon a branch of Alatamaha river, which waſhes
the welt ſide of this agreeable inland, and forms a bay before the town, affording a ſafe
and ſecure harbour for veſſels of the largeſt burthens, Which may lie along the
. 2


WASHINOI rox, the chief town in the county of Wilts, 18 fituated i in latitude „


about fifty miles north-weſt of Auguſta; it had, in 1788, a court houſe, gaol, thirty-
four dwelling houſes, and an academy, whoſe funds amounted to about Sool. 2 24
and the number of ſtudents to between ſixty and ſeventy. _


The town of LovisvitLEe, which is defigned as the future feat of government in


this State, has been laid out on the bank of Ogeechee river, about ſeventy miles from
its mouth, but is not yet built.


So1L, Propuctfons, &c.] The ſoil and its fertility are various, according to ſitu-
ation and different improvement. The iſlands on the ſea board, in their natural
ſtate, are covered with a plentiful growth of pine, oak, and hiccory, live oak, (an


uncommonly hard and a very valuable wood) and ſome red cedar. The ſoil is a mix-


ture of ſand and black mould, making what is commonly called a grey ſoil. A con-
ſiderable part of it, particularly that whereon grow the oak, hiccory, and live oak,


is very rich, and yields, on cultivation, good crops of indigo, cotton, corn, and po-


tatoes. Theſe iſlands are ſurrounded by navigable creeks, between which and the
main land is a large extent of ſalt marſh, fronting the whole State, not leſs, on an
averge, than four or five miles in breadth, interſected with creeks in various directions,
admitting, through the whole, an inland navigation between the iſlands and main
land, from the north-eaſt to the ſouth-eaſt corners of the State. The eaſt ſides of
theſe iſlands are, for the moſt part, clean, hard, ſandy beaches, expoſed to the waſh
of the ocean. Between theſe iſlands are the entrances of the rivers from the interior
country, winding through the low falt marſhes, and delivering their waters into the
40” ſounds,


1 a, ö
ad **
+ , * 8 1 - 2 4 bx . *


356 | "GEORGIA.


bound, "hich form capacious. harbours of from three to eight miles over, 2 hel
communicate with each other by parallel falt creeks. The principal iſlands are Skid-
; AVAy y Wallaw, Offabay, St. Catharine 's, Sapelo, Frederica, Jekyl, Cumberland, and
Ella. f | |
The foil of the main land, adjoining the marſhes and crecks, is nearly of the ſame.
quality with that of the iſlands, except that which borders on thoſe rivers and creeks
which, ſtretch far back into the country. On, theſe, immediately after you leave the
ſalts, begin the valuable rice ſwamps, which, on cultivation, afford the preſent prin-
cipal ſtaple of commerce. The moſt of the rice lands lie on rwers, which, as far as
the tide, flows, are called tide lands; or on creeks. and particular beaches of water,
flowing in ſome deeper or lower parts of the lands, which are called inland ſwamps,
and extend back in the country from fiftcen to twenty-five miles, beyond which very
little rice is planted, though it will grow excecdingly well, as experiment has proved,
one 9 and twenty miles back from the ſea. The intermediate lands, between
: theſe crecks and rivers, are of an inferior quality, being of a grey ſoil, covered chiefly
with pine, and a fort of wild graſs and ſmall reeds, whieh afford a large range of
feeding ound for ſtock both ſummer and winter. Here and there are interſperſed
oak 5 2 Ea ridges, which are of a better ſoil, and produce good crops of corn
and indigo; but theſe are very. little clevated above the circumjacent lands. The lands
_ adjoining the rivers, and, for an hundred miles in a direct line from the ſea, continue
a breadth from two to three or four miles, and wherever, in that diſtance, you find a
piece of high land that extends to the bank of the river on one fide, you may expect to
nd the low or ſwamp ground proportionably wide on the oppoſite fide of the river.
This ſcems to be an invariable rule till Fou come to that part where the river cuts the
| _ mountains, 5
Fhe ſoil between the rivers, py rac you leave che ſea board and the 7 of the fangs
at the diſtance of twenty or thirty miles, changes from a grey to a red colour, on Which
" grows plenty of oak and hiccory, with a conſiderable intermixture of pine. In forge
places it is gravelly, but fertile; and ſo continues for a number of miles, gradually
deepening the reddiſh colour of the earth, till it changes into what is called the Mu-
latto foil, confiſting of a black mould and red earth. The compoſition is darker or
lighter according as there is a larger or ſmaller proportion of the black or red earth in
it. The mulatto lands are generally ſtrong, and yield large crops of: wheat, tobacco,
corn, &c. To this kind of land fucceeds by turns a ſoil nearly black and very rich, on
which grow large quantities of black walnut, mulberry, &. This ſucceſſion of
different ſoils continues uniform and regular, though there are ſome large veins of all
the different ſoils intermixed; and what is more remarkable, this ſucceſſion, in the
order mentioned, ſtretches acroſs this State nearly. parallel with the ſea. coaſt, and
extends through the ſeveral States, nearly in the ſame direction, to the banks of Hud-
ſon's river. In this State are produced by culture, rice, indigo, cotton, filk, (though
not in large quantities) Indian corn, potatoes, Oranges, figs, pomegranates, Ke.
Rice, at preſent, is the ſtaple commodity ; ; and. as a {mail proportion only of the rice
ground 1s under cultivation, the quantity raifed in future muſt be much greater than at
preſe nt. But the rapid increate. of the inhabitants, chiefly by emigrations; whoſe. atten-
tion is titrncck to the railing. of tobacco, and the vaſt extent of. land, with a richneſs
of wil ſuited to the culture of that plant, renders it probable, that tobacco will ſhortly
become the ſtaple. of this State. Cotton was formerly planted only by the poorer claſs
of people, and that oply for family uſe. They planted, of two kinds, the annual and
the Welt Indiin; the former is low and pl: anted every year. The balls of this are very
4 I


GEORGIA. 825


large, and the phlox long, ſtrong, and perfectly a The latter is a tall perc. A
plant, the ſtalk ſomewhat ſhrubby, ſeveral of which riſe up ſrom the root tor teveral
"CATS ſucceſſively, the ſtems of the former year being killed by the winter troſts. The
balls of Weſt India cotton are not quite ſo large as the ot ther, but the phlox of wool is
long, extremely fine, filky, and white. A plantation of this kind will lait ſeveral
years with moderate lahour and care. The culture of cotton. 18 now much. more at-
tended to: ſeveral indigo planters bays converted their plantations into cotton fields;
The tobacco lands are "equally well . to wheat, Which nr Hh hereafter make an
important article of commerce.

On the dry plains grow large crops of fect natihors; which. are : und to ed a
wholeſome nouriſhment, and from which is made, by diſtillation, | a kind of whilky,
tolerably good, but inferior to that made of rye. It is by properly macerating and
waſhing this root that a ſediment or ſtarch is made, which has obtained the name of
ſago, and anſwers all tlie purpoſes of the Indian ſago. W

Moſt of the tropical fruits would flouriſh in this State with proper attention. The

rice plant has been tranſplanted, and alſo the tea plant, of which ſuch immenſe quan-
tities are conſumed in the United States, was introduced into Georgia, by Mr. Samuel
Bowen, about the year 1770, from India. The ſeed was diſſeminated, and the plant
now grows, without culfivation, in moſt of the fenced lots in Savannah.

From many conſiderations we may, perhaps, venture to predict, that the ſouth-
weſtern part of the State, and the parts, of Eaſt and Welt Flor ida, which lie AQOIINg,
will, in ſome future time, become the vineyard of America. . 8

REMARKABLE SPRING. | In the county: of Wilkes, within a mile Li a half of the T
town of Waſhington, i is a medicinal ſpring, Which riſes from a hollow tree, four. or 4
five feet ih leneth. The infide of the tree is covered with a coat of matter, an inch
thick, and the Teaves around the ſpring are incruſted with a ſubſtance as white As ſhow. 5
It 1s faid to be a ſovereign remedy for the ſcurvy, ſcrophulous diſorders, conſumptions,
gouts, and every other diſeaſe ariſing from hümours in the blood. A perſon, Who had
a ſevere rheumatiſm 1 in his. right arm, having, in the ſpace of ten minutes, drank two 1
quarts of the water, experienecd a momentary chill, and was then thrawh into a per-

len which, in a few «hours, left him entirely free from pain, and in PERL... |
ealth. :

This ſpring, Atuated. in a fine healthy, part of the State, in the neighboyrh&bd ol

Waſhington, where are excellent accommodations, will no doubt prove a pleaſant and
falutary place of reſort for. invalids from, the maritime and e parts of this and
the neighbouring Mie

| Confosrriks. ol One of the greateſt curiofities' in gh State is the hank of oyſter thells |

E in the vicinity of Auguſta, go miles from the ſea, already deſcribed, page 139.

| COMMERCE. MANUFACTURES, AND AGRICULTURE, ] The chief articles of export : are


"mY rice, tobacco, (of which the county of Wilkes only exported, in 1788, about 3000 10
i hogtheads) indigo, ſago, lumber of various kinds, naval ſtores, leather, deer IKins,


ſnake rogt, myrtle and bees wax, corn, and live fock. The planters and farmers 19


large ſtocks of cattle, from 100 to 1300 head, and ſome more.
Tho value, f in ſterling money, of the ex ports of Glorie, ſor cighteen years e
1 1755 to 1772, was as follows: | e


4B 2 175


—
2


JJ

L- " L.
15,744 1761 13,970 1767 67, 92
16,776 1762 27,021 | 1768 2,284
15,649 | 1763 - 47,551 | 176g 0,485
6,013 | 1764 - 55,028 {| 1770 99,383


12,694 | 1765 - 73,426. 1771 - 106,337
20,852 770 1766 | 121,077


1755
1756
1757
1758
1759

1760


p
*


W


61,228. [1772


Statement of the number of veſſels cleared out of Georgia, from 1755 to 1772.
Ns I Square rigged. Sloops. Tons. Square rigged. | Sloops.. Tons.
17535 9 43 1,899 | 1764, 36 79 5,586
/ |- 1795... $4 ; .04 ., 7,008
: )))) . os. 90,094 -
1750, 4 1 665 1767, 8 92 5 8,465 ; 8
1739. 13 33 1,981 | 1708, 77 109 10,466 _
178% 7 3% I,457 | 1769, 87 4 9,276 6
- 703» :.....9. --.3% e 113 10514.
1762, 22 35 2,784 | 1771, 64 121 9,553
1763, 34 , 58 4,761 | 1772, 84 133 11,246


The amount of exports in the year ending September zoth, 1791, was 491,472 dol-.
lars. In return for the enumerated exports are imported Weſt India goods, teas, wines,
various articles of clothing, and dry goods of all kinds From the northern States,
cheeſe, fiſh, potatoes, apples, cyder, and ſhoes: The imports and exports of this
State are principally to and from Savannah, which has a fine harbour, and is a place
where the principal commercial buſineſs of the State is tranſacted. The trade with the
Indians in furs and ſkins was very conſiderable before the war, but has fince been in-
terrupted by the wars in which boy have been involved. The manufactures of this
State have hitherto been very inconſiderable, if we except indigo, filk, and ſago. The
manner in which the indigo is cultivated and manufactured is as follows : The
ground, which muſt be a ſtrong rich ſoil, is thrown into beds of ſeven or eight feet
wide, after having been made very mellow, and is then raked till it is fully pulverized: |
the ſeed is then ſown in April, in rows at ſuch a diſtance as conveniently to admit of
hoeing between them. In July the firſt crop is fit to cut, being commonly two and a
half feet high; it is then thrown into vats conſtructed for the purpoſe, and ſteeped
about 30 hours; after which, the liquor is drawn off into other vats, where it is beat,
as they call it, by which means itfis thrown into much ſuch a ſtate of agitation as cream is
by churning. Aſter this proceſs, lime water is put into the liquor, which cauſes the
particles of indigo to ſettle at the bottom. The liquor is then drawn off, and the ſedi-
ment, which is the indigo, is taken out and ſpread on cloths, and partly dried; it is
then put into boxes and preſſed, and, while it 15 yet ſoft, cut into ſquare pieces, which
are thrown into the ſun to dry, and then put up in caſks for the market. They have
commonly three cuttings a ſeaſon. A middling crop for 30 acres is 1300 pounds.
The culture of filk and the manufacture of ſago are at preſent but little attended to.
The people in the lower part of this State manufacture none of their own clothing for
themſelves or their negroes : for almoſt every article of their wearing apparel, as well
as for their huſbandry tools, they depend on their merchants, who import them from
Great Britain and the northern States. In the upper parts of the country, 3
AS, 5


” - 47 4 : ; : "_— * 4 * * n * . * „ HE ves bf yy 1 f POTS < > a 1 <7 N- N 3 FT] 8 | « 5 « * :
lp PR re _ - * + v8; — 2 c r *. N 8 n ee 7, I f * . . W. 0 WY 1 " OS 5 . N n bY * 1 K 4 r *
„ * e - . RNA — 0 « . e ; . ps 1 : TL nn; 8 7 n #4 : | "I . : „ 41-47 hart r e — — - N . Sy 2 .
« F „„


— Ca —
* ery


3.


PC — "__ -
3 — ITS


— 4


—
—
> 2 ö
8 >
of


2 7 ͤ m . ̃ͤ ( OO, 9, , 4 2 — Nr * 8 > 3
D — I" 5 l * n F en fn n r n :


GEORGIA. 559


* inhabitants manufacture the chief part of their clothing from cotton, hemp, |;


and flax.
| CHARACTER AND MaxxgRs J No general character will apply to. the inhabitants at
large. Collected from different parts of the world, as intereſt, neceflity, or iaclina-
tion led them, their character and manners muſt, of courle, partake of all the varieties
which diſting guiſh the ſeveral ſtates and kingdoms from whence they came. There is
ſo little Pr” that it is difficult to trace any governing principles among them,
An averſion to labour is too predominant, owing in part to the relaxing heat of the


_ climate, and partly to the want of neceſſity to excite induſtry. . An open and friendly.


hoſpitality, Fee to ſtrangers, is an ornamental characteriſtic. of a great part of.


this people.


Their diverſions are various. With ſome, Sch Is a Ras amuſement ; athaws


take a faneied pleaſure at the gaming table, which, however, frequently terminates in


the ruin of their happineſs, fortunes, and conſtitutions. In the upper counties, horſe-
racing and cock-fighting prevail, two cruel diverſions imported from Virginia and the
Carolinas, from whence thoſe who practiſe them principally emigrated. But the moſt


rational and univerſal amuſement is hunting; ; and for this Georgia is particularly well


calculated, as the woods abound with plenty of deer, racoons, rabbits, wild turkeys,


and other game; at the ſame time the woods are ſo thin and free from obſtructions, that


vou may generally ride half ſpeed in chace without danger: in this amuſement plea-
ſure and profit are blended. The exerciſe, more than any other, contributes to health,
fits for activity in buſineſs and expertneſs in war; the game alſo affords them a palala-


ble food, and the ſkins a profitable article of commerce.


REL1610y, | The inhabitants of this State, who profeſs the Chriſtian religion, are of


the Preſbyterian, Epiſcopalian, Baptiſt, and Methodiſt denominations. They have
but a few regular miniſters among them.


Coxsrrruriox.] The preſent conſtitution ol this State was Smet and eſtabliſhed
in the year 1789, and is nearly upon the plan of the conſtitution of the United States.
Starz o LIT ERA TURE.] The literature of this State, which is yet in its infaney, is
1 on a plan which affords the moſt flattering proſpects. It ſeems to have
been the deſign of the legiſlature of this State, as far as poſſible, to unite their literary
concerns, and provide for them in common, that the Dr might feel the benefit, and


no part be neglected or left a prey to party rage, private prejudices and contentions,


and conſequent i ignorance, their inſeparable attendant. For this purpoſe, the literature
of this State, like its policy, appears to be, conſidered as one object, and in the ſame
manner ſubject to common and general regulations for the good of the whole. The


charter, containing their preſent {yſtem qi education, was paſſed in the year 1 785. A


college, with ample and liberal endewygents; is inſtituted in Louiſville, a high and
healthy part of the country, near the pen Agr the State. There is alſo proviſion made
for the inſtitution of an academy in each county in the State, to be ſupported from
the ſame funds, and conſidered as parts and members of the ſame inftitution, under the
general ſuperintendence and direction of a prefident and board of truſtees, appointed,


for their literary accompliſhments, from the different parts of the State, inveſted with
the cuſtomary powers of corporations. The inſtitution thus compoſed, . 1s denomi-


nated, The Univerſity of Georgia.”

That this body of literati, to whom is intruſted the direction of the general literature
of the State, may not be ſo detached and independent, as not to poſſeſs the confidence
of the State; and, in order to ſecure the attention and patronage of the principal of-
ficers of government, the governor and council, the 1 of the Houſe of *

an


S 99 | G 1 Q. R. G. A. 2


and the chief juſtice of the State, are aſſociated with the board of truſtees, in ſome of
the great and more folemn duties of their office,” ſuchi as making the Taws, appointing
the preiident, ſettling the property, and inſtituting academies. Thus aſſociated, they
are denominated, “ The Senate of the Univerſity,” and are to hold a ſtated, annual
meeting, at which the governor of the State preſid ess. Fr ee +
The Senate appoint a board of commiſſioners in each county, for the particular ma-
nagement and direction of the academy, and the other ſchools in each county, who are
to receive their inſtructions from, and are accountable to the fenate. The rector of
each academy is an officer of the univerſity, to be appointed by the prefident, with the
advice of the truſtees, and commiffioned under the public feal, and is to attend with
the other officers at the annual meeting of the ſenate, to. deliberate on the general inte-
reſts of literature, and to determine on the courſe of ſtruction for the year, through-
out the univerſity. The prefident has the general charge and overſight of the whole,
and is from time to time to viſit them, to examine into their order and performances.
The funds for the ſupport of their inftitution are principally in lands, amounting in
the whole to about fifty thoutand acres, a great part of which is of the beſt quality, and
at preſent very valuable. There are alſo nearly fix thouſand pounds ſterling in Von, 20
| houſes and town lots in the town of Auguſta. Other public property, to the amount of
1000l. in each county, has been ſet apart for the purpoſes of building and furniſhing
their reſpective academics: I 7 4-H ; 25 Fat. * — ö I : DH 1 ”y a tn 5 : ” lb d bg BD
IN DIAxs.] The Muſkogee or Creek Indians inhabit the middle part of this State,
and are the moſt numerous tribe of Indians of any within the limits of the United
States: their whole number ſome years fince was 17, 280, of which 3, 860 were fighting
men. They are compoſed of various tribes, who, aſter bloody wile thought it good
policy to unite and ſapport themſelves againſt the Chactaws, &c. They confiſf of the
Appalachies, Alibamas, Abecas, Cawittaws, Cooſas, Conthacks, Coofattees, Chacſi-
hoomas, Natchez, Oconies, Oakmulgies, Okohoys, Pakanas, Taenſas, Talepooſas, 5
Weetumkas, and ſome others. Their union has rendered them victorious over the
Chactaws, and formidable to all the nations around them. They are a well- made,
expert, hardy, ſagacious, politic people, extremely jealous of their rights, and averſe
to parting with their lands. They have abundance of tame cattic and ſwine, turkeys,
ducks, and other poultry ; they cultivate tobacco, rice, Indian corn, potatoes, beans,
peas, cabbage, melons, and have plenty of peaches; plums, grapes, ſtrawberries, and


other fruits. They are faithful friends, but inveterate enemies; hoſpitable to ſtran-
gers, and honeſt and fair in their dealings. No nation has a more contemptible opi-
nion of the white mens' faith in general than theſe people, yet they place great confi-
dence in the United States, and wiſh to agree with them upon a permanent boundary,
over which the ſouthern States ſhall not tretpaſs. TE TT on enrrentt
The country which they claim is bounded northward by about the 34th degree of
latitude, and extends from the Tombeckbee, or Mobile river, to the Atlantic ocean,
though they have ceded a part of this tract on the ſea coaſt, by different treaties, to the
State of Georgia. Their principal towns lie in latitude 32?, and longitude 110 20 from
Philadelphia. They are ſettled in a hilly but not mountainous country. The ſoil is
fruitful in a high degree, and well watered, abounding in creeks and rivulets, from
w hence they are called the Creek Indians.* x r EO Ce.
RE 1 1 8
* General M*Gillivray, the celebrated Chief of the Creeks, is a half-blooded Indian, his mother being a
wornan of high rank in the Creek nation. He was ſo highly eſteemed among them, that they in a formal man-
ner elected him their ſovereign, and veſted him with conſiderable powers. He has ſeveral ſiſters 1 ah


Si 561


The Chactaws, or flat heads, inhabit a very fine and extenſive tract of hilly country,
with large and fertile plains intervening, between the Alabama and Mifliffippi rivers,
in the weſtern part of this State. This nation had, not many years ago, 43 towns and


villages, in three diviſions, containing 12,123 fouls, of which 4,041 were fighting
men. | 113 |


The Chickaſaws are ſettled on the head branches of the Tombeckbee, Mobile, and
Yazoo rivers, in the aorth-weſt corner of the State. Their country is an extenfive
plain, tolerably well watered from ſprings, and of a pretty good foil. They have ſeven
towns, the central one of which is in latitude 34 23˙, and longitude 14* 3o' weſt. The
number of ſouls in this nation have been formerly reckoned at 1725, of which 575 were
HisToky. ] The ſettlement of a colony between the rivers Savannah and Alatamaha
was meditated in England in 1732, for the accommodation of poor people in Great
Britain and Ireland, and for the further ſecurity of Carolina. Private compaſſion and public
ſpirit conſpired to promote the benevolent deſign. Humane and opulent men ſuggeſted
a plan of tranſporting a number of [indigent families to this part of America, free of
expenſe. For this purpoſe they applied to the King, George the II. and obtained from
him letters patent, bearing date June 9th, 1732, for legally carrying into execution
what they had generouſly projected. They called the new province GEoRG1A, in
honour of the King, who encouraged the plan. A corporation, conſiſting of twenty-one
perſons, was conſtituted by the name of the truſtees for ſettling and eſtabliſhing the
colony of Georgia; which was, ſeparated from Carolina by the river Savannah. The
truſtees having firſt ſet an example themſelves, by largely contributing to the ſcheme,
undertook alſo to ſolicit benefactions from others, and to apply the money towards
clothing, arming, purchaſing utenſils for cultivation, and tranſporting ſuch poor peo-
ple as ſhould content to go over and begin a ſettlement. They did not confine their
charitable views to the ſubjects of Britain alone, but wiſely: opened a door for the in-
digent and oppreſſed proteſtants of other nations. To prevent a miſapplication of the
money, it was depoſited in the bank of Englaae .
About the middle of July, 1732, the truſtees for Georgia held their firſt meeting,
and choſe Lord Percival preſident of the corporation, and ordered a common ſeal to be
made. In November following, 116 ſettlers embarked for Georgia, to be conveyed
thither free of expenſe, furniſhed. with every thing requiſite for building and for culti-
vating the ſoil. James Oglethorpe, one of the truſtees, and an active promoter of the
ſettlement, embarked. as the head and director of theſe ſettlers. They arrived at
Charleſtown early in the next year, where they met a friendly reception from the gover-
nor and council. Mr. Oglethorpe, accompanied by William Bull, ſhortly after his
arrival viſited Georgia, and after reconnoitering the country, marked the ſpot on
which Savannah now ſtands, as the fitteſt to begin a ſettlement. Here they accordingly
began and built a ſmall fort, and a number of ſmall huts for their defence and accom-
modation. Such of the ſettlers as were able to bear arms were embodied, and well ap-
pointed with officers, arms, and ammunition. .. A treaty of friendſhip was concluded
between the ſettlers and their neighbours, and the Creek Indians, and every thing wore


the aſpect of peace and future proſperity.


leading men among the Creeks. This gentleman would gladly have remained a citizen of the United States;

dut having ſerved under the Britiſi during the late war, his property in Georgia, which was conſiderable,

was confiicated. This circumſtance induced him to retire among his friends the Creeks, ſince which he has
b.cn an active and zealous partiſan in their intereſts and politics. i er ne ;


1


„ 801


; rs A -


In the mean time the truſtees of Georgia had been employed in franing a plap of
ſettlement, and eſtabliſhing ſueh public regulations as they jddged mot proper for an-
ſwering the great end of the corporation. In the general plan they corfidered each in-
habitant both as a planter and # ſoldier, ho muſt be provided with arms afid àmmuni-
tion for defence, as well as with tools and utenſils for cultivation: As the ftrength '6
the province was the object in view, they agreed to eſtabliſh ſuch tenures for holdin
lands in it as they judged moſt-favourable for military eſtabliſnment. Each tract of
land granted was confidered as a- military fief, for which the poſſeſſor was to appear in
arms, and take the field, when called upon for the public defence. To prevent large
tracts from falling, in proceſs of time, to ofie perſon, they agreed to grant their Hunde
in tail male, in preference to tail general. On the termination of the eſtate in tall
male, the lands were to revert to the truſt; and ſuch lands thus reverting were to be
granted again to ſuch perſons, as the common council of the truſt ſhould judge moſt
advantageous for the colony; only the truſtees in ſuch a caſe were to pay ſpecial regard
to the daughters of ſuch perſons as had made improvements on their lots, eſpeciall/
when not already provided for by marriage. The wives of ſuch perſons as ſhould ſur-
vive them, were to be, during their lives, entitled to the manſion houſe, and one half
of the lands improved by their huſpands. No man was to be permitted to depart the
province without licenſe. If any of the lands granted by the truſtees ſhall not be cul-
tivated, cleared, and fenced round about with a worm fence, or pales, fix feet high,
within eighteen years from the date of the grant, ſuch part was to revert to the truſt,
and the grant with reſpect to it to be void: All forfeitures for non-refidences, high
treaſons, felonies, &c. were to the truſtees ſor the uſe and benefit of the colony. The uſe
of negroes to be abſolutely prohibited, and alſo the importation of rum. None of the
coloniſts were to be permitted to trade with the Indians, but ſuch as ſhould obtain A


ſpecial licenſe for that putpoſe.


I beſe were ſome of the fundamental regulations eſtabliſhed” by the 'truſtees of
Georgia, and perhaps th imagination could ſcarcely have framed a ſyſtem of rules worſe
adapted to the circumſtunces and ſituation of the poor ſettlers; and of more pernicious

conſequence to the proſperity of the province. Yet, although the truſtees were greatly
miſtaken, with reſpect to the plan of ſettlement, it muſt be acknowledged their views
were generous. As the people ſent out by them were the poor and unfortunate, Wo
were to be provided with neceſſaries at their public ſtore, they received their lands
upon condition of cultivation, and, by their perſonal reſidence, of defence. Silk and
wine being the chief articles intended to be raiſed, they judged negrocs were not requi-
fite for theſe purpoſes. As the colony was defigned to be à barrier to South Carolina
againſt the Spaniſh ſettlement at Auguſtine, they imagined that negroes would rather
weaken than ſtrengthen it, and that ſuch poor coloniſts would run in debt, and ruin
themſelves by purchaſing them. Rum was judged pernicious to health, and ruinous

to the inſant ſettlement. A free trade with Indians was a thing that might have a ten-
dency to involve the people in quarrels and troubles with tlie powerful ſavages, and ex-

poſe them to danger and deſtruction. Such were probably the motives which induced
thoſe humane and generous perſons to impoſe ſuch föoliſn and ridiculous reſtrictions
on their colony. For by granting their ſmall eſtates in tail male, they drove the ſettlers
ſrom Georgia, who ſoon found that abundance of lands could be obtained in America
upon a larger ſcale, and on much better terms. By the prohibition” of negroes they

rendered it impracticable in ſuch à climate to make any impreſſion on the thick foreſts,
Europeans being utterly unqualified for the heavy taſk. By their diſcharging a trade
with the Weſt Indies, they 2 the coloniſts of an excellent and convenient 7
8 C


themſelves with the hope of ſoon ſeeing it in a promiſing condition.


GRORGIHA. _ 563


above four hundred Britiſh ſubjects, and about an hundred and ſeventy foreigners.
Afterwards, feveral adventurers, both from Scotland and Germany, followed their
countrymen, and added farther ſtrength to the province, and the truſtees flattered


Their hopes, however, were vain : their injudicious 19 9 and reſtrictions,


the wars in which they were involved with the Spaniards and Indians, and the frequent
inſurrections among themſelves, threw the colony into a fate of confuſion and wretch-
edneſs too great for human nature to endure. Their opprefied ſituation was repreſented
to the truſtees by repeated complaints; till at length, finding that the province lan-
guiſhed under their care, and weary with the complaints of the people, they, in the
year 1752, ſurrendered their charter to the King, and it was made a royal govern-
ment. In conſequence of which, his Majeſty appointed John Reynolds, an officer of
the navy, governor of the province, and a legiſlature, ſimilar to that of the other royal


*governments in America, was eſtabliſhed in it. Great had been the expenſe which
the mother country had already incurred, befides private benefactions, for ſupporting
this colony; and ſmall had been the returns yet made by it. The veſtiges of cultiva-


tion were ſcarcely perceptible in the foreſts, and in England all commerce with it was


neglected and deſpiſed. At this-time the whole annual exports of Georgia did not


amount to 10,000l. ſterling. Though the people were now favoured with the ſame


Liberties and privileges enjoyed by their neighbours under the royal care, yet ſeveral
years more elapſed before the value of the lands in Georgia was known, and that ſpirit


4 GC of


1 ee
of induſtry broke out in it, which afterwards diffuſed its happy influence over the
country.

In the year 1740, the Rev. George Whitefield ride an orphan houſe academy
in Georgia, about 12 miles from Savannah. For the ſupport of this, in his itinera-
tions, he collected large ſums of money of all denominations of Chriſtians; both in
England and America. A part of this money was expended in erecting proper build-

ings to accommodate the ſtudents, and a part m ſupporting them. In 1768, it was
propod poſed that the. orphan houſe ſhould be erected into a college; whereupon Mr.
hitefield applied to the crown for a charter. In conſequence of ſome diſpute, the
affair of a charter was given up, and Mr. Whitefield made his aſſignment of the or-
phan houſe in truſt to the Counteſs of Huntingdon. Mr. Whitefield died at Newbury
Port, in New England, September 3oth, 1770, in the 56th year of his age, and was
buried under the Preſbyterian church in that place.
Soon after his death, a charter was granted to his inftitution in Georgia, and the

Kev. Mr. Percy was appointed preſident of the college. Mr. Percy accordingly came
over to execute his office, but, unfortunately, on the 30th of May, 177 5, the: orphan
houſe building taught fire, and was entirely conſumed; except the two wings, which
are ſtill remaining. The American war ſoon after came on, and put every thing into

confuſion, and the funds have ever ſince lain in an unproductive ſtate. It is probable
that the college eſtate, by the conſent of the Counteſs of Huntingdon, may hereafter be
ſo incorporated with the univerfity of Georgia, as to ſubſerve the dz e and pious
purpoſes of its founder.

From the time Georgia became a royal government, in 1752, till the peace of Paris,
in 1763, ſhe ſtruggled under many difficulties, ariſing from the want of credit from
friends, and the frequent moleſtations of enemies. The good effects of the peace were

ſenfibly felt in the province of Georgia. From this time it began to flouriſh, under
the fatherly care of Governor Wright. To form a judgement of the rapid growth of
the colony, we need only attend to its exports in the foregoing table.

During the late war, Georgia was over-run by the Britiſh troops, and the ibu
tants were obliged to flee into the neighbouring States for ſafety. The ſufferings and
loſſes of her citizens were as great, in proportion to their numbers and wealth, as in
any of the States. Since the peace, the progreſs of the population of this State has
been rapid: its growth in improvement and population has been checked by the hoſ-

tile! 2 3 of the Creek Indians, which have been frequent, and very diſtreſſing to
the frontier inhabitants. Treaties have been held, and a ceſſation of hoſtilities agreed
to between the parties; and it is expected that a permanent peace will ſoon be con-


cluded, and tranquillity reſtored to the State. —See Hewett's Hiſt. S. Cen and
Georgia. |


. 1 5 k | ; 11 1 1 . 4
5 3 — * e - e f
” . 4 4 1 * L l N
0 , 4 : , . 1.5 4 . 1 ? 4 N '
| 335 SPANISH
OC * r ,
F » * . 7 "
41 7 a F 2 4 F * i 4 a : .


. . . — — — Fr, . — =
— — — , ——— 7—˖˙*¾̃ *‚ů — =


Fon, PN.


„


.


2
—
>»


FFF i


1 2


. AOL — —


C,
„ .


avg lu


Y


ren Yn
meg 97 un; {40


——


%,


1 W Uπůiü


5
.
4
„


\


"VaIOT14\%
| 5 N \ | |


LS AM bun J S VA


19 mi} | | |
"_ * a ö I © | Oo | /


qH


PWC


— —


„


PAIADUTDY)' —


| 2 bf 4 G —
7 u, 7


CET. %. % „. |
n a Wy | K
* e | |


J ri | | as *


/


0, up mp.ndg


JO AF Sel 5
7 8 | : | | | 4


1 mayor's 18 | I Avg > 3 4 —_—_— ba þ 21 0 3 | x * *


\ 1 W Is oy 27 0˙ g/
Je V
dee, | = . I


= PO Ie > ey as ww... 1 * reer „ Mags

OY & CIS 2 4s aw : F

——— oY .
1 "x e


Ve > — * a *
2 of * *
on —— 2 . — — e «—§— res — o


—


(365
v4


2 ten pe OMINIONS.


EAST AND. WEST FLORIDA.


5 | Miles. N
Length 600 250 had 31*N. Latitude.
Breadth 130 43 between 15 5* and 1 W. Long. from Philadelphia. - |


)OUNDED north, by Georgia ; eaſt, by the Atlantic ocean; ſouth»


BouxDanues.] by the Gulf of Mexico; weſt, by the Wie lying i in the


form of an L.


Rivess, Irin AND \ SpRINGS. ] Among the rivers that fall into the Atlantic, St.


John's and Indian rivers are the principal. St. John's river riſes in or near a large


ſwamp, in the heart of Eaſt Florida, and purſues a northern courſe in a broad, navi-
gable ſtream, which, in ſeveral places, ſpreads into broad bays or lakes. Lake George,
which 1s only a dilatation of the river, is a beautiful piece of water, generally about 15
miles broad, and from 15 to 20 feet deep. It is ornamented with ſeveral charming
iſlands, one of which is a mere orange grove, interſperſed with magnolias and palm
trees. Near Long Lake, which 1s two miles Jong and four wide, which communicates
with St. John's river by a ſmall creek, is a vaſt fountain of warm or rather hot mineral

water, iſſuing from a high bank on the river: it boils up with great force, forming


immediately a valt circular baſon, capacious enough for ſeveral ſhallops to ride in, and


runs with rapidity into the riyer, three or four hundred yards diſtance. The water is


perfectly clear; and the prodigious number and variety of fiſh in it, though many fect


deep, appear as plainly as though lying on a table before your eyes: the water has a
diſagreeable taſte, and ſmells like bilge water. This river enters into the Atlantic,


north of St. Auguſtine.


Indian river riſes a ſhort diſtance from the ſea coaſt, ang runs from north to ſouth,
forming a kind of inland paſſage for many miles along the coaſt.
Seguana, Apalachicola, Chatahatchi, Eſcambia, Mobile, Paſcagodla, and Pearl


rivers, all riſe in Georgia, and run ſoutherly into the Gulf of Mexico.


CLIMATE. & Very little different from that of Georgia. | |

SOIL AND PRODUCTIONS. | There are, in this country, a great variety of ſoils. The 7
eaſtern part of it, near 5 about St. Auguſtine, is far the moſt unfruitful ; yet even
here two crops. of Indian corn a year are produced. The banks of the rivers which


water the Floridas, and the parts contiguous, are of a ſuperior quality, and well


adapted to the culture of rice and corn, while the more interior country, which is high
and pleaſant, abounds with wood of almoſt every kind; particularly white and red
oak, live oak, laurel magnolia, pine hiccory, cypreſs, red and white cedar, The live
oaks, though not tall, contain a prodigious quantity of timber: the trunk is generally


from 12 to 20 feet in circumference, and riſes 10 or 12 feet from the earth, and then


branches into four or five great limbs, which grow in nearly a horizontal direction,
zorming a gentle curve. * have ſtepped,“ ſays Bartram,“ «© above 50 paces, on a


* Travels, page 85. e ;
402 ſtraight


566 | SPANISH DOMINIONS.
ſtraight line, from the trunk of one of theſe trees to the extremity of the limbs.” They
are ever green, and the wood almoſt incorruptible. They bear a preat quantity of
ſmall acorns, which is agtetable fdod, when roafted, and from which the Indians
extract a ſweet oil, which they uſe in cooking homminy and rice.
The laurel magnolia is the moſt beautiful among the trees of the foreſt, and is-
uſually 100 feet high, though ſome are much higher. The trunk is perfectly erect,
riſing in the form of a beautiful column, and ſupporting a head like an obtuſe cone.
The flowers are on the extremities of the branches; are large, white, and expanded
like a roſe, and are the largeſt and moſt complete of any yet known; when fully ex-
anded, they are from fix to nine inches diameter, and have a moſt delicious fragrance..
The cypreſs is the largeft of the American trees. I have feen tranks of theſe trees,”
ſays Bartram, © that would meafure eight, ten, and twelve feet in diameter, for forty
and fitty fect ſtraight ſhaſt. The trunks make excellent ſhingles, beards, and other
timber; and when hollowed, make durable and convenient canoes. © When the
planters fell theſe mighty trees, they raiſe a ſtage around them, as higk as to reach
above the buttreſſes; on this ſtage eight or ten negroes aſcend with their axes, and fall
to work round its trunk.” 5 „
The intervals between the hilly part of this country are extremely rich, and pro-
duce ſpontaneouſly the fruits and vegetables that are common to Georgia and the
Carolinas. But this country is rendered valuable in a peculiar manner by the exten-
five ranges for cattle. OR 1 1
CRIEF Towxs.] Sr. Avevsrixx, the capital of Eaſt Florida, is fitimted on the ſea
coaſt, latitude 2945; is of an oblong figure, and interſected by four ſtreets, which
cut each other at right angles. The town is fortified with baſtions, and encloſed wit
a ditch: it is likewiſe defended by a caſtle, called Fort St. John, which is well ap-
pointed as to ordnanee. The north and ſouth breakers, at the entrance of the harbour,
form two channels, whoſe bars have eight feet water. ne
The principal town in Weſt Florida is, PexsacoLa,. latitude 3o* 22'. It lies along
the beach, and, like St. Auguſtine, is of an oblong form. The water approaches to tlie
town, except for ſmall veſſels, is obſtructed by a low and ſandy ſhore. The bay, however,
on which the town ſtands, forms a very commodious harbour, and veſſels may ride
here ſecure from every wind. The exports from this town, cenfiſting of ſkins, log-
wood, dying ſtuff, and ſilver dollars, amounted, while in the poſſeſſion of the Britiſh, to
63,0001. annually ; the average value of imports, for three years, from Great Britain,
was 97, oool. 5 TW V
Hisrok r.] The Floridas have experienced the viciſſitudes of war, and frequently
changed maſters, belonging alternately to the French and Spaniards. Weſt Florida,
as far eaſt as Perdido river, was owned and occupicd by the French; the remainder,
and all Eaft Florida by the Spaniards, previous to their being ceded to the Engliſh at
the peace of 1763. The Engliſh divided this country into Eaſt and Weſt Florida.
They were ceded by Spain to the Engliſh at the peace of 1763. During the daſt war
they were reduced by the arms of his Catholic Majeſty, and guaranteed to the crown
of Spain by the defimiture treaty of 1783. — —


LOUISIANA,


{ 397 )


LO VIS I AN 4.


OUNDED by the Miſlifippi caſt; by the Gulf of Mexico
BoUNDARIES. ] B ſouth; by New Mexico weſt ; and runs indefinitely north.


Under the French government Louiſiana included both fides of the Miſſiſſippi, from
its mouth to the Illinois, and back from the river, eaſt and weſt indefinitely.
 Rivzrs.] It is interſected by a number of fine rivers, among which are St. Francis,
which empties into the Mifliſſip i at Kappas Old Fort, navigable about 250 or 300
miles; its courſe is nearly pa le with the Miſſiſſippi, and from twenty to thirty
miles diſtant from it. The N Natchitorhes, which empties. into the Miffulippi above
Point Coupee, and the Adayes or Mexicano river, emptying into the Gulf of Mexico,
and the River Rouge, on which, it 1s well known, are as rich filver mines as any in
Mexico. This is ſuppoſed to be one Principal reaſon, why the exchiſrve * of
the Miſſiſſippi has been ſo much au ted on by Spain.
Carrrar.] New OkLeaxs. It ſtands on the eaft fide of the Miſflippi, 105 miles
from its mouth, in latitude 30 2 north, In the beginning of the laſt year it contained
about 1100 houſes, ſeven eighths of which were conſumed by fire, in the ſpace of five


hours, on the 19th of March, 1788. It is now faft rebuilding. Its advantages for =


trade are very great. Situated on a noble river, in a fertile and healthy country,
within a week's ſail of Mexico, by ſea, and as near to the Britiſn, French, and Spaniſh
Weſt India iſlands, with a moral certainty of its becoming the general receptacle for
the produce of that extenſive and valuable country, on the Miſſiſſippi and Ohio;
theſe circumſtances are ſufficient to enſure its future growth and commercial un-
ortance.

; Rer16ron, Government, &c.] The greater part of the white inhabitants are Ro-
man Catholics. "They are governed by a Viceroy from Spain, and the number of in-
habitants is unknown.

CraxarR, S0IL, AND PRODUCE. | Louifiana is 3 ſituated between the ex-
tremes of heat and cold. Its climate varies as it extends towards the north. The
ſouthern parts, lying within the reach of the refreſhing breezes from the ſea, are not
ſcorched like thoſe under the ſame latitudes in Africa; and its northern regions are
colder than thoſe of Europe under the ſame parallels, with a wholeſome ſerene air.
To judge of the produce to be expected from the ſoil of Louiſiana, let us turn our
eyes to Egypt, Arabia Felix, Perſia, India, China, and Japan, all lying in correſpond-
ing latitudes. Of theſe, China alone has a tolerable government; and yet it muſt be
acknowledged they all are, or have been, famous for their riches and fertility. From
the favourableneſs of the climate, two annual crops of Indian corn may be produced;
and the ſoil, with little cultivation, would furniſh gram of every kind in the greateſt
abundance. Their timber is as fine as any in the world, and the quantities of live
oak, aſh, mulberry, walnut, cherry, cypreſs, and cedar, are aſtoniſhing. The neigh-
bourhood of the Miſliflippi, beſides, furniſhes the richeſt fruits in gre eat variety; dhe
foil is particularly adapted for hemp, flax, and tobacco; and indigo is at this time a
ſtaple commodity, which commonly yields the planter three or four cuttings a year.
In a word, whatever is rich and rare in the moſt defirable climates in Europe, ſeems
to be the ſpontaneous production of this delightful country. The Miſſiſſippi and the

neighbouring lakes furniſh in great * Kveral forts of fiſh, —=—_ perch, L

Pike g ſturgeon, and cels. |

| 2 | | {1


368 LOUISIANA.


In the northern part of Louiſiana, forty-five miles below the mouth of the Ohio
river, on the weſt bank of the Miſſiſſippi, a ſettlement is commencing, conducted by
Colonel Morgan of New Jerſey, under the patronage of the Spaniſh king. The ſpot
on which the city is propoſed to be built is called New Madrid, after the capital of
Spain, and is in north latitude 36* 30. e 9 ; .

The limits of the new city of Madrid are to extend four miles ſouth, and two miles
weſt from the river, ſo as to croſs a beautiful, living, deep lake, of the pureſt ſpring
water, one hundred yards wide, and ſeveral miles in length, emptying itſelf, by a con-
ſtant rapid narrow ftream, through the center of the city. The banks of this lake,
which is called St. Annis, are high, beautiful, and pleaſant; the waters deep, clear,

and ſweet; the bottom a clear ſand, free from woods, ſhrubs, or other vegetables, and
well ſtored with fiſh. On each Tide of this delightful lake ſtreets are laid out, 10
| ſeet wide, and a road to be continued round it, of the ſame breadth; and the ſtreets
are directed to be preſerved for ever, for the health and pleaſure of the citizens. A
ſtreet 120 feet wide, on the banks of the Miſſiſſippi, is laid out; and the trees are
directed to be preſerved for the ſame purpoſe. Twelve acres, in a central part of the
city, are to be reſerved in like manner, to be ornamented, regulated, and improved b
the magiſtracy cf the city for public walks; and forty half acre lots for other public
| uſes; and one lot of twelve acres for the king's uſe. A

New Madrid, from its local fituation and adventitious privileges, is in proſpect of

being the great emporium of the weſtern country, unleſs the free navigation of the

_ Miftiflippi ſhould be opened to the United States. And even ſhould this defired event

take place, which probably will not without a rupture with Spain, this muſt be a place
of great trade. For here will naturally center the immenſe quantities of produce that
will be borne down the Illinois, the Miſſiſſippi, the Ohio, and their various branches;
and if the carriers can find as good a market for their cargoes here, as at New Orleans

or the Weſt Indies, and can procure the articles they deſire, they will gladly fave them-

ſelves the difficulties and dangers of navigating the long Miſlifippi =O
The country in the vicinity of this intended city is repreſented as excellent, in many
parts beyond deſcription. The natural growth confiſis of mulberry, locuſt, ſaſſafras,
walnut, hiccory, oak, aſh, dog-wood, -&c. with one or more grape vines running up
almoſt every tree ; the grapes yield, from experiment, good red wine in plenty, and
with little labour. In ſome of the low grounds grow large cypreſs trees. The country
is interſperſed with prairies and now and then a cane patch of 100, and ſome of 1000

_ acres. Theſe prairies have no trees on them, but are fertile in graſs, flowering plants,
ſtrawberries, and, when cultivated, produce good crops of wheat, harley, Indian corn,
flax, hemp, and tobacco, and are eaſily tilled. The climate is ſaid to be favourable
for health and to the culture of fruits of various kinds, and particularly for garden
vegetables. Iron and lead mines and falt ſprings, it is aſſerted, are found in ſuch plenty
as to afford an abundant ſupply of theſe neceſſary articles. The banks of the Miſſiſ-
ſippi, for many leagues in extent, commencing about twenty miles above the mouth of
Ohio, are a continued chain of lime-ſtone. A fine tract of high, rich, level land,
S. W. W. and N. W. of New Madrid, about twenty-five miles wide, extends quite to the
River St. Francis. „ 1 ns e

It has been ſuppoſed by ſome that all ſettlers who go beyond the Miſſiſſipi, will be

for ever loſt to the United States. There is, I believe, little danger of this, provided


they are not provoked to withdraw their friendſhip. The emigrants will be made up of


the citizens of the United States. They will carry along with them their manners and
cuſtoms, their habits of government, religion and education; and as they are to be in-


dulged


dulged with religious freedom, and with the privilege of making their own laws, and of


medium of trade reciprocally advantageous.


ans EM»: courts id, Cr


LOUISIANA. 569


conducting education upon their own plans, theſe American habits will undoubtedl
be cheriſhed. If ſo they will be Americans in fact, though nominally the ſubjects of
Spain. | |

Mt is true Spain will draw a revenue from them, but in return they will enj oy peculiar
commercial advantages, the benefit of which will be experienced by the United States,
and perhaps be an ample compenſation for the loſs of ſo many citizens as may migrate
thither. In ſhort, this ſettlement, if conducted with judgement and prudence, may be


mutually ſerviceable both to Spain and the United States; it may prevent jealouſies;


leſſen national prejudices ; promote religious toleration ; preſerve harmony, and be a

Beſides, it is well known that empire has been travelling from eaſt to weſt. Proba-
bly her laſt and broadeſt feat will be America. Here the ſciences and the arts of civi-
lized life are to receive their higheſt improvements: here civil and religious liberty are
to flouriſh, unchecked by the cruel hand of civil or eccleſiaſtical tyranny :- here genius,
aided by all the improvements of former ages, is to be exerted in humanizing mankind,
in expanding and enriching their minds with religious and philoſophical knowledge,
and in planning and executing a form of government, which ſhall involve all the ex-
cellencies of former governments, with as few of their defects as is conſiſtent with the


imperfection of human affairs, and which ſhall be calculated to protect and unite, in a


manner confiſtent with the natural rights of mankind, the largeſt empire that ever
exiſted. Elevated with thele proſpects, which are not merely the viſions of fancy, we
cannot but anticipate the period, as not far diſtant, when the American Empire will


comprehend millions of ſouls weſt of the Miſſiſſippi. Judging upon probable grounds,
the Miſſiſſippi was never deſigned as the weſtern boundary of the American empire.
The God of Nature never intended that ſome of the beſt part of his earth ſhould be in-
habited by the ſubjects of a monarch 4000 miles from them. And may we not venture
to predict, that, when the rights of mankind ſhall be more fully known, (and the
knowledge of them is faſt increafing both in Europe and America) the power of Eu-


ropean potentates will be confined to Europe, and their preſent American dominiors .
become, like the United States, free, fovereign, and independent empires.

It ſeems to depend on a timely adoption of a wiſe and liberal policy on the part of
Spain, whether or not there ſhall be a tpeedy revolution in her American colonies. It


is aſſerted by the beſt informed on the ſubject, that there are not a hundred Spanith


families in all Louiſiana and Weſt Florida; the bulk of the inhabitants are French pea-

ple, whe are inimical to the Spaniards, and emigrants from the United States, and a
few Engliſh, Scots, Dutch, and Iriſh. This was the cafe in 1791 ; and as all emigra-
tions to this country have ſince been, and will probably in future be from the United


States, and theſe emigrations are numerous, the tune will ſoon come, when the Anglo


Americans in this country will far exceed the number of all other nations.
The wretched and wicked policy of New Orleans, unleſs changed, will haften a re-
volution in the Spamiſh colonies. So long as the governor can dictate laws and. diſ-


penſe with them at his pleaſure, and create monopolies in trade for his own and his


favourites' advantage, as is now the caſe, there can be no ſtability in the ecommerce” of


this place. The excluſive right, even of ſupplying the market with freth beef, pork,


veal, and mutton, is monopolized. No farmer or planter is allowed to kill, his own


beef, ſwine, calf, or ſheep, and ſend it to market; he muſt ſell it to the King's
butcher, as he is called, at the price he is pleaſed to give; and this man retails it out


at a certain price agreed upon by the governor, in juſt ſuch pieces as hie thinks proper,


1 through


570 LOUISIANA.


throngh a window or grate. Aſk for a roaſting piece, and he will give you a ſhin or
briſket of beef; point to the piece you want, and he will tell you it is engaged to your
ſupcrior. From firmlar conduct, turkies now ſell for four or five dollars a piece, which,
under the French government, were in abundance for half a dollar. The monapoly
of flour is, if poſſible, on ſtill a worſe footing for the inhabitant: and the tobacco in-
ſpeclion yet more diſcouraging to the planter. The governor, or the crown, as it is
called, muſt have an undefined advantage in every thing. Hence all are ripe for a
revolution the moment one ſhall offer with proſpect of being ſupported, whether it
ſhall come from the United States, England, France, or internally from the in-
habitants. 1 F x 15
It is faid to be the fixed reſolution of the Britiſh miniſtry to ſeize on New Orleans,
in the firſt inſtance, in caſe of a rupture with Spain, as a neceſſary prelude to an attack
on the Spaniſh poſſeſſions in the Weſt Indies and on the main: it has been their policy
uniformly, and orders have been given accordingly at different times. For this pur-
poſe every bend of the river, every bay and harbour on the coaſt, have been ſurveyed
and founded with the utmoſt exactneſs, and all of them are better known to the Britiſh
than to the Spamards themſelves oo 2 5
—_ "Whilſt the United States were engaged in the revolution war againſt England, the
_ Spaniards attacked and poſſeſſed themſelves of all the Engliſh poſts and ſettlements on
the Miffiflipp1, from the Iberville up to the Yazoos river, including the Natchez
country; and by virtue of this conqueſt are now peopling and governing an extent
three degrees north of the United States' ſouth boundary, claiming the excluſive navi-
gation. of the other. This alone will probably be deemed ſufficient cauſe for the
United States to unite with any other power againſt Spain, the firſt opportunity, as
both of right, they conceive, belong to them by treaty. It is aſſerted that the Kentucky
country alone could, in one week, raiſe a ſufficient force to conquer all the Spaniſh
poſſeſſions on the Mifliflippi ; whilft one thouſand men would be equal to defend the
whole country of New Orleans and Louiſiana from any enemy approaching it by ſea.
The greater a hoſtile fleet entering the Miſſiſſippi, the greater and more certain would
be their deſtruction if oppoſed by men of knowledge and reſolution.“


HisToky.


+ The following extract of a letter from a gentleman at New Orleans, dated September, 1ygo, contains
much uſeful information, in confirmation of the above. ' 3 .
„ When left you and my other friends in Baltimore, laſt year, I promiſed to write to you by every op-
Portunity, and to communicate to you every information which I could derive from my excurſion to the Ohio,
down that beautiful ſtream, during my ſtay at Kentucky and the weſtern peſts, my viſit to the Illinois and the
different ſettlements on the Miſſiſſippi, from thence downward to New Orleans. |
As I have devoted more than twelve months in making this tour, with the determination to judge for
myſelf, and to give you and my other friends information to be depended upon, regarding the climate, ſoil,
natural productions, population, and other advantages and diſadvantages, which you may depend on finding
in the country I have paſſed through, I cannot, within the narrow bounds af this letter, comply with my in-
tention, and your wiſh, but I muſt beg of you to reſt ſatisfied with what follows: 99
* * | * * * * * * * * * * * * * ** *


Nearly oppoſite to Louifville is a ſtockade fort, garriſoned by two companies of the 1ſt United States
regiment. - What uſe this poſt of, I never could learn It is a mere hoſpital in the ſummer ſeaſon, and the
rave of brave men, who might be uſefully employed elſewhere. Fort Harmar is as 8 healthful;

is the New England ſettlement at Muſkingum; and 1 think the Miami ſettlement will be healthful when the
pas have the comforts of good living about them; at preſent they are the pooreſt among the poor emigrants
to this country, and not the heſt managers. Below the falls, on the weſt fide, is a miſerable ſettlement,
called Clarkſville, frequently flooded, and compoſed of people who.cannat better themſelves at preſent, or I
ſuppoſe they would nut continue here. From hence | ads an excurſion by land to Poſt Vincent, diſtant
about 100 miles: the fort here is garriſoned by two nies, at great expenſe, but little uſe. Not liking
the country on account of the many hoſtile neighbouring Indians, I Fattened out of it, and went with a pay,


5 12 : To ee ooo


LOUISIANA. 671


His ron v.] The Miſſiſſippi, on which the fine country of Louiſiana is ſituated, was
firſt diſcovered by Ferdinand de Soto, in 1541. Monſieur de la Salle was the firſt


who traverſed it. He, in the year 1682, having paſſed down to the mouth of the


took paſſage to France.


From the flattering accounts which he gave of the country, and the conſequential
advantages that would accrue from ſettling a colony in thoſe parts, Louis XIV. was
induced to eſtabliſh a company for the purpoſe. Accordingly a ſquadron of four
veſtels, amply provided with men and proviſions, under the command of Monſieur de
la Salle, embarked, with an intention of ſettling near the mouth of the Miſſiſſipi. But


Miſſiſſippi, and ſurveyed the adjacent country, returned to Canada, from whence he


he unintentionally ſailed a hundred leagues to the weſtward of it, where he attempted


to eſtabliſh a colony; but through the unfavourableneſs of the climate, moſt of his men


miſerably periſhed, and he himſelf was villainouſly murdered, not long after, by two


of his own men. Monſieur Ibberville ſucceeded him in his laudable attempts. He,
after two ſucceſsful voyages, died while preparing for a third. Crozat ſucceeded him;
and in 1712, the king gave him Louiſiana. This grant continued but a ſhort time


—_— J


aſter the death of Louis XIV. In 1763, Louiſiana was ceded to the King of Spain, to


F


: . , Vu
whom it now belongs.


of Frenchmen to Kaſkaſkias, in the Illinois country, and viſited Prairie des Rochers, St. Philip's, Belle Fon-
taine, and Kahokia; from whence making up a party to purſue ſome hoſtile Kukapoos, and ſteering due eaſt,
we fell on the head waters of the Kaſkaſkia river, which we croſſed at ſome diſtance. This is a delightful
country! On our return to Kahokia, I crofſed over to St. Louis, on the Spaniſh fide, but I did not proceed
far into the country; what I did ſee I did not like, and therefore bought a canoe and went down the Miſſiſ-
ſippi to St. Genevieve and the Saline. Not being pleaſed with theſe places, nor the country around, I em-
braced the company of ſome French hunters and traders going towards the St. Francis river, in a ſouth-welt
direction from St. Genevieve. After 8 thirty miles nearly, I came to a ſweet country; here meeting
a


with ſome Shawaneſe Indians going to PAnce la Graiſe and New Madrid, I made them a ſmall preſent, and


engaged them to eſcort me there, which they did through a country fine and beautiful beyond deſcription ;


variegated by ſmall hills, beautiful timber, and extenſive plains of luxuriant ſoil, Here the Spaniards are


building a handſome fort, to encourage the ſettlement by Americans, on a plan of Colonel Morgan's, of New


Jerſey ; which, had it been purſued, as propoſed by him, would have made this the firſt in all the weſtern


country; but they have deviated from it, ſo much as to diſcourage the ſettlement, and many have left it.
The banks of the Miſſiſſippi overflow above and below the town, but the country back from the river is in-


comparably beautiful and fine, I made a tour back to the river St. Francis, diſtant about twenty-eight or
thirty miles, and returned by another route more ſouthward, to my great ſatisfaction. Expreſſing to ſome


of the people, at New Madrid, my ſurpriſe at Colonel S* * account of this country, I was told that he
never went 100 yards back from the river, either on the Ohio or Miſſiſſippi, except once, and that was at
PAnce la Graiſe, where a horſe was provided for him, and he rode fifteen or twenty miles, and returned ſo


enraptured with the country, that he would not liſten to the propoſed ſettlement of New Madrid being fixed
at any other place; and he actually applied to Colonel Morgan for forty ſurveys, moſt of which were en-


ecuted; and he entered into obligations for ſettlements thereof; but the Colonel refuſing to grant him 300


acres of the town lots, for a farm, as it would be injurious to other applicants of equal merit, S*** twore he


would do every thing in his power to injure Morgan and the ſettlement, which it ſeems he nas endeavoured


to do, to the ruin, however, of his own reputation. I am ſatisfied that the failure of this {ettiement is only


owing to a narrow policy in the Spaniſh government, or to a deviation from their firſt plan, and not frem
the cauſes repreſented by its enemies. This is the country, of all others, J have ſeen, Which I would with to


ſettle in, bad Col. Morgan's plan been adopted, or carried into execution; and thoufands among the beit


people of the weſtern country would already have been ſettled here. Wly it was not, I know not; but lam


told jealouſy of his ſucceſs was the cauſe. | 3 ee eee

« After continuing two months in this delightful country, I proceeded to the Natchez, which has already
become a conſiderable ſettlement, and is now under the government of Don Gayoſo, a man greatly beloved;
but the Spaniſh government, though I think it liberal at preſent, will not long agree with American ideas of
liberty and juſtice ; and a revolution is now in embryo, which a ſmall matter will blow to a flawe; and New


Orleans itſelf will be at the mercy ef new ſubjecte, it joined by a handful of the Kentucky people.


4 D MEXICO;


67)


MEXICO, , NEW SPAIN.


Srrrariox AND EXTENT,


Miles.
Length 4 betwee: 9? and 40? N. Latitude
Bread 1600 8 1185 and go W. Longitude


JOUNDED north, by unknown regions; eaſt, by Levifiane,
and the Gulf of Mexico; ſouth, by the Iithmiis of Darien,
which ſeparates it from Terra Firma in South America; weſt, by the Pacific ocean.

Gunar Divisioxs. ] This vaſt country is divided as follow 8:


Fr DAR 18]


Grand Diviſions. Audiences. Provinces. Chief Towns.
e Galicia, TOW Guadalaxara
Orp Mexico. | Mexico * N. lat. 54 26
8 Guatimala, 6 Guatimala.*
New Mexico (A acheira 7 3
PRop ER. Sener } Sr. Fe, N. lat. 36 30
ay CALIFORNIA, on the weſt, a peninfula. Sr. Jux.


Runs, LAKES, AND v FouxTaixs.] The land is in great part abrupt and monn- ,
tainous, covered with thick v oods, and watered with large rivers. * Some of theſe rut
into the Gulf of Mexico, and others into the Pacific ocean. Among the firſt are,
Alvarado, Coatzacualco, and Tabeſco. The Alvarado has its pr incipal ſource in the
mountains of the Zapotecas, and after making a circuit through the province of Ma-

zaltan, and receiving other ſmaller rivers and Aireams, IS diſcharged into the Gulf by
three navigable mouths, at thirty miles diſtance from Vera Cruz. The river Coatza-
cualco, which is alto navigable, empties into the occin near the country of Onchualco.
The river Tabaſco begins its courſe from the mountains, which ſeparate the dioceſe of
Chiapan from that of Guatimala, and afterwards that of Onohualco, where it runs into
the tea.

Amongſt the rivers which run into the Pacific ocean, the principal | is the river Gua-
dalaxara, or Great River. It takes its riſe in the mountains of the valley of 'Toloccan,
M aters the country of Tonollan, where at preſent ſtands the city of Guadalaxara, the
capital of New Gatlicia; and after running a courte of more than 60 milos, dit
charges itſelf iuto the occan, in the latitude of 22 degrees.
| There are ſeveral lakes, which do not lets cmbellith the country than give conveni-
ence to the commerce of the people. The lakes of Nicaragua, Chapallan, and Paz-
quaro, are among the largeſt, 'The lakes Tetzcuco and Chalco occupy a great part of
the Vale of Mexico, which is the fineſt tract of country in New Spain. The waters
of Chalco are ſweet, thote of Tetzcuco are brackith. A canal unites them. The
lower lake, Tetzcueo, was tormerly as much as 20 miles long and 17 broad, and Tying
at the bottom of the vale, is the reſervoir of all the waters from the ſurr oundling


. This city was fwall owed up by an earthquake, June 5th, 1773, when $000 families inſtantly periſhed.
New Guatimala i is well inhabited. * 1 ; b BELL. { |


2 ; * mountains.


SPANISH DOMINION 8. 373


mountains. The city of Mexico ſtands on an ifland in this lake. Theſe two lakes,
whoſe circumference was not lets than go miles, repreſented the figure of a camel. At
preſent the extent of theſe lakes is much lets, for the Spaniards have diverted into new
C hannels many rivers which formerly ran into them. ll the water which is collected
there 18 at firſt feet, and becomes ſalt afterwards, from the nitrous bed of the lake
where it is received. M. De Bomare favs, that the {lt of the Mexican lake may pro-
ceed from the waters of the ocean in the north being filtered through the earth. But
this is truly a groſs error, hecauſe that lake is 180 miles diſtant from the ocean; be-
ſides, the bed of his lake is fo elevated, that it has at leaſt one mile of perpendicular
height above the level of the fea. The lake of Tocktlan makes a fine proſpect, and
its banks a moſt delighttul dwelling.

In this country are interſperſed * many fountains, of different qualities. There are
an infinity of nitrous, tulphurcous, vitriolic, and aluminous mineral waters, ſome of
which ſpring out 10 hot, that in a ſhart time any kind of fruit or animal food is boiled
in them. There are allo petrifying waters, namely, thote of Yehuacan, a city about

120 miles ſouth-eaſt from Mexico; thoſe of the ſpring of Pucuaro, in the States of the
Conte di Miravalles, in the kingdom of Michuacan, and that of a river in the pro-
vince of the Queleni, With the waters of Pucuaro they make little white fnooth
ſtones, not diſpleaſing to the taſte ; ſcrapings from which taken in hroth, or in gruel
made of Indian corn, are moſt powerful diaphoretics, and are uſed with remarkable
ſucceſs in various kinds of fevers. The citizens of Mexico, during the time of their
kings, ſupplied themſolves with water from the great ſpring of Chapoltepee, which was
conveyed to the city by an aqueduct.

Me might here deſeribe the ſtupendous falls or r caſcades of ſeveral rivers, particularly
that in the river Guadalaxara, 15 miles ſouth of that city; and the famous PoxT1 DI
Dio, which is a natural bridge thrown over the deep river Atoyaque, | 100 miles ſouth-

_ eaſt of Mexico, over which coaches and carriages conveniently paſs.

CLINATE.] The climate of this extenſive country is various. The maritime parts
are hot, and for the moſt part moiſt and unhealthy. Their, heat, which occaſions
tweat even in January, is owing to the perfect flatneſs of the coaſts compared with the
inland country; or from the mountains of ſand that gather upon the thore. Lands

which are very high, or very near to high mountains, "which are perpetually covered
with ſnow, arc cold; there has been White froſts and ice, in the dog-days. All the
other inland parts w hich are the moſt populous, enjoy a climate mild and benign, that

they neither feel the rigour of winter, nor the heats of ſummer. No other fire than
the ſun's rays is neceſfary to give warmth in winter; no other relief is wanted in the
teatons of heat than tl«: ſhade; the ſame clothing which covers a man in the dog-
| Fu detends him in January: and the animals feen all the year under the open
IKy.

The mildneſs at d agrecableneſs of the climate under the torrid zone is the effect of

| ſev eral natural cauſes, entirely unknown to the ancients, who believed it uninhabita-
ble; and not well ads ſtood by ſome moderns, by whom it is eſtcemed unfavourable

to thoſe who live in it. The purity of the atmoſphere, the ſmaller obliquity of the ſo-

lar rays, and the longer ſtay of this kaminary upon the horizon in winter, in compa-
riſos with other regions far ther removed from the equator, concur to leſſen the cold,
and to prevent all that horror which disfigures the face of nature in other climes.

During that ſeaton, a ſerene ſky, and the natural delights of the country are enjoyed;

whereds under the t frigid, and even for the moſt part under the temperate zones, the

donde rob man of the proſpect of heaven, and the ſnow huries the beautiful produc-
490 tions


c cc


[Fe
. ©


N
o


374 SPANISH DOMINIONS.


tions of the earth. No leſs cauſes combine to temper the heat of ſummer. The plen⸗
tiful ſhowers which frequently water the earth after mid-day, from April or May, to
September or October; the high mountains continually loaded with ſnow, ſcattered
here and there through the country; ; the cool winds which breathe from them in that
teaton-; and the thorter ſtay of the ſun upon the horizon, compared with the circum.
ſtances of the temperate zone, transform the ſummer of thoſe happy countries into a
cool and cheertul ſpring.

But the agreeableneſs of the climate is counterbalanced by ces ſtorms, which are
frequent i in ſummer, and by earthquakes, which at all ſeaſons are felt, although witl
leſs danger than terror.

MoUuxTAIXS. ] The fire kindled in the bowels of the earth by the Wire and
bituminous materials, has made vents for itſelf in ſome of the mountains, or volcanos,
ſrom whence flames are often ſeen to iſſue, and aſhes and ſmoke. There are es
mountains in the diſtrict of the Mexican empire, where, at different times, this dread-

tul phenomenon has been obferved. |

Pojauhtecal, called by the Spaniards, Volcan de Orizaba, began to ſend forth ſmoke
in the year 1545, and continued to do fo for twenty years; but after that, for the ſpace
of more than two centuries, there has not been obſerved the ſmalleſt ſign of burning.
This celebrated mountain, which is of a conical figure, is indiſputably the higheſt land
in all Mexico; and, on account of its height, is the firſt land deſcried by ſeamen who
are ſteering that way, at the diſtance of fifty leagues. It is higher than the peak of
Teneriffe. Its top is always covered with ſnow, and its border adorned with large
cedars, pine, and other 'trees, of valuable wood, which make the proſpect of it
every way beautiful. It is diſtant from the capital ee of ninety miles to the eaſt-
ward.

"The Popocatepu and Tztaceihuat], which ke near each other, thirty-three miles:
ſouth-caſi from Mexico, are alſo of a ſurpriſing height. Popocatepu, for which they
have ſubſtituted the name Volcan, has a mouth or vent more than half a mile wide;
from which, in the time of the Mexican kings, it frequently emitted flames; and in the
laſt century many times threw out great quantities of aſhes upon the places adjacent;
but in this century hardly any ſmoke has been obſerved. Tztaceihuatl, or Seirra Ne-
vada, threw out alſo at ſome times ſmoke and aſhes. Both mountains have tops
always covered with ſnow, in ſuch quantities, as to ſupply, with what precipitates on
the neighbouring rocks, the cities of Mexico, Gilopoli, Cholula, and the adjoining
places, to the diſtance of forty miles from theſe mountains, where an incredible quan-
tity is yearly conſumed in cooling and congealing liquors.

The mountain Juruyo, ſituated in the valley of Urecho, is a.great curioſity. Before
the year 1760, there was nothing of it but a ſmall hill, where there was a ſugar plan»
wag But on the 29th of September, 1760, it burſt with furious ſhocks, and en-

tirely ruined the ſugar works, and the neighbouring village of Guacana; and from
that time has continued to emit fire and burning rocks, which have formed themſelves
iu three high mountains, whoſe circumference was nearly ſix miles in 1766, accord-
to the account communicated by the governor of that province, who was an cye-
wink of the fact. The aſhes, at the irruption, were forced to the almoſt incredible
diſtance of 150 miles. In the city of Valadolid, 60 miles diſtant, it ramed aſhes in
ſuch abundance that they, were obliged to ſweep tho yards of. the houſes two or three
times during the day.

Beſides theſe a are 9 alſo, which; though not hurning mountains, are yet of

great celebrity for their height.
3


STONES


in the country of the Cohuixcas.


SPANISH DOMINIONS. 515


STONES AND MIixERALSs.] The mountains of Mexico abound in ores of every kind
of metal, and a great variety of foſſils. The Mexicans found gold in various parts of
their country: they gathered this precious metal chiefly in grains among the ſand of
the river. Silver was dug out of the mines of Ilachco, and others; but it was not fo
much- prized by them as it is by other nations. Since the conqueſt, ſo many ſilver
mines have been diſcovered in that country, eſpecially in the provinces which are to
the north-weſt of the capital, it is quite impoſſible to enumerate them. Of copper,
they had two forts; one hard, which they uſed inſtead of iron to make axes, hatchets,


mattocks, and other inſtruments of war and agriculture ; the other flexible, for making
of baſons, pots, and other veſſels. Of tin, they made money, and lead was fold at


market. There are alſo mines of iron, quickfilver, and in many places mines of ſul-
phur, alum, vitriol, cinnabar, ochre, and a white earth ſtrongly reſembling white lead.


Of amber and aſphaltum, or bitumen of Judea, there was and ſtill is great abundance


on both coaſts; amber was uſed to ſet in gold for ornaments; aſphaltum was em-
ployed in certain incenſe offerings. 5 5 | 1 8 5
With reſpect to precious ſtones there were, and ſtill are, diamonds, though few in
number; amethyſts, cats eyes, turquoiſes, cornelians, and ſome green ſtones re-
ſembling emeralds, and not much inferior to them. There are quarries of jaſper, and
marble of different colours, in the mountains of Calpolalpan. The ſtone Tetzontli is
generally of a dark red colour, pretty hard, porous, and light, unites moſt firmly with
time and ſand, and is therefore more in demand than any other, for the buildings of
the capital, where the foundation is marſhy. There are beſides, entire mountains of
loadſtone, and among others one very conſiderable between 'Icoiltylan and Chilapan,


PRO DVC TIONS.] However plentiful and rich the mineral kingdom of Mexico may


be, the vegetable kingdom is ſtill more various and abundant. The celebrated Dr.


Hernandez, the Pliny of New Spain, deſcribes, in his Natural Hiſtory, about twelve


hundred plants, natives of that country; but as his deſcription 1s confined to medici-


nal plants, he has hardly comprited one half of what provident nature has produced
there for the benefit of mankind. With regard to the other vegetables, ſome are
eſteemed for their flowers, ſome tor their fruit, tome for their leaves, ſome for their
roots, ſome for their trunk or their wood, and others for their gum, reſin, oil, or
juice. Many flowers which embelliſh the meads, and adorn the gardens of the Mexi-


cans, are worthy to be mentioned (would our limits permit) either on account of the


fingular beauty of their colours, their exquiſite fragrance, or the extraordinarineſs of


their form. | :


The fruits which are original in Mexico, are the pine- apple, plums, dates, and a
great variety of others. There are alſo many others that are not original in the coun +


try, viz. water-melons, apples, peaches, quinces, apricots, pears, pomegranates, figs,
black cherries, walnuts, almonds, olives, cheſnuts, and grapes. |


The cocoa-nut, vainilla, chia, great pepper, tomati, the pepper of Tabaſco, and.


cotton, are very common with the Mexicans. Wheat, barley, peas, beans, and rice,
: ans, 4


have been ſucceſsfully cultivated in this country. O
With reſpect to plants which yield profitable refins, gums, oils, or juices, the


country of Mexico is fingularly fertile. Of the elaſtic grm, the Mexicans make their
ſoot-balls, which, though heavy, rebound more than thoſe filled with air.


AninArs.] The animal kingdom of Mexico is not very well known. Of the qua-
drupeds, ſome are ancient and tome are modern; thoſe are called modern which were
tranſported from the Canaries and Europe into that country in the ſixteenth century:


ſuch


376 SPANISH DOMINIONS.


ſuch are horſes, aſſes, bulls, theep, goats, hogs, dogs, and cats, which have all mul-
tiplied. Of the ancient quadrupeds, by which is meant thoſe that from time immemo-
rial have been in that country, tome were common to both the continents of Europe
and America, fome peculiar to the new world, others natives only of the kingdom of
Mexico. The ancient quadrupeds common to Mexico and the old continents are,
lions, tygers, wild cats, bears, wolves, foxes, the common ſtags and white ſtags,
bucks, wild coats, badgers, pole cats, weafles, martins, ſquirrels, rabbits, hares,
otters, and rats. There are many other kinds of animals in thus country, too nume-
rous to mention.

Bixps or Mex1co.] Their prodigious number, their variety, and many valuable
qualities, have occaſtoned tome authors to obterve, that as Ai is the country of
beaſis, to Mexico is the country of birds. It is faid there are 200 ſpecies peculiar to that
kingdom. There are a prodigious mumber of geete ; at leatt, twenty tpecies of ducks;
ſeveral kinds of herons, with vaſt numbers of T% ans, water ee divers, king fiſhers, poli-
cans, and others. The multitude of ducks is ſometimes ſo great, as quite to cover the
fields, and to appear at a diſtance like flocks of ſheep. IT be pelican ts remarkable in
afliſting the ſick or wounded of its own ſpecies, a circumſtance which the Americans
ſometimes take adv antage of, to procurc fith without trouble. They take a live pelican,
break its wing, and after tving it to a tree, conceal themſelves in the neighbourhood ;
there they w atch the coming of the other pelicans with their proviſions, "and as ſoon
as they tee theſe throw up > the fiſh from their pouch, run and ſeize them, and after
leaving a little for the captive bird, they carry off the reſt.

In the other claſſes of birds, ſome arc valuable on account of Shale fleſh, ſome for
their plumage, and ſome for their ſong; while others engage our attention by their
extraordinary mſtinct, or ſome other rematkable quality: : Of birds which afford a
wholeſome and agr eeable food, there are more than ſeventy ſpecies. There are .
five ſpecies of Mexican birds that are ſuperlatively beautiful. The talking birds,
thoſe which imitate the human voice, are to be found in equal abundance in this

country; of thete the parrot holds the firſt place.

Fish.] The fiſh common to both oceans are, whales, dolphins, ſword fiſh, faw
fiſh, tiburones, manitis, mantas, porpoiſes, bonatas, cod, mullets, thornbacks, bar-
bels, flying fiſh, ſhad, lobſters, ſoles, and many others, together with ſeveral ſpecics
of tortoiſes, polypus, crabs, ſpunges, &, The Mexican gulf, betides thoſe already
mentioned, aftords ſurgeons, pike, congers, cuttle fiſh, anchovies, carp, eels, nau-
tiluſes, turbot, &e. In the Pacific ocean, beſides thoſe common to the two ſeas, there
are ſalmon, tunnies, ſea ſcorpions, herrings, and others. In the lakes and rivers
are three or four kinds of white fiſh, carp, mullet, trout, barbels, cels, and many
Ons.

Shells have been found i in prodigious numbers, and of great 3 and ſome of
_ them of extraordinary beauty, efpecially thoſe of the Pacific occan. Pearls alſo have
been fiſned, at different times, along all the coaſis of that ocean.

GovkRNMENT AND RELIGION. ] "The civil government of Mexico 18 adminiſtered
by tribunals, called audiences. In theſe courts the viceroy of the King of Spain


prefides. His employment 1s the greateſt truſt and power his Catholic Majeſty has at
his diſpoſal, and is perhaps the richeſt government entruſted to any ſubject in the world,
The viceroy continues in office three years. '

The clergy are extremely numerous in Mexico. The prieſts, monks, and nuns,
of all orders, make a fitth part of the white inhabitants, both here and in other parts
of Spaniſh America,


Fn


SPANISH DOMINIONS. 577


Cnixr Towns, Ax D CouxtzRCE.] Mxxico is the oldeſt city in America of which
we have any account. The Abbe Clavigero, who is our authority for the preceding
account of this country, dates its foundation as far back as 1325. It is ſituated in the
charming vale of Mexico, on ſeveral ſmall iſlands, in lake Tetzcuco, in North latitude
197 26 and 276 34 Weſt longitude from Ferro. This vale is ſurrounded with lofty
and verdant mountains, and formerly contained no leſs than forty eminent cities, be-


ſides villages and hamlets. The city is ſubject to frequent inundations, as is cafily


accounted for from its local ſituation, the lake in which it ſtands being the reſervoir of
the waters flowing from the neighbouring mountains.

Concerning the ancient population of this city there are various opinions. The
hiſtorians moſt to be relied on ſay that it was nearly nine miles in circumference, and
contained upwards of 60,000 houſes, containing each from four to ten inhabitants.
Some hiſtorians reckon 120,000 and ſome 130,000 houſes. By a late accurate enu-
meration, made by the magiſtrates and pricfts, it appears that the prefent number of


inhabitants exceeds 200,000. We may form ſome idea of its populouſneſs from the


quantity of pulque“ and tobacco which are daily conſumed in it, aſcertained from the
cuſtom houſe books, February 23, 1775. Every day upwards of 190,000 pounds of
pulque are carried into the city, which is almoſt ſolely conſumed by the Indians and
Mulattoes, who drink this beverage. ' The tax upon it amounts annually to about
280,000 crowns. The daily conſumption of tobacco is reckoned at 1250 crowns.
The orcateſt curioſity in the city of Mexico is their floating gardens. When the


Mexicans, about the year 1325, were ſubducd by the Colhuan and Tepanecan nations,
and confined to the ſmall iflands in the lake, having no land to cultivate, they were


taught by neceſſity to form moveable gardens, which floated on the lake. Their con-
ſtruction is very ſimple. They take willows and the roots of marſh plants, and other


materials which are light, and twiſt them together, and ſo firmly unite them as to form


a fort of platform, which is capable of ſapporting the carth of the garden. Upon
this foundation they lay the light buſhes which float on the lake, and over {ſpread tie


mud and dirt which they Saw up from the bottom of the lake. Their re gular figure is


quadrangular ;- their length and breadth various, but generally about eight rods long
and three wide; and their elevation from the ſurface of the water is lets than a foot.
Theſe were the firſt fields that the Mexicans owned after the foundation of Mexico ;
there they firſt cultivated the maize, great pepper, and other plants neceſſary for their
tupport. From the induſtry of the people theſe fields ſoon became numerous. At
preſent they cultivate flowers and every tort of garden herbs upon them. Every day of


the year, at ſunriſe, innumerable veſlels or boats, loaded with various kinds of flowers
and herbs which are cultivated in theſe gardens, are teen arriving by the canal at the
great market place of Mexico. All plants thrive in them ſurpriſingly ; ; the much of the
lake makes a very rich ſoil, which requires no water from the clouds. In the Jar geſt


gardens there is commonly a little free, and a little hut to ſhelter the cultivator, and
defend him from the rain or the ſan. When the owner of a garden, or the Chinampa,
as he is called, wiſhes to change his ſituation, to get out of a bad neighbourhood, or


to come nearer to his family, he gets into his little boat, and, by his OWN ſtrength


alone, if the garden is ſmall, or with the aſſiſtunce of others, if it is large, conducts
it wherever he pleaſes, with the little tree and hut upon it. That part of the iſland.
where theſe floating gardens are, is a place of delighttul recreation, where the tentes


receive the higheſt pollible g gratification.


* Pulque is the uſual wine or beer of the 1 made of the fermented j juice of the Maguei. This
liquor will not keep but one day, and therefore what is made is daily conſumed. T
ne


. SPANISH DOMINIONS.


The buildings, which are of ſtone, are convenient, and tlie public edifices,
eſpe


cially the churches, are magnificent, and the aity has tho APPEArance of im-
menſe wealth.

The trade of Mexico conſiſts of three great branches, whic h extend over the whole
world. It carries on a traffic with Europe, by La Vera Cruz, ſituated on the Gulf of
Mexico, on North Sea; with the Eaſt 48 by Acapulo on the South Sea, two
hundred and ten miles ſouth-weſt of Mexico; and with South America, by the ſame
port. Theſe two ſea ports, Vera Cruz and Acapulco, are admirably well ſituated for
the commercial purpoſes to which they were applied. It is by means of the former that
Mexico pours her wealth over the whole world; and receives in return the numberleſs
luxuries and neceſſaries which Europe affords her. To this port the fleet from Cadiz,
called the Flota, conſiſting of three men of war, as a convoy, and fourteen large mer-
chant ſhips, annually arrives about the beginning of November. Its cargo conſiſts of
almoſt every commodity and manufacture of Europe ; and there are few vations but
have more concern in it than the Spaniards, who ſend out little elſe except wine and

oil. The profit of theſe, with the freight and commiſſion to the merchants, and duty
to the king, is all the adrantage Which Spain derives from the American commerce.

When all the goods are landed and diſpoſed of at La Vera Cruz, the fleet takes in the
plate, precious ſtones, and other commodities for Europe. Some time in May they
are ready to depart. From La Vera Cruz they ſail to the Havannah, in the Iſle of
Cuba, w hich is the rendezvous where they meet the galleons, another fleet which
carries on the trade of Terra Firma by Carthagena, and of Peru by Panama and Porto
Bello. When all are collected and provided with a convoy neceſfary for their lafety,
they ſteer for Old Spain.

Acapulco is the ſea port by which the communication is kept up between the dif-
ferent parts of the Spaniſh empire in America, and the Eaſt Indies. About the month
of December, the great galleon, attended by a large ſhip as a convoy, which make the
only communication between the Philippines and Mexico, annually arrive here. The
cargoes of theſe ſhips, (for the convoy, though in a clandeſtine manner, likewiſe carries
goods) confiſt of all the rich commodities and manufactures of the eaſt. At the ſame
time the annual ſhip from Lima, the capital of Peru, comes in, and is computed to
bring not leſs than two millions of pieces of eight in filver, beſides quickfilver, and
other valuable commodities, to he laid out in the purchaſe of the galcons cargoes.
Several other ſhips, from different parts of Chili and Peru, mect upon the fame occa-
ſion. A great fair, in which the commodities of all parts of the world are bartered for
one another, laſts thirty days. The galcon then prepares for her voyage, loaded with
 flver and ſuch European goods as have been thought neceſlary. The Spaniards,
though this trade be carried on entirely through their hands, and in the v ery heart of their
dominions, are comparatively but ſmall gainers by it. For as they allow the Dutch,
Great Britain, and other commercial States, to furniſh the greater part of the cargo of
the flota, ſo the Spaniſh inhabitants of the Philippines, tainted with the indolence
which ruined their European anceſtors, permit the Chineſe merchants to furniſh the
greater part of the cargo of the galeon. Notwithſtanding what has been ſaid of Vera
Cruz and Acapulco, "the city of Mexico, the capita] of the empire, ought to be con-

fidered as the center of commerce in this part of the world ; for here the principal
merchants reſide, and the greateſt part of the buſineſs is negociated. The Eaſt India
goods from Acapulco, and the European from Vera Cruz, alſo pats through this city.
Hither all the gold and filver come to be coined, here the king's fifth is depoſited,


2 | | 5 and


SPANISH DOMINIONS. 579
and here are wrought all thoſe utenſils and ornaments in plate which are every year
ſent into Europe. | |

Hisronv.] The empire of Mexico was ſubdued by Cortes, in the year 1521-
Montezuma was at that time emperor of Mexico. In the courſe of the wir, he was
treacherouſly taken by Cortes, and held as a priſoner. During the impriſonment of
Montezuma, Cortes and his army had made repeated attacks on his ſubjects, but
without ſucceſs. Cortes was now determined, as his laſt reſource, to try what effect
ihe interpoſition of Montezuma might have to ſoothe or overawe his ſubjects. This
unfortunate prince, at the mercy of the treacherous Spaniards, and reduced to the ſad


neceſſity of becoming the inſtrument of his own diſgrace, and of the flavery of his


ſubjects, advanced to the battlements in his royal robes, 1n all the pomp in which he
uſed to appear on ſolemn occaſions. At fight of their ſovereign, whom they had long


been accuſtomed to honour, and almoſt to revere as a god, the weapons dropped from


their hands, every tongue was ſilent, all bowed their heads, and many proſtrated
themſelves on the ground. Montezuma addreſſed them with every argument that


could mitigate their rage, or perſuade them from hoſtilities. When he ended his diſ-


courſe, a ſullen murmur of diſapprobation ran through the crowd; to this ſucceeded
reproaches and threats; and their fury riſing in a moment, they violently poured in
whole flights of arrows and vollies of ſtones upon their unhappy monarch ; two of the
arrows ſtruck him in his body, which, with the blow of a ſtone on his temple, put an
end to his life. Guatimozin ſucceeded Montezuma, and maintained a vigorous oppo-
ſition againſt the aſſaults of Cortes; but he, like his predeceſſor, after a noble defence,
was forced to ſubmit. Previous to this, being aware of his impending fate, he had
ordered that all his treaſures ſhould be thrown info the lake. While a priſoner, on
ſuſpicion of his having concealed his treaſure, he \was put to the torture, which was


done by laying him on burning coals ; but he bore whatever the refined cruelty of his
tormentors could inflict with the invincible fortitude of an American warrior. One
vf his chief favourites, his fellow ſufferer, being overcome by the violence of the anguiſh,


turned a dejected eye towards his maſter, which ſeemed to implore his permiſſion to
reveal all that he knew. But the high-ſpirited prince darted on him a look of autho-
rity, mingled with ſcorn, and checked his weakneſs by aſking, Am repoſin go a


bed flowers?” Overawed by the reproach, he perſevered in dutiful filence, and


expired. Cortes, aſhamed of a ſcene ſo horrid, reſcued the royal victim from the hands
of his torturers, and prolonged a life for new indignities and ſufferings. Cortes died in
Spain, in the year 1547, in the fixty-ſecond year of his age. Envied by his contem-

poraries, and fll requited by the court which he ſerved, he has been admired and


celebrated by ſucceeding ages. By his own defire he was carried to Mexico, and
buried there. 3 5 2


Cortes, the great conqueror of Mexico, diſcovered the extenſive peninſula of Cali-
fornia in the year 1536, after enduring incredible hardfhips, and entountering dangers


of almoſt every ſpecies. During a long period it continued to be fo little frequented,


that even its form was unknown, and in moſt maps it was repreſented as an iſland.
Sir Francis Digke was the firſt who took poſſeſſion of it in 1578, and his right was


confirmed by the principal king or chief in the whole country,


7 0 S0 TII


*
*
2
2

*

*
BY.
WE,
*
*
7

5

13

9

1

— *

3
N. *

=

p »
"+
4 g
+. *

1

2 *

I 3

*

1

.
#2 A

SB

vf #
* £

4 d
A
T 4.
—_
EY
*
1
1
Br |
1 ,
.
CN ;
*
N
* 5
by .
7938
*
SW

0

2
; *
7 2
F : *
. 1
1
1
8
theo 2
1
3
4

&
*

=

»* £2 4
*

J ol

£
1
£48
4 8 -
8 0
1
4

—4
*

CE
* 4
1
1
F

4 :
s f
1

.

*
4 F
8
14 »
4 bd -
2.
= en
s £1
„ z
"124
.

, - *
=
1
A
#4 ;
-
4
Os
"V2 ff
+ &Y
14
be
TE
Eu
_
- +»
1
o
. :
5
1 4
* »
>
1

4

F
In

N
LE


A
—


0 — — — © —
2 2 z - bg
G > ihe


might have ſupported millions of beings in affluence.


« 5% )


SOUTH AMERICA.


E now enter upon the deſcription of that part of the globe, where the human
mind will be ſuccethvely ſurpriſed with the ſublime and aſtoniſhing works of
nature; where rnvers of amazing breadth flow through beautiful and widely-extended
plains, and where lofty mountains, whoſe ſummits are covered with eternal ſnow,
antercept the courte of the clouds, and hide their heads from the view of mortals. 18
ſome parts of this extenſive region, nature hath bountifully beſtowed her treaſures, and
given every thing neceſſary for the convenience and happineſs of man. We have only
to regret that a ſet of avaricious men have ſucceſſively drenched with innocent blood
theſe plains, which are ſo beautifully formed and enriched by the hand of nature; an
that the rod of Spaniſh deſpotiſm has prevented the population of a country which


Pivisioxs.] South America, like Africa, is an extenſive peninſula, connected
with North America by the iſthmus of Darien, and divided between. Spain, Portugal,
France, Holland, and the e as follows:


and Peru; weſt, by the Pacific ocean.


5 Chief Towns |
Terra Firma, Panama and Carthagena,
SPANISH Douixioxs ] Peru, Lam, os
"TOY Ort” WE Chili, St. Jago,

LParagua, Buennos Ayres.
N rr St. Salvador.
FRENCH.] Cayenne, Caen. |

Dvurcu. | _ Surrinam, Paramaribo. _
Akonieix s i 4 Amazonia, | |
: Patagonia.


Of theſe countries we ſhall treat in their order. 0


For the beſt hiſtory of South America and Mexico, the reader is referred to | Robertſon? 8 Hiſtory of
e and the Abbe Clavigero's * of Mexico.


- aL -M " SR”

_— *
” N K .
4 1 6 - o
5 * 8 1
—dſ


hs — FL — r 1


ie AMERI CA.


TERRA FIRMA, OR ' CASTILE DEL oRO.
Srruarion AND Exrext.

T Miles.

Length 1400 600 a 825 Weſt * tude: |

Breadth M between { The Equator, and 1 2 N orth Latitude.


\ TPOUNDED north, by the Atlantic ocean, here called the North
mu! B Sea; eaſt, by the ſame ocean and Surinam; ſouth, by Amazonia


I 11


8 res — — —— ——
—
—  inaoes


—— 646 Ba ,


——


5 | | 164


Spurl] 11uo2elpy


ag Hh
hs 3 THAI IL nos


e 4 1 8 3 2 94 % "72 |
| ll ue 9 \ . |
| 9790 r | ;
|


— — —ę— — -


.
% >
—


W


D. 902770,


| | = 4 on


| /
i
_— 1 7 \
8a84q ©: *


N \
| ö 5 .
| 2 „ 8 :
b 155 "hn © . > FL.
[ H ä
9 * 2 a * 00 |


777. ne
_ a IG %
= We, SI — |


\
/ \


ov
5 11 |
/ —
/ T ſ *
ir : | * ̃ Fg | | % |
Il a | . 0 * = . * 486 , ; / *
# Y 0 NG, - \ p 2 a \ | 7 *
/ many u vd 7 5 0
* 5 ä A e We e is os
HS ee 21 jo a; | ap org 00s Of 95 E |
| 6.mqurazu of = | |


oyuny op WNT],


YA -
. ,


N . | N.
\
| - / | 3 FS _ I > me, 4947 277 7
5 & 13 LD
- : _ ; p : * NA.
F . 5 { N 1 ö : 4 i ns —
| Fa DUAL IV, 7 J LE 4 i) ©)! G 9 i An U
x !


. « of . 4 | : ey
e 142 | ny Py „ .
. — 3 ; 3
* * Py a —
; . — | by
| ; Sg 3 i 0
, e |
F


- Mom 8 ;


uo uns JV J
es


; / : 9 9 | | 3 2 © | |
2 — 3 2 WWW
Fayn x ey EE ne be Ca ns nd es ERS |

een. I :


: 0 * apa 4
=


A 4 as;
— WS


/


UNS


Neri


:


auns bn 9 5
%% , oy


oval,


e. 4 i
0414940 punts 1 1 /


"* 2 N FID vin), —
N | —


|
|
|
|
|


Len oP")


*


— | | 2 To
* * 5 5 2 : | | |
| * 5 | * ,


| *
| 8

e *

z | D449)

Pos N


[|
8 ou, CI :
v 55 1
1 2 :


e c
5 . 5


81


930?
avr 103 a J h
on ww


45 e -Y" \
' -_
: 23104) 10 bot * \-
, 5 RJ, — - 719 ; I a
r „e 8 - . ö


ng
: &
7
2
Pg
1


79 71, ”
57 16 N >
- Uy vararl vnn jo g
eee CLF VIS NVa AA“ IAV.) GW

woman 2 N
a f 5

3 as
g 7 * =.
$4110 =


- : 7
* ä 5 _— 9
. EF, YoLen 11

-


,


.


9.


2 may;
Uu Ty eee eee


mmemammmm
mnt mr melt unn
mum mmm mint mmm OAT ——
ius
eee my
2 7 X
N


—
— — mmm —— —


mmm mmm munen


umme, ; . momma


tf


P


Carthagena,
St. Martha,
Venezeula,
Comana,
553
New Gr anada,
Popayan.
Bars.]


and Oronoko.
deſcription.


have ſince been named Spaniſh Guiana.


entirely peculiar.


depend entirely on the rainy ſeaſon.
The river is not ſo eafi


round the obſtruction.
CLIMATE, SOIL, AND PRODUCTIONS.


parts, is extremely hot and ſultry during the whole year.


SPANISH AMERICA.


IT IS DIVIDED INTO


Terra Firma Proper, or Darten,


Chief Towns.

1 Bello,
Panama.

Carthagena.


Popayan.


In the South Sea the principal 1 are thoſe of Panama and St. Michael;
in the North Sea are the bays of Porto Bello, Sino, Guiara, &c.


Rivexs.] The principal rivers are the Darien, Chagre, Santa Mari ia, Conception,
The peculiarities of this laſt mentioned river require a particular


It was Colambus, who, in 1498, firſt diſcovered the Oronoko, the borders of which


This


great river takes its riſe among the


Cordeleras mountains, and is ſaid to diſcharge ittelf into the ocean by forty openings,
after it hath been increaſed, throughout an immenſe tract, by the afflux of a
gious number of rivers more or leſs conſiderable.
the ſirongeſt tides, and preſerves the freſhneſs of its waters to the diſtance of twelve
leagues from the mouth of that vaſt and deep channel within which it was confined.

Its rapidity, however, is not always the ſame, which is owing to a circumſtance perhaps
The Oronoko, which begins to ſwell in April, continues riſing for
five months, and during the ſixth remains at its


begins gradually to ſubſide, till the month of March, throughout the whole of which
it remains in the fixed ſtate of its greateſt diminution.


gular, and even, invariable. Perhaps the riſing of the waters of the Oronoko may


prodi-


Such is its impetuoſity that it ſtems


greateſt height. From October, it


Theſe alternate changes are re-


ty navigated as might be preſumed from its magnitude;
its bed being in many places filled up


at times, to carry both his boats and the merchandize they are laden with, by land


with rocks, which oblige the navigator,


The climate here, cf pecially i in the northern
From the month af May ta


the end of November, the ſeaſon called winter i the inhabitants, is almoſt a continual
ſucceſſion of thunder, rain, and tempeſis ; the clouds precipitating the rains with ſuch


impetuoſity, that the low lands exhibit the appearance of an occan.


Great part of the


country 1s of conſequence almoſt continually flooded ; and this, together with the
exceſſive heat, ſo impregnates the air with vapours, that in many Provinces, Particu-


larly about Popayan and Porto Bello, it is extremely unwholeſome.


The ſoil of this


country is very different, the inland parts being extremely rich and fertile, and the


coaſts ſandy and barren.


It is impoſſible to view without admiration the perpetual


verdure of the woods, the luxuriancy of the plains, and the towering height of the


mountains.


moſt remarkable is that of the manzanillo tree; it bears a. fruit rele mbing an apple,
| 4E 2


This country produces corn, ſugar, tobacco, and fruits of all Kinds; the


but


582 SPANISH AMERICA.


but which, under this ſpecious appearance, contains the moſt ſubtile poiſon. The bean
of Carthagena i is the fruit of a ſpecies of willow, about the bigneſs of a bean, and is an
excellent remedy for the bite of the moſt venomous terpents, which are very frequent
all over this country. Among the natural merchandize of Terra Firma, the pearls found
on the coalt. particularly in the bay of Panama, are not the leaſt conſiderable. An
mmenie number of uegro flayes are employed in fiſhing tor theſe, and have arrived at
a wonderful dexterity in this occupation. They are ſometimes: however, devoured by
arks, while they dive to the e or are cruſhed againſt the ſhelves of the
LOCKS.

Cutter Towxs.? CarrtHAGENA is the principal ſea port town in Terra Firma. It
is fituated on the Atlantic ocean, in North latitude 10 26, and about three degrees
weit of the meridian of Philadelphia. The bay on which it ſtands is ſeven miles wide
from north to touth ; abounds with varicty ot good fiſh ; and has a ſufficient depth of
water, with good anchorage, and ſo ſmooth that {hips are no more agitated than on a
river. The many fhallows at its entrance, however, make the help of a good pilot
necefarv. The town and its ſuburbs are fortified in modern ſtyle; the ſtreets are
ſtraight, broad, and well-paved. The houtes are principally brick, and one ſto
hich. All houtes have balconies and lattices of wood. This city is the reſidence of
the governor of the province of Carthagena, and of a biſhop, whoſe ſpiritual juriſ-

diction extends over the whole province. There is here alſo a court of inquiſition;
ſeveral convents and nunneries; a church, a chapel of eaſe, and a college of Jeſuits.

The city is well peopled with Indians, Europeans, Negroes, and Creoles. The Euro-
peans, who are not numerous, and the Creoles, manage the whole trade of the place;
the other inhabitants are poor, and work hard for ſubſiſtence. The inhabitants are
univerſally fond of chocolate and tobacco; and the moſt fober ſeldom fail of drinking a
glaſs of brandy 1 in the morning.

Paxana is the capital of Terra Firma Proper, and 1s ſituated upon a capa-
cious bay to which it gives its name. It is the great receptacle of the vaſt quan-
tities of gold and filver, with other rich merchandize, from all parts of Peru and
Chili; here they are lodged in ſtore Ne, till the e ſeaſon arrives to tranfport
them to Europe.

Porto BELL o is ſituated cloſe to the ſea, « on the declivity of a mountain which
ſurrounds the whole harbour. The convenience and ſafety of this harbour is ſuch,
that Columbus, who firſt diſcovered it, gave it the name of Porto Bello, or the Fine
Harbour.

Hrsroxy.] T his part of South America was diſcovered by Columbus, in his
third voyage to this continent. It was ſubdued and ſettled by the Spaniards about
the year 1 1514, after deſtroying, with great inhumanity, ſeveral millions of the
natives. This country was called Terra Firma, on account of its being the firſt


wks of the continent wich was diſcovered, all the lands diſcovered previous to this
ing Hands,


—


PERU.


| 533 )


.


SITVATION AND EXTENT.


the Equator and 25* South Latitude.


Miles.
Length _ bee
Breadth 300 . 60 and 81 Weſt Longitude.
5 | OUNDED north, by Terra Firma; weſt, by the Pacific ocean;
BOUNDARIES, | ſouth, by Chih ; and eaſt, by the mountains called the Andes.


Divistoxs. | Peru is divided into the following provinces 2


Provinces. Chief Towns.
Quito, Quito, Payta,
Lima, 8 Lima, latitude 12s 11 South.
Los Charcos, Potoſi, Poreo. TEE


| Rivers.] There is a number of rivers which riſe in the Andes, but moſt of them
run to the eaſtward. Among theſe are the Grande, Oronoko, Amazon and Plate.
The Amazon riſes in Peru, but directs its courſe eaſtward, and after running between


three and four thouſand miles, falls into the Atlantic ocean, under the equator. This


river, like others between the tropics, annually overflows its banks, at which time it is
one hundred and fifty miles wide at its mouth. It is ſuppoſed to be the largeſt river in
the world, either with regard to the length of its courſe, the depth of its waters, or its
aſtoniſhing breadth. There is one river in Peru, the waters of which are ſaid to be as
red as blood; but this is doubted by ſome : it is probable, however, that there may be
qualities in the earth through which this river runs, which may tinge the waters and
J relemblance to blood. ene noone got 1
_ CLiMATE, AIR, AND S0IL.] From the ſituation of this country, which is within,
the torrid zone, it is natural to ſuppoſe that it would be almoſt uninhabitable ; but the
Andes mountains being on the one fide, and the South ſea on the other, it is not 1o-
prodigiouſly hot as tropical countries in general are; and in ſome parts it is diſagreeably
cold. In one part are mountains of a ſtupendous height and magnitude, having their
ſummits covered with ſhow ; on the other, volcanoes flaming within, while their
ſummits, chaſins, and apertures are involved in ice. The plains are temperate, the
| beaches and vallies hot; and laſtly, according to the diſpoſition of the country, its high
or low ſituation, we find all the variety of gradations of temperature between the two
extremes of heat and cold. It is remarkable, that in ſome places it never rains,
which defect is ſupplied by a dew that falls every night, and ſuſficiently retreſhes the
vegetable creation; but in Quito they have prodigious rains, attended by dreadful
ſtorms of thunder and lightning. In the inland paris of Peru, and. by the banks.
of the rivers, the ſoit is uſually very fertile; but along the tea coaſt it is a
barren ſand. EO $4 |

ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PRODUCTIONS. | Vaſt numbers of cattle were imported
by the Spaniards into Peru, when they took poſſeſſion of that country; thete are now
ſo amazingly increaſed, that they run wild and are hunted like game. The. moſt
remarkable animals in this country are the Peruvian ſheep, called the lamas and.
vicunnas. The lama, in ſeveral particulars, reſembles the camel, as in the thape of
the neck, head, and ſome other parts; but has no bunch, is much ſmaller, and is


cloven-footed. Its upper lip is clett like that of a hare, through which, whenenraged.,
| — | if


PPP


8 SPANISH AMERICA.


it ſpits a venomous juice, that inflames the part on which it falls. The wool with
which it is covered is of different colours, but generally brown. Theſe animals are
generally docile, to that the Indians uſe them as beaſts of burden. Formerly they uſed
to eat their fleſh, and ſtill continue to make that uſe of ſuch as are paſt labour,
eſteeming it preterable to mutton, The vicunna refembles the lama in ſhape, but is
much tmaller, and its wool ſhorter and finer. The moſt remarkable birds found in
Peru are the condors and hummers. The condor is prodigiouſly large and carnivorous,
and very voracious, frequently ſeizing the lambs as they are feeding upon the heath.
The humttter is a night bird, pectthar to the mbuntaittous deſerts of Peru. They are
Teldomt feen, though frequently heard, both by their ſinging, and a ſtrange humming
made in the air by the rapidity of their flight; which when near makes a noite like that of
a rocket. The infects found in Peru ate muſquetoes in prodigious numbers, miguas, and
teveral others equally venomous ; alfo a variety of beautiful butterflies. This countr
produces fruits pecultar to the climate, and moſt of thoſe in Europe. The culture of
maize, of pimento and of cotton, - which was found eſtabliſhed there, has not been
neglected z and that of wheat, barley, caſſava, potatoes, ſugar, and of the olive and
vine is attended to. The goat has thriven very well; but the ſheep have degenerated,
and their wool is become extremely coarſe. TY r
 Mrxes.] In the nortlieri parts of Peru are ſeveral gold mines; but thoſe of ſilver
are found all over the country, particulary in the neighbourhood of Potofi. Nature
never offered to the avidity of mankind, in any country on the globe, ſuch rich mines
as thoſe of Potoſi. Theſe famous mines were accidentally difcovered in the year 1545,
in this manner; an Indian, named Hualpa, one day following ſome deer, they made
directly up the hill of Potofi ; he came to a ſteep craggy part of the hill, and the better
to enable him to climb up, laid hold of a ſhrub, which came up by the roots, and laid
open, a mats of filver ore He for ſome time kept it a ſecret, but afterwards revealed
it to his friend Guanca, who, becauſe he would not diſcover to him the method of
refining it, acquainted the Spaniard his maſter, named Valaroel, with the diſcovery.
Valaroe! regiftered the mine in 1545; and from that time till 1638 theſe mines of
Potofi had yielded 395,619,000 pieces of eight, which is about 4, 255, ooo pieces a
Fear. Potofi is about twenty or twenty-five leagues from the city of La Plata. The
hill, and alſo the country for a conſiderable diſtance round, is quite barren and deſert,
and produces neither tree, plant, nor herb, fo that the inhabitants of Potoſi, which
is ſituated at the foot of the hill, on the ſouth fide, are obliged to procure all the
neceſſaries of life from Peru. Theſe mines begin to decreaſe, and others rife in
reputation. a „„ „ FVV
 MaxveactUuREs, TRADE, AND CirrEs.] We join theſe articles here becauſe of
their intimate connection ; for, except in the cities we ſhall deſcribe, there is no com-
merce worth mentioning. The city of Lima is the capital of Peru, and of the whole
Spaniſh empire: its ſituation, in the middle of a ſpacious and delightful valley, was
fixed upon by the famous Pizarro, as the moſt proper for a city, which he expected
would preſerve his memory. It is ſo well watered by the Rimac, that the inhabitants,
like thoſe of London, command a fiream, each for his own uſe. There are many
very magnificent ſtructures, particularly churches, in this city; though the houſes in
general are built of ſlight materials, the equality of the climate, and want of rain,
rendering ſtone houſes unneceflary ; and beſides it is found, that theſe are more apt to
ſuffer by ſhocks of the earth, which arc frequent and dreadful all over this province.
Lima is about two leagues from the ſea, extends in length two mules, and in breadth
| | | PH | ; One


SPANISH AMERICA. 585


done and a quarter. One remarkable fact is ſufficient to demonſtrate tlie wealth of this
city. When the viceroy, the duke de la Palada, made his entry into Lima in 1682,
the inhabitants, to do him honour, cauſed the ſtreets to be paved with ingots of ſilver,
amounting to ſeventeen millions ſterling. All travellers ſpeak with-amazement of the
decorations of the churches with gold, filver, and precious ſtones, which load and
ornament even the walls. The only thing that could juſtify theſe accounts, is the im-
mente richneſs and extenfive commerce of theinhabitants. The merchants of Lima may
be ſaid to deal with all the quarters of the world, and that both on their own accounts,
and as factors for others. Here all the products of the ſouthern provinces are con-
veyed, in order to be exchanged at the harbour of Lima for ſuch articles as the inha-
bitants of Peru ftand in need of; the fleet from Europe and the Eaſt Indies land at the
ſume harbour, and the commodities of Aſia, Europe, and America, are there bartered
for each other. What there is no immediate vent for, the. merchants of Lima purchaſe
on their own accounts, and lay up in warehoutes, knowing that they muſt ſoon find an
outlet for them, ſince by one channel or other they have a communication with almoſt
every commercial nation. But all the wealth of the inhabitants, all the beauty of the
fituation, and the fertility of the climate of Lima are not ſufficient to compenſate for
one diſaſter, which always threatens and has ſometimes actually befallen them. In the
year 1747, a moſt tremendous earthquake laid three fourths of this city level with the
ground, and entirely demoliſhed Callao, the port town belonging to it. Never was
any deſtruction more perfect, not more than one of three thoutand inhabitants being
left to record this dreadful calamity, and he, by a providence the moſt ſingular and
extraordinary imaginable. This man, who happened to be on a tort which overlooked
the harbour, perceived in one minute the-inhabitants running trom their houſes in the
utmoſt terror and confuſion ; the ſea, as is uſual on fuch occaſions, receding to a con-
ſiderable diſtance, returned in mountainous waves, foaming with the violence of the
_ agitation, buried the inhabitants for ever in its boſom, and immediately all was ſilent:
but the ſame wave which deſtroyed the town, drove. a little boat by the place where the
man ftood, into which he threw himfelf, and was faved.
Cuſco, the ancient capital of the Peruvian empire, hes in this mountainous country,
at a diſtance from the fea, and has long been or the decline, but it is yet a very
conſiderable place. The inhabitants, three parts of whom are Indians, are very
induſtrious in manufacturing baize, cotton, and leather. They have alto both here
and in Quito, a particular taſte for painting; and their productions in this way,
tome of which have been admired in Italy, are diſperſed all over South America.
Quito is next to. Lima in populouſneſs, if not ſuperior to it. It is like Cuſco,
an inland city, and having no mines in its neighbourhood, is chiefly famous for its
manufactures of cotton, wool, and flax, which ſupply the conſumption. over all the
kingdom of Peru. . „ Fo. EET TOTES .
INHABITAN Ss, MANNERS, AND GOVERNMENT. | It is unpoſſible to aſcertain. with.
any degree of preciſion the number of inhabitants in Peru. The city of Lama is faid
to contain 54,000; Guagaquill 20,000; Potoſi 25,000; La Paz 20,000, and Cuſco
26,000. Among all the inhabitants of Peru, pride and lazineſs are ſaid to be the moſt
predominant paſſions. Avarice may likewiſe be attributed to fome of them with a
great deal of propricty. MES
The Indians and negroes are forbidden, under the ſevereſt penalties, to intermarry ;
for divifion between theſe two claſſes is the great inſtrument in which the Spaniards
| truſt for the preſervation of the colonies. Peru is governed by a viceroy, who is abſo-
lute ; but it being impoſſible for him to ſuperintend the whole extent of his govern-
| | | ment,


586 SPANISH AMERICA.


ment, he delegates a part of his mather ity to the ſeveral audiences and courts, eſta.
blithed at different places throughout his territories. At Lima there is a treaſury court
for receiving a fifth of the mines, and certain taxes paid by the Indians, which belohg
to the King of Spain.

NATURAL IIIis roxv.] There are certain waters in this country, which, in their
courſe, turn into ſtone; and fountains of liquid matter, called coppey, reſembling pitch
and tar, and uſed by ſeamen for the tame purpoſe. On the coaſts of Guagaquill and
Guatimala are found a certain ſpęcies of ſnails, which vield the purple dye to celebrated
by the ancients. and which the moderns have ſuppoted to have been loſt. The ſhell
that contains them is fixed to rocks, watered by the ſea : it is of the ſize of a large nut.
Various methods are uted to extract the purple matter from the animal. There 1 Is no
colour that can be compared to this either in luſtre or permanence.

Under this head it may not be improper to make ſome obſervations upon that new
ſubſtance called the Platina, and which may be confidercd as an eighth metal. In its
native ſtate it is mixed with gold and iron, and this at firſt gave rife to a ſuſpicion that

it was nothing more than a combination of theſe two metals; but late experiments of
chymiſts fully prove, that it is a pure and ſimple metal, with properties pecuhar to it-
ſelf. It cannot be affected by any ſimple acid, or by any known ſolvent, except the
aqua regia; it will not tarnith in the air, r will it ruſt; it unites to the fixed.
neis of gold. and to the property it has of not being ſuſceptible of deſtruction, a hard-
nets almoſt equal to that of iron, and a much greater difficulty of fuſion: it is of an
intermediate colour between that of iron and ſilver; it can be forged and extended into
thin plates; and when diſſolved in aqua regia, it may be made to aſſume, by preci-
pitation, an infinite diverſity of colours: and Count Milbey has ſucceeded in varying
theſe precipitates ſo much, that he has had a picture painted, in the colouring of
which, there is ſcarce any thing but platina made uſe of. Upon the whole, from
conſidering the advantages of the platina, we cannot but conclude that this metal de-
Jerves, at leaſt, from its ſuperiority to all others, to ſhare the title of king of the metals,
ot which gold has ſo long been in poſſeſſion. The Peruvian bark, ſo famous at pre-
ſent for curing intermittent fevers, may likewiſe be mentioned in this place. The tree
from which it is 0 grows upon the ſlope of mountains, and is about the ſize of a
common cherry tree. It is diſtinguiſhed into three kinds; the red, yellow, and the
White; but the nd. is found to be the beſt and moſt efficacious. The Jeſuits carried
this bark to Rome as early as 1639; but the natives are ſuppoſed to have been ac-
quainted with its medicinal 4 many ages before.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 1 In treating of this country the mind is naturally led back
to the barbarous and cruel conquerors of it, who, coming from the old world in queſt
of gold to ſatisfy their avarice, diſplayed ſcenes ſhocking to humanity. After the con-
2 the country ſcarcely preſerved any thing but its name, every thing aſſumed a new

There were other edifices, other inhabitants, other occupations , other pre) u-
= and other religions, — See Robertſon 8 Hiſtory ot Ats.


CHILI.


N 1


.


SITUATION AND EXTENT.


Miles.


Length 1260 25 and 44* S. Lat.
Breadth 580 e {8 * and 85* W. Long.


| 3 OUNDED on the north, by Peru; by Paragua or La Plata, on the
DOUNDARIES: ] B eaſt ; by Patagonia, on the Cantk and by the Pacific ocean, on
the weſt, It lies on both ſides of the Andes; Chili Proper lies on the weſt, and Cuyo


or Cutio, on the eaſt. The principal towns in the former are St. Jago and Baldivia;
in the latter, St. John de Frontiera. |


CLIMATE AND SoOIL.} The climate of Chili is one of the moſt delightful in the
world, being a medium between the intenſe heats of the torrid, and the piercing colds


of the frigid zones. Along the coaſt of the Pacific ocean, they enjoy a fine temperate
air, and a clear ſerene ſky, moſt part of the year; but ſometimes the winds that blow


ſrom the mountains, in winter, are exceedingly ſharp. There are few places in this


extenſive country where the ſoil is not exuberantly rich; and were its natural advan-


tages ſeconded by the induſtry of the inhabitants, Chili would be the moſt opulent
kingdom in America.


ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE 8 ] The horſes and mules of Chili are in great


eſteem, particularly the former. This breed of horſes was originally carried from Old


Spain, and inſtead of degenerating, have now become ſuperior to the Spaniſh horſes
themſelves : in beauty and gracefulneſs, they are not inferior to the famous Andaluſian
horſes ; and ſuch is their, yalue, that one of them 1s thought a preſent worthy the ac-
ceptance of @ crowned head.

Prodigious numbers of oxen, goats, and ſheep, are fattened in the luxuriant paſ-
tures of Chili, and indeed this is the only part of huſbandry to which the inhabitants


= pay any "conſiderable attention. An ox well fattened may be purchaſed for four dol-
Turkeys, geeſe, and all kinds of poultry are found here in the ſame profuſion .
wild fowl are alſo common, among which are wood pigeons, turtle-doves, partridges,


and royal cirapicos. A very particular ſpecies of bird is found in Chili, called the
awakener; it is about the fize of a middling fowl ; its plumage 18 black and white ;
| has a thick neck; the head rather large, erect, and beautifully adorned with a tuft of
ſcatliers; its eyes are large, ſharp; and lively ; on the fore part of its wings are two
ſpurs, about an inch in length, theſe are its weapons of defeyce againſt all other birds.


It has obtained the name of the awakener from the notice it gives fo all birds in time of


danger; and this it does, by making a loud chattering noiſe, Which immediately i in-
duc es the other to fly from the enemy.


'The coaſts abound with many excellent fiſh : there are alſo vaſt numbers of. TFT


and ſea wolves. The ſoil produces Indian and European. corn, hemp, grapes, and all
e propped to enable them to ſikl-


other fruits. The European fruit trees are obliged to
tain the weight of the fruit; the orchards 1 in particular yield great quantities of all forts
01 apples; 4 the ſtrawberrics are very large and moſt commonIy red, but ſometimes w hite
and yellow. In many places orange trees, are in bloom, and bear fruit throug ghout, the
zear: olives alſo, and almond trees, thrive exccedingly well, and the inhabitants preſs


4 F | f a kind


„
* ,


$A * —
x AL ES 7 OA Inn It ICE CI T0


389 SPANISH AMERICA.


a kind of muſcadee wine from their grapes, which far exceeds any of the kind made in
Spain. The trunks of the vines are, in ſome places, ſaid to be as thick as a man's
body, and the grapes are amazingly large. |
Mixes. | Mines of gold, ſilver, copper, tin, quickfilver, iron and lead, abound in
this country. Vaſt quantities of gold are waſhed down from the mountains by brooks
and torrents; the annual amount of which, when manufactured, is eſtimated at no
tets than 800,000 dollars. |
CoMERCE.] Chili has always had commercial connections with the neighbourin
Indians on its frontiers, with Peru and with Paragua. The Indians in their tranſac-
Uons are found to be perfectly honeſt. Chili ſupplies Peru with hides, dried fruit, cop-
per, ſalt meat, horſes, hemp, and corn; and receives in exchange tobacco, ſugar, co-
coa, earthen ware, ſome manufactures made at Quito, and ſome articles of luxury
brought from Europe. The ſhips ſent from Calao on this traffic, which is reciprocally
uſeful, were formerly bound for Conception bay, but now come to Valparaiſo. During
the courle of near a century, no navigator in theſe tranquil ſeas would venture to loſe
figlit of land, and then theſe voyages laſted a whole year. A pilot of the old world,
having at length obſerved the winds, pertormed the navigation in one month. He
was conſidered as a wizard, and was taken up by order of the inquiſition, whoſe igno-
rance becomes an object of ridicule, when its cruelty doth not excite our abhorrence.
The journal he produced was his vindication ; and it plainly appeared that to perform
the ſame voyage it was only neceſſary to keep clear of the coaſts: his method was
therefore univerſally adopftetl. g LOT 5
Chili ſends to Paragua wines, brandy, oil, and chiefly gold; and receives in pay-
ment mules, wax, cotton, the herb of Paragua, negroes, and alſo much of the mer-
ahandize of the ancient hemiſphere, before the merchants of Lima had obtained, either
by bribery, or by their influence, that this laſt branch of commerce ſhould be prohi-
bited. The commerce between the two colonies is not carried on by fea ; it hath been:

found more expeditious, ſafe, and even leſs expenſive to go by land, though it 1s 354.

leagues from St. Jago to Buennos Ayres, and more than forty leagues of the way are

amidit the ſnows and precipices of the Cordeleras. LES Ou :

__ IxnanitanTs, Manners, Ax D Cusrous.] The Indians in this country are ſtill in a
great meaſure unconquered ; they live ſcattered in the deſerts and the foreſts, and it is
impoſſible to aſcertain their numbers. It has already been mentioned, that thoſe In-

dians, which are not ſubject to the Spaniſh yoke, are very honeſt in their commercial
tranſactions, performing to a punctilio whatever they have promiſed ; but, like almoſt
all other Indians, they are very fond of ſpirituous liquors, and are eager to purchaſe
them from every quarter. They live in ſmall huts, which they build in the courſe of a
day or two at fartheſt; and which they abandon when hard puſhed by an enemy.
They are brave and warlike, and all the attempts of the Spaniards to ſubdue them have
proved ineffectual. It is almoſt equally difficult to aſcertain the number of Spaniards
in Chili. The Abbe Raynal ſays, there are 40,000 in the city of St. Jago; if this be
true, the aggregate number in all the provinces of Chili muſt be more conſiderable
than has been generally ſuppoſed. The character and manners of theſe people da not
differ materially from thoſe 1n Peru. 5 88 SE |
— GovegrNMENT. | St. Jago is the capital of the State and the ſeat, of the empire. The
commandant there is ſubordinate to the viceroy of Peru in all matters relating to the
government, to the finances, and to war; but he is independent of him as chief admi-
niftrator of juſtice, and preſident of the royal audience. Eleven inferior officers, diſ-
_#fibuted in the province, are charged, under his orders, with the details of admi-
iſtration, | S |
PRRA-


55 6


PARA GG UA, oz LA PLATA.


SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Miles.


Length 1500 12” "and 37 S. Lat. -
Breadth 12881 wen 1 5o* and 759 W. Long.


3 oN DED by Aunmsonia, on the north; by Braſil, eaſt; by Pata-
Banne J B gonia, ſouth ; and by Peru and — well. 4

It contains the following provinces :

Paragua, Parana, Guira, Uragua, Tucuman, Rio de la Plata.

RrvEss. ] Befides a vaſt number of ſmaller rivers which water this country, there is
the grand river La Plata, which deſerves a particular deſcription. A Modeneſe Jeſuit,
by the name of P. Cattanco, who failed up this river, ſpeaks in the following language


concerning it : © While I refided in Europe, and read in books of hiſtory or geogra-
Phy that the river de la Plata was 1 50 miles in breadth, I confidered it as an exagge-


ration, becauſe in this hemiſphere, we have no example of ſuch vaſt rivers. When I


approached its mouth, I had the moſt vehement deſire to aſcertain the breadth with my
own eyes, and 1 have found the matter to be exactly as it was repreſented. This I


deduce particularly from one circumſtance : when we took our departure from Monte
Viedo, a fort ſituated more than 100 miles from the mouth of the river, and where its


| breadth is conſiderably diminiſhed, we failed a complete day before we diſcovered the


land on the oppoſite bank of the river; and when we were in the middle of the chan-


nel, we could not diſcover land on either fide, and ſaw nothing but the ſky and water,


as if we had been in ſome great ocean. Indeed, we ſhould have taken it to be ſea, if
the freſh water of the river, which was turbid like the Po, had not fatisfied us that it
was a river.


CLIMATE, or axp Propper. 1 From the ſituation of this country, ſome parts of


it muſt be extremely hot, from the almoſt vertical influence of the rays of the ſun ; while


other parts muſt be pleaſant and delightful. But the heat is in ſome meaſure abated
by the gentle breezes, which generally begin about nine or ten o'clock in the morning,


and continue the greateſt part of the day. Some parts of the country are very moun-


tainous ; but in many others you find extenfive and beautitul plains, where the ſoil is
very rich, producing cotton, tobacco, and the valuable herb called Paragua, together
with a variety of fruits. There are alſo prodigiouſly rich paſtures, in w hich are bred


fuch herds of cattle, that, it is ſaid, the hides are the only part exported ; while the
_ fleſh is left to be devoured by the ravenous beaſts of the wilderneſs. Not long ſince, a


horſe might be purchaſed here for one dollar, and an ox, choſen out of ſeveral hun-


---axed, for a ſtill more trifling ſum.


Commerce axp Cure City. | Paragua ſends annually into the kingdom of Peru as
many as: 1500 or 2000 mules. They tr ravel over dreary deſerts for the diſtance of 8 or
g20 leagues. What is not man capable of doing when necethity, reſolution, and
avarice are united? neither deep and miry ſrramps, nor ſummits of lofty mountains
covered with eternal ſnow, can bar his progreſs. The province of Tucuman furmthes
to Potoſi, annually, 16 or 18,000 oxen, and 4 or 5000 horſes, brought forth and


=


4F 2 reared


590 SPANISH AMERICA.


reared upon its own territory. Paragua ſends ſeveral articles of commerce to Spain,
but they are all brought from neighbouring diſtricts. The only article it furniſhes from
its own territory is Rides. A. e 100 13.0}
| Buennos Ayres is the capital of this country: its ſituation on the river La Plata is
healthy and pleaſant, and the air temperate : it is regularly built; its ſtreets are wide,
the houſes are extremely low, and each of them is accommodated with a garden. The
public and private buildings which, ſixty years ago, were all made of earth, are of
more ſolid and commodiors conſtruction; ſince the natives have learned the art of
making brick and lime. The number of inhabitants is about 30,000. One ſide of
che town is defended by a fortreſs with a garriſon of 6 or 700 men. The town ſtands
180 mites from the ſea ; the ſhips get to it by failing up a river that wants depth, is full
of iſlands, ſhoals, and rocks, and where ſtorms are more frequent and more dreadful
than on the ocean. It is neceſſary to anchor every night on the ſpot where they come
to; and on the moſt moderate days a pilot muſt go to found the way for the ſhip:
after having ſurmounted theſe difficulties, the ſhips are obliged, at the diſtance of three
| leagnes from the town, to put their goods on board ſome light veſſel, and to go to re-
fit, and to wait for their cargoes at Incunado de Barragan, fituated ſeven or eight
teagnes below. PI” 1d | UN EAT FO RO
_- Innanrtants. | As to the number of inhabitants in this country, from the beſt in-
formation that can be obtained, there are not more than 100, ooo, including Spaniards,
Indians, Negroes, and the mixed blood or Cicoles. The Spaniards exhibit much the
fame character here as in the other kingdoms already deſcribed. Eg ang *
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. | It is a circumſtance well known to all who are ac-
quainted with the hiſtory of South America, that long ago the Jeſuits mtroduced them-
ſelves into this country, and made great efforts to civilize and chriſtianize the natives.
Their conduct and inſtitutions open an abundant ſource of reflection. We are natu-
rally led to inquire what could induce men to abandon the ſeat of eaſe and tranquil-
Hty; to traverſe immenſe deſerts; to climb the craggy cliffs of lofty mountains; to
plunge into deep and miry ſwamps ; to ſubject themſelves to hunger, to thirſt, to dan-
ger and miſery of every kind; ſurrounded by fierce and unknown ſavages, whoſe cha-
racters they were unacquainted with, and whoſe ſuſpicions might have armed them
with vengeance in an inſtant; who neither knew nor cared to know the errand on
which theſe miſſionaries came; whoſe manner of life was independent, and whoſe
minds diſdained the burdens of civilized life: I ſay, we with to know what powerful
motives could have inclined theſe miſſionaries to leave cultivated fociety, and encoun-
ter all theſe dangers? Was it the love of riches, a thirſt for glory, or the good of
mankind, that influenced their conduct? or were they influenced by a blind and miſ-
guided ſuperſtition ? Whatever may have been their motives, if hiſtory ſpeaks the
truth, they have really made the inhabitants of this part of the new world more virtu-
ous, more civil, and more happy. 1


—


e 1 — 4 4 3 9


1438)


0


PORTUGUESE AMERICA.


.


f M SITUATION AND EXTENT.
8 .

ength 2500 Equator and 35 S. Lat.

Breadth yoo 81 between ew 5* and 60* W. Longitude.


OUNDED by the mouth of the river Amazon and the Atlantic
ocean, on the north; and by the ſame ocean, on the eaſt; on the


BoUNDARIES. I B


ſouth by the river Plata; on the weſt, by moraſſes, lakes, torrents, rivers, and moun-
tains, which ſeparate it from Amazonia and the Spaniſh poſſeſſions. On the coaſt are


three ſmall iſlands, where ſhips touch for proviſions on their voyage to the South Seas,
viz. Fernando, St. Barbaro, and St. Catherine's.

Bars, Hax BOURS, AND Rivess.| Theſe are the harbours of Panambuco, All Saints,
Rio Janeiro, the port of St. Vincent, the harbour of Gabriel, and the Port of St. Sal-


vador. There are a great number of noble ſtreams, which unite with the rivers Ama-


zon and Plata, beſides others which fall into the Atlantic occan.
CLIxATE, SoIL, Ax D PRoDucTIONS.| The climate of Brazil has been deſeribed by
two eminent naturaliſts, Piſo and Margrave, who obſerved it with a philoſophical ac-


dure to be temperate and mild, when compared with that of Africa: they aſcribe
iefly to the refreſhing wind which blows continually from the ſea. The air is
not only cool, but chilly through the night, ſo that the natives kindle a fire every even-
ing in their huts. As the rivers in this country annually overflow their banks, and
leave a ſort of ſlime upon the lands, the ſoil here muſt be in many places amazingly


this


rich; and this correſponds with the beſt information upon the ſubject. The vegetable


productions are Indian corn, ſugar canes, tobacco, indigo, hides, ipecacuana, balſam,


Brazil wood, which is of a red colour, hard and dry, and 1s chiefly ufed in dying, but


not the red of the beſt kind. Here is alſo the yellow fuſtic, of uſe in dying yellow ;


and a beautiful piece of ſpeckled wood, made uſe of in cabinet work. Here are five
different ſorts of palm trees, ſome curious ebony, and a great variety of cotton trees.


This country abounds in horned cattle, which are hunted for their hides only, 20,000
being ſent annually into Europe. "There is allo a plenty of deers, hares, and other


game. Amongſt the wild beaſts ſound here, are tygers, porcupines, janouveras, and
a fierce animal, ſomewhat like a greyhound ;- monkeys, fſloths, and the topiraſſou, a


— creature between a bull and an aſs, but without horns, and r . harmleſs; the fleth


#44 4% 4


8 | next


22 a — — een
_ 14 1 8
. eel 5 EEC ˙¹Ü¹wmẽ¾d!̃ ²˙ ů» é [ 4A N — —— — — - — . — *


8


592 PORTUGUESE AMERICA.


next white, afterwards ſcarlet, and laſt of all crimſon : which colours grow richer
and deeper the longer the bird lives. Among the abundance of fiſh with which the
ſeas, lakes, and rivers: of this country are ſtored, is the globe fiſh, ſo called from its
form, which is ſo beſet with ſpines like a hedge-hog, that it bids defiance to all fiſh of
prey. But the moſt remarkable creature is the ſea bladder, ſo called becauſe it greatly
reſembles. one, and ſwims on the ſurface of the waves; the inſide is filled with air,
except a ſmall quantity of water, that ſerves to poiſe it. The ſkin is very thin and
tranſparent, and, like a bubble raiſed in the water, reflects all the colours of the ſky.
Brazil breeds a great variety of ſerpents and venomous creatures, among which are the
Indian ſalamander, a four-legged inſect, the ſting of which is mortal; the ibivaboca,
a ſpecies of ferpent, about ſeven yards long, and half a yard in circumference, whoſe
poiſon is inſtantaneouſly fatal; the rattle ſnake, which there attains an enormous ſize;
the liboyd or roe-buck ſnake, which authors informs us are capable of ſwallowing a
roe-buck whole with his horns, being between twenty and thirty feet in length, and
two yards in circumference. Beſides thoſe there are many other inſects and ſerpents of
a dangerous and venomous nature. % ne ol e
CouxERCE AND Crier Towns.] The trade of Brazil is very great, and increaſes
every year; which is the leſs ſurpriſing, as the Portugueſe have opportunities of ſup-
plying themſelves with ſaves for their ſeveral works, at a much cheaper rate than any
other European power that has ſettlements in America, they being the only European
nation that has eſtabliſhed colonies tn Africa, and from whence they import as many
as 40,000 negroes annually. The exports of Brazil are diamonds, ſugar, tobacco,
hides, drugs and medicines; and they receive in return, woollen goods of all kinds,
linens, laces, ſilks, hats, lead, tin, pewter, copper, iron, beef, and cheeſe. They
alſo receive from Madeira a great quantity of wine, vinegar, and brandy ; and from
Azores, 25,000l. worth of other liquors. . i VV
Sr. SALVADOR is the capital of Brazil. This city, which has a noble, ſpacious, and
.commodious harbour, 5s built on a high and ſteep rock, having the ſea upon one fide,
a lake forming a creſcent on the other. The fituation makes it in a manner impregnable
by nature, and they have beſides added to it very ſtrong fertifications. It is populous,
magnificent, and beyond compariſon the moſt gay and opulent in all Brazil.
MixEs.] There are gold mines in many parts of this country, which have been
wrought with conſiderable profit to government. The extraction of gold is neither very
laborious nor dangerous in Brazil. It is ſometimes on the ſurface of the ſoil, and this
is the pureſt kind, and at other times it is neceſſary to dig for it 18 or 20 feet, but
ſeldom lower. It is found in larger pieces upon the mountains and barren rocks than in
the valleys, or on the borders of the river. Every man who diſcovers a mine, muſt
give notice of it to the government. If the vein be thought of little conſequence by
perſons appointed to examine it, it is always given up to the public. If it be declared
to be a rich vein, the government reſerve a portion of it to themſelves. Another ſhare
is given to the commandant, a third to the intendant, and two ſhares are ſecured to
the diſcoverer. The mines are obliged to deliver to the king of Portugal a fifth part
of all the gold which is extracted. There are alſo many diamond mines, which have
been diſcovered in this country; they are of all colours and alſo of every ſhade. The
diamond has the red of the ruby, the orange of the hyacinth, the blue of the ſapphire,
and the green of the emerald. The laſt is the moſt ſcarce and deareſt, when it is of
4 3 ful tint. Tranſparency and clearneſs are the natural eſſential properties of the
iamond. |


NaTivEs.|


PORTUGUESE AMERICA. 593


Nartvzs.] The native Brazilians are about the ſize of the Europeans, but not ſo
ſtout. They are ſubject to fewer diſtempers, and are long lived. They wear no
cloathing ; the women wear their hair extremely long, the men cut their's ſhort ; the
women wear bracelets of bones of a beautiful white, the men necklaces of the fame ;
the women paint their faces, and the men their bodies. The food of the Brazilians is
very ſimple; they live upon ſhell fiſh by the ſea fide, along the rivers by fiſhing, and
in the foreſts by hunting; and when theſe fail, they live upon caſſava and other roots.
They are extremely fond of dancing and other amuſements, and theſe amuſements are
not interrupted by the worſhip of a Supreme Being, for it is ſaid they know of none,
nor is their tranquillity diſturbed by the dread of a future ſtate, of which they have no
idea. They have however their magicians, who, by ſtrange contortions, ſo far work
upon the credulity of the people, as to throw them into violent convulſions. If the
poſtures of theſe magicians are detected, they are immediately put to death, which
ſerves in ſome meaſure to check the ſpirit of deceit. Every Brazilian takes as many.
wives as he chooſes, and puts them away when he gets tired of them. When the
women lie in, they keep their bed but a day or two; then the mother, hanging the
child to her neck in a cotton ſcarf, returns to her uſual occupation, without any kind
of inconvenience: Travellers are received with diſtinguiſhed marks of civility by the
native Brazilians. Wherever they go they are ſurrounded with women, who -waſh
their feet, and welcome them with the moſt obliging expreſſions. . But it would be
an unpardonable affront if they ſhould leave the family where they were firſt enter-
tained, in hopes of better accommodation in another. Some of theſe virtues, however,
were more applicable to theſe natives, before. they were corrupted by an intercourſe -
/// 1 VVofff! OTK.
RxeL1i610n.] Though the king of Portugal, as grand mafter of the order of Chriſt,
be ſolely in poſſeſſion of the titles; and though the produce of the cruſade be-
longs entirely to him; yet in this extenſive country; ſix biſhoprics have been ſucceſ-
ſively founded, which acknowledge for their ſuperior the archbiſhopric of Bohia,
_ eſtabliſhed in the year 1552. The fortunate prelates, moſt of them Europeans, who
fill theſe honourable ſees, live in a very commodious manner, upon the emoluments
attached to the function of their miniſtry, and upon a penſion of gol. and from that to
1250l. granted to them by the: government. Among the inferior clergy, none but the
miſſionaries, who are ſettled in the Indian villages, are paid; but the others find ſuf-
ficient reſources among the ſuperſtitious people, whom they are to edify, to inſtruct,
and to comfort. Beſides an annual tribute, paid by. every family to the clergyman, he
is entitled to two ſhillings for every birth, for every wedding, and every burial. Though
there be not abſolutely an inquifition in Brazil, yet the people of that country are not
protected from the outrages of that barbarous inſtitution. 5
Government. | The government of Brazil is in the viceroy, who has two councils; :
one for criminal, the other for civil affairs, in both of which he prefides ; but there is
mo part of the world where the lawyers are more corrupt, or the chicanery of their
profeſſion more practiſed. 5 . :
Only half of the 16 Captainries, into which this country is divided, belong to the
crown, the reſt being fiefs made over to ſome of the nobility, in reward of their ex-
traordinary ſervices, who do little more than acknowledge the ſovereignty of the king
of Portugal. ; 5
. & c.] The Portugueſe diſcovered this country in the year 1500, but did
not plant it till the year 1549, when they took poſſeſſion of All Saints Bay, and built
the city of St. Salvador, which is now the reſidence of the viceroy and * :
3 | | S8


VB
:
a
15
©
F
$4
-
|
_ |
"Fi
„
F
'
1
*
#


FRENCH ̃ ²˙


BorNDARIES.] B


— on the dert Cayenne eaſt ; Amazonia ſouth, and Terra Firma weft.


The Dutch invaded Brazil in 1623, and ſubdued the northern provinces ; but the Por-
tugueſe agreed in 1661, to pay the Dutch eight tons of gold to relinquiſh their intereft
in this country, whicl was accepted, and the Portugueſe remained in peaceable poſſeſ-
ſion of all Brazil till about the end of 1762, when the Spaniſh governor of Buennos
Ayres, hearing of a war between Portugal and Spain, took, after a month's fiege, the


Portugueſe frontier fortreſs, called St. Sacrament; but BY the treaty of peace it was
reſtored,


F %


—


FRENCH AMERICA.


CAYENNE.
OUNDED north and eaſt, by the Atlantic ocean ; ſouth, by Ama-


zonia; and weſt, by Guiana, or Surrinam. It extends 240 miles


along the coaſt of Guiana, and nearly 300 miles within land, lying between the equa-
tor and the 5th degree north latitude.


CLIMATE, Soll, AND PRoDUCE.] The land along g the coaſt is low, and very ſubject


to inundations during the rainy ſeaſons, from the multitude of rivers which ruſh down
from the mountains with great impetuoſity. Here the atmoſphere is very hot, moiſt


and unwholeſome, eſpecially where the woods are not cleared away; but on the higher
parts where the trees are cut down, and the ground laid out in plantations,. the air
is more healthy, and the heat greatly mitigated by the ſea breezes. The ſoil in many
parts 1s very tertile, producing ſugar, tobacen, Indian corn, fruits, and other necel-


aries of life.


GENERAL OzservaTIONs.] The French have taken poſſoſſion of an iſland, upon
this coaſt, called alſo Cayenne. It is about 3o miles in circumference, and is very un-


healthy; but having ſome good harbours, they have here ſome ſettlements, which raiſe
ſugur, coffee, and ſome other kinds of produce. The French eſtabliſhed themſelves
here in 1635; but they afterwards abandoned the iſland, and the Engliſh took poſſeſ-


fion of it. Soon after the French returned and drove out the Engliſh, but were ex-
pelled in their turn by the Dutch, who kept their conqueſt but a ſhort time, and then


were ſubdued by the French, who ſtill 8 poſſeſſion of it. The whole of Cayenne 1 Is
An Dnoonderable Pravinky; and eee very little is related of it.


D = ty — —


*
2 „


DUTCH AMERICA.


W


\ SURRINAM, on DUTCH. GUIANA,


Alls provinee the enly one belonging to the Dutch, on the continent of America,
is ſituated between ze and 72 N. lat. having the mouth of the Oronoko and the


The |


rica,
the


The


DUTCH AMERICA. 595

The Dutch claim the whole coaſt from the mouth of Oronoko to the river Marowyne,
on which are ſituated their colonies of Eſſequebo, Demerara, Berbice, and Surrinam.
The latter begins with the river Saramacha, and ends with the Marowyne, including a


length of coaſt of 120 miles.
Rivers. | A number of fine rivers paſs through this country, the principal of


which are Eflequebo, Surrinam, Demerara, Berbice, and Conya. Eſſequebo is nine


miles wide at its mouth, and is more than goo miles in length. Surrinam is a beauti-


ſul river, three quarters of a mile wide, navigable for the largeſt veſſels four leagues, and


for ſmaller veſſels 60 or 70 miles further. Its banks, quite to the water's edge, are


covered with evergreen mangrove trees, which render the paſſage up this river very
aclighttul. The Demerara is about three quarters of a mile wide where it empties
into the Surrinam, is navigable for large veflels 100 miles; a hundred miles further are
ſeveral falls of eaſy aſcent, above which it divides into the ſouth-weſt and ſouth-eaſt
branches. We | | e + Bake

CLIAATE.] In the months of September, October, and November, the climate is


unhealthy, particularly to ſtrangers. 'The common diſeaſes are putrid and other
fevers, the dry belly-ach, and the dropſy.— 1o0 miles back from the fea, you come to
quite a different ſoil, a hilly country, a pure, dry, wholeſome air, where a fire ſome-
times would not be diſagrecable. Along the ſea coaſt the water is brackiſh and un-
wholetome, the air damp and ſultry.— The thermometer ranges from 75 to go* through


the year. A north-eaſt breeze never fails to blow from about g o'clock in the morning


through the day, in the hotteſt ſeaſons. As the days and nights throughout the year


are very nearly of equal length, the air can never become extremely heated, nor the


inhabitants ſo greatly incommoded by the heat, as thoſe who live at a greater diſtance


{rom the equator. The ſeaſons were formerly divided regularly into rainy and dry;
but of late years ſo much dependence cannot be placed upon them, owing probably


to the country's being more cleared, by which means a free paſſage is opened for the


air and vapours.


WarrR.] The water of the lower parts of the river is brackiſh, and unfit for uſe;


and the inhabitants are obliged to make uſe of rain water, which is here uncommonly


ſweet and good. It is caught in ciſterns placed under ground, and before drinking,
is (et in large earthen pots to ſettle, by which means it becomes very clear and whole-


tome. Theſe ciſterns are ſo large and numerous, that water is ſeldom ſcarce.


_ Cnrey Towxs AND PoruLATION.] Paramaribo, fituated on Surrinam river, 4 leagues
from the ſea, N. Lat. 6* W. Lon. 5 5* from London, is the principal town in Surrinam.
It contains about 2000 whites, one half of whom are Jews, and 8000 ſlaves. The


houſes are principally of wood, fome few have glaſs windows, but generally they have


wooden ſhutters. The ſtreets are ſpacious and ſtraight, and planted on each fide with


orange or tamarind trees.


About ſeventy miles from the ſea, on the ſame river, is a village of about 40 or 50


houſes, inhabited by Jews. This village and the town above mentioned, with the in-


tervening plantations, contain all the inhabitants in this colony, which amount to


3200 whites, and 43,000 ſlaves. The buildings on the plantations are many of them

coſtly, convenient, and airy. The country around is thinly inhabited with the native

Indians, a harmleſs friendly ſet of beings. They are, in general, ſhort of ſtature, but

remarkably well made, of a light copper colour, ſtraight black hair, without beards,

_ high cheek bones, and broad ſhoulders. In their ears, noſes, and hair, the women

v ear ornaments of ſilver, &c. Both men and women go naked. One nation or tribe
of them tie the lower part of the leg of the female children, when young, with a cord


4 & bound


|
|
|


— - "> ”
ho ner ——ö—1n; —— 2 ͤ —— ; —


Y — 65g *
:᷑ nos 0 oy IAG > a7 en


*
r VET „
* *


Ly 4 —
—


596 dDburch AMERICA.


bound very tight for the breadth of 6 inches about the ancle, which cord is never after.


wards taken off but to put on a new one, by which means the fleſh, which ſhould


otherwiſe grow on that part of the leg, increaſes the calt to a great fize, and leaves
the bone below nearly bare. This, though it muſt render them very weak, is reckoned
a great beauty by them. The language of the Indians appears to be very foft. They


are mortal enemies to every kind of labour; but nevertheleſs manutacture a few articles,


ſuch as very fine cotton hammocks, earthen water pots, baſkets, a red or yellow dye
called Rovcax, and ſome other trifles, all which they bring to town and exchange tor
tuch articles as they ſtand in need of. 14


They paint themſelves red, and ſome are curiouſly figured with black. Their food


conſiſts chiefly of fiſh and crabs, and caſſava, of which they plant great quantities,


and this is almoſt the only produce they attend to. They cannot be faid to be abſo-
lutely wandering tribes, but their huts being merely a tew croſs ſticks covered with
branches, ſo as to defend them from the rain and fun, they frequently quit their habi-
tations, if they ſee occaſion, and eftabliſh them elſewhere. The
whites, and have been ſerviceable againſt the runaway negroes. Tr

Dr. Bancroft obſerves, that the inhabitants of Dutch Guiana are either whites,


blacks, or the reddiſh brown aboriginal natives. The promitcuous intercourſe of theſe


different people have generated ſeveral intermediate caſts, whoſe colours depend on
their degree of conſanguinity to either whites, blacks, negroes, or Indians.

Sol, PRoDucTIONSs, TRADE, &c.| Through the whole country runs a ridge of
oyſter-ſhells, nearly parallel to the coaſt, but three or four leagues from it, of a con-


fiderable breadth, and from four to eight feet deep, compoſed of thells exactly of the
ſame nature as thoſe which form the preſent coaſt : from this and other circumſtances,


there is great reaſon to believe that the land, from that diſtance from the ſea, is all
new land, reſcued from
cauſe. |


On each fid


500 to 2000 acres each, in number about 550 in the whole colony, producing at pre-


fent annually about 16,000 hhds. of ſugar, 12,000,0001b. coffee, 700, ooo lb. cocoa,
8 50, ooolb. cotton: all which articles (cotton excepted) have fallen off within 15 years,


at leaſt one third, owing


other cauſes. Of the proprietors of theſe plantations, not above 80 reftde here. The


e of the rivers and creeks are fituated the Plantations, containing from


s to bad management, both here and in Holland, and to


y do not ſhun the


the ſea, either by ſome revolution in nature, or other unknown


fagar plantations have many of them water-mills, which being much more profitable


than others, and the fituation of the colony admitting of them, will probably become
general; of the reſt, ſome are worked by mules, others by cattle, but from the low-
neſs of the country none by the wind. The eſtates are for the

for as much or more than they are worth, which greatly diſcourages any improvements


which might otherwiſe be made. Was it not for the unfortunate fituation of the


colony in this and other reſpects, it is certainly capable of being brought to a great


height of improvement ; dyes, gum, oils, plants for medical purpoſes, &c. might, and-
Rum might be


undoubtedly will, at ſome future period, be found in abundance.

diſtilled here; indigo, ginger, rice, tobacco, have been, and may be farther culti-
vated, and many other articles. In the woods are found many kinds of good and
durable timber, and ſome woods for ornamental purpoſes, particularly a kind of ma-
hogany called copic. The ſoil is perhaps as rich and as luxuriant as any in the world;
it is generally a rich, fat, clayey earth, lying in ſome places above the level of the
rivers at high water, (which riſes about 8 feet) and in moſt places below it. W henever,


from a.continued courſe of cultivation for many years, a piece. of land becomes im- |


«1 3 Es | os poveriſhed,


greateſt part mortgaged


oF


TV


DUTCH AMERTCA 59)
years, and thereby regains its fertility, and in the mean time a new piece of wood land is
cleared. This country has never experienced thoſe dreadful ſcourges of the Weſt Indies,
hurricanes; and droughts from the lowneſs of the land it has not to fear, nor has the


produce ever been deſtroyed by inſects or by the blaſt. In ſhort, this colony, by pro-


per management, might become equal to Jamaica, or any other. Land is not want-
ing; it is finely interſected by noble rivers, and abundant creeks ; the foil is of the
beſt kind; it is well ſituated, and the climate is not very unhealthy, and is growing
better, and will continue fo to do, the more the country is cleared of its woods, and
cultivated, 2


AxIMALS, Frsn, SERPENTS, &c.| The rivers abound with fiſh, ſome of which


are good ; at certain ſeaſons of the year there 1s plenty of turtle. The woods


abound with plenty of deer, hares, and rabbits, a kind of, buffaloe, and two ſpecies


of wild hogs, one of which (the peccary) 1s remarkable tor having its navel on the


The woods are infeſted with ſeveral ſpecies of tygers, but with no other ravenous


or dangerous animals. The rivers are rendered dangerous by alligators, from four
to ſeven feet long, and a man was a ſhort time fince craſhed between the jaws
of a fiſh, but its name is not known. Scorpions and tarantulas are found here of a


large ſize and great venom, and other inſects without number, ſome of them very


dangerous and troubleſome. The torporific cel alſo, the touch of which, by means of


the barc hand or any conductor, has the effect of a ſtrong electrical ſhock. Serpents
alſo, ſome of which are venomous, and others, as has been afferted by many credible


perſons, are from 25 to 50 feet long. In the woods are monkeys, the ſloth, and par-
Tots in all their varieties; alſo ſome birds of beautiful plumage, among others the


, ” 3
flamingo, but few or no ſinging birds. 3
MILITARY STRENGTH, GOVERNMENT, pr The river Surrinam is guarded by a


ſort and two redoubts at the entrance, and a fort at Paramaribo, but none of them of


any ſirength, ſo that one or two frigates would be ſufficient to make themſelves maſters


of the whole colony, and never was there a people who more ardently withed for a


change of government than the inhabitants of this colony do at this time. The man
grievances they labour under, and the immenſe burthen of taxes, which almoſt threaten
the ruin of the colony, make them in ſome meaſure excuſable in their general defire


to change the Dutch for a Britiſh or French government. The colony is not imme-


ciately under the States General, but under a company in Holland, called the Direc-
tors of Surrinam, (a company firſt formed by the States General, but now ſupplying its


own vacancies) by them are appointed the governor and all the principal officers both


civil and military. The interior government confifts of a governor, and a ſupreme


aud inferior council; the members of the latter are choſen by the governor from a.


double nomination of the principal inhabitants, and thoſe of the former in the ſame,
manner. By theſe powers, and by a magiſtrate preſiding over all criminal affairs,
juſtice is executed, and laws are eaacted neceſſary for the interior government of the
colony; thoſe of a more general and public nature are enacted by the directors, and
require no approbation here by the court. | 2

The colony is guarded farther by about 1600 regular troops paid by the directors.


Theſe troops, together with a corps of about 250 free negroes, pug by the court here,
t


and another ſmall corps of chaſſeurs, and ſo many ſlaves as the court thinks fit to


order from. the planters, from tune to time, are diſperſed at poſts placed at proper diſ-


t1nces on a Cordon, ſurrounding the colony on the land fide, in order, as far as poſ-
| | 4 G 2 | ble,


poveriſhed, (for manure is not known here) it is laid under water for a certain number of


|


* -
1 a
. ee ee fr I TA oy nagar ew,


— PP—PPP c ˙ ˙ .


38 ABORIGINAL AMERICA.


ſibko, to defend the diſtant plantations and the colony in general, from the attacks of

ſoveral dangerous bands of runaway {laves, which from very tmall beginnings have, from

the natural prolifteacy of the negro race, and the continual addition of freſh fugitives,

| arrived at ſuch an height as to have coſt the country very great ſums of money and
| much loſs of men, without being able to do thete negroes any effectual injury.“

Hisroxr.] This colony was firſt poſſeſſed by the French as early as the year 1630

er 40, and.was abandoned by them on account of its unhealthy climate. In the year

16 50 it was taken by ſome Engliſumen, and in 1662 a charter was granted by Cha. II,


| 8 About this time it was conſiderably augmented by the ſettlement of a number of
| Jews, who had been driven out of Cayenne and the Brazils, whoſe deſcendants (with
| ____ efhep Jews) compote at prefent one half of the white inhabitants of the colony, and


are allowed. great privileges. In 1667 it was taken by the Dutch, and the Englith
Having got poſſeſſion about the ſame time of the then Dutch colony of New York,
each party retained its conqueſt; the Engliſh planters moſt of them retired to Jamaica,
leaving their ſlaves behind them, whoſe language is ſtill Engliſh, but ſo corrupted as
not to be underſtood at firſt by an Engliſhman. 5 ps


— — n —


ABORIGINAL AMERICA,


Or that. Part which the ABORIGINAL IX DIANS poſſeſs.


: AM AZ ON IA.


SiruATION AND EXTENT.
Miles. 5


Length 1400 1 the Equator and 20˙
Breadth goo þ between { South Latitode.


L 2 OUNDED north, by Terra Firma and Guiana; eaſt, by Brazil;
BounDar ms] BB ſouth, by Rs; wet. by Fer, ĩ ha :
Rrvers. | The river Amazon is the largeſt in the known world. This river, ſo
famous for the length of its courſe, that great vaſſal of the fea, to which it brings the
tribute it has received from ſo many of its own vaſlals, ſeems to be produced by in-
numerable torrents, which ruſh down with amazing impetuoſity from the eaſtern de--
clivity of the Andes, and unite in a ſpacious plain to form this immenſe river. In its
progreſs of 3300 miles, it receives the waters of a prodigious number of rivers, . ſome
of which come from far, and are very broad and deep. It is interſperſed with an in-
finite number of iſlands, which are too often overflowed to admit of culture. It falls.
into the Atlantic ocean under the equator, and is there 150 miles broad.

CLiMATE, SOIL, AND PRODUCTIONS. | The air is cooler in this country: than could
be expected, conſidering it is ſituated in the torrid zone. 'This-1s partly owing to the
* * The foregoing account of Surrinam was principally taken from a leiter of Mr. Apthorp to his father.

1 | See American Apollo. ; EST IT Oro nn mM


| ;


heavy


heavy rains which occaſion the rivers to overflow their banks one half of the year,


and partly to the clondineſs of the weather, which obſcures the ſun great part of the


time he is above the horizon. During the rainy ſeaſon the country is lubject to dread-
ful forms of thunder and lightning.


The ſoil is extremely fertile, producing cocoa nuts, pine apples, bananas, plantains, -
and a great variety of tropical fruits; cedar, redwood, pak, ebony, logwood, and


many other torts of dying wood ; together with tobacco, ſugar canes, cotton, potatoes,


baltam, honey, &c. The woods abound with tygers, wild boars, buffaloes, deer, and


game of various kinds. The rivers and lakes abound with fiſh. Here are alſo ſea-


cows and turtles ; but the crocodiles and water — render fiſhing a dangerous
employment.


Womrx.] As early as the time of Hercules and Theſeus, the Greeks had imagined |


the exiſtence of a nation of Amazons; with this fable they embelliſhed the hiſtory of
all their heroes, not excepting that of Alexander; and the Spaniards, infatuated with


this dream of antiquity, transferred it to America. They reported that a republic of |


female warriors actually exiſted in America, who did not live in ſociety with men, and


only admitted them once a year for the purpoſes of procreation. To give the more
credit to this romantic ſtory, it was reported, not without reaſon, that the women iii


America were all ſo unhappy, and were treated with ſuch contempt 'and inhumanity
by the men, that many of them had agreed to ſhake off the yoke of their tyrants. It


Vas further ſaid, that being accuſtomed to follow the men into the foreſts, and to carry
their proviſions and baggage when they went out to fight or to hunt, they muſt neceſ-
farily have been inured to hardſhips, and rendered capable of forming ſo bold a refolu-


tion. Since this ſtory has been propagated, infinite pains have been taken to find out -
the truth of it, but no traces could ever be diſcovered.


Narivks.] Theſe natives, like all the other Americans, are of a good ſtature; have


handſome features, long black hair, and copper complexions. They are ſaid to have
a taſte for the imitative arts, eſpecially painting and ſculpture, - and make good
mechanics. 'Their cordage 1s made of the barks of trees, and their ſails of cotton,
their hatchets of tortoiſe ſhells or hard ſtones ; their chiſſels, plains, and wimbles, of the
| horns and teeth of wild beaſts, and their canoes are trees hollowed. They ſpin and
weave cotton cloth, and build their houſes with wood and clay, and thatch them with


reeds. Their arms in general are darts and javelins, bows and arrows, with targets


of cane or fiſh ikins. The ſeveral nations are governed by their chiefs or cachiques;
it being obſervable that the monarchical form of government has prevailed almoſt uni-
verſally, both among the ancient and modern barbarians, doubtleſs, on aceount of its
requiring a much Jeſs refined policy than the republican ſyſtem. The regalia, which
diſtinguiſh the chiefs are a crown of parrots' feathers, a chain of tygers teeth or claws,


which hangs round the waiſt, and a wooden ſword.


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. I The mind of a good man is pleaſed with the reflection,
that any part of South America has eſcaped the ravages of European conquerors.
This country has hitherto remained unſubdued. The original inhabitants enjoy” their '


native freedom and independence. |


PATAGONTA,


ABGAIGINAL AMERICA ug!


|
;
}
4
N
{
J
?
a


— 7 —— — — co —
— —ͤÜ—— — — — OE ITY WS.


1 9 1:
PATAGONIA.


SGrrvariox AND EETENT.
Miles.

Length

5 beben en [35 5* and 545 South tao.


. OUNDED north, by Chili and Para ua; eaſt, by the Ae
Bors buntes ] B ocean; ſouth, by the Straits of Magellan; 5 welt; by 828 Pacific ocean.
CLIMATE, SOIL, AND Proves. The climate is ſaid to be much colder in this
country, than in the north, under the ſame parallels of latitude ; which is imputed to
its being in the vicinity of the Andes, which paſs through it, being covered with eter—
nal ſnow. It is almoſt impoſſible to ſay what the ſoil would produce, as it 18 not at
all cultivated by the natives. The northern parts are covered with wood, amon
which is an inexhauſtible fund of large timber; but towards the ſouth it is ſaid there
is not a fingle tree large enough to be of uſe to mechanics. There are, however, good
paſtures, which feed incredible numbers of horned cattle and horſes, firſt carried there
by the Spaniards, and now increaſed in an amazing degree.
INHABITANTS. | dam, or mogt is inhabited by a variety of Indian tribes, among which
are the Patagons, from whom the country takes its name; the Pampas and the Coffores,
They all live upon fiſh and game, and what the earth produces ſpontancouſly, Their
— are thatched, and, notwithſtanding the rigour of the climate, they wear no other
clothes than a mantle made of ſeal ſkin, or the ſkin of ſome beaſt, and that they
throw off when they are in action. They are exceedingly hardy, brave, and active,
making uſe of their arms, which are bows and arrows headed with flints, with amazing
_ dexterity. _ |
4 8 who firſt Aboard the Arai which bear his name, and after him
Commodore Biron, have reported, that there exiſts, in theſe regions, a race of giants;
but others, who. have failed this way, contradict the report. Upon the whole we may
| conclude that this ſtory is like that of the female republic of Amazons.
© The Spaniards once built a fort upon the ſtraits, and left a garriſon 1 in it to arvrant
any other European nation paſſing that way into the Pacific ocean; but moſt of the
men periſhed by hunger, whence the place obtained the name of Port Famine; and
ſince that fatal Sn. no nation has attempted to plant colonics in Patagonia. As to
the religion or government of thete ſavages, we have no certain information. Some
have reported, that theſe people believe in inviſible powers, both good and evil; and


that they pay a tribute of gratitact to the one, and deprecate the wrath and vengeance
of the other.


GExNTRAL. Gr Alan UPON « SOUTH, AMERICA.


We have now traverſed the ſeveral provinces of that extenſive region, which is com-
prehended between the iſthmus of Darien and the fiſty- fourth degree of South latitude.
We have taken a curſory view of the rivers, the foil, the climate, the productions, the
commerce, the inhabitants, &c. It only remains now, that we ſhould make ſuch other
general obſervations as naturally occur upon the ſubject.

The hiſtory of Columbus, together witli his bold and adventurous actions in the
diſcovery of this country, are ſufficiently known to all who have paid any attention to


hiſtory.


ABORIGINAL AMERICA. "box


| hiſtory. His clevated mind ſuggeſted to him ideas ſuperior to any other man of his:
age, and his aſpiring genius prompted him to make greater and more noble efforts for
new diſcoveries. He crofled the extenſive Atlantic, and brought to view a world
unheard of by the people of the ancient hemiſphere. This excited an enterpriſing,
avaricious ſpirit among the inhabitants of Europe ; and they flocked to America for
the purpoſes of carnage and plunder. Accordingly, a ſcene of barbarity has been acted,
of which South America has been the principal theatre, which ſhocks the human mind,
and almoſt ſtaggers belief. No ſooner had the Spaniards ſet foot upon the American
continent, than they laid claim to the ſoil, to the mines, and to the ſervices of the
natives, Wherever they came. Countries were invaded, kingdoms were overturned,
innocence was attacked, and happineſs had no aſylum. Deſpotiſm and cruelty, with

all their terrible ſcourges, attended their advances in every part. They went forth, they
conquered, they ravaged, they deſtroyed. No deceit, no cruelty was too great to be
made uſe of to fatisfy their avarice. Juſtice was diſregarded, and mercy formed no

art of the character of theſe inhuman conquerors. They were intent only on the pro-
ſecution of ſchemes moſt degrading and moſt ſcandalous to the human character. In
South America, the kingdoms of Terra Firma, of Peru, of Chili, of Paragua, of
Brazil, and of Guiana, ſucceſſively fell a ſacrifice to their vicious ambition. The
hiſtory of their ſeveral reductions is too lengthy to be inſerted in a work of this kind.*
Let us then turn from theſe diſtreſſing ſcenes ; let us leave the political world, where
nothing but ſpectacles of horror are reſented to our view: ; where ſcenes of bloed and
carnage diſtract the imagination; whe re the avarice, injuſtice, and inhumanity of men
furniſh nothing but uneaſy ſenſations ; ; Tet us leave theſe, I ſay, and enter the natural
world; whoſe Fas are conſtant and uniform, and where beautiful, grand, and ſublime
objects continually preſent themſelves to our view.

We have already given a deſcription of thoſe beautifal and ſpacious rivers which
every where interſect this country ; the next thing that will engage our attention is that
immenſe chain of mountains, which runs from one end of the continent to the other.
At fight of theſe enormous maſles, which riſe to ſuch prodigious heights above the
humble ſurface of the earth, where almoſt all mankind have fixed their refidence ; of
thoſe maſſes, which in one part are crowned with impenetrable and ancient foreſts,
that have never reſounded with the ſtroke of the hatchet, and in another, raiſe their
' towering tops, and ſtop the clouds in their courſe, while in other parts they keep the
traveller at a diſtance from their ſummits, either by ramparts of ice that ſurround them,
or from vollies of flame iſſuing forth from the frightful and yawning caverns ; maſſes
giving riſe to impetuous torrents defcending with Areadful noiſe from their open ſides,
to rivers, fountains, and boiling ſprings: at theſe appearances, I fay, PF beholder
is fixed in aſtoniſhment.
The height of the moſt elevated point in the Pyrenees 3 is, according to Mr. Coch,
6,646 feet. The height of the mountain Gemmi, in the canton of Berne, is 10, 110
feet. The height of the pike of Teneriffe is 13,178 feet. The height of the Chimbo-
razo, the moſt elevated point of the Andes, is 20,280 feet. Upon compariſon, the
higheſt part of the Andes 1s 7,102 feet higher than the pike of 4 eneriffe, the moſt ele-
vated mountain known in the ancient hemiſphere.


a The reader will find the beſt hiſtory. a thelp tragicat. Jenes in Dr. Robertſon's Hiſory of South:
nerica.


| 6602)


THIS LIST OP


AMERICAN QUADRUPEDS


Ts borrowed from Ar. PexxAxT's Second Edition of his Ax Zoorocy, page CCLLXIX
x of the InTRoDVcTION, The references are to the Second Edition of his Hiſtory of Quadru.
| 8 pHeds, publiſhed in 1792. — e Editor muſt expreſs his Gratitude to Mr. PENN ANT for
1 His obliging Permiſſion. ERECT TR VVV


TABLE OF QUADRUPEDS.


GENUS, 1 HIST, QUADR. | OLD WORLD. Ie WORLD.
I. Ox. Biſon, No. 6. In parts of Lithuania, and To the weſt of Canada,
4 | about mount Caucaſus;| andas low as Louiſiana.
ö except there, univerſally} In New Mexico, on the
5 =] domeſticated, | welſtern fide of North
| 5 America.
| Muſk, No.9 To the north of Hudſon's


fo Bay, from Churchill river
to lat. 73, and among
1 the Chriſtinaux, and in
3 | 3-4 Te I New Mexico.
II. SukkEr. [Wild, P- 36. Sardinia. Corſica. Crete. Suſpected to be Hund in
ES 2 TDNorth of India. Perſian California; but not on
4 Alps. About the Onon| the beſt authorities.
| and Argun, in Siberia.
| Mongalia, to lat. 60.
Eaſt of the Lena, and
3 | quite to Kamtſchatka. TE
III. Dzzz. Mooſe, No. 42. Norway. Sweden, tolat.64. Hudſon's Bay. Canada.
5 3 | Ruſſia. Siberia, as low as | NovaScotia. New Eng-
|


— —
N nm td. — tt. 4 * 2 i


| lat. 53. As far eaſt as land; and near the nor-
1 Lake Baikal; and in the thern part of the river


north of China to the] Ohio.
N I ñnorth of Corea. lat. 45.“ 1
| | Rem, No. 43. Lapland. Norway. Samoi-|Hudſon's Bay. Northern
] edea. Along the Arctic] parts of Canada. La-
" "IM | coaſts, to Kamtichatka.| brador. Iſland of New -
| . nenn moun-| ſoundland.

i tains


nrr : * Or lat, 42. according to Mr, Zimmerman's new map.


f {


—


TABLE OF QUADRUPE
"GENUS, = HIST. QUADR.


' OLD" WORLD. : |
tains to 8 in lat. |
67. 10. About Lake
Baikal. Spitzbergen.


|


e


"08 Stag


rica uſually called the


Jefferſon, p. 88. This


as yet has never been


1 Mexican Roe, "2
5 iS No. 2
Roe, No. 51. "TOR 8 e Moſt


Ruſſia. Scotland.


D I G IT AT E D


DEV. I.


| partof Europe. In Aſia,

1 from the circle to Perſia.

4 2 Kamtſchatka. All parts
| of Africa.


140.); circle. Iceland. Spitz-
bergen. Greenland. Fin-


8 North of Sibe-


. — Ca teile


ere Fox, | In all. parts of Europe.


No. 139. |


| 35 Greenland. | |
Stag, No. 45. Norway, and moſt part! From Canada, over all
Fa of Europe to the ſouth. parts of North America.

— In the north of Afia. ( Mexico.

China. : Barbary.; - E...

| In various parts of North

i America; from New| ©

» If England, to the Allega--

| _ ny Chain behind Penn-

TW Ce ſylvana. It is in Ame“


round-horned Elk. See


4 fullydeſcribed. Commu-

{ nicated by Mr. Pennant

from his MS. notes.

7 Virginian, No. 46. ; — — ps |


part of Europe, 3


ria. Kamtſchatka, and


NEW WORLD.


1
4


1


f


From the provinces ſouth


of Canada to Florida,


Perhaps in Guiana,


of America? Mexico.


in Canada ?


| {Worr, No. 137. Prom the Artic circle|From Hudſon's Bay to the
to the moſt ſouthern} moſt ſouthern parts of


North America.


|


|


Arctic Fox, Ne-1 With the whole Arctic Hudſors Bay. The iſles
| in the high latitudes on


the weſtern fide of Ame-
rica.


From Hudfſon' S Bay, eroſs


and the cold and tem- the continent to the
! - RH: - ©: perntet Fax


DS. - if


\ 8 northweſtern parts


According to Charley oix.


604 | TABLE OP QUADRUPEDS,


GENUS. , | HIST, QUADR, | OLD WORLD, | NEW WORLD
: | perate parts of Aſia. Fox Iſles. Labrador,
mſchatka, and its] Newfoundland. Cana-
fartheſt iſles. Iceland. da. Not further _
| | F - „ only, |
| . Brandt Fox, in Nes
| | Jun New Baden
Grey. No. 142. — — TFrom New England to
. 28 8 ; | the ſouthern Td of
| „„ North America.
CCW — In Louiſiana.
V. Car. Puma, No. 160. — _ From Canada to Florida;
Tx 1 ; Et: | thence throug h Mex-
* A 5 ico, quite to Quito in
1 i )
Is 1 Lynx, No. 170. Foreſts of the north of From Canada, over moſt
| Europe, andmany of the] parts of North America.
| | CW | .
| | ; of Afia, and the moun-|
' Þ tains in the north of
| „ India.“ 5
1 {Bay Lynx, No. 0 OO. — In the province of New
| [ $71.3]. „5
. 5 (Mountain, No. 3 — — J carolina, and perhapsother
» 1 } 168. parts of North America.
| VI. Bear. Polar, No, 175. Within the whole polar The ſame in America;
SPE. „ circle of Europe and alſo as low as Hudſon's
5 3 Bay and Labrador.
Black, No. 174. Jeſo Maſima, north of Ja- In all parts of North Ame-
3 1 pan; perhaps in Japan. rica.
Brown, ibid. In moſt parts of Europe, To the north-weſt of
1 north and ſouth. The] Hudſon's Bay, and on
1 | ſame in Aſia, even as] the weſtern ſide of Ame-
| - far as. Arabia. Bar-] rica. About Nootka
- bary. Ceylon. Kamtſ- Sound. On the Andes


chatka. of Peru.

North of Norway. 1 As far north as the Copper

J] land. North of Sibe-| River, and ſouth as the
ria. Kamtſchatka. | country between lake
; Huron and Superior.

| On the weſtern fide of

North America.

2 2 From New Englandto Po-

123 rida. Mexico. Ifles of

Maria, near Cape Cori-

'} entes, in the South Sea.

VII. BADER.


* As Thave been affared by Doctor Pallas, ſince the publication of my Hiſtory of Quadrupeds.
4 Shaw's Travels, 249.
1 Condamine's Travels, 82,—Ulks' 8 i. 461.


: . #
. m :


GENUS,


VII . BADGRER.


IX. WexssL.


X. OrrER.


XI. Har.


| | Pekan, No.
| *
1 | Fiſher, No.
[Siriated, No. 21 7.


rege, No. 228.
| Yaik. Poland, Lithu-|


[


TABLE OF QUADRUPEDS.


HIST, QUADR.


dhe


| . 179.


3


|


]
.


1 No. 200.


ö


204.
205.
201.


Viſon, No.


No.


[Skunk, No. 218.


226.


243.


Alpine, No. 248.


.


Common, No.


181.
Common, No.
3 192. |
1 |
[Stoat, No. 193.


:
| 1
Pine Martin, } North of Europe. Rare

in France. Only in the
| weſt of Siberia. In


4
.4


+


202.


{ Common, No.


| Varying, No. 242. ;


American, No. ] |


|


,


ern


F


4 .
From the


- OLD WORLD.
In the ſouth of Norway,
and all the more ſouth-


In the temperate


Europe


and the Kuril iſles. E.


China. E.


— —


|
E”
Siberia. Kamtghakka Ku-


ril iſles.


— —


po r 1 ; —


Northern Europe and Aſia.


Kamtſchatka. E.
About the banks of the


Finland.


ania.


Isea, No. 230. Kamtſchatka. Kuril iſles.


DIV. IL


ria.Kamtſchatka,Grecn-
land. E. 1


Altaic chain:
to lake Baikal ; thence


|


4H 2


to Kamtſchatka, 4


7
1


Moſt parts of Euro
Siberia. Kamtſchatka.
| Barbary. E.


Sons ne vis. Ruſſia. Sibe-


|


8 "Os


parts of Europe.
parts
| of Aſia, as far as China
3 3 caſtward. E.
VIII. Oros8UM. 7h Virginian, No. }
|


a [Hudſon's Bay.


All the northern parts of
and Aſia; and
as far as Kamtſchatka|


*** 1 * i... 2 a


I


605


NEW WORLD.


In the neighbourhood of


Hudſon's Bay. Terra
de Labrador, and as
low as Pennſylvania.


As far north as Canada,
and from thence to the
Braſils and Peru.

New -

| foundland. As far ſouth
as Carolina.

Hudſon's Bay, and as low


Canada.


Northern parts of North


America, quite to the


South Sea.
Hudſon's Bay. Canada.


Canada.
Canada.


| Hudſon! 8 Bay. New Eng-


land. Pennſylvania.
Pennſylvania to Louiſiana.


FromHudſon'sBaytoPeru.
From Hudſon's Bay to


Louiſiana.
From New Jerſey to Ca-


rolina.


Weſtern coaſts of America.


Hudſon's Bay.


| Cook's river.


From Hudſon's Bay to the


extremityofNorth Ame-
rica.

Aleutian iſles. Poſſibly the
weſt of North America.


as Newfoundland and


About


* XII. BRAVER.


606 TABLE OF QUADRUPEDS.


GENUS. | HIST. QUVADR. | OLD WORLD. | NEW WORLD...
XII. Beavex. | Caſtor, No. 251.|Scandinavia, About the From Hudſon's Bay to:
| leneſei and Konda. Inj Louiſiana.

Caſan, and: about the


|


| |... LK. _ BY
Muſk, No. 252. — — From Hudſon's Bay to.
L Lowfſiana.
XIII. Porcu- E anada, No. 257. _ _ at Hudſon's: Bay to
PINE. d einn
XIV. MaRror. Quebec, No. 259. — — Canada.
Maryland, EA 'N 5 8380 — N Pennſylvania to the
Hoary, No. 261.| — — {North of North America.
Tail-leſs, No. 265. — — Hudſon's Bay.


Earleſs, No. 263. Bohemia: Auftria. Hun- Weſtern fide of North.
JJ I gary. From the Occa| Americas.

| over the temperate parts ws

| of Siberia. About Ja-

34 me” ff.. Rots.: Gamiichatts.
XV. SaviRREL.jHudion, No. 274. 55


— — Hudſon's Bay. Labrador.
Grey, No. 272. . — : New England to Peru and
% Fe es, Chili.
Black, No. 273. — — New England to Mexico.
| Flying, No. 283 — — From the ſouthern part of


| Hudſon's Bay to Mex-


Ir TC | ico.
. No. 284. — — Virginia.
| jSevern. River, 4. — — Hudſon's Bay.
XVI. Don- Striped, No. 286. Siberia, as high as lat 65. Hudſon's Bay to Louiſiana.


MOUSE. | j

Engliſh? No 28g. Sweden, and all Europe |

| | ſouth. E. Carolina?

NPE Man: Black, No. 297. All Europe. Many of the The 1 among the Blue
| | |
: South Sea. iſlands. | E.] Mountains.

Amer. No. 299. Mongolia. ; North America.

| Water, No. 300.|From Lapland to the ſouth From Canada to Carolina.

55 of Europe. From Peterſ-|

burgh to Kamtſchatka,|

: + and as low as the Caſ-

I | -pian fea, and Ferſia. Raf. - BH


| py 8
| 4


—
*


5 Moudo, No. 301. Univerſal. E. Among the rocks, with
Eo ES | 2 the Black Rat.
I Field, No. 302. All 8 Not beyond Hudſon's Bay. New Lork.
tes] | the Urallian chain. E. .
Virginian; — . Virginia.

| re N


e Labrador, ED 0 — rmafons Bay. Labrador.
| No, 295+ 5 1 et SE .
YES © i Hudſon's:


| HIST. QUADR. |
Hudſon's,
No. 319
Meadow,


No. 322.


GENUS,


j


ö
|
.
|
4


Hare-tailed ?
TE No. 320.
F ed, No. 341.


XVIII. f
XIX. Mor.
Radiated,


No. 351.
Brown, No. 353.


XX. Warnvs. Artic, No. 373:


3
Common,


XXI. SEAL.
„ No. 3755


}


Rubbon,No. 1
Great No. 38a.


309


|


1
"Pane,
No. 381.


4 FATPs No. 385.


"IVY No. 28 3.
5 Vrane, No. 387.


Leonine, No. 389.

4 Jo Fre 1 3

XXII. MaNATI Whale tailed,
No. 390.


]


Lon ele
*


|


Y
.
11
=


E
x


Hooded, No. 28 ;.


bs =


1

Iceland. White Sea. Kamtſ-

;; chatka. my

Kamiſchacka. New Zea-
land. .


TABLE OF QUADRUPEDS.
|


OLD WORLD.


i


Sweden. All temperate


to the Irtiſch. E.


Siberia.


Dare


Kamt-
ſchatka.


Ruſſia. In Siberia only


607


NEW WORLD.
Same places.


Hudſon's Bay. Newfound-
land.


Hadfon s Bay.


A


Hudſon's Bay. Carolina, |


New York. Interior parts


of Hudſon's Bay.


3 Lork.


- 9 "af F
D I V. III.


K


| Staten,”
| NovaZemhla. The coaſt}


the ſouth of Behring's
ſtreights, as low'as lat.
62. 50.

All the European. and
80 northern Aftatic ſeas,
even to the fartheſt


'The Kuril iſles.

* and Kamtſ-
chatka. E.

White Sea. Iceland. Spitz-
bergen. Kamtſchatka.


Kamtſchatka.


Behring s iſle, and near the


[Sca Ape, p. 392


|


iſle of St. Mauri itius.


of the. Frozen Sea. And
on the Aſiatic fide, to


;
north. Kamtſchatka. E. |


Ge ecnland. | |


5


WE


| New Georgia.


| Weſt of America. Streights
1


| New Vork.
Hudſon's Bay. Gulph of
St. Laurence. On the
. weſtern fide of America,


Northern {eas of America.


Welt of North America.


There can be no doubt
that every ſpecies of
Seal is found on the
American coaſt.


Weſt of America, and from
the iſle of Gallipagos to


of Magellan. Statenland.
Falkland iſles.
Weſt of America.


Weſt of America.


DIV.


603 $ WEST INDIES.
.
cenus. J NIST. QUADR. 1 OLD WORLD. NEW WORLD,
XXIII. Bar. |New York, {New Zealand. | New York.
| No. 403. } FF Yo rx Ks
Long-haired, 4452 — Carolina.
| ” No.B3-H- > -- „
Noctule, No. 40). France. E. IH Hudſon's Bay.


WEST INDIA ISLANDS.


ETWEEN North and South America He a multitude of iſlands, which are called
the Weſt Indies, and which, ſuch as are worth cultivation, now belong to five


=
European powers, as Great Britain, Spain, France, Holland, Borg, Denmark, as
follows: N
; The Barren claim
Jamaica, — © Vincent,
Barbadoes, s Mens. : :
St. Chriſtopher's, _ Montſerrat,
Antigua, Barbuda,
Grenada, and the Gre- Anguilla,
nadines, Bermudas, 1
| Dominica, The 2 Inands. |
Sram claims 111 55
Rn Cuba, 3 Trinidad,
r of st. Domingo, Margaretta, TINY
* or Hiſpaniola, Juan Fernandes, in the Pa-
Porto Rico, dcdific Ocean,


The Fr ENCH claim


Part of St. Domingo, "= Bartholomew, Deſeada,
Martinico,


g and —
Gaudalupe, Fobaga.*
| St. Lucia,


* Since the commencement of the preſent war, 0 Engl nation has ken from the French the iſland
of Tobago ; and by intelligence received while this work was in the preſs, it a


pears that great part of St,
Domingo has ſurrendered to the Engliſh arms, an cxawple which will . be followed by all the other
French ſugar iſlands in the Weſt Indies, -
2 : The
KA,
ts Hs lt err OO e e Boas; eee Lee een ae eee eee


ö eG ed ee Cn re Re Rn _


*


7 =A V. 4 Sy 4


VND


—


=


Chatham Ba


Inte ot (el W 2) | 5 i
— | 3 | | A Ty E Spin un rovidence Guahani Cat [: )
X I C 1 \ Santo als S. Salvador
| i 9 Watlands ” |


” * : L 177? | N Lock Wy nr |
Ce — a | 4 IAnguill <1 Zr bh luna _ Manna ice
„ J— eln, ad ar RS. OY rooted 7
> t VOOR e


_ 3


Jardin Ael Per. — 5
D | = Ichlins her


» » þ ES
( ape SS Antonio =


4.
241 78/5 A, pines


1414. {1d


9 BAune 3
S'Yaoo
.. _ ©


= | S EZ . umel | | ; | |
7 UCATAN a i; B A * O F


Inther are aan


VA
e


% F | .
255 HO N D UR AS


e.


une,


—
> << Swan 1


A
Ks attan Y 0


ZE Guan, 17


— - —


n


VERAPAZ ©


—


3 — 4 55 833
| I, TS, FEES * | | | * |
11 ON Dt -R = N 1 1 1 I * 55


Ilie.


*
Erangnans


HD 08


„


i
Britiſh Niles _ -
_ =
| 76 e 7.0 20 256 30 5 =
. is wen FT ; * = F Y
In. Id | car ev : —. 2


I} ene, 17


E Blorfields


2 ,agoon


S! Martha Þ


D SAN


a


— — S' Juan CARTAGE vA 5


COSTA RICA |
lortobelt,


*


(onception A |
——_ DARIEN


.


Culf of
. rie


— ͤ Wn HE ·A ] ꝶ . P innerer eee
. PI 8 1 0 2
-
, 0
90 B53 8 0 7 5


Publiſhed Ju 9. 1794. tr l. Stockdale


or Cat 1. 0 |


lvador a
M tels 25 |


4


7


1
5


8 — Altwoods A, *


— Crook 6 9


2 Wa nguana


[chlins her |
The Creos «ff
* or. es argues
CE . =
Oe
8
co\
a of 3 18
3 Francet-
\\= Old (,


= = o a aha
Lot. 1 OI.
222 Sy, -


_ , MS DOM INGO


, „ .
. Louis


FJ Samara


= (bo


te


2


5 *
AN 5


(Curacao,


J/ Juen- ne


C. Fla 7 (ele Oehibaco


— —


—


: CU „on un
uehlo | Y |
OF' = OULF OF


E


VENEZUE


— —


——


—


CARACAS


DIANTA
Mara ca 7 F-


A


MARTHA T L 2 4


.F 1


I Stockdale . Piecadilt


9 Leon


A £ # 7


Lu —— n uu THI vey | I


WEST INDIES


Jrom the beſt


AUTHORITIES.


Anegada
Anguilla
0 S* Martin Hatuda
Gr


TY Devvada 5 |
Fe des Chatearur re)


+ 0 Marie Galante


—


Oben 22
F''Rera Martinico m=


—


nM 1


Grate


W |
F<, 1 S's ef} Barbadoe


S' Vincent's.


Beeew x7 Ls


A —
k *
„
| * lartuacou | *
Granada
2 Tobago
C


E L1 TRINIDAD


benen ES:


1 Margarita


e.


E
e Lamia Salada


1 |
1 (mana 0
* ad
2
OV


CUARAUNOS Tat


( 7 1.4 AAA


OUVAYANAS


G 4A


— uw! Aue
6\5 Longitude Weſt from London . To


co


—
—
—


20


20


r
*


8


WEST INDIES. W WM


The Durch .


The Iſland of St. Eu- Curaſſou, or Curacoa,
ſtatia, | Saba.


Dexxark claims
The Iſlands of St. Croix, © St. Thomas, and St. John' 8.


The climate in all the Weſt India iſlands is nearly the fame, allowing for theſe


accidental differences which the ſeveral ſituations and qualities of the lands themſclves.


produce. As they lie within the tropics, and the ſun goes quite over their heads,
paſſing beyond them to the north, and never returning farther from any of them than


about thirty degrees to the ſouth, they would be continually ſubjected to an extreme
and intolerable heat, if the trade winds, riſing gradually as the ſun gathers firength,
did not blow in upon them from the lea, and refreſh the air in ſuch a manner, as to
enable them to attend their concerns even under the meridian fun. On the other hand,


as the night advances, a breeze begins to be perceived, which blows ſmartly from
the land, as it were from the center, towards the ſea, to all 8 of the compaſs
at once.

By the fame comarkible Providews i in the dif poſing of thing gs, it is that when the
ſun . made a great progreſs towards the tropic of Cancer, and becomes in a manner


vertical, he draws after him ſuch a vaſt body of clouds, which ſhield them from his


direct beams, and diflolving into rain, cool the air, and refreſh the country, thirſty
with the long drought, which commonly prevails from the beginning of January to the

latter end of May.

The rains in the Weſt Indies are like floods of water, poured from the clouds with

a prodi gious impetuoſity; the rivers ſuddenly riſe ; new rivers and lakes are formed,

and in a ſhort time all the low country is under water.“ Hence it is, that the rivers


which have their ſource within the tropics, ſwell and overflow their banks at a certain


ſeaſon ; but ſo miſtaken were the ancients in their idea of the torrid zone, that the
imagined it to be dried and ſcorched up with a continual and fervent heat, and to be


for that reaſon uninhabitable ; when, in reality, ſome of the largeſt rivers of the world


have their courſe within its limits, and the moiſture 1s one of the greateſt 1 inconveniencies
of the climate in ſeveral places.


The rains make the only diſtinction of ſeaſons in the Weſt Indies; the trees are


green the whole year round; they have no cold, no froſts, no ſnows, and but rarely
fome hail ; the ſtorms of hail are, however, very violent when they happen, and the


hailſtones very great and heavy. Whether it be owing to this wa Fara. which alone
does not ſeem. to be a ſufficient cauſe, or to a greater quantity of a ſulphureous acid,


which predominates in the air of this country, metals of all kinds that are ſubject to the
action of ſuch cautes ruſt and canker in a very ſhort time; and this cauſe, —— >


much as the heat itſelf, contributes to make the climate of the Welt Indies unfriendly


and unpleaſant to an European conſtitution.


It is in the rainy ſeaſon (principally in the month of Auguſt, more rarely in July and


September) that they are aflaulted by hurricanes, the moſt terrible calamity to which


they are ſubject (as well as the people in the Eaſt Indies) from the climate; this deſtroys,


at a ſtroke, the labours of many years, and proſtrates the moſt exalted hopes of the
planter, and at the moment when he thinks himſelf out of danger. It is a ſudden and
violent ſtorm of wind, rain, thunder, and lightning, attended with a furious ſwelling of
the ſeas, and ſometimes with an earthquake; in ſhort, with edn romance which


the
v: Sec Wafer s journey acroſs the Iſthmus of Darien,


{x mY


6:0 WEST INDIES
the elements can aſſemble, that is terrible and deſtructive. Firſt, they ſee a prelude to
the enſuing havock, whole fields of ſugar canes whurled into the air, and ſcattered over
the face of the country. The ſtrongeſt trees of the foreſt are torn up by the roots, and
driven about like ſtubble ; their windmills are ſwept away in a moment; their utenſils,
the fixtures, the ponderous copper boilers, and ſtills of ſeveral hundred weight are
wrenched from the ground, and battered to pieces; their houſes are no protection; the
roots are torn off at one blaſt; whilſt the rain, which | in an hour raiſes the water five
Feet, ruſhes in upon them with an irrefiſtible violence. © |
The grand ſtaple commodity of the Weſt Indies is ſugar; this commodity was not at
all known to the Greeks and Romans, though it was made i in China, in very early
times, from whence was derived the fir knowledge of it ; but the Portugueſe were the
firſt who cultivated it in America, and brought it into requeſt, as one of the materials
of a very univerſal luxury in Europe. It is not determined whether the cane, from
which this ſubſtance is taken, be a native of America, or brought thither to their colony 8
of Brazil, by the Portugueſe, from India and the coaſt of Africa; but, however that
matter may be, in the beginning they made the moſt, as they Rill do the beſt, ſugars
which come to market in this part of the world. The 3 juice within the ſugar cane is the
moſt lively, excellent, and the leaſt cloying ſweet in nature; which, ſucked raw, has
proved extremely nutritive and wholeſome. From the molaſſes, rum is diſtilled, and
from the ſcummings of the ſugar a meaner ſpirit is procured. The tops of the canes,
and the leaves which grow upon the joints, make very good provender for their cattle;
and the refuſe of the cane, after grinding, ſerves for fire; ſo that no part of this
excellent plant is without its uſe. NT
They compute that, when things are well managed, the rum and molaſſes pay the
charges of the plantation, and the ſugars are clear gain. However, a man cannot begin
a ſugar plantation of any conſequence, not to mention the e of the land, which
is very high, under a capital of at leaſt 5000 l.
The quantity of rum and molaſſes exported from all the Britiſh Weſt India iſlands;
in 1787, 1788, and 1789, to all Parts, was, accurately, as tollows : ;


| Gallons. Gallons.
1787 Rum - 5 2061249 of which 1,660, 155 came to the United States.
Molaſſes 30, 580 do. 4, 200 „
1788 Rum - 6,770,332 do. 1,541,093 do.
4.4 Molaſſes 28,812 de. 3928 +: 0s
1789 Rum 9,492,177 do. 1,485,461 8
Krane ͤ ae, de. 1,000 1 *


The negroes in the plantations are ſubſiſted at a very eaſy rate. This is generally S
allotting to each family of them a ſmall portion of land, 3 allowing them two days in
the week, Saturday and Sunday, to cultivate it; ſome are ſubſiſted in this manner,
but others find their negroes a certain portion of Guinea or Indian cor n, and to ſome a

ſalt herring, or a ſmall portion of bacon or falt pork, a day. All the reſt of the charge
conſiſts in a cap, a ſhirt, a pair of breeches, and a blanket; and the profit of their
labour yields ten or twelve pounds annually. The price of men negroes, upon their.
firſt arrival, is from thirty to thirty-fix pounds, women and grown boys fifty ſhillings
tefs ; but ſuch negro families as are acquainted with the buſineſs of the iſlands generally


Mr. Baillie, in his debate on the motion for the abolition of the ſlave trade, April, 1792, aſſerts—that the
exports and imports to and from the Weſt India iſlands and Africa, amount annually to 10,000,000.
ſterling, which gives employment to 390,000 tons of ſhipping, and about. #000 ſeamen.


4 bring


WEST INDIES. 611
bring above forty pounds upon an average one with another; and there are inſtances
of a fingle negro man, expert in the bufinets, bringing one hundred and fifty
guineas; "and the wealth of a planter 1s generally computed from the number of ſlaves
he pofſeſſes. |
The iſlands of the Weſt 1 88 lie in the form of a bow, or ſemi-circle, ſtretching
almoſt from the coaſt of Florida north, to the river Oronoko, in the main coniment of
South America. Some call them the Caribbees, from the firſt inhabitants; though
this is a term that moſt geographers confine to the Leeward Iſlands. Sailors diſtin guiſh
them into the Windward and Leeward iſlands, with regard to the utual courſes of
ſhips, from Old Spain, or the Canaries, to Carthagena, or New Spain and Porto
Bello. The geographical tables and maps diſtinguiſh them into Great and Little
Antilles. 1 | 5


E


1 234 „


—
— —


JAMAICA.


HIS land, the moſt valuable appendage to the Britiſh dominions in America, is
one hundred and eighty miles long and fixty broad; of an oval form, lying
between 17 34 North latitude, and about the longitude of: Philadelphia: containing
3,500,000 acres of land; 600,000 of which are cleared, and about 400,000 cultivated.”
Divisions AND PorvrArrox. Jamaica is divided as follows;


Counties. Pariſhes. Towns and Acres. Inhabitants.
2 „ Villages. D
_ Middleſex 8 „ 1,305,235 .
. 1 OE. e 23,000 Whites.
Cornwall 5 10 7, 512,149 300,000 Negroes,
Total This 0 7 12, 500,000. | 323,000


This iſland is interſected with a ridge of ſteep rocks, tumbling, by the frequent
earthquakes, in a ſtupendous manner upon one another. From the rocks iſſue a vaſt
number of ſmall rivers of pure wholefome water, which fall down in cataracts, and,
together with the ſtupendous height of the mountains, and the bright verdure of the
trees through which they flow, form a moſt delightful landſcape. On each fide of this
chain of mountains are ridges of lower ones, which diminiſh as they remove from it.
On theſe, coffee grows in great plenty. The vallies and — between theſe ridges
are © level, and the foil is prodigiouſly fertile.


* If the reader i is deſirous of the fulleſt information concerning ſuch part of the Weſt India iſlands as belong
to Great Britain, he is referred to the 500 extenſive and valuable hiſtory of * 1 by Bryan Edwards,
wh publiſhed in 1793, by Mr. Stockdale, ;

41 8 The


2 —— —


612 BRITISH WEST INDIES.


The longeſt day in ſummer is about thirteen hours, and the ſhorteſt in winter about
eleven; but the moſt uſual diviſions of the ſeaſons in the Weſt Indies are into the dry
and wet ſeaſons. The air of this iſland is in moſt places exceſſively hot, and unfavour-


able to European conſtitutions ; but the cool ſea breezes, which ſet in every morning at


ten o'clock, render the heat more tolerable ; and the air upon the high grounds is tem-
perate, pure, and cooling. It lightens almoſt every night, but without much thunder,
which when it happens is terrible, and roars with aſtoniſhing loudneſs ; and the
lightning in theſe violent ſtorms frequently does great damage. In February or
March, they expect carthquakes. During the months of May and October, the rains
are extremely violent, and continue ſometimes for a fortnight together.—In the plains.
are found ſeveral falt fountains ; and in the mountains, not far from Spaniſh Town, is
a hot bath, of great medicinal virtues ! it gives relief in the dry belly-ach, which,


_ excepting the bilious and ycllow fever, is one of the moſt terrible endemial diſtempers


of Jamaica. 7 88 8 5

Sugar is the greateſt and moſt valuable production of this ifland. In 1 787, 824,706
cwt. of this article was exported to Great Britain; and in 1790, 1,185,519 cwt.
Cocoa was formerly cultivated in it to great extent. It produces alſo ginger and the
pimento, or, as it is called, Jamaica pepper, and vulgarly allſpice; the wild cinnamon
tree, whoſe bark is fo uſeful in medicine; the machineel, whoſe fruit, though uncom-
monly delightful to the eye, contains one of the worſt poiſons in nature; the maho-
gany, and of the moſt valuable quality; but this wood begins to be ſcarce, and of late


is very dear. Excellent cedars, of a large ſize and durable; the cabbage tree, remark-
able for the hardneſs of its wood, which, when dry, is incorruptible, and hardl


yields to any kind of tool ; the palma, affording oil, much efteemed by the ſavages,


doth in food and medicine; the ſoap tree, whoſe berries anſwer all purpoſes of waſhing;
the mangrove and olive bark, uſeful to tanners; the fuſtic and redwood to the dyers;


and lately the logwood. The indigo plant was formerly much cultivated, and the
cotton tree is ſtill to. They have maize, or Indian corn, Guinea corn, peas of various
kinds, with a variety of roots. Fruits grow in great plenty; citrons, Seville and China


-oranges, common and fweet lemons, limes, ſhadocks, pomegranates, mamees, ſour-
ſops, papas, pine apples, prickly pears, allicada pears, melons, pompions, guavas, and
| ſeveral kinds of berries ; alſo garden ſtuffs in great plenty, and good. The cattle bred
on this iſland are but few; their beef is tough and lean ; the mutton and lamb are


tolerable; they have plenty of hogs ; many plantations have hundreds of them, and
their fleſh is exceedingly ſweet and delicate. Their horſes are fmall, mettleſome and


hardy, and when well made generally tell for thirty or forty pounds ſterling. Jamaica
| Iikewite ſupplies the apothecary with guaiacum, ſarſaparilla, china, eaſſia, and tama-


rinds. Among the animals are the land and ſea turtle, and the alligator. Here are


all forts of fowl, wild and tame, parrots, parroquets, pelieans, ſnipes, teal, Guinea
hens, geeſe, ducks, and tarkies, the humming bird, and a great variety of others. The


rivers and bays abound with fifth. * The mountains breed numberleſs adders, and other
noxious animals, as the fens and marihes do the guana and gallewaſp; bat theſe laſt
are not venomous. Among the inſects are the ciror, or chegoe, which eat into the

ervous and membranous parts of the fleſh of the negroes, and the white people are
ſometimes plagued with them. Theſe inſects get into any parts of the body, but


chr -fiy th: legs and feet, where they breed in great numbers, and ſhut themſelves up
in a bag; as ſoon as the perſon feels them, which is not perhaps till a week after they


have been in the bo ly, the / pick them out with a needle or the point of a penkniſe,
„e | taking


BRITISH WEST INDTES. 613
taking care to deſiroy the bag entirely, that none of the breed, which are like nits,
may be left behindl. They ſometimes get into the toes and cat the fleſh” to the very
bone. . A |

Port Royal was formerly the capital of Jamaica. It ſtood upon the point of a
narrow neck of land, which, towards the ſea, formed part of the border of a very fine
harbour of its own name. The convenience of this harbour, which was capable of
containing a thouſand ſail of large ſhips, and of ſuch depth as to allow them to load
and unload with the greateſt eaſe, weighed ſo much with the inhabitants, that the
choſe to build their capital on this ſpot, though the place was a hot dry ſand, and
produced none of the neceſſaries of life, not even freſh water. But the advantage of
its harbour, and the reſort of pirates, made it a place of great conſideration. Theſe
pirates were called Buccaneers ; they fought with a deſperate bravery, and then ſpent
their fortune in this capital with as inconſiderate diflipation. About the year 1692,
no place for its fize could be compared to this town for trade, wealth, and an entire
corruption of manners. In the month of June, in this year, an earthquake, which
1hook the whole iſland to its foundations, totally overwhelmed this city, ſo as to leave
in one quarter, not even the ſmalleſt veſtige remaining. In two minutes the earth
opened and ſwallowed up nine tenths of the houſes, and two thouſand people. The
water guſhed out from the openings of the earth, and tumbled the people on heaps ;

but ſome of them had the good fortune to catch the beams and rafters of houſes, and
were afterwards ſaved by boats. Several ſhips were caſt away in the harbour; and the
Swan frigate, which lay in the dock to careen, was carried over the tops of ſinking
| houſes, and did not overſet, but afforded a retreat to ſome hundreds of people, who
ſaved their lives upon her. An officer who was in the town at this time, ſays, the
earth opened and ſhut very quick in ſome places, and he faw ſeveral people fink down
to the middle, and others appeared with their heads juſt above ground and were
ſqueezed to death. At Savannah, above a thouſand acres were ſunk, with the houſes
and people in them; the place appeared for ſome time like a lake, was afterwards
dried up, but no houſes were ſeen. In ſome parts mountains were ſplit; and at one
place a plantation was removed to the diſtance of a mile. They again rebuilt the city;
but it was a ſecond time, ten years after, deſtroyed by a great fire. The extraordi-
nary. convenience of the harbour tempted them to build it once more; and once more,
in 1782, was it laid in rubbiſh by a hurricane the moſt terrible on record. Such re-
peated calamities ſeemed to mark out this place as a devoted ſpot ; the inhabitants
therefore reſolved to forſake it for ever, and to reſide at the oppoſite bay, where they
built Kingſton, which is now the capital of this iſland. It confiſts of upwards of one
thouſand houſes, many of them handſomely built, and in the taſte of theſe iſlands, as
Well as the neighbouring continent, one ſtory high, with porticoes, and every con-
venience for a comfortable habitation in that climate. Not far from Kingſton ſtands '
St. Jago de le Vega, or Spaniſh Town, which, though at preſent inferior to Kingſton,
was once the capital of Jamaica, and is fill the ſeat of government, and the place
where the courts of juſtice are held. EDDIE | Nr 5,

On the 3d of October, 1780, was a dreadful hurricane, which almoſt overwhelmed
the little ſeaport town of Savannah le Mer, in Jamaica, and a part of the adjacent
country. Very few houſes were left ſtanding, and a great number of people were
killed. Much damage was alſo done, and many lives loſt, in other parts of the
iſland. 775 251 755 3 |

The whole product of the ifland may be reduced to theſe heads. Firſt, ſugars, of
which they exported in 1787, 824,706 cwt.—1588, 1,124,017 c wt.— 1789, 1, 236, 603

412 SEED | cwt.


614 * BRITISH WEST INDIES.


cwt.—1 700, 151 8 5,519 cwt. Moſt of this goes to London, Briſtol, and Glaſgow, and

ſome part of it into the United States, in return for the beef, pork, cheeſe, corn, peas,
ſtaves, planks, pitch and tar, which they have from thence. Second, rum, of which
they export about 4000 puncheons annually. The rum of this iſland is generally
eſteemed the beſt, and is the moſt uſed in Great Britain. Third, molaſſes, in py
they tormerly made their remittances for the produce of the grand ſtaple the ſug
cane. According to the late teſtimony of a reſpectable planter i in Jamaica, that illand
hath 280, ooo acres in canes, of which 210,000 are annually cut, and mate from 68
to 70,000 tons of ſugar, and 4, 200, ooo gallons of rum. Fourth, cotton, of which
they tend out two thouſand bags. The indigo, formerly much cultivated, is now incon-
__ fkiderable; ; but ſome cocoa and coffee are exported, with a confiderabic quantity af

pepper, ginger, drugs for dyers and apothecaries, {weetmeats, mahogany and machi- |
nee} planks. But ſome of the moſt confiderable articles of their trade are with the
Spaniſh continent of New Spain and Terra Firma; for in the former they cut great
quantities of logwood, and both in the former and latter they carry on a vaſt and
profitable trade in negroes and all kinds of European goods.

This iſland was originally a part of the Spaniſh empire in America. Several de-
ſcents had been made upon it by the Engliſh, prior to 1656; but it was not till this
year that Jamaica was reduced under the Britiſh dominion. Cromwell had fitted out
a ſquadron, under Penn and Venables, to reduce the Spaniſh iſland of. Hiſpaniola,
but there this ſquadron was unſucceſsful. The commanders, of their own accord, to
_ atone for this misfortune, made a deſcent on Jamaica, and having carried the ca ital,
St. Jago, ſoon compelled the whole iſland to ſurrender. Ever fince it has been ſubject ;
to the Engliſh, and the government of it is one of the richeſt places, next to that of

Ireland, in the diſpoſal of the crown, the ftanding ſalary being 2,500l. per annum,
and the aſſembly commonly voting the governor as much more; which, with the
other ene make it on the whole little inferior to 10, 000l. Per annum.


BARBADOBS.


This iſland, the moſt cafurly of all the Caribhecs, is fituated in 59 dbgions Weſt
longitude, and 13 degrees North latitude. It is twenty-one miles in length, and
fourteen in breadth. When the Engliſn, ſome time after the year 1625, firſt landed
here, it had not the leaſt appearance of ever having been peopled even by ſavages.

There was no kind of beaſts, no fruit, no herb nor root, fit for ſupporting the life of
man; yet, as the climate was fo good, and the fail appeared fertile, ſome gentlemen
of ſmall fortunes in England retolved to become adventurers tlnther. The trees were
1o large, and of a wood fo hard and ſtubborn, that it was with great difficulty they
could clear as much ground as was neceſlary for thew ſubſiſtence. By unremitting
perſeverance, however, they brought it to yield them a tolerable ſapport ; and they

found that cotton and indigo agreed well with the foil, and that tobacco, which was
beginning to come into repute in England, anſwered tolerably well. Theſe proſpects,
together with the ſtorm between the King and parliament, which was beginning to
break out in England, induced many new-adventurers to tranfport themſelves to this

iſland. And . 0 is remarkable, twenty-five years. aſter its firſt ſettlement, in 1650,
it contained more than 50,000 wintes, and a much greater number of negro and Indian
ſlaves; the latter they acquired by means not at all to their honour; for they ſeized
upon all thoſe unhappy men, without any pretence, in the neighbouring iſlands, and
carried them into ſlavery; a practice, which has rendered the Caribbee Indians irre- *


concileable


*


BRITISH JJ... © 649


concileable to the Engliſh ever fince. They had begun, a little before this, to cultivate
ſugar to great advantage. The number of ſlaves was, in conſequence of their wealth,
ſtill augmented ; and in 1676, it is ſuppoſed that their number amounted to 100 „ooo,
which, together with zo, ooo whites, make 150, ooo on this ſmall ſpot, a degree of
population unknown in Holland, in China, or any other N of the world moſt re-
nowned for numbers. |

At this time Barbadoes employed 400 fail of ſhips, one with another of 150 tons,
in their trade. Their annual exports in ſugar, indigo, ginger, cotton, and citron
water, were about 350, oool. and their circulating cath at home was 200,000]. Such
was the increaſe of population, trade, and wealth, in the courſe of fifty years. But
{ſince that time, this iſland has been much on the decline, which is to be attributed
partly to the growth of the French ſugar colonies, and partly to the other Engliſh
eſtabliſhments in the neighbouring iſles. Their numbers at preſent are ſaid to be
20,000 whites, and 100,000 ſlaves. Their commerce conſiſts in the ſame articles as
formerly, though they deal in them to leſs extent. In 1787 they exported to Great Britain


upwards of 130,000 wt. of ſugar, and in 1790, but about 113,000 cewt. Their capital


is Bridgetown, where the governor refides, whoſe employment is ſaid to be Worth
zool. per annum. They have a college, founded and well endowed by Colonet


Codrington, who was a native of this and. Barbadoes, as well as Jamaica, has


ſuffered much by hurricanes, fire, and the plague. On the 1oth of October, 1780, a
dreadful hurricane occafioned vaſt devaſtation in Barbadoes, great numbers of the
houſes were deſtroyed, not one houſe in the iſland was wholly free from damage,
many perſons were buried in the ruing of the dmidings, and great numbers were
driven into the 2 and there parted. |


1 CHRISTOPHER


1 his iſland, commonly called by the ſailors St. Kitt's, is ſituated in 62 degrees Weſt
longitude, and 1 7 degrees North latitude, about fourteen leagues from Antigua, and is
twenty miles long, and ſeven broad. It has its name from the famous Chriſtopher
Columbus, who diſcovered it for the Spaniards. That nation, however, abandoned it,
as unworthy of their attention; and, in 1626, it was ſettled by the French and Engliſh ;
conjuncily ; but entirely ceded to the latter by the peace of Utrecht. Beſides cotton,
_ ginger, and the tropical fruits, it produced, in 178), 231,397 cwt. of ſugar, and in
1790, but about 113,200 cwt. It is computed that this ifland contains 6000 Whites
and 36,000 negrocs. In February, 1782, it was taken by the French, but reſtored
to England by the treaty of 1783.


AN T þ 0 * OY
Situated in 61 * Weſt longitude, and 17 degrees North latitude, is of a 3 |


form, near twenty wiles over every way. This ifland, which was formerly thought
uſeleſs, has now Cot the art of the reſt. It has one of the beſt harbours in the Weſt
Indies; and its capital St. John's, which, before the fire in 1769, was large and wealthy,
is the ordinary ſeat of the governor of the Leeward iſlands. Antigua is ſuppoſed to
contain about 7000 whites, and 30,000 flaves. In 1787. 254,706 cwt. of tugar was
{ent from this [and to Great Britain, and in 1790, BY 65 „o cut.


GRENADA


ss BRITISH WEST INDIES.


GRENADA axy 1E GRENADINES.


Grenada is fituated in 12. North lat. and 62* Weſt lon. about thirty leagues S.W. of
Barbadoes, and almoſt the ſame diſtance north of Andalufia, or the Spaniſh Main.
This iſland is ſaid to be thirty miles in length, and fifteen in breadth. Experience has
proved, that the foil of this iſland is extremely proper for producing ſugar, coffee, to-
bacco, and indigo; and upon the whole it carries with it all the appearance of becom-
ing as flouriſhing a colony as any in the Weſt Indies, of its dimenſions. A lake on


the top of a hill, in the middle of the iſland, ſupplies it plentifully with fine rivers,
which adorn and fertilize it. Several bays and harbours lie round the iſland, ſome of


which may be fortified with great advantage, which render it very convenient for
ſhipping; and has the happineſs of not being ſubje& to hurricanes. St. George's Bay
has a ſandy bottom, and is capacious, but open. In its harbour, or careening place,
100 large veſſels may be moored with perfect ſafety. This iſland was long the theatre
of bloody wars between the native Indians and the French, during which theſe handful
of Caribbees defended themſelves with the moſt reſolute bravery. In the laſt war but
one, when Grenada was attacked by the Engliſh, the French inhabitants, who were
not very numerous, were ſo amazed at the reduction of Guadalupe and Martinico, that
they loft all ſpirit, and ſurrendered without making the leaſt oppoſition ; and the full
property of this iſland, together with the ſmall iſlands on the north, called the Grena-
dines, which yield the ſame produce, were confirmed to the crown of Great Britain
by the treaty of Paris in 1763. But in July 1779, the French made themſelves maſters
of this ifland, though it was reſtored to Great Britain by the late treaty of peace. In


1787, 172,880 cwt. of ſugar was exported from theſe iſlands to Great Britain, and in


1790, 191,625 owt.


Situated in 16' N. lat. and in 62* W. lon. lies about half way between Guadalupe
and Martinico. It is near twenty-cight miles in length, and thirteen in breadth; it
obtained its name from being diſcovered by Columbus on a Sunday. The ſoil of this
iſland is thin, and better adapted to the rearing of cotton than ſugar ;' but the fides of
the hills bear the fineſt trees in the Weſt Indies, and the iſland is well ſupplied with

rivulets of good water. By the peace of Paris, in 1763, it was ceded to the Engliſh ;
but they have derived little advantage from this conqueſt, the iſland being, till lately,
no better than a harbour for the natives of the other Caribbees, who being expelled
their own ſettlements, have taken refuge here. But, on account of its fituation be-
tween the principal French iflands, and Prince Rupert's Bay being one of the moſt
capacious in the Weft Indies, it has been judged expedient to form Dominica into a
government of itſelf, and to declare it a free port. It was taken by the French in
1778; but it was reſtored again to Great Britain by the late peace. It exported to
ont Britain, in 1790, upwards of 50,000 cwt. of ſugar, and confiderably more in
1787. . 2


sT. VINCENT.


Situated in 13 N. lat. and 616 W. long. 50 miles north-weſt of Barbadoes, 30
miles ſouth of St. Lucia, is about 24 miles in length, and 18 in breadth. It is
very fruitful, being a black mould upon a ſtrong loam, the moſt proper for the
raiſing of ſugar. Indigo thrives here remarkably well; but this article is leſs culti


vated


than


BRITISH WEST INDIES. 617


than formerly throughout the Weſt Indies. Many of the inhabitants are Caribbeans,
and many here alſo fugitive, from Barbadoes and the other iflands.
The Caribbeans were treated with ſo much injuſtice and barbarity, after this iſland


came into poſſeſſion of the Engliſh, to whom it was ceded by the peace in 1763, that


they greatly contributed towards enabling the French to get poſſeſſion of it again in
1779; but it was reſtored to Great Britain by the late treaty of peace. It ſent to Great


Britain in 1790, 76,747 cwt. of ſugar.


NEVIS AND MONTSERRAT.


Two ſmall iſlands lying between St. Chriſtopher's and Antigua, neither of them ex-


ceeding 18 miles in circumference, and are ſaid to contain 5ooo whites,. and 10,000


ſlaves. The foil in theſe four iſlands is pretty much alike, light and ſandy, but not-


withſtanding fertile in an high degree; and their principal exports are derived from the


ſugar cane. Both theſe iſlands were taken by the French in 1782, but were reſtored
at the peace. They ſent to Great Britain, in 1787, 108, 324 ct. of ſugar, but much


leſs in 1790. 855
rn BARBUDA.


Situated 17 49 N. lat. 61 30% W. long. 35 miles north of Antigua, is 20 miles in
tength, and 12 in breadth. It is fertile, and has a good road for ſhipping, but no


direct trade with England. The inhabitants are chiefly employed in huſbandry, and
raifing freſh proviſions for the uſe of the neighbouring iſles. It belongs to the Cod-


rington family, and the inhabitants amount to about 1500.


ANGUILLA. *


Situated in 18 N. lat. 60 miles N. W. of St. Chriſtopher's, is about 50 miles long,
and 10 broad. This iſland is perfectly level, and the climate nearly the fame with that
of Jamaica. The inhabitants, who are not numerous, apply themſelves to huſbandry


and feeding of cattle.


: BERMUDAS, on SOMMERS' ISLANDS. |
Theſe received their firſt name from their being diſcovered by John Bermudas, a


Spaniard; and were called Sommers' Iflands from Sir George Sommers, who was.
ſhipwrecked on their rocks, in 1609, in his paſſage to Virginia. They are ſituated, at


a vaſt diſtance from any continent, in 32 N. lat. and in 65 W. long. Their diſtance
from the Madeiras is about 1200 leagues, and from Carolina 300. They are nearly in
the form of a ſhepherd's crook ; the main iſland is about 16 miles in length, and from


one to two in breadth. The pariſh of St. George's is an ifland to the eaſtward of the
main land, on which ſtands the town of St. _ containing about 500 houſes;
Contiguous to this is the ifland of St. David's, w

milk, vegetables, poultry, and freſhmeat. In the botom of the crook lie a vaſt num


ber of ſmall iſlands, uninhabited. The iſland is rocky, and the groundihily. In the
main road a fulky may paſs; and even there, in many places, with difficulty; but


turn to the right or left, and it is paſſable only on horſeback. The air is healthy "1"


eontinual ipring prevails :: cedars, mantled in green, always adorn the hills: the paſ-
ture ground is ever verdant ; the gardens ever in bloom. Moſt of the productions of
| | the


ich ſupplies the town with butter,


/


4 - rr ¶ IE, e
is = ? —— th + tra


- — 2


618 BRITISH WEST INDIES.


the Weſt Indies might be here cultivated. The Faber are built of a ſoft ſtone, which
is fawn like timber; when expoted to the weather, and waſhed with lime, it becomes
hard. The houſes are white as ſnow, which, behcld from an eminence, contraſted
with the 47 aa ot the cedars and paſture g ground, and the multitude of iſlands, full

in view, realize what the Poets have feigned concerning the Elyſian fields. The inha-


bitants ; are numerous; the whole iſland is a continued village; no lets, perhaps, than


15 or 20,080 are collected on this ſmall ſpot. The blacks are twice as numerous as
the whites. Happy for the country, were the colour unknown among them! The
Bermudians are chiefly ſeafaring people; few of the men are ever at home ; ; 3 or 400
go annually to Turk's Ifland to rake falt, which is carried to America for proviſions, or
{old to ſuch as may call at Turk's Ifland, for caſh. However induſtrious the men are


abroad, at home they are indolent ; much given, particularly of late, to gambling and


luxury. The women are generally handſome and comely; they love their huſbands,


their children, and their dreſs. Dancing is their favourite amuſement. The men muſt
be equipped in taſte when they appear in company, ſhould they not have a dollar in
the pound to pay their creditors ; the women muſt array themſelves like the belles of


Paris, ſhould they not have a morſel of bread to preterve their blooming complexion.


They are thoroughly acquainted with one another's families, and from their tea tables,


as from their atmoſphere; ariſes conſtant guſts of ſcandal and detraction. To ſtran-
gers they are kind, but among themſelves are quarrelſome: their friendly intercourſe
is too much confined within a narrow circle, bounded by couſins or ſecond couſins.
The common food of the Bermudians is coffee, fiſh of different kinds, a ſweet po-
tatoe, Indian corn, and American flour. Their water is rain preſerved in ciſterns; the
general drink is grog. The men are amphibious animals; from their being a yard


long they ſwim out of their depth, and fiſhing is their favourite amuſement when


grown up. The government is conducted under a governor named by the crown of
England, a council, and general aſſembly. The eſtabliſhed religion is Epiſcopacy.

There are nine churches; ; three clergymen have the charge of theſe nine: there is one
Preſbyterian church. A regard for religion is not the characteriſtic of the Bermudians;


they ſeldom go to church, except it be to attend a funeral, or get thew children __ 4
tied, or to hear a ſtranger. *


LUCAY', OR BAHAMA ISLANDS.
The Bahamas are fituated between 22 and 27 degrees North latitude, and 73 and 81 |


degrees V oft longitude. They extend along the coaſt of Florida quite down to Cuba,


and are ſaid to be 500 in number, ſome of them only rocks, but twelve of them are


large and fertile; all are, however, uninhabited, except Providence, which is 200


miles eaſt of the Floridas; though ſome others are larger and more fertile, on Which


%


_ the Engliun have plantations.


Thee iflands were the firſt fruits of Columbus's 3 TER they were not
known.to the Engliſh till 1667. The Iſle of Providence became an harbour for the
buccancers, or pirates, who for a long time infeſted the American navigation. This
ol liged the government, in 1718, to ſend out Captain Woodes Rogers with a fleet to
5 pirates, and for making a ſettlement. This the captain effected; a tort
was crected, and an independent company was ſtationed in the iſland. . Ever ſince this


* The RE ro deſcription of theſe iſlands was ſent the _ by an intelligent gentleman, who had re-
Gded a number of ycars in Bermuda,


2 | laſt |


SPANISH WEST INDIES. 619


laſt ſettlement, thee iſlands have been improving, though they advance but flowly.
In time of war, people gain conſiderably by the prizes condemned there ; and at all
times by the wrecks, which are frequent in this labyrinth of rocks and ſhelves. The
Spaniards and Americans captured theſe iſlands during the laſt war, but they were ro-


taken by a detachment from St. ä April 7th, 1783.


FALKLAND ISLANDS.


Though theſe are not among the Weſt India Iſlands, we- ſhall mention them in this
place. They lie in the 52d degree of ſouth latitude, near the Straits of Magellan, at
the utmoſt extremity of South America.

Falkland Iſlands were firſt diſcovered by Sir Richard Hawkins in 1594, the pr incipal
of which he named Hawkins' Maidenland, in honour of Queen Elizabeth. The pre-
ſent Englth name Falkland was probably given them by Captain Strong, in 1689,
and, being adopted by Halley, it has from that time been received into maps. Cap-
tain M' Bride, who viſited them in 1766, thus deſcribes them: We found,” ſays he,

% a maſs of iſlands and broken lands, of which the ſoil was nothing but a bog g, with
no better proſpect than that of barren mountains, . beaten by ſtorms almoſt perpetual.
| Yet this is ſummer; and if the winds of winter hold their natural proportion, thoſe

who he but two cables length from 'the ſhore, muſt paſs weeks without any commu-
nication with it.” The plants and vegetables which were planted by Mr. Byron's peo-
ple, and the fir trees, a native of rugged and cold climates, had withered away; but
goats, ſheep, and hogs, that were carried thither, were found to thrive and increaſe as
in other places. Geeſe, of a fiſhy taſte, ſnipes, foxes, ſea lions, penguins, plenty of

good water, and, in the ſummer : Bw" wild celery and ſorrel, are the natural luxu-
ries of theſe iſlands. But though the ſoil be barren, and the ſea tempeſtuous, an Eng-


liſh ſettlement was A here, of which _y were diſpoſſeſſed by the Spaniards
in 17 „


SPANISH WEST INDIES.


o U B A.


HE iſland of Cuba is ſituated 8 19 and 23° N. lat. and between 74* and
87 W. long. 100 miles to the ſouth of Cape Florida, and 75 miles north of Ja-
maica, and is ncarly 700 miles in length, and generally about 70 miles in breadth. A
chain of hills runs through the middle of the iſland from eaſt to weſt ; but the land
near the ſea is in general level and flooded in the rainy ſeaſon, when the ſun is verti-
cal. This noble iſland is ſuppoſed to have the beſt ſoil, for ſo large a country, of any
in America: it produces all the commodities known in the Weſt Indies, particularly
ginger, long pepper, and other ſpices, caſſia, fiſtula, maſtich, and aloes. It alſo
produces tobacco and ſugar; but from the want of hands, and che lazineſs of the Spa-
niards, not in ſuch quantities as might be expected. It is owing to the ſame cauſe


4K that


bs SPANISH WEST INDIES.


that this large iſland does not produce, including all its commodities, ſo much for ex-
portation as the ſmall iſland of Antigua.

The courſe of the rivers is too ſhort to be of any conſequence to navigation; but there
are ſeveral good harbours in the iſland, which belong to the principal towns, as that of
St. Jago, facing Jamaica, ſtrongly ſituated and well fortified, but neither populous nor


rich. That of the Hav annah, facing Florida, which is the capital of Cuba, and a


place of great ſtrength and importance, containing about 2000 houſes, with a great
number of churches and convents. It was taken, however, by the Engliſh in the year
1762, but reſtored in the ſubſequent treaty of peace. Beſides theſc, there is alſo Cum-


berland harbour, and that of Santa Cruz, a conſiderable town thirty miles eaſt of the
Havannah.


HISPANIOLA, on ST. DOMINGO.


This iſland was at firſt poſſeſſed by the Spaniards alone; but by far the moſt conſi-
derable part is now in the hands of the French; however, as the Spaniards were the
original poſſeſſors, and ſtill continue to have a ſhare 1 in it, Hiſpaniola is commonly re.
garded as a Spanith iſland.

It is ſituated between the 17th and 21ſt degrees N. lat. and the 67th and 74th of
W. long. lying in the middle between Cuba and Porto Rico, and is 450 miles long,


and 150 broad. When Hiſpaniola was firſt diſcovered by Columbus, the number of


its inhabitants was computed to be at leaſt one million. But ſuch was the cruelty of
the Spaniards, and to ſo infamous a height did they carry their oppreſſion of the poor


natives, that they were reduced to ſixty thouſand in the ſpace of fifteen years. The
face of the iſland preſents an agreeable variety of hills, vallies, woods, and rivers; and


the foil is allowed to be extremely fertile, producing ſugar, cotton, indigo, tohacco,
maize, and caſſava root. The European cattle are ſo multiplied here, that they run


will in the woods, and, as in South America, are hunted for their hides and tallow


only. In the moſt barren parts of the rocks, they diſcovered formerly ſilver and gold.
The mines, however, are not worked now. The north-weſt parts, which are in the
poffeſſion of the French, conſiſt of large fruitful plains, which produce the articles al-


ready mentioned in vaſt abundance, This indeed is the beſt and moſt fruitful part of


the beſt and moſt fertile iſland in the Weſt Indies, and perhaps in the world.
The moft ancient town in this iſland, and in all America, built by Eurepeans, is St.


Domingo. It was founded by Bartholomew Columbus, brother to the admiral, in 1504,


who gave it that name in honour of his father Dominic, and by which the whole
1land is ſometimes named. It is fituated on a ſpacious harbour, and is a large well-
built city, inhabited, like the other a towns, by a mixture of Europeans, Creoles,


Meſtizos, and Negroes.


The French towns are Cape Francois, the capital, containing, ſeveral years ago,
about 8000 white and blacks. Leogane, though inferior in point of fize, is a good


port, a place of confiderable trade, and the ſeat of the French government in that


Hand. They have two other towns, conſiderable tor their trade, Petit Guaves, and
Port Louis.


The following is ſaid to be an exact ſtatement of the product, population, and com-
merce of the French colony of Hiſpamola, in the year 1788, and may ſerve to ſhew the
immenſe loſſes faſtained by the late inſurrection of the negroes.

PoevLation. | White people 27,717; viz. 9,699 men; 2,401 males above 12 years
old ; 0 0 under 12 Dare 3 1 8 huſbandmen of plantations; ; 1,832 plantation ma-

| nagers;


| SPANISH WEST INDIES. 621
nagers ; 325 ſugar refiners; 308 phyſicians ; ; 5 10 mechanics; 614 clerks; two white
ſervants; 8,511 women and girls.

Free people of colour 21,808; of which 3,493 were men; 2,892 males above 12
years; 2,892 under 12; 2,700 ſervants; ; 9,833 women or girls ; ; ſlaves 405,528.

PLANTATIONS AND Maxuracrokfxs. Sugar 792; indigo 3,097; cotton 705;. cot-
fee 2,810 ; diſtilleries 173; brick and PRI s warc 63; cocoa 69; tanners 3.


Niet EXPORTED TO France.


70,22), 709 pounds of White Sugar, 930,016 pounds of Indigo,
93,177,518 ditto Brut ditto, 6,286,126 ditto Cotton,
68,151, 181 ditto Coffee, 12,995 Dreſſed Skins.


SoLD To n ENLISH, AND Doren Suwobrkn.
25,000,000 pounds of Brut Sugars, 3,009,000 pounds of Cotton.
12,000,000 ditto Coffee,


The molafles exported in American bottoms, valued at 1,000,000 o dollars; i precious
wood, exported in French ſhips, 200,000 dollars.


Tx. J Five hundred and eighty large ſhips, carrying 189,679 toms, in which the


imports amounted to 12,000,000 dollars, of which more than 8,000,c00 dollars were
in manufactured goods of F rance, and the other 4,000,000 in French produce.


The Spaniſh ſhips exported in French goods or money 1 ,400,000 dollars, for mules |


imported by them into the colony.


Ninety-eight French ſhips, carrying 40,130 tons, imported 29, 506 negroes ; ; which


ſold for 8, ooo, ooo dollars.
The negroes in the French diviſion of this iſland have, for ſeveral years paſt, been
in a ſtate of inſurrection. In the progreſs of theſe diſturbances, which have not yet


ſubſided, the planters and others have ſuſtained immenſe loſſes. As this unhappy at-
fair has engaged much of the attention of the public, we are N in being able to


give a ſummary ſtatement of the cauſes of this inſurrection.*
The fituation of the French colonies early attracted the attention of the Conſti-


tuent Aſſembly. At this time all was as tranquil as ſuch a ſtate of oppreſſion would


permit. Political health can only be attributed to a country with a free conſtitution.


The ſituation of the iſlands is that of a paralytic : one part is torpid, whilſt the other


is affected with the frantic motions of St. Vitus's Dance.

The firſt interference of the National Aſſembly in the affairs of the colonies, was by
a decree of the 8th of March, 1790, which declared, That all free perſons, who
were proprietors and reſidents of two years ſtanding, and who contributed to the exi-
gencies of the State, ſhould exerciſe the rights of voting, which conſtitute the quality
of French citizens.”

This decree, though in fact it gave no new rights to the people of colour, was re-
garded with a jealous eye by the white planters, who evidently ſaw that the generality
of the qualification included all deſcriptions of proprietors ; they affected, however, to
impoſe a different conſtruction upon it. The people of colour appealed. to common
juſtice and common ſenſe ; it was to no purpoſe ; the whites repelled them from their


aſſemblies: ſome commotions enſued, in which they mutually tell a  facrifice to their


pride and reſentment.


* From a pamphlet publiſhed | in 1792, intitled, “ An ſoquiry into the Cauſes of the Inſurrection of the
Negroes in the Iſland of St. Domingo. . | 45
4 K 2 N The ſe


622 SPANISH WEST INDIES.

Theſe difturbances again excited the vigilance of the National Aſſembly: a decree
was pailed on the 12th day of October, 1790, by which the Aſſembly declared, as a
conſtitutional article, © That they would eſtabliſh no regulations reſpecting the internal
government of the colonies, without the precite and tormal requeſt of the Colonial
Aﬀembhes.”

Peace, however, was not the conſequence of this decree. The proprietors, it is true,
had obtained a legal right of tyrannizing ; but the unfortunate queſtion ſtill recurred,
Who ſhould be permitted to exerciſe that right ? On this head the decree was filent.
New diſſenſions aroſe ; each of the parties covered, under a factious patriotiſm, the
moſt atrocious deſigns. Aſſaſſination and revolt became frequent. Mauduit, a French
officer of rank, loſt his life by the hands of his own countrymen. The unfortunate
Oge, a planter of colour, who had exerted himſelf in France in the cauſe of his bre-
thren, reſolved to ſupport by force their juſt pretenſions. He landed in the Spaniſh
territory of St. Domingo, where he aſſembled about 600 mulattoes. Before he pro-

ceeded to hoſtilities, he wrote to the French general, that his defire was for peace, pro-
vided the laws were enforced. His letter was abſurdly conſidered as a declaration of
war. Being attacked and vanquiſhed, he took refuge amongſt the Spaniards, who de-
livered him up to his adverſaries. The horrors of his death were the harbingers of fu-
ture crimes. Theſe diſturbances ftill increaſing, the National Aſſembly found it
neceſſary, at length, to decide between the contending parties.

On the 15th of May, 1791, a decree was made, conſiſting of two articles, by the


| firſt of which the Aﬀembly confirmed that of the 12th of October, ſo far as reſpected
the ſlaves in their iſlands. It is true, that the word ſlave was cautiouſly omitted i in this


document, and they are only characterized by the negative deſcription of © men not
free,” as if right and wrong depended on a play of words, or a mode of expreffion.
I This part of the decree met with but little oppoſition, though it paſſed not without
| ſevere reprehenſion from a few enlightened members. The ſecond article, reſpecting
the people of colour, was ſtrongly conteſted: thoſe who were before known by the a
pellation of patriots divided upon it. It was, however, determined in the reſult, that
the people of colour, born of free parents, ſhould be confidered as active citizens, and
be eligible to the offices of government in the iſlands.
This ſecond article, which decided upon a right that the 2 of colour had been
entitled to for upwards of a century, inſtead of reſtoring peace, may be confidered as
the cauſe, or rather the pretext, of all the ſubſequent evils that the colony of St. Do-
mingo bas ſuftained. They aroſe not indeed from its execution, but from its counter-
action by the white colonifts. Had they, after the awful warnings they had already
experienced, obeyed the ordinances of an Aſſembly they pretended to revere ; had they
imbibed one drop of the true ſpirit of that conſtitution to which they had yowed an in-
violable attachment; had they even ſuppreſſed the dictates of pride in the fuggeſtions
of prudence ; the form that thr catened them had been averted, and in their obedience
to the parent State they had difplayed an act of patriotiſm, : and ed themſelves
from all poſlibility of danger.
But the equalization of the people of 2 AM ſung the irritable nerves of the white
coloniſts. The deſcendants of ſlaves might have loſt the reſentments of their fathers ;
but the hatred of a deſpot is hereditary. „ he European maxim allows, “That they
never pardon who have done the wrong;” but in the colonies this perverſity attains a
more monſtrous growth, and the averſion to African blood deſcends from generation
to generation. No toner had the decree paſſed, than deputics-from the iſlands to the
National Ailembly withdrew their attendance : the colonul committce, always _
2 the


SPANISH WEST INDIES. 623
the influence of the planters, ſuſpended their labours. Its arrival in the iſland ſtruck
the whites with conſternation : they vowed to ſacrifice their lives rather than ſuffer the
execution of the decree. Their rage bordered upon phrenzy : they propoſed to impri-
ton the French merchants then in the iſland, to tear down the National flag, and hoiſt
the Britiſh ſtandard in its place. Whilſt the joy of the mulattoes was mingled with ap-
prehenſions and with fears, St. Domingo re-echoed with the cries of the whites, with
their menaces, with their blaſphemies againſt the conſtitution. A motion was made
in the ſtreets to fire upon the people of colour, who fled from the city, and took refuge
in the plantations of their friends and in the woods: they were at length recalled by a
proclamation ; but it was only to ſwear ſubordination to the whites, and-to be witneſſes
of freſh enormities. Amidſt theſe agitations the ſlaves had remained in their accuſ-
tomed ſubordination. Nor was it till the month of Auguſt, 1791, that the ſymptoms
of the inſurrection appeared amongſt them. N


A conſiderable number, both of whites and people of colour, had loſt their lives in


theſe commotions before the ſlaves had given indications of diſaffection; they were not,
however, inſenſible of the opportunities of revolt afforded by the diſſenſions of their
maſters: they had learnt that no alleviation of their miſeries was ever to be expected
from Europe; that in the ſtruggle for colonial dominion, their humble intereſts had
been equally ſacrificed or forgotten by all parties. They felt their curb relaxed by the


diſarming and diſperſion of their mulatto maſters, who had been accuſtomed to keep


them under rigorous diſcipline. Hopeleſs of relief from any quarter, they roſe in dif-
ferent parts, and ſpread deſolation over the iſland. If the cold cruelties of deſpotiſm
have no bounds, what ſhall be expected from the paroxiſms of deſpair ? 9

On the 11th of September, 1791, a convention took place, which produced the


agreement called the Concordat, by which the white planters ſtipulated, that they
would no longer oppoſe the law of the 15th of May, which gave political rights to the


people of colour. The Colonial Aſſembly even promiſed to meliorate the fituation of
the people of colour, born of parents not free, and to whom the decree of the 15th of


May did not extend. An union was formed between the planters, which, if it had
ſooner taken place, had prevented the inſutrection. The infurgents were every where


diſpirited, repulſed, and diſperſed; and the colony itfelf preſerved from total de-
ſtruction. 5 3 1


By a decree of the National Aſſembly, the 24th of September, the people of colour


were virtually excluded from all right of colonial legiſlation, and expreſsly placed in
the power of the white coloniſts. | Se | RON” ;


If the decree of the iʒth of May could inſtigate the white coloniſts to the frantic acts of
violence before deſcribed, what ſhall we ſuppoſe were the feelings of the people of co-


lour on that of the 24th of September, which again blaſted thoſe hopes they had juſtly
| founded on the conſtitutional law of the parent ſtate, and the folemn ratification of the
white coloniſts? No ſooner was it known in the iſlands, than thoſe diſſenſions which
the revolt of the negroes had for a while appeaſed, broke out with freſh violence. The


apprehenfions entertained from the ſlaves had been allayed by the effects of the Con-


cordat ; but the whites no ſooner found themſelves relieved from the terrors of im-
mediate deſtruction, than they availed themſelves of the decree of the 24th of Septem-


ber; they formally revoked the Concordat, and treacherouſly refuted to comply with
an engagement to which they owed their very exiſtence. The people of colour were in


arms; they attacked the whites in the ſouthern provinces; they poſſeſſed themſelves of
Fort St. Louis, and defeated their opponents in ſeveral engagements. A powerful body

ſurrounded Port au Prince, the capital of the iſland, and claimed the execution of tlie
| Concor-


— . — 9 A — —̃— —̃—p— — —— 1


|
|
|
|
|


5 — — —
*


— —
—— — _ \
= = 5


1


——
——


2 2


— ——
. Cm ner tron —
8


—
———


— 1 — ; — —
r 2


624 SPANISH WEST INDIES.


Concordat. At three different times did the whites aſſent to the requiſition, and as
often broke their engagement. Gratified with the predilection for ariſtocracy, which
the Conſtituent Aſſembly had in its dotage avowed, they affected the appellation of
patriots, and had the addreſs to transfer the popular odium to the people of colour, who
were contending for their inditputable rights, and to the few white coloniſts who had
virtue enough to eſpouſe their cauſe. Under this pretext, the municipality of Port au
Prince required M. Grimoard, the captain of the Boreas, a French line of battle ſhip,
to bring his guns to bear upon, and to cannonade the people of colour aflembled near
the town : he at firſt refuſed, but the crew, deluded by the cry of patriotitm, enforced
his compliance. No ſooner was this meaſure adopted, than the people of colour gave
a looſe to their indignation ; they ſpread over the country, and ſet fire indiſcriminately
to all the plantations ; the greateſt part of the town of Port au Prince ſoon after ſhared

the ſame fate. Nothing ſeemed to remain for the white inhabitants but to ſeck their
tatety in quitting the colony.

In the northern parts the people of colour adopted a a more magnanimous and perhaps
a more prudent conduct. They begun, ſays Mr. * erniaud, * by offering their
blood to the whites. We ſhall wait,” aid they, „ till we have ſaved you, before we
aſſert our own claims.” They accordingly oppoſed themſelves to the revolted negroes
with unexamplcd courage: they endeavoured to ſoothe them by attending to their rea-
ſonable requiſitions; and if the colony of St. Domingo be preſerved to the French na-
tion, it will be by the exertions of the people of colour. _

After this recital of authentic and indiſputable facts, it is not difficult to trace the


cauſes of the inſurrection. The effects of thus dreadful udurreclion we leere to be de-
leribed by the profeſſed hiſtorian.


PORTO RICO.


Situated between 64 and 67 degrees W. long. and in 18 degrees N. lat. ying between
Hiſpaniola and St. Chriſtopher's, is 100 miles long, and 40 broad. The ſoil is beau-
tifully diverſified with woods, vallics, and plains; and is very fertile, producing the
ſame fruits as the other iſlands : it is well watered with ſprings and rivers; but the
iſland is unhealthy in the rainy ſeaſons. It was on account of the gold that the Spa-


niards ſettled here; but there is no Jonger- any configerabic quantity of this metal
found in it.


Porto Rico, the capital town, ſtands in a little iſland on the north ſide, forming a
capacious harbour, defended by forts and batteries, which render the town almoſt in-
acceſſible. It was, however, taken by Sir Francis Drake, and afterwards by the Earl
of Cumberland. It is better inhabited than moſt of the Spaniſh towns, becaule it is the
center of the contraband trade carried on by the Engliſh and F rench with the King of
Spain's ſubjects.


VIROIIS ISLANDS, fituated at the eaſt end of Porto Rico, are extremely ſmall.


TRINIDAD.


Situated between 59 and 62 degrees W. long. and in 10 degrees N. lat. lies between
the iſland Tobago and the Spanith Main, from which it is ſeparated by the ſtraits of
Paria : it is about go miles long, and 60 broad, and is an unhealthful but fruitful ſpot,
producing tugar, fine tobacco, indigo, ginger, a varicty of {ruit, and ſome cotton trees,


and


FRENCH WEST INDIES. d


and Indian corn. It was taken by Sir Walter Raleigh in 1595, and by the French in
1676, who plundered the iſland, and extorted money from the inhabitants.


MARGARET TA.
Situated in 64 degrees W. long. and 11—30 N. lat. ſeparated from the northern
coaſt of New Andaluſia, in Terra Firma, by a ſtrait of 24 miles, and is about 40 miles
in length, and 24 in breadth ; and being always verdant, affords a moſt agreeable
proſpect. The iſland abounds in paſture, maize, and fruit; but there is a ſcarcity of
wood and water. There was once a pearl fiſhery on its coaſt. 5
There are many other ſmall iſlands in theſe ſeas, to which the Spaniards have paid
no attention. We ſhall therefore proceed round Cape Horn into the South Seas, where
the firſt Spaniſh iſland of any importance is CHILOE, on the coaſt of Chili, which has
a governor, and ſome harbours well fortified. 5 8


JUAN FERNANDES.
Lying in 83 degrees W. long. and 33 S. lat. 3oo miles weſt of Chili. This iſland is
uninhabited ; but having ſome good harbours, it is found extremely convenient for the
Engliſh cruiſers to touch at and water. This iſland is famous for having given riſc to
the celebrated romance of Robinſon Cruſoe. It ſeems one Alexander Selkirk, a Scotch-
man, was left aſhore in this ſolitary place by his captain, where he lived for ſome
years, until he was diſcovered by Captain Woodes Rogers, in 1709; when taken up,
he had almoſt forgotten his native language: he was dreſſed in goat's ſkins, and would
drink nothing but water. During his abode in this iſland, he had killed 500 goats,
which he caught by running them down ; and he marked as many more on the ear,
which he let go. Some of theſe were caught thirty years after by Lord Anſon's people;
their venerable aſpect and majeſtic beards diſcovered ſtrong ſymptoms of antiquity.
Selkirk, upon his return to England, was adviſed to publiſh an account of his life
and adventures in his little kingdom. He is ſaid to have put his papers into the hands
of Daniel Defoe, to prepare them for publication; but that writer, by the help of
thoſe papers, and a lively fancy, transformed Alexander Selkirk into Robinſon Cruſoe, d
and returned Selkirk his papers again; ſo that the latter derived no advantage from
them. They were probably too indigeſted for publication, and Defoe might derive
little from them but thoſe hints which might give rife to his own celebrated per-
tormance.* 5 | | C |


- us —
— k - _- - bo? <m  - >
As 1 9 n 5 — — — . — .
Sg * 2 2 ? : — — 2 oo = \ * 2 $
R eee 58 = = *
.


n


- der.
"on OR. "AP WO ST ER Go onf


|
9


5 4
FRENCH WEST INDIES.


p IE French were among the laſt nations who made ſettlements in the Wett Indies;
but they made ample amends by the vigour with which they parted them, and
by that chain of judicious and admirable meatures which they uted in drawing from


3 ſplendid Edmion of Robinſon Cruſoe, with ſeventeen Copper Plates, and a very intereſting account of
the Lite of Daniel Defoe; by George Chalmers, Eſq. is publiſhed by Mr. Stockdale, in 2 vols. dvo.


them


6686 FRENCH WEST INDIES,


them every advantage that the nature of the climate would yield; and in the contend.
ing againit the difficulties which it threw in their way.

We have atready mentioned the French colony upon the Spaniſh iſland of Hiſpa-
niola, or St. Domingo, as the moſt important. of all their foreign ſettlements. We
thall next proceed to the iſlands of which the French have the tole ADSI beginning
with the large and important one of


MARTINICO,


Which is ftunted between 14 and 15 degrees of N. lat. and in 61 degrees W. long.
Iving about 40 degrees N. W. of Barbadoes, is about 60 miles in length and 30 in
breadth. The inland part of it is hilly, from which are poured out upon every ſide, a
number of agrecable and uſeful rivers, which adorn and enrich this iſland in a high
degree. The produce of the ſoil is ſugar, cotton, indigo, g inger, and ſuch fruits as
are found in the neighbouring iflands : but ſugar is here, as in all the Weſt India
- iſlands, the principal commodity of which they export a conſiderable quantity annually.

Martinico is the reſidence of the govenor of the French iſlands in theſe ſeas. Its bays
and harbours are numerous, 1afe, and commodious, and well fortified. In the year


1756 this iſlaud was added to the Britith empire, but it was: given back at the treaty of
. 8
6 UA D A L OUP E,


80 called by Columbus, from the reſemblance of its mountains to thoſe of that name in
Spain, is ſituated in 16 degrees N. lat. and in 62 degrees W. long. about 3o leagues north
of Martinico,aud almoſt as many ſouth of Antigua; being 45 miles long, and 38 broad.

It is divided into two parts by a ſmall arm of the fea, or rather a narrow channel,
through which no ſhips can venture; but the inhabitants paſs it in a ferry boat: its
foil is equally fertile, and in the fame productions with that of Martinico. This ifland
is in a flouriſhing condition, and its exports of ſugar almoſt incredible.


8 T. LUCIA,


Situated ; in 14 degrees N. lat. and in 61 degrees W. long. 80 aide north-weſt of
Barbadoes, is 23 miles in length, and 12 in breadth. It received its name from being
diſcovered on the day dedicated to the virgin martyr St. Lucia. The Engliſh firſt ſettled
on this iſland in 1637. From this time they met with various misfortunes from the na-
tives and French; and at length it was agreed on between the latter and the Engliſh,
that this iſland, together with Dominica and St. Vincent, ſhould remain neutral. But

the French, before the war of 1 756 broke out, began to ſettle theſe iſlands; which, by
the treaty of peace were yielded up to Great Britain, and this iſland to France. The
ſoil of St. Lucia, in the vallies, is extremely rich: it produces excellent timber, and
abounds with pleaſant rivers and well fituated harbours; and is now declared a free


port under certain reſtrictions. The Engliſh made themſelves maſters of it in l
but it was reſtored again to the French 1 in 1783.


TOBAGO.


Iꝓ)ꝓhis iſland is ſituated 11 degrees odd minutes, N. lat. 120 miles ſouth of Barbadoes, :
and about the fame QULBnCE from the Sanin! Main. It is about 32 mules in length,


and


puren WEST INDIES. 627

and nine in breadth. The climate here is not ſo hot as might be expected ſo near the
equator ; and it is ſaid that it lies out of the courſe of thoſe hurricanes that have ſome-
times proved ſo fatal to the other Weſt India iſlands. It has a fruitful ſoil, capable of
Producing ſugar, and indeed every thing elle that is raiſed in the Weſt Indies, with the
addition (if we may believe the Dutch) of the cinnamon, nutmeg, and gum copal. It
is well watered with numerous ſprings; and its bays and rivers are ſo diſpoſed, as to
be very commodious for all kind of ſhipping. The value and importance of this ifland
appears from the expenſive and formidable armaments ſent thither by European powers


in ſupport of their different claims. It ſeems to have been chiefly poſſeſſed by the Dutch,


who defended their pretenſions againſt both England and France with the molt obſti-
nate perſeverance. By the treaty of Aix la Chapelle, in 1745 it was declared neutral;


though, by the treaty of peace in 1763, it was yielded up to Great Britain; but in


June, 1781, it was taken by the French, and ceded to them by the treaty of 1783.


ST. BARTHOLOMEW, DESEADA, D MARIGALANT E,


Are three ſmall iſlands lying in the neighbourhood of Antigua and St. Chriſtopher's,
and are of no great conſequence to the French, except in time of war, when they give
thelter to an incredible number of privateers, which greatly annoy the Britiſh Weſt


India trade. St. Bartholomew is now to be conſidered as belonging to the crown of


Sweden, being ceded to it by France, 1785.


— — i. * * he 8


DUT VVV


ST. EUSTATIUS, ox EUSTATIA,


QUITUATED in % 29 N. lat. and 6 3* 10 W. long. and three leagues north-weſt of
St. Chriſtopher's, is only a mountain, about 29 miles in compaſs, riſing out of the


ſea, like a pyramid, and almoſt round. But, though ſo ſmall and inconvenientiy


laid out by nature, the induſtry of the Dutch have made it to turn to very good ac-
count; and it is ſaid to contain $000 whites, and I 5,000 Negroes. The ſides of the
mountains are laid out in very pretty ſettlements; but they have neither fprings nor


rivers. They raiſe here ſugar and tobacco; and this iſland, as well as Curaſſou, is
engaged in the Spaniſh contraband trade, for which, however, it is not ſo well
ſituated ; and it has drawn the ſame advantage from its conſtant neutrality. But when
hoſtilities were commenced by Great Britain againſt Holland, Admiral Rodney was


ſent with a conſiderable land and ſea force againſt St. Euſtatius, which, being incapa=
ble. of any defence, ſurrendered at diſcretion, on the 3d of February, 1781. The pri-
vate property of the inhabitants was confiſcated, with a degree of rigour very uncom-
mon among civilized nations, and very inconſiſtent with the 9 and 3
by which the Engliſh nation uſed to be characteriſed. : The reaſon a gned was, that
the inhabitants of St. Euſtatius had aſſiſted 22 United States with naval and Hr
6 4 T's 1 . . | . Wy res.


— „
8


' 42 * 4 _-
37” OP " m_— — 0 I 3 - mes
2 ä — LS — — — 8
py FRE p 5 1 2 -= * — ” — — — — . — —
ww o nn — 2 7 Mo 3 _ —— — —— - — _ - — —
— bo n n N ö P — —— p_ = 5
Wen . To TEAS ace —_ _ : - .
— Ih :


— 288 n n .
— - * — *
— — — 1 : — n
- ba Wy — FAC er. 1 *
3 i I. 5 2 rtr“ —
> — — 5 6 ” 6 om 1 2 CO wid 4
ES e


. DUTCH WEST INDIES.


ſtores. But on the 25th of November, the ſame year, St. Euſtatius was Nen by
the French, under the command of the Marquis de Bouille, though their force con-
ſiſted of only three frigates and ſome ſmall craft, and about —


CURASSOU,


Situated in twelve degrees north latitude, nine or ten leagues from the continent of
Terra Firma, is thirty miles long, and ten broad. It ſeems as if it were fated, that the
ingenuity and patience of the Hollanders ſhould every where, both in Europe and
America, be employed in fighting againſt an unfriendly nature; for the iſland is not
only barren, and dependent on the rains for its water, but the harbour rs naturally one
of the worſt in America; yet the Dutch have entirely remedied that defect; they have
upon this harbour one of the largeft and by far the moſt elegant and cleanly towns in
the Weſt Indies. The public buildings are numerous and handſome ; the private
houſes commodious ; and the magazines large, convenient, and well filled. All kind
of labour is here performed by engines ; ſome of them ſo well contrived, that ups are
at once lifted into the dock.
Though this ifland is naturally barren, the induftry of the Dutch has brought it to
produce : a conſiderable quantity both of tobacco and 1 ; it has, beſides, good ſalt
works, for the produce of which there is a briſk demand from the Englifh iflands, and
the colonies on the continent. But what renders this ifland of moſt advantage to the
Dutch, is the contraband trade which is carried on between the inhabitants and the
Spaniards, and their harbour being the rendezvous to all nations in time of war. _
The Dutch ſhips from Europe touch at this iſland for intelligence, or pilots, and then
ns to the Spaniſh coaſts for trade, which they force with a ſtrong hand, it being
very difficult for the Spaniſh guarda coſtas to take theſe veſſels; for they are not only
ſtout ſhips, with a 3 of guns, but are manned with Iarge crews of choſen ſeamen,
deeply intereſted in the ſafety of the veſſel and the ſucceſs of the voyage. They have
_ eachi a ſhard in the cargo, of a value proportioned to the ſtation of the owner, ſupplied
by the merchants upon credit, and at prime coſt. This animates them with an uncom-
mon courage, and they fight bravdy, becanſe every mam fights im defence of his own
property. "Beſides tins, there is a conſtant intercourſe between this iſland and the
Spaniſh continent.
Curaſiou has numerous warehouſes, always full of the ai of Europe and
the Eaſt Indies. Here arc all forts of hg” 15 and linen cloth, laces, ſilks, e
iron utenſils, naval and military ſtores, brandy, the ſpices of the Moluccas, and the
calicoęs of India, white and painted. Hither the Dutch Weſt India, which is al
their African Company, annually bring three or four cargoes of ſlaves ; and to this
wart the Spaniards themtelves come m mall veſſels, and carry off not only the beſt of
the negroes, at a very a 2 price, but great quantities of all the above ſorts of goods ;
and the cler has this advantage, that the reſuſe of warehouſes and mercers' ſhops,
and every thing that is grown unſaſhionable and unſaleable in Europe, go off here
extremely well; every thing being ſufficiently recommended by its being European.
The Spaniards pay in gold and filver, coined or in bars, cocoa, vanilla, jeſuits bark,
cochineal, and other valuable commodities. 12 —
Ibe trade of Curaſſou, eyen in times of peace, is ſaid to be annually worth to the
Dutch no leſs than 500,000], but in time of war the profit is ſtill greater, for then it
becames the common emporium of the Weſt Indies; it affords a retreat to ſhips of
all nations, and at the ſame time refuſes none of them arms and ammunition to deſtroy


Olle


= DANISH WEST INDIES 629
one another. The intercourſe with Spain being then interrupted, the Spanith colonies


have ſcarcely any other market from whence they can be well ſupplied either with
ſlaves or goods, The French come hither to buy the beef, pork, corn, flour, and
lumber, which are brought from the continent of North America, or exported from


Ireland; ſo that, whether in peace or in war, the trade of this iſland flouriſhes
extremely. 2 Is


The trade of all the Dutch American ſettlements was ori ginally carried on by the


Weſt India Company alone; at preſent, ſuch ſhips as go upon that trade, pay two

and a half per cent. for their licenſes ; the company, however, reſerve to themſelves
the whole of what is carried on between Africa and the American iſlands, _
The other iſlands, Box AIRE and Arvusa, are inconfiderable in themſelves, and
ſhould be regarded as appendages to Curaſſou, for which they are chiefly employed in
raiſing cattle and other proviſions.


The iſland of Saza, ſituated at no great diſtance from St. Euſtatius, is ſinall and


hardly deſerves to be mentioned.


m_


— p —_—— 9 . f
—— £ th. —— - - — —


—


*


DAN ISH WEST INDIES.


oo. oo FRSMAk


AN inconſiderable member of the Caribbees, ſituated in 64 degrees Weſt longitude,


and 18 degrees North latitude, about 15 miles in circumference, and has a ſafe


and commodious harbour.


ST. CROIX, ox SANTA CRUZ,


Another ſmall and unhealthy iſland, lying about five leagues eaſt of St. Thomas,
ten or twelve leagues in length, and three or four where it is broadeſt. Theſe iflands,
ſo long as they remained in the hands of the Daniſh Weſt India Company, were ill-


managed, and of little conſequence to the Danes; but that wiſe and benevolent prince,
the late king of Denmark, bought up the company's ſtock, and laid the trade open ;


and ſince that time the iſland of St. Thomas, as well as this, has been fo greatly im-


proved, that it is ſaid to produce upwards of 3000 hogſheads of ſugar, of 1000 weight


each, and other of the Weſt India commodities in tolerable plenty. In time of war,


privateers bring in their prizes here for ſale; and a great many veſſels trade from hence


along the Spaniſh main, and return with money in ſpecic or bars, and valuable mer-


chandiſe. - As for Santa Cruz, from a perfect deſert a few years ſince, it is beginnin


to ſcttle faſt ; ſeveral perſons from the Engliſh iſlands, ſome of them of great wealth,


have gone to ſettle there, and have received very great encouragement to do ſo.
Theſe two nations, the Dutch and the Danes, hardly deſerve to be mentioned among
the proprietors of America; their poſſeſſions there are comparatively nothing. But,
| | RET, oF Ye eo notwith⸗


* 9
. — - — Her — — ow "004
es NE n — —
— * * : 7
—ä —:̃ RR TRIES. * 2 =_
UP * OR T5


1 — r Aa
ng Es 3 5 .

* # mou — np ——

——P— er — — —_—


—

_ c ST.
- oy — .
zr


Page. er
F


·˙w-


on
G \ ——. - — P — r 4444 2 — 1 — L
l 0 * .


—— ——


a - —
— — vw —_
—— av. TS ô--ů
——


63⁰ NEW DISCOVERTES
notwithſtanding they appear extremely worthy of the attention of theſe powers, as the
ſhare of the Dutch only is worth to them at leafi 600,000. a year.
„There ſcems to be a remarkable providence,” fays an mgenious and political
writer, © in caſting the parts, if I may ute that expreſſion, of the ſeveral European
nations who act upon the ſtage ot America. The Spamard, proud, lazy, and magni-
ficent, has an ample walk in which to expatiate, a foit climate to indulge his love of
eaſe, and a profuſion of gold and filver to procure him all thofe luxuries his pride de-
'mands, but which his lazineſs would refute him. | F
The Portugueſe, naturally indigent at home, and enterprifing rather than induf-

trious abroad, has gold and diamonds as the Spaniard has, wants them as he docs, but


*


poſſeſſes them in a more uſeful though a leſs oſtentatious manner.

The Engliſh, of a reaſoning diſpoſition, thoughtful and cool, and men
rather than of great induſtry, impatient of much fruitleſs labour, abborrent of con-
ſtraint, and lovers of a country life, have a lot which indted produces neither gold


-


nor ſilver ; but they have a large tract of a fine continent; * a noble field for the & -


erciſe of agriculture, and ſufficient to turniſh their trade without laying them under any
great difficulties. . Intolerant as they are of the moſt uſeful reſtraints, their commerce
flouriſhes from the freedom every man has of purſuing it according to his own ideas,
and directing has lite after is own os. On,
« The Frenth, active, lively, enterpriſing, pliable, and politic; and though
changing their purſuits, always purſuing the preſent object with eagerneſs, are, not-
withſtanding, tractable, and obedient to rules and laws, which bridle their diſpoſitions,
and wind and turn them to proper courſes —Thelſe people have a country (when Canada
was in their poſſeſſion) where more is to be effected by managing the people than by
cultivating the ground; where a peddling eommerce, that requires conftant motion,
flouriſhes more than agriculture, or a regular traffic; where they have difficulties


which keep them alert by ſtruggling witli them, and where their obedience to a wiſe


government (meaning the excellent regulations reſpecting the French colonies in Ame-


nich) ſerves them for perfonal witdom. _Iir the iſtands, the whole is the work of their


policy, and a right turn their government has taken. 5 ;
„The Dutch have a rock or two, on which to diſplay the miracles of frugality and
diligence (which are, their virtues) and on which they have exerted theſe virtues, and
Heyn ole nuiracles.“ . > RY 7


er
6


7 | E
4 3 - % 4 —
- . N z y 55 1 — HE" a
_ p 2 1
4 - p . 1 7 4 ? _ —
* - >
*


11 t 2 7
. . 1 34


NEW DISCOVERIES.


*


ON knowledge of the globe has been confiderably augmented by the late dif-
AXLZ coverics of Rutha, Britith, and American navigators, which have been numcrous
and important. Of theſe diſcoveries we have already given ſome account, page. 98.
To the account we have given, we add the following. „ n


* Theſe obſervati ons were made before the United States were ſeparated from Great Britain, and by an
Engliſbn 0+» | | | |


Lm ee * W


"oY
vow __
tk RC Ss 1


„


NOR


* te 2 *


f buſineſs


ra - .


+


ble 1p rs Hihi gb 4g egen,


9 5


— —


2
|


7 wuun hub 5


2opUu 07 0d L017 v |
TDs — 164 —
$TTUYTAOISIO MIN
ee jv fm,
„% „ 6 GIN OM
5 1 2 di
TEW EP
| | mA 4 es
Z uoun}er rr | : a7 0.8
WT nbuoy © | — 3 | puvpyny N
8 , nun |
PU” : |
omg yy”. | „ | 4h
8 = L >doy prog got) 4 V4 0 | f
AF 4eFI 0. | | | | X |
. 7 85 I 4 . |
anmig PT” K : | .
. | | JV 0119 43
SS ni JE IR


XXV


5 2 2 9


„ % F
aun t,


a, ee


1
voltagondgp N
7. 5 ang” | {1 | | |
2 os — IMAM 2 m_ Ialunmm Gin 5 _ Nummaumm "=
9 i C : Oo i |

2 o o Oo


4 O 91742190


IAHAHEHAu
1


„ >>" lxroag RS,


——_


NEW DISCOVERIES 631


NORTHERN ARCHIPELAGO.


coalt of Kamtſchatka, and the weſtern coaſt of the continent of America.“


Some of theſe iſlands are only inhabited occaſionally, and for ſome months in the


year, and others are very thinly peopled; but others have a great number of inhabi-
tants, who conſtantly refide in them. The inhabitants of theſe iſlands are, in general,
of a ſhort ſtature, with ſtrong and robuſt limbs, but free and ſupple. They have lank


black hair, and little beard, flattiſn faces, and fair ſkins. They are for the moſt part


well made, and of ſtrong conftitutions] ſuitable to the boiſterous climate of their iſles.
Ihe Fox Iflands, one of the groups, are ſo called from the great number of black,
grey, and red foxes, with which they abound. The dreſs of the inhabitants , conſiſts
of a cap and a fur coat, which reaches down to the knee. Some of them wear com-
mon caps of a party-coloured bird ſkin, upon which they leave part of the wings and
tail. On the fore part of their hunting and fiſhing caps, they place a ſmall board like
a ſkreen. adorned with the jaw bones of ſea bears, and ornamented with glaſs beads,
which they receive in barter from the Ruſſians. At their feſtivals and dancing parties


they uſe a much more ſhewy fort of caps. They feed upon the fleſh of all forts of


fea animals, and generally cat it raw; but if at any time they chooſe to dreſs their
victuals, they make uſe of a hollow ſtone; having placed the fiſh or fleſh therein,
they cover it with another, and cloſe the interſtices with lime or clay; they then lay
it horizontally upon two ſtones, and light a fire under it. The proviſion intended for
keeping is dried without ſalt in the open air. Their weapons conſiſt of bows, arrows,
and darts, and for defence they uſe wooden ſhields. ont 3
The moſt perfect equality reigns among theſe iflanders. They have neither chieſs
nor ſupertors, neither laws nor puniſhments. They hve together in families, and ſo-
cieties of ſeveral ſamilies united, which form what they call a race, who, in caſe of an
attack, or defence, mutually help and ſupport each other. The inhabitants of the
fame iſland always pretend to be of the ſame race; and every perſon looks upon his
Wand-as a poſſeſſion, the property of which is common to all the individuals of the
fame ſociety. Feaſts are very conumnon among them, and more particularly when the


inhabitants of one. fland-are viſited by thoſe of the others. The men of the village


meet their gueſts beating drums, and preceded by the women, who dance. At the
concluſion of the dance, the hoſts ſerve up their beſt proviſions, and invite their


gueſts to partake of the feaſt. _ They feed their children when very young with the


coarſeſt fleſh, and for the moſt part raw. If an infant cries, the mother immediately
carries it to the ſea-fide, and, whether it be ſummer or winter, holds it naked in the
Water until it is quiet. This cuſtom is ſo far from doing the children any harm, that
it hardens them againſt the cold, and they accordingly go barefooted through the win-
ter without the leaſt inconvenience. They ſeldom heat their dwellings ; but, when


„Mr. Coxe obſerves, that, © the firſt projet for making diſcoveries in that tempeſtuous ſea, which lies


between Kamtſchatka and America, was conceived and planned by Peter I.” Voyages with that view were
accordingly undertaken at the expeoſe of the crown ; but when it was difcovered that the iflands in that fea
abounded with valuable furs, private merchants immediately engaged with ardour in ſimilar expeditions ; and
within a period of ten years, more important diſcoveries were made by theſe individuals, at their own private
coſt, than had hitherto been effected by all the efforts of the crown. The inveſtigation of utetul knowledge
has alſo been greatly encouraged by the preſent empreſs of Ruſſia ; and the moſt diſtant parts of her vaſt
dominions, and other countries and iſlands, have been explored, at her expenſe, by perſons of abilities and
learning, in conſequence of which ſeveral diſcoveries have been made, |


they


This conſiſts of ſeveral groups of iſlands, which are ſituated between the eaſtern


632 NEW DISCOVERIES.
they are defirous of warming themſelves, they light a bundle of hay, and ſtand over
it; or elle they ſet fire to train oil, which they pour into a hollow ſtone. They have a
good ſhare of plain natural ſenſe, but are rather ſlow of underſtanding. They ſcem
cold and indifferent in moſt of their actions; but let an injury or even ſuſpicion only
rouſe them from this phlegmatic ſtate, and they become inflexible and furious, taking
the moſt violent revenge, without any regard to the conſequences. The leaſt afflic-
tion prompts them to ſuicide ; the apprehenfion of even an uncertain evil often leads
them to deſpair; and they put an end to _ _ with great apparent OY:


Tut PELEW ISLANDS.


The exiſtence and fituation of theſe iſlands were probably known to the 8 aniards
at a diſtant period; but from a report among the neighbouring iſlands, of their being
inhabited by a ſavage race of cannibals, it appears that there had never been the leaſt

communication between them and any of the Europeans, till the Antelope Packet,
(belonging to the Eaſt India Company) was wrecked on one of them, in Auguſt 1783.
From the accounts given of theſe iſlands, by Captain Wilfon, who commanded. the
packet, it appears that they are fituated An, the Fes and gth degrees north lati-
tude, and between 130 and 136 degrees of caſt longitude from Greenwich, and he in
a N. E. and S. W. direction; they are long but narrow, of a moderate height, and
well covered with wood; the climate temperate and agreeable; the lands produce
ſugar cane, yams, cocoa nuts, plantains, bananas, oranges, and lemons ; ; and the
ſurrounding ſeas abound with the fineſt and greateſt variety of fiſh.

The natives of theſe iſlands are a ſtout, well-made people, above the middle ſtature; ;
their complexions are of a far deeper colour than what is underftood by the Indian
copper, but not black. The men go entirely naked, and the women wear only two
ſmall aprons, one behind and one before, made of the huſks of the cocoa nut, dyed
with different ſhades of ycllow.

The government is monarchical, and the king is abſolute, but his power is exerciſed
more with the mildneſs of a father than a ſovereign. In the language of Europeans,

he is the fountain of honour. - He occaſionally creates his nobles, called — or
Chiefs, and confers a fingle honour of knighthood, called the Order of the one, the
members of which are diſtinguiſhed by wearing a bone on their arm.

The idea of theſe iſlanders, as communicated in the publiſhed account of Captain
Wilſon, is that of a people who, though totally ignorant of the arts and ſciences, and

living in the ſimpleſt ſtate of nature, yet poſſelz all that genuine politeneſs, that de-
licacy and chaſtity of intercourſe between the ſexes, that reſpect for perſonal property,
that ſubordination to government, and theſe habits of Induſtry, which are {0 _—
united in the more civilized ſocieties of modern times.

It appears that when the Engliſh were thrown on one of theſe iflands, they were
received by the natives with the greateſt humanity and hoſpitality ; and till their
departure, experienced the utmoſt courteſy and attention. They felt our people
were diſtreſſed, and in conſequence wiſhed they ſhould ſhare whatever they had to
give. It was not that worldly munificence, that beſtows and ſpreads its favours with
a diſtant eye to retribution ; it was the pure emotion of native benevolence ;. it was
the love of man to man; it was a ſcene that pictures human nature in triumphant


colouring, and whilſt their liberality gratificd the ſenſe, their virtue firuck the heart!”


i


Tu


3 NEW DISCOVERIES. os 633


TAE MARQUESAS ISLANDS


Are five in number, firſt diſcovered by Quiros, in 1595, and their ſituation better
aſcertained by Captain Cook, in 1774. St. Dominica is the largeſt, about 16 leagues _
m circuit. The inhabitants, their language, manners, and clothing, with the vegeta-
ble productions, are nearly the ſame as the Society Iſles. :


INGRAHAM's ISLANDS.


= Theſe iflands were diſcovered by Captain Joſeph Ingraham, of Boſton, commander
ot the Brigantine Hope, on the igth of April, 1791. They lie N. N. W. from the
Marqueſas iſlands, from 35 to 50 leagues diſtant, and are ſever in number, which Cap--
tain Ingraham named as follows, viz. 1 8 e
Names, Tat, 8. «Long. from Lon- — Circuit}
Waſhington, 8 52 1409 19 | - Theſe 5, except
Adams, — 9 20 140% 54 Federal Ifl. which
Lincoln. 9 24 140% 54 } is ſmaller, are about
Federal, 8 55 140 50, j 10 leagues in cir-
Frankhn, 8» 45 140% 49, (cuit.
Hancock, - 8 3, 141” 144 6 or 7 leagues;
Knox, - 0.5: 2410 16 5 ditto.. |
Moſt, if not all theſe iſlands are inhabited, and: appear generally to be diverſified
with hills and vallies, and to be well wooded, and very pleaſant. The people reſem-
ble thoſe of the Marqueſas iſlands, as do their canoes, which are carved at each end:
They appeared friendly. | TS e


— — CTR ern mtr ont” *


OTAH EITE oz KING GEORGE's ISLAND.


This iſland was diſcovered by Captain Wallis, in the Dolphin, on the roth of
June, 1767. It is ſttuated between the r7th degree 28 minutes, and the 17th
degree 53 minutes ſouth latitude, and between the r4gth degree 11 minutes, and
the 149th degree 39 minutes, weſt longitude. It conſiſts of two peninſulas,
of a ſomewhat circular form, joined by an iſthumus, and is ſurrounded! by 4
reef of coral rocks, which form feveral excellent bays and harbours, where there is room
and depth of water for almoſt any number of the largeſt ſhips. The face of the
country is very extraordinary, for a border of low land almoſt entirely ſurrounds each)
_ peninſula, and behind this border the land riſes in ridges that run up into the middle
of theſe diviſions, and thefe form mountains that may be feen at fixty leagues diſtance.
The foil, except upon the very tops of the ridges, is remarkably rich and fertile;
watcred by a great number of rivulets, and covered with fruit trees of various Kinds,
forming the moſt delightful groves. The border of low lands that lies between the
ridges and the ſea, is in very few places more than a mile and à half broad, and this,
together with ſome of the vallics, are the only parts that are inhabited.
Some parts of the iftand of Otahcite are very populous; and Capt. Cook was of
opu jon that the number of inhabitants on the whole iſland amounted to 204,000,, in-
clucing women and children. They are of a clear olive complexion ; the men are
tall, 1ttzong, well limbed, and finely thaped ; the women are of an inferior ſize, but
handſome, and very amorous, and indeed generally ſomewhat licentious. Their cloth-


ng


634 NEW DISCOVERIES. |
ing conſiſts of cloth or matting of different kinds; and the greateſt part of the food
eaten here is vegetable, as cocoa nuts, bananas, bread truit, | plantain, and a great
variety of other fruit.
They have no tools among them made of metal ; and thoſe the) wh are made of
ſtone, or ſome kind of bones. The inhabitants A Otatheite are remarkable for their
cleanlineſs :; for both men and women conftantly wath their whole bodies in running


water three times every day. Their language is ſoft and melodious, and abounds with
vowels.


There were no tame animals on this iſland but hogs, digs, and poultry ; and the
only wild animals are tropical birds, paroquets, pigeons, ducks, a few other birds,
rats, and a very few ſerpents. The ſea, however, {upplies the inhabitants with a great
rariety of the moſt excellent fith, and by the kindneſs of the Engliſh and the Spa-
niards, they have now bulls and cows, theep, goats, a horſe and mare, geeſe, ducks,
peacocks, and turkeys, and alſo cats.

The inhabitants of Otaheite believe in one dopecche Deity, but at the Carine time ac-
knowledge a yariety of ſubordinate deities : they offer up their prayers without the uſe
of idols, "and believe the exiſtence of the foul in a ſeparate ſtate, where there are two

fituations, of different degrees of happineſs. Among theſe people a ſubordination is
eſtabliſhed, which ſomewhat reſembles the carly ſtate of the European nations, under


the feudal ſyſtem. If a general attack happens to be made on the iſland, every diſtrict
is obliged to furniſh its pro


are flin gs, which they uſe with great dexterity, and clubs of about fix or ſeven feet
long, and made of a hard heavy wood. They have a great number of boats, many


of which are conſtructed for warlike operations. 'Dtabdte n ſaid to be — to ſend
out 1729 war canoes, and 5 88 . ö 2 Nil!


SOCIETY: ISLANDS.


Of the ſeveral iflands fo called in honour of the Royal Society, which were diſco-


vered by Captain Cook, in the year 1769, the principal are, HuAnEINx, ULTza,
Orka, and BoLABOLA. Huaheine is about 31 leagues to the north-weſt of Otaheite,
and its productions are the ſame. The inhabitants ſeem to be larger made and more


ſtout than thoſe of Otaheite. Mr. Banks meaſured one of the men, and found him
to be ſix ſeet three inches and a half high;


perſuade one of them to go up the hills wich him; for they ſaid, if they ſhould at-


tempt it, the fatigue would kill them. Ulitea is about or eight leagues. to the


n of Huaheine, and is a much larger ifland, but appears neither ſo fer-
tile nor ſo populous. Otaha is divided from Ulica by a ſtrait, that in the narroweſt
ak is not above two miles broad. About four leagues to the north-weſt of Otaha

es Bolabola, which is ſurrounded by a reef of rocks, and ſeveral ſmall iſlands, all
which arc no more than eight leagues in compals. To theſe iſlands, and thoſe of


Maura, which lie about 14 miles to the weſtward of ene, containing ſix in all,
Capt. Cook gave the name of ere Iſlands.


THE PRIENDLY ISLAN DS.


"Theſe iſlands were ſo named by Capt. Cook, in the year 1773, on 1 of the


friendſhip which appeared to ſubſiſt among the inhabitants, and from their courteous
behaviour to ſtrangers.


The


portion of ſoldiers for the common defence. Their weapons


yet they are ſo indolent, that he could not


I


NEW DISCOVERIES. 635


The plantations on ſome of theſe iſlands are both more numerous and more exten-


ſive, and encloſed by fences, which running parallel to each other, form fine ſpacious


public roads, which would appear beautiful in countries where rural conveniencies have
been carried to the greateſt perfection. They are in general highly cultivated, and
well ſtocked with the ſeveral roots and fruits which theſe iſlands produce; and Capt.
Cook endeavoured to add to their number by planting Indian corn, and the ſeed of
melons, pumpkins, and the like. 1 | | |
 Eooa, when viewed from the ſhip at anchor, formed one of the moſt beautiful

proſpects in nature, and very different from the others of the Friendly Iles, which


being low and perfectly level, exhibit nothing to the eye but the trees which cover


them; whereas here, the land rifing gently to a conſiderable height, preſents us with
an extenſtve proſpect, where groves of trees are only interſperſed at irregular diſtances,
in beautiful diſorder, and all the reſt is covered with graſs, except near the ſhores,


v;


where it is covered with fruit and other trees, amongſt which are the habitations of the
r 1k Ro» 5 WD


We are informed that the bulk of the people of theſe iſlands are ſatisfied with one
wife, but the chiefs have commonly ſeveral women, though it appeared as if one only
was looked on as a miſtreſs of the family. Though female chaſtity was frail enough
in ſome, it is higlily probable that conjugal fidelity is ſcldom violated, as it does not
appear that more than one inftance of it was known to our voyagers ; and in that, the


man's life who was the cauſe of it paid the forfeit for his crime. Nor were thoſe of


the better ſort who were unmarried more liberal of their favours ; thoſe who were being
obvious proſtitutes by profeſſion. When they are afflicted by any diſorder which they


deem dangerous, they cut off the joint of one of their little fingers, fondly believing


that the Deity will accept of that, as a ſort of ſacrifice efficacious enough to procure
the recovery of their health. It was fuppoſed from ſome circumſtances, that though


they believe in a future ſtate, they have no notion of future rewards nor puniſhments


for the things done here. They believe in a Supreme Being, but they believe alſo in a
number of inferior ones: every iſland has its peculiar god, as every European nation
has its peculiar faint. Capt. Cook thinks he can pronounce that they do not worſhip
any thing that is the work of their own hands, or any viſible part of the creation.
They make no offering of hogs, dogs, or fruit, to the Otooa, as at Otaheite ; but it


is abſolutely certain that even this mild, humane, and beneficent people uſe human


ſacrifices. The government, as far as could he diſcovered, appears to approach nearly


to the feudal ſyſtem, formerly eſtabliſhed all over Europe. When any perſon of con-


ſequence dies, his body is waſhed and decorated by ſome women, who are appointed
on the occaſion, and theſe women are not, by their cuſtoms, to touch any food with
their hands for many months afterwards; and it is remarkable, that the length of the


time they arc thus proſcribed is the greater in proportion to the rank of the chief they


had waſhed. Their great men are fond of a ſingular piece of luxury, which is to
have women fit befide them all night, and beat on different parts of their body until
they go to ſleep ; aſter which they relax a little of their labour, unleſs they appear


likely to awake, in which cafe they redouble their drumming, until they are again faſt


aſleep. Theſe are ſome of the moſt remarkable opinions, cuſtoms, laws, and ceremo-
nies obſerved at the Friendly Iflands, and which we have cndeavoured to collect into


one point of view for the information of our more inquiſitive readers. 125


4 M * 5 NEW


636 NEW DISCOVERIES.


NEW ZEALAND.


This country was firſt diſcovered by Taſman, the Dutch navigator, i in the year
1642; who gave it the name of Staten Land, though it has been generally diſtinguiſhed
in our maps and charts by the name of New Zealand, and was ſuppoſed to be part of
a ſouthern continent; but it is now known, from the late diſcoveries of Capt. Cook,

who failed round it, to confift of two large iſlands, divided from each other by a firait,

four or five leagues broad. They are fituated between the latitudes of 34 and 48
degrees S. and between the longitudes of 166 and 180 degrees E. of Greenwich. One
of theſe iſlands is for the moſt part mountainous, rather barren, and but thinly in-
habited; but the other is much more fertile, and of a better appearance. In the opi-
nion of Sir Joſeph Banks and Dr. Solander, every kind of European fruits, grain, and
plants, would flouriſh here in the utmoſt luxuriance. From the vegetables found here,
it is ſuppoſed that the winters are milder than thoſe of England, and the ſummers not
hotter, though more equally warm; fo that it is imagined that if this country were
ſettled by people from Europe, they would, with moderate induſtry, be ſoon ſupplied
not only with the neceflaries but the luxuries of life in great abundance. Here are
foreſts of vaſt extent, filled-with very large timber trees; and near four hundred plants.
were found here that had not been deſcribed by naturaliſts. The inhabitants of New.
Zealand are ſtout and robuſt and equal in ſtature to the largeſt Europeans.. Their


colour in general is brown, but in few deeper than that of a Spaniard who has been


expoſed to the fun, and in many not ſo deep; and both ſexes have good features.

Their dreſs 1s very uncouth, and they mark their bodies in a manner ſimilar to thoſe

of Otaheite, which is called tattowing. Their rincipal weapons are lances, darts, and

a Kind of battle-axes; and they have at 2 ſhewn themſelves very hoſtile to the
Europeans who have viſited them. As to their religious principles, they believe that
the fouls of ſuch as are killed in battle, and their fleſh afterwards eaten by the enemy,

are doomed to perpetual fire; while the ſouls of thoſe who die a natural death, or
whoſe bodies are preſerved from ſuch ignominious treatment, aſcend to the habitations
of the gods. The common method of diſpoſing of their dead is by interment in the
earth; but if they have more of their ſlaughtered enemies than they can eat, they
throw them into the ſea. They have no ſuch things as morais, or other places of public
worſhip ; nor do they ever aſſemble together with this view.

We conclude this article with the following character of Capt. Cook, to perpetuate
the memory and ſervices of ſo excellent a navigator and commander :

Perhaps no ſcience ever received greater additions from the labours of a fingle man,
than geography has done from thoſe of Capt. Cook. In his firſt voyage to the South
Seas, he diſcovered the Society Iflands ; determined the inſularity of New Zealand;
diſcovered the firaits which ſeparate the two iſlands, and are called after his name;
and made a complete ſurvey of both. He afterwards explored the eaſtern coaſt of
New Holland, hitherto unknown; an extent of tw enty-ſeven- degrees of latitude, or

upwards of 2000 miles.

In his ſecond expedition he ſolved the great problem of a ſouthern continent, 8
traverſed that hemiſphere between the latitude of 40 and o, in ſuch a manner as not
to leave a poſſibility of its exiſtence, unleſs near the pole, and out of the reach of
navigation. During this voyage, he diſcovered New 1 (Gainſ the largeſt iſland in

the Southern Pacific, except New Zealand; the iſland of Georgia, and an unknown
coaſt, which he named Sandwich Land, the 7, bule of the ſouthern hemiſphere ; and


_ 1727 having


NEW DISCOVERIES 6375


having twice viſited the tropical ſeas, he ſettled the ſituations of the old, and made
everal new diſcoveries. |
But the laſt voyage is diſtinguiſhed above all the reſt by the extent and importance
of the diſcoveries. Beſides ſeveral 1ſmaller iſlands in the Southern Pacific, he diſco-
vered, to the north of the equinoctial line, the group called the Sandwich lands,
which, from their fituation and productions, bid fairer for becoming an object of con-
ſequence in the ſyſtem of European navigation, than any other diſcovery in the South
Sea. He afterwards explored what had hitherto remained unknown of the weſtern
coaſt of America, from the latitude of 437 to 70 north, containing an extent of 3,500
miles; aſcertained the proximity of the two great continents of Afia and America;
paſſed the ſtraits between them, and ſurveyed the coaſt on each ſide to ſuch a height
of northern latitude, as to demonſtrate the impracticability of a paſſage, in that hemi-
ſphere, from the Atlantic into the Pacific ocean, either by an eaſtern or a weſtern
courſe. In ſhort, if we except the Sea of Amur, and the Japaneſe Archipelago, which
ſtill remain imperfectly known to Europeans, he has completed the hydrography of
the babitable globe. | ro bent oh" pa ek 81 I CEE WET
As a navigator, his ſervices were not, perhaps, leſs ſplendid ; certainly not leſs im-
portant and meritorious. The method which he-diſcoveredy and ſo fucceſsfully purſued,
of preſerving the health of ſeamen, forms a new era in navigation, and will tranſmit
his name to future ages among the friends and benefactors of mankind. |
_ Thoſe who are converſant in naval hiſtory need not be told at how dear a rate the
advantages which have been ſought, through the medium of long voyages at ſea, have
always been purchaſed. That dreadful diſorder which is peculiar to their ſervice, and
whole ravages have marked the tracts of diſcoverers with circumſtances almoſt too
ſhocking to relate, muſt, without exerciſing an unwarrantable tyranny over the lives of
our ſeamen, have proved an inſuperable obſtacle to the proſecution of ſuch enterprizes.
It was reſerved for Capt. Cook to ſhew the world, by repeated trials, that voyages


—


might be protracted to the unuſual length of three, or even four years, in unknown


regions, and under every change and rigour of the climate, not only without affecting
the health, but even without diminiſhing the probability of life, in the ſmalleſt degree.


— — . — —u — —


OF the diſcoveries which have been made in the eaſtern hemiſphere, that merit
particular notice, are New Holland, New Guinca, New Britain, and New Ireland.
We ſhall alſo here add a more particular account of the Sandwich lilands.


CONTINENT or NEW HOLLAND.
SITUATION AND EXTENT. | NE
eo” +10 12 Bales: 1, 5 :
Length J 2400 4 10 and 153? E. Long.
ET e 1 11 and 43“ S. Lat.

Ir lies S. E. of the iſland of Java, and ſouth of New Guinea, in the Great South
Sea. For more than a century after its firſt diſcovery by the Dutch, in 16 16, it was
thought to be a part of a vaſt ſouthern continent, the exiſtence of Which had been a
favourite idea with many experienced navigators. The great extent of New Holland


gives it an unqueſtionable claim to the name of Cox IX RN Tr. | o
| | 4 M 2 DES The


%


638 NEW DISCOVERIES.
The principal capes arc, Cape York and South Cape, which form the extreme N. and
S. points of the contment. Between thete capes. aloug the cajtern ſhore, are Cape Flat-
tery, Cape Glouceſtor, Cape Tow njend. Sandy Cape, Smoakley y Cape, and Cape Howe,
The moſt noted hays ate Botany Bay, on the caſt fide of the continent, Biteman Bay,
ſouth of it, and Gtaichoute Bay, Harvey's, Kepple, Halifax, and Frinity Bays, all
between Botany Bay and York Cape, on the eaſtern ſhore. Shark Bay lies on the-
welt fide of the continent, about ſouth lat. 25% The capacious gulf of Carpentaria,
diſcovered in 1618, hes on the moans. York Cape and Arneim's land make the two
points of it.
The whole eaſtern coaſt of this continent, extent the very ſouthern point, was-
difcorered and explored by Capt. Cook, in 1770, and is called New Sour WaALEs..
It is claimed by England on the old principle of prior difcovery.
From want of opportunity to examine, no conſiderable rivers have yet been dit -
covered; but from the appearance of the country, it is conjectured that it is well.
watered. Two kinds of gum are produced here, called red and jellow gums; the
former reſembles ſanguis draconis, but is perfectly ſoluble in water. It is drawn from
the tree by tapping, or taken out of the veins of the wood, when dry, in which it is
copiouſly diſtributed. It is a very powerful remedy in the dyſentery.
I be yellow gum, as it is called, is ſtrictly refin, not being at all ſoluble in water:
it has the reſemblance of gamboge, but has not the property of ſtaining. The plant
that produces it is low and ſmall, with long graſſy leaves; but the fructification of it
fhoots out in a ſingular manner from the center of the leaves, on a fingle ſtraight
ſtem, to the height of twelve or fourteen feet. Of this ſtem, which is like ſome of
the reed claſs, the natives ufually make their ſpears. The refin is generally dug up
out of the ſoil under the tree, not collected from it, and may perhaps be that which
Taliſman calls gum lac of the ground.” _


There are a great variety of birds and animals found here, ſeveral of which, before
the diſcovery of this place, were non-deſcripts.*®
The natives go always uncovered, although it is obſerved they fuffer ſometimes
from the cold. Thoſe on the borders of the fea coaft ſubfiſt principally on fiſh: On.
that part of the coaſt which the Engliſh have invaded, the natives have retired, and,
from accounts, are much diſtreſſed tor proviſton. A kind of twine is manufactured
among them, which, with their fiſhing nets, is very neatly made from the flax plant.
This plant promiſes to be very valuable for the purpoſe of making cordage, and the
_ fineſt manufactures: it grows in Norfolk iſland (a fmall iſland N.W. of New Hol-
land, on which the Engliſh are likewiſe making a ſetttement) in great plenty and with.
ſuch luxuriance as to reach the height of eight feet.


Their cutting implements are made of ſtone. Several figures of animals, of ſhields.


and weapons, and even of men, have been ſeen carved upon the rocks roughly, indeed, „


but ſufficiently well executed to indicate the object intended by them. On the top of
the hills 1s the figure of a man, in the attitude aſſumed by them when they begin
to dance, executed in a ſtill ſuperior ſtile. That the arts of imitation ſhould thus ;
precede in any degree thoſe of neceſſity, ſeems to be an exception to the rules laid

down in theory for the progreſs of invention. Though they have made no attempts
towards clothing themſelves, they are by no means infenſible of the cold, and appear


very much to diſlike the rain. During a ſhower, they have been obſerved: to cover


* The reader will find cuts, and a deſcription of a number of theſe animals and birds, 1 in 6 The Voyage
at Governor Philip to Botany Bay,“ publiſhed by * Stockdale, London, in 1790. FS. bo
NCIT.


| NEW DISCOVERIES. 639
their heads with pieces of bark, and to ſhiver exceedingly. Their method of kindlin
fire is probably very laborious, as they are rarely ſeen without a fire actually made,
or a piece of burning wood, which they carry with them from place to place, and
even in their canoes. The perpetual fires, which in ſome countries formed a part of
the national religion, had perhaps no other origin than a ſimilar inability to produce
it at pleaſure, and if we fuppole the original flame to have been made from lightning,
5 HT, of its coming down from heaven will be found to deviate very little from

e truth. - | „ e BED ao ;

In May 1587, the Britiſh government fitted out a ſquadron of eleven veſſels, with
850 convicts, under the command of Arthur Philip, Efq. in order to form a ſettlement
on this continent. The ſituation determined upon has been named Port Jackſon ;
ſouth lat. 32 52, caſt long. from Greenwieh, 15919 30%. This place is about nine
miles from Botany Bay, and has a harbour capable of containing 1000 fail of the line
in perfect ſecurity. A plan of à town has been regularly laid out, and from the lateſf

accounts, the proſpect was flattering to the new ſettlers © ©

On the fiſt arrival of the-Englith, the natives were found amicable, hoſpitable, un-
accuſtomed to act with=treachery, or to take the leaſt advantage, and every pre-
caution was taken to prevent this harmony from being interrupted ; but from ſome
diſagreement with individuals, or what is more probable, a diſhke of the encroach-
ments on their territories,” they appear to avoid any intercourſe with their new neigh-
bours. VV 5 5

The natives; like all other barbarous nations, have fome cuſtoms peculiar to them-
ſelves. Governor Philip, in the interviews he had with the natives, obſerved that the
women in general had loſt two joints from the little finger of their left hands. He
was not able to find out the occaſion of this mutilation, but noticed that it was con-
fined to the females.* or oo ?”õU 8 5 1

The men are diſtinguiſned in a different manner: their fingers are not mutilated,
but moſt of them want the right front tooth in the upper jaw. They alſo have a
cuſtom of perforating the cartilage that divides the noſtrils, and thruſting through it a
eh 3 : 5 a

The women are not treated with much tendernets ; and are kept in great ſubordi-
nation by their huſbands. They appear to be employed chiefly in the eanoes, in which.
women have frequently been ſeen with young children at the breaſt. Ee

The inhabitants are not numerous, and are of a chocolate colour, middle ſtature,
and very active and courageous. Their food is chiefly fiſh, birds of various kinds,
yams, fruit, and the fleſh of the kanguroo, an animal reſembling the opoſſum, and
peculiar to this continent. Their weapons are ſpears and lances of different kinds,
which they throw with great dexterity.. They alſo uſe ſhields of an oblong form,
made of bark. SED | 542


!


u Patterſon, in his Travels in Africa, tells us that he met with a tribe of Hottentots hear Orange River, all

of whom had loſt the firſt joint of their little finger: the reaſon they gave for cutting it off was, that it was a
cure for a particular ſickneſs to which they were ſubject when young. It would be a curious coincidence

ſhould it be diſcovered that the natives of New Holland do it for any ſimilar reaſon. 1 pray


+ For a continuation of the Diſcoveries in New South Wales and in the South Seas, with a particular ae-
count of the natives and of the new ſettlements, the reader is referred to The Hiſtorical Journal of the
Tranſactions at Port Jackſon and Norfolk Iſland, by Governor Hunter, in one volume gto. printed for Mr.


3
Tip


=_ NEW DISCOVERIES.
| Tus: NEW HEBRIDES.


This name was given * Captain Cook to a cluſter of iſlands, the moſt northerly
of which was ſeen by Quiros, the Spaniſh navigator, in 1606, and by him ds!
Tierra del Eſpiritu Santo. From that time, till Bougainville's voyage in 1768, and
Capt. Cook's voyage in the Endeavour, in 1769, this land was ſuppoſed to be” part of a
great fouthern contment, called Terra. Auſtralis incognila. But when Capt. Cook had
{ſailed round New Zealand, and along the eaſtern coaſt of New Holland, this opinion
was fully confuted. On his next voyage, in the Reſolution, he reſolved to explore
thoſe parts accurately; and accordingly, in 1774, beſides aſcertaining the extent and
ſituation of theſe rſlands, he diſcovered ſeveral in the group, which \ were before un-
known. The New Hebrides are ſituated between the latitudes of 14% 29 and 20 4
ſouth; and between 169* 41', and 170? 21 eaſt longitude, They conſiſt of the fol-
lowing iſlands, ſome of which have received names from the. different European navi-
gators, and others retain the names which they bear among the natives, viz. Ticrra del
Eſpiritu Santo, Mallicolla, St. Bartholomew, Iſle of Lepers, Aurora, Whitſuntide,
Ambrym, Immer, Apee, Three Hills, Sandw ich, Montagu, Hinchinbrook, Shepherd,
Eorromanga, Irronan, Annatom, and Tanna.

Not far diſtant from the New Hebrides, and fouth-weſtward of them, lies New
CaLepoNrA, a very large iſland, firſt diſcovered by Capt. Cook, in 1774. It is about
eighty-ſeven leagues long, but its breadthi is not conſider able, nor any where exceeds
ten leagues. It 1s inhabited by a race of ſtout, tall, well-proportioned Indians, of a


 ſwarthy or dark cheſnut brown. A few ag diſtant are two {mall lands a called
the Iſlands of Pines and Botany Iſland. |


* £21 NEW GUINEA,


Till the late diſcoveries, was thought to be the nurn coaſt of an n con
tinent, and to be joined to New Holland; but Capt. Cook diſcovered a ſtrait between
them which runs north-eaſt, through which he failed. Thus it was found to be a long
narrow iſland, extending north-eaſt ſrom the ſecond degree of ſauth latitude to the
twelfth, and from one hundred and thirty-one to one hundred and fifty degrees eaſt
longitude ; but in one part it does not appear to be above fifty miles broad. The
country conſiſts of a mixture of very high hills and vallies, interſperſed with groves of

| cocoa nut trees, plantains, bread fruit, and moſt of the trees, ſhrubs, and plants, that
are ſound in the other South Sea iſlands. It affords from the fea a variety of delight-
ful proſpects. The inhabitants make nearly the ſame appearanoe as the New Hol-
landers on the other fide the ſtraits.

VNVorth of New Guinea is New Britain, which i 18 ſituated in the 4th degree of ſouth
latitude, and 152 19 caſt longitude from Greenwich. It was ſuppoſed to be part of
an imaginary continent, till Capt. Dampier found it to be an iſland, and failed through

a ſtrait which divides it from New Guinea. Capt. Carteret, in his voyage round the

world, 1767, found that it was of much leſs extent than it was till then imagined to

be, by ſailing through another ſtrait to the north, which ſeparates it from a long iſland,
to which he gave the name of New Ireland. There are, many high hills in New

Britain, and it abounds with large and ſtately trees. To the — d of New Britain,


and in both the above ſiraits, are many iſlands, moſt of which are ſaid to be extremely
fertile, and to abound with plantains and cocoa nut trees.*


*The reader will be much gratified in the peruſal of a new work of real merit, entitled Diſcoveries of


the French and Spaniards to the ſouth-eaſt of New 221 by 9 TRY in one volume 4to. with
twelve large plates, printed for Mr. Stockdale.


NEW


NEW DISCOVERIES.
. NEW IRELAND

Extends in length, from the north-caſt to the ſouth-eaſt, about two hundred and
#eventy miles, but is in general very narrow. It abounds with a variety of trees and
plants, and with many pigeons, parrots, rooks, and other birds. The inhabitants
are black and woolly headed, like the negroes of Guinea, but have not, like them,
flat noſes and thick lips. North-weſtward of New- Ireland, a cluſter of iſlands was
ſeen by Capt. Carteret, lying very near each other, and fuppoſed to conſiſt of twenty
or thirty in number. One of theſe, which is of a very confſiderable extent, was named


NEW HaxoveR ; but the reſt of the cluſter received the name of the Apmizarry
ISLANDS. 185 |


641


SANDWICH ISLANDS.
| Beſides the voyages already mentioned, another voyage was performed by Capt.
Cook and Capt. Clerke, in the Reſolution and Diſcovery, during the years 1776, 1777,
1778, and 1779, in ſearch of a north-weſt paſſage between the continents of Afia
and America. After they had arrived at the Cape of Good Hope, they proceeded from
thence to New Holland. In this courſe they diſcovered two iſlands, which Capt. Cook
called Prince Edward's Iſles. The largeſt, about fifteen leagues in circuit, is in lat.
46 53 ſouth, long. 37 467: the other about nine leagues in circuit, lat. 46? 4o', and
long. 380 & eaſt, both barren and almoſt covered with ſhow. From thence they pro-
ceeded to New Zealand, and afterwards they viſited the Friendly and the Society Hes.
In January 1777, they arrived at the Sandwich Iſles, which are twelve in number, and
are ſituated between 229 150 and 18? 53' N. lat. The air of theſe iſlands is in general
ſalubrious, and many of the vegetable productions are the fame with thoſe of the
Society and Friendly Iſles. The inhabitants are of a middle fize, ſtout and well made,
and their complexion in general a brown olive. Owhyhee is in circumference about
300 Engliſh miles, and the number of inhabitants is computed at 150,000. The
others are large and well peopled. The natives are deſcribed as of a mild and friendly
temper and carriage, and in hoſpitality to ſtrangers not exceeded by the inhabitants of
the Friendly Ifles. On the 7th of February, being nearly in lat. 44 33' north, and
long. 235 36' eaſt, they ſaw part of the American continent bearing north-eaft.
Capt. Cook afterwards diſcovered King George's Sound, which is fituated on the
north-weſt coaſt of America, and 1s extenfive ; that part of 1t where the ſhips under
his command anchored, is in lat. 49 36! north, and long. 233* 287 eait. The whole
ſound is ſurrounded by high land, which in ſome place appears very broken and ragged,
and is in general covered with wood to the very top. They found the inhabitants
here rather below the middle fize, and their complexions approaching to a copper
colour. On the 12th of May, they diſcovered Sandwich Sound, in lat. 59* 54 north.
The harbour in which the ſhips anchored, appeared to be almoſt ſurrounded with
hich land, which was covered with ſnow ; and here they were vitited by ſome of the
Americans in their canoes. They afterwards procecded to the iſland of Unalaſchka,
and after their departure from thence ſtill continued to trace the coaſt. They arrived
on the 20th of Auguſt, 1778, in lat. 70˙ 54, long. 194* 35 where they found them
ſelves almoſt ſurrounded with ice, and the farther they proceeded to the eaſtward, the
cloſer the ice became compacted. They continued labouring among the ice till the
25th, when a ſtorm came on, which made it dangerous for them to proceed ; and a
conſultation was therefore held on board the Reſolution, as ſoon as the violence of the
gale abated, when it was reſolved, that as this paſſage was impracticable for any uſeful


40 purpoſe


642 NEW DISCOVERIES.


purpoſe of navigation, which was the great object of the voyage, it ſhould be proſe-
cuted no farther; and eſpecially on account of the condition the ſhips were in, the
approach of winter, and their great diſtance from any known place of refreſhment.

The voyage, indeed, afforded ſufficient evidence, that no practicable paſſage exiſts be-
tween the Atlantic and Pacific oceans towards the north; and this voyage alſo aſcer-
tained the weftern boundaries of the great continent of America. On their return it un-
fortunately happened, that the celebrated and able navigator Capt. Cook was killed in.
an affray with the natives, by an act of ſudden reſentment and fear, rather than from
a bad diſpoſition, on the iſland of Owhyhee, the largeſt of the Sandwich Hes, on the
14th of February 1779; and his death was univerſally regretted, not only in Great
Britain, but alſo in other parts of Europe, by thoſe to whom his merits and public
ſervices were known. In his laſt voyage he had explored the coaſt of America, from
42* 27% to 70 40 57” north. After the death of Capt. Cook, the command devolved
on Capt. Clerke, who died at ſea on his return to the uthward: on the 22d day of

Auguſt 1779. The two ſhips returned home by the Cape of Good 2 and c on the 25
5th of 8 . anchored at __ Nore. 3


* For a x full: account of the Diſcoveries on the Coat of „ New Holla p prior to the Britiſh Settle-.
ment, ſee the following work, printed for Mr. Stockdale, in one volume 8vo.


THE HISTORY OF NEW HOLLAND,


Frei. b its firſt Diſcovery in 1616, to the preſent Time ; with. a particular Account of its Produce and Inhabi-
tants, and a Deſcription of Botany Bay : alſo a Liſt of the Naval, Marine, Military and Civil Eſtabliſhment,


To which is prefixed, an Introdudory Diſcourſe on Baniſhment, By the Right Hon. Lord Auckland. II-
WEE with. *


; is 44 07 elit;


EUROPE.


2
it!
C to Ban -
i. <8} 28 f
e 21
ee eee * S1TVATION AND EXTENT. *
Length. 3000] between J W. and 65° E. Lon. from London.
355 Bee 2360 e 36 METER: EEO 5;
Bone ni 7 OUNDED north, by the Frozen Ocean ; eaſt, by Afia ; ſouth, by


the Mediterranean Sea; weſt, by the Atlantic Ocean, which ſe-
parates it from America. | 1 .
Europe is the leaſt extenſive quarter of the globe, containing only about 2,627,574.
ſquare miles, whereas the habitable parts of the world in the other quarters, are eſti-
mated at 36, 666, 806 ſquare miles. Here the arts of utility and ornament, the ſciences,
both military and civil, have been carried to the greateſt perfection. If we except
the earlieſt ages of the world, it is in Europe that we find the greateſt variety of cha-
racter, government, and manners, and from whence we draw the greateſt number of
facts and memorials, both for our entertainment and inſtruction. „
Beſides monarchies, in which one man bears the chief fway, there are, in Europe,
 ariflocracies, or governments of the nobles, and demecracies, or governments of the
people. Venice is an example of the former; Holland, and ſome ſtates of Italy and
Switzerland, afford examples of the latter. There are likewite mixed governments,
which cannot be aſſigned to any one claſs. 5 BY
Ihe Chriſtian religion is eſtabliſhed throughout every part of Europe, except Tur-
key; but from the various capacities of the human mind, and the different lights in
which ſpeculative opinions are apt to appear, when viewed by perſons of different edu-
cations and paſlions, that religion is divided into a number of different ſects,” but
which may be comprehended under three general denominations : iſt, The Greek
church; ad, The Roman Catholic; and 3d, Proteſtantiſm : which laſt is again di-
vided into Lutheraniſm and Calviniſm, ſo called from Luther and Calvin, the two
diſtinguiſhed reformers of the 16th century. 3 15 5
The number of Roman Catholics is about 65,000,000 ; the number of Proteſtants,


about 24,000,000. oo _ .
The languages of Europe are derived from the ſix following : the Greek, Latin,
Teutonic or old German, the Celtic, Sclavonic, and Gothic. Ce
Ihe armies of all the countries in Europe amount to about two million of men;
ſo that ſuppoſing 140 million of inhabitants in Europe, no more than ys of the whole
population are ſoldiers. | Th


* A Collection of Forty- two Plans of the capital Cities in Europe, and ſome remarka3le Cities in Aſia, Africa;
and America, with a Deſcription of their mcft remarkable B uildings, Trade, Situation, Extent, Sc. Oc. ſelefted
From the beſt Authorities, By Mr. Joha Andrews. Printed for J. Stockdale, |

. a 5— 4 O 2 | | The


C44 EUROPE.
The greateſt part of Europe being fituated above the 45th degree of northern lati-


tude, and even its moſt ſouthern provinces being far diſtant from the torrid zone, the
ſpecies of organized bodies are much leſs numerous in Europe, than in the other parts
of the globe. Thus, for inſtance, upon an equal number of ſquare miles, the number
of ſpecies of quadrupeds in Europe is to the number of them in Aſia, as 1 to 23» to
that in America, as 1 to 2 and to that in Africa, as 1 to 10, and the number of
the vegetable ſpecies in the other three diviſions of the globe is greatly ſuperior to that.
in Europe. But nature has enriched the European continent with every ſpecies of mi-
nerals; diamonds and platina, perhaps, excepted. Gold, the firſt of metals, is not
found in Europe ſo plentifully as in the other continents. However, as the European
nations have the ſkill of making the beſt uſe of their natural productions, and have
taken care to tranſplant into their own ſoil as many of the foreign productions as their
nature will permit, Europe, upon the whole, muſt be allowed tobe one of the richeſt
Parts of the globe.
I be greateſt part of Europe is under the :nfluence of aclimate, which, Wa tem-
pered with a moderate degree of cold, forms a race of men, ſtrong, bold, active, and


mgenious; forced by neceſſity to make the beſt uſe they can of the fnaller. ſhare ot. Y
vegetable and animal treaſures, which their ſoil produces.


GRAND DIVISIONS.


m 8 _———
e 5 _—


8 8 Kingdoms mT | Len: | Br. | Chief Cites. 9 2 e 0
| 5 "PP „ 3800 300 London 5 IX 2 | To Gal. tec. .
* | Scotland - - 300 150 Edinburgh 400 N. | Calviniſts, &c.
= (| Ireland - - =— |} 285] 160] Dublin 270 N. W. Lut. Cal. & R. C.
5 ſ Norway | - = [ro00 300 Bergen 540 N. | Lutherans 9
| Denmark - - | 240] 180 Copenhagen |__500 N. E. | Lutherans oo
r 800 5000 8 Stockholm 750] N. 1 Lutherans
Kuſfia = - — [r50c|1 oo Peterſburgh | 1140 N. E E. | Greek Church 1
I 700 6go| Warlaw | 760 E. 1 R. C. Lu. & Cal. |
N Pruſſian Domimons 09 359] Berlin 3 540 E. 1 Luth. and Cal. |
Germany = - | boo _ Zoo] | Vienna | 600 E. TK C. Lat. & Cal. |
5 4 Bohemia = 300| 250 Prague 608 E = Roman Catholics
| 305 Holland „ | t50| 100 Amfterdam 1 80 E. 1 Calviniſts .
= | Flanders <>. | 200] 200] Bruſſels N Roman Catholics :
| —ůůů — 6 500| Paris 200 8. E. 1 Unknown
| | Spain = 8 | 700 500 Madrid 800 8. | Roman Catholics |
| 2 | Poriuga! 3 30⁰ 10 | Liſbon [4 850 S. W. W. Roman Catholics
| 3 Switzerland 26⁰ — OR: 8. E. AW ow & Rom. Ca. E
| . . od |


"Italy.


EUR 0 PE. 645
'| Several ſmall [ Piedmont, | Montſerrat, | Mas, Parma, | Modena, | Mantua, | VIS Genoa, | Tuſcany, } |
. States. Turin Cafal. | Milan. 5 Parma | Modena. | Mantua. Venice. — Florence,
— | phe
S . — Len. | Br. | Chief Cities. . e -
|| Popedom 3 240 120 Rome 820 S. E. |Roman Catholics
Napſcs 288120 Naples | $870 S. E. Roman Catholics
Hungary | _ | 306, | 200 Buda 780 8. E. R. C. and Frotel.
A Danubian 880 5 1 maal SOS, 8. E. -
> .] | Provinces j 420% nople | 132? 5. F. Mahometans and |
5 31 Lower Tartary* 380| 240 Precop 1500 E. Greek Church.
2 Greece 1 400 | 240 Athens 1360 S. E. |


Excluſive of the Britiſh Iles, Europe contains the following principal iſlands:


m the Northern Ocean.


Baltic Sea.


Mediterranean Sea.


|


Adriatic, or Gulf Venice. |


_ Archipelago, and Levant }


Iſlands,


Leland. WE
Zealand,  Funen, Alſen, Fal-
ſter, Langland, Laland, Fe-
meren, Mona, Bornholm, )


 Gothland, Aland, Rugen,


Luſiena, Corfu, Cephalanis.
Zant, Leucadia,
(Candia, Rhodes, Negropont, .


0


Oſel, Dagho, —— —
Uſedom, . —
Ivica, —
Majorca, — „
1 Minorca, — —

Corfica, — —

Sardinia, — —

Sicily, —


Lemnos, Tenedos, .
Mytelene, Scio, Samos, Pat-
mos, Paros, Cerigo, Santo-
rin, &c. being part of an-


* This includes Crim Tar tary, now ceded to Ruſſia.


+ Minorca was taken from Spain by General 1
of Utrecht 1713, but was beſieged and taken by the Spaniar ds, 1 135 1782, and confirmed


Treaty


cient and modern. Greece,


3


to them oF: the definitive Treaty of Peace, ſigned at Paris, September 3, 178 3.


Chief Towns, Subject to
Skalholt. Denmark
— — Sweden.
— — Ruſſia
_ Pruſſia :
en. Spain
Majorca, Ditto
Port Mahon, . Ditto
T
Cagliaria, K. of Sard.
Fe K. of 2 Sic.
— Venice.
— — Turkey.


1708, and confirmed to Great Britain by the


Poss ESSILONS


646 DENMARK.


Poss Ess oN Ss of DENMARK IN EUROPE.


A LL the Daniſh provinces contain 182, 400 ſquare miles, and, including the co-
lonies, 2 2,500,000 inhabitants.


Diviſions, Sq. Miles. Population. Chief Towns. b
5 Dane 13 7 Oe __ 13,000 1,125,000 COPENHAGEN, 87, ooo
a 8 eb = 2,800 310, ooo Glukſiadt, 1 2,483
3 3 has — 112, %ĩ⸗1 ' 723,44 Bergen. ; 138,000
4 Faro Iflands, — „ — —
5 Iceland. 46,400 46, 201 Skalholt.


The whole of Denmark contains 68 towns, 22 boroughs, I 5 aride 16 baronics,
932 eſtates of the inferior nobility, and 7000 villages.

Norway contains only 18 towns, 2 earldoms, and 27 eſtates of the other nobility.
The Danes have ſettlements at Coromandel in Afia, on the coaſt of Guinea, and
other places in Africa, and in Greenland, in America. Greenland is divided into
eaſt and weſt Greenland, a very extenſive country, but thinly inhabited. Crantz rec-
kons only 957 ſtated, and 7000 wandering inhabitants in Welt Greenland. The
Danes are the only nation who have ſettlements in Weſt Greenland; where, under
their protection, the Moravian brethren have miſſionari ies, and very uſeful eſtabliſh-
ments.

WiaaLTE Ax D Comuerce.] If the cold and barren kingdom of Norway did not
require large ſupplies of corn from Denmark, the latter could export a conſiderable
quantity of it. Sleſwick, Jutland, Zealand, and Leland, are very rich corn coun-
tries, and abound in black cattle. The chief produce of ? Norway is wood, timber,
and a great variety of peltry. The mines of Norway are very valuable, as well as its
fiſheries. Only one fourteenth part of it is fit for agriculture. - The balance of trade
is in favour of Norw ay, and againſt Denmark. The whole of the exports of Denmark
and Holſtein amounted, in 1768, to 1,382,681 rix dollars; the imports to 1,976,800.
The exports of Norw ay to 1,711,369, and the imports to 1,2 23852 284 dollars. Manu-
factures do not thrive in Denmark.

Carr AL.] CoPpENHAGEN is the capital of Denmark, and the reſidence of the
king. It hes in north lat. 53% 41' and caſt long. 12% 50, and ſtands on a low
marſhy ground, on the margin of the Baltic Sea, and has a beautiful and commodious
harbour, which admits only one ſhip to enter it at a time, but is capable containing 500.
The road for the ſhipping begins about two miles from the town, and is de ended by
go pieces of cannon. On the land fide are ſome lakes which furniſh the inhabitants
with plenty of freſh water. The adjacent country is pleaſant ; and oppoſite the city
lies the iſland of Amac, which is very fruitful, and forms the harbour. It is joined


to the town by two bridges. This city is more than ſix miles in circu mference, and
makes a fine appearance at a diſtance.


RELICOION.] The cſtabliſhed religion is the Lutheran.
Government. | Denmark is an hereditary kingdom, and governed in an able
manner; but the Daniſh Kings are legal ſovereigns, and perhaps the only legal fove-


reigns |


L APL AND. | 647


reĩgns in the world; for the ſenators, nobility, clergy, and commons, diveſted them-
ſelves of their right as well as power, in the year 1061, and made a formal ſurrender
of their liberties to the then king Frederick III.

HISTORY. Denmark, the ancient kingdom of the Goths, was little known tilt
the year 714, when Gormo was king. Chriſtian VIE. is the preſent ſovereign ; he vi-
fited England in 1768. His queen, the youngeſt fifter of George III. king of Great
Britain, was fuddenly ſeized, confined in a caſtle as a ſtate priſoner, and afterwards
baniſhed the kingdom.“ The Counts Struenſee and Brandt (the firſt prime miniſter,
and the queen's phyſician). were ſeized at the ſame time, January 1772, and beheaded
the ſame year. 1 . | LE In”
Bartholinus, celebrated for his knowledge of anatomy, and Tycho Brahe,. the fa-
mous aſtronomer, were natives of this country. BER


1 A N DD.


HE whole country of Lapland extends, fo far as it is known, from the North:
1 Cape in 71% 3o north lat. to the White Sea, under the arctic circle. Part of
Lapland belongs to the Danes, and is included in the government of Wardhuys ;
part to the Swedes, which is by far the moſt valuable; and ſome part in the eaſt, to
the Muſcovites or Ruſſians. It is impoſſible to point out the dimenſions of each. It
has been generally thought, that the Laplanders are the deſcendants of Finlanders
driven out of their own country, and that they take their name from Lappes, which
ſignifies exiles. In Lapland, for ſome months in the ſummer, the ſun never ſets ; and.
during the winter it never riſes : but the inhabitants are ſo well aſſiſted by the twilight,
and the aurora borealis, that they never ditcontinue their work on account of the
darkneſs. JJC | - -
CLI xMATE.] The winters here, as may eafily be concluded, are extremely cold.
Drifts of ſnow often threaten to bury the traveller, and cover the ground four
or five feet deep. A thaw ſometimes takes place; and, then, the froſt that ſuc-
ceeds, preſents the Laplander with a ſmooth level of ice, over which he travels with:
a rein-deer, in a fledge, with inconceivable ſwiftneſs. The heats of ſummer are
exceſſive for a ſhort time; and the cataracts, which daſh from the mountains, often
preſent to the eye the moſt pictureſque appearances, 5 EET.
P EOPLIR, Cusrous, and MAN NERS.] The majority of the Laplanders are Pagans.
The number and oddities of their ſuperſtitions have induced the northern traders to
believe that they are ſkilled in magic and divination. They ſtill retain the worſhip of
many of the Teutonic gods; but have among them great remains of the Druidical
inſtitutions. They believe the tranſmigration of the ſoul ; and have feſtivals ſet apart
for the worſhip of certain genii, called Jeuhles, who they think inhabit the air, and
have great power over human actions; but being without form or ſubſtance, they
aſſign to them neither images nor ſtatues. : 5
The employment of the women conſiſts in making nets for the fiſhery, in drying
fiſh and meat, in milking the rein-deer, in making cheeſe, and in tanning hides; but:


* For à faithful account of this tragical ewent,. tbe reader is referred to a true and interefiing work, intituled,
An authentic Elucidation of the Hiſtory of Counts Struenſee and Brandt, and of the Revolution in Denmark
in the year 1742. Printed privately, but not publiſhed, by a Perjonage principally interefied. Tran/lated from
the German by B. H. Latrobe. Printed for ]. STOCKDALE>


it


648 SWE D E N. |
it is underſtood to be the buſineſs of the men to look after the kitchen, i in which, it


is ſaid, the women never interfere.

The Laplanders live in huts in the form of tents, from 25 to 30 feet in diamet
and not much above ſix feet in height. They cover them according to the ſeaſon, and
the means of the poſſeſſor; ſome with briars, bark of birch, and linen; others with
turf, coarſe cloth, or felt, or the old ſkins of rein-deer. The door is of felt, made
like two curtains, w hich open aſunder. A little place, ſurrounded with "ones, 18
made in the middle of the hut, for fire, over which a chain is ſuſpended to hang the
kettle upon. In winter, at night, they put their naked feet into a fur bag.

Lapland is but poorly peopled, owing to the general barrenneſs of its ſoil. The
whole number of its inhabitants may amount to about 60,000. Both men and wo-
men are in general conſiderably ſhorter than more ſouthern Europeans. Mauper-
tuis meaſured a woman who was ſuckling her child, whoſe height did not exceed
four feet two inches and a half; they- make, however, a much more agreeable appear-
ance than the men, who are often ill ſhaped and ugly, and their heads too large for
their bodies. The women are complaitant, chaſte, often well made, and extremely
nervous; which is alſo obſervable among the men, although more rarely.

| When a Laplander intends to marry a female, he, or his friends, court her father
with brandy ; when with ſome dithculty he gains admittance to his fair one, he offers
her a beaver's tongue, or ſome other catable; which ſhe rejects before company, but
accepts of in private. Cohabitation often precedes marriage; but every admittance to
the fair one is purchaſed from her father by her lover with a bottle of brand , and
this prolongs the courtthip ſometimes for three years. The prieſt of the pariſh at laſt
celebrates the nuptials; but the bridegroom is obliged to ſerve his father. in. law
for four years after. He then carries his wite and her fortune home. |


—_ —


JJ
SITUATION AND ExTENT.

_ Miles. „„ .
1 800 50 and 70e N. Lat.
Breadth 5500 between L10% and zo? E. Lon.


"OUNDED north, by the Frozen. Ocean; eaſt, by Ruſſia; ſoufh,
I by Denmark and the Baltic; weſt, by Norway. The whole


kingdom of Sweden contains 104 towns, 80, 2 30 villages, and 1200 eſtates of the
Nobility.


6 JP


8 5 8g. Miles. e 8 Capital Tones. |
1 Sweden Proper ſ TOCKHOLM,
2 Gothland ene 3 { 80,000 inhabitants.
3 Nordland 95,472 150,000 | 7 Lund.
4 Lapland — — 8
5 Finland 48,780 624, ooo Abo.
6 Swediſh Pomerania 1, 440 100,550 Bergen.
7 In the Weſt Indies, Sweden obtained from France, 1 in the year 1785, the iſland
of *


2 | Carrar.]


SWEDEN. "os


CariTar.] STOCKHOLM, the capital of Sweden, and the refidenee of the king, is
ſituated in north lat. 59% 207, and eaſt long. 19% 30, 760 miles N. E. from Lon-
don. Standing at the junction of the Baltic Sea, and the lake Maler, it has the ad-
vantage of both ſalt and freſh water. It is built, partly on fix iſlands, and partly on
peninſulas, and in its circuit is computed at 12 miles. Moſt of the fireets are broad,
and the market places ſpacious. In the quarter of the town properly called the city,
are above 5000 houtes, moſt of them ſtanding on piles. They are built entirely of
ſtone, and are four or five ſtories high: but ſome are covered with copper or iron
lates, and others with tiles. |

All parts of this city are connected by bridges. It affords a fine proſpect of the
lake Maler on one ade, and of the AS on the other. The number of inhabi-
tants who pay taxes, is computed at 60, ooo.

CLIMATE, EXPORTS, AND IMPporTs.| Sweden has an inhoſpitable climate, and the
greater part of the ſoil is barren ; upwards of 110,000 ſquare miles lie uncuſtivated ;
yet the induſtry of the inhabitants in arts and agriculture has raiſed it to the rank af
a ſecondary European power. Sweden imports 300,090 tons of corn, 4,535 hogtheads
of ſpirituous liquors, beſides hemp, flax, ſalt, wine, beef, filk, paper, leatl er, and
Eaſt and Weſt India goods. The exports of Sweden conſiſt chiefly of wocd, pitch,
tar, fiſh, furs, copper, iron, ſome gold and filver, and other minerals, to the amount,
in the year 1768, of upwards of 1 3,000,000 of dollars; and their imports in the
fame year amounted to little more than 10,000,000 of dollars. The Swedes trade to
all parts of Europe, to the Levant, the Eaft and Welt Indies, to Africa and China.

REENUE.] In 1784, four millions of rix dollars.

GoveRNMENT.] Since the memorable revolution in 1772, „Sweden may be called
a monarchy. The ſenate ſtill claim ſome ſhare in the adminiſtration, but its mem-
bers are ehoſen by the king. The king has the abſolute diſpoſal of the army, and
has the power of calling and of diſſolving the aſſembly of the ſtates; but he cannot
impoſe any new tax without conſulting the diet. The ſenate is the higheſt court or
council in the kingdom, and 1s compoſed of ſeventeen ſenators, or ſupreme counſel-
lors. The provinces are under governors, called provindut captains, i 2

Azny.]. In 1784, it conſiſted of 50,421 men.

REIN. ] "The religion eſtabliſhed in Sweden is the Lutheran, which the five.
reign muſt profeſs, and is engaged to maintain in the kingdom. Calviniſts, Roman
Catholics, and Jews are tolerated. The ſuperior clergy of Sweden have preſerved the
dignities of the Roman Catholic church; it is compoſed of the archbiſhop of Upfal,
of 14 biſhops, and of 192 preſidents. The juriſdiction in ecclefiaſtical matters is in
the hands of 19 conſiſtories. The number of the inferior clergy, comprehending
the miniſters of pariſhes, &c. amounts only to 1387... 0

Hisronre] We have no account of this country till the reign:of Bornio IH. A. D.
774. Margaret, queen of Denmark and Norway, was called to the throne of Swe
den, on the forced reſignation of Albert their king, A. D. 1387. It remained united
to the Daniſh crown till 1523, when the famous Guſtavus Vaſa expelled! the Danes,
and ever fince it has remained independent; but was made an abſolute monarchy by
Guſtavus III. in 1772. The late king, Guſtavus IV. was aſſufſinated. by Ankerſtrom,
on the 16th of March, 1792; and was ſucceeded by his fon, the preſent king, then

14 years old, The ntbafiafic aflaſlin, amidſt the 4 use 8. gloried in his |
my” —


*


— |


( 6500)


MUSCOVE, oR THE. RUSSIAN EMPIRE. IN. REURGEE. « AND:
ASIA.


SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Miles. 4 1
Length unknown 23 and 180% g.
Breadth J pokig 3 hs 188 145 * 40 and 722 N. lat.


Tous immenſe empire ſtretches from the Baltic Sea and 'Sweden- on the weſt; to
Kamtſchatka and the Pacific Ocean on the eaſt ; and from the Frozen Ocean on
| the. north, to about the 44th deg.. of lat. on the ſouth, on which tide it is bounded by
E Poland, Little Tartary, Turkey, Georgia, the Euxine and Caſpian Seas, Great Tar-
A} _ Chineſe Tartary, and other unknown regions in Afia, | |
| 5 The country now compriſed under the name of Ruſſia or the Ruſſſas, is of an ex-
tent nearly equal to alk the reſt of Europe, and greater than the Roman empire in
the zenith of its power, or the empire of Darius ſubdued by Alexander, or both put
together.

Divis 10 NS. ] Ruflia is at preſent divided into Bs governments, which are compre- -
hbended * under 19 genera governments, viz


Governments.> Inhab. Capitals: + Bs 1


= 8 rt of Ruſſia, 30 40, ooo, ooo Peterſburg, 170, ooo
Aſiatic Ruflia, 1a 4,000,000 Cafan, 25, ooo


The ſuperiority of. the- 3 part over the vaſt, but uncultivated provinces of
Aſia, is ſtriking. The provinces aequired by the diviſion of Poland, are highly va--
Tuable to Ruſſia, to which-the- acquiſition. of .Crimea is by no means compyraile in
vale. -
This immenſe empire comprehends upwards of fifty . different nations, and the
number of languages is ſuppoſed not to be leſs than the number of nations.
WEALTH- AND COMMERCE.| In ſo vaſt a tract of country as the empire of Ruſſia,
fpreading under many of 'Jatitude, watered by more than eight rivers, which
run through the ſpace of 2000 miles, and troſſed by an extenſive chain of mountains,
we may expect to- find an infinite number: of natural productions, though we muſt
make ſome allowances for the- great deſerts of Siberia, and the many parts, not yet
thoroughly inveſtigated by natural hiſtorians. The ſpecies of plants pecuhar to
this part of the globe, which have already been diſcovered, amount to many thou-
5 fands. The ſoil contains almoſt all een tin, platina, and ſome ſemi- metals
excepted. Ruſſia abounds with animals of almoſt all the various kinds, and has
many that have never been deſcribed. It has the greateſt variety of the fincft furs.
In 1781, there were exported from Peterſburgh alone, 428,877 ſkins of hares, 36,904
of grey ſquirrels, 1,354 of bears, 2,018” of ermine, 5,639 of foxes, 300 of wild
cats, beſides thoſe of wolves, and of the faſtick (a beautiful animal of the rat kind)
exclufive of the exportation of the ſame articles from Archangel, Riga, and the
Caſpian Sea. In one year there were exported from Archangel, 783,000 pud of tal-
8 low (a pud is equal ny 40 Ib.) 8,602 Jr of candles, and 102 pud of butter. In
f 1781 from Peterſburg, 148,095 pud of red leather, 10,885 pud of leather for ſoals,
j $39,650 pad of candles, 50,000 pud of ſoap, 27,416 pud of ox bones, 990 calve


P
Þ ins.
. ;


Kins. The fiſheries belonging to Ruſſia are very productive. The foreſts of fir
trees are immenſely valuable. Oak and beech do not grow to an uſeful ſize beyond
the 6oth degree of north latitude. They export timber, pitch, tar, and potaſh, to a
vaſt amount. Rye, wheat, tobacco, hemp, flax, fail cloth, liuſced oil, flax ſeed,
iron, filver, copper, ſalt, jaſper, marble granite, &c. are among the productions of
Ruſſia. The whole of the exports of Ruſlia amounted in 1783, to near 13,000,000
of rubles or dollars ; the imports did not much exceed the ſum of 12,000,000. The
imports confift chiefly of wine, ſpices, fruits, fine cloth, and other manufactured com-

modities and articles of luxury. There are at preſent no more than 484 manufac-
turers in the whole empire. 5 e

_ Army. It conſiſted in 1772, of 600,000 men.

Navy. | Sixty-three armed ſhips, and 20,000 ſailors. 1

Go RERNMEN T.] The emperor or autocrator of Ruſſia, (the preſent empreſs ſtyles
herſelf autocratrix) is abſolute. He muſt be of the Greek church, by the ancient
cuſtom of the empire. The only written fundamental law exiſting is that of Peter J.
by which the right of ſucceſſion to the throne depends entirely on the choice of the
reigning monarch, who has unlimited authority over the lives and property of all his
. ſubjects. The management of public affairs is entruſted to ſeveral departments. At

the head of all thoſe concerned in the regulation of internal affairs (the ecclefiaſtical
ſynod excepted, 1s the ſenate, under the prefidency of a chancellor and vice-chan-
cellor. The ſovereign nominates the members of this ſupreme court, which is divided
into fix chambers, four at Peterſburgh, and 2 at Moſcow. The provinces are ruled
by governors appointed by the ſovereign.  _ „ FO,
CET Cirits. | PETERSBURG, the capital of Ruſſia, lies at the junction of the
river Neva with the lake Ladoga, in north lat. 59 57, and eaſt long. 31“; but the
reader may have a better idea of its ſituation, by being informed that it ftands on
both fides the river Neva, between that lake and the bottom of the Finland gulf. In
the year 1703, this city conſiſted of a few ſmall fiſhing huts, on a ſpot ſo marſhy,
that the ground was formed into nine iſlands. It now extends about fix miles every
way, and contains every ſtructure for magnificence, the improvement of the arts,
revenue, navigation, war, and commerce, that are to be found in the moſt celebrated
cities in Europe. 3 1 5 . |

The city of Moſcow, formerly the capital of this great empire, ſtands on a pleafant
plain, in north lat. 53 5 4o', eaſt long. 38; 1414 miles N. E. of London. The river
Moſkwa running through it in a winding courſe, and ſeveral eminences, interſperſed
with gardens, groves, and lawns, form moſt delightful proſpects. It ſeems rather to
be a cultivated country than a city. The ground it ſtands on is computed to be ſixteen
miles in circumference. It contains 1600 churches, The number of inhabitants is
about 150%, „ A 4 |

The great bell of Moſcow, the largeſt in the world, weighs 443,772 pounds.

Rericion.] The religion eſtabliſhed in the Ruffian empire, is the Greek. The
moſt eſſential point in which their profeſſion of faith differs from that of the Latin
church, is the doctrine, that the Holy Ghoſt proceeds from the Father only. Their
worſhip is as much overloaded with ceremonies as the Roman Catholic. Saints are
| held in veneration, and painted images of them, but not ſtatues, are ſuffered in the
churches. The church has been governed, fince the time of Peter the Great, by a
national council, called the Holy Synod. Marriage is forbidden to the archbithops
and biſhops, but is allowed to the inferior clergy. There are 479 convents for men,


74 for women, in which are about 70,000 perſons. Above goo, ooo peaſants belong
to the eſtates in poſſeſſion of the clergy. = 25 T
e 4 P 2 | _ HisTokrv. ]


0
_—


ö »


652 GREAT BRITATN AND IRELAND.


Hisrory.] T he earlieff authentlc account we 50 of Ruſſia, is A. D. 862, when
Ruric was Grand Duke of Novogored, in this country. In the year 981, W olidimer
was the firſt Chriſtian king. The Poles conquered it about 1058, but it is uncertam
bow long they kept it. Andrey I. began his reign 1158, and laid the foundation of
Moſcow. About 1200 of the Mungul Tartars conquered it, and held it ſubject to
them till 15:0, when John. Bafitowitz reſtored it to independeney. About the middle
of the fixteenth century, the Ruffians diſcovered and conquered: Siberia. It became
an empire 1721, when Peter I. aſſumed the title of emperor-of all the Ruſſias, which
was admitted by the powers of Europe, to be obſerved in future — with

the court of Peterſburgh.

The reign of Elizabeth, in the courſe of the preſent century, 18 remarkable, ON:
account of her aboliſhing the uſe of torture, and governing her e for twenty
ears without inflicting a + ſivgle capitabpuniſhment.

The preſent empreſs 18 actually employed in founding a number of holz for
the education of the lower claffes of her ſubjects, throughout the beſt inhabited
parts of the empire; an inſtitution of the moſt beneficial tendency, which, if rightly


executed, will entitle the Great Catharine, more than any ot. her predeceſſors, to the
gratitude of the Ruſhan nation.


— -


GREAT BRITAIN any IRELAND,
Lie between 49* and 555 50% North Latitude, and 2% Eaſt, and 6* 20 W. eſt


Longitude. PEE
Diviſions. S4 Miles. Population: „ CapitaF Inhad:
NGLAND and Wales, 54,112 7,000,000 Lobo, $00,009
Scotland, 25,600 1,300,000” Edinburgh, 80,000
Irdand, a 5 21 6% 2,406,818) Dublin, 41060, 000
Counties. Counties.
Engtand i is div ided into 40 Scotland 31 and 2 Kewatsthips, :
. ales | 12 Ireland 32 m4 provinces,


BRITISH POSSESSIONS BEYOND T HE SEAS.


x. In Evoye, the fortreſs of Gibraltar, on the coaſt of Spain, 3,200 inhabitants.
2. In Arzica, Cabo Corſe, on the coaft of Guinea, and tome other torts there
near the Gambia, and the iſland of St. Helena.

In Afia, the extenſive countrics of Bengal, Bahar, 20 part of Orixa : the ca-
pital of Bengal is Caleutta or Fort William, the refidence of the governor-general
of the Eaſt India Settlements. Theſe territorics are computed to contam 10,000,000
inhabitants, and to be in extent near 150,000 tquare miles. 2. Large ſettlements on

the coaſt of Coromandel, of which Madras is the capital, containing 80, ooo inhabi-

tants. 3. The ſettlements of Bombay and Surat, on the Malabar coaſt, and many
other forts and factories on the continent of India, and the iflands of Sumatra, On,
and Banca.

4. In AMeRica, the extenſive provinces of Canada! 1. Nova Scots; " Gttlements
in Labrador and Hudſon's Bay, the iſlands of Newfoundland, Cape Breton, and St.
Jin. 2. In the Weſt Indies, the iſlands mentioned in page 6112


„ Since the preceding ſheets were printed Great Britain has taken from France moſt of their iſlands 3 in
the Weſt Indies,


WIAILTE


GREAT BRITWINW ANB IRELAND. 633


WALTIn AND CoxstER CE. *] The two Aviſtons of Great Britain, England and
Scotland, differ widely with reſpect to thief nataral fertility, and to the wealth of
their inhabitants. South Britain, or England, abounds with all the uſeful productions
oi thoſe countries of Europe, which are in parallel latitides, wine, filk, and ſome wild
animals excepted. Agriculture, gardening, the cultivation of all thoſe plants which
are moſt uſeful in feeding cattle, and breeding horſes, and ſheep, are carried on in
England to an aſtoniſhing height. Of about 42,000,000 acres, which England con-
| tains, only 8,500,000 produce corn ; the reſt is either covered with wood, or laid out

m meadows, gardens, park, &c. and a conſiderable part is ſtill waſte lands; ; Jet out of
the crops obtained from the fifth part of the lands, there have been exported, during
the {pace of five years, from 1745 to 1750, quantities of corn to the value of £.7,600,000
ſterling. The net produce of- the Engliſh corn land is eſtimated at £-9,000,000 ſter⸗
ling. The rents of paſture ground, meadows, &c. at C. 7, ooo, ooo. The number of
people engaged in, and maintained by farming, is ſuppoted to be 2,800,000. England
abounds in excellent cattle and ſheep. In the beginning of the preſent century,
there were ſuppoſed to be 12,000,000 of ſheep, and their number has fince been in-
creaſing. In the years 1769, 1770, and 1771, the value of the woollens, exported
from England, including thoſe of Yorkſhire, amounted to upwards of L. 13, 500, oo
ſterling.

Copper, tin, lead, and iron, are found in great abundance in Great Britain,
where there is made every year from 50 to 60, 0 tons of pig iron, and from 20 to
30, ooo tons of bar iron.

England poſſeſſes a great treaſure in its inexhauſtible coal mines, which are worked
chiefly. in the northern counties, whence the coal is conveyed by ſea, and by the
inland canals to every part of the kingdom. The mines of Northumberland alone
ſend every year upwards of 600,000 chaldrons of coals to London, and 1 590 veſſels
are employed in carrying them along the eaſtern coaſt of England.

SCOTLAND'S natural productions are greatly inferior to thoſe of England, both with
reſpe& to plenty and variety. It produces chiefly flax, hemp, coals, ſome iron, and
much lead. The trade of this country conſiſts chiefly in linen, thread, and coals ;
they have lately begun to manufacture cloth, carpets, ſugar, &c. . |

IRELAND 1 is, in moſt of its provinces, not inferior in fertility to England, but very
far behind it in point of civilization and induſtry. This inferiority 1 muſt be partly
attributed to the idleneſs, ignorance, and oppreſſion of its inhabitants; and partly
to the commercial jealouſy of the Britiſh legiſlation, from which Ireland has at length
been emancipated. The chief articles of its produce are cattle, ſheep, hogs, and flax ; ;
large quantities of excellent ſalted pork, beef, and butter, are annually exported.
Ihe Iriſh wool is very fine. The principal manufacture of Ireland is that of
linen, which, at preſent, is a very valuable article of exportation. Fitteen hundred
perſons are employed in the filk manufactures at Dublin.

With the increaſe of liberty and induſtry, this kingdom will ſoon riſe to the com-
mercial Sonam to which it is zalütlec by its fertility and ſituation. |


* For the wealth and icurees of this country, we Ri the reader to an incomparable work, intituled,
An Eflimatg of the comparative Strength of Great Britain. B Geor,e Chalmers, Eſq. Publiſhed by Stockdale. |
+ Scotland from the time of its (a) union with i! in 1707, has been gradually riſing in wealth,

commerce, and agriculture. = |


(a) For this great national event, ſee The | Hiftory of the Union Terre Een and Scotland, by Daniel De Foe; ;
with An Introduction to a fimilar dn Wikh Ireland. By J. L. De Lolme. Printed for Stockdale, Th |
| ©


6:4 GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND.


The total value of the exparts from Ireland to Great Britain, in 177, and 158
at an average, was C. a, 3oo, ooo. The balance is greatly in favour of Ireland.*

The manufactures in England are, confeſſedly, with very few exceptions, ſu-
perior to thoſe of other countries. For this ſuperiority, they are nearly equally in-
debted to national character, to the ſituation of their oauntry, and to their excellent
conſtitution.

The Engliſh government, favourable to every exertion of genius, has provided,
by wiſe and excellent laws, for the ſecure enjoyment of property acquired by ingenu-
ity and: labour, and has removed all obſtacles to induſtry, by prohibiting the 1 impor-
tation of iuch articles from abroad which could be manufactured at home. +
The Britiſh iſlands, among other advantages for navigation, have coaſts, the ſea
line of which, including both Great Britain and Ireland, extends nearly 3800 miles.
The commerce of Great Britain is immenſe and increafing. In the years 1783, and

1784, the ſhips cleared outwards, amounting to 950,000 tons, exceeded the number
of tons of the ſhips cmaplbyed in 1760, (24 years before) by upwards of 406,000 ton.
The value of the cargoes exported in 1784, amounted to upwards of £.15,000,000
ſterling; and the net cuſtoms: paid by them into the exchequer, were upwards of
£-3,000,000 ſterling; and even this ſum was exceeded the following year, 1785, by
| upwards of C. 1, ooo, ooo ſterling. The balance of trade in favour of England is eſti-

mated at £.3,000,000. The inland trade is valued at £.42,000,000 ſterling. The
fiſheries of Great Britain are numerous and very productive. The privileged tra-
ding companies, of which the Eaſt India Company, chartered in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, is the principal, carry on the moſt important foreign commerce.

GovERNMENT. ] The government of Great Britain may be called a limited mo-
narchy. It is a combination of a monarchical and popular government. The King
| has only the executive power; the legiſlative is ſhared by him and the parliament,
or more properly by the people. The crown is hereditary ; both male and female
deſcendants are capable of ſucceſſion. The king muſt profeſs the Proteſtant religion.

RELIGION. The eſtabliſhed religion, in that part of Great Britain called
England, is the Epiſcopal church of England, of which the king, without any ſpiri-
tak power, is the head. The revenues of the church of England are ſuppoſed to be
about /. 3, ooo, ooo ſterling. All other denominations of Chriſtians, called Diſſen-
ters, and Jews, are tolerated. Four fifths of the people of Ireland are Roman Ca-
tholics, and are conſequently excluded from all places of truſt and profit. Their
clergy are numerous. The Scotch are Preſbyterians, and are Calviniſts in doc-
trine and form of eccleſiaſtical government. The other moſt conſiderable religious


ſects in England, are, Unitarians, Baptiſts, Quakers (60,000), Methodiits, Roman


Catholics (60,000), 12,000 families of Jews, and F rench and German Lutherans :
and Calviniſts.


Hisrokv.] Britain was firſt inhabited by a tribe of Gauls. Fiſty-· two years be-
. the birth of Chriſt, Julius Cæſar en them to the Roman empire. The


=


For one of the beſt hacks relating to Ireland, we cannot refrain from alata our . to a <a
in gyo. of Hiftorical Trafts, by Sir Jobn Davies, Attorn ey-general, and Speaker of the Houſe of Commons in
Ireland. Conſiſting of, 1K. A Diſcovery of the true Cauſe why Ireland was never brought under Obedi-
ence to the Crown of England. ad. A Letter to the Earl of Saliſbury on the State of Ireland | in 1607. 3d.
A Letter to the Earl of Saliſbury in 1610, Bing an Account of the ; Plantations in Ulſter. 4th. A Speech
to the Lord Deputy in 1613, tracing the ancient Conſtitution of Ireland. To whieh is prefixed, a new Life
of the Author, from authentic Documents. By George Chalmers, 'E(q. Printed for Stockdate.


+ See A Collection of Treaties between Great Britain and other Powers. Zy George. Chalmers, Eſg ·
Prin ęd for Stockdale,


2 Romans


GERMANY. 655


Romans remained maſters of Britain 500 years, till they were called home in defence
of their native country againſt the invaſions of the Goths and Vandals. The Picts,
Scots, and Saxons, then took poſſeſſion of the iſland. In 1606, William duke of
Normandy, obtained a complete victory over Harold king of England, which is
called the Norman conqueſt. Magna Charta was figned by John, 1216. This is
called ihe bulwark of Engliſh liberty. In 1485, the houſes of York and Lancaſter
were united in Henry VII. after a long and bloody conteſt. In 16c3, King James VI.
of Scotland, who tucceeded Queen Elizabeth, united both kingdoms, under the
name of Great Britain. The uſurpation of Cromwell took place in 1647. The re-
volution (fo called, on account of James the Second's abdicating the throne, to whom
William and Mary ſucceeded) happened 1688. Queen Anne ſucceeded William
and Mary in 17402, in whom ended the Proteſtant line of Charles I. George I. of
the houſe of Hanover, aſcended the throne in 1714, and the ſucceſſion has fince
been regular in this line. George the III. is the preſent King. F


VCC
Miles. . 1 |
Length 600) 4, #45* 4 and 54* 40 N. Latitude.
Breadth 5204 Pen 5. and 197 Baſt Longitade,
OUNDED.-:nerth; by the German ocean, Denmark, and the Baltic; eaſt, by -
Poland and Hungary; ſouth, by Switzerland and the Alps, which divide it from
Italy; weſt, by the dominions of France and the Low Countries, from which it is
ſeparated by the Rhine, Moſelle, and the Maeſe or Meuſe. e
DxvISIOxS.] The. German empire is divided into ten circles, VI.


. ese, Diele,, Dee

Upper Saxony- 3, 70, 0 Þ Burgundy =—* 1,880,000 :
Lower Saxony” 2, 100, h ;;: Franconia. = | 1, 00, 00
Weſtphalia _ 2, 300, 0ũ0 Swabia Þ 1,800,000 '
Upper Rhine 1,000,000 [Bavaria 1,600,000
Lower Rhine + 1,109,000  *' Auſtria — 4, 182,000


Beſides theſe ten circles, there belong alſo. to the German empire
; A785 206 , mh rugs a0 ne os!
The Kingdom ef Bohemia, divided into 16 circles 2,266, 00
The Marquiſate of Moravia, in 3 circles, — 2 ͤ—ͤ—% -
The Marquiſate of Luſatia, (belonging to the Elector of Saxony,) 400, oo
Sitefia; (belonging to the Roman empire)? 1᷑, 800, 00


Ruvxns. ]. No country can boaſt of a greater variety of noble large rivers than
Germany. At their head ſtands the Danube or Donaw, ſo called from the ſwiſtneſs
of the current, and which ſome pretend to be naturally the fineſt river in the world.
From Vienna to Belgrade, in Hungary, it is ſo broad, that in the wars between
the Turks and Chriſtians, ſhips of war have been engaged on it; and its conveni-
ency ſor carriage to all the countries through which it paſſes, is inconceivable. The
Danube, however, contains a l number of cataracts and Whirlpools; its ſtream 1
* rapid,


.


bob. © GERMANY..


rapid, and its courte, without reckoning turnings and windings, is computed to be
1620 miles. The other principal rivers are Rhine, Elbe, Oder, Weſer, and Moſelle.
PrRoDucT1oNs, AND Couukgctg.] From the advantageous ſituation, and the great
extent of Germany, from the various appearance of the ſoil, the number of its moun-
tains, foreſts, and large rivers, we ſhquld be led to expect, what we actually find, a
great variety and plenty of uſeful productions. The northern, and chiefly the north-
eaſtern parts, furniſh many ſorts of peltry, as ſkins of foxes, bears, wolves, ſquir-
rels, lynxes, wild cats, boars, &c. The ſouthern parts produce excellent wines and
fruits; and. the middle provinces great plenty of corn, cattle, and minerals. Salt is
found in Germany in greater abundance and purity, than in moſt other countries.
GovfRNMENT. | The German empire, which, till the, year, 843, was fa er WE
with France, new forms a ſtate by-iulels or may be; conſidered. as a- combination of
upwards of 300 ſoxereiguties, independent of each other, but compaſing one political
body, under an elective head, called the Emperor vf Germany, ,or the Roman Em-
peror. All other ſovereigns allow him the firſt rank among the European monarchs.
Eight princes of the empire, called electors, have the right of electing the Emperor.
The electors are divided into ecclefiaſtical and temporal.


Ihe King or Elector of Bohemia,


T's}


n If Blector of the Palatine of Ba-|
The Archbiſhop of Mentz, varia, 8
The Archbiſhop of Treves, The Elector of "Ss 11 8
The Archbithop * Cologne, EKW Elector of Brandenburg, [E

145:


ade


he Elector of Brunſwick,
Ihe Elector of Hanover,
AMx. J- The my. of the 1 when. complete, muſt amount, acconing 1
agreement in 1681, to. 28,090 infantry, and 12,999 cavalry. otro 54 tie?
REL1610x.] Since the year 1555, the Roman Catholic, the, laben and the
Calviniſt, generally called the Reformed Religion, have been the eſtabliſhed religions
of Germany. The firſt prevails in the ſouth of Germany, the Lutheran in the north,
and the Reformed near the Rhine. Ty


| CAPITAL] ViexNA, on the Danube, is the capital of Auſtria, and, 2 the, whole
German empire; and 1s the refidence of the Emperor. By -Tekedlie
IMmPFfOvEMENTS. | The Germans can boaſt of : a greater number of, uſcſul.; .
veries and inventions in arts and ſciences, than any other European nation. They
have the honour of inventing the art of printing, 1 the year 1450.
HisToky, &c. | . | Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, king of. France; as the
founder of the German empire, in 800. The Emperor Joſeph died Feb. 20, 1790;


and his ſucceflor, 2 II. was poiſoned Wh 1» 1 . "The, Preſent _
The German empire, WE conſidered as, one Single ann or, date, with tha” em-
peror at its head, is of no great political, conſequence. it. Europe, became, fem the
inequality and weak connexion of its parts, and the different 1 nature of, ge f over Ve
ments, from the inſignificancy of its ill compoſed army, and abOVe all, f f-


| ferent views and intereſts of its maſters, it Is "next to im e "Its. force ſh th i Ia No 2
united, e and uniform. ne i b I.


| Reclefiftcal.


4 18 ö
' 4 ” & 3 4 : 5 15? i fo 8 1 5 {4 > 1 i
N —


{ps Po "IS. 2 1 j 45
18


3 410 215 39 1% 8 > z 4 15.45


1 * > 8 9 % ; PRE ng. *
TT f * 144 333 * 81


| i 2s * BY. $3'.#-: 3% :
e 9 mea fl Faroighdl ee
® .


L 87 1


VV


T* countries belonging to this monarchy are ſcattered, and without any natural
connexion. The kingdom of Pruſſia is bounded north, by part of Samogitia;

ſouth, by Poland Proper and Maſovia; eaſt, by part of Lithuania; weſt, by Poliſh
Pruſſia and the Baltic; 160 miles in length, and 112 miles in breadth. Pruſſia ex-
tends to 55 N. lat. and is divided into


5 ; ; 3 9 5 Population |
The countries which are independent of the German empire, 6, ooo, ooo
The countries which are dependent, | 6,400,000


WEALTH AND COMMERCE.| The different provinces of the Pruſſian monarchy are
by no means equal to one another, with reſpect to fertility and the articles of their
produce. The kingdom of Pruſſia, being the moſt northern part of the monarchy,
is rich in corn, timber, manna, graſs, flax, and peltry of all forts, and exports theſe
articles. Amber is exported annually, to the value of 20,000 dollars. Pruſſia wants
falt, and has no metals but iron. The profits of its fiſheries-are confiderable. Other
parts of the monarchy produce various metallic ores, minerals, and precious ſtones.
The ſum accruing to the king from the mines amounts to Soo, ooo dollars, and the
profits of private proprietors to 500,0c0 dollars. Five thouſand hands are employed
in the ſilk manufactures. Pruſſia annually exports linen to the value of fix millions
of dollars. Their manufactures of iron, cloth, filk, linen, leather, cotton, porce-

lain, hard ware, glaſs, paper, and their principal manuſactures, employ upwards of
165,000 hands, and the produce of their induſtry is eſtimated at upwards of 30 mil-
lions of dollars. „„ . %%%ͤ;õ 1 . .

_ Capitar, Towns. | KoxIxGS BVR, a city of Poland, the capital of Ducal Pruſſia,
and of the king of Pruſſia's Poliſh dommions, is fituated on the river Pregel, over
which it has ſeven bridges. According to Buſching, it is ſeven miles in circumference,
and contains 3800 houſes, and about 60,000 inhabitants. Its river being navigable .
for ſhips, it has made a conſiderable figure in the commercial world. A univerſity
was founded at Koningſburg in 1554. TL
BERLIN is the capital of the Pruſſian dominions in Germany, fituated on the river.

Spree, in the marquiſate of Brandenburg. 3 OT
_ GoverRNMENT AND REL1610n.] The Pruffian monarchy reſembles a very compli-
cated machine, which, by its ingenious and admirable conſtruction, produces the
_ greateſt effects with the greateſt eaſe, but in which the yielding of a wheel, or the
relaxation of a ſpring, will ſtop the motion of the whole. The united effects of flou-
riſhing finances, of prudent economy, of accuracy and diſpatch in every branch of
adminiſtration, and of a formidable military ſtrength, have given ſuch conſequence to
the Pruſſian monarchy, that the tranquillity and ſecurity, not only of Germany, but
of all Europe, depend, in a great meaſure, on the politics of its cabinet. The ad-
miniſtration of juſtice is likewiſe admirably fimplified, and executed with unparalleled
quickneſs. 3 5

Under the reign of the late King, Frederic the Great, all ſects. of Chriſtians lived
peaceably together, becauſe the eſtabliſhed religion, which is the reformed, had no
power to oppreſs thoſe of a different perſuaſion. . Roman Catholics and Jews are very

numerous in the Pruſſian dominions ; they enjoy the moſt perfect freedom in the exer-
ciſe of their religion. 2 |


40 | Rs Axa]


. „ AU f .


Axkxr.] In 1783, the army of Pruſſia amounted to 224,431 men.

FiNANCES. | The finances of this monarchy amount ta 2 3 millions of dollars.

His rok v.] Pruſſia was anciently inhabited by an idolatrous and cruel people.
The barbarity and ravages they were continually making upon their neighbours,
obliged Conrad, Duke ot Maſovia, about the middle of the thirteenth century, to call
to his affiftance the knights of the Teutonic order, who were juſt returned from the
holy land. Theſe knights choſe a grand maſter, attacked thoſe people with ſucceſs,
and after a bloody war of fifty years, reduced them to obedience, and obliged ther:
to embrace Chriſtianity. They maintained their conqueſt till 1525, when Albert,


. Margrave of Brandenburg, their laſt Grand Maſter, having made himſelf maſter of


all Pruſſia, ceded the weſtern part to the king of Poland, and was acknowledged
duke of the eaſtern part, but to be held as a fief of that kingdom. The elector,
Frederic William, ſurnamed the Great, by a treaty with Poland in 1656, obtained

a confirmation of this part of Pruſſia to him and his heirs, free from vaſſalage, and,
in 1663, he was declared independent and fovereign duke. With theſe titles, and as
Grand Maſter of the Teutonic order, they continued till 1701, when Frederic, ſon
of Frederic William the Great, and grandfather of the late king, raiſed the duchy
of Pruſſia to a kingdom, and on January 18, 1701, in a ſolemu aſſembly of the ſtates
of the empire, placed the crown, with his own hands, upon his head; foon after
which he was acknowledged as king of Pruſſia by all the other European 2


Frederic III. died Auguſt 17, 1786, and was ſucceeded by his nephew, rederic
William, t the preſent king, who was born 1 in the year 1744. 1


Tus Auſtrian dominions elde 8 The ks of Auſtria, the kingdom of Bo-
hemia. Marquiſate of Moravia, part of Silefta, and the Auſtrian Netherlands;
all which belong to the German empire. 2. Lombardy, in Italy; Hungary, Illyria,
Tranſylvania, Buckowina, Gallicia, and Lodomiria ; countries which are A
of the German empire.
WeaLtn, CouukER- E, &c.] The provinces of de Auſtrian monarchy are not
only favourably ſituated as to climate, but they may be reckoned among the moſt
fertile in Europe. There is ſcarcely any valuable product which is not to be met with
m them. Bohemia produces and exports flax, wool, hides, ſkins, hops, iron, ſteel,
tin, cobalt, vitriol, brimſtone, allum, garnets, and other precious ſtones; it imports
falt, wine, filk, cotton, ſpices, &c. upon the whole, the value of exports exceeds
that of the imports by two millions of florins. Silefia exports large quantities of
knen, and Moravia has a great number of manufactures of all ſorts, chiefly of cloth,
the produce of which amounts to the value of 13 millions. The exports, of Lower
Auſtria to the Levant are computed at fix millions; but the ' imports, confiſting of
the articles of cotton, goats or camels hair, ſpices and coffee, at nine millions. The
diſtrict comprehending the provinces of Stiria, Carinthia, and Carniola, called by the
_ German ge 2 hers Interior Auſtria, is famous for its minerals. Lombardy, the
population of. which is prodigious, produces vaſt quantities of filk, to the ne of


4,500,000 florins. The value of the mines of the Auſtrian monarchy 18 computed to
amount to 19,000,000 florins. It is well known that Hungary produces an incredible


quantity


BOHEMIA. ; 659


quantity of excellent wines; the moſt delicious of which is the famous Tokay. The
Auſtrian Netherlands have been long famous for their fiſheries, corn, madder, and
flax of a ſuperior fineneſs, of which the Brabant lace is made, which brings a great
deal of money into the country. | 5
VIENNA is the capital of the circle of Auſtria, and is the reſidence of the emperor
of the whole empire of Germany. It is a noble and a ſtrong city, and the princes
of the houſe of Auſtria have omitted nothing that could contribute to its grandeur and
riches. Its inhabitants are reckoned at 206,000. Tad
Finances. | The finances of the Auſtrian monarchy amount to above 100 millions
of florins. Ss
Their debts to about 200 millions of florins.
Army.] The Auſtrian army, according to the new regulations of 1779, amount
to 282,000 men. 5 .
GENERAL REMARKs.] The Roman Catholic religion is the eſtabliſhed religion of
the monarchy : there are, however, at leaſt 80,000 Proteſtants in the provinces be-
longing to the German empire. In Hungary the number of Proteſtants is ſo great,
that ſince the act of toleration has been publiſhed, no leſs than 200 churches have
been allowed to them. There are beſides many thouſand Greeks, 223,000 Jews,
and about 50,000 Egyptians or Gypſies, in the Auſtrian dominions. At the begin-
ning of the preſent reign, there were upwards of 2000 convents of monks and nuns,
which are now wiſely reduced to 1143. The arts and ſciences, hitherto greatly neg-
- lected, begin to make conſiderable progreſs. The emperor Joſeph appropriated the
greateſt part of the revenues, ariſing from the eſtates of the ſecularized convents, to
the improvement of the ſchools, and the encouragement of literary merit.


KINGDOM or BOHEMIA, BELonNGING To THE
| AusrRIAN Monarchy.


SITUATION AND EXTENT.
Miles. 5 R
Length 478 1 .,__.. 48 and 52 N. Latitude,
Breadth 322 denten 0 12% and 19 E. Longitude.


B 3 OUNDED by Saxony and Brandenburg, on the north; by Poland
BOUNDARIES. ] D and Hungary, on the eaft ; by Auſtria and Bavaria, on the South;
and by the palatinate of Bavaria, on the weſt ; formerly comprehending, 1. Bohemia
Proper; 2. Sileſia; and, 3. Moravia. | Sebi fk Wes 2,
Crriks and Towns.} PRAGus, the capital of Bohemia, is one of the fineſt and

moſt magnificent cities in Europe, and famous for its noble bridge. Its circumference

is ſo large, that the grand Pruffian army, in its laſt ſiege, never could completely in-
veſt it. The inhabitants are computed at 80,000. It contains 92 churches and
chapels, and 40 cloiſters. It is a place of little or no trade, and therefore the mid-
dling inhabitants are not wealthy; but the Jews are ſaid to carry on a large commerce
in jewels. Olmutz is the capital of Moravia :.It is well fortified, and has manufac-
tures of woollen, iron, glaſs, paper, and gunpowder. It contains 11,000 inhabitants.
Hreſlaw is the capital of Silefia. © | THE. FT ue,
Un | 2 oo 8 COMMERCE


1 HUNGARY.


ComMEence AND ManvraAcTuREs. | Sce Auſtria.

ConSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT, | The forms, and only the forms, of the
old Bohemian conſtitution ſtill ſubſiſt; but the government under the Emperor is deſ-
potic. Their ſtates are TE Abs of the. cler Ty, nobility, gentry, and repreſentatives
of towns.
His rox v.] The Bohemian nobility uſed to elect their own princes, though the
Emperors of Germany ſometimes impoſed a king upon them, and at length uſurped
that throne themſelves. In the year 1438, Albert II. ot Auſtria, received three crow ns,

that of Hungary, the Empire, and Bohemia.

In 1414, Jolin Huts and Jerome of Prague, two of the firſt reformers, and Bo-
hemians, were burnt at the council of Conſtance, though the Emperor of Germany
had given them his protection. This occaſioned an inſurrection in Bohemia: the people

of Prague threw the Emperor's officers out of the windows of the council chamber;
and the famous Riſca, aſlembling an army of 40,000 Bohemians, deteated the Em-
peror's forces in ſeveral engagements, and drove the Imperialiſts out of the kingdom.
The divifions of the Huſſites among themſelves enabled the emperors to keep poſleſ- -
ſion of Bohemia, though an attempt was made to throw off the Imperial yoke, by
electing, in the year 1618, a Proteſtant king, in the perſon of the Prince Palatine,
ſon-in-law to James I. of England. He was driven from Bohemia by the emperor's
generals, and, being ſtripped of his other dominions, was forced. to depend on the
court of England for a ſubſiſtence. After a war of thirty years duration, which deſo-


lated the whole empire, the Bohemians, ſince that time, have remained ſubject to.
the houſe. of Auſtria.


HUNGARY, BELoNGING TO THE HousE of AUSTRIA.


SITVATION AND EXTENT,


5 Miles. . Miles.
Length 300 7 and 23 E. Longitude,
Breadth =] between (27 and' 49? N. Latitude. } 96,900:


| OUN DED north, by Poland: eaſt, by Tranſylvania and Wala-
Boum mts B chia; ſouth, by ee weſt, by * my Moravia. Di-
vided into Upper Hungary, north of the Danube, capital, Preſburg ; and Lower e

touth of the Danube, capital, Buda, lat. 47 40 north, long. 19 200 caſt. |
Por uTArlox. Hungary contains 3,170,000 inhabitants.
Alx, SOLL, Ax D PRODUCE. | The air in the ſouthern parts of Hungary is very
unhealthy, owing to ſtagnated waters in lakes and marſhes. The air in the northern
part is more ſerene and healthy. The ſoit in ſome parts is very fertile, and produces
almoſt every kind ef fruits. They have a fine breed of mouſe- coloured horſes, much
eſteemed by military officers.

RELIGION] The eſtabliſhed. religion in Hungary is the Roman Catholic, though
the greater part of the inhabitants are Proteſtants or Greeks ; and they now enjoy the
full exerciſe of their religious liberties.  _

GOVERNMENT. | By the conſtitution of Hungary, the crown is ſtill held to be


elective. This point is not diſputed. All that is infiſted on is, that the beir of the
houſe of Auſtria ſhall be elected as often as a vacancy happens. IM


The


33%


TRANSYLVANIA, SCLAVONIA, CROATIA, Kc. 66


The regalia of Hungary, conſiſting of the crown and ſcepter of St. Stephen, the
firſt king, are depoſited in Preſburg. Theſe are carefully ſecured by ſeven locks, the
keys of which are kept by the ſame number of Hungarian Noblemen. No prince is
held by the populace as legally their ſovercign, till he be crowned with the diadem
of King Stephen; and they have a notion that the fate of their nation depends upon
this crown's remaining in their poſſeſſion; it has therefore been always removed, in
times of danger, to places of the greateſt ſafety. . |

Chikr Tows.] PrtszuRG, lat. 48? 20 north, long. 17 3o' eaſt, in Upper
Hungary, is the capital of the whole kingdom. It is well built on the Danube, and,
like Vienna, has ſuburbs more magnificent than itſelf. In this city the ſtates of Hun-
gary hold their aſſemblies, and in the cathedral church the ſovereign is crowned.

_ Hisrory.] This kingdom is the ancient Pannonia. Julius Cæſar was the firſt
Roman that attacked Hungary, and Tiberius ſubdued it. The Goths afterwards took
it; and in the year 376, it became a prey to the Huns and Lombards. It was an-
nexed to the empire of Germany under Charlemagne, but became an independent
kingdom in 920. It was the feat of bloody wars between the Turks and Germans,
from 1540 to 1739, when, by the treaty of Belgrade, it was ceded to the latter, and
is now annexed to the German empire. Formerly it was an aſſemblage of different
ſtates, and Stephen was the firſt who aſſumed the title of king, in the year 997. He
was diſtinguiſhed with the appellation. of Saint, becauſe he firſt introduced Chriſtia-


nity into this country.


3 2


—


*
Ms 4


TRANSYLVANIA, SCLAVONIA, CROATIA, axp HUN-
OL 0 19 , DAEMATIA.: #7 +


E have thrown thoſe countries under one diviſion, for ſeveral reaſons, and par-
ticularly becauſe we. have no' account ſufficiently exact, of their extent and
boundaries, The beſt account of them follows: "Tranſylvania belongs to the houſe
of Auſtria, and is bounded on the north, by the Carpathian mountains, which divide
it from Poland; on the eaſt, by Moldavia and Walachia ; on the ſouth, by Walachia;
and on the weſt, by Upper and Lower Hungary. It lies between 22 and 25 degrees
of eaſt longitude, and 45 and 48 of north latitnde. Its length is extended about 185,
and its breadth 120 miles; and contains nearly 14, 400 ſquare miles, but it is ſur-
rounded on all fides by high mountains. Its produce, vegetables, and animals, are
almoſt the fame with thoſe of Hungary. Catholics, Lutherans, Calviniſts, Socinians,
Arians, Greeks, Mahometans, and other ſectaries, here enjoy their ſeveral religions.
Tranſylvania is part of the ancient Dacia, the inhabitants of which long employed
the Roman arms, before they could be ſubdued. The Tranſylvanians can bring to
the field 30,000 troops. Stephen I. king of Hungary, introduced Chriſtianity there
r OE
Sclavonia lies between the 16th and 23d degrees of caft longitude, and the 45th
and 47th of north latitude. It is thought to be about 200 miles in length, and 60
in breadth, and contains about ro, ooo ſquare miles. It is bounded by the Drave on
the north ; by the Danube on the eaft ; by the Save on the ſouth ; and by Kiria in
Auſtria on the weſt. The Sclavonians are zealous Roman Cathohes, though Greeks
and Jews are tolerated. In 1746, Sclavonia was united to Hungary, and the ſtates
tend repreſentatives to the diet of Hungary. 5 *
1 | rOatlàa


662 POLAND AND LITHUANIA.


Croatia lies between the 15th and 17th degrees of eaſt lon gitude, and the 4 «th and

47th of north latitude. It is 80 miles in length, and 70 in breadth, and contains

about 2,500 ſquare miles. The manners, government, religion, language, and

cuſtoms of the Croats are fimilar to thoſe of the Sclavonians and Tranſylvanians, who

_ their neighbours. Carolſtadt is a place of ſome note, but Zagrab 1s the capital of
roatia.

Hungarian Dalmatia lies in the upper part of the Adriatic fo. and conſiſts of five
diſtricts; in which the moſt remarkable places are Segna, which is a royal tree town
fortified both by nature and by art, and fituated near the ſea, in a bleak, mountainous,
and barren ſoil; and Ottoſchatz, a frontier fortification on the river Gatz ka.


—_
*


POLAND AND LITHUANIA.


Srrokriox AND ExTexT.


15 Miles.
ngth 700 16° and 345 E. 113
Breadth 680 between 146 30 and 572 3 LY N. Lat.


EFORE the extraordinary partition of this country by the King of Pruſſia, aided

by the Emperor and Empreſs Queen, and the Empreſs of Ruſſia, which event
happened f tince the year 1771, the kingdom of Poland, with the duchy of Lithuania
annexed, was bounded north, by Livonia, Muſcovy, and the Baltic ; ; caſt, by Muſ-
covy; ſouth, by Hungary, Turkey, and Little Tartary ; weſt, by Germany. | Con-
taining 230 towns.

In Poland, are villages 2377, convents of nuns 86, noblemen' s eſtates 22,032, ab-
beys 37, convents of monks 579, houſes in general 1,674,328, peaſants 1, 243, 00,
Jews 500,000. _

Div1sioxs. | The kingdom of Poland contains 155 towns, and is divided into, 1.
Great Poland, which is ſubdivided into 12 diſtricts, called woiwodſhips. 2. Little
Poland, three woiwodſhips. 3. Polachia, three counties. 4. Chelm, remaining

of Red Ruffia. 5. Podolia and Bratzaw. 6. Kow. 7. Volhynia. 8. The
creat duchy of Lithuania, which includes White Ruſlia, Black Ruffia, Poleſia, and
te duchy of Szamaite. 5
WæzLTI and Commerce] 1 Europe, owing
do the oppreſſion of the trades people in the towns, and the ſlavery of the peaſantry.
If the {kill of the natives in eee bore any proportion to 3 fertility of the
ſoil, Poland might be one of the richeſt countries in the world; for though a large
E of it lies uncultivated, it exports no inconſiderable quantity of corn. Want of
induſtry and of freedom are the chief reaſons that the balance of trade is fo much
againſt Poland. The exports are corn, hemp, flax, horſes, - cattle, (about 100,000
oxen every year) peltry, timber, metals, manna, wax, honey, &c. the TRE of them
in the year 1977, amounted to nearly 30 millions of gs The imports, conſiſt-
ing chiefly in wine, cloth, filk, hard ware, gold, filver, Eaſt and We India goods,
were ſuppoſed to amount to no lets than 47 millions of * —


GOVERNMENT. What their more powerful and e neighbours are pleaſed
to appoint. ©


Rex16108.]


5 SWITZERLAND. e
RELIGION, | The eſtabliſhed religion is the Roman Catholic. Proteſtants, to


whom. the name of Diffidents is now confined, are tolerated. The power of the hope:


and of the prieſts is very great.


CærirAT.] Wargaw, ſituated on the river Viſtula „in the center of Poland, con-
tains 50,000 inhabitants.


Ha srok r.] Poland was anciently the country of the Vandals, who emigrated


from it to invade the Roman empire. It was erected into a duchy, of which Lechus
was the firſt Duke, A. D. 694. In his time the uſe of gold and filver was unknown
to his ſubjects, their commerce being carried on only by exchange of goods. It be-
came a kingdom in the year 1000; Otho III. emperor of Germany, ang the
title of king on Boleſlaus I. Red Ruffia was added to this kingdom by Boleſlaus II.
who married the heireſs of that. country, A. D. 1059. Diſmembered by the emperor
of Germany, the empreſs of Ruſſia, and the king of Pruflia, who, by a partition
treaty, ſeized the moſt valuable territories, 1 772. Thele nations have lately made
another partition of this *


—B


8 0 Ds T E 3 * N D.


S1TUAmION AND Exrexr, „

Miles. = 5
Length 260 bot 6⁰ and 110 E. Longitude.
Breadth Wok W aa 145% and 460 N. Latitude. |


Bou NDED north, by Germany; eaſt, by Tirol, Trent, and Lake Conſtance; ;
ſouth, by Italy; —— by France.
Divisioxs.] Switzerland is divided into thirteen cantons, which mand in point


of precedency as follows; 1. Zurich; 2. Bern; 3. Lucerne; 4. Uri; 5. Schwetz;


6. Underwalden; 7. Zug; 8. Glaris; 13. Appenzel.


Citigs.| BRN, on the river Aar, is the moſt ade de city in Switzerland.


Bas11,, on the banks of the ne, contains 220 ſtreets, and by ſome 18 reckaned the
capital of all Switzerland.


Rovers. ] The principal rivers are Rhine and Rhone, both. of which riſe in the


Alps.

Ns SoiL, AND ! This country” is full of W ; on the
tops of ſome of them the fnow remains the year round; the air, of conſequence, is
keen, and the froſts ſevere. In the ſummer the inequality of the ſoil renders the ſame

province very unequal in its ſeaſons, On one fide of the mountains, called the Alps,
the inhabitants are often reaping, while they are ſowing on the other. The vallies,
bowever, are warm, fruitful, and well cultivated. The water of Switzerland is ex-


cellent, deſcending from the mountains: in beautiful cataracts, which have: a moſt


pleafing and delightful effect. Its productions are ſheep, cattle, Ine, flax, wheat,
barley, apples, peaches, cherries, chefnuts, and plums.


POPULATION AND Cuanacrer,] The number of inhabitants are reckemes at
1, 500,000.


The Swils are a 1 hardy, ene people, remarkable for thats fidelity, and
their zealous attachment to the liherties of their country. A general ſimplicity of


ieee Ns uaaſſacted. r ankneſs, e with an inxincible ſpirit of —
4 | = om,


* 1 1


* 8 Y * K's FI.
. YI Sp 4 — 3


3 8


664 NETHERLANDS.


dom, are the moſt | Bfinguihing charaGeriſtics ' of the inbabitarts of Switzerland,
On the firſt entrance. into this country, travellers cannot but obſerve the air of con-
tent and ſatisfaction which appears in the countenances of the inhabitants A taſte.
for literature is prevalent among them, from the higheſt to the low eſt rank. Theſe
are the happy conſequences of a mild republican government. |
Rericion.] The eſtabliſhed religions are Calviniſm and Popery ; ; theugh, in ſome .
doctrinal points, they differ much from Calvin. Their ſentiments on religious tole-
ration are much leſs liberal than upon civil government.
_ Government. | Switzerland comprehends thirteen cantons; that i is, ſo many dif-
ferent republics, all united into one confederacy, for their mutual preſervation.. The
government is partly ariſtocratical, and partly democratical. Every canton is ab-
folute in its own juriſdiction. But whether the government be ariſtocratical, de-
mocratical or mixed, a general ſpirit of liberty pervades and actuates the ſeveral
conſtitutions. The real intereſts of the people appear to be attended to, and they en-
joy a degree of happineſs not to be expected in deſpotic governments.
Hisrokv.] The old inhabitants of this country were called Helvetii; they were
defeated by Julius Cæſar, 57 years before Chriſt, and the territory remained ſubject
to the Romans, till it was conquered by the Alemans, German emigrants, A. D.
295; who were expelled by Clovis, king of France, in 496. lt underwent another
revolution in 888, ves made part of the kingdom of Burgundy, to Conrad II. em-
peror of Germany; ; from which time it was held as part of the empire, till the year
1307, when a very ſingular revolt delivered the Swiſs cantons from the German yoke.
 Griſler, governor of theſe provinces for the emperor Albert, having ordered one Wil-
Ham Tell, an illuſtrious Swiſs patriot, under pain of death, to ſhoot at an apple, placed
on the head of one of his children, he had the dexterity, though the diſtance was
very conſiderable, to ſtrike it off without hitting the child. The tyrant, perceiving |
that he had another arrow under his cloak, aſked him for what purpoſe he intended it?.
he boldly replied, “ To have ſhot you to the heart, if I'd had the misfortune to kill
« my ſon.” The enraged governor ordered him to be hanged, but his fellow citizens,
animated by his fortitude and patriotiſm, flew to arms, attacked and vanquiſhed
Griſler, who was ſhot dead by Tell, and the independency of the ſeveral ſtates of this
country, now called the Thirteen Cantons, under a republican form of government,
took place immediately; which was made perpetual, by a league among themſelves,
in the year 1315; and confirmed by treaty with the other powers of N TOR
SCVEn of theſe cantons are Roman „ and fix TIT. 5


N E T H E . e on oo


HE ſeventeen provinces, which are nn by the name of the 8 were
formerly part of Gallia Belgica, and aſterwards of the circle of Belgium, or
Burgundy, in the German empire. They obtained the general name of Aae
Pais-Bas, or Low Countries, from their ſituation in reſpect of Germany.
: 4 U
Exrzxr, $ITUATION, AND BOUNDARIES, OF THE (SEVENTBEN Provixers. |


"Miles.


Length 360 49 and 54 N. Latitude,
Breadth . between, 12 __ 7 * *


. = 1 The


HOLLAND. IE


They! are bounded by the German ſea on the north; by gelen , caſt ; by Lor-
rain and France, ſouth; and by the Britiſh channel, weſt, ©


We ſhall, for the ſake of pertÞicuity, and to avoid repetition, treat of the ſeventeen
Provinces under two great diyifions: firſt, the Northern, which contain the Seven


United Provinces, uſually known by the name of Horan : ſecondly, the Southern,
containing the Auſtrian and French Netherlands,


HOLLAND, OR THE SEVEN UNITED PROVINCES.


na Milcs. | 3 5 : Miles.
Length 180 51 20' and 532 N. ee
Breadth 145 between [9 2 and 7 E. Longitude. dio ooo


8 OUNDED caſt, by 3 ; ſouth, by the Auſtrian and
BOUNDA ales.) B French Netherlands; ; welt and north, by the German ocean.
Containing | 113 towns, 1400. villages.


Divisioxs AND PorulArflox.


Provinces. Population. | Chief Towns. | ' Inhabitants.

| een. et e Nimeguen, 12,000
- Holland; -' ; - - 080,000 Amſterdam, — 212,000

Utrecht, 85,000 Utrecht, —— 39,000

tele. . erem: 85,000 Middleburg, — 24,000
Frieſland; 11 40,000 Leuwarden, 5
Overyſſel, Tied = Deventer,

Groningen, — 100,000 8 Groningen.


Total, 2,758, 632 in 1785


E ountry of Drenthe, under the protection of the United Provinces. 25

Lands of the Generality, commonly called Dutch Brabant, 435,000 inhabitants.
Chief town, Bois le Duc, 12,000 inhabitants.

Posskssroxs.] 1. Ia Aſia. The coaſt of the iſland of Java; the capital of which


1s Batavia, the ſeat of the governor-general of all the Eaſt India ſettlements of the


Dutch. 2. Some ſettlements on the coaſts of Sumatra. 3. The greateſt part of the


Molucca, or Spice Iflands ; chiefly Amboyna, Banda, Ternate, Tidor, Motyr, Ba-


chian; ſettlements or factories on the iſland of Celebes, &c. 4. On the coaſts of


Malabar and Coromandel; Sedraipatam, Bimlipatan, Tepatam, Cochin, and Ca-
nannore; factories at Surat, Petra, &c. alſo in the gulf of Perſia, at Gamron,


Baſſora, &c. 5. On the land of -Ceylon, the chief place is Colombo; they have


beſides, Trincomale, Jafnapatam, Negambo, and a great number of lodges, or
factories,

2. In Africa. 1. The Cape of Good Hope, a large ſettlement, of hc the Cape-
town, with its fortreſs, is the capital. There is alſo a French colony at the Cape,
called Nouvelle Rochelle. The governor of the Cape does not depend on the go-
vernor of Batavia, but is under the immediate control of the States of Holland.,
2. George de la Mina, and other fortreſſes, and faQories i in Guinca. |


F


9.


*
S
3 © . N n *


666 HOLLAND,


3. L America. 1. The iſlands of St. Euſtatia, Saba, Curacoa. 2. Tic colonics
of Eſſequibo, Demarara, Surinam, and Berbice, on the continent of Guiana.
WEALTH AND ComnmBRCE.] The, Seven United Provinces afford a ſtriking. proof,
that unwearied and perſevering induſtry, is capable of conquering every diladvantage :
of climate and ſituation. The. air and water, are bad; the ſoil naturally produces
ſcarcely any thing but turf; and the poſſeſſion of this ſoil, poor as it is, is diſputed
by the ocean, which, riſing confiderably above the level of the land, can only be
prevented by ſtrong and expenſive dykes, from overflowing a ſpot which ſeems to
be ſtolen from its natural domains. Notwithſtanding theſe difficulties, which might
teem inſurmountable to a leſs induſtrious people, the perſevering labours of the
patient Dutehmen have rendered this ſinall, and ſeemingly inſigniſicant territory,


CarrraL. J. AMSTERDAM, which is built on piles of wood, and is one of the


31


laws, and cxerciſes moſt of the rights of; a ſovereign ſtate. In conſequence of the
union, the Seven Provinces guarantee 005 other's rights; they make war and peace,


republic. The provinces rank in


power of the ſtate. 3
RELISION.] The Calviniſt or Reformed religion is eſtabliſhed in Holland; but


General. The French and Walloon Calvinifts have Synods of their own. - 1 the
5 $10 even


AUSTRIAN aww FRENCH NETHERLANDS. 667


Seven Provinces are, 1579 miniſters of the &ftabliſhed church, go of the Walloon
Church, 800 Roman Catholic, 53 Lutheran, 43 Arminian, and 312 Baptiſt miniſters.
_ = Eaſt Indies there are 46, and in the Weſt Indies 9 miniſters of the eſtabliſhed
church. a Wl | {SO ee 1 | |
HrsTory.] Theſe provinces were, originally an aſſemblage of ſeveral lordſhips,
dependent upon the kings of Spain; from whoſe yoke they withdrew themſelves
during the reign of Philip II. in the year'1579, under the conduct of the Prince of
Orange, and tormed the republic, now called the Seven United Provinces, or Hol-
land, that being the moſt remarkable province. The office of Stadtholder, or Captain
General of the United Provinces, was made hereditary in the Prince of Orange's
family, not excepting females, in 1747. FE NO a Ss


*


Taye AUSTRIAN AND FRENCH NETHERLANDS.
Miles. OS 3
Length 00) | ſ 49 and 52 North Latitude.
Breadth 2001 2 and 7 Faſt Longitude.

OUNDED north, by Holland and the German ocean; eaſt, by Germany; ſouth

D and weſt, by France and the Britiſh channel. „„

Drvrsroxs.] This country is divided into ten provinces, viz. |

; J ; : D , : | bh $5 on 288 Chief Towns.

Brabant, belonging to the Dutch-and Auſtrians, © - - = - 1 8 0 oy


Mag” | ſubject to the houſe of Auſiria, ee Antwerp 5


Limburg, belonging to the Dutch and Auſtrians-——m j Limburg.
Luxemburg, Auſtrian and French, - - - - - Luxemburg.
Namur, middle parts belonging to Auſtria, - - - - Namur.

 Hainault, Auſtrian and French, - - - -- - - Mons.
Cambreſis, ſubje& to France, - - - - - -- - - Cambray.

Artois, ſubject to France, - -- Arras.
Flanders, belonging to the Dutch, Auſtrians, and French, 88
INRABTTA NAS AND REricion. | The Netherlands are inhabited by about 1,500,000
ſouls. The Roman Catholic is the eſtabliſned religion, but Proteſtants and Jews
are not moleſted. . VVV 2

Maxveracturss.] Their principal manufactures are, fine lawns, cambrics, lace,
and tapeſtry, with which they carry on a very advantageous traffic, eſpecially with
England, from whence it is computed: they receive a balance of half a million an-
nually, in time of peace. _ b e eee bb.
_  Cmizy  Towns:], \BrvssELs is the chief town of Brabant, and the capital of

Flanders. Here the beſt camlets are made, and moſt of the fine laces, which are

worn in every part of the world. 1 3

_ GoveRNMENT.| The Auſtrian Netherlands are ſtill confidered as a circle of the
empire, of which the archducal houſe, as being ſovereign of the whole, is tlic ſole
director and ſummoning prince. This * contributes its ſhare to the impoſts o

F 4 R 2 SOON | the


between


. Provinces.


668 FRAN OE.


| the empire, and ſends an envoy to the diet, but is not ſubje& to the judicatories
4 of the empire. It is under a, governor-general, appointed "aa the court of Vienna.

The face of an ailembly or parliament for each province is ſtill kept up, aud conſiſts

of the clergy, nobility, and deputies of towns, who meet at Brufſels.—Each province

claims particular privileges, but they are of very little effect; and the governor ſeldom
'S or never finds any refiſtance to the will of His court. Every province has a par-
. ticular governor, ſubject to the regent ; and tauſes are here decided according t to the
i Civil and canon law.

His rokx.] Flanders, originally the country of the ancient Belgæ, was con-
quered by Julius Cæſar, forty-ſeven years before Chriſt ; paſſed into the hands of
France, A. D. 412; and was governed by its earls, ſubj ect to that crown, from
864 to 1369. By marriage, it then came into the houſe of Auſtria; but was yielded
to. Spain in 1556. Shook off the Spaniſh yoke 1572, and in the year 172 5, by the
treaty of Vienna, was annexed to the German empire.


**


F R FY N © E.


Miles. N -
Length 45 and 31% N. Lat.
Brcadth 850 between { 5* a and 892 E. Long. —
UN DED north, by the Engtſh channel and the Netherlands ; caſt, by ow
many, Switzerland, and Italy; ſouth, by the Mediterranean and Spain ; ; weſt,


by the Bay of Biſcay. Containing, before the revolution, 400. cities, 150 fnaller
towns, 43, ooo pariſhes, 100,000 villages.


POSSESIONS IN OTHER PARTS OF THE GLOBE.


1. In Ala. Some diſtricts on the coaſt of Coromandel, of which Pondicherry is
the capital. Some lefs confiderable ſettlements on the Malabar coaſt, and in Benguls
and ſeveral factories: -

2. In Africa. In Barbary, Balkon de Frag! The and” of Gree, date of Se-
negambia, Fort Louis on the Senegal, and Podar, Galam, Portendic, Fort Arguin.
On the coaſt of Guinea, Frangois:. In the Indian Sea, the iſfands or Boutbon and
Ifle de France. =

In America. The North American Hd of St. ps 23 Miquelon. In:
the Weſi Indies, part of the iſland of St. Domingo, the iſlands of Martinique,
Guadaloupe, St. Lucia, Maria Galante, St. Martin, and Tobago. N In South Amer.
rica, ſome ſettlements in Guiana and Cayenne.

All theſe poſſeſſions, according to Neckar, contain abont 60010 inhabitants.
Moſt of theſe places have lately fallen into the hands of the Britiſh; .

Since the Revolution, a new diviſion of the kingdom has been made as Ws |
« Each diſtrict to be divided into cantons of about four ſquare Jeagues each, with
at leaſt one primary aſſembly in each canton. If the number of citizens in a canton
do not amount to goo, there is to be only one aſſembl) 75 but if- they amount to
that number, there are to be two aſſemblies of 450 each. Each ordinary aſfembly
to confiſt as nearly as poflible, of 600, which. ſhalt bè the mean number: the leaſt
to be 440. The number of deputies ſent to the national aſſembly by each diſtrict, to
be in proportion to the population, taxes, and . jointly conſidered,” -

This


DNA 669


This new political diviſion of France correſponds, in ſome reſpects, with the divi-
ſions of New England: Diſtricts in France anſwer to counties in New England—
cantons to townſhips, and aſſemblies to town meetings.
CLIMATE, SOIL, Rivers, ComMERCE, &c.] France is ſituated in a very mild cli-
mate. Its ſoil in moſt parts is very fertile; it is bounded by high ridges of moun-
tains, the lower branches of which croſs the greater part of the kingdom; it abounds.
with large rivers, viz. the Rhone, the Loire, the Garonne, the Seine, &c. to the
amount of 200, many of which are navigable; and it is contiguous to two oceans.
Theic united advantages render this kingdom one of the richeſt countries in Europe,
both with reſpect to natural productions and commerce. Wine is the ſtaple commo-
dity of France. One million ſix hundred thouſand acres. of ground are laid: out in
vineyards ; and the net profit from each acre is eſtimated at from four to ſeven pounds
ſterling. France annually exports wines to the amount of twenty-four millions of
livres. The fruits and other productions of France do not much differ from thoſe d
of Spain, but are raiſed in much greater plenty. France has very important fiſheries,
both on her own and on the American coaſt. 5 5
In 1773, there were in France 1500 filk mills, 21,000 looms for filk ſtuffs, 1 2, 00
for ribands and lace, 20,000 for filk ſtockings, and the different filk manufactories
employed 2,000,000 of people. 1, 5 .
In point of commerce, France may be ranked next to England and Holland. Be-
fore the revolution, the French had the greateſt ſhare of the Levant trade -they en-
joyed ſome valuable commercial privileges in Turkey; but their Weſt India poſſeſſions, .
which were admirably cultivated and governed, were the richeit. Before the late
American war, the balance of commerce, in favour of France, was eſtimated at.
70,000,000 livres.* „% ee ie 125 5 1
GOVERNMENT] Republican---unſettled.. 1 Coger . 5
In this country there were 18 archbiſhops, 111 biſhops, 166,000 clergymen, 5, 400
convents, containing 200,000 perſons devoted to monaſtic life. Theſe are all abo-
_ liſhed fince the revolution. T 3 1 4
ILE ARNING.] The ſciences have riſen to a very great height in this nation, which.
can boaſt of having produced great maſter- pieces in almoſt every branch of ſcientific
knowledge, and elegant literature. There are 20 univerſities in France. The royal
academies, of ſciences, of the French language, and of inſcriptions and antiquities
at Paris, are juſtly. celebrated. EL). ng ermat bolt annie tied 3
Histoxy.] France was originally the country of the ancient Gauls, and was con-
quered by the Romans twenty-five years before Chriſt. The Goths, Vandals, Alans,
and Suevi, and afterwards the Burgundi, divided it amongſt them from A. D. 400 to
476, when the Franks, another ſet of German emigrants, who had ſettled between.
the Rhine and the Maine, completed the foundation of the preſent kingdom under
Clovis. It was conquered, except Paris, by Edward III. of England, between 1341
and 1359. In 1420 an entire conqueſt was made by Henry. V. who was appointed
regent, during the life, of Charles, VI. acknowledged heir to. the crown of France, .
and homage paid to him accordingly. The Engliſh crown loſt. all its: poſſeſſions in
France during the reign. of Henry, VI. between 1434 and 1430.


The laſt king of this potent empire, was Louis XVI. the friend of America, and of
the rights of mankind. He was born Auguſt 23, 1754; married Maria Antomettas
of. Auſtria, May, 16, 1770; acceded to the throne upon the death of his grandfather


Louis


By the loſs of her valuable poſſeſſions in the Eaſt.and Weſt Indies, and the ifland of Corſica, her com-
merce is nearly annihilated.


6 SPAIN.


Louis XV. May 10, 1774; and was crowned at 'Rheies, June 12, 1775. He was


beheaded January 21, 1793, and his queen met with the ſame untimely fate, Oc. | Pp
in the tame year.


JJC
SITUATION AND ExrENT.
I. TR
Length 365 o and 44" N. Lat.
Breadth od between Ls o and 10˙ E. Long.


B Pan weſt, by Pa and the Atlantic; north, by the
| ovxDAnrs.] bay of Biſcay and the Pyrenean mountains, which divide it from
France; eaſt and ſouth, "by the Mediterranean Sea, and the Straits of Gibraltar.


Spain 18 divided into 14 diſtricts, in which are 139 towns, and 21,00 3 villages and
_ boroughs.


| POSSESSIONS IN OTHER PARTS OF THE GLOBE.


1. In Africa. On the coaſt of Barbary, the towns of Ceuta, Oran, Melilla, and
Naſalquivir: the Canary Iſlands, viz. Canaria, Ferro, Teneriffe, &c. The lands of
Annabou and Delpo, under the equator.


2. In Aa. The Philippine Iſlands, the principal of which is Iron, whoſe capi- |
tal is Manilla. The Marian, the Caroline, and Palaos iſlands.


3. 1n America. Immenſe provinces, much larger than all Europe, moſt of which
are aſtoniſhingly fertile.


(1.) In North America, Louiſania, California, Old Mexico, or New Spain, New
Mexico, both the Floridas.


(2.) In the Weſt Indies, the iſland of Cuba, one half of St. Domingo, Porto Ri-
co, Trinidad, Margaretta, Tortuga, &c.

(3.) In South America, Terra Firma, Peru, Chili, Pein. Paraguay, Patagonia.

Theſe extenfive countries we have already mentioned.

RIVvERS.] The Deuro, the Tagus, the Guadiana, the Guadalquivir, all which fall
into the Atlantic Ocean, and the Ebro, the ancient Iberus, which falls into the Me-
diterranean.
Carrral. ] Maps, ſituated on a 1 branch of the river T agus, contains 140,000
inhabitants. CAD1Z, ſituated on the Atlantic, a little to the northward of the Straits
of Gibraltar, is the great emporium of Spain, and contains $0,000 inhabitants.

 Wearrs AND ComMmerce.] The advantages of Spain as to climate, foil, natural
productions, rivers, navigation, and foreign poſſeſſions, which are immenſely rich,
-ought to raiſe this monarchy high above all the other powers of Europe; yet the re-
verſe is the caſe : Spain is but thinly peopled---has but little commerce few manu- |
factures---and what little commerce it has, is almoſt entirely in the hands of ſtrangers,
notwithſtanding the impediments thrown in their way by government.

Spain produces excellent oranges, lemons, almonds, figs, grapes, pomegranates,
dates, piſtachios, capers, cheſnuts, tobacco, ſoda, faffron, honey, falt, ſaltpetre, wines
of a rich and delicious flavour, cotton, rice, corn, oil, wool, ſilk, hemp, flax, &c.


which, with proper induſtry, might be exported to an fue amount. | And. _


throne in the year 1788.


PORTUGAL. 5 671


the exports of Spain, moſt articles of which no other country can ſupply, are eſti-


mated. at only 3,333, 3331. ſterling. Spain does not produce corn enough for its own
conſumption, and is under the neceſſity of importing large quantities.
GOVERNMENT. Spain is an abſolute: monarchy. The provinces of Navarre, Biſ-
cay, and Arragon, have pxeſerved ſome of their ancient privileges. The king's edicts
muſt be regiſtered in the court of Caſtile before they acquire the force of laws. The
crown is hereditary both in the male and female line. By a law made in 1715, female
heirs cannot ſucceed till after the whole male line is extinct. 25 .
Rex1610n.] The Roman Catholic religion, to the exclufion of all others, is the
religion of the Spaniſh monarch; and it is in theſe countries, of the moſt bigotted,
ſuperſtitious, and tyrannical character. All other denominations of Chriſtians, as well


as Jews, are expoſed to all the ſeverities of perſecution. The power of the court of-
Inquiſition, eſtabliſhed in Spain in 1578, has been diminiſhed in ſome reſpects by


the interference of the civil power. It is ſuppoſed. that the clergy of this kingdom:


amount to 200,000, half of whom are monks and nuns, diſtributed in 3000 convents.


The revenue of the archbiſhop of Toledo is 300,000 ducats. There are in the king-


dom of Spain, 8 archbiſhops, 46 biſhops; in America, 6 archbiſhops and 28 biſhops;
in the Philippine iſles, 1 archbiſhop and 3 biſhops: All theſe dignities are in the gift


of the King. Fifty-two inferior eccleſiaſtical dignities and offices are in the gift of


the Pope.


Hisronv.] The firſt inhabitants of Spain were the Celtæ, a people of Gaul; after
them the Phœnicians poſſeſſed themſelves of the moſt ſouthern parts of the country,


and may well be ſuppoſed to have been the firſt civilizers of this kingdom, and the
| founders of the moſt ancient cities. After theſe followed the Grecians ; then the Car-
thaginians, an whoſe departure, ſixteen years before Chriſt, it became ſubject: to the
Romans, till the year 400, when the Goths, Vandals, Suevi, Alans, and Sillingi, on
Conſtantine's withdrawing his forces from that kingdom to the eaft,. inyaded it, and
divided it amongſt themſelves; but the Goths in a little time were ſole maſters of it,


under their king Alarick I. who founded the Spaniſh monarchy. After a regular fſuc-
ceſſion of monarchs, we come to the preſent king Charles IV. who. aſcended the.


SiruATTION AND EXTENT.
Length 300}. , 37 and 42 N. Latitude.
Breadth 7 een l 7% and 109 Weſt Longitude.


e PD OUNDED north and caſt, by Spain; ſouth and weſt, by tlie
Soon nanres:] B Atlantic Ocean. Containing 19 towns, 527 villages, 3343


pariſhes. | - 5
RIVERS.] Every Brook in Portugal is called a river. Its rivers riſe in Spain and
run weſt through Portugal, into the Atlantic. The moſt noted is the Tagus. PE
_ Caprrai.]. Lion, at the mouth of the Tagus, contains about 150,000 inhabi-
tants. In 1755, it was laid: level with the ground, by a tremendous earthquake,
which was ſucceeded by a general conffagration, in which cataſtrophe upwards of
10,000 people loſt their lives. 3 5 3


—


CLIMATE, .


N


672 ITALY


 Crinartg, PrRobvcTiONSE, AND COMMERCE. 8 Portugal, ſituated in a genial climate,
beam in excellent natural productions, and is well watered. It poſſeſſes very rich
provinces in, and upon the coaſts of Aſia, Africa, and America. It is, however, not
proportionably powerful; ; its inhabitants are indigent, and the balance of trade 18
againſt it. It is even obliged to import the neceſſaries of lift, chiefly corn, from other
countries. Portugal produces wine, wool, oil, honey, aniſe feed, ſumac, a variety of
fine fruits, ſome corn, flax, and cork. In 178 5, the goods imported from Great Bri-
tain and Ireland into Portugal, confiſting of woollens, corn, fiſh, wood, and hard
ware, amounted to upwards of 960,000. "ſterling. The Engliſh took in return, of
the produce of Portugal and Brazil, to the amount of 728, oool. ſterling. Only 15
millions of livres are ſuppoſed to circulate in a country which draws annually upwards
of 1, 500, oool. ſterling, or 36 millions of livres, from the mines of Brazil. Since the
diſcovery of theſe mines, that is, within 60 years, Portugal has brought from Brazil
about 2, 400, ooo, ooo of livres, or ioo, ooo, oool. ſterling.

GOVERNMENT AND RxTLIerox.] Since the council of the three eſtates, viz. the
clergy, the nobility, and the cities, the members of which are nominated by the king,
was ſubſtituted in the room of the diets or meetings of the ſtates (which event took
palwkVace the latter end of the laſt century) the government of the kingdom of Portugal
has been abſolutely monarchical. The proceedings of the courts of juſtice are flow

and arbitrary, and the number of lawyers and law officers is exccedingly great.

The tate of religion in Portugal is the ſame as in Spain. The Portugueſe ' clergy
conſiſt of one Patriarch, a dignity granted to the church of Portugal in the year 18. 2»

of 3 archbiſhops and 15 biſhops. The whole number of eccleſiaſtics is 200, ooo:
30,000-of which, and ſome ſay 60,000, are monks and nuns. The number of con-
vents is 745. IT he number of clerical perſons to that of the laymen, is as 1 to 11.

HISZOR x.] Portugal was anciently called Luſitania, and inhabited by tribes of
wandering people, till it became ſubject to the Carthaginians and Phœnicians, Who
were diſpoſſeſſed by the Romans 250 years before Chriſt. In the 5th century, it fell
under the yoke of the Suevi and Vandals, who were driven out by the Goths of Spain,
in · the year 589; but when the Moars of Africa made themſelves maſters of the great-

eſt part of Spain, in the beginning of the eighth century, they penetrated into Luſi-
tania; there they eſtabliſhed governors, who made themſelves kings. It became
ſubj ect to Spain in 1580; but in 1640, the people rebelled, ſhook off the Spaniſh
yoke, and elected for their king the duke of Braganza, who took the name of John

IV. in whoſe family it has ever ſince remained, independent of Spain. Her preſent

mejeny s name is Mary F rancis Iſabella, who acceded to the throne 1 in the ond I 777.


1 7 . Y.


*SITUATION AND EXTENT.


13 Miles. Square Miles.
ngth 600 380 and 4% N. Lat.
Breadth 40] beta een, . 7e and 199 E. Long. 75


Jay is a large peninſula, ſhares like a boot and ſpur; and is bode Gesch, by
the Alps, which divide it from France and Switzerland; caſt, by the . 1 Ve.
nice, or Adriatic ſea; ſouth and weſt, by the Mediterranean ſea.


The


ITALY.


673


The whole of the Italian dominions, comprehending Corſica and Sardinia, are di-


vided as follows:


. { Piedmont, - (Tuſcany,
.. | Savoy, Maſla,
Le nel 8 | Montſerrat, To their reſpec- } Parma,
"Bia balon Aleſſandrine, tive Princes, Modena,
long] Onegli Piombi
glia, iombino,
| Sardinia Il. Monaco,
_ Tothekingdom 12 aples, [Lucca,
of Naples, L Sicily iſland, Republics, 1 St. Marino,
_- Milan, . | Genoa,
To the Emper. J Mantua, To England, Corſica iſland.
L(Mirandola, ( Venice,
To the Republic) Iſtria,
of wenne I ͤDalmatia,


Uliles of Dalmat.


Pope's dominions.
5 Iſlands in the Venetian dominions.


Arn, SolL, AND A e Italy is the moſt celebrated country in Europe,
having been formerly the ſeat of the Roman empire, and is at preſent of the Po
The country is ſo fine and fruitful, that it is commonly called the garden of Europe.
The air is temperate and wholeſome, excepting the territory of the Church, where it

is very indifferent. The ſoil is fertile and produces wheat, rice, wine, oil, oranges,
and all forts of fruits, flowers, honey, ſilk; and in the Kingdom of Naples are cot-
ton and ſugar. The foreſts are full of all kinds of game. On the mountains are fine
paſtures, which feed great numbers of cattle. |
IXHABITANTs.] Italy is thought to contain upwards of fourteen millions of inhabi-
tants. The Italians excel in complaiſant, obliging behaviour to each other, and
affability to foreigners; muſic, poetry, painting, ſculpture, and architecture, are their
favourite ſtudies, and there are no people who have brought them to renter Per-
fection.
RLIeIOx.] The Italians are da profeſſors of the doctrine of the church of
Rome. The Jews are here tolerated in the public exerciſe of their religion. The
natives, either in reverence to the Pope, or by being induſtriouſly kept in ignorance
of the proteſtant doctrines, entertain monſtrous notions of all the diſſenters from the
church of Rome. The inquiſition here is little more than a ſound. In Naples, there
are 20 archbiſhops, 107 biſhops: in Sicily, 3 archbiſhops, and 8 biſhops. In the
year 1782, there were in Naples alone, 45,525 prieſts, 24,694 monks, 20,793 nuns.
In 1783, government reſolved to diſſolve 466 convents of nuns.

CET Ciry.] Roms, once the capital of the world, is now the chief city in
Italy. It contained, in the year 1714, 143, ooo inhabitants, and is ſituated upon the
river Tyber. It was founded by Romulus 750 years before Chriſt, and was formerly
three tunes as large as at preſent ; and is now one of the largeft and handſomeſt cities

in Europe.

 MovxrTaixs. | Mount Veſuvius, in the Lindon of Naples, and Aitna, in Sicily,

are remarkable tor their fiery eruptions, whtch frequently bury whole cities in Tuins.
GovkRNMENT.] The government of Venice is ariſtocratical, under a chief ma-

giſtrate called a Doge, who is ſaid to be a king as to robes, a ſenator in the council


houſe, a priſoner within the city, aud a private man out of it.
48 | | "There


*


r al


674 1 TURKEY.


There are many different ſovereignties in Italy. It is divided into little republics,
principalities, and [dukedomns which, in ſpiritual matters, are ſubject to the pope, who,
like the ghoſt of the deceaſed Roman empire, fits crowned upon its grave.

Hisrogv. | The ra of the foundation of Rome begins April 20, 7 53 years before
the birth of Chriſt, Authors generally aflign the honour to Romulus its firſt King,
who was but eighteen years old. He was a wife, courageous, and politic prince.

St. Peter is placed at the head of the popes or biſhops of Rome, in the 33d year


of the common ra. The preſent pope is Pius VI. elected February 15 1773


— —


T U. * .
The Grand Signior's Deminions are divided into
Inhabitants. Sq. Miles.
F« T urkey! in Europe. | OG
2. Turkey in Aſia. 49, ooo, ooo 950,060, Guthrie;
3: pes þ in Africa. (Soo, ooo, On


TURKEY im EUROPE.


SITUATION AND EXTENT. 3
„„ | 1 80 Miles
Length 1000 % and 40% E. Long.
Breadth 3 between 127 and 49 N. Lat. } .


O0UNDED by Ruſſia, Poland, and Sclavonia, on the cdorth ; by
Circaſſia, the Black Sea, the Propontis, Helleſpont, and Ateht


pelago, on the eaſt; by the Mediterranean, on the ſouth; by the ſame ſea, and the


Venetian and Auſtrian terntories, on the welt.
Soll, Air, Ap PRoDucTIONs.] Nature has been laviſh of her bleſſings upon:


the inhabitants of Turkey in theſe particulars. The ſoil, though unimproved, through:


the indolence of the Turks, is luxuriant beyond deſcription. The air is ſalubrious


and friendly to the imagination, unleſs corrupted by the neighbouring countries, or


through the uncleanlineis of its inhabitants. The ſeaſons: here are regular and plea-


fant, and have been celebrated from the remoteſt times of antiquity. The Turks are ”


invited to frequent bathings,. by the purity and wholeſomenefs of the water in every


part of their dominione. Raw filk, cotton, oil, leather, tobaceo, cake ſoap, honey,
wax, manna, and various fruits and drugs, are here produced in plenty.


Cuize Cities. | CONSTANTINOPLE, the eapital of this empire, flanding on the
weſt fide-of the Boſphorus, in the Province of Romania, was rebuilt by the emperor:


Conſtantine in the fourth century, who transferred hither. the ſeat of the Roman go--
vernment; upon his death it obtained the name of Conſtantinople. It is of a trian-
gular ſhape, waſhed by the ſea on two ſides, and riſing gradually from the ſhore, in:


the form of an amphitheatre. The view of it, from the harbour, is conſeſſedly the
fineſt in the world. The city is ſurrounded by a wall about 12 miles in circumference,,


and the ſuburbs are very extenſive. It contains 1 ooo, ooo ſouls, of which 20⁰,½ !


are G 40,000 9 and ew Jews.
| | RELICIOx.]


ISLANDS, SEAS, MOUNTAINS, e. 6555


 Rer161n.] The eſtabliſhed religion in this empire is the Mahometan, of the ſe&
of the Sunnites. All other religions are tolerated, on paying a certain capitation.

Among the Chriſtians reſiding in * urkey, thoſe of the orthodox Greeks are the moſt
numerous, and they enjoy, among other priviles ges, that of being advanced to diginties
and poſts of truſt and profit. The Türkiſh cler gy are numerous, being compoſed of


all the learned in the empire, and are the only teachers of the law, and muſt be con-


ſulted in all important caſes.
GOVERNMENT. ] See Turkey in Afia.
HisToky.| The Offoman empire, or ſovereignty of the Turkiſh empire, was
founded at Conſtantinople by Othman I. upon the total deſtruction of the empire of
the eaſtern Greeks, in the year 1300, who was ſucceeded by a race of the mo! it war-
like princes that are recorded in hiſtory. The Turkiſh throne is hereditary ia the ta-
mily of Oſman. The preſent Ottoman or Turkith emperor is Abdelhamet or Aci:met


III. who had been in confinement 44 Years. He ſuccecded his brother Muſtapha III. 8


January 21, 1774.“


ISLANDS, SEAS, MOUN TAINS, 1 OF EUROPE.


Tun principal iſlands of Europe are, Great Britain and Ireland i in the north. In
the Mediterranean ſea are, Yvica, Majorca, and Minorca, ſubject to Spain. Cor-


ſica, tulject to England by conqueſt. Sardinia is ſubject to its own king; and Sicily is


governed by a viceroy under the king of Naples, to whom the ifland belongs. The
Iſlands of the Baltic, the Adriatic, and Tonian ſeas are not worthy of notice.

The principal ſeas, gulfs, and bays in Europe, are the Adriatic ſea, between Italy
and Turkey; the Baltic ſea, between Denmark, Poland, and Sweden; the bay of
| Biſcay, between France and Spain; the Engliſh channel, between England and

France; the Euxine or Black ſea, between Europe and Aſia; the German ocean, be-
tween Germany and Britain; and the Mediterranean ſea, between Europe and Africa.

The chief mountains in Europe are, the Alps, between France and Italy; the Ap-
pennine hills in Italy; the Pyrenean hills, that divide France from Spain ; the Carpa-
thian mountains, in the ſouth of Poland; the Peak in Derbyſhire ; the Plinlimmon
in Wales; beſides the terrible volcanoes, or burning mountains of Veſuvius and
Stromboli. in Naples; Atna in Sicily, and Hecla in the cold iſland of Iceland.


* See the Hiſtory of the Turkiſh or. Ottoman Empire by A. Hankins, Eſq. in 4 vols. sro. Printed


for ]. Stockdale,


a | ASIA


— of Braes = 9"


6676)


TH immenſe tract of country ſtretches into all climates, from the frozen wilds of
Siberia, where the hardy inhabitants, clothed in fur, are drawn in fledges over

the ſnow to the ſultry regions of India and Siam; where, ſeated: on huge elephants,.
the people ſhelter themſelves from the N rays of the ſun by the ſpreading um-
brella. P
This is the princivet quarter of the globe; for in Afia; the Mili Creator bnd
the garden of Eden, in which Adam and Eve were formed, from whom the whole
human race have derived their exiſtence. Aſia became again the nurſery of the world
after the deluge, whence the deſcendants of Noah diſperſed their various colonies
into all the other parts of the globe. It was here our Saviour was born, and accom--
pliſhed the great and merciful work of our redemption, and it was hence, that the
light of his glorious goſpel was carried, with amazing rapidity, inte all the ſurround-
ing nations, by his diſciples and followers. This Was, in ſhort, the theatre of almoſt
every action recorded in the Holy Scriptures.
This vaſt tract of land was, in the earlieſt ages, governed by the Ain Medes,
Perſians, and Greeks. Upon the extinction of theſe empires; the Romans carried
their arms even beyond the Ganges, till at length the Mahometans, or as they are
uſually called, Saracens, ſpread their devaſtations over this country, deſtroying all its


ancient ſplendour, and rendering the moſt populous and an ſpots of Aſia, wild and
uncultivated deſerts.
Among the remarkable mountains of Aſia are, Ararat, near the Caſpi pian ſea; on
which the ark of Noah reſted, when the waters of the del ge ſubſided; and Heret-
and Sinai, in Arabia.


The principal languages ſpoken in Aſia are, the modern Greek, .the Turkiſh, the
Ruſſian, the Tartarian, the Perſian, the Arabic, the Malayan, the Chineſe, and the


Japaneſe. The European languages are alſo ſpoken upon the coaſts of India and China.
The continent of Afia is fituated between 25 and 180 degrees of eaſt longitude, and
between the equator, and 80 degrees of north latitude. It is about 4740 miles in
length, and about 4380 miles in breadth. It is bounded north, by the Frozen Ocean;
weſt, by the Red Sea, Levant, or Mediterranean, and Europe; i js by the Pacific


Ocean, or South Sea, Which ſeparates it from America; ſouth, by the Indian Ocean;
G that it is almoſt ſurrounded by the ſea.


This vaſt tract of country is divided as follows, viz. Ws


Nations.


A 8 I A. 677
. Diſtance and bear” 1
5 6 Nations. 22 Waage Miles. Chief Cities.” tin + front L oth don. - Religions, | |
7 | 12 N 5
. | Ruffian - - - | 3,050,000] Tobolſk 2160 N. E. Chriſt. and Pa |
5 || Chineſe - - - | . 644,000 | Chynian - 4480 N. E. | Pagans - *
5 . Mogulean - - 185,350 Tibet 3780 E. Pagans
* | | Independen, - | 600,060 | Samarcand [ED — Pagans
China - - 1,105, c | Pekin 7 | 4320 S. E. "Pagans Fog
Moguls - - - | 1,916,500 |\Delhi J 3720 S. FE. Mahom. & ——
India beyond the n "Is
| Perlia Perſia We 2 __ 800,002 | Iſpahan I .2460 . = ; "Mahometans —
al Part c of Arabia joo, oo Mecca | - | 2640 8. E. | Mahometans |
| Syria, - - - |. 29,000 | Aleppo | 1866. C. E. | Chriſt. & Mah. |.
II Holy Land - - |. ; 7,600 | Jerutalem _ | 1920. S. E. | Chriſt. & Mah.
<a i. tee ae cf, os do Boris. of 11-7 - 8 3
Nato | 195,600 | 3 1440 8. E. | Mahometans
2 Diari eck of 7 e F
E 2 or Calder 8 8168 ET Mahometans |
Fa PF" 17 r with ſome few 7
4 Armenian | 59,000 Erzerum — — j
\-Georgia 5 8 1 55355 * Q | „
| mmm or mud 23, 900 Scherazer 2220 B NM Mahometans, |


E9＋⁊— —


All the iſlands of Aſia e 8 TIER mentioned; in the 33 belonging
to the Turks) lie in the Pacific or Eaſtern Ocean, and the Indian Seas; of which
the . where the W trade, or have ſettlements, are,


Iſfands. | rept Towns. 1 1 "hp Miles. 1
. or belong.
The «ab 0 iſles — _—- - _ Jeddo, Meaco =: -- 38,000 Dutch
The Ladrones: , J ⁵—8 Spain
TTV) V% ⁰ — „„ = i
C -  — --  Kionteheow *\- — 11255 | China: 5 |
Fhe Philipines 8 2 Mäna 1343,00 Spain i
The NMoldera or Clove iſles -- Victoria fort; Tenite- Dutch
The Banda, or Nutmeg iſles Lantor r Dutch
Aub nN ſürrounding tlie : Kinboyna: EFF 0 fee.
Celebes „ ee Molucca Macaffſ ar 68,400 Dutch
„ and Banda iſles Silolo = = 10,400 Dutch
Borneo Borneo, Cimtongee” >=- 228,000 All nations
| The Sunda iſles { Sumatra Achen, .Bencoolen. -- 129,000 Eng. & Dt.
Java, &c. Batavia, Bantam 38,250 Dutch
The Andama and Nicobar Hes Andaman, Nicobar an All nations
| Ceylon 1 8 „ 175 Candy — — — 27,730 Dutch


The F |


. TURKEY IN ASIA.


[lands, - - Towns. | Sq. Miles 2
| ? | » or
The Maldives - - — Caridon 3 All 8
Bombay = - Bombay -= - . -- Engliſh
The Kurile iſles, and thats 5 in the ſea of Kamtſchatka, 1
lately diſcovered by the Ruſſians. EKuſſia.


2 0 Sirbanes AND Exrzxr. |

Miles. 3 | 8g. Miles:
Length 1000 Ni 250 nd 165 E. 1 g. ug
Breadth ** between 2 8* and 45 N. Lat. © nu |


Bü 1 by the Black Sea and. Circaſſia, on the north ; by Per-
enn ] fia, on the eaſt ; by Arabia and the Levant Sea, on the ſouth;
and by the Archipelago, t the Helleſpont, and Propontis, which ſeparate. it from Eu-
rope, on the weſt.

Movxraixs.] Theſe are famous in facred, as well as profane writings. The moſt
remarkable are, Olympus, Taurus, and Antitaurus ; Caucaſus and Ararat; Lebanon
and Hermon.

Rivers.) The ſame may pe obſerved of the x rivers, which are the Tigris, Oromos,
| Meander, arabat, Kara, and Jordan.
WALTH AND CoMMERCE.] The T ark ith l including, beſides. the
above ſpecified poſſeſſions in Europe, the provinces of Aſia Minor, Georgia,“ Min-
grelia, Armenia, Bagdat, Aleppo. Damaſcus, Paleſtina, part of Arahia and Egypt,
belong to thoſe parts of the werld which enjoy the moſt delightful climate, and the
_ hap eſt ſituation for commerce and the Soqguitition of opulence. .. Nature has poured
out 1555 gifts on theſe provinces with profuſion : but the ty rannical government now
prevailing in this large part of the world, being hoſtile to induſtry and population,
renders this immenſe empire wretched and in igent. |

Beſides the fineſt natural productions which are found in Spain and Italy, Turkey
in Afia abounds in horſes, and in various forts of excellent peltry, ſupplied by the
wild beaſts in the mountainous and woody parts of the provinces. It produces alſo a
great deal of cotton, maſtich, manna, goats hair, which reſembles filk in ſoftneſs,
eſpecially the ſort called camel hair.

The principal trading towns in Turkey are the cities of Conſtantinopls, Smyrna,
Aleppo, Damaſcus, Alexandria, and Salonichi.

Government.) The government of the Turkiſh empire is deſpotic ; the life and
property of the ſubject depend on the will of the Sultan, who is the only free man,
in his dominions, and who exacts a blind obedience to his will, as a civil and religi-,
_ ous duty: yet the emperor is reſtrained, in ſome meaſure, by the ſame religions ſyl-
tem on which his arbitrary power is founded, and. ſtill more by the intrigues of the
principal officers of his court or ſeraglio, WhO are poſſeſſed of the actual Power, 0 of
which the Sultan enjoys only the appearance. _ .


1 g


* Georgia hath lately claimed independence, and ee auen wor the protein of Ruſſp. 1 3
N The


TURKEY IN ASIA. N


The ſapreme council of ſtate is called the Divan. The regular or ordinary divan is
compoſed of the high officers of ſtate; and, on particular emergencies, an extraor-
dinary divan is held, which conſiſts, betides theſe officers, of other perſons of ex-
perience and knowledge of the law, called in by the miniſters to aſſiſt in their delibe-
rations ,. "Eh Ws] b FP |

The Turkiſh laws are contained in the Koran, in the code of laws collected by
Soliman II. and, in dubious caſes, the deciſions of the Mufti, the chief of the Ma-
hometan church, have the authority of laws. Sree
FI NANCES.] The public revenue amounts to 30,000,000 dollars.

Navel t is uſually eſtimated at 300,000 men. $56


Navv.] About 60 ſhips of war. In the year 1786, the Turks had actually 30
ſhips of the line. of 800 mem each, and 40 gallies, of 140 men each; and this num
ber was intended to be increaſed, | : #
RELIGION. See Turkey in Europe. 901
ManklAeESs.] Marriages in this country are chiefly negociated by the ladies.
When the terms are agreed upon, the bridegroom pays down a ſum of money, a
licence is taken out from the Cadi, or proper magiſtrate, and the parties are married,
The bargain is celebrated, as 1n other nations, with mirth and jollity ;. and the money
is generally employed in furmfhing the houſe: of the young couple. They are not
allowed, by their law, more than four wives, but they may have as many concubines
as they can maintain, Accordingly, beſides their wives, the wealthy Turks keep a
kind of ſeraglio of women: but all theſe indulgencies are ſometimes inſufficient to
gratify their unnatural deſire. F
Ax ricpirtEs AND, CURIOSITIES, NATURAL AND. ARTIFICTAL.] Theſe are ſo
various, that they have furniſhed matter for many voluminous publications, and others
are appearing every day.. Among the moſt noted. are thoſe of Balbeo and Palmyra.
Balbec is ſituated on a rifing plain, between Tripoli in Syria and Damaſcus, at the
foot of Mount. Libanus. Its remains of antiquity diſplay, according to the beſt
judges, the boldeſt plan that ever was attempted in architecture.
. have been the conjectures concerning the founders of theſe immenſe build-
ings. The inhabitants of Aſia aſcribe them to Solomon, but others, with more pro-
bability, aſcribe them to Antoninus Pius. Balbec is at preſent a little city encompaſſed!
with a wall; inhabited by about 5000 Greeks. 31555
Palmyra, or, as it was called in Scripture, Tadmor in the deſert, is ſituated in the
wilds of Arabia Petræa, about 33 north lat. 203 miles to the ſouth-eaſt of Aleppo,
and about 60 from the river Euphrates. This city, formerly one of the moſt ſuperb in
the world, is now in ruins. It was built by Solomon, for the convenience of trade
with the Eaſt Indies; and was formerly the great emporium of the eaſtern world.
| Mecca and Medina are curiofities only through the ſuperſtition of Mahometans.
Their buildings are mean when. compared to thoſe of England; and even the tem-
ple of Mecca, in point of architecture, makes but a ſorry appearance, though erected
on the ſpot where Mahomet is ſaid to have been born. The fame may be faid of
the moſque at Medina, where that unpoſtor was buried.. 2 3
CrriES and PrINCIPAL Towxs.] Though theſe are innumerable, and moſt of
them once remarkable for the beauty and magniticence of their buildings, the number
of their inhabitants, and the prodigious extent of their trade; they are at preſent ſo
fallen from their former grandeur, that very few of them are worthy our notice.
Natolia, or Afia Minor, comprehending the ancient provinces of Lydia, Pamphy-
lia, Piſidia, Lycaonia, Cilicia, Cappadocia, and Pontus or Amaſia, . _ b
e . 1 . brated.


-


680 TURKEY IN ASIA.


brated in the Greek and Roman hiſtories, are now moſtly forſaken, and become a
heap of ruins. The ſame fate has likewiſe attended the once>flourtſhing, countries of
Paleſtine and Judea.

Old Troy cannot be diſcovered by the ſmalleſt veſtige, and the place where it
ſtood is only known by its being oppoſite to the iſle of Tenedos. Scanderoon ſtands
upon the fite of Old Alexandria, and is only remarkable for the remains of antiquity
found in its neighbourhood. Turkiſh Curdiſtan, part of which is ſubject to the Per-
Hans, is the ancient Aſſyria, and Curdiſtan, the capital, is ſaid to be chiefly cut out
-of a mountain: as to Nineveh, :the former capital of this country, it 1s now entirely
deſtroyed, and even its ſituation hardly known.

Smyrna, the capital of Tonia, is fituated at the bottom of a bay of the Archipela-
go, and is eſteemed one of the fineſt ports in the Levant. Its form is that of a tri-
Angle, its circumference about four miles, and the number of its inhabitants, inclu-

ding Turks, Greeks, ſews, Armenians, and Europeans, is computed at 27,000.

The beſt commodities of Aſia and Europe are fold here remarkably cheap.

Aleppo, the capital of Syria, ſtands on four hills, twenty-two leagues eaſt of Scan-
deroon:: this city is about three miles in circuit. The whole number of inhabitants,
Jews, Turks, and Chriſtians, in the city and ſuburbs, is about 2 30, 00. The trade

of this city is very confiderable, for hither are brought all the commodities of Europe
on the one hand, and thoſe of Afia on the other; and from hence they are again ex-
ported, the former into Aſia, and the latter to Europe.

Damaſcus; now called Sham, is ſituated on the river Barada, and was formerly a
very celebrated city, having been long tlie reſidence of the Syrian kings, and after-
wards of the Caliphs of the Saracens: In the neighbourhood of the city is an hoſpi-
tal for pilgrims and ſtrangers of all religions, who are maintained at the Grand Seig-


nor's expenee. The great moſque, formerly a Chriſtian church, is a 525 magnificent
edifice, into which it is death for any but Muſſelmen to enter.


The chief trade of Damaſcus conſiſts in ſcimctars, ſword: Ulades, Saints: bridle
bits, and all kinds of iron ànd ſteel wares, in which it is ſuppoſed above .20,000;0f
the inhabitants are employed. They likewiſe manufacture thraſe beautiful filks, which,

from this city, obtained the appellation of damaſks.


Tyre and Sidon, formerly ſo diſtinguiſhed by their ala and opulence, are al-
moſt entirely decayed : the latter, indeed, has a good harbour, and ſtill carries on a

trifling trade; but Tyre, which i is NOW called Sur, is only inhabited by a few miſera-
ble fiſhermen, who live in the ruins of its primitive ſtate.


Bagdat, the capital of Babylon, is ſituated on a delightful plain, on the eafiern
banks of the Tigris.

Jeruſalem, formerly the capital of Judea, is no.] called by the Turks, Cudſemba-
ric, and Cudtcherif : it is about three miles in e. and ſituated on a rocky
mountain, with very ſteep aſcents on all fides, except to the north; the vallies DEAE
deep, and at ſome diſtance, enviraned with hills. From the oppreflive tyranny 0
the Turks, it is now but thinly inhabited, and the private buildings are exceedingly |
mean. Though common ue muſt ſuggeſt, that from the number of times this city
Has been deſtroyed and rebuilt, there cannot remain the leaſt: veſtige of thoſe places
where the ſeveral parts of our Redeemer's paſſion were tranſacted; yet the Greek. and
Armenian prieſts ſubſiſt by guiding travellers and pilgrims to particular ſpots, which
they pretend are thoſe pointed out in the New Teſtament. The chief of theſe,
however, are ſaid:to be incloſed in the church of the Holy Sepulchre, built by He-
Jena, mother to Conſtautine the Great. This edifice 1 is ſtill in good repair; the mw |

3 *


—


— — 4 - po —— 232 ",— r RR


TARTARY IN ASIA. .


end contains Mount Calvary; and in a chapel, the aſcent to which is by 22 ſteps,


they ſhew the very hole where the croſs was fixed : here is a ſuperb altar, with three
eroſſes, before which hang forty-ſix lamps of great value, kept continually burning.
At the weſt end is the Holy Sepulchre, covered with a ſtately cupola, ſupported by
fixteen maſſive columns, incruſted with marble. The center of this dome is open at
top, juſt over the ſepulchre; and the chapel of the ſepulchre is hewn in the ſolid
rock, and has a ſmall dome or lanthern gon the top; ſupported by pillars of porphyry.
The cloiſter round it is divided into ſeveral chapels, appropriated to the different


ſects of Chriſtians who reſide there. This church is the chief ſupport of the town;


the whole buſineſs of the city being to accommodate pilgrims, &c. with conveniences ;
and the fees which they pay to the government for the liberty of going into this holy


edifice, alſo yield a very conſiderable revenue. Beſides this church, there are ſome
others erected by the ſame empreſs, over ſuch places as were ſuppoſed to have been
the ſcene of any remarkable tranſaction ; as, where Chriſt eat his laſt ſupper; where
the palace of Caiaphas ſtood ; where our Saviour was buffeted and mocked ; the


houſe of Pontius Pilate ; the Field of Blood; that part of the garden on Mount
Olivet where Chriſt prayed in his extreme agony ; on the fummit of this mount a


chapel is built over the place of our Saviour's aſcenſion, the floor of which is the ſolid
Tock, and the crafty prieſts pretend to ſhew therein the print of one of his feet, 'which
has remained ever ſince that period. Theſe impoſtors do not wholly confine them-


ſelves to. the places mentioned in the New Teſtament, they diſtinguiſh many re-
corded in the Old; and to an edifice twenty cubits ſquare, and ſixty high, they have
| gon the appellation of Abſalom's Pillar. At the ſouth-eaſt part of the city, upon
Mount Moriah, there is an edifice, commonly called Solomon's Temple. It cer-


tainly ſtands on the ſpot where the ancient temple did; but that, according to the


prediction of our Saviour, was ſo effectually demoliſhed by the Romans, that not
one ſtone remained upon another: it is uncertain by whom this mock fabric was


raiſed. About ſeven miles ſouth of Jeruſalem ſtands the once famous city of Beth-


lehem, juſtly celebrated for being the birth place of our Saviour, but now reduced to
an inconſiderable village. A noble temple was erected by the empreſs Helena, over


the ſpot where the ſtable is fuppoſed to have ſtood, in which Chriſt was horn, and hi-
ther a prodigious number of pilgrims daily reſort. 1


—


—— 8


**
9


»


TARTAEKT n ASIA.
Length 4000 between J 59 2nd 150 E. Longitude.


ARTARL, taken in its fulleſt extent, is bounded by the Frozen Ocean, bn the


1 north; by the Pacific Ocean, on the eaft ; by China, India, Perſia, and the
Caſpian Sea, on the ſouth; and by Muſcovy, on the weſt.
 Rivzxs.] The principal rivers are, the Wolga, which runs a courſe of 2000 miles;
the Oby, Which divides Afia from Europe; the Tabol, Irtis, Geneſa, or Jetifka ;
the Burrumpooter, the Lena, and the Argun, which divides' the Rufffan and Chirteſe


1 i ©


682 8 CHINA.


c be northern are exceſſively cold and barren, but the ſouthern more ferpe-

rate and fertile. The 8 abounds with unwholeſome lakes and marſhes, moun-
tains and ſandy deſerts. Their commodities are chiefly ſkins of foxes, ſables, .
lynxes, and other furs alſo; flax, muſk, rhubarb, and einnamon.

The Tartars are chiefly Pagans, Mahometans, and Chriſtians; the firſt are moſt
numerous.

Muſcovite Tartary is fab; ject to the empreſs of Was ; Chineſe Tartary to the
emperor of China ; other 9 of Tartary have their own princes or chams, and ſome
are fabject to Perfia and the Great Mogul.

The Tartars are in general ſtrong made, ftout men; ſome are honeſt and hoſpita-
ble; others barbarous and live by plundering. The beauty of the Cireaſſian women
is a kind of ſtaple commodity in that country; for parents there make no ſcruple of
ſelling their daughters to recruit the feraglios of the * men of Turkey and Perſia.

They avoid all Tabour as the greateſt ſlavery. Their only employment is tending their
flocks, hunting, and managing their horſes. If they are angry with a perſon, the
worſt they wiſh him is, that he may Iive in one fixed place, and work like a Ruſſian.

The firſt acknowledged ſovereign of theſe diſmal territories was the famous Zin-
£15 or Jenghis Khan, A. D. 1206. His deſcendants poſſeſſed it till 1582, when

ungls — * to Manchew Tartars, who reign in China. The Eluths became an.
8 8 ſtate about oats and fo remain. | - he DOOR LATE FH,


Tux EMPIRE or CHINA.


. ; © StrUATION AND > ExTenT. Es
Miles. piles 80. Miles.


| Length 1450 2 | - 20? and 42 N. Lat. * | 1
Breadth 1260 8 98˙ and 1232 E. Lon. r
To which ſhould be added Chineſe Tae; 2 0 64400


| T is bounded by the Chineſe Tartary and an amazing ſtone wall, on
BounDarres JI the north ; by the Pacific Ocean, ter divides it ing £ North Ame-
rica, on the eaſt ; by the Chineſe Sea, ſouth; and by Tonquin, and the Tartarian
countries and mountains of Thibet and Ruſſia, on the weſt.

Drv1s10ns.] The great diviſions of this empire, according to the authors of the
Univerſal Hiſtory, are into fifteen provinces (excluſive of that of Lyau-tong, which
is fitnated without the Great Wall, though under the fame dominion) each of which

might, for their largeneſs, fertility, pop ulouſneſs, and e Paſs for ſo many
diſtinct kingdoms. 1


China, excepting to the north, is a plain country and contains no remarkable
mountains.

Rivers, Bars, K.] The chief rivers are the Yamour, and. the e which
are the boundary between Ruſſian and Chineſe Tartary ; the Crocceus,, or Whambo,
or the Yellow -River; the Kiam, or the Blue River, and the Tay. Common water
in China is very indifferent, and is in ſome places boiled to make it fit * uſe. The
chief bays are thoſe of Nankin and Canton.


Canars,]


m
*


1
7
J © 4 -&


Canals.) Theſe are ſufficient to entitle the ancient Chineſe to the character
of being the wiſeſt and moſt induſtrious people in the world. The commodiouſneſs
and length of their canals is incredible. The chief of them are lined with hewn ſtone
on the ſides, and they are ſo. deep that they carry large veſſels, . and ſometimes
they extend above 1000 miles in length. Thoſe veſſels are fitted up for all the
conveniencies of life ; and 'it has been thought by ſome, that in China, the water
contains as many inhabitants as the land. They are furniſhed with ſtone quays,
and ſometimes with bridges of an amazing conſtruction. The navigation is ſlow,
and the veſſels ſometimes drawn by men. About 10,000 boats from 200 tons and
under, are kept at the public expenſe. No precautions are wanting, that could be
formed by art or perſeverance, for the ſafety of the paſſengers, in caſe a canal is croſ-
fed by a rapid river, or expoſed to torrents from the mountains. Theſe canals, and
the variety that is ſeen upon the borders, render China the moſt delightful to the
eye, of any country in the world, as well as fertile, in places that are not ſo by
naturc. Ts 33 | | . | "461 >
S01L. AND PRopuce.| The ſoil is, either by nature or art, fruitful of ever


thing that can miniſter to the neceſſities, conveniencies, or luxuries of life. The


culture of the cotton, and the rice fields, from which the bulk of the inhabitants
are clothed and fed, is ingenious almoſt beyond deſcription. The rare trees, and


aromatic productions, either ornamental or medicinal, that abound in other parts of


the world, are to be found in China 572
The 7allow tree is about the height of a common cherry tree. The fruit it pro-
duces has all the qualities of our tallow, and when manufactured with oil, ſerves
the natives as candles; but they ſmell ſtrong, nor is their light clear. The rea plant,
or ſhrub, is planted in rows, and pruned to prevent its luxuriancy. The culture
of this plant ſeems to be very ſimple; and it is certain that ſome kinds are of a
much higher and delicious flavour than others. The greateſt difference is between
the bohea and the green. The ginſeng is a native of Chineſe Tartary. 5


PopurA Trio AND INHABITANTS. ] Much has been ſaid of the population of China.


It is undoubtedly great. According to Le Compte, the 15 provinces contain 2357
fortified towns, 10, 128,789 families, 58,916,783 men. But it appears from later


and more authentic accounts, that this great empire contains at leaſt two hundred


millions of inhabitants. Notwithſtanding the induſtry of the people, their amazing
population frequently occaſions a dearth. . Parents, who cannot ſupport their fe-


male children, are allowed to caſt them into the river; but they faſten a gourd to
the child, that it may float on the water; and there are often compaſſionate peo-
ple of fortane, who are moved by the cries of the children to ſave them from death.
The Chineſe, in their perſons, are middle fized, their faces broad, their eyes black
and ſmall, their noſes rather ſhort. The Chineſe have particular ideas of beauty.


They pluck up the hairs of the lower part of their faces by the roots with tweezers,


leaving a few ſtraggling ones by way of beard. Their Tartar princes compel them


to cut off the hair of their heads, and, like Mahometans, to wear only a lock on
the crown. Their completion towards the north is fair, towards the ſouth,
ſwarthy, and the fatter a man is, they think him the handſomer. Men of quality


and learning, who are not much expoſed to the ſun, are delicately complectioned,
and they who are bred to letters let the nails of their fingers grow to an enormous
length, to ſhew that they are not employed in manual labour, LEE 157


>


The women have little eyes, plump roſy lips, black hair, regular features , and a
delicate, though florid complection. LA ſmallneſs of their feet is reckoned a prin-
5 41124 e cipal


CHINA. | — 0


+
—— Ae»


> re , Co I OY NEE , e r Ao RP Pe —


*


684 CHINA,
cipal it their beauty, and no ſwathing is omitted, when they are young, o


give them that accompliſhment; ſo that when they grow up, they may be laid to
totter rather than walk.


Max klass.] The parties never fee each other, in China, till the dnn is


eoncluded by the parents, and that is generally when the parties are perfect children.


Fux RRALS. People of note cauſe their coffins to be made, and their tombs to


be built in their life-time. No perſons are buried within the walls of the city.


Lax6vacs.] The Chineſe Ianguage contains only 330 words, all of one f yllable;
but then each. word is pronounced with ſuch various modulations, and re "with a


different meaning, that it becomes more copious than could be eafily imagined, 4


and enables them to expreſs themſelves very well on the common occaſions of lite.
Conrosrrirs.] The artificial curioſities of China are ſtupendous. The great wall

ſeparating China from Tartary, to prevent the mcurſion of the Tartars, is fuppoſed

to extend from 1200 to 1500 miles. It is carried over mountains and vallies, and


reaches from the province of Xenfi to the Kang ſea, between the provinces of Pekin:
and Lenotum. It is in moſt places built of brick and mortar, Which is ſo well


tempered, that though it has ftood for 1800 years, it is but little decayed. It is
terraſſed and caſed with bricks, and is from twenty to twenty-five feet high. It is-
paved wide enough on the top for five or fix horſemen. to travel abreaſt with eaſe. .
The Chineſe are remarkably fond of bells. One at Pekin, weighs 120,000 pounds,,
but its ſound is ſaid to be diſagreeable.
CHIEF Cirigs.] Theſe are Pekin, Nankin, and Canton. Pekin, - the capital of


* whole empire of China, and the ordinary reſidenee of the Emperors, is ſituated:
in a very fertile plain, 20 leagues diſtant from the great wall. It is an oblong


ſquare, and is divided into two cities, ſix leagues in compaſs. The walls and gates
of Pekin are of the ſurpriſing height of fifty cubits, ſo that they hide the whole
city; and are fo broad, that centinels are placed upon them on horſeback; for there
are ſlopes within the city of conſiderable length, by which horſemen may aſcend
the =" "ol Moſt of the Pellet are built in a direct line; the largeſt are about 120 feet


broad, and a league in length. The ſhops, where they ſell filks and china ware,


take up the whole ſtreet, and afford & very agreeable proſpect. Each ſhop< _
per places before his ſhop, on a ſmall kind of pedeſtal, a board about twenty feet


high, painted, -varniſhed, and often gilt, on whieh is written in large characters, the
names of the ſeveral commodities: he ſells. Theſe being placed on each ſide of the


ſtreet, at nearly an equal diftance from each other, have a very pretty n
The city of Pekin is ſaid to contain two millions of inhabitants.

Nankin is ſaid to exceed Pekin, both in extent and population. But if we may 5
judge from the account which M. Bourgeois, miſſionary at Pekin, gives of it, in a
letter of his, dated in 1777, we are to believe that there is nothing remarkable in this


celebrated city, but its famous ſteeple, its vaſt circumference, the barren hills, and
uncultivated tracts of land that are incloſed within its walls, and which make a firan-


ger think that he has left it far behind him, when he is in the midſt of it.

Canton is the greateſt port in China, and the only port that has been much fre
quented by Europeans. Ehe ci He, is about five miles in circumference, with
vor pleaſant walks ks around it. he city is entered by feyen 1 iron gates, and within


* There i is * to hope that: the oublic will ſoon be {wired with a 8 account of the city of
Pekin, &c. from the able pens of Lord Macartney and Sir ew 9 art, who are 1 returned
to England from their embaſly AI | * wal

1


fide of cath, there is a  guard-houſe. The ſtreets of Ca anton are very ſtraight, but
generally narrow, and paved with flag ſtones; they are ſo crowded, that it is diffi-
culty to walk in them; yet a woman of faſhion is ſeldom to be. ſeen, unleſs b

chance, when coming out of their chairs. There are great nunibers of market-places
for fiſh, fleſh, poultry, vegetables, and all kinds of proviſions, which are fold very
cheap. They have all ſuch a regard to privacy, that no windows are made towards
the ſtreets, but in ſhops and places of public buſineſs; nor do any of their windows
ook towards thoſe of their neithbolues The ſhops of thoſe that deal in filk, are very


neat, make a fine ſhow, and ate all in one part of the city; for tradeſmen, or dealers


in one kind of goods herd together in the ſame ſtreet. It 1s computed that there are


in this city, and its ſuburbs, 1 en People ; ank there are often 000 trading veſſels-
by ng before the city. =»


ANUPACTURES. | China is fo happily ſituated, and produces ſuch a variety of
materials for manufactures, that it may be ſaid to be-the native land of induſtry; and


which 18 exerciſed with vaſt art and neatneſs. The manufacture of that earthen ware,


generally known by the name of China, was long a ſecret in Europe, and brought


immenſe ſums to that country. The ancients, knew and eſteemed it highly under
the name of porcelain, but it was of a much better fabric than the modern. The
Chineſe ſilks are generally plain and flowered gauzes, and they are ſaid to have been
originally fabricated in that country, where the art of rearing filk worms was firſt


diſeovered. They manufacture filks likewiſe of a more durable kind; and their


cotton, and otlier cloths; are famous for furniſhing a light warm wear.


Their trade is open to Americans, and to all the European nations, with whom


they deal for ready money; for ſuch is tlie pride and avarice of the e that
they think no manufactures equal to their M] “õ _


GovernMent. | The original plan of the Ciances Sovermeindt was patri ber


almoſt in the ſtricteſt ſenſe of the word. Duty and obedience to the father of each


family, was recommended and enforced in the moſt rigorous manner; but, at the
ſame time, the Emperor was conſidered as the father of the whole. His mandarins,


or great officers of ſtate, were looked upon as his ſubſtitutes; and the degrees of


ſubmiſſion which were due from the inferior ranks to the ſuperior, were ſettled and


obſerved with the moſt ſcrupulous preciſion. This ſimple claim of obedience re-
quired great addreſs and knowledge of human nature to render it effectual; and


appear to have been poſſeſſed of
wonderful abilities. They enveloped their dictates in a number of myſtical appear-


the Chineſe legiflators, Confucius particularly,


ances, ſo as to ſtrike the people with awe and veneration. The mandarins had


modes of ſpeaking and writing different from thoſe of other ſubjects, and the people
were taught to believe that their princes partook of divinity, ſo that they were feldom


feen, and more ſeldom approached. But fince the conqueſt of China by the Tar-


tars, about 160 R ago, the Pater form of government has been changed for


the moatfclfent-


The preſent emperor, who n fa a D family, 18 s ſtyled cc Holy Son
of Heaven, Sole Governor of the Earth, Great Father of his People.


Rrriero x.] This article is nearly connected with the preceding. Though the


ancient Chineſe worſhipped idols, yet their Philoſophers and legiſlators had juſter
ſentiments of the Deity, and indulged the people in the worſhip of ſenſible objects,


only to make them more ſubmiffive to government. Confucius, and the Chineſe
legrflators! introduced a moſt excellent fyſtem of morals among the people, and.


endeavdured to e want of juſt dend of al future ſtate, by preſcribing to them
the


C HIN A. 3 | 1


'
7
2
:
:
*
;
1
f 1
.
1
*
\
=
+
„
7
+
I
3
13
|


obs IN DOS TAN, ke.


5 with the Chriſtian religion.


ject, theſe extravagant pretenſions to antiquity appear to be wholly unſupported.


thentic umb and full of contradictions.


leſt the ſettlements which they had under the Ruffian government on the banks of the


the worſhip of inferior deities. | Their morality approximated to that of Chriſtianity,
but as we e little of their religion, only through the Jeſuits, ave cannot adop
for truth, the numerous inſtances which — tell us of the conformity of the Chineſe


Hisroxv.] The Chineſe pretend, as a nation, to an \ antiquity beyond. all meaſure
of credibility ; and their annals have been carried beyond the period to which the
ſcripture chronology aſſigns the creation of the world. Poan Kou is ſaid by them to
have been the firſt man, and the interval of time betwixt him and the death of the
celebrated Confucius, which was in the year before Chriſt, 479, has been reckoned
from 276, ooo to 96, 961, 740 years. But upon an accurate inveſtigation of this ſub-


All hiſtorical relations of events prior to the reign of Yao, who lived 2057 years
before Chriſt, are entirely fabulous, compoſed in modern times, unſupported 15 au-


The origin of the Chineſe empire cannot be Placed bigher than two or three gene-
rations before Yao.


In the year 1771, all the Tartars which oonyicled. the nation of the Togu


Wolga, and the Iaick, at a ſmall diſtance from the Caſpian ſea, and in a vaſt body of


o, oo0 families, they paſſed through the country of the Haſacks. After a march of
3 months, in which they ſurmounted innumerable difficulties and dangers, they
arrived in the plains that lie on the frontier of Carapen, not far. from the banks of the


river Ily, and offered themſelves as ſubjects to Kien-long, Emperor of China, who


was then in the 36th year of his reign. He received them graciouſly, furniſhed them


with proviſions, clothes, and money, and allotted to each family a portion of land for


agriculture and paſturage. The year following there was a ſecond emigration of about
30, ooo other Tartar families, who alſo quitted the ſettlements they enjoyed under the


Ruſſian government, and ſubmitted to the Chineſe ſcepter. The Emperor cauſed the


— of the emigrations to be WAGONS on he er in four 1 ede b


— —


1


* „


INDOSTAN, HINDOOSTAN, or bie on this fide the


Gangs. |


- SrTvATION and} His fine country, one e of the —_ labs in the was hs its


BobxDARIES antiquity, population, and opulence, is fituated between 66 and |
92* 3 of eaſtern longitude, and between the 8th and g6th degrees of northern lati-


| tude, and is conſequently, partly 3 in the torrid, and partly in the northern tem perate


zone.
It is waſhed on the ſouth-weſt, by that part = the Indian Ocean, called the Arabian
Sea; on the ſouth-caſt, by another large inlet of the ſame ocean, called the Bay of


| Bengal; and bounded on all other fides by . Independent Nr Thibet, and


India beyond the Ganges.
- The principal. diviſions of this country, as they ſtood in 1782, are as follow, viz.
The Britiſh poſſeſſions; States in alliance with Britain; Tippoo Saib's territories ; Mah-


calls. e nn and the terxitories of the Subah % the Decan. 1
R1-


IND O S 7 AN, . 3


Barrisk Pessxssfoxs. “] The Britiſh poſſeſſions contain about 1 50,000 ſquare Bri-
fiſh miles (which is about 18,000 more than is contained in Great Britain and
Ireland) and about 10 millions of inhabitants, They conſiſt of three diſtinct go-
vernments, viz, _ | |

Government of Calcutta or Bengal---On the Ganges.

Government of Madraſs---On the coaſt of Coromandel.

Government of Bombay---On the gulf of Cambay.

Alk AND SEAsONs.| The winds in this climate generally blow for ſix months frous
the ſouth, and fix from the north. April, May,. and the beginning of June, are ex-
ceſſively hot, but refreſhed by ſea breezes; and in ſome dry ſeaſons, the hurricanes,
which tear up the fands, and let them fall in dry ſhowers, are exceſſively diſagreeable.

RIVvERS.] Of the rivers of Indoſtan three far exceed the reſt in magnitude and
utility; the Indus, the Ganges, and the Burrampooter. OE:

The Ganges is one of the fineſt rivers in the world. It is revered by the Hindoos
as a deity that is to waſh away all their ſtains. The entire courſe of the Ganges is
2100 mules.

 PoPULATION,. IxHABTTANTS, RELIG10N, &c. .j The Mahomdtans, who are: Weck
Moors, of Indoſtan, are computed to be about ten millions, and the Indians about
100 millions. :

The original inhabitants 5 India are cle Goss or, as 8 call chem,
 Hindoos, and the country Hindooſtan. They pretend that Brumma, who was their
Tegiſlator both in politics and religion, was inferior only to- God, and that he exiſted
many thouſand: years before our account of the creation.
The foundation of Brumma's doctrine confiſted in the belief of a Supreme Rein g.
| who created a regular gradation of beings, ſome ſuperior and ſome inferior to man;
in the immortality of the ſoul, and a future ſtate of rewards and puniſhments, which

is to conſiſt of a tranſmigration into different bodies, ITY to the lives thay: have
led in their pre-exiſtent ſtate. _

The Hindoos have from time l been divided into four great tribes. The
firſt and moſt noble tribe are the Bramins, who alone can officiate in the prieſthood,
like the Jewiſh tribe of Levi. The ſecond in order is the Sittri tribe, who, according
to their original inſtitution, ought to be all military men. The third is the tribe of
Beiſe, who are chiefly merchants, bankers, and banias or ſhopkeepers. The fourth
tribe is that of Sudder, who ought to be menial ſeryants ; and they are ele of

raiſing themſelves to any ſuperior rank.

 Befides this diviſion into tribes, the Gentoo are alſo ſubdivided into cafe. or nel
Jer claſſes and tribes ; and it has been computed that there are ei en of theſe
caſts.

The cuſtom of women burnin g eee upon the death wy their Fuſbande ſtill
continues to be practiſed e ſome of high caſt and condition, though much leſs
frequently than formerly.

"The Gentoos are as ada: of the cultivation” of their lands, and their public
wilthh and conveniences, as the Chineſe ;. and remarkably honeſt and humane: There
is ſearcly an inſtance of a robbery in all Fa though the diamond merchants
travel without defenſive Weapons. vitab al 10 .


* For. the. Confli tation, Government, and Fe 71 FA Adotatayes of the Raf Baer to Great TY we muſt
beg leave to refer our Readers to a new Work, intituled, & Sketch of the late Arrangements, and a Review
2 Hag Reſources of Bengal; by Thomas Law, 22. late a . of the C n of Revenue in Fort
liam, Printed for J. Stockdale. 1792. The;
- er


bs IN DOS TAN, Ce.
the worſhip of inferior deities. Their morality approximated to that of Chriſtianity;
but as we know little of their religion, only through the Jeſuits, we cannot adopt
for truth, the numerous inſtances which FURY tell us of 58 conformity of the Chineſe
with the Chriſtian religion.
_ HisTory.} The Chineſe vretind; as a nation, to an antiquity beyond all meaſure
of credibility; and their annals have been carried beyond the period to Which the

ſeoeripture chronology affigns the creation of the world. Poan Kou is ſaid by them to
have been the firſt man, and the interval of time betwixt him and the death of the
celebrated Confucius, which was in the year before Chriſt, 479, has been reckoned
from 276, ooo to 96,961,740 years. But upon an accurate inveſtigation of this ſub-

zect, theſe extravagant pretenſions to antiquity appear to be wholly unſupported.
All hiftorical relations of events prior to the reign of Yao, who lived 2057 years
before Chriſt, are entirely fabulous, compoſed in modern times, qr omg ye. au-
thentic records, and full of contradictions. 0

The origin of the Chineſe empire cannot be placed higher than two or three gene-

rations before Yao.
In the year 1771, all the Tartars which compoſed. the nation of: the Tongue,
left the ſcttlements which they had under the Ruſſian government on the banks of the
Wolga, and the Iaick, at a ſmall diſtance from the Caſpian ſea, and in a vaſt body of
| 30,000 families, they paſſed through the country of the Haſacks. After a march of
8 months, in which they ſurmounted innumerable difficulties and dangers, they


arrived in the plains that lie on the frontier of Carapen, not far from the banks of the


river Ily, and offered themſelves as ſubjects to Kien-long, Emperor of China, who
was then in the 36th year of his reign. He received them graciouſly,” furniſhed them
with proviſions, clothes, and money, and allotted to each family a portion of land for
agriculture and paſturage. The year following there was a ſecond emigration'of about
30, ooo other Tartar families, who alſo quitted the ſettlements they enjoyed under the
Ruſſian government, and ſubmitted to the Chineſe ſcepter. The Emperor cauſed the
* of the n to be N upon ge in none 1 8 b 22


*


0 FINDOOSTAN, or In DIA on | this fide the
8 Saxens. |


SITUATION anp His fine 1 one of the moſt 1 in the world for its
|  BounpaktEs - antiquity, population, and opulence, is ſituated between 66? and
92? 3 of eaſtern longitude, and between the 8th.and g6th degrees of northern lati-
tude, and 1s conſequently, partly 3 in the torrid, and partly 4 in the northern temperate
ZONE.
It is waſhedon the ſouth-weſt, by that part = the Indian Ocean, called the Arabian
Sea; on the ſouth-caſt, by another large inlet of the ſame. ocean, called the Bay of
Bengal; and bounded on all other fides by Perſia, Independent TOA; Thibet, and
India beyond the Ganges.
The principal diviſions of this country, as they ſtood in 1782, are as follow, viz.
The Britiſh poſſeſſions; States in alliance with Britain; Tippoo Saib's territories ; Mah-


ratta fates — their tributaries; and the territories of the Subah of the Decan. 1
Al-


IN DOS TAN, Kc. „„


Barr1sH Pessxsstoxs * ] The Britiſh poſſeſſions contain about 1 50,000 ſquare Bri-
fiſh miles (which is about 18,000 more than is contained in Great Britain and
Ireland) and about 10 millions of inhabitants. They conſiſt of three diſtinct go-
vernments, viz. |

Government of Calcutta or Bengal---On the Ganges.

Government of Madraſs---On the coaſt of Coromandel.

Government of Bombay---On the gulf of Cambay.

Alx AND SEASONS.|] The winds in this climate generally blow for ſix months from
the ſouth, and ſix from the north. April, May, and the beginning of June, are ex-
ceſſively hot, but refreſhed by ſea breezes; and in ſome dry ſeaſons, the hurricanes,
which tear up the fands, and let them fall in dry ſhowers, are exceſſively diſagreeable.

Rrvgrs.] Of the rivers of Indoſtan three far exceed the reſt in magnitude and


utility; ; the Indus, the Ganges, and the Burrampooter.


The Ganges is one of the fineſt rivers in the world. It is revered by the Hindoos


as a deity that is to waſh away all their ſtains. The entire courſe of the — 18


2100 miles.
PoPULATION, INHABITANTS, 8 &c.] The Ae who are called


5 Moors, of Indoſtan, are computed to be about ben millions, and the Indians about
100 millions.


The original inhabitünti of India are e . or, as . call 3


Hindoos, and the country Hindooſtan. They pretend that Brumma, who was their
 Tegiſlator both in politics and religion, was inferior only to God, and that he exiſted
many thouſand years before our account of the creation.


The foundation of Brumma's doctrine conſiſted in the belief af a Supreme Bein g.


who created a regular gradation of beings, ſome ſuperior and ſome inferior to man;


in the immortality of the ſoul, and a future ſtate of rewards and puniſhments, which


is to conſiſt of a tranſmigration into different bodies, according to the lives they have
| led in their pre- exiſtent ſtate.


The Hindoos have from time immemorial been divided into four great tribes... The
firſt and moſt noble tribe are the Bramins, who alone can officiate in the prieſthood,
like the Jewiſh tribe of Levi. The ſecond in order is the Sittri tribe, who, according
to their original inſtitution, ought to be all military men. The third. is the tribe of


| Beiſe, who are chiefly merchants, bankers, and banias or ſhopkcepers. The fourth
tribe is that of Sudder, who ought to be menial ſervants; ; and they, are incapable of


raifing themſelves to any ſuperior rank.
Beſides this diviſion into tribes, the Gentoos : are alſo fibdivided into caſts, or ang


ler claſſes and tribes; and it has deen computed that there are R of theſe


caſts.
| The cuſtom of women burning themſelves upon the death of their huſbands fill
continues to be practiſed among ſome of high caſt and condition, though much leſs
frequently than formerly:
"The Gentoos are as careful * the anden of their lands, ind their public
works and conveniencies, as the Chineſe; and remarkably honeſt and humane: There


is ſcarcly an inſtance of a robbery ir in all Indoſtan, though the diamond merchants
travel without defenſive weapons. is |


* For the Conflitation, Government, end the riſa Abend of the Eaft Indies to Great Brita, we PEER
beg leave to refer our Readers to a-riew Work, intituled, 4 Sketch of the late Arrangements, and a Review
ia rifing Reſources of Bengal; 'by Thomas Law, E. late a Member of the Connent of Revenue in Fort


lian, —— for J. Steckdate 1792.
= Their


tbe Empire of Hindooftan to: Mow preſent. Day: aud the
By Captain Janaſ bas datt. * vals. 400 · „ Fe . J


688 Tux PEN INS LtA, Ke.


Their perſons are ſtraight and olegant, their limbs finely 1 propentioned, their fingers


long and tapering, their countenances open and pleafant, —. their features exhibit
the moſt delicate lines of beauty in the females; and in the males, a kind of ' manly


ſoftneſs. Their walk and gait, as well as their whole en is in the higheſt
degree graceful.


The Gentoos marry early, the 3 ebe fourteen, and the female at ten or ele-


ven years of age. A man is in the decline of hte at thirty, and the beauty of the


women is on the decay at eighteen: at twenty-five they have all the marks of old
age. We are not therefore to wonder at their being, ſoon ſtrangers to all perſonal ex-


ertion and vigour. of mind: and whatever may be the. cauſe, a recent traveller amon
them obſerves, it is certain, that death is regarded with lets horror in India, than in


any other country in the world. The origin and the end of all things, ſay the philo-

ſophers of India of the preſent times, is a vacuum. A ſtate of repoſe is the ſtate of
greateſt Ction: and this is the ſtate after which a wiſe man aſpires. It is better,
fay the Hindoos, to fit than to walk, and to — to wake; but death is beſt
of all. ---

Fort St. George, better known by the name of Madrafs, is the capital of the
Engliſh Eaſt India Company's 3 in that part of the Eaſt Indies, and 3 is diſtant
eaſtward from London, about 4800 miles.

Near Bombay are ſeveral. iſlands, one of which, called Elephanta, contains the
moſt inexplicable antiquity perhaps in the world. A figure of an elephant, of the
natural fize, cut coarſely in ſtone, preſents itfelf on the landing place, near the bot-
tom of a mountain. An eaſy. ſlope then leads to a ſtupendous temple, hewn out of
the ſolid rock, 80 or 90 feet long, and 40 broad. The roof, which is cut flat, is fup-
ported by regular rows of pillars, Moat: 10 feet high, with capitals, reſembling wh
cuſhions, as as if prefſed by the weight of the incumbent mountain. At the farther end
are three gigantic figures. Beſides the temple, are various images, and groups on
each hand, cut in the ſtone: one of the latter bearing a rude reſemblance of the
judgment of Solomon; alſo a colonnade, with a door of regular N but
the — hears no manner of reſemblance to "I the n — 7


— ant
- "PP - :


The PENINSULA of INDIA N the Gaxors, | called the


* 4 o
$7 ; F*%
A 4 |


PARTHAR PENINSULA. 1


Square Miles.


1 Miles. | 4
neth 2000, 8 EN: at.
Breadth . between wel & 10% E. Long. 4e,


: HIS peninſula is bounded by Thibet and China, en the north; by
BOUNDARIES. ] T Ching and the Chineſe ſea; on the caſt; by the ſame; ſea and the


Straits of More, on the ſouth-; and oy the 55 a Bengal and . Hither India, =


* Ks a very interefiive OED: of India T4 one of its W re) Feriſhta's Nb of Dellen from the
Hit Mahummedan Conguefts: with a Continuation from other native Writers, of the Events in that Part of India,


to the Reduction of its laſt Monarchs. by the Emperor. n urungzebe : alſo, the Reigns of bis ſucceſſors in
: ah Fer the Ari 7 e


* . * 490 433 $34 & SS: 4-@+IS 'Þ»


F


tion than any European oak. Teck ſhips, 40 years old, are no uncommon obj ects in
the Indian ſeas. This peninſula abounds likewiſe in filks, elephants, and tes


The natives drive a great trade in gold, diamonds, rubies, topazes, amethyſts, and


a Tartarian prince, who died A. D. 1226. In 1399, Timur Bek, by conqueſt, be-
came Great Mogul. The dynaſty continued in his family till the conqueſt of Tamer- | N
lane in the 15th century, whoſe deſcendants. have poſſeſſed the throne from that time; 1
but Kouli Khan, the famous Sophi of Perſia, conſiderably diminiſhed the power of | 9
the Moguls, carried away immenſe treaſures from Delhi; and ſince that event many 2


n i 4 Mops Perſia is bounded by the mountains of Ararat, or r Dag-


: Oxus, which divides it from Uſbec Tartary, on the north-eaſt ; by India, on the caſt 3


any country that has more mountains and fewer rivers. The productions of Perſia _
are fimilar to thoſe of India.


and civil — Their great foible ſeems to be oſtentation in their u


2 «dhe weſt. The bs ara between Bengal and China is now called the province of 4

The name of India is taken gen the river Indus, hach of all others, was bet | |
known to the Perſians. The whole of this peninſula was unknown to the — =
and is partly ſo to the moderns.

Rivers.] The chief are Sanpoo or Burrumpooter, Domea, Mecon, Menan, and
Ava, or the great river Nou Kian.

Bars, Ke The bays of Bengal are Siam and Cochin China. The ſtraits of
Malacea and Sincapora.

SoiL.] The foil of this peninfiila | 18 ; Guitfal 4 in general, and produces: all the deli-
cious fruits that are found in other countries contiguous to the Ganges, as well as


roots and vegetables; and in Ava, a quantity of ſaltpetre, and the beſt teek timber,
or Indian oak, which, for ſhip building in warm climates, is of much longer dura-


peds, both domeſtic and wild, that are common in the ſouthern kingdoms of Afia.


other precious ſtones. Tonquin produces little or no corn or wine, but is the moſt
healthful country of all the peninſula. .


His rox Y.] The firſt conqueror of the whole of this country Was Jenghis Khan, '


of the YN abs and Nabobs have made themſelves independent.


PR R 8 1 X.
Srͤrrvariom AND EXTENT. |
Miles. : 89. Miles.


Length 1390 44 and 70⁰ E. Longitude,
Breadth 1 w_ between | L2 59 and 44? N. Latitude. J 800,000


hiſtan, which divide it from Circaſſian Tartary, on the north-
weſt; by the Caſpian Sea, which divides it from Ruſſia, on the north; by the river


and by the Indian Ocean, and the gulfs of Perſia and Ormus, on the ſouth; and by
Arabia and Turkey, on the weſt.
The chief city and reſidence of the ſovereign is Ifpahan, a fins ſpacious city. 5
The north and eaſt parts of Perſia are mountainous and cold; the provinces to the
ſouth-eaſt are ſandy and deſert: thoſe on the ſouth and weſt are very fertile. The air
in the ſouth is extremely hot in ſummer, and very unwholeſome. There is ſcarcely


The Perſtans, are a brave, polite, an and ingenious people ; honeſt in their dealings,
40 The


8 A' RN ART A


The Perſians, in general, are ſtrict followers of Mahomet's doctrine, but differ
confiderably from the Turks. There are many Chriſtians 1 in 1 and a lect Who
worſhip fire, the followers of Zoroaſter.


Perſia is governed by an abſolute monarch, called. Shaw: or kin 85 and frequently
Sophi. The crown is hereditary, but females are excluded. |

'The Perfian empire was founded by Cyrus, after his conqueſt of Media, 5 36 years
before Chriſt. It continued till it was overthrown by Alexander the Great 33 1 before
Chriſt. A new empire, ſtiled the Parthian, was formed by the Perſians under Ar-
baces, 250 years before Chriſt; but in A. D. 229, Artaxerxes reſtored it to its ancient
title; and in 651, the Saracens put an end to that empire. From this time Perſia was.
a prey to the Tartars, and a province of Indoſtan, till Thomas Keuli Khan, once
more raiſed it to a powerful . He was WINE] in 1147.


SITUATION Ax D ExrEN T.
Miles. Sq. Miles.


Length 1430 3 R and 60* E. Lon.
Breadth 36 between {72s and zo N. Lat. } 700,000


OUNDED by Turkey on the north; by the Gulfs of Perks: or
Bovxnanis,) B Baſſora, and Ormus, which ſeparate it from Perha, on the eaſt;


by the Indian Ocean, ſouth; and the Red. Sea, which divides it en Africa, on the
weſt. |


Diviſions. Chief Towns. |
1. Arabia Petræa, north-weſt. Sen E. Lon. 3927 N. Lat. 295 500


2. 2 Deſerta, 1 in the mid- Mecca, rn. 435 E 11 Or


3. Arabia Felix, fouth-eadi; Mocha, E. Lon: 44 4“. N. Lat. 1345.


It is remarkable that this country has always ae ts ancient name. The word:
Arab, it is generally ſaid, ſignifies a robber, or freebooter. The word Saracen, by
which one tribe is called, is {aid to fignify both a thief and an inhabitant of the deſert.
Theſe names juſtly belong to the Arabians, for they ſeldom let any merchandize paſs |
through the country without extorting nne from the owners, if they do not rob
them.

We are told, that ſo late as the year 17 50, a body of 50,000 Avibians: attacked a
caravan of merchants and pilgrims returning from 8 killed about 60,000 per-
ſons, and plundered it of every thing valuable, though eſcorted by a Turkith army.

As a confiderable part of this country lies under the Torrid Zone, the air is exceſ-
fively dry and hot, and the country is ſubject to hot poiſonous winds, | which often

prove fatal, eſpecially to ſtrangers. The ſoil, in ſome parts, is nothing more than
immenſe lands, which, when agitated by the winds, roll like the troubled ocean, and
ſometimes form mountains, by which whole caravans have been buried or loſt. In
theſe deſerts, the caravans, Having no tracks, are guided, as at ſea, by a compaſs, or
by the ſtars; for they travel chiefly in the night. Here, ſays Dr. Shaw, are no paſ-
tures clothed with flocks, nor vallies ſtanding thick with corn; here are no. vineyards

or oliveyards; but the whole is a lonefome, deſolate Wilderness no otherwiſe diverſi-
fied than by plains covered with ſand, and mountains that are made up, of naked


rocks


ARABIA | „„


tocks and precipices. Neither is this country ever, unleſs ſometimes at the equinoxes,


refreſhed with rain ; and the intenſeneſs of the cold in the night is almoſt equal to
that of the heat in the day-time. But the ſouthern part of Arabia, deſervedly called
the Happy, is bleſſed with an excellent foil, and, in general, is very fertile. There


the cultivated lands, which are chiefly about the towns near the ſea coaſt, produce


balm of Gilead, manna, myrrh, caſſia, aloes, frankincenſe, ſpikenard, and other va-


tuable gums; cinnamon, pepper, cardamum, oranges, lemons, pomegranates, figs,
and other fruits ; ; honey and wax in plenty, with a ſmall quantity of corn and wine.
This country is famous for its coffee and its dates.


The moſt uſeful animals in Arabia are camels and dromedaries; they are amazingly |


fitted by Providence for travelling the dry and parched deſerts of this country; for
they are ſo formed, that they can throw up the liquor from their ſtomach into their throat,
by which means they can travel fix or eight days without water. The camels uſually


carry 8oolh. weight upon their backs, which is not taken off during the whole jour
ney, for they naturally kneel down to reſt, and in due time riſe with their load. The
dromedary 1 is a ſmaller animal, nearly reſembling a camel, that will travel many miles


a day. It is an obſervation among the Arabs, that wherever there are trees, the
water is not far off; and when they draw near a pool, their camels will ſmell it at a
- diſtance, and ſet up their great trot till they come to it.


In the Temple of Mecca, or ſuſpended on its walls and gates, are ſeven Arabian


poems, called Moalacat, which have been lately tranſlated into. Engliſh by Sir Wil-
_ ham Jones: the following ſtanzas of one of the poems are tranſcribed, as they ſerve


to gratify the curioſity, and alſo diſplay a HE and TAS: view of the Arabian


cuſtoms and modes of living:


I. * Deſolate are the manſions of the fair, the aations 1 in Minia, Were the WY


and thoſe where they fixed their abodes ! Wild are e the hills of Goul, and deſerted
is the ſummit of Rijaam.


2. The canabs of Rayann are deſtroyed ; the remains of them are laid bare, and


ſmoothed by the floods, like characters engraved on the ſolid rocks.

3: Dear ruins! Many a year has been cloſed, many a month, holy and unhallowed,
has elapſed fince I exchanged tender vows with the fair inhabitants.

4. The rainy conſtellations of ſpring have made their hills green and luxuriant : the
drops from the thunder-clouds have drenched them W ith. Pr ofuſe as well as gentle
ſhowers.

5. Showers from every nightly cloud, from every cloud veiling the e at day-

break, and from every evening cloud, reſponſive with hoarſe murmurs.

©, Here the wild eringo plants raiſe their heads ; here the antelopes bring forth their

poung by the ſides of the valley ; and here the oftriches drop their eggs.

7. The large-eyed wild cows lie ſuckling their young a fe days old; their young,
who will ſoon become an herd on the plain.

8. The torrents have cleared the rubbiſh, and diſcloſed the traces o ſhabitations, as
the reeds of a writer reſtore effaced letters in a book. _


9. Or as the black duſt, {prinkled over- the varied marks on a fair hand, brings to


view, with a brighter tint, the blue ſtains of woad.


10. I ſtood aſking news of the ruins concerning their lovely inhabitants; but what


avail my queſtions to dreary rocks, WhO anſwer them only by their echo?


11. In the plains, which now are naked, a populous city once ſtood; but they de-


camped at early dawn, and nothing of them remains but the canals which encir-
cled their tents, and the Thumaam plants, with which they were repaired.


4U2 _ | 12. How


*
2 - 4


692 431K


many chapels and cells poſſeſſed by the Greek and Latin monks, who, like the reli-


recorded in the ſcripture, happened.


 Mahomet fled when he was driven out of Mecca, and the place where he was buried,
is a ſtately moſque ſupported by 400 pillars, and furniſhed with 8 ſilver lamps,
which are continually burning. It is called Mo Holy by the Tur


ring the various conqueſts of the Greeks, Nun. and Tartars, a convincing proot 5
of the divine origin of this prediction.


their ancient faith, and became Mahometans. In a word, the contagion ſpread over


12. How were thy tender affections. raiſed, when the damſels of the tribe departed;
when they hid themſelves in. carriages of cotton, like antelopes 1 in their . and
the tents, as they were ſtruck, gave a piereing ſound !

13. They were concealed in vehicles, whoſe ſides were well covered with aumings
and carpets, with fine ſpun curtains, and pictured, veils.

14. A company of maidens were ſeated in them, with black eyes and graceful mo-
tions, like the wild heifers of Tudah, or the roes of. Wegera, tenderly gazing on
their young.

15. They ha ſtened their camels, till the ſultry vapour gradually ſtole them from thy
acht; and they ſeemed to paſs through a vale, wild * tamariſks, and rough with |
large ſtones, like the valley of Beiſba.


What is called the Deſert of Sinai, is a beautiful plain near -nine miles long, and
above three in breadth; it lies open to the north-eaſt, but to the ſouthward is cloſed
by ſome of the lower eminences of Mount- Sinai ; and other parts of that mountain
make ſuch encroachments upon the plain as to divide it into two, each fo capacious as
to be ſufficient to receive the whole camp of the Ifraelites.

From Mount Sinat may be feen Mount Horeb, where Moſes kept the flocks of Je-
thro, his father-in-law, when he ſaw the burning buſh. On thoſe mountains are


gious at Jeruſalem, pretend to ſhew the very ſpot where every miracle or tranſaction 5


At Mecca, the capital of all Arabia, and the birth place of Mahomet, is a moſque ſo
glorious, that it is generally counted the moſt magnificent of any temple 3 in the Turkiſh
dominions. The number of Pilgrims, who yearly viſit this place, is almoſt incredible,


every muſſulman being obliged, by his religion, to come hither once in his life-time,
or ſend a deputy. At Medina, about 50 miles from the Red Sea, the city to which


s, becauſe in it
15 placed the coffin of their prophet Mahomet, Sd with cloth of gold, under a
canopy of ſilver tiſſue. Hither the Pil gras reſort, as to Mecca, but not in ſuch
numbers.

The Arabs are deſcended from Iſhmael, of hob: poſterity it was foretold, that
they ſhall be invincible, have their hands againſt every man, and every man's hands
againſt theirs.” They are at preſent, and have remained from the remoteſt ages, du-


The famous. Mahomcet was born in the year 569, at Mecca. From his fli ght to
Medina, which happened in the 622d year KR Chit the 54th year of Mahomet's s age,
and the tenth of his miniſtry, his followers, the Mahometans, compute their time,
and the æra is called in Arabic, Hegira, the Flight.” |

Mahomet, by the aſſiſtance of the inhabitants of Medina, and of others, whom his
addreſs daily attached to him, brought over all his countrymen to a belief, or at leaſt.
to an acquieſcence in his doctrines. The ſpeedy propagation of his ſyftem among
the Arabians, was a new argument in its behalf among the inhabitants of Egypt, and
the Eaſt, who were previouſly diſpoſed to it. Arians, Jews, and Gentiles all forſook.


Arabia, Syria, Egypt, and Perſia ; and Mahomet, front a deceitful _ became
the moſt powerlul monarch in his time. He was proclaimed king at — in the


4 as year


AS IAT Ie IS LES. --


year 627, and after ſubduing part of Arabia and Syria, he died in 632, leaving two
branches of his race, both eſteemed divine among their ſubjects.

See The Hiſtory of the Turkiſh or Ottoman empire, from its foundation in
1300, to the peace of Belgrade, in 1740; to which is prefixed an Hiſtorical Diſ-
courſe on Mahomet and his ſucceſſors;“ tranſlated from the French of Mignot, by A.


Hawkins, Eſq, publiſhed in 1787, by Stockdale, London.


ASIATIC ISLES.
HE Japan Iflands, forming an empire, governed by a moſt deſpotic king, lie
about 150 miles eaſt of China. The ſoil and productions of theſe iflands are
much the ſame as thoſe of China. The Japaneſe are the groſſeſt idolators, and irre-
concileable to Chriſtianity, They are of a yellow complection, narrow eyes, ſhort”
noſes, black hair. A ſameneſs of dreſs prevails through the whole empire, from the
emperor to the peaſant. The firſt compliment offered to a ſtranger in their houſes,
is a dith of tea, and a pipe of tobacco. Obedience to parents, and reſpect to ſupe-
riors, characterize the nation. Their penal laws are very ſevere, but puniſhment is
ſeldom inflicted. The inhabitants have made great progreſs in commerce and agri-
culture. „„ e 3 TY
Formoſa, is a fine iſland eaſt of China, abounding in all the neceſſaries of life.
The Philippines, 1100 in number, lying 200 miles ſouth-eaſt of China, belonging
to Spain, are fruitful in all the neceſſaries of life, and beautiful to the eye. They
are, however, ſubject to earthquakes, thunder, and lightning, venemous beaſts, and
noxious herbs, whoſe poiſon kills inſtantaneouſly. They are ſubject to the Spaniſh
government. The Sultan of Mindanao is a Mahometan. Cs 8
Borneo, 800 miles long, and 700 broad, next to New Holland, is thought to be
the largeſt iſtand in the world. It lies on both ſides of the equator, and is famous


ſor being the native country of the Ouran Outang, which, of all irrational animals,


reſembles a man the moſt. |

Sumatra, weſt of Borneo, produces ſo much gold, that it was thought to be the
Ophir mentioned in the Scriptures. But Mr. Marſden, in his late hiſtory of this
land, thinks it was unknown to the ancients; and Mr. Bruce has pretty clearly
ſhewn that the Ophir mentioned in the Scriptures is in Africa. 5

Ceylon belongs to the Dutch, and is ſaid to be by nature, the richeſt and fineſt
iſland in the world. The natives call it, with ſome ſhew of reaſon, the terreſtrial
| paradiſe. They are a ſober, inoffenſive people; but idolaters. This iſland is noted


for the cinnamon tree.


Java principally belongs to the Dutch, who have here erected a kind of commer-
cial monarchy, the capital of which is Batavia, a noble and populous city, lying in
the latitude of fix degrees ſouth, at the mouth of the river Jucata, and furniſhed with
one of the fineſt harbours in the world. The Chineſe, reſiding in this iſland, are
computed at 100,000 ; about 30,000 of that nation were barbarouſly maſſacred,


without the ſmalleſt offence ever proved upon them, in 1740.


AFRICA.


* * — n * N : * 5 ”


"CIR


& TS IEA


FRICA, the fourth grand diviſion of the globe, bears ſome - reſemblance to the


form of a pyramid, the baſe being the northern part of it, which runs along


the ſhores of the Mediterranean, and the point or top of the pyramid, the Cape of
Good Hope. Africa is a peninſula of a prodigious extent, joined to Aſia only by a
neck of land, about 60 miles over, between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean,


uſually called the Iſthmus-of*Suez, and its utmoſt length from north to ſouth is 4300
miles; and the broadeſt part is 3 500 miles from eaſt to weſt. It is bounded on the
north by the Mediterranean ſea, which ſeparates it from Europe; on the eaſt, by the
Iſthmus of Suez, the Red Sea, and the Indian Ocean, which divide it from Afia ;
on the ſouth, by the Southern Ocean ; and on the weſt, by the great Atlantic Ocean,


which ſeparates 1t from America.


The moſt conſiderable rivers in Africa are, the Niger, which falls into the Atlantic
or Weſtern Ocean, after a courſe of 2800 miles. It increaſes and decreaſes as the
Nile fertilizes the country, and has grains of gold in many parts of it. The Gambia
and Senegal are only branches of this river. The Nile, which dividing Egypt into
two parts, diſcharges itfelt into the Mediterranean, after a prodigious courſe from its
ſource in Abyſſinia. The moſt conſiderable mountains in Africa are the Atlas, a
ridge extending from the Weſtern Ocean, to which it gives the name of Atlantic
Ocean, as far as Egypt, and had its name from a king of Mauritania, a great lover
of aſtronomer, who uſed to obſerve the ſtars from its ſummit ; on which account the
poets repreſent him as bearing the heavens on his ſhoulders. The Mountains of the

oon, extending themſelves between Abyſſinia and Monomopata, and are ſtill
higher than thoſe of Atlas. Thoſe of Sierra Leona, or the mountains of the Lions,
which divide Nigritia ſrom Guinea, and extend as far as Ethiopia. Theſe were ſtyled


by the ancients, the Mountains of God, on account of their being ſubject to thunder
and lightning. The Peak of Teneriffe, which the Dutch make their meridian, 1s
about two miles high, in the form of a ſugar loaf, and is ſituated on an iſland of the


ſame name near the coaſt. The moſt noted capes or promontories, in this country,
are Cape Verd, the moſt weſterly point of the continent of Africa, and the Cape of
Good Hope (fo denominated by the Portugueſe, when they firſt went round it in


1498) the Fou extremity of Africa, in the country of the Hottentots. There is


but one ſtrait in Africa, which is called Babelmandel, and is the communication be-
tween the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean.


Africa once contained ſeveral kingdoms and ſtates, eminent for the liberal arts, for
wealth and power, and the moſt extenfive commerce. The kingdoms of Egypt and


Ethiopia, in particular, were much celebrated; and the rich and powerful ſtate of


Carthage, that once formidable rival to Rome itſelf, extended her commerce to every
A of the then 3 world. Upon the decline of the Roman empire, in the


*


. - , - .
* <A f - . +. * 8 wk U _ . : ” 4 = * 2 1 of l 4
Wes? Ee FTI meme cc
N 4 CRE _ >” TY LADY YE 3


EGYPT. | 5
fifth century, the north of Attica was overrun by the Vandals, who contributed
ſtill more to the deſtruction of arts and ſciences; and, to add to this country's cala-
mity, the Saracens made a ſudden conqueſt of all the coaſts of Egypt and Barbary,
in the ſeventh century. Theſe were ſucceeded by the Turks; and both being of the
Mahometan religion, whoſe profeſſors carried deſolation with them wherever they
came, the ruin of that once flouriſhing part of the world was thereby completed.

The inhabitants of this continent, wth reſpect to religion, may be divided into
three ſorts; namely, Pagans, Mahometans, and. Chriſtians. | The firſt are the moſt:
numerous,

Having given the reader ſome idea of Africa in general, we ſhall now conſider it
under three grand diviſions: firſt, Egypt; ſecondly, the ſtates of Barbary, ſtretching
along the coaſt of the Mediterranean from Egypt, on the eaſt, to the Atlantic Ocean,
weſt ; and, laſtly, that. part of Africa, between the tropic of Cancer and the Cape of
Good Hope; the laſt of theſe diviſions, indeed, is vaſtly greater than the other two;
but the nations which it contains are ſo little known, and ſo barbarous, and, like all


barbarous nations, ſo ſimilar in moſt reſpects to one another, that they * without
impropriety, be thrown. under one l head.


E 6 Y Pp T.


Srruarion AND, Eun NT.


3 Miles. Square Miles.
ngth 600 . and 36 N. Lat.
6 N 8 Goo} between 28 and 36 E. Long. 140,700

Tu NG J is bounded by the Mediterranean Sea, north; by the Red Sea,
\ Boonpanins.] I eaſt ; by Abyflinia, or the Upper Ethiopia, on es ſouth; by the
Deſert of Barca, and the unknown parts of Africa, welt. It. 18 divided into Lower
and Upper Egypt.

CLIMATE. |: It is obſerved by M. Volney, that during eight months of the year
(from March to November) the heat is almoſt inſupportable by an European. * Du-
ring the whole of this ſeaſon, the air is inflamed, the ſky. ſparkling, and the heat
oppreſſive to all unaccuſtomed to it.” The other months are more temperate. The
ſoutherly winds, which ſometimes blow in Egypt, are, by the natives, called nas -
winds, or. the hot nds of the deſert. They are of ſuch extreme heat and dryneis, that
no animated body expoſed to it can withſtand its fatal influence, During the three
days which. it generally laſts, the ſtreets are deſerted; and woe to the traveller,
whom this wind furprizes remote from ſhelter.: when. it exceeds three days, it is un-
ſupportable. | -

The ſoil is-exceedingly fruitful, EY S's = the overflowing of the Nile, 9

leaves a fattening ſlime behind it. Thoſe parts not overflowed by the Nile arc un-
cultivated, ſandy, and barren. Egypt produces corn, rice, 1 ſugar, flax, linen, ſalt,
ſal ammoniac, balſam, and various ſorts of fruits and drugs.
Egypt is governed by a Baſhaw, ſent from Conſtantinople, being a province Tl” the
Turkiſh. empire. The Turks and Arabs are Mahometans. Mahomctaniſm is the
eſtabliſhed religion of Eg gypt; but there are many Chriſtians called Copts, and the
Jews are very numerous. |


696 Tux STATES or BARBARY.

The number of inhabitants in Egypt, according to M. Volney, is about 2,300,000;
of which Cairo, the capital, contains 250,000.

Egypt is famous for its pyramids, thoſe ſtupendons works of folly. The Egyptians
were the only people who were acquainted with the art of embalming or preſerving
dead bodies from putrefaction. Here is the river Nile, celebrated for its fertilizing
inundations, and for the ſubtle, voracious crocodiles which inhabit its ſhores. The
natives at the head of this famous river pay divine honours to it. Thouſands of
cattle are offered to the Deity, who is ſuppoſed to reſide at its ſource. This was
the theatre of thoſe remarkable tranſactions, which make up the beautiful and af-
ſecting hiſtory of Joſeph. Here, Pharaoh exhibited ſcenes of cruelty, tyranny, and
oppreſſion, towards the liraelites, in the courſe of their 400 years bondage to the
Egyptians. Here, too, Moſes was born, and was preſerved in the little ark, among
the flags on the banks of the Nile. Here, through the inſtrumentality of this great
man, the Egyptians were afflicted with many grievous plagues, which induced them at
laſt to et Hrael go. Here, Moſes, with his rod, divided the Red fea, and Ifrael paſſed
it on dry land ; which the Egyptians, attempting to do, were overwhelmed by the
returning of the waters. To this ſcene, ſucceeded the Iſraelites memorable 40 years
mareh through the deſerts of Arabia, before they reached the land of Canaan.


—_— —


Tus STATES or BARBARY.
TN DER this head, we ſhall rank PR countries of, 1. Morocco and Fez; j 2. Al. 1
giers; 3. Tunis ; ; 4. Tripoli and Barca.
The empire of Morocco, including Fez, is bounded on the north, by the Medi-
|  terranean ſea; on the ſouth, by Tafilet; and, on the eaſt, by Segelmeſſa and the
kingdom of Algiers; being 500 miles in length, and 480 in breadth.
Fenz, which is now united to Morocco, is about 125 miles in length, and much
the ſame in breadth. It lies between the kingdom of Algiers to the eaſt, and Mo-
rocco on the ſouth, and is ſurrounded on other parts by the ſea. -
Algiers, formerly a kingdom, is bounded on the eaſt, by the kingdom of Tunis; 3
on the north by the Mediterranean ; on the ſouth, by Mount Atlas, and on the
| weſt, by the kingdoms of Morocco and Tafilet. According to Dr. Shaw, who re-
ſided 12 years at Algiers, this country extends in length 480 miles along the coaſt
of the Mediterranean, and between 40 and 100 miles in breadth.
Tunis is bounded by the Mediterranean on the north and eaſt ; by the kingdom
of Algiers on the welt; and by Tripoli, with part of Biledulgerid, on the ſouth;
being 220 miles in length, from north to ſouth, and 170 in breadth, from caſt to
Welt. -
Tripoli, including Barca, i is bounded on the et: by the Mediterranean ſea; on
the ſouth, by the country of the Beriberies ; on-the welt, by the kingdom of Tunis,
Biledulgerid, and a territory of the Gadamis; and on che eaſt, by Egypt; extending
about 1100 miles along the ſea coaſt; and the breadth is from 100 to 300 miles.
Each capital bears the name of the ſtate or kingdom to which it — but the
capital of Biledulgerid (the ancient Numidia) is Dara.
The Barbary ſtates ſorm a great political 9 * each is independent
as to the exerciſe of its internal policy. 5


Tun STATES or BAR BAR T. - = by


"The air of theſe ſtates is mild and agreeable. |

Under the Roman empire, they were juſtly denominated the garden of. the world ;
and to have a refidence there, was conſidered as the higheſt ftate of luxury.

The produce of their foil formed . thoſe magazines, which furniſhed all Italy,


are now: uncultivated, through the oppreſſion and barbarity of their conſtitution,
yet they are ſtill fertile, not only in the above-mentioned commodities, but in dates,
figs, . raiſins, almonds, apples, pears, cherries, plums, citrons, lemons; oranges,
pomegranates, with plenty of roots and herbs in their kitchen e Excellent
Wy and flax grow on their plains.
_ Morocco, the capital of the empire of the ſame name, is thought to confain
25,000 inhabitants.
The city of Algiers is faid to contain 100,000 Mahometans, 1 5,000 Jews, and
2000 Chriſtian ſlaves; among whom are a number of unfortunate Americans ; but no
eſtimate ean be formed as to the populouſneſs of its territory.


houſes. The Tunifine women are very handſome in their perſons ; and though
the men are funburnt, the completion of the ladies is very delicate, nor are they leſs
neat and clegant in their dreſs ; ; but they improve the beauty of their eyes by art,
particularly the powder of lead ore, the ſame pigment, according to the opinion of
the learned Dr. Shaw, that Jezebel made uſe of when ſhe is ſaid (2 Kings, chap. ix
verſe 30.) to have painted her face; the words of the iin being, that ſhe ſet off
her eyes with the powder of lead ore.
_ . *Fripoli was once the richeſt, moſt populous and opulent, of all the ſtates on the

conlt; but 1t 48 now much redubed: and the inhabitants, who are ſaid to amount to
between 4 and 500,000, have all the vices of the Algerines.

All foreigners are here allowed the open profeſſion of their e Is the in-

kakitants of theſe ſtates are Mahometans ; and many ſubjects of Morocco follow


of the caliſs. The Moors of Barbary, as the inhabitants of theſe ſtates are now
promiſcuouſly called (becauſe the Saracens firit entered Europe from Mauritania, the
country of the Moors) have adopted the very worſt parts of the Mahometan reli gion,
and ſeem to have retained only as much of it as countenances their vices.

The emperor of Morocco is an arbitrary prince. Algiers is governed by a
prince, ealled the Dey, elected by. the Army. The ſovereigns of Tunis and Tri-
poli, called Beys, are not ſo independent as the former. Theſe three ſtates may
be looked upon as republics of foldiers, under the protection of the Grand Seignior.
On this coaſt ſtood the famous city of Carthage, which was deſtroyed by the Ro-


Africanus, Arnobius, Lactantius, and St. Auſtin, all biſhops of the church. The


Terence and 0 8.


15 F or a very lexroes and ingenious work relatiog to this great OT ſee The Courſe of Hannibal oer,
the Alps, aſcertained wy Fobu Whitaker, B. D. In 2 vols. 8 o. Printed for Stockdale, in 2794+ | |


TY


* * ,


4
# Fg
7 *: ,
Pg —


and great part of the Roman empire, with corn, wine, and oil. Though the lands


Tunis is the moſt poliſhed republic of all the Burbary ſtates. The capital contains
10,000 families, and above 3ooo tradeſmen's ſhops, and its ſuburbs conſiſt of 1000


the tenets of one Hamed, a modern ſectariſt, and an enemy to the ancient doctrine


mans. Among the great men Africa has produced, are, Tertullian, Cyprian, Julius


warriors of note are, Hamilcar, Hannibal, * and Aſdrubal. Aunons HAAR Poets ares


| | a | 4 * 7
1 LI . ; | # >
= : *
+.% * 9 8 —
4 X - - Or
; :


F
F3


WA Py * „ es


( 698 )


Or AFRICA, FROM THE Tropic of CANCER, To THE: Cape:


OE Goop HorE.


f HIS. immenſe territory 16% comparatively ſpeaking, very little known; there is


no modern traveller that hath penetrated into the interior parts; to that we


are ignorant not only of tlie bounds, but even of the names of ſeveral inland coun-


tries. In many material oircumſtances, the inhabitants of this extenfive continent
agree with each other. If we except the people of Abyſſinia, they are all of a


black complection: in their religion, except on the ſea coaſts, which have been


- . viſited and ſettled by ſtrangers, they are pagans; and the form of government is


every where monarchical or deſpotio. Few princes, however, poſſeſs a very exten-


five juriſdiction; for as the natives of this part of Africa are ſaid to - be. groſs] y 1gno- -
rant in all the arts of utility or refinement, they muſt be little acquainted with one


another; and generally united in ſmall ſocieties, each governed by its own prince.


We are but imperfectly acquainted with the manners and cuſtoms of the people


of this extenſive country. The accounts given us by Mr. Bruce, of the Abyſlimi- -
ans, repreſent them as in a ſtate of very great barbariſm. Their manner of feeding


is beyond a parallel, if we may believe the report of our author. He informs us,
that having fallen in with ſome ſoldiers driving a cow before them, he was furprifed |
to ſee them throw down the animal, cut off pieces of her fleſh, and. then flapping


the ſkin over the wound, make her get 1 and walk on as before. He found This :


to be the common practice of the coun


The religion of the Abyſſinians is a Aide of+ Chriſtianity ity, Judaiſin; and Pa-.


ganiſm; the two. latter of which are by far the moſt predominant. There are here


more churches than in any other country, and though it is very mountainous,
and conſequently the view much obſtructed, it is very ſeldom you ſee leſs than five or


fix churches. Every great man when he dies, thinks he has atoned for all his wick


edneſs, if he leaves a fund to build a church, or has one built in his life- time.


The churehes are full of Pictures, ſlovenly painted on parchment, and wied pon .
the walls. There is - no choice in their ſaints; they are both of the Old and New


Teſtament, and thoſe that might be diſpenſed with from both. There is St. Pontius


Pilate and his wite 3: there. 18 St. Balaam and his aſs; . and his ae, and 'Y


ſo of the reſt. 15 1


en #


The fertility of a. country fo- prodig giouſly | exteriſire might be tuppotel more va-
rious than we find it is; in "fact, there is no medium in this part of Africa with


regard to the advantages of ſoil; it is either perfectly barren or extremely fertile; this


— —


ariſes from the intenſe heat of the ſun, which, here it meets with ſufficient moiſture, :


produces with the utmoſt luxuriancy; and, in thoſe countries where there are few rivers, -


reduces the ſurface of the earth to a barren ſand. Of this ſort are the- countries of


Anian and Zaara, which for want of water, and conſequently of all other neceſſaries,


are reduced to perfect deſerts, as the name of the latter denotes: In thoſe countries,


abundance. The countries of Mandingo, Ethiopia, Congo, Angola, Batua, Tru-
tieui, Mone motapa, Caſati, and Mehenemugi, are 9 rich in gold and fil-


ver-


5 | l Se | Gondar,


on the other hand, where there i 1s plenty ol water, and particularly where the rivers
overflow the land, part of the year as in Abyſinia, the productions of nature, both
ol the animal and vegetable kinds, are found in the higheſt perfection and greateſt


F


Or TAE SLAVE COAST, %e. - „„
Gondar, the metropolis of Abyſfinia, is fituated upon a hill of conſiderable height,
the top of it nearly plain, on which the town is placed. It conſiſts of about 10,9000
families in times of peace: the houſes are chieſly of clay, the roofs thatched in the
form of cones, which is always the conſtruction within the tropical rains. SF
The Abyſſinians, from a very ancient tradition, according to Mr. Bruce, attribute
the foundation of their monarchy. to Menilek, fon of Solomon by the Queen of
Sheba, rendered in the Vulgate, the Queen of the South. The annals. of the Abyſ-
Unians ſay, ſhe was a Pagan when ſhe left her own country, but being full of ad-
miration at the fight of Solomon's works, ſhe. was converted to Judaiſm in Jeruſalem,
and bore him a ſon, whom ſhe called Menilek, and he became their firſt king.
She returned with her ſon to Sheba, whom, after keeping him ſome years, ſhe ſent
back to hjs father to be inſtructed. Solomon did not neglect his charge, and he
was anointed and crowned king of Ethiopia, in the temple of Jeruſalem, and at
his inauguration, took the name of David: after this he returned to Sheba, and
brought with him a colony of Jews, among whom were many doctors of the law of
| Moſes, particularly one of each tribe, to make judges in his kingdom. With theſe
came alſo Azarias, the ſon of Zadok the prieſt, and brought with him a Hebrew -
tranſcript of the law, which was delivered into his cuſtody, as he bore the title of
Nebrit, or High Prieſt; and this charge, though the book itſelf was burnt with the
Church at Axum, in the Mooriſh war of Adel, is ſtill continued, as it is ſaid, in the
lineage of Azarias, who are keepers of the church of Axum at this day. All Abyſſinia
was thereupon converted, and the government of the church and ſtate modelled ac-
cording to what was then in uſe at Jeruſalem. _ „ 5
On the Guinea or weſtern coaſt, the Engliſh trade to James's Fort, and other ſet-
tlements near and up the river Gambia, where they exchange their woollen and
linen manufactures, their hardware and ſpirituous liquors, for the perſons of the
natives. By the treaty of peace in 1783, the river of Senegal, with its dependencies,
were given up to France. Among the Negroes, a man's wealth conſiſts in the
number of his family, whom he ſells like ſo many cattle, and often at an inferior
price. Gold and ivory, next to the ſlave trade, form principal branches of African
commerce, 1 „ i
The greateſt part of the profits of the ſlave trade 1s raiſed on the ſugar plantations.
If by eſtabliſhing factories, and encouraging civilization on the coaſt of Africa,
and returning ſome of the Weſt India and other flaves to their original -country,
ſome amends could be made for paſt treachery to the natives, and the :inhabitants
could be inſtructed in the culture of tobacco, indigo, cotton, rice, &c. to barter with
us for our manufactures, great might be the profits, and much would it ſerve the
cauſe of humanity. An undertaking of this kind has lately been ſet on foot by the
Sierra Leona company, which bids fair te be ſucceisful, and does very great honor,
to the humane gentlemen who are agents in this buſineis. | 5
The eſtabliſhment which the Dutch Eaſt India company have made on either
ſide of the Cape of Good Hope, the extreme ſouthern point of that great continent,
which comprehends Europe, Aſia, and Africa, extends, according to computation,
450 miles eaſtward and weflward, and 250 towards the north. In this extenſive
domain, the population amounts to 17,000 inhabitants of European deſcent, and
about 30,000 flaves, Africans and Afiatics. —— — |
This country is capable of being made, by the ſimpleſt means, a populous. com-
mercial colony, _ SBM
| . 4 X 2 boy Ns 0 | = 'The


A


__ AFRICAN TSLANDS.


8 Horigines of the country, who are called Hottentots, and who are of a mild and
tractable diſpoſition, have been eaſily reduced to the condition of obedicnt ſubjects.
They are a quiet, inoffenfive people, uſeſuk to the Dutch in many reſpects, particu-

: vals} in the management of flocks and herds of cattle. They have been very muclr.

raiſrepreſented : and it is farpriſing, that the falſehoods which bave been propa-.

_ gated: concerning them, ſhould fo long have gained credit in the world. It is not
true; that they arc in the practice of eating raw fleſh, or that they entwine their

bodies with the entrails of cattle. They prepare their food with fire; and their

clothing conſiſts of a dreſſed hide, which is tied like a collar round the neck, hangs
down over the ſhoulders near to the ground, and is broad, and may be wrapt round
the fore part of the body x befides this, they wear another covering of ſkin round the.
loins, which reaches half way down the thighs. Sometimes they have a cap for the
head, and ſhoes for the feet, of the ſame materials. Their ſhoes are formed of a piece
of- hide, drawn clofely abvurt. the feet with thongs of the fame. The Hottentots
having few conveniencies for bathing; and living in a climate where they are very.
frequently involved in clouds of duſt, have acquired habits of dirtineſs; but their
fkins, when waſhed, are clear, though fallow. _

The employment of the Hottentots is purely paftoral'; their principal and almoſt:

only occupation being the care of their herds of ſheep and kine. 5

A fea-offcer lately viſited all the chiefs of the Negroes in the Engliſh ſettlements,
from Santa Apollonia to Athera, which is upwards of 250 miles, and found the
police and pantſhment of all crimes ſupported by the flave trade: * Thoſe who commit
erimes or treſpaſſes againſt their laws, are, at the deciſion of twelve elders; fold for
flaves for the uſe of their government; and the ſupport of their chiefs: Theft, adul-
tery, and murder, are the higheſt crimes, and whenever they are detected, ſubject the.
whole family to flavery. But any individual; condemned to flavery for the crime of
his relation, may redeem his own perſon, by furniſtting two ſlaves in his room. Or
when a man commits one of the above cardinal crimes, all-the male part*of his family
are forſeited to-flavery ; if a woman, the ſemale part is ſold. While on the coaſt,
ſays he; I ſaw inſtances. of this fort: 10 truly cruel, as made my very boſom bleed.

This trathe in crimes makes the chiefs vigilant. Nor do our planters, who purchaſe
them, uſe any pains to inſtruct them in religion, to make them amends for the op-
py thus exerciſed on them. I am. ſorry to fay they are- unnaturally averſe to

very thing that tends to it; yet the Portuguefe, French, and Spaniards, in their ſet-
pan Boks ſucceed in their- attempts to. inſtruct them; as much to the advantage of:
commerce, as of religion. It is for the ſake of Chriftianity, and the advantages ac--
companying it, that Engliſh ſlaves embrace every occaſion of derte to the ſettle--
ments of theſe nations.”
It is high time ſor the legiſlature to enforce and put an end to this moſt: infamous


of all trades, and ſo diſgraceful to the Chriſtian. ps, and ſo repugnant | to the prin+- :
ciples of a. free government.


—


AFRICAN ISLANDS.


T the mouth of the Red ſea is the iſland that . now call! Socotara,
or Socatra, famous ſor its aloes, which are eſteemed the beſt in the world.
Sailing down, ſouthward, we come to the land of Madagaſcar, or Lawrence,


abounding


„ OENETRAL REMARKS 5


abounding in cattle and corn, and moſt of the neceffaries of life, but no ſufficient
merchandize ta induce the Europeans to ſettle colonies; it has ſeveral petty ſavage


kings of its own, both Arabs and Negraes, who make war on each other, ſell their


priſoncrs for flaves to the ſhipping which call here, taking cloths, utenſils, and
other: Heceflanes in inn.. 8 | 25 n 5
Near it, are the four Comorra ifles, whoſe petty kings are tributary to the Por-
tugueſe ; and near thefe, lies the iſland of Bourbon; and; a little higher, Maurice, fo
called by the Dutch, who firſt touched here in 1598. It* is now in the poſſeſſion
of the French, and by them called the Iſle of France, lat. 20% S. long. 56 E. |
Quitting the eaſtern world, and the Indies, and paſſing round the Cape of Good
Hope into the wide Atlantic ocean, the firſt iſland is the ſmall, but pleaſant one,
called St. Helena, at which place, all the Engliſh and American Eaſt India ſhips
ſtop, to get water and freſh proviſions, in their way home. Near this, are the
Guinea iſlands, St. Matthew, St. Thomas, and others, not far from the coaſt under
the equinoctial line, belonging to the Portugueſe. Theſe were ſo named by the ſai-
lors, who firſt found them on the ſeſtivals of St. Helen, St. Thomas, and St. Matthew.
Thence, northward, are the Cape Verd iſlands, fo called from their verdure.
They eg belong to the Portugueſe, who are furniſhed from thence with - falt, and
oats' ſkins... LR 2019 biet a ei ga en i] .
Farther north are the pleaſant Canaries, belonging to the Spaniards, from whence
firſt came canary wine, and the beautiful ſinging birds, called canary birds. The an-
cients called them the Fortunate Iſles, and placed there the Elyſian fields. They are
ten or twelve in number, the chief are, Teneriffe, Gomera, Ferro, and Great Canary.
The fertile iſlands of Madeira lie ſtill further north, and are famous for the beſt


*


ſtomachic wine.“ They belong to the Portugueſo.


— a * * 5 * 9 .
f 9 a : : F FE: a 4 by ne
£©*Y 9 . 7 - 4 * 8-5 J ! o& > x - 0 1 . 2
: : 5 - 3 - . 3
4 a : ; : : | , ;
$ S#-4 4 . * ' - . s 4 . — > 4 4
* 1 5 „* : . ; 5
1 * © : , . T 7 a : - + .-< 4.4 * *
7 M N N 8 © RE ER ; .
* " & %. .* *:.v \ 4 f 1 Fl F. 1 , . . 3
4 7 : g # . 3 1 : - % 5
1 ” ” * Pu * by * ©
q . . z — " 2 2 by » 2 1 . f 5 , -
N 4 £ * — g n , 2 PRs... * : | L ; \ 1 12 .
* . * | a . . 5 F . : p 4 , . : 1 7 J. f x þ- | d ; .
4 * A \ * — 93 4 : * - " WP | k e ” % * # * %:


F among the human race, ſays Dr. Percival, enumerated by Linnæus
1 and Baffon; are fix. The firſt is found under the polar regions, and compre-


hends the Laplanders, the Eſquimaux Indians, the Samoeid Tartars, the inhabitants

ol Nova Zembla, the Berandians, the Greenlanders, and the people of Kamſchatka.

The vifage of men, in theſe countries, is large and broad; the noſe flat and ſhort;

the eyes of a yellowiſh brown, inclining to blackneſs; the cheek» bones extremely

high; the mouth large; the lips thick, and turning outwards; the voice thin and

ſqueaking; and the ſkin a dark grey colour- The people are ſhort in ſtature, the ge-

nerality being about four feet high, and the talleſt not more than five. Ignorance,
ſtupidity, and ſuperſtition, are the mental characteriſtics of the inhabitants -of-- theſe -

rigorous climes. For here JF oY

| Doze the groſs race. Nor ſprightly jeſt nor ſong,

Nor tenderneſs they know, nor aught of life,

Beyond the kindred bears that ſtalk without.


The Tartar race, comprehending - the Chineſe and the apaneſe, forms the ſecond ö
variety in the human ſpecies; Their countenances are broad and wrinkled, even in
| 2 At the conalukes of theſe defcriptions it may not be amiſs to refer our readers to a work compiled and
printed at a very great expenſe, and of utility to the public, intituled, 4 Compleat Geographical Dictionary of
the Warld, by JohN S8ALLY, and IsxAET Lyons, of Cambridge. Printed for Fielding. |


youth he


”
K . 2 — * q a 4 q . . K ”
* 7 2. * bi - 5 + a . E
” : 3
** cock. FEY 4 _ * 1 FR. - = 4
— * —ꝓ—ä— — BY WW —ͤ—ũ—ͤ — AAA — mug; 2 It — a * ww * b
: | 4
* 2 1 * TY , oy
— . « © „ f ny — ws. > +
ov» - - * — nn * o 8 —— om
E — — * << * * — PX. * n e .
Ts. 4 ; 2 >


E


n


ag Ca.
1


8


" TED,”


n q -S 7 *


than by relating the following incident from Dr. Goldſmith:


702 GENERAL; REMARKS.


youth ; their noſes ſhort and flat; their eyes little, Garik. in the ſockets, REY ſeveral
inches aſunder; their cheek bones are high; their teeth of a large ſize and ſeparate
from each other; their complections are olive and their hair black. Theſe nations,


in general, excepting the Japaneſe and Chineſe, have no religion, no ſettled notions


- morality, and no decency of behaviour, They are chietly robbers ; their wealth
conſiſis in horſes, and their {kill in the management of them.


The third variety of mankind, is that of the fouthern Aſiatics, or the inhabitants


of India. Theſe are of a flender ſhape, have long ſtraight black hair, and genera et —


Roman nofes. Theſe pops: are Dot en W N and
feminate. |


——The parent Sun bimtelf 280
Seems o'er thin world of flaves to tyrannize;
And, with opprefhve ray, the roſeate an > 3.1
Of beauty bieten ing, gives the gloomy hue.
3 And features groſs: or worſe, to ruthleſs deeds,
£48 IR ©] Mad jealouſy, blind rage, and fell revenge, EEE To J <7]
Their fervid ſpitit fires. Love dwells not there, IE
The ſoft regards, the tenderneſs of life, N
The heart ſhed tear, th'ineffable delight Ts 3 | 3
Of ſweet humanity : theſe court the benmmmgm Fork: 0
Of milder climes; in ſelfiſh fierce defire,
And the wild fury of voluptuous ſenſe,
.-.._ "There loft. The very brute creation there.
This rage partakes, and burns with horrid ſire. g


The wt 3 Africa conſtitute a fourth ſtriking variety in the human ſpecies:


but they differ widely from each other; thoſe of ee fox in ſtance, are extremely


ugly, and have an inſupportably offenſive ſcent; while thoſe of Moſambique are


reckoned beautiful, and are untainted with any diſagreeable ſmell. The Negroes


are, in general, of a black colour; the downy loftneſs of hair, which grows upon


the ſkin, gives a ſmoothneſs to it, reſembling that of velvet. The hair of their
heads is Woolly, ſhort, and black; but their beards often turn grey, and ſometimes


white. Their noſcs : are flat and ſhort, their 8 thick and tumid, and their teeth of


an ivory whntenels.


The intellectual a . powers ol theſe wretched people are ancultivated;


and they are ſubject to the moſt barbarous deſpotiſm. The ſavage tyrants, who rule


over them, make war upon each other for human plunder ! and the wretched victims,
bartered for ſpirituous liquors, are torn-from their families, their friends, and their
native land, and conſigned for life to miſery, toil, and bondage, But how I am
ſhocked to inform you, that this infernal commerce is carried on by the humane,
the poliſhed, the Chriſtian inhabitants of Europe ; nay, even by es whoſe.
anceſtors have bled in the cauſe of liberty, and whoſe breaſts ſtill glow with the


lame generous flame! I cannot give you a more ſtriking proof of the ideas of hor-


ror, which the captive Negroes entertain of the ſtate of ſervitude-they are to undergo,


« A Guinea Captain was, by diſtreſs of weather, driven into a certain harbour,
with a lading of ſickly ſlaves, who tock every opportunity to throw themſelves over-


board, when brought upon deck for the Rey vg of freſh air. The captain per-
ceiving, among others, a female ſlave attempting to drown herſelf, pitched upon her


as a proper example for the reſt. As he ſupp oled that they did not knom the terrors


attending death, he ordered, he woman to be tied with a rope under the arm-Pits,
ig 8 Wun into the water. W the Poor ercature was thus plunged | in, and


I 5 about


FEDERAL MONEY,——CALCULATIONS. pez


about half way down, ſhe was heard to give a terrible ſhriek, which, at firſt; was
aſoribed to her fears of drowning, but ſoon after, the water appeared red around
her, ſhe was drawn up, and it was found that a ſhark, which had followed the
ſhip,” had bitten her off from the middle... eee
The native inhabitants of America make a fifth race of men. They are of a
copper colour, have black, thick, ſtraight” hair, flat noſes, high cheek bones, and
ſmall eyes. They paint the body and face of various colours, and eradicate the
hair of their beards and other parts as a deformity. Their limbs are not ſo large and
robuſt as thoſe of the Europeans. They endure hunger, thirſt, and pain with aſtoniſh-


ing firmneſs and patience; and, though eruel to their enemies, they are kind and IE


Juſt to each other. 1 7 . 8
The Europeans may be -confidered as the laſt variety of human kind. They
enjoy ſingular advantages from the fairneſs of their complections. The face of the
African black, or of the olive- coloured Afiatic, is a very imperſect index of the
mind, r e {ame ſettled ſhade in joy and ſorrow, confidence and ſhame, -
anger and deſpair, ficknefs and health. The Engliſh are ſaid to be the faireft of the
_ Europeans: and we may therefore preſume, that their countenances beſt expreſs
N the variations : of the patitons, and. Meiſſitudes of diſeaſe. But the intellectual and |
moral ' characteriſtics of the different nations which compoſe this quarter of the
globe, are of more importance to be known. Theſe, however, become gradually
les diſcernible, as ſaſhion, learning, and commerce prevail more univerſally. *“


—


mY 2 -


—
—


FEDERAL MONEY.


IN New England and Vir-] 67 South Carolina and Georgia, 4/8.
ginia, a dollar is bfec- New York and North Ca- 87
New Jerſey, CEL Ca rolina,, - = »- - 5 fe -
Pennſylvania, 75 | „


*
*


Delaware,


Maryland,


1


. : * i 1
— —— r — —


Intereſting | Calculations upon the Population of the United
CS... Hates, and or e


Ya ee the preſent population of the United States to be four millions,
'A which; conſidering the emigrations ſince the peace, the general health that
has.prevailed; and the imperfection of our eſtimates, is probably not far from tlie
truth, anck calculating our. progreflive increaſe to continue doubling: once in twenty >
years, as has hitherto been the caſe ; at the end of 100 years, there will be 128, ooo, ooo
of ſouls in the United States of America; which is almoſt as many as there are at
preſent. in all Europe. And when we conſider the probable- acquiſition of people
* See-the very able. Treatiſe on the Cauſes of the Variety of Complection and Figure in the human Spe-


cies. T6 which are added Strictures on Lord Kaim's Diſcourſe on the original Diverſity of Mankind. By -
the Riv. Samuel Stanhope Smith, D. D. Printed for Stockaale, in 1789.


/ | | by ;


P = - .

< — a — 2 — *
wa Ned n > E
om » 1 R r ob y 6 7 7 4
. » ws * 22 1 b E * —
ere F SITS 3 728 ER * , re T RAY 5 « 4 *
Fer n 5 fad, 2 "I ey > + ES
r . ,


| | . 2 2 4 * wry n * . 2
; ; ; = þ "0 im 2
J e 44 — hare — — * * * *
* me 1 panes. + ——— 33 r N
5 n
3


: *
n 2 —
7 =O 47-40. * .


by foreien emigrations, .and that the injetion-aud unſettled parts of America are

amply ſufficient to provide for this number, the Pefumptian is rong that this eſti-

mate will not differ materially from the eyent.

It is computed that there are, at e # in ry four quarters of the globe,

959:909,000 of NOS. HA 6 tnt

1 65 * America 180
Europe, — {= = 1 50

. e e eee

e —— ehe n


——


Total, 950 millions 187850
IT then we reckon that a generation laſts thirty years, in that ſpace, 9 $0,000 0jdos
of le will be born and die; conſequently, about 31,000,000 die annually;
86, ooo ur day; 3 3 ,600.exery hour ; 60 cFery minute, and 1 in every ſecond.


This is much too Jarge an * of the jnhabjtants of theavorld.. The. number BY America is much
leſs than 50,000,000, Some ſuppoſe that 15,000,000 is a large eſtimate, It is Dr. les' opinion, that
the number of Indians in North and South America, does not exceed 2,500,000. -
According to Zimmerman, who is a better 2 a Guthrie, * but 1449 399909 i inhabitant
2 ü r - Ae | | 3 81


AMERICA, eee Page.
« pose. | Commerce and diſcovery os We
BOUNDARIES and extent IDS Face of the country, ſoil, &. - 108
Chronological 9 of diſcovery and . |} General deſcription of the country © "OT
ſettlement | 5 - 85 } Inhabitants, their manners, cuſtoms, &c. 108
Darien, Iſthmus of F 8 Rivers, their ſource and extent 33
Diſcovered by Columbus 51 5
e 'cl” <= 4 32-1 UPPER ann LOWER CANADA.
GSulph ſtream deſcribed' ' - „
Inhabitants deſcribed 62 | Boundaries and diviſions = 112
Mountains, the principal ones enumerated 54 | Climate „„ - ib.
Ney diſcoveries on the N. W. 777 Government png et et erg, 23 1
Peopled, by whom 5 „ V e 35 |
Population eſtimated > "+ 54 Population x RE 3 4
Rivers, names of the principal ones 53 |- Religion, various ſeQts of 5 2 6. *
I Situation and extent — 5 14
| Soil and produce „ =
N 0 R T H. A * E R C A. W 5 principal ones deſeribed 1 f
Bays, their ſituat! on and extent 2 Rey \ 4 Trade, value of 5 . 115 14
Boundaries ö „„ 5 ö F
Diviſions 5G IM ie en ISLAND OF CAPE BRETON. 9
9 Face of the country, climate ſoil, and { 3
| GREENLAND. EHPFLk m 1
5 + +. | - | — — 1 | I” 3s
| Animals, var various kinds t, |=. en | | pa F -
e 7 b ee Situation and extent - - 115 OY a
ene and extent Es oe is Þ Rc. Towns, the chief Jefcritied” — 116 — 1
Face of the country dſerided' „ Trace, ern ä of > 15 „
Hiſtor 2 | „ 103 + |
5 8 eſtimate f - 100 N O VA s O 0 T I A. | 5 : 8 [
Productions, 1 mineral and vegetable 1a 8037 do and bins 5c St a. FF
Religion e ib. Climate, ſoil, and productions — 121 ; PTS 1
Tides, ſprings, and rivers 10 | Diviſions, a table of EE TE Oo h |
3 I Forts, their ſtrength 3 RAS 2... 04 | wy |
BRITISH AMERICA. e,, d _
3 Indiahs, different tribes of ib. EY =
Diviſions general 5 r 107 Rivers, bays, lakes, and capes, deſeribed 120: ? h
Situation 905 extent 8 ib. . Towns, deſcription of the principal ones ib.
— Lots — Trade, account of exports, de. 3 1 |
NEW BRITAIN ET: sax oF Sr. JOHN. ” | I!
Anitnals deſcribed = 109 „ j
Climate on. — - 108 | Situation and dem F 122 | |
3 4 Y . IsLaxn .


$7 ” wet % 4 n


Taz UNITED STATES or AMERICA.


Agriculture, preſent ſtate of
Animals, a catalogue of


deſcribed —
Bank, account of 3
Bays- enumerated <
Birds, a catalogue of is
———, deſcription of >
undaries | |


iucinnati, 2 facets fo called


merce, general account of


ed: ration, articles of, ratified


* defects of 1


Conſtitution, general — of
N bills of
Debt, ſoreign, amount N.


F iſhes, a catalogue of 3


deſcribed.


Flowering / trees and male acxtalogye of a


Foreſt trees, do. |
Fruits, wild, da. Fi


, native, in New England


706
Wan or NEWF OUNDLAND.
Situation and extent 8
Trade, value of *


Söðà¹oſbůſbßb


er regulations, the reciproctacy of 200%


**


Nuties on goods imported, abſtract of
on the 2 of veſſels, general


abſtract of - - .
Exports, ſummary of — 2
Face of the country deſcribed —


| „exotic, account of £

Finances, ſtate of . 3
Fruits, nut, catalogue of 3
Government, the form of 3
Grain, cultivation of 5
Gxaſſes, various ſorts . >


Hiſtory, general, of the late Near.
Inſects, a catalogue o.


deſcribed. -


Inhabitants, their character and manners.


Lakes, their ſituation and extent
Map of Northern and Middle States


Military ſtrength


--
p


Manufactures, obſervations thereon.


Mountains enumerated: 5 deſeribed:


Meschandiſe exported, ne .

Plants medicinal, a catalogue of

Population
— 2 =

Peace, concluſion of -

Rivers deſcribed. -

8 amphibious, A iption f


2


5 7 1 %


196


148


150


218


136
160
168,
0, 23;

195


197


IND E x.
Page. Reli gion, various denominations of
122 Baptiſts -
ib. Congregationaliſts:
| ———— Epiſcopalians.
| — Js -
—ſ ü — Methodiſts


. Moravians
——— Vennoniſts


- Preſbyterians
— — 22 -:
Roman Catholics.
Swinſeildians. _ =-
——— Tunkers' 9


| — Univerſaliſts. |
Situation and extent of the United - States 123.


Soil and vegetable productions


| Serpents, amphibious, a mme 9 115

| ——-— deſcribed

| United States, grand- divition. of;
, their independenceacknow- f


 ledged |


Waſhington. Gn choſen preſident of


the United States N


NEW ENGLAND:


Climate .
Diviſions enumerated ES
Diſeaſes, a liſt ff Be


Face of the country deſcribed”
Hiſtory, general


Inhabitants, their character


Mountains .
Population, abſtract of


Productions from culture


Rivers, their ſource and extent


Situation and boundaries
| Shrubs and Rats, a: catalogue aff


VERMONT.
Climate: ä —
Conſtitution deſeribed. A ary
Curioſities = e
Diviſions, a table of ” —
Hiſtory, general: e
Lakes. extent of: 5 —
Literature
Military ſtrength _ --


Mountains; their extent, &c.


1 Population, eſtimate of


Rivers, their ſource and extent
Situation and extent of 5


Springs, account of -


Soil and produce -


CC
8
No
0


3 T4 8 11


8

8
Va
N


— 229


— 142


— 172


272 |

288
— 271
ERS 475
— 279.
--”
— 274.
- 27 1
=";
N 274
— 8
— ib.
uh ” 278.
3

2758


8 the chief, deſcribed
Trade, articles of -


NEW HAMPSHIRE.


Agriculture, ſtate of
Bank, eſtabliſhment of
Canal, deſcription of


Country, the face of it deſcribed |


Clearances, table of
Curioſities, account of
Conſtitution deſcribed

_ Diviſions civil, a table of
Exportation, a table of
Fiſheries, ſtatement of
Hiſtory


8 their akivitice:
Lakes, their ſituation and extent


Mountains


Population, &c. abſtraQt of,


Religion
Rivers, their . &c.
Situation and extent


Towns, the chief deſcribed
5 Trage, general account |


' DISTRICT or- MAN.


; Boundaries 4 -.


Bays and capes =


Climate


Commerce and eee account of.
Country, the face of it ee


Diviſions, general


Exports, general abſtract of.


Hiſtory of

Indians, different. tribes of,
Lakes, deſcription of
Literature, ſtate of
Minerals, account of


Productions, various kinds of


„ Situation and extent


Seil, variety of W TP INg
Rivers, ſource and extent of
Teen, the . ipal ones deſcribed |


MASSACHUSETTS. |


Academies, account of t
Banks, account of


Boundaries of bee e
Bridges F
Capes of 6 2
Canals deſcribed : - |


4 6 5 6 10


Ne IT ES


; *. *
FS 6d 1 £6 6-4-3
— * %


*


INDEX


32:


707
"Ing ] | Page.
287 | Curioſities, account of — ib.
286 | Colleges, their eſtabliſhent — 330
| Conſtitution, when eſtabliſhed — 367
e table of - - 8310
ands o - - —
299 | Inventions and i improvements ts eb
392 | Light-houſes enumerated 3
Joy Literature, hiſtory of = >; 26
291 | Manufactures, account of —
2 Minerals and mineral ſprings — 325
394 [Military ſtrength = 88
305 [ Population, abſtract of —
291 Rivers, their ſource and extent E oz.
es Religion, different denominations of 3 1
301 ñ Revenue, account f — 337
305 | Situation and extent "LI TR agen >
392. | Societies, literary and humane -. oo -
2098 Taxes, how raiſed — — 337
5 Towns, hiſtory of the mack 331
206 | RHODE- ISLAND an PROVIDENCE
290. | PLANTATIONS.
298 Bays enumerated 1 9 339
303 Boundaries deſcribed — - 338
— * Bridges, ſituation of — 342
|| Climate, variety of — — 340
| | | Conſtitution, eſtabliſhed | =. 447
30 Tx Curioſities * - w.. 346.
39 Diviſions, civil, account of — 338
8 306 PFiſhes, variety of - - 340
310 _— deſcription of - —
e A 3 ©
ib. | Iflands 5 - —̃
4 | Indians, various nations of = 346
312: Light-houſe deſcribed - - 344
311 Literature, hiſtory of = * 341
5 300% 4 1 * of O 344
311 inerals e
| _ | Mountains, extent of - - 342
309 Population, abſtract of — &
| 3050 n V ” , 005
18.0% | eligion - Sy Ln 2
| 4 4 R, their ſource and extent - ib.
310 Situation and extent 7
I | Societies, account of the Aferent ones .
I | Sai, nature of 343
ä | Towns, the principal ones deſcribed 344
3298 I general account of f 343
I =
313 | CONNECTICUT.
jj Boundaries e "EI" 33391
6 324% | Climate of e 8 353 a
a Curi-


D Bo. Veg Ic We GR »


Y R = , * . 1 * -
, 7 = N . 4 2 ws W 1 e 1 b SNN * : e F 23 — — —
* Y , © Foo So «Sn. * * 5 1 A — — — — - a,
5 P A irs egy. oO ES OW . E : ? . * DES R f 8 SET bees, q þ l — —— !
a F FRE * o * * 3 * * 3 =F 2 \ 2 4 = _ + * * 0 — * %.- —
. — d n Le rn v2 = a. 4 a ws \ * 4 - 2 8 = n — +


708 1 N DE X a
LEI 5 Page, 1 | Page,
Curioſities deferibed =» — . Juſtice, adminiſtration. of - 304
Conſtitution, general account of 300 | Lakes, their ſituation and extent 376
Diviſions, civil, table of — 350 | Literature, the ſtate of - - 392
Damages ſuſtained by the late war 355 Manufactures deſcribed . : - - 387
| Governors, liſt of - — 364 } Minerals, variety of - - 391
Hiſtory - - - 08 Military ſtrength - - - 396
Harbours, defcription of - 352 | Mountains deſcribed - — 378
Inventions, new, by whom - 362 Productions, variety of 6 |


Juſtice, account of the different courts of 360


Literature, colleges, academies and ſchools


deſcribed — - - 358
Law, the practice of - - 302
Manufactures, different kinds of 353
Minerals, variety 'of > 359


Population and character of the Thar 354%
Productions, various kinds of


Rivers, their ſource and extent . 5
Religion — 233
Situation and extent of — 3
Soil, account of ß — I03

Springs, mineral ones deſcribed 360
Towns, the chief ones deſcribed 356

Taxes, mode of levying — 0 359

Trade, account of - — 8

MIDDLE STATES.

Bays, Ades of - E x 370;
Boundaries - 1 - 2
—_— e

Different provinces, account of a

Rivers, their ſource and extent ib.

1 YORK. 1138

Meier deſcribel 392

Agriculture, ſtate of . 5 387

Banks, account of — 397
Bays — e

Boundaries . © * "ng,

Bridges, n © . 9 +

Canals deſcribed — 7
Country, the face of it deſcribed. "AC...
Colleges, endowments of 392
Conſtitution, hiſtory f 394

Curioſities, deſcription of 98


Diviſions, civil, a table of
Finances, ſtate of


--


* || * : |} 5 1 *
* 3
by


Foſſils, enumeration of


Forts, where ſituated * i
Governors, liſt of = - 403
Hiſtory — - „
Inhabitants, character of - 379
Indians, different tribes of - 399
Iſlands belonging to New York 401


|


4-1


|


:


"Ph, 5 PENNSYLVANIA. | a,
Agriculture, ſtate of- 5 1 428
Antiquities deſcribed - 126.0 eff


Population ſummary of
Rivers, their ſource, &c.
Roads, principal ones deſcribed
Situation and extent
Sail, nature of |
Springs, medicinal ones
Societies, literary and humane, intention of


— 4. 8
—-


1


391
Taxes, mode of raiſing them - = 397
Towns, the chief ones ide 8


1
Of


Trade account of it


--


NEW JERSEY”


'Ss Tn EF K
4897 1


| Agriculture, ſtate of — =
Bays, deſcription os; 19 oer
Boundaries = 4 403
Canals deſcribed !. tte fob dais 0 an 40%
; Country, the face of deſcribed! 406
Caves, remarkable ones —
Conſtitution, when eſtabliſne ' - [£: 416
Courts of Juſtice, account of — 4.
Diviſions,” civil, enumerated | — 403
Governors, liſt a « bas
Hiſtory, civil and commercial id.
| | Inhabitants; their character, &ke. 412
Literature, colleges, academies and ſchools, Shed
foundation of a8 E. it
Law, the practice o — 2 418
Laws, code of - - 4117
Manufactures, ſtate of hd ats
Mines and minerals, defcrighon of ee
Mountains deſeribed eee
Monuments, where ereted” | . 411“
Minktary ſtrength, accdunt of 4178
Population; a table of - Ss © 08+"
Phyſic, preſent practice of — "og
Rivers, their ſource and extent e
Religion | ien C2395 wy) e 412
Situation and extent of the province 403
Soll and produce. | enn —


rings, ſome curious ones deſcribed 410:
1 deſcription of the ptincipal or ones 414.


Advantages.


Page.
Adrantages natural to the province 425
Boundaries deſcribed - - 419
Canals, where fituated 2 |
Caves, remarkable ones j 443
Country, the face of it deſcribed 423
Conſtitution, hiſtory of — *
Diviſions, civil, table of - 419
Exports, ſummary of — - 428
Governors, liſt of _— - 448
Hiſtory, general, of the province . 448.
Inhabitants, their character and manners 429
Inventions, new, account of „
Learning, account of ene academies |
and ſchools . 431
Manufactures, preſent ſtate "" PRES Rao © 6
Mountains, account of remarkable ones 423
Productions, variety of „„
Rivers, their ſource and extent — 18
Religion, various ſeas PT _ 429
Situation and extent - — 419
Soil defſeribed - | - 78
Societies, literary and humane, account of 430
Springs, fome curious ones deſcribed 443
Swamps, where ſituated = =, 422
TROL the chief deſcribed — "IT
DELAWARE.
J 449
Country, the face of it deſcribed e
Conſtitution, hiſtory of — 453
Diviſions, civil, table . 449
Light-houſe, whete ere reg: os
Manufactures, ſtate of 5
Minerals, different forts of 453
Rivers and creeks, their number and fource 449
Religion, account of 4 -".; a;
Seil deſcribed VVV
Towns, the principal deſcribed - ib.
Trade, preſent ſtate of „„
TERRITORY NORTH-WEST, QF THE.
OHIO, $.
| Avitiquities deſeribed | 8 460
Boundaries aſcertained .
Country, the face of it deſcribed *
Curioſities, ſome remarkable ones e
Diviſions, civil, table of es ꝙw - |
Fofts, where ä 460
Government, form of it deſcribed 1
Population, a table ß W > 2
Rivers, their ſituation” and extent 455
Situation and extent of the province 454


INDEX. © 500" =. on
j


SOUTHERN STATES.


Page.
We — - - 464.
Provinces, account of — . ib.
Population, table of - - ib.

: MARYLAND. | |
Boundaries aſcertained . =: © .
Conſtitution, account oe... = 471

Country, face of it deſcribed = , 455

_ Curioſities, natural, ſome remarkable ib.
Diviſions, civil, account of 5 464
Government, expences of — 471
* Governors, a liſt of — — 474

| Hiſtory, general, of the province 4


Inhabitants, their character and manners 466
Learning, account of different ſeminaries 470


Mines and manufactures, ſtate of .
Population, table f = 466
| Produce, account.of = « ib;
Kebeion --- . 470
Rivers and bays, their ſituation and extent 465
Situation and extent of the province 464
Soil deſcribed = - 1:10
| Towns, the principal ones deſcribed — 47
Trade, principal articles of — 470
VIRGINIA.
Boundaries — lp ow; 408}
Climate — bo > 478
Canals — — 479
Country, the face of it deſcribed. 483.
Colleges and academies = - 495
Commerce, total of exports — 500
Conſtitution — - 498-
Diviſions, civil, table . for
Governors, liſt of 3 — _ $03.
Hliſtory, general, of _ -- 3501
Inhabitants, their character and manners 498
Law, different courts of — ib.
Manufactures, various kinds of ib.
Mountains . 5 Fee 482
Mines and minerals = — 46
DE oo - - 490
Population, table of — -, 1
Productions, account of — 484
| Rivers, their ſource and extent aeg 4709
Religion 3 — 497
Tn the principal ones deſcribed 490
INDIANA.
General account of — — 503
| N KEN-


3
. =
Ty
*
*
Po
8
1
4
1
BS
S
: \
3 WM
-M
F i
4
,
: 7
1
4
KH
G
:
Y
. *
$
7
4
.
fr
＋
68 I
4
mw]
*
5
*
13
3
8 1
< N
*
*
|
7
— =
»
*
* *


r


7's SS n E


F ic
.
4
i
.
1 :


g
5
wo
$.
L
as
*
5
|
7-4


_—_


710
KENTUCKY.

Boundaries — 504

Climate —

Conſtitution, account 8 „ 209

Country, the face of it — | 506

Curioſities —
| Diviſions, civil, a table of 505

Hiſtory. <:

Inhabitants, their charaQter, &c. 509

Literature and improrem cu | 510

Population 509

Productions 507

Rivers, their ſource and extent 505

Religion 509

Springs 506

Soil - - ib.

Towns, the principal ones deſcribed 507

NORTH CAROLINA.

Boundaries 5
Climate and diſeaſes —
Colleges and academies 1

Country, the face of it deſcribed 5x9

Conſtitution of 23
' Diviſions, civil, table of „

Hiſtory — "06

Inhabitants, their character, manners, and

__ cuſtoms | 3 083

ManufaQures - ib.

Natural hiſtor _ — =

Population, abſtract of —

Rivers, their ſource and extent 514
Keligion, different ſects of — 8

Situation and extent 513

Sounds, capes, and inlets — 4 | =

Swamps 5 517

Soil and produce PRE
Towns, the principal deſcribed. 517
Trade, general account of DES

TERRITORY sovurTa or TRE OHIO.

Acidemy and ſociety. „„
Animals deſcribed —
Boundaries - 527

Climate — 528

Commerce 2 On-

Diviſions, civil, a liſt of -
_ Government, origin of 2

Hiſtory | 8

Indians, different tribes Us — ib.

Inhabitants, their nn, &c. 532

Militia 5 — ib.

Pdpulation 5


!
*


— —̃ͤ —— 2


IND EX.


Revenue, account of £
Roads, table of - -
Rivers and mountains —
Religion - >
Situation and extent .
So. ---- — —


Salines, mines, and ſprings


Towns, the principal ones deſcribed
8 damages ſuſtained by it


SOUTH CAROLINA.
Banks, account ß
Canal, origin of -
Clitnate 3


Country, the face of it deſcribed


Conſtitution, hiſtory of
Commerce, abſtract of -
Diviſions, civil, table of -
Harbours — —


| Inhabitants, their manners and cuſtoms
| Indians, different tribes of


Iſlands — —
Law, the different courts of
Laws, abſtrat of _ +=
Literature, ſtate of -
ManufaQories _ -


Mountains, their extent


Military ſtrength 3


Rivers, their ſource and extent


Rice, the mode of cultivation
Religion, different ſects of


Revenue, amount of —


Soil and produ te


Societies, charitable, account of


L043 3 04-474:


Towns, the principal ones deſcribed .


1 Taxes, mode of leyying them


Wir, damages ſuſtained by it
cOROIA.


Boundaries aſcertained


Climate and diſeaſes
Country, the face of it deſeribed
Commerce, ſtatement of |


Conſtitution deſcribed 0
Curioſities, remarkable ones


Dlviſions, civil, table uf
I | Hiſtory, general, of —
| Indians, different tribes of


u gef their character and manners. 5 50


[Lak es and ſwamps, t their ſituation and ex-


ent e
1 ſtate. of | - E n1$59;6
Manu-


Manufactures and agriculture, preſent
ſtate of - - :
Population, table of 5 «
Religion, various ſeas of *
Rivers, their ſource and extent
Situation and extent
Soil and productions, nature ß


Spring, a remarkable one deſcribed
Towns, the chief ones deſcribed. 2


SPANISH DOMINIONS.
EAST and WEST FLORIDA.


| Boundaries * 1 . 25
Extent: ES 4 5
Hiſtory TN — — = |


Rivers, their ſituation and extent
Soil and productions, the nature of.
Towns, Principal o ones deſcribed


LOUISIANA. .
Boundaries aſcertained < -
Climate, account of 5 A
Hiſtory. = 8
Produce, various kinds of e
Religion — 4.
Soil Geſcribed . FS


Town, the. N deſcribed


MEXICO on NEW SPAIN.


711


Page.


585


583
ib.
ib.


INDEX:
. Page. | SPANISH AMERICA.
558 | TERRA FIRMA, ox CASTILE DEL.
5851 ORO. |
Tea Bays enumerated ,_ «=
55 o | Boundaries aſcertained
55 57 [| Climate | De "
557 | Diviſions, table of - -
554. | Hiſtory, general, of - 8
Rivers, their extent + a
| Dituation and extent af: .. 1
|; Soil and produce, account of -
| Towns, the chief deſcribed 1
fi i
555. | 8 3
ib. Boundaries aſcertained
566 | Climate, air, and foil — = .
565 | Cities deſcribed =
ib. Diviſions, table ß
566 | General obſervations = =
| Inhabitants, their manners and. govern-
. — * .

_ Manufactures and trade, general account
567 of — 5 — -
id. Mines 7
571 | Natural hiſtory, biegt ſubjects of.
508 . e animal and vegetable, account

0 e

68 Rivers deſcribed. 3 —

| 566. = Situation and extent - —
SHILI,

I | Boundaries aſcertained _ Shy
576 Climate and ſoil deſcribed. .
572 Commerce, abſtract of +
$73 | Government, . account of: _
577 | Inhabitants, their manners and cuſioms N 1
572 | Mines deſcribed _ - 1
576 Productions, animal and vegetable

ib. Situation and extent „ 2 —
579 1 ;
ved | | PARAGUA on LA PLATA:
576 | Boundaries r 3333
__. | | Chmate, ſoil and produce, account of
572 Commerce, fummary of —
ib. | City, the principal one deſcribed.
577. | General obfervations — 1
Inhabitants, their number, Kc.
Rivers, their ſource and extent
Situation and extent
12


Birds, variety of . =
Boundaries aſcertained = -
Climate, deſcription .of. —
Commerce, abſtract of 8
Divifions, table of 5 8
Fiſh, the different ſpecies d
Government, h
Hiſtory, general, f -
Mountains, their names and ſituation
Population, abſtract of — —
Religion, various ſes of -
Rivers, lakes, and- fountains, general de- |
ſcription of each = 4
Situation and extent
x TOE the principal ones deſeribed
- SOUTH AMERICA.
Diriſions,. table of rs


1


*


| 712 YN I N D 0 nn.
' POR TUGUESE AMERICA. ö 1 Page.
| Inhabitants, deſcription off 0
BRAZIL. Situation and extent — - ib.
Bays, harbours, and rivers, deſcription of 591 | ; SOUTH AMERIC A.
Boundaries aſcertained ; F 5
Climate, ſoil, and productions id. General obſervations on - boo
Commerce and chief towns, account and | Quadrupeds, American, a liſt of 602
deſcription of — „„ 8 1 . |
Government, hiſtory of < +08 | WEST INDIA ISLANDS.
Hiſtory, general of — - ib. :
Mines, account of - - 1392 General account of _—_ . . — 608
Natives, general deſcription of 10 al?
P. ͤ =; A BRITISH IVEST INDIES.
Situation and extent = 8 591
. 1 JAMAICA.
FRENCH AMERICA. | Country and produce, account of | 619
8 3 ls Diviſions and population 611
3 : CAYONNE. Situation and 7 ib
Boundaries aſcertained le Bo
Climate, ſoil, and produce „ 4c; BARBADOS.
2 3 5 5 ib. E General account of CT — 614
DONNA] t Sr. CHRISTOPHERS.
SURINAM oz DUTCH GUIANA, | Mc > 745:
| (| - . We
Animals, fiſh, ſerpents, v various ſpecies of $07 - 1. — my N on
Climate deſcribed | =”, | rer
Hiſtory, general, of — = 3 28 ANTIGUA. tes foe
Military ſtrength and e 597 | Situation, extent, and produce e
Population - ad 1: 5
Rivers, their ſource and extent | 5
Situation and extent of 2 5 594 1 GRENADA.
wo produce, and trade, general or ares 3 Situation, extent, and produce - 616
0 59 | 0 ns e
Towns, the chief deſcribed — is 4
Water, the properties o ß — ib. . DOMITECA. „
CCC 5 Situation, extent, and produce NC,
ABONOILNAL AMERICA. e
"TEE. ST. VINCENT.
AMAZONIA. | VVV s
ä Situation, extent, and produce 616
Boundaries aſcertained EY - $508 5 1 .
Climate, ſoil, and productions id. NEVIS any» MONSERRAT |
General obſervations OT >< ca; e kd whhert 1 ad
Natives deſcribed C Situation and extent r er
Rivers, account of © 2 EYES” 5 |
Situation and extent - 33 BARBUDA.
Women, general character of them n :
| Situation and extent —
ee 1 ANGUILLA.
Boundaries aſcertained +: boo | 4 e api
Climate, ſoil, and produce = ib. Situation and extent — - 677


INDEX. „


| BERMUDAS OR SOMERS' ISLANDS,


Page.
Sitwation and extent . » 617


TLUCAY's, ox BAHAMA ISLANDS.


Situation and extent - — 618


F ALKLAND ISLANDS.
Account of - „CC


SPANISH WEST IN DIES.
CUBA,


Situation, extents and produſfe 619


HISPANIOLA | OR ST. DOMINGO.


| Plantations and manufaQures | - 64
Population, abſtract of „ 000
Productions exported, table ol > "mas --
Situation and extent _ i —
Towns, the chief, deſcribed 4. ib.
: Trade, articles of „„ #008
PORTO. RICO. T3
Situation and extent = 2 3 624 :
Towns, the capital deſcribed ib.
| TR INIDAD.
Situation, extent, and general hiſtory 624
| MARGARETTA. 5
Situation, extent, and general mier 625


JUAN FERNANDES.


Situation of | — „ nn


FRENCH VEST INDIES.


MARTINICO.
Situation and extent of — —
Sr. LUCIA,
Situation —= extent of 8 626
TOBAGO.
Situation and extent of — 626


.


Sr. BATHOLOMEW, ' DESEADA, AND


MARIGALANTE.
Situation and extent of 4 bes
DUTCH EST INDIES.
ST, EUSTATIVUS, ox EUSTATIA.


Situation, extent, and general 5 627
' CURASSOU.
Situation, extent, and general hiſtory = 628


DANS H WEST INDIES.
ST. THOM AS' „
Situation of 510


ST. CROIX, OR SANTA CRUZ.


General Di, - 630 :
| Situation, extent, and produce 9 5 n 8
VE DISCOVERIES.


| NOR THERN ARCHIPEL 4G 0. |


FOX ISLANDS.
Inhabitants deſcribed | - 1 631


Situation of 5 „ .


PELEW ISL ANDS.


Tohabitana deſcribed = . f 632


Situation and extent of


8

. 18
2
®


MARQUESAS ISLANDS.


1 Diſcovery and ſituation 8 — 633


INGRAHAM's ISLANDS.


General deſcription of, names, and ſitua-


tion - - - 633
OTAHEITE.

Inhabitants, their manners and cuſtoms 634

Population, abſtrat of _ —

Produce, account of 9 5 ib.


4 2 | —


/ 714 INDEX
1 Soc TV ISLANDS, - |


. | Page. | 1 —
' General account of them '- 634 | Polan
4 N a : | | Switzerland — -
Tux FRIENDLY ISLANDS. | ea *
=
General deſcription of them = 635 | Auſtrian and F rench Netherlands


| e - -
NEW ZEALAND. | | Spain - - +... 670
5 Fortugal - - — 671
De and general , 638 Italy 5 - = 672
Situation and extent = 637 | Turkey in Europe - «6 -
| | Iflands, ſeas, mountains, &. of * 675


Tu NEW HEBRIDES. 7 © 5 676
„ Aſia - ET
General acconnt of them | — 640 | Tartaryin Aſa - - 681
8 The empire of China „ — 682


NEW GUINEA. Indoſtan, or India on this ſide the Ganges 686
7 The peninſula of India * the GC 688
' Deſcriptin 8 Yo »- 640 | Perſia - 689
* | 7 ; © Arabia . * | 4 Fa 690 |
; — | | Aſiatic iſtes - i” — 008
} ET 7 N 8 e — 694
| - 8 043 1 Egypt - - 695
| - — 646 | The ſtates of Wal 8 - 1
I - — 647 Of Africa, from the tropic of Cancer to
pl — , = 648 the Cape of Good Hope 25 - © 698
; - - 650 African itlands += oo. — 700
. 155 — General remarks 6: 33
5 „ 6583 | - Federal money __-. ©" .
1 15 — 657 } Calculations upon population .
4 — - 658 | Liſt of Books and Authors quoted and re-

n 3 - 659 | ferred to in the preceding Work #715
6 2 1 Ng * 80
1 \ #

4 LISP
;

| a


Adams's Hiſtory


e


7 A


LIST. or BOOKS AND AUTHORS


| Quoted and referred to in the ANG. Wor.


Avans Age H. ) View of Religions


publics in the World
Andrews's Plans of the capital Cities of
the World

Bartram's Travels

Belknap's Hiſtory of New Hampſhire
Bruce's 'Travels

Carey's American Muſeum
Chalmers's Collection of Treaties.


Chalmers on the Strength ot Great Bri.


tain
Chalmers's Life of De Foe 7 ob
Clavigero's Hiſtory of N 5
Cook's Voyages
Cox's Travels
Condamine's Travels 5
Crantz's Hiſtory of Greenland
Davies's Hiſtorical Tracts
De Foe's Hiſtory of the Union =
Dixon's Voyage ZN 7
Douglaſs's Summary _
Edwards's Hiſtory of the wel Mus
Ellis's Voyage to Hudſon's Bay
Filſon's Hiſtory of Kentucky
Fleurieu's Voyages and Diſcoveries
Dr. Franklin's Hiſtorical Review
Hazard's Hiſtorical Collections
Hawkins's Hiſtory of the Turkiſh or
Ottoman Empire
Hearne's Tour


Dr. Herſchell's Diſcovery in 1 |
| | - Wilſon's, Hiſtory of the Pelew Iſlands

| Winthrop's Journal

pt Zimmerman s Folitical Survey


Hiſtory of New Holland
Hopkinſon's Works
Hunter 8 un 805 and Moperics.


wo % AM


of the n Re-


4


11 Seott's Hiſtory
Shaw's Travels
828 | Smith on the Variety i in the Human Spe-


Whitaker's Courſe of Hannibal over


| Mallet's Northern Antiqui
1 Minot' s Hiſtory of the Rebellion of


H utchins's Deſcription of Aten
Jefferſon's Hiſtory of Virginia


Joſſelyn's Voyage to New England.


EKirwan's Eſſay on the Temperature of :


different E


La Trobe's Hiſtory of Counts Struenzee


and Brandt |
Law on the Rifing Reſources of India
ties


Maſſachuſetts


| Dr. Mitchell's Enquiries

Patterſon's Travels
Pennant's Arctic Zoology
Phillip's Voyage 5

 Portlock's Voyage


Ramſay's Hiſtory of the Revolution of
South Carolina

Ramſay's Hiſtory of the American War

Robertſon's Hiſtory of America

Dr. Ruſh's Enquiries

of the Eaſt Indies


cles


1 3. 1 8 Expoſition of the Chriſ-


tian Doctrine


1 Trumbull's Private Collecuons
I Ulloa's Voyages
Wafer's Journey acroſs the Iſthmus of


Darien _


the Alps aſcertained


*


PROFOSALS FOR PUBLISHIN G BY SUBSCRIPTION.


In the Preſs, and ſpcedily will be publiſhed, in One large Volume, Royal Quarto,


Price ol. 28. in boards, or, to Non-Subſcribers, al. 128. 6d. neatly printed on
a Superfine Wove Paper, illuſtrated with a large Tw6-Sheet Map of the
Country from thirty to forty Miles round Mancheſter ; on which will be accu-
rately laid down all the Noblemens' and Gentlemens' Scats,. Parks, Towns,
Villages, Public Buildings, Manufactories ; old and new Turnpike and Crofs
Roads, Rivers, Lakes, Bridges, and Canals; and embelliſhed with ſixty Cop-
per-Plates of Views of Towns, Romantic Scenes, New and Ancient Build-
ings, &c. taken on the Spot by E. DAYES, and five ſeparate Maps of the


Counties of CHE SIE, LANCASHIRE, Denny, STAPFORDSHIRE, and


YORKSHIRE, and a ſeparate Map to each Canal,


A DESCRIPTION or rns 9


From Thirty to Forty Miles round Mancheſter.


CONTAINING


1. A full Account of its Geography, both Civil and Natural, and of its principal Pro-


duQions.


II. Accounts of its Towns and chief Villages—their Hiſtory, Population, Commerce, EE
and ManufaQtures.


III. Remains of Antiquity, Notices of diſtinguiſhed F amilies and Perſons, and other 1


| Miſcellaneous Obj jets, curious and intereſting.
IV. Hiſtory 1 the Canals.


THE MATERIALS TOBE ARRANGED, AND THE WORK comin? 1 0 8 8
By J. AIK IN. M. D. Fo


Printed for Y O HN STOCKDAL. 3


*


be following Places, among ft many others, will be noticeds

Altringham Burſlem Congleton Knutsford Middlewich _ Rochdale 5
| Aſhborne Bury Cromford Leeds Nantwich © Sandbach

- Aſhton, under Buxton Dukinfield Leek Newton Sbeffield
Line Caſtleton Eceleſton © Leigh Newcaſtle under Stockport
Bakewell | Chapel in the Fairfield 6 Line ee ney.

' Barnſley | Frith Fradſham ' Longnor Northwich Tidwell

= - Cheſter wo Sloſſop  .- Macclesfield Oldham Wakefield
Blackburn Cheſterfield Halifax Malpas Ormſkirk © Warrington -
Bolton Chorley Haſlingden Matlock Poulton :: Whitchurch |
Bradford Clithero Huddersfield Mottram | in Preſcot Wigan
Burnley Coln Kirkham > Longdendale Preſton Wrexham.


The following is a Lift of the PLATES. now engraving 1 this 1 excl 2 1 the . ;


ove· mentioned.


VIEWS OF TE "wins by | oy vrews or
4. Mancheer 17. Barton Bridge 32. Dukinfield Hall
2. Stockport 18. Old Church, a 33. Royton Hall
3. Aſhton under Line 19. Dukinfield Bridge 34. Dunham
4. Mottram i 7 Longdendale 20. Mottram Church „ 3 Heaton,
5. Live 21. Rowe Croſs gk ' Poynton |
6. Macc field 22. Chatſworth n — Anco ats
.. 46 HS. . _ — Lodge 38. Jailor's Chapel
38. Aſhborne p 871 7 Hall © AND PLANS OF
. ²˙ p 2 Old Hall, Aſhton | 39. Mancheſter
10. Matlock Bath 26. Hyde Hall 14180. Liverpool
11. Caſtleton 217. Harden Hall 41. Cheſter
12. Hartſhead Pike _ 28. Lime Hall | 42. Bucton Caſtle
13. Scout Mil! 29. Tatton Hal - 43+ Caſtleſhaw
14. Broadbottom Bridge 30. Chadderton Hall 44. Caſtle Croft
Fairfield 31. Booths's Hall 45. Caſtle — Ks:
© x Stayley Bridge


r A LisT of the SUBSCRIBERS will be PRINTED, and the Books will be * as nearly as poſlible,


in the Order they are ſubſcribed for,


— . got To ran e
, e 3 — n Fg


ASA, ns aft
